Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\jinapanjara_critical_study\research-notes\loop_F04\documents\2020-gornall-rewriting_buddhism.pdf
Total Pages: 286
Health Check: PASS (avg 2898.4 chars/page)
Total Characters: 828943

--- Page 1 of 286 ---


--- Page 2 of 286 ---
Rewriting Buddhism

--- Page 3 of 286 ---


--- Page 4 of 286 ---
Rewriting Buddhism
Pali literature and monastic reform  
in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270
Alastair Gornall

--- Page 5 of 286 ---
First published in 2020 by
UCL Press
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT
Available to download free: www.uclpress.co.uk
Text © the author, 2020
The author has asserted his rights under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 to be 
identified as the author of this work.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from The British Library. 
This book is published under a Creative Commons 4.0 International licence (CC BY 4.0). 
This licence allows you to share, copy, distribute and transmit the work; to adapt the work 
and to make commercial use of the work providing attribution is made to the authors (but not 
in any way that suggests that they endorse you or your use of the work). Attribution should 
include the following information:
Gornall, Alastair 2020. Rewriting Buddhism: Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri 
Lanka, 1157–1270. London: UCL Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/111.9781787355156
Further details about Creative Commons licences are available at http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/
Any third-party material in this book is published under the book’s Creative Commons 
licence unless indicated otherwise in the credit line to the material. If you would like to re-
use any third-party material not covered by the book’s Creative Commons licence, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
ISBN: 978-1-78735-517-0 (Hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-78735-516-3 (Pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-78735-515-6 (PDF)
ISBN: 978-1-78735-518-7 (epub)
ISBN: 978-1-78735-519-4 (mobi)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/111.9781787355156
Cover image: A statue of a bodhisattva near the site of the tooth relic temple in Polonnaruva.

--- Page 6 of 286 ---
For my parents

--- Page 7 of 286 ---


--- Page 8 of 286 ---
vii
Contents
List of maps viii
List of tables ix
List of figures x
Notes on the presentation of texts and sources xi
Acknowledgements xii
 1. Introduction: Themes and theories 3
Part I: Chaos 17
 2. Before 1165 and all that 19
 3. The reform era and its Pali literature 36
Part II: Order 61
 4. Scholarly foundations: Moggallāna’s grammar 63
 5. Buddhist scholasticism: Sumaṅgala’s commentaries 88
 6. Eschatological encyclopedism: Siddhattha’s anthology 119
Part III: Emotion 143
 7. Sense and sensibility: Saṅgharakkhita’s poetics 145
 8. The politics of relics: Dhammakitti’s history 168
 9. Devotional power: Buddharakkhita’s Buddha biography 190
 10. Conclusion: Other lives and afterlives 213
References 225
Index 255

--- Page 9 of 286 ---
viii
List of Maps
Map 1 Laṅkā and neighbouring kingdoms, c. 900–1300 1
Map 2 Sri Lanka in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries 2

--- Page 10 of 286 ---
ix
List of Tables
Table 3.1 The reigns of the kings and queens of Laṅkā,  
1157–1270 38
Table 3.2 A hypothetical chronology of Pali works com-
posed in South India and Sri Lanka,  
300–900 CE 41
Table 3.3 A hypothetical chronology of Pali works com-
posed in South India and Sri Lanka,  
900–1500 CE 53
Table 4.1 A hypothetical chronology of Śrī Rāhula’s San-
skrit grammatical and lexicographical sources 72
Table 4.2 A comparison of rules in the Moggallāna and 
Cāndra grammars 74
Table 4.3 A comparison of Moggallānavutti 2.32 and 
Cāndravṛtti 2.1.85 76
Table 4.4 The derivation of passive and active sentences 
in the Moggallāna system 79

--- Page 11 of 286 ---
x
List of Figures
Figure 3.1  The hierarchy of the Saṅgha as depicted in the 
Daṁbadeṇiya edict 45
Figure 4.1 The five ‘meaning-elements’ underpinning linguistic usage 81
Figure 5.1 Words designate unreal concepts or real dhammas 100
Figure 5.2  A simplified diagram of linguistic cognition in the 
handbooks 103
Figure 5.3  A simplified diagram of Ānanda’s view of 
 linguistic cognition 105
Figure 5.4 Scripture as either speech or concept 108

--- Page 12 of 286 ---
xi
Note on the Presentation of Texts and Sources
I have transliterated Pali (P.), Sanskrit (Sk.) and Sinhala (Sin.) texts according 
to standard scholarly conventions. The translations contained herein are either 
my own or as cited. For personal and geographical names, I have usually 
adopted the Pali version of the name along with diacritics. Some names, how-
ever, are more familiar in their Sanskrit/Sinhala form, such as ‘Parākrama -
bāhu’ and ‘Daṁbadeṇiya’, and in these cases I follow common usage. The one 
exception is the Cōḻa dynasty, which I refer to using the transliterated Tamil 
name. I do not transliterate terms such as ‘nirvana’ and ‘Theravada’, which 
have entered the English lexicon.
I use the modern country name ‘Sri Lanka’ primarily as a toponym des-
ignating the geographical island. Where I occasionally refer specifically to a 
political territory, however, I have opted to use the most common medieval 
name for the kingdom, namely, Laṅkā, in order to distinguish the fluctuating 
territorial boundaries of kings during the period with the actual geographical 
boundaries of the island. On occasion I have also used the modern English 
name for a Southern Asian place, such as ‘Kashmir’ rather than ‘Kaśmīra’, 
where appropriate.
Wherever possible I cite primary source material with a page number and 
line number, with the line number indicated in subscript (e.g. 1
2). In general, 
whenever I directly quote and translate a passage from a primary source, I also 
provide the Pali, Sanskrit or Sinhala text in the endnotes of each chapter. If the 
texture of the original language itself is relevant to the topic of discussion, then 
I also quote it in the main text of the book too. In each chapter the titles of Pali, 
Sanskrit and Sinhala works are translated in the first instance of their use and, 
likewise, the regnal dates of each king or queen are cited when they are first 
mentioned.

--- Page 13 of 286 ---
xii
Acknowledgements
This book could not have been written without the generous support of a num-
ber of institutions and funding bodies. I am grateful to the Faculty of Asian 
and Middle Eastern Studies, University of Cambridge, and the Rapson Schol-
arship Committee for supporting my dissertation research; to the School of 
Languages, Cultures and Linguistics (South Asia Section), School of Oriental 
and African Studies, University of London, for granting me a Research Asso-
ciateship; to the Singapore University of Technology and Design for support-
ing my research with a Start-Up Research Grant; and to the Robert H.N. Ho 
Family Foundation, for a Research Fellowship in Buddhist Studies (2018–19) 
that allowed me finally to finish this manuscript. I am also grateful to the Brit-
ish Library, Cambridge University Library, National University of Singapore’s 
ISEAS Library, Peradeniya University’s Main Library, the School of Oriental 
and African Studies Library, and SUTD Library for their valuable assistance 
and for their permission to use their collections.
The scope and approach of this book owes much to the wonderful teach-
ers I have had over the years. As an undergraduate and master’s student at 
the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, I studied 
Pali with Kate Crosby, who instilled in me the confidence to pursue an aca -
demic career and who first introduced me to the literary world of late medieval 
Sri Lanka, and Sanskrit with Whitney Cox, who encouraged my interest in 
Sanskrit śāstra and generously let me sit in on numerous Sanskrit courses. 
I completed my doctoral dissertation on traditional Pali grammar at the 
University of Cambridge under the supervision of Eivind Kahrs, who showed 
me with constant humour and patience how to uncover human stories even 
within the most technical Sanskrit and Pali texts. This book also owes much to 
a number of other teachers, friends and colleagues at SOAS, Cambridge, MIT, 
Pune and SUTD who have supported my research, in particular, Arthur Bahr, 
James Buzard, Chong Tow Chong, Giovanni Ciotti, Margaret Cone, Mahesh 
Deokar, Paolo Di Leo, Michael M.J. Fischer, Chetana and Rajeev Gosavi, 
Amal Gunasena, Maddalena Italia, Varun Khanna, Alan Kolata, Lim Sun 
Sun, Francesca Orsini, Pey Kin Leong, Shankar Raman, Aleix Ruiz-Falqués, 
Andrew Skilton, Vincenzo Vergiani and Paolo Visigalli.

--- Page 14 of 286 ---
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xiii
I am deeply indebted to the generosity of the many scholars and friends 
who took the time to respond with care and attention to drafts of the book and 
its chapters. Special thanks are due to Petra Kieffer-Pülz and Alan Strathern, 
true kalyāṇa-mittas, who both read full drafts of the book (at short notice) as 
well as versions of chapter three  and the introduction, respectively. Jeffrey 
Sundberg read chapter two; Rhema Hokama, Samson Lim, Sandeep Ray, 
Aleix Ruiz-Falqués and Gabriel Tusinski read chapter four ; 
 Rupert Gethin 
and Aleix Ruiz-Falqués read chapter five; Maria Heim read chapter six; Yigal 
Bronner read chapter seven; Michael M.J. Fischer, Rhema Hokama, Samson 
Lim, Zsombor Méder, Paolo Visigalli, and Jonathan Walters read chapter eight; 
and both Whitney Cox and Alan Strathern provided comments on my book 
proposal to UCL Press. Enlightening conversations with the participants of a 
Theravada Civilizations Project workshop in Springfield, Missouri, in particu-
lar, Stephen Berkwitz, Steven Collins, Kate Crosby and Charles Hallisey, also 
helped shape the overall scope of the book. I am profoundly grateful to all for 
their feedback and I only wish I was more capable of taking full advantage of 
their insightful comments and criticisms. I should stress, therefore, that all the 
deficiencies that remain in the work reflect my own shortcomings.
I also wish to express my gratitude to three brilliant scholars who sadly 
passed away while I was completing this book, all of whom contributed in var-
ious ways to its completion. Steven Collins, an inspirational figure throughout 
my study of Buddhism, opened my eyes to the civilizational history of Pali lit-
erature. Lance Cousins, who had an inspiring command of Pali commentarial 
literature, offered me early guidance in untangling a number of knotty issues 
related to the Theravada Abhidhamma. Anne Monius, one of the kindest and 
most intelligent scholars I had the pleasure to meet, supported my work on Pali 
grammar and poetics and generously read and commented on chapters of my 
PhD dissertation.
I am fortunate to have had the love and support of a wonderful family. 
My parents, Richard and Morag Gornall; my grandparents, Peter and Elizabeth 
Edwards and Ronald and Annette Gornall; my brother, Robert Gornall; my 
sister, Ailsa Davis; and my parents-in-law, Rumman and Naveed Faruqi, have 
all been such an important presence in my life. I especially thank my beautiful 
wife, Samar Faruqi, who was a constant source of encouragement, and my 
son, Zaki, who made the last few years writing this book such a joyful time. 
I dedicate this book to my parents who raised me to love learning.

--- Page 15 of 286 ---


--- Page 16 of 286 ---
Map 1. Laṅkā and neighbouring kingdoms, c. 900–1300. 

--- Page 17 of 286 ---
Map 2. Sri Lanka in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.

--- Page 18 of 286 ---
3
1
Introduction: Themes and Theories
Throughout history Buddhists have held vastly different views about the 
language in which the Buddha taught. For some he possessed a supernatural 
ability to speak in any language he wished.
1 Others claimed by contrast that 
the Buddha never taught anything at all.2 Theravada Buddhist scholar-monks, 
however, believe that the Buddha taught in only one language, Pali, or ‘the 
language of Magadha’ (magadhabhāsā), as it is known by the tradition, and 
that he produced a body of teachings, the Tipiṭaka (‘three baskets’), so large 
that, after his death, it took his disciples seven months to recite and compile 
it.
3 When we speak of ‘Pali literature’ it is perhaps understandable that many 
people will think of the Tipiṭaka or ‘Pali canon’, as it is often referred to in 
Western academic writings. And yet for almost 2,000 years the monastic com-
munity, the Saṅgha, has continued to use Pali as a privileged language for 
commenting on and elaborating upon the Buddha’s doctrine, the Dhamma.
One of the most important commentators in Buddhist history was a 
fourth or fifth-century South Indian scholar fittingly known as Buddhaghosa 
or ‘voice of the Buddha’ who wrote a number of definitive works in Sri Lanka 
elucidating and developing upon the Buddha’s ideas. Tradition has it that 
Buddhaghosa based his commentaries on Sinhala translations of earlier Pali 
works that were brought to Sri Lanka by a monk named Mahinda, the eldest 
son of emperor Aśoka. A late Burmese biography of Buddhaghosa states that, 
when these first Sinhala commentaries were piled up, they reached the height 
of seven ‘medium-sized’ elephants.
4 Throughout the first millennium the Pali 
tradition continued to grow; scholars added new commentaries, some com -
posed explanations of older commentaries, and others occupied themselves by 
writing histories of the Buddhist tradition and their monastic lineage.
5
Then something radically changed. From around the tenth century 
there was a massive explosion in the number and types of works composed 
in Pali. This period of literary efflorescence reached its peak in the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries, specifically between the years 1157–1270. To give 

--- Page 19 of 286 ---
4 REWRITING BUDDHISM
a rough estimate, it is likely that out of all the known Pali works composed 
in Sri Lanka and South India, more than a third were composed during this 
long  century .6 The number of works preserved from this era attests not only 
to the relative magnitude of literary production but also to the fact that these 
works have long been preserved as key authorities for the Theravada Buddhist 
 tradition throughout Southern Asia.
For the new Pali texts that emerged during this period were taken by 
scholar-monks from Sri Lanka to Southeast Asian kingdoms from the twelfth 
century onwards and they thus became an important resource in the develop -
ment of early modern Theravada Buddhism.
7
I refer to this long century, spanning 1157–1270, as Sri Lanka’s ‘reform 
era’, since the period was marked by three important monastic reforms held in 
1165, c. 1232–6 and 1266 during the reigns of Parākramabāhu I (1157–86),
8 
Vijayabāhu III (1232–6) and Parākramabāhu II (1236–70) respectively. These 
reforms responded to what was perceived to be an age of religious decline and 
attempted to purify and unify the monastic community, which before 1165 
was traditionally said to have been divided into three fraternities, but that in 
reality was likely even more fragmented than this formulaic enumeration sug-
gests.
9 The idea of a ‘reform era’ does not mean, however, that the reform 
process began or ended with the reigns of these three kings, when in fact 
moves towards unifying the Saṅgha are apparent in the decades before 1165, 
in particular during the reign of Vijayabāhu I (1055–1110), and also between 
1165 and 1232, when the monastic community emerged as a more coherent 
and autonomous entity better able to regulate itself. Despite the turmoil of the 
decades after Parākramabāhu I’s reign, the process of reform, characterized by 
constant attempts to reconcile the different factions of the Saṅgha and unify 
them under a single administrative structure, continued even during times of 
minimal royal intervention, patronage and protection.
This book is the first intellectual history of what was the most  cultur ally 
productive period in Sri Lanka’s premodern era. 10 It is less concerned with 
cataloguing the doctrinal positions of the reform-era Saṅgha than with 
describing broader changes in the monastic community’s religious orienta -
tion as expressed primarily in the Pali literature composed during the reforms 
and in the role played by these works in facilitating the reform process. It 
argues that the intensive production of Pali literature during this era was fun -
damentally a consequence of the Saṅgha’s emerging political autonomy and 
that  scholar -monks composed works in Pali, in particular philological works, 
 commentaries, anthologies and poems, as a means of framing the increasingly 
chaotic political landscape of their time within an organizational plane, in 
which they could navigate their changing social and economic conditions.11

--- Page 20 of 286 ---
 I NTRODUCTION : T HEMES  AND  T HEORIES  5
Pali specifically, rather than Sinhala, was the privileged medium for cre-
ating this ordered, conceptual space for three main reasons. 12 First, scholar 
monks viewed Pali as authoritative both because it was the language of the 
Buddha and because it was thought to have magical properties that made it 
uniquely capable of expressing reality. Second, reform-era scholars, increas -
ingly conscious of Pali’s relationship with the other literary languages of 
South Asia, also began to view Pali as a sui generis, independent language 
that, unlike all other languages in South Asia, was underived from Sanskrit. 
As such Pali was considered to be ‘pure’ (suddha) and we can hypothesize that 
underlying ideas of moral and linguistic purity, in part, also meant that reform-
era works were preferably composed in Pali before being translated and dis -
seminated more widely in what were perceived to be derivative languages 
like Sinhala. Finally, as a transregional medium, Pali was the choice language 
for conveying the Saṅgha’s new, unified monastic identity to the increasingly 
cosmopolitan monastic community at home; to non-Sinhala speaking com-
munities abroad, in particular those in the Tamil South; as well as to the royal 
court, which from the eleventh century onwards was dominated by foreign 
rulers and factions such as the Kāliṅgas and the Pāṇḍyas from Northeast and 
Southeast India respectively.
13
1.1. Thr ee Orientations of Reform-era Literature
The forces of reform governing the unification of the monastic community are, 
in many respects, mirrored in the changing form of the Pali literature produced 
during this period. The new Pali works and textual genres that emerged out 
of the reforms all reflect, in various degrees, the desire to fight the forces of 
doctrinal degeneration and social fragmentation. This desire emerges in the 
literature of the long century in a number of ways but which, for analytical 
purposes, we can group together under three interrelated orientations, namely 
(1) an increasing concern for the degeneration of the Dhamma, social-moral 
order and cosmos; (2) a desire to recover and protect the perceived essential 
meaning of the Buddha’s teachings through new forms of scholastic enquiry; 
and (3) an urgent need among elites to accrue vast amounts of merit through 
devotion to the Buddha, facilitated, in particular, by new aesthetic literary 
techniques better able to inculcate such devotional sentiments.
The first of these orientations provides much of the context for under -
standing the development of the other two. The monastic writings of the 
reform era are haunted by a sense of urgency to counter the perceived decline 
of their Buddhist tradition. In 993 the South Indian Cō ḻa king Rājarāja Cōḻa I 
(985–1012) invaded Sri Lanka and moved its capital to Poḷonnaruva, resulting 

--- Page 21 of 286 ---
6 REWRITING BUDDHISM
over the century of Cōḻa rule in the gradual collapse of the old sacred capital of 
Anurādhapura. The post-Cōḻa political environment was marked, furthermore, 
by frequent, transregional wars for the throne between rival foreign factions. 
These events aligned with ideas about the precipitous decline of the Dhamma. 
The Buddha’s Dhamma, it is said, would last 5,000 years and over time the 
possibility of liberation would diminish.
14 Faced with social upheaval, monks 
depict their age as one in which disorder prevails in the interpretation of texts, 
in the production of literature and in the behaviour of monks. Authors explic-
itly state that they codified the rules of language, wrote new works and revised 
old ones with the idea that they were creating order out of what was perceived 
to be chaos.
These attempts to unify the sprawling Pali textual tradition were based, 
in part, on the traditional belief that preserving the Dhamma would postpone 
this inevitable decline. What was innovative about the exegetical approaches 
of reform-era works, the book argues, is that they adopted new textual mod -
els from the Sanskrit tradition while also subtly shifting their attitude con -
cerning the nature of the Dhamma. Scholar-monks of the era, in contrast to 
earlier commentators, such as Buddhaghosa, began to think of the Dhamma 
principally as the meaning of the Buddha’s teachings rather than its wording 
and they place emphasis on distilling and condensing the ‘essence’ ( sāra) of 
this meaning through philological work. The concern for the essence of the 
Dhamma, rather than simply its literal form, accompanied the development of 
new modes of scriptural analysis, including new types of grammar, anthology 
and handbook commentary all of which claimed to recover or protect some 
essential part of their scriptural heritage that in some way had been obscured 
by previous scholarly approaches.
The need to protect and preserve their tradition in the face of religious 
decline was accompanied by a desire to intervene in the circumstances they 
faced. The eschatological concerns of the scholar-monks of the era shifted 
their attention to more immanent religious goals  – transforming their lives 
within Saṃsāra rather than obtaining nirvana – since transcendence was per -
ceived to be increasingly difficult to achieve. Central to this shift was a need 
to develop better karmic conditions for the survival of their religious tradition. 
The attention of elites thus turned to enhancing the accrual of merit through 
devotional practices, in particular the cultivation of favourable emotions in 
the worship of the Buddha and his relics. New forms of Pali literature too 
played an important role in supporting this emotionally charged soteriology, 
and scholar-monks, for the first time, composed devotional poems designed 
to inspire transformative sentiments in their audience. In writing these works, 
monks disregarded centuries of scepticism about the moral value of ornate 

--- Page 22 of 286 ---
 I NTRODUCTION : T HEMES  AND  T HEORIES  7
poetry and relied on Sanskrit aesthetics and Sanskritic literary models as a 
resource for their new literature.
1.2. Theor etical Considerations
A close reading of the texts produced in the reform era allows us to critique 
and re-examine more generally a number of important themes and concepts 
frequently used in the civilizational history of Theravada Buddhism. The book 
challenges ideas about Buddhism in Sri Lanka as an essentially conservative 
tradition preserving Buddhism in its earliest form, it rethinks the social role of 
Pali literature as an ‘imaginaire’ or ‘databank’ and lastly it critiques the per -
vasive characterization of the relationship between the Saṅgha and the royal 
court in terms of a symbiosis of social functions.
(a) An Island unto Itself?
Island cultures, it is said, can be viewed in two ways, either as ‘continental 
islands’, that is, those ‘accidental, derived islands’ that at some point drifted 
away from the mainland, and ‘oceanic islands’, the ‘originary, essential 
islands’ that spontaneously arose from the sea.
15 These two physical pro-
cesses mirror the way in which medieval Buddhism in Sri Lanka has been 
discussed in much academic writing. Early colonialists and Orientalists, for 
instance, often regarded Buddhism in Sri Lanka and its Pali canon, in par -
ticular, as representative of ‘original’ or ‘early’ Buddhism.
16 There was an 
assumption that the island of Sri Lanka had protected the Buddha’s teach -
ings from the same fate as its Indian counterpart, which according to R.C. 
Childers (1838–1876) had fallen over time into ‘an extraordinary state of 
corruption and travesty’.
17
Related is the commonly held view of Theravada Buddhism in Sri 
Lanka as an essentially conservative tradition that stubbornly resisted the cul-
tural influence of the wider region. 18 The Theravada Buddhist tradition in Sri 
Lanka is, of course, conservative in that it strove to preserve the Buddha’s 
teachings in a literal form, though, as we will see, these practices of conser -
vation were themselves subject to change. What is problematic is the idea of 
a generalized conservative mentality, almost akin to a political attitude, in 
opposition to ‘liberal’ Buddhists elsewhere, that has often meant that schol -
ars have viewed Buddhism on the island, in particular during the ‘traditional 
period’ of the middle ages, as without innovation.
19 In light of the intellec -
tual vigour of the reform era, it is remarkable that Sri Lanka’s foundational 

--- Page 23 of 286 ---
8 REWRITING BUDDHISM
national history, the University of Ceylon History of Ceylon , dismisses the 
period as follows: ‘This literature does not reveal that there has been much 
original thinking in the domains of metaphysics, philosophy or doctrine. The 
Pāli language, in fact, had ceased to be an instrument of original thought long 
before our period.’
20
When scholars have recognized the innovations of the Pali literature of 
the reform era, there has been the opposite tendency to view it as inauthentic, 
both in relation to canonical language and to the Sanskrit literary tradition. 
With respect to late medieval Pali poetry, A.K. Warder in particular noted that 
‘scholars have often spoken, with something like scorn, of “Sanskritised” Pali 
in works like these, as if their style of composition is not really legitimate 
or natural’.
21 We can partly explain this attitude as a by-product of the way 
Orientalists privileged Pali canonical writings as the authentic representa -
tion of Buddhism over those of the later tradition. It re-emerges in the late 
colonial writings of Sri Lankan scholars too, who sometimes recapitulated 
the same idea, albeit now imbued with a sense of authentic national identity. 
G.P. Malalasekera in his The Pāli Literature of Ceylon , for instance, linked 
the influence of Sanskrit during the reform era with the presence of Tamil 
‘ colonists’  and wrote of Sanskrit as a contaminating influence on Pali. 22 At the 
same time one can detect an intellectual chauvinism among Sanskrit scholars 
and historians of India too who habitually ignore Sri Lanka as a participant in 
the cultural history of South Asia. To his credit, P.L. Vaidya, editor of numer-
ous Buddhist Sanskrit works, put this usually informal bias into writing and, 
with respect to later Pali literature, once wrote that, ‘save for the lively com -
mentarial literature, it is but a poor imitation of the corresponding works in 
Sanskrit literature’.
23
The island model then presents us with a false dichotomy: either medi -
eval Theravada Buddhism in Sri Lanka was conservative and culturally iso -
lated, or it was derivative and provincial. A combination of these approaches 
has resulted in the extraordinary fact that the full intellectual significance of 
this era has been largely overlooked in modern academic writing. This book 
challenges both positions by demonstrating firstly that Theravada Buddhism 
in Sri Lanka was always intimately connected with the history and culture 
of the Indian subcontinent but that the contours of its engagement appear 
differently depending on the texts and genre one is looking at. In addition, we 
will see in the six case studies that the Pali literature of this long century was 
not simply a mere imitation of continental literary traditions, but rather that 
it played a genuine and authentic role in Sri Lanka’s changing religious and 
political life.

--- Page 24 of 286 ---
 I NTRODUCTION : T HEMES  AND  T HEORIES  9
(b) The Pali Imaginaire: A View from Nowhere?24
The Orientalist view of the Pali canon as original or ideal Buddhism further 
led some early scholars to view the culture of later Buddhist societies, more 
generally, as a vulgarization and deviation from the perceived purity and pris-
tine teachings of the Buddha. For almost half a century anthropologists in par-
ticular have challenged this approach and have instead analysed contemporary 
Buddhist societies on their own terms, viewing the historical developments of 
the tradition as ‘continuities’ and ‘transformations’ rather than devi  ations.25 
And yet, while scholars no longer make a moral distinction between the 
Buddhism of Pali literature and contemporary forms of Buddhist life, the 
dichotomy between the ideal Pali canon and ‘living’ Buddhism – which was 
originally the product of an Orientalist concern for origins – lives on, in many 
respects, even in the works of the foremost critics of this view.
Pali texts in some way or another are still used, for instance, as a point 
of reference for contextualizing local forms of Buddhist belief and practice. 
While nobody speaks any more of ‘original Buddhism’, the Pali canon and 
Pali literature in general often form the constituent part of what is signified 
by more innocuous, but in some cases no less suspect, analytical categories, 
such as the ‘doctrinal’, ‘orthodox’ and ‘normative’.
26 These concepts are then 
used as a structural framework to think about the specificities of religion in 
a particular time and place, sometimes referred to as ‘practical’, ‘popular’ or 
‘local’. Distinctions such as these are, to some extent, a necessary outcome 
of establishing ‘Theravada Buddhism’, both in its universality and particular-
ity, as a coherent, historical and social object of academic enquiry. One unin-
tended consequence of this analytical dichotomy, however, is that, in many 
cases, what is regarded as ‘doctrinal’, ‘orthodox’ and ‘normative’ is treated as 
if it transcends history.
This is the case even in one of the most sophisticated models for thinking 
about the social function of Pali literature in Buddhist civilizational history. In 
his erudite and expansive work, Nirvana and other Buddhist Felicities, Steven 
Collins coined the felicitous expression ‘the Pali imaginaire’, which he defined 
as ‘a discursive, textual world available to the imagination of elites, and grad-
ually others, in the premodern agrarian societies of Southern Asia’.
27 It was an 
ideology, he argues, that primarily established the hegemony of a dominant class 
comprising the royal court and the Buddhist monastic community and that further 
served to naturalize its extraction of tribute from the agrarian populace. Collins 
presents the Pali imaginaire as a stable system, preserved by scholar-monks, 
enmeshed and intertwined within the societies and cultures of what we might ex 
post facto call the Theravada world. It played this role throughout what Collins 

--- Page 25 of 286 ---
10 REWRITING BUDDHISM
refers to as ‘the long middle ages’, an agrarian, pre-industrial period that he 
argues lasted from the third century BCE to the nineteenth century.28
There is much to admire in the notion of the Pali imaginaire as an ana-
lytical category, that is, as a way of thinking about the historical influence of 
‘the mental universe created by and within Pali texts’.
29 The concept, however, 
has limitations when one tries to historicize the Pali intellectual tradition itself. 
This is because Collins, due to the admirably broad historical scope of his 
book, adopts an analytical dualism in which he strategically separates Pali 
texts as a ‘cultural system’, from what he refers to as ‘socio-cultural life’, with 
the former possessing an ‘a priori and a posteriori coherence’.
30 He states that:
there is sufficient coherence in the Pali imaginaire – at least in the grand 
matters of time, death, happiness and wisdom with which this book has 
been concerned – to treat it as a Cultural System in abstraction from its 
(greater or lesser) imbrication and enmeshment in the Socio-Cultural 
life of countless millions of people in Southern Asia over countless 
generations.
31
Collins thus approaches the Pali tradition as an intellectual resource independ-
ent of the historical Buddhist tradition in which it played an important cultural 
part. He perhaps overlooks, then, the role of Pali texts themselves as agents of 
social and cultural change.
While Collins stresses that he treats the Pali imaginaire as autonomous 
in this way only for analytical utility, he imbues his analytical category with an 
ontological coherence by connecting it to real economic conditions, explain -
ing that the imaginaire’s constancy and longevity derives from the general 
stability of the agrarian society of the Middle Ages. Any analysis of the pos -
sible dynamic interplay between the ‘cultural system’ and ‘socio-cultural life’ 
is largely curtailed, therefore, first by his deterministic view of material condi-
tions and second by an exceedingly long definition of the Middle Ages. Peter 
Skilling in a recent, useful critique has questioned this overly stable depiction 
of premodern Pali textual culture and the very notion of a long ‘traditional 
period’, stating ‘I do not see any exceptional degree of stability or cohesion – 
there is continuity, there is rupture, there is reformation, and there is reformu-
lation, none of which avoid or inhibit change and reinvention.’
32 Skilling still 
subscribes, however, to a similar analytical dichotomy that places Pali textual 
culture as a ‘databank’, ‘a fount of ideas, a system or network of references 
and co-ordinates’, and states that these ‘key ideological components are, so 
to speak, downloaded through sermons and through liturgy, through social 
etiquettes and hierarchies, through legal enactments and educational patterns, 
and through architecture and the visual and plastic arts’.
33

--- Page 26 of 286 ---
 I NTRODUCTION : T HEMES  AND  T HEORIES  11
In critiquing the Pali imaginaire I do not wish to challenge the general 
premise that culture plays a role in structuring agency. Rather, I think it is 
necessary, if we are to recover the historical agency of the authors of Pali 
texts, to no longer objectively conflate the analytical category of a ‘cultural 
system’, that is, the structuring ideas of a society, with existing texts in a par-
ticular language. This is important, first, so that we do not confuse analytical 
utility with ontological reality and second, so that we can view the ideas of 
Pali texts, where suitable, either as cultural structures – part of the system – or 
as part of ‘socio-cultural life’, that is, as a key expression of agency in his-
tory that allowed individuals to actively and purposefully change and reshape 
their already existing circumstances. This book emphasizes the latter role of 
Pali texts in the intellectual history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. It is perhaps 
better, in this regard, then, to think of these works as something like a matrix 
(mātikā) rather than imaginaire; an orientating point of origin that was created 
to inspire new thoughts, feelings and actions.
(c) San.gha, State and Compound Kingship
The economic and intellectual stability that scholars have seen in premodern 
Theravada Buddhist societies also pervades ideas about the historical rela -
tionship between ‘Saṅgha and state’. Frequently invoked to describe all types 
of premodern Buddhist societies is R.A.L.H. Gunawardana’s description of 
monastic and court relations in early medieval Sri Lanka as an ‘antagonistic 
symbiosis’.
34
Gunawardana’s useful ecological metaphor reveals an essentially func-
tionalist approach to this relationship, where the state is thought to have pro -
vided the necessary coercive power to protect the Saṅgha and, in return, the 
Saṅgha offered religious ideology and legitimation in support of the state. In 
its foundations, then, Gunawardana’s notion of symbiosis is clearly inspired 
by earlier sociological models, such as those of Georges Dumézil and Louis 
Dumont.
35 Gunawardana notes, however, that this symbiosis of functions 
became steadily antagonistic in the early medieval period due to the fact that 
the Saṅgha was developing into an increasingly autonomous legal and fiscal 
entity.
36 In his felicitous expression, then, Gunawardana manages to capture 
not only the historical interdependence between the two institutions but also 
the often conflictual nature of their relationship.
Gunawardana did not necessarily intend for his expression to be a 
definitive characterization of the relationship between Saṅgha and state, how-
ever. Rather, he coined the expression specifically to describe early medi -
eval Sri Lanka in contrast to Walpola Rahula’s characterization of the early 

--- Page 27 of 286 ---
12 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Saṅgha-state relationship as purely symbiotic and A.M. Hocart’s view that the 
Saṅgha effectively functioned as a ‘court and kingdom in miniature’.37
It is worth turning to A.M. Hocart (1883–1939) in more detail for our 
late medieval context since he offered a more nuanced understanding of the 
relationship between institution and function. Hocart developed a theory of 
‘dual kingship’ in which he argues that society is structured by complementary 
‘terrestrial’ and ‘spiritual’ functions.
38 While predicated on a similar notion of 
natural symbiosis, Hocart differs from Gunawardana in that he did not regard 
function and institution (Hocart’s ‘organization’) as necessarily contiguous. 
He stresses that this ‘dichotomy need not produce a pair’ and that the duality of 
functions can manifest in any institutional pattern, whether, one, two or many 
institutions.
39 When observing the societies of India and Sri Lanka, Hocart 
observed, in this regard, that:
the Church and the State are one in India. The head of this Church-State 
is the king … The king’s state is reproduced in miniature by his vassals; 
a farmer has his court, consisting of the personages most essential to the 
ritual, and so present even in the smallest community, the barber, the 
washerman, the drummers and so forth. The temple and the palace are 
indistinguishable, for the king represents the gods. Therefore, there is 
only one word in Sinhalese and in Tamil for both. The god in his temple 
has his court like the king in his palace; smiths, carpenters, potters all 
work for him.
40
A.M. Hocart could not have known at the time that what he observed in Sri 
Lanka had a specific historical genesis. Based, in particular, on the work of 
Ronald Inden, we can now describe the politics of late medieval Sri Lanka 
more accurately as one based on political models that developed in India 
between the eighth and twelfth centuries. Inden describes the medieval Indian 
imperial formation as a ‘society of kings’ structured by a ‘scale of kingships’, 
that is, a hierarchy of rulers based on encompassing spheres of lordship, from 
village chieftains at the bottom to the emperor, or ‘king of kings’ at its worldly 
apex. Above him, still, Inden describes a higher transcendent king, usually 
a deity, such as Viṣṇu or Śiva, but also, the Jina too, who bestowed lordship 
upon the emperor. This formation was not structured by a balance of religious 
and political functions between institutions but rather – and here we see the 
influence of Hocart’s more fluid view of social function – Inden describes 
political power as ‘compound kingship’, ‘the manifestation of divine and 
human wills relative to one another in a complex agent’.
41 Each of the political 
actors, then, in this scale of kingship, is a compound king and maintains a 
diminishing sphere of both temporal and spiritual power.

--- Page 28 of 286 ---
 I NTRODUCTION : T HEMES  AND  T HEORIES  13
This book shows that beginning in reform-era Sri Lanka we see monks 
claiming a similar position for the Buddha as sovereign over the temporal and 
spiritual worlds and depicting the ruling monarch as the Buddha’s inferior 
vassal. What is less clear in Inden’s work, however, is where religious special-
ists, such as Buddhist monks, fit within such a scale of kingship. Inspired by 
Hocart’s analysis of the sociological position of the Saṅgha, the book argues 
that the monastic elite in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries increasingly styled 
itself as an independent royal court led by a king-like figure, the so-called 
‘grandmaster’ (mahāsāmi), with an administrative structure that resembled a 
political actor. Monastic elites presented themselves, rather than the king and 
his court, under the Buddha at the apex of Laṅkā’s long chain of lordship and 
believed that the superior rights enjoyed by the Buddha should extend first to 
them before the king. The relationship then between the Saṅgha and the royal 
court was no longer one of an antagonistic symbiosis but rather a hierarchy 
of compound kingship, in which, at least from the monastic perspective, the 
Buddha and monastic elites possessed temporal and spiritual rights superior to 
the ruling king and nobility.
42
1.3. Chaos, Order  and Emotion
This book is divided into three parts, ‘chaos’, ‘order’ and ‘emotion’. In part 
one, we explore the historical context of the first of our overarching themes, 
namely that the cultural efflorescence that took place in the twelfth and thir -
teenth centuries was in part a response to social and political disorder. The 
term ‘chaos’ is not used to denote a complete breakdown of order but rather 
reflects the multiple, competing orders that ruptured the stable social struc-
tures of the previous millennium.
In the first chapter we will explore the prehistory of the reform era in 
the two centuries before the reform and unification of the Saṅgha in 1165. 
The chapter focuses in particular on the Cōḻa invasion and rule of Sri Lanka in 
the tenth century and the role it played in the rise of new centres of monastic 
power, changes in the cultural make-up of the royal family in Sri Lanka, and 
the increasing authority of Sanskrit textual models within the Saṅgha’s liter -
ary culture. In the second chapter we will then situate the production of Pali 
literature itself within the immediate context of the monastic reforms that took 
place in the era. The chapter outlines in broad terms the connection between 
reform-era Pali texts, the Saṅgha’s developing institutional autonomy and the 
localization of politics on the island.
The following two sections of the book are divided according to the 
two other intellectual orientations that shaped the reform era, namely a desire 

--- Page 29 of 286 ---
14 REWRITING BUDDHISM
to enframe and protect the essential meaning of the Buddha’s teachings and 
to accrue transformative merit through devotion to the Buddha. In part two, 
‘Order’, we will discuss the connection between social and political disorder, 
monastic perceptions of religious decline and the emergence of new types of 
grammar, commentary and anthology.
Chapter three  discusses the prominence of grammar or vyākaraṇa in 
reform-era intellectual culture. It focuses on the new grammar of Moggallāna 
and its perceived role as the first line of defence in stemming religious decline. 
Moggallāna adopted Sanskrit grammatical models and philosophies of lan-
guage that allowed the Saṅgha to think about their scriptures in new ways. In 
chapter four, we turn to Sumaṅgala’s reform-era handbook commentaries and 
highlight the development of a new scholastic formalism in these works, based 
in part on the pedagogical needs of the reform-era school system. These for -
mal changes were accompanied by a reappraisal of the authority of handbooks 
and the nature of scriptural language. Chapter five focuses on the composition 
of new anthologies, in particular, Siddhattha’s Sārasaṅgaha, ‘Compendium of 
the essence’. It explores how Siddhattha used new philological techniques to 
curate his scriptural heritage into practical models for pursuing religious goals 
relevant to his chaotic era, in particular the pursuit of buddhahood through 
devotional practices.
In part three, ‘Emotion’, we explore in more detail the renewed empha -
sis on religious devotion to the Buddha, in particular relic worship, in the 
reform era, its role in instantiating a new social order presided over by monas-
tic elites, and how these changes in orientation reflected and were supported 
by the development of independent works of Pali kāvya or poetry, including 
histories of the Buddha’s relics and Buddha biographies.
Chapter six focuses on the development of Pali poetics (alaṅkāra) in 
the reform era and investigates how literary theorists abandoned their scep -
ticism about the religious value of ornate poetry and instead came to view 
literary eloquence in devotional poetry as a moral virtue. In chapter seven, 
we then turn to how Pali kāvya worked in practice. One relic history, the 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa or ‘History of the tooth’, the chapter argues, was used to establish 
devotional relationships with the reform-era’s shifting elites and to instantiate 
relic shrines and the monastic leadership above the royal court at the pinnacle 
of a new devotional and political hierarchy. Chapter eight  concerns a similar 
development in the composition of ornate Buddha biographies. It explores in 
particular how one Buddha biography, the Jinālaṅkāra  or ‘Ornament of the 
Conqueror’, managed the aesthetic experiences and religious ambitions of its 
audience so as to support, rather than destabilize, monastic power.
The final chapter brings together the different intellectual strands dis-
cussed in the book, namely the creative influence of perceived religious 

--- Page 30 of 286 ---
 INTRODUCTION : T HEMES  AND  T HEORIES  15
decline, the desire to protect the Buddha’s teachings through new scholastic 
forms, and the perceived need to accrue transformative merit through devotion 
to the Buddha, as expressed in particular in new forms of Pali poetry. It then 
explores how Pali literary production changed in Sri Lanka in the two cen -
turies after the reform era and reassesses the way in which reform-era monas-
tic lineages were transmitted to Southeast Asia, in particular to the Pagan 
empire in what is now Burma.
Notes
1. See Wallace, 2018. Mahayana literature and some early Pali texts before Buddhaghosa also inter -
pret the so-called ‘analytical knowledge of language’ (niruttipaṭisambhidā , Sk. niruktipratisaṃvid) 
as the ability of an enlightened being to convey the Dhamma in any language necessary. See 
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkārasvavṛtti of Asaṅga, 18.34; Peṭakopadesa, 33,21–4.
2. See, for instance, a passage from the Tathāgatācintyaguhyanirdeśasūtra, translated and quoted in 
Lopez, 1993, 48–9.
3. See Vinaya II, 139,13–16; Samantapāsādikā VI, 1214,16–19. Bond, 1982, 19. There has been much re -
cent debate about the analytical validity of the term ‘Theravada’ in academic discourse since it was 
never used by the tradition itself prior to modernity. See, for instance, Skilling et al. (eds) 2012. I 
continue to use the term ‘Theravada’ since I am wary of adopting a nominalist stance where the 
lack of a single, shared identity marker among these monks – though there are some contenders, 
such as Mahāvihāravāsi and Vibhajjavādi – is taken as evidence that such a monastic circle did not 
exist, for the monks and monasteries of this book certainly had: (1) common authoritative religious 
texts; (2) similar ritual practices; (3) a shared corporate memory; and (4) were often administratively 
linked. When I use the term in this book, I am referring specifically either to one or more of the three 
nikāyas in pre-reform Sri Lanka and South India and, then, in the reform era, usually to the Mahāvi-
hāran monastic lineage as it emerged in Sri Lanka after the reforms themselves. I also often use the 
term ‘Buddhism’ to refer to the same lineage in cases where the context is clear.
4. Buddhaghosuppatti of Mahāmaṅgala, 60,24–9.
5. See Gornall and Ruiz-Falqués, 2019.
6. Taking as guides: Franke, 1902; V on Hinüber, 1996; Subhūti, 1876.
7. See chapter nine.
8. The dates given after the names of kings and queens, unless otherwise specified, refer to the duration 
of their reigns. On the regnal dates of reform-era kings and queens, see chapter three.
9. See chapter two.
10. There are a number of useful social, economic and political histories that, at least in part, cover the re-
form era. Book-length studies include, for instance, Ariyapala, 1956; Bechert, 1966; De Silva, 1981; 
De Silva, 1997; Dhammavisuddhi, 1970; Gunawardana, 1979; Ilangasinha, 1992; Liyanagamage, 
1968; Panabokke, 1993; Ray, ed. 1959–60.
11. Throughout this book I have found useful Whitney Cox’s recent work on politics in premodern South 
India. See Cox, 2016, esp. 16–21. I borrow the concept of an ‘organizational plane’ from Deleuze 
and Guattari, 1994. I have found helpful their distinction between the chaotic conceptual world as 
a whole, the ‘virtuality’, and the local conceptual orders immanent within this virtuality that help 
agents think and act. For an earlier, looser adaptation of similar Deleuzian ideas in the interpretation 
of the Sri Lankan ‘Suniyama’ ritual, see Kapferer, 1997. I have also found particularly inspiring Alan 
Strathern’s recent monumental study on religious and political change in premodernity, especially his 
second chapter. See Strathern, 2019.
12. Here, see chapter two.
13. On this, see the discussions in chapters one and four.
14. A number of other works have drawn a connection between cultural production and eschatological 
expectations. See, in particular, Blackburn, 2001, 80–6; Blackburn, 2017; Frasch, 2014; Frasch, 2017.
15. Deleuze, 2004.
16. See, for instance, Hallisey, 1995.

--- Page 31 of 286 ---
16 REWRITING BUDDHISM
17. Childers, 1875, xii.
18. Gombrich, 1988, 22–3. See also the criticisms in Blackburn, 2001, 5–9.
19. See, for instance, Paranavitana, 1960, 566–70.
20. Paranavitana, 1960, 577.
21. Warder, 1981, 204.
22. Malalasekera, 1994, 148; 163; 168.
23. Vaidya, 1946, 479.
24. I borrow the description of Pali texts as a ‘view from nowhere’ from a critical appraisal of this pos -
ition in Choompolpaisal, 2008.
25. Tambiah, 1984, 7–8. On the methodological divide between anthropologists and philologists, see 
Crosby, 2008a.
26. See, for instance, Spiro, 1982.
27. Collins, 1998, 1–117, esp. 18. This book owes a great deal to the works and advice of Steven Collins. 
In testament to his generosity as a teacher and intellectual spirit, I am particularly grateful to him for 
encouraging me to engage more critically with his work.
28. Here following Le Gof f, 1988.
29. Collins, 1998, 41.
30. Here relying on Archer, 1988.
31. Collins, 1998, 570.
32. Skilling, 2012, 336. For similar criticisms of Jacques Le Goff, see Savy, 2014.
33. Skilling, 2012, 345–6.
34. The expression is employed by Steven Collins, for instance, to describe premodern Buddhist civil -
izations in general. See Collins, 1998, 1–40. It has been adopted in comparative studies of premodern 
religion too.
35. See Dumézil, 1958; Dumont, 1999. Also, Rahula, 1956.
36. Gunawardana, 1979, 343–4; Gunawardana, 1976.
37. Gunawardana, 1979, 344, citing Hocart, 1968, 68.
38. Hocart, 1970, 162–79. Hocart recognized that this dichotomy was an analytical distinction rather 
than a natural one, stating that ‘the divorce of temporal and spiritual is unnatural; for both are rules of 
living, and there cannot be two sets of rules’ (176).
39. Hocart, 1970, 289. He earlier in the work distinguishes the fluctuating functions of persons or organ-
izations in contrast with the more stable functions of what he calls ‘personages’, that is, characters or 
representations of persons. He writes, for instance, that ‘we thus see how vain it is to try and define 
the terms “priest”, “king” in fact any titles. You cannot define what is in a constant state of flux; priest 
passes into king, especially law-king, such as the Dalai Lama and the Pope, and king may be assimi-
lated to priest.’ See Hocart, 1970, 200.
40. Hocart, 1968, 67–8.
41. Inden, 2000, 213–62. See also Inden, 1981. Victor Lieberman has similarly spoken of a ‘model’, 
developed in Gupta India, of ‘multiple, nested sovereignties and attenuated zones of influence’ that 
‘provided a template for all later South Asian – and Indic Southeast Asian – states.’ See Lieberman, 
2009, 640, cited also in Strathern, 2009, 824.
42. This is not to say that this phase of ‘compound kingship’ cannot be thought of as a development on 
the antagonistic symbiosis of the early medieval period. It is simply that we need to view symbiosis 
as defining the relationship between functions (in this case, of a single institution) and not between 
institutions, since function and institution were no longer identifiably contiguous in the reform era. 
Rather, the relationship was now largely competitive and hierarchical, with co-operation induced 
through the powers of persuasion rather than met as a result of social needs. See also the extended 
discussion in the notes on part four of chapter eight.

--- Page 32 of 286 ---
Part I
Chaos

--- Page 33 of 286 ---


--- Page 34 of 286 ---
19
2
Before 1165 and All That
Scholar-monks composed new Pali texts in the reform era as a creative 
response to perceived religious decline and it was the very upending of trad -
itional order in the preceding two centuries that provided these monks not only 
with the motivation but also the resources to bring about a resurgence of their 
tradition. Early attempts to explain this era of literary efflorescence focused 
narrowly only on the causal role of political stability and patronage during 
the events of the reforms themselves. Declaring this period to be Sri Lanka’s 
‘Augustan age’, for instance, G.P. Malalasekera in his influential The Pāli Lit-
erature of Ceylon emphasized Parākramabāhu I’s role (1157–86) in determin-
ing the cultural character of the era. He wrote that, ‘with this perfect internal 
tranquillity, undisturbed by oppression, encouraged in their activities by the 
great and devout interest taken by the head of the State himself, and working 
amidst congenial and beautiful surroundings, there arose during this period a 
band of scholars, who made this epoch the Augustan age of Ceylon literature’.
1
There is no doubt that the reforms of Parākramabāhu I were a cru -
cial moment in the monastic community’s cultural resurgence and we will 
explore the nature of these reforms in the following chapter. To understand 
more fully the relationship between culture and society during the reform 
era, however, it is worth expanding the scope of our analysis beyond the 
momentary stability of the events themselves to examine how such reforms 
could not have occurred without the social and political turmoil that sur -
rounded them. What, in particular, had changed on the island to allow the 
Saṅgha to finally achieve unity for the first time in well over 1,000 years? 
It is impossible to single out any one reason for this development, for, as 
Buddhaghosa wisely once wrote about causality, ‘conditions … give rise to 
phenomena … only when they are not independent of each other or deficient 
with respect to each other’.
2
That said, three interrelated changes in the tenth and eleventh centuries 
in particular stand out as important, namely the invasions of the South Indian 
Cōḻa kings Rājarāja (985–1012) and Rājendra I (1012–44), the fragmentation 

--- Page 35 of 286 ---
20 REWRITING BUDDHISM
of the royal family as a result of its pursuit of a new, exogamous marriage strat-
egy alongside growing monastic involvement in dynastic politics, and lastly 
changing attitudes to Sanskrit literature as a model for composing Pali and 
Sinhala works. Each of these factors, which roughly correspond to changes in 
the island’s economic, social and intellectual resources, played an important 
role in both disrupting the old cultural order and in setting the stage for the 
emergence of new forms of religious life.
2.1.   The   Cōḻas,   Monastic   Property   and   the   Rise   of   the  
Forest Monks
The millennium that preceded the reform era in Sri Lanka was characterized 
by contained conflict. It was marked by constant upheaval caused by endless 
dynastic and succession disputes that importantly, however, did not present 
an existential threat to the general patterns of social and political life.
3 The 
dynastic struggles of the first millennium were often local and centred on a 
rivalry between two competing branches of the royal family, the Lambakaṇṇa, 
who ruled in Anurādhapura until 428 CE and then again after 614 CE, and 
the Moriya, who ruled with only a slight interruption between 455 and 614 
CE.
4 One distinct feature of the monarchy in Sri Lanka in particular in the 
second Lambakaṇṇa dynasty after 614 CE was the general preference for an 
endog amous marriage strategy, that is, for marrying in the family. Thomas 
Trautmann has observed that:
to a much greater extent than elsewhere in South Asia, the Cey -
lonese throne may be described as the joint property of an extended fam-
ily, and the monarch as its trustee. The family itself was large, but its 
boundaries were fairly well defined. It did not need to favor the other 
families occupying the inferior offices of state by marrying their daugh-
ters, since its own members filled those offices, supplied brides and gave 
support; nor did it have to choose brides from a wide array of neighbor-
ing states which, as an island, Ceylon lacks. On the whole the attempt 
to keep the property in the family was remarkably successful, and the 
Ceylonese monarchy had a degree of continuity not to be found in the 
Sub-continent.
5
The history of the Saṅgha during the same period displays a similar tension 
between constant shifts in power and a general trend towards institutional con-
tinuity. From early on in its history the Saṅgha in Sri Lanka too was riven 
with rivalries and was ultimately split into three main fraternities or nikāyas, 

--- Page 36 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  21
the Mahāvihāra, Abhayagirivihāra and Jetavanavihāra, for most of the Mid-
dle Ages. The Abhayagiri split from the Mahāvihāra during the reign of king 
Vaṭṭagāmaṇi Abhaya (89–77 BCE) and a further schism in the Mahāvihāra 
occurred in the reign of Mahāsena (274–301) from which the Jetavana arose.
6 
Throughout the first millennium these three fraternities competed for the 
patronage of the royal family, who variously favoured one fraternity over the 
other two. The Saṅgha as a whole was successful in maintaining its wealth 
and property and, for much of the first millennium, monarchs respected the 
continued rights of a monastery over previously donated lands. R.A.L.H. Gun-
awardana observed, in this regard, that ‘apart from instances of plunder of the 
wealth accumulated in monasteries by kings at war, no attempt to confiscate 
the land granted to monasteries is evident until the end of the period of the 
Anurādhapura kingdom’.
7
At the end of the first millennium all of this changed. Sri Lanka became 
intimately embroiled in a struggle with the three great powers of South India, 
the Pāṇḍyas, Pallavas and Cō ḻa.8 It began when Sena II (853–887) invaded 
Pāṇḍya country in revenge for the Pāṇḍya sacking of Anurādhapura in around 
840, killing the monarch and forming a new alliance with the king’s son who 
he placed on the throne.
9 Then came the fall of the Pallavas when in 897 a Cōḻa 
feudatory, crowned as Āditya I (871–907), defeated and killed his Pallava 
overlord Aparājita (879–97) in battle and annexed the Pallava heartland of 
Toṇḍaimaṇḍalam.
10
The rapid end to Pallava rule led to a hasty reorganization of the political 
status quo that had existed in the orbit of the old power. The Laṅkan monar -
chy, in particular, pursued a dangerous strategy of maintaining alliances with 
the Cōḻa’s neighbouring enemies. The alliance with the Pāṇḍyas led Kassapa 
V (914–23) to send an army in support of Rājasiṃha II (900–20) against the 
Cōḻas and to give the latter’s son asylum in Sri Lanka after the defeat of their 
combined forces. The Cō ḻa king Parāntaka (907–55) was intent on invad -
ing Sri Lanka in order to capture the Pāṇḍya regalia, briefly succeeding in 
the reign of Udaya IV (946–54), who is remembered by monastic historians 
as a lazy drunk.
11 It was Parāntaka’s later successors, Rājarāja and his son 
Rājendra, however, who were able to firmly establish Cōḻa rule on the island. 
The Cōḻas chose Poḷonnaruva in the east as their principal base instead of the 
old capital of Anurādhapura and maintained settlements around Poḷonnaruva 
and various port towns that acted as staging posts for incursions into the south 
of the island.
12
It has been suggested that the Cō ḻa invasions brought about cultural 
change due to imperialism or even some ethno-religious rivalry. 13 There is 
little evidence, however, that the Cō ḻas harboured much cultural ambition 
in their rule. In terms of literary influence, the Cō ḻa rulers only left a few 

--- Page 37 of 286 ---
22 REWRITING BUDDHISM
inscriptions often connected with the patronage of Śaiva temples. 14 It was 
rather the wider South Indian elite – courtiers, warlords, artisans and mer -
chant guilds – and also later kings who were responsible for the majority of 
Tamil inscriptions produced on the island, most of which can be dated to long 
after Cōḻa rule had ended. An inscription dating to the reign of Vijayabāhu I 
(1055–1110), for instance, entrusting the protection of the tooth relic of the 
Buddha to the Vēlaikkāra mercenary company, begins with a Sanskrit verse 
and eulogizes Vijayabāhu in literary Tamil.
15 Most of the religious patronage 
connected with the Cō ḻas came from the new mercantile communities who 
supported the construction of Śaiva temples and also some Buddhist monas -
teries around Poḷonnaruva, port towns and other commercial centres. 16 If this 
religious patronage did result in the production of Tamil literature, no work 
prior to the fifteenth century has survived.
17
Monastic histories viewed the Cōḻa invasions as primarily an economic 
loss. The late-medieval Cūḷavaṃsa (‘Little history’) states that ‘by violently 
breaking open the relic chambers of all three fraternities in the undivided land 
of Laṅkā with their numerous, valuable golden images and thus taking the 
vitality (oja) out of all the monasteries here and there, demons seized the heart 
(sāra) of Laṅkā’.
18 The emphasis on the widespread looting and destruction of 
monasteries and relic sites found in such monastic accounts was possibly more 
of a literary embellishment than reality.
19 Keir Strickland in a recent archae -
ological study, for instance, has concluded that there is very little evidence at 
Anurādhapura for any of the mass devastation of the Sacred City mentioned 
in monastic histories.
20
Strickland confirms, though, that the civilization around the old sacred 
capital of Anurādhapura did indeed collapse by the eleventh century. It seems 
that more damaging than the sacking of monasteries was that the Cō ḻas re- 
centred their administration and economic infrastructure around Poḷonnaruva, 
redirecting long-distance trade routes away from the west to the northeast. 
According to Strickland, ‘we see the reorganisation of trade routes away from 
Anurādhapura, the disappearance from Anurādhapura of craft specialists, of 
manufacturing, of the elite, of monumental construction, effectively the loss 
of all the characteristics of an urbanised complex society, all the characteris-
tics of a centralised economy’.
21 The economic shock was compounded by 
the fact that Vijayabāhu I, having overthrown the Cō ḻas in 1070, maintained 
Poḷonnaruva as his administrative base.22
Cōḻa rule was also likely more harmful to monastic interests than any 
prior incursion on the island due to the fact that in the preceding centuries 
the monastic community had transformed into a powerful landowner. From 
around the late eighth century inscriptions record a large number of royal 
donations to the Saṅgha of land and immunities, in particular exemption from 

--- Page 38 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  23
taxation. Recent analysis of Christopher Davis suggests a steady rise in such 
donations, peaking in the ninth and tenth centuries. 23 The Saṅgha benefited 
from the alienation of land by taxing its inhabitants, using their labour, or 
extracting their surplus produce.
24 As R.A.L.H. Gunawardana notes:
by about the ninth century, monasteries had come to own, apart from 
movable possessions, a vast extent of property in estates,  irrigation 
works and even salterns, some of them situated at  considerable distance 
from the owning institution.25
The Saṅgha maintained its rights through a variety of methods. In the cases 
where the original donor continued to manage the estate, the donor over -
saw the continued transference of appropriate income from the estate to the 
Saṅgha. In instances where the Saṅgha had full proprietary rights over the 
land, it employed coercive strategies to maintain control such as restricting 
the water supply to unco-operative tenant farmers or confiscating their tools, 
which the monastery owned.
26 While it is unclear if the Cōḻas forcibly deprived 
the Saṅgha of its land rights, the economic shift east would have drastically 
reduced its income centred on Anurādhapura and its hinterland.
It is in the context of this unprecedented economic change that we can 
perhaps understand the curious rise to prominence of a group of forest monks 
based in Diṁbulāgala, a hilltop monastery situated roughly twenty kilometres 
from Poḷonnaruva. Most significantly, Parākramabāhu I selected these monks, 
led by a certain Kassapa, to oversee the reform and unification of the Saṅgha 
in 1165. The highest ranks of the Saṅgha after the reforms continued to be 
dominated by monks from this forest fraternity. It was a certain Medhaṅkara, 
another forest monk from Diṁbulāgala, who led the monastic reforms of 
Parākramabāhu II in 1266. Explanations of the meteoric rise of what prior to 
the Cōḻa invasions was a peripheral monastic outpost have tended to rely on 
Weberian theories about the revolutionary potential of charismatic leaders. 27 
It was the ‘ascetic charisma’ of forest fraternities, R.A.L.H. Gunawardana has 
argued, that enabled them to secure popularity in the eyes of the laity.
28 There 
is clearly some truth to this in that the forest monks of the reform era do play 
up their ascetic credentials in their claims for authority. We can speculate that 
what actually brought these forest monks into power in the first place, how-
ever, was their fortuitous economic position in Poḷonnaruva’s hinterland.
We learn from an inscription of Sundarī or Sundaramahādevī, the 
Kāliṅga dowager-queen of Vikramabāhu I (1111–32), for instance, that more 
than five hundred monks were living at Diṁbulāgala prior to the reforms, 
indicating that the hilltop monastery had thrived after the Cō ḻa invasions.29 
The monastery had likely benefited from the new trade routes and was now 

--- Page 39 of 286 ---
24 REWRITING BUDDHISM
better connected with the northeast Indian mainland than the old centres in 
the west of the island. H.C.P. Bell noted that even in 1917 Diṁbulāgala was 
a ‘ beacon-hill’, ‘by which mariners skirting the Eastern coast of Ceylon are 
greatly assured of their position’.30 While historians have debated the extent to 
which the reforms of 1165 actually amounted to a victory of the Mahāvihāra 
over the Jetavana and Abhayagiri, few have questioned how much continu -
ity there was between the post-Cō ḻa Mahāvihāra and what had been before. 31 
There is an argument to be made that the reformed monastic community after 
1165 was the product of a unique strand of Mahāvihāran thought and practice 
found at this hilltop site.
2.2. Stranger  Queens, Civil War and Buddhist Politics
When the Cō ḻas overthrew the Pallavas in 897, there was no guarantee that 
they would become the hegemonic power in the region that they did. In fact, 
in the century before their conquest of Sri Lanka beginning in 993, there were 
occasions when the Laṅkan court asserted its independence from the Cōḻas and 
fended off a number of attempts to bring the island under their suzerainty. 32 
And yet, paradoxically, the court’s very attempt to assert its independence 
from its neighbours contributed to its rapid fragmentation from the eleventh 
century onwards. This was in part because rulers, for the first time, intensified 
marriage alliances with kingdoms rivalling the Cō ḻas, creating rival factions 
within the royal family.
Nearly all the foreign queens who married into the Laṅkan royal family 
from the tenth century onwards were from the kingdom of Kaliṅga, situated on 
India’s eastern coast just south of Bengal in what is now Orissa, though later 
marriages with the South Indian Pāṇḍyas and other northern lineages further 
complicate the picture. We find frequent mention of Kāliṅga royalty present in 
the Laṅkan court from the reign of Kassapa IV (898–914) onwards.
33 Mahinda 
IV (956–72) was the first to marry a Kāliṅga princess, who may have been 
mother of his son Mahinda V (982–1029).
34 The author of the Cūḷavaṃsa 
thought the event unusual enough to write that ‘even though there existed a 
lineage of kṣatriyas in Laṅkā, the ruler of men had fetched a princess born in 
the lineage of the Wheel-Turning king of Kāliṅga and made her his principal 
queen’.
35 Her brother also had a daughter Lokitā who then became the wife of 
Kassapa VI (known as ‘Vikramabāhu’, 1029–40).36
Vijayabāhu I strengthened ties with the Kāliṅgas and took a Kāliṅga 
princess, Tilokasundarī, as his queen or mahesī to ensure ‘the longevity of 
his own lineage’, according to the Cūḷavaṃsa. 37 He had three of his queen’s 
kinsmen, Madhukaṇṇava, Bhīmarāja and Balakkāra, brought from Sīhapura in 

--- Page 40 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  25
Kaliṅga country and established at his court. 38 Vijayabāhu and Tilokasundarī 
had a son, Vikramabāhu I, and, for the purpose of continuing their line, 
arranged his marriage to a Kāliṅga princess, Sundarī or Sundaramahādevī, the 
younger sister of these three Kāliṅga princes.
39
It was in the reign of Vijayabāhu I that the monarchy’s ties to India 
became more complex. During Cōḻa rule there appears to have been a number 
of foreign dignitaries in the kingdom of Rohaṇa in the South of Sri Lanka, 
most notably a certain Jagatipāla, who is described in the Cūḷavaṃsa as a 
prince of the solar dynasty hailing from ‘Ayojjhā’ (Sk. Ayodhyā) in northern 
India. In a power struggle over control of the South, the Cōḻas killed Jagatipāla 
and captured his queen and daughter, Līlāvatī. 40 In the reign of Vijayabāhu I 
both queen and daughter escaped to Sri Lanka and the monarch took Līlāvatī 
as one of his queens.
41 Vijayabāhu further sent his sister, Mittā, to marry a 
Pāṇḍya prince, whose offspring identified as Pāṇḍyas and as scions of the 
lunar dynasty, opposing the Kāliṅga side of the royal family.
42
After the death of Vijayabāhu I, rightful succession was meant to 
pass to  his brother Jayabāhu I (1110–11), followed by Vijayabāhu’s son 
Vikramabāhu I. 43 Vikramabāhu’s right to the throne, however, was soon 
challenged by Mittā’s three sons, Vīrabāhu (also known as Māṇābharaṇa), 
Kittisirimegha and Sirivallabha, who plotted with Jayabāhu to install Vīrabāhu 
instead as his successor. This led to a bloody civil war between the two factions 
resulting in Vikramabāhu I nominally ascending the throne at Poḷonnaruva and 
the three brothers along with the elderly Jayabāhu ruling regions outside of the 
capital.
44 Matters were not helped by the fact that Vikramabāhu while fighting 
his half-brothers also had to contend with an invasion of the island by a north 
Indian prince, Vīradeva, who temporarily captured Poḷonnaruva before being 
finally slain on a muddy highway somewhere near the capital.
45 The Saṅgha it 
seems opposed Vikramabāhu’s usurpation of Jayabāhu’s throne and never offi-
cially consecrated him as king. The monastic community suffered greatly dur-
ing this period of war and monastic historians remember the warring brothers 
with contempt, singling out Vikramabāhu in particular for stealing monastic 
property in order to support his military exploits:
King Vikramabāhu seized the maintenance villages belonging to the 
Buddha and so forth and gave them to his attendants. In Poḷonnaruva 
he gave over many monasteries distinguished with relics for foreign sol-
diers to live in. Gems, pearls and the like that had been given by the 
faithful as offerings to the alms-bowl relic and precious tooth relic; the 
sandalwood, the aloes, the camphor, and the many images of gold and 
the like too; those he plundered and forcefully took away as he pleased.
46

--- Page 41 of 286 ---
26 REWRITING BUDDHISM
This civil war encouraged further social and political fragmentation. The people 
of the different regions stopped paying dues (kara) to these different kings and, 
according to the Cūḷavaṃsa, ‘ignoring the ruler, they resorted to banditry, and 
lived impudently (lit. ‘raised up’, i.e. independently) each in their own territory’.47
This newly fragmented social and political order continued into the 
reign of Vikramabāhu’s son and nominal successor, Gajabāhu II (1132–53). 
Gajabāhu never sat securely on the throne and his reign was constantly threat-
ened by familiar rival factions. His biggest threat was a young Parākramabāhu, 
ruler of the province of Māyāraṭṭha. Parākramabāhu was of mixed Kāliṅga and 
Pāṇḍya ancestry since his mother, Ratanāvalī, was the daughter of Vijayabāhu 
and the Kāliṅga Tilokasundarī, and his father was Vīrabāhu, the eldest son 
of Mittā, who had unsuccessfully attempted to install himself as Jayabāhu 
I’s successor. Another contender for the throne was Mānābharaṇa, ruler of 
Rohaṇa in the South. He too had a heritage reflective of the court’s rival fac-
tions since he was the son of Sirivallabha, the youngest of Mittā’s three sons, 
and Sugalā, who was the great-granddaughter of the North Indian prince 
Jagatipāla, through Vijayabāhu’s marriage to Līlāvatī.
Eyeing the throne, Parākramabāhu steadily amassed a large army and 
finally attacked Gajabāhu in Poḷonnaruva. According to the Cūḷavaṃsa, he jus-
tified his challenge to the Kāliṅga king on religious grounds since Gajabāhu ‘had 
fetched princes holding evil beliefs from abroad and had thus filled Rājaraṭṭha 
with enemies (lit. thorns)’.
48 It was the monastic community, however, who 
stepped in and brokered a peace deal between Gajabāhu and Parākramabāhu 
in which the latter was effectively recognized as Gajabāhu’s legitimate suc-
cessor.
49 But upon Gajabāhu’s death in 1153 his ministers reneged on the 
treaty and brought to the throne Parākramabāhu’s cousin, Mānābharaṇa, ruler 
of Rohaṇa. Parākramabāhu’s forces attacked Mānābharaṇa and forced him to 
flee south for refuge, where he died. His mother Sugalā hid the Buddha’s tooth 
and bowl relics in Rohaṇa and, in pursuit, Parākramabāhu violently subdued 
the province and brought both Sugalā and the relics back to Poḷonnaruva.
50 
While Parākramabāhu’s twenty-nine-year reign ushered in relative peace on 
the island, old enmities between royal factions re-emerged upon his death and 
sixteen rulers, allied variously to Kāliṅga and Pāṇḍya factions, took the throne 
in the fifty years before the reign of Parākramabāhu II (1236–70).
The increasingly cosmopolitan nature of the royal court changed political dis-
course on the island too. Kassapa IV in 904 CE claimed for the first time in 
a royal inscription that he as monarch descended from the Indian Okkāka or 
Ikṣvāku (Sk.) lineage of kings. Rulers from Kassapa IV onwards frequently 

--- Page 42 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  27
assert their supremacy within this transregional royal lineage at the beginning 
of their inscriptions in royal eulogies or praśastis often modelled on conti -
nental Sanskrit forms. 51 The Sinhala of the royal court, then, took on many 
of the characteristics of what Sheldon Pollock has called a ‘cosmopolitan 
vernacular’, localizing for the court’s audience on the island transregional, 
Sanskritic conceptions of kingship and power.
52 Mahinda IV , for instance, 
regularly claimed in his inscriptions to be ‘descended from the royal line of 
King Okkāka, who abounds in a multitude of illustrious, boundless and tran-
scendental virtues’ and that he ‘had made other Kṣatriya families of the entire 
Jambudvīpa (India) his vassals’.
53
At the same time we also begin to see in the monastic writings of the 
era detailed discussions about the connection between the Okkāka royal line 
and the Buddha’s own genealogy.
54 A contemporary Pali commentary on the 
Mahāvaṃsa ‘Great history’ that was perhaps in dialogue with Mahinda IV’s 
political project, for instance, claimed that the Śākya branch of the Okkāka 
lineage, which it argues was the superior branch of the solar dynasty, solely 
survived in Sri Lanka since the royal family on the island descended from 
Paṇḍukābhaya, the mythic king of Laṅkā, who was a grandson of Amitodana, 
the Buddha’s paternal uncle, and whose Kāliṅga wife was also a grandchild 
of Amitodana.
55 (In introducing within this narrative a Kāliṅga queen, who is 
pointedly also descended from the Buddha, it is tempting to see here as well 
an attempt to accommodate Mahinda IV’s unusual Kāliṅga marriage within 
expectations about the religious identity of the island’s rulers.)
There are occasions in the tenth century where we find mirrored in the 
inscriptions of the monarchs of the era this explicitly Buddhist form of polit -
ical identity, where kings connect their Okkāka genealogy to the Śākya clan of 
the Buddha. The few inscriptions that do echo monastic expectations of royal 
identity are always addressed to monastic elites.
56 We can perhaps explain the 
explicit religious inflection occasionally given to these rulers’ Okkāka ances -
try as a sign of more local political constraints where kings chose to mirror 
monastic expectations of kingship, at least partly, we can imagine, in defer -
ence to the very real power of the monasteries they patronized. This is evident 
in the very first inscription to evoke the Śākya clan in a praśasti, namely, 
Kassapa V’s regulatory inscription at the Abhayagirivihāra in Anurādhapura 
in 920, where he responds to an incident in which his officials had given away 
oxen from a service village belonging to the monastery. Kassapa V reminds 
the monks of his benevolence to them, formally reconfirms the villages owned 
by the monastery and establishes a number of other freedoms and protections, 
while also – perhaps in return for siding with the monastery – assigning new 
rules for monastic behaviour and practice.
57

--- Page 43 of 286 ---
28 REWRITING BUDDHISM
In periods of royal power and relative stability, as we find in the early 
tenth century, we can easily overlook the political necessity of such diplo -
macy. It is only when the island descended into civil war, with some rulers 
attempting to deprive monasteries of their land, that we begin to see the actual 
contingency underlying relations between the court and monastic community. 
In such a fragmented social and political environment, ignoring monastic 
power could have disastrous consequences, as the fate of one of Vijayabāhu’s 
foreign queens attests. According to the Cūḷavaṃsa, either Tilokasundarī or 
Līlāvatī made the error of seizing property belonging to the monastic commu-
nity and, in a theatrical show of deference, the king ‘had her led by the neck 
and evicted from the city’.
58
And yet it is also in the inscriptions of the foreign queens of the era 
that we find some of the most creative religious politics ever produced on the 
island.
59 Perhaps the greatest politician of the age, at least in terms of monastic 
relations, was the Kāliṅga queen Sundarī, wife of Vikramabāhu I. Her dip-
lomatic interventions were particularly crucial since, as mentioned, her hus -
band was largely despised by the Saṅgha. In one unprecedentedly deferential 
inscription, Sundarī actually begins her record with a short praśasti in Pali 
eulogizing a powerful monk, Ānanda, who she describes as a ‘banner raised 
aloft in the land of Laṅkā’.
60 Never before had Pali been used as a language 
of inscriptional encomium and nor had a member of the royal family treated 
the monastic community as a political overlord by placing a praise poem to a 
monk before the traditional eulogy to the monarch.
Another impressive political statement is her inscription at Diṁbulāgala, 
discussed above, where Sundarī records the construction of a road between 
two caves at the hilltop monastery.
61 In a masterful political move, she 
donated to the ‘cave of the sun’ (hiru-maha-leṇa) – the name of which evokes 
her ‘solar’ royal lineage – ‘statues, stūpas and bodhi trees’ and renamed it 
‘Kāliṅga’ cave (kāliṅgu-leṇa ) after her own clan. Sundarī further describes 
herself in the inscription’s opening eulogy ‘as descended from the Solar 
dynasty which belongs to the lineage of Suddhodana, the Buddha’s father, 
that has sprung from the royal race of Okkāka’. She does not mention king 
Paṇḍukābhaya, grandson of the Buddha’s paternal uncle, perhaps because, as 
Kaliṅga-born, she was technically not part of this branch of the Śākyas, and 
instead, echoing the commentary on the Mahāvaṃsa, connects her Kāliṅga 
lineage directly with Suddhodana himself.
62 She further uniquely dates the 
inscription (c. 1136) not to the reign of her deceased, unpopular husband, but 
from the date of the coronation of king Jayabāhu I who, as mentioned, was the 
last king before the civil war consecrated by the monastic community.
63
Her skilful Buddhist politics, without precedent in earlier inscriptions, 
were likely intended to win favour for her son Gajabāhu and it seems to have 

--- Page 44 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  29
helped when, faced with imminent death at the hands of Parākramabāhu’s 
forces, the Saṅgha intervened on Gajabāhu’s behalf and brokered a peace deal 
between him and Parākramabāhu, ultimately saving the king’s life. The war 
and in-fighting among the long line of pretenders to the throne prior to the 
reign of Parākramabāhu I, then, had turned the Saṅgha into an important polit-
ical entity in its own right, introducing as a result more localized, religious 
forms of political discourse.
2.3.  The Complex Prehistory of Reform-era Sanskrit
The adoption of Sanskrit literary models in the royal inscriptions of the tenth 
century was part of a growing engagement with Sanskrit court culture – cen-
tred on poetry or kāvya and its ancillary philological disciplines such as gram-
mar and poetics – both within the Laṅkan court and the Mahāvihāra prior 
to the reforms. Kassapa V , for instance, likely composed the first treatise on 
Sinhala poetics, based on Sanskrit models, and a number of scholar-monks 
composed Sanskrit grammatical works too.
64 Both the court and monastery 
relied upon similar intellectual resources, notably the Sanskrit works of Bud -
dhist monks with ties to northeast India.
The most influential scholar of the pre-reform era was undoubtedly 
Ratnamati or Ratnaśrījñāna. Ratnamati was one of a number of monks 
from Sri Lanka who travelled in this period between the island and north -
east India, especially to the sacred site of Bodh Gayā. 65 In a recent pioneer -
ing study Dragomir Dimitrov has plausibly argued that this scholar-monk 
composed, among other works, a Sanskrit commentary on Candragomin’s 
Cāndravyākaraṇa
 (‘Grammar of Candragomin’), a work of grammatical phil-
osophy, the Śabdārthacintā (‘Reflections on words and their meanings’), as 
well as a Sanskrit commentary on Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa (‘Mirror of litera -
ture’, c. eighth century). 66 It was possibly under this scholar’s influence that 
Kassapa V  composed his work on Sinhala poetics, the Siyabaslakara (‘Literary 
ornaments for our own language’), with Ratnamati writing its Sinhala com-
mentary (sannaya) soon after.
67 As we will see in later chapters, Ratnamati’s 
Sanskrit works on poetics and grammar served as models for new forms of 
Pali philology in the reform era too.
It is difficult to say with any certainty why a scholar-monk such as 
Ratnamati suddenly became an important authority for both the royal court 
and the Mahāvihāra from the tenth century onwards. For there had long been 
scholars from Sri Lanka present in northeast India. There is a tradition in a 
seventeenth-century Tibetan history, for instance, that in the reign of king 
Dhammapāla (775–812) a contingent of Sinhalese monks at Bodh Gayā, 

--- Page 45 of 286 ---
30 REWRITING BUDDHISM
likely allied to the Mahāvihāra, joined with certain monks from Sindh in 
actively opposing Tantric practices there. 68 Some of the monks who travelled 
must have become highly educated. We learn from the same history too that 
a scholar-monk from Sri Lanka, Jayabhadra, even rose to the position of 
abbot at Vikramaśīla in the middle third of the ninth century.
69 Ratnamati’s 
peculiar rise to prominence may be explained, as Dragomir Dimitrov has 
argued, by the fact that he was simply a rare and brilliant individual. Or per -
haps also his influence was a sign of a shift in the Mahāvihāra’s own attitude 
to Sanskrit.
It seems that Mahāvihāran monks in Sri Lanka began to engage with 
courtly forms of Sanskrit prior to the reforms. Kassapa, the leading hierarch 
at Diṁbulāgala, had the library and resources there to write a grammatical 
handbook for the Sanskrit Cāndravyākaraṇa, probably at some point before 
the reforms of 1165 took place.
70 Such scholarship, while not identifiably reli-
gious, cannot easily be explained as service to the royal court either, since 
there is no evidence it was undertaken for any king or minister. We can specu-
late that perhaps scholar-monks had started to produce such works for their 
own sake, adopting forms of culture suitably expressive of their status in the 
political landscape.
71 That the Sanskrit learning usually associated with court 
culture was now a sign of status and prestige for the reform-era Mahāvihāra is 
reflected in the changing scholarly ideal of the period.
72 In one of his works, 
for instance, a reform leader, Sāriputta, is compared favourably with great 
Sanskrit grammarians and poets, such as, Pāṇini and Kālidāsa.
73
The history of reform-era Sanskrit is further complicated by the fact 
that the monastic literary culture of the period was influenced not only by 
courtly forms of Sanskrit but also Buddhist Sanskrit works associated with the 
Mahayana and Tantric traditions. From the tenth century, for instance, we begin 
to see in Pali and Sinhala works a more conspicuous engagement with themes 
and ideas usually associated with the literary cultures of these other Buddhist 
traditions.
74 While we can speculate that the scholar-monks of the reform era 
engaged with these ideas as part of a larger cultural package that had entered 
the Saṅgha through the travels of monks such as Ratnamati, we should keep in 
mind that the study of Buddhist Sanskrit works among the monks of the three 
fraternities in Sri Lanka had a much longer history too, in particular during the 
period of Pallava dominance in the seventh and eighth centuries.
Pallava kings encouraged Buddhist intellectual centres, such as the dis -
trict of Kāñcī, to flourish on the periphery of their empire.
75 These centres 
acted as diplomatic nodes in a complex religious, trade and political network, 
including Sri Lanka, the Pālas in northeast India, Śrī Vijaya (modern-day 
Sumatra) and the Tang court in China.
76 The Pallavas in the early eighth 

--- Page 46 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  31
century, for instance, sent a number of ambassadors to the Tang court and 
even built a Buddhist monastery for the Chinese emperor in Nāgapaṭṭana. 77 
Sri Lanka, it seems, was an important centre of relics and Tantric learn -
ing at the  time. Thanks to Jeffrey Sundberg and Rolf Giebel, we know of 
scholar-monks such as Vajrabodhi (d. 743) who travelled with merchants 
to Sri Lanka via the Pallava court to worship the island’s relics, in particu-
lar the Buddha’s tooth relic at the Abhayagirivihāra, en route to Śrī Vijaya 
and then China.
78 Travelling the other way, we find Chinese monks, such as 
Amoghavajra (705–744), who also stayed at the Abhayagirivihāra in search of 
Tantric texts.
79
Of the three monastic fraternities in Sri Lanka, then, the Abhayagirivihāra 
was most connected to this ‘esoteric Buddhist network’. 80 Contemporary 
accounts from Chinese travellers to South Asia note that the Abhayagiri 
engaged in Tantric and Mahayana practices. A seventh-century Chinese 
monk-explorer, Xuanzang (602–664) learned on his travels in India that the 
monks of the Abhayagiri in Sri Lanka studied the Mahayana whereas those 
of the Mahāvihāra rejected it.
81 In a number of articles Jeffrey Sundberg has 
argued that king Mānavamma (684–718) and his descendants, who had all spent 
years exiled in the Pallava court, were great patrons of the Abhayagirivihāra 
and supported its esoteric Buddhist practices.
82 According to the Cūḷavaṃsa, 
Mānavamma even ordained as a monk in the Abhayagiri order and his brother 
‘Māna’ ruled in his stead.
83 These monarchs of Laṅkā with Pallava associations 
oversaw institutional changes in the Abhayagiri, establishing, in particular, a 
number of pariveṇas or ‘schools’ within the fraternity, such as the Uttaromūla, 
which became the custodian of the Buddha’s tooth relic.
84
The Mahāvihāra’s longstanding opposition to Buddhist Sanskrit lit -
erary culture began to shift subtly during the period of Pallava dominance 
too. The late Lance Cousins has revealed that Mahāvihāran monks at the 
time, most notably a certain Jotipāla (possibly from the seventh century), 
composed Sanskrit works seemingly in debate with other Buddhist counter -
parts.
85 The Mahāvihāra’s attitude to Buddhist Sanskrit likely further changed 
in the ninth century when Sena II and his successors shifted their patronage 
from the Abhayagirivihāra to the Mahāvihāra.
86 Having supplanted their old 
adversary, the Mahāvihāra began to resemble the Abhayagiri in a number 
ways. It adopted some of its ritual practices, such as enshrining scriptures 
in reliquaries,
87 it took on similar social functions, such as consecrating 
kings,88 and it also began to develop its own network of powerful schools 
or pariveṇas. We can speculate, then, that this emerging continuity between 
the two fraternities prior to the reforms, whether due to an affinity or rivalry, 
likely extended to their attitude about studying the Sanskrit works of other 
Buddhists too.
89

--- Page 47 of 286 ---
32 REWRITING BUDDHISM
2.4.  Summary
The world faced by the beleaguered monastic factions who gathered together 
in 1165 with the idea of uniting for the first time in more than a thousand 
years was radically different from the one experienced only two hundred years 
earlier in 956, when Mahinda IV had come to occupy the throne. Then, the 
monarchy in Sri Lanka asserted its independence from its neighbours and 
unprecedentedly favoured the Mahāvihāra over the other two fraternities. And 
yet within a few years everything collapsed. Cō ḻa rule in Poḷonnaruva deci -
mated Anurādhapura’s economy and resulted in the abandonment of the old 
capital as anything more than a ceremonial site. The marriage practices of the 
kings of Laṅkā during their brief freedom from suzerainty led, perhaps para-
doxically, to the fragmentation of the traditional royal family and to a greater 
monastic involvement in politics. Wars of succession between rival factions 
allied to other royalty in India raged either side of Parākramabāhu I’s reign, 
again to the detriment of the Saṅgha’s prosperity. At the same time, the absorp-
tion of the island into continental dynastic politics was mirrored culturally in 
the adoption of continental, Sanskrit textual forms, both by the royal court and 
monastic elites. These new forms of expression not only reflected stronger 
ties with India but also changing attitudes among the elites of the Mahāvihāra 
to court culture as well as to the Sanskrit literary cultures of other Buddhists.
Notes
1. Malalasekera, 1994, 178. Also, Wijesekera, 1973, 102–9.
2. Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosa, 444,1–3.
3. De Silva, 1981, 17.
4. De Silva, 1981, 18.
5. Trautmann, 1973, 180.
6. Bareau, 1955, 205–43; Gunawardana, 1979, 7–51; Rahula, 1956, 78–111. There is no definitive 
proof, however, that these schisms immediately resulted in the emergence of a separate nikāya. See, 
for instance, Kieffer-Pülz, 1999a, 72–3.
7. Gunawardana, 1979, 67. On the sacking of monasteries to fund wars, see Liyanagamage, 2001a, 57.
8. De Silva, 1981, 17–26.
9. Walters, 2000, 134; Sundberg, 2018, 342, n. 442.
10. Nilakanta Sastri, 1935, 135–6; 1958, 168.
11. Cūḷavaṃsa 53.40. Jeffrey Sundberg has noted that Parāntaka in his inscriptions actually describes 
himself as ‘taker of Īḷam’, that is, as conqueror of Sri Lanka, years before his invasion in the reign of 
Udaya IV . See Sundberg, 2018, 434, n. 597, citing Nilakanta Sastri, 1935, 435. It is difficult to deter-
mine, however, how far these early boasts were statements of fact or simply expressions of intent.
12. De Silva, 1981, 24–6; Spencer, 1976, 409. See also, Pathmanathan, 1978, 33–61; Nilakanta Sastri, 
1960, 413–14; Wijayatuṅga, 1965, 69–70.
13. See, for instance, Bechert, 1976, 30; 2005, 36; Malalasekera, 1994, 168.
14. South Indian Inscriptions IV , nos. 1388; 1392; 1393; Gunasingam, 1974; Indrapala, 1971a; 1978.
15. Epigraphia Zeylanica III, 242–55.
16. Indrapala, 1971b; Pathmanathan, 1978, 66–83; 1976; 1982b; 1984.
17. Henry, 2017, 84–90.

--- Page 48 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  33
18. Cūḷavaṃsa 55.20–1:
 nikāyattitaye dhātugabbhe laṅkātale ’khile
 mahārahe suvaṇṇādipaṭibimbe ca ’nappake
 bhinditvā sahasā sabbe vihāre ca tahiṃ tahiṃ
 yathojohārino yakkhā laṅkāyaṃ sāram aggahuṃ.
 Chapters 37–79 of the Cūḷavaṃsa are often considered to be the work of a single scholar-monk Dham-
makitti in the thirteenth century. Sirima Wickramasinghe, however, argued convincingly that Dhammakitti 
likely composed only the section dealing with Parākramabāhu’s reign. See Wickramasinghe, 1958, 8–33.
19. Davis, 1993. Vijayabāhu I’s repairs in Anurādhapura are mainly mentioned in the context of decay 
rather than destruction, for instance. He only refers to damage caused by the Cō ḻas in relation to the 
Thūpārāma and relic shrines in Mahāgāma, that is, modern-day Hambantota in the far South of Sri 
Lanka. See Cūḷavaṃsa 60.56–63.
20. Strickland, 2017, 150–3; 2011, 302–9.
21. Strickland, 2017, 161; 2011, 331.
22. It has been plausibly suggested that a transfer of power from Anurādhapura to Poḷonnaruva had 
begun earlier as a result of the Pāṇḍya invasion of 840. See Sundberg, 2018, 213, n. 268. Even so, 
the evidence suggests that the economy and population of Anurādhapura continued to grow until the 
eleventh century, that is, until Cōḻa rule. See Strickland, 2017, 87; 113; 138; 2011, 196; 243; 286.
23. Davis, 2013, 269–318, esp. 308; 2017. Due to the loss of much of the inscriptional record prior to 
this period, it is difficult to properly assess the relative significance of this perceived increase in land 
grants. The gaps in the inscriptional record may be due to the fact that kings seem to have removed 
the inscriptions of their predecessors which their own edicts superseded, sometimes using the older 
rock inscriptions as building materials. See Sundberg, 2018, 194, n. 242.
24. Gunawardana, 1979, 57–67.
25. Gunawardana, 1971, 19.
26. Gunawardana, 1979, 57; 1971, 20.
27. On the few mentions of Diṁbulāgala in pre-reform literature, see Nicholas, 1963, 40.
28. Gunawardana, 1979, 46–7; 316; 349–50. See also Blackburn, 1999b, 361.
29. Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 184–9; 194–202 (= Inscriptions of Ceylon  6, no. 8.1). Vikramabāhu I is 
sometimes referred to as Vikramabāhu II since Kassapa VI was also known as ‘Vikramabāhu’. See 
Pathmanathan, 1993.
30. Bell, 1917.
31. Bechert, 1993; Gunawardana, 1979, 282–337.
32. Walters, 2000, 132–46. Jeffrey Sundberg has critiqued Walters for overestimating the power of the 
monarchy during the tenth century. See Sundberg, 2018, 429. I would contend, however, that, while 
it was perhaps not a dominant, transregional power, the monarchy was certainly resisting suzerainty, 
much to the frustration of neighbouring kingdoms.
33. Epigraphia Zeylanica V .III, 340; Epigraphia Zeylanica I, 161, cited in Walters, 2000, 135. See also 
from the reign of Kassapa IV: Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.1, nos. 69.18; 72.21; 78.27; 79.28; 83.32.
34. Note, however, that S. Paranavitana has incorrectly argued that Mahinda V identified as Kāliṅga due 
to his reading of an inscription he attributed to the king. See Epigraphia Zeylanica IV , 59–67. Sirimal 
Ranawella has contested this reading and rather dates the inscription to the reign of Udaya III. See 
Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.2, no. 37.3.
35. Cūḷavaṃsa 54. 9–10ab: 
 vijjamāne pi laṅkāyaṃ khattiyānaṃ narādhipo
 kāliṅgacakkavattissa vaṃse jātaṃ kumārikaṃ
 ānāpetvāna taṃ aggamahesiṃ attano akā.
 See also Sirisena, 1971, esp. 12.
36. Geiger , interpreting Cūḷavaṃsa 57.27–9, has argued that Kassapa VI’s son Moggallāna was also the 
father of Vijayabāhu I. See Geiger and Rickmers, 1998, 195, n. 3. But see Ranawella,  Inscriptions of 
Ceylon 6, xxiv–xxvi.
37. Cūḷavaṃsa 59.30.
38. Cūḷavaṃsa 59.46–8.
39. Cūḷavaṃsa 59.49.
40. Cūḷavaṃsa 56.13–15.
41. Cūḷavaṃsa 59.23–5. Vikramabāhu would later take his father and Līlāvatī’s granddaughter, also 
named Līlāvatī, as his second queen.
42. Cūḷavaṃsa 59.41.
43. See Geiger and Rickmers, 1998, 225, n. 1.
44. See the description in Cūḷavaṃsa 61.

--- Page 49 of 286 ---
34 REWRITING BUDDHISM
45. Cūḷavaṃsa 61.46.
46. Cūḷavaṃsa 61.54–7
uddharitvāna buddhādisantake bhogagāmake
so vikkamabhujo rājā sevakesu samappayi.
pulatthinagare nekavihāre dhātumaṇḍite
so va desantarīyānaṃ bhaṭānaṃ vasituṃ dadi.
saddhehi pattadhātussa dāṭhādhātuvarassa ca
pūjanatthāya dinnāni maṇimuttādikāni ca
candanāgarukappūraṃ suvaṇṇādimayā bahū
paṭimāyo ca acchijja yathākāmaṃ vayaṃ nayi. Trans. adapted from Geiger and Rickmers, 1998, 230.
47. Cūḷavaṃsa 61.71:
rājāṇaṃ agaṇentā te gatā dāmarikattanaṃ
sakaṃ sakaṃ va visayaṃ āvasiṃsu samuddhatā.
Trans. adapted from Geiger and Rickmers, 1998, 231.
48. Cūḷavaṃsa 70.53–4ab:
tadā desantarā rājakumāre pāpadiṭṭhino
gajabāhumahīpālo ānāpiya sakaṇṭakaṃ
rājaraṭṭhaṃ akāsī ti suṇitvāna narissaro …
Trans. adapted from Geiger and Rickmers, 1998, 291. Pathmanathan has speculated that Gajabāhu 
was in fact Hindu, based on his reading of the Tamil history of the temple of Koṇesvaram, the 
 seventeenth-century (?) Koṇēcar Kalveṭṭu. See Pathmanathan, 1987, 58–60. Also, Henry, 2017, 115–26.
49. Epigraphia Zeylanica IV , 1–8.
50. Cūḷavaṃsa 70–2; Liyanagamage, 1968, 34–8.
51. For the first such inscription, see Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.1, no. 67.16.
52. Pollock, 2006, 26. On the Sinhala praśasti, see Berkwitz, 2016; Hallisey, 2003, 698–9.
53. Inscriptions of Ceylon  5.2, no. 62.1. I have added the information in parentheses to Ranawella’s 
translation.
54. Walters, 2000, 125–32. For earlier accounts of the Okkāka lineage, see Dīpavaṃsa 10; Mahāvaṃsa of 
Mahānāma, 9.1–28. I differ from Walters in that I do not view this genealogy as necessarily working 
in service of the imperial aims of the court.
55. Walters, 2000, 129.
56. The inscriptions that refer to the Śākyas, Paṇḍukābhaya or Suddhodana in the tenth century are as follows:
Ruler Dates Issuer Inscription Audience Purpose
Kassapa V 914–23 Kassapa V IC 5.1, no. 
104.14
Monastic Monastic 
regulations
Ādipāda 
Mahinda
IC 5.1, no. 
110.20
Monastic Immunities
Dappula IV 924–35 Lämäni 
Mahiṅdu
IC 5.2, no. 
10.10
Monastic Immunities
Mahapā Udā IC 5.2, no. 
18.18
Monastic Immunities
Dappula IV IC 5.2, no. 
19.19
Monastic Immunities
Mahapā Udā IC 5.2, no. 
29.29
Monastic Immunities
Udaya III 935–8 Udaya III IC 5.2, no. 
37.3
Monastic Immunities
Sena III 938–46 Sena III IC 5.2, no. 
40.3
Monastic Monastic 
regulations
Mahinda IV 982–1029 Mahinda IV IC 5.2, no. 
65.4
Monastic Rules for 
maintenance
Mahinda IV IC 5.3, no.  
26
Monastic Hospital 
regulations

--- Page 50 of 286 ---
 B E fORE  1165 AND  A LL  T HAT  35
57. Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.1, no. 104.14 (= Epigraphia Zeylanica I, 41–57). On this inscription, see 
Sundberg, 2018, 355–82.
58. Cūḷavaṃsa 60.54–5, cited in Gunawardana, 1979, 209.
59. On the queens of the era, see Seneviratne, 1969; Schrijvers, 1986.
60. Epigraphia Zeylanica IV , 67–72 (= Inscriptions of Ceylon 6, no. 7.2). Junko Matsumura has  identified 
this Ānanda with the teacher of Buddhappiya, author of the Rūpasiddhi. See Matsumura, 1999, 158.
61. Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 184–9; 194–202 (= Inscriptions of Ceylon 6, no. 8.1).
62. It is of course possible that this was simply a convention. In fact, Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.3, no. 26 
also connects Mahinda IV’s genealogy directly to Suddhodana and does not mention king Paṇḍukāb-
haya either.
63. See Paranavitana’ s discussion on this point in Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 200–2. Also, Kiribamune, 1976.
64. Dimitrov, 2016, 105–23. See also Hallisey, 2003; Pollock, 2006, 386–7. The Sanskrit works that like-
ly predate the reforms include Dharmakīrti’s Rūpāvatāra, Kassapa’s Bālāvabodhana and Sāriputta’s 
Cāndrapañcikālaṅkāra. Another possibility is Buddhanāga’s Pātrīkaraṇaṭīkā, a commentary on a 
grammatical handbook, Guṇākara’s Pātrīkaraṇa, though we can only be sure that it was composed 
before 1458 since it is quoted in Śrī Rāhula’s Moggallānapañcikāpradīpaya. On these works, see also 
Bechert, 1987, 5–16.
65. Frasch, 1998, 69–72.
66. Dimitrov, 2016, 51–74; 565–96; 599–706. For a critical overview of Dimitrov’s arguments concern-
ing the works he attributes to Ratnamati, see Gornall, 2017. In this book, I follow Dimitrov in taking 
Ratnamati and Ratnaśrījñāna to be the same individual, though I am also aware that this cannot be 
conclusively proved.
67. Dimitrov, 2016, 105–22.
68. Chimpa and Chattopadhyaya, trans. 1990, 279.
69. T o be precise, he was the third vajrācārya. See Chimpa and Chattopadhyaya, trans. 1990, 325. The 
historian Tāranātha wrote his work in 1608 supposedly using three Sanskrit sources. On the date and 
identity of this monk, see Sundberg and Giebel, 2011, 207, n. 137.
70. Bechert, 2005, 142.
71. While there is no doubt a historical connection, then, as Sheldon Pollock has skilfully elucidated, 
between such courtly forms of Sanskrit and political power, it is necessary to disentangle political 
function from the institution of the court and to acknowledge that the monastery was an equally 
important site of cultural change. Sheldon Pollock discusses the Buddhist monastery as a site for the 
production of Sanskrit court literature in an earlier article, but really only as an exception that proves 
the rule. See Pollock, 2003, esp. 114–121. On sites of literary production outside the court, see Cox, 
2017, 156. On monastic political autonomy in India, see Davidson, 2002, esp. 167–8.
72. See also Hallisey , 2003, 707–12.
73. Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya of Sāriputta, 257,27–30.
74. See, for instance, Bechert, 2005, 59–90; Dimitrov, 2016; Gunawardana, 1979, 322–7; Kieffer- Pülz, 
2013, 129–31.
75. Schalk, 2002, 378–429.
76. Sen, 2003, 224.
77. Sundber g and Giebel, 2011, 143–5.
78. Sundber g and Giebel, 2011, 134–40.
79. Sundber g and Giebel, 2011, 145; 149; 186, n. 72.
80. See Acri, 2016. On the Abhayagiri’s transregional connections, see De Casparis, 1961; Sundberg, 
2004.
81. Bechert, 1977; Deeg, 2012, 152. On the Abhayagiri and Sanskrit literary culture, see, most recently, 
Chandawimala, 2016. The Abhayagiri also maintained a rich tradition of studying the Pali canon and 
composing Pali works. See Cousins, 2012.
82. See, in particular , Sundberg, 2014; 2017.
83. Cūḷavaṃsa 57.4–27, discussed in Sundberg, 2017, 204–18. This passage has also been analysed as 
an origin story for the position of ‘grandmaster’ (mahāsāmi) in the Saṅgha’s hierarchy. See Gornall, 
2013, 37–40; Rohanadeera, 1985, 33–5.
84. Sundberg, 2017, 213–18.
85. Cousins, 2013; 2016. See also chapter six.
86. See W alters, 2000, 132–41.
87. On the ‘cult of the book’  in late medieval Sri Lanka, see chapter six.
88. Walters, 2000, 130; 134–5.
89. The reform-era Saṅgha, for instance, seems to have tolerated monks studying the works of other 
religious traditions. See Gornall, 2014a, 524–5.

--- Page 51 of 286 ---
36
3
The Reform Era and its Pali Literature
When the Cō ḻas ruled Sri Lanka and brought about the gradual collapse of 
Anurādhapura, they set in motion a complex chain of events that upended life 
on the island. If the early post-Cōḻa era appears confusing to us today, it must 
have been utterly bewildering for those who were buffeted by what no doubt 
seemed like an uncontrollable wave of disasters. Importantly, however, this 
misfortune did not distinguish between the three fraternities within the monas-
tic community. Faced for the first time with an apparent existential threat, the 
old sectarian politics of Anurādhapura began to fall away. Smaller monastic 
groupings emerged alongside the traditional nikāya divisions and at least some 
elite monks decided to unify under the banner of the Mahāvihāra, leading to 
the dissolution of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana fraternities.
1 It took almost one 
hundred years after Cō ḻa rule, however, for these elites to gather together at 
a council overseen by Parākramabāhu I (1157–86) and fight against the often 
intangible forces of perceived religious decline through the composition of 
new Pali texts.
This scholarship differed from earlier heydays not only in terms of the 
quantity and types of works composed but also in its sharp focus on monastic 
reform. Surveys of the Pali textual tradition rarely distinguish these works from 
earlier monastic scholarship and pay little attention to issues of periodization, 
simply treating Pali literature as ‘everything that is written in Pali’.
2 When 
its literature is historicized it is usually from a linguistic standpoint. From 
this perspective, the Pali language can be understood as a partly Sanskritized 
patchwork of a variety of Middle-Indic dialects.
3 These dialects from vari -
ous regions of India developed and intertwined to form the language of the 
Tipiṭaka and then that  language changed through increasing Sanskritization 
into the language of canonical commentary and medieval literature. 4 This is 
certainly an important part of the story. A less understood aspect, however, 
concerns the formal changes in genre and style that occurred in Theravada 
monastic literary culture over time and the place of these developments in the 
wider history of Buddhism.

--- Page 52 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  37
Few scholars have given any serious attention to this history. Heinz 
Bechert stands out as one of the earliest and most insightful scholars to com-
bine philology and social and political history in the study of Pali, Sanskrit 
and Sinhalese literature in Sri Lanka.
5 More recently, the late Steven Collins 
pioneered studies of Pali literature within the broader civilizational history 
of Theravada Buddhism.
6 Collins was the first to question, in particular, why 
monks during the reform era started to compose independent works of poetry 
or kāvya
 in Pali in a ‘consciously high-  literate, Sanskritized manner’ when 
previously they had concerned themselves almost exclusively with writing 
commentaries on the Pali canon and histories of their religious tradition. 
Collins referred to this question as ‘the problem of literature in Pali’.
7 To a 
large extent, this book is an extended answer to Collins’s question, though 
this chapter will establish that the problem may be far larger than Collins first 
thought. For it was not only a Sanskritized Pali poetry that emerged during this 
period but also, as we will see, new forms of philology, including grammar 
and poetics, pedagogical handbooks and new types of commentary.
Collins speculated that this new Pali literature, while formally in  -
novative, continued to share with older Pali texts the same general purpose 
of providing societal elites a cultural coherence on which their rule and status 
depended. These texts were, he speculated, ‘an element in the rhetorical, the-
atrical constitution of civilization-bearing state-systems: symbolic capital con-
tributing to the prestige of both the maṇḍala-organizing king and his clients’.
8 
If we were only to speak about the court-centred polities of early medieval Sri 
Lanka or the charter states of Southeast Asia, there may be some sense, due 
to the concentration of wealth in the court and the monastery’s dependence 
on it, to speak of Saṅgha and state as part of a single community and to think 
about Buddhist textual culture in terms of the cultural cohesion it brought to 
this elite. And yet, as we have seen, the old order had entirely changed after 
Cōḻa rule. Political power on the island had fragmented and the monastic com-
munity had been increasingly drawn into dynastic politics as a political actor 
in its own right.
The Pali literature of the reform era, then, necessarily performed a dif -
ferent type of labour from that produced in the pre-Cōl-a period. This chapter 
attempts to draw a contrast between the reform era and what came before 
and also between the differing aims of Pali texts within the monastic reforms, 
in particular their role in maintaining the autonomous order of the monas-
tic community and in establishing new forms of patronage among a shift-
ing elite. These posited aims of Pali literature are inextricably linked with 
how we view the reforms as historical phenomena too. This chapter further 
explores the nature of the royal reforms and argues that the reform process 
did not turn Buddhism into a kind of imperial religion, as is often argued, but 

--- Page 53 of 286 ---
38 REWRITING BUDDHISM
rather that, even when the process was overseen by powerful rulers, such as, 
Parākramabāhu I, it primarily enabled the monastic community to regulate 
itself and better survive as a political entity more autonomous than before.
3.1. A  Short Sketch of Pre-reform Pali and its Literature
Before we can discuss the reforms and the literature they produced it is nec -
essary to sketch out a short history of the Pali tradition prior to this period. 
The Theravada Buddhist tradition divides the teachings of the Buddha into 
three (ti-) baskets (piṭaka), namely, the monastic rules (Vinaya), his religious 
discourses (Sutta), and the so-called ‘supreme teachings’ (Abhidhamma), sys-
tematic presentations of the ideas contained in the Suttas. While the contents 
of many of the texts of the Pali canon may date at least in oral form to the early 
centuries after the Buddha’s death, the process of arranging, systematizing 
and authorizing the texts of the Tipiṭaka as we now have it probably occurred 
over a much longer period.
10 A key part of this process was the development 
Table 3.1: The reigns of the kings and queens of Laṅkā, 1157–12709
Regnal Dates Monarch
1157–86 Parākramabāhu I
1186–7 Vijayabāhu II
1187 (five days) Mahinda VI
1187–96 Niśśaṅka Malla
1196 Vikramabāhu II
1196–7 Coḍagaṅga
1197–1200 Līlāvatī
1200–2 Sāhassa Malla
1202–8 Kalyāṇavatī
1208–9 Dharmāśoka
1209 Anīkaṅga, Mahādipāda
1209–10 Līlāvatī
1210–11 Lokeśvara
1211–12 Līlāvatī
1212–15 Parākrama Paṇḍu
1215–36 Māgha (Kāliṅga Vijayabāhu)
1232–6 Vijayabāhu III
1236–70 Parākramabāhu II

--- Page 54 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  39
of exegetical literature on canonical texts. Some of the earliest commentaries 
and manuals of textual exegesis, namely the Suttavibhan.ga (‘Analysis of the 
[Pa-timokkha] discourse’), Niddesa (‘Exposition’), Nettipakaran.a (‘Guide’) 
and Pet.akopadesa (‘Piṭaka disclosure’), were composed in Pali possibly at the 
turn of the Common Era.11 It is perhaps to the same early post-Aśokan period 
that we witness the beginning of Pali historiography as represented by the 
Cariya-piṭaka (‘Basket of conduct’), Buddhavaṃsa (‘History of the buddhas’) 
and Apada-na (‘Legends’).
12
Monastic literature for much of the first millennium continued to be 
divided into these two genres: histories ( vaṃsa) of Buddhism in Sri Lanka 
and the far more numerous commentaries and subcommentaries on the Pali 
canon. Nearly all of the works we possess from the era are the products of 
the Mahāvihāra, since it was this fraternity’s textual tradition that formed the 
basis of the 1165 reforms. Foremost of the early commentators was the fourth 
or fifth-century exegete Buddhaghosa who, according to tradition, wrote Pali 
commentaries on the five Nikāyas of the Suttapiṭaka, two commentaries on 
the Vinaya, commentaries on the seven books of the Abhidhamma, and a com-
prehensive summary of Buddhist practice, the Visuddhimagga (‘Path of puri-
fication’).
13 Modern scholars have rightly cast doubt on a number of the works 
attributed to Buddhaghosa and often only view the Visuddhimagga and the 
commentaries on the first four Nikāyas as his own.14
Before ‘Buddhaghosa’ composed his works, an anonymous scholar 
or scholars authored the Dīpavaṃsa (‘History of the island’), a history of 
Buddhism in Sri Lanka and possibly the first Pali work ever composed on 
the island.
15 Following Buddhaghosa’s works, a scholar monk known as 
Mahānāma also composed another history of Buddhism, the Mahāvaṃsa 
(‘Great history’), improving upon the language of the Dīpavaṃsa and siding 
more specifically with the Mahāvihāra sect.16 A number of other commentators 
succeeded Buddhaghosa prior to the reform era, including Buddhadatta, who 
composed some of the first handbooks on the Abhidhamma and Vinaya in 
around the fifth century, Ānanda, who wrote commentaries on Buddhaghosa’s 
Abhidhamma works in the sixth century, and Dhammapāla who, as well as 
writing commentaries on books of the Khuddaka Nikāya, composed a number 
of Pali subcommentaries at some point before the twelfth century.
17
It is in these early commentaries that we see develop distinct ideas about 
Pali as a sacred language. At least since Buddhaghosa, Pali was thought to 
be the only language in which the Buddha spoke, the ‘language of Magadha’ 
(Magadhabhāsā), and the language of the earliest commentaries that were 
brought to Sri Lanka by Aśoka’s son Mahinda. To write in Pali, then, was to 
connect one’s work with the universal authority of the Buddha and his imme-
diate disciples. In Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga and also in the Abhidhamma 

--- Page 55 of 286 ---
40 REWRITING BUDDHISM
commentaries, we further find descriptions of Pali as a magical language. 18 It 
is there that the commentator explains, for instance, that Pali is the sabhāvan-
irutti or ‘essence-language’ because it is spoken throughout the cosmos by 
animals, hungry ghosts, humans and gods and that it is the default language 
of a child brought up without human contact. Echoing similar Brahmanical 
claims for Sanskrit, the commentator states that Pali is unchanging unlike the 
other languages of the world that are subject to the ravages of time and that, 
for the adept, its meaning immediately manifests as soon as it is heard, with -
out intellectual reflection. He determines too that one can obtain an analytical 
knowledge (paṭisambhidā) of scripture only when it is studied in Pali and not 
when it is translated.
19
Many, if not the majority, of commentators, including Buddhaghosa, 
Buddhadatta and Dhammapāla, were likely of South Indian origin and another 
main reason Pali was cultivated as a commentarial language was to allow 
communication within the wider circle of scholar-monks in South India and 
Sri Lanka.
20 In the preamble to the commentary on the Vinaya, for instance, 
the author writes that he specifically wrote his commentary in what he refers 
to as a language ‘imitative of the style of canonical texts’ and not in Sinhala 
for the benefit also of those on the ‘other island’ ( dīpantara) or the Indian 
mainland.
21 The scholar monks of the period tended to divide their world 
into two islands: ‘Lion island’ ( sīhaḷadīpa) or Sri Lanka and ‘Plum island’ 
(jambudīpa), India. 22 In transcending Lion island, then, Pali commentaries 
became a frame of reference through which a transregional Buddhist commu-
nity could be created, one that would persist fairly unaltered until the reform 
era when we see the emergence of separate, sectarian identities in Cōl-a India 
and Sri Lanka.23
The literary activity of the first millennium has usually been connected 
with periods in which the Mahāvihāra was favoured by the ruling monarch. 
G.P. Malalasekera put it most succinctly when he wrote with respect to early 
commentarial activity in Pali that, ‘material prosperity is the handmaid of lit -
erary development, as of all artistic work’.
24 The idea that literary produc -
tion was necessarily predicated on royal support and stable kingship reflects a 
longstanding assumption in histories of Buddhism that the court and monas-
tery were interdependent parts of a social whole or even a proto-nation state. 
If the royal court was stable and prosperous, so the logic goes, the monas -
tic community had the resources and necessary peace of mind to engage in 
scholarly work. For Walpola Rahula, for instance, the Buddhist tradition and 
the Saṅgha, in particular, was a ‘fully-fledged state department’ and Buddhist 
monasteries were ‘centres of national culture’.
25 R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, 
while setting aside tropes of nationhood, spoke instead of an ‘antagonistic 
symbiosis’ between court and monastery and viewed the two institutions as 

--- Page 56 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  41
functionally interdependent, if sometimes disputatious, parts of a single social 
whole, with monks providing ideological support for the ruling monarch in 
return for protection and patronage. Gunawardana’s more sophisticated model 
also forms the sociological basis of Steven Collins’s Pali imaginaire too.
26
The reality, with respect to textual production in particular, is more 
difficult to determine due to a lack of historical information in most early 
Pali texts. Monastic historians certainly viewed the changing fate of their fra-
ternity in dynastic terms, according to the successive reigns of the island’s 
moral and immoral kings. They regarded Buddhaghosa’s commentaries, for 
instance, as a product of the resurgence of the Mahāvihāra under the patronage 
of king Mahānāma (406–28).
27 The Dīpavaṃsa too may have been composed, 
at least partly, for king Sirimeghavaṇṇa (301–28) in order to regain patron -
age for the Mahāvihāra, which the king’s father Mahāsena (274–301) had 
neglected in favour of the Abhayagiri.
28 We can also tentatively connect cer -
tain South Indian exegetical works with periodic support for the Mahāvihāra 
in the region. Buddhadatta, the author of early Pali handbooks, states in his 
Vinayavinicchaya (‘Exegesis on the Discipline’) that he wrote his work in 
Cōl-a country during the reign of a certain Accutavikkanta of the ‘Kalambha’ 
dynasty.
29 He was likely referring to the Kaḷabhras, a minor South Indian clan 
who perhaps favoured Buddhists or Jains in their patronage. 30 The majority 
of first millennium Pali works, however, provide little insight into the politics 
of their production and we can only speculate about how far royal patronage 
actually determined monastic literary activity.
Table 3.2: A hypothetical chronology of Pali works composed in South India and 
Sri Lanka, 300–900 CE31
Text Author Date
Commentaries/Subcommentaries on Canonical Texts
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī Buddhaghosa 370–450
Papañcasūdanī Buddhaghosa 370–450
Sāratthappakāsinī Buddhaghosa 370–450
Manorathapūraṇī Buddhaghosa 370–450
Atthasālinī Anon. 370–450
Sammohavinodanī Anon. 370–450
Pañcappakaraṇaṭṭhakathā Anon. 370–450
Samantapāsādikā Anon. 386/427
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī Anon. after 386/427
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā Anon. after 450
Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā Anon. after 450
(Continued)

--- Page 57 of 286 ---
42 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Text Author Date
Paramatthajotikā I Anon. after 450
Paramatthajotikā II Anon. after 450
Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā Ānanda 500–600
Vibhaṅgamūlaṭīkā Ānanda 500–600
Pañcappakaraṇamūlaṭīkā Ānanda 500–600
Saddhammapakāsinī Mahānāma 559
Paramatthadīpanī I Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthadīpanī II Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthadīpanī III Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthadīpanī IV Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthadīpanī V Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthadīpanī VI Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthadīpanī VII Dhammapāla after 700
Līnatthappakāsinī Dhammapāla after 700
Līnatthavaṇṇanā I Dhammapāla after 700
Paramatthamañjūsā Dhammapāla after 700
Nettiaṭṭhakathā Dhammapāla after 700
Līnatthavaṇṇanā II Dhammapāla after 700
Saddhammapajjotikā Upasena 877
Histories
Dīpavaṃsa Anon. 300–400
Mahāvaṃsa Mahānāma 400–500
Handbooks
Visuddhimagga Buddhaghosa 370–450
Khuddasikkhā Dhammasiri after 386/427
Vinayavinicchaya Buddhadatta 450–600
Uttaravinicchaya Buddhadatta 450–600
Abhidhammāvatāra Buddhadatta 450–600
Rūpārūpavibhāga Buddhadatta 450–600
Saccasaṅkhepa Anon. after 500
Mūlasikkhā Mahāsāmi before 1200
Philological works
Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa Kaccāyana 600–700
Kaccāyanavutti Saṅghanandi after 700
Table 3.2:
 (Continued)

--- Page 58 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  43
3.2.  An Era of Reform, Unification and Education
The reign of Parākramabāhu I, characterized by its attempt at centralized, 
charter state politics, appears on the surface like a good example of this ideal 
Saṅgha-state model. And yet, as we have seen, his reign was something of 
an anomaly when compared with the general political trajectory towards the 
fragmentation and localization of power.
32 ‘Parākramabāhu I’s empire’, Keith 
Taylor perceptively noted, ‘though not an example of political fragmentation, 
was only possible by the destruction of the traditional order and the welding 
together of the resulting fragments through sheer physical force’.33 Parākrama-
bāhu’s rise was born of this chaos and the political turmoil after his reign was, 
to some degree, the natural continuation of the centrifugal political patterns 
prior to his ascension to the throne. We should be wary, then, of understanding 
the comparisons in monastic histories between his 1165 reforms and the third 
council (saṅgīti) held in the reign of the emperor Aśoka too literally.
34 For the 
Aśokan model, in which a Buddhist emperor acts as the ‘crux of order in soci-
ety’, was by 1165 an abstraction or ceremonial ideal with little correspondence 
to the general political reality of the era.35
Heinz Bechert was the first to refer aptly to the events of 1165 as ‘sāsana 
reforms’ and it is through the lens of ‘reform’ that similar royal councils have 
been viewed subsequently.
36 There is no equivalent to the word ‘reform’ 
either as a movement or as an event in the monastic writing of the era. The 
actual activity of reform is usually described as a ‘purification’ ( visuddhi, 
visodhana) of the religion or sāsana. The ‘purity’ of the tradition, at least in 
royal edicts, was always primarily associated with monastic behaviour and 
the formal rules of monastic discipline. This meant in the 1165 reforms pur -
ging the order of most of the monks who did not conform to Mahāvihāran 
standards of discipline.
37 Doctrinal coherence was an important aspect of 
reforms but it was dealt with within the Saṅgha and not by royal intervention. 
Buddhist monastic reforms also often included, at least rhetorically, a unifi -
cation (samagga) of antagonistic monastic factions.
38 The unification of the 
remaining monastic groups in 1165, for instance, enabled the Saṅgha to claim 
that they had restored the religion to an original, pristine state, ‘as it had been 
in Buddha’s time’.
39
The dual reform processes of purification and unification were viewed 
cosmologically as postponing the inevitable disappearance of the sāsana. In the 
royal edict issued after the 1165 reforms, it is said that while Parākramabāhu 
I ‘was enjoying the delight of kingship with a display of abundant virtues, he 
witnessed sons of noble families of the Buddhist persuasion on the road to 
hell’.
40 He then evokes in the edict a prophecy, which first emerges in fourth- 
or fifth-century commentaries, that the Buddhist tradition would survive 

--- Page 59 of 286 ---
44 REWRITING BUDDHISM
five thousand years after the Buddha’s death and hoped that, as a result of 
his effort, the unified monastic community would not disappear prematurely.41 
Reference continues to be made to this prophecy in the 1266 Daṁbadeṇiya 
edict too, and later in the ordinance Parākramabāhu II specifically connects 
the perceived decline of the Buddhist tradition with the monastic neglect of 
the study of their sacred scriptures. Monks are thus encouraged to ‘study the 
Tipiṭaka together with the commentaries from virtuous teachers and thereby 
become very learned’.
42
The 1165 reforms and those like them that followed both in Sri Lanka 
and Southeast Asia have been interpreted as evidence that the Saṅgha had been 
further integrated into the state.
43 The schematic nature of much of this ana -
lysis, however, obscures what was a varied and highly complex phenomenon. 
Even if we limit ourselves to our ‘reform era’, there are marked differences, 
for instance, between the ‘imperial’ nature of the reforms of Parākramabāhu 
I and II in 1165 and 1266 respectively. One might think of the 1165 reforms 
as imperial in nature, on the basis that it was the king himself who oversaw 
the events and who used his coercive power to expel troublesome factions 
from the order, that it is said he personally selected monks from the monastery 
of Diṁbulāgala, led by the elder Kassapa, to undertake the reforms and that 
monks were invited from regions bound by the territory of his kingdom. That 
said, there is also no evidence that Parākramabāhu I played any role in formu-
lating the rules promulgated in the edict or in supporting the appointment of 
monks to administrative positions. In fact, he appears to encourage the Saṅgha 
to regulate itself, stating, ‘devoting themselves diligently to the two tasks of 
scriptural study and contemplation, may the Saṅgha protect the sāsana by the 
administration of admonitions (avavāda) and decrees (śāsana)’.
44 In terms of 
motive, Parākramabāhu simply cites the pain he felt as a Buddhist emperor, a 
cakravartin, in seeing the religion in an impure state, though economic interest 
in reclaiming ownership of the land that formerly belonged to expelled monks 
may have been an  underlying factor .45
The reforms of Vijayabāhu III around 1232 and Parākramabāhu II in 
1266 differ for a number of reasons. We will speak of both together since the 
edict Vijayabāhu issued was lost and what we know about his reforms comes 
from Parākramabāhu’s Daṁbadeṇiya edict, which subsumed and supplanted 
the former’s proclamations. The Daṁbadeṇiya edict describes the Saṅgha’s 
administrative structure as akin to a royal court. There it is stated, for instance, 
that the Saṅgha was led by a mahāsāmi
 ‘ grandmaster ’ who was assisted by 
two mahātheras or ‘great elders’ representing both forest monks (araññavāsi) 
and village monks (gāmavāsi). Under these mahātheras were placed the 
heads of eight fraternities (āyatana
),  followed by the heads of various schools 
(pariveṇa).46

--- Page 60 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  45
Unlike the 1165 reforms it is stated that both the king and the Saṅgha 
needed to consent to the appointment of the leaders of the eight fraternities as 
well as the heads of monastic schools (pariveṇa). The two mahātheras needed 
the approval of the Saṅgha to be appointed but were only required to ‘venerate’ 
the king prior to taking up their position. The ‘grandmaster’ was succeeded 
after his death by one of these mahātheras seemingly without need for either 
royal or monastic approval.
48 If we view royal involvement in the appointment 
of senior religious figures as characteristic of an imperial religion – as it has 
been, for example, in the study of ‘the imperial church systems’ in northern 
Europe – then the 1266 reforms could be seen as more imperial than 1165.
49 
And yet, we should also note that, unlike 1165, Parākramabāhu II’s reforms 
were not clearly defined by his kingdom’s territory – he invited Cōl-a monks, 
for instance, from outside of his kingdom as part of his reforms – and that as 
a relatively weak ruler his territorial control was slight and his jurisdictional 
reach must have been limited.
50
These reforms facilitated monastic literary production not only because 
of royal patronage but also because textual study constituted the Saṅgha’s 
new institutional and conceptual order. The qualifications needed to rise in 
the Saṅgha’s administration related to a monk’s moral purity as well as his 
familial lineage but by far the most important was his level of education.
51 The 
1266 edict, for instance, presents traditional forms of monastic education in 
a six-tiered hierarchy: (1) the lay candidate for ordination; (2) the novice; (3) 
higher ordination; (4) one free from pupillary dependence (nissayamutta); (5) 
an elder (thera); and (6) great elder (mahāthera) – each involving increasingly 
difficult forms of textual study with senior monks.
52 It is in the context of 
this formal educational system that we can partly understand the intensity of 
literary activity during the reform era. New texts, in particular Pali handbooks 
and handbook commentaries, sifted and sorted the doctrine and discipline – 
sometimes experimenting with new pedagogical techniques from the Sanskrit 
tradition – in order to unify Buddhist thought and practice and disseminate 
Figure 3.1 The hierarchy of the Saṅgha as depicted in the Daṁbadeṇiya 
edict47

--- Page 61 of 286 ---
46 REWRITING BUDDHISM
it within the reformed Saṅgha. As part of the 1165 reforms or soon after, we 
see that a prominent monk, Sāriputta, who would go on to become leader of 
the Saṅgha, composed three new works on the monastic discipline, namely, a 
subcommentary on the Vinaya, a new Vinaya handbook and a commentary for 
this handbook, as well as a subcommentary on the Aṅguttara Nikāya.
53
The curriculum set out in the detailed 1266 edict reveals distinct roles 
played by Pali and Sinhala texts in monastic education. 54 The studies of nov -
ice monks focused largely on Sinhala texts, especially handbooks on monastic 
discipline, such as the Heraṇasikha (‘Rules for novices’) and Sikhavalaṅda 
(‘Illustration of the rules’).
55 There was some emphasis in the early stages of edu-
cation, even for candidates for ordination, on memorizing protective (paritta) 
Pali texts. The monastic discipline only began to be studied more intensely in 
Pali after higher ordination and, even then, it was mainly through handbooks, 
such as the Mūlasikkhā (‘Basic training’). The highest levels of study within 
the monastic hierarchy, however, were exclusively in Pali. When monks trained 
to be free from pupillary dependence (nissayamutta) they were expected to 
study Vinaya handbooks, such as the Khuddasikkhā (‘Minor rules’), Pali com-
mentaries ( ṭīkā) presumably on handbooks, canonical Vinaya texts such as 
the Pātimokkha and its Pali commentary, the Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī (‘Overcoming 
doubts’), as well as Pali grammatical texts. The edict is less specific about the 
curriculum for the position of ‘elder’ (thera), though we know it included Pali 
commentaries (ṭīkā) as well as various parts of the canonical Vinaya. Monastic 
candidates for the high position of ‘great elder’ ( mahāthera) were further 
encouraged to master the ‘Tipiṭaka together with its commentaries’.
It is clear from the Daṁbadeṇiya edict that Pali was not simply a transre-
gional medium but the principal means of organizing the Buddhist tradition, both 
on a conceptual level and in terms of social hierarchy. The expanding use of Pali 
in service of the reforms was accompanied by a new assessment of the nature of 
Pali as a literary language in a number of Pali treatises on grammar and poetics 
modelled on Sanskrit works. Within these texts Pali is explicitly placed for the 
first time alongside and in contrast with the classical Indian division of literary 
languages into Sanskrit, Prakrit, Apabhraṃśa and Paiśācī, with the latter three 
viewed as subordinate to Sanskrit. Pali is never placed within this framework 
and, instead, is simply situated as an independent, singular language sharing the 
same literariness as these languages but without figuring as a language derived 
from Sanskrit.
56 The scholar-monk Saṅgharakkhita stresses this independence 
by referring to Pali or Māgadha as suddha- or ‘pure’ Māgadha. He states that the 
prefix suddha- means that this language and those who know it are free from the 
impurity or obscurity (kālusiya) of Sanskrit and the other languages.57

--- Page 62 of 286 ---
 THE  R EfORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  47
There is a danger in focusing on these edicts – viewing monastic reforms sim-
ply as ‘events’ – that we lose sight of the real social contours of the era.58 Imme-
diately prior to the reign of Parākramabāhu I and the fifty years that followed 
it there was no discernible stability in the royal court as the island witnessed 
an endless stream of monarchs due to wars of succession, as we discussed in 
chapter one. One would think based on the ‘imperial’ model that a Saṅgha left 
rudderless without a dependable monarch would have similarly fragmented. 
And yet all the historical evidence we have points to the contrary. It seems 
that prior to the reign of Parākramabāhu I the Saṅgha was by its own volition 
agitating for unity and that, after the reforms, it continued to develop its admin-
istrative structure.
59
It is only after 1165 that the position of ‘grandmaster’ (mahāsāmi) 
emerges as a title for the leader of the Saṅgha. 60 A system of inheriting the 
position after the grandmaster’s death also seems to have been established 
far earlier than the 1266 edict. In fact, the succession of grandmasters during 
the period occurred, at least on the surface, without interruption and followed 
regular, pupillary succession without exception. After the 1165 reforms, for 
instance, we find Sāriputta as the first official ‘grandmaster’, followed by 
his pupil Moggallāna, his pupil Saṅgharakkhita in 1232, and then his pupil 
Medhaṅkara, who led the reforms in 1266.
61 The monastic elite was remark -
ably stable when compared with the sixteen kings from different lineages that 
took the throne between Parākramabāhu I and II. This is not to say that monks 
were happy about being left without a stable king as reference point – chan -
ging political conditions could not remove centuries of viewing a single, cen-
tral monarch as the primary benefactor and protector of the religion – rather it 
is that the Saṅgha’s administrative autonomy meant that a stable core of elites 
could withstand such political chaos.
That the reforms should be regarded more as a process than a single 
event is reflected in the fact that monks wrote new works long after the coun-
cils took place but with them still in mind. Thanks to the remarkable work 
of Petra Kieffer-Pülz in dating many reform-era texts, in particular those 
composed after the reign of Parākramabāhu I, it is now possible to show that 
prominent monks continued to write even during times that fell outside peri -
ods of strong Buddhist kingship. We now know, for instance, that the scholar 
monk Vācissara, pupil of Sāriputta, composed commentaries on Buddhadatta’s 
Vinaya handbooks at some point between 1210 and 1245.
62 Another pupil 
of Sāriputta and Moggallāna, Saṅgharakkhita, wrote the Subodhālaṅkāra 
(‘Lucid poetics’), the first work on Pali poetics, the Vuttodaya (‘Exposition of 
metres’), the first treatise on Pali metrics, and also a handbook on Pali syntax, 
the Sambandhacintā (‘Reflections on syntactic relationships’), at some point 

--- Page 63 of 286 ---
48 REWRITING BUDDHISM
between 1186 and 1232.63 Despite writing long after the reforms of 1165, both 
authors reference these events as part of their shared ‘corporate memory’. 64 
Authors of this period often compose eulogies in memory of their teacher, 
Sāriputta, who had likely already passed away, as a means of reaffirming their 
bonds to the reformed Saṅgha and the continuing process of reform. Writing 
after 1232, Saṅgharakkhita (or one of his acolytes) praised Sāriputta as follows:
By composing subcommentaries, such as that for the Vinaya, he, a priceless 
necklace among the wise (lit. having an unrivalled  ornament-like throat),  
created order, desiring the conqueror’s (i.e. the Buddha’s) religion to be 
pure. Victorious on earth was this grandmaster, my heroic teacher, Sāriputta 
(‘son of Sārī’), who pursued peace, possessed no trifling intellect, and who 
deserves utmost respect.
65
Such fidelity and devotion between guru and pupil, reinforced by a structured 
educational system, must have placed the monastic community at a stra -
tegic advantage when compared with the now unstable kinship practices of 
the court.
In the space of a few decades then, depending on one’s perspective, 
the process of reform involved events in which monastic elites and royal 
court co-operated closely as well as years of political instability where those 
same elites had to function without any long-term, reliable source of central 
patronage. In many ways the very fact that the degree of royal involvement in 
monastic reform fluctuated during the period reveals that royal oversight was 
not the main factor or, at least, a necessary condition for the production of 
literature in aid of the reforms. Rather, one could argue that what was common 
to both periods of stability and turmoil was the newly centralized, hierarchical 
structure of the Saṅgha itself. It was this reluctant autonomy, more akin to 
the Benedictine monasteries of Cluny than any ‘imperial church’, that best 
explains how the Saṅgha managed to unify and how it continued the process 
of reform in between the events of 1165, 1232–6 and 1266.
66
3.3. Monastic Literatur e and the Localization of Politics
The emergence of a fragmented political landscape also meant that the Saṅgha 
throughout the period was negotiating an increasingly complex patronage net-
work of petits nobles governing smaller political domains, including, war -
lords
67, merchants, minor royals, monastic nobles and lay functionaries68 who 
had become progressively powerful through the maintenance of the Saṅgha’s 
extensive wealth and lands.
69 This form of negotiation differed from the 

--- Page 64 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  49
politics of the first millennium not only in terms of the diversity of patrons 
able to support the Saṅgha with largesse, in particular by building monas-
teries, but due to the explicitly personal relationships authors had with these 
individuals.
70 The works of Saṅgharakkhita and Vācissara, studied by Petra 
Kieffer-Pülz, are again a useful case study in this regard. Saṅgharakkhita, for 
instance, writes in the colophon of his grammatical commentary that he lived 
in a monastery built by a warlord named ‘Subha’, who he praises as ‘endowed 
with qualities such as strength, wisdom and compassion’.
71 He then, in the sec-
ond part of the colophon, which we discussed above, goes on to eulogize the 
intellectual achievements of his teacher, Sāriputta, and the political prowess of 
a monarch who we may identify with Vijayabāhu III. Similarly, Vācissara in 
the colophon to his commentary on a Vinaya handbook praises five individuals 
who helped initiate his work, including three monks, two of whom were from 
Cōl-a country in South India, a lay disciple and a merchant named ‘Bhāṇu’.
72
It is made explicit in reform-era works for the first time that both edu -
cational and kinship ties with the laity played important roles in establishing 
bonds of textual patronage. Vācissara in the colophon to an exposition on an 
Abhidhamma handbook praises at length one of his lay students, Dhammakitti. 
It appears from his colophon that, in the middle of writing his commentary, 
his student, having built a monastery, invited him there to complete the work 
and provided him with 4,000 books to do so.
73 The earliest explicit example 
of lay involvement in the patronage of a work, other than by the king himself, 
took place a decade or two earlier in the composition of a Pali grammatical 
handbook by a monk Piyadassi, probably in the early years after the reign of 
Parākramabāhu I. The unusual colophon to the grammar demonstrates how 
personal relationships could shape the composition of Pali works:
Having composed the Padasādhana (‘Forming words’), which I under-
took for the benefit of others, may this world through that merit accom -
plish (sādhetu) the unchanging goal (pada).
With purity as a support, Moggallāna [Piyadassi’s teacher] rose 
up having perfected his virtues. As an exemplar, he serves the Saṅgha 
of exemplary monks. Dwelling in the beautiful town of Anurādha, he is 
a lotus among bees and a standard for his own pure family. Filled with 
faith,
74 he reveres the Buddha at each and every step, burns asunder all 
evil enemies with the fires of a continuous and unbroken asceticism, 
and is like a gold cup containing the lion’s perfume
75 called the true 
Dhamma. He is skilled in the different, deficient views of philosophers, 
a master of the wife that is language, and a compassionate teacher who 
follows tradition with intelligence.

--- Page 65 of 286 ---
50 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Trained in grammar and the like by the renowned elder Moggallāna 
at his feet like a parakeet caught in a cage, the monk named Piyadassi 
wisely composed this work for the attainment of happiness, having been 
spoken to by his kind maternal uncle named Kappiṇa who is like a nup-
tial mark (tilaka ) on the forehead of the wife-like Ramhā monastery, 
which offers the finest enjoyments (upabhoga), has full breasts/water 
containers (payodhara), is free of anger/jungle (vana), and is servile/has 
servants (sevikā).
76
The colophon, it seems, was composed in two parts. Piyadassi only wrote 
the opening verse where he plays on the title of his grammar, Padasādhana, 
which can either mean forming words grammatically or attaining nirvana. The 
second part consists of an ornate, Sanskritic praise of Moggallāna, Piyadassi’s 
teacher. The final verse of the colophon, which appears to have been added 
at some point before the fifteenth century, further reveals that Piyadassi’s 
maternal uncle, Kappiṇa, who was the chieftain of a maintenance village con-
nected to the Ramhā monastery, requested Piyadassi to compose the grammar. 
This village was likely situated in Rohaṇa near the old provincial capital of 
Mahānāgakula.
With respect to the final part of the colophon, the fifteenth- century com-
mentary on this passage explains that in this verse the uncle likens himself and 
his village to a husband and wife.
77 It seems to me, however, that the verse 
compares the uncle to a decoration adorning the wife-like village and that it 
is actually to Piyadassi that the village is being offered as a spouse, with the 
uncle acting as symbolic evidence of the union between monk and village. The 
offer is framed as a marriage in sensual language, with the village’s material 
requisites described in terms that can also refer to an ideal wife’s physical 
beauty and subordinate disposition.
The colophon, in this regard, memorializes both Piyadassi’s educational 
and familial ties in highly stylized Sanskritic poetry, celebrating asceticism 
and sensuality with seemingly no recognition of any potential incompatibil -
ity. The colophon also reveals that it was thought possible that a head of a 
main tenance village would have the financial means to sponsor a grammati -
cal work, an expensive affair if one considers the costs of housing the monk, 
scholarly ritual and ceremony, procuring and copying books and producing 
writing material, in particular the elaborate process of actually making the 
palm leaves suitable for inscribing.
The continued production of literature among monastics in periods where 
patronage from a single, powerful royal court was either intermittent or com -
pletely lacking has proved puzzling. ‘One would wonder’, M. Sri Rammandala 
once wrote, ‘whether any kind of movement either for the development of 

--- Page 66 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  51
education in the country or for the material or the spiritual welfare of the Island 
could ever have been fostered during this turbulent epoch’.78 The evidence we 
have suggests, however, that the fragmentation of power on the island, while 
viewed negatively by the monks themselves, may not actually have been as 
deleterious to Buddhist literary culture as imagined. In fact, the formation of 
multiple centres of power produced multiple sources of patronage and it is a 
testament to the acumen of the monastic elites that they quickly adapted to the 
local and personal politics of the age.
At least as important as material patronage was also the monastic com -
munity’s own sense of itself as a political actor who, in writing Pali texts, 
could shape its social relationships, bound by religious identity, education, 
kinship and perceived karmic ties. We have already discussed in the previous 
chapter how the monastic community was drawn further into dynastic politics 
as a result of the instability of Cōl-a rule and that the ruling elite occasionally 
addressed monks in their inscriptions as political actors, sometimes in almost 
royal terms. After the reforms these scholar- monks began to write back, com-
posing new Pali texts, especially literary works modelled on Sanskrit poetry, as 
a means of creating devotional subjects out of the new elites that had emerged 
during the period. A senior monk known as Dhammakitti, for instance, seem-
ingly allied with a warlord, Parakkama, who was grooming a young Pāṇḍya 
prince from South India for the throne of Laṅkā, composed a history of the 
Buddha’s tooth relic, the Dāṭhāvaṃsa (‘History of the tooth’), in which he 
reframes the genealogy of the Pāṇḍya royal family within the karmic history 
of Buddhism as a means of cultivating the prince into a patron favourable to 
the monastic community.
79
The desire to establish new ties of patronage in an unstable, local-
ized political situation also led, perhaps paradoxically, to monks travelling 
abroad and establishing ties with petits nobles outside of the island too. A 
good example of this is the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra (‘Ornament of lay follow -
ers’), a Buddhist manual for the laity, composed by Ānanda, a forest monk 
from Sri Lanka, likely at some point during the reign of Māgha.
80 We learn 
that he had left Sri Lanka to Pāṇḍya country during this period of upheaval 
and that he wrote his manual under the patronage of a certain Coḷagaṅga, 
who is referred to as a ‘feudatory chieftain of a forest tract’ (vaññosāmantab-
hūmipa). Displaying sensitivity to local politics, Ānanda adapts the form of 
his manual according to what he refers to as the wishes of his newly Buddhist 
(abhinavasādhujana) audience.
81 Though it is clear his main motivation was 
to satisfy his immediate readers, Ānanda maintained close ties with Sri Lanka 
and monks there had access to his work soon after it was composed.
82 When 
some authors, then, still claimed to be writing in Pali for those from Sri Lanka 

--- Page 67 of 286 ---
52 REWRITING BUDDHISM
and India – partly in imitation of the early commentators – we can hypothesize 
that they often primarily meant their local, cosmopolitan audience and that any 
further dissemination was a secondary consideration.83
Even when scholar-monks did compose works with elite monastic insti-
tutions in South India in mind, they did so under new, regionally defined iden-
tities as an indirect consequence of the 1165 reforms. Having sought unity 
and political autonomy in the midst of the fragmented nature of politics in 
reform-era Sri Lanka, the Saṅgha’s identity had become locally bounded in 
that it began to be viewed, first by those outside of the island, as a separate, 
independent monastic lineage. Scholar-monks from Sri Lanka living in South 
India first started to identify as ‘Sīhaḷa’ and, likewise, monks in Sri Lanka occa-
sionally spoke of those living in the South Indian Cō ḻa kingdom as ‘Coḷiya’ 
too.84 The emergence of separate, locally-defined identities within a lineage 
that prior to the twelfth century had been regarded as part of the same monastic 
circle led to intensified, occasionally adversarial communication between the 
two communities, which was formalized in the renewed composition of Pali 
texts addressing controversial issues of doctrine and discipline. After Sāriputta 
wrote his subcommentary on the Vinaya, a certain Coḷiya Kassapa composed 
another subcommentary, often challenging Sāriputta’s interpretations.
85 We 
should note, however, that the separation of the identities of the two com -
munities was primarily political rather than linguistic or ethnic. It has been 
plausibly suggested that Coḷiya Kassapa was actually a Sinhalese monk who 
had relocated to a South Indian monastery.
86
In light of the local character of the reform era it may be surprising, 
then, that this period in Sri Lanka’s history is often framed as the moment in 
which Theravada Buddhism or at least Sīhaḷa monastic lineages became trans-
regional and ‘spread’ to Burma and Thailand. This type of teleological reading 
of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, however, focusing on the period as a 
staging post towards the spread of Buddhism in Southeast Asia, can obscure 
the historical reality of the period.
87 The elite scholar-monks of the reform 
era hardly ever mention Southeast Asia and their world was still very much 
a dichotomous one, split between Plum island and Lion island, India and Sri 
Lanka.
88 The revival of Pali then was not at this point connected to the ‘spread 
of Buddhism’ but was indirectly linked in so far as the political chaos and 
new, local politics on the island meant that some ambitious monks traced their 
capillary personal relationships further afield to find patronage, including to 
Southeast Asia.
89 For the most part, this movement did not produce ‘networks’ 
in the sense of continuous ties – we only know of most of these monks due 
to Southeast Asian chronicles and inscriptions – and at this stage there was 
little in the way of intellectual exchange between the regions. Rather these 

--- Page 68 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  53
new lineages in Southeast Asia can be better regarded as ‘filiations’, that is, 
offspring who maintained a certain familial identity and a shared tradition of 
historical memories but who, for much of their early existence, acted inde-
pendently without continuous contact or oversight.
90
Table 3.3:  A hypothetical chronology of Pali works composed in South 
India and Sri Lanka, 900–1500 CE91
Text Author Date
Commentaries/Subcommentaries on Canonical Texts and Histories
Visuddhajanavilāsinī Anon. Unknown
Amatarasadhārā Upatissa 900–1000
Madhuratthappakāsinī Upatissa? 900–1000
Vaṃsatthappakāsinī Upatissa? 900–1000
Vajirabuddhiṭīkā Vajirabuddhi 900–1000
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇīporāṇaṭīkā Anon. after 900–1000 (after 
Vajirabuddhiṭīkā)
Sāratthadīpanī Sāriputta 1165–86
Sāratthamañjūsā Sāriputta 1165–86
Vinayatthamañjūsā Buddhanāga 1165–86 (after 
Sāratthadīpanī)
Mohavicchedanī Kassapa 1165–1300
Vimativinodanī Kassapa 1165–1300
Handbooks, Anthologies and Compendia
Nāmarūpasamāsa Khema Unknown
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha Anuruddha before 1200
Paramatthavinicchaya Anuruddha before 1200
Nāmarūpapariccheda Anuruddha before 1200
Suttasaṅgaha Anon. before 1200
Vinayasaṅkhepaṭṭhakathā Anon. 1100–1300
Vinayasaṅgaha Sāriputta 1165–86
Upāsakajanālaṅkāra Ānanda 1215–32
Sīmālaṅkārasaṅgaha Vācissara 1225–50
Sārasaṅgaha Siddhattha 1250–1300
Bhesajjamañjūsā Anon. 1267
Commentaries/Subcommentaries on Handbooks, Anthologies and Compendia
Abhidhammāvatārapurāṇaṭīkā Anon. before 1165
Vinayasaṅgahapurāṇaṭīkā Sāriputta 1165–86
(Continued)

--- Page 69 of 286 ---
54 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Text Author Date
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī Sumaṅgala 1165–1232
Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī Sumaṅgala 1165–1232
Khuddasikkhāpurāṇaṭīkā Anon. 1175–1250
Līnatthappakāsinī Vācissara 1210–45
Sāratthasālinī Vācissara 1210–45
Vinayasāratthasandīpanī Vācissara 1210–45
Mūlasikkhāpurāṇaṭīkā Anon. after 1232
Sumaṅgalappasādanī Saṅgharakkhita after 1232
Philological Texts
Mukhamattadīpanī Vimalabuddhi 900–1100
Rūpasiddhi Buddhappiya 1008–1165
Moggallānavyākaraṇa Moggallāna 1165–86
Moggallānavutti Moggallāna 1165–86
Moggallānapañcikā Moggallāna 1165–86
Abhidhānappadīpikā Moggallāna (II) 1186–1232
Padasādhana Piyadassi 1186–1232
Sambandhacintā Saṅgharakkhita 1186–1232
Subodhālaṅkāra Saṅgharakkhita 1186–1232
Vuttodaya Saṅgharakkhita 1186–1232
Yogavinicchaya Saṅgharakkhita 1186–1232
Sāratthavilāsinī Saṅgharakkhita after 1232
Subodhālaṅkāraṭīkā Saṅgharakkhita after 1232
Payogasiddhi Medhaṅkara 1272–84
Bālāvatāra Dhammakitti 1350–1400
Buddhippasādanī Śrī Rāhula 1468–76
Literary Texts
Telakaṭāhagāthā Anon. Unknown
Sīhaḷavatthuppakaraṇa Dhammanandi Unknown
Anāgatavaṃsa Upatissa? 900–1000
Mahābodhivaṃsa Upatissa 900–1000
Naḷātadhātuvaṃsa Anon. 900–1100
Sahassavatthuppakaraṇa Raṭṭhapāla 900–1236
Jinālaṅkāra Buddharakkhita 1156/7
Saddhammopāyana Ānanda before 1165
Cūḷavaṃsa (part) Dhammakitti after 1186
Pajjamadhu Buddhappiya 1200–1300
Table 3.3 (Continued)
(Continued )

--- Page 70 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  55
3.4.  Summary
The reform-era Saṅgha, then, was primarily inward looking. The explosion in 
the production of Pali literature was in part due to the need to unify the discip-
line and doctrine on the island, to constitute the Saṅgha’s new hierarchy and 
achieve status within it in accordance with new scholarly ideals, to establish 
and maintain ties with a more diffuse and localized patronage network and 
finally to draw disciplinary distinctions between themselves and those in India 
or the ‘other island’, as they traditionally referred to it. This radically different 
context for Pali literary production contributed to large changes in genre and 
style. Compared with the Pali works produced prior to the Cōl -a ascendancy, 
which largely focused on canonical commentaries (tab. 3.2), the period after 
around 900 CE and in particular during the reform era, 1157–1270, witnessed 
a rapid diversification of Pali works including the renewed composition of 
handbooks, numerous handbook commentaries, a large amount of grammat -
ical literature as well as some works on poetics and finally new literary works 
that rewrote the Buddhist history of the island (tab. 3.3).
In the following two sections of this book we will now build upon this 
skeletal outline by turning away from the question of what happened to rather 
how it happened, in particular the way in which scholar-monks of the age 
reacted to and experienced this unprecedented change and turmoil. Part two, 
in particular, focuses on how scholar-monks viewed their exegetical activities 
as a battle against this perceived religious decline. They composed new works 
of grammar, experimented with more systematic forms of commentary and 
Text Author Date
Dāṭhāvaṃsa Dhammakitti 1211/12
Mahānāgakulasandesa Nāgasena 1211–56
Thūpavaṃsa Vācissara 1236–50
Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa Anon. 1236–66
Jinacarita Medhaṅkara 1236–70
Rasavāhinī Vedeha 1236–70
Samantakūṭavaṇṇanā Vedeha 1236–70
Sāratthasamuccaya Anon. after 1266
Janānurāgacarita Dhammakitti I 1300–50
Pāramīsataka Dhammakitti I 1300–50
Jinabodhāvalī Dhammakitti II 1350–1400
Table 3.3 (Continued)

--- Page 71 of 286 ---
56 REWRITING BUDDHISM
also, for the first time, started to produce anthologies of canonical and com-
mentarial literature. This project of organizational philology was united by 
the shared reform goal of protecting and framing their scriptures within new, 
systematic forms of scholastic enquiry. This process, we will see, was not 
purely descriptive but also creative in that these new approaches changed the 
very way scholar-monks thought about their scriptural tradition, its language 
and authority.
Notes
1. R.A.L.H. Gunawardana has argued that there was a unification of eight sub-groups, mūla or āyatana, 
that he suggests had supplanted the traditional division of the three nikāyas. Monastic elites from 
these eight fraternities, however, did unify under the umbrella of the Mahāvihāra. See Gunawardana, 
1979, 282–337. Heinz Bechert questioned the degree to which these eight groups had in fact sup-
planted the three nikāyas within the Saṅgha’s structure. See Bechert, 1993. It is the case, for instance, 
that these mūlas still maintained at least a nominal affiliation with one of the three fraternities. See, in 
this regard, Panabokke, 1993, 179.
2. Collins, 2003, 650, fn. 1, citing Norman, 1983, ix.
3. Norman, 1997, 59–76; V on Hinüber, 1982.
4. For example, Norman, 1983, 2–7.
5. For instance, Bechert, 1966.
6. See Collins, 1998.
7. Collins, 2003, 649–50.
8. Collins, 2003, 682–3.
9. Regnal dates are from De Silva, 1981, 565–73. I have also included the reign of Mahinda VI. On Ma-
hinda VI, see Liyanagamage, 1968, 45–6. Thanks to the recent epigraphical work of G.S. Ranawella, 
we can now more accurately date the official coronation of Parākramabāhu I to 1157 and not 1153, as 
previously thought. See Ranawella, Inscriptions of Ceylon 6, xxvi–vii.
10. Wynne, 2005.
11. V on Hinüber, 1996, §§22–7; §§116–18; §§158–71.
12. Walters, 1997.
13. Norman, 1983, 121.
14. V on Hinüber, 1996, §207.
15. V on Hinüber, 1996, §183. R.A.L.H. Gunawardana has suggested that nuns could have written the 
Dīpavaṃsa. See Gunawardana, 1988.
16. V on Hinüber, 1996, §185.
17. Gornall and Ruiz-Falqués, 2019, 422–3.
18. Sammohavinodanī, 387,4 – 388,16; Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosa, 373,27–34.
19. See also Collins, 2003, 46–53; Crosby, 2004; 2013, 82–4; V on Hinüber, 1994. The qualification ‘sab-
hāva-’ may also refer to the language’s capacity to capture the essence of reality. See, for instance, 
Vibhaṅgamūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 191,16–17: dhammaniruttābhilāpe ti ettha dhammasaddo sabhāvavācako 
ti katvā āha yā sabhāvaniruttī ti.
20. On this circle, Cousins, 2001; Gethin, 2012.
21. Samantapāsādikā I, 2,7–14. Also, Crosby, 2004.
22. See, for instance, Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 20,10–12.
23. Collins, 2003, 52–3. On the translation of jambudvīpa, see Wujastyk, 2004.
24. Malalasekera, 1994, 104.
25. Rahula, 1956, 62–77.
26. See introduction.
27. Cūḷavaṃsa 37.215–46. On problems with dating this commentary to the reign of Mahānāma, how -
ever, see Kieffer-Pülz, 1992, 162–7.

--- Page 72 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  57
28. Walters, 1999, 331–7. There is also a tradition that king Dhātusena (455–73) ordered ‘a redaction of 
the Buddhist canon and a revision of Dīpavaṃsa’, with the latter possibly referring to the compos -
ition of the Mahāvaṃsa. See Walters, 1997, 120, citing Cūḷavaṃsa 38.43–59.
29. Vinayavinicchaya of Buddhadatta, vv. 3166–82.
30. Buddhadatta, 1945; Nilakanta Sastri, 1935, 120–1. Valérie Gillet has persuasively argued, however, 
that the ‘Kaḷabhra’ dynasty was not a dominant power in South India between the third and sixth 
centuries, as has been thought. See Gillet, 2014, esp. 298–9.
31. This chronology is based on information provided in Gornall and Ruiz-Falqués, 2019; V on Hinüber, 
1996; Kieffer-Pülz, 2015c; Pind, 1997, 523–7.
32. See Strathern, 2009, 827–8.
33. Taylor, 1976, 258.
34. Cūḷavaṃsa 78.6; Epigraphia Zeylanica  II, 274. On Aśoka as a model for kings in Sri Lanka, see 
Lingat, 1989; Tambiah, 1976, 54–72; 168.
35. In this regard, see also Hallisey , 1991.
36. For instance, Bechert, 1965; 1970; 1974.
37. Cūḷavaṃsa 78.20–7.
38. Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 275. The edict issued after the 1266 reform, which incorporated the edict of 
1232–6, makes no mention of any unification of the Saṅgha. We know from the Cūḷavaṃsa, however, 
that the 1266 reforms involved a reconciliation between the Cōl-a and Sīhaḷa monastic communities. 
The Pūjāvaliya also adds that the 1232 reforms included a similar reconciliation between factions 
in the Saṅgha too but gives little detail. See Cūḷavaṃsa 78.5; 84.7–10; Pūjāvaliya of Mayūrapāda, 
733,9; 736, 1; 740, 28–32; Nikāyasaṅgrahaya of Devarakṣita Dharmakīrti, 19, 28–9; 20, 33. The term sa-
magga in an early Buddhist context refers to legal unanimity and it seems to maintain this sense for 
medieval historians in Sri Lanka. See V on Hinüber, 1969, 124.
39. Cūḷavaṃsa 78.27.
40. Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 274.
41. Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 274. On these two processes, see Gunawardana, 1979, 319.
42. Ratnapāla, 1971, 146.
43. For instance, Bechert, 1973, 87.
44. Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 275. The text in parentheses is my own addition. Compare this with Niśśaṅka-
malla, who specifically states that he protects the religion by means of admonitions (avavāda). See 
Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 96–8.
45. Epigraphia Zeylanica  II, 274. Michael Aung Thwin has interpreted monastic reforms as a royal 
mechanism to reappropriate land from the Saṅgha ‘in a legal and socially acceptable manner’. See 
Aung Thwin, 1979, on Sri Lanka esp., 686–8. That Parākramabāhu I had such motivations in mind 
is not unlikely since, as R.A.L.H. Gunawardana noted, the king did not return to the Saṅgha lands 
that had been confiscated during the civil war prior to his ascension to the throne. See Gunawardana, 
1979, 94. For criticisms of Aung Thwin’s analysis, see Lieberman, 1981; Frasch, 1996, 237–44.
46. Ratnapāla, 1971, 147. We can make the conjecture that the two mahātheras here mentioned corre -
spond both in their role and function with the courtly positions of apa (heir presumptive) and mahapa 
(heir apparent) who were ideally charged with administrating the regions of Rohaṇa and Māyāraṭṭha, 
respectively.
47. Adapted from Phadnis, 1976, 78.
48. See also, Bechert, 1966, 211. Royal involvement in the appointment of the heads of āyatanas contin-
ued into the early fifteenth century. See Ilangasinha, 1992, 69–70.
49. For a useful critique of the notion of an ‘imperial’ Church in medieval Europe, see Reuter, 1982. We 
should keep in mind too that the relative importance of royal ecclesiastical appointments in defining 
‘imperial religion’ in a European context is largely due the importance of this issue in the ‘investiture 
controversy’, which led after the Concordat of Worms in 1122 to a restriction on royal oversight in 
the appointment of bishops.
50. Cūḷavaṃsa 84.10; Pūjāvaliya of Mayūrapāda, 740, 28–32. On the reality of Parākramabāhu II’s rela -
tively weak rule, see Liyanagamage, 1968, 133–59.
51. On caste as a determining factor in monastic rank, see Ratnapāla, 1971, 141; 147; Liyanagamage, 
2001b, 169–216.
52. Dhammavisuddhi, 1970, 247–315.
53. Crosby, 2006; Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 22; 2017a; Pecenko, 1997.
54. Ratnapāla, 1971, 142–7.
55. It is only in the Poḷonnaruva edict that the Sikhavalaṅda is mentioned in the context of a novice’s edu-
cation but I infer that it was studied at the time of the Daṁbadeṇiya edict too since its commentary, 

--- Page 73 of 286 ---
58 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Sikhavalaṅdavinisa, is required to be studied by monks after higher ordination. See Ratnapāla, 1971, 
143. While handbooks dominated monastic education, the Tipiṭaka still played an important role as 
the final source of religious authority. See, for instance,  Kief fer-Pülz, 2016–17.
56. Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna, 3, 33–5; Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 14, 22–5; Sub-
odhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 28, 27–29,10 (≈ Ratnaśrīṭīkā on Kāvyādarśa 1.33). 
 Andrew Ollett has dubbed this classical arrangement of literary languages headed by Sanskrit as ‘the 
language order of premodern India’. See Ollett, 2017.
57. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 7, 12–27, quoted and translated in chapter seven. 
Similarly, Sāriputta in his Vinaya subcommentary criticizes those who mix Pali with other languages. 
See chapter five.
58. Similarly , Vanderputten, 2013, 1–13.
59. Gunawardana, 1979, 321–9.
60. But before 1 185, see Rohanadeera, 1985, 30.
61. On the evolution of the position of mahāsāmi, see Rohanadeera, 1985; 1996.
62. Kief fer-Pülz, 2018, 197.
63. Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b.
64. On ‘corporate memories of reform’, see Vanderputten, 2013, 14–30.
65. Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 285,24–7:
ṭīkāyo vinayādinaṃ viracayī yo kaṇṭhabhūsāparo
viññūnaṃ jinasāsanāmalamatī so ’kāsi cānākulaṃ.
santosakkamano-m-anomakamano sabbhāvanīyo mahā-
sāmī me gurupuṅgavo vijayate sārīsuto ’yaṃ bhuvi.
For ease of comprehension, I have separated the glide -m- in pāda A of the second verse, which the 
Burmese edition leaves unmarked. See also, Kieffer-Pülz, 2017b, 28–31.
66. For instance, Rosenwein, 1982, esp. 30–56; 101–12. Strathern has noted too the general capacity 
of ‘transcendentalist clerisies’ in premodernity to maintain organizational power during periods of 
social and political turmoil. See Strathern, 2019, 140–1.
67. I use the term ‘warlord’ here to loosely translate senāpati or yuddhapati often rendered as ‘general’ 
since it is not clear that these figures were subsumed within any particular state bureaucracy.
68. It has been plausibly suggested, for instance, that a new group of nobles, the gaṇavāsi (Sin. gaṇa-
väsi), emerged at the end of the Anurādhapura period and that this lineage was intimately tied to the 
lay management of monastic property. See Ilangasinha, 1992, 85–6.
69. On this localizatio n, see Liyanagamage, 1968; Perera, 1960–1; de Silva, 1981, 81–96; Taylor, 1976. 
Also, Indrapala, 1970; Indrapala (ed), 1971c; Pathmanathan, 1972.
70. On similar feudal developments in Europe, see Bloch, 1961.
71. Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b, 28.
72. Kief fer-Pülz, 2018, 195.
73. Kief fer-Pülz, 2018, 209–10.
74. The Padasādhanasannaya glosses saddhālunā as śraddhābahulavū, ‘one who has lots of faith’. See 
Padasādhanasannaya of Ānanda, 197,32.
75. On sīhatela or sīhavasā, literally, ‘lion’s oil/perfume’, see Norman, 1993, 161–2.
76. Padasādhana of Piyadassi, 197,5–198,8:
paratthāya mayā laddhaṃ katvāna padasādhanaṃ
puññena tena loko ’yaṃ sādhetu padam accutaṃ.
suddhāsayena parisuddhaguṇoditena
sārena sārayatisaṅghanisevitena
ramme ’nurādhanagare vasatambujena
vidvālinaṃ nijavisuddhakuladdhajena
mānentena tathāgataṃ paṭipadāyogena saddhālunā
niccākhaṇḍataponalehi nikhilappāpārisantāpinā
saddhammavhayasīhatelaṭhitiyā cāmīkaratthālinā
nānāvādikudiṭṭhibhedapaṭunā vāṇivadhūsāminā
satthānaṃ karuṇāvatā gatavatā pāramparaṃ dhīmatā
therenātumapādapañjaragato yo saddasatthādisu
moggallāyanavissuten’ iha suvacchāpo vinīto yathā
so ’kāsī piyadassi nāma yati ’daṃ byattaṃ sukhappattiyā.
vutto ’va vuttam (corr. uttam°) upabhoginiyā sakāya pinappayodharavanāpagasevikāya,
ramhāvihāravadhuyā tilakātulena santena kappiṇasamavhayamātulena.
77. Buddhippasādanī of Śrī Rāhula, 133,24–134,9.

--- Page 74 of 286 ---
 T HE  R E fORM  E RA  AND  ITS  PALI  L ITERATURE  59
78. Rammandala, 1954, 38. Similarly, see Dhammapala, 2003, 35.
79. See chapter seven.
80. Liyanagamage, 2001a; Kieffer-Pülz, 2015a.
81. Agostini, 2015, xi–xiv.
82. It is quoted, for instance, in the Sārasaṅgaha. See Neri, 2015, 345. See also chapter five.
83. On Tamil monks in Sri Lanka, see Gunawardana, 1979, 47–8. Tilman Frasch has argued similarly that 
Pali was used in Burma, in part, to communicate with the increasingly diverse monastic community 
at home. See Frasch, 2017, 72.
84. See, for instance, Liyanagamage, 2001a; Monius, 2001, 123–5. It is difficult to say when monks 
 started using these labels as forms of identification. It is certainly present in Vācissara’s Sīmālaṅkāras-
aṅgaha. See Kieffer-Pülz, 2020.
85. Dhammaratana, 1997; Kieffer-Pülz, 2005.
86. Crosby and Skilton, 1999, 176.
87. S. Paranavitana invented fantastical and fictitious accounts of Sri Lanka’s relations with Southeast 
Asia in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. For thorough critiques of his theories, see Gunawardana, 
1967; Indrapala, 1967; Kiribamune, 1970; Nilakanta Sastri, 1962; Sirisena, 1971.
88. In fact, the Abhidhānappadīpikā, when adapting the Amarakośa’s geographical vocabulary, includes 
Sri Lanka in Jambudvīpa and lists twenty regions in this realm, none of which are Southeast Asian. 
See Abhidhānappadīpikā of Moggallāna, vv. 184–5.
89. On relations with Burma, specifically , see chapter ten.
90. I borrow the concept of monastic ‘filiations’  from Tellenbach, 1993, 109.
91. In addition to the sources mentioned for table 3.2 , this chronology is based on information pro -
vided in Barnett, 1905; Dimitrov, 2016, 157–450; Kieffer-Pülz and Peters, 2002;  Kief fer-Pülz, 2015a; 
2018; Kitsudo, 2015; Liyanaratne, 1983, Wickramasinghe, 1958, 8–33. With respect to Buddhap-
piya’s Rūpasiddhi, it must have been composed before 1165 since Moggallāna  refers to it in his 
grammatical works. Buddhappiya also must have composed his grammar after his monastery, the 
 Cūḍāmaṇivarmavihāra, was founded in 1005/6. See Epigraphia Indica 22, no. 34.

--- Page 75 of 286 ---


--- Page 76 of 286 ---
Part II
Order

--- Page 77 of 286 ---


--- Page 78 of 286 ---
63
4
Scholarly Foundations: Moggalla ¯na’s 
Grammar
The scholar-monks of the reform era approached the composition of literature 
with a mindset that was akin to a form of technological determinism or, better 
still, philological determinism. For they viewed the state of their scriptures 
and the degree to which the monastic community adhered to those texts as the 
principal cause of the social and political upheaval in which they had found 
themselves. At the same time, they believed that by better preserving their 
scriptures and, in particular, by improving their understanding of them through 
further exegetical work they could actively change these conditions. This was 
nothing new, of course, and reflected longstanding Buddhist beliefs about the 
interdependence between the moral character of a particular historical era and 
the state of the Buddha’s teachings.
1 What seems to have changed or at least 
come to a head during the reform era was the attitude of  scholar -monks towards 
implementing new philological technologies in preserving and protecting the 
coherence of their religious literature.
2 One such technology introduced after 
the 1165 reforms was a new system of Pali grammar, the Moggallānavyā-
karaṇa (‘Grammar of Moggallāna’), modelled on older, derivational gram-
mars in the Sanskrit tradition. This grammar introduced new approaches to 
language that helped change how monks thought about and approached their 
sacred texts.
The term vyākaraṇa or ‘grammar’ as it is most often translated in 
English refers to the discipline of analysing (lit. dividing) language into its 
constituent parts, such as nouns, verbs, roots, bases and suffixes.
3 The post-
seventh- century commentator Dhammapāla, echoing older Brahmanical inter-
pretations in the Sanskrit tradition, defines vyākaraṇa as ‘the means by which 
one anal yses (byākaroti) and explains (byācikkhati) different words and their 
meanings’.4 There is a longstanding connection between Hinduism and the 
oldest Sanskrit grammatical works, namely, Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī (‘Eight lec -
tures’, early to mid-fourth century BCE), Kātyāyana’s vārttikas or ‘annota -
tions’ on the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and Patañjali’s Mahābhāṣya (‘Great commentary’, 
mid- second century BCE), the oldest surviving exposition of Pāṇini’s gram -
mar that is ostensibly a commentary on Kātyāyana’s annotations. 5 At least 

--- Page 79 of 286 ---
64 REWRITING BUDDHISM
since Patañjali, Hindu grammarians have viewed vyākaraṇa as the first and 
foremost of the so-called vedāṅgas, that is, the six disciplines or limbs (aṅga) 
that help preserve the Vedas and Vedic ritual. 6 Early in its history, however, 
the discipline spread outside of the Vedic sphere and transitioned from being a 
technology of liturgy to also one of literature. Sheldon Pollock has described 
in detail how grammar developed into a prestigious discipline within the lit -
erary culture of the royal court; kings patronized grammatical scholarship, 
competed with rival courts in the grammatical works they produced, and their 
knowledge of grammar was praised as an integral part of just rule.
7 For much 
of its history, then, grammar was an ecumenical science used by priests and 
poets alike and ‘a support shared by all’, in the words of the fifth-century 
grammarian Bhartṛhari.
8
The comparable role grammar played in Buddhist intellectual life from 
an early period has received relatively little attention. Buddhist Sanskrit gram-
marians reinterpreted the religious origins of vyākaraṇa and viewed Pāṇini 
as a Buddhist inspired by the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara. 9 Grammar was 
used to interpret Buddhist Sanskrit scriptures, though Buddhists writing in 
Sanskrit did not view the discipline of grammar as exclusively an exegetical 
tool. Rather scholar-monks also saw grammar as a useful weapon in debates 
with other religious competitors and, as a result, categorized the discipline as 
an ‘external’ (Sk. vāhya) knowledge due to the fact it was directed ‘outwards’, 
towards others.
10 They further considered grammar, more broadly, to be part of 
a buddha’s omniscient knowledge and thus as an important object of study for 
one who aspired to achieve the state of buddhahood.11 Towards the end of the 
first millennium, like their Brahmanical contemporaries, Buddhist grammar -
ians further composed grammatical works, occasionally for royal patrons, but 
also, we can speculate, for their own intellectual and political ends.
12
Pali grammar became an important scholarly discipline for the 
Theravada Buddhist tradition in the second half of the first millennium. 13 
Prior to that, early commentators such as Buddhaghosa relied upon Sanskrit 
grammars, such as Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī, in the interpretation of Pali scripture.
14 
The earliest known Pali grammar, the Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa (‘Grammar of 
Kaccāyana’), was likely composed in around the seventh century, though a 
number of Pali grammarians from the tenth century onwards believed that the 
work was composed by the Buddha’s disciple Mahā Kaccāyana.
15 While Pali 
grammatical works were more singularly rooted in the exegesis of scripture 
than the Sanskrit grammars of their Buddhist counterparts, in the reform era 
we begin to see a transition from purely exegetical approaches to language to 
those that were more analytical in nature.
Pali vyākaraṇa never became a courtly discipline in reform-era Sri 
Lanka, though it did develop associations with political power within the 

--- Page 80 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  65
Saṅgha’s own monastic hierarchy. 16 During the reform era, for instance, 
all the monks to hold the high office of ‘grandmaster’ were grammarians. 17 
The  forest-monk and Sanskrit grammarian, Diṁbulāgala Kassapa, held the 
position of leader of the Saṅgha during the 1165 reforms, though he was not 
referred to as grandmaster.18 Sāriputta, his pupil, was the first to be acknow -
ledged officially with this title and early in his career authored a Sanskrit gram-
matical commentary, the Cāndrapañcikālaṅkāra (‘Ornament to the extensive 
commentary on Candra’s grammar’).
19 Our Pali grammarian Moggallāna sub-
sequently attained the position of grandmaster, presumably after Sāriputta’s 
death.
20 Saṅgharakkhita then ascended to the role in the reign of Vijayabāhu 
III (1232–6), administered monastic reforms and composed a commentary on 
Moggallāna’s grammar during his tenure too.
21 His pupil, Medhaṅkara, author 
of a grammatical handbook, the Payogasiddhi (‘Practical construction’), and 
a member of the Diṁbulāgala forest fraternity, succeeded him in turn and led 
further monastic reforms during the reign of Parākramabāhu II in 1266.
22
Despite its important place in Buddhist intellectual culture, grammar 
has been almost entirely overlooked in the academic study of Buddhism. 23 
One possible reason for this is that Pali vyākaraṇa and Sanskrit vyākaraṇa, in 
particular, have generally been studied within the fields of philology and lin-
guistics. Commonly understood as a poor imitation of its Sanskrit counterpart, 
traditional Pali grammar has languished among what the historian of science 
Otto Neugebauer famously defended as ‘wretched subjects’, that is, premod -
ern scientific disciplines viewed as debased or flawed.
24 Wilhelm Geiger 
(1882–1945), for instance, lamented the ‘slavish imitation’ of Pali grammars 
on the Sanskrit grammatical tradition and their ‘artificial’ grammatical con-
structions not found in any attested canonical literature.
25 This chapter aims 
to unmoor the study of traditional Pali grammar from the empiricist character 
of such assessments by exploring from a social and historical perspective why 
grammar was thought to be so important for the reform era, how it shaped new 
ways of thinking about language and literature, and also what it can tell us 
about the monastic community’s engagement with Sanskrit literary culture.
26
4.1. The Changing Purpose of Grammar
When in around the seventh century a scholar-monk known as Kaccāyana 
composed the first Pali grammar for the language of scripture his work soon 
inspired a number of commentaries and other independent grammars, most 
of which are no longer extant.
27 Among these early works, still available are 
Vimalabuddhi’s Mukhamattadīpanī (‘Straightforward illuminator’), an influ-
ential tenth or eleventh-  century commentary, and the grammar’s eleventh 

--- Page 81 of 286 ---
66 REWRITING BUDDHISM
or early twelfth-century handbook, Cōḻa Buddhappiya’s Rūpasiddhi (‘Con-
struction of [word] forms’). 28 Writing at the Thūpārāma in the old capital of 
Anurādhapura in the aftermath of the unification of the Saṅgha in 1165, the 
scholar- monk Moggallāna brought the dominance of the Kaccāyana gram-
matical tradition in Sri Lanka to an abrupt end with the composition of a new 
grammatical system consisting of a set of rules, the Moggallānavyākaraṇa , a 
paraphrase on those rules, the Moggallānavutti, and an extensive commen -
tary, the Moggallānapañcikā. Moggallāna in his colophon to the Moggallāna-
pañcikā explicitly connects the composition of this new grammatical system 
with the monastic reforms that had taken place in the years before. 29 That a 
new grammar was considered to be a necessary outcome of the 1165 reforms 
raises the question about the role the discipline was thought to play in the uni-
fication and purification of the Saṅgha.
The early grammarians presented Pali grammar as essentially a 
tool used for the exegesis of the Buddha’s discourses. The author of the 
Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa, for instance, writes at the outset of his work that he 
composed his grammar in order to ‘understand well the right meaning of 
the discourses of the Teacher’.
30 Centuries later, Vimalabuddhi adds in his 
Mukhamattadīpanī that studying grammar has a further incidental (anusaṅgika) 
purpose. A monk who understands grammar, he states, lives according to the 
meaning of scripture and as a result becomes joyful in the knowledge that he is 
behaving appropriately. This joy leads to other calming emotions, such as sat-
isfaction (pīti) and happiness (sukha), which help produce a composed mind 
that can achieve spiritual insights.
31 Here Vimalabuddhi evokes a longstanding 
causal connection in Buddhist thought between studying authoritative scrip -
ture (pariyatti), good practice (paṭipatti) and the attainment of spiritual insight 
(paṭivedha), and places the study of grammar as its foundation.
In his own discussion on the purpose of the discipline, Moggallāna simi-
larly presents grammar as the foundation of the same causal sequence of spiritual 
development: grammatical knowledge, followed by scriptural knowledge, fol-
lowed by good practice and culminating in spiritual insight. His discussion dif-
fers, however, in two main ways. Moggallāna first speaks of the loss of one’s 
status within the Saṅgha’s hierarchy as a result of not knowing grammar. He 
stresses that an individual who does not know grammar cannot become a teacher 
of others or lead legal rites within the Saṅgha. He further differs from older gram-
marians in explicitly justifying the study of the discipline in terms of the need to 
counter religious decline. There he argues that without grammar, scripture would 
completely disappear, followed by practice and then finally by insight:
For one who is ignorant of grammar is not skilled in the doctrine and 
discipline, and since he is not skilled in them he is not able to practise 

--- Page 82 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARLY fOUNDATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  67
according to the Dhamma. In losing his practice he partakes only in the 
suffering of cyclic existence and is not able to become a support (i.e. a 
teacher) for the faithful renunciates, the noble sons. For only those who 
know grammar are able to train noble sons in the doctrine and discipline, 
having checked the wording according to the meaning and the meaning 
according to the wording, and are able to complete this or that legal 
act (kamma) among the disciplinary acts, such as the probation ritual 
(parivāsa), having recited the legal formulae (kammavācā) in accord-
ance with it (i.e. the discipline). No other can do this. He who does not 
know grammar, moreover, and who does not practise accordingly elim-
inates also the three-fold true Dhamma. To explain: 
He who does not know grammar destroys scripture, which is only 
based on it (i.e. grammar). Then when this is destroyed, practice, which is 
based on scripture, is destroyed. And then realization, which is based on 
practice, is also destroyed. For the Bhagavan has said this: ‘Monks, these 
two conditions lead to the confusion and destruction of the true Dhamma. 
What two? An incorrectly placed expression and the misunderstanding 
of meaning. If an expression is misplaced, monks, the meaning in turn 
is liable to be misunderstood. These two conditions, monks, lead to the 
confusion and destruction of the true Dhamma.’
32 This is the fault in not 
knowing grammar.33
Moggallāna likely raised the issues of education and legal rites here due to 
the fact that grammar in the reform-era curriculum was a testing ground for 
monks who aspired to leading positions in the monastic community’s edu -
cational hierarchy. The Daṁbadeṇiya edict of Parākramabāhu II highlights 
a Vinaya regulation that after higher ordination a monk could undertake a 
five-year period of study with a teacher in order to be declared ‘independ -
ent’ (Sin. niśrayamukta), that is, he could move freely without permission.
34 
The highest course of study as part of its curriculum was delivered by a lead -
ing monk (nāyaka) and included the study of grammatical texts. Once these 
texts were memorized the monk was examined on them and finally released 
from dependence on his teacher, with the request that he would occasionally 
recite these works in front of the monastic community from time to time.
35 
Grammar was studied widely, then, since knowledge of the subject was also a 
means by which a monk could achieve independence and a high rank within 
the Saṅgha.
36
Moggallāna’s emphasis on religious decline may reflect the wider 
 eschatological concerns motivating these monastic reforms.37 Descriptions of 
the reforms that took place in 1165, c. 1232 and 1266 all emphasize a perceived 
deterioration in the monastic tradition, as discussed in chapter two, and it seems 

--- Page 83 of 286 ---
68 REWRITING BUDDHISM
likely that these eschatological considerations also informed Moggallāna’s 
view of grammar as the first line of defence in delaying the destruction of 
Buddhism. That Moggallāna had such eschatological concerns in mind when 
writing his grammar is supported by its earliest interpreter, Saṅgharakkhita, 
who wrote a commentary to his teacher’s work in the third quarter of the thir-
teenth century. There, in elaborating on this passage, he specifically evokes 
the source of this eschatological prophecy, Buddhaghosa’s fourth- or fifth-  
century Aṅguttara Nikāya commentary, where the commentator describes in 
detail how, over a five-thousand-year period after the Buddha’s death, there 
would be the gradual disappearance of ‘five aspects’ of the Buddhist tradition, 
namely realization, practice, scripture, signs of monasticism such as robes, 
and the Buddha’s relics.
38 Saṅgharakkhita connects Moggallāna’s discussion 
of religious decline with this passage by quoting the following three verses 
that Buddhaghosa appends to his prophecy:
As far as the Suttantas remain and the Vinaya shines
they illuminate the entire world as when the sun has arisen.
When the Suttantas are no more and the Vinaya has been lost
there will be darkness in the world as when the sun has set.
When the Suttanta is being preserved, practice is preserved.
Steadfast in practice, the wise do not lose their freedom from bondage.
39
Saṅgharakkhita creatively reframes Buddhaghosa’s short poem here by pla -
cing before these verses his own opening couplet that presents the study of 
language, that is, grammatical practice, as the basis of scriptural knowledge. 
He writes:
One who would study the three baskets without having studied language
stumbles on each word (at every step) like a blind elephant in a forest.
40
Saṅgharakkhita thus connects Moggallāna’s initial discussions about religious 
decline with traditional eschatological theory. The association in Saṅghar -
akkhita’s mind between grammar and eschatology suggests that he too saw 
grammar not only as the foundation of one’s personal spiritual development 
but, from a civilizational perspective, also as the basis for protecting the world 
from impending darkness. In this regard we can speculate that the very real, 
exegetical connection between understanding the rules of the Pali language 
and studying its literature had, in the minds of some scholar-monks of the era, 
become generalized into an ideal connection, where the study of grammar 
took on a magical or apotropaic role in forestalling the impending disappear -
ance of the religion.
41

--- Page 84 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARLY fOUNDATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  69
4.2. The Information Order of Reform-era 
Grammarians
Reform-era grammarians differed from their predecessors not only in their 
aims but also in their radical rejection of tradition, dispensing with the older 
Kaccāyana grammar and adopting and better adapting new models of gram -
matical analysis from other Sanskrit grammars. This new orientation owed 
much to the wider reforming mentality of the era, characterized by the need to 
stem religious decline, but also to the availability of new intellectual resources, 
described in chapter two, that allowed scholars to rethink the ways in which 
they were taking care of their sacred language and scriptures. The sources 
Moggallāna used to create a new organizational framework for his sacred lan-
guage provide an insight into his ‘information order’, that is, the historical 
‘knowledge flows’ through which his work was produced.
42
Moggallāna wrote his eponymous grammar at the Thūpārāma in the 
southwest of Anurādhapura, nestled equidistantly between the main monaster-
ies of the three fraternities, the Mahāvihāra, Abhayagiri and Jetavana. 43 Prior 
to the Cōḻa invasions, the Thūpārāma’s affiliation with any one particular fra-
ternity was contested and evidence suggests that it maintained an administra -
tive autonomy in the sectarian landscape of the old capital. 44 The location of 
the Thūpārāma was deemed particularly sacred since it housed the Buddha’s 
collar-bone relic and it was thought to occupy the same abstract topological 
space in Anurādhapura as the site of the Buddha’s passing in the ancient Indian 
town of Kuśināra.
45
Moggallāna’s sources reflect the wider changes in Sri Lanka’s reli -
gious and political alliances discussed in chapter two. His grammar reveals, 
for instance, strong intellectual ties with the scholarly communities of north -
east India, in particular the Bengal region, as well as an increasing rivalry 
with Cōḻa scholar-monks in South India. While most of the Sanskrit works 
Moggallāna used betray no religious affiliation, based on the little informa -
tion we know about the authors of these works it seems that his sources were 
largely Buddhist and monastic.
Moggallāna’s main opponent and representative of the older Kaccāyana 
grammatical tradition was the South Indian scholar-monk Buddhappiya. 
Buddhappiya presided as head monk over two monasteries in Nāgapaṭṭana, mod-
ern day Nagapattinam, namely the Bālādityavihāra and Cūḍāmaṇivarmavihāra, 
and perhaps led his own reforms of the monastic community in Cōḻa country 
prior to those that took place in Sri Lanka in 1165, resulting in a schism in what 
monks had regarded as their shared ‘circle of influence’ (maṇḍala).
46 The latter 
monastery, in particular, is historically significant since it was built by the ruler 
of Śrīvijaya, Māravijayottuṅgavarman, of the Śailendra dynasty in 1005/6 and 

--- Page 85 of 286 ---
70 REWRITING BUDDHISM
continued to receive endowments from Cōḻa kings throughout the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries.47
We can speculate that Buddhappiya’s close ties with the Cōḻa court may 
have contributed to the split that took place between the monastic orders in 
South India and Sri Lanka. This schism manifests itself intellectually through-
out Moggallāna’s grammar but it is worth highlighting two main points of lin-
guistic controversy. First, Moggallāna directly argues against Buddhappiya in 
his very first rule in claiming that Pali has  forty-three sounds, including short e 
and o, in its syllabary rather than the forty-one enumerated by the Kaccāyana 
tradition.48 Second, Moggallāna, again partly in opposition to Buddhappiya, 
radically reduces the scope of the Pali dative case. He argues that Kaccāyana 
grammarians were overly influenced by Sanskrit grammars in ascribing many 
of the functions they do to the dative. He instead argues that most of these 
functions should be subsumed under an expanded Pali genitive case.
49
In terms of Sanskrit sources, Moggallāna modelled his grammar on the 
Cāndravyākaraṇa (‘Grammar of Candragomin’), a work that was composed by 
Candragomin, who, according to late Tibetan tradition, was a Buddhist layman 
and resident at the monastery of Nālandā in northeast India.
50 Possibly written 
in the fifth century his work is second only to Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī in its influ-
ence on South Asia’s indigenous grammatical traditions. 51 A Buddhist monk 
called Dharmadāsa composed a paraphrase (vṛtti ) for the Cāndravyākaraṇa 
possibly in the late fifth or sixth century and Moggallāna also nearly always 
follows his explanations when writing his own paraphrase on rules borrowed 
from the Cāndra grammar.
52 Moggallāna’s use of the Cāndra tradition of 
Sanskrit grammar was mediated by two Sanskrit commentaries composed by 
scholar-monks from Sri Lanka prior to the reforms. A prolific tenth-century 
scholar known as Ratnamati, discussed in chapter two, composed an influ -
ential commentary, the Cāndrapañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on Candra’s 
grammar’), on Dharmadāsa’s paraphrase.
53 This work, in turn, was commented 
upon by Sāriputta in a work known as the Cāndrapañcikālaṅkāra.54
Both Ratnamati and Sāriputta may have had personal ties with the monas-
tic communities of northeast India. Dragomir Dimitrov has recently argued 
that it was this same Ratnamati, using the name Ratnaśrījñāna, who composed 
an inscription at the sacred site of Bodh Gayā as well as a commentary on 
Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa (‘Mirror of literature’) in northeast India.
55 Sāriputta’s 
Sanskrit commentary was lost in Sri Lanka and is only known about through 
quotations in other reform-era works. Dimitrov, however, has published a fac-
simile edition of a manuscript of a commentary on Ratnamati’s work entitled 
the Candrālaṅkāra, which was copied in 1116 at the Somapura Mahāvihāra, a 
monastery located near the modern-day village of Paharpur in Bangladesh, and 
identifies this work with Sāriputta’s lost commentary.
56 Recorded quotations 

--- Page 86 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  71
from Sāriputta’s commentary in works from Sri Lanka unfortunately fall out-
side the material covered in this fragmentary manuscript and so this attribution, 
while possible, cannot as yet be confirmed. If the work is indeed Sāriputta’s 
then the early date of the manuscript would suggest that the island’s monastic 
community likely had close contact with this monastery in Bengal.
One of the keenest observers of Moggallāna’s source material was 
the fifteenth-century polymath Śrī Rāhula. He was the head monk of the 
academy of Toṭagamuva, the personal tutor of king Parākramabāhu VI 
(1411–66) and a distant relative of Sāriputta. In 1458 he composed the 
Moggallānapañcikāpradīpaya (‘Lamp on Moggallāna’s extensive commen -
tary’), a Sinhala commentary on the Moggallānapañcikā, and later also a 
commentary on Piyadassi’s grammatical handbook.
57 In this latter work Śrī 
Rāhula confirms that Moggallāna knew the Cāndra grammar, its paraphrase 
by Dharmadāsa and its commentaries composed by Ratnamati and Sāriputta. 
He also notes, furthermore, that Moggallāna had mastered many other 
Sanskrit grammars, including Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī, its paraphrase, Jayāditya’s 
Kāśikāvṛtti (‘Benares paraphrase’) and a commentary, Jinendrabuddhi’s 
Kāśikāvṛttipañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on the Benares paraphrase’) as 
well as the Kātantravyākaraṇa (‘Little grammar’) with its paraphrase and com-
mentary by Durghasiṃha and Trilocanadāsa respectively.
58 These other com-
mentaries that Śrī Rāhula states Moggallāna used, namely, Jinendrabuddhi’s 
seventh- century Kāśikāvṛttipañcikā and Trilocanadāsa’s eleventh-century (?) 
Kātantrapañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on the Little grammar’) are both 
traditionally associated with the Buddhist monastic intellectual culture of 
northeast India.
59
Śrī Rāhula’s Sinhala commentary is useful in and of itself in ascertain-
ing a reliable picture of the full scope of Sanskrit source material available 
to the monks of the reform era. His work is renowned in Sri Lanka for the 
sheer breadth of texts he had at his disposal in his library at Toṭagamuva in 
1458. The commentary thus provides a snapshot of the Sanskrit knowledge 
preserved in Sri Lanka in the middle of the fifteenth century. Śrī Dharmārāma, 
who edited Śrī Rāhula’s ‘Lamp’ in 1886, lists fifty-nine quoted works in his 
introduction.
60 Almost half of these works were Sanskrit philological texts, 
principally grammars and lexica (see Table 4.1).
The diversity of Śrī Rāhula’s source material is quite astounding, all the 
more so since much of this knowledge was lost in Sri Lanka in the subsequent 
centuries of colonial rule.
61 What is interesting from the perspective of the 
reform era’s intellectual history, specifically, is the concentration of sources 
from the tenth to twelfth centuries and the focus on the region of Bengal. 
This connection seems to have persisted even after the 1165 reforms since 
Śrī Rāhula cites Sena dynasty works, such as Puruṣottamadeva’s Bhāṣāvṛtti 

--- Page 87 of 286 ---
72 REWRITING BUDDHISM
(‘Commentary on language’), which was composed at some point during the 
reign of king Lakṣmaṇasena (1179–1206).63
While there was likely an ornamental, stylistic purpose in citing such a 
diverse array of works, it seems on occasion too that Śrī Rāhula used his Sanskrit 
archive to provide historical explanations for Moggallāna’s more un usual linguis-
tic observations. By way of example, in his paraphrase on rule 4.80 Moggallāna 
Table 4.1: A hypothetical chronology of Śrī Rāhula’s Sanskrit grammatical and 
lexicographical sources62
Title Author Date Provenance
1 Aṣṭādhyāyī Pāṇini 300–400 BC N.W. India
2 Vārttika Kātyāyana 300–400 BC S. India
3 Mahābhāṣya Patañjali 200–100 BC N.W. India
4 Kātantravyākaraṇa Śarvavarman 100–200 S. India
5 Cāndravyākaraṇa Candragomin 100–200 S. India
6 Amarakośa Amarasiṃha 500–600 Unknown
7 Kāśikāvṛtti Jayāditya 600–700 Kashmir
8 Kāśikāvṛttipañcikā Jinendrabuddhi after 700 Bengal
9 Śākaṭāyanavyākaraṇa Pālyakīrti 800–900 W. India
10 Rūpāvatāra Dharmakīrti 900–1000 Sri Lanka
11 Halāyudhakośa Halāyudha 900–1000 W. India
12 Cāndrapañcikā Ratnamati 900–1000 Sri Lanka
13 Śabdārthacintā Ratnamati/
Ratnaśrījñāna
900–1000 N.E. India
14 Bhāgavṛtti Vimalamati 900–1000 Bengal
15 V opālitakośa V opālita 900–1000 Unknown
16 Bhāṣyapradīpa Kaiyaṭa 1000–1100 Kashmir
17 Anunyāsa Indumitra 1000–1100 Bengal
18 Kavikāmadhenu Subhūticandra 1000–1100 Bengal
19 Kātantrapañcikā Trilocanadāsa 1000–1100 Bengal
20 Bhāgavṛttipañcikā Śrīdhara before 1100 Bengal
21 Cāndrapañcikālaṅkāra Sāriputta before 1165 Sri Lanka
22 Pātrīkaraṇaṭīkā Buddhanāga 1100–1300 Sri Lanka
23 Viśvaprakāśa Maheśvarakavi 1111/12 Unknown
24 Vaijayantīkośa Yādavaprakāśa 1100–1200 S. India
25 Trikāṇḍaśeṣa Puruṣottamadeva 1100–1200 Bengal
26 Bhāṣāvṛtti Puruṣottamadeva 1179–1209 Bengal
27 Sārasvatavyākaraṇa Anubhūtisvarūpa 1200–1400 Unknown

--- Page 88 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARLY fOUNDATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  73
explains that the word vaṇṇa (caste, class, complexion; Sk. varṇa) means ‘celi-
bate ascetic’ (Sk. brahmacārin) when combined with a possessive suffix –ī (i.e. 
vaṇṇī, Sk. varṇin).64 This sense is not attested in the Pali canon and would likely 
be unfamiliar to the average monastic reader. In an extraordinary demonstration 
of his learning, Śrī Rāhula quotes an explanation of the term brahmacārin from 
Śrīdhara’s eleventh-century (?) Bhāgavṛttipañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on 
the Bhāgavṛtti’), followed by a definition of the Sanskrit varṇin in the sense of 
‘ascetic’ from Puruṣottamadeva’s twelfth-century Trikāṇḍaśeṣa (‘Appendix to 
the three chapters [of the Amarakośa]’), and then turns to the opening verse from 
Bhāravi’s sixth-century court epic, the Kirātārjunīya (‘On Kirāta and Arjuna’), 
where the word is used in the same sense.65
There is not a single reason for this sudden engagement with a wide 
range of Sanskrit grammatical literature associated with the Bengal region. 
As discussed in chapter two, the rise of the Cōḻas in South India led to a 
strengthening of ties between Laṅkā and the Cōḻa empire’s adversaries, in par-
ticular the kingdoms of northeast India. It is possible too that increased trade 
and mobility between Sri Lanka and northeast India – perhaps along the new 
trade routes established during Cōḻa rule – may have further facilitated the 
exchange of monks and Buddhist knowledge.
66 Finally, we can also speculate 
that another factor contributing to the movement of texts outside of northeast 
India in the twelfth century specifically was the weakening of Pāla rule in 
Bengal, the rise of the Senas, who more openly favoured Hindu groups, and 
the imminent threat of the Turkic invasions of northern India.
67
4.3. Moggallāna’s New Philology and the Creation of Order
Contact between Sri Lanka and Bengal cannot in and of itself explain cultural 
change, however. Why did scholar-monks decide to take up these Sanskrit 
texts and use them as a model for their own grammatical works? Descriptions 
of scholarly practice from the reform era suggest that monks thought new 
textual practices would establish a better order for their sacred language and 
scriptures and thus help stem the decline of their community and society. This 
connection is reflected in the common metaphors authors use to describe the 
effects of both their new textual practices and the process of reform. Authors 
frequently employ the terms ākula ‘confused’ and its negation anākula or 
nirākula ‘unconfused’, in particular, to compare the disordered nature of their 
textual tradition and the behaviour of monks prior to the reforms with the 
order of their texts and community after the reforms.
68 In the colophon of his 
paraphrase, for instance, Moggallāna juxtaposes the ‘ordered’ nature of his 
work with the ‘order’ brought about in the previously ‘disordered’ Saṅgha by 

--- Page 89 of 286 ---
74 REWRITING BUDDHISM
the reforms of Parākramabāhu I in 1165.69 His student, Saṅgharakkhita, further 
favourably contrasts Moggallāna’s grammar with the perceived disorder of the 
older Pali grammatical tradition.70
In using the Cāndravyākaraṇa as a model for his grammar, Moggallāna 
radically differentiated his system from the style of earlier Pali grammatical 
texts. Moggallāna adopts a similar means of grammatical description to the 
Cāndra grammar in that he composed his main work using short aphorisms or 
sūtras connected by the principle of ellipsis (Sk. anuvṛtti), whereby the whole 
or part of one sūtra may be used to make sense of another. The sūtra genre 
had a long history in Sanskrit writing, with brevity and economy praised as 
the principal virtue of scholarly discourse. (There is a Sanskrit maxim that 
compares the happiness at shortening an aphorism to the birth of a son.)
71 In 
Sri Lanka, this form of writing, while not unknown, was not widely studied or 
used in Pali and Sinhala texts prior to the reform era.
72 The older Kaccāyana 
grammar, for instance, was modelled on the Sanskrit Kātantravyākaraṇa, a 
work more concerned with the simplicity of descriptive detail than with the 
brevity of its analytical model.
73
To understand how such aphorisms work, take, for example, a series of 
rules in Moggallāna’s grammar, which he has adapted from the Cāndra grammar, 
prescribing some of the functions of the fifth or ‘ablative’ case (see Table 4.2).
These statements below may be quite meaningless for most readers of 
this book who are unfamiliar with traditional Sanskrit grammar. But if we look 
beyond the strange style and technical terminology the basic mechanisms at 
work are quite simple.
Table 4.2: A comparison of rules in the Moggallāna and Cāndra grammars
Moggallāna grammar Cāndra grammar
2.28 pañcamy avadhismā74 
The fifth case [occurs after a 
nominal stem] that is a limiting point 
(avadhi).
2.1.81 avadheḥ pañcamī
The fifth case occurs [after a nominal stem] 
that is a limiting point (avadhi).
2.31 rite dutiyā ca [#2.28 pañcamī]
The second case and [the fifth case 
occur after a nominal stem co-
occurring with] rite ‘apart’.
2.1.84 ṛte dvitīyā ca [#2.1.81 pañcamī] The 
second case and [the fifth case occur after a 
nominal stem co-occurring with] ṛte ‘apart’.
2.32 vināññatra tatiyā ca [#2.29 
pañcamī #2.31 dutiyā ca] 
The third case, [the fifth case and the 
second case occur after a nominal 
stem co-occurring with] vinā 
‘without’ and aññatra ‘except’.
2.1.85 vinā tṛtīyā ca [#2.1.81 pañcamī #2.1.84 
dvitīyā ca]  
The third case, [the fifth case and the second 
case occur after a nominal stem co-occurring 
with] vinā ‘without’.

--- Page 90 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  75
First, rule 2.28 begins Moggallāna’s discussion of the fifth or ablative 
case and consists of two words. Literally it means, ‘fifth, after limiting point’. 
To understand what is meant here we must supply an implicit verb ‘to be’ – 
which I translate as ‘occurs’ – and also understand that the ‘limiting point’ 
refers to the word denoting the point from which an action occurs. In the 
sentence, ‘he flies from London to Singapore’, for instance, London acts as 
the limiting point for the act of flying and thus in English takes the ablative 
preposition ‘from’. In the Pali sentence gāmasmā āgacchatu (‘let him come 
from the village’) the village (gāma) acts as the limiting point for the act of 
movement and thus takes the fifth case suffix –smā.
75 The rule thus prescribes 
the fifth case after a noun that denotes such a limiting point.
If we skip over a few rules and turn to 2.31 and 2.32 we can further see 
the principle of ellipsis at work. Rule 2.31 consists of three words and literally 
means ‘without, and the second’. Here we must also include the word ‘fifth’ 
from 2.28 to understand that both the fifth (‘ablative’) and
 the second (‘ac  -
cusative’) cases occur after a noun alongside the word ‘apart’ (rite ). For ex  -
ample, one can use the fifth case and say rite dhammā ‘apart from the doctrine’ 
or the second and say rite dhammaṃ. More than one word can be introduced 
through this mechanism of ellipsis too. In 2.32 which literally means ‘without, 
except, and the third’ we must understand that the fifth, second and third cases 
occur after a noun alongside the words ‘without’ (vinā) and ‘except’ (aññatra). 
One can say, for instance, vinā dhammā ‘without the doctrine’, using the fifth 
case, or vinā dhammaṃ and vinā dhammena, using the second and third cases 
respectively, without altering the meaning of the expression.
Moggallāna was the first grammarian to produce a faultless piece of 
technical writing of this style in Pali and he acknowledges in the opening to 
his commentary that not everyone in the Saṅgha would be familiar with it.
76 
When commenting on the very first rule of his grammar he writes that ‘this 
statement might be meaningless – some kind of speech of a mad man or such 
like’. He introduces this possibility only to demur, of course, and adds: ‘or 
it may be meaningful like the [Buddha’s] statement: “mind is the forerunner 
of all things”’.
77 Grammatical aphorisms are meaningful, he states, because 
the meaning of each aphorism should be sought in its paraphrase or vutti 
(Sk. vṛtti).
Most works of grammar composed using sūtras are accompanied by a 
paraphrase that rewrites the rules in plain language making all the implied 
information explicit. As mentioned, a Buddhist monk called Dharmadāsa 
composed a paraphrase for the Cāndra grammar possibly in the late fifth or 
sixth century and Moggallāna nearly always follows his explanations when 
writing his own paraphrase. Take the paraphrases in both works on the rules 
2.32 and 2.1.85, which we have just discussed above:

--- Page 91 of 286 ---
76 REWRITING BUDDHISM
After restating the meaning of the sūtras in simple prose each paraphrase 
usually introduces a series of practical examples. Dharmadāsa’s example here 
‘without wind’ (vinā vātena) alludes to possible sentences such as ‘the tree fell 
without a gust of wind’. 78 Moggallāna does not follow his Sanskrit sources 
blindly, however, and is sensitive in adapting Sanskrit grammatical theory 
to the Pali language. He introduces the word aññatra ‘except’ into the rule, 
for instance, in order to cover the particularities of his scriptural language 
and includes a canonical quotation in support: ‘I must not be approached by 
anyone except the one who brings the alms-food.’
79 This sentence is taken 
from the Mahāgovinda Sutta, an account of the Buddha’s past life as a young 
Brahmin royal steward, Mahāgovinda, who undertakes a meditative retreat in 
order to visit the heavens and see the gods.
It is important to understand that the act of placing Pali within such an 
organizational framework was not simply a descriptive practice of a modern, 
linguistic kind. Rather, it was inherently creative in that such grammatical 
analysis established the idea of Pali as an object of knowledge and associated 
it with scholarly and monastic virtues: economy, regularity and orderliness. 
These ideas could then be generalized for scripture in its entirety, since the 
‘canon’ described by these grammars was not the actual canon but rather select 
phrases, ‘symbols of grammatical knowledgeability’, that had circulated 
among scholars as a synecdoche for the Pali canon as a whole.
80 As an access 
Table 4.3: A comparison of Moggallānavutti 2.32 and Cāndravṛtti 2.1.85
Moggallāna paraphrase on 2.32 Cāndra paraphrase on 2.1.85
vināññatrasaddehi yoge nāmasmā 
tatiyā ca hoti dutiyāpañcamiyo 
ca. (1) vinā vātena, (2) vinā vātaṃ, 
(3) vinā vātasmā, (4) aññatra ekena 
piṇḍapātanīhārakena, (5) aññatra 
dhammaṃ, (6) aññatra dhammā. 
The third case, as well as the second and 
fifth cases, occur after a nominal stem 
when co-occurring with the words vinā 
‘without’ and aññatra ‘except’. [For 
example:] (1) without wind (vātena), 
(2) without wind (vātaṃ), (3) without 
wind (vātasmā), (4) except the one 
who brings alms-food (Dīgha Nikāya 
II 237
,31), (5) except the Dhamma 
(dhammaṃ), (6) except the Dhamma 
(dhammā).
vināśabdena yoge tṛtīyāpañcamyau 
bhavato dvitīyā ca. (1) vinā vātena, (2) 
vinā vātāt, (3) vinā vātam. 
The third and fifth cases occur, as well as 
the second, when co-occurring with the 
word vinā ‘without’. [For example:] (1) 
without wind (vātena), (2) without wind 
(vātāt), (3) without wind (vātam).

--- Page 92 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  77
discipline for any monk wishing to ascend the monastic hierarchy and study 
Pali scriptures, grammar must have served for many as one of the first ways 
they engaged in any scholarly fashion with their sacred texts and thus, with 
respect to the literary value of their scriptures, grammar could be said to have 
shaped ideas about the Pali canon as much as it described it.
Moggallāna further takes care to place his canonical sentences among 
stock grammatical examples from the Sanskrit tradition, such as the ex  ample 
‘without wind’ mentioned above. Since they are unmarked only a careful reader 
would be able to distinguish the canonical quotations from the non- canonical. 
This ambiguity encourages the reader, furthermore, to imagine the Pali lan-
guage as grammatically complete, despite the fact that certain grammatical 
expressions, as Wilhelm Geiger lamented, may be unattested in the canon. Far 
from being a methodological flaw, we can view this treatment of Pali as an 
attempt to go beyond the purely exegetical character of the Kaccāyana gram-
mar and to represent the boundless, expressive capacity of the Pali language as 
a whole. It is Moggallāna’s interest in investigating the workings of Pali as a 
language beyond simply establishing the meaning of scriptural sentences that 
further distinguished his approach from his predecessors, and it is to this issue 
we will now turn.
4.4.  Fr om   Exegetical   to  Analytical  Appr oaches  
to Language
A certain exegetical pragmatism characterized the way early commentators 
and grammarians used vyākaraṇa to analyse scriptural language. For the com-
mentators in particular, grammar was only thought about insofar as it could 
help resolve linguistic problems in the interpretation of the canon and as such 
their grammatical analysis often reveals a willingness to bend the scope of the 
Sanskrit grammars they used to suit their exegetical needs. The Kaccāyana 
grammar represented a large improvement on the analysis of the commen -
tators but even it confused rudimentary principles of Sanskrit grammar and 
slowly lost much of its coherence due to the additions and clarifications of 
later grammarians who prioritized exegetical comprehensiveness over the 
integrity of the metarules of the discipline.
We see in Moggallāna’s works and those of his students an interest in 
the analysis of language as an object of knowledge outside of the narrow con-
fines of exegetical utility. The impetus for this change appears to have been 
a number of Sanskrit philological works composed by the tenth-  century Sri 
Lankan monk Ratnamati, in particular his Cāndrapañcikā, a commentary on 
Dharmadāsa’s Cāndravṛtti, and his Śabdārthacintā (‘Reflections on words 

--- Page 93 of 286 ---
78 REWRITING BUDDHISM
and meanings’), a work of grammatical philosophy. Dragomir Dimitrov 
and Mahesh Deokar have recently revealed the large extent to which the 
Cāndrapañcikā served as the model for much of Moggallāna’s own autocom-
mentary, the Moggallānapañcikā.
81 Dimitrov has noted Ratnamati’s deep inter-
est in grammatical philosophy in both his Cāndrapañcikā and Śabdārthacintā 
and has shown that his ideas about the metaphysics of semantics ( artha) par-
ticularly influenced Moggallāna and his students.82
The ability to isolate semantics as an object of philosophical analysis 
can be understood as a by-product of the derivational nature of most Sanskrit 
grammars, where meaning conditions the introduction of affixes.
83 In the 
Pāṇinian and Cāndra grammatical traditions, for instance, there are implicit 
analytical distinctions between what we can think about as semantics, syn -
tax, morphology and phonology, with no one-to-one correspondence between 
them, that is to say these traditions can explain how one and the same meaning 
may be represented by different syntactic roles, which then can be represented 
by different cases, and which, in turn, can be represented by different case-  
endings. Moggallāna throughout his grammar and commentaries assumes 
similar analytical distinctions in the derivational process.
To understand the distinction between these differing domains, take, 
for example, the sentences (1) puruso rukkhaṃ chindati (‘the man cuts the 
tree’) and (2) purusena rukkho chijjati  (‘the tree is cut by the man’). To 
form these sentences derivational grammars begin with a common semantic 
base: the man is the doer, the tree is the object and cutting is the present 
action. At a syntactic level, these can correspond – either through opera -
tional rules or according to convention (vivakṣā) – to an agent, an accusa -
tive and either an active or passive verb.
84 In terms of morphology, the first 
case reflects the agent and second case denotes the accusative, whereas in 
the passive, the third case denotes the agent and the first case reflects the 
accusative.
85 Finally, the grammarians assign the relevant suffixes corre -
sponding to these cases. For a skeletal framework outlining these analytical 
distinctions, see Table 4.4. 86
Distinguishing these different levels and allowing for variation between 
them enables precision and consistency in grammatical analysis. Take, for 
instance, a canonical sentence Moggallāna analyses in his discussion of the 
accusative: ‘the body will lie on the ground’ (kāyo paṭhavim adhisessati). This 
sentence comes from a verse in the Dhammapada: ‘Not long alas, and it will 
lie this body, here upon the earth. Discarded, void of consciousness, useless as 
a rotten log.’
87 In this sentence the ground paṭhaviṃ is in the second case and 
is syntactically an accusative (lit. *the body lies the ground), though it has the 
sense of the locus of lying down. Moggallāna observes that the second case is 
used ‘as there is the desire to speak of the accusative (kamma) in the sense of 

--- Page 94 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  79
Table 4.4: The derivation of passive and active sentences in the Moggallāna system
Sentence 1: puruso rukkhaṃ chindati ‘the man cuts the tree’
1. Semantic level purusa *doer rukkha object √chid present time, doer
2. Abstract syntactic level purusa agent(kattu) rukkha accusative(kamma) √chid present tense, active (vattamāna, kattari)
3. Morphological level purusa + Si1st case, singular rukkha + aṃ2nd case, singular chid + La + ti3rd person, singular
4. Phonological level purusa + o rukkha + aṃ chind + a + ti
puruso ‘the man’ rukkhaṃ ‘the tree’ chindati ‘cuts’
Sentence 2: purusena rukkho chijjati ‘the tree is cut by the man’
1. Semantic level purusa doer rukkha *object √chid present time, object
2. Abstract syntactic level purusa agent(kattu) rukkha accusative(kamma) √chid present tense, passive (vattamāna, kamme)
3. Morphological level purusa + nā3rd case, singular rukkha + Si1st case, singular chid + Kya + ti3rd person, singular
4. Phonological level purusa + ena rukkha + o chid + ya + ti
purusena ‘by the man’ rukkho ‘the tree’ chijjati ‘is cut’

--- Page 95 of 286 ---
80 REWRITING BUDDHISM
the locus’.88 Here Moggallāna analytically distinguishes between morphology 
(‘the second case’), syntax (‘the accusative’) and semantics (‘locus’) and flex-
ibly prescribes an accusative in the sense of locus of an action rather than in 
the sense of the object of an action, as is most common.
There is far more going on in this analysis than merely an exegetical 
need to understand the sentence. In the 2,000-year history of reading the 
Dhammapada there appears to have been little confusion about what this verse 
meant. The earliest Pali commentators argued that the second case of paṭhavī  
was governed by adhi–, and treated adhi as an indeclinable particle rather 
than the preposition of the verb.
89 Buddhappiya in his Rūpasiddhi follows the 
commentators and uses this example to illustrate the use of the second case 
with certain indeclinable particles.
90 He complicates matters, however, in that 
later in his grammar he again cursorily refers to the same example under a dif-
ferent grammatical rule appointing ‘the second case in the sense of the third or 
seventh cases’.
91 Moggallāna, it seems, demanded a higher degree of consist-
ency in the analysis of language based on a systematic application of a single 
grammatical model.
92 In light of our discussion above about the changing pur-
pose of grammar, we can hypothesize that this degree of rigour was ultimately 
motivated by a need to protect Buddhism, underpinned by a belief in an onto-
logical connection between the order of sacred language and that of society.
The results of the reform era’s grammatical turn can be compared, albeit 
anachronistically, with the way the rather differing scientific aims of mod -
ern linguistics transformed the analysis of European languages. Compare, 
for example, the history of interpreting English phrases, such as ‘to walk the 
streets’, as in Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night: ‘I do not without danger walk 
these streets’.
93 The earliest interpreters of such expressions simply inferred 
that there had been the elision of a preposition ‘through’ or ‘in’ before ‘these 
streets’. Even the first modern linguists, such as Otto Jespersen, merely 
appealed to the ‘vague’ and ‘indistinct character’ of the English object when 
explaining why ‘walk’ takes a direct object here. It is only relatively recently, 
however, that linguists have thought in a similar way to interpret ‘streets’ as a 
‘locative object’, where the object has a locative sense.
94
This desire to describe the order of language at its most fundamental level 
extended to a philosophical investigation of the deeper semantic structures 
underpinning the Pali language. Moggallāna borrowed from the Sanskrit com-
mentary of his predecessor, Ratnamati, a theory of five unvarying ‘meaning 
elements’ (padattha) that words can possibly signify, namely the sense of the 
word itself (sakattha), a universal (jāti), a quality (guṇa), a particular (dabba) 
or an activity (kriyā).
95 Following their Sanskrit counterparts, reform-era Pali 
grammarians were interested in how the ontological relationship between 
these elements formed the semantic basis of syntax.
96 This relationship was 

--- Page 96 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  81
thought of as one of dependency, where elements were described either as 
qualified (visessa) by other elements or as doing the qualifying ( visesana). In 
the expression ‘the white cloth’, for instance, the cloth is a particular (dabba) 
characterized or qualified by a quality (guṇa), namely the colour white, and 
it is this real semantic connection that underpins the syntactic relationship 
between the words ‘white’ and ‘cloth’.
This form of analysis extended to whole sentences. Take, for instance, 
the Pali sentence kaṭe nisīdati devadatto  (‘Devadatta sits on the mat’) that 
Moggallāna refers to as an example to illustrate the locative case.
97 Here we 
have three ‘meaning elements’, namely, two particulars, Devadatta and the 
mat, and an activity, sitting. What is happening metaphysically? Reform-era 
grammarians would say, following their Sanskrit sources, that a particular, the 
mat, supports another particular, Devadatta, in whom subsists an activity of 
sitting.
98 This kind of thinking informs Moggallāna’s original definition of a 
locus as ‘a support for an activity, in so far as it supports either the agent or 
object, which is the [ultimate] locus of the activity.’99 There was a widespread 
adoption of this type of metaphysical analysis among reform-era grammar -
ians. The first grammar of Sinhala, for example, the late thirteenth-century 
Sidat Saṅgarāva (‘Handbook of sound and meaning’), contains a chapter on 
the meaning elements and analyses Sinhala syntax in a similar way.
100
The more philosophical orientation of reform-era grammarians is no bet-
ter illustrated than by Saṅgharakkhita’s Sambandhacintā (‘Reflections on syn-
tactic relationships’) the first treatise composed in Sri Lanka on the philosophy 
Figure 4.1 The five ‘meaning-elements’ underpinning linguistic usage


--- Page 97 of 286 ---
82 REWRITING BUDDHISM
of Pali syntax.101 Saṅgharakkhita begins his work with a lengthy discussion on 
the five ‘meaning elements’, how they relate to each other and how they can 
be spoken of using words in a syntactically coherent sentence. 102 This work 
demonstrates that scholars were now thinking about Pali primarily in terms 
of a real, semantic level and only secondarily in terms of the variable distri -
bution of syntactic categories, morphology and phonology. It is simply due 
to a speaker’s intention, he states, that one can speak of the same underlying 
meaning elements in multiple possible ways. One can say variously ‘the pot 
cooks’, ‘he cooks in the pot’ or ‘he cooks with the pot’, for example, about 
the same ontological event.
103 His commentator, Gotama, uses theatre as one 
of his analogies to describe how the same meaning element can adopt various 
syntactic roles in speech. He states that a meaning element, just like a single 
actor, has the capacity (śakti) to adopt the costume of the characters of Rāma 
or Rāvaṇa, that is, it can adopt different syntactic functions and can be spoken 
of in terms of these functions just as the same actor can be referred to as either 
‘Rāma’ or ‘Rāvaṇa’.
104
This form of analysis will not strike those familiar with Sanskrit gram -
mar as unusual and there is scope for a more fulsome appraisal of this philo -
sophical development than I have been able to give here. What is important 
from a historical perspective, however, is that scholar-monks were thinking 
about their sacred language with deep semantic structures rather than phonet-
ics as a starting point and that their approach was increasingly analytical rather 
than simply exegetical. Taken in light of the way scholar-monks described 
grammatical practice in the reform era, it seems likely that monks were so con-
cerned about establishing a strong grammatical foundation for the Buddhist 
tradition that they sought order not only in the organized style of Sanskrit 
grammars but also in contemporary philosophical views on the deep semantic 
structures underpinning linguistic usage. The philosophy of language can be 
seen in this regard as part of the wider cultural work of grammar, namely 
providing an organizational plane on which the monastic community’s sacred 
canon and language could be established as an ordered and coherent object, 
bringing into being, as a result, an orderly monastic community and in turn a 
favourable social and political climate.
4.5. Summary
Scholar-monks of the reform era wrote in Pali primarily to stem the pre -
mature decline of their religious tradition. As the acknowledged foun-
dation and access discipline for scriptural study, grammar was seen as 
playing a pivotal role as the first line of defence against the degeneration 

--- Page 98 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  83
of  Buddhism. During the reform era in particular , characterized by social 
and political upheaval and confusion, sensitivity to traditional ideas of 
religious decline were heightened. In an unprecedented intellectual feat, 
scholar-monks decided to abandon their old grammatical tradition – much  
like many abandoned the old sacred capital of Anurādhapura after the Cōḻa 
invasions – and started anew with a different system of rules, the Moggallāna-
vyākaraṇa, that would form the basis of philological activity in the centuries 
to come. In seeking to explain their age of confusion,  scholar -monks blamed 
their older textual practices and sought out new forms of textual order, pre -
sumably as a way of pushing back against the harsh political conditions they 
had endured prior to 1165 and subsequently after Parākramabāhu I’s demise 
in 1186. The framework for this new order was found in the Sanskrit texts 
that had become available due to intensified contact with monastic centres in 
northeast India. These new intellectual resources combined with the reform 
mentality to produce an improved, analytical system of grammar, one that was 
not only based on  understanding Buddhist scriptures and the Pali language but 
was focused too on establishing linguistic order at its most deep and funda -
mental level.
Notes
1. Nattier, 1991, 133–44.
2. On grammar as a ‘technology of transformation’ in the context of borān kammaṭṭhāna, see Crosby, 
2013, 70–82.
3. Visigalli, 2014, 25–50.
4. Majjhimanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla III, 167, 3–4: taṃ taṃ saddaṃ tadatthañ ca byākaro -
ti byācikkhati etenā ti byākaraṇaṃ saddasatthaṃ (= Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I,  
380,4–6).
5. Cardona, 1976, 261–8.
6. Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali I, 1,19. Also, Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari 1.11.
7. Pollock, 2006, 162–84. Also, Inden, 2000, 40.
8. See Mahābhāṣyadīpikā of Bhartṛhari, 28,11: na hīdaṃ śāstraṃ kasyacid ekasya sahāyabhūtaṃ, sar -
vasādhāraṇam.
9. Deshpande, 1997.
10. Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkārasvavṛtti on Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra 11.60. The Pali tradition occasionally 
refers to Sanskrit grammar as bāhira ‘external’ too but this seems to denote the extracanonical status 
of these texts. See, for instance, Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna on 2.35, 72, 22; Moggallāna-
pañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on 2.33 (35), 113,9. Also, Gunawardana, 1979, 160, n. 152.
11. See, for instance, Ruegg, 1995, 101.
12. Śaraṇadeva, for instance, composed the Durghaṭavṛtti in 1173/4 and can possibly be identified 
with a poet, Śaraṇa, in the court of king Lakṣmaṇasena (1179–1209). King Lakṣmaṇasena was also 
the patron of Puruṣottamadeva, author of the Bhāṣāvṛtti, who may have been a Buddhist too. See 
Wielińska-Soltwedel, 2006, esp. 39; 51–3.
13. See Subhūti, 1876, i–c; Franke, 1902; Pind, 2012; Gornall and Gunasena, 2018.
14. Pind, 1989; 1990; Gornall, 2011. There is an older tradition of grammatical analysis in the commen-
taries, though it is likely that this was inherited from ancient commentarial sources. See Pind, 2012, 
61–7.
15. Pind, 2012, 71.

--- Page 99 of 286 ---
84 REWRITING BUDDHISM
16. The only evidence that kings studied Pali grammar comes from the late thirteenth, early 
 fourteenth-century Daṁbadeṇiasna, a history of the reign of Parākramabāhu II, where it is said that 
the monarch studied both the Moggallāna and Kaccāyana  systems of grammar. See Meddegama, 
trans. 2011, 102. Parākramabāhu I too was supposedly ‘skilled’ in Pali and studied grammar, though 
we do not know whether it was Sanskrit or Pali grammar. See Abhidhānappadīpikā of Moggallāna, 
182,4; Cūḷavaṃsa 64.2–5.
17. See chapter three.
18. Sāriputta may have been a forest monk prior to ascending to this role. See Liyanagamage, 1968, 92, 
n. 4; Kieffer-Pülz, 2018, 203, n. 42.
19. Dimitrov, 2010, 25–49.
20. See Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 7,18–19: mahāsāmiṭṭhānantarapattiṃ … vibhāveti.
21. Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b, 31–4.
22. Ratnapāla, 1971, 140; Kieffer-Pülz, 2017b, 39–40.
23. One notable exception is Ruiz-Falqués, 2017b.
24. Neugebauer, 1951. Neugebauer’s article is a succinct defence of research into ‘pseudo’ sciences 
such as astrology in response to George Sarton’s review of E.S. Drower’s 1949 The Book of the 
Zodiac (Sarton, 1950), in which he described the book as a ‘wretched collection of omens, debased 
astrology, and miscellaneous nonsense’ (374).
25. Geiger, 1943, 50. Also, Bechert, 1978a, 5.
26. My approach here is indebted to the works of Eivind Kahrs, esp. Kahrs, 1998.
27. Pind, 2012.
28. Pind, 2012, 117–20; Franke, 1902, 23; 25–9; Subhūti, 1876, ix–x; xxi–xxiii. On the date of the 
Rūpasiddhi, see chapter three.
29. Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna, 380,8–19.
30. Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa of Kaccāyana, 1, 3–4: satthussa tassa vacanatthavaraṃ suboddhuṃ vakkhāmi 
suttahitaṃ ettha susandhikappaṃ.
31. Mukhamattadīpanī of Vimalabuddhi, 6,4–9.
32. Aṅguttara Nikāya I, 58,37–59,4. Also, Nettipakaraṇa, 21,12–14.
33. Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna, 4,4–21:
aviññātasaddalakkhaṇo hi dhammavinayesu kusalo na hoti. tesu vākusalattā (corr. cākusalattā) 
yathādhammaṃ paṭipajjitum asakkonto paṭipattiṃ virādhetvā saṃsāradukkhass’ eva bhāgī hoti. 
na ca saddhāpabbajitānaṃ kulaputtānaṃ patiṭṭhā bhavituṃ sakko ti. saddalakkhaṇaññū yeva hi 
atthānurūpaṃ vyañjanaṃ vyañjanānurūpaṃ atthaṃ sallakkhetvā dhammavinayesu kulaputte sik-
khāpetuṃ parivāsādisu ca vinayakammesu tadanurūpaṃ kammavācaṃ katvā taṃ taṃ kammaṃ 
 nittharituṃ sakko ti nāñño. ajānanto pana saddalakkhaṇam ayathāpaṭipajjamāno tividham pi sad -
dhammaṃ antaradhāpeti. tathāhi so saddalakkhaṇam ajānanto tammūlikantā va pariyattiṃ nāseti. 
tāya ca nāsitāya pariyattimūlikā (paṭipatti) paṭipattimūliko ca paṭivedho nāsito va hoti. vuttaṃ 
h’etaṃ bhagavatā: “dve ’me bhikkhave dhammā saddhammassa sammosāya antaradhānāya saṃ-
vattanti. katame dve? dunnikkhittañ ca padavyañjanaṃ attho ca dunnīto. dunnikkhittassa bhikkhave 
padavyañjanassa attho ’pi dunnayo hoti. ime kho bhikkhave dve dhammā saddhammassa sam -
mosāya antaradhānāya saṃvattantī” ti. ayaṃ saddalakkhaṇassa ajānane doso.
34. See chapter three.
35. Ratnapāla, 1971, 144.
36. Many grammatical handbooks define their intended readership explicitly as young monks. See, for 
instance, the titles of the Bālāvabodhana of Kassapa and Bālāvatāra of Dhammakitti, as well as the 
opening comments in the Rūpasiddhi of Buddhappiya, 1, and the Padasādhana of Piyadassi, 2,1.
37. On the applicability of the term ‘eschatology’ in connection with traditional Buddhist theories of 
religious and cosmic decline, see Apple, 2010.
38. Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa I, 87,1–93,26. See Clark, 2018; Endo, 2013, 123–42.
39. Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa I, 93,9–15 (= Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 16,15–26):
yāva tiṭṭhanti suttantā vinayo yāva dippati
tāva dakkhinti ālokaṃ suriye abbh’ uṭṭhite yathā.
suttantesu asantesu pammuṭṭhe vinayamhi ca
tamo bhavissati loke suriye attaṅgate yathā.
suttante rakkhite sante paṭipatti hoti rakkhitā
paṭipattiyaṃ ṭhito dhīro yogakkhemā na dhaṃsati.
40. Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 16,5–6 (= Kavidappaṇanīti v. 143):
yo niruttiṃ na sikkheyya sikkhanto piṭakattayaṃ
pade pade vikaṅkheyya vane andhagajo yathā.

--- Page 100 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARLY fOUNDATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  85
41. Tambiah, 1990, 45.
42. I borrow the expression ‘information order’ from Schaffer, 2008.
43. Padasādhana of Piyadassi, 197,9; Buddhippasādanī of Śrī Rāhula, 132,14.
44. Gunawardana, 1979, 9–10.
45. Sāratthappakāsinī of Buddhaghosa I, 222,24–9.
46. Gornall, 2014a, 519–25.
47. Epigraphia Indica 22, nos. 34–5.
48. Gornall, 2014a.
49. Moggallāna offers a number of arguments in support of bringing many of the functions ascribed 
to the dative in the Kaccāyana tradition under the genitive. First, he observes simply that in Pali 
the dative and genitive cases are almost phonologically identical. Second, he states that Sanskrit 
grammars, such as Vimalamati’s Bhāgavṛtti, consider that all upapada cases – that is, the use of 
a case to syntactically connect two words rather than a word and an action – are to be regarded as 
exceptions to the sixth case. As such, due to the phonological identity of the fourth and sixth cases 
in Pali all upapada conditions traditionally assigned to the fourth can seamlessly be moved to the 
sixth. Lastly, he argues that many of the kāraka conditions traditionally assigned to the dative are, 
in fact, upapada conditions and can, therefore, for the same reason, be subsumed within the sixth 
case. See Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna on 2.27, 56,
27–57,4.
50. See Franke, 1902; 1902–3a; 1902–3b. More recently, Deokar, 2008; 2017; Dimitrov, 2016,  
599–706; Gornall, 2013, 68–136.
51. Oberlies, 1989, 11–14.
52. Oberlies, 1989, 14; Vergiani, 2011.
53. Dimitrov, 2016, 599–706; Deokar, 2017.
54. See Dimitrov, 2010, 31–8.
55. See chapter two.
56. Dimitrov, 2010, 31–47.
57. On Śrī Rāhula’s works, see Godakumbura, 1955, 152–4; 191–5; 316–17.
58. Buddhippasādanī of Śrī Rāhula, 6,3–14.
59. On Jinendrabuddhi, see most recently Wielińska-Soltwedel, 2006, 9–11. Far less is known about 
Trilocanadāsa. A citation of the work in Niścalakara’s Ratnaprabhā seems to point to a Bengali 
origin and eleventh-century floruit. See Bhattacharyya, 1947, 142–3. There is an admittedly un-
proven assumption that he is identical with a commentator of the same name on the Amarakośa. See 
Dasgupta, 1935. Śrī Rāhula’s observations on Moggallāna’s diverse source material are supported 
by Saṅgharakkhita, Moggallāna’s earliest commentator, who names and quotes a number of these 
works when analysing Moggallāna’s discussions.
60. Śrī Dharmārāma, ed. 1896, xix–xxi.
61. In compiling this table, I have relied on the following sources: Bechert, 1987; Bhattacharyya, 1947; 
Bronner, 2012; Cardona, 1974; Dimitrov, 2016; Scharfe, 1977; Sternbach, 1978; 1980; V ogel, 1979; 
Wielińska-Soltwedel, 2006; Zachariae, 1897.
62. The rediscovery of Śrī Rāhula’s works supported a revival in monastic education in the nineteenth 
century. See Blackburn, 2010, 63.
63. On Puruṣottamadeva, see Wielińska-Soltwedel, 2006, 38–42.
64. Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna on 4.80 daṇḍāditvikaī vā, 237,4.
65. Moggallānapañcikāpradīpaya of Śrī Rāhula, 137,25–138,6. Śrī Rāhula is attentive to local variations 
in the interpretation of the Pali canon too, quoting Sinhala commentaries as well as lost Tamil exe-
getical works. With respect to the word deṇḍimā ‘drum’ in the dvandva or copulative compound 
saṅkhadeṇḍimam ‘conch and drum’, for instance, he notes that the Sinhala glossary on the Ummag-
ga Jātaka defines deṇḍimā as a ‘lap drum’ (Sin. ikiḷi-bera) whereas the Tamil glossary, which is no 
longer extant, defines it as a ‘kettle drum’ (Tam. paṭaha). See Moggallānapañcikāpradīpaya of Śrī 
Rāhula, 114,28–9; also 115,26, giving a second quote of a Tamil glossary.
66. On increased monastic mobility as a result of changing trade conditions between 1000–1500, see 
Blackburn, 2015, esp. 239–47.
67. Frasch, 1998, 77.
68. See the incipit of the Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, translated in chapter five. See also the incipits of 
Vinayasaṅgaha of Sāriputta, Vimativinodanī of Kassapa, Mohavicchedanī of Kassapa, Rasavāhinī 
of Vedeha, Thūpavaṃsa of Vācissara, and the colophon of the Vinayatthamañjūsā of Buddhanāga.
69. Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna, 380,8–19.
70. Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 9,1–4, on Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna, 1,22.
71. Paribhāṣenduśekhara of Nāgojī Bhaṭṭa I, no. 122. But see the caution of Cardona, 1969, 41, n. 91.
72. On the sūtra as a genre of ‘Brahmanical technical writing’, see Bronkhorst, 2010.

--- Page 101 of 286 ---
86 REWRITING BUDDHISM
73. Scharfe, 1977, 162–3; also, Ruiz-Falqués, 2017b.
74. T echnically in each of these suttas the word nāmasmā ‘after a nominal stem’ should be introduced 
from rule 2.1. To simplify matters and to aid comparison I have left it out here. See Gornall, 2013, 
101–10.
75. Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna, 62,2; Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna, 62,21–9.
76. The Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa did attempt it to some extent but with limited success. As Émile Sen -
art wrote almost a century-and-a-half ago with respect to the grammar: ‘Nous avons visiblement 
affaire à une collection d’observations grammaticales bien plus qu’à une grammaire méthodique, 
où chaque mot serait pesé et les limites naturelles de chaque règle seraient nettement définies.’ See 
Senart, 1871, 94. For counterarguments to some of Senart’s observations, see Ruiz-Falqués, 2017a.
77. Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna, 5, 24–7: idaṃ vacanam anatthakaṃ vā siyā yathā kiñci ummat -
takādivākyaṃ sātthakaṃ vā yathā “manopubbaṅgamā dhammā” ti ādi vākyaṃ. na tāva anatthakaṃ, 
vuttiyaṃ vuttena atthena sātthakattā. vakkhamānattham ev’ idaṃ suttaṃ.
78. The Kāśikāvṛtti quotes from the Harivaṃsa 51.29 when discussing the equivalent rule in the 
Aṣṭādhyāyī, A.2.3.32: vinā vātaṃ vinā varṣaṃ vidyutprapatanaṃ vinā, vinā hastikṛtān doṣān kene -
mau pātitau drumau.
79. Dīgha Nikāya II, 237, 31–2: n’amhi kenaci upasaṅkamitabbo aññatra ekena bhattābhihārena (Mog-
gallānavutti, piṇḍapātanīhārakena).
80. Here, borrowing from Chin, 2008, 17.
81. Dimitrov, 2016, 599–622; Deokar, 2017.
82. Dimitrov, 2016, 565–96; 632–49.
83. See Kiparsky and Staal, 1969. There has been debate as to the actual semantic, syntactic and mor -
phological ‘levels’ present in Pāṇini’s grammar. See most recently, Scharf, 2009. On Cāndra and 
Moggallāna, see Gornall, 2014b.
84. See, for instance, Joshi and Roodbergen, eds. and trans. 1975, xvi. It is important to note that the 
Cāndra system – and thus also the Moggallāna system – does not formally map semantic charac -
terizations onto abstract syntactic categories by means of operational rules and rather informally 
establishes the connection as part of social convention (Sk. vivakṣā, P. vivakkhā), often indicated in 
the paraphrase to its sūtras. Cāndra and Moggallāna are thus less complicated than the Aṣṭādhyāyī 
and, to some extent, also the Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa, which does try and maintain similar operational 
‘levels’ to Pāṇini and its model grammar, the Kātantravyākaraṇa. Both the Cāndra and Moggallāna 
traditions still deal with these conceptual differences, however, in their discussions of rules and the 
Moggallāna, in particular, handles these analytical distinctions with greater sophistication than the 
Kaccāyana, despite lacking the equivalent operational rules. Since the technicalities here fall out -
side the aims of this chapter, I have consciously chosen to present a simplified account for readers 
of this book. For more detail, see Gornall, 2014b.
85. It is actually more complicated than this. Both Sanskrit and Pali grammarians state that the sense 
of agent or object is conveyed by the verbal ending. The word in the first case tells us who or what 
the agent or object is but the first case does not denote agency or objectivity itself. This allows for 
grammarians to explain instances where the identity of the agent is left unexpressed in a sentence. 
One can say sa pacati ‘he cooks’ or simply pacati ‘he cooks’, for instance, without a change in 
meaning. See Cardona, 1974, 246–9.
86. Adapted from Kahrs, 1992, 10–14; 1998, 50–4.
87. Dhammapada 41, trans. Khantipālo, trans. 1980, 26.
88. Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna on 2.2, 38,2–3 also cited in Gornall, 2014b, 103.
89. Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā I on v. 41, 320,17–19.
90. Rūpasiddhi of Buddhappiya, 439,4 (after sūtra 281 = Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa 235).
91. Rūpasiddhi of Buddhappiya, 531,5 (sūtra 287, Be290 = Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa 309).
92. Moggallāna explicitly acknowledges that his analysis is based on Aṣṭādhyāyī 1.4.46 adhiśīṅsthāsāṃ 
karma. See Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna on 2.2, 40,24–6.
93. See Twelfth Night, or What You Will, Act 3, Scene 3.
94. Jespersen, 1965, 238. On ‘locative objects’ and other similar examples, see Quirk et al., 1985, 749.
95. See, for instance, Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna on 5.44, 280, 19– 281, 10 =  Cāndravyā-
karaṇapañjikā of Ratnamati on C.1.3.7, ed. and compared in Dimitrov, 2016, 632–3. See also Mog-
gallānapañcikā of Moggallāna on 2.1, 36,21–37,16 = Nyāsa of Jinendrabuddhi on A.1.4.21, 275,5–21.
96. See, in particular , Sambandhacintā of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 4.
97. Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna on 2.34, 71, 11. The example is actually ‘he sits on the mat’ (kaṭe 
nisīdati). I have added the name ‘Devadatta’ for the purpose of clarity.
98. See, for instance, Cardona, 1974, 246–51.

--- Page 102 of 286 ---
 SCHOLARL Y fOUND ATIONS: MOGGALLA ¯NA’S GRAMMAR  87
99. Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna on 2.34, 71,9–10: kriyādhārabhūtakattukammānaṃ dhāraṇena yo kri-
yāyādhāro tasmiṃ kārake nāmasmā sattamī hoti. Compare also Rūpasiddhi of Buddhappiya, 633,1–3 
(sūtra 309, B e320 = Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa 280): kattukammasamavetānaṃ nisajjapacanādikri -
yānaṃ patiṭṭhānaṭṭhena yo ādhāro, taṃ kārakaṃ okāsasaññaṃ hoti.
100. Sidat Saṅgarā of Vedeha I.2, 16–19.
101. On the earlier (early twelfth century?) Burmese work, Dhammasenāpati’s Kārikā, see Ruiz-Falqués, 
2017b, 65–87. Dragomir Dimitrov and Mahesh A. Deokar are currently editing this work and have 
discovered that it is largely a translation of Ratnamati/Ratnaśrījñāna’s Śabdārthacintā. There is no 
evidence that this work was known in Sri Lanka during the reform era, however.
102. Sambandhacintā of Saṅgharakkhita, 3–18. On śabdapravṛttinimitta, see Aussant, 2009, 55–68.
103. Moggallānapañcikā of Moggallāna on 5.44, 280,19–281,10. See also Sambandhacintā of Saṅgharak-
khita, 45,1–4; 46,1–3; Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna on 2.2, 39,1–3, where the examples used refer to 
various ways of saying ‘lightning strikes’ (valāhakā vijjotate).
104. Sambandhacintāsannaya of Gotama, 46,25–47,9.

--- Page 103 of 286 ---
88
5  
Buddhist Scholasticism: Suman·gala’s 
Commentaries
The systematic approach to scriptural language found in reform-era gram -
matical texts was further developed in the large number of commentaries on 
doctrinal handbooks produced during the period. These new commentaries, 
composed explicitly as part of a continuing process of monastic unification, 
demonstrated a panoptic control over the previous exegetical tradition and 
often attempted to reconcile the differing views found within these older 
works. This process was combined with a pervasive belief among exegetes 
that their new hermeneutic techniques allowed them to recover the ‘essen -
tial’ (sāra), even primordial, meaning of the works they were commenting 
on. The increasingly systematic structure of these commentaries was equally 
informed by the development of more formal educational curricula and hier -
archies within the reformed monastic community and it is not unreasonable, 
in this regard, to speak of this development as the beginning of scholasticism 
in Sri Lanka.
1
There have been few attempts to describe how commentarial style devel-
oped in the Pali commentarial tradition throughout its long history, and for 
good reason. Even if we were to limit the scope of our analysis to the com-
mentaries traditionally ascribed to Buddhaghosa, the sheer diversity of com -
mentarial methods employed in these works makes it difficult to make any 
substantive generalization about an early commentarial style let alone how this 
style developed over time.
2 The difficulty is compounded by the fact that the 
Pali Buddhist tradition itself provides little in the way of an emic framework 
through which we can begin to understand the complex relationship between 
commentary, exegetical style and genre, for instance. Scholar monks of the 
reform era tend to define the three most common words for ‘commentary’, 
namely, aṭṭhakathā, ṭīkā and saṃvaṇṇanā (also vaṇṇanā), in almost identi -
cal terms, often simply as that by which meaning ( attha) is related kathīyati  
<aṭṭhakathā), explained ( ṭikīyati < ṭīkā) or communicated ( saṃvaṇṇīyati 

--- Page 104 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  89
<saṃvaṇṇanā), despite the fact that in practice the term aṭṭhakathā is gen-
erally reserved for commentaries on canonical literature, ṭīkā often refers to a 
commentary on the aṭṭhakathā s, that is, a subcommentary, and saṃvaṇṇanā, 
while frequently used synonymously with aṭṭhakathā or ṭīkā , can refer to a 
more elaborate and discursive commentary. 3 Nevertheless, much reform-era 
commentarial writing, particularly on handbooks, can be distinguished by its 
more economical and systematic construction, which was likely the result of 
the adaptation of Sanskritic commentarial methods.
4
Reform-era commentators on handbooks not only adopted new forms of 
exegesis but also used their powers of synthesis to innovate doctrinally. The 
ability of commentators to reshape doctrine has often been overlooked largely 
because the authors themselves were very conscious to present their work 
as a continuation or a recovery of tradition rather than something new. The 
emphasis on preservation rather than innovation within the Pali tradition has 
on occasion led to the open frustration of intellectual historians and philolo -
gists. Erich Frauwallner once remarked about this conservative tendency in the 
Abhidhamma tradition, specifically, that:
This degeneration was probably at its worst in the Pali school, which 
confined itself exclusively to the transmitted doctrinal material and 
never really developed any original thought of its own. The compulsion 
always to say the same things while expressing them in a different form 
helped to promote these methodological excesses and aberrations.
5
There is no doubt that commentators were generally conservative in that they 
respected tradition and were ever fearful of being viewed as schismatics. At 
the same time, if we move beyond their conservative rhetoric, we can begin to 
see these assertions for what they are: claims for authority that often mask the 
hidden politics and struggle over the development of doctrine. This is no more 
apparent than in reform-era literature where the task of adjudicating between 
the disparate views of the monastic factions that survived the reforms of 1165 
led to subtle but significant shifts in doctrine. In this chapter we will continue 
to explore, in this regard, how scholar-monks began to think differently about 
Pali as a language and focus, in particular, on how Abhidhamma scholars 
entertained a conceptual understanding of language, one that acknowledged a 
separate reality for scripture beyond its exact wording.
The chapter focuses primarily on commentaries on Abhidhamma 
handbooks, that is, manuals of Buddhist metaphysics, composed by the 
 scholar-monk Sumaṅgala. Sumaṅgala was one of the most prominent intel -
lectuals in the aftermath of the 1165 reforms. He was a pupil of Sāriputta, the 
first grandmaster, and resided in the Nandi school (pariveṇa) at the Jetavana 

--- Page 105 of 286 ---
90 REWRITING BUDDHISM
monastery in Poḷonnaruva. 6 Sumaṅgala composed two handbook commen -
taries: one on Buddhadatta’s fifth- or sixth-century Abhidhammāvatāra 
(‘Entrance into the Supreme doctrine’) and another on Anuruddha’s post-
sixth-century Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (‘Compendium of the meaning of 
the Supreme doctrine’).7 The renewed systematic study of handbooks as part 
of the reforms meant that the composition of commentaries on these works 
became an educational and political necessity, in that clear, systematic explan-
ations were needed to facilitate learning and spread effectively the doctrinal 
views of the monastic leadership throughout the Saṅgha. In doing so, these 
new commentaries were better able to innovate in their argumentative meth -
ods in contrast to reform-era commentaries on the Pali canon itself, which 
more closely followed older commentarial styles and techniques.
5.1.  The Authority   of   Commentaries   and   Handbooks
Scholar-monks in the Theravada tradition have long viewed Pali commentar -
ies on the canon as the pre-eminent, authoritative means of understanding the 
Buddha’s discourses. There is an apparently unique tradition among the exe -
getes of the Mahāvihāra, for instance, that commentaries on the canon were 
composed and recited in the three monastic councils held in the centuries after 
the Buddha’s death, with the third occurring under the aegis of the emperor 
Aśoka.
8 Writing in the preamble to his works, Buddhaghosa explains that these 
Pali commentaries were brought to Sri Lanka by Aśoka’s son, Mahinda, and 
that they were then translated into Sinhala. Buddhaghosa claimed that, in using 
these Sinhala commentaries as sources for his new Pali commentaries, he was 
in effect restoring this exegetical tradition back to its original state.
9 In relating 
a similar story, the author of the Samantapāsādikā (‘Completely pleasing’) 
goes further and states that he follows a tradition based on the opinions of the 
‘sons’ of the Buddha, that is, his direct disciples, who understood the Buddha’s 
teachings in the same way (tath’ eva) as the Buddha taught them.
10
If there was any doubt, then, the author of the Samantapāsādikā makes it 
clear that the tradition’s commentaries explain the Buddha’s teachings without 
deviating from the views of those who first heard those discourses at the teach-
er’s feet. The reform-era commentator Sāriputta takes up this statement in the 
Samantapāsādikā and explains moreover that the commentarial tradition can 
be thought of as beginning with the Buddha himself. He writes:
There is not a word of scripture that the Bhagavan has not explained. He 
has given the meaning for all of them. One should understand, then, that 
the perfectly enlightened one taught even the method of explaining the 

--- Page 106 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  91
meaning of the three baskets. For a commentary is simply the miscel -
laneous teaching that the Bhagavan established here and there.11
Sāriputta was not the first to refer to the commentaries as the Buddha’s ‘mis -
cellaneous teachings’ (pakiṇṇakadesanā). We find such a description of the 
commentaries in Dhammapāla’s autocommentary on the Nettipakaraṇa 
(‘Guide’), for instance. There, however, Sāriputta’s predecessor raises the 
designation only to argue precisely that commentaries should not be attributed 
to the Buddha.
Even if a commentary is the miscellaneous teaching of the Bhagavan 
established here and there, it is called ‘the doctrine of teachers’ ( ācari-
yavāda) since the compilers of the Dhamma, who had recited the three 
baskets, that is, the Buddha’s discourses, were the first to establish its 
wording in conformity with his explanations of its meaning.
12
Sāriputta, then, subtly differs from Dhammapāla in that he never qualifies his 
statement in the same way by referring to the orthodox view that commentar-
ies are secondary authorities, since their wording (vācā) was established by 
teachers, not the Buddha. He rather ignores their formal origin and instead 
states that the commentaries were initiated by the Buddha since it was he who 
established their meaning.
There was a slight shift in the way handbooks were thought about in the 
reform era too. Traditionally scholar-monks distinguished between commen -
taries (aṭṭhakathā) and subcommentaries (ṭīkā ) on the one hand, and hand -
books (saṅgaha) on the other, with the latter categorized separately as ‘books’ 
(pakaraṇa).
13 This ambiguous category of the ‘book’ can refer to any work that 
falls outside of the domain of the Pali canon and the commentaries that deal 
with its exegesis.
14 In the reform era, however, handbooks began to be dis -
cussed as if they were exegetical works. Sumaṅgala writes in his commentary 
on Buddhadatta’s Abhidhammāvatāra, for instance, that the exegetical practice 
of summarizing (samāsa) refers to explaining (katheti ) a work according to 
its meaning (attha) while condensing its wording (sadda).
15 Sumaṅgala treats  
the Abhidhammāvatāra, then, not simply as a primer but as an explan  ation 
of the meaning of the Abhidhamma that has less regard for the literal form of 
the text on which it is commenting.
16 The inherent flexibility in this exegetical 
approach is reflected in the way Sumaṅgala describes Buddhadatta’s practical 
distillation of the Abhidhamma as taking the meaning of the text and turning 
it into a ball (piṇḍana).
17
The late thirteenth-century Pūjāvaliya (‘Garland of offerings’) too 
reportedly refers to the Abhidhammāvatāra as an aṭṭhakathā, indicating that 

--- Page 107 of 286 ---
92 REWRITING BUDDHISM
the work was now formally thought of under the category of commentary 
rather than ‘book’.18 Scriptural meaning, it seems, as in the grammatical tra -
dition, could now be treated as a domain that was analytically separate from 
scriptural wording and as something that could be reworked and reproduced in 
new textual forms, with these works being treated as having the same author-
itative status as commentaries.
The titles of reform-era commentaries, in this regard, stand out for 
their frequent reference to a posited ‘essential meaning’ (sārattha) as the 
object of their exegesis.
19 The earliest of these, Sāriputta’s subcommentary 
on the Vinaya, is referred to as the Sāratthadīpanī or ‘Illuminator of essen-
tial meaning’. The use of the expression ‘essential meaning’ is not unique 
to the reform period; Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the Saṃyutta Nikāya  
is similarly named the Sāratthappakāsinī (‘Illustrator of essential meaning’). 
What is un usual in the reform era is the pervasive use of the term to explicitly 
distinguish the object of exegesis from the commentarial practices of previ -
ous scholars. In the preamble to these works their authors often speak of this 
‘essential meaning’ as a stable, almost fixed entity that they believed had been 
obscured by commentarial proliferation in the preceding centuries. Take the 
opening to Sāriputta’s Sāratthadīpanī:
I will compose an exposition of the concealed, essential meaning 
(sārattha) of the Vinaya’s commentary that is easy to understand, is 
complete and unconfused. Though predecessors ( porāṇa) gave an 
explanation of the hidden meaning, they did not convey that meaning 
in its entirety to monks in all cases. Among the many glossaries, some 
in some places are written in the Sinhala language, which, by nature, is 
difficult to understand. Someone also wrote a certain [glossary] mixed 
with other languages, even though it was undertaken in the Māgadha 
language. Precisely there, the burden of unessential ( asāra) learning 
(gantha, lit. books) is often apparent, and confusion is created even 
when actually it (the Vinaya commentary) is easy to understand. How 
then can those who live in various regions understand the meaning [of 
the Vinaya commentary] in its entirety with this kind of incomplete 
[glossary]? I will compose, therefore, an unconfused, complete exe -
gesis, without using another language and by extracting the essence 
(sāra) throughout.
20
Sāriputta here contrasts his own exposition of the ‘essential meaning’ of the 
Vinaya commentary with older types of subcommentary. First, he criticizes 

--- Page 108 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  93
his predecessors who focused on explaining the ‘hidden meaning’ but who 
did not manage to convey adequately the whole sense of the commentary. He 
then turns to existing Sinhala glossaries on the Samantapāsādikā, the so-called 
gaṇṭhipadas, and argues that the fact they are written in Sinhala makes them 
difficult to understand. (It is also possible to interpret his statement here as 
meaning that Sinhala is a form of expression (nirutti) through which essences 
(sabhāva), i.e. ‘reality’, are difficult to comprehend.)
Sāriputta then mentions a certain glossary in Pali that was ‘mixed’ with 
other languages. It has been argued that he may be referring here, in particular, 
to an older Vinaya subcommentary, the Vajirabuddhiṭīkā (‘Diamond-mind sub-
commentary’, c. tenth century).
21 The work cites a number of Sanskrit texts (the 
‘unessential books’) in Pali translation, which, it seems, scholars like Sāriputta 
viewed as obstacles to the universal intelligibility of the commentary.
22 We get 
a sense from Sāriputta’s preamble, then, that he believed that his Pali exegesis 
was in some way better able to recover a complete, clear and concise meaning 
that had been obscured by older exegetical methods, vernacular expositions and 
Sanskritic commentaries.
A related literary virtue that is praised highly in reform-era commen -
taries is brevity or summarizing ( samāsa). Scholar-monks often connect the 
recovery of the essential meaning of the text they are discussing with the 
need to condense older, diverse exegetical material. There are obvious, real 
connections between the intellectual need for condensation and the reform 
process of creating a single monastic community based on a unified discip -
line and doctrine. 23 Vācissara, for instance, composed a Pali commentary 
on Buddhadatta’s Vinayavinicchaya (‘Exegesis on the Discipline’) sometime 
between 1225 and 1250. In his opening preamble he heaps great praise on 
the leading scholar Sāriputta and the reforms that took place in the reign 
of Parākramabāhu I (1157–86) more than fifty years earlier and specifically 
connects the brevity of his work with the process of establishing a new, doc -
trinal orthodoxy. He writes that:
I shall explain the essence of the meaning of that [text], … by avoid -
ing the defect of the views of other monastic fraternities, having made 
concise the extremely extensive style (of the older commentaries), by 
elucidating meaning not made explicit and by not deviating from the 
order of the text, and also by extracting the essence from other books.
24
This ‘essential meaning’ (sārattha) then was not only identified by its com-
pleteness, its apparent totality, but also by its utility, that is, as the most expe-
dient form of representing the Pali scriptural tradition.

--- Page 109 of 286 ---
94 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Finally, for reform-era commentators, we should add that the social 
implications of writing commentaries also went far beyond their instrumental 
purpose in organizing the doctrine and discipline of the Saṅgha. It should be 
unnecessary to mention were it not so rarely discussed that all literary activity 
was part of a universal system of karma or moral causation. Monks were fully 
aware that virtuous intentions behind preserving the Buddha’s teachings had 
the capacity through the merit ( puñña) accrued to transform their lives both 
as individuals and as a community.
Another disciple of Sāriputta, Buddhanāga, who composed a subcom -
mentary on the Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī (‘Overcoming doubts’) between 1165 and 
1186, writes in his colophon, for instance, that his commentary was produced 
with a mind of merit (puññamana) and lists a series of diverse transformations 
that he hoped would occur as a result of his meritorious intentions. He wished 
that the merit accrued would help all living beings find happiness and achieve 
heaven or nirvana, that this merit would enable his readers specifically to 
study his commentary with ease and also achieve nirvana, that there would 
always be rainfall at the right time, that kings would rule justly and that liv -
ing beings would cultivate merit in performing virtuous acts, such as giving 
(dāna).
25
Other meritorious results of literary activity may be anticipated far in 
the future. Sumaṅgala, for instance, writes touchingly at the end of his com -
mentary on Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha that he hoped, due to the 
scholarly efforts of his guru Sāriputta, to be reborn in the presence of the future 
Buddha, Metteyya, and to be reunited there again with his teacher who will 
explain Metteyya’s teachings.
26
5.2. The Grammatization of Commentaries
There are close associations in the reform era between elite scholar monks 
and monastic schools known as pariveṇa. 27 It is in the context of the more 
formal school system of the period that we can best understand the changes 
in commentarial style. Many reform-era commentaries in particular adopt 
increasingly systematic methods of exegesis based on formal lists (mātikā) of 
exegetical procedures.
28 These lists are occasionally mentioned in earlier Pali 
commentaries, though their programmatic use has a much longer history in the 
Buddhist Sanskrit tradition and it is no coincidence that many of the schemas 
quoted in Pali texts are likely adaptations of Sanskrit originals, from works 
such as Vasubandhu’s Vyākhyāyukti (‘Art of explanation’).
29
Such lists differ and are variously five-fold, six-fold and eight-fold in their 
classification, though they all follow a similar pattern that can be divided into 

--- Page 110 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  95
three components. First, a commentator should establish the context (sambandha, 
samuṭṭhāna, upogghāṭa) of the root text, that is, the work he is commenting on. 
This is often accompanied by an analysis of the overall purpose (payojana) of 
the work. In the second component, a commentator should parse the words in 
the text (pada), discuss their meaning (padattha) and also provide a philological 
analysis of them (padaviggaha, °vibhāga). Sometimes, this analysis is preceded 
by a series of summaries either of the root text as a whole or its different sections 
(padapiṇḍa) and may also be appended with a discussion of how the sections 
of the root text are arranged ( anusandhi). In the third and final component, a 
commentator should raise objections (codanā) with respect to the commentarial 
analysis conducted and then refute those objections (parihāra).
30
Early commentators viewed these lists as procedures for commenting 
on a work or text as a whole, in accordance, we can speculate, with the pre -
scriptions of Buddhist Sanskrit exegetical guides.31 Reform-era commentators, 
however, often innovatively employ each of these techniques in a systematic 
fashion for single passages and even single words. The first evidence of such 
a systematic and repetitive use of these techniques occurs in Vimalabuddhi’s 
Mukhamattadīpanī (‘Straightforward illuminator’), a tenth-century commen -
tary on the Kaccāyana grammar and its paraphrase ( vutti). Later redactors 
describe Vimalabuddhi’s commentarial method as six-fold, namely: (1) con -
text ( sambandha); (2) the words ( pada); (3) the meaning of words ( padat-
tha); (4) the analysis of words (padaviggaha); (5) objections ( codanā); and 
(6) their refutation ( parihāra).
32 Vimalabuddhi, however, often also includes 
a comment explaining the sequence of rules ( anusandhi), after the section on 
word analysis.
The application of these techniques in Vimalabuddhi’s work represents 
a great innovation in Buddhist intellectual history since he uses what is essen-
tially a framework for commenting on Buddhist scripture as a whole in order 
to analyse grammatical aphorisms (sūtras). This means that for each and every 
rule in the Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa, Vimalabuddhi establishes the rule’s context, 
its words, the meaning of the words, an analysis of the words, objections and 
their refutation. He often frames his exegesis, in particular, at the beginning 
of his work, within a scholastic context and refers to the students ( sissa) to 
whom his commentary was addressed. There may be some parallels between 
this excessive ‘hypercommentary’ and similar developments in the Sanskrit 
tradition, though any tentative comparison is undermined by the lack of a sys-
tematic study of the development of commentarial style in Sanskrit.
33 Take, for 
example, his analysis of the grammatical rule sarā sare lopaṃ (Kaccāyana 12, 
‘vowels before a vowel are to be elided’), which governs the elision of a vowel 
when two vowels come into contact (i.e. loka + aggo → lokaggo):

--- Page 111 of 286 ---
96 REWRITING BUDDHISM
1. context
2. words
3. meaning
4. analysis34
5. sequence
6. objection
7. reply
(1) sarā sare lopaṃ ‘vowels before a vowel are to be elided’: 
for what purpose does he (Kaccāyana) say this? [He says this] 
for the purpose of eliding the preceding vowel, when there is a 
conjunction [of vowels]. (2) sarā: this is one word; sare: this 
is one; lopaṃ: this is one; this rule has three words. (3) The 
meaning [of the rule] is that ‘vowels undergo elision before a 
vowel’. (4) And in this [rule], sarā is defined as the agent, sāre 
is the cause, and lopaṃ is the grammatical operation. ‘They 
shine’ (saranti), therefore they are sarā. Elision (lutti) is lopo. 
(5) He states this [rule] here because sandhi rules for vowels 
are to be given first, since it is vowels that are appointed first 
[in the syllabary]. (6) And in this [rule], he mentions sare 
‘before a vowel’ and does not say saresu ‘before vowels’ for the 
purpose of indicating that [the operation should occur] only one 
[vowel] at a time. Yet if this is the case, why does [the author] 
say sarā ‘vowels’ and not saro ‘vowel’? (7) [He says sarā] for 
the purpose of indicating that the elision occurs even for one, 
two or four vowels [simultaneously]. For instance, in [the rule] 
sakhāto gass’ e vā (Kaccāyana 113, ‘Optionally, a, ā, i, ī, and 
e replace ga [voc. sg.] after the word sakhā “friend”’), e has 
been separated into a, ā, i, ī, and e and is understood to be a 
copulative (dvanda) compound, in keeping with the governing 
rule nāmānaṃ samāso yuttattho (Kaccāyana 318, ‘A compound 
of words has a unified sense’) and nāmānaṃ samuccayo 
dvando (Kaccāyana 331, ‘An aggregation of words is a dvanda 
compound’); and [as a dvanda] there is no need to use the word 
ca since ‘one does not use [speech forms] whose object (ṭṭhāna) 
has already been denoted’. One should understand, then, that in 
the case of a, ā, i, ī, and e, there is the elision of the other vowels 
due to the following e sound.
35
Similar forms of punctilious exegesis begin to emerge in subsequent Sinhala 
commentaries or sannaya on grammars too. 36 The Sinhala commentary on 
Buddhappiya’s Rūpasiddhi (‘Construction of [word] forms’), for instance, one 
of the earliest known Sinhala sannayas, incorporates many of the developed 
exegetical features employed in the Mukhamattadīpanī .37 We also begin to 
find in the reform era equivalent forms of commentary outside of the gram -
matical sphere too as represented by works such as Sāriputta’s Sinhala com-
mentary on the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha.
This ‘grammatization’ of Sinhala commentaries, to borrow a term 
from Sylvain Auroux, was accompanied by a parallel development in many 

--- Page 112 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  97
reform-era Pali handbook commentaries, not least because a number of these 
Pali works were translated from Sinhala antecedents. 38 This is the case with 
Sumaṅgala’s Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha commentary, which is largely a Pali 
rendering of Sāriputta’s Sinhala commentary on the same work. Sumaṅgala 
never explicitly states that his work is a translation, though he hints at the ease 
at which he composed his exposition in the final verse of his colophon, stating, 
to quote R.P. Wijeratne and Rupert Gethin’s rendering, that ‘this commentary 
has been completed in twenty-four days, may beings’ good-aspirations be as 
quickly realised’.
39
The works of Sāriputta and Sumaṅgala will often first provide the reason 
(sambandha) Anuruddha introduces a particular statement or verse. Sāriputta 
then always moves on to provide a word-by-word analysis of the meaning of 
the passage under discussion, though Sumaṅgala often omits this in his trans-
lation. A separate section in which the commentators provide a more detailed 
grammatical or etymological analysis of certain words then usually follows. 
The order and content of these two sections reflects a division between ‘word 
meaning’ (padattha) and ‘word analysis’ (padaviggaha) similar to the one 
Vimalabuddhi employs in his Mukhamattadīpanī. Likewise, after conducting 
an analysis of key words, they usually introduce possible objections followed 
by answers to these objections. Sāriputta and his student translator, Sumaṅgala, 
then, follow similarly formal exegetical procedures to those employed by 
Vimalabuddhi and continue to apply these principles sequentially on a narrow 
scope, whether on single words, sentences or verses.
Take, for example, Sāriputta and Sumaṅgala’s discussion of the first sen-
tence of Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha 2.8 in which compassion (karuṇā) and sym-
pathetic joy (muditā) are defined as ‘the illimitables’ (appamaññā):
Compassion  and   sympathetic   joy ,   furthermor e,   ar e   called   ‘the  
 illimitables’. Along with the faculty of wisdom these twenty-five 
 mentalities are all together termed ‘the beautifuls’.40
Sāriputta begins his Sinhala commentary with an analysis of the meaning of 
the words in the first sentence, though Sumaṅgala does not include this section 
in his translation:
1. meaning (1) compassion and sympathetic joy, furthermore: compassion 
is that which removes the suffering of living beings who are 
suffering; sympathetic joy is having sympathetic joy with 
respect to the happiness of living beings who are happy; both 
these two furthermore; 
called ‘the illimitables’: they are named 
‘illimitable’ since they encompass illimitable living beings.41

--- Page 113 of 286 ---
98 REWRITING BUDDHISM
The rest of the commentary in both Sāriputta and Sumaṅgala’s works contin -
ues as follows, consisting of exegesis dedicated to word analysis, an objection 
and finally a reply.42
These more systematic forms of commentary provided a means by which the 
tradition could better control the interpretation of texts. The balance here, 
for instance, between internal word analysis and the externalized, dialogic 
structure of the objection and its rebuttal helps establish the endo- and exo-  
consistency of philosophical terminology. 43 The commentators use grammar 
and semantic analysis (Sk. nirvacana) to capture the internal particularity 
or visesa, as Dhammapāla calls it, of philosophical terms according to the 
weave of their linguistic fabric.
44 These terms are then placed in relation to 
other philosophical terms or other instances where the same term is used in 
a different philosophical framework. The commentators raise, for instance, 
the issue of the standard four-fold list of illimitables known as the brahmavi-
hāras or ‘divine abidings’, which include friendliness ( mettā) and equanim -
ity (upekkhā), discussed by Anuruddha in his chapter on meditative practice 
(kammaṭṭhāna). They ask why Anuruddha in his handbook does not include 
2. analysis
3. objection
4. reply
(2) Compassion (karuṇā) is that which makes (karoti), produces, 
upset in the hearts of good people in response to the suffering 
of others; or it is that which scatters (kirati), disperses, others’ 
suffering; or it is that which kills (kiṇāti), harms, it; or it is that 
which is scattered (kiriyati), spread, among those who suffer. It is 
the characteristic of the state of desiring to remove the suffering 
of others, for whether one removes others’ suffering or not by 
means of it (i.e. the desire), it certainly exists in that manner. 
Sympathetic joy is that by means of which they rejoice. It is 
characterized by sympathetic joy in the success of others. As 
they have measureless beings as their cognitive object they are 
illimitables. (3) But will he (i.e. Anuruddha) not state that there 
are ‘four illimitables’ (§9.9)? So why are only two mentioned 
here? (4) Because friendliness (mettā) and equanimity (upekkhā) 
are taken with lack of hatred and balance [respectively]. For lack 
of hatred that occurs as the wish for beings’ welfare is called 
friendliness, and balance that occurs as the allaying of disliking 
or liking them is called equanimity. Therefore, predecessors (i.e. 
Buddhadatta) have said:
Since friendliness is taken with not harming, and equanimity 
with balance, so neither are included [here].
(Abhidhammāvatāra, v. 70)

--- Page 114 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  99
these other two states in his list of illimitables in his chapter on mentalities 
(cetasika). They respond that the mentalities of friendliness and equanimity 
are in fact mentioned elsewhere in the chapter under the designations of lack 
of hatred (adosa) and balance (tatramajjhattatā) and quote the Abhidhammā-
vatāra in support.
45 This objection and its rebuttal, then, allows the author to 
draw out connections beyond the root text to establish a coherent matrix of 
meaning within Pali Buddhist thought as a whole.
While there is less uniformity in the systematic application of these tech-
niques among other reform-era Pali commentaries on handbooks, there is cer-
tainly a general trend towards such structured forms of exegesis. Sumaṅgala’s 
other commentary on the Abhidhammāvatāra, which may not be a transla -
tion from a Sinhala commentary, very often exhibits similar strategies in its 
analysis to his commentary on the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. He often begins 
his analysis by providing the context ( sambandha) for individual verses in 
the Abhidhammāvatāra. In doing so, he sometimes refers to an objection that 
he thinks was ‘hidden’ (antolīna ) in Buddhadatta’s mind ( manasi) or heart 
(hadaye) at the time of composition.
46 These forays in the psychology of 
authorial intention serve to create parallel structures in the root text and the 
commentary that enable a closer reading of the two works together, with the 
latter extending and elaborating on the answers of the former. He then fol -
lows a standard order of exegesis and glosses the meaning of words, gives 
a detailed grammatical and semantic analysis of them and frequently raises 
a number of possible objections and responses, often as part of what Deven 
Patel aptly calls a ‘staged curiosity’, that is, a strategic mechanism through 
which he can address rudimentary questions in the systematization of Buddhist 
terminology.
47
5.3.  Language, Concepts and Reality
In employing new exegetical techniques to recover the essence (sāra) of their 
tradition, reform-era scholar-monks emphasized their continuity with the past 
authorities of the Mahāvihāra. This rhetoric hides a more complex reality and 
the factions who came together after 1165 held views on doctrinal matters that 
diverged both from each other and from the early commentators. In an effort 
to find unity within the new Mahāvihāra, the commentaries composed in the 
reform era often mediate between these different doctrinal positions.
48 Both 
Sumaṅgala and Sāriputta in their works, for instance, display skill in weaving 
conflicting doctrinal strands into a coherent whole. The second half of this 
chapter, in this regard, offers a new hypothesis that reform-era monks enter -
tained views on the ontological nature of their scriptural language different 

--- Page 115 of 286 ---
100 REWRITING BUDDHISM
from those held in the past. Specifically, they increasingly thought of their 
scriptural language as a mental object rather than as speech.
Before addressing this important shift in intellectual orientation directly, 
however, it is necessary to frame it within the much longer history of the devel-
opment of Abhidhamma thought concerning: (1) the ontological status of con-
cepts; and (2) the status of language as a concept.
49 The canonical Abhidhamma 
as represented by works such as the Dhammasaṅgaṇi (‘Enumeration of dham-
mas’) and the Vibhaṅga (‘Analysis’) provides a systematic arrangement of the 
ultimate elements of physical and mental reality (dhammas) and a framework 
for understanding their causal relationship.
50 The eighty-two types of dhamma 
in the Pali tradition are divided into two groups. Eighty-one are classified as 
‘conditioned’ (saṅkhata), that is, they arise, persist and cease due to causes, 
while only one nirvana is ‘unconditioned’ (asaṅkhata) and sits outside of 
 causality. Concepts (paññatti) or ideas, such as ‘I’ or ‘my’, have no place in 
this system since they were not thought to ultimately exist.
One short work in the Abhidhamma basket, however, the Puggalapaññatti 
(‘Designation of human types’), does provide a detailed account of the various 
ways personhood (puggala) can be conceptualized and its early commentary 
more fully elaborates upon the nature of concepts in the Abhidhamma.
51 There 
the commentator semantically analyses the word paññatti and establishes that 
it refers both to the concepts that can be designated (paññāpetabba) by words 
as well as to the words themselves that designate ( paññāpana) concepts. In 
his opening the commentator then proceeds to provide a detailed taxonomy 
of different types of designations based on whether they signify unreal con -
cepts or real dhammas. Designations (paññatti ), such as ‘form’ (rūpa), that 
denote real dhammas, for instance, are said to be ‘designations of what is real’ 
 (vijjamāna-paññatti) and those that denote unreal concepts (paññatti), such as 
‘I’, are ‘designations of what does is not real’ (avijjamāna-paññatti).52
The formal ontological status of concepts develops in the Abhi -
dhamma handbooks of the fifth- or sixth-century scholar-monk Buddhadatta. 
Buddhadatta introduces into his Abhidhammāvatāra a chapter on concepts or 
paññattis that follows his analysis of conditioned and unconditioned dham -
mas. Opening this chapter, he asks, ‘is only this much knowable, or is there Figure 5.1 Words designate unreal concepts or real dhammas 

--- Page 116 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  101
something else that exists (atthi)?’ He replies that, ‘a concept indeed exists’.53 
Implicit in his question, it seems, is the suggestion that concepts are existing 
entities that are neither conditioned nor unconditioned. Buddhadatta argues, 
for instance, that while concepts derive from real dhammas they are differ -
ent in that they are not subject to ‘rise and fall’ (uppāda-vaya).
54 Later schol-
ars explain that as timeless phenomena concepts are not ‘conditioned’ like 
other real entities nor are they ‘unconditioned’ like nirvana since they still 
have dhammas as their cause.
55 To put it in simpler terms, we can say, for 
instance, that while the materiality (rūpa) of a chair is conditioned and subject 
to change, the concept of chair, though dependent on that materiality, may 
independently persist and thus have a separate, quasi-real status.
Buddhadatta attempts to ground his views on the ontological status of 
concepts as a third category of existent, one neither conditioned nor uncon -
ditioned, in scripture by interpreting a passage from the Dhammasaṅgaṇi 
in a way that would include concepts in its classification of existing things. 
The passage in question takes three terms used to denote language, namely 
adhivacana ‘articulation’, nirutti ‘expression’ and paññatti ‘designation’, 
and describes them identically using a series of equivalent linguistic terms. 
Here, for instance, is the treatment of paññatti:
56
1308. What dhammas are paññatti ? That label (saṅkhā), category 
(samaññā), designation ( paññatti), discourse (vohāra), name (nāma), 
appellation (nāmakamma), naming (nāmadheyya), expression (nirutti ), 
phrasing (vyañjana), utterance (abhilāpa) of this or that dhamma; These 
dhammas are paññatti. All dhammas have a way of designation.
57
Separated from its traditional exegesis this passage appears to simply distin -
guish between dhammas and the spoken words that denote them, which are 
also viewed as dhammas, perhaps because they are by nature sounds (sadda).
58 
And yet the fourth or fifth-century Dhammasaṅgaṇi commentator provides 
a semantic analysis of each of the terms in this list in a way that left room 
for ambiguity. He defines the first four terms here, beginning with saṅkhā 
‘label’, for instance, as ‘words’ in the sense that they are what is stated (e.g. 
saṅkhāyati). He remarks with respect to saṅkhā:
saṅkhā ‘a label’ is what is stated (saṅkhāyati ), [i.e.] it means ‘what 
is spoken’. ‘What’ is spoken? ‘I’, ‘my’, ‘other’, ‘for another’, ‘living 
being’, ‘being’, ‘person’, ‘individual’, ‘man’, ‘youth’, ‘Tissa’, ‘Datta’, 
‘bed’, ‘seat’, ‘mat’, ‘pillow’, ‘monastery’, ‘chamber’, ‘door’ and ‘win-
dow’. Thus, [the meaning] is spoken through many forms (ākāra).
59

--- Page 117 of 286 ---
102 REWRITING BUDDHISM
It is possible, however, as later subcommentators cautioned, to interpret the 
commentary here as defining the first four terms in the list, beginning with 
saṅkhā, as referring to the actual concept ‘I’ denoted by a word rather than the 
word ‘I’ that is uttered.
60 This would mean that the Dhammasaṅgaṇi in this 
passage rather categorizes as existent entities not only physical words but also 
concepts too. This is how Buddhadatta understood the passage:
61
Here, saṅkhā ‘a label’ is what is stated (saṅkhāyati), [i.e.] it means ‘what 
is spoken’. ‘What’ is it that is spoken? ‘I’, ‘my’, ‘other’, ‘for another’, 
‘bed’ and ‘seat’. What is spoken by many forms (ākāra) is saṅkhā . 
What is categorized is samaññā. What is designated is paññatti. What 
is uttered is vohāra. ‘What’ is it that is uttered? ‘I’, ‘my’, ‘other’, ‘for 
another’, ‘bed’ and ‘seat’. Thus, first they are referred to as paññatti 
since they are what is to be designated (paññāpetabba). For ‘I’, which 
relies on dhammas, form ( rūpa) and the like, [i.e.] depends on them 
and takes them as a cause, is different from them (na evaṃvidhā), since 
those dhammas, form and the like, arise ( uppāda) and cease ( vaya). 
The meaning is that it is this [concept] I, formed entirely by social con-
vention, which is spoken of and designated as ‘I’, that is the paññatti 
(‘what is designated’). Then, to introduce a paññatti which designates 
(paññāpana), it (the Dhammasaṅgaṇi) states nāma and nāmakamma, 
etc. (i.e. the remaining terms in §§1306–1308). There, nāma is what 
designates this or that dhamma – ‘this has such a name’ – and therefore 
is referred to as a paññatti (‘designation’). [The terms] nāmakamma, 
etc. are simply its synonyms. This is named paññatti since it designates 
(paññāpana).
62
Buddhadatta thus argues that the ten terms for language listed in the Dham-
masaṅgaṇi can be divided into two groups. The first four, beginning with 
saṅkhā ‘label’, refer to what is to be designated (paññāpetabba) – that is, 
existing concepts that are dependent on dhammas, but are free from rise and 
fall – and the remaining six, beginning with nāma ‘name’, refer to what desig-
nates (paññāpana) either dhammas or concepts. All terms are subsumed under 
the category of paññatti but are divided by its two possible meanings; either 
a concept or a designation. As the ‘shadow of something real’, Buddhadatta 
fits concepts as knowable entities within the Dhammasaṅgaṇi’s description of 
existence and, having done so, continues in his chapter to present a taxonomy 
of concepts similar to that found in the Puggalapaññatti commentary.
63
We also find a second innovation in Buddhadatta’s chapter on concepts, 
namely that he further differs from even the Puggalapaññatti commentary in 
that he defines paññatti in the sense of designation (paññāpana) and paññatti 

--- Page 118 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  103
in the sense of what is to be designated (paññāpetabba) both as mental objects. 
That is, he explicitly treats designating paññattis too as mental objects distinct 
from the sounds of words. He states, for instance, in admittedly technical lan-
guage that:
Either way (i.e. whether designating something real or not), furthermore, 
this [designating paññatti] is cognized by an impulse consciousness at the 
mind-door, which has grasped a previous convention immediately after 
the impulse (javana) at the ear-door. It is by means of this that the impulse 
consciousness at the mind-door, having grasped the previous convention, 
makes known [the meaning].
64
Writing sometime after the sixth century, Anuruddha in his Abhidhamma man-
uals adopts a similar ontology of concepts and also cites the Dhammasaṅgaṇi 
to support the existence of these two types of concept, that is, designating and 
designated concepts, though employs new terminology to analytically sep arate  
them.65 He clearly distinguishes, for instance, between designated concepts 
derived from dhammas, which he calls upādāpaññatti ‘dependent concepts’ or 
atthapaññatti ‘meaning concepts’, and the concepts that signify these concep-
tual referents as nāmapaññatti ‘naming concepts’.66 Importantly, both types of 
paññatti, the naming paññatti and meaning paññatti, are explicitly conceptual 
in nature, that is, they are mental objects. Anuruddha summarizes the processes 
of cognition and the role played by the naming concept, in particular, as follows:
It is in conformity with this [naming concept] – which is the objective 
field of the mind-door that arises immediately after the occurrence of 
an ear-consciousness process in the wake of the sound of speech – that 
meanings are afterwards discerned. A concept such as this is to be under-
stood as created by ordinary convention (lokasaṅketa).
67
The handbook tradition’s creative reading of the Dhammasaṅgaṇi was at odds 
with the doctrinal interpretations of the subcommentators on the Abhidhamma, 
Figure 5.2  A simplified diagram of linguistic cognition in the handbooks 


--- Page 119 of 286 ---
104 REWRITING BUDDHISM
however, who simply viewed all these terms, saṅkhā ‘label’, etc., as refer -
ring to speech (vacana ). A sixth-century scholar-monk Ānanda and his post-  
seventh-century successor Dhammapāla directly criticize this ontological 
classification of concepts and its perceived canonical justification in Dham-
masaṅgaṇi §§1306–8.68 Ānanda, for instance, writes:
Teachers state here, however, that, ‘the four words saṅkhā, samaññā, 
paññatti and vohāra are referred to as paññatti since they are what is 
to be designated. The other [words are referred to as paññatti] since 
they are what designates. And here the former is a dependent concept 
(upādāpaññatti), which lacks the function of rising and falling, and 
is established by ordinary convention. The latter is a naming concept 
(nāmapaññatti) – grasped by a stream of consciousness at the mind door 
that manifests immediately after a stream of consciousness at the ear 
door, having grasped a previous convention – through which the for -
mer concept (i.e. the dependent concept) and form ( rūpa) etc. are made 
known.’
69
Ānanda frames his criticism of this standpoint as a ‘rejection of the exist -
ence (atthitā) of what is other than conditioned (saṅkhata) and unconditioned 
(asaṅkhata)’ in an apparent challenge to the classification of concepts as a 
third category of existing entity. 70 Ānanda views designated concepts simply 
as perceptions ( saññā) of what is unreal and, therefore, ultimately as condi -
tioned ( saṅkhata) mental objects. While this perception exists, the concep -
tualized object of cognition is not afforded a separate status as an existent 
entity too, as it is in the handbooks.
71 He also refutes his opponents’ inter -
pretation of Dhammasaṅgaṇi §§1306–8 for a number of reasons, most of 
which are philological.72 He argues against the existence of naming concepts 
(nāmapaññatti), specifically, on more philosophical grounds and contends 
that if such a conceptualization of language is needed to establish a conven -
tional association between a word and its meaning, then similarly to form 
an association between that concept and a word another concept would be 
needed, and so on, leading to infinite regress.
73 He concludes that paññatti, 
as a category encompassing all the linguistic terms introduced in Dham-
masaṅgaṇi §§1306–8, should be understood simply as speech ( vacana) since 
this conforms with what is said in the canon and its commentaries. 74
It is a testament to the renewed attention to the Abhidhamma handbooks 
in the reform era that this disagreement about the ontological status of con -
cepts and the existence, in particular, of naming concepts ( nāmapaññatti) 
has gone unrecognized in Western scholarship. In his commentary on the 
Abhidhammāvatāra, Sumaṅgala develops Buddhadatta’s paññatti theory 

--- Page 120 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  105
by bringing it into harmony with Anuruddha’s manuals and also by  subtly 
accommodating some of the criticisms of the subcommentators. In his 
analysis of Buddhadatta’s chapter on paññatti , specifically, Sumaṅgala fol-
lows Buddhadatta’s ontological classification of concepts, though he takes 
care to admit that this paññatti theory is based on an interpretation of the 
Dhammasaṅgaṇi that is only accepted among teachers ( ācariyānaṃ icchi -
tattā), with the implication being that these views, as Ānanda argues, cannot 
be supported by the commentaries.
75 Sumaṅgala throughout his analysis brings 
in aspects of Anuruddha’s presentation of paññatti theory in order to establish 
coherence between the handbooks. He uses Anuruddha’s terminology to gloss 
what Buddhadatta describes as paññattis to be designated (paññāpetabba) and 
those that designate (paññāpana):
Here, by paññāpetabbato  [he means] a paññatti [in the sense of] 
‘what is designated’ (paññāpīyati), [i.e.] ‘what is made known by a 
means’ (pakārena ñāpiyati). Thus, as it denotes the object of an action 
(kammasādhana) it is called the ‘dependent concept’ (upādāpaññatti ), 
which becomes the meaning concept (atthapaññatti ) (i.e. the refer -
ent of a designation). By paññāpanato [he means] a paññatti [in the 
sense of] ‘what designates’ (paññāpeti ), [i.e.] ‘what makes known by 
a means’ (pakārena ñāpeti ). Thus, as it denotes the agent of an action 
(kattusādhana), understand that it is a naming concept ( nāmapaññatti), 
which becomes the signifier of it [i.e., of the meaning concept].
76
Sumaṅgala further develops in his commentary on the precise cognitive stage 
in which the naming concept arises, breaking down the cognitive process 
into minute phases of so-called ‘cognitive impulses’ or javanas. He states, 
following Sāriputta’s Sinhala commentary on the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, 
that when one hears the word ‘pot’ ( ghaṭo), each of the sounds gha and ṭo  
are cognized over two ‘courses of impulse’ ( javanavāra) each. These are 
gathered as a whole word ( saddasamudāya) in another impulse moment, 
Figure 5.3  A simplified diagram of Ānanda’s view of linguistic cognition 

--- Page 121 of 286 ---
106 REWRITING BUDDHISM
after which the corresponding ‘naming concept’ ( nāmapaññatti) immedi -
ately arises in the next impulse moment. 77 Sumaṅgala uniquely states in his 
commentary on the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha too that this ‘naming concept’ 
is in fact formed of a string of syllables (akkharāvalībhūta).78 He presents the 
‘naming concept’, then, simply as an immediate, conceptual copy of a word’s 
sounds. We can speculate that in emphasizing the extremely close cognitive 
connection between a word and the naming concept Sumaṅgala was possibly 
attempting to reconcile those who believed that a designation ( paññatti) was 
speech and those who thought that it was a concept, something ideal rather 
than physical.
5.4. Rethinking the Natur e of Scripture
When reading extremely complex debates such as these it is hard to know 
exactly what was at stake for these scholar-monks. Why did it matter if con -
cepts were treated as existents and if language was thought of primarily as 
such a conceptual entity rather than as sound? Clearly there were issues here 
about Abhidhamma ontology and fidelity to the Pali canon and its commentar-
ies. The arguments of Ānanda were principally philological and they largely 
support the view of language as sound, in particular, on the basis that it con -
forms with what is said in scripture. Ānanda cites canonical statements, such 
as, ‘[the Buddha’s] discourse (vohāra) penetrates the worldly ear’, to prove 
that words such as vohāra refer to physical sounds rather than something con-
ceptual. In his own commentary on Ānanda’s discussion, however, Dham-
mapāla describes how those who understood vohāra ‘discourse’ to be a mental 
concept rather than a physical sound interpreted such canonical passages:
Discourse penetrates  the  worldly  ear: understand that in [expressions] 
such as this, as it is the sound that is heard, discourse etc., which are the 
cognitive objects (visaya) of that [sound], are spoken of fig  urativel y as 
that which penetrates [the ear] and as that which is aud  ible. Or rather, 
only sound is meant here in so far as it is concomitant (sahacāritā) with 
discourse, etc. For it is not possible to say that everywhere the teaching 
exists with a single form ( ekarasa).79 For instance, in some places it is 
said, sukhā dukkhā (pleasant and unpleasant) [or] sukhā pi vedanā duk-
khā (also pleasant and unpleasant feelings); dukkhā sukhā (unpleasant 
and pleasant) [or] dukkhā pi sukhā (also unpleasant and pleasant [feel -
ings]).80 Thus (i.e. for this reason), also the two-fold concept (i.e. mean-
ing and naming concept), as described, is spoken of in the commentary 
as the meaning of the [ Dhammasaṅgaṇi] passage (§§1306–1308) 

--- Page 122 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  107
beginning ‘articulation’ (adhivacana). This is the exegesis of those who 
accept a particular knowable [entity] separate from what is conditioned 
and unconditioned.
81
It seems that those who adhered to a conceptual understanding of language, 
interpreted certain statements in the canon explicitly referring to the Buddha’s 
speech as figurative rather than literal. The second remark here concerning 
textual variation is also telling for it reveals an awareness among monks that 
the wording of their scriptures, possibly as found in manuscripts, was not con-
sistent and indicates that, as a result, some sought uniformity rather in a con-
ceptual understanding of language. It appears, then, that looming behind this 
debate was a wider concern among scholar-monks about what their scriptures 
actually were.
Sumaṅgala makes this connection explicit in his commentary on the 
Abhidhammāvatāra when explaining at length the term sabhāvanirutti or ‘nat-
ural expression’ that was used since Buddhaghosa to describe scriptural lan -
guage.
82 In doing so Sumaṅgala introduces a debate on the nature of scriptural 
language first found in the commentary on another canonical Abhidhamma 
text, the Vibhaṅga, that is intimately related with the controversy about ‘con-
cepts’ in the interpretation of the Dhammasaṅgaṇi:
Natural expression: the unchanging expression. The unchanging 
expression is referred to as the language of Magadha, an unwavering 
discourse, which has a fixed relationship in all times in making known 
this or that meaning. For it has a fixed relationship [with meaning] in 
all times, whereas other languages change over time. The teachers, 
however, state that ‘in fact (atthato ), this [language] is a “naming con-
cept” (nāmapaññatti)’. For they say: ‘the expression, the language of 
Magadha, is in fact a naming figuration (nāmasammuti).’
83
Sumaṅgala begins his analysis here by presenting a definition of scriptural 
language first found in the commentary on the Vibhaṅga on the religious 
attainment known as the ‘analysis of scripture’ (niruttipaṭisambhidā ), where 
the commentator famously describes the language as an unchanging, magi -
cal form of expression naturally spoken throughout the cosmos by humans 
and gods.
84 Sumaṅgala then introduces a definition of the ‘natural expression’ 
that he ascribes to certain ‘teachers’. These teachers, he writes, claim that the 
‘natural expression’ is in reality a ‘naming concept’ (nāmapaññatti), that is to 
say, it is primarily conceptual in nature.
85 Sumaṅgala then quotes the first line 
of a verse from a Sanskrit Abhidharma manual that the late L.S. Cousins has 
found quoted in Parākramabāhu II’s (1236–70) Sinhala commentary on the 

--- Page 123 of 286 ---
108 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Visuddhimagga (‘Path of purification’). 86 The Sanskrit original of this verse 
also contains reference to the opposing view of commentators like Ānanda 
and Dhammapāla that scriptural language is, in essence, the sound of a text:87
niruktir māgadhī bhāṣā sā cārthān nāmasaṃvṛtiḥ
keci dhvāna iti prāhur vijñaptyākārasaṃyutaḥ.
The expression, the Māgadhī language, is in fact a naming figuration.
Some proclaim that it is sound connected with a form of information. 88
Sumaṅgala understood the expression ‘naming figuration’ (nāmasaṃvṛti) here 
as synonymous with his ‘naming concept’ (nāmapaññatti) as developed in 
the handbooks. The Sinhala commentary on the Visuddhimagga attributes this 
verse to a certain Jotipāla, who Cousins has suggested may be identical to an 
Indian Mahāvihāran monk mentioned in the Cūḷavaṃsa as defeating in debate 
a Vetullavāda or Mahayana opponent called Dāṭhāpabhuti.
89 If this narrative 
does refer to Jotipāla the commentator, we can date the scholar to the reign 
of Aggabodhi I (571–604) and thus to the early seventh century. This would 
place Jotipāla’s floruit at the heart of an era of Pallava influence on the island, 
in which forms of Tantric and Mahayana doctrine were widespread.
90 It is 
perhaps not surprising, then, that a Mahāvihāran apologist like Jotipāla might 
make some concessions when debating opponents who adhered to definitions 
of scripture less literal than those of his own tradition.
91
Sumaṅgala shows he was very much aware of the challenge to orthodoxy 
posed by conceptual views of scripture for he quickly follows his mention of 
this standpoint by contrasting it with the opinions of ‘others’, in this case, the 
more traditional view expressed by the Vibhaṅga commentator that scriptural 
language was in essence the precise wording of a text.
92 There the Vibhaṅga 
commentator states that the ‘natural expression’ (sabhāvanirutti), that is, scrip-
tural language, is recognized by its sounds (sadda) rather than its concepts 
Figure 5.4 Scripture as either speech or concept 

--- Page 124 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  109
(paññatti) and furnishes this distinction with an example. The Pali word phasso 
(a masculine noun meaning ‘sense-contact’), he states, can be considered scrip-
ture but incorrect grammatical forms such as * phassā (f.) and *phassam (n.) 
are not, despite the fact they may convey the same idea. The commentary refers 
to the ability to distinguish scriptural language as the niruttipaṭisambhidā or 
‘analysis of scripture’. 93 These views conform with the general approach of 
the other early commentaries, traditionally ascribed to Buddhaghosa, that treat 
scriptural meaning (attha) as rich and expansive but never as detached from or 
as more important than scripture’s phrasing (vyañjana).
94
Sumaṅgala, however, remains markedly silent about whether he agreed 
with the Vibhaṅga commentator here, probably because, as we have discussed, 
he actually accepted a largely conceptual understanding of language. And yet, 
in an exegetical move that is potentially conciliatory to those who defined 
scripture principally as sound, he quotes in agreement a discussion in Ānanda’s 
subcommentary on this Vibhaṅga passage concerning when in the cognitive 
process the ‘analysis of scripture’ takes place. There, Ānanda states that, while 
the analysis of the ‘natural expression’ occurs as soon as the sounds of the 
language are heard, it is not impossible that this analysis continues at a sec -
ondary, conceptual stage of cognition.
95 There is potentially room in Ānanda’s 
comments here, however intentional, for both views of scripture to be seen as 
compatible without overtly impinging on commentarial orthodoxy and it is 
no coincidence, I think, that Sumaṅgala draws our attention to this passage.
96
There is evidence that the two competing views on scriptural language as 
concept or speech found their way outside of elite philosophical circles too. We 
find, for instance, the debate referenced in Sāriputta’s Vinaya subcommentary 
where it seems the glossaries (gaṇṭhipada) available to him on the Vinaya and 
Abhidhamma contained conflicting views about the matter. Commenting on 
the opening to the Vinaya commentary, where the commentator defines the 
Dhamma specifically as the texts listed in the Tipiṭaka, Sāriputta raises the 
question of what exactly is meant by the word ‘Dhamma’. He initially appears 
to follow the Vinaya commentator by defining the Dhamma specifically as pāḷi, 
that is, as a canonical text.
He then, however, raises the issue of what is meant by such a ‘text’ and 
offers two different interpretations. The first opinion, supposedly taken from a 
Sinhala Abhidhamma glossary, argues instead that a canonical text is in actu-
ality a conceptual entity.
97 The second opinion, which he states derives from a 
Vinaya glossary, follows the traditional view in claiming that a canonical text 
is defined primarily by its sounds, that is, its exact wording. Of the two views, 
Sāriputta explains the former at length whereas he only cursorily defends the 
latter by quoting Dhammapāla’s Dīgha Nikāya subcommentary.
98 His prin-
cipal argument for the first position is that if the expression ‘canonical text’ 

--- Page 125 of 286 ---
110 REWRITING BUDDHISM
refers primarily to the words of the text rather than the concepts conveyed by 
them, then there would be no difference between the Dhamma and the teaching 
(desanā) of the Dhamma. According to this reasoning, then, the Dhamma is a 
nominal entity and scriptural language itself is its verbal articulation.
99
Reading between the lines, the silence of Sumaṅgala and Sāriputta  – 
their reluctance to explicitly take the early commentators’ side against those 
like Jotipāla – is revealing in that previously heterodox views of scripture as 
a concept were now presented as plausible, if not preferable. In exegetical 
fidelity to the handbook authors, both scholars expound a view of scriptural 
language that takes into account that scripture could be identified as a concep-
tual entity; an object of the mind rather than something heard. This was not 
to the exclusion of the traditional standpoint, of course. There were clear dan-
gers in defining scripture as something solely conceptual, for the Mahāvihāra’s 
identity and authority was based on the very idea that its Pali scriptures were 
spoken by the Buddha. Sumaṅgala seems to agree that while scripture can 
be analytically separated as a conceptual entity and potentially reformulated, 
these concepts must ultimately derive at some point from Pali sounds.
It is tempting to view this accommodation as part of the subtle loosening 
of the traditional link between the phrasing and meaning of scripture among 
the scholar-monks of the era, as discussed at the beginning of the chapter. Such 
a shift in emphasis perhaps makes sense when we consider the changes in the 
monastic curriculum, where condensations of the canon’s meaning, with little 
exegetical connection to the wording of scripture, had begun to be viewed as 
commentaries too. Only a few elite monks had much sustained contact with 
the actual text of the Pali canon and most increasingly encountered concep -
tual abstractions: summaries, anthologies and grammars. Summaries could 
repackage this ‘essential meaning’ (sārattha) with a new wording and anthol-
ogies too could detach commentarial passages from their root text and still 
treat them as part of the meaning of scripture as an analytical domain. And yet 
these new formulations needed an authoritative connection with the Pali canon 
as a text, even if this was an increasingly rhetorical gesture that masked the 
reality of scholarly practice.
5.5.  Summary
There is a great deal of overlap between the intellectual orientations of the 
reform-era grammarians and commentators. Both share a similar care and 
attention for the formal handling of scriptural meaning. We find, in general, 
increasingly systematic forms of exegesis, in particular, in the handbook 
commentarial tradition, based on an innovative application of commentarial 

--- Page 126 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  111
models that, we can hypothesize, had first circulated in the Sanskrit tradition. 
The new formalism that characterized the exegetical culture of the era likely 
reflected the reform-era desire, as expressed by the grammarians, to stem the 
perceived religious decline of the period. It is also clear, at the same time, that 
these new models of writing responded to the practical needs of the late medi-
eval school (pariveṇa) system, with older exegetical procedures deployed in 
greater frequency and specificity for pedagogical purposes. This new scholas-
tic formalism was accompanied too by new ways of thinking about scripture. 
Scholar-monks, for instance, began to regard handbooks as ‘commentaries’, 
though ones that explain only the meaning and not the wording of scripture. 
This accompanied a reappraisal too of once heterodox views of scripture as 
something conceptual that could be analytically separated from scriptural 
wording.
Notes
1. It is possible to argue for the existence of ‘scholasticism’ in the sense of a systematic and  rational 
exegetical method in earlier Pali literature. On the use of the term in this more general sense, see 
Cabezón, ed. 1998, 1–18; also, Ronkin, 2005, 7–9. Here, however, I wish to draw a more explicit 
comparison with the so-called European ‘twelfth-century renaissance’ where the scholastic method 
was intimately tied to the development in northern Europe, in particular, of new centres of learning in 
the form of schools or universities. See Southern, 1970.
2. Bond, 1982; Endo, 2013; Heim, 2018.
3. See, for instance, Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 19, 22: attho kathīyati etāyā ti aṭṭhakathā; 
Vinayatthamañjūsā of Buddhanāga, 124: vaṇṇīyati attho kathīyati etāyā ti vaṇṇanā, aṭṭhakathā, taṃ 
vaṇṇanaṃ; Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 3, 15–17: anvattha byapadesena saṃvaṇṇīyati 
vivaritvā vitthāretvā kathīyati attho etāyā ti saṃvaṇṇanā; Saddanīti of Aggavaṃsa II, 326, 5–6: ettha 
ṭīkā ti ṭikīyati jānīyati saṃvaṇṇanāya attho etāyā ti ṭīkā.
4. This is a general trend rather than a rule, for there are some commentaries, such as Sāriputta’s ṭīkā 
on his Vinayasaṅgaha, that rearrange material from the canonical ṭīkās. Others, such as the Mūlasik-
khāṭīkā, while reflecting the reform-era concern for simplicity and concision, do not employ the 
full range of exegetical methods that we find systematically applied in some of the other handbook 
commentaries of the age.
5. Frauwallner, 1995, 11.
6. V on Hinüber, 1996, §343; Wijeratne and Gethin, trans. 2007, xvi–xvii. Sumaṅgala may also be iden-
tified with the initiator of the Vinayavinicchayaṭīkā and Khuddasikkhābhinavaṭīkā, though he is re-
ferred to in the latter work as a ‘constant forest dweller’. See Gunawardana, 1979, 156; Kieffer-Pülz, 
2017b, 36. Mayūrapāda also mentions in his Pūjāvaliya a famous relative, Sumaṅgala, who shared 
his Gaṇavāsi and Pāṇḍya descent. Similarly, there is a reference to a Sumaṅgala in Medhaṅkara’s 
Payogasiddhi who was head of a monastery at Jambudoṇi (Daṁbadeṇiya). See Kieffer-Pülz, 2018, 
195, n. 15.
7. V on Hinüber, 1996, §343; §346.
8. See, for instance, Skilling, 2010, 10–15.
9. Sumaṅgalavilāsinī of Buddhaghosa I, 1,15–18.
10. Samantapāsādikā I, 2,27–3,12.
11. Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 21, 19–22: na hi bhagavatā abyākataṃ nāma tantipadaṃ atthi, sabbesaṃ 
yeva attho kathito. tasmā sammāsambuddhen’eva tiṇṇaṃ piṭakānaṃ atthavaṇṇanākkamo pi bhāsito 
ti daṭṭhabbaṃ. tattha tattha bhagavatā pavattitā pakiṇṇakadesanā yeva hi aṭṭhakathā.
12. Nettipakaraṇaṭīkā of Dhammapāla, 56: yadi pi tattha tattha pavattā bhagavato pakiṇṇakade -
sanā aṭṭhakathā, sā pana dhammasaṅgāhakehi tepiṭakaṃ buddhavacanaṃ saṅgāyitvā tassa at-
thasaṃvaṇṇanānurūpena vācanām aggaṃ āropitattā ācariyavādo nāma.

--- Page 127 of 286 ---
112 REWRITING BUDDHISM
13. Dhammapāla explicitly refers to the Abhidhammāvatāra as an independent work ( pakaraṇa) rather 
than a commentary. Visuddhimaggamahāṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 2, 21–6, cited in V on Hinüber, 1996, 
§340.
14. The Saddhammasaṅgaha, for instance, includes handbooks, exegetical manuals and grammars under 
the category of pakaraṇa. See Saddhammasaṅgaha of Dhammakitti, 62–4.
15. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala I, 157,17–19: atthavasena pakārena kathento pi saddavasena 
saṅkhipitvā kathessāmī ti dassento āha “samāsenā” ti.
16. Similarly , in Sāriputta’s Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya and Sumaṅgala’s vibhāvinī, for instance, 
it is made clear that Anuruddha, author of the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, was thought to have ex -
plained the meaning of the Abhidhamma texts, ‘having gathered that meaning in one place’ (i.e. ‘in 
one book’). See Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya of Sāriputta, 1, 16–21 =  Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī 
of Sumaṅgala, 54,7–11, trans. Wijeratne and Gethin, 2007, 2. The term attha here is difficult to translate 
since, on the one hand, attha refers specifically to the meaning of the Abhidhamma canonical texts 
and, on the other, it may also refer to commentaries in so far as they establish the attha of the canon.
17. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala I, 157,11–15.
18. See Buddhadatta, ed. 1980, xiv. I have searched for the citation given by Buddhadatta in the Pūjāvali-
ya but, due to the work’s large size, it is difficult to confirm his reading without reference to a chapter 
or page number. On the use of the term aṭṭhakathā to refer to handbooks in the early modern Burmese 
tradition, see Kieffer-Pülz, 2020, § 2.
19. See, for instance, the Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta, the Sāratthamañjūsā of Sāriputta, the Sārasaṅga-
ha of Siddhattha, the Vinayasāratthasandīpanī of Vācissara, the Sāratthasālinī of Vācissara (?), the 
Sāratthasamuccaya, and the Sāratthavilāsinī of Saṅgharakkhita. The uniformity of these titles has 
already been noted by Kieffer-Pülz, 2018, 191, n. 10 and Agostini, 2015, 2, n. 2.
20. Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 2,3–16:
 vinayaṭṭhakathāyāhaṃ līnasāratthadīpaniṃ
 karissāmi suviññeyyaṃ paripuṇṇam anākulaṃ.
 porāṇehi kataṃ yaṃ tu līnatthassa pakāsanaṃ
 na taṃ sabbattha bhikkhūnaṃ atthaṃ sādheti sabbaso.
 duviññeyyasabhāvāya sīhaḷāya niruttiyā
 gaṇṭhipadesv anekesu likhitaṃ kiñci katthaci.
 māgadhikāya bhāsāya ārabhitvāpi kenaci
 bhāsantarehi sammissaṃ likhitaṃ kiñcideva ca.
 asāraganthabhāro ’pi tatth’  eva bahu dissati
 ākulañ ca kataṃ yattha suviññeyyam pi atthato.
 tato aparipuṇṇena tādisen’  ettha sabbaso
 katham atthaṃ vijānanti nānādesanivāsino.
 bhāsantaraṃ tato hitvā sāram ādāya sabbaso
 anākulaṃ karissāmi paripuṇṇavinicchayan ti.
  My translation differs slightly from Petra Kieffer-Pülz’s recent rendering. See Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 
62–3, n. 131.
21. Kief fer-Pülz, 2013, 62–4. See also Bollée, 1969, 824–35; Dimitrov, 2016, 479.
22. Petra Kieffer-Pülz has plausibly suggested that Sāriputta here is rather referring to Sanskrit forms 
of language used in the Vajirabuddhiṭīkā (gri for giri, for instance). See Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 130–1. 
As Sāriputta speaks of the ‘unessential books’ (asāragantha) as an obstacle in this connection, I am 
inclined, therefore, to hypothesize that he may also have in mind instances in the Vajirabuddhiṭīkā 
where the author cites Sanskrit works (albeit in Pali translation). See Dimitrov, 2016, 467–512. There 
was perhaps a convention that Sanskrit works should not be cited in Pali compositions. It is note -
worthy, in this regard, that Sumaṅgala, when rendering Sāriputta’s sannaya on the Abhidhammat-
thasaṅgaha into Pali, omits and never translates the work’s Sanskrit citations.
23. Coḷiya Kassapa, for instance, plays on the double meaning of laghu/lahu (‘light’) by stating that his 
concise commentary is best suited for those of ‘light’ or ‘lowly’ behaviour (lahuvutti). See the incipit 
of the Vimativinodanī of Kassapa.
24. Adapted from Kief fer-Pülz, 2018, 194.
25. See the colophon of the Vinayatthamañjūsā of Buddhanāga, 407,13–409,23.
26. Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala, 212,18–25, trans. Wijeratne and Gethin, 2007, 267.
27. For details see chapter three.
28. There is some evidence that late Southeast Asian commentaries on the canon also began to employ 
this more systematic form of exegesis. See, for instance, V on Hinüber, 1997.

--- Page 128 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  113
29. See, for instance, Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 87, n. 192; See also Nance, 2012, 98–122; Skilling, 2000, 318.
30. Petra Kieffer-Pülz has compiled mentions of such mātikā in Pali works. See Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 
86–95. I have represented below those from the pre-reform era and I have added to this collection 
also a second mātikā cited in the Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 245,9–246,15. These lists can be 
summarized in the following table:
Vajirabuddhiṭīkā Nettipakaraṇa-
aṭṭhakathā 1
Nettipakaraṇa-
aṭṭhakathā 2
Nettipakaraṇa-
aṭṭhakathā 3
Dīghanikāya-
ṭīkā 1
Dīghanikāya-
ṭīkā 2
1 upogghāṭa samuṭṭhāna payojana upogghāṭa samuṭṭhāna samuṭṭhāna
2 pada adhippāya piṇḍattha X pada payojana
3 padattha padattha padattha padaviggaha padavibhāga bhājana
4 padaviggaha vidhi/anuvāda anusandhi padattha padattha piṇḍattha
5 codanā virodha codanā cālanā anuyoga X
6 pratyavajja anusandhi parihāra paccupaṭṭhāna parihāra X
31. This is evident, for instance, in Dhammapāla’s subcommentary on the Brahmajāla Sutta of the Dīgha 
Nikāya. In an excursus at the end of his commentary he states that now he will present an ‘explanation 
of the meaning of the text according to the method of the exegetical treatises ( pakaraṇanayena)’. It 
is there that he introduces another list of exegetical principles and briefly discusses the Sutta on the 
basis of this list, though his main interest in this appendix is to demonstrate the many other exeget-
ical techniques described in the Nettipakaraṇa. Dhammapāla treats the points in this list, however, 
as referring to what a commentary on a Sutta should contain as a whole and not necessarily how it 
should comment on each and every passage. He understands samuṭṭhāna ‘context’, for instance, as 
the context of the Sutta as a whole and, likewise, he takes piṇḍattha ‘concise meaning’ as referring to 
a summary of the Sutta too. See Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 245,
9–267,29, trans. Bodhi, 2007, 
215–42. This corresponds with how these commentarial principles were implemented in certain 
works in the Mahayana Buddhist commentarial tradition. See, for instance, Nance, 2012, 98–122; 
Schoening, 1991, esp. 49–57.
32. The Burmese edit ion of the commentary, for instance, includes at the beginning of Vimalabuddhi’s 
discussion of Kaccāyana’s second rule the following schema, which is almost identical to the one 
found in the Vajirabuddhiṭīkā  and the Suttaniddesa  of Chapaṭa. Its awkward placement, however, 
suggests that the verse is not original to the Mukhamattadīpanī. See Mukhamattadīpanī of Vimala-
buddhi Be 7 (= Suttaniddesa of Chapaṭa, 3,33–4):
 sambandho ca padañ c’eva padattho padaviggaho,
 codanā parihāro ca chabbidhā suttavaṇṇanā.
 For other texts citing this verse, see Kief fer-Pülz, 2013, 91.
33. There has been some recent work on Sanskrit philosophical commentaries, however. See Ganeri, 
2010; Eltschinger, 2018.
34. V imalabuddhi’s application of the principle of ‘word analysis’ ( padaviggaha/padavibhāga) is in -
novative in that he uses it to refer to any form of grammatical analysis, including semantic analysis, 
and not only as the parsing of compounds, as it is often taken to mean.
35. Mukhamattadīpanī of Vimalabuddhi, 19, 28–20,5: sarā sar e  lopaṃ: kim attham idam uccate. anan -
taresu pubbasarassa lopatthaṃ. sarā ti ekaṃ padaṃ, sare ti ekaṃ, lopan ti ekaṃ, tipadam idaṃ 
suttaṃ. sarā kho sare pare lopaṃ pappontī ti attho. ettha ca sarā ti kārino nidasseti. sare ti nimittaṃ. 
lopan ti kāriyaṃ. sarantī ti sarā. lutti lopo. sarānaṃ paṭhamaṃ niddiṭṭhattā paṭhamaṃ tesaṃ san-
dhividhānaṃ vattabban ti ihedaṃ vuttaṃ. ettha ca saresū ti avatvā sare ti vacanaṃ ekekasmiṃ yevā 
ti ñāpanatthaṃ. yadi evaṃ saro ti avatvā kasmā sarā ti vuttaṃ ti. ekadviticatunnam pi lopo hotī ti 
ñāpanatthaṃ. “tena sakhāto gass’ e vā” (Kaccāyana 113) ti ettha a ca ā ca i ca ī ca e cā ti viggahaṃ 
katvā “nāmānaṃ samāso yuttattho” (Kaccāyana 318) ti adhikicca “nāmānaṃ samuccayo dvando” 
(Kaccāyana 331) ti dvandasamāsaṃ katvā “vuttaṭṭhānam appayogo” ti casaddam appayogaṃ katvā 
a ā i ī e ti evaṃ ṭhite ekāre pare sesasarānaṃ lopo hotī ti daṭṭhabbaṃ. Translation amended from 
Gornall and Gunasena, 2018, 14–15.
36. On the types of Sinhala sannayas and their style, see Bechert, 2005, 26–9; Blackburn, 2001, 68–9; 
107–38.

--- Page 129 of 286 ---
114 REWRITING BUDDHISM
37. See Rūpasiddhisannaya. Also, Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 91. This is in contrast to earlier Sinhala commen-
taries, such as the Siyabaslakarasannaya, which very often only consist of a word-by-word trans -
lation of each passage commented upon, sometimes followed by a brief paragraph  explaining the 
passage’s underlying idea or bhāva. See Siyabaslakarasannaya of Ruvanmī. For a translated example 
of its analysis, see Dimitrov, 2016, 105–6. The Sinhala sannaya tradition also influenced the devel -
opment of the Burmese nissaya. See Pruitt, 1994.
38. See Auroux, 1994.
39. W ijeratne and Gethin, trans. 2007, 367.
40. Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha 2.8: karuṇā-muditā-appamaññāyo nāmā ti sabbathāpi 
paññindriyena saddhiṃ pañcavīsat’ ime cetasikā sobhanā ti veditabbā. The translation is slightly 
adapted from Wijeratne and Gethin, 2007, 65.
41. Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya of Sāriputta, 48, 34–49,7: karuṇāmuditā  pana duḥkhita sat-
tvayangē duḥkhāpagamaya kaṭäṭi karuṇāya sukhita sattvayangē sukhayehī pramuditava pavatnā 
muditāya yana mē dedenā vanāhi; appamaññā  nāmā   ti, apramāṇa sattvayan viṣayakoṭa pavat -
nāheyin aprāmāṇya nam veti.
42. Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala, 86, 11–26 (= Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya of Sāriput-
ta 49, 8–22): karoti paradukkhe sati sādhūnaṃ hadayakhedaṃ janeti, kirati vā vikkhipati paraduk-
khaṃ, kiṇāti vā taṃ hiṃsati, kiriyāti (corr. kiriyati) vā dukkhitesu pasārīyatī ti karuṇā. sā 
paradukkhāpanayanakāmatālakkhaṇā; tāya hi paradukkhaṃ apanīyatu vā, mā vā tadākāren’ eva 
sā pavattati. modanti etāyā ti muditā. sā parasampatti-anumodana-lakkhaṇā. appamāṇasattāram -
maṇattā appamāṇā, tā eva appamaññā. nanu ca “catasso appamaññā” (Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha 
9.9) ti vakkhati. kasmā pan’ ettha dve yeva vuttā? ti. adosa-tatramajjhattatāhi mettupekkhānaṃ 
gahitattā. adoso yeva hi sattesu hitajjhāsayavasappavatto mettā nāma, tatramajjhattatā yeva tesu 
paṭighānunayavūpasamappavattā upekkhā nāma. ten’ āhu porāṇā: “avyāpādena mettā hi tatra -
majjhattatāya ca, upekkhā gahitā yasmā tasmā na gahitā ubho” ti. Translation adapted from Wijeratne 
and Gethin, 2007, 65.
43. Here borrowing from Deleuze and Guattari, 1994, 15–34.
44. Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 43,17.
45. See Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha, 2.6.
46. For instance, Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II on vv. 74–80. This is also not uncommon 
in the canonical ṭīkā literature, with both Dhammapāla and Sāriputta sometimes referring to hidden 
(antolīna) objections that ‘Buddhaghosa’ was responding to. To give but one example from each 
work, see Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 269,22–4; Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 204,23.
47. Patel, 2014, 89.
48. On Sāriputta’ s conciliatory approach, see Kieffer-P ü lz, 2005.
49. I presented some of the material that has been used to write this section at a talk at the Oxford Centre 
of Buddhist Studies in 2012. I had the pleasure there of discussing these issues with Lance Cousins, 
who kindly sent me a number of references and pointers that greatly enriched my understanding of 
the topic. The presentation of the debate here owes much to his wisdom and kindness. There are few 
secondary sources on the topic. See Warder, 1971.
50. Useful summaries of Abhidhamma thought and the content of the Abhidhammapiṭaka can be found 
in Crosby, 2014, 175–93; Gethin, 1998, 202–23; Nyanatiloka, 2008.
51. See, in particular , Puggalapaññattiaṭṭhakathā, 171–5. See also Priestley, 1999, 139–42.
52. Designations can also be a combination of both such as ‘a designation of what is not real by means 
of what is real’ ( vijjamānena-avijjamāna-paññatti), as in the word chaḷabhiñña ‘one with the six 
knowledges’. Also, in this regard, Karunadasa, 2010, 57–8.
53. Abhidhammāvatāra, 83,3–4.
54. Abhidhammāvatāra, 83, 16: ahan ti hi rūpādayo dhamme upādāya paṭicca kāraṇaṃ katvā yathā 
te rūpādayo dhammā uppāda-vaya-vanto na evaṃvidhā. See the translation below. Sumaṅga -
la (Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī , 201, 1–6) comments here as follows: ahan ti rūpādivinimuttaṃ 
ahaṃkārabuddhivisayabhūtaṃ attano khandhasamūhasantānam upādāya paññattaṃ, tadaññānaññab-
hāvena anibbacanīyaṃ upādāpaññattiṃ vadati. tenāha ahan ti  hī ti ādi. “ahan ti … pe … katvā” ti 
upādāpaññattiyā uppattiṃ dassetvā yathā ti ādinā taṃ pakāseti. ‘The [concept] “I” is conceptualized 
(paññatta), having as its cause (upādāya) the continuity of one’s own mass of aggregates (khandha), 
which become an object of the self-conscious intellect, independent of form, etc. (i.e. dhammas). He 
(Buddhadatta) states that the dependent concept (upādāpaññatti) cannot be explained as either being 
different from that [mass of aggregates] nor as non-different from that. For this reason, [he] begins 
ahan ti hi. Having pointed to the arising of the dependent concept, [by stating] ahan ti … pe … 
katvā, he explains this with [the statement] beginning yathā.’

--- Page 130 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  115
55. Later in his commentary Sumaṅgala explicitly treats paññattis as neither conditioned nor uncondi-
tioned and speaks of saṅkhata, asaṅkhata and paññatti dhammas, though the latter, of course, are es-
senceless (asabhāva). See Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala on v. 1395. Y . Karunadasa notes 
this too, though he is less attentive to the historical development of this categorization of paññattis. 
See Karunadasa, 2010, 50–1. Sāriputta in his Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya states that paññat-
tis, like nirvana, are free from time ( kālavinirmukta). See  Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya, 209,18  
(= Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala, 193,14).
56. Dhammasaṅgaṇi, §§1306–1308 (Be, §§1312–1314). See also, Karunadasa, 2010, 48.
57. Dhammasaṅgaṇi, §1308: katame dhammā paññatti? yā tesaṃ tesaṃ dhammānaṃ saṅkhā samaññā 
paññatti vohāro nāmaṃ nāmakammaṃ nāmadheyyaṃ nirutti vyañjanaṃ abhilāpo, ime dhammā 
paññatti. sabbe va dhammā paññattipathā.
58. This seems at least to be the view of the subcommentators on this passage. See below .
59. Atthasālinī, 390,14–19: saṅkhāyatī ti saṅkhā. saṅkathīyatī ti attho. kin ti saṅkathīyati? ahan ti maman 
ti paro ti parassā ti satto ti gāvo ti poso ti puggalo ti naro ti mānavo ti tisso ti datto ti mañco pīthaṃ 
(corr. pīṭhaṃ) bhisī bimbohanan ti vihāro pariveṇaṃ dvāraṃ vātapānaṃ ti evaṃ anekehi ākārehi 
saṅkathīyatī ti.
60. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 177, 13–16: ahan ti iti-saddaparena ahaṃ-saddena hetubhūtena 
yo attho viññāyati, so saṃkathīyati, udīrīyatīti attho. aññathā hi vuccamānassa vacanena pakāsi-
yamānassa padatthassa saṅkhādibhāve sabbesaṃ kusalādidhammānaṃ adhivacanāditā siyā ti. ‘ahan 
ti: as the word iti  follows [the word ahaṃ], the sense is “the meaning which is understood with the 
word ahaṃ as its cause, that is spoken, [i.e.] it is uttered”. For, otherwise, if the word-meaning which 
is being expressed, [i.e.] being designated by an expression, has the status of saṅkhā, etc., then all 
dhammas, wholesome, etc., would have the status of being adhivacana “designation”, etc.’
61. This has also influenced contemporary interpretations of this Dhammasaṅgaṇi passage. See, for in-
stance, Karunadasa, 2010, 48–9; Collins, 1998, 184.
62. Abhidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta, 83, 8–18: tattha saṅkhāyatī ti saṅkhā kathīyatī ti attho; kin ti 
kathīyati? ahan ti mamā ti paro ti parassā ti mañco ti pīṭhan ti anekehi ākārehi kathīyatī ti saṅkhā; 
samaññāyatī ti samaññā; paññāpīyatī ti paññatti; voharīyatī ti vohāro. kin ti voharīyati? ahan ti 
mamā ti paro ti parassā ti mañco ti pīṭhan ti. evaṃ tāva paññāpetabbato paññattī ti vuttā. ahan ti hi 
rūpādayo dhamme upādāya paṭicca kāraṇaṃ katvā yathā te rūpādayo dhammā uppāda-vaya-vanto na 
evaṃvidhā. kevalaṃ lokasaṅketena siddhā yā ahaṃ ahan ti kathīyati paññāpīyati ca, esā paññattī ti 
attho. idāni paññāpanato paññattiṃ pakāsetuṃ nāmaṃ nāmakamman ti ādim āha; tattha “nāman” ti 
taṃ taṃ dhammaṃ “esa itthan nāmo” ti paññāpeti, tasmā taṃ paññattī ti pavuccati; nāmakamman ti 
ādīni tassā eva vevacanāni. ayaṃ paññāpanato paññatti nāma.
63. This is Anuruddha’s expression. See Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha 43,27, trans. Wijeratne and Gethin, 
2007, 320.
64. Abhidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta, 84, 6–9: duvidhā pi pan’ esā sotadvāra-javanānantaraṃ gahita-   
pubba-saṅketen’ eva manodvāra-javana-viññāṇena viññāyati, sā ’yaṃ (Be, yāya)  gahita-pubba-saṅketena  
manodvāra-javana-viññāṇena paññāpīyati.
65. Anuruddha refers to the same Dhammasaṅgaṇi passage in introducing atthapaññatti s and 
nāmapaññattis. See, in particular, Paramatthavinicchaya of Anuruddha, vv. 1073–80. But also, Ab-
hidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha, 43,32.
66. Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha, 43, 18–44,14: Paramatthavinicchaya of Anuruddha, vv.  
1064–1142. The expression nāmapaññatti was first employed rather ambiguously in the Dham-
masaṅgaṇi commentary to refer collectively to the list of linguistic terms the work introduces as 
designators of dhammas. Atthasālinī, 391,
21–5, discussed in Ronkin, 2005, 161. See also Puggalapa-
ññattiaṭṭhakathā, 17119–173,6.
67. Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha, 44,9–12:
 vacīghosānusārena sotaviññāṇavīthiyā
 pavattānantaruppannamanodvārassa gocarā.
 atthā yassānusārena viññāyanti tato paraṃ
 sāyaṃ paññatti viññeyyā lokasaṅketanimmitā.
 T ranslation slightly altered from Wijeratne and Gethin, 2007, 323.
68. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 177, 13–181,19; Dhammasaṅgaṇianuṭīkā of Dhammapāla, 
189,24–197,31. It is noteworthy that the Saccasaṅkhepa, traditionally ascribed to Dhammapāla, es-
sentially summarizes and supports Ānanda’s arguments here too. See Saccasaṅkhepa, vv. 372–83. I 
was lucky to have Lance Cousins’s rough translation of the Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā passage here 
to hand in order to refine my own translation. Lance was interested in this passage due to his work on 
the Saccasaṅkhepa. My understanding of the passage in the context of the debate on paññatti and as 

--- Page 131 of 286 ---
116 REWRITING BUDDHISM
a critique of views like those expressed in the Abhidhammāvatāra is my own. I plan in the near future 
to publish full translations of Ānanda’s arguments along with Dhammapāla’s subcommentary. For the 
purpose of this chapter, however, I will cite the sections relating to the individual arguments and only 
translate key points.
69. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 178, 9–14: ettha pana saṅkhā samaññā paññatti vohāro ti catūhi 
padehi paññāpitabbato paññatti vuttā, itarehi paññāpanato. tattha ca purimā upādāpaññatti uppā-
davayakiccarahitā lokasaṅketasiddhā pacchimā nāmapaññatti yāya purimā paññatti rūpādayo ca 
sotadvāraviññāṇasantānānantaram uppannena gahitapubbasaṅketena manodvāraviññāṇasantānena 
gahitāya paññāpīyantī ti ācariyā vadanti.
70. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 181, 18–19: ayaṃ saṅkhatāsaṅkhatavinimuttassa at-
thitāpaṭisedhaṃ sabbathā anuvattantānaṃ vinicchayo.
71. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 180,6–181,19. See, esp. 180,12–21: yasmā pana yesu rūpādīsu cak-
khādīsu ca tathā tathā pavattamānesu “satto itthī ratho ghaṭo” ti ādikā vicittasaññā uppajjati, saññānu-
lomāni ca adhivacanāni, tehi rūpacakkhādīhi añño sattarathādisaññāvalambito vacanattho vijjamāno 
na hoti. tasmā sattarathādi-abhilāpā “avijjamānapaññattī” ti vuccanti, na ca te “musā” ti vuccanti lo -
kasamaññāvasena pavattattā. tato eva te abhilāpā “sammutisaccan” ti vuccanti. so ca vacanattho sayaṃ 
avijjamāno pi vijjamānassa vacanass’ eva vasena paññattivohāraṃ labhati, “sammutisaccan” ti ca vuc-
cati yathāgahitasaññāvasena pavattavacanatthabhāvato.
  ‘Since, however, various perceptions, such as being, woman, cart, and pot, arise when form etc. (i.e. 
objects of senses) and eye etc. (i.e. the sense organs) are occurring this way and that (tathā tathā), 
and designations (adhivacana) conform with these perceptions, there is no real object of speech (i.e. 
a conceptual paññatti) other than form and eye etc. attached to the perception of being and cart etc. 
Therefore, the utterances of “being” and “cart” etc. are spoken of as “designations of what is unreal”, 
though they are not spoken of as “false” since they occur as an ordinary category. Therefore, these 
utterances (abhilāpa) are referred to as “conventional truth”. And that object of speech even though 
it itself is unreal obtains the label “paññatti” only by dint of real speech and it is referred to as “con-
ventional truth” as its status (bhāva) as the object of speech occurs because of the perception (saññā) 
as grasped.’
72. His first three ar guments are as follows:
 (1) It contradicts what is said in the Dhammasaṅgaṇi commentary.
  Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 178,15–22: etasmiṃ pana imissā pāḷiyā aṭṭhakathāya ca atthe sati 
yaṃ vuttaṃ mātikāyaṃ “vacanamattam eva adhikāraṃ katvā pavattā adhivacanā nāma … sahetukaṃ 
katvā vuccamānā abhilāpā nirutti nāma … pakārena ñāpanato paññatti nāmā” ti (Atthasālinī , 51), 
tena virodho siyā. na hi uppādavayakiccarahitassa vacanamattaṃ adhikāraṃ katvā pavatti atthi up-
pādādisahitass’ eva pavattisabbhāvato (conj. °sabhāvato?); na ca vacanavacanatthavimuttassa nāmas-
sa niddhāretvā sahetukaṃ katvā vuccamānatā atthi; nāpi aniddhāritasabhāvassa padatthassa tena tena 
pakārena ñāpanaṃ atthī ti.
  ‘If this here, however, is the meaning of this canonical text and commentary then there would be a 
contradiction with what is said with respect to the mātikā, [namely, that] “adhivacana is so-called as 
it occurs taking only speech as a support; nirutti is so-called as it is an utterance being spoken for a 
reason; paññatti is so-called since it is making known by a means.” This is because (1) there cannot 
be the occurrence of what lacks the function of arising and ceasing having taken speech as a support, 
since only that accompanied by arising, etc. can by nature occur; (2) a name separate from speech 
and the meaning of speech cannot be expressed with specificity, with a cause; (3) nor can a meaning 
element (padattha) of unspecified nature (sabhāva) be made known by this or that means.’
  (2) The  two-fold  division  of  dependent  and  naming  concepts,  as  described,  is  not  found  in  any  
other  commentary.
  Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 178, 23–179,7, esp. 179, 4–6: avijjamānapaññattivacanena 
paññāpitabbā upādāpaññatti, tassā paññāpanabhūtā nāmapaññatti ca vuttā, itarehi nāmapaññatti yeva 
yathā vuttā ti ce? na, asiddhattā.
  ‘What if by the expression avijjamānapaññatti one refers to both the dependent concept which is to 
be designated and the naming concept which designates it, just as by the others (i.e. the other com -
binations of designating vijjamāna and avijjamāna paññattis) one refers only to the naming concept? 
No, for it is not established.’ Ānanda argues here that the upādā- and nāmapaññatti distinction, as 
described, cannot be inferred from the Puggalapaññattiaṭṭhakathā categorization of the various com-
binations of vijjamāna and avijjamānapaññattis.
  (3) If  the  unr eal  things  words  denote  have  the  status  of  ‘unr eal  concepts’ then  one  might  think  that 
signified dhammas  too  have  the  status  of  ‘r eal  concepts’,  contradicting  the  Dhammasaṅgaṇi state-
ment that dhammas themselves have a ‘way of designation’  (paññattipatha).

--- Page 132 of 286 ---
 BUDDHIS T SCHOLASTICISM: SUMAN · GALA’S COMMENTARIES  117
  Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 179, 7–179,26, esp. 179, 11–14: yathā ca paññāpitabbato 
avijjamānānaṃ sattādīnaṃ avijjamānapaññattibhāvo, evaṃ rūpādīnaṃ vijjamānānaṃ paññāpetabba-
to vijjamānapaññattibhāvo āpajjati. tato “sabbe dhammā paññattī” ti paññattipathehi avisiṭṭho paññat-
tidhammaniddeso vattabbo siyā.
  ‘And since, as [something] to be designated, unreal beings etc. have the status of paññattis of what 
is unreal, then there is the unwanted consequence that real forms ( rūpa) etc., as [something] to be 
designated, would have the status of paññattis of what is real. Then, one would have to specify that 
dhammas are paññattis, [stating,] “all dhammas are paññatti”, without qualifying them as “having 
ways of paññatti” (as in Dhammasaṅgaṇi, §§1306–8).’
73. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 179, 26–180,1, esp. 179, 26–9: yadi hi tesaṃ vinā paññattiyā at-
thapaññāpane asamatthatā siyā, paññattipaññāpane ca asamatthatā ti tassā aññā paññatti vattabbā 
siyā, tassā tassā ti anavatthānaṃ. tato atthavijānanam eva na siyā.
‘For if it were impossible for a [naming] paññatti to designate the meaning without them (i.e. under-
standings of a convention), then it would also be impossible to designate the [naming] paññatti. Thus, 
one would have to speak of another [naming] paññatti for that (i.e. to designate that naming paññatti), 
and for that, and that. There would be infinite regress and, thus, no signification of meaning at all.’
74. Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda, 180,1–5: “buddhassa bhagavato vohāro lokiye sote paṭihaññati” 
(Kathāvatthu 2.10), “abhijānāsi no tvaṃ ānanda ito pubbe evarūpaṃ nāmadheyyaṃ sutaṃ yadidaṃ 
javanasabho” (Dīgha Nikāya  II, 18.9) ti, “nāmañ ca sāveti koṇḍañño ahaṃ bhagavā” (Saṃyutta 
Nikāya I, 8.9) ti ādīhi ca paññattiyā vacanabhāvo siddho. tasmā pāḷiyā aṭṭhakathāya ca aviruddho 
attho vicāretvā gahetabbo.
  ‘Through [statements], such as, “the discourse of the enlightened Bhagavan impinges on the ordinary 
ear”, “Are you not aware, Ānanda, that before [now] there was such a one known by the name of 
‘Javanasabha’?”, and “He announced his name: I am Koṇḍañña, Bhagavan”, it is established that 
paññatti is by nature speech. Therefore, upon examination, a meaning that does not contradict the 
canonical text and its commentary should be accepted.’
  That the Pali commentaries lack any detailed discussion on the ontological nature of concepts has 
been noted, however. Nyanaponika Thera, for instance, criticized the Venerable U Ñāṇa, translator of 
Ledi Sayadaw’s Vipassanā Dīpanī, for ‘ascribing the teaching on the “eternal nature” of concepts and 
space to Buddhist philosophy in general’ and remarks that ‘this teaching is obviously of late origin, 
being found neither in the Abhidhamma Piṭaka nor in the old Abhidhamma commentaries’. See Ledi 
Sayādaw, 2007, 38.
75. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II, 200,14–17.
76. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II, 200, 8–13: tattha “paññāpetabbato” ti iminā paññāpīyati 
pakārena ñāpiyatī ti paññattī ti evaṃ kammasādhanavasena atthapaññattibhūtā upādāpaññatti vuttā. 
“paññāpanato” ti iminā paññāpeti pakārena ñāpetī ti paññattī ti evaṃ kattusādhanavasena tassā ab-
hidhāyakabhūtā nāmapaññattī ti veditabbaṃ.
77. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II, 203, 13–19 (≈ Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya of 
Sāriputta, 214, 20–6; Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala, 195, 12–17): katarajavanavīthiyaṃ 
panāyaṃ viññāyatī ti? ghaṭo ti ādisaddaṃ suṇantassa ekamekaṃ saddaṃ ārabbha paccuppan -
nātītārammaṇavasena dve dve javanavārā honti. tato saddasamudāyam ārabbha eko, tato nāmapaññat-
tim ārabbha eko ti evaṃ saddasamudāyārammaṇāya javanavīthiyā anantaraṃ nāmapaññatti pākaṭā 
hoti. tato paraṃ atthāvabodho ti ācariyā.
78. Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala, 195, 8–9: manodvāragahitā akkharāvalībhūtā paññatti 
viññeyyā. But see the slightly different Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya of Sāriputta, 214, 15–17: 
viññeyyā manodvārika vijñānayen gannālada akṣarāvali saṃkhyāta nāmaprajñaptiya yi datayuttī yi.
79. The emphasis is my own. Note that here the opponent evokes the Buddha’s statement that the Dham -
ma and Vinaya share the singular taste (ekarasa) of liberation. See, for instance, Vinaya II, 239,33–4. 
In speaking specifically of the teaching (desanā) having no singular taste, the opponent is making a 
distinction between the ideal Dhamma and its verbal articulation.
80. I would have expected dukkhāpi sukhā vedanā here. This is a tentative translation, though I am con-
fident Dhammapāla is raising the issue of textual variation.
81. Dhammasaṅgaṇianuṭīkā of Dhammapāla, 197,24–31:
vohāro lokiyasote  paṭihaññatī ti ādisu sotabbassa saddassa vasena tabbisayabhūtā vohārādayo paṭi-
hananasotabbatāpariyāyena vuttā ti daṭṭhabbā. saddo yeva vā tattha vohārādisahacāritāya tathā vutto. 
na hi sakkā sabbattha ekarasā desanā pavattī ti vattuṃ. tathā hi katthaci sukhā dukkhā, sukhā pi 
vedanā dukkhā ti vuccanti, dukkhā sukhā dukkhā pi sukhā ti. evaṃ yathāvuttā duvidhāpi paññatti 
adhivacanādipāṭhassa atthabhāvena aṭṭhakathāyaṃ vuttā yevā ti. ayaṃ saṅkhatāsaṅkhatavinimuttaṃ 
ñeyyavisesaṃ icchantānaṃ vasena vinicchayo.

--- Page 133 of 286 ---
118 REWRITING BUDDHISM
82. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II on v. 1189, 301–2, (≈ Sammohavinodanī 387,4–9). Ab-
hidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta, v. 1189:
  tasmiṃ atthe ca dhamme ca yā sabhāvanirutti tu,
 niruttī ti ca niddiṭṭhā niruttikusalena sā.
 ‘The natural expression (sabhāvanirutti), however, with respect to both attha and dhamma
 is also referred to as the “nirutti” by those skilled in nirutti.’
 I agree with Brian Levman, here, that nirutti in Pali literature seems to refer specifically to the Pali 
lexicon, that is, to words rather than ‘language’ in general. Levman, 2008–9.
83. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II, 301, 9–15: sabhāvaniruttī ti aviparītanirutti, aviparītan-
iruttī ti tassa tassa atthassa bodhane sabbakālaṃ paṭiniyatasambandho abyabhicāravohāro māgadhab-
hāsā ti vuttaṃ hoti. sā hi sabbakālaṃ paṭiniyatasambandho, itarā bhāsā pana kālantarena parivattanti 
(≈ Sammohavinodanī, 387,4–17). atthato pan’ esā nāmapaññattī ti ācariyā. yathāhu: “nirutti māgadhā 
bhāsā, atthato nāmasammutī” ti.
84. See chapter three, §1.
85. It is possible that atthato in the passage means more literally ‘as to the meaning’. I interpret the 
term attha more figuratively here, however, as being used to mean ‘in fact’ or ‘in reality’ since the 
nāmapaññatti, while conceptual, is not technically the referent or meaning of a word.
86. Cousins, 2011, 17–21.
87. Dhammapāla uses an almost identical expression to represent his and Ānanda’s views. See  
Vibhaṅga-anuṭīkā of Dhammapāla, 192,17–18: viññattivikārasahito saddo paññattī ti attano adhippāyo.
88. In the Theravada Abhidhamma the term vijñapti (P. viññatti) is difficult to translate. It refers here, 
it seems, to a mode of the earth element born from the mind that helps produce speech when one 
wants to say something. Y . Karunadasa states that the ‘so-called ākāra-vikāra of the earth-element 
(= vācīviññatti) strikes against the vocal apparatus (upādiṇṇaka, akkharuppattiṭṭhāna) and produces 
(vocal) sound through which the thought is communicated.’ Karunadasa, 1967, 76.
89. Cūḷavaṃsa 42.35–8 cited in Cousins, 2011, 2–3.
90. See chapter one.
91. See Skilling, 2010. A similar debate on the nature of scriptural language took place between the Sau-
trāntikas and the Vaibhāṣikas. See, for instance, Jaini, 2001. Jaini perceives some similarities in this 
regard between the nāmapaññatti, as developed in Abhidhamma handbooks, and the Vaibhāṣika’s 
nāmakāya, a linguistic dhamma separate from verbal sound.
92. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II on v. 1189, 301–2 (≈ Sammohavinodanī 387).
93. Sammohavinodanī, 387, 4–17.
94. Heim, 2018, 73–85, esp. 84.
95. Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala II on v. 1189, 301,25–302,19 (= Vibhaṅgamūlaṭīkā of Ānan-
da, 191, 26–192,13). See in particular, 302, 13–15 (= Vibhaṅgamūlaṭīkā 192, 8–11): taṃ sabhāvaniruttiṃ 
saddaṃ ārammaṇaṃ katvā paccavekkhantassā ti ca paccuppannasaddārammaṇaṃ paccavekkhaṇaṃ 
pavattayantassā ti na na sakkā vattuṃ. ‘For it is not impossible to say with respect to the statement, 
“one who investigates having taken the sound of the natural expression as cognitive object”, that [it 
means]: “one who keeps investigating the cognitive object of present sound”.’
96. I disagree with Lance Cousins’s interpretation here that in this passage Ānanda ‘avoids the two al -
ternatives’ and ‘speaks instead of a paññatti which is not speech’. See Cousins, 2013, 7. According 
to my reading, both Ānanda and Dhammapāla follow the Vibhaṅga commentator in advocating that 
the principal analysis, the niruttipaṭisambhidā, occurs as soon as Pali sounds are heard, though they 
concede that further analysis occurs after speech has been cognized.
97. Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 77,2–8. On the gaṇṭhipadas quoted by Sāriputta, see also  Kief fer-Pülz, 
2013, 22–39, esp. 27.
98. Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 77,20–7 = Dīghanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla I, 37,21–38,21.
99. Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 77, 8–19. Later commentators, such as Coḷiya Kassapa, see both views 
as compatible too. See Vimativinodanī of Kassapa I, 21, and, for a lengthier, erudite summary of this 
whole debate, see Dīghanikāya-abhinavaṭīkā of Ñāṇābhivaṃsa I, 102–8.

--- Page 134 of 286 ---
119
6
Eschatological Encyclopedism: 
Siddhattha’s Anthology
The techniques of organization found in the pedagogical commentaries of 
the reform era are complemented by those of the new handbooks composed 
during the period. Many of these handbooks differ from the earlier condensa-
tions of Buddhist doctrine and practice in that they can be defined more pre-
cisely as anthologies, that is, they cut, rearrange and weave together passages 
mostly from the commentaries in order to create new formulations of Buddhist 
thought more suited to the monastic community’s changed circumstances. The 
creation of anthologies involved also the development of new philological 
practices of compilation, including, for instance, the creation of contents lists, 
detailed referencing and forms of bibliography. This need for textual control 
not only related to the educational function of these works but also, this chap-
ter argues, to the desire for concise, comprehensive and efficient charters for 
Buddhist practice in an age of foreseen civilizational collapse.
In one sense, an intellectual tendency towards condensation and en  -
cyclopedism has been ever-present in Buddhist thought, even in the ear -
liest Pali literature. The Buddha of the Suttas, for instance, often favoured 
explaining his doctrine using numerical lists, such as the four noble truths 
or noble eight-fold path.
1 These mnemonic lists were then systematized and 
consolidated in the conceptual matrices (mātikā) of the Abhidhamma. 2 In the 
Khuddaka Nikāya of the Suttapiṭaka we also find early anthologies of teach -
ings, such as the Khuddakapāṭha (‘Short recitation’), in which different dis-
courses of the Pali canon were collected and rearranged.3 The first evidence of 
the handbook as a distinct genre, however, can be traced to the fourth or fifth 
century. Buddhaghosa composed the Visuddhimagga (‘Path of purification’), 
which, to some extent, summarizes the ideas contained in his commentaries 
on the Suttapiṭaka.
4 After Buddhaghosa we then find Buddhadatta’s two prim-
ers for the Vinaya and two more for the Abhidhamma. 5 We also know of a 

--- Page 135 of 286 ---
120 REWRITING BUDDHISM
few handbooks composed in the second half of the first millennium, such as 
Dhammasiri’s fifth- or sixth-century Khuddasikkhā (‘Minor rules’) and the 
post-fifth-century (?) Saccasaṅkhepa (‘Summary of truth’).6
The reform era witnessed increased interest in the study and compos -
ition of handbooks. Scholar-monks wrote new Pali and Sinhala commentar -
ies for older works, as discussed in the previous chapter, and translated early 
handbooks into Sinhala too. The most striking formal innovation during the 
period, however, was the creation of anthologies of Buddhist doctrine and 
practice.
7 One new anthology in particular stands out for its unique scope. The 
Sārasaṅgaha (‘Compendium of the essence’), composed in the late thirteenth 
century by a monk known as Siddhattha,
8 was the first work in Pali history 
that attempted to collate in a single text information from the three baskets 
of the canon and its commentaries that Siddhattha deemed essential ( sāra) 
for happiness and well-being.
9 Siddhattha’s work, then, provides us with a 
unique insight into the ways in which monastic elites were using their Pali 
textual tradition in practice and how new techniques of compilation enabled 
them to innovate in representing the religious outlook of their canon and its 
commentaries.
10
The ‘essence’ of Buddhism for Siddhattha, in this regard, focuses 
almost exclusively on what Melford Spiro called ‘kammatic’ Buddhism, that 
is, the accrual of merit and better rebirth, not necessarily to the exclusion 
of nirvana as a soteriological goal, but certainly as part of an awareness of 
the ever-tightening karmic limits on human effort.
11 Siddhattha’s soteriology 
calls into question a common sociological assumption in Buddhist history that 
such a shift in emphasis towards kammatic practices primarily developed to 
accommodate the laity as part of the emergence of Buddhism as a cultural 
religion of the masses.
12 The Sārasaṅgaha shows us, however, that the shift 
in orientation towards karma and rebirth may not have been solely a result of 
popular diffusion but was simultaneously a form of Buddhist life cultivated 
at the very heart of elite intellectual culture. The increased emphasis on kam -
matic practices that we see, at least in the Sārasaṅgaha, was rather likely a 
response to the social and political chaos of the era; a conscious decision by 
elites to involve themselves more intensely with the karmic conditions that 
shaped their lives.
6.1.  Embattled Encyclopedists
It is difficult to define the term saṅgaha (lit. ‘gathering together’) since it can 
refer to a variety of different types of compendia. Early handbooks, such as 

--- Page 136 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  121
the aforementioned treatises of Buddhadatta and those of Anuruddha, dis-
cussed in the previous chapter, summarize the meaning (attha) of either the 
Abhidhamma or Vinaya in a new composition. Most of the handbooks of the 
reform era differ, however, in that four of them, namely, Sāriputta’s Vinayas-
aṅgaha (‘Compendium of the Discipline’), Ānanda’s Upāsakajanālaṅkāra 
(‘Ornament of lay followers’), Siddhattha’s Sārasaṅgaha, and the Bhesajja -
mañjūsā (‘Casket of medicine’), can be thought of as anthologies, since they 
compile material largely excised from the canon and its commentarial tradition 
or, in the case of the Bhesajjamañjūsā, other Sanskrit medical works.
13 These 
anthologies are more encyclopedic in nature in that, rather than summarizing a 
single basket of the canon, they attempt to consolidate and organize a diverse 
array of canonical and commentarial material that the tradition had produced 
over more than a thousand years.
14 Ānanda acknowledges and celebrates the 
broad scope of his source material in his opening, stating that ‘craftsmen make 
the best crown with gems coming from several mines’.
15 Siddhattha similarly 
boasts in his colophon of memorizing 100,000 books, though frames this goal 
in terms of his desire to protect his scriptural tradition.
16
This interest in encyclopedism in reform-era Sri Lanka mirrors to some 
degree contemporary developments in Sanskrit literature throughout South 
Asia. The early second millennium, for instance, witnessed the first digests 
of Hindu Dharma ( nibandha), Jain manuals of lay conduct ( śrāvakācāra) 
and also the earliest anthology of Sanskrit court poetry.
17 Sri Lanka played 
an important but little recognized role in this development and monks on 
the island wrote the earliest known Sanskrit grammatical handbook as well 
as the first Sanskrit digest of astronomy and astrology.
18 Sheldon Pollock 
has speculated that the production of digests of Hindu Dharma, in particu -
lar, may be connected with the Turkic invasions of North India, noting that 
‘totalizing conceptualizations of society became possible only by juxtapos -
ition with alternative lifeworlds’, and that, ‘they became necessary only at 
the moment when the total form of the society was for the first time believed, 
by the privileged theorists of society, to be threatened’.
19 
Setting aside possible objections to the specifics of his historical anal -
ysis, Pollock’s general observation concerning the connection between 
encyclopedism and perceived threats to the social order may be useful for 
thinking about the creative influence of the reform era’s chaotic political 
environment, described in part one of this book.
20 Many of the authors of 
these reform-era handbooks were responding to social and political changes 
that often had directly impacted their lives. We learn from the colophon to the 
Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, for instance, that Ānanda composed his work in exile in 
Pāṇḍya country in South India.
21 Remembering the events that had caused him 
to flee to South India, he writes that:

--- Page 137 of 286 ---
122 REWRITING BUDDHISM
When the whole island of Laṅkā was destabilized (samākula) by the fire 
of the Damiḷas, in order to protect themselves for the future growth of 
the teaching, the elders came and resided there. They were like banners 
[to the island of] Tambapaṇṇi, always abiding in the pasture land of the 
true Doctrine, preserving the tradition.
22
It is likely that Ānanda here was referring to the rule of the anti-Buddhist 
Kāliṅga king Māgha (1215–36), who having invaded Sri Lanka with an army 
of South Indian mercenaries remained a destructive force in Buddhist pol -
itics until his death in 1255.23 These political events radically altered Ānanda’s 
social environment and in the opening of his work he states that he composed 
the treatise for those he describes as ‘people who recently became pious’ 
 (abhinava-sādhujana), likely pointing to the fact that his benefactors in Pāṇḍya 
country had only latterly begun to favour his Buddhist tradition. He explains 
too that the expanded scope of his work was suitable for these newcomers 
(abhinavāvatāri) who were not satisfied with an older work on lay conduct, 
the Paṭipattisaṅgaha (‘Compendium of conduct’).
24 Ānanda is explicit then 
that his encyclopedic concerns were inspired by existential threats to his reli -
gious community and the perceived need to protect and transmit his religious 
heritage in a new social environment.
Our author Siddhattha, unlike Ānanda, never directly addresses his spe-
cific social circumstances, though we know that the upheaval Ānanda experi-
enced persisted late into the thirteenth century. The colophon to the Sārasaṅgaha 
states that Siddhattha was the governor (pati) of the Dakkhiṇārāma monastery, 
a temple possibly located in Poḷonnaruva, and that he was the last pupil of his 
teacher, Buddhappiya.
25 We can tentatively identify this Buddhappiya with the 
thirteenth-century scholar-monk who composed the Pajjamadhu (‘Nectar of 
verse’), an ornate, devotional poem to the Buddha. We know that other pupils 
of Buddhappiya, such as Vedeha, author of the Rasavāhinī (‘Stream of aes-
thetic moods’), likely wrote during the reign of Parākramabāhu II (1236–70) 
and it is reasonable to think that Siddhattha was also active towards the end of 
his rule, if not shortly after.
26
The relatively long reign of Parākramabāhu II and its eulogistic portrayal 
in the Cūḷavaṃsa (‘Little history’) masks the fact that his beleaguered rule 
was marred by continuous wars with foreign invaders, in particular Māgha, 
who we discussed above, the ascendant Pāṇḍya kings, Sundara Pāṇḍya (a. 
1251) and Vīra Pāṇḍya (a. 1253/4), who record military victories in Sri Lanka 
between 1258–63, and the Javanese king Candrabhānu, who invaded twice 
in 1247 and 1261. Such was Parākramabāhu II’s frailty that his forces were 
only able to enter Poḷonnaruva in 1262, twenty-six years after his coronation, 
as a result of a fragile peace brokered by Vīra Pāṇḍya, who, having killed 

--- Page 138 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  123
Candrabhānu alongside Parākramabāhu’s forces, reinstated Candrabhānu’s 
son to maintain a fragmented political landscape on the island advantageous 
to his South Indian kingdom.
27
Ensconced for much of his reign on the rocky outcrop of Daṁbadeṇiya 
situated 150 kilometres southwest of Poḷonnaruva, Parākramabāhu II’s strug-
gle to protect and preserve his power in a small fortress mirrors somewhat the 
battle of Siddhattha, our reform-era archivist, who was intent on protecting the 
essence of his religion from destruction and decline.
28 These events, we can 
speculate, may have fuelled Siddhattha’s karmic and eschatological interests. 
The first twelve chapters of his work, for instance, broadly focus on buddhas, 
in particular, future buddhas, the Dhamma and Saṅgha as objects of devotion 
and sources of merit, with a particular interest in their ritual veneration. After 
three short chapters dealing with morality, meditation and nirvana, perhaps 
consciously echoing the arrangement of Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga (‘Path 
of purification’),
29 Siddhattha attends solely to issues of karma and rebirth. 
He describes in chapters sixteen to twenty-four different types of karma and 
their consequences and continues in chapters twenty-five to thirty-four to cat-
egorize the various living beings in the universe and the different types of 
rebirth possible. He concludes his work with six detailed chapters describing 
the life-cycle and physical attributes of the universe.
30
G.P. Malalasekera wrote with some bemusement about the work’s focus 
that, it is ‘a curious medley of matter of diverse interest, jumbled together any-
how, with no attempt at arrangement.’31 We do not, however, need to assume, 
like Malalasekera, that the work had been ‘tampered with by later editors’ 
to account for its karmic and eschatological interests. Siddhattha’s focus can 
make sense if we view it as a hopeful response to his political circumstances, 
one that saw in the chaos of his era signs and portents of a new buddha age in 
the distant future.
32 As Steven Collins once noted, ‘just as one can be sure that 
knowledge of the truth will fade so one can (now, in the present) be reassured 
that someday – even if theoretically very far distant – there will be Buddhas 
to rediscover it’.33 It is relevant in this respect that in his colophon Siddhattha 
explicitly declares that he desired to become a bodhisattva himself, that is, 
a buddha-to-be, and, in comparing his own path with the previous lives of 
Gotama Buddha, dedicates the merit accrued in writing the work to his fulfil -
ment of the ten perfections of a bodhisattva:
… with this merit, in birth after birth until enlightenment,
having fulfilled all perfections – that is, by giving like Sasarāja,
being moral like Saṅkhapāla, in renouncing like Hatthipāla,
being wise like Sānaka, having energy like king Janaka,
by being patient like Khantivāda, truthful like Sutasoma,

--- Page 139 of 286 ---
124 REWRITING BUDDHISM
determined like Mūgapakkha, by being kind like Ekarāja,
and having equanimity like Lomahaṃsa –
may I obtain the ultimate, perfect enlightenment
and teach the immaculate four truths to all living beings.
34
Siddhattha is but one of a number of scholar-monks in the reform era who 
primarily aspired to buddhahood or at least better rebirths instead of nirvana.
35 
This shift in attention away from nirvana to the attainment of a remote and 
distant buddhahood involved, perhaps paradoxically, an intensified engage -
ment with the world, since it was the main task of a bodhisattva to accumulate 
vast merit capable of producing a birth in which buddhahood is possible.
36 We 
can possibly view the spread of the bodhisattva ideal among elites during the 
reform era as a lingering residue of the esoteric Buddhist practices cultivated, 
in particular, when the Abhayagiri was at the height of its powers before the 
tenth century.
37 Yet there is only so far that such external contact can be used as 
a total explanation for cultural change. For whether or not the bodhisattva path 
as imagined by the Mahāvihāra developed, even in part, due to attraction or 
rivalry with the previous era’s Mahayana and Tantric practices, it is clear from 
reform-era writings that the pursuit of buddhahood was a genuine response to 
the chaos of the reform period and that Mahāvihāran monks created a concep-
tual framework for this path from within their own Pali tradition.
6.2.  Authority, Control and the Art   of   the  Anthology
We have already seen in the preceding chapters how the intertwined exigen-
cies of staving off religious decline and establishing monastic unification had 
brought about a new systematicity in the way the Saṅgha handled its scrip-
tural tradition. The anthologists, in this regard, shared the same desire for 
systematicity, concision and comprehensiveness as the reform-era commen -
tators, indicated in particular by the word sāra (‘essence’) found in the title 
of Siddhattha’s Sārasaṅgaha, or ‘Sārattha’-saṅgaha (‘essential meaning’) as 
attested by later tradition;
38 a word which, as discussed in chapter five, denotes 
both semantic totality and also compact utility.39
Like the commentators, the anthologists employed new philological 
approaches to recover and control this essence. One such technique that 
became pervasive in reform-era works was the introduction of a contents list 
at the beginning of each handbook, often referred to as a mātikā (‘matrix’), 
providing the chapter divisions of the work. Prior to the reform era, the only 
handbook to include such a list was Dhammasiri’s fifth- or sixth-  century  
Khuddasikkhā.40 There is no other evidence, as far as I am aware, of the 

--- Page 140 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  125
use of a contents list in works contemporary with Dhammasiri, even in 
Sanskrit, and this possibly represents the first use of such a metatextual 
device in South Asian intellectual history. The list re-emerges in Sāriputta’s 
Vinayasaṅgaha and can be found in the other anthologies of the era, includ -
ing the Sārasaṅgaha, the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, the Bhesajjamañjūsā and 
the Daivajñakāmadhenu (‘Wish-fulfilling cow of divine insight’). The 
device also emerges outside of the Sri Lankan tradition in contemporary 
twelfth-century works, such as the Kṛtyakalpataru (‘Wish-fulfilling tree of 
rites’), a manual of Dharmaśāstra  or Hindu law, though it is referred to there 
as the ‘introduction’ (pratijñā).
41
The term mātikā has a long history in Buddhist thought. It refers most 
commonly to the lists of phenomena that were derived from the Suttas 
and systematized in the Abhidhamma.
42 These lists of entities, sometimes 
referred to also as uddesa (‘topics’), begin certain Abhidhamma texts, 
such as the Vibhaṅga (‘Analysis’), and are then explained at length in the 
so-called niddesa (‘explication’) section. Even in certain Suttas, such as the 
Bhaddekaratta Sutta  (‘One fortunate attachment’), the Buddha expli  citly  
separates his discourse into an initial summary ( uddesa) followed by an 
extended explanation (vibhaṅga).43 Commenting on this Sutta, Buddhaghosa 
defines uddesa simply as mātikā.44 Writing sometime after the seventh cen -
tury, Dhammapāla adds here that, ‘He (Buddhaghosa) uses [the word] mātikā 
as it (i.e. the ‘summary’) is like a mother ( mātā) since it is engaged in pro-
ducing words of explication ( niddesapada).’45
The exegetical character of the early mātikā continues in the commen -
tarial tradition in the form of exegetical schemas (also called mātikā) used to 
guide commentarial analysis, as discussed in the previous chapter. 46 There is 
a clear conceptual continuity, then, throughout the tradition’s history in the 
productive and exegetical function of these lists.
47 In the reform-era hand -
books, however, we begin to see a subtle shift in the perceived role played by 
these schemas. Sāriputta, for instance, when defining the term mātikā used to 
introduce the contents list of his Vinaya handbook, differs from previous tradi-
tion by explicitly stating that this schema serves as a ‘finding device’ in that it 
enables those searching for a particular disciplinary judgement to find it easily 
and thus remove their doubts ( kaṅkhā).
48 It is perhaps for this reason that the 
contents lists of the anthologies were more elaborate than the exegetical sche-
mas of the commentaries. See, for instance, the contents list of Siddhattha’s 
Sārasaṅgaha:
This here is the contents list (mātikā):
(1) The resolve of buddhas, etc.; (2) the marvellous deeds of the teacher; 
(3) the five disappearances; (4) defining a Wheel-Turning monarch; 

--- Page 141 of 286 ---
126 REWRITING BUDDHISM
(5) characterizing the shrines of buddhas and Wheel-Turning monarchs; 
(6) the benefits of sweeping [a shrine]; (7)  the marvel of the Dhamma; 
(8), the marvel of the Saṅgha; (9)  defining sleep; (10) explaining 
dreams; (11) exchanging things belonging to the Buddha and Dhamma; 
(12) types of refuge; (13) types of morals; (14) meditation; (15) nirvana 
(anālaya); (16) disrespecting the [three] jewels; (17) defining the types 
of karma; (18)  karma with immediate [consequences]; (19) defining 
false views; (20) the karma of finding fault with the noble; (21) the dan-
ger of deceit; (22) types of envy; (23) characterising the three-fold fire; 
(24) meritorious karma, such as, giving; (25) specifying the nutriments 
of living things; (26) types of reproductive structure of living things; 
(27) exchanging male and female genders; (28) types of women; (29) 
types of eunuch (paṇḍaka); (30) types of dragons; (31) types of snakes; 
(32) types of ghost; (33) types of demigod; (34) types of god; (35) the 
evolution of the earth; (36) earthquakes; (37) explaining rain and wind, 
etc.; (38) miscellaneous discussions; (39) extraordinary powers; (40) the 
form of the world.49
These contents lists usually give the book’s chapters in order and are often 
composed in verse, presumably to facilitate memorization. Handbooks, like 
the Sārasaṅgaha, clearly demarcate the beginning and end of each chapter by 
citing the name of the topic as given in the contents list. Echoing older textual 
models, Siddhattha presents each chapter, at least at the outset, as an exegesis 
on the wording of the topic given in the contents. This all helps bind the work’s 
content to its organizational structure and allows the reader to browse topics 
of interest more easily.
Another complementary innovation that we find in the anthologies of the 
reform era is that authors provide detailed information about the works used as 
source material. Unlike older commentaries and handbooks, for instance, there 
is an increasing tendency in works such as the Sārasaṅgaha and, to a lesser 
extent, the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, to cite with great specificity the authoritative 
source for a particular passage or quotation.
50 While Siddhattha usually pro-
vides the name of his source immediately after citing a particular text, on occa-
sion he also innovatively chooses to provide a list of the sources he has used at 
the very end of a longer passage or chapter in the form of a bibliography. This 
enables him to seamlessly weave his disparate source material together with -
out interruption. We can speculate that this strategy also allowed him to mask 
the fact that some passages in his work cannot be traced to any of the texts that 
he cites as sources.
51 The occasional preference for endnotes rather than in-text 
citations is most pronounced in his final discussion of cosmology (lokaṭṭhiti ) 

--- Page 142 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  127
where the entire chapter is appended with a long list of authoritative sources, 
the beginning of which is as follows:
In this chapter, then: (1) the mode of destroying and establishing an eon 
(kappa) due to three causes is taken from the Aggañña Sutta (‘What is 
primary’) in the Dīgha Nikāya and the Visuddhimagga; (2) how the seat 
of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa) is established is mentioned in the commen-
tary on the Mahāpadāna Sutta (‘Great lineage’) in the Dīgha Nikāya; 
(3) the two-fold division of an established eon as either ‘empty’ or ‘not 
empty’ is mentioned in the commentary on the history of Padumuttara 
Buddha in the Buddhavaṃsa (‘History of the buddhas’); (4) the analysis 
(vibhāga) of the size and motion of the moon and sun is mentioned in 
the commentary on the Aggañña Sutta, etc.; (5) the seizing [of the sun] 
by Rāhu (i.e. an eclipse), furthermore, is mentioned in the commentary 
on the Devaputtasaṃyutta in the Saṃyutta Nikāya …
52
Chiara Neri in a recent pioneering study has pointed to a couple of passages 
in the Sārasaṅgaha where Siddhattha explains the purpose of such detailed 
referencing.
53 Early on in his work he specifically asks the question, ‘What is 
the purpose in saying “this here is stated in such and such a source (ṭhāna)”?’54 
Siddhattha’s answer indicates that he was concerned primarily with the legit -
imacy and credibility of his sources, in particular the authoritative status of his 
commentarial material, which by far represents the main source of information 
for his handbook.
He first paraphrases a discussion found in Sāriputta’s Vinaya subcom-
mentary, already discussed in our previous chapter, where commentaries are 
referred to as the ‘miscellaneous teachings’ (pakiṇṇakadesanā) of the Buddha 
himself since ‘only the perfectly enlightened one uttered the method (kkama) 
of commenting on the meaning of the three baskets’. He continues, ‘only the 
miscellaneous teachings that were initiated by the Buddha here and there are 
called a commentary (aṭṭhakathā ). More generally, however, in some cases 
they are called a commentary ( aṭṭhakathā) and in others a subcommentary 
(ṭīkā).’ Siddhattha, then, differs from Sāriputta by including here even the sub-
commentaries as ‘teachings initiated by the Buddha’ and it is noteworthy that 
he also cites doctrinal handbooks in his anthology, further indicating that these 
works were now treated as commentaries.
55 Siddhattha viewed his sources as 
part of a tradition established by the Buddha and our anthologist concludes 
that, ‘therefore when a source is specified the wise understand this well’.
56
These references, according to Siddhattha, were not only provided to 
lend authority to his work but served a practical purpose in that they could act 
as a guide for students who wished to study a topic in more detail. He writes at 

--- Page 143 of 286 ---
128 REWRITING BUDDHISM
the end of his thirty-eighth chapter, to quote Chiara Neri’s translation, that ‘it 
is necessary to refer back [to the quoted texts] continually so as to understand 
the true essence (sāra) [of these teachings] and furthermore to understand the 
essence [of the teachings] not explained here’.
57 To this end, the references 
in the Sārasaṅgaha act as a further matrix that orientates and organizes the 
reader’s systematic investigation of the Pali textual tradition as a whole. The 
effect of this ‘binding back’ into his sprawling textual heritage is that, through 
the lens of the anthology, the canon and its commentaries appear organized 
and coherent and can be studied as such.
58 By shifting the framework in which 
the Pali textual tradition is analysed, Siddhattha, with the aim of conserving 
the tradition of the Mahāvihāra, is able to innovate in the way he represents the 
essence of his tradition and can provide a creative reading of this material to 
accommodate the interests of his contemporary monastic community.
6.3.  Buddhology, Eschatology and Immanence
We can better appreciate the creativity inherent in the practice of compilation 
by exploring in more detail the emphasis the Sārasaṅgaha places on Buddhol-
ogy, eschatology and karma, characterized, in particular, by the cultivation 
of merit and the pursuit of better rebirths. This reformulation of what was 
thought to be essential in the Buddha’s teachings represented a marked shift 
from the earliest tradition. Siddhattha, for instance, spends a good forty-three 
pages in the Pali Text Society edition discussing the ‘form of the world’ and 
only one-and-a-half on the topic of nirvana. Rather than viewing these topics 
as a ‘curious medley’ with little connection to one another, it is possible by 
exploring how Siddhattha knits together in his anthology diverse topics, such 
as the portents of dreams and the cleaning of shrines, to discern how they form 
part of a coherent religious orientation.
The work’s fundamental concern with the bodhisattva path is apparent 
at the outset where it begins with a chapter dedicated to the formal ‘undertak-
ing’ (abhinīhāra) of buddhahood, that is, the resolution one makes to become 
a buddha when entering the bodhisattva path.
59 Excised almost exclusively 
from the opening or nidāna to the commentary on the Khaggavisāṇa Sutta 
(‘Rhinoceros horn’), Siddhattha includes detailed descriptions of the length of 
time needed to achieve buddhahood, the eight prerequisites needed to make 
such an undertaking, as well as details on when and how a buddha arises in 
the world. He includes, for instance, information that buddhahood takes a 
minimum of ‘four incalculables and one hundred thousand eons’ to achieve 
and that to make a formal aspiration to buddhahood one must be a human, a 
male, a renunciate, have the capacity to achieve Arahantship, possess excellent 

--- Page 144 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  129
qualities, have performed exceptional deeds of self-sacrifice, harbour the 
strong desire to achieve the goal and, importantly, make one’s formal aspir -
ation only after having personally seen a buddha.
This commentarial introduction originally served to contextualize the 
commentator’s subsequent discussions on the nature of a paccekabuddha 
(‘solitary buddha’), so-called because these buddhas do not teach others and 
live, supposedly like rhinoceroses, as solitary ascetics. Siddhattha, however, 
skilfully excises key passages from the commentary and uses them as a source 
to teach the doctrinal technicalities and prerequisites of making an aspiration 
to pursue buddhahood.
60
We can detect a concern in Siddhattha’s work also for information on 
how one can gain certainty that buddhahood will be obtained. It is in this 
light that we can understand the two chapters in the first quarter of his work 
concerning sleep ( niddā) and dreams (supina).
61 He shows an interest in 
explan ations of how we dream as well as the types of dream one can have, 
in particular prognosticatory dreams (pubbanimittabhūta).62 These dreams are 
further classified by the level of truth (sacca) that one can derive from such 
visions. The omens from prognosticatory dreams, for instance, are regarded by 
the commentarial tradition as entirely true (ekantasacca).
63 Siddhattha’s main 
concern in his chapter are the five great dreams (mahāsupina) that a bodhisat-
tva sees in his last birth before enlightenment. G.P. Malalasekera summarizes 
them as follows:
(i) that the world is his couch with the Himalaya as his pillow, his left 
hand resting on the eastern sea, his right on the western and his feet on 
the southern; (ii) that a blade of tiriyā (kusa) grass, growing from his 
navel touches the clouds; (iii) that white worms with black heads creep 
up from his feet, covering his knees; (iv) that four birds of varied hues 
from the four quarters of the world fall at his feet and become white; 
and (v) that he walks to and fro on a heap of dung, by which he remains 
unsullied.
64
His concern for prognosticatory signs extends to cosmological portents and 
their relationship with the fate of his Buddhist tradition (sāsana). This is most 
evident in the prominent place Siddhattha assigns in his work to the so-called 
‘five disappearances’ ( pañca-antaradhāna), discussed in chapter three , that 
are said to characterize the inevitable decline and destruction of Buddhism, 
namely the gradual disappearance of realization, practice, scripture, monas -
tic signs and relics.
65 Siddhattha’s discussion of this topic is based largely 
on Buddhaghosa’s prophecy in his Aṅguttara Nikāya  commentary con -
cerning the decline of the Buddhist tradition over the course of 5,000 years 

--- Page 145 of 286 ---
130 REWRITING BUDDHISM
after the Buddha’s death. 66 This decline, Buddhaghosa writes, is ultimately 
brought about by the disappearance of scriptural knowledge due to kings 
whose im  morality ( adhammika) causes the rain gods to create a drought. 67 
This results in famine and the ultimate loss of religious patronage due to the 
impoverishment of society.
Siddhattha further cites in the chapter a number of other commentar -
ial accounts of religious decline, focusing in particular on the diminishing 
scope of religious attainments possible in each age. In the most pessimistic but 
widely cited of these accounts, the commentator on the Vinaya states that the 
first 1,000 years after the Buddha’s death will mark the end of the attainment 
of the so-called ‘analytical insights’ (paṭisambhidā) and that after the second 
1,000 years monks will lose the possibility of ‘dry insight’ (sukkhavipassana) 
and, seemingly, of enlightenment itself.
68 The remaining 3,000 years witness 
the disappearance, in turn, of becoming a ‘non returner’ who is spontaneously 
reborn in the realm of form, a ‘once returner’ who has one life left, and finally 
a ‘stream enterer’ who has entered onto the path of enlightenment.
There is a connection in Buddhist eschatology between the decline of 
the Dhamma, the destruction of the cosmos as a whole and the appearance 
of buddhas. Siddhattha writes at length about cosmic decline and he dedi -
cates the final and longest chapter in the work to a detailed description of the 
cosmos, its creation, maintenance and eventual destruction. There, he quotes 
Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga and describes the three ways the universe can 
be destroyed, either by fire, water or wind. With respect to fire, for instance, 
he describes the future appearance of seven suns that will eventually destroy 
the universe in an apocalyptic inferno, ‘leaving no ash like a flame burning 
ghee and oil’.
69
The Buddha’s relationship to this universe is characterized as a three-
fold ‘Buddha field’ (buddhakhetta), divided into his ‘field of birth’ (jātikhetta), 
‘field of influence’ (āṇākhetta ) and ‘field of scope’ (visayakhetta ). His ‘field 
of birth’ extends to the 10,000 world-systems (cakkavāḷa) that shook upon his 
entrance into his mother’s womb. His ‘field of influence’, defined as the scope 
of the power of certain protective Suttas ( paritta), further extends to 100,000 
myriad world-systems.70 Finally, his ‘field of scope’, that is, the scope of his 
omniscience, is boundless and has no spatial limit. It is the end of the Buddha’s 
‘field of influence’, Buddhaghosa writes, that brings about the destruction of 
the 10,000 world systems that constitute his ‘field of birth’ and the world as 
we know it.
71 The root cause of this destruction is said to be the accumulation 
of the so-called ‘three fires’, namely, greed (rāga), hatred (dosa) and delusion 
(moha).
72
Implicit in the stages of religious decline set out in the ‘five disappear -
ances’ is a steady transition from religious transcendence to immanence.73 After 

--- Page 146 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  131
the possibility of transcendent enlightenment and other realizations (adhigama) 
has been lost along with doctrine (pariyatti) and correct practice (paṭipatti), we 
are left with only the outward, worldly signs (liṅga) of the religious tradition – 
those who look like monks, for instance, despite being morally corrupt – and, 
finally, also the Buddha’s relics (dhātu).74 It is perhaps owing to his eschatolog-
ical interests, then, that Siddhattha places such em phasis on relic worship. In a  
detailed description of the types of relics and the benefits of worshipping them in 
chapter five, Siddhattha cites the Buddha’s statement in the Mahāparinibbāna 
Sutta (‘Great passing’) that, ‘Whoever, Ānanda, wanders visiting shrines and 
dies with a serene (pasanna) mind will, after the break-up of the body at death, 
be reborn in a good destiny, a heavenly world.’
75 Siddhattha then immediately 
quotes Buddhaghosa’s explanation:
Here, wanders  visiting   shrines means those who, so far, wander 
(āhiṇḍati), i.e. roam (vicarati), here and there sweeping a shrine’s court-
yard, washing its seats and watering the Bodhi tree. These need no explan-
ation. [The Buddha] reveals that those possessed of a serene heart, even if 
they die having set out with the intention, ‘we will worship the shrine at 
such and such a monastery’, will in fact immediately reappear in heaven.
76
He explains here a stipulation that was originally about making pilgrimages 
to shrines in terms that instead emphasize their maintenance. Of the ritual acts 
mentioned, the sweeping of a shrine in particular appears to have captured the 
monastic imagination in the reform era. Siddhattha devotes an entire chapter 
to the topic including a passage in the Vinaya dedicated to the five benefits of 
sweeping and its commentarial explanation.
77 The passage states, ‘there are 
five benefits in sweeping: one pleases (pasīdati) one’s own mind, one pleases 
the mind of another, deities become delighted, one accumulates merit that 
leads to what is pleasing ( pasādika), and, after the break-up of the body, that 
is, after death, one is reborn in a good destiny, a heavenly world’.
78
We can see from the Buddha’s statement in the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta 
and from this Vinaya passage that even in the very earliest tradition the reli -
gious importance of shrines and their associated ritual acts lay in their role as 
emotional stimulants, in particular their ability to bring about pleasing feel -
ings. The words used here are the verb pasīdati (
pa + sad, Sk. pra + sad), its 
nominal derivative pasāda or its past participle pasanna. It literally means to 
be ‘bright’ or ‘pleased’ but it is also used in the sense of gaining peace, clarity 
and confidence. Summarizing well the wide semantic range of the word, Edith 
Ludowyk-Gyömröi wrote that it refers to ‘a mental attitude which unites deep 
feeling, intellectual appreciation and satisfaction, clarification of thought and 
attraction toward the teacher’.
79

--- Page 147 of 286 ---
132 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Throughout his work but in particular when discussing the ‘marvels’ 
(acchariya) of the Buddha, Dhamma and Saṅgha in his opening chapters, 
Siddhattha emphasizes the role of these devotional objects in inspiring among 
Buddhist devotees this feeling of ‘serene joy’, as Kevin Trainor succinctly 
renders the term.
80 These are not passive aesthetic objects, rather they are 
described as agents inculcating pasāda among devotees: the Buddha is a ‘con-
veyer’ (āvaha) of this emotion, the Dhamma actively ‘pleases’ (pasīdati) and 
monks are ‘stimulators’ (saṃvaddhaka) of pasāda.
81 Even in the earliest trad-
ition this emotion is highlighted as an important karmic condition for bringing 
about a heavenly rebirth and even buddhahood itself. The enacting of whole -
some karma through relic worship was traditionally always tied to the arising 
of the emotion, for, as Jonathan Walters states, ‘such mental pleasure consti -
tutes the operative element of meritorious karma, good actions being effica -
cious to the extent that they are performed with delight …’.
82 A soteriology 
centred on devotion, then, was primarily focused on finding ways to cultivate 
in oneself and others this serene joy since, throughout the tradition’s history, it 
was this emotion that was a primary means of karmic transformation.
This fact is underlined by a charming story from Buddhaghosa’s 
Majjhima Nikāya commentary that Siddhattha relates at the end of his chapter 
on the marvel of the Saṅgha, where an owl comes to worship the Buddha, 
bowing its head and folding its wings together in reverence. The Buddha 
smiles and declares that ‘having cultivated serene joy (pasādetvā) in his heart 
with respect to me and the unsurpassed monastic community, he will not go 
to a bad rebirth for 100,000 eons. Having left the realm of the gods, impelled 
by a virtuous beginning (mūla), he will become an omniscient buddha named 
Somanassa.’
83 The prominence given to such stories reflects Siddhattha’s so -
teriological interest in the transformative capacity of serene joy as one of the 
most potent means by which he could escape the chaos of his social and polit-
ical circumstances and ensure a heavenly rebirth or perhaps even buddhahood 
in the distant future.
6.4.  The Cult of the Book and Monastic Property
The widespread eschatological concerns and increasing popularity of the 
bodhisattva path among high status intellectuals must have rebalanced the 
social order by shifting the collective aim of a good number of monastic elites 
towards rebirth-orientated practices, in particular the cultivation of favour able 
emotions using the island’s aesthetically-charged relics and other pleasing 
traces of Gotama Buddha’s dispensation.
84 The danger, however, of shifting 
religious hierarchies around the immanent power of the Buddha, as embodied 

--- Page 148 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  133
in his shrines in particular, is that it made the monastic elite more vulnerable to 
competition from other religious groups since it could allow the concentration 
of elite monastic power to weaken through the loss of control and possible 
proliferation of relics.
85 Such a concern is evident in Siddhattha’s handling of 
one of the reform era’s most striking developments in ritual practice, namely 
the acceptance of scriptural texts as Buddha relics.
Prior to tenth century, relic worship had been particularly prominent in 
the royally-favoured Abhayagiri fraternity, as a result, perhaps, of the court’s 
interest in their apotropaic power.
86 After the unification of 1165 there is evi -
dence that certain ritual practices found originally in the Abhayagiri appear 
to have continued within the Mahāvihāra, the most prominent of which was 
the practice of depositing scriptural texts in shrines and worshipping them 
as relics of the Buddha. Gregory Schopen famously referred to this long -
standing practice among Mahayana and Tantric Buddhists as the ‘cult of the 
book’.
87 From at least the second century, as Daniel Boucher has described, 
we find Sanskrit inscriptions of short sūtras describing the Buddhist doctrine 
of dependent co-arising (pratītyasamutpāda, P. paṭiccasamuppāda) etched on 
reliquaries (stūpa) in India and Central Asia. 88 We also find, from around the 
sixth century until the twelfth, variations on the following Sanskrit verse sum-
marizing the doctrine of dependent co-arising deposited as a relic itself often 
etched on clay tablets inside reliquaries:
ye dharmā hetuprabhavā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat
teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃvādī mahāśramaṇaḥ.
89
The Buddha spoke of the cause of those dhammas that arise from a cause
and the cessation of them. The great renunciate has taught this much.
The worship of scripture as a relic of the Buddha was based in part on the 
ancient identification of the Buddha with his teachings as reflected in scrip-
tural statements found also in the Pali canon, such as, ‘One who sees the 
Dhamma, Vakkali, sees me; one who sees me, sees the Dhamma.’
90 As the 
central doctrine of Buddhist thought, dependent co-arising was regarded by 
the earliest tradition as the epitome of the Buddha’s teachings. Developing on 
the perceived identity between the Buddha and his doctrine, early Mahayana 
sūtras explicitly equate the doctrine of dependent co-arising with the Bud -
dha himself. In the Śālistamba Sūtra (‘Rice stalk’) the bodhisattva Maitreya 
addresses Śāriputra as follows: ‘He, monks, who sees dependent co-arising 
sees the Dharma; he who sees the Dharma sees the Buddha.’
91 It is not diffi-
cult to see, then, how scripture began to be treated as a relic equivalent to the 

--- Page 149 of 286 ---
134 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Buddha’s body. The middle of the first millennium further witnessed a parallel 
development where these textual formulas became increasingly cryptic and 
were deposited as relics in the form of dhāraṇīs, that is, ‘coded systems of the 
Buddha’s speech’ often consisting of ritualized symbols sometimes in the form 
of mantras. These mantras served in Tantric soteriology to expedite religious 
attainments and also as apotropaic spells for karmic protection.
92
The Pali tradition in Sri Lanka by contrast remained for much of its 
history remarkably ambivalent about such ritual practices.93 This is not to say 
that the ‘cult of the book’ was not found in Sri Lanka. In fact there is some 
evidence that the ritual use of Sanskrit texts, incised as inscriptions or depos-
ited as relics, was not uncommon on the island.
94 While we can conventionally 
speak of these as evidence of Mahayana or Tantric Buddhism in Sri Lanka, 
the boundaries between Buddhist traditions are much harder to differentiate in 
practice. We have already discussed in chapter one that the Abhayagiri frater-
nity, in particular, embraced Tantric Buddhist practices, including the enshrin-
ing of protective dhāraṇīs. One dhāraṇī dating to around the ninth century is 
especially interesting since it was inscribed on six tablets at the Abhayagiri 
monastery in Anurādhapura.
95 It records a discourse between the bodhisattva 
Vajrapāṇi and the Buddha in which the Buddha proclaims that if someone 
were to deposit the sūtra within a reliquary or stūpa then ‘that stūpa would 
become a stūpa of the relics of the “essence” of vajra of all Tathāgatas’.
96
There are some rare examples too of ritual deposits of Pali canonical for-
mulas in Sri Lanka at sites associated with the Abhayagiri in particular. A gold 
foil Pali eulogy, giving the iti pi so formula, for instance, was discovered under-
neath a pillar of a relic shrine (vaṭadāge) at Mädirigiriya, which, according to 
Jeffrey Sundberg, may have been affiliated with the Abhayagiri fraternity. The 
first account of the etching dates it to the construction of the shrine in the 
reign of Aggabodhi VI (733–72). Sundberg, however, has recently speculated 
that it may date to one of the later renovations of the shrine and represent an 
attempt on the part of Abhayagiri monks to ‘accommodate’ or ‘revalorize’ Pali 
religious symbolism.
97 Sundberg has also plausibly suggested that the revival 
of the Mahāvihāra after Sena II (853–87) led the fraternity to adopt some of 
the ritual practices of their competitors and it is possible that the use of the 
Pali canon as a ritual deposit, first among Abhayagiri monks, was incorporated 
by Mahāvihāran monks into their own ritual repertoire during the tenth cen-
tury.
98 It appears, for instance, that Kassapa V (914–23), an ardent supporter 
of the Mahāvihāra, enshrined the Abhidhamma text, the Dhammasaṅgaṇi 
(‘Enumeration of dhammas’), within a temple in Anurādhapura, and that 
this relic became an important ritual object for his successors, in particular, 
Mahinda IV (954–72).
99

--- Page 150 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  135
By the reform era the treatment of scripture as a relic had become for -
mally incorporated within the Pali matrix. Writing in his voluminous com -
mentary on the Vinaya, for instance, Sāriputta states that there are three types 
of shrine to the Buddha (buddhacetiya ), namely a shrine to items he used 
(paribhogacetiya), a shrine to his corporeal relics ( dhātucetiya) and finally a 
shrine to his teachings (dhammacetiya). He defines the latter in terms familiar 
from Mahayana practice as ‘a shrine built having deposited therein a book 
inscribed with dependent co-arising, etc.’
100 Siddhattha in his Sārasaṅgaha 
incorporates this passage in his discussion in chapter five of the shrines of 
Sages and Wheel-Turning kings. He also further dedicates an entire chapter 
to a particularly creative discussion on the legal status of offerings made to 
such a Dhamma shrine and their interchangeability with offerings made to the 
Buddha’s corporeal relics:
101
The exchange of things belonging to the Buddha and Dhamma:  
This here is an explanation. Is it permissible to make an offering to the 
Buddha with the property of the Dhamma or an offering to the Dhamma 
with the property of the Buddha or not? They say that it is permissible 
since there is the statement ( vacana), ‘This, Vāseṭṭha, is a designation 
of the Tathāgata, namely, the body of Dhamma (dhammakāya)’ ( Dīgha 
Nikāya III, 84,
23–4), and also, ‘one who sees the Dhamma, Vakkali, sees 
me’ (Saṃyutta Nikāya III, 120,28–31).
Some, however, say that it is not permissible since, if this were the 
case, due to the statement ‘a monk who would care for me, should care 
for the ill’ (Vinaya I, 302,
19–20), there would be the unwanted consequence 
that one would be allowed to make medicine also for an ill [person] 
using the property of the Buddha (on account of a perceived equivalence 
between the two).
This is baseless since, in the statement ‘a monk who would care 
for me, should care for the ill’, not a single similarity ( ekasadisatā) is 
mentioned between himself (Buddha) and the ill, nor is an equal benefit 
(samaphalatā) mentioned for the one who cares for them. For this here is 
the meaning: One who would care for me by delivering advice (ovāda) 
and instruction (anusāsanī), should care for the ill. By delivering my 
advice, the ill are to be cared for. In terms of any similarity between 
caring for the Buddha and for the ill, however, we do not accept such a 
sense here.
Because of the statement, ‘the doctrine and discipline, Ānanda, that I 
taught and declared to you will be your teacher after my passing’ (Dīgha 
Nikāya II, 154,
6–8); and because it was said, ‘at present, furthermore, it 
is I alone who admonishes and instructs you. After I have completely 

--- Page 151 of 286 ---
136 REWRITING BUDDHISM
passed away these 84,000 buddhas will admonish and instruct you’; 
and because, when praising a learned monk, it was also said, ‘You 
should not call him a “hearer”, Cunda, this one is called “awakened”’ 
(Sumaṅgalavilāsinī III, 912,
11–12); and because the Buddha has the status 
of teacher of the Dhamma, only the first reasoning should be praised (i.e. 
it is permissible to exchange the property of the Buddha and Dhamma). 
This is mentioned in the subcommentary (ṭīkā) on the Vinaya.
102
In this fascinating discussion taken from Sāriputta’s Sāratthadīpanī (‘Illu -
minator of essential meaning’) we can see that reform-era scholar- monks were 
less concerned with the doctrinal implications of the cult of the book than with 
the social and economic consequences of this ritual practice. Sāriputta, for 
instance, cites a number of key passages where the ontological and functional 
equivalence between the Buddha and his Dhamma is made explicit.
His imagined opponent argues against this not on any philosophical 
basis but simply because of what he perceives to be the possible economic 
consequences of this doctrine. Sāriputta’s adversary argues that if the Buddha 
and Dhamma are treated as identical on account of passages comparing them, 
then – since there is also a canonical passage that seems to compare caring for 
the Buddha with caring for the ill – one unwanted consequence of this logic 
would be that the Buddha’s property may be used to care for the ill as well. 
While Sāriputta does not disagree with his opponent’s fear about the distribu-
tion of the Buddha’s wealth, he views the comparison between the Buddha 
and the ill as different from passages comparing the Buddha and Dhamma. It 
is possible, therefore, to transfer property between shrines to the Buddha and 
Dhamma, though this logic should not extend to the comparison between the 
Buddha and the ill, and thus the Buddha’s wealth cannot be used for the com-
monweal. This passage is buried deep within Sāriputta’s Vinaya commentary 
and could easily be missed. Its relative importance, however, for reform-era 
practice is reflected in the fact that Siddhattha highlighted it and placed it as a 
chapter at the beginning of his anthology.
Siddhattha at the end of the chapter departs from Sāriputta’s Vinaya sub-
commentary and, for good measure, reminds his reader also about the legal 
rules concerning the exchangeability of the property of relic shrines and that of 
the monastic community as a whole. He quotes Buddhaghosa’s Vinaya com -
mentary, for instance, as stating:
It is permissible to have the property of a relic shrine maintained with 
the property of either a relic shrine or the Saṅgha. It is not permis sible to 
have the Saṅgha’s property maintained with the property of a relic shrine. 
The property of the Saṅgha, however, which is deposited together with 

--- Page 152 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  137
the property of a relic shrine, can only be maintained when the property 
of the relic shrine is maintained.103
Buddhaghosa here states quite clearly that the property of a shrine cannot be 
transferred to the Saṅgha whereas the Saṅgha’s property can be invested in a 
shrine. We can infer from this that the elite monks who managed such shrines 
must have long formed a fiscally and in part legally independent faction 
within the Saṅgha. There was an economic incentive in the post-  reform era 
then to maintain control of such shrines, not only because of their ritual power 
in facilitating karmic transformation, but because these sites represented a 
common market for the Buddha’s transferable property and the pinnacle of 
wealth within the Saṅgha’s own courtly hierarchy. We can speculate further 
that Dhamma shrines, while a useful karmic technology, represented an eco -
nomic challenge to monastic elites since they had the potential to radically 
distribute the Buddha’s power and wealth on the island through proliferation. 
By incorp orating Dhamma shrines within the Pali matrix and by legislating for  
the transferability of wealth between Dhamma shrines and Buddha shrines, the 
monastic leadership, in principle, was able to maintain control of the Buddha’s 
immanent power on the island within their protectionist relic market.
6.5.  Summary
The Sārasaṅgaha in many ways sits at the nexus of the main strands of thought 
that governed reform-era monastic life. As one of the new anthologies com -
posed during the reform era, the Sārasaṅgaha displays a number of innovative 
philological techniques to extract and organize the semantic essence of the 
Pali scriptural tradition, using contents lists, citations and bibliographies to 
curate the substance of the canon into something that could stand for scrip -
ture in its totality as well as in its compact utility. Siddhattha’s decision to 
present a totalizing depiction of his scriptural tradition in an anthology stems 
perhaps from the threat posed by the social and political turmoil of the age 
and his desire to intervene in these circumstances by pursuing buddhahood. 
This required a new charter for monastic action based on an engagement with 
karmic rituals that could bring vast amounts of merit, centred primarily on 
cultivating the transformative emotion of serene joy. To some extent, then, the 
task of a bodhisattva was to seek out stimulation, in particular from the inspir-
ing traces of the Buddha, Dhamma and Saṅgha. This shift in soteriological 
emphasis among elites, however, while encouraged by the eschatologically 
orientated reforms, also needed to be formalized in Pali theory due to its con-
current potential to undermine the reformed Saṅgha’s authority and economic 

--- Page 153 of 286 ---
138 REWRITING BUDDHISM
hierarchy. Relics and other such sacred stimulants are treated in Siddhattha’s 
manual not only as objects of religious transformation but also as potentially 
destabilizing entities that had to be controlled and legislated for within the 
monastic disciplinary code.
Notes
1. Dessein, 2013.
2. Gethin, 1992. Concerning Vinaya mātṛkās, see Clarke, 2004.
3. V on Hinüber, 1996, §§86–7.
4. V on Hinüber, 1996, §245.
5. V on Hinüber, 1996, §325; §340.
6. See Kieffer-Pülz, 2013, 194–7; 2015, 435. On the authorship of the Saccasaṅkhepa, see V on Hinüber, 
1996, §351; Cousins, 2013; Kieffer-Pülz, 2018, 190, n. 4. Other handbooks from this era include 
Mahāsāmi’s (?) Mūlasikkhā and possibly also the Abhidhamma works of Anuruddha.
7. See Heim, 2004, 21–8.
8. Malalasekera, 1994, 228–9; Sasaki, ed. 1992, vii–xiii; Neri, 2015, 337–9.
9. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 1,5. Reading sāta° instead of sata° in the compound satasukhāvahaṃ. On 
sātasukha, see Aṅguttara Nikāya I, 81,27.
10. I am influenced here by Blackburn, 1999a; Collins, 1990; Heim, 2004, 1–31; McDaniel, 2008, 191–
204; Parkes, 1991.
11. Spiro, 1982.
12. As well as Spiro, 1982, esp. 69–70, see Ames, 1963; Deegalle, 1997; 2006; Keyes, 1995, 86; Rey-
nolds and Hallisey, 1989, esp. 19. This is not to deny that a form of Buddhist public did start to 
emerge during this period or that this was linked to the development of vernacular preaching texts, 
but simply to question whether this process was the sole cause for the kammatic focus of much of the 
literature composed during the reform era and its aftermath. On the connection between eschatologi-
cal notions of decline and popular religion in Japan, see Strathern, 2019, 96.
13. One exception is Vācissara’s Sīmālaṅkārasaṅgaha. Another anthology is the Suttasaṅgaha, though 
attempts to date the work are highly speculative. See Chaudhuri and Guha, eds. 1957, xii–xiii.
14. I use the term ‘encyclopedism’ advisedly to denote the compilation of material from a wide range of 
disciplines, often collected in relation to a single topic. On the history of the term in early modern 
Europe, see Blair, 2013. See also, Blair, 2010, 168–72.
15. Upāsakajanālaṅkāra of Ānanda, 123, v. 4, trans. Agostini, 2015, 2.
16. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 344,20–5.
17. For an overview , see Cox, 2017, 19–22, esp. 19, n. 35; Heim, 2004, 1–31.
18. On the Rūpāvatāra of Dharmakīrti, see Cardona, 1976, 285. On the Daivajñakāmadhenu of Anavam-
adarśin, see Pingree, 1981, 115.
19. Pollock, 1993a, 105–6, also discussed in Heim, 2004, 8.
20. For possible objections, see Brick, 2015, 14–15, also discussed in De Simini, 2016, 428–34.
21. Vācissara, author of the Sīmālaṅkārasaṅgaha, may also have fled to South India during the invasion of 
Māgha, if the author is identical with a Vācissara mentioned in Cūḷavaṃsa 81.17–22. See Kieffer-Pülz, 
1999b; 2020.
22. Upāsakajanālaṅkāra of Ānanda, 358, 15–22, trans. Agostini, 2015, 337–8. I have added the text in 
parentheses.
23. Liyanagamage, 2001a; Kieffer-Pülz, 2015a.
24. Agostini, 2015, xi–xii. The Paṭipattisaṅgaha, for instance, is more closely aligned with the structure 
of the Visuddhimagga. See Young, 2011, 33.
25. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 344,16–17. On the monastery’s possible location, see Sasaki, ed. 1992, viii.
26. It is more likely that Siddhattha is referring here to the thirteenth-century Buddhappiya, author of the 
Pajjamadhu, rather than the eleventh or early twelfth-century author of the Rūpasiddhi. The Sāras-
aṅgaha must date after the 1165 reform since it cites Sumaṅgala. See Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 
105,15–18 = Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala, 201,19–20, cited in V on Hinüber, 1996, §385.
27. Here following Liyanagamage, 1968, 133–59.

--- Page 154 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  139
28. I am inspired here by Whitney Cox’s recent comparison of the monumental character of Bhoja’s 
Śṛṅgāraprakāśa and the same king’s expansive irrigation works at Bhojpur. See Cox, 2012, 61–3.
29. On the influence of the Visuddhimagga on the Sārasaṅgaha’s discussion of meditation, see Neri, 
2015, 339–42.
30. Other scholars have identified patterns in the work’s arrangement of topics. Citing N. Nobuaki’s 
work, which I have not been able to access, Chiara Neri quotes Nobuaki as identifying ‘five macro 
subjects in the chapters of the Ss: Buddha, Dhamma and Saṅgha; spiritual exercises; problems linked 
to kamma in the saṃsaric [sic.] life; the various types of sentient beings; issues concerning the natural 
world.’ See Nobuaki, 1998, 2, cited in Neri, 2015, 338.
31. Malalasekera, 1994, 230.
32. The category ‘millennialism’ has been used in this context as a catch-all description for both the de -
votional, karmic soteriology of the bodhisattva path and its attendant eschatological concerns. For an 
overview of studies relating to Theravada Buddhism and millennialism, see Collins, 1998, 395–413. 
If, as Collins argues, we take millennialism in a Theravada context as ‘an overall category for Bud-
dhist ideas of future felicity associated with Metteyya and other future Buddhas’ (413), then I think 
the term only covers a part of the mentality of scholars such as Siddhattha. While our author certainly 
hoped to be consecrated as a bodhisattva in the presence of Metteyya, he is aware that this will only 
occur in the unfathomable future and much of his concern as a bodhisattva is drawn rather to karmic 
practices in the here and now.
33. Collins, 1998, 394.
34. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 344,6–13:
… tena puññena ābodhā jātijātiyaṃ
sasarājā va dānena saṅkhapālo va sīlavā
hatthipālo va nekkhamme sānako viya paññavā
viriyavā janakarājā va khantivādo va khantiyā
saccavā sutasomo va adhiṭṭhāne mūgapakkha va
mettāya ekarājā va lomahaṃso v’upekkhavā
pūretvā pāramī sabbā patvā sambodhim uttamaṃ
bodheyyaṃ sabbasattānaṃ catusaccaṃ sunimmalaṃ.
35. Here is an admittedly tentative list of authors, who either directly state that they aspired to buddha -
hood or who hint at it. In this regard, see also Dimitrov, 2016, 226; 230; 375; 548.
Text Author Date Aspiration
Amatarasadhārā Upatissa 900–1000 Buddhahood
Vaṃsatthappakāsinī Upatissa? 900–1000 Buddhahood
Mahābodhivaṃsa Upatissa 900–1000 Liberate all beings
Jinālaṅkāra Buddharakkhita 1157 Buddhahood
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī Sumaṅgala 1165–1232 To see Metteyya
Pajjamadhu Buddhappiya 1200–1300 Rebirth for others
Sārasaṅgaha Siddhattha 1250–1300 Buddhahood
Sumaṅgalappasādanī Saṅgharakkhita after 1232 Rebirth for others
Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa Anon. 1236–66 Buddhahood
Payogasiddhi Be Medhaṅkara 1272–84 To see Metteyya
Jinacarita Medhaṅkara 1236–70 Buddhahood
Sambandhacintāsannaya Gotama after 1232 Buddhahood
Pūjāvaliya Mayūrapāda 1266 Buddhahood
Pāramīsataka Dhammakitti 1300–50 Buddhahood
Saddharmālaṅkāraya Dhammakitti II 1350–1400 Buddhahood
Jinabodhāvalī Dhammakitti II 1350–1400 Buddhahood
36. On the Bodhisattva ideal in Theravada Buddhism, see, in particular, Samuels, 1997.

--- Page 155 of 286 ---
140 REWRITING BUDDHISM
37. See R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, 1966, also cited in Holt, 1991, 66. More generally, Jeffrey Sundberg has 
argued that after the reign of Sena II the Mahāvihāra incorporated a number of  ‘Esoteric Buddhist 
practices’ within their Pali-based religious framework, perhaps in order to compete with the apotropaic 
expertise of the Abhayagiri. See, in particular, Sundberg, 2018, 214.
38. Gandhavaṃsa, 72,3–4.
39. The Abhidhammāvatāra, for instance, is described as ‘portable wealth’ (hatthasāra). See 
 Abhidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta, 1,16.
40. Khuddasikkhā of Dhammasiri, 88,3–19.
41. See, for instance, Kṛtyakalpataru of Lakṣmīdhara I, 4,5.
42. See Gethin, 1992. On the development of the Abhidhamma, see Anālayo, 2014.
43. See the whole of the Vibhaṅgavagga of the Majjhima Nikāya III.131–42, in particular the Bhaddeka-
ratta Sutta (131). I have followed Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation of these terms. 
See Ñāṇamoli and Bodhi, trans. 1995, 1039–41.
44. Papañcasūdanī of Buddhaghosa V , 1,11.
45. Majjhimanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla III, 366, 8–9: yasmā pana niddesapadānaṃ jananiṭṭhāne  ṭhitattā 
mātā viyā ti mātikā ti vuccati.
46. See chapter five. The productive sense of mātikā as a ‘point of origin’ can be found throughout Pali 
commentarial literature. Maria Heim has shown, for instance, that the Kathāvatthu was regarded as 
canonical on the basis that it was thought to be an expansion of a mātikā laid down by the Buddha. 
See Heim, 2018, 42. I differentiate these uses from those of the reform era, however, as our ‘contents 
lists’ served the additional purpose of allowing students to systematically browse a work of interest.
47. See for instance, Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 25,10–11; Mohavicchedanī of Kassapa, 2,10–13; Vimativ-
inodanī of Kassapa I, 9. See also, Gethin, 1992, 161.
48. Vinayasaṅgahapurāṇaṭīkā of Sāriputta, 2, 12–16: idāni sukhagahaṇatthaṃ vattabbavinicchayaṃ sakal-
am pi saṅgahetvā mātikaṃ ṭhapento “tatrāyaṃ mātikā” ti ādim āha, vijjamānesu hi  mātikāp adesu ye 
yaṃ yaṃ vinicchayaṃ kātum icchanti, te mātikāpadānasārena (corr. ° anusārena) taṃtad eva gahetvā 
olokentā attano kaṅkhaṃ vinodenti. I borrow this expression ‘finding devices’ from Blair, 2010, 
117–72.
49. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 1,6–23.
tatrāyaṃ mātikā
buddhādi-m-abhinīhāro kiriyaṃ satthu-m-abbhutaṃ
pañca antaradhānāni cakkavattī-vibhāvanaṃ.
saṃbuddhacakkavattīnaṃ cetiyānaṃ nidassanaṃ
sammajjanānisaṃsañ ca dhammasaṅghānam abbhutaṃ.
niddāvibhāvanañ c’eva supinassa ca dīpanaṃ
buddhadhammānam āyatto (corr. āyatta°) vatthūnaṃ parivattanaṃ.
pabhedo saraṇasīlānaṃ kammaṭṭhānam anālayaṃ
agāravo ca ratanānaṃ kammabhedavibhāvanaṃ.
ānantariyakammaṃ ca micchādiṭṭhivibhāvanaṃ
ariyūpavādakammañ ca kohaññadīnavam pi ca.
maccherānaṃ pabhedo ca tividhagginidassanaṃ
dānādipuññakammañ ca sattāhāravivecanaṃ.
yonippabhedo sattānaṃ pumitthiparivattanaṃ
ṭhīnaṃ paṇḍakanāgānaṃ supannānañ ca bhedanaṃ.
petāsurānaṃ devānaṃ bhedā paṭhavivaḍḍhanaṃ
mahīkampaṃ tathā vuṭṭhivātādīnaṃ pakāsanaṃ
pakiṇṇakakathā iddhi lokasaṇṭhānam eva cā ti.
50. Similarly , see Kieffer-Pülz, 2015b, 438–9.
51. On the ‘hidden texts’  cited in the Sārasaṅgaha, see Neri, 2015, 342–4. Also, Blair, 2010, 134.
52. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 343,13–22:
ettha pana tīhi kāraṇehi kappassa vināsasaṇṭhahanākāro dīghanikāye aggaññasutte ca visuddhimagge 
ca āgato. bodhimaṇḍassa saṇṭhahanākāro dīghanikāye mahāpadānasutta- vaṇṇanāya vutto. saṇṭhitassa 
kappassa suññāsuññavasena duvidhādibhedo buddhavaṃse  padumuttarabuddhavaṃsa-vaṇṇ anāyaṃ 
vutto. candimasuriyānaṃ parimāṇagamanādivibhāge (corr. °vibhāgo) aggaññasutta-vaṇṇanādisu 
vutto. rāhuggahaṇaṃ pana saṃyuttanikāye devaputtasaṃyutta-vaṇṇanāya vuttaṃ.
53. Neri, 2015, 342; 347.
54. My translation dif fers from Neri, 2015, 347.
55. For a list of the Sārasaṅgaha’s sources, see Neri, 2015, 349–82.
56. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 26,31–8:

--- Page 156 of 286 ---
 ESCHA TOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPEDISM: SIDDHATTHA’S ANTHOLOGY  141
kim ettha-m-idam asukaṭhāne vuttan ti kathane payojanan ti ce. sammāsambuddhen’ eva hi tiṇṇaṃ 
pi piṭakānam atthavaṇṇanākkamo bhāsito. tattha tattha bhagavatā pavattitā pakiṇṇakadesanā yeva hi 
aṭṭhakathā nāma. yebhuyyena pana aññattha aṭṭhakathā, aññattha ṭīkā nāma. tasmā ṭhānaniyame kate 
medhāvino idaṃ suṭṭhu gaṇhantī ti. idam ettha ṭhānaniyame prayojanan ti.
57. Sārasaṅgaha, 278,21–3, cited and translated in Neri, 2015, 342.
58. I borrow the idea of a commentary ‘binding’ a root text back within a wider textual tradition from 
Hallisey, 2017.
59. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 2–6, trans. Neumann, 1891.
60. Paramatthajotikā II of Dhammapāla I, 46,15–52,9, trans. Bodhi, 2017, 401–7.
61. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 76–82.
62. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 78,23–5. On sleepiness and sleep, see Gethin, 2017.
63. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 79,13–14.
64. Malalasekera, 1938, 326; Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 80,41–82,25.
65. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 27–37. See chapter four.
66. Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa I, 87,1–93,26. See also Clark, 2018; Endo, 2013, 121–42.
67. Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa I, 88,3–14.
68. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 36,40–37,3, citing Samantapāsādikā VI, 1291,18–23.
69. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 306,4–8, citing Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosa, 351,23–6. See also, Aṅgut-
tara Nikāya IV , 7.62, Sattasuriya Sutta.
70. On paritta, see most recently Shulman, 2019.
71. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 302,12–303,14.
72. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 314, 1–16. That a new buddha arises only after the cosmos has been de -
stroyed is made clear in the Anāgatavaṃsa Desanā. See Meddegama, trans. 1993, 26.
73. On the analytical distinction between ‘immanentism’ and ‘transcendentalism’, see Strathern, 2019, 
27–106.
74. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 28,14–32,20.
75. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 40, 21–4, citing Dīgha Nikāya  II, 141, 9–11: ye hi keci Ānanda cetiyacāri -
kam āhiṇḍantā pasannacittā kālaṃ karissanti, sabbe te kāyassa bhedā param maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ 
lokam uppajjissanti. See also Schopen, 1997, 115–18.
76. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 40,24–30, citing Sumaṅgalavilāsinī of Buddhaghosa II, 582,20–5: tattha ce-
tiyacārikam āhiṇḍantā ti ye tāva tattha tattha cetiyaṅgaṇaṃ samajjantā āsanāni dhovantā bodhiṃhi 
udakaṃ āsiñcantā āhiṇḍanti vicaranti. tesu vattabbam eva n’atthi. “asuka-  vihāre cetiyaṃ vandis -
sāmā” ti nikkhamitvā pasannacittā antarā kālaṃ karontā pi anantarā yeva sagge patiṭṭhahissanti yevā 
ti dassetī ti.
77. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 42–4.
78. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 42,4–8: pañcānisaṃsā sammajjaniyā; sakacittaṃ pasīdati, paracittaṃ pasī-
dati, devatā attamanā honti, pasādikasaṃvattanikaṃ puññam upacināti, kāyassa bhedā param maraṇā 
sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokam uppajjatī ti.
79. Ludowyk-Gyömröi, 1943, 82, also cited in Trainor, 1997, 167.
80. Trainor, 1997, 167.
81. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 26, 17–29; 55,27–31; 62,30. Andy Rotman has noted that this experience is 
involuntary for there is a presumption within Buddhist texts ‘that Buddhist cognitive and causal 
realities are natural laws, not religious creations.’ See Rotman, 2003, 561.
82. Walters, 2014, 144.  Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 73, 23–41, citing Papañcasūdanī of Buddhaghosa II, 
16,17–17,9.
83. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 73,38–41, citing Papañcasūdanī of Buddhaghosa II, 17,1–4.
mayi cittaṃ pasādetvā bhikkhusaṅghe anuttare
kappāni satasahassāni duggatiṃ so na gacchati.
devalokā cavitvāna kusalamūlena vodito
bhavissati anantañāṇo somanasso ti vissuto.
84. See chapter seven.
85. See Strathern, 2019, 148–50.
86. Sundberg, 2018, 214.
87. Schopen, 1975.
88. Boucher, 1991.
89. This verse is also found in the Pali canon. See Vinaya I, 40,28–9.
90. Saṃyutta Nikāya III, 120,28–31.
91. Boucher, 1991, 2, citing Poussin, 1913, 70.
92. Davidson, 2009, 141.

--- Page 157 of 286 ---
142 REWRITING BUDDHISM
93. This is not the case for the Theravada world in general. See, most recently, Skilling, 2008.
94. Mudiyanse, 1967; V on Hinüber, 1983. Daniel Drewes, however, has questioned whether the gold 
plates of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā found deposited in an earthenware pot at the 
Jetavanārāma in Anurādhapura were buried for ritual purposes. See Drewes, 2007, 132.
95. Mudiyanse, 1967, 99–105.
96. Schopen, 1982, 104. Schopen identified the inscription on these stones with the Ārya-sarva-
tathāgatādhiṣṭhāna-hṛdaya-guhya-dhātu-karaṇḍa-mudra-nāma-dhāraṇī Sūtra. Chandawimala has 
further identified stones VI and VII with the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, an influential esoteric 
Buddhist work that had a wide circulation in Sri Lanka and an important place in esoteric Buddhist 
practice on the island. Chandawimala, 2016, 165–90. See also Powell, 2018, 5–26; Sundberg, 2017, 
294–9; 2018, 182, n. 222.
97. Sundberg, 2017, 253–5.
98. Sundberg, 2018, 348, n. 451. There is evidence that the scholar-monks of the era viewed the ritual 
veneration of Sanskrit texts as a threat. The Cūḷavaṃsa (41.37–40), for instance, refers to a certain 
dhammadhātu (‘Dhamma relic’) brought by a merchant to Sri Lanka during the reign of Silākāla 
(518–31), who mistakenly took it to be the ‘true doctrine of the Buddha’.
99. The Saddharmālaṅkāraya also refers to the depositing of the Dhammasaṅgaṇi within a Dhamma 
shrine. See Gunawardana, 1979, 230–1; Epigraphia Zeylanica III, 133.
100. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 40,10–19, citing Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I, 172,2–8. See also Skilling, 
1997, 102, n. 35.
101. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 83.
102. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 83, 3–29, citing Sāratthadīpanī  of Sāriputta II, 166, 20–7,10: 
 buddhadhammānām āyattavatthūnaṃ parivattanan ti etthāyaṃ vibhāvanā. dhammasantakena bud -
dhapūjaṃ kātuṃ buddhasantakena vā dhammapūjaṃ kātuṃ vaṭṭati na vaṭṭatī ti. “tathāgatassa vā 
kho etaṃ vāseṭṭha adhivacanaṃ dhammakāyo” (Dīgha Nikāya III, 84,23–4) iti pi ca “yo kho vakkali 
dhammaṃ passati so maṃ passatī” (Saṃyutta Nikāya  III, 120, 28–31) ti vacanato vaṭṭatī ti vadanti. 
keci pana evaṃ sante “yo bhikkhu mam upaṭṭhaheyya so gilānam upaṭṭhaheyyā” (Vinaya I, 302,19–20) 
ti vacanato buddhasantakena gilānassāpi bhesajjaṃ kātuṃ yuttan ti āpajjeyya tasmā na vaṭṭatī ti 
vadanti, tam akāraṇaṃ. na hi “yo bhikkhave mam upaṭṭhaheyya so gilānam upaṭṭhaheyyā” ti iminā 
attano ca gilānassa ca ekasadisatā tad-upaṭṭhānassa vā samaphalatā vuttā. ayaṃ h’ettha attho: yo 
mam ovādānusāsanīkaraṇena upaṭṭhaheyya so gilānam upaṭṭhaheyya. mama ovādakārakena gilāno 
upaṭṭhātabbo ti. bhagavato ca gilānassa ca upaṭṭhānam ekasadisan ti evaṃ pan’ettha attho no ge-
hetabbo (Sāratthadīpanī, na gahetabbo). “yo vo ānanda mayā dhammo ca vinayo ca desito paññatto 
so vo mamaccayena satthā” (Dīgha Nikāya II, 154,
6–8) ti vacanato “ahañ ca pan’idāni eko va tumhe 
ovadāmi anusāsāmi, mayi parinibbute imāni caturāsīti buddhasahassāni tumhe ovadissanti anusāsis-
santī” ti vuttattā ca bahussutaṃ bhikkhuṃ pasaṃsantena ca “na so tumhākaṃ sāvako nāma buddho 
nāma eso, cundā” (Sumaṅgalavilāsinī III, 912,11–12) ti vuttattā ca dhammagarukattā ca tathāgatassa 
pubbanayo eva pasatthataro ti vinayaṭīkāya vuttaṃ.
103. Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha, 83,29–35, citing Samantapāsādikā of Buddhaghosa II, 358,16–21: cetiyassa 
vā saṅghassa vā santakena cetiyassa santakaṃ rakkhāpetuṃ vaṭṭati. cetiyassa santakena saṅghas-
antakaṃ rakkhāpetuṃ na vaṭṭati. yaṃ pana cetiyassa santakena saddhiṃ saṅghasantakaṃ ṭhapitaṃ 
hoti, taṃ cetiyasantake rakkhite rakkhāpitam (Samantapāsādikā, rakkhāpite rakkhitam) eva hotī ti 
cīvarakkhandhakavaṇṇanāya vuttaṃ.

--- Page 158 of 286 ---
Part III
Emotion

--- Page 159 of 286 ---


--- Page 160 of 286 ---
145
7
Sense and Sensibility: 
San·gharakkhita’s Poetics
In seeking to improve their circumstances through the performance of virtu -
ous karma and the accrual of merit, elite reform-era monks sought out reli -
gious stimulation and were focused in particular on cultivating an experience 
of karmically transformative emotions. In the third part of this book we will 
explore how this shift may have contributed to a revalorization of aesthetically 
pleasing literature as a means of such stimulation both on an individual level 
and also within the Saṅgha as a whole. This, to a large degree, meant finally 
embracing traditional theories of aesthetics as developed in the Sanskrit tra -
dition, for it was Sanskrit that had long provided the paradigmatic framework 
for literary expression, in particular in the royal courts of Southern Asia. The 
two textual traditions of court and monastery, however, were not seamlessly 
compatible and we can see in the new literary and devotional works of the 
reform era a conscious reconceptualization of literary eloquence as a virtue 
suited to monastic goals as well as royal amusement. This issue was con -
fronted directly during the reform era most notably by Saṅgharakkhita, who 
wrote after the 1165 reforms and who presided over Vijayabāhu III’s reform 
council, c. 1232–6.
Saṅgharakkhita was one of the most prolific authors of the Pali reform 
period, composing at least seven works in Pali, six of which concerned grammar 
(vyākaraṇa) and poetics (alaṅkāra).
1 Of the works relating to poetry, he com-
posed the Subodhālaṅkāra (‘Lucid poetics’) its mahāsāmiṭīkā (‘Grandmaster 
commentary’) and the Vuttodaya (‘Exposition of metres’), a treatise on met -
rics. The title of his commentary on the Subodhālaṅkāra refers to the fact that 
he composed the work after having risen within the monastic community to 
the position of mahāsāmi or ‘grandmaster’.2 He appears to have composed the 
Subodhālaṅkāra itself before he became grandmaster, most probably between 
1186 and 1232, a period characterized by almost constant war.3 The Cūḷavaṃsa 
records that Vijayabāhu III (1232–6) appointed Saṅgharakkhita to the role and 

--- Page 161 of 286 ---
146 REWRITING BUDDHISM
entrusted him with the education of his eldest son, the future Parākramabāhu 
II (1236–70), with the tooth and alms bowl relics of the Buddha, with the 
Saṅgha and with all the subjects living in Laṅkā.
4 The allusions in this passage 
to Saṅgharakkhita’s sovereignty may not have been entirely rhetorical since 
he was well-connected with the increasingly powerful nobility outside of the 
weakened royal court and dwelt in monasteries that had been donated by pow-
erful warlords.
5 There is also a fourteenth-century Burmese tradition, accord -
ing to G.P. Malalasekera, that Saṅgharakkhita was descended from nobility 
and that he was a distant relative of king Dāṭhopatissa I (639–50).
6
The composition of the Subodhālaṅkāra represented a profound shift in 
Pali literary culture for a number of reasons. It engaged openly, for instance, 
with the cosmopolitan world of Sanskrit pandits, it formally sanctioned sen -
sual, devotional poetry to the Buddha as a religious practice and it set itself the 
aim of disseminating this knowledge throughout the Saṅgha. Those unfamiliar 
with reform-era Buddhism in Sri Lanka may be struck by the seemingly par -
adoxical celebration of passionate devotion to an ascetic who spent much of 
his life teaching the value of dispassion. If we were to take into account only 
the early Buddhist tradition, one would have to admit that there was a certain 
ambivalence, if not antipathy, towards ornate literature or kāvya in Buddhist 
monastic life.
While the Pali canon contains some of South Asia’s oldest examples of 
poetic expression, the Buddha on a number of occasions makes his dislike for 
this literary form known. He states in the Brahmajāla Sutta (‘Supreme net’) 
that poetry is ‘bestial knowledge’ (tiracchānavijjā) and that being a poet is an 
immoral occupation.
7 In the same discourse he criticizes ascetics for continu -
ing to engage in a number of activities associated with court culture, includ -
ing listening to literary recitals ( akkhyāna), and categorizes talk of kings, 
armies and heroes as ‘bestial conversation’ (tiracchānakathā).8 Elsewhere, the 
Buddha criticizes those trained in the rhetorical arts rather than philosoph -
ical enquiry who are unable to question his discourses and who instead are 
content, he states, to listen to ‘mere poetry composed by poets’.
9 Writing in 
the fourth century, Buddhaghosa, when discussing what counts as a ‘literary 
recital’, ‘bestial conversation’ or ‘senseless babble’ (samphapalāpa
) specif-
ically targets Brahmanical court culture and refers a number of times to the 
two Sanskrit epics, the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa.
10
Textual sources, of course, cannot tell us the whole story about early 
Buddhist attitudes to poetry. Still, it is the case that in the Pali tradition no 
independent works of ornate poetry, with the possible exception of the 
Mahāvaṃsa (‘Great history’), were composed in the language for much of 
the first millennium.
11 It is perhaps not surprising then that monks who engage 
in such worldly activity are often perceived as deviating from some Buddhist 

--- Page 162 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  147
ideal type, famously characterized by Max Weber as otherworldly, mystic 
and sense-denying in nature. 12 In his translation of the Subhāṣitaratnakośa 
(‘Treasury of well-turned verse’), a compendium of Sanskrit court poetry com-
piled by a Buddhist monk, Vidyākara, in twelfth-century Bengal, Daniel H.H. 
Ingalls remarked that Buddhist monks ‘could succeed in the court tradition 
only by forgetting that they were Buddhists’.
13 More recently, with respect to 
the same text, Sheldon Pollock has asked in understandable puzzlement, ‘What 
do we make of the fact that a collection of this-worldly poetry, three-quarters 
of it dealing with the physical love of men and women, was prepared at an 
institution for Buddhist renunciates?’
14
As the first treatise on Pali poetics, the Subodhālaṅkāra offers a unique 
insight into a shift in attitude during the reform era among the Saṅgha’s hier -
archy towards the composition of ornate poetry based on Sanskrit models. 
Representing the only surviving explicitly Buddhist work on the subject, the 
Subodhālaṅkāra also potentially sheds light too on how monks in the wider 
region may have thought about poetry, sensuality and their monastic voca-
tion. This chapter then investigates the way in which Saṅgharakkhita abstracts 
theories of poetic eloquence from the Sanskrit tradition and how he uses 
these theories to reframe Buddhist devotion. The most radical contribution 
Saṅgharakkhita makes to Buddhist thought, in this regard, is the central place 
he gives to morality and civility in the composition and appreciation of poetry. 
In fusing eloquence and morality, Saṅgharakkhita not only manages to assimi-
late the intellectual cultures of the monastery and royal court but also provides 
a moral framework for all monks within the Saṅgha to compose and enjoy 
devotional literature. This was necessary since, in the decades before, as we 
will explore in the next two chapters, scholar-monks had begun to compose 
ornate, literary works as a means of inculcating in themselves and others kar-
mically transformative devotional feelings.
15
7.1. Reframing Devotion
Saṅgharakkhita had two main objectives when writing the Subodhālaṅkāra. 
He wanted to formally define the full literary potential of the Pali language, 
which to a large extent meant showing that Pali possessed the same literariness 
as Sanskrit (though he treats literary eloquence as an ideal type not restricted 
to any one particular language). Saṅgharakkhita also intended to demonstrate 
to the wider Saṅgha the compatibility between this literary ideal and Buddhist 
norms by using the Sanskritic model to write devotional poetry to the Buddha.
While he adopts and adapts the latest ideas in Sanskrit literary the-
ory from places as far away as Kashmir, the devotional content of his work 

--- Page 163 of 286 ---
148 REWRITING BUDDHISM
reflects more local literary developments. Prior to the composition of the 
Subodhālaṅkāra, for instance, we find in the tenth century the first treatise on 
Sinhala poetics, the Siyabaslakara, focused similarly on Buddhist devotional 
poetry and inspired by Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa (‘Mirror of literature’) as well as 
a number of twelfth-century devotional works, such as the Amāvatura (‘Flood 
of nectar’) and Jinālaṅkāra  (‘Ornament of the conqueror’).
16 This focus on 
devotion, as discussed in the previous chapter, reflected a wider feeling in the 
reform era that it was increasingly difficult to achieve any religious attainment 
without the help of a massive accumulation of merit.
17 The primary source 
of this merit was devotion to the Buddha, as represented by his relics, the 
Dhamma and Saṅgha. New forms of literature, it seems, had begun to play a 
key role in facilitating this devotion and Saṅgharakkhita’s Subodhālaṅkāra 
is in many respects the culminating reflection on this artistic shift, setting 
out formally a theoretical model for the composition and appreciation of Pali 
devotional poetry. After each poetic figure, Saṅgharakkhita wastes no oppor -
tunity to furnish his work with an illustration in praise of the Buddha. Take, 
for instance, the following verse used to illustrate the poetic merit of delicate 
sounds (sukhumālatā):
romañcapiñcharacanā sādhuvādāhitaddhanī
laḷanti ’me munimeghummadā sādhusikhāvalā.
18
These peacock-like devotees,
fanning the feathers of their wings
and crying in appreciation,
frolic in frenzied madness
at [the sight of] the cloudlike sage.
Saṅgharakkhita uses the light, pitter-pattering alliteration of the verse here to 
evoke the image of rain and cleverly exploits the Sanskritic trope of excited 
peacocks awaiting the rains as a metaphor for the enthralment felt by Buddhist 
devotees at the sight of their master. The metaphor skilfully encompasses all 
objects in the comparandum. The Buddha is a raincloud, the devotees are pea-
cocks, the devotees’ utterances of approbation are the peacocks’ cries and their 
feather fans (a sign of royalty) are their wings. Why the peacocks celebrate the 
rains, furthermore, is not made explicit and is left open to suggestion. A skilled 
reader, however, knows that peacocks rejoice at the sight of the rain clouds as 
the rains mark the beginning of their mating season. The unstated extension of 
the metaphor is that Buddhist devotees celebrate the coming of the Buddha as 
he signals their impending liberation.

--- Page 164 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  149
The devotional focus of the Subodhālaṅkāra, however, did not over -
whelm the courtly tenor of its Sanskrit framework. Saṅgharakkhita follows 
the authors of treatises on Sanskrit poetics and likens poetry to a woman’s 
body, and compares the arrangement of chapters in his work to the suc-
cessive stages of beautifying her appearance.
19 His Subodhālaṅkāra con -
sists of five chapters, namely: (1) poetic faults ( dosa); (2) their removal 
(dosaparihāra); (3) poetic merits (guṇa); (4) ornaments (alaṅkāra), that is, 
figures of sense; and (5) aesthetic moods and feelings ( rasabhāva). 20 The 
Subodhālaṅkāra begins with poetic faults and their removal on the basis 
that, ‘like a good wife’ ( vadhū), a faultless poem is implicitly virtuous.
21 
Saṅgharakkhita then turns to poetic merits in chapter three, which he defines 
as a poem’s phonetic configuration ( saddālaṅkāra). 22 His chapter on poetic 
ornaments proper describes figures of sense ( atthālaṅkāra), metaphors, sim -
iles and suchlike. He writes that these figures are dealt with after the merits 
as it is through ornamentation that a virtuous ( saguṇa) lover becomes excep -
tionally attractive.
23 Finally, aesthetic moods and feelings ( rasabhāva) are 
treated last, he says, since they are occasioned by ornamentation. 24 Yet these 
moods and feelings, he notes, cannot be attributed to any particular formal 
feature of a poem, just as a woman’s beauty cannot be attributed to any one 
attribute.
25
Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa, arguably the most influential work on Sanskrit 
poetics in South Asian history, was the principal source of inspiration for the lit-
erary ideal that Saṅgharakkhita formally wanted to introduce into the Saṅgha.26 
Saṅgharakkhita cites Daṇḍin as a source for his chapter on ornaments of sense 
and it is there that the Kāvyādarśa’s influence is most pronounced.
27 The small 
amount of historical information about Daṇḍin suggests that the author was 
active around 680–720 in Kāñcī in South India during the reign of the Pallava 
king, Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha (690/1–728/9).
28 Heramba Chatterjee 
has surveyed the thirty-seven ornaments of sense in Saṅgharakkhita’s work 
and has shown that nearly all are adopted from Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa.
29 As 
well as following Daṇḍin’s definitions of poetic figures, Saṅgharakkhita often 
adopts the examples he gives for each of these figures too. This occasionally 
means he takes one of Daṇḍin’s amorous illustrations and with some minor 
changes, such as a well-placed vocative ‘O Buddha’, turns it into a poem of 
devotion and piety. Take, for example, his minor amendment to Daṇḍin’s 
illustration of a simile through negation (paṭisedhopamā), that is, a simile 
where a comparison between two objects is refuted in order to heighten the 
intended point of comparison.
30 Daṇḍin in his example likens a lover’s face to 
the moon, whereas Saṅgharakkhita changes the subject of the comparison to 
the Buddha’s face.

--- Page 165 of 286 ---
150 REWRITING BUDDHISM
na jātu śaktir indos te mukhena pratigarjitum
kalaṅkino jaḍasyeti pratiṣedhopamaiva sā. (Kāvyādarśa 2.34)
‘The frigid, mottled moon does not have the power to ever rival your 
face.’ This is a simile through negation (pratiṣedhopamā).
asamattho mukhen’ indu Jina te paṭigajjituṃ
jaḷo kalaṅkī ti ayaṃ paṭisedhopamā siyā. (Subodhālaṅkāra 193)
‘The frigid, mottled moon, O conqueror, is incapable of rivalling your 
face.’ This is a simile through negation (paṭisedhopamā).
The burgeoning interest in Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa in Sri Lanka from the tenth 
century onwards was highly influenced by the works of Ratnamati or Rat-
naśrījñāna, as he is otherwise known. We have already noted the great influ-
ence this scholar’s Sanskrit commentary on the Cāndravyākaraṇa (‘Grammar 
of Candragomin’) had on the development of Moggallāna’s new system of 
Pali grammar.
31 Writing under the name Ratnaśrījñāna, his Sanskrit commen-
tary on the Kāvyādarśa too appears to have played an important role in the 
development of literary theory in Sri Lanka. Dragomir Dimitrov has argued 
that this commentary was an important source for a tenth-century (?) Sinhala 
commentary, the Kāvyādarśasannaya, too.
32 He has shown, furthermore, that 
whenever Saṅgharakkhita relies upon Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa in composing the 
Subodhālaṅkāra, he also follows Ratnamati’s commentary on the Kāvyādarśa 
when writing his autocommentary.33
Alongside Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa, there is a pronounced strand of influ-
ence on the Subodhālaṅkāra from the Kashmiri tradition of poetics. It is 
unclear how this Kashmiri literature arrived in Sri Lanka though we can specu-
late, following Whitney Cox, that increased trade between Kashmir and South 
India during the period may have led to this drift South.
34 The order of chap-
ters in the Subodhālaṅkāra deviates markedly from the Kāvyādarśa and better 
resembles the chapter divisions of the Kāvyālaṅkāra (‘Ornament of poetry’) 
of Vāmana, a minister in the court of the Kashmiri king Jayāpīḍa (779–813).35 
Saṅgharakkhita’s opening two chapters on faults and their removal have an 
affinity, at least in terms of their subdivisions, with Vāmana’s Kāvyālaṅkāra 
too. Like Vāmana, he divides his analysis of faults into the faults of words, the 
faults of sentences and the faults of the meaning of sentences.
36 He also mir-
rors the more expansive treatment of faults in the Kāvyālaṅkāra and discusses 
twenty- three faults in comparison to the reduced ten discussed by Daṇḍin.37
In general, Saṅgharakkhita places his faults in the same categories as 
Vāmana and adopts some of his innovations such as the introduction of the 

--- Page 166 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  151
generalized fault of grāmya or ‘coarse language’. 38 Despite defining poetic 
merits as primarily phonetic embellishments (saddālaṅkāra), Saṅgharakkhita 
occasionally borrows Vāmana’s division of poetic merits into both merits 
of sense (Sk. arthaguṇa) and merits of sound (Sk. śabdaguṇa). He relies 
on Vāmana in his discussions on both the phonetic and semantic aspects 
of the poetic merits known as oja (‘strength’), sukhumālatā (‘tenderness’) 
and atthavyatta (‘the explicit’). 39 Saṅgharakkhita adopts, for instance, 
Vāmana’s idea that the merit of ‘tenderness’ refers to either the use of light, 
delicate sounds or of tender sentiments and uses an example given in the 
Kāvyālaṅkāra to illustrate the latter, namely, that instead of stating directly 
that someone has ‘died’ ( mata) one should instead say that only their ‘fame 
remains’ (kittisesa).
40
In his final chapter, Saṅgharakkhita borrows from another ninth- century 
Kashmiri work, Ānandavardhana’s Dhvanyāloka (‘Light on suggestion’), 
and introduces a standard framework of aesthetic moods and feelings (ras-
abhāva).
41 Like the Dhvanyāloka, the Subodhālaṅkāra posits nine possible 
aesthetic moods culminating in santarasa (Sk. śāntarasa) or the mood of qui-
escence. According to the Rājataraṅgiṇī (‘River of kings’), Ānandavardhana 
was a poet in the court of the Kashmiri king Avantivarman (855–83). 42 He 
revolutionized the study of Sanskrit poetry by developing a theory of aes-
thetics centred on the idea that aesthetic moods or rasa were brought about 
ultimately by the suggestive capacity (dhvani) of the artistic object as a whole 
and not solely due to formal combinations of poetic merits and figurations, as 
had been previously thought.
43 As we will see below, Saṅgharakkhita directly 
praises literary suggestion over formalist figuration when commenting on the 
second verse of his Subodhālaṅkāra and quotes Ānandavardhana’s famous 
pronouncement in his Dhvanyāloka that literary suggestion, ‘is a distinct ele -
ment in the language of great poets, which appears separately from the well-
known parts (of a poem), like beauty in women’.44
The point here is that, just as the beauty of a woman cannot be attributed 
to a particular body part or ornament, the suggested meaning of a literary 
work, which is, for Ānandavardhana, the determining factor in the enjoyment 
of a reader or listener, cannot be explained through a purely formalist analysis 
of a poem’s parts and figures. We can speculate, in this regard, that just as 
theories of deep-level semantics in contemporary Sanskrit grammatical lit -
erature facilitated the grammatization of languages other than Sanskrit in Sri 
Lanka, as discussed in chapter three, the discussions on suggestion among the 
Kashmiri poeticians of the age provided the conceptual resources necessary 
to think about aesthetic beauty separately from the formal features of any one 
particular language or literature.
45

--- Page 167 of 286 ---
152 REWRITING BUDDHISM
7.2. The Pur e Reader
The intellectual challenge of fusing Buddhist devotional sentiment with San-
skrit literary models was relatively simple when compared with the political 
task of appealing to a Saṅgha that was conflicted about the need for such a 
work of Pali poetics. We learn from the Subodhālaṅkāra, for instance, that 
access to Sanskrit education and Sanskrit poetry was very uneven within the 
Saṅgha and that some monks viewed an engagement with these worldly works 
as morally problematic. It becomes clear that the multilingual nature of late 
medieval scholastic culture had created new hierarchies based on one’s level 
of literacy in Sinhala, Pali and Sanskrit and that these emergent forms of social 
stratification had become the site of political agitation and contest. Saṅghar -
akkhita maintains the mollifying tone of his predecessors, such as Sāriputta 
and Sumaṅgala, and attempts to reconcile the competing views of his various 
constituencies. In doing so he presents the study of literary theory as a moral 
practice while simultaneously criticizing Sanskrit and its literature for being 
polluting and impure. He argues at the beginning of his work that the Sub-
odhālaṅkāra was designed to bring the morally transformative power of San-
skrit literary theory into monastic education without exposing young monks to 
content that some scholars perceived to be dangerous.
46
Saṅgharakkhita establishes at the beginning of his treatise, for instance, 
that he has composed his work for monks who he refers to as ‘pure Magadhans’, 
that is, those who only know Pali or Māgadha, and writes in his second verse 
that, ‘even though there are good, old works on poetics (alaṅkāra), such as 
Rāmasamma (Sk. Rāmaśarman), the pure Magadhans do not use them’.
47 
Saṅgharakkhita explains in his commentary on this verse what he means by 
the term ‘pure Magadhan’ and also discusses why poetics had been neglected 
by the monastic community in the past:
The pure Magadhans (suddhamāgadhikā): Māgadha [means] either the 
people of Magadha or the words that are understood there. Magadhans 
(māgadhikā) are those who are from Magadha or who learn (lit. are tied 
to) Māgadha [words]. Pure Magadhans, (i.e.) novices (yatipota ), are 
those Magadhans who are pure ( suddha), that is, they are completely 
pure or unmixed since they are unfamiliar with the impurity of Sanskrit 
literature, etc. (sakkaṭādibhāsita ). They (i.e., the pure Magadhans) do 
not use the aforementioned treatises on poetics ( alaṅkāra), which dif -
ferentiate ornaments (i.e. poetic figures), nor can they tell the difference 
[between literary] styles ( pasādhana). This is because, furthermore, 
one becomes a pure Magadhan by specifically studying and memoriz -
ing different books (i.e. Pali texts), whereas [works on poetics], such as 

--- Page 168 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  153
Rāmasamma, are in languages such as Sanskrit. This is the meaning of 
the word ‘pure Magadhan’ here.
A subtle, implied sense also obtains in this verse, according to the 
usual, well-known use [of these words]. The pure Magadhans, [for 
instance], due to being completely pure in themselves, previously did 
not use [figures of speech], [thinking] that ‘these figures of speech, even 
though beautiful, have now become stale, what use are stale things for 
pure beings like us?’ For [Ānandavardhana] has said: ‘Further, what is 
implicitly understood is a particular object in the speech of great poets, 
which, like the beauty of women, is distinct from the well-known parts 
[of speech]’ (Dhvanyāloka 1.4).
48
In this rather dense discussion, Saṅgharakkhita draws out a number of the 
overlapping meanings of the term. To be a Magadhan, then, one can either be 
from Magadha or simply be a speaker of the Pali language. A ‘pure’ (suddha) 
Magadhan, however, is one who has not been polluted by ‘what is spoken in 
Sanskrit, etc.’ (sakkaṭādibhāsita). We should likely infer from the open-ended 
‘etc.’ that Saṅgharakkhita also includes here the literary Prakrits and other 
languages of classical India. The word kālusiya (‘impurity’) refers both to 
Sanskrit literature’s perceived immorality and also to its difficulty, literally, 
its turbidity. It is likely Saṅgharakkhita further intended to make an ethical 
connection here too between Pali’s status as a pure language, underived from 
Sanskrit, and the moral purity of its users.
Even though Saṅgharakkhita speaks in this verse of Sanskrit poet-
ics as ‘good’ (santa), he reveals in his commentary that, at the same time, 
Sanskrit figures of speech, while beautiful, were not good enough for the 
pure Magadhans since they were perceived to be stale or mouldy ( malag-
gahita). It is here that Saṅgharakkhita quotes the aforementioned verse in 
Ānandavardhana’s Dhvanyāloka concerning literary suggestion. In using a 
metaphor of decay, Saṅgharakkhita acknowledges the beauty of formalistic 
ornamentation, while attacking the stale and perhaps immoral application of 
the ornaments as developed in the tradition of Sanskrit court poetry. We can 
speculate, furthermore, that by quoting the Dhvanyāloka here he indicates that 
the old schematic formalism of the alaṅkāra tradition had been supplanted 
to an extent with Kashmiri theories of suggestion (dhvani) that subordinated 
formal figuration and which were viewed as new and sophisticated. It seems 
possible, in this respect, that these new theories allowed monks to reconsider 
the nature of good poetry separate from the morally suspect, ornamental for -
malism of earlier Sanskrit poetics.
In what at first may seem like a contradiction in terms, Saṅgharakkhita 
continues in his commentary to praise those who have mastered these formal 

--- Page 169 of 286 ---
154 REWRITING BUDDHISM
aspects of poetry, namely literary merits and faults, as virtuous people (sappur-
isa) and those who have not as nothing more than beasts ( pasu). He manages 
to reconcile his praise for experts in Sanskrit literary theory with his previous 
praise for those who know no Sanskrit at all, by speaking of the knowledge 
of poetic merits and faults less in terms of its importance in creating beautiful 
poetry and more as a marker of one’s wisdom, civility and morality. In doing 
so, he develops upon ideas presented in the opening to the Kāvyādarśa and 
reinterprets them in light of Ratnamati’s commentary.
Daṇḍin writes at the beginning of the Kāvyādarśa, for instance, that lan-
guage (śabda) is a light that stops the world being conquered by darkness.
49 He 
then lends a social and moral inflection to this connection between language 
and the world and, by employing a witty pun on the word go, which means 
both ‘cow’ and ‘language’, argues that anyone who uses language ineloquently 
reveals their bovine nature (gotva).
50 Ratnamati overlooks the jocular nature of 
this verse, however, and takes it rather literally. He states that well-composed 
literature is constitutive of the four wholesome goals of life (Sk. caturvarga), 
which are classified traditionally as artha (‘material wealth’), kāma
 (‘phys-
ical pleasure’), dharma (‘duty’) and mokṣa (‘liberation’), and that, since good 
literature reproduces social values, literary erudition – the composition and 
appreciation of kāvya – reveals in many ways one’s own moral and social con-
dition. He extends Daṇḍin’s metaphor and writes, for instance, that those who 
know the śāstras, that is, any prescriptive science, including literary science, 
are to be treated like gods whereas those who do not are nothing more than 
beasts (paśu).
51
Saṅgharakkhita reproduces this social and moral understanding of lit -
erary erudition in his introduction and similarly speaks of those who study 
the discipline of poetics as ‘virtuous people’ ( sappurisa) and those who do 
not as ‘beast-like people’ ( purisapasu).
52 He writes, echoing Ratnamati (and 
partly Daṇḍin himself), that ‘only those who know śāstra can discriminate 
between different merits and faults. Those who do not know śāstra – the 
beast-like men (purisapasu) – cannot.’ 53 He places the science of poetry 
(alaṅkārasattha) alongside Buddhist scripture (tipiṭaka ), philosophy (takka ) 
and grammar ( vyākaraṇa) as a source of wisdom ( paññā) and speaks of the 
opportunity to learn poetics from a teacher as the result of the accumulation 
of merit.
54 Saṅgharakkhita presents the relationship between teacher and pupil 
in the study of poetics as not only marked by differing levels of wisdom but 
also by levels of civility too. He reiterates that the wisdom gained through 
education in literary theory distinguishes those who are virtuous from those 
who are bestial and quotes in support the following canonical verse from the 
Sevitabba Sutta (‘Who is to be associated with’), which originally concerns 

--- Page 170 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  155
the need to associate with those accomplished in morality, meditative concen-
tration and wisdom:
A man who associates with a lower descends,
and one who associates with an equal never fails.
The wise one who attends upon a superior rises,
therefore, revere one who is superior to yourself!55
Alongside the ‘pure Magadhans’ who only know Pali and the ‘virtuous 
 people’ who have mastered literary theory, Saṅgharakkhita mentions a third 
constituency in his work, namely, those who were disinterested in poetry and 
whose sole focus was the attainment of nirvana. In his final chapter on aes-
thetic moods and feelings, beginning with the erotic (siṅgāra, Sk. śṛṅgāra), 
Saṅgharakkhita provides only definitions of these aesthetic moods and feel -
ings and does not include example verses for he admits in his commentary that 
this worldly topic is ‘not studied by those of high faith whose minds are gladly 
focused on analyzing the tradition of the pure, true Dhamma, which is the sole 
rasa, the rasa of liberation, and the only cause for escaping the suffering of 
saṃsāra entirely’.
56 The earliest Sinhala commentary on the Subodhālaṅkāra 
was less wary of the criticism of those who it describes as ‘greedy’ (luddha) 
for nirvana and rectifies Saṅgharakkhita’s indecisive treatment of the topic 
by composing example verses for all of the aesthetic feelings using the narra-
tive of the Vidhurapaṇḍita Jātaka (‘Birth story of wise Vidhura’).
57 The ten-
sion between those engaging with the world and those wanting to escape it 
reemerges decades later in the Daṁbadeṇiya edict, which advises that ‘des-
picable arts such as poetry and drama should neither be studied nor taught to 
others’.
58 It is possible that Saṅgharakkhita’s willingness to engage in worldly 
matters reflected the fact, as he seems to declare in two of his works, that he 
pursued the bodhisattva path. He writes, for instance, in the colophon to his 
Khuddasikkhābhinavaṭīkā (‘New commentary on the Minor rules’), to quote 
Petra Kieffer-Pülz’s translation, ‘May I, by the merit acquired from working 
for the benefit of others become one who works for the benefit of others in suc-
cessive births.’
59 Whether he pursued buddhahood or not, he certainly presents 
his study of impure Sanskrit literature as an act of charity that was solely for 
the benefit of the pure Magadhans.
7.3.  Propriety as the Secret of Poetry
Saṅgharakkhita’s depiction of those who study poetic figuration as essen-
tially moral beings in opposition to the bestial inerudite anticipates the main 

--- Page 171 of 286 ---
156 REWRITING BUDDHISM
innovation of his work, namely the centrality with which he places the poetic 
virtue of ‘propriety’ (ocitya ) in literary practice. Writing at the beginning of 
his final chapter on aesthetic moods and feelings Saṅgharakkhita states, for 
instance, that, ‘[this chapter] has been composed by a poet possessed of cre-
ative eloquence ( paṭibhāna), who relies on worldly discourse (lokavohāra), 
and who feels the exhilaration of utter propriety’.
60 Clearly having his 
 nirvana-orientated opponents in mind when writing this verse,  Saṅgharakkhita 
provocatively declares that as a poet his engagement with the world is 
 necessarily moral. He writes in his commentary that:
What is known as ‘propriety’ is the greatest secret among poets and only 
the one who knows what is acceptable (ucita) also in worldly discourse 
(lokavohāra) is to be praised. Only by relying on completely suitable 
worldly discourse can a poem, composed according to what is said 
below (i.e. in the chapter on moods and feelings), produce the taste of an 
aesthetic mood (rasa) for sentient beings. It is permissible, therefore, to 
compose a literary work (bandhana) only when it shines and reveals the 
exhilarating state of propriety.
61
Saṅgharakkhita here brings out the connection between morality and the aes-
thetic experience. He argues that in order to produce an aesthetic experience 
for another one must know about worldly norms and conventions, with the 
implication that to transgress what is tasteful in worldly society would be to 
be render one’s poem ineffective.
In referring to propriety as ‘the greatest secret among poets’ Saṅghar akkhita  
paraphrases Ānandavardhana’s famous pronouncement in his Dhvanyāloka that 
‘a composition containing well-known propriety is the utmost secret of rasa’.62 
While the Dhvanyāloka first articulated the idea that propriety (aucitya) was an 
important part of affective poetry, it was developed upon more fully by other 
later Kashmiri literary theorists. Kṣemendra, a mid-eleventh-century poly -
math, in particular, wrote a treatise on the topic called the Aucityavicāracarcā 
(‘Discourse on deliberating propriety’) and defined aucitya as a kind of cor -
respondence or alignment (sadṛśa) between a text and what it signifies.63
Kṣemendra uses similes in each verse of his work to connect poetic pro-
priety with worldly propriety. He writes that ‘the excellence, the lovely metre, 
and the goodness of a poem become prominent (lit. shine) if the verb is proper, 
just as the virtues, the behaviour, and the nobility of a person shine, if his deeds 
are good’.
64 This connection is not simply figurative since he understands the 
conventions of poetry as on a continuum with the social norms and proper 
behaviours of Brahmanical, monarchical society. This is most apparent when 
Kṣemendra discusses propriety in the topics and themes of poetry. He writes 
with respect to the need for a poem to depict ‘appropriate’ (ucita ) families or 

--- Page 172 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  157
lineages, for instance, that ‘the propriety surrounding a family lends special 
excellence to the charm of the poetry, just as the propriety of the lineage of a 
person is generally dear to those who have a heart to feel’.
65 As an example he 
quotes a verse from Kālidāsa’s Raghuvaṃśa (‘Dynasty of Raghu’), in which 
prince Raghu is installed on the throne by his father, king Dilīpa, who then 
retires with his queen to the forest:
Then, he (Dilīpa), whose heart had turned away from the sensual sphere, 
gave the white parasol, a symbol of kingship, to his young son (Raghu), 
according to the traditional rites. Together with his queen, he took refuge 
under the shady tree of an ascetic grove. For this is the familial custom 
of Ikṣvāku kings who have reached old age.
66
Kṣemendra was one of the first authors to emphasize the role of propriety, that 
is, the poem’s connection with the world outside the text, as the determining 
factor in its aesthetic success. If the poetic text does not properly relate to 
the social conventions of its audience then it will fail to convey an aesthetic 
mood.
67 Referring to this intellectual shift as the development of Sanskrit’s 
‘social aesthetic’, Sheldon Pollock writes that:
Kṣemendra’s importance for us, if not his novelty, lies in his un  equivocal 
affirmation of the constitutive relationship of propriety and aesthetic 
sentiment: Aucitya now has become explicitly the life-force ( jīvita) of 
rasa itself: how laughable and disruptive of the heroic mood, Kṣemendra 
says, is martial violence directed toward a suppliant, or, in the case of the 
piteous mood, compassion towards an enemy.
68
We can account for the centrality of propriety in the Subodhālaṅkāra by 
hypothesizing that Saṅgharakkhita was likely a close reader of Kṣemendra’s 
work. In explicitly pointing out the connection, between aesthetic feelings, 
propriety and what he calls ‘worldly discourse’ (lokavohāra), which could just 
as easily be translated as ‘social discourse’, Saṅgharakkhita goes even further 
than Kṣemendra in emphasizing the centrality of the social and moral con-
struction of good poetry. The development of this new social aesthetic reval -
orized literary eloquence and allowed poetry to take on a new significance in 
the Sri Lankan monastic sphere, as a necessarily moral practice rather than as 
valueless sensuality.
Saṅgharakkhita not only discusses propriety in the context of his final 
chapter on aesthetic moods and feelings but references the value of propriety 
throughout his work. He explains, for instance, why he refers to the Buddha 
as ‘lord of sages’ (muninda) in his opening verse in which he implores the 
goddess of speech, who is said to reside in the muninda’s lotus-like mouth, 

--- Page 173 of 286 ---
158 REWRITING BUDDHISM
to gladden his mind. 69 Saṅgharakkhita writes that the word muninda is the 
most tasteful name for the Buddha in this verse since it signifies the fact that 
in knowing both worlds – this life and the world beyond – the Buddha is 
the ultimate ruler (paramissariya) of both the sages ( muni) and those people 
(puggala) (we can assume kings) who wield supreme power on earth. For this 
reason, he states, this word, muninda, is exceptionally pleasing and as such it 
also sustains the propriety of the other words in the verse.
70
The Sinhala commentary here ties Saṅgharakkhita’s discussion to 
another one of his innovations, namely his introduction of a new poetic fault, 
the ‘lack of propriety’ (ocityahīna) and quotes a verse from this section stating, 
‘that which is called “propriety” (ocitya) in the world should be learned out of 
respect. For the greatest poets, who are good people, are a source of instruction 
in [propriety].’
71 The late ‘new commentary’ on the Subodhālaṅkāra, possibly 
composed in Burma in the fifteenth century, remarks on this topic that while 
Saṅgharakkhita wanted to write a brief work, he explains propriety at length 
due to his fondness for it.
72
Whereas Kashmiri theorists such as Kṣemendra framed propriety 
almost exclusively in terms of the social norms of the Brahmanical court, 
Saṅgharakkhita uses Buddhist ideals as the norm by which the propriety of 
poetry should be judged. In his discussion of the fault that he calls ‘a lack of 
propriety’ (ocityahīna), he presents the following example, for instance, based 
on the Vessantara Jātaka (‘Birth story of Vessantara’) narrative:
73
If asked, how could I not give up even my life?
Even so, my heart trembles to give up my son.74
With respect to this verse, Saṅgharakkhita argues that the impropriety (anu-
cita) here lies in Vessantara’s expression of trepidation in giving away his son. 
This he argues transgresses the merit of loftiness ( udāra) that was initially 
conveyed by the first half of the verse: ‘If asked, how could I not give up 
even my life?’
75 The merit of loftiness ( udāra), first described in Daṇḍin’s 
Kāvyādarśa but also adopted in the Subodhālaṅkāra, refers to any quality in 
a verse that is uplifting (ukkaṃsavanta). Daṇḍin illustrates this merit with a 
verse describing the uplifting nature of a king’s royal demeanour, though for 
Saṅgharakkhita it is of course the Buddha who evokes such feelings of ela -
tion.
76 When discussing the removal of the fault of propriety, Saṅgharakkhita 
provides the following verse as an example:
He set up a victory festival right in front of Māra’s army,
and did not consider it to be worth even a blade of grass.
May the conqueror give us victory!
77

--- Page 174 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  159
The Buddha, then, is the ideal and most fitting subject of artistic expression 
according to Saṅgharakkhita’s conception of propriety. Yet Pali poetry com -
posed in a kāvya mode, even when in devotion to the Buddha, cannot escape 
the heroic tropes of court society, and the assimilation of the values of court 
poetry within a Buddhist frame still requires some accommodation. In this 
verse, for instance, the praiseworthy heroism of a king in battle is appropri -
ated figuratively to describe the Buddha’s spiritual conquest and his bravado 
in the face of his foe. Saṅgharakkhita, then, found a way to reconcile the 
roles and ideals of both poet and priest. Inspired by the latest literary theory 
from Kashmir, represented, in particular, by Kṣemendra, Saṅgharakkhita was 
able to build a bridge between the aesthetic sensibilities of court poetry and 
Buddhist devotion. He focused on the idea of propriety as the governing prin-
ciple of poetry and established his devotional writings as primarily a moral 
practice.
7.4.  The Buddha as a Literary Figure
By reframing the composition and appreciation of poetry as a religious prac -
tice, Saṅgharakkhita is careful not to present aesthetic experiences as lib-
erating or otherworldly. In restricting aesthetic experience to the realm of 
worldly discourse, Saṅgharakkhita’s thought runs counter to the general intel-
lectual trajectory of Sanskrit poetics in India. There is a noticeable claim in 
the works of tenth- and eleventh-century Kashmiri scholars, such as Kuntaka 
and Abhinavagupta, that aesthetic experience, at least in part, is a transcen -
dental (alaukika) one rather than simply a mundane experience (laukika ).
78 
This appeal to the extraordinary nature of aesthetic sentiment develops in later 
poetical theory from Northeast India in particular, where we find claims in the 
work of the fifteenth- century scholar Bhānudatta, for instance, that devotional 
experience is by nature a transcendent phenomenon.79
In the midst of the emerging trend for theistic devotional poetry or bhakti 
poetry in the region it is not surprising to find scholars advocating aesthetic 
experience as a means of salvation.
80 Saṅgharakkhita, on the other hand, main-
tains a strict distinction between mundane (lokiya) poetry and the transcendent 
nature of the Buddha and nirvana. Rather than shying away from the paradox 
inherent in writing devotional poetry to a being who in essence transcends the 
world, Saṅgharakkhita is keen throughout the Subodhālaṅkāra to draw atten-
tion, often playfully, to the problem in his work.
81 He writes in one particularly 
ironic verse that:

--- Page 175 of 286 ---
160 REWRITING BUDDHISM
One should pay homage to the Tathāgata who is beyond all similes,
for him who has obtained the highest world no likeness (upamā) can be 
used.82
Saṅgharakkhita reflects on the tension between the worldly and otherworldly 
in Pali kāvya, in particular when discussing a poetic fault fittingly known as 
‘contradiction’ (virodhi). Following Daṇḍin, Saṅgharakkhita speaks of contra-
dictions in the description of places ( desa), time (kāla), art (kalā), the world 
(loka), logic (ñāya) and tradition (āgama) as possible faults that a poet should 
be aware of.
83 The point is that a poet may fall into contradiction if he trans -
gresses the conventions governing what he is depicting. For instance, if a poet 
writes, as Daṇḍin imagines, that ‘day lotuses bloom at night’, this would be 
classed as a fault since it contradicts conventions regarding time.
84 Daṇḍin 
adds, however, that a poet may occasionally through his own literary skill turn 
such a contradiction into a poetic merit and provides a number of examples 
where contradiction adds to the eloquence of a verse.
85 One verse in particular, 
illustrating how a logical contradiction can in fact be a poetic merit, stands 
out among Daṇḍin’s courtly examples for its devotional and religious content:
Although you are knowable, you are unknowable;
Although you bear fruit, you possess no fruit;
Although you are one, you are many;
Homage to you, the universal form.
86
Ratnamati, when commenting on this verse, writes tersely that there is no fault 
of contradiction here since ‘such is the nature (vidha) of the ultimate Brah -
man.’
87 Inspired by this accommodation of Hindu devotional poetry, Saṅghar-
akkhita proceeds to demonstrate in a series of devotional verses corresponding 
to each of these faults that none of the types of contradiction obtains when the 
Buddha is the subject of a poem, since the Buddha, his miracles and even the 
merit he accrued as a bodhisattva are all incomprehensible (acintanīya) and 
immeasurable (aparimāṇa).
88 The implication is that, like Brahman, descrip -
tions of the Buddha and bodhisattva do not contradict worldly discourse but 
rather transcend the very possibility of contradiction. Saṅgharakkhita com -
poses an equivalent verse in praise of the Buddha using Daṇḍin’s as a model:
Although you have abandoned birth, you bring about (good) rebirth;
Homage to you, best among sages, whose essential virtues are 
unknowable.
89
Saṅgharakkhita here addresses the apparent contradiction in the fact that the 
Buddha, though he has escaped cyclic existence, is able to bring about a good 

--- Page 176 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  161
rebirth for his devotees. He does not choose to engage fully with this difficult 
issue, however, perhaps because for him it was an obvious statement of fact, 
and instead simply echoes Ratnamati’s explanation in stating that there is no 
contradiction since ‘such is the nature of the best of sages’.
90 Saṅgharakkhita 
is concerned more with moulding Buddhist devotion on to the armature of 
Sanskrit poetics than with metaphysical issues. That said, we can detect an 
implicit aesthetic pragmatism in his writing. It seems that, for Saṅgharakkhita, 
so long as devotional poetry to the Buddha inspires the audience then it is good 
poetry, regardless of possible contradictions.
His discussion of the fault of ‘contradiction in art’ (kalānirodha) is 
interesting in this regard. In his example of how such faulty depictions of 
art can actually be a poetic merit, Saṅgharakkhita composes a verse recalling 
the celestial minstrel, Pañcasikha, who in the Sakkapañha Sutta (‘Question 
of Sakka’) serenades the Buddha with a song extolling the qualities of the 
Buddha, the Dhamma, the Buddha’s enlightened disciples and, finally, of love 
itself:
91
What people would not be pleased by the discordant notes of the lute of 
Pañcasikha, whose mind is submerged in the qualities of the Buddha?
92
Saṅgharakkhita writes in his commentary on this verse that there is no mis -
take in depicting the faulty performance of the arts, in this case the  incorrect 
playing of a lute, since the clumsy performance is due to the fact that the 
performer, Pañcasikha, is immersed in meditation on the immeasurable (apa-
rimāṇa) qualities of the Buddha.
93 We can infer that because the performance 
was inspired by meditation on the  Buddha, any error that is produced is, in 
some respects, negligible since the audience is enraptured by the artist, who 
acts as a medium between the transcendent Buddha and the world.
Saṅgharakkhita is careful to note the subtle distinction between the 
Buddha’s status as transcendent muse and his worldly representation in poetry 
in his commentary. He describes Pañcasikha, for instance, as immersed in 
the immeasurable qualities of the Buddha, that is, in his transcendent virtues, 
though takes care to note that the listening audience only has a sense of the 
Buddha’s worldly (lokiya) qualities.
94 While he never spells it out explicitly, 
we obtain a glimpse in this verse as to how Saṅgharakkhita imagined devo-
tional poetry to function, where the transcendent Buddha acts as a muse for 
the artist who creates in a worldly form an experience of pleasure for an audi-
ence, who cannot grasp the nature of the Buddha in actuality. The idea of the 
transcendent, not transcendence itself, becomes a worldly object of pleasure 
for devotees and a means of karmic transformation and better rebirth.
The old Sinhala commentary to the Subodhālaṅkāra provides another 
perspective on the matter when interpreting one of the Buddha’s birth stories 

--- Page 177 of 286 ---
162 REWRITING BUDDHISM
or jātakas in terms of the aesthetic feelings it depicts. Whereas Saṅgharakkhita 
was hesitant to illustrate such moods and feelings in his own explication of 
his final chapter, the Sinhala commentary composes Pali examples based on 
the narrative of the Vidhurapaṇḍita Jātaka for each of the foundational aes -
thetic feelings (ṭhayībhāva), which are said  to bring about the experience of 
aesthetic moods (rasa). In interpreting the Vidhurapaṇḍita narrative in terms 
of the aesthetic feelings it conveys, the  commentary not only shows that tra -
ditional Pali literature can evoke the same range of aesthetic sentiments as 
Sanskrit kāvya but, in attributing these emotions to the characters involved 
in the birth story, in particular to the Bodhisattva himself, it presents some of 
these emotions as virtuous mental states on the bodhisattva path. In illustrat -
ing the aesthetic  feeling of sama or ‘calming’, for instance, the commentary 
describes how the demon (yakkha), Puṇṇaka, at the behest of the dragon (nāga) 
king whose daughter he wished to marry, attempted to kill the Bodhisattva, 
who had been born as Vidhura, the wise, royal advisor of the Kurus:
Even though lions and elephants charged [Vidhura],
a serpent wrapped round [his body],
and the demon [Puṇṇaka], like an elephant in rut,
shook the mountain as if it were a bunch of bamboo,
experiencing a sweet feeling, Vidhura did not shake in the slightest,
as if having gone to a state of peace.
95
Relying further on complex Sanskrit aesthetic theory, the Sinhala commentary 
on this verse explains that, while factors such as the charging of lions should 
inspire terror, Vidhura’s experience of calm emerges here due to other factors, 
namely friendship (mettā), compassion (dayā) and joy (moda). This is made 
explicit in the verse when Vidhura is described as attaining a state peace on 
account of joyful feelings. The commentary further adds that these determin -
ing feelings are accompanied in the verse by other, more transitory feelings 
(vyabhicāribhāva), namely steadfastness (dhiti), intelligence (mati) and mind-
fulness (sati), and other physical effects (anubhāva), such as not shaking.
96 
This bundle of emotion and action created by the verse produces the overall 
foundational feeling of calm, which for the audience transforms into the aes-
thetic mood known as santa or ‘quiescence’.
When placed within the framework of a birth story of the Buddha, in 
this case his previous life as the pandit Vidhura, the aesthetic feelings associ -
ated with artistic representation are transformed into Buddhist virtues and the 
audience identifies with our hero Vidhura and emulates somewhat his virtu -
ous mental state. While the line between reality and representation becomes 
blurred in the aesthetic experience of worldly emotions, the commentary still 

--- Page 178 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  163
draws a sharp line between such experiences and the transcendence of nirvana. 
It is careful to highlight in the verse, for instance, that such a feeling of peace 
is only like the attainment of nirvana and is not liberation in and of itself.
97
7.5.  Summary
Writing in the middle of the thirteenth century, Saṅgharakkhita’s Sub-
odhālaṅkāra was the first attempt by the Saṅgha’s hierarchy to propagate 
knowledge of literary theory to the whole monastic community. Previously, 
elite scholar-monks had incorporated Sanskrit literary models in their Pali 
works by means of a direct engagement with Sanskrit poetry and treatises on 
poetics. In creating the Subodhālaṅkāra, Saṅgharakkhita was able to success-
fully abstract an ideal literary model from Sanskrit treatises on poetics and use 
it as the framework for a specifically Pali poetics based on Buddhist norms 
and values. This act of formally sanctioning the study of poetics, a subject 
defined by its sensuality and worldliness, was not without controversy. The 
image of the late medieval Saṅgha that emerges from the Subodhālaṅkāra 
is one that is deeply conflicted about the value of studying poetics as part of 
a monastic vocation. Saṅgharakkhita skilfully negotiates the different views 
within the monastic community by praising literary theory as an intrinsically 
moral system while denigrating Sanskrit literature itself as impure. It is his 
re-centring of Pali poetics around notions of morality, civility and propriety 
that represents his most innovative contribution to Buddhist intellectual cul -
ture. In placing a knowledge of worldly propriety as the essence of composing 
and appreciating good poetry, Saṅgharakkhita manages to present Pali poetics 
to his sceptical audience as not only an acceptable object of study but one that 
is essential for the cultivation of morality and for one’s self-presentation as a 
moral individual. He is careful, however, not to overexaggerate the liberat -
ing capacity of poetry and emphasizes that, while devotional poetry is whole-
some and inspiring, it can never directly free a practitioner, nor can it capture 
the true nature of either the Buddha or nirvana. Rather, it produces virtuous 
emotions that can bring about better rebirths, even though, as Saṅgharakkhita 
notes, the Buddha himself has abandoned birth altogether.
Notes
1. On Saṅgharakkhita and his works, see Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b.
2. Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b, 31–4. Note, however, that Saṅgharakkhita did not replace Sāriputta as grand-
master but rather Moggallāna.
3. Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b, 49.

--- Page 179 of 286 ---
164 REWRITING BUDDHISM
4. Cūḷavaṃsa 81.76–8. The Saṅgha, like the royal court, had its own system of appointing the grand -
master and, thus, like its own role in the coronation of kings, royal oversight in the selection of the 
grandmaster could have been largely ceremonial in nature. See chapter three.
5. See Kieffer-Pülz, 2017b, 49, referring to Saṅgharakkhita’s Khuddasikkhābhinavaṭīkā and the Mog-
gallānapañcikāṭīkā.
6. Malalasekera, 1994, 198, citing the Candasāratthaṭīkā , a commentary on Saṅgharakkhita’s Sam-
bandhacintā.
7. Dīgha Nikāya I, 11,10–12; 69,5–7. See Collins, 2003, 670.
8. Dīgha Nikāya I, 7,27–8,6. This passage and its commentary remained significant for reform-era intel-
lectuals. The Sinhala Karmavibhāgaya (twelfth century?), for instance, takes these topics and qual -
ifies that if literature depicts the impermanence of kings, heroes and armies then such literature is in 
fact conducive to nirvana and heavenly rebirth. See Karmavibhāgaya, 79,9–83,11.
9. Aṅguttara Nikāya  I, 72, 20–73,23, trans. Bodhi, 2012, 163–4. Bodhi translates the terms paṭipuc-
chāvinīta (‘trained in philosophical enquiry’) and ‘ukkācitavinīta’ (‘trained in rhetoric’) as ‘trained in 
interrogation’ and ‘trained in vain talk’, respectively. See also Bodhi, trans. 2012, 1630, n. 284. This 
passage is also cited in Collins, 2003, 670, n. 50.
10. Sumaṅgalavilāsinī of Buddhaghosa I, 76,12; 84,15; 89,26. See also Guruge, 1993–4, 134. This attitude 
to the two Sanskrit epics continues in late medieval Sri Lanka. See, for instance, the thirteenth-  
century Sinhala commentary on the Maṅgala Sutta, translated in Hallisey, 2007, 299. On the more 
favourable reception given to the Rāmāyaṇa after the fourteenth century, see Henry, 2017, 145–81.
11. Collins, 2003, 649–50. On what Collins refers to as the ‘problem of literature in Pali’, see chapter 
three. For a recent, literary reading of the Mahāvaṃsa, see Scheible, 2016.
12. Załęski, 2010. Since the 1960s, however, a number of excellent anthropological studies have chal -
lenged the very idea of such an ideal type, in particular one based on the Pali canon, and instead point 
to ethnographic evidence for the Saṅgha’s intimate engagement with society and politics. For a recent 
overview see Schober, 2011, 1–14.
13. Ingalls, trans. 1965, 59.
14. Pollock, 2003, 114.
15. Many of my insights in this chapter are indebted to questions first posed by Charles Hallisey. See 
Hallisey, 2003, esp. 702–3.
16. See, for instance, Hallisey, 1988; 2003, 703–7; Dhammapala, 2003. On the Jinālaṅkāra, see chapter 
nine.
17. W ith respect to this period, Hallisey ( 1988, 17–18) perceptively writes that ‘during a period of 
 roughly three centuries beginning around 1200 C.E., Theravadin intellectuals in Sri Lanka became in-
creasingly concerned with the significance of a juxtaposition of self-effort and human limitations … 
When the medieval thinkers reflected on what amounts to the effective dependence of human beings 
on the career of the Buddha, they also asked what human responses might be appropriate when an 
individual recognized this antecedent grace.’
18. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 138.
19. See, for instance, Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 14; Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 1.7.
20. On the more logical structure of the Subodhālaṅkāra compared with the Kāvyādarśa, see Wright, 
2002.
21. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 16. Compare this with the Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana, where 
‘faults are in essence the opposite of merits’ (2.1.1: guṇaviparyayātmāno doṣāḥ) and, similarly, they 
are to be understood by implication (2.1.2: arthatas tadavagamaḥ).
22. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 116. I am not aware of a similar definition in other works on 
Sanskrit poetics, though this requires further investigation.
23. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 164.
24. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 338, 272,5.
25. See below on Saṅgharakkhita’ s adoption of Ānandavardhana’s theory of suggestion (dhvani).
26. See, for instance, Wright, 2002.
27. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 337, 270, 9. The second verse of the Sub-
odhālaṅkāra also refers to a theorist called Rāmaśarman (P. Rāmasamma) who, as Yigal Bronner has 
shown, was a predecessor of both Bhāmaha and Daṇḍin. See Bronner, 2012.
28. Bronner, 2012, 76.
29. Chatterjee, 1960.
30. I borrow here Yigal Bronner’s translation of this term (personal communication).
31. See chapter three.

--- Page 180 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  165
32. Dimitrov, 2016, 125–54. Dimitrov rather attributes the authorship of the Kāvyādarśasannaya and 
also the Siyabaslakarasannaya to Ratnamati/Ratnaśrījñāna. His arguments concerning the Kāvy-
ādarśasannaya, in particular, are quite speculative. See Gornall, 2017, 476–7.
33. Dimitrov, 2016, 99–101.
34. Cox, 2011.
35. The chapter divisions of Vāmana’s Kāvyālaṅkāra are as follows: (1) ‘the body’ (śarīra), that is, the 
components of poetry; (2) defects ( doṣa); (3) merits (guṇa); and (4) figures of speech (alaṅkāra). 
Vāmana is also mentioned in verse two of the Siyabaslakara. See Hallisey, 2003, 695, n. 25. On the 
date of Vāmana, see McCrea, 2008, 50, citing Rājataraṅgiṇī, v. 4.497.
36. The divisions of faults in Vāmana’s Kāvyālaṅkāra are: (1) the faults of words and the meanings of 
words; (2) the faults of sentences; and (3) the faults of the meanings of sentences.
37. Y et where there is agreement with the Kāvyādarśa, such as on the fault of tautology ( ekārtha), 
Saṅgharakkhita still prefers to adopt the wording of Daṇḍin’s definitions. See Subodhālaṅkāra of 
Saṅgharakkhita, v. 40 = Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 3.135.
38. See Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 45 and Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana, 2.1.7. Another general 
fault developed by Vāmana that Saṅgharakkhita borrows is the fault of meaninglessness (anatthaka). 
See Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 39 and Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana, 2.1.9.
39. In Saṅgharakkhita’s definition of oja (Sk. ojas), for instance, he adopts two aspects of Vāmana’s 
description of ojas, namely, samāsa (brevity) and vyāsa (diffuseness). Compare Subodhālaṅkāra of 
Saṅgharakkhita, v. 123 with Kāvyālaṅkāravṛtti of Vāmana, 3.2.2, 32, 10. On sukhumālatā, see Sub-
odhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 135 and Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana, 3.2.12. For atthavyatta, see 
Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 147 and Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana, 3.2.14.
40. Compare Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 139 and Kāvyālaṅkāravṛtti of Vāmana on 3.2.12, 
35,14: yathā mṛtaṃ yaśaḥśeṣa ity āhuḥ.
41. It is quite possible that there is also an influence from Udbhaṭa on this chapter, though this needs to 
be explored. See Bronner, 2016.
42. McCrea, 2008, 99, citing Rājataraṅgiṇī , 5.34. It is worth noting here that Senarat Paranavitana in -
vented and published in the Journal of the American Oriental Society  a fictitious ‘Sanskrit inscrip-
tion’ that purportedly recorded a debate on the authorship of the Dhvanikārikās which ascribed them 
to a Buddhist monk, Dharmadāsa. See Paranavitana, 1974. The veracity of the inscription was taken 
seriously, for instance, by Daniel H.H. Ingalls in his translation of the Dhvanyāloka and its Locana. 
See Ingalls et al., trans. 1990, 27, n. 12.
43. McCrea, 2008, 99–164. Also, 2016.
44. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 2, 7,23–26 = Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana, 
1.4, translated in McCrea, 2008, 105.
45. On the connection between alaṅkāraśāstra and vyākaraṇa as ‘grammars’, see Bronner, 2007b.
46. W e find a similar concern in Saṅgharakkhita’s Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā concerning Moggallāna’s use 
of a grammatical example that appears to reflect Jain philosophy. He argues in this case, however, that 
an exposure to the doctrines of other religious communities is beneficial since it allows a practitioner 
to see the flaws in these doctrines and to develop stronger faith in the Buddha. See Moggallāna-
pañcikāṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 85,1–16, discussed and translated in Gornall, 2013, 58.
47. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 2:
rāmasammādyalaṅkārā santi santo purātanā
tathā pi tu vaḷañjenti suddhamāgadhikā na te.
48. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 2, 7, 12–27: suddhamāgadhikā ti magadhesu 
bhavā, tattha viditā vā māgadhā saddā. te etesaṃ santi, tesu vā niyuttā ti māgadhikā. suddhā ca sak-
kaṭādibhāsitakālusiyābhāvena visuddhā, asammissā vā aparicitattā te māgadhikā cā ti suddhamāga -
dhikā, yatipotā. te yathāvutte alaṅkāre ābharaṇavisese na vaḷañjenti, pasādhanavisese nānubhavanti, 
ganthavisese pana uggahaṇadhāraṇādivisesena attano suddhamāgadhikattā, rāmasammādīnañ ca 
sakkaṭādibhāvato ti ayam ettha saddattho. bhāvatthaleso p’ ettha paripūrati, tathāvidhapatītiyogato. 
suddhamāgadhikā attano parisuddhabhāvena pubbe sobhanā pi te alaṅkārā idāni malaggahitabhāvap-
pattā, kiṃ tehi malaggahitehi amhādisānaṃ suddhasattānan ti na vaḷañjentī ti.
“patīyamānaṃ pana kiñci vatthu atth’ eva vāṇīsu mahākavīnaṃ,
yaṃ taṃ pasiddhāvayavātirittaṃ ābhāti lāvaṇyam iva ’ṅganāsū” (Dhvanyāloka 1.4) ti hi vuttaṃ. On 
the derivation of māgadhikā, see also Moggallānavyākaraṇa of Moggallāna, 4.20; 4.26.
49. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, vv. 1.3–4.
50. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 1.6.
51. Ratnaśrīṭīkā of Ratnaśrījñāna, 5,26–6,9.

--- Page 181 of 286 ---
166 REWRITING BUDDHISM
52. For a useful discussion of the satpuruṣa as a category of reader in medieval Sri Lankan literature, see 
Berkwitz, 2004, 258–70.
53. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā on v. 5, 11,19–20: tasmā guṇadosavibhāgavicāraṇaṃ nāma tabbidūnaṃ 
yeva, nāsatthaññūnaṃ purisapasūnaṃ. He further writes that these beast-like people do not have 
the authority or entitlement ( adhikāra) to discriminate between these literary merits and faults. See 
Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 5, 12,24–5 ≈ Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 8.
54. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 5, 12,6–9.
55. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 5, 12,19–22 = Aṅguttara Nikāya I, 126,1–4:
nihīyati puriso nihīnasevī
na ca hāyetha kadāci tulyasevī,
seṭṭham upanamam udeti dhīro
tasmā ’ttano uttaritaraṃ bhajethā ti.
56. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 338, 272, 5–7: … sakala-saṃsāra-dukkha-  
nissaraṇekanimitta-vimuttirasekarasa-visuddha-saddhammāgama-viggāha-sampīṇanoṇata-matīnaṃ 
parama-saddhālūnam anadhigatatthe pi ….
57. Subodhālaṅkārapurāṇasannaya, 177, 24 =  Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā on 338, 272, 24. This was 
also noted by Padmanabh S. Jaini in relation to the sannaya’s Pali translation, the abhinavaṭīkā. See 
Jaini, ed. 2000, xviii.
58. Ratnapāla, 1971, 150. See also, Gornall and Henry, 2017, 86. In this article I wrongly refer to 
Saṅgharakkhita as the hierarch during the 1266 reform when in fact it was Medhaṅkara.
59. Kief fer-Pülz, 2017b, 38, translating verse five of the colophon of the Khuddasikkhābhinavaṭīkā of 
Saṅgharakkhita, 440. A similar verse is found in the Vuttodaya colophon (v. 134). See Kieffer-Pülz, 
2017b, 48.
60. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 338:
paṭibhānavatā lokavohāram anusārinā
kat’ ocityasamulhāsavedinā kavinā paraṃ.
61. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 338, 272, 13–17: yato ocityaṃ nāma kavīnaṃ 
paramaṃ rahassaṃ lokavohāre pi ucitaññu yeva pasaṃsīyate, samucitalokavohārānusāren’ eva ca 
vakkhamānāukkamena viracitā racanā sacetanānaṃ rasassādāya sampajjate, tasmā ocitye samulla -
sattaṃ (corr. samullāsattaṃ) dittaṃ phuṭam eva bandhanaṃ kātuṃ vaṭṭati.
62. Dhvanyālokavṛtti of Ānandavardhana on vv. 3.10–14, 145,17–18:
anaucityād ṛte nānyad rasabhaṅgasya kāraṇam
prasiddhaucityabandhas tu rasasyopaniṣat parā.
63. Aucityavicāracarcā of Kṣemendra, v.7ab: ucitaḥ prāhur ācāryāḥ sadṛśaṃ kila yasya yat. See Pollock, 
2001b, 213.
64. Aucityavicāracarcā of Kṣemendra, v. 19, ed. and trans. Sūryakānta, 1954, 142.
65. Aucityavicāracarcā of Kṣemendra, v. 28, ed. and trans. Sūryakānta, 1954, 157.
66. Raghuvaṃśa of Kālidāsa, v. 3.70, cited in Aucityavicāracarcā of Kṣemendra, 49,4–7:
atha sa viṣayavyāvṛttātmā yathāvidhi sūnave
nṛpatikakudaṃ dattvā yūne sitātapavāraṇam
munivanatarucchāyāṃ devyā tayā saha śiśriye
galitavayasām ikṣvākūṇāṃ idaṃ hi kulavratam.
In translating this verse, I consulted the translation by Sūryakānta, 1954, 157.
67. V erse twelve of the Aucityavicāracarcā mentions explicitly the ‘approbation of the wise’ as a deter-
mining feature of propriety, for instance.
68. Pollock, 2001b, 213.
69. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 1 ≈ Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 1.1. His appeal here for divine 
inspiration imitates the Kāvyādarśa, which begins similarly by imploring the Hindu goddess Sāras-
vatī to inspire its author. Whereas Daṇḍin describes Sārasvatī as dwelling in the mouth of the god 
Brahma, ‘like a she-goose in a lotus garden’, Saṅgharakkhita conjures an explicitly Buddhist image 
and reimagines the goddess of speech as ‘born in the womb of the Buddha’s lotus-like mouth’.
70. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita on v. 1, 2,27–3,6.
71. Subodhālaṅkārapurāṇasannaya on v. 1, 4, 1–2 =  Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā on v. 1, 6, 24–5, citing  
 Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 103:
ocityaṃ nāma viññeyyaṃ loke vikhyātam ādarā
tatthopadesappabhavā sujanā kavipuṅgavā.
72. Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā on v. 106, 114, 16–19. This passage is not found in the older Sinhala 
sannaya (on v. 106, 66) on which the abhinavaṭīkā is based. See Jaini, ed. 2000, xiv; xviii.

--- Page 182 of 286 ---
 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY : SAN·GHARAKKHITA’S POETICS  167
73. Charles Hallisey was the first to note the potential significance of the introduction of this fault. See 
Hallisey, 2003, 703.
74. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 62:
yācito ’haṃ kathaṃ nāma na dajjāmy api jīvitaṃ
tathā pi puttadānena vedhate hadayaṃ mama.
75. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā on v. 62, 80,21–3.
76. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, vv. 1.76–77; Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, vv. 142–3.
77. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 106:
yo mārasenam āsannam āsannavijayussavo,
tiṇāya pi na maññittha so vo detu jayaṃ jino.
78. Cuneo, 2013; Kulkarni, 1986; McCrea, 2008, 392–6; Shulman, 2012, 93.
79. See, for instance, Pollock, trans. 2009, 251.
80. See, for instance, Haberman, 2001, 30–9.
81. A  similar aesthetic exploitation of the perceived incongruity between poetic speech and the divine 
can be found in much Hindu devotional poetry too. See, for instance, Bronner, 2007a, 119–23.
82. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 52:
name taṃ sirasā sabbopamātītaṃ tathāgataṃ
yassa lokaggataṃ pattassopamā na hi yujjati.
83. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 34; Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, vv. 3.162–85.
84. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 3.167.
85. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 3.179.
86. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 3.184:
prameyo ’py aprameyo ’si saphalo ’py asi niṣphalaḥ
ekas tvam apy aneko ’si namas te viśvamūrtaye.
87. Ratnaśrīṭīkā of Ratnaśrījñāna, 275,22–3: itīdṛśaṃ na nyāyaviruddham evaṃvidhatvād brahmaṇaḥ par-
amasyeti.
88. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, vv. 75–80.
89. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 79:
pariccattabhavo pi tvam upanītabhavo asi
acintyaguṇasārāya namo te munipuṅgava.
90. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 97, 6–7: īdisaṃ na nyāyaviruddham evaṃvidhattā 
munipuṅgavassa.
91. Dīgha Nikāya II, 265,16–267,13.
92. Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 77:
nimuggamanaso buddhaguṇe pañcasikhassa pi
tantissaravirodho so na sampīṇeti kaṃ janaṃ.
93. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 95,19–26.
94. Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā of Saṅgharakkhita, 95,24.
95. Subodhālaṅkārapurāṇasannaya, 186,28–32 (= Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā, 304,16–19):
entesu kesarikarīsv api veṭhayante nāge nagaṃ madagaje viya veḷugumbaṃ
yakkhe vicālayati no cali īsakam pi santiṃ gato va vidhuro madhurāpi bhāvā.
96. Subodhālaṅkārapurāṇasannaya, 187,10–18 = Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā, 304,29–305,6.
97. Subodhālaṅkārapurāṇasannaya, 187,5–8 = Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā, 304,24–7.

--- Page 183 of 286 ---
168
8
The Politics of Relics: Dhammakitti’s 
History
Saṅgharakkhita’s poetics, fusing eloquence and morality, turned ornate liter -
ature from an object of spiritual danger into a potent source of stimulation 
for seekers of devotional sentiments. Saṅgharakkhita did not forge the con-
nection between ornate literature and devotional practice himself, however. 
Rather, it had emerged in historiographical works composed in the decades 
prior to the composition of his treatise. These experimental texts reveal more 
clearly the role this new form of kāvya was thought to play in monastic life 
and underscore the fact that elite monks had begun to use the Buddha’s rel -
ics, reliquaries and ornamental Pali literature alike as tools in the search for 
serene joy (pasāda). There is, of course, a long-standing tradition that speech 
can inspire such devotional feeling. The Mahāvaṃsa (‘Great history’) sets 
out explicitly that one of its aims was to inculcate serene joy in its audience. 
Reform-era histories differed, however, in that a new poetic form modelled on 
Sanskrit kāvya was now used as an affective soteriological tool and, due to its 
historical associations with political power, also as the appropriate medium for 
aesthetically instantiating new relationships with the Buddha that were at once 
devotional and political.
The term vaṃsa when used as a genre of literature is most often trans -
lated either as ‘chronicle’ or ‘history’. The original meaning of the word 
though was ‘bamboo’; the successive segments of clumping  bamboo stems 
provided an apt metaphor for the multiple lineages of buddhas and kings 
described in these texts.
1 The vaṃsas most often begin by recounting certain 
episodes in the lives of Buddha Gotama (the buddha of our current age) – or 
even of previous buddhas – and go on to narrate the fate of the sāsana, that 
is, the Buddhist tradition,
2 during the reigns of successive monarchs, one after 
the other. The linearity of historical description in these texts serves both to 
cast the Buddhist tradition in Sri Lanka as the sole continuation of the sāsana 

--- Page 184 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  169
established by the Buddha and to underscore its steady, uninterrupted march 
through the fleetingly fragile  structures of temporal power .3
The earliest example of a Pali vaṃsa is the Buddhavaṃsa (‘History of 
the buddhas’), which was written in India possibly around the second century 
BCE.4 The text is an account of the succession of previous buddhas beginning 
with Buddha Dīpaṅkara ‘100,000 eons and four incalculable eons ago’ and 
ending with Buddha Gotama, his life, death and the distribution of his relics.
5 
This work was followed centuries later by two vaṃsas composed in Sri Lanka 
that continued the account from where the Buddhavaṃsa left off. The earlier 
Dīpavaṃsa (‘History of the island’), most likely composed in the fourth cen -
tury, again narrates the life of the Buddha, his visits to Sri Lanka, the estab -
lishment of Buddhism there, and its subsequent history in the reigns of kings 
up until Mahāsena (274–301).
6 The later Mahāvaṃsa, likely composed in the 
fifth century, is a more coherent work and is essentially a systematic revision 
of the Dīpavaṃsa narrative.
7
The motivation to compose these early histories was not to provide 
a chronicle of past events for posterity or to detail the genealogies of royal 
dynasties to serve the political ends of the royal court.
8 First and foremost 
these histories can be understood as documenting ‘successions of the Buddha’s 
presence’, as Jonathan Walters fittingly puts it, that is, they describe the inter-
connections of karma that influence the fate of the Buddhist tradition, age 
after age, king after king. As Walters says, ‘more important than who a king’s 
mother was, in the eyes of the authors of the Pāli Vaṃsas, is the question of 
his kamma: what merit, and what demerit, did he accrue as king? How will 
this affect where he is going? Did he assist, or injure, the instituted Discipline 
on the island?’
9 Kings and their polities are at once subject to previous karma 
stretching back to the incalculable past and agents of karma that will produce 
effects for future generations. This desire to provide causal, ethical explan -
ations for history is always underpinned by a deep soteriological concern for 
the health and state of the sāsana.
By the tenth century scholar-monks began to compose histories influ-
enced by new, Sanskritic ideas of literary beauty, including, for instance, a 
continuation of the Mahāvaṃsa, known as the Cūḷavaṃsa (‘Little history’), 
and a number of new histories that narrate the fate of the different relics of 
the Buddha. While parts of older histories may have, on occasion, addressed 
royal audiences,
10 the later vaṃsas sometimes explicitly address elites and 
often focus on deeds of royal heroism in the protection and preservation of the 
Buddha’s relics. These vaṃsas adopt conventions of Sanskrit narrative litera-
ture in a seemingly conscious move away from the previous vaṃsa style and 
consist for the most part of a self-contained, episodic story of how a particular 
Buddha relic travelled from India and became enshrined in a certain location 

--- Page 185 of 286 ---
170 REWRITING BUDDHISM
in Sri Lanka. 11 Their literary quality meant that early Orientalists, such as 
Wilhelm Geiger (1882–1945), whose approach to the vaṃsas focused on sep-
arating historical facts from ‘fables, legends and tales of marvels’, viewed 
them as particularly ‘artificial and sometimes even abstruse’ when compared 
with the ‘sober and reliable form’ of the Mahāvaṃsa.
12
Focusing on Dhammakitti’s Dāṭhāvaṃsa (‘History of the tooth’), a his-
tory of the Buddha’s tooth composed for the court of Queen Līlāvatī (1211–12), 
we will explore how such ornamental poetry supported the centrality of relic 
worship in reform-era practice and how these texts became agents themselves 
in enhancing the affective power of the relics they described. The aesthetic of 
these poems was not only devotional but also simultaneously political, since 
monks employed this courtly form of writing to assert the Buddha’s spiritual 
and temporal sovereignty over the island. In thinking about the political func-
tion of relic histories we will move beyond previous approaches that treated 
these poems solely as forms of state ideology and as tools of royal legiti -
mation.
13 This is not to deny, as others have, the existence of group ideolo -
gies or of legitimation as a possible outcome of premodern politics but rather 
to highlight, from a monastic perspective, how the relic vaṃsas served the 
autonomous political interests of monastic elites during the reform era and 
how monks viewed relics, not as tools of court power, but as potent agents in 
emotionally instantiating the king and the court’s status as devotional vassals 
to the Buddha and the Saṅgha.
14 In exploring the Saṅgha’s political agency this 
chapter thus emphasizes the historical contingency, rather than natural ‘symbi-
osis’, inherent in the emergence of Saṅgha-state co-operation; 15 co- operation 
that was not met as a result of social needs but rather made as a result of the 
political endeavours of the scholar-monks of the era.16
8.1. The Political Aesthetic and Sociokarmic Figuration
The Dāṭhāvaṃsa is a Pali poem in five chapters composed by the royal pre-
ceptor (rājaguru) Dhammakitti at the request of the warlord Parakkama, who 
was army commander during the reign of Queen Līlāvatī and  protec tor of her 
young Pāṇḍya successor, prince Madhurinda. In his opening verses, Dham-
makitti states that his Pali poem is in fact a rendering of an older Sinhala his -
tory of the tooth relic and that he composed it for those who live on the other 
island (dīpantaravāsi).
17 The Sinhala commentary on this verse clarifies that 
the author meant that the history was composed both for those in Sri Lanka 
and India.
18 The work is composed in a Sanskrit literary mode, a ‘political aes-
thetic’ that Sheldon Pollock has shown was intimately tied to court culture and 

--- Page 186 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  171
expressions of political power.19 It opens with a eulogy or praśasti praising the 
court and in both form and content presupposes an elite audience.
Since Dhammakitti praises the royal court and adopts a literary form 
associated with celebrating sovereignty, we could feasibly interpret the poem 
as a work of court poetry. This genre, however, is often too mechanically 
applied to premodern South Asian kāvya  and obscures the complex political 
relationships underpinning literary production. We cannot say, for instance, 
that Dhammakitti was a dependent member of the royal household like the 
poets in the lettered courts of late medieval Europe, nor did he necessarily 
intend to sustain the royal court as a social group.
20 The tendency to frame 
literary works such as the Dāṭhāvaṃsa as reflective of a single interpretative 
community or dominant class – what we can call ‘court culture’ – could easily 
lead us to overlook the complicated political situation of the poem, which 
represents in actuality a monastic intervention in a trialogue between local 
powerholders, namely monastic elites, a warlord, and the royal court, that was 
intended at least in part to declare the lordship of the Buddha over the island 
and to turn the newly arrived Pāṇḍya prince into a Buddhist devotee and trib-
utary supplicant. The opening eulogy of the history hints at some of the com -
plexities in the work’s production:
An ornament in the lineage of the inhabitants of Kāḷaka, the compas -
sionate warlord Parakkama – who strives for the advancement of the 
conqueror’s religion and who longs for what is good for the people – 
appointed into royal dominion over the whole land of Laṅkā Queen 
Līlāvatī, who was born of the pure, resplendent, and stainless Paṇḍu lin-
eage, who is highly devoted to the religion of the king of sages, pleasant 
in speech, like a parent, a mother, to the people who follow the path of 
guidance at all times, loving queen to King Parākramabāhu, possessed 
of discriminating intelligence, and one who gives what is needed. He 
(Parakkama) appointed as her heir-apparent a scion of the lineage of 
Paṇḍu kings named Madhurinda – who pleases his honourable minis -
ters, is kind-hearted, faithful, and well-learned in religious matters and 
worldly arts – and dispelled the disgrace known as ‘Tisīhaḷa’,
21 which 
was kingless for so long, and always made the well-disciplined San˙ gha 
pleased with good robes and other requisites.22
The timeless motifs of power, fame and valour contained in these opening 
verses project a sense of stability that contrasts with the reality of the historical 
context, which we know was characterized by chaos and violence. The eulogy 
is particularly unusual since it primarily glorifies the warlord Parakkama and 
only praises Queen Līlāvatī and Prince Madhurinda as his dependents, both 

--- Page 187 of 286 ---
172 REWRITING BUDDHISM
of whom were of Pāṇḍya descent. During this era, the so-called ‘period of 
sixteen kings’23, rulers of both the Kāliṅga and Pāṇḍya lineages fought over 
the throne of Laṅkā and were supported by various local warlords who acted 
as kingmakers.
24
Writing in 1211, Dhammakitti had just witnessed the young Kāliṅ ga 
prince Dharmāśoka (1208–9) put to death possibly by his own father Anīkaṅga 
(1209) of the Eastern Gaṅgas, who in turn was killed by a warlord Vikkanta-
Camūnaka to make way for Līlāvatī’s second reign (1209–10).
25 Her first 
reign (1197–1200) had similarly come about due to the murder of Coḍagaṅga 
(1196–7) at the hands of a Pāṇḍya-supporting warlord named Kitti. At the 
end of her third and final reign in around 1212, both Līlāvatī and the young 
Madhurinda were deposed by another Pāṇḍya prince also called ‘Parākrama’ 
(1212–15) who landed in Sri Lanka with an army from South India. His fleet-
ing reign, in turn, was put to a violent end by Māgha of Kaliṅga who invaded 
in 1215 and ruled until 1236.
26 In the midst of this pan-South Asian internecine 
war on the island, we have two local actors, namely, a warlord, Parakkama, 
and a monk, Dhammakitti, who both have interests in cultivating one of these 
monarchs into a favourable ally for their respective causes. For Dhammakitti, 
in particular, this critically involved maintaining a monarch who was favour -
able to the monastic community and who, most importantly, would respect its 
sovereignty and land rights.
Dhammakitti’s choice to compose his work in Pali was an attempt to 
bring the history of the Buddha’s tooth to a foreign audience. At the same 
time his claim to be a translator rather than an author lends his work a certain 
authority in the local vaṃsa tradition while also reinstating the authority of his 
Sinhala sources in transregional Buddhist history more generally. In the plot 
of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa itself we can read an attempt to frame the Indian geneal -
ogies of both the Pāṇḍya and Kāliṅga lineages within the karmic history of 
Buddhism in order to encourage a sense of communality with and favour -
ability towards the Buddhist tradition. The Dāṭhāvaṃsa begins by relating the 
Buddha’s previous life as an ascetic Sumedha who in the presence of the pre-
vious Buddha Dīpaṅkara made the aspiration to become a buddha himself. We 
are then given a brief account of the life of the Buddha Gotama, his princely 
upbringing, his renunciation and enlightenment.
When describing the Buddha’s cremation and the distribution of his rel-
ics the Dāṭhāvaṃsa states that the monk Khema who had been apportioned the 
left canine tooth took the relic to Brahmadatta, king of Kaliṅga, in Dantapura 
(‘Tooth city’). Khema introduced Brahmadatta to the Buddha’s teachings 
and the king established a temple to house the relic. The subsequent kings of 
Kaliṅga continued to worship the relic until a certain ruler Guhasīva ascended 
the throne. Guhasīva was less discriminating in his patronage of religious sects 

--- Page 188 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  173
and began to adhere to wrong views ( diṭṭhi).27 The Kāliṅga king, however, 
eventually relinquished his false views and banished non-Buddhist ascetics 
(nigaṇṭha) from his kingdom, having witnessed the Buddhist festivals of the 
city-dwellers and having listened to his minister’s advice about the benefits of 
worshipping the relic.
The non-Buddhist ascetics went to Pāṭaliputta and appealed to king 
Paṇḍu, lord of Jambudīpa, as ‘a worshipper of the gods such as Śiva and 
Brahma’ to reprimand king Guhasīva.
28 King Paṇḍu sent a suzerain, king 
Cittayāna, to bring Guhasīva and the tooth relic to Pāṭaliputta. Paṇḍu then 
had the non-Buddhist ascetics at his court throw the tooth relic into a fire and 
pound it with a hammer, though each time the relic performed a miracle and 
remained undamaged. A noble of Paṇḍu’s court, Subhadda, who had become 
pleased with the relic’s power, then eloquently sang the praises of the Buddha 
and touched the hearts of the assembly. Responding to Subhadda’s worship, 
the relic performed a miracle and ‘lit up all the directions like the star Venus’.
29 
Paṇḍu’s ministers appealed to the king to favour the Buddha ‘in order to reach 
heaven and nirvana’, at which point the king, full of joy, worshipped the relic, 
paraded it around the city, and built a gem-studded temple for it.
King Paṇḍu then ruled virtuously, defeated his enemy Khīradhāra in bat-
tle, gave to the poor and lived with self-control into old age. Before passing 
away and attaining his heavenly goal he entrusted the throne to his son and 
returned the tooth relic to king Guhasīva. Guhasīva then married his daughter, 
Hemamālā, to prince Danta, the son of the king of Ujjenī. Soon after, relatives 
of king Khīradhāra attempted to invade Kaliṅga and seize the tooth relic, for-
cing Guhasīva to give prince Danta and his daughter the tooth relic so that they 
could take it to the Buddhist king Mahāsena in Sri Lanka to ensure its safety. 
Finding Mahāsena had passed away, the two were greeted instead by his suc-
cessor, king Kittisirimegha, also known as Sirimeghavaṇṇa (301–28), who, 
in devotion, offered the island of Sri Lanka to the relic. At Kittisirimegha’s 
request, the relic miraculously travelled in a golden chariot in a celebratory 
procession through the streets of Anurādhapura and, after circumambulating 
the city, settled beyond its northern gate at the Abhayagiri monastery, bathing 
the city in light:
sā dantadhātu sasikhaṇḍasamānavaṇṇā
raṃsīhi kundanavacandanapaṇḍarehi
pāsādagopurasiluccayapādapādiṃ
niddhotarūpiyamayaṃ va akā khaṇena.
30
The tooth relic, coloured like a crescent moon,
with rays white like jasmine and fresh sandalwood,

--- Page 189 of 286 ---
174 REWRITING BUDDHISM
made the palace, the city gates, hills, and trees
appear for a moment as if made of pure silver.
Dhammakitti in his narrative modifies traditional accounts connecting the tooth 
relic with the Kāliṅgas, as found in the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (‘Great pass-
ing’), for instance, and introduces for the first time the figure of king Paṇḍu, 
who it seems we are to identify as an ancestor of the Pāṇḍya royal family. 
There was a popular South Indian tradition of tracing the Pāṇḍya dynasty to 
North Indian predecessors and it is noteworthy that Dhammakitti speaks of the 
‘Paṇḍu lineage’ (paṇḍuvaṃsa) when referring to Līlāvatī and Madhurinda’s 
Pāṇḍya ancestry.
31 King Paṇḍu, perhaps like Madhurinda, was not a Buddhist 
but a Hindu and it is only by witnessing the miracles performed by the relic 
that he turns his favour towards Buddhism. It seems likely that Dhammakitti 
intended the Pāṇḍyas in the Laṅkan court, in particular the heir apparent prince 
Madhurinda, to identify with their heroic Buddhist ancestor.
Kings in the narrative also do not act independently but are heavily influ-
enced by their ministers and there may well be other correspondences between 
ministerial figures in the poem and those surrounding prince Madhurinda.  It 
is the army commander ( senāpati), for instance, who propitiates the relic on 
behalf of king Paṇḍu and entreats it to travel to the royal palace and have the 
king favour the triple gem. The army commander’s role as a powerful facil -
itator of the king’s conversion here clearly mirrors the possible role played 
by the warlord Parakkama who was the patron of the  Dāṭhāvaṃsa and pro-
tector of prince Madhurinda. More generally, we can speculate too that the 
co- operation that results between king Paṇḍu, the Kāliṅga Guhasīva, and the 
Laṅkan monarch Kittisirimegha reflects Dhammakitti’s desire for unity among 
the royal court’s factions centred on a common concern for the well-being of 
the monastic community and the Buddhist tradition in general.
It seems likely, then, that one of Dhammakitti’s aims in narrating the 
ancient history of the tooth in his Dāṭhāvaṃsa was to provide a framework 
for contemporary political action.
32 It would be overly simplistic, however, to 
view this representation of the past simply as a pragmatic instrumentalization 
of myth. Rather, Dhammakitti was perhaps seeking karmic explanations for 
the events unfolding before his eyes. This karma was not just personal but 
rather what Jonathan Walters calls ‘sociokarma’, in which the social relations 
that bind communities are thought to transmigrate and karmically continue in 
successive lives.
33 We can speculate that Dhammakitti intended his audience 
to identify as heirs of this sociokarma, either by identifying as their ances -
tor reborn or as a recipient of karmic ‘overflow’, that is to say, they viewed 
themselves as indirectly benefiting from the good karma of their ancestors. 
Through this sociokarmic figuration Dhammakitti skilfully intertwines the 

--- Page 190 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  175
consanguineous descent of the royal houses he depicts with their karmic 
ties to the Buddhist tradition and, in doing so, redefines kinship in karmic 
terms, allowing him to localize these foreign rulers. This karmic model, of 
course, did not ‘overwhelm political exigency’ and Dhammakitti’s vision was 
adapted, reinterpreted and selectively ignored at various points in the course 
of its reception in Laṅkan political life.
34 This point is starkly reinforced by the 
fact that within months of its completion both royal Pāṇḍyas, Madhurinda and 
Līlāvatī, were likely killed before Dhammakitti’s vision of Buddhist Pāṇḍya 
kingship could be realized.
8.2. Serene Joy and the Poetics of Relics
The drama of the central chapters of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa centres on the shifting 
religious identities of the two kings, Guhasīva and Paṇḍu, and the role of the 
tooth relic’s miracles, ornamented reliquaries, public festivals and royal minis-
ters’ speeches in reshaping their sensibilities in favour of Buddhism. Descrip-
tions in the history of the religious power of each of these spectacles combine 
traditional ideas about the emotional charge of religious wonders with courtly 
attitudes about the moral value of ornamentation and beautification.
35 We can 
detect in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, for instance, subtle shifts in emphasis, first within 
its descriptions of the power of these objects in terms of their ornamental con-
figuration, and second in the inclusion of a broader array of sensual objects 
that are not directly religious as stimulators of serene joy (pasāda) in the con-
version of kings and their courtiers, including ornate speeches, courtly behav-
iour and well-governed kingdoms.
36
The short conversion narrative of the non-Buddhist king Cittayāna, 
who was sent by king Paṇḍu to bring both Guhasīva and the tooth relic to 
Pāṭaliputta, illustrates well how kings in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa are brought to a state 
of serene joy through a complex construction of diverse events and objects. 
Over the course of twenty-five verses (2.99–124), Cittayāna experiences a 
number of pleasing events that gather in intensity until finally he witnesses 
the tooth relic of the Buddha produce a spectacular miracle and renounces his 
false views. These events, however, are not all specifically Buddhist and the 
first descriptions of Cittayāna’s change of heart occur as a result of Guhasīva’s 
courtly decorum and the good governance of the city of Dantapura. We are 
told that upon his arrival king Guhasīva pleased (tosesi) his guest with gifts of 
elephants and that Cittayāna became well-disposed (sumana) when surveying 
the capital city which was ‘decorated with walls, gates, towers, palaces and 
garlands’ and was ‘well furnished with alms-houses’.
37

--- Page 191 of 286 ---
176 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Incidentally, a fourteenth-century Sinhala rendering of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, 
the Daḷadāpūjāvaliya (‘Garland of offerings to the tooth’), places greater 
emphasis on the spectacle of Dantapura and expands in opulent detail on the 
wonderful construction of the city.38 The descriptions of diplomatic decorum 
in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa conform to tropes of royal virtue derived from Indian 
court culture and the inclusion of ornate descriptions of cities, for instance, 
likewise follows the prescriptions of Sanskrit poetical treatises.
39 At the same 
time, however, our author Dhammakitti situates these courtly emotions as part 
of a cumulative aesthetic experience that ultimately will lead to Cittayāna’s 
conversion.
The subsequent objects that bring Cittayāna to an experience of serene 
joy are more recognizably Buddhist. At their first meeting Guhasīva delivers a 
short sermon praising the Buddha and his path to enlightenment that produces 
in Cittayāna a state of serene joy (pasannatā) accompanied by a flood of joyful 
tears (ānandassu
°). There is a clear connection here between Cittayāna’s sensi-
tivity to courtly beauty, garlands, palaces, etc., and his emotional receptiveness 
to the poetic praise of the Buddha. At this point Cittayāna has yet to renounce 
his non-Buddhist views and it is only through a series of visual sights, namely 
an ornate relic temple, a glittering reliquary and finally a miracle ‘pleasing to 
the eye’ performed by the tooth relic itself, that brings Cittayāna and his entire 
army to such a state of pleasure ( haṭṭha) that they renounce their false views. 
We can perhaps also read into Dhammakitti’s descriptions of these spectacles 
elements of a courtly aesthetic, in particular, in the construction of the tooth 
relic temple, which is described as having been built with sandalwood, jewels 
and gems and decorated with coral images and other paintings.
40
It is useful to compare the conversion narrative of Cittayāna with that of 
king Paṇḍu. Our author, Dhammakitti, relates the indecorous courtly behav-
iour of Paṇḍu and his advisors with their lack of emotional receptiveness to 
the religious spectacles that they witness. Paṇḍu is described as arrogant and 
bad-tempered and surrounded by a court of deceitful advisors. He becomes 
filled with rage, for instance, when observing the celebratory procession that 
accompanies Guhasīva and the relic to Pāṭaliputta and continues to remain 
emotionally unmoved and full of suspicion when viewing the many miracles 
performed by the relic in his court. Conversely, Paṇḍu’s virtuous royal conduct 
after his conversion only further serves to underscore the connection between 
Buddhist and courtly sensibilities.
41 It is only after a number of royal courtiers 
are moved to petition Paṇḍu to change his mind that finally the king becomes 
overjoyed (pahaṭṭha) with his ‘doubts dispelled’ (vitiṇṇakaṅkha).
42
It is a longstanding trope of Pali vaṃsas that inspiring speech has trans-
formative, pleasing effects in the same way as other visual marvels. The 
Mahāvaṃsa, for instance, claims both in its opening verses and at the end of 

--- Page 192 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  177
each chapter that the history was composed to arouse the ‘serene joy (pasāda) 
and powerful emotion (saṃvega) of the good people’.43 Eloquent speech in the 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa similarly instils in kings feelings of joy and happiness in identical 
ways to religious spectacles. The speech that finally brings Paṇḍu to a joyful 
state is as follows:
What advantage is having wisdom, king, if, upon seeing such extraor -
dinary power of the chief of sages (i.e. Buddha), one does not experience 
even a little serene joy? It is the nature of good people [to experience] 
serene joy, king, with respect to qualities that should inspire serene joy. 
All the buds of white waterlilies blossom automatically at moonrise. Do 
not then, king, abandon the path to heaven on account of the speech of 
the ill-minded. What unconfused person in search of a good path would 
walk holding on to the blind? Even powerful kings such as Kappiṇa, 
Bimbisāra and Suddhodana came to the Dhamma king (i.e. Buddha) for 
refuge and attentively drank the immortal Dhamma. Even [Indra] the 
thousand-eyed king of the gods (lit. ‘the thirty’
44) whose life was spent 
came to the king of sages, who had destroyed birth, listened carefully 
to the pure Dhamma and, having realized the Dhamma, obtained also 
[a longer] life. You too, supreme king of men, for the sake of obtaining 
heaven and nirvana quickly make your mind serenely joyful with respect 
to the destroyer of the five Māras
45, preeminent god of gods 46, the best 
Dhamma king.47
This speech introduces historical models of ideal devotion in the form of the 
ancient kings Kappiṇa, Bimbisāra and Suddhodana, and also the king of the 
gods, Indra, who sought long lives and immortality. After narrating these past 
events, the speech sharply turns to the present with a direct imperative (make 
your mind serenely joyful!) instructing the king to act similarly. 
Dhammakitti in the narrative here presents the past as a model for royal 
behaviour and seems to have viewed his own history as similarly politically 
instructive.
48 Here, the model emphasizes as a rhetorical strategy the karmic 
rewards of Dhammic action, notably extended life and immortality. In struc -
ture, the passage resembles to some extent the so-called ‘acts of truth’ (sacca-
kiriyā) common in early Buddhist literature, defined by Eugene Burlingame 
as a ‘formal declaration of fact, accompanied by a command or resolution 
or prayer that the purpose of the agent shall be accomplished’.
49 Even in the 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa we have three explicit instances of the ritual performance of ‘acts 
of truth’ in which the previous deeds of the Buddha are narrated in order to 
move the tooth relic to perform a miracle.
50 While similar, the speeches of 

--- Page 193 of 286 ---
178 REWRITING BUDDHISM
ministers – variously described in the poem as subhāsita ‘eloquent exposi-
tions’ (2.86) or vaṇṇanā ‘praises’ (2.108), for instance – differ from these ‘acts 
of truth’, however, in that they are not just effective in terms of the truth they 
convey but are also affective due to their ornate, formal composition and rhe-
torical power.
The first two verses of the speech help us understand something of the 
‘mechanism’ of pasāda in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa
, that is to say they explain expli -
citly why some do and do not experience serene joy when witnessing religious 
spectacles.
51 First, it is noteworthy that there is little emphasis here on the 
agency or power of the Buddha in bringing about serene joy in the audience 
witnessing his wonders.
52 Rather, Dhammakitti chooses to stress instead the 
morality and wisdom of the spectator as the determining factor in the experi -
ence of this joy. He treats as a natural indicator of one’s moral condition the 
ability to experience serene joy with respect to an object that should produce 
this emotion. He reinforces the morally normative nature of this experience 
by likening it to the natural world where forest water lilies blossom automat -
ically in the moonlight. There is a similarity here between the moral basis of 
the aesthetic appreciation of Buddhist miracles and Saṅgharakkhita’s ideas 
about the importance of propriety in one’s emotional response to poetry.
53 In 
both cases morality is the foundation of a transformative emotional experi -
ence that, as Dhammakitti reminds us, can take us to heaven or even lead to 
nirvana. The similarity in the dynamics of religious and artistic experience 
underscores the continuity in Dhammakitti’s poem between Buddhist reli -
gious sensibilities and the normative behavioural and emotional repertoire of 
courtly society.
8.3. Assembling an Affective   Community
Dhammakitti presents religious wonders, relics, reliquaries and ornate speech, 
including his own poem, as potent tools in the cultivation of serene joy.
54 By 
placing emphasis on the audience’s role in the affective success of Buddhist 
spectacles, Dhammakitti provides a framework to imagine the parameters of 
a Buddhist community, defined by what Émile Durkheim would call a ‘col -
lective effervescence’, a shared emotional response towards some material 
object that creates social solidarity. Yet in speaking of the social, ritual func -
tion of the religious spectacle, whether relics, festivals or poetry, I do not 
mean to suggest, following Durkheim, that such rituals are a ‘social neces -
sity’, that is, a manifestation of the needs of an a priori social whole.
55 Rather, 
we can see in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa how relic worship functions as a focal point for 
the creative reorganization of a particular monastic conception of society. At 

--- Page 194 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  179
any one time, kings, ministers and ascetics move in and out of the Buddhist 
 community depending on whether they participate in the solidarity engen -
dered by shared serene joy.56
We can see such a dynamic process at work in the  Dāṭhāvaṃsa in the 
way the poem frames the struggle to win the favour of kings within a conflict 
between Buddhists and non-Buddhists. As mentioned, these non-Buddhists 
in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa are referred to as  nigaṇṭhas, a word that in earlier Pali 
literature especially referred to Jain ascetics. In Dhammakitti’s history, how-
ever, the term is employed in a more capacious manner to denote all theists. 
Dhammakitti is rather insensitive to the various sectarian distinctions among 
his adversaries and largely lumps all gods together in what we might under -
stand as an early delineation of Hindu identity, albeit in opposition to Buddhist 
ritual practice.
57 He initially describes king Paṇḍu, for instance, as a worship-
per of gods, ‘such as Śiva and Brahma’, and yet when Paṇḍu is inspecting the 
relic his advisors claim that the tooth is a bone from Rāma, an incarnation of 
Viṣṇu, and the king initially worships it as such.
58 The sly nigaṇṭhas function 
both as a foil for their moral Buddhist counterparts but also as a means for 
Dhammakitti to stress the exclusivity of Buddhist sensibilities. The experience 
of serene joy and the rewards of relic worship, such as a heavenly rebirth, are 
not available for those who hold sympathies for non-Buddhist sects.
59
The sharp contours of Buddhist identity that emerge in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa 
take on a spatial dimension too and are explicitly linked with political terri -
tory. Upon experiencing serene joy in relation to the three jewels, for instance, 
Guhasīva has the nigaṇṭhas banished from his kingdom.
60 Similarly, in con-
trast to the hostile religious competition of northern India, Dhammakitti 
depicts the island of Sri Lanka or Sīhaḷa in the reign of Kittisirimegha as a 
Buddhist utopia filled with monks, relics and a devoted populace. While never 
a lived reality, we can hypothesize that the idea of an exclusively Buddhist 
kingdom in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa was an articulation of Dhammakitti’s desire to 
overcome the antagonistic religious rivalries of the thirteenth century. The 
choice of Kittisirimegha’s reign is suggestive too in that the monarch ensured 
the survival and eventual triumph of the Mahāvihāra by restoring its properties 
and plunder taken during the reign of his father, Mahāsena, whose support for 
competing fraternities had almost eradicated the Mahāvihāra entirely. Writing 
half a century after these rival monastic fraternities were reunified in 1165, 
Dhammakitti perhaps chose to strike a conciliatory note in situating the arrival 
of the tooth relic at the Abhayagiri during the reign of such a harmonizing 
figure, rather than the historically divisive Mahāsena.
61
The contestation with Hindu ascetics in the narrative simultaneously 
underscores the fragility and malleability of a Buddhist community bound by a 
common emotional response to the Buddha’s relics. In the court of Paṇḍu, for 

--- Page 195 of 286 ---
180 REWRITING BUDDHISM
instance, the king’s Hindu advisors employ a number of strategies to exploit 
the ‘ambiguity of miracles’ and undermine both the affective success of wit -
nessing the tooth relic and its exclusively Buddhist significance. 62 They first 
inform Paṇḍu that Guhasīva despises the gods and worships the ‘bone of a 
corpse’ (chavaṭṭhi).
63 Confronted with the relic’s miracles, however, the Hindu 
ascetics first claim that the bone is a relic of one of Viṣṇu’s incarnations and, 
when the relic fails to respond to their worship of it as such, they then claim 
that its miracles derive from the magical powers ( vijjābala) of the Buddhist 
monks and not the relic itself.
64
On the one hand, the Hindu ascetics seek to subordinate Buddhist relic 
worship against the transcendental position of their own gods by first framing 
the veneration of the tooth as a form of animism and later by explaining the 
relic’s miracles as a product of the monk’s immanent magical power. The other 
more disruptive strategy employed by the ascetics is the attempt to incorporate 
the tooth within their own theistic framework by claiming that it is a bone from 
an avatar of Viṣṇu. Phyllis Granoff has perceptively noted with respect to this 
episode that it is only among audiences of ‘non-believers’ that the miracles 
of relics are treated and contested as evidence of the Buddha’s power and 
continued presence.
65 By having the relic perform such ‘evidential miracles’ 
to disprove the suppositions of the Hindu ascetics about its natural, divine or 
magical origin, Dhammakitti seeks to remove the ambiguity of the relic’s mir-
acles and in particular to prohibit, at least within his own aesthetic community, 
the assimilation of the relic within another religious assemblage.
66
The dramatic threat posed by the Vaiṣṇava appropriation of the Buddha’s 
relics in the narrative can be possibly connected with contemporary histor -
ical events in northeast India, in particular in Kaliṅga, which we can infer 
Dhammakitti’s courtly audience would be aware of. Less than 100 years prior 
to the composition of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, the Eastern Gaṅgas, beginning with 
Coḍagaṅga, turned away from Śaivism to Vaiṣṇavism, incorporating in par -
ticular the local cult of Jagannātha, a deity that had longstanding associations 
with the Buddha.
67 From the tenth century, the Orissan Vaiṣṇava tradition 
equated Jagannātha with the ninth avatar of Viṣṇu, who prior to this period 
was identified with the Buddha.
68 We can possibly read Dhammakitti’s con -
scious allusions to Hindu appropriation in the ancient past as a contemporary 
response to the threat of the ‘theistic inclusivism’ of Vaiṣṇavism, a trait that is 
readily apparent in the religious sensibilities of the Eastern Gaṅgas, who were 
likely an important force in the Kāliṅga-Pāṇḍya contest over the Sri Lankan 
throne.
69
While the construction of a Buddhist community in the  Dāṭhāvaṃsa 
centres on the king and the royal court, a Buddhist public sphere also plays an 
important, stabilizing role in the narrative by highlighting the constancy of the 

--- Page 196 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  181
Buddhist tradition in the midst of shifting royal sensibilities. 70 In describing 
the kingdoms of both Guhasīva and Kittisirimegha, Dhammakitti introduces 
the idea of a Buddhist populace, principally, to act as a religious spectacle that 
can inspire joy in much the same way as a reliquary. As such, for the most part, 
the public in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa are a faceless entity that are only encountered 
indirectly during festivities and other displays of religious and political power. 
Even the vernacular retellings of the history, while elaborating on the ornate 
processions and  festivals described in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, continue to centre on 
the perspective of the king and the court, where the flags, drums and chariots 
of a city’s festivals remain a disembodied presence with no mention of the 
types of people and characters who may be contributing to these effects.
71
There are occasions, however, where the public can be understood 
as an agent capable of petitioning the king and his court. In the episode of 
Guhasīva’s conversion, for instance, the king gazes out of his palace win -
dow and witnesses the wonderful spectacle of his subjects participating in a 
Buddhist festival.
72 While the people here play a passive role in this scene, in 
the fourteenth-century Daḷadāpūjāvaliya  the city-dwellers host an elaborate 
festival for the tooth relic ‘having understood that the king neglected to wor -
ship the tooth relic’.73 In this vernacular account it is the people who are active 
participants in the attempt to convert the king and are not simply a passive 
object to be gazed upon.
Similarly, in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa’s depiction of the utopian kingdom of 
Kittisirimegha, the countryfolk, townsfolk and city-dwellers, gather together 
in the presence of the king and protest (ugghosayiṃsu) that they have not seen 
the relic, stating, ‘the lord of Dhamma was born in the world (loka) for the 
benefit of all people (loka) and worked for the benefit of all humanity (janatā). 
His relics were distributed for the masses ( bahujana) and we too desire to 
worship the [tooth] relic.’
74 A Buddhist monk advises the king to display the 
relic outside every spring so that the people (jana) may make merit, since, he 
argues, ‘it is the nature of great men to act for the benefit of those dependent 
[on them] (anujīvi)’.
75
In evoking the spectre of the public in the latter episode, in particular, 
Dhammakitti skilfully instils a sense of religious obligation in his royal audi -
ence by assimilating the role of monarch with a priestly responsibility for pro-
viding merit and by conflating the Buddha’s universal mission with a king’s 
duty to his people. Throughout the Dāṭhāvaṃsa Dhammakitti speaks of the 
benefits of tooth relic worship most often in terms of its power to provide 
a heavenly rebirth for his audience. Dhammakitti usually depicts any con -
nection between relic worship and a king’s ability to govern in terms of the 
perceived continuity between Buddhist and royal virtues, as mentioned above. 
In this late passage, however, we see for the first time Dhammakitti appeal to 

--- Page 197 of 286 ---
182 REWRITING BUDDHISM
the Buddhist sensibilities of the masses as a potential reason for Sri Lanka’s 
kings to favour the Buddhist tradition. In happily conflating the ritual agency 
of the public with their potential for collective political agency, Dhammakitti 
thus presents the Buddhist public as an arbiter on royal authority.
76
8.4. Offering the Island to the Buddha
While co-operation between Saṅgha and state was by no means inevitable 
in late medieval Sri Lanka – as the relatively long reign of the anti-Buddhist 
king Māgha attests (1215–36) – it was often the case that, even in times of 
upheaval, kings conformed to Buddhist norms and respected the property 
rights of the Saṅgha. R.A.L.H. Gunawardana has described this tendency as a 
reflection of a natural, if occasionally antagonistic and disputatious, symbiosis 
between the institutions of court and monastery, based on their differing polit-
ical and religious social functions.
77 In naturalizing their relationship, we can 
often overlook the inherent, political contingency of relations between court 
and monastery, the fluidity of social functions across these institutions, and 
the hierarchical relationship that often resulted from competition over shared 
social terrain.
78 Focusing on the concluding episode of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, 
namely Kittisirimegha’s offering of Sīhaḷa island to the tooth relic, and the 
 earliest  prescriptions for royal tooth relic worship contained in the  Daḷadā-
sirita (‘Acts of the tooth’), we will explore the monastic conception of Saṅgha-
court relations and, in particular, how royal relic worship was thought of as 
a ritual instantiation of a monarch’s subordinate position to monastic elites.
In the climactic scene where king Kittisirimegha,  overwhelmed with 
joy, offers Sīhaḷa island to the tooth relic,  the king confesses that no offer -
ing is suitable to the Buddha, ‘even the entire earth with its abundant gems, 
wealth and pleasures’. He then laments that as his kingdom is ‘very small’ 
he does not possess enough wealth to worship the Buddha, ‘the sole lord 
of the three worlds’ ( tibhavekanātha). Overcome with emotion he faints but 
on regaining consciousness he consoles himself that even a ‘small seed’ can 
produce many desired fruits and, ‘with a face resembling the full moon due 
to a great amount of joy’, promptly offers ‘the whole Sīhaḷa island’ to the 
tooth relic in order to attain the happiness of heaven and nirvana.
79 The scene 
is framed by a complex interplay between temporal and spiritual kingship. 
The Buddha is characterized, for instance, as ‘lord of the three worlds’, a 
figurative reference both to his escape from and, by implication, mastery of 
all of cyclic existence.
In response Kittisirimegha first assimilates into the role of subordinate 
king by depicting his offering solely in material terms, as if he was a suzerain 

--- Page 198 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  183
relinquishing territory to his imperial overlord. Then taking on a priestly role, 
Kittisirimegha subsequently appeals to a spiritual teleology and reconciles that 
even a small offering to the Buddha, now referred to as the sovereign of the 
Dhamma (dhammissara), may bring about the rewards of a heavenly rebirth 
through the merit generated. We can see here in the offering of the kingdom 
to the tooth relic that, at least in the monastic imagination, the Buddha takes 
the form of both the king’s political and religious overlord and the monarch 
likewise assimilates into a political vassal and a priestly devotee.
80 From a 
monastic perspective, then, there is no symbiosis of function between the two 
and the king is simply a pale imitation of the Buddha in what Ronald Inden 
referred to as a ‘hierarchy of lordship’.
81
The personages adopted by the king and the Buddha in such passages, 
furthermore, should not be understood as entirely symbolic either, especially 
when taken in the context of the material realities of the period. The shrine of the 
tooth relic in late medieval Sri Lanka, for instance, had become one of the larg-
est landholding temples on the island and kings after the Anurādhapura period 
would make regular land grants to the temple as part of their rituals in asso -
ciation with the tooth relic.
82 We learn from the eleventh-century Vēlaikkāra 
inscription that the Saṅgha employed, at least on this occasion, a mercenary 
company to guard the tooth relic temple and rewarded the custo  dians with  
some land owned by the temple, in this case between 36 and 54 acres, that is, 
around the size of Grand Central Station in New York.83 The Buddha then was 
quite literally not only lord of the Dhamma but also a landlord.
This is not to say that all offerings of kingdoms to the Buddha and 
Saṅgha should be understood literally. Certainly in earlier periods we find sim-
ilar instances of the king giving his kingdom to the Buddha’s relics.
84 The first 
such example is found in the Vinayanidāna, where Aśoka ‘honours the Bodhi 
tree with sovereignty over all Jambudīpa’.85 In some of these instances, how -
ever, the symbolic nature of the gift is made explicit either through the return 
of the gift or through its substitution for wealth. According to the Cūḷavaṃsa, 
Moggallāna I (491–508) offered the Saṅgha his royal parasol, a symbol of 
his rule, but this was promptly returned to him by the monastic community.
86 
Similarly, Aggabodhi VIII (804–815) had his mother offer his own body to the 
Saṅgha but this was later exchanged for his equivalent value in gold.
87 In the 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa, though, Kittisirimegha’s offering of the physical island is not 
qualified by any substitution, metaphorical interpretation or abstract reference 
to ‘sovereignty’. That the offering of the island to the Buddha should be taken 
quite literally, albeit with of pinch of poetic hyperbole, as referring to an ideal 
transfer of territory to monastic elites is hinted at in the Daḷadāsirita, an early 
fourteenth-century Sinhala retelling of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, which, in rendering 
this passage, refers to the ‘land’ (tala) of the kingdom.
88

--- Page 199 of 286 ---
184 REWRITING BUDDHISM
The earliest detailed regulations for worshipping the tooth relic found 
in the Daḷadāsirita, first translated by A.M. Hocart and Senarat Paranavitana, 
further reveal how the monarchical role played by the Buddha during rituals 
was intended to translate into real monastic autonomy.
89 In describing the later 
tooth relic rituals of the Kandyan period, H.L. Seneviratne depicts these events 
essentially as instruments of state, an opportunity for the king to legitimize his 
rule and consolidate his power.
90 In the regulations given in the Daḷadāsirita, 
however, the Saṅgha plays the orchestrating role and the king, both spirit-
ually and temporally, is subordinated to the Buddha who is represented by the 
tooth relic. The king, as A.M. Hocart once wrote, ‘used to act as priest for a 
greater king than himself, the Buddha’.
91 According to the Daḷadāsirita each 
day kings must:
leave all their retinue outside, cleanse themselves, enter the house with 
devotion and respect, take a broom and sweep the house, wash their 
hands, offer gold, flowers, etc., worship by meditating on the nine vir -
tues of the Buddha, such as sainthood, make obeisance, and take upon 
themselves the five commandments.
92
At the New Year and Kārtika festivals too it explicitly specifies that those 
who wish to make offerings to the king must first make offerings to the tooth 
relic temple. The ministers of the royal court are also ritually subordinated to 
their counterparts in the monastic community. In the description of the ritual 
procession of the tooth relic, the relic is accompanied first by the Saṅgha, 
protected by sacred threads and other rites, along with temple officials and 
ritual drummers, who are then followed, finally, by the musicians of the royal 
court and the king’s ministers protected by the army.
93 The rituals depicted in 
the Daḷadāsirita further give prominence to lay Buddhist functionaries and 
other nobility with a longstanding connection to the Saṅgha. The Saṅgha’s 
own ‘acolytes’ (kapuvā) guard the tooth relic temple, for instance, and the 
families of the Gaṇaväsi and Kiliṁ, the latter being of Kāliṅga ancestry, act as 
officiants, second only to the chief monk of the Uttaromūla monastery.
94 Note 
that the king provides no military support to the Saṅgha or tooth relic in the 
ritual and his army participates in the parade only to guard his own ministers.
The last temple regulations in the Daḷadāsirita do not concern ritual 
directly but rather establish rules for the handling of donations and the reso-
lution of legal disputes, all of which reveal how the ritual superiority of the 
Buddha over the king was meant to translate into the Saṅgha’s autonomy. We 
learn, for instance, that if a matter of dispute arose  concerning the tooth relic 
temple, there would first be an attempted resolution between the head of the 
Uttaromūla monastery, chief custodian of the relic temple, and the ministers 

--- Page 200 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  185
of the king. If no resolution could be found, the authority for the final decision 
is said to rest with the monastic community. Similarly, the work specifically 
states that ‘not even a kahāpaṇa coin’, that is, ‘a cent’, donated to the tooth 
relic temple, should be moved to the king’s palace. Finally, the work claims 
legal autonomy from the royal court in declaring the temple a place of sanctu-
ary, stating that ‘anyone coming to the Tooth-relic house in fear of something 
should not be molested’.
95 The Daḷadāsirita ends its regulations by detailing 
arrangements for taxation. Gifts, it states, should be given by ‘those holding 
grants of freeholds’, ‘oil and wicks from villages holding service lands’ and 
from others regular dues should be paid.
By noting the translation of ritual to temporal sovereignty, I do not wish 
to argue for a form of ritual determinism, that is, we cannot say that belief 
in such rituals ensured that the personages adopted within the ritual sphere 
led to their translation outside of this arena. The tumultuous events of this 
century suggest that many monarchs may have ignored such prescriptions 
and may have had their own understanding of the  rituals they participated in. 
Rather, what is certain is that monastic elites at least did not regard the tem -
poral and spiritual personages adopted in ritual and narrative works such as the 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa as purely symbolic. There was a palpable desire on behalf of the 
leaders of the Saṅgha that the lordship of the Buddha as embodied, in particu-
lar, in the ritual and literary representation of the tooth relic should translate 
into real legal and fiscal autonomy for themselves.
8.5. Summary
Dhammakitti’s Dāṭhāvaṃsa employed a number of strategies to cultivate in 
his audience devotional sentiments sympathetic to the Buddhist tradition. 
Dhammakitti instilled in his audience, for instance, feelings of identification 
with the historical figures depicted in the narrative by framing the events 
as a sociokarmic figuration. He stressed in his work the continuity between 
relics, courtly behaviour and literary speech as religious stimulants, creat -
ing a new, holistic social aesthetic, combining courtly and Buddhist values, 
conducive to the cultivation of serene joy. For Dhammakitti serene joy was 
an emotion not only of personal transformation but also of social unity and 
he viewed his religious community as primarily an aesthetic entity, that is, 
he describes it as a constantly shifting assemblage constructed primarily by 
shared devotional emotions. In constituting this affective community, the 
Buddha, as embodied in his relics, served, from the monastic perspective, 
as the temporal and spiritual overlord on the island, with the king and court 
serving as religious and political vassals. The metaphors and figurations of 

--- Page 201 of 286 ---
186 REWRITING BUDDHISM
literature and ritual, in this regard, were not simply symbolic but were meant 
to translate into real social, material and economic changes for the monastic 
elites who wielded them.
Notes
1. Collins, 1998, 254.
2. On sāsana, see Carbine, 2012, 266.
3. Collins, 1998, 270; See also, Collins, 1990, 99–101.
4. Walters, 1997. Also, V on Hinüber, 1996, §§124–5.
5. See Steven Collins’ s translation of selected passages from the Buddhavaṃsa and his analysis of its 
depiction of time. Collins, 1998, 257–67; 577–92.
6. V on Hinüber, 1996, §183; Walters, 1999, 331–37, dates the work to the reign of Mahāsena’s son and 
successor, Sirimeghavaṇṇa (301–28).
7. V on Hinüber, 1996, §185. Walters, 1999, 337, speculatively identifies the author of the Mahāvaṃsa 
with a certain Mahānāma, who was the teacher and maternal uncle of king Dhātusena (455–73).
8. Collins, 1998, 255.
9. Walters, 2000, 107.
10. Walters, 1999.
11. The author of the Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa, for instance, declares that in composing his work 
he relied upon stories (kathā) based on history (itihānugata). See Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa, 1,14; 
Godakumbura, ed. 1956, ix–xvii.
12. Geiger, 1930, 212–13. Even the Mahāvaṃsa, however, had been regarded as filled with ‘intentional 
perversion’. See Turnour, 1838, 686–7, cited in Walters, 2000, 158–9.
13. See the recent summary of previous approaches to the vaṃsas in Berkwitz, 2004, 55–6; Scheible, 
2016, 117–54. On the tooth relic and royal legitimation, see, in particular, Seneviratne, 1978a; 1978b. 
For a critique of Seneviratne’s Weberian approach and his neglect of monastic agency, see Appadurai, 
1981.
14. Sheldon Pollock has provided a far-reaching critique of the often mechanical application of ‘legitim -
ation’, ‘ideology’ and other sociological constructs in explaining the relationship between culture 
and power in premodern South Asia and my approach to Pali literature is influenced by his methodo-
logical focus on ‘the subjective horizon’ of historical actors or what he refers to in Sanskrit termi -
nology as the vyavahārika-sat (‘conventional truth’). See Pollock, 2006, 511–24. In his critique 
of legitimation and ideology, however, Pollock goes so far as to argue objectively that both were 
historical impossibilities in premodern South Asia. I rather agree with Alan Strathern, who has per -
ceptively raised a number of problems with Pollock’s analysis here. He argues, in particular, that, 
while legitimation may not be found in the intentions of historical actors, that is, in their ‘subjective 
horizons’, these processes can still be analysed as historical effects. See Strathern, 2019, 110–14.
15. Steven Collins argued, for instance, that ‘this symbiosis was not a historically contingent alliance but an 
intrinsic feature of the civilizational work of articulating order’. See Collins, 1998, 32.
16. W e can fruitfully read the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, here, in light of Whitney Cox’s recent discussion of the pol-
itical function of a Cōl˗a-era temple chronicle, the Cidambaramahātmya, which he  characterizes as a  
‘work that was intended to intervene within a set of material and symbolic relations among persons and 
institutions, and to present an argument for how this order should be maintained’. See Cox, 2016, 197.
17. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 1.10.
18. Dāṭhāvaṃsasannaya on v. 1.10, 4,33–4: dīpantaravāsinam api, jambudvīpayehi ättavunṭada lakdiva 
ättavunṭada.
19. On the work’ s style, see Law, 2000, 579–81. On the close association between kāvya and the political 
culture of the royal court, see Pollock, 2006.
20. See Green, 1980. On court culture and the reproduction of ‘interpretative communities’, see Ali, 
2006, 19.
21. Tisīhaḷa refers to a traditional three-fold political division of the island of Sri Lanka, namely, rāja (or 
pihiṭi, the northern portion of the island), māyā (the central highlands) and rohaṇa (ruhuṇu, the South). 
We can perhaps understand the dismissive use of the term here as reflecting the author’s negative view 
of the political fragmentation that had emerged in the reform era.

--- Page 202 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  187
22. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 1.4–8:
 vibhūsayaṃ kāḷakanāgaranvayaṃ parakkamo kāruṇiko camūpati
 gavesamāno jinasāsanassa yo virūḷhim atthañ ca janassa patthayaṃ
 sudhāmayūkhāmalapaṇḍuvaṃsajaṃ virūḷhasaddhaṃ munirājasāsane
 piyaṃvadaṃ nītipathānuvattinaṃ sadā pajānaṃ janikaṃ va mātaraṃ
 piyaṃ parakkantibhujassa rājino mahesim accunnatabuddhisampadaṃ
 vidhāya līlāvatim icchitatthadaṃ asesalaṅkātalarajjalakkhiyaṃ
 kumāram ārādhitasādhumantinaṃ mahādayaṃ paṇḍunarindavaṃsajaṃ
 vidhāya saddhaṃ madhurindanāmakaṃ susikkhitaṃ pāvacane kalāsu ca
 narindasuññaṃ suciran tisīhalaṃ iti ppatītaṃ ayasaṃ apānudi
 ciram paṇītena ca cīvarādinā susaññate saṃyamino atappayi.
 This translation has been amended from the one in Gornall and Henry, 2017, 89. In translating pas-
sages from the Dāṭhāvaṃsa I have also often consulted the translation of Mutu Coomāra Swāmy, 
1874.
23. Cūḷavaṃsa, 80.
24. See chapter one for more details.
25. It is possible that Anīkaṅga had the support of the Cōl˗as. See Pathmanathan, 2004, 31.
26. Liyanagamage, 1968, 42–75; De Silva, 1981, 63.
27. On the translation of nigaṇṭha in the sense of ‘non-Buddhists’ in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, see Granoff, 1996, 
82.
28. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.93.
29. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 3.53.
30. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 5.63.
31. There is a late South Indian tradition, for instance, that Arjuna of the Mahābhārata married Cit -
rāṅgadā, who is described in these works as the daughter of a Pāṇḍya king. See, for instance, Bishop 
Robert Caldwell, 1881, 12–13, who is likely referring to the Villipāratam of Villiputtar (c. 1400). 
William Taylor (Taylor, 1857, 488) describes a seventeenth-century Telugu work, the Vijayavilāsam, 
that similarly expounds on Arjuna’s exploits in South India and marriage to the Pāṇḍya Citrāṅgadā. 
He also translated another late history connecting the Pāṇḍya dynasty with Arjuna, and thus the 
Pāṇḍavas, in an earlier work under the title ‘An account of kings who reigned in the Cali-yuga and of 
those who ruled in Madhura’. See Taylor, 1835, 195–206. This connection between the Pāṇḍyas and 
the Pāṇḍava brothers is made far earlier in Jain literature. See Churn Law, 1949, 52.
32. On myth, history and politics, see Gunawardana, 1976; Pollock, 1993b and Cox, 2016, 34–42.
33. Walters, 2003. See also Appleton, 2014, 126–54; Crosby, 2008b; Strong, 1997.
34. See Cox, 2016, 38. The Pūjāvaliya of Mayūrapāda, 728, 18–29, provides an account of the tooth rel-
ic narrative, though omits any reference to the Paṇḍu episode altogether. The same is true for the 
 fourteenth-century Rājāvaliya, 37,7–28.
35. Pollock, 2001b; Ali, 2006, 175–82. See also, Gornall and Henry, 2017, 78–85. On the role of pasāda 
in early Buddhist literature, see Rotman, 2009, 65–150.
36. On ‘conversion’  as an analytical term in comparative history, see Strathern, 2007a.
37. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.99–101.
38. Daḷadāpūjāvaliya, 17,9–24.
39. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, 1.14–22. On Daṇḍin’s definition of a mahākāvya, see Peterson, 2003, 8–13.
40. It is quite possible, of course, that this is simply part of a longstanding ‘assimilation’ between the 
Buddhist temple and the artistic traditions of the royal palace. See Schopen, 2006.
41. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 4.1–5.
42. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 3.76.
43. Trainor, 1997, 82, n. 54. See also Berkwitz, 2003; 2004, 231–86; Scheible, 2010–11; Trainor, 1989; 
2003; Walters, 1997, 179–80.
44. Reading tidasa °for tidisa° in v. 3.74a.
45. On Māra and his five-fold nature, see Nyanatiloka, 1998, 184.
46. On atideva (‘preeminent god’), see Norman, 1991.
47. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 3.70–75:
 disvāna yo īdisakam pi rāja iddhānubhāvaṃ munipuṅgavassa
 pasādamattam pi kareyya no ce kimatthiyā tassa bhaveyya paññā.
 pasādanīyesu guṇesu rāja pasādanaṃ sādhujanassa dhammo
 pupphanti sabbe sayam eva cande samuggate komudakānanāni.
 vācāya tesaṃ pana dummatīnaṃ mā saggamaggaṃ pajahittha rāja
 andhe gahetvā vicareyya ko hi anvesamāno supathaṃ amūḷho.

--- Page 203 of 286 ---
188 REWRITING BUDDHISM
 narādhipā kappiṇabimbisārasuddhodanādī api tejavantā
 taṃ dhammarājaṃ saraṇaṃ upecca piviṃsu dhammāmataṃ ādareṇa.
 sahassanetto tidisādhipo pi khīṇāyuko khīṇabhavaṃ munindaṃ
 upecca dhammaṃ vimalaṃ nisamma alattha āyuṃ api diṭṭhadhammo.
 tuvam pi tasmiṃ jitapañcamāre devātideve varadhammarāje
 saggāpavaggādhigamāya khippaṃ cittaṃ pasādehi narādhirāja.
48. This is not to say that this was the purpose of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa in the entire history of its reception.
49. Burlingame, 1917, 429. See also Söhnen-Thieme, 1995. On saccakiriyā in Buddhist literature, spe-
cifically, see Fiordalis, 2008, 103–7.
50. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.115 (abhiyācana); 3.53 (sacca); 3.81 (ajjhesi).
51. Here, borrowing the expression from Rotman, 2003, 557.
52. See T rainor, 1997, 164–5. Considerations about the Buddha’s continuing power do arise with respect 
to secondary debates about the authenticity of the relics, as we see among the nigaṇṭhas in the court 
of Paṇḍu, for instance.
53. See chapter six.
54. Crosby, 2014, 61–4. On the Mahāvaṃsa, see similarly Scheible, 2016, 247–8.
55. Durkheim, 1964, 236–7.
56. In order to describe these dynamic relationships it is perhaps more useful to speak of a Buddhist 
‘assemblage’ rather than ‘society’. See DeLanda, 2006, 253.
57. On the emer gence of a nascent Hindu identity between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries, see 
 Nicholson, 2014.
58. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.93; 3.19. See also in the Daḷadāsirita of Devrada Dampasaṅginā, 
23,
1, the use of the expression brahma-viṣṇu-maheśvarādi when referring to king Guhasīva’s turn to 
theism. The author of the Daḷadāsirita demonstrates a greater knowledge of Vaiṣṇava theology, how-
ever, and explicitly refers to Rāma as one of the ten avatars of Viṣṇu. See Daḷadāsirita of Devrada 
Dampasaṅginā, 27,12–13.
59. Guhasīva, for instance, is never accused of converting exclusively to Hinduism, only of making 
offerings to the nigaṇṭhas. See Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.73.
60. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.89.
61. On Mahāsena and the Mahāvihāra, see Walters 1999. I am grateful to Jonathan Walters for clarify -
ing the historical significance of Kittisirimegha/Sirimeghavaṇṇa’s reign. It is noteworthy too that, 
despite Mahāsena’s evil reputation in older works, such as the Dīpavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa, in the 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa he is depicted as a pious Buddhist. As mentioned, Guhasīva initially instructs Prince 
Danta and Hemamālā to take the tooth relic to Mahāsena’s kingdom, though when they arrive the 
monarch has passed away. It is possible the earlier source material Dhammakitti used to write his 
history of the tooth relic, which had historical associations with the Abhayagiri nikāya, originally 
situated the arrival of the relic in Mahāsena’s reign, since he was likely viewed by the Abhayagiri fra-
ternity as a just and benevolent monarch. Writing after the unification of the three nikāyas, however, 
in which the monks who identified with the Mahāvihāran lineage took prominent positions, it was 
perhaps necessary for Dhammakitti to tweak the narrative in order to promote reconciliation.
62. Granoff, 1996.
63. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.94.
64. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 3.19; 3.56. On vijjā (Sk. vidyā) in the sense of ‘magical spell’, see 
Fiordalis, 2008, 121.
65. Granoff, 1996, 81–2. See also Strong, 2007, 193.
66. I borrow the expression ‘evidential miracles’  from Verellen, 1992.
67. Mukherjee, 1940, 18–19; 1949, 291–2. On the development of the cult, see Kulke, 1981.
68. Mukherjee, 1939, 780.
69. Clooney, 2003. Evidence of such theistic inclusivism prior to the composition of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa is 
perhaps found in an inscription of Gajabāhu II (1132–53), a monarch known for his Hindu inclin -
ations, dated to 1153, which records a land grant to a monastery, using the Vaiṣṇava terms āḷvār and 
vallavaraiyan for the Buddha. See Pathmanathan, 1995, 39–40.
70. On the ‘public sphere’ in premodern South Asia, see Novetzke, 2016 and Fisher, 2017. Both provide 
conceptions of the public sphere that usefully differ from Jürgen Habermas’s characterization of the 
public sphere as an arena of secular rationality.
71. See, in particular , Daḷadāpūjāvaliya (on Dāṭhāvaṃsa 3.2), 18,8–19,9.
72. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 2.79–80.
73. Daḷadāpūjāvaliya, 16,3–4: … pūjāsatkārayehi raja upekṣakavū niyāva däna nāgarika janayā divyapu-
rayak men nuvara sarjjita koṭa … The Daḷadāsirita elaborates in greater detail on the faults of the 

--- Page 204 of 286 ---
 T HE  P OLITICS  O f R ELICS : D HAMMAKITTI ’ S  H ISTORY  189
king but, like the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, presents the festival of the people as a coincidence rather than as an 
intentional form of political action. See Daḷadāsirita of Devrada Dampasaṅginā, 21.
74. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 5.39–40.
75. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 5.43.
76. Here we can see most clearly the importance, as Alan Strathern has argued, of distinguishing inten -
tion from effect when discussing legitimation. For while Dhammakitti’s motivation here is to bolster 
monastic autonomy and status, one possible effect of his strategies, regardless of intention, is to le -
gitimize any compliant and subordinate Buddhist court within his social model. See Strathern, 2019, 
110–14.
77. Gunawardana, 1979, 343–4.
78. While Gunawardana does recognize the growing political autonomy of the monastic community, he 
never truly analytically separates political and religious functions from the institutions of the court 
and monastery. Gunawardana depicts competition or antagonism between the court and monastery in 
early medieval Sri Lanka as occurring almost in spite of their underlying, functional interdependence. 
The convergence of roles that we see in the reform era between court and monastery are difficult to 
analyse if function is seen as essentially contiguous with institution. Rather, if we separate the two 
analytically, then it is possible to view this convergence as a new institutional expression of the 
symbiosis of religious and political functions in the longue durée, albeit a symbiosis occurring within 
singular institutions rather than between institutions. The resulting relationship between such com -
plex institutions, then, becomes primarily defined by political rivalry, a hierarchy of lordship, rather 
than symbiosis. The term ‘antagonistic symbiosis’ then cannot at least be used in the reform era to 
describe an institutional relationship and yet we can evoke its components so long as it is clear that 
symbiosis here can only refer to a relationship between functions and not one between institutions.
79. Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti, 5.14–21.
80. Hocart, 1970, 270.
81. See introduction.
82. Herath, 1994, 114–35.
83. Herath, 1994, 116; Epigraphia Zeylanica II, 242–55.
84. Rahula, 1956, 75.
85. Samantapāsādikā I, 93,27–8.
86. Cūḷavaṃsa, 39.31.
87. Cūḷavaṃsa, 49.63.
88. Daḷadāsirita of Devrada Dampasaṅginā, 42, 11. The work was likely composed during the reign of 
Parākramabāhu IV (1302–26) by a lay minister in charge of ‘ecclesiastical affairs’. See Herath, 1994, 10.
89. Hocart, 1996, 34–7.
90. Seneviratne, 1978b, 1–20. See also Holt, 1982, 23–8.
91. Hocart, 1970, 199.
92. Hocart, 1996, 35. The translations given are those of A.M. Hocart and S. Paranavitana. See Daḷadā-
sirita of Devrada Dampasaṅginā, 52–60.
93. Hocart, 1996, 36.
94. Hocart, 1996, 35–6.
95. Hocart, 1996, 37.

--- Page 205 of 286 ---
190
9
Devotional Power: Buddharakkhita’s 
Buddha Biography
The turn towards devotion to the Buddha and his relics in the monastic liter -
ature of the reform era provided a means to counter perceived disorder, reas -
surance of better days to come and strengthened the monastic community’s 
karmic relationships with each other and the laity in shared aesthetic experi -
ences. There is a volatility, however, inherent in the immanence of devotional 
religion in that it has the potential to give rise to new, charismatic authorities in 
the religious landscape, fuelled by merit-making and claims of grand karmic 
inheritance. The rise of buddhahood as a prominent religious goal of elites, 
in particular, had the potential to unsettle the social hierarchies of the era. In 
this chapter, then, we will turn to a close reading of what was the reform era’s 
first and arguably most ornate devotional poem, the Jinālaṅkāra (‘Ornament 
of the conqueror’), so as to explore how a biographer of the Buddha carefully 
managed the aesthetic experiences of his audience in order to cultivate them 
into devotional subjects while subduing any destabilizing potential in their 
religious aspirations.
1
Buddha biographies, such as the Jinālaṅkāra and Jinacarita (‘Acts of 
the Buddha’), are unique in Pali literary history in terms of their devotional 
content and their highly ornate, literary style, marked in particular by the 
employment of poetic figures derived from Sanskrit literary theory.
2 While 
they represent a departure from previous tradition, at the same time, there 
is much continuity between these works and older Pali histories. Late medi -
eval Buddha biographies, for instance, often commence in a similar fashion 
to earlier works by situating the Buddha’s life on a cosmic scale and begin 
their accounts not with the birth of the Buddha but with his previous life as 
Sumedha in which he made the aspiration to buddhahood in the presence of 
the Buddha Dīpaṅkara. In narrating the Buddha’s life and enlightenment prior 
to his death and distribution of his relics they further borrow from narratives 
found in post-Aśokan works such as the Apadāna (‘Legends’), Buddhavaṃsa 

--- Page 206 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  191
(‘History of the buddhas’), Cariyāpiṭaka (‘Basket of conduct’) and the 
Nidānakathā (‘Story of origins’).3
Of these works, the Nidānakathā was the main source for the bio-
graphical framework adopted in the reform era, though it differs from later 
biographies both in terms of its intended audience and the message it con -
veys. The Nidānakathā is a prose work that serves as an introduction to the 
canonical Jātakas or ‘birth stories’ of the previous lives of the Buddha. 4 The 
central drama of the Nidānakathā unfolds from a prediction by Brahmin 
soothsayers that the new-born prince would either become a universal sov -
ereign (cakkavatti) or a buddha. To stop Siddhattha renouncing the world his 
father Suddhodana contrives to trap his son in a life of utter satisfaction free 
from its usual sufferings. The narrative depicts courtly life as ultimately a 
deceitful existence. Renunciation, by contrast, is presented as a necessity, not 
just for Siddhattha, but for all those who wish to follow him, as the Brahmin 
Koṇḍañña reminds us:
Siddhattha the prince has taken the vows. Assuredly he will become 
a buddha. If your fathers were in health they would to-day leave their 
homes, and go forth: and now, if you should so desire, come, I will leave 
the world in imitation of him.
5
The Jinālaṅkāra and Jinacarita differ in that they stress the long, karmic path 
to enlightenment or buddhahood instead of encouraging immediate renunci -
ation.6 The Jinālaṅkāra, for instance, emphasizes not the universal necessity 
of renunciation but the impossibly immense merit needed to give up the per -
fection of the royal court. There is a repeated refrain in the Jinālaṅkāra after 
describing each of the wonderful aspects of  Siddhattha’ s courtly life: ‘how 
did he, free from desires, walk away?’7 Even the bees of the palace garden are 
so satisfied with their lives that they cry in astonishment, ‘why did our lord 
abandon this?’
8 In the Jinacarita we find an explicit subordination of renunci-
ation in favour of pursuing buddhahood when Gotama, in his previous life as 
Sumedha, remarks that:
Today even, if I wished it, I could put an end to the endless fight, that 
is, existence, and, becoming a novice in the Saṅgha, enter the great city 
of nirvana! But what’s the point of me extinguishing my  defilemen ts in 
another garb? Having, like this Buddha, become an incomparable bud-
dha in the world, better for me complete extinction, when in the boat 
of Dhamma I have ferried humanity across the ocean of rebirths and 
brought them to the city of nirvana!
9

--- Page 207 of 286 ---
192 REWRITING BUDDHISM
This path of merit-making and the pursuit of buddhahood among elites has 
most often been studied from the perspective of the royal court, with reference 
to what Emanuel Sarkisyanz called the ‘bodhisattva ideal of kingship’, that is, 
the belief expressed in the royal inscriptions of kings after the tenth century 
in both Sri Lanka and Burma that they were bodhisattvas, buddhas-to-be.
10 
Scholars have generally interpreted such statements as part of the royal 
desire for ‘unquestionable legitimacy’, ‘spiritual authority’, and ‘soteriolog -
ical charisma’.
11 Echoing Max Weber, who argued that the bodhisattva ideal 
developed in the Buddhist tradition in response to the popular demand for a 
saviour,
12 Paul Mus even goes so far as to depict this shift in Sri Lanka as a 
‘messianic’ response to ‘Hindu’ invasions that ‘had to be reconciled’ with ‘the 
most inflexible tenets of orthodoxy’.
13 In this chapter we will explore from 
the monastic perspective how scholar-monks rather promoted the bodhisattva 
path via the Buddha’s life-story, in part, to control its charismatic potential 
within traditional devotional frameworks, to foster social support for monastic 
elites both within the Saṅgha and among the nobility and to establish a soterio-
logical path compatible with their worldly engagements. This chapter argues, 
then, that at the stylus of Buddharakkhita the bodhisattva path emerges as a 
new form of virtuosity, rather than as source of charismatic authority, that, 
as a consequence, could support rather than disrupt elite monastic power in 
Sri Lanka’s changing political landscape.14
9.1. The Jinālan.kāra and Karmic Determinism
The Jinālaṅkāra’s colophon states that the work was written 1,700 years after 
the Buddha’s passing, that is, in 1156 or 1157 CE, and that the author, Bud -
dharakkhita, descended from a noble family (sucivaṃsa) in Rohaṇa and was 
the chief incumbent ( gaṇavācaka) of his monastery. 15 The work’s Pali com -
mentary adds that Buddharakkhita had been initiated by the best scholars in 
Sri Lanka and the ‘Tamba country’ of the Cō ḻas.16 It is likely no coincidence 
that Buddharakkhita composed his poem at such an auspicious time and in the 
very same year that Parākramabāhu I (1157–86) was crowned ruler of Laṅkā 
in the capital of Poḷonnaruva.
Fresh in Buddharakkhita’s mind when writing the Jinālaṅkāra must 
have been Parākramabāhu’s spectacularly violent rise to power on the island. 
Buddharakkhita’s native Rohaṇa in the South, in particular, had borne the brunt 
of the civil war that raged prior to Parākramabāhu’s ascension to the throne. 
The young pretender had waged a bloody campaign in the region, hunting 
down Sugalā, mother of Mānābharaṇa, and recapturing the tooth and alms 
bowl relics hidden there. To win over the remaining resistance in Rohaṇa, the 

--- Page 208 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  193
Cūḷavaṃsa (‘Little history’) states that Parākramabāhu’s army had hundreds 
of Mānābharaṇa’s allies publicly impaled in villages and market towns. The 
history describes his brutality with an awe that usually accompanies religious 
miracles. The vaṃsa states, for instance, that ‘they had many other foes hanged 
on the gallows and burnt and showed forth in every way the majesty – hard to 
subdue, scarcely to be surpassed, arousing astonishment – of the Ruler of men 
Parākramabāhu’. Following the conquest of the region, Parākramabāhu is said 
to have invited to Poḷonnaruva his army, the subdued dignitaries of Rohaṇa, 
as well as the monastic community of the region in order to ‘cleanse their 
heads with the blossom dust of the foot-lotus of the illustrious King of kings 
enthroned (there) in splendour’.
17
As a senior monk from the region, Buddharakkhita could well have made 
the long march from the ruins of his Rohaṇa homeland to the new king’s cap-
ital and placed his head at Parākramabāhu’s feet. When reading the unflinch-
ingly eulogistic description of the king’s rise in the Cūḷavaṃsa and also the 
praise openings of Parākramabāhu’s royal inscriptions, one immediately gets 
the sense that the monarch saw himself as a karmically superior being, who 
was fulfilling his destiny in conquering the island. The Cūḷavaṃsa writes that 
the young prince, filled with a sense of his own cosmological importance, 
modelled himself as a bodhisattva, a buddha-to-be, as a king like Rāma in 
the Rāmāyaṇa, and as a hero like one of the five Pāṇḍava brothers of the 
Mahābhārata.
18 It is noteworthy, then, that a work like the Jinālaṅkāra, which 
was composed in the year of Parākramabāhu’s coronation, presents a more 
nuanced vision of the bodhisattva path and of bodhisattvas, one that sanctifies 
lordship, to some degree, while subordinating elites by establishing devotional 
relationships with the historical Buddha.
While we can never know if Parākramabāhu was aware of 
Buddharakkhita’s work, we can hypothesize with some confidence that the 
poem’s immediate audience must have consisted of monastic and lay nobil -
ity. The poem does not cite its patron or contain an opening royal eulogy 
like the Dāṭhāvaṃsa but it frequently uses complex poetic figures that only 
the very few with a high level of education in Sanskrit, whether in the royal 
courts or elite monasteries, would be able to understand.
19 It is due to its 
prosaic difficulty, for instance, that the Jinālaṅkāra even became an object 
of satire in a fifteenth-century (?) Burmese biography of Buddhaghosa, 
where the poem is attributed incorrectly to Buddhadatta. The work describes 
a meeting between Buddhaghosa and Buddhadatta, in which Buddhadatta 
recites a verse from the Jinālaṅkāra . Upon listening to the ornate verse, 
Buddhaghosa responds dismissively that, even though the poem was ‘beauti -
fully composed’, ‘the ignorant will find it unintelligible’ and ‘those of noble 
birth will not understand it’.
20

--- Page 209 of 286 ---
194 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Buddharakkhita speaks in his work both of the pursuit of nirvana and of 
buddhahood, though it is the latter that he himself strived to attain. Echoing 
the consecration of Gotama’s own path to buddhahood in the presence of for-
mer buddhas, in a series of aspirations ( patthanā) at the end of the poem, 
Buddharakkhita imagines the future Buddha Maitreya prophesizing that ‘he 
will become a buddha in the future’. 21 Written in the first person and in an 
inclusive tone these aspirations could equally apply to anyone who recites or 
listens to these verses.
Buddharakkhita opens his poem by stating that he will speak about the 
causes (hetu) necessary for buddhahood and the results ( phala) obtained by 
the Buddha corresponding to these causes.22 Here he advertises what is essen-
tially unique about his method of biography in that he eschews the conven -
tions of the older tradition, in which we find a linear narrative beginning with 
Gotama’s aspiration to enlightenment under former buddhas, his arduous jour-
ney in fulfilling the perfections (pāramī) and finally his birth as Siddhattha, 
renunciation and enlightenment. The Nidānakathā, for instance, separates 
the events prior to his birth as Siddhattha in a long chapter referred to as the 
‘distant cause’ (dūrenidāna). Buddharakkhita condenses this narrative and 
collapses its linear, cosmic timeline by interweaving occasional references to 
the events of Gotama’s previous lives with the story of his renunciation and 
enlightenment in his final rebirth. This condensed form which weaves between 
Siddhattha’s present condition and events in the cosmic past makes the con -
nection between the cause, Gotama’s karma, and the effect, his buddhahood, 
more tangible. One implication of this, however, is that, in literary terms, the 
courtly drama concerning whether Siddhattha will renounce is very much lost 
and, as a character, the prince becomes almost a karmic vessel without auton-
omy whose course is already set.
The emphasis in the biography on what we can call ‘karmic determinism’ 
is reflected in Buddharakkhita’s decision to remove or modify the traditional 
episodes in which Brahmin soothsayers prophesize that the new-born prince 
would either become a universal sovereign ( cakkavatti) or a buddha. King 
Suddhodana in the Nidānakathā
, for instance,  summons sixty-four Brahmins  
to interpret Queen Māyā’s dream that a white elephant entered her side and 
all state that she is pregnant with a boy who will either become a universal 
sovereign or a buddha.
23 At the birth of the prince, an ascetic and royal advisor, 
Kāḷa Devala, provides a second prediction that the new-born would become 
a buddha.
24 At the prince’s name-giving ceremony, seven Brahmins make a 
third prophecy and reiterate that the prince could either become a universal 
sovereign or a buddha, though another, the youngest Koṇḍañña, determines 
the new-born prince is destined for buddhahood.
25 In the Jinālaṅkāra, how-
ever, any dramatic ambiguity is removed. There is no mention of the first two 

--- Page 210 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  195
prophecies concerning Queen Māyā’s dream or Kāḷa Devala and the third 
prophecy at Siddhattha’s name-giving ceremony is radically altered. There, 
all the Brahmins are in agreement and raise a single finger, declaring that ‘he 
will become a buddha free from passion’.
26 There is a consensual uniformity 
in the Jinālaṅkāra between the predictions of the previous buddhas, who, in 
Gotama’s former lives, determined that ‘he will be a buddha in the future’, and 
the prophecies made in his final life. There is no mention at all of the possible 
path of temporal lordship available to one born with the thirty-two marks of 
a great man.
Buddharakkhita perhaps pre-empts criticism of his deterministic depic-
tion of the Bodhisattva’s fate when narrating the episode of Gotama’s initial 
aspiration to buddhahood in the presence of the Buddha Dīpaṅkara. There, our 
author clarifies that ‘he [the Buddha] obtained this result, [i.e. buddhahood], 
only through the incomparable acts of giving, etc., that he performed himself. 
He did not obtain it without a cause, or due to previous buddhas, or because 
of agreement among many Brahmas, etc.’
27 Buddharakkhita wants to avoid 
any supposition that the Buddha gained enlightenment by chance or through 
divine predestination. It is the Bodhisattva’s own karma, he emphasizes, that 
determines his eventual buddhahood.
Here, Buddharakkhita reiterates orthodox opinion regarding the predic-
tions of former buddhas. ‘Buddhas’, writes the Kathāvatthu’s (‘Topics of dis-
pute’) commentator,
28 ‘through the power of their own insight, determine that 
“this being in the future will attain buddhahood” and speak of the Bodhisattva 
as assured [of buddhahood] by reason of the cumulative growth of merit’.
29 The 
commentator clarifies, however, that even though bodhisattvas can be conven-
tionally referred to as ‘assured of buddhahood’, they only officially enter the 
‘path of assurance’ (niyāmaṃ okkamati), that is, a guarantee of nirvana, when 
realizing the truth at the foot of the Bodhi tree.
30 By emphasizing the inevi -
tability of the prince’s enlightenment from birth, however, Buddharakkhita 
differs from the Kathāvatthu commentator in that, like the latter’s opponents, 
he views the possibility of enlightenment as assured, at the very least, from the 
time that Siddhattha is born in Suddhodana’s court.
31
This subtle shift in emphasis has great repercussions for how 
Buddharakkhita depicts courtly life in the biography of the Buddha. Rather 
than simply a soteriological obstacle, Siddhattha’s courtly upbringing is framed 
equally as a karmically necessary step towards buddhahood. At the beginning 
of a chapter entitled in James Gray’s translation, ‘verses illuminating the good 
fortune (sampatti) of being a householder ( agāriya)’, Buddharakkhita writes 
of the Bodhisattva’s birth in the royal court that, ‘over time, as his family 
prospered like a waxing moon, by accumulating merit, he grew up like the sun 

--- Page 211 of 286 ---
196 REWRITING BUDDHISM
in the sky (ambara)’.32 The point here is that the Bodhisattva’s life as a royal 
householder was a necessary condition for the accumulation of further merit.33
Note, however, that the Jinālaṅkāra’s re-evaluation of the Bodhisattva’s 
courtly life did not alter the basic nature of Buddhist soteriology. The 
Bodhisattva still detaches from his life of sensuality and comes to the conclu-
sion that sovereignty is ‘terrifying’ (sasārajja).34 We can read such statements 
as a critique of court culture but not one that is in any way subversive since, as 
we will discuss below, the Jinālaṅkāra does not present the Bodhisattva  as 
a role model who should be emulated in the here and now. While the royal 
court is certainly an arena of sensuality that a bodhisattva must eventually 
renounce, the general tenor of Buddharakkhita’s narrative focuses on the court 
as a model of material perfection, the fulfilment of lifetimes of good karma 
and the best possible birth before complete buddhahood.
This shift in emphasis is no better illustrated than in the eulogistic and 
idealized descriptions of Yasodharā, the Bodhisattva’s wife, in the Jinālaṅkāra 
when compared with her depiction in the Nidānakathā. In the latter work, 
Yasodharā figures less prominently and is referred to only as ‘mother of 
Rāhula’, the Bodhisattva’s son.
35 The Jinālaṅkāra by  contrast spends many 
verses describing the virtues of Yasodharā as the perfect wife who only the 
Bodhisattva would have the strength to abandon.
36 It is possible that the nas-
cent devotion to Yasodharā in the Jinālaṅkāra reflected a renewed interest in 
the Apadāna (‘Legends’), in which we find an elaborate, eulogistic life-story 
of the queen. 37 This narrative, for instance, was rendered into Sinhala dur -
ing the period. 38 In the Pūjāvaliya  (‘Garland of offerings’) too Yasodharā is 
depicted in a devotional light. The author has Yasodharā defend her supposed 
previous misdemeanours in her relationship with the Bodhisattva, in particular 
in his previous life as king Kusa, on the basis that her wrongdoings helped ‘to 
strengthen’ the Bodhisattva’s perfections (pāramī). She states then that, ‘even 
wrongs done by me were in fact a source of benefit to you’.
39 There was a 
wider tendency during the period, then, found not only in Jinālaṅkāra, to pres-
ent the Bodhisattva’s family life as a model or, at least as karmically useful, 
rather than simply as a dangerous obstacle.
9.2. The Rhetoric of Distance
Buddharakkhita’s emphasis on courtly life as an inevitable, meritorious con -
dition on the path to buddhahood offers a new soteriological frame for those 
who held Buddhist sensibilities and who wielded temporal power, whether 
lay or monastic nobility. There is no contradiction, for instance, when Bud-
dharakkhita aspires at the end of his poem to be both wealthy (v. 245) and a 

--- Page 212 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  197
buddha (v. 250). This is not an Augustinian style self-delusion – Give me bud-
dhahood, but not yet! – but rather a reflection of a twelfth-century view of the 
bodhisattva path as characterized by accumulating vast merit, often reflected 
in mater ial prosperity , and of buddhahood as a worthy but utterly remote goal. 
In Buddharakkhita’s own words, ‘I will be a buddha in future times!’40 Bernard 
Faure has written persuasively about a ‘rhetoric of immediacy’ in the Chan 
Buddhist  tradition , that is, how the doctrine of immediate enlightenment func-
tioned to construct a new religious elite in opposition to older gradualists. 41 
Conversely, we can view the two aspects of Buddharakkhita’s bodhisattva 
path, namely his accommodation of sensuality and material prosperity and his 
emphasis on the remoteness of buddhahood, as part of a ‘rhetoric of distance’ 
that on the one hand represents an expansion of Buddhist ideology into courtly 
society and on the other a desire to contain the aspirations of a community 
formed of those engaged with worldly power.
Buddharakkhita conveys the remoteness of buddhahood in the 
Jinālaṅkāra principally by emphasizing the inconceivable deeds necessary to 
fulfil the bodhisattva path. He emphasizes, for instance, that the Bodhisattva’s 
impossible acts of gruesome self-sacrifice – whether cutting off his own head 
as a gift, cooking himself over a fire to feed others, plucking out his eyes, 
or spilling oceans of blood
42 – provide the exceptional karmic conditions for 
his renunciation. Our author constantly reminds his audience furthermore that 
these are karmic conditions that they sorely lack. In conversation with Māra, 
for instance, the Bodhisattva reminds us:
Indeed, the good done by men in the innumerable world systems is not 
worth a sixteenth part of even one of my perfections. Once, as a hare, on 
seeing a mendicant coming, I fell into a fire and cooked myself so that 
I could offer my meat. Thus, I performed arduous deeds during endless 
ages; who other, indeed, possessed of intelligence, and not insane, could 
have acted thus?
43
The implication here is not that the Bodhisattva’s extreme acts of generosity 
should be imitated but that nobody else of sound mind could or should per -
form such an act.
44 By praising the inimitable nature of the Bodhisattva, Bud-
dharakkhita elevates the Bodhisattva as an extraordinary object of devotion 
for his audience while also ensuring that the favourable Buddhist nobility did 
not renounce their power or develop charismatic authority by transgressing 
worldly norms in imitation of him.
Buddharakkhita further muddies the distinction between the transcendent 
status of the Buddha and his meritorious position in his last life as a  buddha- 
to-be. He resituates a famous episode in the Pali canon, for instance, in which the 

--- Page 213 of 286 ---
198 REWRITING BUDDHISM
enlightened Buddha declares that he is neither a god, spirit (gandhabba), demon 
(yakkha) or man, and instead places this speech in the mouth of the Bodhisattva 
in conversation with Māra prior to his final enlightenment. 45 In the canonical 
discourse, a Brahmin Doṇa encounters the Buddha’s footprints when travelling 
along a path and notices that they contain wheels with thousands of spokes. He 
declares in astonishment that these footprints cannot belong to a human being 
and follows them until he finally encounters the Buddha sitting under a tree by 
the roadside. The Buddha then answers a series of questions about whether he is 
a god, spirit, demon or human, each time giving a negative reply.
46 He responds, 
instead, that he is awakened (buddha) and free from taints, like a lotus flower 
standing unsoiled above the water. In the Jinālaṅkāra, however, Buddharakkhita 
has the Bodhisattva proclaim before Māra that he is not ‘a man, a demon, a 
god (brahma), or a minor deity ( devatā)’ since his body is created by infinite 
merit (anantapuñña).
47 Whereas here the Bodhisattva is regarded as beyond 
 identification due to his unique karma, in the canonical discourse the Buddha 
transcends worldly designations precisely because he is free from karma.
Buddharakkhita further plays with the style of the poem itself in order 
to instil feelings of separation between his audience and the Bodhisattva. 
Buddharakkhita employs a variety of literary strategies, for instance, that 
encourage the reader to adopt the perspective of the astonished royal house -
hold rather than the prince who is renouncing courtly life.
48 Buddharakkhita 
often inserts rhetorical interjections to guide the reader’s emotional experience 
of the unfolding events. In one particularly sonorous verse, designed to emu -
late the sounds and rhythm of courtly dance, a disembodied voice laments that 
the detached prince paid little attention to the beautiful dancing of his wife 
Yasodharā before abandoning the royal household:
pāde pāde valayaviravā mekhalāvīṇānādā
’gītaṃ gītaṃ patiratikaraṃ gāyatī gāyatī sā
hatthe hatthe valayacalitā sambhamaṃ sambhamantī
disvādisvā iti ratikaraṃ yāti hāhā kim īhā.
49
With the jingling of anklets on each foot,
and the lute-like tinkling of her girdle,
she, Gāyatrī, sang a song not sung before
to entice her lord,
shaking the bangles on each hand,
and whirling around in excitement.
Though seeing her amorous advances,
it is as if he does not see and leaves.
Oh no, why the effort?
50

--- Page 214 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  199
It is not readily apparent who makes the interjection ‘Oh no, why the effort?’ 
(‘hā hā kim īhā’) in the final line. Could it be his wife, Yasodharā, who has 
gone to great lengths to entertain and offer herself to the prince? What about 
the poet and narrator himself who cannot fathom how the enlightened subject 
could reject such a spectacle? Or, quite possibly, the author is also pre-empting 
the response of his ideal audience, one  educated and refined enough to under-
stand something of the life on offer to the prince? Either way, the ambiguity 
of these interjections allows the reader to adopt these judgements as their own 
and to both commiserate with the Bodhisattva’s wife and marvel in astonish-
ment at his extraordinary detachment.
Buddharakkhita cleverly utilizes the poem’s complex ornaments 
(alaṅkāra) or ‘figures of speech’ too in order to frustrate his audience and 
model the difficulty of the Buddha’s renunciation. While the Jinālaṅkāra is 
arguably one of the most ornate Sanskritic poems composed in the reform 
era it is not uniformly so. Between stanzas forty-nine and one hundred and 
ten, as perceptively noted by Dragomir Dimitrov, there is a large concentra -
tion of saddālaṅkāras or phonetic embellishments.
51 We can speculate that 
Buddharakkhita quite deliberately employs such complex verses here because 
the section (vv. 49–110) describes the Bodhisattva’s incredible decision to 
renounce courtly life. The verses of this section get progressively more difficult 
ending with ones consisting of yamakas, phonetically identical duplicates,
52 
of only one consonant class, such as gutturals, palatals, etc., ( ekaṭhānika, 
vv. 101–4) or of only one letter ( akkharuttarika, vv. 105–8) and even one verse 
containing a riddle ( paheḷi, v. 109). The poetic figures are among those that 
even Daṇḍin in his Kāvyādarśa describes as ‘difficult’ (duṣkara) to compose 
and that Saṅgharakkhita in the Subodhālaṅkāra omits entirely because they 
‘tire students’ (sissakheda).53 The difficulty of language mirrors the incompre-
hensibility of what Buddharakkhita refers to in the title of the opening chapter 
of this section as the Bodhisattva’s ‘astonishing (vimhaya) act of renunciation 
(pāduddhāra)’. By struggling to understand these verses the reader is given a 
taste of the effort required by the Bodhisattva to renounce the world and per -
haps also a sense of the bemusement felt by the royal household in witnessing 
his departure.
It is likely that for many readers the section would prove difficult to 
comprehend and they would struggle to read beyond the Bodhisattva’s life 
in the court. Buddharakkhita does provide some help though and in a few 
instances indicates the type of yamaka that is employed in a particular group 
of verses. The entire section itself is marked by a clever veneration to the 
Buddha that can be read identically both forwards and backwards, namo tassa 
yato mahimato yassa tamo na (Homage to him, the great one, he who has no 

--- Page 215 of 286 ---
200 REWRITING BUDDHISM
darkness). One of the verses that is composed of only guttural sounds (ka, kha, 
ga, gha, ṅa) is as follows:
ākaṅkhakkhākaṅkhaṅga kaṅkhāgaṅgāghāgahaka
kaṅkhāgāhakakaṅkhāgha hā hā kaṅkhā kahaṃ kahaṃ.54
O one whose senses [can obtain what they] desire, whose form removes 
doubt, who does not hold on to the suffering that is the river of doubt, 
who destroys the doubts of those who hold them – Oh, Oh! Where, o 
where can there be doubt?
The verse ends with an interjection by the narrator that is playfully ambiguous. 
One sense – and perhaps the dominant sense – of the rhetorical question is the 
total conviction of the narrator. No doubt about the Buddha remains. Yet the 
question could equally imply that the narrator has some doubt that he cannot 
quite comprehend himself, further underlining his distance from the subject of 
his poem who renounced the world. We can speculate too that there is likely 
a further meta-literary aspect to the verse, where the obvious repetition of the 
word ‘doubt’ in the puzzle stands out as a humorous comment on the linguistic 
difficulty of the verse itself.
We find in the Jinālaṅkāra, then, a soteriological path in which those 
wielding wealth and power are sanctified but subordinated as devotional sub-
jects to the Buddha and, by implication, to monastic elites too. Those like 
Buddharakkhita were not the slightest bit interested in narrating the bodhisat-
tva path to create messianic saviours either from their own fold or out of the 
nobility.
55 Some rulers of the era, such as Parākramabāhu I, who rose to power 
amid political and social conflagration, no doubt harboured and advertised 
a sense of their own cosmological importance – as buddhas-to-be or eman -
ations of gods – but Buddharakkhita, at least, exhibits in his poem a desire to 
harness this will to power and contain it within models of virtuosity that main-
tain the social order, in particular the status of monastic elites. This model, 
Buddharakkhita’s path, was focused primarily on the vast accumulation of 
merit through generosity to the Buddha and his poetic imagination, as we will 
now see, played an important role in instilling in the audience a sense of this 
devotional and political obligation.
9.3.   The   Literary   Imagination   and   Meditative   
Visualization
As an ornate work of kāvya, the Jinālaṅkāra was not simply composed as a 
trojan horse to bring Buddhist ideology into courtly society, in the way, for 

--- Page 216 of 286 ---
 DEvOTIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’S B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  201
instance, that Aśvaghoṣa states was the purpose of his Saundarananda (‘Hand-
some Nanda’): ‘This work, which contains liberation within it, is made for 
inner peace, not for pleasure, in the guise of a poem, so as to captivate hearers, 
who are concerned with other things.’
56 Rather, Buddharakkhita also under -
stood his ornate poem as playing a role in the meditative contemplation of the 
Buddha. Buddharakkhita appeals to meditators in his third verse, for instance, 
and states that one who is devoted to the Buddha can obtain liberation through 
meditation (bhāvanā) and the contemplation of him (buddhānussati).
57
Buddharakkhita again raises the practice of meditative contemplation 
at the end of his twenty-eighth chapter and states that the reader of the poem 
(iha … passatā) must reflect (cintanīya ) on the Buddha’s awakening, which 
among other things he characterizes as a constant means of accumulating 
merit (subha).
58 He writes that the point of this spiritual exercise is that one 
who is wise – which he defines as one who is educated in philosophy (takka), 
grammar (vyākaraṇa ) and the Buddha’s teachings  – having understood the 
poem completely, develops faith ( saddahate) in the Buddha’s enlightenment 
by perceiving its causes and results.59
The word saddhā ‘faith’ is difficult to translate in Buddhist literature due 
to the fact that in certain passages it seems to be a cognitive state, a reasoned 
belief, and in others it is quite clearly emotional or affective in nature similar 
to the state of pasāda ‘serene joy’ discussed in chapters six and eight.
60 Here 
Buddharakkhita presents the faith that arises in reading the Jinālaṅkāra as 
both cognitive and affective. It is an affective disposition that leads one to 
adore and venerate the Buddha but one that is developed through reasoning. 
This reasoning, it should be said, is not based on direct experience but a log -
ical inference on the possibility of buddhahood through examining its causes 
and conditions. The reciprocal cognitive and affective aspects of faith are best 
illustrated in an episode from the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (‘Great passing’) 
where Sāriputta proclaims with conviction, a ‘lion’s roar’, that there is no one 
greater than the Buddha. The Buddha challenges Sāriputta about how he can 
say such a thing when he has no direct experience of the nature of a buddha, 
to which he responds that while he has not experienced buddhahood himself 
he has witnessed, in Kate Crosby’s rendering, ‘the logical consequences of the 
Dhamma’ (dhammanvaya).
61
In order to understand what these meditational instructions for reading 
the Jinālaṅkāra may have meant to Buddharakkhita’s audience, it is helpful to 
turn to the work’s commentary, the Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā. The colophon of the 
commentary claims that it was composed by Buddharakkhita himself. It states 
that this ‘mass of texts’ (ganthapiṇḍa), twenty-eight recitations (bhāṇavāra) 
long – a reference, according to Dragomir Dimitrov, to the cumulative 
length of the commentary and Jinālaṅkāra – was compiled (sampiṇḍita) by 
Buddharakkhita.
62 There is reason to doubt this attribution, however, since  in 

--- Page 217 of 286 ---
202 REWRITING BUDDHISM
at least one instance the commentary deviates subtly from the biographical 
account narrated in the main poem. 63 The commentary, furthermore, had a 
large influence on a Southeast Asian Buddha biography, the Paṭhamasambodhi 
(‘First awakening’), and it quotes texts, such as the Lokapaññatti (‘Description 
of the world’), which had a wide circulation in Southeast Asia but which are 
not cited in Sri Lanka until the early modern period.
64 The only evidence 
that the commentary was available in reform-era Sri Lanka is that it shares a 
 quotation with Guruḷugomi’s Dharmapradīpikāva (‘Lamp on the Dhamma’), 
a work that also cites the Jinālaṅkāra.65 Nevertheless, the commentary’s col-
ophon provides plausible information about Buddharakkhita’s own life and, 
since it must date before the early sixteenth century, it remains a significant 
source for understanding how the Jinālaṅkāra was interpreted by its earliest 
monastic readers.
66
The commentary explains that Buddharakkhita composed his poem prin-
cipally for meditating nobles (yogāvacarakulaputta).67 A kulaputta refers to a 
monk or layperson who is either a noble by birth (jāti) or one who has attained 
this status through his conduct (ācāra).68 The commentary further refers to this 
meditating noble as a ‘good worldling’ (kalyāṇaputhujjana), a technical term 
employed in Pali commentaries to refer to a virtuous practitioner who has not 
yet attained stream entry ( sotapanna), the lowest of the four religious attain -
ments in the tradition.
69 While the commentator, like Buddharakkhita, speaks 
of both the pursuit of nirvana and buddhahood, he reads the Jinālaṅkāra pri-
marily as a poem intended for bodhisattvas who aspired to the latter. The com-
mentator on the Jinālaṅkāra  fittingly employs a courtly analogy to explain 
the precise relationship between Buddharakkhita’s ornate biography, which 
is likened to a casket of gems, the Buddha, and his meditating reader seeking 
buddhahood:
It is just as a skilful treasurer would take the ornamental treasures of a 
Wheel-Turning (cakkavatti) king, deposit them in a jewelled chest and 
would instruct his most treasured counsellor (the king’s heir) to ‘guard 
this!’ He (the counsellor) would take and guard it and, on the death of 
his father (the king), in becoming the Wheel-Turning king he would be 
adorned with that treasure and become lord of the world (lokissara). In the 
same way, the teacher Buddharakkhita, who is like the treasurer, has taken 
the treasure, that is, the virtuous ornaments of the blessed Buddha – lord 
of all worlds, boundless conqueror – has deposited them in a chest-like 
poem called the Ornament of the conqueror and has instructed the noble 
meditator who is like the most trusted counsellor. He (the noble meditator) 
receives it respectfully and humbly and protects it by engaging in medita-
tion/imagining (bhāvanā). Practising as instructed he gradually achieves 

--- Page 218 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  203
the Buddha domain and in becoming the boundless conqueror (i.e. a 
 buddha) he is adorned with those virtuous ornaments. 70 Having made a 
single light for the entire world he shines and becomes lord of the world. 
[Buddharakkhita] thus describes the meditating noble [in verse three] as he 
is the principal recipient (paṭiggāhaka) of the Ornament of the conqueror 
that he will compose.
71
The ornate biography, then, acts as a repository of the Buddha’s qualities 
that can be used by a meditator when engaging in the practice of recollection 
(anussati). The analogy captures the multiple senses of the word alaṅkāra in 
the poem’s title. The term refers both to the Buddha’s virtues that are likened 
to treasures and also to the embellished nature of the poem (‘the jewelled 
chest’) decorated with ornaments or ‘figures of speech’. The ornamental treas-
ure chest, the alaṅkāra-filled poem, is a fitting vessel for the Buddha’s qual -
ities, both in terms of beauty and value, and is the most secure and difficult 
to access. As an idiom associated with royal power, it is the most suitable 
medium for conveying the Buddha’s power, since, as Paul Mus observed, the 
model of the Wheel-Turning king traditionally provided the conceptual frame-
work for imagining the Buddha’s role as transcendent, universal overlord.
72
Framed within the analogy of royal succession and inheritance, the 
commentary also points to the exclusivity and linearity of the succession of 
buddhas and to the fact that bodhisattvas, as heirs in waiting, cannot possess 
a buddha’s qualities while he is still in power, that is, they do not decorate 
themselves in the Buddha’s ornaments but guard them until the time they suc-
ceed the Buddha as the world’s overlord. The analogy of royal inheritance 
thus touches upon a core aspect of Pali Buddhology that distinguishes the 
bodhisattva path of Theravada elites from other schools of Buddhism. Since 
Bodhisattvas, by definition, have not been taught by a buddha, the tradition 
classifies bodhisattvas as worldlings (puthujjana ), and thus inferior to those 
on the noble path to enlightenment, up until they realize the Dhamma at the 
foot of the Bodhi tree.
73 Elsewhere, the commentary wryly states, for instance, 
that a such a worldling bodhisattva has a better chance of ‘stabbing the back 
of a mosquito with a dagger’ than directly comprehending the virtues of a 
buddha.
74
We can speculate too that the ornamental imagery decorating the poem 
was thought to aid the process of contemplation, with an affinity perceived 
between meditative bhāvanā or ‘becoming’ and the poet’s creative bhāvanā or 
‘imagination’. The bhāvanā of meditative rituals, as David Shulman states, is 
akin to the poet’s bhāvanā ‘insofar as we are dealing with vivid internal per -
ceptions crystallized as mental images amenable to definition in words’.
75 It 
is within the sphere of the imagination, common to both the literary and ritual 

--- Page 219 of 286 ---
204 REWRITING BUDDHISM
worlds, that we see most clearly the inapplicability in a Buddhist context of 
a distinction Sheldon Pollock makes in his analysis of Sanskrit court poetry 
between aesthetic power and material power.
76 The aesthetic cannot be sep -
arated from the quotidian here since both are encompassed by the moral laws 
of karma, in which one’s emotions are an important causal condition for future 
material giving and the accrual of material rewards.
77 Within what Kevin 
Trainor fittingly describes as an ‘aesthetically charged ritual environment’ 78, 
the ornamental poem brings the reader into Buddhism’s ‘moral economy’ and 
literature becomes a site of exchange, where one can convert moral action, 
including the cultivation of faith, into merit and in turn convert that merit into 
material and spiritual attainments. This merit, as Andy Rotman notes, is both 
‘the basis for future good deeds and attainments, and the purchasing power for 
current ones’.
79
We find a compelling depiction of the interplay between the aesthetic and 
material worlds, for instance, in the penultimate chapter of the Jinālaṅkāra, en-
titled ‘verses illuminating the rules for offerings (pūjāvidhāna)’.80 Writing in the 
first person, Buddharakkhita describes the world system in which the Buddha 
was born as a devotional landscape, filled with valuable and beautiful objects, 
including, flowers, fruits, trees, birds, mountains, precious woods, gems, silver, 
gold, silks and fine cloths, and imagines himself, and by implication the reader, 
offering these items to the Buddha, as well as the Dhamma and Saṅgha, in 
devotion. This section serves as an opportunity for our poet to show his skill in 
naturalistic description (Sk. svabhāvokti) while simultaneously acting as an aes-
thetic, ritual environment in which Buddharakkhita and his readers can simulate 
undertaking great acts of giving to the Buddha.
81 He concludes that:
I pay honour to his first inconceivable aspiration [to buddhahood] by 
means of all the existing objects in the world system.
82
This exercise of imagining the world system and offering its treasures to the 
Buddha resembles, in many respects, the way the Bodhisattva, as described at 
the beginning of the Apadāna, imagines a Buddha field for himself in the form 
of a palace filled with buddhas, to whom he makes offerings in order to gen -
erate merit for his final birth.
83 The practice of creating the image of a buddha 
in one’s mind and mediating with this image in order to generate merit has 
further parallels with South Indian Tantric and bhakti
 meditations contempor-
ary with Buddharakkhita.84 Unlike these practices of meditative imagination, 
however, there is never a sense in the Jinālaṅkāra  or its commentary that a 
practitioner should identify with the Buddha. Both works stress the path of 
devotion, but this is one of long and arduous merit making and not immediate 
transformation. The meditator, the commentator states, only gradually gains 

--- Page 220 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  205
a sense of the Buddha’s virtues ‘like a falling leaf’ that becomes perfumed 
having brushed the back of a fragrant elephant.85
Buddharakkhita then ends his chapter by venerating in succession various 
important moments on the Bodhisattva’s path to buddhahood, the Buddha’s real-
i zations, his teachings, the monasteries he founded, the Tipiṭaka that he preached, 
his relics and Buddha images.86 In an apparent attempt to sanction the path of 
devotion towards the Buddha’s relics, he creatively modifies the Buddha’s famous 
injunction in the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta that, ‘what I have taught and explained 
to you as doctrine and discipline will, at my passing, be your teacher’.
87 He rather 
quotes the Buddha as follows: ‘The great Sage sanctioned that, “this doctrine 
and discipline that I have properly taught, as well as my bodily relics, are your 
teacher after my passing; the unconquerable throne and the splendid Bodhi tree 
are also your teacher after my passing”.’
88 This expansion of religious authority 
to include material objects of devotion, such as relics and Buddha images, rein-
forces the fact that the Pali reform era was an age of emotion, where emotions 
as well as ideas were increasingly sources of authority, communal identity and 
religious transformation, especially for those who were taking their first lotus-
like steps towards achieving buddhahood in the incalculable future.
9.4.  The Buddha’s Proprietary Rights
In presenting material generosity towards the Buddha as the natural outcome 
of developing faith in his enlightenment through reading his biography, the 
Jinālaṅkāra reflects a feature that became common to a number of other late 
medieval works of kāvya in Sri Lanka both in Pali and Sinhala. What Stephen 
Berkwitz notes with respect to the Sinhala rendering of the Thūpavaṃsa (‘His-
tory of the relic shrine’), namely that it ‘was composed and copied, as well 
as read and recited, in premodern Sri Lanka to instil emotions of serene joy 
and gratitude that compel acts of relic veneration’, for instance, could equally 
apply to the Jinālaṅkāra and the Dāṭhāvaṃsa too.
89 Buddharakkhita in his 
work also hints at the social and political assumptions underpinning the poetic 
instantiation of relic worship. He frames his descriptions of the wealth con -
tained in the universe and the imagined gifting of it to the Buddha in his final 
chapter not only as a spiritual obligation on the part of the reader but, uniquely, 
as the Buddha’s proprietary right:
I venerate him (the Buddha), who previously venerated those worthy 
of veneration (former buddhas), with the charming objects that exist in 
his birthing chamber, that is, the auspicious world system that belongs 
to him.
90

--- Page 221 of 286 ---
206 REWRITING BUDDHISM
In presenting the Buddha as one ‘who previously venerated those worthy of 
veneration’ the verse depicts the Buddha as a devotee of former buddhas and 
thus instils the reader with a familiar sense of obligation since this path of 
devotion should be followed by those who aspire to buddhahood.
91 The verse 
then uniquely turns to describe the world system in which the Buddha was 
born as his ‘birthing chamber’ (jātovaraka ) and his property ( āyattaka). The 
commentary elaborates on this statement using legal terminology from the 
Vinaya, stating, with respect to the contents of the universe, that, ‘it belongs 
to him, [i.e.] it is his property (santaka). Even the living beings and material 
things that exist in that [world system]? [Yes,] all of it is only his property.’
92
While references to the Buddha’s ownership of property in texts from 
Sri Lanka are rare, as discussed in chapter five, we do find a discussion of the 
Buddha’s property (santaka) in Sāriputta’s Vinaya commentary, quoted also 
in Siddhattha’s Sārasaṅgaha (‘Compendium of the essence’), where the work 
sanctions the offering of property belonging to the Buddha as an offering to 
the Dhamma (dhammapūjā) and vice versa.
93 Here, however, Buddharakkhita 
goes even further and makes the extraordinary claim that the Buddha is in fact 
the legal owner of the entire universe.
There is an affinity here between this image of ownership and tradi -
tional ideas about the Buddha’s relationship with his so-called ‘Buddha field’ 
(buddhakhetta). We have already noted, for instance, that in the first chapter 
of the Apadāna, the Bodhisattva becomes king of a heavenly realm that he 
creates in his mind, the ‘Buddha field’, in which he worships former bud -
dhas, before being reborn in the Tāvatiṃsa heaven prior to his final birth as 
Siddhattha.94 The concept of the Buddha field developed in later tradition to 
refer to the Buddha’s sphere of power more generally, divided into ‘the field 
of his birth’ (jātikhetta), that is, the world system in which he is born, ‘the field 
of influence’ (āṇākhetta
), the cosmological extent of the apotropaic efficacy of 
his teachings, and ‘the field of scope’ (visayakhetta), the infinite extent of his 
knowledge.95
In the Mahayana sūtra, the Karuṇāpuṇḍarīka (‘Lotus of compassion’), 
we find an equivalent idea that the Buddha owns his ‘field of birth’ on the 
basis that it is his Dhamma, his moral law, that governs the world system in 
which he is born.
96 In depicting the Buddha as owner of all precious objects 
in the world, our author, Buddharakkhita, asserts the Buddha’s proprietary 
rights over even the king; an important message when one considers that 
Buddharakkhita’s fellow Rohaṇa monks had been ordered to Poḷonnaruva in 
order to prostrate before the ‘king of kings’ Parākramabāhu. The implication 
then, we can hypothesize, is that all devotees, including those in the highest 
social sphere, are obliged to make offerings to the Buddha both for future 
rewards and also in recognition that, in a certain sense, one’s possessions are 

--- Page 222 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  207
owned by the Buddha in that they were ultimately produced and acquired due 
to the Buddha’s karmic laws. Clearly, this is not art for art’s sake. It is ideo -
logical in that it naturalizes the tributary relationship between the monastic 
community and the nobility.
Ronald M. Davidson is one of the few scholars to recognize the political 
nature of the ‘Buddha field’ and he has argued that the word kṣetra (‘field’) 
‘should be understood in the sense of “domain” (rather than field) over which 
Buddha – as the pre-eminent kṣatriya and lord of that domain – presides with 
the dominion (kṣatra) of his Dharma’.
97 Even Davidson, however, ultimately 
regards the prevalence of such imperial metaphors in late medieval Indian 
Buddhism as ‘only a weak imitation of the authentic imperial tradition’.
98 In 
the Sri Lankan context, at least, the very real temporal power wielded by the 
Saṅgha, as we have already discussed in previous chapters, makes it plausible 
that such feudal imagery reflected a form of genuine belief in the Buddha’s, 
and, by implication, the Saṅgha’s, rights over the island’s wealth.
The Buddha’s depiction here in the Jinālaṅkāra is another example 
of how scholar-monks in the reform era began to think about lordship, land 
and property in terms of what Ronald Inden referred to as an ‘Indian imper -
ial formation’. 99 Building on Inden’s work, Daud Ali has recently explored 
conceptions of property in medieval India. He explains, following Inden, 
that the lordship of a creator deity, usually, Viṣṇu or Śiva, was thought to 
extend throughout the cosmos to all worldly agencies, which ‘were in fact 
conceived of as the capacities of greater and lesser lordships anchored in the 
agency of the supreme lord’.
100 This cosmology formed the blueprint for the 
social organization of kingdoms, which were viewed similarly as a hier  archy  
of nested spheres of lordship encompassing one another, with the ruling 
monarch at its apex. This social order, Ali writes, ‘enabled, ultimately, the 
extraction of surplus from the direct producer through a hierarchical chain 
of rights and privileges manifested through superior claims upon places 
as the instantiation of moral value and social being ’.
101 Buddharakkhita 
appears to have conceived of his social structure similarly, with the Buddha, 
through his immense karma, acting as the all-encompassing moral sovereign 
of the world.
We have already seen in the Dāṭhāvaṃsa how the relationship between 
the king and Buddha was portrayed as a hierarchy of lordship rather than as 
a division of social functions. The grandmaster and his Saṅgha and the king 
and the royal court were two important links within a great chain of power 
that ultimately, from the Buddhist perspective, was anchored in the Buddha’s 
Dharma. Even when Buddhist kings reigned Laṅkā, the site of ideological 
struggle, as presented in the Pali literature of the period, was not between the 
Saṅgha or royal court and agrarian producers, but between the royal court and 

--- Page 223 of 286 ---
208 REWRITING BUDDHISM
monastic elites, competing for position at the apex of the social hierarchy with 
its attendant rights and privileges under the Buddha as cosmic overlord.
It is not necessary to assume, then, as both Sheldon Pollock and Steven 
Collins do in criticizing the idea that kāvya functioned ideologically, that 
 ideology must be directed downwards towards an agrarian class, who may or 
may not have participated in the ideology of elites. 102 Nor was Pali kāvya the 
product of a homogeneous ruling class or  ‘civilization-bearing state-system’, 
as Collins depicts, but rather an expression of particular monastic interests 
directed primarily, we can hypothesize, towards others who wielded political 
power.
103 The Theravada bodhisattva path in this regard served the nobility, 
both monks and the laity, in that it accommodated their lordship as karmically 
beneficial, while, at the same time, it established their devotional and political 
relationship with the Buddha (represented primarily by his relics administered 
by monastic elites) based on a confluence of spiritual and temporal rights and 
obligations.
9.5.  Summary
As the first Pali poem composed by an aspirant to buddhahood, about the Bud-
dha’s final life, and for those interested in following this path, the Jinālaṅkāra 
provides a unique insight into the mentality of a bodhisattva at the cusp of the 
reform era recollecting the deeds of the Buddha of his current age. Contrary to 
previous views connecting the rise of the bodhisattva ideal with a supposed, 
popular desire for a Buddhist saviour, we have seen that the dominant tone 
in Buddharakkhita’s work is rather one of devotional subordination. In the 
Jinālaṅkāra, Buddharakkhita depicts buddhahood as karmically determined 
and he accommodates materiality and sensuality as a sign of good karma and 
as an opportunity for creating more merit. The bodhisattva path sanctifies high 
status while at the same time it creates out of these figures subordinate, devo-
tional subjects. Bodhisattvas are simply worldlings, the poem’s commentator 
wrote, mere falling leaves that have the good fortune to brush against the back 
of the great elephant. Pali kāvya
, in this regard, was not a non- ideological form 
of aesthetic politics as has been argued in the case of other ‘court’ literature. 
The aesthetic in Buddhist thought cannot be separated from the material since 
aesthetic pleasure was thought to manifest karmically in the form of material 
generosity and future material rewards. Pali kāvya was also more pointedly 
ideological than its Sanskrit counterpart in that it was used to extract wealth 
from its noble audience both through creating a sense of devotional obligation 
and, for the first time in Sri Lanka’s history, instantiating the Buddha’s propri-
etary rights over all things in the universe.

--- Page 224 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  209
Notes
1. Berkwitz, 2004, 231–70. Also, Ladwig, 2014; Strathern, 2019, 148–50.
2. In this respect they are written in a literar y style reminiscent of other Sanskrit biographies, such as 
Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita and the ninth or tenth-century (?) Padyacūḍāmaṇi. See Hiltebeitel, 2006. 
Also, Franceschini, 2010; 2013.
3. Walters, 1997, 165. See also Reynolds, 1976; 1997, esp. 20, where Reynolds refers to histories of the 
Buddha’s relics as the final part of the ‘mythically constructed biography of the Buddha’.
4. V on Hinüber, 1996, §111. See also, Reynolds, 1997, 27–8.
5. Jātakaṭṭhakathā I, 56,29–32, trans. Rhys Davids, 1925, 162.
6. In this regard, these works share a certain similarity with Buddha biographies outside of the Ther -
avada tradition, such as those found in the Mahāvastu and the Lalitavistara . On the Mahāvastu, in 
particular, see Tournier, 2017.
7. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 65d–69d: kathaṃ nu padam uddhari so nirāso. Trans. by James 
Gray (1894, 90). The expression padam uddhari literally means ‘lifted the foot’.
8. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 71d: jahitaṃ kim idaṃ patinā.
9. Jinacarita of Medhaṅkara, vv. 40–2:
 iccheyyañ ce ’ham ajj’  eva hantvānantaraṇe bhave
 saṅghassa navako hutvā paṭiseyyaṃ puraṃ varaṃ.
 kiṃ aññātakavesena klesanibbāpanena me
 ayaṃ buddho va ’haṃ buddho hutvā loke anuttaro.
 janataṃ dhammanāvāya tāretvāna bhavaṇṇavā
 nibbānapuram ānetvā seyyaṃ me parinibbutaṃ.
 I have adapted this translation from Duroiselle, ed. and trans. 1906, 131. A similar passage occurs 
in the tenth-century Mahābodhivaṃsa, an important source for the Jinacarita, though it is notably 
absent from earlier works. See, in particular, Matsumura, 2010, 101–33. On textual parallels in the 
Mahābodhivaṃsa and Jinacarita, see Dimitrov, 2016, 515–52.
10. Sarkisyanz, 1965, 59–67.
11. See Holt, 1991, 57; Sarkisyanz, 1965, 59; Mus, 1965, xvii. See also Yabuuchi, 2007, 108–11. Steven 
Collins has rightly critiqued Mus and Sarkisyanz’s interpretation that such inscriptions indicate that 
kings identified themselves with the future Buddha, Maitreya. Rather, as Collins notes, these kings 
were simply claiming to be a future buddha, not necessarily the next buddha. See Collins, 1998, 381.
12. Weber, 1958, 237; 249. See also Malalgoda, 1970, 426.
13. Mus, 1965, xviii. Emphasis in the original.
14. On the Weberian categories of virtuosity and charisma in a Theravada monastic context and their 
sometimes overlapping sense, in particular, when speaking of ‘institutionalized charisma’, see Silber, 
1995.
15. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita C e, vv. 271–5 (Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā , 290,6–15). Dragomir Dimitrov 
has discussed in detail this unstable colophon, which is rightly included in Välipaṭanavila Dīpaṅkara 
and Baṭapolē Dhammapāla’s edition but is missing in James Gray’s edition of the poem. See Dimi-
trov, 2016, 272. On gaṇa and the related term gaṇanāyaka, see Ilangasinha, 1992, 75–7.
16. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 290,16–17.
17. Cūḷavaṃsa, 75.185–204. These are Geiger and Rickmers’ translations. See Geiger and Rickmers, 
1998, 62–3. On Parākramabāhu I’s Rohaṇa campaign, see Liyanagamage, 1968, 34–42.
18. Cūḷavaṃsa, 64.26–64.
19. See chapter six for a discussion of the social stratification of linguistic knowledge.
20. Buddhaghosuppatti of Mahāmaṅgala, 50,19–21.
21. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 242–50.
22. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 2.
23. Jātakaṭṭhakathā I, 50,30–51,3.
24. Jātakaṭṭhakathā I, 55, 15–18. The ascetic is also referred to in the canonical biographical tradition as 
‘Asita’. See Sutta Nipāta 3.11.
25. Jātakaṭṭhakathā I, 56,8–15.
26. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 44.
27. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 14:
 nādhicca laddhaṃ na ca pubbabuddhā
 brahmādinaṃ sammutiyā bahūnaṃ
 sayaṃkaten’  eva anopamena
 dānādinā laddham idaṃ vipākaṃ.

--- Page 225 of 286 ---
210 REWRITING BUDDHISM
28. V on Hinüber, 1996, §312.
29. Kathāvatthuaṭṭhakathā, 143,6–8. In translating this passage, I have consulted Bimala Churn Law’s 
translation. See Law, 1940, 175.
30. Kathāvatthuaṭṭhakathā, 143,18–20.
31. Kathāvatthuaṭṭhakathā, 143,8–12. On this passage, see also McDermott, 1989. The issue is more am -
biguous in canonical literature itself, see Anālayo, 2013, 178.
32. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 46:
 kālakkamena cando va vaḍḍhanto vaḍḍhite kule
 puññodayen’  udento so bhāṇumā viya ambare.
33. W e find a much longer glorification of Siddhattha’s family in chapter three of the Lalitavistara , for 
instance. See Lalitavistara, 11–21.
34. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 60.
35. In this regard, see Bareau, 1982.
36. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 62, 77, 87–93.
37. Apadāna II, 584–90 (Therīapadāna 3.28). See Jonathan S. Walters’ recent translation of the Apadāna 
(apadana.whitman.edu).
38. Obeyesekere, 2009, 1–35.
39. Cited and translated in Obeyesekere, 2009, 11–12.
40. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 250, trans. by Gray, 1894, 112.
41. Faure, 1991, 32–52.
42. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 25, 31, 128.
43. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 127–9:
 anantalokadhātumhi sattānaṃ hi kataṃ subhaṃ
 mayhekapāramiyā pi kalaṃ n’agghati soḷasiṃ.
 tiracchāno saso hutvā disvā yācakam āgataṃ
 pacitvāna sakaṃ maṃsaṃ patito ’ggimhi dātave.
 evaṃ anantakālesu kataṃ dukkarakārikaṃ
 ko hi nāma kareyy’  añño anummatto sacetano.
 T rans. adapted from Gray, 1894, 98.
44. The inimitable nature of the Bodhisattva is stated more clearly in other Mahayana writings. See 
Ohnuma, 2000; 2007.
45. Doṇa Sutta, Aṅguttara Nikāya II, 37; Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 130–1.
46. Aṅguttara Nikāya II, 38, 10–18: manusso no bhavaṃ bhavissatī ti, for instance. The interpretation of 
the verb bhavissati is problematic here. Buddhaghosa’s commentary interprets it as a simple future 
and thus the Brahmin Doṇa is enquiring about the Buddha’s future rebirth. See Manorathapūraṇī 
of Buddhaghosa III, 78, 21–3. It is more likely that, as the author of the Samantapāsādikā recognizes 
elsewhere, the future tense (lṛt) here is used in the sense of impossibility ( anavakḷpti) or intolerance 
(amarṣa) as set out in Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī 3.3.146 kiṃkilāstyartheṣu lṛt (‘The future tense is intro-
duced after a verbal stem co-occurring with kiṃ-kila and expressions denoting the sense of the verbal 
stem as- “be”’). This is Katre’s translation (Aṣṭādhyāyī, 313). See Samantapāsādikā I, 209, 27–210,1, 
and the discussion of the related Sanskrit grammatical rules in Pind, 1989, 57–8.
47. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 130–1.
48. See, for instance, Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 65–77.
49. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 77.
50. The commentary on this verse in the Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā not unreasonably tries to read formal yam-
akas in lines one and three and, in doing so, states that the beginning of these lines prior to sandhi 
should read pāde apāde (lit. ‘on the foot, not on the foot’) and hatthe ahatthe (lit. ‘on the hand, not on 
the hand’). The commentary, however, rather dubiously interprets the negation here as meaning that 
the limb is flung out (glossing a- as apagata). It interprets the verse, then, as depicting the jingling of 
bangles on two feet, with one placed on the floor and the other raised up, and, likewise, with one hand 
down and the other up. I am not completely satisfied with this explanation and thus provisionally 
translate the reduplication here as simply distributive (‘on each hand’, etc.). See Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 
174,
20–2; 32–3.
51. Dimitrov, 2016, 262–4.
52. Bronner, 2010, 21.
53. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, vv. 3.78; 3.96; Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 33.
54. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 101.
55. Jonathan Walters, in this regard, has highlighted a claim made in the Vaṃsatthappakāsinī that, prior 
to attaining buddhahood as Gotama, the Bodhisattva in his previous lives had taken birth as various 

--- Page 226 of 286 ---
 D E vO TIONAL  P OWER : B UDDHARAKKHITA ’ S  B UDDHA  B IOGRAPHY  211
paramount kings, including Mahāsammata. He interprets this, rather speculatively, as meaning that 
‘if the coming Buddha is to be found, like his predecessor Gotama Buddha, incarnate in the Śākya 
branch of the Okkāka dynasty, and if the only extant descendants of Okkāka rule Sri Lanka, then a 
Sri Lankan king who attains imperial status must also be the coming Buddha’. See Walters, 2000, 
132. While it is, of course, possible that some kings may have identified themselves directly with 
Maitreya, this was not, I think, the Saṅgha’s view of bodhisattva kings. Reform-era scholar-monks 
rather presented the bodhisattva path and buddhahood as an extremely distant goal to be followed by 
many and thus discourage and even preclude, at least from the monastic perspective, such a view.
56. Saundarananda of Aśvaghoṣa, v. 18.64ab, translated in McCrea, 2013, 121. Johannes Bronkhorst 
has described Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita as a ‘Trojan horse’ intended to weaken Brahmanical court 
society from within. See Bronkhorst, 2011, 168.
57. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 3.
58. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 185. I follow the sannaya of the editors (Ce, v. 205) of the Sinhala 
edition here in taking iha ‘here’ in this verse as referring to the poem itself.
59. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 186.
60. Gethin, 2001, 106–112; Rotman, 2009, 23–62.
61. Dīgha Nikāya II, 83,8, trans. Crosby, 2014, 23–4.
62. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 290,16–27. For a discussion of this colophon, see Dimitrov, 2016, 266; also, V on 
Hinüber, 1996, §407.
63. As mentioned in verse forty-four in the Jinālaṅkāra, for instance, Buddharakkhita deviates from 
the Nidānakathā narrative and states that, upon seeing the new-born prince, Brahmin soothsayers 
declared that the prince would become a buddha. In the Nidānakathā, however, the seven Brahmin 
soothsayers disagree about whether the prince would become a world-  conquering king (cakkavatti) 
or a buddha and only one Brahmin, Koṇḍañña, states with certainty that the new-born will certainly 
achieve buddhahood. The Jinālaṅkāra commentary, however, seems to try to reconcile the two ver-
sions. See Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 146,8–16.
64. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 50,3. On the influence of the Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā in Southeast Asia, see Balbir, 
2007, 336–46.
65. Rammandala, 1954, 53–5. Dragomir Dimitrov has noted too that, ‘In Laṅkā the Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā 
seems to have been lost for several centuries, and presumably it has hardly been possible to procure 
copies of it on the island until the revival of the Sinhalese Sangha in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries when many Pali texts have been (re)imported from Burma and Siam to Laṅkā.’ See Dimi-
trov, 2016, 270.
66. The work is quoted in Ratanapañña’s Jinakālamālī, composed around 1516–17, and also in a Pali 
translation of a Thai chronicle entitled the Mūlasāsanā. See Dimitrov, 2016, 264.
67. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 12,33–4. On the term yogāvacara in the early Pali tradition, see Silk, 1997. On its 
use in later Theravada writings, see Crosby, 2000; 2013, 154, n. 26.
68. See, for instance, Sāratthappakāsinī of Buddhaghosa II, 49,13–14. This dual understanding of noble status 
persisted in the reform era. See Guruḷugomi on kulaputta: Dharmapradīpikāva of Guruḷugomi, 269,6–15.
69. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 13,14.
70. A  similar metaphor is used, but with the object of comparison reversed, in an inscription of the Pāla 
king Devapāla, which states that the king ascended the throne as a bodhisattva succeeds a buddha. 
See Davidson, 2002, 89, citing Kielhorn, 1892, 258.
71. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā of Buddharakkhita, 12, 20–34: seyyathāpi nāma cheko bhaṇḍāgāriko cakka -
vattirañño alaṅkārabhaṇḍāni gahetvā ratanakaraṇḍake pakkhipitvā evaṃ “taṃ anurakkhāhī” ti 
parināyakaratanassa nīyyādeyya. so taṃ gahetvā anurakkhanto pitu accayena cakkavattirājā hutvā 
tenālaṅkārena alaṅkato lokissaro hoti. evam eva bhaṇḍāgārikasadiso buddharakkhitācariyo sabba-
lokissarassa anantajinassa buddhassa bhagavato guṇālaṅkārabhaṇḍāni gahetvā jinālaṅkārasaṃkhāte 
gandhakaraṇḍake pakkhipitvā parināyakaratanasadisassa yogāvacarakulaputtassa nīyyādeyya. yas-
mā ca so taṃ sakkaccaṃ sirasā paṭiggahetvā bhāvanānuyogavasena anurakkhanto yathānusiṭṭhaṃ 
paṭipajjanto anukkamena buddhabhūmiṃ patvā anantajino hutvā tena guṇālaṅkārena alaṅkato 
sakalalokaṃ ekobhāsaṃ katvā virocanto lokissaro hoti, tasmā sabbapaṭhamaṃ attanā vattabbassa 
jinālaṅkārassa paṭiggāhakaṃ yogāvacarakulaputtaṃ vaṇṇento āha: [v. 3].
72. Mus, 1928, 274.
73. Relatively little has been written about this important point of doctrine. Patrick Pranke has picked 
up on it in his recent paper on Buddhist saints in Burma. See Pranke, 2010–11, 457, n. 8, citing 
 Kathāvatthu 4.8, 286–90. For a comprehensive overview of the Bodhisattva ideal in the different 
schools of Buddhism and the differing ideas about the Bodhisattva’s status as a pṛthagjana (P. 
puthujjana), see Krishan, 1984, esp. 202.

--- Page 227 of 286 ---
212 REWRITING BUDDHISM
74. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 34,11–12.
75. Shulman, 2012, 131.
76. Pollock, 2006, 14. With respect to the Sanskrit eulogy of royal inscriptions, in particular, Pollock 
writes that it ‘was beyond the quotidian and the instrumental; it was directed above all toward 
 articulating a form of political consciousness and culture, politics not as transaction of material 
power – the power of recording deeds, contracts, tax records, and the like – but as celebration of 
aesthetic power’.
77. For a similar criticism, see Ali, 2006, 16–17.
78. Trainor, 2003, 526.
79. Rotman, 2009, 9.
80. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 189–241.
81. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin, v. 2.8; Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita, v. 165.
82. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 217:
 pujemi paṭhamaṃ tassa paṇidhānaṃ acintiyaṃ
 cakkavāḷamhi sabbehi vijjamānehi vatthuhi.
 T rans. adapted from Gray, 1894, 108.
83. Apadāna I, 1–6. See also Bechert, 1992.
84. Shulman, 2012, 109–43.
85. The commentator also likens the bodhisattva meditator to one who uses a sesame seed to collect the 
ocean’s water. See, for instance, Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 34,7–8; 25–30.
86. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 218–41.
87. Dīgha Nikāya II, 154,6–8. Trans. by Walshe, 1995, 270.
88. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, vv. 232–3:
 svāyaṃ dhammo vinayo ca desito sādhukaṃ mayā
 mamaccayena so satthā dhātu cāpi sarīrajā
 apparājitapallaṅkaṃ (corr. aparājita°) bodhirukkhañ ca uttamaṃ
 mamaccayena satthā ti anujāni mahāmuni.
 T rans. adapted from Gray, 1894, 110.
89. Berkwitz, 2004, 281.
90. Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita, v. 189:
 tasmā hi jātovarakamhi tassa āyattake maṅgalacakkavāḷe
 bhūtehi vatthūhi manoramehi pūjemi taṃ pūjitapūjitaṃ pure.
 T rans. adapted from Gray, 1894, 105.
91. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 285,13–18.
92. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā of Buddharakkhita, 285, 8–11: tassa āyattakaṃ santakaṃ. tasmiṃ vijjamānaṃ 
yaṃ kiñci sattasaṅkhāragataṃ? taṃ sabbaṃ tass’ eva santakaṃ hoti. On the Buddha as owner of 
property, see Schopen, 1990.
93. See chapter five. See also the Caturārakkhadīpanī, vv. 4.48–9.
94. Barua, 1946.
95. Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosa, 349,18–28. See also Rowell, 1934; Kloetzli, 1983, 56–7.
96. Rowell, 1934, 231.
97. Davidson, 2002, 133.
98. Davidson, 2002, 168.
99. Inden, 2000, 213–62.
100. Ali, 2008, 123.
101. Ali, 2008, 137. Emphasis in the original.
102. See, for instance, Collins, 2003, 682–3; Pollock, 2006, 511–24. For different reasons, Daud Ali states 
that Hindu cosmology was ‘without ideology’, on the basis that ‘representations of society had a 
direct relationship to class hierarchies’; see Ali, 2008, 138. If I understand Daud Ali correctly, I think 
that in our context we can see that, while this may have been the case for those lower down the social 
hierarchy, the site of ideological struggle, that is the naturalization of social order, occurred between 
the royal court and the Saṅgha, rather than the royal court and agrarian producers. Therefore, rep -
resentations did not necessarily reflect the social hierarchies of these elites, which were very much 
contested and unstable during the period in question.
103. Collins, 2003, 682–3.

--- Page 228 of 286 ---
213
10
Conclusion: Other Lives and Afterlives
Sri Lanka’s reform era requires us to rethink a number of assumptions 
about the history of Buddhism, in particular about the agency of  Buddhist 
 scholar-monks in premodern politics and social life, about Pali literature as a 
dynamic and creative, rather than static and conservative, form of knowledge, 
and even about how we think of the island of Sri Lanka as a place deeply con-
nected with, rather than isolated from, its neighbours in the wider region. This 
book has argued that the unprecedented cultural productivity of the reform era 
was not a by-product of political stability or of the munificent patronage of a 
single emperor, as has often been thought. Rather, it was rooted in chaos, the 
destruction of the old social order and the birth of a more fragmented polit -
ical environment. The monastic community emerged from this era of war and 
strife with greater autonomy than it had possessed in the previous centuries. 
Through the dual reform processes of purification and unification the Mahāvi-
hāra carefully crafted a new coherent identity. This coherence was sustained 
primarily within a matrix of Pali texts that provided a conceptual order within 
which monastic elites could think and act with a greater sense of control over 
their circumstances.
The process of reform was guided by textual production for a number 
of reasons. Most fundamentally, scholar-monks had traditionally believed in 
an ontological connection between the state of scriptural learning and the 
moral condition of their social and political environment. Faced with the 
unpre cedented upheaval brought about by Cōl ˗a rule, the scholar-monks of 
the era sought in their philological practices explanations for the decline they 
perceived in their tradition. Religious decline, in this regard, was primar -
ily interpreted as a philological problem and scholar-monks developed new 
textual forms as a means of countering the deterioration of their tradition 
and better protecting and propagating the doctrine and discipline within the 
Saṅgha. This project was accompanied by the expulsion of monks who did 
not suitably conform to the new orthodoxy and by the emergence of a more 

--- Page 229 of 286 ---
214 REWRITING BUDDHISM
structured, courtly hierarchy among the remaining monks, which enabled 
them to act with greater autonomy in the midst of political uncertainty. This 
hierarchy was primarily educational in that a monk’s level of training in Pali 
texts largely determined his social position in the monastic community. Not 
only, then, did Pali literature provide an organizational plane on which reli -
gious thought could be ordered but that same plane served as the perform -
ative means by which monastic social hierarchies could be established and 
consolidated.
On the face of it, there’s something almost paradoxical in how  scholar - 
monks experimented with Pali during the period. For, on the one hand, the 
aforementioned concern for social and textual order and the exigencies of 
reform meant that Pali grammars, commentaries and  handbooks, in particular , 
were increasingly systematic in their construction. (The development of new 
textual forms, as we have seen, normally meant the adoption of models, often 
from Sanskrit, deemed more methodical than those that were used previously.) 
At the same time, the very ability of scholar monks to move beyond traditional 
philological forms was accompanied by more abstract and less formal notions 
of scriptural language and scriptural authority. The grammarians introduced 
philosophical ideas about universal semantics and the variability of phonetic 
representation; handbook commentators began to view their digests as author-
ities equal to commentaries, which in turn were now thought of as an ana -
lytical extension of the Dhamma’s meaning, and also seemingly entertained 
previously heterodox ideas about scripture as a conceptual entity; and, finally, 
anthologists felt able to compile excerpts of largely commentarial material 
while supposedly protecting the ‘essential meaning’ of their scriptures.
The increasingly loose relationship in the reform era between Pali text -
ual production and the formal canon is no better illustrated than in the prolif-
eration of new literary works in Pali, in particular relic  histories and Buddha 
biographies. While these works can be seen as a  continuation of traditional 
historiography, they depart from pre-reform literature in both style and sub -
stance. They are particularly concerned with the traces of the Buddha’s dis -
pensation and their role in stimulating karmically transformative emotions, 
in particular serene joy. In many respects they are a literary expression of the 
immanent religious goals of the monastic elites of the period, as reflected, 
for instance, in the karmic focus of the new anthologies. While grammars, 
commentaries and handbooks, in this regard, served as new exegetical tech -
nologies, designed primarily to extract and protect the essence of scriptural 
tradition, reform-era Pali poetry was a complementary, karmic technology, 
one that utilized Sanskritic literary models and theories in order to better cul-
tivate favourable emotions among an increasingly diverse audience of lay and 
monastic nobles. The soteriology of devotion, as developed in these works, 

--- Page 230 of 286 ---
 CONCL USION : O THER  L I v ES  AND  Af TERLI v ES  215
reflected a reform-era concern with human limitations and a desire for con -
trol, though one that was more focused on shaping future circumstances than 
conservation.
A different tension between form and content also underpinned the 
development of ornate Pali poetry too. Traditionally scholar monks had, at 
least ideally, been wary of ornamentation, whether that meant wearing jewel-
lery or enjoying the wordplays of a poem, since such decoration was viewed 
as an immoral distraction that may foster undesirable attachments. In the early 
works of the reform era, however, we have seen how the pressing karmic 
demands of this period of chaos led to a radical re-evaluation of emotion -
ally charged ornamentalism. The era’s foremost literary theorist, for instance, 
argued that the composition and appreciation of ornate poetry was inherently 
moral since literature’s affective success was based on a knowledge of worldly 
morals and propriety; the relic historians also established an aesthetic con -
tinuity between relics, reliquaries, miracles and ornate, stylized poetry as 
stimulants of meritorious sentiments; and Buddha biographers too creatively 
adapted this traditional, courtly form of poetry and employed it to aesthetically 
instantiate the Buddha’s religious and political sovereignty over the island.
10.1.   The   Post-Reform   Sīhaḷa   Saṅgha   in  Thirteenth-
Century Pagan
The aim of this book has been to explore the intense production of monastic 
literature in reform-era Sri Lanka and to understand its importance in relation 
to the monastic community’s changing social and political circumstances. In 
order to avoid a teleological reading of the period as a point of origin for later 
religious developments, I have consciously set aside much discussion of the 
outcomes of this era of change. And yet, having established the significance of 
the reform era on its own terms, it is worthwhile turning our attention to these 
outcomes if only to suggest some of the possible implications of the era for 
the history of Theravada Buddhism in Southern Asia and also for the literary 
culture in Sri Lanka in the centuries that followed.
It is well known that monastic centres that identified with Sīhaḷa monas-
tic lineages, that is, post-reform Mahāvihāran lineages, were established from 
the twelfth century onwards in what is now Burma, Thailand and Laos.
1 This 
movement of monks is rightly regarded as an important moment in the devel-
opment of Theravada Buddhism as an early modern, transregional religious 
formation. While it is no coincidence that this occurred during Sri Lanka’s 
reform era, the question arises as to the exact causal relationship between 
the reforms on the island and the movement of monks abroad. The arrival 

--- Page 231 of 286 ---
216 REWRITING BUDDHISM
of Sīhaḷa monastic lineages in Southeast Asia from the twelfth century is 
often depicted solely as a royal, political initiative, in which kings, eyeing the 
reforms in Sri Lanka, brought monks and texts to their kingdoms as part of 
their state-building enterprises.
2 This analysis is predicated, to a large extent, 
on the old view that Sri Lanka’s reforms turned Buddhism into a kind of state 
religion. In light of the arguments made in this book, we can suggest that, 
rather than as a result of any imperial project, many of the monks who trav -
elled to Southeast Asia may have actually done so as an indirect consequence 
of political fragmentation.
The kingdom of Pagan represents a useful case study in this regard since 
its history has been well documented by Michael Aung Thwin and Tilman 
Frasch.
3 Part of the problem in ascertaining how the Sīhaḷa lineage became 
established in Burma is the rather late source material describing these 
events. It is only in a fifteenth-century inscription, the Kalyāṇī inscription, for 
instance, that we find the first account of what went on. There, it is said that 
in 1170 the royal monastic preceptor Uttarajīva travelled to Sri Lanka in order 
to worship the island’s relic shrines.
4 His pupil, Chapaṭa, returned ten years 
later (c. 1181) during the reign of king Narapatisithu (1174–1211) along with 
four other monks, Sīvali, Tāmalinda, Rāhula and Ānanda, thus introducing 
the Sīhaḷa ordination lineage to Pagan. It appears that these monks gained the 
favour of Narapatisithu and established monasteries in the city, though they 
soon splintered into rival monastic factions.
5 Michael Aung Thwin has framed 
the patronage they received as part of a process of royal monastic reform and 
has claimed that Narapatisithu himself intended to bring the Sīhaḷa order to 
Pagan, writing that, ‘king Narapatisithu purified the Order by sending a few 
chosen monks to Ceylon to be reordained, then bringing them back to reform 
the Order in Burma’.
6
The idea that Narapatisithu led reforms that brought the Sīhaḷa lineage 
to Pagan is often repeated and yet the sources on which these assertions are 
made do not explicitly state that such reforms ever took place.7 We only learn, 
for instance, that Narapatisithu patronized the Sīhaḷa fraternity but there’s no 
mention that he did so with the intention of reforming the Saṅgha in Pagan.
8 In 
the case of Uttarajīva, if the Kalyāṇī inscription is a reliable source, it seems 
rather that he went to Sri Lanka in search of relics and not as a result of any 
royal injunction instructing him to reform the monastic community in his 
homeland.
9
This is not to say, of course, that religion did not play a role in the 
politics between the courts of Pagan and Laṅkā. King Anuruddha (1044–78) 
of Pagan, for instance, sent monks in aid of Vijayabāhu I (1055–1110), who 
the Cūḷavaṃsa (‘Little history’) rather dubiously states could no longer find 
fully ordained monks in Sri Lanka to carry out ordinations.
10 The same king 

--- Page 232 of 286 ---
 CONCL USION : O THER  L I v ES  AND  Af TERLI v ES  217
supposedly invaded Thaton to obtain a copy of the Tipiṭaka and similarly sent 
‘four great warriors’ to Sri Lanka to procure another as well. 11
We do find mention of a possible royal monastic reform in Pagan after 
Narapatisithu’s reign, however, in the fragmentary Mahānāgakulasandesa 
(‘Message from Mahānāgakula’), a poem apparently composed in mid-  
thirteenth-century Sri Lanka. The work is an ornate kāvya containing a mes -
sage sent to a monk in Pagan, Kassapa, from a certain Nāgasena who resided 
in the South of Sri Lanka.
12 Nāgasena writes that he was responding to a mes-
sage originally sent by Kassapa through a minister Ñāṇa. The first editor of the 
poem, Lionel D. Barnett, identified the Pagan king ‘Dhammarāja’ mentioned 
in the poem with one of the three who ruled with this epithet between 1211 
and 1256.
13 Epigraphic evidence from Pagan attests to the existence during 
this time too of a high status forest monk, Kassapa, and a minister, Ñāṇa.14 The 
issue of reform, however, is only raised in the final verse of the poem; a verse 
that Barnett importantly deemed corrupt and a later addition.
15 In this verse 
Nāgasena asks Kassapa to encourage king Dhammarāja to reform the Saṅgha 
in Pagan like Parākramabāhu I (1157–86):
saddhiṃ parakkamabhujena mahībhujena
saṅgho visodhayi yathā jinasāsan’ ettha
tumhe pi tattha siri-dhammanarādhirājam
ādāya sāsanavaraṃ suvisodhayātha.
16
As the Saṅgha purified the conqueror’s religion here
alongside Parakkamabhuja (‘the strong armed’),
ruler of the earth,
so you too should purify it well there,
seizing what is best in the religion
with Siri-Dhammanara as king.
There are a few references to ‘purifications’ of the Saṅgha from this period in 
inscriptions from Burma too, though they provide little context for understand-
ing the nature of these activities. Tilman Frasch, for instance, has pointed to 
a fifteenth-century inscription that claims a Cambodian monk, Subhūticanda, 
‘purified’ (visodhayi) the sāsana in 1248.
17 Similarly, a 1259 inscription from 
Pagan, also states that a minister built a monastery for a certain Ānanda who 
had ‘purified’ the Buddha’s religion.
18 While such references do attest to a 
continuing rhetoric of reform internal to monastic factions in Pagan, they do 
not explicitly point to reforms comparable to those that took place in Sri Lanka 
during the reform era.
19 This reform mentality, for instance, does not seem to 
have led to any greater unity or autonomy at least within the Sīhaḷa fraternity. 

--- Page 233 of 286 ---
218 REWRITING BUDDHISM
This is indicated by the fact that the Sīhaḷa lineages in thirteenth-century Pagan 
were greatly fractured and did not adopt centralized, monarchical hierarchies 
under a ‘grandmaster’ (mahāsāmi) as they had done during the reform era in 
their homeland.
20
Inscriptional evidence in Burma contemporary with the arrival of Sīhaḷa 
monastic lineages in the thirteenth century suggests rather that the rise of 
this Sīhaḷa lineage in Pagan was far less centralized than is often appreci -
ated. Tilman Frasch, for instance, has noted that the thirteenth century saw an 
increase in the number of inscriptions in Pagan mentioning monks who had 
‘arrived from Sri Lanka’.
21 Almost none of the monks can be identified with 
any of the senior prelates in Sri Lanka during the reform era and it is even 
unclear whether they were Sinhalese monks leaving Sri Lanka or Burmese 
monks returning home. One exceptional inscription, though, can speculatively 
be connected with concrete events and persons of the period. Incised at the 
Tāmanī-complex – a Sīhaḷa lineage monastery founded by Tāmalinda, one of 
Chapaṭa’s companions who returned to Pagan in 1181 – the inscription refers 
to a certain ‘Sīlavisuddhi, preceptor of king Sīri Dhammāsoka’, who was stay-
ing at the monastery in 1228. Frasch has suggested that this Sinhalese (?) monk 
may well have been the preceptor of the young Kāliṅga prince Dharmāśoka, 
who nominally ruled Laṅkā for a few months in 1208/9 before being put to 
death.
22 Even in this case, however, it seems likely, as Frasch suggests, that 
Sīlavisuddhi travelled to Pagan due to political turmoil rather than some impe-
rial mission.
The Pali literature produced by these early Sīhaḷa scholar-monks in 
Pagan also helps us better understand the knowledge flows underpinning the 
emergence of these groups. It seems that the monks who travelled to Burma 
brought with them a number of reform-era Pali works. We find, for instance, 
possibly mentioned in a 1236 inscription of a certain royal teacher, Sīri 
Mahādhamma, the Dhātuvaṃsa (‘History of the relic’) and Dhammakitti’s 
Dāṭhāvaṃsa (‘History of the tooth’). Similarly, the Kubyaukkyi pagoda in 
Myinkaba, built by king Kyanzittha’s (1084–1112) son in around 1112/13, 
apparently contains murals that depict the reign of Vijayabāhu I, possibly as 
described in the Cūḷavaṃsa.
23 The Sīhaḷa-lineage monks in Pagan also com-
posed new Pali works, though curiously those that survive are almost entirely 
grammatical works.
24 It may be that these are simply the extant remains of a 
more diverse literary culture or it is possible that monks focused on grammar, 
as they did in reform-era Sri Lanka, because it was perceived to be the foun -
dation of religious and social order.
25 Nevertheless these earliest grammatical 
works contain a number of quotations from grammars composed in reform-era 
Sri Lanka and other Pali works too, attesting to the fact that the monks who 
travelled to Burma did so with the latest scholarship.
26

--- Page 234 of 286 ---
 CONCL USION : O THER  L I v ES  AND  Af TERLI v ES  219
In terms of the movement of texts from Burma to Sri Lanka, an 
 eighteenth-century Burmese Pali history, the Sāsanavaṃsa (‘History of the 
teaching’), states that when Uttarajīva travelled to Sri Lanka in 1170 he did 
so carrying a new Pali grammar composed in Pagan, Aggavaṃsa’s Saddanīti 
(‘Word guide’), and that the scholar-monks on the island marvelled at the 
scope of its erudition.
27 Setting aside the date of the Saddanīti, which is dif -
ficult to ascertain with any accuracy, the reform-era literature of Sri Lanka 
provides a rather different impression of cultural exchange between the 
regions.
28 The Pali and Sinhala literature composed prior to the fifteenth cen-
tury, for instance, is remarkably silent about Burmese scholarship and I am not 
aware of a single Burmese work quoted in any text from Sri Lanka before Śrī 
Rāhula’s Sinhala commentary on the Moggallānapañcikā (‘Extensive com-
mentary on Moggallāna’s grammar’) in 1458.
29 This apparent lack of intel -
lectual exchange prior to the fifteenth century reminds us again to be cautious 
about projecting onto the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the more connected 
realities of a later historical period. In fact, before the fifteenth century, while 
there were knowledge flows from Sri Lanka to Burma, it seems that there was 
little in the way of intellectual exchange between the two regions, at least one 
recoverable from the available texts.
10.2.  The ‘Twilight Glow’  Revisited,   1270–1527
If the long century beginning with the thirty-three-year reign of Parākramabāhu 
I was notable for its revitalized intellectual order sustained by new Pali works, 
the subsequent era prior to the beginning of European colonization reflects an 
almost opposite trend, where monastic interest in the composition of new Pali 
texts dwindled. G.P. Malalasekera is the only scholar, as far as I am aware, who 
has offered an explanation for this period of decline. He described this era, for 
instance, as the ‘twilight glow’ of Pali literature and attributed it to ‘foreign influ-
ence’, in particular, South Indian marriages with the Laṅkan monarchy and the 
increasing power of ‘Tamil’ polities in the north of the island, which, he argued, 
led to a widespread loss of patronage since ‘the people were too much engrossed 
in the protection of their property and persons to have time for anything else’.
30
The reduced interest in composing new Pali works in Sri Lanka, much 
like the posited ‘death of Sanskrit’ in India, was a highly complex affair 
involving a number of causes.
31 While a definitive account of the cultural 
changes of this period must wait, in this section we will explore alternative 
hypotheses that challenge the ‘twilight glow’ narrative. The main reason for 
doubting Malalasekera’s account is that, while Pali  literary production did 
notably diminish, the same cannot be said for Sinhala. In fact, the long century 

--- Page 235 of 286 ---
220 REWRITING BUDDHISM
after the reform era has been rightly considered as something of a golden age 
for Sinhala literature.32 For much of the reform era, poetic Sinhala remained 
on the whole a  language of court culture. The royal courts of the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries, for instance, produced three Sinhala kāvyas inspired by 
jātakas, namely, the Sasadāvata (‘Story of a hare’), Muvadevdāvata (‘Story of 
king Makhadeva’), and the Kavsilumiṇa (‘Crown jewel of literature’).33
These courtly works, modelled on Sanskrit literary forms and themes, 
reflect many of the features of ‘cosmopolitan vernacularization’, as defined 
by Sheldon Pollock, and accompanied a heightened awareness of Laṅkā’s 
local political identity as a kingdom in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
34 
At the same time, it is important to note that, contrary to Pollock’s assertions, 
these works were not a product of the political unification of the island under 
Parākramabāhu I but rather they were likely composed during the chaotic 
aftermath of his rule, in particular, in the reigns of Līlāvatī (1197–1200; 1209–
10; 1211–12) and Parākramabāhu II (1236–70), for instance. Their exclusively 
Buddhist content may suggest also that these works were not simply a celebra-
tion of royal sovereignty but were a product of the new, localized (and more 
religious) political discourse that had emerged during the reform era as part of 
the court’s mimetic political dialogue with monastic powers.
35
A related but rather different strand of vernacularization also continued 
to develop after the reform era, namely, the monastic use of Sinhala primar -
ily for exegetical and pedagogical purposes; to comment on and sometimes 
translate Pali works, in particular, those that had been newly composed as 
part of the reform programme. Many of the Sinhala adaptations of this period 
expanded the intellectual scope of reform-era Pali works, spreading their doc-
trines to a wider audience of novice monks and the laity. It is in the latter half 
of the thirteenth century too that monks began to compose Sinhala preaching 
(baṇa) works, such as the Butsaraṇa (‘Refuge of the Buddha’) and Pūjāvaliya 
(‘Garland of offerings’), which were only tangentially exegetical in purpose.
36 
The author of the encyclopedic Pūjāvaliya, for instance, presents his work as 
an exposition of the Pali word arahaṃ (‘worthy’), an epithet of the Buddha, 
though, in reality, the work is more a devotional anthology of Buddhist histor-
ical and didactic narratives than a commentary in the strict sense.
37
It is possible to interpret the rise of such independent, Sinhala preach -
ing works as in part a continuation of processes that had begun in the reform 
era. We have seen how during the reforms the strong traditional ties between 
the Dhamma and the precise wording of Pali texts was slowly loosening. This 
shift in emphasis accompanied the rise of newly authoritative Pali texts that 
would have previously fallen outside the strict parameters of what had been 
classed as a commentary. In the subsequent centuries the necessary connection 
even between the Dhamma and Pali language began to unravel and we see that 

--- Page 236 of 286 ---
 CONCL USION : O THER  L I v ES  AND  Af TERLI v ES  221
scholar-monks start to justify the composition of preaching poems about the 
Dhamma in Sinhala on the basis that the vernacular too could be a means of 
enlightenment.
38 Writing in the fifteenth century at the beginning of his Lōväḍa 
Saṅgarāva (‘Handbook for the world’s welfare’), for instance, Vīdāgama 
Maitreya defended his use of poetic Sinhala or Eḷu to teach the Dhamma as 
follows:
I thus venerate with devotion and respect the charming trainer of men 
(i.e. the Buddha), the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha and now declare in Eḷu 
the results of karma, especially for those who do not understand the Pali 
Dhamma (peḷadam).
Formerly, sixty members of the Saṅgha, gladdened their minds and 
gained confidence when [listening] to an Eḷu poem that conformed 
(sarikoṭa) with the Dhamma and, reflecting on the many defects in the 
composition of the aggregates, they reached nirvana.
Therefore, do not disparage that which is uttered in Eḷu. For if one listens 
to this charming Dhamma with respect and the pleasure of reverence, then 
you will surely obtain the glory of heaven and liberation.
39
These verses also point to a second factor underpinning the development of 
independent preaching literature, namely, the need to extend the reach of the 
Dhamma to new audiences, in particular those who were unable to understand 
Pali. Whereas the development of vernacular court poetry, as Sheldon Pollock 
has argued, likely had little to do with any emerging popular or public audience, 
this second strand of monastic-led vernacularization was connected with the 
spread of Buddhism as a cultural religion.
40 Even in Mayūrapāda’s Pūjāvaliya, 
composed in 1266, we find an early, programmatic description of this expand-
ing audience. There, the author divides his imagined readership into eight 
groups and explains how each could benefit from appreciating expos  itions of 
the Dhamma written in Sinhala. The eight groups consist of kings, queens and 
women, deputy kings and ministers, Mahātheras, meditators, eloquent preach-
ers, virtuous people, and ‘the pious living in remote places’.
41
It would be wrong, however, to treat court literature and preaching texts 
as completely distinct genres, since there was some overlap between the two 
in both style and audience.
42 In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, for 
instance, monks composed in poetic Sinhala a great number of ‘messenger’ 
(sandeśa) poems explicitly addressed to the monarchy, especially, the court 
of Parākramabāhu VI (1411–66), during a brief moment of political central -
ization. These poems were modelled on an older Sanskrit genre in which the 

--- Page 237 of 286 ---
222 REWRITING BUDDHISM
plot centres on the delivery of a message and the journey undertaken by the 
messenger.43 While originally a form of erotic, court literature, the genre as it 
developed in both Sri Lanka and South India in the fourteenth century became 
more devotional and religious. In almost every Sinhala messenger poem, 
as Justin Henry notes, ‘the “message” to be delivered consists of a request 
to a Hindu deity to produce some benefit to a king or member of the royal 
family’.
44 Henry has skilfully shown, however, that alongside their theurgic, 
courtly role these poems also formed an arena for religious debate, with rival 
monastic factions – the forest dwelling monks and village or city dwelling 
monks – presenting to the court alternative articulations of Buddhist ortho-
doxy and religious pluralism.
45 We can speculate that these rival perspectives 
between factions within the Saṅgha on the island were perhaps best expressed 
in Sinhala, since the political univocality that had underpinned monastic 
scholarship in Pali was now lacking.
Alongside broad divisions between forest dwelling and village or city 
dwelling monks, for instance, the individual schools or pariveṇas had also 
developed more autonomy and scholar-monks from these schools began to 
formally identify with a particular institution in their monastic title.
46 There 
has been some doubt too about whether the position of mahāsāmi or grand -
master continued in regular succession after the reform era. Some have argued 
that the position remained singular whereas others have noted that the plurality 
of ‘grandmasters’ mentioned during this period cannot be explained if regular 
succession had continued.
47 Monastic histories and inscriptions from Burma 
and Thailand further complicate the picture since we find accounts of monks 
from Sri Lanka, such as, ‘Udumbara Mahāsāmi’ and a certain ‘Mahāsāmi 
Saṅgharāja’, travelling to Southeast Asia in the fourteenth century. These 
monks clearly styled themselves as monastic hierarchs but cannot be identified 
with any of the known prelates in Sri Lanka from the period.
48 The agreement 
among scholar-monks in the reform era, then, had thus begun to break down 
and, both in terms of administration and monastic identity, the Saṅgha had 
once more fragmented, destined never again to achieve the same productive 
unity as it found in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Notes
1. See Blackburn, 2015a; 2015b.
2. For instance, Keyes, 1995, 80–2; Collins, 2003, 680–4.
3. See Aung Thwin, 1985; Frasch, 1996.
4. Kalyāṇī Inscriptions, 50. See also Epigraphia Birmanica  3.2, no. XII. Later Pali and Burmese his -
tories provide a similar account of these events. See Sāsanavaṃsa, 65; Pranke, 2004, 148–50; Maung 
Tin and Luce, 1923, 142–4.
5. Frasch, 1996, 292.

--- Page 238 of 286 ---
 CONCL USION : O THER  L I v ES  AND  Af TERLI v ES  223
6. Aung Thwin, 1979, 673–4.
7. See Aung Thwin, 1985, 169–98; 1976, 215, citing the Sāsanavaṃsa, Glass Palace Chronicle  and 
Kalyāṇī inscription. The idea of Narapatisithu’s ‘reforms’, for instance, is repeated in Taylor, 1992, 
164–8; also, Frasch, 1996, 288–305; 2001, 94. Similar doubts have been raised concerning the histor-
ical reality of the ‘reforms’ that Aung Thwin also claims took place during the reign of Narapatisithu’s 
descendant Klacwā (1234–49). See Chan, 1988, 92–3.
8. This, of course, depends on how we define reform. Further work is needed to think more critically 
about the term as a category in the comparative history of Buddhist traditions. How can we differen-
tiate reform from selective patronage, for instance?
9. Historians have tended to interpret Narapatisithu’ s reign rather anachronistically in light of the reli -
gious activities of king Dhammaceti (1460–91) who initiated the fifteenth-century Kalyāṇī inscrip-
tion and who did send monks to Sri Lanka in order to purify the order in Burma in conscious imitation 
of the reforming activities Parākramabāhu I.
10. Cūḷavaṃsa, 60.4–7.
11. Sāsanavaṃsa, 63–4.
12. V on Hinüber, 1996, §441.
13. Barnett, 1905, 266. See also, Günther, 1942, 257–64.
14. Barnett, 1905, 266–7.
15. Barnett, 1905, 265. There’s reason to doubt too whether Nāgasena would have solicited Kassapa’s 
help in attempting to orchestrate a royal reform in Pagan based on Sīhaḷa orthodoxy since this Kas-
sapa was perhaps a leading monk in the Burmese forest fraternity and was not of the Sīhaḷa lineage. 
See Frasch, 1996, 296–7.
16. Mahānāgakulasandesa of Nāgasena, v. 62. Herbert Günther ignores the strange accusative of 
the compound Siri-Dhammanarādhirājam and translates it as an instrumental (‘mit dem König 
 Siri-Dhammaraja’) to mirror the syntax of the relative clause. See Günther, 1942, 281. The reading 
suvisodhayātha is also either a corrupt imperative plural (with elongated ā), as Günther translates it, 
or an ungrammatical imperative singular (sandhi with atha) that does not agree with the plural agent 
tumhe. On monastic agency in initiating ‘royally sponsored ordination embassies’ in Lān Nā, see 
Blackburn, 2015b, 324.
17. Frasch, 2017, 71; 2019, 143–4, citing Inscriptions of Burma III, plate 302.
18. Frasch, 1996, 294–5, citing Inscriptions of Burma III, plate 226.
19. Frasch does compare these references to the reforms that took place in twelfth- and  thirt eenth-century 
Sri Lanka, though defines ‘reform’ more capaciously as a joint recitation of texts and a renewal of 
ordination lineages. See Frasch, 2017, 148.
20. Frasch, 1996, 304–5.
21. Frasch, 2001, 92–6.
22. Frasch, 2001, 93–4. See also chapter seven.
23. Frasch, 1996, 327–8. See also Frasch, 1998, 86–7.
24. Frasch, 1996, 328–35. Gornall and Ruiz-Falqués, 2019, 426–31.
25. In this regard, see Ruiz-Falqués, 2017b. Frasch (1996, 328–35) also speculates that the focus on 
grammar was due to the fact that Burmese monks had to learn Pali as a second language. This is no 
doubt likely, though it does not adequately explain the composition of works on grammatical phil -
osophy or other detailed, extensive commentaries.
26. Aleix Ruiz-Falqués is currently working on these thirteenth-century grammatical texts, such as, the 
Sambandhacintāpurāṇaṭīkā and Mukhamattasāra, and has found in them quotations of Moggallāna’s 
grammatical works, for instance.
27. Sāsanavaṃsa, 74.
28. On the date of the Saddanīti, see Gornall and Ruiz-Falqués, 2019, 428.
29. The work apparently cites the Saddanīti. See Dharmārāma, ed. 1896, xix–xxi.
30. Malalasekera, 1994, 238–9.
31. See Pollock, 2001a. For some useful criticisms of the idea of such a ‘death’, see Hanneder, 2002.
32. See, for instance, Hallisey , 2003.
33. Godakumbura, 1955, 144–51.
34. See Pollock, 2006, 386–7.
35. See chapter one.
36. See Deegalle, 1997; 2006; Dhammapala, 2003; Godakumbura, 1955, 56–66; 73–6. The one early 
exception is Guruḷugomi’s mid-twelfth-century Amāvatura (‘Flood of nectar’).
37. Godakumbura, 1955, 61.

--- Page 239 of 286 ---
224 REWRITING BUDDHISM
38. This appears to run counter to the suggestion in the Vibhaṅga commentary that one can only obtain 
insight into scripture (niruttipaṭisambhidā) and, thus, seemingly enlightenment when it is in Pali and 
not when it is translated. See Sammohavinodanī, 388,13–16.
39. Lōväḍa Saṅgarāva of Vīdāgama Maitreya, vv. 4–6:
 manaram naradam säridam saṅganaṭa
 melesin bätiyen adarin nama koṭa
 vesesin peḷadam nomadat danahaṭa
 pavasam kaḷa kam pala dän heḷu koṭa.
 dahamaṭa sarikoṭa eḷuven perakī
 kaviyaṭa sita pahadā siṭa nisäkī
 sihikoṭa kaṅda piḷiveḷa dos noyekī
 nivanaṭa sapämiṇi saṅga säṭanamakī.
 ebävin eḷuven kīvayi anadara
 novamin bätiyen adarin namakara
 satosin äsuvot medahaṃ manahara
 säbavin siduveyi saga mok sirisara.
 In translating these verses, I have consulted the translations in Ñāṇānanda, 2000 and Lōväḍa 
 Saṅgarāva (ed. and trans. De Silva), 2007. See also Hallisey, 2003, 706–7.
40. See Pollock, 2006, 426.
41. See the analysis and translation of this passage in Deegalle, 1997, 189–91. See also Hallisey, 2003, 
733. On social and political changes after the reform era, see Kulasuriya, 1976.
42. Śrī Rāhula in his Kāvyaśekhāraya (v. 260), for instance, speaks of his style as a combination of a 
‘poetic path’ and a ‘preaching path’ (kivilakara hā banamaga). See Dhammapala, 2003, 200.
43. On these works, see Henry, 2017, 220–37. Henry notes, however, that the earliest poem of this type, 
the Vuttamālāsandesasataka (‘Hundred-verse message in a garland of metres’, c. 1340s), was actu -
ally composed in Pali.
44. Henry, 2017, 222.
45. Henry, 2017, 220–37.
46. Dhammavisuddhi, 1970, 86–131.
47. Dhammavisuddhi, 1970, 78–9, citing Jayatilaka, 1956, 137–8, and Buddhadatta, 1960, 142.
48. Jinakālamālī of Ratanapañña, 84. See also Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng, translated in Prem-
chit and Swearer, 1977; Cœdès, 1924, 99, cited in Sirisena, 1978, 93. On the possible identity of these 
individuals, see Griswold and Nagara, 1973.

--- Page 240 of 286 ---
225
References
I. Primary sources
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha:
Saddhātissa, Hammalawa, ed. The Abhidhammatthasa ṅgaha of Bhadantācariya Anuruddha and the 
 Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā of Bhadantācariya Sumaṅgala. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1989.
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī of Sumaṅgala:
See Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Anuruddha.
Abhidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta:
Buddhadatta, A.P., ed. Buddhadatta’ s Manuals, Part 1: Abhidhammāvatāra and Rūpārūpavibhāga, Part 2: 
Vinayavinicchaya and Uttaravinicchaya. 1915, 1928. Combined reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1980.
Abhidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta Be:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala I:
Abhidhammāvatārapurāṇaṭīkā. Abhidhammāvatārabhinavaṭīkā. 2 vols. Rangoon: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 
1961.
Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī
 of Sumaṅgala II:
See Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī of Sumaṅgala I.
Abhidhānappadīpikā of Moggallāna:
Subhūti, Waskaḍuwē, ed. and trans. Abhidhānappadīpikā; or, dictionary of the Pali language. By Mog -
gallāna Thero. Colombo: W. Henry Herbert, Acting Government Printer, 1865.
Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya
 of Sāriputta:
Siri Pannamoli Tissa, ed. Abhidharmārthasaṅgraha vistara sannaya. Third edition, revised and edited. 
Ambalamgoḍa: Wijaya Printing Press, 1926.
Aṅguttara Nikāya I:
Morris, Richard, ed. The Aṅguttara-Nikāya, Part 1: Ekanipāta, Dukanipāta, and Tikanipāta. 1885. Second 
edition, revised by A.K. Warder, London: Pali Text Society, 1961.
Aṅguttara Nikāya IV:
Hardy, E., ed. The Aṅguttara-Nikāya, Part 4: Sattaka-nipāta, aṭṭhaka-nipāta, and navaka-nipāta . 1899. 
Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1958.
Apadāna I–II:
Lilley, Mary E., ed. The Apadāna, Parts 1–2. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 2000.
Aṣṭādhyāyī
 of Pāṇini:
Katre, Sumitra M., ed. and trans. Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini in Roman Transliteration . Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 1987.

--- Page 241 of 286 ---
226 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Atthasālinī:
Müller, Edward, ed. The Atthasālinī: Buddhaghosa’ s Commentary on the Dhammasaṅgaṇi. 1897. Revised 
edition, London: Pali Text Society, 1979.
Aucityavicāracarcā of Kṣemendra:
Rāghavāchārya, Vidyāratna E.V .V . and D.G. Padhye, eds. Minor Works of Kṣemendra. Hyderabad: San-
skrit Academy Osmania University, 1961.
Bālāvabodhana of Kassapa:
Sri Seelaskhandha, C.A., ed. Balawa Bodhana, An Abridgement of Chandra’ s Grammar by the most ven-
erable Sri Mahakasyapa Sangharaja Mahasthavira of Jētawana Mahāvihāra, Polonnaruwa. Aluthgama: 
Saddharmaprakasa Press, 1924.
Bālāvatāra of Dhammakitti:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Buddhaghosuppatti of Mahāmaṅgala:
Gray, James, ed. and trans. Buddhaghosuppatti or The History Romance of the Rise and Career of Bud-
dhaghosa. London: Luzac, 1892.
Buddhippasādanī of Śrī Rāhula:
Sri Dhirananda and Vachissara, eds. Buddhippasadani. A commentary on Padasadhana, Grammar of 
the Pali Language. By Sangharaja Sri Rahula, Principal of the College Srisanghabodhi-  Srivijayabahu 
Parivena, Totagamuwa. Colombo: Vidyasagara Printing Works, 1908.
Caturārakkhadīpanī:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Cūḷavaṃsa:
Geiger, Wilhelm, ed. Cūlavaṃsa: Being the most recent part of the Mahāvaṃsa, Volumes, 1–2. 1925, 
1927. Combined reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1980.
Daḷadāpūjāvaliya:
Sugatapāla, T., ed. Daḷadāpūjāvaliya. Colombo: Vidyādarśa Press, 1929.
Daḷadāsirita of Devrada Dampasaṅginā:
Rajasekhara, E.S., ed. Daḷadā Sirita. Colombo: Granthaprakasa Press, 1920.
Dāṭhāvaṃsa of Dhammakitti:
Morris, Richard and T.W. Rhys Davids, eds. ‘The Dāṭhāvaṃsa’, Journal of the Pali Text Society (1884): 
109–51.
Dāṭhāvaṃsasannaya:
Āsabha Tissa, ed. Dāṭhāvaṅso or The History of the Tooth Relic With its Sinhalese Paraphrase by Ācariya 
Dharmakīrti Mahā Terunnānsē of Pulastinagara A.B. 1762. Kelaniya: Sastradhara Press, 1883.
Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā I:
Norman, H.C., ed. The Commentary on the Dhammapada, Volume 1, Part 1. 1906. Reprint, London: Pali 
Text Society, 1970.
Dhammasaṅgaṇi:
Müller, Edward, ed. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi. 1885. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1978.
Dhammasaṅgaṇi Be:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Dhammasaṅgaṇianuṭīkā of Dhammapāla:
See Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda.
Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā of Ānanda:
Abhidhammapiṭake Dhammasaṅgaṇī-aṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantācariya-  ānandatther ena 
katā Dhammasaṅgaṇīmūlaṭīkā. Tapassānuvaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantācariyadhammapālattherena katā 
 Dhammasaṅgaṇī-anuṭīkā. Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.

--- Page 242 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 227
Dharmapradīpikāva of Guruḷugomi:
Vimalavaṃsa, Baddēgama, ed. Dharmapradīpikāva. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1967.
Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana:
Durgāprasāda, Mahāmahopādhyāya Paṇḍit and Wāsudev Laxmaṇ Śāstrī Paṇśīkar, eds. The Dhvanyāloka 
of Ānandavardhanāchārya with the Commentary of Abhinavaguptāchārya (Kāvyāmālā 25). Third edition. 
Bombay: Nirṇaya-Sāgar Press, 1928.
Dhvanyālokavṛtti of Ānandavardhana:
See Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana.
Dīgha Nikāya I:
Rhys Davids, T.W. and J. Estlin Carpenter, eds. The Dīgha Nikāya, Volume 1. 1890. Reprint, London: Pali 
Text Society, 1975.
Dīgha Nikāya II:
Rhys Davids, T.W. and J. Estlin Carpenter, eds. The Dīgha Nikāya, Volume 2. 1903. Reprint, London: Pali 
Text Society, 1966.
Dīghanikāya-abhinavaṭīkā
 of Ñāṇābhivaṃsa I:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Dīghanikāyaṭīkā
 of Dhammapāla I:
De Silva, Lily, ed. Dīghanikāy-aṭṭhakathāṭīkā Līnatthavaṇṇanā, Volume 1. London: Pali Text Society, 
1970.
Dīpavaṃsa:
Oldenberg, Hermann, ed. and trans. The Dīpavaṃsa: An Ancient Buddhist Historical Record. 1879. Re-
print, London: Pali Text Society, 2000.
Epigraphia Birmanica 3.2:
Duroiselle, Charles, ed. Epigraphia Birmanica: Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Burma,  Volume 
3, Part 2: Mon Inscriptions: Section II, The Mediaeval Mon Records, No. XII The Inscriptions of the 
Kalyāṇīsīmā, Pegu, edited by C.O. Blagden. Rangoon: Government Printer, 1928.
Epigraphia Indica 22:
Chakravarti, N.P., ed. Epigraphia Indica and Record of the Archaeological Survey of India , Volume 22, 
1933–34. Delhi: Manager of Publications, 1938.
Epigraphia Zeylanica I:
Wickremasinghe, Don Martino De Zilva, ed. and trans. Epigraphia Zeylanica: Being Lithic and Other 
Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 1. London: Oxford University Press, 1912.
Epigraphia Zeylanica II:
Wickremasinghe, Don Martino De Zilva, ed. and trans. Epigraphia Zeylanica: Being Lithic and Other 
Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 2. London: Oxford University Press, 1928.
Epigraphia Zeylanica III:
Wickremasinghe, Don Martino De Zilva and H.W. Codrington, ed. and trans. Epigraphia Zeylanica: Be-
ing Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 3. London: Oxford University Press, 1933.
Epigraphia Zeylanica IV:
Codrington, H.W. and S. Paranavitana, ed. and trans. Epigraphia Zeylanica: Being Lithic and Other In-
scriptions of Ceylon, Volume 4. London: Oxford University Press, 1934.
Epigraphia Zeylanica V .III:
Paranavitana, S. and C.E. Godakumbura, ed. Epigraphia Zeylanica: Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions 
of Ceylon, Volume 5, Part 3. Colombo: The Archaeological Department, 1965.
Gandhavaṃsa:
Minayeff, J.P., ed. ‘Gandha-Vaṃsa’, Journal of the Pali Text Society (1886): 54–80.

--- Page 243 of 286 ---
228 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Harivaṃsa:
Vaidya, Parashuram Lakshman, ed. The Harivamsa: Being the Khila or Supplement to the Mahābhārata, 
Volume 1. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1969.
Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa:
Godakumbura, C.E., ed. Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society, 1956.
Inscriptions of Burma 3:
Inscriptions of Burma, Portfolio III: 630–662 B.E. (1268–1300 A.D.) . London: Oxford University Press, 
1939.
Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.1:
Ranawella, Sirimal, ed. and trans. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 5, Part 1: Containing Pillar, Slab and 
Rock Inscriptions from 815 AD to 923 AD. Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka, 2001.
Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.2:
Ranawella, G.S., ed. and trans. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 5, Part 2: Containing Pillar Inscriptions 
and Slab Inscriptions from 924 AD to 1017 AD. Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka, 2004.
Inscriptions of Ceylon 5.3:
Ranawella, Sirimal, ed. and trans. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 5, Part 3:  Containing Pillar, Slab and 
Rock Inscriptions from 9th Century to 10th Century AD. Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka, 
2005.
Inscriptions of Ceylon 6:
Ranawella, G.S., ed. and trans. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume 6:  Containing Pillar Inscriptions, Slab 
Inscriptions and Rock Inscriptions of the Polonnaruva Period . Colombo: Department of Archaeology, 
Sri Lanka, 2007.
Jātakaṭṭhakathā I:
Faussbøll, V ., ed. The Jātaka Together with its Commentary: Being Tales of the Anterior Births of Gotama 
Buddha, Volume 1. 1877. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1962.
Jinacarita of Medhaṅkara:
Duroiselle, Charles, ed. and trans. Jinacarita or “The Career of the Conqueror”. A Pali Poem Edited and 
Translated with Notes by Charles Duroiselle. Rangoon: British Burma Press, 1906.
Jinakālamālī of Ratanapañña:
Buddhadatta, A.P., ed. Jinakālamālī. London: Pali Text Society, 1962.
Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita:
Gray, James, ed. and trans. Jinālaṅkāra or “Embellishments of Buddha” by Buddharakkhita . London: 
Luzac, 1894.
Jinālaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita Ce:
Dīpaṅkara, Välipaṭanvila and Baṭapolē Dhammapāla, eds. The Jinālaṅkāra by Tripiṭaka Vāgīsvarācārya 
the Venerable Buddharakkhita Maha Thera. Galle: Vidyaloka Press, 1900.
Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā:
Dīpaṅkara, Välipaṭanvila and Baṭapolē Dhammapāla, eds. Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā. Aluthgama: Saddham-
mappakāsa Press, 1913.
Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa of Kaccāyana:
Pind, Ole Holten, ed. Kaccāyana. Bristol: Pali Text Society, 2012.
Kalyāṇī Inscriptions:
Taw Sein Ko, ed. and trans. The Kalyānī Inscriptions, erected by King Dhammacetī at Pegu in 1476 A.D.: 
Text and Translation. Rangoon: Government Press, 1892.
Karmavibhāgaya:
Jinaratana, Isvällē and Saraṇapāla, Paluvälgālē, eds. Karmavibhāgaya. Colombo: Vidyārthaprakāśa Press, 
1929.

--- Page 244 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 229
Kāśikāvṛtti:
Shastri, Dwarikadas and Kalikaprasad Shukla, eds. Nyāsa or Pañcikā Commentary of Ᾱcārya Jinen -
drabuddhipāda and Padamañjarī of Haradatta Miśra on the Kāśikāvṛtti (Commentary on the Aṣṭādhyāyī 
of Pāṇini) of Vāmana-Jayāditya, Part 2: Chapter 2 and up to second section of Chapter 3. Varanasi: 
Prachya Bharati Prakashan, 1965.
Kathāvatthu:
Taylor, Arnold C., ed. Kathāvatthu, Volumes 1–2. 1894, 1897. Combined reprint, London: Pali Text So -
ciety, 1979.
Kathāvatthuaṭṭhakathā:
Jayawickrama, N.A., ed. Kathāvatthuppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā  included in Pañcappakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā 
named Paramatthadīpanī. London: Pali Text Society, 1979.
Kavidappaṇanīti:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin:
Belvalkar, S.K., ed. and trans. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin: Sanskrit text and English translation. Poona: 
 Oriental Book-Supplying Agency, 1924.
Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana:
Durgāprasāda, Mahāmahopādhyāya Paṇḍit and Kāśināth Pāṇḍurang Parab, eds. The Kāvyālankāra-Sūtras of 
Vāmana with his own Vṛtti. Revised by Wāsudev Laxmaṇ Shāstrī Paṇśīkar. Third edition. Bombay: Nirṇaya-
Sāgar Press, 1926.
Kāvyālaṅkāravṛtti of Vāmana:
See Kāvyālaṅkāra of Vāmana.
Khuddasikkhā of Dhammasiri:
Müller, Edward, ed. ‘Khuddasikkhā and Mūlasikkhā’, Journal of the Pali Text Society (1883): 86–132.
Khuddasikkhābhinavaṭīkā
 of Saṅgharakkhita:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Kṛtyakalpataru of Lakṣmīdhara I:
Rangaswami Aiyangar, K.V ., ed. Kṛtyakalpataru of Bhaṭṭa Lakṣmīdhara, Volume 1, Brahmacārikāṇḍa. 
Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1948.
Lalitavistara:
Vaidya, P.L. ed. Lalita-vistara. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in 
Sanskrit Learning, 1958.
Lōväḍa Saṅgarāva of Vīdāgama Maitreya:
de Silva, W.A., ed. and trans. Lōväḍa Saṅgarāva: The Book of Public Welfare; Sinhala Text, English 
Transliteration and English Translation. Colombo: Godage International, 2007.
Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali I:
Kielhorn, F., ed. The Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, Volume 1. Third edition revised and furnished 
with additional readings, references and select critical notes by MM. K.V . Abhyankar. Pune: Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, 1962.
Mahābhāṣyadīpikā of Bhartṛhari:
Abhyankar, K.V . and Limaye V .P., eds. Mahābhāṣyadīpikā of Bhartṛhari. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Re-
search Institute, 1970.
Mahānāgakulasandesa of Nāgasena:
Günther, Herbert, ed. ‘Der Mahānāgakula-sandeśa’, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 
49 (1942): 257–81.
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkārasvavṛtti
 of Asaṅga:
Bagchi, S., ed. Mahāyāna-sūtrālaṅkāra of Asaṅga with its svavṛtti . Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of 
Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning, 1970.

--- Page 245 of 286 ---
230 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Mahāvaṃsa of Mahānāma:
Geiger, Wilhelm, ed. The Mahāvaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society, 1908.
Majjhima Nikāya III:
Chalmers, Robert, ed. The Majjhima-Nikāya, Volume 3. 1899. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1977.
Majjhimanikāyaṭīkā of Dhammapāla III:
Majjhimapaṇṇāsaṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantācariyadhammapālattherena katā 
Majjhimapaṇṇāsaṭīkā. Tathā — Uparipaṇṇāsaṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Uparipaṇṇāsaṭīkā. Yan-
gon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.
Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa I:
Walleser, Max, ed. Manorathapūraṇī. Buddhaghosa’ s commentary on the Aṅguttara-nikāya after the 
manu script of Edmund Har dy, Volume 1: Eka-nipāta-vaṇṇanā. 1924. Second edition, revised. London: 
Pali Text Society, 1973.
Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa III:
Kopp, Hermann, ed. Manorathapūraṇī. Commentary on the Aṅguttara Nikāya, Volume 3: Catukka- pañcaka-
chakka-nipāta-vaṇṇanā. 1936. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1966.
Manorathapūraṇī of Buddhaghosa Be:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Moggallānapañcikā
 of Moggallāna:
See Moggallānavyākaraṇa of Moggallāna.
Moggallānapañcikāpradīpaya of Śrī Rāhula:
Śrī Dharmārāma, ed. Moggallāna Pañchikā Pradīpa: A Treatise on Moggallāna’ s System of Pali Gram-
mar by Saṅgharāja Srī Rāhula Mahāsthavira. Colombo: H.C. Cottle, Acting Government Printer, 1896.
Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā
 of Saṅgharakkhita:
Moggallān pañcikā aphvaṅ. Sāratthavilāsinī maññ so Moggallān pañcikā ṭīkā. Rankun: Mrui jambū. mit 
chve piṭakat puṃ nhip tuik, 1413 (1955).
Moggallānavutti of Moggallāna:
See Moggallānavyākaraṇa of Moggallāna.
Moggallānavyākaraṇa of Moggallāna:
Srī Dharmānanda, ed. Moggallāna Pañcikā with Sutta Vutti by the Venerable Moggallāna Mahā Sāmi. 
Colombo: Satyasamuccaya Press, 1931.
Mohavicchedanī of Kassapa:
Buddhadatta, A.P. and A.K. Warder, eds. Mohavicchedanī Abhidhammamātikatthavaṇṇanā by Kassapat-
thera of Coḷa. London: Pali Text Society, 1961.
Mukhamattadīpanī of Vimalabuddhi:
Dhammaratana, Weliwiṭiyē, ed. The Mukhamattadīpanī, with the Kaccāyana Vutti, and an appendix of 
useful information on nouns, verbs, &c. Colombo: H.C. Cottle, Acting Government Printer, 1898.
Mukhamattadīpanī of Vimalabuddhi B
e:
Nyāsapāṭh. Yangon: Sudhammavatī Press, 1933.
Nettipakaraṇa:
Hardy, E., ed. The Netti-Pakaraṇa with extracts from Dhammapāla’ s commentary. 1902. Reprint, London: 
Pali Text Society, 1961.
Nettipakaraṇaṭīkā of Dhammapāla:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Nikāyasaṅgrahaya
 of Devarakṣita Dharmakīrti:
De Silva, Simon, A. Mendis Gunasekera, and W.F. Gunawardhana, eds. Nikāya-Saṅgraha; or 
Sāsanāwatāraya: A history of Buddhism in India and Ceylon by Dewarakshita Dharmakīrti Saṅgharāja. 
Colombo: H.C. Cottle, Acting Government Printer, 1907.

--- Page 246 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 231
Nyāsa of Jinendrabuddhi:
Chakravarti, Srish Chandra, ed. The Kāśikā-vivaraṇa-pañjikā (The Nyāsa): A Commentary on 
 Vāmana-Jayāditya’ s Kāśikā by Jinendra Buddhi, Volume 1: Adhyāyas 1–4. Rajshahi, Bengal: The Varen-
dra Research Society, 1916.
Padasādhana of Piyadassi:
Dharmasena, Doḍandūvē, ed. Padasādhanaya pūjācāryya Piyadassīmahāsthavira pādayanvahansē visin 
viracitayi. Diṁbulāgala medhaṅkarābhidhāna mahāyati śreṣṭhayanvahansēgē śiṣyavū Ānandamahāstha-
vira pādayanvahansē visin liyanalada vyākhyānayen samupalakṣitayi.  Colombo: Lankābhinava Viśruta 
Press, 1905.
Padasādhanasannaya
 of Ānanda:
See Padasādhana of Piyadassi.
Papañcasūdanī of Buddhaghosa II:
Woods, J.H. and D. Kosambi, ed. Papañcasūdanī Majjhimanikāyaṭṭhakathā of Buddhaghosācariya, Part 
2: Suttas 11–50. 1928. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society 1979.
Papañcasūdanī of Buddhaghosa V:
Horner, I.B., ed. Papañcasūdanī Majjhimanikāyaṭṭhakathā of Buddhaghosācariya, Part 4: Suttas 
101–130, Part 5: Suttas 131–152. 1937, 1938. Combined reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1977.
Paramatthajotikā II of Dhammapāla I:
Smith, Helmer, ed. Sutta-Nipāta Commentary: Being Paramatthajotikā II, Volume 1: Uragavagga Cūḷav-
agga. 1916. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1966.
Paramatthavinicchaya of Anuruddha:
Buddhadatta, A.P., ed. ‘Paramatthavinicchaya by Anuruddha’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 10 (1985): 
155–226.
Paribhāṣenduśekhara of Nāgojī Bhaṭṭa:
Abhyankar, K.V ., ed. Paribhāṣenduśekhara of Nāgojī Bhaṭṭa, Part 1. New edition with the commentary 
Tattvādarśa of MM. Vasudev Shastri Abhyankar. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1962.
Payogasiddhi of Medhaṅkara:
Siri Ñāṇāloka Kōdāgoḍa, ed. Payogasiddhi mugalan viyaraṇa äsiri koṭa Medhaṅkara vanaratana mahāst-
havirayan vahansē visin viracitayi. Colombo: Śrī Laṅkā Saṃskṛtika Maṇḍalaya, 1974.
Peṭakopadesa:
Barua, Arabinda, ed. The Peṭakopadesa. 1949. Revised edition, London: Pali Text Society, 1982.
Puggalapaññattiaṭṭhakathā:
Morris, Richard, ed. Puggala-paññatti. 1883. Georg Landsberg and Caroline Rhys Davids, eds.  
 Puggala-paññatti-atthakathā . 1914. Combined reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1972.
Pūjāvaliya of Mayūrapāda:
Saddhatissa, Bentota, ed. Pujawalie by the Venerable Buddhaputta Maha Thero, principal of the Maura -
pada Piriwena. Panadura: Panadura Press, 1930.
Raghuvaṃśa of Kālidāsa:
Kale, Moreshwar Ramachandra, ed. and trans. The Raghuvamśa of Kālidāsa, with the Commentary (the 
Sanjīvinī) of Mallinātha. Cantos I–X. Third revised edition. Bombay: Gopal Narayen, 1922.
Rājataraṅgiṇī:
Bandhu, Vishva, ed. Rājataraṅgiṇī of Kalhaṇa. Edited, critically, and annotated with text-comparative 
data from original manuscripts and other available materials, Part 1: Taraṅga-s 1–7. Edited in collab -
oration with Bhīma Dev, K.S. Rāmaswāmi Sāstrī and S. Bhāskaran Nair. Hoshiapur: Vishveshvaranand 
Vedic Research Institute, 1963.
Rājāvaliya:
Guṇasēkara, B., ed. The Rājāvaliya: Or, A Historical Narrative of Siṇhalese Kings from Vijaya to Vimala 
Dharma Sūrya II. Colombo: H.C. Cottle, Government Printer, 1911.

--- Page 247 of 286 ---
232 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Rasavāhinī of Vedeha:
Saraṇatissa, ed. Rasavāhinī. Patirājapariveṇajjhācariyavarena saddasatthāgamapāradassinā Vede-
hamahātherasāminā pubbaracanānirākulīkaraṇato sampāditā. Second edition. Colombo: Vijjāsāgara 
Press, 1896.
Ratnaśrīṭīkā of Ratnaśrījñāna:
Thakur, Anantalal and Upendra Jha, eds. Kāvyalakṣaṇa of Daṇḍin (also known as Kāvyādarśa) with com-
mentary called Ratnaśrī of Ratnaśrījñāna. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate Studies and 
Research in Sanskrit Learning, 1957.
Rūpasiddhi of Buddhappiya:
Dhammaratana, B.K., ed. Maharupasiddhi by Ven. Choliya Buddhapriya Maha Thera, the Head of the 
Maha Vihara sect in Ceylon, with Sandehavighatani, a Sinhalese paraphrase by an ancient great scholar. 
Weligama: Sathmina Press, 1936.
Rūpasiddhi
 of Buddhappiya Be:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Rūpasiddhisannaya:
Dhammaratana, Baddegama Keertisri, ed. Maha Rupa Siddhi Sanna or Paraphrase of Maha Rupa Siddhi 
by an Ancient Pandit. Peliyagoda: Satyasamuccaya Press, 1926.
Saccasaṅkhepa:
Dharmārāma, P., ed. ‘Sacca-Sankhepa, by Dhammapāla’, Journal of the Pali Text Society  (1917–19): 
1–25.
Saddanīti of Aggavaṃsa   II:
Smith, Helmer, ed. Saddanīti: La Grammaire Palie d’Aggavaṃsa, Volume 2: Dhātumālā (Pariccheda 
15–19). Lund: C.W.K. Gleerup, 1929.
Saddhammasaṅgaha of Dhammakitti:
Saddhānanda, Nedimāle, ed. ‘Saddhamma Samgaho’, Journal of the Pali Text Society (1890): 21–90.
Samantapāsādikā I:
Takakusu, J. and M. Nagai, eds. Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghosa’ s commentary on the Vinaya Piṭaka, 
Volume 1. 1924. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1975.
Samantapāsādikā VI:
Takakusu, J. and Makoto Nagai, eds. Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghosa’ s commentary on the Vinaya 
 Piṭaka, Volume 6. 1947. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1982.
Sambandhacintā of Saṅgharakkhita:
Sārānanda, Kalutara, ed. The Sambandha-cintā by Venerable Sthavira Sri Sangha Rakshita, translated by 
Venerable Gotama Maha Sami. Colombo: Lakrivikiraṇa Press, 1891.
Sambandhacintāsannaya of Gotama:
See Sambandhacintā of Saṅgharakkhita.
Sammohavinodanī:
Buddhadatta, A.P., ed. Sammoha-vinodanī Abhidhamma-Piṭake Vibhaṅgaṭṭhakathā. 1923. London: Pali 
Text Society, 1980.
Saṃyutta Nikāya III:
Feer, Leon, ed. Saṃyutta-nikāya, Part 3: Khandha-vagga. 1890. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1975.
Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta I:
Samantapāsādikāya Vinayaṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantasāriputtattherena katā Sārat-
thadīpanīṭīkā (Paṭhamo bhāgo). Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.
Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta II:
Samantapāsādikāya Vinayaṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantasāriputtattherena katā Sārat-
thadīpanīṭīkā (Dutiyo bhāgo). Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.

--- Page 248 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 233
Sāratthadīpanī of Sāriputta III:
Samantapāsādikāya Vinayaṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantasāriputtattherena katā Sārat-
thadīpanīṭīkā (Tatiyo bhāgo). Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.
Sāratthappakāsinī of Buddhaghosa I:
Woodward, F.L., ed. Sārattha-ppakāsinī: Buddhaghosa’ s commentary on the Saṃyutta-Nikāya, Volume 1: 
On Sagāthā-vagga. 1929. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1977.
Sāratthappakāsinī of Buddhaghosa II:
Woodward, F.L., ed. Sārattha-ppakāsinī: Buddhaghosa’ s commentary on the Saṃyutta-Nikāya, Volume 
2: On Nidāna-Vagga, Khandha-Vagga, Saḷāyatana-Vagga (First Part). 1932. Reprint, London: Pali Text 
Society, 1977.
Sārasaṅgaha of Siddhattha:
Sasaki, Genjun H., ed. Sārasaṅgaha. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1992.
Sāsanavaṃsa:
Bode, Mabel, ed. Sāsanavaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society, 1897.
Saundarananda
 of Aśvaghoṣa:
Johnston, E.H., ed. and trans. The Saundarananda of Aśvaghoṣa. 1928, 1932. Combined reprint, Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1975.
Sidat Saṅgarāva of Vedeha:
Gair, James W. and W.S. Karunatillake. The Sidat Saňgarā: Text, Translation and Glossary (American 
Oriental Series 95). New Haven, Connecticut: American Oriental Society, 2013.
Sinhala Inscriptions in the Colombo National Museum:
Ranawella, Sirimal, ed. and trans. Sinhala Inscriptions in the Colombo National Museum. Colombo: De-
partment of National Museums, 2005.
Siyabaslakarasannaya of Ruvanmī:
Jayatilaka, Hendrick, ed. Siyabas Lakara or Siṇhalese Rhetoric by king Silāmēghavarṇa. Paraphrased by 
Ratnamadhvāchārya Mahā Thēra. Colombo: Lakrivikiraṇa Press, 1892.
South Indian Inscriptions IV:
Sastri, Rao Bahadur H. Krishna, ed. South-Indian Inscriptions (Texts), Volume 4: Miscellaneous Inscrip-
tions from the Tamil, Telugu and Kannada Countries and Ceylon (with eleven plates) . Madras: Govern-
ment Press, 1923.
Subodhālaṅkāra
 of Saṅgharakkhita:
Jaini, Padmanabh S. ed., Subodhālaṅkāra. Porāṇa-ṭīkā (Mahāsāmi-ṭīkā) by Saṅgharakkhita Mahāsāmi, 
Abhinava-ṭīkā (Nissaya) (anonymous). Oxford: Pali Text Society, 2000.
Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā:
See Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita.
Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭīkā
 of Saṅgharakkhita:
See Subodhālaṅkāra of Saṅgharakkhita.
Subodhālaṅkārapurāṇasannaya:
Dharmasena, Doḍandūvē, ed. Subodhālaṅkāraya. Mahā mahopādhyāya śrī saṅgharakṣita saṅgharāja 
svāmipādayan visin viracitayi. Purātanācāryyavarayaku visin liyanalada praśasta vyākhyātayakin yuk-
tayi. Colombo: Sevyaśrī Press, 1910.
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī of Buddhaghosa I:
Rhys Davids, T.W. and J. Estlin Carpenter, eds. The Sumaṅgala-Vilāsinī, Buddhaghosa’ s Commentary on 
the Dīgha-Nikāya, Part 1. 1886. Reprint, London. Pali Text Society, 1968.
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī of Buddhaghosa II:
Stede, W., ed. The Sumaṅgala-vilāsinī, Buddhaghosa’ s Commentary on the Dīgha-Nikāya, Part 2: Suttas 
8–20. 1931. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1971.

--- Page 249 of 286 ---
234 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī of Buddhaghosa III:
Stede, W., ed. The Sumaṅgala-vilāsinī, Buddhaghosa’ s Commentary on the Dīgha-Nikāya, Part 3: Suttas 
21–24. 1932. Reprint, London: Pali Text Society, 1971.
Suttaniddesa of Chapaṭa:
Medhankara, Mabopiṭiyē, ed. The Kachchayanasuttaniddesa. By the ven’ble neruttikachariya Cchappada 
maha thera. Colombo: Vidyabhusana Press, 1915.
Suttanipāta:
Andersen, Dines and Helmer Smith, eds. Sutta-Nipāta. 1913. Reprint, Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1948.
Thūpavaṃsa of Vācissara:
Jayawickrama, N.A., ed. and trans. The chronicle of the Thūpa and the Thūpavaṃsa. London: Pali Text 
Society, 1971.
Upāsakajanālaṅkāra of Ānanda:
Saddhatissa, H., ed. Upāsakajanālaṅkāra: A critical edition and study. London: Pali Text Society, 1965.
Vajirabuddhiṭīkā:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari:
Subramania Iyer, K.A., ed. Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari with the Commentaries, Vṛtti and Paddhati of 
Vṛṣabhadeva, Kāṇḍa 1. Poona: Deccan College Postgraduate and Research Institute, 1966.
Vibhaṅgamūlaṭīkā of Ānanda:
Abhidhammapiṭake Vibhaṅgaṭṭhakathāya Atthavaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantācariya-ānandattherena katā Vib-
haṅgamūlaṭīkā. Tapassānuvaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantācariyadhammapālattherena katā  V ibhaṅga-anuṭīkā. 
Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.
Vimativinodanī of Kassapa:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Vinaya I:
Oldenberg, Hermann, ed. The Vinaya Piṭakaṃ: One of the Principal Buddhist Holy Scriptures in the Pāli 
Language, Volume 1: The Mahāvagga. 1879. Reprint, Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1997.
Vinaya II:
Oldenberg, Hermann, ed. The Vinaya Piṭakaṃ: One of the Principal Buddhist Holy Scriptures in the Pāli 
Language, Volume 2: The Cullavagga. 1880. Reprint, Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1995.
Vinaya IV:
Oldenberg, Hermann, ed. The Vinaya Piṭakaṃ: One of the Principal Buddhist Holy Scriptures in the Pāli 
Language, Volume 4: The Suttavibhāga, Second Part (End of the Mahāvibhaṅga; Bhikkhunīvibhaṅga) . 
1882. Reprint, Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1993.
Vinayasaṅgaha
 of Sāriputta:
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-ROM, Version 3.0. Igatpuri: Vipassana Research Institute, 1999.
Vinayasaṅgahapurāṇaṭīkā
 of Sāriputta:
Pannasara, K. and P. Nanavimalatissa, ed. Palimuttaka Vinaya Vinicchaya Sangahatika. Edited by Very 
Revd. Sariputra Sangharaja of Jetawanarama in Pollonnaruwa. Matara: Sudarsana Press, 1908.
Vinayatthamañjūsā of Buddhanāga:
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇīpurāṇaṭīkā. Kaṅkhāvitaraṇīabhinavaṭīkā. Rangoon: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1961.
Vinayavinicchaya of Buddhadatta:
See Abhidhammāvatāra of Buddhadatta.
Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosa:
Warren, Henry Clarke, ed. Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosācariya . Revised by Dharmananda Kosambi 
(Harvard Oriental Series 41). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1950.

--- Page 250 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 235
Visuddhimaggamahāṭīkā of Dhammapāla I:
Visuddhimaggassa Atthasaṃvaṇṇanābhūtā Bhadantācariyadhammapālattherena katā Paramatthamañ-
jūsā nāma Visuddhimaggamahāṭīkā (Paṭhamo bhāgo). Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2008.
Vuttodaya of Saṅgharakkhita:
Ānandajoti, ed. and trans. Vuttodaya: The Composition of Metre by Ven. Saṅgharakkhita. 2016.
II. Secondary sources
Acri, Andrea. ‘Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th Cen -
tury AD’, in Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , 
edited by Andrea Acri, 1–28. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, 2016.
Agostini, Giulio, trans. The Ornament of Lay Followers: Ānanda’ s Upāsakajanālaṅkāra. Bristol: Pali 
Text Society, 2015.
Ali, Daud. ‘Royal Eulogy as World History: Rethinking Copper-Plate Inscriptions in Cōḻa India’, in 
 Querying the Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia , edited by Ronald Inden, 
Jonathan Walters and Daud Ali, 165–229. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Ali, Daud. Courtly Culture and Political Life in Early Medieval India. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2006.
Ali, Daud. ‘Cosmos, Realm, and Property in Early Medieval South India’, in Tamil Geographies: Cultural 
Constructions of Space and Place in South India, edited by Martha Ann Selby and Indira Viswana -
than Peterson, 117–41. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008.
Ames, Michael. ‘Ideological and Social Change in Ceylon’, Human Organization 22, no. 1 (1963): 45–53.
Anālayo, Bhikkhu. The Genesis of the Bodhisattva Ideal (Hamburg Buddhist Studies 1). Hamburg: Ham-
burg University Press, 2010.
Anālayo, Bhikkhu. ‘The Evolution of the Bodhisattva Concept in Early Buddhist Canonical Literature’, 
in The Bodhisattva Ideal: Essays on the Emergence of Mahāyāna , edited by Bhikkhu Ñāṇatusita, 
165–208. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 2013.
Anālayo, Bhikkhu. The Dawn of the Abhidharma. Hamburg: Hamburg University Press, 2014.
Appadurai, Arjun. ‘Royal Rituals and Cultural Change’, Reviews in Anthropology 8, no. 2 (1981): 121–38.
Apple, James B. ‘Eschatology and World Order in Buddhist Formations’, Religious Studies and Theology 
29, no. 1 (2010): 109–22.
Appleton, Naomi. Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism: Narrating the Bodhisatta Path. Farnham: Ash-
gate Publishing, 2010.
Appleton, Naomi. Narrating Karma and Rebirth: Buddhist and Jain Multi-Life Stories. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2014.
Archer, Margaret S. Culture and Agency: The Place of Culture in Social Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988.
Ariyapala, M.B. Society in Mediaeval Ceylon: The State of Society in Ceylon as Depicted in the 
 Saddharma-ratnāvaliya and Other Literature of the Thirteenth Century . Colombo: K.V .G. de Silva, 
1956.
Aung Thwin, Michael Arthur. ‘The Nature of State and Society in Pagan: An Institutional History of 12th 
and 13th Century Burma’. PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 1976.
Aung Thwin, Michael. ‘The Role of Sasana Reform in Burmese History: Economic Dimensions of a 
Religious Purification’, Journal of Asian Studies 38, no. 4 (1979): 671–88.
Aung Thwin, Michael. Pagan: The Origins of Modern Burma . Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 
1985.
Auroux, Sylvain. La révolution technologique de la grammatisation: Introduction à l'histoire des sciences 
du langage. Liège: Mardaga, 1994.
Aussant, Émilie. Le nom propre en Inde: Considérations sur le mécanisme référentiel. Lyon: ENS Édi-
tions, 2009.
Balbir, Nalini. ‘Three Pāli Works Revisited’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 29 (2007): 331–64.
Bareau, André. Les sectes bouddhiques du Petit Véhicule . Saigon: École française d’Extrême-Orient, 
1955.

--- Page 251 of 286 ---
236 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Bareau, André. ‘Un personnage bien mystérieux: L'épouse du Buddha’, in Indological and Buddhist Stud-
ies: Volume in Honour of Professor J.W. de Jong on His Sixtieth Birthday , edited by L.A. Hercus, 
F.B.J. Kuiper, T. Rajapatirana and E.R. Skrzypczak, 31–59. Canberra: Faculty of Asian Studies, Aus-
tralian National University, 1982.
Barnett, Lionel D. ‘The Manavulu – Sandesaya’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland (April 1905): 265–83.
Barua, Dwijendralal. ‘“Buddhakhetta” in the Apadāna’, in B.C. Law Volume, Volume 2, edited by D.R. 
Bhandarkar, K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, B.M. Barua, B.K. Ghosh and P.K. Gode, 183–90. Poona: 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1946.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Ways of Sasana Reform in Theravada Buddhism’, in Rhys Davids Memorial Volume , 
edited by V . Ñāṇāloka, 145–57. Colombo: University of Ceylon, 1965.
Bechert, Heinz. Buddhismus, Staat und Gesellschaft in den Ländern des Theravāda-Buddhismus, Volume 
1: Grundlagen; Ceylon. Frankfurt am Main: Alfred Metzner Verlag, 1966.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Theravāda Buddhist Sangha: Some General Observations on Historical and Political 
Factors in Its Development’, Journal of Asian Studies 29, no. 4 (1970): 761–78.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Sangha, State, Society, “Nation”: Persistence of Traditions in “Post-Traditional” Bud-
dhist Societies’, Daedalus 102, no. 1 (1973): 85–95.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Sāsana-Reform im Theravāda-Buddhismus’, in 50 Jahre Buddhistisches Haus: Gegrün-
det von Paul Dahlke 1924–1974, edited by A. Sri Gnanawimala Maha Thera, Guido Auster and Ralf 
Leu, 19–34. Berlin-Frohnau: German Dharmaduta Society, 1974.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Sanskrit Literature in Sri Lanka as a Paradigm of Regional Sanskrit Literatures’, in Mala-
lasekera Commemoration Volume, edited by O.H. de A. Wijesekera, 23–35. Colombo: Malalasekera 
Commemoration V olume Editorial Committee, 1976.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Mahāyāna Literature in Sri Lanka: The Early Phase’, in Prajñāpāramitā and Related 
Systems: Studies in Honor of Edward Conze, edited by Lewis Lancaster and Luis O. Gómez, 361–8. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Beginnings of Buddhist Historiography: Mahāvaṃsa and Political Thinking’, in Religion 
and Legitimation of Power in Sri Lanka, edited by Bardwell L. Smith, 1–12. Chambersburg, PA: 
Anima Books, 1978a.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Remarks on Astrological Sanskrit Literature from Sri Lanka’, in Senarat Paranavitana 
Commemoration Volume, edited by Leelananda Prematilleke, Karthigesu Indrapala and J.E. van 
 Lohuizen-de Leeuw, 45–7. Leiden: Brill, 1978b.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Sanskrit-Grammatiken in singhalesischer Überlieferung’, Studien zur Indologie und 
Iranistik 13/14 (1987): 5–16.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Buddha-Field and Transfer of Merit in a Theravāda Source’, Indo-Iranian Journal 35, 
no. 2 (1992): 95–108.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘The Nikāyas of Mediaeval Sri Lanka and the Unification of the Sangha by Parākrama-
bāhu I’, in Studies on Buddhism in Honour of Professor A.K. Warder, edited by N.K. Wagle and F. 
Watanabe, 11–21. Toronto: University of Toronto, Centre for South Asian Studies, 1993.
Bechert, Heinz. ‘Remarks on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature in Sri Lanka from the 9th Century until the End 
of the Dambadeṇiya period’, in Sūryacandrāya: Essays in Honour of Akira Yuyama on the Occasion 
of His 65th Birthday, edited by Paul Harrison and Gregory Schopen, 1–8.  Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica 
et Tibetica, 1998.
Bechert, Heinz. Eine regionale hochsprachliche Tradition in Südasien: Sanskrit-Literatur bei den Bud-
dhistischen Singhalesen. Vienna: Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2005.
Bell, H.C.P. ‘Dimbulá-gala: Its Caves, Ruins, and Inscriptions’, Ceylon Antiquary and Literary Register  
3, no. 1 (1917): 1–12.
Berkemer, Georg. Little Kingdoms in Kaliṅga: Ideologie, Legitimation und Politik regionaler Eliten . 
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1993.
Berkwitz, Stephen C. ‘History and Gratitude in Theravāda Buddhism’, Journal of the American Academy 
of Religion 71, no. 3 (2003): 579–604.
Berkwitz, Stephen C. Buddhist History in the Vernacular: The Power of the Past in Late Medieval Sri 
Lanka. Leiden: Brill, 2004.
Berkwitz, Stephen C. ‘Reimagining Buddhist Kingship in a Sinhala Praśasti’, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 136, no. 2 (2016): 325–41.
Bhattacharyya, Dinesh Chandra. ‘New Light on Vaidyaka Literature (from Niścalakara’s Ratnaprabhā)’, 
Indian Historical Quarterly 23, no. 1 (1947): 123–55.
Blackburn, Anne M. ‘Looking for the Vinaya: Monastic Discipline in the Practical Canons of the Ther -
avāda’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 22, no. 2 (1999a): 281–309.

--- Page 252 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 237
Blackburn, Anne M. ‘Magic in the Monastery: Textual Practice and Monastic Identity in Sri Lanka’, His-
tory of Religions 38, no. 4 (1999b): 354–72.
Blackburn, Anne M. Buddhist Learning and Textual Practice in Eighteenth-Century Lankan Monastic 
Culture. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Blackburn, Anne M. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2010.
Blackburn, Anne M. ‘Buddhist Connections in the Indian Ocean: Changes in Monastic Mobility, 1000–
1500’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 58, no. 3 (2015): 237–66.
Blackburn, Anne M. ‘Sīhaḷa Saṅgha and Laṅkā in Later Premodern Southeast Asia’, in Buddhist Dynamics 
in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia , edited by D. Christian Lammerts, 307–32. Singa-
pore: ISEAS Publishing, 2015.
Blackburn, Anne M. ‘Buddhist Technologies of Statecraft and Millennial Moments’, History and Theory 
56, no. 1 (2017): 71–9.
Blair, Ann M. Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the Modern Age. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2010.
Blair, Ann. ‘Revisiting Renaissance Encyclopaedism’, in Encyclopaedism from Antiquity to the Renais-
sance, edited by Jason König and Greg Woolf, 379–97. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2013.
Bloch, Marc. Feudal Society, Volume 1: The Growth of Ties of Dependence, translated by L.A. Manyon. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. The Discourse on the All-Embracing Net of Views: The Brahmajāla Sutta and Its 
Commentaries. 2nd ed. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 2007.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Aṅguttara Nikāya. 
Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications, 2012.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. The Suttanipāta: An Ancient Collection of the Buddha’ s Discourses, Together with 
Its Commentaries: Paramatthajotikā II and Excerpts from the Niddesa. Somerville, MA: Wisdom 
Publications, 2017.
Bollée, W.B. ‘Die Stellung der Vinaya-ṭīkās in der Pāli-Literatur’, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlän-
dischen Gesellschaft, Suppl. 1, no. 17 (1969): 824–35.
Bond, George D. “The Word of the Buddha”: The Tipiṭaka and Its Interpretation in Theravada Buddhism. 
Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1982.
Boucher, Daniel. ‘The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā and Its Role in the Medieval Cult of the Relics’, Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 14, no. 1 (1991): 1–27.
Bretfeld, Sven. ‘The Later Spread of Buddhism in Tibet’, in The Spread of Buddhism , edited by Ann 
Heirman and Stephan Peter Bumbacher, 341–77. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Brick, David. Brahmanical Theories of the Gift: A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of the 
Dānakāṇd. a of the Kṛtyakalpataru  (Harvard Oriental Series 77). Cambridge, MA: Department of 
South Asian Studies, Harvard University, 2015.
Bronkhorst, Johannes. ‘Sūtras’, in Brill’ s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Volume 2: Sacred Texts, Ritual 
 Traditions, Arts, Concepts, edited by Knut A. Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar and Vasudha 
Narayanan, 182–92. Leiden: Brill, 2010.
Bronkhorst, Johannes. Buddhism in the Shadow of Brahmanism. Leiden: Brill, 2011.
Bronner, Yigal. ‘Singing to God, Educating the People: Appayya Dīks .ita and the Function of Stotras’, 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 127, no. 2 (2007a): 113–30.
Bronner, Yigal. ‘There is No Lotus, It is a Face: Poetics as Grammar in Daṇḍin’s Investigation of the 
Simile’, in The Poetics of Grammar and the Metaphysics of Sound and Sign , edited by S. La Porta 
and D. Shulman, 91–108. Leiden: Brill, 2007b.
Bronner, Yigal. Extreme Poetry: The South Asian Movement of Simultaneous Narration . New York: 
 Columbia University Press, 2010.
Bronner, Yigal. ‘A Question of Priority: Revisiting the Bhāmaha-Daṇḍin Debate’, Journal of Indian 
 Philosophy 40, no. 1 (2012): 67–118.
Bronner, Yigal. ‘Understanding Udbhaṭa: The Invention of Kashmiri Poetics in the Jayāpīḍa Moment’, in 
Around Abhinavagupta: Aspects of the Intellectual History of Kashmir from the Ninth to the Eleventh 
Century, edited by Eli Franco and Isabelle Ratié, 81–148. Berlin: LIT, 2016.
Buddhadatta, A.P. ‘The Great Author of Summaries – Contemporary of Buddhaghosa’, University of Cey-
lon Review 3, no. 1 (1945): 34–40.
Buddhadatta, A.P. Pāli Sāhityaya. 2 vols. Colombo: Maradāna Sāhitya Press, 1956–7.
Buddhadatta, A.P. Theravādī Bauddhācāryayo¯. Ambalamgoḍa: S.K. Candratilaka, 1960.

--- Page 253 of 286 ---
238 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Buddhadatta, A.P., ed. Buddhadatta’ s Manuals, Part 1: Abhidhammāvatāra and Rūpārūpavibhāga, Part 
2: Vinayavinicchaya and Uttaravinicchaya. London: Pali Text Society, 1980.
Burlingame, Eugene Watson. ‘The Act of Truth (Saccakiriya): A Hindu Spell and Its Employment as 
a Psychic Motif in Hindu Fiction’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 49, no. 3 (1917): 429–67.
Cabezón, José Ignacio, ed. Scholasticism: Cross-Cultural and Comparative Perspectives . Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1998.
Caldwell, Robert. A Political and General History of the District of Tinnevelly, in the Presidency of Ma-
dras, from the Earliest Period to Its Cession to the English Government in AD 1 801. Madras: E. 
Keys, Government Press, 1881.
Carbine, Jason A. ‘Sāsanasuddhi/Sīmāsammuti: Comments on a Spatial Basis of the Buddha’s Religion’, 
in How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities , edited by Peter Skilling, Jason A. 
Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, 241–74. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.
Cardona, George. ‘Studies in Indian Grammarians, I: The Method of Description Reflected in the 
Śivasūtras’, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 59, no. 1 (1969): 3–48.
Cardona, George. ‘Pāṇini’s Kārakas: Agency, Animation and Identity’, Journal of Indian Philosophy  2, 
no. 3/4 (1974): 231–306.
Cardona, George. Pāṇini: A Survey of Research. The Hague: Mouton, 1976.
Carrithers, Michael B. ‘“Sie werden die Herren der Insel sein”: Buddhismus in Sri Lanka’, in Der Bud-
dhismus: Geschichte und Gegenwart, edited by Heinz Bechert and Richard Gombrich, 140–68. 
 Munich: C.H. Beck, 1984.
Chan, Aye. ‘The Nature of Land and Labour Endowments to Sasana in Medieval Burmese History: Re-
view of the Theory of “Merit-Path-to-Salvation”’, Southeast Asian Studies 26, no. 1 (1988): 86–95.
Chandawimala, Rangama. Heterodox Buddhism: The School of Abhayagiri. Colombo: Rangama Chan-
dawimala Thero, 2016.
Chatterjee, Heramba Nath. Comparative Studies in Pāli and Sanskrit Alaṅkāras, Part 1. Calcutta: Sanskrit 
Pustak Bhandar, 1960.
Chaudhuri, Ramaprasad and Devaprasad Guha, eds. Suttasaṃgaha. Calcutta: Asiatic Society, 1957.
Childers, Robert Cæsar. A Dictionary of the Pali Language. London: Trübner and Company, 1875.
Chimpa, Lama and Alaka Chattopadhyaya, trans. Tāranātha’ s History of Buddhism in India, edited by 
Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1990.
Chin, Catherine M. Grammar and Christianity in the Late Roman World . Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
Choompolpaisal, Phibul. ‘Constrictive Constructs: Unravelling the Influence of Weber’s Sociology on 
Theravada Studies since the 1960s’, Contemporary Buddhism 9, no. 1 (2008): 7–51.
Clark, Chris. ‘A Note on the Disappearance of the Dhamma According to the Manorathapūraṇī’, Journal 
of the Pali Text Society 33 (2018): 101–14.
Clarke, Shayne. ‘Vinaya Mātṛkā – Mother of Monastic Codes, or Just Another Set of Lists? A Response 
to Frauwallner’s Handling of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya’, Indo-Iranian Journal 47, no. 2 (2004): 
77–120.
Clooney, Francis X. ‘Hindu Views of Religious Others: Implications for Christian Theology’, Theological 
Studies 64, no. 2 (2003): 306–33.
Cœdès, G. Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Première partie: Inscriptions de Sukhodaya. Bangkok: Bang-
kok Times Press, 1924.
Collins, Steven. ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 15 (1990): 89–126.
Collins, Steven. Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali imaginaire. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1998.
Collins, Steven. ‘What is Literature in Pali?’, in Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South 
Asia, edited by Sheldon Pollock, 649–88. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
Coomāra Swāmy, Mutu, trans. The Daṭhāvansa; or, The History of the Tooth-Relic of Gotama Buddha . 
London: Trübner, 1874.
Copland, Ian, Ian Mabbett, Asim Roy, Kate Brittlebank and Adam Bowles. A History of State and Religion 
in India. London: Routledge, 2012.
Cousins, L.S. ‘On the Vibhajjavādins: The Mahiṃsāsaka, Dhammaguttaka, Kassapiya and Tambapaṇṇiya 
Branches of the Ancient Theriyas’, Buddhist Studies Review 18, no. 2 (2001): 131–82.
Cousins, L.S. ‘Abhidhamma Studies I: Jotipāla and the Abhidhamma Anuṭīkā’, Thai International Journal 
of Buddhist Studies 2 (2011): 1–36.
Cousins, L.S. ‘The Teachings of the Abhayagiri School’, in How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring 
Buddhist Identities , edited by Peter Skilling, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pak-
deekham, 67–127. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.

--- Page 254 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 239
Cousins, L.S. ‘Abhidhamma Studies II: Sanskrit Abhidharma Literature of the Mahāvihāravāsins’, Thai 
International Journal of Buddhist Studies 4 (2013): 1–62.
Cousins, Lance S. ‘Sanskrit Abhidharma Literature of the Mahāvihāravāsins’, in Text, History, and Philos-
ophy: Abhidharma across Buddhist Scholastic Traditions, edited by Bart Dessein and Weijen Teng, 
169–222. Leiden: Brill, 2016.
Cox, Whitney. ‘Saffron in the Rasam’, in South Asian Texts in History: Critical Engagements with Sheldon 
Pollock, edited by Yigal Bronner, Whitney Cox and Lawrence McCrea, 177–201. Ann Arbor, MI: 
Association for Asian Studies, 2011.
Cox, Whitney. ‘Bhoja’s Alternate Universe’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 22, no. 1 (2012): 57–72.
Cox, Whitney. Politics, Kingship, and Poetry in Medieval South India: Moonset on Sunrise Mountain. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Cox, Whitney. Modes of Philology in Medieval South India. Leiden: Brill, 2017.
Crosby, Kate. ‘History versus Modern Myth: The Abhayagirivihāra, the Vimuttimagga and Yogāvacara 
Meditation’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 27, no. 6 (1999): 503–50.
Crosby, Kate. ‘Tantric Theravāda: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of François Bizot and Others on 
the Yogāvacara Tradition’, Contemporary Buddhism 1, no. 2 (2000): 141–98.
Crosby, Kate. ‘The Origin of Pāli as a Language Name in Medieval Theravāda Literature’, Journal of the 
Centre for Buddhist Studies, Sri Lanka 2 (2004): 70–116.
Crosby, Kate. ‘Sāriputta’s Three Works on the Samantapāsādikā’, Journal of the Pali Text Society  28 
(2006): 49–59.
Crosby, Kate. ‘Changing the Landscape of Theravada Studies’, Contemporary Buddhism 9, no. 1 (2008a): 
1–6.
Crosby, Kate. ‘Kamma, Social Collapse or Geophysics? Interpretations of Suffering among Sri Lankan 
Buddhists in the Immediate Aftermath of the 2004 Asian Tsunami’, Contemporary Buddhism 9, no. 
1 (2008b): 53–76.
Crosby, Kate. Traditional Theravada Meditation and Its Modern-Era Suppression. Hong Kong: Buddha 
Dharma Centre of Hong Kong, 2013.
Crosby, Kate. Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity . Chichester: Wiley-  
Blackwell, 2014.
Crosby, Kate and Andrew  Skilton. ‘A Note on the Date of Mahākassapa, Author of the Mohavicchedanī’, 
Bulletin d’études indiennes 17/18 (1999): 173–9.
Cuneo, Daniele. ‘Unfuzzying the Fuzzy: The Distinction between Rasas and Bhāvas in Bharata and Ab-
hinavagupta’, in Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India, through Texts and Traditions: Contributions to 
Current Research in Indology, Volume 1, edited by Nina Mirnig, Péter-Dániel Szántó and Michael 
Williams, 49–75. Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2013.
Dasgupta, Nalini Nath. ‘The Bengali Commentators on the Amara-Kos.a’, Indian Culture 2 (1935): 261–9.
Davidson, Ronald M. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2002.
Davidson, Ronald M. Tibetan Renaissance: Tantric Buddhism in the Rebirth of Tibetan Culture . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2005.
Davidson, Ronald M. ‘Studies in Dhāraṇī Literature I: Revisiting the Meaning of the Term Dhāraṇī’, 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 37, no. 2 (2009): 97–147.
Davis, Christopher Edward. ‘Early Buddhist Monasteries in Sri Lanka: A Landscape Approach’. PhD 
thesis, Durham University, 2013.
Davis, Christopher Edward. ‘Patterns of Patronage: A Reanalysis of the Contents and Distribution of In-
scriptions in Sri Lanka’, in Buddha Rashmi: Vesak Volume: Essays in Buddhism and Buddhist Monas-
tic Archaeology, edited by Prishanta Gunawardhana, Robin Coningham and Krishnan Nampoothiri, 
53–66. Colombo: Sri Lanka Central Cultural Fund, Ministry of Education, 2017.
Davis, Richard H. ‘Indian Art Objects as Loot’, Journal of Asian Studies 52, no. 1 (1993): 22–48.
De Casparis, J.G. ‘New Evidence on Cultural Relations between Java and Ceylon in Ancient Times’, 
Artibus Asiae 24, no. 3/4 (1961): 241–8.
Deeg, Max. ‘Abhayagiri-vihāra – Geschichte und “Geschichte” eines ceylonesischen Klosters’, in Mauss, 
Buddhismus, Devianz: Festschrift für Heinz Mürmel zum 65. Geburtstag , edited by Thomas Hase, 
Johannes Graul, Katharina Neef and Judith Zimmermann, 135–51. Marburg:  Diagonal-V erlag, 
2009.
Deeg, Max. ‘Sthavira, Thera and “*Sthaviravāda” in Chinese Buddhist Sources’, in How Theravāda 
is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities , edited by Peter Skilling, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio 
 Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, 129–63. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.

--- Page 255 of 286 ---
240 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Deegalle, Mahinda. ‘Buddhist Preaching and Sinhala Religious Rhetoric: Medieval Buddhist Methods to 
Popularize Theravāda’, Numen 44, no. 2 (1997): 180–210.
Deegalle, Mahinda. Popularizing Buddhism: Preaching as Performance in Sri Lanka. Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 2006.
DeLanda, Manuel. ‘Deleuzian Social Ontology and Assemblage Theory’, in Deleuze and the Social, ed-
ited by Martin Fuglsang and Bent Meier Sørensen, 250–66. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 
2006.
De La Vallée Poussin, L. Bouddhisme, études et matériaux: Théorie des douze causes . Ghent: Librairie 
scientifique E. Van Goethem, 1913.
Deleuze, Gilles. ‘Desert Islands’, in Desert Islands and Other Texts, 1953–1974, edited by David Lapou-
jade and translated by Michael Taormina, 9–14. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2004.
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari. What is Philosophy? , translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Graham 
Burchell. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.
Deokar, Mahesh A. Technical Terms and Techniques of the Pali and the Sanskrit Grammars. Varanasi: 
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 2008.
Deokar, Mahesh A. ‘The Cāndravyākaraṇapañjikā: An Important Tool for the Study of the Moggallānavut-
tivivaraṇapañcikā: A Case Study Based on a Cambridge Fragment of the Cāndravyākaraṇapañjikā 
with Special Reference to CV 2.2.1 and MV 3.11’, in Indic Manuscript Cultures through the Ages: 
Material, Textual, and Historical Investigations , edited by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo and 
Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 695–726. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2017.
Deshpande, Madhav M. ‘Who Inspired Pāṇini? Reconstructing the Hindu and Buddhist  Counter -Claims’, 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 117, no. 3 (1997): 444–65.
De Silva, Chandra Richard. Sri Lanka: A History. 2nd ed. Delhi: Vikas Publishing House, 1997.
De Silva, K.M. A History of Sri Lanka. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1981.
De Simini, Florinda. Of Gods and Books: Ritual and Knowledge Transmission in the Manuscript Cultures 
of Premodern India. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2016.
Dessein, Bart. ‘Lists as Dynamic Devices in Early Buddhist Doctrine and Textual Tradition’, Antiquorum 
Philosophia 7 (2013): 29–48.
Dhammapala, Gatare. A Comparative Study of Sinhala Literature: Polonnaru Period . Colombo: Godage 
International Publishers, 2003.
Dhammaratana, Bhikkhu T. ‘La littérature bouddhique des Ṭīkās et la Vimativinodanī’, in Dharmadūta: 
Mélanges offerts au Vén érable Thích Huyên-Vi à l'occasion de son soixante-dixième anniversaire , 
edited by Bhikkhu T. Dhammaratana and Bhikkhu Pāsādika, 57–82. Paris: Éditions You-Feng, 1997.
Dhammavisuddhi, Yatadolawatte. ‘The Buddhist Sangha in Ceylon (circa 1200–1400 AD)’. PhD thesis, 
University of London, 1970.
Dimitrov, Dragomir. The Bhaikṣukī Manuscript of the Candrālaṃkāra: Study, Script Tables, and Facsim-
ile Edition (Harvard Oriental Series 72). Cambridge, MA: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, 
Harvard University, 2010.
Dimitrov, Dragomir. The Legacy of the Jewel Mind: On the Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese Works by Rat-
namati: A Philological Chronicle (Phullalocanavaṃsa). Naples: Università degli studi di Napoli 
“L’Orientale”, Dipartimento Asia Africa e Mediterraneo, 2016.
Dimitrov, Dragomir. ‘Trials and Tribulations in the Study of the Cult of Maitreya in Theravāda Buddhism’, 
Journal of Buddhist Studies 24 (2017): 151–82.
Drewes, David. ‘Revisiting the Phrase “Sa Pṛthivīpradeśaś Caityabhūto Bhavet ” and the Mahāyāna Cult 
of the Book’, Indo-Iranian Journal 50, no. 2 (2007): 101–43.
Dumézil, Georges. L’idéologie tripartie des Indo-Européens. Brussels: Collection Latomus, 1958.
Dumont, Louis. Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications , translated by Mark Sains-
bury, Louis Dumont and Basia Gulati. Rev. ed. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Dundas, Paul. ‘Jain Attitudes towards the Sanskrit Language’, in Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contri-
butions to the History of the Sanskrit Language , edited by Jan E.M. Houben, 137–56. Leiden: Brill, 
1996.
Durkheim, Émile. The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, translated by Joseph Ward Swain. London: 
George Allen and Unwin, 1964.
Duroiselle, Charles, ed. and trans. Jinacarita or “The Career of the Conqueror”. Rangoon: British Burma 
Press, 1906.
Eltschinger, Vincent. ‘From Commentary to Philosophy, or Lectio and Disputatio in Indian Buddhist 
Commentarial Literature’, in L’espace du sens: Approches de la philologie indienne = The Space of 
Meaning: Approaches to Indian Philology, edited by Silvia D’Intino and Sheldon Pollock, 271–303. 
Paris: De Boccard, 2018.

--- Page 256 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 241
Endo, Toshiichi. Studies in Pāli Commentarial Literature: Sources, Controversies and Insights. Hong 
Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies, University of Hong Kong, 2013.
Faure, Bernard. The Rhetoric of Immediacy: A Cultural Critique of Chan/Zen Buddhism. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1991.
Fiordalis, David V . ‘Miracles and Superhuman Powers in South Asian Buddhist Literature’. PhD thesis, 
University of Michigan, 2008.
Fisher, Elaine M. Hindu Pluralism: Religion and the Public Sphere in Early Modern South India. Oakland: 
University of California Press, 2017.
Franceschini, Marco, trans. Buddhaghoṣa, Padyacūḍāmaṇi: Il diadema dei versi. Milan: Edizioni Ariele, 
2010.
Franceschini, Marco. ‘Buddhaghoṣa’s Padyacūḍāmaṇi: A Medieval Mahākāvya on the Life of the Bud-
dha’, in Stylistic Devices in Indian Literature and Arts , edited by Giuliano Boccali and Elena Muc-
ciarelli, 37–45. Milan: Cisalpino, Istituto Editoriale Universitario, 2013.
Franke, R. Otto. Geschichte und Kritik der einheimischen Pāli-Grammatik und -Lexicographie . Stras-
bourg: Trübner, 1902.
Franke, R. Otto. ‘Moggallāna’s Saddalakkhaṇa und das Cāndra-Vyākaraṇa’, Journal of the Pali Text So-
ciety (1902–3a): 70–95.
Franke, R. Otto. ‘Rūpasiddhi, Moggallāna, Mahāvutti, Vutti’, Journal of the Pali Text Society (1902–3b): 
113–25.
Frasch, Tilman. Pagan: Stadt und Staat. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1996.
Frasch, Tilman. ‘A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal: Relations between Bodhgayā, Burma and Sri 
Lanka, c. 300–1300’, in From the Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, edited by 
Claude Guillot, Denys Lombard and Roderich Ptak, with the assistance of Richard Teschke, 69–92. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1998.
Frasch, Tilman. ‘The Buddhist Connection: Sinhalese-Burmese Intercourse in the Middle Ages’, in Ex-
plorations in the History of South Asia: Essays in Honour of Dietmar Rothermund , edited by Georg 
Berkemer, Tilman Frasch, Hermann Kulke and Jürgen Lütt, 85–97. Delhi: Manohar, 2001.
Frasch, Tilman. ‘The Theravāda Buddhist Ecumene in the Fifteenth Century: Intellectual Foundations 
and Material Representations’, in Buddhism across Asia: Networks of Material, Intellectual and 
Cultural Exchange, Volume 1, edited by Tansen Sen, 347–67. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, 2014.
Frasch, Tilman. ‘A Pāli Cosmopolis? Sri Lanka and the Theravāda Buddhist Ecumene, c. 500–1500’, in 
Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History, edited by Zoltán Biedermann and Alan Strathern, 66–76. 
London: UCL Press, 2017.
Frasch, Tilman. ‘Kontakte, Konzile, Kontroversen: Begegnungen in der Theravada-Kosmopolis, ca. 
1000–1300’, in Religionsbegegnung in der asiatischen Religionsgeschichte: Kritische Reflexionen 
über ein etabliertes Konzept, edited by Max Deeg, Oliver Freiberger and Christoph Kleine, 129–52. 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 2019.
Frauwallner, Erich. Studies in Abhidharma Literature and the Origins of Buddhist Philosophical Systems, 
translated by Sophie Francis Kidd. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995.
Gair, James W. and W.S. Karunatillake. The Sidat Saňgarā: Text, Translation and Glossary (American 
Oriental Series 95). New Haven: American Oriental Society, 2013.
Ganeri, Jonardon. ‘Sanskrit Philosophical Commentary’, Journal of the Indian Council of Philosophical 
Research 25, no. 1 (2010): 107–27.
Geiger, Wilhelm. ‘The Trustworthiness of the Mahāvaṃsa’, Indian Historical Quarterly 6, no. 2 (1930): 
205–28.
Geiger, Wilhelm. Pāli Literature and Language, translated by Batakrishna Ghosh. Calcutta: University 
of Calcutta, 1943.
Geiger, Wilhelm and C. Mabel Rickmers, trans. 
Cūḷavaṃsa: Being the More Recent Part of the Mahā -
vaṃsa. Delhi: Asian Educational Services, 1998.
Gethin, Rupert. ‘The Mātikās: Memorization, Mindfulness, and the List’, in In the Mirror of Memory: Re-
flections on Mindfulness and Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism, edited by Janet Gyatso, 
149–72. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992.
Gethin, Rupert. The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Gethin, R.M.L. The Buddhist Path to Awakening. Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2001.
Gethin, Rupert. ‘Was Buddhaghosa a Theravādin? Buddhist Identity in the Pali Commentaries and Chron-
icles’, in How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities , edited by Peter Skilling, Ja-
son A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, 1–63. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.

--- Page 257 of 286 ---
242 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Gethin, Rupert. ‘Body, Mind and Sleepiness: On the Abhidharma Understanding of Styāna and Middha’, 
Journal of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 21 (2017): 123–61.
Gillet, Valérie. ‘The Dark Period: Myth or Reality?’, Indian Economic and Social History Review 51, no. 
3 (2014): 283–302.
Godakumbura, C.E. Sinhalese Literature. Colombo: Colombo Apothecaries’ Company, 1955.
Gombrich, Richard F. Theravāda Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to Modern Colombo. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1988.
Gornall, A.M. ‘Some Remarks on Buddhaghosa’s Use of Sanskrit Grammar: Possible Hints of an Un-
known Pāṇinian Commentary in Buddhaghosa’s Grammatical Arguments’, Journal of the Oxford 
Centre for Buddhist Studies 1 (2011): 89–107.
Gornall, Alastair Malcolm. ‘Buddhism and Grammar: The Scholarly Cultivation of Pāli in Medieval 
Laṅkā’. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, 2013.
Gornall, Alastair. ‘How Many Sounds Are in Pāli? Schism, Identity and Ritual in the Theravāda Saṅgha’, 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 42, no. 5 (2014a): 511–50.
Gornall, Alastair. ‘Kārakas in Cāndra Grammar: An Interpretation from the Pāli Buddhist Śāstras’, in 
Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India, through Texts and Traditions: Contributions to Current Research in 
Indology, Volume 2, edited by Giovanni Ciotti, Alastair Gornall and Paolo Visigalli, 87–113. Oxford: 
Oxbow Books, 2014b.
Gornall, Alastair. ‘Ratnamati et ses œuvres’, Bulletin de l'École française d'Extrême-Orient 103 (2017): 
475–91.
Gornall, Alastair and Amal Gunasena, trans. ‘A History of the Pali Grammatical Tradition of South and 
Southeast Asia by Vaskaḍuvē Subhūti (1876), Part 1’, Journal of the Pali Text Society  33 (2018): 
1–53.
Gornall, Alastair and Justin Henry. ‘Beautifully Moral: Cosmopolitan Issues in Medieval Pāli Literary 
Theory’, in Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History, edited by Zoltán Biedermann and Alan Strathern, 
77–93. London: UCL Press, 2017.
Gornall, Alastair and Aleix Ruiz-Falqués. ‘Scholars of Premodern Pali Buddhism’, in Brill’ s Encyclopedia 
of Buddhism, Volume 2: Lives, edited by Richard Bowring, Vincent Eltschinger and Michael Radich, 
420–36. Leiden: Brill, 2019.
Graeber, David and Marshall Sahlins. On Kings. Chicago: Hau Books, 2017.
Granoff, Phyllis. ‘The Ambiguity of Miracles: Buddhist Understandings of Supernatural Power’, East and 
West 46, no. 1/2 (1996): 79–96.
Gray, James, ed. and trans. Jinālaṅkāra; or “Embellishments of Buddha” by Buddharakkhita . London: 
Luzac and Company, 1894.
Green, Richard Firth. Poets and Princepleasers: Literature and the English Court in the Late Middle Ages. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1980.
Griswold, A.B. and Prasert na Nagara. ‘The Epigraphy of Mahādharmarājā I of Sukhodaya: Epigraphic 
and Historical Studies, No. 11, Part II’, Journal of the Siam Society 61, no. 2 (1973): 91–128.
Gunasingam, S. Two Inscriptions of Cola Ilankesvara Deva (Trincomalee Inscriptions Series 1). Peraden-
iya: University of Sri Lanka, 1974.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. ‘Buddhist Nikāyas in Mediaeval Ceylon’, Ceylon Journal of Historical and So-
cial Studies 9 (1966): 55–66.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. ‘Ceylon and Malaysia: A Study of Professor S. Paranavitana’s Research on the 
Relations between the Two Regions’, University of Ceylon Review 25, no. 1/2 (1967): 1–64.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. ‘Irrigation and Hydraulic Society in Early Medieval Ceylon’, Past and Present 
53 (1971): 3–27.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. ‘The Kinsmen of the Buddha: Myth as Political Charter in the Ancient and Early 
Medieval Kingdoms of Sri Lanka’, Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities 2, no. 1 (1976): 53–62.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval Sri 
Lanka. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1979.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. ‘Subtile Silks of Ferreous Firmness: Buddhist Nuns in Ancient and Early Medi -
eval Sri Lanka and Their Role in the Propagation of Buddhism’, Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities 
14, no. 1/2 (1988): 1–59.
Günther, Herbert. ‘Der Mahānāgakula-sandeśa’, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes  49 
(1942): 257–81.
Guruge, Ananda W.P. ‘Sri Lankan Attitude to the Rāmāyaṇa: A Historical Analysis’, Indologica Taurin-
ensia 19/20 (1993–4): 131–46.
Haberman, David L. Acting as a Way of Salvation: A Study of Rāgānugā Bhakti Sādhana. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 2001.

--- Page 258 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 243
Hallisey, Charles. ‘Devotion in the Buddhist Literature of Medieval Sri Lanka’. PhD thesis, University 
of Chicago, 1988.
Hallisey, Charles. ‘Councils as Ideas and Events in the Theravāda’, in The Buddhist Forum, Volume 2: 
Seminar Papers 1988–90, edited by Tadeusz Skorupski, 133–48. London: School of Oriental and 
African Studies, 1991.
Hallisey, Charles. ‘Roads Taken and Not Taken in the Study of Theravāda Buddhism’, in Curators of the 
Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under Colonialism, edited by Donald S. Lopez Jr., 31–61. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Hallisey, Charles. ‘Works and Persons in Sinhala Literary Culture’, in Literary Cultures in History: Recon-
structions from South Asia, edited by Sheldon Pollock, 689–746. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2003.
Hallisey, Charles. ‘Auspicious Things’, in Buddhism in Practice: Abridged Edition , edited by Donald S. 
Lopez Jr., 296–310. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Hallisey, Charles. ‘Learning from Samāsokti in Sri Lanka’, Rivista degli Studi Orientali  90, no. 1–4 
(2017): 127–44.
Hanneder, J. ‘On “The Death of Sanskrit”’, Indo-Iranian Journal 45, no. 4 (2002): 293–310.
Hazra, Kanai Lal. History of Theravāda Buddhism in South-East Asia: With Special Reference to India and 
Ceylon. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1982.
Heim, Maria. Theories of the Gift in South Asia: Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain Reflections on Dāna. New 
York: Routledge, 2004.
Heim, Maria. The Forerunner of All Things: Buddhaghosa on Mind, Intention, and Agency . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2014.
Heim, Maria. Voice of the Buddha: Buddhaghosa on the Immeasurable Words . New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2018.
Henry, Justin Wesley. ‘Distant Shores of Dharma: Historical Imagination in Sri Lanka from the Late 
 Medieval Period’. PhD thesis, University of Chicago, 2017.
Herath, Dharmaratna. The Tooth Relic and the Crown. Colombo: Gunaratne Offset, 1994.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. ‘Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close and Critical Reading of the Brah-
manical Sanskrit Epics’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 34, no. 3 (2006): 229–86.
Hocart, A.M. Caste: A Comparative Study. New York: Russell and Russell, 1968.
Hocart, A.M. Kings and Councillors: An Essay in the Comparative Anatomy of Human Society. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Hocart, A.M. The Temple of the Tooth in Kandy (Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon 4). 
Delhi: Asian Educational Services, 1996.
Holt, John C. ‘Pilgrimage and the Structure of Sinhalese Buddhism’, Journal of the International Associ-
ation of Buddhist Studies 5, no. 2 (1982): 23–40.
Holt, John Clifford. Buddha in the Crown: Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist Traditions of Sri Lanka. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Ilangasinha, H.B.M. Buddhism in Medieval Sri Lanka. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1992.
Inden, Ronald. ‘Hierarchies of Kings in Early Medieval India’, Contributions to Indian Sociology 15, no. 
1/2 (1981): 99–125.
Inden, Ronald. Imagining India. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000.
Indrapala, K. ‘Book Review – Ceylon and Malaysia, by S. Paranavitana (1966)’, Journal of the Ceylon 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 11 (1967): 101–6.
Indrapala, K. ‘The Origin of the Tamil Vanni Chieftaincies of Ceylon’, Ceylon Journal of the Humanities 
1, no. 2 (1970): 111–40.
Indrapala, K. ‘An Inscription of the Time of Rajaraja Cola I from Padaviya’, Epigraphia Tamilica 1, no. 
1 (1971a): 32–6.
Indrapala, K. ‘South Indian Mercantile Communities in Ceylon, circa 950–1250’, Ceylon Journal of His-
torical and Social Studies 1, no. 2 (1971b): 101–13.
Indrapala, K., ed. The Collapse of the Rajarata Civilization in Ceylon and the Drift to the South-West: A 
Symposium. Peradeniya: University of Ceylon, 1971c.
Indrapala, K. ‘An Inscription of the Tenth Year of Cōl ˗a Laṅkeśvara Deva from Kantalai, Sri Lanka’, 
in Senarat Paranavitana Commemoration Volume , edited by Leelananda Prematilleke, Karthigesu 
Indrapala and J.E. van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, 81–97. Leiden: Brill, 1978.
Ingalls, Daniel H.H., trans. An Anthology of Sanskrit Court Poetry: Vidyākara’ s Subhāṣitaratnakoṣa (Har-
vard Oriental Series 44). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.

--- Page 259 of 286 ---
244 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Ingalls, Daniel H.H., Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and M.V . Patwardhan, trans. The Dhvanyāloka of Ānan-
davardhana, with the Locana of Abhinavagupta (Harvard Oriental Series 49). Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 1990.
Irvine, Martin. The Making of Textual Culture: “Grammatica” and Literary Theory, 350–1100 . Cam -
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Jaini, Padmanabh S., ed. Subodhālaṅkāra: Porāṇa-Ṭīkā (Mahāsāmi-Ṭīkā), by Saṅgharakkhita Mahāsāmi; 
Abhinava-Ṭīkā (Nissaya) (anonymous). Oxford: Pali Text Society, 2000.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. ‘The Vaibhāṣika Theory of Words and Meanings’, in Collected Papers on Buddhist 
Studies, 201–18. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2001.
Jayatilaka, D.B., ed. Siṃhala Sāhitya Lipi. Maharagama: Saman Press, 1956.
Jayawardhana, Somapala. Handbook of Pali Literature. Colombo: Karunaratne and Sons, 1994.
Jayawickrama, N.A., trans. The Inception of Discipline and the Vinaya Nidāna: Being a Translation and 
Edition of the Bāhiranidāna of Buddhaghosa’ s Samantapāsādikā, the Vinaya Commentary. London: 
Pali Text Society, 1986.
Jespersen, Otto. A Modern English Grammar on Historical Principles, Part 3: Syntax, Volume 2. London: 
George Allen and Unwin, 1965.
Joshi, S.D. and J.A.F. Roodbergen, eds. and trans. Patañjali’ s Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya: Kārakāhnika 
(P .1.4.23–1.4.55). Poona: University of Poona, 1975.
Kahrs, E.G. ‘Exploring the Saddanīti’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 17 (1992): 1–212.
Kahrs, Eivind. Indian Semantic Analysis: The Nirvacana Tradition . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998.
Kapferer, Bruce. The Feast of the Sorcerer: Practices of Consciousness and Power . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1997.
Karunadasa, Y . Buddhist Analysis of Matter. Colombo: Department of Cultural Affairs, 1967.
Karunadasa, Y . The Dhamma Theory: Philosophical Cornerstone of the Abhidhamma. Kandy: Buddhist 
Publication Society, 1996.
Karunadasa, Y . The Theravāda Abhidhamma: Its Inquiry into the Nature of Conditioned Reality . Hong 
Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies, University of Hong Kong, 2010.
Katre, Sumitra M., ed. and trans. Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, in Roman Transliteration by Sumitra M. Katre. 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1987.
Keyes, Charles F. ‘Merit-Transference in the Kammic Theory of Popular Theravāda Buddhism’, in 
 Karma: An Anthropological Inquiry, edited by Charles F. Keyes and E. Valentine Daniel, 261–86. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983.
Keyes, Charles F. The Golden Peninsula: Culture and Adaptation in Mainland Southeast Asia. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press, 1995.
Khantipālo, Bhikkhu, ed. and trans. Bag of Bones: A Miscellany on the Body. Kandy: Buddhist Publication 
Society, 1980.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. 
Die Sīmā: Vorschriften zur Regelung der buddhistischen Gemeindegrenze in älteren 
buddhistischen Texten (Monographien zur indischen Archäologie, Kunst und Philologie 8). Berlin: 
Dietrich Reimer, 1992.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Ceremonial Boundaries in the Buddhist Monastic Tradition in Sri Lanka’, in Wilhelm 
Geiger and the Study of the History and Culture of Sri Lanka, edited by Ulrich Everding and  Asanga 
Tilakaratne, 43–90. Colombo: Goethe Institute and Postgraduate Institute of Pali and Buddhist Stud-
ies, 1999a.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Vācissara’s Sīmālaṅkārasaṅgaha and the Disagreement between Coḷiyas and 
Sīhaḷas’, Buddhist Studies (Bukkyō Kenkyū) 28 (1999b): 11–18.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Die Klassifizierung des Alkoholverbots in der buddhistischen Rechtsliteratur der 
Theravādin’, in Im Dickicht der Gebote: Studien zur Dialektik von Norm und Praxis in der Buddhis-
musgeschichte Asiens, edited by Peter Schalk, Max Deeg, Oliver Freiberger, Christoph Kleine and 
Astrid van Nahl, 153–223. Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet, 2005.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. Verlorene Gaṇṭhipadas zum buddhistischen Ordensrecht: Untersuchungen zu den in 
der Vajirabuddhiṭīkā zitierten Kommentaren Dhammasiris und Vajirabuddhis, Teil 1 (Veröffentli -
chungen der Indologischen Kommission 1). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2013.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Book Review – The Ornament of Lay Followers: Ānanda’ s Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, 
translated by Giulio Agostini (2015)’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies  78, no. 
3 (2015a): 632–3.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Quotatives Indicating Quotations in Pāli Commentarial Literature, I Iti/ti and Quota-
tives with Vuttaṃ’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 43, no. 4/5 (2015b): 427–52.

--- Page 260 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 245
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Vinaya Commentarial Literature in Pali’, in Brill’ s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol-
ume 1: Literature and Languages, edited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber and Vincent Eltsch-
inger, 430–41. Leiden: Brill, 2015c.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Translocal Debates and Legal Hermeneutics: Early Pāli Vinaya Texts in the Adju-
dication of Sīmā Procedures, c. 1200–1900 CE’, Buddhism, Law and Society 2 (2016–17): 103–58.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Book Review – Aṅguttaranikāya-Purāṇaṭīkā Catutthā Līnatthapakāsinī , edited by 
Primoz Pecenko (2012)’, Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 112, no. 4/5 (2017a): 422–6.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘Saṅgharakkhita Mahāsāmi’s Oeuvre Based on Intertextual Links in His Texts’, An-
nual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University  20 
(2017b): 23–55.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘The Relation of the Saccasaṅkhepaṭīkā Called Sāratthasālinī  to the Vinayavinic-
chayaṭīkā Called Vinayasāratthasandīpanī’, Buddhist Studies Review 35, no. 1/2 (2018): 189–223.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. ‘A Manual of the Adornment of the Monastic Boundary: Vācissara’s Sīmālaṅkāras-
aṅgaha; Edition and Annotated Translation’, in Sīmās: Foundations of Buddhist Religion, edited by 
Jason A. Carbine and Erik Davis, 417–573. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2020. 
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra and Anne Peters. ‘The Vinayasaṅkhepaṭṭhakathā: An Unknown Vinaya Handbook?’, 
in Buddhist and Indian Studies in Honour of Professor Sodo Mori , 117–27. Hamamatsu: Kokusai 
Bukkyōto Kyōkai, 2002.
Kielhorn, F. ‘The Mungir Copper-Plate Grant of Devapaladeva’, Indian Antiquary 21 (1892): 253–8.
Kiparsky, P. and J.F. Staal. ‘Syntactic and Semantic Relations in Pāṇini’, Foundations of Language 5, no. 
1 (1969): 83–117.
Kiribamune, Sirima. ‘Some Reflections on Professor Paranavitana’s Contribution to History’, Ceylon 
Journal of the Humanities 1, no. 1 (1970): 76–92.
Kiribamune, Sirima. ‘The Royal Consecration in Medieval Sri Lanka: The Problem of Vikramabāhu I and 
Gajabāhu II’, Sri Lanka Journal of South Asian Studies 1, no. 1 (1976): 12–32.
Kitsudo, Masahiro. Pāli Texts Printed in Sri Lanka in Sinhalese Characters with Supplementary Informa-
tion on Related Texts. Bristol: Pali Text Society, 2015.
Kloetzli, Randy. Buddhist Cosmology: From Single World System to Pure Land: Science and Theology in 
the Images of Motion and Light. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983.
Krishan, Y . ‘The Origin and Development of the Bodhisattva Doctrine’, East and West 34, no. 1–3 (1984): 
199–232.
Kulasuriya, Ananda S. ‘Regional Independence and Élite Change in the Politics of 14th-Century Sri 
 Lanka’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 108, no. 2 (1976): 136–55.
Kulkarni, V .M. ‘Abhinavagupta on the Alaukika Nature of Rasa’, in Some Aspects of the Rasa Theory, 
edited by V .M. Kulkarni, 28–42. Delhi: B.L. Institute of Indology, 1986.
Kulke, Hermann. ‘King Anaṅgabhīma III, the Veritable Founder of the Gajapati Kingship and of the Ja-
gannātha Trinity at Puri’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 113, no. 1 (1981): 26–39.
Ladwig, Patrice. ‘Millennialism, Charisma and Utopia: Revolutionary Potentialities in Pre-modern Lao 
and Thai Theravāda Buddhism’, Politics, Religion and Ideology 15, no. 2 (2014): 308–29.
Lammerts, D. Christian. Buddhist Law in Burma: A History of Dhammasattha Texts and Jurisprudence, 
1250–1850. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2018.
Law, Bimala Churn, trans. The Debates Commentary (Kathāvatthuppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā ). London: Pali 
Text Society, 1940.
Law, Bimala Churn. Some Jaina Canonical Sūtras. Bombay: Royal Asiatic Society, 1949.
Law, Bimala Churn. A History of Pāli Literature. Varanasi: Indica Books, 2000.
Ledi, Sayādaw Mahāthera. The Manual of Insight: Vipassanā Dīpanī, translated by U. Ñāṇa Mahāthera. 
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 2007.
Le Goff, Jacques. The Medieval Imagination, translated by Arthur Goldhammer. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1988.
Levman, Bryan. ‘Sakāya niruttiyā revisited’, Bulletin des études indiennes 26/27 (2008–9): 33–51.
Lieberman, Victor B. ‘A Note on Burmese Religious Landholdings’, Journal of Asian Studies 40, no. 4 
(1981): 745–6.
Lieberman, Victor. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, c. 800–1830, Volume 1: Integra-
tion on the Mainland. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Lieberman, Victor. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, c. 800–1830, Volume 2: Main-
land Mirrors: Europe, Japan, China, South Asia, and the Islands. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009.

--- Page 261 of 286 ---
246 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Lingat, Robert. Royautés bouddhiques: Aśoka et la fonction royale à  Ceylan, edited by Gérard Fussman 
and Eric Meyer. Paris: Éditions de l’École des hautes études en sciences sociales, 1989.
Liyanagamage, Amaradasa. The Decline of Polonnaruwa and the Rise of Dambadeniya, circa 1180–1270 
AD. Colombo: Department of Cultural Affairs, 1968.
Liyanagamage, Amaradasa. ‘A Forgotten Aspect of the Relations between the Sinhalese and the Tamils: 
The Upāsakajanālaṅkāra: A Re-Examination of Its Date and Authorship and Its Significance in the 
History of South India and Sri Lanka’, in Society, State and Religion in Premodern Sri Lanka, 15–72. 
Kelaniya: University of Kelaniya, 2001a.
Liyanagamage, Amaradasa. ‘The Influence of Caste on the Buddhist Saṅgha in Ancient and Early Medi -
eval Sri Lanka’, in Society, State and Religion in Premodern Sri Lanka, 169–216. Kelaniya: Univer-
sity of Kelaniya, 2001b.
Liyanaratne, Jinadasa. ‘La Jinabodhāvalī de Devarakkhita Jayabāhu Dhammakitti: Édition du texte pāli et 
traduction française’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 72 (1983): 49–80.
Lopez Jr., Donald S. ‘On the Interpretation of the Mahāyāna Sūtras’, in Buddhist Hermeneutics, edited by 
Donald S. Lopez Jr., 47–70. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1993.
Ludowyk-Gyömröi, Edith. ‘Note on the Interpretation of Pasīdati’, University of Ceylon Review 1 (1943): 
74–82.
Malalasekera, G.P. Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, Volume 2: N–H. London: John Murray, 1938.
Malalasekera, G.P. The Pāli Literature of Ceylon. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 1994.
Malalgoda, Kitsiri. ‘Millennialism in Relation to Buddhism’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 
12, no. 4 (1970): 424–41.
Matsumura, Junko. ‘Remarks on the Rasavāhinī and the Related Literature’, Journal of the Pali Text 
Society 25 (1999): 155–72.
Matsumura, Junko. ‘The Sumedhakathā in Pāli Literature and Its Relation to the Northern Buddhist 
 Textual Tradition’, Journal of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 14 (2010): 
101–33.
Maung Tin, Pe and G.H. Luce, trans. The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1923.
McCrea, Lawrence J. The Teleology of Poetics in Medieval Kashmir (Harvard Oriental Series 71). Cam-
bridge, MA: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University, 2008.
McCrea, Lawrence. ‘In the World of Men and beyond It: Thoughts on Sheldon Pollock’s The Language 
of the Gods in the World of Men’, Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 33, 
no. 1 (2013): 117–24.
McCrea, Lawrence. ‘“Resonance” and Its Reverberations: Two Cultures in Indian Epistemology of Aes-
thetic Meaning’, in The Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Indian Aesthetics and the Philosophy of 
Art, edited by Arindam Chakrabarti, 25–41. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2016.
McDaniel, Justin Thomas. Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Educa -
tion in Laos and Thailand. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2008.
McDermott, James P. ‘The Kathāvatthu Niyāma Debates’, Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 12, no. 1 (1989): 139–46.
Meddegama, Udaya, trans. Anāgatavaṃsa Desanā: The Sermon of the Chronicle-To-Be. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1993.
Meddegama, Udaya, trans. ‘Dambadeni Asna’, in The Sri Lanka Reader: History, Culture, Politics, edited 
by John Clifford Holt, 101–6. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
Meegama, Sujatha Arundathi. ‘South Indian or Sri Lankan? The Hindu Temples of Polonnaruva, Sri 
 Lanka’, Artibus Asiae 70, no. 1 (2010): 25–45.
Mingous, Lise, ed. and trans. ‘Thérapeute, exorciste et hôte: Trois facettes des activités d’un moine 
bouddhiste dans le Pāḷimuttaka-vinaya-vinicchaya-saṅgaha; Édition critique, traduction et étude du 
troisième chapitre’. Master’s dissertation. Paris: École Pratique des Hautes Études, 2019.
Monius, Anne E. Imagining a Place for Buddhism: Literary Culture and Religious Community in 
 Tamil-Speaking South India. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Mudiyansē, Nandasēna. Mahayana Monuments in Ceylon. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1967.
Mukherjee, Prabhat. ‘Vīrasiṃha, a Forgotten Buddhist Scholar of Orissa’, Proceedings of the Indian His-
tory Congress 3 (1939): 780–5.
Mukherjee, Prabhat. The History of Medieval Vaishnavism in Orissa. Calcutta: R. Chatterjee, 1940.
Mukherjee, P. ‘The Influence of Vaishnavism in Medieval Orissa’, Proceedings of the Indian History 
Congress 12 (1949): 291–5.

--- Page 262 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 247
Mus, Paul. ‘Études indiennes et indochinoises II: Le Buddha paré: Son origine indienne: Çākyamuni 
dans le Mahāyānisme moyen’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 28, no. 1/2 (1928): 
153–278.
Mus, Paul. ‘Preface’, in Buddhist Backgrounds of the Burmese Revolution, by E. Sarkisyanz, vii–xxii. The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1965.
Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu and Bhikkhu Bodhi, trans. The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A New 
Translation of the Majjhima Nikāya. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995.
Ñāṇānanda, Bhikkhu K., ed. and trans. Towards a Better World (Lōväḍa Saṅgarāva): A Sinhalese Poem 
of the 15th Century by Venerable V ī dāgama Maitreya Mah āthera. Colombo: Dhamma Publications 
Trust, 2000.
Nance, Richard F. Speaking for Buddhas: Scriptural Commentary in Indian Buddhism. New York: 
 Columbia University Press, 2012.
Nattier, Jan. Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist Prophecy of Decline . Berkeley: Asian 
Humanities Press, 1991.
Neri, Chiara. ‘The Case of the Sārasaṅgaha: Reflections on the Reuse of Texts in Medieval Sinhalese Pāli 
Literature’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 43, no. 4/5 (2015): 335–88.
Neugebauer, O. ‘The Study of Wretched Subjects’, Isis 42, no. 2 (1951): 111.
Neumann, K.E., ed. and trans. Des Sārasaṅgaho, eines Kompendiums buddhistischer Anschauungen, er-
stes Kapitel. Leipzig: Max Spohr, 1891.
Nicholas, C.W. ‘Historical Topography of Ancient and Medieval Ceylon’, Journal of the Ceylon Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, n.s., 6, Special Number (1963): 1–232.
Nicholson, Andrew J. Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2014.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A. The Cōlas, Volume 1: To the Accession of Kulottunga I. Madras: University of 
Madras, 1935.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A. A History of South India from Prehistoric Times to the Fall of Vijayanagar. 2nd ed. 
Madras: Oxford University Press, 1958.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A. ‘Ceylon as a Province of the Coḷa Empire’, in History of Ceylon, Volume 1: From 
the Earliest Times to 1505, Part 2, edited by H.C. Ray, 411–15. Colombo: Ceylon University Press, 
1960.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A. ‘Ceylon and Sri Vijaya’, Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
8, no. 1 (1962): 125–40.
Nobuaki, N. Sārasaṅgaha no kenkyū [A Study of the Sārasaṅgaha]. Kyoto: Heirakuji-shoten, 1998.
Norman, K.R. Pāli Literature, including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of All the 
Hīnayāna Schools of Buddhism (A History of Indian Literature 7.2). Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 
1983.
Norman, K.R. ‘Devas and Adhidevas in Buddhism’, in Collected Papers, Volume 2, 162–71. Oxford: Pali 
Text Society, 1991.
Norman, K.R. ‘Pāli Lexicographical Studies VIII’, in Collected Papers, Volume 4, 155–63. Oxford: Pali 
Text Society, 1993.
Norman, K.R. A Philological Approach to Buddhism: The Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai Lectures 1994 (The 
Buddhist Forum 5). London: School of Oriental and African Studies, 1997.
Novetzke, Christian Lee. The Quotidian Revolution: Vernacularization, Religion, and the Premodern Pub-
lic Sphere in India. New York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Nyanatiloka. Buddhist Dictionary: Manual of Buddhist Terms and Doctrines , edited by Nyanaponika. 
Rev. ed. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 1998.
Nyanatiloka. Guide through the Abhidhamma Piṭaka: A Synopsis of the Philosophical Collection of the 
Theravāda Buddhist Canon; Followed by an Essay on Dependent Origination. Kandy: Buddhist 
Publication Society, 2008.
Oberlies, Thomas. Studie zum Cāndravyākaraṇa: Eine kritische Bearbeitung von Candra IV .4.52–148 und 
V. 2. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1989.
Obeyesekere, Ranjini, trans. Yasodharā, the Wife of the Bōdhisattva: The Sinhala Yasodharāvata (The 
Story of Yasodharā) and the Sinhala Yasodharāpadānaya (The Sacred Biography of Yasodharā). 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 2009.
Ohnuma, Reiko. ‘Internal and External Opposition to the Bodhisattva’s Gift of His Body’, Journal of 
Indian Philosophy 28, no. 1 (2000): 43–75.
Ohnuma, Reiko. Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian Buddhist Literature. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2007.

--- Page 263 of 286 ---
248 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Ollett, Andrew. Language of the Snakes: Prakrit, Sanskrit, and the Language Order of Premodern India. 
Oakland: University of California Press, 2017.
Panabokke, Gunaratne. History of the Buddhist Sangha in India and Sri Lanka . Colombo: Postgraduate 
Institute of Pali and Buddhist Studies, University of Kelaniya, 1993.
Pannasara, Dehigaspe. Sanskrit Literature: Extant among the Sinhalese and the Influence of Sanskrit on 
Sinhalese. Colombo: W.D. Hewavitarane Esqr., 1958.
Paranavitana, S. ‘The Kāliṅga Dynasty of Ceylon’, Journal of the Greater India Society  3, no. 1 (1936): 
57–64.
Paranavitana, S. ‘Civilisation of the Polonnaru Period (Continued): Religion, Literature and Art’, in His-
tory of Ceylon, Volume 1: From the Earliest Times to 1505, Part 2 , edited by H.C. Ray, 563–612. 
Colombo: Ceylon University Press, 1960.
Paranavitana, S. ‘The Dhvanikārikās in Fifteenth Century Ceylon’, Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 94, no. 1 (1974): 131–3.
Parkes, M.B. ‘The Influence of the Concepts of Ordinatio and Compilatio on the Development of the 
Book’, in Scribes, Scripts and Readers: Studies in the Communication, Presentation and Dissemina-
tion of Medieval Texts, 35–70. London: Hambledon Press, 1991.
Patel, Deven M. Text to Tradition: The Naiṣadhīyacarita and Literary Community in South Asia. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2014.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘Feudal Polity in Medieval Ceylon: An Examination of the Chieftaincies of the Vanni’, 
Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies new series 2, no. 2 (1972): 118–30.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘The Velaikkarar in Medieval South India and Sri Lanka’, Sri Lanka Journal of the 
Humanities 2, no. 2 (1976): 120–37.
Pathmanathan, S. The Kingdom of Jaffna, Part 1 (circa AD 1250–1450). Colombo: Arul M. Rajendran, 
1978.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘Kingship in Sri Lanka, AD 1070–1270: The Dhammic Conception, Divinity of King-
ship and the Heroic Ideal’, Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities 8, no. 1/2 (1982a): 120–45.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘The Cities of Medieval Sri Lanka (AD 1000–1250): Centres of Dynastic Power, Re-
ligious Authority and Commercial Activity’, Sri Lanka Journal of Social Sciences 5, no. 1 (1982b): 
11–35.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘The Nagaram of the Nanadesis in Sri Lanka circa AD 1000–1300’, Sri Lanka Journal 
of the Humanities 10, no. 1/2 (1984): 122–63.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘Hinduism in Sri Lanka (circa AD 1000–1250): Indian Influences on the Development 
of Saivism’, Modern Sri Lanka Studies 2, no. 1/2 (1987): 52–66.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘Vikramabāhu II and Vikrama Salamevan’, Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities 19, no. 
1/2 (1993): 93–111.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘The Tamil Pillar Inscription from Mankanay’, Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities 21, 
no. 1/2 (1995): 31–41.
Pathmanathan, S. ‘New Light on the Decline of Polonnaruwa (1196–1215): The Tamil Pillar Inscription 
from Rankot Vihara’, Proceedings of the Peradeniya University Research Sessions 9 (2004): 31.
Pecenko, Primoz. ‘Sāriputta and His Works’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 23 (1997): 159–79.
Perera, B.J. ‘Some Political Trends in the Late Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa Period’, Ceylon Historical 
Journal 10, no. 1–4 (1960–1): 60–76.
Perera, Lakshman S. ‘Proprietary and Tenurial Rights in Ancient Ceylon’, Ceylon Journal of Historical 
and Social Studies 2, no. 1 (1959): 1–36.
Peterson, Indira Viswanathan. Design and Rhetoric in a Sanskrit Court Epic: The Kirātārjunīya of 
 Bhāravi. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2003.
Phadnis, Urmila. Religion and Politics in Sri Lanka. London: C. Hurst, 1976.
Pind, Ole Holten. ‘Studies in the Pāli Grammarians I: Buddhaghosa’s Reference to Grammar and Gram-
marians’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 13 (1989): 33–82.
Pind, Ole Holten. ‘Studies in the Pāli Grammarians II.1’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 14 (1990): 
175–218.
Pind, Ole H. ‘Pāli Miscellany’, in Bauddhavidyāsudhākaraḥ: Studies in Honour of Heinz Bechert on 
the Occasion of His 65th Birthday , edited by Petra Kieffer-Pülz and Jens-Uwe Hartmann, 515–36. 
Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1997.
Pind, Ole Holten. ‘Pali Grammar and Grammarians from Buddhaghosa to Vajirabuddhi: A Survey’, Jour-
nal of the Pali Text Society 31 (2012): 57–124.
Pingree, David. Jyotiḥśāstra: Astral and Mathematical Literature. A History of Indian Literature 6.4. 
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1981.

--- Page 264 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 249
Pollock, Sheldon. ‘Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power beyond the Raj’, in Orientalism and 
the Postcolonial Predicament: Perspectives on South Asia, edited by Carol A. Breckenridge and Peter 
van der Veer, 76–133. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993a.
Pollock, Sheldon. ‘Rāmāyaṇa and Political Imagination in India’, Journal of Asian Studies  52, no. 2 
(1993b): 261–97.
Pollock, Sheldon. ‘The Death of Sanskrit’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 43, no. 2 (2001a): 
392–426.
Pollock, Sheldon. ‘The Social Aesthetic and Sanskrit Literary Theory’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 29, 
no. 1/2 (2001b): 197–229.
Pollock, Sheldon. ‘Sanskrit Literary Culture from the Inside Out’, in Literary Cultures in History: Recon-
structions from South Asia, edited by Sheldon Pollock, 39–130. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2003.
Pollock, Sheldon. ‘Ratnaśrījñāna’, in Encyclopaedia of Indian Wisdom: Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Felicita-
tion Volume, edited by R.K. Sharma, 637–43. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 2005.
Pollock, Sheldon. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Pre -
modern India. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.
Pollock, Sheldon, trans. “Bouquet of Rasa” and “River of Rasa” by Bhānudatta . New York: New York 
University Press, 2009.
Powell, Kellie Marie. ‘Rituals and Ruins: Recovering the History of Vajrayāna Buddhism in Sri Lanka’. 
Master’s dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 2018.
Pranke, Patrick Arthur. ‘The “Treatise on the Lineage of Elders” ( Vaṃsadīpanī): Monastic Reform and 
the Writing of Buddhist History in Eighteenth-Century Burma’. PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 
2004.
Pranke, Patrick. ‘On Saints and Wizards: Ideals of Human Perfection and Power in Contemporary Bur -
mese Buddhism’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 33, no. 1/2 (2010–11): 
453–88.
Premchit, Sommai and Donald K. Swearer. ‘A Translation of Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng: The 
Chronicle of the Founding of Buddhism of the Wat Pā Daeng Tradition’, Journal of the Siam Society 
65, no. 2 (1977): 73–110.
Priestley, Leonard C.D.C. Pudgalavāda Buddhism: The Reality of the Indeterminate Self  (South Asian 
Studies Paper 12). Toronto: Centre for South Asian Studies, University of Toronto, 1999.
Pruitt, William. Étude linguistique de nissaya birmans: Traduction commentée de textes bouddhiques. 
Paris: Presses de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient, 1994.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech and Jan Svartvik. A Comprehensive Grammar of 
the English Language. London: Longman, 1985.
Rahula, Walpola. History of Buddhism in Ceylon: The Anuradhapura Period, 3rd Century BC–10th Cen-
tury AC. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1956.
Rammandala, M.S. ‘A Critical Study of Dharmapradipikava’. PhD thesis, University of London, 1954.
Ratnapāla, Nandasēna. The Katikāvatas: Laws of the Buddhist Order of Ceylon from the 12th Century to 
the 18th Century (Critically Edited, Translated and Annotated). Munich: Kitzinger, 1971.
Ray, H.C., ed. History of Ceylon, Volume 1: From the Earliest Times to 1505, Parts 1–2. Colombo: Ceylon 
University Press, 1959–60.
Reuter, Timothy. ‘The “Imperial Church System” of the Ottonian and Salian Rulers: A Reconsideration’, 
Journal of Ecclesiastical History 33, no. 3 (1982): 347–74.
Reynolds, Frank E. ‘The Many Lives of Buddha: A Study of Sacred Biography and Theravāda Tradition’, 
in The Biographical Process: Studies in the History and Psychology of Religion , edited by Frank E. 
Reynolds and Donald Capps, 37–61. The Hague: Mouton, 1976.
Reynolds, Frank E. and Charles Hallisey. ‘Buddhist Religion, Culture, and Civilization’, in Buddhism and 
Asian History, edited by Joseph M. Kitagawa and Mark D. Cummings, 3–28. New York: Macmillan, 
1989.
Reynolds, Frank E. ‘Rebirth Traditions and the Lineages of Gotama: A Study in Theravāda Bud dhology’, 
in Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia , edited by Juliane 
Schober, 19–39. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1997.
Rhys Davids, T.W., trans. Buddhist Birth-Stories (Jataka Tales): The Commentarial Introduction Entitled 
Nidāna-Kathā, The Story of the Lineage. Revised edition by C.A.F. Rhys Davids. London: George 
Routledge and Sons, 1925.
Rohanadeera, Mendis. ‘Mahāsāmi Sangha Rāja Institution in Sri Lanka: Its Origin, Development, Status, 
Duties and Functions’, Vidyodaya Journal of Arts, Science, and Letters 13, no. 1 (1985): 27–43.

--- Page 265 of 286 ---
250 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Rōhaṇadī ra, Măndis. Śrī Laṅkāvē Mahāsāmi Saṅgharāja Parapura: Madhyatana Yugaya, Bu. Va. 1708–
2135, Kri. Va. 1165–1592. Nugēgoḍa: Sīmāsahita Mudraṇa/Prakāśana (Paudgalika), 1996.
Ronkin, Noa. Early Buddhist Metaphysics: The Making of a Philosophical Tradition. London: Routledge-
Curzon, 2005.
Rosenwein, Barbara H. Rhinoceros Bound: Cluny in the Tenth Century. Philadelphia: University of Penn-
sylvania Press, 1982.
Rotman, Andy. ‘The Erotics of Practice: Objects and Agency in Buddhist Avadāna Literature’, Journal of 
the American Academy of Religion 71, no. 3 (2003): 555–78.
Rotman, Andy. Thus Have I Seen: Visualizing Faith in Early Indian Buddhism. New York: Oxford Uni -
versity Press, 2009.
Rowell, Teresina. ‘The Background and Early Use of the Buddha-kṣetra Concept: Introduction and Chap-
ter One’, Eastern Buddhist 6, no. 3 (1934): 199–246.
Ruegg, David Seyfort. Ordre spirituel et ordre temporel dans la pensée bouddhique de l’Inde et du Tibet: 
Quatre conférences au Collège de France. Paris: De Boccard, 1995.
Ruiz-Falqués, A. ‘On the Authorship of Kaccāyana, the Oldest Pāli Grammar’, in Pariyatti: Studies in 
Pāli Language and Literature, edited by Bimalendra Kumar and Ujjwal Kumar, 251–68. Delhi: 
 Aditya Prakashan, 2017a.
Ruiz Falqués, Aleix. ‘The Role of Pāli Grammar in Burmese Buddhism’, Journal of Burma Studies  21, 
no. 1 (2017b): 1–96.
Sahlins, Marshall. ‘The Stranger-King; or Dumézil among the Fijians’, Journal of Pacific History 16, no. 
3 (1981): 107–32.
Samuels, Jeffrey. ‘The Bodhisattva Ideal in Theravāda Buddhist Theory and Practice: A Reevaluation of 
the Bodhisattva-Śrāvaka Opposition’, Philosophy East and West 47, no. 3 (1997): 399–415.
Sannasgala, P.B. Sinhala Sāhitya Vaṃsaya. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1964.
Sarkisyanz, E. Buddhist Backgrounds of the Burmese Revolution. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1965.
Sarton, George. ‘Seventy-Sixth Critical Bibliography of the History and Philosophy of Science and of the 
History of Civilization (to May 1950)’, Isis 41, no. 3/4 (1950): 328–424.
Sasaki, Genjun H., ed. Sārasaṅgaha. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1992.
Savy, Pierre. ‘L’histoire à la découpe’, La vie des idées, 2 April 2014. Accessed 17 June 2019. http://www.
laviedesidees.fr/L-histoire-a-la-decoupe.html.
Schaffer, Simon. The Information Order of Isaac Newton’ s Principia Mathematica: The Hans Rausing 
Lecture 2008 (Salvia Småskrifter 11). Uppsala: Office for History of Science, Uppsala University, 
2008.
Schalk, Peter. ‘Pallava Policy on Buddhism’, in Buddhism among Tamils in Pre-Colonial Tamiḻakam and 
Īḻam, Part 1: Prologue: The Pre-Pallava and the Pallava Period, edited by Peter Schalk and Āḷvāp-
piḷḷai Vēluppiḷḷai, 378–429. Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet, 2002.
Scharf, Peter M. ‘Levels in Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī’, in Sanskrit Computational Linguistics: Third Inter -
national Symposium, Hyderabad, India, January 15–17, 2009: Proceedings , edited by Amba 
Kulkarni and Gérard Huet, 66–77. Berlin: Springer, 2009.
Scharfe, Hartmut. Grammatical Literature (A History of Indian Literature 5.2). Wiesbaden: Otto Harras-
sowitz, 1977.
Scheible, Kristin. ‘Priming the Lamp of Dhamma: The Buddha’s Miracles in the Pāli Mahāvaṃsa’, Jour-
nal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 33, no. 1/2 (2010–11): 435–51.
Scheible, Kristin. Reading the Mahāvaṃsa: The Literary Aims of a Theravāda Buddhist History. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Schober, Juliane. Modern Buddhist Conjunctures in Myanmar: Cultural Narratives, Colonial Legacies, 
and Civil Society. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2011.
Schoening, Jeffrey Davis. ‘The “Śālistamba-Sūtra” and Its Indian Commentaries’. PhD thesis, University 
of Washington, 1991.
Schopen, Gregory. ‘The Phrase “Sa Pṛthivīpradeśaś Caityabhūto Bhavet” in the Vajracchedikā: Notes on 
the Cult of the Book in Mahāyāna’, Indo-Iranian Journal 17, no. 3/4 (1975): 147–81.
Schopen, Gregory. ‘The Text on the “Dhāraṇī Stones from Abhayagiriya”: A Minor Contribution to the 
Study of Mahāyāna Literature in Ceylon’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Stud-
ies 5, no. 1 (1982): 100–8.
Schopen, Gregory. ‘The Buddha as an Owner of Property and Permanent Resident in Medieval Indian 
Monasteries’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 18, no. 3 (1990): 181–217.
Schopen, Gregory. ‘Burial Ad Sanctos and the Physical Presence of the Buddha in Early Indian Buddhism: 
A Study in the Archaeology of Religions’, in Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers 

--- Page 266 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 251
on the Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India , 114–47. Honolulu: Uni-
versity of Hawai‘i Press, 1997.
Schopen, Gregory. Buddhist Monks and Business Matters: Still More Papers on Monastic Buddhism in 
India. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2004.
Schopen, Gregory. ‘The Buddhist “Monastery” and the Indian Garden: Aesthetics, Assimilations, and 
the Siting of Monastic Establishments’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 126, no. 4 (2006): 
487–505.
Schrijvers, Joke. ‘Make Your Son a King: Political Power through Matronage and Motherhood’, in Pri-
vate Politics: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to “Big-Man” Systems, edited by Martin A. van Bakel, 
Renée R. Hagesteijn and Pieter van de Velde, 13–32. Leiden: Brill, 1986.
Sen, Tansen. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian Relations, 600–1400. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2003.
Senart, E. Kaccâyana et la littérature grammaticale du Pâli, 1re partie: Grammaire pâlie de Kaccâyana, 
sûtras et commentaire, publiés avec une traduction et des notes. Paris: Imprimerie nationale, 1871.
Seneviratne, H.L. ‘Religion and Legitimacy of Power in the Kandyan Kingdom’, in Religion and Legit-
imation of Power in Sri Lanka, edited by Bardwell L. Smith, 177–87. Chambersburg, PA: Anima 
Books, 1978a.
Seneviratne, H.L. Rituals of the Kandyan State. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978b.
Seneviratne, Maureen. Some Women of the Mahavamsa and Cūlavamsa. Colombo: H.W. Cave and Com-
pany, 1969.
Shulman, David. More Than Real: A History of the Imagination in South India. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2012.
Shulman, Eviatar. ‘The Protective Buddha: On the Cosmological Logic of Paritta’, Numen 66 (2019): 
207–42.
Silber, Ilana Friedrich. Virtuosity, Charisma, and Social Order: A Comparative Sociological Study of Mo-
nasticism in Theravada Buddhism and Medieval Catholicism . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995.
Silk, Jonathan A. ‘Further Remarks on the Yogācāra Bhikṣu’, in Dharmadūta: Mélanges offerts au 
Vénérable Thích Huyên-Vi à  l’occasion de son soixante-dixi è me anniversaire, edited by Bhikkhu T. 
Dhammaratana and Bhikkhu Pāsādika, 233–50. Paris: Éditions You-Feng, 1997.
Sirisena, W.M. ‘The Kalinga Dynasty of Ceylon and the Theory of Its South-East Asian Origin’, Ceylon 
Journal of Historical and Social Studies 1, no. 1 (1971): 11–47.
Sirisena, W.M. Sri Lanka and South-East Asia: Political, Religious and Cultural Relations from AD  
c. 1000 to c. 1500. Leiden: Brill, 1978.
Skilling, Peter. ‘The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland South-East Asia’, Journal of the Inter-
national Association of Buddhist Studies 20, no. 1 (1997): 93–107.
Skilling, Peter. ‘Vasubandhu and the Vyākhyāyukti Literature’, Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 23, no. 2 (2000): 297–350.
Skilling, Peter. ‘Buddhist Sealings in Thailand and Southeast Asia: Iconography, Function, and Ritual 
Context’, in Interpreting Southeast Asia’ s Past: Monument, Image and Text: Selected Papers from 
the 10th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Volume 2, edited by Elisabeth A. Bacus, Ian C. Glover and Peter D. Sharrock, 248–62. Singapore: 
NUS Press, 2008.
Skilling, Peter. ‘Scriptural Authenticity and the Śrāvaka Schools: An Essay towards an Indian Perspec-
tive’, Eastern Buddhist 41, no. 2 (2010): 1–47.
Skilling, Peter. ‘King Rāma I and Wat Phra Chetuphon: The Buddha-śāsanā in Early Bangkok’, in How 
Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, edited by Peter Skilling, Jason A. Carbine, 
Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, 297–353. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.
Skilling, Peter, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, eds. How Theravāda is Ther-
avāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.
Smith, Bardwell L. ‘The Polonnaruva Period (ca. 993–1293 AD): A Thematic Bibliographical Essay’, in 
Religion and Legitimation of Power in Sri Lanka , edited by Bardwell L. Smith, 119–54. Chambers-
burg, PA: Anima Books, 1978.
Söhnen-Thieme, Renate. ‘On the Concept and Function of Satya (“Truth”) in Ancient Indian Literature’, 
in International Conference on Sanskrit and Related Studies, September 23–26, 1993: Proceedings , 
edited by Cezary Galewicz, 235–44. Cracow: Enigma Press, 1995.
Southern, R.W. Medieval Humanism. New York: Harper and Row, 1970.
Spencer, George W. ‘The Politics of Plunder: The Cholas in Eleventh-Century Ceylon’, Journal of Asian 
Studies 35, no. 3 (1976): 405–19.

--- Page 267 of 286 ---
252 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Spiro, Melford E. Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and Its Burmese Vicissitudes. 2nd ed. Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1982.
Śrī Dharmārāma, ed. Moggallāna Pañchikā Pradīpa: A Treatise on Moggallāna’ s System of Pali Grammar 
by Saṅgharāja Srī Rāhula Mahāsthavira. Colombo: H.C. Cottle, Acting Government Printer, 1896.
Sternbach, Ludwik. A Descriptive Catalogue of Poets Quoted in Sanskrit Anthologies and Inscriptions, 
Volume 1: Am˙ śudhara–Dhoyi. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1978.
Sternbach, Ludwik. A Descriptive Catalogue of Poets quoted in Sanskrit Anthologies and Inscriptions, 
Volume 2: Nakula–Hevidhanesora. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1980.
Strathern, Alan. Kingship and Conversion in Sixteenth-Century Sri Lanka: Portuguese Imperialism in a 
Buddhist Land. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007a.
Strathern, Alan. ‘Transcendentalist Intransigence: Why Rulers Rejected Monotheism in Early Modern South-
east Asia and Beyond’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 49, no. 2 (2007b): 358–83.
Strathern, Alan. ‘Sri Lanka in the Long Early Modern Period: Its Place in a Comparative Theory of Second 
Millennium Eurasian History’, Modern Asian Studies 43, no. 4 (2009): 815–69.
Strathern, Alan. ‘The Digestion of the Foreign in Lankan History, c. 500–1818’, in Sri Lanka at the Cross-
roads of History, edited by Zoltán Biedermann and Alan Strathern, 216–38. London: UCL Press, 
2017.
Strathern, Alan. Unearthly Powers: Religious and Political Change in World History. Cambridge: Cam -
bridge University Press, 2019.
Strathern, Alan and Zoltán Biedermann. ‘Introduction: Querying the Cosmopolitan in Sri Lankan and 
Indian Ocean history’, in Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History , edited by Zoltán Biedermann and 
Alan Strathern, 1–18. London: UCL Press, 2017.
Strickland, Keir Magalie. ‘The Jungle Tide: “Collapse” in Early Mediaeval Sri Lanka’. PhD thesis, Dur -
ham University, 2011.
Strickland, Keir Magalie. A Time of Change: Questioning the “Collapse” of Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka . 
Oxford: Archaeopress, 2017.
Strong, John S. ‘A Family Quest: The Buddha, Yaśodharā, and Rāhula in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya’, in 
Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia, edited by Juliane Schober, 
113–28. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1997.
Strong, John S. Relics of the Buddha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007.
Subhūti, Waskaḍuwē. Nāmamālā; or A Work on Pāli Grammar . Colombo: Government Printing Office, 
1876.
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger. ‘The Wilderness Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and the Origins of  Sino-Javanese 
Esoteric Buddhism’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 160, no. 1 (2004): 95–123.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. ‘The Abhayagirivihāra’s Pāṃśukūlika Monks in Second Lambakaṇṇa Śrī Laṅkā and 
Śailendra Java: The Flowering and Fall of a Cardinal Center of Influence in Early Esoteric Bud-
dhism’, Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies 16 (2014): 49–185.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. ‘Appreciation of Relics, Stūpas, and Relic Stūpas in Eighth Century Esoteric Bud-
dhism: Taishō Tripiṭaka Texts and Archaeological Residues in Guhyā Laṅkā, Part 1’, Indian Interna-
tional Journal of Buddhist Studies 18 (2017): 173–340.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. ‘Appreciation of Relics, Stūpas, and Relic Stūpas in Eighth Century Esoteric Bud-
dhism: Taishō Tripiṭaka Texts and Archaeological Residues in Guhyā Laṅkā, Part 2’, Indian Inter-
national Journal of Buddhist Studies 19 (2018): 181–458.
Sundberg, Jeffrey and Rolf Giebel. ‘The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi as Chronicled by Lü 
Xiang (呂向): South Indian and Śrī Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of the Buddhist Vajrayāna 
in Eighth-Century Java and China’, Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies  13 
(2011): 129–222.
Sūryakānta, ed. and trans. Kṣemendra Studies: Together with an English Translation of His Kavikaṇṭhāb-
haraṇa, Aucityavicāracarcā and Suvṛttatilaka. Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1954.
Tambiah, S.J. World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand 
against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. 
The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets: A Study in Cha -
risma, Hagiography, Sectarianism, and Millennial Buddhism . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1984.
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. Magic, Science, Religion, and the Scope of Rationality . Cambridge: Cam -
bridge University Press, 1990.
Taylor, Keith. ‘The Devolution of Kingship in Twelfth Century Ceylon’, in Explorations in Early South-
east Asian History: The Origins of Southeast Asian Statecraft, edited by Kenneth R. Hall and John 

--- Page 268 of 286 ---
 REfERENCES 253
K. Whitmore, 257–302. Ann Arbor: Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of 
Michigan, 1976.
Taylor, Keith W. ‘The Early Kingdoms’, in The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, Volume 1: From 
Early Times to c. 1800, edited by Nicholas Tarling, 137–82. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1992.
Taylor, William. Oriental Historical Manuscripts, in the Tamil Language: Translated; with Annotations, 
Volume 1. Madras: n.p., 1835.
Taylor, William. A Catalogue Raisonné of Oriental Manuscripts in the Library of the Government . Ma-
dras: Fort St. George Gazette Press, 1857.
Tellenbach, Gerd. The Church in Western Europe from the Tenth to the Early Twelfth Century, translated 
by Timothy Reuter. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Tournier, Vincent. La formation du Mahāvastu et la mise en place des conceptions relatives à  la carri è re 
du bodhisattva. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient, 2017.
Trainor, Kevin. ‘Pasanna/Pasāda in the Pāli Vaṃsa Literature’, Vidyodaya Journal of Social Sciences  3 
(1989): 185–90.
Trainor, Kevin. Relics, Ritual, and Representation in Buddhism: Rematerializing the Sri Lankan Ther -
avāda Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Trainor, Kevin. ‘Seeing, Feeling, Doing: Ethics and Emotions in South Asian Buddhism’, Journal of the 
American Academy of Religion 71, no. 3 (2003): 523–9.
Trautmann, Thomas R. ‘Consanguineous Marriage in Pali Literature’, Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 93, no. 2 (1973): 158–80.
Turnour, George. ‘An Examination of the Pali Buddhistical Annals, No. 3’, Journal of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal 7, no. 80 (1838): 686–701.
Vaidya, P.L. ‘Pali and Buddhistic Literature’, in Encyclopedia of Literature, Volume 1, edited by Joseph T. 
Shipley, 478–81. New York: Philosophical Library, 1946.
Vanderputten, Steven. Monastic Reform as Process: Realities and Representations in Medieval Flanders, 
900–1100. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2013.
Verellen, Franciscus. ‘“Evidential Miracles in Support of Taoism”: The Inversion of a Buddhist Apologetic 
Tradition in Late Tang China’, T’oung Pao 78, no. 4/5 (1992): 217–63.
Vergiani, Vincenzo. ‘A Quotation from the Mahābhāṣyadīpikā of Bhartṛhari in the Pratyāhāra Section of 
the Kāśikāvṛtti’, in Studies in the Kāśikāvṛtti: The Section on Pratyāhāras: Critical Edition, Trans-
lation and Other Contributions, edited by Pascale Haag and Vincenzo Vergiani, 161–89. London: 
Anthem Press, 2011.
Visigalli, Paolo. ‘The Cultural Genesis of Systematic Inquiries into Language in Ancient India’. PhD 
thesis, University of Cambridge, 2014.
V ogel, Claus. Indian Lexicography (A History of Indian Literature 5.4). Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 
1979.
V on Hinüber, Oskar. ‘Eine Karmavācanā-Sammlung aus Gilgit’, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländis-
chen Gesellschaft 119, no. 1 (1969): 102–32.
V on Hinüber, Oskar. ‘Pāli as an Artificial Language’, Indologica Taurinensia 10 (1982): 133–40.
V on Hinüber, Oskar. Sieben Goldblätter einer Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā aus Anurādhapura. 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1983.
V on Hinüber, O. ‘On the History of the Name of the Pāli Language’, in Selected Papers on Pāli Studies, 
76–90. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1994.
V on Hinüber, Oskar. A Handbook of Pāli Literature. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1996.
V on Hinüber, Oskar. ‘The Paramatthajotikādīpanī, a Fragment of the Subcommentary to the Paramattha-
jotikā II on the Suttanipāta’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 23 (1997): 27–41.
Wallace, Vesna A. ‘Authenticating the Tradition through Linguistic Arguments’, in Buddhism and Linguistics: 
Theory and Philosophy, edited by Manel Herat, 101–22. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
Walshe, Maurice, trans. The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Dīgha Nikāya. Boston: 
Wisdom Publications, 1995.
Walters, Jonathan S. ‘Stūpa, Story, and Empire: Constructions of the Buddha Biography in Early Post-  
Aśokan India’, in Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia , edited 
by Juliane Schober, 160–92. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1997.
Walters, Jonathan S. ‘Mahāsena at the Mahāvihāra: On the Interpretation and Politics of History in 
Pre-Colonial Sri Lanka’, in Invoking the Past: The Uses of History in South Asia, edited by Daud Ali, 
322–66. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1999.

--- Page 269 of 286 ---
254 REWRITING BUDDHISM
Walters, Jonathan S. ‘Buddhist History: The Sri Lankan Pāli Vaṃsas and Their Commentary’, in Querying 
the Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia , by Ronald Inden, Jonathan Walters 
and Daud Ali, 99–164. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Walters, Jonathan S. ‘Communal Karma and Karmic Community in Theravāda Buddhist History’, in 
Constituting Communities: Theravāda Buddhism and the Religious Cultures of South and Southeast 
Asia, edited by John Clifford Holt, Jacob N. Kinnard and Jonathan S. Walters, 9–39. Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 2003.
Walters, Jonathan S. ‘Flanked by Images of Our Buddha: Community, Law, and Religion in a Premodern 
Buddhist Context’, in Buddhism and Law: An Introduction, edited by Rebecca Redwood French and 
Mark A. Nathan, 135–49. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Warder, A.K. ‘The Concept of a Concept’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 1, no. 2 (1971): 181–96.
Warder, A.K. ‘Some Problems of the Later Pali Literature’, Journal of the Pali Text Society  9 (1981): 
198–207.
Warder, A.K. Indian Kāvya Literature, Volume 5: The Bold Style (Śaktibhadra to Dhanapāla). Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1988.
Weber, Max. The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism, edited and translated by 
Hans H. Gerth and Don Martindale. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1958.
Weber, Max. The Agrarian Sociology of Ancient Civilizations , translated by R.I. Frank. London: Verso, 
2013.
Wickham, Chris. Medieval Europe. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2016.
Wickramasinghe, Sirima. ‘The Age of Parākramabāhu I’. PhD thesis, University of London, 1958.
Wielińska-Soltwedel, Małgorzata. ‘The Bhāṣāvṛttivivaraṇapañjikā of Viśvarūpa, the First Adhyāya and a 
Detailed Examination’. PhD thesis, Universität Hamburg, 2006.
Wijayatuṅga, W.M.K. ‘Some Aspects of Cola Administration of Ceylon in the Eleventh Century’, Univer-
sity of Ceylon Review 23, no. 1/2 (1965): 67–82.
Wijeratne, R.P. and Rupert Gethin, trans. Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma (Abhidhammatthasaṅga-
ha) by Anuruddha; Exposition of the Topics of Abhidhamma (Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī), Being a 
Commentary to Anuruddha’ s “Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma”, by Sumaṅgala. Lancaster: 
Pali Text Society, 2007.
Wijesekera, O.H. de A. ‘Pali and Sanskrit in the Polonnaruva Period’, in The Polonnaruva Period, edited 
by S.D. Saparamadu, 102–9. Dehiwala: Tisara Prakasakayo, 1973.
Wright, J.C. ‘The Pali Subodhālaṅkāra and Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 65, no. 2 (2002): 323–41.
Wujastyk, Dominik. ‘Jambudvīpa: Apples or Plums?’, in Studies in the History of the Exact Sciences in 
Honour of David Pingree, edited by Charles Burnett, Jan P. Hogendijk, Kim Plofker and Michio 
Yano, 287–301. Leiden: Brill, 2004.
Wynne, Alexander. ‘The Historical Authenticity of Early Buddhist Literature: A Critical Evaluation’, Wie-
ner Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 49 (2005): 35–70.
Yabuuchi, Satoko. ‘The Ideal of the Bodhisattva King in Sri Lanka and the Reform of the Saṅgha’, Journal 
of Indian and Buddhist Studies 55, no. 3 (2007): 108–11.
Young, Jonathan A. ‘Adornments of Virtue: The Production of Lay Buddhist Virtuosity in the Upāsaka-
janālaṅkāra’. PhD thesis, Cornell University, 2011.
Zachariae, Theodor. Die Indischen Wörterbücher (Kośa) (Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie und 
Altertumskunde, Band 1, Heft 3B), edited by G. Bühler. Strasbourg: Trübner, 1897.
Załęski, Paweł. ‘Ideal Types in Max Weber’s Sociology of Religion: Some Theoretical Inspirations for a 
Study of the Religious Field’, Polish Sociological Review 3, no. 171 (2010): 319–25.

--- Page 270 of 286 ---
255
Index
Abhayagiri(vihāra), 24, 41, 69
dissolution of, 36
esoteric Buddhism and, 31, 124, 134, 140n37
relic worship and, 133–4, see also 
relic:worship; reliquary; shrines
Sanskrit literary culture and, 31, 35n81
split from Mahāvihāra, 21
tooth relic and, 31, 173, 179, 188n61, see also 
relic:tooth; temple:tooth relic
transregional connections of, 35n80
Abhidhamma, 89, 91, 107, 112n16, 118n88
commentaries, 39, 103, 117n74, see also 
commentary:on the Pali canon
definition of, 38, 100, 114n50
development of, 100, 140n42
glossaries, 109, see also glossary
handbooks. See handbook:Abhidhamma
matrices (mātikā). See matrix:Abhidhamma
ontology, 100, 106, 117n74
as relic, 134, 
see also cult of the book; 
relic:scripture as
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (‘Compendium of the 
meaning of the Supreme doctrine’),  
53, 112
Sinhala commentary on. See 
Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya
Sumaṅgala’s commentary on. See 
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī, 54, 90, 94, 97, 99, 
106, 112
Abhidhammāvatāra (‘Entrance into the Supreme 
doctrine’), 42, 98–9, 100, 116n68,  
140n39
as commentary, 91–2, 112n13
Sumaṅgala’s commentary on. See 
Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī
Abhidhammāvatārapurāṇaṭīkā, 53
Abhidhammāvatāravikāsinī, 54, 90, 91, 99, 104, 
107
Abhidhānappadīpikā, 54, 59n88
Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya, 96–7, 105, 112, 
112n16, 115n55
Abhinavagupta, 159
Accutavikkanta, 41
acts of truth (saccakiriyā), 177, 188n49,
Āditya I (871–907), 21
aesthetics, 5, 132, 157, 161, 167n81, 178, 185
aesthetic experience, 14, 156, 159, 162, 176, 
190
court culture and, 159, 176, 
see also court 
culture
moods and feelings (rasabhāva), 122, 149, 
151, 155–7, 162, see also poetics
political, 170, 208, see also power:aesthetic/
affective
power and. See power:aesthetic/affective
of ritual, 204, 215, see also ritual
Sanskrit, 6, 145
social. See social aesthetic
theories of, 145, 151, 162, see also literary 
theory; poetics
affective community, 178–81, 185, see also 
assemblage; power:aesthetic/affective
Aggabodhi I (571–604), 108
Aggabodhi VI (733–72), 134
Aggabodhi VIII (804–15), 183
Aggañña Sutta (‘What is primary’), 127
ākula. See disorder
alaṅkāra. See figures of speech; poetics
Ali, Daud, 207, 212n102
Amarakośa, 72–3, 85n59
Amarasiṃha, 72
Amatarasadhārā, 53, 139n35
Amāvatura (‘Flood of nectar’), 148, 223n36
Amitodana, 27
Amoghavajra (705–44), 31
Anāgatavaṃsa, 54
Anāgatavaṃsa Desanā, 141n72
analytical approaches to language, 64, 74, 77–82, 
83, 86n84, 110, 214
analytical knowledge of scripture (paṭisambhidā), 
15n1, 40, 107, 109, 118n96, 130, 224n38
Ānanda,
Abhidhamma subcommentator, 39, 42, 104–10, 
118n96
author of Saddhammopāyana, 54
author of Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, 51, 53, 121–2 
disciple of the Buddha, 131, 135
follower of Chapaṭa, 216
reformer in Pagan, 217
teacher of Buddhappiya, 28, 35n60
Ānandavardhana, 151, 153
Aṅguttara Nikāya,
commentary on, 68, 129, 
see also 
Manorathapūraṇī
subcommentary on, 46, see also 
Sāratthamañjūsā
Anīkaṅga, Mahādipāda (1209), 38,  
172, 187n25
antagonistic symbiosis, 11–13, 16n42, 40, 
182, 189n78, see also royal court:its 
relationship with the Saṅgha

--- Page 271 of 286 ---
256 INDEX
anthology, 4, 6, 14, 53, 56, 110, 119–20, 137, 
138n13, 220
doctrinal focus of, 14, 128–32, 214
vs. handbook, 119–21
Sanskrit, 121
techniques of compilation in, 124–8, 137, 
see also bibliography; contents list; 
referencing
Anubhūtisvarūpa, 72
Anurādhapura, 20–1, 21, 27, 33n19, 66, 69, 134, 
142n94, 173
collapse of, 6, 22–3, 36, 83, 
see also 
Cōḻa:invasions
Pāṇḍya sacking of, 21, 33n22
period, 58n68, 183
Anuruddha, 97–8, 103, 112n16, 115n65, 121, 
138n6
Anuruddha (1044–78), 216
anuvṛtti. See ellipsis
Apabhraṃśa, 46
Apadāna (‘Legends’), 190, 196, 204, 206
Aparājita (879–97), 21
araññavāsi. See forest monks
Arjuna, 187n31
Aśoka (P. Asoka), 3, 39, 43, 57n34, 90, 183
assemblage, 180, 185, 188n56, 
see also affective 
community
Aṣṭādhyāyī (‘Eight lectures’), 63–4, 70–2,  
86n84
astrology, 84n24, 121
Aśvaghoṣa, 201, 209, 211n56
attha. See meaning
aṭṭhakathā. See commentary:on the Pali canon
atthapaññatti. See concept:meaning
Atthasālinī, 41, 
see also 
Dhammasaṅgaṇi:commentary on
Aucityavicāracarcā (‘Discourse deliberating 
propriety’), 156, 166n67
Augustan Age, 19
Auroux, Silvain, 96
Avalokiteśvara, 64
Avantivarman (855–83), 151
aviparītanirutti. See Māgadha:as unchanging 
language
āyatana. See fraternity:as āyatana
Ayojjhā (Sk. Ayodhyā), 25
Bālādityavihāra, 69
Balakkāra, 24
Bālāvabodhana, 35n64, 84n36
Bālāvatāra, 54, 84n36
baṇa. See preaching
Bangladesh, 70
Barnett, Lionel D., 217
beauty, 50, 149, 151, 153, 169, 176, 179, 203
Bechert, Heinz, 37, 43, 56n1
Benedictine monasteries. See Cluny
Bengal, 24, 147
intellectual contacts with, 69, 71–2
Berkwitz, Stephen, 205
Bhaddekaratta Sutta (‘One fortunate attachment’), 
125, 140n43
Bhāgavṛtti, 72, 85n49
Bhāgavṛttipañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on the 
Bhāgavṛtti’), 72–3
Bhāmaha, 164n27
Bhāṇu, 49
Bhānudatta, 159
Bhāravi, 73
Bhartṛhari, 64
Bhāṣāvṛtti (‘Commentary on language’), 71–2, 
83n12
Bhāṣyapradīpa, 72
Bhesajjamañjūsā (‘Casket of medicine’), 53, 
121, 125
Bhīmarāja, 24
Bhoja, 139n28
Bhojpur, 139n28
Bodh Gayā, 29, 70
bodhisattva (P. bodhisatta), 123
, 129, 133–4, 137, 
212n85
Buddha (Gotama) as, 160, 162, 195–9, 204, 
206, 210n44
ideal, 124, 139n36, 192, 203, 208, 211n73
kings, 192–3, 200, 210n55, 211n70
path, 124, 128, 132, 139n32, 155, 162, 192–3, 
197, 200, 203, 208
scholar-monks, 139n35
book (pakaraṇa), 91, 112n13, 112n14
Brahmadatta, 172
Brahmajāla Sutta (‘Supreme net’), 113n31, 146
Brahman, 160
Brahmanism, 40
court culture of, 146, 156, 158, 211n56, 
see also court culture
intellectual tradition of, 63–4, 85n72
Bronner, Yigal, 164n27
Buddha Dīpaṅkara, 169, 172, 190, 195
buddha field (buddhakhetta), 130, 204, 206–7
Buddha (Gotama), 3, 9, 38–9, 43–4, 64, 68–9, 90, 
117n79, 119, 125, 130–4, 137, 139n30, 
140n46, 142n98, 146, 165n46, 168–9, 
172–3, 177, 220
biographies of, 14, 172, 190–2, 195, 209n3, 
209n6, 211n63, 214–5
as bodhisattva. See bodhisattva:Buddha 
(Gotama) as
death of, 130
devotion to. See devotion:to the Buddha/
Buddha’s relics
genealogy of, 27–8, 210n55
his identity with the Dhamma. See Dhamma:its 
identity with the Buddha
as initiator of the commentaries. See 
commentary:as Buddha’s miscellaneous 
teachings
language of, 3, 5, 39, 110
power of. See power:of the Buddha
previous lives of, 76, 123, 177, 194
property of, 25, 126, 135–7, 205–8, 212n92, 
see also Dhamma:property of the
relics of. See relic
as sovereign, 13, 158, 168, 170–1, 182–5, 203, 
see also lordship; sovereignty
teachings (dhamma) of. See Dhamma
transcendence of. See transcendence:of the 
Buddha
Vaiṣṇavism and, 180, 188n69, see also 
Vaiṣṇavism
wife of. See Yasodharā
Buddha Padumuttara, 127
Buddha Somanassa, 132

--- Page 272 of 286 ---
 INDEX 257
Buddhacarita, 209n2, 211n56
Buddhadatta, 39, 40–2, 98, 100–2, 105, 114n54, 
121, 193
Buddhadatta, A.P., 112n18
Buddhaghosa, 3, 6, 15n1, 19, 39–41, 88, 90, 92, 
114n46, 119, 123, 125, 131–2, 136–7, 
193, 210n46
commentaries of, 41–2
criticisms of Sanskrit epics, 146, see also 
Sanskrit:epics
eschatological writings of, 68, 129–30, 
see also eschatology:religious decline 
and; Dhamma:disappearance of; five 
disappearances
grammatical knowledge of, 64, see also 
grammar
views on scriptural language, 107, 109, see also 
scripture:nature of
buddhahood, 14, 64, 132, 137, 155, 190, 192, 
195–6, 201, 208, 211n63
aspiration to, 128–9, 139n35, 204, 206, 
see also bodhisattva:scholar-monks; 
enlightenment:aspiration to
remoteness of, 197, 205, 210n55
as soteriological goal vs. nirvana, 124, 191, 
194, 202
buddhakhetta. See buddha field
Buddhanāga
author of Pātrīkaraṇaṭīkā, 35n64, 72
author of Vinayatthamañjūsā, 53, 94
Buddhappiya
author of Pajjamadhu, 54, 122, 138n26, 
139n35
author of Rūpasiddhi, 35n60, 54, 59n91, 
138n26,
as opponent of Moggallāna, 69–70, 80
Buddharakkhita, 54, 139n35, 190–208,  
211n63
Buddhavaṃsa (‘History of the buddhas’), 39, 127, 
169, 186n5, 190
Buddhippasādanī, 54
Buddhism,
arrival in Sri Lanka, 169
conversion to. See conversion
as cultural religion. See religion:cultural
disappearance of. See eschatology:religious 
decline and; five disappearances
esoteric. See Tantric Buddhism
imperial. See imperial formation; 
reform:imperial nature of; 
religion:imperial
Indian, 207
kammatic, 120
historiography of, 7–13, 36–8, 40–1, 213–5, 
see also reform era:historiography of
history of. See history
Mahayana. See Mahayana Buddhism
medieval, 7–8, 207
original, 7–9
schools of, 203, 211n73
spread of, 52
Tantric. See Tantric Buddhism
Theravada. See Theravada Buddhism
buddhology, 128–32
Burlingame, Eugene, 177
Burma, 15, 52, 59n83, 59n89, 158, 192, 211n65, 
211n73, 215–19, 222, 223n9
Butsaraṇa (‘Refuge of the Buddha’), 220
cakkavatti. See Wheel-Turning monarch
Candasāratthaṭīkā, 164n6
Candrabhānu, 122–3
Candragomin, 29, 70, 72, 150
Candrālaṅkāra, 70
Cāndrapañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on 
Candra’s grammar’), 70–2, 77–8
Cāndrapañcikālaṅkāra (‘Ornament to the 
extensive commentary on Candra’s 
grammar’), 35n64, 65, 70, 72
Cāndravṛtti, 76–7, 
see also 
Cāndravyākaraṇa:paraphrase on
Cāndravyākaraṇa (‘Grammar of Candragomin’), 
69–77, 150
paraphrase on, 70–1, 75–6, 86n84, see also 
Cāndravṛtti
canon, Pali, 3, 35n81, 37–8, 57n28, 65, 73, 
77, 85n65, 90–91, 104, 106–7, 110, 
112n16, 112n28, 119, 141n89, 146, 
164n12, 197, 214
Abhayagiri and, 35n81, see also Abhayagiri
anthologies of. See anthologies
authority of, 110
commentaries on. See commentary:on the 
Pali canon
date of, 38
as an idea, 76–7, 82, 128, 137
orientalist view of, 7–9
poetry and, 146
as ritual deposit, 133–4, see also cult of the 
book; relic:scripture as
canonical text (pāḷi), 109–10, see also 
scripture:nature of
Cariyāpiṭaka (‘Basket of conduct’), 191
chaos, 6, 13, 43, 47, 52, 120, 123–4, 132, 171, 
213, 215, see also disorder; localization; 
power:fragmentation of
Chapaṭa
author of Suttaniddesa, 113n32
pupil of Uttarajīva, 216
charisma, 23, 192, 209n14, see also virtuosity
Childers, R.C., 7
China, 30–1
chronicle, 168–9, 186n16, 211n66, see also history
church, 12, 45, 48, 57n49
Cidambaramahātmya, 186n16
circle of influence (maṇḍala), 37, 69
Citrāṅgadā, 187n31
Cittayāna, 173, 175–6
civil war, 24–9, 57n45, 192
civilizational history, 7, 9, 37, see also 
Buddhism:historiography of
Cluny, 48
Coḍagaṅga (1196–7), 38, 172, 180
cognition, 103–5, 109, 
see also concept
Cōḻa, 5, 21, 73
invasions, 13, 19, 21–3, 69, 83
monks, 52, 66, 69–70
rule in Sri Lanka, 6, 21–2, 25, 33n22, 36–7, 73
Coḷagaṅga, 51
Collins, Steven, 9, 41, 16n27, 16n34, 37, 123, 
186n5, 186n15, 208, 209n11

--- Page 273 of 286 ---
258 INDEX
colonialism, 7–8, 71, see also Orientalism
commentary,
authority of, 90–4
as Buddha’s miscellaneous teachings, 90–1, 
127
on handbooks. See handbook:commentary
manuals for composing, 39, 95, 112n14, 
113n31
methods/forms of, 55, 88–91, 93–9, 110, 
111n1, 111n4, 112n28, 113n31, 125, 
see also exegesis
in monastic education, 46, see also education
Pali as a language of, 3, 40, 58n57, 112n22, 
see also Pali:as sacred language
on the Pali canon (aṭṭhakathā), 36–42, 90–1, 
117n74, 202, see also canon, Pali
Sanskrit, 29, 65, 70–1, 80, 150, 154, see also 
Sanskrit
Sinhala/sannaya, 3, 29, 71, 85n65, 90, 96–9, 
105, 107–8, 112n22, 113n36, 114n37, 
120, 123, 150, 155, 158, 161–2, 164n10, 
166n57, 166n72, 170, 211n58, 219–20, 
see also Sinhala
compendium. See anthology; handbook
concept (paññatti), 100–10, 114n54, 116n72
dependent (upādāpaññatti), 104–5,
meaning (atthapaññatti), 105–6
naming (nāmapaññatti), 103–8, 116n72
conservatism, 7–8, 89, 213, see also orthodoxy
contents list, 124–6, see also 
anthology:techniques of compilation in; 
bibliography; referencing
conversion, 174–6, 181, 187n36
coronation, 28, 56n9, 122, 164n4, 193
cosmology, 5, 40, 107, 126, 129–30, 141n72, 
193, 200, 206–7, 212n102, see also 
buddhology
cosmopolitanism, 5, 26, 52, 146
cosmopolitan vernacular, 27, 220
council (saṅgīti). See reform:council
court. See royal court
court culture, 29–30, 32, 146, 170–1, 176, 
186n20, 196, 220
Cousins, Lance, 31, 114n49,
Cox, Whitney, 15n11, 139n28, 150, 186n16
Crosby, Kate, 201
Cūḍāmaṇivarmavihāra, 59n91, 69
Cūḷavaṃsa (‘Little history’), 22, 24–6, 28, 31, 
33n18, 54, 57n38, 108, 122, 145, 169, 
183, 193, 216, 218
cult of the book, 35n87, 132–7, 142n98, 142n99, 
see also relic:scripture as
Cunda, 136
Daivajñakāmadhenu (‘Wish-fulfilling cow of 
divine insight’), 125, 138n18
Daḷadāpūjāvaliya (‘Garland of offerings to the 
tooth’), 176, 181
Daḷadāsirita (‘Acts of the tooth’), 182–5, 188n58, 
188n73
Daṁbadeṇiasna, 83n16
Daṁbadeṇiya, 111n6, 123
edict, 44–6, 57n55, 67, 155
Daṇḍin, 148–50, 154, 158, 160, 164n27, 165n37, 
166n69, 187n39, 199
Dantapura, 172, 175–6
Dāṭhāpabhuti, 108
Dāṭhāvaṃsa (‘History of the tooth’), 14, 51, 55, 
170–2, 174–83, 185, 186n16, 187n27, 
188n48, 188n61, 188n69, 189n73, 193, 
205, 207, 218
Dāṭhopatissa I (639–50), 146
Davidson, Ronald M., 207
designation (paññatti), 101–2, 105–6, 114n52, 
116n72, 
see also concept
as speech, 104, 106–8
Devapāla, 211n70
Devaputtasaṃyutta, 127
devotion, 6, 14, 51, 173, 177, 184
in anthologies, 220, see also anthology
to the Bodhisattva, 197, see also bodhisattva
Buddhist, 147, 159, 161
to the Buddha/Buddha’s relics, 5–6, 14–15, 
49, 122–3, 132, 146–51, 157–63, 164n17, 
168, 176, 182–3, 190, 193, 200–5, 221, 
see also Buddha (Gotama); relic
to the Dhamma and Saṅgha, 123, 132, 148, 
161, 204, 221 see also Dhamma; Saṅgha
in Hindu poetry, 160, 167n81, 222, see also 
Hindu; poetry
in Pali poetry, 6, 14, 122, 145–51, 159–63, 
see also poetry
path/soteriology of, 132, 139n32, 168, 204, 
206, 214
power/politics and, 14, 168, 170, 190–208, 
see also politics:aesthetic; power:aesthetic
between teacher and pupil, 48, see also 
education
sentiments/feelings of, 5, 147, 152, 168, 185, 
see also aesthetics:moods and feelings
to Yasodharā, 196, see also Yasodharā
Dhamma (Sk. Dharma),
as a conceptual/nominal entity vs. speech,  
106–10, 220–1, see also concept; 
designation:as speech
devotion to the. See devotion:to the Dhamma 
and Saṅgha
disappearance of, 5–6, 67, 130, see also 
eschatology:religious decline and; five 
disappearances
essence (sāra) of, 6, 14, 40, 92–3, 99, 120, 
123–4, 128, 137, 206, 214, see also 
meaning:essential
its identity with the Buddha, 133, 136
lord of the, 181, 183
marvel of the, 126, 132
property of the, 132–7, 206, see also Buddha 
(Gotama):property of
as relic. See cult of the book; relic:scripture as
taste/form (rasa) of the, 106, 117n79, 155
as teachings, 3, 6, 15n1, 49, 75–6, 91, 188n82, 
139n30, 177, 191, 201, 203
Dhammakitti
author of the Bālāvatāra, 54, 84n36
author of the Cūḷavaṃsa, 33n18, 54
author of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, 51, 55, 170–2, 174, 
176–82, 185, 188n61
author of the Janānurāgacarita and 
Pāramīsataka, 55, 139n35
author of the Jinabodhāvalī, 55, 139n35
author of the Saddharmālaṅkāraya, 139n35
lay student of Vācissara, 49

--- Page 274 of 286 ---
 INDEX 259
Dhammanandi, 54
Dhammapada, 78, 80
Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā, 41
Dhammapāla, 42, 63, 91, 98, 104, 106, 108–9, 
112n13, 113n31, 114n46, 115n68, 117n80, 
118n87, 118n96, 125
Dhammapāla, Baṭapolē, 209n15
Dhammapāla, Pāla king (c. 775–812), 29
dhammas (phenomena), 100–3, 114n54, 115n55, 
115n60, 115n66, 116n72, 118n91, 133, 
see also Abhidhamma
Dhammasaṅgaṇi (‘Enumeration of dhammas’), 
100–7, 115n61, 115n65, 116n72, 134, 
142n99
commentary on, 101, 115n66, 116n72, see also 
Atthasālinī
Dhammasaṅgaṇimūlaṭīkā, 42, 115n68
Dhammasenāpati, 87n101
Dhammasiri, 42, 125
dhāraṇī, 134, see also cult of the book
Dharmadāsa, 70–1, 75–7, 165n42
Dharmakīrti
author of the Rūpāvatāra, 72
Dharmapradīpikāva (‘Lamp on the Dhamma’), 202
Dharmaśāstra, 125, see also Hindu:law
Dharmāśoka (1208–9), 38, 172, 218
Dhātuvaṃsa (‘History of the relic’), 218
dhvani. See suggestion
Dhvanyāloka (‘Light on suggestion’), 151, 153, 
156, 165n42
Dīgha Nikāya, 76
subcommentary on, 109, 113n31, 127
Dilīpa, 157
Diṁbulāgala, 23–4, 28, 30, 33n27, 44, 65
Dimitrov, Dragomir, 29–30, 70, 78, 87n101, 150, 
199, 201, 209n15, 211n65
dīpa. See Sīhaḷa:island
dīpantara. See India:as other island
Dīpavaṃsa (‘History of the island’), 39, 41–2, 
56n15, 57n28, 169, 188n61
disorder (ākula), 6, 13–4, 73–4, 190, 
see also 
chaos; power:fragmentation of
doctrine of teachers (ācariyavāda), 91, see also 
commentary
Doṇa, 198, 210n46
dreams, 126, 128–9, 194–5
Drewes, Daniel, 142n94
Dumézil, Georges, 11
Dumont, Louis, 11
Durghaṭavṛtti, 83n12
Durkheim, Émile, 178
education, 10, 48, 50–1, 58, 67, 85, 88, 90, 119, 
146, 154
languages of, 45–6, 152, 193, 
see also 
Sanskrit:education; Sinhala:education
stages and hierarchies of, 43–6, 214, see also 
Saṅgha:hierarchy of
ellipsis (anuvṛtti), 74–5, see also grammar
eloquence, 14, 145, 147, 156, 157, 160, 168, 
see also poetics
Eḷu, 221, see also Sinhala
emotion, 13–14, 132, 137, 162, 177–8, 182, 185, 
205
encyclopedism, 121–2, 220, see also anthology
definition of, 119, 138n14
enlightenment, 129, 172, 190, 195, 197–8, 221, 
224n38, see also buddhahood; nirvana
aspiration to, 123–4, 194, see also 
buddhahood:aspiration to
faith in, 201, 205
path to, 176, 191, 203
possibility of, 130–1, 195
eschatology, 84n36, 119, 138n12, 139n32
cultural production and, 5–7, 15n14, 55–6, 63, 
68, 213–4
interest in, 6, 67–8, 123, 131–2, 137, see also 
Buddhaghosa:eschatological writings of
religious decline and, 68, 82, 128–32, 
see also Dhamma:disappearance of; five 
disappearances
Esoteric Buddhism. See Tantric Buddhism
essence (sāra). See Dhamma:essence of; 
meaning:essential
essence language (sabhāvanirutti), 40, 56n19, 
107–8, 118n82
eulogy, 27–8, 34n52, 48, 134, 171, 193, 212n76, 
see also praśasti
Europe, 45, 57n49, 58n70, 111n1, 138n14, 171
exegesis, 6, 41, 63–4, 90–5, 101, 107, 126, 214, 
220, see also commentary
exegetical approach of grammarians. See 
grammar:analytical vs. exegetical
manuals of. See commentary:manuals for 
composing
methods/forms of. See commentary:methods/
forms of
schemas (mātikā) of. See matrix:as exegetical 
schema
faith (saddhā), 25, 49, 58n74, 67, 155, 165, 171, 
201, 204–5, see also serene joy
feudalism, 58n70, 207
figuration, sociokarmic, 170–5, see also karma
figures of speech (alaṅkāra), 149, 151–3, 165n35, 
199, 203, see also poetry:ornamental
filiation, 53, 59n90, see also networks
five disappearances (pañca-antaradhāna), 
68, 125, 129, 130–1, see also 
eschatology:religious decline and; 
Dhamma:disappearance of
forest monks (araññavāsi), 20–4, 44, 51, 65, 
84n18, 111n6, 217, 222, 223n15, see also 
village monks
formalism, 14, 111, 153, see also 
commentary:methods/forms of
fragmentation. See power:fragmentation of
Frasch, Tilman, 59n83, 216–8
Fraternity,
as āyatana, 44–5, 56n1
forest, 23, 65, 223n15, 
see also forest monks
as nikāya, 4, 20–3, 30–2, 36, 39, 69, 93,  
133–4, 179
Sīhaḷa. See Sīhaḷa:saṅgha
Gajabāhu II (1132–53), 26–9, 34n48, 188n69
gāmavāsi. See village monks
gaṇavāsi, 58n68, 111n6, 184
Gaṅgas, 172, 180
gaṇṭhipada. See glossary
Geiger, Wilhelm, 65, 77, 170
Gethin, Rupert, 97

--- Page 275 of 286 ---
260 INDEX
Gillet, Valérie, 57n30
glossary (gaṇṭhipada), 85n65, 92–3, 109
gods, 76, 132, 154, 173, 177, 179–80
kings as, 200
Pali as a language of, 40, 107
rain, 130
grammar (vyākaraṇa), 6, 14, 29, 37, 46, 49–50, 
55, 59n91, 64–8, 80, 86n85, 98, 110–11, 
112n14, 145, 150, 154, 165n45, 201, 214
analytical vs. exegetical, 63–4, 77–82
Cāndra, 70–1
changing form/method of, 73–6, 86n76
commentary on, 95–6
derivational, 63, 78
as ecumenical science, 64, 
see also science
handbook of. See handbook:grammatical
in Pagan, 218–9, 223n25
Pāṇinian, 78
royal knowledge of, 64, 83n16
Sanskrit, 29–30, 63–5, 69–83, 83n10, 83n16, 
85n49, 86n85, 121, 151, 210n46
as technology, 63, see also technology
grammatization, 94–9, 151
grandmaster (mahāsāmi), 13, 44, 48, 89, 145, 
207, 218
development of position, 35n83, 47
grammarians and, 65
post reform era, 222
procedures of appointing, 45, 164n4
Guhasīva, 172–6, 179–81, 188n58, 188n59, 
188n61
guṇa. See merit:literary
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H., 11–12, 23, 40–1, 56n1, 
57n45, 182, 189n78
Günther, Herbert, 223n16
Guruḷugomi, 202, 211, 223
Hallisey, Charles, 164n15, 167n73
Hambantota. See Mahāgāma
handbook (saṅgaha), 6, 41–2, 45, 53–5, 57n55, 
88, 138n6, 214, 221
Abhidhamma, 39, 49, 89, 98, 100, 103–5, 108, 
110, 118n91, 119, 121
, 138n6
vs. anthology. See anthology:vs. handbook
authority of, 14
as commentary, 91, 111, 112n14, 127
commentary, 6, 35n64, 89–91, 97, 99
grammatical, 30, 35, 65–6, 71, 81, 84n36
as teaching tool, 37
Vinaya, 39, 46–7, 49, 119, 125
Harivaṃsa, 86n78
Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa, 55, 139n35, 186n11
heavens, 76, 94, 131–3, 164, 173, 177–9, 181–3, 
206, 221
Hemamālā, 173, 188
Henry, Justin, 222
Heraṇasikha (‘Rules for novices’), 46
Hindu, 34, 72, 174, 179, 188n57, 192
ascetics, 180
cosmology, 212n102
devotional poetry. See devotion:in Hindu 
poetry
goddess, 166
gods, 222, 
see also gods
grammarians, 64
law, 121, 125, see also Dharmaśāstra
Hinduism, 63, 188
history (vaṃsa), 27, 39, 127, 169, 172, 177, 190, 
193, 219, see also chronicle
approaches to, 186n13
definition of, 168
karmic, 51, 172, see also figuration, 
sociokarmic
of relics, 14, 51, 54–5, 168, 170–2, 174–5, 177, 
179, 188n61, 215
style of, 169, 186n11, see also relic
Sinhala, 83n16, 170, 172, 176, 181, 183, 205, 
see also Sinhala
Tamil, 34n48, 186n16, see also Tamil
Tibetan, 29–30, see also Tibet
Hocart, A.M., 12–13, 16n38, 184
ideology, 9, 11, 170, 197, 200, 207–8, see also 
legitimation
criticisms of, 186n14, 212n102
Ikṣvāku, 26, 157, see also Okkāka
imaginaire, Pali, 7, 9–11, 41
imagination, 9, 131, 183, 202–4
immanence, 128–32, 190, see also transcendence
imperial formations, 12, 207, see also 
lordship; reform:imperial nature of; 
religion:imperial
Inden, Ronald, 12, 183
independence,
nissayamutta (Sk. niśrayamukta), 45–6, 67, 
see also education
India, 7–8, 12, 16n41, 24–7, 32, 35n71, 36, 46, 
108, 133, 159, 169–70, 176, 179–80, 207
intellectual contact with, 29–31, 69–73, 83, 
147–51
as Jambudvīpa (P. Jambudīpa), 27, 40, 56n23, 
59n88, 173, 183
literary languages of, 58n56, 153
as other island (dīpantara), 40, 55, 170
South, 3–5, 15n3, 19, 21–2, 40–1, 49, 51–3, 
57n30, 121–3, 138n21, 149–50, 172, 174, 
187n31, 204, 219, 222
Ingalls, Daniel H.H., 147, 165n42
intellectual culture, 14, 65, 71, 120
intellectual history, 4, 11, 71, 95, 125
island cultures, 7
Jagannātha, 180
Jagatipāla, 25–6
Jambudvīpa. See India:as Jambudvīpa
Janānurāgacarita, 55
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, 41
Java, 122
Jayabāhu I (1110–11), 25–6, 28
Jayabhadra, 30
Jayāditya, 71–2
Jayāpīḍa (779–813), 150
Jetavanavihāra, 21, 24, 36, 69, 89, 142n94
Jinabodhāvalī, 55, 139n35
Jinacarita (‘Acts of the Buddha’), 55, 139n35, 
190–1, 209n9
Jinakālamālī, 211n66
Jinālaṅkāra (‘Ornament of the conqueror’), 
54
, 139n35, 148, 164n16, 190–208, 
211n63
Jinālaṅkāravaṇṇanā, 201–3, 206, 210n50, 211n63, 
211n64, 211n65

--- Page 276 of 286 ---
 INDEX 261
Jinendrabuddhi, 71–2, 85n59
Jotipāla, 31, 108, 110
Kaccāyana, 65, 96, 113n32
grammar, 66, 69–70, 74, 77, 83n16, 85n49, 
95–6, see also Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa
Kaccāyanavutti, 42, 95
Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa (‘Grammar of Kaccāyana’), 
42, 64, 66, 86n76, 86n84, 95
Kahrs, Eivind, 84n26
Kaiyaṭa, 72
Kāḷa Devala, 194–5
Kalambha (Kaḷabhra), 41
Kālidāsa, 30, 157
Kaliṅga, 5, 23–8, 33n34, 38, 121, 172–4, 180, 
184, 218
Kalyāṇavatī (1202–8), 38
Kalyāṇī inscription, 216, 223n9
kammatic Buddhism. See Buddhism:kammatic
Kāñcī, 30, 149
Kandy, 184
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī (‘Overcoming doubts’), 41, 46, 94
subcommentary on, 94, 
see also 
Vinayatthamañjūsā
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇīporāṇaṭīkā, 53
Kappiṇa,
king, contemporary of the Buddha, 177
uncle of Piyadassi, 50, see also Piyadassi
Kārikā, 87n101
karma, 51, 94, 120, 123, 126, 128, 132, 134, 137, 
139n32, 145, 169, 172, 174, 191, 194–6, 
198, 204, 207–8, 215, 221
karmic conditions, 6, 120, 132, 197
karmic determinism, 192–6
karmic technology, 137, 214, 
see also 
technology
karmic transformation, 132, 137, 145, 147, 
161, 214
socio-. See figuration, sociokarmic
karmic ties, 51, 190
Karmavibhāgaya, 164n8
Kārtika festival, 184
Karuṇāpuṇḍarīka (‘Lotus of Compassion’), 206
Kashmir, 72, 147, 150–1, 153, 156, 158–9
Kāśikāvṛtti (‘Benares paraphrase’), 71–2,  
86n78
Kāśikāvṛttipañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on 
the Benares paraphrase’), 72
Kassapa,
Coḷiya, 52–3, 85n68, 112n23, 118n99
Diṁbulāgala, 23, 30, 35n64, 44, 65,  
84n36
of Pagan, 217, 223n15
Kassapa IV (898–914), 24, 26, 33n33
Kassapa V (914–23), 21, 27, 29, 34n56, 134
Kassapa VI (1029–40), 33n29, 33n36
also known as Vikramabāhu, 24
Kātantrapañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on the 
Little grammar’), 71–2
Kātantravyākaraṇa (‘Little grammar’), 71–2, 74, 
86n84
Kathāvatthu (‘Topics of dispute’), 140n46
commentary on, 195
Kātyāyana, 63, 72
Kavikāmadhenu, 72
Kavsilumiṇa (‘Crown jewel of literature’), 220
kāvya, 14, 29, 
37, 146, 154, 159–60, 162, 168, 
171, 186n19, 200, 205, 208, 217, 220, 
see also poetry
mahā-, definition of, 187n39
Kāvyādarśa (‘Mirror of literature’), 29, 70, 
148–50, 154, 158, 164n20, 165n37, 199
Kāvyādarśasannaya, 150, 165n32
Kāvyālaṅkāra (‘Ornament of poetry’), 150–1, 
164n21, 165n35
Khaggavisāṇa Sutta (‘Rhinoceros horn’), 128
Khantivāda, 123
Khīradhāra, 173
Khuddaka Nikāya, 119
commentaries on, 39, 
see also 
Paramatthadīpanī I–VII
Khuddakapāṭha (‘Short recitation’), 119
Khuddasikkhā (‘Minor rules’), 42, 46, 120, 124
Khuddasikkhābhinavaṭīkā (‘New commentary 
on the Minor rules’), 111n6, 155, 164n5, 
166n58, 
see also Sumaṅgalappasādanī
Khuddasikkhāpurāṇaṭīkā, 54
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra, 47, 49, 112n20, 112n22, 
113n30, 155
kingship, 27, 40, 43, 47, 157, 175, 182, 192
compound, 11–13, 16n42, see also imperial 
formations; lordship; monarchy; 
power:political; religion:imperial
kinship, 48–9, 51, 175
Kirātārjunīya (‘On Kirāta and Arjuna’), 73
Kittisirimegha,
son of Mittā, 25
king, 173–4, 179, 181–3, 188n61, 
see also 
Sirimeghavaṇṇa (301–28)
Klacwā (1234–49), 223n7
Koṇḍañña, 191, 194, 211n63
Koṇēcar Kalveṭṭu, 34n48, 
see also history:Tamil
Koṇesvaram, 34n48
Kṛtyakalpataru (‘Wish-fulfilling tree of rites’), 
125
kṣatriya, 24, 27, 207
Kṣemendra, 156–9
Kubyaukkyi pagoda, 218
Kuntaka, 159
Kurus, 162
Kuśināra, 69
Kyanzittha (1084–1112), 218
laity, 23, 45, 48–9, 51, 58n68, 120–2, 184, 
189n88, 190, 193, 196, 202, 208, 
214, 220, see also public sphere; 
religion:cultural
Lakṣmaṇasena (1179–1206), 72, 83n12
Lalitavistara, 209n6, 210n33
Lambakaṇṇa, 20
land, 22, 28, 44, 57n45, 122, 171, 183, 207, 
see also Buddha (Gotama):property 
of; lordship; Saṅgha:as landowner; 
sovereignty
alienation of, 23
grants, 21–2, 33n23, 183, 188n69
rights, 23, 172
Laṅkā
defined vs. Sri Lanka, xi
kings and queens of, 38
neighbouring kingdoms and, 1
Pagan and, 216

--- Page 277 of 286 ---
262 INDEX
legitimation, 11, 170, 186n13, 186n14, 189n76, 
see also ideology
Līlāvatī (1197–1200; 1209–10; 1211–12), 38, 
170–2, 174–5, 220
Līlāvatī,
a queen of Vijayabāhu I, 25–6, 28
a queen of Vikramabāhu I, 33n41
līnattha. See meaning:hidden
Līnatthappakāsinī,
of Dhammapāla, 42
of Vācissara, 54
Līnatthavaṇṇanā I, 54
Līnatthavaṇṇanā II, 54
liṅga. See worldliness:worldly signs
literary activity/production, 4, 15, 40–1, 45, 55, 
94, 171, 219
sites of, 35n71
literary culture
Buddhist, 30, 51, 215
Sanskrit, 31–2, 35n81, 65, see also court 
culture; Sanskrit
monastic, 13, 30, 36
in Pagan, 218, see also Pagan
Pali, 146,
royal, 64, 
see also court culture
literary theory, 150, 152, 154–5, 159, 163, 190, 
see also poetics
Sanskrit, 147, 152, 154, 190, see also 
poetics:Sanskrit
localization, 20, 27, 29, 43, 148, 175, 180
of politics, 13, 48–55, 58n69, 171–2, 220, 
see also power:fragmentation of
Lokapaññatti (‘Description of the world’), 202
lokavohāra. See worldliness:worldly discourse
Lokeśvara /Lokissara (1210–11), 138
Lokitā, 24
Lomahaṃsa, 124
lordship, 12–13, 171, 183, 185, 189n78, 193, 
195, 207–8, 
see also imperial formations; 
kingship; monarchy; power:political; 
sovereignty
Lōväḍa Saṅgarāva (‘Handbook for the world’s 
welfare’), 221
Ludowyk-Gyömröi, Edith, 131
Madhukaṇṇava, 24
Madhuratthappakāsinī, 53
Madhurinda, 170–2, 174–5
Mädirigiriya, 134
Māgadha/ Magadhabhāsā, 3, 39, 46, 92, see also Pali
pure (suddha), 152–3, 155
as unchanging language (aviparītanirutti), 
107–8, see also essence language; Pali:as 
sacred language
Māgha (Kāliṅga Vijayabāhu) (1215–36), 38, 51, 
122, 138n21, 172, 182
magic, 5, 40, 68, 180, 188n64
Mahābhārata, 146, 187, 193
Mahābhāṣya (‘Great commentary’), 63, 72
Mahābodhivaṃsa, 54, 139n35, 209n9
Mahāgāma, 33n19
Mahāgovinda, 76
Mahāgovinda Sutta, 76
Mahānāgakula, 50
Mahānāgakulasandesa (‘Message from 
Mahānāgakula’), 55, 217
Mahānāma,
author of Mahāvaṃsa, 39, 42, 186n7
author of Saddhammapakāsinī, 42
Mahānāma (406–28), 41, 56n27
Mahāpadāna Sutta (‘Great lineage’), 127
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (‘Great passing’), 131, 
174, 201, 205
mahāsāmi. See grandmaster
Mahāsāmi, author (?) of Mūlasikkhā, 138n6
Mahāsāmi Saṅgharāja, 222
Mahāsena (274–301), 21, 41, 169, 173, 179, 
186n6, 188n61
Mahāvaṃsa (‘Great history’), 27–8, 39, 42, 
57n28, 146, 164n11, 168–70, 176, 186n7, 
186n12, 188n54, 188n61
Mahāvastu, 209n6
Mahāvihāra, 15, 21, 24, 29–32, 36, 39–41, 43, 
56n1, 69, 90, 99, 108, 110, 124, 128, 
133–4, 140n37, 179, 188n61, 215
Mahayana Buddhism, 15n1, 30–1, 108, 113n31, 
124, 133–5, 206, 210n44
Maheśvarakavi, 72
Mahinda, son of Aśoka, 3, 39, 90
Mahinda IV (956–72), 24, 27, 32, 34n56, 35n62, 
134
Mahinda V (982–1029), 33n34
Mahinda VI (1187), 38, 56n9
Maitreya, 133, 194, 209n11, 210n55
Majjhima Nikāya
commentary on, 132, 
see also Papañcasūdanī
Makhadeva, 220
Malalasekera, G.P., 8, 19, 40, 123, 129,  
146, 219
Mānābharaṇa,
also known as Vīrabāhu, 25–6
ruler of Rohaṇa, 26, 192–3
Mānavamma (684–718), 31
maṇḍala. See circle of influence
Manorathapūraṇī, 41
manual, 39, 51, 89, 103, 105, 112n14, 121, 125, 
138, 
see also anthology; handbook
Māra, 187n45
Māravijayottuṅgavarman, 69
mātikā. See Abhidhamma:matrices; contents list; 
exegesis:schemas of; matrix
matrix (mātikā),
Abhidhamma, 116n72, 119, 125
as contents list. See contents list
as exegetical schema, 94, 113n30, 125,  
140n46
as organizational plane, 99, 128, 135, 137, 213, 
see also order:conceptual; organizational 
plane; philology:organizational
vs. imaginaire, 11
Māyā, Queen, 194–5
Māyāraṭṭha (Sin. Māyāraṭa), 26, 57n46, 186n21
Mayūrapāda, 111n6, 139n35
meaning (attha), 40, 78, 95–9, 104, 107, 112n16, 
116n72, 117n73, 118n85, 121, 127, 150
concept (atthapaññatti). See concept:meaning
concise, 93, 113n31
element (padattha), 80–2, 116n72, see also 
philosophy:grammatical
essential (sārattha), 5–6, 14, 88, 92–3, 110, 
124, 136, 214, see also Dhamma:essence 
of

--- Page 278 of 286 ---
 INDEX 263
hidden (līnattha), 93
scriptural, 66–7, 77, 90–2, 109
vs. scriptural phrasing, 110–11, see also 
scripture:nature of
Medhaṅkara,
author of the Jinacarita, 55, 139
of Diṁbulāgala, 23, 47, 54, 65, 111n6, 139, 
166n58
meditation, 123, 126, 139n29, 161, 201–4
mercenaries, 22, 122, 183
merchants, 22, 31, 48–9, 142n98
merit,
karmic (puñña), 5–6, 14–15, 49, 94, 120, 
123–4, 126, 128, 131–2, 137, 145, 148, 
154–5, 160, 169, 181, 183, 190–2, 195–8, 
200–1, 204, 208, 215, see also karma
literary (guṇa), 148–9, 151, 154, 158, 160–1, 
164n21, 165n35, 166n53, see also figures 
of speech; poetry
metaphor, 11, 73, 148–9, 153–4, 168, 183, 185, 
207, 211n70, see also figures of speech
metaphysics, 8, 78, 81, 89, 161, see also 
Abhidhamma
Metteyya (Sk. Maitreya), 94, 133, 139n32, 
139n35, 194, 209n11, 210n55
middle ages, 7, 9–10, 21
millennialism, 139n32
miracles, 160, 173–8, 180, 188n66, 193, 215
Moggallāna,
author of Abhidhānappadīpikā, 54
the grammarian, 14, 47, 49–50, 54, 59n91, 
63, 65–83, 85n49, 85n59, 150, 163n2, 
165n46, 219, 223n26
son of Kassapa VI, 33n36
Moggallāna I (491–508), 183
Moggallānapañcikā (‘Extensive commentary on 
Moggallāna’s grammar), 54, 66, 78
Moggallānapañcikāpradīpaya (‘Lamp on 
Moggallāna’s extensive commentary’), 
71, 219
Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā, 68, 164n5, 165n46
Moggallānavutti, 54, 66, 76
Moggallānavyākaraṇa (‘Grammar of 
Moggallāna’), 63–87
paraphrase on, 70, 72–3, 75–6, 86n84, 
see also 
Moggallānavutti
Mohavicchedanī, 53, 85n68
monarchy, 20–1, 25, 32, 33n32, 219, 221, see also 
kingship; lordship; royal court
monastic autonomy, 4, 13, 35n71, 47–8, 52, 69, 
184–5, 189n76, 189n78, 194, 213–4, 217, 
222, 
see also sovereignty
moral economy, 204
morality, 5–6, 9, 14, 41, 45, 63, 94, 123, 126, 
147, 152–9, 163, 168, 175, 178–9, 204–7, 
213–5
lack of, 130–1, 146, 153, 215, see also 
eschatology:religious decline and
Moriya, 20
Mūgapakkha, 124
Mukhamattadīpanī (‘Straightforward 
illuminator’), 54, 65–6, 95–7, 113n32
Mukhamattasāra, 223n26
Mūlasāsanā, 211n66, 224n48
Mūlasikkhā (‘Basic training’), 138n6, 42, 46
Mūlasikkhāpurāṇaṭīkā, 54
Mus, Paul, 192, 203
Muvadevdāvata (‘Story of king Makhadeva’), 220
Nāgapaṭṭana (Nagapattinam), 31, 69
Nāgasena,
author of Mahānāgakulasandesa, 55, 217, 
223n15
Nālandā, 70
Naḷātadhātuvaṃsa, 54
nāmapaññatti. See concept:naming
Nāmarūpapariccheda, 53
Nāmarūpasamāsa, 53
Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu, 140n43
Narapatisithu (1174–1211), 216–7, 223n7, 223n9
Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha (690/1–728/9), 
149
nationalism, 40
natural expression (sabhāvanirutti). See essence 
language
Neri, Chiara, 127–8, 139n30
Nettiaṭṭhakathā, 42
Nettipakaraṇa (‘Guide’), 91, 113n31
networks, 30–1, 52, 
see also filiation
patronage, 48, 55, see also patronage
Neugebauer, Otto, 65, 84n24
Nidānakathā (‘Story of origins’), 191, 194, 196, 
211n63
Niddesa (‘Exposition’), 39
nigaṇṭha, 173, 179, 187n27, 188n52, 188n59, 
see also Hindu:ascetics
nikāya. See fraternity:as nikāya
nirvana, 6, 50, 94, 100–1, 115n55, 120, 123–4, 
126, 128, 155–6, 159, 163, 164n8, 173, 
177–8, 182, 191, 194–5, 202, 221, 
see also buddhahood; enlightenment
Niścalakara, 85n59
Niśśaṅka Malla (1187–96), 38, 57n44
nissayamutta (Sk. niśrayamukta). See 
independence
nobility, 13, 43, 48, 51, 58n68, 67, 146, 156, 173, 
184, 192–3, 196–7, 200, 202, 207–8, 214, 
see also laity
Nobuaki, N., 139n30
ocitya (Sk. aucitya). See propriety
ocityahīna. See propriety:lack of
Okkāka, 26–8, 34n54, 210n55, see also Ikṣvāku
Ollett, Andrew, 58n56
omens, 84n24, 129
order, 6, 13, 43, 48, 73, 76, 82, 93, 186n15, 
186n16
conceptual, 5, 15n11, 45, 213–14, 
see also matrix:as organizational 
plane; organizational plane; 
philology:organizational
cultural, 20
information, 69–73, 84n42
intellectual, 219
language/linguistic, 58n56, 80, 83
monastic, 31, 37, 43–4, 45, 82, 216, 223n9, 
see also Saṅgha:factions of
political, 13–14, 26, 37, see also politics; 
power:political
scriptural, 73–4, 80, 82–3
social, 5, 14, 26, 43, 80, 121, 132, 200, 207, 
212n102, 213, 218

--- Page 279 of 286 ---
264 INDEX
ordination, 216, 223n16
candidate for, 45–6
higher, 45–6, 57n55, 67
lineage, 216
organizational plane, 4, 15n11, 46, 82, 214, 
see also matrix:as organizational plane; 
philology:organizational
Orientalists, 7–9, 170, see also colonialism
Orissa, 24, 180
orthodoxy, 9, 91, 93, 108–9, 192, 195,  
213, 222, 223n15, see also  
conservatism
Padasādhana (‘Forming words’), 50, 54
Padasādhanasannaya, 58n74
padattha. See meaning:element
Padyacūḍāmaṇi, 209n2
Pagan, 15, 215–19, 223n15
Paharpur, 70
Paiśācī, 46
Pajjamadhu (‘Nectar of verse’), 54, 122, 138n26, 
139n35
pakaraṇa. See book
Pāla, 73, 211n70
pāḷi. See canonical text
Pali,
as commentarial language. See 
commentary:Pali as a language of
canon. See canon, Pali
imaginaire. See imaginaire, Pali
as literary language, 5, 46, 
see also 
India:literary languages of; Māgadha; 
order:language; Sanskrit:other literary 
languages and
as sacred language, 39–40, 107, see also 
essence language; gods:Pali as a language 
of; sacred language/texts
tradition, 10, 38, 83n10, 89, 100, 124, 134, 
146, 211n67
translations of Sanskrit and vernaculars, 93, 
112n22, 116n57, 211n66
as transregional language, 5, 40, 46, 172
Pali literature/texts,
after the reform era, 215–22
chronology of, 41–2, 53–5
pre-reform, 38–42
reform-era, 43–55
Pallava, 21, 24, 30–1, 108, 149
Pālyakīrti, 72
pañca-antaradhāna. See five disappearances
Pañcappakaraṇamūlaṭīkā, 42
Pañcappakaraṇaṭṭhakathā, 41
Pañcasikha, 161
Pāñcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, 142n94
Paṇḍu,
king, 172–7, 179–80, 187n34, 188n52
lineage, 171, 174, 
see also Pāṇḍya
Paṇḍukābhaya, 27–8, 34n56, 35n62
Pāṇḍya, 21, 24–6, 33n22, 51, 111n6, 121–2, 
170–2, 174–5, 180, 187n31
Pāṇini, 30, 63–4, 70–2, 86n83, 86n84,  
210n46
paññatti. See concept; designation.
Papañcasūdanī, 41
Parakkama, warlord, 51, 170–2, 174
Parākrama Paṇḍu (1212–15), 38, 172
Parākramabāhu I (1157–86), 4, 19, 23, 26, 29, 32, 
33n18, 36, 38, 43–4, 47, 49, 56n9, 57n45, 
74, 83, 83n16, 93, 171, 192–3, 200, 206, 
209n17, 217, 219–20, 223n9
Parākramabāhu II (1236–70), 4, 23, 26, 38, 44–5, 47, 
57n50, 65, 67, 83n16, 107, 122–3, 145, 220
Parākramabāhu IV (1302–26), 189n88
Parākramabāhu VI (1411–66), 71, 221
Paramatthadīpanī I–VII, 42
Paramatthajotikā I–II, 42
Paramatthamañjūsā, 42
Paramatthavinicchaya, 53
Pāramīsataka, 55, 139n35
Paranavitana, Senarat, 33n34, 35n63, 59n87, 
165n42, 184, 189n92
Parāntaka I (907—55), 21, 32n11
paraphrase (vutti, Sk. vṛtti), 66, 70–3, 75–6, 
86n84, 95, 
see also grammar
pasāda. See serene joy
Pāṭaliputta, 173, 175–6
Patañjali, 63, 72
Paṭhamasambodhi (‘First awakening’), 202
Pathmanathan, S., 34n48
Pātimokkha, 46
paṭisambhidā. See analytical knowledge of scripture
Pātrīkaraṇa, 35n64
Pātrīkaraṇaṭīkā, 35n64, 72
patronage, 4, 19, 21–2, 31, 37, 41, 45, 48–52, 55, 
130, 172, 213, 216, 219, 222n8
Payogasiddhi (‘Practical construction’), 54, 65, 
111n6, 139n35
personages, 12, 16n39, 183, 185, see also 
kingship:compound
philology, 29, 37, 65, 73–7
organizational, 56, see also matrix:as 
organizational plane; organizational plane
philosophy, 154, 201
Buddhist, 117n74
grammatical, 29, 78, 81, 223n25, see also 
meaning:element
Jain, 165n46
of language, 82, 
see also grammar
Pihiṭi, 186n21, see also Rājaraṭṭha
Piyadassi, 49–50, 54, 71
poetics (alaṅkāra), 14, 29, 37, 46–7, 55, 145–63, 
165n45, 168
Kashmiri tradition of, 150
of relics, 175–82, see also relic
Sanskrit, 149, 153, 159, 161, 163, 164n22
Sinhala, 29, 148
poetry, 8, 14–15, 37, 50, 145–63, 164n35, 170, 
178, 214–5
Buddhist attitudes to, 146–7, 155, 164n8
devotional, 14, 146–8, 159–63, 167n81, 
see also devotion:in Hindu poetry; 
devotion:in Pali poetry
ornamental, 153, 168, 170, 203–4, 215, 
see also figures of speech
Sanskrit/court, 29, 51, 121, 147, 151–3, 159, 
163, 171, 204, see also court culture
science of, 154, see also poetics
vernacular, 221, see also vernacularization
politics, 12, 15n11, 32, 41, 89, 164n12, 187n32, 
213, 216
aesthetic, 170–5, 208, 212n76, see also 
power:aesthetic/affective

--- Page 280 of 286 ---
 INDEX 265
Buddhist, 24–9, 122, see also Saṅgha:as 
political actor
charter state, 43
dynastic, 20, 32, 37, 51
localization of. See localization:of politics
models of, 12
of relics, 168–86, see also relic
sectarian, 36
Pollock, Sheldon, 27, 35n71, 64, 121, 147, 157, 
170, 186n14, 204, 208, 220–1
Poḷonnaruva, 5, 21–3, 25–6, 32, 33n22, 90, 
122–3, 192–3, 206
edict, 57n55
power, 11, 20–1, 24–5, 27, 33n22, 56n30, 57, 123, 
130, 137, 150, 158, 200, 207, 219
aesthetic/affective, 152, 170, 204, 212n76, 
see also politics:aesthetic
of the Buddha, 130, 132, 137, 177–8, 180–1, 
188n52, 195
fragmentation of, 5, 19, 24, 26, 32, 43, 51, 
186n21, 216, see also localization:of  
politics
monastic, 13–14, 23, 27–8, 133, 192, 207, 220
organizational, 58n66
political, 12, 35n71, 37, 44, 64, 168, 171, 181, 
186n14, 208
religious, 12, 175, 181, 197
royal, 28, 33n32, 192, 203
Prakrit, 46, 153, see also Sanskrit:other literary 
languages and
praśasti, 27–8, 34n52, 171, see also eulogy
preaching (Sin. baṇa), 138n12, 220–1, 224n42
propriety (ocitya, Sk. aucitya), 155–9, 163, 
166n67, 178, 215
lack of (ocityahīna), 158
public sphere, 138n12, 175, 180–2, 188n70, 193, 
221, see also laity
Puggalapaññatti (‘Designation of human types’), 
100
Puggalapaññattiaṭṭhakathā, 102
Pūjāvaliya (‘Garland of offerings’), 91, 111n6, 
112n18, 139n35, 196, 220–1
puñña. See merit:karmic
Puṇṇaka, 162
Puruṣottamadeva, 71–3, 83n12, 85n63
puthujjana. See worldling
queens, 15n8, 24–6, 28, 35n59, 38, 221
Raghu (prince), 157
Raghuvaṃśa (‘Dynasty of Raghu’), 157
Rāhula,
Buddha’s son, 196
companion of Chapaṭa, 216
Rahula, Walpola, 11, 40
Rājarāja Cōḻa I (985–1012), 5, 19, 21
Rājaraṭṭha, 26, 
see also Pihiṭi
Rājasiṃha II (900–20), 21
Rājataraṅgiṇī (‘River of kings’), 151
Rājāvaliya, 187n34
Rājendra Cōḻa I (1012–44), 19, 21
Rāmaśarman (P. Rāmasamma), 152, 164n27
Rāmāyaṇa, 146, 164n10, 193
Ramhā monastery, 50
Ranawella, G.S., 34n53, 56n9
rasa. See aesthetics:moods and feelings; 
Dhamma:taste/form of the
Rasavāhinī (‘Stream of aesthetic moods’), 85n68, 
122
Ratanapañña, 211n66
Ratanāvalī, 26
Ratnamati, 29–30, 35n66, 70–2, 77–8, 80, 
87n101, 150, 154, 160–1, 165n32, 
see also Ratnaśrījñāna
Ratnaprabhā, 85n59
Ratnaśrījñāna, 29, 35n66, 70, 72, 87n101, 150, 
165n32, see also Ratnamati
Raṭṭhapāla, 54
Rāvaṇa, 82
rebirth, 120, 123–4, 128, 132, 139n35, 160–1, 
163, 164n8, 179, 181, 183, 191, 194, 
210n46
referencing, 119, 127, 
see also 
anthology:techniques of compilation in; 
bibliography; contents list
reform,
1165 reform, 4, 13, 19, 23–4, 30, 32, 36, 
39, 43–8, 52, 59n91, 63, 65–7, 69, 71, 
74, 83, 89–90, 99, 133, 138n26, 179, 
223n9
1232–6 reform, 4, 23, 44, 47–8, 57n38, 65, 
67, 145
1266 reform, 4, 23, 44–8, 57n38, 65–7, 166n58
council (saṅgīti), 36
corporate memories of, 58n64
definition of, 43, 223n8
imperial nature of, 44, 57n45, see also imperial 
formations; lordship; religion:imperial
mentality, 69, 83, 217
in Pagan, 215–19, 223n7, 223n15, 223n19, 
see also Pagan
process, 4, 37, 43, 47–8, 73, 93, 213
as purification (visuddhi), 43, 66, 213, 217
as unification (samagga), 13, 23, 43–6, 56n1, 
57n38, 66, 88, 124, 133, 188n61, 213
reform era/period,
cultural productivity of, 3–4, 213
definition of, 4
historiography of, 15n10
religious orientations of, 5–6, 214–5
relic, 6, 14, 22, 25–6, 31, 68, 129, 131–3, 138, 
148, 168–9, 172, 188n52, 190, 205, 208, 
209n3, 215–6
alms-bowl, 25–6, 146, 192
collarbone, 69
histories. See history:of relics
market, 137
miracles of. See miracles
scripture as, 132–7, 142n98, see also cult of 
the book
shrines. See shrines
temple, 176, 183–5
tooth, 22, 25, 31, 51, 168–86, 187n34, 188n61, 
192
and royal legitimation, 186n13, see also 
legitimation; politics:of relics
worship, 14, 131–3, 170, 172, 178–82, 205
religion, 9, 16n34, 43–4, 47–8, 57n44, 68, 123, 
138n12, 171, 216–7
cultural, 120, 221, see also laity; public sphere
devotional, 190, see also devotion
imperial, 37, 45–8, 57n49, 216, 218, 
see also imperial formations; lordship; 
reform:imperial nature of

--- Page 281 of 286 ---
266 INDEX
popular, 138n12
state and, 216
reliquary, 134, 176, 181, see also relic; shrine; stūpa
renaissance, 111n1
renunciation, 172, 191, 194, 197, 199
Reynolds, Frank E., 209n3
ritual, 15n3, 15n11, 31, 50, 123, 131, 133–4, 
136–7, 141n98, 142n94, 177–9, 182–6
determinism, 185
environment, 203–4
meditative, 203
probation, 67
Vedic, 64
Rohaṇa, 25–6, 50, 57n46, 186n21, 192–3, 206, 
209n17
Rotman, Andy, 141n81, 204
royal court, 169, 171, 180, 191–2, 195–6
cosmopolitan nature of, 26, 
see also 
cosmopolitanism
factions of, 5, 174
instability of, 47, 50, see also chaos; disorder; 
power:fragmentation of
intellectual culture of, 27, 29–30, 32, 64, 145, 
147, 171, 186n19, 193, 220, see also 
intellectual culture
as model for the Saṅgha, 13, 44, 164n4, 
see also Saṅgha:hierarchy of
its relationship with the Saṅgha, 7, 9, 11–15, 
37, 40–1, 43–5, 47–8, 146, 182–5, 207–8, 
212n102
Ruiz-Falqués, Aleix, 223n26
Rūpārūpavibhāga, 42
Rūpasiddhi (‘Construction of [word] forms’), 35n60, 
54, 59n91, 66, 80, 84n28, 96, 138n26
Rūpasiddhisannaya, 96
Rūpāvatāra, 35n64, 72, 138n18
Śabdārthacintā (‘Reflections on words and 
meanings’), 29, 72, 77–8, 87n101
sabhāvanirutti. See essence language
saccakiriyā. See acts of truth
Saccasaṅkhepa (‘Summary of truth’), 115n68, 
120, 138n6
sacred language/texts, 39–40, 44, 63, 69, 73, 77, 
80, 82–3, 
see also Pali
Saddanīti (‘Word guide’), 219, 223n28,  
223n29
saddhā. See faith
Saddhammapajjotikā, 42
Saddhammapakāsinī, 42
Saddhammasaṅgaha, 112n14
Saddhammopāyana, 54
Sāhassa Malla (1200–2), 38
Sahassavatthuppakaraṇa, 54
Śailendra dynasty, 69
Śaivism, 22, 180
Śākaṭāyanavyākaraṇa, 72
Sakkapañha Sutta (‘Question of Sakka’), 161
Śākyas, 27–8, 34n56, 210n55
Śālistamba Sūtra (‘Rice stalk’), 133
samagga. See reform:as unification
Samantakūṭavaṇṇanā, 55
Samantapāsādikā (‘Completely pleasing’), 41, 90, 
93, 210n46
samāsa. See summarizing
Sambandhacintā (‘Reflections on syntactic 
relationships’), 54, 81, 164n6
Sambandhacintāpurāṇaṭīkā, 223n26
Sambandhacintāsannaya, 82, 139n35
Sammohavinodanī, 41
Saṃyutta Nikāya, 127
commentary on, 92, 
see also Sāratthappakāsinī
Sānaka, 123
saṅgaha. See handbook
Saṅgha, 13–14, 25, 30, 32, 49, 66, 73, 75, 124, 
145–7, 152, 163, 164n12, 192, 210n55, 
211n65
factions of, 4, 20–1, 56n1, 57n38, 222
hierarchy of, 35n83, 44–5, 47–8, 55, 57n46, 
65–6, 137–8, 147, 163
as landowner, 22–3, 136–7, 183, 
see also land
as object of devotion. See devotion:to the 
Dhamma and Saṅgha
as political actor, 13, 29, 170, 182, 186n13, 
213, 223n16, see also politics:Buddhist; 
power:monastic; power:religious
its relationship with the court. See royal 
court:its relationship with the Saṅgha
Sīhaḷa, 52, 215–19
unification of, 4–5, 13, 19, see also reform:as 
unification
Saṅgharakkhita, 46–9, 54, 65, 68, 74, 81, 85n59, 
111n6, 139n35, 145–63, 163n1, 163n2, 
164n5, 164n6, 164n25, 165n37, 165n38, 
165n39, 165n46, 166n58, 166n69, 168, 
178, 199
saṅgīti. See reform:council
Saṅkhapāla, 123
sannaya. See commentary:Sinhala/sannaya
Sanskrit,
Abhayagiri and. See Abhayagiri:Sanskrit 
literary culture and
Abhidharma manual, 107
astronomy/astrology, 121
Buddhist, 8, 30–1, 64, 94–5
commentaries. See commentary:Sanskrit
court culture and, 29–30, 35n71, 
see also court 
culture
death of, 219
education, 152, see also education
epics, 146, 164n10, see also 
Buddhaghosa:criticisms of Sanskrit epics
eulogy, 22, 27, see also eulogy; praśasti
grammar. See grammar:Sanskrit
inscriptions, 133, 165n42
medicine, 121
other literary languages and, 46, 58n56, 147, 
see also order:language
poetics. See poetics:Sanskrit; literary 
theory:Sanskrit
poetry. See poetry:Sanskrit/court
Sanskrit literature/texts,
as models for reform-era Pali works, 13, 20, 
27, 29, 32, 45–6, 51, 63, 70, 73–4, 78, 
145, 147, 149, 163, 168, 220–1
as ritual deposits, 134, 142n98, see also cult of 
the book; relic:scripture as
sāra. See Dhamma:essence of
Śaraṇadeva, 83n12
Sārasaṅgaha (‘Compendium of the essence’), 
14, 53, 59n82, 112n19, 119–38, 138n26, 
139n35, 140n51, 206
Sārasvatavyākaraṇa, 72
Sārasvatī, 166n69

--- Page 282 of 286 ---
 INDEX 267
sārattha. See meaning:essential
Sāratthadīpanī (‘Illuminator of essential 
meaning’), 53, 85n68, 92, 112n19, 136
Sāratthamañjūsā, 53, 112n19
Sāratthappakāsinī (‘Illustrator of essential 
meaning’), 41, 92
Sāratthasālinī, 54, 112n19
Sāratthasamuccaya, 55, 122n19
Sāratthavilāsinī, 112n19, see also 
Moggallānapañcikāṭīkā
Sāriputta (Sk. Śāriputra)
disciple of the Buddha, 201
reform leader, 30, 46–9, 52–3, 58n57, 65, 70–2, 
84n18, 89–94, 97–9, 109–10, 112n22, 
114n46, 115n55, 118n97, 125, 127, 
135–6, 152, 163n2
Sarkisyanz, Emanuel, 192, 209n11
Sarton, George, 84n24
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, 142n96
Śarvavarman, 72
Sasadāvata (‘Story of a hare’), 220
Sāsanavaṃsa (‘History of the teaching’), 219, 223n7
Sasarāja, 123
śāstra. See science:prescriptive
Saundarananda (‘Handsome Nanda’), 201
Sautrāntika, 118n91
saviour/messiah, 192, 200, 208
scholasticism, 88, 
see also school
culture of, 152
definition of, 88, 111n1
school (pariveṇa), 31, 44–5, 89, 94, 111, 222
science,
grammar as, 64, see also grammar
history of, 65, 84n24
literary, 154, 
see also literary theory; poetics
prescriptive (śāstra), 154
scripture, 56, 66, 68, 73, 76, 93, 101, 121, 124, 
137, 154, see also canon, Pali
analytical knowledge of. See analytical 
knowledge of scripture
authority of, 66
disappearance of, 67–8, 129–30, see also five 
disappearances
exegesis of, 6, 64, 90, 95, see also 
commentary:on the Pali canon; exegesis
language of, 65, 76–7, 88, see also essence 
language
meaning of. See meaning:scriptural
nature of, 14, 89, 99–100, 106–11, 118n91, 214
as relic. See relic:scripture as; cult of the book
study of, 44, 66, 82, 131, 213
semantics, 78, 80, 151, 214, see also meaning
Sena (dynasty), 71
Sena II (853–87), 21, 31, 134, 140n37
Sena III (938–46), 34n56
Senart, Émile, 86n76
Seneviratne, H.L., 184, 186n13
serene joy (pasāda), 132, 137, 168, 175–9, 185, 
201, 205, 214, 
see also faith
Sevitabba Sutta (‘Who is to be associated with’), 
154
Shakespeare, William, 80
shrines, 14, 33n19, 126, 128, 131, 142n99, 169, 
216, see also relic; reliquary; stūpa
as emotional stimulants, 131
political control of, 132–7, 183
Sidat Saṅgarāva (‘Handbook of sound and 
meaning’), 81
Siddhattha
author of the Sārasaṅgaha, 14, 53, 112n19, 
119–38, 138n26, 139n32, 139n35
prince, 191, 194–5, 206, 210n33
Sīhaḷa,
island (dīpa), 182
saṅgha, 52, 57n38, 179, 215–19, 223n15
Sīhaḷavatthuppakaraṇa, 54
Sīhapura, 24
Sikhavalaṅda (‘Illustration of the rules’), 46, 
57n55
Sikhavalaṅdavinisa, 57n55
Sīmālaṅkārasaṅgaha, 53, 59n84, 138n13,  
138n21
Sindh, 30
Sinhala, 5, 20, 27, 30, 40, 74, 81, 92–3, 164n8, 
196, 211n58
commentary/sannaya. See 
commentary:Sinhala/sannaya
education, 45–6, 
see also education
glossary, 85n65, 93, 109, see also glossary
history. See history:Sinhala
literature/poetry, 37, 219–22, see also poetry
poetics. See poetics:Sinhala
praśasti, 34n52, see also eulogy; praśasti
translations, 3, see also 
commentary:Sinhala/sannaya
Sinhalese, 29, 52, 211n65, 218
Sirimeghavaṇṇa (301–28), 41, 173, 186n6, 
188n61, see also Kittisirimegha
Sirivallabha, 25–6
Sīvali, 216
Siyabaslakara (‘Literary ornaments for our own 
language’), 29, 148, 165n35
Siyabaslakarasannaya, 114n37, 165n32
Skilling, Peter, 10
social aesthetic, 157, 185, see also aesthetics
sociokarma. See figuration, sociokarmic
Somapura Mahāvihāra, 70
soteriology, 6, 120, 132, 134, 137, 139n32, 168–9, 
192, 195–6, 200, 214
sovereignty, 170–2, 183, 185, 196, 215, 
220, see also Buddha (Gotama):as 
sovereign; kingship; lordship; monarchy; 
power:political
Sri Lanka,
as cultural island, 7–8
defined vs. Laṅkā. See Laṅkā:defined vs. Sri 
Lanka
early medieval, 11–12, 37, 189n78
history of premodern, 4
late medieval, 12, 182
map of, 2
pre-reform, 15n3
reform-era, 13, 52, 64, 121, 202, 215, 218
South India and, 15n3, 40–1, 53, 70
South of, 25, 33n19, 217, 
see also Rohaṇa
Śrī Rāhula, 35n64, 71–3, 85n57, 85n59, 85n62, 
85n65, 219, 224n42
Sri Rammandala, M., 50
Śrīdhara, 72
Śrīvijaya, 69
Śṛṅgāraprakāśa, 139n28
Strathern, Alan, 15n11, 58n66, 186n14, 189n76

--- Page 283 of 286 ---
268 INDEX
Strickland, Keir, 22
stūpa, 28, 133–4, see also relic; reliquary; shrine
subcommentary (ṭīkā), 39, 41, 46, 48, 52–3, 
58n57, 88–9, 91–4, 109, 111n4, 113n31, 
114n46, 115n68, 136
as Buddha’s miscellaneous teachings, 127, 
see also commentary:as Buddha’s 
miscellaneous teachings
Subha, warlord, 49
Subhadda, 173
Subhāṣitaratnakośa (‘Treasury of well-turned 
verse’), 147
Subhūticanda, Pagan monk, 217
Subhūticandra, lexicographer, 72
Subodhālaṅkāra (‘Lucid poetics’), 54, 145–63, 
164n20, 164n27, 199
Subodhālaṅkāra-abhinavaṭīkā, 166n57, 166n72
Subodhālaṅkāramahāsāmiṭikā (‘Grandmaster 
commentary’), 54, 145
suddhamāgadha. See Māgadha:pure
Suddhodana, 28, 34n56, 35n62, 177, 194–5
Sugalā, 26, 192
suggestion (dhvani), 148, 151, 153, 164n25, 191, 
see also poetics; literary theory
Sumaṅgala, 14, 54, 89–91, 94, 97–9, 104–10, 
111n6, 112n16, 112n22, 114n54, 138n26, 
152
Sumaṅgalappasādanī, 54, 139n35
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, 41
Sumatra, 30
Sumedha, 172, 190–1
summarizing (samāsa), 91, 93, see also 
commentary:methods/forms of
Sundara Pāṇḍya, 122
Sundaramahādevī (Sundarī), 23, 25, 28
Sundberg, Jeffrey, 31, 32n11, 33n32, 134,  
140n37
Sutasoma, 123
Suttaniddesa, 113n32
Suttapiṭaka, 39, 119
Suttasaṅgaha, 53, 138n13
Suttavibhaṅga (‘Analysis of the [Pātimokkha] 
discourse’), 39
suzerainty, 24, 32, 33n32, 173, 182, 
see also 
vassal
Tāmalinda, 216, 218
Tambapaṇṇi, 122, see also Laṅkā; Sīhaḷa:island; 
Sri Lanka; Tisīhaḷa
Tamil, 5, 8, 12
glossaries, 85n65, see also glossary
history. See history:Tamil
inscriptions, 22
literature, 22
monks, 59n83
polities, 219
Tantric Buddhism, 30–1, 108, 124–5, 133–4, 
140n37, 142n96, 204
Tāranātha, 35n69
Tathāgata, 134–5, 160, see also Buddha (Gotama)
technology,
determinism of, 63
exegetical, 214, see also commentary; exegesis
karmic. See karma:karmic technology
liturgical, 64
philological, 63, see also grammar:as 
technology
of transformation, 83n2
Telakaṭāhagāthā, 54
temple, 12, 122, 134, 187n40
chronicle, 34n48, 186n16, see also 
history:Tamil
of Koṇesvaram, 34n48, see also Koṇesvaram
Śaiva, 22, see also Śaivism
tooth relic, 172–3, 176, 183–5, see also 
relic:tooth
textual culture, 10, 37, see also literary culture
Thailand, 52, 215, 222
Theravada Buddhism/Buddhist, 3–4, 9, 36–7, 52, 
90, 118n88, 139n32, 139n36, 164n17, 
203, 208, 209n14, 211n67, 215
definition of, 15n3
societies, 11
tradition, 4, 7, 38, 64, 90, 209n6
world, 9, 142n93
Thūpārāma, 33n19, 66, 69
Thūpavaṃsa (‘History of the relic shrine’), 55, 
85n68, 205
Tibet, 29, 70
ṭīkā. See subcommentary
Tilokasundarī, 24–6, 28
Tipiṭaka, 3, 36, 38, 44, 46, 57n55, 109, 154, 205, 
217, 
see also canon, Pali
Tisīhaḷa, 171, 186n21, see also Laṅkā; Sīhaḷa 
island; Sri Lanka
Toṇḍaimaṇḍalam, 21
Toṭagamuva, 71
Trainor, Kevin, 132, 204
transcendence, 
see also immanence
of the Buddha, 12–13, 161, 163, 197–8, 203, 
see also Buddha (Gotama)
of devotion, 159, see also devotion
of gods, 180, see also gods
of kings, 27, see also kingship
of nirvana, 6, 131, 161, 163, see also nirvana
Trikāṇḍaśeṣa (‘Appendix to the three chapters [of 
the Amarakośa]’), 72–3
Trilocanadāsa, 71–2, 85n59
Turkic invasions, 73, 121
Udaya III (935–8), 33n34
Udaya IV (946–54), 21, 32n11
Udbhaṭa, 165n41
Udumbara Mahāsāmi, 222
Ujjenī, 173
Ummagga Jātaka, 85n65
unification. See reform:as unification
upādāpaññatti. See concept:dependent
Upāsakajanālaṅkāra (‘Ornament of lay 
followers’), 53, 121, 125–6
utopia, 179, 181
Uttarajīva, 216, 219
Uttaravinicchaya, 42
Uttaromūla, 31, 184
Vācissara, 47, 49, 53–5, 59n84, 85n68, 93, 
112n19, 138n13, 138n21
Vaibhāṣika, 118n91
Vaijayantīkośa, 72
Vaiṣṇavism, 180, 188n58, 188n69

--- Page 284 of 286 ---
 INDEX 269
Vajirabuddhi, 53
Vajirabuddhiṭīkā (‘Diamond-mind 
subcommentary’), 53, 93, 112n22, 
113n30, 113n32
Vajrabodhi, 31
Vajrapāṇi, 134
Vakkali, 133, 135
Vāmana, 150–1, 164n21, 165n35, 165n36, 
165n38, 165n39
vaṃsa. See history
Vaṃsatthappakāsinī, 53, 139n35, 210n55
Vārttika (‘Annotations’), 63, 72
Vāseṭṭha, 135
vassal, 12–13, 27, 170, 183, 185, see also 
suzerainty
Vasubandhu, 94
Vaṭṭagāmaṇi Abhaya (89–77 BCE), 21
vedāṅga, 64
Vedas, 64
Vedeha, 55, 85n68, 122
Vēlaikkāra, 22, 183
vernacularization, 27, 93, 138n12, 181, 220–1, 
see also cosmopolitan vernacular
Vessantara Jātaka (‘Birth story of Vessantara’), 
158
Vetullavāda, 108, see also Mahayana Buddhism
Vibhajjavāda, 15n3, see also Theravada 
Buddhism
Vibhaṅga (‘Analysis’), 100, 125,
commentary on, 107–9, 118n96, 224n38, 
see also Sammohavinodanī
Vibhaṅgamūlaṭīkā, 42
Vīdāgama Maitreya, 221
Vidhura, 162
Vidhurapaṇḍita Jātaka (‘Birth story of wise 
Vidhura’), 155, 162
Vidyākara, 147
Vijayabāhu I (1055–1110), 4, 22, 24–6, 28, 33n19, 
33n36, 216, 218
Vijayabāhu II (1186–7), 38
Vijayabāhu III (1232–6), 4, 38, 44, 49, 65, 145
Vikkanta-Camūnaka, 172
Vikramabāhu I (1111–32), 25–6, 28, 33n29, 
33n41
Vikramabāhu II (1196), 38
Vikramaśīla, 30
village monks (gāmavāsi), 44, 222, 
see also forest 
monks
Vimalabuddhi, 54, 65–6, 95, 97, 113n32,  
113n34
Vimalamati, 72, 85n49
Vimativinodanī, 53, 85n68, 112n23
Vinaya, 38, 46, 67–8, 117n79, 121, 131, 138,  
206
commentary, 39–40, 46, 92, 109, 130, 136, 
see also Samantapāsādikā
glossary, 109, see also glossary
handbooks of. See handbook:Vinaya
subcommentary, 46, 48, 52, 58n57, 92–3, 109, 
127, 135–6, 206, see also Sāratthadīpanī; 
Vimativinodanī
Vinayasaṅgaha (‘Compendium of the Discipline’), 
53, 85n68, 121, 125
Vinayasaṅgahapurāṇaṭīkā, 53, 111n4
Vinayasaṅkhepaṭṭhakathā, 53
Vinayasāratthasandīpanī, 112n19, see also 
Vinayavinicchayaṭīkā
Vinayatthamañjūsā, 53, 85n68
Vinayavinicchaya (‘Exegesis on the Discipline’), 
41–2
commentary on, 93, see also 
Vinayavinicchayaṭīkā; 
Vinayasāratthasandīpanī
Vinayavinicchayaṭīkā, 111n6, see also 
Vinayasāratthasandīpanī
Vīrabāhu. See Mānābharaṇa:also known as 
Vīrabāhu
Vīradeva, 25
Vīra Pāṇḍya (a. 1253/4), 122
virtuosity, 200, 209n14, 
see also charisma
Viṣṇu, 12, 179–80, 188n58, 207
Visuddhajanavilāsinī, 53
visuddhi. See reform:as purification
Visuddhimagga (‘Path of purification’), 39, 42, 
108, 119, 123, 127, 130, 138n24, 139n29
Viśvaprakāśa, 72
V opālita, 72
V opālitakośa, 72
vutti (Sk. vṛtti). See paraphrase
Vuttodaya (‘Exposition of metres’), 47, 54, 145, 
166n59
vyākaraṇa. See grammar
Vyākhyāyukti (‘Art of explanation’), 94
Walters, Jonathan, 132, 169, 174, 188n61, 210n55
Warder, A.K., 8
warlords, 22, 49, 51, 58n67, 146, 170–2, 174
wealth, 21, 37, 48, 136–7, 140n39, 154, 182–3, 
200, 205, 207–8
Weber, Max, 23, 147, 192, 186n13, 209n14
Wheel-turning monarch (cakkavatti), 24, 44, 
125–
6, 135, 202–3
Wijeratne, R.P., 97
worldliness, 12, 146–7, 152, 155, 171, 192, 197–8
worldly discourse (lokavohāra), 106, 156–7, 
159–63
worldly signs (liṅga) 131, 207, 215
worldling (puthujjana), 202–3
Worms, Concordat of, 57n49
Xuanzang (602–64), 31
Yādavaprakāśa, 72
Yasodharā, 196, 198–9
yogāvacara, 202, 211n67
Yogavinicchaya, 54

--- Page 285 of 286 ---


--- Page 286 of 286 ---
