=== PAGE 1 ===
SUTRASANNAYASANDSARANAMRARA:CHANGES
IN EIGHTEENTH CENTURY BUnDIIIST EDUCATIONJ
Introduction
A striking feature of Buddhist manuscript evidence from eighteenth and
nineteenth-century Sri Lanka is the large number of Sinhala-language
commentaries on Pali suttas. These commentaries, known as satra sannayas,
and/or as satra vistara sannayas, were composed in large numbers beginning in
the middle of the eighteenth century. In what follows, I present the historical
context for this change in Buddhist textual practices, explaining how the
emergence of these commentaries was part of broader changes in Sri Lankan
Buddhist monastic life. Examining two satra sannayas more closely, I explore
several features of their commentarial style which made them useful in training
monks as preachers. I go on to analyze the impact of this new commentarial
style on Buddhist communities in Sri Lanka more generally, arguing that they
played a central role in the formation of a new Buddhist "textual community."
What is a Siitra Sannaya?
A surra sannaya is a type of commentary, distinguished by the type of text on
which it comments and by the way in which it comments. As the name
suggests, satra sannayas are commentaries written on Buddhist suttas (satras,
to use the Sanskrit term which was usually used by the Sinhala writers of these
commentaries), or the discourses attributed to Sakyamuni Buddha. In principle,
a satra sannaya could be written for any sutta found in the Pali tipitaka. In
fact, the manuscript evidence shows that sutra sannayas were written for a much
smaller number of satras, which appear to have been the favourite discourses of
eighteenth and nineteenth-century Buddhists. Judging from extant manuscripts,
the paritta (or piriti suttas -- including Metta Sutta, Mangala Sutta,
Karaniyametta Sutta, and Dhajagga Sutta, for instance -- were among these
favourites. Among the other popular suttas we find Dhammacakkappavattana
This paper is respectfully dedicated to Professor P.B. Meegaskumbura,
who has so generously shared his knowledge with me, and to Godwin
Samararatne, whose kindness and wisdom have enriched my visits to Sri
Lanka. Any faults herein, of course, are solely mine.

=== PAGE 2 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 77
Sutta, Mahasatipatthana Sutta and Brahrnajala Sutta.?
A sannaya is an explanation or exposition (ryahyava) which may be an
elucidation of meaning (arthavivaraqayay or an exposition of detail tvistara
kathanayay? Here the distinction between elucidation of meaning and
exposition of detail roughly parallels that between padavannana and
aithavannana in the Pali commentarial traditions. That is, in both instances.
the first commentarial style--arthavivarGl.wyaor padavannona=ioosses on the
immediate meaning of the word or phrase by unpacking grammatical compounds
and providing synonyms while the second -- vistara kathanaya or
auhavalJl}ana -- explores the broader possibilities for meaning by placing a
word or phrase within a more extensive narrative context."
The stura sannayas produced in eighteenth and nineteenth-century Sri
Lanka consistently combine the two functions of elucidating basic meaning and
providing more detailed exposition. The commentary written in Sinhala for a
Pali sutta within a satra sannaya will, for instance, provide a simple translation
of a Pali word or phrase, which also clarities tense, number, etc. However, the
style of commentary used in the sutra sannayas does not restrict itself to a
word-for-word translation, or to an analysis of grammatical structure. Rather,
sutra sannayas typically introduce phrases, and sometimes longer sentences and
even short narratives, to elaborate the Pali word or words in question.
A simple example can be drawn from the opening lines of a satra
sannaya, which comment upon the" evarp me sutam" which starts a Pali sutta.
The Sinhala commentary typically first explains that "me" means "by me." It
then goes on to explain, for instance, that the manner in which the sutta was
heard is the manner in which it was heard by the Venerable Kassapa at the First
Council. Other straightforward examples include the way in which the Pali term
"bhagava" is often given a lengthy comment which elaborates particular virtues
Somadasa's (1959) Lamkave Puskola PO! Namavaliya is one source of
evidence for the popularity of particular satra sannayas. My recent
work in temple libraries in the Kandy and Sat Korale areas shows that
the satra sannayas mentioned here also consistently dominate temple
collections.
See Sorata (1963) sv. sanna.
4
See Bond (1982, esp. pp. 149-50) for a useful discussion of Pali
cuihavannana.

=== PAGE 3 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 78
of the Buddha, or the way in which the Sinhala comment explains how certain
Pali place names are derived (such-and-such happened there, etc.). Below I will
present some examples of more elaborate satra sannaya commentary.
To clarify the structure and function of sutra sannayas we can also use
the Sinhala-language distinction between arthavyakhyana and dharmavyakhyana.
While arthavyakhyanas focus on authoritative sources word for word,
dharmavyakhyanas (like the Saddharmaratnavaliyai are bound only to convey
the idea of the original. As commentarial works which contain a substantial
proportion of detailed exposition, the stura sannaya's function is not exhausted
by the relatively restricted exegetical aims of arthavyakhyana texts. Their
adherence to the word order and structure of the Pali texts upon which they
comment, however, prevents them from attaining the level of sustained and
independent narrative characteristic of dharmavyakhyanas, A satra sannaya is
best understood as an intermediate form between the narrowest and broadest
Sinhala exegetical styles.
Stura sannayas appeared as early as the twelfth century but were, in
Somadasa's words, only "a minor literary genre prior to the eighteenth century"
(1987, x). The production of satra sannaya texts began in the twelfth century
and ceased in the fifteenth for reasons which remain unclear. It is likely that the
early satra sannayas drew on earlier (5th-7th century) translations of Pali suttas
into Sinhala but this cannot be confirmed as none of these earlier translations are
extant. 5 SrI Dharmakirti analyzes the prominence of sannayas in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries in terms of linguistic change within Sinhala culture,
arguing that works written in the Sinhala language of the earlier Anuradhapura
Period were no longer accessible to later readers of Sinhala and that new
commentarial works were necessary to mediate between Pali and Sinhala (1961,
136).
Why Write Siitra Sannayas't
For those interested in placing textual production within a broader historical
context, the sudden emergence of satra sannaya commentaries in the eighteenth
century provides an intriguing puzzle, leading us to ask: what changes in
Buddhist institutions and/or devotional practices hrought the sutra sannaya to
prominence at this time?
5
In this regard see Godakumbura (1955, p. 23).

=== PAGE 4 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 79
When we look for other evidence of Buddhist life during this period
which might shed light on such questions, we find that the first satra
sannaya--called Sararthadlpani (or, Illuminator of Excellent Meaning) -- written
since the fifteenth century was written sometime between 1739 and 1747 by a
novice monk named Velivita Saranamkara living in the Kandyan Kingdom. We
also find evidence which points to a reorganization of monastic institutions in the
mid-eighteenth century, one which included the development of a new
educational system in which Pali instruction and trained preaching played a
major role. In what follows I will explore the reasons or the popularity of sutra
sannayas in this context, and the way in which they were used within the newly
organized monastic, and especially educational, system."
Decentralized Monasticism
In the early part of the eighteenth century, upasampada festivals ceased
to be held because the necessary monastic quorum no longer existed. Thus.
despite the fact that upasampada was reintroduced twice from Southeast Asia, in
1596 and 1697, the community of upsampada monks did not take strong hold.
The last upasampada monk during this period was Hulamgarnuve Jinadasa, who
died in 1729 (Dewaraja 1988, 166). The absence of higher ordination during
this time is important not only because it may have allowed for (and resulted
from) altered expectations of monastic discipline but also because it meant the
absence of certain collective monastic observances, like the recitation of the
patirnokkha on uposatha days and the delegation of authority over younger
monks during upasampada, which helped to create and maintain a clear and
centralized system of monastic organization and administration.
Despite the fact that monks no longer attained upasampada, and no
longer participated in many of the acts of the monastic community for which
upasarnpada monks are responsible, many Buddhist temples were not
uninhabited. They were, instead, maintained by men who lived as novice
monks, or by monks who had chosen to give up their upsampada status while
(,
Others have noted the popularity of satra sannayas in eighteenth-century
Sri Lanka, and have linked this popularity to the preaching practices of
that period (Sannasgala 1964,492 and Somadasa 1987, ix). However,
the precise institutional context in which the satra sannaya commentarial
style developed, and its impact on Sri Lankan Buddhism. has not yet
been examined.

=== PAGE 5 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 80
retaining temple positions. Although such monks did not have upasarnpada
status, it appears that at least some of them (those in the wealthier temples or
with good family connections) had high social standing and participated actively
in the administration of the Kandyan Kingdom.' These monks, sometimes
called ganinnanses, also preached to lay men and women. According to some
accounts, these monks were also active as doctors and astrologers, while looking
after temple lands and living with wives and children." This may be true, at
least in part, hut it is difficult to develop a clear picture of the ganinnanse
lifestyle because, as I have argued elsewhere, our evidence of it consists of
highly rhetorical statements written by monks and laymen who wished to
distance themselves from their ganinnanse predecessors (Blackburn 1997).
There is evidence to suggest that learning was not absent from Sri
Lankan Buddhist communities after the death of Parakramabahu VI in 1465, hut
that it became increasingly determined by local factors, lacking the strong
educational infrastructure which had characterized the most stable political
domains during the reign of Parakramabahu VI of Kotte (De Silva 1992,95-7;
Mirando 1985, 19-20).
Two particularly influential eighteenth-century hagiographies are usually
cited as evidence for the low level of Buddhist education from the late fifteenth
to the early eighteenth centuries. These works, the Samgharajasadhucariyava
and the Sarpgharajavata, describe the life and work of the monk named Velivita
Saranamkara who became a key monastic leader in the mid-eighteenth century
and was active in the process of monastic reorganization which I will descrihe
in more detail below. These works describe Saranamkara's attempts to educate
himself in heroic terms, emphasizing, in particular, the lack of teachers skilled
in Pali, and the dearth of Buddhist manuscripts." Although, as I hope to show
below, it is important not to underestimate the impact of Saranamkara's learning
and leadership on Buddhism in Sri Lanka, careful historical work requires that
we do not too quickly dismiss the years immediately preceding his labours as an
age of ignorance.
For details in this regard, see Dewaraja (1988).
See, for instance, Ratnapala (1971, p. 97; pp. 107-8), sse (14), and SV
(58, 80). In what follows, sse refers to pages from
Samgharajasadhucariyava, SV to verses from Samgharajavata, ev to
verses from Culavamsa, and SD to pages from Sararthadtpani.
9 See, for instance, sse (15-21).

=== PAGE 6 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 81
If Vacissara is correct, both ganinnanses and lay people living in the
early eighteenth century were familiar with portions of the jataka corpus,
although for many that familiarity would have come through Sinhala rather than
Pali, and through hearing rather than reading. Vacissara describes a style of
religious instruction in which ganinnanses recited Pali jatakas before explaining
their meaning in Sinhala (1964, 50).
Robert Knox, in his account of Kandyan culture written about his stay
in the region during the 1660s, gives clear evidence of religious instruction in
which a sonorous recitation (probably in Pali) is followed by an explanation of
its meaning in more accessible language (1966, 141). It is likely, especially in
the light of Hevavasam's comments on seventeenth-century Buddhist literature
(1966, 8-9) that this preaching worked with a jataka-based corpus.
The early works of Saranarpkara themselves indicate that, in addition to
the jatakas, other Buddhist works were available. Sararthasangrahaya, written
at the invitation of King Narendrasimha, clearly shows the influence of the
Visuddhimagga, Milindapanha and Saddharrnaratnavaliya. Sararthadipani, the
first of the new generation of surra sannayas, written between 1739 and 1747,
draws on the fifth-century Pali anhakatha tradition for paritta suttas, either
directly or as mediated through thirteenth-century works.
If eighteenth-century sources like the Sarngharajasadhucariyava are
accurate in this regard, it appears that Saranamkara sought out Buddhist texts
and teachers from various Buddhist temples as he began to write his own works
and to train his students. to We have accounts of Sarnamkara's Pali studies
with Levuke and Palkurnbure Atthadassi, and know that Atthadassi was the chief
student of one of the last upasampada monks in the eighteenth century,
Vatapuluve, and that Atthadassi taught Levuke (Hevavasam 1966, 20). The
situation in southern Sri Lanka appears to have been similar. Sitinarnaluve
Dhammajoti, a monk from Tangalle who became one of Saranamkara's first
students, is reported to have travelled from temple to temple in the southern
region, collecting available works in both Pali and Sinhala before going to the
Kandyan Kingdom to study with Saranamkara (Hevavasam 1966, 33).
Abhayaratna describes a situation in which texts related to the tipitaka teachings
were safeguarded, and in which particular works were considered to be
particularly useful as bana pot (works of basic education for beginning monks)
were copied and used, as were the jatakas (1991, 231).
10
sse (15-16).

=== PAGE 7 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 82
All of this suggests that in the early part of the eighteenth century,
Buddhist education was not absent, but that it depended greatly on local
circumstances: educational opportunities depended on the student's commitment
to seeking learning, the knowledge of nearby teachers, on the texts which those
teachers had obtained through their own monastic lineages and on the texts
which were favoured for preaching and ritual purposes.
Centralizing and Systematizing Monastic Education
In the 1740s, a new monastic group began to form under the leadership
of Velivita Saranamkara. This group, called the Silvat Sarnagarna (the
Disciplined Group), are said to have heen attracted hy the commitment to
learning and monastic discipline showed by the novice Saranamkara.
Saranamkara, who came from a prestigious up-country family with ties to the
court of the Kandyan Kingdom, was born in 1698. In 1714 he became a novice
monk under Suriyagoda Kitsirimevan Rajasundara, who had received
upasampada during the reign of King Vimaladharma Suriya II, and had
subsequently given up his upasampada status to live as a ganinnanse (Hevavasam
1966, 19). After learning Pali grammar from Levuke and Atthadassi,
Saranamkara in turn taught his two chief followers, Sitinarnaluve and
Ilipangamuve, and continued to study on his own. As these three travelled
throughout the Kandy and Sat Korale regions, they began to attract others to the
Silvat Samagarna.
The fortunes of the Silvat Sarnagama waxed and waned in response to
competition from other monks affiliated with the two main temples in Kandy --
the Malvatu and Asgiriya Viharayas -- and in accord with court politics.
Eventually, Saranarpkara received more consistent support from King
Narendrasirpha, who sponsored the establishment of Niyamakanda as an
educational centre. Saranamkara's fortunes grew further in the early years of
Kirti SrI Rajasimha's reign. In 1753, with royal support, a group of monks was
brought to the Kandyan Kingdom from Siyam to restart the practice of
upasarnpada. From 1764 onwards, independent upasampada festivals were held
at both the Malvatu and Asgiriya Viharayas for monks affiliated with the new
Siyam Nikaya, the monastic fraternity established in 1753 with the arrival of
upasampada from Siam. The growth of the Siyam Nikaya involved monks from
the Kandy and Sat Korale regions as well as from the south. The 1750s and
I760s saw the rise of new monastic lineages affiliated with the Siyam Nikaya,
and an elaborate system of monastic administration which linked together monks
from large parts of Sri Lanka.

=== PAGE 8 ===
SlJTRA SANNAYAS AND SARANAMKARA: 83
The changing nature of Buddhist education in the eighteenth century, and
the place of sutra sannaya commentaries within this education, cannot be
adequately understood without reference to the rise of the Silvat Samagama and
the formation of the Siyam Nikaya. Under Saranarnkara's leadership, monks
of the Silvat Samagama began to study in new ways. This training, in turn,
shaped the nature of monastic administration within the emerging Siyam Nikaya.
Saranamkara's power and the authority of the Siyam Nikaya were due, to a
significant extent, to the way in which these monks were able to identify
themselves as, and be identified as, authoritative by virtue of their education.
In addition, the educational system which developed under Saranamkara created
and helped to sustain the strong linkages between the up-country, Sat Korale and
the southern temples, which began to make the Siyam Nikaya a large and
int1uential monastic institution.
For the sake of convenience, it is possible to divide the emergence of
this new monastic educational system into four stages. The first was the
development of temple schools in places influenced by the Silvat Samagarna.
The second was the establishment of Niyamakanda as an educational centre prior
to the reintroduction of upasampada from Siam. The establishment of a number
of other educational centres in the up-country after 1753 marks the third stage,
and the introduction of the new up-country educational system to temples in Sat
Korale and the southern areas under Dutch control forms the fourth.
According to Hevavasarn (1966, 20), education under Saranamkara's
leadership was characterized by four class divisions. The first class was for
students without knowledge of the Sinhala alphabet, the second for students with
some knowledge of the alphabet, and the third was for students who were
already somewhat skilled at reading manuscripts. The first three classes included
both lay and monastic students. The fourth class, restricted to novice monks,
was devoted to a more detailed study of manuscripts for those who were inclined
to take upasarnpada. Abhayaratna (1991, 233; 242) states that the third level of
education focused on subjects relating to exposition, and that bana daham pot
were used to provide novice monks with an introduction to the dhamma.
The approach to learning established by Saranarnkara was apparently
intended to make students familiar with Sinhala and Pali grammar (and in some
cases also Sanskrit), to increase their understanding of both dhamma and vinaya,
and to accustom them to expository discourse (Abhayaratna 1991, 241). Satra
sannayas were appropriate for use in the third and fourth class. Extant
manuscript evidence suggests that some satra sannayas were sometimes included
with other basic texts in the bana daham pot used by novice monks but were

=== PAGE 9 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 84
most often studied separately in order to become familiar with a single sutta or
group of related suttas.
Several aspects of the mid-eighteenth-century educational context made
the satra sannayas a particularly valuable part of the emerging educational
system. The fact that Buddhist monastic education during the period
immediately preceding Saranarnkara was decentralized and unsystematic meant
that the presence of teachers trained in Pali and in the more sophisticated literary
Sinhala at local temples was oy no means guaranteed. During the first stage of
the emergence of education influenced hy Saranamkara, students studied first
from the itinerant teachers of the Silvat Samagarna and were then forced to work
independently. Sarra sannayas were a natural pedagogical tool in this context,
since these commentaries provided a copy of Pali suttas, explained the narrative
and grammatical contents of a Pali sutta, and suggested patterns of exposition
suitable for preaching. Even in the absence of a teacher, a student with a
knowledge of the alphabet and a limited understanding of Pali language could
work alone.
In the second and third stages, when students studied at Niyamakanda
and other educational centres later established in the up-country, surrasannayas
appear to have served several purposes. The descriptions of study provided by
the Sarpgharajasadhucariyava suggest that the composition and study of satra
sannayas provided a way for those skilled in Pali to demonstrate that skill and
to provide texts for the use of students. In the context of these educational
centres, the study of satrasannayas written by these monastic teachers provided
a natural way to deepen students' familiarity with Pali grammar and with the
contents of specific suttas used in preaching and ritual recitation.
In the fourth stage, when students trained in the up-country educational
centres returned to southern and Sat Korale temples to teach students there and
develop their own student following, II the sutra sannayas served an important
purpose in bringing the grammatical and interpretive skills of up-country
educators to the temples in other regions. The use of surrasannayas meant that
even a monk who had spent a short period of time at up-country studies could
bring the tools for further study and teaching with him when he left. The use
of satra sannayas in this way helped to standardize the educational experience
II On which, for valuable details, see Hevavasam (1966).

=== PAGE 10 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 8S
of monastic students over a relatively large geographical area. 12
Many monks did, in fact, spend short periods of time in the Kandy area.
After the reintroduction of higher ordination from Siam in 1753 and the
appointment of Saranarpkara to the position of Samgharaja, or leader of the
monastic community, monks from all parts of the island who sought full
ordination were required to come to the capital of the Kandyan Kingdom, the hill
town of Kandy, in order to receive higher ordination at the Malvatu and Asgiriya
Viharayas, Their stay in Kandy was not limited to the ordination ritual but
included a stay, of perhaps two months," at one of several newly established
centres for monastic instruction in the Kandy region (Dewaraja 1988, 118-9;
Malalgoda 1976, 65). These monks remained a part of the Kandyan educational
environment even after their departure for home temples, by sending their
brighter students to up-country educational centres when possihle (Hevavasam
1966, 42-71), maintaining links with Kandy for the higher ordination of novice
monks and receiving guidance from Saranamkara with regard to monastic
education and discipline (Vacissara 1964, 211). Ties between Kandy, the Sat
Korale and the southern region strengthened significantly after 1753 despite
unsettled political conditions.
It appears, from the accounts found within several works written during
the eighteenth century by those affiliated with Saranamkara's monastic
community, that the monks of the Silvat Samagarna, and later of the early Siyam
Nikaya, emphasized the importance of Pali study and trained preaching in
monastic education. We do not yet have enough detailed information about
monastic education in earl ier periods of monastic reorganization to fully evaluate
the novelty of these preoccupations. It is clear that skill in Pali was a crucial
12 This is not to say that everyone who encountered a sutra sannaya
encountered precisely the same text in the same way, since there were
certain to be slight differences in redaction and interpretation. However,
since sutra sannayas were typically written by highly esteemed teachers,
as the Samgharajasadhucariyava indicates, it is likely that their contents
would have been relatively stable and interpretation of them relatively
conservative. The two manuscript copies of Saranarpkara's
Sararthadtpani at which I have looked (British Library OR 6600 (151)
and Colombo Museum Library 1465), for instance, are virtually
identical to the 1891 printed edition.
13 According to the Viharadhipati at Madavela Rajamahaviharaya, 15 July,
1997.

=== PAGE 11 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 86
marker of monastic leadership and expertise, as we see in contents of the
Samgharajasadhucariyava, where reading and reproducing Pali cornmentarial
literature, and the composition of Sinhala commentaries for Pali texts, are
repeated tropes in monastic biography. 14
The Samgharajasadhucariyava also contains consistent references
Saranarpkara's skill as a preacher, and to the ability of key monastic students to
preach the dhamma. Saranamkara is described, for instance, as someone who
"has many manuscripts written and expounded, has preaching studied and
encourages preaching to the populace. "15 Another monk, Irivinne Vipassi
"lived in the Badhagamu monastery and was very skilled in writing the small
letters used in writing memorization books appropriate to grammar and
preaching. 1116 Moreover, accounts of Saranamkara's students' skill in
preaching suggest a sophisticated level of exposition ability possible only after
considerable training. They were able to declare the meaning of the Pali
nikayas, commentaries, etc. and to preach in a royal assembly relying on works
like the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta and the Brahrnajala Sutta while providing
various elaborate and special explanations for three nights running."
Shifts in narrative emphasis between the Mahavarnsa, early chapters of
the Culavarnsa and the final chapters of the Culavamsa written by
Buddharakkhita also point to the critical importance of preaching to the monks
of Saranarnkara's period. Looking at these works we find that, at the time of
Saranamkara, instruction, rather than construction, is considered the crucial
mode of devotional activity.
Using Siitra Sannayas
Although surra sannayas were used to help monks learn to read Pali
suttas and to train monks as preachers, these commentaries were almost certainly
not used directly as a text from which to preach. Although Sornadasa (1987, ix)
and Vacissara (1964, 19) suggest that sutra sannayas were at least sometimes
used directly, during two-seated preaching in which Pali recitation and Sinhala
14
SSC (37-53).
SSC (22).15
It>
SSC (51).
17 sse (55).

=== PAGE 12 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 87
exposition proceeded in tandem, a loose examination of extant satra sannaya
manuscripts makes this seem quite unlikely. Tne size of the script used in
writing satra sannayas is consistently small enough to make them awkward as
a preaching aid. This becomes even clearer when surra sannaya manuscripts are
compared with paritta manuscripts, or "pirit pot." Many of these collections of
Pali paritta suttas are written in a strikingly large clear hand, large enough to
serve as a reminder during the act of recitation itself.
Satra sannayas were written, read and copied as a guide to the
comprehension of Pali suttas. . Their word-by-word or phrase-by-phrase
translation of Pali suttas helped to clarify Pali meanings and structures, while
additional commentarial detail helped to create an interpretative foundation from
which monks preached. As two monks recently reminded me, one learns how
to explain ideas to others by exploring their meaning in one's own studies. IS
Let us look more closely at two satra sannayas, as examples of the
genre, to see how they helped students develop an expository command of Pali
suttas and how Saranamkara and other teachers were able to use these
commentaries while building new educational networks. Since composition of
satra sannayas began again with Saranamkara's Sararthadipani, a collection of
satra sannayas on suttas from the paritta collection, I have chosen to use the
Metta Satra Sannaya and Dhajagga Sutra Sannaya from Sararthadipani.
The Metta Satra Sannaya begins with a lengthy origin story which
explains the context in which the Buddha taught the Merta Sutta. The sutta was
preached, we are told, to show that a monk who cultivates metra, or loving
kindness, as a meditative technique deserves the support of the laity. The
Buddha made this point in order to arrest an exodus of monks from the order,
caused by a previous sermon in which the message of the Aggikkhandopama
Sutta overwhelmed many of the listening monks and drove them to live as
devout laymen. The story concludes with a reference to the benefits of
cultivating loving kindness, thus reinforcing the importance of the sutta's
contents.
After a full repetition of the origin story in Pali, the sutta itself begins.
The Buddha announces that there are eleven benefits of loving kindness and
18 SrI Narendrarama Rajarnahaviharayadhipati, 30 June, 1997 and
Mulkirigala Rajamahaviharayadhipati, 6 July, 1997.

=== PAGE 13 ===
ANNE M~ BLACKBURN 88
proceeds to enumerate them, introducing the list with the words:. "monks, there
are eleven welcomed benefits of loving kindness -- mental liberation --when it
is followed, developed, made much of, practised, made a foundation, when it
is familiar and well undertaken" and concluding the list with a similar sentence:
"monks, these are the eleven welcomed benefits of loving kindness -- mental
liberation -- which is followed, developed, made much of, practised, made a
foundation, when it is familiar and well undertaken. "19
The commentary provided for these lines indicates the way in which the
sannaya's narrative detail reinforces patterns of explanation and association
through the repetition of phrasing and the consistent use of simile. Comment on
both instances of "which has been practised," for instance, proceeds with
identical phrasing: "which has been accomplished, as a plough is put down after
use. "20 The commentary also maintains throughout the verbal association
between mental freedom and freedom from the obstructions to liberation which
are imaginatively described as enemies. Similes such as these help to animate
the commentary.
As the sutta unfolds, the sannaya's amplification of the original Pali
becomes increasingly vivid. The comment on the benefits of "awaking happily"
and "avoiding nightmares" first reproduces a brief Pali commentarial passage
and then expands this into a dramatic account in Sinhala reinforced by another
Pali commentarial passage which follows. The first Pali commentarial passage
says, "While others wake unhappily, rolling over, yawning and moaning, not
waking thus one wakes steadily and happily, like a blossoming lotus. "21 To
this the Sinhala commentary adds:
If other people awake unhappily, tossing and
constricting [their bodies] and feeling uneasy,
[this] person awakes differently, comfortably,
without movement, like an opening lotus ... if
[he] dreams he has appropriate dreams. [In the
dream he] is worshipping devotional memorials
or listening to religious instruction. While other
beings have nightmares like being thrown down
19
SD (87).
SD (87-90).
21 SO (87).

=== PAGE 14 ===
SiJTRA SANNAYAS AND SARANAMKARA: 89
a mountain or being oppressed by beasts of prey
or being surrounded by thieves, this person
doesn't have such nightmares."
Here the satra sannaya provides the details of cause and effect which can be
used to help develop a preacher's exhortation.
The Metta SutraSannaya then proceeds to comment densely upon two
further benefits of loving kindness. After explaining the benefit of being "dear
to people" the sannaya comments upon the next benefit of being "dear to non-
humans."
Or, if the person is dear to humans he is also
dear to non-humans, like the elder monk
Visakha. The story of the elder monk Visakha
was put down in detail in the explanation of
meditation through amity in the Visuddhimagga
and has been included in the Mangalasutrakatha
of my Sararthasangrahaya. This should be
understood by looking at it as it appears
there."
To explain the benefit of being "unharmed by poison, sword or fire" the sannaya
provides a brief word gloss before turning to a Pali commentary to provide
illustrative examples:
... examine the commentarial section written for
this ... It is said that fire [doesn't affect] the
body of one living according to loving kindness
(like the laywoman Uttaraya) or poison [one]
like the monk Cullasiva who preached the
samyutta [nikaya, a section of the Pali canon Jor
sword [one] like the novice Samkicca. [These
things Jdon't have an effect, don't enter, don't
disturb that person's body."
22 ibid.
ibid., (88).
24 ibid., (88-89).

=== PAGE 15 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN
These passages from the satra sannaya help us to see that one of the ways in
which satra sannayas were useful in educating preachers was their invocation of
particular characters as illustrative examples. In some cases, as in the references
to Uttaraya and Cullasiva, above, the preacher seems to have been expected to
have further details about the illustrative character in mind as part of an
established repertoire. In other cases, as with the reference to Visakha, the
author of the sutra sannaya provides explicit direction to the commentary's user
about the way in which the character's story can, and should, be understood.
Within the broader context of a newly organized monastic community
under Saranamkara's leadership, and the program of education associated with
it, Saranamkara's reference to his own work, Sararthasangrahaya, is significant,
for it helps us to see some of the subtle ways in which the new satra sannaya
commentaries helped to shape and unify a community of monastic students under
Saranarpkara's guidance. Other sutra sannaya composers, like those mentioned
in the section from Samgharajasadhucariyava mentioned above, participated in
this process also by including their own guiding references in these
commentaries.
The Dhajagga Aatra Sannaya starts with the Pali sutta directly, without
an elaborate origin story. The Pali sutta begins with the Buddha addressing a
company of monks gathered in a monastery in Jeta's grove. He recounts an
instance of divine battle in which Sakka, lord of the gods, addressed these gods
living in the Tavatirnsa heaven saying,
If, sirs, going into battle you feel fearful, or
stiffen with dread, or your hair stands on end,
then you should look at the top of my battle
standard. Whatever hair-raising fear or
stiffening with dread you might experience will
disappear as you look at the top of my
standard."
The Sinhala commentary begins by providing a relatively simple word gloss and
explanation of this passage. Soon, however, the sannaya intensifies the narrative
ibid., (109).
90

=== PAGE 16 ===
SUTRA SANNAYAS AND SARANAMKARA: 91
with a vivid excursus in which Sakka and his standard are described from the
perspective of his watching subjects:
The chariot of Sakka, king of the gods, was one
hundred and fifty yojanas long. From the
middle of the chariot to its far end was fifty
yojanas. From the middle of the chariot to its
front was fifty yojanas. The [central] box was
fifty yojanas. Doubling that measurement they
say you come up with three hundred yojanas.
A white umbrella measuring three yojanas was
raised up on top. A thousand horses were
yoked [to the chariot] and that's not all
regarding the rest of the accoutrements. Its
standard was two hundred and fifty yojanas
high. When the wind hit the standard it made a
sound like that of the five types of instruments
[as if saying], "look at this standard!" To those
looking at that chariot our king arrived and
stood in the midst of a retinue like an upright
pillar. Fear disappeared [as they thought),
"why should we fear?"26
Sakka's voice resumes the sutta's Pali narrative with further instructions
to his subjects in which he offers alternative sources of solace to those who do
not (presumably cannot, perhaps because of their vantage point) look at the top
of his standard. The symptoms of fear are guaranteed to disappear for those
looking at the top of battle standards belonging to Pajapati, Varuna and Isana.
Once again, after a minimal word gloss on these lines of the Pali sutta, the
sannaya introduces a narrative aside which articulates the divine hierarchy of the
Tavatimsa heaven.
These three divine kings have complexion and
longevity equal to that of the divine king
Sakka's. Among them, the divine king Pajapati
holds the seat second to the divine king Sakka's.
Varuna the divine king receives the third seat.
The divine king Isana receives the fourth seat.
26
ibid., (110).

=== PAGE 17 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN
Thus should their personal power be shown."
At this point the Buddha's voice resumes in the Pali sutta as he sets the
stage for a specifically Buddhist challenge to Sakka's power as a defense.
If that hair-raising fear, or stiffening with dread
which occurs to those looking at the top of the
divine king Sakka's standard--or the top of the
divine king Pajapati' s standard, or the top of the
divine king Varuna's standard, or the top of the
divine king Isana's standard=doesn't disappear,
what is the reason? Monks, Sakka, lord of the
gods, is not without passion, not without hatred,
not without delusion. He has tled, afraid,
tense, trembling. 28
Once again Sararthadipani's commentary moves beyond a limited gloss to the
Pali words quoted above in ways which explain the narrative movement of the
sutta and, even more importantly, reinforce a specifically Buddhist explanation
of Sakka's weakness .
... the point is: if fear [felt by those looking at
Sakka's standard] has been held at bay it doesn't
remain so for long if they are looking at the
standard of a Sakka who is disposed to flee,
shaking, because he has not destroyed the
defilements [mental impurities which impede
progress toward liberation]. After descrihing
the way Sakka, king of the gods and one of the
four divine kings praised here, shook with fear
and tled what more could one say about the
other three? Thus, by association with the
statement that Sakka, king of the gods, trembled
and tled I have indeed said that the remaining
three were disposed to flee, trembling with fear.
Or, it should be understood that [this] isn't
stated separately since the trembling and flight
ibid., (112).
ibid.
92

=== PAGE 18 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 93
of the other three who follow him [Sakka] is
understood by saying that he shook with fear
and fled. This is because Sakka, king of the
gods, dominates the others."
Here Sakka's failure to destroy the defilements further elucidates the Buddha's
previous statement that Sakka is still bound by passion, hatred and delusion-sa
standard negative triad in Buddhist discourse.
The Buddha's first alternative to seeking refuge in Sakka and his
companion gods is refuge in the Buddha himself, but the transposition is not
straightforward. The scene changes and gods in battle are replaced by
meditative monks. Sakka is also displaced indirectly after his frailty, in Buddhist
terms, is shown by the section of sutta and commentary we have just examined.
Monks, I speak thus. If, monks, you are
fearful, overwhelmed by hair-raising fear when
you are in the forest, at the foot of a tree or in
an empty building, at that time you should
remember me thus: he is fortunate, an arahat,
perfectly enlightened, endowed with wisdom
and virtue, in very good circumstances [Pali:
sugato], knower of the world, unrivalled, guide
of people who must be trained, teacher to gods
and men, Buddha, fortunate one."
Sararthadlpani's commentary to these lines of the Pali sutta deserves a close
examination. The narrative detail provided for each epithet of the Buddha is
elaborate and, taken together, provides something like a summa of a Buddha's
enlightened state. This is an excellent example of the way in which the
sannaya's provision of detail sustains patterns of association to be used in
reflection on, exposition of, and engagement with, the teaching.
Look, for instance, at the sannaya 'streatment of several epithets. Once
again the canonical Pali appears in capitalized text.
~9 ibid., (112-13).
JO ibid., (113).

=== PAGE 19 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 94
ARHA T, an arahat; because he doesn't do
improper things in private, because he is worthy
of things like the four requisites, because he has
destroyed the enemies, the det1lements .... IN
VERY GOOD CIRCUMSTANCES [sugato],
called "sugato" because of speaking well and
having gone well, and because of having gone
to nirvana which is termed a good place, and
because of having a good journey ... GUIDE OF
PEOPLE WHO MUST BE TRAINED, hecause
of establishing malleable people in the refuges,
moral conduct, etc. and training [them];
TEACHER FOR GODS AND MEN, because
he gives instruction in the various appropriate
ways with compassion for his world and other
[worlds], for gods and men ... FORTUNATE
ONE [bhagava], called "bhagava" because he
has destroyed all of the defilements such as
passion and because he possesses merit
accomplished through the perfections such as
generosity and moral conduct. 31
Creative etymology takes a central role in the commentary's elucidation of detail
as we see in the comment on "arahat" and "sugato" in particular. Exegesis of
"arahat" plays on the P~Hiword for "private" [rahas] as well as the Pali verb
"arahati" (to be worthy of) and the Pali noun "art' (enemy) while that for
"sugato" explores possible uses of the root "garn" (to go) for which the past
participle is "gato" here combined with the prefix "su-i'rneaning "good." Note
that the sannaya's explanation of "bhagava" heightens the contrast between the
Buddha and Sakka with the description of the Buddha as one who has destroyed
the defilements such as passion, the cause of Sakka's weakness earlier in the
sutta.
By providing elaborate detail for each of the Buddha's epithets the
commentary also evokes aspects of Buddhist devotion which occur independently
of the Dhajagga Sutta in Buddhist practice. This is a particularly striking
example of the ways in which the contents of a satra sannaya echo and sustain
broader patterns of association in Buddhist discourse. The epithets found in the
P~Hisutta discussed above have a long history in meditation practice and are now
31 ibid., (113).

=== PAGE 20 ===
SUTRA SANNAY AS AND SARANAMKARA: 95
regularly chanted in devotional recollection of the Buddha and are known in that
context as the 'iti pi so gatha' or the verses which explain the Buddha's
nature. 32 There is evidence from the eighteenth or early nineteenth century
that they were also used as protective verse."
In the final portions of the sutta the Buddha exhorts the listening monks
to recollect the teaching if they do not recollect him, and to recollect the
monastic community if not the teaching. Any of these three refuges, declares
the Buddha, will vanquish hair-raising fear and paralysis. As the Buddha
announces the value of recollecting the teaching and the monastic community he
declares the standard epithets appropriate to each refuge, epithets which, like the
Buddha's epithets, are part of evotional recitation. Once again the commentary,
with its detailed explanation of these epithets, participates in a complex of echoes
and expository elaboration.
The conclusion of the Dhajagga Sutta Sannayafurther reinforces the
contrast between Sakka and the Buddha which has been gathering momentum as
the sutta and its commentary progress. The Pali sutta's section on recollection
of the monastic community ends with a summary statement linking the efficacy
of recollecting the monastic community to the character of the Buddha: "Monks,
the hair-raising fear or paralysis which arises will disappear for those
recollecting the monastic community. Why? The Buddha, monks, an arahat,
perfectly enlightened, without passion, hatred and delusion, fearless,
unparalyzed, courageous didn't flee." The commentary to these lines draws
attention to the earl ier characterization of Sakka as fearful and defiled through
its re-articulation of the sutta word by word. And, in a subtle but powerful
conclusion which unites the force of creative etymology and the developing
contrast between Sakka and the Buddha as sources of refuge, the sannaya runs:
"the Buddha said this; said this Dhajagga Pirit; further the 'sugato ,' In Sakka's
place, said ... "~4 The Buddha has, in the course of the sutra sannaya,
redefined the terms of power, replaced Sakka as refuge and overtaken Sakka's
place at the head of his own retinue.
In this satra sannaya, as in the Metta Satra Sannaya, the commentarial
details provided in Sinhala enrich the sutta's narrative and provide natural points
32 See, for instance, Visuddhimagga p. 7.
33 Jonathan Walters. Personal communication.
34
SO (113).
--

=== PAGE 21 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 96
of elaboration for a preacher inclined to heighten the sutta's drama or to
elaborate the Buddha's power. In doing so, the Dhajagga Sutra Sannaya uses
vivid imagery and word play which can become part of the student's own
expository repertoire.
Textual Communities
In seeking to understand the role of satra sannayas within a changing
monastic environment and a new system of Buddhist education, I have stressed
the ways in which these commentaries helped students study Pali language, and
to develop the command of specific suttas necessary for their work as preachers.
The fact that satra sannayas were used in these ways within an extensive and
clearly structured educational system under Saranarnkara and others associated
with the new Siyam Nikaya suggests that satra sannaya commentaries had a
significant impact on lay and monastic Buddhist communities in much of Sri
Lanka. In order to describe this impact more clearly, I draw on the concept of
a "textual community" developed by Brian Stock in his study of the impact of
literate textuality on eleventh-century European culture.
There Stock uses the term "textual communities" to describe" groups of
people whose social activities are centred around texts, or, more precisely,
around a literate interpreter of them." Although texts, in Stock's view, need not
be written nor their auditors literate, they exert a formative intluence on the
textual communities' behaviour and attitudes. In particular, he claims, a culture
in which texts and the literate are accepted as authoritative and influential is
characterized by a move toward what he calls "an intellectualism inseparable
from the study of texts" (1983, esp. 522-4). I do not embrace Stock's view that
an increasingly literate and textual culture is characterized by specific forms of
rationality or the implication that text-centred activities necessarily dominate
cultures in which texts and their interpreters are accorded authoritative value.
Despite these reservations, however, Stock's terminology can be used in a more
limited sense which helps to illuminate the effect of the emergence of surra
sannayas on Buddhists in eighteenth-century Sri Lanka. For these purposes, I
adapt the term "textual community" to mean a group of individuals united by
their exposure, through reading and listening, to certain ideas and patterns of
discourse which draw upon and are sustained by written textual sources.
This usage of the term textual community provides a useful way of
looking at the interlocking processes of monastic education and the performance
of preaching, both of which were informed by the use of satra sannaya
commentaries initiated by Saranarpkara and carried out by his students.

=== PAGE 22 ===
SUTRA SANNA YAS AND SARANAMKARA: 97
Monastic education, characterized by reading, listening, memorizing, composing
and copying, gave students many opportunities to engage the contents of
favourite Pali suttas through satra sannayas. In doing so, these students
accumulated a textual familiarity which included patterns of association between
suttas and between suttas and other Buddhist texts, as well as strategies for the
exposition of important suttas and key ideas contained within them.
Monastic students trained within the educational networks established by
Saranarnkara and sustained hy the emergence of the Siyam Nikaya formed a
textual community in the sense I outlined above. They were not the only textual
community formed by and around the surra sannaya commentaries, however.
Because the commentarial detail of satra sannayas fed into the act of Buddhist
preaching, these commentaries played a pivotal role in the creation of a wider
textual community of lay people and monastics, whose level of formal education
varied widely hut whose imaginative dispositions may have had much in
common because of their shared experience of particular Pali suttas and
interpretations of them. The interlocking practices of education and preaching
in eighteenth-century Sri Lanka created a situation in which complex
combinations of oral and written culture helped to sustain certain "habits of
thought, "35 or dispositions to reflect on ideas and behaviours in particular
ways, common to a range of readers and listeners, regardless of their educational
level or status.
In developing the idea of shared habits of thought formed and sustained
by a textual community and applying it to eighteenth-century (and later, but that
is another story) Sri Lankan Buddhists, I do not mean to suggest that all
members of this textual community thought alike, even about matters relating to
morality and devotion. Rather, members of this new textual community shared
a certain kind of narrative experience, and a language to be used in thinking
about the topics found in Pali suttas.
As Carruthers puts it in her description of a different set of readers and
listeners,
The Latin word textus comes from the verb meaning "to weave"
and it is in the institutionalizing of a story through memoria that
textualizing occurs. Literary works become institutionalized as
they weave a community together by providing it with shared
experience and a certain kind of language ... (1990, 12).
A phrase taken from D' Avray (1985).

=== PAGE 23 ===
ANNE M. BLACKBURN 98
Conclusion
Responding to evidence of changing textual preoccupations among Buddhist
authors in eighteenth-century Sri Lanka, I have tried to show the way in which the
renaissance of Sinhala commentaries on P~Hisuttas, in the form of satra sannayas,
was linked to broader changes in Buddhist monastic organization and education.
Uniting a literary analysis of satra sannayas and a historical analysis of religious
institutions, this study suggests some of the ways in which a new educational
infrastructure shaped the Buddhist environment of eighteenth and
nineteenth-century Sri Lanka.
REFERENCES
Abhayaratna, Adhikari. Sn-Laf!1kave SambhavyaAdhyapanayaSaha Mahasagana.
Colombo: Nava Samagi, ]991.
Blackburn, Anne M. "When A Decline May Not Be Decline, and A Revival No
Revival: Reconsidering Histories of Buddhism in Eighteenth-century Sri
Lanka." Ms. 1997.
Bond, George. The Word of the Buddha. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1982.
Carruthers, Mary J. The Book of Memory. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990.
Calavamsa. Ed. Wilhelm Geiger. London: Pali Text Society, 1980.
D'Avray, D.L. The Preaching of the Friars. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.
De Silva, Chandra R. Sri Lanka: A History. Delhi: Vikas Publishing House,
1992.
Dewara ja, L. S. The Kandyan Kingdom of Sri Lanka 1707-1782. Colombo: Lake
House, 1988.
Godakumbura, C. E. Sinhalese Literature. Colombo: The Colombo Apothecaries
Co, 1955.
Hevavasam, P.B. Matara Yagaye Sahityadharayan Ha Sahitya Nibhandhana.
Colombo: LarpkaQdhuve Mudranalaya, 1966.

=== PAGE 24 ===
SUTRA SANNAY AS AND SARANAMKARA: 99
Knox, Robert. A Historical Relation of Ceylon. Dehiwala: Tisara Prakasakayo,
1%6.
Malalgoda, Kitsiri. Buddhism in Sinhalese Society 1750-1900. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1976.
Mirando, A.H. Buddhism in Sri Lanka in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Centuries. Colombo: Tisara Prakasakayo, 1985.
Ratnapala, Nandasena. The Katikavatas. Munich: R. Kitzinger, 1971.
SrI Dharmakirti, Nivandama. Simhala Sahityaye Svarnayugaya. Colombo:
Vidyalankara Visvavidyalaya. 1961.
Samgharajasadhucariyava. Ed. Henpitagedara Piyananda. Colombo: Ratna Pot
Prakasakayo, 1%9.
Samgharajavata. ed. SrI Charles de Silva. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena. 1955.
Sannasgala, Punchibandara. Simhala Sahitya Va1]lsaya. Colombo: Lake House,
1964.
Sararthadtpant. ed. Beligalle Sobhita. Peliyagoda: Satya Samuccaya Press, 1891.
Somadasa, K.D. Lamkave Puskola Pot Namavaliya. Colombo: Department of
Cultural Affairs, 1959/1964.
Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of Sinhalese Manuscripts. Vol. I.
London: British Library and Pali Text Society, 1987.
Sorata, W. Sri Samangalasabdakosaya. Colombo: Anula Press, 1963.
Stock, Brian. The Implications of Literacy. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1983.
Vacissara, Kotagama. Saranatpkara Samgharaja Samaya. Private Publication:
Don Adhwin et ai, 1964.
Yisuddhimagga. ed. C.A.F. Rhys Davids. London: Pali Text Society, 1975.
M. BLACKBURN

