ISSN: 2586-9620 (online)
https://so09.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/jibs
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
This work is licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License .(https://creativecommons.org/  
licenses/by/4.0/).
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  
Vol.16 No.1 (January-june, 2025): 88 - 108
Research Article  
Keywords: Pāḷi, Bagan, Theravāda 
Buddhism, namo tassa, Myanmar, 
inscriptions  
Received: January 6, 2025 
Revised: March 5, 2025mber 
Accepted: May 30, 2025
Published online: June 10, 2025
Pāḷi is regarded as the sacred language of Theravāda Buddhism and 
holds great significance for Theravādins, serving as the principal  
language for preserving and transmitting the teachings of the Buddha. 
The Bagan kingdom (11th to 13th century) in present-day Myanmar is 
widely recognized as a golden age of Buddhist culture, evidenced by  
the enduring presence of ancient temples, murals, and an extensive 
corpus of stone inscriptions. This article aims to investigate the profound 
impact of the Pāḷi language on the intellectual, religious, and social 
life of Bagan society. The study draws upon a wide range of both  
primary and secondary sources, including donative inscriptions,  
Burmese chronicles, epigraphic evidence, and the works of modern 
scholars. It employs historical and textual analysis to reveal the  
development of both Pāḷi and Theravāda Buddhism in ancient Bagan 
after the 11th century. The findings demonstrate that Pāḷi was not only 
used for religious purposes but also functioned as an indicator of  
prestige, particularly among the royal elite and learned monks. This 
study highlights how Pāḷi played the crucial role in shaping Bagan  
society and in promoting the wider spread of Buddhism. By focusing 
on the Bagan kingdom, this research contributes to the broader  
discussion on the relationship between language, religion, and culture 
in pre-modern Southeast Asia. 
ABSTRACT
DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM 
THE BAGAN ERA   
Phyu Mar Lwin 
 College of Religious Studies, Mahidol University, Thailand
Author for correspondence email; phyumarlwin@gmail.com
ARTICLE INFO
89DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
INTRODUCTION
Numerous Buddhist scriptures in the Paḷi language are preserved in Theravāda countries such as 
Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Thailand.1 Over time, Pāli developed into a sacred and scholarly language to 
maintain Buddhist teachings.2 There is abundant evidence of Pāḷi texts dating to the 11th century that have 
been unearthed in Bagan, the important Buddhist culture center located in present-day Myanmar. Significant 
records from the region are found on votive tablets, stone slabs, and gold, silver, or copper plates dating 
from the time of Pyu civilization (ca. 1st– 3rd century).3 Notable archaeological evidence includes the Pāḷi 
word ‘saṃghasiri’4 inscribed on a stamp (dating to the 2nd century, with a script reminiscent of Southern 
Indian Brahmi script) unearthed at the Beikthano archaeological site. 5 Additionally, twenty gold plates 
discovered in the Khin Ba mound at Śriksetra, provide further evidence of the use of Pāḷi. These plates are 
recognized as the earliest Pāḷi inscriptions extracted from the Piṭaka (classical Buddhist texts)6 during the Pyu 
era.7 A notable aspect of the Pyu inscriptions is the preponderance of Pāḷi texts derived from the Buddhist 
canon, such as Suttanta8 and Abhidhamma.9 
Following the fall of the Pyu kingdom in 832, 10 the Bagan Empire developed gradually from  
the 11th century onwards. During this early era, the practice of epigraphic culture flourished. The Bagan 
populace, including kings, queens, princes, ministers, members of the royal family, clergy, affluent  
individuals, and even commoners, engaged in inscriptions to record their religious deeds on stone. These 
inscriptions appear in various languages such as Pyu, Mon, Burmese, Pāḷi, Sanskrit, Siamese, Chinese, and 
Tamil.11  According to Burmese chronicles, the account of King Anuruddha (also known as Anawrahta, r. 
1044–1077) embraced Theravāda Buddhism after his encounter with Shin Arahan, a monk from Thaton, 
the capital of the Mon kingdom. 12 During his reign, inscribing Pāḷi language in Burmese script 13 was 
exclusively observed on votive tablets. The earliest epigraphs in Bagan are seals bearing the name of 
Aniruddha in Sanskrit or Anuruddha in Pāḷi on votive tablets.14   
1 K.R. Norman, Pāḷi Literature, including The Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of all the Hinayāna 
Schools of  Buddhism (Wisebaden: Harrassowitz, 1983), 1-3.
2 Oskar von Hinüber, A Handbook of Pāḷi Literature (New York: Walter de Gruyter. 1996), 1-4.
 3 Bob Hudson, “A thousand years before Bagan: Radiocarbon dates and Myanmar’s ancient Pyu cities”. Bagan and the 
World: Early Myanmar and its Global Connections (Singapore, ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, 2018), 89.
4 ‘saṃghasiri’ is a Pāḷi word which means ‘the glory of monk’, inscribing on a stamp. It is also an evidence of using 
Pāli in the Pyu era dating from the 2nd century.  
5 Aung Thaw, Report on the excavation at Beikthano (Rangoon, Ministry of Union Culture, 1968), 48-50.
6 Pāḷi inscriptions starting with “Siddaṃ,avijjāpaccayāsaṅkhārā…..” as found in the Abhidhamma and Vinaya Piṭaka. 
The scripts are similar to Nāgarī script of Southern India (4th -5th c).
7 Sein Win, The Corpus of Pyu Epigraphy, vol 1 (Yangon: Department of Archaeology, 2016), 11.
8 A discourse: CPED (Colombo: Colombo Apothecaries Co., Ltd, 1957), 301.
9 The special dhamma; theory of doctrine: PTS PED (London: Pāḷi Text Society, 1925), 65.
10 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism, AD 1000-1300.”  Journal of Burmese Research Society (1978): 2.
 11 C. Duroiselle, A List of Inscriptions found in Burma (Rangoon, Superintendent Government Printing), i-ii. 
12 Pe Maung Tin and G.H. Luce, The Glass Palace Chronicle of Kings of Burma (London: Oxford University Press, 
1921), 71-74.
13 K.R. Norman, Pāḷi Literature, including The Canonocal Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of all the Hinayāna 
Schools of Buddhism (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1983), 4. “Pāli texts have been written in the scripts of various countries—
Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand—indicating that Pāli had no script of its own but adopted the script of the host culture.”
14 G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 16.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
90
 After the reign of King Kyanzittha (1084 1113), “Pāḷi and Pāḷi mixed with Burmese were preferred 
to write inscriptions instead of Mon language.”15 Prince Rajakumār, the son of King Kyanzittha, undertook 
an act of merit for his deceased father by inscribing a donative record on quadrilateral stone in four lan-
guages   Pāḷi, Mon, Burmese, and Pyu.16 Subsequently, his grandson, King Cañsū I who was known by the 
Burmese name Alaung-sithu, is recorded to have constructed the Shwegu temple in 1131, in which two 
stone inscriptions were engraved and affixed to the temple’s walls.17 The records include dates of com-
mencement and completion of the construction of the temple in Sanskrit while the rest of the text is inscribed 
in Pāḷi.18 This evidence suggests that Pāḷi literature was developing during the reign of Cañsū I.
Figure 1. The Rājakumar four-faced pillar in the compound of Myazedi pagoda, Bagan, Myanmar. 
Photograph by the author, August 12, 2020.  
During the reign of Cañsū II (1174  1211), several inscriptions were engraved in both Pāḷi and 
Burmese. These bilingual inscriptions indicate a shift in linguistic preferences toward Pāḷi over Sanskrit in 
Bagan during this period. This language preference is further substantiated by the discovery of many Pāḷi 
epigraphs dating after the 11th century. Concurrently, Burmese became a significant vernacular language 
during the Bagan era while Pāḷi continued to be used for religious inscriptions. The Bagan era was a prolific 
period for composition in Pāḷi not only of donative records but also a multitude of Pāḷi grammatical works, 
commentaries and sub-commentaries. This evidence demonstrates the increasing importance of Pāḷi in 
15 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000–1300, “ Journal of the Burma Research Society 61, no. 1–2 
(1978): 58.
16 Epigraphia.Birmanixa. vol. 1, (Rangoon: Government Printing, 1960) 1. The Kubyuak-gyi inscription    also 
known as the Rājakumar inscription or the Myazedi inscription    is found on a four-faced pillar written in Pyu, Mon, Myan-
mar and Pāḷi languages:  See figure 1.
17 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000–1300, “ Journal of the Burma Research Society 61, no. 1–2 
(1978): 11.
18 G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 83.

91DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
Bagan during the reign of King Cañsū II. An important question, therefore, arises: why was Pali an 
increasingly important language during the Bagan era? It will be demonstrated that Pāḷi literature and 
culture developed in close conjunction with Theravāda Buddhism during this era. 
Figure 2. The inscriptions depository in Mandalay Palace, Myanmar.  
Photograph by the author, August 8, 2019.
PĀḶI : THE LANGUAGE OF BUDDHISM
 Pāḷi is classified as a dialect of the Middle Indo-Aryan language. As a term describing a specific 
language, Pāḷi was first introduced by European scholars. 19 Generally, Pāḷi is recognized as the sacred 
language of Theravāda Buddhism. Theravādins adhere to the belief that Pāḷi is the word of the Buddha or 
Buddhavacana, and that the Buddha himself delivered his teachings in Pāḷi. However, the specific language 
used by the Buddha remains uncertain. According to standard dictionaries, Pāḷi can also be defined as  
“a line; range; or the canon of the Buddhist writing.”20 In addition, Richard Gombrich states: “The word 
Pāḷi (which in Pāli can also be spelled with a dot under the “l”: Pāḷi) is connected with a Sanskrit verbal 
root ‘paṭh’, meaning ‘recite’ and originally meant ‘text for recitation.’21 Additionally, Steven Collins has 
noted that “the word Pāḷi was not originally the name of a language, but a term meaning firstly a line, bridge, 
or causeway, and thence a text.”22 The precise origins and meanings of the term Pāḷi remain an important 
research subject among Buddhologists. 
19 K.R. Norman, Pāḷi Literature, including The Canonocal Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of all the Hinayāna 
Schools of  Buddhism (Wisebaden, Harrassowitz, 1983), 1.
20 T.W. Rhys Davids, PED (London, PTS, 1925), 455.
21 Richard Gombrich, Buddhism and Pali (Oxford: Mud Pie Books, 2018), 11.
22 Steven Collins, “What Is Literature in Pali?” in Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia, ed. 
Sheldon Pollock (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 91.

 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
92
While there is debate surrounding the question of whether Pāḷi was the language spoken by  
the Buddha, many scholars concur that it served as the literary language for the early Buddhists. R.C. 
Childer claims that Pāḷi belongs to the Prakrits, specifically the Māgadhi language or the Aryan vernaculars 
of ancient India. 23 The historical and cultural context of Buddhism, particularly its origins in India  
(Majjhimadesa), suggests that the language of early Buddhism was likely derived from various dialects in 
India. Presently, Pāḷi continues to be used in several Theravāda Buddhist countries, particularly Sri Lanka, 
Burma, Laos, Cambodia, and Thailand, where many adherents of Buddhism suppose that Pāḷi and Māgadhī 
are the same. The precise date and location of the origin of Pāḷi remain uncertain. However, following the 
third Buddhist council under the patronage of Aṥoka,24 Buddhism disseminated throughout central India, 
leading to the development of Pāḷi as a language influenced by numerous different Indo-Aryan dialects.25 
Several scholars have posited that Māghadī serves as the foundation for Pāḷi. However, Oldenberg advanced 
a different perspective, proposing that Pāḷi is the original language of Kaḷinga,26 a claim substantiated by 
his reference to the large inscription at Khandagiri.27, 28 In contrast, Rhys Davids hypothesized that Pāḷi is 
derived from the dialect of Kosala, 29 and Max Walleser proposed that Pāḷi represents the language of 
Pāṭaliputra.30, 31 Furthermore, scholars such as E. Kuhn and Westergaard assumed Pāḷi functioned as the 
vernacular in Ujjeni, the capital of Mālava during the time when Mahinda, the son of Asoka, took the sacred 
text to Ceylon.32    
The Tipiṭaka Pāḷi-Myanmar Dictionary postulates that Pāḷi is undoubtedly Buddhavacana or  
the word of the Buddha. In the Parājika-Pāḷi,33 the Buddha used the word “ariyaka”34 or “ariyabhāsā” to 
denote his own language. The commentator explains that this ariyabhāsa is the language used by the ariyā 
or noble person.35 In the commentaries and sub-commentaries, Pāḷi is mentioned as māgadhabhāsā, 36 
23 R.C. Childer, A Dictionary of the Pāḷi Language (London, Trubner &Co., 1875), vii. “The word ‘Pāḷi’ in Sanskrit 
means ‘line, row, series’ and by the South Buddhists is extended to mean the series of books which form the text of the Buddhist 
scripture.  Pāḷibhāsā means language of the text, which of course is equivalent to saying Māgadhī language.”.  See also B.C. 
Law, A History of Pāḷi Literature V ol I, 1933,  ix – xxv.   
24 Aṥoka is the well-known emperor of Maurya Dynasty (268-232 CE) .
25 M. Winternitz, A History of Indian Literature V ol II (Calcutta, University of Calcutta, 1933), 12. According to Win-
ternitz, the Buddha himself is believed to have spoken the dialect of Kosala, and then he wandered in Māgadha, where he 
preached in Maghadhī, the dialect of Magadha (present-day Bihar). Winternitz states that the dissemination of the Buddha’s 
teaching by monks from various regions of India occurred through the medium of their respective dialects. 
26 Kaḷinga is an ancient region located on the eastern coast of the India.
27 Khandagiri refers to an ancient site of rock-cut caves located near Bhubaneswar, in Odisha, India.
28 Alexander Cunningham, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. 1 (Calcutta: Survey of India, 1877), 98.
29 Kosala was a powerful kingdom in the northern India during the time of the Buddha. 
30 Pāṭaliputra: an ancient capital of India, modern day Patna.
31 B.C. Law, The History of Pāḷi Literature (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., Ltd., 1933), ix-xxv.
32 E. Müller, A Simplified Grammar of the Pāḷi Language (London: Trübner & Co., 1884), iii; see also Ernst Kuhn, 
Beiträge zur Pali-Grammatik (Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus, 1875), 9; and Niels Ludvig Westergaard, Über den ältesten Zeitraum 
der indischen Geschichte mit Rücksicht auf die Litteratur (Breslau: Verlag von Wilhelm Koebner, 1862), 1–16.
33 Parājika-Pāḷi refers the first part of Vinaya Piṭaka.  
34 Vin (Be) I, 33: Ariyakena milakkhassa santike sikkhaṃ paccakkhāti, so ca na paṭivijanāti, apaccakkhātā hoti sikkhā. 
35 Ibid. Ariyakaṃ nāma ariyavohāro māgadhabhāsā. 
36 “Māgadhabhāsā: the language of Māgadha.” See TP PMD, vol 16, 536.
93DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
tantibhāsā,37 mūlabhāsā,38 and pakatibhāsā.39 The word māgadhabhāsā is mentioned frequently, while the 
others are mentioned very infrequently in the original text, commentaries, and sub-commentaries. 
Notably, in the late 17th century, Simon de la Loubère mentioned the name of Pāḷi as “Balie language, 
the learned language tongue of the Siamese” 40 and “the Barly language, the learned language of  
 the Siamese”41 in his book “A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam.”42 This is believed to be 
the first documented usage of the term Pāḷi in a published work although it is plausible that the term had 
been used earlier. Subsequently, Clough adopted the term in his grammar book in 1824, and Burnouf and 
Lassen also used the term in their book in 1826. 43 According to K.R. Norman, the designation Pāḷi is  
a misnomer, as it may be a localized dialect in India akin to Māgadhī in Māgadha or Gandhāri in Gandhāra.44 
The renowned Buddhist commentator Buddhaghosa identified Pāḷi as the original words of  
the Buddha (buddhavacanaṃ), akin to the concept of Māgadhī being synonymous with Pāḷi. From a gram-
matical perspective, von Hinüber characterized Pāḷi as an artificial language or a composite language since 
“it had manifold connections to many dialects was not identical with either of them.”45 Furthermore, he 
asserted that Pāḷi was “the very earliest language of Buddhism, which most likely was close to the language 
of the Buddha himself, was an eastern Middle Indic [language]’ which is called ‘Buddhist Middle Indic.”46 
On the other hand, the Mahāvaṃsa47 states that “Māgadhī is the root languages of all languages.”48 For 
Theravādins, these commentarial and other chronical evidence is sufficiently reliable to believe that  
the Buddhavacana is indeed Māgadhī.49 Moreover, Winternitz also attributes the language of the Theravāda 
texts to an old form of Māgadhi due to the absence of a distinction between Pāli and Māgadha in  
the Theravāda tradition.50 Conversely, K.R. Norman affirmed that Pāḷi is not the same as Māghadhī although 
there is lack of direct evidence about Māghadhī before the time of Aśoka.51 Consequently, he deduced that 
37 “Tantibhāsā: the language spoken by the Buddha.” See TP PMD, vol 9, 210-211.
38 “Mūlabhāsā: the original language.” See TP PMD, vol 16, 783.
39 “Pakatibhāsā: the original language.” See TP PMD, vol 13, 43. 
40 Simon de la Loubère, A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam: Envoy Extraordinary from the French King 
to the King of Siam, in the Year 1687–1688 (London, 1693), 5.
41 Ibid., 7.
42 Ibid., 9.
43 K.R. Norman, Pali Literature: incl. the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of All the Hinayana Schools 
of Buddhism (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1983), 1.
44 Ibid.
45 Oskar von Hinüber, “Pali as an Artificial Language,” Indologica Taurinensia 10 (1982): 137.
46 Oskar von Hinüber, “The Oldest Literary Language of Buddhism,” in Selected Papers on Pali Studies (Oxford: 
Pali Text Society, 2005), 194.
47 The Mahāvaṃsa: the great chronicle of Ceylon written in Pāḷi.
48 Wilhelm Geiger, The Mahāvaṃsa or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon, trans. Wilhelm Geiger, assisted by Mabel 
Haynes Bode (London: Pāli Text Society, 1912; repr., Oxford: Pāli Text Society, 1993), 208. The verse reads: “Sabbesaṃ 
mūlabhāsāya māgadhāya niruttiyā.”
49 Wilhelm Geiger, A Pali Grammar, ed. K.R. Norman, trans. Batakrishna Bhosh (Oxford: The Pali Text Society, 
2005), 1-8.
50 Maurice Winternitz, A History of Indian Literature, vol. 2 (Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1933), 7.
51 K.R. Norman, Pali Literature: incl. the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of All the Hinayana Schools 
of Buddhism (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1983), 3. 
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
94
“it, therefore, seems very likely that the Buddha’s sermons were preached in a non-Sanskritic language.”52 
Later, Chowdhury agrees that Pāḷi and Māghadhī share dialectic links with each other.53 
These debates surrounding Pāḷi reveal a variety of perspectives on the language exist among scholars. 
Although the language spoken by the Buddha is not fully known, it is generally accepted that Pāḷi and 
Theravāda Buddhism are inextricably linked due to the role of Pāḷi as the language of early Buddhist scriptures. 
Nihar Ranjan Ray has argued that Pāḷi is the language of Theravāda Buddhism, stating “Those that use Pāḷi, 
in whatever script can safely be said to have belonged to the Theravāda.”54 Accordingly, Pāḷi is regarded 
as a sacred language in all Theravāda traditions and continues to play and extremely important role in 
Theravāda Buddhism today.
ARIMADDANA    THE BAGAN EMPIRE
   Bagan (formerly known as Pagan), was an ancient capital of the first Burmese empire. Bagan is 
situated on the eastern banks of the Irrawaddy River, which transverses Myanmar from north to south.  
The city is located in the central dry zone of Myanmar and the climate has helped preserve historic sites. 
During the zenith of the Bagan Empire, numerous religious monuments including temples, stupas and   
monasteries, were constructed in the city by kings, royal families and citizens. To this day, more than 2000 
temples and pagodas persist as Buddhist pilgrimage sites. The archaeological evidence, artifacts, and stone 
inscriptions attest to the splendor of Bagan and the profound devotion of its inhabitants to Buddhism during 
the 11th to 13th centuries. 
The Burmese chronicles state that the first foundation of Bagan was laid in 107 CE, when the city 
was settled by King Thamoddarit and the inhabitants of nineteen villages in Yunhlutkyun. The city was 
initially named Arimaddanapūra, which translates to “the city that conquers enemies.”55 The Sāsanavaṃsa56 
states that Bagan was part of the Aparanta region.57 According to the Buddha’s prophecy during his journey 
52 K.R. Norman, “Pali and the Language of Early Buddhism,” in Indo-Iranian Languages and Peoples, no. 116, ed. 
Nicholas Sims-Williams (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 137.
53 Chimpamong Chowdhury, “Did the Buddha Speak Pali? An Investigation of the Buddhavacana and Origins of 
Pali,” The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics 2, no. 4 (2009): 52.
54 Nihar Ranjan Ray, Theravāda Buddhism in Burma (Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1946), 71.
55 [Thamoddarit settles near Pagan, 107 AD] When the Kanyans fled, the Pyus fought among themselves and split again 
into three divisions. The Kyabins took over one division, the Theks another. The third made their home in the country of Taung-
nyo. After three years they were attacked by the Talaings and spoiled. And they moved thence and founded the country Padaung 
Thetta and dwelt there. After six years they were attacked and spoiled once more by Kanyans, Thence they moved and built 
Mindon and dwelt there for three years. Therafter Thamoddarit began to build in the country of Yonhlutkyun in the year 29, 
Short Era. In the sixteen years after Mahallaka the Brahmin abolished the old era, the kingdom of Thaerhkhittara perished. 
When the Pyus had fought with the Kanyans and dwelt in Taungnyo, Padaung Thetta and Mindon, in the twenty-ninth year 
Short Era (including the twelve years interregnum) King Thamoddarit began to build a city with the dwellers in nineteen vil-
lages in Yonhlutkyun”: Pe Maung tin & Luce, Glass Palace Chronicle (London, Oxford University Press, 1923), 28. See 
Twin-thin Yazawinthit. vol. 1, (Yangon, Yarpyae Press, 2012), 72.
56 Sāsanavaṃsa refers to the chronicle of Buddhism composed by Ven. Paññāsāmi in 1861.
57 B.C Law, The History of Buddha’ s Religion (Sāsanavaṃsa), (London: Pāḷi Text Society, 1952), 61. Law stated that 
“Aparantaraṭṭha is no other than Sunāparanta of the Burmese, i.e., the region lying west of the upper Irrawaddy.” In the intro-
duction of the Sāsanavaṃsa, he further elaborated, stating “The history of religion in Maramma is nothing more than the his-
95DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
to Aparanta, a king named Samutti would one day establish a town called Arimaddana (Bagan), where  
the Buddha’s teachings would flourish and become firmly established.58 Consistent with the archaeological 
evidence, Duroiselle concluded that “the date of Bagan city wall is about 850, the year of the foundation 
of Pagan.” 59 The two Cham inscriptions from approximately 1050   Phan-rang (Pāṇduraṅga) and  
the Po-Nagar and Lom-ngo pillars, mention the name of Pagan. In the former, the name is written as Pukaṃ, 
and in the latter, it was written as Pukāṃ. In Old Mon, the name is written as Pokam, Pukām and possibly 
Bukām. The earliest mention of Pagan appears in 1093. In Old Burmese (earliest mention in 1196),  
the name is written as Pukaṁ or Pukam.60 In the book “The Indianized States of Southeast Asia,” Cœdès 
stated the following: “Anoratha, who became king in 1044, increased the territory of the kingdom of Pagan, 
which at the beginning was still small. In internal affairs, his two most remarkable achievements were  
the creation of a system of irrigation east of his capital, in the rice plain of Kyakse, which became the granary 
of northern Burma, and the conversion of the country to Theravāda Buddhism.”61 Following the reign of 
King Anuruddha, the Bagan dynasty underwent a succession of rulers, with the Mongol invasion and 
gradual fragmentation of the empire eventually leading to the reign of last king, Saw Mon Nit, in 1368.62            
BUDDHISM IN THE BAGAN ERA
The Burmese chronicles specifically the Sāsanālankāra, the Sāsanavaṃsa, and the Vaṃsadīpanī, 
all attest to the enduring presence of Buddhi sm in Myanmar during the life time of the Buddha. Law  
corroborated this, stating   “In our Maramma63 country, they say, the religion stood firm from a time when 
there still remained more than twenty years after the Blessed One’s life-time.”64 Buddhism flourished in 
Myanmar during the Pyu era (200 BCE – 900 CE),65 a period that followed the demise of the Buddha by  
a century, as recorded in the chronicles.66 This assertion is further supported by George Cœdes’ description 
of presence of diverse Buddhist practices in Pyu:
tory of the Buddhist saṃgha in Sunāparanta and Tambadīpa, which includes the districts of Pugan, Ava, Pinya, Myenzain and 
also the upper portion of the Thayet district on the bank of the river Irrawaddy.” 
58 B.C Law, The History of Buddha’ s Religion (Sāsanavaṃsa), (London: Pāḷi Text Society, 1952), 61.
59 Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India, 1921–22 (Delhi: Manager of Publications, 1923), 136.
60 G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 8.
61 Georges Cœdès, The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, trans. Susan Brown Cowing (Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press, 1968), 149.
62 See the appendix for a detailed chronology of the Bagan kings.
63 Maramma is an early term for Myanmar, as referenced in the Sāsanavaṃsa.
64 B.C Law, The History of Buddha’ s Religion (Sāsanavaṃsa), (London: Pāḷi Text Society, 1952), 61.
65 Michael Aung-Thwin and Maitrii Aung-Thwin, A History of Myanmar Since Ancient Times: Traditions and Trans-
formations (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2012), 63.
66 The Sāsanavaṃsa states that Buddhism was established in the Pyu kingdom during the reign of King Dvattabaung; 
see The Sāsanavaṃsa, trans. Bimala Churn Law (London: PTS, 1952), 59.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
96
   “Theravāda Buddhism, witnessed at Prome 67 before the seventh century in the  
     fragments of the Pāḷi canon previously mentioned, was either supplanted or at  
    least relegated to second place by a school with the Sanskrit canon perhaps  
   the Mūlasarvāstivāda,68 whose predominance in Father India I-ching69 has affirmed.  
    But farther north, at Pagan, it seems that Mahāyana Buddhism was already firmly  
    established and had assumed, under the influence of Bengal, an aspect that is  
    sometimes said to be Tantric.”70 
 Cœdes states that Mahāyāna Buddhism was already established in Bagan prior to the flourishing 
of Theravāda Buddhism. Conversely, the chronicles recount a legend in which King Anuruddha became a 
Buddhist after his first encounter with Shin Arahan.71 The extant evidence can verify that Buddhism was 
established in Bagan prior to this event, and that the prevailing beliefs were influenced by animism. Luce’s 
account illuminates this point, stating   “At Pagan itself, Buddhism first shows itself in the Bu-paya, a small 
bulbous stupa on the river bank, possibly inherited from the pre-Burmese inhabitants, Pyu refugees from 
Śrikṣetra. By 1000 AD Caw Rahan had built a chapter-house on Mt. Turuin and Aniruddha’s father, Kyaung 
Phyu, a monastery at Myinkaba village in Bagan. But Nat72 worship and Nāga73 worship were still more 
prevalent than Buddhism.”74 Furthermore, the practices of the Ari75 sect are mentioned in large scale in the 
chronicles. Nevertheless, Than Tun explains that the veracity of these practices remains uncertain and 
requires further evidence.76 He also asserts that Buddhism during that era was similar to the present day, 
though it showed a more pronounced Brahmanical influence. Additionally, Than Tun notes the presence 
of the Bhikkhuni order which indicates the existence of female ascetics during that period.77 
67 ‘Prome’ was the name for the city in Myanmar during the colonial period that is known as ‘Pyay’ in the modern-day. 
68 Mūlasarvāstivāda  is a sect of early Buddhism and is a branch of the Sarvāstivāda tradition.
69 A Chinese Buddhist monk (635-713) who translate Buddhist texts from Sanskrit and Pāḷi into Chinese language.  
70 Georges Cœdès, The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, trans. Susan Brown Cowing (Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press, 1968), 87.
71 A Buddhist monk who came from Thaton, the capital of Mon kingdom. See The Glass Palace Chronicle of the 
Kings of Burma, trans. Pe Maung Tin and G.H. Luce (London, Oxford University Press, 1923), 71-75.
72 A term for spirit in Burmese language.
73 A serpent or Nāga demon, playing a prominent part of Buddhist fairy tales, Rhys Davids, PED (London, PTS, 
1925), 349.
74 G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 13.
75 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” Journal of Burmese Research Society 61 (1-2) 
(1978): iv. “The Ari sect was a religious order before the flourishing of Theravāda Buddhism in Bagan and was suppressed by 
King Anuruddha in the 11th century.” 
76 Than Tun, Essays on the History and Buddhism of Burma, ed. Paul Strachan (Edinburgh: Kiscadale Publications, 
1988), 42.
77 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000–1300,” Journal of the Burma Research Society 61, no. 1–2 
(1978): iv-v.
97DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
As stated by the chronicles, the arrival of Pāḷipiṭaka in Bagan occurred after the conquest of Thaton, 
the capital of Mon kingdom, by King Anuruddha in 1057.78 This episode of battle is meticulously detailed, 
demonstrating the introduction of pure Theravāda Buddhism to Bagan and Upper Burma.79 However, there 
is an absence of contemporary evidence to support this event. The reliability of the information concerning 
the conquest of 1057, as stated in various chronicles is questionable. It is more plausible that Buddhism 
was already introduced to Upper Burma before the 11 th century.80 G.H. Luce also refuted the dramatic  
episode depicted in Burmese chronicles, highlighting the flaws in these texts as follows: 
 “Already these accounts cancel themselves out: Aniruddha goes seeking the Tipitaka    now  
   at Thaton now at the Khmer capital Angkor. He receives an insolent refusal now at Thaton,  
   now at Angkor. Kyanzittha the General in one case, Aniruddha the King in the other, per 
   forms feats of gymnastics ‘piercing the Cambojans’ (krwan; thui); the scene is now Pegu,  
   now Angkor. Each has magic horses that can fly so fast as to give the impression of an army.  
   Each cows his rival with the spectre of streaks of betel blood: but in once case it is the Khmer  
   monarch, in the other that of Nanchao. Hero, scene and villain are alike lost   folktale and  
   history sub-merged in the myth.”81 
Though Theravāda Buddhism was developing in Bagan since the 11th century, it was still a mixture 
of Nat and Nāga worship and Vaiṣṇava Hinduism blended with Buddhism. Than Tun states, “The people 
not only believed deeply in the religion but practiced it according to their own lights. They believed then, 
as at present that religion shall last for five millennium and that they were to support it to their utmost 
capacity, hence a great deal of dedications to the religion.”82 Therefore, during this period, religious practice 
in Bagan was characterized by a flexibility that did not rigidly confine individuals to a single faith. 
PĀḶI LITERATURE IN THE BAGAN ERA 
 On the subject of Theravāda Buddhism in Burma, Nihar Ranjan Ray highlights the proliferation of 
stupas and temples adorned with Pāli inscriptions during the Bagan period as compelling evidence of  
the firm establishment of Pāli Buddhism.83 According to K.R. Norman, “Pāḷi literature means everything 
that is written in Pāḷi,”84 thus even the writing of a name or a title in Pāḷi can be considered Pāḷi literature. 
From the 12th century onward, Pāḷi monolingual and Pāḷi-Burmese bilingual inscriptions are frequently 
78 The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma, trans. Pe Maung Tin and G.H. Luce (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1923), 71–72; see also Michael A. Aung-Thwin, The Mists of Rāmañña: The Legend that was Lower Burma (Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press, 2005), 124–126.
79 Ibid., 77-80.
80 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” Journal of Burmese Research Society 61 (1-2) 
(1978): 50-51.
81 G.H. Luce, “Mons of the Pagan dynasty,” Journal of Burmese Research Society 36 (1950): 9.  
82 Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” Journal of Burmese Research Society 61 (1-2) 
(1978): 62.
83 Nihar Ranjan Ray, Theravāda Buddhism in Burma (Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1946), 188.
84 K.R. Norman, Pali Literature: Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of All the Hinayana Schools 
of Buddhism (Wiesbaden, Otto Harrassowitz, 1983), ix.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
98
found in Bagan. In addition to stone and ink inscriptions written in Pāḷi, skillful works on Pāḷī grammar 
and Abhidhamma treatises were also produced in ancient Bagan. The earliest known Pāḷi inscription from 
the Bagan era, the Rājakumar four-faced pillar, was engraved in 1113. 
In analyzing the Pāḷi culture of the Bagan era, one notable point is the frequent appearance of 
Pāḷi invocations at the beginning of many inscriptions. These include: “namo tassa bhagavato arahato 
sammāsambuddhassa; namo tassa’ti; namo ratanattaya; namo buddhāya; namo sabbaññāya; namo 
sabbabuddhānaṃ; namāmi rattanattiyaṃ.” In some cases, Pāḷi phrases are written in the middle of 
inscriptions such as “yeme puññannumodanti...kadāci pi”. Additionally, some inscriptions conclude with 
Pāḷi verses, such as “nibbana paccayoti.” Another significant feature observed in Bagan inscriptions is  
the use of Pāḷinissaya,85 a method of translating Pāḷi into Burmese on a word-by-word basis which reflects 
the level of Pāḷi proficiency among the people of Bagan. 
Through analysis of Pāḷi invocations, it seems clear that the people of Bagan were eager to use  
the Pāḷi language in their donative records. This use of Pāḷi may relate to a desire to show respect to  
the Buddha and Triples Gems through inclusion of Pāḷi invocations at the beginning of inscriptions. Though 
the donors did not inscribe their donative records entirely in Pāḷi language, they started inscriptions with 
Pāḷi invocations to show veneration in a manner consistent with established religious ritual. According to 
Peter Skilling, “the use of that language (Pāḷi) in the inscriptions is a strong indication of Theravādin activity 
in the region”86 Indeed, writing Pāḷi invocations at the beginning of inscriptions or a Buddhist treatise 
became an established tradition in Myanmar that was passed down from the time of ancient Bagan.               
Among the Pāḷi invocations, ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ is the most 
popular from the Bagan era to the present day. It appears at the beginning of the inscriptions, manuscripts 
and Buddhist books to pay respect to the Buddha. Evidence indicates that the Matimā Mathegyi inscription 
(1105) is the earliest bilingual inscription starting with ‘namo tassa ….’. Afterward, the ‘namo tassa ….’ 
invocation was inscribed at the beginning of many inscriptions. According to the excavated inscriptions, 
there are thirty three inscriptions starting with ‘namo tassa ….’ dating before the fall of Bagan in the mid 
-14th century. Similarly, the ‘namo tassa’ti’ invocation, which serves as a short form of ‘namo tassa bhagavato 
arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ is an important invocation from this era. Twenty seven inscriptions are 
found with ‘namo tassa’ti’ invocation at the beginning of the passage. Therefore, ‘namo tassa’ti’ is recognized 
as the second most written invocation. The earliest ‘namo tassa’ti’ invocation is found in the Hle-Htauk-
Phayar inscription dating from 1084 under the reign of King Kyanzittha. Other Pāḷi invocations occasionally 
appear at the first line of inscription which further suggests that inscribing Pāḷi invocations was not only 
for the veneration of the Triple Gems (Buddha, Dhamma and Saṅgha) but also makes evident the perception 
of Pāḷi as a sacred language among the people of the Bagan dynasty.   
  
85 The Shwe-twin Aung Pagoda inscription (1200) and A-Caw-Latt Couple inscription (1261). See figure 3.
86 Peter Skilling, “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland Southeast Asia.” Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 20, no. 1 (1997): 97.
99DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
A subset of Pāḷi monolingual inscriptions87composed solely in Pāḷi is attested during the Bagan era, 
reflecting the prominence of Pāḷi for the religious purpose. Furthermore, forty-five bilingual stone inscriptions, 
with both Pāḷī and Burmese, that date from the late 11 th century to the mid of 14 th century have been 
unearthed. Apart from Pāḷi invocations, Pāḷi verses excerpted from the canonical texts and commentaries, 
Pāḷi verses composed by ancient Buddhist scholars, attributes of donors such as those alluding to kings and 
the royal family, and donative objects in Pāḷi were inscribed together with Burmese language in these 
bilingual inscriptions. To some extent, the Burmese verses found in bilingual inscriptions are not identical 
in meaning to their Pāḷi versions; however, in some cases, these Pāḷi and Burmese inscriptions are more 
similar in meaning. Generally, royal families, royal officials and wealthy men were the main donors of 
religious buildings and they sponsored donative inscriptions. 88 This evidence suggests that Pāḷi was  
particularly important as a classical language that appealed to the elites. Pāḷi inscriptions indicate the higher 
level of education of this group. Knowledge of Pāḷi was a source of pride for elites. The use of Pāḷi is  
particularly associated with Buddhist invocations. Whether it be for prestige or a sense of the sacred, Pāḷi 
emerged as an important language and source of inscriptions in Bagan. 
Moreover, inscriptions composed in Pāḷi were not the only discovered use of the language in 
Bagan. Scholarly works on Pāḷī grammar and Abhidhamma treatises also serve as evidence for accessing 
the development of Pāḷi tradition during the Bagan era. The earliest Pāḷi grammar treatise entitled  
the Kārikā.89was composed by Dhammasenāpati, 90 during the reign of Kyanzittha in 1064 CE. Another 
important and well-known treatise written in Pāḷi is the Saddaniti composed by Venerable Aggavaṃsa.91 
This work is regarded as the third major text on Pāḷi grammar.92 Additionally, many grammatical works,93 
87 The Rājakumar inscription (1113), the Shwegugyi inscription (1131), the Mahādānapati inscription (1231),  
the Sima inscription (1341), and the Tikekyi-gone inscription (date is undecipherable).
88  Arlo Griffiths and Charlotte Lammert, “Epigraphy: Southeast Asia”, Brill Encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol.2 
(Leiden: Brill, 2022), 986. Griffiths and Lammert state: “They may be classified as citation inscriptions, caption inscriptions, 
or donative inscriptions.”
89 Mabel Haynes Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1909), 34. Bode describes the 
Kārikā as the modest little metrical treatise. 
90 The exact status of “Dhammasenapati” to monkhood remains uncertain. Despite residing in a monastery, it cannot 
be definitively concluded whether he was a monk or a layman. “Dhammasenapati”is designated as an ācariya (teacher) in the 
Gandhavaṃsa: Bimalendra Kumar, Gandhavaṃsa (Delhi: Eastern Book Linker, 1992), 63, 73. However, Forchhammer referes 
to “Dhammasenapati” as a Burmese nobleman of Bagan: see M.Bode, The Pāḷi Literature in Burma (London: The Royal Asiatic 
Society, 1909), 16. 
91 Mabel Haynes Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma (London: The Royal Asiatic Society, 1909), 15–16.
 92 The Kaccāyana, the Moggallāna and the Saddanīti are three main principal works in Pāḷi grammar.
 93 The Mukhamattadīpanī, the Saṃbeṅ ṭīkā, the Mukhamattasāra, the Mukhamattasāraṭīkā, the Saddabindu,  
the Saddabinduṭīkā, the Sambandhacintāṭīkā, the Saddatthabhedacintā, the Suttaniddesa, the Kaccāyanasāra,  
the Kaccāyanasāraṭīkā, the Bālāvatara, the Bālāvataraṭīkā,  the Vāccavācaka, the Saddavutti, the Saddavuttiṭīkā, the Ganthaṭṭhi, 
the Padacintā, the Cadyatthadīpanī , the Saddā–kyanmwe , the Saddā- kyan-nat , the Sambandhamalinī ,  
the Akkharasammohachedanī, the Akkharakosalla, the Akkharakosallatīkā. See ‘The Piṭakat-taw-thamaing  (Yangon: Ministry 
of Religious Affairs, 2000), 183-189.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
100
Vinaya commentaries and sub commentaries,94 other expositions95 and prosody treatises were written in 
Pāḷi during this period.96 
Figure 3. The Shwe-Twin-Aung inscription beginning with “namo tassa bhagavato arahato 
sammāsambuddhassa,” and Pāḷinissaya, Amyint Township, Myanmar.  
Photograph by the author, August 11, 2020.
Pāḷi Literacy in the Bagan Era
After the era of King Anuruddha, Theravāda Buddhism experienced a period of widespread  
dissemination, potentially prompting the people of the Bagan era, especially those of higher social status, 
to pursue learning Pāḷi. Luce assumes that Prince Rājakumār, who established the four-faced pillar  
inscriptions, was a remarkable Pāḷi scholar, and recognized as a genuine Tipiṭakadhara.97, 98 Moreover, 
Luce also states that the high civil officials in the Bagan period also admired the use of Pāḷi, observing that 
94 The Vinayaguḷhatthadīpanī,  the Nāmacāradīpaka, the Sīmālaṅkāraṭīkā, the Saṅkhepavaṇṇanāṭīkā, and the 
Nāmacāradīpakaṭīkā, the Paramatthabindhu, and its commentary, the Paramatthabindhuṭīkā. See ‘The Piṭakat-taw-
thamaing  (Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2000),  164-171.
95 The Mahābodhivaṅ-ṭīkā, the Tathāgatuppatti,  the Buddhosuppatti and the Arahattamaggavaṇṇanā, the 
Lokappattipakāsanī. See ‘The Piṭakat-taw-thamaing  (Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2000), 174 -178.
96 The Vuttodayatīkā by Navavimalabuddhi, the Chandosāratthavikāsanī by Saddhammañāṇa, and the 
Vacanatthajotika-tīkā. See ‘The Piṭakat-taw-thamaing  (Yangon: Ministry of Religious Affairs, 2000), 191.
97 Tipiṭakadhara is one who memorizes the Tipiṭaka: the three baskets of knowledge of Pāḷi canon. See TP PMD, vol. 
9, 498. 
98 G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 76.

101DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
many officials wrote in Pāḷi sentences on their votive tablets.99 Than Tun notes that not only princes and 
high-ranking officials of Bagan, but also the king himself could be considered as educated in Pāḷi literature. 
He further states, “The most interesting record of Cañsu I is a Pāḷi inscription of two faces…the inscription 
is Pāḷi verse of great poetical merit.”100 Professor Pe Maung Tin also acknowledged and commends the Pāḷi 
composition of the Shwegugyi inscription, stating    “It is such good Pāḷi. Some verses of the prayer remind 
us of the canonical Metta Sutta, or the Discourse on Love.”101 Despite the development of Pāḷi literature, 
monolingual inscriptions written solely in Pāḷi remained relatively scarce throughout the Bagan dynasty 
for more than two centuries. The Shwegugyi inscription serves as a testament to the high standard of Pāḷi 
ability in the Bagan era. However, this evidence is insufficient to conclude that most people in that period 
possessed the ability to read and write Pāḷi. These inscriptions were primarily commissioned by royalty 
and are associated with the societal elite. Extant inscriptions suggest that Pāḷi studies may have played  
a crucial role among the clergy, royal family and at administrative levels but were much less significant for 
the grassroots population. Than Tun states, “As the use of the native tongue became popular, it seems that 
everybody who could afford a dedication would think his work of merit incomplete unless he recorded it 
on an inscription.”102 The inscription can be considered an integral part of religious structures during  
the Bagan period. From the reign of Cañsū II (1174   1211) to the early 1300s, approximately fifty inscriptions, 
both Pāḷi monolingual and Pāḷi-Burmese bilingual, have been discovered. Many of these inscriptions begin 
with an invocation in Pāḷi. Overall, a significant corpus of Pāḷi scholarly works, comprising grammar books, 
commentaries, and sub-commentaries, was produced during the Bagan era.
On the development of Pāḷi in Myanmar during the twelfth century and later, Luce states: 
“The period 1113 to 1174 AD was a nimble and an eager age of transition. This is seen most  
  obviously in language. Aniruddha had written in Sanskrit or Pāḷi   in Sanskrit, perhaps, for  
  dignity, in Pāḷi for ease. Saw Lu wrote Pāḷi and (perhaps) Mon; Kyansittha almost always  
  in Mon. His son, Rājakumār, in 1113 CE wrote in four languages: Pāḷi, Pyu, Mon, Burmese  
  but normally in Mon. The grandson Cañsū I, wrote in Pāḷi, with dates and epilogue in  
  Sanskrit, and once (at least) in Mon. In his reign and his successor’s, Burmese inscriptions  
  begin to appear; some undated ones may well go back to Kyanzittha’s reign, over even  
  earlier. From Cañsū II onwards Burmese triumphs. Pyu practically disappears. Mon almost  
  disappears from Pagan at any rate. Sanskrit is confined to a few scholars; and Pāḷi mostly  
  to monks”103 
99  G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 99.
100 Than Tun, History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000-1300, Journal of Burmese Research Society 61 (1-2) 
(1978), 11.
101 Pe Maung Tin, “The Shwegu Pagoda Inscription,” Journal of the Burma Research Society 10, no. 2 (1920): 67.
102 Than Tun, History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000-1300, Journal of Burmese Research Society 61 (1-2) 
(1978), 18.
103 G.H. Luce, Old Burma, Early Pagan, vol. 1 (New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969), 96.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
102
 This linguistic progression reflects a cultural shift during the Bagan period. As Burmese became 
the dominant language from the reign of King Cañsū II onward, other languages such as Pyu and Mon 
gradually declined in epigraphic usage. Nevertheless, Pāḷi continued to be used in inscriptions particularly 
in religious contexts as evidenced by inscriptions discovered up to the mid-14th century. 
 
CONCLUSION
In Theravāda Buddhist countries, particularly in mainland Southeast Asia, Pāḷi is regarded as  
a sacred language mainly used in Buddhist activities. It is hard to imagine Theravāda Buddhism without 
Pāḷi, as the religion and language are intrinsically linked. According to tradition, the Pāḷi Tipiṭaka was  
introduced to the Bagan kingdom after King Anuruddha’s conquest of Thaton, the capital of the Mon  
kingdom. Based on epigraphic evidence, as Theravāda Buddhism flourished, Pali also became prominent 
in Bagan. Unlike the present day, Paḷi was employed to record donations and other affairs in Bagan, mostly 
for religious purposes. Pāḷi monolingual inscriptions and Pāḷi-Burmese bilingual inscriptions reveal that 
Pāḷi served as a sacred language for religious purposes among the royal elites, learned monks, and in certain 
scholarly circles. Proficiency in Pāḷi was considered a marker of prestige and was closely associated with 
education and high social status in ancient Bagan. Furthermore, the presence of a substantial corpus of Pāḷi 
grammatical treatises and other literary works serves as strong evidence that many Buddhist monks in 
Bagan were not only devoted to learning Pāḷi but also enthusiastic about contributing to the Pāḷi tradition. 
This phenomenon contributed to a Pāḷi cultural shift, which was concomitant with the flourishing of 
Theravāda Buddhism among the Bagan societal elite. These developments demonstrate that Pali functioned 
as a language of religious scriptures and also as a powerful tool for shaping the intellectual milieu during 
the Bagan era. Significantly, Pāḷi invocations such as ‘namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
that continue to place at the beginning of Buddhist scriptures today, suggests a continuity of Pāḷi culture 
from the Bagan era into contemporary Myanmar. The evidence related to the emergent Pali culture of the 
Bagan era is primarily connected to the monastic community but has also had a lasting impact on lay  
followers of Theravāda Buddhism down to the modern age. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ASI Annual Report, Archaeological Survey of India
B I & II The Inscriptions copied from stones collected by King Bodawpaya and placed near 
Arakan Pagoda, 1897
BBHC Bulletin of the Burma Historical Commission
CPED Concise Pāḷi-English Dictionary
GPC The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma
IB Inscription of Burma (Portfolios)
JBS Journal of Buddhist Studies 
JBRS Journal of the Burma Research Society
JIABS Journal of International Association of Buddhist Studies
List  A List of Inscriptions found in Burma, 1921
103DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
MW A Sanskrit-English Dictionary. 1986. Monier Williams, Monier Willams, 
 Tokyo: Meicho-fukyukai. (First printed. 1899. Oxford: Clarendon Press) 
P  Pāḷi
PED The Pāḷī Text Society’ s Pāḷi-English Dictionary. 1921-1925.
 T.W. Rhys Davids and Willam Stede. London: PTS.
PPA   The Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya, Ava
Pṭkt Piṭakat-taw-thamaing (The History of Piṭaka)
PTS Pāḷi Text Society   
Sdn The Saddanīti
SN Samyutta Nikāya
TP PMD Tipiṭaka Pāḷi-Myanmar Dictionary
UB I & II Inscriptions collected in Upper Burma
UNM U Nyein Maung, Rheh Hoṅh Mranmā Krokcā mrah (The Ancient Burmese Inscriptions)
UHS PMD U Hoke Sein Pāḷī-Myanmar Dictionary
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary Sources
Bischoff, R. Buddhism in Myanmar: A Short History. 1995.
Bode, Mabel Haynes. The Pali Literature of Burma. London: The Royal Asiatic Society, 1909.
Boke, U. Pugam Sutesana Lamnhwan (Guide to Researches on Pagan). Yangon: Sarpay Beikman, 1981.
Childers, Robert Caesar. A Dictionary of the Pāḷi Language. London: Trübner & Co., 1875.
Cone, Margaret. A Dictionary of Pali. Bristol: Pali Text Society, 2010.
Davids, T. W. Rhys. Pali-English Dictionary. London: Pali Text Society, 1925.
Duroiselle, Charles. A List of Inscriptions Found in Burma. Rangoon: Superintendent, Government  
  Printing, 1921.
______, ed. Original Inscriptions Collected by King Bodawpaya in Upper Burma. Rangoon:  
 Government Printing, 1913.
Geiger, Wilhelm. Pali Literature and Language. Translated by Batakrishna Ghosh. New Delhi: Oriental  
  Book Agency, 1968.
The Mahāvaṃsa or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon. Translated by Wilhelm Geiger, assisted by Mabel 
Haynes Bode. London: Pāli Text Society, 1912. Reprint, Oxford: Pāli Text Society, 1993.
Gombrich, Richard. Buddhism and Pali. Oxford: Mud Pie Books, 2018.
Harvey, G. E. History of Burma: From the Earliest Times to 10 March 1824. London: Frank Cass & Co.,  
 Ltd., 1925.
Hazra, Kanai Lal. Buddhism and Pali Literature. Delhi: Buddhist World Press, 2011.
Hinüber, Oskar von. A Handbook of Pali Literature. New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
104
Ko, Taw Sein. Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava, Deciphered from the Ink Impressions Found among  
  the Papers of the Late Dr. E. Forchhammer. Rangoon: Superintendent, Government Printing,  
  1892.
Kumara, Ashin. History of Pali Literature (Pāḷi Cape Thaming). Yangon: Belief Publishing, 2010. 
Law, Bimala Churn. A History of Pali Literature. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., Ltd.,  
  1933.
______. The History of the Buddha’ s Religion (Sāsanavaṃsa). London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner &  
  Co., Ltd., 1933.
Luce, G. H., and Pe Maung Tin. Inscriptions of Burma. Rangoon: Rangoon University Press, 1933– 
  1956.
Mahāthera, A. P. Buddhadatta. Concise Pali-English Dictionary. University of Ceylon, 1958.
Maung, Nyein. Rheh Hoṅh Mranmā Krokcā Mrah (The Ancient Burmese Inscriptions). V ol. I. Yangon:  
  Department of Archaeology, 1972.
______. Rheh Hoṅh Mranmā Krokcā Mrah (The Ancient Burmese Inscriptions). V ol. II. Yangon:  
  Department of Archaeology, 1982.
______. Rheh Hoṅh Mranmā Krokcā Mrah (The Ancient Burmese Inscriptions). V ol. III. Yangon:  
  Department of Archaeology, 1983.
______. Rheh Hoṅh Mranmā Krokcā Mrah (The Ancient Burmese Inscriptions). V ol. IV . Yangon:  
  Department of Archaeology, 1983.
Mya, U. Rhe:hoṅ: Utkhwak Ruppvā: Chan:tutau Mya: (Votive Tablets of Burma). 2 vols. Yangon:  
  Department of Archaeology, 1961.
Nyein, Tun. Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava: Translation with Notes. Rangoon: Superintendent,  
  Government Printing, 1899.
Nyo, U Tun. Twin Thin Myanmar Yazawinthit. V ol. I. Yangon: Yar Pyae Publishing House, 2012.
Nyunt, Maung Maung. New History of Pali and Piṭaka in Myanmar. Yangon, 2003.
Oldenberg, Hermann, trans. Dipavaṃsa: An Ancient Buddhist Historical Record. London: Williams and  
  Norgate, 1879.
______, trans. The Vinaya Piṭaka: The Sacred Books of the Buddhists.. V ol. I. London: Williams and  
  Norgate, 1879.
Sein, Hoke. Padattha Mañjūsā Pali-Myanmar Dictionary. Yangon: Chanthar Press, 1999.
Tin, Pe Maung, and G. H. Luce, trans. The Glass Palace Chronicle of Burma. London: Oxford University  
  Press, 1923.
Tipiṭaka Pali-Myanmar Dictionary. Yangon: Department of Religious Affairs, 1967.
Tun, Than. “History of Buddhism in Burma, A.D. 1000–1300.” Journal of the Burma Research Society  
  61(1978): 1–256.
Winternitz, Maurice. A History of Indian Literature. V ol. II. Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1933.
Zartartawpon Yazawin. Yangon: Department of Ancient Literature and Culture, 1960.
105DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
Zeyathu, Maha Thiri. Piṭakat-taw-thamaing (The History of the Piṭaka). 3rd ed. Yangon: Ministry of  
  Religious Affairs, 2000.
.Secondary Sources
Annual report of the Archaeological Survey of India. Delhi: Manager of Publications, 1902-1936.
Archaelogical Survey of Burma. Epigraphia Birmanica, Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Burma,  
  vol. 3, part 2. Rangoon: Government Printing, 1928.
Blagden, C. O., and J. F. Fleet. “The Revised Buddhist Era in Burma.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic  
  Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1910): 474–481.
Chowdhury, Chimpamong. “Did the Buddha speak Pali? An Investigation of the Buddha-Vacana and  
  Origins of Pali.” The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics 2, no. 4 (2009): 43-57.
Clough, Benjamin. A Compendious Pali Grammar with a Copious Vocabulary in the Same Language.  
  Colombo: Wesleyan Mission Press, 1824.
Cœdès, Georges. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Translated by Susan Brown Cowing. Honolulu:  
  University of Hawaii Press, 1968.
Collins, Steven. “What is literature in Pali?” In Literary Cultures in History: Reconstruction from South  
  Asia, edited by Sheldon Pollock, 649-688. Berkerley: University of Califonia Press, 2003, 
Cunningham, Alexander. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. V ol. 1. Calcutta: Survey of India, 1877.
Duroiselle, Charles, and Taw Sein Ko, eds. Epigraphia Birmanica. V ol. 1. Rangoon: Superintendent,  
  Government Printing, 1919; reprint, 1972.
Geiger, Wilhelm. A Pali Grammar. Edited by K.R Norman. Translated by Batakrishna Bhosh. Oxford:  
  Pali Text Society, 2005.
Hinuber, Oskar V on. “Pali as an Artificial Language.” Indologica Tourinensia 10 (Klein Schriften),  
  1982: 133  140.
______. “The Oldest Literary Language of Buddhism.” In Selected Papaers on Pali Studies (Pali Text  
  Society), 2005: 177  194. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 2005
Hudson, Bob. “A Thousand Years before Bagan: radiocarbondates and Myanmar’s ancient Pyu  
  cities(In).” In Bagan and the World: Early Myanmar and its Global Connections, edited by J.N. 
Miksic and M. Aung Thwin G.Y . Goh, 88  121. Singapore: ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, 2018.
Hudson, Bob, Nyein Lwin, and Win Maung (Tanpawady). “The Origins of Bagan: New Dates and Old  
  Inhabitants.” Asian Perspectives 40, no. 1 (2001): 48–74.
Kahrs, E.G. “Exploring the Saddaniti.” Journal of Pali Text Society 17 (1992): 1-212. 
La Loubère, Simon de. A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam, Envoy extraordinary from the  
  French King, to the King of Siam, in the year 1687-1688. London: Printed by F.L. for Tho. Home,  
  Francis Saunders, and Tho. Bennet, 1693.
Lammerts, D. Christian, and Arlo Griffiths. “Epigraphy: Southeast Asia.” In Encyclopedia of Buddhism,  
  edited by Robert E. Buswell Jr., 988-1009. New York: Macmillan Reference USA, 2015.
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
106
Lamotte, Étinenne. History of Indian Buddhism from the origin to the Saka Era. Translated by Sara  
  Webb-Boin. Paris: Peter Press, 1988.
Legge, James. A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms: Being an Account by the Chinese Monk Fa-Hien of His  
  Travels in India and Ceylon (A.D.399-414) in Search of the Buddhist Books of Descipline.  
  Reprint. New York: Dover Publication, 1965.
Levman, Bryan Geoffery. Linguistic Ambiguities, the Transmission Process, and the Earliest Recover 
  able Language of Buddhism.PhD diss., University of Toronto, 2014.
______. “The Language of Early Buddhism.” Journal of South Asian Languages and Linguistics 3, no. 1  
  (2016): 1-14.
Luce, G.H. “Mons of the Pagan Dynasty.” Journal of Burmese Research Society XXXVI, 1-20.
______. Old Burma, Early Pagan. 3 vols. New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher, 1969-1970.
———. Phrases of Pre-Pagan Burma. 2 vols. London: Oxford Univesity Press, 1985.
Luce, G.H., and Pe Maung Tin. “The Shwegugyi Pagoda Inscription, Pagan, 1141 AD.” Journal of the  
  Burma Research Society 10.2 (1920): 377-384.
______. “The Shwegugyi Pāḷi Inscription, Bagan.” Bulletin of the Burma Historical Commission 1  
  (1960): 1-28.
Lwin, Tin. “The Introduction of Rajakumar Inscription .” Takkatho Paññāpadethar Journal 1, no 1,  
  (March 1966).
______. “The Saddaniti.” In In Hounours of Mingun Sayadaw’ s 80th Birthday, 117-126. Yangon:  
 Tipitaka Nikaya Ministratives Organization, 1991. 
Muller, Edward. A Simplified Grammar of the Pali Language. London: Trubner & Co., Ludgate Hill,  
  1884.
Norman, K.R. “Pali and the Language of the Heretics.” Acta Orientalia 37 (1976): 117–127.
______. Pali Literature: Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of All the Hinayana 
Schools of Buddhism. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1983.
______. “Pali and the Language of Early Buddhism.” In Indo-Iranian Languages and Peoples, edited by  
  Nicholas Sims-Williams, 135–150. Proceedings of the British Academy, no. 116. Oxford: Oxford  
  University Press, 2002.
Ray, Nihar Ranjan. Theravāda Buddhism in Burma. Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1946.
Ruiz-Falques, Aleix. “The Role of Pali Grammar in Burmese Buddhism.” Journal of Buddhist Studies  
  21 (2017): 1-96.
Sayadaw, Mede. Vamsa Dipani. Yangon: Hantharwady Press, 1966.
Skilling, Peter. “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland Southeast Asia.” Journal of the  
  International Association of Buddhist Studies 20 (1997): 93–107.
Smith, Helmer. Saddanīti. La Grammaire Palie d’Aggavaṃsa. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1928; reprint,  
  2001.
Solomon, Richard. Indian Epigraphy, A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the  
107DEVELOPMENT OF PĀḶI BASED ON EPIGRAPHICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BAGAN ERA  
 other Indo-Aryan Languages. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt.Ltd., 1998.
Strachan, Paul. Imperial Pagan: Art and Architecure of Burma. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press,  
  1989.
Thaw, Aung. Historical Sites in Burma. Rangoon: Ministry of Union Culture, 1972.
______. Report on the excavation at Beikthano Revolutionary Government of the Union of Burma.  
  Rangoon: Ministry of Union Culture, 1968.
Thera, Aggavamsa. Saddaniti Padamala. Yangon: Department of Religious Affairs, 1964.
Thwin, Michael Aung. Pagan: the Origins of Modern Burma. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press,  
  1985.
______.  The Mists of Rāmañña: The Legend that was Lower Burma. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i  
  Press, 2005.
Thwin, Michael Aung, and Maitrii Aung Thwin. A History of Myanmar Since Ancient Times: Traditions  
  and Transformations. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2012.
Tun, Than. A New Vision on Myanmar History. 2nd ed. Yangon: Seikku Cho Cho Publishing, 2000.
______. Essays on the History and Buddhism of Burma. Edited by Paul Strachan. Edinburgh: Kiscadale  
  Publications, 1988.
______. Khet-hon: Mranma Rajawan (History of Old Myanmar). Yangon: Mahadagon Press, 1969.
______. “Religion in Burma, AD, 1000  1300.” Journal of the Burma Research Society 42, no. 2 (1959):  
  48  69.
______. The Political History of Bagan. Yangon, 2015.
Tun, Win Than. Myanmar Buddhism of The Bagan Period. Singapore: PhD diss., National University of  
  Singapore, 2002.
Win, Sein. The Corpus of Pyu Epigraphy. V ol. 1. Yangon: Department of Archaeology, 2016.
        
 JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST STUDIES,  VOL.16  NO. 1 (JANUARY-JUNE, 2025) 88 - 108
108
APPENDIX
Table 1: Kings of Bagan (1044   1368 CE)
No Name Referred to  
Dr. Than Tun
Referred to 
Zartardawpon
Referred to GPC Referred to 
Twin Thin
1. Aniruddha ?1044    ?1077 1044  1077 1017   1059 1017   1059
2. Maṅ Lulaṅ ?1077 – 1084 1077  1084 1059   1064 1059 – 1064
3. Thiluiṅ Maṅ 1084 – 1113* 1084  1111 1064 – 1092 1064 – 1093
4. Cañsū I 1113    ?1163 1111  1167 1092 – 1167 1093 – 1168
5. Im Taw Syaṅ ?1163 – 1165 1167  1170 1167 – 1171 1168 – 1171
Interregnum
*Minyin Narathinga 1165 – 1174 1170  1173 1171 – 1174 1171 – 1174
6. Cañsū II 1174   1211 1173  1210 1174 – 1210 1174 – 1211
7. Nātoṅmyā 1211    ?1231 1210  1234 1210 – 1234  1211 – 1234
8. Narasiṅgha Uccanā ?1231 – 1235
9. Klacwā 1235 – 1249 1234  1249 1234 – 1249 1234 – 1250
10. Uccanā ?1249 – 1256 1249  1254 1249 – 1254 1250 – 1255
11. Min-Yin ?1256
12. Tarukpliy 1256 – 1287 1254  1287 1254 – 1287 1255 – 1286
13. Kyawswa 1287  1300 1287 – 1300   1286 – 1298
14. Sawnit 1300  1331 1300 – 1331 1298 – 1330
15. Saw Mon Nit 1331  1368 1331 – 1368 1330 – 1368