=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 1/15] ===
CHAPTER II

FROM OLD CHANTING TO NEW PHENOMENON:
THE RETURN OF JINAPANJARA AFTER
ONE DECADE SOMDEJ TOH PASSED AWAY

“HRH Princess Srirasmi, the Royal Consort of HRH Crown Prince
Maha Vajiralongkom, revealed that she uses Jinapanjara song as a lullaby
for the baby prince.”’

“Soraphong Chatri puts trusts in Jinapanjara Gatha power, he has a
strong belief that Jinapanjara Gatha protects him from accidents and
danger and he also hangs a picture of “Somdej Toh” as a sacred amulet.”

“When my wife was bed-ridden, in a critical state, I went and made
propitiations at shrines everywhere. I would chant continuously the
Jinapanjara, an ancient mantra popularized by the late Buddhist saint,
Somdej Toh of Wat Rakhang.”

“Patavee said after he continuously chanted Jinapanjara Gatha each
time for hours and started making merit, something wonderful happened to
him, whatever he wanted to know, he succeeded in knowing, since then he
has become a fortune teller.”

“Latest, bring “Pra Somdej Bang Khun Prom” to Luang Phore Koon
of Wat Baan Rai to recite incantation over it along with continuously
chanting Jinapanjara 108 times.”

These are some news items regarding Jinapanjara that have appeared in
several media sources , much like celebrities are often mentioned in magazines and
another kinds of media. Of course, Jinapanjara is a prayer, but a celebrated one,
which recently has become very well known among Thais,.not only among the
elderly, but also adolescents and, in particular, city working people.

Chanting is usually treated as a religious activity by Thai society. But, with
respect to Jinapanjara Gatha, the difference is it has been adopted with more
expectation than other Buddhist prayers. Spreading by word of mouth, the trend of
chanting Jinapanjara has become widely known; with at least 10,000,000 copies
distributed for free on various occasions.

In this chapter the Jinapanjara popularity in contemporary Thai society will
be explored. As the popularity of the Jinapanjara can be found through the media,

1 Khao Sod (11 August 2005)

2 The Daily News (15 January 2005)

3 “House of Hope,” Montien Boonma at Deith Projects, ARTseenSOHO.
4 Baan Muang (13 August 2005)

5 Khao Sod (15 March 2005)

6 Interview with Preecha Dhammaphiphop, 7 October 2005.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 2/15] ===
| ม อ ส ม ต ก ล า ง ส ถา บ ั น ว ท ย บ ร ก ร ร
๊ -
จ ู พา ล ง ก ร ณ ม พ า ว ิ ท ชา ถ ั ย
ร ---=

the results of a survey of what has happened in the media concerning the Jinapanjara
will be detailed, starting with audio products, as that is a significant factor of
increasing its vogue.

2.1 JINPANJARA ON AUDIO PRODUCTS: A NEW LOOK OF
CHANTING

At present, several different chants, such as “Pahung” or “Jayamangala
Gatha,” “Yod Pra Kan Tripidok,” and “Jinapanjara Gatha,” are produced in the form
of cassette tapes, CDs and VCDs. They are available on the shelves of many
bookstores and audio shops. For “Jinapanjara Gatha” and “Pahung” it appears that
Sathienphong Wannapok, a famous Buddhist thinker, was the first person to bring
them to the public in the form of audio cassettes. Later Supachai Jarusomboon, an
alternative medical therapist, did the same thing with Sathienphongs. Besides these
two versions, there are also traditional-style chanting voiced by Thai monks and
musical versions done by different producers.

Sathienphong Wannapok was the first person to reproduce the Jinapanjara
and Pahung in the form of song, with Surapol Tonavanik, a national artist, the
person who arranged the music. This Jinapanjara version has both Pali and Thai text,
which was translated by Sathienphong himself.

“I would like to communicate to a new Buddhist generation
to enjoy listening to Dhamma since it would enable them to pay
attention to Dhamma later. Importantly, this is my strategy to
communicate with teenagers”

He also noted that his Jinapanjara song has been produced into two versions;
the first one is for elders and the second version, which is faster, is designed to be
appreciated by teenagers. Meanwhile, Supachai Jarusomboon, described his product
as “Mantra Therapy” which has healing effects both on mental and physical health.
He explained that chanting can create energy vibration which can impact directly to
all body systems. He strongly believes that voicing the chanting in Pali and Sanskrit
will produce a certain force that is useful for stimulating organs to work effectively.
By this activity, many physical ailments and also mental health can recover better.
He also advises listeners about the way to receive more good energy from listening
to his CD by using a certain gesture called “Ti Lanjakorn,” which is the way to
center all energy in order to gain advantage for mental health.

“Listening to Jinapanjara before sleeping would allow the
listener to have better sleep.”

Prasert Sukhothanang, the Secretary of The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting
Club, said regarding various versions of Jinapanjara, that:

“As I know, there are at least 5 versions of Jinapanjara Gatha on CDs
or tapes, even in a form of Thai folk song (Pleng Luktoong) done by

7 Interview with Sathienphong Wannapok, 10 October 2005.
8 Thai Post (3 June 2005)

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2560 21-48-24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 3/15] ===
Wongchan Pairote. Furthermore, there are about 10 traditional non-music
versions appearing on the market.”

Preecha Dhammaphiphop, owner of Ocean Media Co, Ltd., who has
reproduced several chantings, including Jinapanjara Gatha, as song, views this
phenomenon as:

“No rights are reserved for Jinapanjara, so whoever is able, can
reproduce it.”

Information from some producers and distributors who are working with the
chantings in audio recording format, found that among all chantings in audio
recordings, Jinapanjara Gatha ranks the best-seller as follows:

OCEAN MEDIA’S AUDIO RECORDS

TOP 3 BEST SELLERS
1. Jinapanjara Gatha on CD,VCD
2. Yod Pra Kan Tripidok<Pinnacle of the Tripitaka>
3. Buddhajayamangala

TARGET CUSTOMERS
1. Middle age people
2. Working people
3. Elders
4. Teenagers

DHAMMA SAPA’S AUDIO RECORDS
TOP 3 BEST SELLERS
1. Jinapanjara Gatha in cassette tapes
2. Yod Pra Kan Tripidok
3. Buddhajayamangala Gatha

TARGET CUSTOMERS
1. Elders
2. Working people
3. Young people

9 Interview with Prasert Sukhotanang, 17 September 2005.
10 Interview with Preecha Dhammaphiphop, 7 October 2005.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 4/15] ===
CHULA BOOKSTORE’S AUDIO RECORDS
TOP 3 BEST SELLERS
1. Jinapanjara Gatha both of CD and VCD
2. General chanting
3. Dhamma teaching

TARGET CUSTOMERS
1. Most are working people, 30 years old up
2. Teachers, purchase for libraries or for use as teaching media
3. Monks

BOOK SHOP AT VEGETERIAN RESTAURANT AT CHATUCHAK
TOP 3 BEST SELLERS

1. Jinapanjara Gatha on CD,VCD

2. Tibetan Chanting Song

3. General Chanting

TARGET CUSTOMERS
1. Middle age people, 50 years old and up
2. Working age people, 30 years old
3. Elders

2.2 INTERNET SURVEYING

In the cyber world, Jinapanjara Gatha is easily found on different websites
and visitors are welcome to listen or download Jinapanjara Gatha free of charge.
Noticeably, it is usually attached with stories and pictures of its reviser, “Somdej
Toh” as a kind of trademark.

When the word Jinapanjara Gatha (in Thai) was searched on the GOOGLE
search engine, 707 items appeared. This can be compared with other famous chants,
as follows:

- Jinapanjara 707
- Mangalasutta 263
- Jayamangala 155
- Dhamachakhappawattanasutta 107
- Karaneeyamettasutta 52

It should be noted that the Thai names for the Pali chantings can be spelled
more than one way. For example Jayamangala is also called “Gatha Pahung.” When
the chantings were searched to make this comparison, it was done through the many
possible ways of spelling the chant. Notwithstanding, the Jinapanjara was still

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป

ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 5/15] ===
8

found on the top of the list. It was not only found on different websites, but
sometime the Jinapanjara was raised as a topic of information and experience
exchange, mainly from the younger generation, based on the style of language used.
At www.mthai.com, between 17-21 November 2004, one visitor posted some point
about Jinapanjara Gatha, then 62 visitors came to join, sharing their views and
experience.

In the case of large bookstores, those that provide searching on their website,
like Chula Book Store and Se-education, Jinapanjara books and audio records items
are found to be the most among chanting material as well:

www.chulabook.com

- Jinapanjara 15

- Jayamangala 11

- Mangalasutta 3
www.se-ed.com

- Jinapanjara 22

- Jayamangala 10

- Mangalasutta 1

2.3 THE JINAPANJARA ON RADIO PROGRAMS

With respect to radio broadcasts, the Jinapanjara Gatha has at least two
regular programs devoted to the matter. By this, it has been popularized by certain
moderators who are very ardent followers of Jinapanjara and “Somdej Toh.” While
it is difficult to know the exact number of listeners who have been influenced by this
media; clearly, this has been one way to popularize the Jinapanjara to new chanters
and also keep those who already know informed about this chant.

“CHANTING FOR LIFE”

By Prasert Sukhothanang

On air 10.00 - 11.00 p.m.
Monday - Friday, A.M.1053 Khz.

Lorain

This program’s concept focuses on the benefits to be found in chantings.
Certainly, the Jinapanjara Gatha is the most popular among many chantings. The
main format of the program is that the moderator would lead the audience in
chanting together and will end with sending loving kindness to all others in the
world. For this reason, the program is not merely a radio program but also provides



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 6/15] ===
9

a forum for group performing a spiritual rite at the same time. There is a close
connection to “The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting Club”, thus linking the two groups.
It could be said that the radio program is a public relation channel of the club.

“NEW DIMENSION”
By Dr. Boonchai Kosolthanakul,
On air 9.00 - 10.00 a.m., Sunday, F.M. 96.5 MHz.

Actually, the NEW DIMENSION Program is not directly related to the
Jinapanjara Gatha. The objective of the program aims to integrate ideas and
knowledge between the West and the East as a new dimension of business and life.

“Anyway, I usually talk about Jinapanjara whenever I can because
for me I regard chanting of Jinapanjara as a tool of practicing meditation
and it works quite well for me. So when my audience has some life
problem, I usually suggest that they start with chanting Jinapanjara in order
to make them feel relaxed and calm, then the way out would appear
eventually when the mind is silent enough.”

“Personally, I am fond of Jinapanjara because its content has a
poetic beauty and importantly it is not very difficult to remember even
though it looks quite long. I started chanting Jinapanjara when I was only
12. At that time, migraine headaches were my big trouble and many
doctors were not able to heal me. Then, my older brother introduced me to
try chanting Jinapanjara. Amazingly, within 2 to 3 weeks after chanting
Jinapanjara 9 times per day more or less, the migraines had totally gone

away. | have never suffered from them since.”

After finding these amazing benefits, Dr.Boonchai continued chanting
Jinapanjara because his brother told him that one who chants will have well being
in life.

11 Interview with Dr.Boonchai Kosolthanakul, 9 October 2005.
12 Ibid., interview with Dr.Boonchai Kosolthanakul.



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 7/15] ===
10

“For me, I chant whenever I can and wonderful results happened
again and again. It may sound unbelievable; my studies were much more
developed than before. I could pass to a higher class and control myself
while my concentration is much better. My thoughts are clearer and
everything has improved. Importantly, I was successful in every test I took,
such as the entrance to Faculty of Arts, Chulalongkorn University. I was
also successful in get a job at the Ministry of Foreign Affair and in getting
a Fulbright scholarship.”

It should be noted that F.M. 96.5 MHz. by MCOT (Mass Communication
Organization of Thailand) is recognized as one of the highest rated “News and Talk
Channel” while FAST ENGLISH is accepted as one of the leading English teaching
schools in Bangkok as well. So it is interesting how many audience members and
how many students have been inspired by him to starting Jinapanjara chanting.
Besides those radio programs mentioned above, two informal surveys were
conducted on another radio program not related to Jinapanjara Gatha. With the aim
of doing a random check to see if the audience knew Jinapanjara Gatha, the host
picked up a story about one man who remarkably survived a severe car accident.
According to the story, the man really believed that one particular prayer saved his
life. After telling the story, the host let audience members guess which prayer he
chanted. Most of answers were Jinapanjara while only 10 percent of the answers
were other prayers.

The second time, on the same program, but one year later, Petch Pra Uma, a
great Thai jungle adventure series novel, was discussed, telling a particular part of
episode 2 when Darin, the heroine, encounters monsters without the hero’s
assistance. She recites one prayer which is successful in suppressing the monsters.
Then the host let audience members join by sending an SMS to answer what chant
she had used. The result was almost the same, 90 percent of audience gave
Jinapanjara Gatha as their answer. This program is a part of sports station F.M. 99
MHz., under the roof of Mass Communication Organization of Thailand. The target
is not elder people, but most are young and working people who are interested in
sports and health. As mentioned before, it was merely an informal survey, however,
it demonstrates something that should not be ignored in term of people’s random
perception.

2.4 JINAPANJARA IN NOVELS

Among all Thai adventure novels, Petch Pra Uma is considered one of most
famous series, containing 48 volumes. The author, Phnomthien, took 25 years 7
months to write the series. Inspired by the story of “King Solomon’s Mines,” he
took main points from that story and applied it to be more Thai in detail. First
published in 1964, it is continuously popularity until today. It is a story about a
group of people who go into the jungle in order to find someone who has been lost
for years. They encounter various strange incidents such as giants centipedes, a
sleeping city, primitive jungle or even ghosts and monsters. This series gained high
popularity among Thai readers, and, even now, Pech Pra Uma is available in
bookstores and is still in vogue. Every book fair, readers can find Petch Pra Uma in
a big set (containing 48 volumes).

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 8/15] ===
11

On the page 1391 of the Naga Devi episode, Darin Vararit and her team face
a troop of monsters without the assistance of Raphin Phraiwan. At that moment, her
brother reminds her to use Jinapanjara in order to suppress those monsters since
only Darin is capable of reciting this long gatha. As soon as she does, all of
monsters scatter immediately. After that, Chaiyan (one of the team) asks Darin to
teach him and then Darin gives the full gatha to Chaiyan, accompanied with the
meaning, translation and directions to use it in detail. That particular part attracted a
lot interest in Jinapanjara as a powerful mantra in suppressing ghosts or monsters.

As an author, Phanomthien was promoted as a National Artist in 1997, now
he is 75 years old <2007>, and still be an ardent followers of Jinapanjara, chant at
least 3-4 times every day. He stressed that Jinapanjara in Phet Pra U-ma inspired by
his real experience as well as his faith. As detailed in chapter 3, see that he is really
believed the sacred of Jinapanjara since has his own experience. Thus, it is like
another certification to certified Jinapanjara by an author who is trusted by readers
as an expert of mantra and magical implement.

“Jinapanjara changed my life at all, I used to be a hunter, killed many
jungle animals but since I know Jinapanjara all bad thing were absolutely
stopped. It avert dangers, and evils either from outside or inner meanwhile
bringing good luck as well.”"

Phanomthien emphasized that Jinapanjara enable him to stop hunting and
also modified him to be a better man who concerns on moral and virtue more than
before. Ask for the total sale throughout 42 years of popularity he said that Phetch
Pra Uma has been selling several millions copies for the whole set comprise 48
volumes. Personally, he also propagates Jinapanjara to others with strong recommend
that

“This is the extraordinary mantra best in term of protection as well
as providing all good things such as good health, fame, wealth and
prosperity. Another mantra might works for safety but Jinapanjara give you
more than that, it take you to the good and the right things and directions™"*

2.5 JINAPANJARA ON FILM: NANG NAG

Although, Nang Nag died a long time ago<on Thai belief that she used to be
a real person> but actually, her story become an immortal love story ,re-produced
several times as TV series and films.On the latest version made by Nonsi Nimibutra
in the middle of 1999 Nang Nag had been awaken again with a good- taste
production and good research. This version gained high success and remarked as a
Thai film which accomplishment to awaken Thai movies return in vogue again<after
Hollywood movies occupied Thai movies market for a long time>.

This version of Nang Nag achieved income 150 millions baths, regards as a
high income of Thai movie at that time. One point interesting is Nang Nag or Mae
Nag in 1999 was not attractive mere general Thai people but also drawn attention to

13 Interview with Chatchai Visetsuwarnabumi<Phanomthien>, 7 December 2006.
14 Ibid., interview with Chatchai Visetsuwarnabumi<Phanomthien>

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 9/15] ===
12

educated people or middle class people as well because of its production quality and
also the credit of Nonsi Nimibutra ,the film director and his team.

Although the hero is Nai Mag, Nang Nag's husband, but actually, the real
hero who had an opportunity to show hero ability is "Somdej Toh", the monk who
was capable to suppress Nang Nag eventually<after several attempts were failed
before>.In the movie at last, audiences would see "Somdej Toh" recited Jinapanjara
before Nang Nag burial ground calling her to negotiate and accept the truth of life
then penetrated her forehead bone kept it as an buckle. This story has been told
popularly until nowadays reconfirmed "Somdej Toh" as an sacred monk who had
superstitious power over a horrible ghost like Nan Nag who nobody success to stop
her.

Dr.Justin McDaniel, Assistant Professor of Religious Studies at the
University of California at Riverside, usa. Who has researched on “Somdej Toh”
topic and about to launch his book in near future, gave his opinion on this point that:

“It’s very important since in Nang Nag version 1999 different to
versions before this. In other Nang Nag there was Samanen ส า ม เณ ร a
novice as a hero but in this version “Somdej Toh” was portrayed as a hero ,
chanting Jinapanjara on the climax scene so he was like “Praek wszian”the

real hero of film. I think one of the reasons he become popular again come
from that film partly.”"

Dr. Justin also pointed that a lot of people saw Nang Nag then many might
continue their attention by visiting some places connected to*“Somdej Toh” such as
Wat Indravihan or Wat Rakhang so it is possible that they would become new
chanters of Jinapanjara Gatha eventually.

2.6. JINAPANJARA AND RELEVANT PLACES

2.6.1 WAT RAKHANG GHOSITARAM

With the aim to examine the route of the Jinapanjara chant, we should start
from Wat Rakhang where Somdej Toh, commonly known as Somdej Toh Wat
Rakhang, stayed. Today Wat Rakhang is full of shops selling animal for release to
make merit, such as fish, eels, pond snails, turtles, and birds. People can come to the
Wat and buy something for releasing at the river nearby. When entering the
monastery, one can see that there is a vihan where Somdej Toh’s statue is placed
with a holy water jar. In this vihan there are many free copies of Jinapanjara Gatha
distributed by people who have strong faith in Somdej Toh and try to make merit by
spreading Jinapanjara Gatha. Inside this small place, people come to pay respect to
Somdej Toh as well as to chant Jinapanjara Gatha. Anyone who is unable to recite
from memory can use a copy provided here, with many copies of Jinapanjara
available. Although Wat Rakhang is usually associated with Somdej Toh, as we find
in the name ‘Somdej Toh of Wat Rakhang’, in fact there is only one small vihan that
is directly connected to Somdej Toh and Jinapanjara Gatha.

15 Interview with Dr.Justin McDaniel , 1 August 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 10/15] ===
13

“I did a lot for Jinapanjara propaganda. Now it’s enough. People
mostly do know this gatha, so it is not necessary for Wat Rakhang to take
anymore action.”

The caretaker abbot Chao Khun Tiang or Pra Debvisutthimethi, who is 70
years old, revealed that the Jinapanjara Gatha of Wat Rakhang, which is regarded as
the most believable version, actually comes from Wat Kallayanamitra.

“Luang Poo Nag, the ninth abbot, received Jinapanjara Gatha
from Luang Por Heng of Wat Kallayanamitra. It was the first time
that I saw Jinapanjara on paper. It is written “Jinapanjara Gatha by
Somdej Toh Wat Rakhang.” Luang Poo Nag didn’t tell me anything
about that gatha. After that I made photo copies and try to chant by
myself!”

After trying to chant the Jinapanjara for some time, Chao Khun Tieng felt
that this particular gatha was very outstanding in terms of magical power. By his
own experience he felt very impressed with Jinapanjara since it created a sense of
security, self- confidence and also concentration. With this, he started making copies
of Jinapanjara Gatha, accompanied by the text describing its benefit from his own
experience and distributed it to people, so far more than 100,000 copies.
Subsequently, around 10 years later, the monks at Wat Rakhang started to chant
Jinapanjara daily by adding it to the morning chanting. This would indicate that the
monks at Wat Rakhang did not chant Jinapanjara Gatha since the time of Somde;j
Toh, but just started 30 years ago after receiving it from Wat Kallayanamitra.
Although it is difficult to count the exact number of people who have been inspired
by Chao Khun Thieng’s Jinapanjara copies, surely this small operation must have
had some impact on the increasing of Jinapanjara chanters. In addition, Chao Khun
Thieng also gave the value of Jinapanjara by making a link with Pra Somdej
amulets, the most expensive amulet in market, that:

“One who chants Jinapanjara Gatha regularly will get benefit as if he
has 100 Pra Somdej.”"®

This sounds like some sort of metaphor, but the significance is that Pra
Somdej amulets are very popular in amulet circles. One genuine Pra Somdej amulet
can cost around 15-50 million baht." In addition, people believe that Jinapanjara is
the only mantra Somdej Toh used in making Pra Somdej amulets. By this belief, Pra
Somdej amulets and Jinapanjara have been linked together as an alternative to
common people who are unable to possess real Pra Somdet amulets. They are able
to chant Jinapanjara as much as they want. From the interview, Chao Khun Thieng
emphasized firmly that Jinapanjara Gatha is a special chant which contains a strong
meditative power which can give great protection as well as bring good luck to

16 Interview with Pra Debvisutthimethi<Chao Khun Thieng>, 21 June 2006.

17 Ibid., interview with Pra Debvisutthimethi<Chao Khun Thieng>

18 Ibid., interview with Pra Debvisutthimethi<Chao Khun Thieng>

19 Sattha lae Ngen-Tra Nai Loke Thurakit Prakrueng, Sarakadee Magazine (January 2006): 63.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 11/15] ===
14

chanters. This is the reason why he has made an attempt to distribute as many copies
of Jinapanjara as possible.

2.6.2 WAT INDRAVIHAN

Another related place to Jinapanjara and Somdej Toh is Wat Indravihan,
Bangkhunprom, Bangkok. Directly upon entering the monastery boundary, one
encounters the words “Somdej Prabuddhajarn Toh Bramarungsi” placed at various
places. This monastery is understood as the place where Somdej Toh grew and
learned before moving to study further at Wat Rakhang when he was 18 years old.
Although Somdej Toh is always associated with Wat Rakhang, it appears that
people today think of Wat Indra more than Wat Rakhang when talking about
Somdej Toh, especially when that they want to find a particular place to chant
Jinapanjara. Everyday a number of people of various ages come to the pavilion
located in front of main chapel (Ubosot). This place was built over holy water (one
of the Somdej Toh-related places) and had an official opening ceremony on March
1988 by Crown Princess Sirindhon.

In front of “Bor Nam Mon” there is an 84 year old woman selling flowers
and incense sticks for chanters as a volunteer. She said that Thursdays, Saturdays
and Sundays are the most crowded days because Thursdays are regarded as
auspicious days for starting a chant of Jinapanjara, while Saturdays and Sundays
are the day off and thus convenient for people to come.

“Some came here with flowers on a tray to offer to Somdej Toh,
asking to be able to remember Jinapanjara successfully, while some aim to
ask for lottery numbers (Kor huay); it’s a variety, depending on each
Karm ล 920

Even though her job is related to Jinapanjara, she can not recite Jinapanjara
from memory without a text to read. She said she first knew Jinapanjara 40 years
ago, but she does not chant Jinapanjara regularly as an ardent chanter. She just
chants sometime, like other chant, with no special impression for her; and she comes
here just to help do something for the monastery. Upon entering the pavilion, one
will see people sitting around in meditation; most are chanting while some have
their eyes closed and are sitting peacefully. One point that should be noted is that
people who came to chant here mostly are from the younger generation, old people
are found less.

Under dim lights and cool temperature, the sound of Jinapanjara chanted by
the monks plays continuously. With this kind of atmosphere, this particular place
then easily has become a suitable place for chanting, especially Jinapanjara Gatha.
It gives the impression of a special world, where people feel free to do individual
religious activity among others who do the same, as long as they want from 6.00 a.m
to 8.00 p.m. everyday. Near Bor Nam Mon, there is an open pavilion full of

20 Interview with old woman <denied to be named >who sells flowers at Wat Indravihan , 4 July 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 12/15] ===
15

Jinapanjara Gatha material on every wall. Each wall portrays Jinapanjara Gatha in
various languages:

-Thai;

-Lao;

-Khmer;

-English;

-Burmese;

-Lanna (Traditional Northern Language); and

-A big portrait of Somdej Toh.

Those languages represent each nation capable of causing aggression against
any border of Thailand. Thus Jinapanjara Gatha, in this case, has special symbolic
meaning in the protection of the country. With this kind of belief, Jinapanjara’s
function can thus be considered not only for individual benefit, but also for national
benefit.

Besides the pavilion over Bor Nam Mon, Wat Indra also produces
Jinapanjara in audio media, such as cassette tapes, CD/VCDs, including other
chants either in slow speed version or fast speed version depending on the
customer’s choices, as follows:

-Jinapanjara Gatha 9 times and Yod Pra Kan Tripidok;

-Jinapanjara Gatha 9 times in slow Sangyoke and Sorapanya fast melody; and

-Jinapanjara Gatha 9 times in slow Sangyoke and Yod Pra Kan Tripidok.

Moreover, there is also a karaoke version for people who are unable to recite
and want to practice in karaoke style. These audio products were produced after the
Jinapanjara song produced by Sathienphong Wannapok in 2002. The difference
between Wat Indra’s product and Sathienphong’s product is that Wat Indra uses
monks’ voice but Sathienphong uses a singer. Another difference is Sathienphong’s
song is presented with the music, not just the sound of chanting.

“Our Jinapanjara Gatha audio is voiced by the abbot and monks in a
monastery so that you can feel the traditional atmosphere of genuine

chanting.”

The monk who takes care of a souvenir shop in the monastery points out the
shelf of audio where there are T-shirts on which Jinapanjara Gatha is printed in
different colors. According to the monks, these T-shirts were put in the incantation
ceremony as well as other amulets. One point that should be mentioned is that these
T-shirts are all right reserved, show clearly on the front of them.

21 Interview with a monk at Wat Indravihan’s souvenir shop,4 July 2006

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2560 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 13/15] ===
16

Besides amulets, T-shirts and audio products, holy water in bottles is another
thing related to Somdej Toh. With a price of 20 baht each and with modern
packaging, it makes for easy selling. It could be said that in Wat Indravihan people
can come to chant as well as enjoy shopping for amulet products, which are all
connected to Somdej Toh and Jinapanjara Gatha.

2.6.3 THE JINAPANJARA GATHA CHANTING CLUB

Located on Petchkasem Road at Soi 65, about 200 meters from the front on
the left side, is The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting Club’s head office. This office has
many items connected to Jinapanjara Gatha and Somdej Toh, such as books,
cassette tapes, CDs, VCDs, and Buddha images, holy water in bottles and other
amulets. This place is descended from Samnag Poosawan some years ago.
Subsequently, some key followers gathered again under the roof of a chanting club
focusing on Jinapanjara Gatha, which was considered the most popular for general
lay people. Founded in 1992, and kept going continuously for over 10 years, the
club is still working on its aim to inspire people to chant both individually and in
groups. From the beginning to the present, 100,000 people have participated in
group-chanting here. Most particularly on Sunday, followers will gather here on the
third floor to have a routine group chant. Group chanting is not only performed in
the office, but also outside at important places.

In addition, the club also organizes a ritual ceremony related to Somdej Toh
on important occasions. For example, every June 22, a ritual ceremony is organized
in commemoration of the day Somdej Toh’s passed away. Approximately 300-400
participants comprised of worker people, elders and some monks, all who believe in
Jinapanjara, come and join the ceremony. On this occasion, a ritual will be held
from morning until evening, with a superstitious atmosphere. This spiritual rite,
conducted by monks and nuns, is called “The Heart of Jinapanjara.” This ceremony
is believed to have the ability to generate auspicious power, good health and wealth
to participants and, particularly, healing power for those who suffer from anything.
The expense of this rite is 100 baht per person, per time (some people join the



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 14/15] ===
17

ceremony more than one time); and one who joins the ceremony will receive an
amulet as a souvenir.

The club appears to play a role as a meeting center for chanters who like to
share their belief or experience with others. On ordinary days, vegetarian shops are
open for visitors whereas a small shop providing several books on Somdej Toh, as
well as various audio products which include Jinapanjara Gatha. The club is
usually quiet on ordinary days, but some days there are many followers who came to
visit and talk with the staff or buy some cassettes or CDs for themselves and others.
It would appear that this is a good place for one who is interested in Somdej Toh and
Jinapanjara Gatha.

One ironically interesting point is that Head of the club, Dr.Phichai Tovivich,
an associate professor, used to be a scientist teacher and the head of Chemistry
Department at Chulalongkorn University. After retirement he conducts his own
business meanwhile ranks a chairman of the chanting club with strong belief on
Jinapanjara and Somdej Toh that it will be detailed in Chapter IV.

2.6.4 SOMDEJ TOH CENTER AT NAKORN RATCHASIMA

Away from Bangkok to the Northeastern region of Thailand, in Nakorn
Ratchasima province, there is a huge statue of Somdej Toh in his familiar seated
position. This is not a monastery occupied by monks, but a private place built by a
famous actor, Soraphong Chatri, who has strong faith in Somdej Toh. He established
this location by himself by collecting money from donations. From the beginning
until now, at least 300-400 million baht has been spent on the huge project.

Every weekend, Soraphong comes to stay here as a host. Visitors are able to
meet or take a photo with him. For those who might not be a Soraphong fan, clean
toilets with free food, are other magnets to draw people to this site. In the main hall,
there are also some people dressed in white who continuously chant Jinapanjara.

“I have to take care whoever comes to pay respect to “Poo
Toh<Grandfather Toh>" here as much as I can because “Poo Toh” gave
me a lot. He changed me to become a new Soraphong who loved others
more than before, and also had a sense of shame. Importantly, I usually
have gotten success and good luck so that it is my responsibility to take
care whoever comes to pay respect to “Poo Toh” because they are “Poo
Toh’s guests.”

This private center started its activities by building the “Somdej Toh” statue,
followed by building a hall. Now, in 2007, the “Somdej Toh” statue is considered to
be the biggest in Thailand. Everyday, many people come here as their destination,
while others just enjoy the location as a break point during a long travel.
Nevertheless, Soraphong is willing to welcome everyone with free facilities such as
car parks, toilets, free food and also an opportunity to meet the famous actor. It was

22 Interview with Soraphong Chatri, 13 November 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch2.pdf | Page 15/15] ===
18

noted during the interview, Soraphong was very willing to talk about Somdej Toh
and Jinapanjara as if he was speaking of his real grandfather.

“I still owe “Poo Toh” many times for Jinapanjara chanting.”

Soraphong revealed that when he wanted help from “Poo Toh”, he offered
him chanting Jinapanjara at least 100 to 1,000 times, depending on the importance
of his request.

“I used chanting Jinapanjara as my offering to “Poo Toh” instead of
food or things; this is the best worship, in my opinion.”

The Jinapanjara Gatha is chanted at “Somdej Toh Center” by visitors with
different aims. Most of them do not seem to be concerned much about its history,
they just keep chanting as much as they can. In a sense of faith, sometimes
knowledge is not necessarily needed. However, from an academic perspective, it is
important. So, in the next chapter the history of Jinapanjara and its reviser will be
investigated for more understanding.

23 Ibid., interview with Soraphong Chatri.
24 Ibid.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:24

