=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 1/12] ===
CHAPTER III

BACK TO THE ORIGIN OF JINAPANJARA:
AN UNIDENTIFIED MANTRA

The Jinapanjara is an ancient prayer chanted exclusively in Buddhist
countries like Thailand, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka. It was introduced and revised by
Somdej Toh to Siam during the time of King Rama IV. This gatha, as we have seen,
still widely exists in Thailand. It is portrayed as a sacred chant and is increasingly
popular among contemporary Thai Buddhist. This chapter tries to explore the origin
of Jinapanjara, within the limit of the information readily available. Actually the
real history of Jinapanjara is not of importance for the chanters. What is important
for them is its benefit. They only know that this gatha belonged to Somdej Toh and
that is sufficient for them to keep on chanting. The origin of this unidentified mantra
is very interesting since there are several versions of Jinapanjara today and one of
them is included in the traditional Northern chanting book as an auspicious gatha for
ritual ceremony. Surprisingly, it has been recognized among local scholars in the
North for almost 500 years ago, although today general Northern people are not
familiar with this chant. The Jinapanjara is more popular as a chant in central
Thailand. To understand the route of the Jinapanjara phenomenon, we should start
from the name, Jinapanjara, or “Chinabanchorn,” in Thai pronunciation.

3.1 THE MEANING OF “JINAPANJARA”

“JINA” means “conqueror,” but in this case, it represents an epithet of the
Buddha, while “PANJARA” has been interpreted with several meanings such as
cage, window and armor. In terms of linguistics, “PANJARA” means window or
cage but in this case likely means something like armor since the chant is used as a
great protection for chanters. Thus, JINAPANJARA could be translated with several
meanings, depending on the various view points of translators, such as:

“The Golden Cage of the Buddha” '
“The window of the Victorious One’
“The Great Armor of the Buddha”

However, it would appear that its exact meaning does not matter to general
chanters as much as its reputation. As the contents of the chant contain the names of
the 27 previous Buddhas, the present Buddha, 15 prominent Arahants, and 4
Buddhist Suttas, invite all to give Dhamma protection to chanters. For better
understanding, all the gathas will be illustrated through colors as follows:

Text in bold letters means previous Buddhas.
Text in italic letters means Arahants.
Text with underline means Suttas or Buddhist scriptures.

1 Sathienphong Wannapok, Jinapanjara Gatha, (Bangkok: Ariyamag Funds, 2004), pp. 34-35.
2 Suchitra Onkom, Buddhist Chanting: Pali - Thai - English, p.43.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป

ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2560 21:48:29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 2/12] ===
20
JINAPANJARA GATHA

1. JAYASANAKATA BUDDHA JETAVA MARAM SAVAHANAM
CATUSACCHASABHAM RASAM YE PIVIMSU NARASABHA

Those Buddhas who defeated the Mara and his hosts, were the most brave,
sublime, noble and mightiest of men who had sipped the immortal taste of the Four
Noble Truths.

2. TANHAMKARADAYO BUDDHA ATTHAVISATI NAYAKA
SABBE PATTITTHITA MAYHAM MATTHAKE TE MUNISSARA

The twenty-eight Buddhas, one of whom was Tanhankara Buddha, were true
leaders of the world. May each and every one of those wise sages be dwelling upon
the crown of my head.

3. SISE PATTITTHITO MAYHAM BUDDHO DHAMMO DAVILOCANE
SANGHO PATITTHITO MAYHAM URE SABBAGUNAKARO

May all the Buddhas be enshrined on my head and in my eyes their Sacred
Teachings; in my heart the community of noble disciples of blessed. One who are
the spring of all virtues.

4. HADAYE ME ANURUDDHO SARIPUTTO CA DAKKHINE
KONDANNO PITTHIBHAGASMIM ~~ MOGGALLANO CA VAMAKE

May Anuruddha Thera dwells in my heart,Sariputta Thera the Chief Disciple
at my right side,the Elder Kondanna at the back and Moggallana the other Chief
Disciple be at the left.

5. DAKKHINE SAVANE MAYHAM ASUM ANANDA-RAHULO
KASSAPO CA MAHANAMO UBHASUM VAMASOTAKE

Likewise, may Ananda and Rahula dwell at my right ear, and at my left ear
dwell Kassapa and Mahanama.

6. KESATO PITTHIBHAGASMIM SURIYO VA PABHANKARO
NISINNO SIRISAMPANNO SOBHITO MUNIPUNGAVO

May the mighty sage,Sobhita,seated in all his glory,like the blazing
sun,dwell upon every hair-tip on my back.

7. KUMARAKASSAPO THERO MAHESI CITTAVADAKO
SO MAYHAM VADANE NICCAM PATITTHASI GUNAKARO

May Kumara Kassapa Thera, one who seeks the greatest virtues, commands
fine speech and is the spring of fine virtues, always be the dwelling guardian of my
mouth.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2560 21-48-29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 3/12] ===
ขุ ๐

= จ ๊ ว

| พ 9 ส ม ค ก ถา ง ฮุ ถ ว บ ั น ว ั ท ย ขบ ร ั ก า ร
-

จ ุ พ า ล ง ก ร ณ ม ห า ว ท ย า ล ั ย

8. PUNNO ANGULIMALO CA UPALI-NANDA-SIVALI
THERA PANCA IME JATA NALATE TILATHA MAMA

May these five Elders: Punna Thera, Angulimala Thera, Upali Thera, Nanda
Thera and Sivali Thera, be just like the auspicious marking anointed on my
forehead.

9. SESASITI MAHATHERA VIITA JINASAVAKA
ETESITI MAHATHERA JITAVANTO JINORASA
JALANTA SILATEJENA ANGAMANGESU SANTHITA

May all the rest of the eighty great disciples and sons of the Buddha, the
Victorious One, who have defeated all their defilements and prosper by the moral
disciples they adhere to, condescend in to be with me all the minor and major organs
of mine.

10. RATANAM PURATO ASI DAKKHINE METTASUTTAKAM
DHAJAGGAM PACCHATO ASI VAME ANGULIMALAKAM

May the Ratana Sutta be remained to my front, may the Metta Sutta be at my
right side, may the Dhajagga Sutta be remained at the back and may the Angulimala
Sutta be remained at my left.

11. KHANDHA MORAPARITTANCA ATANATIYASUTTAKAM
AKASE CHADANAM ASI SESA PAKARASANTHITA

The Khandha paritta, Mora Paritta, Atanatiya Paritta and the rest form
sheltering frame for me, just like the canopy above or the wall around me.

12. JINANA VARASAMYUTTA SATTAPAKARALANKATA
VATAPITTADISANJATA BAHIRAJJHATTUPADDAVA

May the sublimeDhamma which is the power of the Victorious One be
adorned upon me just like a seven-layer wall protecting me from all outside and
inside dangers or perils which may arise from whatever natural causes, wind or bile
so that there will be none of these dangers remain.

13, ASESA VINAYAM YANTU ANANTAJINATEJASA
VADATO ME SAKICCENA SADA SAMBUDDHAPANJARE

Let all the remaining illness be got rid of by the power of the Victorious One
whose virtues are endless, all throughout the time when I still observe the moral
disciples of such a moral person like, for example, the Buddha.

14. JINAPANJARAMAJJHENAHI VIHARANTAM MAHITALE
SADA PALENTU MAM SABBE TE MAHAPURISASABHA

May all those great and brave Noble Ones who live in the midst of the
Victorious One on this earth protect and guard me.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 4/12] ===
22

15. ICCEVA MANTO SUGUTTO SURAKKHO
JINANUBHAVENA JITUPADDAVO
DHAMMANUBHAVENA JITARISANGHO
SANGHANUBHAVENA JITANTARAYO

SADDHAMMANUBHAVAPALITO  JACARAMI JINAPANJARETI.

Indeed, thus am I well protected as all the distresses have been rid of by the
Victorious One; so many whatever potential dangers there may be in the future, be
eliminated by the power of the Dhamma and the Sangha and may the same power of
the truth of Dhamma protect and guide me that I may live and thrive in the path of
the Victorious One.’

3.2 CONTENT AND INTONATION

One significant point that should be noted is Jinapanjara is composed in the
form of a basic verse “Patthayawatra Chant ป ั ฐ ย า ว ั ต ร ร ั น ท ์ ” which is recognized among
Pali specialist as the simplest one .Comparison can be made to another popular gatha
like “Pahung” or Jayamangala Gatha, which is more traditional, and the less popular
Pahung, which is composed in form of Wasantadilaka Chant ว ล้ น ต ด ิ ล ก ร ั น ท ์ and thus is
more complicate and difficult for either composing or reciting. Dr.Banjob
Bannaruji, Pali scholar at Religious and Philosophy Department, Faculty of Arts,
Chulalongkorn University made this point:

“One of the distinctive point of Jinapanjara as a prayer is that
chanters are able to empower themselves every time they perform it. It is
similar to the celebration ceremony of Buddha images in those monks have
to recite incantation over Buddha images. But in this case, as the content
emphasizes inviting the previous Buddhas and important Arahants to come
to give protection to the chanter though, it is the same concept that you are
reciting an incantation “ปลุกเสก” over yourself, by yourself.”

Dr.Banjob also pointed out that the original composer must have been a
person who had a high degree of knowledge of Pali. This can be seen from the
wording and grammar appearing in Jinapanjara even though it is composed in the
form of a basic poem, “Patthayawatra Chant ป ั ฐ ย า ว ั ต ร ร ั น ท ์ ”, but in terms of poetics, it
is really beautiful and exceptional.”

Accordance to Sathienphong who affirmed that whoever composed this
gatha must be a prominent person, who has a great talent for Pali composition.

“The style of composing is quite wonderful’

Interestingly, some Pali specialists have an opposite view in that Jinapanjara
Gatha is merely common and basic in terms of Pali verse.

3 Ibid. Suchitra Onkom, pp.43-48.
4 Interview with Dr.Banjob Bannaruji, 14 November 2006.
5 Interview with Sathienphong Wannapok, 10 October 2005.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:20



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 5/12] ===
23

“With respect to Pali language, there is nothing special in term of
poetics. It is merely a basic verse with a basic form and not too long for lay
people.” ¢

Similarly, Pra Srisitthimuni, the Dean of Graduate School,
Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, claimed that:

“It is a very basic one, give me 10 minutes and I will compose a new
one like this to you .It is just bringing many holy names in Buddhism and
arranging them in form of verse, that is it.”

As for the content, there is no Dhamma doctrine set forth in Jinapanjara
Gatha, which is quite distinctive compared to other chants in Buddhism. Most chants
demonstrate, in some form or another, the teaching of Buddha or at least eulogies his
virtues.Sathienphong Wannapok gave a comment on the Jinapanjara’s contents
saying that it is unique, totally different from others.

“As all supreme names are invited, Jinapanjara Gatha is like an
amulet providing chanters a feeling of extraordinary safety.”

Whereas Suchao Ploychum, associate professor at Rajanagarindra Institute
of Linguistics and Cultural Studies, Kasetsart University pointed out that Jinapanjara
is not exactly new or different from others:

“In terms of Paritta, Jinapanjara is not exactly new in term of content
in that it mentions important figures named in Buddhism. Maha

Upasantiluang ม ห า อ ุ ป ล ั น ต ิ ห ล ว ง also mentions Buddha's names as well, but
actually it is not as apparent as in Jinapanjara.”

Although, there are several different views on Jinapanjara content and
intonation, the important point is that it was composed in the easiest form of Pali
verse, which is easy to recite for lay people and apparent for its content. In addition,
Jinapanjara contains most of the supreme holy names in Buddhism, and, even
though this character is not exact a new style, the Jinapanjara composer made it
more obvious than before. Therefore, what is the real original propose of this
controversial gatha?

3.3 THE HISTORY OF JINAPANJARA GATHA

According to related documents, Jinapanjara Gatha was first mentioned in
the reign of King Rama IV when Venerable “Somdej Pra Buddhajarmn Toh
Brahamarangsi” or “Somdej Toh” was chanting before him. The king expressed his
appreciation and asked about its origin. At that moment, “Somdej Toh” answered
that it was an ancient chant but he himself had later revised and shortened it. Then, it
is said that this gatha became popular among royal lineages and nobles. For
example, Prince Damrong Rajanubhab adjusted the Jinapanjara Gatha to his own

6 Interview with Suchao Ploychum, 7 November 2006.
7 Pra Srisitthimuni, discussion on thesis defense, 26 April 2007
8 Interview with Sathienphong Wannapok, 10 October 2005.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21-48-29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 6/12] ===
24

purpose by reciting only the eighth verse to pronounce incantation over his cleaning
water every morning, believing it would bring him charm and admiration.’

In the biography of “Somdej Toh” printed by The Chanting Jinapanjara
Club, it is mentioned that the chant had been first discovered by “Somdej Toh” in an
old pagoda at Kampangpetch Province when he visited his relatives there. It was
said that in the night time, “Thao Mahabrahama Jinapanjara”, the high-rank deity
who proclaimed to be a disciple of Pra Mogallana, the great left side disciple of the
Buddha, appeared to him by omen or “NIMIT” and taught “Somdej Toh” some
techniques to create divine power, particularly how to produce superstitious objects
(recite incantation over amulets.) For this reason, after “Somdej Toh” studied that
ancient manuscript, he was determined to revise it and named it “Jinapanjara™ in
order to honor “Thao Mahabrahama Jinapanjara.” Today, the belief of “Thao
Mahabrahama Jinapanjara” is still seriously respected by members of The
Jianpanjara Gatha Chanting Club, as his statue was built and placed in the main hall
of its head office.

As mentioned before, most history books on Jinapanjara are full of miracles
and myths since they have been written by ardent followers with the aim to
propagate Jinapanjara and “Somdej Toh.” It is difficult to utilize these sources in
making an academic analysis of the Jinapanjara. However, one document that
attempts to find the fact of Jinapanjara is a small book written by the present
Supreme Patriarch or “Sangaraj,” This book was first published in 1975 on his
birthday.

In the book entitled “Jinapanjara Gatha” the Supreme Patriarch tried to
correct words in Jinapanjara by comparison to a Sri Lankan version from the book
“The Mirror of The Dhamma” by Narada Thera and Kassapa Thera (printed in Sri
Lanka, in 1961). He also addressed the question, that he wondered about for a some
time, about the origin of this chant and was unable to point out whether Somdej Toh
had composed himself or received the manuscript from somewhere.’

It might be said that this book by the Supreme Patriarch was the first attempt
to make an academic study on Jinapanjara. Eleven year later, the Supreme Patriarch
assigned one of his disciples, Suchao Ploychum, associate professor at
Rajanagarindra Institute of Linguistics and Cultural Studies, Kasetsart University, to
conduct research on the Jinapanjara, which subsequently became a book named
“The History of Jinapanjara™ and was first distributed in 1986. In this book, Suchao
mentioned the name of Pra Dhammananda Thera, a Burmese monk at Wat Thamao,
Lampang province. This monk claimed that Jinapanjara is not only popular in
Thailand but also in Myanmar. In the past, it was widely recited by Burmese temple
boys with belief it can protect them from any kind of harm and danger. He himself
has been able to recite the whole gatha since he was 7-8 years old. He also said that
Jinapanjara was actually composed at Chiang Mai in the reign of King Anoradha in

9 The eighth verse of Jinapanjara Gatha is:
“PUNNO ANGULIMALO CA UPALI-NANDA-SIVALI
THERA PANCA IME JATA NALATE TILATHA MAMA”
10 Somdej Pra Yanasangvara, the Supreme Patriarch, Jinapanjara Gatha, (Bangkok: Dhamma Sapa, 2005.)

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 7/12] ===
25

the year B.E. 2123, but could not specify who was the author. At that time magical
rituals were generally practiced in Chiang Mai. According to this belief, King
Anoradha felt unhappy with occultism practiced in his kingdom. He made an effort
to change people to believe in the Buddhist way by encouraging them to worship
Buddha images instead of spirits. The cerebration ceremony on Buddha images was
promoted as a new auspicious rite replacing spiritual worship that had been
worshiped before.

With this aim, the names of various Buddhas, the name of Buddhist
scriptures, as well as the name of Arahants, including other sacred Buddhist figures,
were put into Buddhist chants for people to recite instead of magical mantra. It is
claimed that this is the origin of the celebration ceremony on Buddha images since it
never was known to happen before.

Apart from Pra Dhamma Thera, Suchao also pointed out that there are other
indications that Jinapanjara might have originated at Chiang Mai during the reign of
King Anoradha in B.E. 2123 but he was not able to specify the source. However,
according to this book, Jinapanjara seems to appear in several sources, for example:

-It was found on the first page of the Sankhayapakasakatika (both Burmese
script version and Khmer script version), a ancient Northern Buddhist scripture
written by Pra Sirimangalajarn a prominent Chiang Mai scholar monk in B.E. 2063.
In this text it was called “Rattanapanjara Gatha.”

-Another version was found on a palm leaf manuscript in Singhalese
language called “Jinapanjaraparitta.”

Today, these documents are preserved in the National Library. According to
this information, it means that Jinapanjara gained some level of popularity since
ancient times and either monks or some lay people have been chanting it before
under several names. The various names of Jinapanjara are:

“Sutracheyyabengchon” (ส ู ต ร เช ย ย เบ ง ชร )
“Jaiyabengjon” (ไจ ย ะ เบ ง จ ร )

“Chaiyabenchon” (ชั ย เบ ็ ญ ช ร )

In this case, Jinapanjara is used for various occasions such as:
-Extending life ritual (พ ิ ธี ล ื บ ชะ ต า )

-Celebrate new house ceremony (ขึ ้ น บ ้ า น ให ม ่ )
-Asking for rain ritual (พ ิ ธี ขอ ฝน )

In the reign of King Muang Kaew (B.E.2038-2068), Jinapanjara was
mentioned as one of compulsory suttas to be chanted by monks. Thus it might be
said that Jinapanjara appeared in Chiang Mai around 500 years ago, the same time
as when Pra Sirimangalajarn composed his prominent Sankhayapakasakatika in
B.E.2063. From this evidence, Suchao assumed that Jinapanjara might have been
composed in Chiang Mai, then discovered and revised by “Somdej Toh.” Since the

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:20



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 8/12] ===
26

original edition was quite long; he edited and shortened it keeping all of its essence
with the aim of making it easier to recite.

“Burmese evidence said clearly it was created in Chiang Mai and it
was spread by word of mouth among Burmese monks and novices as
PraDhammananda Thera, Burmese monk, the abbot of Wat Thama-o,
Lampang said that he could recite Jinapanjara since he was young before
moving to Thailand.”

This assumption does not comport with the idea that Jinapanjara was written
by a Sri Lankan scholar and then imported to Thailand via Chiang Mai.
Nevertheless, a new theory was put forth by Sathienphong Wannapok in his book
“Jinapanjara Gatha”, saying something similar to that said by Suchao, that is,
Jinapanjara Gatha was formerly called “Rattana Panjara.” Sathienpong believed it
was composed by some unnamed Sri Lankan scholar. The time when it was
composed might be the same period as when the Jinakalamalipakarana, an ancient
text of The Lanna Kingdom, was composed."

Even though it might be difficult to conclude with certainty that Jinapanjara
was first composed in the Northern part of Thailand, it is clear that Jinapanjara was
known and used for 400 years in Lanna before “Somdej Toh” introduced it to the
court and people in the Central part. Accordingly, it would seem that Jinapanjara
should be well known among Northern people. However, based on interviews with a
local historian, a local ritual leader and a domestic resident, who are connected to
many people, all confirmed that, in general, Northern people do not know much
about Jinapanjara. On the contrary, most of them know Jinapanjara from the
Central part of Thailand as a mantra of “Somdej Toh.”

Deja Tiangket, local historian and one of organizers of “Pithee Saha Moncol
Sueb Chata Nai Luang” (พ ิ ธี ส ห ม ง ค ล สื บ ซะ ต า ใน ห ล ว ง ), an auspicious rite for blessing the
king, is very interested in Lanna history and also Lanna scriptures. He also worked

on the same team as Paothong Thong-Juea promoting local heritage conservation at
Mae Cham.

“If you ask older original Lanna people who don’t know much about
stories from outside, you will be surprised because most of them don’t
know either Jinapanjara or Somdej Toh.”"

According to Deja, Northern people who know Jinapanjara and are able to
recite it, usually come from these two groups:

1. “Mor Kwan” (ห ม อ ขวัญ ) that is local learned persons who conduct ritual
ceremony by reciting some Mantra. Jinapanjara is merely one of mantra sets used
by them. There is nothing special for this mantra, which is called different names,
such as “Jaiyabengchorn (ไจ ย ะ เบ ง ชร )

11 Ibid., Interview with Suchao Ploychum.
12 Sathienphong Wannapok, Jinapanjara Gatha, (Bangkok, 2004), pp.33-35
13 Interview with Deja Tiangket, 13 October 2006

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 9/12] ===
27

2. Young generation who have been educated from Bangkok or are
connected by working with people from Bangkok or other central provinces. Some
adapted this belief to practice as their personal ritual with the perception that this
gatha comes from the Central part of Thailand and belongs to “Somdej Toh.”

Even thought, it is not popular for general local people and it is not Lanna
culture to chant in daily life, Deja believes Jinapanjara could have been adapted
from Lanna to Central part of Thailand. In the past there were several wars between
Lanna and Siam after which Lanna people were taken to Siam as captives.
Moreover, there are several Lanna prayers having been brought to practice in Siam
without reference being made to Lanna."

Por Nan Chan Sanglar (พ ่ อ ห น า น จ ั น ท ร ์ แส ง ห ล ้ า ), one of “Mor Kwan” who was

born and lives in Payao province, accepts that Jinapanjara is one mantra used in
ritual ceremonies such as new home ceremony, ordination, or bad spirit suppressing
ceremony. However, Por Nan Chan emphasizes it is not a mantra for general people
but for specialists who are capable of conducting rites such as spirit suppressors, and
monks and novices who are well trained in magic. Nan Chan learned this gatha from
his monk master while he was a novice 30 years ago.

“I don’t know much about it. I just heard that it came from Tibet. For
me I cannot recite without a book. I just remember some parts. It might be
known by some groups, not in general. I heard that it works for suppressing
spirits or when we want protection from sacred figures. Most normal
Northern people don’t know about this. We called it by different names:
“Jaiyabengchorn™ or “Benjabengchorn” is

As for ordinary people, Pratthana Hanmethee who was born and lives in
Lampang, now runs her own ceramic factory and is responsible for a community
radio program. As a business woman and local media owner, she knows many
groups of people in the area. From her experience, Jinapanjara has been used
among business people who want something to encourage themselves.

“I know Jinapanjara from Bangkok, not from Lampang .Personally, I
don’t chant but some of my business friends usually chant it for prosperity
and good luck. We just know it came from “Somdej Toh Wat Rakang.”'®

3.4 DIFFERENT VERSIONS OF JINAPANJARA GATHA

Today, Jinapanjara Gatha is found in 3 countries: Thailand, Myanmar, and
Sri Lanka and there are several versions differing in detail and length. Suchao
Ploychum has compiled different 8 versions of Jinapanjara in his book, “Prawat
Gatha Chinnabanchorn.”<see Appendix A> In 1992, The Jinapanjara Gatha
Chanting Club was founded to encourage people to chant for peacefulness. The club
has its own interpretation of the text. It is quite different from other versions chanted
in Thailand. All versions are similar in terms of content but different by their length,

14 Ibid. Deja Tiengket.
15 Interview with Por Nan Chan Sanglar, 23 November 2006.
16 Interview with Pratthana Hanmethee, 8 December 2006

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2560 21-48-29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 10/12] ===
28

type of poetry style and some words. For example, regarding the first stanza, there
are at least 3 versions written:

-JAYASARAKATA BUDDHA
-JAYASANAKATA BUDDHA
-JIYASANAKATA BUDDHA

The present Supreme Patriarch, gave his words on Jinapanjara’s origin in
1975 that:

“Each Jinapanjara Gatha version from each religious school is not
similar, it would be better if we could end all as once.”

Whereas Sathienphong Wannapok confirmed that in term of Pali translation,
all dissimilar words have some meaning, even though a little bit different.

“If we chant for auspicious power, the meaning does not matter; but if
we chant for faith and wisdom we should know its exact meaning.”"®

For Thai chanters, it seems that some dissimilar wording is not a problem;
they just trust the one they chant without any doubt, although there are at least 9
versions of Jinapanjara making it difficult to identify which one is the original.
With the fact that it is composed in Pali which most lay people do not know much, it
has becomes like a sacred verse. People are not that concerned with its accuracy;
they just recognized that it was revised by Somdej Toh, who is very respected as a
virtuous monk as well as a great amulet maker. Significantly, people recognize
Jinapanjara as the prayer used by Somdej Toh in reciting incantation over all his
amulets. Thus it is likely the best of best selected by “Somdej Toh” among all
prayers in terms of its superstitious power.

As there is a strong connection between “Somdej Toh” and “Jinapanjara
Gatha”, whenever chanters recite Jinapanjara they have to think of “Somdej Toh”
and, vice versa, when they want to contact “Somdej Toh”, they have to chant
Jinapanjara. Why does a monk who passed away over 130 years ago still persists in
people’s attention as if he is still alive? This question will be addressed and we will
come to know “Somdej Toh” in a next section.

17 Somdej Pra Yanasangvara, the Supreme Patriarch, Jinapanjara Gatha, (Bangkok: Dhamma Sapa, 2005.)
18 Sathienphong Wannapok, Jinapanjara Gatha, (Bangkok: Ariyamag Funds, 2004), p.36.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:29



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 11/12] ===
29

3.5 “SOMDEJ TOH” JINAPANJARA REVISER
SOMDEJ PRA BUDDHAJARN TOH BRAHAMARANGSI

As 90 percent of the Thai population is Buddhist, it is not strange for Thais
to rely on venerable monks for refuge. But, in case of “Somdej Toh” it is quite
distinct since even though he passed away 133 years, he is still admired by followers
as if he was alive. His story has been retold many times; with his pictures appearing
on CDs, VCDs and books. His name is usually mentioned among amulet collectors
and Jinapanjara chanters whenever they chant.

Why is this venerable monk so attractive to Thai Buddhist? Somdej Toh’s
story has many versions, like his Jinapanjara Gatha. In books published by “The
Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting Club”, it is stressed that he was an illegitimate son of
King Rama II and a Kampang Petch villager called “Ngud.” Whereas another
version says he was the illegitimate child of King Rama I instead. Meanwhile, other
version believes he was born in 1788 as such a commoner in Ayutthaya and then
moved to Angthong and Bangkok.

However, the theory he was the lineage of a king seems to be believed more
than others. Sathienphong Wannapok, a researcher on “Somdej Toh’s” background
agreed that “Somdej Toh” is most likely of royal lineage since there are two pieces
of evidence to confirm this. The first piece of evidence showing his royal lineage is
that when he passed away in 1872, he was recorded with the royal word by Somdej
Pra Mahasamanachao Krom Praya Pavaresvariyalongkorn. This raised a big

question since the royal word, “ถึ ง ซี พ ิ ต ั ก ษั ย ", normally is applied only to a royal family

member.'” Another piece of evidence mentioned among researchers is that King
Rama II presented him a royal boat "เร ื อ ก ั น ย า ห ล ั ง ค า ก ร ะ แซ ง .” This kind of boat is usually

used only by royal member in the level of “Pra Ong Chao” (พ ร ะ อ ง ค ์ เจ ้ า ).

19 Sathienphong Wannapok, Jinapanjara Gatha, referred to Somdej Pra Mahasamanachao Krom Praya
Pavaresvariyalongkorn, The raining account chronicle, No.3 p.44.

เต ย ผ เ ซ ท ว เป



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch3.pdf | Page 12/12] ===
30

Of course, the evidence set forth above might be a condition to make him
become a more charismatic figure. But the more significant point seems to be his
remarkable behavior. According to history, even though he was very intellectual and
proficient in both Tripidok and meditation practice and, importantly, admired by the
King, “Somdej Toh” usually kept his life far from wealth and power. He preferred to
live as a humble and simple monk. It was not until the reign of King Rama IV that
he was admitted to be in the high rank as Somdej Pra Buddhajarn. About his
proficiency, Sathienphong Wannapok stated that:

“For my opinion, only Jinapanjara Gatha is enough to show his
ability on Pali since it was very perfectly composed.”

If Jinapanjara Gatha is the evidence showing his ability in Pali, probably
“Pra Somdej” (his amulets) might be evidence of his meditation practice since they
are very successful in terms of sacredness among collectors. “Somdej Toh” died in
1872 when he was 84 years old. One hundred years later, his amulets gained high
demand, as well as Jinapanjara Gatha, his fine piece of revising becomes widely
chanted by people in Thailand.

Considering the evidence and information, the history of Jinapanjara is still
a mystery. No one is able to confirm exactly the place and time it was written. It is
possible that it was written by a Sri Lankan scholar then passed to Thailand, or it
was a masterpiece of a Chiang Mai scholar monk which was then copied by Sri
Lanka and after that returned to Thailand, again with unknown origin background.
This chanting verse has appeared for at least 500 years in Thailand before it was
introduced to the court by Somdej Toh and became widely accepted by common
people since the reign of King Rama IV.

In that case, the question is why is it so popular and well-known by Thai
people? What are the main factors stimulating Jinapanjara into the top of vogue
among various other prayers in Thailand? Is it merely the influence from “Somdej
Toh” or are there other factors? In the next chapter we will study the Jinapanjara
chanters and the benefits they think can be obtained through the chanting in order to
know more about people’s motivation behind this phenomenon.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21-48-29

