=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 1/20] ===
CHAPTER IV

JINAPANJARA: AN ANALYSIS ON
CHANTING AND CHANTERS

In the course of this research, in depth interviews have been done with
various groups of people. It was found that Jinapanjara chanters are not limited to
elder persons or people who have strong interest in religious practice this chant is
also known and believed among teenagers and middle-class workers as well.

The following were the topics set up to explore what people feel and do with
respect to the Jinapanjara.

-How do people feel about it?

-How do they practice it?

-What are benefits they have gotten from serious chanting?

-What are the main differences between Jinapanjara and other Buddhist
prayers?

4.1. SOME JINAPANJARA CHANTERS IN THE INTERNET

As mentioned previously, if the word “Jinapanjara” is searched on the internet,
many items will be retrieved, both on websites and web boards. For example, on one
internet web board, a man posted his belief in Jinapanjara Gatha, saying he chants it
regularly and really believes it is capable of protecting him when someone tends to
harm or beat him for any reason. He made a posting on 17-01-2005, and then 47
readers came to share this topic, posting their views and chanting experience until
13-10-2006. Most of the people posting comments were also chanters who often or
regularly chant and have faith in Jinapanjara, while some just came to appreciation
the good topic and said they would try this after being inspired by the amazing
experiences. One point worth mentioning here is that some of readers started
chanting Jinapanjara since they were young:

“I started chanting Jinapanjara because of my Grandma. At that time,
I was in secondary school. Noticeably, after chanting regularly, I often
could get some amazing support.”

“10 years ago, when I was in university, I suffered from a severe
backache because of renal calculus. Knowing that it required a lot of
money to heal, I, though I should make a wish to Somdej Toh and ask him
to help me and I offered chanting Jinapanjara 100 times for worship. One

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 2/20] ===
32

week after that, surprisingly, the backache was absolutely gone. By this
experience, I really believe in it and still keep chanting until today”
The Bad Guy

“] started chanting Jinapanjara since I was in M.1 (first year in Thai
secondary school). I took 3 days to remember the whole thing. This is
because my mother said that Jinapanjara always providing good things to
chanters.™

Khochpaak

“For me it is a supreme prayer, because it was the first one I chanted
when I was in secondary school. Since then I still keep chanting especially
when I have an examination. Once I could not prepare enough for an exam
and this subject was very important to me. But something strange happened.
The teacher could not find my exam paper. I needed to use that score result
to ask for permission. Finally, I passed that subject with just exactly the
point that permission required. Until now I still wondered that it must be
due to my teacher loosing my exam paper so that he had to let me pass.”

Sunny

“ have chanted Jinapanjara since I was a teenager until now, 40
years old. From my experience, I found many good miracles; and moreover
I have also used Jinapanjara to help others in emergency incidents many
times. I suggest chanters keep on faith while you are chanting because it is
not only chanting that makes it work, but keeping faith on the gatha as well
as on Somdej Toh is the essence of using it effectively.”

Chanu-123

“] started the chant of Jinapanjara at 18 years old. It is my first prayer
which I chant regularly every day until now. Whoever has bad luck, I
strong recommend that they chant Jinapanjara 9 times in the morning and 9
times in the evening. Believe me you will get better soon.”

Angus

“] started chanting Jinapanjara since I was in secondary school full of
curiosity but without faith. Seven days after that I dreamed of Somdej Toh
clearly as if it was true. In the dream he was chanting Jinapanjara

1 “ Than Dai Mee Prasobkan Dee Dee Thee Dai Suad Pra Gatha Chinnabanchorn™, <Online> 2006. Available from

http://www .palungjit.com/board//archive/index.php/t-3439.htmI<2006 ,November 20>
2 Ibid. “ Than Dai Mee Prasobkan Dee Dee Thee Dai Suad Pra Gatha Chinnabanchorn™
3 Ibid. “ Than Dai Mee Prasobkan Dee Dee Thee Dai Suad Pra Gatha Chinnabanchorn™
4 Ibid. “ Than Dai Mee Prasobkan Dee Dee Thee Dai Suad Pra Gatha Chinnabanchorn™
5 Ibid. “ Than Dai Mee Prasobkan Dee Dee Thee Dai Suad Pra Gatha Chinnabanchorn”

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 3/20] ===
33

accompanied with another 3 monks. After awakening, amazingly, I could
recite the whole gatha. Someone interpreted that Somdej Toh came to me
with compassion since I chanted without faith. He came to show his
existence in order to create my right attitude on chanting. From this story I
advise whoever to chant Jinapanjara and chant translation along with the
text for right understanding. That will bring you the most benefit from
Jinapanjara.™

Nefertity

These are just a few postings of Jinapanjara chanters appearing in the
internet. The significant point is that even the internet and this new technology
might take part in increasing Jinapanjara’s popularity. Most of them were inspired
personally by their parents, relatives, friends or books. It also shows that Jinapanjara
is not some thing far away from the young generation. On the contrary, it is quite
close to them as an invisible refuge.

4.2 DIRECT INTERVIEWS

CASE I
UNREVEALED-NAMED GIRL, 21
SECOND YEAR UNIVERSITY STUDENT 7

“I first started chanting Jinapanjara Gatha at the age of 15. At first, reciting
the whole chant was very difficult. Three months later I succeeded reciting
without looking at the book. Normally, I chant one time before sleeping.
But during the day time, I will do it as often as I can. To me, nine times is
excellent. But it is all right to do more or less, depending to my schedule.
In a case of special need, which is usually about my studying, such as when
I do not feel confident about some subjects, I will chant 99 times,
dedicating it to “Somdej Toh”, as a commitment if my request becomes
successful. But chanting for the whole 99 times in one day is quite a big
deal. I usually divide chanting into several days and chanted 9-10 times for
each day continuously until 99 times has been done finally.”

Apart from her belief, she does not feel the need to offer things when she
makes a wish just commit herself to make an effort on a difficult task. This is
enough and more effective than offering any objects. When the girl was asked about
“Somdej Toh,” she accepted that she has very strong trust in him.

“When I think about monks I would think of him first. For me, he is
a kind- hearted monk. He makes me feel warm with a sense of confidence
and safety. Sometime, when I have to stay home alone, I do not feel scared
because I have him and Jinapanjara Gatha as my refuge that gives me a
sense of security. Moreover, I can feel my concentration is better than

6 “ Than Dai Mee Prasobkan Dee Dee Thee Dai Suad Pra Gatha Chinnabanchorn”
7 Interview with Unrevealed - Named Girl, 13 November 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 4/20] ===
34

before. This is judged from a fact that I can remember the whole
Jinapanjara Gatha. So what about other ป ั น่ ท อ ร?”*

CASE II
PAPHICHAYA CHAISKUL, 24
MASTER DEGREE STUDENT IN ENGINEERING
CHULALONGKORN UNIVERSITY’

Initially, Jinapanjara was introduced to Papitchaya by his father when he was
18 years old and a first year student of Engineering Faculty, Chulalongkorn
University. But this first recommendation was not effective since after he tried
chanting a bit he quit shortly after that. The second inspiration was made by Dr.
Boonchai Kosolthanakul, the teacher and owner of FAST ENGLISH one of the
well- known English Teaching School in Bangkok. This time it was successful in
motivating Paphichaya to become one of the ardent chanters of Jinapanjara.

“Basically, I respect Dr. Boonchai as he is a talented person. For this
reason when he mentioned and suggested that students chant Jinapanjara
Gatha in order to improve learning skills, I was interested to try again to
chanting this long gatha.”

According to Papitchaya, Dr. Boonchai often gave talks on the benefits of
Jinapanjara Gatha and also other Dhamma subjects especially those related to
“Somdej Toh” while he was giving lectures on English lessons.

“He usually stated that concentration is one of the main success
factors in doing anything, especially studying. By his words, Jinapanjara is
good for increasing concentration. Personally, I respect him so I believe
everything he advised. That is why I try to chant Jinapanjara again whether
it works for me or not and it already proved —it absolutely works.”

From a student who was quite poor in English and got “D” grade in the first
year, Paphichaya was capable of getting a high score in TOEFL after he chanted
Jinapanjara seriously 9 times every day and making a wish that he get 650 score.
The result surprised his friends and even himself because he got 647 score. That is
very high score and close to his wish.

“I think Jinapanjara is a good tool for building concentration and also
in the attempt in doing everything especially studying and doing tough
tasks like exams. It was very incredible for me to get such a high score like
this. Even though I studied really hard, without supporting from
Jinapanjara I think it was impossible.”

This happened not only one time, on his second time at taking the TOEFL
examination, he made a wish from “Somdej Toh” again that may he get the full
score 677. This time he got 667.

8 Interview with Unrevealed - Named Girl, 13 November 2006.
9 Interview with Paphichaya Chaiskul, 4 July 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 5/20] ===
35

“Two of my friends who study with Dr. Boonchai like me used to
make very specific requests from “Somdej Toh” in TOEFL’s WRITING
PART which contains 180 issues. They made a wish that the issues they
prepared be identical with the issues in the exam. And very unbelievable, it
was as they requested. The issues in the examination were the issues they
had prepared. That enabled them to get a good score on that exam.”

In addition, he believed that not only his memory and concentration became
better, his self confidence is also better as well.

“] am a kind of negative thinking person. This makes me usually
depressed with a lack of confidence. Importantly, I was unhappy in daily
life; but after I chanted the Jinapanjara continuously, everything I said
disappeared. My mental heath improved; good things often come to my
life.”

“Actually, I am such a person who never pays attention to religious
issues; but now I feel interested in the Dhamma and have the Jinapanjara as
my inner — refuge. This makes me realize how religion is important to my life.”

CASE 111
MATTHEW (NICK NAME), THAI, 27
A BANK'S SALE EXECUTIVE"

Among people who were chanting together in a dimly light hall, a young
man sat quietly for hours without any movement. He looked calm and serious during
his long time in Bor Nam Mon at Wat Indravihan. He managed to chant Jinapanjara
Gatha 30 times.

“I knew Jinapanjara from a chanting book 9 years ago in 1998. At
that time, I was stressed and felt pressured from the economic collapse. I
started chanting with the aim to energize myself. Normally I chant 10 times
and up and make a wish about working matters and it usually works for me.”

Matthew said that after chanting Jinapanjara everything seems to go in a
good direction; his memory improved, as well as his working ability; and his clients
increased as well.

“Besides bed time chanting, I also chant whenever I drive. It makes
me calm down and can keep everything in control in a troubled situation or
emergency.”

Matthew also stated that chanting Jinapanjara with a loud voice is effective
since it will generate more power to chanters and will bring good force to chanters.
He often comes to chant at Bor Nam Mon, whenever he can, on average 12-13
times/month. Every time at Wat Indra, he normally chants at least 10 times since he
believes 10 times is the minimum quantity for being successful especially in
business negotiation.

10 Interview with Mattew.<nick name>, 4 July 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35

LUNA

ม บ ม



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 6/20] ===
36

CASE IV
BENZ (NICK NAME), THAI 26

TRADESWOMAN'!

Benz is another chanter found at Wat Indravihan. She looked calm. After
finishing her chanting activity in Bor Nam Mon and before going home, Benz
bought two bottles of holy water. She felt a bit surprised when being asked about
Jinapanjara. However, after knowing the aim of the talk, she allowed herself to be
interviewed but denied to give her real name. According to Benz, she has been
chanting Jinapanjara Gatha for three years, starting on recommendation of her older
sister who knew this prayer from Wat Indravihan. With a guarantee that it will bring
safety and good luck to the chanter, she created her own way to chant this long
prayer by putting it on the table in a prayer room and chanting as loud as she could.
She believed that chanting with voice is more effective than chanting in the mind.
As a shopkeeper, after chanting Jinapanjara regularly one time every day, Benz
noticed that customers began increasing; her financial status and her personal life are
now going into a good direction.

“My life is obviously better. I did succeed in several matters. It
probably resulted from my peaceful mind so that everything is improving.
But, actually, I never have had magical experience like others. I just feel
that it is good for me. It provides me the feeling “Sabayjai” and that is
enough for keeping it.”

Benz also introduced Jinapanjara to others and strongly recommended that it
will bring good things to chanters as well as avert all bad luck. She came to chant at
Wat Indra two times and Wat Rakhang two or three times; but normally she chants
every morning after offering food to Buddha Images at her home.

“I feel that Jinapanjara is an ancient prayer which is likely a multi-
function mantra, and it is quite popular not among the aged but young
people too. Inside Bor Nam Mon you will find young people more than
elderly.”

Benz used to take three day retreats for Buaj Chee Pram. It could be said that
the only religious activity she does nowadays is chanting the Jinapanjara.

CASE V
LT. PHITHAKRAJ NILPRUEK, 31
A COMPANY COMMANDER OF MARINE CORPS

LT. Phithakraj had been sent on active duty to Narathivas province from
October 2005 till September 2006. Almost one year in the Deep South, he faced
bomb incidents several times but survived fortunately without any injury. Some of
his friends were killed. LT. Phitharaj said he took Jinapanjara as his amulet and also
recommended his subordinates to chant as well.

“My father suggested this prayer to me with advice that it would
bring me protective power. According to his experience as a soldier in the
Vietnam War, my father kept faith in this prayer and has been chanting

11 Interview with Benze.<nick name>, 4 July 2006.
12 Interview with LT. Phithakraj Nilpruek, 17 October 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 7/20] ===
37

Jinapanjara Gatha until today. Formerly, I was not much interested in this
gatha. But when I had to work in the Deep South it became my daily
activity, 1-3 times a day depending on the situation. On a usual situation, 1
time before going out to work is enough; on serious day or whenever I feel
insecure 3 times is needed. But on every Thursday 9 times is perfect for
special occasion.”*

According to LT. Phithakraj, the power of Jinapanjara was shown in 2005
when he and his team faced two serious explosions incidents. He was safe while
some of his team got a bit injury.

“When I worked in the Deep South, every amulet was in need. For
me I chanted Jinapanjara and “Gatha Luang Poo Tuad.” I suggested to my
team to chant too. I didn’t know exactly about its benefit. I just felt that it
provided me self-confidence and a sense of courage. That was very
important for us. However, with regularly chanted, my team never faced
uncontrollable violent incidents whereas other teams did often”

Asked about his private life, he revealed that his girl friend also believed in
chanting Jinapanjara. As her home town is in See Kiew, Nakhorn Ratchasima,
sometimes when they go there together they would stop at “Somdej Toh Center”
built by Soraphong Chartri at See kiew and have a peacefully duo-chanting. With 14
years of chanting Jinapanjara, LT. Phithakraj has been quite impressed by this
prayer and recommends to his children to keep on chanting like his father did to him
before. Another point should be noted here is that besides Jinapanjara benefits,
LT.Phithakraj also related some incredible incidents that he had got “Pra Somdej”
amulet by chance from someone.

“I am interested in “Pra Somdej” for a long time and want to own a
real one if possible. But it is impossible because they are very expensive.
After I have been chanting Jinapanjara, “Pra Somdej” came to me for free
by chance. It is quite unbelievable.”

Today, he has moved to work in Bangkok and still chants Jinapanjara
sometimes but not seriously and regularly like before when he was in the Deep South.

CASE VI
BOONYARUT APHICHARTTRISORN, 53
INTERNATIONAL NEWS EDITOR

KOM CHAD LUEK NEWSPAPER
As the international news editor of a well known newspaper, Booyarut is not
shy to reveal her faith in Jinapanjara, even though it is in quite a contrast with her
image. Starting with listening to cassette tapes in the car, Boonyarut turned to chant
herself just 4-5 years ago.

“My important motivation was Petch Pra Uma. I am crazy fond of
this novel. In Episode II it was mentioned about Jinapanjara as an effective
weapon that Darin performed to suppress a monster troop and save every

* Thursday according to Thai belief is a teacher’s day; but in the context of “Somdej Toh™ history, it means his birthday.
13 Interview with Boonyarut Aphicharttrisorn, 27 November 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 8/20] ===
38

life in her team even without supporting by Rapin. I was very impressed
then. [ started chanting after merely listening to audio tapes several years.”

Boonyarut prefers chanting while driving. As soon as getting in the car,
chanting will start automatically with an average of at least 8 times a day. But on the
day when there is a traffic jam, it means Boonyarut’s opportunity to chant more than
usual. Asking about the motivation to keep on chanting until now, she mentioned
about 4 incidents which obviously show Jinapanjara power according to her
experience.

1. Two years ago, when she was driving home at night, she had a serious car
crash getting hit by a trailer-truck. But even though the car spun around she was
totally safe.

2. After that she faced an accident from a trailer- truck due to its stopping
suddenly. At that time she was able to stop the car before hitting the truck.

3. Not only did she survive these accidents, but sometime she is able to feel a
sixth sense about accidents in the future. Last year on the Motorway road, while she
was driving, a scene of car crash appeared clearly to her mind two times. She
decided to slow down. After a few minutes, a car in front of her had an accident.

4. October 13, 2005, Booyarut appeared on the first page news as a person
who survived a thunderstruck in Cambodia. From her words, the thunderbolt struck
straight to her body; she was unconscious just for ten minutes and had a burnt trace
on her neck.

Boonyarut stated that the main benefit of Jinapanjara is about preventing or
being protected from all kinds of accidents. Moreover the minor potential of
Jinapanjara is it also is able to bring chanters good things such as opportunities for a
good job or even when plunged into trouble to get support unexpectedly.

“Personally, when there is nobody with me I prefer to recite with a
loud voice because it enables me to build concentration better than
chanting in the mind. From my opinion, if compare among other famous
prayers like Pahung and Yod Pra Kan Tripidok, Jinapanjara is the simplest
one. I feel attached to Jinapanjara sometimes. When I chant, it reminds me
of the Arahant who are mentioned in its contents. ”

As a news editor, Boonyarut applies Jinapanjara as a means to produce
concentration as well as consciousness and peaceful mind which are really important
to her task. On the other hand, even though she has a strong faith in chanting and
Dhamma, she does not like chanting in the temple. She just attends Dhamma
practicing courses sometimes.

“I am rather against every form of practicing the Dhamma, because it
has many rules depending on each school of Dhamma. I prefer self-
practicing on my own with chanting approach.”

Besides Jinapanjara, she added that Gatha Luang Poo Tuad Wat Chang Hai,
Pattani is another one she pays respect to most as well as Jinapanjara.*

* (ว ิ ล ฝ่า ล Luang Poo Tuad reads,“Namo Bhodisatto Akantimaya Itibagava.”

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 9/20] ===
39

CASE VII
RATTANAPORN FAROH, 38

YOGA INSTRUCTOR
Unlike other cases, Rattanaporn is a Jinapanjara chanter who is able to chant
both the central version and the Lanna version. Growing up in a family seriously
concerned with chanting, she learned several prayers from her grandmother since
she was 3. Eventually, at the age of 22 Rattanaporn became an ardent chanter
because of her own belief and experience.

“Originally, I started with Chao Khun Nor version ten times a day
after listening to it in the car for a while. But after a retreat at Wat Pradthat
Haripunchai, Lampoon, I had a chance to learn Jinapanjara in Lanna
Version. So I can chant both general version and Lanna version as well.
For me Jinapanjara is a strong Mantra that can build a crystal wall around
the body of a chanter. Before you chant you should inform those
nonhuman beings around you to go away otherwise they could be hurt by
the power of Jinapanjara and come to hurt you later.”

Rattanaporn really believes in Jinapanjara so that she recommends others to
chant as well as writing Jinapanjara CD copies herself and distributing them among
her friends and also her yoga students. Although, unable to count how many CDs
she has given out or how many people that knew Jinapanjara from her, she is a
private distributor that has spread out Jinapanjara effectively with a strong
recommendation. Today, she still keeps on propagating Jinapanjara in anyway she
can. She personally does chanting Jinapanjara ten times a day with belief that this is
the right number of chanting Jinapanjara.

CASE VIII
A DOCTOR WHO DENIED TO BE NAMED, 45"

With a Chinese-Thai background as stereotype of the general doctor, he
looks bright, smart and modern. He does not show any sign of being connected to
traditional activity like chanting at all. But, in fact, he does. During the last two
years, he has been given a number of “Somdej Toh™s Phra Somdej of different
varieties. Some have diamonds and gems on them while some have small pieces of
gold in its texture.

“It is so amazing that I can have all these things in my life. I have not
tried to calculate the value of all these. And I don’t think about it in this
aspect too. I have one small box containing three very old amulets that
were distributed at the King V funeral. I also have a specially made bell,
sizes about one stand cup, with Somdej Toh imprint and “Pra Tat”
(Buddha's relics) in it. There are so many strange things happening in my
life together with all these. It seems to me that I have this special event
with some purpose.

So, one little thing that I can do is to pray “Jinapanjara.” The length
of this prayer is not a problem for me at all. I spend much more time in
chanting. And I am starting to meditate using newly learned techniques
from my ‘network’ that help introduce me to “Somdej Toh.” After I have

14 Interview with Rattanaporn Faroh, 24 November 2006
15 Interview with Doctor Who Denied to be Named, 20 March 2007.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 10/20] ===
40

been exposed to a large amount of “Somdej Toh” amulets, I feel so amazed
at how “Somdej Toh” managed to produce all these. I also found some
connected feelings with him.

I chant as part of my spiritual life to develop and refine my
mind/spirit. When I chant, I observe very closely my breathing. And I
experience deep calmness. Therefore, chanting Jinapanjara should not be
considered in isolation, but looked at in the whole picture of my belief
system and my life practice. The flowing of “Somdej Toh” amulet into my
life is an event that shapes/refines my belief system. It’s so special when
many special objects like these coming into your life. Many people,
however rich they are, can not find these objects.”

Now, he chants Jinapanjara one time before sleeping with other prayers
every night. This belief is like a secret that lies behind his modern image.

“Science and technology sometime is limited to provide answers for
human questions, especially question about the variation of life.”

That why he keeps on chanting Jinapanjara as well as keeps faith in “Somde;j
Toh” and has a two-side life; one is connected with superstitious power he
experienced and one represents the image of a general doctor who is expected to be
in the context of society.

4.3 SOME UNIQUE POINTS IN JINAPANJARA PHENOMENON
All the cases studies here are just a few examples of Jinapanjara chanters

selected to be interviewed on a random approach among different groups of people.
Besides these cases, the experiences found in the book entitled “Prasobkan Poosuad
Pra Gatha Chinabanchorn” compiled by The Jinapanjara Chanting Club have been
used as a source of information as well. The following are the noteworthy points
found in the study.

4.3.1 THINKING OF JINAPANJARA, THINKING OF SOMDEJ TOH

It might be said that the Jinapanjara phenomenon is running along with
“Somdej Toh” popularity. Many aspects of Jinapanjara are often associated with
“Somdej Toh.” No matter who was the actual original author, most of the people
seem to ignore that point. They merely know that this gatha was selected by
“Somdej Toh” and used in reciting incantation over amulets. That is enough for their
faith. As generally understood, the Jinapanjara Gatha ‘belongs’ to “Somdej Toh.”
Everyone who wants to chant should ask permission from him or at least think of
him whenever they chant.

Starting with the instructions on how to chant, it appears widely in chanting
books that new chanters have to start on Thursday with flowers, incense sticks and
candles. Some are more specific in detail saying that the offering should be 9
incense sticks, 9 candles, 9 flowers and/or a specified kind of flower, such as lotus

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 11/20] ===
41

or Jasmine only. New chanters have to worship the Triple Gem first then think of
“Somdej Toh” as the owner, asking him for permission to use his chant. It is
believed that following these instructions will provide chanters success in reciting it
in a short time. As for the starting day, Thursday, it is recognized in Thai society as
“the Teachers Day” and it is believed to be an auspicious day for starting any
learning. But in the case of Jinapanjara, it means more than that since it was the
birthday of “Somdej Toh.”* The good places to start chanting are “Vihan Somdej”
at Wat Rakhang and Bor Nam Mon at Wat Indravihan which are both associated
with him.

4.3.2 THE MORE YOU CHANT THE MORE EFFECTIVE IT IS
It was found that Jinapanjara has been used by people who demand several
things depending on their needs at that moment. The point is the quantity of
chanting is treated as the key to success. It is usually applied following the belief of
each chanter, meaning that it is related to the wish they request. For example:
-At least 1 time a day, usually used before going sleep or before going
out to work, in the usual situation.
-2-3 times, for a bit of an unusual situation or on the day chanters would
have a tough task they felt worry about.
-9 times, an auspicious number followed by most chanters, which is
considered an efficient quantity enabling chanters to achieve all their wishes.
-10 times, some schools claimed that 10 was the original quantity before
it was adapted to be 9 times.
-108 times, the number for big requests, such as before undertaking an
important business negotiation or ask for recovery from an illness.
-100 times-1,000 times, the maximum quantity found in the case of
Soraphong and his family using this number when he wanted to ask for some
thing that is quite special or a very tough task.
-As much as possible, treated by ardent chanters who have strong faith
in Jinapanjara and Somdej Toh. In this case the Jinapanjara is usually chanted
whenever they drive or on travel.

It should be noted that most serious chanters prefer chanting Jinapanjara
during the day time. It is not usually chanted at bed time. They gave the reason that
they need time and concentration, so the day time is most suitable. Moreover,
chanting with voice as loud as possible is suggested by some ardent chanters
because it will bring chanters more success, power and concentration than chanting
in the mind.

* “Somdej Toh” was believed to be born on Thursday 17 of April, 1788.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 12/20] ===
42

4.3.3 MULTI-FUNCTIONED PRAYER
In general, prayers are usually believed to have some specific benefit such as
the Seven Bojjhanga being good for one who is suffering from sickness, the Yantun
Nimittang is good for protection from nightmares or the Metta Sutta is good for
charming. The Jinapanjara is believed to give more benefits than that. From
followers experience and belief, Jinapanjara gives great protection to chanters as
well as bringing or leading chanters to good thing. Moreover, some insisted that it
also works as mind purification as well. In the book “Prasobkan Poosuad Pra Gatha
Chinabanchorn” of The Jinapanjara Chanting Club, the benefits of regularly
chanting Jinapanjara are demonstrated as below:
-Protection from accidents and harms
-As an auspicious charm
-Giving a sixth sense warning in advance in case of accidents and bad luck
-One who has meditative power can use it to make sacred water in order
to heal some sicknesses
-Useful in negotiations with “Chao Kam Nai Ven” (one who has anger
toward a person who has committed bad karma to him or her in the past and

ready to harm them) by offering them plenty of chanting such as 500 or 1,000
times in case of sickness.

-Provide blessing for worker’s prosperity as well as student’s success
-Decrease bad karma from the past
-Enhance national security in case of big group chantings'®

However, from the interview cases studies and stories from different
chanters, it is found that the benefits claimed by chanters are generally as follows:

4.3.3.1 ACCIDENT PROTECTION

This is the most noted benefit widely believed among chanters. It applies to
chanting in the car as a car protector, encouraging chanters to feel confident for their
safety. In this sense it is usually chanted either when chanters are driving or are
struck in a traffic jam. Many chanters trust that Jinapanjara enables them to be safe
in case of an accident, despite the fact that they might have a good safety system in
their cars.

“Every time I take a motorcycle, I have to chant Jinapanjara because
it is the only thing you can do at that time. I don’t know whether it can save
me or not, but it is better than doing nothing. Actually, it makes me feel

16 The Jinapanjara Chanting Club, Prasobkan Poosuad Pra Gatha Chinabanchorn, pp.169-171.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 13/20] ===
43
reassured that if an accident happens there is an invisible thing beside me
to saves me finally.”
A journalist who denied to be named

4.3.3.2 HEALING AND RECOVERING

One of the most significant purposes, besides accident protection, is that
many people apply chanting Jinapanjara when they get seriously sick. They have a
strong belief that it will enable them to survive or get better from the severe
sickness. This can be seen in case of Jinda Hengsomboon, the author of the book
“Kunanuphap hang Pra Gatha Jinapanjara.” 1t is stated on page 25 that obviously
she survived because of Jinapanjara. In the book the author said that during the time
when she was seriously ill, she suffered from weakness, she could not breathe
normally and was out of energy. She made an attempt to focus on chanting
Jinapanjara and finally got well within three hours. This inspired her to write the
book referenced above.

According to Phanomthien’s belief, he said in an interview that when he
suffered from temporary paralysis he focused on chanting Jinapanjara continuously
from 6 p.m. until 3 a.m. He got better then at 6 a.m. He was absolutely fine and was
able to go back home. People in these two cases strongly believed in the Jinapanjara
as a remedy prayer which save their life during an emergency moment.

In the instructions of Jinapanjara Chanting Club, instruction number 6 says
that if patients keep on chanting when they get sick, it will amazingly enable them to
recover sooner. Moreover, it also works for other purposes such as to dedicate the
chanting merit to the “Chao Kam Nai Ven” of the sick person.

4.3.3.3. INVISIBLE REFUGE FOR STUDENTS

This benefit could be seen in the case of Dr. Boonchai, Paphichaya and his
students, and the unnamed girl at Soraphong’s house. All emphasized that whenever
they have to take a tough exam, the Jinapanjara would be used seriously as part of
their learning process. Although they worked hard, they still thought it would not be
enough. So the Jinapanjara is applied as the students’ refuge. It should be noted that
Jinapanjara is only one prayer to serve students for general exams in school to
English exams like TOEFL. This seems in strong contrast to their modern and hi-
technology image.

17 Interview with a Journalist who denied to be named, 9 August 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 14/20] ===
Dr. Boonchai gave an explanation for this benefit that:

“The Jinapanjara is effective for brain arranging. It could be viewed
as a “brain’s arranging equipment.” When our brain is in order, it would be
very effective to do anything, especially study. There were many parents of
my students who called me with thanks that I have made their kids better.
Actually, I did nothing, but the Jinapanjara did. I suggested to them to
chant Jinapanjara regularly and some wanted to try since they wanted to
prove if it really works or not. And finally when they knew by their own
experience, they would continue chanting themselves.”'®

It not only works for his students, the Jinapanjara also works to himself. Dr.
Boonchai believes that his study has much improved until he could get a good job
and has a good life today. All of this he attributes to Jinapanjara, the prayer he has
been chanting since the age of 12 until present, 9 times a day.

“In my case, my concentration and thinking are really better than
ever. It enables me to control myself and also realize what is good or bad
for me; what should be done or should not. Briefly, Jinapanjara affected me
so much in terms of developing my brain potential. Originally, I was not an
excellent student. I have now succeeded in taking several tough exams
amazingly. These include successes in studying at Trium Udom School, in
entrancing to the Arts faculty of Chulalongkorn University, in getting a
good job in Ministry of Foreign affairs and in getting a Fulbright
scholarship. These happened after I kept on regularly chanting Jinapanjara
and meanwhile studying hard.”"’

Although Jinapanjara is likely viewed as an instant prayer providing many
advantages to chanters, one point that has never been heard from its followers, even
among teenagers, are love and relationship problems. This aspect has never been
mentioned as a Jinapanjara capacity.

4.3.4 ONE PRAYER, MANY PRODUCTS

Normally, prayers appear in prayer books; but in the case of Jinapanjara it is
also found on other media which are not normally related in terms of religion. The
following are the products of Jinapanjara found in several forms:

18 Interview with Boonchai Kosolthanakul, 9 October 2005.
19 Ibid., interview with Boonchai Kosolthanakul.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 15/20] ===
45

-The only prayer appeared on the cover page of an English self-learning
magazine for adolescents “E-Lang” in December, 2006 issue. The magazine also
published the meaning translation in English.

-The only prayer printed on a pillow produced by Propaganda, ล modern
brand for home interior design.

-As a prayer printed on T-shirts produced and sold by Wat Indravihan.

-As a project called “Jinapanjara Family” which aims to encourage families
to chant Jinapanjara as a family activity in order to protect the family from all evils
and make new generation to have more virtuous behavior.

-As a commercial program on mobile phone found on several website.

4.3.5 POPULAR AMONG MIDDLE CLASS WORKERS
From media observation, interviews and related documents, it is found that

Jinapanjara is quite popular among middle class workers. This middle class group
comprises various careers of chanters, even some who work and study in scientific
field, such as Dr. Phichai Tovivich, the head of the chanting club, Paphichaya,
Boonyarut, and Dr. Boonchai, and this does not include many who asked not to be
named. These unnamed people acknowledged that they chant Jinapanjara as regular
activity every day at least once a day. Most of them chant before go to sleep. As a
religious activity connected to a superstitious story, some prefer hiding this from the
public since it is contradictory with their working image. However, some of them
openly acknowledge this practice and try to induce others to chant as well are to
share their experience on this topic. This type is seen in case of Dr. Phichai, Dr.
Boonchai, Booyarut, Paphichaya and Soraphong Chartri, etc.

Pra Paisan Visalo, a scholar monk, gave his view on this phenomenon that:

“This is such a phenomenon that is in accordance with middle class
characters that prefer individualism and consumerism. The Jinapanjara can
be performed individually and freely without any commitment of place,
time or person. Importantly, wealth and safety are the outstanding benefits
of Jinapanjara. This well serves the middle class demands.”

4.3.6 FULL OF MYTH AND MIRACLE STORIES

It should be noted that Jinapanjara is a prayer that is full of myth and stories,
not only from “Somdej Toh” but also from the experiences of individual chanters.
These stories are often told and retold among chanters. It should not be looked over
as a factor behind this phenomenon.

20 Interview with Pra Paisan Visalo, 7 July 2006.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 16/20] ===
46

“If you chant Jinapanjara, don’t stop it until it ends. It will provide
you safety. Because chanting Jinapanjara will provide a wall throughout
your body and if you stop chanting before it ends, there would be some
part left from the protection. In case you have bad fate, bad evil might be
able to harm you. At the time I was in bad fate I usually faced many bad
things. Once I chanted only half Jinapanjara, then took a motorcycle sitting
behind my friend, I did not know what happened. But I fell from the
motorcycle and rolled down several times on the road. Amazingly, I did
not get seriously injured and when I fell down I saw a monk standing in
front of me.”

Psychology lecturer in a university

“There was a case that a son chanted for his mother and made a vow
that if his mother got well he would chant 108 Jinapanjara as an offering.
After that when his mother got well he did not do as he promised. He got
sick himself eventually.”

Prasert Sukhothanang, secretary of the Chanting Club

“When my mother was 80 she suffered from a gall stone, she chanted
Jinapanjara before a Buddha Image. After that one month later the gall
stone was absolutely gone”

Dr. Phichai Tovivich,The Head of The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting Club

It should be noted that there is a special belief in Jinapanjara held by
members of the club that chanting Jinapanjara is capable to decrease future lives.
For example, if one who will be born again 100 times, if he chants the Jinapanjara
enough, his mind will be purified. A number of his future lives will be reduced. This
is called in the club “Yon Chat Phop” (the reduction of birth).

“One of my friend when he has to make a big business deal or go for
an auction, he chants Jinapanjara 108 times. Now he is very rich and
successful.”

Thida Baramanand, Managing Editor of Rak Luk Books

4.3.7 SPIRITUAL REFUGE FOR WEAK PEOPLE
“It is a spiritual refuge for insecure people. Now there are more
insecure people so that why chanters have increased”

21 Interview with a Psychology lecturer in a university who denied to be named, 4 March 2007.
22 Interview with Prasert Sukhothanang, 17 September 2005

23 Interview with Dr.Phichai Tovivich, 22 June 2006

24 Interview with Thida Baramanand, 13 October 2005

25 Ibid., Interview with Dr.Boochai Kosolthanakul.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื ่ อ 31/08/2560 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 17/20] ===
47

Dr. Boonchai said, from his own experience, he himself accepted that he
used to be an insecure child with a lack of confidence and also had weak physical
health. After he chanted Jinapanjara nine times regularly every day, everything
seemed better both physically and mentally.

“I became a new person with clearer thinking and not confused like
before. I gained more self-confidence, was stronger and full of energy as
you seeing now. Whenever I feel blue, stuck in trouble, Jinapanjara is my
refuge for holding on. Chanting nine times is effective enough to recover

my energy.”

He proudly said about his inner development because of Jinapanjara.

Similar to other experiences in the same direction, in the case of Paphichaya,
it is clearly mentioned that he used to have a lack of confidence and often suffered
from too much care for others as well as thinking too much on silly matters. This

made him unhappy until he chanted Jinapanjara. As a result, his personality
improved to be better including his brain capacity.

“If I were like before, I would not allow you to interview me because
it would cause me to feel anxiety. But now I am all right.”?’

Likewise, Matthew, a bank sale executive, who looked a bit nervous at first,
seemed more relaxing when talking about Jinapanjara.

“I always have a chanting book wherever I go. I chant in the car as
much as I can. Once I was stuck in an elevator almost 30 minutes. At that
time, just chanting Jinapanjara and thinking of Somdej Toh helped me to
stay clam down, not to panic until I was saved. Once again when I got
Hemorrhagic Fever and was in a severe condition, during the stay in the
hospital I kept on chanting Jinapanjara all day and my blood data increased
from 700-800 to 100,000 within a short time amazingly. That caused me
get better very soon. It is a miracle that you can see by yourself.”

Matthew gave a definition of Jinapanjara through his belief and experience
similar to the girl who lived in Soraphong’s house as she said that

26 Ibid., Interview with Boonchai Kosolthanakul.
27 Ibid., Interview with Paphichaya Chaiskul.
28 Ibid., Interview with Matthew.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 18/20] ===
48

“Sometimes I have to stay home alone, but I do not feel scared
because I have him and Jinapanjara Gatha as my refuge. This gives me a
sense of security.”

Once on a radio program, the effect of divorce problems was being
discussed; one audience member called into the program and revealed that he was
abandoned by his parents since he was young. So he had to stay with his relatives
and grew up alone until he graduated with a bachelor degree and got a good job
eventually. This person shared his experience with a proud feeling for his success.
And at the end he mentioned Jinapanjara and Somdej Toh as follows.

“When I feel lonely I chant Jinapanjara and take Somdej Toh as my
refuge. This helps me much and provides me with a feeling that I am not
alone.”

4.3.8 NOT POPULAR AMONG DHAMMA PRACTITIONERS

It is worth mentioning here that most ardent chanters in this research are not
intellectual Buddhists. The term ‘intellectual Buddhists’ here means Buddhists who
understand the real teaching of the Buddha. The Buddhists of this kind do not pay
much attention on chanting especially chanting Jinapanjara. As seen in the case of
Boonyaraut, we have found that she was rather against every form of practicing the
Dhamma because it usually requires many rules to follow. She preferred to have a
self- practice on her own with chanting approach. It may be possible that for her the
practice of Dhamma is more difficult than chanting.

Normally, the Jinapanjara chanters are not interested much in practicing the
Dhamma. Or it might be said that ardent chanters has no aims in Nirvana or
liberating themselves from defilement. They live their lives as worldly people who
are still concerned with wealth, success or fame. Interestingly, people who are
concerned with the practice of Dhamma and have the goal to attain Nirvana do not
pay attention much on Jinapanjara. Saran Maitreewej or Dung Truen, a well known
Dhamma book author, accepted that he used to chant Jinapanjara seriously before;
but after he turned to practice the Dhamma he stop chanting Jinapanjara. His reason
is that:

“I chanted a lot in the past including Jinapanjara; but after I
understood clearly about what is real Buddhism and what is Saiyasart, I
stopped chanting Jinapanjara. Prayers in terms of real Buddhism should
say about the Dhamma or praising of Buddha. Calling sacred power to be

29 Ibid., Interview withUnrevealed named girl.

30 “Krobkrua Kui Kan,” a radio program, on air Tuesday 13, March, 2007, FM 92 MHz.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 19/20] ===
49

the assistant like this is not appropriate in Buddhism’s view. So I do not
chant Jinapanjara anymore for this reason.”

In the same manner, Thanarath Sotajinda, a Buddhist who concerned with
the Dhamma practice seriously, said that chanting is not much important for him
since he was interested more in following the Buddha’s footsteps by practicing the
Buddha's teaching to purify his mind and stop being reborn.

“If we do good cause we must gain good result; that is the rule of
Karma.”

Same as Assoc.Pro.Suchao Ploychum, author of “Prawat Gatha Jinapanjara,”
denied chanting Jinapanjara in daily life when being asked if he chanted Jinapanjara
or not.

“I do not pay attention much on it. The Jinapanjara is quite far away
from Dhamma. Unlike other Buddhist prayers in the Tripidok that
obviously mentioned the Dhamma, probably the author might realize that it
is hard to bring people in this time to be interested in pure Dhamma. So
have the benefit first then lead to Dhamma later.”

As a Buddhist monk, Pra Paisan Visalo analyzed why Jinapanjara is often
taken as the refuge for Thais nowadays.

“Modern life is quite unstable. It shakes people’s confidence. So they
need something to hold their mind on with effortless approach. Some seek
amulets, some offer things to sacred power, and some chant. In my
opinion, chanting is rather good because more or less it provides
concentration and requires only faith and commitment in the level that not
much like when you take Dhamma practicing course in monastery or
Dhamma center.”

4.3.9. FOND BY SOME INTELLECTUALS

WITH SCIENTIFIC EXPLANATION

Whereas another group of Buddhists who are considered as intellectual
person, with good educational background seem to view different with their own
reason. In case of Dr.Phichai Tovivich, Head of The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting
Club gave reason on this belief that:

"At first you have to accept that sacred power is real, soul is never
gone from the world, it still exist. For previous Buddha and Arahants
despite they all achieve Nirvana already but their power still exist and

31 Interview with Saran Maitreewej <Dung Truen>, 13 November 2006.
32 Interview with Thanarath Sotajinda, 30 January 2007

33 Interview with Suchao Ploychum, 7 November 2006.

34 Ibid., Interview with Pra Paisan Visalo.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch4.pdf | Page 20/20] ===
50

remain actively .If one know the way to tune and receive that wave, it
would bring advantage to health and life directly.

These kind of wave or vibrations are not different from FM /AM of
radio wave or even mobile wave which we can not see but they are actively
for using. As scientist ,I study on chanting and found that chanting creates
low frequency vibration which is a good type of vibration that effective
and useful to destroy disease caused by high frequency vibration such as
cancer's cells. Low frequency vibration is able to recover abnormal
conditions by effect to the change at the level of cells .It also helps the
balance of cells to be in good order, as this condition, it enables cells to be
powerful and stronger enough to prevent and destroy all kinds of diseases.
This is my hypothesis on the relation between benefits of chanting and
science.

In case of Jinapanjara, it is so special than another prayers since
Jinapanjara portrays most sacred names which are like the transmitters
connect to pass on that kind of vibration to chanters. This is the distinction
of Jinapanjara which reflects the insight of composer that brought in sacred

vibrations via mentioning sacred names by chanting.”

In accordance with Dr.Boonchai Kosolthanakul, who explained that chanting
Jinapanjara is not a kind of Saiyasat or magical matter but it is the difficult for
modern people to understand .

"Why don't you wonder to the work of mobile phone which you can
not see its wave but you can use it, so does the power of mind .In my
opinion, the power of Jinapanjara resulted from the power of sacred figures
be mentioned in the content.

Such power is like some kind of vibration or wave though, I believe
that their vibrations still remain in universe, it depends on us whether we
can tap this kind of power. Jinapanjara Gatha is likely the implement for
tuning our mind, re - arranging it to be in good order with self-balancing
and inducing it to be ready for receiving good energy.

I believe in the power of mind and believe that Somdej Toh put his
power of mind into Pra Somdej and Jinapanjara, for me the miracle of
Somdej Toh is nothing else but his power of mind. For as chanting,
Jinapanjara can be used in many levels like learning the English language,
that we can use as a saleman until as a diplomat."

From an analysis focuses on chanting and chanters, next, the phenomenon
will be analyzed in the last Chapter with conclusion.

35 Ibid., Interview with Dr. Phichai Tovivich.
36 Ibid., Interview with Dr.Boonchai Kosolthanakul.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:35

