=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 1/17] ===
CHAPTER V

THE PHENOMENON ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION

In this last chapter, the route of Jinapanjara’s popularity will be analyzed,
along with an investigation of the main causes that stimulated this chant to become
popular and a description of why it came to be in vogue one decade after “Somde;j
Toh” died. Also, how Jinapanjara has impacted Thai chanting tradition will be
examine as well as some reflections of Thai society through this chanting
phenomenon.

5.1 THE TIME LINE OF JINAPANJARA’S NEW APPEARANCE

1957 The care taker abbot of Wat Rakhang distributed photocopies
of Jinapanjara.

1960 Wat Rakhang built the Vihan “Somdej Toh” which become a
place for chanting Jinapanjara.

1975 The supreme patriarch distributed a Jinapanjara chanting book
on his birthday.

1981 Jinapanjara was mentioned in one of the most widely distributed
novels, “Petch Pra Uma”, as a sacred mantra which the heroine
uses to suppress Frankenstein’s monster successfully.

1986 The Supreme Patriarch assigned his student to do research on
Jinapanjara, which became a book “The history of Jinapanjara”,
the first academic type book on Jinapanjara.

1987 Wat Indravihan built a pavilion where “Somdej Toh” used to
practice Dhamma and do meditation and allowed people to come
chant inside.

1992 A group of Poo Swan followers founded The Jinapanjara Gatha
Chanting Club and started a weekly group chanting schedule.

1999 Nonsi Nimibutr launched “Nang Nag” which became one of the
most popular films, in which “Somdej Toh” is mentioned as a

hero who was able to suppress Nang Nag by reciting Jinapanjara
Gatha.

2001 The Ocean Media company launched Tibetan Chanting Song to
the market.

2002 Sathienphong Wannapok, A Honorary Fellow of Religious
Studies, The Academy of Moral and Political Science, co-

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป

ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 2/17] ===
52

operated with National Artist, Surapol Tonavanik, to produce
Jinapanjara on cassette tape as a version of “entertain -Dhamma”
and included a new melody to support the content’s translation in
the form of a chanting song. The new image of this sacred chant
raised many critical comments among Thai Buddhist academics.
Some disagreed with the new way of presenting this modern
Jinapanjara, while some criticized him as the one who made this
sacred chant into a business product.

2003 A new modified version on CD was produced and added
Buddhajayamangala Gatha “Pahung” as one part of the CD.

2004 Supachai Jarusomboon cooperated with Media of Medias, a
famous media production house, to produced Jinapanjara on
VCD designed to be a “Therapy Version” showing a different
selling point from Sathientphong’s “Mantra Therapy”.

2007 Jatukam Rammathep phenomenon dominated the amulets market
and became a new phenomenon.

2007 Jatukam Rammathep continues in popularity whereas
Jinapanjara chanters kept their faith on chanting and “Somdej
Toh” although not as boom like in the past.

5.2 JINAPANJARA POPULARITY ANALYSIS

With respect to the question of when Jinapanjara started its popularity and
became a new chanting phenomenon, this research indicates that it might have
started around 1957 when Chao Khun Thieng claimed to have distributed about
100,000 copies to the public with a recommendation based on his own practice.
Although, this operation looks relatively small and personal, this appears to have
been significant inspiration and recognition for people, because today Chao Khun
Thieng’s words are still recognized by Jinapanjara chanters. Thus, this is a notable
beginning point, and occurred before it was mentioned again, in a hit novel series,
Pet Pra Uma in 1974."

The next significant event was when The Supreme Patriarch launched his
birthday books with Jinapanjara as the main content, in which he pointed out the
difference between the two versions, Thai and Sri Lankan. The Sangaraja also gave
his own translation and corrected some words by comparing them to the Sri Lankan
version. His special birthday books have been in high demand based on the fact that
afterwards the same books were reprinted several times and distributed on his
birthday occasion. Furthermore, sometimes disciples have asked for permission to
reprint these books for free distributing at funeral ceremonies, although there is no
exact statistic on how many have been reprinted.

1 Chao Khun Thieng words “One who chant Jinapanjara Gatha regularly, the benefit is equal occupying 100 Pra

Somdej.”

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 3/17] ===
53
The Sangaraja is the highest ranking monk in the kingdom and has a

reputation as an “Pra Keji พ ร ะ เก จ ิ ” in which it is believed that he has achieved high

meditative power and is capable to make sacred amulets, as well as being regarded
as a prominent Buddhist scholar. These facts are significant when considering that
he gave his attention to this gatha. In addition, the Supreme Patriarch assigned his
disciples Suchao Ploychum to research and studies Jinapanjara’s history and
releases a book to the public in 1986.This likely brought up Jinapanjara as a social
concern again, even in the small circle.

Another famous monk that should be mentioned as a Jinapanjara distributor

is Praya Norrarutrajmanit or Dhmaavitago Bhikku who is usually called by Thais as
Chao Khun Nor. Although he passed away over 30 years <in 1971>, his story still
remains and can be seen on several websites organized by his disciples under “เจ ้ า ค ุ ณ น ร ฯ ?”
which also contain a lot of related information. It is told among his disciples that
Chao Khun Nor used Jinapanjara as a Mantra in reciting incantation over his
amulets. Once one monk asked him which Mantra he used in making amulets and
Chao Khun Nor replied clearly that he used Jinapanjara:

“In term of making amulet, Jinapanjara of “Somdej Toh” Wat
Rakhang is the best of the best, to me I used this Mantra whenever 1
make amulets.” *

Meanwhile, Chao Khun Nor also recommended that his disciple recite
Jinapanjara as a great protection from any danger. Moreover, there is a recording of
Jinapanjara chanted by Chao Khun Nor with his real voice, which still remains and
is distributed among his followers and treated as a sacred version. From a prominent
monk who achieved high honor rank, as well as high respect from Thais Buddhists,
Jinapanjara can be seen as being certified again by Chao Khun Nor, which caused it
to spread to a new group, increasing new chanters.

The next important step in the Jinapanjara phenomenon started when Wat
Indraviharn, under the charge of the new abbot Pra Rajarattanaborn, built a Pavilion
to cover Bor Nam Mon of “Somdej Toh” and opened it for people to chant and
practice meditation. As well, he renovated every place related to “Somdej Toh” as
mentioned before. Bor Nam Mon became a chanting center for city people, available
everyday from 6.00 a.m.-6.00 p.m. At the same time, in 1986, Samnag Poosawan
created a radio show, “Rai Kan Jinapanjara ร า ย ก า ร ชิ น บ ั ญ ช ร ”, and formed a new chanting
community as “The Chanting Jinapanjara Gatha Club”. In addition, he first launched
“Somdej Toh’s™ history book, “Amata Thera”, in commemoration of his 200th
birthday anniversary. Although, the club did not promote itself much, by its product
and activities it was like the silently growing seeds of faith in society. It might be

* Chao Khun Nor used to be a royal page of King Rama VI. After King Rama V1 passed away he decided to
become a monk and aimed to make merit dedicated to the king. Then he intended to continue his ascetic life, even though he
lived his life in Wat Dhebsirin, in central Bangkok, not in a jungle or rural area like a “Pra Pa”. He gained high respect from
Thais who adored him as “Arahant in the city”. Also, he is one of the famous monks among the amulet circle as well.

2 Sak Talingchan. ป า ฏิ ห า ร ิ ย ์ ใน พ ุ ท ธ ศ า ส น า (Online) available from: hitp/www.saktalingchan. cormvindex php?lay=show&ac=article&cId=79936.
<2007, March 12>

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 4/17] ===
54

said that Jinapanjara was mentioned and recognized much more than ever before in
this phase.

Jinapanjara came to the peak of its vogue in 2002-2004 after Sathienphong
Wannapok launched his product, Jinapanjara in song, to the market, which was the
first time for there to be an obvious commercial sale item. With the reputation of
Sathienphong, along with the power of media advertisement and good marketing, it
enjoyed high success among people who already knew this chant and for those who
did not know Jinapanjara since it was produced in song and modern music, as
demanded by the middle class and young generation. Furthermore, the virtue of
Jinapanjara was confirmed again when Supachai Jarusomboon reproduced it in
terms of chanting therapy or what he called, Mantra Therapy, backed up by Media
of Medias company.

Therefore, it can be seen that Jinapanjara’s popularity has been influenced by
several related factors, which can be put into three groups, as below:

Monastic Factor

๑ The Present Supreme Patriarch

๑ Chao Khun Nor

๑ Chao Khun Thieng, Wat Rakhang
๑ Pra Rajrattanaporn, Wat Indravihan

Secular Factor

๑ The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting Club
๑ Sathienphong Wannapok

๑ Supachai Jarusomboon

๑ Dr. Boonchai Kosolthanakul

Media Factor

๑ Petch Pra Uma

๑ Nang Nag

๑ Chanting books and all related books

With all these related factors in mind, however, this phenomenon might not
have occurred as it did without the reviser, “Somdej Toh”. All of factors mentioned
above seem to be merely minor factors, while the main factors appears to come from
its reviser as well as its believers’ faith. These two parts would seem to be the main
causes behind this phenomenon. From this study, every interview done with
Jinapanjara chanters mentioned “Somdej Toh” as the reviser or as the composer
depending on their knowledge. This seems to show that “Somdej Toh” is the most
influential person in the view of Jinapanjara chanters.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 5/17] ===
55

5.3 THE MAIN CAUSES OF JINAPANJARA'’S POPULARITY
5.3.1. “SOMDEJ TOH” EFFECT

“One thing I noticed when driving to the North is I often find Somdej
Toh’s statues and Luang Por Tuad statues located in many temples. What
does it mean? It means that they might gain respect from local people there
or there are some organization sending those statues to several temples.
This is quite special and might affect more or less to local belief.”

Dr. Prawate Tantiphiwattanaskul, psychiatrist from the Mental Heath
Department, Ministry of Public Health, raised his point that “Somdej Toh’s”
popularity shows itself in many temples. Interestingly, at the King Naresuan
Monument shrine in Donjedi, Suphan Buri, visitors can find Somdej Toh’s statue
there as well. As a monk who defeated Nang Nag in the famous movie and immortal
ghost story, Somdej Toh looks like a hero who is great both in terms of monkhood
and superstitious power. In addition, it has been retold widely that he was so modest
and lived simply and was easy to access, despite ranking in a high monastic position.
This also makes him widely respected.

“Thais do adore this type of monk who is compassionate, simple but
great; particularly the one who has superstitious power at the same time.

Pra Paisan Visalo, gave the above analysis on Somdej Toh’s popularity. Pra
Paisan also believes that “Somdej Toh” is a main factor behind the Jinapanjara
phenomenon. Therefore, even though the origin of Jinapanjara is not clear, just a
belief that it was selected and introduced by “Somdej Toh” is enough to make
Jinapanjara so popular. Somdej Toh has been appreciated and has received high
respect from a huge number of Thais, not only in his time but also at the present. He
is regarded as a sacred monk with special talent on superstitious power incantations.
All stories related to him, such as his behavior, his words, and his works, have been
told repeatedly many times such that myth and reality are blurred”.

For example, his biography “Toh Brahamarangsi”, printed by Dhamma
Sapa, describes his family background, life, personal character and also his teaching.
The book has been ranked as the BEST SELLER biography among 17 venerable
monks’ biography books, which shows that “Somdej Toh” is still in vogue and of
interest to Thais, even though he passed away 133 years ago.” The book was re-
printed 10 times. The top 3 best sellers of 17 venerable monks” biography books by
Dhamma Sapa are as follows:

-Somdej Toh
-Luang Poo Man
-Buddhadasa Bhikku®

3 Interview with Dr. Prawate Tantiphiwattanaskul, 16 February 2007.

4 Interview with Pra Paisan Visalo, 7 July 2006.

5 Somdej Pra Buddhajarn Toh passed away in 1872 at Bangkok when he was 84 years old.

6 Interview with Narin Unti, Dhamma Sapa Distributed Network Staff, 12 October 12, 2005.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 6/17] ===
56

Another fact that should be mentioned here is that his amulets, called “Pra
Som Dej”, are the most popular amulets among collectors. Today, the price for a
perfect one is about 20 million baht and normally “Pra Somde;j” is not cheaper than
one million baht each. The high price of his amulets is a significant indicator to
point out how popular he is at the present time. In this case “Somdej Toh” is like a
high quality brand name. With this factor, whatever objects that were created by him
are then regarded as the best with no doubt by his followers. This applies as well to
Jinapanjara. People know that this Gatha was introduced by him meaning this
particular Gatha must have something special as it had been selected by Somde;j
Toh. Moreover, when King Rama IV asked why his amulet was so popular, Somdej
Toh answered that he chanted Jinapanjara Gatha into his amulets.

“Somdej Toh” is well versed in theTripidok. For this reason
Jinapanjara Gatha might be the best of the best he selected.”

“Whenever you chant Jinapanjara it means you will not receive only
protection by the power of Gatha but also from “Somdej Toh” as well.”

5.3.2 SOCIETY EFFECT & CHANTERS EFFECT

Besides all external factors that have influenced the growth of Jinapanjara
chanting, the chanters themselves have been quite influential. This is like a direct
sale system propagating its popularity by word of mouth, with strong
recommendations to family, relative or friends. This growth path is silent in nature
without any coordinated strategy and beyond some marketing plan.

Dr.Prawate Tantiphiwatthanaskul, psychiatrist, explained that in term of
psychology the phenomenon of Jinapanjara might result from 4 main points:

5.3.2.1 SUPERSTITION CAN BE FOUND EVERYWHERE

Thai society is full of supernatural stories regarding respectable monk
masters and also the belief in amulets. This belief is likely at the very root of society
and can easily be found in the Thai way of thinking, thus it is not new. Moreover,
people older than 40 are possibly inclined to pay attention and believe in this kind of
things more than ever. Thai society is a society that has gotten used to supernatural
beliefs as its own foundation.

5.3.2.2 A TRUSTFUL CONTENT

With the invitation of many supreme figures in Buddhism coming to give
protection to chanters in only one prayer, this is quite unique and trustworthy in
terms of belief. Moreover, “Somdej Toh” is also treated as a special figure too; so
that has a lot of impact from Thai society,

5.3.2.3 DO LOW INVESTMENT BUT EXPECT HIGH PROFIT

Although this habit can be found in general, not only in Thais, it seems that
Thais adapt this idea in terms of karma, asking for a lot of good benefit by doing
mere chanting.

7 Interview with Dr. Boonchai Kosolthanakul, 9 October 2005.
8 Ibid., Interview with Dr. Boonchai Kosolthanakul.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 7/17] ===
57

5.3.2.4 LIVES IN HI-SPEED

As lives at present tend to vary more than ever and science is unable to give
exact answers to unpredictable situations, people then seek something to fill their
feeling of confidence. For example, even though people have things like ABS or
airbags in their cars, nothing can guarantee absolute safety. People need something
more than technology, something that provides absolutely safety for them, that is
supernatural power which science and technology are unable to disprove.

“I found someone who died in a motorcycle accident because he had
strong trust in his amulet. He neglected to wear safety helmet. It sounds
unreasonable but this is a belief and found in general in Thai society.”

Apart from fear, people attach their hope to invisible power as their invisible
assistance. This can be seen clearly from businesspersons. Dr. Prawate pointed out
that many businesspersons seek help from superstitious things in making their
investments.

“Although they usually say “Mai Chuea Ya Lob Lu”, meaning “not
believe, not insult”, actually they really trust in it. As business investments
nowadays is subject to big risk, nobody and nothing is able to make sure it
will be successful. So ritual ceremony, amulets or Feng Shui is
implemented as the last answer, along with chanting.”"

Is has been noted that Jinapanjara chanters, when they encounter a situation
and get some good benefit, mention that Jinapanjara provided them super safety as
well as good luck. Dr. Prawate gave an explanation to this phenomenon as “Self
Fulfilling Prophecy.” It is the forecast one has for oneself and tries to make it
become true. It is like the concept “you are what you believe.” “Self Fulfilling
Prophecy” is the process when you believe in something you usually find evidence
to support your hypothesis. For example, if you believe that the Jinapanjara will
bring you good luck, then you will spot everything good that happen; and when you
pay attention to something specially, it seems that thing you spotted will appear
more often than ever. The more you try the more you find.

“Behind this phenomenon there are many stories backing it up as
foundation to make it more incredible. But, importantly, it is hard to prove
whether the stories are true or not, as well as no one would really like to
prove it. I think this theory can be applied to explain other superstition in
Thai society as well.” 11

Dr. Banjob Bannaruji, a Chulalongkorn Pali scholar, sees this phenomenon
as a reflection of society. People need something to cling to, something capable of
providing them with a sense of confidence and security beyond the boundary of
reason.

9 Ibid. Interview with Dr.Prawate Tantiphiwatthanaskul.
10 Ibid. Interview with Dr.Prawate Tantiphiwatthanaskul.
11 Ibid. Interview with Dr.Prawate Tantiphiwatthanaskul.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 8/17] ===
58

“The world goes so fast and it changes so fast too. As people have to
adapt themselves to the change, it is easy to feel frustrated. They want
something to assure success, as well as encourage them when they fail. In
addition, nowadays, we should not deny the power of advertisement and
media; it has a powerful impact to drive something into popularity.”

Dr. Banjob analyzed this phenomenon to result mainly from Somdej Toh’s
reputation, plus the recognition of his amulet (“Pra Somdej™). The explanation as to
why “Somdej Toh” has gained such a high respect from Thais comes from the fact
that “Somdej Toh” had a significant relation to the monarchy.

5.3.3 CONTENT AND INTONATION EFFECT

As addressed previously in Chapter III, Jinapanjara was composed in the
form of Patthayawatra Chant, which is easy to write and, importantly, to recite.
Probably, this is the an important reason why most Jinapanjara followers agree that,
although it looks quite long and is suppose to be very difficult, in reality, it is easier
than their expectation. This character is likely a supporting factor that has made
Jinapanjara become popular.

Thida Baramanand, the Managing Editor of Rak Luke Books Publishing, and
a Jinapanjara follower, compared her feeling between "Jinapanjara" and “Pahung”.
From her own experience, she has chanted both "Pahung" and "Jinapanjara"
regularly, but personally, she prefers Jinapanjara since it is easier to recite while
"Pahung" is more difficult.

“Sometime, when my concentration is not good, it is difficult to
recite "Pahung” correctly but for Jinapanjara it is easier.” 1 จ

She is also fascinated by Jinapanjara’s intonation and feels comfortable to
chant whenever she is driving with the belief it would save her from every kind of
danger.

In the same way, Dr. Boonchai Kosolthanakul M.D. of "FAST ENGLISH",
a radio moderator and teacher, whose work is directly involved with voice skill,
mentioned the unique character of Jinapanjara intonation that:

"Jinapanjara Gatha gives me many benefits, but one of them is its
poetic beauty which enables me to improve both voice skill and
communication skill as well, this is very useful to my career. Actually, I do
not exactly know the different between them. I just know that personally I
love to chant Jinapanjara Gatha and feel free to recite it more than
“Pahung”.”"*

Similarly, Boonyarut Aphicharttrisorn, International news editor, “Kom
Chad Luek” Newspaper clearly explained her impressive of Jinapanjara that:

12 Interview with Dr. Banjob Bannaruji. 14 November 2006.
13 Interview with Thida Baramanand, 13 October 2005.
14 Ibid., Interview with Dr. Boonchai Kosolthanakul.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 9/17] ===
59

“One thing about Jinapanjara that impressed me is its poetic beauty.
Actually, it is quite long for lay people, but if compared to others, like
Pahung or Yod Kan PraTripidok, I do not know why I can remember only
Jinapanjara while the other two, I can not chant without a book. To me
Jinapanjara is the simplest one and take less effort to recite.” 1 ว ้

Suphachai Jarusomboon is regarded as a guru on Mantra Therapy who runs
clinics at Sukhumvit and also is a producer of Jinapanjara on audio records. He
explained this particular point of Jinapanjara that:

"Jinapanjara provides wonderful benefits either chanting or listening,
in term of Mantra Therapy. Listening to Jinapanjara will enable you to
receive natural energy from those 9 planets < Dao Noppakroh > which will
come to balance all elements in our body .This will create the highest
potential in term of diseases prevention from outside.”

Suphachai also said that this kind of natural power from 9 planets can be
seen from Kirlian Photography < invented by Samyon Kirlian, a Russian inventor>
which is known among alternative medicine circle who are interested in Aura
Energy. He stated that in case of sickness, listening to some prayers like Jinapanjara
is one method of healing since the sound of the Mantra can create vibration which
will adjust balance for good health.

In term of its content, the length and intonation, Jinapanjara is not exactly
new nor totally different from other prayers in the same category of Parritta. But the
point is it is the noteworthiness of its composer <or reviser> that has made it more
outstanding and because of its purpose being for protection not for Dhamma
illustration.

With its length, although it looks difficult for lay people who are not familiar
with a long prayer, but the simplest form of verse was selected which is easy to
recite that has made it quite effective in spreading it broadly beyond its limit.

5.3.4. THE ECONOMIC CRISIS EFFECT

With respect to the economic crisis, it is not as obvious an indicator that this
phenomenon has been greatly impacted by the economic crisis. However, if we
consider the gradually increasing sale of chanting books from many places after the
crisis, plus the popular trend of its audio products that emerged after about 3-4 years,
it might be considered to have a significant, although, indirectly impact on the boom
of chanting.

According to the marketing information from The Ocean Media, Chula
Bookstore and Dhamma Sapa, with respect to the trend of sales of chanting
products, both books and audio records items, including Jinapanjara, all have been
going up since the year of the economic crisis and have never go down since.

15 Interview with Boonyarut Aphicharttrisorn, 27 November 2006.
16 Suphachai Jarusomboon, Mantra Therapy, Bangkok: Khunpor, 1994, pp 74-75.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 10/17] ===
60

In addition, chantings on audio records and many chanting books, some of
which include Jinapanjara Gatha as part or all of their content, have been printed
after the year 2000, especially after the year 2002, the peak time of the Jinapanjara
phenomenon.

The number of young generation interested in this is increasing especially
after the economic crisis, while the whole total sale is increasing obviously
and still going well until the present."”

<The Ocean Media>

“Even though the total sale is not increasing rapidly, but it has a tendency
to be a good product, particularly after the economic crisis when the total
sales have grown gradually every year until now.”'®

< Dhamma Sapa>

“It is noticeable that around the year 2002 — 2003 the total sale was
obviously greater than before and then it has never reduced until now.”

พ ล ย น แน น แน แล่ หน แน แน แน แน แน แน ห น แน แน แน แน หน ห น น น ล น แน ห น แน แน แอ แน แน แน แล แน แน แน แน แล แน แน แน แน แน หน แน แน แน แน ห น แน แน แน แน แล แน แน แน แน ม น แน แน แน แน แก แน แน แน แน แน แน ห น แน น แน อ น สน แล แน น แน แล แล ส น อ น ส ม ล

<Chula Bookstore >

As one factor of Jinapanjara’s popularity, Sathienphong Wannapok,
accepted that the economic crisis has effected the new boom of Jinapanjara since the
value of chanting in Thai society sticks on its appeal instead of its essence.
Therefore, when they were in trouble or in crisis, Jinapanjara Gatha was raised as a
sacred amulet and eventually gave them supernatural assistance.

Whereas Dr.Boonchai Kosolthanakul viewed that suffering and weakness
due to the economic crisis might be a strong factor that motivated people to chant
Jinapanjara Gatha more than before, as a sort of refuge. He considered it the usual
nature of humans that spiritual development would come after the sufficiency of
essential elements has been met. However, even though some people try to chant
Jinapanjara Gatha for mere material benefit, it still is good, because chanting
Jinapanjara Gatha is the simplest way to practice meditation without any side
effects.

17 Interview with Preecha Dhammaphiphop, 7 October 2005.
18 Ibid. Interview with Narin Unti.
19 Interview with Wuthichai Kongsa-ad, 28 March 2007.

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 11/17] ===
61

As a new chanter who started chanting for 4 years, Thida Baramanand,
acknowledged that she was fascinated with chanting Jinapanjara because it works
for reducing her stress and suffering. When she was asking, if her life was excellent,
would she be interest in Jinapanjara Gatha, and the answer was, may be or may be
not.

Nevertheless, after the year 2000, world circumstances looked worse than
before, the economic situation seemed unstable, while new illnesses appeared along
with the cruel incidents in the Deep South. For these fears, chanting Jinapanjara
Gatha was supposed to be the simple way to create self-encouragement for herself.

One interesting point that should be mentioned is that before the economic
crisis took place, Jinapanjara Gatha was available on cassette tapes on sale already
in traditional style <that is, chanted by monks without music> but it was not
popular as at the present. After that, starting from 2001, The Ocean Media, an audio
company, launched Tibetan chanting songs in market with quite a good feed back
from customers. Afterward, Jinapanjara song was reproduced by Sathienphong
Wannapok, who was the first to reproduced Jinapanjara in new image, which was
followed by Supachai Jarusomboon and many others.

These chanting songs were actually produced in Singapore by Chinese
producers. At the beginning, it was popularized among Chinese-Thais, listening at
home or occasionally in Chinese temples. Then, after it become legal, more products
were available on shelves.

It might be noted that Sathienphong acknowledged that he got the idea for
producing Jinapanjara song years before it was really produced from considered
Christian and Mahayana religious songs.

“Christianity is highly success in applying religion to songs, and it
works to attract followers’ attention as well as Mahayana Buddhism which
also is successful in creating Dhamma songs as well.”

Whether Tibetan chanting songs inspired the appearance of Jinapanjara song
is hard to conclude since all producers insist on their own idea. However, if
considered by the timing, there might be some connection linking these two
chanting song.

20 Interview with Sathienphong Wannapok. 10 October 2005

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 12/17] ===
62

5.4 JINAPANJARA EFFECT: HOW JINAPANJARA PHENOMENON
AFFECTS THAI CHANTING TRADITION

The Jinapanjara phenomenon has created many new chanters including
teenagers and middle class workers that are a new target of this activity. However,
looking deeper at their expectation, chanting is not for spiritual development, as it
normally has been; but instead it has been used to serve people for worldly and
commercial demands. The Jinapanjara’s main impact on Thai traditional chanting
might be divided into two aspects as follows:

5.4.1 CHANTING SERVES WORLDLY PURPOSES MORE THAN

SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENTS

Thais perform chanting as a daily ritual, especially before sleeping, in order
to calm down their mind. Some prefer chanting as one kind of practicing
“Dhamanusati.” But it seems that the Jinapanjara phenomenon has played a vital
role in changing people’s recognition in chanting such that it could be a tool to gain
certain advantages and achievements. For the Jinapanjara chanters, chanting is not
only a ritual for spiritual development, it also plays a new role in gaining worldly
achievement as well.

“If we are insufficient in essential materials, it is hard to be interested
in spiritual development. Jinapanjara provides chanters several stages of
benefit, starting from the basic one for those who are insufficient in their
well being, and then they can go further for spiritual development. So it
depends on the chanters, which stage you are at in, what you can get from
the practice of Jinapanjara: success, wealth, health, or mind purification.”

As can be seen from above, Dr. Boonchai described Jinapanjara in terms of
its benefit. This role is really suitable for people in the consumerist world where
they have to survive high competition. For this new image, chanting is treated as an
“individual activity” more than “religious ritual” as it used to be.

5.4.2 CHANTING BECOMES MARKETABLE PRODUCTS

Many Thais have been taught to calm down their mind before sleeping by
chanting some famous prayers like Namo Tassa, Itipiso or Pae Metta. With the new
image created by the Jinapanjara phenomenon, chanting is now more seriously
performed than before and has gained high attention, not only Jinapanjara but also
other prayers as well. In book stores and audio shops, many chanting books and
audio records are displayed as marketable products. The prayers, similar to
Jinapanjara, have created interest, sort of as Jinapanjara byproducts. Many products
related to chanting have been launched on the market during and after the peak
period of Jinapanjara phenomenon (2002-2005) as can be seen in the table below:

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป

ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 13/17] ===
Book Titles Authors Publishers First Year
Printing and

Re-Printed

“Namo Tassa” Prasert Boonta Knowledge Plus | 2003/2004

Pahung. The trouble situations Prasert Boonta Knowledge Plus 2004
of The Lord Buddha

Jinapanjara and its legend Prasert Boonta Knowledge Plus | 2004/2005

Pahung Mahaga and Jinapanjara Lek Original Lek Original 2003

Pray Therapy Verachet Pongpan One world 2004/2004/2005

Pray for Good Health, Good luck | Verachet Pongpan One world 2004/2004/2005
and wealth.

Wuthichai Kongsa-ad, Assistant Marketing Manager of Chula bookstore,
Siam Square, described his experience and viewpoint regarding Jinapanjara with
respect to the sales that:

“After Sathienphong launched his Jinapanjara in song and it gained
high attention from customers, it was rather influential to the trend of other
chanting books as well. Formerly, chanting books merely contained the
basic and traditional prayers like Morning Chanting or Evening Chanting
with their meaning translation in Thai. But after Jinapanjara boomed, a
new trend of chanting books emerged.”

It should be noted that besides Jinapanjara in song, Sathientphong also
launched books on chanting to the market as well. His books are some of the many
books that came out, apart from this chanting phenomenon. These are some of
Sathienphong books about chanting:

Gatha Chinabanchorn “ค า ถา ชิ น บ ั ญ ชร ” with content focus on describing the

history of both Jinapanjara and “Somdej Toh” accompanied with an appendix
portraying a list of 28 previous Buddhas that appear in Jinapanjara as well as 7
Suttra and Paritta and, last, a brief story of the important Arahants mentioned in
Jinapanjara.

21 Ibid. Interview with Wuthichai Kongsa-ad.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 14/17] ===
64

Teaching Kids To Chant, Son Luke Hai Suad Mon “ส อ น ล ู ก ให ้ ส ว ด ม น ต ์ ” this

book is meant to communicate with parents, encourage them to realize the value and
benefits of chanting so they can pass this idea to their children.

Three Mantra for Young Families, Sam Mon Gatha Saksit Samrub
Krobkrua Wai Jo “ส า ม ม น ต ์ ค า ถา ศั ก ด ิ ์ ส ิ ท ธิ ์ ส ํ า ห ร ั บ ค ร อ บ ค ร ั ว ว ั ย โจ ๋ " with some content like

Gatha Chinbanchorn but re-arranged and Itipiso and Pahung added as three sacred
Mantras for the modern family. This book was first launched after re-arranging in
January, 2005.

The new trends of chanting books after the Jinapanjara boom are not
traditional like before, but obviously focus on certain advantages such as wealth and
worldly success. Wuthichai gave information that, today, the total sale of chanting
books is still going quite well, although not as good as ever during 2002 - 2005.

5.5. THE REFLECTION OF THAI SOCIETY

Pra Paisan Visalo, a scholar monk and author of the book “The Future of
Thai Buddhism”, gave the opinion that the Jinapanjara phenomenon reflected the
individualist culture of Thais middle class.

“I think this is a phenomenon in the circle of middle class society
more than local society since it can respond to middle class people’s main
demands which are wealth and safety. Interestingly, about the expectation
from superstitious power, I found that when the villagers pray, they often
ask for community peacefulness more than asking for personal demand.
Likewise, they do not have a private shrine at home but the shrine normally
belongs to community instead. Recently, it has begun to change that city
people turned to be more individual such as the fashion of the worship of
Paladkhig and some started to build their own shrine at home.”

At the time this thesis is being written (2007), the phenomenon of Jatukarm
Ramathep is running at its peak point, as can be seen from what happened on
February 22, 2007 when around 200,000 people went to Wat Mahathat, Nakomnsi
Thammaraj province, in order to receive this icon. Moreover, Kasikorn Thai
research center reported that this year an immense amount of money, about 1,000
million baht increase in the amulet market, because of Jatukarm Ramathep and
relevant business. Today, Thais enjoy changing their mobile phone, updating their
computer or going crazy in the cyber world. In the opposite way, they turn to be
interested in ancient faith which is unable to be proved.

On Songkran and New Year festival, many people are killed by road
accidents, several hundreds a year. Some are caused by cars while many are caused
by motorcyclists driving without a safety helmet. Furthermore, drunk drivers often
cause accidents and make new handicaps on society. This means that every time
people go out of their home, either by own car, public bus or motorcycle, they run
the risk of having an accident even if they do not break any traffic rules, caused by
drunk drivers, careless bus drivers or motorcycle racing gangs as can be often seen
from the newspaper.

22 Ibid., Interview with Pra Paisan Visalo.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 15/17] ===
65

As this point, the Jinapanjara phenomenon does not reflect merely inner
insecure of Thai people but it also reflects Thai society as an unsafe place as well. In
addition, Jinapanjara phenomenon seems to reflect Thais habit as a SABAI SABAI
society in that most are not concerned with safety but still want to be protected.
They see the concept of “SABAI SABAI ส บ า ย ส บ า ย or TAM ARAI TAM JAI KUEA

THAI THAE ท ํ า อ ะ ไร ต า ม ใจ ค ื อ ไท ย แท ้ that they can break any safety rule such as
wearing safety helmet or driving while drunk, with the feeling of “Mai Pen Rai lai
เป ็ น ไร .”, “it doesn’t matter.” Instead of establishing an effective system to provide

safety they turn to cling to invisible assistance like amulets, especially Buddha
Image made by GEJI ARJARN, or perform chanting like Jinapanjara.

The popularity of the Jinapanjara phenomenon appeared after the economic
crisis This could reflect that in Thai society superstition is still a social foundation,
notwithstanding the advance of science and technology. Instead, science and
technology have been used for distributing superstitious belief widely and
effectively, as seen from many website demonstrating Jinapanjara and welcoming
people to download Jinapanjara on CD which is very easy to reproduce and copying
and thus being spread widely.

5.6 CONCLUDING REMARKS

As previously mentioned, during the time of writing this thesis, the trend of
Jatukarm Ramathep is arising as a hot phenomenon, appearing in newspapers almost
everyday either as a news item (fighting over Jatukarm Ramathep) or advertising its
producing ceremony. Meanwhile, Khunphantharakrajadej became a celebrity after
passed away at the age of 108. His story has been told in several versions in many
books available in general book shops. The big icons of Jatukarm Ramathep hang
broadly and commonly with the belief and pride as a sort of spiritual fashion.

Going back to the years 2002-2005, at that time Jinapanjara was celebrated
at the peak of its chanting phenomenon; related products were selling well; plenty of
copies were printed over and over in order to distribute to public. Jinapanjara
appeared almost everywhere in book shops, audio shops as well as some temples.

Research for this thesis started in middle of year 2005 until today, 2007, and
found many interesting points which provide some understanding of Thai society.
One year and a half was spent collecting information and interviewing relevant
people. It is quite obvious that Jinapanjara is a new chanting phenomenon which has
affected greatly the traditional chanting in Thai society in several aspects. Following
are concluding remarks for this thesis.

First, Jinapanjara’s origin is still a mystery as to whether it came from a Sri
Lankan or Lanna scholar. However, at least 500 years ago it was chanted in the
northern part under the name “Jaiyabengchon™ as an auspicious prayer in ritual
ceremony, and was known among some people who attended ritual performances.
Its origin became clearer when “Somdej Toh” received the manuscript from a
pagoda in Kampangpetch and then revised it and used it in making his amulets.
Despite many myths and legends, Jinapanjara’s route is still indistinct. Before it was

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 16/17] ===
66

added as a part of chanting books around 30 years ago, Jinapanjara likely
disappeared from Thai society for a while. No mention in public was made until
gradually it emerged with distribution done under the care taker abbot of Wat
Rakhang around the year 1957. Subsequently, it was verified by several figures in
society both from monastic and secular parts.

Second, it is remarkable that this gatha has been associated with many
prominent and influential figures that have good educational background, both
monks and lay people, such as the present Supreme Patriarch, Chao Khun
Norraratrajamanit, Phanomthien and Sathienphong Wannapok. In addition, when
society was stuck in frustration resulting from the economic crisis, people became
nervous due to the unpredictable circumstances and science was unable to assure
security. In this circumstance, superstitious came to take place and play a vital role
in soothing people and giving them courage and support. With this condition, when
Jinapanjara was launched as a spiritual audio product, first created by Sathienphong,
it quickly gained wide attention and from society, particularly among the middle
class group.

Third, it can be said that the Jinapanjara’s popularity unintentionally resulted
from many factors. But without “Somdej Toh” it would not have been as popular as
seen at present. The study of the Jinapanjara phenomenon can not be separated from
“Somdej Toh” since it was found that “Somdej Toh” is the main factor behind this
phenomenon. Most chanters agree that they respect him personally, because of his
character, his teaching or even just the feeling that “Somdej Toh” is like their
superior relative who has compassion and is ready to give them assistance whenever
they need it. This is the special aspect of Jinapanjara that makes it totally different
from other prayers.

Fourth, in terms of traditional chanting, Jinapanjara is categorized as a type
of Paritta, a kind of prayer mainly for protection like the Hindu Atharva Veda.
Chanting for protection itself is not a new custom in Thai society. In Theravada
Buddhism, there are many Paritta texts that offer benefit similar to Jinapanjara but
have not draw attention from Thais like Jinapanjara. Furthermore, the versification
of Jinapanjara was wisely composed, with the simple but beautiful format making it
not difficult to remember for lay people in general. This is another interesting factor
explaining why most ardent chanters are so fascinated and stick with chanting
Jinapanjara, even though it is quite a long. Also, it has been found that the content is
one of the outstanding factors of Jinapanjara Gatha. Even though some chanters do
not pay much attention to it, this is the only one prayer that mentions most of the
supreme holy names in Buddhism, giving strong faith to the chanters as a
superpower prayer to bring chanters invisible protection.

Fifth, for the effects on Thai traditional chanting, it is found that Jinapanjara
has motivated people to pay attention to chanting practice more than ever. It has
changed the image of chanting from the practice of old persons to the activity for
everyone. The trend of chanting has motivated people to explore other prayers that
are believed to provide particular benefits to chanters. Seen from many books and
audio records that have been launched recently, it is found that they mostly focus on
a specific advantage. Jinapanjara Gatha is different from the past by the detail of

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch5.pdf | Page 17/17] ===
67

benefit since it is more extended to serve the desire of contemporary people and also
has been made into a marketable product.

Sixth, to examine people’s motivation under this phenomenon, one
interesting point has been found, that is, the Jinapanjara phenomenon is one piece of
the jigsaw puzzle confirming the belief that superstition is widely rooted in Thai
society, not only in poor people, but also the middle class who have a good
educational background.

Seventh, chanting in Thai society today means more than chanting for mind
purification. It is found that most of the Jinapanjara chanters are those who do not
know the real teaching of the Buddha. For the Buddhists who are acquainted with
Buddhist teaching in theTripidok, the Buddha himself criticized the use of magical
power as something not real and not sustainable. This seems to make the Dhamma
Practitioner Buddhists, those who have enough knowledge to distinguish between
Buddhism and superstition, not interested in the Jinapanjara. However, it is not the
objective of the thesis to say what should be counted as “real Buddhism.” The
objective of the thesis is mainly to observe and understand a notable phenomenon
called “the Jinapanjara Phenomenon.” It is solely done under a belief that to
understand Thai society, one way is to explore what Thai people think and do. It
seems that the belief in magical power and superstition is one of the very old
behaviors of human beings. It persists everywhere in the world. Some people say
that sometimes it seems hopeless to imagine that one day this kind of belief will
disappear from the earth. The question is, if this thing can never be abolished from
our society, how to live with it? This is an important question.

Eighth, this phenomenon reflects the conditions when faith leading wisdom.
Buddhism is considered as a religion of wisdom more than religion of faith.
Actually, faith is useful in order to get achievement but without wisdom it is not
different from a power without control or traveling without a good map which
makes it very easy to get lost. The chanting Jinapanjara phenomenon, even though it
comprises faith more than wisdom, at least chanting Jinapanjara itself is the process
that is capable of providing “inner development” because of it length and chanters’
belief. Temporary concentration is the first stage of its benefit which chanters
achieve no matter what benefit they expect. Thus, it depends on chanters
themselves, whether they can develop their lives from this basic benefit of
Jinapanjara, or what they learn from Somdej Toh’s teaching in being his followers
through chanting Jinapanjara.

Chanting Jinapanjara could be a bridge leading chanters to interest in
Dhamma, and the opportunity to achieve Buddhist wisdom. Meanwhile, it could be
merely a refuge for weak people to console themselves among all the uncertainty of
the world without any reason but only faith. This is the interest and challenge for
Jinapanjara chanters, to see if they can go beyond the boundary of faith and access
wisdom.

เด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:40

