=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch1.pdf | Page 1/3] ===
CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

“Ye Dharma Hetu Prabhava Hetun Teschan Tathagato Hey Vadat Teshan
Ca Yo Nirodha Evam Vadi Maha Shramanah ” the gatha that Assashi Thera said to
Saributra inspiring him to become a monk. Subsequently, this gatha appeared often
in Dhavaravati culture <A.C.6-10> with the abbreviation “Ye Dharma” on several
objects such as terracotta Buddha images or some stamps. In fact, according to
archeological evidence, it might be said that it is the most popular gatha found
during the Dhavaravati period. Just these only 2 words attempt to portray the
essence of Buddhist doctrine, although no one really knows how popular this short
gatha was at that time.

Turning to the present time, among all Buddhist prayers in Thailand,
Jinapanjara Gatha is recognized now as the most popular gatha. Interestingly, it
enjoys great popularity and respect among various groups of people, without regard
to age, education and career. The chanting of Jinapanjara is believed by the chanters
to provide many benefits, for example; safety, prosperity, health, wealth, success,
and even charm.

Jinapanjara is not only used for chanting but is also popular for listening too.
Its popularity has boomed, helped by its reproduction in CD and VCD format
accompanied by modern music and is widely available in many bookstores and
audio shops. Furthermore, it is interesting that Jinapanjara is the only prayer in
Thailand that has inspired clubs to be formed, the “The Jinapanjara Gatha Chanting
Club”. Given the popularity of this particular prayer, it is interesting to study why
Thai people in the 21st century pay a lot of attention and effort to reciting this long
gatha. What are the factors behind the rising popularity of this chanting
phenomenon?

Normally, chanting is treated as a religious activity, which has been quite well
accepted as such in Thai society. But, in the case of Jinapanjara Gatha, the
difference is it has been used with expectation of gaining more. Generally, passed by
word of mouth, the popularity of chanting Jinapanjara has spread wide. It has even
been claimed that at least 10,000,000 copies have been distributed for free in various
occasions."

Actually, this is not a new prayer, but it has gained high attention from Thai
people as a new social chanting phenomenon. This phenomenon has created many
firsts:

-The first time that people have been interested in chanting like this.
-The first time people gather together as a particular club, lasting for over 10
years.

-The first time people go to a particular place to chant the same prayer.

1 Interview with Preecha Dhammaphiphop, 7 October 2005.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป
ด า ว น ์ โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2560 21:48:19



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch1.pdf | Page 2/3] ===
2

-The first time a chant has been reproduced with music aimed at relaxation,
with at least 200,000 copies being sold.

-The first time that chanting has been practiced in cars instead of just at temples
or at home.

-The first time chanting and a specific monk are joined together as a product
and brand, with advertising appearing in several kinds of media.

The history of Jinapanjara Gatha is still in question. Most Thai Buddhists
know that it is connected to Somdej Toh. He is one of the most respected monks that
has lived during the Bangkok Period and who is famous for his amulet “Pra Somdej”
which is the most expensive among the amulet circle. There are several books
related to Jinapanjara, but in fact the documented history is quite limited to make
serious academic research.

With regard to its content, Jinapanjara is categorized as Paritta, but it is not a
traditional Paritta. In the past, monks did not chanted Jinapanjara in Morning and
Evening Chanting. However, today, Jinapanjara has been included as a part of
“Tham Wat Chao” <Morning Chanting>at Wat Rakhang Ghositaram and also at
some particular monasteries.

Thus, this thesis aims to investigate, to the extent possible, the origin of
Jinapanjara chanting, as well as examine how Jinapanjara gained popularity. Also,
this thesis will study Jinapanjara’s effects on the Thai chanting tradition and what it
has done to changes in society. Importantly, this study will look at Thai people’s
motivation in order to better understand current Thai values and beliefs. It is
hypothesized that “Somdej Toh” is considered as the main factor for Jinapanjara’s
popularity, with its content, media promotion and monastery promotion assumed to
be additional stimulating factors that have made Jinapanjara widely known among
contemporary Thai people, particularly, after the time of the 1997 economic crisis.

As a contemporary phenomenon study, the research methodology applied in
this thesis comprises a literature review and direct interviews. With respect to
literature review, there are a limit number of academic documents on this matter,
most of stories are focused on myth and superstition .Thus, direct interviews have
been conducted as the main part of the research. The research focuses on several
groups of people who are connected to this phenomenon.

This thesis contains five chapters, starting from exploration of Jinapanjara’s
popularity in Chapter Two, which appears to have started its vogue through the
media, starting from audio records, and seems to have been the sparking factor
making it more widely known in a short period.

Chapter Three is a historical survey, investigating Jinapanjara’s origin to try
to understand whether it originated locally or was imported from Sri Lanka. The
possibility that it was composed in ancient Lanna Kingdom is explored and
interviews with local connected people are described who related their experience
with regards to Jinapanjara in the context of society and belief. This chapter also
explores the background of Jinapanjara’s reviser, Somdej Toh and how he became

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป

ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2563 21:48:19



=== [2006-maneenil-chanting_jinapanjara_ch1.pdf | Page 3/3] ===
3

one of a most notable monk of the Bangkok period, still well-respected by Thai
people. Significantly, the relationship between him and Jinapanjara is examined.

Chapter Four contains nine cases studies of chanters, examining their first
inspiration and motivation to become Jinapanjara chanters. An analysis is done to
find out unique characteristics and significant factors behind this phenomenon. In
order to better understand the relationship between Jinapanjara and its reviser, the
way in which Somdej Toh influenced the Jinapanjara phenomenon will be looked at.

Chapter Five contains an analysis and conclusion, pointing out the possible
causes of Jinapanjara’s popularity and whether Somdej Toh’s influenced is the main
factor and what other factors impact this phenomenon. Finally, there is an
examination of how Jinapanjara phenomenon has affected Thai chanting tradition
and a discussion of the reflection of society through the context of Jinapanjara
phenomenon. In addition to these five chapters, there is an appendix showing some
related pictures.

This thesis takes a look at this phenomenon as an observer to see and
understand what is beneath the surface and try to look at it without any bias. There is
the hope that this is the one step in the sphere of academic research on superstitious
phenomenon which exists in Thai society since from the past until today.

TECHNICAL TERMS AND PARTICULAR NAMES

As can be expected, there are many Pali terms mentioned in this thesis,
which for consistency will be spelled using the Thai pronunciation. However, the
term “Jinapanjara”, which according to the Thai pronunciation “ชิ น บ ั ญ ช ร " should be
spelling as “Chinabanchorn or Chinnabanchorn”, will be set forth using the Pali
spelling since it is internationally accepted.

In addition, it should be noted that Jinapanjara usually is accompanied with

the term “Gatha” and “Mantra”, which have similar means:

“Gatha”  in— a verse or the poem in Pali,
the sacred word?

“Mantra” 1 e—f- the sacred word, word for chanting’

2 The Royal Institute, Thai Dictionary, the edition of the year 1999, p.183
3 Ibid., p.628.

โด ย ผู ใช ท ั ว ไป

ด า ว น โห ล ด เม ื อ 31/08/2569 21:48:19

