=== PAGE 1 ===

=== PAGE 2 ===
The Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive 
 Bringing you the teachings of Lama Yeshe and Lama Zopa Rinpoche 
 
This book is made possible by kind supporters of the Archive who, 
like you, appreciate how we make these Dharma teachings freely 
available on our website for instant reading, watching, listening or 
downloading, as printed, audio and e-books, as multimedia 
presentations, in our historic image galleries, on our Youtube 
channel, through our monthly eletter and podcast and with our 
wonderful social media communities. 
Please help us increase our efforts to spread the Dharma for the 
happiness and benefit of everyone everywhere. Come find out 
more about supporting the Archive and see all we have to offer by 
exploring our website at www.lamayeshe.com.  
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
Sun of Devotion, Stream of Blessings

=== PAGE 4 ===
Previously published 
by the Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive
By Lama Zopa Rinpoche
Virtue and Reality
Teachings from the Vajrasattva  
Retreat
Daily Purification:  
A Short Vajrasattva Practice
Making Life Meaningful
Teachings from the Mani Retreat
The Direct and Unmistaken Method
The Yoga of Offering Food
The Joy of Compassion
How Things Exist
The Heart of the Path
Teachings from the Medicine  
Buddha Retreat
Kadampa Teachings
Bodhisattva Attitude
How to Practice Dharma
The Perfect Human Rebirth
A Teaching on Heruka  
(initiates only)
A Teaching on Yamantaka  
(initiates only)
By Lama Yeshe
Becoming Your Own Therapist
Make Your Mind an Ocean
The Essence of Tibetan Buddhism
The Peaceful Stillness of the Silent Mind
Ego, Attachment and Liberation
Universal Love
Life, Death and After Death
By Lama Yeshe &  
Lama Zopa Rinpoche
Advice for Monks and Nuns
Freedom Through Understanding
Other books
Teachings from Tibet by various great lamas
The Kindness of Others by Geshe Jampa 
Tegchok
In association with  
TDL Publications
Mirror of Wisdom 
by Geshe Tsultim Gyeltsen
Illuminating the Path to Enlightenment 
by His Holiness the Dalai Lama
May whoever sees, touches, reads, remembers, or talks or thinks about these books  
never be reborn in unfortunate circumstances, receive only rebirths in situations  
conducive to the perfect practice of Dharma, meet only perfectly qualiﬁed  
spiritual guides, quickly develop bodhicitta and immediately  
attain enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings.
. . . .
.

=== PAGE 5 ===
Lama Zopa Rinpoche
Sun of Devotion,  
Stream of Blessings
Edited by Gordon McDougall
Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive  •  Boston
www.LamaYeshe.com
A non-­profit charitable organization for the benefit of all 
sentient beings and an affiliate of the Foundation for 
the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition 
www.fpmt.org

=== PAGE 6 ===
First published 2016
Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive
PO Box 636
Lincoln
MA 01773, USA
© Lama Thubten Zopa Rinpoche 2016
Please do not reproduce any part of this book  
by any means whatsoever without our permission
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Thubten Zopa, Rinpoche, 1945- author. | McDougall, Gordon, 
1948-  editor.
Title: Sun of devotion, stream of blessings / Lama Zopa Rinpoche ; 
edited By Gordon McDougall.
Description: Boston : Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2016. | Includes 
bibliographical references.
“In 2014 Lama Zopa Rinpoche gave extensive teachings in Leeds and  
London, England. He covered such essential topics as guru devotion 
and emptiness, talked about the dakini Khadro-la, told stories from his 
life and explained the dangers of the spirit Dolgyal. This book is suit-
able for both beginners and advanced students of Tibetan Buddhism”  
—Provided by publisher.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016024514 (print) | LCCN 2016025638 (ebook)  
| ISBN 9781891868856 | ISBN 9781891868870 ()
Subjects: LCSH: Buddhism—Tibet Region.
Classification: LCC BQ7604 .T493 2016 (print) | LCC BQ7604 
(ebook) | DDC 294.3/4—dc23
ISBN 978-­1-­891868-­85-­6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Cover photograph by Thubten Kunsang
Designed by Gopa&Ted2 Inc.
♻ Printed in the USA with environmental mindfulness on 30% PCW recycled paper. The 
following resources have been saved: 24 trees, 760 lbs. of solid waste, 11,000 gallons of water, 
2,175 lbs. of greenhouse gases and 11 million BTUs of energy. (papercalculator.org)
Please contact the Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive  
for more copies of this and our other free books.

=== PAGE 7 ===
Contents
.,
Publisher’s Acknowledgments 	
ix
Editor’s Preface	
xi
	 1.	 Taking Care of the Mind	
1
The method to transform the mind	
3
In a well-­cultivated field, whatever is  
planted will grow	
6
Happiness is a dependent arising	
8
	 2.	 Our Happiness Is in Our Hands	
13
Transforming suffering into happiness	
13
The ultimate mind is sang-­gyä	
16
Education is more than learning	
17
Padmasambhava’s ways of diagnosing illness	
19
What is samsara?	
20
Practicing Dharma is subduing our mind	
21
The inner education of patience and  
compassion	
23
Our family is our mind training	
24
There can be no happiness following the self-­cherishing thought 	
26
	 3.	 The Hallucination of the Real I	
31
Buddhism comes to Tibet	
31
The Buddha manifests in an ordinary form to guide us 	
36

=== PAGE 8 ===
vi    sun of devotion
Emptiness only, tong-­pa-­nyi	
38
What we do to protect this nonexistent real I	
39
How everything appears to us as truly existing	
42
The Prasangika view of emptiness 	
45
	 4. 	The Need for Ethics and Refuge	
47
We have met these eight freedoms and ten richnesses	
47
The perfect human rebirth is so rare and so fragile	
51
Believer or nonbeliever, we must still lead an ethical life	
55
The need for refuge in our life	
58
The importance of the Namgyälma mantra	
61
	 5. 	The Room Before It Is Named	
65
The room before it is named	
67
Illusioned by the magician, ignorance	
69
Understanding the real I	
71
We have met the correct teachings	
72
The king of delusions	
73
The emptiness of the Z	
74
Time to stop the tyranny of the real I	
75
	 6. 	The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object	
79
The sun of devotion, the stream of blessings	
79
To disrespect the guru is to disrespect all the buddhas	
82
The kindness of the parents	
84
Wasting our life, we waste our parents’ lives	
88
The guru is the most powerful object	
89
Examples of offering service to the guru	
92
	 7. 	A Talk about Dolgyal	
97
My life in Phagri and Buxa Duar	
99
Buxa Duar	
102
About Dolgyal	
103
Having no mistakes but showing mistakes	
105
The need to renounce Dolgyal practice	
108
His Holiness is the one to reveal the complete teachings	
113

=== PAGE 9 ===
Contents    vii
	 8. 	Khadro-­la	
115
Khadro-­la and earthquakes	
115
The power of the bodhisattvas	
117
Saving animals and humans	
118
Publicly she is like an ordinary person	
120
The guru appears in an ordinary form because  
of our impure mind	
123
The absolute and conventional guru	
128
	 9. 	The Importance of Guru Devotion	
133
The importance of guru devotion	
134
The real beginning is guru devotion	
139
All happiness comes from Dharma	
141
The importance of the Dharma and Dharma centers	
143
Rinpoche learns English	
145
Vajrayana is like the sun and moon	
146
How can we be happy while others suffer? 	
148
	10. 	Seeing the Guru as a Buddha	
151
The harm Dolgyal has done 	
151
We must investigate any guru we want to follow	
154
Seeing the guru as a buddha	
157
Offering to the pores of His Holiness	
160
The guru is more precious than a wish-­granting jewel	
165
Seeing apparent mistakes in the guru	
168
	11.	 More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel	
173
Lama Tsongkhapa and Mönlam	
173
The benefits of prostrations	
175
Khadro-­la’s story 	
178
Benefiting sentient beings 	
180
How to help somebody who is dying or dead	
181
Having a perfect human rebirth is like a dream	
183
We must not waste one moment	
185
Whether or not we eat animals is in our hands	
186

=== PAGE 10 ===
viii    sun of devotion
This precious human life is more precious than  
a wish-­granting jewel	
187
We must prepare for the next life	
191
Which will come first, tomorrow or the next life?	
192
Renounce this life	
195
	12.	 Cutting the Root of Samsara	
199
The decoration that pervades our life	
199
Cutting the root of samsara	
200
The twelve limbs	
202
All our happiness has come from other  
sentient beings 	
206
Only by cherishing others will we attain enlightenment 	
210
	13. 	Practicing Tantra	
213
Heruka, Guhyasamaja and Yamantaka	
213
Why practicing Heruka is important	
215
Taking initiation: the samayas of the five buddha families	
217
Using the damaru, vajra and bell	
223
The interpretation of dreams	
225
Vajrayana and emptiness 	
226
Vajrayana combines method and wisdom in one mind 	
227
Tantra is the resultant vehicle	
228
Chronology	
231
Bibliography	
277

=== PAGE 11 ===
Publisher’s Acknowledgments 
.,
W
	 	e are extremely grateful to our friends and supporters who 
have made it possible for the Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive to both 
exist and function: Lama Yeshe and Lama Zopa Rinpoche, whose kind-
ness is impossible to repay; Peter and Nicole Kedge and Venerable Ailsa 
Cameron for their initial work on the Archive; Venerable Roger Kunsang, 
Rinpoche’s tireless assistant, for his kindness and consideration; and our sus-
taining supporters—Christine Arlington, Roger and Claire Ash-­Wheeler, 
Tom and Suzanne Castles, Nick and Gisela Dawson, Richard Gere, Goh 
Pik Pin, Annelies van der Heijden and Annette van Citters, Barry and 
Connie Hershey, Dr. S.T. Lee, Ho Sau Ling, Therese Miller, Janet Moore, 
Ven. Gyalten Palmo, Erick Rinner, Tham Poon King, Thubten Yeshe, Yeshe 
Khorlo Foundation, and several anonymous benefactors.
With respect to Sun of Devotion, Stream of Blessings, in late 2014 I 
received a call from Ven. Roger that Rinpoche would like his recent teach-
ings in England published soon. So Gordon got to work and produced a 
manuscript not long after, and after Sandy Smith’s final polish, here it is. 
Thank you Gordon and Sandy for your great work.
Thanks are also due to Rajiv Mehrotra of the Foundation for Universal 
Responsibility of His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Ashok Chopra of Hay 
House Publishers India for permission to use the line drawing of the wheel 
of life from The End of Suffering and the Discovery of Happiness: The Path of 
Tibetan Buddhism, by H.H. the Dalai Lama.
We are also deeply grateful to all those who have become members of the 
Archive over the past few years. Details of our membership program may 
be found at the back of this book, and if you are not a member, please do 
consider joining up. Due to the kindness of those who have, we now have 

=== PAGE 12 ===
x    sun of devotion
several editors working on our vast collection of teachings for the benefit 
of all. We have posted our list of individual and corporate members on our 
website, LamaYeshe.com. 
Furthermore, we would like to express our appreciation for the kindness 
and compassion of all those other generous benefactors who have contrib-
uted since we began publishing free books. Thankfully, you are too numer-
ous to mention individually, but we value highly each and every donation 
made to spreading the Dharma for the sake of the kind mother sentient 
beings and greatly appreciate the support of those who partner with us in 
this amazing and beneficial work. Thank you so much. 
Finally, I would like to thank the many other kind people who have asked 
that their donations be kept anonymous; my wife, Wendy Cook, for her sup-
port and editing skills; our dedicated office staff, Jennifer Barlow and Ven. 
Ani Tenzin Desal; our editors Ven. Ailsa Cameron, Ven. Sarah Thresher, 
Ven. Connie Miller, Gordon McDougall and Sandy Smith; Ven. Kunsang 
for recording Lama Zopa Rinpoche; our transcribers Ven. Thubten Mun-
sel, Diana van Die, Mer Stafford, Su Hung and Pat Lee; our social media 
and e-­publishing manager Megan Evart; Ven. Bob Alcorn for his work on 
our videos; David Zinn for his digital imaging expertise; FPMT Australia 
for help with our distribution in Australia, and Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
and Losang Dragpa Centre for their help with our distribution in Singa-
pore and Malaysia respectively; and everybody else who helps us in so many 
ways. Thank you all.
 If you, dear reader, would like to join this noble group of openhearted 
altruists by contributing to the production of more books by Lama Yeshe 
or Lama Zopa Rinpoche or to any other aspect of the Lama Yeshe Wisdom 
Archive’s work, please contact us to find out how. 
Dr. Nicholas Ribush 
Through the merit of having contributed to the spread of the Buddha’s 
 teachings for the sake of all sentient beings, may our benefactors  
and their families and friends have long and healthy lives,  
all happiness, and may all their Dharma  
wishes be instantly fulfilled. 
. . . . .

=== PAGE 13 ===
Editor’s Preface
.,
T
his book is the record of a remarkable series of events. In July 2014, 
Lama Zopa Rinpoche, the spiritual director of the Foundation for the 
Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition (FPMT), visited the United King-
dom for the first time in thirteen years, teaching in Leeds and London. 
That Rinpoche taught was not remarkable—Rinpoche teaches with every 
breath—but the timing of the event and the power and clarity of his teach-
ings after so long an absence were something none of us there at the time 
will forget. 
The first event took place at Trinity University in Leeds on exactly the 
same day and within a few kilometers of the start of the Tour de France, the 
3,600-­kilometer cycle race that is the greatest sporting event in France (and 
for some reason started in the UK in 2014). The million people who came 
to witness the start made the logistics of getting to Rinpoche interesting. 
I remember arriving at Leeds station and seeing a sea of humanity filling 
every platform, making Delhi railway station at rush hour look deserted by 
comparison. Miraculously, just outside, empty taxis were waiting and there 
was a clear run to the university. A local said to me, “This is the most amaz-
ing day Leeds has ever seen.” I had to agree with him, although which of the 
two events was the more amazing I will leave for you to decide. 
I feel very fortunate to have been at those teachings (albeit flagging a 
bit by dawn of the second all-­nighter in London) and so in editing them I 
wanted to retain the flavor of a great master giving precise instructions to 
the students in front of him. 
Besides omitting the end-­of-­session dedications and event-­specific 
aspects—the giving of an oral transmission and an initiation—I have tried 
to keep the subjects in the book as close to how Rinpoche taught them and 

=== PAGE 14 ===
xii    sun of devotion
in the order they were given. I have merged one or two sections, especially 
where in Leeds and London he said basically the same thing, and shifted the 
order of a few small sections to give the book greater overall cohesion, but 
this is still the record of an oral teaching. Therefore you will notice many 
interjections where, for example, Rinpoche explains a side issue (sometimes 
at length) within the context of the main subject. Bear with this. If you have 
ever had the good fortune of actually experiencing one of Rinpoche’s teach-
ings you will know that this is his style. 
Furthermore, the way he kept coming back to certain ideas, as if to rein-
force and expand on what he had said previously, felt incredibly powerful to 
me as I sat there in front of him. As I edit the transcripts it still feels that way. 
I hope the way I have edited the book has not lost too much of the power 
of Rinpoche’s presentation.
His profound explanation of sang-­gyä is one instance of this, which he 
reiterates many times. Rather than use the stock English translation of 
“buddha,” Rinpoche dissects the Tibetan term and shows that sang, the 
complete elimination of all obscurations, and gyä, the complete attainment 
of all realizations, is what a buddha is, is what buddhahood—enlighten-
ment—is. For most of us, the Buddha is a guy sitting under a tree glowing 
with light. Rinpoche explodes that very limited view. As he says, “Don’t get 
hung up on the words.” 
The other two themes he kept returning to were the danger of follow-
ing the worldly protector Shugden, or Dolgyal, as he has here more often 
referred to him, and the great qualities of Khadro-­la, the incredible being 
who has become very important to Tibetan Buddhism, FPMT and the 
world. Having had the fortune of doing two retreats with her, I feel that 
what Rinpoche says of her importance is no exaggeration at all.  
Usually with edits of Rinpoche’s teachings I am unable to thank peo-
ple individually because it has been a team effort often spanning decades. 
Although there have been many people involved in the production of this 
book, I would like to thank two in particular, Ven. Thubten Munsel, who 
transcribed the audio files, and Diana van Die, who checked the transcripts. 
They both did their work with such speed, accuracy and devotion that my 
job was made very easy indeed. Whatever mistakes and confusions there 
might be in the book are entirely of my doing. 
May this book of Rinpoche’s UK teachings inspire all who read it and 
bring them compassion, patience and wisdom. In particular, may it be 
the source of harmony and strength to the various UK centers and study 

=== PAGE 15 ===
Editor’s Preface    xiii
groups, especially the brand new Land of Joy retreat community, which 
became physically manifest during Rinpoche’s visit. 
May whatever small merit gained from the creation of this book be dedi-
cated to the long and healthy lives of His Holiness the Dalai Lama, Lama 
Zopa Rinpoche, Khadro-­la and the other great teachers of the FPMT, of 
Tibetan Buddhism and of all Buddhist traditions. Through the sun of our 
devotion, may the stream of their blessings always pour down upon us.
Bath, UK 
February 2015

=== PAGE 16 ===
Roger Kunsamg
We at LYWA dedicate this book to our dear friend and colleague, the late  
Ven. Thubten Kunsang (Henri Lopez), who worked with us for many years 
recording Rinpoche’s teachings (including the ones that constitute this book)  
and taking photos and video. At Ösel Labrang, Sera-je Monastery, India,  
January 2016. This was his last meeting with Rinpoche.

=== PAGE 17 ===
1. Taking Care of the Mind
.,
T
hank you very much, everybody I’ve met in this life and in past 
lives. The reason we are gathered here is because we have met in past 
lives or past times. So, to all of you, my brothers and sisters, thank you very 
much for coming and I offer you my best wishes. 
What are we going to talk about? I think the most important thing in 
the world is to realize how all our happiness and problems come from our 
mind—all our hour-­to-­hour happiness and problems, minute-­to-­minute 
happiness and problems, second-­to-­second happiness and problems come 
from our mind. 
Sometimes in certain situations in our life we are able to recognize that 
thinking one way brings peace to others and ourselves whereas thinking 
another way brings harm. The way we act with others in any situation deter-
mines the outcome. Understanding this shows us that we have total free-
dom in our hands—freedom to stop problems and freedom to bring peace 
and happiness to others and ourselves. 
Even when great anger arises, we can be aware there is a choice. Our usu-
ally uncontrollable self-­cherishing thought arises, bringing self-­concern, 
anger, pride and so forth, but sometimes that can make us aware that there 
is a choice. We can choose. We always have the choice of bringing either 
happiness or suffering to another person, but because of our anger, the wish 
to hurt, we generally choose wrong. This clearly proves that our mind is the 
creator of all our day-­to-­day life’s problems and happiness. 
Seeing how this life’s problems and happiness come from our mind, we 
can go beyond that and see that all the suffering we have experienced and 
will experience throughout all our lifetimes comes from the mind, includ-
ing the heavier suffering of the animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. 

=== PAGE 18 ===
2    sun of devotion
Everything we have experienced in the past and will experience in the future 
comes from the mind. 
Samsara is Sanskrit for cyclic existence or circling, and nirvana is San-
skrit for the ultimate, blissful state of peace for ourselves, the total cessation 
of all the oceans of samsaric suffering. Both samsara and nirvana come from 
our mind. Enlightenment is the peerless happiness, the state of omniscient 
mind. The Tibetan term, sang-­gyä, means exactly this, the total cessation of 
all obscurations and the completion of all realizations. Enlightenment also 
comes from our mind. It does not come from anywhere else, from temples 
or anywhere outside. It comes from our mind. 
Every day, every minute, we have either happiness or problems. If we can 
learn to think in a better way our problems will disappear and we’ll have 
peace and happiness in our life. But when we don’t change the way we think, 
problems fill our entire life, day and night. Then we have to go to see psy-
chologists and doctors. Seeing all these specialists makes our life very expen-
sive! On top of the food and household expenses we generally incur there 
are all these extra expensive doctors’ fees, probably thousands, hundreds of 
thousands, millions of dollars! Life is so expensive because we don’t know 
how to take care of our mind, we don’t know how to take care of our life. 
Actually, Dharma practice, meditation—there are many different 
names—is the best psychology for the healthiest mind. And the healthiest 
mind allows us to have the healthiest body. This is impossible if we don’t 
care for our mind, treating it like garbage, throwing it in the bin.
Failing to take care of our mind always brings unpleasant results, creat-
ing many worries, many problems, one after the other. No sooner have we 
solved one problem than another arises, on and on, our whole life getting 
worse and worse. Out of control, we receive more and more bills, incur 
more and more debt, over and over again. Like that, our whole life passes. 
The key to happiness is the mind. With the mind, we can switch our life 
to suffering or we can switch it to happiness, just as we change television 
channels, choosing to watch programs about fighting and war, or peaceful 
things, like the nature programs people seem to enjoy. Experiencing happi-
ness or suffering depends entirely on what we do with our mind. 
Taking care of the mind, taking care of life, means meditating. Practic-
ing meditation should be just that—taking care of our mind, taking care of 
our life, taking care of ourselves. This is what I’d like to talk about. I don’t 
know Buddhism well but I can say a few words about what I’m a little bit 
familiar with. 

=== PAGE 19 ===
Taking Care of the Mind    3
The method to transform the mind
Leaving aside the various higher levels of happiness we can obtain in this life 
and the happiness beyond this life, most people don’t know that even this 
life’s mundane happiness comes entirely from the mind. All they consider 
is this life, which might seem long now but is, in reality, very, very short.
This becomes very apparent at the moment of death. After having had 
this human body with all its comforts and pleasures—car, house, family and 
so forth—when the moment of death arrives everything is gone. One min-
ute we have it and the next it’s gone. This is what we will experience as we 
die because during our life we never meditated; we failed to make use of this 
most important psychology to make our mind positive and healthy. This 
is what the Buddha taught in his fundamental teaching on the four noble 
truths, the main focus of the Hinayana: true suffering, true cause of suffer-
ing, true cessation of suffering and its cause and the true path that leads to 
the cessation of suffering and its cause. 
Within this fundamental teaching of the Buddha are the teachings on 
impermanence and death. As long as we remain unaware of imperma-
nence—not so much gross impermanence but mainly subtle imperma-
nence—we will experience problems with our life, relationships and so 
forth. 
In the same way that most people do not understand the mind, they also 
do not understand death. Yet it is vital to understand what happens at death 
so that when we are actually in the death process we can be happy. Although 
we are still not free from death, by knowing about it we can make it most 
beneficial for ourselves and all the other living beings, who also have to 
experience the suffering of death. 
We still have to experience death because we have yet to eliminate its 
cause, karma and delusion. Without a direct perception of emptiness, we 
cannot do this. So, this is what we need to do. Destroying the cause makes 
it impossible to experience the result: the suffering of death, the suffering of 
rebirth, the suffering of sicknesses, the suffering of old age and—again—the 
suffering of death, over and over, again and again. 
People spend a lot of money to stop looking old—hundreds, thousands 
or even millions of dollars. However, if we were to stop painting our body to 
beautify it but just let it remain natural, aging would show; we would notice 
it more and more with each passing year. 
It also depends on how a person has lived life. Even within a year, someone 

=== PAGE 20 ===
4    sun of devotion
experiencing great unhappiness can become externally old, her1 skin wrin-
kled, her hair quite gray. On the other hand, another person whose life 
is very stable and peaceful and without much suffering—especially if her 
mind is very happy—changes very little physically, even though the aging 
process is there in the same way. 
We are getting old all the time—not only day by day but also hour by 
hour and minute by minute. We cannot remain the same because we are 
changing, even second by second. Geshe Lamrimpa, a Tibetan meditator, 
mentioned that even within a second, very subtle imprints causing changes 
occur. This is evolution; this is what happens. This is impermanence, the 
fact we are constantly aging, getting older. Here, of course, we are generally 
referring to external things, such as the body. 
The happiest person is the one who always thinks positively, who prac-
tices Dharma, particularly bodhicitta, the most positive mind. With such 
a mind we can use whatever problem arises to make it most beneficial and 
transform it into happiness, using it to free ourselves from the oceans of 
samsaric suffering. Not only that, but we can use it to achieve peerless hap-
piness, the state of omniscient mind, sang-­gyä, the total elimination of 
obscurations and the completion of all realizations. We can use it not just 
for ourselves but for others, to free numberless sentient beings from the 
oceans of samsaric suffering and also bring them into peerless happiness, the 
state of omniscient mind. 
With such a mind, we can use whatever problem we experience in our life 
in this way, even death or cancer. That is truly unbelievable. We use prob-
lems to collect skies of merit; more than skies of merit. If such merit were 
to manifest in form it would be bigger than the sky. The Buddha explained 
this in a sutra and Lama Atisha said the same thing: 
If the bodhicitta you actualized
Were to take form,
What you collected 
Would be bigger than the sky. 
This is the best purification. Bodhicitta purifies the obscurations collected 
from beginningless rebirths that bring suffering in this and future lives and 
1  Or his. Rather than use “they” or “their” for non-­gender specific examples like this, we shall 
just alternate the genders.

=== PAGE 21 ===
Taking Care of the Mind    5
cause us to be reborn in the lower realms. The minute we practice, the sec-
ond we practice, this is what happens. This is the best way to practice. 
In America it sometimes happens that small schoolchildren kill many 
people. Not only small children but adults as well. This happened last year 
and, from time to time, it has happened before; suddenly, surprisingly. I’m 
sure it’s not only in America but in the rest of the world as well. 
For example, in America they have talked for years without ever decid-
ing about the right to have guns. At present, everybody can have a gun, so if 
your enemy or somebody shoots at you, you can shoot back. That seems to 
be the ordinary mind in America. And so it has happened many times that 
even young children have killed many people. 
After such a shooting incident, people talk about it on TV and elsewhere 
for weeks and weeks and weeks. They wonder how a small child could kill 
so many people. They talk and talk and talk but there is no solution. Once, 
after a man had killed many people, they checked for insanity but found he 
was a normal person, or what they call a “normal” person. He was just doing 
a normal job and living a normal life, like those who are regarded as sane by 
the government and other organizations. On that particular day, however, 
his way of thinking suddenly changed, he got a gun and killed many people. 
This happened.
Everybody was very surprised. On CNN, Anderson Cooper demanded 
to know how this could happen, but at the same time said he knew people 
wouldn’t have an answer. To his mind there was no answer as to how to stop 
this kind of killing. I’m sorry to say this but he was wrong, there is a way. If 
the killer had met the Dharma and listened to the teachings of the Omni-
scient One, he would know there is a method to transform his mind so that 
such things wouldn’t happen. The method is to purify past negative karma, 
the obscurations, not just from this life but also from all the beginningless 
rebirths; to confess and purify. If he could have purified the obscurations 
that caused him to change his mind and kill all those people, that negative 
thought would not have arisen and the shooting would not have happened. 
People might be shocked at what I’m saying but this is the solution. 
Similarly, if the victims of the shooting had known the practice of purifi-
cation then the result of being killed would not have happened. This is pos-
sible. In that way, both victim and perpetrator need purification. 
There is a method, there is something we can do, and that is to work with 
the mind, not simply to try to effect change from outside but to transform 
the mind. It’s a purely mental action. Just working with the mind can do 

=== PAGE 22 ===
6    sun of devotion
that. But unfortunately, because these people have not met the Dharma, 
they don’t know the method, the solution. 
That is the reason I want to talk about the mind, about how to transform 
the mind, to stop thinking in unhealthy, nonvirtuous ways that brings prob-
lems to others and ourselves and to transform the mind into a positive way 
of thinking, to be able to live the happiest, most positive life. 
In a well-­cultivated field, whatever is  
planted will grow
In Heart Instructions of the Book of Kadam, Lama Atisha is quoted as saying 
these lines:
If the field is well cultivated, whatever you plant will grow. 
With a good heart all your higher wishes will succeed,
And so whatever you do must come from the awakening mind.
Lama Atisha said this to the spiritual mentor Dromtönpa.
With perseverance and stability there will be no obstacles.
If you are learned in what to practice and what to abandon, 
You will go to liberation abiding in the sphere of wisdom.
Lama Atisha said learning, discipline and kindness must  
complement each other.2 
He starts with the example of the field. If it is well plowed and well culti-
vated, then whatever we plant there will grow well. In the same way, if we 
have a good heart, we will attain all our wishes. Everything we wish for 
will happen. When we have perseverance we will have no obstacles, which 
means obstacles to any happiness, most importantly, ultimate happiness—
freedom from the oceans of samsaric suffering, and especially peerless hap-
piness, the state of the omniscient mind. For example, I myself am lazy, so 
nothing is happening. But those who have perseverance have no obstacles. 
They will achieve whatever they want to achieve. 
There’s a Tibetan saying that a turtle goes very, very slowly but reaches 
its goal, whereas a flea jumps all over the place and never gets anywhere. 
2  By Yongzin Yeshe Gyaltsen, section 8, vv. 18–19. Cf. Thupten Jinpa’s translation in The Book 
of Kadam, p. 555. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
Taking Care of the Mind    7
Somebody who has a little perseverance and is active for a short time but 
does not persevere continuously will not succeed. I think this Tibetan say-
ing is very useful. 
Even though we do a tiny amount of practice, it is very important that 
we continue it. We shouldn’t just practice for a short time but then, due to 
lack of perseverance, allow our mind to become weaker until we no longer 
feel we can practice. Then maybe, after having stopped practicing for a long 
time, we meet somebody or hear a talk and become inspired, causing us to 
try again for a few days or a few months. It should not be like that. Even 
though the Dharma practice we do might be very small, it is most impor-
tant that we persevere with it. 
As well as perseverance, we also need to know what should be practiced 
and what should be abandoned. Whether we want to practice the Dharma 
or not is up to us, but if we do, investigation and learning, or knowledge, are 
so important. If we know the Dharma, the Omniscient One’s teachings, we 
develop the wisdom to discriminate right from wrong in our life. Then we 
can abandon what is wrong and practice what is right and because of that 
achieve liberation, ultimate happiness, the blissful state of peace. This is the 
advice from Heart Instructions of the Book of Kadam.
I haven’t yet seen a commentary on this, but my view is that this is 
achieved by realizing the “skillful means of appearances,” the Prasangika 
view of very subtle dependent arising. The Madhyamaka school is subdi-
vided into Svatantrika and Prasangika, and this is the view of the latter, the 
Prasangika—very subtle dependent arising. 
The Buddha realized ultimate wisdom and then revealed it to us sentient 
beings. Because of that, numberless sentient beings have already been liber-
ated from oceans of samsaric suffering and brought to peerless happiness, 
full enlightenment. “Abiding in the sphere of the wisdom” means gaining a 
direct perception of emptiness through equipoise meditation. 
We can then lead the other transmigratory beings to liberation. In 
Tibetan, the word for transmigratory beings is dro-­wa, meaning they are 
not free from the cause of suffering, karma and delusion, but have perpet-
ually been circling in samsara. Hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, gods, 
demigods and human beings have been circling in the suffering realms from 
beginningless rebirths. If they don’t meet the Dharma, if they don’t know 
the Dharma, they will have to suffer like this endlessly, so they are called 
dro-­wa, transmigratory beings. However, by the skillful means of appear-
ances, we are able to liberate those transmigratory beings from the oceans of 

=== PAGE 24 ===
8    sun of devotion
samsaric suffering and bring them to ultimate happiness, the state of omni-
scient mind. 
Just reading a little bit about Buddhism without really meditating is like 
a child playing at meditating. We must do more than that.
Happiness is a dependent arising
What we want is happiness and what we do not want is suffering. This is 
what everybody wants. Even ants running about busily, day and night, are 
doing so because of this. When I’m in Nepal, if I spill some sweet tea on 
my table, almost immediately there are ants crawling all over it. They come 
in the daytime but at night they are not there. Maybe they are sleeping, I 
don’t know. Maybe they have a good sleep at night. It seems that some ants 
do and others don’t, but generally ants are very busy, climbing up trees, 
climbing down them, so incredibly busy. Just like human beings and every-
body else. 
In that we are all the same. Just like the insects, like every being, we are 
all looking to have happiness and avoid suffering. For that reason we are all 
constantly moving about, looking for food, looking for comfort, looking 
for everything. 
Every single fish in the ocean is like this. I don’t know who guides all 
those billions and billions of tiny fish, but they are always looking for food 
while at the same time trying to escape their enemies. There are millions of 
them, not just the small ones, going everywhere for food and at the same 
time trying to escape their enemies. That’s just one example, but everyone 
is like that. 
When we look down at the sea from an airplane it is so blue. It looks so 
peaceful, so calm, with a kind of happiness, without any sense of violence 
at all. But were we to go just below the surface of the water, the story is 
very different. There are whales and sharks and other big fish, all eating one 
another. Sea lions, those great fat creatures, come out of the ocean and laze 
on the rocks, then go back in and eat the penguins swimming there. The sea 
lions eat the penguins and then they are eaten by whales or other big ani-
mals. One eats another, another eats another and on and on and on.
This is what we would see if we were to go just below the surface of the 
water, the whole ocean full of numberless sentient beings being eaten by 
each other. They are always either trying to escape or trying to find food. 
Most of us humans, fortunately, don’t have that problem.
What a pleasant life we human beings have, what comfort, what free-

=== PAGE 25 ===
Taking Care of the Mind    9
dom. We should use this great opportunity to benefit all living sentient 
beings, particularly those in this country and this world. 
All beings want happiness and do not want suffering. We humans are the 
same, whatever we are doing, whether we are going by airplane, by boat, by 
car or by bicycle. The bike race has just finished in Leeds.3 I wasn’t there but 
I saw it on TV. Everyone everywhere—in the shops, in the restaurants, in 
the offices, on bicycles—everyone wants happiness and does not want suf-
fering, including the tiny insects that we can only see through a microscope. 
We all have the same motivation. 
What should we do to succeed in our wish to only have happiness? This 
is an important question, especially after the collapse of the world economy 
and the destruction of the Twin Towers in New York. I even heard that 
many airlines went bankrupt in both America and other countries, impov-
erishing many people, making them unable to look after their children. So 
many people in many countries lost their jobs and were reduced to poverty 
when those two buildings were destroyed and the economy of the whole 
world suffered. 
Success and happiness are what everybody wants, both believers and 
nonbelievers—people who are practicing Dharma and people who are not 
practicing Dharma. 
I have just a tiny bit of understanding from hearing about Buddhism and 
from reading some texts, but what I would like to say is that whether we are 
believers or nonbelievers, practicing Dharma or not, since we are looking 
for happiness, since we want success, first we need to create the cause. The 
success that we want is not independent; it is a dependent arising. Because it 
depends on causes and conditions, we need to create those causes and con-
ditions. Of course, there is no way animals can understand this. Ants and 
those small jumping ones, grasshoppers, cannot understand our language. 
Not only from reading the Omniscient One’s teachings but maybe a little 
from my own experience, I can suggest that the first thing we need to do is 
to fulfill other sentient beings’ wishes, whether they are animals or people. 
In everyday life, whether we are believers or nonbelievers, whether we medi-
tate or not, it doesn’t matter. If we want happiness and don’t want suffering, 
this is what we must do. We must serve others and fulfill their wishes for 
3  The day Rinpoche started this series of teachings, the Tour de France, the most important 
cycle race in the world, was starting in Leeds city centre a few miles away, with an estimated 
million people in the streets watching.

=== PAGE 26 ===
10    sun of devotion
happiness. If we do that, by depending on that cause, the result of happiness 
will come to us. First we create the cause by bringing happiness to others 
and then we ourselves achieve the result, happiness. 
Perhaps we wish for something and without effort it just happens. Per-
haps it happens in the same month, the same day or even after just a few 
hours. And then it happens more and more, seemingly without effort. Logi-
cally, it seems impossible, but because we have created the cause it just hap-
pens without any effort. That is really amazing. 
I’ll tell you this from my own tiny experience. Over the years I have made 
some small offerings to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Now, as a result, 
I’m able to offer more than I could in the past, when I was stingy, miserly, 
thinking, “If I offer this, what will happen to me in the future? I will lose 
everything; I will become sick.” Trying to keep everything for ourselves is 
the wrong way. 
If we want success and happiness, first we need to cause others to have suc-
cess and happiness. From that comes the result, achieving all our wishes—
not only temporary happiness but even liberation from samsara and the 
ultimate happiness of enlightenment, sang-­gyä, the total elimination of all 
obscurations and the completion of all realizations. 
Of course, I’m not talking about that from my own experience, but to 
give a small example, I once offered a pearl mala; I got some pearls and 
offered them to the Twenty-­one Taras. After that I got a dependent arising. 
From that cause, I received a pearl mala where the pearls were not just fake 
ones but real, and then more and more came and I was able to offer to the 
Twenty-­one Taras in different places, not just at FPMT centers but at other 
centers as well, offering more and more. I’m just giving this small example 
to show how success comes as a dependent arising. 
Then there are the general offerings to the Sangha. At Sera Je there are 
about three thousand monks and we have been offering food to them for 
about twenty-­five years. First they were served a portion of their lunch; 
then we could offer them a real lunch, and then dinner and breakfast as 
well. Before that, many monks who came from Tibet had to share their 
teachers’ food and they never got enough. Their stomachs were never filled 
and many of them had to return to Tibet, so there was no continual study. 
However, after we started offering them meals, they were able to stay and 
continue their studies. 
I offer food to Sera Je, but of course, if I could, I would also offer to all 
of Sera, Ganden and Drepung. Altogether there are six main Gelug monas-

=== PAGE 27 ===
Taking Care of the Mind    11
teries: Sera Me, Sera Je, Ganden Shartse, Ganden Jangtse, Drepung Losel-
ing and Drepung Gomang, but Sera Je is the largest monastery in the Lama 
Tsongkhapa tradition and the monks who study there are able to continu-
ally study Buddhist philosophy, which is as vast and profound as the Pacific 
Ocean is wide and deep. 
This is not just faith; this is also logical. If the monks complete their 
studies there they become geshes and we can invite them to teach Buddha-
dharma in the rest of the world. In that way, many sentient beings all over 
the world get the opportunity to learn and to awaken their minds and to 
eventually achieve enlightenment.
If conditions in the monasteries deteriorate, however, we won’t be able 
to get qualified teachers to teach in the rest of the world, like Geshe Tashi 
Tsering4 here in London, who has been enlightening beings in the United 
Kingdom for so many years, always teaching the lam-­rim and helping the 
Westerners and Tibetans. If the monasteries become weak, sending great 
geshes like Geshe Tashi to other countries won’t be possible and sentient 
beings will no longer get any opportunity to awaken their minds and attain 
enlightenment. 
Even just in the FPMT we have forty-­five teachers teaching the Dharma 
and awakening the minds of students. And this is without considering the 
other great traditions: Nyingma, Kagyü and Sakya as well as the other orga-
nizations within Lama Tsongkhapa’s tradition. 
I was using myself, my little tiny bit of experience, as one example but 
there are many others. From the offerings I normally make to my gurus 
they build monasteries and khangtsens in different places. There are so many 
other things like this. Collecting more merit, I am able to benefit the teach-
ings of the Buddha and sentient beings more and more. That’s what I do. 
That is just to show logically what you need to do if you want success. 
Karma is definite. This is the first of the four outlines of karma. If we cre-
ate virtue, engaging in positive, healthy karma, or action, we will definitely 
experience happiness in this life and future lives. If we create nonvirtue, 
engaging in unhealthy, disturbing karma, or action, then the result is suffer-
ing in this life and other lives. 
The second outline is that karma is expandable. If we help somebody—if 
we give food to an ant or a person, if we fulfill the wishes of one sentient 
4  The resident teacher at Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, since 1994; author of the Foun-
dation of Buddhist Thought series of books. 

=== PAGE 28 ===
12    sun of devotion
being—the result is that we will have happiness for many lifetimes, for ten, 
five hundred, even a thousand lifetimes from just that one action of helping 
somebody, from fulfilling their happiness just one time. 
Cherishing even one sentient being brings us to buddhahood, the state 
of omniscient mind, the cessation of all obscurations and attainment of all 
realizations. Even cherishing just one sentient being. It helps to keep this in 
mind. Killing one insect means we will be killed by others for five hundred 
lifetimes. Cheating one sentient being means we will be cheated for a thou-
sand lifetimes. This is mentioned in the commentary of Aryadeva’s Four 
Hundred Verses. Therefore, any negativity, any harm we do will bring us suf-
fering from life to life to life to life. All this has come from our mind; it has 
not come from others. The reason others are forced to harm us, to cause us 
suffering, is because of our past mind. It has come from us, from our mind. 
The last two outlines of karma are that if the karma has not been created, 
the result of happiness or suffering cannot happen, and that if the karma has 
been created, the result of happiness or suffering will never get lost—even 
after a billion, zillion, trillion eons we will experience it. It never gets lost. 
We can purify negative karma, but if we don’t purify it, then this is what 
happens. Similarly, if we don’t destroy the cause of happiness, then we will 
definitely experience it. 
Success, all the way up to enlightenment, has to come from our mind. 
Therefore, the real, real meditation, the real Dharma practice, is to serve 
others, to cherish others. 
If we help one sentient being, one insect, one person, that is the best 
offering to the numberless bodhisattvas and the numberless buddhas 
because that is what they cherish the most. This sentient being—even this 
one insect, even this one mosquito, even this one ant, even this one per-
son—is most cherished by numberless bodhisattvas and buddhas. 

=== PAGE 29 ===
2. Our Happiness Is in Our Hands
.,
Transforming suffering into happiness
T
o our hallucinated mind it looks like all our day-­to-­day happi-
ness and problems—every hour’s, every minute’s, even every second’s 
happiness and problems—come from the outside. But in reality, they come 
from our mind, from our concepts. They are the results of actions, karma, 
done in the past. Of the two components of our being, body and mind, they 
come from the mind.
There are six principal consciousnesses and fifty-­one secondary minds, 
thoughts or mental factors. With respect to any particular object, the men-
tal factors that accompany the principal consciousness are similar to it in 
five ways: object, aspect, time, entity and basis.5 
Among those fifty-­one secondary minds are the five omnipresent mental 
factors that always accompany the principal consciousness: feeling, cogni-
tion, contact, intention and attention.6 Intention—sem-­pa in Tibetan, what 
we usually call karma, which literally means action—is one of the omnipres-
ent mental factors. Because intention is always there, we label things as posi-
tive or negative every minute, every second; our mind merely labels things 
as positive or negative all the time. 
5  The five similarities are: they are produced in dependence on the same basis (Skt: ashraya; 
Tib: ten); they observe the same object (Skt: alambana; Tib: mig-­pa); they are generated in 
the same aspect (Skt: akara; Tib: nam-­pa); they occur at the same time (Skt: kala; Tib: dü) 
and they are the same substantial entity (Skt: dravya; Tib: dzä). See Mind in Tibetan Bud-
dhism, pp. 35–36. Also The Mind and Its Functions, pp. 105–6, where they are listed as basis, 
duration, aspect, referent and substance.
6  See Mind in Tibetan Buddhism, p. 36, where the five omnipresent factors (Tib: kün-­dro 
nga) are listed as feeling, discrimination, intention, mental engagement and contact.

=== PAGE 30 ===
14    sun of devotion
Whatever we perceive—another person’s body, speech or mind or some 
material object—we label it positive or negative. In this way we label the 
world. All the time, every hour, every minute, every second we are labeling, 
and not just labeling but merely labeling, merely imputing things. In that 
way we create the I, we create the action, we create the object, we create the 
whole world as positive or negative. So positive and negative are merely des-
ignations of our own mind.
Because the results of happiness or suffering are ripening results of 
imprints in our own mind and not other people’s imprints, we have con-
trol of our life. There is a practice called lo-­jong, thought transformation, 
where we utilize our problems, turning them into happiness, making them 
worthwhile. Any problem we have—a relationship problem, a disease such 
as cancer, being in debt—is all to do with the mind; it is a concept of the 
mind. It depends on how we look at it. Therefore we can reinterpret it, put-
ting a positive label on it instead of a negative one. In that way we are able to 
utilize the problem, transforming it not just into temporary happiness but 
ultimate happiness. This is what we really need to be able to do. 
In all our beginningless lives, there is no temporary happiness that we 
have never achieved. We think a temporary happiness we experience is new 
because we have not encountered it before in this life, but there is nothing 
new for us. Whatever happiness or problem we experience, we have experi-
enced it numberless times before. 
Just recently I went to Land of Medicine Buddha, one of the FPMT cen-
ters in California, to greet a high lama, the second highest lama in the Gelug 
tradition after the Ganden Tripa, who had come to give teachings. There 
was a group of people there with cancer, meditating and having discussions. 
I met them outside and I told them my view. I said this is nothing new. 
This is something they have already had numberless times in the past, even 
though it might seem new for them. I said the most important thing is to 
use the cancer they have and make it useful, worthwhile—make it beneficial 
for all living beings. 
There are numberless hell beings, numberless hungry ghosts, number-
less animals, numberless human beings, numberless gods and numberless 
demigods. There are numberless human beings, not only in this world, this 
southern continent, but also in the numberless universes. That there are 
numberless universes is not something asserted by only Buddha, the Omni-
scient One, but by modern science as well.  
The important thing is to make our cancer beneficial for everybody. If we 
find we have cancer we should make it beneficial for all living beings who 

=== PAGE 31 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    15
are suffering but don’t want suffering and who need happiness. We experi-
ence it for them to let them be free from the oceans of samsaric suffering. 
Actually, even though people have no idea what it means, everybody wants 
not just ordinary happiness but ultimate happiness, which means attaining 
the dharmakaya, the truth body of a buddha. 
There are also many other sentient beings who even now have cancer. We 
can make our own cancer worthwhile by experiencing it for them and let-
ting them be free from all suffering, not only cancer. In that way we make 
our own experience of cancer most happy, most useful. This is what I sug-
gested to that group at Land of Medicine Buddha. 
Because everything is created by the mind, because problems are pro-
jected, merely labeled by the mind, we have the ability to transform them 
into happiness. We can make cancer most useful. We can even transform 
death into the happiest possible death, making it most beneficial for other 
sentient beings. We do this by experiencing it with compassion for other 
sentient beings, who are numberless, who are like our family. We can see 
the different sentient beings, not only in this world but also in the number-
less realms, as our family. We humans, insects and even ants are all just one 
family. We can experience the suffering for them; we can let the numberless 
beings have happiness.
We have the opportunity to transform suffering into happiness in daily 
life because it’s up to our mind. It’s up to our own mind whether any situa-
tion becomes a suffering or a happy one. It depends on how much knowl-
edge we have, on whether we know the Dharma or not, whether we know 
inner science. Knowing Dharma and knowing inner science is the same 
thing. 
We can choose whether a situation is a problem or not. We say, “I have 
a problem! When can I be happy? When can I be happy?” Then we make 
ourselves sick. Nobody else makes us sick, we make ourselves sick; our own 
mind makes us sick. That’s how we do it. Unless we transform our way of 
thinking, this is how it will stay, our old mind, our old concepts will create 
the same problems for us over and over again. 
With the same old mind we remain the same old person—old in terms of 
having to endure the same kinds of suffering rather than old in age. Rather 
than using our short life to become a happy person we continue to create 
the same causes of suffering. Because our life is created by our mind, how-
ever, we also have the chance to have a healthy, awakened life. We have the 
ability to choose happiness or suffering. 
Even though cancer or some other sickness—even death—happens as 

=== PAGE 32 ===
16    sun of devotion
the result of some previous action we have done, if we have a wise mind 
we can utilize the best psychology, the best meditation, and transform that 
situation into happiness. By looking at the situation in a different light we 
are able to change from disliking it to liking it. 
And we do this not just for ourselves. Doing this becomes beneficial 
for numberless living beings: numberless hell beings, numberless hungry 
ghosts, numberless animals, numberless human beings, numberless gods 
and numberless demigods. Even though we can’t comprehend all that, we 
can at least see that it benefits numberless human beings. 
The ultimate mind is sang-­gyä
The goal of Mahayana Buddhism is to use whatever problem we have to free 
numberless living beings from the oceans of samsaric suffering and bring 
them to peerless happiness—the total cessation of all obscurations and the 
completion of all realizations. That is the actual meaning of the Tibetan 
word sang-­gyä, which is generally translated as “buddha.” Sang means the 
cessation of all the gross and subtle obscurations of the mind, and gyä means 
the complete attainment of all realizations and all levels of happiness. There 
is nothing more to be eliminated and there is nothing more to be devel-
oped. There is no other happiness that still needs to be achieved. Everything 
has been completed. 
Don’t get hung up on words. Don’t get hung up on the Sanskrit terms or 
whether sang-­gyä refers to a buddha or the state of buddhahood. Sang is the 
cessation of all the gross and subtle obscurations of the mind. Because the 
mind is not oneness with the obscurations but just temporarily obscured, 
it can be cleansed of them just as a dirty cloth can be cleansed from dirt. 
Dirt cannot be separated from dirt but a cloth that is dirty can be washed 
so that the dirt is completely removed. With soap or whatever other cleans-
ing agent, it can become completely clean, without a trace of dirt. It’s the 
same thing with the mind. The mind can also become completely, totally 
cleansed of the dirt of the obscurations. Totally ceasing gross and subtle 
obscurations, we can then fully develop the power, the potential of the 
mind and complete all realizations. That is peerless happiness; that is “bud-
dha” or “buddhahood.” That is sang-­gyä. 
This is just a simple description of our mind. Everybody’s mind is similar. 
Even a mosquito’s mind, an ant’s mind, a bee’s mind is the same. We all have 
buddha nature. We all have that capacity to be sang-­gyä, to be totally free 
from all obscurations and to complete all realizations. After we have freed 

=== PAGE 33 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    17
ourselves from the gross obscurations we attain nirvana, ultimate happi-
ness, liberation from the oceans of samsaric suffering, the blissful state of 
happiness for ourselves. Then, after even the subtle obscurations have been 
removed by actualizing the path, the remedy, we attain peerless happiness, 
actualizing all realizations, sang-­gyä.
Even insects like mosquitoes or ants have the potential to attain 
sang-­gyä. They have buddha nature. They have the nature, or potential, 
of sang-­gyä. Even tiny insects only visible through a microscope have a 
mind whose ultimate nature, like ours, is buddha nature. Their mind can 
become a buddha’s holy mind, the dharmakaya, the truth body, which has 
two aspects: the transcendental wisdom truth body and the natural truth 
body, the self-­nature of the omniscient mind. Even the tiniest insect can 
become that. 
Because every sentient being, including us, has buddha nature, the nature 
of sang-­gyä, no matter how much suffering we have, it is only temporary. We 
can become free from it. Like the example I have just given, just as a cloth 
can be cleansed of dirt because it is not one with the dirt, our mind can be 
freed from suffering because it is not one with suffering but is only tempo-
rarily obscured. Because the mind has buddha nature, it is possible to elimi-
nate not just suffering but the very cause of suffering. 
Education is more than learning
During its lifetime, a tiny insect like a mosquito has no chance to develop its 
buddha nature. On the other hand, because we can think in a more subtle 
way, we human beings have not only the potential but also the incredible 
opportunity to develop our buddha nature in this lifetime. Our ability is 
so much vaster than that of nonhuman beings like insects. In their pres-
ent form, animals and insects do not have the ability to learn and practice 
meditation, to understand the inner science of the Dharma. Only if they 
can become like us, humans, will they have that ability.
Our thinking is so much more complex and profound than that of non-­
humans, whether we use it for positive or negative things. His Holiness the 
Dalai Lama has given the example of Bin Laden, how he must have had an 
incredible brain to mastermind those planes flying into the World Trade 
Center. His intelligence was truly amazing but he used it to harm others. 
We can use the incredible potential we have to bring happiness or suffering 
to the world. Therefore, while we are so fortunate to now be human, our 

=== PAGE 34 ===
18    sun of devotion
education is very important. People think that education is just learning but 
it’s much more than that. 
What about this? There is a person with a degree from a top university, so 
learned, so knowledgeable—knowledgeable about external things, I mean, 
not about the mind—but his individual life is always suffering, always con-
fused; there is no happiness. He has so many problems such as jealousy, 
pride, anger, attachment and so forth. His life is always up and down. Only 
ever thinking of this one life, not knowing what else to do, he is so over-
whelmed with problems that suicide might even seem the easy way to end 
it all. 
Then there is another person who doesn’t have a high degree or much 
formal education at all but her life is so happy. Poorly educated, how can her 
life be happy? The answer is that the person with the high degree, whose life 
nonetheless is filled with much suffering, pride, jealousy, fear and worry, is 
ruled by the self-­cherishing thought, whereas the poorly-­educated person 
has a good heart. Of course, she still has self-­cherishing but it is not very 
strong. Because of her good heart, her life has much happiness. 
Education doesn’t only happen at school, there is education at home 
with the parents as well. Parents set a strong example for their children. I’m 
not only referring to specific family relationships but also, in general, we are 
all children compared to our parents, just as they are children compared to 
their parents. Children spend much more time at home than at school and 
their main education is there. How their parents raise them is vital.
Real education is not just gaining knowledge of the subjects taught at 
school. The very essence of education is compassion. Parents’ main aim 
should be showing their children how to develop compassion at home. 
They should be an example of that to their children, knowing how to skill-
fully guide them. 
Of course, it’s not easy. It’s also not easy guiding children at school, 
because to really guide others without making any mistakes, we need to 
have an omniscient mind. Parents need omniscient minds; teachers in 
school need omniscient minds. Only then can they guide children perfectly 
without the slightest mistake. Only then can they be perfect guides. 
At least parents and teachers should have ordinary clairvoyance7 to know 
the present and see the future; otherwise they are totally ignorant. How can 
7  Rinpoche differentiates ordinary clairvoyance, also called common siddhis, such as reading 
minds, seeing into the future and so forth, from the supreme siddhi, which is enlightenment. 

=== PAGE 35 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    19
they help children to live in this world? How can they even guide them-
selves? Not only skillful speech, not only a knowledge of Dharma, they 
need ordinary clairvoyance. Guiding children is not easy! 
Padmasambhava’s ways of diagnosing illness
In the past, doctors could diagnose a disease exactly by following the texts, 
such as those of the Medicine Buddha. These texts, which clearly showed 
holy beings the route to enlightenment, gave detailed explanations of the 
diseases that existed and the medicines needed to cure them, as well as how 
to make those medicines, so doctors would know simply by reading these 
texts. But in these degenerate times it is no longer possible to gain a clear 
diagnosis of a person’s illness just from a text. I’m not saying for every per-
son, but many illnesses are no longer normal ones that can be diagnosed in 
that way. 
What can be done when the texts no longer give a clear diagnosis? The 
powerful yogi, the enlightened being Padmasambhava, explained one of 
the ways to Yeshe Tsogyal,8 who asked him about this very point. Padma-
sambhava explained that the method was to do a Medicine Buddha retreat, 
using the Medicine Buddha retreat text. After the retreat, you are able to 
diagnose the person’s disease. After I read this text, I mentioned it to a West-
ern doctor I met in Dharamsala who had learned Tibetan medicine, but I 
somehow doubt that he followed the text’s advice and did a retreat.
However, the best way to be able to diagnose disease is to have clairvoy-
ance. Whatever disease the person has just comes into your mind, without 
mistake. Such knowledge does not come through study but through retreat. 
Another way of telling is by consulting dakinis, female sky-­goers. There 
are different levels of dakinis, those who are unenlightened beings and those 
who are enlightened. There are dakinis who have generated realizations of 
the tantric path, of the gross and subtle generation stages and of the gradu-
ated completion stage. There are dakinis who have actualized clear light and 
dakinis who have actualized the unification of clear light and illusory body. 
It is possible in trying to find a diagnosis for a disease to consult dakinis who 
can tell clearly what the illness is. 
Another way is through dreams. Whatever patient you are going to meet 
the next day, that night you dream of the patient and see what disease that 
8  The principal consort of Padmasambhava.

=== PAGE 36 ===
20    sun of devotion
person has and what medicine should be taken. Even though you have not 
done years of study on diseases and diagnoses, even though you haven’t 
learned anything normal, this is one method to help sick people. This is 
what Padmasambhava mentioned. 
Otherwise you are unable to make a proper diagnosis and, thinking the 
person has such-­and-­such a disease, you give the wrong medicine. This is 
how it has become nowadays. Because the time has become greatly degen-
erated, there are more and more diseases that are outside the range of what 
is found in the normal texts.
What is samsara?9
We are so lucky to be human at this time. As His Holiness explained, we 
can use our mind in a positive way to not just benefit ourselves but to ben-
efit the world. We really can do that. And we can benefit others, not just in 
this world but in all worlds, bringing them as much happiness as possible. 
That is the reason for and purpose of our life, and it is as deep as the Pacific 
Ocean and as vast as the sky. 
Whatever we call the heaviest possible suffering, “hell” or whatever, 
where does it come from? It all comes from the mind. And where does the 
greatest possible happiness come from? Peerless happiness, the total cessa-
tion of all obscurations and completion of all realizations—sang-­gyä—also 
comes from the mind. Nirvana comes from our mind and samsara comes 
from our mind. 
Samsara is divided into three realms: the desire realm, which depends on 
the five senses, which in turn are dependent on external objects, the form 
realm and the formless realm. The form realm is achieved through calm 
abiding meditation, which has nine stages, the last stage being firm contem-
plation.10 When you experience this, you are in the form realm. 
Then you become bored with even this inner experience and, due to that, 
you are reborn in the formless realm, which has four levels: infinite sky, infi-
nite consciousness, infinite nothingness and the tip of samsara. In the form-
less realm there is only consciousness; there is no body.11 At the moment 
we have five aggregates—form, feeling, cognition, compounding aggregates 
9  For a more detailed discussion of samsara, see Rinpoche’s Bodhisattva Attitude, pp. 75–90.
10  See Meditative States in Tibetan Buddhism, pp. 42–45.
11  See Meditative States in Tibetan Buddhism, pp. 45–47.

=== PAGE 37 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    21
and consciousness—but there are not necessarily always five. In the formless 
realm, without form, there are only four.
We have been born in the desire, form and formless realms numberless 
times. And after the formless realm we have been reborn in the lower realms 
as hell beings, hungry ghosts or animals, or we have been reborn as human 
beings or in the form realm. This has happened to us numberless times in 
the past, from beginningless rebirths, because we have never been able to 
generate complete renunciation for the whole of samsara. 
Samsara is the continuity of the cycle of rebirth of these aggregates we 
have. This continuity of rebirths is due to the contaminated aggregates 
caused by karma, which is motivated by delusion, by wrong concepts. That 
is why our aggregates are in nature of suffering—they are pervaded by 
suffering. 
This continuity of the circling of rebirths of the contaminated aggregates 
caused by karma and delusion is the real samsara, not the aggregates them-
selves. This was mentioned by the Seventh Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso, as 
well as by Lama Tsongkhapa in the Lamrim Chenmo, where he described 
samsara as “the part of the continuity of the contaminated aggregates caused 
by karma and delusion.”
He emphasized that samsara is the part of the continuity of the aggre-
gates because there are five paths to liberation—the paths of merit, prepara-
tion, right-­seeing, meditation and no more learning—and a meditator who 
has achieved the path of meditation already has the wisdom directly per-
ceiving emptiness. As he is no longer under the power of karma and delu-
sion, the cause of samsara ceases and he does not have to reincarnate. The 
meditator who has achieved the path of meditation is excluded. That is the 
reason for adding the word “part” here. 
Because, I suspect, none of us have achieved the exalted path of medita-
tion and directly perceived emptiness, we will all have to reincarnate again, 
so this does not apply to us. If we were to achieve the path of meditation 
before we die, however, we would be free from that “part” that Lama Tsong-
khapa mentioned, the part of the continuity of the circling of the contami-
nated aggregates caused by karma and delusion. We would no longer be in 
samsara.
Practicing Dharma is subduing our mind
This samsara we are trapped in comes from our mind, but so does nirvana. 
The problems we have to face, the happiness we can experience, every day, 

=== PAGE 38 ===
22    sun of devotion
every hour, every minute, all come from the mind. Therefore, meditation, 
Dharma practice, the inner science, is so important to help our mind. That 
is what the Buddha said:
Do not commit any nonvirtuous actions,
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
Subdue your mind thoroughly—
This is the teaching of the Buddha.
That is why the practice of Buddhadharma is taking care of our own mind, 
subduing our own mind. Unless we eliminate the confusion within the 
mind that is the source of all suffering we will forever remain in the prison 
of samsara, the prison of suffering. We have been there for beginningless 
lifetimes and if we don’t do something about it we will never get out. 
Therefore, practicing Buddhadharma is subduing our mind. Taking care 
of our mind leads to every possible happiness: all the happiness of our day-­
to-­day life, all our future lives’ happiness, the ultimate happiness of libera-
tion from samsara and, finally, peerless happiness, sang-­gyä, the omniscient 
mind. 
Practicing Dharma means developing a positive mind, a healthy mind, 
which leads to a healthy body and a healthy life. Nowadays even psycholo-
gists and doctors commonly agree that a healthy body and a healthy lifestyle 
depend on a healthy mind. Taking care of our mind means not letting our-
selves suffer. From beginningless rebirths until now we have suffered, but 
we no longer let ourselves suffer. Instead, freeing ourselves from confusion, 
we allow ourselves to have every kind of happiness, right up to enlighten-
ment, the state of the omniscient mind. Meditating means that. Practicing 
Dharma means that. To have a positive, healthy mind we have to under-
stand how it all depends on taking care of the mind. 
Even when we tell a friend “Take care of yourself ” we should have that 
meaning in mind. We have great freedom. Everything is in our hands. Our 
enlightenment, the state of omniscient mind, sang-­gyä, is in our hands. 
Ultimate happiness, liberation from samsara, is in our hands. And our day-­
to-­day life’s happiness is in our hands. 
Whether we want problems or not is up to how we think. If we think in 
a positive way, we’ll have happiness; if we think in a negative way, we’ll have 
problems. It’s like that. It’s all in our hands. What we do with our life is in 
our hands. 

=== PAGE 39 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    23
We have incredible freedom. Please recognize and enjoy this. Enjoying 
our life in this way, having a healthy mind and a healthy life, is practicing 
Dharma.
The inner education of patience and  
compassion
I mentioned how the very essence of education is compassion. Education is 
not just learning new things. I saw a story on TV about a couple who for the 
last six or seven years have been been studying a small pod of whales. They 
are still studying them. All day long they take their boat out into the ocean 
to look for and study the whales. There is also somebody who has been 
studying spiders, maybe in fireplaces, for years. There are probably organiza-
tions that pay people to study things like that.
Scientific knowledge is good, but education is not just learning new 
things. The essence of education is developing compassion for living 
beings—compassion not only for our family and friends but for all living 
beings. That especially includes our enemy, the one who dislikes us, who 
gets angry with us, who harms us. If we can generate compassion for that 
person, it’s an unbelievable thing. If we can bring peace to that person, then 
it is easy to bring peace to anybody. This is how we learn to bring peace to 
the world. Starting with one or two people, we can slowly bring peace to 
the world. 
That’s an unbelievable accomplishment, more incredible that climbing 
Mount Everest a hundred times or…what else? Going to the moon or the 
sun a hundred times, or a billion times. It’s a much greater accomplishment 
than any of that. It is really so special if we can generate patience and com-
passion toward our enemy, not to mention generating compassion toward 
the numberless other beings.
From time to time in the world it happens that there is a person who 
doesn’t practice patience or compassion toward others. If that person has 
power and influence he can kill many millions of people. There are differ-
ent stories about this kind of thing happening, where millions of people, 
including children, have been killed, burned or gassed by this one powerful 
person. 
That person had power and influence but he didn’t have the education 
that taught him how to practice patience and compassion. Without those 
qualities, patience and compassion, what happened? It’s like Bin Laden. He 

=== PAGE 40 ===
24    sun of devotion
was able to think big, but in a negative way, to harm others. He knew how 
to harm and cheat others in such an unbelievably vast way. 
Patience and compassion are the two very fundamental qualities of our 
inner education. Without them, powerful people have brought so much 
harm to the world, killing millions of people and gaining the worst reputa-
tion because of it. If they had practiced patience and compassion, none of 
that harm—killing and torturing those millions and millions of people—
would have happened. Incredible happiness would have come to those mil-
lions of people from that harm being stopped. This is the influence that one 
powerful person can have on the world. 
There are great holy beings in all the different religions, like Saint Fran-
cis or the Buddha in his past lives as a bodhisattva, who have brought many 
millions of people happiness and peace. Through practicing patience and 
compassion, the most fundamental, important education, even one person 
has the power to bring great happiness to the people of the world. 
Even if we are not able to become like that now, despite the fact that our 
body will not continue, there is the continuation of our consciousness, con-
stantly moving from life to life. For that reason, the most important prac-
tice, the most important education, is developing patience and compassion 
so that we can become like those holy beings in future lives. Then, from life 
to life, we will be able to give happiness to billions and billions of beings—
not only to people, but even to animals—to all other living beings. 
News programs on TV usually only mention people, rarely animals. 
When bombs destroy a place can you imagine how many animals are killed? 
There must be countless animals and insects in the ground, fields and forests 
that are killed, but they’re not mentioned. It’s as if they don’t count.
We must train in this important, innermost education, the education of 
mind, now, in this life while we have all the possibilities to transform our 
mind.
Our family is our mind training
Even people with no belief in any religion or philosophy need harmony 
in their relationships with others, with their family, spouse and children. 
Maintaining a long-­lasting relationship relies on harmony and that comes 
from practicing patience and compassion. No relationship can last without 
patience. If we follow anger rather than patience, our relationship with our 
spouse, family or friends will inevitably deteriorate and finally perish. At 

=== PAGE 41 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    25
first the other person might try to be tolerant of us but that won’t last and 
soon she will no longer be bothered. She might try to physically stay with us 
but her mind will drift away and there will no longer be any harmony. Soon, 
even physically, she will be gone.
We all need help, so to maintain comfortable relationships even non-­
believers need to practice patience and compassion—with their husbands, 
wives, parents and children. That’s the way to make relationships harmoni-
ous and long lasting.
Even if only one person within a relationship practices patience and 
compassion, it helps greatly to maintain harmony and keep the relationship 
together long-­term. Practicing patience, not getting angry, not harming the 
other person with our body, speech and mind, that is peace; that is the peace 
we’re giving to the other person. 
Our family is our mind training. We train our mind with our wife or 
husband, with our children, with our parents. The most important thing 
in following any spiritual path is mental development and in one way our 
family is there for our mental development. The question is whether we rec-
ognize this or not. Our family is there to help us develop our patience and 
compassion; they are there to train us in this. When we have trained with 
them we can then move on to our neighbors and the people around us. In 
that way we are able to generate more and more patience and have less and 
less anger. Then, after some years, even if anger arises it is weak and doesn’t 
last long, just remaining for a short while before evaporating. We slowly 
train our mind to have less anger and more patience toward more and more 
people and then toward all sentient beings. That absence of harm means 
peace for everybody. That’s how mental development works. That’s how we 
can develop our mind. 
Besides being the foundation of a harmonious relationship, generating a 
good heart and patience brings additional benefits to our family members 
and all other sentient beings. Refraining from harm, we lead not only those 
around us into peace and happiness but all the beings of this world. 
We have that responsibility. The world’s peace and happiness is on our 
shoulders. Practicing patience and compassion, refraining from harming 
others, we bring great happiness to numberless living beings: to the num-
berless hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, human beings, gods, demigods 
and intermediate state beings. In that way, we are responsible for the peace 
and happiness of all beings of the six realms. 

=== PAGE 42 ===
26    sun of devotion
Then, with the compassion we have developed toward all living beings, 
we develop wisdom. In that way, we are able to bring them not only the 
temporary happiness of this life but also that of future lives. Then, by under-
standing the mind they understand karma, cause and effect, what specific 
results come from the actions of body, speech and mind—what brings suf-
fering and what brings happiness. By having the wisdom understanding 
karma, they are able to gain ultimate happiness, liberation from the oceans 
of samsaric suffering. In that way, we are able to bring them to the blissful 
state of peace, individual liberation from the oceans of samsaric suffering 
forever. They no longer have to experience any suffering: the suffering of 
pain, the suffering of change and the cause of those two sufferings, pervasive 
compounding suffering. 
Not only that, by developing compassion and wisdom, we are able to 
bring all the numberless living beings to peerless happiness, sang-­gyä, the 
state of the total cessation of all obscurations and the complete develop-
ment of all realizations. 
There can be no happiness following the self-­cherishing thought 
Developing compassion and wisdom is amazing. What our mind can do, 
what our heart can do, is just amazing. However, if you are like me, your 
heart at the moment is full of self-­cherishing. We think, “My happiness is 
more important than anybody else’s. My happiness is more important than 
that of the numberless buddhas, the numberless bodhisattvas, the number-
less sentient beings. It is the most important thing of all, more important 
than the happiness of the numberless hell beings, the numberless hungry 
ghosts, the numberless animals, the numberless human beings, the number-
less gods and demigods and the numberless intermediate state beings. I’m 
the most important one! My happiness is more important than anybody 
else’s!”
At the moment our mind is in that condition, but the mind itself is not 
oneness with the self-­cherishing thought. Not at all. It is just temporarily 
obscured by delusions. Holding the self-­cherishing thought has no logical 
reason. Cherishing the I is just an ego trip! 
The self-­cherishing thought is nothing but a dictatorship and there is no 
logical reason for that dictatorship. It cannot posit one valid reason why 
this I is more important than anybody else, whereas there are infinite valid 
reasons to cherish the numberless others who only want happiness and who 
do not want suffering. There are numberless buddhas and bodhisattvas and 

=== PAGE 43 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    27
there are numberless sentient beings who do not have bodhicitta, so there 
are numberless beings to cherish. Using valid reasoning we can transform 
our mind.   
In A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life the great bodhisattva Shanti-
deva said, 
Thus whoever wishes to quickly afford protection
To both the self and other beings
Should practice that holy secret:
The exchanging of self for others.12 
If we want to quickly help and protect ourselves and others, the ulti-
mate method is transforming our mind from one that cherishes the I and 
renounces others to one that renounces the I and cherishes others. 
Shantideva says we practice this secretly. Here he’s referring to us and the 
lower bodhisattvas. Exchanging oneself for others, renouncing the I and 
cherishing all other beings more than the I instead, is beyond us at this 
stage. Even lower bodhisattvas are not yet brave enough to physically do 
that, therefore it is done as a secret practice, which might mean it is only a 
mental practice. At this stage the mind is being transformed even though 
physically there is no change, so it’s secret in that way also.
We have to remember that. This is the best way to help others and our-
selves. Shantideva continued, 
Whatever joy there is in this world
All comes from desiring others to be happy,
And whatever suffering there is in this world
All comes from desiring myself to be happy.
What need is there to say much more?
The childish work for their own benefit,
The Buddhas [Mighty Ones] work for the benefit of others.
Just look at the difference between them!13
12  Ch. 8, v. 120.
13  Ch. 8, vv. 129 & 130. The cited text has “Buddhas”; when Rinpoche was translating this 
verse during the teachings he used “Mighty Ones,” an epithet of the buddhas. 

=== PAGE 44 ===
28    sun of devotion
“Mighty Ones” means the buddhas. They are “mighty” because they have 
destroyed all the obscurations and completed all the realizations and so 
they have finished their work for self and now work only for others. Shanti-
deva asks us to look at the difference between the buddhas and the childish 
ones—us—who only work for ourselves. 
In Dharma texts, “child” does not mean a physical child but somebody 
who is mentally childish. We could live to be a hundred years old—or a 
thousand or a billion—but if our mind remains under the control of the 
self-­cherishing thought then we are childish. We are just like small children 
who, when they play, do so only for their own happiness. Therefore this is 
used as an example. 
A child plays in the sand, piling it over her feet and thinking that this is 
her house or some such thing. Then another child comes along and destroys 
it and she cries out, “You destroyed my house!” This is the example. If 
somebody harms us, because of the self-­cherishing thought, the emotional 
thought arises, “Somebody has harmed me! He doesn’t love me, he doesn’t 
love me, blah, blah, blah….” Many negative emotions arise and this creates 
suffering. 
We have been following the self-­cherishing thought from beginning-
less rebirths until now and because of that we have been suffering. We have 
lived our life with the self-­cherishing thought; we have followed the self-­
cherishing thought. The self-­cherishing thought has been like our parents, 
like our guru. And because we have followed it we have been suffering in 
samsara for countless lifetimes. That is what has been happening and will 
continue to happen if we don’t transform our mind. The suffering of sam-
sara will be endless. Therefore, while we have this life where we have all the 
opportunities to learn and practice, we must practice the Dharma and gen-
erate the ultimate good heart, bodhicitta. 
The Buddha transformed his mind. He was the same as us, beset with 
all the same problems, the same relationship problems, selfish thoughts, 
negative emotions and so forth. Just like us, he suffered in samsara from 
beginningless rebirths. But the Buddha managed to change his mind from 
cherishing the self to cherishing others. He achieved ultimate happiness, 
enlightenment, sang-­gyä, the cessation of all obscurations and completion 
of all realizations. 
This is something we have not yet done. By following the self-­cherishing 
thought, the suffering of samsara has not ended. If we don’t do something in 

=== PAGE 45 ===
Our Happiness Is in Our Hands    29
this life to change that by developing a good heart, the ultimate good heart, 
bodhicitta, then the suffering of samsara will probably become endless. 
That is what Shantideva means when he asks us to compare ourselves 
to the buddhas. Look at the difference. From having so many problems, 
like us, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha became the “Mighty One,” the Buddha, 
whereas we are still suffering sentient beings. Shantideva also mentioned, 
If I do not actually exchange my happiness 
For the sufferings of others,
I shall not attain the state of Buddhahood
And even in cyclic existence shall have no joy.14
Unless we give others our happiness and take their suffering upon ourselves 
we will be unable to completely transform our mind and so will not be able 
to eliminate all the obscurations and complete all the realizations. In other 
words, we won’t be able to achieve the highest goal. Furthermore, while we 
are trapped in samsara there is no real happiness. Leaving aside happiness 
in future lives, by following the self-­cherishing thought even our work for 
this life will fail. 
Because of the self-­cherishing thought we have to experience so many 
obstacles, such as not succeeding in what we do, being unable to find a job 
and so forth. That is the result of our karma, from past lives or this life, of 
being jealous of others’ success or not letting them have success. The moti-
vation was the self-­cherishing thought, thus creating jealousy and causing 
us to harm others in order to steal their success. Even if we are able to find 
a job, no matter how hard we work we are unable to succeed. In that way, 
cherishing the I ensures we will fail in whatever we do. 
If we renounce self-­cherishing and cherish others instead, if we practice 
patience and compassion for others, then the numberless sentient beings 
receive no harm from us. That is peace and happiness. That is what every 
one of them receives from us. And, as I have just said, that allows them to 
develop inner wisdom, to understand karma and so forth and that leads 
to their future lives’ happiness. In that way, they are brought to complete 
happiness.
What we are able to do when we generate patience and compassion 
is unbelievable. We are responsible for the happiness and peace of every 
14  Ch. 8, v. 131.

=== PAGE 46 ===
30    sun of devotion
sentient being: for everyone in our family, in our society, in our country, in 
this world and in all worlds—and finally for ourselves. We can offer all this 
happiness to every sentient being.
The practice of patience and compassion should really be the main edu-
cation in the family and in schools. Only with that can there be peace in the 
world and an end to suffering.

=== PAGE 47 ===
3. The Hallucination of the Real I
.,
I
f modern technology is used in a positive way it has the potential 
to benefit billions of people and animals in the world. But used in the 
wrong way it can bring unbelievably disastrous harm to billions of beings. 
This is especially true of digital technology, the Internet and so forth, which 
has the power to benefit immediately, sending images and words all over 
the world in a second, but at the same time it also has the power to do great 
damage, harming billions of people, polluting their minds, destroying their 
lives. It all depends on how such things are used.
In a positive way the benefits from life to life are unbelievable. Watching 
His Holiness online, for instance, allows the mind to develop like a lotus 
opening, bringing greater happiness, more success from life to life, for hun-
dreds of lives, thousands of lives, millions and billions of lives. It leads to the 
total liberation from the oceans of samsaric suffering and ultimately to the 
total elimination of all obscurations and the completion of all realizations, 
to that peerless happiness, where there is no trace of ignorance, no obscura-
tions. Therefore, we must be very careful how we use modern technology. 
Buddhism comes to Tibet
In Tibetan Buddhism there are four traditions: Nyingma, Kagyü, Sakya 
and Gelug. When the Nalanda Monastery abbot Shantarakshita went to 
Tibet to purify the land, he built the first monastery in Tibet in Samye. 
However, each night, after the human beings had erected the monastery 
walls during the day, the spirits would tear them down so that the next day 
the people would have to rebuild them. This happened again and again. 
So King Trisong Detsen invited the powerful yogi Padmasambhava from 

=== PAGE 48 ===
32    sun of devotion
India to visit Tibet. There is a whole book—probably several books—on 
the life story of Padmasambhava. When he got to Tibet, he arose in the 
aspect of an enlightened wrathful deity and hooked the spirits. Three ran 
away according to the karma of the Tibetans, but he subdued the other 
twelve and made them pledge to protect and not harm the Buddhadharma 
in Tibet and to protect its practitioners as well. Having been subdued, those 
twelve spirits became Dharma protectors. Since then, Tibetans have been 
making offerings and doing prayers to those protectors and asking them for 
help. From that, Buddhism became firmly established in Tibet. 
Thus the Buddhadharma came to Tibet from India, from Nalanda Mon-
astery—not Nalanda in France but Nalanda in India. And speaking about 
Nalanda in France, that is now a real monastery, not a diluted one, because 
they now do the three main practices of a monastery there: the twice-­
monthly confession ceremonies, the yearly abiding in summer retreat and 
following Vinaya.15 It also fulfills the description of a monastery in that it 
is isolated from villages and crowds. In Nalanda in India there were three 
hundred pandits. After the Buddha achieved enlightenment and revealed 
the teachings, great pandits like Asanga and Nagarjuna, who was like a 
second Buddha, came. These great pandits were holy beings who actual-
ized the path. They were not just scholars, not just experts in words whose 
minds remained ordinary—these three hundred holy beings all actualized 
the path. 
The Buddha’s teachings are contained in the Kangyur, a collection of 
more than a hundred volumes, and the commentaries to the Buddha’s 
teachings by those great Indian pandits are contained in the Tengyur, a col-
lection of more than two hundred volumes. This is what came from India to 
Tibet. In that way, there is a vast and pure lineage within Tibetan Buddhism 
that can be referenced back to the Buddha himself. It’s not like some black 
magic made up by Tibetan lamas.
Before Buddhism came to Tibet there was the Bön religion. There were 
the black Bönpos, which I think was a form of shamanism, and the white 
Bönpos, whose teachings seem similar in subject to dzog-­chen but using dif-
ferent language. The founder of the Bönpo was Yungdrung Tonpa. I don’t 
15  These are customs the Buddha established for monasteries. So-­jong (Tib.) is a confes-
sion ceremony where Sangha members admit any wrongdoings; abiding in summer retreat 
(Tib: yar-­ne) occurred every summer in India during the rainy season; and following Vinaya 
means following the rules of discipline that the Buddha laid down. 

=== PAGE 49 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    33
know if the white Bönpos take refuge in him but he is not a buddha. It’s 
like in Hinduism there are Shiva and Maheshwara and other deities who 
are not buddhas.16 
The teachings of most of the lineage lamas of the four Tibetan traditions 
can be traced back to Nalanda, so we can say that Buddhadharma in Tibet, 
both sutra and tantra, came from Nalanda and, therefore, the Buddha.
After Padmasambhava subdued all the spirits in the different impor-
tant places of Tibet and they became Dharma protectors, Buddhadharma 
spread, mainly in the monasteries, where there was extensive study, as deep 
and wide as the Pacific Ocean. From the commentaries by the Nalanda pan-
dits, the great Tibetan teachers wrote their own commentaries. The many 
enlightened beings from all of the four traditions, such as Lama Tsong-
khapa, all studied extensively, listening, reflecting, meditating and then 
actualizing the path. After that, they wrote commentaries based on their 
own experiences and taught others the path that they themselves had prac-
ticed and actualized. 
At that time there were a great many lay practitioners and ordained 
Sangha living in caves. There were so many caves that the mountains were 
like ants’ nests. Now so much has been destroyed or has become old and 
ruined. I didn’t see the whole of Tibet when I went there, only that which 
was on the way to Lhasa, but in the early times it must have been amazing. 
These great lamas actualized the whole path to enlightenment, the 
extensive study, the middle study and the heart study. The Kadampa geshes 
started with Lama Atisha, the great pandit who in the eleventh century was 
invited from India to Tibet to make Buddhism pure again when its practice 
in Tibet had degenerated and there was much misunderstanding of tantra. 
People felt that if they practiced sutra they could not practice tantra and 
vice versa. There was much confusion.
Seeing this, the Dharma king of Tibet, Lha Lama Yeshe Ö, collected gold 
to offer to Lama Atisha in order to invite him to Tibet. He first sent the 
16  Bön is the religion in Tibet that is often said to have preceded Buddhism. His Holiness 
the Dalai Lama has recognized Bön as the fifth tradition along with the four major tradi-
tions of Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyü and Gelug. Practitioners of Bön are called Bönpos. The 
founder’s full name was Tonpa Shenrab Miwoche. Yungdrung is the name of one of the Bön 
traditions, they do consider Tonpa a buddha and the Yungdrung school is essentially Bud-
dhism. Some scholars assert that Bön arose only in the eleventh century and was therefore 
not a pre-­Buddhist religion in Tibet and that the religion that did precede Buddhism was 
probably not called Bön.

=== PAGE 50 ===
34    sun of devotion
translator Gyatsoen Senge to India but he could not meet Lama Atisha and 
was therefore unable to invite him. 
The second time, while Lha Lama Yeshe Ö was looking for more gold to 
offer Atisha, he was captured by an irreligious king and put into prison. In 
order to free his uncle, his nephew, Jangchub Ö, offered the gold meant for 
Lama Atisha but the irreligious king said that there wasn’t enough, that gold 
the size of the king’s head was still missing and that to free the king he had 
to be offered gold the size of the king’s body plus his head. 
When Jangchub Ö reported this to his uncle, the Dharma king said, “I 
will die in prison for the sentient beings in Tibet and to spread pure Bud-
dhism, so don’t give him even a handful of gold. Take all the gold to India, 
offer it to Lama Atisha and invite him here.” The king sent Atisha a message 
that he would meet him in his next life. Then the translator Nagtso Lotsawa 
went to India carrying the gold. He offered it to Lama Atisha and explained 
all the problems and misunderstandings prevalent in Tibet. 
So Lama Atisha asked Tara, the female embodiment of all the number-
less buddhas’ holy actions, whether he should go to Tibet to spread the pure 
Buddhadharma. He often prayed with great devotion to Tara for success, as 
did many great yogis, lamas, pandits, Sangha and lay practitioners, because 
Tara had manifested specifically in order to fulfill the hopes and wishes of 
sentient beings. Tara said, “Your time in Tibet will be highly beneficial but 
your life will be shortened by seven years.” Lama Atisha replied, “I don’t 
mind if my life becomes shorter, as long as it’s beneficial for Tibet.” 
He then pretended he was going to Nepal on pilgrimage, not telling the 
monastery or the Indian people that he was going to Tibet, because they 
would not have let him undertake such a long journey. In that way he went 
to Tibet via Nepal. 
When Lama Atisha arrived in Tibet, Jangchub Ö explained the situation 
fully to him, telling him, “We Tibetans are very ignorant, so please explain 
refuge to us.” Jangchub Ö didn’t request initiations or teachings on shun-
yata or other high teachings. This is what he requested of Lama Atisha. 
Lama Atisha was extremely pleased, so he wrote a short text, the Lamp for 
the Path to Enlightenment, in which he integrated all the teachings of Bud-
dha into what has become known as the graduated path to enlightenment.17
He was able to condense the essence of the 84,000 teachings of the 
Buddha—all the Hinayana teachings, the Mahayana sutra teachings and 
17  (Tib: lam-­rim). See Teachings from Tibet, appendix 2, for a translation of Atisha’s text.

=== PAGE 51 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    35
the Mahayana tantra teachings, the three levels the Buddha taught—into 
a few pages. He made how to practice very clear, without any contradic-
tion between sutra and tantra practice, so people could practice both. Those 
who practiced tantra could also practice sutra and those who practiced sutra 
could also practice tantra. That helped so much. 
In those days, before newly written works could be published they had 
to be checked by a group of pandits. If a text was found to be correct it 
would be approved for publication but if it had mistakes it would be tied 
to the tail of a dog, which would then be chased around the city by people 
proclaiming the name of the disgraced author. So before making his text 
available Atisha sent it to his monastery for review. The pandits there were 
extremely surprised by the quality of Lama Atisha’s writing and praised him 
highly for writing it.18
After that, many other great meditator lamas wrote commentaries on 
that first lam-­rim teaching according to the experiences they had had by 
reading, reflecting and meditating on it. Lama Tsongkhapa, who was one 
of these, wrote the most elaborate commentary (the Lamrim Chenmo, The 
Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment), the Middle Length 
Lam-­rim, a short one called Songs of Spiritual Experience and, finally, the 
very short Three Principal Aspects of the Path to Enlightenment. The term 
“lam-­rim” comes from Lama Atisha’s Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. 
Thus the misconceptions about Buddhism that prevailed in Tibet were 
completely eliminated, the Dharma was made pure and much sutra and tan-
tra was practiced and actualized. 
Attaining enlightenment comes from the base, the two truths: the truth 
for the all-­obscuring mind and the truth for absolute mind. These two 
truths are the base, the path is practicing method and wisdom—putting the 
essence of method and wisdom into the path—and the goal to be achieved 
is the buddha’s holy body and holy mind. This is the entire Buddhadharma, 
and both sutra and tantra are what the monks studied in the monasteries 
in Tibet for their whole lives. Through that, numberless meditators became 
bodhisattvas and were able to achieve buddhahood, becoming enlightened 
beings.
In many other holy places in Tibet practitioners also achieved realiza-
tions; not only Milarepa but many others attained enlightenment there as 
18  See Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand, pp. 49–50. The book contains a complete biog-
raphy of Lama Atisha.

=== PAGE 52 ===
36    sun of devotion
well. Because of that, there are many, many places in Tibet that are unbe-
lievably blessed.
Just as the pandits did in Tibet, you Western students also need to study 
what is written in the texts and, through intensive contemplation, meditate 
on and actualize the path. You must try to hold in your heart the teach-
ings that the Buddha and those other great holy beings in India and Tibet 
explained. If you can do that then the West too can become an extremely 
blessed place, like India, Nepal and Tibet.
Otherwise it is just studying words, as people do at universities. Of course, 
you have to start with words, but without actualizing the path in your mind, 
without transforming your life, then it is merely study. It is still unbelievably 
fortunate that you can do it, but it’s not Buddhadharma as found in India, 
Nepal and Tibet. When tsampa is thrown into a river it doesn’t sink, it stays 
on the surface. Likewise, if the Buddhadharma you study does not enter 
your heart but just stays on the surface, all you’re doing is studying words. 
It’s kind of empty. However, I think there are many people who are learning 
and trying to meditate and practice, and gradually this is having a beneficial 
effect on their mind. That is very good.
The Buddha manifests in an ordinary  
form to guide us 
His Holiness the Dalai Lama is the sole object of refuge for the numberless 
sentient beings of the six realms: for the beings of the hell realm, the hungry 
ghost realm, the animal realm, the human realm, the god realm, the demi-
god realm and the intermediate state. He is the sole object of refuge for all 
sentient beings including us. He is the embodiment of the compassion of 
all the numberless past buddhas, present buddhas and future buddhas, the 
definitive meaning of Avalokiteshvara, the Compassion Buddha. 
The buddhas manifest in human form in order to show us how to be free 
from the lower realms, from samsara and even from the peace of lower nir-
vana. Through their guidance we can become free from all subtle obscura-
tions and actualize all realizations and so attain buddhahood, the peerless 
state of the omniscient mind. In order to guide us, to explain the teach-
ings in a way that we can understand, the buddhas manifest in an ordinary 
aspect, in a human form. 
“Ordinary” means this. Although for them there is no suffering of 
rebirth, they show the suffering of rebirth; although they have no suffering 

=== PAGE 53 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    37
of old age, they show the suffering of old age; although they have no suffer-
ing of illness, they show the suffering of illness; although they have no suf-
fering of death, they show the suffering of death. 
Arhats are free from only the disturbing-­thought obscurations, not the 
subtle obscurations to knowledge, yet they are free from these four suffer-
ings. So how can enlightened beings, who are free from even the subtle 
obscurations, have old age, sickness, death and rebirth? Since there is no 
cause for these sufferings, it’s impossible. The buddhas don’t have these suf-
ferings but they show the aspect of having them for our sake.
Take Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, for example. According to the Maha-
yana teachings, in reality the Buddha achieved enlightenment numberless 
eons ago. He did not become enlightened two thousand six hundred years 
ago in Bodhgaya. All the twelve deeds were to show us what to do. Tak-
ing birth in Lumbini, achieving enlightenment in Bodhgaya, teaching the 
Dharma and passing away in Kushinagar—performing all these holy deeds 
was purely to show us the path.
In many universes at different times the Buddha simultaneously shows 
different aspects of the twelve deeds. While the Buddha was taking birth 
here in this world all those centuries ago, in another universe he was show-
ing the aspect of becoming enlightened. Even now, in one universe he is 
showing the aspect of passing away while in another he is showing the 
aspect of sitting under the bodhi tree, and in yet another he is showing the 
aspect of turning the Dharma wheel. He manifests in numberless aspects 
without effort and gives various teachings in numberless different universes 
to numberless sentient beings. This is beyond our imagination. 
According to the Hinayana teachings, the teachings for that level of 
mind, his enlightenment in Bodhgaya was the first time, but according to 
the Mahayana, the Buddha was enlightened eons ago and he performed the 
twelve deeds just to show us suffering sentient beings that although there is 
suffering that none of us want, there is both a cause for that suffering and a 
path that leads to its cessation. 
Rather than complaining that we are suffering and never doing anything 
about it, we see that there is an evolution; that suffering is a dependent aris-
ing. Since any suffering we are experiencing depends on causes and condi-
tions, if we apply the correct method, the cause of suffering—karma and 
delusion—can definitely be eliminated and we can become free from it.
The Buddha showed us that our mind has this possibility, this potential. 
Because there is a path we can actualize we can definitely achieve ultimate 

=== PAGE 54 ===
38    sun of devotion
happiness, the blissful state of peace for ourselves, liberation forever from 
the oceans of samsaric suffering. We can learn, we can reflect, we can medi-
tate on the path and we can actualize it. 
Emptiness only, tong-­pa-­nyi
In particular, we can actualize the direct perception of emptiness, emptiness 
only. That only—nyi—makes it a specific emptiness, not just any emptiness. 
The nyi cuts ordinary emptiness. 
Not understanding this specific emptiness is the root of our suffering, the 
root of the oceans of samsaric suffering, the sufferings of rebirth, old age, 
sickness, death and so forth. And that is only the suffering of pain, which is 
not the only suffering in samsara. There is also the suffering of change and 
pervasive compounding suffering, which is the cause of the other two.
We are afraid of cancer and many people die from it, but they don’t know 
that the root cause of cancer is not understanding this particular emptiness. 
It is also the root cause of AIDS and all the other diseases that medicine has 
no cure for, not to mention all the other sufferings of samsara, not just sick-
ness. It is where all our relationship problems and depression come from. It 
is the cause of anorexia, bulimia, obesity and all other eating disorders. This 
ignorance is the very root of the problems experienced by every individ-
ual, by every family, by every society, by every country, by the entire globe. 
Whatever suffering there is, this ignorance is the root.
All problems come from this root, which is a wrong concept, therefore 
this wrong concept is what we need to eliminate. By studying, reflecting and 
meditating, by realizing the ultimate truth, we can come to realize that this 
concept is totally wrong.
I don’t understand emptiness well so I can only explain it in a simple way. 
There is a base—the five aggregates—that exists and, depending on that, the 
thought of the I arises. For instance, if the base, the aggregates (in this case 
the body), is sitting, then the thought of the I arises, the merely labeled, “I 
am sitting.” We label this on the sitting aggregates.
When the aggregates stand up, again there is the thought of the I. The 
aggregates are the base upon which the I is labeled. There is the subject that 
labels the I and the aggregates that are the object. When the aggregates are 
standing, the thought of the I merely imputes, “I am standing.” When the 
form aggregate is standing, the thought of the I doesn’t label, “I am sitting.” 
No. The thought of the I is dependent on what we do. When walking, the 

=== PAGE 55 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    39
thought of the I merely imputes, “I am walking.” Whatever action we are 
doing—eating, standing, sitting, sleeping, lying down—the aggregates are 
doing the action and then, on top of that, the thought of the I is merely 
imputed and we believe it. 
When the aggregates are jogging to become skinny—maybe that’s not 
correct, maybe it’s to become fit—then the thought of the I merely imputes 
“I am jogging.” When the aggregates are talking, depending on that action, 
the thought of the I merely imputes, “I am talking.” We put the I on the 
action of talking, or “I am in silence” or whatever it is. 
When we are meditating, in dependence upon the mind meditating the 
thought of the I, the subject, applies the label, “I am meditating.” We call 
the merely-­imputed I and the merely-­imputed action of the I “meditating.” 
So, depending on what the aggregates—our body and mind—are doing, 
depending on the action, the labeling thought merely imputes the I and 
merely imputes the action of the I. 
From the moment we wake up in the morning until we go to sleep in 
the evening, all day long, depending on what our body and mind does, the 
labeling thought merely imputes the I and the merely labeled action of the 
I, whatever the I does. The I and the action of the I—whatever we have 
believed from morning until night—has all come from our mind, has all 
been labeled by our mind. 
This meditation is incredibly powerful, like an atomic bomb, destroying 
our enemy. An atomic bomb is considered the most powerful weapon to 
destroy an external enemy. Ordinary people in the ordinary world believe 
that the true enemy is the external enemy. According to Dharma this is not 
so at all, and this mindfulness meditation is really the best way to destroy 
the one true enemy, the inner enemy.
What we do to protect this nonexistent real I
If we do some profound scientific analysis, some inner scientific analysis, 
we can see how much we believe in this totally real I that actually does not 
exist. It appears to be real from its own side, we believe it to be one hundred 
percent real, but it is not there. By doing this inner scientific analysis, this 
meditation, we can come to see this very subtle point, the nonexistence of 
this “real” I. 
Otherwise, without checking, because of our belief in its reality we have 
all these worries, all these fears. Because of this wrong projection, when 
somebody passes us with her nose in the air, looking down at us disdainfully, 

=== PAGE 56 ===
40    sun of devotion
it hurts so much. Or when we do a good deed for somebody, such as giving 
a thirsty person a glass of water, and don’t even get a simple thank you, that 
really hurts. Being shouted at, being complained about, hearing disrespect-
ful words—all these things hurt us. 
Especially nowadays, with the world economy in recession, people are 
trying to find ways to make money, so they complain about any small thing 
that somebody else does. I don’t know about England, but I’ve heard that 
in America you are supposed keep the front of your house clear of snow and 
if you don’t clear it away well enough and somebody falls over you will be 
sued, which in America means a huge expense. 
There is a good example from the FPMT center in Sicily, Centro Muni 
Gyana. Once, while I was giving a talk there a student explained how she 
had been sued. Her job was assisting in the births of babies, delivering them 
from their mothers’ wombs, and one day a baby had died. I’m not sure 
whether the baby was dead in the womb or it died during delivery, but the 
mother blamed this girl, telling her she had killed the baby, that the baby 
died because she had made a mistake. The girl talked with all her friends 
and they confirmed what she did was right, that it wasn’t her fault, but the 
mother blamed her and wanted money from her. She was trying to make 
money out of the situation. This is just one example. 
Nowadays, with the downturn in the world economy, many people are 
trying to make money in this way, trying to prove that somebody else has 
made a mistake, whether they have or not. The girl asked me what to do and 
I did my own Mickey Mouse divination and told her to recite the Vajra Cut-
ter Sutra eight times. She did this immediately and later she told me that she 
had won the court case. 
Just reading the Vajra Cutter Sutra is unbelievably powerful but, of 
course, the main thing is to realize emptiness, to eradicate the very root of 
samsara. That is what reading the Vajra Cutter Sutra eventually does. Then 
we become free from oceans of samsaric suffering, achieving ultimate hap-
piness. Without talking about enlightenment, just that is unbelievable. 
Our whole life is spent being afraid of something happening to this I, to 
this real I that appears to us from there. We totally, one hundred percent 
believe it is real and do everything we possibly can to protect this real I, 
which is not there. We see all the possibilities of being hurt. “This will make 
me sick. This will kill me. This will hurt me.” We take every possible precau-
tion to prevent this real I that doesn’t exist from being hurt. 
Determined to keep fit, we do hours of exercise every day, jogging or 

=== PAGE 57 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    41
working out on machines. There is a big industry making new types of 
machines for our real I to keep fit on. After a machine has been on the mar-
ket for a few months a new one comes out and our real I has to have it. Each 
machine makes us exercise differently—from lying upside down to putting 
our head between our legs—and we are forced to buy new ones because the 
experts in advertisements convince us that these new ones are better. 
All this is done for our real I, for the I that appears real and we believe 
one hundred percent is truly there. Even exercising the body, doing many 
hundreds of pushups, is for this real I. Everybody jogging, running and exer-
cising is doing it so that this I does not get sick. They are protecting this 
I. They have injections to prevent diseases before they happen. They take 
every single precaution they can to protect this real I. 
If we were to meditate for just one day, analyzing, checking, going to a 
subtler level, we would see that this real I is not there. What appears as the 
real I, what we believe one hundred percent to be real, is not there. How-
ever, we don’t check and this labeling process goes on continuously. It has 
been going on since we were born and will continue up to death. 
Because the aggregates—the body and mind—are there, because they 
exist, they are the valid base on which the labeling mind merely imputes the 
I. Then, depending on what that base does, the labeling mind merely labels 
the action. 
The labeling thought merely labels I on the subject and the merely labeled 
action on whatever the aggregates do. It has been and will be like that, from 
the time our consciousness entered the fertilized egg in our mother’s womb 
until our death, when the extremely subtle mind, what we call the subtle 
mind of death,19 leaves from the heart, the place where it entered the fertil-
ized egg at the very beginning. This happens after the person is clinically 
dead: after the breathing has stopped, the heart has stopped beating and 
there is no more brain function.  
When we analyze, we can understand very clearly the great difference 
between the reality of the I and actions and how we believe they exist when 
we don’t think about it. The way we normally think is a total hallucination, 
a total illusion; it is like a dream. 
From beginningless rebirths up to now there has always been the conti-
nuity of existence of the aggregates, although not necessarily always of the 
physical body—a formless realm rebirth doesn’t have a physical body. And 
19  Tib: sem shin-­tu tra-­mo.

=== PAGE 58 ===
42    sun of devotion
just as there has always been the valid base, the aggregates, their continuity, 
there has always been the labeling thought that merely imputes the I and 
merely imputes the action of the I, depending on what the aggregates do. 
When we analyze dependent arising—not the gross one but the Prasangika 
view of subtle dependent arising—we see that it has always been like this 
from beginningless rebirths up to now. 
How everything appears to us as truly existing
As long as there is the continuity of the valid base, the aggregates, there is 
always the mere I existing and there is always the mere action of the I exist-
ing. While we are circling in samsara it will be like that. This will not change, 
even after we become enlightened, when our mind is totally free from subtle 
obscurations and completes all the realizations. It is like that forever. 
The I exists and the action of the I exists because the valid base exists. 
They exist in mere name, not from their own side. Even the valid base exists 
in mere name. 
Saying the I exists “in mere name” does not mean that it does not actually 
exist. It exists, but the way of existing is unbelievably subtle. This is incred-
ibly interesting. The way of existing is so subtle that, for our hallucinating 
mind, it is like it does not exist. In fact, for our hallucinating mind, what 
exists—the merely labeled I—seems to be nonexistent and what doesn’t 
exist—the real I—we totally, totally believe in. When we check, when we 
search, when we meditate, using our inner science, we find that what really 
exists seems to be nonexistent to the hallucinated mind. 
Our normal life is totally like a dream, like a hallucination, like an illu-
sion, like a mirage. By thinking about what really exists, we can understand 
the hallucination. By considering what is the truth in life we can understand 
what is false in life. Otherwise we can know neither the full truth nor what 
is false. 
To summarize, the valid base, the aggregates, is there. Because of that, the 
thought of I arises, the merely labeled I and the merely labeled action arise, 
depending on what the valid base does. 
In the first moment the labeling thought merely imputes the I and the 
action. For instance, if the I is sitting—if sitting is the merely labeled action 
of the I—there is firstly the merely labeled I and then secondly the merely 
labeled action, “sitting.”
Therefore, it is so subtle. How the I exists is extremely subtle; it is never 
the way we normally believe it to be from birth; from beginningless rebirths 

=== PAGE 59 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    43
in fact. It is never the way that our mind projects it to be—truly existent. 
The I that exists is extremely subtle. It’s like it doesn’t exist compared to how 
it appears to our normal hallucinated mind.
That happens in the first moment. In the second moment, when it appears 
back it should appear back as merely labeled. It has just been merely labeled 
by our mind a moment ago so it should appear back to us like that. But for 
us that is not what happens. It only appears back to the buddhas as merely 
labeled, only to those beings who have no disturbing-­thought obscurations, 
for whom there is no trace of negative imprints at all. Only the enlightened 
beings, the buddhas, apprehend it as merely labeled. Until that time, for us 
sentient beings, we have this hallucination of the truly existing appearance 
because the negative imprints of the disturbing-­thought obscurations have 
not yet ceased. 
There are sentient beings who are arya beings, who have the direct real-
ization of emptiness only, shunyata. When their mind is in equipoise medi-
tation they don’t have the dualistic mind, the appearance of true existence. 
However, in the post-­meditation break time, they have the hallucination. 
Even with bodhicitta and compassion, they still all have the appearance of 
true existence. For us, however, the moment after the mind merely imputes 
the I, it appears back as a real I, not as a merely imputed I. This is a huge hal-
lucination. How does that hallucination happen? 
Take color, for instance. We see light appearing from an object, such as 
black letters on white paper or a bunch of roses appearing as white and red. 
Or when we are driving and see a traffic light appearing as red, we stop. The 
red color appears to exist from there but actually it is our mind that has 
imputed that red. We don’t see that this is so. Just as with the I, everything 
that appears to our senses appears in this way. There is this hallucination. 
This is exactly what the Heart Sutra refutes. 
To understand how all phenomena appear like this, the I is a good exam-
ple. The reason the merely labeled I appears as a real I is because of past igno-
rance holding the I as truly existent, while it is not, while it is totally empty 
of existing from its own side. That particular ignorance has left a negative 
imprint on the mind and that negative imprint projects. Firstly, depending 
on the base, the mind merely imputes the I, then in the next moment the 
negative imprint left by the past ignorance projects the real I. It projects it 
just as a film put into a movie projector is projected onto a screen. The real 
I has never existed in that way and it will never exist in that way. 
And then, in the third moment, we believe that this I really exists as it 

=== PAGE 60 ===
44    sun of devotion
appears. In Tibetan it is called ti-­mug ten-­dzin ma-­rig-­pa, the ignorance 
holding the I as truly existent. That concept, that this is real, is the root of 
samsara, the root of all the sufferings of samsara. It is where all the suffer-
ing of rebirth comes from, where all the suffering of sickness comes from, 
where all the suffering of old age comes from, where all the suffering of 
death comes from, where all the suffering of pain comes from. 
If, for example, we don’t want cancer, we have to realize emptiness and 
eliminate this gross wrong concept of the self-­existent I. By eliminating it, 
none of the three poisonous minds of attachment, anger or ignorance or 
any of the other delusions can happen and we therefore cannot experience 
the oceans of the suffering of samsara. 
Similarly, what is the root of all our depression? Some people get 
depressed when the sun sets, some at night, some in the morning, but 
always at a fixed time. For some it is dependent on the situation. Some peo-
ple spend years and years suffering from depression. Where does it come 
from? It comes from this root, this wrong concept from where all the suf-
fering of pain originates.
With respect to the suffering of change, all temporary samsaric plea-
sures—pleasures that neither last nor increase—arise because they are in 
the nature of suffering. This also comes from the same wrong concept.
These two types of suffering, of pain and of change, come from the third 
type of suffering, pervasive compounding suffering, the root of all these 
sufferings. For Buddhists, this is what we should be free from. This is what 
we should understand. This is the suffering we should generate the wish to 
be free from. The way we free ourselves is by actualizing the path, thereby 
achieving ultimate liberation. 
The root of even that basic suffering is this wrong concept. All prob-
lems come from this: global problems, countries’ problems, family prob-
lems, society’s problems, the problems of individuals who live in a city or 
who live in the wild—even insects’ problems and those of dinosaurs as well. 
When we consider this belief in the real I, this thing that is the root of 
all our problems, it is very interesting. It is colorless and shapeless, without 
physical form. It is just a concept, just a way of thinking. This concept is the 
total opposite of the reality of how the I exists. It is the total opposite of how 
the aggregates exist. We have this wrong concept and then we believe in it. 
This is so subtle but this is where the whole of our suffering comes from. 
How do we eliminate this? The essence of Buddhism is renunciation, 
bodhicitta and right view. So it is very important to study, understand and 

=== PAGE 61 ===
The Hallucination of the Real I    45
reflect and meditate on the right view in order to develop the ultimate wis-
dom realizing emptiness. By developing a direct perception of emptiness we 
are able to eliminate this disturbing thought-­obscuration, this wrong con-
cept, the seed of these wrong concepts and achieve nirvana, the sorrowless 
state, the blissful state of peace.
The Prasangika view of emptiness 
What eliminates the root of ignorance is the right view according to the 
Prasangika, the most subtle of the four Buddhist philosophical schools: 
Sautrantika, Vaibhashika, Cittamatra and Madhyamaka, which has two 
sub-­schools, Svatantrika and Prasangika. 
Even though each school has an idea of ultimate reality, it is the Prasan-
gika view that really cuts the root of the oceans of samsaric suffering: the 
suffering of pain, the suffering of change and pervasive compounding suf-
fering. The only thing that can completely eliminate that ignorance is the 
Prasangika view of emptiness, emptiness-­only, shunyata. To bring us to that 
understanding, the Buddha gave us the teachings on dependent arising, 
which have the power to lead us to the end of samsara. 
Padmasambhava, Nagarjuna and Asanga as well as Lama Tsongkhapa—
all of them—actualized the Prasangika view and were therefore able to give 
teachings from their experience and to guide us, helping us to be free from 
the oceans of samsaric suffering and bring us to full enlightenment. What-
ever it is called by different people, whether it is called emptiness or not, it 
is this specific emptiness, the Prasangika view. 
Our understanding of emptiness can only be considered correct if it 
helps us understand subtle dependent arising and does not contradict it. If 
it contradicts dependent arising—if, instead of supporting dependent aris-
ing, it leads us to the conclusion that there is no dependent arising, there is 
no existence—that means there is a mistake in our understanding.
Lama Tsongkhapa uses the example of a vase (vases and pillars are com-
mon examples in debating texts). He says when we check and see that there 
is no vase—that the top is not the vase, the neck is not the vase, the belly 
is not the vase, the bottom is not the vase—if we conclude that there is no 
vase at all, this view of emptiness does not help us see how the vase does exist. 
Unless our conclusion is an understanding of dependent arising—the truth 
for the all-­obscuring mind, conventional truth—we are led into a sense that 
there is no vase, and that is nihilism. 
That meditation leads to nihilism when we begin with the big mistake 

=== PAGE 62 ===
46    sun of devotion
and leave out the object to be refuted. When we look for the vase that exists, 
from the very beginning we fail to touch the object of refutation, that which 
does not exist. What we are looking for is the general vase and in the end we 
conclude that there is no vase. 
Many people believe that is the correct way of meditating on emptiness. 
There are debaters in the monastery—geshes even—who debate well but 
still think that this is the correct meditation to do, without touching the 
thing we have to realize as empty, without touching the gag-­cha at all. This 
is what we are looking for. 
Lama Tsongkhapa very clearly mentioned this in both the Lamrim 
Chenmo and the Middle Length Lam-­rim. There are many pages emphasiz-
ing gag-­cha, the object to be refuted, explaining it and clearly showing what 
we need to understand in order to realize emptiness. 
If the previous meditation were correct, then why would we need to 
understand the four-­point analysis?20 The other meditation does not touch 
that at all, it does not even question it, and so what the meditator is looking 
for is incorrect. It might help some people initially, but finally it will prove 
to be incorrect. That is why the four-­point analysis must come first. 
Only if the meditation on emptiness supports the understanding of 
dependent arising and does not contradict it in any way can we say it is a 
correct meditation on emptiness. So, you can see, these two things are not 
separate. Dependent arising and emptiness are not two separate phenom-
ena. In Tibetan, dependent arising is ten-­ching drel-­war jung-­wa or ten-­jung. 
Ten, “dependent,” eliminates nihilism and jung, “arising,” eliminates eternal-
ism. That is the middle way, neither nihilism nor eternalism. 
What is a dependent arising is empty of existing from its own side, being 
merely labeled by the mind. Nothing exists from its own side. And empti-
ness is a dependent arising. In that way dependent arising and emptiness 
are unified. 
20  Also known as the four vital points of analysis, this is one of the main techniques for medi-
tating on emptiness. 

=== PAGE 63 ===
4. The Need for Ethics and Refuge
.,
We have met these eight freedoms and ten 
richnesses21
Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned,
Because at this time we have received the eight freedoms and ten 
richnesses and are free from being hell beings, hungry ghosts, ani-
mals and so forth, we have the freedom to practice the Dharma.  
At this time we have attained the perfect human rebirth with the eight free-
doms and ten richnesses. The eight freedoms are:
	
1.	 The freedom of not being born as a hell being
	
2.	 The freedom of not being born as a hungry ghost
	
3.	 The freedom of not being born as an animal
	
4.	 The freedom of not being born as a long-­life god
	
5.	 The freedom of not being born where no buddha has descended
	
6.	 The freedom of not being born as a barbarian
	
7.	 The freedom of not being born as a fool
	
8.	 The freedom of not being born as a heretic
The ten richnesses are:
	
1.	 Being born as a human being
	
2.	 Being born in a religious country
	
3.	 Being born with perfect organs
21  See Rinpoche’s The Perfect Human Rebirth for extensive teachings on this topic.

=== PAGE 64 ===
48    sun of devotion
	
4.	 Being free of the five immediate negativities
	
5.	 Having devotion to the teachings
	
6.	 Being born when a buddha has descended
	
7.	 Being born when the teachings have been revealed
	
8.	 Being born when the complete teachings exist
	
9.	 Being born when the teachings are being followed
	 10.	 Having the necessary conditions to practice Dharma
Because we have been born as human beings rather than in the lower realms, 
as hell beings, hungry ghosts or animals, we have the freedom to practice 
Dharma. 
We have not been born as long-­life gods. They have awareness at the 
beginning and the end of their life but for its entire duration—which can 
last thousands or millions of human years—it’s as if they’re in a deep sleep. 
Because of that, these gods have no freedom to practice Dharma. We, how-
ever, have not been born as long-­life gods and so we have that freedom. 
We have not been born in a place where the buddha has not descended, 
where there’s no chance to meet the Dharma. Since we have not been born 
in such a place, we have the freedom to practice Dharma.
We have also not been born as barbarians, living in an irreligious country, 
where there is no chance to practice the Dharma. 
We are neither mutes nor fools. If we were, we would be unable to learn 
and practice the Dharma, but we are free from being born in that state, so 
we have freedom to practice Dharma.
Finally, we have not been born as heretics. Heretics have very closed 
minds. Without an open mind, there is no freedom to understand the 
inner science—knowing what is beneficial and what is harmful—no free-
dom to attain even temporal happiness, let alone ultimate happiness. Her-
etics believe there is no Buddha, Dharma or Sangha, no four noble truths. 
We are not heretics, nonbelievers, so we should feel happy that we have the 
freedom to practice Dharma. 
It is unbelievable that we have all these eight freedoms, which are so pre-
cious. We should feel incredible happiness just thinking about it.
We also have the ten richnesses, the first of which is being human. In 
Tibetan, the normal definition of a human being is one who is able to com-
municate and understand. Having this richness means we have an incredible 
opportunity to practice Dharma. As I have already explained, nonhu-
man beings such as spirits or gods and demigods, as well as other lower 

=== PAGE 65 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    49
realm beings whose suffering is unbelievable, have no freedom to practice 
Dharma. Even in the god realms, their lives are full of unbelievable distrac-
tions caused by attachment. Always chasing pleasure, they have no interest 
in the Dharma. Our life is not like that. Being born human, we have the 
richness to practice Dharma, and that is unbelievably precious. 
We have the richness of being born in a religious country. That has two 
meanings. One is by place, which means in a religious center, such as where 
the Buddha achieved enlightenment. But I think the main thing is where 
there is the lineage of the vows of fully ordained monks and nuns. There are 
also the novice monk and nun lineages of thirty-­six vows. Even if the gel-
ongma lineage no longer exists, the other three lineages do.22 
If we live where the lineage of the vows exists we can consider ourselves 
to be in the center of a religious country because those vow holders help us 
achieve liberation from samsaric suffering and achieve the blissful state of 
peace ourselves. It also means that there are the right conditions and free-
dom from obstacles that make it easier to attain enlightenment. 
The next richness is having perfect organs, which also makes it much 
easier to practice Dharma. Then there is the richness of not falling into any 
of the five extreme actions: killing one’s father, mother or an arhat, causing 
disunity among the Sangha or maliciously causing blood to flow from a 
buddha. We have not engaged in these heavy negative karmas, which result 
in having to experience rebirth in the hottest hell right after death. If we had 
done any of these actions we’d be disqualified from taking vows, but not 
having done them gives us the opportunity to practice Dharma. 
We live in a place where there are the teachings. Traditional texts say 
Vinaya teachings, but it is more than that. In particular, it means where 
there are lam-­rim teachings, the graduated path to enlightenment. The way 
that Lama Atisha presented the lam-­rim is that all the teachings are set up to 
subdue the mind because, as I often mention, all our happiness and suffer-
22  The Sangha consists of different levels of ordination: entering, rabjung ( pravrajya) or rab-
jungma ( pravrajyi), with eight vows; novice, getsul (sramanera) or getsulma (sramaneri), 
with thirty-­six vows; and fully ordained, with 253 vows for monks and 364 vows for nuns. 
The tradition of fully ordained nuns has been lost in Tibet, where the only nuns’ vows are the 
rabjungma and getsulma. At present, Western nuns in the Tibetan tradition wishing to take 
full ordination do so in other traditions, such as the Chinese or Vietnamese, but the Inter-
national Congress on Buddhist Women’s Role in the Sangha, supported by His Holiness the 
Dalai Lama, is investigating how full ordination in Tibetan Buddhism can be reinstated. See 
also Mandala, April 1988, “Focus on Full Ordination for Buddhist Women,” at fpmt.org.

=== PAGE 66 ===
50    sun of devotion
ing come from our mind. Therefore, to attain happiness we have to subdue 
the negative mind, our disturbing thoughts. That is what the lam-­rim helps 
us do, leading us from the wrong thinking that causes suffering to the right 
thinking that causes happiness—every happiness up to enlightenment. 
The next richness is having devotion to the lam-­rim. This gives us an 
incredible opportunity to practice Dharma. The next is being alive at a 
time the Buddha has descended on earth. Because the Buddha descended 
we now have the teachings, the Dharma, that he left for us. Once, the Bud-
dha was an ordinary person like us, with just as many problems, but then 
he was able to transform his mind, generating bodhicitta, letting go of the I 
and cherishing others. In that way he attained the complete Mahayana path 
and achieved enlightenment. 
We have this opportunity because the Buddha generated great compas-
sion for all sentient beings including us. For three countless great eons he 
collected the merits of wisdom—the cause of the dharmakaya, the holy 
mind of a buddha—and the merits of virtue—the cause of the rupakaya, 
the holy body of a buddha. He gave his cherished limbs and his life to sen-
tient beings, not only to the tiger mother in Nepal,23 but to numberless 
other sentient beings, practicing charity, morality, patience, enthusiastic 
perseverance, concentration and wisdom—the six perfections and the ten 
perfections. Then he achieved the purification of all obscurations and com-
pletion all realizations and became a buddha. He did this for us.
And then, for us, the Buddha revealed the 84,000 teachings, the Hina-
yana and the Mahayana, and, of the Mahayana, the Mahayana sutra and the 
Mahayana tantra, the different levels of teachings that are needed as our 
mind develops more and more. He left the teachings for all sentient beings, 
and that includes us.
That means we must learn and practice as much as we possibly can in 
order to not harm others and ourselves but to benefit ourselves and others, 
other sentient beings who are numberless, who want happiness and who do 
not want suffering, like ourselves. 
The way to do that is not by following the ways of the worldly beings but 
through following what the Omniscient One taught. He has shown us the 
path, what is right and what is wrong in life. That is the real education, the 
23  Rinpoche is referring to the famous Jataka tale of the Buddha, who, in a life when he was a 
bodhisattva prince, came across a starving tigress and her dying cubs and sacrificed his body 
so that she and her cubs could live.

=== PAGE 67 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    51
whole thing condensed into compassion and wisdom. The way the lam-­rim 
is set up serves the mind in this way, so we definitely need to study and prac-
tice the lam-­rim. 
The next richness is that, not only has the Buddha descended and 
revealed the teachings, but that the complete teachings still exist. We don’t 
live in a time after the teachings have finished. We are here now, just before 
the end of the teachings, like the sun just before it sets. Because of that, we 
have this incredible opportunity to learn and practice Dharma and to actu-
alize realizations.
Finally, from our side, we follow the teachings with an open mind; gurus 
such as His Holiness the Dalai Lama, having great compassion, reveal the 
Dharma to us; and we have benefactors who support our study and prac-
tice. This gives us such an unbelievable, incredible opportunity to enjoy the 
Dharma, to learn and practice the Dharma. 
The perfect human rebirth is so rare and so fragile
These eight freedoms and ten richnesses we have give us the opportunity to 
develop our mind from where we are now, taking us step by step on the path 
all the way to enlightenment. The first step is to develop guru devotion, the 
root of the whole path to enlightenment, which leads to the other practices 
that comprise the graduated path of the lower capable being. 
By not creating negative karma and by purifying that which has already 
been created, we purify the causes of the lower realms. Then, by practicing 
morality on the basis of taking refuge and protecting our karma, we are 
reborn in the upper realms as a human or god. 
Then we can meet the Dharma again, practice it and actualize the path. 
By actualizing the practice of the graduated path of the middle capable being 
we are able to be free from the oceans of samsaric suffering and achieve nir-
vana, the blissful state of peace for ourselves. 
We can even practice the Mahayana, where we can become free from even 
lower nirvana, peace, and achieve the full state of the omniscient mind for 
sentient beings. This is the graduated path of the higher capable being, where 
the focus is actualizing bodhicitta, the mind that wishes to attain enlight-
enment in order to free the numberless sentient beings from the oceans of 
samsaric suffering and bring them to peerless happiness, the full state of 
the omniscient mind. We can then free numberless hell beings, numberless 
hungry ghosts, numberless animals, numberless human beings, numberless 
gods, numberless demigods and numberless intermediate state beings. 

=== PAGE 68 ===
52    sun of devotion
Therefore, this perfect human body we have achieved is so precious, more 
precious than a wish-­granting jewel. It requires an incredible amount of 
merit to be able to find a wish-­granting jewel, which is much more precious 
than diamonds, sapphires or gold. If we ever found one, whatever we wished 
for in this life—material needs, comfort, all the helicopters, Rolls Royces, 
elephants or diamond palaces we could ever want—would be effortlessly 
obtained. 
However, with a wish-­granting jewel alone we cannot purify past nega-
tive karma and we cannot be assured of a higher rebirth as a god or human 
being, because a human rebirth comes only from pure morality—not just 
morality but morality kept purely. Even the most miserable human exis-
tence, such as a porter on an Indian train, doesn’t come from broken moral-
ity but from pure morality. Therefore, a human body is extremely rare and a 
perfect human rebirth is even more rare. It’s like a dream, like some impos-
sible thing has somehow happened. It’s inexpressible. 
With a wish-­granting jewel we cannot get a higher rebirth but, by tak-
ing refuge and practicing morality using this perfect human body we now 
have, we can. Then, by practicing the higher training of morality, the higher 
training of concentration and the higher training of wisdom, we can free 
ourselves from the oceans of samsaric suffering and attain nirvana, the bliss-
ful state of peace. 
We have already received this perfect human rebirth, so we can generate 
compassion for all sentient beings, attain bodhicitta and go on to achieve 
full enlightenment. Therefore this precious human body is much, much 
more precious than a wish-­granting jewel or a whole sky filled with wish-­
granting jewels. Even if we owned that amount, its value would be nothing 
by comparison; it could meet only the material needs of this life. All those 
wish-­granting jewels could not bring us all the different levels of happiness 
up to enlightenment, but this perfect human rebirth can. 
For example, Milarepa didn’t have even one rupee, even one dollar. He 
ate nothing but nettles. One day, when a thief came to rob him, Milarepa 
invited him to eat but there were only nettles. The thief asked for some 
chili to spice up the nettles, so Milarepa put in some more nettles and said, 
“This is the chili.” Then the thief wanted some salt, so Milarepa added more 
nettles and said, “And this is the salt.” He had nothing else. Before he met 
his guru Marpa he had practiced black magic and killed many people and 
animals by making a house collapse on them. However, because he had 

=== PAGE 69 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    53
received a perfect human rebirth he was able to transform his mind and 
attain enlightenment in that very lifetime. 
If Milarepa could do that after killing so many living beings, we too 
should be able to achieve lam-­rim realizations. In his Hymns of Experience, 
Lama Tsongkhapa said,
This life of leisure is even more precious than a wish-­granting 
jewel. 
Only this once have I found such an existence, 
Which is so hard to find and yet, like a flash of lightning, can so 
easily vanish.24 
This precious human life is not only much more precious than skies of 
wish-­granting jewels but it can also end at any moment. Therefore we must 
not waste it by using it to create negative karma, thus ensuring ourselves of 
rebirth in the lower realms. 
Whatever we do must be a Dharma action. That does not mean we 
should simply close our eyes and sit cross-­legged all the time, never eating 
or sleeping. It means whatever we do, whether it is Dharma practice or any 
other action—eating, walking, sitting, sleeping or working at our job—we 
must make everything as virtuous as possible. In that way everything we do 
becomes a Dharma action. 
So far we have not died. We have been most fortunate to be able to stay 
alive each day, each hour, each minute, each second. We are extremely for-
tunate to have obtained a perfect human rebirth, to have met the Buddha’s 
teachings, the Dharma, and to be learning and trying to understand them. 
These teachings lead us to free ourselves from the oceans of samsaric suffer-
ing. They show us the path and prepare our mind so that even if we don’t 
have realizations in this life, by learning and meditating, in future lives we 
will quickly gain a good understanding of the Dharma and attain realiza-
tions and then, sooner or later, achieve enlightenment. 
This incredibly precious human body we have does not last. It can end 
at any time. We can’t say we are assured of this body lasting for a hundred 
years, that during that period death won’t happen. We can’t even say that 
24  V. 13. (In the bibliography as Songs of Spiritual Experience.)

=== PAGE 70 ===
54    sun of devotion
we are assured of having this body for fifty years or that we will still have it 
in another year. We can’t say, “Tomorrow I won’t die.” We can’t even sign a 
guarantee that we won’t die today. 
We normally don’t think like this. We think that we will always be alive; 
we have a kind of belief in permanence. We really believe that we will live for 
a long time. Five minutes before somebody dies in a car crash or has a heart 
attack he has the concept that he is going to live for a long time. We all live 
with this concept of permanence. 
At this moment there are numberless people dying, even while they are 
still in their mother’s womb. There are those who have just been born who 
are dying and those dying in their early childhood, as well as people of all 
ages—teenagers, adults, old people—who are dying at this very moment. 
There are people dying in so many ways: in accidents, in natural disasters, 
through disease and so forth. 
There are many people who have already died today even without hav-
ing cancer. Usually it’s only when somebody has cancer that we think that 
because of the disease that that person is dying. We consider those without 
terminal diseases to not be dying, but, in reality, we are the same, those of 
us with cancer and those of us without. There are many healthy people who 
will die before those who have cancer. 
I heard that the parents of one of the older FPMT students, Tubten 
Pende, a former Nalanda monk, were talking in their kitchen and, while 
they were talking, Pende’s father turned his head a little to look somewhere 
and just then, while he was looking away, still talking, his wife suddenly 
died, collapsed on the floor.
I heard about another student who was walking along a road one day, 
talking, talking, talking, talking, talking, when she suddenly collapsed and 
died. 
We cannot guarantee we will live much longer at all. Death can happen 
at any time. Even now, being born in the upper realms as human beings, it 
is as if we are prisoners who have been allowed outside for a short time—
an hour or something—and very soon we will have to return home to the 
lower realms. An hour’s respite and then we have to go back inside again 
to live in the prison we came from. Our permanent residence is the lower 
realms. That is where we came from. 
Our life is getting shorter, day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, 
second by second. We have a certain number of breaths from now until 
death, so the number of remaining breaths is constantly decreasing. With 

=== PAGE 71 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    55
every in-­breath we take, every out-­breath we make, our life becomes that 
much shorter. In reality, we are constantly dying.  
When we die, our body stops but our mind continues. There is always the 
continuation of consciousness, migrating between the various realms. There 
are only two ways our consciousness can go at death: with nonvirtue, to the 
lower realms, or with virtue, to the upper realms. 
Taking refuge and protecting our karma is what saves us from rebirth in 
the lower realms. This is the foundation of all realizations, the basis of all 
happiness up to enlightenment. For that reason we take refuge in the Bud-
dha, Dharma and Sangha. 
Believer or nonbeliever, we must still lead an ethical life
The very essence is that we all want happiness and we don’t want suffering. 
Therefore, whatever we do, whether or not we believe in karma, reincar-
nation and so forth, we must still practice an ethical life. No matter what 
feelings we have about karma, not thinking there is a need for ethics will 
naturally lead to unethical conduct and that will lead to suffering and could 
even end up with us in prison. This has nothing to do with our philosophies 
about karma or future lives but with our conduct in this life. Of course, if 
we really like being in prison—if that’s what we enjoy the most—then that’s 
OK!
As I have mentioned, even nonbelievers need to practice patience and 
compassion. Similarly, nonbelievers also need to practice ethics, not harm-
ing others. That is the very basic practice. Even in this life, without con-
sidering the results that will happen in future lives, if we harm others we 
will have to face terrible consequences, such as getting a bad name, being 
treated badly by others, being prosecuted and jailed and many other nega-
tive things. We see this all the time with people who have so much wealth—
billionaires and zillionaires whose lies are exposed and end up in prison, 
despite their great wealth.
All of us, believers or nonbelievers, need to practice an ethical life, not 
harming others: not killing, not lying, not stealing and so forth. That is the 
basis. In that way, we don’t suffer and others don’t suffer. Not being harmed 
by others, we have happiness and then, in turn, we can benefit others more 
and more. As a result, we become happier and happier and so too do others. 
We can bring great happiness to those around us, to our family, our country 
and the world. 
We will be able to do all that, even without believing in karma and 

=== PAGE 72 ===
56    sun of devotion
reincarnation. People who do not necessarily have such beliefs but have a 
very good heart bring much happiness to others and, because of that, gain 
everybody’s respect. In that way they can benefit others more and bring 
more happiness to themselves, their families and the world. 
If ethics is important for the happiness of just this life, it becomes a much 
more important issue when we consider more than one life. The conclu-
sion is this. The suffering we experience in this life might look like it comes 
from others, from external sources, but it does not; it comes from our own 
mind. It is the result of our own past karma, the intention to harm others, 
which left a negative imprint on the continuity of our consciousness. We 
then experience the result in this life.  
Similarly, all the good things we experience in this life are due to our past 
good intentions, our good karma, the help we have given others, which left 
a positive imprint on the continuity of our consciousness, resulting in our 
experience of happiness, joy and success in our wishes. 
Others are not the main cause, they are just a condition; therefore there 
is nothing to blame others for. It has all come from our mind, from our past 
lives. Because we want to be successful in this life, we can see that what we 
need to do is not harm others. Whether or not we believe in karma and 
reincarnation, we need to not harm others and to bring them happiness, to 
use our life to fulfill their wishes. We must bring happiness to everyone—
people, animals, even insects, whatever size they are. Because it is a depen-
dent arising, if we do that, it will become the cause of our own success and 
happiness—using our life to bring happiness to others, to making others’ 
wishes succeed, is the best cause.
Karma is definite. If we create the cause we will definitely experience the 
result, happiness. The result of nonvirtue is suffering; the result of virtue is 
happiness. And karma is expandable. One karmic action results in many 
lifetimes of results. From one act of good karma we can experience many 
lifetimes’ happiness. To be able to fulfill somebody’s wishes of happiness, 
which is one time, we can then experience five hundred or a thousand life-
times of happiness and success for ourselves—from just one good karmic 
act. You should understand that and keep it in mind. 
Conversely, if we harm somebody once, cheating or harming them, we 
experience the suffering results for five hundred or a thousand lifetimes, 
depending on how harmful the action is. In his Four Hundred Verses, the 
Nalanda pandit Aryadeva said that if we cheat one sentient being we will be 

=== PAGE 73 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    57
cheated by others for a thousand lifetimes. If we kill an insect with a nega-
tive mind then, because karma is expandable, the result will be to be killed 
for five hundred lifetimes. Keeping this in the mind, we should dare not 
give even a small harm, even once, to anybody.
This is the way to make our wishes, our life, successful. Without under-
standing Dharma, without understanding karma, the rest of the world 
believes something else. They think the cause is totally something else, but 
that doesn’t work because what they think of as a main cause is only a con-
dition. Dharma practice is the main cause. 
I mentioned before how in America it is common to have a gun and how 
even small children sometimes kill many people. If the gun victims had met 
the Buddhadharma, if they had purified—especially with the four oppo-
nent powers—if they had accepted karma and reincarnation and because 
of that purified the negative karma beforehand, they wouldn’t have had to 
experience being killed like that. Similarly, if the killer could have purified 
his past lives’ negative karma of killing, he wouldn’t have had to kill those 
people. But neither the victims nor the killer had met the Dharma and puri-
fied their negative karma. The karma for all of them becomes very powerful 
to have this experience at this time and so it happens, where one person kills 
and others are killed. 
Therefore, in our life, whether we believe in karma, reincarnation and 
so forth, we need to help others as much as possible. As my guru, Kyabje 
Serkong Tsenshab Rinpoche, says, we need to try to help even an insect 
that is suffering from having fallen into water by taking it out and freeing 
it. And if two insects are fighting, killing each other, we need to separate 
them. Even if we just offer to carry an older person’s heavy luggage or offer 
somebody a seat on the bus or train, even if it is just a small benefit in our 
everyday life, we should do whatever we can to help free others from suffer-
ing, to benefit them. 
Once we have an understanding of the Dharma, especially the lam-­rim, 
we will have many skillful ways to help those with psychological problems. 
If we see somebody with suicidal thoughts, we will have the tools to talk to 
her and bring her around from killing herself and thus cause her to have a 
long life. Normally, we liberate lots of animals that are going to be killed 
and, saving them in that way we cause them to have a long life. But there are 
many human beings who want to kill themselves, so by giving them advice 
and guiding them, doing whatever we can do, we give them a long life. That 

=== PAGE 74 ===
58    sun of devotion
creates the karma for us to live long ourselves, in this and future lives, and 
for all our wishes to succeed. That happens, and we are able to help others 
more and more.  
To practice Dharma, the real thing is to serve others, to benefit others. 
Sentient beings are the objects most cherished by the buddhas. Not only 
Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, but the numberless buddhas and bodhisattvas 
also cherish them. This tiny ant, this mosquito, this human—whether a rich 
man or a beggar—is the object most cherished by the numberless buddhas 
and bodhisattvas.
In whatever way we can care for them, through our education, our wealth 
or whatever, that is the best offering to the numberless bodhisattvas and 
the numberless buddhas. That is really the best service we can offer to the 
bodhisattvas and buddhas. That is the best Dharma. 
What is life? However many years, months, days and hours we have left, 
we must make the most of it. We must do the best. For whom? For others. 
And then the best for us just naturally happens.
The need for refuge in our life
Pervasive compounding suffering, the third kind of suffering, gives rise to 
the other two kinds of suffering: the suffering of pain and the suffering of 
change. Because our aggregates are under the control of karma and delu-
sion, they are pervaded by suffering, which is why this type of suffering is 
called pervasive. 
When we pinch our skin, it hurts. We feel pain because our aggregates 
are pervaded by suffering. That itself is an explanation about reincarnation, 
about the continuity of the consciousness from life to life. That is why it is 
suffering. If this life were the first one, why should there be suffering? What 
is the cause of that first moment of suffering? It doesn’t make any sense. 
However, our aggregates are contaminated by the seed of disturbing 
thoughts, and because of that they are pervaded by suffering. And that is 
compounding suffering because there is the continuation of consciousness 
from life to life. Our consciousness carries negative imprints from past lives. 
That compounds this life’s and future lives’ suffering. 
From the fundamental ignorance of reality arises the ignorance of not 
knowing karma, not knowing Dharma, what is right and wrong. And then, 
from that, attachment and anger arise toward desirable and dislikeable 
objects respectively. That itself is suffering but, motivated by that, we cre-

=== PAGE 75 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    59
ate karma. Then that karma leaves negative imprints on our mind and they 
produce future lives’ rebirth and suffering. Therefore, these aggregates not 
only compound this life’s suffering but future lives’ suffering as well. This is 
how pervasive compounding suffering is the foundation of the two other 
sufferings. 
That is why taking refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is vital. 
The purpose of taking refuge is to be free from the third level of suffering, 
pervasive compounding suffering. If we can be free from this we will never 
ever have to experience the other two sufferings again. We are totally liber-
ated, forever—not just for a few days, a few months, a few years, then we 
have to come back again. It’s not like we have a brief holiday from suffering 
and then have to return to it again. 
If we have refuge in our heart, that is the basis for the various sets of 
vows we can take: the pratimoksha vows, the bodhisattva vows and the tan-
tric vows. These are the means that can lead us to not just attaining libera-
tion but attaining enlightenment for sentient beings, to free them from the 
oceans of samsaric suffering and to bring them to enlightenment. Becom-
ing a bodhisattva and achieving enlightenment are based on the three sets 
of vows. 
With refuge in our mind we are no longer outer beings but inner beings. 
With refuge in our mind, all the negative karma we have collected in the 
past from beginningless rebirths becomes purified and we immediately 
collect skies of extensive merit any time we want. Every time we have the 
opportunity, every day, we can do this. 
By taking refuge in Buddha, Dharma and Sangha we do not receive harm 
from either human beings or nonhuman beings—spirits and so forth. All 
our wishes are successful no matter what they are: our own freedom from 
samsara or enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. We will not be 
reborn in the lower realms and we will quickly become enlightened, achiev-
ing the omniscient mind. 
We need all three objects of refuge: Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. To be 
free from the lower realms we need just one object of refuge, for example, 
we can take refuge in the Buddha alone or simply chant mantras, recite holy 
names or remember Dharma texts such as the Heart Sutra. If we have devo-
tion for even one monk or nun and remember that person when we’re dying 
or if we take refuge in the Buddha at the time of death, we will be saved from 
rebirth in the lower realms. But to be free from pervasive compounding suf-
fering, to be free from samsara completely, we need all three. 

=== PAGE 76 ===
60    sun of devotion
The Dharma is the actual refuge, the medicine that cures our samsaric 
suffering. The Buddha, the founder of the refuge, is like the doctor who 
gives the medicine and the Sangha, who help us actualize the Dharma, are 
like the nurses who help us take what the doctor has prescribed, giving us 
the medicine and helping in all those things. The Sangha lead us by exam-
ple, showing us how to practice Dharma. 
Relying on all three, Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, is a hundred thou-
sand times more effectual than relying on external doctors, medicines and 
nurses. They might be able to cure physical illness, but, without eliminating 
karma and delusion, that can only be temporary. That is why taking refuge 
in Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is vital.
We take refuge in the Buddha by remembering the meaning of “buddha,” 
one who has totally ceased all obscurations and completed all realizations. 
The qualities of a buddha are unbelievable. A buddha can see all past, pres-
ent and future phenomena directly at the same time. By taking refuge in the 
historical Buddha we are taking refuge in all the buddhas, and they all know 
we have taken refuge in them. Every one of the numberless buddhas has that 
quality—sang-­gyä—so we can be assured that we will receive guidance from 
them. That is a reason for great joy. 
Taking refuge in the Dharma means taking refuge in both the absolute 
Dharma and the conventional Dharma. The absolute Dharma is both the 
cessation of all obscurations—the cessation of all suffering—and the true 
path that leads to that cessation, the absolute wisdom directly perceiving 
emptiness. That is the medicine that eliminates the cause of suffering, karma 
and delusion, and allows us to achieve nirvana and enlightenment. Conven-
tional Dharma is the Tripitaka—the three divisions of the Buddha’s teach-
ings: the Vinaya, the Sutra, and the philosophical texts, the Abhidharma. 
These are condensed into the lam-­rim texts. 
Again, when we take refuge in the Sangha we do so in the absolute 
Sangha and the conventional Sangha. The absolute Sangha is anybody, lay 
or ordained, male or female, who has the wisdom directly perceiving empti-
ness, realization of the absolute Dharma. The conventional Sangha refers to 
four fully ordained monks or nuns who are living purely in the vows. 
Very often when a lama gives refuge, the disciples can also choose to take 
lay vows. If you can, it is very good to do this. There are five lay vows: 
▶	 abstaining from killing
▶	 abstaining from sexual misconduct

=== PAGE 77 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    61
▶	 abstaining from stealing
▶	 abstaining from telling lies
▶	 abstaining from taking alcohol 
Generally, you are given the choice of taking all five or some or none when 
you take refuge. The Buddha is so kind, so compassionate, giving us incred-
ible freedom like this.
You can think of sexual misconduct as having sex with a person who 
doesn’t belong to you, who is committed to somebody else. However, Lama 
Atisha is stricter than that. He said that even having sex with your own wife 
or husband in the daytime is also regarded as sexual misconduct. 
From a long time ago in Kopan, we also included taking recreational 
drugs in the vow of abstaining from alcohol, because they make you kind of 
hallucinated, crazy, and cause you to harm yourself and others. But the texts 
mainly refer to alcohol. Abstaining from alcohol is important. It creates so 
many problems within the family, causing whole families to break up and 
forcing the drinkers onto the streets, turning them into beggars. This seems 
to happen at lot in the West, and with alcohol there are many other dangers 
as well. It is easy to see how drinking alcohol interferes with Dharma devel-
opment, but abstaining from it is important for normal life as well.   
When we take these five lay vows we do so for more than our own tempo-
rary happiness. The main purpose is to be free from the oceans of samsaric 
suffering and, not only that, to achieve enlightenment for sentient beings, 
to free them from the oceans of samsaric suffering. We take the vows to free 
all sentient beings from cancer, from AIDS, from all sickness, and from all 
the sufferings of rebirth, old age and death. We take the vows so that all 
sentient beings can be free from the suffering of change and from pervasive 
compounding suffering. We take vows to bring every sentient being to full 
enlightenment by becoming enlightened ourselves. Taking the five lay vows 
is not just a small thing. 
The importance of the Namgyälma mantra
When I give refuge and lay vows, I often give the students a Namgyälma 
mantra amulet to wear, as well as a blessing string and a picture of the bodhi-
sattva Ksitigarbha. These things are incredible because just having them 
constantly purifies negative karma.
Putting the Namgyälma mantra up somewhere in your house or flat 
brings protection and makes it a holy place. Then, whatever sentient beings 

=== PAGE 78 ===
62    sun of devotion
are inside—dogs, cats, mosquitoes etc.—always have their negative karma 
and defilements purified and they obtain a higher rebirth. If even the 
shadow of the house touches any being, like insects or people, their negative 
karma is purified and they get a higher rebirth. If the Namgyälma mantra 
is on top of a mountain, the whole mountain become holy and the nega-
tive karma of any being who climbs or touches the mountain is purified and 
they obtain a higher rebirth. 
I often tell people in the West that having a Namgyälma mantra card in 
the car is vital, because not only the sentient beings inside but also all beings 
who touch the car have their negative karma purified and they obtain a 
higher rebirth. When you drive, many insects and ants are killed, especially 
at nighttime when so many insects fly into your windscreen or are crushed 
under the wheels of the car. With a Namgyälma mantra inside [or a decal 
on the window], the negative karma of all those small insects is purified. 
Of course, that doesn’t mean you should drive over rabbits or dogs or chil-
dren! As a policeman drags you to prison you can’t really tell him you did it 
because you have a mantra in the car! I suspect that would be inadmissible 
in a court case. 
One of the most important things to do when a person or animal dies is 
to put the Namgyälma mantra on the body for little while. Then, definitely, 
a hundred percent, their consciousness will not go to the lower realms but 
will have a higher rebirth instead. This is very important to keep in mind 
when a person or animal dies. Even when you yourself die, you can ask your 
friends to do that. That is very beneficial. 
At the Aptos house in America25 we have a big, well-­decorated board 
with different size mantras carved on it that we place in the ocean. We put 
a tent on the beach and have lunch or tea while the board is in the water. 
In that way we bless the Pacific Ocean. When we place it in the ocean and 
recite om mani padme hum it not only blesses the water but it purifies 
all the numberless sentient beings living in the water, the ones as large as 
a mountain, like the whales, and the ones so small that you can only see 
them through a microscope. Likewise, all the people playing in the waves, 
riding surfboards, get the same benefit. All their negative karma and defile-
ments are purified and they get a higher rebirth and the possibility to meet 
the Dharma again and, because of that, to develop their minds and achieve 
25  Lama Zopa’s residence in California, near Santa Cruz. 

=== PAGE 79 ===
The Need for Ethics and Refuge    63
enlightenment. Before we only did this occasionally but now we try to do 
it at least once a week.
We also liberate fish that are caught for supermarkets. The people at the 
Aptos house and in Washington26 do that quite often. They have probably 
liberated over a thousand already. We also buy worms that are sold live as 
bait for fishermen and liberate them. There are several hundred in one con-
tainer, waiting for a hook to be pushed through them and to be then thrown 
in the water to catch the fish. So in Washington and Aptos every two weeks 
we buy several containers and take them around the stupa. We don’t have a 
large stupa in Washington yet so we take them around the small stupas and 
relics and statues. There are many pictures of deities, statues and tsa-­tsas. In 
Aptos we have a stupa behind the house, so we take them around that and 
recite mantras, as I have advised. 
After I saw two ants’ nests near the house in Washington we made charity 
to them using a text I have, and we also did sur practice for them every night. 
I recited the Namgyälma and many other mantras and sprinkled a little bit 
of almost-­dry tsampa powder over the ants’ nests and they came to eat it. In 
that way we made charity to the ants. 
We found only two nests while I was there, but after I left, Venerable 
Tharchin from Nalanda Monastery in France found seven besides mine. 
He was studying philosophy but had a lot of lung, wind disease, so he went 
to Washington to make many water, light and flower offerings. I told him 
to recite mantras and bless the tsampa and put it on the nests. He does this 
every week. Even in such small ways we try to help sentient beings as much 
as we can. This is not only to fill their stomachs but also to purify their 
minds. That is the whole point, and it gives them the possibility of meeting 
the Dharma in future lives. 
It’s very interesting about ants. I have found that if we put honey or sugar 
down especially for them, which they would normally eat, if the karma is 
not there, they don’t come. Otherwise they come into the kitchen and get 
involved in taking honey and many other things. But if we actually give it 
to them, they don’t come. I think that is because we don’t have the fortune, 
the good karma, for them to take it. 
As I mentioned, besides the Namgyälma mantra, I often give students a 
blessing string. This is not just a Tibetan custom. Many mantras and prayers 
26  This is Buddha Amitabha Pure Land in Washington State, where Rinpoche has a retreat 
house. 

=== PAGE 80 ===
64    sun of devotion
have been recited and blown on it to purify the wearers’ obscurations and 
for them not to be reborn in the lower realms. The mantra used is unbeliev-
ably powerful. Touching the body, the string purifies our negative karma 
and obscurations, decreasing problems we might otherwise have to face, so 
in that way it becomes a great protection. But it is also there to remind us to 
have a good heart, to benefit other sentient beings. 
Finally, there is the picture of the bodhisattva Ksitigarbha. Ksitigarbha is 
in the Guru Puja merit field but he is not as popular in Tibet as in China, 
where he is considered very important for success in business and for heal-
ing. There is a one-­volume text where the Buddha explained the unbeliev-
able qualities of Ksitigarbha. Praying to him whenever you make offerings 
is a hundred million times more powerful for success than praying to other 
bodhisattvas. 

=== PAGE 81 ===
5. The Room Before It Is Named
.,
T
hings appear as truly existent when we fail to analyze them, but 
when we do analyze them we can see that everything is created by our 
mind. There is nobody else who has come and created our problems for 
us—“I’m creating your problems”—they are all created by our mind. We are 
the creator. That is why in his teachings the Buddha said, 
You are your own enemy 
And you are your own guide.
You are the creator of your own suffering
And you are the creator of your own happiness. 
As I have mentioned, we are the creator of our day-­to-­day life’s problems, 
hour by hour, minute by minute, second by second, and we are also the 
creator of our day-­to-­day life’s happiness, hour by hour, minute by minute, 
second by second. 
We need to go beyond this life, however, to past and future lives. We have 
been born as a human being this time but we are also the creator of all our 
past and future states, whether as a hell being or a god or whatever. Just as 
we are the creator of our own samsara, we are also the creator of our own 
nirvana—the blissful state of peace for ourselves, freedom from the oceans 
of samsaric suffering—and our own ultimate happiness, the total elimina-
tion of all obscurations and the completion of all realizations, the peerless 
happiness of enlightenment.
Everything depends on our mind. Everything, whatever we want, is in 
our hands. If we don’t want nirvana, if we want samsara, it’s in our hands. 

=== PAGE 82 ===
66    sun of devotion
If we don’t want enlightenment, if we want hell, it’s in our hands. If we 
want happiness instead of problems, it’s in our hands; it’s all up to us. It 
depends on how we use our mind. With our body and speech we do actions 
that lead to happiness or problems, but it all depends on the creator, our 
own mind. 
Thinking in the correct way brings happiness; thinking in the incorrect 
way brings suffering. Thinking in a healthy, virtuous way brings a healthy 
life. We want others’ help; we do not want harm from them. Similarly, num-
berless others want our help and do not want to be harmed by us. We are 
one; others are numberless. Whether we help or harm them is up to us, so 
we are responsible for their happiness or suffering.
Every day, every hour, every minute, we have total responsibility for 
all living beings. Not only human beings but also nonhuman beings: hell 
beings, hungry ghosts, animals, insects, gods, demigods—all living beings, 
all sentient beings, are our responsibility. It is like that in reality. We are not 
only responsible for the happiness of our family, our parents, our spouse and 
our children, we are responsible for all living beings. 
In that way, our life is not meaningless, not at all. It is not at all hopeless. 
That is totally wrong. If we think like that, intellectually we may know the 
Dharma but we are not practicing, we are not thinking, we are not using the 
Dharma for our mind. Were we to understand the Dharma and practice it 
we would know that life is neither hopeless nor meaningless.  
Our life is so important, so precious. We have the responsibility of free-
ing the numberless beings from the oceans of samsaric suffering: not only 
the suffering of pain but also the suffering of change. 
Dharma happiness lasts, it increases. It is something we can complete 
when we achieve enlightenment. That is the big difference; that is why it 
is worthwhile dedicating our life to it. We have already experienced every 
samsaric pleasure numberless times. What other people are experiencing 
now, including the worldly gods and other humans, we have experienced 
numberless times from beginningless rebirths. This includes all the suffer-
ing experienced by other beings. There is no new samsaric happiness left to 
experience and no new suffering. As long as we are in samsara, it is always 
like that. It is only because you and I have neither an omniscient mind nor 
even ordinary clairvoyance and are unable to remember past lives that we 
cannot see this. 

=== PAGE 83 ===
The Room Before It Is Named    67
The room before it is named
In the Vajra Cutter Sutra the Buddha explained we should look at causative 
phenomena as like a star or a visual aberration.27 The example often given 
is that of hairs appearing to float in front of the eyes or dropping into our 
food where there are no hairs. It can also happen that we seem to see an 
animal running where there is no animal, or we see worms that aren’t there. 
These are temporary defects in our vision. Sometimes it seems to happen 
more to me, sometimes less. I can’t say why. 
The Buddha explained we should look at all causative phenomena in 
this way, like a hallucination, but especially any object of our attachment or 
aversion, such as our own body, our friends, our possessions and other desir-
able and undesirable objects. 
Defective view means we ordinary people see things that don’t exist and 
don’t see things that do exist. There is ultimate reality, emptiness. It exists—
there is such a thing—but for ordinary people like me, it is like it does not 
exist. On the other hand, while what is true seems not to exist to us, the hal-
lucination, what is false, seems to exist. Here “false” means the projection of 
our hallucinated mind, our ignorance that holds the I, the aggregates and so 
forth as truly existing from their own side or existing by themselves. 
It is not like that at all. It has never been like that at all from the begin-
ning, even for one second. It has never been as it appears to us, as we believe. 
Reality means how things exist. They exist because they are empty; because 
they are emptiness only, tong-­pa-­nyi in Tibetan or shunyata in Sanskrit. The 
nyi, the “only” of the term, makes it clear, not just “tong-­pa” but tong-­pa-­nyi. 
Because things are tong-­pa-­nyi, because their nature is emptiness, they 
exist. That is why they exist. That is why they exist, why you exist, why we 
exist, why everything exists. That is why there is birth, existence, cessation, 
why all actions happen. The objects exist in mere name, the actions exist in 
mere name and the effects exist in mere name. 
It is this ignorance, this projection of our hallucinated mind, that fails 
to see this but creates the real I, the real action and the real object. All the 
six senses’ objects—forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangibles and mental 
objects—are projected as real; they have the appearance of being real to our 
hallucinated mind. 
This is how they appear to us one hundred percent and we totally accept 
27  Tib: rab-­rib. Visual aberration or defective view. See page 77.

=== PAGE 84 ===
68    sun of devotion
this. We don’t doubt it at all. We believe that all these things are one hun-
dred percent real. 
This is the foundation of our suffering. This concept, this ignorance, is the 
biggest problem in our life. All other problems are built on that foundation. 
Attachment arises for the real desirable object, because it not only appears 
to us as real but after appearing that way we believe it to be real, that this is 
the truth. Anger arises toward the real undesirable object. It appears to us as 
a real undesirable object, a real dislikeable object, then on the basis of that 
appearance we believe it to be real. And ignorance arises toward real indif-
ferent objects. In that way, all our problems build from that foundation. 
For ordinary people like us, everything that is false in life appears true. 
Whether something exists or is a fantasy, we believe it to be one hundred 
percent true. On the other hand, for our mind, for us, ultimate reality, emp-
tiness only, shunyata, does not exist at all. 
It is like stars in the daytime. Because the sun is too bright, even though 
the stars are there, we cannot see them. In reality, nothing has real, true exis-
tence from its own side. The I, action, object—nothing is real from its own 
side. It has never been real. Right from the beginning, from beginningless 
rebirths, it has never happened that anything has ever come into existence 
from its own side, for even a second. 
Maybe I should give a few examples. Say, we want to rent a house. When 
a house is built there are many empty rooms. As we are shown about the 
house by the owner he names the rooms, “This is the bedroom. This is the 
kitchen. This is the office.” Like that, we learn the names of the different 
rooms.
Before the name was given, we have the appearance of an empty room 
but after the owner has given it a name, such as “office,” we then have the 
appearance of an office. Then later we move stuff in, like a desk and a com-
puter, whatever we need to make that room into an office. That doesn’t 
mean we can call any place we have our computer, such as outside or in an 
airplane, our office. But it is like that with this room we call the office and it 
is the same with the kitchen, the bathroom and so forth. 
First the name is given and then, immediately after that, we have the 
appearance of the office or the kitchen. Being introduced to each room by 
the house’s owner, we are “taught” the names of the rooms and the rooms 
appear to us as just that and we believe in that appearance. 
It should appear to us as merely labeled by the mind, which is exactly 
what has just happened—the empty room was labeled by the mind. Now 

=== PAGE 85 ===
The Room Before It Is Named    69
the big question is this: why doesn’t the room appear like that? We don’t 
remember, or we don’t know, that it was merely labeled by the other person’s 
mind and then our mind accepted the way it was labeled. 
When it appears it should appear as merely labeled by our mind. That is 
the correct view, but that is not how it appears to our mind. It appears to 
be not merely labeled by our mind; it appears as a real one, existing from 
its own side, as a real office, a real bedroom, a real kitchen, a real toilet—
each room existing from its own side, not merely labeled by our mind. Even 
though our mind, or the other person’s mind, merely labeled that empty 
room right now, we do not remember. 
That is totally, completely the wrong view; it is the opposite of reality. 
Appearing as merely labeled by mind, that is correct. That is according to 
reality. But, what appears to us is totally the opposite of reality, of how 
things actually exist. It is totally false. In our life there is what is true and 
what is false, and that is false. 
That wrong view is the basis for all the other delusions: for ignorance, 
attachment and anger, for the six root delusions and the twenty second-
ary delusions28 and then all the 84,000 delusions that are branches of igno-
rance, attachment and anger. Those wrong concepts are the basis for all the 
karmic actions we create and they in turn create samsaric suffering. That 
is how it works. We continuously create the oceans of samsaric suffering 
through this wrong way of thinking, this wrong belief. 
Illusioned by the magician, ignorance
What appears to a buddha? A buddha has totally ceased all obscurations, 
both the disturbing-­thought obscurations and the seeds of those, the sub-
tle obscurations to knowledge. Even the trace of ignorance, the negative 
imprint left by ignorance, has been totally abandoned, totally ceased. So 
what appears to a buddha? A buddha has no projections of the halluci-
nation of true existence at all but still sees what we, the six realm sentient 
beings, see. A buddha sees mere existence, merely labeled by mind. 
When arya Sangha—arhats or arya bodhisattvas—are not in equipoise 
meditation directly perceiving emptiness only, when they are in post-­
28  Buddhist philosophy lists three main causes of suffering: the three poisons of ignorance, 
attachment and anger. The six root delusions consist of those three plus pride, doubt and 
deluded views, and, from these six, the twenty secondary delusions, such as envy, laziness, 
dullness and so forth, arise. See The Mind and Its Functions, pp. 137–62. 

=== PAGE 86 ===
70    sun of devotion
meditation break-­time, they have the hallucination of truly existent appear-
ance. Their bodhicitta has this hallucination; their compassion has this 
hallucination, but, unlike us, they do not believe it. Unlike us, they do not 
have the belief that the hallucination is real.  
It is like having crossed a hot, sunny desert and looking back to see a 
mirage—the appearance of water. Because we have just come from there 
we know that, although the rays of the sun reflect off the sand to give the 
appearance of water, there is no water there at all. 
Or it is like when we are dreaming and we are able to recognize the dream 
as a dream while it is happening. There is the appearance but no belief that 
the dream is real. There might be a sharp object in our dream but we are not 
afraid because we know it cannot hurt us and so we touch it. Of course it 
doesn’t hurt; it’s just a dream. 
Usually we don’t have that sort of dream and while we are dreaming we 
think that whatever we are dreaming about is real from its own side. This is 
not how arhats and arya bodhisattvas, who are much more advanced than 
us, see things. When they are not in equipoise meditation they have the 
hallucination of true existence but no belief in its being real. They see true 
appearance as like a mirage. 
When we awaken from a dream we understand that what we thought 
was real was just a dream and not real at all. Unfortunately, in the daytime 
when we are no longer dreaming, we still believe that which is not real to be 
real. Can you imagine that? 
Our whole life is like a mirage. We have a vision of water where there is 
none. It is like a dream, an illusion; it’s as if a magician has used some man-
tras or some substances and illusioned the audience. I’m not sure of the 
English, but the audience is illusioned. What the audience sees appears as 
real and they believe it to be real. 
For us it is like that all day and all night. Past ignorance has left a nega-
tive imprint on our mind. After the mere imputation, ignorance immedi-
ately projects the appearance of a real object, which makes things appear to 
us as real. This has come from our mind, just as a film put into a projector 
is projected onto the screen. Past ignorance has left negative imprints, and 
right after the mere imputation, the next second, our mind projects the hal-
lucination of a real object existing from its own side. Then, if we fail to ana-
lyze it, we don’t know that it has just come from our mind; we believe it to 
be real, to be true. We hold it as true. Among the delusions, that is the king 
of the delusions. 

=== PAGE 87 ===
The Room Before It Is Named    71
As those who have studied Madhyamaka philosophy know, there are 
many lines of logical reasoning to prove emptiness, but because dependent 
arising states that things are empty of inherent existence because they are 
dependent, it is considered the king of logical reasoning. Conversely, among 
all the delusions, the wrong concept that things exist from their own side is 
the king of the delusions. 
Understanding the real I
From time-­to-­time in the world, great wars like the First and Second World 
Wars happen. With so much destruction and the deaths of millions of peo-
ple with millions more being burned and injured, this is the most intense 
kind of suffering we can experience. As I have mentioned, such wars can 
be due to one person with power and influence. Because of that person’s 
ignorance, he totally believes in the wrong concept and totally fails to com-
prehend that the I is merely labeled by the mind. He wants this I, this real 
I, to be happy, to have power. He takes what he likes and destroys what he 
dislikes in order to attain happiness for that real I, which is not there, which 
has never been there at all, from beginningless rebirths. 
The I is merely imputed by our mind right now. Then follows the projec-
tion, the hallucination by our mind, by past ignorance that has left a nega-
tive imprint on our mind. The real I is a total projection, a hallucination. 
But we completely, one hundred percent, believe it to be true, real. First 
the imputation; then the appearance; then, in the third moment, complete 
belief in that appearance.
Believing in the real I is like believing we have a billion dollars in our 
hand. Like that dictator, we take what we like and destroy what we dislike 
for the happiness of our real I, which does not exist at all.
This wrong concept cheats us. It has been cheating us completely from 
beginningless rebirths up until now. If we don’t study, meditate and real-
ize ultimate reality—emptiness, tong-­pa-­nyi, shunyata—we’re completely 
cheating ourselves. Right now in this life we have all the chances, all the 
opportunities. We have great teachers who are always teaching emptiness, 
particularly the emptiness taught by the Omniscient One, the kind, com-
passionate Shakyamuni Buddha, and the many pandits, Nagarjuna, Lama 
Tsongkhapa and so forth. If we are totally distracted by mundane pleasures, 
which are only suffering, and fail to take this opportunity, we have com-
pletely cheated ourselves. 

=== PAGE 88 ===
72    sun of devotion
We will realize this as we are about to die, but at that time it will be too 
late; there will be no time to do anything about it. No matter how sad we 
are, realizing we have wasted our life, that’s it, it’s time for death. 
We have met the correct teachings
People who have the opportunity to take teachings, study and meditate 
are extremely lucky. Both correct teachings and a perfect, qualified teacher 
are needed. There are many, many teachings and just because the subject 
of a particular teaching is meditation does not necessarily mean it is cor-
rect. Actually, it all depends on an individual person’s karma. If we have 
good karma, then we will meet the correct teacher, receive correct teach-
ings and everything will happen correctly. If we do not have good karma, 
then we will meet the wrong teacher, receive wrong teachings and every-
thing will go wrong. It is very rare to meet the right teacher and receive 
correct teachings. 
We need to not only listen to the teaching but also reflect on everything 
we hear, analyzing the base, the path and the goal. As we have seen, the 
base is the two truths: ultimate truth and the truth for the all-­obscuring 
mind. The path is wisdom and compassion. The goal is the dharmakaya, 
a buddha’s wisdom body, and the rupakaya, a buddha’s form body. We 
reach this goal by analyzing the base and developing through the path of 
study and debate. We do not attain the goal through belief but by study-
ing with learned teachers and investigating their teachings for the whole 
of our life. 
Kyabje Dudjom Rinpoche, the head lama of the Nyingma tradition, 
wrote a religious history about the different traditions within Tibetan Bud-
dhism. In it he said that Lama Tsongkhapa was the teacher who wrote the 
clearest commentaries on the Buddha’s teachings, both sutra and tantra. We 
are so fortunate to be following his tradition. 
In the end, it all comes down to how much positive karma we, the stu-
dents, have created. Having studied meditation and received teachings does 
not necessarily mean that what we have received is correct, but if we dili-
gently follow Lama Tsongkhapa’s teachings we will surely develop on the 
path. Therefore, we are so fortunate. We should feel great happiness, rejoic-
ing all the time, day and night. There is no time for depression. Not even 
for an hour, a minute. 
As I have mentioned, whether we practice Dharma is up to us, but the 
more Dharma we learn, the more wisdom we get and the more we are able 

=== PAGE 89 ===
The Room Before It Is Named    73
to discriminate right from wrong. Then we have the wisdom eye to see what 
to abandon—that which harms ourselves and others—and what to prac-
tice—that which benefits ourselves and others. 
The king of delusions
I’ll give you another example. You have a child and you have to think of a 
name. You decide to call him “George.” Whoever decides the name, you 
both agree and so the thinking is that this is “George.” 
When you first saw the baby there was no appearance of George. You 
didn’t see George. After that, you decided on George. You are the main per-
son to decide this name. Your mind not only labeled the aggregates of the 
baby “George” but merely labeled them. If your mind hadn’t labeled those 
aggregates “George,” George would not have existed. 
Before the baby was conceived, before the aggregates came into exis-
tence, even though you might have already decided on the name for the 
baby, that name has no valid base. George does not exist, even if there is a 
mind that has given the name. 
Therefore George only comes into existence by depending on the aggre-
gates, the valid base, being there, and depending on the labeling valid mind 
that merely labels “George” onto those aggregates. Only then does George 
come into existence. So George exists in mere name. 
In that first moment it is just the merely imputed George, but you do not 
know that, you do not realize that. Then, the next moment, the real George 
appears from there. A merely labeled George should appear—that is the 
reality—but that does not happen. What happens in the next moment is 
that George appears to exist from its own side. This George that didn’t 
come from the mind, is not merely labeled by the mind, has never been 
labeled by the mind and totally exists from its own side is totally false. 
So, the first moment there is the merely labeled George and then, the 
next moment, the negative imprint left by ignorance projects a real George. 
That is the hallucination. Then, in the third moment, you believe that real 
appearance. It appears real and you believe it to be real. You believe this is 
real George, but there is no real George. There is no real George existing 
from its own side at all. That never happened. That is the king of delusions, 
the basic problem. That is the root of all the delusions. All other delusions 
such as attachment arise on the basis of that wrong object. 
Attachment arises on the basis of believing a real George to be there, but 
the object of attachment is not there. 

=== PAGE 90 ===
74    sun of devotion
In the Lamrim Chenmo there is a very good explanation of how delu-
sions are all built on the basis of the wrong concept. There is no object of 
attachment or anger. It does not exist. The mind has projected it; the mind 
has created it. We have totally made it up and we have created the suffering 
ourselves. 
The real George is a good example of this. It is totally false but on the 
basis of it there is so much attachment. We think, “My child,” then when 
something disturbs our attachment, we get angry. Like that, all the other 
delusions arise. In that way, we live our whole life completely in the 
hallucination.
There is no real Lama Zopa. There is no real Jamyang Centre appearing 
from its own side. There is no real teaching appearing from there. All this 
is totally empty. There is no real home appearing from there. There is no 
real car that you drive, existing from its own side. There is no real shop, no 
real shopkeeper, no real money, no real coming and going. There is no real 
university, no real degree, no real job. There is no real cancer. Maybe that 
example is better. There is no real cancer, no real AIDS. 
The emptiness of the Z
I want to end by mentioning this example for you to get a better idea. You 
might have heard it before because it is a common example I give, but I 
think using it again here will make this clearer. 
Go back to your childhood before you knew your ABCs. Your teacher 
draws three lines on the blackboard, a Z. Before she teaches you what those 
lines mean, you see them but you have no appearance that this is a Z. You do 
not see those lines as a Z. Then the teacher introduces you to the name for 
that: “Z.” Before that, you didn’t have the appearance that this is a Z, there 
were just three lines. That is clear. 
Once the teacher has introduced you to the label “Z” you believe in that. 
Following what the teacher says, your mind merely imputes Z and then, 
the next moment, you have the appearance of the Z. But the big question is 
this. It should appear as merely labeled by the mind if that is how you appre-
hended it the moment before, but you do not see that at all. Why is that?
The next moment, for you, there is this wrong projection, a real Z from 
there, a Z that never came from your mind, that was not merely labeled by 
your mind. That is so totally wrong; that is a hallucination. 
In that second moment there is the appearance of a real Z and then, in 
the third moment, you totally believe this to be true, to be real. As it appears 

=== PAGE 91 ===
The Room Before It Is Named    75
real, you believe it to be real. This is the fundamental wrong concept that 
gives rise to all other delusions. Seeing the merely labeled Z, seeing it as 
truly existing and then believing in that not merely labeled, truly-­existing 
Z, those are the steps. I hope that makes it a little clearer. Thinking back 
to when you were a child, the first time you saw these three lines, helps to 
clarify this. 
Another thing is to look for the real Z. Where is the real Z? Is it on the 
top horizontal line? Or the diagonal line? Or is it the bottom horizontal 
line? Or even all three lines? There is no real Z there, even on all three lines. 
It is exactly the same as the valid base, the five aggregates of form, feeling, 
cognition, compounding aggregates and consciousness that we have. These 
are the basis to be labeled, the basis on which the mind merely imputes the 
I. Thus the I exists in mere name. 
That is the reality. None of the aggregates separately is the real I nor are 
all the aggregates as a whole. These five aggregates are the possession and the 
I is the possessor of those aggregates, so how can the possession also be the 
possessor? They are not separate but different. For example, if we own a car 
we are the possessor and the car is our possession. How can it be possible 
for the possessor, we ourselves, to also be the possession, our car? It is not 
possible for possessor and possession to be one. 
The aggregates are the possession and the I is the possessor, therefore they 
are not one. There are other logical arguments that prove the aggregates are 
not the real I; for example, because the real I is one, singular, then all the 
aggregates would have to be one, singular. That dangerous mistake can arise. 
And if the aggregates are the real I, then what is the purpose of calling 
this thing “I”? If there is already a real I why place the name “I” on the 
already existing I? If the label “I” is needed for the already existing real I, 
then that I would also need to be labeled in the same way. We would need 
yet another label and so it would go in an infinite regression, creating num-
berless I’s. That is pointless. 
So, with the Z, none of the lines separately nor all three lines as a whole 
are the real Z. Thinking they are, mistakes like that occur. 
Time to stop the tyranny of the real I
In our life, we have this ignorance, this wrong concept, believing in the real 
I and the real aggregates, which are in fact totally empty, which have never 
existed in the past, from beginningless rebirths. With this false concept we 
are always so worried and afraid. When can this real I that our ignorance 

=== PAGE 92 ===
76    sun of devotion
believes in, which has never existed, ever be happy? When can it be happy? 
All the time, day and night, we worry about the happiness of this real I. 
All through our life we worry about this—through kindergarten, pri-
mary school, high school, college, university, getting a degree and then a 
job. We try to earn a good salary, then we marry and have children. We feel 
that once we have accomplished all this, with a job, a partner and children, 
we’ll be so happy! Yesterday, when I asked a student what he really wanted 
in his life, he said he wanted to see grandchildren. I asked if he wanted to 
see his grandchildren enlightened. I put it that way.
Because of believing in this real I, when somebody cheats us, lies to us, 
steals from us or blames us, we get angry. We get angry for this real I. We 
sue that person, bringing a court case against him, spending thousands of 
pounds or dollars—hundreds of thousands, or millions, I don’t know—all 
for this real I to be happy, to harm and defeat its enemy. For the happiness 
of the real I we want to put that person into prison. 
Perhaps we have to kill that person to make the real I happy. But then 
his friends get angry at us and so we have more enemies and have to kill 
them too. Because of this real I that doesn’t exist we give much harm to 
others. This real I creates great confusion, so many problems in life. We see 
examples of this in newspapers and on TV all the time. But there is no real I 
there at all. It’s all a joke—in reality, it’s not there. We create all this negative 
karma for something that is not there at all, a total hallucination. 
This ties in with what I said earlier about the tyrant with power and influ-
ence who can start wars and cause the deaths of millions of people. He does 
this because he has been completely cheated by this wrong concept. In the 
same way, we ourselves are completely cheated too. 
It is very important to end this tyranny now. For beginningless rebirths we 
have been experiencing the sufferings of the hell beings, the hungry ghosts, 
the animals, the human beings, the gods, the demigods and the intermedi-
ate stage beings. As human beings we have the sufferings of rebirth, old age, 
sickness, death, meeting undesirable objects, not meeting desirable objects 
and losing desirable objects that we’ve found. Even if we manage to get what 
we want, we are still unable to find satisfaction. Never being able to find 
satisfaction is the greatest problem that affluent humans and gods face. No 
matter how many desirable objects we are able to acquire, we can never find 
satisfaction, but we try and try and try. 
This is not the first time we have been like this, with all these sufferings. 
This has been our experience for countless lifetimes and if we fail to do 

=== PAGE 93 ===
The Room Before It Is Named    77
something about it now, while we have the opportunity to realize empti-
ness, we will suffer in samsara endlessly. 
All phenomena are empty; they do not exist from their own side, espe-
cially the I, the body, aggregates and possessions—the objects of our attach-
ment and anger. 
To remind ourselves of the vital subjects of impermanence, emptiness 
and dependent arising, it is most worthwhile to reflect on this four-­line 
verse from the Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha:  
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,
An illusion, a drop of dew or a bubble,
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud—
See conditioned things as such!29 
I explained defective view before, how everything—I, action, object, every-
thing—appears to be truly existent. The way that things appear, as truly 
existent, rab-­rib, relates to that. Causes and conditions exist and therefore 
I, action, object and all other phenomena exist. 
This is totally the opposite of what most people in the world believe. 
What most people in the world believe is not according to reality, that 
is why they suffer so much, why they have so much emotional suffering, 
depression and so forth. 
If we can meditate on this every day, even though we might be far from 
attaining realizations, having a degree of familiarity will help very much; 
it will bring a lot of peace and happiness into our life, our mind. Then we 
will be able to practice Dharma more and more, and gain more and more 
freedom for ourselves. We will be able to attain the blissful state of peace, 
liberation from samsara, and enlightenment. Practicing Dharma every day 
means giving ourselves happiness every day. Especially by practicing lo-­jong, 
thought transformation, any problem that we experience can bring us the 
best happiness. 
29  From Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha. Some translations say “defective view,” some “mirage” 
for rab-­rib. Taken from Essential Buddhist Prayers, Volume 1, p. 76.

=== PAGE 94 ===
Roger Kunsang

=== PAGE 95 ===
6. The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object
.,
The sun of devotion, the stream of blessings
I
f the purpose of our life is to achieve sang-­gyä—the total elimina-
tion of all obscurations and the completion of all realizations—we need 
to find a guru and then correctly devote to and follow that virtuous friend. 
There is a distinction between devoting and following and we need to do 
both. Devoting is just to do with the mind but correctly following the virtu-
ous friend is to do with thoughts and actions. We need to not only develop 
the mind of devotion toward the virtuous friend but also to correctly follow 
the advice of the virtuous friend, which is the root of the path to enlighten-
ment. Much depends on our goal. Khedrub Sangye Yeshe said, 
Without a helmsman, a boat cannot take you across the ocean. 
Like that, without a guru, you cannot be liberated from samsara, 
even if you have complete knowledge of Dharma.30 
Without a guru, we cannot be free from samsara even if we complete all the 
qualities and have all the education. That is very important to know. Even 
if we know by heart and can explain the entire Kangyur and Tengyur, if we 
do not have a guru we cannot be free from samsara. 
Padmasambhava, who is like the second Buddha, also explained,
If you don’t recognize the guru as a buddha,
Your mind cannot be liberated by the blessings.
30  Khedrub Sangye Yeshe (1525–91) was Gyalwa Ensapa’s closest disciple. Quoted in Heart 
of the Path, p. 7.

=== PAGE 96 ===
80    sun of devotion
Therefore, reflect on the qualities of the guru
And then make requests to him.31  
I’m not advertising myself as a buddha to you! You must know that. This 
quotation is what Padmasambhava has said; this is his instruction. So here, 
Padmasambhava is also teaching me as well as you. 
Unless we realize that the guru is buddha, the guru’s blessings cannot lib-
erate our mind, which refers to freeing ourselves from the bondage of delu-
sion and superstition. That relates to the ignorance holding the I, aggregates 
and phenomena as truly existent, and to the self-­cherishing thought and 
attachment to samsara as well. We cannot be liberated from those as well as 
from impure appearance and impure thought, the dualistic mind and the 
dualistic view, the ordinary mind-­wind and the subtle mind-­wind. When 
Padmasambhava talks of liberating the mind this is what he is referring to.
Our practice should be to think of our guru not from the side of his 
apparent mistakes but from the side of his qualities. We should think of 
the guru as having a buddha’s qualities and pray to him like that. This is the 
instruction of Padmasambhava. 
Without a guru, there is no object of meditation to realize the buddha. 
Without that, we cannot receive the blessings of the guru. If we do not 
receive the blessings of the guru, our mind cannot actualize the path to 
enlightenment. Then we cannot liberate our mind from those delusions, 
from the disturbing-­thought obscurations and the subtle obscurations, the 
obscurations to knowledge. For that reason, we have to think of the guru as 
having a buddha’s qualities and pray to him on that basis. 
The fourth Panchen Lama, Panchen Lobsang Chökyi Gyaltsen, who 
composed the Guru Puja, texts on mahamudra and many other collections 
of teachings on sutra and tantra, also explained,
If you cherish yourself, don’t follow just anyone you happen to 
meet, like a dog seeking food in the street. Examine well the lama 
who reveals the holy Dharma, then follow him with respect.32 
We should not be like an old dog who runs toward anybody offering food 
without checking, gobbling it down as quickly as possible. We need to care-
31  Quoted in Heart of the Path, p. 8.
32  Quoted in Heart of the Path, p. 26.

=== PAGE 97 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    81
fully examine the guru who is revealing the Dharma and then follow his 
advice and practice well. 
There was also a great Kagyü lama called Kyobpa Jigten Gonpo.33 From 
his holy mouth came these words,
If on the guru, snow mountain of the four kayas,
The sun of devotion fails to shine,
The stream of blessings will not arise. 
Attend, therefore, to this mind of devotion.34
This means that we cannot receive realizations without the guru’s blessings. 
Therefore, we must pay very careful attention to developing the minds of 
respect and devotion to the guru. 
For example, while we are doing something that pleases the guru, a 
retreat or something, we have a dream. Maybe we have not even informed 
our guru, but we have a dream in which he is very happy and gives us a pres-
ent. He is so pleased, so joyful; he has such a happy face. This happens. 
I think one thing is that all the buddhas are happy with us because of 
our karma with that guru, so all the buddhas communicate with us through 
the guru. Receiving a present or something like that is an indication of this. 
Because we have a connection with that guru, they use the aspect of the guru 
to communicate with us, to give us a blessing. This is definitely there. Con-
versely, if the guru is displeased, that means all the buddhas are displeased. 
Pleasing the buddhas through correctly devoting to and following the 
advice of the guru is not easy to understand but we have to think about it 
because it is an incredibly important consideration for our life. And not 
just this life but all our lives until enlightenment. Whether we can achieve 
enlightenment or not, that’s the highest success. It means completing puri-
fication of all obscurations and attaining all realizations. There’s no higher 
success. Only then can we do perfect work for sentient beings without the 
slightest mistake and free them from the oceans of samsaric suffering and 
bring them to enlightenment, the state of the omniscient mind. 
33  Drigung Kyobpa Jigten Rinpoche (1143–1217), better known as Jigten Sumgön, was the 
founder of the Drikung Kagyü lineage.
34  From Song of the Fivefold Profound Path of Mahamudra, quoted in Khenchen Konchog 
Gyaltshen, Opening the Treasure of the Profound: Teachings on the Songs of Jigten Sumgön 
and Milarepa, p. 79.

=== PAGE 98 ===
82    sun of devotion
What higher success can there be? And that depends on this alone, devel-
oping and maintaining a proper relationship with our guru. So it’s not easy. 
We have to be incredibly careful. We have to think and understand well. It’s 
not just playing a game. It’s not like having a boyfriend or a girlfriend where 
we decide to stay with that person if we like them or leave them if we don’t. I 
want to make that clear. This is a very deep thing, a really important matter.
To disrespect the guru is to disrespect all the buddhas
As I mentioned, after we have done something that pleases the guru, even 
if we have not informed him, we can have dreams that indicate the guru is 
extremely pleased, dreams in which he is very joyful or gives us presents. In 
the same way, if we do something negative, even if we do not tell the guru, 
he can show a negative aspect in dreams, such as appearing very skinny or 
sick. There is a message for us. 
This is mentioned in Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo’s commentary on The 
Essence of Nectar,35 which is an extremely inspiring text by Yeshe Tsöndrü. It 
has a very good lam-­rim outline and I often recommend it as a daily medi-
tation guidebook. There is also a commentary by my guru, Geshe Rabten, 
a great scholar and meditator, which has been published in English as the 
Essential Nectar. 
Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s younger tutor, 
is the root guru of Geshe Rabten Rinpoche and Lama Yeshe, who took care 
of me for more than thirty years. Both my gurus have the same level of tan-
tric realizations: the gross and subtle generation stages and five stages of the 
completion stage; the isolation of body, the isolation of speech, the isola-
tion of mind, the path of unification of clear light and the illusory body, 
and the path of no more learning. Both of them have clear light realization. 
Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche mentioned this. 
Recently I was lucky enough to receive an oral transmission of the whole 
collection of Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche’s teachings from Kyabje Khyongla 
Rato Rinpoche, a Drepung Loseling lama who lives in New York and is 
advanced in both qualities and age. Then, in Sera Monastery after the recent 
teachings by His Holiness, I also received the complete transmission of 
Pabongka Rinpoche’s collected works from Kyabje Chöden Rinpoche. 
35  For the text of the guru devotion section, see Heart of the Path, appendix 5, pp. 407–
14. Pabongka Rinpoche’s commentary on The Essence of Nectar has not been published in 
English. 

=== PAGE 99 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    83
A monk came to help me with the long-­life prayer afterwards. I hadn’t 
met him before but he looked like somebody who was a very sincere practi-
tioner. He was a reincarnation of Yeshe Tsöndrü, the author of The Essence 
of Nectar. When he explained his story I felt his coming to see me was very 
auspicious.
Anyway, in his commentary, Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo mentioned, 
What are the gurus? They are the embodiment of all the Victo-
rious Ones, those who have gained victory over the four maras. 
What are called the holy actions of the Victorious Ones and [the 
holy actions] of the gurus are just names; they are the same thing. 
And so, disrespecting the guru is disrespecting all the buddhas. 
There is no heavier negative karma than this. By thinking of the 
guru as your savior you become the disciple. Then if you belittle 
the guru you will always experience suffering.
That is the instruction. What are the gurus? We have to think of this quo-
tation as an instruction to us. The buddhas are called the Victorious Ones, 
those who have gained victory over the four maras: the maras of the delu-
sions, the contaminated aggregates, the Lord of Death and the deva’s son. 
This is victory over the gross and subtle maras, the disturbing-­thought 
obscurations and the obscurations to knowledge. 
We are not victorious over the maras but defeated by them. We are under 
the control of the maras. But the buddhas are victorious over the four 
maras because they are able to transform the self-­cherishing thought into 
the thought cherishing others. The Buddha was the same as us, having all 
the problems and negative emotions and the same self-­cherishing thought, 
bound by all the worldly dharmas. But that is what he changed. He was able 
to transform his mind and develop bodhicitta, and from that he was able to 
become victorious over all wrong concepts. 
This enlightened quality manifests as our own guru, therefore, to disre-
spect our guru is to disrespect all the buddhas. There are numberless bud-
dhas, not just one—not just Shakyamuni Buddha or just Tara—there are 
numberless buddhas. Even in this fortunate eon, there are a thousand bud-
dhas who have achieved enlightenment or will do so.  
I took some short teachings from Panchen Rinpoche in Tashi Lhunpo 
in Tibet. Just as His Holiness the Dalai Lama is regarded as Chenrezig, 
Avalokiteshvara, the Compassion Buddha, Panchen Rinpoche is regarded 

=== PAGE 100 ===
84    sun of devotion
as Amitabha Buddha. At Tashi Lhunpo Monastery, outside in the court-
yard, there are paintings of the thousand buddhas. To generate the cause 
to achieve bodhicitta and attain enlightenment, people offer flowers and 
conch shells. There is a particular homage to each buddha, each a cause to 
generate bodhicitta and, I believe, enlightenment. I asked the Australian 
monk Max Redlich, who was once director of Tushita Meditation Centre, 
Dharamsala, to photograph all the thousand buddhas, which he did. There 
are also texts like the Sutra of the Fortunate Eon that talk about each of these 
buddhas. 
Being disrespectful to our own guru means we are being disrespect-
ful to all the numberless buddhas. There is no heavier negative ripening 
karma36 than that. The quotation says by thinking of the guru as our savior 
we become his disciple. 
Some people don’t like the fact I translate gön as “savior” because they 
think this is a Christian term and we should use “protector” instead. I don’t 
accept that at all. If we were to use “protector” as a translation of gön, then 
what about sung-­ma, which means “protector” in Tibetan? Just as sung-­ma 
is not “savior” but “protector” in Tibetan, gön is not “protector” but “sav-
ior.” This is just playing with words. “Savior” is the correct word. In Tibetan 
these two terms are different and we have to translate according to that. In 
English the words might have different connotations so we shouldn’t make 
everything solid, mixing everything up together, like making a soup. 
Here the quotation tells us that by thinking of our guru as a savior we 
become his disciple. Then, if we belittle that guru we will always experience 
suffering and obstacles. It says “always” but that is a shorthand way of saying 
for many lifetimes, for thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions of life-
times. This is because the object we belittle is the highest object. We have to 
know that. Otherwise we will wonder why this is so, thinking it makes no 
sense, that it is illogical, just a belief. 
The kindness of the parents
The Buddha gave teachings on the kindness of the parents, how our father 
and mother are unbelievably kind. This text was translated some years ago 
36  Ripening karma is the karma that propels us into the next life.

=== PAGE 101 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    85
into English and I recently received it from a monk at Nalanda, but I haven’t 
seen the Tibetan translation yet.37 
Of the unbelievable kindness of the father and mother, there are differ-
ent types of kindness listed in the texts. There is the kindness of giving us 
our body. In this life our mother bore many hardships, carrying us for nine 
months in her womb and undergoing much suffering in order to protect us 
and save us from anything that might harm us. 
This is not the first time; she has been doing this from beginningless 
rebirths. It would be impossible to repay that kindness, even if we were to 
sacrifice our bodies equaling the particles of dust of the earth. Even if we 
gave all our human bodies numberless times from numberless rebirths, it 
would not be enough to repay the kindness of our mother and father. 
The second kindness is the kindness of protecting our life every day from 
hundreds of life’s dangers. Our mother and our father have both protected 
us so much. And this is not the first time; they have been doing this from 
beginningless rebirths. Even if we don’t remember, this is what has hap-
pened. We cannot remember this because our mind is so ignorant, so 
defiled, like a dirty cup or cloth that is so dirty that the many nice designs 
covering it are invisible. To repay that kindness, even if we were to sacrifice 
our lives for them equaling the number of dust particles of this earth, that is 
not enough; we cannot finish repaying the kindness. 
Then there is the kindness of bearing hardships. Parents undergo so many 
hardships for their children. I just want to tell you about a couple from 
Hawaii who have now separated. This was at Vajrapani,38 on the first visit 
ever from Spain of Ösel Rinpoche, the reincarnation of my guru, Master 
Lama Yeshe, who was kinder than all the three times’ buddhas.
After Lama passed away the Vajrapani students built a stupa and the day 
it was finished and they were consecrating it the incarnation was able to be 
there. There was also Lati Rinpoche from Ganden Monastery, Dharamsala, 
a great lama, a great scholar, a great practitioner. Then there was Geshe Sopa 
Rinpoche, Lama Yeshe’s and my teacher, and the Ganden Shartse geshe, 
Geshe Gyeltsen, as well as other lamas and geshes who came there to bless 
37  The sutra that Rinpoche is probably referring to is the Filial Piety Sutra, a sutra revered 
by Chinese and S.E. Asian Buddhists, in which the Buddha lists ten ways a mother is kind, 
directly paralleling the Tibetan listing in the kindness of the mother bodhicitta teachings. 
See www.buddhanet.net/e-­learning/filial-­sutra.htm
38  Vajrapani Institute, the FPMT center in California where Lama Yeshe was cremated.

=== PAGE 102 ===
86    sun of devotion
the stupa. And Ösel Rinpoche, the incarnation, was able to come back to 
see the stupa.
I was staying in a room in a student’s house in the bush while the other 
lamas were down at the center. The student, a carpenter, had the second 
highest house up the mountain from the center. The highest house was 
Baba-­ji’s, a Danish student who once lived in Nepal a long time ago and 
cooked for Lama Yeshe. He painted thangkas in his house. 
This is not to tell the story of Ösel Rinpoche, but he was just at the same 
place. While I was receiving the oral transmission of the Lam-­rim De-­lam, 
The Path to Bliss Leading to Omniscience,39 from Geshe Sopa Rinpoche, 
Ösel’s mother, Maria, was there with Ösel Rinpoche. He was so small. I 
think he was very handsome, very cute. While we were receiving the lung, 
even though he was very small he suddenly got up and did seven prostra-
tions to Geshe Sopa. It was surprising. I didn’t tell him to, nobody told him 
to; he did it by himself. He was very small but this was the imprint from his 
past life because he is the incarnation of Master Lama Yeshe. It just shows 
about past life’s imprints. 
The main story is about this couple. They had lived in Dharamsala for a 
long time and the last time Lama Yeshe was there they offered some land 
they owned in Hawaii. They had just opened the Shantideva Center there, 
and because of this they invited me for lunch. The man wasn’t there but 
the woman was, with their child. It was amazing. The boy could not sit still 
for one minute, running everywhere, never still. If his mother had failed to 
watch him for one minute he would have been dead. I thought about the 
patience she needed with him, to tolerate him. It was incredible. He gave 
his mother no peace at all. 
I’m sorry; my mind is bad. I watch children at airports or wherever for five 
minutes, seeing how demanding they are, constantly demanding, demand-
ing all the time from their parents. They never give any peace, always crying, 
always demanding. 
Our mother, too, bore many hardships for us and this is not the first time. 
Even just as a human mother she has borne hardships from beginningless 
rebirths. This is without talking about the times she has been an animal 
mother, having to bear unbelievable hardships, such as a mother bird having 
39  Composed by the First Panchen Lama, Lobsang Chökyi Gyaltsen (1570-­1662). The out-
line of this text is included in Path to Bliss, by the Dalai Lama.

=== PAGE 103 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    87
to guard her eggs against predators coming to eat them. Can you imagine all 
the sacrifices that animal mothers have to make? 
It would be impossible to repay the kindness of this current human 
mother who had to bear so much hardship for us, even if we gave up our 
lives equaling the number of dust particles of this earth. We can never fin-
ish repaying that kindness. 
Then, fourth, there is the kindness of giving us an education, also called 
the “kindness of leading us in the path of the world.” Our parents educated 
us themselves and also sent us to school, right up to university, spending a 
great deal of money for all that education. 
Of course, in this life they have also given us access to the Dharma. We’re 
able to read, write and study Dharma books because of the education they 
gave us. Then we come to know why we have to get sick, why we have to 
get old, why we have to die, why we have to be reborn. And we can under-
stand that this is not the first time. For numberless times from beginning-
less rebirths we have had to go through that. And because of that education 
we know that if we cannot actualize the path in this life, especially the 
direct perception of emptiness, then we will have to again endlessly suffer. 
Through our education we come to know this. We learn the correct teach-
ings from qualified teachers, from the four noble truths onwards. 
We are unbelievably fortunate. We can see even this world, the south-
ern world system, just how few people know about this. They do not know 
about the mind, reincarnation, karma or things like that. Most people have 
no awareness of death. Because they don’t know what to do, they put off 
thinking about death. 
Even though at the moment we have not actualized the path to over-
come death by realizing emptiness and so forth, we can still experience an 
incredibly happy death. We can use death in the happiest way, making it 
most beneficial for sentient beings, to free sentient beings from the oceans 
of samsaric suffering and bring them to full enlightenment. So while we 
have to experience death, we can use it for that through the practice of lo-­
jong and bodhicitta.  
People only think of this life, nothing else, only this life, only this year, 
this month, this week, just that. We all have to die but probably because 
they are unable to accept death, because they do not know what to do, they 
refuse to think about it. To learn about death is the most important sub-
ject in life, so it is very strange how people just put it off, just ignore it. It 
doesn’t help. 

=== PAGE 104 ===
88    sun of devotion
On the other hand, we are so fortunate to have this education and that 
is due to our mother’s kindness. She gave us this education. And this is not 
the first time. She has shown us the kindness of giving us an education from 
beginningless rebirths, even just by being our human mother. If we were to 
sacrifice our lives equaling the number of the dust particles of this earth or 
the sand grains of the Pacific Ocean for just this life’s mother, we could still 
not finish repaying her kindness. 
These are the four kindnesses as explained by Kyabje Khunu Lama Rin-
poche, from whom His Holiness received extensive commentary on Shan-
tideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. 
Wasting our life, we waste our parents’ lives
This life’s parents are more powerful objects for us than other people. 
Ordained people are more powerful objects than our parents, though. By 
serving the Sangha we collect much merit and purify much negative karma, 
more than with this life’s parents, but still, our parents are very powerful 
objects for creating merit and negativity as well.
Many older Western students have received teachings and initiations 
from Kyabje Zong Rinpoche. Now his incarnation is an expert because he 
was an expert in his past life, like the former past great yogis such as Nagar-
juna and Asanga. The incarnation is young but he has already finished his 
geshe studies in Ganden Shartse Monastery. A long time ago, I was fortu-
nate to able to help with some of the expenses and make offering to the 
monasteries. I told him that I believed he would be able to offer service to 
the monastery, to take responsibility like an abbot for all the monks, for 
their education and their practice in the monastery. It is easy to go to the 
West to teach, but it is very important in the monastery to look after the dis-
cipline and to give the monks an education and take care of them. I said that 
I felt he would be able to do that. He told me jokingly he would take that 
as a prediction from me. He is very famous in Ganden Shartse Monastery. 
Kyabje Zong Rinpoche was a very high lama in his past life. He became 
the abbot of Ganden Shartse, where there were many thousand monks. 
Once, when his parents came from Kham to Lhasa and he was able to stay 
with them, he wanted to serve them, to clean the house and get rid of the 
garbage, to make food and so forth. In his heart he really wanted to do 
everything a servant would do as a way of repaying their great kindness. He 
told me he was able to do some of those things—not everything, just clean-

=== PAGE 105 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    89
ing the room and the like—but because of his position as a high lama some-
how it was not appropriate. In his heart he really wanted to serve his parents 
because through having learned the Dharma he understood the kindness of 
the parents. 
Understanding the kindness of our parents, we should practice Dharma 
and use our body, speech and mind to not create negative karma. If we harm 
other sentient beings and ourselves it completely wastes our parents’ lives. 
For many, many years they served us, took care of us and gave us an educa-
tion, and if we then waste all that, we have wasted their lives, made them 
empty. There has been no positive result from what they have done. 
We must serve others. Even if we don’t practice Dharma, we must 
develop a good heart and live a good life. We must become good human 
beings and serve others with a sincere heart, with compassion. His Holiness 
emphasizes nowadays that even if we lead a secular life rather than practic-
ing Dharma we must still live an ethical life; we must bring happiness to 
others and ourselves. 
We need to explain this to people who don’t know or practice Dharma, 
to show them how to live their life. If we want to bring peace and happiness 
to others, to not harm them but to benefit them, we need to lead an ethical 
life. And if we do that it will have made our parents’ lives meaningful. They 
suffered so much for us, therefore we must make it all worthwhile, other-
wise we have not given them any meaning in return for all the work they 
did. That would be very sad. It’s very important to think about these things. 
The guru is the most powerful object
As I mentioned, our parents are very powerful objects but the ordained 
Sangha are even more powerful because of the number of vows they live in. 
By being of service or making offerings to them we collect much more merit 
and purify many more defilements than we do with our parents. 
After this come arya beings, arhats, who have freed themselves from the 
oceans of samsaric suffering and attained the blissful state of peace for them-
selves. By making material offerings or offering service to them we collect 
unbelievable merit and purify vast amounts of negative karma and obscu-
rations, much more than we would in connection with ordinary ordained 
people. 
Next, when we compare the numberless arhats with one bodhisattva, if 

=== PAGE 106 ===
90    sun of devotion
we offer service or make offerings to one bodhisattva, we collect much more 
powerful merit—unbelievable, unbelievable merit—and purify much more 
negative karma collected from beginningless rebirths. So many eons of neg-
ative karma and obscurations are purified. It is unbelievably more powerful 
offering service or making offerings to one bodhisattva than to numberless 
arhats. 
Now we compare numberless bodhisattvas with just one buddha. By 
serving or making offerings to one buddha, we purify the most unbeliev-
able negative karma and obscurations collected from beginningless rebirths 
and collect the most unbelievable merit—more than having served or made 
offerings to numberless bodhisattvas. That becomes very small compared to 
serving or making offerings to one buddha even just once. 
Finally, we compare the numberless buddhas with one guru. By offering 
to the numberless buddhas, even just some candy or a glass of water, we col-
lect the most extensive merit and achieve the most powerful purification 
of negative karma and obscurations collected from beginningless rebirths. 
So many eons of negative karma and obscurations are purified and so much 
merit is created by serving or making offerings to numberless buddhas, but 
even though that is unbelievable, it is tiny compared to serving and making 
offerings to the guru. 
Being able to follow the guru’s advice or fulfill one of his wishes just 
once creates the most powerful merit and is the most powerful purifica-
tion. Doing the same for the numberless buddhas, although great in itself, 
becomes very small in comparison. 
Having a relationship with a holy being where we are the disciple and he 
or she is the guru is a dependent arising. The second after that connection is 
made, the guru becomes the most powerful person in our life and one from 
whom we can collect the causes of happiness and purify the causes of suffer-
ing, negative karma and defilements. 
Buddhism came from the Buddha, from India, and then from the great 
pandits, Nagarjuna, Asanga and all the Nalanda pandits and so forth. Then 
it went to Tibet, where the four traditions—Nyingma, Kagyü, Sakya and 
Gelug—developed, depending on the place and the lineage lamas. The 
essence is the same but there are different presentations according to the 
minds of the disciples. That is the evolution. 
In the Sakya tradition there are five great masters, including Sachen 
Kunga Nyingpo and Sakya Pandita. I have mentioned that if you please one 
guru you please all the buddhas. With respect to that, Sakya Pandita said, 

=== PAGE 107 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    91
Even though sunbeams are very hot,
Without a magnifying glass, they cannot ignite a fire.
It is the same with the blessings of the buddhas:
Without the guru, they cannot enter the disciple.40 
Just as we need a magnifying glass to ignite wood using the sun’s rays, in 
order to receive the blessings of the buddhas we need a guru. Even though 
all the buddhas have incredible qualities such as unbelievable compassion, 
without a guru we cannot receive their blessings. 
Sakya Pandita also said,
All the merit you accumulate by practicing the perfection of char-
ity for a thousand eons—giving not only your head and limbs to 
other sentient beings but even the merit you receive by offering 
your body in this way—is accumulated in an instant with the 
path of the guru. Therefore, offer service and feel happy.41 
We can practice the perfection of charity or any of the six perfections for 
thousands of eons but fulfilling the guru’s wishes for even a second equals 
this. The merit we gain from practicing the charity of giving our hands, our 
limbs, our head and so forth for thousands of eons and even giving away the 
merit we gain from that is much less than what we could accumulate in an 
instant by following the guru’s advice and fulfilling his wishes. 
For example, if we are in retreat following our guru’s advice to recite 
om mani padme hum, then each second we recite it we collect the same 
amount of merit that we would in a thousand eons of practice in connec-
tion with sentient beings. This is because we are following the advice of the 
guru and fulfilling his wishes. Whether we are ordained or lay, when we 
keep the vows given to us by our guru, every day, every hour, every min-
ute, every second we purify unbelievable amounts of negativity and collect 
unbelievable merit.
Say we follow the guru’s advice to do the preliminary practices every day. 
In the morning, when we clean the meditation room—not even the guru’s 
room but just our own—even if the room is spotless, each sweep of the 
broom we make to purify our own and other sentient beings’ negativities, is 
40  Quoted in Heart of the Path, p. 239.
41  Quoted in Heart of the Path, p. 95.

=== PAGE 108 ===
92    sun of devotion
incredible purification and creates extensive merit because we are following 
the guru’s advice. 
Our Dharma study is similar to this. When we are memorizing or recit-
ing texts, because each word we memorize is following the guru’s wishes, 
we collect the most unbelievable merit every day, every hour, every minute, 
every second. As Sakya Pandita mentioned, what takes a thousand eons to 
collect in connection with sentient beings, we collect here in connection 
with the guru in one second. We have to recognize that all this is due to fol-
lowing the guru’s wishes and advice. 
While going somewhere or returning, if we are following the guru’s 
wishes, his advice, with each step we collect the most powerful merit and 
purify an unbelievable amount of defilements and obscurations. It’s the 
same thing if we are the guru’s secretary, serving him. With each letter we 
write, we collect the most unbelievable merit and do the most powerful 
purification, each minute, each second. 
Our life is so continuously fortunate. If we think about what Sakya Pan-
dita mentioned I think we can see that. When we recognize what we do 
as guru yoga practice, our life is only filled with incredible joy all the time. 
There is no time for depression. 
Examples of offering service to the guru
I’ll give a few examples of disciples offering service to their guru. 
Before he met Marpa, Milarepa followed his mother’s wishes and learned 
black magic from a lama in the area who practiced it. When he had learnt 
it and gone to the mountains, after digging a hole and doing a seven-­day 
retreat, he returned home to kill his uncle and aunt and their family in 
revenge for the mistreatment of his mother after his father’s death. While 
his aunt and uncle’s family was celebrating a wedding in their house—
dancing, drinking and enjoying themselves upstairs—he made the whole 
house collapse. Stones and rocks fell down on top of them, killing thirty-­six 
people and the many animals that were downstairs. Milarepa himself was 
not injured and later regretted what he had done, so the black magic lama 
advised him to go to see Marpa if he wanted to practice the Dharma. 
Marpa was an enlightened being but he refused to give teachings to Mila-
repa, only scolding and beating him. He did this for years. Even if Milarepa 
came with the other students for teachings, as soon as Marpa would see him 
he would publicly scold him and kick him out of the teachings. 
Marpa asked him to build a nine-­story tower by himself, refusing to let 

=== PAGE 109 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    93
other workers help him. When Milarepa had finished, Marpa made him put 
the stones back where he got them and then build the tower again. I haven’t 
seen the tower yet. I wanted to go to Lhokha to see it when I was in Tibet 
but it didn’t happen.  
Marpa made Milarepa build the tower and tear it down three times. The 
skin on Milarepa’s back became thick and bluish in color from carrying so 
much stone. Then Marpa’s wisdom mother—not his real mother—insisted 
that he give Milarepa teachings, so, because Marpa was the enlightened 
being Heruka, he immediately manifested a mandala and gave Milarepa all 
the teachings he needed. He then advised Milarepa to go to the mountains 
where he could do retreat in different holy places like Lapchi or Sipri. There 
are the three holy places of Heruka, representing Heruka’s holy body, holy 
speech and holy mind—Mount Kailash, Tsari and Lapchi—and Sipri com-
bines all three. 
Living on no other food than nettles in those mountains, Milarepa fol-
lowed Marpa’s advice exactly and was able to complete the path. He ceased 
not only the disturbing-­thought obscurations but also the obscurations to 
knowledge, the subtle obscurations, and so completed all the realizations 
and achieved buddhahood in that very brief lifetime of these degenerate 
times. Even though he had created so much negative karma in his early life, 
in later life he became enlightened. 
Marpa had wanted to make Milarepa bear even more hardships before 
he gave him teachings so that he would become enlightened even more 
quickly, but his wisdom mother intervened so he gave the teachings earlier 
than he wanted to. But still, he made Milarepa build the tower three times. 
That was extremely harsh. 
In the West, if the guru were to speak harshly or use ugly words or do 
something like strike the disciple, the very next day the disciple would 
put him into prison. Here, it wasn’t like that. Milarepa was able to achieve 
enlightenment in a brief lifetime of degenerate times because of the incred-
ible, unbelievable purification from Marpa, particularly accepting every 
scolding and having to build the tower three times. 
There is another story that illustrates the guru-­disciple relationship. 
Losang Dhargye Gyatso was a direct disciple of the Sixth Panchen Lama, 
Losang Palden Yeshe, and Arik Geshe Jampa Özer.42 He was very learned 
and gave a commentary to Lama Tsongkhapa’s important teaching, 
42  See treasuryoflives.org, Shingza Pandita Lobzang Dargye Gyatso (1752–1824).

=== PAGE 110 ===
94    sun of devotion
Drang-­nge-­legshe-­nyingpo, The Heart of the Good Explanation of the Inter-
pretive and Definitive Meaning.43 During the commentary he mentioned 
this story about how the geshe Chenpo Sumra Mitupa had pleased the Sev-
enth Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso. I think Chenpo Sumra Mitupa is a nick-
name meaning “one who doesn’t have a shortsighted mind.” The Seventh 
Dalai Lama was so pleased with this geshe for not having a shortsighted 
mind. 
In the presence of the Victorious Omniscient One, the Seventh Dalai 
Lama, this geshe asked him to predict his next rebirth. The Seventh Dalai 
Lama told him that immediately he died he would be reborn as an ox with 
blue horns. When Geshe Chenpo Sumra Mitupa heard this he laughed 
and laughed and laughed. The Seventh Dalai Lama asked him why he had 
laughed like that and he replied, “O lekso.” That’s a debating term used 
when the debater is asking for reasons, meaning “it’s not easy to believe.” 
He then went on, “Our path is a path of the reasoning. Even if I were to be 
reborn as an ox in the next life, first I would have to go through the inter-
mediate stage; then the father and mother ox would have to meet and I 
would enter into the womb. Then gradually my body would develop and 
hairs would come out. Then, after all that, I would get horns. You told me I 
would be reborn as an ox with blue horns ‘immediately I died’ without any 
time to do all this—the bardo, the male and female ox meeting, and then 
developing in the womb. So I was laughing at the absurdity of it. Without 
time to go through all these processes, to just immediately be born as an ox 
with blue horns—I was laughing at this.”
When he heard this, the Victorious Omniscient One, the Seventh Dalai 
Lama, also laughed and laughed. He then said, “Now in your next life you 
will be born as a bhikshu and you will be in my entourage.” 
Then Geshe Chenpo Sumra Mitupa replied, “Maybe I’m thick-­skulled, 
but this seems unknown and doesn’t fit into our path of reasoning. You said 
before that I will be born as an ox but now you say I will be born a bhikshu. 
And yet I haven’t done any confession, any practice, I haven’t collected any 
merit. There have been no changes, so how can I transform from an ox to a 
bhikshu?” That is what he said. 
His Holiness the Seventh Dalai Lama answered, “For us, for you and 
me, I have become a special object. I have the blessing of Arya Chenrezig.” 
43  See Robert Thurman’s The Central Philosophy of Tibet for a translation of this text.

=== PAGE 111 ===
The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object    95
What that actually means is that he is Chenrezig, but he is expressing it in 
a humble way. 
The main point is this. By laughing so much when he was told he would 
immediately become an ox and laughing again when he was then told he 
would become a bhikshu, questioning His Holiness’s prediction by using 
his logic, he made His Holiness very happy. So right there, within that 
moment, his rebirth changed from animal to human being. He had no need 
to do many hundreds of thousands of prostrations or mandala offerings or 
to make many statues or do all the many other practices that are normally 
needed. No, just there it happened.
Do you understand the point I’m trying to make? Just within that 
moment, his future rebirth changed because he was able to make the guru 
happy. The moment we are able to please the guru our rebirth changes, even 
if we were going to be reborn in the lower realms before. We have to bring 
stories like that into our life, into our practice. That is my conclusion. 

=== PAGE 112 ===
Roger Kunsang

=== PAGE 113 ===
7. A Talk about Dolgyal
.,
R
ecently I wrote a foreword to His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s book 
	 about Dolgyal, or Shugden,44 for the Mongolian translation of 
the book made by the monks from the monastery in Ulaanbaatar, Idgaa 
Choizinling. 
Idgaa Choizinling, which is part of Sera Je, was in Mongolia before Rus-
sia took over. It was built by an old monk who studied at Sera Je, debating 
and studying philosophical texts composed by Jetsun Chökyi Gyaltsen.
I went there the first time I was in Mongolia but the door was closed 
and I didn’t see anybody. The second time I went to Mongolia, the monks 
from the monastery came to the center to call on me but they stayed out-
side and we never managed to meet even though they waited for five days. 
Then on my last day there I went to the monastery and was able to meet 
them. There were twenty young boys of between maybe four and seven, all 
with their heads shaved, dressed in chubas and holding malas. They were 
sitting in a long room looking very inspired, very enthusiastic to be monks. 
I did the five precepts with them and gave the lungs of the Guru Puja, the 
Lama Tsongkhapa Guru Yoga (Tib: Ganden Lha Gyäma) and some other 
practices. 
It was crowded because their parents and many other people were there 
as well. There were only two older monks, maybe eighty or ninety years old, 
left from before the Russians invaded Mongolia. They were fully ordained 
monks before but maybe because of the situation they had taken to wearing 
44  Shugden and Dolgyal are names for the same worldly protector. Rinpoche uses both but 
in this series of teachings seems to prefer Dolgyal. See the foreword Rinpoche refers to in the 
Dorje Shugden section of LamaYeshe.com.

=== PAGE 114 ===
98    sun of devotion
Mongolian robes, a sort of yellow chuba. It was like a robe for the monks. 
Maybe they had only taken the five precepts, I’m not sure. One of the old 
monks was holding the stick wrapped in a lot of Mongolian khatags that 
the disciplinarian holds in a puja, so he might have been the disciplinarian 
before the Russians came.
After the teaching he offered me a Mongolian carpet and asked me to 
rebuild the monastery. I accepted and it has worked very well. It seems they 
have quite good karma because a benefactor in Taiwan, whose father died, 
offered the money to rebuild it and it was finished a long time ago. Now it is 
probably an even better place. Usually monasteries in Tibet are not so com-
fortable and look kind of dark, with tiny windows, but this one has many 
windows. It’s spacious enough to seat thousands of people and is a good 
place to give teachings. The name, Idgaa Choizinling, means “Joyful Pure 
Land” or, in Sanskrit, “Tushita.” There are between thirty and sixty small 
monks who can study there, whereas before to study philosophy they had 
to go to Sera Je, very far away in India. 
The monks there could have translated either of two books by His Holi-
ness the Dalai Lama but they decided to translate the one about Dolg-
yal because although many people in Mongolia have heard His Holiness’s 
advice not to follow Dolgyal, it depends on whom they meet. If they meet 
somebody who follows His Holiness and doesn’t practice Dolgyal, they 
deny practicing Dolgyal. For instance, if they meet me, they tell me they 
don’t practice. 
Some people know about the situation in Dharamsala and what His 
Holiness says but still think this is His Holiness’s advice alone and so they 
continue to practice. They mainly follow the attachment or anger of their 
group, their party or their guru, becoming angry at His Holiness without 
really checking well whether it is correct or incorrect, even though when 
Tibet was free many other important lamas had already advised the monas-
teries not to practice Dolgyal. 
When His Holiness himself was in a young aspect he was in Domo, 
southern Tibet, where I became a monk. It was becoming very difficult in 
Tibet because of China, so there was the question of whether to go to India 
or remain in Tibet. At that time, my teacher’s teacher was the oracle, and 
he was the one who gave the answer. The governors invoked Dolgyal and 
asked him whether His Holiness should remain in Tibet or go to India 
because of the situation. The answer was to stay in Tibet. I heard it helped 
Tibet for one year. 

=== PAGE 115 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    99
After His Holiness himself repeatedly checked, using more and more 
logic, he found out that practicing Dolgyal was wrong and gave up the prac-
tice. That was what he also advised other people to do. At the beginning His 
Holiness was very quiet and didn’t tell people directly, but then later on he 
found more reasons and so he advised that if people were concerned with 
practicing the correct Dharma they should not follow Dolgyal. 
These people who criticize His Holiness are unaware that when Tibet 
was free there were many other lamas who advised against practicing Dol-
gyal. In particular this was the advice of six or seven great lamas who were 
like one sun rising in this world, in this southern continent. These lamas 
did great benefit for sentient beings, for the teachings of the Buddha. They 
wrote many teachings on sutra and tantra. They advised what could and 
couldn’t be taught and practiced in the monasteries, and they advised par-
ticularly not to practice this one, Dolgyal, Shugden. 
They are compared to the sun because when the sun rises it dispels the 
darkness in the world, allowing crops to grow and people to enjoy them-
selves. Especially in England! Especially in London! I heard yesterday that 
when the sun comes out everybody goes to the park. One of the students 
advertised London weather to me like that.
My life in Phagri and Buxa Duar
I’ve known about the English weather from the time I lived in Buxa Duar, 
where I went after I escaped from Tibet. 
I went to Tibet from Solu Khumbu in 1956 when I was very small, with 
my two uncles, who were fully ordained monks and one of whom was also 
my alphabet teacher, my guru. I went there because one of my other uncles, 
who became a soldier in the Indian army, had married a lady from the upper 
part of Tibet who lived in Phagri and had invited us to come. 
On our walk from Solu Khumbu there was very little snow, just on some 
of the mountains. We walked all the time except for one day when two 
Tibetans on horseback gave me a ride on their donkey for two hours until 
we reached their house in Sangba in upper Tibet, where we had thugpa. 
My uncles came later with the luggage they were carrying and we spent the 
night there. 
Generally, however, we walked all the way, every day, all day, along a car 
road, stopping to light a fire on the road to cook food. My teacher made 
tsampa for me by mixing it with black tea in a leather bag. When it was 

=== PAGE 116 ===
100    sun of devotion
well mixed we ate it. This is a very simple way of traveling. Sometimes we 
begged. I was a very small child so, I don’t know, maybe I was cute. Families 
seemed to like us and we were able to beg food on the way. They gave us mil-
let tsampa and chang made from grain and so forth. 
Eventually we reached Shigatse and stayed at Tashi Lhunpo Monastery, 
the monastery of the Panchen Lamas, for about ten days. There was a Sherpa 
khangtsen there and we stayed in the house of a monk from Thangme. As 
you know, Sherpas are expert mountain climbers and assist in many Hima-
layan expeditions. One of the previous Panchen Lamas had a very learned 
Sherpa teacher called Ang something (many Sherpas have Ang as part of 
their name), that’s why there was a Sherpa khangtsen. 
Khangtsens are places where monks stay depending on where they come 
from. A monk will belong to one particular khangtsen and stay in that house 
and be looked after by the teacher there. If the teacher doesn’t teach you 
Dharma he will guide you to somebody who can and you will learn from 
that person. 
So the monk from Thangme insisted very much to my teacher that he 
wanted me to be his disciple but I really didn’t want to be. I don’t think he 
was a monk who had learned the Dharma. He was more into business or 
something. His shem-­thab was very black and greasy from the butter used 
in Tibetan tea. And because it was so cold in Tibet, his shem-­thab was stiff 
and made a swishing noise when he walked. He also had a long Tibetan key 
hanging from his belt. That was the dob-­dob style.
Finally, the day before my teachers were going to walk the seven days 
from Tashi Lhunpo to Phagri, they advised me I was to stay behind to 
become this monk’s disciple. I really didn’t want to become the student of 
somebody who hadn’t studied Dharma.
I didn’t get any sleep that night, wondering how I could become free 
from him. But the next morning as we were having tea and my teachers 
were preparing to leave they said I could come with them. I was very happy. 
One way to understand what happened here is that it’s karma, how what’s 
happening in this life is the result of our past actions. 
It took seven days to walk from Tashi Lhunpo Monastery to Phagri and 
every day my uncles had to carry huge loads. I don’t remember having to 
carry anything myself. 
After we arrived at the uncle’s house in Phagri, my uncles decided to go 
to Lhasa on pilgrimage to see Ganden, Drepung and Sera monasteries and 
the most famous Shakyamuni Buddha statue in Tibet, which was made dur-

=== PAGE 117 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    101
ing the Buddha’s time and blessed by the Buddha, the “Jowo.” But the elder 
of my teachers said I might have some difficulties if I went with them, like 
catching a cold or dying, so they didn’t take me. Later I saw the statue and 
the monasteries, but not at that time.
I think that their decision to not take me was actually very skillful. While 
they were in Lhasa, I was just hanging around, wearing a chuba that had lots 
of lice and lice eggs in its seams. But while I was hanging around I had the 
chance to go to the many branch monasteries of Ganden, Tashi Lhunpo, 
Gyüto and Gyüme Tantric Colleges and so forth. And, of course, the mon-
astery of the great yogi Domo Geshe Rinpoche, where I later became a 
monk.
One morning while my uncles were in Lhasa, I was outside with my 
uncle’s wife and their son, a little monk belonging to a monastery that was 
part of the Tashi Lhunpo. A tall monk called Losang Gyatso came up to me 
and asked, “Do you want to be my disciple?” So I said, “Yes.” I think this 
was past life’s karma ripening. Then he went inside and told my aunt, “He 
wants to be my disciple.” 
She was a very good cook, and the next day she made a thermos of tea, 
filled a Bhutanese container made of woven bamboo with round breads 
(she made very good Tibetan bread, served with a lot of butter) and took 
me to Domo Geshe Rinpoche’s monastery, where he lived, about fifteen 
minutes’ walk from our place. (I should keep this story brief. This doesn’t 
need to become an initiation into my story!)
Early the next morning I washed and then we had to go to somebody’s 
house for puja. We used to go to different people’s houses to do puja every 
day; this was kind of a fixed time to do puja. But sometimes we did extra 
pujas that went all night, like Praises to the Twenty-­one Taras or the Four 
Mandala Offerings to Tara, and on those nights we got no sleep. But mostly 
we did protector practices, the major one being Dolgyal, Shugden, because 
in that area that had been the main practice of Kyabje Domo Geshe Rin-
poche in the past. So this practice was well known in Domo and Phagri. 
They did others as well, such as Mahakala, but this was also very strong and 
often done for the families. 
On that first day there was a puja at the house of the benefactor of 
Domo Geshe Rinpoche’s labrang. I was given some pages of the Yamantaka 
sadhana to memorize and told to stay outside where the family dogs were 
sleeping. I memorized the text and they brought food and tea out to me 
while the other monks were doing puja inside the prayer hall. That was the 

=== PAGE 118 ===
102    sun of devotion
first day. I memorized the text for examination by Losang Gyatso, the tall 
monk who became my teacher. 
Then, on the second day, I went to puja together with them because in 
Solu Khumbu, even though I was very small, I used to attend pujas with 
many people, like the pujas they did when people died, which extended for 
many days. However, in the morning, before going out to puja I had to do 
my memorization.
So, like that, I spent three years in Phagri.
Buxa Duar
Nine months after the Chinese took Tibet I escaped to India through Bhu-
tan. Phagri is near Bhutan and at that time crossing the border was much 
easier than it became later on. We made our way to Jalpaiguri in West Bengal 
and from there to a camp called Buxa Duar, where Prime Minister Nehru 
and Gandhi had been imprisoned during the British time. That’s where the 
Sera Je and Sera Me monks’ puja hall and residences had been reestablished. 
The monks had beds all the way along the walls of a very long, narrow 
building. There was a very small courtyard outside surrounded by barbed 
wire, thorns and a ditch where there were more monks’ beds. The house of 
my teacher Geshe Rabten was also there. The place was very crowded. That’s 
how we lived in Buxa. I was based there for eight years while moving to dif-
ferent places from time to time. 
An Englishwoman called Freda Bedi, who was married to an Indian man 
she met at Oxford University, found me an English pen friend and bene-
factor. Mrs. Bedi had been a Christian before but became a Buddhist in 
Burma. Because her son and daughter were best friends with Pandit Jawa-
harlal Nehru’s son and daughter at university, Nehru gave her the job of 
looking after the Tibetan refugee monks who had been sent to Missamari, 
in Assam. Everybody said she had strong karma to become a Buddhist. She 
became a disciple of His Holiness the Sixteenth Karmapa and one of the 
first Western Tibetan Buddhist nuns, Gelongma Karma Kechog Palmo. 
In looking after the monks, Sister Palmo became close friends with them. 
She came to Buxa three times, looking for all the young incarnate lamas and 
the old ones as well. The pen friend she found for me, Rachel Levy, was a 
member of the Buddhist Society in London. I never met her. 
During my time at Buxa, many monks died of tuberculosis. There was no 
cancer at that time, and TB was the main illness. TB became very famous! 
Looking out from my bed I often saw dead monks being carried to the cem-

=== PAGE 119 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    103
etery by a group of monks from that khangtsen, who would pray for them 
there. It was like that every week. So many monks got sick and died. 
We also heard that food sent by the United Nations was exchanged by 
the camp’s officials for poor quality food. Maybe they did that to give the 
monks the chance to practice the Dharma well!
The head of the lama camp was a Punjabi Sikh, a soldier from the Second 
World War. He was a very pompous, arrogant man. My pen friend sent me 
a book about London, about the weather and the story of London, but the 
head of the camp wanted to read it and I don’t think he gave it back. I don’t 
know what happened to it. 
So, anyway, I learned about London weather at that time—how it is 
always drizzly and always cloudy. I remember that from Buxa all those 
many years ago. In the past, when I would come to the UK and travel to 
Cumbria,45 as we passed Manchester I would see from the train that it was 
foggy and rainy, just as the book had explained it always was.
About Dolgyal
When the Mongolian monks asked me to write the foreword for His Holi-
ness’s book I told them it would take many pages. And it did! I have told His 
Holiness that I am also thinking of writing a book, not about me but about 
Khadro-­la’s special experiences, what she sees from her side. It should be 
very interesting. There is evidently a young lama also working on something 
similar, so His Holiness said he wanted to see my book before I publish it. 
Several years ago, when a new monastery was built at Drepung, His Holi-
ness consecrated it and gave teachings at Sera. At that time, four thousand 
monks gathered at Sera Je and each monk had to come in front of all the 
others and swear into the microphone that he would never practice Dolg-
yal or make any connection with people who were practicing, either with 
materials, which means money, or by teaching or taking teachings. They 
then swore, “May you, Most Secret Hayagriva, understand.”
They had to say that to make it clear to the Tibetan public, to Tibetan 
society. This didn’t come from Dharamsala; it didn’t come from His Holi-
ness. This was from the public’s side; they wanted them to do that. Then, 
after that, those who still practiced Dolgyal were not to return. 
45  There used to be an FPMT center, Manjushri Institute, in Cumbria in the north of Eng-
land, founded in 1976.

=== PAGE 120 ===
104    sun of devotion
I was not there at that time but Lama Lhundrup, the abbot of Kopan 
Monastery, was worried. I went there later. I swore in the front of the Hay-
agriva thangka at Sera Je, with the abbot, the um-­dze—the puja leader—
and the gekyö who came a little bit later. They were very happy that I made 
this promise, but I had stopped practicing a long, long time ago. 
As I mentioned, I became a monk at Domo Geshe Rinpoche’s monastery 
in Phagri, where the Dolgyal practice was regarded as very important. They 
practiced it from the past great yogi and so that is why I didn’t know before. 
That is how it happened. 
We followed Dolgyal for many years, even receiving a kind of life initia-
tion, relying on Dolgyal, from Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, Lama Yeshe’s and 
my root guru. I received my first lam-­rim teaching, Liberation in the Palm of 
your Hand, from Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche in Sarnath. We followed Dolg-
yal for many years but I had stopped long before I went to Sera Je that time.
After I stopped nothing negative happened. The night I stopped I 
dreamed of the oracle from Ganden Shartse giving me scarf. It was not new 
but a little bit old, rolled up, and he left it on my table. He said, “Thank 
you,” and then disappeared. That was a good sign. Nothing threatening hap-
pened; there were no bad dreams or strange events; the ending was good. 
Maybe it’s because I’m not really a lama who benefits the world but just an 
ordinary person that Dolgyal let me go!
I’d like to tell you a story so you can get the idea, so you can understand. 
There was a great lama in Tibet, Trehor Kyörpon Rinpoche, who went to 
Dalhousie, where he later passed away. He achieved many realizations: guru 
devotion, renunciation, bodhicitta, emptiness, and also the two stages of 
tantra, the gross and subtle generation stages and the various stages of com-
pletion stage, the isolation of the body, the isolation of the speech, the iso-
lation of the mind, which is clear light, and the union of clear light and 
illusory body. He achieved the completion stage union of clear light and 
illusory body a long time ago, so of course he would have achieved all the 
rest. He was a great lama. 
He organized his Dalhousie group by checking whether those who came 
to him could follow an ascetic life or not. Those who could were allowed 
to stay to receive his guidance but those who were unable to renounce this 
life had to leave. He checked up like this. There were many geshes learned 
in philosophy there.
When Rinpoche was still in Tibet, Dolgyal entered into an oracle monk 
and came and asked Rinpoche to accept him. He was a high lama with many 

=== PAGE 121 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    105
disciples, so if he accepted Dolgyal many people would trust Dolgyal and 
do the practice. Trehor Kyörpon Rinpoche asked Dolgyal a question about 
impermanence, which Dolgyal answered correctly. Then he asked him 
about the bum-­pa, the vase. This is a very common object used in debating 
along with pillars, rabbits’ horns and things like that. He asked, “Is this vase 
truly existent or not?”
Dolgyal, Shugden, who had entered the monk, answered, “Oh yes, yes, 
yes.” Do you understand? Rinpoche asked if the vase was truly existent and 
Dolgyal replied that is was, so it seems he didn’t know about what makes a 
thing truly existent. He had never been taught. The vase appears to be real, 
but is that true? If Dolgyal had been an enlightened being, there is no way 
he would have replied like that. Not even an arya being would have done 
that, so that proves he was not. 
Then Rinpoche did gek-­tor with three tormas, and by dedicating was able 
to drive Dolgyal away. Dolgyal had come to ask Rinpoche to accept him 
but when Rinpoche heard the incorrect answer he was able to drive him 
away with a gek-­tor practice. Dolgyal’s motivation was not to benefit sen-
tient beings but for the self. It was an activity of the self-­cherishing mind, 
like wanting to become famous or have great power. Wanting to have great 
influence, he tried to use a high lama many people trusted so they would 
accept him and willingly follow him. 
In the West I think you call that sort of thing lobbying. At Istituto Lama 
Tzong Khapa in Italy there had never been a vote in the past, but after Lama 
Yeshe passed away we needed to appoint a director so I called everybody 
together to ask them to vote for one. There was a student who went around 
telling everybody who to vote for; he was lobbying for his friend. In the 
West, people spend millions and millions of dollars trying to get people to 
vote for them. They do whatever they can to win the vote. This is kind of 
what Dolgyal was doing with the high lamas. If you look at it like that, you 
can understand it. He was trying to cheat the high lamas, the learned geshes, 
to control them so that many people would practice him. 
Having no mistakes but showing mistakes
Many of us are disciples of Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche. He was our root guru 
and his root guru was Kyabje Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo. We are disci-
ples in the twenty-­first century, so this is our special karma, our particular 
karma, our obstacle. This obstacle has just arisen; it wasn’t there before but 
has now become a particular problem for us twenty-­first century disciples. 

=== PAGE 122 ===
106    sun of devotion
Now there is great danger from life-­to-­life for hundreds, thousands, hun-
dreds of thousands, even millions of lifetimes—the great danger of our 
being led the wrong way. 
I gave you the example of Trehor Kyörpon Rinpoche. He saw Pabongka 
Dechen Nyingpo and Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche as buddhas, as being with-
out mistakes. How could somebody be a buddha and yet at the same time 
have faults or make mistakes? It is not possible. If he has faults that means 
he is not an enlightened being. That doesn’t happen. If we look at somebody 
and see he has faults—not showing the aspect of having faults but actually 
having faults—then that means he is not an enlightened being but an ordi-
nary being. If he were a buddha he would have no faults. 
According to the Mahayana, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha was enlight-
ened numberless eons ago. He had no suffering but he showed us the twelve 
deeds; he showed us the suffering of rebirth, old age, sickness and death. He 
showed us those sufferings during his life and in the end he showed us the 
aspect of passing away. By taking the aspect of having suffering—by pre-
tending in that way—he was showing us that which is true to higher beings, 
the truth of suffering, so that we can understand and practice Dharma. 
And why is there suffering? Because there is the cause of suffering: karma 
and delusion. That means it is a dependent arising. Suffering is not indepen-
dent but a dependent arising. If we eliminate the cause, karma and delusion, 
we are able to eliminate the result, suffering. Understanding the cause of 
suffering shows us we can achieve the cessation of suffering because there 
is a true path that leads to the actualization of that cessation. By showing 
us true suffering—the suffering of rebirth, old age, sickness and death—the 
Buddha showed us the four noble truths. 
The Buddha had none of these sufferings. Even arhats, who are free from 
delusion and karma, do not have them, so how could a buddha, who is 
totally free from even subtle obscurations, have them? But he showed us 
suffering so that we would practice Dharma. Because we dislike suffering, 
he showed us this to guide us, using himself as an example by enacting the 
twelve deeds. 
There are many stories that illustrate how the buddhas manifest as ordi-
nary beings to guide us. They have no attachment but they show attach-
ment; they have no anger but they show anger; they have no ignorance but 
they show ignorance. 
Like that, because we have this impure karma, Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche 
and his root guru, Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo, showed us the aspect of 

=== PAGE 123 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    107
practicing Shugden. They did not have faults but due to our impure karma 
they appeared as if they had faults. 
This is like the example I have just mentioned of a buddha pretending to 
be an ordinary being. Since we are unable to see buddhas in their enlight-
ened aspect they have to appear to us as ordinary beings so that we can see 
them. Buddhas have no faults but they manifest in an ordinary aspect hav-
ing faults according to our impure karma and in that way are able to com-
municate with us. 
We are also unable to see enlightened beings’ deity aspect; we’re unable 
to receive teachings directly from the deity. We do not have the karma. 
Therefore the buddhas have no choice but to show themselves in an ordi-
nary aspect, where “ordinary” means showing faults. Because of this we are 
able to receive the pratimoksha, bodhisattva and tantric vows; we are able 
to receive initiations; we are able to receive commentaries on sutra and tan-
tra and oral transmissions. It is easy for us to directly see and communicate 
with their ordinary aspect and to directly receive guidance.
Showing the aspect of having faults is unbelievably kind. Because our 
mind is so impure, so obscured, that is the only way we are able to see them 
and receive their guidance. This is the kindness of the guru, appearing to 
us in an ordinary aspect, showing mistakes, so that we can be easily guided 
by him, we can communicate with him, we can make offerings to him. His 
kindness is so important, more precious than the whole sky filled with wish-­
granting jewels. The value of a whole sky filled with wish-­granting jewels is 
nothing compared to the value of the kindness of the guru. 
A key element of guru devotion practice is the understanding that the 
guru shows the aspect of having faults while actually having none. The 
guru has no delusions, no obscurations, but he shows that aspect for us sen-
tient beings. Ordinary bodhisattvas are able to see a buddha’s nirmanakaya 
aspect; higher bodhisattvas can see the sambhogakaya aspect, but for us 
ordinary sentient beings, whose minds are so unenlightened, so obscured, 
so thick skulled, a buddha must show the ordinary aspect, which has faults. 
It is unbelievably important that they show us this ordinary aspect.
We have to bring this understanding—being without mistakes but show-
ing mistakes—into our guru devotion practice. We have to use that phrase, 
“showing mistakes,” while thinking that they have no mistakes. If we say 
they have mistakes then they are not buddhas, they are ordinary beings. 
Then the whole thing changes.
Seeing apparent mistakes in the guru need not become the cause for us 

=== PAGE 124 ===
108    sun of devotion
to lose our devotion but instead it can become the cause to develop it, to 
make our devotion stronger. I would also suggest when problems arise that 
you use the nine thoughts on guru devotion called Practicing Guru Devo-
tion with the Nine Attitudes by the great Nyingma lama, Shabkar Tsogdruk 
Rangdrol.46 He was non-­sectarian and taught lam-­rim on the basis of Lama 
Atisha’s teaching, Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, which explains the 
graduated paths of the lower capable being, the middle capable being and 
the higher capable being. Lama Tsongkhapa explained the nine attitudes 
but Lama Shabkar made them into verses. 
We have put it into the new FPMT prayer book in the Guru Puja lam-­
rim section. First there is the verse on guru devotion, correctly following 
the guru, then the prayer Practicing Guru Devotion with the Nine Attitudes. 
I have translated it so it can be recited during the Guru Puja. 
When you have a negative thought in relation to the guru, one solution 
is to recite that prayer. If you do so, it cuts that negative thought off imme-
diately, clearing it away just like a horrible black fog that fills whole sky sud-
denly dispersing.
The need to renounce Dolgyal practice
Kyabje Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo practiced Most Secret Hayagriva, the 
Circle of Dharma, from the pure appearance of the Fifth Dalai Lama and 
many other things. One day he made a prediction to his attendant that the 
next day a fat monk would come to see him. He told the attendant, “Don’t 
allow him into my room.” 
But, as I mentioned, the karma of us present-­day sentient beings is to deal 
with this problem, to get involved with the Dolgyal problem. So the next 
day, when the fat monk arrived, the attendant forgot Pabongka’s instruction 
and admitted him. I think he spent quite a long time in the room and when 
the attendant entered after the fat monk had left it seemed that Pabongka 
Dechen Nyingpo’s aspect was not well, like something had entered, had 
occupied him. Pabongka seemed changed and the thangkas of Most Secret 
Hayagriva, the deity he had practiced before, which were hanging behind 
him, had been taken down. So this is the start. 
46  Heart of the Path, appendix 8, pp. 429–31. See also Lamrim Chenmo, vol. 1, pp. 78–81. 
Shabkar Tsogdruk Rangdrol (1781–1851) was a tantric practitioner and prolific writer 
and said to be an emanation of Milarepa. See The Life of Shabkar: The Autobiography of a 
Tibetan Yogin.

=== PAGE 125 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    109
If we understand the beginning, this is what happened. Pabongka 
Dechen Nyingpo was a great bodhisattva and a great tantric practitioner, 
a great yogi, Heruka. Because of that, his holy actions were able to bring so 
much benefit to Tibet. Many people believed it was because he practiced 
Dolgyal that he became so famous and was able to extensively benefit Tibet. 
Because many high lamas and geshes have so much devotion to Pabongka, 
without analysis it is very easy to think this.  
There are many others who question this. For example, Kyabje Ling Rin-
poche, His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s elder guru, was a heart disciple of 
Kyabje Pabongka but did not practice Dolgyal. There are many other high 
lamas as well who have questions about it and do not practice, feeling uneasy 
about it. They reject the practice and advise us not to practice it. There are 
also others who are very devoted to Pabongka and who do practice Dolg-
yal, the basic reason being that they have not checked the guru’s activities. 
As I said before, the guru has no faults but he shows the aspect of having 
faults according to our karma.
When we check we can see that in reality all the gurus are one—His 
Holiness the Dalai Lama, Pabongka Rinpoche, Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, 
Kyabje Zong Rinpoche—all the gurus are one. We can see they are all one, 
all Buddha Vajradhara. In the prayer Namo Gurubhya, Namo Buddhaya, 
Namo Dharmaya, Namo Sanghaya, the guru comes first before the Bud-
dha, the Dharma and the Sangha because the guru is kinder than all the 
buddhas. That is why we take refuge in the guru first, then in the Buddha, 
the Dharma and the Sangha. 
The main reason the guru comes first is not the kindness, however, but 
because in reality the guru is that guru, Buddha Vajradhara. We find no 
contradiction there. Otherwise, saying Pabongka Rinpoche is mistaken is 
saying the Guru Vajradhara is mistaken. That means he is not a buddha but 
an ordinary being. That changes everything. 
I mentioned Trehor Kyörpon Rinpoche. Think about what he did and 
you will understand. This is similar to Kyabje Pabongka Rinpoche. He had 
many followers, many learned lamas in Tibet who were his heart disciples 
and did not practice Dolgyal, but there were others who did not check but 
practiced it because they had so much devotion to him. 
This is not just about practicing Dolgyal. There are many examples of the 
guru showing mistakes. He might lead an unhealthy lifestyle such as eating 
harmful food or not exercising and we, as his disciples, need to explain to 
him what might happen if he keeps doing that. He might get sick or have 

=== PAGE 126 ===
110    sun of devotion
to go to the hospital and so forth. There are so many mundane things we 
need to explain to our guru. Although the guru does not have ignorance, he 
shows that aspect because of our impure karma. 
Those great Indian pandits were enlightened. They had actualized the 
path; they knew everything the Buddha taught—the entire Kangyur and 
Tengyur—and were not only experts in the meaning, they had also actual-
ized it. However, when they reincarnated, they showed an ordinary aspect, 
like any small child, crying, making pipi and kaka, playing and so forth. 
They needed to be looked after.
When His Holiness the Dalai Lama, who is Chenrezig, was growing up 
he had to study in the monastery just as normal monks do. He had two main 
tutors, Kyabje Ling Rinpoche and Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, and seven tsen-
shabs, who were not gurus but expert, learned monks who helped with his 
education, his debating, and came from each of the main monasteries, Sera 
(Je and Me colleges), Ganden (Shartse and Jangtse colleges) and Drepung 
(Gomang and Loseling colleges).
His Holiness undertook much study and then sat examinations. So, even 
though he is Chenrezig, an enlightened being, to benefit us ordinary sen-
tient beings he acted in an ordinary aspect. An enlightened being who man-
ifests as a dog must then eat like a dog and bark like a dog. Manifesting as a 
dog, he would have a dog’s hairy body, a dog’s eyes, a dog’s nose and so forth 
and do everything a dog does, all to guide us sentient beings.
One of Lama Tsongkhapa’s closest disciples was a monk called Duldzin 
Dragpa Gyaltsen,47 who some say was reborn at the time of the Fifth Dalai 
Lama as Tulku Dragpa Gyaltsen.48 He was said to have been murdered by a 
government official and to have reincarnated in the wrathful aspect of Dol 
Gyalchen, Dolgyal. In that aspect he went to Tashi Lhunpo Monastery as 
he was a disciple of the Panchen Lama but he was prevented from entering 
by the eight guardian Dharma protectors of the monastery.49 If Dolgyal, 
appearing as Dragpa Gyaltsen, had in actuality been a buddha, an enlight-
ened being, or even an arya bodhisattva, there is no question that he would 
have been allowed in. So it’s a huge question why he was not. A huge ques-
47  1374–1434. He actually resides in Maitreya’s Yiga Chödzin Palace in the pure land of Tush-
ita. There are several versions of the Dolgyal origin story.
48  1619–56. The Dalai Lama says it is doubtful that Tulku Dragpa Gyaltsen was the reincarna-
tion of Duldzin Dragpa Gyaltsen.
49  Tib: nam-­se ta-­dag gyä, the eight keepers of the horses of Vaishravana, who is one of the 
four directional guardians.

=== PAGE 127 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    111
tion. According to one version, he then went off to offer a torma to the head 
of the Sakya order, but the lama put the torma on a very low shelf.
What happens is that practicing Dolgyal creates a problem in your rela-
tionship with His Holiness, who is Chenrezig. It stops you working for and 
offering service to His Holiness. That’s what has happened with many lamas 
who are very devoted to Dolgyal. 
It interferes with your guru devotion. In particular it breaks your samaya 
with His Holiness and that harms not only this life but life after life for 
hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands and even millions of lives and 
it causes you to be reborn in hell and suffer for eons and eons. Then, even if 
you are born human, you cannot find a guru for hundreds or thousands of 
years. It goes on like that. 
It also causes problems at the end of your life. There are stories of people 
who strongly practiced Dolgyal but were harmed terribly at the end of their 
life. Dolgyal has common powers and can manifest in many forms but at 
the end of a practitioner’s life it shows its own form, its spirit form. When 
that happens the person sees clearly what he has done and how Dolgyal has 
cheated him his whole life and he becomes extremely repentant. 
There was a man in Tibet, not a monk, who practiced Dolgyal intensely 
but even his wife didn’t know. When he was gravely ill and nearing death he 
asked his wife to have a puja done, a tea offering in the temple where they 
practiced Dolgyal. It was only then that she came to realize he had been a 
follower of Dolgyal.
He had practiced Dolgyal so much but then, at his last breath, the spirit 
manifested, not in its usual form but in its true form, the real spirit, so ugly, 
so terrifying. Seeing this with his last breath the man realized he had been 
completely deceived by this spirit his whole life. He had unbelievable regret 
and felt strong repentance. This story is in the foreword I wrote. 
There are other stories, like a very learned geshe who died falling from 
a car that crashed. Nobody else in the car was thrown out but he was cata-
pulted over a precipice and died, having great regret. And there are other 
such stories of catastrophes that happened to geshes at the time of death. So, 
it seems there is great harm at the very end. 
When my master, Lama Yeshe, who was kinder than all the past, pres-
ent and future buddhas, was passing away, he went to Los Angeles for an 
operation in a good hospital but they didn’t operate because the doctors 
said the heart was too old to do the operation. What they did, though, 
was put a hole in it and attach some tubes using a new technique. We were 

=== PAGE 128 ===
112    sun of devotion
not allowed to go into the room while that was happening because there 
were machines there but when Lama came out he said it was quite difficult, 
almost like he had passed away. 
We were in America but it was the Tibetan New Year, early in the morn-
ing, around two thirty or three o’clock.50 Whenever obstacles occurred I was 
used to reciting the request to Dolgyal for help, so I was reciting that. Lama’s 
belly seemed to be moving around and I was reciting the prayer requesting 
help when Lama’s eyes opened wide, like he was seeing some unpleasant 
aspect. It was like he was surprised, seeing some form there. It didn’t seem 
positive; it was like there was some negative aspect there. I’m not saying that 
Lama had made a mistake but the aspect was like that. So, as I recited the 
request for Dolgyal’s help it was like he was seeing something fearful. His 
eyes were big and had a kind of surprised, fearful look. 
Dolgyal was the main protector he relied on. That is my view. He com-
monly used Dolgyal, for example, during the Kopan courses whenever 
somebody went crazy. Not everybody went crazy there, of course. Actually, 
I suppose it depends on your definition of craziness. On one level I’m crazy, 
you’re crazy, everybody is crazy. On one level it’s like that, but at the level we 
worldly people are on only a few people become crazy with lung or things 
like that. Lama would do the Dolgyal puja before each one-­month Kopan 
course started and then whenever there was something important. How-
ever, at the end of a person’s life the aspect that Dolgyal shows is not good, 
as I said before. I mentioned Lama’s external aspect in the foreword I wrote.
Another danger of following Dolgyal is that the person criticizes His 
Holiness. When somebody who is not a bodhisattva gets angry with a 
bodhisattva for even one second it destroys all the merit he has collected 
over a thousand eons making charity, making offerings to the buddhas and 
so forth. So if somebody criticizes or gets angry with His Holiness, can you 
imagine? For however long the person is angry and criticizes His Holi-
ness—however many weeks, months or years—countless eons of merit are 
destroyed.
Of the many bodhisattvas, the Buddha predicted that the bodhisattva 
Limitless Supreme Awareness, attaining the state of Chenrezig, would be in 
Tibet in the aspect of His Holiness the Dalai Lama to benefit the Tibetan 
people and spread the Dharma. There were four great prayers done for sen-
tient beings in Tibet and people generated refuge in their heart in the Bud-
50  This was the morning of 3 March 1984.

=== PAGE 129 ===
A Talk about Dolgyal    113
dha, Dharma and Sangha, so it happened as the Buddha has predicted. 
Getting angry with a buddha like His Holiness destroys the merit created 
in the past over millions, probably hundreds of millions of eons. These very 
heavy things happen. 
In short, practicing Dolgyal is harmful to Tibet, harmful to Buddhism, 
harmful to our own life and harmful to the world because it destroys this 
life. And it is not only harmful to this life; it affects the next life and the 
life after that for hundreds and thousands of lifetimes. The harm, the nega-
tive result, goes on and on, for many, many lifetimes. The essence is that we 
destroy ourselves. 
His Holiness is the one to reveal the complete teachings
The last time I visited His Holiness in Dharamsala I thanked him on behalf 
of Tibet and the Tibetan people and also on behalf of practitioners of Bud-
dhism and I think I thanked him on behalf of the world. I thanked His 
Holiness even though many learned lamas and geshes continuously criti-
cize him so much. From His Holiness’s side, he bears all the difficulties with 
much compassion. And His Holiness continuously advises us to not prac-
tice Dolgyal, no matter how much those people are against him, how much 
they criticize him. I think it is so important to thank His Holiness, who is 
the one to correct our life, showing us the unmistaken Dharma we should 
practice and the mistaken Dharma we should avoid. 
He is the one to do this, not just because of his Nobel Peace Prize but 
because in the world he reveals not only the Hinayana teachings but also 
Mahayana sutra and the Mahayana tantra teachings. In reality, he is the 
Buddha. In the past there have been buddhas and now there is Shakyamuni 
Buddha in the aspect of His Holiness. What was in the aspect of Shakya-
muni when the Buddha was giving teachings in India is now in this aspect, 
as His Holiness. 
He is the one who has complete Dharma understanding, so he is the one 
who can correct us, correct our life and explain what is right and wrong. 
He’s the one to show us logically what path to follow instead of just doing 
whatever we like and not doing what we don’t like.
I gave the example at the beginning of Dolgyal in the aspect of the oracle 
monk who went to see Trehor Kyörpon Rinpoche and asked to be accepted 
by him. This is what Dolgyal did with Pabongka and many other lamas. 
That is according to our impure karma. The gurus don’t have mistakes, but 
the aspect of practicing this is our projection that decorates the reality; it 

=== PAGE 130 ===
114    sun of devotion
is our hallucination. It is decorated by ignorance, as I mentioned yesterday. 
Decorating is such a good term, like decorating with paint, putting white 
color on the wall so you don’t see the bricks. 
Can I ask that you please read the foreword I wrote for the Mongolian 
book. Please read it well, not just like reading through a puja or something 
in order to finish it but thoroughly, thinking about what I have written. 

=== PAGE 131 ===
8. Khadro-­la
.,
Khadro-­la and earthquakes
A
lthough Khadro-­la, the young Tibetan lady, has been publicly 
	 recognized as an oracle she is much more than that. She is beyond 
that; she is beyond all of us. The story of what she saw when she went to 
Mount Kailash is just unbelievable. It is not at all what we common people 
normally see.  
When she was in Chamdo, in Kham, she had been unaware of the big 
problem of Dolgyal but when she reached Mount Kailash this problem 
appeared everywhere, in all the four traditions. So, when she was at Mount 
Kailash she went to Tushita, the Joyful Pure Land, Lama Tsongkhapa’s and 
Maitreya Buddha’s pure land, to find Thagpo Dorje Chang. Not many peo-
ple would have heard of Thagpo Dorje Chang but he was a great, great lama 
and one of Pabongka Rinpoche’s gurus. In his past lives he used to see Tara 
Cittamani all the time, and receive initiations, commentaries and all the 
various activities of Tara Cittamani from Tara herself. 
Because Thagpo Dorje Chang was in Tushita, Khadro-­la went there to 
ask him about Dolgyal. She has a totally free mind so she can do that. His 
Holiness has said that the previous beliefs were incorrect, that he had never 
seen the explanation about following Dolgyal in the collections of teach-
ings Thagpo Dorje Chang received from Tibet. I think Lama Tsongkhapa 
asked who would protect his teachings and Thagpo Dorje Chang in the 
pure land said that he would do it. 
Thagpo Dorje Chang was giving teachings to hundreds of dakinis, highly 
realized female sky-­goers, and Khadro-­la went to him and asked this ques-
tion, “What did people believe in, in the past? Did you say it was correct 
to practice Dolgyal before or not?” He replied he had not, that this was 

=== PAGE 132 ===
116    sun of devotion
incorrect. This concurred with what His Holiness had said. By going to the 
pure land Khadro-­la was able to confirm this. 
What she told me is something not known by common people but, in 
order to believe these stories, you need to understand her capacity. 
In Dharamsala quite a number of years ago she told me there was going 
to be a huge earthquake endangering hundreds of thousands or even mil-
lions of people. It involved the whole Himalayan range of mountains. I 
think there was probably going to be a volcanic eruption or something and 
so many people would die. She could see everything and could see that there 
was great danger. 
After she told His Holiness, he gave her the responsibility to prevent it. 
She wanted to build several stupas around His Holiness’s palace. They were 
not exactly the same as normal stupas; they looked much the same on the 
outside but there were some differences on the inside. Because these were 
not normal stupas His Holiness’s Private Office and his attendants didn’t 
listen to her and so for a long time they refused permission. In the end His 
Holiness told them to do whatever Khadro-­la said. She explained the stupa 
to His Holiness’s attendants and that its details were in a particular text by a 
great lama, which was confirmed when they checked. Without ever having 
looked at the text herself she knew exactly where this was mentioned, even 
giving the page number. They were very surprised when they found it was 
there as she had said. Generally Khadro-­la does not read scriptures quickly 
because she has never been trained, or so it appears externally. 
She was finally able to complete all the stupas in different colors. One 
was built at the Tibetan nursery school and another one at Norbulingka in 
lower Dharamsala where the Tibetans who have come from Tibet have art 
and handicraft shops and restaurants. There are many statues there. 
She explained this to me in detail, how although the major earthquake 
could be prevented there would be a very small one that could not be 
stopped. That has already happened in lower Dharamsala and I think one 
cow died, but the major earthquake with the volcanic eruption has been 
stopped. 
Once, when she was on a beach in Taiwan, there was about to be a 
typhoon. She did some prayers, nothing long at all, and the typhoon 
stopped. The students who were around her at the time actually saw this 
happen and they told me. 
She is very powerful. The nagas and worldly protectors who cause violent 
weather—all those hail storms and winds and such things—react depend-

=== PAGE 133 ===
Khadro-­la    117
ing on what people do. If people do positive things the weather is subdued 
but violent weather is the result of people’s negative, violent minds, their 
violent thoughts. 
I’m telling you this in case you are wondering whether it is possible for 
Khadro-­la to go to a pure land. Maybe you believe it or maybe not, but I can 
tell you other things so you can understand what she can do. 
The power of the bodhisattvas
Of course, such powers as being able to influence the weather are as yet 
unknown by Western scientists. They attribute bad weather to other causes. 
They can see the physical conditions but they have yet to understand the 
most important thing, the inner cause, karma. Not even the most expert 
Western scientists have discovered this but it seems their thinking is getting 
more subtle and they are getting closer to the Buddhist views. 
For example, they used to believe that there were no sentient beings on 
Mars but then—before I left America for India last year or the year before—
it was announced that they had discovered the potential for life there.51 So, 
it is changing, and it will continue to change the deeper they check. 
Karma has yet to be discovered by the scientists. But once it is discov-
ered—how all suffering comes from negative karma and all happiness 
comes from positive karma—it will blow their minds! It will be such an 
unbelievable shock. This is what I think. At the moment, because it is not 
within the scope of scientific thought, people in the West don’t think about 
it. Some people might even think that concepts like karma and reincarna-
tion are crazy, that they come from people’s imagination. Such people either 
don’t think about future lives or what death means or their thoughts are 
very vague. 
One time, on an airplane, I was watching my fellow passengers put their 
luggage up before the flight. They were well-­dressed, maybe in clothes 
worth a thousand dollars, and talking about nothing but this life, nothing 
else, about how they made ten million dollars and things like that. But they 
had no idea at all about the life after this. They had never heard that the 
result of negative karma is rebirth in the suffering lower realms—the hells, 
the hungry ghost realm or the animal realm—or that the result of positive 
51  As of March 2016, the Mars rover, Curiosity, is discovering more and more evidence of 
all the factors needed to have life, such as running water, methane and the five principal 
elements. 

=== PAGE 134 ===
118    sun of devotion
karma is the happiness of the human and god realms. And this is without 
talking about what is beyond samsara, about nirvana, the total cessation of 
the oceans of samsaric suffering and the five paths that lead to liberation 
and enlightenment. 
There are five paths to peerless happiness, buddhahood, the state of the 
omniscient mind, the elimination of all obscurations and the completion of 
all realizations—sang-­gyä. Even before reaching that goal, simply progress-
ing through the five paths and the ten bhumis brings unbelievable happi-
ness and bliss. 
Even on the first bhumi a bodhisattva is able to go to a hundred differ-
ent buddha pure lands and receive teaching from the buddhas there at the 
same time and with a hundred different bodies do prostrations to the bud-
dhas there. Then, when he achieves the second bodhisattva bhumi, he is 
able to go to a thousand different buddha pure lands and receive teachings 
and manifest in a thousand bodies and give teachings to sentient beings. 
With each succeeding bhumi the numbers increase and with the eighth, 
ninth and tenth bhumis the bodhisattva can go to billions and zillions of 
pure lands and receive teachings and do prostrations there and is able to 
manifest in billions and zillions and trillions of forms and give teachings, 
getting ever closer to enlightenment like that. He can manifest as a river, a 
bridge, a mountain, as all kinds of things to benefit sentient being. What a 
bodhisattva can do to benefit sentient beings is so amazing it doesn’t fit our 
ordinary, limited concepts. If this is what a bodhisattva can do, there is no 
question what a buddha can do.
Saving animals and humans
There are many stories about Khadro-­la that I have heard as well as many 
stories I have yet to hear. Besides the earthquake that Khadro-­la predicted 
in Dharamsala, there’s also the huge California earthquake that Western 
scientists predicted a long time ago and announced again at the beginning 
of 2014. She has also spoken about that one.
Normally our organization liberates animals. The FPMT center in Singa-
pore has already liberated almost two hundred million. They don’t liberate 
them the way we normally do, just buying them from where they are going 
to be killed and releasing them. What they do is put small insects and shell-
fish into sacks and frogs in containers and circumambulate them around 
many stupas filled with mantras, including the four dharmakaya relic man-
tras, and also many texts, such as the entire collection of teachings by Lama 

=== PAGE 135 ===
Khadro-­la    119
Tsongkhapa and his disciples. There are also the Kangyur and Tengyur and 
many collections of all the teachings.52
Carrying the animals by hand, all the children, parents and grandpar-
ents circumambulate the holy objects. With each circumambulation they 
all create the karma to achieve highest enlightenment, even the insects. In 
one plastic bag there may be a thousand crickets. As many times as that bag 
is taken around, the closer to enlightenment those thousand crickets come. 
That includes nirvana, the blissful state of peace, liberation from the oceans 
of samsaric suffering as well, and a good rebirth in the next life and tempo-
rary happiness—all those things are contained in that. So it has amazing 
benefit. 
Then everybody blesses the buckets of water by reciting different man-
tras, beginning with om mani padme hum of course and many other dif-
ferent mantras, and then blowing on the water. They then sprinkle it over all 
the animals and birds, or, with the sacks containing the shellfish, they pour 
the water over them. That way the animals get a higher rebirth, and pos-
sibly, hopefully, meet the Dharma. The third thing is to recite the mantras 
to those beings who can hear, to plant the seed of enlightenment in their 
minds. So at least we should try to do those three things to benefit them as 
much as possible. 
I tell people who have cancer to dedicate and donate some money to 
those doing animal liberation and sometimes it is able to cure that cancer. 
Cancer causes a shortening of life so by liberating animals we are causing 
them to have a long life and that in turn causes us to have a long life. By giv-
ing others a long life, we can have a long life. And it affects our life for hun-
dreds and thousands of future lifetimes. 
This is how it is done in Singapore, not just buying and releasing them 
but trying to help them as much as possible. We also do that in Hong Kong 
and from time to time in Taiwan. Later I’m hoping we can do it in China 
and Malaysia as well. 
I thought if we do that with animals, why not also save human beings? If 
the big earthquake is going to happen, why not try to help the human beings 
there? I wanted to do something before it happened because once it has 
52  This topic is covered extensively in Rinpoche’s Liberating Animals from the Danger of 
Death and Other Ways to Benefit Them. There is also a CD of Rinpoche’s Recitations for 
Animals. Both are available from the FPMT. See also Practices for Benefiting Animals on the 
LYWA website.

=== PAGE 136 ===
120    sun of devotion
happened so many people will have died. Places that have been developed 
over hundreds of years at a cost of billions, zillions or trillions of dollars can 
be destroyed in an hour by something like an earthquake. 
A few years ago in Dharamsala I asked Khadro-­la about preventing the 
Californian earthquake and she predicted so quickly, like a waterfall, what 
stupas we needed to build, how and where we should build them and so 
forth. I marked where she said on a map but the map was very small. At 
first, the American Embassy in Delhi rejected her visa, even when we tried 
a second time. She even had a letter from His Holiness’s Private Office but 
they didn’t want to read it. They probably do this to other people as well.
Then she tried to go to Canada but they rejected her there as well. We 
spent about ten thousand dollars in America applying many, many times to 
the government before she finally got a visa. 
When she flew to California and was landing in San Francisco, she felt 
this was the place to build a stupa. She stayed at the Aptos house. One day, 
as we went across the Golden Gate Bridge she saw that the nearer of the two 
mountains close to the bridge was the better location for a stupa. So at the 
moment we are looking for the place to build it. One time, when we were in 
a Zen restaurant, I thought maybe we could build it inside the restaurant so 
many people could see it. One of the places is a government park called The 
Presidio. Venerable Roger has appointed an ex-­director of Tse Chen Ling, 
our San Francisco center, to look for a suitable place. 
After the place has been found, Khadro-­la has to come to purify the land, 
to bless it before building the stupa. Hopefully, this will prevent that huge 
earthquake and save hundreds of thousands or even millions of people’s 
lives. 
Publicly she is like an ordinary person
Khadro-­la’s main purpose for coming from Tibet to India was to serve and 
protect His Holiness. 
A few years ago, when His Holiness was ill, all the Tibetan doctors 
agreed that His Holiness should not have an operation. Even the Nechung 
oracle agreed. Nechung, who has been the Tibetan government’s protec-
tor from ancient times, appears in a worldly aspect but is, in reality, the five 
buddha families, or five Dhyani Buddhas. They invoked the protector and 
asked him and even he said not to do the operation. Finally, when His Holi-
ness was in Delhi he asked his attendants to ask Khadro-­la. She said he must 

=== PAGE 137 ===
Khadro-­la    121
have surgery immediately, it was very important. When the doctor in Delhi 
operated he discovered gallstones and was shocked because it was unbeliev-
ably dangerous. So Khadro-­la’s insisting on the operation was correct. This 
is one example of her capacity.
She has also saved several Tibetan people who were about to die, as they 
were drawing their last breath. By coming from Tibet she has been able to 
save the lives of many people, allowing them to live for several years longer. 
Her main responsibility is to look after His Holiness, to protect His 
Holiness’s life, to help His Holiness fulfill his holy wishes in the world. That 
is the most important thing in the world, to benefit the world. Publicly, she 
is just like an ordinary person, but in reality she is beyond that. I have an 
inner offering from her. Basically, I asked for it. It contains her blessing, a 
blessing from the real Vajrayogini. 
I think she might have obtained the inner offering in Kullu Manali, one 
of the two places in India famous for hot springs. One seems good for the 
knees and one for the belly. Once I went there with her. We had arranged a 
hotel but she didn’t stay there; she stayed at the hot spring, where the rooms 
were much cheaper. Many people came day and night. 
While she was there she had a competition with Shiva, the Hindu god. 
Because of Shiva’s powers, he was carrying unbelievable weapons like in the 
many stories you hear about him. He can manifest all kinds of weapons but 
Khadro-­la can also manifest all kinds of weapons as well, so they were com-
peting. Of course, to the other people in the room it probably seemed like 
she was sleeping or something, but in reality this is what happened; she was 
in the aspect of Vajrayogini, with her hair standing straight up terrifyingly, 
competing with Shiva.
Whatever she did, however she transformed or whatever miraculous 
power she displayed, Shiva also did. However, when she sang the hymns of 
the guru, the hymns of emptiness, Shiva knelt down and put his head on 
Khadro-­la’s knee. Until then, she was manifesting all kinds of things and 
he was able to do the same, but finally manifesting in Vajrayogini’s form 
and singing of emptiness was so unimaginable that Shiva knelt down and 
respected her. 
The next day, before she left, she went down to a Shiva temple just to 
say goodbye. The blue drawing of Shiva was there just the same so she said 
goodbye before she left. I think this also happened at the hotel as well. She 
explained that this is a very secret story. 

=== PAGE 138 ===
122    sun of devotion
I think in the future I will ask her to go to the Land of Joy.53 It will be 
good to get her to bless the land. She did that at Mahamudra Centre in 
New Zealand and at Chenrezig Institute in Australia the first time she went 
there. She did a retreat for seven days and everybody cried for two days! 
Everybody cried. 
At Chenrezig Institute they have done the Basic Program several times 
and were just starting another round.54 Some nuns have done the Basic 
Program several times. There are maybe twenty-­five or twenty-­six nuns at 
Chenrezig—a lot of nuns—but not so many monks. Geshe Tashi Tsering—
not the Geshe Tashi in London but another one—was there for many years 
and he was very kind, pushing the nuns to study a lot. He did this because 
in his life in the monastery he saw the importance of studying and working 
very hard for the monastery, and he saw that this was also true for Chen-
rezig Institute. 
When Khadro-­la went there, for the first two days everybody cried 
through her teachings as she brought everybody’s mind into the Dharma. 
Then she went to Mahamudra Centre in New Zealand and all two hundred 
students also cried for the first two days as she brought their minds into the 
Dharma as well. 
Now she is unable to travel for a year because she had a Tibetan yellow 
passport,55 which is a lot of trouble, so she gave that to the Indian Govern-
ment and has applied for an Indian passport, which takes a year. She could 
get the refugee paper back but I advised her to stay there and try to get the 
passport. 
At the moment we are so fortunate. We have this human rebirth, we 
have met Buddhism and we can meet great beings like Khadro-­la. So we are 
unbelievably fortunate.
In the “dream experience” Khadro-­la received many teachings on empti-
ness from Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche in his past life aspect. He told her that 
Dolgyal totally cheated him and this has interfered with the activities of his 
present incarnation. Ling Rinpoche lives in India quite publicly because he 
doesn’t practice Dolgyal but Trijang Rinpoche is sort of in hiding. 
53  The FPMT retreat center in the far north of England that was purchased during Rin-
poche’s 2014 visit. 
54  The Basic Program is an FPMT course of study that has been taught at Chenrezig Institute 
since 1997. Three full rounds have been completed and the fourth started in 2015.  
55  A refugee identification card that few countries recognize.

=== PAGE 139 ===
Khadro-­la    123
The guru appears in an ordinary form because  
of our impure mind
The tantric text Vajra Tent says,
In these degenerate times, I, who am called Vajrasattva, will 
abide in the form of the spiritual master. With the aim of ben-
efiting sentient beings, I will abide in an ordinary form. 
In these times of the five degenerations, Vajrasattva, or Vajradhara—the 
names differ but they’re the same being—has taken the holy form of the 
spiritual master, or guru, to abide in an ordinary form in order to benefit 
sentient beings. We should understand this and generate faith and respect 
for the guru. This is also mentioned in the Fifty Verses of Guru Devotion.56 
Once the bodhisattva Meaningful to Behold asked the Buddha, “When 
you, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, have passed away, who will there be to 
guide us?” To that the Buddha replied, “Hi, Meaningful to Behold, when 
that time comes I will manifest in the form of an abbot, a master, a lob-­pön. 
In order to ripen the minds of sentient beings, in order to benefit them, I 
will show the aspect of having birth, old age, sickness and death.” 
There are other quotations but that is enough. As I have already men-
tioned, for arya bodhisattvas—“arya” meaning exalted bodhisattvas who 
have a direct perception of emptiness—the Buddha manifests in the 
sambhogakaya aspect. Ordinary bodhisattvas who have achieved the great 
stage of the path of merit can see countless buddhas in their nirmanakaya 
aspect. Of the five Mahayana paths, the first one, the path of merit has three 
stages, small, medium and great, and it is when the bodhisattva reaches the 
great stage of the path of merit that he is able to see numberless buddhas in 
nirmanakaya aspect. 
For us ordinary beings, whose minds are obscured, the Buddha manifests 
as an ordinary being, in a human form, like His Holiness, or he manifests 
as a king or as a beggar to allow us sentient beings to collect merit. He can 
manifest as a child, a crazy person, a butcher, a prostitute or a judge. He can 
manifest in all kinds of forms. 
56  Find the root text and commentary at LamaYeshe.com. See also Tsongkhapa’s The Fulfill-
ment of All Hopes.

=== PAGE 140 ===
124    sun of devotion
An abbot of a monastery in Tibet who had clairvoyance recently passed 
away. He seemed to have been a very important lama. I was able to help 
somebody he knew well in Switzerland, a monk who was at Buxa, who 
wanted to build a large covered Padmasambhava statue that would cost a 
hundred thousand dollars. 
Once, this lama went into a market in Kathmandu and, seeing a butcher 
there—just an ordinary butcher living his life selling meat—the lama made 
a throne for him and had him sit on it. So, even in the marketplace we never 
know who is a buddha and who isn’t. We have to know that. We have to be 
careful to not harm others, to not get angry and to practice patience, oth-
erwise we might create the cause to suffer for hundreds of thousands or 
millions of years. When this clairvoyant lama saw the butcher he made a 
throne. 
There is also the story of a teacher, a monk, in Tibet who buried his 
money in the ground outside his room. From time to time he would go to 
where it was buried and look at it. Then one day he died and his disciples 
needed money to make an offering. They couldn’t find any money in his 
room so they went outside to where they had seen their teacher often go. 
When they saw a small mound of earth they dug it up and discovered the 
money, but there was a scorpion holding tightly onto the entire big bundle 
of money. 
A young monk took the scorpion to his teacher’s guru, Chösang Rin-
poche, and asked him what to do. The guru told him he must take it and 
give it to a butcher behind the Potala. When the disciple did this, the 
butcher placed the animal on the chopping block and chopped it in half, 
eating one half and throwing the other half in the air. When the young 
monk told the teacher’s guru what had happened, he said, “Oh, now that 
is very good!” This was because the butcher was the deity, the enlightened 
being, Red Yamantaka, and throwing half the body into the air meant his 
consciousness had been transferred to a pure land.
His Holiness Serkong Tsenshab Rinpoche told me many times that 
although he had not seen this happen he had heard this story. Rinpoche was 
the incarnation of Marpa’s son, Darma Dodé. One day Marpa told Darma 
Dodé not to leave the house but he went anyway to look at some scenery, 
fell off his horse, knocked his head on a stone and died.  Anyway, Serkong 
Tsenshab Rinpoche was his incarnation. This great holy being is among 
my kind teachers. Any small break he had—even while he was eating—he 

=== PAGE 141 ===
Khadro-­la    125
would give teachings and answer questions. He was so kind. He told me this 
story many times. He passed away in Ladakh and his incarnation was born 
in Spiti in 1984.
That butcher behind the Potala was the enlightened deity Red Yaman-
taka. So an enlightened being doesn’t have to be some being we see radiating 
light in the sky whereas somebody we see elsewhere—on the ground, in the 
bathroom, where meat is sold and so forth—could not be an enlightened 
being. Any of those people could be enlightened.
Buddhas manifest as gods or demigods, as all kinds of human beings. For 
example, when we are having problems and somebody suddenly appears 
and helps us, telling us what we need to hear, showing us the path, that 
could be a buddha or a bodhisattva manifesting to help us. This happens 
many times. 
We may think a person is ridiculous, that she doesn’t know any Dharma, 
but we cannot judge by the appearance. In reality, what appears to us is 
totally a projection, or decoration, of our own karma, our ordinary impure 
mind. We really cannot say. The way something appears to us and what 
we believe to be real can be the complete opposite of what is actually real. 
The ordinary person can in reality be an enlightened being. Many times 
unknown people have helped or guided us and we have not known who 
they were. 
Buddhas can manifest as hungry ghosts to help hungry ghosts. They are 
not hungry ghosts but they manifest in that form in order to help them. 
They can manifest as all kinds of animals to help animals. They are buddhas, 
not animals, but they manifest as animals or insects or whatever. They can 
manifest as hell protectors or hell beings. They can manifest as maras; they 
are not maras but they show that aspect to help others. There are all kinds 
of ways they manifest to help beings. 
Because of our deluded mind we find it difficult to know reality and 
always believe that what appears to us exists the way it appears. Somebody 
ordinary appears to us and we believe in that appearance; we think that that 
is the reality. We cannot see the reality, that that is a buddha. 
In the Heruka body mandala there are twenty-­four holy places. When we 
do the sadhana we have to visualize those holy places on the body as they 
are on earth, in Nepal, Tibet and India. They are there, but we also visualize 
them on our body. At that time numberless dakas and dakinis immediately 
come and enter our body, blessing our winds, chakras and drops to make 

=== PAGE 142 ===
126    sun of devotion
them functional while we are meditating, as in the Six Yogas of Naropa.57 
They enter our central channel, abide and absorb, and then, after the gross 
mind is absorbed and the subtle mind is absorbed, the most subtle mind, 
the clear light, arises. Then we experience the great bliss of non-­duality with 
emptiness, ceasing the dualistic mind, the dualistic view, the superstitions, 
ceasing the ordinary mind-­wind. This is like an atomic bomb. This is the 
practice of Highest Yoga Tantra.
At those holy places there are numberless dakas and dakinis with differ-
ent levels of realization. There are those who have just achieved the unifica-
tion of clear light and illusory body and also enlightened beings. When we 
go to those holy places we will definitely meet those holy beings, but the 
question is whether or not we will be able to recognize them as such. That is 
the biggest problem, especially in those places. Of course, this is not some-
thing to speak about in public, but it’s just to get the idea. 
Once in Nepal I dreamed of a small four-­ or five-­year-­old girl who was 
Vajrayogini. The next day we went to Pharping,58 not because of the dream, 
it’s just something we do from time-­to-­time. Pharping is where two broth-
ers, two yogis, the Phamtingpas, achieved Vajrayogini’s enlightenment. 
There is a main Vajrayogini statue there and also a small one—a natural 
one not made by man—that might have belonged to the Phamtingpas. The 
caretakers show it from time-­to-­time, if they are happy. Anyway, that day 
the girl was there—exactly the same girl I saw in my dream. She was with 
some Nepalese ladies who had come to worship the statue. Although she 
was so young she put some sindura on Lobsang Nyima, Lama Yeshe’s disci-
ple from Tibet who served him at Buxa, Lawudo and Kopan. He had good 
guru devotion but sometimes got angry while he was working. This little 
girl didn’t know him and he didn’t know her but she put some sindura on 
him. She didn’t put it on me. It was very interesting and very strange. 
Even though I had seen this very clearly in my dream, still my mind is so 
bad. Because the way it appeared was a projection of my mind, so ordinary, 
what she did was still hard to believe. I should have done what it says to do 
in the Vajrayogini commentary—go around her three times anticlockwise, 
57  In Highest Yoga Tantra the practitioner learns to control the winds (the psychic energy 
that flows through the body), chakras (the energy wheels located along the central psychic 
channel) and drops (subtle substances within the body).
58  A small village and pilgrimage site near Kathmandu where Padmasambhava is said to have 
attained high tantric realizations. It is also the site of an important Vajrayogini temple and 
a self-­emanating Tara.

=== PAGE 143 ===
Khadro-­la    127
grab her feet and say the verses, “You are my mother” and so forth, and 
then one-­pointedly pray for her to guide me. Nobody stopped me from 
doing that, only my own mind. My very strong ordinary mind would not 
let me. My mind is very thick-­skulled, full of very ordinary concepts and I 
followed it. 
The guru’s kindness in guiding us in this life is really unbelievable. It’s 
inexpressible. This has been happening from beginningless rebirths. For 
countless lifetimes the guru has guided us, manifesting in all kinds of ways 
in pure and impure forms. He has manifested not only as a Buddhist teacher 
but also as Brahma, Indra and Shiva, benefiting sentient beings by taking 
their form and then guiding them. He has manifested as a Christian priest, 
a nun or monk, or as a Muslim practitioner. There are all kinds of ways he 
manifests. From beginningless rebirths we have been guided.
In 1983 Lama Yeshe and I went to Assisi, where Saint Francis had died 
and where his holy body is kept along with that of his chief disciple, the nun 
who had three hundred disciples. Her very long body is well preserved in 
a glass-­topped coffin but Saint Francis’ body is covered in a black iron cof-
fin. When we visited there, Lama Yeshe sat down in front of his body and 
meditated. 
At that time I thought that because his mind was so pure, Saint Francis 
was the same as a Kadampa geshe, with bodhicitta, with no self-­cherishing 
thought and no attachment to this life. I don’t know how, but he was a com-
pletely pure Dharma practitioner in his mind. He dressed differently from 
the other monks, so renounced, with many patches in his chuba-­like robes. 
In India and Tibet and also among the Kadampa geshes, there are monks 
who practice renouncing this life who have many patches in their robes, 
even though they have great realizations and are great tantric practitioners. 
Saint Francis was like a Kadampa geshe in this. 
He was very humble and he always recited “God, God” in the same way 
we recite “Tara, Tara.” All his disciples were also very humble. The other 
priests who lived higher up would spit on him and say bad things about 
him because of his humility and patched robes and because he was so dif-
ferent from them. 
I saw on his table a picture of Jesus Christ that had spoken to Saint Fran-
cis. I think, when your mind is pure, statues speak to you. All the statues 
at Bodhgaya spoke to Lama Atisha. Some of the statues there now are new 
because they took away the old statues to sell and put others in their place. 
Even the Buddha statue is not that old. When Lama Atisha was there, all the 

=== PAGE 144 ===
128    sun of devotion
statues, not just the Tara, gave him the answers as to the best way to quickly 
achieve enlightenment for sentient beings. In Tibet, Nepal and India there 
are many holy objects that have spoken to meditators, to practitioners who 
have strong devotion. I think this is similar to Jesus Christ’s picture speaking 
to Saint Francis because of the purity of his mind. 
The absolute and conventional guru
This time we have been born as human beings and, not only that, we have 
met the holy Dharma, which means we have been able to learn and practice 
that much. For many past lives we have been creating the cause, praying for 
this to happen, and now it has happened. This is incredibly precious. We 
must not just take it for granted. That English term, “take it for granted” is 
a nice term. 
Due to the kindness of the guru guiding us from beginningless rebirths 
and continuing to guide us up until the time we achieve enlightenment, 
we are able to do all this, to become enlightened, to free numberless sen-
tient beings from suffering—numberless hell beings, hungry ghosts, ani-
mals, humans, gods, demigods and intermediate state beings. We are able 
to bring them all to peerless happiness, the state of omniscient mind, due to 
the kindness of the guru. We are able to repay the kindness of all the num-
berless mother sentient beings. 
I have already talked about the kindness of the guru but I just want to 
mention this advice from Gyalwa Ensapa, who said,
Until you are free from negative karma and obscurations, even if 
every single buddha were to descend in front of you, you would 
not have the fortune to be able to see their supreme holy bod-
ies adorned with the thirty-­two major marks and eighty minor 
signs. All you could see would be the ordinary view, just an ordi-
nary being. 
This is a great teaching. Until we are free from our negative karma and 
obscurations, even if all the buddhas descended in front of us all we would 
see would be ordinary beings, nothing special. Even though the buddhas 
have the thirty-­two major marks and eighty minor signs, we are unable to 
see this. We do not have the fortune to see the buddhas in the aspect of a 
buddha. 
As I mentioned before, when we say the prayer Namo Gurubhya, Namo 

=== PAGE 145 ===
Khadro-­la    129
Buddhaya, Namo Dharmaya, Namo Sanghaya, the guru comes before the 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. We take refuge in the guru first. Why? There 
is a very important reason that we need to understand. It is not just because 
the guru is kinder than all the buddhas. Yes, this is true, but it is not only 
that. 
I saw in the Heruka sadhana—it may be the same in other sadhanas 
too—the inner offering starts from Vajradhara: Vajradhara, Vajrayogini, the 
great yogi Tilopa, Ghantapa and all the lineage lamas. But at the very begin-
ning is the root guru. Even before Vajradhara, first there is the kind root 
guru. Then it starts from Vajradhara and all the lineage lamas and at the end 
it mentions the root guru again. Why? That is very important.
Here, “guru” means that all these lineage lamas, including Vajradhara, 
Vajrayogini and so forth, come from the root guru. As Padmasambhava 
said, 
The root guru is the essence of all the three times’, ten directions’ 
tathagatas.
He is the originator of the heaps of the 84,000 teachings.
He is the possessor of all the arya Sangha.
To the holy mouth of my kind root guru I make offerings.
Tathagatas means all the numberless buddhas of the ten directions, all the 
past, present and future buddhas’ holy body, holy speech and holy mind, 
their qualities and actions. The root guru is the essence of all that. This is 
what Padmasambhava said. The second line says he is the originator of the 
heaps of the 84,000 teachings, from where all the teachings come. Then 
the quote says that whatever qualities the arya Sangha have, the root guru 
also has.
Finally, he says, “To the holy mouth of my kind root guru I make offer-
ings.” This is before we make offerings to Vajradhara and Vajrayogini. When 
we understand why this is so, we can understand what the guru is. Other-
wise we really can’t. 
That we will be able to enlighten all sentient beings depends on the kind-
ness of the guru. Who is the guru? Who is the guru who has guided us 
from beginningless rebirths and will guide us all the way until we reach 
enlightenment? 
There are the ultimate, or absolute, guru and the conventional guru. 
The absolute guru takes the ordinary form, the conventional guru. The 

=== PAGE 146 ===
130    sun of devotion
conventional guru is just a manifestation but the main thing is the absolute 
guru. The absolute guru is eternal; it is the primordial mind, with no begin-
ning and no end, free from all gross and subtle obscurations. 
And next, it is very important to understand that the absolute guru per-
vades all existence. We say that there is no place where there is no buddha—
which is also stated in the sutra teachings—therefore there is no place where 
there is no absolute guru. Just as we think of the buddha, the omniscient 
mind, pervading all existence, so too does the ultimate guru. 
The guru manifests everywhere to do the work of benefiting sentient 
beings, in a pure form to those whose mind is pure and in an impure form 
to those sentient beings whose mind is impure. The guru works to benefit 
every single sentient being, so it’s infinite. 
For example, in this world only one sun rises, but whether it’s an ocean, 
a river, a spring or just a drop, wherever there is water it can reflect the sun. 
As long as it’s not obscured, the sun can be reflected in water everywhere. 
When the sun rises, its reflection also rises everywhere, naturally and with-
out effort, even in a drop of water. 
A being needs to have motivation before becoming enlightened but after 
that there is no need for effortful motivation. Until each and every single 
sentient being has been enlightened—every hell being, hungry ghost, ani-
mal, human, god and demigod—until each has been brought to enlighten-
ment, the guru continuously works for sentient beings. 
The Guru Puja mentions,
Arising from the play of omniscient transcendental wisdom,
You are the essence of ten million mandala cycles.
Pervading lord of a hundred buddha families, foremost vajra 
holder,
Unified primordial savior, I make requests to you. 
Unobscured, inseparable from the play of simultaneous joy,
Pervading everything in motion and at rest;
The nature of all things, free from beginning or end,
All good actual ultimate bodhicitta; I make requests to you.59  
59  Vv. 51 & 52.

=== PAGE 147 ===
Khadro-­la    131
The guru is the one who manifests as numberless mandalas. Even just one 
mandala manifests many deities such as Yamantaka or Guhyasamaja. There 
are many, many details within the mandala, but the guru manifest as all the 
numberless mandalas, all the numberless deities. This absolute guru, this 
primordial mind, has no beginning or end; it pervades all existence and has 
been guiding us to enlightenment from beginningless rebirths. 
The absolute guru is without obscurations, experiencing simultaneously-­
born bliss, the greatest bliss. Pervading all existence, the numberless bud-
dhas and the numberless mandalas are all absorbed into the one, the 
absolute owner of all, the absolute guru. The absolute guru is all good, abso-
lute bodhicitta. This is not the usual bodhicitta but the bodhicitta of the 
absolute mind, the primordial mind.
The prayer continues,
You are the guru, you are the yidam,
You are the dakinis and Dharma protectors.
From now until enlightenment I shall seek no other refuge  
than you.
In this life, the bardo and all future lives,
Hold me with the hook of your compassion;
Free me from samsara and nirvana’s fears,
Grant all attainments,
Be my constant friend and guard me from interferences.60  
With this request we recognize what the guru is. This is the real guru but 
for us he must manifest in the ordinary aspect. This is the way to under-
stand that the absolute and conventional gurus are not two separate things. 
The absolute guru manifests as the conventional guru to guide us easily. We 
need to think like that, that only with the conventional, ordinary aspect can 
we be guided to enlightenment. That is the guru’s kindness. 
Even if we were dying today, even this hour or this minute, this is what 
we must request, that the guru holds us with the hook of his compassion.
It is as the quote says,
Before the guru there is not even the name “buddha.”
60  V. 53.

=== PAGE 148 ===
132    sun of devotion
So, all the buddhas come from the guru. Can you see that? That is why the 
root guru comes even before Vajradhara in the lineage lama prayer, then 
Vajradhara, Vajrayogini and so forth. Without the root guru there can 
be none of these lineage lamas—no Vajradhara, no Vajrayogini, nothing. 
There cannot be the Buddha. They are all a manifestation of the root guru. 
For that reason the prayer Namo Gurubhya, Namo Buddhaya, Namo Dhar-
maya, Namo Sanghaya has great meaning. 

=== PAGE 149 ===
9. The Importance of Guru Devotion
.,
I
n the Buddha’s time artists could not draw the Buddha by looking 
at him because he was so glorious, so they painted him by looking at his 
reflection in water. There is a standing Buddha statue I have seen all covered 
with wrinkles, especially on the robe, that is a copy of his reflection in water. 
When I was in Mongolia I wanted to see the Buddha statue that was 
made during his time. When the Buddha descended from Tushita, the Land 
of Joy, to Sankasya in India, this Buddha statue walked seven steps without 
touching the ground and greeted the Buddha by sort of bowing three times. 
Then the Buddha predicted which countries this statue would go to in order 
to benefit them: first India, then China, and then different countries. 
There is a story that the Mongolians or Russians stole it from China. The 
stolen statue was supposed to be sandalwood, but the one I saw in Mongolia 
seemed to be made of bronze. The abbot of Ganden Monastery in Ulaan-
baatar also thought the same, that it was bronze. Somehow, when I saw 
the picture of the statue, I didn’t think it was made in the Buddha’s time. 
It seemed more like how statues are made in other places like Japan and it 
looked more contemporary. So I kind of lost hope that this was the real 
statue from the Buddha’s time, but I went because Kyabje Kirti Tsenshab 
Rinpoche wanted to go there to meditate and pray. 
It seems the statue was still in China, but the temple was never open. So 
I asked a student, Dr. Chiu Nan Lai, if she could find out about it and then 
see if I could meet it in the future, maybe secretly or something. 
In Mongolia I was told how the abbots, monks and other people went 
to see an old lama who had passed away before the Russian invasion but his 
subtle mind was still there; he was still meditating. He predicted he would 
continue to meditate and told them to bury him under the ground because 

=== PAGE 150 ===
134    sun of devotion
the Russian Communists were coming and then open the grave after they 
had left and return him to the monastery. 
After the Russians left Mongolia they dug him up. I think they were care-
less and cut his nose so they put something there in its place but his body 
was preserved despite being in the ground the whole time of the Russian 
invasion, some seventy years. 
Just as he had predicted, they took him out of the ground and placed him 
back in the monastery, still meditating. When they do protector practices 
such as Palden Lhamo, sweat comes from his face, so he is still in medi-
tation, continuing to meditate in that way to benefit the world. That he’s 
not just a skeleton and his body is still intact clearly shows the capacity of 
the mind, how it can develop by practicing tantra. We have to know more 
about the different levels of mind: the gross mind, the subtle mind and the 
extremely subtle mind. 
If the Buddha statue had been there, I would have gone to see it, but I was 
not able to get a visa. But I think that particular Buddha statue was made in 
Beijing. That’s the real story. 
The importance of guru devotion
Padampa Sangye advised the people of Tingri,61
You should regard the guru as more exalted than the Buddha. If 
you do that, realization will come in this life, people of Tingri.62 
Kadampa Geshe Chayülwa63 was an incomparable practitioner and disci-
ple who correctly devoted to the virtuous friend, following his guru Geshe 
Chengawa perfectly. If he was doing his mandala offering, piling up the 
mandala to collect merit, and his guru called him, the moment he heard his 
guru’s voice, he would immediately stop his mandala offering and run to his 
guru. If he was writing something, for example, the Tibetan letter na, the 
moment he heard his guru’s voice, he wouldn’t even wait to finish that let-
ter but would immediately run to his guru’s room to offer service. He had 
unbelievable devotion. 
61  A town in southern Tibet not far from the Nepalese border.
62  Quoted in Heart of the Path, p. 176.
63  See also Heart of the Path, pp. 109–10.

=== PAGE 151 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    135
He cleaned his guru’s room every day, collecting the garbage in his lower 
robe, his shem-­thab, holding the robe in one hand and going down the steps 
to throw it out. Cleaning was part of his practice. It was not a question of 
cleaning if there was garbage and not cleaning if there was none. It was a 
preliminary practice, a daily practice he did every day before sitting to medi-
tate, whether there was garbage or not. 
One day he collected the garbage, put it in his shem-­thab and went down 
the stairs as usual, but when he reached the third step he gained a realization. 
We think that we can attain realizations only by doing formal meditation, 
with our eyes closed, but it’s not like that. There have been many practition-
ers who have attained vast numbers of realizations while actively practic-
ing guru yoga, busy serving their guru. In his great commentary Pabongka 
Rinpoche has cited many stories of guru devotion, correctly devoting to 
the virtuous friend, that illustrate how many practitioners have achieved 
realizations by actively serving their guru rather than by sitting on a medi-
tation cushion. My memory’s very bad, so some stories I don’t remember 
very clearly. 
Anyway, on the third step Geshe Chayülwa’s level of mind reached the 
path of merit and of that path’s three levels—lower, middle and great—the 
great path of merit. Then, just there, because his mind had become purer, 
he was able to see numberless buddhas—not on the altar or somewhere else 
but from that step, just as he was going to throw out the garbage. He sud-
denly saw numberless buddhas in their nirmanakaya aspect. 
This incomparable practitioner who correctly devoted to the guru, cor-
rectly followed the guru, said, 
If you wish to attain something special separate from the guru—
Vajradhara or a mind-­seal deity—no attainment will happen in 
your mental continuum. You have to keep this in mind. 
This was his own experience. He had the realization and was expressing 
what he knew. If we think that something special, like Vajradhara or our 
mind-­seal deity, is other than the guru, then we will not attain it. Mind-­seal 
is how I translate yidam. I don’t know what other people do.64  
64  In other teachings Rinpoche has explained that “seal,” as in mahamudra, or “great seal,” 
refers to sealing the mind, as one does an envelope, making it inseparable with the medita-
tional deity, or yidam. 

=== PAGE 152 ===
136    sun of devotion
Also, the Sutra of the Stainless Sky gives very clear advice: 
Regard the virtuous friend as more special 
Than the tathagatas who have gone beyond, 
Who see emptiness as it is. 
No matter how skillful and compassionate the buddhas are, 
Without the self-­condition of the guru,
In the mental continuum of sentient beings to be tamed 
The buddhas’ holy actions and blessings cannot be received. 
Without the guru, even the buddhas themselves cannot occur.65 
We should regard the guru as more special than the tathagatas. The Tibetan 
for tathagata, de-­zhin sheg-­pa, literally means that they have gone beyond 
both disturbing-­thought obscurations and subtle obscurations to knowl-
edge (sheg-­pa) and that they see emptiness as it is (de-­zhin). They see all 
phenomena as empty, as tong-­pa. Here, we do not say tong-­pa-­nyi, “empti-
ness only,” that all phenomena are emptiness only; we say phenomena are 
tong-­pa, empty of being truly existent. Tathagatas see everything directly “as 
it is,” de-­zhin, which is one part of the term, the other being sheg-­pa, “gone 
beyond.” 
Why should we hold the guru more special than the tathagatas? 
Even though a buddha is so skillful, so compassionate, if there is no self-­
condition,66 if there is no guru in the mental continuum of sentient beings 
who are the objects to be subdued, they cannot receive the buddhas’ holy 
actions, the buddhas’ blessings. And then, even a buddha himself or herself 
cannot happen. (In English you have to say “him or her” but in Tibetan you 
don’t need to. Sang-­gyä can refer to a buddha in a male and female aspect.) 
Because a buddha cannot happen without a guru, we must hold the guru 
as more precious than the buddhas. As the quotation from the Sutra of 
Stainless Sky proves, that is what Guru Shakyamuni Buddha himself said 
very clearly.
65  Also known as The Sutra of Immaculate Space (Tib: nam-­kha dri-­ma me-­pä do). See a simi-
lar quote in A Cascading Waterfall of Nectar, p. 32.
66  Tib: dag-­kyen, also called dominant or main condition; one of the four conditions giv-
ing rise to a moment of consciousness, the others being the focal condition (mig-­kyen), the 
immediately preceding condition (de-­ma-­thag-­kyen) and the causal condition ( gyu-­kyen). 
See How Karma Works, p. 135, n. 49.

=== PAGE 153 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    137
The first time Lama Yeshe and I went to Australia there were two hun-
dred people at the course in Diamond Valley, Queensland, near Chenrezig 
Institute. Our hut was some distance from the main tent and the kitchen, 
which were next to the mountain. The outside of the hut was made of logs 
cut in half whereas inside was neat and fresh, with the walls made of the 
stuff you make take-­away cups from, Styrofoam. It was all white, except for 
the floor. 
There was Lama’s room, my room and then, through a door, the kitchen. 
Although we usually had meals from the main kitchen there was a small 
stove where we made tea and cooked some food. Lama made it. He usually 
made food really quickly.67 
At that time there was a tall man68 with a long nose who was supposed to 
practice Ganapati—not the Hindu Ganapati but the Buddhist Ganapati, 
the manifestation of Chenrezig. I think Lama had found a Ganapati statue 
for him somewhere in Australia. Lama had him help put together a Four-­arm 
Chenrezig meditation for Lama’s upcoming visit to the Chinese Buddhist 
Society in Sydney. Anyway, he told Lama, “I don’t know who Chenrezig is 
but I know you, I can see a lama.” I just remembered that. 
So now, this is a real story. At Buxa, there was a monk called Jamyang, 
who was Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo’s attendant in Tibet. Even though 
he couldn’t read texts because he was illiterate—he couldn’t even read the 
Tibetan alphabet—Rinpoche had told him that in the future he would 
be able to read the Guru Puja by himself, without anybody teaching him. 
Then, one day in Buxa, he was suddenly able to read the entire Guru Puja 
from beginning to end. This was the blessing of having served Pabongka 
Dechen Nyingpo in Tibet. By serving him he purified his mind and it hap-
pened exactly as Pabongka Rinpoche had predicted. This was the great ben-
efit of having impeccable guru devotion to Pabongka Rinpoche. He didn’t 
tell me this himself; Lama Lhundrup told me.
Lama Lhundrup and Jamyang both stayed at Lal Bangla, which was not 
within the grounds of the Buxa camp itself but on the hill just outside. This 
was also where Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo’s incarnation stayed, so Jamyang 
was again able to serve him in his next incarnation. I went up there to do 
Dolgyal puja with them a couple of times. While we were doing the protec-
67  A short film of this 1974 course and the things Rinpoche describes can be seen on the 
LYWA YouTube channel.
68  The American student John “Jampa” Laine. 

=== PAGE 154 ===
138    sun of devotion
tor practices there was a wind blowing and he was able to see the different 
protectors coming. 
Dromtönpa was Lama Atisha’s translator in Tibet, translating Sanskrit 
into Tibetan. Toward the end of his time in Tibet, Lama Atisha showed the 
aspect of having sickness. He was sick for quite some time, making kaka and 
pipi in the bed. Dromtönpa cleaned it up with his hands with no thought 
of its being dirty. It was unbelievable purification; he purified many eons’ 
obscurations and collected extensive merit. Suddenly one day Dromtönpa 
was able to read the minds of sentient beings—even insects like ants—for a 
distance as far as an eagle can fly in eighteen days. 
There are many other stories of people serving the guru who have sud-
denly realized emptiness or seen deities. That is the power, the benefit of 
showing devotion to and serving our guru. Our mind is not oneness with 
ignorance, with obscurations. It is only temporarily obscured and by serv-
ing our guru we can purify many eons of negative karma and develop higher 
realizations such as a direct perception of emptiness.
Correctly devoting to the virtuous friend is the root of the path to 
enlightenment. If we don’t know how important it is, nothing can hap-
pen. It is the root of all realizations from here up to enlightenment, on the 
Hinayana path to achieve nirvana and the Mahayana sutra and tantra paths 
to achieve enlightenment. If we correctly follow the virtuous friend with 
thought and action, if the root is there, we can have success up to enlight-
enment. Everything depends on this practice, on how much we know of it. 
This is the reason I have spent a bit of time explaining it, even though I got 
distracted here and there. 
Otherwise we might have done this retreat or that retreat, this practice 
or that practice, received this teaching or that teaching, this initiation or 
that initiation, this and this and this, but nothing happens in our mind. Our 
mind is still like an empty container. Maybe we know the Dharma intellec-
tually, but when a problem comes it looks like we don’t know it at all, like we 
have never learned it. This is why correctly devoting to the spiritual friend is 
called the root of the path to enlightenment. 
Feeling regret purifies mistakes made in the past but in the West regret is 
considered bad. Therefore, since we don’t feel regret for the negative things 
we have done, our mind never changes. Regret can be negative or posi-
tive. Positive regret is like healing—when we regret all our past mistakes 
we naturally purify our negative karma; it becomes thinner. This is a very 
important aspect of the confession practice. Another is to determine not to 
commit negative actions again. This gives us the power or energy to destroy 

=== PAGE 155 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    139
the habit of repeatedly creating negative actions. We can reduce and then 
destroy that habit. It takes time to do, and at the beginning there is still the 
chance that we will repeat that particular action, but by continuously trying 
to overcome it, the habit becomes weaker and weaker. 
I always feel that if we don’t know the Dharma we don’t know how to 
enjoy life, whereas if we know the Dharma we can enjoy our life. And espe-
cially if we practice bodhicitta—especially if we practice bodhicitta—that is 
the real enjoyment in life, that is how to enjoy our life the most, to make it 
most beneficial for sentient beings and for ourselves. 
The real beginning is guru devotion
Fifty Verses of Guru Devotion says, 
A guru should be subdued in his action, cultivated in his speech, 
wise, patient and honest. He should neither conceal his short-
comings nor pretend to possess qualities he lacks. He should 
be an expert in the meanings of the tantra and in its ritual pro-
cedures of medicine and turning back obstacles. He should 
also have loving compassion and a complete knowledge of the 
scriptures.69
A spiritual friend needs to be wise in leading the disciple on the path to 
future lives’ happiness, to a perfect human rebirth and then to nirvana and 
full enlightenment. To do so he must be subdued in mind and manner. 
Then also, from the disciple’s side, we have to have firm devotion, enjoy 
meditation and like virtue very much. I don’t remember the other qualities 
but anyway, those are the three main ones.70 
Kadampa Geshe Chengawa mentioned,
A disciple who practices correct devotion to the virtuous friend, 
even if he is as foolish as a dog or a pig, will have no difficulty in 
becoming like Manjushri.71 
69  V. 8. 
70  For extended teachings on the qualities of the guru and of the disciple, see Heart of the 
Path, pp. 29–48.
71  Quoted in Heart of the Path, p. 114.

=== PAGE 156 ===
140    sun of devotion
The real meaning is that if the only thing we have is guru devotion and we 
know nothing about anything else—even if we are “as foolish as a dog or a 
pig”—because of that devotion we will have no difficulties in becoming like 
Manjushri. We can be completely foolish, knowing nothing other than guru 
devotion, but that will be enough. 
With correct guru devotion, whatever we do in this life also becomes a 
preparation for our future lives, determining whether we will meet a quali-
fied guru or not. This is extraordinary. This is not just for this one life but 
also for life after life. As we improve in following the guru correctly, as we 
come closer to becoming an arya bodhisattva and then a buddha, we have 
progressively fewer difficulties. 
In my view, even if a person knows nothing but has very strong guru 
devotion, that person is the luckiest person. Even though somebody is very 
clever and knows many things—even if he is a great scholar who knows 
both the Kangyur and Tengyur by heart and can explain them perfectly—
and even if he has a guru, if he has no guru devotion, if he fails to take care 
of that most vital practice, his life will not improve. The luckier of the two, 
the one who will achieve enlightenment quicker, is the one who has strong, 
stable guru devotion. 
The other person, the knowledgeable one who fails to take care of his 
practice, will be unable to integrate all he knows into the lam-­rim, the three 
principal aspects of the path to enlightenment, and will be unable to achieve 
the realizations of the two stages of tantra.
Then, when he tries to do shamatha meditation it goes wrong and he gets 
lots of lung, wind disease, and lots of sicknesses. Life becomes like that. He 
might look very clever, but not taking good care of his guru devotion prac-
tice robs him of any real success in life. 
Kadampa Geshe Potowa advised that the guru who leads us should at 
least emphasize attaining the happiness of the next life so that the aim of 
the disciple is not just this life’s happiness. We need to renounce this life’s 
happiness but it should not stop there. There are numberless future lives. 
More important is to free ourselves from karma and delusion and to no 
longer need reincarnation, although I myself have no idea how long that 
takes! 
One time, Lama Yeshe and Geshe Thubten were discussing the definition 
of Dharma, the definition of the renunciation of this life. Geshe Thubten 
said it was that in your heart you felt that future lives were more important 
than this life. Here “important” means making more effort for future lives 

=== PAGE 157 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    141
than this life. Lama said maybe that’s not enough; he added that you should 
be free from the self-­cherishing thought as well. Something like that.
The texts then go on to say that the happiness of future lives is still sam-
saric pleasure and so there is still samsaric suffering, albeit the suffering of 
change rather than the suffering of pain. Therefore, it is better that the guru 
emphasizes that nirvana is more important than that. Better still is the guru 
who emphasizes sang-­gyä, the state of the complete elimination of all obscu-
rations and the attainment of all realizations. Achieving enlightenment for 
the sake of other sentient beings is better than achieving nirvana, the state 
of lower peace for oneself alone. That ultimate level of practice is the most 
important one. 
All happiness comes from Dharma
People who have attained the most precious human body but don’t know 
Dharma do not know how to make this life useful. They have no idea of any-
thing except how to create the cause of suffering day and night. Whenever 
they move, whenever they think, they create negative karma. It makes hav-
ing a good heart difficult. Life is so full of positive things. Even not practic-
ing Dharma, there are many good things they can do to benefit others and 
themselves but, because their mind is very weak, they cannot think of them. 
After many lifetimes of praying and practicing morality they have 
attained this human body, but for what? What do they have this human 
body for? It’s so they can again create the cause of the lower realms, nothing 
else. Whether they are billionaires or zillionaires or whether they are beg-
gars, it’s like that. It’s very sad. 
An example is an Indian billionaire I was told about. He had a lot of 
money but didn’t know what to do with it, so he built a house in Bom-
bay for more than a billion dollars with somewhere between fifty and sixty 
stories. There were quite a few swimming pools and a rooftop helipad. He 
needed six hundred people to take care of the house for him. 
After the house was completed he had a feng shui expert come to check 
out the house. The expert said that the house was very harmful; it was not 
good for him. So then the whole family moved out, leaving the house empty. 
If we were billionaires we could help a lot of poor people even just in 
India, without talking about other countries. There are many poor people 
who are suffering, who are homeless, without food, and there are many ways 
in which we could help bring them happiness. We could build houses for 

=== PAGE 158 ===
142    sun of devotion
them or we could give them food. This man had an unbelievable amount of 
money and all he could think of doing was to build something for his fam-
ily. That’s so poor, so sad. 
If we were like that man and were to suddenly die in our sleep from a 
heart attack or something, what then? Many people die. They go to bed 
alive and the next morning they cannot get up because they’ve become a 
corpse. This happens to millions of people in the world every day. If we 
were to suddenly die like that, what is the connection between this life and 
the next? We collected all that wealth but only our mind continues into the 
next life. We cherished our body more than we cherished the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, more than we cherished all the sentient beings, but even that 
has to be left.
It is very difficult to feel confident that our next rebirth will be in the 
upper realms. It depends on whether we have created virtue or nonvirtue, 
and the nonvirtue we collect every day is very strong—it is perfect—whereas 
whatever virtue we might collect is very weak. Even if we do manage to cre-
ate some virtue, we destroy it by getting angry and having ill will. Whenever 
we fail to practice patience and compassion, anger arises and blows away 
our merit. Since whatever little virtue we have created is not dedicated for 
enlightenment, our merit is completely destroyed by anger and the result is 
rebirth in the lower realms, which is utterly unimaginable. 
When we look at the sentient beings in this world, including ourselves, 
our entire life is spent working for attachment, and not attachment to a 
good rebirth and the samsaric pleasure of the next life but attachment to 
this life, attachment only to this life. Except for those who are practicing 
Dharma, everybody in the world—billionaires, zillionaires, beggars—is 
working for attachment to this life, the eight worldly dharmas. We have 
become servants to money, servants to work, servants to attachment to this 
life.
Furthermore, we also get angry, so we are servants to anger too. And 
ignorance is there all the time, especially the ignorance that holds the I and 
the aggregates as truly existent, the ignorance that is the root of samsara. 
Day and night, all the time, we are completely servants to that as well. This 
is our life.
Happiness comes from Dharma; our job comes from Dharma; money 
comes from Dharma. That is the main cause, good karma, the positive 
mind, the positive actions of body, speech and mind. This is something that 
normally only people who know Dharma would understand. Worldly peo-

=== PAGE 159 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    143
ple do not know this; they do not know that everything positive, all happi-
ness, comes from Dharma.
Practicing Dharma is more important than anything else but it is so dif-
ficult for the majority of people in the world to practice it. They are unable 
to create virtuous actions—the positive, pure, healthy actions that are the 
cause of happiness—because they do not know about the mind, they do 
not know about karma. Whether they are billionaires, zillionaires or beg-
gars, they do not know about Dharma, and so day and night, whatever they 
do with their body, speech and mind becomes an action of attachment; it 
becomes nonvirtue. 
There are people who are ignorant of Dharma but who naturally have 
a good heart. People who think of others can possibly collect merit, but 
without dedicating or practicing patience and compassion, that merit can 
easily be destroyed. 
If, on the other hand, we dedicate whatever merit we create to achiev-
ing the state of the omniscient mind, then even if anger or heresy arise, 
that merit might become weaker but cannot be completely destroyed. As 
Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo said, even though you can remove many rocks 
from a big mountain, the mountain itself will remain. Merit that has been 
dedicated for enlightenment can be harmed but not completely destroyed. 
When it has not been dedicated it can very easily be totally destroyed. 
The best way to dedicate is with emptiness. That is why, when I do the 
dedications at the end of a teaching, I do them with emptiness. If we dedi-
cate our merit by meditating on emptiness—not just saying the word “emp-
tiness” but meditating on emptiness—the merit will not be destroyed and 
later, if heresy or anger arise, they will not even weaken it. 
Kyabje Kirti Tsenshab Rinpoche said only emptiness, and nothing else, 
can directly eliminate the root of samsara, the ignorance holding the I as 
truly existent. Although it can help, even bodhicitta does not have the 
power to do this.
The importance of the Dharma and Dharma centers
Just a little investigation will show clearly how much suffering sentient 
beings are experiencing. Even if we don’t consider all sentient beings and 
simply look at the people in this world, we can see how much suffering they 
must endure by being ignorant of Dharma and how much not knowing 
Dharma harms them in this life. Even here in this world, where the Bud-
dha descended in the past and where Buddhism still exists, human beings 

=== PAGE 160 ===
144    sun of devotion
are still suffering so much. It hasn’t stopped yet. Looking at the plight of 
others, we should appreciate how greatly fortunate we are to not only know 
Dharma but be able to continue to study and assimilate it into our life. 
From that perspective we can see how important a Dharma center is; a 
place with a teacher, a translator and a good, functioning organization. That 
is unbelievably important. It is so beneficial and so needed. 
I want to use this opportunity to thank everybody who works for the 
Dharma centers in the different countries and here in England, at Jamyang 
London and Jamyang Leeds and the other study groups. I want to empha-
size how important it is. Even small study groups are very important. Even 
just one person volunteering at a center is very important.
This is how a person’s connection with the Dharma begins. At the very 
beginning, her mind is totally closed and she has no idea what to do. But 
then she has a chance conversation with a center volunteer in the street or in 
the center’s café and that leads to her coming to classes and reading books. 
Just being able to see Dharma books opens the mind to think about new 
phenomena, to think about new ideas in life. From that she can discover 
new ways to attain happiness. Even just by chatting to somebody on a bus 
about compassion you are able to open that person’s mind. You take that 
opportunity and it starts from there. 
When you simply talk to people about Dharma or Buddhist philosophy 
and they get interested, you can gradually help guide them. You are able to 
benefit sentient beings one-­by-­one like that. You can give them Dharma 
books or show them how to find teachings online. Nowadays there are so 
many more possibilities than there were before. There are many different 
ways of helping, so many different books they can read according to their 
particular problem. That’s how even small study groups are very important.
All of us came to Buddhism through somebody’s introducing us to it. Of 
course, this is all on the basis of previous karma, our past lives’ karma. Then 
we went on to learn and practice and become more involved. There are 
many ways of helping and, of course, because we can’t stand seeing all sen-
tient beings suffering so much, we need to achieve enlightenment ourselves.
So, I would like to take this opportunity to thank everybody from the 
depths of my heart, especially the people who have been serving the FPMT 
organization, working for centers in different countries, and especially 
everybody in England. You have been helping others, teaching, giving hap-
piness to others. That is vital. Others have helped us, so now we should help 
them. On behalf of Lama Yeshe, His Holiness the Dalai Lama, all the bud-

=== PAGE 161 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    145
dhas and bodhisattvas and all sentient beings, I would like to thank every-
body from the bottom of my heart. 
Rinpoche learns English
We all need enlightenment. I don’t know who used the word “enlighten-
ment” as a translation for jang-­chub. It might have been the Sikkimese per-
son who made the very old dictionary I had in Buxa.72 It was very old and 
was printed on very bad paper; even if you put a paper clip on it, it would 
tear. 
I tried to memorize the dictionary. Lama Yeshe and I tried to learn Eng-
lish the way we learnt Dharma texts, by memorizing the whole book. There 
was no other way because at Buxa we had no opportunity to use English. 
When I met the head of the lama camp, the Punjabi Sikh from the Second 
World War that I mentioned before, I would say, “How are you?” or some-
thing. There was no other conversation. 
There were two lower caste Indians working in the khangtsen kitchen. 
One of them was called Pokang Babu, but I don’t remember the name of 
the other one. Anyway, there wasn’t much conversation with them either. 
Because we didn’t have a chance to use it, we forgot it. I could memorize 
most texts well but not that dictionary! The husband of a relative in Ghoom 
gave me some English books.73 He taught at St. Joseph’s School, a very good 
quality Christian school in Darjeeling. I checked the meanings of various 
words and tried to memorize them but then forgot them and had to memo-
rize them again. I did that a few times. Otherwise, the books were of no use. 
And of course there was the pronunciation. Because I didn’t learn from 
somebody, when I tried to use a word it just didn’t work, like the word 
“ritual.” Freda Bedi, who I also mentioned earlier, ran a school in Delhi for 
young lamas and invited me to go there many times, but I didn’t go until I 
got TB. Then I went and stayed there for six months. Later on she moved 
the school to Dalhousie, which I also attended. Once she asked me about 
His Holiness Zong Rinpoche, but when I tried to say he was doing many 
72  Kazi Dawa Samdup (1868–1923), who published An English-­Tibetan Dictionary in Cal-
cutta in 1919. He also translated and published with W. Y. Evans Wentz as editor the Tibetan 
Book of the Dead, Tibet’s Great Yogi Milarepa and Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines. See his 
very interesting entry in Wikipedia.
73  Ghoom is a small hilly locality five miles from Darjeeling, West Bengal, where Samten 
Chöling, Domo Geshe Rinpoche’s monastery, is located. This is where in 1967 the Lamas 
met Zina Rachevsky, their first Western student.

=== PAGE 162 ===
146    sun of devotion
pujas and used the word “rites,” she didn’t understand at all. She thought I’d 
said he was writing! So then we had to look for a translator. 
It’s very strange how life turns out; very, very strange. I must tell you this. 
When I was in Darjeeling somebody took me to see an English movie, the 
only time I saw one. English movies were shown in the evenings, while the 
Hindi ones played in the daytime. Sometimes an elder monk from Tibet 
would take us to see a Hindi movie and they were OK, but the night I was 
taken to see the English movie and saw how busy people were, going all over 
the place in airplanes and running around so busily, I made many prayers 
to never be reborn in the West! Even the Tibetan ladies who were sitting 
behind me watching the movie could hear me praying. I remember that, 
my very first Western movie. But now I live in the West! I’m in Asia from 
time to time but I live in the West. That’s why I said it’s strange the way the 
life turns out. 
Vajrayana is like the sun and moon
As Lama Tsongkhapa, the omniscient one, explained, there are two vehicles, 
or yanas, that can take us to enlightenment, the fully purified and completely 
realized state. They are the Paramitayana and the profound Vajrayana. Of 
those, the Vajrayana, or Secret Mantra, is more special, more exalted than 
the Paramitayana. He said it’s like the sun and the moon, which means it’s 
supreme, the best, in terms of attaining enlightenment.
If we don’t have bodhicitta, we can still develop renunciation of samsara 
and achieve the five paths of the Hinayana, or Lesser Vehicle. In this way 
we can free ourselves from the oceans of samsaric suffering and attain the 
ultimate happiness of lower nirvana, the blissful state of peace for oneself 
alone. But we can’t attain enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. 
For that, we need bodhicitta.
It’s said that we can attain full enlightenment by following the Parami-
tayana path, practicing the bodhicitta aspect of the three principal paths. In 
reality, by following this path, when we’re about to attain enlightenment, 
without receiving initiation and actualizing the clear light, we can’t.
So finally, even though we’ve collected all the merit—the merit of wis-
dom and the merit of virtue—and purified all the defilements necessary to 
attain the dharmakaya, the buddha’s holy mind, and the rupakaya, the bud-
dha’s holy body, and it has taken us three countless great eons to do so, when 
we’re close to enlightenment we still can’t get there without the Vajrayana.

=== PAGE 163 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    147
As the great lay pandit, the great holy being Lobpön Chandragomin 
pointed out, during the three countless great eons that we’re accumulating 
the merit of wisdom and the merit of virtue, sentient beings are undergoing 
sufferings in samsara, and that’s unbearable. It takes so long to reach enlight-
enment following the Paramitayana path. It’s unbearable that the transmi-
gratory beings have to suffer that much and for that long. 
Therefore we should practice the quick path of tantra, but not with the 
attitude, “Great! I can get enlightened quickly and then I can relax. I can 
bliss out,” like taking LSD or some other drug. It’s not like that, where you’re 
totally hallucinated and spaced out and don’t know what’s going on in the 
world or even if it’s day or night. There are many people like this. They either 
don’t know Dharma or don’t practice it. But even if you practice just a little 
Dharma, it reduces attachment, you have some renunciation and it helps 
bring peace.
If you don’t know the Dharma or don’t practice it, you have no protec-
tion and no method to bring happiness into your life. Then all you see is 
problems. The only life you know is one of dissatisfaction. And then, like 
many other people in the world, you get fed up and perhaps even commit 
suicide. This probably happens every day. People don’t know what to do, 
they don’t know how to bring themselves happiness and are overwhelmed 
by problems. It’s such a pity; this is very sad.
So, we must help sentient beings but we cannot wait the three countless 
great eons that it takes to become enlightened following the Paramitayana 
path. Therefore we have to practice tantra, the Vajrayana, which allows us 
to become enlightened in an incredibly short time. 
As the omniscient Lama Tsongkhapa said,
Please bless me to enter 
The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:
The supreme vajra vehicle.74
Of the three vehicles, Hinayana, Mahayana Paramitayana and Mahayana 
Vajrayana, the latter is supreme. It is the holy gateway of the fortunate 
capable beings, who, among sentient beings who are objects to be sub-
dued, are like jewels, with so much merit and intelligence. To achieve full 
74  The Foundation of All Good Qualities.

=== PAGE 164 ===
148    sun of devotion
enlightenment in one life, this is the holy gateway we must enter, so, “Please 
grant me blessings to enter that.” 
We must practice the various levels of tantra: Kriya Tantra, Charya Tan-
tra, Yoga Tantra and Maha-­anuttara Yoga Tantra (or Highest Yoga Tantra). 
Doing so will give us the skillful means we need to achieve enlightenment 
in one lifetime. 
As I mentioned before, transmigratory beings are completely under the 
control of delusion and karma, totally without freedom. All the time they 
migrate through the six realms again and again and again, and suffer and 
suffer and suffer unbelievably, continuously. There is nothing new that they 
have not already done from beginningless rebirths but they are unable to 
remember. 
To free these transmigratory beings from the oceans of samsaric suffering 
and bring them to full enlightenment, we must practice tantra to achieve 
enlightenment in one lifetime. This is the motivation for practicing any of 
the four classes of tantra. But with the lower tantras, we begin by achieving 
a long life, where we can live for hundreds and thousands of years, and even-
tually achieve enlightenment. 
With Highest Yoga Tantra, however, there is no need to do that. Even 
though the practices of the lower tantras are more skillful than those of 
the Mahayana Paramitayana, the sutra vehicle, Highest Yoga Tantra is even 
more skillful than those, and through it we can achieve full enlightenment, 
the unified state of Vajradhara, in one brief lifetime of these degenerated 
times, with no need to prolong our life. So, because of that, it has the great-
est skill. 
How can we be happy while others suffer? 
As the bodhisattva Thogme Zangpo mentioned in his Thirty-­seven Practices 
of a Bodhisattva, 
When your mothers, who’ve loved you since time without 
beginning,
Are suffering, what use is your own happiness?
Therefore to free limitless living beings
Develop the altruistic intention—
This is the practice of bodhisattvas.75 
75  V. 10.

=== PAGE 165 ===
The Importance of Guru Devotion    149
Totally ignorant of the cause of happiness and the cause of suffering, we 
worldly beings think we’re always working for happiness but in reality we 
are constantly creating the cause of suffering. We keep ourselves totally busy, 
day and night, like ants frantically running around, up and down trees or 
whatever. Because our motivation is not even attachment to future lives 
but just attachment to this life, every action of our body, speech and mind 
becomes negative karma. 
In that, we are no different from insects, spiders, crickets, ants and so 
forth. Our motivation is identical to theirs. Likewise the billionaire, the zil-
lionaire, the trillionaire—there is no difference; their motivation is identi-
cal. We have all been billionaires, zillionaires, trillionaires, kings in the god 
and human realms, Indra and Brahma, numberless times. 
We are just like those slugs that come out when it rains. Just like them, 
we work only for this life, so every action we do is nonvirtuous. And even if 
we do collect a little virtue, because we have so many enemies, anger arises 
frequently and very easily due to the habituation of our mind, and whatever 
merit we might have accumulated is continuously destroyed. 
We might intellectually know about merit, thinking, “I’ve done this 
retreat; I’ve done that preliminary practice; I’ve studied this and studied 
that; I’ve done so much, so much,” but, as I mentioned, our mind is the 
same as it ever was or even worse. It’s as if we never met the Dharma. Prob-
lems still come. Before they meet the Dharma, some people have very few 
negative emotions, but the more they engage in intellectual study of the 
Dharma, if they don’t practice, the stronger their negative emotions grow. 
More pride, anger and so forth arise, causing constant suffering now and in 
the future. 
So, Thogme Zangpo asks how can we be happy while numberless sen-
tient beings are suffering? What use is being happy like that? He then says 
that in order to free others from the oceans of samsaric suffering we must 
generate bodhicitta, the practice of the bodhisattvas. 
Until we are free from the control of karma and delusion we must con-
stantly suffer: the suffering of pain, the suffering of change and pervasive 
compounding suffering. We encounter the suffering of the six realms and 
suffer again and again, endlessly. Therefore, we need to be free from the 
whole of samsara and achieve lower nirvana, the blissful state of peace.
But that alone is not sufficient. Rather, we must achieve great nirvana, 
full enlightenment. We must free ourselves from even the subtle obscu-
rations, the obscurations to knowledge, especially for all sentient beings, 

=== PAGE 166 ===
150    sun of devotion
to free them from the oceans of samsaric suffering and bring them to full 
enlightenment as quickly as possible. We must achieve full enlightenment 
as quickly as possible. This is why we must practice Highest Yoga Tantra.

=== PAGE 167 ===
10. Seeing the Guru as a Buddha
.,
The harm Dolgyal has done 
I 
want to mention this story so you can get a better understanding 
of the damage Dolgyal does to the world, to Buddhism, to Tibetan Bud-
dhism, and in particular to Lama Tsongkhapa’s teachings. Some stories are 
from many years ago but this particular story is from recent years.
This incident happened in Ganden Monastery. There was a geshe, Jangtse 
Geshe Drati, who was an expert in philosophy. When we were in Buxa he 
was well known for his understanding of the five major sutra texts—Abhisa-
mayalamkara, Vinaya, Madhyamaka, Abhidharmakosha and Pramanavart-
tika—and I think he became even better known in south India. He came to 
our class in Buxa to explain one of the texts. 
After Buxa he was advised by His Holiness’s office in Dharamsala to 
change the way the monks studied into that of a school, like a university. 
Previously the subjects ran sequentially, one by one, with a different num-
ber of years for each subject, so what was studied depended on time. So he 
transformed the course of study into a university-­type curriculum, where 
the five major sutra texts were taught simultaneously. 
When Geshe Tsephel, who now has a center in America,76 was the 
abbot of Ganden Jangtse, he wanted to take teachings from Geshe Drati, 
especially because he was an expert in Madhyamaka, even though Geshe 
Tsephel himself is also very learned. He had prepared all the offerings in 
order to request the teachings the next day but, that night, he had very bad 
dream, so he did not go. 
What happened was that Geshe Drati had criticized His Holiness. He 
76  Land of Compassion Buddha in West Covina, California.

=== PAGE 168 ===
152    sun of devotion
said there were many learned lamas who were practicing Dolgyal and that 
they were very good, something like that. I didn’t see details of his criticism 
but Khadro-­la told His Holiness that it was the worst criticism so far. 
Ganden Monastery has two divisions, Shartse and Jangtse, and the letter 
criticizing His Holiness was read in public to the Ganden Jangtse assembly. 
I don’t know how many thousands of monks were in Jangtse but they were 
all there for a puja. Because of that, the staff and abbots of the monaster-
ies gathered to decide whether to expel Geshe Drati from Ganden Jangtse 
Monastery, even though he was a great teacher with a thousand disciples. 
They decided to ask Kalarupa, the main protector of Ganden Monastery, 
for advice. The power of all the buddhas is manifested in Yamantaka, Vajra-
bhairava, who is the most wrathful aspect of Manjushri. Kalarupa is the 
protector that Yamantaka orders to do activities. But this protector is not 
a worldly being; he is beyond samsara. There are three aspects of Kalarupa: 
outer Kalarupa, inner Kalarupa and secret Kalarupa. Of Lama Tsongkha-
pa’s two protectors, Kalarupa and Six-­arm Mahakala, Kalarupa is the main 
one. Lama Tsongkhapa gave them orders and they fulfilled them. 
The requesting ceremony to Kalarupa, which requires using small bowls, 
takes time because every bowl has to be weighed exactly, like when you buy 
gold. The answer to the question is inside the bowls—you ask the ques-
tion mentally. So, each bowl has to be of equal weight; if any are lighter or 
heavier the answer becomes incorrect. 
After the abbots and staff of the monastery did pujas and prayers asking 
whether this geshe should be expelled from the monastery or not it came 
out he should be expelled. His criticism of His Holiness was then read out 
to all the monks, who clapped their hands. Clapping hands in the West 
means joy and approval, like in football, to show you are happy. In Tibet, 
clapping hands in this way means the opposite of being happy or welcoming 
somebody. In the monasteries it’s something wrathful. 
We also did it at Buxa in the very early times. A huge pot of black tea was 
made for the monks and they tipped all of it out, which was a sort of wrath-
ful action, showing the unbelievable suffering of the whole of Tibet turned 
upside down. In the very early Buxa days the monks tipped the tea out and 
then beat it with the end of their zens.
The monks did that, but of course, although the action can be wrathful, 
it has to fit into Buddhist practice and be motivated by compassion, other-
wise it becomes a worldly activity, which is the same as most countries do—
fighting each other, killing each other. There is nothing different.

=== PAGE 169 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    153
I heard that in Iraq, while Saddam Hussein was president, when some-
body did something wrong they took him to the place of execution and 
laid him on the ground. His parents and relatives had to be there and when 
his head was chopped off they had to clap their hands as if they were happy 
with the execution. 
The original motivation must fit with Buddhism; it must be great com-
passion for others, even for the enemy. Then, even if the action is wrathful, 
it is like parents punishing their child in order to help him. They send him 
to school to educate him so he can have a good life in the future, but if the 
child refuses to go they scold and beat him with compassion because they 
have concern for his future and they don’t want him to suffer later. This is 
like the monks tipping out the tea. 
In Ganden, when the letter was read publicly, all the monks clapped their 
hands, indicating they wanted to expel that geshe even though he was an 
expert, especially in the Madhyamaka teachings on emptiness. They clapped 
their hands and kicked him out. Now he is in France. 
We ordinary people don’t understand the extent of the harm that Dolg-
yal can do through the great lamas, those learned in philosophy. He harms 
them from the top and then they spread his influence to many people, get-
ting them to practice him. He wants many people to practice him, to follow 
him, so he influences the geshes, the lamas, like this. 
This has even spread to Lama Tsongkhapa’s main monastery, Ganden, 
where his teachings are preserved; where the monks not only study the texts 
but practice their meaning as well. This was a great Lama Tsongkhapa tradi-
tion monastery in Tibet and is now located in south India. They preserve 
the excellent Buddhist education, which is like the Pacific Ocean, deep and 
vast, but it is not just faith. It is not like you are forbidden to check any-
thing, to ask questions, that you must just believe what you are told. The 
monks are perfectly qualified to explain the Dharma to sentient beings, 
whether it is the vast teachings, the middle-­level teachings or just the very 
essence of the lam-­rim, depending on the level of the students’ minds. These 
monasteries—Ganden, Sera and Drepung—always produced highly quali-
fied teachers and continue to do so. 
So you can see that the harm Dolgyal can do is huge. If the top teach-
ers, those who are expert in Dharma, succumb to Dolgyal’s influence, then 
many students, if they don’t check what their guru does, can easily fol-
low. They might even think the reason the guru is so successful is because 
of Dolgyal. 

=== PAGE 170 ===
154    sun of devotion
But the guru is already successful; he already has great knowledge. The 
great lamas like Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, Kyabje Zong Rinpoche, Pabongka 
Rinpoche and all the other lamas have renunciation, bodhicitta, the right 
view of emptiness, and tantric realizations of the generation and comple-
tion stages. Even by just having bodhicitta, of course, they can benefit others 
greatly. Just by giving a spoonful of food to a dog with bodhicitta purifies 
the dog’s negative karma and makes a connection with that dog so that it 
will be able to meet the bodhisattva again and again in future lives. So, it’s 
not only by teaching that these great lamas benefit sentient beings. But so 
many people think that they’re of benefit because of Dolgyal. 
The conclusion is that Dolgyal wants to harm others. He himself has no 
guru connection with His Holiness because he broke his samaya in the past, 
so he wants to make other people like that. He is harming Buddhism—par-
ticularly Lama Tsongkhapa’s teachings—and harming the world. 
Even though we might have learned the words of Dharma well by study-
ing the scriptures, we can still make big mistakes in our practice by not cor-
rectly following our virtuous friend and even criticizing him. We might be 
experts in all the extremely difficult texts but because we have not done 
proper analysis we can easily believe things like that. 
In that way Dolgyal particularly tries to harm Lama Tsongkhapa’s teach-
ings and create disharmony within Lama Tsongkhapa’s tradition. He is very 
sectarian; very, very sectarian. He wants to cause disharmony between the 
Tibetan Buddhist traditions, the Nyingma, Kagyü, Sakya and Gelug. To 
not make a connection with the other traditions, to not take teachings from 
them, is very sectarian; it brings great disharmony. Lama Tsongkhapa took 
the full ordination vows from the eighth Karmapa, Mikyö Dorje, and he 
took different teachings from lamas of the other traditions. 
We must investigate any guru we want to follow
The root of enlightenment is correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. If 
that is done well, it brings every success up to enlightenment, to be able 
to free all sentient beings from the oceans of samsaric suffering and bring 
them to full enlightenment. If the root is wrong, if we are mistaken in how 
we devote to the virtuous friend, then there is no success and there is great 
suffering in this life and from life to life, for hundreds of thousands, or even 
millions of lives. For example, we have to experience the unbearable suffer-
ing of the inexhaustible hell realm for an intermediate eon.77 
77  See Heart of the Path, p. 155.

=== PAGE 171 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    155
But even then our karma is not finished. Even when this world ends, even 
when this world becomes empty, which after a great eon it will, we must be 
born in the hell realm of another universe. There are numberless universes 
and in those universes there are hell realms, so we will be born there and suf-
fer until our karma has finished. 
Even in recent times it has happened that Dolgyal has caused incredible 
danger, particularly to Lama Tsongkhapa’s teachings. For instance, many 
disciples have become angry or developed heresy to their guru, so he cre-
ates harm like this. In one second they have destroyed their ability to attain 
enlightenment, their realizations, their merit. Although I haven’t yet seen 
it with my own eyes, I have heard that the scriptures say that heresy toward 
the guru destroys hundreds of thousands of eons of merit. 
The lam-­rim outline is a bit different. It says that if we get angry with 
our guru, for however many seconds we are angry with him, we have to be 
reborn and suffer in the lower realms for that many eons. There is a contra-
diction in this outline. What I mentioned was that if we are not a bodhi-
sattva and we get angry with a bodhisattva for one second, we destroy one 
thousand eons of virtue created by cherishing sentient beings and making 
offerings to the buddhas. That is also mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo 
and A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. I asked Jangtse Chöje, who 
thought it might be a minute but I think it’s a second. 
These things are not small matters. Dolgyal destroys the root of the path 
to enlightenment, correctly following the virtuous friend, the most impor-
tant thing in our life. You should know this. You should not think, “Oh, this 
is a Tibetan problem.” You have to know how harmful it is, otherwise you 
can get drawn in and then you won’t know you are getting cheated. 
I have heard that Dolgyal followers in Singapore stick the Dolgyal man-
tra on their cars and leave them outside. They actually believe that by put-
ting the mantra on a car or reciting it they can be successful in business. 
We can very easily be cheated, so we must check everything. Guru 
Shakyamuni Buddha said, 
Oh bhikshus and wise men, as one assays gold by rubbing, cut-
ting and melting, so examine well my words and accept them, 
but not because you respect me. 
The Buddha himself said that.78  We have to examine his teachings just as 
78  A well-­known saying of the Buddha from the Ghanavyuha Sutra, this version is found 

=== PAGE 172 ===
156    sun of devotion
we would examine a metal to see if it is gold, to see whether it is false, mixed 
or pure. There are three ways you test for gold, by cutting it, rubbing it and 
burning it. He said we should accept his teachings only after examining 
them and seeing they are correct. That means we are most welcome to inves-
tigate whatever question we have. Once we have investigated and found the 
teachings to be correct and, on the strength of that, have decided to follow 
them, then we are not doing so through blind faith. It’s my view that, among 
all the religions, only Buddhism gives us the opportunity, the freedom, to 
examine the path completely. 
In the monasteries the special way of studying is debate. Acceptance 
of the Buddhadharma is not just through belief but also through debate, 
through questioning—you can ask any question and then decide for your-
self whether the answer is correct or incorrect. Even if it is correct, you can 
still debate. If you are good debater, even if somebody has given a correct 
answer you can still try to change that person’s mind.
Buddhism is very logical, very perfect, and examination of it leads to 
a deep, clear understanding of the teachings. We are not asked to accept 
something on blind faith. We are never told we are not allowed to ask ques-
tions but must just accept what we hear. This is how it can become when 
somebody doesn’t have an answer. 
I’m bringing this up in the context of Dolgyal. What I’m saying is that 
if we are allowed to check what has been revealed by the guru, then why 
not with Dolgyal? That is my question. A Dolgyal practitioner might be 
an expert in debate but has never checked on Dolgyal. That is very strange. 
Especially seeing how Dolgyal is clearly so harmful to the world, to Bud-
dhism, to the success of Tibet, to His Holiness’s wishes and, particularly, to 
Lama Tsongkhapa’s teaching. This is extremely clear. That is what Dolgyal’s 
influence is like, even for learned lamas and geshes. It leads many people to 
no longer follow His Holiness but to follow Dolgyal instead, to go in the 
wrong direction.
If you are following Tibetan Buddhism, learning and practicing tan-
tra, you have to understand this. If, as a non-­Tibetan, you think that this is 
purely a Tibetan problem, you are mistaken. Tibetan Buddhism originated 
from the Buddha himself and from those who were like second Buddhas—
Nagarjuna and all the great pandits from Nalanda and the many enlight-
on a plaque next to the Buddha statue in the Tsuglhakhang, His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s 
temple in Dharamsala. 

=== PAGE 173 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    157
ened Tibetan lamas, such as Lama Tsongkhapa. Because what you are 
learning comes from this great lineage, the Dolgyal problem is also yours. 
Seeing the guru as a buddha
A sutra says, 
From your side as the disciple, think that the guru who reveals 
the Dharma to you is a buddha, always abiding in front of you, 
blessing your heart. By thinking this way, the buddha constantly 
blesses your mind, liberating you from all wrong conceptions 
and mistaken ways of thinking.
It is very important to remember these words whenever we do the guru devo-
tion meditation. Think that the virtuous friend who reveals the Dharma is 
a buddha. From our side as a disciple, we should think of him as a buddha. 
Then the buddha is always abiding in front of us in the form of the one who 
reveals the Dharma to us, as the guru. Even if we have only received an oral 
transmission of om mani padme hum or one verse of teaching, still the 
connection has been made. We are the disciple; he or she is the guru. 
Any time we think “buddha,” the buddha is always there in front of us, 
blessing our mind, our heart. This is not our physical beating heart but 
where the mind is. Scientists often talk about the brain. That is quite natu-
ral, isn’t it? Don’t you sometimes feel that thinking happens in the brain? 
When you think of some problem or something, don’t you feel it’s in the 
brain rather than anywhere else? 
On the other hand, emotions such as compassion, patience and anger 
don’t seem to come from the brain but from the heart. When strong nega-
tive emotions come, that is where we feel them. So my question is, why 
do we feel them there? Why not in the brain, when scientists talk about 
the brain as being everything? I think many of you have investigated and 
rejected the scientific notion that the brain is everything. There are even 
instances where a person has been able to remain alive without a brain. 
In Phagri, where I lived for three years, Kyabje Zong Rinpoche—who 
gave me many initiations and teachings—saw a person without a head, with 
only a neck. To feed him the family spooned the tsampa in through his 
neck. He managed to communicate. When he wanted to be out in the sun 
or when he was hungry he talked with his fingers, like rubbing his stomach 

=== PAGE 174 ===
158    sun of devotion
for hunger. He had no head but he lived. This sounds unbelievable but you 
should know that my guru, Kyabje Zong Rinpoche, actually saw this in 
Phagri. There is no reason why my guru would lie to me.
He also told me that he had heard about a chicken that lived without a 
head for two or three years. Perhaps he saw it on TV. The person who fed 
the chicken took it all around the world to make money but then after three 
years it died because he forgot to give it food or something. It means that 
even without a brain there is still a basis for the mind to function in the 
body; it is still possible to be a living being. 
Later, I saw something similar in a text by a great lama from Amdo, who 
had many collections of sutra and tantra teachings. He said in the teachings 
that in Amdo he saw a person without head. I don’t know what scientists 
would say. If I were in a meeting with them, I would ask that question.
This is all just to do with the notion that the mind is the brain. These 
examples show that there is more to reality than what scientists believe. 
They need to change their ideas, to refine them so that they become closer 
to reality. 
Wherever we consider the mind to be, think of the guru as a buddha who 
always abides there, blessing us and liberating us from all the wrong con-
cepts, especially the ignorance that is the creator of samsara, believing that 
the I and the aggregates are truly existent. This is a very important practice. 
If we want to achieve enlightenment and liberate sentient beings from the 
oceans of samsaric suffering, if we want to lead them all to sang-­gyä, the 
total elimination of all obscurations and the completion of all realizations, 
we must practice seeing the guru as a buddha. 
This is the very essence of how to follow the virtuous friend, how to 
devote to the virtuous friend through thought and action. Devoting 
through thought is looking at the guru as a buddha and devoting through 
action is receiving the guru’s advice and fulfilling his wishes. 
When we invited Kyabje Chöden Rinpoche to Vajrapani Institute79 he 
said that the reason we, as disciples, see the guru as a buddha and follow his 
advice is because this is the sole way to enlightenment. If we are able to ful-
fill these two things, correct thought and action toward the guru, the result 
must be that we will achieve sang-­gyä. Otherwise it is impossible; there can 
be no sang-­gyä. That was his conclusion. Rinpoche did not use that term, 
but that is what it is, sang-­gyä. 
79  The FPMT retreat center in Boulder Creek, California.

=== PAGE 175 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    159
Many people think that to serve the guru we have to be with the guru. 
This is not so. Whether we are far from the guru or near we can still serve 
the guru. It doesn’t matter whether we’re living in his house or on the other 
side of the world. We could be on the moon or the sun and still be serving 
the guru by keeping purely the vows he has given us: refuge vows, pratimok-
sha vows, like the five lay vows or the eight Mahayana precepts, and higher 
vows, such as those of monastic ordination or the bodhisattva or tantric 
vows. If we are keeping those vows we are following the guru’s advice, fulfill-
ing his wishes; we are serving the guru. 
Also, meditating, studying such things as the lam-­rim, the commentaries 
and the philosophical teachings—learning the Dharma and integrating it 
into our practice—is what the guru wishes us to do, and doing all that is also 
serving the guru, fulfilling his advice. Whatever else the guru has advised us 
to do, such as retreat or to teach the Dharma, is also service to the guru. So 
we do not have to be with the guru. We can be far away, on another planet 
or wherever.
In general, anything that benefits sentient beings and helps liberate them 
from suffering is service to the guru because that is exactly what he advises. 
That is fulfilling the guru’s wishes.  
We also need to recognize any physical or verbal action of the guru, even 
dancing, as an action of the buddha’s holy body. Whatever the guru does is 
the holy action of a buddha; whatever the guru says is the holy speech of a 
buddha. 
Rather than having a mind thick with attachment, we have to shake our 
mind, we have to be aware. We have to enlighten our mind. When the guru 
talks to us, we need to see it as the holy speech of all the buddhas. This is 
Shakyamuni Buddha talking to us, this is Maitreya Buddha talking to us, 
this is Tara talking to us, this is Manjushri talking to us, this is Heruka talk-
ing to us, this is our own particular deity talking to us. This is our practice. 
This is what we have to do.  
We also have to think that whatever the guru says or does, which is the 
action of the guru’s mind, is the action of all the numberless buddhas’ holy 
minds. 
Every single atom of the guru’s holy body is all the buddhas’ holy bodies. 
We have to think like that; we have to meditate on that; we have to realize 
that. If we do, then it is like the sutra says—any guru we think of as a bud-
dha in that way, the buddha always abides there and always blesses our heart, 
liberating our mind from all the wrong concepts. 

=== PAGE 176 ===
160    sun of devotion
If we want enlightenment, then this is how and why we should practice. 
We shouldn’t practice just so that we can space out like we do on drugs, on 
LSD—not that I know if anybody here has taken LSD or not.
In the very early times at Kopan, before we built the monastery, Lama 
Yeshe and I were staying in the old British-­style house built for the Nep-
alese king’s astrologer. We had a small room, just big enough to fit two 
people, with Lama on one side and me on the other. There was a door and 
a window, but I can’t remember whether there was a table or not. I remem-
ber a Western student at that time was smoking what he called “Buddha 
grass.” There were many drugs around then. LSD had just come out. Every-
where you went in Kathmandu, on every corner you could see Western 
people, coming from here, coming from there, their faces unhealthy and 
pale because of the drugs they were taking. Once a student gave us some 
bread with LSD in it but we didn’t eat it. If we had taken it, I would be able 
to describe our experience, singing the mandala or maybe visiting hell, I’m 
not sure. 
Offering to the pores of His Holiness
Even though you have read many other lam-­rim texts, when you read any 
of Lama Tsongkhapa’s teachings you think, “Oh, I should have read this at 
the very beginning, as my first teaching. I wish I had seen this when I first 
encountered Buddhism.” When I read one of his texts it strikes me like that. 
His advice is very concise but so vast, so deep. That is the way Lama Tsong-
khapa explains the teachings. For example, with the mandala offering, he 
said it is very important to make a good-­quality visualization. Good quality 
means visualizing the mandala in the most extensive way we can and then 
making the offering. 
Offering the mandala is one of the exceptional methods of collecting 
extensive merit, so doing it purely, doing a good-­quality one—the best 
quality—is very important, as is doing the greatest number of mandala 
offerings possible. He mentions that these are the two ways to collect the 
most merit, the quality of the mandala offering and the number of times 
it’s made. Other lam-­rim texts describe the details of the visualizations but 
Lama Tsongkhapa just makes this main point.
Those meditators who have achieved the eighth, ninth or tenth bodhi-
sattva bhumi can manifest billions, zillions, trillions of mandalas. They can 
do prostrations in the pure land of the buddhas. They can do so much, while 

=== PAGE 177 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    161
we are unable to manifest even one. We have mountains of obscurations and 
negative karma, which high-­level bodhisattvas do not. 
Lama Tsongkhapa said doing prostrations is another way of collecting 
extensive merit. He said we should visualize many bodies, as if we have num-
berless bodies covering the whole ground, and then, with those millions of 
bodies, prostrate to the merit field. 
Visualizing two bodies prostrating gains us the same merit as if two bod-
ies were actually prostrating; visualizing ten bodies prostrating gains us the 
same merit as ten bodies doing it. If we are able to visualize the whole earth 
full of our bodies, filling the four directions and the intermediate ones, all 
prostrating, we get the same merit as that many of our bodies prostrating. 
This creates unbelievable merit. 
Lama Tsongkhapa explains things like this so concisely, giving just the 
essence. Just using one or two words he explains the contradictions in the 
arguments of many famous contemporary and previous meditators. Then 
he spends more pages on practices such as the preliminary practices.  
Just as visualizing countless bodies prostrating brings great merit, so too 
does thinking that, while offering something as small as a cup of water to 
the guru, we are offering it to the numberless buddhas; we get the benefit 
of actually offering water to numberless buddhas. We can think how every 
atom of our guru’s holy body contains numberless buddhas and we are offer-
ing to all of them. Whatever we are doing—offering service, offering robes, 
cleaning or washing—if we think we are doing it for the numberless bud-
dhas, we get that amount of merit. Even if we do not consciously think that, 
we still get much merit. 
For example, when attending our guru’s teachings we can think that 
this is Tara giving the teaching, this is Guru Shakyamuni Buddha giving 
the teaching, this is Manjushri giving the teaching, this is our deity giving 
the teaching, this is the numberless buddhas giving us the teaching. Simi-
larly, whenever our guru gives us advice, whatever it is, we should think that 
this advice is coming from all the numberless buddhas. This is Tara giving 
us advice, this is Maitreya Buddha giving us advice, this is Guru Shakya-
muni Buddha giving us advice, this is Mahakala giving us advice, this is all 
the thousand buddhas of the fortunate eon giving us advice. All the merit 
field, all the dakas and dakinis, all the arhats, including the sixteen who are 
buddhas, the Dharma protectors—everyone is giving us advice. The guru’s 
advice is everybody giving us advice. 

=== PAGE 178 ===
162    sun of devotion
In that way, we never feel abandoned; we are always connected with all 
the numberless buddhas, up to the Dharma protectors of the merit field. In 
the same way, the merits are unbelievable when we make offerings to the 
guru’s disciples, the guru’s “pores.” 
This is an example you can keep in mind. When I make offerings to peo-
ple who have received teachings from His Holiness, even lay people, even 
Westerners, but especially in the monasteries such as Sera, Ganden, Dre-
pung or Kopan, first of all I try to generate bodhicitta motivation, think-
ing, “To achieve enlightenment to free the numberless sentient beings from 
the oceans of samsaric suffering and bring them to full enlightenment I am 
going to make these offerings.” Even without bodhicitta, the merit of offer-
ing to the many fully ordained monks is unbelievable. The higher number 
of vows they live in, the more unbelievable merit we collect by making offer-
ings of food, tea, money or whatever. 
Even offering to one monk with bodhicitta motivation collects skies of 
merit. There are thousands of monks in each monastery—Sera Me, Sera Je, 
Ganden Shartse, Ganden Jangtse, Drepung Gomang and Drepung Losel-
ing—so after generating bodhicitta, I think, “I make this offering to achieve 
enlightenment for sentient beings.” If you offer to each monk in this way 
you collect more than skies of merit. 
After that, I think they are all His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s pores. Lit-
erally, pores are tiny holes in the skin of the body but these pores are differ-
ent. Pores here means not only the disciples of the guru but, if the guru is a 
layperson, it can also mean his or her spouse, children and any animals he 
or she has, dogs, horses and so forth. Even the guru’s neighbors are pores. 
After generating bodhicitta, while making the offering, I think wherever 
they are, whatever college or khangtsen they belong to, they are His Holi-
ness’s pores. So I offer to all the thousands of monks in Sera Je and Sera Me 
thinking that they are all His Holiness’s pores. 
By generating bodhicitta at the beginning and thinking of the monk to 
whom we are making an offering as one of His Holiness’s pores, we collect 
inconceivable merit. The merit of offering to just one statue of the Buddha 
is utterly beyond our comprehension, yet we collect far more merit by offer-
ing a glass of water, tea, money or whatever to a monk we see as a pore of His 
Holiness than we do by making offerings to the numberless Buddhas, the 
numberless Dharma, the numberless Sangha, the numberless statues, the 
numberless scriptures and the numberless stupas combined. 
Now that is by thinking of just one monk as a pore of His Holiness and 

=== PAGE 179 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    163
making an offering to him. Of course, this is multiplied when offered in this 
way to all the other monks. They are all disciples, or pores, of His Holiness, 
so when we make offerings to them we can think that we are making offer-
ings to the guru’s pores. If offering to just one monk brings greater merit 
than offering to the numberless holy objects in all the universes, now there 
is not just one monk but thousands of monks and many of them are fully 
ordained. By thinking of them all as the pores of the guru and making offer-
ings, the merit we create is utterly unimaginable. 
It’s the same at the centers, even in the West, when we make offerings to 
students who are disciples of His Holiness. If they have received teachings 
or initiations from His Holiness and see him as their guru, can you imagine 
the merit we create by offering them just one cup of tea? Or a milkshake! In 
the West there are many things we can offer, not just momos. We can offer 
ice cream or hot apple pie. By thinking of those students at your center as 
pores of His Holiness and offering them something, you create incredible 
merit, even if there are only three students. So it’s not just in faraway mon-
asteries that you can create this kind of merit. 
What a great opportunity we have to make ourselves beneficial for sen-
tient beings, to help free them from the oceans of samsaric suffering and 
bring them to enlightenment. Even if we just offer a little candy, the merit 
can be unbelievable. The opportunity is always there.
When I was in Tibet I visited Tsurphu, the Karmapa’s monastery. I had 
not planned to go there because the Karmapa had fled to India some months 
earlier, but our Sherpa travel guide included it in the itinerary because he 
usually took tourists there. Since I’m a Sherpa the guides made Sherpa food 
for us, millet tsampa mixed with water. 
We were actually on our way to Reting, Dromtönpa’s monastery where 
many of the Kadampa geshes had their hermitages, and the road passed 
through Tölung Dechen, the place west of Lhasa where Lama Yeshe was 
born and where his family still lives. The Karmapa’s monastery was not far 
from there, so they arranged for us to go for a day to visit. The monastery is 
situated in a narrow valley, with a hermitage on the hill. We camped where 
there was running water. 
We went into the monastery and made money offerings. I tried to offer 
the money to each monk myself and I was wondering what to think when 
suddenly I decided to think of each one as my guru. They were not my guru 
but I thought of each one as Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche, my root guru, and 
then made the money offering to them as my guru. They were not my guru’s 

=== PAGE 180 ===
164    sun of devotion
pores, but by thinking like this, thinking of offering to the guru, can you 
imagine the merit? As I mentioned, the guru is the most powerful object, 
the most holy object, so offering in this way becomes the most powerful 
purification and the best way to collect the most extensive merit, much 
more than by making offerings to the numberless Buddhas, Dharma and 
Sangha. Offering to the guru creates unbelievably more merit than that. 
I’m just telling you this so you know how to think to collect the most merit. 
This is just a small good experience I had. 
We also visited Tashi Lhunpo, His Holiness the Panchen Lama’s mon-
astery. When we circumambulated the monastery there were many dogs, 
each with its own place, like a personal hermitage, and a pot to eat its food 
from. The old mothers from Shigatse carried tsampa and water in buck-
ets to give them. Sometimes they gave the dogs big pieces of the tsampa 
from their home. By going around the monastery giving food and water to 
the dogs they were also circumambulating all the unbelievable number of 
holy objects and holy beings inside. I was really happy seeing those moth-
ers being so kind and compassionate, giving food like that. They were very, 
very kind.
Before visiting Tshurpu we had been to Tashi Lhunpo, His Holiness the 
Panchen Lama’s monastery. I had taken a short teaching from the Panchen 
Lama in Dechen Ling, which is just below Tashi Lhunpo, during the previ-
ous trip to Tibet with Geshe Lama Konchog. At that time Gen Wangdu, a 
meditator from Sera Me, was there and he was the main person who wanted 
to meet the Panchen Lama and ask for teachings. I had to lead the mandala 
offering before the interview and, as I had never taken teachings from the 
Panchen Lama before, I was wondering whether to make the guru-­disciple 
connection or not as I began chanting the prayer. It was in my hand whether 
to take him as guru or not. I did not want to feel that His Holiness had 
one view and Panchen Rinpoche another, because then you get into dif-
ficulty and can create heavy negative karma. Then I thought they are one 
in essence. His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Panchen Rinpoche are one in 
essence, one buddha, so there was no problem. Toward the end of the man-
dala I had decided to take the teaching and take him as a guru. It was a short 
teaching based on the Buddha’s advice that we often recite, the verse that 
starts, “Do not commit any unwholesome actions.” He gave a very power-
ful teaching on it. 
Anyway, I wanted to tell you about the dogs. When we were circumam-
bulating the Panchen Lama’s monastery we saw that there were many dogs, 

=== PAGE 181 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    165
each with its own place, like a personal hermitage, and a pot to eat its food 
from. The old mothers from Shigatse carried tsampa and water in buck-
ets to give them. Sometimes they gave the dogs big pieces of the tsampa 
from their home. By going around the monastery giving food and water to 
the dogs they were also circumambulating all the unbelievable number of 
holy objects and holy beings inside. I was really happy seeing those moth-
ers being so kind and compassionate, giving food like that. They were very, 
very kind.
In the same way that I visualized the Tsurphu monks as my guru, you 
can do that whenever you throw a party for your family or friends. If you 
can also invite your enemy, that is the best party! That is something that 
worldly people don’t do. Worldly people usually harm the enemy, insulting 
him, shooting him and things like that. If you are a Dharma practitioner, 
you can invite your enemy and offer him apple pie or momos or whatever. 
At a party, if you think of each guest as your guru or His Holiness the 
Dalai Lama when you offer them food or drink, you are making offerings 
to your guru or His Holiness. In that way you collect the greatest merit 
and make the most powerful purification. It is much greater than making 
offerings to the numberless Buddhas, Dharma and Sangha and the number-
less statues, stupas and scriptures. Such merit is comparatively small. As I 
mentioned, in themselves, such offerings are unbelievable—even offering a 
small grain of rice or a tiny flower to a stupa, a statue or a picture of a bud-
dha, the benefits are beyond our concept, just like the sky. But now, offering 
to the guru, the merit is much greater than offering to all those holy objects. 
You collect the highest merit, the most powerful merit.  
So, by imagining all the guests at your party as your guru, as His Holi-
ness, that is your Dharma practice, your guru devotion practice. Not every-
body can go to the Karmapa’s monastery in Tibet and make offerings to the 
monks while seeing them as the guru, but you can collect a huge amount of 
merit even in your own home by having a party and serving your guests food 
or drink, seeing that as an offering to your guru; that becomes your Dharma 
practice. It is such a quick way to achieve enlightenment. 
The guru is more precious than a wish-­granting jewel
The Kalachakra Tantra says, 
Even making offerings to the Three Rare Sublime Ones of the 
three times for eons 

=== PAGE 182 ===
166    sun of devotion
Or saving tens of millions of creatures, 
You will still not attain enlightenment in this lifetime,
But if you please the guru by devoting yourself with a devotional 
mind, 
Then you will definitely attain the common and sublime qualities 
in this lifetime. 
This is something you should know. The usual translation of kon-­chog sum 
is “Three Jewels” but I think that is a very poor meaning of the term. I pre-
fer to translate it as exactly as I can according to the Tibetan because it 
is very important. We say the “Three Jewels” in relation to the Buddha, 
Dharma and Sangha but “three jewels” what? Three jewels what? It’s noth-
ing; it doesn’t give us anything. I prefer to translate kon-­chog sum as “Three 
Rare Sublime Ones”—the exact Tibetan translation—because it has great 
meaning. 
Why should they be called kon-­chog sum? Among all material objects, 
gold, silver, diamonds and sapphires are the most precious. But rarer than 
these is the wish-­granting jewel. After being in the world a long time, at the 
end, the buddhas’ relics go into the ocean and become wish-­granting jewels. 
I saw this evolution mentioned in a medicine book. That is one explana-
tion; I don’t know if there are any others.
A universal king is a bodhisattva who has collected the most unbeliev-
able merit. They only appear in the world one at a time, never two, and 
when a king does appear his people are able to live their lives in the ten vir-
tues.80 This happens by the power of the universal king. 
Universal, or wheel-­turning, kings—great bodhisattvas who have unbe-
lievable merit—are able to find wish-­granting jewels in the ocean. The jew-
els are cleansed of mud in three ways and on the fifteenth of the month are 
placed on top of a banner. Then, whatever material needs of this life you 
pray for you can have. 
This is something Sai Baba was said to be able to do. He made a hand 
gesture and produced gold chains, watches or things like that for people to 
have. These were not magicians’ hallucinations, things you took back home 
and they then disappeared. You could use them for a long time. Because 
Sai Baba had a lot of merit he was able to produce material gifts for people. 
80  The ten virtues are the opposites of the ten nonvirtues and so, instead of killing, the first 
virtue is not killing or saving lives and so forth. See Rinpoche’s forthcoming book on karma.

=== PAGE 183 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    167
For example, Ming Ming, one of my students and the godmother of 
Sangye from our labrang in Sera, had a special connection with Sai Baba. 
She has been inviting the monks in Sera to do puja every year on Sai Baba’s 
birthday for ten years. She also invites them to do puja on Chinese New 
Year. I heard that Sai Baba produced a gold chain or something for the head 
monk. 
It’s very strange, because usually, in other places, Muslims would never 
think of reciting mantras; they might even become infuriated. But many 
Christians and Muslims come to Singapore and her son recites the man-
tra of the bodhisattva Ksitigarbha, which I gave to him and his mother to 
chant. They have special karma. They made a CD of their chanting, but 
they recite it so fast I couldn’t follow. It is very interesting how the mother 
and children do this. One time when the son chanted it there were thirty-­
one thousand people there. Everybody, including all the Muslims, chanted. 
That is very special. There was no discrimination, no sectarianism, just 
everybody chanting the mantra. For Muslims, chanting is the most difficult 
thing in the world. And after they left Singapore they continued to chant 
the mantras. 
Even though a wish-­granting jewel is much rarer than diamonds, sap-
phires or gold, it cannot purify our past negative karma, the cause of lower 
realms. Only the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha can guide us from the lower 
realms to the upper realms, from the upper realms to nirvana, liberation 
from the oceans of samsara, ultimate happiness, and from there to sang-­gyä, 
the total elimination of all obscurations and the completion of all realiza-
tions. Wish-­granting jewels can give us whatever material comfort of this 
life we ask for but they cannot do what the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha 
can. 
So, kon-­chog sum, the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, is much rarer than 
a wish-­granting jewel, much rarer than numberless wish-­granting jewels. 
Even skies of wish-­granting jewels are nothing compared to the value of the 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and what they can do for us. Kon-­chog sum 
has a very deep meaning, but “Three Jewels” is very loose; it becomes like a 
plastic apple. 
I don’t know if they do this in the West, but in Pathankot81 there is a 
shop that sells fruit. Above the fruit there is a big mirror that reflects all the 
fruit back. From a distance it looks like there is a lot of fruit but when you 
81  The railway town in the Punjab where you alight for the bus to Dharamsala. 

=== PAGE 184 ===
168    sun of devotion
look closer you seen that the top part is only a reflection. Anyway, it’s kind 
of like that. 
It says in the teachings that even making offerings to the Three Rare Sub-
lime Ones, kon-­chog sum, for three eons and saving the lives of ten of mil-
lions of creatures isn’t enough to achieve enlightenment in this lifetime, but 
if we devote ourselves to the guru who has oceans of qualities we can defi-
nitely attain both common and supreme qualities—“supreme” here means 
mahamudra, enlightenment—in this lifetime. 
The tantric text Yeshe Gyatso, Ocean of Transcendental Wisdom, says, 
For the wise fortunate one, skill in doing activities for the guru is 
much more meaningful than doing prostrations to all the past, 
present and future buddhas for ten million, six hundred thou-
sand eons. If you accomplish whatever your guru advises, all your 
desires will succeed.82
Compared with doing prostrations to all the past, present and future bud-
dhas for ten million, six hundred thousand eons, being expert in serving the 
guru and fortunate and wise enough to do so is much more greatly mean-
ingful. If we can accomplish whatever the guru advises us to do, all our 
wishes, our desires, will succeed just like that and we will collect unimagi-
nable merit. 
Seeing apparent mistakes in the guru
There is also a very important practice to remember that helps you develop 
your mind and prevents what has already developed from degenerating. A 
verse by the Fifth Dalai Lama explains how important it is:
When mistakes appear in the guru’s actions you should recog-
nize them as your own distorted, hallucinated mind, which sees 
the opposite of reality. Understand these as your own mistakes 
and abandon such thinking like poison.83
82  See Heart of the Path, pp. 97–98, for the rest of this verse and a commentary upon it.
83  See also Heart of the Path, pp. 194–95.

=== PAGE 185 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    169
This is such an important guru devotion practice. Our mind is hallucinated, 
distorted, and sees the very opposite of reality. To that mind, our own faults 
appear as faults in the actions of the guru. We must recognize this, under-
stand how these are all our own mistakes and abandon the mind that sees 
them as faults in the guru. 
We must abandon that mind like poison. If we encountered poisonous 
food and knew that by eating it we would die, we would immediately throw 
it away, without a second’s delay. Like this, we must recognize the mistakes 
we see in our guru as results of our hallucinated mind and abandon that 
mind immediately. 
When we see an apparent mistake we cannot see that it is completely the 
reflection of our own mistaken thinking. We are unaware of that and see it 
as coming from the guru’s side, that it is his mistake. It is like having dirt on 
our forehead and being unaware of it until we look in the mirror and then 
blame the mirror for the dirt. That way of thinking is totally false; the real-
ity is not like that. This is exactly what the Fifth Dalai Lama said: we must 
recognize that this is our mistake and abandon such wrong thinking like 
poison.
Guru devotion is like a jewel; it’s the most important jewel in our life and 
we can destroy it in an instant by seeing any apparent mistakes of the guru 
as coming from him. For as many seconds as we think like that, we must 
suffer for that many eons in the lower realms; for that many eons our virtue 
is destroyed. Even though we might be just about to attain bodhicitta or 
renunciation or the realization of emptiness, that is delayed for the number 
of eons equivalent to the number of seconds we had heresy or anger. 
When mistakes in the actions of the guru appear to our hallucinated 
mind, there are two ways of utilizing this. The first way is described in this 
verse from the Fifth Dalai Lama. When we recognize that the appearance 
of a mistake is our own mistake, instead of destroying our guru devotion, 
it strengthens it. We use apparent mistakes to develop our devotion. We 
see that the mistake is a projection of our hallucinated mind, our negative 
karma, and there is no mistake from the guru’s side. Because the guru is a 
buddha, the mistake cannot be from the guru’s side. If we think like that our 
devotion will not be disturbed and will, in fact, be made stronger. 
The second way is to see that in order to guide us to liberation, to free us 
from the oceans of samsaric suffering of the lower realms, the guru mani-
fests in an ordinary aspect, as having mistakes, especially for us. Showing an 
ordinary aspect is his method of helping us.

=== PAGE 186 ===
170    sun of devotion
When His Holiness the Dalai Lama first gave the mahamudra commen-
tary84 I asked him what “showing an ordinary aspect” meant. He explained 
that showing an ordinary aspect means showing mistakes. It is very impor-
tant for the guru to show us an ordinary aspect and appear to have mistakes 
in order to guide us. If he were to show himself in the aspect of a buddha 
we would not be able to see him because our mind is so impure. Without 
pure karma we cannot see him in an enlightened aspect. With a mind such 
as ours, a mind full of obscurations, we can only see mistakes. As His Holi-
ness said, the guru can only guide us by appearing to have mistakes. But it 
is a manifestation of our own mistakes, our hallucinated mind. Therefore, 
showing the ordinary aspect, showing mistakes, is unbelievably important 
to us. It is mentioned in the Lama Chöpa, 
Adorned with a sugata’s three bodies and ornamental wheels,
You manifest from an alluring net of skillful means
In ordinary form to lead all beings.
Compassionate refuge savior, I make requests to you.85 
That is very important. The guru is the essence of the three bodies of all the 
buddhas gone to bliss, the sugatas, the skillful means that is like a net cutting 
through appearance. His actions, like a blissful dancing gait, guide transmi-
gratory beings to enlightenment in an ordinary form, not in a pure form. 
This means that when the guru appears, he purposely shows us this mis-
taken, ordinary aspect in order to guide us and all other transmigratory 
beings to enlightenment. The conclusion is that without the guru guiding 
us in this ordinary aspect, we would be without a guide, totally lost in sam-
sara. We would be like a baby left out in a hot desert with no food or water, 
surrounded by dangerous animals. Or we would be like somebody lost in 
the nighttime in a forest full of tigers and many other animals around that 
could eat us at any time. We would be totally lost in samsara, totally without 
a guide, without a protector. 
Because of that we live our life creating only negative karma, nothing 
else, creating only the cause to be born in the lower realms. It is terribly sad, 
just living our whole life day and night to create the karma to be born in the 
84  In Dharamsala at the FPMT’s first Enlightened Experience Celebration, March, 1982. 
Published as The Gelug/Kagyü Tradition of Mahamudra.
85  V.49.

=== PAGE 187 ===
Seeing the Guru as a Buddha    171
lower realms. The lower realms are where we have just come from and now 
all we are doing is creating the cause to go back there and to suffer for eons. 
Every second that the guru appears to us in an ordinary, mistaken aspect 
to guide us is more precious than the whole sky filled with wish-­granting 
jewels. This is a very important meditation. 

=== PAGE 188 ===
Robin Bath

=== PAGE 189 ===
11. More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel
.,
Lama Tsongkhapa and Mönlam
W
	 e chant the Palden Lhamo prayer during the great prayer festival, 
the Mönlam Chenmo. Establishing the Mönlam Chenmo in Lhasa 
was one of Lama Tsongkhapa’s four great holy deeds in Tibet. Another was 
the construction of the Maitreya Buddha statue in the Dzingchi Monastery, 
which I have yet to see.86 Although now many different monasteries or orga-
nizations do mönlams at Bodhgaya, it previously referred to just the prayer 
ceremony initiated by Lama Tsongkhapa. 
There were many thousands of monks in the six colleges of the three 
main monasteries of the Lama Tsongkhapa, or Gelug, tradition in Tibet: 
over seven thousand at Drepung, over five thousand at Sera and over three 
thousand at Ganden. Obviously the numbers are different now in India.
Anyway, these large monasteries, the very top monasteries where the 
monks do extensive study on Buddhist philosophy, are like huge universi-
ties. They resemble the huge factories that make all the different parts of a 
plane—every single screw, every single engine component, everything that 
is needed. Without missing anything, the monks learn the whole path to 
enlightenment, both method and wisdom sides, the qualities of the Bud-
dha, the different levels of the Hinayana and the Mahayana sutra and tantra 
86  The festival (the third great deed) was established in 1409. The Maitreya statue (the first 
great deed) was renovated during Tibetan New Year in 1400, during the time Lama Tsong-
khapa was doing his long retreat at Wolka; Dzinchi is not far from there, in the general 
region of Lake Lhamo Latsho. The other two great deeds were giving an extensive Vinaya 
teaching with Jetsun Rendawa and Kyabchog Pal Zangpo at Namtse Deng in 1402, thereby 
revitalizing the monastic tradition (the second great deed), and constructing Ganden Mon-
astery, which was completed in 1410 (the fourth great deed).

=== PAGE 190 ===
174    sun of devotion
paths, the five paths to liberation, the thirty-­seven aids to enlightenment 
and so forth. What they study is truly amazing; so extensive, as deep and as 
vast as the Pacific Ocean. 
Besides studying the sutra path, the tantra they learn and practice is 
much more than just reciting mantras or doing sadhanas, as people with 
little knowledge might think. Even though reciting mantras greatly puri-
fies the mind and prepares it for achieving enlightenment, the practice of 
tantra is so much more than that. It contains the entire path to enlighten-
ment. In tantra there are many skillful techniques that are not found in the 
practice of sutra. The study of the mind in sutra lacks the great profundity 
of tantra, where we learn about the gross, subtle and extremely subtle mind, 
the pure mind. 
When Lama Tsongkhapa organized the Mönlam Chenmo, all the main 
monasteries and many other monasteries gathered together, and this con-
tinued up until His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai Lama left Tibet. Now 
we do it in exile. The festival lasts for fifteen days, from Losar87 until the Day 
of Miracles.88 Many people think it is just the Day of Miracles, but in fact it 
lasts the entire fifteen days. 
Lama Tsongkhapa was extremely skillful. During the fifteen days of 
Mönlam Chenmo we start each day with puja. Lay people come from all 
over to ask for prayers for those who have died, are sick or have difficulties. 
They make food, money and tea offerings because during this period, the 
merit of offerings made to each monk is increased a hundred million times. 
Monks also come to ask for success in their Dharma studies and practice or 
for help in overcoming obstacles. 
Then the monks debate on the Pramanavarttika, logical teachings on 
mind, reincarnation, the trustworthiness of the Buddha because his teach-
ings are pure and so forth. Then there is another puja followed by debate 
on the Prajnaparamita or the Abhisamayalamkara. After another puja or 
meditation there’s debate on the Madhyamaka and in the evening there is 
another puja and then debate on the Vinaya or the Abhidharmakosha. 
The debates are between geshes who have finished their study of these 
five major texts. Each day they gather in groups and two of them are chosen 
to reply to questions. They are also examined and their answers checked by 
87  Tibetan New Year’s day, determined by the lunar calendar, it usually falls in February or 
March. See fpmt.org for more details.
88  Tib: Chö-­trul Dü-­chen.

=== PAGE 191 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    175
somebody like the Ganden Tripa, His Holiness’s regent or the abbots of the 
monasteries. 
After the early morning puja the Ganden Tripa reads the Buddha’s life 
stories in order to inspire the monks to follow the path he practiced, with 
the six paramitas of charity, morality, patience, perseverance, meditation 
and wisdom. Besides the famous story of when the Buddha gave his body 
to the tiger, there are many stories of how he made charity of his limbs, eyes 
and so forth for three countless great eons. Listening to those stories told by 
Ganden Tripa, the monks and laypeople are inspired to follow in the foot-
steps of the Buddha. 
In that way Lama Tsongkhapa integrated so many things for everybody 
to collect merit. It was an incredibly skillful way to benefit sentient beings. 
As with offerings made to the monks, on any of those fifteen days, recit-
ing one Vajrasattva mantra becomes the equivalent of a hundred million 
Vajrasattva mantras, giving one rupee of charity to a beggar becomes the 
equivalent of giving a hundred million rupees, making offerings of one light 
becomes the equivalent of making a hundred million light offerings and 
so forth. This is also the best time to do a retreat or a nyung-­nä, the exten-
sive two-­day lower tantra retreat on Chenrezig with many prostrations to 
the Thirty-­five Buddhas and Chenrezig and extensive mantra recitation. All 
this creates the most unbelievable merit. 
The benefits of prostrations
During a nyung-­nä people generally do full-­length prostrations, like a tree 
lying down, but it is also possible to do the five-­limb, or half, prostration.
Doing prostrations correctly brings many benefits. As you go down onto 
the floor you must be aware that you’re prostrating to the Buddha, Dharma 
and Sangha, otherwise it just becomes exercise. Mindlessly going up and 
down might make you fit but it doesn’t become prostration. Prostration 
means purifying your body, speech and mind, wiping off the garbage, the 
obscurations and negative karma collected through the actions of your 
body, speech and mind from beginningless rebirths. I don’t know what the 
English word “prostration” means, but in Tibetan, chag has this meaning. 
If you think of the Guru, Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and pay homage to 
them, it becomes a prostration. Otherwise you are just mimicking prostra-
tion and it doesn’t become purification. 
After I’d had my stroke, a lady who came to the Aptos house didn’t know 
what to do. My stroke was a light one and the paralysis was not severe but 

=== PAGE 192 ===
176    sun of devotion
it was difficult to walk. She asked, “What do you want? What do you 
expect?” She often asked that when she came. There was quite a famous 
man in New York who taught meditation by email or through a website that 
many people followed. I can’t say whether he is a realized person or not but 
he seems to have a connection to many people and had put his meditation 
on the Internet. 
She got the idea of doing prostrations from him and told me to do them 
in order to get the movement back in my legs. When I said I would do pros-
trations to the Buddha she was a little bit surprised. I didn’t do them every 
day, but with the exercise I slowly got better. 
For every atom of ground your body covers when you go down you cre-
ate the karma to be born as a wheel-­turning king a thousand times. Wheel-­
turning kings arise only one at a time; there can’t be two at once. They have 
unbelievable power. It takes infinite merit to be born as a wheel-­turning 
king just once, yet with your body covering just one atom of ground you 
create the karma to be born as a wheel-­turning king for a thousand lifetimes. 
From your head down to your feet, when you do prostrations you cover 
so many atoms. Now, if you keep your ankle flexed so that the tips of your 
toes touch the ground, you lose covering many atoms, so when you do pros-
trations you should point your toes. In that way you cover countless more 
atoms. I need to explain this because if you don’t know about it you’re in 
danger of thinking prostration is simply a Tibetan custom and not pros-
trating properly. Then you fail to collect all that unbelievable merit. Due to 
ignorance, you cheat yourself. 
Even though my body is short, when I do prostrations I still cover num-
berless atoms between here and the bottom of the earth. Even atoms that 
our fingers and toes cover are uncountable, especially for us beings who 
don’t have omniscient minds or even ordinary clairvoyance. So, for each 
atom of ground we cover, from the surface of the earth down to its bottom, 
we create the good karma to be born as a wheel-­turning king for a thou-
sand lifetimes. That is mentioned in the Lankavatara Sutra, where it says 
a “golden base,” but it means the bottom of the earth. The merits that the 
Buddha explained in that sutra are beyond comprehension. 
People who are tall or fat cover even more atoms, as do people with long 
hair. If you have long hair, when you do prostrations you should let it loose 
so that it spreads out on the ground and covers even more atoms. Having 
long hair or being tall or fat has huge benefits when doing prostrations; you 
create so much more unbelievable merit, like generating a greater income. I 

=== PAGE 193 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    177
have to do two prostrations for every one a tall or a fat person does! Ameri-
cans tend to be tall, so they are very fortunate because when they do prostra-
tions they collect unbelievable merit. 
Reciting the names of the Thirty-­five Buddhas while doing lots of pros-
trations purifies many eons of negative karma; for example, reciting just 
Guru Shakyamuni Buddha’s name purifies eighty thousand eons of nega-
tivity. Students who come to Kopan and learn to chant Lama tön-­pa chom-­
dän-­dä 89 in the mornings are unbelievably fortunate. The lam-­rim lineage 
lamas normally say that ten thousand eons of negative karma are purified, 
but in the Kangyur I have seen that number cited as ten million eons. Not 
only that, I have even seen it said that it can be a hundred billion eons of 
negative karma.90 That is how much negative karma is purified by reciting 
the buddhas’ names, Guru Shakyamuni’s mantra tadyatha om muné 
muné mahamunayé soha or a few words of the Heart Sutra. It’s unbe-
lievable. We are so fortunate that we are able to know this.
When Lama Tsongkhapa first did seven hundred thousand prostrations 
at Wolka he saw the Thirty-­five Buddhas without their heads. This was 
because he had recited the Thirty-­five Buddhas prayer omitting the words 
de-­zhin sheg-­pa, tathagata, which explains the qualities of a buddha. After-
wards, however, when he added de-­zhin sheg-­pa to the beginning of each 
buddha’s name, he saw them with heads.
So in the Lama Tsongkhapa tradition we include de-­zhin sheg-­pa, whereas 
some other traditions don’t. If you have seen this you might wonder why 
there are different forms of the practice, but it is not that they are different 
texts, it’s just that some omit the de-­zhin sheg-­pa. 
There is also unbelievable merit in doing many prostrations to the 
Thousand-­arm Compassion Buddha with the mantra om mani padme 
hum. The number of atoms of dust of this earth can be counted, the num-
ber of raindrops can be counted, the number of drops of water in the oceans 
can be counted, but we cannot count the benefits of reciting this mantra. It 
89  A prayer of prostration, offering, refuge and a request for blessings containing several epi-
thets of the Buddha: La ma tön pa chom dän dä de zhin sheg pa dra chom pa yang dag par 
dzog pä sang gyä päl gyäl wa shakya thub pa la/chhag tshäl lo chhö do kyab su chhi wo/jin gyi 
lab tu söl.
90  Tib: trag-­trig. In the Tibetan system the large numbers are as follows: 100,000, bum; 1 mil-
lion, sa-­ya; 10 million, je-­wa; 100 million, dung-­chur; 1,000 million (US billion), ter-­bum; 10 
billion, ter-­bum-­chen-­po; 100 billion, trag-­trig; 1 trillion (Euro billion), trag-­trig chen-­po. See 
Teachings from the Vajrasattva Retreat, p. 531. See also “Tibetan numbers” at LamaYeshe.com.

=== PAGE 194 ===
178    sun of devotion
is so unbelievable, especially if you recite it with bodhicitta. Each time you 
recite the mantra om mani padme hum once, each time you recite one 
buddha’s name, you collect more than skies of merit. And besides power-
fully purifying obscurations collected from beginningless rebirths and col-
lecting extensive merit, it generates compassion within your heart for the 
numberless sentient beings: the human beings, the gods, the demigods, the 
hell beings, the hungry ghosts, the animals—for every sentient being, with-
out leaving out even one insect. You develop the most amazing compassion. 
Without generating compassion for sentient beings, there is no enlight-
enment; by generating compassion for others, there is enlightenment. That 
is one hundred percent sure. The benefit of generating compassion for even 
one sentient being—whether it is a mosquito, an ant, any kind of insect or 
whatever, no matter how big or small it is, even as big as a mountain—gener-
ating compassion for even one sentient being brings you to enlightenment. 
I must tell you this. In Solu Khumbu, lay people quite often do nyung-­
näs at the small temples in the different villages but, although they have 
the text, the sadhana, they cannot read it at all, because they have not even 
learned ka kha ga nga, the Tibetan alphabet. Those who can read do so, 
but they are very few. What most people do is go there with great faith and 
recite om mani padme hum, om mani padme hum, doing the sessions 
with prostrations. They also take the eight Mahayana precepts on both days 
of the nyung-­nä. Each precept you take with bodhicitta, you benefit num-
berless sentient beings. You are a great source of happiness and success, an 
unbelievable source of enlightenment for every being. Doing such practices 
combines many powerful things.
Khadro-­la’s story 
Chanting the Palden Lhamo prayer is an important aspect of Mönlam 
Chenmo. When Khadro-­la and I are in different places we chant this prayer. 
Once she made the comment that the prayer actually makes Palden Lhamo 
come, which is why she likes chanting it.
Sorry! Again there’s a story. Palden Lhamo is a servant to Khadro-­la. She 
serves Khadro-­la. When Khadro-­la was going to Mt. Kailash she rode on 
Palden Lhamo’s mule. That is just the essence of the story. 
When Khadro-­la first went to Dharamsala it took her a year to see His 
Holiness because, coming from lower Kham, Chamdo, so far away, she had 
the appearance of a villager, with very messy hair and so forth. Of course, 

=== PAGE 195 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    179
that was just her external appearance and no indication of the level of her 
mind and the realizations she had. On the outside she appeared as a very 
ordinary Tibetan village girl, kind of disheveled, whereas in reality she was 
something else entirely. If I tell you some of her story—I don’t need to tell 
it all—that will show you.
She worked in a Tibetan government restaurant in Dharamsala but 
because of her appearance they made her clean the toilets. Not having any 
tools, she had to clean them by scratching the kaka off with her fingernails. 
That’s what she said, but I think maybe this is not public talk. 
 One day the manager of the restaurant was possibly thinking of hav-
ing physical contact with her, maybe sex, I’m not sure, and she pushed him 
away—just a little shove—but he was flung really far. Then his mind com-
pletely changed. He said, “Now, whenever you want something from the 
refrigerator, Coca-­Cola or anything, please take it any time you want.” Her 
wrathful aspect had so shocked him that his mind completely changed. 
She tried to meet His Holiness for a year but a lay lama who was a reli-
gious head wouldn’t let her. That happened at the beginning of her troubles. 
She may have told me before not to mention this but anyway, she went to 
a place in Dharamsala where the water comes down—I don’t know what 
it’s called—and picked up a stone. After she touched the stone it became 
water, like nectar. She took this to offer to His Holiness. She often went 
into a trance, outside looking like a ten-­ma,91 and then something like blood 
would come. 
Kirti Tsenshab Rinpoche was the one who helped her meet His Holi-
ness. He told her, “I myself will make the golden bridge connecting you 
and His Holiness.” Once he had made that connection she was able to meet 
him. She told me that she went to see Kirti Tsenshab Rinpoche a few times 
and he told her, “Even at the very end of my life, you are the object of ref-
uge I rely on.” 
From that time on she was given a house to stay in and an old lady to take 
care of her. Early one morning the old lady saw a lot of mule prints on the 
floor of her room. It seems that during the night Palden Lhamo had come 
to protect or serve her. 
And similarly, in the middle of the night an old Nyingma lama—I can’t 
say whether he was enlightened or not but he was very highly realized—
91  The ten-­ma goddesses are the twelve guardian deities of the Gelug tradition, associated 
with Palden Lhamo. 

=== PAGE 196 ===
180    sun of devotion
who had just passed away came to speak with her. The old lady who cared 
for her was in the next room and she could hear talking, blah, blah, blah, 
blah, blah, so the next morning she scolded Khadro-­la. “You have a boy-
friend! You have a boyfriend. You are a complete liar!” I think she scolded 
Khadro-­la for a few mornings, not only the one time. Khadro-­la just said, 
“No boyfriend.” The lama came in middle of the night to speak with her, to 
give her teachings or something like that. He had other powers, so I think 
His Holiness also knew. But to the old lady listening from the next room it 
seemed that Khadro-­la had a boyfriend so she scolded her, saying she was 
a total liar. Then afterwards she realized it wasn’t like that, that in reality 
Palden Lhamo was Khadro-­la’s servant. That is what I wanted to tell you.
Benefiting sentient beings 
At this time we have received not just a human rebirth but a perfect human 
rebirth. Each day, each hour, each minute, even each second, how many 
sentient beings from the intermediate state are reborn in the hell realm? It’s 
as many as the specks of dust of this earth. Each day, each hour, each min-
ute, each second how many sentient beings from the intermediate state are 
reborn as hungry ghosts? It’s like the number of the sand grains of the Pacific 
Ocean. Each day, each hour, each minute, each second, how many sentient 
beings from the intermediate state are reborn as animals? It’s as many as the 
blades of grass growing on all the mountains and the ground everywhere—
and of course there are numberless universes—so it’s uncountable. We have 
to think about these things really well.
There are so many kinds of animals in the oceans. Some, like whales, are 
as huge as mountains; others are so small that we can see them only through 
a microscope. I remember we were once crossing a short bridge on a beach 
overlooking the ocean. Due to a combination of sun and shade we saw so 
many incredibly tiny insects in the water under the bridge. Because of the 
way the light hit the water the number of creatures we saw was unbelievable. 
If you look at a drop of water under a microscope you can see all the small 
creatures you cannot see by eye. 
As I have mentioned, although the ocean is very blue, very calm, very 
peaceful looking, just below the surface there are all kinds of sentient beings, 
large and small, swimming everywhere trying to eat each other while at the 
same time trying to avoid being eaten, all the time full of fear. 
Like this, there are numberless animal realm beings in each of the oceans 

=== PAGE 197 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    181
and numberless animal realm beings in the air and on and under the ground. 
Every time you walk on grass, so many tiny insects run away. 
That’s why we recite the mantra to bless the feet in the prayers we say at 
the beginning of each day.92 Traditionally, we recite this mantra seven times 
and then blow on the soles of our feet, but because we all wear shoes I think 
we should blow on the soles of our shoes. This will help any insects, like ants, 
that we kill while walking around. When we recite the mantra and blow on 
the soles of our feet or shoes, any insect we step on will get reborn in the 
Heaven of Thirty-­three. That’s the benefit of this mantra. 
Before we travel by car we can also recite the mantra and spit or blow on 
the tires. That way, any animal or insect that is crushed by the wheels gets 
a higher rebirth. I have already mentioned the benefits of having the Nam-
gyälma mantra in your car.
How to help somebody who is dying or dead
Whenever you yourself, a family member, a friend or an animal is dying or 
dead, one of the most powerful things that can be done is for a Namgyälma 
card to be put on top of the body for a little while. Then that being will defi-
nitely be protected from going to the lower realms and will definitely get 
a higher rebirth with the possibility of meeting the Dharma. That is a vital 
practice when somebody suddenly dies and you don’t know what to do. 
When I was in France leading the Four Kadam Deities retreat at Institut 
Vajrayogini in 2003 the father of one of our German students died. She had 
been a Buddhist for ten years, but when her father suddenly died she didn’t 
know what to do. So I spent a few days during the retreat talking about how 
to help a dying or dead person. Some things were my own ideas and others 
were based on a book. 
The Tibetan way of benefiting dead or dying people may be traditional 
but it is certainly not a meaningless custom. It really benefits. I explained 
ways of helping both yourself and others at the time of death. If you know 
how to do that properly you can help dying or dead people very effectively.
A book based on these talks at Institut Vajrayogini is now available.93 I 
also gave some teachings several years ago about the five powers near the 
92  om krecha raghana hum hri svaha.
93  How to Enjoy Death: Preparing to Meet Life’s Final Challenge without Fear. Also available 
as a free download from fpmt.org as How to Help Your Loved Ones Enjoy Death and Go Hap-
pily to Their Next Rebirth: A Handbook by Lama Zopa Rinpoche.

=== PAGE 198 ===
182    sun of devotion
time of death because I was getting so many messages about people who 
were dying, asking for advice.94 One person I mentioned this to was Linda 
Rose, in Hong Kong, who had cancer. I talked for more than an hour but I 
still wasn’t finished. I told her that she would die if she stayed in Hong Kong 
and that according to my observation, or mo, it would be better for her to 
go to America. So she went to California and lived for another three years. 
Some years ago the FPMT created a “Liberation Box,”95 which contains 
all the things needed to help somebody who is dying or already dead. For 
example, if somebody is still capable of comprehending, you can give them 
advice, but if that is not possible, like with children and very old people, 
you need to help externally in order for them to not be reborn in the lower 
realms. When somebody is dying you can make all these things available to 
help that person, to guide the mind—all the mantras and other things, such 
as po-­wa pills. This is very important.
The Liberation Box already contains all the external things to put on 
people to bless them, to save their consciousness from being reborn in the 
lower realms. Everything is explained; everything is prepared. I don’t think 
other organizations have something like this yet. The FPMT also has other 
books of practices, with different mantras, different pujas and prayers. 
Those who are familiar with these practices can do them. When a person 
dies you really don’t know about the dying person’s mind; you just know 
your own thoughts, so these practices can guide you. 
It is extremely important to be able to help a dying person and, if you can, 
the dying person’s family as well. Like us, they are not yet dead but they are 
dying. There are only a certain number of in-­breaths and out-­breaths in a 
lifetime. Every day, every hour, every minute, every second, that number is 
constantly diminishing. In reality, we too are dying. The intuitive feeling we 
have, that the person with cancer is dying but we are not, is totally incorrect. 
No matter how many days, how many hours, how many minutes, how 
many seconds we have left in this life, they are constantly finishing. Life is 
getting shorter and shorter. We too are dying and are therefore the same as 
the person we label as dying. We could even die before that person. 
I’m extremely happy that the organization and the centers can provide 
such things. It’s really good. We should develop these tools even more, 
showing how to guide others to avoid rebirth in the lower realms and to 
94  Published as Practicing Five Powers Near the Time of Death. 
95  Available from the Foundation Store as the Liberation Box: Tools for a Fortunate Rebirth.

=== PAGE 199 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    183
gain a higher rebirth, in a pure land or as a god or human being, and espe-
cially to receive a perfect human rebirth and meet the Dharma. Most peo-
ple don’t think in that way. 
Having a perfect human rebirth is like a dream
The Buddha compared the number of human beings to the number of other 
beings. He said that if we scratch the ground, the amount of dirt we collect 
under our fingernails is like the number of human beings whereas all the 
dirt of this entire earth is like the number of animals.96 That there are so few 
human beings compared to even the animals is because it is very difficult to 
create the cause to be born human, which is to have not just morality but 
pure morality. Morality alone is not enough to be born as a human being or 
a god; it must be pure morality. 
There are so many animals. There are uncountable gnats in the swarms 
that fly up when we walk on the grass; there are so many ants in just one 
nest. The number of human beings compared to the number of ants living 
in all the ant nests is tiny. We need to make such comparisons in case we 
think that the number of human beings is so huge. 
However, we do not just have a human rebirth but a perfect human 
rebirth, this life in which we have met not just Buddhism but the Mahayana 
teachings, and of the Mahayana teachings, both sutra and tantra. We have 
this perfect human rebirth because in past lives we observed the pratimok-
sha, bodhisattva and tantric vows purely. Therefore in this life we are again 
able to meet all these different levels of teachings and have the opportunity 
to take these vows again. This is almost the only time we will ever receive 
such a perfect human rebirth. We have this opportunity now, but the future 
depends on what we do with it. 
Having received this perfect human rebirth is like a dream. Achieving the 
eight freedoms and the ten richnesses seems impossible but it has happened. 
I don’t need to detail the eight freedoms and the ten richnesses here. If you 
are unfamiliar with the teachings on the perfect human rebirth, please 
study them. There are many lam-­rim books that cover this topic. If you 
don’t know how precious this precious human body is you will not value it. 
Besides seeing the rarity of this perfect human rebirth by comparing it 
96  See also The Perfect Human Rebirth: Freedom and Richness on the Path to Enlightenment, 
p. 115.

=== PAGE 200 ===
184    sun of devotion
to the number of other beings, we can also understand its rarity by investi-
gating its causes and seeing that they are incredibly difficult to create. It is 
difficult to find even a human rebirth in general let alone a perfect human 
rebirth. Reflecting on such things over and over again dispels negative states 
of mind such as laziness, anger, attachment and ignorance, all those things 
that waste this life. 
There is also this example.97 A golden ring floats on the ocean. It is not 
a wooden ring that would float easily but a golden ring, something that 
would normally sink. Somehow it remains afloat but not in one place. It is 
constantly moved about by the wind and waves. 
The golden ring represents pure Buddhism, not corrupted Buddhism. 
I think without studying much Dharma it is difficult to understand what 
“pure” means, what is pure Buddhism and what is corrupted. If you study 
the world, however, and the Dharma you have been practicing, you will 
understand how other people suffer and how difficult it is to find the cor-
rect Dharma. Then you will understand the whole situation. Otherwise you 
can just run to anybody who teaches meditation and never check whether 
he or she is a meditator or not. 
It’s like the quote from Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen that I have 
already mentioned. We should not be like an old dog looking for food in 
the street, grabbing it from anybody and gobbling it down as quickly as pos-
sible. This quote relates to finding a guru but it applies to the teachings in 
general as well. A dog sees somebody handing out food and just runs to him. 
Even if there are no other dogs around, he eats the food without first check-
ing whether it is good for his health or not. You should not be like that dog, 
running to somebody teaching meditation without checking the person or 
the teachings. You need to learn more, especially Lama Tsongkhapa’s teach-
ing, but also look at other teachings. Then you will know. 
So, the golden ring represents pure, unmistaken Buddhism—not just the 
pure morality needed to get a higher rebirth but also the higher trainings 
of morality, concentration and wisdom required to achieve nirvana, lib-
eration from the ocean of samsara. It also means developing compassion, 
bodhicitta, to achieve full enlightenment, the elimination of all obscura-
tions and the completion of all realizations for sentient beings. This is what 
97  These are the three ways to understand the rarity of the perfect human rebirth: by num-
bers, by cause and by example.

=== PAGE 201 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    185
the golden ring signifies. Although the ring is somehow able to stay on top, 
it is moved back and forth by the winds and tides. 
Anyway, in this example, swimming in the depths of the ocean is a blind 
turtle that comes to the surface once every hundred years. Not only does it 
come up rarely, it is also blind, so it cannot see the golden ring. This time we 
have received the perfect human rebirth with eight freedoms and ten rich-
nesses, which gives us the opportunity to practice Dharma and achieve full 
enlightenment for sentient beings. But we have received this perfect human 
rebirth just this once. This is like the blind turtle coming up and putting its 
head through the golden ring. This is an example of something that seems to 
be impossible but has somehow happened. So, this perfect human rebirth 
that we have received this one time is like a dream—a seemingly impossible 
thing that has somehow happened. 
We must not waste one moment
Therefore we must not waste this perfect human rebirth. We must not 
waste one day, one hour, one minute. We must not use our whole life to 
create nonvirtue, to create the cause to be born back where we came from, 
where we have been most of the time, the lower realms. Wasting our life 
means more than just leading an empty life; it means using our life to create 
the causes of the lower realms. 
Without ever having met the Dharma, the Buddha’s legacy to the world, 
and without having developed a good heart, everything we do can only be 
the cause of the lower realms. Our education is solely for this purpose. We 
go to kindergarten, primary school, high school and then college and uni-
versity just to create the causes of the lower realms. I don’t think I have ever 
put it this way before.  
Unless our mind changes we are in no way different to the insects. We 
have the same attachment to this life, just working for the pleasure of this 
life. We are the same as the ants, the same as the worms, the same as the lice. 
How we spend our life is so poor, even if we are a billionaire, a zillionaire, a 
trillionaire. No matter how much power we have in the world, how many 
people we have working under us, in reality there is no difference in the 
motivation, in the way of thinking. It is just cherishing the I, just thinking 
of this life’s happiness. 
We might be human beings, with a better brain and a better education, 
but even if we’ve been to university and have been extensively educated, 
unless we know and practice Dharma, in essence our way of thinking is the 

=== PAGE 202 ===
186    sun of devotion
same as that of an insect. Mosquitoes need to look for blood, but we are no 
different, needing to eat meat, another being’s flesh and blood. If we kill and 
eat animals, how are we any different from mosquitoes? If we don’t practice 
compassion for the beings of the lower realms, how are we different from 
them? 
Whether or not we eat animals is in our hands
While I was in hospital in Australia,98 I saw on TV that Australia was sell-
ing huge numbers of sheep and cows to Indonesia. They showed sheep all 
lined up, so tiny, going to the slaughterhouse. There was the shot of a cow 
with a rope tied around its horns being pulled down from the platform to 
its place of execution. The cow didn’t want to go; it was pulling back and a 
man was pulling it down. 
I think this may have been the first time they exposed this and the Aus-
tralian people, everybody, got so upset. The livestock company stopped sell-
ing animals to Indonesia. But then I don’t know what happened. Of course, 
everything in life is a dependent arising; one thing depends on another. So 
perhaps, because the big companies have all the power, the situation may 
have reverted again after two or three months. 
At that time I thought I cannot stop this, but now, whatever teaching I 
do, even tantric teachings, I announce to the world to be vegetarian, so that 
fewer people will eat meat and fewer animals will get killed and they will 
suffer less. If more people refused to eat meat there would naturally be less 
suffering for animals. 
Not eating meat at all in the world—that is a dream. That will not hap-
pen. But fewer people eating meat can happen. So I thought to announce 
this to the world. It’s very simple. We ourselves don’t want somebody else 
to use our body, to be killed for food. We don’t want to suffer. In exactly the 
same way, why not all others? Animals, insects, they don’t want to suffer. We 
can see that when we touch their bodies, they have such fear. 
Animals can’t speak. They can’t demonstrate in the road or proclaim 
their position on TV or in newspapers. They can’t parade with placards and 
loudspeakers. They have no power at all. Animals are powerless, totally in 
human hands, to be used like toilet paper. It’s so pitiful. People have little 
98  Rinpoche is referring to his stay in hospital after manifesting a stroke in Bendigo, Austra-
lia, April 2011.

=== PAGE 203 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    187
concern about their feelings. Their mind is not open at all. That is really 
so bad.
Learning the Buddha’s teachings makes people understand. It empha-
sizes the need to generate compassion for all sentient beings. People have to 
understand the suffering of other sentient beings as the teachings explain. 
I’m thinking of writing a book about Western food especially for Tibet-
ans, for their monasteries, including Sera. Generally Tibetans from Tibet 
are very used to eating meat because nomads ate it and that’s what we did 
before, with the Bön religion and with shamanism, or black Bönpo. Meat 
eating was common before Buddhism came. This book will explain how to 
make tasty, nutritious vegetarian food and will contain many photographs 
to make it easy for the monks and nuns to be vegetarian. If the food is not 
tasty they will go back to being non-­vegetarians because they are so used to 
eating meat. And I will also explain the meditation to do while cooking, 
cleaning and so forth so that everything becomes Dharma. 
This precious human life is more precious than a wish-­granting jewel
Phagpa Pawo99 was a very famous, learned Hindu yogi, a sadhu who became 
Buddhist after going to Mount Kailash and then became a great, learned 
Buddhist pandit. He said, 
Because of ignorance you fail to collect even a fraction of the 
treasury of merit and after this life enter the house of unceasing 
suffering. You are like a businessman who travels to the land of 
wish-­granting jewels but comes home empty-­handed. 
Due to ignorance we do not collect even a tiny amount of merit and then, 
when we pass into the next life, we “enter the house of unceasing suffering.” 
Because we have not met the Dharma we create nonvirtue, which brings the 
result of suffering, instead of experiencing happiness, which is the result of 
virtue. Entering the house of unceasing suffering means being reborn into 
the suffering of the lower realms in general and the suffering of the hell 
realms in particular. This is the general meaning. 
99  Also called (Tib:) Lobpön Pawo, (Skt:) Ashvaghosha or Aryashura, a second-­century 
Indian master renowned for his scholarship and poetry; author of Fifty Verses of Guru 
Devotion.

=== PAGE 204 ===
188    sun of devotion
He continues that this is like a businessman who goes to a land of wish-­
granting jewels, where he could pick up as many wish-­granting jewels as 
he wanted, but he is not aware of this and as a result returns home empty-­
handed. If we are ignorant of the Dharma, if we fail to practice the Dharma, 
it is exactly like that. We do not know the Buddha’s teachings exist in the 
world or we have a closed mind toward them, so we neither learn nor prac-
tice. That is just like arriving in the land of wish-­granting jewels, not being 
aware they are there and returning home empty-­handed. 
In his Letter to a Disciple, Chandragomin said, 
With this perfect human rebirth that you have received you can 
be free from the oceans of samsaric suffering and furthermore 
you can plant the seeds of virtue for supreme enlightenment. 
Because of this exalted quality, this human body is much more 
valuable than a wish-­granting jewel. Knowing this, who would 
dare not make use of this precious human body? 
We have not only a human rebirth but a perfect human rebirth. Without 
this great quality we would have to suffer not just once but numberless times 
in each of the realms of samsara: the hell realm, the hungry ghost realm, the 
animal realm, the human realm and the god realm. With a perfect human 
rebirth we can free ourselves from the oceans of suffering rebirths and also 
plant the seeds of virtue of supreme enlightenment, the total purification of 
all obscurations and the total actualization of all realizations.
Because our human rebirth has this precious extra quality that allows us 
to do all that, it is like a wish-­granting jewel that allows us to obtain what-
ever material comforts of this life we want but is unable to purify the causes 
of the lower realms or create the causes for a higher rebirth. Therefore this 
human body is so special; it is much more precious than a wish-­granting 
jewel, and not just one wish-­granting jewel but the whole sky filled with 
wish-­granting jewels. Even if we were to have all that it would be nothing 
special; it could not bring us all the benefits that a perfect human rebirth 
can. Therefore, Chandragomin asked, knowing this to be so, who would 
dare use this perfect human body for meaningless things? 
Having been born at a time when the Dharma has spread, we must prac-
tice the unmistaken Dharma, otherwise we will be exactly like the business-
man returning from the land of wish-­granting jewels empty-­handed. 
When I check up on one day of my life, this is what I see: I get up with 

=== PAGE 205 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    189
ignorance and attachment to this life, dress with ignorance and attachment 
to this life, go to the bathroom and wash with ignorance and attachment 
to this life and so forth. That is my motivation—not a Dharma motivation 
but a worldly one. 
Attachment to this life is the main motivation for everything we do; 
we do not have a Dharma motivation. In the same way, we eat breakfast 
with the nonvirtuous thought, attachment to this life. We do everything 
with a totally nonvirtuous motivation. Eating breakfast becomes not holy 
Dharma but worldly dharma. In the same way, our motivation for going to 
work is attachment to this life. We have no Dharma motivation, not even 
to benefit our future lives or to achieve liberation from samsara. However 
many hours of work we do, because of our motivation, they all become non-
virtuous; our work does not become Dharma. 
Eating lunch with the eight worldly dharmas, with attachment to this 
life, cannot become Dharma. However many hours we spend over lunch, 
every second of eating or drinking becomes nonvirtue, the cause of the 
lower realms. Similarly, we eat dinner with the same motivation, attach-
ment to this life, and so that also becomes nonvirtuous. It does not become 
holy Dharma. 
Going to sleep is the same; again, we do it for the pleasure of this life. At 
the beginning there’s no virtuous thought, no Dharma motivation, so how-
ever many hours of comfortable, deep sleep we get, it all becomes nonvirtue.
Even trying to do some Dharma activity like saying mantras or prayers 
fails to become Dharma. Our motivation is the same, the wish for the plea-
sure of this life, therefore our so-­called Dharma activity actually becomes 
non-­Dharma. Such motivation can make even Dharma study a worldly 
concern. Learning more Dharma in order to teach may not be to benefit 
others but for reputation and power. 
If you are like me, when you check on your day you can see that because 
of your worldly motivation, all the activities of your body, speech and mind 
throughout the whole day and night have been completely nonvirtuous. 
And having collected no virtue in this life, only nonvirtue, the result is that 
in your next life, leave aside not attaining another human rebirth, you won’t 
even hear the sound of a human voice for many eons. Once your life in the 
lower realms has started, because your negative karma has not been puri-
fied, because you failed to practice Dharma, you will never hear another 
pleasant sound. 
Shantideva said, 

=== PAGE 206 ===
190    sun of devotion
And if I commit no wholesome deeds (there),
But readily amass much wrongdoing,
Then for a hundred million eons
I shall not even hear the words “a happy life.”100
This time, with this human body, it should be different. We have a differ-
ent body, a different life, a different way of thinking from the animals, so it 
should be different. But since there is no Dharma in our life, there is no real 
difference between the animals and us. Our mind is the same as that of ani-
mals and insects in that we are all only working for this life. The only differ-
ence is that this time we don’t have horns or a tail. But besides not having a 
tail or horns, we are no different at all from the animals and insects.
To use the traditional examples, if we have a boat capable of crossing a 
river or an ocean, we should use it. Or, if a group of heroes ready to help us 
destroy an enemy has gathered, we should use it. That of course does not 
mean to harm others, which is what normal people do in the world. Here 
it means knowing the Dharma, using it to subdue the mind. The enemy is 
the inner enemy; there is no external enemy. If we have anger, delusion and 
so forth in our mind—the inner enemy—we will always have external ene-
mies. If there is no inner enemy, there can be no external enemy.
Nagarjuna said,
Killing the inner enemy of anger is like killing all external enemies. 
When you have heat, water and fertilizer you must plant your 
crops;
When you have a skillful horse you must take the opportunity to 
travel to distant places. 
Killing the inner enemy of anger is like killing all external enemies; if we 
have no anger we can have no external enemies. Therefore we must practice 
Dharma while we have the opportunity. This is analogous to the need to 
plant crops whenever the right conditions come together: heat and water 
and fertilizer. 
There is also the analogy of the skillful horse. If we are lucky enough to 
have a skillful horse we should take the opportunity to travel to faraway 
places. Of course, these days we can go by car or plane. But anyway, this is 
100  A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Ch. 4, v. 19. 

=== PAGE 207 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    191
really the time to do our best, to make our life most beneficial for sentient 
beings as well as ourselves by learning Dharma, knowing Dharma and prac-
ticing Dharma.  
While our cow is giving milk, we must milk her. We must not just waste 
the opportunity by not taking it. Whenever opportunities present them-
selves we should take them, otherwise they will just be wasted. These are all 
examples. When in the land of wish-­granting jewels, take them. 
Due to past merit we have received this precious human rebirth, with its 
five senses intact. Furthermore we have met the Buddha’s teachings, we have 
met a guru, a virtuous friend, and we have every opportunity to practice 
Dharma. Now is the time. This is the time for us to make our mind free, to 
develop contentment and inner happiness, to overcome our confusion and 
problems. While at present we might be experiencing much disturbance 
and suffering because of our attachment, we can replace all that with peace 
and happiness. We must practice Dharma to achieve the happiness of all 
future lives all the way up to liberation and enlightenment. There is no other 
way. 
We must prepare for the next life
To be able to practice Dharma we must decide we want to practice Dharma, 
and to do that we must think about death. Otherwise, we might feel that 
practicing Dharma is good but put it off until the “right” moment, until 
next year or the year after that or the year after that. We postpone it until we 
think we will have some free time or until we have earned our first billion 
dollars. I’m joking! But life becomes like that. We delay practicing Dharma 
until next year, and then it is the next year and then the year after that and so 
on. We think, “When I’m free,” or “When I’m well,” or something like that. 
By thinking like this our fortune, our good luck to practice Dharma 
stops. We delay and delay and delay and then it is gone. We either have 
problems to deal with or else we are sick or there is some other hindrance 
and then…death! Then our opportunity has gone. 
This sense that we have plenty of time before we need to think about 
death is common to all of us. We plan on living for many more years—for-
ever, in fact. People are still thinking like that on the day they die, even five 
minutes before their death. For most people, death happens while they are 
planning on living for many more years. 
Now our life is so good. However, it is like a dream. We are unbelievably 

=== PAGE 208 ===
192    sun of devotion
fortunate that we have not died yet. We are so fortunate but, while we have 
yet to start practicing Dharma, our life is passing by in distraction. In order 
to persuade our mind to practice Dharma we need to think that we are con-
stantly coming closer to death, all the time, day and night, morning, after-
noon, evening and night, closer and closer and closer to death. 
The Buddha mentioned this in the Dhammapada. 
Like a condemned criminal, 
With each step you come closer and closer 
To your executioner.
A human being’s life is like that.101 
We are like a convict who is about to be executed. We are in the custody 
of the police, being led to the place of execution, and each step we take is 
a step closer to death. All human beings are like this. This is a human’s life. 
There are only a certain number of breaths left, a certain number of seconds 
left until death. Life is constantly diminishing, constantly finishing; we are 
rushing so quickly to death. 
We must not cheat ourselves. We really need to practice Dharma, to inte-
grate the lam-­rim into our life and practice the root of the path to enlighten-
ment, correctly following the guru, and on that basis cultivate renunciation, 
bodhicitta and the right view of emptiness as a preparation for tantra. Then, 
when death happens, there will be no regrets; we will be happy. 
If we can live with a good heart, living our life for other sentient beings, 
we will experience great joy and happiness when we die. Then, in our next 
life, we will be of even greater benefit to sentient beings. In that way, we go 
to enlightenment. 
Which will come first, tomorrow or the next life?
In A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Shantideva said, 
If when I have a chance to live a wholesome life
My actions are not wholesome,
Then what shall I be able to do
When confused by the misery of the lower realms?102
101  The Tibetan Dhammapada, Ch. 1, v. 14. 
102  Ch. 4, v. 18.

=== PAGE 209 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    193
If we don’t practice Dharma now, when death suddenly comes and we have 
gone to the lower realms, what can we do at that time? In their previous 
lives, even hungry ghosts or animals such as spiders or ants might have been 
billionaires in a rich country. From living in a house worth many billions of 
dollars they become crickets. Can you imagine it? This can happen. 
If we were to be born in hell with the most unbelievable suffering, what 
could we do at that time? Nothing. Every hope would be gone, finished. 
Because we did not practice when we had the chance it would be too late. 
Our life and death would be over and our rebirth in the lower realms already 
begun. 
A tiny fire spark from hell is sixty times hotter than all the fire of the 
human world put together. That is how hot it is. Compared to that, all the 
fire of our world is like an air conditioner, like snowflakes dropping from 
the sky. It’s nothing. This is also mentioned in A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life. 
One time I was walking up from His Holiness’s temple in McLeod Ganj, 
Dharamsala, to Tushita Retreat Centre when I saw many monkeys on the 
road. I thought that they have no freedom at all. They are totally under 
the control of karma and delusion; they have not the slightest freedom. 
For them, rebirth as a monkey has already happened and there is nothing 
they—or we—can do about it; nothing can be done to immediately change 
it. It has already happened and they have to finish their karma. They are dro-
­wa, transmigratory beings, under the control of karma and delusion.
This is true of whatever animal we look at. It has happened. Tigers are 
completely under the control of karma and delusion and there is no free-
dom at all for them. The tiger rebirth has already happened because the 
causes of that rebirth were not purified before, and that is because the being 
that is now a tiger did not meet the Dharma before. To a tiger its life is the 
most precious thing, but karma forces it to eat other living beings—deer, 
zebra and other pitiful animals—that also only want happiness and do not 
want any suffering whatsoever. 
We have been in this situation numberless times. We have been born as 
a tiger in the past numberless times and have been forced to eat number-
less sentient beings. In the past we have eaten every sentient being. There is 
no beginning to our life in samsara; our rebirths are infinite. Being reborn 
as a tiger and eating those pitiful animals numberless times is just one type 
of rebirth we have had. We have been reborn as countless different types of 
sentient beings and have eaten every other living being numberless times.

=== PAGE 210 ===
194    sun of devotion
There is no sentient being we have not eaten. In the past, you have eaten 
me numberless times; I have eaten you numberless times. This might come 
as a big shock but that’s what has happened.
This is the same rationale as when we meditate on the kindness of the 
mother, how the mother has been kind to us numberless times. It is very 
amazing. The only thing is that we cannot remember our past lives. We 
don’t even remember coming from our mother’s womb or the nine months 
spent in her womb. 
During the one-­month Kopan course we do a meditation on the conti-
nuity of the consciousness where we think about how today’s consciousness 
comes from yesterday’s and yesterday’s comes from that of the day before 
and how this year’s consciousness comes from last year’s and the year before 
that and before that, right back to childhood, right back to when the con-
sciousness entered the mother’s womb.
After one of these meditations a nun from Israel said she remembered 
coming out from her mother’s womb. But most people don’t remember 
even that, so how can they say that past lives do not exist? Asserting that 
there are no past lives because they don’t remember them, they would also 
have to assert that they had not existed in their mother’s womb for nine 
months. How could they say that? That is completely wrong, completely 
stupid. Everybody knows they have come from their mother’s womb. 
How can we assume something has not happened just because we can’t 
remember it? There are so many things from this life’s childhood that we 
cannot remember, so using that way of thinking we would have to assert 
that we had never done them. Using an inability to remember as proof of 
something not happening is very funny logic, very strange logic. 
A popular quote says, 
You cannot be sure which will come first,
Tomorrow or the next life,
Therefore, do not put effort into tomorrow’s plans 
But instead it is worthwhile to attend to the next life.103
We just cannot be sure which will come first, tomorrow or our next life. 
Because of that it is unbelievably worthwhile to work for the next life, to 
103  Also quoted in Liberation, p. 311. No source given.

=== PAGE 211 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    195
attend to the next life by accumulating merit to not be reborn in the lower 
realms. Then, if we were to die tomorrow, our work would have been done. 
And even if we do not die tomorrow, our work has still been done. 
This is what Lama Tsongkhapa said in Lamrim Chenmo: by practicing 
Dharma with the thought that we might die today, if we do die we have 
made the preparation, and if we don’t die then we have further opportu-
nities to collect more merit. Therefore, thinking, “I’m going to die today,” 
and working for future lives, practicing Dharma to benefit our future lives, 
is most worthwhile.  
One way that the Kadampa geshes defined Dharma was that it is some-
thing that benefits future lives; something that brings happiness in future 
lives. If what we are practicing does not do that, it is not Dharma. Another 
way they defined it was that if any action of our body, speech and mind 
becomes an antidote to delusion, it is Dharma; if it does not become an 
antidote to delusion, it is not Dharma. This is how the Kadampa geshes dif-
ferentiated between what is Dharma and what is not. 
Renounce this life
One day Dromtönpa, Lama Atisha’s translator, was walking in the forest 
near Reting Monastery when he saw an old man circumambulating the 
temple. When he asked the old man what he was doing he said, “I’m cir-
cumambulating.” Gyalwa Dromtönpa replied, “It’s good that you are cir-
cumambulating, but wouldn’t it be better if you practiced Dharma?” After 
a while the old man reconsidered and thought that reading texts might be 
what Dromtönpa meant, so he sat down and started doing that. 
Dromtönpa came upon him again and asked, “What are you doing?” to 
which the old man replied, “I’m reading texts.” Dromtönpa said, “It’s good 
that you are reading texts, but wouldn’t it better if you practiced Dharma?” 
Then the old man thought that maybe meditating is what he meant by 
Dharma so he sat down and started meditating. 
Again Dromtönpa came upon him and asked, “What are you doing?” 
and again the old man replied, “I’m meditating.” Dromtönpa said, “It’s 
good that you are meditating, but wouldn’t it be better if you practiced 
Dharma?” Only then did the old man ask, “What do you mean by practic-
ing Dharma?” Gyalwa Dromtönpa replied, “Renounce this life!”
The meaning of “renounce this life” is huge. Not renouncing this life 
is where all our difficulties come from—all our negative emotions, all our 

=== PAGE 212 ===
196    sun of devotion
breakdowns, all our relationship problems and all the rest. All our problems 
come from attachment to this life. 
All the obstacles to practicing Dharma—delaying practicing Dharma, 
not wanting to practice Dharma, wrong concepts, laziness, all these things—
come from the attachment clinging to this life. That is the root of all the 
disease, mental pain and other problems in the world; all the problems 
that people pay psychologists for. People go to see psychologists and it is 
so expensive. People pay and pay and build debt on debt. It’s never-­ending.
The root of this is attachment; all the other problems spread out from 
there, like branches spreading out from the main trunk of a tree. Like this, 
from the root problem, all of life’s problems spread out—so many problems, 
all kinds of problems, anger, pride and so forth. 
So when Gyalwa Dromtönpa told the old man to renounce this life 
he meant to renounce attachment to this life. That means renouncing the 
attachment that brings with it so many expectations, which in turn cause us 
to work so hard to try to fulfill those expectations. From that come worry 
and fear and all the diseases of body and mind. So when we renounce this, 
we renounce all the other problems. Therefore, if we are able to practice 
Dharma, to renounce this life, there is so much inner peace and happiness 
in our life. 
When the root has been cut, all the branches stop growing. We see in 
Milarepa’s life story how he developed incredible peace and happiness from 
just this basic practice of renouncing this life, without talking about his tan-
tric realizations. 
Probably many people think that renouncing this life means throwing 
off your clothes and running around naked in the forest or the street. Then 
the police take you to prison. Of course, it’s not like that. It’s important 
to understand how renouncing this life means renouncing this life’s prob-
lems. If we can think like that, it is a huge solution. That is what Dharma 
practice is. If we practice like that, we are practicing Dharma purely; if we 
don’t, what we are doing might outwardly look like Dharma practice but 
in reality it won’t be. We’ll just be practicing attachment to this life. That 
is the first cause of all the confusion, all the fear, all the desire, all the prob-
lems of life. 
Another thing to understand is how the fundamental suffering of 
this life comes from the eight worldly dharmas. There are four desirable 
objects—receiving comfort, receiving material things, receiving repu-
tation and receiving praise—and four undesirable objects that are the 

=== PAGE 213 ===
More Precious than a Wish-­granting Jewel    197
opposites of those. The four undesirable objects are what we don’t want 
to happen.104 
When the four undesirable objects happen or the four desirable objects 
do not happen, we get angry and many problems arise. We become unhappy 
and our life goes down. Then when we get the four desirable objects, our 
life goes up—we feel happy, but in reality it is the suffering of attachment. 
Our mind has a very uptight quality. Just as we cannot remove oil from 
paper once it’s soaked into it, when our mind gets attached to an object it’s 
almost impossible to separate the attachment from it. This causes a sickness 
of the mind that brings much mental pain. And we have suffered from this 
chronic disease since beginningless rebirths. 
So, whatever happens, we suffer. We feel elated when we get the four 
desirable objects but suffer with attachment, with so much pain. When we 
experience the four undesirable objects, our life goes down and again we 
experience great suffering. 
Renouncing attachment to this life means having neither attachment to 
desirable objects nor aversion to undesirable ones. In our mind, both desir-
able and undesirable objects have been equalized and we have no expecta-
tions. At present, our life is full of the expectations that arise from the eight 
worldly dharmas. Working for this and working for that keeps us busy all 
the time. However long we live, even a hundred years, our whole life is spent 
like that, creating countless expectations and fears. 
By renouncing this life we renounce our attachment and confusion, 
which are in the nature of ignorance. We see the pain that attachment for 
desirable objects and the wish to be separated from undesirable objects 
brings and, not wanting that pain, we free our mind from it. Like that, we 
have neither the ups nor the downs of having one of the four desirable or 
four undesirable objects. So, you can see how much peace we can have in 
our heart when we really practice Dharma. 
Also, practicing Dharma is not only for the shrine room or the temple; 
it’s not only reciting mantras. Practicing Dharma really means having the 
huge determination to give up attachment to this life, which brings incred-
ible peace. Renunciation of this life is the basis. All other realizations natu-
rally come from this: renunciation of samsara, realization of bodhicitta and 
direct perception of emptiness, followed by the realizations of the ­tantric 
104  See Rinpoche’s How to Practice Dharma for extensive teachings on the eight worldly 
dharmas. 

=== PAGE 214 ===
198    sun of devotion
path. So this is just to give you an idea what Dharma practice actually 
 means.
Shantideva said,
It is inappropriate to enjoy myself,
Thinking that today alone I shall not die,
For inevitably the time will come
When I shall become nothing.105 
When we think we’re not going to die we become very lazy. We sit back 
comfortably and do nothing. That is not practicing Dharma; that is not 
worthwhile, because, as Shantideva pointed out, at some time we will be 
gone, we will no longer exist. This will happen without doubt and it can 
even happen today. So, it is much better to practice Dharma—to purify 
negative karma and collect merit; to work to actualize the lam-­rim and 
make preparations for all happiness up to enlightenment; and to become 
enlightened in order to free sentient beings from the oceans of samsaric suf-
fering and bring them to full enlightenment. 
105  Guide, Ch. 2, v. 58. 

=== PAGE 215 ===
12. Cutting the Root of Samsara
.,
The decoration that pervades our life
E
ven taking refuge and protecting our karma so that we will not 
be reborn in the lower realms and will attain a higher rebirth is not suf-
ficient because we are still under the control of karma and delusion. That 
means until we can break free we will continuously circle in samsara, having 
to be reborn again and again. Then, not only will we suffer endlessly but we 
will also be unable to ever meet and practice Dharma, to actualize the path 
to the direct perception of emptiness. It will continue to be like that as it has 
been from beginningless rebirths. 
How we circle in samsara is through the twelve dependent related limbs. 
Upon the valid base of the aggregates there is a valid labeling mind, one that 
merely imputes an I on those aggregates. That happens in the first moment, 
then in the next moment, for many of us, myself included, what happens is 
that what was a moment ago a valid mind merely imputing an I, now, we 
have no idea that was happening. We are so ignorant, so totally ignorant 
that we don’t know that this is the reality. That merely imputed I should 
appear back as just that, an I merely imputed by the mind—that is the real-
ity—but this has not happened from beginningless rebirths. 
As I have mentioned, for a buddha, after the mere imputation, the 
I appears as merely labeled by the mind, however, this does not happen 
for sentient beings unless they are in meditative equipoise. Otherwise, it 
appears as existing from its own side. For us, in the first moment it appears 
as merely imputed by the mind, but in the next moment it appears as exist-
ing from its own side. That is a hallucination, a total hallucination. We are 
completely hallucinating. 
I am not saying this because it is an interesting subject worthy of 

=== PAGE 216 ===
200    sun of devotion
intellectual discussion. This is the real situation we are faced with. It is a big 
mistake—the biggest mistake—that we make, to see things as existing from 
their own side, existing by themselves, as truly existing. To use ordinary lan-
guage, things appear real to us, real from there. 
This ignorance is a hallucination; it decorates an object. I find this a very 
interesting way of describing it. This is how it happens. Past ignorance has 
left an imprint on the mind and that negative imprint decorates, projects, 
the hallucination, making the I appear as real. 
Whatever the object of the mind is—the I, the action, the object, form, 
sound, smell, taste, tangible object—the whole thing appears to us as real. 
There is a real car, a real road, a real sky, a real shop, real ice cream, real 
money. On the road there is a real red light, a real yellow light, a real green 
light. In the real gompa there are real flowers, real thangkas, real statues. 
Everything is real from over there.
It is a creation, a projection, merely imputed by our mind, but we have 
no idea of that. We have no idea that it is only a hallucination coming from 
over there. We see it from there as real. This “real” thing does not exist; it 
has never existed. It has never come into existence and it does not exist now. 
The whole thing is a hallucination. From morning to night it’s like that. 
Since we were born until our death, our whole life—whatever we do, wher-
ever we travel—the whole thing, the objects of our senses, including the I, 
appear as real from there. Everything we experience, including the real I, is 
a hallucination.
Nothing exists in reality. Nothing exists the way it appears to exist, as real 
from there. Everything is totally empty. It’s like a dream, like an illusion.
Cutting the root of samsara
If we are able to meditate in this way, looking at all this as like a dream, an 
illusion, a mirage—all the different examples—then it becomes very inter-
esting. There is nothing to become attached to because it is not real. 
For example, if we recognize a dream as a dream, there is nothing to be 
attached to and there is nothing to be angry about. In a dream, somebody 
abuses us but if we can recognize the dream as a dream, the abuse does not 
bother us at all. Similarly, some object of desire appears in our dream, but 
recognizing it as just a dream, we are not agitated. Nothing disturbs us; our 
mind remains utterly peaceful. Anger and attachment do not arise, so we 
have a very, very interesting life.
Because things appear to us not as a dream but as real from their own 

=== PAGE 217 ===
Cutting the Root of Samsara    201
side, which is how it has been since beginningless time, realizing emptiness 
is vital. It is more important than any job, than all the money in the world, 
than anything. To cut the root of suffering, ignorance, and be free forever 
from the oceans of samsaric suffering, there is nothing more important than 
realizing emptiness. 
We need to cut the wrong belief that whatever object that appears to 
us is real, which is how it appears. As I have said, in the first moment the I 
appears as merely imputed; in the second it appears as real, as a real I; then, 
in the third moment, we believe that I to be real. That wrong concept is the 
root of samsara. 
This is true of every sentient being who has not realized emptiness. Hell 
beings are the same; animals are the same; humans have better brains but 
they too are the same in this unless they have realized emptiness. No matter 
whether it is a king, a president, a scientist or whoever, everybody believes 
this I to be real, to be true. 
Because we believe this I to be real, attachment to the I arises and, when 
somebody does something undesirable, anger erupts. That wrong concept 
of a real I is the root of all suffering—the suffering of rebirth, the suffering 
of old age, the suffering of sickness and the suffering of death. Having to 
become old comes from this; having to die without choice comes from this. 
Cancer and AIDS come from this. It is the root of the suffering of change, 
of all the temporary pleasures that never increase and never last. 
Those two sufferings—the suffering of pain and the suffering of change—
come from pervasive compounding suffering. Because our aggregates are 
under the control of karma and delusion they are pervaded by suffering 
and the contaminated seed of delusion. Because there is a continuity of 
consciousness from past lives, our mindstream carries the imprints of the 
karma we have created, which compounds this life’s and future lives’ suffer-
ing. Meeting desirable and undesirable objects, attachment, anger and igno-
rance arise, which motivates karma, which leaves an imprint on the mind, 
and then that produces future lives’ suffering. So, pervasive compounding 
suffering, the foundation of those other two sufferings, comes from this 
wrong concept of a real I. 
Samsaric happiness can neither increase nor give us any real satisfaction, 
no matter how much effort we put into it. The happiness of Dharma, on 
the other hand, lasts and increases, and when we achieve enlightenment it 
is completed. Therefore, no matter how difficult it is, Dharma practice is 
extremely worthwhile. 

=== PAGE 218 ===
202    sun of devotion
The twelve limbs
Of the twelve dependent related limbs106 I have described the first one, igno-
rance. The second is compounding action, which creates karma and leaves 
an imprint on the consciousness, the third link. Sequentially, the others are 
name and form, six sense organs, contact, feeling, craving, grasping, becoming, 
rebirth and aging and death.
Looking at the twelve dependent related limbs of this life, in a previous 
human life we practiced the compounding action of virtuous deeds, such as 
morality and so forth, and just before the end of our previous life, craving 
and grasping, the eighth and ninth limbs, arose, conditioning the becom-
ing of another human body, the tenth limb, which lead to the eleventh, the 
rebirth of this life.
Nagarjuna said, 
Two deluded actions [links two and ten] arise from three 
deluded causes [links one, eight and nine]; seven uncontrolled 
results [links three, four, five, six, seven, eleven and twelve] arise 
from those two deluded actions. Again three deluded causes 
arise from these seven results. Such a wheel of life goes round 
and round.107 
So once we are reborn the other six results occur: the consciousness of 
this life, name and form, the six sense organs, contact, feeling and aging 
and death. During this life, out of ignorance we engage in compounding 
actions, leaving karmic imprints on our consciousness, and at the end of our 
life, craving, grasping and becoming arise once more. 
The wheel of life illustration seen at the door of many monasteries is sym-
bolic. For instance, for name and form, the fourth limb, a man rowing a 
boat is shown: name is the mind and form is the body. After name and form 
come the six sense bases, depicted by an empty house, and then, after that, 
comes contact, symbolized by the contact of a man and a woman. From 
contact, feeling arises, shown as a man with an arrow in his eye. 
106  Also called the twelve links of dependent origination. See Liberation in the Palm of Your 
Hand, pp. 479–486 or Steps on the Path to Enlightenment, vol. 2, pp. 324–360.
107  From Rinpoche’s Wish-­fulfilling Golden Sun. See that book for a clear, succinct explana-
tion of the twelve links. Also quoted in Steps, vol. 2, p. 346. “The first, eighth and ninth are 
delusions. The second and tenth are karma. The remaining seven are sufferings.”

=== PAGE 219 ===
Cutting the Root of Samsara    203

=== PAGE 220 ===
204    sun of devotion
Since our rebirth most of the other limbs have already happened and all that 
remains is aging and death. Normally the world defines aging by wrinkled 
skin and other visible signs of getting old, but aging actually starts from 
birth. In reality, death is the only one of those seven resultant limbs we have 
yet to experience. 
With every action, we start another set of twelve limbs. For example, 
with one action we might create the potential to be born as a human being 
and with another the potential to be reborn in hell. Which seed will ripen 
when craving and grasping lead us into the becoming of our next rebirth? 
It could easily be that of the hell rebirth. There are eight major hot hells, 
eight major cold hells, six neighboring hells and some occasional hells, ones 
that are anywhere rather than in a specific location. In each hell there is so 
much unbelievable suffering. We have experienced such rebirths countless 
times but cannot remember them. If we could it would be utterly terrifying. 
Hungry ghosts have to suffer for tens of thousands of their years—which 
are much longer than human years—from not finding a drop of water or a 
scrap of food. They have the most unbelievable suffering but are unable to 
die. For tens of thousands of years they have to experience the three types 
of obscurations: outer obscurations, inner obscurations and obscurations 
of food and drink.108 And they have to experience exhaustion, hopelessness 
and disappointment. Their suffering is unbelievable, horrible. 
Then there are the animals, who are so foolish and ignorant. They suffer 
from being eaten by other animals, heat and cold, and hunger and thirst. 
Those that are kept by humans have to endure much torture, being used for 
work and food, killed for their meat, bones and other parts of their body. 
They have so much suffering. 
For example, African elephants are killed for their tusks, which fetch a 
lot of money. One of our students in Singapore has a project to protect the 
elephants, but one of the ways they are protected is by killing the poachers. 
So that’s thinking of the elephants but not thinking of the human beings, 
which seems very silly. I asked her if humans might have to die to protect 
elephants and she said that perhaps that was the case. Maybe later on she 
realized this. 
I once saw a documentary on TV about a fish that hunts insects on the 
overhanging branches of a tree that grows by the river. The fish sees an insect 
from below in the water and squirts water at it to knock it off the branch. 
108  See Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand, pp. 340–45.

=== PAGE 221 ===
Cutting the Root of Samsara    205
Usually it takes a few squirts to dislodge the insect, but as soon as it falls the 
fish shoots up and grabs it. There’s also an insect that kills its prey by spit-
ting some kind of sticky stuff at it from a distance and immobilizing it in 
that way.
I once saw a fight between a snake and a mongoose. Mongooses are very 
smart creatures—the arhat Bakula holds a wealth-­producing mongoose—
but this time the snake won. While in front of the mongoose the snake kept 
its distance, fearing the mongoose’s sharp teeth, but when the mongoose 
got distracted by something, the snake came up from behind, grabbed it by 
the neck and finished it off. 
This is all karma. What the Buddha said about ignorance is exactly true. 
Every problem is due to ignorance. Whatever suffering the animals must 
endure, being killed or whatever, primarily it can all be traced back to 
ignorance. 
Humans have to experience the suffering of rebirth, old age, sickness, 
death, being separated from desirable objects and meeting undesirable 
objects. Even when we find desirable objects we are still unable to find any 
satisfaction at all. And then there is the suffering of having the five aggre-
gates. These are the sufferings experienced by human beings. 
Desire realm gods are completely distracted by pleasure and through 
their attachment to it they continuously create negative karma. Then, when 
they are about to die, they hear a voice telling them they will die in seven 
days—their days are fifty human years long—and they start to experience 
the very heavy sufferings of the signs of death. There are five ways they suf-
fer. For the first time ever, dirt remains on their body. Their boyfriends and 
girlfriends refuse to come near them because of the signs of death but pass 
them flowers on the end of a stick in order to stay far away. And as they 
recall the blissful life they are about to leave, they can see where they are 
going to be reborn, which is a huge change from where they are now. Seeing 
this is said to be much heavier suffering than actually experiencing the hell 
realm. Kyabje Chöden Rinpoche said that hell beings have more physical 
suffering but gods have much greater mental suffering, in the same way that 
rich people have much more mental suffering than poor people. 
Wherever we look in samsara there is so much suffering. The root of it 
all is this incorrect concept that believes that the I is real from its own side. 
It is formless, colorless and shapeless but the result of this wrong concept is 
the unbelievable sufferings of the six realms. The suffering we humans must 
endure is bad enough but that is nothing compared to the suffering of the 

=== PAGE 222 ===
206    sun of devotion
other realms. All of this comes from something that is formless, colorless 
and shapeless. 
Now you can see why meditating on emptiness is so important. Even 
though you don’t have a realization of emptiness, just meditating on it is the 
most important thing to do in order to overcome karma and delusion, the 
cause of the oceans of samsaric suffering. 
While we are circling in samsara, because of ignorance we start so many 
sets of twelve links. We start so many sets of twelve links each hour, so many 
each minute. If we create so many sets of twelve links even within a minute, 
think how many we must create in one day, always creating more and more 
samsara. 
Then, even if we can free ourselves from the prison of one set of twelve 
links, there is another prison outside that we are caught in. And even if we 
can free ourselves from that, there is yet another one outside of that one. The 
prisons are numberless. Due to ignorance we have been creating samsara 
from beginningless rebirths and even in one hour, even in one minute we 
create so many sets of twelve links. It’s endless and this will continue until 
we can actualize the direct perception of emptiness and remove the seed of 
delusion that causes rebirth. 
All our happiness has come from other  
sentient beings 
What I have been mainly talking about so far is how we must free ourselves 
from the sufferings of samsara. In exactly the same way as we are suffering, 
there are numberless other sentient beings who are also suffering: number-
less hell beings, numberless hungry ghosts, numberless animals, number-
less human beings, numberless gods, numberless demigods and numberless 
intermediate state beings. We are lost, but that is nothing. We are just one 
being. There are numberless other beings continuously suffering in samsara. 
Therefore, it is not enough to achieve the blissful state of peace, nirvana, 
for ourselves alone while there are numberless other beings that need our 
help. We need to help all sentient beings.
As I have often said, we have eyes and limbs so that we can run and grab 
the blind person who is walking toward a precipice, mistakenly thinking 
there is a road there. That poor stumbling sentient being cannot see the 
precipice, so it is up to us. That is the first reason for helping sentient beings: 

=== PAGE 223 ===
Cutting the Root of Samsara    207
because we can—they are suffering so much and we are capable of helping 
them.
The next reason for helping sentient beings is that all our happiness 
comes from them. This is summed up in the first verse of the Eight Verses of 
Thought Transformation: 
Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit
From all sentient beings,
Who are more precious than a wish-­granting jewel,
I shall hold them most dear at all times.
This is so important. All our past, present and future happiness, including 
nirvana and the great nirvana, enlightenment, comes from our good karma. 
And our good karma is the action of the buddhas. 
There are two actions of the buddhas: one is the buddha’s holy mind and 
the other is with us sentient beings, our own good karma. We create positive 
actions only because we understand karma—the cause of suffering and the 
cause of happiness—and our understanding of karma is the result of having 
been taught by the buddhas. 
A buddha’s actions come from a buddha; a buddha comes from a bodhi-
sattva; a bodhisattva comes from bodhicitta; bodhicitta comes from great 
compassion; great compassion is generated by contemplating the suffering 
of all sentient beings. Therefore we can see that we can attain enlightenment 
only by depending on the kindness of sentient beings. 
The mind of great compassion—the cause of bodhicitta and thus a 
bodhisattva and thus a buddha—can only be generated by understanding 
the suffering of each and every sentient being. Every sentient being must be 
included: every hell being, every hungry ghost, every animal, every human 
being, every god, every demigod, every intermediate state being. Not even 
one is left out. That is their great kindness.
Therefore, great compassion comes from the numberless suffering sen-
tient beings; bodhicitta comes from the numberless suffering sentient 
beings; bodhisattvas come from the numberless suffering sentient beings; 
buddhas come from the numberless suffering sentient beings—therefore, 
a buddha’s actions come from sentient beings. The Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha, the refuge objects we always pray to, come from sentient beings. 
They come from every single suffering sentient being. 

=== PAGE 224 ===
208    sun of devotion
By their qualities, the buddhas are incredibly precious, but, by their kind-
ness, sentient beings are even more precious. Sentient beings are really the 
most important. 
All our past, present and future happiness, including our enlightenment, 
comes from every single sentient being. When we achieve the bodhisat-
tva’s path, all the unbelievable qualities we attain there come from them. 
And the numberless qualities of a buddha’s holy body, holy speech and holy 
mind, all come from them, from their kindness, from every single suffering 
hell being, hungry ghost, animal, human being, god, demigod and interme-
diate state being; from every one. 
When a person gets angry at and abuses us, whichever way we interpret 
the action, the fact is that every single pleasure and goodness has come from 
that person. Every happiness has come from every sentient being, including 
that person who abuses us. Because the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha come 
from sentient beings, sentient beings are extremely precious and the person 
who has abused us is the most precious one to us, the kindest, dearest one 
to us. He is our wish-­granting jewel. 
Every single sentient being is like that to us. Every one is our wish-­
granting jewel. This is what we have to meditate on every day. This is what 
we should live our life for. This is the purpose of our life, to live for them, 
for their happiness, to serve them. When we breathe, we should breathe in 
and out for them. Whatever we can do, we should try.
This second reason to benefit sentient beings is huge. Whatever we do we 
should do in order to benefit other sentient beings. 
If you are a carer, whoever you care for, even just your own child, you 
should do it for all sentient beings. Whatever you do in that context—even 
things like saying prayers or chanting mantras—should be done without a 
sense of possession—my child, my wife, my husband, my, my, my—that is 
nothing; that is just attachment. 
Caring for this precious sentient being, this child, you should think, “I’m 
so fortunate that I can dedicate my life, I can use my limbs to benefit even 
one precious sentient being—this most precious, most kind, most dear sen-
tient being.”
It’s the same when taking care of an old person. It might be your father 
or mother or maybe you are working in an old folks’ home or something 
and you take care of one old person. You should think the same thing, that 
you are so fortunate to be able to use your body, speech and mind, your 
limbs, to serve this one sentient being. Remembering that all your past 

=== PAGE 225 ===
Cutting the Root of Samsara    209
lives’ happiness, your present happiness and your future happiness all come 
from this person, you should see him or her as most kind, most precious, 
most dear.
Then you serve that person in whatever way you can. If there is some-
thing you are unable to do, what to do? We are all limited in power, but 
whatever you are able to do, offer that service from your heart. It’s not as if 
you’re doing it for money or some other worldly reason. 
Many people who work for money, even in the care profession, come to 
dislike their job. They work as little as possible and at the end of the day get 
away as soon as they can, always longing for their day off. Many people in 
the West cannot appreciate how their suffering comes from the mind, from 
wrong concepts, from not having a good heart. That makes life so difficult. 
Working only for their own pleasure, they find no satisfaction. 
Here, you should offer as much service as you can from your heart; offer 
your body, speech and mind. That is the best Dharma, the best medita-
tion. Then you will be happy. The more you appreciate how precious serving 
another being is, the more you enjoy it. It doesn’t have to be a guru you are 
serving. Your mind will be so happy to serve, whatever you can do. 
This applies to even the small things in your daily life: offering your 
seat to somebody on the bus, helping somebody carry a heavy load or, as 
my guru Kyabje Serkong Tsenshab Rinpoche often mentioned, rescuing a 
drowning insect. Try to do whatever you can to help, according to your 
capacity, whether it’s big or small. 
By using your body, speech and mind to serve others you are repay-
ing your parents’ kindness, not making what they have done meaningless. 
Your mother suffered so much for you for the nine months you were in 
her womb. Then, during your childhood, you were constantly demanding 
things: “I want this, I want that.” Your parents always did whatever they 
could to please you but still you would cry. For so many years they took care 
of you, giving you medicine, books, food, clothing, spending vast amounts 
of money on you. You must repay that kindness, giving them meaning for 
their great effort. 
Serving others means that your parents’ efforts have not been meaning-
less. Otherwise, they have made children simply for their own happiness. 
People get married, have children and then, after some time, there are many 
problems and finally, one day, it is finished. 
Knowing how to live your life with bodhicitta, even if you are living 
a family life with children, means you know how to serve others, how to 

=== PAGE 226 ===
210    sun of devotion
really appreciate others. If you must scold your child, you do it with love so 
that he or she will learn to be a better person. 
Only by cherishing others will we attain enlightenment 
The third reason to help sentient beings is that they have all been our mother 
and father numberless times and have all been kind in the four ways num-
berless times from beginningless rebirths.  
If we are able to cherish one sentient being, even the enemy who gets 
angry at us, by cherishing that one sentient being we can achieve enlight-
enment. That person gives us enlightenment. Not only that, we become 
enlightened for sentient beings. And by the way, by cherishing that sen-
tient being we also achieve the happiness of future lives and liberation from 
samsara. 
By seeing that person as a wish-­granting jewel, there is no mental suffer-
ing. By cherishing a wish-­granting jewel we cannot achieve enlightenment 
but by cherishing that person we can. So, this person we call an enemy is 
more precious than a whole sky filled with wish-­granting jewels. Thinking 
in that way, we should hold him most dear at all times, whatever state we are 
in, happy or unhappy, up or down. We should cherish that one person with 
our body, speech and mind. 
Thinking like this, we ourselves become a wish-­granting jewel to other 
sentient beings. This is not something we do only in a temple or Dharma 
center but not in our own home. It’s not like that. We should happily dedi-
cate our body, speech and mind to every person in our family.
The more we cherish others, the more we see their kindness, the happier 
we will be to serve them. The opportunity to offer service brings such great 
happiness. We naturally, joyfully, want to serve others as much as possible 
because that is where the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha come from. Even 
the small things we do to serve others make our life so joyful, so happy, 
whether they are in our family or outside it. This is how bodhisattvas feel. 
For bodhisattvas, to achieve nirvana, the blissful state of peace for them-
selves alone, is like used toilet paper. Here the texts say “used toilet stone.” I 
remember how in Buxa, because we used stones instead of paper, the toilets 
filled completely and became unusable. And it was a long time before they 
got fixed. When I first went to Sera in south India, the toilets were again 
filled with stones. So the text says “used toilet stone,” but we can read that 
as “used toilet paper.” For bodhisattvas, it is like that: achieving nirvana for 

=== PAGE 227 ===
Cutting the Root of Samsara    211
themselves alone is something to immediately be thrown far away, just as we 
discard used toilet paper, never to use it again.
On the other hand, for bodhisattvas, the thought of being born in the 
hells for sentient beings—even for one sentient being—brings them unbe-
lievable joy and happiness; much greater happiness than an arhat experi-
ences achieving nirvana. 
There is the story of one of the Buddha’s previous lives, in which he was 
a bodhisattva and the captain of a ship carrying five hundred businesspeo-
ple. On board was a man carrying a spear with which he intended to kill 
those five hundred people. The bodhisattva captain saw that and, out of 
great compassion, was concerned that if that man killed all those people, he 
would be born in hell and would have to suffer there for many eons. There-
fore the bodhisattva killed him and faced the consequence of his being born 
in hell instead. But what happened was that, in reality, killing him with such 
great compassion purified a hundred thousand eons of the bodhisattva cap-
tain’s negative karma, which meant he was able to become free from sam-
sara and achieve enlightenment a hundred thousand eons sooner. That is 
what happened, even though his wish was to be reborn in hell instead of 
the man with the spear. 

=== PAGE 228 ===
Robin Bath

=== PAGE 229 ===
13. Practicing Tantra
.,
Heruka, Guhyasamaja and Yamantaka
I 
have already mentioned the absolute guru, the unification of 
no more learning, the inseparability of the two kayas, the two bodies of 
a buddha. This is the goal of tantric practice, the unified state of Vajradhara 
that is achieved as the final result, with its seven qualities such as embracing, 
great bliss, completely full, unceasing and so forth; the union of clear light 
and illusory body, the inseparability of the holy body—the rupakaya—and 
the holy mind—the dharmakaya. Then the dharmakaya manifests as the 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya to benefit the numberless sentient 
beings until they achieve enlightenment.
Before the unification of the clear light and illusory body, we first have to 
achieve the clear light and illusory body separately. Although both the isola-
tion of clear light and the isolation of illusory body are stages in any High-
est Yoga Tantra practice, some tantras emphasize clear light more and some 
illusory body. The tantras that emphasize clear light are called mother tan-
tras whereas those that emphasize the illusory body are called father tantras. 
Even though both father and mother tantras show how to achieve the 
clear light and illusory body, the Guhyasamaja tantra explains how to 
achieve the cause of the rupakaya, the illusory body, more extensively and 
in more detail than any other tantra. I have heard that before Lama Tsong-
khapa’s time there was no really clear, extensive explanation of this, so that 
is one of the benefits of Lama Tsongkhapa coming to teach. When he began 
studying, the Nyingma, Kagyü and Sakya traditions were already estab-
lished. He and his main disciples, Gyältsab Rinpoche and Khedrub Rin-
poche, were originally Sakya. 
Lama Tsongkhapa had received teachings directly from Manjushri well 

=== PAGE 230 ===
214    sun of devotion
before the time that Gyältsab Rinpoche came to meet him. At first he was 
not a disciple and sat on the same throne as Lama Tsongkhapa, but later, 
seeing the profundity of Lama Tsongkhapa’s teachings and their great ben-
efit, he sat below him as a disciple. 
Khedrub Rinpoche was also Sakya before he became Lama Tsongkhapa’s 
disciple. After that, he would debate with anybody who criticized Lama 
Tsongkhapa’s teachings, especially his right view, which was the most sub-
tle one—the Prasangika view actualized by the Buddha, Nagarjuna and 
Padmasambhava. Later on, Khedrub Rinpoche even debated with famous 
meditators who contradicted Lama Tsongkhapa’s view in order to dispel 
their wrong concepts. 
Having received teachings directly from Manjushri, Lama Tsongkhapa 
was able to explain the Buddha’s teachings on sutra and tantra in the clear-
est possible way, even the most difficult points, clarifying the past mistakes 
of the many famous meditators. We are unbelievably lucky to have met his 
teachings. 
As Pabongka Rinpoche said in Calling the Guru from Afar,
Thinking of how the actual form of all buddhas arises in the aspect 
of the lama
And mercifully guides me—reminds me of you, Lama.
Thinking of how you show the excellent unmistaken path to me,
An unfortunate wretched being, abandoned by all the buddhas—
reminds me of you, Lama.
Pabongka calls himself an “unfortunate wretched being.” Likewise, we too 
are unfortunate because we have been abandoned by all the buddhas of the 
past. That means all the buddhas—Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, Buddha 
Kashyapa109 before him and the buddhas before that. Even though during 
the Buddha’s time there were so many enlightened beings, we were not able 
to be their disciple and directly receive teachings from them either. 
Thinking about this shows us the kindness of the guru, how he has 
revealed the unmistaken teachings, and particularly the teachings of Lama 
Tsongkhapa, his teachings on the Prasangika right view of emptiness as well 
109  Of the thousand buddhas of this fortunate age, Buddha Kashyapa is the third and Bud-
dha Shakyamuni the fourth, the first two being Krakucchanda and Kanakamuni. Maitreya 
will be the next. 

=== PAGE 231 ===
Practicing Tantra    215
as tantra, the details of how to achieve the illusory body. With study we can 
recognize how precious the teachings of Lama Tsongkhapa are; how they 
are the correct, unmistaken teachings.
As Pabongka Rinpoche said, thinking about this reminds us of the very 
special kindness of the guru. So we are unbelievably fortunate. However, 
if we don’t study Dharma, if we don’t study the teachings of Lama Tsong-
khapa, if we don’t meditate, we are wasting this precious life, this unbeliev-
ably precious opportunity we have. 
We need to practice both father and mother tantra, therefore we need to 
practice both Guhyasamaja and Heruka. But there can be many obstacles, 
both outer and inner, to successfully actualizing these two paths of the illu-
sory body and the clear light, therefore we also need to practice Yaman-
taka. Yamantaka is not just a wrathful deity but the most wrathful aspect of 
Manjushri, the embodiment of all the buddhas’ wisdom. By practicing that, 
there is no more powerful way to pacify obstacles to the two practices and 
achieve enlightenment. That is what Manjushri advised Lama Tsongkhapa. 
We need to practice these three deities without separation. This is regarded 
as very important. 
In the past, yogis first did a Yamantaka retreat to pacify obstacles to the 
success to their Dharma practice and then they did their other retreats. His 
Holiness Zong Rinpoche also mentioned that. 
Why practicing Heruka is important
There are four reasons why it is important to practice Heruka.110 One is 
that when Vajrapani requested Heruka teachings, Buddha Vajradhara 
manifested the mandala on the top of the Mount Meru and it was never 
absorbed, so it is still there. Because of that, if we practice Heruka we can 
achieve enlightenment more quickly.111 
Another reason is that there are twenty-­four holy places associated with 
Heruka. Because they are the embodiment of Heruka, we first visualize 
them on our body and then do our practice. Immediately we do that, we 
invoke the numberless dakas and dakinis of those holy places. When we 
110  See The Ecstatic Dance of Chakrasamvara, pp. 41–42, for all four reasons.
111  H.H. Trijang Rinpoche elaborates, “Having been requested by Vajrayogini, the Buddha 
manifested as Heruka and taught the root tantra of Heruka on the summit of Mt. Meru, and 
when requested by Vajrapani, taught the explanatory tantra.” See Various Aspects of Tantra 
at LamaYeshe.com.

=== PAGE 232 ===
216    sun of devotion
invoke them, just like stretching out our arms, the dakas and dakinis come, 
absorb into our body and bless our drops, chakras and winds. This makes 
them functional so we can use them for meditations like those in the Six 
Yogas of Naropa, allowing the winds to enter, abide and absorb, helping to 
absorb the gross and subtle minds and then the extremely subtle mind so 
we experience the clear light, simultaneous-­born bliss. From that we can 
achieve the dharmakaya. If we get the experience of the clear light, the 
great bliss non-­dual with emptiness, we can achieve enlightenment in this 
life. 
One of my gurus, Gomo Rinpoche, wrote to me from Mussoorie that he 
had had these experiences after he had finished a Vajrayogini or Tara Cit-
tamani retreat. I took a chöd initiation and six-­session yoga teachings from 
him, but I was not able to receive all the teachings, just half. I also requested 
many initiations from him, but when he gave them at Istituto Lama Tzong 
Khapa I was somehow unable to get there, possibly because there was also 
some problem with Dolgyal at that time.  
Khejok Rinpoche, a friend from Sera Me, wrote to me that he had had a 
similar experience. He didn’t announce it publicly; it was his personal story. 
He just told close friends. I think many other meditators have such experi-
ences of the clear light and illusory body. We can see from the way they look 
externally. Those who have that experience look very special.  
This is an incredible opportunity because the dakas and dakinis of 
the holy places in this world bless us through the body mandala practice. 
That is one reason why this is a quick way to achieve enlightenment. The 
other reasons were mentioned in the Heruka Body Mandala transmitted 
by Pabongka Dechen Nyingpo, which I received from Kyabje Trijang Rin-
poche and Kyabje Zong Rinpoche.
There is a story that Heruka promised Pabongka Rinpoche that whoever 
practices Heruka for seven lifetimes can be born in the Dakpa Khachö pure 
land. Similarly, Vajrayogini promised this to Kyabje Lhatsun Rinpoche. 
Kyabje Denma Lochö Rinpoche received the Vajrayogini initiation from 
him and I took it from Denma Lochö Rinpoche several times. So, if we 
practice Vajrayogini for seven lifetimes, we will be guided in the pure land 
for up to seven lifetimes. 
If we’re born in that pure land we can definitely achieve enlightenment 
there. That is the special benefit it has. It is very easy for common people to 
be born in the Amitabha pure land but, although that frees you from the 
lower realms forever, you don’t have this special opportunity. 

=== PAGE 233 ===
Practicing Tantra    217
Taking initiation: the samayas of the five buddha 
families
His Holiness the Dalai Lama does Yamantaka self-­initiation every day. He 
has said that when he does, he keeps Geshe Kelsang112 in his heart. Geshe 
Kelsang is totally against His Holiness; he demonstrates and criticizes so 
much, but His Holiness says he keeps him in his heart. He told us this.
Sera Je Geshe Dawa was the first resident teacher at Tara House, Mel-
bourne, and also taught at Buddha House in Adelaide and later at Vajrayana 
Institute in Sydney. Then he started to rebuild his old monastery in Tibet. 
He is now extremely old. When he heard His Holiness say that about Geshe 
Kelsang he said, “Oh, I wish I was that!” Geshe Dawa said he wished he 
were like Geshe Kelsang so that His Holiness would hold him in his heart! 
That is a very good practice. When His Holiness takes the bodhisattva 
vows he keeps Geshe Kelsang—who complains about and criticizes him so 
much—in his heart. If there is somebody who criticizes you, who abuses 
you, who blames you, it is good to remember that and, following His Holi-
ness’s practice, keep that person in your heart.
When you take a Highest Yoga Tantra initiation you must also take the 
bodhisattva and tantric vows. Taking the bodhisattva vows is like your con-
tribution to world peace. With these vows, you dedicate your life to helping 
all sentient beings. 
Keeping the tantric vows is the fundamental practice of a tantric practice. 
Even if you don’t meditate on the path, if you keep the vows purely you can 
become enlightened, if not in this life then within three, seven or definitely 
sixteen lifetimes. 
There are five samayas that go with the tantric vows, the samayas of Vai-
rochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. The 
first one, the samaya of Vairochana, represents the three types of morality: 
the moralities of abstaining from nonvirtue, ripening your own mind and 
ripening others’ minds.
The first morality is the morality of abstaining from the ten nonvirtues 
and so forth. That is self-­explanatory. Then there is the morality of ripening 
your own mind, which in this context means bringing the practice of the 
six perfections into whatever you do. When you make charity, within that 
112  Kelsang Gyatso is the head of the New Kadampa Tradition, which promotes the practice 
of Dolgyal. 

=== PAGE 234 ===
218    sun of devotion
there is the practice of the six perfections. When you do a mandala offering, 
within that there is the practice of the six perfections. Within any activity 
you do, within any practice you do, there is the practice of the six perfec-
tions. The third morality is the morality of ripening others’ minds. There 
are about eleven different methods to help sentient beings mentioned in the 
lam-­rim, for example, guiding, showing the path to somebody who is lost. 
That is one of the practices of morality you should keep. 
Sentient beings are numberless; you are one. No matter how much you 
suffer in samsara, you are one. But sentient beings have been suffering from 
beginningless rebirths up to now. There are numberless hell beings, num-
berless hungry ghosts, numberless animals, numberless human beings, 
numberless gods, numberless demigods and numberless intermediate state 
beings. Just like you, they have been suffering from beginningless rebirths, 
but they are numberless and they have the most unbelievable suffering. This 
is utterly unbearable. It’s as if your mother had fallen into a red-­hot fire. You 
could not stand seeing her there for even one second. Therefore you need to 
become enlightened quickly in order to free sentient beings from samsaric 
suffering and lead them to enlightenment as soon as possible. This is your 
motivation for taking the tantric vows.
The samaya of Vairochana also includes taking refuge in the Three Rare 
Sublime Ones, the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Relying on them so that 
you (and because of that, all others) can be saved from samsara is causal ref-
uge. Resultant refuge is the belief that you will achieve the state of Buddha, 
Dharma and Sangha in your mental continuum in the future and taking 
refuge in that. Going for refuge to the resultant refuge is the samaya of the 
Buddha Vairochana. 
Next is the samaya of Akshobhya, which has four types: vajra, bell, mudra 
and guru. The samaya of the vajra is in order to remember the holy mind 
of transcendental wisdom of great bliss. Holding the vajra and remem-
bering that wisdom is keeping the vajra samaya. There is the interpretive 
vajra—remembering emptiness only, tong-­pa-­nyi—and the definitive vajra, 
remembering the meaning of the wisdom of great bliss. 
The samaya of the bell is to remember the wisdom of emptiness, which is 
the interpretive meaning of the bell. Holding the bell is keeping the samaya 
of the bell. This is why, when you are trying to practice tantra, you must 
always have a vajra and bell, even very small ones, like on the counter of a 
mala. You have to secretly keep them in order to remember and practice 
the definitive meaning of vajra and bell. Even a drawing of the six mudras 

=== PAGE 235 ===
Practicing Tantra    219
of the father and the five of the mother that has a vajra and bell helps keep 
this samaya. For this reason, like statues, the vajra and the bell are holy 
objects. 
If possible, the actual vajra and bell you use in practice should also be 
kept secret. Although the Kadampa geshes practiced tantra, they didn’t 
show it externally. When they died people would find a small vajra and bell 
sewed secretly into the collar of their coat or somewhere like that. 
The third samaya of Akshobhya is the samaya of the mudra, where 
you visualize your body transforming into the Buddha Vajradhara father-­
mother, the desire deity. It is very important to understand the reason for 
this. In Highest Yoga Tantra the meaning of vajra and bell together is the 
transcendental wisdom of great bliss non-­dual with emptiness. Like an 
atomic bomb, that is the quickest way to cease even the subtle obscurations, 
the obscurations to knowledge. That allows you to achieve enlightenment 
in a brief lifetime of the degenerate age without needing to prolong your life 
for hundreds or thousands of years, as you do with the lower tantras. 
There is a method where you visualize your body in pure form as, for 
example, Heruka father-­mother or Vajradhara father-­mother. Visualizing 
the father-­mother embracing while holding your vajra and bell helps you 
to develop this experience. It’s like an atomic bomb to speed you quickly to 
achieve enlightenment. That is why you see many statues and thangkas of 
male and female deities embracing. 
This practice is only for those who have very high intelligence, who have 
the highest merit, who need such a practice in order to cease the dualistic 
mind and dualistic views and attain enlightenment as quickly as possible. It 
doesn’t suit everybody, so you are very fortunate to have met tantra at this 
time.  
The last samaya of Akshobhya is the samaya of the guru, which means 
correctly following the virtuous friend, the guru, the vajra master, who is the 
root of all realizations, the root of the path to enlightenment.113 
Next is the samaya of Ratnasambhava, which involves practicing the 
four kinds of charity six times a day: miscellaneous charity, the giving of 
Dharma, the giving of fearlessness and the charity of giving loving kindness.
An example of miscellaneous charity is when, in Mahayana practice, 
you eat food and make charity of it to all the sentient beings—the worms 
and so forth—that are living in your body. Nagarjuna explained this in the 
113  Rinpoche’s book The Heart of the Path explains every last detail of how to do this.

=== PAGE 236 ===
220    sun of devotion
Mahayana eating yoga practice.114 Whenever you eat food and think like 
that, it becomes miscellaneous charity. 
You can also relate this to what you do in your daily life, such as feeding 
your pets. Eating meat is very common in Tibet. There are some lamas who 
don’t eat meat but the majority do. Kyabje Serkong Tsenshab Rinpoche told 
me that when eating he would throw some meat from his plate to the small 
dogs that were in his room, and this became the practice of miscellaneous 
charity from the six-­session guru yoga. If you are feeding birds or other ani-
mals, even ants, or giving food or other things to people, you can also make 
this the practice of miscellaneous charity. There are many different ways 
you can do it. 
Next is the charity of giving Dharma. If you recite mantras or texts such 
as the Vajra-­Cutter Sutra, the Golden Light Sutra or the Heart Sutra, either 
by heart or by reading, aloud you can think that you are giving Dharma to 
all the numberless hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, human beings, gods 
and demigods. Think that you have received the recitation from the Bud-
dha, have realized the meaning and are now reciting it for all sentient beings 
and they are realizing it too.
In Aptos, when we go round the stupa, partly for exercise but also for 
purification and to collect merit, I explain to the other monks and nuns 
that whenever we recite prayers by reading from texts or an iPad, we should 
visualize that we are giving teachings like this. Reciting prayers and mantras 
aloud for animals or any people around, even if they have no serious inter-
est in Dharma, is also making charity of Dharma. And again, when doing 
this we should think that we are giving Dharma to the numberless other 
sentient beings as well.
Then, there is the charity of giving fearlessness. Reciting mantras such 
as the mantras of Maitreya, Medicine Buddha or om mani padme hum 
to animals or people as they are dying stops them from being born in the 
lower realms. Giving advice to people who are suicidal, talking them out of 
killing themselves, is also the charity of fearlessness. You can think of many 
things like this. 
The charity of giving loving kindness means causing sentient beings to 
have happiness. There are many actions you can do, from playing music to 
reciting prayers such as the four immeasurables, but when your motivation 
114  See Rinpoche’s Yoga of Offering Food at LamaYeshe.com.

=== PAGE 237 ===
Practicing Tantra    221
is to benefit others and bring them happiness, that is the charity of loving 
kindness. 
When you do the practice of taking and giving, tong-­len, even if you 
have no specific sentient being you are doing it for, it encompasses all four 
charities. Giving your body, possessions, materials and merit to the sentient 
beings of the six realms is not only miscellaneous charity but the charity of 
fearlessness, loving kindness and many other things as well. 
Next is the samaya of Amitabha. This means following the two types of 
Dharma and the three yanas, or vehicles, individually. The two types of 
Dharma are outer Dharma and secret Dharma, which mean respectively 
the lower tantras—Kriya Tantra and Charya Tantra—and the higher tan-
tras—Yoga Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra. 
The three yanas refer to the Hearer Listener Vehicle, the Solitary Realizer 
Vehicle, and the Mahayana Paramita Vehicle.115 These are the three yanas 
and you pledge to practice them without missing, which means that you 
actually practice the ones you are capable of following and just wish to prac-
tice those you are as yet incapable of following. 
The last samaya is the samaya of Amoghasiddhi, which is to protect all the 
samayas that I have just explained and to do the four types of offerings—
outer, inner, secret and absolute—as well.
You set up and offer the outer offerings: the two waters, argham and 
padyam, and the six desire objects, pushpe, dhupe, aloke, gandhe, naividya 
and shapta.116 
Then you bless and offer the inner offering, the red bodhicitta from the 
female and the white bodhicitta from the male117 as well as the elements. 
Since we have no high tantric realizations and our mind is full of supersti-
tions, we don’t actually take those substances but visualize doing so instead.
The third offering is the secret offering. Through meditation you generate 
115  Shravakayana, Pratyekabuddhayana and Paramitayana. The first two are regarded as 
Hinayana; the latter, one of the two Mahayana vehicles, the other being the Vajrayana. The 
three yanas can also refer to the two Hinayana ones and the Mahayana in general.
116  Traditional offerings to the Three Rare Sublime Ones, they are: water for drinking (Skt: 
argham), water for cleaning the feet ( padyam), flowers ( pushpe), incense (dhupe), light 
(aloke), perfume ( gandhe), food (naivedya) and music (shabda).
117  “Bodhicitta” here refers to the bodhicitta drops or subtle substances that permeate the 
body. The white drop, which originated from the father, is said to reside in the crown chakra 
and the red drop, which originated from the mother, is said to reside in the navel chakra. This 
is according to Guhyasamaja tantra; other tantras may describe them slightly differently. 

=== PAGE 238 ===
222    sun of devotion
the four blisses, the last of which is the simultaneously-­born great bliss, the 
clear light. Having generated that, you make the offering, which is the secret 
offering. Again, you can only do this when your mind is at that level of real-
ization, so now we just visualize making the offering. 
Finally there is the absolute offering. The great bliss you generated in the 
secret offering understands emptiness and you offer that. That is the abso-
lute offering. 
Then you make a promise to generate both wishing and entering bodhi-
citta and to protect the nineteen samayas, the samayas of the five types of 
buddhas. 
The hearer listener and solitary realizer arhats and the bodhisattvas who 
have attained the pure bhumis—the eighth, ninth and tenth—are free from 
the disturbing-­thought obscurations but not the subtle ones. You want to 
free these arhats and bodhisattvas from even these subtle obscurations. And 
you want to liberate ordinary sentient beings, those who are neither arhats 
nor higher bodhisattvas living in the last three bhumis and are therefore not 
free from either disturbing-­thought obscurations or subtle obscurations. 
You want to liberate them from both kinds of obscuration. 
You want to “give breath” to all lower realm beings, such as those in 
hell, who are “unable to breathe” because of the unbelievably heavy suffer-
ing they have to experience, which means you want to free them from the 
suffering of the lower realms. In that way, you promise to lead all sentient 
beings to enlightenment, the non-­abiding sorrowless state. That is the pur-
pose of taking the tantric vows with these commitments.
Sentient beings are most kind, most precious, most dear. All your past, 
present and future happiness, including enlightenment, every collection of 
goodness, comes from every sentient being. You need to understand this 
deeply and also see how much they are suffering. They want happiness but 
they always destroy the cause of happiness. They dislike suffering but day 
and night they are always busy creating the cause of suffering. They are 
always running toward suffering. They destroy their merits because they 
don’t know Dharma. 
Think, “I must free the numberless mother sentient beings from the 
oceans of samsaric suffering and bring them to full enlightenment, the state 
of the omniscient mind, by myself alone. Therefore, I must achieve the state 
of the omniscient mind as quickly as possible.” This is the kind of motiva-
tion you need to bring with you when you take an initiation. 

=== PAGE 239 ===
Practicing Tantra    223
Using the damaru, vajra and bell
When you use the damaru, you have to hold it in your right hand together 
with the vajra while holding the bell in your left hand. Then, as Kyabje Zong 
Rinpoche explained, you think, “In order to achieve enlightenment for the 
benefit of all the mother sentient beings I am going to practice the two 
bodhicittas.” The vajra symbolizes the method of great bliss and the bell 
symbolizes the wisdom of emptiness, which means you are going to prac-
tice method and wisdom respectively, or, in terms of the two bodhicittas, 
conventional and absolute bodhicitta. 
Because holding the vajra and bell symbolizes the inseparability of 
method, great bliss, and wisdom, emptiness, you never put either of them 
down in order to use the damaru. You hold them both at the same time 
to show the essence of tantric practice: the inseparability of method and 
wisdom. 
Whether you can remember that every time or not, at least when you’re 
doing a puja try to remember this meaning at least once! (Kyabje Zong 
Rinpoche didn’t say that; I’m saying it!) Anyway, you need to remember to 
always hold the two together. People also commonly play the damaru incor-
rectly. You should hold the bell at your heart to actualize clear light and play 
the damaru at your navel.
Once when I was at a long life puja for His Holiness the Dalai Lama in 
Dharamsala, I was watching to see who did all this as His Holiness Zong 
Rinpoche explained. Only Samdhong Rinpoche, the previous Tibetan 
prime minister, was doing it correctly. 
The current prime minister is Lobsang Sangay, who seems to have much 
more recognition and respect from the Indian government, which is very 
good. I think it’s important that people in the Tibetan government know 
Dharma well, and as a former principal of the Central Institute of Higher 
Tibetan Studies in Sarnath, Samdhong Rinpoche was an expert in sutra 
and tantra. But of course, Lobsang Sangay is an expert in politics and other 
things, having a law degree from Harvard University. One of the FPMT’s 
major benefactors was asked by His Holiness’s Private Office to help fund 
his studies there and it seems that the Private Office might have planned for 
him to run for office for a long time, so it seems very good, excellent.
So I was watching all these lamas using the damaru at the puja and only 
Samdhong Rinpoche was doing it correctly, holding it at his navel. Of 
course he knows; the rest were holding theirs up like you do in chöd practice. 

=== PAGE 240 ===
224    sun of devotion
So you should not do that, but play it at the navel in order to persuade, or 
hook or attract, the dakinis into your navel chakra to bless it. 
To succeed in the tum-­mo practice of the Six Yogas of Naropa in order 
to attain clear light and great bliss and achieve the state of Vajradhara as 
quickly as possible in this life for the sake of sentient beings you need to 
persuade the dakinis to pay attention to you, to hook them to abide in and 
bless your navel chakra. So this is not like playing the big chöd damaru. If 
you’re doing chöd, that’s different, but even then, there are various ways of 
playing it. I learned to do it one way; His Holiness Khalkha Rinpoche,118 
who is kind of like the Dalai Lama of Mongolia, does it another. But hold-
ing the small damaru like a chöd damaru has no meaning. The bell, too, has 
many explanations.
My suggestion is that generally, always dedicate any practice or puja you 
do for sentient beings, not just yourself. I’m sorry to say this but even my 
Mickey Mouse gek-­tor practice is done for all sentient beings. In the world 
there are so many sick people, so many people facing difficulties, number-
less people experiencing great suffering, and they all need gek-­tor done for 
them. So we do it here not just for those of us taking the initiation but for 
all sentient beings. 
For example, if you are doing a Four Mandala Offerings to Tara puja, 
dedicate it for all sentient beings. Generate bodhicitta not only at the begin-
ning but also, during the puja, remind yourself that you are doing it for all 
the sentient beings who need that Tara puja. There is so much suffering in 
the world. There are numberless sentient beings who are sick or who have 
difficulties in business or other things, so while you can dedicate the puja 
for whatever problems you have personally, you should also dedicate it to 
all the numberless sentient beings who also need it. 
Whatever puja you do, dedicate it to all sentient beings. If you do a Medi-
cine Buddha puja, dedicate it for them. Of course you can think of yourself, 
but there are numberless sentient beings who also need the Medicine Bud-
dha puja. Even if you have to do a puja for a specific sick or dying person, 
dedicate it for all the people, all the sentient beings who need a Medicine 
Buddha puja, not just the one you’re doing it for. Dedicating any puja or 
practice you do for the numberless sentient beings who need it in this way 
is fantastic. 
118  The Ninth Khalkha Jetsun Dhampa. See jetsundhampa.com.

=== PAGE 241 ===
Practicing Tantra    225
The interpretation of dreams
In major initiations that span two days, the disciples are asked to remember 
and interpret whatever dreams they have after the first day. 
Positive dreams are ones in which you are listening to Dharma from, 
for example, a lama or a statue of the deity radiating light and then your 
own body becomes the deity’s holy body; or there are children or women 
who are well-­dressed and adorned with ornaments; or you are able to climb 
without difficulty to the tops of mountains or trees; or you go into beauti-
ful houses, put up prayer flags, blow conch shells or fly in the sky. Actually, 
dreaming of flying in the sky is not necessarily a good sign. It could mean 
you will be reborn as a bird. 
I once asked Lama Yeshe how a certain monk would be reborn. At first it 
looked good, that he would be reborn in a pure land, but then in the mon-
astery he was given the responsibility of running a khangtsen and at some 
point he dreamed he was flying in the sky. It seems that his mind had degen-
erated while he was running the khangtsen, because Lama said that he now 
had the karma to be reborn as a bird. So Lama gave him the Dorje Khadro 
fire puja to do to purify the pollution. 
So dreaming of flying at other times is not necessarily auspicious but, in 
the preparation for an initiation, dreaming of flying in the sky is a good sign; 
it means you will succeed in your practice. Dreaming of drinking milk and 
eating good food are also good signs.
Bad dreams include your body being burned by fire or taken by water, 
falling down precipices, or riding on a donkey or a camel going toward the 
south. Also, walking on a sandy or dusty road or entering a dark room or a 
cave—where there is darkness instead of light—or having difficulty climb-
ing something are also all inauspicious. 
If you have a bad dream, there is a method to dispel the obstacles and 
that is to see that no phenomenon, including the bad dream, exists from 
its own side. Nothing is real—or whatever word you use in normal lan-
guage—from its own side. The texts use terms such as existing from its 
own side, existing by itself or being truly existent. Phenomena do not exist 
from their own side. They are all empty, including your dream. When you 
meditate like that, meditating on Manjushri, you will see that all phenom-
ena are empty. Then as well as meditating on emptiness you can recite om 
kandharohi hum hum phat and offer a burning puja. This will dispel 
the obstacles.  

=== PAGE 242 ===
226    sun of devotion
In particular, do gek-­tor—offer a torma to the interferers. Then the 
obstacles, the interferers who interfere with your being granted the initia-
tion, are dispelled. 
Vajrayana and emptiness 
Vajrayana, the Secret Mantra vehicle, the resultant vehicle, is based on the 
Mahayana sutra vehicle, the causal vehicle, and that is based on the Hina-
yana. This is very important to understand. You should not see the Hina-
yana, Mahayana and Vajrayana as three separate vehicles; that there is the 
Mahayana and then there is the Vajrayana separate from it. Tantra is an 
aspect of the Mahayana. There are many people who think that tantra is a 
separate vehicle from the Mahayana. That is a very common belief in places 
like Singapore and Taiwan, but it is a big mistake. The Mahayana has two 
aspects, Mahayana sutra and Mahayana tantra. 
If you try to practice tantra without the renunciation of samsara of the 
Hinayana, it fails to become the cause for the renunciation of the whole of 
samsara—you have to see that the entire desire realm, form realm and form-
less realm are in the nature of suffering. You have to understand that that is 
the base. Then, if you try to practice tantra without bodhicitta you cannot 
achieve enlightenment. Even if you were able to reach the completion stage 
of Highest Yoga Tantra, still you would be unable to attain enlightenment. 
Of course, practicing tantra without even the renunciation of this life 
doesn’t become Dharma—it becomes nonvirtue, the cause of the lower 
realms. You have to understand that. 
The other traditions—Kagyü, Nyingma and Sakya—separate renuncia-
tion into the renunciation of this life and the renunciation of future lives’ 
samsara, but in Lama Tsongkhapa’s tradition, renunciation means renuncia-
tion of samsara, which includes renunciation of this life. 
Practicing tantra without understanding emptiness does not become 
the remedy that cuts the root of samsara, that eliminates ignorance. It only 
develops more ignorance. That is unbelievably important to understand. 
Therefore, without the three principal aspects of the path—renuncia-
tion, bodhicitta and wisdom—there is no correct way to practice tantra. 
So, while it is correct to differentiate between Paramitayana and Tantrayana 
within Mahayana, to think that tantra is not part of Mahayana means you 
practice tantra without renunciation, bodhicitta or emptiness. 

=== PAGE 243 ===
Practicing Tantra    227
Vajrayana combines method and wisdom in one mind 
It is impossible to practice tantra properly without emptiness. In Highest 
Yoga Tantra there is the transcendental wisdom that realizes emptiness as 
it is empty and that experiences great bliss. That great bliss that is non-­dual 
with emptiness generates into the deity, if possible, the result-­time dharma-
kaya, the pure form, Heruka. 
But, when you become Heruka, if you again become truly existent, the 
real Heruka, that is incorrect. Your understanding of emptiness must be 
continuous. As you focus with wisdom on the holy body of Heruka, your 
wisdom understands that the deity Heruka that appears to us sentient 
beings as a real one is not true. That real Heruka does not exist. It’s like when 
you recognize a dream as a dream. Even though it appears, you know it is 
not true. You understand that despite appearances it does not exist from its 
own side. As you understand that, focus simultaneously on the deity Heru-
ka’s holy body. Meditating on emptiness is the wisdom side and focusing on 
the deity’s holy body is the method side. Therefore, method and wisdom are 
inseparably combined here in one non-­dual mind. 
Focus on the deity’s holy body that appears as real while at the same time 
understanding that what appears as real is not real, that it is nonexistent 
from its own side, like recognizing a dream as a dream or recognizing a 
mirage as being the false appearance of water. While at the same time you 
are focusing on the deity’s holy mind you can think that it is merely labeled 
by the mind, or empty. It comes to the same point: merely labeled means 
empty. 
In the Mahayana Paramitayana, method and wisdom are practiced 
together but not by one mind. Each is practiced by a separate mind. What 
makes tantra the quick path to enlightenment in one life is practicing 
method and wisdom together, in one mind. 
That becomes “vajra.” That is the diamond or the vajra, the thing that can 
cut all other things. Just as a diamond can cut glass or many other things but 
nothing else can cut the diamond itself, this vajra alone can cut the dualistic 
mind, the dualistic view, the impure appearance, the impure mind.
Practicing method and wisdom simultaneously, focusing on the deity’s 
holy body becomes the cause to achieve the rupakaya, a buddha’s holy body, 
and the awareness that it does not exist from its own side become the cause 
to achieve the dharmakaya, a buddha’s holy mind. If you can actualize that 
vajra, it takes you to enlightenment. That is why it is called a yana, or vehicle. 

=== PAGE 244 ===
228    sun of devotion
Just as a car takes you to the place you want to go, this vehicle takes you to 
enlightenment. Therefore it is called the Vajrayana. This is why, in order to 
practice method and wisdom in one mind, inseparably, it is so important to 
really understand emptiness. 
Tantra is the resultant vehicle
Not only does tantra become the quick path to enlightenment in one life-
time because it allows one mind to practice method and wisdom simultane-
ously, it also allows you to meditate on the path similar to the result, hence 
its other name, the resultant vehicle. 
That is the reason why there is usually a commitment to recite the long, 
medium or short sadhana daily and to visualize the deity and the man-
dala. It’s not because you have nothing better to do. Like in the West, when 
people get old, when they are retired, they have nothing to do. They don’t 
recite om mani padme hum or anything worthwhile. They just garden, 
put flowers around their house and so forth to distract their mind but no 
matter whatever else they do, their life is so boring. Doing your sadhana 
is not like that. You don’t do it just to stop your mind from getting bored. 
By doing the meditations of the resultant vehicle you achieve the four 
complete purities, the purities of body, place, deeds and offerings.
The final result of the path is that you become a buddha; your body 
becomes the deity’s pure, holy body. What you are going to attain in the 
future, the deity’s holy body, you visualize now. That is the practice—you 
visualize that you have already achieved the deity’s holy body. That is the 
purity of body. Because this practice purifies the mind of all obscurations, 
of all dualistic views and concepts, it becomes the quick path to enlighten-
ment. You collect the most unbelievable merit and purify so much. 
And in the same way, just as you become the deity, the environment 
appears to you in the form of the mandala—that is what you visualize now. 
That is the purity of place. Visualizing the mandala of the deity purifies ten 
million eons of negative karma. On top of that, when you enter the mandala 
visualized in the sadhana—this perfect environment you will achieve in the 
future—that also becomes the most unbelievable purification. 
In the future, when you become a buddha, you will be able to do unbe-
lievably extensive deeds. Sending even one beam of light to sentient beings 
will liberate them from suffering. That is what you will be able to do and 
so, in your sadhana, you visualize that as happening now. That is the purity 
of deeds.

=== PAGE 245 ===
Practicing Tantra    229
When you become a buddha, due to your mind developing into a totally 
pure, holy mind, without even subtle obscurations, you are able to enjoy 
numberless completely pure offerings. This is what will happen when you 
become a buddha and this is what you visualize now. And again you collect 
unbelievable merit. That is the purity of offerings.
In the Paramitayana, completing the collections of the merit of transcen-
dental wisdom and the merit of virtue, the causes of the dharmakaya and 
rupakaya, takes three countless great eons. But here, in tantra, especially in 
Highest Yoga Tantra, because of great skill, meditating on the path similar 
to the four complete purified results becomes a path to achieve enlighten-
ment in one lifetime. 
That is why we need to practice tantra, and especially Highest Yoga Tan-
tra, right now, without delaying even a second. Only when we achieve full 
enlightenment, the state of the omniscient mind, can we free the number-
less sentient beings from the oceans of samsaric suffering and bring them to 
full enlightenment. If we achieve the omniscient mind, we can do that per-
fectly, without the slightest mistake. Even an arhat or a bodhisattva on the 
tenth bhumi cannot do that.

=== PAGE 246 ===
Robin Bath

=== PAGE 247 ===
Chronology
.,
Where and when these teachings were given.
	 1.	 Taking Care of the Mind
Public talk, Conway Hall, London, July 10, 2014
	2.	 Our Happiness Is in Our Hands
Trinity University, Leeds, July 5, 2014
	 3.	 The Hallucination of the Real I
Trinity University, Leeds, July 6, 2014: Session 1
	4.	 The Need for Ethics and Refuge
Trinity University, Leeds, July 6, 2014: Sessions 2 & 3
	 5.	 The Room Before It Is Named
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 11, 2014
	6.	 The Guru Is the Most Powerful Object
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 11, 2014 (continued)
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 12, 2014: Session 1
	 7.	 A Talk About Dolgyal
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 13, 2014: Session 1
	 8.	 Khadro-­la
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 13, 2014: Session 2

=== PAGE 248 ===
232    sun of devotion
	9.	 The Importance of Guru Devotion
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 13, 2014: Session 3
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 14, 2014: Session 1
	10.	 Seeing the Guru as a Buddha
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 14, 2014: Session 2
	11.	 More Precious Than a Wish-­granting Jewel
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 15, 2014: Sessions 1 & 2
	12.	 Cutting the Root of Samsara
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 15, 2014: Session 2 (continued)
	13.	 Practicing Tantra
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 14, 2014: Session 2 (continued)
Jamyang Buddhist Centre, London, July 15, 2014: Session 3

=== PAGE 249 ===
Bibliography
119
.,
Aryadeva. Four Hundred Verses (Catuhsataka-­shastra-­karika). Published as The 
Yogic Deeds of Bodhisattvas: Gyeltsap on Aryadeva’s Four Hundred, with com-
mentary by Geshe Sonam Rinchen, translated by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca: Snow 
Lion Publications, 1994.
Ashvaghosha. The Fifty Verses of Guru Devotion. Online at LamaYeshe.com
Atisha. A Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. Translated by Ruth Sonam. See 
appendix 2 of Teachings from Tibet. Boston: Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 
2015.
——— & Dromtönpa. The Book of the Kadam. Translated by Thupten Jinpa. Bos-
ton: Wisdom Publications, 2008.
The Buddha. Lankavatara Sutra. Translated by Red Pine. Berkeley: Counterpoint, 
2012. 
———. Heart Sutra (Prajnahridaya/Bhagavatiprajnaparamitahridayasutra, She 
rab nying po/Chom dän de ma she rab kyi pha röl tu jin pa’i do). Available at 
fpmt.org.
———. Sutra of the Fortunate Eon (Bhadrakalpikasutra, Kel-­pa zang-­po’i do). Pub-
lished as The Fortunate Aeon: How the Thousand Buddhas Became Enlightened. 
Cazadero: Dharma Publishing, 1986. 
———. Sutra of Golden Light (The King of Glorious Sutras Called the Exalted Sub-
lime Golden Light: A Mahayana Sutra.) (Suvarnaprabhasottamasutrendrara-
jahmahayanasutra, Phag pa ser ö dam pa do de’i wang po’i gyäl po she ja wa theg 
pa chen po’i do). Available at fpmt.org.
———. Vajra Cutter Sutra (aka Diamond Cutter Sutra) (Aryavajra-­cchedika-­nama-­
prajnaparamita-­mahayana-­sutra; phag pa she rab kyi pha röl tu chin pa dor je 
119  Since this is not an academic work, in the interests of simplicity we have decided not to use 
diacritical marks and to use pronounceable Tibetan phonetics rather than transliteration.

=== PAGE 250 ===
234    sun of devotion
chö pa she ja theg pa chen po’i do). Available in several languages at fpmt.org as 
Vajra Cutter Sutra.
Chandragomin. Letter to a Disciple. Published as Letter to a Great King by Matrceta 
and Letter to a Disciple by Chandragomin. Translated by Michael Hahn. Berke-
ley: Dharma Publishing, 1999. 
FPMT. Essential Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer Book, Volume 1, Basic Prayers 
and Practices. Portland: FPMT, 2011.
———. Liberation Box, Tools for a Fortunate Rebirth. Available at fpmt.org.
Gyaltsen, Khunu Lama Tenzin. The Jewel Lamp: A Praise of Bodhicitta ( published 
in English as Vast as the Heavens, Deep as the Sea). Translated by Gareth Spar-
ham. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1999.
Gyaltsen, Panchen Lobsang Chökyi. Lama Chöpa (Guru Puja). Portland: FPMT, 
2013.
Gyatso, Tenzin, the Fourteenth Dalai Lama. The End of Suffering and the Discovery 
of Happiness: The Path of Tibetan Buddhism. Carlsbad: Hay House, Inc., 2012.
———. Path to Bliss: A Practical Guide to the Stages of Meditation. (Based on Pan-
chen Chökyi Gyaltsen’s Path to Bliss Leading to Omniscience.) Translated by 
Thupten Jinpa. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1991. 
——— and Alexander Berzin. The Gelug/Kagyü Tradition of Mahamudra. Ithaca: 
Snow Lion Publications, 1997.
Khenchen Konchog Gyaltshen. Opening the Treasure of the Profound: Teachings 
on the Songs of Jigten Sumgön and Milarepa. Boston: Snow Lion Publications, 
2013.
Lati Rinbochay. Mind in Tibetan Buddhism. Translated by Elizabeth Napper. 
Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1980.
——— and Denma Lochö Rinbochay. Meditative States in Tibetan Buddhism. 
Translated by Leah Zahler and Jeffrey Hopkins. Boston, Wisdom Publications, 
1983, 1997.
Norbu, Thinley. A Cascading Waterfall of Nectar. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 
2006.
Pabongka Rinpoche. Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand. Translated by Michael 
Richards. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991, 2006. (Page numbers in foot-
notes refer to the latter edition.)
———. Liberation in Our Hands (three parts). Translated by Geshe Lobsang Thar-
chin and Artemus B. Engle. Howell: Mahayana Sutra and Tantra Press, 1990, 
1994, 2001.
Rabten Geshe. The Essential Nectar: Meditations on the Buddhist Path. Edited with 
verse translation by Martin Willson. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1984, 
2014.
———. The Mind and its Functions. Le Mont-­Pèlerin: Editions Rabten Choeling, 
1978, 1992.

=== PAGE 251 ===
Bibliography    235
Ribush, Nicholas (ed). Teachings from Tibet: Guidance from Great Lamas. Boston: 
Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2005, 2015.
Rinchen, Geshe Sonam. How Karma Works: The Twelve Links of Dependent Aris-
ing. Translated and edited by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 
2006.
———. The Thirty-­seven Practices of Bodhisattvas: An Oral Teaching. Translated and 
edited by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1997.
Shabkar Tsogdruk Rangdrol, The Life of Shabkar: The Autobiography of a Tibetan 
Yogin. Translated by Matthieu Ricard. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 2001.
Shantideva. A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Bodhisattvacaryavatara, Jang-­
chub sem-­pa’i chö-­pa la jug-­pa). Translated by Stephen Batchelor. Dharamsala: 
Library of Tibetan Works and Archive, 1979, 2010.
Sopa, Geshe Lhundub. Steps on the Path to Enlightenment (three volumes). Boston: 
Wisdom Publications, 2004, 2005, 2008. 
Sparham, Gareth (trans). The Tibetan Dhammapada: Sayings of the Buddha. Bos-
ton: Wisdom Publications, 1986. 
Tangpa, Langri. The Eight Verses of Thought Transformation. In, for example, Teach-
ings from Tibet and Everflowing Nectar of Bodhicitta (see below).
Thurman, Robert. The Central Philosophy of Tibet: A Study and Translation of Jey 
Tsong Khapa’s Essence of True Eloquence. (Previously published as Tsong Kha-
pa’s Speech of Gold in the Essence of True Eloquence: Reason and Enlightenment 
in the Central Philosophy of Tibet.) Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Trijang Rinpoche Losang Yeshe, Kyabje. The Ecstatic Dance of Chakrasamvara: 
Heruka Body Mandala Practice & Commentary. Seattle: Dechen Ling Press, 
2013.
Tsongkhapa. The Foundation of All Good Qualities (Yön-­ten shir-­gyur ma), in 
Essential Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer Book, Volume 1. Portland: FPMT, 
2009.
———. The Fulfillment of All Hopes: Guru Devotion in Tibetan Buddhism: A Com-
mentary on Ashvaghosha’s Fifty Verses of Guru Devotion. Translated and intro-
duced by Gareth Sparham. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1999.
———. The Great Treatise on the Path to Enlightenment (Lamrim Chenmo) (three 
volumes). Translated by the Lamrim Chenmo Translation Committee. Ithaca: 
Snow Lion Publications, 2000, 2002, 2004. 
———. Middle Length Lam-­rim (Lam-­rim Dring-­po). Additional outline by Tri-
jang Rinpoche, translated by Philip Quarcoo. Portland: FPMT, 2008 (avail-
able at fpmt.org).
———. Songs of Spiritual Experience: Condensed Points of the Stages of the Path. 
Translated by Thupten Jinpa. Available at tibetanclassics.org.
———. The Three Principal Aspects of the Path (Lam-­tso nam-­sum), in Essential 
Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer Book, Volume 1. Portland: FPMT, 2009.
Zopa Rinpoche, Lama. Advice on Benefiting Animals. Available at LamaYeshe.com.

=== PAGE 252 ===
236    sun of devotion
———. Bodhisattva Attitude: How to Dedicate Your Life to Others. Edited by Sarah 
Thresher. Boston: Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2012.
———. Everflowing Nectar of Bodhicitta. Portland: FPMT, 2008.
———. Heart of the Path: How to See the Guru as Buddha. Edited by Ailsa Cam-
eron. Boston: Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2009.
———. How to Enjoy Death: Preparing to Meet Life’s Final Challenge without Fear. 
Edited by Robina Courtin. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2016.
———. How to Practice Dharma: Teachings on the Eight Worldly Dharmas. Edited 
by Gordon McDougall. Boston: Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2012.
———. Liberating Animals from the Danger of Death. Portland: FPMT, 2009.
———. The Method to Transform a Suffering Life into Happiness (Including Enlight-
enment). Portland: FPMT, 2015. 
———. The Perfect Human Rebirth: Freedom and Richness on the Path to Enlight-
enment. Edited by Gordon McDougall. Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2013.
———. Practicing the Five Powers Near the Time of Death. Portland: FPMT, 2012.
———. Teachings from the Vajrasattva Retreat. Edited by Ailsa Cameron and Nich-
olas Ribush. Boston: Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive, 2000.
———. The Wish-­fulfilling Golden Sun of the Mahayana Thought Training: Direct-
ing in the Short Cut Path to Enlightenment. Edited by Nicholas Ribush. Kath-
mandu: Kopan Monastery Publications, 1975. Available at LamaYeshe.com. 

=== PAGE 253 ===
Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive
The Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive (LYWA) is the collected works of Lama 
Thubten Yeshe and Lama Thubten Zopa Rinpoche. Lama Zopa Rinpoche, its spiri-
tual director, founded the Archive in 1996. 
Lama Yeshe and Lama Zopa Rinpoche began teaching at Kopan Monastery, 
Nepal, in 1970. Since then, their teachings have been recorded and transcribed. At 
present we have well over 12,000 hours of digital audio and some 90,000 pages of 
raw transcript. Many recordings, mostly teachings by Lama Zopa Rinpoche, remain 
to be transcribed, and as Rinpoche continues to teach, the number of recordings 
in the Archive increases accordingly. Most of our transcripts have been neither 
checked nor edited.
Here at the LYWA we are making every effort to organize the transcription of 
that which has not yet been transcribed, edit that which has not yet been edited, 
and generally do the many other tasks detailed below.
The work of the Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive falls into two categories: 
archiving and dissemination.
Archiving requires managing the recordings of teachings by Lama Yeshe and 
Lama Zopa Rinpoche that have already been collected, collecting recordings of 
teachings given but not yet sent to the Archive, and collecting recordings of 
Lama Zopa’s on-­going teachings, talks, advice and so forth as he travels the world 
for the benefit of all. Incoming media are then catalogued and stored safely while 
being kept accessible for further work.
We organize the transcription of audio, add the transcripts to the already exis-
tent database of teachings, manage this database, have transcripts checked, and 
make transcripts available to editors or others doing research on or practicing these 
teachings.
Other archiving activities include working with video and photographs of the 
Lamas and digitizing Archive materials.
Dissemination involves keeping up with evolving technology and making the 
Lamas’ teachings available through various avenues including books for free dis-
tribution and sale, ebooks on a wide range of readers, lightly edited transcripts, 
a monthly e-­letter (see below), social media, DVDs and online video, articles in 
Mandala and other magazines and on our website. Irrespective of the medium we 
choose, the teachings require a significant amount of work to prepare them for 
distribution.
This is just a summary of what we do. The Archive was established with vir-
tually no seed funding and has developed solely through the kindness of the many 
people all over the world who partner with us in this amazing and beneficial work. 
We are indebted to you all.

=== PAGE 254 ===
Our further development similarly depends upon the generosity of those who 
see the benefit and necessity of this work, and we would be extremely grateful for 
your help. Thus we hereby appeal to you for your kind support. If you would like to 
make a contribution to help us with any of the above tasks or to sponsor books for 
free distribution, please contact us:
Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive
PO Box 636, Lincoln, MA 01773, USA
Telephone (781) 259-­4466
info@LamaYeshe.com
www.LamaYeshe.com 
The Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive is a 501(c)(3) tax-­deductible, non-­profit 
corporation dedicated to the welfare of all sentient beings and totally dependent 
upon your donations for its continued existence. Thank you so much for your sup-
port. You may contribute by mailing a check, bank draft or money order to our 
Lincoln address; by making a donation on our secure website; by mailing us your 
credit card number or phoning it in; or by transferring funds directly to our bank—
ask us for details.
Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive Membership
In order to raise the money we need to employ editors to make available the thou-
sands of hours of teachings mentioned above, we have established a membership 
plan. Membership costs US$1,000 and its main benefit is that you will be help-
ing make the Lamas’ incredible teachings available to a worldwide audience. More 
direct and tangible benefits to you personally include free Lama Yeshe and Lama 
Zopa Rinpoche books from the Archive and Wisdom Publications, a year’s sub-
scription to Mandala, a year of monthly pujas by the monks and nuns at Kopan 
Monastery with your personal dedication, and access to an exclusive members-­only 
section of our website containing the entire library of publications in electronic for-
mat. Please see LamaYeshe.com for more information. 
Social Media and Monthly e-­letter
Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Google Plus and every day read 
gems from our online teachings, view amazing images and keep up to date with our 
latest offerings. Also, each month we send out a free e-­letter containing our latest 
news and a previously unpublished teaching by Lama Yeshe or Lama Zopa Rin-
poche. See our website for links.

=== PAGE 255 ===
LYWA eBooks and Audio books
All Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive titles are available as ebooks from all 
major online bookstore vendors such as Amazon, Apple, and more. 
Our free titles are also available to read online, or download in pdf for-
mat, on our website. 
We also offer titles in ebook format only, such as Lama Zopa Rinpoche’s “Lam-
rim Teachings from Kopan 1991” series. 
In addition to the hundreds of hours of audio that can be listened to on our 
website, LYWA also offers a selection of our titles as audio books on Audible.com. 
Listen anytime to Dharma teachings from the LYWA collection.   
LYWA Multimedia Titles
We also invite you to explore our growing collection of free multimedia titles pre-
senting teachings by Lama Yeshe and Lama Zopa Rinpoche on a wide range of 
Dharma topics. These titles offer the teachings in all their multimedia aspects: 
edited original transcripts enhanced by images, audio and video from that teach-
ing and supplemented by related informal teaching clips, advice and other relevant 
teaching materials from the Archive. 
Explore the LYWA online store at www.LamaYeshe.com where you can find links 
to our print, ebook, audiobook and multimedia editions.   

=== PAGE 256 ===
The Foundation for the Preservation of  
the Mahayana Tradition
The Foundation for the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition (FPMT) is an 
international organization of Buddhist meditation study and retreat centers—
both urban and rural—monasteries, publishing houses, healing centers and other 
related activities founded in 1975 by Lama Thubten Yeshe and Lama Thubten Zopa 
Rinpoche. At present, there are more than 160 FPMT centers, projects and services 
in over forty countries worldwide.
The FPMT has been established to facilitate the study and practice of Mahayana 
Buddhism in general and the Tibetan Gelug tradition, founded in the fifteenth 
century by the great scholar, yogi and saint, Lama Je Tsongkhapa, in particular.
Twice a year, the Foundation publishes a wonderful news journal, Mandala, 
from its International Office in the United States of America. To subscribe or view 
back-­issues, please go to the Mandala website, mandalamagazine.org, or contact:
FPMT
1632 SE 11th Avenue, Portland, OR 97214
Telephone (503) 808-­1588; Fax (503) 808-­1589
info@fpmt.org
www.fpmt.org
The FPMT website also offers teachings by His Holiness the Dalai Lama, Lama 
Yeshe, Lama Zopa Rinpoche and many other highly respected teachers in the tra-
dition, details about the FPMT’s educational programs, an online learning center, 
a complete listing of FPMT centers all over the world and, especially, those in your 
area, a link to the excellent FPMT Store, and links to FPMT centers—where you 
will find details of their programs—and other interesting Buddhist and Tibetan 
pages.

=== PAGE 257 ===
 
What to do with Dharma Teachings
The Buddhadharma is the true source of happiness for all sentient beings. Books 
like this show you how to put the teachings into practice and integrate them into 
your life, whereby you get the happiness you seek. Therefore, anything contain-
ing Dharma teachings, the names of your teachers or holy images is more precious 
than other material objects and should be treated with respect. To avoid creat-
ing the karma of not meeting the Dharma again in future lives, please do not put 
books (or other holy objects) on the floor or underneath other stuff, step over or 
sit upon them, or use them for mundane purposes such as propping up wobbly 
chairs or tables. They should be kept in a clean, high place, separate from worldly 
writings, and wrapped in cloth when being carried around. These are but a few 
considerations.
Should you need to get rid of Dharma materials, they should not be thrown in 
the rubbish but burned in a special way. Briefly: do not incinerate such materials 
with other trash, but alone, and as they burn, recite the mantra om ah hum. As 
the smoke rises, visualize that it pervades all of space, carrying the essence of the 
Dharma to all sentient beings in the six samsaric realms, purifying their minds, 
alleviating their suffering, and bringing them all happiness, up to and including 
enlightenment. Some people might find this practice a bit unusual, but it is given 
according to tradition. Thank you very much.
Dedication
Through the merit created by preparing, reading, thinking about and sharing this 
book with others, may all teachers of the Dharma live long and healthy lives, may 
the Dharma spread throughout the infinite reaches of space, and may all sentient 
beings quickly attain enlightenment.
In whichever realm, country, area or place this book may be, may there be no war, 
drought, famine, disease, injury, disharmony or unhappiness, may there be only 
great prosperity, may everything needed be easily obtained, and may all be guided 
by only perfectly qualified Dharma teachers, enjoy the happiness of Dharma, have 
love and compassion for all sentient beings, and only benefit and never harm each 
other.

=== PAGE 258 ===
Lama Thubten Zopa Rinpoche was born in Thangme, Nepal, in 1945. 
At the age of three he was recognized as the reincarnation of the Lawudo 
Lama, who had lived nearby at Lawudo, within sight of Rinpoche’s 
Thangme home. Rinpoche’s own description of his early years may be found 
in his book, The Door to Satisfaction. At the age of ten, Rinpoche went to 
Tibet and studied and meditated at Domo Geshe Rinpoche’s monastery 
near Pagri, until the Chinese occupation of Tibet in 1959 forced him to 
forsake Tibet for the safety of Bhutan. Rinpoche then went to the Tibetan 
refugee camp at Buxa Duar, West Bengal, India, where he met Lama Yeshe, 
who became his closest teacher. The Lamas went to Nepal in 1967, and over 
the next few years built Kopan and Lawudo Monasteries. In 1971 Lama 
Zopa Rinpoche gave the first of his famous annual lam-­rim retreat courses, 
which continue at Kopan to this day. In 1974, with Lama Yeshe, Rinpoche 
began traveling the world to teach and establish centers of Dharma. When 
Lama Yeshe passed away in 1984, Rinpoche took over as spiritual head of 
the FPMT, which has continued to flourish under his peerless leadership. 
More details of Rinpoche’s life and work may be found in The Lawudo 
Lama and on the LYWA and FPMT websites. In addition to many LYWA 
and FPMT books, Rinpoche’s other published teachings include Wisdom 
Energy (with Lama Yeshe), Transforming Problems, The Door to Satisfaction, 
Ultimate Healing, Dear Lama Zopa, How to Be Happy, Wholesome Fear 
and many transcripts and practice booklets.
Gordon McDougall first met Tibetan Buddhism in Hong Kong in 1986 and 
was the director of Cham-­Tse Ling, the FPMT center there, for two years. Since 
then he has been involved with various FPMT centers and projects. In 2001 he 
became the spiritual program coordinator of Jamyang Buddhist Centre, Lon-
don, where he worked with the resident teacher, Geshe Tashi Tsering, to develop 
the Foundation of Buddhist Thought, the two-­year campus and correspondence 
course that is part of the FPMT core education program. He administered the 
course and worked at Jamyang for seven years, editing the six FBT books, first as 
study books for the course and then as “stand-­alone” books for Wisdom Publica-
tions. He has also led lam-­rim courses in Europe and India and was involved with 
the creation of the Discovering Buddhist program. After moving to Bath, England, 
he became a full time editor with the Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive in 2008, 
managing the Publishing the FPMT Lineage project and editing the books pub-
lished in the series.
