=== PAGE 1 ===
© Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2015	
BEB, vol. I
Also available online – www.brill
for reconstructing the intellectual landscape of 
medieval Indian Buddhism in general and esoteric 
Buddhism in particular.
An argumentative prakaraṇa is typically written 
in prose, but the kārikā style, fully versified form 
is not unknown; some are written in mixed prose 
and verse. Following the ­age-old model, after the 
topic has been pointed out, possible objections 
are listed and refuted employing reasoning (yukti) 
and the authority of revelation and previous mas-
ters (āgama), either by allusion or direct quota-
tion. Descriptive prakaraṇas are usually in verse, 
the density of which suggests that this is mainly a 
mnemonic device. These do not typically follow the 
argumentative style, but almost always endorse a 
particular doctrinal perspective, at the expense of 
competing views.
Even if a particular prakaraṇa is not openly argu-
mentative, the designation is similar to the titles of 
those that are. The headings of both kinds of treatises 
employ terms such as tattva (reality) or a synonym 
thereof; other words commonly employed include 
nirukti (elucidation), pradīpa (lamp), nirākaraṇa 
(refutation), or siddhi (proof or accomplishment). 
Furthermore, not infrequently a descriptive trea-
tise was followed by an argumentative commentary 
either by the author himself or a disciple.
Although quite a few prakaraṇas have survived 
in the original Sanskrit, some of the most impor-
tant and influential ones can now be accessed only 
in Tibetan translations, many of which are of poor 
quality. The individual texts discussed below are 
for the most part those whose original is extant, 
but exception is made in those cases where the 
work is too important to ignore. The survey is not 
­comprehensive.
Padmavajra’s Guhyasiddhi 
The Guhyasiddhi of Padmavajra (The Accomplish-
ment of the Secret; Gsang ba grub pa; D 2217/P 5016) 
is very probably an ­8th-century ce work. The Sanskrit 
original is available, but it is very poorly transmit-
ted; the only edition thus far (Rinpoche & Dwivedi, 
1987, 5–62) should be considered a very tentative 
Prakaraṇas are usually short or ­mid-length treatises 
on a particular aspect of doctrine and/or practice, 
either tacitly endorsing and promoting a viewpoint 
or phrased in an apologetic style; in other words, 
they are descriptive or argumentative, ­essay-style 
exegetical writings. While there is nothing specifi-
cally tantric about the term prakaraṇa itself, in the 
present article it refers to those related to esoteric 
literature. These treatises do not claim to be rev-
elation: the author is known, or there is at least 
supposed to have been a human author, even if 
authorship is frequently debated. Examples of a 
treatise being attributed to an already ­well-known 
figure in order to increase its prestige abound. Some 
prakaraṇas proved to be very influential, as they are 
frequently quoted, endorsed, and debated.
The boundary lines between prakaraṇas and 
other genres such as commentaries or ritual manu-
als are not always so sharp, since works of the latter 
type often contain argumentative excursuses, which 
can be seen as ­mini-treatises (one such example is 
a treatise embedded in the Vimalaprabhā, a com-
mentary to the Kālacakratantra; Gnoli, 1997). More-
over, some prakaraṇas were so prestigious and 
influential that later scriptural compilers took over 
from them entire paragraphs, thus “scripturalizing” 
passages that were presumably seen as important. 
In cultures in which tantric literature has been can-
onized (China, Tibet), there is no separate section 
dedicated to prakaraṇas; instead they are found 
dispersed among other genres of exegesis, some-
times affiliated to a particular cycle of scriptural 
revelation.
Topics can be varied. A popular theme is the sur-
veying of Buddhist revelation, evaluating the virtues 
of one doctrine over another, and showing how the 
tantric revelation fits into the scheme. It did not 
escape the attention of authors that esoteric teach-
ings were of a very different type when compared to 
mainstream Buddhism, and thus quite a lot of effort 
went into justifying not only their place but also 
their superiority. However, sometimes the theme of 
a treatise can be narrowly specialized, for example 
the precise number of initiations (abhiṣeka) and 
what they should consist of. For the historian these 
are very precious documents, since they are crucial 
Tantric Prakaraṇas

=== PAGE 2 ===
756	
Tantric Prakaraṇas
attempt. The work is arranged in nine chapters 
and it is almost entirely in verse. The Guhyasiddhi 
seeks to elucidate a number of points about what 
it sees as the fundamental tantric scripture, the 
Guhyasamājatantra, which is unequivocally seen as 
the culmination of Buddhist revelation. The author 
advocates a complete, unapologetically antinomian 
spiritual programme for practitioners of varying 
abilities and accomplishments based on that scrip-
ture, beginning with the service of a guru, receiving 
initiation followed by diligent meditative practice, 
sexual yoga beginning with a real woman and cul-
minating with a visualized internal consort, and 
various kinds of ­post-initiatory observance (caryā). 
One such passage (ch. 8, esp. v. 12) betrays intimate 
familiarity with rival Śaiva cults (Tanemura, 2008, 
55–58; Sanderson, 2009, 144–145).
Indrabhūti’s Jñānasiddhi 
The Jñānasiddhi (Accomplishment of [Nondual] 
Gnosis; ed. Bhattacharyya, 1929, 31–100; Rinpoche 
& Dwivedi, 1987, 89–158; Ye shes grub pa; D 2219/ 
P 3063) is confessedly a practical manual, but it is 
much more than that, as the author frequently 
digresses into supportive philosophical discussions, 
such as the Yogācāra controversy of sākāra and 
nirākāra (i.e. whether or not the perceiving mind 
“takes the form” of the perceived object). The work, 
which is structured in 20 chapters, is no doubt early, 
perhaps from the 9th century ce. Unfortunately, it is 
also rather badly transmitted (de Jong, 1998) in rela-
tively late paper manuscripts. Just like Padmavajra, 
Indrabhūti promotes a unambiguously transgres-
sive spiritual programme: the practitioner is free to 
do anything provided that he maintains meditative 
identity with the deity. The work is imbued with the 
spirit and diction of the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍā­
kinījālaśaṃvara, a scripture the author also fre-
quently quotes and refers to (Sanderson, 2009, 
155–156, 163).
Jñānapāda’s Ātmasādhanāvatāra 
Perhaps one of the earliest argumentative prakaraṇas 
of late tantric Buddhism is to be found among 
the works of Jñānapāda or *Buddhaśrījñāna (late 
­8th-early 9th cent. ce). His Ātmasādhanāvatāra 
(An Introduction to Accomplishment in the Body; 
Bdag sgrub pa la ’jug pa; D 1860/P 2723) is extant in 
Sanskrit (Kawasaki, 2004, 51) but remains inacces-
sible. More than half of the original can be recov-
ered from two long excursuses in a still unstudied 
recension of a work called the Sāramañjarī (for the 
catalogue entry, see Sferra, 2008, 45). The work seeks 
to advocate, defend, and harmonize the fundamen-
tally tantric practice of visualizing oneself as a deity 
with Yogācāra Buddhism.
Works of the Ārya School
The ­so-called Ārya school is one of the two most 
influential traditions of Guhyasamājatantra exege-
sis. While the fundamental text of this group, the 
Pañcakrama (The Five Stages; Rim pa lnga pa; D 1802/ 
P 2667) deals almost exclusively with practice 
(a comprehensive study, edition, and French trans-
lation can be found in Tomabechi, 2006), the Sūtaka 
or Sūtakamelāpaka (The Integration of Sūtras, 
Tantras, and Kalpas; Spyod pa bsdus pa’i sgron ma; 
D 1803/P 2668), better known under the otherwise 
unattested title as the *Caryāmelāpakapradīpa of 
­deutero-Āryadeva (most likely early 9th cent. ce) 
also deals with doctrinal matters, advocating a grad-
ual path of tantric practice as the culmination of 
Mahāyāna in the form of a conversation between mas-
ter and disciple (edited and translated into English 
in Wedemeyer, 2007). The Cittaviśuddhiprakaraṇa 
(A Treatise on the Purification of Mind; Sems kyi 
sgrib pa rnam par sbyong ba zhes bya ba’i rab tu byed 
pa; D 1804/P 2669) of presumably the same, tantric 
Āryadeva is a defense of antinomian practice and an 
attempt to show that in spite of all appearances, such 
a path is in perfect harmony with Mahāyāna philos-
ophy (the latest edition and study, greatly in need 
of revision, is Varghese, 2008; for another transla-
tion, see Wedemeyer, 1999, 357–382). Attributed to 
the same author, the Svādhiṣṭhānakramaprabheda 
(An Elucidation of the Stages of ­Self-empowerment; 
Bdag byin gyis brlab pa’i rim par rnam par dbye ba; 
D 1805/P 2670) is another work on ­self-identification 
with the deity; it is deeply influenced by the Sarva- 
buddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara. It has been 
edited (Pandey, 1997, 169–194) and translated into 
English in C.K. Wedemeyer, 1999, 383–391.
Śāntarakṣita’s Tattvasiddhi 
The most widely known prakaraṇa is perhaps the 
Tattvasiddhi (A Proof of Reality; De kho na nyid grub 

=== PAGE 3 ===
	
Tantric Prakaraṇas	
757
pa; D 3708/P 4531) attributed to Śāntarakṣita. Both 
the Tibetan tradition and some modern scholars 
(e.g. Mishra, 1985–1986, 123–124) maintain that this 
author is the same as the first abbot of Bsam yas and 
the author of the Tattvasaṃgraha, a philosophi-
cal work. However, it is much more likely that the 
author is a ­deutero-Śāntarakṣita, perhaps from the 
9th century ce and not the 8th. The only complete 
edition of the Sanskrit text thus far is a draft by 
K.N. Mishra, which remains unpublished but avail-
able since 1986. A complete edition by T. Tomabechi 
incorporating the readings of a ­palm-leaf manu-
script found in China is forthcoming (announced 
in Steinkellner, 2008, 291). Partial editions have 
been published in Moriguchi Kōshun, 1993 (with a 
Japanese translation and an examination of texts 
quoted by the work) and E. Steinkellner, 2001 (the 
passage is translated into English in Steinkellner, 
2008). All the manuscripts used in these editions are 
rather poor paper witnesses. The overall goal of the 
­Tattvasiddhi is to justify antinomian and ­anti-ascetic 
tantric practice, promoting the idea that great bliss 
(mahāsukha), which is supposedly enjoyed by lib-
erated beings, can only be produced by sensual 
bliss (sukha). To this end, the author employs a 
variety of techniques, chief among which is a type 
of inference developed by the logician Dharmakīrti 
(Steinkellner, 1999, 355–360). Although the work 
lacks the sophistication and elegance of ­logico- 
philosophical authors, it proved important and 
influential, as parts of it were incorporated into at 
least one scripture fashioned in the late 10th or early 
11th century (Szántó, 2013b, 349). At present, there is 
no complete translation of the text; a comprehen-
sive summary can be found in E. Steinkellner, 2008, 
293–294.
Anaṅgavajra’s 
Prajñopāyaviniścayasiddhi 
The chief idea of Anaṅgavajra’s work (Establishing 
the Ascertainment of Wisdom and Means; Thabs 
dang shes rab rnam par gtan la dbab pa’i sgrub 
pa; D 2218/P 3062; ed. Bhattacharyya, 1929, 3–27; 
Rinpoche & Dwivedi, 1987, 63–87) is the importance 
and indispensability of a master and the initiations 
and instructions provided by him in order to obtain 
success on the tantric path. Large blocks of this text 
have been transformed into scripture, namely, the 
Saṃpuṭodbhavatantra (Szántó, 2013b, 353, 354, 356). 
The dating of the author is uncertain, but he must, 
on account of the mentioned adaptation, precede 
the end of the 10th century.
*Tripiṭakamalla’s *Nayatrayapradīpa 
The *Nayatrayapradīpa (A Lamp [to Elucidate the 
Respective Superiority of] the Three Ways; Tshul 
gsum gyi sgron ma; D 3707/P 4530) is a lengthy 
and sophisticated work now available only in 
Tibetan. The author’s name has been transmitted 
and tentatively reconstructed in a variety of ways 
(*Tripiṭakamala, *Tripiṭakamāla, *Tripiṭakakamala) 
of which *Tripiṭakamalla (“Champion of the Three 
Canons”) is the most plausible. A critical edition 
of the Tibetan is lacking but a substantial por-
tion has been studied and translated in I. Onians, 
2002, 92–139. The author presents the three ways 
– the way of hearers (Śrāvakayāna), the great way 
(Mahāyāna), and the vajra way (Vajrayāna) – in an 
inclusivistic model. His teaching on the superiority 
of Vajrayāna or tantric teachings over mainstream 
Mahāyāna is encapsulated in the following cel-
ebrated verse, which is often quoted and thus avail-
able in the original: 
ekārthatve ’py asaṃmohād bahūpāyād aduṣkarāt | 
tīkṣṇendriyādhikārāc ca mantraśāstraṃ viśiṣyate || 
(the last quarter is also seen as mantranītiḥ 
praśasyate, or mantranītir viśiṣyate) 
Even if the aim is the same, the mantra teaching 
is distinguished [from that of the Perfections] 
by its lack of confusion, many methods, easiness 
and appropriateness for those of sharp faculties. 
(trans. Onians, 2002, 88)
The author argues that the tantric path does not 
have a different goal than that of the Mahāyāna, 
but it is supreme to it in these four ways. The text 
then proceeds to elaborate on these four kinds 
of superiority in great detail. The author must be 
quite early: his paradigmatic tantric scripture is the 
Guhyasamājatantra and he does not seem to quote 
any text later than the 9th century ce.
*Dharmendra’s *Tattvasārasaṃgraha 
and *Udbhaṭa’s *Mantranayāloka 
The otherwise unknown authors *Dharmendra and 
*Udbhaṭa were master and disciple as is clear from 
the latter’s testimony. *Dharmendra’s *Tattvasāra­
saṃgraha (A Compendium on the Essence of Reality; 

=== PAGE 4 ===
758	
Tantric Prakaraṇas
De kho na nyid kyi snying po bsdus pa; D 3711/P 4534) 
is a long work on Mahāyāna soteriology. In the last 
section the author states that he chose not to engage 
with the Vajrayāna because although the tantric rev-
elation is legitimate, in this degenerate age there are 
no suitable candidates for its practice. *Udbhaṭa’s 
work, the *Mantranayāloka (A Look at the Way 
of Mantras; Gsang sngags kyi tshul gyi snang ba; D 
3710/P 4533) is an apology for this statement, which 
proved very controversial with contemporaries, 
although this author is not quite as dismissive as his 
master. Judging from the textual pool cited in the 
two works (e.g. the Guhyendutilaka, the Paramādya, 
already the *Nayatrayapradīpa, as well as some now 
completely lost works), both must date from circa 
the 9th century ce.
Aśvaghoṣa/Vāpilladatta’s 
Gurupañcāśikā 
The Gurupañcāśikā (Fifty [Stanzas] on the Guru; 
Bla ma lnga bcu pa; D 3721/P 4544) is a short but 
very influential work already cited in the 10th cen-
tury, in actual fact for the most part an anthology of 
scriptural verses, describing the qualities of a tan-
tric master and how disciples should interact with 
him. At present we are aware of only two Sanskrit 
manuscripts, both fragments (Lévi, 1929, also con-
tains a French translation; Szántó, 2013a; Pandey, 
1997, 33–40 misleadingly prints the entire Sanskrit 
text, but the latter part is a back translation from 
Tibetan marked only by square brackets). There is 
also a rather inferior Chinese translation (事師法
五十頌; T. 1687). The manuscript studied by S. Lévi 
also transmits two further small works, lists of the 
­so-called fundamental (mūlāpatti) and gross tres-
passes (sthūlāpatti), essentially major and minor 
commandments for a tantric initiate. There are 
several other such works deserving closer attention 
(a preliminary overview is presented in Davidson, 
2002, 322–327). In spite of their brevity, these texts 
allow valuable insights into the inner workings of a 
tantric community.
The works of Advayavajra and his 
followers
Nearly all the works of the early ­11th-century author 
known as Advayavajra or Maitreyanātha (or even 
Avadhūtipāda and Maitrīpāda) may be considered 
as prakaraṇas. This famous master is among the 
first tantric authors to have come to the attention 
of modern scholarship, when a collection of nearly 
two dozen of his short treatises was published by 
H.P. Shastri (1927). A new edition of this corpus – 
with the exception of the Tattvaratnāvalī, for which 
see Ui Hakuju, 1952 – using new manuscript mate-
rial accompanied by Japanese translations has been 
published by the ­Mikkyō-seiten Kenkyūkai (Eso-
teric Scriptures Study Group; 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991). 
A comprehensive account of Advayavajra’s thought 
is still lacking; the latest word on the subject is 
H. Isaacson and F. Sferra, 2014. At least two topics 
from his works merit and received special attention. 
The first concerns initiation: the author seems to 
have held a minority view concerning the correct 
sequence of blisses (ānanda) that are experienced 
during sexual initiation; this was one of the great-
est debates among tantric authors of the period. His 
teachings on this theme were defended by one of 
his disciples, Rāmapāla, in his Sekanirdeśapañjikā 
(A Commentary to the Instruction Concerning Ini-
tiation; Dbang bskur ba nges par bstan pa’i dka’ ’grel; 
D 2253/P 4098). This latter work is comprehensively 
studied, edited, and translated in H. Isaacson and 
F. Sferra, 2014. The second topic associated with 
Advayavajra is the ­so-called ­non-tantric practice 
of the “great seal” (mahāmudrā; Isaacson & Sferra, 
2014, 411–420).
The Works of Vāgīśvarakīrti
A close contemporary of Advayavajra was 
Vāgīśvarakīrti, who was best known for his argu-
mentative works and passages concerning ini-
tiation, more specifically the fourth initiation 
(caturthābhiṣeka), of which he was an advocate. 
To this day, the most comprehensive study of 
Vāgīśvarakīrti’s works is a monograph in Japanese 
(Sakurai, 1996), which includes an edition of his 
initiation manual containing a defense of sexual 
initiation for qualified monks (on which see Onians, 
2002, 279–289). His Tattvaratnāvalokavivaraṇa (An 
Elucidation of “A consideration of Precious Reality”; 
De kho na nyid rin po che snang ba’i rnam par bshad 
pa; D 1890/P 2754, 4793; Sanskrit and Tibetan edi-
tion in Pandey, 1997, 83–142) is for the most part an 
elaborate defense of the fourth initiation (Isaacson, 
2010, 269–271), dispelling a variety of contradicting 
doctrines, whereas his *Saptāṅga (On the Seven 
Ancillaries; Yan lag bdun pa; D 1888/P 2752) deals 

=== PAGE 5 ===
	
Tantric Prakaraṇas	
759
chiefly with the same issue even more extensively 
(Sakurai, 1996, 212–220), analyzing no less than 17 
views concerning the topic.
Jñānakīrti’s Tattvāvatāra 
Already cited by early ­11th-century authors, the 
Tattvāvatāra of Jñānakīrti (An Introduction to 
Reality; De kho na nyid la ‘jug pa; D 3709/P 4532) is 
a lengthy and comprehensive overview beginning 
by defining types of Buddhist practitioners accord-
ing to ability, with the paths suitable for them, and 
culminating in a discussion of the highest spiri-
tual attainment. The work is cited by later Tibetan 
authorities as one advocating the achievement of 
the “great seal” based on exclusively exoteric, sūtra-
based practices. While many of the quotations from 
the text can be found in the original elsewhere, the 
work itself is lost in Sanskrit, and the Tibetan trans-
lation has still not received the attention it deserves.
Jñānaśrī’s 
*Vajrayānāntadvayanirākaraṇa 
The authorship of the *Vajrayānāntadvayanirā­
karaṇa (Dispelling the Two Extreme Views Con-
cerning the Tantric Way; Rdo rje theg pa’i mtha’ 
gnyis sel ba; D 3714/P 4537) has not been established 
with certainty. The work was probably written in 
the 11th century. It is a learned and sophisticated 
text that first seeks to prove that the tantric rev-
elation is indeed the Buddha’s teaching, and then 
proceeds to describe its superiority to exoteric Bud-
dhism with great emphasis on the idea of “skill in 
means” (upāyakauśalya). The discussion of the tan-
tric path’s superiority closely mirrors the discussion 
of the superiority of the Mahāyāna in the classic 
Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra. The critical edition of the 
Tibetan translation has not yet been published (the 
Sanskrit original has been lost), but two ­in-depth 
studies greatly facilitate access to this text (Kyuma, 
2009; Tanemura, 2009).
Ratnavajra’s 
Caturthasadbhāvopadeśa 
Ratnavajra was a Kashmiri author also known as 
Sūkṣmāvartabhaṭṭa; his activity can be placed with 
certainty in the first half of the 11th century. The text 
entitled Caturthasadbhāvopadeśa (A Teaching Con-
cerning the True Nature of the Fourth [Initiation]; 
Bzhi pa’i don rnam par nges pa’i man ngag; D 2475) 
is extant in Sanskrit, but it is at present inaccessible 
(Kawasaki, 2004, 51). This fully versified, short and 
dense work seeks to refute the opinion of certain 
“Eastern scholars” (almost certainly Vāgīśvarakīrti 
and perhaps Ratnākaraśānti) that the fourth initia-
tion (caturthābhiṣeka) is a separate rite. Ratnavajra 
points out that previously the “fourth” was unknown 
in Kashmir, but it is now practiced in spite of its spu-
rious nature.
*Jñānākara’s *Mantrāvatāra and 
*Mantrāvatāravṛtti 
*Jñānākara is very likely another ­11th-century author. 
His ­60-verse *Mantrāvatāra (An Introduction to the 
[Way of] Mantras; Gsang sngags la ’jug pa; D 3718/ 
P 4541) and an autocommentary (Gsangs sngags la 
’jug pa’i ’grel pa; D 3719/P 4542) seek to briefly intro-
duce the tantric path under 15 headings, such as 
the appropriate practitioner, the types and nature 
of his accomplishment, the proper and improper 
way of practice, and so forth. The originals of both 
works have been lost. The *Mantrāvatāra is not 
argumentative as such, but its introduction states 
quite clearly that it is intended to refute “perverted 
views.” The commentary makes it clear that in the 
author’s mind this meant a literal interpretation 
of the tantras promoted by what he views as false 
teachers. Some verses of the root text (as quoted 
by the Tibetan scholar Bu ston Rin chen grub) have 
been translated in J. Hopkins, 2008, 227–230.
Jinasujayaśrīgupta’s Abhiṣekanirukti 
The Abhiṣekanirukti (An Explanation of [the Third 
and Fourth] Initiations; Dbang bskur ba’i nges pa 
bstan pa; D 2476/P 3301; Dbang gi don nges par 
brjod pa; D 2477/P 3302; ed. by Isaacson used with 
attribution in Onians, 2002, 349–368; trans. Onians, 
2002, 322–348; new draft in Isaacson, 2008) is a 
complex and in some ways unusual treatise on 
viewpoints concerning the function of “knowl-
edge of wisdom initiation” (prajñājñānābhiṣeka), 
in which the initiand has to copulate with a con-
sort. Jinasujayaśrīgupta lists three views of the 
­yogatantras (by which here the Guhyasamājatantra 
is meant) and three views of the yoginītantras 

=== PAGE 6 ===
760	
Tantric Prakaraṇas
(represented by the Hevajratantra), but unconven-
tionally he does not commit himself to any of them; 
instead he exhorts the reader to select the appropri-
ate one. The two Tibetan translations differ in attri-
bution: the first is assigned to Ratnākaraśānti and 
the second to Jinasujayaśrīgupta, but it can be shown 
that the true author is the latter, probably a disciple 
of the former, and that the attribution was altered 
deliberately in order to increase the work’s prestige 
(Isaacson, 2010, 267).
Śrīlakṣmī’s 
Advayasiddhisādhanopāyikā 
Although Śrīlakṣmī or Lakṣmīkarā is presented by 
the tradition as having lived at least three centu-
ries earlier, it is unlikely that she dates from before 
the late 10th century. Her Advayasiddhir nāma 
sādhanopāyikā (A Practical Manual Called The 
Attainment of Nonduality; Gnyis su med par grub 
pa’i sgrub thabs; D 2220/P 3064) is a short, ­36-verse 
work, a gnostic practical manual, for the most part a 
compilation of ­well-known aphorisms (for the best 
edition, see Rinpoche & Dwivedi, 1987, 159–164). The 
practitioner is exhorted to give up external methods 
and focus on worshipping the guru, sexual yoga with 
a consort, and the cultivation of nonduality. Perhaps 
the only truly distinctive feature of the work is that it 
is signed by a female author.
The anonymous Subhāṣitasaṃgraha 
The Subhāṣitasaṃgraha (A Collection of Aphoristic 
Statements) was one of the earliest tantric Buddhist 
works published in Europe, with profuse apolo-
gies for and a condemnation of its contents (Ben-
dall, 1903; 1904a; 1904b). The text is available only 
in Sanskrit and it is poorly transmitted. As the title 
shows, the author did not mean to be original and 
his work is for the most part indeed a collection of 
quotations. However, the manner in which these 
are strung together is significant, as is the fact that 
many of these passages are not available in the orig-
inal elsewhere. By making reference to authorities 
both scriptural and exegetical, the compiler wished 
to present a comprehensive map of tantric practice 
underpinned by Madhyamaka philosophy. The 
work is greatly inspired by Jñānakīrti’s Tattvāvatāra.
The anonymous Yuktipradīpa 
A completely unknown prakaraṇa by an anonymous 
author entitled Yuktipradīpa or Yuktidīpa (A Lamp 
of Reasoning) was discovered by R. Sāṅkṛityāyana 
(1937, 27–28) on his second journey to Tibet. The 
current state of the manuscript is unconfirmed, and 
it is accessible only through very low quality, some-
times barely legible photographs in the Tucci collec-
tion (Sferra, 2008, 42). There is no edition of the text 
and it is doubtful whether one could be produced at 
this stage. From what is legible, it would seem that 
the author’s main opponents were subitists who 
claimed that liberation is possible merely by hav-
ing received a guru’s teaching, without the need for 
gradual and constant meditative and ritual practice. 
Judging by the quotations, the author was a follower 
of the ­so-called Jñānapāda school.
Bibliography
“Adovuayavuajira ­chosaku-shū: Bonbun tekisuto, wayaku 
(1), (2), (3), (4)” (アドヴァヤヴァジラ著作集: 梵文テ
キスト・和訳 (1), (2), (3), (4); Advayavajra’s Collected 
Works: Sanskrit Text and Japanese Translation, parts 1–4), 
TDSBKN 10, 1988, 1–57; TDSBKN 11, 1989, 86–145; TDSBKN 
12, 1990, 49–83; TDSBKN 10, 1991, 46–95.
Bendall, C., ed., “­Subhāṣita-saṃgraha (Appendix),” MUSEON 
5, 1904a, 245–274.
Bendall, C., ed., “­Subhāṣita-saṃgraha (Suite),” MUSEON 5, 
1904b, 5–46.
Bendall, C., ed., “­Subhāṣita-saṃgraha: An Anthology of 
Extracts from Buddhist Works Compiled by an Unknown 
Author, to Illustrate the Doctrines of Scholastic and of 
Mystic (Tāntrik) Buddhism,” MUSEON 4, 1903, 375–402.
Bhattacharyya, B., ed., Two Vajrayāna Works, Baroda, 1929.
Davidson, R.M., Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of 
the Tantric Movement, New York, 2002.
Gnoli, R., Puṇḍarīka: La realizzazione della conoscenza del 
Supremo immoto (Paramākṣarajñānasiddhi), Rome, 1997.
Jong, J.W. de, “Notes on the Text of Indrabhūti’s Jñānasiddhi,” 
in: P. Harrison & G. Schopen, eds., Sūryacandrāya, Essays 
in Honour of Akira Yuyama On the Occasion of His 65th 
Birthday, ­Swisttal-Odendorf, 1998, 95–106.
Hopkins, J., Tantric Techniques, Ithaca, 2008.
Isaacson, H., “Observations on the Development of the 
Ritual on Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in the Higher Buddhist 
Tantric Systems,” in: A. Zotter & C. Zotter, eds., Hindu and 
Buddhist Initiations in India and Nepal, Wiesbaden, 2010, 
261–279.
Isaacson, H., ed., The Abhiṣekanirukti of Sujayaśrīgupta, 2008, 
http://www.­tantric-studies.­uni-hamburg.de/en/research/­
e-texts/­buddhist-e-texts/abhinir.txt.

=== PAGE 7 ===
	
Tantric Prakaraṇas	
761
Isaacson, H. & F. Sferra, The Sekanirdeśa of Maitreyanātha 
(Advayavajra) with the Sekanirdeśapañjikā of Rāmapāla: 
Critical Edition of the Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts with Eng­
lish Translation and Reproductions of the Mss, Naples, 2014.
Kawasaki, K., “On a ­Birch-bark Sanskrit Manuscript Pre-
served in the Tibet Museum,” IBK 52, 2004, 50–52.
Kyuma, T., “Superiority of Vajrayāna – Part I: Some Remarks 
on the Vajrayānāntadvayanirākaraṇa (rDo rje theg pa’i 
mtha’ gñis sel ba) Ascribed to Jñānakīrti,” in: S. Einoo, 
ed., Genesis and Development of Tantrism, Tokyo, 2009, 
469–485.
Lévi, S., “Autour d’Aśvaghoṣa,” JA 215, 1929, 255–285.
Mishra, K.N., “The Unpublished Tattvasiddhi of Śāntarakṣita: 
A Résumé,” unpublished draft edition.
Moriguchi Kōshun (森口 光俊), “Tattvasiddhināmaprakaraṇa 
I. shoin kyō ron” (Tattvasiddhināmaprakaraṇa I. 所引経 
論; Sūtra and Śāstra Quotations in the Tattvasiddhinā­
maprakaraṇa I.), IMK, 1993, 157–199.
Onians, I., “Tantric Buddhist Apologetics or Antinomianism 
as a Norm,” diss., Oxford University, 2002.
Pandey, J., ed., Bauddhalaghugranthasaṃgraha, a Collection 
of Minor Buddhist Texts, Sarnath, 1997.
Rinpoche, S., & V. Dwivedi, eds., Guhyādi-Aṣṭasiddhi-
Saṅgraha, Sarnath, 1987.
Sakurai Munenobu (桜井 宗信), Indo Mikkyō Girei Kenkyū: 
Kōki Indo Mikkyō no Kanjō Shidai (インド密教儀礼研
究：後期インド密教の灌頂次第; A Study of Indian Eso-
teric Buddhist Ritual: On Initiation in Later Indian Eso-
teric Buddhism), Kyoto, 1996.
Sanderson, A.G.J.S., “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance 
of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period,” in: S. Einoo, 
ed., Genesis and Development of Tantrism, Tokyo, 2009, 
41–349.
Sāṅkṛityāyana, R., “Second Search of Sanskrit ­Palm-leaf Mss. 
in Tibet,” JBORS 33/1, 1937, 1–57.
Sferra, F., “Sanskrit Manuscripts and Photographs of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection,” in: F. Sferra, 
ed., Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection, part 1, 
Rome, 2008, 15–78.
Shastri, H.P., ed., Advayavajrasaṁgraha, Baroda, 1927.
Steinkellner, E., “Is the Ultimate Cognition of the Yogin Con-
ceptual or ­Non-conceptual? Part 2: Introducing the Prob-
lem in the Final Section of the Tantristic Tattvasiddhi with 
Analysis and Translation,” in: Esoteric Buddhist Studies: 
Identity in Diversity, publ. ICEBS Editorial Board, Koyasan, 
2008, 291–306.
Steinkellner, E., “Is the Ultimate Cognition of the Yogin Con-
ceptual or ­Non-conceptual? Part 1: A Critical Edition of the 
Tantristic Tattvasiddhi, Final Section,” in: R. Torella, ed., 
Le parole e i marmi: Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 
70˚ compleanno, Rome, 2001, 835–852.
Steinkellner, E., “Yogic Cognition, Tantric Goal, and 
Other Methodological Applications of Dharmakīrti’s 
kāryānumāna Theorem,” in: S. Katsura, ed., Dharmakīrti’s 
Thought and Its Impact on Indian and Tibetan Philosophy, 
Vienna, 1999, 349–362.
Szántó, P.-D., “Minor Vajrayāna Texts II: A New Manuscript 
of the Gurupañcāśikā,” in: N. Mirnig, P.-D. Szántó & M. 
Williams, eds., Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India Through 
Texts and Traditions, vol. I, Oxford, 2013a, 443–450.
Szántó, P.-D., “Before a Critical Edition of the Sampuṭa,” in: 
C. Cüppers, R. Mayer & M. Walter, eds., Tibet after Empire: 
Culture, Society and Religion between 850–1000, Lumbini, 
2013b, 343–365.
Tanemura, R., “Justification for and Classification of the 
­Post-initiatory Caryā in Later Tantric Buddhism,” IJSAS 1, 
2008, 53–75.
Tanemura, R., “Superiority of Vajrayāna – Part II: 
Superiority of the Tantric Practice Taught in the 
*Vajrayānāntadvayanirākaraṇa (rDo rje theg pa’i mtha’ 
gñis sel ba),” in: S. Einoo, ed., Genesis and Development of 
Tantrism, Tokyo, 2009, 487–514.
Tomabechi, T., “Étude du Pañcakrama, Introduction et Tra-
duction Annotée,” diss., Lausanne University, 2006.
Ui Hakuju (宇井伯寿), “Advayavajra. Tattvaratnāvalī,” 
JFLNU 3, 1952, 1–52.
Varghese, M., Principles of Buddhist Tantra; A Discourse on 
Cittaviśuddhi-prakaraṇa of Āryadeva, New Delhi, 2008.
Wedemeyer, C.K., Āryadeva’s Lamp that Integrates the 
Practice: Caryāmelāpakapradīpa; The Gradual Path of 
Vajrayāna Buddhism According to the Esoteric Community 
Noble Tradition, New York, 2007.
Wedemeyer, C.K., “Vajrayāna and its Doubles: A Critical His-
toriography, Exposition, and Translation of the Tantric 
Works of Āryadeva,” diss., Columbia University, 1999.
Péter-Dániel Szántó
