# SOURCE FILE: article-p249_4.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_A01\documents\article-p249_4.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_1_materials (1. วัสดุศาสตร์ หมึก และการอนุรักษ์เชิงเคมี)
# PAGES: 32 | TOTAL CHARS: 75296

=== PAGE 1 ===
© aditia gunawan, 2015 | doi: 10.1163/22134379-17101004
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported (cc-by-nc 3.0) License.
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
bki
brill.com/bki
Nipah or Gebang?
A Philological and Codicological Study Based on Sources from West Java
Aditia Gunawan*
National Library of the Republic of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia
rotan_jr@yahoo.com
Abstract
This article takes up the question of writing supports, the physical media on which
texts were recorded on the island of Java before paper and printing were introduced,
with special focus on the western region and the Old Sundanese tradition. In the past,
two types of indigenous writing materials prepared from the leaves of palm trees were
identified, one known among scholars in the Dutch tradition as ‘nipah’, the other as
‘lontar’. While lontar is a common, widely used designation for the type of palm-leaf
writing material used in the vast majority of surviving manuscripts, the nipah is rare
and not commonly thought of as a writing material outside of scholarly circles. In an
effort to understand the place of nipah in the tradition, the author turns to descriptions
of writing materials in old written as well as oral sources and concludes that the
terminology used there is at odds with the accepted idea that the second, rare type
of leaf used in the palm leaf manuscript tradition came from the nipah palm. Instead,
it was prepared from another palm species called gebang. At the same time, the author
provides new insight into indigenous conceptualizations that differentiate the types of
texts recorded on lontar and gebang materials.
*
I would like to thank Henri Chambert-Loir, Willem van der Molen and Dina Isyanti for their
valuable suggestions on the first draft of this article. Special thanks go to Arlo Griffiths for his
generosity in providing relevant sources from the efeo library in Jakarta and for important
comments on and corrections to this article. This article appears in its present form thanks to
Tim Behrend, who helped translate it into English with great care, at the same time providing
valuablefeedbackandcriticalcommentary.Forthis,Iamsincerelygrateful.Nevertheless,any
mistakes that might remain are entirely my own responsibility.

=== PAGE 2 ===
250
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Keywords
palm leaf manuscripts – West Java – nipah – gebang – Old Sundanese
It is widely accepted and regularly repeated among scholars that there are
two types of palm leaves that were historically used as writing supports in
manuscripts from the Indonesian archipelago: leaves of the sugar, or toddy,
palm (Borassus flabellifer) and those of the nipa palm (Nypa fruticans). These
palms and their leaves are known as lontar and nipah respectively. These
two types of leaves can easily be distinguished by the naked eye: the latter
are thinner and stiffer, and they are of a lighter colour than the former. The
mannerofinscribingtextonthesetwosortsofleavesisalsodifferent:lontar are
inscribed through a process of scratching or incising, while nipah are written
upon directly using black ink.
In contrast to lontar-leaf manuscripts,which makeup the vastmajority of all
known palm leaf manuscripts from Lombok to Sumatra, use of the nipah leaf
as writing support has been the subject of only limited codicological research,
receiving almost no attention in the literature (Van der Molen 1983:88). The
only testimony to the use of nipah leaves for writing material is De Clercq (1927,
as quoted in Van der Molen 1983:89), who states that he heard that formerly, in
the hinterlands of South Sumatra, and perhaps up to the time of his report,
nipah were used for writing ephemeral love letters. Beyond this, the literature
is silent on the characteristics of this rare writing material. There are, to be sure,
a small number of articles or catalogue notes that discuss nipah, but they are
limited to the investigation of available nipah manuscripts; the writing support
is in such sources categorized as nipah without further question. The process-
ing and preparation of nipah leaves for writing also remains an uninvestigated
question, as does their use.
The first notice mentioning the existence of manuscripts written on palm
leaves from the Priangan area was published by Netscher (1853:474), although
he still designated the writing material of the Arjunawiwāha codex (later ac-
quired by the Bataviaasch Genootschap [hereafter bg] with accession num-
ber l 641) as lontarblad (lontar leaf). Holle was the first to use the term nipah
in 1862 (nbg 1, 1862–1863:14; Van Lennep 1969:16).
Five years later Holle (1867) described three nipah leaf manuscripts donated
by Raden Saleh.1 Holle identified these three manuscripts as mss a, b, and c,
1 Raden Saleh’s gift in 1866 totaled 38 manuscripts (nbg 5, 1867:155), but Cohen Stuart (1872)

=== PAGE 3 ===
nipah or gebang
251
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
and it can be determined that ms a is now catalogued as pnri number l 632
(Kabuyutan Galuṅguṅ); ms b is l 630 (SaṅHyaṅSiksa KandaṅKarəsian), while
ms c is number l 631 (Chandakaraṇa)2 (Holle 1867:452–64).3
But the discussion which touches most directly upon the use of nipah leaf
as a writing medium is the general sketch given by Holle in the introduction
to his Tabel van Oud- en Nieuw-Indische alphabetten (1882), a work on palaeog-
raphy that makes use of epigraphic sources as well as later records on organic
materials. There are three important things to note from Holle’s study: (1) the
sites where nipah manuscripts were collected; (2) the writing implements used
to inscribe them; and (3) the style of script and other aspects of palaeogra-
phy. Holle states that most nipah manuscripts originated in West Java, with a
small number also acquired from the hermit-scholar collections in the Merapi-
Merbabu mountain region of Central Java. With regards to writing implements,
he says that nipah manuscripts were inscribed using a type of ink fabricated
from the nagasari plant (cobra’s saffron, Mesua ferrea) and damar sela resin
(Sundanese, harupat). In relation to the writing itself, Holle states that the let-
ters inscribed on the nipah were in a quadratic Kawi script. He also provides a
table of characters drawn from several nipah manuscripts found in West Java,
that is, in Talaga, Cirebon, and Ciburuy (1882:7–8, 17, 25–6).
A few other investigations of nipah manuscripts by scholars of subsequent
generations also need to be mentioned here. Among them is the promising
investigation by Van Lennep in her 1969 undergraduate thesis done at Sydney
University. Her research is important because it notes details of the original
acquisitionofnipahmanuscriptsbythebg,andtakesadifferentlookataspects
only recorded 35 of them. The three manuscripts not noted by Cohen Stuart were all made
from nipah leaves. This is rather surprising recalling that Holle 1867 had already provided
descriptions of them. See also Van Lennep 1969:11.
2 A complete edition of this manuscript is available in Lokesh Chandra 1995. See also Appendix
1 of this article.
3 A quick word on the fraught matter of spelling in this article. In order to avoid confusion
due to variation in orthography in quotes from various printed and hand-written sources in
three languages (Sundanese, Old Sundanese, and Old Javanese), all quotes from older literary
sources have been standardized according to the system used in Zoetmulder’s Old Javanese–
English dictionary (ojed) (1982), with slight changes as follows: the e-pepet is rendered as ə,
not ĕ, while ŋ becomes ṅ. Furthermore, because the orthographic system used in Old Sun-
danese manuscripts does not distinguish between the vowels ə and eu, it is not necessary nor
even, in my opinion, desirable to distinguish between the two in transcription. I have there-
fore used only the character ə where modern orthography distinguishes e and eu. All quotes
from pantun have been standardized according to Modern Sundanese spelling as used in the
Kamus umum basa Sunda (Panitia Kamus Sunda 1976).

=== PAGE 4 ===
252
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
ofnipah.VanLennepalsohypothesizesthatthebg’stroveofnipahmanuscripts
was part of a royal manuscript collection of the Pajajaran Kingdom in West Java
which, when under threat due to the rise of Islam in the sixteenth century, was
removed to (or hidden in) the surrounding mountains, such as Mt Cikuray near
Garut (Van Lennep 1969:29–33).
Another important codicological contribution is Van der Molen’s careful
physical examination (1983:90–3) of one particular nipah manuscript contain-
ing a Kuñjarakarṇa text (LOr 2266), edited in his Leiden doctoral thesis.
Through meticulous attention to small details he was able to observe traces
of a press or pressure device in the form of marginal lines—one on the right,
one on the left, and two in the centre of the leaves—sometimes quite clear,
other times faint. Observations on the distance between these lines, measured
to the millimetre, indicated that the processing of leaves for use as writing
supports was a precision craft. Following Grader (1941:25), who established a
relationship between the variability of dimensions of manuscripts and the use
of different tools by different artisans, Van der Molen (1983:91) arrived at the
hypothesis that there are two possibilities related to such variability. If tools or
equipment are the source of variation, then indications regarding the identity
of workshops can be derived from manuscript features such as length, breadth,
distance between holes, and distance from holes to leaf-edge. If the type of leaf
is the most significant variable, then measurements can be the same over a
wide area.
The most recent study of interest for our investigation is Acri’s (2011a) inves-
tigation of the Dharma Pātañjala, an Old Javanese Shaivite text. This wide-
ranging study includes identification of nearly every known nipah manuscript.
The specific Dharma Pātañjala text Acri focused on was found in a manuscript
from the Merapi-Merbabu area, not West Java, where most nipah manuscripts
originated.Withrespecttotheplacewherethemanuscriptwasfound,Acrisug-
gested that there may once have been a relationship between scriptoria in West
Java and the manuscript repositories of the Central Javanese massif. It is possi-
blethatseveralnipahmanuscriptsfromWestJavacouldhavemadetheirwayto
Merapi-Merbabu some time before the middle of the eighteenth century, and
from there ended up in the great Windu Sono collection of Merapi-Merbabu
manuscripts that was later transferred into the possession of the bg. Cultural
ties between these two centres of literary production might have led to the
exchange of manuscripts in the past (Acri 2011a:44–7).4 This completes the sur-
4 On the Merapi-Merbabu scriptoria, see Wiryamartana 1993. The relationship of those scripto-
ria with West Java was indirectly referred to by Bujangga Manik, a sixteenth-century Hindu-

=== PAGE 5 ===
nipah or gebang
253
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
vey of principal sources on manuscripts hitherto identified as being inscribed
on so-called nipah leaves.
Among the studies mentioned above, only those of Holle will continue
to retain our attention in this article, for Holle was the first to identify the
writing medium that is the focus of our attention here as nipah and to furnish
codicological explanations about both the material and the utensils used to
write on it.
It is unclear on what basis Holle arrived at this identification, as he men-
tions no source. There seem to be two possibilities: either Holle himself estab-
lished this botanical identification (with or without the help of an anonymous
botanist), or he obtained this information from his local contacts in West Java,
where he lived. There is something to be said for the first possibility, because
we find that Kern wrote, just a few years later: ‘according to the opinion of the
botanists it is palm leaf, I take it to be very thin bark’ (nbg 25, 1887: 179; Van
Lennep 1969:16). The second possibility also makes sense, as the word nipah
had already been recorded in the Sundanese dictionaries that date from the
same period (Rigg 1862:s.v.; Geerdink 1875:s.v.), and was almost certainly known
to Holle’s informants as some kind of palm tree.5
But we must remember that Holle’s explanations date to a time when, as
reported by Netscher (1853), the practice of writing on nipah leaves was no
longer a living tradition. For this reason, we may ask ourselves whether the
identification received from an informant was merely based on the physical
appearance of the leaves, or whether the informant was actually familiar with
the use of the same leaves as reported from Sumatra by De Clerq a few decades
later (1927). We may indeed ask ourselves whether Holle’s identification can be
acceped at all. In this article I will propose a new identification of this type of
palm leaf used as writing material, using sources that were not used by Holle
in determining his identification.
Sundanese pilgrim who visited Damalung (an old name for Mt Merbabu) to study there
(Noorduyn 1982). Damalung is also mentioned in the Sri Ajñana (ll. 45–53, Noorduyn and
Teeuw 2006) as the name of a place where a heavenly protagonist was exiled to earth in pun-
ishment for his sins.
5 One of Holle’s most important informants was his friend Muhammad Musa, a religious leader
(penghulubesar)fromGarutandanimportantfigureforSundaneseliteratureinhistime(see
Moriyama2005:100–42).OneexampleoftheimportantrolethatMusaplayedasaninformant
for Holle is the fact that in his study of the Batu Tulis inscription at Bogor, Holle refers to the
authority of his friend when he translates the word ñusuk found in this inscription with the
verb ‘to establish’: ‘Volgens den Panghoeloe van Garoet wordt het Soendasche njoesoek nu
nog wel eens in de beteekenis van een dorp of stad stichten gebruikt’ (Holle 1869:485).

=== PAGE 6 ===
254
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Nipah Manuscripts
The total number of nipah manuscripts is a tiny fraction of those written on
lontar. When all nipah manuscripts in Indonesian and European collections
are added up, they number only 29 out of the many thousands of Indonesian
palm leaf manuscripts in existence. At least 20 of these 29 manuscripts are
in the collection of the Perpustakaan Nasional Republik Indonesia (National
Library of Indonesia; hereafter pnri) in Jakarta;6 three are in the Kabuyutan
(hermitage) of Ciburuy, Garut;7 and a single manuscript is in the Sri Baduga
Museum at Bandung.8 In Europe there are at least five such manuscripts: two
inthelibraryofLeidenUniversity,9oneattheBibliothèquenationaledeFrance
(French National Library) in Paris,10 one at the Staatsbibliothek (State Library)
in Berlin,11 and one at the Bodleian Library, Oxford.12 Others may exist, but they
have not yet been detected or described.
Although there are a few exceptions, nearly all nipah manuscripts have been
found in West Java, as indicated in the institutional records on their acquisi-
tion history. The origins of the nipah manuscripts at the pnri are indicative.
Manuscripts l 374 and l 630–632 were obtained from the Galuh area of East
Priangan by the well-known Javanese artist and cultural figure Raden Saleh
6
Consult Holil and Gunawan’s study (2010) on pre-Islamic, West Javanese manuscripts
(including so-called nipah manuscripts in Old Javanese) in the collection of the pnri.
7
Acri and Darsa 2009 initially identified four nipah manuscripts from Kabuyutan Ciburuy
inGarut,inadditionto23lontar manuscriptskeptinthesamelocation.Butbasedonmore
recent data, it appears that there are only three nipah and 24 lontar manuscripts in the
Kabuyutan Ciburuy. I would like to thank Andrea Acri for this information (private email
communication, 19 March 2013), and for his permission to include the list of manuscripts
in appendix 2 to this article.
8
A manuscript titled SaṅHyaṅRaga Dewata, ms 07.106 (Darsa and Ekadjati 2004).
9
The manuscript mentioned earlier (LOr 2266, containing a text of the Kuñjarakarṇa) and
LOr 2267, containing the Tiga Jñana (Pigeaud 1968:94).
10
Manuscript no. Mal. Pol. 161 (Cabaton 1912:254). In Cabaton’s catalogue this manuscript is
not given a title, but Acri (2011a:645) has identified it as containing a text of the SaṅHyaṅ
Hayu.Severalothermanuscriptswiththesametitlearefoundinthecollectionofthepnri
(l 634, l 637, l 638); an edition of SaṅHyaṅHayu based only on pnri l 634 and l 637 has
been provided by Darsa 1998.
11
The manuscript is titled Dharma Pātañjala, Cod. Schoemann i-21 (Pigeaud 1975:111–2). An
edition of this manuscript has been offered by Acri 2011a.
12
Manuscript titled Rasa Carita, ms Jav.b.1; a portion of this manuscript was photocopied,
transliterated, and annotated by Voorhoeve and Soegiarto, and is available as item LOr
8515 in the Leiden collection (Ricklefs and Voorhoeve 1977:177; see also Pigeaud 1968:479).

=== PAGE 7 ===
nipah or gebang
255
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
figure 1
‘Nipah’ Manuscripts. a. Arjunawiwāha (Old Javanese, 1334 ce, cod. pnri l 641);
b. SaṅHyaṅHayu (Old Javanese, 1523 ce, cod. pnri l 634); c. SaṅHyaṅSiksa Kan-
daṅKarəsian (Old Sundanese, 1518 ce, cod. pnri l 630). national library of
the republic of indonesia.
(Cohen Stuart 1872; Holle 1867); manuscripts l 633–642 were acquired by the
bupatiofBandungfromnearCilegon,Garut(Netscher1853;Krom1914:71);l643
originated from Talaga, Cirebon (nbg 4, 1866:118; Krom 1914:92); manuscripts
l 1095, l 1097, and l 1099 all came from Kabuyutan Koleang at Jasinga, Bogor
(Krom 1914:32). There is some uncertainty about the provenance of three pnri
manuscripts, that is, l 455, l 627, and l 628. However, in copies of these
manuscripts in the K.F. Holle Collection (pnri Peti 89) the reader finds notes
indicating that the last three came from Merbabu (cf. Acri 2011a:46 n. 9).
ThesituationregardingprovenanceissimilarfornipahmanuscriptsinEuro-
pean collections. The two manuscripts kept in Leiden, Kuñjarakarṇa (LOr
2266) and Tiga Jñana (LOr 2267), are thought to come from West Java (Pigeaud
1968:94; 1970:21, 56). The Rasa Carita at Oxford (ms Jav.b.1) is one of a pair of
manuscripts donated by Andrew James during the seventeenth century and
very likely to have originated in West Java, the other manuscript being in Old
Sundanese (Noorduyn 1985). The provenance of the manuscript in Paris is
unclear,butnotingthatitstextcontainstheSaṅHyaṅHayu,whichisalsofound
at Ciburuy and in three pnri manuscripts known to originate near Garut, it
must be closely associated with the textual tradition of West Java. One excep-
tion is the Berlin collection, whose Dharma Pātañjala came from Mt Merbabu
in Central Java (Pigeaud 1975:111–2; cf. Acri 2011a:44).
Local Sources
As mentioned above, De Clercq stated in 1927 that in South Sumatra nipah was
used as a writing material for a specific function—love letters. The function of
so-called nipah manuscripts in Java, that is to say,the type of textsfound copied

=== PAGE 8 ===
256
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
on nipah leaf manuscripts, was quite different. Judging by the surviving corpus
of such manuscripts, they never contain love letters. This difference in use or
functioniswhatpromptedVanderMolen(1983:89)toask,‘CanDeClerq’sinfor-
mation be applied to literature and to Java?’. In other words, are there sources
from Java that designate nipah as a writing material? We can say from the out-
set that the answer to this question is resoundingly negative. Although in an
article on Old Javanese writing materials Hinzler (2001) states that nipah was
a type of writing support mentioned in older Javanese texts, she does not indi-
catethetextualsourceuponwhichthisclaimisbased.Thewordsheisreferring
to is found in the Tuhañaru, Wariṅin Pitu, and Balawi inscriptions, as quoted
in Zoetmulder’s ojed under the entry nipah (1982:1183). But the form of the
wordquotedthere,anipah,13andthefactthatitappearsinacontextcontaining
references to payuṅwəlu (round parasol?), mopih (wrapping or covering), and
ruṅki (a type of woven basket?), does not indicate any relationship to writing.
In any case these inscriptions all originate in East Java. Outside of the realm of
epigraphy, I have not found a single textual passage involving nipah that could
be quoted here.
The identification of the rarer of the two types of palm leaf manuscript
as nipah until now has hinged on a single scholarly assertion. It has become
part of ‘common knowledge’ about palm leaf manuscripts in Java, though it
is not based on thorough philological or codicological research. This article
will show that this is a case of mistaken identification which has escaped the
attentionofresearchersworkingonso-callednipahmanuscripts.Whatwehave
cometoknowasnipahmanuscriptsareprobablynotactuallymadefromnipah
leaves. In any case, there are no known references to Nypafruticans as a writing
support in the textual traditions of Java and Sunda. Because so-called nipah
manuscripts generally originated from West Java, sources from this region
should interest us before all others in an effort to clarify the identity of these
writing materials and the terminology associated with them. Relevant passages
have been identified in several texts and in passages from the oral tradition of
Sundanese pantun, as outlined in the following paragraphs.
SaṅHyaṅŚāsana Mahāguru
The first source that mentions palm leaves and their use as writing materials is
theSaṅHyaṅŚāsanaMahāguru(hereafterŚāsanaMahāguru),aprosework.As
13
InhisstudyoftheTuhañaruinscriptionfromSidoteko,Mojokerto,Sarkar(1935)cautiously
suggested that anipah is based on sipah (from səpah?) with prefixed a-, and that its
meaning relates to ‘sirih-plums?’.

=== PAGE 9 ===
nipah or gebang
257
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
far as is known there are two manuscripts containing this text, both written in
Old Sundanese script and language on lontar leaves; they are pnri manuscript
l 621 and another manuscript, identified as kropak 26, in the collection at
Kabuyutan Ciburuy. The text is a tutur presenting the teachings of a guru (saṅ
pandita) to his student, a religious devotee (saṅsewaka dharma), presented
in typical form as a question and answer narrative. The parts of the text that
are of specific relevance are the maṅgala, or introduction, as well as a section
containing an enumeration of the ‘ten improvements’ (dasawṛddhi), or ten
types of material used as writing media. An edition of this text based on
manuscript l 621 is provided in Gunawan (2009).
Bhīmaswarga
The second source is a prose text in Old Javanese, the Bhīmaswarga, which
recounts the adventures of Bhīma, second of the five Pāṇḍawa brothers, as
he journeys to heaven. There are a number of versions of the Old Javanese
Bhīmaswarga text. Hinzler (1981:194–203) notes one prose and two poetic ren-
ditions in the Balinese tradition. Among the Merapi-Merbabu manuscripts,
Setyawati, Wiryamartana, and Van der Molen (2002) have recorded six copies
of a prose Bhīmaswarga that differs from the Balinese version. There is also
a prose Bhīmaswarga that originates in West Java that is different again from
either of the aforementioned. This is the version employed in this study.
The West Javanese Bhīmaswarga, an edition of which is currently being
prepared by this writer, is known from three manuscripts, two of which are
currently held at the pnri in Jakarta and one in Ciburuy. The first manuscript,
l 455, is inscribed on nipah leaves in a script that resembles that found in
the Kuñjarakarṇa manuscript, LOr 2266, at Leiden. The second is manuscript
l 623, inscribed in Old Sundanese script on lontar leaves. The third manuscript
from the Kabuyutan at Ciburuy is incomplete and has been separated into two
separate fragments catalogued as lontar Ciburuy vii and kropak Ciburuy xii.
It, too, is written in Old Sundanese script.
Although the core text is entirely in Old Javanese, certain sections display
affinities to the pre-Islamic manuscript tradition that is specific to West Java.
First, both l 623 and the Ciburuy manuscript are written in local script. Second,
the colophon found in l 623 is written in Old Sundanese and states that the
text, here given the title Bhīmaləpas, was composed (or copied) at Mt Cikuray,
situated in the Garut district of West Java.14 Finally, although it is recorded
14
Thecolophonreads:itiḥkahuwusaniṅpu[s]takabimaləpasharanika,samaptasampunsin-
urat [riṅ] wulan kasa, saṅanurat panadaan saka pat pun, ə[ñ]cu nu ṅaheraṅbukit cikuray

=== PAGE 10 ===
258
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
figure 2
Source Manuscripts. a. SaṅHyaṅŚāsana Mahāguru (pnri l 621); b. SaṅHyaṅ
Śāsana Mahāguru (Ciburuy Kropak 26); c. Bhīmaswarga (pnri l 455);
d. Bhīmaswarga (pnri l 623); e. Bhīmaswarga (lontar Ciburuy vii); f. SaṅHyaṅ
Swawarcinta (pnri l 626). national library of the republic of
indonesia.
that l 455 was acquired from Mt Merbabu, the writing material indicates
the possibility alluded to earlier, namely that the manuscript was originally
produced in West Java before ending up in the Merbabu manuscript trove.
SaṅHyaṅSwawarcinta
The third source is a poetic text in Old Sundanese, the SaṅHyaṅSwawarcinta,
available in pnri manuscript l 626. This is a codex unicus. It is inscribed on
lontar leaves in a form of Old Sundanese script. It contains a long narrative
by an author who considers himself quite young (boñcah), and who asks his
readers for permission to present them with ilmu, knowledge. Its contents
samapunØ‘Thisistheendofthebookcalled Bhīmaləpas,itswritingwascompletedinthe
first month, written by pa na da an (?) Śaka year four (?), grandson of the one practising
meditation (at) Mt Cikuray. Finished.’

=== PAGE 11 ===
nipah or gebang
259
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
include numerous depictions of the everyday lives of the Sundanese people at
the time the text was written, such as the stories they recited, types of food,
manners, and the like. An edition based on this manuscript was published in
Wartini et al. (2011).
Pantun
The last source is pantun literature. Pantun form part of the Sundanese oral tra-
dition, consisting of tales about the initiation and exploits of cultural heroes.
They are recited without reference to a written text by a juru pantun, usually
accompanied by a kecapi lyre, in a performance that lasts most of the night.
According to Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:279) there is a historical relationship
between Old Sundanese poetic literature and pantun, which is apparent not
only in the shared feature of composition in octosyllabic lines, but also in the
formulaicexpressionsfoundinboth.Mysourcesforthesecomepredominantly
from transcriptions of pantun tales made by Ajip Rosidi: Carita Kembang Pan-
yarikan (1973), Tjarita Demung Kalagan (1970), Carita Gantangan Wangi (1973),
and Tjarita Parenggong Jaya (1971).15
Nipah or Gebang?
In this section, passages containing information about writing materials from
the sources listed above will be presented. In this way the tradition can itself
testify about writing materials and their historical use.
InthemaṅgalaofŚāsanaMahāguruthewriterdedicateshisworktoBhaṭāra
Gaṇa (Gaṇeśa), the creator of writing implements. Below is the relevant quo-
tation:
aṅrəguṅta jantra sri batara
gana, sinamburatkən riṅmanusa
madyapada, matəmahan ta ya
gəbaṅlawan lwantar, tipuk diwasa
pupus gəbaṅlawan lwantar, tinut
pinada-pada, lwane lawan dawane,
tinitisan asta gaṅga wira tanu.
Śrī Bhaṭāra Gaṇa’s trunk trumpeted,
so that it sprayed towards
humankind in the middle realm. He
created gebang and lontar. [When]
the time came for the gebang and
lontar to form young leaves, they
followed precisely the same pattern
15
Further information about pantun performance is found in Ensiklopedi Sunda 2000:493.
On the relationship between pantun and Old Sundanese literature, see Noorduyn and
Teeuw 2006:10–1; 279–81.

=== PAGE 12 ===
260
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
with respect to their width and
length, [so that they could have]
hasta gaṅgā wīra tanu applied.
apa ta sinaṅguh asta gaṅga wira
tanu, asta ṅaraniṅtaṅan, gaṅga
ṅaraniṅbañu, wira ta ṅaraniṅ
panurat lawan panuli, tanu ṅaraniṅ
maṅsi, tinulis de saṅpandita, pinaca
de saṅapuṅguṅ/6v/ tambah
uni-uniṅana, winaləran de saṅkawi.
Śāsana Mahāguru iii
What is it that is called hasta gaṅgā
wīra tanu? Hasta means hand, gaṅgā
means water, wīra means pen and
brush, tanu means ink. They are used
for writing by a holy man, for reading
by one without knowledge [in order
that] knowledge might increase, as
determined by the poet.
We see that in this maṅgala the writer dedicates the work he is composing
to Bhaṭāra Gaṇa, whose trunk trumpeted and sprayed a gift to the realm of
humankind. Through this gift he created (matəmahan) both gebang and lon-
tar. After the first green shoots of gebang and lontar appeared (pupus), they
were formed in precisely the same way (tinut pinada-pada) in their length and
breadth, making them ideal to be used as writing materials that could subse-
quently ‘be sprinkled’ (tinitisan) by the four instruments of writing, that is, the
hand (hasta), water (gaṅgā), pen or brush (wīra), and ink (tanu). These are all
instrumentsusedbyapanditatowriteaworkthatcanthenbereadbysomeone
lacking understanding so that their knowledge can grow; they are instruments
by which the passing on of knowledge is determined or limited (winaləran) by
the poet (saṅkawi).
The quartet hasta-gaṅgā-wīra-tanu as writing instruments or elements can
also be found in the text of the Bhīmaswarga below, with the difference that
in this text we find a set of three elements, gaṅgā-wīra-tanu, while hasta is not
mentioned:
bima dakwarah ta kita, mulaniṅ
pustaka hirəṅ, roniṅgəbaṅ, tinut
pinada-pada lwane lawan dawane,
tinitisan gaṅga wira tanu, gaṅga ri
bañu, tanu ri maṅsi, wira ri panulis.
l 623 f. 6r; l 455 f. 7r
Bhīma, I will instruct you, the
beginnings of a book (pustaka) are
black. Gebang leaves, they followed
precisely the same pattern with
respect to their width and length, [so
that they could have] gaṅgā wīra
tanu applied. Gaṅgā is water, tanu
ink, wīra pen.
The words ‘black’ and ‘ink’ in this context are key. These terms are relevant only
for manuscripts written on the palm leaf type identified by scholars as nipah.

=== PAGE 13 ===
nipah or gebang
261
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Withlontar,asiswellknown,thewritingitselfiscreatedbycolourlessincisions
which are only subsequently made visible by the application of oily lampblack
or a similar soot-based blackener.
Elsewhere in the Bhīmaswarga we find mention of gebang again in relation
to books (pustaka), as can be seen in the following allegorical enumeration of
Bhīma’s divine allies:
sadasiwah pustakaṅku, papanku
brahmasiwah, gəbaṅku bhaṭāra
bayu, taline pustakaṅku, saṅhyaṅ
suntagi manik.
l 623 f. 10r; l 455 12r
Sadāśiwa is my book, Brahmaśiwa is
my cover board, Bhaṭāra Bāyu my
gebang, SaṅHyaṅSuntagi Manik my
book’s binding string.
In the Bhīmaswarga text, in addition to gods, the Pāṇḍawa are also represented
in ways symbolically linked to a book or pustaka:
manih bima, yudistira pinakagəbaṅ,
arjuna pinakatali, sakula sadewa
pinakapapan, tulis iṅpustaka, saṅ
hyaṅdarmaraja, kaṅasəḍahan
pustaka, hyaṅbagawan citragotra
l 623 f. 8v; l 455 f. 10v–11r
And further, Bhīma, Yudhiṣṭhira
serves as the gebang leaf, Arjuna as
the cord, Sakula [that is, Nakula] and
Sahadewa as the cover boards, the
writing in the book [is] SaṅHyaṅ
Dharmarāja [Yama], the one
responsible for writing the book is
Bhagawān Citragotra.16
This quote paints a picture in which pustaka is the term for book (manuscript)
as a whole, which consists of several parts: gəbaṅrefers to the leaves; tali to
the string passed through the perforation in the middle of the stacked leaves;
papan refers to the box (kropak) or wooden cover boards of the manuscript.17
16
In the Korawāśrama (Swellengrebel 1936:112) Citragotra is also said to have the respon-
siblity for writing pustaka (bhagawān citragotra pwa masəḍahan pustaka). The character
referredtohereisnoneotherthanCitragupta,theassistantorclerkofDharmarāja(Yama),
who keeps the book of humanity’s karma.
17
In an Old Javanese text from Bali, the Tutur Aji Saraswatī (Cod. Gedong Kirtya 2289), there
isalsoasymbolicidentificationofthePāṇḍawawiththecomponentsofapustaka.Inplace
of gebang, this text has lontar. The twins, Nakula and Sahadewa, between them symbolize
the two cover boards (cakəpan kalih), Arjuna the lontar leaf (əntal), Bhīma the string, and
Dharmatanaya the textual contents (śāstra) (Rubinstein 2000:56–7).

=== PAGE 14 ===
262
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Based on these excerpts from West Javanese sources, we have at this point
been introduced to two types of writing support: lontar and gebang. Further-
more, in the Śāsana Mahāguru it is stated that these two writing materials
represent two of ten types of writing media:
[…] na naha nu dimantraan eta? ah
kena karah aiṅñahwa dek mijilkən
aksara: sastra muṅgu di na omas,
sastra muṅgu riṅsalaka, sastra
muṅgu riṅtambaga, sastra muṅgu riṅ
cundiga, sastra muṅgu riṅbəsi, sastra
muṅgu riṅbatu, sastra muṅgu riṅ
paduṅ, sastra muṅgu riṅpəjwa, sastra
muṅgu riṅtaal, sastra muṅgu riṅ
gəbaṅ.
Śāsana Mahāguru iii
For what purpose am I uttering this
mantra? Well, it is because I know
[what must be done] when one
wishes to produce letters: writing on
gold, writing on silver, writing on
copper, writing on steel, writing on
iron, writing on stone, writing on
wooden strips, writing on pejwa
(bamboo?), writing on lontar, writing
on gebang.
As enumerated here, the ten writing supports are (1) gold (omas), (2) silver
(salaka), (3) copper (tambaga), (4) steel (cundiga), (5) iron (bəsi), (6) stone
(batu), (7) wooden boards (paduṅ), (8) bamboo? (pəjwa), (9) lontar (taal), and
(10) gəbang. For the purposes of this article, only the last two are of direct
interest.
Further along the Śāsana Mahāguru gives a more detailed explanation of
terms and functions related to writing on lontar and gebang:
[…] sastra muṅgu riṅtaal, diṅaranan
ta ya carik, aya eta mənaṅutama,
kena na lain pikabuyutanən.
diturunkən dəi, sastra muṅgu riṅ
[…] writing on lontar is called
incising (carik), indeed it has its
virtues for it is not to be used for
sacred texts (kabuyutan).18 Let’s
18
Ichoosetotranslatekabuyutanas‘sacredtext’,notas‘placeofworship’.Thelattermeaning
does not suit the context because kabuyutan (in the sense of a place) actually denotes a
place for storage of manuscripts of various types. Besides the meaning ‘place of worship’,
ojed (s.v. buyut) also records other senses of this word, namely ‘object of worship, status
of elder’. Furthermore, in the actual contexts where we find the word kabuyutan in Old
Sundanese sources, it clearly does not always denote a place, but also denotes things
that are ‘holy, sacred’ in a more general way, for example, ‘words’, as in Sewaka Darma
(lines 513–4): saur dipikabuyutan, sabda dipirahasea ‘words are held sacred, sounds are
kept secret’ (Darsa 2012:383); or ‘cloth’ in ThesonsofRamaandRawana (lines 179–81): diais
ku sabuk wayaṅ, dibaur dəṅkabuyutan, saṅhyaṅgula gumantuṅ‘He carried the boy in his

=== PAGE 15 ===
nipah or gebang
263
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
gəbaṅ, diṅaranan ta ya cəməṅ, ini
ma iña pikabuyutanən, ṅaran saṅ
hyaṅripta, ya sunya, ya ləpihan, ya
mastra, ya lepwakarana, iya pustaka
katuṅgalanana.
Śāsana Mahāguru iii
go down again: writing on gebang is
called black (cəməṅ), and this is for
the sacred texts, in other words, for
such texts referred to as manuscripts
(saṅhyaṅripta), the means for
attaining emptiness (śūnya), leaves
(ləpihan), mastra (?), the smearing
(of ink, lepakaraṇa?), and pustaka are
synonyms.
Thus, a technical demarcation is established between the two media in terms
of use and function: writing on lontar is called carik, while writing on gebang
is called cəməṅ. The word carik means ‘scratch, line’; lontar manuscripts are
written by incising, cutting, and scratching shapes onto the leaf surface using
a type of knife (Balinese: pengutik; Sundanese: péso pangot). As for cəməṅ, its
meaningissimply‘black’(cf.Javanesecemeng).Perhaps‘black’isusedtosignify
black ink, such as we find used on nipah, as stated by earlier scholars? Compare
also the term hirəṅas written in the opening of the Bhīmaswarga’s first passage
on the pustaka. The material distinction between lontar and gebang as writ-
ing supports is paralleled by a distinction in the type of text that each is meant
to bear: lontar are not meant to hold writings of an inherently sacred charac-
ter (lain pikabuyutanən), while gebang leaf is specifically intended to be the
medium for conveying sacred texts (pikabuyutanən).
Another useful source is the Old Sundanese text SaṅHyaṅSwawarcinta,
ll. 447–52, which provides the following overview:
447
kaguritkən kaguratkən,
dina gəbaṅlawan lo(n)tar,
ləmpihan kukuluntuṅan,
dicarik (ku) tanah hirəṅ,
ampar gəlar susuratan,
əsi saṅhiyaṅpustaka.
Written incised, on gebang and
lontar, leaves or rolls, incised with
black tanah, the writing spread out,
containing a sacred book.
The meaning of tanah (l. 450) raises several questions.19 Zoetmulder (1974:129–
35) has identified this writing implement in the Old Javanese tradition as a sort
decorated sash, with his sacred cloth, the sacred Gula Gumantung’ (Noorduyn and Teeuw
2006:183).
19
On the meaning and use of tanah in Old Javanese, see Zoetmulder 1974:129–35 and Robson
1976.

=== PAGE 16 ===
264
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
of slate pencil made from a soft stone; it could be sharpened with the fingernail
and was simply thrown away when it was broken or worn down to a nub. Inter-
estingly, the quote links tanah directly to lontar and gebang, while in kakawin
sources it is regularly paired with karas (a writing slate) and never with palm
leaves. In the excerpt above it is stated that the tanah is black. Can the tanah
intended here be linked to the spines (lidi) of Enau sugar palm fronds (Arenga
pinnata), called harupat in Sundanese, as stated by Holle (1882:17)? Can the
characteristics of tanah as identified by Zoetmulder be linked to those of the
lidi of the Enau palm, which in fact is black, easily bent, and capable of being
sharpened with the fingernail?
Let us turn our attention now to the final set of sources: the pantun of the
oral-tradition.Therelevantportionsforthepurposesofthisarticlearetherajah
in the pantun stories. Rajah, which are usually performed by the juru pantun
at the beginning of a performance, are sung prayers asking the gods to prevent
the occurrence of any disturbances during the performance of the tale:
Mopoya(n)keun kandana anu
baheula,
urang diguratkeun cenah ku urang téh
diguritkeun,
kana pus gebang,
na pus gebang gé pondok lontang,
cecekan guguluntungan,
sabeulit tamba pamali.
Demung Kalagan, p. 4
This is a tale from the days of yore,
incised and composed by us on
gebang shoots, on gebang shoots and
young lontar leaves, dotted on a
rolled [leaf?] and twisted once to
ward off taboos.
The word pus is a short form of pupus, meaning ‘the young (just unfolding) leaf
of the banana and the lirang-palm’ (ojed, s.v. pupus). In the next line we find
as synonym of pupus the word pondok, which appears to be a mispronuncia-
tion by the juru pantun of, or a mistranscription/misprint for, the more archaic
word pondoh, which is still noted in dictionaries with the meaning ‘young palm
leaf’ (Danadibrata 2006:s.v. pondoh). This may be compared with the case of
the synonyms pucuk, which also means ‘young leaf’, and pondok (again mispro-
nounced/mistranscribed for pondoh) in the pantun Kembang Panyarikan cited
below.
Lontang is also a mispronunciation/mistranscription for lontar. Sabeulit,
‘one twist or turn’, indicates a length of string wrapped once through the
perforation at the middle of the manuscript leaves (Balinese: song) and then
wound once around the cover boards. In the context of the quoted sentence,
the word sabeulit indicates that the juru pantun intends to finish the entire

=== PAGE 17 ===
nipah or gebang
265
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
narrative in a ‘single wrap’ of the manuscript (though in fact the performance
does not involve actually reading from a physical manuscript). The entire story
must be finished as a tamba pamali, or protection from forbidden things.
The rajah (introduction, introit) reproduced above is parallel with the rajah
at the opening of the pantun called Kembang Panyarikan, as below:
Caturkeun,
urang cuang caritakeun,
cuang diajar mupulihkeun nu bihari,
mopoya[n]keun nu baheula,
diguratkən diguritkeun,
kana pucuk gebang pondok lontar,
ecekan guguluntungan,
sabeulit tamba pamali.
Kembang Panyarikan, p. 7
Let the story be told. We relate and
we learn while speaking of old tales,
which were incised and composed on
young gebang leaves and young
lontar leaves, [the letters] sprinkled
onto rolled leaves wound around
once and serving as a tamba pamali.
Gebray geuning pucuk kawung
beukah,
lain gebray pucuk kawung beukah,
apus gebar mana lawé lontar,
ngaranna lulumbang siang,
mun surat kukuluntungan.
Perenggong Jaya, p. 5
Split, it seems to be the aren shoot
that has split. No! It is not the aren
shoot that has split, but the gebang
string and the lontar cord. This is
called lulumbang siang, a letter that
is rolled up.
In this passage, gebar is a mispronunciation/mistranscription of gebang, the
same phenomenon of /r/ and /ng/ being switched (as in lontar < lontang) seen
in the Demung Kalagan excerpt. The quote above also shows the word lawe
being used as a synonym for apus, meaning string or cord. The word lulumbang
is assumed to have the meaning of lulumban in modern Sundanese (ng < n),
meaning ‘to be joyful’ (Satjadibrata 2005:235). Lulumbang siang may perhaps
have a meaning similar to baranang siang, ‘a clear day’, which, in the above
context, indicates a bright and joyful mood. It appears the writer intended
to offer good tidings through the gebang and lontar, whose leaves have been
opened:
abis gobang lawé lontar,
cekcekan guguluntungan,
dituruban ku bandepung.
Gantangan Wangi, p. 8
cord of gebang, string of lontar, drops
[of ink] in a rolled-up [writing],
wrapped in a protective cloth.

=== PAGE 18 ===
266
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Abis gobang is a mispronunciation by the juru pantun (or mistranscription)
of apus gəbang (gebang cord), as becomes clear from the next phrase, lawe
lontar (lontar string), a near synonym. Bandepung may be taken as a variant of
mandepun,apieceofclothusedtocoverupobjectssetonatray.Amandepunis
also used to wrap up ‘manuscripts’ and other sacred heirlooms (Panitia Kamus
Sunda 1976:301). Once again we see the equivalence of /ng/ in pantun usage to
/n/ in modern Sundanese.
TheexcerptsfromtherajahofpantunstoriesofferedabovestrengthenNoor-
duyn and Teeuw’s assertion (2006) that pantun are closely related to the Old
Sundanese written tradition. In practice, juru pantun performed pantun tales
without relying on a written text, but when the reciter began his performance
by uttering the opening rajah, it is clear that the story about to be related had
originated in a text recorded in a manuscript (kandana baheula) consistently
described as gebang and lontar.
Gebang
As has been shown above, the analysis of West Javanese sources, both in the
form of ancient manuscripts preserved in West Java and in oral tradition,
provides reasonably strong evidence that the term gebang is used to refer to
a type of writing material in the manuscript tradition of West Java. By contrast,
the word nipah never figures anywhere in ancient sources in the contexts that
concern us here. Although there are physical similarities between nipah and
gebang, and both belong to the same botanical family (namely, the Arecaceae
palm family), they are distinct species belonging to different genera. There
appears to be no indication in Sundanese, Javanese, or Balinese sources that
nipah has ever been commonly used as a writing support.20
20
As for sources in Old Javanese not transmitted in West Java, I first note that Zoetmulder
(1982:505,s.v.gĕbaŋ)citesjustonetext,namelythe Pārthayajña,whichmentionsthisword
among other trees. A so far unrecognized occurrence of the word gəbaṅis to be found
in a passage in the Agastyaparwa (Gonda 1933:381 lines 27–30, 1936:266): kunaṅanak
bhagawān pulastya i saṅwirudhinyaṅodwad, salwiriṅodwad, sakwehiṅrumambat mwaṅ
dukut, pətuṅ, nyuh, hano, tal, gəbaṅ(em., gəṅaṅed.), salwirniṅtwaksāra. nahan tānak
bhagawān pulastya i saṅwirudhi ‘And the children of Bhagawān Pulastya with Wirodhi,
they are the hanging plants, all types of hanging plants; all creepers and grasses, bamboos,
coconut-palms, aren-palms, lontar-palms, gebang-palms, all types of trees. Those are the
children of Bhagawān Pulastya with Wirudhi.’ The emendation to gəbaṅis unproblematic
in palaeographic terms (ṅand b are very similar in Balinese script), and evident in the

=== PAGE 19 ===
nipah or gebang
267
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
It is worth noting in this connection how palm leaves were historically used
as a writing material in other, related cultural settings in South and South-
east Asia. Throughout this extensive zone, Borassus flabellifer L. and Corypha
umbraculifera L. (both members of the subfamily Coryphoideae) are the two
types of palm most widely used (Jahn 2006:923). A survey of studies of palm
leaves as writing support from Tibet to the Philippines confirms that the gen-
era Corypha and Borassus are the raw materials of first resort in societies that
manufacture writing materials from palm leaves. Writing about India, Hoernle
(1900:93) explains that two types of palm leaves were traditionally used as
writing supports there—just as we have seen in Java. Those two species of
palm were the tāḍatāla (Borassus flabellifer) and tāḍitāli (Corypha umbrac-
ulifera). Tāḍatāla is the same species as lontar. Tāḍitāli is the leaf of a differ-
ent type of palm, called talipot; its leaves are thinner, wider, and have have a
smoother surface than the Borassus. Thus we see that in India, too, two types
of palm leaves are used as writing materials, one identical to lontar, the other
a close relative of gebang (Corypha utan or Corypha gebanga).21 Indeed in a
very recent article, Perumal (2012:159) notes that Corypha utan is a third type
of palm leaf used as a writing support in Tamilnadu, South India, in addi-
tion to Corypha umbracullifera and Borassus flabellifer, while Nypa is notably
absent.22
When we regard these plants in their natural environments in Indonesia,
gebang is a common and well distributed variety of palm tree (Rigg 1862s.v.). It
is naturally known by a variety of terms in the languages of the archipelago.
The Dayak people know it as gabang, the people of Timor call it gawang,
in Madura it is pocok, to the Betawi it is pucuk, among the Batak and Sasak
it is ibus, while in Minahasa it is silar. Physically, a mature specimen ranges
between 15 to 20 metres in height. Gebang leaves form a fan shape, like the
fingers of an open hand, with a diameter of 2–3.5 metres, joined at the tip
of a stalk. This tree is most commonly found in coastal areas near rivers and
light of the West Javanese textual evidence presented above. The Agastyaparwa passage
and this emendation were pointed out to me by Arlo Griffiths.
21
For more details on local names for Borrassus flabellifer and Corypha umbraculifera in
India and Indonesia, see the table provided by Jahn (2006:927–8). Interestingly, in this
table, Corypha umbraculifera and Corypha utan are considered to be the same.
22
This article presents two misconceptions that need to be clarified. First, it states that
Corypha umbraculifera grows in dry climates. In reality the opposite is true: this species
does not thrive in dry zones. Second, Corypha utan is referred to as lontar and is said to
grow in wet zones. Lontar is not Corypha utan but Borassus flabellifer, and only grows in
dry zones.

=== PAGE 20 ===
268
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
swamps; it is also encountered in hilly countryside, though more sparsely.
Gebang have a slow rate of growth and are not found above elevations of 300
metres (Heyne 1922:301). The geographical origins of this species are not clear,
but its distribution today includes tropical Africa, India, Burma, Thailand, the
Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
By contrast, the nipah palm is more rarely found in Java (Gallop 1998:16).
Local toponymy gives a clear reflection of the relative abundance, importance,
and familiarity of natural landscape features, flora, and fauna. An examination
ofgazetteersrevealsthatnipahisalmostcompletelyunknowninthetoponymy
of West Java. Gebang, by contrast, is widely used in place names, including
Bantar Gebang in Bekasi, Gebang sub-district in Cirebon, and Ciawi Gebang
in Kuningan. Several of these place names are located in lowland areas (such
as Bantar Gebang and the Cirebon sub-district); others are in areas of low hills
(Ciawi Gebang). One can deduce that areas named after this type of palm tree
are places where the gebang once grew in a way that made it stand out. Nipah
stands out only by its absence as an element in place names.
Although our focus here has been on Java and in particular its western
stretches, it should be noted that there are references outside of West Java
to gebang as a writing support. Ketut Ginarsa (1975:92) once wrote that ‘in
Bali, in addition to lontar, gebang (Corypha utan), sometimes called “forest
lontar”, is also said to be related to writing implements (for example in the
prayer accompanying wayang performances uttered by dalang in North Bali)’.
Hinzler (1993:438) quotes Cox (1931) in the opening to her article on palm
leaf manuscripts in Bali, adding that the gebang palm was, at least in the
1930s, very rare in Bali, whereas lontar palms grew abundantly in dry areas.
No further information offering insights into their use along the lines found
in West Javanese sources is mentioned.
Conclusion
Holle’s misidentification of gebang as nipah more than 130 years ago was taken
up uncritically by subsequent researchers. It is contradicted by sources from
West Java, both manuscripts and the oral pantun, which describe use of two
types of palm leaves as complementary writing materials: gebang and lontar.
Nipah does not enter into these passages, though other types of material that
can be used for writing on are enumerated. As long as no other sources are
found that contain references to nipah, one should rely on the term gebang
(Corypha gebanga, Corypha utan Lam.) to designate the palm-leaf writing sup-
port that is written on with ink, not incised with a knife or stylus. Indeed, the

=== PAGE 21 ===
nipah or gebang
269
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
character of manuscripts copied through use of ‘black’ (cəməṅ) rather than
‘incising’ (carik), is differentiated in important ways. Writing on lontar is ‘not
intended to be used to preserve a sacred text’ (lain pikabuyutanən), that is, a
textimbuedwithsacralpoweranddealingwithmattersoftranscendentknowl-
edge. This theoretical notion is substantiated by the fact that, in general, Old
Sundanese texts found on lontar tend more to have the characteristics of ‘lit-
erature’ as understood by modern readers. Writing on gebang, by contrast, is
‘intended for use in preserving sacred texts’ (pikabuyutanən). This statement,
too, is substantiated by the fact that nearly all texts written on gebang are of the
tutur or tattwa variety, that is to say, didactic religious works in prose contain-
ing teachings of sacred knowledge structured as an exchange between a guru
and a student, and often accompanied by several śloka.23 The special, religious
character of these texts is reflected in the use of Old Javanese, the cosmopolitan
language of Java and Bali in that period, which is relatively dominant in texts
written on gebang.24 It is worth noting that in Sanskrit and descendant Indo-
Aryan languages Corypha is also called śrītāla (Jahn 2006:929). The addition of
the element śrī (sacred) to the word tāla in this compound may indicate the
special character of Corypha compared to Borrasus.
Gebang manuscripts available to us at this time provide evidence that, al-
though the gebang leaves are physically less robust than lontar, as a writing
support they are very long-lasting and able to survive in the humid tropical cli-
mate of Indonesia. The oldest of the gebang manuscripts, giving a text of the
Arjunawiwāha (pnri l 641, dated 1334 ce), is nearly seven hundred years old.
Although it has been late in coming, further codicological research on the pro-
duction process by which leaves become writing supports, such as that carried
out by Hoernle for palm leaf manuscripts in India more than a century ago,
remains an important task to be pursued today. The conclusions reached here
on philological grounds should also be strengthened by botanical research on
nipah and gebang through laboratory experiments. Although this could not
yet be offered here, such experimental evidence will be important to deter-
mine with greater precision which type of leaf was actually used in the past to
23
A detailed acount of tutur or tattwa, including chronology, typology, and relationship
betweenthesetextsandtheirSanskritantecedents,canbefoundinAcri2006and2011a:8–
10.
24
Such as SaṅHyaṅHayu (pnri l 634, l 637, l 638, see Darsa 1998), Dharma Pātañjala (cod.
Schoemann i-21, see Acri 2011a), Siksa Guru (pnri l 627, l 628, l 643), Kuñjarakarṇa (LOr
2266, see Van der Molen 1983), Arjunawiwāha (pnri l 641, see Poerbatjaraka 1926), and
others.

=== PAGE 22 ===
270
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
produce the type of writing material that I propose from now on to designate
as gebang.
Pun. Leuwih luangan kurang wuwuhan.
Finished. Whatever is excessive, please reduce; whatever is deficient, please
supply.
References
Acri, Andrea (2006). ‘The Sanskrit-Old Javanese tutur literature from Bali: The textual
basis of Śaivism in ancient Indonesia’, Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1:107–37.
Acri, Andrea (2011a). Dharma Pātañjala: A Śaiva scripture from ancient Java studied in
the light of related Old Javanese and Sanskrit texts. Groningen: Forsten Publishing.
Acri, Andrea (2011b). ‘Javanese manuscripts of the Tattvajñāna’, in: ManjuShree (ed.),
From beyond the eastern horizon: Essays in honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra,
pp. 119–29. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Acri, Andrea and Undang Ahmad Darsa [2009]. Situs Kabuyutan Ciburuy: Collection
description. Endangered Archives Programme (eap) 280—‘Retrieving Heritage:
RareOld Javaneseand Old Sundanese Manuscripts fromWestJava’.http://eap.bl.uk/
database/overview_project.a4d?projID=EAP280 (accessed March 2014).
Cabaton, A. (1912). CataloguesommairedesmanuscritsIndiens:Indo-Chinois &Malayo-
Polynésiens. Paris: Leroux.
Carita Gantangan Wangi. 1973. Carita Gantangan Wangi. Dipantunkan oleh Ki Asom
(Pringkasap, Subang), diusahakan oleh Ajip Rosidi. Bandung: Proyek penelitian
pantun dan folklor Sunda. [Mimeographed.]
Carita Kembang Panyarikan (1973). Carita Kembang Panyarikan. Dipantunkan oleh Ki
Kamal (Lebak Wangi, Kuningan), diusahakan oleh Ajip Rosidi. Proyek Penelitian
Pantun dan Folklor Sunda. [Mimeographed.]
CohenStuart,AbrahamBenjamin.[1872]. Eerstevervolgcatalogusderbibliotheekencat-
alogus der Maleische, Javaansche en Kawi handschriften van het Bataviaasch Genoot-
schap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen. Batavia: Bruining & Wijt; ’s Gravenhage:
Nijhoff.
Clerq, F.S.A. de. (1927). Nieuw plantkundig woordenboek voor Nederlandsh Indië. Met
korte aanwijzingen van het nuttig gebruik der planten en hare beteekenis in het volks-
leven, en met registers der inlandsche en wetenschappelijke benamingen. Amsterdam:
DeBussy.Tweede,herzieneenvermeerderdedrukbewerktdoorA.Pulle,metmede-
werking voor het taalkundig gedeelte van den heer A.H.J.G. Walbeehm te Leiden.
Cox, J. (1931). ‘Monografie Bali en Lombok’. [Unpublished typewritten report dated
1931.]

=== PAGE 23 ===
nipah or gebang
271
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Danadibrata,R.A.(2006). KamusbasaSunda.Bandung:PanitiaPenerbitanKamusBasa
Sunda in collaboration with Kiblat Buku Utama & Universitas Padjadjaran.
Darsa, Undang A. (1998). Sang Hyang Hayu: Kajian filologi naskah bahasa Jawa Kuno di
Sunda pada abad xvi. [Magister thesis, Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung.]
Darsa, Undang A. (2012). Séwaka Darma dalam naskah tradisi Sunda Kuno abad xv–
xvii Masehi. [Phd thesis, Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung.]
Darsa, Undang A. and Edi S. Ekadjati (2004). ‘Sanghyang Raga Dewata’, in: Fatimah in
West Java: Moral admonitions to Sundanese gentlewomen dan kajian lainnya menge-
nai budaya Sunda, pp. 134–79. Bandung: Pusat Studi Sunda & Kiblat Buku Utama.
[Seri Sundalana 2.]
Ensiklopedi Sunda (2000). Ensiklopedi Sunda: Alam, manusia, dan budaya (termasuk
budaya Betawi dan Cirebon). Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya.
Gallop, Annabel T. (1998). ‘Indigenous writing materials: Seals’, in: John H. McGlynn
(ed.), Language and literature, pp. 16–7, 44–5. Singapore: Archipelago. [Indonesian
heritage 10.]
Geerdink, A. (1875). Soendaneesch-Hollandsch woordenboek. Batavia: H.M. van Dorp &
Co.
Ginarsa,I Ketut(1975).‘The lontar (palmyra)palm’, ReviewofIndonesianandMalaysian
Affairs 9:90–103.
Gonda, J. (1933). ‘Agastyaparwa: Een Oud-Javaansch proza-geschrift’, Bijdragen tot de
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 90:329–419.
Gonda, J. (1936). ‘Agastyaparwa: Vertaling’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde
94:223–85.
Grader, C.J. (1941). ‘De vervaardiging’, in: C.J. Grader and C. Hooykaas, ‘Lontar als schrijf-
materiaal’, Mededeelingen van de Kirtya Liefrinck-Van der Tuuk 13:23–6.
Gunawan, Aditia (2009). Sang Hyang Sasana Maha Guru dan Kala Purbaka (suntingan
dan terjemahan). Jakarta: Perpustakaan Nasional ri.
Heyne, K. (1922). De nuttige planten van Nederlandsch-Indië: Tevens synthetische cat-
alogus der verzamelingen van het museum voor economische Botanie te Buitenzorg.
Batavia: Ruygrok & Co.
Hinzler, H. (1981). Bima Swarga in Balinese wayang. The Hague: Nijhoff. [Verhandelin-
gen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 90.]
Hinzler, H. (1993). ‘Balinese palm-leaf manuscripts’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 149:438–73.
Hinzler, H. (2001). ‘The book in ancient Java: Books, writing, writing material, and
reading in written and visual evidence’, in: Marijke J. Klokke and Karel R. van Kooij
(eds), Fruits of inspiration: Studies in honour of Prof. J.G. de Casparis. Groningen:
Forsten.
Hoernle, A.F. Rudolf (1900). ‘An epigraphical note on palm-leaf, paper and birch-bark’,
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 69:93–134.

=== PAGE 24 ===
272
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Holil, Munawar and Aditia Gunawan (2010). ‘Membuka peti naskah Sunda kuna di Per-
pustakaan Nasional ri: Upaya rekatalogisasi’, in: Perubahan pandangan aristokrat
Sunda dan esei-esei lainnya mengenai kebudayaan Sunda, pp. 104–46. Bandung:
Pusat Studi Sunda dan Kiblat Buku Utama. [Seri Sundalana 9.]
Holle, K.F. (1867). ‘Vlugtig berigt omtrent eenige lontar-handschriften afkomstig uit de
Soenda-landen’, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 16:450–70.
Holle, K.F. (1869). ‘De Batoe-Toelis te Buitenzorg’, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land-
en Volkenkunde 17:483–8.
Holle, K.F. (1882). Tabel van Oud-en Nieuw-Indische alphabetten. Bijdrage tot de pale-
ographie van Nederlandsch-Indië. Batavia: Bruining; ’s Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Jahn, Samia Al Azharia (2006). ‘Comparative studies on different concepts about the
origin of writing on palm leaf: Botany—traditional technologies—divine teachers’,
Asiatische Studien / Études Asiatiques 60–4:921–61.
Krom, N.J. (1914). Rapporten van den Oudheidkundigen Dienst in Nederlandsch Indië.
Inventaris der Hindoe-oudheden op den grondslag van Dr. R.O.M. Verbeek’s Oudheden
van Java, Eerste Deel. Weltevreden: Albrecht & Co.
Lennep, D. van (1969). Some observations on the nipah leaf kropaks from West Java, with
an analysis of content and historical relevance of the manggala to the Old-Javanese
Amaramala. [ba honours thesis, University of Sydney.]
Lokesh Chandra (1997). ‘Chanda-Karaṇa: The art of writing poetry’, in: Lokesh Chandra,
Cultural horizons of India. Vol. 6, Studies in Tantra and Buddhism, art and archae-
ology, language and literature, pp. 140–242. New Delhi: International Academy of
Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan.
Molen, Willem van der (1983). Javaanse tekstkritiek: Een overzicht en een nieuwe bena-
dering geïllustreerd aan de Kuñjarakarna. Dordrecht: Foris. [PhD thesis, University
of Leiden.]
Moriyama, Mikihiro (2005). Sundanese print culture and modernity in 19th-century West
Java. Singapore: Singapore University Press.
nbg (various years). Notulen van de algemeene en directievergaderingen van het Batavi-
aasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen. Batavia: Lange & Co., later Brui-
ning, Kolff & Co; ’s Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Netscher, E. (1853). ‘Iets over eenige in de Preanger-regentschappen gevonden Kawi-
handschriften’, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 1:469–79.
Noorduyn, J. (1982). ‘Bujangga Manik’s journeys through Java: topographical data from
an old Sundanese source’, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 138: 413–42.
Noorduyn, J. (1985). ‘The three palm-leaf mss from Java in the Bodleian Library and
their donors’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 117:58–
64.
Noorduyn, J. and A. Teeuw (2006). Three Old Sundanese poems. Leiden: kitlv Press.
[Bibliotheca Indonesica 29.]

=== PAGE 25 ===
nipah or gebang
273
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Panitia Kamus Sunda (1976). Kamus umum basa Sunda. Compiled by Panitia Kamus
Lembaga Basa & Sastra Sunda. Bandung: Tarate.
Perumal,P.(2012).‘TheSanskritmanuscriptinTamilnadu’,in:SarajuRath(ed.), Aspects
of manuscript culture in South India, pp. 157–72. Leiden: Brill [Brill’s Indological
library 40.]
Pigeaud, Th. (1968). Literature of Java: Catalogue raisonné of Javanese manuscripts in
the library of the University of Leiden and other public collections in the Netherlands.
Vol. ii, Descriptive list of Javanese manuscripts. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Pigeaud, Th. (1970). Literature of Java: Catalogue raisonné of Javanese manuscripts in
the library of the University of Leiden and other public collections in the Netherlands.
Vol. iii, Illustrations and facsimiles of manuscripts, maps, addenda and a general
index of names and subjects. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Pigeaud, Th. (1975). Javanese and Balinese manuscripts and some codices written in
related idioms spoken in Java and Bali. Descriptive catalogue. Wiesbaden: Steiner.
[Orientalische Handschriften in Deutschland 31.]
Poerbatjaraka, R.M.Ng. (1926). ‘Arjuna-wiwāha. Tekst en vertaling’. Bijdragen tot de
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 82:181–305.
Ricklefs, M.C. and P. Voorhoeve. (1977). Indonesian manuscripts in Great Britain; A
catalogue of manuscripts in Indonesian languages in British public collections.
Rigg, Jonathan (1862). A dictionary of the Sunda language of Java. Batavia: Lange & Co.
Robson, S.O. (1976). ‘More about tanah and karas’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 132:353–5.
Rubinstein, Raechelle (2000). Beyond the realm of the senses: The Balinese ritual of
kakawincomposition.Leiden:kitlvPress.[VerhandelingenvanhetKoninklijkInsti-
tuut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 181.]
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan (1935). ‘The Old-Javanese copper-plates from Sidotĕka of the
śaka year 1245’, Journal of the Greater India Society 2:133–41.
Satjadibrata (2005). Kamus basa Sunda. Bandung: Kiblat Buku Utama.
Setyawati, Kartika, Kuntara Wiryamartana, and Willem van der Molen (2002). Kata-
lognaskahMerapi-Merbabu,PerpustakaanNasionalRepublikIndonesia. Yogyakarta:
Penerbitan Universitas Sanata Dharma; Leiden: Opleiding Talen en Culturen van
Zuidoost-Azië en Oceanië, Universiteit Leiden.
Swellengrebel, J.L. (1936). Korawāçrama: Een Oudjavaans gedicht. Groningen: Mees.
Tjarita Demung Kalagan (1970). Tjarita Demung Kalagan, dipantunkeun ku Ki Kamal
(Lebakwangi, Kuningan), diusahakeun ku Ajip Rosidi. Bandung: Proyek Penelitian
Pantun dan Folklor Sunda.
Tjarita Parenggong Jaya (1971). Tjarita Parenggong Jaya, dipantunkan oleh Ki Samid
Tjisolok—Sukabumi, diusahakan oleh Ajip Rosidi. Bandung: Proyek Penelitian Pan-
tun dan Folklor Sunda.
Wartini, Tien, Ruhaliah, Mamat Ruhimat and Aditia Gunawan (2011). Sanghyang Swa-

=== PAGE 26 ===
274
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
war Cinta: Teks dan terjemahan. Jakarta: Kerjasama Perpustakaan Nasional ri dan
Pusat Studi Sunda.
Wiryamartana, I. Kuntara (1993) ‘The scriptoria in the Merbabu-Merapi area’, Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 149:503–9.
Zoetmulder, P.J. (1974). Kalangwan: A survey of Old Javanese literature. The Hague:
Nijhoff. [kitlv Translation Series 16.]
Zoetmulder, P.J. (1982). Old Javanese–English dictionary. With the collaboration of S.O.
Robson. Two vols. ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff.

=== PAGE 27 ===
nipah or gebang
275
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
Appendix 1. Gebang Manuscripts in the Collection of the National
Library of Indonesia
Abbreviations
nbg Notulen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschap-
pen.
tbg Tijdschrift van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten-
schappen.
No.
ms no.
Title
Description
1
l 374 Peti 16
?
Fragments w/o cover boards, 35×3.4cm (longest leaf),
10 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese quadratic
script, Old Sundanese and Old Javanese language, prose.
Title on label ‘Old Javanese/Sundanese?’.
Contents: not further identified, mentions jati
niskala, state of sunya (emptiness) dan acintya
(inconceivableness of god).
2
l 455 Peti 16
Bhīmaswarga
34.9×3.9cm, 36 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose. In
Holle’s copy (260 peti 89) there is a note saying that
l 455 came from Merbabu. This manuscript may not be
from West Java.
Contents: tale of Bhīma’s journey to heaven to meet
Bhaṭāra Guru in order to have the gift of heaven
bestowed on Pandu, Bhīma’s father. It consists almost
exclusively of question-and-answer exchange between
Bhaṭāra Guru and Bhīma.
Copy of manuscript: No. 260, peti 89.
3
l 627 Peti 16
?
38.7×3.7cm, 26 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose. Leaves
damaged, out of order.
Contents: religious text, unidentified, mentions
sapta-patala.
Copy of manuscript: No. 261, peti 89.
4
l 628 Peti 16
Siksa Guru
35×3.3cm, 23 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose. Some
leaves broken, edges damaged, holes due to insects.

=== PAGE 28 ===
276
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
(cont.)
No.
ms no.
Title
Description
Place copied: Lurah Kamulan? Title on label ‘Old
Javanese/Sundanese?’
Contents: religious teachings of SaṅPandita to Saṅ
Sewaka Darma about life in this world. Core of
teachings centred on mastering bayu, sabda, and hədap
and potential of the dasaindria possessed by humans
Copy of manuscript: No. 262, peti 89.
5
l 630 Peti 16
SaṅHyaṅSiksa
KandaṅKarəsian
35×3.5cm, 29 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Sundanese language, prose. Time
of writing: third month of 1440 Ś (1518 ce). Manuscript
from Galuh (Krom 1914:98).
Copy of manuscript: Plt. 131, peti 119; No. 263, peti 89.
6
l 631 Peti 15
Chanda-Karaṇa
44×3.1cm, 49 leaves, Old (West) Javanese quadratic
script, Old Javanese language, prose. Note saying this
was a ms from Raden Saleh. Holle (tbg 16) calls this
ms c. From Galuh.
Contents: teachings on the art of writing kakawin,
amaramālā (Sanskrit-Old Javanese lexicon).
7
l 632a Peti 16
Kabuyutan
Galuṅguṅ
34×3cm, 6 leaves (4 leaves separate from case), 4
lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese quadratic script, Old
Sundanese language, prose. Leaves adhere to cover
boards, middle part missing, leaf edges damaged and
breaking.
Contents: begins with genealogy of RahyaṅBaṅa,
continues with advice of Darmasiksa to care for and
protect kabuyutan in Galuṅguṅ.
Copy of manuscript: Plt. 120, Peti 119; No. 265, peti 89.
Pleyte himself, in the manuscript Plt. 120, Peti 119, gave
the title ‘Darmasiksa’.
8
l 633 Peti 16
Siksa Guru
22.6×4cm, 41 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Sundanese language and Old
Javanese. Manuscript from Tarogong, Garut (Krom
1914:71). Time of writing: bulan kasapuluh (tenth
mounth). Place copied: Desa Sunya. Title on label ‘Serat
Sewaka’.
Copy of manuscript: No. 264, peti 89.

=== PAGE 29 ===
nipah or gebang
277
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
No.
ms no.
Title
Description
9
l 634 Peti 16
SaṅHyaṅHayu
47×3.6cm, 80 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose.
Manuscript in good condition, well-bound, neat. Time
of writing: 1445 Ś (1523/4 ce). Place copied: Desa
Mahapawite (read Mahapawitra?), Tajak Barat, Giri
Waṅsa. Manuscript from Cilegon, Tarogong, Garut, gift
of Rd. Tumenggung Suria Kerta Adi Ningrat (Netscher
1853:469–79; Krom 1914:71).
Copy of manuscript: No. 267, peti 89; No. 268, peti 89.
10
l 635 Peti 16
SaṅHyaṅHayu
36.8×3.6cm, 122 leaves, 4 lines/ leaves, Old (West)
Javanese quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose.
Manuscript from Tarogong, Garut (Krom 1914:71). Title
on label ‘Serat Buwana Pitu’.
Copy of manuscript: No. 155 (Ciburuy i), peti 89
(Javanese script); No. 274, Peti 89.
11
l 636 Peti 16
SaṅHyaṅHayu
42.5×4cm, 83 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose. Place
copied: Giri Sunya. Copyist: SaṅBujaṅga Rəsi Laksa.
Manuscript from Tarogong, Garut (Krom 1914:71).
12
l 637 Peti 16
SaṅHyaṅHayu
37.6×4cm, 103 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose. Place
copied: Desa Mahapawita (read Mahapawitra?), Tajak
Barat. Manuscript from Tarogong, Garut (Krom 1914:71).
13
l 638 Peti 16
SaṅHyaṅHayu
38.6×4cm, 129 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose. Time of
writing: begun on Tuesday Kliwon, seventh month
and completed on Pon in the ninth month. Year of
composition: 1357 Ś (1435 ce). Manuscript from Cilegon,
Tarogong, Garut, gift of Rd. Tumenggung Suria Kerta
Adi Ningrat (Netscher 1853:469–79; Krom 1914:71). Title
on label ‘Serat Dewa Buda’.
Copy of manuscript: No. 270, peti 89.
14
l 641 Peti 16
Arjunawiwāha
47.5×4cm, 38 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language. Date of
composition: 1256 Ś (1334 ce). Place copied: SaṅHyaṅ
Mandala Katyagan in Gugur. Copyist: SaṅGuguron?
Manuscript from Cilegon, Tarogong, Garut, gift of Rd.

=== PAGE 30 ===
278
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
(cont.)
No.
ms no.
Title
Description
Tumenggung Suria Kerta Adi Ningrat (Netscher
1853:469–79; Krom 1914:71). Title on label ‘Serat Wiwaha
Kawi’.
Copy of manuscript: No. 272, peti 89; kbg 346 (Javanese
script).
15
l 642 Peti 88
Siksa Guru
37.5×3.6cm, 23 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Sundanese language and Old
Javanese, prose. Manuscript from Tarogong, Garut
(Krom 1914:71).
Place copied: Desa Mahapawitra in the Śaka year hlaṙ
(2) twaya (4) wu (1) (142×, that is, 1498–1509 ce).
16
l 643 Peti 16
?
34×3.8cm, 14 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Javanese language, prose.
Manuscript from Talaga (nbg 4, 1866:118; Krom 1914:92).
Title on label ‘Old Javanese/Sundanese?’. Manuscript in
poor condition.
Contents: religious treatise on mastering the three
elements bayu, sabda, dan hədap. Text incomplete.
17
l 647 Peti 16
?
Fragments, manuscript in shambles, 4 leaves, 4
lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese quadratic script, Old
Javanese language, prose. Title on label ‘Fragment
Stukken’.
Contents: not yet identified.
18
l 1095 Peti 69
LaṅgəṅJati
31×3.8cm, 37 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Sundanese language, prose. Place
copied: GunuṅJati Sunya, upstream from the silent
forest of Mandala Puntaṅ. Manuscript from kabuyutan
Koléang, Jasinga (nbg 50, 1912:44, 86; nbg 51, 1913:24;
Krom 1914:32). Title on label ‘Sundaasch’.
Contents: religious text containing teachings on the
highest wisdom (ajñana).
Copy of manuscript: Plt. 116, peti 119; No. 275, peti 89;
No. 155, peti 89 (Ciburuy iii).
19
l 1097 Peti 69
Carita Jati Mula
21.4×3.7cm, 57 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Sundanese language, prose. Place
copied: Sagara Wisesa. Title on label ‘Sundaasch (met

=== PAGE 31 ===
nipah or gebang
279
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
No.
ms no.
Title
Description
inkt)’. Manuscript from kabuyutan Koleang, Jasinga
(nbg 50, 1912:44, 86; nbg 51, 1913:24; Krom 1914:32).
Contents: religious text on the essence of the true soul
not swayed by praise and other worldly disturbances.
Copy of manuscript: Plt. 149, peti 119; No. 277,
peti 89; No. 155, peti 89, Ciburuy v (Javanese
script).
20
l 1099 Peti 68 SaṅHyaṅTattwa
Ajñana (Pakeən
Raga?)
24.5×3.7cm, 70 leaves, 4 lines/leaf, Old (West) Javanese
quadratic script, Old Sundanese language, prose.
Manuscript from kabuyutan Koléang, Jasinga (nbg 50,
1912:44, 86; nbg 51, 1913:24; Krom 1914:32).
Contents: didactic religious text containing teachings
on meditation that leads the soul to achieve final
liberation (moksa).
Copy of manuscript: Plt. 118, peti 119; No. 155, peti 89,
Ciburuy v (Javanese script); No. 278, peti 89.
Appendix 2. Gebang Manuscripts from Kabuyutan Ciburuy
Information on manuscripts below is drawn from the descriptions in Acri and
Darsa (2009). These descriptions were appended as an index for the Ciburuy
manuscript digitalization project, sponsored by the British Library through
its Endangered Archive Program (eap) in 2009. Digitalized copies are kept
at the National Library of Indonesia with an additional copy deposited at
the British Library as the sponsoring institution (http://eap.bl.uk/database/
overview_project.a4d?projID=EAP280).
No.
Ms. no
Description
1.
Kropak Ciburuy i
280_Peti2b_krpkCbrI
Former title: n.a.
86 leaves, 51×4cm, 4 lines.
Script: Old (West) Javanese quadratic. Language: Old Javanese.
Title: Buana Pitu (?); time and place of writing unknown.

=== PAGE 32 ===
280
gunawan
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 171 (2015) 249–280
(cont.)
No.
Ms. no
Description
2.
Kropak 23
280_Peti2b_krpk23
Former title: 24 Bud/b.p.c. 5
3 leaves damaged, 36×4cm, 4 lines.
Script: Old (West) Javanese quadratic. Language: Old Javanese.
Title: Tattvajñana (see Acri 2011b); time and place of writing:
unknown.
3.
Kropak 24
280_Peti2d_krpk24
Former title: 25 Bud
7 leaves + some broken leaves, ca. 35×4cm, 4 lines.
Script: Old (West) Javanese quadratic. Language: Old Javanese.
Title: SaṅHyaṅHayu (?); time and place of writing: unknown.

