# SOURCE FILE: humanities-07-00092-v2.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\PDF\humanities-07-00092-v2.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_1_materials (1. วัสดุศาสตร์ หมึก และการอนุรักษ์เชิงเคมี)
# PAGES: 31 | TOTAL CHARS: 82597

=== PAGE 1 ===
humanities
Article
Images of the Crowned Buddha along the Silk Road:
Iconography and Ideology
Rebecca L. Twist
Art Department, Paciﬁc University, Forest Grove, OR 97123, USA; rtwist@paciﬁcu.edu
Received: 9 August 2018; Accepted: 10 September 2018; Published: 21 September 2018


Abstract: The interpretation of early Buddha images with a crown has long been a source of debate.
Many scholars have concluded that the iconography of the crown is intended to denote ´S¯akyamuni
as a cakravartin or universal Buddha. A few have suggested it represents a sambhogak¯aya Buddha in
Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism. This art historical and Buddhological study examines the visual record of early
crowned Buddhas along the Silk Road, focusing on the iconographic signiﬁers of the crown, silk items,
and ornaments, and interprets them within a broader framework of Buddhist theoretical principals
and practice. Not only is this a visual analysis of iconography, it also considers contemporary
Buddhist literary evidence that shows the development of the iconography and ideology of the
crowned Buddha. As a result of this examination, I propose that the recurring iconographic evidence
and the textual evidence underscore the intention to depict a form of sambhogak¯aya Buddha as an
early esoteric meditational construct. Moreover, many Buddhas perform one of the two mudr¯as that
are particular to the esoteric form of Vairocana Buddha. Therefore, the iconography also signiﬁes the
ideology of the archetypal ¯Adi Buddha as an esoteric conception.
Keywords: crowned Buddha; Buddhism; Vajray¯ana; sambhogak¯aya; Vairocana; cakravartin; Silk
Road; Pat.ola ´S¯ahi
1. Introduction
The paradigm of the crowned Buddha ﬁgures found along the transcontinental travel system of the
Silk Road has been a discourse in scholarship for many years. These images are often called bejeweled
Buddhas because they not only feature a crown, they are also decorated with ornaments and jewels in
contrast to the depiction of the unadorned Buddha in monastic robes. The most prevalent interpretation
for this iconography is that the crown is used to denote a Buddha as a cakravartin or universal sovereign.
Under this ideology, the historical ´S¯akyamuni Buddha has been given new, transcendent powers
within Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism.1 In particular, several scholars suggest the iconography of the crowned
Buddha with a cape (often called a chasuble) and jewels depicts ´S¯akyamuni’s coronation or abhis.eka
(consecration) as a cakravartin in Tus.ita paradise, where Maitreya, the future Buddha, will reside
until his eon or kalpa arrives (Rowland 1961; Snellgrove 1978; Klimburg-Salter 1989; Taddei 1989;
Von Schroeder 2001). In a Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhist context, the crown typically represents the highest level
of knowledge and attainment, especially due to the completion of the last or 10th stage or bh¯umi on a
bodhisattva path experienced by all bodhisattvas or Buddhas-to-be before their last rebirth.2 As such,
1
Rowland (1961) suggests that the ornamentation was added to distinguish Mah¯ay¯ana Buddha images from Hinay¯ana ones.
2
For example, in Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism, a tenth-stage or great bh¯umi bodhisattva is an advanced being who has completed the
practice of the ten dharmas of the ten bh¯umis. The bodhisattvas at this level perform intense meditation, allowing them to
visualize or experience various Buddhas and to receive the teachings. On the 10th bh¯umi, which is equivalent to attaining
the dharmak¯aya, the bodhisattva is on the threshold of Buddhahood (Grifﬁths 1994; Xing 2005).
Humanities 2018, 7, 92; doi:10.3390/h7040092
www.mdpi.com/journal/humanities

=== PAGE 2 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
2 of 31
the crown is a marker of Buddhahood. Klimburg-Salter (1989) stated that during the coronation, he is
crowned and given royal regalia, which corresponds to the iconography of these images.3
Another ideology presented by previous scholars is that the iconography of the crowned Buddha
relates to the pañcav¯ars.ika ceremony (Rowland 1961; Klimburg-Salter 1989; Taddei 1989). The ceremony
was documented by Buddhist pilgrims, such as Faxien and later by Xuan Zhang in various Buddhist
kingdoms and sites, including Bamiyan, Kapisa, Khotan, and Kucha.4 For example, Xuan Zhang
(629) described one ceremony that involved the king and all of his people as well as a procession
of “highly adorned images of Buddha, decorated with precious substances and covered with silken
stuffs” (Klimburg-Salter 1989; Walter 1997). During the ritual, the king gives his crown and cape to the
adorned Buddha. It is at this point, according to Maurizio Taddei (1989), that the Buddha revealed
himself as a universal sovereign or cakravartin. Moreover, Taddei proposed that an image of a jeweled
Buddha was a gift during the ceremony. Since the ritual is closely tied to the sacred role of the king,
it is often argued that only the images of the crowned Buddhas with accompanying donors can be
interpreted as this particular ceremony. Using the Sam. gh¯at.a S¯utra (a text also found among the Gilgit
Manuscripts), Rob Linrothe (2014) suggested that the cape as an expensive garment is meant to be a
gift to an image of the Buddha, and is not necessarily tied to the ceremony or kingship. This is based
on a section where ´S¯akyamuni Buddha recalls one of his previous lives as a wealthy householder and
the gifts he gave to Buddhas, including garments, ornaments, and cloaks.
On the other hand, some scholars have suggested that the crowned Buddha represents a
sambhogak¯aya Buddha in Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism (Mus 1928; Coomaraswamy 1928; Rowland 1961;
Snellgrove 1978; Paul 1986). The sambhogak¯aya or enjoyment body form of a Buddha is a meditational
construct that is part of the trik¯aya or three-body system, which will be discussed in depth later in
this article. V. Krishan (1971) and Taddei (1989) disagreed with this notion, saying the iconography
refers to the abhis.eka. Moreover, Taddei said that in the Lotus Sutra, ´S¯akyamuni only revealed his
sambhogak¯aya form to a multitude of bodhisattvas, and therefore, since no bodhisattvas are depicted
with the crowned Buddhas, the iconography does not ﬁt.
This article focuses on the visual record of images speciﬁcally depicting crowned Buddhas,
including sculptures and paintings, from some of the major cities along the Silk Road, including
Bamiyan, Foundukistan, Had. d. a, Gandhara, Swat, Kashmir, Tibet, Gilgit, and Baltistan or Bol¯or (today
known as Northern Pakistan). Using this visual record, I ﬁrst demonstrate that there are recurring
core iconographic elements on the crowned Buddhas with underlying symbolism. These iconographic
parallels consist of the cape, the crown, and the symbol of a crescent moon with a sun. Next, using more
recent publications on Buddhist iconography and Vajray¯ana Buddhism (Huntington and Bangdel 2003;
Chandrasekhar 2004; Twist 2011), I show that an examination of these images with their coded
visual language within a larger Buddhist framework underscores the intention to depict a form of
a sambhogak¯aya Buddha or enjoyment body nature of a meditational construct that relates to early
Vajray¯ana Buddhism. In addition, I propose that there are also iconographic signiﬁers that are relevant
to an esoteric form of Vairocana Buddha as an archetypal ¯Adi or Primordial Buddha. Thus, through the
new contextualization of these crowned Buddhas along the Silk Road, a form of religious transmission
or early Vajr¯ayana ideology and practice is revealed.
3
Klimburg-Salter (1989) stated that originally, ﬂames on the shoulders were used in early iconography for this purpose,
which were then replaced by the moon and sun symbols.
4
Klimburg-Salter (1989) stated that this ceremony was found in China from the sixth to eighth century and Japan from the
sixth to the 11th century.

=== PAGE 3 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
3 of 31
2. Recurring Core Iconographic Elements
2.1. Cape
The distinct cape found on the Buddha images is depicted with a triangle corner draped over
each shoulder, one on the chest, and one on the back, making a four pointed cape. This can be
seen on a seventh to eighth c. crowned Buddha from Kashmir published in Buddhist Sculptures in
Tibet (Von Schroeder 2001), pl. 16A. These capes are typically decorated with jewels and/or tassels.
Although Klimburg-Salter (1989) called it a three-pointed cape, Taddei (1989) and P. Banerjee (1992)
among other scholars generally agreed that in a frontal image with such a cape, the fourth corner on the
back is likely to be understood as another point. Examples of this cape can be found on a sculpture of
Buddha from Gandhara (second to fourth c.) and on a Buddha painted in niche I at Bamiyan (seventh
c.) (Figures 1 and 2).5 Similarly, a fragment of a Buddha ﬁgure from Had. d. a wears a cape decorated
with jewels, including a large crescent moon symbol (Figure 3). A similar cape is found on a Buddha
from Niche D at a monastery in Fondukistan (seventh c.); he is wearing a jeweled four-pointed cape
with tassels (Figure 4).6 In addition, there are several sculptures of Buddhas from Gilgit or Baltistan
(Little or Greater Bol¯or) that all feature the same distinct elaborate cape (Figures 5 and 6).7 Through
inscriptions, these are known to have been commissioned by the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi dynasty that ruled in that
region (Von Hinüber 2004; Twist 2011). Since the geographical location of Gilgit is more commonly
known in scholarship, I will use that term for this article.
 
Figure 1. Buddha wearing a crown and jeweled cape, second to fourth c. Gandhara. Stucco. H 51 cm.
Walmore Collection, London. Photograph courtesy of John C. Huntington.
5
It is not clear if there is a symbol of a sun and moon on the shoulders or not. According to Klimburg-Salter (1989), there are
ﬂame-like emblems on the shoulders. She provided images of other crowned Buddhas with capes at Bamiyan, such as in the
colossal Buddha niche (Klimburg-Salter 1989, Figures 31, 35, 36); one in cave S (Figure 33); and in cave K on the ceiling
(Figure 5).
6
David Snellgrove (1978) suggested that the Buddha had a metal crown originally. There is also a Buddha ﬁgure made of clay
from Tapa Sardar on the left wall in Chapel 23 who wears monastic robes and a cape. This is discussed in (Taddei 1989).
7
For an additional example, see the Buddha wearing a crown and cape with crescent moon and sun symbols that was
commissioned by the monk Bhadradharma and his parents, 679/680 C.E. Gilgit. Brass with silver inlay. 20.5 cm H × 20.2 cm
W. Po ta la Collection: Sa gsum lha khang: inventory no. 82. Red Palace, Lhasa, Tibet, in Ulrich Von Schroeder (2001, pl. 22).

=== PAGE 4 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
4 of 31
 
Figure 2. Buddha wearing a crown and cape. Painting in niche “I” at Bamiyan, seventh c. Photograph
courtesy of John C. Huntington.
 
Figure 3. Buddha ﬁgure wearing a cape and jewels. Had. d. a. Stucco fragment. Musée Guimet, Paris
(MG 20996). Photograph from Taddei (1989), courtesy of the Musée Guimet.
 
Figure 4. Buddha wearing a jeweled cape. Clay fragment from niche D, seventh c. Fondukistan. Musée
Guimet, Paris. Photograph from Twist, courtesy of the Musée Guimet.

=== PAGE 5 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
5 of 31
Figure 5.
Buddha wearing a crown and cape with crescent moon and sun symbols
performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. Commissioned by King Nandivikramadityanandi,
April or September, 715 C.E. Gilgit.
Brass with copper and silver inlay.
36.8 cm H.
Pritzker Collection. https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2015/08/8th-c-715-gilgit-
shakyamuni-brasssil-c-inlay-donorsattendantsdancer-private-col.jpg.
 
Figure 6. Buddha wearing a crown and cape with crescent moon and sun symbols performing the
dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. Commissioned by Sam. karasen. a and the princess Devasr¯ı, April 20, 714
C.E. Gilgit. Brass with inlays of copper, silver, and zinc. 12 1
4 in. H. (31.1. cm). Asia Society, New
York: Mr.and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller 3rd Collection (1979.44). https://www.buddhistdoor.net/news/
collecting-paradise-buddhist-art-of-kashmir-and-its-legacies.
2.2. Crown
Crowns are utilized in a plethora of religions for the representation of deities as an emblem of
their supremacy. Thus, it is no surprise to ﬁnd images of crowned Buddhas both with and without
the jeweled cape from the Silk Road. Two exemplars of crowned Buddhas without the cape are from
Kashmir (eighth to ninth c.) (Figures 7 and 8). Numerous crowned Buddhas also without capes come
from Gilgit, some with inscriptions that indicate they are from the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi dynasty (Figures 9–12)
(Von Schroeder 2001; Von Hinüber 2004; Twist 2011).8 It is important to note that these bejeweled
crowns, some with a string of pearls, are consistently depicted with ﬂowing silk ribbons attached to
8
Two other crowned Buddhas of a similar artistic idiom are believed to be from Gilgit as well or perhaps Kashmir. (See
(Von Schroeder 2001, pl. 25A and 25B) or (Twist 2011, Figures A25 and A26)).

=== PAGE 6 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
6 of 31
sides along with two open lotuses as jewels on each side of the crowns.9 This iconography is consistent
among the Silk Road crowned Buddhas, and will be discussed later.
 
Figure 7. Buddha wearing a crown. Eighth c. Parihasapura, Kashmir. Stone. H 128.2 cm. Sri Pratap
Singh Museum, Srinagar, Kashmir. Photograph courtesy of John C. Huntington.
 
Figure 8. Buddha wearing a crown. Eighth to ninth c. Kashmir. Brass. H 35 cm. Po to la Collection: Li
ma lha khang; inventory no. 1392. Red Palace, Lhasa, Tibet. https://www.himalayanart.org/items/
9086. Copyright@ 2018 Himalayan Art Resources Inc.
9
The silk ribbons were likely derived from royal crowns on historical kings, thus becoming a symbol of royalty used by
Buddhist artists. This could have originated from the Iranian or Sassanian kings, perhaps back to the Achamenids. The
ribbons are also attached to carved images of st¯upas along the Silk Road for similar royal symbology.

=== PAGE 7 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
7 of 31
 
Figure 9. Buddha wearing a crown. Commissioned by King Nandivikramadityanandi, April 714 C.E.
Gilgit. Brass–copper alloy with copper and silver inlays. 11 1
2”H × 6”W × 4”D. Virginia Museum
of Fine Arts, Richmond. Arthur and Margaret Glasgow Fund (86.120). https://alaintruong2014.ﬁles.
wordpress.com/2015/01/1919.jpg.
 
Figure 10. Buddha wearing a crown performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudra. Commissioned by
´Sr¯ı Surabh¯ı and the monk Haris.aya´sa, 678/679 C.E. Gilgit. Brass with copper and silver inlay. 22cm
H. Tibet Museum, Alain Bordier Foundation, Gruyeres/Suisse (No. 3). (item #3 on website page)
http://tibetmuseum.info/e/Kashmir.html.
 
Figure 11. Buddha wearing a crown performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. Approx. 675–722 C.E.
Gilgit or Kashmir. Brass with copper and silver alloy. 31.1 cm H. Jo khang/gTsug lag khang Collection:
inventory no. 261[A]. Lhasa, Tibet. https://www.himalayanart.org/items/57104. Copyright@ 2018
Himalayan Art Resources Inc.

=== PAGE 8 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
8 of 31
 
Figure 12. Crowned Buddha, seventh century. Side one of a three-sided stone sculpture from Gilgit.
Photograph courtesy of John C. Huntington.
More importantly, several images of crowned Buddhas feature both iconographic motifs of the
crown and the elaborate cape. Several examples of crowned Buddhas with capes come from Kashmir
(seventh to eighth and ninth c.) (Figures 13–16). Two Buddhas believed to be from Gilgit or possibly
Kashmir also feature a cape and a crown (Figures 17 and 18).10 An example can even be found on a
rock carving from Chilas clearly depicting a crowned Buddha ﬁgure wearing the cape (dated prior to
630) (Figure 19). In addition, several examples mentioned previously regarding the elaborate cape
from Bamiyan and Gilgit also feature a crown (Figures 2, 5 and 6).
 
Figure 13. Buddha wearing a crown and jeweled cape with a crescent moon and sun symbols, eighth c.
Parihasapura, Kashmir. Stone. Sri Pratap Singh Museum, Srinagar, Kashmir. Photograph courtesy of
John C. Huntington.
10
For a similar Buddha located in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, see Pal, Bronzes of Kashmir, pl. 36.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
9 of 31
 
Figure 14. Buddha wearing a crown and a jeweled cape, seventh to eighth c.Kashmir. Brass with
silver inlay. H 16 cm. Jo khang/gTsug lag khang Collection; inventory no. 644, Lhasa, Tibet. https:
//www.himalayanart.org/items/57102. Copyright@ 2018 Himalayan Art Resources Inc.
 
Figure 15. Buddha wearing a crown and jeweled cape, ninth c. Kashmir or Northern India. Bronze.
Alan Robert Naftalis Collection. https://www.himalayanart.org/items/86315/images/primary#-1710,
-2380,3009,-1. Copyright@ 2018 Himalayan Art Resources Inc.
 
Figure 16. Buddha wearing a crown and a cape with crescent moon and sun symbols, eighth to ninth c.
Kashmir. Brass. H 52 cm. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Gift of Ben Heller (1970.297).
https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/39345.

=== PAGE 10 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
10 of 31
 
Figure 17. Buddha wearing a crown and cape performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a, eighth c.
Gilgit or Kashmir. Gilt copper alloy, private collection. https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.
com/2015/08/8th-c-gilgit-shakyamuni-labellted-maitreya-gilt-bronze-photo-hughes-dubois.jpeg.
 
Figure 18. Buddha wearing a crown and cape with crescent moon and sun symbols. Approx. 675–722
C.E. Kashmir or Gilgit. Brass. 7 1
4” H. Pan-Asian Collection https://www.himalayanart.org/items/
61436. Copyright@ 2018 Himalayan Art Resources Inc.
 
Figure 19. Crowned Buddha with a cape, prior to 630 C.E. Rock carving from Chilas. Commissioned
by Sim. hota. Photograph courtesy of John C. Huntington.

=== PAGE 11 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
11 of 31
2.3. Crescent Moon with a Sun
The symbols of the crescent moon with a rosette-like sun are also recurring iconographic elements
on crowned Buddha ﬁgures from the Silk Road. Sometimes, these symbols are depicted within the
crown and/or on the shoulders of the Buddha; hence, they can be considered a form of jeweled
ornament. Several crowned Buddha ﬁgures from Kashmir that were mentioned earlier feature crowns
that carry the motifs of the crescent moon with a rosette-like sun inside of it (see Figures 7, 8, 13 and 16).
Note that two of the four Buddhas also feature the elaborate cape, and that Figure 16 also bears the
same symbolic motif on the shoulders.
Similar lunar and solar symbolism appears on quite a few of the crowns on the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi
Buddhas. More importantly, a crescent moon with a sun inside is found on all of the shoulders of their
crowned Buddhas wearing capes (see Figures 5, 6 and 19). Interestingly, the symbols also appear on
the top of the st¯upas that ﬂank the Buddha in one sculpture (Figure 6). These are not the only examples
of this iconography along the Silk Road. The crescent moon with a solar disc is also depicted on several
st¯upas found in rock carvings in Chilas and one from Thalpan.
3. Crowned Buddha as Cakravartin
As mentioned previously, one iconographic interpretation of a Buddha with a crown is that
he is to be understood as a cakravartin, and as such, the recurring parallels of the above motifs can
certainly support the meaning of a universal sovereign. For example, some scholars suggest that
the elaborate cape was adopted from royal attire, perhaps from Gandhara, Central Asia, or even
the Himalayas, in order to denote a cakravartin Buddha (Taddei 1989; Klimburg-Salter 1989; Von
Schroeder 2001; Paul 1986).11 An example of a royal donor ﬁgure wearing a cape can be seen on two
Gandharan sculptures. One from the Lahore Museum in India depicts P¯aῆcika with a donor that wears
a cape (see S. Huntington, The Art of Ancient India, Figure 8.25). Another sculpture from a private
collection is believed to be a donor wearing a cape holding his offering (see Isao Kurita, The World of
the Buddha: Ancient Buddhist Art-Gandhara, vol. 2, Figure 523) However, it is important to note that the
donor capes are made of what appears to be animal skin, and they are not decorated with jewels or a
fringe of tassels. Therefore, they are very different than the capes depicted on the crowned Buddhas.
Moreover, several Pat.ola ´S¯ahi kings are depicted in their sculptures, and none of them wear a cape.
Linrothe (2014, pl. 1.30) pointed out a sculpture that is possibly from Kashmir published by John
Siudmak (2013, pl. 189) that features Surya and Danda in a tasseled cape, suggesting this indicates
it was not strictly used in Buddhist iconography. Rather, he stated that it was used to show power
on images from Greater Kashmir. However, it is signiﬁcant to note that these capes are not decorated
with jewels. Regardless, it is certainly possible that the cape may have been a symbol borrowed from
kings to convey the notion of the attainment of Buddhahood.
The crown is historically an ancient symbol that is worn to mark royalty in the earthly realm,
and therefore, it became an emblem to denote power and authority. Since the crown is a signiﬁer
of kingship, it is no surprise to see it used in Buddhist images to convey the ideology of a universal
sovereign or cakravartin Buddha. As mentioned previously, the crown represents the highest level of
knowledge and attainment of Buddhahood in the completion of the last stage or bh¯umi (his abhis.eka);
hence, he could be recognized as a universal Buddha via the crown. The ﬂowing ribbons and lotuses
on the crown further signify the royal imagery of a universal sovereign.
11
Several scholars argue that the cape motif is from a famous image at the Mahabodi Temple in Bodh Gaya. This suggestion
comes from a ninth c. painting discovered at Dunhuang that has the following inscription: “Country of Magadha light
emitting magical image.” See (Rowland 1961). It is believed that this painting was a representation of the same Buddha at
Bodh Gaya, and it bears a cape and crown. However, the cape is different, with scalloped edges rather than the distinct four
corners found on the Buddha images used for this article. The only cape I found that was similar with the scalloped edges is
on the stone-carved crowned Gilgit Buddha.

=== PAGE 12 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
12 of 31
The lunar and solar symbols are also efﬁgies of kingship, and therefore, their royal connotations
serve as iconographic symbols on a crowned Buddha to denote his status as a cakravartin.12 A Buddha
in the aspect of a universal sovereign is depicted wearing a crown and jewelry to symbolize his great
power and authority. John Huntington explained that the crown and jewelry “draw a visual analogy
between the attainment of Buddhahood and coronation as a king” (Huntington and Huntington 1990).
Therefore, the crescent moon with the rosette-like sun on a Buddha’s shoulders, together with a crown,
signiﬁes his highest status.
These iconographic symbols are also signiﬁcant emblems in Buddhist iconography. The sun
and the moon are often used as metaphors or descriptors for Buddhas and Buddhist teachings. For
example, the Lotus S¯utra says, “As the light of the sun and moon can banish all obscurity and gloom,
so this person [Buddha] as he passes through the world can wipe out the darkness of living beings”
(Watson 1993). The sun and the moon dispel darkness and aid in disseminating light just like the light
of knowledge taught by the Buddhist dharma. In addition, in the Bhaisajyagura S¯utra found in Gilgit, it
says that the sun and moon have great power, just like the Buddha and the dharma (Schopen 1976).
Moreover, in visual imagery, a moon or sun disk on a lotus represents the perfect wisdom attained by
all Buddhas through the dharma.
Thus, it is likely that these recurring key motifs were deliberately chosen as iconography explicitly
used for crowned Buddhas to set them apart and convey speciﬁc meanings. Since they were all
emblems used by royalty, this iconography of kingship was given to a supreme Buddha ﬁgure to
imbue him with a higher status and mark him as a cakravartin. Therefore, it is clear that these core
iconographic motifs can work together on one level to denote the notion of a transcendent Buddha and
universal sovereign, signifying the crowned Buddha’s attainment of the highest truth and authority of
Buddhahood. Similar to other scholars, Linrothe (2014) suggested that it is safest to conclude that the
crown and cape are merely associated with kingship and royal rituals.13
4. Crowned Buddha as Sambhogak¯aya
However, Buddhist iconography is often multivalent, and as such, several of these symbols hold
underlying esoteric ideologies as well. I propose in a deeper contextualization of these crowned
Buddhas that the iconography reveals an underlying pattern of the primary benchmarks that are
needed to portray an early meditational construct of a sambhogak¯aya Buddha.
The sambhogak¯aya or enjoyment body form of a Buddha is the meditational form that serves as
a way to experience or visualize the highest or non-representational form body of a Buddha called
the dharmak¯aya. It is part of the trik¯aya or three-body system that is used to understand the nature
of numerous Buddhas, and is a fundamental concept in both Mah¯ay¯ana and Vajray¯ana Buddhism.
The three natures of a Buddha can be experienced as nirm¯an. ak¯aya (the transformation and physical
body), sambhogak¯aya (the enjoyment body), and dharmak¯aya, which is inconceivable, so it has no
representation.14 All three bodies were considered different aspects of the same reality. Paul Grifﬁths
(1994) explained that dharmak¯aya is considered to be identical to dharmadh¯atu or the dharma realm.
Minoru Kiyota (1982) explained that sambhogak¯aya is indestructible and eternal, similar to dharmak¯aya,
but it is also capable of communicating with sentient beings like nirm¯an. ak¯aya. The enjoyment body
12
Evidence of this can even be seen on some of these artworks. For example, both the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi king and queen donors of the
Buddha in Figure 5 have crescent moons with a solar symbol inside of it decorating their crowns. Moreover, Klimburg-Salter
(1989) pointed out examples at Bamiyan and Fondukistan with other variations of the heavenly symbols incorporated into
the decoration of the crowns used for kings. It is possible that these motifs also derive from the Sassanians, such as the silk
ribbons on the crown.
13
I agree that the iconography clearly has references to kingship; this is discussed in several chapters in (Twist 2011).
14
The trik¯aya system was developed primarily by Asa ˙nga, his teacher Maitreya, and his brother Vasubandhu in fourth century
India. Together, they are often credited with establishing a new school of thought in Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism called Yog¯ac¯ara.
The earliest texts written by the sect introducing the trik¯aya system are the Mah¯ay¯anas¯utr¯alam. k¯ara by Maitreya and the
Mah¯ay¯anasam. graha by Asa ˙nga. See (Hanson 1980, pp. 62–65; Grifﬁths 1989).

=== PAGE 13 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
13 of 31
transcends the nirm¯an. ak¯aya Buddha as a symbol for living beings to understand dharmak¯aya, and as
such, sambhogak¯aya concretizes the indeﬁnable (Xing 2005; Williams 1989).
In the meditational realm of skilled adepts, the sambhogak¯aya enables beings to perfect their
skills and attain the reiﬁcation of dharmak¯aya and Buddhahood (Grifﬁths 1994). Thus, the intrinsic
nature of the Buddha ﬁeld and sambhogak¯aya is manifested in the mind. Chaya Chandrasekhar
(2004) explained that enjoyment bodies “are sole meditational constructs, manifested in the minds of
skilled practitioners . . . In other words, through envisioning a Buddha ﬁeld and its inhabitants, an
adept practitioner, while physically bound to earthly existence, conceptually experiences the glory
of the sambhogak¯aya and transcends ordinary space and time.” In Vajray¯ana Buddhism, in particular,
through using transformative meditation practices, the adept even becomes a sambhogak¯aya Buddha
in the highest meditational realm of Akanis.t.ha on Mt. Meru. In essence, a sambhogak¯aya Buddha
is a meditational construct that is manifest in the minds of advanced practitioners, especially in
esoteric Buddhism.
4.1. The Representation of a Sambhogak¯aya Buddha
When a Buddha (such as the historical ´S¯akyamuni) is portrayed or visualized in his human
emanation body or nirm¯an. ak¯aya, he is depicted as an unadorned ascetic wearing monastic garments.
Often, his mudr¯a refers to a particular life event highlighting his nirm¯an. ak¯aya nature. Chandrasekhar
(2004) explained that the nirm¯an. ak¯aya Buddha’s mudr¯as relate to the earthly activities completed in
order to bring living beings to enlightenment.
According to Sonam Kazi’s translation (Kazi 1989–1993) of Kün-zang Lama’s instructions, the
visual representation of a tantric, meditational, or sambhogak¯aya Buddha is presented with key
identifying traits.
The list of 13 speciﬁc characteristics for the fully developed iconography of
a meditational Buddha is listed below, and is divided into Silk Items and Jeweled Ornaments
(Huntington 2003a):
Five Silk Items:
(1)
Ribbons (ties on the crown)
(2)
Upper garment (almost never depicted)
(3)
Silk scarf (billowing behind)
(4)
Sash at the waist (often hidden)
(5)
Lower garment (dhoti)
Eight Jeweled Ornaments:
(1)
Crown
(2)
Right and left earrings (count as one)
(3)
Necklace
(4)
Two armlets (count as one)
(5)
Long and short necklaces (count as one)
(6)
Two bracelets (count as one)
(7)
Finger rings (count as one)
(8)
Two anklets (count as one)
The sculpture of a 14th century Vairocana Buddha from Western Tibet displays this fully developed
codiﬁed iconography of a sambhogak¯aya (see Figure 20).

=== PAGE 14 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
14 of 31
 
Figure 20.
Vairocana Buddha.
14th century, Western Tibet https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.
wordpress.com/2015/09/12th-c-tibet-ct-vairocana-c-a-cold-g-61-cm-albuquerque.jpg.
In Vajray¯ana or esoteric Buddhism, the ﬁve-pointed crown especially represents the ﬁve
transcendent insights (jñ¯ana) that are needed to attain all knowledge and ensuing Buddhahood. These
ﬁve qualities are personiﬁed in Buddhist iconography by the pañca (ﬁve) jina (victorious) Buddhas,
who are often depicted in a mandala.15 They are also called cosmic or transcendent Buddhas (or
sometimes dhyana Buddhas), and are generally shown wearing the silk items and jeweled ornaments of
a sambhogak¯aya. Vairocana Buddha is shown in the center of their mandala as the most important, since
he personiﬁes the transcendent insight of the full understanding of truth and reality, or the totality of
all ﬁve insights.
Moreover, when a crown on a Buddha has ﬁve points or triangular sections or ﬁve jewels around
the diadem, it especially represents the ﬁve insights of the pañca jina Buddhas, and is therefore called a
pañca jina crown (Figure 21). The crown can also depict each of the ﬁve Buddhas as well. The pañca
jina crown is an esoteric symbol of the ﬁve transcendent qualities and ﬁve Buddhas that constitute
the totality of enlightenment or Buddhahood (Huntington and Huntington 1990; Livingston 2003;
Huntington and Bangdel 2003).16 Thus, both the pañca jina Buddhas and the crown are a paradigm for
Vajray¯ana symbology, practice, and attainment.
15
The ﬁve insights are: Akshobhya = mirror-like wisdom; Ratnasambhava = equality of all things; Amitabha = discriminating
wisdom; Amoghasiddhi = perfected action; and Vairocana = full understanding of truth and reality. Each jina Buddha
presides over what is called a Buddha family or kula, each with their own color, direction, mudr¯a, symbol, and female prajñ¯a
(partner). For a detailed discussion on the pañca jina Buddhas, see (Livingston 2003).
16
An example of the pañca jina crown’s esoteric function can be seen with the Vajrasattva headdress when it is used in public
rituals in Nepal. When the practitioner places the crown on his head, he becomes puriﬁed as an adamantine being, and
transformed into the deity Vajrasattva. The practitioner can then perform the Buddhist ritual with authority and full
knowledge of the secret rites. This marks the knowledge and power that are inherent in the crown. The crown is part of
esoteric initiations as well. John Huntington suggested that, because their concept is so fundamental in Vajray¯ana Buddhism,
the jina Buddhas are inherent in every piece of esoteric art, including the ﬁve-pointed crown (Huntington and Bangdel 2003).

=== PAGE 15 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
15 of 31
 
Figure 21. Paῆca jina Crown, Tibet. https://www.himalayanart.org/items/59558/images/primary#
-55,-1300,2524,0. Copyright@ 2018 Himalayan Art Resources Inc.
Considering the representation of a sambhogak¯aya Buddha, it is evident that many of the crowned
Buddhas in the visual record from the Silk Road feature some of the primary benchmarks from
Kün-zang Lama’s list that are especially needed to distinguish them as early forms of esoteric
meditational constructs—in particular, the crown, the silk ribbons, and the jeweled ornaments. While
not all of the crowns found on the Buddha images are the ﬁve-pointed pañca jina crowns, some of them
appear to have ﬁve leaves. Regardless, the symbology of the crown creates a clear distinction between
an unadorned Buddha and a crowned one wearing jeweled ornaments.
It is possible that the elaborate cape was an early form of the upper garment listed under the
Silk Items. In a Buddhist practitioner’s context, each of the four corners of the cape represent the four
corners of Mt. Meru (or the Buddhist cosmos), and the four quarters of the worldly realm of knowledge
(Bangdel and Huntington 2003).17 This is even evident today in Vajray¯ana Buddhism, where this same
type of cape is worn by Vajrasattva priests in Nepal when they do meditations, visualizing themselves
as being on Mt. Meru at the center of a mandala (Huntington and Bangdel 2003). The cape aids in the
transformation of space and identity in Vajray¯ana practice for a yogin priest, particularly taking place
in the highest meditational realm on Mt. Meru: Akanis.t.ha.
Moreover, the moon and sun symbols appearing in the crown and on the shoulders could be
considered jeweled ornaments from the list. As Gérard Fussman (1994) pointed out, the sun and moon
symbols, especially on a crowned, tantric Buddha’s shoulders, signify his attainment of the highest
truth and Buddhahood, similar to the iconography of the crown. Both the Buddha and his teachings
emanate light and truth; similar to the heavenly symbols, they reﬂect his great power and sovereignty.
In a further contextualization of the Buddhist iconography, there is another level of interpretation
for the symbols. The emblems are found on the shoulders of many crowned Buddhas wearing the
elaborate cape, which as mentioned, symbolizes Mt. Meru. Hence, it is also possible that in Vajray¯ana
mediations, the sun and moon symbols represent the sun and moon that are visualized to circle
around Mt. Meru, aiding in the transformation of space. Therefore, the efﬁgies are most likely another
iconographic element that is chosen to reinforce the notion of the highest realm of attainment in
Akanis.t.ha on Mt. Meru. They are also symbols in yogic meditation where the sun and moon motif
represent the top chakras (Huntington and Bangdel 2003). Moreover, in Vajray¯ana Buddhism, the
emblems of the sun and moon can also symbolize the male and female principles, and are still used to
represent their union in esoteric methodology (Dasgupta 1974; Huntington and Bangdel 2003; Twist
2011).18 Thus, the visual evidence indicates that the hallmark symbols that consistently appear were
17
Mt. Meru is conceptually the center of the Buddhist world system; it not a physical place, but a conceptual one, where
almost all meditation and all levels of Buddhist attainments occur. Since every Buddha has attained highest enlightenment,
Mt. Meru symbolism is inherent in all Buddhist artworks, architecture, and practice. See (Huntington 2003c).
18
According to Shashi Bhushan Dasgupta (1974), Vajray¯ana Buddhism practiced in Nepal uses the sun and moon symbols
to express male and female. The crescent moon symbolizes the female element, and the ﬂame inside it is the male aspect,
representing their union. The union of male and female as a symbol of non-duality is an important concept in esoteric

=== PAGE 16 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
16 of 31
possibly chosen and understood at a multivalent level to convey the iconography of an early form of
esoteric sambhogak¯aya Buddha.
4.2. Textual Evidence: Transition from Cakravartin to Sambhogak¯aya
This raises the question: “What contemporary Buddhist literary evidence exists that speciﬁcally
describes the same iconography of a sambhogak¯aya?” Consequently, I examined various Buddhist
texts, such as the Mah¯avastu, the Avatamsaka S¯utra, the Mañjusr¯ım¯ulakalpa, the Guhyasam¯aja Tantra,
and the Mah¯avairocana abhisam. bodhi Tantra, looking for descriptions of crowned Buddhas and the
sambhogak¯aya nature. The dates of the texts provide a general understanding of the religious principles
and practices that were current at the time of this visual record. Although this article cannot discuss
all of the texts in detail, the premise is that there is a clear development in the texts illustrating the
iconographical conception of a crowned Buddha, which transitions from a cakravartin, and changes
to then portray a sambhogak¯aya aspect within Vajray¯ana theoretical practices. This transition includes
images of Vairocana Buddha as the archetypal sambhogak¯aya.
4.3. Mah¯avastu
The Mah¯avastu, an early Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhist text, was compiled over a long period of time, so it is
generally dated from the ﬁrst to the fourth c. (Jones 1973–1978). It is a collection of history and legends
regarding ´S¯akyamuni and other Buddhas. It is an example where magic powers and superhuman
qualities are attributed to ´S¯akyamuni in the emanation body. Adjectives such as “transcendent”,
the “king of dharma”, and “splendid in majesty” are used to describe ´S¯akyamuni (Jones 1973–1978).
Although there are references to ´S¯akyamuni as a king, he is not directly called a universal king or
cakravartin, nor is he described as wearing a crown. The term “universal king” is used throughout
the text, but it is used for the 10th stage bodhisattvas in their last rebirth as a cakravartin king, which of
course relates to ´S¯akyamuni (Jones 1973–1978). This is the text that is most commonly used to refer to
the abhis.eka ceremony or coronation associated with the iconography of a royal crown on images of
´S¯akyamuni. Hence, in the text, the ascetic ﬁgure of ´S¯akyamuni developed into a transcendent Buddha
endowed with great powers.19 The date of the text is too early for the established trik¯aya system, and
the sambhogak¯aya body theory is not mentioned or implied in the Mah¯avastu text.
4.4. Avatamsaka S¯utra (Flower Garland S¯utra)
The Avatamsaka S¯utra was begun as early as the second century, with a comprehensive rendition
existing by the early ﬁfth century (Cleary 1993). It is a Mah¯ay¯ana text that is primarily about Vairocana
(Intense Light) and spiritual experience. In addition, it is considered the precursor of later Tantras that
centered on Mah¯avairocana (Greatly Intense Light). Moreover, Shashi Bhushan Dasgupta (1974) said
that the dharmak¯aya’s cosmological and ontological meaning in this s¯utra lead to the development of
the tantric concept of the primordial or ¯Adi Buddha.
In the text, ´Sakyamuni, as a cakravartin, is no longer the primary Buddha. The new theory of
sambhogak¯aya is presented as a means to differentiate between the emanation body and the enjoyment
body, so Vairocana is described as the universal Buddha. Therefore, it has a clear description of the
dharmak¯aya as Vairocana who resides in Akanis.t.ha (the realm of the sambhogak¯aya beings), where he
is the entirety of all of the Buddha realms and teachings (Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000). It
methodologies. Perhaps the version of the crescent moon with the rosette sun on these images is an earlier prototype for
this metaphor of non-duality through the union of male and female. Pairing of male and female donors is also found with
the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi sculptures, see discussion in (Twist 2011).
19
However, the text does brieﬂy mention the name of Vairocana in relation to a universal king. It says, “Suprabhasa was
tath¯agata and a perfect Buddha when the bodhisattva Maitreya, as the universal king Vairocana, was aiming at perfect
enlightenment in the future and ﬁrst acquired the roots of goodness” (Jones 1973–1978).

=== PAGE 17 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
17 of 31
states that the universe or dharmadh¯atu realm is the Buddha, and the essence of Vairocana.20 Therefore,
when Vairocana is visualized or depicted, it is generally understood that his sambhogak¯aya nature
personiﬁes dharmak¯aya.
To indicate Vairocana’s status as a universal Buddha and early sambhogak¯aya form in the s¯utra, he
is described as an intensely luminescent light, transcendent as the sun, pervading the whole universe.
Vairocana is also described as puriﬁed by jewels and arrayed with adornments, or with marks of
greatness, so that each limb is adorned with multiple jewels (Cleary 1993). The s¯utra also contains
the “Tenth Stage of Enlightenment”, which is the stage of coronation or anointment where receiving a
crown represents the attainment of a Buddha as a symbol of all knowledge, including Vairocana.
In this s¯utra, ´S¯akyamuni is simultaneously present in several places in different forms, so at this
point, it is important to discuss the hypostasis or conﬂation of Buddhas that will be seen in later
iconography. In the text, while ´S¯akyamuni is sitting under the bodhi tree, he also ascends to the peak of
Mt. Meru in Akanis.t.ha to preach to enlightened beings. In other words, ´S¯akyamuni is Vairocana, and
they are just two different manifestations in two places. This happens in other Buddha ﬁelds (or Pure
Lands) as well. The conﬂation of two seemingly different Buddhas indicates a conscious association of
the two; therefore, the identity of a Buddha can be layered with the identity of sambhogak¯aya Vairocana.
In addition, using the Avatamsaka S¯utra and its 10th stage coronation to explain the iconography of a
crowned Buddha, some scholars argue about when and where ´S¯akyamuni can appear as a crowned
Buddha. As mentioned earlier, it is thought that crowned Buddhas represent the abhis.eka Buddhas in
Tus.ita, and that bodhisattvas should be present as other ﬁgures in the composition. Yet in this text, it is
clear that he is conﬂated with other Buddhas in other paradises, so the singular interpretation of the
crown as only related to the abhis.eka ceremony does not hold up.
Hence, by the time of this s¯utra, the royal motif of a crown and the solar symbolism is clearly
used as a signiﬁer not only for a cakravartin, but also for a sambhogak¯aya Buddha. It is obvious that the
text is no longer referring to an all-powerful or transcendent ´S¯akyamuni Buddha, but rather, a cosmic
principal of the universe: Vairocana, who is a dharmak¯aya Buddha.
There are several extant images that likely represent Vairocana in his Mah¯ay¯ana sambhogak¯aya
form that relate to this text. The colossal Buddha carved at Longmen in Honan, China commissioned
by the Empress Wu in 672–675 is identiﬁed as Vairocana. This representation of a giant Buddha is
based on the Avatamsaka S¯utra, which was popular in China at that time. His transcendent light that
emanates and pervades all things is symbolized through his ﬂaming halo and mandorla. Moreover,
the large size of the sculpture conveys the notion in the s¯utra that he has a great cosmic body as a
Universal Buddha. Both the eighth c. colossal Vairocana Buddha (Birushana) at T¯odai-ji in Japan and
the eighth c. Vairocana Buddha at T¯osh¯odai-ji (with 1000 little Buddhas in his halo) were likely based
on the same premise and s¯utra. Although missing the solar symbolism, perhaps the colossal Buddha at
Kargah, near Gilgit, is meant to represent Vairocana as the great Universal Buddha as well (Figure 22).
20
For discussion on the dharmadh¯atu in the Avatamsaka, see (Grifﬁths 1994, 122 ff).

=== PAGE 18 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
18 of 31
 
Figure 22. Colossal Buddha, seventh to eighth century. Carved into cliffs at Kargah near Gilgit.
https://explorebeautyofpakistan.com/gilgit-baltistan/gilgit-region/kargha-budhha/.
Vairocana’s early sambhogak¯aya aspect was also depicted through other forms of representation.
For example, the cave painting at Balawaste in Central Asia (seventh to eighth c.) depicts the concept
of the universal and cosmic Vairocana by painting ornaments and symbols on the body of the Buddha
(Figure 23). Vairocana even has a solar symbol on his right shoulder and a crescent moon with a
rosette on his left shoulder. Banerjee (1992) suggested that he held a crown in his hands that is no
longer present. Other images that are similar include a Vairocana Buddha painted on a banner from
Dunhuang which is now in the British Museum, and others from Farhad-Beg, Kyzyl, Karashar, and
China, some dated as early as the ﬁfth to sixth c. (Howard 1986). Thus, the textual evidence of the
Flower Garland S¯utra indicates an understanding of the sambhogak¯aya form in Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism, but
visually, the iconography of correlating images is still being formulated. Although the iconography
successfully conveys a cosmic and universal form with solar symbolism, the extant Buddhas do not
yet feature crowns.
 
Figure 23. Vairocana with crescent moon and sun symbols. Painting from Balawaste, Central Asia,
eighth c. National Museum, New Delhi, Stein Collection of Central Asian Antiquities. Photograph
courtesy of John C. Huntington. See also http://museumsoﬁndia.gov.in/repository/record/nat_del-
99-1-46-4635.

=== PAGE 19 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
19 of 31
4.5. Mañjusr¯ım¯ulakalpa
The Mañjusr¯ım¯ulakalpa (hereafter called the Mmk) is another Buddhist text that was compiled
over time and contains parts that might have existed independently at one time (Wallis 1999). It is
suggested that Mmk 4 is the oldest, perhaps dating between the second and fourth century, while the
remaining chapters are dated somewhere between the ﬁfth and seventh centuries.21 However, Glenn
Robert Wallis (1999) pointed out that it is clear that the Mmk documents a prevalent form of Buddhism
practiced by the early eighth century. This text is important not only because it introduces many new
Buddhist deities, but also because they are to be worshiped inside mandalas (sacred diagrams) through
various rituals using mantras (sacred syllables or words) and mudr¯as (sacred hand gestures), which are
all associated with Vajray¯ana Buddhist practice.22
In the Mmk, the iconography is clearly set forth where sambhogak¯aya Buddhas are described as
crowned and adorned with jewels and garments, including Mañjusr¯ı and Ratnaketu (also known as
the jina Buddha Aks.obhya). Interestingly, there is a crowned Buddha ﬁgure that is often identiﬁed as
Mañjusr¯ı (714 CE) from the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi dynasty in Gilgit that has these primary visual indicators to
create a sambhogak¯aya Buddha with the crown and jewels and silk scarfs (Figure 9).
Some scholars, such as Klimburg-Salter (1989), have attempted to use the explanation for an image
of a crowned Buddha in the Mmk mandalas as a direct correlation to a coronation or abhis.eka during
the 10th stage. Klimburg-Salter stated that transcendent ´S¯akyamuni is dressed as a king in the center
of the mandala; however, it is Ratnakatu who is named in the text as being in the mandala. It is rightly
so in Vajray¯ana Buddhism that the abhis.eka takes place in the mandala for the initiate, and there, the
initiate identiﬁes with the crowned Buddha. However, in theoretical application, it is not a nirm¯an. ak¯aya
Buddha that one visualizes for identity transfer, but rather a sambhogak¯aya crowned Buddha. Therefore,
the crowned Buddha in a mandala is best explained in the Mmk as the sambhogak¯aya nature manifesting
the body of dharma. Thus, in the Mmk, there is a standard formula developed for the iconography
of an enjoyment body Buddha, particularly with the crown, garments, and jewels that are seen in
contemporary images. It is a means of visualization and representation for the meditational construct
of a sambhogak¯aya Buddha, not nirm¯an. ak¯aya ´S¯akyamuni.
4.6. Guhyasam¯aja Tantra: (Secret Assembly Tantra)
The Guhyasam¯aja Tantra is dated by some to the third to fourth century or by others to the sixth
to seventh century, with its explanatory Tantras written in the eighth to 12th centuries (Cunningham
2003).23 It is more systematic than the Mmk with a clear classiﬁcation of the Vajray¯ana Buddhist
pantheon worshipped through mandalas, mantras, invocations, and mudr¯as. It includes the esoteric
form of Mañjusr¯ı, as Guhyasam¯aja-Mañjuvajra, and the esoteric pañca jina Buddhas with their prajῆ¯as
or female counterparts (Cunningham 2003). The Buddhas are described as wearing the fully codiﬁed
iconography consisting of the ﬁve silk items and the eight jeweled ornaments, particularly the crown, in
order to manifest their esoteric sambhogak¯aya nature.24 Moreover, Vairocana is referenced as becoming
a supreme Buddha. As quoted by David Snellgrove (1959), “At that moment, (the yogin) becomes
equal in radiance to Vairocana, (he becomes) Vajrasattva, the Great King, a Buddha, comprehending
the vara of the threefold body.”
21
Scholars debate over the dates. Although Wallis (1999) said it is early, Rob Linrothe (1999) claimed it is from the sixth to
seventh century, with later parts from the eighth century.
22
It is not within the scope of this article to argue whether this text is Mah¯ay¯ana or early Vajray¯ana. For the sake of this study,
it is considered, at least, proto-Vajray¯ana with many esoteric elements.
23
The GS tantra was originally associated with the Sarva Tath¯agata Tattva Sam. graha in the sixth to seventh c. as a supreme
uttaratantra in India.
24
For Tibetan images of Guhyasam¯aja from the 12th and 15th c., see (Huntington and Bangdel 2003, pl. 134, 135; and
Huntington and Huntington 1990, pl. 127).

=== PAGE 20 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
20 of 31
The pañca jina Buddhas in the s¯utra are also embodiments of the dharmak¯aya, and as such, they play
a fundamental role in the conception of sambhogak¯aya (Huntington 2003b).25 Iconographically, they
appear in sambhogak¯aya form and are most often depicted with the characteristic enjoyment body traits,
in particular, the pañca jina crown mentioned earlier. Two sculptures from Kashmir (seventh to eighth
c.) represent the early iconography for the esoteric group of pañca jina Buddhas (Figures 24 and 25).
Both sculptures show the ﬁve transcendent Buddhas sitting in a row upon their v¯ahanas (vehicles).
However, in these ﬁgures, only Vairocana is shown as a sambhogak¯aya Buddha with a crown, jeweled
ornaments, and silk items; the other Buddhas are unadorned. This early iconography likely sets him
apart from the others in order to mark his primary role in Vajray¯ana Buddhism as the totality of all ﬁve
insights (Snellgrove 1978). Consequently, the Guhyasam¯aja Tantra indicates a formulated iconography
for the esoteric meditational construct of a sambhogak¯aya Buddha that is also reﬂected, in part, in some
contemporary artworks from the Silk Road.
 
Figure 24. Paῆca jina Buddhas with crowned Vairocana, seventh to eighth c. Kashmir. Brass. H 14.7 cm
W. 25.6 cm. Po ta la Collection: Li ma lha khang: inventory no. 567. Red Palace, Lhasa, Tibet. https:
//himalayanbuddhistart.wordpress.com/category/all/tibet/buddhas-masculine-form/amitabha/.
 
Figure 25. Paῆca jina Buddhas with crowned Vairocana. Possible Kashmir originally, now in Ladakh,
Tibet, seventh to eighth c. Brass. Photograph courtesy of John C. Huntington.
25
Huntington (2003b) and Snellgrove (1978) explain that sambhogak¯aya jina Buddhas began with three Buddha families rather
than ﬁve, consisting of the Tath¯agata or Buddha Family (Vairocana), the Vajra family (Aks.obhya), and the Padma family
(Amit¯abha). By the fourth to ﬁfth century, the three developed into the ﬁve families, manifesting the jina Buddhas.

=== PAGE 21 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
21 of 31
4.7. Mah¯avairocana abhisam. bodhi Tantra
The Mah¯avairocana abhisam. bodhi Tantra, which is also called the Mah¯avairocana S¯utra (hereafter
called MVT), was most likely composed during the ﬁrst half of the seventh century according to
Stephen Hodge (2003), who also said that it is one of the ﬁrst fully developed extant tantras.26 In this
tantra, Mah¯avairocana is indeed a supreme ¯Adi or Primordial Buddha.27 Thus, there is a clear reference
to him as a sambhogak¯aya by describing him as blazing in light with his topknot, crown, and jeweled
ornaments (Hodge 2003). Michael Saso (1990) pointed out that in the meditation, Vairocana is wearing
the paῆca jina crown and is ﬁnely adorned. The imagery identifying Mah¯avairocana as a sambhogak¯aya
Buddha is further conﬁrmed in the eighth century commentary on the s¯utra by Buddhaguhya, where it
directly states that Mah¯avairocana is a sambhogak¯aya Buddha. In the MVT, Vairocana or Mah¯avairocana
as a transcendent Buddha not limited by time and space is also considered the universal sovereign.
Tom Kasulis (2004) explained that the universe is a manifestation of the actions and deeds of Vairocana;
thereby, this Buddha is at the core of everything in the cosmos. According to John Huntington (2003b),
the ¯Adi Buddha “who, depending entirely on sectarian teachings, is actually the Dharmakaya or is
a sambhoga kaya Buddha manifesting the Dharmakaya”. Therefore, Vairocana is the descriptor or
manifestation of dharmak¯aya (Saso 1990; Huntington 2003b).
In the MVT, it is clear from the prescribed practice and the text itself that Mah¯avairocana is a
mind-manifested being. It says, “Know your mind as it really is. That is, the supreme, full and perfect
enlightenment” (Hodge 2003). In other words, to know enlightenment is to know Mah¯avairocana.
Hodge (2003) explained that he manifests all three bodies of the trik¯aya in the tantra.28 The dharmak¯aya
is Mah¯avairocana’s mind, and since it is formless, it cannot be directly manifested. In this aspect,
he is an ¯Adi Buddha, generating the mandala of the mind. Therefore, he is an archetypal enjoyment
body Buddha and ¯Adi Buddha, and now he is worshiped and visualized through Vajray¯ana practices
(Saso 1990; Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000; Huntington 2003b). Hence, the image of a crowned
Buddha clearly evolved from the Mah¯ay¯ana universal sovereign to an esoteric conception.29
5. Crowned Buddha as ¯Adi Buddha
An ¯Adi Buddha is a primordial or supreme Buddha that is considered to be the essence of
Buddhist dharma; they are dharmak¯aya in Mah¯ay¯ana and Vajray¯ana Buddhism. Since the dharmak¯aya is
non-representational, a visual depiction of an ¯Adi Buddha is regarded as a sambhogak¯aya manifestation
(Huntington and Bangdel 2003). Some of the ¯Adi Buddhas include Vairocana, Vajrasattva, and
Vajradhatu. Vairocana, as the embodiment of dharma, is the totality of the processes of the pañca jina
Buddhas and an ¯Adi Buddha; therefore, he is the true teacher of esoteric Buddhism. In a conversation
with John Huntington in 2005, he stated, “The Vairocana concept humanizes and reiﬁes the teachings
26
The s¯utra was taken to China by the monk ´Subh¯akarasim. ha (637–735). Hodge (2003) suggested a date for the s¯utra around
640 C.E., making it a true tantra of the early phase. ´Subh¯akarasim. ha spent two years in Kashmir learning the tantra before
going to China (Huntington 1981). The tantra then made it to Japan by the early ninth c. (Snellgrove 1959). This s¯utra
features the Gharbadh¯atu mandala with Vairocana at the center, and it is used in both Shingon and Tendai Buddhism in
Japan. For a discussion of the transmission to Japan, see (Kiyota 1978, pp. 11–14).
27
Krishan (1971) and Coomaraswamy (1928) stated that N.G. Mazumder (1926–1927) suggested that the crowned Buddha is
an ¯Adi Buddha; however, Krishan said this concept did not exist until the 10th c. Hodge’s (2003) more recent study on the
MVT indicates that Mah¯avairocana was an ¯Adi Buddha.
28
Vairocana and the mandala that he manifests embody the relationship of the trik¯aya. The center of the mandala is dharmak¯aya,
then there is the sambhogak¯aya, and then on the outside, there are the nirm¯an. ak¯aya beings (Hodge 2003; Kiyota 1982).
29
Claudine Bautze-Picron (2010) discussed Figure 6 in this article and how the iconography relates to the Mah¯avairocana
abhisam. bodhi Tantra. She identiﬁed the naga ﬁgures in the base as associated with the goddess Ap¯arajit¯a in the tantra;
however, in the story, they give ´S¯akaymuni power to overcome demons while under the Bodhi tree. It is possible that this
interpretation is correct, as Linrothe (2014) pointed out, but if it relates to the image of a crowned Buddha with the cape and
the sun and moon symbols, I would think that the iconography of nagas would consistently also appear on the other images,
but it does not.

=== PAGE 22 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
22 of 31
that generate all Buddhas.” In other words, Vairocana is implied in any and every Buddha, making
him the perfect construct for the sambhogak¯aya and ¯Adi Buddha.
Vairocana in his sambhogak¯aya form can be distinguished by the silk items and jeweled ornaments.
Interestingly, in early esoteric artworks in Tibet, the iconography of the cape was used as a means to
distinguish an ¯Adi Buddha from other Buddhas (Von Schroeder 2001). For example, the four-pointed
cape is placed on a rock carving of Vairocana abhisam. bodhi (804–816 CE) at lDan ma brag in Eastern
Tibet or Kahms (see Von Schroeder 2001, Figure xxi-9). The cape was also used in later images in Tibet
to individualize the other ¯Adi Buddhas, such as Vajrasattva, Vajradhara, and Sarvavid Vairocana.
5.1. Representations of Mah¯avairocana: Bodhy¯agr¯ı Mudr¯a
The artworks depicting the concept of a universal dharmak¯aya Buddha and theoretical practice of
Vairocana as a meditational construct or sambhogak¯aya become more consistent in their iconography
by the seventh to eighth century along the Silk Road. He no longer appears solely as a luminescent,
colossal, or cosmic representation. Rather, Vairocana is depicted with the speciﬁc characteristics of a
sambhogak¯aya that are described in the MVT, such as the crown, silk items (including those tied to the
crown), and jeweled ornaments.
Moreover, the sambhogak¯aya and ¯Adi Buddha Mah¯avairocana performs the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a that
symbolizes supreme wisdom and immediate enlightenment. This mudr¯a is also called the bodh¯agr¯ı
and the bodhy¯ang¯ı mudra (ﬁst of wisdom). The bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a is formed by the index ﬁnger of
the right hand pointing upwards, while the thumb and remaining ﬁngers of the right hand make
a ﬁst. The ﬁngers of the left hand wrap around the vertical right ﬁnger. As prescribed in the
Sarva-tath¯agata-tattva-sam. graha (sixth to eighth c.) and the S¯adhanam¯al¯a for Vairocana, this mudr¯a
is speciﬁc to Vairocana, because it represents the totality of the ﬁve transcendental insights of the pañca
jina Buddhas.30 As such, Vairocana is a manifestation of the supreme or highest enlightenment of the
ﬁve (Chandra and Snellgrove 1981; Wilson and Brauen 2000). Therefore, as Chandrasekhar (2004)
explained, the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a of Vairocana is, in essence, an attribute that conveys his primary nature
as a meditational tantric Buddha.
In addition, this mudr¯a represents the union of wisdom and compassion, which is also
representative of male and female principles in esoteric Buddhism (Huntington and Bangdel 2003;
Snellgrove 1978). Therefore, it is the gesture or symbol of a promise of quick enlightenment; in other
words, it is a symbol of the rapid Vajray¯ana path. Thus, the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a denotes the highest
enlightenment held by a dharmak¯aya Buddha in esoteric Buddhism.
This iconography unequivocally identiﬁes the eighth c. sculpture of Mah¯avairocana from Kashmir
(Figure 26) and the seventh to eighth c. sculpture from Gilgit (Von Schroeder 2001, pl. 23E). There are
three similar sculptures of Vairocana from Swat, one from the seventh c. (Figure 27) and the other two
from the eighth and ninth c. (Figures 28 and 29). Another example is from Kashmir or Gilgit, dating to
the ninth or early 10th c. (Figure 30). As esoteric constructs, they all consistently wear the silk items of
the ribbons tied to the crown, a silk scarf, perhaps a sash at the waist, and the lower garment. They
also wear the jeweled ornaments, including the crown, earrings, beaded necklace, armlets, bracelets,
ring, and anklets. Thus, the iconography corresponds to Kün-zang Lama’s codiﬁed representation for
a tantric sambhogak¯aya Buddha.
30
The Sarva-tath¯agata-tattva-sam. graha is believed to have immediately followed the M¯ahavairocana-abhisam. bodhi Tantra with
a more elaborate version translated by Amoghavajra in 753. Similar to the MVT, it is a fully developed Tantra with
sophisticated practice and doctrine, using mandalas, mantras, mudr¯as, and yogin practices of transformation. It also focuses
on Vairocana, with two major mandalas: Gharbadh¯atu mandala from the MVT and the new Varjadh¯atu mandala. At the
center of the Garbhadh¯atu mandala, Vairocana performs the sam¯adhi or dhyana mudr¯a, while he performs the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a
in the Vajradh¯atu mandala (Hodge 2003). It is suggested that since the same forms of the mandalas are seen in the caves at
Ajanta around the ﬁfth c., that there must have been some form of this Tantric soteriological methodology extant at that time
(Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000).

=== PAGE 23 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
23 of 31
 
Figure 26. Mah¯avairocana in sambhogak¯aya form performing the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a, eighth c. Kashmir.
Brass. Sri Pratap Singh Museum, Srinagar, Kashmir. Photograph from Pal, Bronzes of Kashmir, pl. 37.
 
Figure 27. Vairocana in sambhogak¯aya form performing the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a, seventh c. Swat. Brass with
silver inlay eyes and copper inlay lips, 19 cm H. https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.com/
2012/10/7th-c-swat-valley-vairocana-brasssil-inlay-19-cm-rossi.jpg.
 
Figure 28. Vairocana in sambhogak¯aya form performing the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a, eighth to ninth c. Swat.
Copper alloy with silver inlay. Private collection. https://himalayanbuddhistart.wordpress.com/
category/all/swat-valley-area/#jp-carousel-15485.

=== PAGE 24 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
24 of 31
 
Figure 29. Vairocana in sambhogak¯aya form performing the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a, eighth to ninth c. Swat.
Bronze with silver inlay. 12.7 cm H. Private Collection. https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.
com/2012/10/8-9th-c-swat-valley-vairocana-bronzesil-eyes-127-cm-christies.jpg.
 
Figure 30. Vairocana in sambhogak¯aya form performing the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a, ninth to early 10th c. From
Pakistan (possibly Gilgit region). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gandharan_Buddhism#/media/File:
MET_DT5714.jpg.
5.2. Representations of Mah¯avairocana: Dharmacakra-Pravartana Mudr¯a
Some scholars have argued that a ﬁgure can only be identiﬁed as Vairocana if he is performing
the bodhy¯agr¯ı mudr¯a. However, there is another mudr¯a that acts as an iconographic signiﬁer to identify
Vairocana, although it is perhaps less known. It is the dharmacakra-pravartana mudra (Snellgrove 1978;
Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000; Von Schroeder 2001). This mudr¯a refers to the turning or teaching
of the wheel of Buddhist law. Typically, in the dharmacakra mudra, the wheel is formed by the thumb
and foreﬁnger of the right hand in front of the chest, or where the seat of the heart–mind lies, while the
index or second ﬁnger of the left hand points to the wheel. In the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a, the
right hand is creating the same wheel; however, the little or fourth ﬁnger of the left hand points to the
wheel instead (Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000).
While there are images of a Buddha using the index ﬁnger or the third or ring ﬁnger to point to
the wheel, the symbolic meaning of the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a especially relates to the use of
the fourth ﬁnger of the left hand touching the dharmacakra formed in the right hand.31 Huntington
and Chandrasekhar (2000) suggested that since a mudr¯a is a symbolic language, there is a sequential
progression counted on the ﬁngers in the mudr¯as that refers to a speciﬁc category of Buddhist teaching.
In this case, this fourth or little ﬁnger pointing to the foreﬁnger of the right hand refers to the fourth
31
For a discussion of some related images, see (Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000).

=== PAGE 25 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
25 of 31
Buddhist teaching. They suggest that this might relate to the teachings of Zhiyi, the founder of
the Tendai sect (Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000).32 Zhiyi divided ´S¯akyamuni’s teachings into
ﬁve categories. The ﬁrst category refers to the moment of ´S¯akyamuni’s enlightenment and victory
over Mara when he goes to Akanis.t.ha and teaches as Vairocana. The second teaching refers to the
First Sermon at Deer Park, or what is known as Hinay¯ana or Sravakay¯ana Buddhism. The third
category is the Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhist teachings. Since esoteric Buddhism is the last and most complex
of the Buddhist teachings, it is suggested that the fourth teaching refers to Vajray¯ana Buddhism.
Therefore, the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a is not only another means of depicting Vairocana as a
sambhogak¯aya and ¯Adi Buddha—the embodiment of dharmak¯aya—it is also another symbolic reference
to esoteric Buddhist teachings, which are the quickest and highest method of enlightenment through
Vajray¯ana Buddhism.
The dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a is known to be performed by Vairocana Buddha in the
Durgatipari´sodhana mandala in the eighth to ninth c. Ni´spanna Yogaval¯ı (Garland of Perfection Yoga)
(Skorupski 1983). In the text, Vairocana is dressed in the monastic robes of ´S¯akyamuni (meaning
he is unadorned) and performs this mudra (Von Schroeder 2001).33 Chandrasekhar (2004) explained
that the mudr¯as of Vairocana can also serve to underscore his sambhogak¯aya identity. In Buddhism, a
mudr¯a is deﬁned as a sign or a seal. It is a symbolic mark or seal of a vow to lead sentient beings to
enlightenment; therefore, it is a visual manifestation of the permanent and absolute dharma. In other
words, since he embodies the ultimate state of Buddhahood, he does not need an attribute; his mudr¯a
is his symbol or promise. As the manifestation of dharmak¯aya, Vairocana does not need the crown
and silks, since this mudr¯a also serves as a signiﬁer of his mind-manifested sambhogak¯aya nature as an
¯Adi Buddha.
It is no surprise that the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a is also found in images along the Silk Road,
such as three Buddhas from Kashmir dating to the seventh to eighth century (Figures 31–33).34 There
is one from Swat as well, although it is dated much later (see Klimburg-Salter 1982, pl. 113). As
the text describes, the unadorned Buddhas wear monastic robes and perform this mudr¯a.35 Through
the iconographic signiﬁer of the mudr¯a, they can be identiﬁed as Vairocana or Mah¯avairocana: the
quintessential enjoyment body Buddha.
32
For a detailed discussion of the Five Periods of Teaching, see (Chegwan 1983, pp. 55–61).
33
Without a complete understanding of the iconography, von Schroeder suggested that when ´S¯akyamuni made the mudr¯a, it
represented the First Sermon, but on other images, it just represented the wheel of the dharma, 118. For a further discussion
on the meaning of a mudr¯a, see (Beer 1999, pp. 149–50).
34
Examples of the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a can be found as early as the caves at Ajanta (Huntington 1981 and Snellgrove
1978). An image in Cave 4, dating to the ﬁfth century, shows a Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. The
dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a is found frequently, and remained consistent throughout West India; thereby, it is suggested
that it must be an iconographic convention based on a particular teaching (Huntington and Chandrasekhar 2000). Moreover,
in several caves at Aurangabad, especially caves 6 and 7, the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a is performed by a Vairocana
Buddha and a Maitreya Buddha, respectively. These caves date to the sixth century (Huntington 1981).
35
In addition, some of these unadorned Buddhas feature the ﬂaming jewel as a bindu on top of his merujat¯a hair arrangement
that indicates his yogic attainments and identiﬁes him as Mah¯avairocana.

=== PAGE 26 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
26 of 31
 
Figure 31. Vairocana Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. circa 725–750. India,
Jammu and Kashmir, Kashmir region, South Asia. Brass inlaid with silver. 16 × 8 1/2 × 3 5/8
in. (40.64 × 21.59 × 9.2 cm). Nasli and Alice Heeramaneck Collection (M.69.13.5). LACMA. https:
//collections.lacma.org/node/236668.
 
Figure 32. Vairocana Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. Kashmir eighth c. Gilded
bronze, British Museum (1953,0718.1) http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/
collection_object_details/collection_image_gallery.aspx?assetId=57550001&objectId=247419&
partId=1. Copyright@ Trustees of the British Museum.
 
Figure 33. Vairocana Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. 7th c. Kashmir. Brass with
cold gold and pigments from Tibet. https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2015/08/7th-
c-kashmir-shakyamuni-brasspig-232-cm-karkota-potala.jpg.

=== PAGE 27 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
27 of 31
Moreover, the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a is commonly found on the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi Buddhas (Twist
2011). Four similar Pat.ola ´S¯ahi Vairocana Buddhas dating from the seventh to eighth c. are unadorned,
wear monastic robes, and perform the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a (Figures 34–36). Interestingly,
several crowned Buddhas from the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi dynasty featuring jewelry, ﬂowing silk ribbons, a cape,
and a crescent moon with a sun, perform the same mudr¯a as well, and therefore can likely be identiﬁed
as Vairocana (Figures 5, 6, 10 and 11). In addition, a Buddha with all of the similar iconographic
emblems comes from seventh Kashmir (Figure 37), while another similar Vairocana Buddha from the
seventh to eighth c. comes from Gilgit or Kashmir (Figure 38).
 
Figure 34. Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. From a pair of painted covers from
Manuscript 3, Sam. gh¯at.a S¯utra, commissioned by Deva´sirik¯a and Atthocasim. gha, 627/628 C.E. Gilgit.
Pigment on birch bark. 9” × 3”. Museum of the Institute of Central Asian Studies at Kashmir University,
Srinigar, Kashmir. http://travelthehimalayas.com/kiki/2018/7/21/the-gilgit-manuscripts.
 
Figure 35. Vairocana Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. Approx. 675–722 C.E.
Kashmir or Gilgit. Brass with copper and silver inlay. 30.3 cm H. Po ta la Collection: Li ma lha khang:
inventory no. 1383. Red Palace, Lhasa, Tibet. https://himalayanbuddhistart.wordpress.com/category/
all/gilgit/#jp-carousel-178.

=== PAGE 28 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
28 of 31
 
Figure 36. Vairocana Buddha performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a. Commissioned by Vars.a,
645 or 654 C.E. Kashmir or Gilgit. Brass. 29 cm H. Anna Maria Rossi and Fabio Rossi Collection (88515).
https://www.himalayanart.org/items/88515. Copyright@ 2018 Himalayan Art Resources Inc.
 
Figure 37. Vairocana Buddha wearing a crown and cape with crescent moon and sun symbols
performing the dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a, seventh c.
Kashmir.
Brass with silver inlay.
Private collection.
https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2012/11/7th-c-kashmir-
shakyamuni-brasssil-inlaid-eyes.jpg.
 
Figure 38. Vairocana Buddha wearing a crown and jewelry performing the dharmacakra-pravartana
mudr¯a,
seventh to eighth c.
Gilgit or Kashmir.
Brass with silver and copper inlay.
https://himalayanbuddhistart.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2015/08/7th-8th-c-gilgit-vairocana-brasssil-
eyescop-lips-beaded-textile-2-donors-sharada-inscrip-identify-patron-bonhams.jpg.

=== PAGE 29 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
29 of 31
6. Conclusions
Overall, there is a clear pattern of deliberate core iconographic elements that recur on crowned
Buddha ﬁgures from the extant visual record of the Silk Road. On one level, the ideology could be
intended to convey the notion of a cakravartin Buddha. Yet, I suggest that scholars do not need to restrict
it to a singular interpretation. Rather, an analysis and contextualization reveals there is a multilayered
signiﬁcance to the crowned Buddha. The iconography presents a coded visual language to manifest
a transcendent form of an enjoyment body Buddha. Therefore, the crown, silk ribbons, ornaments,
and possibly the jeweled cape are iconographic signiﬁers of a sambhogak¯aya meditational construct.
Moreover, the visual and textual evidence demonstrate the potential for some of these Buddhas to be
identiﬁed as the esoteric archetypal sambhogak¯aya and ¯Adi Buddha Vairocana in Akanis.t.ha.
Thus, Vairocana can be identiﬁed not only through the sambhogak¯aya traits, but also with the two
mudr¯as that serve as attributes and identiﬁers. Both the bodhy¯agr¯ı and dharmacakra-pravartana mudr¯a
denote the highest enlightenment held by a dharmak¯aya Buddha in esoteric Buddhism, and thus convey
his primary nature as a meditational tantric Buddha. Therefore, the iconography constructs Vairocana
as a paradigm for early Vajray¯ana symbology, practice, and attainment.36 Thus, the proliﬁc examples
from the various locations along the Silk Road demonstrate a systematic form of transmission and
religious syncretism in both iconography and ideology.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest in the publication of this article.
References
Banerjee, Priyatosh. 1992. New Light on Central Asian Art and Iconography. New Delhi: Abha Prakashan.
Bangdel, Dina, and John C. Huntington.
2003.
Buddhist Cosmology:
Environment of Meditative
Transformation—Mt. Meru. In The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art. Edited by John C. Huntington
and Dina Bangdel. Chicago: Serindia Publications, pp. 66–69.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 2010. The Bejewelled Buddha: From India to Burma, New Considerations. New Delhi:
Sanctum Books.
Beer, Robert. 1999. The Encyclopedia of Tibetan Symbols and Motifs. Boston: Shambhala.
Chandra, Lokesh, and David L. Snellgrove. 1981. Sarva-Tath¯agata-tattva-sam. graha. New Delhi: Sharada Rani.
Chandrasekhar, Chaya. 2004. P¯ala-Period Buddha Images: The Hands, Hand Gestures, and Hand-Held Attributes.
Ph.D. dissertation, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Chegwan, Monk. 1983. T’en-T’ai Buddhism: An Outline of the Fourfold Teachings. Translated by The Buddhist
Translation Seminar of Hawaii. Tokyo: Daiichi-Shobo.
Cleary, Thomas, trans. 1993. The Flower Ornament Scripture: A Translation of the Avatamsaka S¯utra. Boston:
Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K. 1928. The Buddha’s c¯ud. ¯a, Hair, us.n.¯ısa, and crown. JRAS 60: 815–41.
Cunningham, Cathleen A. 2003. Guhysamaja Tantra. In The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art. Edited by
John C. Huntington and Dina Bangdel. Chicago: Serindia Publications, pp. 432–35.
Dasgupta, Shashi Bhushan. 1974. An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism, 3rd ed.Kolkata: Calcutta University Press.
Fussman, Gérard. 1994. Chilas-Thalpan et L’art du Tibet. In Antiquities of Northern Pakistan: Reports and Studies.
Mainz: Verlag Philip von Zabern, vol. 3, pp. 57–72.
Grifﬁths, Paul J. 1989.
The Realm of Awakening:
A Translation and Study of the tenth chapter of Asa˙nga’s
Mah¯ay¯anasam. graha. New York: Oxford University Press.
Grifﬁths, Paul J. 1994. On Being Buddha—The Classical Doctrine of Buddhahood. Albany: State University of New
York Press.
36
See Twist (2011) for a discussion on the Pat.ola ´S¯ahi’s and the Gilgit Manuscripts as evidence of possible early
Vajray¯ana practice.

=== PAGE 30 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
30 of 31
Hanson, Mervin Viggo. 1980. The Trik¯aya: A Study of the Buddhology of the Early Vijñanavada School of Indian
Buddhism. Ph.D. dissertation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. M¯aha-vairocana-abhisam. bodhi tantra with Buddhaguhya’s Commentary. London: RoutledgeCurzen.
Howard, Angela Falco. 1986. The Imagery of the Cosmological Buddha. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Huntington, John C. 1981. Cave Six at Aurangabad: A Tantrayåna Moment. In Kal¯adar´sana-American Studies in
the Art of India. Edited by Joanna G. Williams. Collaboration with American Institute of Indian Studies.
New Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta: Oxford and IBH Publishing Co., pp. 47–55.
Huntington, John C., and Chaya Chandrasekhar. 2000. The Dharmacakramudr¯a Variant at Ajanta: An Iconological
Study. Ars Orientalis 1: 33–39.
Huntington, John C., and Dina Bangdel, eds. 2003. The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art. Chicago:
Serindia Publications.
Huntington, John C. 2003a. Practitioner as Perfected Being: Meditations on Vajrasattva. In The Circle of Bliss:
Buddhist Meditational Art. Edited by John C. Huntington and Dina Bangdel. Chicago: Serindia Publications,
pp. 208–11.
Huntington, John C. 2003b. Vairochana and Vajradhara: Visually Communicating the Buddhist Notion of
Universality. In The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art. Edited by John C. Huntington and Dina Bangdel.
Chicago: Serindia Publications, pp. 80–81.
Huntington, John C. 2003c. Buddhist Cosmology: Environment of Meditative Transformation: Mt. Meru. In The
Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art. Edited by John C. Huntington and Dina Bangdel. Chicago: Serindia
Publications, pp. 66–69.
Huntington, Susan L., and John C. Huntington. 1990. Leaves from the Bodhi Tree: The Art of P¯ala India (8th–12th
centuries) and Its International Legacy. Seattle and London: The Dayton Art Institute in Association with
University of Washington Press.
Jones, John James., trans. 1973–1978. The Mah¯avastu. London: The Pali Text Society, Boston: Routledge and Kegan
Paul Ltd., vols. 1–3.
Kasulis, Thomas P. 2004. Shinto—The Way Home. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Kazi, Sonam T., trans. and ed. 1989–1993. Kün-zang la-may zhal-lung: The Oral Instruction of Kün-zang La-ma on
the Preliminary Practices of Dzog-ch’en Long-ch’en Nying-tig. Upper Montclair: Diamond-Lotus Publishing,
vols. 4, 5.
Kiyota, Minoru. 1978. Shingon Buddhism: Theory and Practice. Los Angeles-Tokyo: Buddhist Books International.
Kiyota, Minoru. 1982. Tantric Concept of Bodhicitta: A Buddhist Experiential Philosophy—An Exposition based
upon the Mah¯avairocana-sütra, Bodhicitta-´s¯astra and Sokushin-j¯obutsu-gi. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah. 1982. The Silk Route and the Diamond Path: Esoteric Buddhist Art on the Trans-Himalayan
Trade Routes. Los Angeles: Published under the Sponsorship of the UCLA Art Council.
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah. 1989. Kingdom of B¯amiy¯an: Buddhist Art and Culture of the Hindu Kush. Naples and Rome:
Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Krishan, V. 1971. The Origin of the Crowned Buddha. East and West XXI: 91–96.
Linrothe, Rob. 1999. Ruthless Compassion—Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Esoteric Buddhist Art. London:
Serindia Publications.
Linrothe, Rob. 2014. Collecting Paradise: Buddhist Art of Kashmir and its Legacies. New York: Ruben Museum of Art
and the Mary and Leigh Block Museum of Art, Northwestern University.
Livingston, Amy. 2003. Enlightenment Symbolized: The Five Jina Buddhas. In The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist
Meditational Art. Edited by John C. Huntington and Dina Bangdel. Chicago: Serindia Publications, pp. 90–92.
Mus, Paul. 1928. Le Buddha Paré. Son Origine Indienne. ´Sakyamuni dans le Mah¯ay¯anism moyen. Bulletin de
l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient XXVIII: 153–278.
Paul, Pran Gopal. 1986. Early Sculpture of Kashmir: Before the Middle of the 8th Century. Ph.D. dissertation,
Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Rowland, Benjamin. 1961. The Bejeweled Buddha in Afghanistan. Artibus Asiae XXIV: 20–24.
Saso, Michael. 1990. Tantric Art and Meditation: The Tendai Tradition. Honolulu and Hawaii: University of
Hawaii Press.
Schopen, Gregory. 1976. Three Studies in Non-Tantric Buddhist Cult Form. Master’s thesis, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

=== PAGE 31 ===
Humanities 2018, 7, 92
31 of 31
Siudmak, John. 2013. The Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Ancient Kashmir and its Inﬂuence. Leiden: Brill.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 1983. The Sarvadurgatipar´sodhana Tantra: Elimination of all Evil Destinies. Delhi, Varnasi and
Patna: Motilal Banarsidass.
Snellgrove, D. L. 1959. The Notion of Divine Kingship in Tantric Buddhism. In The Sacral Kingship—Contributions
to the Central Theme of the XIIIth International Congress for the History of Religions, Rome, April, 1955. Leiden: E.J.
Brill, pp. 204–18.
Snellgrove, David L., ed. 1978. The Image of the Buddha. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural
Organization, Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Taddei, Maurizio. 1989. The Bejewelled Buddha and the Mahis. ¯asuramardin¯ı: Religion and Political Ideology in
Pre-Muslim Afghanistan. South Asian Archaeology, 457–64.
Twist, Rebecca L. 2011. The Patola Shahi Dynasty: A Buddhological Study of their Patronage, Devotion and Politics.
Germany: VDM Verlag Dr. Müller.
Von Hinüber, Oskar. 2004. Die Palola S. ¯ahis: ihre Steinenschriften, Inschriften auf Bronzen, Handschriftenkolophone
und Schutzzauber—Materialen zur Geschlichte von Gilgit und Chilas. In Antiquities of Northern Pakistan: Reports
and Studies. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern, vol. 5.
Von Schroeder, Ulrich. 2001. Buddhist Sculptures in Tibet. Hong Kong: Visual Dharma Publications Ltd., vols. 1, 2.
Wallis, Glenn. 1999. The Persistence of Power: Ritual in the Mañju´sr¯ım¯ulakalpa. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Walter, Mariko Namba. 1997. Kingship and Buddhism in Central Asia. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
Watson, Burton, trans. 1993. The Lotus S¯utra. New York: Columbia University Press.
Williams, Paul. 1989. Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism—The Doctrinal Foundations. London and New York: Routledge.
Wilson, Martin, and Martin Brauen. 2000. Deities of Tibetan Buddhism: The Zurich Painting of the Icons Worthwhile to
See (Bris sku mthon ba don Ldan). Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Xing, Guang. 2005. The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trik¯aya Theory. London and
New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
© 2018 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

