# SOURCE FILE: klebanov2021_susrutasamhita_ejim12.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_B01\documents\klebanov2021_susrutasamhita_ejim12.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_1_materials (1. วัสดุศาสตร์ หมึก และการอนุรักษ์เชิงเคมี)
# PAGES: 64 | TOTAL CHARS: 157016

=== PAGE 1 ===
eJournal of Indian Medicine  Volume 12 (2021), 1–64
https://doi.org/10.21827/ejim.12.1.37385 
On the Textual History  
of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1): 
A Study of Three Nepalese Manuscripts1 
ANDREY KLEBANOV  
Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University 
Introduction 
In this article I will present first results of my study of three Nepalese manu-
scripts of the Suśrutasaṃhitā. After a critical survey of the research that has 
already been done on these manuscripts, I will provide their detailed descrip-
tions. This will be followed by a first and still preliminary glimpse at what I 
————— 
1 The paper published in this issue of eJIM is guest-edited by Anthony Cerulli, Philipp 
A. Maas and Karin Preisendanz. It is part of a series of papers that were originally
written in connection with a meeting of the Classical Ayurveda Text Study Group,
which was organized by Kenneth Zysk as the section “The Transmission of Sanskrit
Medical Literature in India” of the International Asian Dynamics Initiative Conference 
“Asian Diversity in a Global Context”, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, Novem-
ber 11–13, 2010. The preparation of the paper was at different times financially sup-
ported by the Centre for Buddhist Studies and the Centre for the Study of Manuscript
Cultures (SFB 950), both at the University of Hamburg, by the EFEO, Paris, as well
as by JSPS KAKENHI grant number 17K17835.
My thanks are due to the participants of the aforementioned meeting, and to the special 
editors of this volume of eJIM, especially Prof. Karin Preisendanz, for their sugges-
tions and improvements. I am also grateful to Dr. Kengo Harimoto for his support
throughout my study of the Suśrutasaṃhitā. Furthermore, I would like to thank Prof.
Dinesh Raj Pant and Prof. Michio Yano, who shared their expertise in the field of
Indian astronomy, and to Dr. Victor B. D’Avella, who read and commented upon a
much earlier version of this article.
The initial draft of this paper was submitted in 2013.

=== PAGE 2 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
2
call the *Nepalese version of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (SS) focusing on its structure, 
selected structural elements and a few selected elements of content. 
 
The designation “Nepalese” points not only to the place where these man-
uscripts were initially discovered, but also to the most probable area of their 
production (see Section 2 below). As I see it, these manuscripts attest to a 
peculiar line of transmission of the text or, in terms of stemmatic analysis, 
they appear to share a common ancestor (hyparchetype) or a group of ances-
tors. On this basis, I propose to speak of the *Nepalese version of the SS in 
the same way, for example, that Adriaensen et al. (1998) speak of the Nepa-
lese recension of the Skandapurāṇa or Maas (2013) speaks of Bengali and 
Kashmir groups of manuscripts of the Carakasaṃhitā (CS).  
 
This hypothesis is based on the systematic comparison of the above-men-
tioned Nepalese manuscripts with several printed editions of the text and with 
the readings (pāṭha-s) discussed in the commentaries (studied mainly on the 
basis of commonly available printed editions).2 With regard to this reference 
group (that is, to the compared textual sources of the SS), the Nepalese man-
uscripts agree in all cases of “major” divergences from this material (when 
the variant readings clearly affect or change the meaning of the text); in most 
cases of “normal” divergences (such as, for example, the use of different se-
mantically similar words, changes in the word and verse order, etc.); and even 
in the case of “minor” divergences (such as orthographical alterations, etc.).3 
It is important to stress, however, that no other manuscripts of the text, either 
from the same area or from other parts of South Asia, have been systemati-
cally included in the collation process so far.4  
 
In this way, the claim for the existence of a Nepalese version remains 
speculative, and therefore the expression “*Nepalese version” is always 
marked with an asterisk in this article. Nonetheless, it will be shown that the 
text transmitted in these manuscripts, whether specific to them or not, widely 
differs from the known printed versions, bears several distinct features, and is 
of vast importance to the study of the textual history of the SS as well as the 
history of Āyurveda in general. It is my hope that the findings presented here 
————— 
 
2 See the list of printed editions of the SS and its commentaries in the bibliography 
below. 
 
3 This gradation of variants does not claim to be complete. It is used here merely to 
provide a relative characterization of the types of variants observed in the particular 
case. 
 
4 In the preparation of this article, I have occasionally examined several further manu-
scripts of the SS and its commentaries. All of these are listed in a separate section of 
the bibliography at the end of this article. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
3 
may encourage other scholars or, in fact, myself to study further the textual 
transmission of the SS and associated texts. 
1. A Survey of Research 
In what follows, I briefly review several major publications that deal with the 
manuscripts under discussion in this article, critically examining some of the 
observations and conclusions presented in these studies.  
1.1. Hemarāja Śarman on a Sauśrutācārya 
The existence of one of the manuscripts from the Nepalese group, the young-
est available to us, H (see Section 2.3 below), was first brought to light by 
Nepālarājaguru Hemarāja Śarman, who referred to it in Śarmā (1938).5 There, 
Hemarāja raised the question of a possible redactor, or redactorial process, 
subsequent to Suśruta’s compilation of Dhanvantari’s teaching.6 Although the 
identity of these redactors (pratisaṃskartṛ) is unambiguously stated in the 
Kāśyapasaṃhitā and the Carakasaṃhitā (CS), no mention is made of them in 
the SS.7 Hemarāja thus presented his own arguments for a probable redaction 
and augmentation of the text.8 He observed that in the colophon to the first 
part (pūrvabhāga) of a certain medieval manuscript of the SS dated to Nepal 
Samvat (NS) 633 and available at his disposal,9 the work is referred to with 
————— 
 
5 The relevant passage is quoted in full in the introduction (pp. 18–19) of Jādavjī 
Trikamjī & ‘Kāvyatīrtha’ (1938 [2004]), an edition of the SS (see Section 1.2). 
 
6 According to Hemarāja’s summary in Śarmā (1938, p. 104), and in agreement with 
the traditional view on the subject, the doctrines propounded by the sages of old (such 
as Dhanvantari, Ātreya or Kaśyapa), orally or in the form of extensive works (saṃhitā-
s), were collected and systematized into a new generation of texts (tantra-s) by their 
disciples (such as Suśruta, Agniveśa or Vṛddhajīvaka, respectively). These tantra-s 
were later edited by a younger generation of scholars (such as Caraka and Dṛḍhabala 
in the case of the CS or Vyāsa in the case of the Kāśyapasaṃhitā). 
 
7 Śarmā (1938, p. 104). 
 
8 Note that in Śarmā (1938, pp. 111–112), Hemarāja rejects the identification of this 
editor with Nāgārjuna proposed by Ḍalhaṇa in his NiSaṃ at SS 1.1.2.  
 
9 That is “our” manuscript H. On the issue of dating, the reader is referred to Section 
2.3 below. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
4
the words suśrute śalyatantre.10 Yet the corresponding colophon to the Ut, the 
final sixth section of the SS, and one appended to the subsequent Sauśru-
tanighaṇṭu (SauNi) have iti sauśrute mahottaratantre [!] and sauśrutyāṃ 
saṃhitāyāṃ mahottarāyām [sic]” respectively.11 By juxtaposing these two 
colophons, Hemarāja conjectured that Suśruta himself composed only the first 
five sections of the text, while the Uttaratantra and the Nighaṇṭu were added 
by a Sauśrutācārya belonging to Suśruta’s lineage or tradition; the same 
————— 
 
10 Śarmā (1938, p. 112). These words can be translated in two ways (admittedly, without 
any substantial bearing on its meaning) by supplying different words as (1) “in the 
surgical treatise [composed by] Suśruta” (for something like *suśruta[viracite] śal-
yatantre) or (2) “in the surgical treatise [called] Suśruta[saṃhitā]” (for *suśruta[saṃ- 
hitākhye] śalyatantre). Both usages – that is, (1) and (2) – can be justified by a general 
principle referred to in the Mahābhāṣya (for example at Vārttika 3 on Aṣṭādhyāyī [A] 
1.1.45) and often cited in the commentatorial literature on poetry as padaikadeśa[gra-
haṇam] (that is, reference to a composite word by one of its parts). Note, furthermore, 
that references to both the SS and the CS with the expressions suśrute (“in Suśruta”) 
or carake (“in Caraka”) are rather commonly found in the āyurvedic literature. For an 
example of such usage see Section 3.2.2 below. Outside of the medical literature, this 
usage is attested, for example, in the twelfth-century Sanskrit poem Naiṣadhīyacarita 
(ch. 4, vs. 116 or 117, depending on the recension of the text). Here the commentator 
Cāṇḍūpaṇḍita (fl. ca. 13th c.) glosses the word suśruta with āyurvedagrantha (“a trea-
tise on Āyurveda”), and Nārāyaṇa (fl. ca. 16th c.) explains it with suśrutākhyavaidyak-
agrantha (“a medical treatise called Suśruta”). 
 
11 Śarmā (1938, p. 112) admitted the possibility to understand the nominal base sauśruta- 
(suśruta- + aṆ) as “[a treatise] of Suśruta” (in accordance with A 4.3.120: tasyedam; 
it is, perhaps, even more appropriate to recall two other meanings of aṆ described in 
A 4.3.101: tena proktam, and A 4.3.116: kṛte granthe). However, the scholar argued 
that this interpretation could not be accepted because presumably a single author of 
the colophons to all sections of the SS would not use different grammatical construc-
tions to express a single meaning. In this way, two different formulations – that is, 
suśrute śalyatantre and sauśrute mahottaratantre (along with the related sauśrutyāṃ 
saṃhitāyāṃ mahottarāyām) – should be interpreted differently as “the surgical treatise 
[composed by] Suśruta” and “the great Uttaratantra [composed by] Sauśruta”, respec-
tively. The concerned nominal base should be, therefore, understood as referring to a 
descendent of Suśruta, in accordance, e.g., with the general rule in A 4.1.92: ta-
syāpatyam (idamarthapratyayāntena sauśrutaśabdena suśrutagranthasyāpi grahaṇaṃ 
sambhavati, paraṃ purvāparabhāgayor ekanibanddhṛbhāva ekenaiva rūpeṇollekha- 
sya samucitatayā […] pūrvabhāgaḥ suśrutācāryasya, uttarabhāgas tadvaṃśyasya 
sauśrutācāryasyeti buddhāv ārohayati). 

=== PAGE 5 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
5 
author must also have revised Suśruta’s original composition (tena suśrutasya 
vaṃśyena sāmpradāyikena vā sauśrutācāryeṇa suśrutasya pūrvatantraṃ 
saṃskṛtam, uttaratantraṃ nighaṇṭubhāgaś ca yojite ity anumīyate).12  
 
The following points may be made about Hemarāja's study: 
 
(1) In order to arrive at the above conjecture, Hemarāja must have ac-
counted for the first colophon (… śuśrute śalyatantre …) to conclude all five 
initial sections of the work. One would thus expect to find it at the end of the 
Kalpasthāna (Ka), the fifth section of the SS. Nevertheless, a close examina-
tion of the actual colophons in manuscript H inspected by the Nepalese 
scholar provides a different picture. Namely, the reference suśrute śalyatantre 
is found at the end of the Sūtrasthāna (Sū), the very first section of the SS. The 
colophons to the Nidānasthāna (Ni) and to Śārīrasthāna (Śā), the second and 
the third sections of the SS, end with a generic statement: samāptaṃ 
nidāna[etc.]sthānam (“The section on etiology, etc., is concluded.”) The 
fourth section of the work, the Cikitsāsthāna (Ci), ends with a slightly ex-
tended variant of the same formula: yad uktaṃ catvāriṃśac cikitsitānīti tat 
sarvam samāptam iti (“What was referred to [in the third chapter of the Sū] 
by saying ‘[There are] 40 chapters of the Cikitsāsthāna,’ this all is concluded 
now.”). Moreover, the fifth section of the work, the Ka, actually ends with 
sauśrute śalyatantre kalpasthānaṃ samāptam (“The Kalpasthāna in the surgi-
cal treatise composed by Suśruta is concluded,” see note 11 for Hemārāja’s 
interpretation). 
 
If one were strictly to follow Hemarāja’s initial line of reasoning on the 
basis of the above observations, one would need to postulate the secondary 
character of not only the Ut and the SauNi (as summarized above),13 but of the 
Ka as well: colophons of all three sections in manuscript H use the secondary 
derivation sauśruta- with the reference to the author of the text. This assump-
tion, though not entirely improbable, would go far beyond Hemarāja’s initial 
proposal and would require further evidence, which can be provided only on 
the basis of a thorough study of the textual history of the SS. 
 
(2) Moving beyond the *Nepalese version to consider other available 
manuscript material, we encounter a situation even less favorable to 
Hemarāja’s arguments. The majority of the (sub-)colophons to other available 
manuscripts of the SS without a commentary use the formula sauśrute 
————— 
 
12 Śarmā (1938, p. 112). Cf. also HIML IA, pp. 340–341. 
 
13 It should also be noted that the colophon found at the end of the SauNi in the manu-
script discussed by Hemarāja occurs verbatim (and at the same place) in manuscript 
K (see Section 2.1), that is, in the oldest Nepalese manuscript of the SS. It must, there-
fore, reflect upon a considerably old reading of a supposed hyparchetype. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
6
nidāna[etc.]sthāne in concluding the chapters or respective sections, regard-
less of the part of the text to which these colophons belong. Most of the sub-
colophons in the manuscripts of Gayadāsa’s Nyāyacandrikā (NC), although 
not without variations, refer to the text as sauśrutaṃ śalyatantram, whereas 
the manuscripts of the Suśrutapāṭhaśuddhi mostly use the designation sauśru-
tam āyurvedaśāstram.  
 
While it may be too early for a broad statement about possible reasons for 
and impacts of this state of affairs, it seems certain that Hemarāja’s argumen-
tation, genuine as it was in its time, can no longer be maintained.  
 
(3) To conclude, it must be added that a careful examination of the colo-
phons to the Ut as well as the SauNi in both the available old Nepalese man-
uscripts shows that what Hemarāja transcribed as mahottaratantra- should be 
read as sahottaratantra- a fact already recognized by Jādavjī Trikamjī14 in his 
quote of Hemarāja’s discussion (see note 5), the improved reading of the syl-
lable sa is added in parentheses. 
1.2. Two Editions of the Main Body of the Suśrutasaṃhitā 
Fortunately, Hemarāja’s (re-)discovery did not remain unnoticed. Two edi-
tions of the SS that appeared in the same year and in the year following the 
publication discussed above, and which were co-authored by the same editor, 
made use of H. The first, Jādavjī Trikamjī & ʻKāvyatīrtha’ (1938 [2004]) (E), 
was the third in a series of revisions of the original edited by Jādavjī Trikamjī 
(1915) (based on three manuscripts), which was followed by his 1931 edition 
(based on additional nine manuscripts). This time the edition was enhanced 
by Gayadāsa’s NC on the Ni as well as by a collation of three further manu-
scripts of the SS (among these the Nepalese manuscript H). The variant read-
ings thus detected were occasionally mentioned in the footnotes.15 
————— 
 
14 In the list of references below, the first part of the name of this influential scholar–
physician (cf. Preisendanz 2018, p. 192) is variously spelled as Jādavjī, Jādavji and 
Yadavaji, and the second part — actually, the name of his father — as Trikamjī, 
Trikamji, or Trikumji. The Sanskrit title pages of the respective publications, however, 
invariably identify him as Ācāryopāhva Trivikramātmaja Yādavaśarman. In order to 
avoid confusion, throughout this article I follow the English spelling of the name in-
troduced in Jādavjī Trikamjī & ‘Kāvyatīrtha’ (1938 [2004]), the publication that I cite 
the most often. 
 
15 For a brief outline of the history of editions of the SS, see Wujastyk (2013, pp. 141–
143). 

=== PAGE 7 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
7 
 
According to the introductory remarks to the second publication, by 
Jādavjī Trikamjī and Nandakishor (1939 [2001]), which is mainly an edition 
of Cakrapāṇidatta’s Bhānumatī on the Sū of the SS, the editors examined two 
manuscripts (in addition to several printed sources): the Nepalese manuscript 
H as well as a manuscript of the Bhānumatī from the India Office, London. 
Having no access to the latter, and without the critical apparatus in the pub-
lished text, one cannot be certain about the extent to which the editors made 
use of H. It is, however, certain that readings supported by the *Nepalese ver-
sion are occasionally found in the text proposed by Jādavjī Trikamjī and Nan-
dakishor (1939 [2001]). 
 
In spite of the importance of both editions for all subsequent studies of the 
SS, it must be noted that they share two basic shortcomings. First, they fail to 
distinguish between the text of the SS (constituted according to its own man-
uscripts) and the text presupposed (that is, the text commented upon) by the 
edited commentaries. This often leads to an incongruity between the printed 
basic text of the SS proper and the text of the commentary thereupon (see, for 
example, Klebanov 2010, p. 86ff.). Second, and more importantly, they do not 
conform to the basic requirement of a critical edition: namely, they do not 
accurately present the evidence on the basis of which the proposed text is con-
stituted, that is, the readings of the manuscripts and, if applicable, parallels 
and other testimonia. The later circumstance in particular significantly limits 
the usability of these editions with regard to a text-historical study of the SS. 
1.3. The Sauśrutanighaṇṭu: A Historical Note and a Recent Edition 
It is most probable that Jādavjī Trikamjī, the individual behind a number of 
widely used vulgate editions of āyurvedic classics, upheld personal contact 
with Hemarāja Śarman. Roughly half a century later, however, another emi-
nent scholar of Āyurveda, Priya Vrat Sharma, relied on the above mentioned 
note alone when writing about the almost legendary existence of a Sauśru-
tanighaṇṭu in the introductory remarks to his widely used introduction to 
āyurvedic pharmacology.16  
 
Strangely enough, this text still retains its legendary status among āyurve-
dic scholars even after the publication of an edition by Suvedī and Tivārī 
(2000). The authors of this publication made use of both of the available man-
uscripts of the SauNi, that is, H as well as K (the oldest so far known 
————— 
 
16 Sharma (1976, p. 95f.): “It is said that in one of the manuscripts of the Suśruta Saṃhitā 
there was appended a nighaṇṭu (Hemarāja Sharma: Introduction, Kāśyapa Saṃhitā, p. 
57).” 

=== PAGE 8 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
8
manuscript of the SS, see Section 2.1), and furnished the text with extensive 
introductory and explanatory notes. These include, among other things, a de-
tailed study of the text, a tabular representation of parallel material, and a 
thorough study of the utilized manuscripts. The negative apparatus to the text 
of the edition reports all (or certainly most) of the variant readings of the man-
uscripts, and it provides the reader with parallels from other known medical 
nighaṇṭu-s. I shall refer to this book at several occasions later in this article. 
1.4. Historical Literature 
A number of publications on the history of Nepal should be mentioned in con-
nection with the study of K (see Section 2.1). The most influential ones are 
Regmi (1983) and Petech (1984).17 The colophon of the manuscript (see Sec-
tion 2.1.3.3) is usually cited as evidence for the existence of the late Licchavi 
king Mānadeva and his tentative date.18 
1.5. Three Recent Research Articles 
A recently published article by Dominik Wujastyk (2013) was in fact the ini-
tial trigger for my work on the study presented here.19 After a historical note 
on the SS and its editions, Wujastyk points towards an abundance of textual 
problems detected already by medieval commentators on the SS. Wujastyk 
emphasizes the importance of the newly re-discovered old manuscript of the 
text (K), the evaluation of which is the means “to attempt to clarify the textual 
history of the Suśrutasaṃhitā” (p. 147). The author also mentions the exist-
ence of other Nepalese manuscripts and outlines a roadmap for further text-
historical research on the SS. Following the initial submission of the present 
article (in 2013), Prof. Wujastyk has continued his scholarly engagement with 
this material. In April 2020, he initiated a four-year project at the University 
of Alberta (Edmonton, Canada) with the aim of editing, translating and stud-
ying the *Nepalese version of the SS.20 
————— 
 
17 Another two important publications are Vajracharya (1973) and Malla (2005). 
 
18 Cf., for example, Petech (1984, p. 29). 
 
19 An earlier version of the same study was published as Wujastyk (2009). 
 
20 The project “The Textual and Cultural History of Medicine in South Asia Based on 
Newly-Discovered Manuscript Evidence” is financially supported by the Social Sci-
ences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (grant no. 435-2020-1077) and the 
Singhmar Chair fund at the University of Alberta. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
9 
 
Further, two important articles were written by Kengo Harimoto (2011, 
2014), to whom I owe much of the description of the manuscripts in the fol-
lowing section. The earlier one of the two publications focuses on the study 
of several old manuscripts preserved and catalogued by the Nepal–German 
Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP) and the Nepalese–German Man-
uscript Cataloguing Project (NGMCP), respectively (see below). Among 
these, K is mentioned as the “oldest verifiably dated manuscript” of the col-
lection (Harimoto 2011, pp. 87–88) on account of its colophon, which is 
quoted and discussed. Later in the article (pp. 101–104), when discussing an 
example from the forth chapter of Suśruta’s Ka (on the classification of 
earthly snakes), Harimoto convincingly demonstrates how “[u]sing the Nep-
alese manuscripts, we can obtain a coherent classification of snakes,” and thus 
how “[t]he ancient manuscripts from Nepal help us recover a state of the text 
that it once was [in] when it was more internally consistent and coherent” (p. 
104). 
 
Harimoto’s study published in 2014 deals specifically with the three Nep-
alese manuscripts examined in the present article. It arrives at a number of 
seminal philological observations and in this way has a direct bearing on sev-
eral issues discussed here. On p. 1089 (25), for example, Harimoto analyzes 
the relationship between the concerned manuscripts and establishes that “none 
of the Nepalese manuscripts directly derive from another.” Similarly, on pp. 
1090–1091 (26–27), he demonstrates that, despite its antiquity, already the 
earliest Nepalese manuscripts (K) bears “signs of a long history of transmis-
sion,” which, among other things, “indicate the antiquity of the text.” 
2. Description of the Manuscripts 
In the following descriptions, two reference numbers are provided for each 
manuscript. The first one consists of an abbreviated name of the library in 
Nepal where the manuscript is kept and its accession number in the same li-
brary. The second number, starting with the abbreviation NGMCP, refers to 
the serial number (reel number and number on the reel) of the associated mi-
crofilm according to the catalogue of the NGMCP and its forerunner, the 
NGMPP. All three manuscripts were made available to me by the NGMCP in 
the form of digital scans of their black-and-white microfilms. In the case of 
NGMCP C80/7, however, an additional set of recent high-resolution digital 
colour photos was my main source of reference. During the final stage of 
preparation of this article I also had the opportunity to visit Nepal and briefly 
examine directly manuscripts K (see Section 2.1) and H (see Section 2.3). 

=== PAGE 10 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
10
2.1. KL 699 (NGMCP C80/7), Siglum K21 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: KL 699, fragment of fol. 14v (Sū 14). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: KL 699, fragment of 69v. 
 
Figure 3: KL 699, fragment of 12v: Ci 19 (?). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: L 699, fragment of 91v. 
 
 
————— 
 
21 A catalogue entry of the NGMCP can be found here: http://catalogue-old.ngmcp.uni-
hamburg.de/mediawiki/index.php/C_80-7_Suśrutasaṃhitā (accessed January 12, 
2021). It should be noted that thanks to the efforts of both the NGMCP teams in Kath-
mandu and Hamburg, this manuscript has been recently included in the “Memory of 
the World” register of the UNESCO. See http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communica-
tion-and-information/memory-of-the-world/register/full-list-of-registered-heritage/regis-
tered-heritage-page-8/susrutamhita-sahottartantra-manuscript/ (accessed on January 12, 
2021) for further details. 

=== PAGE 11 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
11
2.1.1. Physical Description 
This is an incomplete and partly damaged palm-leaf manuscript written in the 
so-called transitional Gupta script, comprising 152 folios. The size of the fo-
lios is 53.5 x 4.4 cm, and each folio has two string holes. The text on each 
folio extends over six to eight lines. Letter numerals are found on the left 
margin of each verso leaf. 
2.1.2. General Description 
This manuscript belongs to the Kaiser Shamsher library (KL), Kathmandu22 
and, as noted in Sections 1.2.4–5, was already referred to by a number of 
scholars. KL 699 (see Figures 1 to 4) comprises no less than four different 
codicological units.23 All of these can be distinguished from each other on the 
basis of text-external features, such as the shape and size of the letters (akṣara-
s), number and arrangement of lines on a folio, and the style of foliation (for 
example, horizontal foliation as in Figure 2 versus vertical foliation as dis-
played in Figure 1).24 
 
All codicological units, separately and together, are fragmentary. They 
cover parts of the Sū (≈ 1–31),25 a fragment of Ni 16, portions of the Ci (≈ 
part of Ci 2 and from Ci 19 onwards), contain almost the complete text of Ka 
and Ut, and include one of the highlights of the *Nepalese version of the SS, 
namely, the text of the SauNi, of which one folio is missing. The codicological 
unit shown in Figure 3 is extant in only two folios and comprises the text 
roughly identifiable as part of Ci 19–24. At present, no text-overlap between 
different units has been observed.26 One might wonder whether at some point 
this bundle was deliberately compiled (possibly by the curators of the KL col-
lection or by a student of the SS) from the remains of several manuscripts, or 
whether it was initially copied by several scribes each in his own style. 
————— 
 
22 On Kaiser Shamsher and his library, see Dimitrov & Tamot (2007). 
 
23 For a succinct definition of the term “codicological unit” often used in the present 
article, the reader is referred to Friedrich & Schwanke (2016, p. 8), who also provide 
further bibliographical references. A fuller treatment of the same concept with a focus 
on South Asian manuscripts is given in Formigatti (2011, p. 29ff.). 
 
24 By means of an examination of the ornate symbols used in the manuscripts Bhattarai 
(2019) has confirmed the hypothesized number of codicological units. 
 
25 All references to passages of the SS in this article follow E unless otherwise stated. 
 
26 There is, however, an overlap in the folio numbers between the unit represented in 
Figure 1 and the one in Figure 2. 

=== PAGE 12 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
12
2.1.3. Auspicious Scribal Phrases, Colophon and Dating Issues 
2.1.3.1. Auspicious Scribal Phrases 
The scribe’s maṅgala (auspicious phrase, usually an invocation of a deity)27 
found in the beginning of folio 1v of K reads: [SIDDHAM]28 namaḥ kama-
lahastāya, “[SIDDHAM] Obeisance to Kamalahasta.” 
 
Even if the name Kamalahasta, that is, “[the deity holding a] Lotus in the 
Hand,” can be attributed to both Buddhist and non-Buddhist deities,29 it seems 
most natural, in the context of medieval Nepal, to interpret it as a synonym of 
the more common Padmapāṇi, a widespread byname of the Bodhisattva Ava-
lokiteśvara.30 
 
The text of the SauNi is preceded by [SIDDHAM] namaḥ sarvajñāyānut-
taravaidyarājāya “[SIDDHAM] Obeisance to the Omniscient One, the Un-
surpassed King of Doctors.” Here too, the attribute of the invoked deity (“om-
niscient”) as well as its imagery as the “Unsurpassed King of Doctors” clearly 
point towards a Buddhist affiliation of the scribe.31 
2.1.3.2. Colophon and Dating32 
Notably, the final colophon of the manuscript (209v ll. 5–7), which records 
the date and the circumstances of its production, is found not at the end of the 
whole manuscript (that is, after the text of the SauNi), but at the end of what 
the scribe, or one of his predecessors, may have thought the main body of the 
text was — namely the Ut, the sixth and the last section of the SS. Nonetheless, 
————— 
 
27 Cf. Minkowski (2008). 
 
28 This is my transliteration (in following Harimoto 2014) of the so-called Siddham sign, 
an auspicous symbol often found in Buddhist manuscripts and in manuscripts from 
Nepal in general (see, for example, Roth 1986 and Sander 1986).  
 
29 Cf. several occurrences of this name in Śaiva Tantric and Purāṇic contexts in the text 
databases of GRETIL (http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil.html, accessed Sep-
tember 26, 2020) and Muktabodha (https://etexts.muktabodha.org/digital_library.htm, 
accessed September 26, 2020). 
 
30 Cf., for example, Hodgson (1829), La Vallée Poussin (1917), etc. 
 
31 For a discussion of the use of medical metaphors in Buddhist literature in general and 
in connection with the bynames of the Buddha in particular, see Klebanov (2010, p. 
4ff.).  
 
32 I want to thank Prof. Diwakar Nath Acharya (abbreviated as DA in the apparatus), the 
participants of the conference section in Copenhagen mentioned in note 1 above, and 
the editors of this volume for their invaluable help in reading and interpreting the col-
ophon. 

=== PAGE 13 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
13
the concluding colophon of the Ut (and, in fact, of the whole SS) that imme-
diately precedes the scribe’s final colophon makes an explicit reference to the 
following text of SauNi: samāptaṃ caidaṃ sahottaratantram ity ato nighaṇṭur 
bhaviṣyati, “And this treatise together with the Uttara[tantra] is concluded. 
Hereafter will come the Nighaṇṭu.” 
 
In contrast to common practice, in the following I give an edited text of 
the colophon rather than its transcription. This should facilitate the discussion 
of its meaning as well as highlight the differences between readings of the 
same text proposed in several publications.33 
2.1.3.3. Colophon of KL 699 (fol. 209v) 
 
 
rājñi34 śrīmā35nadeve pṛthusitayaśasi prodyadinduprakāśe 
 
kāle puṇyārjanasya sakala36janamanohlādiramye37 vasante38 | 
 
varṣe caikottare39 ’smiṃs tritayaśatagate mādhave māsi śukle 
 
saptamyāṃ puṣya-ṛkṣe daśaśata40kiraṇe vāsare siddhayoge || 1 ||41 
 
utpattyādyambuvelākulavividharuja42grahajuṣṭā43tiraudre 
 
saṃsāre sāgare ’smiñ jagad idam akhilaṃ glāninam sampravīkṣya | 
————— 
 
33 In the following critical apparatus, Petech stands for Petech (1984, p. 29), Suvedī & 
Tivārī for Suvedī & Tivārī (2000, pp. 12–13), and Vajracharya for Vajracharya (1973, 
p. 599). For a short list of other symbols and abbreviations used in the text-critical 
notes, the reader is referred to the tabular listing at the end of this article. The abbre-
viation “conj. DA” refers to conjectures suggested to me by Prof. Diwakar Nath 
Acharya in an email message of December 17, 2012. 
 
34 rājñi] KPC Petech, Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya; śrījñi KAC (<śrī> has been deleted 
and <rā> written instead. One can, however, still recognize the shape of the originally 
written akṣara.). 
 
35 °mā°] Petech, Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya; damaged in K. 
 
36 sakala°] Petech, Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya; sakala° KPC (<la> is added in the 
lower margin, perhaps by the first hand); saka° KAC. 
 
37 °hlādiramye] K Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya; abhiramye Petech.  
 
38 vasante] Petech, Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya; partly damaged in K. 
 
39 caikottare] K Petech, Suvedī & Tivārī; caikottara° Vajracharya. 
 
40 daśaśata°] KPC (<śa> added in the lower margin); daśata° KAC. 
 
41 The transcription in Petech (1984) ends here. 
 
42 °ruja°] K; °rujā° Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya. 
 
43 °juṣṭā°] K Suvedī & Tivārī; lacuna in Vajracharya. 

=== PAGE 14 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
14
 
tasmāc chrīharṣacandro nirati44śayaghṛṇābhāvito45 moktu46kāmaḥ 
 
prītyā cai° − ∪ − − ∪ ∪ ∪ ∪ ∪ ∪ °taṃ prālikhat47 suśrutākhyam  || 2 ||48 
śrīgaṇadevadevakuladūnī49gvalakanivāsino vaidyavasuvarmaṇaḥ pusta- 
kam idaṃ paṭhitvārtham avagamya sarvasattvānām upadeśaṃ vidhātuṃ50 
pratipāditam, atas tad ādhi 51 krayābhyāṃ tadgotrajena kenacin na 52 
kañcid53 dātavyam | yadā nopakriyate tadāsmān eva54 pratyarpanīyam iti || 
 
When Śrī Mānadeva, with his extensive and bright fame brilliant like the 
rising moon, was the king,55 at the time of bestowing merits, in spring, 
pleasing the minds of all the people and being delightful [to them], in the 
year 301 in the bright half of the month of Vaiśākha, on [its] seventh day, 
in the constellation of Puṣya, on a Sunday, in the Siddhi yoga, after seeing 
this whole world exhausted in this ocean that is worldly existence, ex-
tremely violent with its waters agitated by the tides that are birth, etc. (that 
————— 
 
44 °ndro nirati°] conj.; °ndro nnirati° K °ndrān nirati° Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya. 
 
45 °bhāvito] K Vajracharya; °bhāvino Suvedī & Tivārī. 
 
46 moktu°] K Vajracharya; mokṣa° Suvedī & Tivārī. 
 
47 prālikhat] conj., Vajracharya; prālikhaṃ Suvedī & Tivārī; prākhilat K. 
 
48 The metre is sragdharā. 
 
49 °dūnī°] K; °dūrī° Suvedī & Tivārī, Vajracharya. 
 
50 The transcription in Vajracharya (1973) ends here. 
 
51 ādhī°] K; adhi° Suvedī & Tivārī. 
 
52 tadgotrajena kenacin na] conj. DA; tadgotrajena cin na K; lacuna Suvedī & Tivārī. 
 
53 kañcid] conj. DA; kaścid K Suvedī & Tivārī. 
 
54 tadāsmān eva] conj. DA; tadāsmad eva K; lacuna Suvedī & Tivārī. 
 
55 This translation of the absolute construction in the first quarter of the verse was sug-
gested to me by the participants of the conference section “The Transmission of San-
skrit Medical Literature in India” (see note Fout! Bladwijzer niet gedefinieerd.). It 
involves the addition of an omitted present participle sat, “being,” or a similar word 
(that is, mānadeve rājñi [sati]). This is necessary because according to A 2.3.37 (yasya 
ca bhāvena bhāvalakṣaṇam), a rule that describes this construction, the locative end-
ings are added “after a stem whose implied action characterizes another action” 
(Sharma 1995, p. 142). The only other action found in the concerned verse quarter is 
expressed by the present participle pra-ud-yat-, the first member of the bahuvrīhi com-
pound prodyadinduprakāśe. An alternative absolute construction related to this activ-
ity could therefore be translated as “When the brilliance of King Mānadeva, whose 
fame was extensive and bright, was rising like the [brilliance of the] moon” (or, more 
literally: “when […] Mānadeva […] was such, whose brilliance was rising like […] 
the moon”). 

=== PAGE 15 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
15
is, the life cycle), and being inhabited by different sea-monsters that are 
the diseases, Śrī Harṣacandra, therefore filled with unsurpassed compas-
sion and wishing to liberate [living beings] with great joy [...] copied [this 
book] that is called Suśruta[saṃhitā]. 
This manuscript of Vaidya Vasuvarman, who lives in [the area of] the 
temple56 [constructed for (?)] Śrī Gaṇadeva, was given [to him] to distrib-
ute the teaching to all living beings after [he] has studied and understood 
its meaning. Hence, it should not be given to anyone else by anyone be-
longing to his family either as a pawn or for sale. When it is not used 
anymore, then it should be returned to me. 
 
The date mentioned in the first sragdharā verse is verified for Sunday, April 
13, AD 878 and, in the words of Harimoto (2011, p. 88), “[t]here are contro-
versies regarding the origin of the era, but there is an agreement as to which 
date this points to, thanks to the mention of Sunday in this colophon.”  
 
Due to the lacuna caused by damage to the palm-leaf at the end of the 
second verse, as well as several linguistic and codicological difficulties in 
reading the colophon, the exact circumstances of this manuscript's production 
and the roles of the individuals mentioned in it remain unclear to me.  
 
Suvedī and Tivārī (2000, pp. 13–14) suggest that the name of the scribe 
was written in the damaged part of the manuscript and is now therefore lost. 
This explanation goes along with their reading of the crucial second half of 
the second verse: Instead of the nominative construction in the third quarter, 
chrīharṣacandro nniratiśayaghṛṇābhāvito they read an ablative construction 
chrīharṣacandrān niratiśayaghṛṇābhāvino (cf. notes 44 and 45), and instead 
of the imperfect third person singular form prālikhat in the last quarter, they 
read prālikham, which is the first person singular form of the same verb (cf. 
note 47). To begin with, the characters ta and na, found here at the end of the 
attributive compound beginning with niratiśaya-, can hardly be distinguished 
in the given script. The reading of the ligature ndro as ndrā,57 on the other 
hand, must have been proposed by the two scholars in order to explain the 
doubling of n at the beginning of the following word nniratiśaya-. Adopting 
————— 
 
56 Here Diwakar Nath Acharya (personal communication by email of December 2012) 
noted that from the context of other uses, we know that the non-Sanskritic gvala al-
ways denotes some kind of temple. It is not clear, however, what the meaning of dūnī 
may be. 
 
57 Compare the ligature under consideration 
 (209v6) with a ndro 
 (5v3) and a 
ndrā 
 (6r4) of most probably the same codicological unit. 

=== PAGE 16 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
16
an alternative line of reasoning, I take the gemination of n as a wrong appli-
cation of sandhi rules. The readings of both prālikhat and prālikham are, fur-
thermore, conjectured from prākhilat found in the manuscript. In my view, a 
simple metathesis from likhat to khilat is more probable to have taken place 
than a more complex scenario involving the corruption of likham into khilat. 
Unfortunately, the editors do not furnish us with any theory concerning the 
role of Śrī Harṣacandra in the preparation of the manuscript. An ablative con-
struction could be understood, however, as “on command of Śrī Harṣacan-
dra.”  
 
I believe, following my translation above, that the situation could hypo-
thetically be established as follows: Śrī Harṣacandra either sponsored the cop-
ying enterprise or wrote the manuscript himself (see below). He donated it to 
Vaidya Vasuvarman on the condition that he (Vasuvarman) would study the 
text and explain it to others. The second condition was that the manuscript 
should remain in the family and not be given away either for sale or as a pawn. 
If the manuscript sat unused, it should be returned to Śrī Harṣacandra.58 
 
The abundance of scribal errors in the otherwise sophisticated colophon 
seems, furthermore, to suggest a scenario in which a third person (a pandit 
different from the scribe) was commissioned to compose it. The scribe subse-
quently added this person’s words (possibly dictated to him) at the end of the 
manuscript and in the course of this introduced several textual corruptions. 
The involvement of a third person, as author of the elaborated verse colophon, 
makes the following proposition of Diwakar Nath Acharya seem rather plau-
sible to me.59 According to his suggestion, the verbal form prālikhat should 
be contextually understood as simplex pro causativo (as in the English expres-
sion “king so-and-so built this palace”).60 It seems that such a construction can 
be justified with reference to an important or wealthy person acting either as 
————— 
 
58 With respect to Vaidya Vasuvarman, Suvedī and Tivārī (2000, p. 13) write that it can 
not be established with any certainty wether he was the writer or merely the owner of 
the manuscript. 
 
59 Personal communication in December 2012. 
 
60 In Pāṇinian terminology, this is called antarbhāvitaṇyartha- (see, for example, Kāśikā 
on A 1.3.84 and 3.2.95) or antarbhūtaṇijartha- (Vākyapadīya 3.7.73). Roodbergen 
(2008, p. 33) translates the former term as “having causative meaning which is implied 
/ caused to be inside.” One of the examples given in the Mahābhāṣya (Kielhorn 1983, 
p. 33) as well as in Vākyapadīya 3.12.24 is pañcabhir halaiḥ kṛṣati (“he plows with 
five ploughs”), which amounts to pañcabhir halaiḥ karṣayati (“he makes [five people] 
plow with five ploughs”). 

=== PAGE 17 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
17
a sponsor or patronizing the production of the manuscript in any other way.61 
Alternatively, it is still possible to understand the verbal form prālikhat in the 
straightforward sense as “he wrote,” and thus consider Śrī Harṣacandra as the 
scribe of the manuscript. 
2.2. NAK 1/1079 (NGMCP A 45/5(1) = A 1267/11(2)), Siglum N62  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: NAK 1/1079, fragment of 1v. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: NAK 1/1079, last folio (65v, numbered as 40v). 
2.2.1. Physical Description 
This is an incomplete and partially damaged palm-leaf manuscript written in 
a variety of the Newari script. It contains 65 folios, 56 x 5cm in size, with two 
string holes each. There are ca. 7 lines of text on each folio as well as figure 
numerals (digits) in both margins of every verso. 
 
 
————— 
 
61 As suggested by the editors of this issue of eJIM, this analysis may result in the neces-
sity to reinterpret the date given in the colophon. This date may consequently refer to 
the time when Harṣacandra issued his order, donated money, etc., for the writing of 
the manuscript, and not to the time of its completion. Yet, while this reinterpretation 
is not absolutely compelling (as in the example “this palace was built by king so-and-
so in the year so-and-so”), it is nonetheless worth consideration.  
 
62 A catalogue entry of the NGMCP can be found here: http://catalogue-old.ngmcp.uni-
hamburg.de/mediawiki/index.php/A_45-5_(Suśrutasaṃhitā) (accessed January 12, 
2021). 

=== PAGE 18 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
18
2.2.2. General Description 
This manuscript belongs to the collection of the National Archives, Kath-
mandu (NAK). It consists of a single codicological unit and contains the com-
plete text of the Sū and Ni. The text suddenly breaks off in the middle of a 
leaf at a sentence identifiable as Śā 2.35 (see Figure 6). There is no indication 
whatsoever of the nature of circumstances that could have prevented the 
scribe from completing his work. There is a lengthy passage omitted in Sū 21 
where the scribe (or one of his predecessors) might have skipped one side of 
a folio in the exemplar. 
2.2.3. Auspicious Scribal Phrases, Colophon and Dating Issues 
The manuscript starts with a felicitation of all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, as 
well as the Buddhist sage Nāgārjuna: [SIDDHAM] namaḥ sarvabuddha- 
bodhisatvebhyaḥ | namo nāgārjunāpādāya, “[SIDDHAM] Obeisance to all the 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Obeisance to the venerable Nāgārjuna.” 
 
Due to its abrupt ending, N lacks a colophon or any mention of a date or 
place of copying. On the basis of palaeographical features, I conjecture that it 
is younger than K (see Section 2.1) and older than H (see Section 2.3) and that 
it was most likely produced in Nepal.63 
2.3. NAK 5/333 and 5/334 (NGMCP B 29/19 and B 30/15), Siglum H64 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: NAK 5/333, folio 1v. 
 
 
————— 
 
63 Based on my still limited experience with Nepalese manuscripts, I estimate that N 
could have been produced some time during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. This 
impression was confirmed by Prof. Yuko Yokochi and Prof. Somdev Vasudeva (per-
sonal communication, April 2018), two senior scholars with considerable experience 
on the field of Nepalese codicology. 
 
64 A catalogue entry of the NGMCP can be found here: http://ngmcp.fdm.uni-ham-
burg.de/mediawiki/index.php/B_29-19_Suśrutasaṃhitā (accessed January 12, 2021). 

=== PAGE 19 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
19
There is some confusion as to whether the above accession numbers refer to 
one manuscript or two.65 The microfilm of manuscript NAK 5/334 (NGMCP 
B 30/5, taken on October 18, 1970) comprises about one sixth of the folios 
(parts of the Ut and the SauNi) already microfilmed as NGMCP B 29/19 two 
days earlier (on October 16, 1970), referring, however, to manuscript NAK 
5/333. The folios seen on the former microfilm are furthermore disarranged 
and the microfilm is of notably worse quality. I was able to match all folios 
filmed on B 30/15 with those of B 29/19. Thus, there can be no doubt about 
the identity of the actually filmed leaves. At the same time, on the older title 
cards of the NGMPP, NAK 5/334 (B 30/15) and 5/333 (B 29/19) are reported 
to have different physical dimensions (29.5 x 4.5 cm and 34 x 5 cm, respec-
tively). This circumstance probably misled Suvedī and Tivārī (2000, p. 4f.). 
On the one hand, they rightly observe that “these manuscripts” are not only 
identical in the number of lines and akṣara-s per line on individual folios, but 
also share exactly the same omissions as well as corrections; on the other 
hand, they state that in a few places there is some difference as far as the 
correction of errors and the readability of akṣara-s are concerned. Thus, they 
reason that NAK 5/334 (their ga) must be older than 5/333 (ka). This conclu-
sion is best explained as an erroneous superimposition of the notion of a mi-
crofilm on that of a manuscript (sūkṣmacchavicitra and grantha in the authors’ 
terminology). 
 
My visit to the National Library, Kathmandu, in the fall of 2013 revealed 
another puzzling fact. Namely, the manuscript bundle kept under the acces-
sion number NAK 5/334 consists of nothing but laminated black-and-white 
photocopies of several disarranged folios of the manuscript numbered NAK 
5/333. Neither the reasons for this strange substitution nor its circumstances 
could be recovered by the employees at the archives, who would hardly be 
able to recollect the state of affairs in the 1970s. 
2.3.1. Physical Description 
This is a well-preserved and almost complete palm-leaf manuscript from 
which only several folios of the Ut are missing. It is written in a variety of the 
Newari script. It contains 435 folios that are 34 x 5cm in size, with one string 
hole in the middle of each folio. There are approximately 6 lines per folio as 
well as two types of folio numbering on each verso: (1) figure numerals (dig-
its) are found in the right-hand margin, which give the “absolute” number of 
the folio in the manuscript, whereas (2) the letter numerals in the left-hand 
————— 
 
65 A short discussion of this issue is also found in Harimoto (2014, p. 1092 [27], n. 2). 

=== PAGE 20 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
20
margin restart at the beginning of every sthāna. Starting from folio 21 of the 
Ka (folio 344 according to the numbering in the right margin), the letter nu-
merals are prefixed with kalpaḥ and later on, from the first folio of the Ut 
onwards, with uttara. Many folios in the Ut lack the figure numbers as well 
as the prefix uttara. The folios of the SauNi are foliated with letters in the left-
hand margin and figures in the right-hand margin, both starting at number 
one. 
2.3.2. General Description  
NAK 5/333 stems from the private collection of the above-mentioned Nepa-
lese pandit Hemarāja Śarman (fl. 1878–1953). Soon after Hemarāja’s death, 
the entire collection was acquired by His Majesty the Government of Nepal 
and has been kept since then in the National Library of Nepal.66 H contains a 
complete text of all six sthāna-s of the SS as well as the text of the SauNi.  
 
Among the disordered folios of the Ut we find a folio with a short alchem-
ical text called Gandhakakalpa attributed to Nāgārjuna.67 The script, the ar-
rangement of lines, and the shape of individual akṣara-s in the Gandhakakalpa 
suggest its close relationship to the folios of the main codicological unit as far 
as their place and time of production are concerned. Whether the texts of the 
SS and the Gandhakakalpa originally constituted a multiple-text manuscript 
or were put together at a later point remains unclear. 
2.3.3. Auspicious Scribal Phrases, Colophon and Dating Issues 
The scribe’s benedictory invocation at the beginning of the manuscript reads: 
[SIDDHAM] [OM] namo dhanvantaraye, “[SIDDHAM] [OM] Obeisance to 
Dhanvantari.” 
 
Noteworthy is the scribal benediction that precedes the text of the SauNi. 
It is identical with the one found at the beginning of the SauNi in K (see Sec-
tion 2.1.3.1). Given the rare character of the addressed deity in the Nepalese 
manuscripts,68 this fact may suggest a link between the two manuscripts, or, 
in fact, the portions containing the text of the Nighaṇṭu. At the same time, as 
————— 
 
66 Cf. Dimitrov & Tamot (2007, p. 33). 
 
67 See the NGMCP catalogue entry for the transcript of the Gandhakakalpa (see note 
64).  
 
68 I was unable to locate any other instance where a scribe would pay homage to an 
anuttaravaidyarāja (“unsurpassed king of doctors”) in the online catalogue of the 
NGMCP (accessed September 17, 2015). 

=== PAGE 21 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
21
neither my own research (Klebanov 2010, pp. 77ff.) nor the study undertaken 
in Harimoto (2014, p. 1089) could determine any linear connection between 
any of the Nepalese manuscripts of the SS, one may assume that this invoca-
tion goes back to an older common ancestor of both of the manuscripts K and 
H. 
2.3.4. The final Colophon to NAK 5/333-334 (H nighaṇṭu 24v) 
The concluding colophon is found at the end of the manuscript after the text 
of the SauNi. The reading of the date, however, is uncertain.  
 
 
varṣe ’nalāṅga69rasage nabhakālapakṣe 
 
viśve tithau dinakare divase gurau bhe | 
 
dhīro nighaṇṭum iha kāmaladattir eṣa 
 
vaidyo lilekha asuko ’marasiṃhako nu ||70 
 
In the year 3(anala)-6(aṅga)71-6(rasa)72 in the dark half of the month 
Nabhas (= Śrāvaṇa)73 on the 13th tithi, on a Sunday, in the nakṣatra 
Puṣya, 74 this intelligent son of Kamaladatta, 75 this 76 doctor Amara-
siṃhaka, has copied here the Nighaṇtu. 
 
————— 
 
69 ’nalāṅga°] HAC; ’nalāgni° HPC; ’nalāṅka° Suvedī & Tivārī (2000, p. 15). 
 
70 The metre is vasantatilaka. 
 
71 The translation of the second number changes according to the different readings that 
may be adopted: 3 (agni), 6 (aṅga), or 9 (aṅka).  
 
72 My translation lacks any explicit rendition of the final member of the compound 
anala-[…]-rasaga, namely, -ga. In my interpretation of the colophon, -ga does not 
bear any distinct semantic value (similar to, e.g., -gata or -stha that can be often found 
in a similar position.) A more literal translation of the concerned compound could read 
approximately “in the year being / abiding [in the count] …” (cf. PWT’s entry for ga: 
“(von gam) adj. [...] 2) =gata sich befindend, befindlich; von der Stellung der Ge-
stirne”). It is, however, also possible to interpret -ga in a different way as “ongoing” 
(as opposed to “expired”).  
 
73 For this identification, see Pingree (1978, p. 535). 
 
74 The words gurau bhe literally mean “the nakṣatra [associated with] Jupiter (guru, i.e., 
Bṛhaspati)”. A table of correspondances between nakṣatra-s and associated deities can 
be found in Pingree (1978, p. 535). 
 
75 kāmaladatti is a patronymic formation from kamaladatta taught in A 4.1.95 (ata iñ). 
 
76 Within the Pāṇinian system of grammar, the uncommon word asukaḥ is justified as 
the nominative singular of the secondary pronominal base *adakas- formed by the 

=== PAGE 22 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
22
 
 
Figure 8: A fragment of the final colophon of NAK 5/333-334 (H nighaṇṭu 24v). 
 
There are several diverging opinions concerning the identification of the date 
given in the colophon. In the following, I furnish my current understanding of 
the matter and present several alternative analyses.  
 
(1) According to my current understanding, I adopt the reading anala(3)-
aṅga(6)-rasa(6). On paleographical grounds, to begin with, this reading 
seems most likely to be the original one (ante correctionem), that is, to be the 
reading of the manuscript before the secondary addition of the post-consonan-
tal i and a correction of the consonant ligature (see Figure 8). As far as the 
computation of the date is concerned, I adopted the following procedure: 
Given that the years recorded according to the Nepāla (or Nevāra) era (Nepāla 
Saṃvat, NS) start with the month of Kārttika, “in order to obtain the current 
(northern) Vikrama year, we must add to the expired years of the Nēwār era 
[…] 938, when a date falls within any of the seven months from Chaitra to 
Āśvina.”77 Thus, remembering that “Hindus, during the middle ages, were in 
the habit of dating their documents in expired years,”78 we obtain NS 663 + 
938 = VS 1601 (current). Accepting, furthermore, that in the case of Nepāla 
years “the scheme of the months is the amānta-scheme,”79 with the help of 
Pancanga,80 one can arrive at Sunday, July 29, AD 1543.81 For the given date, 
————— 
addition of the taddhita affix akAC to the pronominal base adas- (A 5.3.71). Further 
morphological changes, which are triggered by the addition of sU, the general case 
ending of the nominative and vocative singular, are described in A 7.2.106 (a[d-
>s]akas+sU) and A 7.2.107 with Vārttika 1 (Kielhorn 1884, p. 312) on the same rule 
(as[a->u]kas+[sU->ø]).  
 
77 Kielhorn (1888, p. 247). 
 
78 Kielhorn (1888, p. 246). 
 
79 Ibid. 
 
80 Fushimi and Yano (2014).  
 
81 This and all other calculations in this section were carried out with the longitude and 
latitude values set to those of Kathmandu. In all calculations, after identifying an ap-
proximate date using the “Try” option of the software, I have confirmed and readjusted 

=== PAGE 23 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
23
the “List” option of the Pancanga determines the nakṣatra Punarvasū with 
Puṣya to follow on the next day (on Monday, July 30). According to Prof. 
Michio Yano,82 a discrepancy by a single nakṣatra can usually be neglected, 
because the nakṣatra-s do not always coincide with the tithi-s and their exact 
value could vary depending on the actual time of the composition of the col-
ophon. Furthermore, according to Yano’s estimation the scribe could have 
preferred the nakṣatra Puṣya to Punarvasū because the former was considered 
particularly auspicious.  
 
It should be noted that according to the Pancanga the determined day falls 
within a so called adhika māsa (Śrāvaṇa-adhika in this case).83 This circum-
stance considerably complicates the computation of the concerned dates and 
renders the results of the program less reliable. According to the calculations 
of Prof. Dinesh Raj Pant,84 furthermore, the nakṣatra is Aśvinī. 
 
(2) Suvedī and Tivārī (2000, pp. 15–16), while acknowledging the ambi-
guity of the reading, adopt anala(3)-aṅka(9)-rasa(6) as the most probable one, 
relying on the opinion of Bālarāmaprasāda Lāmicchāne, a student of the fa-
mous Nepalese astronomer Naya Raj Pant. The calculation carried out by 
Lāmicchāne was, furthermore, repeated and confirmed by Dinesh Raj Pant.85 
In this reckoning, the determined solar day should be considered “expired” 
and increased by one in order to obtain the date of the current (or “ongoing”) 
day. With this adjustment, both astronomers arrived at Sunday, June 28, AD 
1573, calculating according to the pūrṇimānta system.86 As per their findings, 
the nakṣatra is the sought one, namely, Puṣya.87  
 
 
————— 
it with the help of the more precise “List” option. Note that the calculations of the 
Pancanga are carried out for expired years, so that one needs to subtract one year from 
the above value of VS (1601 – 1 = 1600). 
 
82 Personal communication, September 2018. 
 
83 See Dīkshit & Sewell (1896, p. 11) for a succinct examination of the term adhika māsa. 
 
84 Personal communication, October 2013. 
 
85 Personal communication, October 2013. 
 
86 For expired VS 1630 (693 + 938 – 1), kṛṣṇapakṣa of Śrāvaṇa, 13th tithi according to 
the pūrṇimānta system, Pancanga arrives at Saturday, June 27, AD 1573. In accord-
ance with the above consideration (see note 81), this date needs to be increased by one 
day. 
 
87 Suvedī and Tivārī (2000, pp. 15-16) write: “tadanusāraṃ tena viduṣā 1630 
vaikramābdasya śrāvaṇamāse kṛṣṇapakṣe (pūrṇāntamānena) 27tame divase (gate), 
trayodaśī tithiḥ – ghaṭī 39, palāni 39, ravivāsaraḥ, puṣyanakṣatram (ghaṭī 38/ palāni 
58), śakābdaḥ 1495 nepālasaṃvat 693 iti kālavivaraṇaṃ prastutam.” 

=== PAGE 24 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
24
 
I would like to point out that according to Kielhorn’s findings88 the use of 
the pūrṇimānta system in connection with the NS years should be considered 
untypical. Moreover, the reading aṅka appears to be the least probable one 
from the paleographical point of view (see Figure 8). 
 
(3) Hemarāja Śarman (see Section 1.1) dated the manuscript to the year 
NS 633, for which he must have adopted the reading anala(3)-agni(3)-
rasa(6).89 As mentioned above, this reading should be considered secondary 
(post correctionem). According to the calculations of Dinesh Raj Pant,90 the 
resulting date (either in the amānta or pūrṇimānta system) cannot satisfy the 
constraint of the day being a Sunday.  
 
Following the above procedure, that is, calculating with the help of the 
Pancanga for NS 633 (i.e., expired VS 1570) in the amānta system, I arrived 
at Saturday, July 30, AD 1513, with the nakṣatra Punarvasū.91 It is worth not-
ing that the immediately following calendar day, that is, July 31, AD 1513, 
for which the Pancanga lists the 14th tithi, satisfies both the other stipulations 
of the day being a Sunday and the nakṣatra being Puṣya.  
 
(4) In the above calculations, it has not been considered that the mentioned 
year might refer to a current, that is, currently ongoing year.92 In this case, one 
needs to reduce the count of years by one prior to applying Kielhorn’s con-
version formula. Table 1 below shows that none of the dates computed with 
this adjustment can meet all requirements. Nevertheless, the date computed 
for NS 633 in the amānta system deviates from the wanted weekday by only 
a single position. Dr. Karl-Heinz Golzio93 considers Sunday, July 11, AD 
1512 (see Table 1) to be the day of the composition of the colophon. 
 
 
————— 
 
88 Kielhorn (1888, pp. 246 and 253). 
 
89 See also Suvedī & Tivārī (2000, p. 15, n. 20): “rājaguruṇā hemarājena madhyagata-
syāṅkasya ‘agnir’ iti pāṭhaṃ sambhāvya tadanusāraṃ ‘633 nevārasaṃvallikhite’ iti 
likhitaṃ pratīyate.” 
 
90 Personal communication, October 2013. 
 
91 Calculating according to the pūrṇimānta system, one arrives at Friday, July 1, AD 
1513 (nakṣatra Mṛgaśīrṣa). 
 
92 Cf. note 72. I thank Dr. Karl-Heinz Golzio (personal communication by email of Sep-
tember 2015) for pointing out this shortcoming to me. 
 
93 Ibid. 

=== PAGE 25 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
25
  
NSCURR 633 = VSEXP 
1569  
NSCURR 663 = VSEXP 
1599  
NSCURR 693 = VSEXP 
1629 
amānta 
Monday, August 9, 
1512 (Puṣya) 
Wednesday, August 9, 
1542 (Puṣya) 
Thursday, August 7, 
1572 
pūrṇimānta 
(unusual) 
Sunday, July 11, 1512 
(Ārdrā)94 
Monday, July 10, 1542 
(Mṛgaśīrṣa) 
Tuesday, July 8, 
1572 
 
Table 1: Pancanga calculations for the ongoing year NS 633, dark half of Śrāvaṇa, 13th 
tithi. 
 
 
(5) In all of the above calculations, the words viśve tithau (or viśvetithau) 
were interpreted as “tithi [number] 13”. viśva (or viśve-), in any case an 
abridged form of viśvedevāḥ, was understood as a so-called bhūtasaṃkhyā, 
that is, a word expressive of a number. Because the word viśvedevāḥ denotes 
a group of thirteen divinities, it can be used to signify this number.95 This un-
derstanding seems to be further supported by the colophon of a decisively 
younger Nepalese manuscript catalogued by the NGMCP as NGMCP B 242/2 
(NAK 3/190).96 The date given in this colophon is saṃvat 1853, bright half of 
Śuci (i.e., Āṣāḍha), Sunday, and the value of the tithi is stated as viśve-tithau. 
Assuming that the latter refers to the thirteenth tithi and that the year is given 
according to the Vikrama era, with the help of the Pancanga one can arrive at 
Sunday, July 17, AD 1796. 
 
It is, however, important to note that the above Sanskrit expression can 
also be understood as “tithi [governed by the] viśvedeva-s.” According to the 
list found in the popular Muhūrtacintāmaṇi by Rāma Daivajña (fl. around 
1600),97 the viśvedeva-s govern the 11th tithi.98 The calculation of the respec-
tive dates shows, however, that this interpretation is unlikely (see Table 2). 
 
 
————— 
 
94 This value has kindly been confirmed by Karl-Heinz Golzio (personal communication 
in September 2015).  
 
95 Sircar (1965, pp. 230-233) provides a comprehensive list of these word numerals. 
 
96 The catalogue entry that includes the transcript of this colophon can be found at 
http://catalogue-old.ngmcp.uni-hamburg.de/mediawiki/index.php/B_242-
2_Mahābhārata (accessed September 21, 2020). 
 
97 Cf. Pingree (1994, p. 426). The popularity of the text can be inferred from the striking 
number of extant manuscripts of this text (700) recorded by Pingree (1994, pp. 428–
442).  
 
98 Muhūrtacintāmaṇi 1.3: tithīśā vahnikau gaurī gaṇeśo ’hir guho raviḥ | śivo durgāntako 
viśve hariḥ kāmaḥ śivaḥ śaśī ||. 

=== PAGE 26 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
26
 
NS 633 
NS 663 
NS 693 
 
current:  
VSEXP 
1569 
expired:  
VSEXP 1570 
current: 
VSEXP 1599  
expired: 
VSEXP 
1600 
current:  
VSEXP 
1629 
expired: 
VSEXP 
1630 
amā° 
Saturday, 
August 7, 
1512  
(Ārdrā) 
Thursday, 
July 28, 
1513   
Monday, 
August 7, 
1542 
(Ārdrā) 
Friday, 
July 27, 
1543 
Tuesday, 
August 5, 
1572 
Monday, 
August 24, 
1573 
(Puṣya) 
pūrṇimā° 
Friday, 
July 9, 
1512 
Wednes-
day, June 
29, 1513 
Saturday, 
July 8, 
1542 
(Kṛttikā) 
Thursday, 
June 28, 
1543 
Sunday, 
July 6, 
1572 
(Rohiṇī) 
Friday, 
June 26, 
1573 
 
Table 2: Pancanga calculation for the years NS 633, NS 663 and NS 693 (both expired and 
ongoing), dark half of Śrāvaṇa, 11th tithi. 
 
 
(6) Whether or not one finds any of the above hypotheses convincing, it 
can be established beyond any doubt that the manuscript was completed in the 
sixteenth century, sometimes between AD 1512 and 1573.  
3. The *Nepalese Version of the Suśrutasaṃhitā 
In this section I report some of my findings pertaining to the characteristics 
of the *Nepalese version of the SS. They are grouped here into two categories 
according to the aspect of the text they affect: those findings which are (1) 
related to the structural elements or the structure of the text, and those (2) 
related to individual issues of content.  
 
The Nepalese manuscripts also record a number of orthographical peculi-
arities that I do not address here separately. Some of these, such as the spelling 
piṭakā instead of the usual piḍakā (see Section 3.2.2) seem to be generally 
acceptable, while others, such as the spelling vyājī- (in vyājī-kṛ) instead of 
vājī- throughout the Nepalese manuscripts, seem to point to a mistake in one 
or several related archetypes. 
 
 

=== PAGE 27 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
27
3.1. Structure & Structural Elements 
3.1.1. General Remarks 
The general structure of the text found in the *Nepalese version of the SS 
widely corresponds to the available vulgate versions. There are several minor 
changes in the order of the chapters, which partly coincide with the variations 
detected in the other textual witnesses. So, for example, the order of the chap-
ters Sū 36 (Bhūmipravibhāgīya) and Sū 37 (Miśraka) according to E is in-
verted not only in the *Nepalese version of the SS, but also in all of the printed 
sources from Bengal that are available to me.99 A brief mention of this disa-
greement is found in both the commentaries by Cakrapāṇi and Ḍalhaṇa100 and, 
what is more, it is reproduced in the *Nepalese and the Bengali reading of Sū 
3, one of the introductory chapters of the SS that lists all of the chapters in the 
first five sections of the work. The *Nepalese inversion of Ka 6 (Dundub-
hisvanīya) and Ka 7 (Mūṣikakalpa), the relocation of the chapters 
Pratiśyāyapratiṣedha (from Ut 25 in the printed sources to Ut 51 in the Nepa-
lese manuscripts) and Yonivyāpat (from Ut 38 to 58) as well as the omission 
of Ut 14 (Bhedyarogapratiṣedha), on the other hand, neither have any parallels 
in other textual sources nor agree with the *Nepalese reading of Sū 3.101 It is 
noteworthy that all of the above alterations are reflected in the chapter-group 
colophons of the *Nepalese version of the SS (see Section 3.1.4). 
————— 
 
99 The sources from Bengal include an edition of the text of the SS in Bhaṭṭācārya (1889), 
an edition of the SS along with an early modern Sanskrit commentary by Hārāṇacandra 
in Bhaṭṭācārya (1905–1917), as well as an English translation of the SS in Bhishagratna 
(1907, 1911, 1916). 
 100 Ḍalhaṇa, at the beginning of the chapter Bhūmipravibhāgīya, which he accepts to pre-
cede Miśraka, justifies this choice as follows: kecid atrāntarāle miśrakādhyāyaṃ 
paṭhanti, tan na, pūrvācāryair apaṭhitatvāt (“Some [people] insert here the chapter 
[called] Miśraka. This is not correct, because the previous teachers did not read it 
[here].”). Cakrapāṇidatta, a slightly earlier scholar from Bengal, holds a different 
view. At the beginning of the chapter Miśraka, which in his opinion should precede 
the Bhūmīpravibhāgīya, he writes: imaṃ cādhyāyam anye bhūmipravibhāgīyānan- 
taraṃ vyākhyānayanti, tac coddeśakramaviruddham iti nādriyāmahe (“Others com-
ment upon this chapter after the Bhūmipravibhāgīya, but this contradicts the order of 
listing [that is, the order of chapters given in Sū 3], so that we do not accept it.”). 
 101 Sū 3 covers only the first five sthāna-s of the SS (Sū, Ni, Ci, Śā and Ka), so that the 
changes in the order of chapters of the Ut cannot be expected to have been reflected 
there in any case. 

=== PAGE 28 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
28
 
The hierarchy of the sections (five main sthāna-s plus an additional “later” 
Uttaratantra) that can be observed from the vulgate version of the text, is iden-
tical with that of the *Nepalese version. In fact, several peculiar readings of 
the Nepalese manuscripts even seem to strengthen this division. Among these, 
for example, is the extended section colophon to the Ka, which seems to pro-
vide a final word to the preceding text, as well as the name given to the work 
in the short prose colophons of K: samāptañ cedaṃ sahottaratantram ity atho 
nighaṇṭur bhaviṣyati (see Section 2.1.3.2) and H: sauśrutyāṃ saṃhitāyāṃ sa-
hottarāyāṃ nighaṇṭuḥ samāptaḥ (“The Nighaṇṭu in the Saṃhitā of Suśruta, 
along with the Uttara[tantra], is concluded.”) As one can see, the Uttaratantra 
is mentioned in both cases as an additional feature of the work, which accom-
panies the actual text of the SS.102 
 
A major addition to both the structure and content of the SS found in the 
*Nepalese version is the Sauśrutanighaṇṭu. This text, which is immensely im-
portant to the history of Āyurveda, has been recently studied and published 
separately from the *Nepalese SS by Suvedī and Tivārī (2000) and will not be 
discussed in detail in this article. 
3.1.2. The Phrase yathovāca bhagavān dhanvantariḥ 
The discussion below was inspired by an observation made by Wujastyk al-
ready in the first version (2009) of his article referred to above and reformu-
lated (2013, p. 147) as follows: 
 
A preliminary examination of Kaiser Shamsher […] 9/699 has already 
revealed a startling fact. It frequently lacks the standard phrase yathovāca 
bhagavān dhanvantariḥ “as the sage Dhanvantari declared,” that appears 
at the start of all chapters in the vulgate text. This phrase casts the entire 
work as a series of lectures made by the ancient sage Dhanvantari. […] 
 
In order to evaluate this statement, it is necessary to place it in a broader con-
text. 
 
(1) Every chapter in the editions prepared by Jādavjī Trikamjī103 incorpo-
rates in its repetitious introductory formula the phrase yathovāca bhagavān 
dhanvantari:  
————— 
 102 In both cases, I interpret sahottara as a bahuvrīhi compound meaning “accompanied 
by the Uttara[tantra].” 
 103 Trikumji Āchārya (1915), Trikamji Ācharyā (1931), Jādavjī Trikamjī & ‘Kāvyatīrtha’ 
(1938 [1980]) and Trikamji Acharya & Nandakishor (1939 [2001]). 

=== PAGE 29 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
29
 
a. The chapters of the Sū start with the formula athātaḥ [chapter name] 
adhyāyaṃ vyākhyāsyāmaḥ. 104 yathovāca bhagavān dhanvantariḥ (“Now, 
henceforth we will expound the chapter [dealing with / containing discussion 
on]105 ‘[chapter topic].’ Thus the sage Dhanvantari declared.”). 
 
b. The chapters of the Ni and the Ci are introduced in either of the two 
following ways: athātaḥ [disease name]-nidānaṃ / -cikitsitaṃ vyākhyā- 
syāmaḥ. yathovāca … or athātaḥ [disease name]-Gen. nidānaṃ / cikitsitaṃ 
vyākhyāsyāmaḥ. yathovāca … The meaning of both formulas is the same: 
“Now, henceforth we will expound the [chapter dealing with / containing dis-
cussion on] ‘etiology / treatment of [disease name].’ Thus the sage Dhan-
vantari declared.” 
 
c. The chapters of the Śā invariably begin with athātaḥ [chapter name]-
śārīraṃ vyākhyāsyāmaḥ. yathovāca … (“Now, henceforth we will expound 
the [chapter on) anatomy [dealing with / containing discussion on] ‘[chapter 
topic].’106 Thus the sage Dhanvantari declared.”). 
 
d. The introductory formulas of the Ut follow that of Sū, but occasionally 
omit the word adhyāyam. 
————— 
 104 The majority of the chapter names in the Sū (except for Sū 1, 6, 7, 11, 12, 16, 18, 37, 
45 and 46) are formed with the help of the secondary suffix -īya- (see, for example, 
Stenzler 2003, p. 76), as in Śiṣyopanayanīya (Sū 2), etc. In Pāṇinian terminology, this 
is the taddhita-affix known as cha, which obtains its actual phonetic form (i.e., -īya-) 
after application of A 7.1.2. It is worth mentioning briefly that within the Pāṇinian 
system of grammar the exact derivational process, in result of which these chapter 
names are formed, involves certain technical difficulties. Haradatta (fl. ca. 12th cen-
tury AD), the author of the Padamañjarī, one of the two preserved commentaries on 
the Kāśikā, addresses this issue at two different instances. According to him, it is, 
among other things, in order to tackle exactly this matter that (1) one of the examples 
given in the Kāśikā on A 5.2.60 reads dīrghajīvitaḥ, dīrghajīvitīyaḥ (possibly a refer-
ence to Sū 1 in the CS), and that (2) the mention of the words śiśukranda and yamasa-
bhā has been made by Pāṇini in A 4.3.87 and interpreted in the Kāśikā as providing 
additional details (prapañcārtham). Note that in the commentary on SS Sū 1.1, 
Cakrapāṇidatta explains the addition and the optional elision of cha based exclusively 
on A 5.2.60. As far as I can judge from the fragmentary manuscript of the NC, on the 
other hand, in the commentary on Sū 2.1 Gayadāsa proposes to follow either one of 
two alternatives (i.e., A 4.3.87 or A 5.2.60). 
 105 The two alternative translations correspond to the two grammatical interpretations 
mentioned in n. 104 above. 
 106 In the NiSaṃ on Śā 1.1–2, Ḍalhaṇa interprets the title of the relevant chapter (Sarva-
bhūtacintāśārīra). 

=== PAGE 30 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
30
 
e. The introductions to the chapters of the Ka eclectically adopt all the 
above stereotypical formulas.  
 
(2) Neither Cakrapāṇidatta nor Ḍalhaṇa (the latter seems to comment on 
every single sentence in his version of the SS) makes note of the phrase 
yathovāca… anywhere else apart from its very first appearance at the begin-
ning of the text. Here, in line with the above formula, E’s first sentence reads: 
athāto vedotpattim adhyāyaṃ vyākhyāsyāmaḥ. yathovāca bhagavān dhan-
vantariḥ (see above). 
 
This first appearance of yathovāca… attracted the attention of both com-
mentators and gave rise to contemplation about a possible classification of 
sentences in the SS, according to their actual authorship. Ḍalhaṇa accounts for 
the expression yathovāca… as the composition of a redactor (pratisaṃs- 
kartṛsūtra), whose name he thinks was Nāgārjuna. Ḍalhaṇa further gives a 
general rule to distinguish the words of a redactor from all the others. It is 
based on a Pāṇinian prescription that the perfect tense107 (in this case the finite 
verbal form uvāca) is “used in the sense of past time [3.2.84], not of today 
[3.2.111], and not witnessed by the speaker [3.2.115].”108 Thus, according to 
Ḍalhaṇa all sentences of the SS using this verbal form were written by a re-
dactor who was not present at the actual occasion of Dhanvantari’s instruc-
tion.109  
 
Cakrapāṇidatta, roughly a century before Ḍalhaṇa and probably slightly 
later than Gayadāsa,110 engages in a long elaborate discussion, where he ques-
tions the idea of a multiple authorship of the text. Finally, he concludes that 
the phrase yathovāca…, as indeed all the other sentences in the text, must have 
been written by Suśruta himself.111 
————— 
 107 To be more precise, the Pāṇinian system of grammar does not speak of the perfect 
tense as such, but rather of the affix lIṬ that marks particular aspects of meaning that 
are expressed by the associated verbal stem. 
 108 Roodbergen (2008, p. 360). 
 109 NiSaṃ ad Sū 1.2: idaṃ pratisaṃskartṛsūtram, yatra yatra parokṣe liṭprayogas tatra 
tatraiva pratisaṃskartṛsūtraṃ jñātavyam iti; pratisaṃskartāpīha nāgārjuna eva. 
 110 On Cakrapāṇi’s dates, see HIML IIA, p. 93, on Gayadāsa HIML IA, p. 382f., and on 
Ḍalhaṇa HIML IA, p. 378f. Ḍalhaṇa refers to Cakrapāṇi at SS Ut 49.20. 
 111 Cakrapaṇi rejects the grammatical argumentation relied upon by Ḍalhaṇa by providing 
counterexamples from the Jatūkarṇyasaṃhitā/tantra, presently considered lost (?) (cf. 
HIML IA, p. 161), and the Harivaṃśa, where the affix lIṬ is added to verbal roots, but 
expresses arguably only the first two of the three meanings (that is, refers to an event 
in the past which did not happen today). 

=== PAGE 31 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
31
 
(3) Furthermore, all the early-modern sources of the text from Bengal 
available to me (see note 99) have the formula yathovāca… only at the begin-
ning of the text.112 
 
(4) Similarly, none of the manuscripts of the text available to me, exclud-
ing the Nepalese manuscripts for the time being, have the words yathovāca… 
anywhere except at the beginning of the first chapter of Sū. 
 
The foregoing observations show that the reading yathovāca… at the be-
ginning of every chapter of the text is a variant found so far solely in the edi-
tions of the SS produced by Jādavjī Trikamjī (see note 103) and that it was 
possibly unknown to the medieval commentators. Therefore, it appears likely 
that this variant was either accepted by the editor–scholar on the basis of a 
limited number of manuscripts or even introduced by himself without any 
manuscript evidence. In both cases he may have followed a certain tradition 
of teaching, memorization, and recitation of the SS (or of medical saṃhitā-s 
in general), 113 where at the beginning of every chapter the expression 
yathovāca… (or parallel phrases in the case of other medical works) could 
have played the role of framing and marking the beginning of the actual 
text.114 
 
(5) To return to the *Nepalese version of the SS, it is interesting to note 
that the phrase yathovāca… is found here not at the beginning of the text,115 
but, against expectation, at the beginning of the first chapter of Ka, that is, the 
fifth section of the book.116  
 
It is difficult to evaluate this finding in the absence of wider manuscript 
evidence, so any conclusion remains purely hypothetical for now. Nonethe-
less, from the philological point of view (i.e., in following the principle known 
as lectio difficilior potior), it seems plausible to assume that the Nepalese var-
iant represents an earlier, less structured state of the text and that it could even 
be original. It is in fact more difficult to explain why anyone would have been 
————— 
 112 Note that these sources all read yathovāca bhagavān dhvanvantariḥ suśrutāya (“[…] 
to Suśruta”), a variant added in brackets in some of the Trikamjī editions (e.g., Triku-
mji Āchārya 1915). 
 113 See, for example, Zimmermann (1987, p. 135f.). 
 114 Note Wujastyk’s (2013, p. 147) remark that “some of the Carakasaṃhitā manuscripts 
[…] also lack the parallel framing.” Note, furthermore, that both the older editions of 
the Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya available to me (Kunte & Navre 1902; Śarmā 1928) likewise con-
tain the analogous expression iti ha smāhur ātreyādayo maharṣayaḥ only at the begin-
ning of the first chapter of each sthāna. 
 115 For this part, we have the evidence of all three manuscripts. 
 116 For this part, we have the evidence of only two manuscripts, namely, K and H. 

=== PAGE 32 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
32
tempted to move the phrase yathovāca… from the beginning of the SS to the 
beginning of its fifth section, unless that person deliberately had wanted to 
disturb the text. The opposite scenario, however, is more likely to be true, 
because it could be explained by someone’s aspiration to smoothen and sys-
tematize the text. It should also be noted that the current earliest attestation of 
this “polished” reading dates back to the medieval commentaries and thus 
postdates the production of K by at least half a century. 
3.1.3. Ślokasthāna vs. Sūtrasthāna 
Another admittedly minor alteration pertaining to a structural element of the 
text belongs to the title of the first section of the work commonly known as 
the Sūtrasthāna, which is often referred to in the *Nepalese version as the 
Ślokasthāna. In the following, I try to systematize the relevant textual data. 
 
(1) All the printed sources of the SS available to me (see the bibliography 
below) call the first section of the work “Sūtrasthāna” in all of its chapter-
colophons as well as in the section’s own final colophon. In the running text 
of the sthāna itself, its name appears three times, in Sū 1.40, 3.3 and 3.12, and 
always as “Sūtrasthāna.” Four further appearances of the section’s name in 
the text are at Ut 42.61, 64.3, 65.30, and 65.31. Of all my sources, only 
Bhishagratna (1907), an early translator of the SS, consistently employs the 
section name Sūtrasthāna. Jādavjī Trikamjī, however, prints Ślokasthāna in 
Ut 42.61, 65.30, and 65.31, whereas Bhaṭṭācārya (1889) accepts this section 
name only at the two later instances.117 Among the three usages of the desig-
nation Ślokasthāna by Jādavjī Trikamjī, Ḍalhaṇa quotes the word at Ut 42.61 
and 65.30 and in the former case paraphrases it as Sūtrasthāna. This indicates 
that the commentator must have also found this word in his version of the 
SS.118 
 
(2) In the case of the above mentioned occurrences of the designation 
Sūtrasthāna within the text of the section itself, the *Nepalese version pre-
serves this reading only at a single instance, namely, in Sū 3.12, the verse that, 
among other things, provides what can be called an etymological analysis of 
————— 
 117 Note that the numbering in this edition deviates from the one adopted by me from 
Jādavjī Trikamjī. 
 118 This logic holds good only if we accept Jādavjī Trikamjī’s restoration of Ḍalhaṇa’s 
text as trustworthy. Although a single manuscript of the SS at my disposal contains 
fragments of the NiSaṃ, I have not collated its readings yet. 

=== PAGE 33 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
33
the actual word sūtrasthāna.119 See SS Sū 3.12 according to the *Nepalese 
version (K: 3v4, N: 3v1, H: 6r2):  
 
 
sūcanāt sūtraṇāc caiva sādhanāc cārthasantateḥ |  
 
ṣaṭcatvāriṃśadadhyāyaṃ sūtrasthānaṃ pravakṣyate ||120 
 
[Called this way] because it indicates, strings together and accomplishes 
a series of meanings, the Sūtrasthāna, containing forty-six chapters, will 
be proclaimed.121 
 
At both the other instances, however, the *Nepalese version prefers Ślo-
kasthāna. In SS Sū 1.40, the Nepalese manuscripts read (K: 2v6; N: 2v4; H: 
4r6): 
————— 
 119 In my understanding of the involved phonological-semantic analysis as a kind of ety-
mology I follow Visigalli (2017, pp. 1–2, n. 2). 
 120 Cf. SS Sū 3.12 according to E: sūcanāt sūtraṇāc caiva savanāc cārthasantateḥ | ṣaṭcat-
vāriṃśadadhyāyaṃ sūtrasthānaṃ pracakṣate || Sharma (1999, p. 39) translates: “Thus 
sūtrasthāna containing fortysix chapters is so called as it indicates, links and poten-
tially generates the idea of the text.” Note the *Nepalese variant reading sādhanāc in 
place of E’s savanāc (literally, “inasmuch as it urges” or, according to Ḍalhaṇa’s gloss 
jananāt, “because it gives birth, produces”). See the next note for further discussion. 
 121 The verbal nouns in pāda-s a and b provide glosses for the word sūtra in pāda d. This 
seems to be based primarily on a phonetic similarity between the underlying verbal 
roots and the word sūtra (akin to akṣaravarṇasāmānya, “similarity in syllables and 
sound”, in Yāska’s Nirukta 2.1; see, for example, Deeg 1995, p. 77). The first two 
words in pāda a are common to both, the vulgate and the *Nepalese version: sūcana 
is derived from the root sūc (“to indicate,” DhP x, 327) that shares two letters with 
sūtra, and sūtraṇa, whether it is derived from sūtr- (”to release,” DhP x, 362) or, what 
is more likely, it is based on a denominative of the actual word sūtra (Uṇādisūtra iv, 
162 derives the latter from the root sīv, “to weave a thread,” DhP iv, 2), is obviously 
related to the word to be explained. The third gloss in E is savana. It is derived from 
sū (“to urge,” DhP vi, 115, or “to give birth,” DhP ii, 21 and iv, 24), a root that shares 
the first two letters of the word sūtra. The *Nepalese reading sādhana, on the other 
hand, is derived from sādh (“to accomplish,” DhP v, 17) and has only the initial con-
sonant s in common with the word it explains. The similarity is so meager that is even 
possible to assume that the author(s) of the *Nepalese reading did not intend any ety-
mological connection between both words. Given the above, it appears likely that, in 
agreement with the principle of lectio difficilior potior, the reading of the vulgate is a 
secondary improvement. 

=== PAGE 34 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
34
tac ca viṃśam adhyāyaśataṃ pañcasu sthāneṣu ceti | tatra śloka122 sthāna- 
nidānaśārīracikitsitakalpeṣv arthavaśād vibhajyottare vakṣyāmaḥ |123 
 
And these 120 chapters are also (ca) [found/arranged] in five sections – 
thus [it should be known] (iti).124 In this regard, having distributed [them] 
in accordance with the content among the Ślokasthāna, Nidāna, Śārīra, 
Cikitsā and Kalpa, we will proclaim [these chapters] in the Uttaratantra 
(?).”125  
 
Similarly, the *Nepalese version of SS Sū 3.3, a passage closely related to the 
one just quoted, reads as follows (K: 3r7; N: 3r6; H: 5v2): 
————— 
 122 śloka°] K N Hac; sūtre Hpc. The word sūtre is added here above the line. The locative 
case may point to its being an explanatory gloss rather than a correction of the reading. 
 123 Cf. SS 1.40 according to E: tac ca saviṃśam adhyāyaśatam pañcasu sthāneṣu. sūtra-
nidānaśārīracikitsitakalpeṣv arthavaśāt saṃvibhajyottare tantre śeṣān arthān vyā- 
khyāsyāmaḥ. Sharma (1999, p. 27) translates: “The text in one hundred and twenty 
chapters is divided into five sthānas (sections); out of them, respective subjects are 
arranged in Sūtra, Nidāna, Śārīra, Cikitsā and Kalpa and the remaining subjects would 
be dealt within the uttaratantra.” 
 124 In the actual context of the present sentence, it appears more fitting to interpret iti 
differently from what I have proposed in my translation, namely, as a logical con-
nector: “[…] in five section; therefore (iti) […].” Yet, based on the *Nepalese reading 
of SS Sū 3.3 that partly quotes SS Sū 1.40, I consider the expression tac ca viṃśam 
adhyāyaśataṃ pañcasu sthāneṣu ceti to constitute a complete syntactic unit on its own. 
 125 The *Nepalese reading uttare is very difficult to interpret, and, in my opinion, it is 
likely to have occurred as the result of some textual corruption. The construction “ut-
tare + a form of a verb of speaking in the future tense” is found in the SS at several 
instances (Śā 10.51, Ci 5.24, Ka 8.140 and Ut 1.3). In all cases, the available Nepalese 
manuscripts confirm the concerned text (for the *Nepalese reading of Ka 8.140, see 
Section 3.1.4.3). At one further instance, in SS Sū 24.12, the word uttare is used along 
with tantre, but it is clear that also in all the above usages uttare should be understood 
as an abbreviation of uttare tantre (or uttaratantre). As the above translation shows, 
this interpretation appears somewhat strange in the discussed case, because the implied 
object of the first verbal action referred to by vibhajya, that is, saviṃśam adhyāyaśa-
tam, cannot at the same time be the object of uttare [tantre] vakṣyāmaḥ (see the reading 
in E). Alternatively, one could interpret uttare as meaning “in the following.” In this 
case, however, the indeclinable uttaram would be preferrable. As far as I can see, nei-
ther uttare nor uttaram is used in this sense anywhere in the SS. 

=== PAGE 35 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
35
prāg abhihitaṃ saviṃśam adhyāyaśataṃ pañcasu sthāneṣu ceti | tatra 
śloka126sthāne hy adhyāyāḥ ṣaṭcatvāriṃśat […]127 
 
It was stated above: “And these 120 chapters are also (ca) [found/ar-
ranged] in five sections – thus [it should be known] (iti).” In fact, among 
these, in the Ślokasthāna, [there are] forty-six chapters […]. 
 
Regarding the occurrences of the concerned section title in the Uttaratantra, 
64.3 is omitted (a direct quote from Sū is introduced instead of an indirect 
reference), but at the remaining three places (Ut 42.61, 65.30 and 31) both the 
available Nepalese manuscripts (K and H) read Ślokasthāna.  
 
In the section colophon to Sū found in the Nepalese manuscripts (N: 51v2; 
H: 124r3) and absent from E (see Section 3.1.4) we read: 
 
 
sūtrasthāne purā proktaṃ catvāriṃśat ṣaḍuttaram | 
 
adhyāyāḥ kāśirājena pūrṇaṃ sarvaṃ savistaram ||128 
 
The Nepalese colophon to Ka (see Section 3.1.4.3) contains a half-verse that 
in a way harmonizes both uses: 
 
 
sūtrabhūtaṃ samāsena ślokasthānaṃ pravakṣyate || 
 
(3) A cursory look at the unpublished commentaries to the SS provides further 
insights into the history of the text. Based on my reading of the fragmentary 
manuscript of Gayadāsa’s NC (Anup Sanskrit Library, Bikaner, no. 4389, 
5r5),129 the commentator clearly calls the first section of the work Ślokasthāna 
as he introduces SS Sū 3.4 in the following way: 
 
————— 
 126 śloka°] K N; sūtra HAC; om. HPC. The word sūtra was deleted in H, but remains visible. 
 127 Cf. SS Sū 3.3 according to E: prāg abhihitaṃ saviṃśam adhyāyaśataṃ pañcasu 
sthāneṣu. tatra sūtrasthānam adhyāyāḥ ṣaṭcatvāriṃśat […]. Sharma (1999, p. 36) 
translates: “Earlier it is stated that the text contains one hundred and twenty chapters 
divided into five sections. Among them, sūtrasthāna (section on aphorisms, fundamen-
tals) has forty six chapters, […].” 
 128 See Section 3.1.4.2 for a translation. 
 129 As the library does not allow any kind of reproduction of its holdings, I have examined 
this manuscript during my visit there. 

=== PAGE 36 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
36
atha ke te ślokasthāne130 ṣaṭcatvāriṃśad131 adhyāyā ity āha — vedotpattir 
ityādi || 
 
In the same way, the anonymous Suśrutavyākhyā (GOML, Madras, no. R 
3422, p. 33) evidently presupposes the mention of the section title Ślokasthāna 
in SS Sū 3.3 and provides a further historically significant clue on the use of 
the same title in another ancient medical compendium authored by Bhāluki:132 
 
 
tatra ślokasthāna adhyāyāḥ ślokānāṃ ṣaṭ133catvāriṃśat | āha bhālukiḥ –  
 
ślokāḥ pūrvam ihādhyāyāḥ śārīrāṇi tataḥ param | 
 
nidānāni cikitsāś ca kalpāś134 caiṣa kramaḥ sṃṛtaḥ || iti […] 
 
In conclusion of this section, I would like to point out that Preisendanz (2018, 
p. 205) has recently observed a very similar ambiguity with regard to the title 
given to the first section of the CS. According to her estimate, the name Ślo-
kasthāna “which is difficult to explain […] is the original one […] whereas 
the second one may have originated from an explanatory stanza at the very 
end of this sthāna.” Although the exact reasons for the occurrence of the title 
Sūtrasthāna in place of the Ślokasthāna require further investigation,135 the 
observations offered in the present section seem to support the above hypoth-
esis. Furthermore, it appears likely that at the stage of textual development 
reflected by the *Nepalese version of the SS, both designations of the sthāna 
were considered equivalent and interchangeable, in the same way as they 
seem to have been considered by Ḍalhaṇa in his NiSaṃ on SS Ut 42.61. 
 
 
 
————— 
 130 °sthāne] em.; —ne Anup 4384. The dash before ne represents a similarly looking sym-
bol found in this manuscript. 
 131 ṣaṭcatvāriṃśad] em.; pya+cāniśadd Anup 4384. The plus sign stands for an illegible 
syllable (similar to ḍū) in the manuscript. 
 132 See Klebanov (2020) for a brief discussion of this verse and its implications for our 
knowledge of the text of Bhāluki’s lost Bhālukitantra (or Bhālukīya). On the latter see 
HIML IA, pp. 689–690. 
 133 ṣaṭ°] em.; kṣada° R 3422. 
 134 kalpāś] conj.; kalpaś R 3422. 
 135 It is possible that the section name Sūtrasthāna has replaced Ślokasthāna in common 
parlance merely due to the fact that the former has some kind of “śāstric aura” and on 
account of the doctors’ efforts to establish their teachings as a formal śāstra, in fact, 
an ancillary of the Veda (cf. SS Sū 1.6).  

=== PAGE 37 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
37
3.1.4. Text Structuring: The Sub-colophons 
Noteworthy features of the *Nepalese text of the SS are its chapter-group col-
ophons and the colophons found at the end of individual sections. These col-
ophons play an important role in the structuring of the text and are for the 
most part absent from the printed editions. In fact, in all of the consulted 
printed versions of the SS, only the concluding verses of the Ka (Ka 8.140–
143) and the Ut (Ut 66.15–17) contain texts that can be, broadly speaking, 
called colophons. These passages will be discussed later in this section. 
3.1.4.1. Chapter-group Colophons 
The Nepalese manuscripts of the SS furnish the text of every sthāna with met-
rical colophons, which conclude smaller subsections of usually ten chapters. 
The chapters of each sthāna are arranged in groups of ten, with the remaining 
chapters of such a division forming their own smaller group. This means that 
in the Sū such metrical colophons are found after the tenth, twentieth, thirtieth, 
fortieth and forty-sixth chapter, concluding chapters 1–10, 11–20, 21–30, 31–
40 and 41–46, respectively; in the Ni after the tenth and sixteenth chapter, 
concluding chapters 1–10 and 11–16; in the Śā after the tenth chapter, con-
cluding chapters 1–10; in the Ci after the tenth, twentieth, thirtieth and fortieth 
chapter, concluding chapters 1–10, 11–20, 21–30 and 31–40; and in the Ka 
after the eighth and final chapter. 
 
The grouping of the chapters in the Ut follows this general pattern, but 
additionally respects the boundaries between the thematic subsections, which 
are, according to the *Nepalese recension of the SS, the Śālākyatantra 136 
(chapters 1–24), Kumāratantra137 (chapters 25–35), and Kāyacikitsā138 (chap-
ters 36–64). In this way, the chapter-group colophons of the Ut are found after 
the tenth, twentieth, twenty-fourth, thirty-fifth, forty-fifth, fifty-fifth and 
sixty-fifth chapter, concluding chapters 1–10, 11–20, 21–24 and the 
Śālākyatantra, 25–35 and the Kumāratantra, 36–45, 46–55, and 56–65 and the 
Kāyacikitsā, respectively. 
 
All chapter-group colophons have the same structure: they list the names 
of the concluded chapters and give their count in tens (that is, the first, second, 
etc., decad). The majority of these colophons are composed in the anuṣṭubh 
metre, but there are also several instances of the upajāti metre. The grammar, 
syntax and metrics of these verses are often incorrect. The chapter names are 
————— 
 136 “[Section on] diseases of supraclavicular region”; see Sharma (2001, p. 103). 
 137 “[Section on] pediatrics including gynaecology”; see Sharma (2001, p. 277). 
 138 “[Section on] general medicine”; see Sharma (2001, p. 313). 

=== PAGE 38 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
38
at times modified to conform to the metre, a practice that is also found in SS 
Sū 3.  
 
To demonstrate the features described above, in the following I limit my-
self to a single example of a chapter-group colophon. Due to the fragmentary 
character of all of the discussed manuscripts, only two of these subcolophons 
bear evidence of all three Nepalese sources (on Sū 1–10 and 21–30). Of these 
two, the second one, consisting of ten metrical feet, is given here as an illus-
tration (K: 28v6; N: 26r1; H: 63v4): 
 
 
vraṇapraśnaṃ vraṇāsrāvaṃ kṛtyākṛtyavidhiṃ tathā |  
 
vyādhyuddeśīyam adhyāyaṃ śastrakarmāṣtakaṃ tathā || 1 ||  
 
praṇaṣṭaśalyavijñānaṃ śalyāpanayanam eva139 ca |140 
 
viparītavraṇajñānaṃ dūtasvapnaviparyayam ||  
 
pañcendriyārthavibhrāntiṃ proktaṃ vai tṛtīyo daśa || 2 ||141 
 
Vraṇapraśna (“Questions related to Ulcers”), Vraṇāsrāva (“Discharges 
from Ulcers”), so also Kṛtyākṛtyavidhi (“Description of Curable and In-
curable [Ulcers]”), the chapter Vyādhyuddeśīya (“Description of Dis-
eases”) as well as Śastrakarmāṣṭaka (“Eight Surgical Operations”), 
Praṇaṣṭaśalyavijñāna (“Knowledge of Dislocated (?) Foreign Bodies”) 
and also Śalyāpanayana (“Extraction of Foreign Bodies”); Viparītav-
raṇajñāna (“Knowledge of Ulcers Adverse [to Medical Treatment]”), 
Dūtasvapnaviparyaya (“Adversity [to Medical Treatment Known] on the 
Basis of Messengers and Dreams”), Pañcendriyārthavibhrānti (“[Unfa-
vourable Prognosis the Basis of] Erroneous Perception of the Objects of 
the Five Senses.” Certainly, the third decade has been taught [thus].142 
 
 
————— 
 139 °nayanam eva] KPC N H; °nayanava KAC (me is added in K in the space below the line 
by an unmistakably later hand). 
 140 2b is hypermetrical. A most obvious fix would be a shortening of °panayanam to °pa-
nayam. 
 141 2f is unmetrical on account of the restriction that the fifth syllable (in this case tī) of 
an even verse quarter should invariably be light.  
 142 This translation does not reproduce grammatical peculiarities of the original. It merely 
renders its meaning according to my understanding of the grammatically flawed text. 
The additions in square brackets are made on the basis of the commentatorial remarks 
and my knowledge about the content of the chapters. See note 104 on the grammatical 
technicalities involved in the formation of the chapter names. 

=== PAGE 39 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
39
With respect to Sanskrit grammar, one can see that the text is irregular or even 
faulty. In the first part of the colophon (verse quarters 1–2d), several chapter 
names as well as the Sanskrit word for “chapter” (adhyāya), which should be 
used in the masculine gender, are used in the neuter.143 It is possible to imag-
ine a scenario in which the author of the colophon wrongly thought that the 
chapter names were to be construed as accusative objects of the verbal action 
expressed by proktam,144 or, similarly improbable though, as accusative ob-
jects relating to an absent, that is, merely presupposed, finite verbal form. In 
the final two quarters of verse 2 (2ef), three syntactically connected declined 
words ― proktam (“has been taught,” nominative singular neuter), tṛtīyo (or-
dinal adjective “third” nominative singular masculine) and daśa (cardinal 
number “ten,” nominative plural) ― do not grammatically agree with each 
other. The author of the two verses must have, furthermore, used the word 
daśan (“ten”) in the sense of daśaka or daśat (“decad”). The former is, in fact, 
found at several other instances in the chapter-group colophons of the *Nep-
alese version of the SS, most of which contain grammatical mistakes very 
similar to those detected here. 
 
As noted in Section 3.1.1 above, the names and, more evidently, the order 
of the chapters given in the chapter-group colophons match exactly the text 
circulated in the *Nepalese version of the SS. One can therefore detect a prox-
imate connection of the colophons with the particular transmissional line. 
Their grammatical defectiveness, on the other hand, clearly differentiates 
them from the actual text of the *Nepalese SS, which, notwithstanding certain 
peculiarities, is written according to the standards of classical Sanskrit gram-
mar. As a result, it appears tenable that the chapter-group colophons were 
added by a person involved merely in the copying of the existing text and not 
directly connected with its composition, redaction, or compilation. Their sec-
ondary character could be further argued from the point of “lower” textual 
criticism: of two possible editorial activities, namely, (1) furnishing the text 
with structuring and framing colophons, and (2) deleting such colophons, the 
former is more likely to have happened. A clue about the age of this likely 
addition could be provided by the reading of KPC in the colophon to Sū 21–30 
cited above. This emendation of a nonsensical to a metrically wrong reading, 
which could easily be improved upon (see note 140), seems to point to the fact 
————— 
 143 Cf. the similar grammatical irregularities observed in the case of Tantric textual ma-
terial transmitted in Nepalese manuscripts by Goodall et.al (2015, p. 116f.). See also 
Oberlies (2003, p. XXXVIIIff.) for general observations on the change of grammatical 
gender in Epic Sanskrit. 
 144 proktam, being a passive form, relates to the object of action in the nominative case. 

=== PAGE 40 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
40
that the scribe of KPC corrected the spelling mistake of KAC (written either by 
the same or a different person) on the basis of a comparison with the exemplar 
and not due to his own considerations about grammar and metre. Following 
this interpretation, one can infer the existence of a manuscript older than K 
that had already contained the text of the chapter-group colophons. The fact 
that none of the three Nepalese manuscripts has been found to be a direct copy 
of either of the other two may further corroborate the hypothetical existence 
of such an older common ancestor. 
3.1.4.2. Final Section Colophons  
The ending of each sthāna of the *Nepalese SS is marked with a section-col-
ophon.145 The colophons to Sū and Ni are metrical. The colophon to Sū runs 
as follows (N: 51v2; H: 124r1): 
 
 
sūtrasthāne purā proktaṃ catvāriṃśat ṣaṭuttaram (!)|146  
 
adhyāyāḥ kāśirājena pūrṇaṃ sarvaṃ savistaram || 
 
iti suśrute śalyatantre147 sūtrasthānaṃ samāptam 
 
[What] was declared earlier (that is, in Sū 3.3 and 3.12) by Kāśirāja 
[namely, that there were] forty-six chapters in the Sūtrasthāna, [this] all is 
now complete with elaboration. 
 
Thus the Sūtrasthāna in the surgical treatise [of] Suśruta is concluded.148 
 
 
————— 
 145 On the section colophon to the Ut see Sections 2.1.3 and 2.3.5. 
 146 Apart from the orthographically odd ṣaṭ-uttaram, for the normal ṣaḍ-uttaram, the ex-
pression catvāriṃśaṭ ṣaḍuttaram (“forty followed by six”) is grammatically contesta-
ble. A word of the type X-uttara (“followed / increased by X”) is most commonly used 
as an adjective and has to match the word it qualifies in grammatical attributes such 
as gender, etc. (see, e.g., Perry 1965, pp. 126f.). catvārimśat (“forty”) is a feminine 
cardinal number word, so that the expected expression is catvāriṃśaṭ ṣaḍuttarā (cf. n. 
125). It appears nonetheless possible to justify the mere grammaticality of the reading 
ṣaḍuttaram by interpreting it as an adverb. However, even if this form may thus be 
acceptable from a strict grammatical point of view, it strikes as very unusual for the 
current context. 
 147 iti suśrute śalyatantre] H; om. N. 
 148 As in the case of the colophon to Sū 21–30 cited in Section 3.1.4.1, this translation 
does not reproduce grammatical peculiarities of the original. It merely renders the 
meaning of the grammatically faulty text according to my understanding. 

=== PAGE 41 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
41
The colophon to Ni reads (K: 86r7; N: 38v2; H: 158r2): 
 
 
sūtre pradiṣṭaṃ149 daśa ṣaṭ ca150 pūrvaṃ sthānaṃ nidānam bhavatīti  
 
 
yac ca | 
 
savistaraṃ tat kathitaṃ mayeha svayambhunā yat kathitaṃ hitāya ||151 
 
|| samāptaṃ nidānasthānam || 
 
And what was previously declared in the Sūtrasthāna (i.e., in Sū 3.3 and 
3.14), [namely,] that the Nidānasthāna was ten and six [chapters long], 
this has now been told by me here in detail according to what Brahma had 
told for the benefit [of all]. 
 
The Nidānasthāna is concluded. 
 
Śā, Ci and Ka, on the other hand, close with short concluding phrases in prose. 
The briefest is the one concluding Śā (H: 199v1): 
 
 
iti śārīrasthānaṃ samāptam 
 
 
Thus the Śārīrasthāna is concluded. 
 
In the case of the Ci, the number of chapters is indicated (K: 143r1; H: 323v6): 
 
 
yad uktaṃ catvāriṃśac cikitsitānīti tat sarvaṃ samāptam iti 
 
What has been referred to (in Sū 3.3) by saying “[There are] forty chapters 
of the Cikitsāsthāna,” this all is concluded now. 
 
The colophon to the Ka reads (K: 157r5; H: 352v6): 
 
 
sauśrute śalyatantre kalpasthānaṃ samāptam 
 
 
The Kalpasthāna in the surgical treatise of Suśruta is concluded. 
 
One can see that the above grouping of the section colophons according to 
their form (verses versus prose) does not correspond to their content. Whereas 
the colophons to the Śā and Ka are very brief, the conclusions of the other 
————— 
 149 °diṣṭaṃ] em.; °diṣṭa° K N; °didiṣṭaṃ H. 
 150 1a ca] N H; cā° K. 
 151 The metre is upajāti. 

=== PAGE 42 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
42
three sthāna-s are slightly more elaborate and share the same elements: They 
refer to the third chapter of the Sū and the number of chapters specified therein 
for the respective section. After that, they state that the announced chapters 
have been completed. Noteworthy is also the fact that the colophon to the Ni 
is composed in the first person and thus is “put into the mouth” of the sup-
posed author of the SS (perhaps, Suśruta or Kāśīrāja Divodāsa).  
 
On the basis of the following collective evidence, I conjecture that at least 
two of the metrical section colophons (relating to Sū and Ni) belong to the 
same or a similar strata of the textual development as the chapter-group colo-
phons discussed in the previous paragraph: 
 
(1) Both verses are similarly unsmooth in terms of grammar and syntax. 
While the colophon to the Sū contains a grammatical mistake and omits any 
syntactical linkage between the different parts of the complex sentence, the 
verse concluding the Ni reads clumsily with the construction daśa ṣaṭ ca […] 
sthānaṃ nidānam and the apposition of yat – tat – yat. Following the argu-
mentation presented in the case of the chapter-group colophons, these verses 
should be differentiated from the main body of the *Nepalese SS. 
 
(2) All the described section colophons are found in the Nepalese manu-
scripts after the last chapter-group colophon of the respective section. That 
being the case, one could argue (a) that they were either produced by the same 
author, or (b) that the author of the chapter-group colophons, which were 
added last, recognized the section colophons as additions and not as a part of 
the actual text of the SS, or, less probable, (c) that the section-colophons were 
added even after the addition of the chapter-colophons. Whichever of the three 
options may appear most likely to the reader (I prefer the first one), they all 
point towards a later addition of the section colophons by a person not con-
nected with the redaction, etc., of the actual text of the *Nepalese SS. 
3.1.4.3. Verses Concluding the Kalpasthāna 
A different case is an extended version of the concluding verses to the Ka 
found in the Nepalese manuscripts of the SS. From four and a half anuṣṭubh 
verses152 known from the printed vulgate versions of the SS, the text is ex-
panded to fourteen verses in the anuṣṭubh metre and one in the longer 
vaṃśastha. These verses are written in grammatically (and metrically) correct 
Sanskrit and should be, in my view, regarded as a part of the main text of the 
*Nepalese SS. Apparently, they were considered as such also by the composer 
of the chapter-group colophons, because the colophon at the end of the last 
chapter of the Ka was put after these concluding verses. In the following I 
————— 
 152 Ka 8.140–143ef in E. 

=== PAGE 43 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
43
provide the complete transcription of the concerned verses (K: 156v6 – 157r4; 
H: 152r1 – 152r4). The many interesting features of this text and its connec-
tion to the version circulated in the vulgate will have to be discussed on an-
other occasion. 
 
saviṃśam adhyāyaśatam etad uktaṃ vibhāgaśaḥ | (= Ka 8.140ab)153 
ihoddiṣṭān anirdiṣṭān arthān154 vakṣyāmi cottare || 1 || (~ 8.140cd) 
śāstraṃ śāstrasamutpattiṃ vyādhikāryabalā155balam | 
sūtrabhūtaṃ samāsena ślokasthānaṃ pravakṣyate || 2 || 
doṣāhārāpa156cāraiś ca sāgantūvyādhilakṣaṇam | 
avasthālakṣaṇaṃ caiva nidānaṃ sthānam ucyate || 3 || 
sambhavaś caiva dehasya dhātur indriyamarmasu | 
sirādināṃ ca sarveṣāṃ śārīre kathitaṃ mayā || 4 || 
yathāsthānopadiṣṭāṇāṃ viditānāṃ ca la157kṣaṇaiḥ | 
vyādhīnāṃ sādhanaṃ śāstre cikitsitam iti smṛtam || 5 ||  
sthāvare jaṅgame caiva viṣe hitavikalpanam | 
sādhanaṃ caiva kārtsnyena158 kalpasthānaṃ tad ucyate || 6 || 
sāhasro vistaraḥ pūrvaṃ prajāpatimukhodbhavaḥ | 
saviṃśad159 adhyāyaśataṃ mayā vatsa prakīrtitam || 7 ||160 
sanātanatvād vedānām akṣaratvāt tathaiva ca | (= 8.141ab)161 
dṛṣṭādṛṣṭaphalatvāc ca hitatvāc cāpi dehinām || 8 || (~ 8.141cd) 
vāksamūhārthavistārāt pūjitatvāc ca dehiṣu162 | (~ 8.142ab) 
————— 
 153 1a is a bha-vipulā. 
 154 arthān] H; arthā K. 
 155 °balā°] H; °bālā° K. 
 156 °āpa°] K, HPC; °ūpa° HAC. 
 157 °nāṃ ca la°] K; blank space H. 
 158 °na] KPC, H; om. KAC. 
 159 °viṃśad] K; °viṃśam H. For the time being, I prefer the reading of K based merely 
on the principle of lectio difficilior and the consideration that K is elder than H. Note, 
however, that 7c is evidently related to 1a (saviṃśam adhyāyaśatam) and 15b 
(saviṃśad adhyāyaśatam) in the current section, as well as to several other statements 
in the SS that are phrased similarly. Some examples can be found in Sections 3.1.4.1 
and 3.1.4.2. Therefore, the final decision concerning the problematic reading needs to 
be taken in view of this collective evidence. 
 160 7c is a bha-vipulā. 
 161 8a is a ma-vipulā. 
 162 dehiṣu] K; dehinaḥ H. 

=== PAGE 44 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
44
cikitsitāt puṇyatamaṃ na kiṃcid api śuśrumaḥ || 9 || (= 8.142cd)163 
ṛṣer indraprabhāvasya tasmād amṛtajanmanaḥ | (~ 8.143ab) 
dhārayitvedam amalaṃ mataṃ paramasaṃmatam || 10 || (~ 8.143cd)164 
uktācārasamācārāḥ pretya165 ceha ca nandati | (~ 8.143ef) 
śeṣāṇām api tantrāṇāṃ yuktijño lokabandhavaḥ || 11 || 
yat kiṃcid ābādhakaraṃ tad yasmāc chalyasaṃjñitam |166,167 
vyāptāny aṅgāny atas tena śalyajñānena bhūriṇā || 12 || 
ataś cāsya viśeṣeṇa gatir na pratiṣidhyate | 
yathā svaviṣayasthasya rājño balavato gatiḥ || 13 || 
upadravāṇāṃ nirdeśo nidānaṃ vyañjanāni168 ca |169 
jvarādīnāṃ cikitsārtham uttaraṃ tantram ucyate || 14 || 
bhavati170 cātra  | 
idaṃ tu yaḥ pañcasu saṃniveśitaṃ saviṃśad adhyāyaśataṃ sahottaraṃ | 
paṭhet sa rājño ’rhati vaidyapūjitaḥ kriyāṃ prayoktum bhiṣag āga-
takramaḥ || 15 || iti | 
3.2. Elements of Content 
3.2.1. General Observations 
The *Nepalese version of the SS, when compared to the text of the vulgate 
versions, abounds in readings that often result in changes in terms of the con-
tent of the text. Some of these alterations are elaborately reflected upon in the 
commentaries, some are merely introduced as known alternatives, and some, 
perhaps the majority, are not mentioned at all.  
 
 
————— 
 163 9c is a bha-vipulā. 
 164 10a is a na-vipulā. 
 165 pretya] K; pratya H. 
 166 12a is a bha-vipulā. 
 167 Cf. yat kiṃcid ābādhakaraṃ śarīre tat sarvam eva pravadanti śalyam (quoted in the 
NiSaṃ ad SS Sū 1.8.1). 
 168 vyañjanāni] K; vyajanāni H.  
 169 14a is a ma-vipulā. 
 170 bhavati] K; bhavanti H. 

=== PAGE 45 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
45
 
In SS Sū 45.48, for example, in the description of the qualities of different 
milks and milk products (kṣīravarga), the only available Nepalese manuscript 
H unmistakenly attests to the same version of the text as attributed to Jejjaṭa 
in the NiSaṃ (see Table 3 and note 171 below), while the recension of the SS 
propagated by Ḍalhaṇa contains two additional, metrically superfluous verse 
quarters. The prose passage that commences immediately after this verse of-
fers another example of a similar correspondence: SS Sū 45.49 gives a long 
list of medical properties that in Ḍalhaṇa’s reading should equally apply to all 
varieties of milk. According to Jejjaṭa’s text, as observed by Ḍalhaṇa (see note 
172), and also the *Nepalese version of the SS, however, they are accepted to 
be present only in cow milk: 
 
H (94v5) 
E (SS Sū 45.48–49) 
tat tv anekauṣadhirasaḥ prasādakṣīratāṃ 
gataḥ | 
 
 
sarvaprāṇabhṛtāṃ tasmāt sātmyaṃ kṣīram 
ihocyate ||171 
gavyaṃ tu śītasnigdhamadhuram avidāhi, 
vātapitta- […]172 
tat tv anekauṣadhirasaprasādaṃ prāṇadaṃ 
guru | 
madhuraṃ picchilaṃ śītaṃ snigdhaṃ 
ślakṣṇaṃ saraṃ mṛdu | 
sarvaprāṇabhṛtāṃ tasmāt sātmyaṃ kṣīram 
ihocyate || (Sū 45.48ab–ef) 
tatra sarvam eva kṣīraṃ prāṇinām apratiṣid-
dhaṃ jātisātmyāt, vātapitta-[…] 
 
Table 3: SS Sū 45.48–49 in the Nepalese manuscript H and in E 
 
A representative example of a case where Ḍalhaṇa quotes a reading obviously 
corresponding with the *Nepalese version as a known alternative not con-
nected to any particular authority can be seen at SS Sū 15.7. Here the topic is 
the description of the functions of the seven bodily elements (dhātu-s). The 
*Nepalese version merely lists the functions of each dhātu, whereas Ḍalhaṇa’s 
text additionally highlights their consecutive interdependency and thus pre-
sents a more advanced state of the Āyurvedic theory. At the end of the com-
mentary, however, Ḍalhaṇa mentions a reading just slightly different from the 
one found in the Nepalese manuscripts: 
 
 
————— 
 171 Cf. NiSaṃ ad Sū 45.48: Jejjaṭas tu “tat tv anekauṣadhirasaprasādaḥ kṣīratāṃ gataḥ | 
 
 sarvaprāṇabhṛtāṃ tasmāt sātmyaṃ kṣīram ihocyate ||” iti. 
 172 Cf. NiSaṃ ad Sū 45.49: Jejjaṭas tu “gavyaṃ tu śītaṃ snigdhamadhuram avidāhi” iti 
paṭhati, śeṣaṃ tu samam, tanmate gokṣīrasyaiva guṇāḥ ||. 

=== PAGE 46 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
46
E 
rasas tuṣṭiṃ prīṇanaṃ raktapuṣṭiṃ ca karoti, raktaṃ varṇaprasādaṃ 
māṃsapuṣṭiṃ jīvayati ca, māṃsaṃ śarīrapuṣṭiṃ medasaś ca, medaḥ snehasve-
dau dṛḍhatvaṃ puṣṭim asthnāṃ ca, asthīni dehadhāraṇaṃ majjñaḥ puṣṭiṃ ca, 
majjā prītiṃ snehaṃ balaṃ śukrapuṣṭiṃ pūraṇam asthnāṃ ca karoti, śukraṃ 
dhairyaṃ cyavanaṃ prītiṃ dehabalaṃ harṣaṃ bījārthaṃ ca || 
K: 14r7 
N: 12v2 
H: 28r1 
rasaḥ prīṇayati, raktaṃ jīvayati, māṃsaṃ lepayati, medaḥ snehayati, asthi 
dhārayati, majjā pūrayati, bījārthaharṣakṛc chukraṃ kledayati || 
NiSaṃ 
anye tv anyathā paṭhanti — “rasaḥ prīṇayati, raktaṃ jīvayati, māṃsaṃ lepayati, 
medaḥ snehayati, asthi dhārayati, majjā asthīni pūrayati, śukraṃ dhairyacya-
vanaṃ prītidehabalaharṣabījārthakṛt” iti, vyākhyānayanti ca […] ayaṃ pāṭho ni-
bandhakāraiḥ sādaraṃ paṭhitaḥ |173 
 
Table 4: SS Sū 15.7 in the Nepalese manuscripts, in E and in the NiSaṃ 
 
An example of a peculiar variant in terms of content unnoticed by the com-
mentators is found in the same fifteenth chapter of the Sū immediately pre-
ceding the passage quoted in Table 4. In Sū 15.5–6 Ḍalhaṇa’s text (and, in 
fact, the text printed in all vulgate versions) divides not just vāta (the humour 
wind), but also pitta (the humour bile) and śleṣman (the humour phlegm) into 
five types. The *Nepalese text, for its part, omits the division of the latter two 
entities. It is taken up in Sū 21, however, so that it is not the existence but the 
importance of this concept in the *Nepalese version of the SS (or, for that 
matter, at an earlier state in the development of āyurvedic doctrine connected 
with the SS) that should be re-examined. 
 
As can be expected, a significant number of variants pertain to matters of 
pharmacology. In fact, one of the main highlights of the Nepalese manuscripts 
of the SS — the appended Sauśrutanighaṇṭu — concerns exactly this area of 
medical knowledge. As this text was recently published and extensively stud-
ied along with the respective chapters of the SS, I shall not devote much space 
to it here. Among many significant findings, Suvedī and Tivārī (2000) made 
the general observation that the text of the SauNi is by far more closely related 
to the pharmacological chapters (above all, to Sū 38, the Dravyasaṃgraha- 
————— 
 173 The identity of the nibandhakāra-s (or, possibly, a single well-respected ni-
bandhakāra), who are quoted by Ḍalhaṇa at a number of instances (cf. HIML IA, pp. 
376f.), remains undetermined. In the current case, it is noteworthy that the reading of 
the SS quoted in the NiSaṃ largely corresponds with the one presupposed by the 
Bhānumatī. 

=== PAGE 47 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
47
ṇīya) of the *Nepalese version than to the text of these chapters known from 
the vulgate versions of the SS.174 Here, apart from several groups of drugs 
(gaṇa-s) listed in different positions or missing substances in comparison to 
the text of the vulgate versions, the Nepalese manuscripts account for only 35 
instead of 37 groups commonly ascribed to the SS.175 Two gaṇa-s, the so-
called trikaṭu and āmalakyādi, are omitted in both the *Nepalese SS and the 
SauNi. From among many internal deviations in the lists, one may highlight 
the use of eraṇḍa (castor seed) instead of trikaṇṭaka (puncture vine) in the 
well-known combination called kanīyapañcamūla or laghupañcamūla (on this 
variant in other medical texts, see also Ghildiyal & Joshi [2012]). 
3.2.2. The Number of Pramehapiṭakā-s176 (SS Ni 6.14–19) 
In this section I consider the number and the list of skin lesions (piṭakā) asso-
ciated with urinary disease (prameha).177 In order to visualize the problem, I 
present the text of SS Ni 6.14–19 as found in E and the *Nepalese version, 
along with the parallels from CS Sū 17.82–90 and Mādhavanidāna (MN) 
59.29–34, in Table 5. 
 
 
————— 
 174 Cf. Suvedī & Tivārī (2000, p. 45): “suśrutasaṃhitāyā hastalikhitagranthāntargato 
dravyasaṃgrahaṇīyādhyāya eva sauśrutanighaṇṭugranthasyādhāro vartate viśeṣeṇa | 
paraṃ tatrāpi kvacit gaṇakramabhaṅgaḥ, gaṇeṣu dravyāṇāṃ kramabhaṅgaḥ, gaṇokta- 
dravyāṇāṃ paryāyādyanullekhaḥ, anuktadravyāṇāṃ paryāyavacrṇanaś [!] ca vihitaṃ 
dṛśyate ||.” Furthermore, paragraphs 3.a), 3.ā), 3.i) and 3.ī) in Suvedī & Tivārī (2000, 
pp. 45–46) list cases where the text of the SS presupposed by the SauNi differs from 
both the *Nepalese and the vulgate versions. 
 175 Cf. Suvedī & Tivārī (2000, p. 22). 
 176 The orthography of the word piṭakā adopted here is attested throughout the Nepalese 
manuscripts of the SS at all instances of its usage. In printed sources, however, the 
word is most commonly spelled as piḍakā, as in all consulted editions of the SS, 
whereas Kunte and Navre (1939), for example, opt for piṭikā. Surendran (2008, p. 96) 
lists all three spellings.  
 177 Note that according to CS Sū 17.104–106 and Ḍalhaṇa’s remark at the very beginning 
of SS Ci 12, pramehapiṭakā-s (literally, skin lesions [associated] with urinary disease) 
can arise without a urinary disease as a precondition, but due to the corrupted element 
fat (duṣṭamedas). From a therapeutical point of view, Ḍalhaṇa adds, these lesions are 
treated equally, since their pathogenesis involves the same doṣa-s (morbific entities) 
and dūṣya-s (i.e., corruptible entities, such as the dhātu-s, etc.). 

=== PAGE 48 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
48
 
E 
tatra vasāmedobhyām abhipannaśarīrasya tribhir doṣaiś cānugatadhātoḥ 
pramehiṇo daśa piḍakā jāyante | 
tad yathā — śarāvikā (1), sarṣapikā (2), kacchapikā (3), jālinī (4), vinatā (5), 
putriṇī (6), masūrikā (7), alajī (8), vidārikā (9), vidradhikā (10) ceti || (Ni 6.14) 
 
N, H tatra vasāmedobhyām abhipannaśarīrasya doṣair anugatadhātoḥ pramehiṇo 
nava piṭakāḥ saṃjāyante | 
tad yathā — sarāvikā (1), sarṣapī (2), kacchapikā (3), jālinī (4), putriṇī (5), 
masūrikā (6), alajī (7), vidārikā (8), vidradhikā (9) ceti || 
 
E 
śarāvamātrā tadrūpā nimnamadhyā śarāvikā (Ni 6.15ab) 
 
N, H antonnatā ca tadrūpā nimnamadhyā sarāvikā 
MN 
antonnatā tu tadrūpā nimnamadhyā śarāvikā (59.29ab) 
CS 
antonnatā madhyanimnā śyāvā kledaruganvitā | śarāvikā syāt piḍakā 
śarāvākṛtisaṃsthitā || (Sū 17.84) 
 
E 
gaurasarṣapasaṃsthānā tatpramāṇā ca sārṣapī (Ni 6.15cd) 
 
N, H gaurasarṣapasaṃsthānā tatpramāṇā ca sarṣapī 
MN 
gaurasarṣapasaṃsthānā tatpramāṇā ca sarṣapī (59.29cd) 
CS 
piḍakā nātimahatī kṣiprapākā mahārujā | sarṣapī sarṣapābhābhiḥ piḍakābhiś 
citā bhavet || (Sū 17.87) 
 
E 
sadāhā kūrmasaṃsthānā jñeyā kacchapikā budhaiḥ (Ni 6.16ab) 
 
N, H sadāhā kūrmasaṃsthānā jñeyā kacchapikā budhaiḥ 
MN 
sadāhā kūrmasaṃsthānā jñeyā kacchapikā budhaiḥ (59.30ab) 
CS 
avagāḍhārtinistodā mahāvāstuparigrahā | ślakṣṇā kacchapapṛṣṭhābhā piḍakā 
kacchapī matā || (Sū 17.85) 
 
E 
jālinī tīvradāhā tu māṃsajālasamāvṛtā (Ni 6.16cd) 
 
N, H jālinī tīvradāhā tu māṃsajālasamāvṛtā  
MN 
jālinī tīvradāhā tu māṃsajālasamāvṛtā (59.30cd) 
CS 
stabdhā sirājālavatī snigdhāsrāvā mahāśayā | rujānistodabahulā sūkṣmacchidrā 
ca jālinī || (Sū 17.86) 
 
E 
mahatī piḍakā nīlā piḍakā vinatā smṛtā (Ni 6.17ab) 
 
N, H om. 
CS 
avagāḍharujākledā pṛṣṭhe vāpy udare 'pi vā | mahatī vinatā nīlā piḍakā vinatā 
matā || (Sū 17.89) 
MN 
avagāḍharujākledā pṛṣṭhe vāpy udare 'pi vā | mahatī piḍakā nīlā vinatā nāma sā 
smṛtā || (59.31) 
 
 

=== PAGE 49 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
49
 
E 
mahaty alpācitā jñeyā piḍakā sā tu putriṇī (Ni 6.17cd) 
 
N, H mahaty alpacitā jñeyā piṭakā cāpi putriṇī  
MN 
mahaty alpacitā jñeyā piḍakā cāpi putriṇī (59.32ab) 
CS 
om. 
 
E 
masūrasamasaṃsthānā jñeyā sā tu masūrikā (Ni 6.18ab) 
 
N, H masūrasaṃsthānasamā vijñeyā tu masūrikā  
MN 
masūrākṛtisaṃsthānā vijñeyā tu masūrikā (59.32cd) 
CS 
om. 
 
E 
raktā sitā sphoṭavatī dāruṇā tv alajī bhavet (Ni 6.18cd) 
 
N, H raktā sitā sphoṭa*citā dāruṇā tv alajī bhavet 
 
 
*sphoṭa°] H; sphoṭā° N. The adopted reading of the younger H, supported here 
by MN, accounts for a correct bha-vipulā. The reading of N, on the other hand, 
is metrically faulty. A study of metres used in the SS is still to be undertaken. 
MN 
raktā sitā sphoṭacitā dāruṇā tv alajī bhavet (51.33ab) 
CS 
dahati tvacam utthāne tṛṣṇāmohajvarapradā | visarpaty aniśaṃ duḥkhād dahaty 
agnir ivālajī || (Sū 17.88) 
 
E 
vidārīkandavad vṛttā kaṭhinā ca vidārikā (Ni 6.19ab) 
 
N, H vidārīkandavad vṛttā kaṭhinā ca vidārikā 
MN 
vidārīkandavad vṛttā kaṭhinā ca vidārikā (51.33cd) 
CS 
om. 
 
E 
vidradher lakṣaṇair yuktā jñeyā vidradhikā budhaiḥ (Ni 6.19cd) 
 
N, H vidradher lakṣaṇair yuktā jñeyā vidradhikā budhaiḥ  
MN 
vidradher lakṣaṇair yuktā jñeyā vidradhikā tu sā (51.34ab) 
CS 
vidradhiṃ dvividhām āhur bāhyām ābhyantarīṃ tathā | bāhyā tvak-
snāyumāṃsotthā kaṇḍarābhā mahārujā || (Sū 17.90) 
 
Table 5:  SS Ni 6.14–19 according to E and the Nepalese manuscripts (N: 56r2–3; H: 137v6 
– 138r4), along with the parallels from the CS and MN. 
 
As one can see, a major difference between the readings of E (as well as all 
other printed sources of the SS) and the *Nepalese version lies in the number 
of skin lesions to be accounted for. N and H omit the type called vinatā in 
both instances — that is, in the general list as well as in the descriptive verses 
— and read accordingly “nine” (nava) instead of “ten” (daśa) as the exact 
number of varieties of lesions.  
 
 

=== PAGE 50 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
50
 
Though the parallel passage in MN 59.27–34178 seems to support the num-
ber and the list of piṭakā-s presented in the vulgate versions, it contains an 
important pointer. Whereas the wording of the MN resembles the text of the 
SS in the absolute majority of cases, precisely in the definition of vinatā it 
clearly depends on the CS. It is worth noting that the respective verse in the 
vulgate of the SS is also unusually close to the wording of the CS. 
 
Furthermore, the text of the SS as found in the consulted printed sources 
contains an internal inconsistency. Namely, the counterpart of the concerned 
passage in SS Ci 12 deals with only nine varieties of pramehapiṭakā-s and 
omits the concerned type vinatā. Neither Ḍalhaṇa nor Hārāṇacandra problem-
atize this issue, which had been, however, already discussed by their prede-
cessor Gayadāsa. To quote his commentary on SS Ni 6.14–19, along with a 
collation of the manuscript of the Nyāyacandrikā (NC) that I was permitted to 
consult (Anup Sanskrit Library, Bikaner, no. 4390, 36r5–9):179 
 
piḍikās tu sapta Carake, Suśrute nava | Suśrute yadāpy anye180 vinatām 
adhīyate, “nīlāvagāḍharujā” 181 ityādinā, tatpāṭhe 182 tu saṃkhyātirekāt 
samānatantreṣv apāṭhāc ca183 sā na paṭhanīyā | tathā hi Bhojaḥ — 
 
sarāvikā (1) sarṣapikā (2) kūrmikā (3) jālinī (4) tathā | 
 
kulatthikā (5) ’lajī (6) putrī (7) vidāri (8) vidradhī (9) tathā | 
 
navaitāḥ piḍikā jñeyā mehināṃ lakṣaṇaiḥ śṛṇu184 | 
————— 
 178 Further parallels not presented here are Aṣṭāṅgasaṅgraha (AS) Ni 10.11–12, 
Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya (AH) Ni 10.27–34, and Bhāvaprakāśa Madhyakhaṇḍa 38.28–36, the 
latter being almost identical with the passage in the MN. 
 179 The collated manuscript is likely to be identical with (or related to) the one used by 
Jādavjī Trikamjī and ‘Kāvyatīrtha’ (1938 [2004]) for their edition of the text, because 
(1) Jādavjī Trikamjī obtained his copy from the same royal library in Bikaner (p. 22), 
and because (2) according to my survey, only one among the three extant manuscripts 
of the NC listed in Dash (2014, p. 374b) contains the commentary on Ni. 
 180 yadāpy anye] conj.; yavānpe Anup 4390; ye E. 
 181 Cf. AS Ni 10.12: mahatī nīlāvagāḍharujākledā pṛṣṭhodarānyatarādhiṣṭhānā vinatā 
vinatā |. Note that avagāḍharujā nīlā instead of nīlāvagāḍharujā would account for a 
metrically correct uneven pāda of an anuṣṭubh verse. 
 182 tatpāṭhe] E; tatpoṭhe Anup 4390. 
 183 apāṭhāc ca] Anup 4390; apāṭhat E. 
 184 śṛṇu] Anup 4390; śṛṇu │ iti E. 

=== PAGE 51 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
51
tasmāt tulyatantrasaṃvādāt185 tathaiva vinatātra186 vihatāstīti | masūri-
kaiva Bhoje kulatthikā || 
 
The skin lesions, for their part, are seven in the Caraka[saṃhitā], [and] 
nine in the Suśruta[saṃhitā]. But even though others, by [accepting the 
variant] “blue, [causing] deep pain,” etc., study the vinatā type in the 
Suśruta[saṃhitā], it (i.e., the concerned type of lesion) should not be read 
here, because, should this reading be [accepted], there would be an excess 
in the number [of lesions], and because it is not taught in treatises [belong-
ing to the] same [tradition]. To explain further, the Bhoja[saṃhitā gives 
the following list]: 
sarāvikā (1) […], also vidradhī (9) ― listen to these nine [types of] lesions 
of people suffering from urinary diseases which should be known along 
with their definitions. 
Therefore, because of the agreement with similar treatises, the vinatā has 
been rejected here in exactly the same way (i.e., as in the Bhojasaṃhitā). 
It is really the masūrikā type (i.e., not the vinatā type) that is [called] ku-
latthikā in the Bhoja[saṃhitā]. 
 
As becomes evident from the above quote, Gayadāsa was aware of an effort 
to bring all possible types of piṭakā-s together in the text of the SS. He rejected 
this development, however, and accepted the shorter list of skin lesions, thus 
staying in line with what he regarded to be the original and hence more au-
thoritative list that is corroborated by SS Ci 12.  
 
Noteworthy is the variant reading nīlāvagāḍharujā quoted in the NC 
which differs from the reading accepted by Ḍalhaṇa and assimilated in the 
later transmission of the SS, in a distinct way. What is more, the variant vio-
lates the norms of the anuṣṭubh meter (in fact, it does not seem to be metrical 
at all) and in this way appears quite alien in the context of a metrical text 
passage. Its agreement with the corresponding passage in the AS is as remark-
able as it is difficult to interpret unequivocally: one may wonder whether the 
variant known to Gayadāsa gave rise to the known text of the AS or whether 
it occurred the other way round. 
 
Another circumstance is significant for the evaluation of the text-histori-
cal value of the *Nepalese version of the SS. At several instances, where the 
Nepalese manuscripts have a reading different from E, the MN follows the 
————— 
 185 °saṃvādāt] E; °sāmāt Anup 4390. 
 186 vinatātra] conj.; vinatāstu Anup 4390; vinatā E. 

=== PAGE 52 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
52
Nepalese variant.187 From this we can reasonably assume that the version of 
the SS that Mādhava (ca. 8th c.)188 had at his disposal for this part of the text 
was still closer to the *Nepalese version than the recension popularized by 
Ḍalhaṇa. This is further corroborated by the observation that Mādhava bor-
rowed the description of vinatā from the CS: it must have been absent from 
his text of the SS. 
3.2.3. The Number of Prāṇa-s (SS Śā 4.3) 
The discussion in this section deals with the variation in the list of prāṇa-s 
(“vital energies” or “vital forces”) active in the production of a human foetus. 
This list is found at the beginning of SS Śā 4. As in the previous case, I resort 
to the learned remarks found in the NC to evaluate the readings. It is impossi-
ble, however, to detail Gayadāsa’s explanations in the scope of the present 
article, so that I shall use them here merely as textual evidence for the exist-
ence of a certain reading and hope to examine their content on another occa-
sion.  
 
The text of Śā 4.3, as found in the vulgate versions and in the only Nepa-
lese manuscript (H) that is available for this part, reads as follows: 
 
H (168v2) 
E 
agnīṣomau189 (1, 2) vāyuḥ (3) sattvaṃ (4) 
rajas (5) tamaḥ (6) pañcendriyāṇi (7–11) 
bhūtātmā (12) manaś (13) ceti prāṇāḥ | 
agniḥ (1) somo (2) vāyuḥ (3) sattvaṃ (4) 
rajas (5) tamaḥ (6) pañcendriyāṇi (7–11) 
bhūtātmeti (12) prāṇāḥ | 
Cf. BhP Pūrvakhaṇḍa 3.320: garbhasya kiṃ kiṃ viśiṣṭopakārakaṃ tad āha ― 
agnīṣomau (1, 2) mahī (3) vāyur (4) nabhaḥ (5) sattvaṃ (6) rajas (7) tamaḥ (8) | 
pañcendriyāṇi (9–13) bhūtātmā (14) garbhaṃ sañjīvayanti hi || 
 
Table 6: SS Śā 4.3 according to E and the *Nepalese version, along with a parallel from 
the BhP. 
 
 
 
————— 
 187 The text of the MN is closer to the *Nepalese version of the SS than to E in the de-
scriptions of śarāvikā, putriṇī and alajī (see Table 5). In the cases of masūrikā and 
vidradhikā, it equally resembles both versions and introduces its own variants. 
 188 See HIML IIA, p. 72. 
 189 °ṣomau] em.; °ṣomo H. 

=== PAGE 53 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
53
 
The difference between the two versions of the text is in the number of 
prāṇa-s. While E accounts for twelve items, H lists manas (“mind”) in addi-
tion to that, and thus has a total of thirteen elements.190 The only obvious par-
allel I could find in another medical textbook is the passage from the BhP 
presented above.191 Yet we can see that the list there does not match either 
reading. The archaic, or, at least, less common in āyurvedic literature three-
fold group consisting of agni (“fire”), soma (“the somic substance”, i.e., wa-
ter?), and vāyu (“wind”) is supplemented by mahī (“earth”) and nabhas 
(“sky”, though in the current context rather “space” or “ether”), and thus 
transformed into a well-known list of five gross elements.192 Given that the 
decisive item manas (“mind”) is not present in the list of the BhP, it is more 
likely that the latter list was inspired by the enumeration found in E and com-
mented upon by Ḍalhaṇa.193 
 
Another interesting and much earlier occurrence of the list is found in 
Cakrapāṇidatta’s Bhānumatī on SS Sū 15.21.194 Here, commenting on a verse 
devoted to the qualities of ojas (“vital fluid”) and discussing the meaning of 
the word prāṇāyatana (roughly, “seat of vital energy”), Cakrapāṇi gives the 
following list: 
 
agniḥ (1) somo (2) vāyuḥ (3) sattvaṃ (4) pañcendriyāṇi (5–9) bhūtātmā 
(10) manaś (11) ceti prāṇāḥ 
————— 
 190 On the role of the manas and the connected manovahā channel in the yogic physiology 
described in the Vārṣṇeyādhyātma section of the Mahābhārata, see Takahashi (2019).  
 191 This parallel is also noted and discussed in Das (2003, p. 164). 
 192 Kirfel (1951, p. 8) argues for the originality of the three elements fire, water and wind: 
“Diese ursprüngliche Dreizahl der Elemente gehört offenbar zu einer älteren Kultur-
stufe der Menschheit, als sie noch unter der Wirkung eines dualistischen Grundprin-
zips stand.” Frauwallner (1953, pp. 31–43) speaks of the three fundamental doctrines 
of the Upaṇiṣads (“die Lehre vom Kreislauf des Wassers”, “die Atemlehre” and “die 
Feuerlehre”), which are obviously related to the three gross elements. Frauwallner’s 
arguments are summarized in Wujastyk (2004, p. 349). For an overview of citations 
from āyurvedic literature that allude to the trinity of elements, see Das (2003, pp. 161–
166). 
 193 Note that Ḍalhaṇa enumerates the very same twelve prāṇa-s at two further instances 
in the NiSaṃ: in the commentary to SS Sū 5.24b and in the commentary to SS Ut 66.7. 
Curiously enough, the latter verse (as found in E as well as in K 209r1) speaks of only 
eleven prāṇa-s (prāṇāś caikādaśaiva ye), so that at least part of Ḍalhaṇa’s commenta-
torial effort is spent on harmonizing both lists. 
 194 This is also noted in Das (2003, p.164, n. 527). 

=== PAGE 54 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
54
 
This list, as printed in Trikamji Acharya & Nandakishor (1939 [2001]), 
even though it contains the relevant item manas, lacks rajas and tamas, two 
essential items, which together with sattva make the fundamental threefold 
group of qualities or constituents of primal matter (guṇa-s) according to 
Sāṃkhya metaphysics. Nevertheless, it is probable that the explanation for the 
omission of these two guṇa-s should be sought not with Cakrapāṇidatta, but 
with the transmission of his commentary, preserved so far in only a single 
manuscript. Without access to this textual witness, it remains a matter of pure 
speculation whether or not the eleventh-century Bengali commentator was fa-
miliar with the same version of the list as the one found in H. 
 
Strong evidence for the knowledge and acceptance of the list preserved in 
the Nepalese manuscript can be found in Gayadāsa’s Nyāyacandrikā on SS Ni 
1.13. Starting with the printed evidence, supplemented by the evidence of the 
manuscript (Anup Sanskrit Library, Bikaner, no. 4390, 8r4),195 we find the 
following remark in the NC on SS Ni 1.13 (“The wind circulating in the mouth 
is called prāṇa [“breath”], which upholds the body; it makes the [solid] food 
enter [the body] and also supports the vital forces [prāṇa-s]”):196 
 
[...] prāṇāṃś cā 197 gnīṣomādīn anilavarjitān 198 dvādaśa, athavā tray-
odaśaiva,199 vāto ’pi vātāntaram avalambata200 eva | 
 
[…] and [supports] the prāṇa-s, that is, the twelve [prāṇa-s] beginning 
with fire and the somic substance, except for wind, or, alternatively, [it 
supports] all thirteen [prāṇa-s], [inasmuch as] wind, for its part, certainly 
supports other [kind(s) of] wind. 
 
Gayadāsa unambiguously refers here to the list of thirteen prāṇa-s in total and 
provides two alternative ways to account for the interaction between vāyu, 
————— 
 195 As the library does not allow any kind of reproduction of its holdings, I have examined 
this manuscript during my visit there. 
 196 SS Ni 1.13 (in E): yo vāyur vaktrasaṃcārī sa prāṇo nāma dehadhṛk | so 'nnaṃ 
praveśayaty antaḥ prāṇāṃś cāpy avalambate ||. 
 197 prāṇāṃś cā°] conj.; prāṇān cā° Anup 4390; prāṇān E. 
 198 °varjitān] E; °varjitā Anup 4390. 
 199 trayodaśaiva] E; tapodviśaiva Anup 4390. 
 200 avalambata] E; avalamba Anup 4390. 

=== PAGE 55 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
55
itself a member of the group, and the other prāṇa-s in the list: vāyu either 
supports the twelve other prāṇa-s, or, alternatively, it supports itself as well.201  
 
That the list Gayadāsa presupposed in the passage quoted above was iden-
tical with the one in H is confirmed by his as yet unpublished commentary on 
SS Śā (Cambridge Add. 2491). Here, at Śā 4.3 (33v2ff.), the commentator 
discusses each of its items separately and in relation to each other. At the level 
of a mere gloss, the word bhūtātman is explained as karmapuruṣa, whereas 
manas is explained as cetanā. Gayadāsa also mentions the opinion of Jaḍa (= 
Jejjaṭa), who proposed not to read manas here since there is no difference 
between it and the bhūtātman. This must be the tradition silently followed by 
Ḍalhaṇa and thus adopted in the later transmission of the SS.  
 
The example described in the foregoing demonstrates once again that the 
*Nepalese version of the SS enables us directly to access a very early stage of 
textual development of the SS. At the same time, it highlights the importance 
of thorough research into the commentarial literature of Āyurveda, which so 
far remains largely unpublished. 
 
————— 
 201 The exact meaning and implication of Gayadāsa’s remarks are not entirely clear to me 
at the moment. According to my initial assessment, the special type of wind, the one 
active in the mouth and technically designated prāṇa, could be said to support other 
winds, inasmuch as it can support the other four types of wind (udāna, samāna, vyāna, 
and apāna), which are enumerated in the directly preceding verse (SS Ni 1.12) and 
examined in the following verses (Ni 1.13–20). According to a suggestion of the spe-
cial editors of this volume, however, Gayadāsa may be drawing a contrast between the 
special form of wind (the one active in the mouth and called prāṇa) and the inner vital 
force “wind” that is conceived as another kind of wind. Gayadāsa’s further explana-
tions of the same verse add a certain complexity to the whole issue (and, perhaps, 
support the editors’ interpretation). In short, he argues that the very mention of the 
capacity of prāṇa (i.e., the prāṇavāyu, one of the five bodily winds) to support the 
prāṇa-s (i.e., the vital principles in the body) indicates that, in harmony with other 
treatises, the author of SS actually holds the opinion that the prāṇavāyu is located in 
the whole of the upper body and, specifically, sustains the region of the heart. It is in 
this way that the prāṇavāyu supports the prāṇa-s, because they are located in the heart 
(vaktre saṃcaraṇam asyoktaṃ vaktracaratvād vāyoḥ, prāṇāvalambanavacanena tu 
hṛdayāvalambanam uktam […] vaktrasaṃcāritvaṃ cāsyopalakṣaṇam, tena mūrdho- 
raḥkaṇṭhanāsikā api prāṇasthānam […] prāṇānām agnīṣomādīnān ādheyānām ava-
lambanavacanenādhārabhūtahṛdayāvalambanam evocyate, tatraiva teṣāṃ samastā- 
nām avasthiteḥ). 

=== PAGE 56 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
56
4. Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to express my current hypotheses concerning the 
*Nepalese version of the SS and to summarize the evidence in their support. 
 
The three Nepalese manuscripts of the SS discussed here transmit a version of 
the text particular to a certain hyperarchetype or a group of such. They pre-
serve several features specific to this/these hyperarchetype(s). These features 
were transmitted locally in Nepal and may possibly have originated there: 
 
a. On the basis of paleographic features and the information given in the 
colophons to K and H, one can conclude that all Nepalese manuscripts dis-
cussed here were produced in Nepal. 
 
b. The colophon in K suggests that it was produced for use in a certain 
family. 
 
c. The chapter-group colophons suggest the origin of the Nepalese manu-
scripts from a a certain hyperarchetype in which these paratexts had been 
added by a scribe. The same is most likely true for the auspicious scribal 
phrase found at the beginning of the SauNi in both H and K. Particular atten-
tion should be paid to the Buddhist character of this invocation. The scribe of 
H does not show any Buddhist inclinations elsewhere. 
 
d. According to the present state of research, the existence of an important 
SauNi has not been mentioned in any of the classical Indian medical treatises 
and commentaries on them. The text of the SauNi, on the other hand, corre-
sponds with the specific features of the *Nepalese version of the SS.  
 
It seems probable that the hypearchetype of the *Nepalese version would have 
arrived in Nepal from India, possibly from Bengal or elsewhere in Eastern 
India: 
 
e. Plentiful evidence proves that certain Indian commentators, starting 
with Jejjaṭa, knew readings of the SS similar or equal to those preserved in the 
Nepalese manuscripts. Thus, it is difficult to maintain that the *Nepalese ver-
sion was disseminated to India from Nepal. 
 
f. The readings of the SS followed by the Bengali commentator Cakrapāṇi-
datta seem to be much closer to the text of the *Nepalese version than those 
followed by Ḍalhaṇa. 
 
g. It is possible that Mādhava (8th c., Bengal) was familiar with a version 
of the SS similar to the *Nepalese version (see Section 3.2.2). A close study 
of parallels in the MN is a desideratum that will enable us to ascertain or reject 
this hypothesis. 

=== PAGE 57 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
57
The *Nepalese version of the SS represents an early stage in the development 
of the text: 
 
h. The date of the copy of K, April 13, AD 878, sets the terminus ante 
quem for the age of the *Nepalese version. This manuscript probably predates 
the composition of the major commentarial works on the SS, that is, Ga-
yadāsa’s Nyāyacandrikā (ca. 10th to 11th c.), Cakrapāṇidatta’s Bhānumatī 
(about the third quarter of the 11th c.), Ḍalhaṇa’s Nibandhasaṃgraha (NiSaṃ) 
(ca. 12th c.) and Candraṭa’s Suśrutapāṭhaśuddhi (ca. 10th to 11th c.), but post-
dates Jejjaṭa’s work (7th or 8th c.).  
 
i. Several variant readings discussed above, both pertaining to the struc-
ture and content of the text, can be considered as archaic as far as their origi-
nality (see, for example, Sections 3.1.2–3) and the development of medical 
doctrines (see Section 3.2) are concerned.  
 
I hope to have proven that the study of the *Nepalese version of SS is a matter 
of considerable significance not just for our knowledge of an early local trans-
mission of the text, but, more importantly, for the estimation of original read-
ings, and thus for serious text-historical research on the SS. It is important to 
remember, though, that the Nepalese manuscripts do not provide us with an 
Ur-Suśrutasaṃhitā or anything of the like. They do, however, provide us with 
exceptionally rare and valuable textual data, which must be carefully evalu-
ated on the basis of all available sources. In this respect, I would like to em-
phasize the importance of a thorough examination of both the published and 
unpublished commentatorial literature on the SS. 
Abbreviations 
Titles of Sanskrit texts 
AS  
 
Aṣṭāṅgasaṃgraha 
CS  
 
Carakasaṃhitā 
MN  
 
Mādhavanidāna 
NiSaṃ  
Nibandhasaṃgraha, commentary on the Suśrutasaṃhitā by  
 
 
 
Ḍalhaṇācārya (vulgo Ḍalhaṇa) 
NC  
 
Nyāyacandrikā, commentary on the Suśrutasaṃhitā by Gayadāsa 
SauNi 
 
Sauśrutanighaṇṭu 
SS  
 
Suśrutasaṃhitā; the numbering of passages follows E unless  
 
 
 
otherwise stated 
 
 

=== PAGE 58 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
58
Sections in Sanskrit medical works 
Ci  
 
Cikitsāsthāna 
Ka  
 
Kalpasthāna 
Ni  
 
Nidānasthāna 
Śā  
 
Śārīrasthāna 
Śl  
 
Ślokasthāna 
Sū  
 
Sūtrasthāna 
Ut  
 
Uttaratantra 
Bibliographical references 
E 
 
 
SS in Jādavjī Trikamjī & ‘Kāvyatīrtha’ (1938 [2004]) 
H 
 
 
Nepalese manuscript H of the SS, see Section 2.3 
HIML 
 
Meulenbeld (1999–2002) 
K 
 
 
Nepalese manuscript K of the SS, see Section 2.1 
N 
 
 
Nepalese manuscript N of the SS, see Section 2.2 
Pancanga 
Yano & Fushimi (2014) 
Sigla used in the text-critical notes 
] 
 
 
end of a lemma 
AC  
 
ante correctionem (before correction) 
conj. 
 
conjectured 
conj. DA 
conjectured by Prof. Diwakar Acharya 
om.  
 
omitted 
PC  
 
post correctionem (after correction) 
Miscellaneous abbreviations 
NAK 
 
National Archives, Kathmandu 
NGMCP 
Nepalese–German Manuscript Cataloguing Project 
NGMPP  
Nepal–German Manuscript Preservation Project 
NS  
 
Nepal (Nepāla/Newari/Newar/Nevāra) Saṃvat 
VS  
 
Vikrama Saṃvat 
 
 

=== PAGE 59 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
59
References 
Manuscripts of the Suśrutasaṃhitā and its commentaries 
Nyāyacandrikā 
— on Suśrutasaṃhitā Nidānasthāna: Devanāgarī, paper, ca. 60 folios, incomplete, dam-
aged. Anup Sanskrit Library, Bikaner: no. 4390. 
— on Suśrutasaṃhitā Śārīrasthāna: Devanāgarī, paper, 67 folios, incomplete, partly dam-
aged. University Library, Cambridge: Add. 2691. 
— on Suśrutasaṃhitā Sūtrasthāna: Jaina Devanāgarī, paper, ca. 60 folios, incomplete, 
damaged. Anup Sanskrit Library, Bikaner: no. 4389. 
Suśrutasaṃhitā 
— Transitional Gupta, palm-leaf, 152 folios, incomplete, partly damaged, date of copy: 
April 13, 878. http://catalogue.ngmcp.uni-hamburg.de/wiki/C_80-7_Suśrutasaṃhitā. 
Accessed September 21, 2020. Kaiser Shamsher Library, Kathmandu: KL 699 
(NGMCP C 80/7). Siglum: K. 
— Newari, palm-leaf, 435 folios, complete, date of copy: *1573. http://cata-
logue.ngmcp.uni-hamburg.de/wiki/B_29-19_Suśrutasaṃhitā. Accessed September 
21, 2020. National Archives Kathmandu: NAK 5/333 (NGMCP B 29/19). Siglum: H. 
— Newari, 
palm-leaf, 
65 
folios, 
incomplete. 
http://catalogue.ngmcp.uni-ham-
burg.de/wiki/A_45-5_(Suśrutasaṃhitā). Accessed September 21, 2020. National Ar-
chives Kathmandu: NAK 1–1079 (NGMCP A 45/5–1 = A 1267/11–2). Siglum: N. 
Suśrutavyākhyā. Devanāgarī transcript, paper, 217 pages, date of transcription: 1920.  
Goverment Oriental Manuscript Library, Madras: R 3422. 
Printed editions and translations of the Suśrutasaṃhitā  
and its commentaries 
Bhaṭṭācārya, J.B.T. (Ed.) (1889). Suśrutaḥ. Sūtranidānaśārīracikitsakalpottarakalpita 
āyurvedaḥ. Bhagavatā dhanvantariṇopadiṣṭaḥ śuśrutanāmadheyena tacchiṣyeṇa vi-
racitaḥ. Calcutta: Śrī Kṣetramohanamukhopādhyāya. 
Bhaṭṭācārya, C. (Ed.) (1908). Suśrutasaṃhitā of Suśruta: Originally expounded by Kāśirāja 
Divodāsa Dhanvantari. With the commentary Suśrutārtha Sandīpana Bhāṣya by Ka-
virāja Hārāṇacandra Cakravarti. Reprint (in 3 vols.) Varanasi: Chaukhamba Surbha-
rati Prakashan, 2000. 
Bhishagratna, K.L. (Tr.) (1907–1916). An English translation of “The Suśruta Saṃhitā”, 
based on the original Sanskrit text (in three volumes). Calcutta: J.N. Bose. 
Jādavji Trikumji, Ā. (= Jādavjī Trikamjī, Ā.) (Ed.) (1915). The Suśrutasamhita of Suśruta, 
with the Nibandhasaṃgraha commentary of Shri Ḍalhaṇāchārya. Bombay: Tukārām 
Jāvajī, proprietor of the “Nirnaya-Sagar” Press. 

=== PAGE 60 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
60
Jādavji Trikamji, Ā. (= Jādavjī Trikamjī, Ā.) (Ed.) (1931). The Sushrutasaṃhitā of 
Sushruta, with the Nibandhasangraha commentary of Shree Dalhaṇāchārya (Sūtra, 
Nidān, Shārīr, Chikitsa, Kalpasthān and Uttaratantra sthān). 2nd ed. Bombay: Pān-
durang Jāwajī, proprietor of the “Nirṇaya-Sāgar” Press. 
Jādavjī Trikamjī, Ā., & ‘Kāvyatīrtha’, R.Ā.N. (Eds.) (1938). Suśrutasaṃhitā Śrī- 
Ḍalhaṇācāryaviracitayā Nibandhasaṃgrahākhyavyākhyayā, nidānasthānasya Śrī- 
GayadāsācāryaviracitaNyāyācandrikākhyavyākhyayā ca samullasitā. 3rd ed. Bom-
bay: “Nirṇaya Sāgar” Press. Reprint Varanasi: Chowkhamba Krishnadas Academy, 
2004. 
Sharma, P.V. (Tr.) (1999). Suśrutasaṃhitā, with English translation of text and Ḍalhaṇa's 
commentary along with critical notes. Vol. I (Sūtrasthāna). Varanasi: Chaukhamba 
Vishvabharati. 
Sharma, P.V. (Tr.) (2001). Suśrutasaṃhitā, with English translation of text and Ḍalhaṇa's 
commentary along with critical notes. Vol. III (Kalpasthāna and Uttaratantra). Vara-
nasi: Chaukhamba Vishvabharati. 
Suvedī, K.S., & Tivārī, N. (Eds.) (2000). Sauśrutanighaṇṭuḥ: granthādau vistṛtena gran-
thavaiśiṣṭyaprakāśakenopodghātena avasāne ca dravyāṇām anekabhāṣānām āvalī-
paryāyasaṅgrahābhyāṃ samalaṅkr̥taḥ Suśrutasaṃhitāyāṃ prayuktānām auṣadhadra-
vyāṇāṃ paryāya-guṇakarmavarṇātmako ’pūrvagranthaḥ. Belajhuṇḍī, Ḍāṅ: Mahen-
drasaṃskr̥taviśvavidyālayaḥ. 
Yadavaji Trikamji, A. (= Jādavjī Trikamjī, Ā.), & Nandakishor, S.B. (Eds.) (1939). 
Suśruta-Saṃhitā (Sūtra Sthān). With Bhānumatī commentary by Cakrapāṇidatta. With 
introduction by Mahamahopadhyaya Kaviraj Gananatha Sen Saraswati M.A., L.M.S. 
Agra: Pt. Shyāmsundar Sharmā, M.A. Reprint Varanasi: Krishnadas Academy, 2001. 
Printed editions and translations of other Sanskrit works 
Aṣṭādhyāyī 
 
See Sharma (1995). 
Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya 
— Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayam Sūtrasthānam: ṭīkātrayasaṃvalitaṃ saṭippaṇīkaṃ. Edited by 
Rāmaprasāda Śarmā. Bombay: Śrīveṅkateśvar Steam Press, ca. 1928. 
— Śrīmadvāgbhaṭaviracitam 
Aṣṭaṅgahṛdayam: 
Sūtra-Śārīra-Nidāna-Cikitsā-Kalpa- 
Uttarasthānavibhaktam. Śrīmadaruṇadattapraṇītayā Sarvāṅgasundarākhyayā vyā- 
khyayā samalaṃkṛtam. Edited by Anna Moreswar Kunte and Krishna Ramchandra 
Shastri Navre. 3rd ed. Bombay: Tukārāma Jāwajī, 1902. 
Aṣṭāṅgasaṃgraha 
 
Aṣṭāṅgasaṅgrahaḥ Induvyākhyāsahitaḥ. Edited by Ananta Dāmodara Āṭhavale. Pune: 
Śrīmad Ātreya Prakāśanam, 1980. 
 
 

=== PAGE 61 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
61
Bhāvaprakāśa 
The Bhāvaprakasa of Śri Bhāvamiśra. Edited with the Vidyotinī Hindī commentary, 
notes, introduction, index etc. (Part II). Edited by Srī Brahma Śankara Miśra. The 
Kashi Sanskrit Series 130. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1961. 
Carakasaṃhitā 
Carakasaṃhitā of Agniveśa. Elaborated by Caraka and Ḍṛḍhabala. With the 
Āyurveda-Dīpikā commentary by Cakrapaṇidatta. Edited by Vaidya Jadavaji Trikamji 
Acharya (= Jādavjī Trikamjī, Ā.). 3rd ed. Bombay: Nirṇaya-Sāgara Press, 1941. Re-
print Varanasi: Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashan, 2008. 
Kāśikavṛtti (Kāśikā) 
Kāśikavṛtti of Jayāditya-Vāmana (along with commentaries Vivaraṇapañcikā-Nyāsa 
of Jinendrabuddhi and Padamañjarī of Haradatta Miśra). Edited by ŚrīNārāyaṇa 
Miśra. Ratnabharati Series 5–10. 5 vols. Varanasi: Ratna Publications, 1985. 
Mahābhāṣya 
Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāshya of Patanjali. Edited by F. Kielhorn. 3 vols. Bombay: Gover-
ment Central Book Depot, 1880–1884. 
Mādhavanidāna 
Mādhavanidānam: mahāmati-Śrī-Mādhavakara-viracitam, mahāmahopādhyāya-Śrī-
Vijayarakṣita-Śrī-Kaṇṭhadattābhyām viracitayā “Madhukośa”vyākhyayā vibhūṣitam, 
tathā 
[...] 
Āyurvedācārya-Śrī-Sudarśanaśāstri-(A.M.S.)-kṛtayā 
“Vidyotinī” 
hindīṭīkayā, navīnavaijñānika-“Vimarśena” ca samullasitam. Edited by Yadunandana 
Upādhyāya. 2nd ed. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1960. 
Naiṣadhīyacaritam 
— Naiṣadhīyacarita: With the commentary (Naiṣadhīyaprakāśa) of Nārāyaṇa. Edited by 
(Mahāmahopādhyāya) Pandit Śivadatta. 4th ed. Bombay: Tukārām Jāvajī, 1912. 
— Naiṣadhamahākāvya saṭīka (Cāṇḍū Paṇḍita kṛt Naiṣadhadīpikā ṭīkā sahit). Edited by 
Jayadev Jani. Rājasthān Purātan Granthamālā 188. Jodhpur: Rājasthān Prācyavidyā 
Pratiṣṭhān, 1997. 
Vākyapadīya 
— Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari with the commentary of Helarāja. Kāṇḍa III, Part 1. Edited 
by S.K. Iyer. Poona: Deccan College Postgraduate and Research Institute, 1963. 
— Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari with the Prakīrṇakaprakāśa of Helarāja. Kāṇḍa III, Part 2. 
Edited by S.K. Iyer. Poona: Deccan College Postgraduate and Research Institute, 
1973. 
Further literature 
Adriaensen, R., Bakker, H.T., & Isaacson, H. (Eds.) (1998). The Skandapurāṇa: Critically 
edited with prolegomena and English synopsis. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 

=== PAGE 62 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
62
Bhattarai, B. (2019). Dividing texts: conventions of visual text-organization in North Indian 
and Nepalese manuscripts. Studies in Manuscript Cultures 10. Berlin/Boston: Walter 
de Gruyter. 
Das, R.P. (2003). The origin of the life of a human being: Conception and the female ac-
cording to ancient Indian medical and sexological literature. Delhi: Motilal Banar-
sidass Publishers. 
Dash, S. (Ed.) (2014). New Catalogus Catalogorum: An alphabetical Register of Sanskrit 
and allied works and authors. Vol. XXXIV (Śāla – Śīroṣpaniṣad). Chennai / New 
Delhi: University of Madras / National Mission for Manuscripts. 
Deeg, M. (1995). Die altindische Etymologie nach dem Verständnis Yāska’s und seiner 
Vorgänger: Eine Untersuchung über ihre Praktiken, ihre literarische Verbreitung und 
ihr Verhältnis zur dichterischen Gestaltung und Sprachmagie. Würzburger Studien zur 
Sprache und Kultur 2. Dettelbach: J.H. Röll. 
Dīkshit, Ś.B., & Sewell, R. (1896). The Indian calendar: with tables for the conversion of 
Hindu and Muhammadan into A.D. dates, and vice versa. London: Swan Sonnenschein 
& Co. Ltd. 
Dimitrov, D., & Tamot, K. (2007). Kaiser Shamsher, his library and his manuscript col-
lection. Newsletter of the Nepal–German Manuscript Cataloguing Project, 3, 26–36. 
Formigatti, C.A. (2011). Sanskrit annotated manuscripts from Northern India and Nepal. 
PhD Thesis, Universität Hamburg. 
Frauwallner, E. (1953). Geschichte der indischen Philosophie. 1. Band: Die Philosophie 
des Veda und des Epos. Der Buddha und der Jina. Das Sāṃkhya und das klassische 
Yoga-System. Reihe Wort und Antwort 6.1. Salzburg: Otto Müller. 
Friedrich, M. & Schwarke C. (2016). Introduction – manuscripts as evolving entities. In 
M. Friedrich & C. Schwarke (Eds.), One-volume libraries: Composite and multiple-
text manuscripts (pp. 1–26). Studies in Manuscript Cultures 9. Berlin/ Boston: Walter 
De Gruyter. 
Ghildiyal, S. & Joshi, V.K. (2012). A critical review on two types of laghupanchamula. 
Ayu, 33(3), 343–347. 
Goodall, D., Sanderson, A. & Isaacson, H. (2015). The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The earliest 
surviving Śaiva Tantra. A critical edition & annotated translation of the Mūlasūtra, 
Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra. Pondicherry/Hamburg: L’Institut Français de Pondichéry – 
École Française d’Extrême-Orient – Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universität Hamburg. 
Harimoto, K. (2011). In search of the oldest Nepalese manuscript. Rivista degli studi orien-
tali, 84(1–4), 85–106.  
Harimoto, K. (2014). Nepalese manuscripts of the Suśrutasaṃhitā. Journal of Indian and 
Buddhist Studies, 62(3), 1087–1093 (23–29). 
Hodgson, B.H. (1829). Sketch of Buddhism, derived from the Bauddha scriptures of Nipál. 
Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 2(1), 222–257. 
Kielhorn, F. (1888). The epoch of the Newar era. Indian Antiquary, 17, 246–253. 

=== PAGE 63 ===
On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1) 
 
63
Kirfel, W. (1951). Die fünf Elemente, insbesondere Wasser und Feuer: Ihre Bedeutung für 
den Ursprung altindischer and altmediterraner Heilkunde. Beiträge zur Sprach- und 
Kulturgeschichte des Orients 4. Walldorf: Verlag für Orientkunde. 
Klebanov, A. (2010). The *Nepalese version of the Suśrutasaṃhitā and its interrelation 
with Buddhism and the Buddhists. MA Thesis, Universität Hamburg. 
Klebanov, A. (2020). On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (2): An Anonymous 
Commentary and Its Identified Citations. In T.L. Knudsen, J. Schmidt-Madsen & S. 
Speyer (Eds.), Body and cosmos: Studies in early Indian medical and astral sciences 
in honor of Kenneth G. Zysk (pp. 110–139). Leiden/Boston: Brill. 
La Vallée Poussin, L. de (1917). Padmapāṇi. In J. Hastings, J.A. Selbie & L.H. Gray (Eds.), 
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics (p. 590). New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 
Maas, P.A. (2013). On what to do with a stemma –– towards a critical edition of Cara-
kasaṃhitā Vimānasthāna 8. In D. Wujastyk, A. Cerulli & K. Preisendanz (Eds.), Med-
ical texts and manuscripts in Indian cultural history (pp. 29–61). New Delhi: Ajay 
Kumar Jain for Manohar Publishers & Distributors. 
Malla, K.P. (2005). Mānadeva saṃvat: an investigation into an historical fraud. Contribu-
tion to Nepalese Studies, 32(1), 1–49. 
Meulenbeld, G.J. (1999–2002). A history of Indian medical literature. 5 vols. Groningen: 
Egbert Forsten. 
Minkowski, C. (2008), Why should we read the maṅgala verses? In W. Slaje (Ed.), 
Śāstrārambha: Inquiries into the preamble in Sanskrit (pp. 1–24). Wiesbaden: Har-
rassowitz. 
Oberlies, T. (2003). A grammar of epic Sanskrit. Berlin / New York: Walter de Gruyter. 
Petech, L. (1984). Medieval history of Nepal (c. 750–1482). 2nd ed.  Roma: Instituto Ita-
liano per il Medio ed Estremo Orientale. 
Pingree, D. (1978). History of mathematical astronomy in India. In C.C. Gillispie (Ed.), 
Dictionary of scientific biography. Vol. 15 (Supplement 1) (pp. 533–633). New York: 
Charles Scribner’s Sons. 
Pingree, D. (1994). Census of the exact sciences in Sanskrit. Series A, Volume 5. Memoirs 
of the American Philosophical Society 213. Philadelphia: American Philosophical So-
ciety. 
Preisendanz, K. (2018). Text Segmentation, Chapter Naming and the Transmission of Em-
bedded Texts in South Asia, with Special Reference to the Medical and Philosophical 
Traditions as Exemplified by the Carakasaṃhitā and the Nyāyasūtra. In F. Bretelle-
Establet & S. Schmitt (Eds.), Pieces and parts in scientific texts (pp. 159–220). Why 
the Sciences of the Ancient World Matter 1. Cham: Springer. 
Regmi, D.R. (1983). Inscriptions of ancient Nepal. New Delhi: Shakti Malik Abhinav Pub-
lications. 
Roodbergen, J.A.F. (2008). Dictionary of Pāṇinian grammatical terminology. Pune: 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 

=== PAGE 64 ===
ANDREY KLEBANOV 
. 
64
Roth, G. (1986). Mangala-symbols in Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts and inscriptions. In 
G. Bhattacharya (Ed.), Deyadharma: Studies in memory of Dr. D.C. Sircar (pp. 239–
249). Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications. 
Sander, L. (1986). Om or siddham – Remarks on penings of Buddhist manuscripts and 
inscriptions from Gilgit and Central Asia. In G. Bhattacharya (Ed.), Deyadharma: 
Studies in memory of Dr. D.C. Sircar. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications. 
Śarmā, H. (1938). Upodghātaḥ [Introduction]. In Ā. Jādavjī Trikamjī & Somanāth Śarmā 
(Eds.), Kāśyapasaṃhitā (or Vṛiddhajīvakīya Tantra) by Vṛiddhajīvaka and revised by 
Vātsya, with an introduction by Nepāl Rājguru Paṇḍit Hemrāj Śarmā. Bombay: 
Nirṇaya-Sāgara Press. 
Surendran, E. (2008). Lakshana Sabdāvali. Cherpulassery: Perfect Publications. 
Sharma, P.V. (1976). Introduction to dravyaguṇa (Indian pharmacology). Varanasi: Chau-
khamba Orientalia. 
Sharma, R.N. (1995). The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini. Volume III. English Translation of 
Adhyāyas Two and Three with Sanskrit Text, Transliteration, Word-Boundary, 
Anuvṛtti, Vṛtti, Explanatory Notes, Derivational History of Examples, and Indices. New 
Delhi: Munishiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd. 
Sircar, D.C. (1965). Indian epigraphy. Delhi/Varanasi/Patna: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Stenzler, A.F. (2003). Elementarbuch der Sanskrit-Sprache: Grammatik, Texte, Wörter-
buch. 19th ed. Berlin / New York: Walter de Gruyter. 
Takahashi, K. (2019). The manas and the manovahā channel in the Vārṣṇeyādhyātma of 
the Mahābhārata: A Critical Reading of Mahābhārata 12.207.16–29. Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 47, 421-452. 
Vajracharya, D.V. (1973). Licchavikalka abhilekha. Kathmandu: Centre for Nepal and 
Asian Studies. 
Visigalli, P. (2017). The Vedic background of Yāska’s Nirukta. Indo-Iranian Journal, 60, 
2, 101–131. 
Wujastyk, D. (2004). Agni and Soma: A universal classification. Studia Asiatica, 4–5, 347–
369. 
Wujastyk, D. (2009). New evidence for the textual and cultural history of the Suśruta 
Saṃhitā. Indian Journal of History of Science, 44(2), 187–197. 
Wujastyk, D. (2013). New manuscript evidence for the textual history of early classical 
Indian medicine. In D. Wujastyk, A. Cerulli & K. Preisendanz (Eds.), Medical texts 
and manuscripts in Indian cultural history (pp. 140–156). New Delhi: Ajay Kumar 
Jain for Manohar Publishers & Distributors. 
Yano, M. & Fushimi, M. Pancanga (version 3.13). http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/~yanom/ 
pancanga/. Accessed September 21, 2020. 
Zimmermann, F. (1987). The jungle and the aroma of meats: An ecological theme in Hindu 
medicine. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

