ARCHIVED RAW COPY (fetched 2026-08-26 via https://www.asianart.com/articles/tamsuks/index.html)
Article: "Conservation and Digitisation of Rolled Palm Leaf Manuscripts in Nepal"
Authors: Naoko Takagi, Yoriko Chudo, Reiko Maeda (Members of Paper Conservators Asia Unlimited)
Published: November 14, 2005 on asianart.com

VERBATIM KEY PASSAGES:

"During the summer of 2005, the conservation and digitisation of 400 rolled palm leaf manuscripts with clay seals (fig. 01, below) housed at the Asa Archives in Kathmandu was carried out over a period of 6 weeks."

"The Asa Archives is a public library named after the late Mr Asha Man Singha Kansakar [...] The archives houses more than 6,700 manuscripts, including Buddhist and Hindu texts, medical texts, manuals of magic and necromancy, astrology, astronomy, Vedic, Purana and Tantric text. Land grants written on rolled palm leaf manuscripts with clay seals are unique to Nepal."

"'Since palm leaf is not native to Nepal, one can presume that the tradition of writing in this medium was introduced into the country from the Indian plains probably during the Lichchhavi period (330-879 AD)' (Pal & Meech-Pekarik, 1982, p. 95)."

"Leaves of Talipot (Corypha umbraculifera Linn) and Palmyra (Borassus flabellifer Linn) were both found among the manuscripts in the Asa Archives. Talipot is far superior as writing material; longer, wider, lighter in colour with a smooth and supple surface, whereas the Palmyra leaf is shorter, narrower, thicker, corser and tends to become brittle and prone to physical damage."

"There are approximately 1000 catalogued and 300 uncatalogued rolled palm leaf manuscripts in the archives, making it the largest collection of its kind in Nepal. They are land grant documents commonly called tamsuk in both Nepali and Newari (Nepal Bhasa). The oldest tamsuk among the 400 conserved is dated 1337AD (Newari Samvat 457) and they run up to the 17th century."

"Out of the 400 tamsuk the longest was 1m 27cm excluding the part which was folded several times under the seal. The shortest complete manuscript was 25.7cm. The average length was 55.2cm. The natural shape of a palm leaf is generally widest in the middle and tapered towards both ends. The width in the middle varied between 1.5cm and 5.5cm."

"At the head of each tamsuk, an unfired dark grey clay seal varying in design and in size between 8mm and 2.8cm, is affixed over a knot of palm leaf strips which secured the folded part of the document"

"'The agreement was written in two identical copies on the right and the left side of a single strip of palm leaf, the two copies being separated by the fleuron. Upon ratification of the agreement, each party was issued with one part' (Kölver & Shakya, 1985, p. 26)."

"The text was normally written on one side only but occasionally codicils, brief notes or numbers were added on the verso."

"The text was written on the surface, presumably with a reed pen and carbon based ink, rather than incised."

"151 rolls out of 400 (38%) were damaged to a various extent by mice [...] Unexpectedly only 12 rolls were damaged by insects [...] A few suffered from mould damage especially around and underneath the seals." / "184 rolls (46%) had previous cellotape repairs." / "The clay seals of 175 rolls (44%) were either completely missing, separated from the palm leaf strip [...], or cracked."

"One can imagine the kayasthas (official scribes) in Mediaeval Nepal carefully choosing a prepared and polished palm leaf [...] He would then write out the document, fold the head part of the leaf several times and make a small incision for the palm leaf strip to go through and tie a knot to secure the folded part. Finally, he would take a small amount of round soft clay to impress his particular seal over it."

REFERENCES LISTED (verbatim selection):
- Kölver, B. & Shakya, H. (1985). Documents from the Rudravarna-Mahavihara, Patan. 1. Sales and Mortgages. Sankt Augustin: VGH Wissenscharisherlag.
- Losty, J. P. (1982). The art of the book in India. London: The British Library.
- Pal, P. & Meech-Pekarik, J. (1988). Buddhist book illuminations. Hong Kong: Ravi Kumar, Publisher.
- Trier, J. (1972). Ancient paper of Nepal. Copenhagen: Jutland Archaeological Society Publications, Volume X.
- Suryawanshi, D. G., Nair, M. V. & Agrawal, O. P. (1994). Basic studies on the properties of palm leaf. Restaurator, 15, 65-78.
- Asa Saphukuthi. (1996). Kathmandu: The Asa Archives, Publisher.
