iroronto   ^n(bersit|)  llihxaxi^. 


PRESENTED    BY 


TAe   University  of  Cambridge 

,  f/irono^/i  the   Committee  formed  in 

the  Old  Country 

to  aid  in  replacing  the  loss  caused  by  the  Disastrous  Fire 
of  February  the  l^th,  1890. 


CATALOGUE 


OF 


BUDDHIST    SANSKEIT 
MANUSCRIPTS. 


SonDon :  c.  J.  CLAY,  M.A.  &  SON, 

CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY    PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 
17,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


ffiambtitse:    DEIGUTON,   BELL,   AND  CO. 
fLeip?ig:    F.  A.  BROCKHAUS. 


CATALOGUE 


OF    THE 


BUDDHIST    SANSKRIT 
MANUSCRIPTS 


IK    THE 


UNIVERSITY   LIBRARY,   CAMBRIDGE, 


WITH  INTRODUCTORY  NOTICES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 
OF  THE  PALEOGRAPHY  AND  CHRONOLOGY 
OF  NEPAL  AND   BENGAL. 


CECIL   BENDALL,   M.A., 

FELLOW     OF     GOXVILLE     AND     CAIUS     COLLEGE,     CAMBRIDGE. 


AT  THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS 

1883 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2009  witii  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/catalogueofbuddliOOcamb 


TABLE   OF  CONTENTS. 


Preface 


Historical  Introduction 

Chronological  Appendix  i.         ....;. 

»  „  II 

„  „         III.  (see  inserted  sheet  after  page  xvi) 

IV 

Pal^ographical  Introduction    .... 
Excursus  on  Two  MSS.  of  the  IXth  Century   . 
Note  on  the  Tables  of  Letters  and  Numbers  . 
List  of  the  principal  works  referred  to 
Corrigenda  ...-.■.... 

Catalogue     ......... 

Supplementary  Note  to  Add.  1586    . 

Index  i.  Titles  of  MSS.     ..... 

Index;  ii.  Names  op  Authors  and  Commentators 

General  Index     . 

Pr,ATE8  (see  list  over  leaf)        ..... 


FAGB 
VII 

i 

xii 
xiv 

xvi 

xvii 

xx.xix 

lii 

Iv 

hi 

1 

20V> 
209 
■2]'2 
212 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


AUTOTYPES. 

I.  1.  Transitional  Gupta  character  of  the  vui — ixth  century. 
MS.  Add.  1702,  leaf  numbered  19,  showing  both  hands.  See  Excursus, 
p.  xlii. 

I.  2.  Transitional  Gupta.  MS.  Add.  1049.  See  p.  xl.  The 
lower  leaf  shows  date  [Criharsha-]  Samvat  252  (a.  d.  857). 

I.  3.  Early  Devanagavl  and  Kutila  hand.  MS.  Add.  866. 
Recto  of  last  leaf  showing  date  N.S.  128  (a.d.  1008)  and  kings' 
names. 

II.  1.  Kutila  writing  of  Bengal,  xith  century.  MS,  Add.  1464, 
leaf  128. 

II.  2.  Kutila  as  modified  in  the  xiith  century.  MS.  Add. 
1693,  recto  of  last  leaf,  showing  date  N.  S.  285  (a.d.  1165)  and 
kings'  name.s. 

II.  3.  Early  Nepalese  hooked  writing.  MS.  Add.  1686,  leaf 
58,  showing  date,  N.  S.  286  (a.d.  1165). 

II.  4.  Early  Bengali  hand.  Add.  1699.  1  (a.d.  1198),  leaf  5, 
showing  table  of  initial  vowels. 

III.  1.  Nepalese  hand  of  the  xiith  century.  Add.  1691.  2, 
leaf  22,  showing  list  of  initial  vowels. 

III.  2.  Nepalese  hooked  writing  of  the  middle  period.  MS. 
Add.  1395  (A.D.  1385),  leaf  113. 

III.  3.  Ai'chaistic  Nepalese  hand  of  the  xvith  century,  and 
brass  work  of  the  same  period.  MS.  Add.  1556  (a.  D.  1583),  written 
in  white  letters  on  black  paper,  leaf  11. 

LITHOGRAPHS. 

IV.  Table  of  Selected  Letters. 

V.  Table  of  Numerals,  expressed  in  the  old  system  of  letters 
or  aksharas,  and  in  the  newer  system  of  figures. 


PKEFACE. 


The  present  Catalogue  describes  the  chief  and  most  charac- 
teristic portion  of  a  large  number  of  MSS.  collected  by  Dr 
Daniel  Wright,  now  of  St  Andrew's,  Fife,  and  formerly  surgeon 
to  the  British  Residency  at  Kathmandu,  Nepal.  They  were 
received  at  Cambridge  from  time  to  time,  as  they  were  pro- 
cured, from  February  1873  to  May  1876. 

The  first  discovery  of  a  large  unexplored  literature  in  Nepal 
was  due  to  Mr  Brian  Houghton  Hodgson,  whose  untiring  zeal 
and  well-used  opportunities  have  enabled  him  to  supply  a 
greater  quantity  of  material  for  the  study  of  the  literature  and 
natural  history  of  India  and  Tibet  than  any  person  before  or 
since.  After  such  achievements*,  immortalized  by  the  great 
work  of  Burnouf,  it  was  but  natural  to  hope  that  further 
material  for  research  might  still  be  forthcoming  in  the  same 
country.  Accordingly  on  the  suggestion  of  Professor  Cowell, 
Dr  Wright  was  requested  by  Professor  W.  Wright  to  procure 
specimens  of  such  copies  as  could  be  made  to  order  from  works 
still  extant  in  Nepal.  These  specimens  were  sent,  and  form 
Add.  1042  (see  below  pp.  26,  27)  in  our  collection. 

Dr  Wright  however  soon  found  that  originals -f*  were  pro- 
curable, and  the  result  of  his  energetic  and  persevering  negotia- 


*  Mr  Hodgson's  manifold  services  are  briefly  set  forth  in  a 
pamphlet  by  Dr  W.  W.  Hunter  (Triibner  and  Co.,  1881).  See  also 
the  elaborate  and  graceful  tribute  to  Mr  Hodgson's  laboiu^  in 
Dr  Rajendralala  Mitra's  work  noticed  below. 

t  Mr  Hodgson  had  obtained  a  few  originals.  Specimens  of  the 
more  interesting  are  figured  in  the  plates  accompanying  Cowell  and 
Eggeling's  Catalogue  (R.  A.  S.  Joum.  New  Ser.  viii.  50). 


VIII  PREFACE. 

tion  and  the  well-timed  liberality  of  the  University*  has  been 
the  acquisition  of  a  series  of  works  which,  apart  from  their 
literary  interest,  will  be  seen  from  the  following  pages  to 
be  from  a  merely  antiquarian  and  palaeographical  point  of  view, 
the  most  important  collection  of  Indian  MSS.  that  has  come 
into  the  hands  of  scholars. 

Soon  after  the  arrival  of  the  MSS.  Professor  Cowell  com- 
menced descriptive  work  on  a  number  of  the  earliest  and  most 
interesting  of  them,  chiefly  on  the  lines  of  the  Catalogue  pre- 
pared by  himself  and  Dr  Eggeling  for  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 
but  also  adding  some  references  to  the  bibliography  of  the 
.subject.  Professor  Co  well's  various  engagements  and  studies  un- 
fortunately prevented  him  from  giving  the  work  any  continuous 
attention.  When  therefore  he  suggested  that  I  should  endeavour 
to  complete  it,  I  commenced  at  first  on  the  MSS.  that  he  had 
left  untouched,  availing  myself  however  of  the  material  that  he 
kindly  made  over  to  me. 

As  to  the  plan  of  my  own  work,  it  may  be  regarded  in  some 
sense  as  an  amplification  of  that  adopted  by  Professor  Cowell, 
yet  without  aspiring  to  the  elaborate  scale  of  a  work  like 
Professor  Aufrecht's  Bodleian  Catalogue,  affording  a  detailed 
analysis  of  unpublished  literature.  Such  a  work  indeed  has  been 
to  a  great  extent  rendered  unnecessary  for  Sanskrit  Buddhist 
literature  by  the  appearance  of  Dr  Rajendralala  Mitra's  long 
promised  work  on  the  Nepalese  MSS.  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic 
Society. 

I  have  however  added  references,  which  I  believe  will  be 
found  faii'ly  complete,  to  the  printed  literature  of  the  subject, 
including  in  the  latter  part  of  the  text  two  very  important 
works,  which  reached  me  only  after  the  greater  portion  of  it 


*  At  one  period  of  the  negotiations  the  Library  was  under  great 
obligations  to  the  liberality  of  individuals,  who  took  upon  themselves 
the  cost,  at  a  time  when  it  was  impracticable  to  call  a  meeting  of  the 
Library  authorities.  Among  these  may  be  named  especially  the 
present  Bishop  of  Durham. 


PREFACE.  IX 

had  been  printed  off;  I  mean  Babu  Rajendralala's  work  just 
referred  to,  and  Mr  Bunyiu  Nanjio's  Catalogue  of  the  Japanese 
Buddhist  Tripitaka.  This  may  be  found  to  explain  or  to  com- 
pensate for  any  undue  brevity,  not  to  say  bareness,  in  some  of  the 
descriptions  of  subject-matter.  Indeed,  my  main  object  has  been 
to  provide  material  for  identification  for  students  at  a  distance, 
and  for  such  as  come  to  consult  the  MSS.  general  clues  and 
assistance,  rather  than  by  detailed  narratives  to  obviate  the 
necessity  for  studying  the  originals.  Thus,  to  take  an  instance 
from  one  branch  of  literature,  folk-lore ;  I  have  usually  given 
the  names  of  the  chief  personages  in  jdtakas  or  avadanas  of 
which  no  account  has  been  published,  without  as  a  rule  entering 
into  the  details  of  the  plot. 

A  special  feature  of  the  present  work,  and  one  on  which  my 
studies  have  necessarily  been  almost  unaided,  is  the  part 
relating  to  paljeography.  To  some  readers,  perhaps,  the  dis- 
cussions on  this  subject  may  seem  barren  and  tedious;  others 
again  may  find  them  ill-proportioned  or  incomplete.  To  such 
strictures  my  reply  must  be,  that  the  unexampled  antiquity 
claimed  for  these  MSS.  seemed  to  require  as  full  an  examination 
as  it  was  in  my  power  to  supply,  and  that  if,  after  the  publica- 
tion of  so  many  catalogues  of  Sanskrit  MSS.,  this  be  the  first 
which  attempts  systematically  to  discuss  the  age  of  the  docu- 
ments described,  some  imperfection  of  treatment  is  naturally  to 
be  expected. 

Palaeography,  and  especially  the  history  of  alphabets  so 
extensive  as  those  of  India,  will  always  be  a  study  involving 
laborious  detail,  but  it  is  of  course  only  on  detailed  monographs, 
accompanied  by  a  due  amount  of  accurate  illustration,  that  safe 
generalisations  in  so  wide  a  subject  as  Indian  Palaeography  can 
be  founded.  How  much  more  material  is  ready  to  hand  for 
work  of  this  kind  for  scholars  who  are  privileged  to  have  access 
to  it,  may  be  seen  from  the  Reports  on  Sanskrit  MSS.  in 
Western  India  by  Dr  Biihler  and  Dr  Kielhorn,  as  well  as  from 
some  of  the  later  numbers  of  Dr  Rajendralala  Mitra's  "Notices." 


X  PREFACE. 

From  such  ptiidy,  joined  Nvitli  accurate  work  on  inscriptions, 
we  may  look  for  some  treatise  which  shall  do  for  the  wider  field 
of  North  India  what  the  late  Dr  Bumell's  great  work*  has  done 
for  the  alphabets  of  the  South. 

My  essay  on  the  historical  and  chronological  points  brought 
out  by  the  colophons  of  these  MSS.  has  of  course  a  bearing  on 
the  palaeography,  which  may  serve  as  a  justification  of  that  part 
of  the  work  (if  any  be  needed),  independently  of  the  considera- 
tions urged  on  page  iv. 

With  regard  to  the  scope  of  the  work,  the  present  volume 
deals,  as  I  have  said,  with  the  most  characteristic  portion  of 
the  collection.  This  includes  Buddhist  literature  in  the  widest 
sense,  so  as  to  take  in  on  the  one  hand  mystical  or  religious 
works  of  the  tantric  kind,  where  debased  Buddhism  is  hardly 
distinguishable  from  .  ^ivaism ;  and  on  the  other,  works  of 
no  special  religious  tendency,  but  merely  the  supposed  products 
of  Buddhistic  civilization,  e.g.  the  Amarakoca  (though  some 
suppose  its  author  to  have  been  a  Jain),  as  well  as  the  local 
Nepalese  literature,  some  of  which  bears  more  on  Hindu  my- 
thology than  on  the  Buddhist  system.  Some  few  of  the  MSS. 
falling  under  this  latter  head  are  written  in  the  vernacular. 
Of  such  I  have  nothing  by  way  of  description  to  offer  but  names 
and  titles  of  chapters.  These  are  however  the  latest  and  least 
important  part  of  our  collection. 

None  of  the  palm-leaf  MSS.  are  in  the  vernacular,  but  some  of 
them  have  vernacular  colophons,  and  in  almost  all  of  them  the 
Sanskrit  notes  etc.  written  by  the  scribes  are  more  or  less  faulty. 
In  cases  of  the  most  glaring  blunders  I  have  added  "  sic  "  ;  but 
on  almost  every  page  of  this  work  will  be  found  violations  of 
strict  Sanskrit  phonetics,  familiar  to  all  who  are  conversant 
with  MSS.  from  Nepal.     On  this  subject  the  valuable  observa- 


*  Dr  Burnell"s  ,Sui(th  Indian  ralaogmp/nj  was  originally  intended 
for  a  preface  to  his  Catalogue  of  the  MSS.  at  Tanjore  (6'.  Ind.  Pal. 
lutrod.  p.  ix). 


PREFACE.  XI 

tiuiis  <tf  M.  Senart  in  the  lutroductioii  tu  his  edition  of  the 
Mahavastu  (pp.  xii— xvii)  should  be  consulted. 

With  reference  to  the  compilation  of  a  full  catalogue  of 
the  Wright  collection,  the  task  to  which  I  was  originally  invited 
by  the  Library  Syndicate,  and  for  which  I  have  prepared  a 
considerable  amount  of  material,  I  can  only  say  that  I  hope  to 
complete  it  before  very  long,  according  as  time  and  opportunities 
may  alhjw.  Such  work  is  of  course  carried  on  at  some  dis- 
advantage by  a  non-resident ;  and  the  wisdom  of  recent  re- 
formers has  clearly  tended  practically  to  discourage  the  prolonged 
residence  in  our  University  of  those  of  its  members  whose 
special  literary  pursuits  cannot  at  once  be  utilised  for  the 
conduct  of  the  ordinary  round  of  its  more  obvious  studies. 

It  now  only  remains  for  me  to  make  acknowledgement  of 
the  kind  assistance  I  have  received  from  various  friends. 
Amongst  the  foremost  comes  Professor  William  Wright,  w^ho 
has  communicated  to  me  many  valuable  particulars  as  to  the 
history  of  these  MSS.,  derived  from  his  brother  Dr  Daniel 
Wright,  and  has  materially  contributed  to  the  usefulness  of 
the  Avork,  by  many  suggestions  and  corrections  made  on  the 
proof-sheets  of  this  book,  which  he  has  most  kindl}'  and 
promptly  revised  throughout.  Similar  help,  has  also  been 
given  by  several  Cambiidge  Sanskritists,  especially  by  Mr 
R.  A.  Neil,  and  Mr  W.  F.  Webster.  Occasional  assistance  from 
several  scholars  is  acknowledged  in  various  passages  of  the  Text 
and  Introduction.  Help  from  science,  as  represented  by  Pro- 
fessor Adams,  has  also  been  afforded  in  several  points,  of  which 
the  chief  will  be  found  on  page  183.  On  all  matters  wherein  the 
experience  and  insight  of  the  scholarly  librarian  are  of  avail,  I 
have  been  able  to  invoke  the  counsel  of  Mr  Bradshaw,  University 
Librarian,  whose  sympathies  seem  to  embrace  the  wants  of  all 
students  of  the  works  under  his  charge  from  the  Buddhism  of 
Tibet  to  the  Christianity  of  medieval  Ireland. 

Lastly,  my  thanks  and  those  of  all  interested  in  this 
collection  arc  due  to   Professor  Cowell,  who  first  suggested  the 


XII  PREFACE. 

acquisition  of  these  M8S.,  and,  as  lias  been  said,  really  made 
a  beginning  of  the  present  catalogue.  In  view  of  his  unfailing 
helpfulness,  I  may,  perhaps,  fitly  (as  a  pupil)  and  significantly 
conclude  this  preface  with  the  familiar  concluding  words  of 
the  Buddhist  scribes : 

^T"^   ^^    ri:g-^fqT^TW'RT^T^T|=iT  li<^  ^T'TXIi^- 

^T^T^  II 

CECIL  BENDALL. 

London, 
May,  1883. 


HISTOEICAL  INTEODUCTION. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  sides  of  the  careful  study 
of  Oriental  MSS.  is  the  insight  we  occasionally  gain  into 
events  that  were  happening  at  the  time  of  writing.  It  would 
be,  of  course,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  unreasonable  to 
expect  that  anything  like  a  detailed  or  coherent  history  could 
be  gathered  from  fragmentary  and  scattered  notices  in  the 
colophons  of  MSS. ;  yet  by  the  very  garrulity  or  effusiveness 
which  prompts  the  ordinary  Indian  scribes  to  repeat  certain 
traditional  lines  of  self-commiseration*,  or,  if  Buddhists,  to 
append  the  j^rofession  of  faith  so  familiar  to  us  from  inscriptionsf, 
we  often  gain  fresh  and  valuable  pieces  of  contemporary  testi- 
mony to  current  events. 

That  no  excuse  is  needed  for  detailed  study  of  this  kind  is 
sufficiently  proved  by  cases  of  discoveries  like  that  of  Professor 
W.  Wright  in  his  Catalogue  of  Syriac  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum 
(p.  65,  col.  2),  where  a  short  note  on  the  cover  of  a  MS.  gives 
the  earliest  known  and  probably  contemporary  account  of  the 
capture  of  Damascus  by  the  Arabs.  Notes  of  this  kind  are  of 
course  rare ;  but  ISTepalese  MSS.  are,  like  Nepalese  inscriptions 
(see  the  "Indian  Antiquary,"  Vol.  ix.),  particularly  rich  in  royal 
genealogies.     The  main  historical  importance    of  the   present 

*  The  verses  of  complaint  as  to  the  writer's  "broken  back  and 
dim  eye,"  etc.,  cited  on  p.  50,  are  of  common  occurrence  in  our  books. 

+  ^  "^^T  etc.;  V.  p.  14.  Another  formula  begins  ^^"^  IJ^ 
(see  Add.  1688) ;  it  is  often  corrupted  in  later  MSS. 

b 


li  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION.    . 

collection  consists  in  the  names  of  kings  given,  in  so  many 
cases,  along  with  the  carefully  and  minutely  expressed  dates  of 
writing.  To  draw  out  more  or  less  in  detail  and  to  tabulate 
the  chronological  information  thus  derived,  formed  the  chief 
scope  of  my  contribution  to  the  International  Congress  of 
Orientalists  at  Berlin,  1881.  Much  of  what  follows  will  there- 
fore necessarily  be  a  repetition  of  remarks  made  on  that  occasion. 

Keeping  in  view  the  double  local  origin  of  our  collection,  the 
subject  of  History,  like  that  of  Palaeography,  falls  into  two  main 
divisions,  relating  respectively  to  Bengal  and  Nepal.  In  this 
place  it  will  be  best  to  treat  first  of  the  MSS.  written  in  Bengal, 
as  the  subject  is  shorter,  simpler,  and  perhaps  of  more  general 
interest,  than  the  history  of  Nepal  itself. 

The  five  earliest  of  our  Bengal  MSS.  belong  to  the  Pala 
dynasty,  on  which  see  General  Cunningham's  "Archaeological 
Survey,"  in.  134;  some  criticisms,  etc.,  by  Dr  Rajendralala 
Mitra  in  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society's  Journal,  XLVII.  385,  and 
the  rejoinder  by  General  Cunningham  in  the  "Survey,"  xi.  177. 

These  MSS.,  like  the  inscriptions  of  the  same  place  and 
time,  but  unlike  our  MSS.  written  in  Nepal  itself,  are  dated  not 
by  years  of  any  era,  but  by  the  year'  of  the  reigning  monarch*. 

By  a  somewhat  fortunate  accident,  four  of  these  five  MSS. 
fall  in  the  two  reigns  of  which  we  possess  dated  inscriptions, 
cited  of  course  by  the  authors  above  named.  We  arrange 
them  as  follows. 

Add.  1464,  circa  A.D.  1020. 

The  MS.  is  dated  in  the  5th  year  of  Mahipala,  whom 
we  find  from  the  Sarnath  inscription  reigning  A.D.  1026. 
Cunningham  places  his  accession  c.  1015  ("Survey,"  11.  cc). 

*  It  was  the  difference  of  usage  in  this  respect  between  the  two 
divisions  of  ou^r  collection, — divisions  which  were  not  recognized  by 
any  of  those  who  first  examined  these  MSS., — that  gave  rise  to  some 
erroneously  early  dates  in  the  first  rough  printed  list  ("History  of 
Nepal,"  p.  321,  11.  5—8,  etc.). 


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION.  iii 

Add.  1688,  c.  1054. 

14th  year  of  Nayapala.  If,  as  seems  likely,  the  Daddaka 
of  this  MS.  is  the  same  person  as  Ladaka  of  the  last,  we 
have  some  confirmation  of  the  Dinajpur  genealogical 
inscription  which  makes  Nayapala  to  be  Mahipala's 
immediate  successor. 
Add.  1699,  Nos.  I,  II  and  III,  a.d.  1198—1200. 

These  three  MSS.  are  dated  in  the  37th,  38th,  and  39th 
years  respectively  of  Govindapala,  whose  accession  (a.d. 
1161)  is  known  from  the  inscription  in  Cunningham's 
Survey,  ill.  125*. 
A  very  curious  and  historically  interesting  point  occurs  in  the 
colophon  of  the  second  of  the  last  group,  which  runs  as  follows  : 
paramegvaretyddi  rdjdvall  purvavat  grimadgovindapdladevdndm 
vinashtardjye  ashtatrimgatsamvatsare  'hhilikhyamdno.  The  lirst 
clause  probably  represents  the  scribe  as  declining  to  recite  as 
before  {purvavat)  the  long  list  of  royal  titles  beginning — as 
they  do,  in  fact,  in  the  first  three  MSS.  noticed — with  the  title 
parame^vara.  The  great  interest,  however,  of  the  colophon  lies 
in  the  phrase  vinashtardjye,  instead  of  the  usual  pravardhanm- 
navijayardjye.  I  take  this  to  be  an  acknowledgment  that  the 
star  of  the  Buddhist  dynasty  had  set  and  that  their  empire  was 
in  A.D.  1199  "vinashta,"  "ruined";  a  view  which  well  accords 
with  the  fact  that  Govindapala  was  the  last  Buddhist  sovereign 
of  whom  we  have  authentic  record,  and  that  the  Mohamme- 
dan conquest  of  all  Bengal  took  place  in  the  very  first  years 
of  the  xiiith  cent.  A.D.  Hence  it  would  also  appear  that, 
unless  Gen.  Cunningham  has  some  better  authority  than  tradi- 
tion ("Arch.  Surv."  ill.  135)  for  his  last  Pala  monarch  Indra- 


*  The  Hodgson  collection  has  also  a  MS.  of  this  reign  (ISTo.  1, 
dated  in  its  4th  year);  but  the  inscription  escaped  the  notice  of 
Professors  Cowell  and  Eggeling  ("Journal  R.  A.  S.",  Oct.  1875,  pp. 
2  and  51),  as  well  as  of  Dr  D.  Wright  ("History  of  Nepal,"  p.  317). 

h2 


iv  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTIOX. 

dyumna,  the  reign  of  such  a  king  in  Magadha  must  be  re- 
jected. At  all  events,  he  can  hardly  have  come  to  the  throne 
in  1180  or  1185,  as  supposed.  No  other  names  of  sovereigns  are 
to  be  gained  from  our  later  MSS.  written  in  Bengal,  but  the 
colophon  of  one  of  them,  Add.  1364,  a  Buddhist  tantra,  written 
by  a  Kayastha  of  Jhera  in  Magadha  in  a.d.  1446,  is  interesting 
as  showing  how  long  Buddhism  survived  even  among  the 
educated  classes  of  Eastern  India. 

Passing  now  to  the  second  and  far  larger  part  of  our  collection, 
— the  MSS.  written  in  Nepal  itself, — we  may  notice  that  they 
are  dated  not  by  regnal  years,  like  those  originally  coming  from 
Bengal,  but  always  by  the  year  of  some  era,  the  name  of  the 
reigning  king  being  generally  added. 

The  absence  of  an  historical  literature  in  Sanskrit  has  often 
been  commented  on.  It  has  been  reserved  for  the  dwellers  on 
the  very  outskirts  of  the  Aryan  territory  in  India,  such  as  Kashmir 
or  Nepal,  to  chronicle  their  somewhat  uneventful  national  life. 
Judging  however  from  the  amount  of  energy  and  acumen 
already  bestowed  on  the  elucidation  of  Kashmirian  chronology, 
it  would  seem  that  all  contributions  to  an  accurate  system  of 
Indian  dates  are  valued  by  scholars.  The  practical  literary 
value  of  such  researches  is  attested  by  our  experience  in  the 
present  collection,  where  the  date  of  the  composition  of  an 
interesting  work  is  known  through  this  very  Kashmirian  chron- 
ology. Especially,  then,  as  we  possess  several  groups  of  docu- 
ments on  Nepalese  chronology  and  history,  besides  some  recently 
acquired  dated  inscriptions,  no  apology  is  needed  for  investiga- 
ting the  relations  between  these  and  the  dated  colophons  of 
MSS.  The  results  of  my  investigations  are  tabulated  and 
summarized  in  the  Appendices  to  the  present  Introduction. 

The  era  by  which  our  strictly  Nepalese  MSS.  are  almost 
invariably  dated  is  the  Samvat  still  used  in  Nepal.  This 
commences  from  a.d.  880,  a  year  which  is  attested  as  well  by 
modern  usage  as  by  the  astronomical  and  calendric  data 
furnished  by  many  of  our  oldest  MSS. 


HISTORICAL   IXTRODUCTION.  V 

The  two  eras  most  commonly  used  in  India  generally — 
the  ^aka  and  the  Yikrama  Samvat — were  also  known  in  Nepal. 
Several  of  our  MSS.,  especially  the  non-Buddhistic  ones,  are 
dated  by  the  former.  On  another  era — that  of  (^riharsha — see 
the  account  of  Add.  MS.  1049  in  the  special  excursus  appended 
to  the  Palaeographical  Introduction. 

We  now  pass  to  chronological  details  as  supplied  to  us  by 
MSS.,  and  as  checked  by  inscriptions  and  the  somewhat  waver- 
ing or  conflicting  testimony  of  the  various  histories.  It  may  be 
noted  that  our  historical  authorities  are  divided  in  the  Chrono- 
logical Appendix  No.  1  into  two  main  groups.  (1)  The  Yam- 
9avali  (Add.  1952),  translated  in  Dr  D.  "Wright's  "History  of 
Nepal,"  and  its  Gorkha  redaction  (Add.  IIGO,  see  p.  31).  (2) 
The  group  tabulated  in  the  next  column,  which  do  not  aspire 
to  the  rank  even  of  historical  sketches,  but  are  mere  chrono- 
logical lists  of  kings,  with  notes  of  a  few  important  events  and 
changes  interspersed.  As  regards  Add.  MS.  866  (dated  A.D. 
1008),  hitherto*  regarded  as  the  oldest  of  all  extant  Sanskrit 
MSS.,  I  give  elsewhere  reasons  for  my  views  on  the  character 
of  the  writing,  differing  from  those  put  forward  by  the  learned 
compilers  of  the  account  of  the  MS.  cited  in  my  description  on 
p.  2  of  the  present  work.  It  will  also  be  seen  that  the  reading 
of  the  colophon  of  the  MS.,  given  as  fully  as  the  state  of  the 
leaves  allows  on  pp.  3 — 4,  and  reproduced  in  Plate  I.,  places  the 
history  connected  with  the  MS.  in  a  new  light.  In  the  early 
account  of  the  colophon,  only  the  name  of  Rudradeva  was  de- 
ciphered, but  my  recognition  of  the  name  of  Nirbhaya, — 
apparently  the  chief  of  the  co-regents, — brings  the  colophon 
into  connection  with  our  second  group  of  historical  authorities"!*. 

Our  next  dated  MS.  (Add.  164-3,  A.D.  1015)  speaks  of  three 
kings;  the  one,  Bhojadeva,  governing  apparently  one  half  of  the 

*  See  now  the  excursus  just  cited. 

t  See  Chronological  Appendix  I,  Column  4  (Reign  ace.  to 
Kirkpatrick,  etc.). 


vi  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION. 

kingdom,  and  the  other  two,  Rudradeva  and  Lakshmikamadeva, 
being  co-regents  of  the  remaining  half.  The  metrical  colophon 
of  Add.  lG64f  bears  interesting  testimony  to  this  system  of 
co-regency  as  being  a  constitutional  usage,  at  all-  events  in  later 
times  (see  below,  p.  ix.). 

The  next  MS.  (Add.  1683,  dated  A.D.  lOGo)  speaks  of  La- 
kshmikamadeva alone  as  king.  As  to  the  king  next  on  our  list 
of  whom  we  have  a  dated  MS.,  I  formerly  read  his  name 
Padmyamrakamadeva,  and  this  form  certainly  agi'ees  best 
with  the  form  Padmadeva  found  in  Wright's  "History  of 
Nepal "  as  well  as  in  Mr  Hodgson's  lists.  But  the  other  reading 
proposed,  Pradyumnakamadeva,  has  the  advantage,  as  I  now 
think,  not  only  on  pakeographic  grounds,  but  also  as  giving  a 
name  of  far  more  intelligible  and  probable  form.  Moreover  the 
form  Padyumna  found  in  our  MS.  shows  how  the  contraction 
to  Padma  might  have  arisen.  Kirkpatrick  has  a  more  than 
usually  barbarous  form,  'Puddiem.'  The  date  of  this  MS.  (a.D. 
10G5)  very  nearly  accords  with  the  chronology  of  Kirkpatrick, 
who  makes  Manadeva — whom  we  find  from  a  curious  and 
interesting  note  in  Add.  1643  to  be  on  the  throne  in  1139 — 
not  to  be  reigning  till  85  years  after  Pradyumna's  death,  while 
the  dates  of  these  MSS.  are  only  74  years  apart.  This  difficulty 
may  be  just  got  over,  if  we  can  disregard  the  12  years  given  by 
Kirkpatrick  to  Indradeva  (Mana's  predecessor),  whom  the  Yam- 
9avali  does  not  mention.  With  the  reigns  assigned  to  the 
monarchs  immediately  preceding,  this  date  does  not  accord  so 
well;  but  a  change  of  dynasty  and  some  other  unsettling 
influences  occurred  in  the  country  just  before  this  time,  which 
may  account  for  some  discrepancy  in  the  historical  sketches  as 
well  as  in  the  chronology. 

After  1140  the  dates  proceed  with  great  regularity,  and  are, 
on  the  whole,  strikingly  in  accord  with  the  historical  accounts 
for  nearly  two  centuries. 

After  Manadeva  (1139)  we  get  two  dated  MSS.  of  the  reign 
next  but  one,  that  of  Anandadeva,  called  in  the  Vam9avall 


HISTORICAL   INTRODUCTION.  vii 

NanJa-deva.  Of  the  second  of  these  (R.  A.  S.  Hodgson  No.  2) 
a  leaf  has  been  reproduced  by  the  Palseographical  Society 
(Oriental  Series,  Plate  43).  As  to  the  account  therewith  given 
by  the  late  Dr  Haas,  it  is  now  clear  that  Prinsep's  table — taken 
in  its  earlier  part,  it  would  seem,  entirely  from  Kirkpatrick — is 
defective  in  names  of  kings,  and  so  very  roughly  correct  as  to 
dates  that  no  one  system  of  adjustment  will  put  it  right.  Thus 
Dr  Haas's  proposed  correction  will  not  fit  the  case  of  Ananta- 
malla,  to  whom  we  come  presently,  and  whose  date  Prinsep 
gives  tolerably  correctly  (a.D.  1280)  ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  of  Lakshmikamadeva,  whose  date  he  makes  more  than 
a  century  earlier  than  we  above  determined  it. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  next  century,  the  xiiith,  we 
have  MSS.  of  Arideva-malla  and  Abhaya-malla,  but  unfortun- 
ately the  dates  have  in  no  case  been  certainly  discovered. 

Of  Ananta-malla  (called  in  the  Vamgavall  Ananda-malla, 
but  not  to  be  confused  with  the  former  monarch  really  of  that 
name)  two  MSS.  are  extant,  with  dates  respectively  corresponding 
to  A.D.  1286  and  1302.  This  reign  has  25  years  assigned  to  it 
in  the  Varnqavall,  so  that  these  MSS.  belong  to  its  opposite 
extremities.  For  the  first  (Brit.  Mus.  Or.  1439)  see  the  account 
in  the  Pateographical  Society's  Oriental  Series,  PI.  32 ;  on  the 
second  (Add.  1306)  see  pp.  42—3. 

There  is  now  a  gap  of  70  years  in  our  MSS,  that  bear  kings' 
names.  It  is  probably  more  than  a  coincidence  that  this  gap, 
like  the  one  of  similar  length  a  century  and  a  half  before 
(1065 — 1139),  is  contemporaneous  with  the  introduction  of  a 
new  dynasty.  Although  our  scanty  historical  accounts  give  us 
but  little  insight  into  such  matters,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
changes  of  this  kind  were  attended  with  very  considerable 
disturbance  in  the  country;  and  that  either  literary  studies 
altogether  declined,  or  the  scribes  were  at  a  loss  whom  to 
acknowledge  as  the  real  and  chief  ruler  of  a  country  which, 
as  we  know,  has  frequently  been  under  divided  rule.  For 
it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  everything  shows  that  most  of 


VI 11  HISTORICAL  IXTRODUCTION. 

our  MSS.  were  written  more  or  less  directly  under  royal  or 
court  influences.  In  many  cases,  as  we  shall  see,  kings  are 
stated  to  be  the  authors*;  in  others,  lists  of  the  royal  family  are 
given,  or  the  command  of  some  royal  person  for  the  writing. 

The  great  event  which  happened  in  Nepal  at  this  time  was 
the  conquest  of  the  country  by  Harisimha  of  Simraon.  On  the 
names  of  his  dynasty,  none  of  which  appear  in  our  MSS.,  see 
the  special  Table  in  Chronological  Appendix  II. 

The  first  two  names  of  the  next  group,  Jayarjuna  [a.d.  1374 
and  1384  (see  Add.  1689  and  1488)]  and  Katnajyotirdeva  [A.D. 
1392  (see  Add.  1108,  written  in  an  obscure  town)]  are  unknown 
to  the  histories.  These  kings  were  probably  predecessors  of 
the  "refractory  Rajas  of  Patau  and  Kathmandu,"  who  were 
"completely  subdued"  by  Yaksha-malla  soon  after  this  time 
(Kirkpatrick,  p.  266). 

The  next  three  reigns,  those  of  Jayasthiti,  Jyotir-malla  and 
Yaksha-malla,  appear  to  have  been  a  time  of  prosperity  in 
Nepal,  MSS.  are  abundant,  and  mostly  contain  the  names  of 
the  sovereigns  and,  in  some  cases,  further  particulars. 

We  are  also  helped  for  this  period  by  a  most  interesting 
inscription  lately  discovered  at  the  great  temple  of  Pa^upati  in 
Nepal  and  published  in  the  "Indian  Antiquary"  for  Aug.  1880. 
It  is  dated  N.  s.  533  (A.D.  1413),  and  gives  not  only  the  name  of 
the  king,  Jyotir-malla,  but  also  that  of  his  father  Jayasthiti,  and 
the  names  of  various  other  members  of  the  royal  family,  which 
occur  in  several  MSS.  with  similar  honorific  titles  and  other 
indications,  and  form  one  of  the  many  proofs  of  the  trust- 
worthiness of  the  colophons  of  these  MSS. 

As  to  the  doings  of  Jayasthiti-malla,  the  first  of  the  three, 
the  Vam9avali  is  particularly  eloquent ;  certain  pandits  specially 
employed  by  him  are  mentioned  by  name  (Wright's  "Nepal," 
p.  183,  fin.).     The  MSS.  of  this  reign  ai-e,  as  might  be  expected, 

*  Compare  also  Dr  Pischel's  remai'ks  in  the  "Katalog  der 
Handschr.  d.  d.  morg.  Gesellscliaft,"  pp.  S — 9. 


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION.  ix 

numerous.  We  possess  in  the  present  collection  four  with 
dates,  ranging  from  A.D.  1385  to  1391 ;  but  besides  these,  there 
is  a  MS.  (Add.  1658),  undated  it  is  true,  but  easily  fixed  as  to 
time,  and  historically  one  of  the  most  curious  and  valuable  in 
the  collection.  This,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  account  at  p. 
159,  is  a  copy  of  a  play,  the  Ahhinavaraghavdnanda,  by  a  certain 
Manika.  In  the  ndndl  the  goddess  Manegvari  is  named — as 
also  in  Add.  1698 — in  a  manner  which  quite  confirms  Dr 
Buhler's  conjecture,  in  his  note  on  the  name  as  occurring  in 
the  inscription,  that  she  was  the  king's  "Kuladevata."  Further 
on,  in  the  prastdvand,  we  find  the  names  of  the  queen,  the 
heir-apparent,  and  the  second  son  Jyotir-malla,  who  is  called 
bdla-ndrdyanah.  If  this  implies  that  he  was  a  mere  boy,  it  will 
put  the  play  at  least  20  years  earlier,  as  we  find  him  in  the 
inscription  (dated  =  A.D.  1413)  apparently  the  sole  reigning 
king  and  the  father  of  three  adult  children.  Besides  this, 
we  have  a  curious  metrical  colophon  in  Add.  MS.  1664  (a  non- 
Buddhistic  work,  and  therefore  not  described  in  the  present 
catalogue),  dated  A.D.  1400,  and  describing  a  triple  sovereignty 
of  the  same  Jyotir-malla  with  his  elder  and  younger  brothers. 
Of  Jyotir-malla's  own  reign  we  have  only  one  MS.  (Add. 
1649),  attributed  however  to  the  king  himself  The  date 
corresponds  to  A.D.  1412.  This  may  seem,  at  first  sight,  to 
curtail  too  much  the  reign  of  Jayasthiti,  who  perhaps  came  to 
the  throne  in  1385  (Add.  MS.  1395, — Jayarjuna  was  reigning 
in  1384),  and  yet  is  stated  by  the  Vam^avali  to  have  reigned 
43  years.  If  this  be  so,  we  have  here  probably  a  case  of  the 
peculiar  error  noticed  in  the  learned  review  of  Dr  D.  Wright's 
"History  of  Nepal"  in  the  "Litterarisches  Centralblatt"  for  Dec. 
15th,  1877;  viz.,  that  when  the  chronicler  was  uncertain  as  to 
the  exact  length  of  some  of  the  reigns  in  a  dynasty,  he  took  one 
or  more  of  the  later  reigns  of  that  dynasty  as  a  pattern,  and  put 
the  others  down  as  the  same.  It  is  accordingly  very  suspicious 
that  both  Jayasthiti  and  Yaksha  are  credited  Avith  the  large 
allowance  of  43  years.     Little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the 


X  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION. 

VarrKjavall  just  here,  as  we  find  Jyotir-malla  completely  ignored 
and  Yaksha  called  Jayasthiti's  son.  Of  Yaksha-  (or,  as  he  is 
generally  styled  in  the  MSS.,  Jaksha-)malla  we  have  four  MSS., 
ranging  from  A.D.  1429  to  1457,  so  that  a  reign  of  43  years 
seems  here  not  improbable. 

After  the  death  of  Yaksha  the  history  of  Nepal,  as  a  united 
kingdom,  ceases  for  several  centuries  ;  and,  curiously  enough, 
nearly  all  our  chronology  from  MSS.  ceases  also,  for  nearly 
two  centuries.  The  kingdom  was  now  divided,  and  possibly 
considerable  disturbances  again  ensued  which  were  unfavour- 
able to  the  preservation  of  literature  by  the  copying  of  MSS. 
Compare  verse  18  of  the  inscription  in  "  Ind.  Antiq."  IX.  185. 

During  the  xvith  century  MSS.  are  scarce,  and  only  one 
king  (Sadii^iva  of  Kathmandu,  v.  Add.  1355  and  Brit.  Mus.  Or. 
2206)  is  referred  to  by  name.  The  names  of  the  kings  from 
this  period  onwards  will  be  found  in  Appendix  III. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  xviith  century  a  fresh  division 
occurs,  as  Lalitapura  (Patau)  becomes  indeijendent  of  Kath- 
mandu. Literature  however  w^as  patronized  at  this  time,  es- 
pecially under  Pratapa-malla  at  Kathmandu  (see  Wright's 
"Nepal"  and  Inscriptions,  Nos.  18  and  19)  as  well  as  under 
Jagajjyotih  at  Bhatgaon.  Both  of  these  monarchs  are  sj^oken  of 
as  authors  of  extant  works  (Add.  1641,  1696,  and  D.  M.  G,  6  at 
Halle).  After  this  time  we  find  traces  of  further  dissensions 
amongst  the  rival  sovereigns  until  the  time  of  the  Gorkha 
conquest. 

A  special  difficulty  arises  owing  to  the  similarity  in  form 
and  meaning  of  the  names  of  some  of  the  sovereigns  in  all  three 
cities  at  the  beginning  of  the  xviiith  century.  This  difficulty 
was  noticed  in  the  review  of  Wright's  "  Nepal "  already  cited. 
The  very  acute  suggestion  there  made,  however,  of  identifying 
Mahlpatlndra  of  Kathmandu  with  the  contemporary  monarch  at 
Bhatgaon  of  synonymous  name,  Bhupatindra,  seems  however 
hardly  so  simple  as  to  suppose  Mahlpatindra  to  be  a  mere  title 
of  Jagajjaya ;   since  we  find   the   word   Mahlpatindra  on  the 


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION.  xi 

reverse  of  his  coins.  Indeed  the  fact  that  all  this  group  of 
names  would  pass  for  mere  kingly  titles  greatly  increases  the 
doubt  and  difficulty.  Further  discussion  of  this  point  hardly 
falls  within  the  scoj>e  of  the  present  work,  as  the  time  is  one  of 
little  importance  from  the  point  of  view  either  of  literature  or 
of  palsBography. 

Our  third  Chronological  Appendix  gives  the  remaining 
kings,  from  the  division  of  the  kingdom  to  the  Gorkha  invasion. 
The  number  of  years  in  the  reign  of  each  is  not  given,  partly 
because  the  chronicles  are  inconsistent  with  each  other  and 
with  themselves  and  contain  suspicious  repetitions  of  round 
numbers  like  15*,  as  well  as  impossibly  long  reigns-f*;  partly, 
also,  because  after  the  xvith  century  we  get  a  tolerably  complete 
series  of  dates  from  coins.  Indeed  the  settlement  and  adjust- 
ment of  the  more  minute  points  of  chronology  at  this  period 
may  be  perhaps  more  appropriately  left  to  the  student  of  the 
monuments  or  the  coins  of  Nepal.  After  the  brief  literary 
revival  in  the  middle  of  the  xviith  century  already  referred  to, 
literature  and  the  arts  seem  to  have  gradually  declined  amid  the 
constant  internal  discords.  Since  the  Gorkha  invasion  the  old 
and  characteristic  Buddhistic  civilization,  already  much  cor- 
rupted, has  been,  it  would  seem,  fast  passing  away,  and  giving 
place  to  a  mixed  Hinduism  and  autochthonic  superstitions. 
A  list  of  the  Gorkha  sovereigns  is  given,  for  reference,  in 
Chronological  Appendix  IV. 

*  Wright's  "Nepal,"  p.  190. 
+  Ibid.  p.  203. 


K  -5 


g  ;=" 


fcO 


O 


S3     O     ./    O) 


?S    n 


'  s  ^ 


S     "^     fe  _=!     2 
Co     o     p  ■— <     "^ 

-^  ^  a  S  t^ 

-g  a:  J  2  i 

-3  o  s  ^  3 
s-  -e  ^  ^  .3  CO 


o  -3   g 


x 


tJJO 

S  CO 

■^  o 

' '     T— I 

tj    >H  ^  r^  «<-i  •■7' 


O 


o 

eo 


Ph 


,fcO 


CO  cS 

o  to 

o  a 

r— 1  O 

O  "^ 

*"  O 


■=*  ^   o     . 
C   tc 


S£. 


:2;  e. 


K  ri 


CM  O 

<M  (M 


•2   phM 


^^-,t^eot-c-ioco^ioi>- 


r3 

"3 

o3 


OclJOO::^^^^ 


"  i-H  CM 


O  --^  X) 


O 

Cs 

i-H 
l> 


o  o 
CO  5  E2 


CO 

5 


00 

o 
o 


CO 

o 


P5 


s 
o 


M 


c3 
•^  D2  P5 


a    3    C    a  rt 

-    A^  ^  ^  ^ 

"^     K     X  03 

ri4    ^  i-3 


1=3 

-a 


i:3 

pq 


tS    =3 


**    c3     I    »— ' 


«3 

01    r^ 


^>' 


't3 

c;  S  S  ^  5 


d 


^      •? 


Ph 


!> 


^    ^ 


c3 
at 

Si 

P5 


o 


cS    cS    '-'    c  <i^    is 


cl^'^^ 


.y^KJj  rt  ^  -*^  -^^ 


9  ^  d   >. 

"   s  ^   tfi 

^  2  33.2 

?  <D     ii 

8  o  s  ^ 

^-^  5  .2 


C    PI 
—  to 

M 
O 


3   o 


-tf  += 


o3    ^ 


^  o  '^  &■ 
^  -S    II  << 

- .—  _  '^  ^ 
-t^  Pl  o  S  <^  "^ 
«=  <i^  -S  .2  -I  fl 
.2  C5  "5  j3  >■  'o 


o 


M 


=*-■  _   d  ^  - 
o  g  S  2  c 

I  '-5 


'  tct^    3    «    Z. 

^  3  'TS  o 


:  o 

CC    GO 


.|L9       C3 


c^ 


rt  2        <»  <j 


to 


—      .03 


CO   «*-i 


Ph  h 


-    ^,    tj     ••  ^ 


1  IJ  -2 

.      (D  as 

C-  ^  -O 

Oh  -e  o 


O    c«  I 

.   o 


'73 

to 

a 


> 


I  co'    0) 


o  :: 


.     03 

^     J-i     G^ 


£  p 


PI  3 


CO 


2     g  (M 


tn 

CO 

Ph 

M 

CO 


c  Tc  J?    3  1^ 


Jl       P!    Pi 


"    > 


£     ^  .S 


C5      rj 


O 

CO 

CO 

;> 


CO    ci 


O 
o 


CO 


•^ 

< 


pq 


Ci  00  '-0  O)  ^H  CO  I 1 

(X   00  Ci  Ci  O  O   OO 

CO  '^  ^  o  t^  cp>  o 


n3 
•T3 

<1 


r2      O        <^ 


CO  O 

c-i  CO 


-^  ^  O  O  Ci  1-H  01 
t-  00   X   X   CO  CI  C5 

CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 


O  OT  O  ^  t^ 

O  I— I  <M  O  iO. 


c3 

a 

ei 

> 

c3 

a 

a 

>-3 

rH 

^ 

rt 

rrt 

h3 

1-^ 

rt 

<^ 

<^ 

l«^ 


c3 

a 

c3 
Pi 

P! 


13      a 
a     IT 


•?    pi 


'^ 

7i 

-1-3 

r^ 

m 

t>» 

M 

;^' 

c;J 

>^ 

>^ 

1-5 


XIV  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION. 


Chronological  Appendix  II. 


Reigns  said  to  intervene  between  those  of  Anantamalla  (a.  r>.  1302) 
and  Jayasthiti  (1380). 

The  account  given  in  the  Vara9avali  is  very  confused  and  the 
chronology  quite  wild  (e.g.,  both  the  dates  in  Wright,  p.  167,  are 
more  than  three  centuiies  too  early). 

The  only  chronologically  certain  event  seems  to  be  the  invasion 
of  Hari-simha  of  Simraon,  which  is  given  probably  enough  as  N.  S. 
444  (a.  D.  1324);  and  this  is  exactly  confirmed  by  the  postscript  of 
the  Nepalese  Sanskrit  MS.  No.  6  of  the  "Deutsche  Morg.  Ges." 
(see  Di\  Pischel's  catalogue,  p.  8).     Compare  also  Kirkpatrick. 


CJ 


2   'S     05 


S:S 


'-^        *-<        I-. 


^-5   -e 


.        C    "S    -iH     JJ 


O 

ri2 


>>:: 


S     r^ 

2;  o  "^  P4  O'^ 

■^     ^ 

,5  ^ 


B' 

Is  '^   to 

II  =i5- 

•T' 

05 

a 

111" 

pq      - 

ce 


c3 


^2 

^5 


S    c3 

>^   CD 


c8 


^^-7  -S  J  ^  J  ^ 

f go  id IK 


M 


P^ 


o 


,c3    o 


^.3 

ft 


00  O  <M  O 
(7^  I— I  C^l  I— I 


^    rf 


^  Cw      C^      c*  '^   -li  --^ 

^  g   g  cs  G  a  -g 

^  irt   5*  Qj  ic  o  rf 

4  ^^ 


xvi  HISTORICAL   INTRODUCTION. 


Chronological  Appendix  IV. 


List  of  the  Gorkha  Kings. 

Prith(i)vl  Narayana  Sah  (a.  d.  1768—1774). 

Pratapa  Simlia  Sah  (1774 — 1777). 

Rana  Bahadur  Sah  (1777 — 1779). 

Girvana  Yuddha  Sah  (1799—1816). 

Rajendra  Vikrama  Sah  (1816—1847). 

Surendra  Vikrama  Sah  (1847—1881). 

Prithivl  Vira  Vikrama  Sah. 


conquest. 


LineHathmandu 


A,D.  1628  De 
„     1633  (Add. 

1687) 
Cf.  Add.  1696 


tna     VGHI19. 

aara     VH  [om.  GI]. 

rya     VGHI19. 

3ndra    VGIi9[om.  H]. 

indra     VGHI19. 

igiva  V,  Add.  1355,  and  Brit. 
Mus.  Or.  2206;  om. 
GHI. 

"imha     VGHI19. 
I 
rasimha     In  &  19. 


Line  of  Lalitapur  (Patan) 


.  1631  (Coin)  j    Siddhinarasimha 

1633(Add.l637)  I 

A. D.  1642  (Coin)    Js  1637  (In)  f 

I  1654  (Coin)  I 

1665  (D5)  \  Nivasa 

1665  (?)  (Coin)  I  I 

.  }^^^|  (Coins)  {      Yoganarendra 

IvUUj  ^  '  (         (Yogendra) 


1663 


1705 


„     1695      „        Bl 


Lokapraka9a 
(queen  dowager,  Yogamati) 
(1 21  and  Coin) 


„     1722     „ 


ramahlndra 

W.)  Mahindrasimhadeva 

]  1722  (?)  (Coin)        Jayayogapraka9a 


1729 
1731 

1742 

1745  (])      ','  W. 

dates  from  Coins 
or  MSS. 


Vislimx 

Rajyaprakaqa 
I 
Vigvajit     VGH. 

Dalamardana  Sah     VGH. 
1 
V     Tejanarasimha     VGH. 

Explanation  of  Abbi.M.  Or.  6.  H=Mr  Hodgson's  papers  in  the  India 
OfiSce.  D  =  MSS.  5  &mary,  Aug.  1880.  The  coins  referred  to  are  in  the 
British  Museum,  except 

ITo  follow  page  x 


Chronological  Appendix  III. 

Kings  of  Nepal  from  the  division  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Gorkha  conquest. 


Line  of  Bhatgaon 


Yaksha-malla 
(ob.  circa  a.d.  1460). 


Line  op  Kathmandu 


A.D.  1628  D6 
„     1633  (Add. 

1687) 
Cf.  Add.  1696 


Raya     VHDe  (Rama,  G). 

Suvarna     VG  (Bhavana  H, 
I  Bhuvana  De). 

Prana     VGHDe. 

Vigva     VGHDe. 

Trailokya     VGHDe. 

JagajjyotLh     VGH. 


Narendra     V  (Narega  H, 
I  cm.  G). 


A.D.  1576  (Add.  1355) 


Ratna     VGHIi9. 

I 
Amara     VH  [cm.  GI]. 

Surya     VGHI19. 
I 
Narendra   VGI19  [cm.  H]. 

Mahindra     VGHI19. 

I 
Sadagiva  V,  Add.  1355,  and  Brit. 

Mus.  Or.  2206;  cm. 

GHI. 

Qivasimha     VGHI19. 


(King  of  Patan only,  V)     Hariharasimha     In  & 
Line  of  Kathmandu 


Line  op  Lalitapur  (Patan) 


\ 
Lakshmlnarasiinha 


A.D.  1642  (Coin)    Jagatpraka^a     VGH. 


1663 


1695 


1722 


Jitamitra     VGH. 


Bhupatlndra     VGH. 


Ranajita     VGH. 


A.D.  1649  1 17  (cf.  1 19)        1 
„     1654  Inscr.  Wright, 
in  pi.  13 
1656  (Coin) 
1659  (Add.  1385) 

1669)  ,„  .     , 
^gyg^  (Coins) 

1682  (Coins  and  Add. 

1475) 
1701  (Coin) 


A.D.  1631  (Coin)         j   Siddhinarasimha 
„     1633(Add.l637) 
„     1637  (Ii7) 


Cakravartendra 

Nripendra 

Bhupalendra 

I 
Bhaskara 


Cf.  V 
(Wright, 
p.  220) 


1654  (Coin) 
1665  (Ds) 
1665  0)  (Coin) 
1686)  ,f,  .    , 
1700)  f*^*""') 

1705 


)|  (Coins)      I 


Nivasa 

Yoganarendra 
(Yogendra) 


Lokapraka9a 
(queen  dowager,  Yogamati) 
(1 21  and  Coin) 


„  .       ("1709  Jayaviramahlndra 
Ooms  ^I'jii^  1715  (w.)  Mahin 


Mahindrasimhadeva 


1722  (Coin)  I 

1728  (Coin,  W.)  | 

1736      „  i 

1753      „  I 

1 749  (Coin,  struck  ap- 
parently in  a  rebellion ; 
see  Wright,  p.  224) 


Jagajjaya  (styled  Maht- 
I  patindra) 

Jayapraka9a  (later  also  at 
I  Lalitapur) 

[JyotihprakaQa] 


1722  (?)  (Coin)        Jayayogaprakaga 


1729 
1731 
1742 
1745  (1) 


„  W.  ( 


Vishnu 

I' 
Rajyaprakaga 

ViQvajit     VGH. 

Dalamardana  Sah     VGH. 
1 
Tejanarasimha     VGH. 

Explanation  of  Abbreviations.  V  =  Vam(;aYali  (Dr  D.  Wright's  History  of  Nepal).  G  =  Gorkha  histories,  Add.  1160  and  B.  M.  Or.  6.  H=Mr  Hodgson's  papers  in  the  India 
0£Sce.  D  =  MSS.  5  and  6  in  the  Ubrary  of  the  Deutsche  Morgenlandisohe  Gesellschaft.  I = Inscriptions  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  Aug.  1880.  The  coins  referred  to  are  in  the 
British  Museum,  except  those  marked  W.,  which  are  in  the  possession  of  Professor  W.  Wright,  at  Cambridge. 


No  dates  from  Coins 
or  MSS. 


[To  follow  pagf  ivi.] 


PAL^OGRAPHICAL  INTRODUCTION. 

It  is  now  perhaps  generally  known  amongst  Sanskritists  and 
other  Orientalists  that  one  distinguishing  feature  of  the  present 
collection  is  the  high  antiquity  of  its  MSS.  as  compared  with 
any  Sanskrit  MSS.  previously  discovered.  Some  doubt,  indeed, 
has  been  expressed  as  to  the  genuineness  of  these  dates;  and 
it  was  one  of  the  objects  of  the  paper  read  by  the  present 
writer  at  the  Fifth  Congress  of  Orientalists,  referred  to  in  the 
Historical  Introduction,  to  establish  the  antiquity  claimed  for 
them  by  showing  the  great  variety  of  testimony  on  which  that 
claim  rests.  It  will  not,  therefore,  be  out  of  place  to  repeat 
here  the  general  heads  of  argument  there*  enumerated,  before 
proceeding  to  note  the  various  details  which  it  is  the  special 
object  of  the  present  Introduction  to  collect  and  classify. 

(1)  The  climate  and  remote  position  of  Nepal,  as  compared 
with  other  parts  of  India,  have  favoured  the  preservation  of 
MSS.     . 

(2)  The  decline  of  religion  and  learning  in  the  country  for 
the  last  five  centuries  has  caused  many  ancient  works  to  be 
forgotten  and  quite  unused.  Nor  are  we  left  to  conjecture 
here.  In  many  of  our  Cambridge  MSS.  of  the  xivth,  xiiith, 
and  even  the  xith  cewtury,  I  have  found  the  powdered  chalk, 
put  in  by  the  scribes  to  preserve  the  leaves,  still  quite  fresh. 
But  even  if  not  read,  old  MSS.  were,  and  are,  often  preserved  as 
heirlooms  and  the  like,  with  all  the  superstitious  care  that  an 
ignorant  people  can  sometimes  give  to  the  monuments  of  an 


*  See    Verhmullungen  '  des  filnften  Orienlalisten-Conjresses,  2te 
"Theil,  2te  Halfte,  pp.  190—1. 


XVlll  PALJ^OGRAPIIICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

unknown  learning.  Compare  the  passage  of  the  old  native 
Chronicle,  the  Vam^avall  (Wright's  Nepal,  p.  159),  in  which 
we  read  that,  in  the  reign  of  (^aiikara-deva  (xith  cent.  A.D.), 
"  at  the  time  when  the  village  of  Jhul  was  burning,  Yasodhara, 
the  Brahmani  widow,  fled  to  Patan  with  a  small  model  of  a 
chaitya,  the  book  Pragya-paramita  (wiitten  in  gold  letters 
in  Vikrama-sambat  245  [=A.  D.  188]),  and  her  infant  son 
Yasodhara." 

(3)  The  evidence  of  inscriptions  discovered  in  Bengal,  and 
recently  in  Nepal  itself,  remarkably  confirms  in  several  highly 
interesting  cases,  the  sometimes  detailed  information  given  by 
scribes  as  to  contemporary  dynasties,  etc.  See  the  Historical 
Introduction,  pp.  iii,  viii,  ix. 

(4)  Evidence  from  astronomy  and  the  (lunar)  calendar. 
An  eclipse  in  one  case,  and  in  several  others  the  days  of  the 
week  and  month, — stated  according  to  the  complicated  lunar 
calendar,  which  a  forger  would  have  required  far  more  learning 
than  modern  scribes  possess,  to  work  out  correctly, — have  been 
calculated  by  Professor  Adams,  and  are  found  to  tally. 

(5)  Lastly,  the  whole  chain  of  palseographical  and  monu- 
mental evidence  is  as  convincing  as  it  is  instructive,  seeing  that 
we  have  here  to  deal  not  with  isolated  MSS.,  but  with  a  regular 
series,  showing  a  progressive  development  of  handwriting  corre- 
sponding to  the  dates  given. 

The  review  of  the  testimony  under  this  last  head  is  of  course 
at  present  our  more  immediate  object.  It  may,  however,  not  be 
out  of  place  to  notice  here  one  objection  urged  against  the 
antiquity  of  these  and  other  early  Indian  MSS. 

In  an  interesting  article  on  Nepalese  history  and  antiquities 
in  "  Indische  Streifen  "  III.  528,  Professor  Weber  suggests  grave 
doubts  lest  the  boasted  antiquity  of  MSS.  from  Nepal  may  not 
fall  to  the  ground  in  the  same  way  as  did  that  of  a  Sanskrit 
MS.  at  Paris,  where  the  date  of  the  archetype  has  been  heed- 
lessly reproduced  by  the  scribe,  not  from  any  desire  to  forge  or 
otherwise  deceive,  but  from  sheer  unreflecting  thoughtlessness. 


PALvEO GRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xix 

A  few  weeks  before  the  death  of  the  greatest  authority  on 
Indian  palaeography,  the  late  Dr  A.  C.  Bumell,  I  received 
from  him  a  letter  which  showed  that  even  he  felt  misgivings 
on  the  same  ground.  Dr  Burnell  wrote:  "I  was  hardly  prepared 
to  believe  that  these  palm-leaf  MSS.  [at  Cambridge]  could 
be  so  old  as  was  said ;  but  I  think  you  have  made  it  clear  [in 
the  article  cited  above]  that  some  are  really  of  the  dates  they 
bear,  I  fear  still  that  some  are  merely  copies  with  the  date 
of  the  original  given  in  the  copy,  as  is  commonly  done  in  India. 
I  am  led  to  this  by  the  modern  appearance  of  the  palm  leaves, 
so  far  as  I  can  judge  from  the  engravings  etc.  that  I  have 
seen;  I  have  not  seen  one  of  the  originals  as  yet.  In  the 
dry  parts  of  S.  India,  the  palm  leaves  become  nearly  black  in 
400  years,  and  in  the  damp  parts  (Malabar  and  Canara  e.g.), 
the  same  time  turns  them  to  the  colour  of  mahogany.  In 
every  case,  they  become  so  fragile  that  it  is  impossible  to 
touch  them."  I  have  quoted  more  of  this  interesting  passage 
than  strictly  bears  on  the  point  now  in  question,  as  being 
perhaps  the  last  utterance  of  its  distinguished  author  on  palaeo- 
graphy, his  greatest  study,  and  as  showing  that  the  preliminary 
considerations  (1)  and  (2)  urged  above  are  far  from  irrelevant. 

Returning,  however,  to  the  subject  of  copied  dates,  our 
chief  answer  to  objectors  must  of  course  be  of  a  palseographical 
nature.  Let  any  candid  critic,  even  if  his  patience  fail  him  for 
the  perusal  of  the  minuter  examinations  of  the  gradual  develop- 
ment of  letters  which  form  a  large  part  of  the  present  essay, 
simply  turn  to  the  table  of  selected  letters  appended,  and  then 
say  if  on  the  hj^pothesis  of  copied  dates  so  regular  and  gradual 
a  development  would  be  traceable.  On  such  a  hypothesis  we 
should  rather  find  the  latest  and  most  modem  forms  of  letters 
in  MSS.  professing  to  be  of  early  dates.  Certain  at  least  it 
must  needs  be  admitted  to  be,  that  our  MSS,  in  the  older  forms 
of  character  have  been  in  no  sense  written  recently ;  for  at  the 
present  day,  there  is  scarcely  a  person  in  Nepal  who  can  read, 
much  less  write,  such  a  hand, 

c  2 


XX  PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

But  we  are  not  left  entirely  to  inference  or  conjecture.  We 
have  indeed  two  cases  of  copied  dates;  but  the  circumstances 
under  M'hich  they  occur  are  most  instructive.  In  each  case  the 
last  leaf  of  a  palm-leaf  MS.,  as  so',  often  happens,  has  .suffered 
by  time  and  usage,  and  we  have  a  paper  supply-leaf  recording 
the  date  of  the  original,  which  was  in  a  perishing  condition, 
preserved  together  with  it.  See  especially  the  account  of  Add. 
1644,  p.  1.53.  Here  then  we  find  not  the  inconsiderateness  or 
stupidity  attributed  by  Prof.  Weber  to  the  scribes  in  this 
matter,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  most  considerate  regard  for 
posterity  and  indeed  a  surprising  amount  of  genuine  antiquarian 
feeling.  For  a  case  of  mere  retracing,  truthfully  executed 
however,  see  p.  155, 1.  25. 

Strong  auxiliary  evidence  as  to  the  real  date  of  MSS.  may 
be  also  gained  from  a  careful  examination  of  their  material. 
On  this  point  I  may  again  repeat  remarks  already  published. 
'Progressive  development  may  be  traced  in  material,  as  has 
been  long  acknowledged  in  the  case  of  European  MSS.  Even 
in  palm-leaves  the  earlier  show  differences  from  the  later  in 
colour,  form  and  texture ;  and  in  paper  this  is  especially 
noticeable.  The  two  MSS.  [Add.  1412.  1  and  2]  are  written 
on  paper  no  more  like  the  modern  paper  of  Nepal  than  Caxton's 
paper  is  like  that  of  a  modern  journal.  The  xviith  century 
too,  when  paper  had  become  common,  has  its  own  special 
paper.'     See  Add.  1611  and  1405,  both  archetypes. 

Before  proceeding  to  examine,  century  by  century,  all  the 
local  and  other  palaeographical  peculiarities  of  our  collection, 
extending,  as  we  shall  hereafter  show,  over  more  than  a  thousand 
years,  it  may  be  well  to  notice  very  briefly  the  chief  stages  in 
the  history  of  the  development  of  the  alphabet  in  North  India, 
so  far  as  it  can  be  traced. 

The  earliest  period  (B.C.  200 — A.D.  100)  of  which  we  have  a 
connected  series  of  monuments,  the  A^oka  inscriptions,  is  that 
of  the  Ariano-Pali  and  the  Indo-Pali  alphabets.  This  is  well 
illustrated  in  Cunningham's  "  Corpus  Inscriptionum  Indicaruni," 


PAL.EOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxi 

where  also  references  to  the  various  theories  of  their  origin 
are  given  (pp.  50  sqq.). 

Followinof  the  line  of  the  Indo-Pali,  we  find  that,  at  the 
time  of  the  ascendancy  of  the  Gupta  dynasty,  a  fresh  stage  of 
writing,  now  called  after  them,  is  reached.  The  era  instituted 
by  the  Guptas  has  been  recently  fixed  by  General  Cunningham 
as  beginning  A.D.  167.  The  character  was  in  general  use 
throughout  Northern  India  from  this  time  till  about  A.  D. 
600,  the  time  of  the  aj^pearance  of  the  great  conqueror  Qn- 
harsha,  of  whom  we  shall  have  more  to  say  in  the  Excursus 
appended  to  this  Introduction.  We  find  that  it  prevailed  in 
Nepal  from  the  earliest*  monuments  of  that  country  at  present 
known  to  us.  It  is  also  found  on  the  Nepalese  coins  of  the 
viith  century,  of  which  I  have  treated  in  the  "Zeitschrift  der 
deutschen  morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft "  for  1882,  p.  651. 
Towards  the  end  of  this  century,  however,  changes  begin  to 
arise,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  same  series  of  Inscriptions, 
Nos.  9 — 14  (compare  the  editors'  introduction,  p.  171).  Simi- 
larly modified  forms  occur  in  contemporary  inscriptions  from 
other  parts  of  India. 

No  traces  of  the  Gupta  character  have  as  yet  been  found  in 
MSS.,  nor  indeed  of  any  form  of  writing  approaching  it  in 
antiquity.  Two  MSS.  (one  dated)  presenting  a  modified  form 
of  this  character  are  preserved  in  the  present  collection,  and 
to  them  a  special  Excursus,  appended  to  the  present  essay, 
is  devoted.  In  the  ixth  and  xth  centuries  the  Gupta  dis- 
appears, and  gives  place  either  to  the  ordinary  square  and 
straight-topped  writing  of  North  India,  known  generally  as 
Devanagari,  or  else  to  the  early,  yet  ornamental  and  somewhat 
fanciful  variety,  called  Kutila.  This  variety  w^as  possibly  due 
in  the  first  instance  to  individual  caprice,  and  then  passed 
through  the  stage  of  a  fashion  into  a  currency  which  was  general, 
though  not  of  long  duration.     This  character  again,  hitherto 

■*'  Sec  the  Indian  Antiquary/,  Vol.  ix.  pp.  163,  sqq. 


XXU  PALiEOGRAPHTCAL    IXTRODUCTIOX. 

only  known  from  inscriptions,  is  found  amongst  the  MSS.  now 
described,  more  markedly  in  some  not  originally  written  in 
Nepal. 

This  brings  us  to  a  feature  in  our  collection  most  important 
for  its  classification;  viz.  its  double  local  origin.  The  favourable 
influence  of  the  remote  position  of  Nepal  has  been  indicated 
above.  This  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  both  Dr  Wright  and  Mr 
Hodgson*  found  in  Nepal  MSS.  actually  written  in  Bengal,  but 
older  than  any  brought  to  light  even  by  recent  investigations 
in  the  latter  country  itself  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  one 
case  at  least  of  a  MS,  (Add.  1693)  written  in  Nepal  by  a  hand 
precisely  similar  to  that  in  vogue  at  the  time  in  Bengal  and  not 
in  Nepal.  We  shall  have  also  occasion  hereafter  to  note  what 
may  be  called  'Bengalisras'  in  the  writing  of  MSS.  otherwise 
thoroughly  Nepalese.  Palseographical  testimony  thus  bears  out 
what  we  should  naturally  have  expected,  that  adjacent  countries, 
allied  by  a  common  religion,  as  well  as  doubtless  by  political 
and  commercial  relations,  had  considerable  mutual  influence  up 
to  comparatively  late  times.  Besides,  Nepal  was  no  doubt  in 
some  sense  a  place  of  refuge +.  For  although  we  find,  in  the  case 
of  Add.  1364,  Buddhist  monks  and  laymen  still  existing  even 
among  the  better  classes  in  Eastern  India,  yet  no  doubt  the 
Mohammedan  conquest  brought  some  persecution  and  danger 
to  Buddhists  and  their  books.  So  at  least  we  may  infer  from 
the  postscript  of  Add.  1643,  which  tells  us  how  the  book  was 
rescued  when  'fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  people  alien  to  the 
faith.' 

The  next  century,  the  xiith,  witnessed  at  its  close  the  entire 
subjugation  of  Bengal  by  the  Mohammedans;  and  from  this 
time  each  of  the  two  countries  develops  an  individual  style  of 
writing.     In  Bengal  we  find  the  first  beginnings  of  a  variety  of 

*  See  MS.  No.  1  in  the  E..  A.  S.  Hodgson-collection,  noticed 
below. 

f  Compare  Wright's  Nepal,  p.  72  at  the  foot. 


PAL.EOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxiii 

writing  now  called  Bengali,  of  which  the  present  collection 
affords  the  earliest  dated  specimens.  In  Nepal  also,  where  up 
to  this  time  no  local  peculiarity  is  observable  in  inscriptions  or 
MSS.,  a  distinct  writing  is  developed.  This  seems  to  originate 
in  a  caprice  or  fashion  analogous  to  that  observed  in  the  case  of 
the  Kutila.  At  the  same  time,  as  might  be  expected  from  the 
geographical  remoteness  of  the  country,  as  well  as,  in  later 
times,  from  its  political  and  religious  isolation,  many  archaisms 
are  preserved  even  to  modern  days.  The  special  trick  or  fashion 
referred  to  is  the  addition  of  a  curve  or  hook  to  the  top  of  each 
letter. 

This  fashion  becomes  general  in  the  Xlllth  century ;  in  the 
Xivth,  however,  we  find  the  ordinary  horizontal  and  the  hooked 
tops  in  about  an  equal  number  of  cases ;  in  the  XYth  century 
there  is  again  a  decided  preponderance  of  the  hooked  form,  but 
by  the  xvith  century  it  has  disappeared  altogether.  This 
hook  was  regarded  by  Dr  Haas  as  the  'dominant  feature'  of 
the  Nepalese  hand  (Pal.  Soc.  Or.  Ser.  PI.  xxxii),*  which 
furnished  'the  connecting  link  between  the  ordinary  Devanagari 
and  the  Uriya  alphabet.'  The  circumstances  of  the  case  as 
just  summarized,  and  more  fully  investigated  below,  put  it  in 
a  somewhat  different  light.  The  hooked  top  in  Nepal  lasts 
only  for  three  centuries  and  a  half,  and  was  never  universally 
used  there.  Its  total  disappearance  after  the  XVth  century 
thus  makes  the  connexion  with  the  modern  Uriya  doubtful. 
Unless,  then,  some  direct  connexion  between  the  two  alphabets 
can  be  shown,  it  seems  safer  to  regard  both  as  mere  local 
fashions  of  independent  growth.  Owing,  however,  to  the  con- 
servation of  archaisms  above  referred  to,  and  to  several  other 
features  more  fully  described  below,  a  distinct  and  characteristic 
Nepalese  hand  has  been  maintained  to  the  present  day. 

We  may  now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  manuscripts  in  detail, 

*  See  also  his  'pedigree'  of  alphabets  in  the  same  series,  Plate 

XLIV. 


xxb'  PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

considering  them  in  their  two  main  classes  of  Nepalese  and 
Bengali,  and  by  centuries  or  other  periods  of  development  in 
writing.  Reserving  our  curiously  isolated  examples  of  the  ixth 
century  for  separate  treatment,  we  come  first  to  MSS.  of  the 
Xlth  century. 

Of  MSS.  written  at  this  time  in  Nepal  we  have  six  dated 
examples.  These  are  all  written  in  a  square,  clear,  and  often 
beautifully  clean  hand,  the  contrast  between  thick  and  fine 
strokes  being  strongly  mai'ked.  In  the  first  MS.  (dated  =  A. D. 
1008)  the  right-hand  twist  at  the  bottom  of  the  vertical  strokes, 
which  seems  to  have  suggested  the  name  Kutila,  is  clearly 
discernible;  in  the  second  (a. D.  1015)  somewhat  less  so.  The 
transition  seems  marked  by  the  third  MS.,  of  A.D.  1039,  written 
by  more  than  one  scribe,  where  the  body  of  the  letters  is 
uniform  throughout,  but  the  Kutila  curves  are  far  more  pro- 
nounced towards  the  middle  of  the  MS.  (leaves  Sob — 68)  than 
elsewhere.  In  the  three  remaining  MSS.,  all  of  the  latter  half 
of  the  century,  this  characteristic  disappears. 

Of  MSS.  written  in  Bengal  we  have  two  examples  from  the 
middle  of  this  century.  These  show  the  Kutila  twist  very 
markedly,  but  instead  of  the  vertical  stroke  curving  or  sweeping 
round  in  the  form  that  would  naturally  be  produced  by  graving- 
tools  or  the  like,  we  get  an  angle  formed  apparently  by  a 
sudden  turn  of  the  kalam,  so  that  a  fine  stroke  at  an  angle  of 
120"  with  the  vertical  thick  stroke  is  the  result.  It  may  be 
here  observed,  in  general,  that  the  alphabet  employed  exhibits 
hardly  any  of  the  forms  of  what  is  now  known  as  Bengali 
writing  (as  distinct  from  Devanagari),  that  writing  having 
arisen  apparently  at  the  end  of  the  next  century  in  MSS. 
A  specimen  of  the  earlier  of  the  two  is  given  in  Plate  II. 

The  chief  palaeographic  details  of  these  MSS.,  to  be  taken 
in  connexion  with  the  tables  of  letters  and  figures  apj)ended  to 
this  Introduction,  are  subjoined. 

Add.  866  (a.d.   1008)  preserves  several  remarkable  archaisms. 
The?  forms  of  j,  t,  and  J,  if  compared  with  those  of  our  two 


PAL.EOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

MSS.  of  the  ninth  century  (see  the  Excursus  appended  to 
the  present  essay),  are  most  interesting  survivals  of  a  stage  of 
writing  antecedent  even  to  the  Kutila,  as  kno%vn  to  us  from 
the  inscriptions  of  Bareli  (see  Prinsep's  Table  of  AlpJuthets) 
or  Dhara  (Burgess,  Arch.  Surv.  W.  Ind.  for  1875,  p.  101). 
A  reproduction  of  part  of  the  last  leaf  is  given  in  Plate  i. 

Add.  1643  (A.D.  1015*),  less  like  Kutila  in  general  appearance 
than  Add.  866,  shows  in  several  cases  Kutila  forms  (gh,  j, 
n,  etc.),  in  some  cases  where  that  MS.  shows  still  more 
archaic  ones.     See  the  Table  of  Letters. 

Add.  1683  (a.d.  1039).  This  MS.  is  in  several  hands.  From 
leaf  66  to  the  end,  though  less  curved,  as  has  been  said,  than 
the  30  leaves  preceding,  it  is  in  many  respects  more  archaic, 
e.g.  in  pi-eserving  the  earlier  form  of  th,  as  in  Add.  866.  The 
forms  given  in  the  table  recall  the  Tibetan  and  Carada  forms. 

Add.  1681  (a.d.  1065)  exhibits  the  first  examples  of  the  modern 
r  conjunct  and  the  modern  Nepal ese  c.  Of  the  latter  we  get 
an  early  anticipation  in  the  Deogarh  Inscription  (Cunning- 
ham's Survey,  x.  PI.  32). 

Add.  1680.1  (a.d.  1068)  is  a  small,  clearly  written  MS.,  and  is 
similar,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  nearness  of  the  date, 
to  the  last. 

Add.  1161  (a.d.  1084),  to  which  much  the  same  remarks  apply, 
preserves  however  the  archaic  th. 

Add.  1704  is  a  well  written  MS.,  strongly  resembling  Add. 
1680.  1. 

Add.  1464  and  1688  (c.  1025 — 1055).  Among  the  most  notice- 
able forms  in  these  are  the  two  forms  of  e  and  ai  medial,  kh, 
gh  (peculiar,  but  less  archaic  than  the  contemporary  Nepalese), 
ii,  n,  and  esjDecially  9,  the  rounded  top  of  which  is  an  in- 
tei'estiug  survival, 

*  It  should  have  been  observed  in  the  account  of  this  MS.  in  the 
text  that  possibly  the  main  date,  and  probably  that  of  the  later  note, 
constitute  cases,  isolated  in  our  collection,  of  the  use  of  atita  or 
'elapsed'  years  (cf.  Burnell,  S.  I.  P.,  ed.  2.  p.  72).  If  this  be  so,  we 
get  A.D.  1016  and  1140  i-espectively. 


XXVI  PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

The  xiitli  century  is  extremely  interesting  and  important 
for  our  present  investigation.  Both  in  Nepal  and  Bengal  we 
find  the  last  specimens  of  an  olil  st3de  of  hand,  followed  with 
surprising  abruptness  by  a  new  writing,  possessing  in  each  case 
a  marked  individuality  for  which  the  older  style  gives  little  or 
no  preparation.  The  only  dated  MS.  that  we  possess  of  the 
first  half  of  the  century  (Add.  1645,  A.D.  1139)  is  written  in 
practically  the  same  hand  as  the  Nepalese  MSS.  of  the  last 
half  of  the  xith  century  (see  the  Table  of  Letters).  The  first 
half  of  the  year  1165  (month  of  (^ravana)  gives  us  another  last 
survival,  viz.,  that  of  the  square  hand  as  then  written  in  Bengal. 
Of  this  we  shall  speak  in  connexion  with  the  Bengali  MSS. 
of  this  time.  To  this  year  also  belongs  a  MS.  Avritten  in 
Bengal  (B,.  A.  S.  Hodgs.  No.  1)  in  a  strikingly  similar  character. 
The  latter  half  of  the  same  year  (aionth  of  Pausha)  gives  us 
the  first  certain  example  of  the  hooked  hand  peculiar  to  Nepal. 
There  are  four  more  examples  of  this  hand  in  the  same  century ; 
the  dates  of  two  of  these,  however,  are  somewhat  doubtful. 

It  is  from  this  time,  then,  that  we  find  Nepalese  on  the  one 
hand,  and  Bengali  on  the  other,  as  distinct  alphabets  or  styles 
of  writing.  It  has  been  already  observed  that  the  hooked 
feature  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  distinguishing  note  of  Nepalese, 
as  this  was  never  universally  employed,  and  has  now  disappeared 
for  several  centuries.  If  again  we  observe  the  forms  of  indi- 
vidual letters,  we  fail  to  find  any  distinct  original  development. 
One  of  the  few  scientific  observers  of  this  style  of  writing, 
Dr  Johann  Klatt*,  gives  a  list  of  ten  letters  which  he  finds 
in  xviith  century  MSS.  as  characteristic  of  Nepalese.  He 
observes:  "Plurimum  notae  i,  e,  n,  jh,  n,  n,  ph,  bh,  r,  q,  ab 
Nagaricis  nunc  usitatis  differunt."  True ;  but  the  Nepalese 
forms  of  each  of  these  letters  may  be  paralleled  from  earlier 
Devanagari,  even  from  distant  parts  of  India.  The  Nepalese 
must  not,  then,  be  regarded  as  a  distinct  and  original  develop- 

*  'De  CCC.  Canakyae  sententiis.' 


PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxvii. 

raent  of  the  Indian  alphabet  in  the  same  sense  that  Bengali, 
for  instance,  is  so.  The  fact  rather  is  that,  from  the  xiith — 
Xllith  century  onwards,  the  geographical  and  political  isolation 
of  Nepal  resulted  in  the  conservation  of  early  forms,  accom- 
panied by  the  prevalence  of  several  more  or  less  transient 
embellishments  or  calligraphic  fashions  peculiar  to  the  country. 
From  this  time,  therefore,  we  treat  of  Nepalese  MSS.  alone, 
and  reserve  the  remaining  examples  of  Bengali  hand  for 
connected  treatment  later  on. 

In  the  Table,  note  that  Add.  1686  is  the  first  MS.  written  in 
Nepal  that  shows  the  regular  Nepalese  bh  ;  though  the  earlier 
form  is  also  iu  use.  The  later  form  is  also  found  in  Central 
Indian  inscriptions  of  the  twelfth  century ;  see  Cunningham, 
Survey,  IX.,  pi.  XVI. 

In  this  century  also  we  find  the  first  examples  of  the  modern 
Nepalese  e  initial  and  kh,  akin  to  the  Bengali  forms.  The 
open  top  of  the  dh  seems  a  preparation  for  the  modern  shape. 
The  list  of  initial  vowels  is  valuable  and  interesting  (see 
Plate  III). 

The  curious  Kutila  subscription  of  Add.  1691.  1  (see  text)  has 
quite  exaggerated  slanting  and  angular  strokes  at  the  bottom 
of  the  letters,  and  looks  somewhat  like  the  protest  of  a  more 
conservative  scribe  of  the  old  school  against  the  incoming 
hooked  style  in  which  the  MS.  is  written. 

Add.  1657  no  doubt  belongs  to  the  end  of  this  century.  Its 
date  (=1199  a.d.)  is  reproduced  in  a  note  to  the  Table  of 
Numbers.  As  to  the  letters,  we  find  that  gh,  j,  n,  1,  g  and  sh, 
take  the  forms  given  under  Add.  1645  ;  bh  varies,  as  in  Add. 
1686;  dh  is  of  the  transitional  form  given  under  Add.  1691.2 
(cf.  u,  e  and  th  in  that  MS.). 

In  the  next  century,  the  xiilth,  the  hooked  form  of  character 
is  thoroughly  in  vogue ;  for  there  exists,  as  far  as  I  know,  only 
one  dated  Nepalese  MS.  of  this  time  otherwise  written.  The 
large  bold  handwriting  usual  in  the  Xlith  century,  with  strongly 
contrasted  thick  and  fine  strokes,  continues  through  most  of 


xxvm  PALEOGRAPIIICAL    IXTRODUCTIOX. 

this  century,  though  in  some  later  MSS.  we  observe  a  transition 
commencinsr. 

The  dated  MSS.  of  this  century  are  Add.  1644  (a.d.  1205), 
1648  (c.  1216),  1465  (12.. 4),  1412.  1.  2  (1276  and  1278), 
1707  (1276),  1706.1  (1261  ?),  1706.  2  (1279). 

Add.  1644  has  been  ah-eady  referred  to  on  the  question  of 
copied  dates.  The  year  assigned  (a..d.  1205)  is  fully  borne  out 
by  the  palifiographic  phenomena  of  the  MS.,  as  this  is  one  of 
the  finest  examples  we  possess  of  the  bold  and  clearly  written 
early  hooked  Nepal ese.  Amongst  individual  letters,  it  may 
be  noted  that  e  takes  the  form  given  in  the  table  from  Add. 
1693;  dh  has  the  early  form  similar  to  the  modern  "^ ;  bh 
varies  between  the  older  and  newer  forms.  The  general 
character  of  the  letters  may  be  seen  from  the  letter-numerals 
in  the  table  of  numbers,  where  also  the  character  used  for  7 
is  noteworthy.     Compai'e  the  Bengali  ,c^. 

Add.  1648  (c.  1216,  vide  text)  is  the  one  MS.  of  this  century 
with  horizontal-topped  characters.  The  hand  is  in  other 
respects  exceptional,  as  it  shows  considerable  affinity  to  the 
early  Bengali  hand  of  which  we  shall  treat  below,  Note 
especially  the  forms  of  bh,  1,  sh  and  y,  and  of  i  and  e  medial 
as  given  in  the  table.  The  variation  in  the  figures  is  difficult 
and  often  confusing. 

Add.  1465,  though  the  middle  figure  of  the  date  is  not  clear  to 
me,  belongs  to  the  middle  of  this  century  (see  text).  The 
hand  is  very  similar  to  that  of  Add.  1644,  though  rather  less 
bold. 

The  early  parts  of  the  remarkable  paper  MSS.  Add.  1412.  1 
and  2  are  very  similar  to  the  other  MSS.  of  this  time ; 
the  form  of  dh,  however,  is  often  more  modern. 

Add.  1707  is  mostly  written  in  a  hand  less  bold  than  the  pre- 
ceding, the  strokes  being  more  uniform  and  finer,  and  the 
letters  usually  smaller.  Bh  and  dh  both  appear  in  the  later 
form;  altogether,  the  MS.  shows  the  transition  to  the  style  of 
the  next  century. 

Add.  1706.  1  and  2  are  unimportant  MSS.,  written  in  a  small 


PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxix 

hand  on  small  leaves  and  witli  no  great  care.  1706.  1,  the 
earlier  of  the  two  (though  the  middle  figure  of  the  date  is 
not  quite  clear),  has  the  early  dh  and  transitional  bh  ;  1706.  2 
has  also  the  early  dh. 
The  bulk  of  Add.  16.56  also  is  a  fine  example  of  the  bold  hand 
of  this  century ;  but  the  date  is  not  ascertainable,  as  the  last 
leaf  of  the  original  MS.  has  disappeared.  Compare  also  Add. 
1680,  fragments  8  and  9. 

The  xivth  and  xvth  centuries  may  be  treated  as  a  single 
palaeographic  pei'iod.  Books  seem  to  have  been  commoner 
at  this  time*  than  in  the  centuries  immediately  succeeding  or 
preceding.  Our  MSS.  are  plentiful  and  generally  written  on 
leaves  of  serviceable  size  and  quality.  We  neither  find  scarce- 
ness of  literature,  as  in  the  xvith  century,  nor  the  merely 
ornamental  MSS.  which  we  shall  notice  hereafter  in  the  XVlith 
century.  On  the  other  hand,  writing  as  a  fine  art  seems  to  be 
more  or  less  on  the  decline.  We  no  longer  meet  with  the  large 
boldly  written  MSS.  of  early  times;  nor  have  we  any  single 
instance  of  illumination.  With  the  diminished  size  of  the 
material,  the  handwriting  is  also  diminished.  The  characteristic 
hooked  form  of  the  letters  generally,  but  by  no  means  univer- 
sally, prevails.  Thus  in  the  xivth  century  about  one  third  of 
the  MSS.  have  letters  with  straight  tops,  and  in  the  next  century 
we  find  nearly  the  same  proportion.  It  should  be  observed, 
however,  that  we  do  not  get  the  horizontal  regularity  of  good 
modern  Devauagarl  MSS.  In  some  cases  the  tops,  though 
not  hooked,  are  very  irregular,  and  in  no  case  are  they  quite 
joined  so  as  to  form  a  continuous  line. 

The  handwritings  of  the  MSS.  of  this  century  hardly  require  a 
minute  separate  examination.  A  few  important  and  repre- 
sentative ones  only  are  selected  and  giv^en  in  the  Table.  As 
to  individual  letters,  note  that  the  second  form  of  e  (see  Add. 


*  Compare  the  passage  in  Dr  D.  Wright's  Nepal,  p.  183  sqq., 
cited  in  the  Historical  Introduction. 


XXX  PAL.EOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

1693  in  the  Table)  gradually  gives  place  to  the  form  still 
common  to  Nepal  and  Bengal  (see  Add.  1648).  The  early  dh, 
resembling  tf,  may  be  observed  passing  through  various  stages 
(found  also  earlier,  see  1691.  2  and  1648  in  the  Table)  to  its 
modern  form.  Bh  is  likewise  seen  in  various  forms,  though 
the  old  form,  often  (as  in  Add.  1665,  A.D.  1487)  side  by  side 
with  the  modem,  lingers  on  into  the  xvth  century.  The 
Bengali  form  is  also  found  in  not  a  few  instances.  The 
ordinary  Nepalese  shape  is  however  generally  prevalent. 

Taking  first  the  four  examples  of  straight-topped  characters, 
we  notice  that  all  present  Bengali  forms.  Add.  1306  (a.d. 
1302),  like  Add.  1409  (a.d.  1360),  given  in  the  Table  of 
Letters,  has  the  Bengali  bh,  e  medial,  i  initial  (see  Add. 
1690.  1.  2),  and  occasionally  t;  it  has  moreover  the  Bengali  p, 
which  is  very  rare  in  MSS.  from  Nepal.  In  the  Table  of 
Numbers  note  the  strange  and  somewhat  ambiguous  letter- 
form  used  for  5  in  Add.  1409. 

Add.  1689  closely  resembles  Add.  1409  in  style  of  hand;  but 
the  forms  of  bh  and  e  medial  vary  between  Bengali  and 
middle  Nepalese.  There  is  also  a  curious  survival  of  the 
early  gh,  similar  to  that  in  Add.  1645  (a.d.  1135) ;  see  Table. 

Add.  1406*  furnishes  our  only  example  of  the  system  of  notation 
for  dates  by  syllables,  noticed  by  Burnell  (-S*.  Ind.  Palceogr. 
ed.  2,  p.  72)  and  Mr  L.  Rice  {Mysore  Inscriptions  p.  xxii.). 
If  the  colophon,  which  i-eads  p-Jmat-karfiaprakdga  vyayaha- 
ranaydm  sasama  samvatsare,  be  correctly  interpreted  on  this 
principle,  the  date  comes  out  N.  S.  557  or  a.d.  1437;  though 
from  the  archaic  forms  of  e,  dh,  bh,  and  s,  we  should  have  been 
prepared  for  an  earlier  date. 

Of  the  remaining  MSS.  of  these  centuries  little  need  be  said ; 
they  are  mostly  written  in  a  rather  small,  but  clear,  hooked- 
top  character.  The  eai'lier  of  two.  Add.  1395  (a.d.  1385) 
(see  Plate  iii)  and  Add.  1708  (a.d.  1450),  selected  as  ex- 
amples in  the  Table,  show  some  tendency  to  the  long  down- 

*  A   non-Buddhistic   MS.    and    therefore    not    described    in    the 
present  volume. 


PALiEOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxxi 

ward  flourishes  (e.g.  in  bh,  s  and  h)  so  common  in  late  and 
modern  Nepalese  MSS.  The  numerals  are  more  or  less  in  a 
state  of  transition,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  examples  in 
the  table.  In  Add.  1685  (a.d.  1380)  ^  is  used  for  40, 
apparently  under  the  influence  of  the  use  of  "^  for  30  (compare 
the  signs  for  100  and  200  in  Add.  1G43). 

Dated  MSS.  of  the  xvith  century  are  almost  too  scarce  to 
afford  a  basis  for  generalization,  as  we  possess  only  five  examples. 
These,  nevertheless,  have  in  common  the  important  feature  of 
showing  the  horizontal  top  line  nearly  continuous,  while  the 

vertical  strokes  often  slightly  project  above  this  line,  thus,  •IT^. 
Paper  seems  to  have  come  into  general  use  at  the  end  of  this 
century.  Two  of  our  palm-leaf  MSS.,  Add.  1659  (a.d.  1501) 
and  Add.  1479  (a.d.  1546),  are  written  in  a  hand  the  individual 
letters  of  which  hardly  differ  from  those  of  the  preceding 
century,  yet  the  regular  square  and  horizontal  appearance 
gives  the  general  effect  of  Devanagari.  There  is  also  a  paper 
MS.,  Add,  1597  (a.d.  1574),  similar  to  those  which  we  shall 
treat  of  in  connexion  with  MSS.  of  the  next  century. 

This  century,  too,  gives  the  first  two  instances  of  what  seems 
like  an  archaistic  revival  in  Nepalese  writing.  These  MSS. 
recall  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  square  hand  usual  in  Bengal 
in  the  xith — xilth  century,  but  also,  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of 
Add.  1693,  employed  in  Nepal.  Be.sides  several  remarkable 
reproductions  of  letters  noticed  below,  there  is  a  decided 
resemblance  in  the  square  uprightness  of  the  characters  (albeit 
the  later  hand  shows  a  certain  attenuation  and  want  of  boldness), 
and  also  in  the  peculiar  pointed  form  on  the  left  horizontal  top- 
stroke  (as  in  the  ^  of  Add.  1693  in  the  Table). 

The  two  MSS.  just  referred  to  belong  to  the  last  quai-ter  of  the 
century.  The  first,  Add.  1355,  dated  a.d.  157G,  is  on  palm-leaf, 
the  last  complete  MS.  of  that  material.  Among  the  letters 
given  in  the  Table,  those  which  most  forcibly  suggest  a  con- 
scious revival  of  the  square  hand  of  the  xi — xiith  century 
are  n,  9  and  e  (ai)  medial. 


xxxii  PAL^.OGRAPIIICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

Add.  1556  (a.d.  1583)  is  written  in  the  same  style  (see  Plate 
III).  The  letter-numbers  in  the  Table,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9  and  10, 
should  be  noted  as  remarkable  revivals  of  xith  century  Ben- 
gali forms. 

Add.  1556  is  important  also  as  being  the  earliest  specimen 
of  a  class  of  MSS.  of  which  our  collection  affords  several 
examples ;  those  written  on  black  paper  in  white  or  yellow 
letters. 

The  use  of  silver  and  gold  in  writing  was  early  known,  as 
we  see  from  the  passage  of  the  Vamqavali  cited  on  p.  xviii.  No 
examples  of  palm-leaf  MSS.  written  in  anything  but  ink  ai'e 
extant ;  but  after  the  introduction  of  paper,  writing  in  the 
materials  just  mentioned  becomes  frequent  down  to  the  end  of 
the  xviiith  century,  though  these  MSS.  are  not  very  often 
dated.  At  present,  as  I  learn  from  Dr  Wright,  this  kind  of 
writing  is  only  practised  in  Tibet. 

We  may  now  pass  to  the  XVllth  century,  which  contrasts 
markedly  with  the  last  in  the  great  abundance  of  MSS. 
Literature  was  at  this  time  evidently  flourishing  under  monarchs 
like  Pratapa-malla,  whose  name  will  be  found  amongst  the 
authors  of  works  in  the  present  collection.  The  various  hand- 
writings fall  into  two  main  groups,  corresponding  to  those  noticed 
in  the  last  century. 

The  first  may  be  called  the  normal  or  natural  style,  in 
contradistinction  to  the  artificial  and  partly  ornamental  archaic 
style  described  above.  It  includes  the  great  majority  of  the 
MSS.,  and  falls  into  several  subordinate  varieties,  not  distinguish- 
able in  the  form  of  the  letters  but  in  the  general  character  of  the 
hand.  The  first  is  a  thick,  bold  and  square  style,  which  carries 
even  further  than  in  the  case  of  MSS.  noticed  in  the  last 
century  the  tendency  to  approximate  to  the  general  appearance 
of  Devaniigarl,  while  preserving  the  individualities  of  Nepalese. 

Good    examples    of    this    variety    are   Add.    1405    and   1475 
(a.d.    1614  and   1682   resspectively),  and    also  the  palm-leaf 


PAL.EOGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxxiii 

supply  to  Add.  1662  (a  xilth  century  MS.),  written  in  1619, 
and  constituting  our  latest  dated  specimen  of  palm-leaf. 

In  contradistinction  to  this,  we  find  several  MSS.,  as  M.  Feer* 
says  of  one  of  them,  Add.  1611  (a.d.  1645),  "d'une  e'criture  fine 
et  serr^e."  These  MSS.  are  usually  written  with  ruled  lines, 
which  are  exceedingly  prominent. 

Other  examples  are  Add.  1586  (a.d.  1661),  and  to  some  extent 
Add.  163 1  (a.d.  1652)  and  1638  (a.d.  1682),  though  in  these 
last  the  writing  is  less  fine.  To  this  century  may  also  possibly 
be  assigned  Add.  1041  (see  the  account  in  the  text). 

Between  these  two  varieties  lies  a  third,  the  distinguishing 
feature  of  which  is  a  thick  and  regular  top  to  each  letter,  the 
body  of  the  letters  being  more  or  less  fine. 

One  example  of  this  hand  occurs  in  the  previous  century,  Add. 
1597  (a.d.  1574).  In  the  present  century  good  examples  are 
Add.  1695  (a.d.  1629)  and  Add.  1588  (a.d.  1669). 

The  individual  letters  common  to  the  three  varieties  of  this 
group  will  be  found  accurately  described  in  the  plate  ac- 
companying Dr  Klatt's  dissertation  on  Canakya  already  cited. 
The  MS.  there  used  for  illustration  (which  I  have  not  examined) 
seems  to  lie  between  the  first  and  second  varieties,  being  boldly 
written,  yet  with  somewhat  thin,  fine,  and  uniform  strokes.  In 
Dr  Klatt's  table,  as  generally  representing  this  century,  we  may 
note  especially  the  relative  distinction  of  i  and  i  initial,  and  the 
long  sweeping  form  of  t  conjunct,  as  well  as  the  form  of  r. 

Our  second  group  contains  only  about  three  dated  examples, 
but  these  are  important  for  the  history  of  writing.  The  con- 
ventional hand  becomes  still  more  stiff  and,  so  to  say,  decorative. 
Our  black-paper  MS.,  Add.  1485  (a.d.  1677),  has  the  appearance 
of  being  written  to  be  looked  at  rather  than  to  be  read.  The 
usual  case,  indeed,  with  these  MSS.  is  that  the  letters  are 
hard  to  distinguish  and  the  readings  corrupt  and  barbarous. 

*  Journ.  Asiatique,  Aug.  1879,  p.  144. 


XXXIV  PALJi:OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

The  other  two  MSS.,  Add.  1536  and  1385,  are  on  ordinary 
paper,  and,  though  apparently  under  the  influence  of  the 
conventional  archaic  style,  revert  to  the  modern  forms  of  some 
letters,  as  n  and  q. 

In  the  xviiith  centur}^  the  same  traditions  continue  in  the 
black  paper  MSS.,  and  the  same  general  style  of  hand  (though 
without  any  specially  archaic  forms  of  letters)  is  followed  in 
some  ordinary  paper  MSS. 

In  Add.  1023  (a.d.  1700),  a  black  and  gold  MS.,  both  the 
archaic  and  modern  Nepalese  forms  of  q  are  found ;  Add.  875 
(a.d.  1794),  however,  of  the  same  materials,  presents  all  the 
archaic  forms. 

With  regard  to  the  ordinary  paper  MSS.  of  this  and  of 
the  present  century  little  remains  to  be  said.  A  few  of  the 
earlier  MSS.  of  the  xvilith  century  (e.g.  Add.  1595,  A.D.  1712) 
preserve  something  of  the  fineness  and  regularity  of  the  preceding 
period,  but  the  majority  of  them  seem  to  show  that  the  art  of 
writing,  as  indeed  arts  and  civilization  in  general,  have  declined 
since  the  Gorkha  invasion.  In  contrast  to  the  beautifully 
drawn,  coloured,  and  sometimes  gilded  illuminations  commonly 
occurring  down  to  the  Xiiith  century,  the  illustrations  are  coarse 
in  colour  and  so  feeble  in  drawling  as  to  be  unworthy  of  the 
name  of  art.  Instead  of  colophons  written  in  metre,  correct 
and  elaborate,  such  as  we  find  in  some  MSS.  of  the  xith  century, 
or  at  all  events  attempted,  as  is  the  case  down  to  the  XVth 
century,  the  postscripts  are  now  often  in  the  vernacular  or  in 
Sanskrit  hardly  distinguishable  therefrom. 

Since  the  predominance  of  Hindu  influence  consequent  on 
the  conquest  of  the  country,  we  find  the  Devanagari  hand 
not  uncommonly  employed,  especially  for  non-Buddhistic  works. 
Indeed  the  leaves  sent  to  the  library  as  specimens  of  transcrip- 
tion (see  the  account  of  Add.  1042,  p.  27)  are  in  Devanagari, 
though  the  copies  that  were  actually  made  for  us  are  not 
usually  in  that  hand. 

We  may  conclude  this  part  of  the  present  essay  by  examining 


PAL.E0GRAPH1CAL    INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

the  characteristic  letters  of  the  Nepalese  alphabet  as  at  present 
employed.  These  are,  as  Dr  Klatt  gives  them,  i,  e,  n,  jh,  n,  n,  ph, 
bh,  r,  9.  The  present  Nepalese  forms  of  these  letters  will,  as 
before  remarked,  be  found  to  be  survivals,  rather  than  original 
local  developments.  We  may  remark  specially  i  (initial). 
This  letter  is  not  given  in  the  columns  of  the  table,  because, 
though  characteristic  of  Nepalese  throughout,  its  shape  varies 
but  little.  On  the  earlier  forms,  see  the  Excursus  on  the  MSS. 
of  the  ixth  century.  Its  shape  in  A.D.  1179  hardly  differs  from 
that  given  in  Klatt's  table  (and  still  used),  except  that  the 
stroke  like  a  comma  beneath  the  two  circles,  formerly  dis- 
tinguishing I,  is  now  used  for  T.  The  forms  of  e,  n,  n  and  9  are, 
as  Dr  Klatt  notices,  paralleled  by  the  Bengali  developments, 
and  the  same  may  be  said  of  ph. 

Perhaps  the  only  letter  really  characteristic  of  Nepalese 
MSS.  of  all  dates  is  one  form  of  e  medial,  that  with  the  curved 
or  wavy  line,  a  very  slight  development  or  modification  of  the 
form  of  the  letter  as  found  in  inscriptions  of  the  Devanagari 
period.  Indeed  the  most  archaic  of  our  MSS.  (Add.  1702,  see 
Table  of  Letters)  shows  a  form  exactly  corresponding  with  that 
of  the  Samangarh  inscription  of  A.D.  753  (Bombay  Asiatic 
Journal,  ii.  371). 

We  pass  now  to  the  consideration  of  MSS.  distinctively 
Bengali.  From  the  Xilth  century  onwards,  this  writing, 
though  apparently  of  less  antiquity  as  a  separate  hand  and 
perhaps  on  the  whole  less  archaic  than  the  Nepalese,  has  a 
stronger  claim  than  it  to  be  considered  a  separate  alphabet : 
for  we  have  here  both  letters  in  more  archaic  forms  than  are 
found  in  the  contemporary  Devanagari,  though  these  are  fewer 
in  number  than  in  the  Nepalese,  and  also  original  and  peculiar 
local  developments  and  modifications.  Again,  we  have  what  is 
more  than  a  passing  fashion  in  writing,  like  the  Nepalese  hooked 
tops,  namely  a  distinct  tendency  continuously  in  force  and  even 
increasing  down  to  modern  times:  I  refer  to  the  use  of  pointed 


XXXvi  PALATOGRAPH ICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

appendages,  especially  at  the  bottom  of  several  letters,  e.  g. 
k,  V,  y. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  hand  seems  to  have  been 
specially  developed  by  scribes,  for  we  find  many  inscriptions 
from  Bengal,  several  centuries  later,  in  a  character  hardly,  if  at 
all,  differing  from  ordinary  Devanagarl. 

Our  collection  claims  the  earliest  examples  yet  noticed  of 
genuine  Bengali  handwriting  (Add.  1699. 1,  2,  &  3).  The  dates 
of  these  three  MSS.  are  A.D.  1198,  1199,  1200,  respectively 
(cf.  pp.  iii.  and  188). 

To  this  century  belong  also  two  MSS.  in  the  square  character 
similar  to  that  observed  in  MSS.  from  Bengal  in  the  previous  cen- 
tury. One  of  them,  apparently  written  in  Bengal,  is  in  the  Hodg- 
son collection  of  the  Boyal  Asiatic  Society  (No.  1,  see  Plate 
2  in  the  Catalogue) ;  the  other  is  in  the  present  collection 
(Add.  1693).  The  two  hands  are  as  much  alike  as  if  written 
by  the  same  scribe,  and  it  is  not  the  least  curious  or  significant 
among  the  palaeographical  and  chronological  coincidences  of 
these  collections,  that  the  MSS.,  though  dated  according  to  the 
different  systems  of  the  two  countries,  belong  to  the  same  year, 
A.D.  1165. 

The  general  style  of  the  writing,  as  may  be  seen  from  our 
tables,  and  Plate  ir,  as  also  from  the  Plate  in  the  R.  A.  S.  Catalogue, 
already  cited,  is  that  of  the  quasi-Kutila  MSS.  written  in 
Bengal  in  the  previous  century.  It  will  be  noticed  however  that 
the  ornamental  and  characteristic  fine  strokes  at  the  bottom  of 
the  letters  have  almost  disappeared.  There  is  a  tendency  to 
modern  Bengali  forms  in  the  letters  e  (initial)  and  bh. 

Specimen  leaves  of  two  of  the  group  (Add.  1 699.  1 — 4)  of  early 
Bengali  MSS.  were  reproduced  by  the  Palseographical  Society 
(Oriental  Series  PI.  81)  soon  after  my  discovery  of  their  true 
date  [see  also  Plate  ii].  The  letters  which  I  have  called 
in  the  accompanying  description  "distinctively  Bengali"  are 
initial  u,  Iri  and  Irl,  initial  and  medial  e,  ai,  o,  au  j  k,  kh,  c, 
fi,  dh,  y,  r,  v,  and  sh.     Several  of  these  forms  may  be  found, 


PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION.  XXXvii 

however,  in  our  Table  from  Nepalese  MSS.     C  approximates 
rather  to  the  Nepalese  or  the  early  Devanagari,  as  seen  in 
the  inscription  in  the  Indian  Antiquaiy,  I.   81  :    h  has  the 
ordinary  Devanagari  form ;  n,  d,  and  p  are  all  more  or  less 
transitional.      Initial   i  may  now  be    paralleled   from   Add. 
1691.  2  (see  Table). 
The  next  MS.  of  certain  date  in  this  department  of  our  col- 
lection is  Add.  136-4,  dated  Vikrama  Sam  vat  1503  (a.d.  1447). 
The  last  leaf  of  this  MS.,  perhaps  the  most  beautifully  written 
of    the    whole    collection,    is    given    in   the    Palseographical 
Society's  Oriental  Series,  Plate  xxxiii.    The  general  appearance 
of  the  writing  is  more  like  the  early  MSS.  just  noticed  than 
the  contemporary  and  later  MSS.  of  which  lithographs  are 
given  by  Dr  Eajendralala  Mitra  in  his  Notices  of  Sanskrit 
3ISS.,  Vol.  v.     Amongst  individual  letters  we  may  note  that 
initial  i  has  nearly  reached  the  modern  form  ;  c  still  resembles 
the  Nepalese  letter ;  1  is  still  distinguishable  from  n,  but  n,  d, 
and  p  have  nearly  or  quite   assumed  their  regular   Bengali 
forms. 
For  a  full  examination,  however,  of  Bengali  writing  the 
materials  exist  at  present  only  in  India.    Our  collection  presents 
only  a  few  other  examples,  more  or  less  isolated ;   and  other 
Bengali  MSS.  in  Europe  reach  back  only  about  two  centuries. 
One  of  our  later  MSS.  Add.  1654.  2,  dated  452,  I  described  in 
Plate   Lxxxii   of  the   Oriental   Series  of  the   Palseographical 
Society,  together  with  a  MS.  sent  by  Dr  Rajendralala  Mitra  and 
considered  by  him  to  be  his  earliest  specimen.    I  was  then  obliged 
to  point  out  some  inconsistencies  in  the  learned  Babii's  first 
interpretation  of  the  colophon,  especially  in  view  of  certain 
alterations  given  in  his  5th  Vol.  of  "  Notices "  above  referred 
to,  which  reached  me  as  my  account  was  in  the  press.     On 
further  examination,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  one  or  both 
MSS.  are  of  the  xvith  century.     The  date  of  our  MS.,  at  all 
events,  is  expressed  in  characters  almost  identical  with  those  of 
the  MS,  given  in  Dr  Rajendralala  Mitra's  new  volume,  Plate  III. 
if  the  lithograph  can  be  relied  on,  viz.  cf  ^.     The  Bengali  cf 


XXXviii         PAL^OGRAPHICAL    INTRODUCTION. 

I  had  read  as  •[  (from  which  it  is  often  quite  undistinguishable), 
and  naturally  concluded  that  sr  i^  indicated  "  Nepal  Samvat " 
(■io2  =  A.D.  1332).  If  however  the  Lakshmana  Samvat  be  es- 
tablished as  commencing  in  A.D.  1106  (see  Dr  Rajendralala 
Mitra  in  the  Journal  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  XLVii.  399, 
sqq.),  the  date  452  corresponds  to  A.D.  1558. 

Our  collection  contains  several  other  MSS.  and  fragments, 
both  palm-leaf  and  paper,  in  this  hand,  but  our  present  unsys- 
tematized knowledge  of  later  Bengali  palaeography,  renders  it 
difficult  to  assign  to  them  certain  dates.  What  is  required  is,  no 
doubt,  that  some  of  the  oldest  MSS.  in  Bengal  should  be 
collected  and  systematically  arranged,  somewhat  in  the  manner 
that  has  been  attempted  for  our  more  continuous  collection  of 
Nepalese  writing. 


EXCURSUS  ON  TWO  MSS.  OF  THE  IXth  CENTURY, 
ADD.  1049  AND  1702. 

As  these  MSS.  are  almost  isolated  survivals  of  an  altogether 
earlier  stage  of  writing,  and  lie  away  from  our  dated  Nepalese 
series,  they  require  special  examination  both  as  to  their  date 
and  other  peculiarities.  A  few  words  first  on  the  history  of 
the  dated  MS.,  Add.  1049.  During  Dr  D.  Wright's  sojourn  in 
Kathmandu,  one  of  the  ancient  temples  in  the  durbar  fell  into 
disuse,  owing  to  the  extinction  of  the  family  who  were  its 
hereditary  guardians,  and  Sir  Jung  Bahadur  gave  orders  for 
the  building  to  be  restored.  "Restoration"  being  almost  as 
summary  a  process  in  Buddhist  temples  as  in  some  of  our  own 
sacred  buildings,  the  temple  furniture,  including  buckets  full  of 
coins  and  bronze  tablets,  and  a  huge  pile  of  manuscripts,  was 
brought  out  into  the  court — just  as  the  European  church- 
restorer  hurls  forth  his  ancient  paving-tiles  or  tombstones  into 
the  churchyard,  in  favour  of  the  "  improved  "  modem  flooring. 
Of  the  coins  some  few  were  saved  from  the  smelting-pot  by 
Col.  F.  Warren,  who  was  then  at  Kathmandu,  through  whom 
and  Dr  Wright  they  have  reached  Europe.  In  the  "  Zeitschrift 
der  deutschen  morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,"  1882,  I  have 
identified  some  as  of  AniQuvarman  (viith  cent.  A.D. ;  see  above 
p.  xxi).  The  great  mass  of  the  MSS.  were  abandoned  to  rot, 
at  the  instigation  of  the  jealous  Brahmans;  but  a  handful  of 
fragments,  including  this  MS.  and  portions  of  others  of  various 
dates  and  subjects  (see  Add.  1679  and  1680),  were  given  to 
Dr  D.  Wright. 


xl  EXCURSUS   ON   TWO   MSS. 

The  circumstances  of  the  discovery  of  Add.  1049  were  thus 
exceptional.  Its  date,  as  given  in  Plate  i.,  is  beyond  question 
'Samvat  252' ;  for  as  regards  the  first  letter,  a  is  the  undoubted 
equivalent  for  200,  and  that  "^  is  in  this  MS.  the  mode  of 
expressing  a  may  be  seen  from  the  alphabet  on  the  other  leaf. 
See  the  plate,  where  the  alphabet-leaf  has  been  photographed 
entire,  together  with  the  important  part  of  the  date-leaf.  The 
character  for  50  turned  to  the  left,  though  unusual,  has  been 
noticed  by  Gen.  Cunningham  in  his  "  Corpus  Inscriptionum 
Indicarum,"  I.  22*.  The  figures  being  clear,  it  only  remains  to 
consider  to  what  era  they  refer.  That  this  is  not  the  ordinary 
era  of  Nepal  (which  would  give  the  MS.  a  date  equal  to  A.D. 
1132)  is,  it  may  be  almost  said,  obvious,  from  a  comparison  of 
the  letters  with  those  of  xiith  century  Nepalese  MSS.  as  repre- 
sented by  the  specimens  in  our  Table,  which  show  the  adoption 
of  a  very  marked  local  peculiarity,  the  hooked  top,  fully  described 
above,  and  further  exemplified  by  Plate  3  in  the  Catalogue  of 
the  Hodgson  MSS.  of  the  E.  A.  S.  From  the  detailed  examina- 
tion  of  the  letters  which  we  shall  presently  give,  it  will  be  seen 
that  some  of  the  forms  cannot  be  at  all  paralleled  even  in  the 
Xith  century,  of  which  we  have  so  many  well  preserved  and 
archaic  examples. 

Palseographical  considerations,  again,  forbid  us  to  place  the 
writing  earlier  than  A.D.  600  at  the  furthest,  even  supposing 
that  the  palm-leaves  could  have  lasted  so  long.  This  disposes  of 
the  Vikramaditya,  i^ska,  Gupta,  and  Vallabhi  eras.  One  era 
remains,  which  we  know  to  have  been  used  in  various  parts  of 
Northern  India — that  instituted  by,  and  called  after,  the 
great  conqueror  (j^riharsha.     This  era,  which  commenced  in  the 

*  A  more  recent  notice  of  the  use  of  this  symbol,  in  MSS.  of 
Western  India,  is  to  be  found  in  Dr  Kielhorn's  "  Report  on  Sanskrit 
MSS."  (Bombay,  1881),  p.  ix.  ;  but  from  the  whole  passage  there  no 
very  decisive  result  can  be  deduced  as  to  its  general  usage.  See  also 
Sir  K  C.  Bayley's  paper  on  the  Nnmeials  in  the  R.  A.  S.  Journal 
for  1882. 


OF   THE    IXth   century.  xli 

year  606  A.D.*,  was  known  in  Kashmir  in  Al-Beruni's  time,  and 
we  find  it  used  in  inscriptions  of  the  xth  century  in  Central  and 
Eastern  India  (see  Gen.  Cunningham's  Archceological  Survey, 
IX.  84  and  x.  101). 

But  further,  there  has  recently  been  brought  from  Nepal 
itself  a  series  of  inscriptions  (already  referred  to  in  the 
preceding  essays),  published  in  the  Indian  Antiquary  for 
Aug.  1880  by  the  discoverer  Pandit  Bhagvanlal  Indraji,  and  by 
Dr  Biihler,  the  dates  of  several  of  which  are  assigned  by 
them  to  the  era  of  (^riharsha.  The  sequel  of  the  article, 
containing  the  full  justification  of  this  decision,  has  not  yet 
appeared,  but  I  have  been  favoured  by  Dr  Biihler  with  some 
notes  on  the  subject.  The  first  dated  inscriptions  of  this  part 
of  the  series  (Nos.  6 — 15)  belong  to  the  reign  of  Amguvarman, 
whom  Dr  Biihler  has  no  hesitation  in  identifying  with  the 
Am9uvarman  whom  we  find  mentioned  by  Hiouen  Thsang  as 
reigning  in  Nepal  at  the  beginning  of  the  viith  century.  In 
support  of  this  identification  we  may  now  refer  to  the  coins  noticed 
above.  Further,  in  the  inscriptions  Am9uvarman  acknowledges 
a  sovereign  lord,  so  that  the  era  can  hardly  be  his  own,  nor  is  any 
sovereign  likely  to  have  established  an  era  at  this  time  in 
opposition  to  that  of  Qriharsha,  who  conquered  all  India  from 
Gujerat  to  Assam.  We  may  also  compare  the  statement  of  the 
Vam^avali  (Wright's  Nepal,  pp.  131,  132)  that  previous  to  the 
accession  of  Am^uvarman  the  country  was  invaded  by  "  Vikra- 
maditya,"  who  introduced  his  era,  which  however  fell  sub- 
sequently into  disuse  (ibid.  p.  134).  There  is  probably  some 
confusion  here  with  the  great  Vikramaditya,  but  still  I  observe 
that  in  the  Bajataranginl  the  names  Harsha  and  Vikramaditya 
are  applied  to  the  same  king.  It  is  also  worth  noticing  that,  in 
Inscription  Mo.  15,  the  great  (^riharsha  is  mentioned  with  much 

*  So  Dr  Biihler ;  Gen.  Ciumingham  makes  it  a  year  later.  In 
the  account  of  the   MS.  in  the  text   correct  A.D.    859   to   857   or 

857—8. 


xlii  EXCURSUS   ox   TWO   MSS. 

solemnity  as  the  ancestor  of  the  queen.  By  this  reckoning, 
then,  the  date  of  the  MS.  will  be  a.d.  857. 

One  other  MS.  of  this  period,  Add.  1702,  is  undated,  but 
is  in  two  hands,  one  of  which  especially  is  even  more  archaic 
than  that  of  the  MS.  just  noticed.  The  leaf  selected  for  repro- 
duction in  Plate  i.  shows  the  end  of  the  first  hand  and  the 
beginning  of  the  second. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  writing  of  these  MSS., 
I  have  selected  three  inscriptions  from  the  small  number  of 
dated  examples  that  seem  to  be  available  for  the  illustration  of 
the  period  of  transition  from  Gupta  to  Devanagarl.  It  will  be 
observed  that  evidence  derived  from  these  examples  is  of  the 
more  weight  from  the  fact  that  they  represent  a  considerable 
variety  as  regards  locality,  material  and  subject. 

The  earliest  of  the  three  is  No.  15  of  Dr  Biihler's  series, 
dated  ^riharsha  Samvat  153  (a.d.  758),  and  thus  99  years 
earlier  than  our  dated  MS.  The  material  on  which  the 
inscription  is  graven  is  slate.  The  character  is  described  by  the 
editors  of  the  series  of  inscriptions  to  which  it  belongs,  as  a 
modified  form  of  the  Gupta  alphabet.  Although  some  further 
modifications  have  taken  place,  as  might  be  expected,  our 
dated  MS.  has  many  distinct  Gupta  features,  and  the  whole 
bears  striking  resemblance  to  the  forms  of  this  inscription. 
The  next  example  is  the  copper  plate  of  Morvi  in  Gujerat  (see 
Ind.  Antiq.  ii.  258)  dated  in  the  585th  year  of  the  Gupta  era, 
and  this  is  certainly  of  the  same  palseographical  period  as  that 
to  which  we  assign  these  MSS.,  even  if  the  elaborate  investiga- 
tions of  Gen.  Cunningham  {Survey,  Vol.  x.  preface,  etc.)  be  not 
regarded  as  finally  established.  Lastly,  I  have  selected  the 
pillar-inscription  of  Deogarh,  made  known  to  us  in  Gen, 
Cunningham's  Volume  just  cited,  where  we  find  a  reproduction 
(Plate  xxxill),  apparently  tolerably  faithful  in  spite  of  the 
faultiness  of  the  transcript  (p.  101).  The  date  is  clearly 
expressed  in  two  eras,  and  equals  A.D.  862. 

The  general  feature  that  most  obviously  distinguishes  the 


ON  THE  ixth  century.  xliii 

character  of  these  inscriptions  and  of  our  two  MSS.  from  that 
of  both  inscriptions  and  MSS.  of  the  Xilth  and  succeeding 
centuries  is  the  absence  of  the  regular  horizontal  top  for 
each  letter,  which,  as  we  found  in  later  MSS.  even  in  Nepal,  and 
still  more  of  course  in  ordinary  Devanagari,  tends  to  form  a 
continuous  line. 

In  these  MSS.,  as  contrasted  with  later  ones,  we  must 
observe  first  the  separateness  of  the  letters,  reminding  us  more 
of  stone  inscriptions  than  of  written  documents :  and  further 
we  shall  find  in  the  examination  of  details,  to  which  we  now 
proceed,  that  the  want  of  regularity  as  compared  with  modern 
writing  is  further  increased  by  the  fact  that  most  of  the  letters 
have  altogether  open  tops  (thus  m  approximates  to  the  form 
of  modern  bh) ;  while  the  letters  that  have  only  a  single  main 
down-stroke,  as  k  and  t,  show  rather  an  approximation  to  the 
nail-headed  form  of  character,  commonly  found  in  inscriptions 
of  the  early  transitional  period,  than  to  the  ordinary  straight- 
topped  form  so  pronounced  in  the  Devanagari.  I  have  also 
compared  our  MSS.  with  the  Tibetan,  and  with  the  early  North 
Indian  alphabet  as  preserved,  yet  (as  in  the  case  of  Tibetan) 
more  or  less  modified,  in  Japanese  works.  The  clearest  examples 
of  this  are  to  be  found  in  the  Siebold  collection  at  the  British 
Museum  (for  my  knowledge  of  which  I  have  to  thank  Prof. 
Douglas),  and  also  in  Prof.  Max  Miiller's  edition  of  the 
Vajracchedika. 

We  now  proceed  to  examine  the  forms  of  letters  in  the 
MSS.  in  detail. 

iV  denotes  our  first  inscription,  that  from  Nepal ;  M  that 
from  Morvi ;  D  that  from  Deogarh. 

For  the  MSS.,  A  denotes  Add.  1049,  B'  and  B'  the  first  and 
second  hands  respectively  of  Add.  1702. 

§  1.     Initial  Vowels. 

a.  This  letter  preserves  the  detached  and  open  top  found 
in  Gupta  and  Tibetan.     In  Kutila,  and  in  alphabets  generally 


xliv  EXCURSUS   ON   TWO  MSS. 

after  the  xth  century,  the  closed  top  is  found ;  though  in 
the  West  of  India  the  open  top  has  survived  to  the  present 
time. 

a.  The  long  vowel  is  expressed  by  a  curve  below,  as  in 
inscriptions  N  and  D.  In  other  MSS.  this  is  unknown,  except 
in  the  archaic  (^arada  character  (see  Haas  in  the  Palseographical 
Society's  Oriental  Series,  44).  In  a  few  MSS.  only  it  adds 
to  the  number  of  curious  archaisms,  surviving  amongst  the 
letter-numerals  (=200,  see  the  Table). 

i.  The  triangular  form  of  this  letter,  formed  by  dots  or 
small  circles,  sometimes  with  a  top-line,  is  an  archaism  in 
general  Indian  palseography ;  but  as  it  survives  to  the  present 
time  in  Nepal,  no  argument  as  to  the  date  of  these  MSS. 
can  be  founded  on  it. 

1  is  of  course  extremely  rare  as  an  initial.  The  curve  on 
the  top,  very  similar  to  the  one  before  us,  occurs  in  Tibetan, 
which  represents,  as  is  well  knovsm,  the  North  Indian  character 
of  the  viith  century,  with  local  modifications, 

u,  II.  These  letters  have  varied  little  from  the  Gupta  period 
to  the  present  time. 

ri,  ri.  I  have  only  been  able  to  find  analogies  for  these 
necessarily  very  rare  letters,  in  the  ^arada  alphabet,  and, 
somewhat  closer,  in  those  of  the  Indian  alphabets  preserved 
in  Japanese  works.  These  have  been  as  yet  little  studied,  but 
as  far  as  I  can  judge,  their  palseographic  position  is  very  similar 
to  that  of  the  Tibetan,  though  they  seem  to  reflect  a  somewhat 
later  stage  of  writing. 

e.  The  triangular  A9oka  form,  already  lost  in  the  Kutila, 
lingered  on  later  in  Nepal  than  elsewhere. 

ai.  The  curve,  though  especially  characteristic  of  the 
Kutila  period,  is  found  in  all  three  inscriptions. 

o.  This  form  is  nearly  identical  with  the  modern  Bengali, 
with  which  however  the  Japanese  corresponds.  The  earlier 
Nepalese  Gupta  inscriptions  have  this  form  in  the  syllable 
om. 


ON   THE   IXth   century,  xlv 

au.  Some  analogy  to  the  mode  of  lengthening  this  rare 
letter  (to  distinguish  it  from  o)  is  found  in  ^arada.  The  Bengali 
also  shows  the  same  thing,  in  a  later  development. 

§  2.     Medial  voicels. 

a.  Besides  the  ordinary  full  vertical  stroke,  we  get  in  MS. 
B  (see  the  examples  in  table  of  letters)  (1)  the  half  stroke, 
commonly,  but  not  invariably,  used  in  the  inscriptions ;  (2)  the 
small  up-stroke  above  the  letter,  usually,  as  in  the  specimen  in 
the  Table,  employed  with  conjunct  consonants.  This  seems  not 
only  to  be  unknown  in  any  other  MSS.,  but  also  to  be  wanting 
even  in  our  selected  inscriptions,  being  in  fact  a  remarkable 
survival  of  an  altogether  earlier  stage  of  writing.  Compare,  for 
instance,  the  series  of  Inscriptions  from  Mathura  given  in 
Cunningham's  Survey  (Plates  xiii — xv),  where  it  is  the  regular 
form. 

i.  Here  B^  shows  an  earlier  form,  similar  to  that  used  in  N 
and  in  Gupta  generally.  The  form  of  A  and  B^  is  however  used 
in  M  and  I)  as  well  as  in  the  Japanese.  In  Nepal  however 
the  regular  modern  form  is  not  reached  for  some  centuries  later. 

i.  B  preserves  the  Gupta  form,  consisting  of  a  simple  hook 
or  curve  above  the  general  level  of  the  letters  and  springing 
from  the  top  of  the  consonant.  A  has  a  transitional  form,  in 
which  the  curve  springs  from  the  top  of  the  consonant  but  is 
carried  down  to  the  lower  line  of  the  letters  in  a  sweep.  This 
form  is  seen  in  D  and  in  the  Gopala  inscription  cited  below 
in  the  account  of  j.     iVhas  both  forms. 

u  in  B^  is  again  archaic,  corresponding  with  the  forms  of 
two  of  our  inscriptions,  iV  and  M,  a  form  not  otherwise  known 
in  MSS.     A,  however,  has  the  modern  form,  as  also  has  D. 

e.  There  are  several  modes  of  expressing  this  letter  in  our 
MSS.  Only  B^  shows  the  most  archaic  form — the  triangular 
pendant,  resembling  the  left-hand  member  of  a  Roman  T, 
This  is  the  usual  form  in  N,  as  in  earlier  Gupta,  and  is 
preserved  likewise  in  the  Japanese.     In  A  we  have  (2)  the 


xlvi  EXCURSUS  ON   TWO   MSS. 

line  above  as  in  Kutila.  In  M  and  D  we  have  (3)  a  wavy 
line  terminated  in  a  dot,  which  generally  hangs  slightly  below 
the  line,  so  that  we  get  something  between  modern  Nepalese 
and  Kutila.  This  is  also  found  in  Nepalese  of  the  xith  and 
Xllth  centuries. 

ai.  This  vowel  is  also  expressed  in  three  ways,  corresponding 
to  those  given  for  e.  B^  takes,  in  addition  to  the  form  for  e,  a 
sloping  stroke  above,  approximating  to  the  modern  form,  while 
B*^  and  A  double  or  add  the  curving  or  wavy  line  above. 

o  and  au  have  the  same  forms  plus  the  mark  of  a ;  though 
B\  strangely  enough,  often  has  a  form  like  that  used  in  modern 
Devanagari. 

Visarga  and  Anusvara  are  often  expressed  by  small  circles, 
as  in  early  inscriptions  and  in  modern  Bengali,  instead  of  by 
mere  dots,  as  in  later  MSS. 

§  3.     Single   Consonants. 

k.  Both  the  inscriptions  and  the  MSS.  show  generally  in 
this  letter  a  marked  departure  from  the  Gupta  and  earlier  form, 
where  it  was  a  mere  cross  or  dagger-shaped  sign.  This  form 
occasionally  however  survives  in  the  sign  for  ku. 

kh.  The  shape  of  this  letter  calls  for  little  remark.  The 
first  member  in  N,  as  in  our  two  MSS,,  is  somewhat  smaller 
than  the  second. 

g  also  has  changed  very  little.  Some  slight  remains  of 
the  round-topped  form  are  found  in  B. 

gh.  In  this  letter  appear  some  of  the  most  striking 
archaisms  of  these  two  MSS.  They  exhibit  a  form  which  down 
to  the  minutest  details  corresponds  with  that  of  inscription  N 
(see  last  line).  The  left-hand  part  is  open  and  slightly  curved 
on  the  outside,  resembling  a  modern  V,  while  the  other  half  of 
the  letter  is  pointed  at  the  bottom. 

ri.  This  letter  has  in  A  the  simple  form  with  pointed 
pendant,  which  is  found  in  N  and  approximately  in  D.     B  has 


OF   THE  IXth   century.  xlvii 

in  place  of  this  pendant  the  downward  curve  shown  in  the 
Table,  which  looks  like  a  precursor  of  the  modern  dotted  form. 

c  has  changed  little  from  the  earliest  times.  Note,  that, 
in  the  MSS.,  as  in  inscriptions  generally  as  far  back  as  those  of 
A^oka,  the  stroke  above  the  loop  is  not  horizontal,  as  in  modern 
DevanagarJ,  but  slopes  somewhat  downwards.  In  the  Japanese 
this  slope  alone  differentiates  the  letter  from  p. 

ch.  The  archaic  form  of  this  letter  is  preserved  in  Nepalese 
writing  of  all  dates. 

j.  The  forms  of  this  letter  afford  an  interesting  study  for 
the  transition.  We  get  (1)  in  B^  the  archaic  Gupta  (hitherto 
quite  unknown,  I  believe,  in  MSS.)  resembling  an  E,  found 
also  in  Tibetan.  (2)  In  A  we  have  the  curious  intermediate 
form,  found  also  in  some  of  the  earlier  Nepalese  MSS., 
showing  a  small  pendant  to  the  right  of  the  letter.  In  the 
inscription  of  Gopala  (Cunningham,  Survey,  Vol.  i.,  plate  Xlii.), 
circa  A.D.  820  (ibid.,  xi.  181),  we  get  an  exact  counterpart  of 
this  form  (compare  also  the  Japanese).  In  B"  the  forms 
waver.  Among  our  select  inscriptions,  N  has  the  older  form, 
while  I)  and  31  show  a  transitional  variety. 

jh.  In  A  this  letter  is  intermediate  between  the  A^oka 
and  Kanishka  and  the  modern  Bengali  forms.  I  have  not 
succeeded  in  finding  an  example  of  this  very  rare  letter  in  B. 

n.  This  letter  does  not  occur  of  course  separately  in 
inscriptions,  or  in  non-alphabetic  MSS.  Where  it  appears  as 
a  conjunct  in  A,  the  form  approximates  to  that  of  the  cerebral 
nasal,  which  differs  from  it  only  in  having  a  somewhat  deeper 
depression  in  the  middle  of  the  top  portion.  This  exactly 
agrees  with  JV  (cf.  1.  26  ad  fin.,  etc.).  Anusvara  seems  always  to 
be  used  for  this  letter  in  B. 

t.  The  curious  archaism  of  the  pendant  to  the  right  (compare 
the  form  of  j  in  A)  is  distinctly  visible  in  M  (1.  13,  bis). 
Compare  the  Kashmirian. 

th.  This  letter  appears  in  the  same  form  in  which  we  find 
it  in  all  the  early  alphabets,  namely  a  simple  circle  or  ellipse. 


xlviii  EXCURSUS  ox  TWO   MSS. 

without  any  vertical  or  horizontal  up-stroke  or  connecting  line 
at  the  top. 

d.  The  Gupta  form  survives  almost  unchanged  in  both 
MSS.,  the  chief  difference  between  this  and  the  modern  form 
being  the  angular  character  of  the  letter,  which  is  not  curved 
as  at  present.  In  B^  we  have  the  pointed  back  of  the  old 
form  with  an  anticipation  of  the  modern  curve  below  it. 

dh.  This  letter  has  changed  little  from  Gupta  times  to 
the  present.  Note  however  tbat  our  MSS.  agree  with  JS^  (1.  13) 
in  the  peculiar  pointed  back,  instead  of  the  ordinary  rounded 
shape.  This  last  feature  occurs  in  an  exaggerated  form  in  the 
Japanese. 

n.  The  forms  in  B  fall  between  the  Gupta  and  Kutila 
though  nearer  to  the  latter,  especially  in  the  case  of  B^  where 
the  wide  and  horizontal  bottom  of  the  middle  portion  of  the 
letter  is  especially  noteworthy,  and  seems  quite  unknown  in 
Devanagari.  A,  though  more  modern  in  general  form,  shows  a 
curious  and  minute  correspondence  with  all  three  inscriptions  in 
the  curious  ear-like  projection  at  the  top  of  the  right-hand 
horizontal  stroke. 

t.  The  form  of  this  letter  in  our  MSS.  is  a  hook-like  curve, 
either  touching  a  horizontal  top  line  immediately,  or  suspended 
from  it  in  the  centre  by  a  small  vertical  down-stroke.  Both 
these  varieties  occur  in  Gupta  inscriptions :  the  second  lingers 
on,  though  in  rare  instances,  in  some  of  the  earliest  Nepalese 
MSS. 

th.  This  character,  which  accords  with  N  (I.  5  ad  fin.), 
affords  another  instance  of  a  form  exactly  intermediate  between 
the  Gupta  and  our  earliest  MSS.  The  former  has  a  dotted 
circle,  the  latter  show  a  character  like  the  modem  sh,  while  the 
present  letter  is  semicircular  and  shows  the  dot  increased  to  a 
small  dividing  line. 

d.  Our  MSS.  and  inscriptions  agree  in  showing  a  pointed 
form  in  this  letter  precisely  similar  to  that  just  noticed  in  the 
case  of  dh. 


OF   THE   IXtii   CENTURY.  xlix 

dh.  This  letter  differs  from  the  early  Nepalcse  form  only 
in  being  somewhat  more  rounded  at  the  top,  and  having  in 
most  cases  a  smaller  vertical  stroke ;  thus  approximating  more 
nearly  to  the  A9oka  form.  Of  our  inscriptions,  which  vary 
somewhat  here,  D  is  the  nearest. 

n.  This  letter  differs  hardly  at  all  from  t  except  in  the 
shortness  of  the  left-hand  member.  The  really  distinguishing 
feature  of  the  letter,  as  seen  in  Gupta,  Tibetan,  and  Kutila, 
with  which  this  otherwise  accords,  is  the  front  loop,  which  is 
lost  through  the  smallness  of  the  handwritings. 

p.  The  form  in  the  MSS.  is  the  same  as  that  of  our  three 
inscriptions.  The  open  top  is  found  in  all  early  inscriptions, 
as  well  as  in  Panjabi  and  Kashmirian,  but  never  in  later 
Nepalese  or  ordinary  North  Indian  MSS. 

ph.  We  have  here  two  interesting  stages  of  development. 
B^  preserves  nearly  intact  the  Gupta  form,  or  at  all  events  with 
such  slight  modification  as  we  find  in  M.  In  this  form  the 
direct  connection  with  the  p  of  the  period  can  clearly  be  seen : 
Compare  the  Tibetan.  The  next  stage,  which  we  find  in  B^ 
and  still  more  plainly  in  A,  is  midway  between  the  last  and  the 
modern  Bengali.  "With  it  we  may  compare  the  Panjabi  and 
Kashmirian  forms.  The  nearest  approach  to  these  is  to  be 
found  in  our  two  earliest  MSS.  from  Nepal,  where  the  letter 
nearly  approximates  in  shape  to  h. 

b,  V.  There  is  little  in  the  single  form  used  for  these 
two  letters  that  calls  for  remark,  except  that  the  loop  is 
somewhat  larger  than  in  the  modern  letter.  The  use  of  the 
single  form  for  the  two  letters  is  parallelled  by  M. 

bh.  This  letter  in  the  somewhat  minute  writing  of  our  two 
MSS.  is  often  hard  to  distinguish  from  t,  the  only  difference 
being  the  wedged  shape  of  the  left-hand  member.  In  inscrip- 
tions, as  D  and  M,  we  find  the  wedge  left  02-)en,  so  that  no 
difficulty  is  presented ;  so  too  in  Kutila.  The  Japanese  forms 
of  the  two  letters  are  also  interestingly  illustrative. 

m.     The  form  with  open  top  is  found  in  our  three  inscrip- 


1  EXCURSUS  OX   TWO   MSS. 

tions,  as  also  in  Gupta  and  Tibetan,  but  not  in  later  MSS.  It 
occurs  in  B^  and  generally  in  B^  and  A\  The  small  hori- 
zontal projection  at  the  lower  left-hand  comer  (rounded  in 
later  MSS.)  is  a  survival  of  Gupta  usage. 

y.  This  letter  exhibits  one  of  the  distinguishing  archaisms 
of  B.  The  projection  on  the  left  with  its  minute  cross-stroke 
is  an  early  usage  not  even  preserved  in  our  three  inscriptions, 
which  agree  with  A  in  showing  a  form  like  that  of  the  modern 
letter,  but  with  open  top  and  somewhat  more  curved  in  front. 

r.  The  variations  in  this  letter  are  too  minute  to  require 
comment. 

1.  Our  MSS.  display  considerable  variety  in  the  forms  of 
this  letter,  showing  the  transdtien  from  the  Gupta  to  the  modern 
form. 

9,  s.  These  letters  are  soiaewhat  hard  to  distinguish  from 
one  another  and  from  m.  The  normal  shape  of  9  seems  to 
be  much  like  the  modern  s  (^),  but  rounded  instead  of 
square  at  the  top.  This  is  the  usual  Gupta  form,  which 
survives  also  in  Xith  century  MSS.  and  in  the  Japanese.  As 
might  be  expected  however,  from  the  frequent  confusion  of  9 
and  s  in  North  Indian  MSS.  of  all  dates  (especially  in  Nepal), 
as  well  as  from  the  small  writing  of  our  two  MSS.,  the  curve  is 
often  lost,  and  we  get  a  straight  top  as  in  the  modern  s. 

The  proper  form  of  s,  and  that  usually  found  in  both  MSS., 
has  the  open  top,  but  from  the  causes  just  mentioned  the 
distinction  is  often  wanting  in  A  and  occasionally  in  B^  The 
distinction  in  21  consists  only  in  a  mallet-like  projection 
from  the  lower  left-hand  corner  (compare  the  forms  in  D 
and  M  and  in  the  Japanese),  as  compared  with  the  merely 
produced  line  (cf.  the  Japanese)  or  the  loop  (cf.  B)  character- 
istic of  m, 

sh.  Here  again  the  open  tojo  of  the  letter  constitutes  an 
archaism  and  a  survival  of  a  Gupta  form,  not  found  in  later 
MSS.  It  distinguishes  the  letter  from  a  form  otherwise  very 
similar,  that  of  th. 


OF   THE   IXth   century.  li 

h.  The  form  is  a  very  slight  modification  of  the  Kanishka 
and  aorees  with  our  three  inscriptions.  The  absence  of  the 
lower  stroke  found  in  the  modern  letter  is  especially  note- 
worthy. 

§  4.     Conjunct   Consonants. 

B  has  very  noticeable  archaisms  in  the  cases  of  r  preceding, 
and  y  followiDg,  consonants.  The  perpendicular  nail-headed 
shape  of  the  former  exactly  coincides  with  the  forms  in  JV 
and  D,  as  well  as  in  earlier  inscriptions,  but  seems  unparalleled 
in  MSS. 

The  y  by  its  peculiarly  pointed  form,  curving  under  the 
letters  to  which  it  is  joined,  strikingly  recalls  the  Tibetan  y 
conjunct  as  distinct  from  y  single.  N  and  J)  again  furnish 
exact  parallels. 


NOTE   ON   THE   TABLES   OF   LETTERS   AND 
NUMERALS. 

The  Tables  given  in  the  present  volume  (Plates  iv,  v),  which  are 
lithographed  from  tracings  made  from  the  MSS.  under  the  supervi- 
sion of  the  compiler  of  this  work,  are  designed  to  give  a  summary 
view  of  the  progress  of  writing,  as  illustrated  by  these  documents. 

From  the  xviith  century  onwards  no  specimens  have  been  given, 
partly  because  the  peculiarities  of  xviith  century  MSS.  have  been 
well  discussed  and  illustrated  in  Dr  Johann  Klatt's  work  on 
Canakya  already  cited,  partly  because  from  that  time  onwards  MSS. 
oflfer  no  fresh  points  of  palseographical  interest,  nor,  at  all  events  to 
those  accustomed  to  the  more  archaic,  any  practical  difficulty  of 
decipherment.  Thus  both  tables  end  with  illustrations  of  the 
archaistic  revival  of  the  xvith  century  described  at  p.  xxxL  This 
of  course  must  be  borne  in  mind,  if  they  be  used  merely  in  the 
manner  supposed  at  p.  xix.  ad  fin. 

With  regard  to  the  Table  of  Letters,  in  view  of  the  great  extent 
of  the  Indian  alphabet,  an  apology  will  scarcely  be  needed  for 
giving  here  only  such  letters  as  seemed  best  to  illustrate  the  gradual 
development  of  forms.  The  autotype  illustrations*  convey  an 
accurate  notion  of  the  general  style  of  writing  of  some  of  our  most 
important  MSS.  ;  while  the  regular  columns  of  the  lithographic 
table  are  supplemented  by  the  general  column  headed  "  other  letters," 
in  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  group  all  the  remaining  forms  that 
seemed  likely  to  prove  of  interest. 


*  These,  it  will  l^e  observed,  are  all  of  the  actual  size,  with  the 
exception  of  xVdd.  1691.  '2  on  Plate  III.,  whicli  is  slightly  reduced. 


ON  THE   TABLES   OF   LETTERS   AND   NUMERALS.      liii 

As  to  the  Table  of  Numbers,  many  interesting  deductions  are 
suggested  in  view  of  recent  investigations  on  tlie  subject,  especially 
those  of  Pandit  Bhagvanlal  Indraji  and  Dr  Biihler  {Ind.  Antiq. 
vi.  42),  commented  on  in  Bui-nell's  South  Indian  Pcdceogrcq^hy,  2nd  ed. 
p.  65,  and  those  of  Sir  E.  Clive  Bayley  in  the  R.  A.  S.  Journal,  New 
Ser.  Vols.  XIV,  xv.  Bearing  in  mind  that  the  object  of  the  present 
work  is  rather  to  provide  material  for  research,  than  to  originate  or 
modify  theories,  I  subjoin  in  this  place  only  a  few  notes  and  suggestions. 

We  observe  then,  first  and  generally,  the  remarkable  conservatism 
of  the  Nepalese  Buddhists*  in  preserving  side  by  side  with  the  new 
system  of  digit  numerals  the  old  system  of  numeration  by  aksharas 
or  syllables  which  I  have  termed  "  Letter-numerals.'^ 

The  two  systems  were  no  doubt  confused,  so  that  we  certainly  find 
in  many  cases  what  Sir  Clive  Bayley  (xv.  28)  calls  "a  singular  medley 
of  the  old  and  new  "  systems.  Thus  for  the  first  three  numerals,  in 
earlier  MSS.,  the  figures  for  the  first  three  digits  are  the  same,  or 
nearly  so,  in  both  systems.  We  do  not  find  the  newer  system  of 
"figures,"  in  our  sense  of  the  term,  used  at  first  in  Nepal  for  number- 
ing the  leaves  of  MSS.,  and  in  the  passages  of  the  text  of  the  MSS. 
from  which  we  draw  our  first  examples  the  forms  vary  somewhat.  It 
is  important  however  to  notice  that  at  leaf  75  C^M.,)  of  Add.  1702, 
our  most  archaic  MS.,  ^^  and  '^^  are  used  for  12  and  13  showing, 
in  qualification  of  Sir  Clive  Bayley 's  remarks  (xv.  27  &  45),  that 
the  value  of  position  was  early  understood  in  Nepal. 

There  is  some  variety  of  form,  as  in  the  case  of  7,  and  in  that  of 
4  and  5,  as  employed  in  the  letter-  or  akshara-sjstem. 

Again  we  find  in  several  MSS.  the  round  mark  for  zero  used 
with  the  akshara  for  all  the  even  tens,  10,  20,  30,  etc.  (it  is  only 
indicated  in  the  Table  in  each  case  for  the  10).  In  Add.  1643  we 
even  find  the  double  zero  with  200.  The  same  MS.  gives  us  the 
remai-kable  expression  for  447  given  in  the  note  at  the  foot  of  the 
Table.  It  occurs  at  the  end  of  Chapter  I.  All  the  other  verse- 
numbers  +  are  given  in  figures,  on  the  new  system.     This  case  is 


*  The  same  thing  has  been  found  recently  by  Dr  Kielhorn  in 
early  MSS.  from  Western  India :    see  his  Report  for  1880-1. 
t  See  the  text  p.  2,  1.  21. 


liv      ON    THE  TABLES   OF    LETTERS   AXD  NUMERALS. 

especially  curious  from  the  unit  and  ten-numeral  following  tlie  old 
system,  while  the  four  hundred  is  expressed  by  a  mere  unit-four 
figure,  but  of  the  forms  employed  for  the  unit  under  the  old  plan. 
With  these  exceptions,  distinct  sets  of  characters  are  preserved  for  the 
two  methods  throughout. 

As  to  the  letter  numerals :  ■with  regard  to  their  progressive 
variation,  we  notice  in  some  cases  mere  perversion  of  form,  as 
where  tr'i  (5)  changes  to  hri,  or  gra  (7)  to  apparently  a  form  of  iia ; 
in  others,  a  change  in  the  akshara  as  a  spoken*  sound,  as  when  2^^^'>'<^ 
(6)t  becomes  hhra. 

In  the  200  of  Add.  1049  the  curve  below  must  not  of  course  be 
confused  with  the  curve  of  the  u  in  the  probably  original  form  su. 
See  above  p.  xl. 

As  to  the  newer  system  ("  figure-numerals  "),  the  chief  difficulty 
and  interest  lie  in  the  forms  used  for  4,  5,  and  6.  The  set  of  forms 
that  I  regard  as  characteristically  Nepalese  are  most  clearly  seen  in 
Add.  1395  (a.  D.  1385)  in  contrast  with  the' ordinary  forms  found  in 
a  considerably  earlier  MS.,  Add.  1644.  These  forms,  apparently 
local,  linger  on  in  the  coinage,  though  they  are  rare  in  the  MSS.,  of 
the  XVII — xviiith  centuries.  As  to  the  last  of  the  three,  it  will  be 
found,  I  believe,  to  be  a  case  of  the  preservation  in  Nepalese  usage 
of  a  form  developed  from  Gupta  forms,  the  connecting  link  being 
furnished  by  the  remarkable  MS.  Add.  1702.  If  the  form  for  the 
figure  6  given  in  the  second  series  of  the  Table  be  compared  with  the 
second  of  the  forms  given  by  Pandit  Bhagvanlal  {Ind.  Ant.  vi.  44, 
coh  4)  it  %vill  be  found  to  add  still  another  instance  to  the  number 
of  remarkable  survivals  of- the  Gupta  usage  noted  in  the  Excursus  as 
found  in  that  MS. 


*  Cf.  Dr  Buhler  quoted  by  Sir  Clive  Bayley  (xiv.  343). 

t  The  evidence  of  the  first  of  the  two  forms  (both=;^/tra)  in  our 
most  archaic  MS.,  Add.  1702,  seems  to  me  to  go  some  way  to  disprove 
the  objection  of  Burnell  (.S'.  /.  P.  p.  66)  to  Bhagvanlul's  theory,  on 
the  ground  that  the  resemblance  of  the  figure  originally  used  for  6 
to  the  syllable  phra  is  accidental.  The  archaic  looped  form  seems  to 
supply  just  the  connecting  link  that  one  would  expect  in  support  of 
the  Pandit's  theory. 


LIST   OF  THE   PEINCIPAL  WORKS  REFERRED  TO. 

Aufreclit  (Th.).     Catalogtis  Codd.  Sanscriticorum  Bibliothecae  Bod- 

leianae.     (Oxford,  1864.) 
Beal  (S.).     The  Buddhist  Tripitaka... Catalogue.     (London,  1876.) 
Bohtlingk  (0.)  and  Roth  (R.)  =  [B.  and  R.].     Sanskrit- Worterbuch. 

(St  Petersburg,  1855 — 75.) 
Biihler  (J.  G.).     Report  in  Journal  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic  Society, 

1877. 
Burn  ell,  (A.  C).     A  classified  Index  to  the  MSS.  in  the  Palace  at 

Tanjore.     (London,   1881.)     Elements  of  South  Indian  Palaeo- 
graphy, ed.  1,  1874  >  ed.  2,  1878. 
Burnouf  (Eugene).    Introduction  a  I'histoire  du  Buddhisme  Indien, 

ed.    1.   (Paris,  1844) :  and  'Le  Lotus  de  la  bonne  loi'  forming  a 

sequel  to  the  last  (ibid.,  1852). 
Childers  (R.  C).     Pali  Dictionary.     (London,  1875.) 
Cowell    (E.    B.)    and    Eggeling    (J.)       Catalogue    of    the    Buddhist 

Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  possession  of  the   Royal  Asiatic  Society 

(Hodgson    Collection) ;    originally   published   in   the    R.   A.    S. 

Journal,  Oct.  1875. 
Csoma  de  Kijros.     Papers  on  Tibetan  Buddhist  literature  in  Asiatic 

Researches,  Yol.  xx.     See  also  Peer. 
Cunningham  (A.).     Archaeological  Survey  of  India.     (Simla,  1871 — -.) 
Feer  (L.).     Papers  on  Buddhist  literature  in  the  Journal  Asiatique, 

for  1875  and  1879. 
—     Translation  of  Csoma's  work,  •with  notes  and  indices,  in  the  An- 

nales  du  Musee  Guimet  (Ann.  G.),  Voh  ii.     (Paris,  1881.) 
Hodgson   (B.  H.).     Essay  on  the   Literature  of  Nepal;    originally 

published  in  "Asiatic  Researches,"  Yol.  xvi.     (Calcutta,  1828), 

and  reprinted  by  Trubner  (London,  1874). 
Indian  Antiquaiy.     Papers  by  Dr  Biihler,  Pandit  Bhagvanlal  and 

othei-s,  in  Yols.  ii,  vi  and  ix.     (Bombay,  1873 — 1880.) 
Kirkpatrick  (W.).    An  account  of  the  kingdom  of  Nepaul.     (London, 

1811.) 


Ivi        LIST  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  WORKS  REFERRED  TO. 

Klatt  (J.).     De  trecentis  Canakyae  sententiis.     (Berlin,  1873.) 
Nanjio    Bunyiu.       Catalogue   of   the    Chinese    Buddhist    Tripitaka. 

(Oxford,  1883.) 
Palseogi-aphical  Society's  Oriental  Series.     (London,  1873 — 1883.) 
Pischel   (R.).     Katalog  der  Bibliothek  der  Deutschen  Morgenland- 

ischen  Gesellschaft.     (Leipzig,  1881.) 
Rajendralala  Mitra.     Notices  of  Sanskrit  MSS.     (Calcutta,  1871 — .) 

The  Sanskrit  Buddhist  Literature  of  Nepal  [being  a  descriptive 

catalogue  of  the  Hodgson  MSS.  at  Calcutta],  cited  as  Xep.  B. 

L.     (Calcutta,  1882.) 
Senart  (K).     Le  Mahavastu.     (Paris,  1882.) 
Wassiliew  (W.).     Der  Buddhismus  [partly  founded  on  Taranatha's 

Tibetan  History  of  Buddhism]  (St  Petersburg,  18G0.) 
W^right  (D.).     History  of  Nepal.     (Cambridge,  1875.) 


CORRIGENDA. 

Page  6,  line  5.     For  ^if^rT^W^  read  ^TTWrff^oET^ 
„    27,     „    11.    „  859  „     857.     See  p.  xli,  note. 

,,    34,     „    7.     Dele  Devanagarl  hand. 
„    75,  lines  26,  27,  34.     For  Boddhi-  read  Bodhi- 
„    76,     „     23.     For  #-?:T^TrT^"5^iT°  read  °T^"5^rT^° 
„   76,     „     26.       „    ^-^rTT^T^rT^  „  °"^fTT^TTT75rT° 

Pages    82,    83.     On   the    Chapter-titles    see    now    Prof.    Beal's 
translation  in  the  "Sacred  Books  of  the  East." 

Pasre  135,  line  4.     For    -loka    read      -lata. 

„    152,  „  7.     „  ^wr    „    ^^^<^T. 


CATALOGUE 


OP 


BUDDHIST    SANSKRIT 

MANUSCEIPTS. 


Add.  865. 
Paper;   258  leaves,  14 — 15  lines,  14  x  6|  in. ;   modern  Ne- 
palese  hand;  written  1873. 

DlVYAVADlNA. 

Copied  to  order  for  the  University  Library,  tlirough  Dr  D. 
Wright,  from  the  only  early  copy  known  to  exist,  still  preserved  at 
Katmandu.  Written  in  the  ordinary  modern  handwi'iting  of  Nepal, 
as  are  all  the  MSS.  described  in  this  Catalogue,  unless  something  in 
the  character  calls  for  especial  notice.  Leaves  numbered  on  the  left 
hand  margin  of  the  verso  (as  is  commonly  the  case),  1 — 23,  25 — 79, 
81—235,  235*,  236—259. 

This  collection  of  stories  is  noticed  by  Bumouf  in  his  Introduction 
d.  Vhistoire  du  Buddhisme  hidien.*  An  edition  of  the  text,  with 
introductions,  &c.,  by  Prof.  Cowell  and  Mr  R.  A.  Neil,  is  in  coui-se 
of  publication  at  the  University  Press. 

Add.  866. 

Palm-leaf;  202  leaves,  6  lines,  21  x  2in, ;  early  Devanagarl 
hand,  with  some  Kutila  characteristics  ;  dated  Nepal  Samvat 
128  (A.D.  1008). 

ASHTASAHASRIKA   PrAJNAPARAMITA. 

Leaves  someAvhat  damaged  at  the  beginning,  but  on  the  whole  in 
excellent  preservation.     Written  during  a  joint -regency,  apparently, 

*  Wherever  Burnoufs  Introduction  (Burn.  Intr.)  is  cited  in  this 
catalogue,  reference  is  made  to  the  fii-st  edition  (Paris,  1844,  4to.). 

1 


2  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  866. 

of  Nirbhaya  and  Rudradeva,  See  the  Historical  Inti-oduction  to 
this  Catalogue. 

A  facsimile  of  leaf  1436  of  this  MS.  is  given  in  Plate  XVI  of  the 
Palseographical  Society's  Oriental  Series  (Part  2,  1877),  with  a  notice 
of  the  MS.  by  Professors  Cowell  and  Eggeling.  What  is  there  said 
on  the  handwriting  must  however  be  corrected  by  the  results  of 
further  examination,  which  will  be  found  in  the  present  writer's 
remarks  on  Plate  LXXXI  of  the  same  series  (Part  7,  1882).  See 
the  Palseographical  Introduction  to  this  Catalogue. 

Copies  of  this  book  are  numerous  and  often  ancient;  see  Dr  D. 
Wright's  History  of  Nepal,  p.  159  (a  bibliographically  curious 
passage).  Ou  the  work  itself,  the  8000- line  recension  of  the  Pi-ajria- 
paramita,  see  Bum.  Intr.  p.  464. 

Begins : 

After  a  page  of  introductory  ^lokas : 

T?:t  ^T^T  ^^rm^n^Fpq^  ^JNM^  TJWJ^   N^^m  ^ 

^5^^  T7^°.  (leaf  2a.  line  1.) 

The  work  consists  of  32  chapters,  with  subscriptions  as  follows  (the 
number  of  verses  in  each  being  given  in  figures  at  the  end)  : 

fn"^4lMK^Trf  ^T^  TT^^:  II    88^  II    136. 

2.    °^3r^^f<^^f  ^nr  f^^ffhr:  ii  ^8^^  ii  20a. 

^^ffi^:  II    ^^^^  11    885. 

4.     ^^WTKc^Tl^qfT^^f  Tm^^^:  II  ^5^^-11    42a. 

5.  '^WT^T^RfT^^  ^rm  tr^rr:  ii  ^^£-  ii  555. 

6.  °^^*ri  <  *i  I M  r<ui  r^^iT^n:^:  ^f:  11  ^^i-ii  69&. 

7.  »M<4jMn^:^Tm:  n  5^8"^  11  75a. 

8.  *Nii4,r^Mr<^-dt  ^rrrn-giT:  11  \t-8  11  796. 

9.  '"^frRn:^^  ^^  ^W^:  II   W^  II   826. 

10.  ^VTTW^W^f^lTNnTTT^TTf  ^^  ^^3R:  ii  ^t::^  || 
91a. 


Add.  866.]  SANSKRIT  MAXUSCRIPTS.  3 

11.  ^^T^'i^fT^Tff  ^ifi*i<ai:  II  ^«i-ii  986. 

12.  ^^t^r^^^^^Rft^rff  ^rm  ttt^t:  ii  ^^^  ii  losa. 

13.  ''^^'ryMKcl-Hf  ^m  Ml^\^^:  II   \°^  II  1106. 

14.  °'ClV»^MK=(Trf  Tm  ""^fj^:  II   ^'^y.ll   114a. 

15.  ^^^ft^rff^rm^^T^:  ll  '^"^ll   119a. 

16.  ^fT^fTRfTTrff  ^Tf\  WTSUl  II  5^^8  II  1246. 

17.  ®^NM=|-ri«?RI*KM^-Mr<=lTrf  TT^  ^H<a(:  || 
*^^8  II  1316. 

18.  °S[fr^dlMl\^^f  TT^TT^^:  II  \^^  n  1356. 

19.  *'^^-^MI*in»H"T^n.cjTrf*il+l*MNa|rd<1*j:||5^^^|| 
1416. 

20.   «^^tn^T^nr^5ii:^^Tr^TTrfT^^  wm  f^nfwrm:  ii 

»^^^  II  148a. 

21.  «^T<*^MK!:jTrf  TrRTi:*N3|ffTfm:il  \^«^ll  152a. 

22.  '^f^iTwnr^TR:^^^  ^T^  ^rrftirffTfrR:  ii  \£-^  ii 

157a. 

23.  *!U*Mr<c(TlT  'TT^  ^^frfwfrrrR:  II  ^^  II   1596. 

24.  ^^rwn^Rft^rff  ^nr  ^^^rjffinTTfrR:  ll  "^^  ll  162a. 

25.  ^nrWrfTTrff  ^T^^^^TTJrfrfrRT:  II  ^^^^  ||   166a. 

26.  ^^T^TtmTTft^Tff  Wm  ^ft^rffTfTTT:  II  -^8^  II  1696. 

27.  *^KMK=(-df  ^rm  ^Trfwf?rrr^:  ii  ^^l^^ ii  i74a. 

28.  ^^^R^W^l^T^rm  Tft^rffs^rfWirfHfm:  ii  ^°\  ii 

1816. 

29.  ^'^R^Rnrfr^'T^  ^rm  T^^^iMaiTi*^:  ii  ^°  ii  i836. 

30.    'W^TTT^f^TriT^^  ^T^  NtTtT^:  11  8^811  1956. 

31.  ''"tmfffTTlT^Tff  «ii8*RaiTi*j:  ii  5^^^  11  201a. 

32.    'TT^I^-STTqiT^rff  [sic]  TT^  TrN^Tm:  II  ^^11 

^*<rvii  ^  ^JNryi^i-g:fiT^T%i*i  imT^TTnfmT  wr^T- 

After  this,  come  three  more  lines  iii  the  same  style  (cf.  Add.  1 163) 
and  then  the  verse  "^  VI®,  etc.  ;  and  then  the  following  particu- 
lars as  to  time  of  writing  : 

1—2 


4  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  866. 

f^^T^^^5L<<=<  ^^^iP^Md^T^i  Tit f^TT^^f^mt^m 
(?)  trr^*^  II  TT^  ^TT . . .  ^n^rr^TT  ^^  i  ^^"^frnnr  (?) 

Xf^  ^tf<f rT^^lTrf ^  I  ^m^ . . . 

What  follows  is  too  faint  to  be  read  with  certainty,  but  the  words 
^T^  and  "^V^  and  the  title  of  the  book  can  be  discerned,  so  that 
it  is  probably  a  line  in  praise  of  the  'fruit '  of  reading  the  book. 

After  a  full  stop  comes  another  line  in  rather  fresher  ink  but 
similar  handwriting : 

f^^rr^  <|Jlir<*^TT5ITfT  TT^^T  ^T^fPTWlTT^  II 

Add.  867.  1. 

Paper;  1  leaf,  8  lines,  12f  x  3fin.  ;  xvillth.  cent. 

Fragment  of  the  Candrapradipa-SUTRA  (?). 

This  leaf  Avas  substituted  by  mistake  for  leaf  1  of  the  next  MS. 
and  is  bound  with  it. 
Begins  : 

^T^  ^^^T^rrf^TTfw^  II 

In  1.  7  we  find  : 


Add.  867.  2. 

Paper;  124  leaves,  7 — 9  lines,  12f  x  3f in.     Dated  N.  S.  872 
(A.  D.  1752). 

Da^abhumi^vara. 

Leaves  1,  2.5,  54,  and  105  are  missing.     Another  copy  in  R.  A.  S. 


Add,  867.2.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  5 

Cat.  3.  The  work  is  called  by  Burnouf,  Introcl.  pp.  68,  438, 
"  exposition  des  dix  degres  de  perfection,  par  lesquels  passe  un 
Buddlia."  It  is  one  of  the  'nine  dharmas',  {id.  ib.  68).  For  the 
beginning,  and  the  colophon  of  Chapter  1  see  the  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  The 
remaining  10  Chapters  end  as  follows: 

3.  "JWrart  ^frm  ^fft^T°  44a. 

4.  ^?rf%T[ffV]  'TTJT  '^^^^  52a. 

5.  "^^^T^^T^^®  61a. 
G.  '^rW?^  TTiT  ^^"^  72a. 

7.  ^t'WT  Tm  ^TWt"  84a. 

8.  ^"^^TT  «fl*<l^*lt°  98a. 

9.  wrsmrft  ^TTR  ^r^nFfV'  io7b. 

10.  v^f^T  ^rm  ^^ai7ft°  i20a. 

11.  TffT^#fifv^f«*^4iM^Mi  ^ipg;^^^ ^nr  iFTfT- 


Add.  868. 

Paper;  43  leaves,  7  lines,  10^  x  3^  in.;  xvii — xviilth  century. 
SAPTA9ATIKA   Prajnaparamita. 

Last  leaf  recent  supply.  Leaves  originally  numbered  14 — 56, 
later  1—43, 

The  work  exists  in  Tibetan  (Csoma  in  -45.  Bes.  xx.  395).  It 
consists  of  a  dialogue  on  prajnd  j)aramitd  between  the  Bhagavat  and 
MafijuQrl  (Kumara-bhuta),  accompanied  by  Caradvatlputra,  Purna 
son  of  MaitrayanT,  Maudgalyayana,  Ka9yapa,  Katyayana,  Kaushthila 
and  others. 


6  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  S68. 

Begins  : 

T^t  i?^T  ^fT^^rf^^  W^  ^^RT^^  ^l^^i   f^^<M 

Ends,  with  the  common  formula: 

After  which : 

^rr^wrnrfH^H"  TT^TTrrf'Trrr  ^WTTTT I  436. 

As  a  specimen,  the  opening  of  the  dialogue  (3a),  is  subjoined: 
^TRT^Tf  I  ^^  if^^:  rfm^TT  ^S<*ri  ^TRrT^  T^^- 

rirT^:  I  ^fT^^Rtrrf  I  rf^fTi*KW  (sic)  rfm'^m  xra^n^TR- 

Add.  869. 

Paper;  66  leaves,  7  lines,  10ix4^iu.;  modem,  ordiuaiy 
Devanagari  hand. 

BODHICARYAVATARA. 

This  is  the  ninth  section  of  the  A^okavadana-mala  (see  MS,  Add. 
1482).  It  is  in  verse,  containing  ten  par icchechs.  See  R.  A.  S.  Cat. 
No.  13;  and  copies  are  also  at  the  India  office,  Paris  and  Calcutta. 

Begins  : 

The  sections  end  thus  : 

-^^fi:  II  4o. 


Add.  869.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS. 

2.  °^iM<ai*ir  trft^TT  ft<ft^:'  sb. 

3  o^tfVf^TnTfr^rtt  ^m  w^tm  ^°  iia. 

5.  °^^5RTW^W:  W^TRl"  22b. 

6.  ""^ipTlMKr+ldr  ^^:'  sib. 

7.  ^fr^xnTHRfTT  t(n7%^:  ^rm:  ii  366. 

8.  °^T^MKr*<rH  ^TT^TTS^:'  49a. 

9.  "ilTJlMKr+idl  xrnc^^T*  ['I^^.*]"  616. 

10.  °^n:u!m*ji  qn:^<r  ^TT^:  ii  66a. 


Add.  870. 

Paper;  225  leaves,  7—8  Hnes,  13^  x  41  in.;  dated  N.s.  974 
(a.  d.  1854). 

VrIHAT    SvAYAMBHtJ-PURANA. 

A  work  in  verse  on  the  sacred  places  of  Nepal.  See  Hodgson 
Ess.  Lit.  Nep  17;  Burn.  Intr.  581;  Lotus  502—504;  E.  A.  S.  Cat. 
Nos.  17,  18,  23;  Pischel,  Catal.  der  Hdss.  der  Deutschen  Morgenl. 
Gesellsch.  2 — 3.  Of  this  purana  there  seem  to  be  at  least  three, 
and  possibly  four,  redactions : 

(1)  The  Vrihat  svayambhu-p°,  see  also  MS.  Add.  1468. 

(2)  The  Mahat-sv° ;  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  18.  This  is  perhaps  rather 
a  different  recension  of  the  text  of  No.  1  than  a  separate  redaction, 
since  most  of  the  chapters  coincide  with  No.  1  both  at  the  beginning 
and  end;  though  the  beginning  of  the  work  coincides  with  No.  3,  and 
that  of  ch.  2  with  No.  4. 

(3)  The  Madhyama-sv^';  see  MS.  Add.  1469,  R.  A.  S.  No.  23, 
and  Pischel,  Cat.  1.  c. 

(4)  The  smallest,  see  MSS.  Add.  871, 1536,  and  P.  A.  S.  No.  17. 
Of  these  redactions  Nos.  1,  2,  and  4  have  the  same  number  of 

chapters,  eight,  with  names  in  most  cases  identical;  and  No.  3,  though 
in  10  chapters,  is  substantially  the  same. 

The  text  of  the  present  MS.  is  independent  of  Add.  1468; 
Compare  the  two  lacunae  which  are  marked  in  that  MS.  at  the  end 
of  ch.  5;  and  the  title  of  ch.  4  which  in  this  MS.  corresponds  with 


8  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Apd.  870. 

ch.  4,  of  the  'maclhyama'  recension,  while  in  Add.  1468  it  is  the  same 
as  in  the  others. 
Begins  : 

^fR^TTfTT^^^  'm^  ^t  w^  II 

The  chapters  end : 
^^rg^^^T^t  TT^ifr S'^^TRT:  II   19a. 

TT^H*^=|UI«1T  ^T^  ftfTt^S'Srr^:  ll   57a. 

3.    TTrT  °^TT^  ^^^f2Tm^^"nRt  (^ffliTlS'SIT^:  II  82a. 

TT?TRrf«fr  ^rm  '^fJ^fsWRT:  11   108a. 

rfV^NffT^frCTTT^'t^f^^i^WT^t  tT^^S^STRT:  II  135a. 

^TW:  II  1916." 

8.    TffT   ^^VWT^C^'^^ "^ K*I ^^  (sic)  ^TTriWT^^^Ht 

^rsiT^  II  ^t^^^t:  t^tt^  it^'^^t  inrf^rfrT  ii  225a. 

Then  follow  two  lines  in  vernacular. 

A  table  of  contents,  and  the  title  '  T^^^^^TT^Tf^T^TT ' 

are  on  the  cover  at  the  beginning. 

*  Often  corrected  later  to  ^l<4^°.    It  is  also  sometimes  written 
^W«   or  f^". 


Add.  871.]  SAXSKRIT  MAXUSCRIPTS.  9 


Add.  871. 

Paper ;  26  leaves,  5  lines,  10|  x  2^  in. ;  modern. 

SvAYAMBHtJ-PURANA  (smallest  redaction). 
For  an  account  of  the  work  see  under  Add.  870. 
Begins  : 

%^^  ^sprffT  wr^  ^Ti^^T  TR?  ^^:  i 

Ends: 

2.  TTrT  ^wrxR^R^Ht  ^rm  ilffft^:  ^°  i  Qb, 

3.  TTH  ''■^^•S^tttrqr^  ^rm  STfN:  ^°  l   9a. 

4.  TfH  °^rmTl\^^^^f5^:  ^°  I    12a. 

16a. 

6.  TfH  °^^^Ific|Hn^iM=l(l«lT  TTR  ^^^:  XT®  I  21a. 

7.  ttH  ° wfcnTj^^fhgft  ^"fr  ^{vr  ^tw:  tf^  i  226. 

26a. 


Add.  872. 

Paper;  234  leaves,  7  lines,  14x5  in.;  modern,  ordinary 
Devanagari  hand. 

AVALOKITE^VARA-GUNA-KARANDA-VYUHA. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  1 — 235,  as  209  is  omitte'd  in  the 
numberingr. 

o 

On  the  work,  a  poetical  version  of  the  Karanda-vyuha,  see 
Burn.  Intr.  220—230,  Lotus  352:  see  also  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  19. 
Copies  are  also  at  the  India  office,  in  Paris  and  at  Calcutta. 


10  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  872. 

Begins  : 

fT  W^if  1I-5CW  l\(3(T  ^^  ^T%7r^7^^^^  II 

^^  wrT%?r  ^  %yifi*r*i4  ^^m^  i 

M<^Sl<Ui  7T(^  ^Pdi^M^llnH^:  II 

The  woi'k  is  entirely  composed  in  9lokas.     The  following  sections 
are  marked,  but  not  numbered  (see  however  Add.  1322)  : 

1.  xfH  ^tNt^^^t^tftrwr^  TT^zmtswr^:  ii  12. 

2.  Tf5r#N ^  Cm  ^'  ^TV *f  <  1  ^TRT^t^^IT^nrW  I   22. 

3.  Tf>T^rHi^<lf<^=l^4irMK*iM*<Ui  38. 

4.  TffTWRrrT^f^f^CT'^^^^^^'RT'TiT^r^ii  546. 

5.  Tf^^4''^^l'^='^^TV^Tf^^4NdKU!i<*<W||60. 

6.  Tf^rvt^^WriTTWTT^r^  11  646. 

7.  TT% ^^T^T^'bg;^"! "^ fi ^ K M^wt^TT^^J^n: W II  68 J. 

8.  TffT  ^f^rwrfcJ^Tfvm^T^rTTT^TT^TW  II   106. 

TWTT^T^II   113. 

10.  Tf<^  ^^IT^^^T^Tj^^r^^-friTTWTT^T^  II  117. 

11.  TfHf*i^"^'4'^MTT^^lMK?rfe|5ri^KUiM*<^i(i||12iz,. 

12.  Tf?r  5^  K"  I  ^1  *rTUf*i*1  dl  ^TT^lT^nCT^  ||  1226. 

13.  Tf^  ^Tnif^^^fM«ft^*ri^KU!y^TW  II  1266. 

14.  TfH^m■<1K^♦^N^^^3I*i^<5lNffli^^<i^*^i|ch<^5ll 

1316. 
15.    Tfff  f^^^^T^Wrf T^TT^TT^T^  H  1616. 


Add.  872.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  11 

TTfrr«I*l*iM*<ui  II   211. 

18.  TTfT  faiW^^T^^^Pf^TW  II  227. 

19.  TTrT  f^5T^t<l^Mft¥^^^^t¥ITHTfWfPft^fTT^T- 
^^TWd^<^jUI<*KU^oe^^i^4^r^|^l<;i  W[^]Tf  II  235. 

Add.  874. 

Paper;  76  leaves,  5  lines,  10  x  3  in.;  dated  N.  S.  913  (A.D. 
1793). 

Manicudavadana. 

The  leaves  are  mimbered  as  75,  26  being  written  twice.     The 
text  is  very  faulty.     There  are  also  copies  at  Paris  and  Calcutta. 
Begins  (after  the  invocation) : 

T?;^  TnSTT  ^fW^rf^R^q^  ^^^T^^  ^T^^t  "RT^  ^  I 

The  tale  commences  by  the  introduction  of  King  Brahmadatta  and 
hLs  wife  Kantamati  at  Saketa;  her  pregnancy  and  various  longings 
therein ;  the  birth  of  a  son  who  is  called  Manicuda,  because  bora  with 
a  jewel  on  his  head;  his  marriage  to  Padmavati,  daughter  of  a  rishi 
Bhavabhuti;  the  birth  of  a  son  Padraottara.  In  the  subsequent  course 
of  the  tale,  Bi'ahraasahampati  and  Qakra  are  among  the  speakers  and 
actors,  also  a  rishi  Mai'ici  (sic). 

At  If.  70  the  characters  in  their  present  births  are  thus  identified : 
The  king  Manicuda  is  the  narrator,  the  Buddha;  Padmavati  is 
Yagodhara,  the  yuvaraja  Padmottara  is  Eahula;  Brahmaratha  was 
Qariputra;  Bhavabhuti  is  Ananda;  Marici  is  Kagyapa;  Brahmadatta 
is  Cuddhodana,  and  Kantamati,  Maya;  Mara  is  Maudgalyayana ; 
Indra  is  a  bliikshu  Nagira;  the  king  Dushprasaha  is  Devadatta.  In 
an  earlier  birth,  Manicuda  had  been  a  sai'thavaha  who  had  built  and 
adorned  various  stupas. 


12  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  874. 

The  final  colophon  in  Skt.  and  vernacular  begins: 

TTrf  ^V^TRT^^^'RTT^  WfTT^  76. 

The  remainder  is  to  the  effect  that  the  MS.  was  written  at  Katmandu 
in  the  reign  of  Rana  Bahadur,  in  the  year  above  mentioned,  at 
Gophalatora-\'ihara  by  Vigvabhadra. 


Add.  875. 

Paper;  90  leaves,  5  lines,  13^  x  3  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  914  (a.d. 
1794)  reign  of  Rana-bahadur. 

Suvarxa-prabhasa. 

Written  in  gold  on  black  paper,  in  a  square  and  somewhat  crabbed 
hand,  in  the  reign  of  Rana  Bahadur.  See  Burn.  Intr.  529  sqq. 
(where  an  abstract  is  given);  and  Wassil.  153.  From  Beal's  Bicddh. 
Trip.  15  it  appears  that  there  is  a  Chinese  version,  of  the  vith  cent. 
Cf.  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  8. 

Begins  (after  invocations)  : 

:^ft  ^^^^  T's^t  fw^TT '^nftvTfR-  TnrfVt.... 

The  work  consists  of  twenty-one  Parivartas  which  end  as  follows : 

1.  TTrT  ^^^TWlfTTfTr^^^TT^  M^I'IMKcItI: 
TT^W:  3. 

2.  ttH  ^  '^''  rrmTrrT^-qrTrTrnf^^TT°  f^^ffV^:  8. 

3.  °W^°  "^rfN:   9. 

4.  °<|5i^4amMr<«:|-df  ^T^  ^fj^:  156. 

G.    °"Sp?JrTT^°  WEfi:  206. 

7.    °^^(5^^TTT^R°  Wrm:  406. 

8.  °^Twt^^°  ^rnrrs^:  44. 

9.    °^*<^K=fl^°  'T^^:  46. 
10.     °^4^^CTfV^r4*H*f  ^Vrrf^  (sic)  ^°  T^Vfl'   47. 

11.  °i<jiyi^41<cifim°  ^ifi*i^^*i:  51. 

12.  ^'w^^n?'  ^T^'Ji:  53. 


Add.  875.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  13 

13.  °f  t^^^  ^m  TTwarr^  ^ft^TH^TT3r:  ii  57. 

14.  ^^^JiT^®  "^fj^:  59. 

15.  *"?T^T^^  ^T^  T^T^°  ^^T^:  63. 

17.  «-5TTfVTrar^T^T:r*  wtt^tt:  6db. 

18.  ^"siw^rf^T^  ^^l^^^**  S¥T^:  77. 

19.  °'5TrfTTT°  ^T^r^ffaifrrrR:  876. 

20.  °^^tff^T^rRf^®  TTaiffTfW:  89. 

TWT^^^t^wrwTwrrr^r-^^^TT^:  ^n:^??TTT:  90a. 

After  quoting  the  verses  ^  ^J^T  "^fj®  etc.,  invocations  of  bless- 
ings on  his  Acarja  parents  etc.,  the  scribe  proceeds  : 

1%2yiv^sn«if  (?)  ^v^T^  "^  "^  "^  ^^jnxnu**^^^  (sic)  I 

^T^RffT  ^PrT^t  TTTR^t   ^rf^^Tf^TTT^   VT^f^^TT 

The  translation  into  the  veraacular  accordingly  follows,  and  the 
work  concludes  with  an  invocation  to  Manjucrl. 

Like  other  MSS.  in  black  and  gold,  the  readings  are  difficult  to 
decipher  and  little  to  be  depended  on. 

Add.  899. 

Paper;  written  continuously  on  22  unnumbered  leaves  folding 
backwards  and  forwards  ;  7  lines,  6f  x  8f  in. ;  modern. 

I.      NAIPALiYA-DEVATA-STUTI-KALYANA-PANCAVIMgATIKA. 
This  is  translated  by  Wilson,  Asiatic  Researches,  xvii.  p.  458, 


14  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  899. 

Begins  (page  3) : 

Ends: 

II.  BHADEACARiaiAHAPRAXIDHAXARAJA. 

See  R.  A.  S.  No.  33  and  Add.  1681 ;  copies  are  also  at  Paris  and 
St  Petersburg.  A  wood-cut  text  was  published  in  Japan  in  1832,  and 
there  is  a  Chinese  version  (Tripit.  1142)  by  Amoghavajra  (ob. 
A.D.  771). 

Begins  (page  15) : 

^^  ^^  W^PrRT^  ftfV^T  TTTT^f^  JlrU^  WtWVT- 

^r^T^^  ^r^m^TT^rfwnTsmr^  ^c^T^rr  ttt^^t  ^t^- 

Ends  (page  31)  : 

III.  Xryavrittam. 

Four  short  commentaries  on  the  Qloka  of  the  four  truths  (cf. 
Burnouf,  Lotus  522),  each  of  which  is  called  a  2>ci^sha.  The  Qloka 
is  given  thus,  in  its  later  form : 

^  'fef^  ^fJTW^  "tfJ^Wt  rT'^ITTrT:  I 

IV.  Sapta-BUDDHA-STOTRA,  in  nine  9lokas. 

See  R.  A.  S.  No.  30,  part  2.    It  is  translated  by  "Wilson,  Asiatic 
Researches,  xvi.  p.  453. 
Begins  : 

Ends: 

*  For  anahhildpya  cf.  the  nirahhUapya  of  the  Sarvadarg.  p.  15, 
line  1. 


Add.  900.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  15 

Add.  900. 

Paper;  35  leaves,  11  lines,  9  x  4|in.;  modern. 

As  HTAMi- VRATA-VIDHANA-K  ATHA. 

A  work  in  ^lokas,  being  a  dialogue  between  AQoka  and  Upagupta; 
and  forming  the  last  two  tales  (29,  30)  of  the  Kalpadrumavadanamala; 
see  Add.  1590  (271  to  end),  a  MS.  of  the  same  family  as  this  ;  cf.  the 
lacuna  on  34,  line  8.  It  is  a  different  work  from  that  translated  by 
Wilson,  Asiatic  Researches,  xvi.  472. 

Begins  : 

^^^^  ^^  '^^^  ^^*  "^TTf  lKTT^f%:  II 
<tRI  tj^  fW^T^  ^  ^m  ^^iTl^f%  II 

^^'^J  ^frf^grft  ^^fft  rT^^T^rr  II 

Ends: 


Add.  901. 

Paper;  41  leaves,  11 — 18  lines,  14  x  5  in.;  modem. 

GUHYA-SAMAJA   (PtJRVARDDHA). 

A  modern  copy  of  a  faulty  archetype:  cf.  Add.  1329,  This  is  the 
first  of  the  three  parts  of  the  Guhya-samaja  ;  for  the  others  see  Add. 
1365  and  Add.  1617.  This  part  seems  to  be  sometimes  reckoned 
as  part  of  the  Tathagataguhyaka ;  see  Add.  1365. 

Begins  : 


16  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  901. 

Tlie  work  consists  of  18  chajiters,  ending  thus  : 

f^TT^Z:^!  f^^S  ^J'm  II   4a. 
^TPR  ^^^nt^Md^^ffT^TS  'STT^:  II  46. 

4.  THT     ^^^m^m^T^^ I <*j^iTi  <-^ ^^T^^^^rr^ 

^fff  IIT'JT  rr^  -^  *  I  *^  =i  I  chj'^  TT^TJ^^i^^rgfJ^^  5  WTm  II  5a. 

-sfT^:  II  5b. 

tfz^:  i^TS  ^srr^:  ii  g6. 

^z^:  ^^^Ts  "^^T^:  ii  76. 

8.  TfH  ^°  ^TTT^NTRrr^tRrw  sic  ^-^^s  "^^rr^:  ii  sa. 

9.  TTrT  ^"^  ^^^frr%  qT'=rT^^^T^^:r^'I^TS  "STT^:  II  9a. 

10.  TTfl  ^1"°  W^T^  ^^m^rT^^^T^-^T^T  ^TIR  ^Z^ 

^^ai^TS  'srr^:  ii  lOa. 

^q^iTi+jq^^  'q:^rr^^s  'srr^:  ii  ii6. 

12.    TffT       ^wtrT^T^rT^H^T^^wNTf^^T^^rfef^T- 
^^T^T^^T  ^T^  ^T^TS't^TT^:  II   136. 

ffrqi^T^^WrfV^TZ^^^T^TS  -STRT:  II   186. 

14.  TfH    ^t^^^"PTrich 1 5^ cjT^f-^i ti< ^ <^ I g "n^^rr^ 

11   22a. 

oirT^^^^rTWr^¥Ti^l|d^°  Add.  1329. 
o"q-^7Tr^i5i;fnqT^^^Fn?T:TZ^°  Add.  13G5. 
•  ^f^rrrgfT  (recte)  Add.  1365;  "tT^:  Add.  1329. 


Add.  901.] 


SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS. 


17 


15.    Tfrf   ^T°    ^^T^   ^NTr^^^^TT^^^^ffplT^. 
[q^]^^^;  tj-g^-gcr:  n  266. 

16.  TTrr  ^«  ^^T%  ^ff^d^^rni^R^Tf^T^frfV^nr 
^z^:  Tfrrsi:  wrn^^:  ii  2%. 

^T^^:  ^TT^ir:  ii  356. 

18.    TfH  ^°  ^Trr%  ^^"Uf^X  ^ ^ "^  TlT'TTT^'RT  (sic) 


Add.  912. 

Paper;    4  leaves  in  book  form,  30 — 35  lines,  8^  x  13iin. ; 
modern. 

List  of  Books. 

The  list  is  classified  under  the  following  heads  : 


1.  Puranas 

2.  Niti 

3.  Itihasa 

4.  Kavyani  (sic) 

5.  Natakani 

6.  Samhityani  (sic) 

7.  Vyakaranani 

8.  Kosha 

9.  Chandamsi 

10.  Jyotishani 

11.  Tantrani 

12.  Vaidyakani 


containing  51  books 
4 


3 

36 
15 
16 
41 
11 
6 
38 
29 
40 


Inside  the  same  cover  is  a  shorter  list  in  English  writing, 
somewhat  similarly  classified,  and  headed  '  List  of  books  in  Maharaja's 
library.'  It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  any  such  collection  really 
exists.  The  fact  is  that  these  were  received  at  Cambridge  in  answer  to 
a  request  for  information  as  to  the  books  of  which  it  would  be  possible 
to  procure  transcripts  for  the  University  Library.  See  under  Add. 
1042. 


18  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  913. 

Add.  913. 
Paper;  152  leaves,  10—11  lines,  12  x  5J  in.;  modern. 
Bodhisattvavadana-Kalpalata  by  Kshemendra. 

A  copy  of  a  copy,  more  or  less  direct,  of  Add.  1306;  see  the 
lacunae  1416,  corresponding  to  a  faded  part  of  Add.  1306  (3736). 

On  the  -work  see  Burn.  Intr,  555;  also  Feer  in  Jour n.  A siatique  1879 
p.  299;  who  also  adds  remarks  on  both  our  MSS.  The  complete  work 
consists  of  108  avadanas,  and  is  divided  into  two  pai'ts  or  volumes, 
the  hrst  containing  1 — 49,  the  second  50 — 108.  It  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  Add.  1306,  which  is  the  original,  though  not  the  immediate, 
archetype  of  this  copy,  begins  imperfectly  in  the  middle  of  Tale  41 
(Panditavadana).  For  details  not  given  here  see  the  description  of 
that  MS. 

The  autlior  is  Kshemendra,  and  the  date  of  composition  the  27th 
year  of  the  Saptarshi  era  (a.d.  1052);  see  below,  and  on  Kshemendra 
and  his  other  works,  one  of  which  is  partly  Buddhistic,  see  Biihler, 
Beport  of  Tour,  Journ.  B.  A.  S.  Bombay,  1877,  pp.  46,  47. 

The  work  is  in  clokas  throughout. 

The  pi'esent  copy  is  curiously  miswritten,  and  the  chapters  are  not 
numbered.  It  begins  with  Part  2  (Tale  50  in  Add.  1306)  and  runs 
on  correctly  to  the  end  of  Tale  67. 

Begins : 

The  subscription  to  each  tale  runs  thus :  TTrf  ^^^TW ^  I  "^  rf  I  <4T 
^ifV *i  t4  N  4  -R^^^ rTT^t ....  ^^^T^m^  I  (In Add.  1306  each 
is  called  a  ^:)«^/rtv«).  The  titles  are  as  follows :  Dacakarmaplutya- 
vadanam  (6a);  Rukmati  (8a);  Adlnapunya  (11a);  Subhashitagave- 
shin  (14rt);  Sattvaushadha  (15a);  Sarvaindada  (176);  Gopalana- 
gadamana  (186);  Stupa  (19a);  Punyabala  (206);  Kunala  (296); 
Nagakumara  (306);  Karshaka  (316);    Ya9oda  (356);   Mahakaeyapa 


Add.  913.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  19 

(38a);  Sudhanakinnari  (516) ;  Ekagiiiiga  (55a);  Kavikumara  (596); 
Saiigliarakshita  (68b). 

Then  follow  Tales  41 — 49,  which  (Vje  it  observed)  are  precisely 
the  remnant  of  Pai-t  1  still  preserved  in  Add.  1306.  The  titles  are  : 
Pandita  (72a);  Kanakavama  (73«);  Hiranyapani  (74a);  Ajatac^atru- 
pitridroha  (766);  Kritajiia  (786);  Calistamba  (806);  Sarvarthasiddha 
(83a);  Hastaka  (87a);  Shaddanta  (916).  To  these  a  note  is  prefixed, 
stating  that  the  beginning  of  the  Panclitavadana  'though  hunted  for 

could  not  be  found  anywhere'  (♦iJi^+IM   Sf^  ^"^T^  "JnTT). 

Tales  68 — 77  and  the  beginning  of  78  ai'e  omitted  altogether, 
though,  as  the  end  of  Tale  67  does  not  occur  at  the  end  of  a  leaf  in 
Add.  1306,  it  seems  clear  that  there  must  have  been  a  defect  at  this 
point  in  the  copy  of  that  MS.  which  our  scribe  had  before  him. 

Then  follows,  after  a  blank  page,  the  latter  portion  of  Tale  78 
(Cakracyavana),  a  note  being  entered  on  the  blank  space  to  the  effect 
that  the  beginning  of  this  tale  could  not  be  found ;  another  proof  of 
the  defective  state  of  the  immediate  original  of  this  MS.  The  tales 
from  this  point  run  on  correctly  to  the  end  of  Tale  107,  with  which 
Kshemendra's  own  work  ends.  The  titles  are  as  follows :  Cakra- 
cy[avana]  (93a);  Mahendrasena  (956);  Samudra  (996);  Hetuttama 
(1006);  Nai'aka-purvika  (102a);  Rahula-kainnapluti  (1036);  Madh- 
urasvara  (1046);  Hitaishi  (1056);  Kapiujala  (1076);  Padmaka 
(109a);  Citrahasti-cayyatiputra  (112a);  Dharmaruci  (119a);  Dhanika 
(1196);  Subhashita  [Civi-subhashitam  Add.  1306,  leaf  343]  (121a); 
Maitrakanyaka  (1236);  Sumagadha  (128a);  Yagomitra  (1286); 
Vyaghra  (129a);  Hasti  (130a);  Kacchapa  (1306);  Tapasa  (131a); 
Bodhisattva  (1316);  Punahprabhasa  (1326);  Cyamaka  (1346);  Simha 
(1356);  Priyapinda  (136a);  Q'acaka  (137a);  Raivata  (139a);  Kana- 
kavarman  (1396);  (^uddhodana  (141a). 

On  151a  we  have  the  subscription   XJ^    '^*i'^  l<4<^l^rfr*4T 

°^fTI^i     H^loH^CT^f^lirt    #mrTm^'iN<^R  I    and  the 

beginning  of  that  section  (141a,   8)  relates  that  Kshemendra  had 

completed    107    avadanas    ( WT Ti  <  ^i  d  *i  d  Ti  *1    IkT    ^ifV^r^- 

■^ I  <^ d  1 1 1  I)  and  that  his  son  Somendra  made  one  more  to  complete 
a  fortvmate  number  (this  is  the  same  legend  as  that  told  in  the 
Nagananda).  The  last  colophon  (151a)  gives  Kshemendra's  genealogy; 
cf.  Biihler  1.  c,  and  goes  on  to  say  that  Kshemendra  undertook  the 
work  at  the  instance  of  a  Buddhist  friend  Nakka,  who  represented 

2—2 


20  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  913. 

that  Gopadatta  and  others  had  compiled  'jatakamalikas'  iii  a  difficult 
style  TTHTTH^f^FiSrTI;  lie  therefore  recommends  him  to  make  a 
selection  in  a  pleasing  style.  He  writes  a  few  avadanas  and  is 
encouraged  to  do  more  by  a  vision  of  'Bhagavan'  in  a  dream;  and 
is  also  assisted  in  Buddhistic  research  by  an  acarya  Viryabhadra. 
What  appears  to  be  the  original  colophon  is  thus  copied : 

^c[^^  ^TTf^  tllT^^  1%^T^  I 

f^^T^:  fwr^f^  ^trTt  #Rr^T^^  ^et^  II 
^PffT^Tr^  Tnii^fw^t  f'Tf^ffts^  3R^:  ii  151&. 

The  MS.  ends: 

XRT^  T?-^^^^^  ^f^^  ^^^^  TTT^  ^^^>.  I  152. 

Add.  914. 

A  roll  of  Indian  paper ;  5  ft.  x  7  in. 

Copy  of  an  Inscription. 

This  copy  was  made  by  a  pandit  for  Dr  D.  Wright.  The  original 
is  on  a  large  stone  in  front  of  an  old  temple  on  'Sambhunath,'  a  hill 
about  a  mile  west  of  Katmandu.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  words 
of  preliminary  invocation,  the  inscription  is  in  a  vernacular  dialect. 
The  date  N.  s,  879  (a.d.  1759)  occurs. 

Add.  915. 

Paper;  160  leaves,  8  lines,  14  x  44  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  916 
(A.D.  1796). 

Saddharma-lan'Kavatara. 

See  R  A.  S.  Cat.  MS.  5,  Burn.  Tntrod.  pp.  514—520,  542, 


Add.  915,]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  21 

Begins  : 

It  consists  of  ten  Parivartas,  which  end  as  follows : 
f^<fN:  ^°  61a. 

fft^:  II  955. 

4.  ^nr^^TT^^Kcl^  4^  ri^:  98a. 

5.  rrm^fTf^WTf^^J^^lf:  ^Kct^:  w^n:  99J. 

6.  ^fW^^ft^:  ^^'   109a. 

7.  ^fW^TT^^^  ^TW:  1105. 

8.  TfrT^^-NdTTT<^^^irT^^^<^l<*il«4J*r^W^- 
^Tffs"g^:  1176. 

9.  Tf<T  ^WT^f^Tt  VTT^nrfT^^f  ^T^'T.*  119a. 

10.  TfJfT^^i:^^!:!^^^^^!^  ^^rsfT^-^^  ^^T^ 
W^TfnrffT  II 

As  might  be  expected  from  Burnouf  s  citations  and  criticisms, 
other  schools  and  authors  are  often  named,  especially  the  Saiikhyas 
and  A^aigeshikas  (e.g.  1486,  3),  with  the  sect  called  Pagupatas;  and 

again  (153a,  3),  where  the  same  schools  are  called  •tt^  I  ^l  l<=h"^  I 
"t'^TTt^^TT*  (tere  Add.  1607  2136,  1  has  the  better  reading 
°s![^^l  l^*1\l  I).  The  Lokayatikas,  also,  are  spoken  of  in  786  sqq. 
Towards  the  end  (1576)  occurs  a  strange  passage  of  prophetical 
rhapsody  in  which  many  of  the  chief  writers  and  sages  of  Hindu 
literature  are  named,  as  Katyayana,  Panini,  Yajfiavalkya,  Valmiki, 
Acvalayana,  etc. 


22  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  915. 

On  117a  the  works  Hastikahsha  and  Ahgalimcdaka  are  referred  to. 
The  colophon,  besides  the  date,  (see  above),  gives  the  scribe's  name, 
Sundara. 


Add.  916. 

Paper;  219  leaves,  7  lines,  14|  x  4  in.  ;  dated  N.  s.  91G 
(A.D.  1796). 

Samadhi-raja. 

One  of  the  Nine  Dharraas :  see  Burn.  Intr.  54,  68,  438 ;  Wass. 
302;  Hodgs.  117.  Compare  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  4,  with  which  this 
MS.  closely  agi-ees. 

The  work  begins: 

It  consists  of  forty  chapters,  which  end  as  follows  : 

1.  TffT  ^T^^fT^  ^T^  ^^^:  11a. 

2.  irr^^TT^T^ft^  f^rTt^:   136. 

3.  ^rR^^W^^JT^r3pT^°  ^ift^:   1G&. 

4.  li;T^WfT^°  "^f5^:  186.  5.  ^TW^tR*  23. 
0.  -^TTlfV^^  26.  7.  N^T^^rTTT^^  276. 
8.  ^^T^^^^<TT7°  30.  9.    ^niflT^^ir'HM'  88. 

10.  ^T^tin^  476.  11.    ■5i:^VTTWT7°  516. 

12.  "^^r^flT^WR^  54.      13.    ^^fVn#3I^°  55. 

14.  f^rf^^-sl^q^  606.  15.    fWnr^T^R:^^°  616. 

16.  -qt^T^^*  64. 

17.  W^^i:f%iTT^^Tfv^^q°  796. 

18.  ■^^T'Sm^t'^^^Tq''  ^i:^*'  826. 

19.  ^"^'^^V^f^'^^n*  "frr^T^f^irf^TrnT:  l   866. 

20.  T^rJTT^q*  ftsr°  98«-6.  [«%f5^^T*  Add.  1481, 
9561.  21.    "qf^T^^"  \^f^  91. 

22.  fT^T^rT^T^f^lf^q''  ^Tf^°  946. 

23.  fTm^rTTf^^f^*^^^   1036. 


Add.  916.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  23 

24.  ITffT^fWT^rfTT^°  107.         25.    ^^^T^^T^°  lOSb. 

26.  "^T^T^lf^^^  110.  27.    ^^f^'^i7°  1106. 

28.  T^T^'3r^TTT°  117.  29.    ^^T^WTT^^°  1246. 

80.  ^7f^F{°   1256.        31.    "^^^^^T^Of^ll^^  128. 

32.  ■^^VTTWT^^^TTT^  141.  33.    ^^^tIM°  1466. 

34.  ^T^T^ffhT°  1536.  35.    "^MiMt^^x?*  1776. 

36.  #T^^^%rq°  1836.  37.    "^^^^^°  (sic)  1906. 

38.  ^^^1^^:^^T^°  205. 

39.  [^T^°]  2176.  (title  omitted:  but  see  Add.  1481,  If.  232,  and 
R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  4). 

40.  ^tvW^T^^^rrr-RXlf^fTTWiTV^mWSl  ^^fV- 

Here  follow  date  and  scribe's  name  (Sundarananda). 


Add.  917. 

Paper;  309  leaves,  11  lines,  13|  x  6Hn. ;  modern. 
Ganda-vyuha. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  1 — 311,  106  and  111  being  omitted  in 
the  pagination. 

For  the  work,  see  Burnouf,  Introd.  pp.  54,  68,  125,  and  R.  A.  S. 
Cat.  No.  2;  also  comj)are  Hodgson,  Ess.  Lit.  Nep.  16,  where 
Aryasanga  is  given  as  the  author. 

Begins : 

Eight  introductory  qlokas,  after  which : 
J^  "Ji^T  ^  rT^T%^T{^ .... 

Ends  : 


-  ■^^'^? 


24  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  917. 


Add.  918. 

Paper  ;  256  leaves,  7  lines,  14f  x  4^  in. ;  modern. 
Lalita-vistara. 

A  very  i^oor  text  has  been  published  by  Dr  Kajendralala  Mitra 
in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica.  It  has  also  been  ti-anslated  by  Foucaux 
(Paris,  1848)  through  the  Tibetan,  and  by  Dr  Lefmann  (Berlin,  1874). 

Begins  : 

Ends  ; 

Add.  1032. 

Paper;  90  leaves,  15 — 18  lines,  14  x  6|  in. ;  modern. 
Saddharma-pundarika. 

'Le  Lotus  de  la  bonne  Loi',  translated  by  Burnouf.     A  revised 
version  will  shortly  be  published  by  Prof.  Kern. 
Begins : 

fT^frf  ^  I 

Ends  : 

^(^1^=11^  ^^^^MfT^^  ^Ir:1"T^^  Wt^l"f^^^  ^t^l"^- 

^T^  ^rrftufTTrr^TS'^T^:  w^t^:  i 


*  The  E.  A.  S.  MS.  reads  ^T^T^T^^T"^!^^ . 


Add.  1039.]  SANSKRIT  MAXUSCRIPTS.  25 


Add.  1039. 

Paper;  7  x  6J-in. ;  modern. 

Astronomical  diagram. 

Refers  to  the  eclipse  of  Oct.  10,  1874;  see  note  by  Dr  Wright. 


Add.  1041. 

Paper;  362  leaves,  11,  12  lines  (ruled),  14  x  3f  in. ;  dated 
(see  below). 

Sphutartha  Abhidharmako^a-vyakhya  by  YAgO^IITRA. 

The  writing  resembles  that  of  MS.  1586  (a.d.  1661).  The  hand 
is  finer  than  usual,  producing  indeed  the  effect  of  having  been  written 
by  an  ordinary  European  pen.  This  was  said  to  be  the  only  copy  of 
the  work  existing  in  Nepal,  and  the  owner  had  a  copy  made  for 
himself. 

An  accurate  copy  of  the  celebrated  commentary  on  Yasubandhu's 
Abhidharma  Ko^a.  See  Burnouf,  latrod.  pp.  563 — 574.  He  calls 
it,  p.  417,  "cette  inepuisable  mine  de  renseignements  precieux  sur 
la  partie  speculative  du  Buddhisme."  The  work  was  translated  into 
Chinese  by  Hiouen  Thsang^:  see  S.  Beal,  Trip.  80. 

Begins : 

^ttrCt  ^T^re^rrfv^pffT  (?  cod.  ^^) 
fT  ^rrw^nr  faiT^T  ^{^xf^  ii 


26  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1041. 

^^T  ^"R5TT  II    ^RTV^f^^TWT^T  lirf^TrT  ^SHT^^nWl^ 
^1     irf^^T^rTTf^^    MnSTT    ^"^T    ^    ^T    ^"^T II    VWT 

W^fJ  ^  ^t^TirafT  ^f^:  II 

Tlie  8  chapters  end  thus  : 

1.  ^?rr^r&^Tf^T^lirfr  (elsewhere  ^IJrrnTt)  ^ZTm^TT- 

46a. 

2.  °Tf^^f^'^T  ^T^  f^ffl^  ^T°  I  136&. 

3.  °^(ft"^  ^T°  (no  special  name)  183a. 

4.  °"^f5^  ^T°  do.  2365. 

5.  "^^'aprf^^T  ^T^  T?^^  WT°  270b. 

6.  ^^J°  312&. 

7.  ^^^  ^°  3356. 

^SjT^nT'g:^  ^HT'^'R  ^^T^f^ffT  I  362&. 

Then  follow  some  verses  by  the  scribe  on  completing  his  task, 
followed  by  the  lines  ^  VIT  in  the  earlier  form,    (See  Introduction.) 

The  MS.  was  copied  by  Pandita  Siddhasena  in  the  year 
^rHli^lMl^Jls^  (671  =  A.  D.  1551),  but  the  date  is  not  wholly 
trustworthy,  as  there  this  line  and  that  above  have  been  retouched. 


Add.  1042. 

Paper;  5  leaves,  10  lines,  13  x  6  in. ;  written  in  1873. 

Specimens  of  transcription. 

(1)     Two   leaves  of  the   Divydvadana,  containing   part   of  the 
Maitrakanyavadanam. 


At)X>.  1042.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  27 

(2)  Three  leaves  of  the  Lanhavaiara,  two  from  the  beginning, 
and  one  from  the  end  of  the  work. 

These  specimens  were  sent  over  from  Nepal  by  Dr  D.  Wright  in 
1873,  when  it  was  proposed  to  obtain  copies  of  various  Sanskrit 
manuscripts  existing  in  Nepal,  for  the  University  Library.  It  was 
from  these  leaves  that  the  whole  of  the  present  collection  took  its 


Add.   1049. 

Palm-leaf;  64  remaining  leaves,  written  at  first  in  2,  then 
in  3  columns,  3 — 5  lines,  16x2  inches;  transitional  Gupta  cha- 
racter; dated  (Qriharsha)  samvat  252  (a.d.  859). 

Fragments  of  the  PlRAMEgvARA-TANTRA  and  of  other 
Tantric  works. 

The  leaves  are  of  curious  narrow  and  curving  form,  much  mutilated 
at  the  edges.  The  original  numbering  of  the  leaves  is  thus  in  many 
cases  lost,  and  the  references  given  below  are  to  the  pencil  numbering 
of  the  61  leaves  that  remain.  On  the  handwriting  and  era  see  the 
Introductions  to  this  Catalogue. 

I.    Parame(;vara-tantra. 

This  woi'k  seems  to  treat  partly  of  the  mystical  value  of  letters: 
see  especially  leaves  9  (^^),  27,  286,  o2a  C^'^^)  ^^  ^^*^  ^^'^^  *^*^ 
of  which  full  and  very  interesting  alphabets  will  be  found.  The 
speakers  are  Paramecvara  or  Icvara  and  Brahma.  A  great  part  of 
the  work  consists  of  ejaculatory  prayers  (Om...)  to  various  person- 
ages.    It  is  divided  into  at  least  3  main  sections  {j>raharana). 

The  beginning  is  mutilated  and  almost  entirely  obliterated. 

Chapters  or  sections  of  verses  end  as  follows  (the  English  numbers 
referring  to  the  modern  pencil  numbering  of  the  existing  leaves,  and 
the  Devanagarl  numbers  to  those  of  the  original,  wherever  they  have 
been  preserved) : 

W^rr:  ^4^1  <5u:-  26  {\). 

T*  ^^  "^°  ^nrr^TT^TW  ^T7^  j^m  ^T^rr:  ^tt^- 


28  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1049. 

X"  ^'  ^°  w°  "^^-Ct^t^t?®  w  ^"gifwrifLT]^  (sic) 

^  176  (M ). 

T°  ^°  w^T°  '^°  t[^]<=iMdH*  ^T^rr:  m^^:  (sic)  is  (48). 
Tf>r  I^^^Md^^^^i:  19. 

^o  -qo  -^o  -^o  f;H^-nT°  ^°  'NTg:  "TTm  ^  I   20  (^\). 
^o  -qo  ^o  ■^TJTXTziTT*  ■^^"5?T7°  ^*  ^  ^fTT^T^:*l  22. 
T°  "^^  "T"  ..."J^I TT^TW 3TT^f^TR°  ^°  ^^ffsifrfl  23a- 
236. 

^o  T^o  ;qo  ^pgiTRTT^n:^  ^7f^ift^'^^3(Md^:  i  35. 

T°  "q^  fl°  "RfT-R^T^  ^^^T^TrT-frfrt  (sic)  TTcjr^rqT- 
ft^frnr:   36. 

X°  ^°  ^°  frrrTT^^^  ^f^T^Trrt^TTft  rf^^^f^T- 
fcf^^T  ^T^  ^T^^TiT3rfr[^:  ^Z^:  I   37. 

Tfrf  q°  ■'T*  ^f^^m^T^q°  ^«  "q^rfi:^!^?^  I  38. 

406  (r^). 

^o  -qo  ^»  "^T^TTT^  ■^^T^iTR^q°  ^°  ^TftJTm:  I 
42  (W). 

Leaf  45  (\*^4)  seems  to  contain  the  end  of  a  section  or  volume  as 
there  is  no  writing  on  the  verso. 

^W(?)'q'^^^T^TW^^"R^  ^^TTT:  I  53. 

The  final  colophon,  including  the  date,  runs  thus  : 

X°  ^°  f^°  ^^TTT^T^  ^^T^f^qt  ^T^rr:  ^(^rftiT^T  i 

^^^  I51?qf^T%fl5rfI  ^Wrl^^'i'^t  II   626  C^^^). 

II.     One  leaf  of  the  Jnaxarxava-tantra. 
Same  writing  as  the  preceding.     String-holes  in  slightly  different 
position.     Numbered  \^\  on  blank  verso. 

On  the  work  see  Burnell,  Ta^ij.  Cat.  and  Aufr.  Cat.  Bodl. 
Ends: 

*  A  curious  vernacular  form:  compare  Beames,  ii.  137. 
t  Expressed  in  letter-numerals:  see  p.  32  foot-note. 


Add.  1104.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  29 

Add.  1104. 

Paper;  25  leaves  (folded  backwards  and  forwards),  6  lines, 
8  X  21  in. ;  xvill — Xixth  cent. 

Nama-sangiti  and  Sragdhara-stotra. 

Writing  of  various  dates  within  tlie  last  two  centuxies ;  mostly 
very  bad  and  indistinct. 

I.  Ndma-saiiglti. 

Begins  like  Add.  1323  (whicb  see  for  colophons,  etc.). 
Ends : 

Tr^^^Tn:°...'^ftW^TTr:  I    (see  Add   1323),  "^    '^T*    fol- 
lowed by  a  scribe's  verse. 

Then,  beginning  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  reverse  of  the  paper: 

II.  Sragdhara-stotra  or  -stuti.  See  Add.  1272  (also  R.  A.  S.  Cat. 
No.  29)  for  beginning  &c. 

Ends  : 

TWT^fTTTT'Tg-Tft^T^T:  ^?r^TT^H(sic)^%l  liffTTT- 

liVf^^^TTWt  (?) 

Add.  1108. 

Palm-leaf;  53  leaves,  6 — 7  lines,  13  x  2in. ;  dated  N.  s.  512 
(A.D.  1392). 

Nama-sangiti-tippani  or  Amrita-kanika. 

Some  leaves  are  rather  broken  at  the  edges,  and  many  pages, 
especially  those  at  the  beginning,  are  blurred  and  illegible. 

For  this  Commentary  on  the  Ndma-sanglti  entitled  the  Amrita- 
Kajiikd,  of.  KA.S.  Cat.  No.  35. 

Begins : 

After  two  introductory  glokas,  follows  : 


30  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1108. 

Wf  ^i;^Tf^Wi^T^t  ^^^^fT  rT^T^^^  TT^lflTrT  Wf  ^T^T- 

^rf  I  ^^frf  I 

A  colophon,  partly  oblitei'ated,  on  386,  runs  thus : 

lirT"^^^ . . .  J^^T^^f^I^UT  (?)  l^T^JqilTSrfT^T^T  T\7^- 
t^WT  ^T^^niTT  II 

^T^^Tm^fjffsrf?!:  II  446. 

^fT^T^^T^W^^UJ  *ry  I  '^^T^^T^^im^T^T  II  495. 
TffT  XT-^rI^T7TrmT^^f?r^T^T:  ^^  50b. 

o2b. 

After  this  follows  : 

^T^TTTT^^UrT    TT^T^   fT?T^t(?)  I      iftWI^^    ^^- 

TT^^T^^  (sic)  ^T^TT^^TTTT^^^     f^^^?:T^  ||      :^T- 

^■^^  (sic)  ^ff ^^  f^rert  ^-^  ^-RgrT^T^^tf^WT  ^^fH- 
f^T%rt  15^  II   5.3. 


Add.  1108.J  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  "31 

Of  Ratnajyoti  we  have  no  other  notice;  lie  was  probably  one  of 
the  upstart  local  rajas,  of  whom  we  hear  several  times  in  the 
Vamgavali  and  elsewhere,  as  being  subdued  by  the  regular  monarchs. 


Add.  1160. 

Paper;  42  leaves  in  book  form,  12-13  lines,  10|  x8|^in. ; 
good  Devanagari  handwriting ;  modern. 

A  history  of  Kepal  in  Parbatiya;  a  redaction  of  the 
Vamgdvall. 

This  is  the  work  referred  to  in  Wright's  History  of  Nepal 
Pref.  p.  vi,  as  "another  redaction,  or  at  all  events  a  similar  work 
[to  the  Vamgavali]  recognised  by  the  Gorkhas  and  Hindu  races  of 
the  country." 

Begins  : 

•    The  MS.  seems  to  end  abruptly. 

Some  additional  chronological  particulars  may  be  gained  from  this 
work:  e.g.  the  lengths  of  the  reigns  of  the  monarchs  (Wright  p.  158), 
and  various  dates  in  the  Kali-yiiga  reckoning;  but  the  history  follows 
strictly  on  the  lines  of  the  VaiuQavali,  and  solves  few  or  none  of  the 
chronological  difficulties  suggested  by  the  colophons  and  inscriptions 
of  the  years  between  A.  D.  1000  and  1600.  Note  however  that  the 
chronology  does  not,  as  a  rule,  accord  with  Kirkpatrick's  account  in 
his  Nepal,  in  cases  where  he  differs  from  other  authorities.  See 
the  Historical  Introduction  to  this  Catalogue. 


Add.  1161. 

Palm-leaf;  8  leaves,  8  lines,  12x2in. ;  dated  N.  s.  204 
(A.D.  1084). 

(^^ISHYALEKHA-DHARMAKAVYA  by   CANCRAGOMIN. 

The  first  page  is  mounted  on  paper  and  touched  up  here  aud  there. 
The  hand  is  small  aud  squai-e  with  some  interesting  archaisms.  The 
last  page  is  reproduced  in  Plate  XYII  of  the  Oriental  Series  of  the 


32  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  UGl. 

Pala30graphical  Society  (Part  2,  1877),  where  a  brief  notice  of  this 
MS.  will  be  found.  On  the  author  see  Wassiliew,  Tdrandth,  52, 
207  etc. 

The  work  is  in  verse,  and  the  style  is  somewhat  artificial  and 
elaborate.  It  forms  a  general  exposition  of  the  drya-satydni,  treating 
of  the  ills  of  life  and  their  true  remedy. 

Begins  (after  invocations)  : 

Ends : 

^if^'HTIi 

Add.  1163. 

Palm-leaf;  206  leaves,  G  lines,  21  x  2  in. ;  XI — xiith 
century. 

ASHTASAHASRIKA   PrAJNAPARAMITA. 

See  under  Add.  866,  for  the  beginning,  and  other  details. 
The  first  four  leaves  and  the  last  have  been  filled  up  by  modern 
paper  supply. 
Ends  : 

^T^f^vT^m^  (sic)  ^Tt  v^^tifT  v^iNnsir^^iN- 

*  Expressed  in  letters  "^TT  "SR  (not  '^).  Compare  Pandit 
Bhagvanlal  in  Indian  Antiq.  1877,  pp.  44,  46. 


Add.  1164.  1.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  33 

Add.  1164.  1. 
Paper;  154  leaves,  5  lines,  13  x  3^in. ;  xvilth  cent. 
Panca-raksha. 

Thei'e  are  illustrations  of  the  five  Buddlia-Caktis,  At  99&  a  new 
hand  and  an  additional  numbering  begin,  but  the  fii-st  hand  is  resumed 
on  the  leaves  where  the  pictures  occur. 

For  the  beginning,  and  the  endings  of  the  chapters  see  Add.  1325. 

The  end  of  the  book  is  much  torn,  and  the  final  titles  etc.  entirely 
obliterated. 

Add.  1164.  2. 

Coarse  brown  paper ;  4  leaves,  6  lines,  13  x  3  in. ;  modern. 
DhIraxis, 

I.  TatJidgatavydptacatam  (1)  in  23  numbei*ed  verses. 
Begins : 

EncUng  (corrupt  and  partly  obliterated)  : 

^JT^^ft  (sic)  ^IRT^:  II  ^^  II 

II.  FancaviTTicatikd-prajfidpdramitd-hridai/am, 
Begins : 

^t    ^mt  ^^^  ^T'^^^TTT^mTTT^Tf  II     T^^-^rm 

Ends,  after  two  lines  of  praise  to  Avalokitegvara  etc.  : 
^^rr^^T^-^ftirffT^TTTTfTTTTTf^'^T^^^  ^^T^:  II  46. 

Add.  1164.  3. 

Brown  paper;  3  leave.s,  5  lines,  13  x  3in. ;  modern. 

Nairatmaguhyecvari-mantra-dharaxi. 

3 


34  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1164.3. 

Begins : 

Ends : 
^TTf?rT^%^TT  ^'^T  VTT^T  (sic)  ^T^  ^^TTT!  I 


Add.  1267. 
Palm-leaf;  90  leaves,  5  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  Devanagarl  hand; 
XIV — xvtli  cent. 

Karanda-vyuha  (prose  version). 
The  work  was  printed  at  Calcutta  in  1873. 


Add.  1270. 

Paper;  211  leaves,  6  lines,  14J  x  3f  in. ;  xviilth  cent. 
AVALOKITEgVARA-GUNA-KARAXDA-VYUHA. 

A  pencilled  note  on  the  cover  by  Dr  Wright  states  that  the  MS. 
is  105  years  old,  i.e.  written  in  1770;  but  the  leaf  which  contained 
this  date  seems  to  have  been  lost. 

For  the  sections  etc.,  see  Add.  872. 


Add.  1271. 

Paper ;  17  leaves,  8 — 9  lines,  18^  x  3f  in. ;  Devanagari  hand  ; 
XYii — xvilith  cent. 

VlGigVARA-PUJA. 

A  work  of  Tantric  ceremonial. 

Yagli^vara  seems  generally  known  through  ffindic  Tantras :  this 
however  seems  Buddhistic  ;  unless  Mafijucri,  like  ]\Iafijughosha,  be  a 
personage  common  to  all  Tantras. 

Begins : 


Add.  1271.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  35 

^^"'l?^ . . . 

Ends : 

^^T^TT^^^  ^  Wrf^TT^  ^^T^^  II 
^i%^T^  II   TffT  WT'Tt^T^^T  ^^TfT  II 


Add.  1272. 

Paper;    25   leaves,    5    lines,    ll|x3in. ;   dated   N.   S.   904 
(A.D.  1784.). 

Sragdhaka-stuti  (with  vernacular  commentary). 

On  the  work,  see  Burn.  Intr.  555. 

The  author  is  Sarvajiiamitra  of  Kagmir ;  see  colophons  of  Add. 
1104  and  1362. 
Begins : 

Ends  : 
TfcT   ^^rtiT^MrlTTT^'TfTTft^T^T    (^TTTfT^T^T)  (sic) 


Add.  1273. 

Paper  ;  49  leaves,  7  lines,  13^  x  4J  in.;  modern. 

SUGATAVADANA. 

A  work  in  verse,  cf.  Burn.  Lotus,  p.  333;  Cat.  R.  A.  S.,  No.  12. 
A  redaction  of  this  tale  in  10  chapters  is  in  the  Paris  MS.  98 
(Divyavadana-mala).     The  work   (cf.   Hodgson,   Ess.   Lit.  Nep.,  19) 

3—2 


36  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1273. 

is  an  avadana  with  regard  to  various  points  of  vbiaya,  e.g.,  monastic 
buildings,  the  observance  of  feasts,  etc.  (cf.  colophons).  The  chief 
characters  are  Indraprishtha  and  PunyavatI,  King  and  Queen  at  the 
city  Gandhavati ;  other  prominent  personages  are  Vasubandhu  and 
Jhanaketu. 

Begins  : 

f^^TTfT  ^^^T^T  ^T^f^^T  ^^T^TS^n:f^fI^T^"t: 

%^mT^T  aT^T^:(sic)l 
The  chapters  end  : 

1.  Tfrr  "^^rlT^^T^  f^^T^qf^^^f  ^T^  TT^iT:  II  4a. 

2.  TffT  "^^rITW^T^f5T^5WWX[fC^Tff  ^T^fl^^fr^:    7a. 

3.  °^^^^irri:in:^^f  *ITiT  ^rfl^:  II   10a. 

4.  t°^fr[TT^^-€T(?)^ft^^f  ^T^^fJ^:  II    136. 

5.  °fTfTTTf^"^TT7^^f^^f  ^T^  i?^^:  II  216. 
G.  ^f^m^RfCTrff  '^J^^  T^^:  II   236. 

7.  °"^^%^Tqn:°  ^TT^:  II  27«. 

8.  ""Ri^^wif^Twar^nr^  ^i:^:  ii  356. 

10.  °^^^^^TXin:o  -^HTW  II  426. 

11.  °^T^^Tf<r  T7i^  "^  T^f^^^f  ^T^^T^ITR:  II  46a. 

12.  Tfrr^T^^fTT^T^^^^T^qf^^^TTI^T^^^: 
¥i?T^:  II 


Add.  1274. 
Paper;  4G  leaves,  13 — 14  lines,  13|  x  5|^in. ;  modem. 

DVAYIMgATYAVADANA-KATHA. 

Inaccurately  written.     Cf.  R.  A.  S.  Cat.,  No.  27,     On  the  work 
see  Feer  in  Journ.  Asiat.,  Sept.  1879,  pp.  295  sqq.  and  305. 

t  Add.  1.377  roads:  TT%  Wf;"ffTTT'3f^mfT°  I 


Add.  1274.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  37 

Begins  : 

^(^T  ^irT^%f5  -^-^^TlT^f^  t^T^f^t^  I 
^^Ttt%:  "^^  ^^^'Txtrf^f^  ^Trf?T  ^:^^T^  || 

The  chapters  end  as  follows  : 

1.  TffI  TOTft(^T^^^^TTTW17t(n:^T'  I   2b. 

2.  Tfrr  W^WW^T<^Tf ^^^Tf^<ft^i7°  I   3a. 

3.  TTrf  TIT^"5I^^H^^T  ^rfr^°  I  ib. 

4.  TTrT  WlfTWT%  ^T^^^T  ^TftJ[(5T^<rT^  ^^^T?°  I 
36. 

5.  TTIt  ^ifWllW^T^T^^T^t  TO^T^:  ^^^nT°  I  oa. 

^1:^°  I  9a. 

7.  T'  ^°  ■^T'T^^TtTfc^rff  ^TTT  ^TTTT:  xr°  |   I2a. 

8.  T"  ^°  W^Tf^TT^^^T^ftwf  ^T^Ti:^:  q«  I  156. 

9.  TTrT  TO^ET^T^^^lirai^  ^^^t  ^^7{:  ^°  \   vja. 

10.  TTrf  ^Tftll°  ^^T^t  ^Tf^T^tt^^m  ^H^:  ^°  I  20a. 

11.  T°  ^°  f{^'^^^J  \^JJ^'=  I   22a. 

12.  T°  ^°  ^T^'T^m  ^TT3i:  ^°  I   24a. 

13.  T°  %°  "qi^flrT^^^T  ^^T^^Trq°  I  256. 

14.  T°  ^°  ^^^m  "^f5^1I^°  I  276. 

15.  T°  ^"^  ^"^^m  17^^:11^'  I  296. 

16.  T°  ^°  "RWI^^m  Cl^^q*'  I   32a. 

17.  T°  ii°  ^'^if^^T^T^T^m^^^^q^l  34a. 

18.  T°  ^°  [fr^t]  ^^T  ^i:T^irq°  l   3Ca. 

19.  T°  "^^  fTf  TT^m  ^^ftjrfrrrrTrTT°  I  38a. 

20.  T°  ^°  ^^^THT^T^  (sic)  mri^rrT^q^  I   39((. 


t  Omitted  in  this  MS. 


38  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1274. 

21.  T°  ^°  ^ir^^T^^^T  "q:^ftarfrirm:  I  ^Ob. 

22.    T**  ^°  ^■5^^T^TT^(sic)^Tf^frrfT^:  I  416. 
Tnr  ^TiraifrT^T^T^Rf^T^t  <rT^T^^T  I   456. 

Add.  1275. 

Paper;  68  leaves,  7  lines,  13^  x  4 J  in. ;  modem. 

Karanda-vyuha  (prose  version). 
Begins  and  ends  as  in  Add.  1330. 

Add.  1276. 

Paper;  Go  leaves,  7  lines,  7f  x  3|  in. ;  modem. 
Papa-parimocana. 

A  Sanskrit  book  with  a  Newari  translation;  it  is  a  treatise  on 
ceremonial,  uttered  by  Maiiju^rl,  and  is  said  to  be  exti*acted  from  the 
SarvctrtcUhagcda-dvadagasaliasra-jmrdjihci-vinai/a-sutra. 

Begins : 

Ends  : 

Add.  1277. 

Paper  (black,  with  gold  letters) ;  20  leaves  and  cover,  5  lines, 
6  X  2|  in. ;  XVII — XVllith  cent. 

Aparimitatudharani-sutra. 

On  leaf  1  there  is  an  elaborately-painted  picture  of  a  Buddha 
holding  a  flower  in  a  vase  on  his  clasped  hands. 


Add.  1277.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  39 

If  this  be  the  work  referred  to  in  Beal's  Buddh.  Trip.,  p.  60,  the 
siitra  was  translated  into  Chinese  before  A.  D.  1278. 
Begins  (after  an  invocation  to  Avalokitecvara) : 

■q-o  ^o  :^o  -q-^o  ^j(o  v(t\^j^  •^J^7^T  (sic)  fTfTTfT  ^  I 
%fTW^  '?RT^f^"^^^TTT^ . . . 

The  substance  of  the  work  is  a  dialogue  between  the  Buddha  and 
Maujugrl,  which  begins  thus  (2a): 

^f^  ^^T  ^rTT  qn:rTTi\fir  (Add.  1623.  1  ^-^g^qftlT- 

1623)  ^rm  ^T^^TfJ^^  ^TT<*iril^:  ^T^^nT^f^rf^^ 

(°fiTrrT^^°  1623)  T^T^nfm^rfrt^  etc.  (the  text  being  cor- 
rupt throughout). 

On  the  next  leaf  a  blessing  is  invoked  on  such  as  shall  copy,  read, 
or  do  honour  to  this  sutra.  A  similar  passage  occurs  in  two  other 
places  in  the  sutra.  One  third  of  the  work  consists  of  invocations 
('Om...,'  to  various  personages). 

Ends  : 

TTrT  ^?RT%^3fTT^  (sic)  ^T^  '^TT^  ^TTT^'RI^^  Wr{Ti{\\ 

Add,  1278. 

Paper ;  82  leaves,  folded  backwards  and  forwards,  6  lines, 
6f  X  3  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  986  (a.d.  18G6). 

Adiyoga-samadhi. 

This  MS.  cannot  be  described  better  than  in  Dr  D.  "Wright's 
words:  "this  book  is  called  the  Xdiyoga-samddhi,  and  consists  of 
pictures  of  the  positions  on  which  the  hands  are  to  be  placed  in 
mudrds,  whilst  muttering  mantras  after  bathing  and  before  doing 
pujd;  the  mantras  are  also  given."  The  pictures  are  numerous  and 
clearly  drawn. 

Begins : 

f^Vrf^i^^^  HT^T^r^f^^f^fT  (sic)  II 
'sst^^T^I^^T  ^t  V^T  ^^T^I5^T  S't  (sic)  II 


40  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1278. 

Ends: 

Add.  1279. 

Paper;  82  leaves,  9  lines,  9  x  4|  in. ;  dated  .  N.  S.  995 
(A.D.  1875). 

NiSHPANNA  YOGASEBALi   (NiSHPANNA-YOGAMBAEA-TANTEA). 

Inaccurately  written. 
Begins : 

^TfrrNftf^fT  "^^w  ^^nt... 

The  following  ends  of  sections  may  be  noted  : 
Tf<T  WT  (?)  ^^^r^^  I   6a. 
«»     fW^Tl%^T  W^:  fja^chfHJcM  (sic)  I  226. 

«    ^^^"^^n^^:  ^T^'nt^:  (sic)  i  246. 

Ends  : 

TffT  ^T^rq^T^T^^T  (sic)  ^T{jt\  ^^fT^  tL^«d,f^ffT 

This  work  agrees  -with  that  described  in  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  39 ; 
but  No,  73  is  a  diffex-ent  work,  though  bearing  the  same  title  as 
the  present  MS, 

Add.  1305. 

Paper  ;  S-i  leaves,  7  lines,  12  x  4|  in, ;  modern. 

Pin  DAPATRAVADANA. 

Some  blanks  are  marked  as  occurring  in  the  original. 
An  avadana  directly  bearing  on  vinaya,  (Burn.  Litr.  39);  for  the 
tale  cf.  id.  ib.  223. 
Begins  : 

mr\^^  ^firtrg  ^t:|"  ^  (sic)  f^^^i?:  ^:  ii 


Add.  1305.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  41 

A  Cravaka,  named  Sunanda,  addresses  Buddha  : 

^?r^  1%^TfxTfT  Wt^  ^^  tpi^  TT"^^^  II 

Buddha  replies  to  this  and  other  questions,  and  on  12a  tells  the 
story  of  Bali,  and  his  final  conversion  to  Buddhism. 
At  33a  Bali  exclaims  ; 

The  book  is  in  verse,  but  without  any  division  into  chapters. 
Ends: 


Add.  1306. 

Palm-leaf;  229  remaining  leaves  (besides  6  of  paper-f-),  5 — 6 
lines,  13  x  2in.;  dated  N.  s.  422  (a.d.  1302). 

BODHISATTVlVADlNA-KALPALATA  by  KSHEMENDRA. 

Excluding  a  palmleaf  at  each  end,  one  containing  a  note  of  the 
defect  at  the  beginning,  the  other  a  list  of  the  tales  in  Part  2 
(Nos.  50 — 108),  the  leaves  of  the  MS.  may  be  thus  described  : 

Leaves  1 — 174  of  the  original  MS.  are  wanting,  and  "nith  them 
Tales  1 — 40  and  part  of  41.  What  the  lost  tales  were  may  be  seen 
from  the  metrical  list  at  the  end,  as  noticed  below. 

Leaves  175 — 198  contain  the  end  of  Tale  41,  and  the  whole  of 
42 — 48,  ending  in  1986  (middle  of  last  line).  These  tales  are 
numbered  42 — 49,  but  that  this  is  a  mistake  is  evident  from  the 
metrical  Ust. 

Tale  49  (here  misnumbered  50)  begins  on  1986  directly  after  the 
end  of  the  preceding,  and  occupies  the  leaves  now  numbered  199* — 

t  Of  the  6  paper  leaves,  one  (185)  supplies  a  defect,  the  others 
are  clearly-written  transcripts  of  the  somewhat  faded  leaves  of  the 
original  after  which  they  are  severally  inserted. 


42 


CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST 


[Add.  13.)G. 


205*.  As  the  next  tale  is  numbered  50  and  begins  Part  2,  while  the 
original  numbering  of  the  leaves  is  continued,  it  is  evident  that  the 
scribe  had  by  accident  omitted  this  tale,  and  copied  it  in  afterwards. 

Leaf  199«,  originally  left  blank  aa  the  opening  of  Part  2,  now 
contains  an  unfinished  list  of  the  tales  in  this  Part. 

Leaves  1996—250,  248*— 250*  (the  numbering  accidentally 
repeated),  251—279,  279*  280—390,  contain  the  whole  of  Part  2, 
or  Tales  50 — 107  of  the  original  author's  collection,  followed  by  Tale 
108,  added  by  Somendra,  and  a  meti'ical  table  of  contents  of  the  whole 
work. 

The  MS.  was  wiitten  by  Mafijubhadrasudhi  in  the  reign  of 
Anantamalla  of  Nepal,  who  must  not  be  confounded  with  the 
Anantamalla  of  Kagmir  in  whose  reign  the  work  was  composed. 

The  first  remaining  tale  of  Part  1  begins  thus  imperfectly : 

...^fWT-(?)ll 

^M ^^^-^^  fT^  f%^rr:  I 

The  several  tales,  each  here  described  as  °^"^WffT'^T  ^UW', 
end  as  follows  (the  numbers  in  the  MS.  being  42 — 50,  as  noticed  above) : 


41 

Pandita  vadana   175  a —  179a. 

46 

Calistamba 

190a. 

42 

Kanaka 

180«. 

47 

Sarvarthasiddha 

1936. 

43 

Hiranyapani 

181a. 

48 

Hastaka 

1986. 

44 

Aj  ata9atru-pitridroha 

1846. 

49 

Shaddanta 

205*6. 

45 

Kritajiia 
Here  Part  2  begins  : 

1876. 

50 

Dagakarmaplutyavadana 

61 

Karshaka 

241a. 

1996 

—206. 

62 

Ya^oda 

246a. 

51 

EukmatI 

2096. 

63 

Mahakacyapa 

250a. 

52 

Admapunya 

2136. 

64 

Sudhanakinnarl 

266a. 

53 

S  ubhashitaga  veshin 

217a. 

65 

Ekagriuga 

272a. 

54 

Sattvaushadha 

2186. 

66 

Kavikumara 

2776. 

55 

Sarvandada 

2216. 

67 

Sangharakshita 

2806. 

56 

Gopalanagadamana 

2236. 

68 

PadmavatI 

2866. 

57 

Stupa 

.2246. 

69  Dharmarajikapratishth 

a  2886. 

58 

Punyabala 

2266. 

70 

Madhyantika 

289a. 

59 

Kunala 

2386. 

71 

Qonavasi 

290a. 

60 

Nagakumara 

240a. 

72 

Upagupta 

2946. 

Add.  1306.]                SANSI 

^RIT  M 

ANU 

SCRIPTS. 

43 

73 

Nagadutagreshana 

296a. 

91 

Civi-subliashita 

343a. 

74 

Prithivipradana 

297«. 

92 

Maitrakaiiyaka 

347a. 

75 

Pi-atltyasamutpada 

298a. 

93 

Sumagadlia 

3536. 

76 

Vidura 

299a. 

94 

Yagomitra 

3546. 

77 

Kaineyaka 

3006. 

95 

Vyaghra 

3556. 

78 

Qakracyavaua 

302a. 

96 

Hasti 

3566. 

79 

Mahendrasena 

3056. 

97 

Kacchapa 

358a. 

80 

Samudra 

311a. 

98 

Tapasa 

3586. 

81 

Hetuttama 

3126. 

99 

Padmaka 

3596. 

82 

Naraka-purvika 

3146. 

100 

Punahpvabliasa 

3606. 

83 

Eahula-karmapluti 

3156. 

101 

(^yamaka 

363a. 

84 

Madhurasvara 

3186. 

102 

Sirnlia 

364a. 

85 

Hitaishi 

321a. 

103 

Priyapiiida 

3656. 

86 

Kapiiijala 

3226. 

104 

Cagaka 

3676. 

87 

Padmaka 

325a. 

105 

Raivata 

3696. 

88 

Citrahasti-gayyatiputr 

1  330a. 

106 

Kanakavarman 

371a. 

89 

Dharmaruci 

3396. 

107 

Quddhodana 

373a. 

90 

Dhanika 

3416. 

Then  follows  Somendra's  supplementary  tale,  108,  entitled 
Jimutavaliana  (386a),  at  the  end  of  wliich  comes  the  genealogy 
noticed  under  Add.  913  f,  and  then  the  table  of  contents  in  glokas, 
ending  on  3896. 

The  scribe's  own  subscription  runs  thus  : 

%^^f^rrTS^%  ^  ^^^  TTV  f^^  17^  I 
f  ^%^  Uft  ^'jftT^^t  ^^T^TT^  'T^T  II 

^(^T%^  ^rrrf^  (?)  ■JT'snfrTfTT  ^i;t  ^^  Wt  II 

f  The  author's  immediate  ancestors,  Prakagendra,  Sindhu  and 
Bhogindra  are  given  as  in  Dr  Biihler's  MS,  (see  his  Report,  cited 
under  Add.  913). 


44  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1315. 

Add.  1315. 

Paper ;  33  leaves,  5  lines,  7|  x  2  J  in. ;  xviiith  cent.  (?) 
Dhakanis. 

Inaccurately  written  (as  tlie  extracts  may  shew).     See  R.  A.  S. 
Cat.  No.  79. 
Begins : 

The  following  ends  of  sections  may  be  noted  : 
V^  qfC^iTT^:  I  86. 

^rr^TW^frT^^  ^1T°  I   13a. 
^^  [^]-^m^^J  ^fn?  VTT^  Wfni{  II  17a. 
^^rr^TiT^^^ffT  ^T^  VTTWt°  I  19a. 
^T^iTT'Cr'CT  ^T^  '^TTWt^  I   21a. 
^T^TT^iTT^^T  ^m  ^TTWt  ^f^^^^:  I  33a. 

Add.  1317. 

Paper;  29  leaves  folding  backwards  and  forwards,  6  lines, 
9  X  3|  in. ;  various  hand^,  cliiefly  xviiith  cent. 

Tantric  mantras,  etc. 

The  manuscript  is  in  a  dihipidated  condition ;  some  of  the  pages 
ai"e  torn,  and  the  Avriting  is  often  illegible.  It  is  a  collection  of 
prayers  and  mantras,  used  apparently  in  Tantric  ceremonials. 

The  following  ends  of  sections  may  be  noted  : 

Tfrf  ^^f^fT  "^T^  ^^T^  I 

The  title  of  the  work  and  the  date  are  ille^ijible. 


Add.  1318.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  45 

Add.  1318. 

Paper ;  8  leaves,  5  lines,  7f  x  2f  in. ;  modern. 

ArYA-TIRABHATTARIK AYA  NaMASHTOTTAR  A.g at AK am. 
The  work  is  in  glokas,  but  inaccurately  written. 
Begins  : 

^T^T^^^rrmT"^  ^T^T^f^f^f;f^^  II ... 

f^^^TT  <TrT:   ^T^T^^  ^^^^T^^f^ri:  (?  read  ^'^^T- 

^T^^f^rr:)  II 

Ends  : 

■RfT  wrr^  I 

Add.  1319. 

Paper ;  70  leaves,  6  lines,  10|  x  3  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  944 
(A.D.  1824), 

Ekaravira-tantra.  (Canda-maharoshanatantra). 

The  MS.  is  carelessly  wi-itten.  See  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  46,  where 
the  book  is  called  Ekalla-vira.  For  some  accoimt  of  it  see  Csorua 
Korosi  {As.  Res.  xx.  p.  426). 

Begins  : 

It  consists  of  twenty  five  patalas,  ending  as  follows  : 
2.    T°  ^°  ^  U^-^q^^  f^rft^  I   46. 

8.  T°  ^°  ^rnrwq^^'^rfT^  I  76. 

4.    T°  ^'  f^rrm^^^^^l   11a. 


46  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1319. 

6.    T°  ^°    MiM«5|4^I^IMdH:   W^^\   186. 

7.  T°  ^°  "^f^^(t)-qz^:  ^^^1  196. 

8.  T®  ^°  ^^^rrz^:  '^rgir:  i  22b. 

9.  T°  ^°  "i^n^^^r^T  ^^^:  I  236. 

10.  T°  ^°  "^TTT^^nrr^T  (sic)  ^im:  I   2G6. 

11.  T°  ^°  f^'SIVi^  "0:^1^^:  I    27a. 

12.  T°  ^°  ■^^^'^^^  ^^Zi(t  ^T^H  I  356. 

13.  T*  ^°  ^^Ttr^^  -^di:^  I   376. 

14.  1:°  ^°  ^TfTT^^^'gcl^^  I   89a. 

15.  T*  ^*  "RI^f^TT^JW:  V^^3i^:  I   426. 

16.  T*  ^'^  imTf^R^fCTT^Md^:  ifrrar:  1  46a. 

17.  T°  ^"^  i^iimi:^?^^:  wrnr^T^:  1  496. 

18.  T°  ^°  ■5jmr€^(^Trf%^^^Tsi:T^"am:  1  oSa. 

19.    T°  ^°  i^lv^^^Tf^^^:^  ^^ftJrffTrT^:  I  566. 

20.  T°  ^°  ^T^Tf^^f^^f^^'^^'^^^:^   ftirnT- 

?!^:  I  616. 

21.  T°  ^°  ^^T^^  17^^  T?;^"mrffTrnR:  I   646. 

22.  T°  ^*  ^IT^T^^Tf^^ffTfT^:  I  666. 

23.  T°  ^°  ^5W^Wi:i<^^^Tf4^fdfTTr:  I  676. 

24.  T°  ^'  '^  ^  <5i  *^T?^S ^^  fjf^Or fT^ :  I  68a. 
Ends : 

25.    TW°  r^^  W^T^  I 

Add.  1320. 

Paper ;  38  lines,  6  leaves,  10|  x  8|  in. ;  dated  (see  below). 

Adiyoga-samadhi. 

The  first  portion  of  the  work  described  under  Add.   1278.     It 
begins  like  that  MS.,  and  contains  numerous  drawings  to  illustrate 


•^  rr\ 


I  ^^TTTW  Add.  1470. 


Add.  1320.]  SAXSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  47 

the  position  of  the  hands  in  vaiious  piljas.  The  writing  is  very 
careless  and  incorrect.  The  book  has  no  title  and  no  conclusion. 
There  is  on  the  fly-leaf  apparently  the  date  N.  s.  958  (a.  d.  1838),  but 
the  second  figure  is  not  clear. 


Add.  1321. 

Paper ;   96  leaves,  6   lines,   lOf  x  ^  in. ;  dated   N.  S.   931 
(a.d.  1811). 

KlRANDA-VTUHA  (prose  version). 

Begins  and  ends  as  in  Add.  1330. 

Add.  1322. 

Paper;  207  leaves,  6  lines,  14|  x  3|in, ;  xviiith  century  (?). 

AVALOKITE^VARA-GUXA-KARAXDA-VYUHA. 
In  this  MS.  the  chapters  are  numbered. 
On  the  work,  see  Add.  872. 

Add.  1323. 

Paper;  40  leaves,  9  lines,  9^  x  4in. ;  dated  N.  s.  979  (a.d. 
1859). 

Nama-sangiti  (with  Newari  Version). 

Begins : 

f^T%  f^-^fl  ^^ft  'T^TTrT^  [1.  TTZJ  ^f^^T  II 
It  is  divided  into  sections,  with  colophons  such  as  the  following : 
^"^j^RTT^Tm  ^r^H  I   5a. 
TTfrR^^TT^T  WZ  I   6a. 
^^^TTWRf^^T^  1 1   66. 
TTT^T^T^rrf^T^flffepR^'^Tm  frT"^:  I   8b. 
^^VTfJ^TT^'^^^Tm  "^fJT^  I  106. 


48  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1323. 

Ends : 

^T^T%  ^TT^^Tfrr:  TTTT^^Tm:  (sic)  I  ^l^rf   ^^^  f^frf  I 

Add.  1324. 

Paper;  96  leaves,  15,  16  lines,  14i  x  6  in. ;  modem. 

Saddhaema-puxdaeika. 
See  Add.  1032. 

Add.  1325. 

Paper;  178  leaves,  5,  6  lines,  9f  x  2f  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  939 
(A.D.  1819). 

Pancaraksha. 

Inaccurately  written.     Compare  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  56.* 
This  work  is  thus  desci'ibed  by  Mr  Hodgson  (Essays,  p.  18),  "an 
Upades'a    Dliarani,    an   account   of  the    five    Buddha- Saktis,    called 
Pratisara,  &c. ;  prose ;  speaker,  'Sdkya ;  hearer,  Ananda  Bhikshu." 
Begins  : 

36&. 

^Ern§TrfTlTffT^TT^T  ^^f^^ITTW  T^IN^I*!*^ 
f^T^T^T^  Wr\Jl{  I  48b. 

^m^fl  109a. 

*  The  great  number  and  antiquity  of  the  cojjies  of  this  intrinsically 
uninteresting  work  are  doubtless  due  to  its  use  in  Buddhist  swearing 
(Wright's  A''e2Jal,  p.  147  note). 


Add.  1325.J  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  49 

167a. 

4.    ^T^  ^Tf rafVrRffV  ^T^  ^^T  (f%^T  ?)  TTTV  ^^TTT  I 

172  J. 

Ends  : 

iT^T^T^^TT^f^^    ^TTTTT^n:    ^rfrafTrf?f?r    ^TfT^^T- 

Add.  1326. 

Paper;  225  leaves,  6  lines,  lo|  x  4  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  839 
(A.D.  1719). 

DhARANI-SANG  R  AHA. 

Good  close  and  regular  Nej^alese  hand-writing. 

At  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  work  ai'e  somewhat  brilliant 
illuminations  of  deities,  etc.     The  binding-boards  are  also  illuminated. 

A  collection  of  Dharanis  different  from  the  Dharanl-saiigraha  of 
R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  55,  and  also  from  Add.  MS.  1485. 

Begins,  after  invocatory  preface: 

The  collection  contains  many  hundreds  of  short  dharanis,  connected 
with  all  the  chief  personages  of  the  Buddhist  Pantheon,  as  well  as 
with  some  of  the  chief  literary  works:  e.g.  the  'Lotus'  and  the 
Lankavatara  (86). 

The  colophon  commences  (2236)  in  what  is  intended  (see  below) 
for  Sanskrit : 

TT^^^T^T^^TfsT^:  ...etc.    ^fwr^fT-^t  ^WT^rfl  ^^T 
TT^WTf^^^W^T^TT  Wt  ^T^ W  etc.  I . . .  ^mW'^. .  .^T^I^- 

t  Wright's  Nepal,  p.  48. 


50  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1326. 

<TT%  ^WTT^tW  i%f^fT  15r?T  "^  ^if^rTT  ^T^-HtT  II    ^^ 

The  vernacular  colophon  accordingly  follows.     Then  a  blessing ; 
after  wliich  : 

^^rr^  ^^£^  ^TX^^^T^  ^fiq% . . .  etc. 

f^f^ri^^  ^ftf^  I  ^^T  -^^ ...  I  -^n^YE . . . 

(For  these  and  other  scribe's  verses  see  Max  Miiller,  Rigveda  Pref. 
p.  xi.).     Then  follow  a  line  of  vei-nacular  and  the  final  invocation. 


Add.  1327. 

Paper;  78  leave.s,  6 — 7  lines,  1.5|  x  31  in.;  in  various  hands, 
XVIII — Xixth  cent. 

DvAVIMgATYAVADAXA-KATHA. 

Carelessly  written.     For  the  beginning  see  Add.  1274-. 
Ends  : 


Add.  1327.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  51 

This  MS.  does  not  contain  the  epilogue  found  in  Add.  1274  and 
the  Paris  MS.,  but  ends  with  its  22nd  avaddna.  The  names  in  the 
index  on  the  cover  do  not  in  all  cases  accord  with  the  colophons. 


Add.  1328. 

Paper;  81  leaves,  14—16  lines,  13f  x  6in. ;  modem. 
Jataka-mala. 

A  transcript  of  the  Jatakamdkl,  containing  34  jatakas.  See 
Add.  1415  for  an  account  of  the  work.  After  the  close  of  the  34th 
Jataka  (80a),  ending  as  in  Add.  1415,  a  short  concluding  chapter  is 
added  in  this  MS. 

Begins  : 

^T^TR^  ^tf^rfr  s^  w^  'T^rrr  H-Rsii'X  M  {-m^  ?)  ii 

Ends: 

After  which  the  colophon  of  the  last  tale  is  repeated : 


Add.  1329. 

Paper;  67  leaves,  9  lines,  13f  x  4f  in.;  modem. 
GUHYASAMAJA   (PuRVARDDHA). 

This  MS.  is  a  copy  made  for  Dr  D.  Wright,  unfortunately  frotn 
the  same  MS.  from  which  Add.  901  is  taken;  compare  the  marks 
of  lacunae  which  coincide  throughout.  The  only  slight  differences  I 
have  noted  are  in  two  titles,  see  Add.  901  supra.  Ch.  i.  ends  oa; 
ii.  6a;  iii.  7a;  iv.  8a;  v.  86;  vi.  10a;  vii.  12a;  viii.  13a;  ix.  146; 
X.  16a;  xi.  186;  xii.  216;  xiii.  296;  xiv.  35a;  xv.  43a;  x-va.  48a; 
xWi.  576;  x\'iii.  67a, 

4—2 


52  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1330. 


Add.  1330. 

Stout  yellow  paper;    84  leaves,  6  lines,  12|  x  Sin. ;  dated 
N.  s.  761  (a.d.  1641). 

Karaxda-vyuha  (prose  version). 

The  lines  are  ruled  and  the  writing  is  regular,  though  not  so  fine 
as  we  sometimes  find  at  this  time. 

There  are  five  illustrations,  somewhat  poor  in  colour  and  drawing. 

The  colophon  is  in  the  vernacular.     See  Add.  1267. 

Ends: 

Add.  1331. 

Paper ;  33  leaves,  6  lines,  8\  x  2^  in. ;  modem. 

Part  of  the  AmarA-KO^A. 
Ends  abruptly  with  the  lines  in  the  bhumi-varga  : 

^rrr  ^^'Tffr— (II.  i.  2). 

Add.  1332. 

Paper;  22  leaves,  folded  backwards  and  forwards,  7  lines, 
81  X  2|in.  ;  xviiith  cent.'? 

4  4  7  I 

Nama-sangIti  and  stotras. 

A  volume  of  gathas  and  stotras,  addressed  to  Lokanath 
(Macchendra?),  Ava]okite9vara,  &c.  in  very  corrupt  Sanskrit,  and 
occasionally  perhaps  in  some  native  dialect.  Stotra  is  always  written 
totra. 

Begins  at  p.  9  : 

^'5CT^f^<^^TT^  ^^T%  "^4  ^^"^^  "^"4'  "1^^  f^^"  I 


Add.  1332.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  53 

This  hymn  occurs  in  Add.  1333  leaf  2. 

The  following  are  the  colophons  of  the  stotras  : 

The  Nama-sangiti  then  follows  ;  see  Add.  1323. 

Add.  1333. 

Paper ;  48  leaves,  folded  backwards  and  forwards,  6 — 7  lines, 
7  X  3^  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  917  (a.d.  1797). 

Stotras. 

The  MS.  is  in  several  hands,  some  being  mere  modern  scribble. 

The  book  is  said  to  contain  hymns  and  prayers  in  Sanskrit  with 
a  Newari  translation. 

The  chief  colophon  runs  : 
TTrT  ^^?rr ^T^ ^Tf^^^T^^WlT^^  *KUIl^*dl^* (sic) 

In  another  page  occurs,  in  a  later  hand,  the  date  ^J«(rT    "^B^  I 

Add.  1334. 

Paper ;  20  leaves,  folded  backwards  and  forwards,  5  lines, 
7-|  X  3  in. ;  modern. 

Bhimasena-puja. 

Several  leaves  are  blank  or  only  filled  with  diagrams.  The 
writing  is  very  careless. 

The  work  contains  a  short  liturgy,  with  prayers  and  hymns  and 
references  to  ceremonial  acts  such  as  caiidanddi-jnijd,  &c. 


54  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1334. 

Begins  : 

^  (t  ?)  ^1%^^  ^srrtnsrr^  (?) 

Ends  : 

Add.  1335. 

Coarse  brown  paper;  3  leaves,  5  lines,  12f  x  Sin. ;  modern. 
Prayers. 

Some  tattered  leaves  containing  short  passages  and  invocations. 
The  beginning  is  torn,  and  there  is  no  regular  colophon. 
Ends  : 


Add.   1336. 
Paper ;  8  leaves,  6  lines,  7|  x  8  in. ;  modem. 

DhARANIS   to   PARXA-^AYARi. 

Apparently  a  fragment  from  a  collection,  one  leaf  being  numbered 
24.  A  Parna-9avarl-sadhana  occurs  in  the  Sadhana-mala-tantra 
Add.  1648,  leaf  90. 

Add.  1337. 

Paper ;  1  leaf,  8  lines,  7|  x  8  in. ;  modern. 
Prayers. 

This  leaf  contains  short  mantras  addressed  to  the  eight  Mdtrikds. 

Add.  1338. 

Coarse  brown  paper;  9  leaves,  6 — 7  lines,  8  x  4  in.;  modem. 
Prayers. 

Several  of  the  pages  are  blank  or  illustrated  with  symbols  and 
coloured  drawings  of  the  Matrika  goddesses.     It  contains  apparently 


Add.  1338.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  55 

some  prayers  used  iu  their  worship  in  a  very  corrupt  Sanskrit  or 
patois. 


Add.  1339. 

Paper;  272  leaves,  16 — 17  lines,  15  x  7  m. ;  modern. 
Mahavastu. 

An  edition  of  the  text  with  introduction  and  commentary  is  now 
being  published  by  M.  E.  Senart.  Vol.  i.  which  has  already  appeared 
(Paris,  1882,  8vo.),  corresponds  to  leaves  1 — 836  of  this  MS. 

TTfT  ^T^r^'R^  ^T^^ft  ^°  I  136. 
T°  ^T^TR"^  ^^T^  ^^li;'^^(?)^°  >  15&. 
T°  ^^t^°  ^^^T  ^f?T:  ^°  I  21&. 
T*  ^T^°  ■RfffT^T  ^f^:  ^°  I  23. 
T°  ^T^*  "S'fft^T  ^f^:  ^°  1   25. 

X°  ^FR°  "^fJ^T  ^f^:  ^*  I    276.  etc.,  the  10th  "bhunii" 
ending  at  446. 

"^T^^TT^^  ^'TT^  II  576. 

°^^^^*  576. 

°Nll^^^  ^T^  ^Trr^°  636. 
(The  story  of  Rakshita  is  wanting  in  this  MS.). 

°^^^^^TfT^°  656. 

*lf^W^  ^Wr^  67. 

°^fW^T^W^  ^m^  706. 

°^Tf?TT:(T^r^  "^^''  756. 

°^TffTi^TW^  ^n^TW°  76a— 6. 

°^Tf^r^  ^T^TrqfrT*  806. 

o-^ft^TrT^^  946. 

ofrr^^Tff^'  95. 

o-5J^TV^3[J^  ^T^^T^^TrT^  (sic)  956. 

o-5I^T^n:T^^Tm^rrT^^TfI^°  96. 


66  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1339. 

°V^^TW^  ^Trr^°  98. 

°^^-^T^  ^^TT^TVTrTT^  ^lr{^°  99Z». 

<'nrKT^Trr^<=  loo. 

"•RT^ft^Trr^^   105. 

^T^^^^T^-^  ^f\jt  nob. 

oWr^T^^Trf^F^  119^. 

"^'if^^  ^T^TT^^  ^T(T^^f<*'?MM4T  120. 
°^T!^^^  ^rnrTW°  1226. 
"I^TfTT^TRnCW^  124  J. 

°"aiiTiT^f^n:^Trr^qn:^^°  128. 
°-nrfTTTH^  '^^TTW^  ^jwk°  nib. 

°"3T^^rRr^TrT^®  1326. 

°15^^^TrT^°  133. 

°^^T^TTfr^°  134. 

"'ai^^^R^Trf^^  135. 

^'^^TT^T  ^%Mi^  ^Trr^°  1356. 

^'^rwrf^ft  ^T^  W^  T^fr^^T^  1456. 

°'?JWrf^  ^JT\   "^^  ^r^T^^^  m'Wt  ^'TT^  160. 

°^W^%  ^7[^TrT^°  1866. 

°"?TSRT^T?T^<'  1866. 

°^T^T^TrI^°  1866. 

°^T^T^TfT^°  187. 

°^^^^T  ^TTT  ^TrT^*'  189. 

^f^^TfTTfr  l^^-?:TWr  ^TrT^'  190. 

°^^T^T^q^  ^^TT-^^T"^^  W^J-^   1926. 

^^TT^f^^T^f  ^T<T^°  2566. 


Add.  1339.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  57 

^■RrT'R^^^rnT^  Wr{Ti{  205. 

o^rRToTTrT^  *IT^o  206. 

"^T^f'T^T^Tfl^^fT^"^*  207. 

°^ff^^r5fTfT^*  2076. 

°^f%^^  -^TnT^^Tfr^  ^f(^°  212. 

^M'iiNdt^  ^■R:^'^°  216. 

^T^'RffT^  ^t^t^r^  216Z». 

"TT^^^T^r^^TT^  iTt^T^°  2176. 

^^^^f^^^^^'Rt  ^Trr^°  2216. 

°TrfT^Tf^T  *r^^T  ^t'RTT^^^'^  W^°  227. 

*'W^i;"^^°  232. 

°^^^RJ^  ^T^TTf^  ^T(#®  241. 

°^^T^t  ^rr^Tfrnf^^wTfT*®  251. 

°^r3r^TT'^  ^Tff^°  252. 

*'^^^"Rt  ^r^^Wf^^TWt  WTrT^'  253. 

o-3n:^aTTrT^*  2556. 

"f^'nf^^'Rt  Tf^^T  256. 

"^T^lTfT'R^^^T^^rT^^  ^Trf^"  257. 

"TT'^+M^l®  258. 

°^f^^  ^^TT^T^T^W^TTTTT"^^!  ^'^  I   2606. 

»-€r^T^^  %1%iJ"^^  Wm°  2636. 

o-^nfr^^  %fS^Trr^°  2636. 

°^!rf^t^^  ^TrRf°  2646. 

2676. 

o^^-s^TT-^T^^TfT^®  272. 
"TT^fr^^^^T'T^  etc.  I 

W^T^"^  ^^^T^  ^Wt  I    ^  V^°  etc.  I 


58  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1339. 

Then  come  8  lines  in  praise  of  the  spiritual  benefit  etc,  of  the 
book ;  after  which  follows  : 


Add.  1340. 

Paper;  63  leaves,  6  lines,  10  x  3f  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  962  (a.d. 
1842). 

He-vajra-pakinIjalasambara-tantra  from  the  Dyatrim- 

9ATKALPA-TANTRA. 

Inaccurately  written.     In  two  parts;  cf.  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  40.     It 
consists  of  a  dialogue  between  Bhagavat  and  Yajragarbha. 
Begins : 

Part  I. 

1.  ^^^^^^w:  ir^^:  (Cod.  ^^^T^rrTwrr^)  i  4a. 

2.  ^m^ -^TJ^^^J-^Wf^f  ^^^^^T  f^nt^  I  8a. 

3.  ^rTIMd^^^fft^:  I   10a. 

4.  ^fTTf^W^ZTW^rJ^:  I   10&. 

5.  [fTT^tizw:  THT^Tr.-f  I]  (?) 

6.  ^^m^:  ^^fi:  I  146. 

7.  CTmf^^f^^^^^^:(?)WTm:  I  17a. 

S"§17:  I   216. 

9.  "R'^ff^T^^T  ^rm  ^mw,  l   23a. 

10.  ^f^ti*i[3^T  ^^^:  I  266. 
^^^^TRT^Tf^  ^T^  ^^:^T^:  ^^T^:  I  276. 

Part  II. 

1.  fW^^Tf^r^^T^#^f^T^^P?g^TT^TT: XIZ^:  1 29a. 

t  Not  found  in  MS.,  but  added  from  Add.  1697.  2,  If  7a. 


Add.  1340.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  59 

2.  ^*  ^°  f^f^f^W^T  ^T^  ^ZW[  1\ffl^:  I  346. 

3.  ^°    ^°     ^rr^f^^T^^t^TT^Tft  (?)  TRT    ^T^^T^- 
^V^:  I  40a. 

4.  %°  ^°  ^i^'W^^^frn?!"^  ^T^  Md^^fi^:  I   486. 

5.  t^^'njT^nTZ^:  i?^^:  i  546. 

6.  "t^^^Tf^^  ^T^^^T  ^ERrf^^T^xR:^:  we:  i  556. 

7.  ^°  ^°  ^^^•RfVT?^^:  WTTTi:  I   566. 

8.  ^°  ^°  "R^^^^^T  S¥^:  I   576. 

9.  ^°  ^°  ^'mi;T<MiH'T  ^^^:  I   61a. 

10.  ^^  ^°  ^IMMd^t  ^^^:  I   616. 

11.  '^^^T^^T^^Z^  l?:^rT^ir:  I   626. 

Add.   1341. 

Paper;  97  leaves,  6  lines,  14  x  4in. ;  dated  N.  s.  963  (a.d. 
1843). 

S  UVARNAVARNAVADANA. 
Written  by  several  scribes.     It  is  a  portion  of  the  Yratavadana- 
mala  (extant  in  the  As.  Soc.  Beng.  Collection  at  Calcutta).     In  3 
chapters. 

Begins,  after  invocations  and  enumeration  of  certain  Bhikshus  : 

1.  TTrf  ^-^TlTW^T^mT^T^T  "^^^^TW^^  'tW'^fTT- 
'T'Sl^^t  ^^%fg"^^rqfTr  ^T^  TT^^TSrr^  I  186. 

2.  Tf<T  'Wri''  f  <=  f^rft^T^T^  I   696. 

Ends: 


60  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1341. 

Wf^T^TI%t^  ^^^T%   firHr^  I    ^#^W  ^f^^T^^  (sic) 

The  first  chapter  introduces  a  sarthavaha  Divakara,  son  of 
Ratuakara,  who  visits  Mahilkacyapa. 

The  origin  of  the  name  Suvai-navarna  is  to  be  found  in  the  second 
chapter,  If.  22b,  1.  1. 

The  third  chapter  tells  of  a  sarthavaha  Karna,  and  commences  by- 
relating  the  circumstances  of  the  birth  of  his  son,  named  Dvirupa, 
716. 

The  date  is  in  figui'es,  and  the  name  of  E,aja  Vikramasah  is 
appended. 


Add.  1342. 

Paper;  79  leaves,  7  lines,  13|  x  4in. ;  modern. 

SUVARXA-PRAEHASA. 

The  beginnings  and  endings  of  the  chapters  substantially  the  same 
as  in  Add.  875  (which  see).     The  postscript  however  consists  only  of 

the  verse  "^  ViTT® ,  with  another  verse  of  invocation  not  found  in 
Add.  875.  At  the  end  is  a  leaf  which  a  note  by  Dr  D.  Wright  states 
to  have  been  put  with  this  MS.  simply  as  a  cover.  It  is  the  beginning 
of  a  modei-n  copy  of  the  Paramarthanamasangati  (see  Add.  1347), 
giving  the  first  7|  clokas. 
Begins  : 

of^f^^:  ^^TTfT^  ^T%^^T.'  (sic)  II  \  II 


Add.  1343. 

Paper;  71  leaves,  4 — 5  lines,  7x2^  in.;  in  various  hands, 
mostly  xvilith  century. 

A  Dharaxi-saxgraha. 
Leaves  16,  38,  39  are  wanting. 


Add.  1343.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  61 

Ends  : 

We  find  here  several  of  the  charms  that  are  usually  comprised  in 
such  collections;  e.g.  the  Vasundhdrd  (4),  the  Gana-patihridaya  (106) 
and  the  Marici  (19);  all  of  which  are  in  the  sahgraha  of  R.  A.  S. 
Cat.  No.  79. 


Add.  1344. 

Paper;  79  leaves,  7 — 9  lines,  11  x  4iin. ;  ordinary  modem 
Devanagari  hand. 

A:VIARA-K09A. 

Well  written  with  dandas  in  red  ink,  and  occasional  comments  in 
a  small  fine  hand  written  over  the  lines. 

The  work  begins  with  the  stanzas  given  in  Deslongchamps'  edition, 
p.  1.  The  first  Kanda  (If.  16)  has  its  own  index  and  cover.  The  MS. 
concludes  with  an  index. 


Add.  1345. 

Paper;  17  leaves,  10 — 12  lines,  13  x  4|in. ;  modem. 

KAPigAVADANA. 
There  are  copies  at  Oxford  and  Paris.     See  also  Add.  1537. 
After  a  preface  of  four  lines,  containing  benedictory  invocations 
and  promise  of  bliss  to  the  reader,  it  begins  : 

1.    Ends: 

TTrf  ^NaiMi^l^  (sic)  M^M*«=(^^I   THT  IT^TTI'iyiV:  | 

36. 


62  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1345. 

4.    ^^  "^T^-S^^^^^  "^fjm^  I  8a. 

6.  X°  ^TfrTf%^^«  W^^T°  I   106. 

7.  T°  ^^Tt:r^^°  ^^m°  I  186. 

8.  T°  "^^Tf^^^  ^T^T"g:?TT 

Ends: 

^  V^STT^  "^  1%^"R"^pTr . .   (a  scribe's  verse). 


Add.  1347. 

Paper ;  63  leaves,  5  lines,  8x3  in. ;  modern. 

PARAMARTHA-NAiyiA-SANGATI  (?). 
Very  corrupt  Sanskrit  and  vernacular  (the  latter  in  red  ink). 
Begins  (after  invocations  to  'Malianatlia') : 

1.  ^W^T^T^^m  Wf^  I  8. 

2.  ITfrr^^^TTm  ^\   10. 

8.  TTT^^T^TnritifrfV^r^^^T^T  N^  (sk)  i  126. 

4.  ^^VTfJ^Tf T^T^^^T"^  ^T^T  "^^  I   176. 

5.  ^f^I^l^^^^TfJ^T^^T^T   ^^N>ffTI   266. 

6.  ^T^^^T^^Tmm^T^r3iri-^-3r(?)i  306. 

7.  TTfJTf^T^T^  ^Tm  ^T^^qrft'aifT^  I  456. 

8.  Hf^T^^rr^  ^T^T  ^^^  I   59. 

9.  TTrT  ^^rimTrrT^T^T  ^^  I   606. 

Ends  : 


Add.  1347.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  63 

Then  follows  a  vernacular  version  of  the  above  lines. 

Add.  1348. 

Paper;  27  leaves,  5  lines,  8  x  Sin. ;  dated  N.  S.  937  (a.d. 
1807). 

[MAHA]-PRATYA^rGlRA-[DHARANl]. 

See  E,.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  77.  A  pencil  note  on  the  cover  by  Dr 
Wright  describes  the  contents  as  "  Prayers  or  mantras  against 
sickness,  witches,  etc." 

Begins  ; 

Ends  : 

^icTfT^  t.^^  f^  ^^^  \  W^  ^TTffT  I  ^TT't  etc. 
(a  scribe's  verse). 

Add.  1351. 

Paper;  19  leaves,  7  lines,  11  x  4in. ;  dated  N.  s.  982  (a.d, 
1862). 

"Work  on  Samvats  (Yernacular). 

On  each  leaf  is  written  ^^  ^.^(^"^  (thtis  divided  between  the 
two  margins). 
Begins : 

Ends  : 


64  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1352. 

Add.  1352. 

Paper;  15  leaves,  5  lines,  11  x  3  in. ;  dated  X.  S.  985  (a.d. 
1865). 

Mahakala-tantra. 

This  is  probably  an  abstract  of  part  of  the  larger  Mahakala-tantra- 
raja  (R.  A.  S.  No.  47  and  Paris  Bibl.  Nat.  Nos.  47  and  48).  See 
the  account  in  Burn.  Intr.  p.  539.  On  the  Tibetan  version,  see  Feer 
in  Ann.  G.  ii.  29. 

The  MS.  begins  like  that  of  the  R.  A.  S.,  and  on  leaves  7a,  10a 
the  colophons  are  those  of  Chapters  V.  and  VII.  respectively  of 
that  MS. 

We  have  also  (leaf  12)   b(i^l|dt?t:  (cf.  ibid.  Ch.  XVII.) ;   (13) 

^^^^^°  (?  cf.  Ch.  XXII.);  (14)  ^^t^rq^T^nr  ^^11 

Ends  : 

(leg.  ^T^°)   rT'^^TT^T^-''?'fTf^T^'^TrTTr^rT^rI5^VTTf^- 

^T^T^T^'^'^  {sic)  [^J^TTT  I   Then  follows  the  date,  see  above. 

Add.  1353. 

Paper ;  26  leaves,  6  lines,  8  x  8  in. ;  modern. 

Utpata-lakshana-[loke9YARA-bhashitam]. 

A  work  on  omens,  in  two  parts.  The  work  "  Lokecwara-para- 
djika"  at  Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.  (Z>.  129)  is  identical  (save  in  its  preface) 
■with  the  second  part  of  this  work. 

Begins,  after  invocation  to  ManjuQri : 

^f?r%^^'g^T^"m  (i)  ^^^r^'^'^  ii  t^^"^  i 

3ZW  ^v^  TTT^lf^  I5^TI5^^fr^W  {sic)  I 
The  first  part  of  the  work,  in  54  stanzas  or  sections  ends : 

TffT  ^JWTfT'^^  I  ^^^mTTf^^T  TfH  12a. 
Then  follow  two  lines  in  a  vernacular. 
Part  2  consists  of  55  stanzas  with  introduction  and  a  long  postscript. 


Add.  1353.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  65 

The  preface  is  a  short  dialogue  between  Tara  and  the  Buddha. 
The  first  stanza  begins  : 

Tit    ^^^?<ft    TT^    ^    f-a^^    ^    rf^Tfq   ^J    ^JVR^ 

"^^^1%  ^  ^^:  I... 

The  work  ends : 


Add.  1355. 

Palm-leaf  of  a  lightish  grey,  and  not  of  the  brown  or  yellow 
colour  that  is  found  in  early  MSS.;  22  leaves,  5  lines,  9^  x  2  in.; 
dated  N.  s.  696  (a.d.  1576). 

Vasu-dharani  [or  Vasudhara-dharanI]. 

The  handwriting  is  square,  close,  and  regular.  "Written  in  the 
reign  of  Sada9iva.  The  leaves  are  numbered  1 — 22,  of  which  leaf  14 
is  missing. 

The  dharani  is  introduced  by  the  naiTation  of  part  of  the  tale  of 
Sucandra  (see  Add.  1400). 

Begins  (after  invocation  and  two  lines  of  preface) :  "^^  "Wm  etc. 
The  tale  begins  thus  {2a  line  2)  : 

Ends : 
^?rr4:?ftT'5VTTT  ^T^   VTT^  ^^TTTTI    f^^T   S^ 

f^^lt^T^mTTT^T^-R^Tft^Tf^*  (?)  WTTT^ft^T^  ^^ 

*  For  sdlagulia  compare  Add.  MS.  1354. 


66  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1355. 

^TrT^T^XTf^rTrTr"^Tf^f?T  l    WfWr\^  i^L-  etc.  (see  above)  I 


Add.  1356. 

Paper ;  42  leave.s,  5  lines  (ruled),  6  x  2^  iu. ;  dated  N.  s.  860 
(A.D.  1740). 

Dhaeaxis. 

Leaf  20  is  written  in  a  very  inferior,  and  more  recent  hand. 

The  collection  is  called  Saptavara  in  Dr  D.  Wright's  list,  Hist  of 
Nejxd,  p.  318.  Compare  the  collections  in  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  59  (where 
also  the  name  Saptavara  occurs)  and  ISTo.  79. 

Begins : 

T1^5^  ?^VTKt  ^  ^^^T^T^TT^TT  I  VWr  VTTWY° 

^T^^^^VRT  ^T  ^T^rfr  TTTairf^  ^^^if^  -w^x^  I 

5a,  etc. 

-^Tl^  ^T^ir^f^^T  {sic)  iTT^  ^TWt  ^iT°  I  196. 

^^^TTTI   22. 

^rr^^TTtfg  ^^fTlVT  'TT^  VTT^  ^^T^f^frf  I   25. 

Ends  ; 

frNrrt   {sic)   T^^^^^Tt^Tt     5 Wf^f^^t^H <  (\ - 

"^H^r  (?)  I   Then  follow  the  scribe's  verse  and  the  date  as  above. 


Cf.  Wright's  Hist,  of  Nepal,  pp.  207—8. 


Add.  1357.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  67 


Add.   1357. 

Paper;  36  leaves,  7  lines,  11  x  Siin. ;  dated  N.  s.  973  (a.d. 
1853). 

AgvAGHOSHA-NANDlMUKHAVADANA  with  vernacular  version. 

See  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  14,  and  compare  Burn.  Intr.  p.  216  and 
Hodgson  as  there  cited. 
Begins  : 

^^^Tf^  TT^^T^  ^^:W3T^r^T  II 
^frfr2rrt^R^^?:T^-^rriT^Tfar^l"  I    ^^1  ^^TIR^- 
^  {sic)  I 
Ends: 

"^^^n^  TTrfl^^TTR  {sic)  I 

Then  date,  as  above,  and  a  vernacular  postscript. 

In  spite  of  our  possessing  three  independent  MSS.,  the  Sanskrit 
is  so  utterly  barbarous,  as  to  render  even  the  main  thread  of  the  story- 
all  but  unintelligible  to  the  ordinary  reader. 

The  opening  of  the  story  however  introduces  a  devt,  Vasundhara, 
who  commands  a  divine  sage  (1)  Nandimukha-AQvaghosha  to.be 
bom  in  the  world  of  mortals  (martyamandala,  or,  as  the  MSS.  every- 
where call  it,  'matya-mandala').  Nandimukha  is  visited  by  a  king. 
Mistrusting  the  king's  designs,  the  sage  transforms  himself  through 
the  power  of  the  dev'i  into  a  boar  and  lays  waste  the  palace-garden. 
The  pursuit  of  the  boar  is  then  described.  Presently,  beneath  an 
A9va[-ttha'?]-tree  an  Apsaras  ajTpears  who  proclaims  the  power  of 
the  Vasundhara- vrata  (11&);  further  incidents  illustrating  this  follow, 
a  Vasundhara- vrata-sutra  being  mentioned  at  19a.  Story  of  a  maid- 
servant (cetikd)  of  the  palace  who  practises  the  vrata.  Declaration  of 
the  ten  Ku^alas  by  the  devl  (32).  The  king  and  his  son  practise  the 
vrata. 

Such  seems  to  be  an  outline  of  this  incoherent  emanation  of  the 
latest  school  of  Northern  Buddhist  mythology. 

5—2 


68  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1357. 

Observe,  that  there  appears  to  be  nothing  in  the  book  to  substan- 
tiate the  statement  in  Bumouf,  as  above  cited,  that  the  work  is  by 
Acvaghosha.  It  seems  rather  to  be  a  fragment  of  his  mythical  history, 
comparable  in  tone  and  authority  to  the  mediteval  stories  about  Virgil. 

Add.  1358. 
Paper;  27  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  2|  in.;  xviiith  cent. 

Pratyangira-dharani, 
For  beginning  and  end  see  Add  1348. 
Ends  with  '^  ^%j[...and  an  invocation. 
There  is  a  picture  of  the  goddess  on  leaf  1. 

Add.  1359. 
Paper ;  6  leaves,  6  lines,  9  x  3  in. ;  xviiith  cent. 

Bhimasexa-dharani. 
The  worlc  consists  of  34  verses. 
Begins  (after  invocations  to  Bhimasena  and  the  Ratnatraya)  : 

Ends: 

Add.  1361. 

Paper;  12  leaves,  folding  backwards  and  forwards,  5  lines, 
6  X  Sin. ;  dated  N.  s.  977  (a.d.  1857). 

Dana-vakya  (?). 

The  above  title  is  given  by  Dr  D.  Wright,  but  the  MS.  seems  to 
give  no  clue.  The  work  consists  of  35  numbered  stanzas  or  divisions, 
and  would  seem  to  be  on  ritual. 

Begins  : 

Ends  : 
. . .  f<r^mWTffT  ^J'^  II  x?T^  II  ^"ill 

The  rest  of  the  colophon  is  in  some  vernacular  dialect. 


Add.  1362.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  69 


Add.   1362. 

Paper;  18  leaves,  8 — 11  lines,  11  x  S^in. ;  dated  N.  s.  966 
(A.D.  1846). 

Sragdhara-stotra  (with  vernacular  eommentary). 
Text  begins  as  in  Add.  1272, 
Ends: 
TWT^rTTTTH^TT^T^T:^^TTWr^(«c)^^Tn  Hfrf- 

V^TWTTf^ffT  (?) 

Then  follow  the  postscript  and  date  in  a  vernacular  dialect. 


Add.  1364. 

Palm-leaf;  128  leaves,  6  lines,.  13^  x  2^  in, ;  Bengali  hand 
of  the  middle  period ;  dated  Vikramaditya  Samvat  1503  (A.D. 
1446). 

Kalacakra-tantra. 

A  leaf  of  this  beautifully- written  MS.  has  been  reproduced  in  the 
Oriental  Series  of  the  Palseographical  Society  PI.  33.  See  also  the 
Introduction  to  the  present  work. 

The  two  wooden  covers  are  filled  on  both  sides  with  mythological 
pictures.     The  edges  of  the  leaves  have  a  sort  of  indistinct  pattern. 

On  the  work  see  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  49.  Compare  also  Csoma  de 
Ooros,  Asiat.  Res.  xx.  488;  Burnouf,  Intr.  p.  539. 

Begins  : 

^t^  ^T^T^T^  f^^?:^TjW  M^M^l*lfIT^  •reTr^W 

1.  TTrT  ^^^TTT^^r^l^  ^T^T^^  ^"RT'^fJ'R^T- 
W^^:  TT^TT:  H  (leo  stanzas)  21. 

2.  ^^'SJTWR^T  ^T^  tR:^  f^rft-^:  II  (180  stanzas)  42. 

3.  "^"W^^^T^^ffl"^:  (203  stanzas)  m. 


70  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1364. 

4.    °^TV^^Z^^?5i[:   (234  stanzas)  05. 

(2G1  stanzas). 
Then  follows : 

^^TT^%%ffTl  %T^T^Tm^f^^^  II  128a. 


Add.  1365. 

Paper;  259  leaves,  6  lines,  14x4Hu. ;  dated  N.  s.  986 
{A.D.  1866). 

GUHYASAilAJA   (PURVARDDHA  and   PaRARDDHA). 

For  the  remaining  portion  of  the  work,  see  Add.  1617-  From 
the  colophon,  2585,  we  might  infer  that  only  Part  2  is  known  as 
TatMgata-guhyaha ;  but  from  the  size  of  tlie  Paris  MS.  of  that  name 
(255  leaves),  it  would  seem  that  the  name  refers  to  both  Purvarddha 
and  Pararddha.  Mr  Hodgson  makes  the  names  Guhyasamaja  and 
Tathagataguhyaka  synonymous  {Ess.  Lit.  Kep.  17).  The  work 
ranks  as  a  "dharma"  in  Nepal;  see  Burn.  Ldr.  G8,  54:2. 

Begins,  after  invocations  to  the  Bodhisatvas,  etc.  : 
-n-o  ■^o  ss^o  iq-o  -^o  i^TT^x^    etc.,  see  Add.  901. 

I.  (Purvarddha)  : 

1 — 7  also  substantially  the  same  titles. 

8  is  entitled  '*?*^^'5^T'^  (instead  of  the  vox  nihUi  of  Add.  901 
8«),  20ff. 

10—18,  see  Add.  901. 


Add.  1365.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  71 

Ends: 

II.  (ParardcUia).     Begins  (after  two  invocations) : 
T?:^  ^"^TT  ^°  "0:°  "€°  "H^^^^  Wtrim^rf  <*  I  ^^  I  ^TTtT- 
^^TSJ^tnr^Tt^   (coiT.  "Clf^^  cf.  Add.  1617.  1)  TTfTT^  I 
^T^Tiro  I   102a. 

VZ^:  I   106a. 

2.    fTf^f^TTT^fTTT  ^TTT  f^T^:  ^Z^l  I  1096. 

4.  T°  "^^  ^^5^^^  ^T^  (cf.  Add.  1617,  ch.  5)  ^?5^:  ^°  I 
1156. 

5.  T°  ^°  ^Tf TrT^TT^  ^rf^fTrTTnTt^T  f^ffT^^  (sic) 

A'^w,  ^°  I  1196. 

5  (bis).  T°    ^°    WT^pTTT^    IT^T^T^TilHTW^T  T^J- 
^m  ^^^:  ^°  I   1226. 

6.  T°  "^^  f^°  W^:  ^°  I   1246. 

7.  T°  ^°  wi*  ^^^T^^ *  ^  ■'CT^  f%#r£T  ^rm: 

^°  I  1286. 

8.    T:°  ^°  "^^  ft°  ^TfwrTRfrT^^^RWT  ^5T^^:  TT°  I 
1306. 

9.    Title  wanting. 

10.  X°  ^°  f^°  ^^TrMprl^^^I^TlT  ^"^II?:  xr°  I   133a. 

11.  T°  "^^  t\«  ■q:^rr^^:  tt°  i  1.396. 

12.  T°^*  f^°  ^Z^rT^T I'M^?!^!^^^ ^TJH:  ^° I  141a. 

13.  T°    ^°    N^^^^^fJW     M*<iil«5iTi7    ^T^TT: 
^^^:  I   143a. 


72  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1365. 

14.  X°  ^°   f^°    W^^Tf%^T^%?T^^?T5R^   ^T^  (cf. 
Add.  1617,  ch.6)  "^f5^1[:  ^°  I   143J. 

15.  T°  "^^  f^°    ^^    "^f  rfSi^f^^T^^^  (67c)  ^T??^'^- 
^nr^TW  ^T^  A^-^W'  ^°  I   145a. 

16.  T°  ^^^t^T^^W^^T^  wr^:  (sic)^!?^^:  1 1536. 

17.  T°  ^°  °^^^frr^^T  ^T^  ^TTTT^r:  ^°  I   1646  (cf. 
Add.  1617,  ch>  9). 

18.  T°  ^*  f^  ^t^rTT^^^T^T^i^  ^Tm^  ^^T^T^li: 
^°  I   176a. 

19.  T'  ^°  ^4*4l3T^T^T^^T  'TT^T^ftlT  ^°  I    189^» 
(cf.  Add.  1617,  ch.  13). 

20.  T°  ^*  ^t^^T'^^TRT^^T  ^Jf{  ^-^XTrnJ  f^frf- 

tR:^:  I  2016, 

21.  T°  ^°  "#^1^  ^trr^TT%  (frf^^rrT^TTT^nr^- 
^^f^ai:  qzw:  i  2076. 

22.  T"  ^°  ^°  ^°  wtf^T^^^T^  ^Tf#3rffi:  ^«  I 
2136. 

23.  T°  "^^  wtfTm^^Trgrrf  ^T^  ^^iftlT:  ^°  I  215a. 

24.  T°  ^°  TTZW^f^W^  ^TiT  ^fjff"  ^°  I   219a. 

25.  Title  apparently  wanting,  see  2226. 

26.  T°  ^°  ■JiTr^Wi%Ti;^^T^75RTtT  ^TTI  wf^I  ^«  I 
223a. 

27.  T°  ^'  ^tfT^f'T^T^Tr^T^^^T^  ^Ti?  ^^f^«  ti°  I 
2256. 

28.  ^^chtMr^^^  TTJTT'STf^:  ^7^:  ^mTTI  I  2586. 
After  which  : 

^  ^^T . . . 


Add.  1365.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  73 

^^  ^i:^  (see  above) . . .  ^TT^TT^^^TRTf  ^^ap^  cTli  rf 
^TTT^fTT^TT%TrTTWl%rf^^  ^TTraT^  etc.  (vernacular).  The 
scribe  appears  to  be  one  Vekbanandana. 

There  is  an  illustration  of  a  goddess  on  2586. 

Add.  1366. 

Paper;  133  leaves,  8  lines,  15  x  5  in. ;  modern. 

AsHTAMi-VEATA  (Newari). 
Cf.  K  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  76, 

Add.   1367. 

Paper;  94  leaves,  12-14  lines,  14J  x  6  in. ;  modern. 
Karuxa-pundarika. 

On  the  work  see  Burn.  Intr.  72. 

Begins  (after  invocations  etc.)  with  title  : 

^^W^WO*l^  TT^^lfV"^^  II 

after  which  : 

"Q:^  ^HTT  ^°  -q;^'  ^«  'H^^T^^  TT^"^  mTf?T  ^  I 

^T^  TT^^:  ^ft^:  I  46. 

4.  T"*  ^T^°  ^TTr^°  "^fV^f^^rRrTW  17°  ^^i[:  1  76Z). 

5.  T°  #^°  T^  MKct-rTl  ^T^  TT^^:  I  876. 

Ends : 

^  WT...ete. 


74  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1368. 

Add.  1368. 

Paper;  35  leaves,  7  lines,  13f  x  8|  in. ;  modern. 

SUKHAVATi-VYtJHA. 

"  TLe  title  varies  between  Sukhavati  and  SukhavatI,  but  tlie  pre- 
ponderance of  MSS,  at  present  known  is  in  favour  of  Sukhavati. 

See  a  short  abstract  of  the  Sutra  in  Burnouf's  Introduction  d. 
Vhistoire  du  Buddhisme,  p.  99  seq.  The  text  of  the  smaller  Sukhavatl- 
vyuha  was  published  with  translation  and  notes  by  Professor  F.  Max 
Muller  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1880,  pp.  153 — 188, 

Of  the  three  MSS.  which  I  have  collated,  those  of  the  Bodleian 
Libraiy  and  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  belong  togethex',  while  the 
Cambridge  MS.  frequently  gives  independent  readings. 

Begins  : 

Ends : 

^^  rT^T^rT^  ^^mt'5^;f  ^^T^T^"^^  -^Wt  II  II  ^^11 

The  subject  is  as  follows  : 

Bhagavat  was  staying  at  Eajagriha  on  the  Gridhrakuta  mountain 
and  addressed  himself  to  Ananda.  Ananda  observed  the  glorious 
countenance  of  Bhagavat,  and  asked  whether  this  was  due  to  his 
Buddha-wisdom  or  to  his  remembrance  of  former  Buddhas.  Bhaga- 
vat praised  Ananda  for  thus  questioning  him,  and  then  told  him  the 
story  of  a  former  Buddha.  The  81st  Tathagata  after  Dipankara  was 
Loke9vara,  and  among  his  pupils  was  a  Bhikshu  called  Dharmakara. 
This  Bhikshu  sang  Gathas  in  praise  of  Lokecvara,  and  expressed  his 
wish  to  become  a  Buddha.  When  asking  for  instruction,  and 
particularly  for  information  as  to  the  right  qualities  of  a  Buddha- 
country,  LokeCj'vara  at  first  told  him  that  he  should  find  them  out 
for  himself     But  when  Dharmakara  declared  his  inability  to  do  so, 


Add.  1368.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  75 

Lokegvara  consented  to  explain  these  qualities.  After  he  had 
listened  to  Lokegvara,  Dharmakara  wished  to  combine  all  the  good 
qualities  of  the  81  Buddha-countries  and  concentrate  them  upon  his 
own,  and,  after  an  absence  of  five  Kalpas,  he  returned  to  Lokecvara 
with  his  own  pranidhanas  or  prayers  for  the  good  qualities  of  his  own 
futui'e  Buddha-country.  Dharmakara  then  pi'oceeded  to  recite  his 
pi-ayers  for  blessings  to  be  confeiTed  on  his  own  Buddha-country, 
which  prayers  (varying  in  number)  are  very  famous  and  often 
referred  to  by  Northern  Buddhists.  After  that,  Dharmakara  recited 
some  Gathas  in  praise  of  Buddha  Lokecvara,  and  obtained  the  object 
of  his  prayers.  He  then  performed  for  many  Kalpas  all  that  was 
required  to  become  a  perfect  Buddha,  he  acquired  all  the  Paramitas, 
and  taught  others  to  follow  his  example.  When  Ananda  asked 
Bhagavat  what  had  become  of  that  Bodhisattva  Dharmakara, 
Bhagavat  replied  that  he  was  living  then  in  the  west  in  Sukhavati, 
and  was  in  fact  Amitabha  (the  chief  Buddha  of  the  Northern 
Buddhists).  Then  follow  long  descriptions  of  the  light  of  Amitabha, 
his  various  names  are  given,  the  number  of  his  followers,  and  his 
boundless  age.  It  is  stated  that  he  obtained  Buddhahood  ten  Kalpas 
ago.  Then  follow  full  accounts  of  Sukhavati,  its  trees,  flowers,  rivers, 
and  the  enjoyments  granted  to  all  who  are  born  into  that  Buddha- 
country.  Whatever  they  wish  for  they  obtain.  Buddhas  from 
other  countries  come  to  praise  Amitabha,  who  appears  to  his 
believers  whenever  they  come  to  die,  and  allows  them  to  enter 
Sukhavati.  After  some  more  Gathas  follows  a  description  of  the 
Boddhi-tree  in  that  Buddha-country,  and  the  benefits  flowing  from 
it.  Two  Boddhisattvas  are  mentioned  as  having  left  this  Buddha- 
kshetra  to  be  born  in  Sukhavati,  "\t.z.  Avalokiteevara  and  Maha- 
sthamaprapta.  Then  follows  a  new  description  of  the  excellencies  of 
Sukhavati  in  which  the  blessings  praj^ed  for  in  the  former  Pranidhanas 
are  represented  as  realised,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Sukhavati  described 
as  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  all  blessings. 

Ananda  then  expressed  a  wish  to  see  Amitabha  and  the- 
Boddhisattvas  face  to  face,  and  at  the  same  moment  Amitabha  sent  a 
ray  of  light  illuminating  the  whole  world.  They  could  see  the 
people  of  Sukhavati  and  the  people  of  Sukhavati  could  see 
Cakyamuni  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  Sahalokadhatu. 

Then  a  dialogue  follows  between  Bhagavat  and  Ajita,  Bhagavat 
asking  Ajita  whether,  after  seeing  the  people  of  Sukhavati,  he  thinks 
that  there  is  any  difierence  between  the  Paranirmitavat-avartin  gods 


76  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1368. 

and  tlie  human  beings  in  Sukiiavati..  Ajita  says  that  he  sees  none. 
Next  comes  a  question  why  some  of  the  people  are  born  there 
miraculously  out  of  lotus  flowers,  while  others  are  born  after 
dwelling  for  some  time  within  the  lotus.  The  reason  is  that  the 
former  have  had  firm  faith  in  Amitabha,  the  latter  had  entertained 
some  doubts.  Lastly  Ajita  asks  whether  people  of  this  and  other 
worlds  are  born,  in  Sukhavatl,  and  Bhagavat  gives  a  long  enumeration 
of  those  who  either  from  this  or  from  other  Buddha-countries  have 
risen  to  Sukhavatl.  The  whole  ends  with  the  usual  panegyric  of  the 
Sukhavatlvyuha-sutra,  and  an  account  of  the  rewards  for  learning, 
writing,  repeating,  and  teaching  it." 

For  the  above  account  of  this  MS.  I  am  indebted  to  Prof.  F. 
Max  Miiller,  to  whom  it  had  been  lent  when  this  part  of  the  Catalogue 
was  in  preparation. 


Add.  1369. 

Paper;   48   leaves,   6   lines,    lOxSiin. ;   dated   N.    s.   963 
(A.D.  1843). 

CHANDO-'milTA-LATA. 

A  work  on  metre^  by  Amrita  Pandita.      Compare  the  Chando- 
manjari  of  Gaiigadasa, 
Begins  : 

[S]'?fTT^"5CT  Srr^TTT^tll 

1.  (81  9lokas)  ends : 

TT^^T  ^^fr  I   4b. 

2.  T*  w°  '^^  "^^T^rrnwr  f?r<fV^T  ww^  i  42. 

3.  T*'  W°  ^°  ^^^^TWr  (?  ^^°)  (TffT^T  ^°  I  43/^. 

4.  T°  W°  "^^  fc<t<HK^T  ^fJ^T  f\°  I   446. 

5.  T'  W°  "^°  m^Ti:?fT^T  ^^^T  f{°  I  466. 


Add.  1369.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  77 

Ends  : 

x°  w°  ^°  "T^iTw^  w#r  ^°  I 

Then  follows  the  date,  as  above ;  aftei'  which  : 

The  illustrations,  as  is  implied  in  Mr  Hodgson's  account  of  the 
work  (Ess.  Lit.  Nei^l,  p.  18)  are  quite  Buddhistic  in  tone,  but  the 
only  author  quoted  by  name  seems  to  be  Pingala  (3,  4). 

Add.  1370. 

Paper;  248  leaves,  7  lines,  13|x4in. ;  dated  N.  s.  967 
(A.D.  1847). 

Lalita-vistara. 

Begins  and  ends  as  in  Add.  918.  The  texts  of  these  two  MSS.  ai-e 
however  quite  independent,  of  each  other,  as  also  of  the  Calcutta 
MS.  (as  represented  in  the  printed  edition). 

Add.  1372L 

Paper;  19  leaves,  6  lines,  9x4  in. ;  clearly-written  modern 
DevanagarT. 

Najvia^sangiti. 

There  are  9  leaves  of  supply,  the  8th,  which  occurs  at  17,  being 
inadvertently  numbered  8. 

Begins  (after  invocations)  as  Add.  1323,  which  see. 

Ends  also  like  that  MS.,  though  with  the  vei*se  ^  V^°,  and 
without  date. 

Add.  1374. 

Paper;  114  leaves,  5  lines,  12x3|in.;  dated  N.  s.  993 
(A.D.  1873). 

Karaxda-vyuha  (prose  version). 
See  Add.  1267. 


78  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1374. 

Begins : 

"q:^  frm  ^?w^fw^^  wr?^  ^^ttt^^  ^T^^t  fTfrf^r 

Ends  : 

The  colophon  is  in  a  vernacular. 

Add.  1375. 

Paper ;  72  leaves,  6  lines,  9^  x  3  in. ;  modern, 

Maxicudavadana. 
There  is  an  illustration  on  the  first  page. 
Begins : 

^f  ^W.  ^W^^f^T^  I  l^t  T?^T  ^°  "Q:°  ^°  V{°  ^T^^t 

f^^T^rT  fFf^Mrrr^T^T  ^f^TTT  ^TT^^Wrf^nTT: 

Ends  : 

TfrT  ^T^V^^T^^-R  (sic)  WnJ-^  II 
See  Add.  874,  of  which  however  this  text  is  independent. 

Add.  1376. 

Paper;  112  leaves,  5  lines,  10|  x  Sin. ;  modern. 
SARVA-DURGATI-PARigODHANA   (Part  2). 
Begins  as  Add.  1378  (which  see). 

Add.  1377. 

Paper;  64  leaves,  6  lines,  13^  x  3^  in. ;  modern. 

SUGATAVADANA. 

Compare  Add.   1273,  with  which  this  MS.  closely  agrees.     Its 
final  subscription  however  runs: 

TfrT    ^"^TTflT^^T^    ^"Wr^TT WRf < 4  tTi  (sic)  ^^ 

^tt^?t:  ^?tttt:  ii 


Add.  1378.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  70 


Add.  1378. 

Paper;    88   leaves,    5   lines,    13  x  3|  in. ;    xviith   or   early 
xviiith  cent. 

SARVA-DUilGATI-PARI(?ODHANA  (Part   2). 

The  leaves  are  numbered  24 — 111.     There  are  three  pictures  of 
deities  on  the  first  page.     A  work  on  tantric  ritual,  etc. 
Begins,  after  invocation  to  Vajrasatya  : 

■q;^  ^f€rr  ^°  "0:°  ^°  *r^^  ^t^fiTf^  ^^w^  frfrffT 

Ends: 

-?rr^^t^^T%^T\ifr'?^TTwrTT^5r^TfT^T^fr^T    ^wt- 

TT^'^  (see  Add.  1376)  S'trf  ^^g^^^lj^^  ^^^^^I  '^W^l  II 
^^^T°...  I 

^^"WTS^  ^^^1T^T*I^Tf^«T:  etc.  (no  name  mentioned). 

The  last  leaf  is  wanting,  and  the  colophon  ends  abruptly  : 


Add.  1379. 

Paper;  22  leaves  folding  backwards  and  forwards,  6  lines, 
7^  X  Sin. ;  dated  N.  s.  905  (a.d.  1785). 

Stoteas. 

1.  25  stanzas,  beginning: 

Ending : 

^W<fH  ^f{T^  I 

2.  13  stanzas,  ending  : 

TffT  ^^Tf^fTTJ^  {sic)  Wnit 


80  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1379. 

3.  10  stanzas,  ending  : 

Tfff  ^T^^TWRT^fJ^  WmTT  I 

4.  14  stanzas,  ending: 

5.  9  stanzas,  ending  : 

6.  27  stanzas,  ending : 

7.  9  stanzas  or  divisions,  ending : 

8.  7  stanzas,  ending  : 

From  the  vernacular  coloplion  it  appears  that  the  MS.  was 
written  in  the  year  given  above  by  Qrlvajracarya  Bhajudhanaracoy- 
aviya  (1)  at  Kantipur  (Kathmandx;). 

Add.  1380. 

Paper  ;  11  leaves,  9  lines,  13  x  5  in. ;  modern, 
Snatavadana. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  12 — 22.  This  tale  is  found  in  Avadana- 
^ataka  ii.  3,  and  Ratnavadanaiaala  No.  2.  There  is  a  short  abstract 
by  M.  Peer  in  the  Journ.  Asiat.  Aug.  1879,  p.  162. 

Begins,  after  invocation  to  the  Ratnatraya  : 

Ends: 

Add.  1381. 

Paper;  11  leaves,  9  lines,  13^  x  5  in. ;  modern. 

Kausigha-vihyotsahanavadana. 

For  this  tale  see  Avadana  Qataka  i.  3  (and  Feer,  as  quoted  in  the 
last  MS.)  and  Ratuavadanamala  1. 


Add.  1381.]  SAXSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  81 

Begins : 

rl^  ^  -^T^T  ^^%:   ^^  I  TfTN%^  ^>Tt  lif^T  rf^T  V^- 

Ends  : 

Add.  1384. 

Paper ;  14  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  3  in. ;  chiefly  xviiith  century. 

SARVA-DURGATI-PAKigODHANA   (Part   1). 
Leaves  G  and  7  are  filled  in  "svith  newer  paper  and  ink. 
For  beginning,  etc.,  see  Add..  1623.  2. 

Ends  with  same  sentences  as  1623.  2,  more  briefly  expressed,  and 
title  as  follows : 

Add.  1385. 

Paper;  17  leaves,  5  lines,  9|  x  .Sin.;  dated  N.  s.  779  (a.d, 
1659). 

APAEIMITAYU-DHARANi-SUTRA. 
The  leaves  are  numbered  54 — 70. 

The  work  stood  apparently  fifth,  from  the  No.  5  at  the  beginning, 
in  a  series.     Compare  Add.  1623. 

For  beginning  and  end  see  Add.  1277. 

On  696  after  the  title,  V  ^pSt®,  W^  etc.,  and  full  date,  the 
scribe  proceeds : 

^TT  ^sspTtrfTfTTf^  ^'^^^T^^T^TT  (?)  I  TfTTT^ . . .  ^^- 
TTrrnW^^^  TT^^T^^R?  f^^^-^T^ 

Then  after  various  minor  particulars  chiefly  in  the  vernacular : 

6 


82  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Ann.  1386. 

Add.  1386. 
Paper;  180  leaves,  12  lines,  13^  x  6in. ;  modern. 

AVADANA-^'ATAKA. 

See  under  Add.  1611  and  Feer  as  there  cited. 
Text  begins : 

Add.  1387. 

Paper;  117  leaves,  5 — 6  lines,  9  x3in. ;  dated,  (in  words) 
N.  s.  950  (a.d.  1830). 

BUDDHA-CARITA-KAVYA. 

Written  by  several  bands. 

The  leaves  rim  thus;  1—3,  2*,  3*  4—109,  109*,  110—114. 
A  fresh  hand  begins  at  2*&  -which  may  account  for  the  repeated 
numbering.     On  109*  see  below. 

On  the  work  see  Burnouf,  Intr,  p.  55G. 

Begins : 

1.  Ends: 

^:  86. 

2.  ^^°  ^^:Trf^^Tft  ^TTR  f^ffl^:  ^°  I  13&,  14a. 

3.  T°  ^°  "^tiltrcrfTr^T^  ^Tft^:  ^°  i  200. 
5.  T°  ^"wf^^^^T  ^T^  ^^^:  ^^  I  35. 

6.    T°  ^°  ^5^^f^^^T  ^TTT  m::  ^M   40is 


Apd.  1387.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  83 

7.  X°  "^^  rTTT^^TTtlfT  ^°  ^1{W.  ^°  I   46. 

8.  T°  ^°  ^^:tITf^^T^T  TTi?rg^:  l   5oa-b. 

9.  T'  ^°  ^^TT%WWt  ^T^  ^W^:  ^°  I  62. 

10.  T®  ^*  ^^m^^fT  ^^f^^^T  ^T^  T^^:  ^°  1 66. 

11.  T*  ^°  ^T^f%7[^^T  ^^^T^rr:  ^o  I  73. 

12.  X°  ^°  "^TT^^^T  ^T^  ^T^^:  ^°  I  81J. 

13.  T*  ^°  "^^  flTTf^^^T  'TT^  ^^T^:  I  88. 

14.  T°  ^°  ^'W^ft^RW^T  ^T^  ^r5^^:  I  9Sb. 

15.  T°  ^°  v^^^^nrfr^'TT'^w^nT^^T^: ^°  1 100&. 

16.  T°  ^°  v^^^^T^n:^^  'TT^  ^t^-jt:  ^«  I  108. 

17.  T*  ^^  S^f^^Tf^  ^T^  ^^^ir:  ^°  I  114&. 

The  MS.  terminated  originally  at  leaf  109:  on  the  back  of  which 
we  get  a  long  colophon,  chiefly  in  the  vernacular,  of  which  the 
following  is  the  first  part  (intended  for  9lokas)  : 

a^^^rwl^^^*^  fif^  ^T%  5f^^  ^t  I 

^^fTT^'5^^  f^f^(ir  ^^^^  ^^^  II  (sic,  contra  me- 
trum) 

"^fj^  ^'^Tt  W[^t  ^TIT^  rr^T  II  5^  II 

Then  follow  some  lines,  chiefly  in  vernacular,  as  to  the  reigning 
monarch  (Rajendra  Vikrama).  The  remainder  of  the  MS.  (109* — 
114),  written  in  the  same  hand,  on  leaves  fresher  looking  and 
slightly  smaller,  contains  oh.  17. 

Add.  1389. 

Paper ;  61  leaves,  7  lines,  10  x  4  in. ;  xviith  or  early 
xviiith  cent. 

GopI-CANDRA-NATAKA  (vernacular). 
Siddhinrisimha  is  mentioned  at  61«  1.  7. 

Compare  Dr  Pischel's  Catal.  der  Deutschen  Morg.  Gesellsch. 
No.  4  (also  a  vei'nacular  play),  p.  6  med. 

6—2 


84  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  13S9. 

At  \b,  1.  1,  Govmda-candra,  'Bangero  adhipati',  is  mentioned. 
Begins : 

Ends  : 

TffT  ^rfl^^^IT^mW'  ^'TTTT:  I   186. 

The  latter  part  of  tlie  IMS.  is  a  good  deal  damaged. 

Add.  1395. 

Palm-leaf;  123  leaves,  5  lines,  13i  x  2  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  505 
(A.D.  1385). 

Panca-raksha. 


•^      ?■ 


For  chapters  see  Add.  1325  eh.  1,  31a,  also  the  verse  ^  "^^1° 
at  the  end. 

At  the  end  of  the  book  after  ^  ^H^T®  we  find  : 

Another  hand  on  the  cover,  newer-looking  but  in  the  same  style 
of  character,  gives  a  date  (1  of  recitation)  N.  s.  572,  month  Jyesbtha, 
in  a  vernacular. 

Add.  1398. 

Paper  ;  40  leaves,  7  lines,  13  x  4^  in. ;  modern. 
Maxicudavadana. 

Begins  and  ends  as  Add.  874,  which  see;  compare  also  Add.  1375. 
The  text  however  .seems  independent  of  both  these  MSS. 

Add.  1400.      ■ 

Paper;  18  leaves,  6. lines,  12  x  3  in. ;  dated  N.  S.  888  (a.D. 
1768). 

VasudharanI-katha  (?)  or  Sucandravada[na]. 

Tlie  second  title  is  written  on  the  loft-liand  mjirgin  of  each  verso. 


Add.  1400.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  85 

The  above  date  thougli  palseograpliically  possible  is  not  altogether 
trustworthy,  as  it  is  added  in  a  somewhat  later  hand. 

The  work  is  a  tale  of  a  rich  merchant  Sucandra  who,  with  his 
wife  CandravatI,  is  reduced  to  poverty,  and  on  consulting  the  Buddha 
is  told  of  the  magic  efficacy  of  the  Yasudhara-dharanI  (10a).  Compare 
Add.  1355. 

Begins  with  the  same  words  as  Add.  1357  (which  compare,  and 
R.  A.  S.  Cat.'ib.  cit.) ;  after  which  : 

"^f^  7\Tw  wr^  ^^^"R^  ^n^q^  ^raiT^t  w^. 

Ends : 

TfrT  ^'^^  Tf^nr:  ¥^ffT  ^^V^vrT^^^T^^rrr^^ 
■axT^^f^fT'ziT^TTT  ^rif^rr:  wtittt:  ii  ^  wrtrj  etc. 

(sic)  ^THJWiW^m  f^RTr7fTTfiTfrr  (sic)  II 


Add.  1401. 

Paper;  17  leaves,  8 — 9  IIdcs,  4x9in. ;  dated  N.  s.  926 
(a.d.  1806). 

Vasundhara-VRATA  (from  the  Vratavadanamala). 
The  MS.  has  been  I'ecently  pieced  and  mended  in  most  leaves. 
Begins : 

Upagupta  then  tells  the  story  of  a  king  Suryodaya  who  gained 
offspring,  wealth  and  power  by  the  observance  of  the  Yasundhara-vow. 
After  32  verses,  the  tale  proceeds  in  prose : 

Ends  : 

Then  the  date,  as  above. 


86  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1405. 


Add.  1405. 

Coarse  paper ;  55  leaves,  5  lines,  9|  x  2^  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  734 
(A.D.  1614). 

Caitya-pungala. 

Compare  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  22. 

A  very  faulty  copy.     The  work  is  a  sutra  on  the  ritual  connected 
with  caityas,  the  hearer  being  a  king,  Indraprishtha. 
Begins : 

^t  ^#r  ^i;t^  II 

f^^VTfJ  ^TT^^  ^^  ^PIT^T[^  ^]  II 
T^¥^  "^^rr^  I  ^T^^TPf^  ^^^  rT^T  ^W  TT^^Tf^  I 
Yf^^t  f^r^^rTlf^  -^T^TfW  ^^Tf^  ^  II 
^•^^^T^^  I  ^T  ^^^Tf^^^¥^  ^W  I  °  II 
•q;^i|f^T  ^TO^f^^^^  vri^T'T  "^^^wt  TI^-R^%  f^- 

^T-nr  ^  I 

The  following  sections  are  marked  : 
Tfrf  ^(^M-^-<*rgTT^  ■^^'TTfq>#  II  66. 
Tfr\  ^mWf'^'^r^'^T^  ^^WTfq\^  II  7b. 
TffT  '^m^T^rg'TT^  '^r^Trqi^  I  16. 

Tf2rfT?:r^5id*'m  Ti^'^^t  (sic)  i  24. 

TfrT  ^Tfr^^fl  ^^^T^mTT^^^f^^  («c)  I   26  (a-h). 
Ends  : 

•^^^^fRfT^T  ^^T"^«  I    ^  ^^B  . . .  etc.  (see  above). 

(The  full  name  of  the  scribe  and  some  'scribe's  verses'  are  added 
in  a  much  smaller  hand.) 


Add.  1409.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  S7 


Add.  1409. 

Palm-leaf;  143  leaves,  5  lines,  13  x  2in. ;  dated  n.  s.  480 
(A.D.  1360). 

Ramanka-natika  by  Dhar>iagupta,  and  fragment. 

Besides  the  leaves  numbered  as  above  there  is  a  cover  and  a  sepa- 
rate leaf  with  a  summary  (1)  of  each  act  in  a  vernacular.     43  is  missing. 

The  MS.  is  the  author's  autograph  (see  below). 

The  work  is  a  play  in  Sanskrit  and  the  usual  Prakrit  by  Dharma- 
gupta,  also  called  "Balavaglcvara"  (?  a  mere  complimentary  title),  son 
of  Ramadasa,  a  magistrate  of  Nepal  (see  below),  in  four  acts. 

The  plot  is  taken  from  the  myth  of  Havana  and  seems  to  have  no 
Buddhistic  references  ;  the  Nandl,  too,  ends  : 

The  Prastavana  begins  thus  (after  the  Nandi) : 

Further  on  (2a,  11.  3,  4)  the  original  place  of  production  is  thus 
referred  to : 

[?leg.  "^^^   ^f%fT'RT^fff< ^ 1 4  < rfr    ^xjnffT^     N«Hai«| 

On  26  the  Vinayaka  enquires  : 
^^  lifrTTT^  I 
To  which  the  answer  is  : 

Another  speaker  thus  continues  : 
^Tf5^TfT^  ^f^F^f^  ^^ffTT^^^T^  f2T^^T^^  TT^ft  sfr 


88  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [4dd.  UOi). 

^(^  ^^Tn^T^"nT^  f^?r^^fT^^^:  ^t'^ — ^  —  ii  (a  few 

letters  oltliteratecl).     King  Dacaratlia  is  then    introduced  with,  his 
followers,  and  the  first  act  begins. 

Act  1  ends:  TffT  ^TT^TlT^lfZ^T^T  TT^^T  Slf.*  I    40&. 

Act  2     „       T°  ^°  f^<fT^T  Sir:  I   70b. 

Act  3     „       T°  ^°  WWf^"  I   1026. 

Act  4    „       T°  ^°  "^r5^°  I   lGO/>. 

After  this  we  read: 

Then  a  v?rse  in  praise  of  the  poet's  education,  etc. : 

TTT^^TT^^  rfl  rf^^ . . . 

Then  the  subscription,  giving  the  date : 

^.»  N»  ^* 

f^NfT  "qrrIT^T^T^T^5^^t  ^  ^rT^T^^  TTTTTf^rTT^Tft^t  I 
^^T  S^  I    ^^fT^  8^°  ^S^^'ST^t  Tf^  TTCt  I    ^tw  ^- 

^TIT^Tft^T  II   15^^^  ^^^T  II 

Leaves  141 — 2  are  namaskaras,  or  short  prayers,  to  various  beings 
connected  with  the  stage. 

Another  leaf,  in  a  different  hand,  is  a  "namaskaratavall"  for  the 
various  acts. 

There  are  also  two  leaves,  unnumbered,  apparently  from  a  play 
ou  a  similar  subject,  Sita  and  other  characters  being  named. 

Add.  1411. 

Paper ;  381  leaves,  7  Hues,  17x4  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  952 
(A.u.  1832).  •  ■ 

BlIADRAKA-LPAVADAXA. 
Copies  exist  at  Calcutta  and  Paris. 


Add.  141  L]  SxVNSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  89 

The  work  is  supposed  to  be  a  dialogue  between  Acoka  and 
Upaguiita,  and  consists  of  28  adhyayas. 

Begins  after  invocation,   «T(^  ^T^rf^T'^"?^'^  . , .  ,  thus  : 

Jina9ri  is  first  introduced,  reminding  JayagrI  (cf.  Burn.  Intr.  221) 
that  he  has  heard  from  him  the  "Crilalita-vyuha,"  and  desiring  now 
to  hear  "Cakyendra-pratyagamana-satkatha,"  Jaya^rl  complies,  and 
accordingly  Agoka  is  introduced  as  enquiring  of  Upagupta  as  follows: 

^n?^n^nt  faF  "RT^^r^  "rt^^^  ii 

^T^-^cm^^l^T  #Tf:ifT  f^Trf^rTT  I 
^TfTWr  ^fJTTlfTfrT^^fwrg  rfm^T:  II 
^^T^fcRT^^:  C^  ^^  f^^ftfTT  TT^j  I 
"m^Tg  15fTT%^  ^^  ^T^T  TT^Tf^TrTT  II 

These  verses  give  a  kind  of  short  summary  of  the  contents  of  the 
book  (compare  also  the  titles  of  the  chapters,  below).  As  the  work  is 
entirely  in  verse,  we  are  not  surprised  at  the  confession  of  jjosteriority 
to  the  Jataka  literature  and  to  the  (Lalita-)Vistara.  For  the 
connexion  with  the  former,  see,  for  examj)le,  ch,  34;  of  the  latter  the 
work  may  be  regarded  as  in  some  sense  a  poetical  continuation,  as  it 
treats  of  the  middle  and  later  life  of  the  Buddha. 

The  work  also  has  some  interest  as  bearing  a  certain  analogy  of 
plan  and  subject  to  the  Pali  Vinaya-Pitakam.  Thus  the  first  chapter 
corresponds  to  Mahavagga  I.  6,  describing  the  beginning  of  the 
Buddha's  ministry,  and  his  meeting  with  the  Pancavargika  Bhikshus. 
After  a  number  of  chapters  devoted  to  Gopa  and  Yacodhara,  the 
conversion  of  several  of  the  celebrated  disciples  is  described,  in 
somewhat  different  order  to  thab  of  the  Pali,  though  chs.  20,  21 
correspond  to  Mahavagga  I.  22 — 24.     In  some  episodes  however  the 


90  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1411. 

legends  give  many  particulars  not  contained  in  other  accounts 
hitherto  noticed.  Thus  in  ch.  35,  Eahula,  before  his  conversion,  is 
induced  by  Cuddhodana  to  mai-ry :  he  accordingly  marries  Kamala, 
and  has  a  son  Sakalananda  (see  next  chapter).  Rahula  is  himself 
received  (as  in  the  Southern  account)  by  Maudgalyayana  and  Cariputra. 
The  titles  of  the  chapters  are : 

1.  THT  ^T^^^^^T^T^  ■^WTTW'^ft  ^T^WT- 
TT^TT"^!^  *rT^  IT^lfT  S^Vm  I  116. 

2.  T°  ^T°  •^T'CtVTTT^^VTTWT  ^TTIT^T^T  S^°  I  206. 

^tT^^TT  ^°  '3"rl°  I   306. 

4.  T°  ^°  ^°  ■^mTffT^TT^ff^T  ^°  ^f5^°  I   486-49. 

5.  .T°  ^°  ^mTTTWT^'T^T  ^°  "q^^°  I   55. 

6.  T°  ^°  "^Tmnr^Trf^  ^®  ^i:°  l  626. 

7.  T°  ^°  ^T^T^^mrT^  ^°  ^Tr°  I   69. 

8.  T*'  ^°  ■?TCT^^T^'3X:Tr^T'SI^  ^T^T"g°  I  73. 

9.  T°  ^°  ■^T'^T^TT^^^^^  ^T^  ^W^T  82a. 

10.  T°    ^°     f^"3T^Tfi:^IT^^T^T^T7n:^^^T    ^T^ 
<r3I'T°  I  846. 

11.  T°  ^°  f^m^^^^TT'^^T^TW  ^°  Tl^T^  I  866. 

12.  T°  ^°  ft^T^^T^^XT^^T^TW^fTrWl  ^°  ^T^°  I 
89. 

13.  T°  ^°  "^°  ^T^^flf^^'^J'^fi'^X'^^fK^T  ^T^ 
•=^^T^T  5"^!°  I  996. 

14.  T°  ■€f^^fr^fT'3^T¥^^<Tr^T^^°  '^rlf°  I  1076. 

15.  T*  -^Tlfr^T^T^  ^^T*  I  1186. 

136. 

17.  T°  ■^T^^^T'R^IT'^^T^rrrgTWT  ^°  ^T{^°  I  1406. 
IS.  T°  "^f^^Tf^^T^^lTfTTT^^  ^°  ^"51^°  I  149. 
19.  T°  ^Tf^fTTrT^f^ifT'^T^WTW^^TrrTf^TT"^°|  1506. 


Add.  1411.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  91 

20.  T*  f^f^^TT^TTf^^^^T^^^TT^^T  ^°  ftsrfrT^* 
160. 

21.  T°  "^^^fT^lT^W[l.  ''TT°°]-^T^T^'^-"^'fT^ir- 
^T^Tr.-^'^*T?fTT-^^T^^^^^^Tin7fT^°  ^°  ^^f^°  1686. 

22.  T*'  ^T'T"5^IT'^^T^TW^fT^^fTfTTf^fi5(?t  ^' 
^Tft°  172. 

23.  T°  ^T^^TT"^^T-^rTT^TWT  ^°  ^Tft°   179. 

24.  T°  'TTT^T^f^^WIT'^^  ^fjff *'  I   1875. 

25.  T°  f^fTrj^^^T^TTqf^^^T  ^°  "q^f^*  2076. 

26.  T°  TT^^^^q^tT^^T  ^°  ^f^°  I  219. 

27.  T°  TT^^^5:^^T%m^qfTW°  ^°  W^°  I  22ob. 

28.  T°  t^^^T^T^  ^°  ^?rSTfW  I   2346. 

29.  X°  "^^Prf^^T^TrT^T^^^TTn:^*  I   2496. 

30.  T°  ^'Sd'^^^^TiTn:^^  TTSlffTrT^:  I  3026—303. 
81.  T°  ■^■nr^WT^^^^TfT^rxjf^^o  -q;^  I  325. 

32.    T°  m^frTfRf^fTrr^qft^°  l^TT^  I   332. 

83.    T°  Tl^^^f^^fW^T^niiq^^T^TrTq^  ^N I  337. 

34.  T°  fr^T€ri;T^  "^^T^^irr^  ^^  "^N°  i  3566. 

Compare  Caiya-Pitaka  Tales  25,  32  and  Jataka-mala  (Add.  1415), 
Tale  32. 

35.  T*  '^■5^T'T'5^Ti\q^lIrr'3lT^^^T?TT'^^T^rI^^T- 
TWt  T°  A'^°  I   3616.  (see  above). 

36.  T°  ^^^T^'S^  ^^TT'^^W^IT'^^T-^fT^TT^T  ^° 
?f<r^°  I  8686^369. 

37.  ^i;V^T^^T^qft^°  ^°  ^m'W*  I  876. 

38.  T°  ^^^T^'5^TfH^^#r^T^rrfr^^Tf^^^^IT^t 

Colophons  in  Sanskrit  and  vernacular  follow,  giving  the  date  and 
stating  that  the  MS.  was  written  by  Niramuni  and  his  son  Jinendra, 
at  the  Yampivihara  in  Lalitapur. 


92  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1415. 


Add.  1415. 

Paper;   130  leaves,  7   lines,   16x3|in. ;   dated   N.  s.   757 
(A.D.  1637). 

Jataka-mala. 

Contains   Si   Jatakas,  and   purports   to  be  the  composition  of 
Arya9ura.     (Cf.  Journ.  Asiatique,  May,  1875,  pp.  413 — 417.) 

Basins  : 


c\ ^^ 


^T^T  ^^T^^'^r^T%^TWf^^  [1.  °t4°]  II 
The  titles  are  as  follows  : 

1.  TffT  ^T^T^TrT^  TT^^  I   4. 

2.  T°  firf^^TrT^  f^rfT^  I   8&. 

3.  T°  ^'^TWnf^T^TfT^  ^rfr^  I   10Z». 

4.  T°  ^^'t^Trf^  (.(c)  ^fj^  I   13. 

5.  T°  "^f^^^^fl^^Trl^  ^^M  I   155. 

6.  T°  HH-^JT^^  ^^i\  I   19. 

7.  T°  ^^^^Trr^  ^TT^  I   23. 

8.  \°  ^^T^^^Trr^?7"g:Tr  i  29. 

9.  T°  f^^'g^T^TfT^  ^^^  I  38. 

10.  T®  'T^^Trl^  ^71^  I   41 Z;. 

11.  T°  ^SI^^TfT^^T^  (sic)  I  435. 

12.  \°  ^T^W^TrT^  ^T^^^  I  456. 

13.  T°  ^^T^^^T^Trf^  "^^T^ir^  I  50. 

14.  T°  "^^TT^^Trf^  (-'c)  "^f^^^^  I   54. 

15.  T°  ■'T'^^TrT^  ^^^^^  I  556. 

10.    T°  ^TT^T^Trr^^Trf^  ^T^IT^  I   566. 


Add.  1415]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  93 

17.  X°  ^^^TrT^  ¥^^1I^  I    oSb. 

18.  J:°  '^^'^^Jrl^fmT^llTi  I   606. 

19.  T°  "R^^Trf^^^T^f^ir-m^  (sic)  I   636. 

20.  T°  ^F^TfT^  fwirnr^  i  67. 

21.  T*  ^i;frf^^TrT^^^ftarrT^  (sic)  I   70J. 

22.  T°  t^^TfT^  ^TftaiffffT^  I  79. 

23.  T°  'JT^fTfTfV^fTfT^  ^^TftJTfrT^  I   856. 

24.  T°  "fr^T^ftT^TfT*  ^(jf^fffrT^  I   896. 

25.  T°  'SdT^r^Trr^  ^^fW^frT^  I   92. 
-  26.  T°  ^^^Tfl^  ^f%'3lffT^  I   96. 

27.  X"  TTTRfftr^Tff^  ^-^TfTJlfH^  I  996. 

28.  X°  W%^TfT^^i:Tf^W^  I   1046. 

29.  T°  "^^^TfT^^^T^N^Tnt  I   109. 

30.  T'  TRTWrrT^  NUtT^  I   113. 

31.  T°  IfTCT^^TrT^t^NlTTr^  I   122. 

32.  T°  ^^T^^^Trr^  ^tNiTtT^  I   126. 

33.  T°  ■'Tf^W^Trl^  ^^rai^TT^  I   128. 

34.  T°  *^rr^^^TfT^    "^fjf^^snr^    ^i^TTTf^frT  I     li- 

As  only  the  words  Kritir  iyam  Aryacurajxidoj-  are  written  in  the 
page,  and  the  rest  is  written  in  a  somewhat  more  recent  hand  vertically 
on  the  margin,  this  MS.  may  be  the  original  from  which  the  MS.  95 
in  the  Bibl.  Rationale  was  copied;  see  Feer,  Journ.  As.  I.e.  p.  413. 

*  The  MS.  had  originally  ^fT^"^®,  but  the  '^  has  been  corrected 
in  the  margin  to  "^X  (which  agrees  with  the  nari'ative)  ;  the  Paris  MS. 
reads  curiously  ^^rT^"^" ;  see  Feer,  Journ.  As.  ibid.  p.  415. 

t  M.  Feer  i-eads  this  name  as  'I'auguste  Curapada';  but  it  seems 
safer  to  take  it  as  Aryacura  with  the  honorific  addition  of  pada  in  the 
plural ;  cf.  the  mention  in  the  Sahitya-darpana,  p.  23,  of  the  author's 
great-great-gi-andfathcr  as  Narayana-padaih  ;  and  '  Candragomi-pada,' 
Add.  11G4. 


94  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  141(5. 

Add.  1416. 
Paper;  21  leaves,  5  lines,  8^  x  Sin. ;  modern. 

SARVA-DURGATI-PARigODHANA  (Part   2). 
The  same  work  as  Add.  1632.  2,  which  see. 

Add.  1418. 

Paper;  11  leaves,  7  lines,  9|  x  4  in. ;  modern. 
Kathinavadana. 

A  treatise  on  vinaya,  especially  on  dress,  etc.  ;  not  a  tale  or 
avadana  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  See  Burn.  Intr.  p.  39, 
Hodgs.  Ess.  Lit.  Nep.  p.  19.  This  work  is  found  at  Paris  (Bibl. 
iSTat.)  in  MS.  98  (Divyavadana-mala). 

Begins  : 

At  76  a  bhikshu  Sumana  gives  an  enumeration  of  the  chief 
requisites  of  ritual,  etc.,  in  short  paragraphs  {lb — 10a),  with  titles 

such  as  V^  I  '^[^  I ,  etc. 

Ends : 

^rf^TT^^T^  ^i?T^:    (tlien  a  .scribe's  verse). 

Add.  1419. 

Paper ;  30  leaves,  5 — 7  lines,  7^  x  3|  in. ;  xviiith  century, 
with  recent  supply. 

LOKEgVARAgATAKAM  by  VaJRADATTA. 

Leaves  1 — 3,  17 — 30  are  a  recent  copy  :  but  the  remainder  of  the 
MS.  is  in  a  square  hand  on  paper  of  last  century;  words  etc.  divided 
in  red  ink.  The  work  is  a  hundred  verses  in  praise  of  Lokegvara. 
See  R,  A.  S.  Cat.  p.  23  and  Hodgson  Essay  Lit.  Nep.  18. 


*  The  Paris  MS.  has  ^"ajTrT. 


A  DP.  1419.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  05 

Begins  : 
^T^^TT%^ WCT^^^frr*i *\'s{\'* ^T^T tT^T^   *rT%JT# 

After  V.  25  : 

After  V.  75  : 

TfH  ^^W^^&^  I 

Ends: 


Add.  1420. 
Paper  ;  6  leaves,  7  lines,  7  x  Sh  in. ;  modern. 

.    LOKEgVAKA-PARAJIKA. 

Each  leaf  bears  the  title   ^ft%"^T^TTTf^^T. 

A  dialogue  between  Lokegvara  and  Tara  in  verse,  apparently  not 
identical  with,  though  similar  in  subject  to,  the  work  at  Paris 
mentioned  under  Add.  1353.  I  have  however  only  examined  the 
two  MSS.  apart. 

Begins  :  •  . 

gi^  fTTt  TT^oTTf^  rlT^W  HTVfrl^  rfm  II 

Ends: 


96  CATALOGUE   oF   BUDDHIST  [Apd.  1421. 


Add.  1421. 

Paper;  13  leaves,  7  lines,  7  x  3^  in. ;  modem  ordinary 
Devanagari. 

Vajka-suci  by  AgvAGHOSHA. 

Edited  by  Prof.  Weber  (Berlin,  18G0).  This  is  a  di.stinct  work 
from  tlie  treatise  of  the  same  name  attributed  to  Qahkaracarya,  shortly 
to  be  published  by  the  compiler  of  this  Catalogue. 

Begins,  after  invocation  to  Manjunatha  : 

End.s : 


Add.  1422. 

Paper;  20  leaves,  7  lines,  7|  x  3|in. ;  modern. 

Dharma-saxgraha,  attributed  to  Nagarjuna  (called 
Saptabhidhanottara  in  Di-  D.  Wright's  list). 

There  are  some  marks  indicating  hiatus  in  the  original  MS. 
on  6&,  126. 

A  fairly  correct  MS.  ;  much  more  so  than  the  India  Office  copy, 
which  contains  an  interpolation  of  the  period  of  the  later  mythology 
inserted  after  the  first  two  lines.  The  book  is  a  summary  of  the 
terminology  of  Buddhist  philosophy  and  metaphysics,  etc. 

Begins  : 
^^T  T^^^T^  II 

^^^  ^T^^TITT^  V^^T^^^  II 

^TPJI  ^T^Tf^  I  ^T^f^^T^  TT^f^^T^  TTTT^T^^fH  II 
^TTf^VT^TTTT^^^T  I  ^#%S^TW¥%:  (?)  TTWT^  :  TTWm^ 
•^fiTWTf^^  ^^^T  II  -^  II 


Add.  1422.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  97 


"^JJJ  ^T^*T  ^^•T  etc. ...in  the  same  strain  for  4  verses,  after 
which  : 

nf^  II  II  ^Tfw  ^it^m^rrf^  ii  CtW^^^tttt^  . . .  etc 

Next  come  the  4  Brahmaviharas,  the  10  Paramitas,  and  so  on. 
Ends  with  an  enumeration  of  the  3  Cikshas ;  after  which  : 

T(fi?f?f  11 


Add.  1423. 

Paper ;  8  leaves,  7  lines,  7  x  3  in. ;  xvillth  cent. 
AMOGHAPlgA-LOKEgVARA-PUJA. 

A  tantric  manual  of  devotion,  etc. 

There  are  several  works  extant  in  the  Chinese  Tripitaka  in  honour 
of  Amoghapaga. 
Begins : 

Ends : 

Add.  1424. 

Paper;  4  leaves  (and  cover),  7  lines,  7  x  Sin. ;  xviiith  cent. 
Manjughosha-pujavidhi. 

Same  hand  as  Add.  1423. 

A  work  of  tantric  devotion,  in  very  corrupt  Sanskrit. 

Begins : 

^t  Wr  ii^^r^T^  I    ^t  ^^^cT^Tr^TTf^  (?)  I    '3[rW- 

Ends : 
Tfrr  ^T^^^  ^T^^T^tr^lMV  ^^TT II 


98  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1444. 

Add.  1444. 

Paper  ;  5  leaves,  7  lines,  8  x  4  in, ;  modern. 

Tantric  fragments. 
Chiefly  ejaculations  to  various  divinities. 

Add.  1445. 
Paper ;  2  large  sheets,  modern. 

Newari  Songs. 

Written  down  for  Dr  D.  Wright. 

Add.  1446-47. 
Paper ;  6  lines  ;  XVII — xviilth  cent. 

Tantric  Devotions. 

1446.  20  leaves,  10  x  2  in.  A  species  of  manual  of  tantric  puja; 
with  a  considerable  admixtui-e  of  vei'nacular  phrases. 

1447.  2  leaves,  12x4  in.  Fragments  of  the  TJshmshavijaya- 
dharani.     Another  copy  will  be  found  in  R.  A.  S.  Cat,  p.  50. 

Add.  1449. 

Coarse  brown  paper;  24?  leaves,  folded  backwards  and  forwards, 
5 — G  lines,  7  x  3  in. ;  modern. 

Dharanis,  Stotras,  &c. 

Various  prayers  &c.,  in  several  hands,  all  barbarous  in  form  and 
language. 

Add.  1451-53. 

Paper ;  xvilith  cent. 

Tantric  Fragments. 

1451.  8  leaves  folded  backwards  and  forwards,  G  lines,  7|  x  3  in. 
Stotras,  in  different  hands,  mainly  ejaculations  to  Mafiju^rl  and 
other  divinities. 


Add.  1451—53.]        SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  99 

1452.  G  leaves  folded  backwards  and  forwards,  6  lines,  7  x  2iin. 
Devotions,  partly  vernacular;  ejaculations  to  Avalokitegvara  and 
others. 

1453.  7  leaves,  5  lines,  7|  x  Sin.  Fragment  (leaves  5 — 11)  of 
the  Aikajata-dharanl. 


Add.  1454. 

Paper;  2  leaves,  5  lines,  8  x  3  in, ;  dated  N,  s.  927  (a.d. 
1807). 

Feagment  of  the  Stuti-dharma-^antu  (?). 

Ejaculation  of  praise  to  Avalokitecvara  and  the  Sukhavatiloka, 
chiefly  interesting  from  containing  the  exact  date  and  place  of  wiiting, 
which  latter  occurs  thus  : 


Add.  1455-56. 

Paper ;  modern  writing. 

Tantric  Fragments, 

1455.  3  leaves,  5  lines,  7|  x  2  J  in.     Fragment  of  a  dharani  or 
stotra,  partly  corrupt  Sanskrit,  partly  vernacular. 

1456.  1    leaf,    6    lines,    8  x  3  in.     Part   of    a    tantra,    chiefly 
vernacular. 


Add.  1460. 

Thick  paper;  50  leaves,  5  lines,  11  x  Sin. ;  dated  N.  s.  792 
(A.D.  1672). 

Pancaraksha. 

The  beginning,  and  the  ends  of  the  chapters,  are  substantially  the 
same  as  in  Add.  1325  (which  see). 

7—2 


\()i)  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.   14G0. 

After  the  title  at  the  end,  49a  1.  5,  follows  the  verse  "^  ^**jT°  .  . , 
and  invocations  of  blessing  on  teachers  and  parents  in  terras  nearly 
identical  with  those  used  in  Add.  875  (which  compare).  Then  follows, 
(496,  1.  4)  : 

^^t^T"^TrT!JXI^^T?r7T^TfV^frT (titles)  ^^TrrTTTITr^- 

^Trfrcrt    ^Tt^T  (?)  TT^Tfr^TTrfvfFfT  - ^^m^  -  "^^T- 

^T^^^    rT^   ^Tf?:  (.;c)  T'ST'm-W^T    rf^   Ctf^T^  (0  ^^IT 

^rf T^T^T^-^TTI^^  ^^^^^^rn"W^fVT^(sic)l  ^^mffT 
^^^^T^T  (?)  "^"^f   ITT^^   V^f^^^-5T   ^^T^T    ^T^WfrT 

f^^^rf  ^«L\  (exact  day,  etc.)  f%f^^^  ^^r^idHTJ^T^TfT- 
<^^^  f^noTTf^ff  I    ^^T  Y^T°   (a    scribe's   verse). 

Add.  1464. 

Palm-leaf;  227  leave.s  (numbered  in  letters  and  figures); 
5 — 6  lines,  21  x  2  in. ;  Kutila  character;  dated  oth  year  of 
Maoipala  of  Bengal  (circa  A.D.   1020). 

ASHTASAHASRIKA   PrAJNAPARAMITA. 

This  MS.,  which  is  in  excellent  pi'eservation,  has  several  illustra- 
tions— chiefly  of  Buddhas,  showing  various  muilrds  etc. — both  near 
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  MS.  and  on  the  binding  boards. 

On  the  date  and  palteography  see  the  Introductions.  There  are 
several  glosses  (e.g.  at  193 — 4)  in  a  hand  from  which  it  would  appear 
that  the  MS.  remaiued  in  Bengal  many  centuries  after  it  was  written. 

The  last  leaf  is  much  obliterated,  but  the  subscriptions  are  in  the 
same  form  as  those  of  Add.  1688;  in  that  beginning  with  the  formula 

■^■^JV^TS^,    the    name  mentioned   also   bears  some   resemblaiice, 

^^^frf^f^-^T^T^T  (of.  ^TW  ^TT^T  Add.  1GS8). 


Add.  1464.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  101 

The  colophon  runs  thus  : 

On  the  work  see  Add.  866. 


Add.  1465. 

Palm-leaf;  originally  299  leaves  (see  below),  7  lines, 
13  X  2 in.;  dated  N.  s.  384  (?)  (a.d.  1264). 

ASHTASAHASRIKA   PrAJNAPARAMITA. 

Leaves  32,  46,  108,  110, 145—147, 188,  191,  193, 197,  211,  238— 
243,  245,  297,  are  missing. 

There  are  also  two  leaves  which  belong  to  other  places,  or  to 
other  MSS.,  numbered  113  and  11... (last  fig.  indistinct):  there 
evidently  however  is  some  confusion  in  this  part  of  the  MS.,  as  the 
real  number  113,  formerly  placed  elsewhere,  and  114  do  not  quite  fit 
(see  the  passage  in  866,  79a  1.  6  fin.)  and  moreover  leaves  118 — 121 
were  originally  numbered  116 — 119.-  There  are  also  several  other 
corrections  of  pagination. 

The  date  is  somewhat  doubtful ;  it  is  expressed  in  letter- numerals 
but  not  on  the  usual  system.  The  first  figure  is  clearly  T^  so  that 
the  digits  are  expressed  each  by  a  unit-figure,  not,  as  usual,  with 
separate  notation  for  tens  and  hundreds.  The  middle  number  is  of 
strange  form.  It  may  be  meant  for  W  (5),  or  for  "^  or  "^  (8)* — 
though  it  moi'e  resembles  the  syllable  "%.  The  latter  value  is 
however  preferable  on  chronological  grounds,  as  regards  the  king 
(Abhaya-malla)  named.  (See  Hist.  Introd.)  The  last  figure  is  certain. 
As  in  Add.  866,  the  number  of  verses  in  each  chapter  is  given  at  the 
end.     On  the  work  see  Add.  866. 

The  colophon,  after  some  verses  in  praise  of  the  book  and  the 
verse  "^  '^^1° ,  runs  thus  : 

^T^TfW^^  (?)  ^^^^ . . .  etc.  I 

*  See  Bhagwanlal  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  vi.  46. 


102  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1465. 

Add.  1467. 

Paper;  297  leaves,  9  lines,  18  x  5  in. ;  modem. 

Gaxda-vyuha. 

There    is    an    illustration   on  If.    1.      On    the    work,    see    under 
Add.  917. 

Add.  1468. 
Paper;  132  leaves,  11 — 12  lines,  14  x  o^in. ;  modern. 

VrIH  AT-S  V  AYAMBHU-P  U  RANA. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  1 — 48,  48*,  49 — 131.     At  least  three 
hands  are  observable. 

On  the  work  see  Add.  870. 

Add.  1469. 

Paper;  153  leaves,  13  lines,  13|  x  7  in. ;  modern. 

Madhyama-Svayambhu-purAna  (also  called  Svayambhut- 
pattikatha),  with  vernacular  translation. 

Begins : 

^T^  fT  ^TTR^  T^  st  ^TWTf^:  II 

^^  r^w^mr^  v^VT^  f^^^r^^^  i 

rTc^^^^^flt  ^WlVR  ^Wr<rTTrT,  II 

MKa44M*i«^:  ^  ^Tfv^<^  ^rf^  W^^  n 
fT^^T^ffTT  f^rsT^^r:  ^^rrrw^:  i 
frfv^r^Tm^Tt  [^]  fw^^TT  ^^Vf^f^:  ir 

For  chapters  etc.,  see  Dr  Pischel,  cited  under  Add.  870. 


Add.  1470.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  103 


Add.  1470. 

Paper;  50  leaves,  9  lines,  12  x  5ia. ;  dated  N.  s.  962  (a.d. 
1842). 

[Ekaka"  or  Ekallaviratantram]  Candamaha- 

ROSHANATANTRAM. 
Compare  Add.  1319,  and  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  46. 
Begins : 

Ends : 

TffT  W  '<^Mt\<\^^'r^^  ^TT^  II  495. 
Then  a  mantra  of  one  page  :  after  which  date  ut  supra ;  then  : 

^^  ^T^T^^l  r^^^s^fW^  "^T^^  tt  []  legend.  ^1^%^] 

Add.  1471. 

Paper ;  10  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  3  in. ;  modern, 
Bhadracari-pranidhana. 

See  Add.  899.  2. 

Add.  1472. 

Paper;  6  leaves,  5  lines,  8  x  4in. ;  modern. 

Vrishticintamani,  by  Raja  Pratapa  Malla. 

A  charm  for  rain  in  34  numbered  stanzas  or  sections.     On  the 
royal  author  see  Wright's  N'epal,  p.  213. 
Begins : 

Ends : 


104  CATALOGUE   OF   liUDDHlST  [Ai>d.  1473. 


Add.  1473. 
Paper;  16  leaves,  7  lines,  9^  x  4  in.;  modern  Devanagari  Land. 
(^^AgA-JATAKAVADANA  (Northern  redaction  in  verse). 

This  is  a  different  redaction  of  the  story  both  from  the  ^agajataka 
of  the  Avadana-mala  (Add.  1415)  and  from  that  of  the  collection  of 
Add.  1598.  Its  distinctively  northern  character  is  shown  by  the 
cosmogony  referred  to  on  2a,  1.  1,  where  Adi-buddha  is  mentioned. 

The  MS.  begins  with  an  invocation  to  Padmakara  of  two  verees. 

Then  a  dialogue  ensues  between  Upagupta  and  A(^oka,  thus  : 

^W  TT^^^  f^T^tl[^T%  TT^^^t  {sic)  1^\  I 

The  actual  story  of  the  hare  is  only  reached  on  leaf  86,  and  from 
here  to  the  end  it  will  be  seen  that  the  verses  of  the  (prose  and  verse) 
story  in  the  Jataka-mala  are  to  be  found  in  our  MS. 

Thus  V.  1  (p.  59  ed.  Fausboll,  "Five  Jatakas"  1861)  is  to  be  found 
on  9a  1.  1,  and  the  last  verse  on  15&  1.  1. 

The  dramatis  personae  (which  may  be  compared  with  the  list  in 
the  Pali  tale,  Fausb.,  "Five  Jatakas,"  p.  58,  1.  9)  are  thus  given 
(156—16): 

Ends  : 
TffT  ^lI^TrT^T^TT^  ¥^T^  II 


Add.  1475.]  SANSKRIT   Mx^NUSCRIPTS.  105 


Add.  1475. 

Paper;  originally  114  leaves  (see  below),  5  lines,  12  x  2  in.; 
xvilth  century. 

Pancaraksha. 

Leaves  17,  29,  92  and  104  are  wanting. 

The  last  leaf  is  written  on  different  paper  and  in  a  slightly  more 
recent  hand  than  the  rest.  It  contains  the  date  N.  s.  802  (a.  d.  1682); 
but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  simply  a  fresh  copy  of 
leaf  found  to  be  damaged.    See  Introduction,  and  compare  Add.  1644. 

The  postscript  consists  of  the  verse  ^  V^T®  etc.  and  the 
following  note  : 

^^^^^^  x^ot^  frr^TJ^^TT^  (sic)  -^w^w^fn^  ^t- 

For  chapters  etc.  see  Add.  1325;  but  the  ending  of  ch.  1  seems 
to  have  been  on  the  missing  leaf  17. 

Two  leaves  (numbered  1  and  38)  of  a  Tantric  Sutra,  size  and  writing 
similar  to  the  supply-leaf  mentioned  above,  have  been  used  probably 
as  covers.  The  forms  are  barbarous  throughout.  Leaf  1  begins, 
after  salutation  to  Gane9a  and  the  Ratnatraya, 

T?:4  ^^T  ^?R:rrig^^^TnT  ^^TT^:  TT^"^  frfTTrT . . . 

Mystic  syllables  follow  soon  after. 


Add.  1476. 

Black  paper ;  29  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  3  in. ;  late  xviith  or 
xvilith  cent. 

Dharanis. 
The  leaves  are  numbered  3 — 31.    Written  in  gold-coloured  letters. 
There  a're  illustrations  of  the  deities  to  whom  the  dharanis  are 
addressed. 


106  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1476. 

Leaves  3 — 9  contain  the  Mahdpratisard-dhdr". 

„       10,  11  ,,  Mahdsdhasraj)ramardinl-dh°. 

„       12 — 166       ,,  2£ahdmdyur~i-dh°. 

,,       16b — 186      ,,  Mahagttavati-dh". 

,,       186 — 206      „  Mahdniantrdniosdrani-dJ)P. 

At  21a  the  names  of  the  preceding  Dharanis  are  recapitulated: 
then  (till  22a)  AhhayOrkali  (?)  dhdrani. 

Leaves  226  to  the  end  contain  the  Aryd-tdrd-dlidraTil. 


Add.  1478. 

Paper;  166  leaves,  6 — 8  lines,  13^  x  2in. ;  chiefly  Bengali 
hand ;  xiv — xvth  cent. 

^IKSHA-SAMUCCAYA   by  JaYADEVA. 

The  earlier  leaves  have  been  renumbered;  we  have  14  and  14*, 
but  no  1 8.  The  writing  is  Bengali,  with  several  antique  features,  e.  g. 
medial  i  written  as  a  simple  curve  above  its  consonant,  not  before  it. 
122a  med.  to  132a  are  written  in  a  hooked-top  Nepalese  hand,  with 
some  early  forms  of  letters ;  e.  g.  that  of  V. 

This  MS.  is  the  archetype  of  the  Hodgson  MS.  (No.  15)  in  the 
India  Office. 

From  the  reference  to  the  work  in  Wassiliew's  Taranath,  p.  208, 
it  would  seem  that  the  work  was  compiled  by  Jayadeva  in  or  about 
the  7th  cent.  A.  D. 

The  work  is  a  compendium  of  Buddhist  teaching  on  vinaya  and 
practical  religious  duty.  It  abounds  in  quotations,  the  chief  sources 
of  which  are  given  below. 

Often  the  quotation  is  not  fully  given  and  the  word  M^T^,  or 
abbreviated  '^  (Pal.  lieyydlani),  placed  to  mark  the  omission. 
Works  cited  are : 
Ratnolkadlmrani  2. 

Gandavyuha-sutra  2,  4,  736,  76,  86,  137. 
Dar^adharma-sidra  36. 
Niyatdniyatdvatdra'S°  46,  49. 
Tathdgataguhyaka  56,  646,  1076,  141,  163. 
(^!urangama-s°  6. 
Bhnd7-akcdpika.'S°  6. 


Add.  1478.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  107 

Da(^abhumi-s°  lb,  126  (called  there  Da^abhumaka-s"). 

Akd^agarbha-s°  7b,  8,  346. 

Sagaramati^s°  9a,  276,  64,  65,  716,  876,  1196. 

Kshitigarbha-s°  96,  49. 

Akshayamati-s°   8,    22,    616,    806,    896,    105,     106,     1186,     120 

{Hi-mahaydna-s"),  1226,  126,  1416. 
Saddharmasmrityupasthdna-s°  86. 
Bhaishajyavaiduryaprabhdrdja-s°  96,  836. 
Manju<^rl.buddhakshetraguiiavyuhdlankdra-s°  10,  316,  846. 
Adhydr^ayasancodana-s°  11a,  526,  1596. 
Prac^dntavini^cayaprdtihdryarS°  11a,  47a6,  486. 
Candrapradlpci-s  116, 126,  14*a,  32,55,  {" Kdya-sambara  madhye") 

606,  77,  856,  896,  906,  1076,  120. 
Ratnameghars°  12,  856,  97,  117,  1196,  128,  137,  157. 
Kdrdyanaparipricclid  14. 
Ratnaciida-s°  14*(a),  1046,  1056,  119. 
Mshtrapdla-s"  14*6,  326,  756,  916. 
Vajradhvaja-s°  15. 

Gaganaganjd-s"  226,  28,  296,  306,  606,  64&,  llSa,  6. 
Vlradatta-paripri°  23,  104. 

Ugradatt(v-parip°  (cf,  Ugra-p°  below)  24,  856,  86. 
Crirndldsivihandda-s°  26, 
AshtasahasrikdprajMpdramitd  27b. 
Saddharmapundarlkd  29,  516,  586. 
Simhaparip)ricchd  316. 
Ratnardr^i-s"  326,  65,  68a,  6,  936,  138. 
JJpdyakauc^alya-s°  39,  796,  806,  81, 
Kshiti-s"  396. 

Pravrajydnurdya-s°  (?  °anur^aya°)  406. 
Craddhdbalddhd')idvatdramudrd-s°  37,  1376, 
Avcdokand-s°  50,  1316. 
Karmavaranaviguddha-s°  50,  82. 
SarvadJiarnuqyravrittirnirder^a  506,  546. 
Qurangamasamddhi-s°  51. 
Mahdkariind-s°  52,  136. 
^  ryasarvadharmavaipidyasangraha-s°  526. 
Dharmmanglti  616,  626,  636,  64,  646,  756,  1036,  105,  1156,  1246, 

1446. 
Brahmaparipricchd  64. 
Ugraparipricchd  67,  72,  906,  916,  92,  117,  1186,  141. 


108  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1478. 

VimalaJdrtinirdeca  716,  116,  1176. 

Ratmikuta-s"  (?)  72. 

Aryarmanju(^rivikrldita-s°  7  36. 

UjHiliparipri°  81,  85. 

Vajracchedikd  82,  120. 

Pushpakutadhdrani  83. 

2.rya[)nahd\megha  (not  °meghasidra)  87. 

Jhdnavaipubja-s°  906. 

Lalitavistara  Q5b,  106a. 

Jidjdvavddaka-s°  956. 

SuvaryiabJidsottamatantra  1 00. 

Fitriputrasamdgama{*)  108. 

Tathdgata-[guhya\-ratna-s°  1196. 

Vajravara-s°  121. 

Vrihatsdgarandgardjaparipricchd  1366. 

Prajndp)dramita  1396,  160. 

Arydnupiirvasamxulgata-parlvartta  (of  some  other  work  ?)   1386 

(cf.  also  supra). 
Ratnakdrandaka-s°  162. 
Begins  : 

The  titles  of  the  sections  are  as  follows  : 
23a. 

^°  I   28a. 

3.  T*  VWT^IT^Ti\T^T  ^ffhr:  TT«  I  34&. 

4.  "^75  nt  ^°  I    536.     (No  general  title,  chiefly  anarthds  and 
different  kinds  of  middpatti). 

^°  I   16a. 

*  This  is  the  name  of  an  adhyaya  of   the  Bhadrakalpavadaua 
(MS.  1411,  1876—2076  p.  91,  supra). 


Add.  1478.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  109 

7.  T°  "HTTT^^r^T  ^^^:  q*  I  776. 

8.  T°  TRifTvrjr^^:  ^°  i  856. 

9.    T°  ^if'HMKr^JfTr  T7«  ^fRTT:  I   89a. 

10.  T"  €t^T7TTf^<Tr  tr«  -^yr^:  \  905. 

11.  T"  "^rr^w^  Trt^TT^^:  q°  1  94a. 

rfJi:  I   1036. 

13.    T°  ^r^T^n^RfT"%T-  ^^irar:  I   107a. 

14.  T°  "^ni^mT^ni^fi^^f^^^:  ^*  1  117^. 

15.  T°  ■HTW^ii^f^:  M^<ai:  xr°  1  noa. 

16.  T°  niw^w^  Hi^^^iNfV:  ^r^TTfl:  q°  1  1316. 

17.  T°  "^^"ni^^^  ^"s^'TT^'t^  ^tt^it:  ^*  I 

141a. 

18.  T*  fll*  ^  T^^^TWm  ^T^rST^^JRo  (sic)  I   157a. 

19.  T°  f^rT^^TRt  ^^IcygdT^t  ^^^^OrWRT- 
f^fT  ^^^  ^  I 

TT^t^lfV^rg'  II 

^wd^:  wwnn  1  \^  11    ^^th^i^  frfV^i^^^^T 

S^^'^^l^l^^rf:  ni^^T^W^  TffT  I   166a-6. 

^  v^T  ffjiT^TTT  %f5%Tr^^T^(Tr  (sic)  '^m^^  1 

%^T^  ^T  f^TTV  l^t  ^^T  TT^T^iTW:  II 
"ftrf"^*^^   ^^^"^TI^rT  . .  (then  in  a    modem    Xepalese    hand) 

^^Tf^FT^^  tjr  ^^^f»r^^TffTT^f%^^  TT^^  II 

Add.  1480. 
Paper;  1  leaf,  7  lines,  14  x  4  in. ;  modern. 

Fragment  of  a  MAHAYAXAsfTP.A. 


110  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1480. 

On  left  TR,'m\;  on  right  ^^  .*  \. 
Begins  (aftei'  invocations  to  Buddha) : 

fTfTTrr  ^^Rfp^  mwwr  ^?fY^mftf^^T^* 

Ends  : 

Then  follow  more  invocations  as  above.  The  whole  does  not 
extend  beyond  the  eight  introductory  qlokas. 

Add.  1481. 

Paper;  235  leaves,  6  lines,  15  x  4i  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  915  (a.d. 
1795). 

Samadhi-eaja. 

On  the  work  see  Add.  916. 

The  postscript  states  that  the  MS.  was  written  in  the  year  men- 
tioned, in  the  reign  of  Rana-Bahadur  (Wright,  pp.  282,  sqq.),  at 
Kathmandu,  by  Karnajoti :  names  of  scribe's  relatives  etc.  are  added. 

Chapters  1  and  2  as  in  Add.  916. 

Ch.  3  (16)  title  as  in  Add.  916  ch.  4;  eh.  4  (186—19),  ^^T^R®: 
For  the  other  chapters  see  Add.  916. 

Ends  like  the  R.  A.  S.  MS.,  with  the  same  curious  corruption, 
apparently,  of  "^IWai®  for  "^(^Tft^ffTrR® :  ;  compare  above 
p.  28,  note. 

Add.  1482. 

Paper;  313  leaves,  6 — 8  lines,  16  x  4in. ;  modern. 

A90KAVADANA-MALA. 
On  the  work  see  Bm-n,  Intr.  p.  358  sqq.,  435,  etc. 
The  tales  are  written  in  ^lokas. 

Begins,  after  four  verses  of  homage  to  Buddha,  etc.  : 
Jl^  ^^T  ^ft  ^f  ^^T  ^  ^^^if^fT  II 


Add.  14S2.J  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  Ill 

fT^rf  #IR^Tf^  cT^WrT  ^^if^  II 

Ends  : 

1.  Tr^^^TniTT^nn"^|2|^R  TT^^T  S'SITX?:  I  \  I  96. 

2.  Tr^^^TTT^T^  Wf^lt  I  ^^  I  326. 

3.  Tf^TO^TR^T^  'Wt^r^^-R^T^  Wfnt  I  ^  I  836. 

I  8  I  92. 

5.  TW^°  ^WT^R^'Rt  ^*  I  y,l   1056. 

6.  TfrT  ^rr3|T^T^"R+  ^»  I  ^  I   1266. 

7.  TfH  f^^^T^^^lT^R^  ^°  I  ^  I   1316. 

8.  I  ^  I  Tf<T  'tr2r^fTT^l|^T^°  ^°  I   1536. 

9.  This  chapter  is  subdivided  into  paricchedas,  as  follows  (these 
subdivisions,  however,  are  numbered  on,  in  figures,  as  if  they  were 
divisions  of  the  main  work,  the  original  numbering  being  afterwards 
reverted  to) : 

XJr\  CTf^f^TTT^lt^T:  I  ^1  (=1)  155. 

T°  ^^T^PIT  f^rft^I^fC'^T-  I  X"  I   157. 

^iT^'^Trnr^TCT  ^t^  ^rj^:  xjIt:^^:  i  \^  i  leo. 

TTrT  ^TT^SP^T'^W:  (sic)  ^T^^I  ^TT^T*  '  ^^  I   163. 
T°  ^TnrRTTf'TrrT  WSl  TTT^T-  '  \^  '   1656. 
X°  fj-imJTVRr^J  ^TW:  ^»  I  \M,I  1706. 

X°  WRmrf^mr  ^riifrgTi:  tt°  i  ^4 1  176. 

T°  3T^T^lTf^FnTr  ^T^  ^!TW^:  ^°  I  \^  I   181. 
TffT  ^Tfv^^TWfTTTT^'t^RT'^  I  ^11  1836. 

10.  TWTrTT^"^rT%(2T'%^'^^T^°§  ^°  I  \°  I   1946. 

*  Cf.  Burn.  Litr.  p.  374  note, 
t  Burn.  Intr.  p.  415,  note. 
\  Cf.  ibid.,  p.  425. 

§  A  smaller  work  called  Ahordtravratakathd  exists  iti  the  E.  A.  S. 
Lond.  J  another  also  (uncertain  what)  at  Paris. 


112  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDPHIST  [Add.  148-?. 

11.  T°  WTr^^TKchN4»  ^«  I  U  I  207. 

This  is  the  same  tale  as  the  sepai-ate  -svork  of  the  same  name  in 
prose  and  verse  at  Paris,  described  by  Burn.  Intr.  p.  556.  Copies 
appear  to  exist  also  in  Calcutta. 

12.  Tf<T  VR^^J^^TR^-R  -W^rk  I  ^^^  I   215. 

The  same  story  as  Avadana-sara-samuccaya  No.  4,  Add.  1598, 
43—56. 

13.  T"*  WTT'Sil^T^  ^*  I  \^  I   2186. 

14.  X°  ^fF^TfT^'TR^^  "^°  I  "^8  I   2246. 

The  story  of  kings  Ajatagatru,  Prasenajit  and  a  Q'reshfhhi, 

15.  T*  ■RT^TT^TTTT^T^*  W°  I  \«i,l  231. 

(Comp.  Avad.-Cat.  li.  10,  and  see  Peer  in  Journ.  Asiatiqiie,  1879, 
XIV.  p.  164). 

16.  T°  ^^TOTT^T%  ^°  I  \^  I  2366. 
Cf.  Avad.-C.  III.  10;  Peer,  p.  IGG. 

17.  T°  wr»Tr^rR^°  ^°  i  \^  i  2426. 

See  another  form  of  the  tale  in  Avad.-Cat.  v.  10;  Peer,  ]>.  172. 

18.  \°  t^T^°  I  XF  I  2476. 
See  Avad.-C.  vi.  10;  Peer,  p.  175. 

19.  T°  TT'^^rfT^T^°  I  \^l   255. 
See  Avad.-Cat;  vii.  10;  Peer,  p.  177. 

20.  T°  T^<^N4°  I   263. 

This  is  the  story  of  Virupa,  who  had  formerly  stood  at  the  churn 
(^i\X)  Avad.-Cat.  viii.  10;  Peer,  p.  180. 

21.  T°  TT?i7TWT^°  "^^  I  5^^  I  270. 

See  Avad.-Cat.  ix.  10;  Peer,  p.  184.  All  the  three  episodes  of 
previou.s  births  are  naiTated  and  at  somewhat  greater  length  than  in 
the  Avad.-Cat. 

22.  T°  "JT^^^^^T"  ^*  I  ^'^  I  2766. 

This  tale  describes  Indra  in  his  glory  in  heaven,  but  feeling 
apprehension  as  to  the  ending  of  his  present  power  and  life.  After 
a  long  conference  with  Caci  it  is  decided  to  seek  a  remedy  in 
Jambudvlpa.  A  troop  of  9ramanas  are  seen,  and  Indra  subsequently 
applies  in  person  to  the  Buddha  himself,  who  reinstates  the  god  in 


Add.  1482.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  113 

bis  glory.  On  the  chiircir.s  enquiring  the  reason  of  this  act,  the 
Buddha  explains  that  on  the  death  of  the  ancient  Buddha  Ki-akuc- 
chandra,  a  king  named  Cobha  had  built  him  a  fine  stupa ;  for  this 
he  had  obtained  his  desire  of  being  deified;  but  his  godhead  lasted 
only  for  a  time:  the  Buddha  had  therefore  reinstated  him,  the 
Buddha  having  been  born  as  Krakucchandra,  and  Indra  having  been 
Qobha. 

23.  T°  Wt^'RT^  ^°  I   283. 

Some  merchants'  sons  from  Pataliputra,  in  quest  of  sandal,  apply 
to  Punyasena ;  their  subsequent  adventures,  visit  to  the  Buddha,  and 
raeetiug  with  a  king  Candraloka  and  others,  are  described. 

24.  X°  HTJT^T^^  ^°  I  '^a  I   2886. 

A  Bx*ahman,  Crutavarman,  has  a  son  Bhava9annan  by  his  wife 
Jayasena.  Bhavacjarman  grows  up :  his  amorous  experiences  are 
described ;  he  is  detected  in  breaking  into  a  palace;  repenting  of  his 
evil  ways,  he  reforms,  practises  various  penances,  and  finally  becomes 
a  convert. 

25.  T°"^VT^TRT°^°  l^^l   2956. 

Birth  and  education  of  Madhurasvara,  son  of  Sudhira  and  Sumetra. 
Ananda  comes  to  beg  at  the  house  and  induces  Madhurasvara  to  follow 
him;  he  is  however  permitted  to  return  after  a  while  to  take  leave 
of  his  parents.  Ananda  then  sends  him  forth  on  his  wanderings  as  a 
bhikshu.  He  falls  among  thieves,  whom  he  converts  and  ordains. 
Subsequent  conversion  and  rejoicing  of  Sudhira. 

26.  Tf<T  M'y^lcl^^  ^°  I  5^^  I   302. 

Padmaka,  son  of  Manasa  a  merchant  of  Cravasti,  sees  the  bhikshu 
Upasena.  Padmaka  gains  his  father's  consent  to  his  becoming  a 
bhikshu.  Tlae  fii-st  house  at  which  he  begs  is  that  of  a  courtezan, 
Qa9ilekha ;  her  attempted  seductions ;  to  which  Padmaka  turns  a 
deaf  ear  and  goes  away  with  empty  bowl.  Qagilekha,  however,  by  the 
help  of  another  ve(^yd,  a  chandali,  Mantrabala,  tries  to  draw  him  back 
by  love-mantras,  etc.  This  attempt  also  is  unsuccessful ;  and  Padmaka 
succeeds  in  converting  both  women.  They  are  received  by  the 
Buddha  at  Ciavasti :  on  the  bhikshiTs'  enquiring  the  reason  of  this 
favourable  reception,  the  Buddha  explains  that  formerly  by  Kacyapa's 
preaching  a  man,  Mitra,  and  his  maids,  Nanda  and  Sunanda,  had 
been  converted  ;  on  their  going  to  the  sisterhood  they  were  abused  by 
one  of  the  sisters;  she  was  born,  for  a  punishment,  as  a  Chandali  veqya; 

8 


114  CATALOGUE  UF   LUUDHIST  [Am.  1482. 

Padmaka  is  Mitra.  Another  birth  of  Padmaka  was  as  Pushpasena, 
who  had  met  a  Buddha  in  a  flower-garden.  Acoka  and  the  rest 
discourse  for  a  wliile  on  tlii.s  story. 

Scene  in  Indra's  heaven.  Buddha  addresses  the  Devas,  Kiniiaras 
etc.  Alarm  of  Indra.  Buddha,  after  some  conversation,  reassures 
him  and  his  followers,  telling  them,  inter  alia,  of  the  Sarvaduryati- 
codhanadhdrcufi* :  afterwards,  lie  proclaims  the  samadhi  called 
Vajradhishthana  ;  recital  of  the  Gnliyahridaya  and  of  other  dharanis 
and  mantx'as.  Buddha  also  addresses  the  Lokapalas  and  other  mytho- 
logical personages. 

Ends: 

In  the  same  covers  is  a  leaf,  blank  on  one  side  and  perhaps 
intended  as  a  cover,  containing  9  numbered  verses  on  the  results  of 
actions,  etc. 

Add.  1483. 

Paper;  178  leaves,  9  lines,  lox-i^in. ;  dated  N.  S.  901 
(a.d.  1781);  good  Devanagari  hand. 

Madhyamaka-vjritti  (called  Vinaya-Sutra,  see  below) 
by  Candrakirti. 

There  are  a  few  marks  of  lacunae  or  the  like  in  the  archetype.  On 
the  work  see  Burn.  Intr.,  559  et  al.  ;  Hodgson,  Ess.  Lit.  Nep.  20. 

It  consists  of  27  chapters  (IT^'^CW),  correspondmg  to  the  27  topics 
enumerated  by  Csoma  (  =  Feer  in  Ann.  Mus.  Guim.  ii.  207). 

Begins  : 

^^  ^^^%^tf€ . . .  etc. 


*  See  Add.  1623. 


Add.  14S3.J  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  11.") 

^TrT^^^T%^T^T^^i;t  rr^Tf^^[T]^T|jf^rTt  (leg. 
W^°)  IT^^t  II  8  II 

Then  follow  the  "quelques  lignes  cl'mtroduction"  (five  in  our  MS.) 
of  which  Burnouf  (1.  c.)  speaks. 

The  text  of  the  sfitra  itself  begins  with  the  words : 

^f^^^  II 

On  which  the  commentary  thus  commences  : 

V^T^^  ^^^TfT^  II 

The  quotations  from  Buddha-palita  (referred  to  by  Burnouf) 
occur  in  5a-b  (cf.  also  (^h,  1,  7;  7a,  1.  4;  and  lOffl,  1.  7):  from  Bhavavi- 
veka  in  10. 

The  chapters  end  thus  : 

^■^^fr  TT^PT^ft^T  ^TiT  TT^^TT^T^  I  276. 

2.    ^^1^°  ■»TrTT^fTT?fT^T  ^°  f^fft^  IT°  I  SSb. 
8.    ^T°  ^^^T^f^^qfr^T  ^°  (^rfl^  TT°  I   .SG. 

4.  ^T°  ^^qft^T  ^°  ^fJ^TT*  I   .38. 

5.  -^r  VTfJ^KT^T  ^°  ■q^TT  IT°  I  40. 

G.  "^T"  TT^T^qftW^^i:wi:  (.ic)  IT°  I   42. 

7.  ^T°  ^lifT^TT^T  ^*  ^^^  (sic)  IT°  I   52. 

8.  ^T°  ^^^TT^^TT^T^^TW^rg:^  I  56. 

9.  ^1°  ■q^^t^T  ^°  ^^^  TT^T^  I  59. 

10.  ^lfT^^q°  ^°  ^^  IT°  I   64. 

11.  "qfT^T^^tq-fr^T  ^T^^T^°  IT°  I   67. 

12.  ^I^^Tt^T  ^°  ^T^°  I   69. 

13.  "^^TTq^  ^^T^°  I   72. 

14.  ^^^q°  ^f5^°  I   75. 

15.  ^^T^°  q^T°  I   80. 

8—2 


IIG  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  14S.3. 

16.  ^^^T^^°  CT^ir°  I  8Gh. 

17.  ^^^°  ^^T°  I  07a-h. 

18.  '^TT^T^"'  ^"g:T^lI°  I   109. 

19.  ^JW;°  ^ift^T^ftai^  I   111. 

20.  ^TTT^m°  "R1I°  I   118. 

21.  ^^^f^»T^^°  "Q:^ft°  I   1246. 

22.  fT^T^rTy°  ^°    131. 

23.  •R^^T^t:?^  ^^Tf^   140. 

24.  ^T^^W^ft^T  ^°  ^^ff°    1546. 

25.  f^tr^lR^  ■q'Wf^^    1C2. 

26.  ^T^^t^^°  W(li°    171. 

27.  ^T^^^^frlmt^r^TNrTT^t    IT^^^TT^    ^Wfl- 

Work.s  cited  (considerable  extracts  often  being  given)  are  : 
Akshayamati-sutra  11,  33. 
Ratnakuta-s°  12b,  1026. 

Subhuti-paripricclia  (dialogue  from  this  work)  136-1 4a. 
[Arya-]  Vajra-nianda-dharanl. 
Gaganaganjasamadhi-sutra  38. 
Samadhiraja-s^  38,  40,  586,  796,  95. 
^MlT^^y  "^T  prob.  --=  Upaliparipriccba  556. 
Anavataptabradapasankramana-s°  70. 
Prajnaparamita  80,  1336. 
Arya-dhyapitamiishti-s°  85,  153. 
Maradamana-s"  86. 
Agama  95. 

Vimalaklrtinirde9a  95. 
Ratnacuda-s°  956. 

Cataka  (without  further  distinction)  101. 
A  shtasah  asrikapraj  naparamita  101. 
Tathagataguhyaka-s"  102,  1036  (bis). 


Add.  14S3.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  117 

Lalitavistara-s°  107. 

In  135  we  read  ^^  ^^^^FCTVIT^T'^^,  which  seems  to 
contain  the  name  of  a  work  in  a  corrupt  form. 


Add.  1485. 

Black  paper  with  gold  letters;  39  leaves,  5  lines,  9|  x  3  iu. ; 
dated  N.  s.  797  (a.d.  1677). 

A  collection  of  Dhaeaxis,  etc. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  16 — 54:.  The  hand  is  of  the  square, 
close,  and  somewhat  illegible  charactei-  usual  in  MSS.  of  this  material. 

The  contents  are  as  follows  : 

1.     PrajMpdramitdhridayam. 

The  Chinese  version  of  this  work  is  translated  by  Prof.  Beal, 
Journ.  R.  A.  S.  1875,  p.  27.  The  identity  of  the  works  will  be 
seen  by  comparing  with  his  version  the  opening  sentences  of  the 
sutra  itself. 

Begins  : 

^iq:  ^^TTT^t  irm'RT^f^rrT'^Tt  ^T^  ^TWt^FTSmt  {sic) 
and,  a  few  lines  further  on  : 

1^^^  ^q  I  t^^T  i|:?^  etc.  I  ^T  ■s[^^ . .  I  ^^TTT  "Ji? 
^i:^^  ^w^^WT  '^rq^T  ^f^^i;T: . . . 

The  words  supplied  by  Prof.  Beal  on  conjecture  (p.  28)  thus 
appear  (18,  1.  2):  7T^  ^^  ^it^^  TIT^^^  ftfV  ^T^T  I 

The  sutra  then  concludes  with  a  few  lines  such  as  are  usually 
found  in  these  works. 

Nos.  2 — 6  are  the  Dluiraiils ;  the  same,  and  in  the  same  oi'der  as 
in  R.  A.  S.  MS.  79,  Nos.  2,  3,  -4,  6,  7  :  viz.  tlie  dharanis  called 
Vajraviddrcoil  (206),  GaiiajrMihridayri,  (226),  Ushinshavijaya  (256), 
Mdrlci  (29),  and  GrahamdtriJcd  (38). 


118  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  14S5. 

7.     Pratyanjira-dhiiranJ  (52b). 

See  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  77. 

After  this  follow  two  pages  of  invocations,  etc.  ;  aftei*  which : 

%^T     S"^    #^rT^    ^«L-^    (month,    nakshatm,    day    etc.)   .  .  . 


Add.  I486. 

Paper;  41  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  3^  in.;  dated  N.  s.  841   (a.d. 
1721). 

AgvAGHOSHA-NANDiMUKHAVADANA  (with  vernacular  version). 
Begins : 

^^TTT  ^T  ^<^T  etc.  (see  Add.  1357). 
Ends  : 

^^^•)g;  ^^?T^  ^B^  (then  nakshatra  etc.,  after  which)  : 

^^^T^r^TT^T  I   ^TWH^  ^^TfTT^oT^  (])... etc.  (vernacu- 
lar).     The  scribe's  name  is  Prabliakara. 

Add.  1487. 

Paper;  121  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  3  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  928  (A.D. 
1808). 

Uposhad[h]a-yrata,  vernacular. 

Cf.  R.  A.  S.,  No.  76. 

Add.   1488. 

Palm-leaf;  129  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  2  in. ;  Xivth  cent,  (date 
retouched,  see  below). 

Amara-koc;a. 

Begins  with  the  live  introductory  i^lokas  given  in  ed.   Deslong- 
chauaps,  p.  2  (after  invocation  of  Buddhu). 


Add.  1488.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  119 

The  letters  are  much  faded,  especially  towards  the  beginning, 
and  accordingly  the  last  few  pages,  and  some  other  jiassages,  have  been 
retraced  with  modern  ink.     Preface,  etc.  as  in  printed  editions. 

Ends  : 

127^.     Then  follows  a  short  summary  of  contents,  after  which  : 

^5^  ^T^^^T  frrm  t^«=R^  ^-sj^T^  ^??Tr^t 

^r^H      Wf^rrmfC    f^rWrf^rr  . . .  (here  an  erasure) . .  .  f^fTI  I 
^'^J  ^T^  TI^T^T^  ^r  (erasure)  cq-JTW^  fC?  TT^T^T^ 

^^T^T^^r  ^^^%^  ff!rf<5rrTf*TffT  I    ^^T  Y'^  *^tc.  II 

On  the  back,  in  a  slightly  larger,  but  probably  contemporary 
hand  : 

^Rm^^^fvf%^RW%  ^T^Tf€%  ^T€  ^  (?;  I  ^^^T 

ffTf^  f^rT-?:^f€  f^  ^rf  (f)  ^-^  (read  °W)  ^T^TfrTrf  I 

This  seems  to  be  for  nepftla  sain[vat\  ahdhi-viiidu-vishaye  =  504 
=  A.  D.  1384.  Vijulu  as  a  word-numeral  is  not  kno\\Ti :  but  in  these 
MSS.  the  sign  of  zei'o  is  frequently  a  mere  dot,  like  anusvara  (viiidu). 
The  king's  name  is  next  given : 

^^T^T^J^^r^^^T  TT^^^ ...  I    ^^^f^^TT^^t   (sic) 

T^ . . .  "^T  ^T^T^^  (?  1.  rT")  ^^f>T  I 

This  date  (1-384)  will  accord  with  MSS.  Add.  1689  and  1395;  in 
the  former  of  which  we  find  Jayaijuna  (or  "jana)  reigning  in  A.  D. 
1374,  and  in  the  latter,  Jayasthiti  in  1385.  Compare  the  neai'ly 
coeval  date  in  the  note  to  Add.  1544. 


Add.  1533. 

Paper  ;  18  leaves,  G  lines,  7i  x  3  in. ;  xviiith  cent. 
AgVAGHOSHA-NAXDIMUKHAYADAXA. 

*'...*  This   is    written    over    in    cpiito   modern    ink; — what   was 
underneath  is  undecipherable. 


120  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1533. 

Leaf  1  is  missing. 

The  language  is  almost  as  hopelessly  barbarous  as  in  the  other 
MSS.  of  the  work  (Add.  1357  et  al.  q.  v.).  The  last  two  leaves  are 
in  a  slightly  different  hand.  A  recent  corrector  has  retouched  the 
MS.  here  and  there,  in  the  vain  endeavour  to  make  the  jargon  into 
something  like  correct  Sanskrit.  The  MS.  shows  some  distinct 
varieties  of  reading,  as  compared  with  the  other  copies. 

A  leaf  at  the  beginning,  serving  as  a  cover,  contains  a  fragment  of 
the  Vasudhdrd  dhdrcfiil,  and  begins : 


Add.   1534. 

Paper ;  36  leaves,  6  lines  (ruled),  8i  x  3  in.  ;  dated  N.  s. 
811  (A.D.  IGOl). 

Megha-sutra. 

This  MS.  was  not  used  for  my  printed  edition,  owing  to  its  not 
having  been  identified  in  the  printed  list:  see  Add.  1G89  and  R  A.  S. 
Journal,  Apr.  1880. 

At  the  end  : 

f^f^^^  ^^  (?)  ^n^^TT  ^^T^T^  ^^"^^^  fwfWrT 
^xjf^frj  I 

Then  follow  a  scribe's  verse  and  the  date. 


Add.  1535. 
Paper ;  6  leaves,  7  lines  (ruled),  9i  x  3  in. ;  xviiith  cent. 

PlNDAPATRAVADANA-KATHA,   attributed   to   DlPANKARA. 

Bad  writing  and  full  of  barbarisms. 

Apparently  the  same  work  as  in  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  45,  but  )iot 
the  same  as  Add.  1305,  supra.  It  also  exists  in  Paris,  Bibl.  Nat. 
MS.  98  ("Divyavadana-mala"). 


Add.  1535.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  121 

The  speaker  is  the  Tathagata,  Dipankara;  the  hearer  king 
8arvananda. 

The  latter  half  of  the  work  (ib-Qa)  consists  of  shoi-t  paragraphs  in 
verse  on  the  various  offerings  suitable  to  be  made  to  a  bhikshu  with  a 
pinda-patra,  etc.;  and  concludes  (66)  with  a  few  words  on  ajipropriatc 
seasons,  months,  etc. 

Ends  : 

TffT     ^r<fr^^T^fTm^rT^  (sic)  fq"^!^r^"R^T^^m 
^m^TT  I 

Add.   1536. 

Paper ;  32  leaves,  5  lines,  9  x  3  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  803  (a.  d, 
1683). 

SVAYAMBHU-PURANA  (smallest  redaction). 
See  Add.  870. 

Illustrations  on  leaves  1,  2,  and  32. 
Ends  (with  date  as  above,  and  scribe's  name) : 

f^nf^T  ^^T^T^T^sh^^cj  fiTTTT  (sic). 

Add.  1537. 

Paper ;  48  leaves,  5  lines,  10^  x  3  in. ;  modern  Nepalese 
hand,  but  squarer  and  more  regular  than  usual. 

KAPiyAVADANA. 

The  leaves  are  uumbei'ed  1 — 25,  27 — 49. 

There  are  words  of  comment,  and  divisions  of  words,  occasionally 
written  above  the  lines  in  red,  or  in  black. 

The  MS.  seems  to  be  an  exact  reproduction  of  tlie  archetype  of 
Add.  1345,  as  the  preface,  titles,  and  even  the  concluding  scribe's 
verse,  are  identical. 


122  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1538. 


Add.  1538. 

Paper ; '40  leaves,  G  lines  (ruled),  14  x  3^  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  964 
(A.D.  1844). 

ViRAKUgAVADANA,   from   the   DiVYAVADANA. 

Text  very  faulty.     Copies  at  Paris  and  Calcutta. 

This  is  a  story  in  praise  of  the  ashtami-vrata,  or  fast  on  the  eighth 
day,  and  probably  composed  to  be  read  on  solemn  occasions  of  this 
kind.  The  subject  matter  purports  to  be  taken  from  the  Divyavadana 
(much  of  which  seems  to  have  perished),  and  illustrates  the  merit  of 
the  fast,  etc. 

Begins  in  verse  thus  (after  invocation) : 

tT^  I  etc. 

After  a  few  more  verses,  the  prose  begins  thus : 

'^Jf{J^ . . . 

The  king  observes  the  ashtamlvrata  in  honour  of  Amogha-paca  and 
Avalokite9vara  (3a.  1);  and  is  rewarded  by  the  mii-aculous  birth  of  a 
son  from  a  sugar-cane  (ikshu),  therefore  called  Ikshvaku.  A  shoi-t 
story  is  now  told  of  a  sdrthavdha,  Supriya,  who  gained  a  shower  of 
jewels  by  a  vrata  (ia-b).  The  king  abdicates  in  favour  of  his  son 
Ikshvaku  (ib,  1 — 2).  The  queen  Alinda  (after  due  attention  to  tlie 
vrata)  bears  a  son  ;  his  name  was  to  have  been  Ku9ala,  but  is 
shortened  by  his  mother  to  Kui^'a  (6a,  5—6);  he  performs  sundry 
deeds  of  prowess,  whence  he  gains  the  name  of  Vira-ku^a  (66.  5). 
The  life  of  Vira-kuca  is  now  detailed,  and  the  moral  is  thus  summed 
up  in  the  last  lino  : 

^f8"5  -^ff^J  (sic)  -arrT^^m^T^  ^rt    r\jf^  ^T^^^  ^ 


Add.  153S.]  SANSKRIT   xMAXUSCRIPTS.  123 

TTrf  ^TfT^T^^T^T^rf  ^^ift"^[rrj-Jf^TrI?I^^T^^T^  (sic) 
^m^  II 

Add.   1543. 
Palm-leaf;  11.3  leaves,  6  lines,  12  x  2in. ;  Xllth  cent. 

SUVIKRANTAVIKRAMI-PARIPKICCHA, 
or  Sarddhadvisahasrika  PRAJNAPARAMITA, 

The  hand  is  very  similar  to  that  of  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  2  :  see  the 
plate  thei-e,  and  compare  that  in  Paljeogx-aphical  Soc.  Orient.  Ser., 
PI.  43.  The  MS.  is  corrected  iu  several  hands,  mostly  of  considerable 
antiquity. 

This  redaction  has  7  parivarttas  and  2500  verses.  See  Wassiliew, 
Taran.  159  (14:7),  and  Csoma  As.  Res.  xx.  395  (also  Ann.  Mus.  Guim, 
ii.  201)  as  to  its  Tibetan  form,  etc. 

After  15  lines  of  invocation  and  preface,  the  text  begius  (26)  : 

1?;^  ^^T  ^fT^^ra^^  '^'^^  ^^^T^^  TT^'^t  fTfTfrT 

The  chapters  end  : 
1.    ^T^TT^TXfTTf«T<Trf%^T^  IT^^!  I   10b. 

246. 

3.  rT^rlT  m^C^T  ^T^  Wnfjf:  S7b. 

4.  ^m^^ftT#t  ^T*?  ^f5^:  I   60. 

5.  -^^fH^n:^'  -q^^:  i  gu. 

6.  ^^mfT^°  ws:  I  94. 

Then  follows  the  verse  ^  I  ^q^TT^T , . , ,  with  which  the  other 
Prajnaparamita  in  2500  verses  beffins  (Add.  MSS.  1628  and  1629). 
The  works,  however,  seem  distinct;  see  Wassiliew  (siiijra  cit.).     As 


124  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1543. 

to  the  subject,  Suvikrantavikramin's  first  questions  of  the  Buddha 
give  some  notion  of  the  general  drift  and  are  thus  expressed  (3a— b) : 

^^^^^  frfV^^T^^  W^°  TT^TtrTTnFTrTT^TWTfT:  TT^T- 
f\^J°  W^T^JXJ^^Wr^JW^m  f{JT'  ^TTt^T^^fTTt  ^^^  [I] 

In  ch.  2,  at  the  beginning,  the  speakers  are  Ananda  and  Caradvatl- 
putra  (Carip") ;  in  ch.  5,  Caradvatlputra  and  Subhuti.  Elsewhere 
they  seem  to  be  Suvikrantavikramin  and  the  Buddha. 

At  the  end  is  an  odd  leaf,  found  in  Add.  1680,  written  by  the 
scribe  of  this  MS.  in  ^irecisely  the  same  style,  and  containing  quite 
similar  matter;  but  it  is  not  numbered  like  the  rest. 


Add.  1544. 
Paper;  172  leaves,  7  lines,  20  x  2  in. ;  xiith  cent. 

ASHTASAHASRIKA-PKAJNAPARAMITA. 

See  Palfeograph.  Soc.  Or.  Series,  Plate  57,  whei-e  Professors 
Cowell  and  Eggeling  assign  the  MS.  to  the  xiith  cent.  Note  also 
that  the  conjecture  there  given  as  to  the  indi\ddual  peculiarity  of  the 
sloping  hand  is  confirmed  by  leaves  84 — 87  of  Add.  1708. 

For  the  postscript  see  Add.  1163. 

There  are  dates  of  recitation  written  on  the  back  of  both  the  first 
and  the  last  leaves;  the  one  being  n.  s.  492,  the  other  499.  The  last 
two  figures  of  the  latter  are  obscure :  the  former  is  interesting  as  being 

expressed  both  in  figures  and  words  ('fTT^  ^^T  Tlf«T«^^^'VT)' 


Add.  1546.  1.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  125 

Add.  1546.  1. 
Black  paper;  3  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  2|  in.;  xviith  cent. 

A  collection  of  Dhakanis. 
Written  in  gold  letters. 
There  is  an  illustration  on  If.  1. 
Begins  : 

TTfT  ^€t«i  ^t^  vtttw  wr(r^  i  2«. 

T°  ^f^rTT^     „  „  „         26. 

T°  ^^T'^Wf^  I   3a. 

Add.  1546.  2. 

Blue-black  paper ;  7  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  2|  in. ;  xviith  cent. 

MAH  A-SAMB  ARA-HRIDAYA-DH  ARAN  I . 

The  leaves  are  numbered  3 — 7,  9,  10. 
Written  in  gold,  silver,  and  bronze  letters. 
Begins : 

On  leaf  5  are  spaces  for  pictures. 
Ends : 

Add.  1547. 

Paper;  18  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  2iin. ;  xviiith  cent. 

AlKAJATA-STOTEA. 
The  leaves  are  numbered  with  small  figures  in  the  right-hand 
corner  at  the  foot. 

On  the  work  see  Add.  1453. 
Begins  : 

T?;t  frm  ^°  "0:^°  ^°  ^^^i^^  ^^tit%  I'^TTicfar^ 

Ends  : 

wrk  #^^  II 


12(3  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [App.  15-18. 

Add.  1548. 

Paper ;  23  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  2i  in. ;  xviiith  cent. 
Nama-saxgIti. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  52 — 73,  so  that  the  MS.  was  apparently 
part  of  a  collection  of  works  ;  cf.  Add.  1104. 
Begins  and  ends  as  Add.  132.3. 

Add.   1549. 

Paper;  9  leaves,  5  lines,  0x2  in.;  dated  x.  s.  921  (a.d.  1801). 
Namashtottara-(;"ataka. 

There  is  an  illustration  of  a  goddess  on  the  first  page. 
Begins  : 

Ends: 

Then  follows  the  date,  as  above ;  but  the  last  figure  is  indistinct. 

Add.  1550. 

Paper;    21  leaves,  5  lines,  6x2^  in.;   modern. 
Panca-maha-raksha-suteaxi. 

A  collection  of  dharaiiis  in  connexion  with  the  same  5  Caktis  as 
those  of  the  Panca-i'aksha,  Add.  1325  (which  see).  Spaces  are  left 
for  pictures  of  the  (y!aktis  at  the  heads  of  the  chapters. 

Begins  : 

2.    ^T^^TT^r^^TTTT^^T"^^  ¥^T^  10. 

Tfrf  ^T^^^^T  ^m  VTTWT  ¥^T^:  n. 
S.  (?)    ^T^^TfT^^TTR^TTT^T  "^^  ^^T^:   15. 


Add.  15.50.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  127 

4.    ^T^^TfT^rl^frTf^^T^T  ^^  ^^TT:   18. 

Ends  : 

TTfT^rfrf^^  (sic)  %  ffT  ^T4i?^TTTfrT°  . . .  ."^^ifw  Wf^J^l 

(see  Add.  1325). 
^  ^'^T*'  etc. 
%m^^t  ^^TT^TW^^  (  =  N.  s.  950  (?)  =  A.D.  1830). 

Add.  1551. 

Paper ;  23  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  2  in. ;  modern. 

A  collection  of  Dharanis. 
There  are  illustrations  at  the  beginning  of  Nos.  1  and  4. 

1.  (^ahraramhara  (l)-dharam. 
Begins  (leaf  2a)  : 

2.  A  stotra  to  Tdrd-devl,  in  21  numbered  stanzas,  ending  8i. 

3.  A  stotra  (?)  to  Vajra-Satva  and  Tatlulgatas.     Ends  12i?'. 

4.  Aryamaha-kcda-dhdrani.     Ends  196. 

5.  Candamahdroshanatantra-dh°,  216. 
Ends  : 

Leaf  16  contains  the  last  words  of  the  postscript  of  something  else  : 
TT^Rl  r^;  ^"f  T^^  {sic). 

Add.  1552. 

Paper;  2  leaves  (numbered  11,  12),  5  lines,  7  x  2  in.;  modern. 

Fragment  of  the  Kalacakra-mantra-dharani. 
Ends: 
TffT  ^T^^g^f^^^TTWV  -^^{1^  II 


128  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1553. 

Add.  1553. 
Paper;   15  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x  22  in. ;  modern. 

A  collection  of  Dharaxis. 
The  leaves  are  numbered  1—11,  13,  15,  18,  19. 
There  are  illustrations  of  deities, 

1.  Pamavihir^atikd-prajniipdramita.Ju-idaya-dlb'.     Ends  at  Ih. 

2.  Sc(JuiS)'abhuja(1)-loke<^va7'a-dhdi'a)il. 
Ends  : 

Add.  1554. 

Paper ;  3  leaves,  5  lines,  6  x2\  in. ;  xviiith  cent. 
Prajnaparamita-hridaya-dharani. 

The  work  consists  chiefly  of  invocations,  etc.     It  is  not  the  same 
as  Add.  1485.  1. 
Begins  : 

'tt  ^W.  ^T^^^T^T^  II  etc. 
Ends  : 

Add.  1555. 

Paper  ;  8  leaves,  5  lines,  6x2  in. ;  modern. 

DHARAXiS. 

1.  Mahdramhara-dhdrani. 
Ends : 

2,  Ijhuta-(1)rambara-dhdra7ii. 
Ends: 

Add.  1580. 

Palra-leaf;  4  leaves,  5  lines,  10  x  2  in.;  dated  X.  S.  547  (a.D. 
U27). 

QAarBUKAVADANA. 


Add.  1580.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  129 

The  MS.  gives  the  title  witli  tlie  strange  barbarism  ^'^'^^® . 

The  style  and  subject  of  the  tale  are  not  unlike  the  Pauca-tantra, 
the  first  personages  introduced  being  seven  shells  (sambhukah)  and 
a  fisherman  named  Rupaka;  further  on,  both  personages  and  scenery 
are  distinctively  Buddhistic. 

Begins,  after  4  glokas  of  prefatory  invocation  : 

TTTT  ^x^-^TjfT  (sic)  ^T'^T%^^^^^^^f%^'^^  (sic)  f^m^- 

Ends : 

fwfWrr  ^T  ^WT^T^^^T^T^  ^T  ^^^^:  (?) 

Add.   1581. 

Paper;  8  leaves,  8  lines,  9  x  5  in.;  modern  Devanagari  han<l. 

Dharma-lakshmi-samvad A  (vernacular) . 

The  syllable  "^T^°  is  ])laced  above  each  page-number. 
The  work  is  divided  into  8  adhyayas. 
Ends  : 

TffT  ^YV^^W^^T^  ^^^T  (.sir)  ^-SIT^  ^^TTT I 

Add.  1585. 

Paper;  13  leaves,  10  lines  (ruled),  14x3 in.;  fine,  minute 
hand-writing  of  the  xviith  cent. 

SuMAGADHAVADANA  and  part  of  the 
DA(;'AKur'ALAJAM  Phala:m. 
On  the  right  side  of  each  leaf  (1—12)  '^iTT^'^T. 
On  the  tale  see  Burnouf,  lafr.  p.   566,  and  Rajendralala,  JS^ej). 
Buddh,  Lit.  p.  237. 
Begins  : 

9 


130  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1585. 

Ends: 

l^nr^TR^T^  WfUii  l  ISa. 

On  136  there  is  marked  at  tlie  side  ^"SXT^IT^. 
Then,  after  invocations  to  Bnddha,  etc. : 

The  MS.  ends  abruptly  with  this  leaf. 

Add.  1586. 

Paper;  20  leaves,  10  lines  (ruled),  14  x  Sin.;  fine,  minute 
hand-writing,  dated  X.  s.  781  (a.d.  1661). 

RlSHTRAPALA-PARIPKICCHA. 

The  title  of  the  work  is  cited  in  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  from  the 
Yyutpatti :   see  two  citations  in  Add.  1478  above. 

Mr  Nanjio  informs  me  that  there  is  a  Chinese  translation  of  this 
work,  made  by  Jfianagupta  under  the  Sin  dynasty  (a.d.  589 — 618), 
being  No.  23  (18)  of  the  Chinese  Tripitaka.  On  the  Tibetan  see  Feer, 
in  Ann.  G.  ii.  254.  [See  also  the  account  in  the  Supplementary  note 
at  the  end  of  the  text.] 

After  the  invocation,  a  line  of  preface  commences  with  the  words 
^T^(^i;^^^^frT^T^f^:rTT  . . . ;  then  follow  "q;^^^!  ^H 
and  a  large  list  of  Bodhisattvas  etc.,  forming  the  audience. 

Ends  : 
tow:  ^r^^^^  ^f^T^-^^T^TT^  ^^T^  ^pJTT- 

date  (see  above)  I    ^Ti?^T^:^Tmf%^  ^  ^^f?!  f^flfri  I 

Add.   1589. 

Paper;  144  leaves,  8  lines,  13x5  in.;  dated  N.  s.  994 
(A.D.  1874). 

ViCITRAKARNIKAVADANA-MAL.l   or   PaPRA^EKHARA-AVADANA 

(Newari). 
Preface  begins  in  Sanskrit : 


Add.  1589.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  131 

Text  (1)  begins  : 

1.  Ends: 
TffT^Tf^N^^f^T^T^m^T^tTT^^TS'^T^:  I  165. 

2.  (?) 

4.  T°  ^T°  °TT^^  ^i^T^^T^T  ^75^  I   (i.e.  %qTW^TT- 

^°)  65. 

5.  T°  ^°  ^°  ■q^^TS'SIT^:  I  766. 

6.  T°  ^T°  ^1°  W^#r  S^^^  I  896. 

7.  T°  ^'^  ^°  ^TT^T  S'SI^  I  100. 

8.  ^°  ^°  'T^  ^?rS^T  S^  I  111. 
The  work  ends  : 

This  last  title  seems  to  occur  only  in  this  placa 

Add.  1590. 

Paper;  257  leaves,  10  lines,  13  x  4in. ;  modern. 
Kalpadrumavadana-mala. 

See  Feer  in  Journ.  Asiatique  1879,  p.  283 ;  also  the  list  of  tales, 
ibid.,  p.  304;  and  likewise  the  long  account  in  Dr  Eajendralala  Mitra, 
iV'ep.  Buddh.  Lit.  pp.  292  sqq. 

Add.  MS.  900  is  a  copy  of  the  last  two  tales. 

Add.  1592. 

Paper;  121  leaves,  10  lines,  12  x  5  in.;  modern. 

Part  of  the  Ratnavadana-mala  (17  tales). 

In  Add.  1615  the  work  is  said  to  be  'spoken'  by  Ci'Ighana. 

For  a  general  account  see  Feei',  Journ.  Asiatique  1879,  pp.  283 
sqq.;  and  his  full  list  of  Tales,  ibid.,  305. 

The  titles  coincide  with  those  of  the  Paris  MS.,  except  where 
otherwise  stated. 

9—2 


132  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  ir,92. 


Tale 

1    ends 

i  96. 

2 

)> 

176. 

3 

)) 

256. 

4 

>) 

336  (^frT^"R^T°). 

5 

)) 

376. 

6 

)) 

416  (-g^^^T^)  (sic). 

7 

)) 

466  (^^T^T^^T^). 

8 

>> 

49a-6  (ITW-d<T  ^^^TT^)- 

,, 

9 

)> 

57. 

>) 

10 

>) 

65. 

>> 

11 

>) 

71. 

>) 

12 

)) 

83. 

>) 

13 

)) 

95  (ITITTT^^^WT^^T'T). 

» 

14 

>> 

1046. 

»» 

15 

)> 

109  (^^^^^T^TT^,    Paris 

p.  298,  tale  No.  16). 
,,      16    „      No  title.     Story  of  a  merchant,  Nanda,  at  Cravasti 
(cf.  Paris  MS.  No.  25),  1176. 

Ends  with  tale   17,   TT^T    ^f?T^T^T^   ^l^T"^  II    Paris  MS., 
tale  15. 


Add.   1593. 

Paper;  253  leaves,  7 — 8  lines,  12  x  3^,  in.;  in  several  hands, 
the  last  giving  a  date  N.  s.  939  (a.d.  1819). 

Sadhana-mala-tantea. 
Add,  1686  is  a  large  fragment  of  an  old  MS.  of  the  same  work  : 
see  the  account  of  that  MS. 
Begms  : 

q?:!^  ^TT:  ^T^^T^^  ^T^  ^f^fT  ^^T^^TW^f :  II  etc. 
A  little  further  on  : 

^TTpq^  fWN'TET  ^■^qTT\^  IT^^rT^  II    ^t  ^^T  S Wr"«IT^ 
'%  ^t  ^W^^  etc.    . 


Add.  1593.]  SAXSKRIT    MANUSCKIITS.  133 

Ends  : 
^t^i;^^  Wt^lIH^^  ^f^iT5^:  II    ^rfT^t  ^%fT^  ^flT- 

^^^^TmT^^'k^:  ii  "R^m^:  ii 

Date  (in  semi- vernacular), 


Add.  1596. 

Paper;  26  leaves,  6  lines,  IS^xSin. ;  dated  N.  S.  950 
(A.D.  1830). 

Katnaguna-sancaya. 

The  leaves  have  the  double  numbering,  1 — 26,  and  (more  con- 
spicuously) 71 — 96,  so  that  the  present  MS.  would  seem  to  have 
belonged  to  a  series. 

Apparently  a  collection  of  gathas  illustrative  of  the  Ashtasahasrika 
Pi'ajiia-paramita;  for  none  of  them  seem  to  occur  in  the  text  of  that 
work,  as  we  have  it  in  Add.  866. 

In  32  short  chapters,  corresponding  to  those  of  the  Ashtas". 

Begins  : 
^W     ^^     ^^^T^T^fTTT^T^^^^WTf  (?)  ^^T^T?Tt 

^TTW^f  ^T^  3T^Tr  ^-^T^:  I   (74). 
5.    ^°  T°  "51^  ^°  ^T^  f^ffr^  I 

^TJT  ^frf^:  qf?:^«  etc. 

For  the  other  titles  see  Add.  866. 
Ends : 

Then  follow  date,  etc.,  as  above. 


134  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1596. 

frf^^  (i.e.  f^f^°)  fiT^-^TfTT^T  ^R^RT^  -q^J- 

The  above  titles,  etc.  may  serve  as  examples  of  the  barbarously 
incorrect  character  of  the  MS. 


Add.  1598. 
Paper;  171  leaves,  5  lines,  11  x  4  in. ;  modern. 
AVADANA-SARA-SAMUCCAYA. 

The  MS.  is  torn  in  places,  and  ends  abruptly  at  the  same  word  as 
Add.  1585. 

Many  of  the  leaves  have  on  their  left  margin  '^°  -^1°  W°,  ao  that 
I  have  supposed  this  to  be  part  of  the  work  No.  48  in  Mr  Hodgson's 
list  (Essay  Lit.  Nep.  p.  38). 

Begins  : 

1.  TTfT  ^T^T^^^Tf^Trf^  WWHi  t  22a. 

2.  T°  '^t^T  ^°  I  83a. 

3.  T*  ^<^TT^'5^T^^^  (sic)  I  43&. 

4.  T*  ■»T^^S^T^°  I  565. 

5.  T*  ^T^T^^Trr^  I   636. 

6.  T*  ^Sni^Trl^  I   70. 

7.  T°  "^^TW^TrT^  I   78. 

8.  X°  -^WRffT  ^°  I   85?>. 

9.  T*  ^^^Trf^  I   1016. 

10.  T°  "^^^TrT^  I  1116. 

11.  T°  'S^^TrT^  I  121a. 

12.  T°  "^^T^Trf^  I   1376. 

The  remainder  of  the  MS.  coincides  exactly  with  Add.  1585, 
containing  the  Sumaghadavadana  and  the  fragment  there  noticed. 


Add.  1598.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  135 

Tale  1  is  apparently  different  from  the  tale  of  the  sarthavaha 
Dharmalaljha  in  the  MahavasLu  (Add.  1339,  leaves  232 — 241). 

Tale  2  is  also  different  from  its  homonym  in  the  Avadana- 
kalpa-loka  (Add.  913,  leaves  15 — 17);  though  the  merit  of  sacrificing 
even  one's  body  for  another's  benefit  is  a  moral  pointed  in  both. 

Tale  3  is  the  story  of  a  sarthavaha  named  Nanda,  who  is 
punished  for  his  excessive  accumulation  of  wealth  in  a  former  birth, 

by  a  miserable  spirit  of  miserly  jealousy  (''RTW^)  in  tliis. 

Tale  4  is  the  same  as  Acokav.  No.  1 2 ;  thus  the  verses  of 
lamentation    uttered    by   the    tajxisvinl    at    the    birth    of    her    son, 

beginning  ^Trf  ^'^ . .,  (49i),  are  identical :  the  bulk  of  both  tales 
consists  of  discourses  on  abhidharma,  etc.  The  beginning  of  this  story 
however •  corresponds  with  208a.  line  4,  not  2076,  of  Add.  1482,  as 
the  tale  there  has  several  pages  of  introduction  and  scenery. 

Tale  5  is  the  story  of  a  sarthavaha  named  Supriya,  in  the  reign  of 
Brahmadatta  at  Benares. 

Tale  6.     Vid.  Add.  1473  et  aL  ib.  cit. 

Tale  7.     On  Candraprabha  see  Burn.  Intr.  138,  160. 

Tale  8.     See  Divyavadana,  Tale  xxxii. 

Tale  9.  A  long  tale  of  Brahmadatta,  king  of  Benares  and  his 
experiences  in  elephant-hunting :  different  from  the  tale  of  the  same 
name  in  the  Jataka-mala. 

Tale  10.  A  tale  illustrative  of  the  virtue  of  kslmnti,  in  which 
the  chief  actors  are  a  certain  Kalinga-raja  and  Candrakumara.  (The 
Chanda-kumara-jataka  in  the  Cariya-pitaka  is  illustrative  of  dana.) 

Tale  11.     One  of  the  numerous  deer-births.     In  praise  of  vTri/a. 

Tale  12.     A  story  of  a  peacock,  Suvarnavabhasa. 


Add.  1603. 

Paper;  18  leaves,  6  lines,  12|  x  3^ in.;  dated  N.  s.  919  (a.d. 
1799). 

Uposhadhavadan A ,  [Deyaputrotpatti,] 

and   DOSHANIRXAYAVADAXA. 

These  are  clearly  the  same  works  as  R.  A.   S.  No.    15   (q.   v.). 
See  also  Add.  1610. 


13G  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1603. 

Begins  (lifter  invocations  of  the  Ratnatraya  and  Avalokitecvara) : 

^"^°  etc. 

^T^^T^  TT^^  I  °  I   10a. 

Ends : 

»TTlTr^^4^Rf^^<^V  ^T^T^^T^  ^^T^f^ffrT  I  (Date  as  above). 
The  titles  ^T^     and  '^T'S°  occur  at  the  light  hand  of  many 
leaves ;  on  the  cover  is  the  general  title  ^TT*i^T=^^"T«T. 

Add.  1607. 

Paper;  224  leaves,  6  lines,  12Ax3in.;  dated  N.  s.  902 
(A.D.  1782). 

Saddharm  \-laxkavatara. 

On  the  work  see  Add.  915,  and  add  a  reference  to  Feer  in  Ann. 
Mus.  Guini.  ii.  237,  This  MS.  represents  an  independent  text,  for 
though  both  are  often  faulty,  passages  are  preserved  hei-e  (e.g.  l6Sa,b, 
endinf'  as  Add.  915,  12ff,  2)  that  are  marked  as  lacunae  in  that  MS. 

Add.  1609. 

Paper;  52  leaves  folding  backwards  and  fonvards,  7  lines, 
9  X  .31  in. ;  xviith  cent. 

Manual  of  Tanteic  puja  (Bali-puja  or  Cakra  puja  ?), 

The  paper  is  mounted  on  muslin  and  gauze. 

The  title  "^sR^fafT  is  given  on  the  wrapper. 

The  title  Bali-puja  given  in  Dr  Wright's  list  is  partly  substan- 
tiated by  the  ending  of  the  work;  which  runs:  TTfT  "'T'^^T^  ... 
after  3  lines  '^ni^T  ^f%. 

The  final  colophon  is  simply  Tfr\  ^^  ^TTT^TII  °  II 


*  Cf.  Oxf.  Cat.  3886,  1.  1. 


Add.  1610.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  137 

Add.  1610. 
Paper;  14  leaves,  9  lines,  13  x  5  in.;  modern. 

IJPOSHADHAVADANA. 
This  is  the  same  work  as  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  1-5,  which  is  there 
called  "Uposhadhavadanain  and  Doshanirnayavadanam ",  but  the 
form  "^XJT^°"  is  written  on  the  right  hand  of  several  leaves 
throughout  our  MS.,  showing  that  "Uposhadha"  is  a  general  name 
for  the  whole  work.     It  consists  of  2  adhyayas. 

This  avadana  belongs  to  the  latest  style  of  composition.  There  is 
no  continuous  plot,  but  the  work  is  a  somewhat  rambling  dialogue 
between  the  Buddha,  YaQishtha  and  others :  there  are  several  pages  of 
invocations  etc.  At  11a  there  occurs  a  short  story  about  Dharmapala 
king  of  Yaigali.     See  more  in  Rajendralala  Mitra,  Nep.  B,  Lit.  p.  26.5. 

Text  begins  : 

Ends  : 
^^TTT II 

Add.  1611. 

Paper;  98  leaves,  13  lines,  14  x  4in. ;  dated  N.  s.  765  (a.d. 
1645). 

AVADANA-gATAKA. 

This  MS.  is  fully  described  by  M.  Feer  in  the  Journ,  Asiatique 
(Aug.— Dec.  1879).  Cf.  especially  p.  144  :  "Ce  MS.  est  sans  doute  le 
seul  representant  des  anciens  manuscrits  de  cet  ouvrage." 

A  full  list  of  the  tales  is  to  be  found  ibid.  p.  302,  For  the 
numbering  compare  p.  159,  note. 


138  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1614. 


Add.  1614. 

Paper;  36  leaves,  7  lines,  13  x  4  in. ;  late  xviiith  cent.,  with 
modern  supply. 

A  collection  of  Stotras  and  Songs, 

The  MS.  consists  of  19  leaves  originally  numbered  20 — 38,  now 
13 — 31,  written  in  a  square  and  regular  Devanagarl  hand  (perhaps  of 
the  end  of  the  xviiith  cent.),  with  lines  and  margins  ruled;  the 
remainder  (1 — 12,  32,  36)  is  a  very  recent  supply  by  ISTepalese  scribes. 

The  verses  in  each  hymn  are  numbered,  and  the  numbers  are 
accordingly  given  below. 

Begins  : 

^r^:  ^TiT^^TT^^^TT^  II    ^Tfv^^T^  II 

The  following  are  the  first  occurring  titles  : 

W^TH  II  '^'i,  II  8. 

TWT^T'  ^R-!=^^^^T^T^l\?f  ^°  "^°  II  '^'i  II  5. 

TWT^T°  -^^-^t  ^TTT^  I  ^8  I   66. 

TWr^TT^  7f:^^Ti;wt^  ^°  I  ^H,  I  76. 

Tf2T°  "^^T^T^*  ^»  I  ^  I  ib. 

TW  "^TW^^rf»T^T^^°  -^^  I  -^^  I  86. 

\m°  T^^Tfrr^*  ^«  I  4  I   9. 

Short  hymns  to  Avalokitecvara  continue  till  13  (the  original  MS.) 
where  we  get : 

and  T*  IT^mTTrRrfT^ffT:  '^'^  I    ibid. 

The  hymns  next  following  are  chiefly  addressed  to  Cakj-a-simha,  and 
are  attributed  to  'Har.sha-deva-bhupati'  (15)  and  Yacodhara  (16,  17). 
Among  the  next  following  are  hymns  purporting  to  be  taken  from 
the  Bhadrakalpavadana,  by  Navagraha  (176),  and  from  the  Svayam- 
bhupurana  (20).     From   33  onwards  the  hymns  are  called  'songs' 

('"TTrf).     Each  consists  of  about  a  score  of  numbered  verses,  the  last 

being  entitled  ^T%^T^<T. 

The  collection  has  no  genei-al  title  or  culophou. 


Add.  1615.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  139 


Add.   1615. 

Paper;  143  leaves,  10  lines,  11  x  6  in. ;  dated  in  words  N.  s. 
923  (a.d.  1803);  large  modern  Nepalese  hand,  often  sloping  to 
the  right. 

Parts  of  the  Katnavadanamala  and  of  other  collections  of  tales. 

Each  tale,  as  a  rule,  has  its  own  pagination,  and  on  the  margin 
are  written  the  names  of  the  collection  and  of  the  tale. 

The  tales  are  as  follows  : 

I.     From  the  Ratndvaddna  (see  the  names  of  the  tales  in  Add. 
1592).     The  scribe  seems  to  have  transcribed  what  he  could  fiud  in  an 
imperfect  copy;  so  he  has  written  it  in  seven  portions  of  24,  12,  9, 
34,  11,  18,  and  7  leaves,  respectively,  making  109  leaves  in  alh 
1. 


Tale  1 

ends 

12a. 

4.  Tale  13 

(here  called   Q'antika) 

2 

» 

23a. 

(lacuna  on  186)  ends  196. 

„     6 

J) 

6a. 

„   U 

breaks  off  at        346. 

„     7 

5> 

126. 

5. 

„  18 

ends                86. 

„     8 

breaks  otF  at 

126. 

„  19 

breaks  off  at        1 36. 

„  11 

(here   called   Hastava- 

6. 

„  25 

ends              116. 

dana)  breaks  off  at 

9a. 

7. 

„  27 

66. 

„  28 

breaks  off  at         8a. 

3. 


II.  From  the  Dvavimratyavaddna,  7  leaves. 

The  text  seems  independent  of  that  of  Add.  1274.  Tale  1  ends  5a; 
2  ends  56;  3  ends  Qa;  4  ends  7a;  5  breaks  off  at  76.  This  last  is 
not  the  same  as  tale  5  in  Add.  1274. 

III.  Work  on  the  12  Tlrthas  of  Nepal. 
14  leaves.     In  verse  throughout. 

Text  begins  : 

^^TT^f  TT^^THT  <fT^Tf^  ^T^^T1%  ^  I 

Ends  abruptly  (14o)  : 

^(^T  W^STITT^TW  ^■3l'?f^i:R^  ^^TrT^  II 

IV.  Uposliadhavaddna  (2nd  adhyaya). 

13  leaves,  numbered  1 — 13,  though  the  MS.  begins  somewhat 
abruptly  at  a  point  corresponding  to  7a,  1.  1  fin.,  of  Add.  1610  (q.  v.). 


140  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDIILST  [Add.  1615. 

Ends: 

^1\  '^'i  etc.  II  t  v#r...  II 

Add.  1617. 

Paper;  55  leaves,  7  liue.s,  18|  x  4  in. ;  date  at  end  N.  s.  945 
(A.D.  1825). 

GUHYA-SAMAJA    (ApaRARDHA). 

On  the  whole  work  see  Add.  1365,  and  add  a  reference  to  the 
detailed  account  of  it  in  Raj  endralal's  Za^ito  Vistara,  Intr.  pp.  11 — 16; 
and  Xej).  B.  L.,  259.  There  is  another  copy  of  this  part  in  R.  A.  S. 
Cat.  No.  44. 

Begins: 

f ^TT^lf^^^  f^oT^TT  I 

2.  °^^?:t^t  fifffr^:  I  15. 

IG— 17. 

4.  °TT^  %TT<?^^TV^  ^TT?  ^fj^q^^:  I   18. 

5.  °#^^T:^^°  21. 

6.  "^^^Tf^'ftt^rr^^TT^  ^T^°  23. 

7.  «^^Tf^^^«  27. 

8.  °fT'^TT^  ^"g:^:°  80. 

9.  °^^^frr^^W^^°  846. 

10.  [The  title  of  this  chapter,  as  in  the  R.  A.  S.  MS.,  seems  to 
be  wanting.] 


Add.  1617.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  141 

11.  «f?f«r^T>5^T^^T^°  38. 

12.  °ft^?Tr^T7T^'2I^*  -^21. 

13.  ° ^t ^"^ JT^T'^^T^^T  ^T^°  476. 

14.  ^TfTtrTTSTT^  ^^^  ^T^«  oOh. 

15.  ^^^^TT^f^^T^frl^^    ^TTT     q^^-Si:    ^Z^:  I 

The  date  is  retouched,  but  it  cannot  be  far  wrong. 

Add.  1618. 

Paper;  138  leaves,  7  lines,  14  x  4|^iu. ;  modern. 

DAgABHUMigVARA, 

For  beginning,  chapters,  etc.,  see  MS.  867. 
Ends  : 

^^T^  I    ^  ^^T  ...  I 

Add.  1620. 
Paper;  119  leaves,  7  lines,  14  x  3i  in.;  xvii — xVilith  cent. 

Ratnavadanamala  (first  13  tales). 
Leaf  13,  as  well  as  63  which  apparently  gave  the  title  of  tale  8, 
are  missing. 

Cf.  Add.  MS.  1592  and  Feer  ib.  cit. 

Add.  1623. 

Black  paper  with  gold  letters;  100  leaves,  5  lines,  15^  x  4  in.; 
dated  N.  s.  820  (a.d.  1700). 

This  MS.  is  in  three  parts,  written  by  the  same  scribe  and  Avith 
continuous  numbering. 

I.     Leaves  1 — 10  (formerly  marked  Add.  1622). 
Aparimitayu-sutra. 

The  text  is  erpxally  barbarous  with  that  of  Add.  1277  (4.  v.). 


142  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1623. 

Ends  : 

II.  Leaves  11—20. 

SARYA-DURGATI-PAKir;ODHAXA    (Part  1). 
Begins  : 

T:iT\lfTV^TT^^  (?) 

This  portion  of  the  woi'k  consists  entii'ely  of  invocations  and  the 
like. 

Ends  : 

^^^^^:^^  ^-^^^r  ^m^:  I 

III.  Leaves  21—100. 

Sarya-durgati-paei(;'odhaxa  (Part  2), 

Begins,  after  invocation  to  Vajrasatva  : 

■q;t  ^^T   ^«   1?:°   ^°   "H^^^  ^"4 \  ^l  ?f TR^^%  (sic) 
fT^TfrT  W  I    ^f^^^ .... 

Ends  (98,  1.  5)  as  Add.  1378  (which  see);  after  which  follows  : 

f;R^.V^TWT-T^T^T^%^f5TT^'5teTT^?fT\--^rrT^tll 

Then  follow  the  usual  acknowledgment  to  parents,  teachers,  etc., 
and  a  mention  of  the  reigning  king,  Bhupatindra  Malla. 

After  this  the  scribe  gives  details  as  to  his  family  and  patrons, 
and  adds  some  notes  in  the  vernacular.  The  date,  etc.,  are  thus 
given : 

^Iclrf^  -c^^o   ^TH"^m^  (sic)  J^W^^  ^^T^^t   ffT^ 
^^^f^frr  I  f^fW^^  ^T  ^T"g:T^"^^-'J7^T^^t  (sic)  ^  rf^- 


Add.  1623.]  SAXSKRIT    MANUSCRIPTS.  143 

^i:*.f{^Tf^^T^  ^TTTTr^TTf^^^rfT  (?)  ^  H^^^  "^^Trf^ 

Tlie  colopliou  coucludes  with  a  scribe's  verse. 

Add.  1625. 

Paper;  406  leaves,  7  Hues,  14  x  4|  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  948  (a.d. 
1828). 

ASHTASAHASRIKA-PRAJNAPAKAMITA, 

The  MS.  is  bound  in  coloured  boards,  with  designs,  etc.,  on  both 
sides.  On  leaf  1  is  a  brightly  coloured  picture  of  the  deity  enthroned 
and  adored  by  two  devotees  bearing  sacred  vessels.  Each  page  is 
bordered  by  a  rim  of  red  and  green  stripes. 

For  the  woi'k  see  Add.  866. 

After  date,  etc.,  as  given  above,  the  scribe  proceeds : 

Add.  1627. 

Paper;  409  leaves,  17 — 18  lines,  14|  x  7  in. ;  modern. 
^ATASAHASRI  Prajnaparamita,  Part  (Khanda)  8. 
On  the  whole  work  see  Add.  1633. 
This  part  contains  chapters  26 — 37. 
Text  begins : 

*  Cf.  MS.  1373. 


144  CATALOGUE    OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1627. 

Ch.  xxvi  ends  1936;  cli.  xxx,  3106;  cU.  xxxv,  373. 
Ends  : 


Add.  1628. 
Paper;  594  leaves,  9  lines,  17  x  4  in.;  on  the  date  see  below. 

PANCAVIMgATISAHASRIKA   PrAJXAPARAMITA. 

Leaves  412 — 559  are  paper  of  the  xviith  or  eai-ly  xviiith  cent.  ; 
the  rest  is  recent  supply.  The  work  is  in  8  parivarttas,  and  is 
preceded  by  an  introductory  treatise  in  8  adhikaras,  ascribed  to 
Maitreyanatha  (leaf  9) ;  see  next  MS. 

Begins  : 

^:  ^^fT^T  ^^f^^^^  m^T^W:  ^T^^T^^I  ^T  TTT^- 

^fn?T      ^^fi;rnifTT     ^T^t4^^TT\^T  I       ^^T^TTT^T 

^fnT  ^^^T  f^^  '^'^J  #'»TrT  I    rr%  ^T^^Tfv^Tcr7Tfl!T«TT 

The  titles  of  the  chapters  are  given  under  the  next  M8.,  in  wliich 
they  are  more  clearly  marked. 


Add.  1629. 

Paper;   884  leaves  (and  cover),  12  lines,  124  x  7  in. ;  dated 
in  words  [x.  s.]  9.  .5. 

PANCAVIMgATISAHASRIKA   PrAJNAPARAMITA. 

The  word  ll'R'^TW^Trfil  is  written  on  the  left  raai-gin  of  1;  there 
is  a  large  illustration  on  the  same  page. 
For  the  beginning  see  the  last  MS. 
Chapters  etc.  end  as  follows  : 

^rTT  sfw^TT:  ^^^:  I  2b. 


Ai>D.  1629.]  SANSKRIT    MANTSfRIPTS.  145 

3.  ""^  w^riTf^^TT^fft-^:  qfc^^:  I  Sb. 

4.  °%  ^tT^TTTfH^frf^TT^fJ^:  ^°  I   46. 

The  5tli   (iTJTfvr^Tr^TfV*),   6tli    (^^tTf^^W^TlfV'' ) 
and  7th  ('Q;^^WTf*ir'')  adhikaras  end  ou  bb. 

*irT%  i^^^T^Tf^^ft  s'g:^:  6. 

With  these  compare  the  account  of   the  work    in    Rajendralal, 
mp.  B.  Z.  193. 

^^^^  I  l)frITT"^^%^^T^^  [«T^T^»    Add.  1628,  If.  9] 

The   main  work   begins   on   the   next  page   (6ft)  with   the  usual 
■q;^^^T  ^rfTF^  and  a  list  of  Bodhisattvus,  etc. 

The  fii'st  parivartta  has  no  regular  subdivision :   much  of  it  is  in 
the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  8ubhuti  and  Cariputra.     It  ends  thus: 

^T^°  ^'^^^f^^fl"  ^°  f^ffl^:  I  ^  I  1906. 

^T^o  rT^rTTt[n:^:  ^(^^:  I  2706  (=4116,  Add.  1623). 

^T^«  TlX^T^ft^fi;^*  "T^TT:  I  3306  (  =  503  ihid.). 

^J•^o  ^^Tffix^m*  ^i::  i  3346  (=  510  ^■6ivz.). 
^r^»  ni^mfT^TrTnr^*  ^im:  1  3436. 

Ends  : 

A  number  of  verses  follow,  by  the  scribe  Tndramuni,  both  \\\ 
Sanskrit  and  the  vernacular. 

Add.  1630. 

Paper  ;  479  leaves,  9  lines,  18  x  6  in. ;  modern. 

^ATASAHASRi   PrAJNAPARAMITA,    Part    2. 

On  leaf  1,  left-hand  margin,  is  the  abbreviation  T"^  TfT. 

10 


146  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1630. 

Another  copy  of  this  Part  is  in  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  63.     This  Part,  or 
Khanda,  contains  parivarttas  xiii — xxv. 
Begins : 

^Trfll 

The  first  chapters  have  numerous  subdivisions,  unnumbered  at 
fii'St,  and  subsequently  with  numbers  running  up  to  42. 

Parivartta  xiv  ends  170J;  xv.  1956;  xvi.  273;  xvii.  280;  xviii. 
291 ;  xix.  2966;  XX.  298  ;  xxi.  312;  xxii.  322;  xxiii.  382;  xxiv.  410. 

Ends  : 

irrfw^°  -qiTf^^  ■q^ft3i°  ■q''  i  Tfr\  f^ffr^^-i^: 

A  verse  or  two  follows  in  praise  of  the  work,  etc. 

Add.  1631. 

Paper;  490  leaves,  10  lines,  20x5jin. ;  dated  in  words 
N.  s.  983  (A.D.  1863). 

^ATASAHASRi  Prajnaparamita.     Part  3  (Chapters  26 — 87). 
Text  begins  : 

^^  ^f^T^lTT^  {sic)  "JnxV^^T  ^^W^^rT^^fT^  ^T 

^IW^rW®  etc.  (see  Add.  1627). 
Ch.  26  ends  252. 

Ends  : 

°^^^T  SI^T^TTTII  ^T^^'3IrI^T^T:(s/c)Tm°  ^"S- 
f^TnT:  ^fX^°  I    Then  follows  the  date  (see  above)  I  ^T  "^r^T- 

WrT  (?)  ^q^frf  II 

Add.  1632. 

Paper;  607  leaves,  10 — 11  lines,  17  x  5  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  923 
(A.D.  1803). 

^ATASAHASRi  Prajnaparamita.    Part  4  (Chapters  38 — 72). 


Adp.  1632.]  SANSKRIT   MAXUSCRIPTS.  147 

Text  begins  : 

Parivartta  38  ends  606;  39,  726;   40,  786;   41,  966;    50,  184; 
55,  509 ;  60,  5906. 
Ends,  607  : 

^"fTrrfrlTi:  ■qx?!!^^?!'.'  I  (This  is  the  only  instance  I  have  observed 
in  this  MS.  of  the  indication  of  a  chapter's  contents  at  the  end.) 
TT^fr^^TT^T^^o  etc ^Tf^IT"«I^"5^f^frT  I    ■WJRT'^J 

^^Tf5^^^q^q^¥#Wl"° ITf^rg^T^t    ^TfTT°    V^- 

^*f^l  . . .  '?rf*r"^^T'^f^Vr^T . . .  and  so  on,  in  praise  of  the 
boot  and  its  study,  for  a  dozen  lines;  after  which  date  and  name  of 
scribe,  as  follows  : 

The  place  of  writing  (Lalita-pura)  and  the  reigning  monarch 
(Glrvana-yuddha)  are  also  mentioned. 

In  spite  of  the  mention  of  a  fifth  Khanda  in  Dr  D.  Wright's  list, 
which  however  does  not  appear  in  oiir  collection,  it  would  seem  from 
the  tone  and  form  of  the  above  colophon,  that  this  is  either  the 
conclusion  of  the  whole  work,  or  that  at  all  events  the  account  given 
by  Mr  Hodgson's  Pandit  (Hodgs.  Essay  Lit.  Nep.  p.  16)  is  correct; 
that  "Sata  Sahasrika  is  a  collective  name  of  the  first  four  Khands,  to 
which  the  fifth  is  not  necessarily  adjunct ;  and  indeed  it  is  one  of  the 
several  abstracts  of  the  Sahasrika."  The  Tibetan  version  (see  Csoma, 
and  Peer  in  Ann.  G.  ii.  197)  has  75  chapters. 


Add.  1633. 

Palm-leaf;  494  leaves,  11  lines,  I7i  x  5  in.;  dated  N.  S.  926 
(A.D.  180G). 

10—2 


148  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1633. 

(^ATASAHASRi  Prajnapaea]viita,  Part  1. 

There  is  an  illustration  on  leaf  1. 

"IT^?T"  is  written  on  the  left  margin  of  many  leaves. 

The  MS.  is  enclosed  by  a  pair  of  very  finely  carved  boards. 

This  appears  to  be  the  second  known  redaction  of  the  Prajiia- 
paramita,  the  chief  philosophical  work  of  Northern  Buddhism. 

It  abounds  in  repetitions,  etc.,  in  the  most  wearisome  style  of 
Buddhist  literature.  For  general  notices  see  Hodgson  Ess.  16,  Burn, 
Intr.  462  etc.,  and  especially  Eajendralal,  Nep.  Buddh.  Lit.  pp. 
177,  sqq. 

Notices  of  the  Tibetan  versions  ax'e  given  in  Wassiliew  and  Csoma 
(Feer  in  Ann.  Guimet,  ii.  197). 

Begins : 

1^^  ^^T  ^°  \°  ^"^  M°  TT^'^t  f^^  ^  I  "^yf;^^ 

Parivartta  i.  ends  96  ;  ii.  139  ;  iii.  1476;  iv.  ?;  v.  2656;  vi.  354; 
vii.  416;  viii.  419;  ix.  4266;  x.  4506;  xi.  482, 
Ends : 

^TTT^fTrfrT  II    ^  ^^T«  I   ^^  etc.  I  ^^rf^  ti^^  tinW^TRT 

«rr^  (?)  _  i;^^frf  _  -^X  -  ^•^-%  -  ^TT^^^^'fT :     TT^^^- 
WTf^^mTTn^fTTW^  ^mV^^Tf^^ft  I  °  I  f^f^rf  ^T- 

^Wl^^  (?)  ^^f^frl  I 

Then  follows  a  line  or  two  as  to  the  writing,  and  in  praise  of  the 
book. 

Add.  1634. 

Paper ;  37  leaves,  5  lines  (ruled  in  red),  7^  x  2  in. ;  dated 
in  words  N.  R.  772  (a.d.  1652). 

KiRTIPATAKA  by   KUNU^ARMAN. 
In  126  numbered  verses. 


Add.  1634,]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  149 

Begins : 

^KrT^T3Tf*I^^^T^^^fT^TTfrrlT3TT^:  I 

€T  S^  ft  f^  ^^T^^"^  ^f^rT  ^ft^ftf5  TT^j:  II 
^f^^^^  [?  tf^«]  T^-^T^T  Yt  ^^T^  f^  ^fcT  I 
^r^^^T^^^T  St  r\-^'^-^  ^fjf^ri:  || 

^^T^^TiTVt^  T^TTTWq^Tif^t  II 

Then  follows  another  introductory  verse. 

The  work  thus  appears  to  be  a  description  of  certain  places  in 
Nepal.     It  commences  with  Lalitapura  thus  : 

Ends: 
^■nfT^ W^fir^TffTf!^%  etc.  (see  above). 


Add.  1635. 

Paper ;   62  leaves  and  cover,  5  lines,  8^  x  3  in. ;  dated  (in 

words)  N.  s.  805  (a.d.  1685). 

AgvAGHOSHA-NANDiMUKHlVADANA,  with  vernacular  version. 
Begins  and  ends  as  Add.  MSS.  1357,  1486  (which  see). 

Add.  1638.  3. 

Paper;  18  leaves,  6  lines,  7  x  Sin. ;  xviith  cent. 

Fragment  of  the  Amara-ko^a  (Book  2). 
Contains  Book  2  to  end  of  ch.  vii.  (p.  159,  ed.  Deslongchamps). 

*  Sic  metri  gratia. 


i;)0  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1639. 

Add.  1639. 

Paper ;  G  leaves,  5  lines,  7x2^  in. ;  modern. 

Fragment  of  the  Amarako^a. 

This  fragment  was  perhaps  intended  as  a  supply  for  the  full 
original  of  Add.  1638.  3  or  a  work  of  similar  size.  It  contains  the 
be^nnninc;  of  the  book. 

Add.  1641. 

Paper;  28  leaves  folding  backwards  and  forwards,  7 — G  lines, 
8x3  in. ;  xvil — xviiith  cent. 

I.      SAXGiTA-TARODAYACtJDAMAXI   by   RaJA   PrATAPA-MALLA. 

Dated  n.  s.  783  (a.d.  1663). 

The  work  is  a  treatise  on  music,  especially  on  tala  or  time. 

On  the  royal  author  and  his  literary  tastas  see  Wright's  Nepal, 
p.  215. 

The  work  is  in  two  parts,  but  some  of  the  first  part  appears  to  be 
missing,  vmless  it  be  repi'esented  by  the  5  verses  on  the  outside  cover 
iu  a  later  hand,  now  almost  illegible. 

The  second  part  is  (unlike  the  first)  in  numbered  verses  (110). 
It  begins  (p.  6)  with  a  discussion  of  the  tdla  or  musical  time  called 
"^W^^  or  "^T'^'T^:  several  other  tCdas  are  mentioned,  corresponding 
with  those  in  the  Puranasarvasva  (Aufr.  Oxf.  Cat.  87a). 

The  work  ends : 

^^^fTT^:  II  X\°  II  ^T^TT^T  ^TffTT  ^T^T^  ^^^T  sft 

Tlien  follow  subscriptions,  chiefly  in  the  vernacular,  giving  the  day 
of  writing  as  Sunday,  and  the  scribe's  name  as  Pumacandra,  resident 


Add.  1641.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  151 

at  the  Dliarmakirti-vihara,  and  the  father  of  3   sons,  Jayakalyana, 
Jayaku9ala,  and  Jayadh[a]rama. 

II  (p.  27).     Vernacular  Avork  in  44  numbered  verses. 

III.     A  manual  of  devotion  to  various  deities. 

Begins  (p.  34) : 

^t    ^TT:    ^T^^^t^T^I     ^^^^^^5T    f%^rJMdo5^ 

TTT^  ^T^f^^TW^^  Tcrf^^-^TT^T  ^^^WT"^^TVrT  ^T- 
^^■pTTfWTT^  f^^^^f^^T  (sic)  mft  ^T^TJ^fr  m  I 

Several  other  prayers,  etc.,  are  added,  chiefly  in  the  vernacular,  or 
in  Sanskrit  like  the  specimen  just  given. 


Add.  1643. 

Palm-leaf;  223  leaves,  6  lines,  21|  x  2in.;  dated  N.  s.  135 
(A.D.  1015). 

ASHTASAHASRIKA  PrAJNAPARAMITA. 

There  are  illustrations  on  many  leaves,  throughout  the  book. 

The  insides  of  the  binding-boards  bear  also  several  more  than 
usually  artistic  figures,  many  of  which  correspond  to  those  in  Yon 
Siebold's  Japan,  Vol.  v.  (Plates). 

See  the  Palaeogi-aphical  Society's  Oriental  Series,  Plate  32,  where 
a  leaf  is  reproduced  :  also  the  Introduction  to  the  present  work. 
On  the  work  see  Add.  866. 

The  subscription  is  in  verse,  occasionally  faulty  in  metre  : 

*  Read  TT^rf  1,  though  both  are  against  the  metre, 
t  Here  some  corrector  has  distm-bed  metre  and  sense. 


l.>2  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  164.?. 

^^Tfj  (?¥^T?5)  rfrFrg:¥^f^r^T^t  II 

Then  follows  (in  the  hooked  Xepalese  hand)  : 

^TrTTTWI^^^^aTT^T:  Tcoit.  *^^°1  IT^T^  II 

Then  follow  two  or  three  more  lines  in  a  similar  strain,  praising 

the  "fruit"  of  reading  the  book. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  last  leaf  is  the  conclusion  (last  5  lines)  of 

a  short  treatise  connected  with  the  Prajuaparamita,  and  in  the  same 

hand  as  the  main  work,  ending  thus  : 

Add.  1644. 

Palm-leaf;  9-i  leaves,  5  lines,  2x21in. ;  dated  N.  S.  325 
(a.  IX  1205,  see  Leluw). 

Paxca-raksha. 

Each  division  or  chapter  of  the  work  has  its  own  numbering. 

Thus  ch.  i.  has  25  leaves ;  ch.  ii.  26;  ch.  iii.  35;  ch.  iv.  3;  ch.  v.  5. 

The  titles  etc.  are  substantially  the  same  as  in  Add.  1325  ;  and, 
except  at  the  end  of  ch.  iii.  each  is  followed  by  a  blank  side,  forming 
volumes. 

The  last  leaf  is  much  mutilated,  and  is  supplied  by  a  paper  leaf. 

On  the  palm-leaf  fragment  can  still  be  made  out,  (1)  the  be- 
ginning of  the  final  title  ^T^^^T^5T5rT^^T"nr^ . .  . ;  (2)  the  end 


Add.  1644.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  153 

of  the  verse   ^  V^"  . . .   and  (3)  the  date  ^^"i^  (tops  of  figures 

only,    visible)    ^ifff^   l^ii  TT^^^   -^^^^^^  [I]  II    TT^- 

fVTT '5I^T*f^  ^^ 'C^*^ ...  On  the  reverse  are  the  remains  of  a 
postscript  in  a  finer  and  later  hand,  in  N^ewari,  with  half-obliterated, 
but  still  certain,  date,  N.  s.  579  (a.d,  UdO).  Above  ai'e  left  a  few 
words  in  the  original  hand  : 

^^TR^TTT^-^T^f^^^^^^N^nf :  (sic)  I  ^^T^  %^- 

The  MS.  concludes  with  a  leaf  of  paper  supply  which  is  remarkable, 
inasmuch  as  it  appears  to  be  a  copy  of  the  real  last  leaf  of  our  MS. 
when  it  was  in  a  rather  more  perfect  condition,  though  perhaps  eveu 
then  it  may  have  been  compared  with  another  MS.,  as  the  last  words 
of  the  book  and  the  title  show  discrepancies  of  forms,  etc. 

The  date  and  scribe's  name  are  thus  o;iven  : 


<-\        /^.    .-V 


^T  iZ  ^%  "€  I 

The  date  is  especially  remarkable,  as  it  seems  a  clear  instance  of  a 
copied  date — the  hand  as  well  as  paper  being  modern.  The  copy 
however  is  neither  a  forgery,  nor  a  mere  thoughtless  repetition,  but 
simply  added  as  a  testimony  to  the  antiquity  of  a  final  leaf  which  was 
in  a  perishing  condition,  doubtless  even  when  the  supply  was  made. 
See  the  Palaeographical  Introduction. 


Add.  1647. 

Palm-leaf;  132  leaves,  5  lines,  13  x  2  in. ;  xviiith  cent. 

Panca-raksha. 

The  MS.  is  illustrated  (cf.  Add.  1164)  with  figures  of  the  5  (^aktis 
at  the  beginnings  of  the  chapters. 

The  boards  are  also  illuminated  with   6  figures  of  Buddha  and 
other  smaller  figures. 

Begins,  after  invocation  to  the  Bodhisattvas  : 


154  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1647. 

The  chapters  are  differently  arranged  from  the  other  MSS. 
Ch.  I  of  Add.  132.5  is  fourth  here;  so  that  the  beginning  of  that 
MS.  will  be  found  on  leaf  986  of  this. 

Ch.  II  (Add.  1325)  =  Ch.  1  ends  386. 
Ch.  Ill  „  „  =  Ch.  2  „  936. 
Ch.  IV    „         „       =  Ch.  3     „     97. 

Ends  : 

^TWf^^TW^TTWrfw^TTT^T  Wf^J^l  I    ^  V^T°  etc. 


Add.  1648. 

Palm-leaf;  228  leaves,  7  lines,  12|  x  2  in.;  Xllith  cent.,  reign 
of  Arimalla. 

SlDHANA-SAMUCCAYA. 

On  the  hand-writing  see  the  Introduction  and  Table. 

The  date  (336)  has  clearly  been  retouched,  possibly  by  one  of  the 
persons  who  wrote  the  numerous  dates  (of  the  next  century)  on  the 
cover.  Comparing  the  forms  of  2  and  3  in  the  latter  part  of  the  MS., 
we  should  certainly  pronounce  the  figures  to  be  2's :  but  the  ordinary 
form  of  2  (though  not  of  3)  is  found  even  in  the  later  part  of  the  MS. 
e.g.  leaves  209,  210. 

The  day  of  the  week  and  month,  which  Prof.  Adams  has  kindly 
worked  out  for  me,  do  not  tally  for  the  year  336 :  nor  does  that  year 
quite  accord  with  chronological  accounts  (see  the  table  in  Historical 
Introduction).  The  numbers  have  therefore  probably  been  incorrectly 
restored. 

The  first  date  on  the  cover  is  that  of  an  ^T<,1  *T«f  (devotional 
or  liturgical  use  of  the  sadhanas  ?),  N.  s.  458  (a.  D.  1338),  by  one 
AnandajTvabhadra,  at  the  Crinaka-vihara. 

The  writing  is  fine  and  clear;  with  many  early  features,  e.g.  the 
manner  of  writing  i  medial,  of  which  both  the  earlier  and  later  forms 
are  seen. 

The  chalk-powder  is  still  distinctly  traceable  on  many  leaves  (see 
Introduction). 

The  work  is  a  collection  of  sadhanas  or  charms  (cf.  Add.  1686), 
to  which  a  full  index  will  be  found  on  an  extra  leaf  written  by  the 
second  hand.      Thus  : 


Add.  1648.J  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  155 

^[^]\  (begins)  f^^RlFT^^TV*!  (this  sadhana  is  by  a  Pandit 
Kuinudakara). 

T^        £_         ,,  '^^TFT'^^T^®    by    Pandit    Ratnakaragupta, 

etc.,  etc.  (51  in  all). 

The  colophon  runs  thus:  "^^^TT^  [^^^]  (^^^  above)      ^T^li'^T- 

The  words  in  brackets  are  rewritten  by  a  second  hand.  Then 
follows  a  page  of  Dharanis  to  Mahakala. 

Add.  1649. 

Palm-leaf;  107  leaves,  5  lines,  12|  x  2  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  532 
(A.D.  1412). 

SiDDHI-SARA  by   RaJA-JYOTIRAJA-MALLA. 

The  subject  of  the  work  is  astrology  and  auspicious  seasons;  it  has 
no  regular  chapters,  but  numerous  small  unnumbered  divisions. 
Begins  : 

f^^^  ^TfrTTT^^  TT^m^j^  Vt^TrfT  I 

"STT^  "^  Pjf^^TT^  ^TfrP^t  Wfi;^^  II 

Ends  : 

T^T^W  I    ^Tf^t   frfm  ^(T?:^^^^  I    T^W3T^^^m*  I 
^Tf^rq^T^t  II  f^nfrffirfrr  I  ^TTT^f^TT^^ < ^^ < l|<;Tr 

t  t  These  words  have  unfortunately  been  retraced;  but  the  name 
JAyajyoti(r)m''t  or  "dyoti  m"  is  established  by  the  verse  at  the 
beginning  of  the  book.      See  also  the  Historical  Introduction. 


*  Cf  Burgess,  Journ.  Am.  Or.  Soc.  vi.  2.36. 
t   For  the  form  of  the  name  cf  Add.  1695. 


156  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1650. 


Add.  1650. 

Palm-leaf;  originall}^  87  leaves,  5  lines,  13  x  l^in. ;  XIV — 
xvth  cent. 

AMARA-KOgA. 

Leaves  31,  32,  .58,  83,  84,  and  86,  are  •wanting. 

Leaf  2  is  modern  supply. 

The  MS.  ends  abruptly  in  the  middle  of  the  last  line  but  one  of 
the  work. 


Add.  1651. 

Palm-leaf;  51  leaves,  7  lines,  11 J  x  2in. ;  Xivtli  cent. 

Amaea-kova, 

Leaves,  7,  14,  20,  40,  45,  are  missing. 

Written  in  a  clear,  square  and  upright  hand. 

Begins    (after   the   invocation)    with    the    5     distichs    given    in 

Deslongchamps'    edition;    ends    abruptly  with    the    word    5(^cjff 
III.  vi.  4. 


Add.  1653. 

Palm-leaf;  IG  leaves,  5  lines,  12  x  1|  in. ;  XIV — XVth  cent. 
Tattwa-saxgraha. 

This  is  probably  the  work  mentioned  in  Hiouen-Thsang  (trans- 
lation of  M.  St.  Julien,  i,  186)  as  "Tri-tchin-lun",  which,  we  are  told, 
"veut  dire  litteralement  'Le  traite  ou  sont  i-assemblees  les  verites'" — 
for  which  M.  Julien  suggests  'Tattva-samuccaya'. 

The  MS.  is  incomplete. 

Begins  : 

^^Vlf^WT  I  ^fw^T^PT^T  TT^^^  3T^TTnTT(?)lTT^:  II 
li^^^^^T5TT^f^^WfrI^Tf^^(?)  I 
^T'^  TNTr^^TrrTTT"^  ^f^^^rrf  (?)  II 


Add.  1653.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  157 

#  TTif^f^r^^  ^T  ^f  rTTTI^Tir  ^T  ^"glTTrSTfT^t^ . . .  etc. 
The  whole  woi'k  seems  to  be  a  collection  of  barbarously  expressed 
tantric  devotion  and  ceremonial,  of  which  the  above  may  serve  as  a 
specimen. 

Add.  1656. 

Palm-leaf  and  paper  supply ;  143  leaves,  5  lines,  13  x  2  in. ; 
cMefly  Xiilth  century  (see  below). 

Panca-eaksha. 

On  the  handwriting  generally  see  the  Palaeographical  Intro- 
duction. 

The  paper  supply  is  quite  modern. 

The  last  page  of  the  MS.  as  we  now  have  it  is  in  a  hand  of  the 
xivth  century.  The  colophon  records  that  the  MS.  was  the  offering 
of  one  Lalitakrama  (see  also  Add.  1701).  The  date  (n.  s.  518)  and 
king's  name  (Jayasthiti)  have  been  retouched. 

This  page  was  written  on  the  back  of  a  leaf  (of  an  avadana  ?), 
which  is  in  the  same  hand  (viz.,  that  of  the  xiiith  cent.)  as  the  bulk 
of  the  MS.,  but  is  not  divided  into  columns,  as  that  is. 

Add.  1657.  1. 

Palm-leaf;  originally  71  leaves,  5 — 6  lines,  12  x  2in. ;  xiiith 
cent. 

Commentary  on  part  of  the  Candra-vyakarana 
(Adhy.  II,  pada  ii). 

Leaves  16,  21,  24—26,  28,  29,  33—36,  41,  59,  60,  66,  68  are 
missing. 

For  the  text  and  other  commentaries  see  Add.  1691.  4 — 6. 

Text  begins  without  invocation,  probably  because  the  MS.  formed 
part  of  a  series  of  commentaries  : 

t^  (sic)  TT^rf TT^"^^  f^fV^tnW^T^^  rT^^^^Tuf^TSEfrW 


158  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1657.  1. 

The  examples  {uddharana)  seem  not  to  be  drawn  from  distinctively 
Buddhist  works. 

On  la  Panini  and  Katyayana  are  referred  to.  Panini  is  also 
cited  116,  326,  496  and  556. 

The  MS.  terminates  abruptly;  j)robably  however  not  many  leaves 
are  lost,  as  the  comment  on  the  last  sutra  of  the  pada  commences  64a. 


Add.  1657.  2. 

Palin-leaf;  3  leaves,  7 — 8  lines,  12  x  2in. ;  dated  N.  s.  319 
(A.D.  1199). 

Fragment  of  Anaxdadatta's  commentary  on  the 
Caxdra-vyakaraxa. 

This  fragment  contains  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  Adhyaya  ii, 
pada  i. 

On  the  date  see  note  to  the  Table  of  Numbers;  and  on  the  hand 
see  the  Introduction. 

The  first  leaf  is  in  a  different  hand  or  hands  from  the  others  : 
the  forms  of  the  letters  however  (e.g.  "^  ^  and  V)  are  very  similar. 
The  number  of  this  leaf  has  perished  :  the  others  are  31  and  32. 

MS.  1705  (q.  V.)  is  a  nearly  complete  copy  of  this  part  of  the 
commentary  :  the  present  MS.  however,  at  the  beginning,  for  ^rf  \ 

3?°..."^:,  reads  simply  ^^TIT%:g;  .* 

Ends  : 

^^^Tt  f^(?T^Twr^^  iT^^:  m^:  ^^tt:  ^^rr^  ^t  ^t  ^ 

Add.  1657.  3. 

Palm-leaf;  4  leaves,  8  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  xvth  cent. 
Fragment  of  a  Commextary  on  part  of  the 
Candra-vyakarana. 

The  leaves  are  in  very  bad  preservation. 
The  sutras  are  given  in  full. 


Add.  1657.  3.]  SAXSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  159 

This  fragment  begins  in  the  middle  of  the  comment  on  the  part  of 
the  text  (v.  1)  occurring  in  Add.   1691.  4  29b,  1.  3,  med.     The  first 

sutra  given  is  T^TT^"^!^^"^ . 

Add.  1691.  4,  which  gives  the  text,  has  lost  part  of  this  pada, 
so  that  leaf  4  of  the  present  MS.  cannot  be  certainly  identified;  the 

last  sutra,  H'^T^T^II,  on  leaf  296  of  the  text  occurs  here  at  leaf  3a, 
line  4,  fin. 

Several  sutras,  however,  on  4a  correspond  with  Pan.  vi.  i.  74, 
sqq.,  and,  as  the  earlier  parts  of  this  pada  correspond  with  the  same 
pada  of  Panini,  the  identification  of  this  leaf  may  be  regarded  as 
very  probable. 

Add.  1658. 

Palm-leaf;  29  leaves,  5  lines,  11x2  in.;  circa  A.D.  1390 
(see  below). 

Abhinava-raghavananda-nataka  by  Manika. 

Part  of  a  play  on  the  life  of  E-ama,  originally  produced  at 
Bhatgaon  (see  below). 

The  MS.  contains  the  Nandi  (leaves  numbered  independently  1, 
2),  Prastavana,  and  Acts  i. — iii.  and  jDax't  of  iv.  (leaves  1 — 27). 
A  curious  and  somewhat  illegible  note  on  the  cover  mentions  the 
Ramayana  as  the  source  of  the  play. 

The  Kandi  and  Prastavana  contain  several  allusions  to  the  reigning 
dynasty,  fixing  the  date  of  the  play  and  agreeing  with  the  interesting 
inscription  lately  discovered  at  the  great  temple  of  Pacupati  (Indian 
Antiquary,' ix.  183). 

The  Nandi,  which  is  pronounced  by  a  sage  Bhringin,  with  some 
remarks  from  the  Vinayaka  and  others,  begins  with  mythological 
genealogy  thus  : 

(^J  ^T^Tf^^-SlT^f^^^  II   etc. 

After  this  the  place  of  performance  (Bhatgaon)  is  thus  fixed  : 

irfrRT^r^  ^T^  rf^^  ^'T'R^  KW^ITf^  ^WTfVT^T^"»t  II 
f%^T^°  II    ^%  ^f^^  "^^^^  I  (^ft^^) 


IGO  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  165«. 

II  f^T^°  II    ^T  "q:€T  ^T^T^^T  ^f^  I 

T?°  II  ^mf^:  II  (YTT)  II 

^^  II    ^^rT^^  ^XTTTiTT^  ^f?r  II 

^%  ■'Jff^,  "q:^^qri^??:  II  Tfrr  rnf.-^T-s^i:  II 

The  Prastavana  tlieii  follows  : 

^f^^T  I  ■J£^[*]  I 

The  sage  says  that  he  has  arrived  at  Bhatgaon,  ^TT  ♦^  i  rf^oTTIfT- 
f^rP:fCf  ITT^T  Sf^  ^'^T'T^f  :  further  (2a),  that  he  is  unckr 
the  orders  of  JayasthitL     Tlie  royal  family  are  referred  to  thus  : 

Then  follows  a  line  in  praise  of  Jayasthiti,  who  has  amongst  other 
titles  ^T^f2p[TT^^  :  ['W]  (of.  Inscription  1.  17)  :  also  of  the 
assembly  of  the  grandees  of  Nepal.  Next,  various  compliments  are 
paid  to  the  heir-apparent  Jaya-dharma-maUa,  mention  is  also  made 
of  Jyotirmalla  w^ho  is  spoken  of  as  ^T^*IT^T^«T  I  This  seems  to 
put  the  composition  of  the  play  at  least  20  years  before  the  inscription 
(of  N.  s.  533  or  a.  d.  1413)  as  we  there  find  Jyotirmalla  the  father  of 
three  adult  children. 

*  Cf.  inscr.  supr.  cit.  for  the  name  and  whole  phrase,  and  note  *' 
thereon. 

t...t  The  text  is  half  obliterated  here. 
§  Inscr.  ver.  2. 


Add.  16.38.]  SANSKRIT   MAXUSCRIPTS.  IGl 

After  tliis  an  actress  enters  from  the  Nepathya  and  the  Sutradhara 
thus  reminds  her  of  the  name  of  the  play  and  its  author  : — (26 — 3a) 

^m^WT^^  %^^  II 

The  actress  invokes  Natyecvara  and  refers  to  the  sacrifices  ofiered. 

After  her  apprehensions  have  been  removed,  the  sul)ject  of  the 
play  is  introduced;  and  Act  1  accordingly  begins  (36)  with  the  entry 
of  Vigvamitra,  solus;  who  is  presently  joined  by  Dacaratha  and 
others. 

Acti.  ends  13,  with  title,  thus:  rrT^c|irTWr(?)^T^3T^"3Tr  S^.'l 

„   ii.    „    226,    ifTrTT^fTW^T  f^fTT^T  S^  :  I 

„  iii.  „   266,  ^^T-SinTWr  ^T^  (?ffT^T  SIT  :  I 

The  MS.  ends  abruptly  after  a  speech  or  two  of  Act  4. 
With  this  MS.  are  several  fragments,  consisting  of  single  leaves, 
with  writing  of  the  xv — xvith  century,  as  follows  : 

1.  Part  of  the  first  leaf  of  a  play,  containing  the  Nandi.  Hand- 
writing very  similar  to  that  of  the  preceding  play. 

2.  A  leaf  (numbered  53)  of  a  work  on  magic  or  ritual;  5  lines, 
8  X  2  in.  In  the  last  line  a  ceremony  called  pindakrishti  and  the 
use  of  mantras  are  mentioned. 

3.  A  leaf  (numbered  37)  of  the  Hitopadeca  (ed.  Johnson,  ii. 
108—119). 

4.  A  cover  of  a  book,  8x2  in.,  containing  only  the  words  : 
^tTC?)  I 


Add.  1661. 

Palm-leaf;  103  leaves,   5  lines,  13  x  2  in.;  dated  X.  s.   545 
(a.D.  1425),  but  see  below. 

Amara-ko<;,'A. 

11 


102  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1661. 

At  the  end  there  is  one  page  of  postscript  by  the  scribe, 
Avantapala,  in  praise  of  the  book,  etc.;  then  a  second  postscript, 
partly  obliterated,  in  a  different,  but  probably  contemporaneous, 
hand,  beginning : 

^^TfTs^  (?)  -  ^^ *  - 1;^  -  f^^  ^f^  f^%  ^frrm 

Yaksha-malla,  the  reigning  king,  is  twice  mentioned. 


Add.  1662. 

Palm-leaf;  135  leaves,  5  lines,  12  x  2  in, ;  the  last  two  leaves 
are  late  palm-leaf  supply,  dated  N.  s.  739  (a.d.  1619),  the  rest  is 
of  the  XII — xiiith  cent. 

Panca-eaksha. 

Leaves  38,  40,  129 — 132,  135  are  wanting.  Each  division  of  the 
work  has  also  its  own  pagination.  There  are  remains  of  illuminations 
on  the  bmding-boards.  On  the  work  see  Add,  1164:.  The  division 
of  the  work  called  "MahasahasrapramardinI",  usually  second,  is  here 
placed  first. 

Ends  : 

(hiatus)  TfJ^fr . . .  etc.  (the  rest  is  in  a  vernacular). 


Add.  1679. 

A  mass  of  palm-leaf  fragments ;  12  x  2  inches  in  size,  unless 
otherwise  described. 

[The  distinctively  Buddhistic  character  of  some  of  these  fragments  is  of  course 

doubtful.] 

I.    Naishadha-carita. 

[Non-Buddhistic] 


*  Cf.  Burnell,  S.  Ind.  Palfeogr.,  ed.  1.,  p.  58, 


Add.  1679.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  103 

II.  Originally  20  leaves,  5  lines  ;  XV — xvith  cent. 

Ganapati-stotra. 

Leaf  19  is  missing. 

A  tantric   manual  of   devotion ;    apparently  Buddhistic,  as  the 
SavisMras  (106)  and  other  characteristics  of  Buddhism  are  mentioned. 
Begins : 

Ends: 
I  ^qTqf%fi?f^^7r^^T3l  *l?fT  ^  ^  II  ^«  II 

Tf<T  ^^^frT^r^  ^WTTT I 

III.  One  leaf,  numbered  67,  6  lines,  12^  x  2^  in. ;  Bengali 
hand  of  xv — xvith  cent. 

Amara-ko^a. 
The  leaf  contains  Am.  iii.  L  26 — 45. 

IV.  The  beginning  of  a  work  on  the  eight  Matris. 

One  leaf  has  a  page-number  19,  the  rest  are  torn  off.  4  and  5 
lines  to  a  page. 

On  the  Matris,  see  B.  and  R.  s.  v.  ^TS"  and  the  var.  lect.  of  the 
Amara-koca  in  Aufr.  Oxf.  Cat.  p.  184a.  Their  cult  seems  to  belong 
rather  to  tantric  worship  than  to  genuine  Buddhism  or  Brahmanism. 

V.  1  leaf,  numbered  18  (?),  5  lines;  straight-topped  charac- 
ters ;  XVth  cent. 

Fragment  of  an  Avadana. 
On  2a  and  46  a  person  spoken  of  as  "^Tl"'^^  .*   is  mentioned  as 
practising  penance,  WTf^TT,  etc. 

VI.  9  X  If  in. ;  XIV — xvth  cent. 

Fragment  of  an  Avadana  (?). 

Small  Nepalese  hand.  The  stops  etc.  are  marked  with  red. 
3  verses  (numbered  9—12)  of  a  metrical  tale  or  the  like. 

VII.  VIII.     [non-Buddhistic] 

11—2 


1G4  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1679. 

IX.  1  leaf,  numbered  3,  5  lines,  straight-topped  hand ; 
XV — xvith  cent. 

Leaf  of  a  work  on  the  expiation  of  offences,  "Durgati- 

PARigoDHANA  "  or  the  like. 

The  leaf  is  mutilated. 

X.     Two  leaves  on  philosophy  or  astPvOLOgy. 

The  first  is  numbered  1,  but  each  leaf  begins  with  a  sign  like  S 
that  used  for  ^  at  commencements.  Straight-topped  characters 
except  26,  which  is  in  the  hooked  Nepalese  of  the  xvth  cent.,  and 
seems  to  be  by  the  same  hand  as  the  next  fragment. 

la  begins  : 

\h  begins  : 

(clearly  astrological). 
2a  begins  : 
JU[  ^^Jlf^  ^T^T  W^  ^  ^^-^^^t:  {sic) 

1h  begins  : 

XI.    On  Astrology. 

One  leaf.     See  last  fragment. 
Begins : 

o^-wj:  imwfTT  I  °  I  ^^"RTW  ^^T . . .  : 

The  outside  seems  to  be  a  cover,  and  contains  ejaculatory  prayers 
etc.,  in  a  later  hand. 

XII.     Fragment  of  an  Astronomical  or  Astrological  work. 
Writing,  etc.,  very  .similar  to  No.  X. 
Begins  : 


AM).  1G79.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  165 

Arjabhata  is  cited  in  line  2. 

The  other  side  is  a  cover  with  writing  nearly  obliterated. 

XIII.  8  leaves  (leaf  1  wanting),  5  lines. 

Part  of  a  work  on  ASTROLOGY. 
Writing,  etc.,  similar  to  the  preceding. 
Begins : 

Ends  (abruptly) : 

f=#fITI    m°(?) 

XIV.  5  leaves,  numbered  on  right-hand  margin,  81 — 85  (?), 
5  lines ;  xvth  cent. 

Part  of  a  work  on  Astrology. 

The  speakers  are  MaJidbhairava  and  a  devi^  so  that  the  work  may 
be  partly,  if  not  wholly,  Civaic  (of.  Burn.  Intr.  551). 

Begins  (after  invocations  to  Mahabhairava)  : 
^^TT^  I     f  ^  ^   WWl^  ^T^^TTfTf^^T^rf^  (?)  I  °  I 

On  56  (which  ends  abruptly)  we  find  the  subscription  "^"j^  ^^- 

XV.  1  leaf,  5  lines  ;  XV — xvith  cent. 

The  first  page  of  a  Lexicon  or  Glossary. 

In  short  sections  of  about  a  couple  of  lines,  each  section  con- 
taining words  beginning  with  the  same  letter. 

This  fragment  extends  as  far  as  "^,  and  contains  inter  alia 
the  forms  ^T^T,  ■SI'#-^^T;  also  ^T#RfTT\  and  ^T^#T^. 

Begins  : 


166  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1679 

XVI.     1  leaf,  5  lines,  7  x  liin,;  modern  hand. 
Fragment  on  the  groups  of  letters. 
A  summary,  apparently,  of  the  mystical  import  of  the  letters. 
Begins  : 

XVII.  1  leaf,  originally  8  lines  ;  xv — xvith  cent. 

Fragment  on  Sacked  Topogeaphy. 

Bengali  hand  of  a  square  form  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  Add. 
1364.  The  rivers  Ganges,  Jumna,  Godavari,  and  SarasvatI,  are 
named  in  line  3  ;  there  is  also  reference  to  bathing  therein. 

On  the  other  side  are  notes  in  a  slightly  different  style  of  writing. 

XVIII.  1  leaf,  6  lines;  in  sections,  numbered  34 — 37. 
Fragment  on  Ritual  (?),  partly  vernacular. 

Page  numbered  62  (in  figures  and  letters) ;  stops  and  emphatic 
words  smeared  with  red.     Frequent  mention  of  "^W,  ^^,  etc. 

XIX.  1  leaf,  5  lines,  xivth  cent. 

Fragment  on  Oblations  or  Cookery. 

Compare  R.  A.  S.  Cat.  No.  74  (photographed),  both  in  writing 
and  subject. 

The  chief  articles  discussed  here  are  oil,  milk,  ghee  and  bilva 

(h,  I  1). 

Begins  : 

XX.  1  leaf,  4 — 5  lines ;  xvth  cent. 

Detached  sentences  on  Oblations. 

The  last  part  of  one  sentence,  "RW^^RJ^kT  ^T  rpRT- 
"^■^^■^Trf^rr  I,  recalls  Pailca-tantra  II.  115. 

XXI.  10  leaves  (numbered  2 — 11),  5  lines;  fine,  clear  hand 
of  the  xiY — xvth  cent. 

Part  of  a  work  on  Magic. 


Add.  1679.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  167 

The  Avork  abounds  in  curious  combinations  of  letters,  similar  to 
those  found  in  Buddhist  books  from  Tibet  and  Japan.     Its  general 

character  may  be  seen  from  colophons  like  ^T^  W^  *m^  (2b  and  3&) ; 

Tf<T '^TT^^   (lib);   TTrT^T^T^:  (last  leaf). 

XXII.  5  lines ;  xv — xvith  cent. 

Three  fragments  of  a  work  on  Magic. 

In  numbered  sections. 

These,  and  the  present  form  of  the  leaves,  seem  to  show  that  we 
have  here  fragments  from  different  parts  of  the  work :  part  I 
comprising  the  leaves  now  numbered  1 — 5 ;  part  2,  6  and  pt  3.  7 — 8. 
The  only  remaining  (original)  numbers  are  12  on  3,  and  14  on  6.  The 
contents  of  the  book  seem  to  be  stotras  etc.  connected  with  magical 

rites  :  thus  on  8,  we  have  the  colophon    ^t'TT^^T^T^^T^TfT 

^^T^ :  II 

XXIII.  1  leaf  numbered  57,  5  lines,  xv — xvith  cent. 

Magic  and  Mysticism. 
Subject :  7iydsas  and  the  mystical  value  of  letters  (a5— 61). 

XXIV.— XXX. 

These  numbers  are  leaves  of  tantric  stotras  and  prayers  too 
unimpoi-tant  to  need  description. 

Besides  the  above  numbered  fragments,  some  20  or  30  leaves  still 
remain,  either  belonging  to  works  clearly  non-Buddhistic  (and  there- 
fore not  noticed  in  this  catalogue),  or  fragments  too  slight  or  indistinct 
for  recognition. 

Add.  1680. 

This  number  represents  a  heterogeneous  mass  of  palm-leaves 
of  various  dates,  which  arrived,  in  many  cases,  caked  together 
by  mud  and  damp.  Each  measures  about  12^  by  2  inches, 
unless  otherwise  noted. 

The  works  are  as  follows  : 

I.      BhADRACARI-PRANIDH  ANA-RAJ  A. 


168  CATALOGUE  OF   BCDDIIIST  [Add.  1680. 

Palm-leaf;  6  leaves,  6  lines,  11  x  2  in.;  dated  n.  s.  188  (a.d. 
1068). 

On  the  handwriting  see  the  Palseogvaphic  Introduction. 

See  K.  A.  S.  Cat.  33  and  Add.  MS.  899.  2 ;  also  Chinese  Tripit. 
1142  (Nanjlo). 

Begins  like  Add.  899.  2,  reading  °^ffr  S^^  ^^°  inline  1. 

Ends  : 

^T^^5:^frRfW^^TT^  ^^TTT:  II  ^   ^T°...ll  %^ri; 

T^T^^  W^r  SV  f^f^rT-nRfrf  || 

II.  8  leaves,  numbered  1 — 3,  18,  also  a  leaf  numbered  2 
from  another  volume  ;  5 — 6  lines,  square  hand,  xiv — xvth  cent. 

Fragments  of  the  AvadIna-^^ataka  (ivth  and  Yth  decades). 
The  fragment  contains  the  stories  of  Dharmapala,  Civi,  and 
Surupa  (Av.-(^at.  iv.  3 — 5);  see  MSS.  1386,  1622,  and  Feer  ib.  cit. 
Lf.  18  gives  the  end  of  the  Anathapindadavad°  (iv.  9).  The  leaf 
numbered  2  is  from  the  Gudacalavad°  (v.  3)  (line  1  =- Add.  1386, 
78  a,  1.  4). 

The  text  on  46,  1.  6  .shows  considerable  discrepancy  with  the 
corresponding  passage  in  Add.  1386  (  =  606  11.  7 — 8). 

III.  21  leaves,  5  lines. 

Fragments  of  the  Diyyavadana, 

Apparently  same  scribe  as  No.  II. 

The  complete  MS.  was  divided  into  volumes  with  independent 
numbering. 

On  the  work  generally  see  Add.  865.  A  collation  of  these 
fragments  will  probably  be  given  in  the  forthcoming  edition  by 
Prof.  Cowell  and  Mr  Neil. 

IV.     Leaf  of  the  MaxicCdavadaxa. 
Same  writing  as  the  preceding  fragments. 
Text  corresponds  to  Add.  874,  76.  1.  3  sqq. 

Y.     Leaf  of  an  Avadaxa. 
Same  hand  as  the  preceding. 


Add.  1G80.]  SxVNSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  169 

The  leaf  is  numbered  17. 

It  describes  a  conversation  between  tbe  Buddha  and  a  E,akshasa; 
the  Buddha  gives  him  food  and  drink. 

YI.     5  lines ;  xv — xvith  cent. 

First  leaf  of  the  Vasudharaxi-katha. 
The  introduction  is  somewhat  shorter  than  in  Add.  1355.     The 
tale  begins,  as  there,  ?T^  "^^  ^^I  ^^^^  ^T"3ir3jt  +i^l*l^^t 

YII.     IG  leaves,  7  lines;  xiiith  cent. 

Part  of  a  work  on  Astrology. 
Numbered  from  9  to  40. 

The  first  portion  of  the  fragment  treats  of  the  nakshatras :  the 
concluding  leaves  of  sudden  or  untimely  death  ('^M*^f4|  I,   "^"*  l- 

VIII.     45  leaves,  5  lines;  xii — xiiith  cent. 

DhAraxis. 

These  fragments  appear  to  be  the  remains  of  several  volumes  of 
collected  charms.  There  are  two  illustrations  of  caityas  etc.  One 
volume  has  pages  with  letter-  as  well  as  figure-numbering,  running 
from  2  to  17 ;  each  page  is  written  in  two  distinct  columns. 
A  second  is  generally  paged  only  in  figures  (these  are  all  between 
9  and  35),  and  has  no  full  columns,  but  only  square  spaces  round  the 
string-hole.  There  are  also  two  leaves  with  columns  on  one  side  and 
space  on  the  other. 

In  the  first  vol.,  we  find  the  ends  of  the  following  dharanis,  etc.  : 
Phaldphalahridaya  (4a)  ;  Jdti-smaTd-dh°  (46)  ;  KaUajaya-dh°  (96)  ; 
Ushnlshavijayd  (176). 

In  the  second  volume  the  following:  Vajrottard-dh"  (12«),  LaJcsha 
(14a);  Hrishtcq^ratyayah StiUidhard-dh°  (146);  Sarvatathagatahridayd- 
dlC  (156);  Heniangd-d]o°  Jaiiguld  malidvidyd  (17);  Akshohhyd-dh" 
(17*6);  Vajrottara  (ib.),  cf.  supra;  Kondrd  dhdrani-caityakaraiia  vidhih 
(18) ;  Arya  Mahddharam,  (21) ;  Buddhahridayd-dh°  (226)  ;  So.man- 
tabJiadrd-dh°  (23);  Dhdtukdrandd  (236);  Svapnandadd-dh  (27b); 
KaUaJaya  (32)  cf.  supra ;  Aryamahd  dlmranl  (33),  cf.  supra ;  Sarva- 
rucirdhgayashti  36;  Sarvqmavgald  {ih.) ;  Scrrvaroga-praramani  (366). 


170  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1680. 

The  two  leaves  with  columns  described  above  are  numbered  9  and 
11  respectively. 

9  has  the  colophon  : 

11.  ^l"T^WfT. 

On  leaves  without  (original)  numbers,  we  find  :  GrahamdtriJcd-dh'' 
(1)  ;  Mdrici  (2b) ;  Samanta-hhadraprajnardh°  (4)  ;  Aslitamahdhhayor 
tdranl  (5)  ;  Jdtismard-dh°  (5)  cf.  supra. 

IX.  3  leaves,  6  lines,  xii — xiiith  cent.  Apparently  these 
form  part  of  one  MS. 

Fragments  of  works  connected  with  the  Prajnaparamita. 
One  is  the  second  and  last  leaf  of 

Prajnaparamita  in  9  ^'Lokas  by  Kambila. 
Ends : 

^^  (?)  TT-RTf^f^TT^  "W'R^^  ^f^^ffT  II 

TffT    'TTfT^:    IT^mTTf'TrrT    ^^T^T  II     lifrTTT^T^- 

^fl?^T7T^T^t  II 

Then  follow  4  glokas  said  to  be  by  Nagarjuna  in  praise  of  the  reader 
of  the  Ndmasamg'iti.      After  several  lines  of  epithets,  etc.,  it  ends  : 

^  f^^^Tfj:  TT^lT^-^TfT^  II   ^T^^T^T^^m<rT^f  II 

The  second  leaf  contains  the  end  of  the 

Pancavim^atika-prajnaparamitahridaya. 

The  text  seems  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  Add.  1486. 

The  third  is  apparently  the  beginning  of  some  redaction  of  the 
Prajiiaparamita. 

After  the  usual  introductory  phrases,  Avalokitegvara  addresses 
Bhagavan  as  follows  :  ^^fj  T{  '^{^-^'^WfiJ^JTVS^rli  ^WT- 

X.    4  lines,  xvith  cent. 

Leaf  of  a  Mystical  work. 


Add.  1680.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  171 

la  tlie  first  line  we  find 

The  next  line  treats  of  the  mystical  value  of  letters.     The  verso 
is  nearly  obliterated,  only  the  page  number  2  being  visible. 

XI.  7  lines,  Bengali  hand,  xvith  cent.  (?). 

Leaf  of  work  on  Ritual. 

The  form  of  the  Avork  seems  to  be  instruction  to  pupils ;  but  the 
whole  leaf  is  very  indistinct.     One  sentence  begins   (1.  3)  : 

rIfT:    fkm:    ^^T^  ^^...;  and  (1.  5)    fffT:    fll^I^T: 

^¥... 

The  fragment  concludes  with  the  5th  line  of  the  verso. 

XII.  6  lines,  xii — xiiith  cent. 

Leaf  of  a  work  on  Buddhist  Mudras. 
In  line  1  we  fi^nd  : 

On  the  verso,  1.  2,  is  the  colophon 

At   the   beginning   of    the   next    chapter   occur   the   names    of 
^uddhodhana,  Aralli,  Rahula,  etc. 

XIII.      (NiRUTTAEA  TANTRA). 
[Non-Buddhistic] 

XIV.     Late  palm-leaf. 

Fragments  of  Stotras,  etc. 
Chiefly  invocations,  "^  '^T  etc.,  to  various  personages. 


Add.  1681. 

Alphabets,  etc.,  compiled  by  Pandit  Gunanand. 
Written  for  use  in  deciphering  the  MSS.  of  the  present  collection. 


172  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1682. 


Add.  1682. 

Palm-leaf;  83  leaves,  5  lines,  21  x  2  iu. ;  Nepalese  hand  of 
the  xith  cent. 

Saddharma-puxdarika. 

Chap.  10  ends  78a,  1.  ;  the  MS.  consequently  terminates  towards 
the  end  of  Chap.  11. 

On  the  work  see  MS.  1032. 


Add.  1683. 

Pahu-leaf;  139  leaves,  5  lines,  21  x  2  in. ;  dated  N.  S.  159 
(A.D.  1039). 

SADDHARMA-PUNDARiKA, 

By  several  scribes ;  leaf  566  ( =  Paris  MS.,  99a  med  —  9%)  is 
commenced  by  the  second  scribe,  but  on  57a  the  same  passage  is 
written  over  again. 

The  MS.,  thougli  as  a  rule  beautifully  written,  is  much  damaged 
by  worms,  etc. 

The  first  part  of  the  colophon,  so  far  as  it  remains  on  the  mutilated 
final  leaf,  coincides  with  Add.  1032,  except  that  we  have  "^"^tm- 
^#T[ir^]  for  Wm^°   (see  p.  24,  line  28). 

The  next  legible  words  are  as  follows  : 

^^^^T  s4 . . .  f^^Tf€^:  m^nr^:  (sic)  ^w^tt^  vj^ 

TO  rT^WfJ  I  ^T^T^Tm'SIT[^]  ...(?)...  (hiatus)  ^^^^^^ 
^^^TT^T^T^^TTT^^  (corr.  °rajn°)  f^f^fTfTrffTI  ^^rf^ 
\yC^    (in  letter-numerals)    tllT^    ^ll    ^rTT^T^t    ^^T\%  I 

A  note  (of  recitation  1)  in  vernacular  follows,  dated  N.  s,  803. 
For  the  work  see  Add.  1032.     This  and  the  preceding  MS.  have 
been  used  by  Prof  Kern  for  his  edition  of  the  text. 


Add.  1684.]  SANSKRIT  MANDSGRIPTS.  17 


Add.  1684. 

Palm-leaf;  originally  156  or  157  leaves,  5—6  lines,  21  x  2  in.; 
dated  N.  s.  185  (a.d.  1065). 

Saddharma-pundarika. 

The  leaves  run  tluis:  2—10,  10*,  11—117,  119—152,  151—156. 

Chap.  15  is  wrongly  mimbered  16,  and  the  mistake  continues  to 
the  end  of  the  MS.  On  the  reigning  king  and  on  the  writing  see 
the  Introductions. 

The  colophon  runs  : 

^^^«  v^^^T^  ^^^ft"^^  T^fTwr  '?rg:f4iif<TrT^:  i 

^51?rf^   l^^s  (in  letter-numerals)   IlITW^^^T^^t  I     ^TJl- 
^fg-TT^^rxT^^^TiT^^  (sic,  V.  Introd.)  TT^  f^^i;^^T- 

i^i^ifw  ^  ^  (hiatus)  15  (?)  ifT^T  (?)  i%^f€^TTr^RrTTfw^- 

•f%TorTr7i^T  ITTTT^Tf^ft  ^^XfrT  1      (Then  a  scribe's  verse)  I 
"With  til  is  MS.  is  a  stray  leaf  of  a  Buddhistical  treatise  in  hand- 

•writing   etc.,    similar   in   all   respects,    witli    the   leaf  number    '^T 

o 
(?)  310  (c£.  table  of  numbers,  note). 

The  first  syUables  are :  °"^TT^rW^°  . . . ;  the  last,  "^T^TWT^. 


Add.  1685. 

Palm-leaf;  64f  leaves,  6  lines,  IS^  x  2in. ;  dated  N.  s.  500 
(A.D.  1380). 

Amara-koca. 

The  final  subscription,  after  date  and  scribe's  verses  partly  faded, 
seems  to  run  thus  : 


-m-^  ^r^^HT?:!^^  (?)  w^  ii 


174  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1686. 


Add.  1686. 

Palm-leaf;  119  leaves,  6  lines,  11 1  x  2  m.;  dated  N.  s.  287 
(A.D.  1167). 

Sadhana-malI-tantra, 

The  MS.  is  very  defective,  and  -svas  perhaps  copied  from  a  faulty 
archetype. 

The  leaf-numbers  fall  into  two  sets  or  volumes. 

The  first  leaf,  which  corresponds  to  Add.  1593,  25b,  1,  is  numbered 

43,  and  this  numeration  continues  to  leaf  57,  the  end  of  which  cor- 
responds to  leaf  3-16  in  the  same  MS.  The  first  volume  was  regarded 
as  ending  at  58a,  for  here  we  find  the  date ;  and  the  leaf  number  is 
added  on  the  recto  in  an  ancient,  though  nevertheless  a  second,  hand. 
The  second  part  or  volume  was  regarded  as  beginning  at  586 ;  for 
here  a  new  series  of  numbers  begins,  not  however  with  leaf  1,  but 
with  34,  perhaps  because  the  leaf  was  the  34th  of  the  whole  extant 
archetype,  at  the  time  when  our  present  MS.  was  copied.  Be  that 
as  it  may,  we  find  the  leaf  common  to  the  two  parts  with  58  on  the 
recto  and  34  on  the  verso.     After  this  leaf,  which  coi-responds  to  346 

Jin. — 356,  2,  of  Add.  1593,  there  is  a  gap,  and  the  next  leaf,  numbered 

44,  corresponds  to  496  of  the  other  MS.  Leaf  53  (1st  series)  and 
leaves  34 — 43,  46,  78,  114,  and  138 — 141  (2nd  series),  are  missing. 
129  is  erroneously  repeated  (129*).  The  MS.  terminates  abruptly  at 
leaf  152  (  =  Add.  1593,  1886,  1.  5).  On  the  writing,  the  first  dated 
example  of  hooked  iNTepalese  hand,  see  the  Palseographical  Intro- 
duction. On  the  work  see  the  account  of  Add.  1593.  It  may  be 
observed  that  there  is  nothing  in  either  MS.  to  show  the  reason  for 
the  division  into  volumes  found  in  the  present  MS.  The  division 
occurs  after  a  charm  (sadhana)  apparently  quite  like  the  rest.  The 
date  and  title  of  the  charm  are  given  thus  : 

"Nrr^  ^^  ^^T^  II  ^  ^^'i^fr-smf^  fH  {sic) 

Add.  1687. 

Coarse   brownish    paper;    129    leaves,    5    lines,    12x2in. ; 
dated  N.  s.  753  (a.d.  1633). 

Karaxpa-vyCha  (Prose  version). 


Add.  1687.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  175 

Written  at  Bhatgaon  in  the  reign  of  Jagajjyotir  Malla  (see  below). 

For  the  work  see  Add.  1267. 

Ends: 

(date  V.  supra)  I    ^TW^T^T^-  Wt^f^^t^  ^T'^TT'S^^^  ^T- 

^TWTf^^T  ^^^  ^^rr^-5^ <ij  ^  M  ^^  (sic)  TfT^n^ft^'f T- 


Add.  1688. 

Palm-leaf;  originally  70  leaves,  6  lines,  22  x  2  in. ;  Kutila 
character;  dated  14th  year  of  Nayapala  of  Bengal  (circa  A.D, 
1054). 

Panca-kaksha. 

Leaf  27  is  missing.    On  the  date  and  writing  see  the  Introductions. 

The  MS.  is  copiously  illustrated  with  figures  of  buddhas,  divini- 
ties, and  caityas:  and  the  ends  of  the  chapters  have  elaborate  patterns 
etc.  On  the  work  see  Add.  1325  and  add  a  reference  to  Rajendralal, 
A^ep.  Buddh.  Lit.,  p.  164. 

The  5  chapters  (for  which  see  Add.  MS.  1325)  end  respectively 
196,  1;  45a,  1;  646,  4;  67a,  2;  70a,  4. 
The  final  subscrijitions  are  as  follows  : 

•%^J  ^^^^i^TTtT^TTT^T^TWT^^    Tf>f  II    TTt^T^rT- 


*  Wright's  Nepal,  pp.  242—3. 


17G  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  16S9. 

Add.  1689. 

Palm-leaf;  23  leaves,  5  lines,  16  x  2in.;  dated  N.  s.  49-i 
(A.D.  1374). 

Megha-sutra. 

Edited  with  notes  and  a  translation,  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal 
As.  Soc,  1880,  by  the  compiler  of  this  catalogue.  See  also  a 
learned,  but  occasionally  over  subtle,  criticism  in  the  China  Review, 
May,  1882. 

Begins  : 

Ends  : 

q^^f^rT??:  WiTTTT:  II 

The  postscript  consists  of  the  verse  '^  '^*HT  etc. 
Then  follows  : 

Next  come  salutations  to  acarya  and  parents  (cf.  Add.  MS. 
1623.  3  supra),  then  date  (day  and  month);  reign  of  Jayarjunadeva 

^^t^t4-^t-?5ti^t  ^^  {sic)  fm^r[f;R^  ^^t^^TO^i 

Then  follow  two  of  the  ordinary  scribe's  verses. 

Add.  1690. 
I.     Palm- leaf ;  4  leaves,  5  lines,  17  x  2  in. ;  XY — xvith  cent.* 
Fragments  of  the  Vasudhara-dharani-katha. 

*  The  supposed  date  given  in  Dr  D.  Wright's  list  is  founded  on  a 
misreading  of  a  date  of  recitation,  now  removed  to  Add.  1689,  to 
which  it  originally  belonged. 


Add.  1690.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  177 

This  fragment  contains  the  first  and  last  leaves  of  the  book,  the 
other  two  being  numbered  13,  14.     See  Add.  MS.  1355. 


II.     Fragments  of  stotras,  etc. 
Size  and  writing  similar  to  the  preceding. 
Chiefly  invocations  and  the  like. 

III.  Palm-leaf;  3|  lines,  written  on  one  side  only;  2  x  16, 
but  originally  perhaps  18  in. ;  xii — xiiitli  cent. ;  has  3  string- 
holes. 

Leaf  of  a  work  on  the  Yanas. 
In  1.  2  vaipulyci-  and  nirdeca-sutras  are  mentioned. 
The  fragment  ends  abruptly  thus  : 
?^^    ^TTT^T^r^TTTJT^^I^   1^%  I  [partial  hiatus]  I    '^TR 

rm  sf?  rn^^Tf'if^^  (?)  "R  fTwnm:  I 


Add.  1691. 

I.  Palm-leaf;  8  leaves,  7  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  apparently  dated 
N.  s.  311  (A.D.  1191). 

HlRAXTA-SAPTAKA. 

The  date  of  writing  is  given  in  another  hand,  as  noticed  in  the 
Palseographical  Introduction.  The  letter  numerals  of  the  date  are 
difficult  to  identify.  The  first  probably  represents  the  figiire  3, 
which  is  also  used  as  a  letter-numeral  (for  the  use  of  the  unit  3,  to 
express  300  in  the  letter-sjstem,  compare  Add.  1465).  The  second 
is  tolerably  clearly  10.  The  last,  which  resembles  ^,  is  extremely 
doubtful.  A  second  subscription  in  the  vernacular,  probably  relating 
to  a  recitation,  twice  mentions  Yakshamalla  and  gives  the  date  N.  s. 
574  (a.d.  1454). 

The  work  is  a  collection  of  16  saptakas  or  groups  of  seven  stanzas. 

Begins : 

12 


178  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1691. 

The  saptakas  have  the  following  titles :  nidmia-saptaka,  jdti-s°, 
dosha-s°,  gu)ia-s°,  linga-s°,  prdrambhas",  prandla-s° ,  praindna-s°  (sic  1), 
dro)ia-s°,  khdta-s",  digvd<-i-s°  (?),  mandcda-s°,  mantras",  kriyd-s°, 
drdma-s°,  ^j/t«^rt-s°. 

The  subscription,  runs  thus  : 

Then,  in  the  second  haud  above  referred  to : 
^f^^^^  W^T  S^  !   ^^rT^  ^l\  (I  ?)  ^TPfT^  {sic)  IP^ 
^^t  (?  ■^["^'??t)  ^^TT^T  f^fWrrf?Tf?T  \\ 

Then  the  last  subscription  in  vernacular,  as  above  mentioned. 

On  the  back  of  the  last  leaf  is  a  page,  numbered  ^T\,  in  a  hand 
very  similar  to  that  of  the  MS.  itself;  there  are  however  only  G  lines 
of  writing  (instead  of  7).  It  is  the  beginning  of  a  work  on  the  use 
of  arms,  entitled  Khadrja-pujd-vidhi. 

Begins  : 

^VTT:  I  Cf.  Add.  1701.  1. 

II.  Palm-leaf;  23  leaves,  5  lines,  12  x  l|in. ;  early  hooked 
Nepale.se  hand,  probably  written  a.d.  1179  (see  below). 

KURUKULLA-KALPA. 

The  date  N.  s.  299  was  given  by  Dr  D.  Wright,  but  the  first 
figure  alone  is  now  left :  the  name  of  the  reigning  king  is  also  torn 
away,  all  but  the  first  letter,  which  however  is  enough  to  fix  the 
king,  Ananda.  The  date  is  however  probably  con-ect,  as  this  year 
comes  -within  Ananda's  reign  (see  Table  in  Historical  Introd.),  and  the 
writing  seems  also  of  this  date  (see  Palaeographical  Introduction 
and  Table  of  letters). 

This  is  a  work  on  ritual  in  connection  with  the  goddess  Kurukulla, 
who  is  mentioned  by  Schiefner  (ap.  B  &  R  s.  v.  '^^^W). 

Begins : 


Add.  1691.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  179 

ft^t  ^T^^Tf T^^t"  I    rfTTT'^fT  ^TT  TT^Tf^rT^  [lacuna]  II 
^^f?r  rT'^l  ^  fwt'^  ^T^T^^  IT^T^T^^  ^^^(^%(ft:  I 

Ends  : 

TT'Tft^^^^^^^Tf^^'^T: . . .  etc. 

^fVffT(?)  rrTtt^^^^i;fT  TffT  II    ^  V^°  etc.  I 

W-7^[T^]  ^T^^  etc.  I 

W^^fT^   '^  . . . .  (see  above)  ^ifdcha^^hM^^t  'Srf^^^'^^ 

A  few  invocations  etc.  to  Kurukulla  follow,  in  a  later  hand. 

III.     Palm-leaf;  15  leaves,  6  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  dated  N.  s. 
560  (A.D.  1440). 

Abhisheka-vidhi. 

A  -work  on  late  Buddhistic  ritual. 
Begins  : 

^t  ^f\:  '^t^i:^wt^t^  i  ?r  fir-si^  ft  ^"^^t  wm- 

fftfff  ^TTRTiqT  I 

The  divisions  of  the  work  are  not  numbered ;  the  following  may 
serve  as  some  clue  to  its  contents  : 

T'rRrT^^TTfR  I  3.      fJT^rrfVrr^^T Wv  I  36.      "^T- 
^T^TTtirf^fVi  46.    ^^n%rf%f^:  I  66.     ^^^rxi^:  (?)  f3j;-si- 

TTtll'Rf^  I  ih.      fnWJJ^^^:  I  7a.       ^"^rTTfT^-RfW:  l  76. 
^T^TfHWWv:  I  8a.    ^^^fnt^f^fv:  I   86  and  so  on. 

12 2 


180  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1691. 

Euds: 

^f^w-Rfv:  ^^tttt:  i  ^^^rf^  y,^°  ^w  ir^  ^^t  i 

A  few  lines  of  prayer  to  various  deities  are  added  by  the  scribe. 
There  are  also  a  few  lines  on  the  cover,  nearly  obliterated. 

IV.  Palm-leaf;  originally  44  leaves,  5  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  x.  S. 
532  (A.D.  1412). 

Caxdea-vyakarana  by  Candragomin. 

Leaves  1 — 7,  26,  27  and  30  are  missing. 

A  work  on  grammar,  in  6  adh)jdyas,  each  subdivided  into  4  padds. 

On  Candragomin  see  Wassiliew,  Tdrandth,  pp.  52,  207  ;  his  school, 
the  Candras,  are  mentioned  in  Siddh-K.  on  Pan.  iii.  ii.  36. 

The  author  follows  Panini  both  in  style,  treatment,  and  often  in 
actual  words,  many  of  the  sutras  being  identical.  Adiiydyas  iv,  v 
correspond  to  Pan.  v,  vi,  respectively. 

This  MS.  commences  in  Adhy.  i,  j)dda  iv,  thus  : 

^^t:  II  fzTT^T^H  II  ^?nm:  ii  mw:  %  i  -^z  ^?n^rr- 

Adhy.  I  ends  96;  adh.  ii,  156;  adh.  iii,  21a;  adh.  iv,  29a;  adh. 
v,  376. 

Ends : 

^^^:  TTft  f^frfm:  II 

S^  I  ^^rT^  y.^'^  ^T^T^  U^  I  T?:^r^^t  frf^T  I  ^rTTrNf 
^fZ  «<°  I  TTT^^^^^  I  ^"^^f3  f  "^f^^T^  I  ¥177^- 
^tl    f^f^fTTTI^II 

V.  Palm-leaf;  18  leaves,  5 — 7  lines,  12  x  2in.  ;  xvth  cent. 

Commentary  on  one  pada  of  the  Caxdra-vyakarana  (v.  iv). 

Closely  written  and  much  blurred  in  places. 
The  text  is  given  in  its  entirety. 


Add.  1691.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  181 

Begins : 

^t  ^w.  ^T^<t  I  ^ftT^^Wi  ^w  I  ("T^fr^T^^:  Add. 

1694.  4.)  I    ^T  T^^TT^^ 

Ends  with  the  comment  on  the  last  sutra  but  three  of  this  pada  : 

w^ :  TT^-HT :  I 

VI.  Palm-leaf;  14  leaves,  8  lines,  12  x  2|iii. ;  xii — xiiith 
cent. 

Part  of  Anandadatta's  commentaky  on  the 

ClNDRA-VYAKARANA  (l.  ill). 

The  writing  is  the  ordinary  hooked  Nepalese,  but  the  early  forms 
of  V  and  ^  are  used. 

Of  the  commentator  nothing  seems  to  be  known. 

The  text  is  indicated  by  abbreviations. 

The  first  page  (unlike  the  rest  of  the  MS.,  which  is  clear  and 
well-preserved,  and  has  the  sutras  divided  by  I'ed  marks)  is  mutilated, 
and  somewhat  indistinct. 

The  commentary  on  the  first  sutra  that  is  legible  (leaf  2a)  begins 
thus : 

i?Tf^  [cf.  Paia.  III.  iii.  175]  II  irffT^^ferg  ^Tffr^  ^^^T. 

^TTTf^ffT^  I    rl^  ^T^ffrfrffT  ^T#t  TTfrfW^: . . .  etc. 

Three  lines  lower,  Yinialamati  is  cited  as  an  authority. 

The  last  sutra  commented  on  is  the  word  «TTT^  I ,  on  which 
the  comment  begins  : 

Ends: 
imT^-f  ^f  Ti^T^T^^  ^-R-s^^^-RfTNTTT^t  (sic) 

VII.  One  palm-leaf  (numbered  51),  5  lines,  8  x  2in.;  xvth 
cent. 

Candra-vyakarana  (text). 
This  leaf  was  found  amongst  the  fragments  of  Add.  1679. 


182  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST.  [Add  1691. 

The  passage  is  Candra-vy.  v.  iL  rued.,  aud  corresponds  to  Add. 
1694,  If.  316,  1.  2— 32a,  4  {nied.). 

VIII,  Palm-leaf;  3  leaves,  6  lines,  11  x  2in. ;  xill — xivth 
cent. 

Fragment  of  a  treatise  on  AsTEOLOGY,  or  of  an  Avadana. 

The  leaves  are  broken  at  the  edges  where  the  numbers  were 
apparently  placed. 

In  the  work  much  is  said  of  births,  conjunctions,  etc.;  but 
characters  are  also  introduced,  especially  a  merchant  Mikira  and 
his  wife  Bhidrika. 

Thus  the  fragment  may  be  from  an  astrological  treatise  with 
illustrations  from  tales,  or  an  astrological  episode  of  an  avadana. 


Add.  1693. 

Palm-leaf;  295  leaves,  6  lines,  17  x  2iin. ;  Kutila  or  early 
Devanagari  hand  as  modified  in  the  Xllth  cent.  A.  D. ;  dated 
N.  s.  285  (A.D.  11G5). 

ASHTASAHASRIKA  PrAJNAPARAMITI. 

The  pagination  is  in  letters  and  figures,  but  there  is  an  error  of 
3  in  the  former  throughout. 

On  the  reigning  monarch  (Ananda)  and  on  the  writing  see  the 
Introductions  and  Plates. 

The  colophon,  giving  also  the  name  and  residence  (the  Dharma- 
cakra-mahavihara)  of  the  scribe,  is  partially  obliterated  in  its  latter 
part : 

^-^^^^  •R^^rrr^ii  f^nsr^T(0 '^i"^'^^T"(0  ^'^- 

Ou  the  book  see  Add.  866. 


Add.  1695.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  183 

Add.  1695. 

Paper;  2-1  leaves,  folding  backwards  and  forwards,  7  lines, 
9  X  3  in. ;  dated  N.  s.  749  (a.d.  1629),  month  of  Jyeshtha,  at  an 
eclipse  of  the  sun. 

Haragauri-vivaha-nataka  by  Raja  Jagajjyotir 
Malla  of  Bhatgaon. 

This  eclipse  has  been  kindly  calcidated  for  me  by  Professor 
Adams,  who  reports  that  a  small  eclipse  was  visible  at  Bhatgaon  on 
June  21st,  1 629  a.  d.  (new  style)  from  7.56  A.  M.  to  9. 17  A,  M.,  local  time. 

The  play  is  in  a  vernacular,  but  like  several  others  of  the  kind 
(cf.  Pischel,  Catal,  der  Bibl.  der  D.  M.  G.)  has  stage  directions,  and 
incidental  ^lokas  in  more  or  less  corrupt  Sanskrit. 

The  piece  seems  to  partake  of  the  nature  of  an  opera ;  as  it 
contains  55  songs  in  various  modes  ('ragas,'  e.g.  the  Malava-raga) ; 

moreover  the  colophon    ^TW   ^m^T  frequently  occurs,  apparently 
denoting  an  instrumental  accompaniment  or  interlude. 

Besides  Civa  and  Gauri,  the  chief  dramatis  personae  seem  to  be 
Gaurl's  parents,  Himalaya  and  Mena,  and  a  rishi,  Bhrihgin. 

The  piece  is  in  10  '  sainhandhas,^  the  first  of  which,  and  part  of 
the  second,  seem  to  be  missing. 
The  colophon  runs  as  follows  : 


Add.  1697. 

I.     Palm-leaf;  165  leaves,  5  lines,  12^x  2in. ;  xili — xivth 

cent. 

KrIYAPANJIKA  of  KULADATTA. 

The  earlier  part  of  the  MS.  had  both  letter-  and  word-numbering, 
but,  owing  to  mutilation  of  the  edges,  much  of  it  has  been  renumbered, 

*  Cf.  Wright's  Nejjol,  p.  216  1.  12  and  B.  &  R.  s.  v.  fJWR^W. 


184  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST.  [Add.  1697. 

and  many  leaves  in  the  latter  part,  which  had  faded,  have  also  been 
recently  retouched.     The  MS.  is  imperfect  at  the  end. 

The  -work  is  on  the  ritual  of  later  northern  Buddhism,  Part  of 
an  index  of  the  vaiious  ^  vidhis,'  etc.,  is  found  on  the  back  of  leaf  1. 
R.  A.  S.  MS.  No.  42  contains  a  small  portion  of  the  work.  The  first 
part,  at  all  events,  is  divided  into  numbered  praliaraims,  but  these 
divisions  seem  to  cease  further  on. 

The  text  begins,  after  salutations  to  Buddha  and  the  Triratna  : 

1.  Ends: 

2.  TTfT  TTfT^nJ^fT^^^*  fli°  f^T^  IT*  I   14  a-h. 

3.  T°  'T*  "S^^  "ST^  29. 

4.  TfH  iTTRn!^rr^^^^°  f^°  "^f  3T°  I   336. 

The  rest  of  the  work  seems  to  be  divided  into  short  unnumbered 
sections,  describing  various  points  of  ritual:  e.g.  at  leaves  141  sqq. 
the  ^  stlMpandniy^  or  settings  up  of  images  of  various  deities. 

On  the  last  page  occurs  the  section-title  Xjf[  %J  T^^*^^  '<■ 
The  MS.  terminates  abruptly  2  lines  below. 

II.  Palm-leaf;  originally  34  leaves,  7  lines,  llx2in. ; 
XV — xvith  cent. 

HEVAJRA-DAKINiJiXASAlVIBAKA-T.iNTRA. 

Bengali  hand,  obscure  and  somewhat  careless.    Leaf  22  is  missing. 
For  the  work  see  Add.  1340. 
Ends  : 

III.  Palm-leaf;  9  leaves  (numbered  2 — 10),  5 — 6  lines, 
12  X  2  in, ;  xvith  cent. 

Part  of  a  work  on  RiTUAL,  etc. 
The  handwriting  is  poor  and  careless. 

First  section  (leaf  3a)  :  "^TTTT^^^'n^TV  ^^TTTfiTffT  (of. 
Add.  1706)11     Then  ^^T  W^^'WT^  ^rmTV^T^T^^ . . . 


Add.  1697.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  185 

The  second  section  ends  on  leaf  6a :   '^♦il^l<t»lf,*<l*H*H(H^ai  ', 

^^ttt:  (^^TT^T^i'^rTT*  ?). 

Section  3  ends  96— 10a  :  ^TnT'fhT^TWV  ^^^TT  '.  II 
Section  4  begins  :   ^?nft  ^IJ^T^T^  II    ^TTI-RcJTT^^T^f^- 

W^  *...(?)...,  and  ends  abruptly  on  the  next  page. 

IV.  Palm-leaf;   16   leaves   and   cover,  5  lines,  12x2in. ; 
dated  N.  s.  583  (a.d.  1463). 

Balimalika  and  two  dhaeanis. 

The  Balimalika  is  a  short  work  on  ritual  in  52  numbered  sections. 
It  consists  chiefly  of  invocations,  mystic  formulae,  and  the  like. 
The  text  begins  : 

^^  WT%^T^  :RTf^fTT  :    ¥^^TnT^  :  II 
T^T^^^Tf^^  ^  m^T^T^  fTrT :  I 
^^fT^  ^^  im  ^TfT^^TV^^  II 

Ends: 

^^T^1%  I  H,^  I  ^f^^f^r^T  wrrn\ :  ittstr^w^t^  i 

8\£-l 

The  first  dharanl  commences  on  the  back  of  the  same  leaf  (14) 
(on  which  there  are  traces  of  obliterated  writing)  thus  : 

f^1¥  f^^  ^T^  f^^'t  f^^  f^f^  I 

The  second  dharani  (fi".  15 — 16)  contains  21  verses  in  honour  of 
Vajra-yogini  beginning  : 

'm^  ^^dnr^  ii  \  ii 

Ending : 

^^fT^  M^^  %E  ^'V  \^  ^  f^f^^  ^TTft  WTr^Trrr- 

^^^TrTT  II 

V.  and  VI.     Palm-leaf;   21   leaves,  7—8    lines,  13x2 in.; 
Bengali  hand  of  XV — xvith  cent. 


186  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST.  [Add.  1697. 

The  two  MSS.  are  apparently  by  one  scribe. 

The  writing  is  faint,  somewhat  careless,  and  very  indistinct. 

The  first  work  (1697.  5)  appears  to  be  a  treatise  on  letters  and 
their  mystical  value  (cf.  1699.  1,  etc.).  The  opening  words  can  now 
hardly  be  deciphered,  but  in  the  first  line  the  book  seems  to  be  described 
as  TJ^T^^j^fxjT. 

The  work  appears  to  consist  of  4  leaves,  (3  being  numbered),  with 
some  kind  of  table  or  diagram  on  the  last  page.  No  colophon  or 
title  of  any  sort  remains. 

The  next  work  (1697.  6)  seems  to  be  on  astrology,  astronomy  or 
the  like. 

It  appears  to  begin  at  leaf  16;  while  la  seems  to  have  something 
in  common  with  both  treatises,  being  both  on  letters  and  auspicious 
days. 

The  work  begins  thus  (f.  15) : 

The  end  is  almost  obliterated. 

VII.  Palm-leaf;  4  leaves,  5  lines,  12^  x  2  in.;  xv — xvith 
cent. 

Cakrasambaradandakastuti  and  other  stotras. 

The  first  stotra  is  in  4  numbered  sections,  the  last  of  which  ends  : 

^^niWT  (?)  "^fH  ^WfT  ^^  I  8  I    ^T^g^^^<4  li^^wH 
^^T^  II 

The  next  stotra,  which  seems  to  be  unfinished,  begins  : 

m^T  Wrf^rTT^T  "S^^r^wf^^Tf^nTT^TT^^  I . . . 

VIII.  Palm-leaf;  4  leaves  and  covers,  12x2in. ;  dated 
N.  S.  475  (A.D.  1355). 

Fragments. 
1.    Leaf  of  the  EkallavIra-tantra. 
Contains  the  end  of  Ch.  23  (  =  Add.  1319,  67a— 26  4). 
2.    Leaf  of  a  Commentary. 

Page-number  5. 


Add.  1697.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  187 

Begins : 

Ends: 

7T?f  ^T^  I  ^i;ii(ir^\n:ffT  ii  ^rr  ti:^  ^t^t:  iiT^iTt 

'<• 

8.     Two  leaves  of  notes,  etc.,  in  various  hands. 
The  first  leaf  consists  of  short  prayers  to   Araoghasiddha ;  the 
second  has  only  a  few  lines  of  writing  in  a  vernacular. 

Add.  1698. 

Palm-leaf;  161  leaves,  5  lines,  13  x  2in. ;  dated  N.  s.  506 
(A.D.  1386). 
AMARA-KogA,  with  Newari  commentary  called  ViVKiTl,  by 

Manikya. 
Written  at  Bhatgaon  in  the  reign  of  Jayasthiti  Malla. 
The  first  leaf,  which  contains  some  prefatory  remarks  (partly  in 
the  vernacular),  is  much  mutilated. 
The  text  ^"^r^J"??  etc.  begins  2&. 
The  colophon  is  iu  verse  (161a) : 

^T"TT(?rr^wT^  ^T  "Rfwr  ^r^'frNrr:  ii 
^Tf^^f^^  TfincRsr^nTT  ^mfT^Tr^:  ii 

^^tTT  (sic)  x?^ir3I^  7T%  s^  %"qTl%%  ^Tf%  ^  %^#%  I 
li^!R%  ^<r^Tf^VT^t  frrm  lllirf T'^^^T^t  "^  II 


188  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1698. 

After  this  comes  a  scribe's  (benedictory)  verse. 
Then  follows  : 

Add.  1699. 

This  number  consists  of  thi-ee  works  and  a  fragment,  written  by 
one  scribe,  Kacrigayakara,  in  three  successive  years  (1 198 — 1200  A.  d.) 
in  the  Bengali  character,  forming  the  earliest  example  of  that  writing 
at  present  found.  See  the  Palaeograpliical  Introduction  to  the  present 
work  and  my  description  in  the  Pal*ographical  Society's  Oriental 
Series,  Plate  81.  The  leaves  measure  11^x2  inches,  and  are  in 
remarkably  fresh  preservation.     There  are  6  to  8  lines  on  each  page. 

I.  5  leaves;  dated  88th  year  of  Go\dndapala  (a.d.  1190). 

Paxcakaka. 

On  the  king  see  the  Historical  Introduction. 

For  the  subject,  divination,  etc.,  by  means  of  letters,  compare  the 
Paiicasvara  (Rajendralal  Mitra,  JS^ot.  Skt.  MSS.,  No.  1478). 
Begins : 

^^:  ¥^^"1^  I TTW^  ^^i;t^>.  ^TfJHl^rfw  Hf^rf:  I 
^^T^TT^^^  ^?ni^^:...TTWT^  ^11 

^  ^T^i5*        ^°         ■^1^15''  I 

For  the  final  colophon,  see  the  Historical  Introduction. 

II.  18   leaves;   dated  in   the  37th  year  of  Govinda-Pala 
(AD.  1198,  cf.  No.  I). 

GuHYAVALi-viVBiTi  by  Ghanadeva. 


*  Cf.  Add.  MS.  1358  and  inscr.  ib.  cit. 


Add.  1699.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  189 

Writing  larger  and  generally  fainter  than  in  No.  1,  but  similar  in 
all  essential  characteristics.  Important  words  etc.,  are  marked  with 
a  red  smear;  some  corrections,  stops,  etc.,  with  yellow. 

A  mystical  work  in  25  paragraphs  ('cl okas'). 

Begins  : 

f^^^T^^^^  "RTTfT:  f^^^  mt  II 
■RT^TTT  I  ai  <^  N  '^TffT^T :  ^TT{^^-R^Tf%^T  ^  <  U!  iTl :  WT- 

•^i%:  ^T^^  II 

For  leaf  96  see  Pal.  Soc.  Or.  Ser.  PI.  81. 
Ends  : 

^r^i 


III.     70  leaves;  dated  a.d.  1200  (see  below). 

YoGARATXA-MALA,  a  commentar}''  on  the  Hevajra  by 
Krishna  or  Kahxa. 


190  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1699. 

Leaves  30,  5-i  and  62  are  missing. 

The  divisions  {kalpa)  and  subdivisions  (pafala)  of  tlie  work 
answer  to  those  of  the  Eevajra  (Add.  1340);  the  first  kalpa  ending 
at  leaf  43.     The  text  is  given  only  in  abbreviations. 

Text  begins : 

Patala  1  ends  : 

TT^^:  ^Z^:  I   11a. 

Ends: 

li^T  %W^m'%^rT^TTI^  I  ^rg^TTTNH  n^  f^li'31:  ^T^- 
f%^T  ^^:  II  ^T%W^^f^^T  ^T^T^^T^T  W^^X^J  II 
II  lifrrn:^  ^mfTT^T^^T^T^m^T^TfTTffT  II  ^T^^t^^IT- 

IV.     2  leaves. 

Fragment  (unfinished)  of  the  Guhyavali-vivriti. 

The  first  leaf  is  numbered  9,  the  second  has  no  number  and  is 
written  on  only  one  side. 

The  fragment  contains  section  17,  with  parts  of  16  and  18, 
corresponding  to  leaves  12 — 13  of  No.  II.  It  is  written  in  the 
same  hand. 

Add.  1701. 

I.  Palm-leaf;  154  leaves,  5  lines,  12  x  2  in.;  dated  N.  S.  509 
(A.D.  1889),  see  below. 

Panca-raksha. 

The  date  and  name  of  the  reigning  king  are  written  in  a  different, 
but  apparently  contemporai-y,  hand. 


Add.  1701.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  191 

There  is  another  date,  probably  of  recitation,  but  nearly  obliterated, 
inside  the  cover. 

As  to  the  book,  see  Add.  1164,  et  al. 
The  colophon  runs  : 

^oT^^n^ll      ^^^Wetc...      ^T^W     TTT'^f^frTII     "^T- 

TT^Tf^TT^^T'^  ^nTT%f^T^^T^TT%i5^:  (sic)  II 

II.     Palm-leaf;  5  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  xiv — xvth  cent. 
First  two  leaves  of  the  Dharmasangraha. 

The  text  differs  somewhat  from  that  of  Add.  1422;  after  the 
mention  of  the  5  shandhas  (26,  3  =  Add.  1422,  26,  3),  it  passes 
directly  to  the  pratlfyasamutj)dda  (ibid.,  5a,  1). 

The  fragment  ends  in  the  enumeration  of  the  seven  hodhyangas. 

m.    [Non-BuddHstic]. 

Add.  1702. 

Palm-leaf;  144  remaining  leaves,  6 — 8  lines,  12  x  2  in.; 
ixth  cent. 

BODHISATTVA-BHtJMI. 

The  MS.  is  imperfect  and  very  shattered  at  the  edges,  in  par- 
ticular many  of  the  leaf-numbers  being  broken  off.  The  original 
order  has  been  restored,  as  far  as  possible,  from  the  writing  and 
subject  of  the  leaves.  On  the  palaeography  and  date  see  the  excursus 
appended  to  the  Palseographical  Introduction.  No  other  MS.  or 
version  of  the  work  seems  to  exist. 

The  subject  of  the  work  is  the  mental  and  spiritual  development 
of  a  bodhisattva.     For  the  use  of  'bhumi'  in  the  sense  of  'stage  of 

*  These  names  occur  in  the  postscript  of  Add.  1656  ;  but  there 
also  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  date. 


192  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1702. 

progress,'  compare  the  Dagabhumi  above  ;  the  stages,  seven  in  this 
case,  are  enumerated  at  the  beginning  of  Chapter  3,  Part  3  (see 
below).     Compare  also  M.  Senart's  Mahavastu,  p.  xxxv,  note. 

The  subjects  of  the  various  chapters  may  be  seen  from  their  titles, 
and  may  be  gathered  more  explicitly  from  a  statement,  usually  in  a 
catechetical  form,  occurring  at  the  beginning  of  each.  These  titles, 
etc.,  so  far  as  they  are  at  present  discoverable,  ai'e  given  below.  The 
main  divisions  of  the  work  are  three. 

[The  leaves  are  tentatively  numbered,  and  are  referred  to  on  the 
same  plan  as  in  Add.  1049  above.] 

I.    Adhara-yogasthana. 

Chap.  1  ends  and  chapter  2  begins  : 

T^...    ^TW^  "W^  ^rTT^f^TfTT  ^^g^^lfv^nrW^^ 

^t^T^T^t  ^T^TT:  W  . . . "  93?^. 

Chap.  2  ends:   ^°  "^^  f^^TTq-T^:    T^**  I    100«. 

Chap,  3  begins  with  an  enumeration  of  the  seven  'sthanas'  of 
the  bodhLsattva. 

These  are  svdrtha,  pardrtha,  tattvdrtha,  prabhdva,  sattvaparipdka 
(cf.  chapters  3 — 6),  dtmano  huddliadharmaparipdka  and  anuttard 
samyahsambodhi.     'Svartha'  is  then  further  explained. 

Ends :    ^^  ^T°  -^TTTT^^T^  ^T^  1076. 

Chap.  4  (r|T«lT^Md^)  commences  by  declaring  tattvdrtha  to  be 
of  two  kinds,  samanta  and  laukika  (]).     Ends  636. 

Chap,  5.  On  j)'^Midva,  begins  (63J,  1,  3)  with  the  curiously 
expressed  declaration  that  the  highest  innate  prabhdva  of  Buddhas 
and  Bodhisattvas  is  the  ^^ Ar^vattMdbhutadharmatd" ,  doubtless  an 
allusion  to  Qakyamuni's  tree. 

Chap.  6  is  on  ^;aW/;a^«,  which  it  commences  (16a)  by  describing 
as  m^lI<*"K=(T^ff^  .* ,  These  six  are  svabhdva,  piulgala,  jmi- 
bhdva,  iipni/a,  and  two  others  which  are  not  legible.      Ends  106. 


Add.  1702.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  193 

Chap.  7  (106)  treats  apparently  of  hodhi.  This  is  described  as 
dvividha,  but  the  further  definition  is  nearly  obliterated. 

The  final  title  is  lost. 

Chap.  8  ends  W®  '^^  ^^^^^^W  I   8^6. 

Then  follows  the  introductory  verse  of  ch.  9,  which  is  on  the  first 
pdramitd,  ddna  : 

^\W  II    ^^T^  %^  Wt  ^  ^-E^t  ^trft  ^^  [I] 

^mirlfl-^^^  ^  ^(qi^lt:  'r\%^  ^  [II] 

■Ri5^  frf^^T^T^t  ^T^%rT(^^T^fT:  II 

These,  we  are  told,  are  the  nine  kinds  of  ddiia  (leaf  S^^S). 
The  bodhisattva  must  practise  this  and  the  five  other  pdramitds. 
The  chapter  ends  H^a. 

Chaps.  10 — 1-4  accordingly  treat  of  the  other  pdramitds,  the  same 
udddna  being  repeated  or  cited  at  the  beginning  of  each. 

Chap.  10  'aft^fX?^^,  ends  \\h. 

„      11  ^Tfrrq-  „      (826). 

„      12  ^q°  „      C5^. 

„      13  ^J^^°  „     ^86. 

„    u  imm°        „    ^ib. 

Chap.  15,  the  title  of  which  is  lost,  begins  on  the  same  leaf  with 
the  query  ^HT^T  ClfV^f^T^t  fTT^T^f^fri^^T^  .*  ? 

Chap.  16  t^T^TTr^XJTT^^  ends  L^a. 

Chap.  17  begins  with  an  udddna  and  a  question,  as  follows,  on 
shame  or  remorse  : 

^^RI^  ^T^frT^T^  'r\%^  TTfrf^f^:  [I] 

^^TV^^^  -^^T  ^Tf  T^^fJ-g^'T^  II 

*  For  the  form  cf.  B.  and  R.  s.v.  "^^T^, 

t  T^^TTTT^I^  seems  to  be  the  right  reading  from  what  follows. 

13 


194  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1702. 

Ends:  ^^  ^T°  ^^^°  -^1^^^^°  (\°^Z>). 
Chap.  18  begins  witli  the  following  tulddna  : 

The  chapter  and  section  end  thus  : 

II.    Adhaea-dharma  or  Adharanudharma  ,  yogasthana. 

Chap.  1  begins  with  the  tulddna  : 
Ends : 

Chap.  2.      Udddna  : 

Ends :  ^°  ^°  f^'  ^'W^^  \\^a. 

Chap.  3.     The  udddna  (which  is  somewhat  indistinct)  and  the 
opening  sentences  describe  vdtsalya  in  its  seven  forms. 

These  are:  '^W^  ^^^%^TI^Tf^ft  "^I^lf^^  "Rf^W  {sic) 
[i.e.,  from  what  follows,  f^^TTW]. 

Ends :  ^°  ^TVTTT^^*  f^°  ^WraX^R°  W^h. 

Chap.  4.      Udddna  : 

TT^T   t   "^Tf^f^TT  (sic)  ^T^T^rg   '^r^im^^    TrfrT^'%^^ 

^T^^  ^TTTm^ffTTT^T  tw^jt:  II 

This  summarises  the  twelve   vihdras  of  the  bodhisattva,  which 
form  the  subject  of  the  chapter. 


Add.  1702.J  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  195 

The  chapter  and  section  end  : 

III.    Adhara-xishtha  yogasthaxa. 

Chap.  1  ends  : 

Chap.  2  briefly  treats  of  parigraha,  which  is  said  to  be  six-fold  : 
sakritsatvasatvcir-jyarigraha  (?),  ddhipat7/a-p°,  uddddna-if,  dlrghakcdiJca, 
adirgluxkdlika,  and  carama. 

Ends :    ■^^  ^?n"°  f^°  "R^TT^"  :    '^^^. 
Chap.  3. 

^T  (read  '^1°)  ftfV^^rTT^T^T  ^fR!  [I]  ^T^^f^!  ^fW 
f^^^T^^°  I5^Tir^^°  TTfrnfTT^^  f^^rr^C^  f^^rl^T- 

^^  Tn7T\fTf%TrT:  ^I'T'sj^si^^tIr:  ^wTr'srTfVNTr- 

"^"^TTTTrTmTT^T'JTI   (and  so  on,  through  the  vihdras  and  bku/nis). 
Ends: 

^T^TT^T^-^rr^  ^rfN  ^f^°   130a. 

Chap.  4.  On  caryd  ;  begins  with  a  division  of  the  subject  under 
four  heads,  pdramitd-caryd,  hodldpaksha-d\  ahhijad-c"  and  satvcqxtri- 
pdkac". 

The  chapter  ends  : 

Of  chap.  5  the  title  is  lost ;  it  commences  with  a  brief  reference  to 
some  of  the  chief  categories  :  the  .32  Mahdpurushcdakshammi,  etc. 
Chap.  6  ends  : 

Crf^'  ^TVKf^T^^T^^T^  irfrr^^Z^  WTJT^  I  44a. 
Then  follows  a  summary  of  the  progress  of  the  bodhisattva  and  of 
the  work  (the  leaf  is  unfortunately  much  faded)  : 

13—2 


196  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1702. 

^q^T^  TT^^W  [446]  TT^^^T^:  ^##11 . . . "^^^,  ^^ii'g:: 

The  next  two  lines  tell  how  he  gains  adhimnhti  and  imparts  it 
{samdddayati,  sic)  to  others  :  he  gains  freedom  from  the  sorrow  of 
fresh  births  {samsdraduhklidparikheda),  becomes  skilled  in  the  nos- 
tras; then  after  completing  the  puni/asambhdra  and  jMnasambhdra, 

^^T^^T^f  TT^^^  (line  6),  and  thus  "JTf T^T^^lTf^^ 

^t^tfV^r^^fR . . . 

What  immediately  follows  is  mostly  obliterated,  but  in  the  last 
line  of  this  page  and  the  beginning  of  the  first  line  of  the  next 
(the  final)  leaf,  we  read  : 

In  line  3  we  find  : 

TTf?TiTfTr'Twf¥t^:  ff^T^^^^wf^^:  CTfvw^T(?)^rr- 

^T^  ^^^;   below,  ^t^^T^TT^Tf^"5  TT^TTZJ^  ^flic^Tf^ 
"^  *l  ^T?^"^T^Trf ;  by  various  forms  of  kuccda  one  becomes  finally 

?r^T'?TT'f#XIT^^:   (line  6).     Of  the  following  lines  little  connected 
sense  can  be  made. 

The  work  ends  as  follows  : 

*i  q^^(?)^^Tr[T]^  itttt:  CT[fv^(^^]^%T^^^:  ttttt: 

II  ^^TTTT  ^  ^Tfv^f^^f^:  II 

From  this  necessarily  very  imperfect  outline  it  will  appear  that 
the  work  is  important  for  the  vinaya,  and  to  some  extent  for  the 
abhidharma,  of  the  Northern  School.  Several,  though  by  no  means 
all,  of  the  numerous  categories  appear  in  the  Pali  works  as  known  to 
us  through  Childers  and  Dr  Oldenberg. 

*  These  letters  I  suj^ply  by  conjecture,  the  leaf  being  broken. 


Add.  1703.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  197 

Add.  1703. 

Palm-leaf;  125  leaves,  6  lines,  11^  x  2  in.;  dated  N.  s.  549 
(A.D.  1429). 

Yajravali  by  Abhayakaragupta. 

Good  Nepalese  hand.     Written  by  Jivaylbliadra. 

The  work  is  a  treatise  on  magic  and  ritual,  styling  itself  a 
"mandalopayika"  (see  below),  and  divided  into  short  "vidhis"  e.g., 

TTfrT^f^f'^:   66,  ^^Tf^:^T^^^Wf^fv:  76,  ^ftTTTr^- 
^f^f^:   86. 

Begins  :    ^WI  ^R^^r^T^  I   ^^  ^f^-^^t 
Ends:    "^'n^T^'^WTT^TWTV!    followed  by   several   verses  be- 
ginning : 

^rmf^  ^  ^ft^:  %T^  ^ST"^  "^^  II 

After  which  : 

T{T!^^Tmf^^T  WRJi{:  I  ^  v^°  I  ^  y.y^  ^?:^T  ^^* 

^^^T^T  (sic)   fffm   f^irTWT!T^%   irfW^^T   ^^t   TT^° 

^W^  f^ftfrT  I  ^^T  Yt  etc.  II 

Add.  1704. 

Palm-leaf,  with  some  paper  supply ;  originally  83  leaves, 
4 — 5  lines,  12  x  2in. ;  Nepalese  hand  of  the  Xlth  cent.,  with 
some  later  additions. 

Catuhpitha-tantra. 

Leaves  81  and  82  are  lost.  83  and  part  of  80  are  xviith  cent. 
paper  supply.  There  are  occasional  corrections  in  the  hooked-top 
hand  of  the  xii — xiiith  cent. 

The  work  is  vindoubtedly  the  original  of  that  described  by 
Csoma  as  existing  in  Kgyut  iv.  6  (see  now  Ann.  du  Musee  Guimet, 
ii.  297). 


198  CATALOGUE  OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  1704. 

The  first  leaf  is  faded.  The  work  consists  of  o  prakaranns,  sub- 
divided into  patalas,  whicli  end  as  follows  (corresponding  to  the  four 
jHfJias  together  with  an  introduction)  : 

TfrT  THI^TTT^T^  ^^TT[  II  86. 

TVr\  IT^TW  ^TT^T^IrZ  ^^TTT II   17. 

Tf<T  TT^TW  ^T^l"3  ^^T^  II  39. 

T°  3T°  ^T^iffZ  ^°  II  596. 

The  final  title  is  nearly  obliterated,  but  we  find  from  the  sub- 
ordinate  p«/rt/as  that  the  title  of  the  last  jjrakaraiia  was  ^"^MT*?, 
whence  the  siipposed  title  of  the  whole  work  as  given  in  Dr 
J).  Wright's  list.  The  real  title  (see  also  the  Tibetan)  may  be  just 
discerned  on  the  back  of  leaf  1. 

At  the  end  is  a  leaf  containing,  on  one  side  only,  4^  lines  of  ISTepalese 
writing  of  the  xiii— xivth  cent.  The  title  is  ^"R^^  (?)  ."t^irf^T . 
The  fragment  is  in  9lokas,  and  apparently  discusses  the  relations  of 
impregnation  and  hereditary  knowledge.     It  begins  : 

^Tf^J  ^f^  f^TT^^  ^T^rJrT"^  ^^T^^  II 
Jfinds:    "^WffTW(O^^T  T''^  ^:^?^  ^T^^lffrl  I 


Add.  1705. 

Palm- leaf ;  35  leaves,  8  lines,  12  x  2  in. ;  Xillth  cent. 

AnandADATTA's  Commentary  on  part  of  the 
Candeavyakaeana  (ii.  i). 

For  the  text,  which  is  here  given  only  in  abbreviations,  see 
Add.  MS.  1691.  4,  leaves  9—11. 

Add.  MS.  16.57.  2  (q.  v.)  is  a  fragment  of  this  same  portion  of 
commentary.  There  are  numerous  citations  from  Jayaditya,  the 
compiler  of  the  Ka9ika-vritti ;  V.  76,  8a,  10a,  116  ("Jayadityadih"). 
Jinendra  is  cited  10a,  1.  3;  and  'Bhashyakara'  (Patafijali  1),  9a, 
186  :  also  'Acarya'  Panini,  26a,  286  fin. 

The  commentary  on  the  first  sutra,  which  extends  over  seven 
leaves,  begins  thus  (after  invocation  to  Buddha)  : 


Add.  1705.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  199 

N*   WT  TT^^TtT   tl^fRrT    (1.  ffT°)    ^^I    ^WI    ^^^^  I 

A  comparison  of  Add.  1657.  2  shows  that  a  line  or  two  is  missing 
at  the  end. 


Add.  1706. 

A  collection  of  palm-leaf  fragments  and  volumes  of  works 
chiefly  on  ritual,  the  construction  of  images,  etc.  All  ori- 
ginally about  Hi  X  1|  in. 

I.  4  leaves,  5  lines,  7  x  iMn. ;  dated  N.  s.  381,  middle  figure 
doubtful  (A.  D.  1261). 

Khadga-pujavidhi. 

A  short  treatise  in  verse  on  the  use  of  arms,  etc.  Tantric  or 
^ivaic. 

Begins  : 
^W,  ^T^^T^f^^^T^  II 

The  same  metre  seems  to  be  continued  throughout  the  work. 
Ends: 

wiwfwfv  ^^T^:  I  ^^T^:  V^xc^)  ^pgf^  [^TJ^'^t 

frT^T  ^"^TT  (?)  T\^  f^ngrfPRffT  I  TT^Tf^TT^IT^^T 
(sic)  ^T  [?  ]  ^  ^T^^^^TKrf  I  ^  TfTT^f»T^  ^- 
TI^T  f^f^fT  I 

II.    Pratimalakshanam,  from  Varahamihira's 
Bkihatsamhita. 

[Non-Buddlaistic]. 


200  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1706. 

Ill,     7  leaves,  5  lines,  8  x  2  in. ;  xiiitli  cent. 

BUDDHA-PBATIMALAKSHAXAM. 

A  short  treatise  in  two  parts  on  images  of  Buddha,  probably  more 
or  less  in  imitation  of  Varahamihira's  work  just  noticed. 
The  work  is  in  regular  sutra-forni,  beginning  : 

Qariputra  enquires  thus  of  Bhagavan  : 

To  which  the  reply  is  : 

The  rest  of  the  work  discusses  the  dimensions,  pose,  etc.,  of  the 
various  members  of  the  images,  ending  thus  : 

T?:rTTf%  Tf  ^^FT^Tf^  ^^WTPT  f^^^W:  I 

TT^rCT^fT^etc. ...    ^■«I^'5^f^rI  II     ^^^^^^Tf^ff 
^^irffT^T^^^  WfJji{  II 

IV.     Dimensions,  writing,  etc.,  same  as  No.  Ill ;  originally 
17  leaves. 

Pratimalakshanavivaranam. 

A  commentary  on  the  last  work. 
Begins  : 

^^  TTnnTr^srnF?frr  i  ^^wr  ^^  ii  ^q^nTri^^^- 

^TW  II 
Ends : 
TTTT  ^^i;^TfWfTTTfrrT?T^^Wf%^TW  ^^T^  II    ^^r^ .... 

(f.  17  wanting). 


Add.  1706.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  201 

V.     Dimensions  and  writing  as  before  ;  23  leaves. 
Part  of  a  Commentary  on  a  work  similar  to  the  two  last. 

Leaf  1  missing;  leaf  2  mutilated,  and  much  obliterated  on  the 
outside.    Leaf  1 9  is  numbered  29  by  mistake.    Compai'e  also  No.  VIII. 

The  Buddhistic  character  of  the  work  is  determined  by  several 
passages,  e.  g.  1 9«,  1.  4  : 

The  main  work  ends  thus  : 

f^XT^^   Tc^TNtTT^:  II    N^tT^T^^^TI^TT  II    Tfr\   ^^W- 
fi?fffll 

After  a  break,  there  follows  on  the  next  leaf  (23)  a  short 
appendix   on    the   pindiJcd    or    pedestal    of  the    image    beginning : 

TTT'^'^**'  l^^  '^  T^"^ W^rf^T Vt^^  II  and  ending  (without  colophon) 

^f^frf  II 

VI.     Dimensions  and  writing  as  above ;  13  leaves. 

A  work  on  the  dimensions  of  Caityas  and  of  Images. 

The  first  few  leaves  are  mutilated  on  the  right  hand  edges. 
Leaves  8  and  9  are  wanting. 

Text  begins  (without  invocation)  : 

^TVm*   fj  . . .  [hiatus]  . . .  f^^^^TWT^^T^T^  ^r?TT^n7^ 
^^T^i^:  I   W^T^T^TWT%p"]  . . .  fWI%^  II 

At  3a  the  second  part  of  the  work,  on  images,  begins  thus  : 

Leaves  10 — 13  contain  little  but  measurements,  in  figures,  of 
various  images,  with  subscriptions  such  as :  TT^  W^'^^^T'^^T 
^fW^TT^^T^t  ^^TTTT^imTW  II  (Ila);  T^  ^rTT^ 
^'TT^ffT^^^iT^(12)ll; 


202  CATALOGUE  OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1706. 

The  work  ends  : 

f^rfl^^fT^  II 

VII.  2  leaves,  same  size  as  the  preceding;  writing  some- 
what later  and  less  accurate. 

Fragment  of  a  work  on  Measurements,  similar  to  the  preceding. 
Begins  : 
^W,  ^^T^  II    V^VT?§;^t  ^^Wm'^T^^^  I    cT^  ^J- 

^T  tf^T^t  f^^Tfw^T^:  (sic)  I 

As  several  abstract  objects  of  veneration  are  mentioned  in  connec- 
tion with  measurements,  we  may  possibly  suppose  the  work  to  treat 
of  temple-inscriptions  or  of  personifications  of  these  objects. 

Thus  at  2a  we  read  TWTT^  "■^fi^.T^^cM  Nt^^T  ^^["^Q- 

i?TT'^^.     Ends  abruptly. 

VIII.  22  leaves. 

A  somewhat  later  but  complete  copy  of  the  work  described 
under  No.  V. 

Begins : 

f?  I   TTTIttiT^^W  ^^T  irT^Tf^;(:[^]^^fTT  I 

After  the  ending  ^^^WT^TfT,  as  in  No.  V.,  we  find  the  verse: 

^T5[^T^^"=Cl"'^  (?)  ^^T^-  IT^T^^  I 
f^^T^f'5Tf^tT?T[T]-»3;rT  ^f^^?:  ^^T  S"^  ^  II 

IX.  7  leaves,  5  lines ;  writing  similar  to  that  of  No.  I. 

Qambara-panjika. 

A  short  manual  on  the  i-itual  or  worship  of  Qambara.  It  consists 
chiefly  of  invocations  and  the  like. 


Add.  1706.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  203 

Begins  : 

Ends  : 

■^J^JJ  (sic)  ttN"%^  ^^T^  I  ^^iV^^T^'Rt  ^  (?)  ^^ 
^t^TT  . . . .  rTT  I    ^mrf^  ^t^T^Tlf^  "R^T^^T^  (?)  I 

Add.  1708. 

I.  Palm-leaf;  originally  115  leaves  (see  below),  5 — 7  lines, 
12  X  2  in. ;  on  the  date  see  below. 

Nama-sangiti-tika  by  Yilasavajra  (?). 

Leaves  4,  5,  8,  9,  19—22,  26,  42,  43,  47,  49,  50,  59,  63,  80,  91, 
92,  94,  97,  99,  109,  110,  112—3  are  missing. 

The  pages  are  numbered  with,  figures  only. 

This  is  apparently  a  diflFerent  commentaiy  from  R.  A.  S.  Cat., 
No.  35,  though  several  chapters  partly  correspond.  It  consists  of  1 2 
adhikaras.  The  number  of  sections  in  each  is  in  several  cases  indi- 
cated by  numerals,  as  shown  below. 

The  work  begins  :  ^T^^'^f^^^j^  ... 

Then,  3  lines  lower,  seems  to  follow  a  table  or  summary  of 
contents  : 

fl^^T  '^I'^WWT  TrffT^"^^  . . .  (see  colophons  of  Add.  1323). 

On    2rt  this    summary    is    further  explained;    e.g.   (1.    1)    TJ^ 

W['^llJ^'r[J^T(^X'^[W[m and  (L  3)  TTff    frr^f»T%- 

mf*T^T^T^T^T*'   (see  Add.  1323). 

(The  end  of  Ch.  1  appears  to  be  missing  with  the  missing  leaves. ) 

2  ends  ^T^^nT^^nTrt^rr^T^nT  ^^^T^TW^Tf^^T- 
^frT^^^Tfv^TT:  f^Ht^:  I   106—11. 

3.  '?IT^'TT«^'^°^t^^TWRf^nTV^TT^rfT^:ill6. 

4.  (Title  apparently  missing.) 


204  CATALOGUE   OF  BUDDHIST  [Add.  1708, 

T^^:  I  306. 

6(1).   ii^^*^!!  ^^n-'  ^«  i5[i.  "^jNa^^^i^Tfj^T^r^- 

WN^TT  [WS]  (?)  546. 

7.  II  ^^  II  '^IT^  i?«  ^T^^T^^^T^^^TfV^T^: 
¥TR:  II  G06. 

8.  II  '^'^'<ii  ^T^  ^°  irm^wr^T^^^  ^c^rfv^Ttt 

S¥^:  826. 

10.  "^^  fi°  imT^^^T^TfT^-^Tsrr^^  -^nw,  \  1026. 

11.    ^T"  ^°  ^^^^'TTT^Wn^lT  ■q:^^lXrr^:  ^ft^^T- 

TT:  1  1026—103. 

The  last  leaf  but  one  (114:)  is  mutilated;  what  remains  of  the 
colophon  runs  as  follows  : 

TTfv^T  ....  ^m^r:  II 

Then  a  verse  in  pi-aise  of  the  study  of  the  work  ;  after  wdiich  : 
^I-^^^f^rf^  (sic)  I   lifrTTT'^  fW^T^^^^  T'^^^f^^T- 

VQ^:  I  ^!?TO^ ....  TnT%^r^  T(.,.,T.... ^'g^mfvr^^T^ ii 

Tr\^r    ^f^Hs^:  (?)  ^^T7T^#"frf^T    Zt^T    ^^^T    (sic) 
S"^  W^W^:  II 

If  the  first  member  of  the  partly  mutilated  compound  word 
expressing  the  figures  of  the  year  stands  for  a9va,  the  date  is  N.  s. 
5  (ishu)  7  (mahidhara)  7  (acva)  or  A.  d.  l-i57. 

II.     Palm-leaf ;  2  leaves,  6  lines,  1 2  x  2  in. 

Fragment  of  the  Nama-saxgiti  (text). 


Add.  1708.]  SANSKRIT   MANUSCRIPTS.  205 

A  different  hand  from  tlie  last,  pei-haps  slightly  earlier.     The 
pages  are  numbered  with  letters  and  figures. 
Begins  as  Add.  1323. 

III.     Palm-leaf;   4   leaves,  5  lines,   12x2in. ;    xv— xvith 
cent. 

Fragment  of  a  Buddhist  tantra. 

The  leaves  are  numbered  2,  4,  6,  7. 

There  are  no  regular  titles  or  subscriptions.     On  2a,  1.  4,  we  find  : 

On  6b  something  is  said  on  the  favourite  tantric  subject  of  the 
mystical  value  of  the  letters. 

The  fragment  ends  abruptly  with  the  words  : 

Add.  1952. 

Paper;  184  leaves,  9  lines,  11  x4^in. ;  recent  Devanagarl 
hand. 

Vaii^avali  (Parbatiya). 

Translated  by  Dr  D.  Wright  and  munshi  Shew  Shnnker  Singh, 
and  published  at  Cambridge,  1877. 

Begins  : 

^nfY^it  'TTR^  ^u^  f^t^Rf  I 
Tsfnfr^^  M^[\-4  ^T^%^  ^WT^ II 

%MIM*|5ft  ^TPrt  tlTT^T  Trl%^  (i.e.  °^^)  II 
Then  the  Parbatiya  text : 


20G  CATALOGUE   OF   BUDDHIST  [Add.  15S6. 

Supplementary  Note  to  Add.  158G. 

As  this  work  seems  to  have  gained  some  note  in  its  various 
redactions  and  versions  in  the  several  parts  of  the  Buddhist  workl, 
the  following  additional  notice  may  be  of  interest.  After  a  long 
description  of  the  scenery  of  the  dialogue,  followed  (2&~36)  by  gdthds 
and  ex])ressions  of  homage  addressed  by  Rashtrapala  to  the  Buddha, 
at  36,  line  8,  the  following  question  is  reached : 

grrT^TT^cf  v^:  ^^Tr^TTnrr  Crfv^ffi  ^rfi^ffi  ^^- 

IT%1I  ^rqqf^T^  "R^TTTlTTrW  ^r^TT^TTSf  ^^rUf^f^^ 

In  the  pages  folloAving,  several  categories  of  dharmas  occur,  which 
may  be  compared  with  those  referred  to  in  the  index  to  Burnouf 's 
Lotus,  s.  V.  quatre. 

^cfrT-JIT  ^m^f^^T^lftfT^T  I  "0:^1  TTT"qT^  ^rjf^vlf : 
^^^T^^T  flfW^ffr  ^^T^f^WfTT  ^TT^f^  ^f^^W^  I   4a. 

The  four  arvdscqrratUCihhd  dharmdh  are  dluirani-jn'atildhha, 
Jcahjdnainitrapr°,  garnhhlradharmahshdntipr'^,  2Kiri(^uddha^llasamd,- 
cdratd  (4&,  1.  5).  Similarly  we  have,  at  line  10,  the  iour  prltikarajid 
dharmdh;  and  (5a)  ananutdjmkarand  dh°  {huddhadarcanam,  amdoma- 
dharmacravaiiam,  sarvasvaparitydgah,  anupalambhadharmakshdntih). 

Next  follow  the  various  groups  of  hindrances  to  the  bodbisattva. 
The  four  kinds  of  prapdta,  (apparently  =  'moral  declension,'  though 
the  word  is  not  found  in  this  sense)  viz.,  agauravatd,  akritajiiatd 
^athyasevanatd* ,  Idbhasatkarddhyavasdnani,  kuhanalapaoiatayd,  Idblia- 
satkardnutpddanam  (6a). 

The  four  bodhijjaripanthakarakd  d/tarnidh  are  acraddad/idiiatd, 
kausldyara,  mdnah,  parapushtershyd,  nuitsaryam  (66). 

At  7a,  1.  2,  we  find  :    ■ 

m^f^^ . . .  ^^TT^^RTT^^: . . .  ^^^TiffT%^^:   ^if^^- 

*  From  the  form  of  the  passage  these  two  seem  to  count  as  one 
quality,  though  the  reason  is  not  clear  to  me. 


Add.  1586.]  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS.  207 

TT^T:  ;  and  ibid.  1.  9  :   ^T^^TT^^^fT^T  t-^fT  ^T^^f^TT 

Finally,  the  four  handhandni  are  pardthnanyutd,  laukikenopdyena 
hlmvanata  prayoganimittasamjnd,  artigrihltacittasya  jndnavirahitasya, 
pramddasevanatd,  and  pratibaddhacittasya  Jculasaiustavah. 

At  11a,  1.  2,  occurs  the  subscription  ■R^T*miTT=TT:  ^^TTT.*  II 

The  second  division  of  the  work  then  begins  : 

^f^^f^  I 

The  book  concludes  with  a  tale  about  a  bodhisattva,  the  hero 
being  a  certain  Punyara9mi,  which  ends  at  196,  where  the  Buddha 
thus  sums  up  : 

S^rT^  II 

On  the  last  page  Rashtrapala  enquires  : 

To  which  the  Buddha  replies  : 


INDEX   I. 


TITLES   OF  MSS. 


Abhidliarmako9a-vyakhya,  25 
Abhinava-raghavananda-nataka, 

159 
Abhisheka-vidhi,  179 
A^okavadana-mala,  110 
A^vaghoslia-nandimukhavadana, 

118,    119;     (with    vernaciilar 

version),  67 
Adiyoga-samadhi,  39,  46 
Aikaj  ata-stotra,  125 
Alphabets,  etc.,  171 
Amara-koca,   52,   61,   118,    149, 

150,  151,  156,  161,  163,  173, 

186,  187 
Amoghapaca-lokec vara-  puj  a,  9  7 
Amrita-kanika,  29 
Apariiriitayu(-dharanl)-sutra,  38, 

81,  141 
Arya-tarabhattarikaya  nama- 

shtottaragataka,  45 
Aryavritta,  14 

Ashtaml-vrata  (vernacular),  73 
Ashtamlvratavidhana-katha,  1 5 
Ashtasahasrika  Prajnaparamita, 

1,  32,  100,  101,  124,  143,  151, 

182 
Astrology,    fragments    of    works 

on,  164,  165,  169,  182 
Asti'onomical  diagram,  25 
Avadana-cataka,  82,  137,  16S 


Avadanasarasamiiccaya,  134 
Avalokitec  varaguna  -  karandavy  u- 

ha,  9,  34,  47 
Balimalika,  185 
Bali-puja  (?),  136 
Bhadracarl-pranidhana-raj  a,  1 4, 

103,  167 
Bhadrakalpavadaiia,  88 
Bhimasena-dharanl,  68 
BhTmasena-pfija,  53 
BodhicaryaA^atara,  6 
Bodhisattva-bhumi,  191 
Bodhisattvavadana-kalpalata,  1 8, 

41 
Buddha-carita-kavya,  82 
Buddha-pratimalakshana,  200 
Qagajataka,  104 
Caityas,  fragment  on,  201 
Caitya-pungala,  86 
Cakra-puja,  136 

Cakrasambaradandakastllti,  1  ^(y 
Cambai-a-pafijika,  202 
Cambukavadana,  128 
Canda-maharoshanatantra,  45 
Candra-pradTpasutra  (?),  4 
Candravyakarana,  157,  158  (bis), 

180,  181,  198 
Catasahasri  Prajnaparamita,  143, 

145,  146,  148 
CatuhpTtha-tantra,  197 

14 


210 


INDEX   I. 


Chaudo-'mrita-lata,  7G 
Cikshiisanmccaya,  104 
Cisliyalekha-dharmakavya,  3 1 
Daeabhumicvara,  4,  141 
Dacakucaliijam  pbalam,  129 
Daua-vakya  (?),  68 
Devaputrotpatti,  135 
Dharams,    33,    44,    66,   98,    105, 

117,  125,  128,  169 
Dharanl-saugraha,  49,  60,  86 
Dharma-lakshmi-samvada,  129 
Dharma-saiigraha,  90,  191 
Divyavadana,  1,  122,  168 
Doshanirnayavadana,  135 
Dvatrimcatkalpa-tantra,  58 
Dvavimcatyavadaua-katba,  36, 

50,  139 
EkaravTra-tantra,  45,  113,  186 
Ganapati-stotra,  163 
Ganda-vyulia,  23,  102 
Gopi-candra-nataka,  83 
Guhya-samaja  (Aparardha),  140 
Guliya-samaja  (Purvardha  aud 

Parardha),  70 
Guhya-samaja  (Purvardha),  15,51 
GuhyavalT-vivriti,  188,  190 
Haragaurl-vivaha-nataka,  183 
He-vajra-dakinTjalasambara-tau- 

tra,  58,  184 
Hiranya-saptaka,  177 
Jataka-ruala,  51,  92 
Juananiava-tantra,  28 
Kalacakra-mautra-dharanI,  127 
Kalacakra-tantra,  69 
K  alpadruma  vadana-mala,  131 
Kapieavadana,  61,  121 
Karanda-vyuha  (prose  version),  4, 

34,  38,  52,  77,  174;  (poetical 

version)  see  Avalokitecvaragu- 

nakar". 


Karuna-pundarlka,  73 
Kathinavadana,  94 
Kausigha-vlryotsahanavadana,  80 
Khadga-pujavidhi,  199 
Kli'tipataka,  148 
Kriyapanjika,  183 
Kurukulla-kalpa,  178 
Lalita-vistara,  24,  77 
Lexicon,  fragment  of  a,  165 
Loke9varagataka,  94 
Loke^vai'a-parajika,  95 
Madhyamaka-vritti,  114 
Madhyama-svayambhu-purana, 

102 
Magic,  fragments  of  works  on,  167 
Mahakala-tantra,  64 
]Maha-sambara-hridaya-dharani, 

125 
Mahavastu,  55 

Manicudavadana,  11,  78,  84,  168 
Manjughosha-pujavidhi,  97 
Megha-sutra,  120,  176 
Nairatmaguhyecvarl-mantra- 

dharanl,  33 
Nama-saugiti,  29,  52,  77, 126,  204 
(with  Newarl  ver- 
sion), 47 
Namashtottara-cataka,  26 
Nama-saiiglti-tlka,  203 

tippani,  29 

Nepallya-devata-stuti-kalyana- 

paficavimcatika,  13 
Newari  songs,  98 
Nislipanna-yogambara-tantra,  40 
Paiicakara,  188 

Panca-maha-i-aksha-sutrani,  126 
Pahca-raksha,   33,   48,    99,    105, 

152,  153,  157,  162,  175,  190 
Panca  vim  (^'atika-praj  fiaparam  ita- 

hridaya,  33,  170 


INDEX    I. 


211 


PancavimQatisahasrika  Praj  fia- 
paramita,  144  (bis) 

Pjipa-parimocana,  38 

Papragekhara-avadana,  130 

Paramarthanamasaugati  (?),  62 

Parame^vara-tanti'a,  27 

Pindapatravadana,  40 

Pindapatravadiina-katlia,  1 20 

Prajfiaparamita  (in  9  glokas),  170 
(see  also  Ashtasahasrika  Pra- 
jiiap°,  Catasah",  Paiicaviipcati- 
sah",  Saptaij-atika,  Sarddliadvi- 
sahasrika) 

PrajilaparamitahiidayadharanI, 
128 

Pratimalakshana,  199 

Pratimalakshanavivarana,  200 

Pratyangira-dharani,  63,  68,  118 

Ramaiika-natika,  87 

Rashtrapala-paripriccha,  130,  206 

Ratnaguna-sancaya,  133 

Ratnavadanamala,  131,  139,  141 

Saddharma-laukavatara,  136 

Saddharnia-pundarlka,  24,  48, 
172  (bis),  173 

Sadhana-mala-tantra,  132 

Sadhana-samuccaya,  154 

Samadlii-raja,  22,  110 

Samvats,  work  on  (vernacular), 
63 

Sanglta-tarodayacudamani,  150 

Saptabhidhanottara,  96 

Saptabuddha-stotra,  14 

Saptagatika  Prajiiaparamita,  5 

Surddhadvisahasrika  Prajfiapara- 
mita, 123 

Sar va-durgati-paricodliana,  7  8, 
81,  94,  142 

Siddhisara,  155 

Snatavadana,  80 


Sphutartha  (Abhidharmako^a- 
vyakhya),  25 

Sragdhara-stotra,  29;  (with  ver- 
nacular commentary),  35,  69 

Stotras,  53,  79,  127,  138       ■ 

Stuti-dharma-9antu  (1),  99 

Sucandravada[na],  84 

Sugatavadana,  35,  78 

Sukhavatl-vyuha,  74 

Sumagadhavadana,  129 

Suvarnaprabhasa,  12,  60 

Suvarnavarnavadana,  59 

Suvikrantavikrami-paripriccba, 
123 

Svayambhu-purana  (smallest  re- 
daction), 9,  121 ;  (other  redac- 
tions) see  Vrihat-sv°,  Madbya- 
ma-sv" 

Svayambbutpatti-katba,  1 02 

Tantric  fragments,  45,  98,  205 

Tattva-saiigraha,  156 

Uposbadlia-vrata,  118 

Uposbadhavadana,  135,  137,  139 

Utpata-lakshana,  64 

Vaglgvara-puja,  34 

Yajra-suci  (of  Acvagliosba),  96 

Vajravali,  197 

Yamcavali,  31,  205 

Vasudbrira-dbaranT,  65,  84,  169, 
176 

Vasudbaranl-katba,  see  Yasu- 
dbara-dharam 

Yasundliara-vrata,  85 

Yicitrakarnikavadana-mala,  1 30 

Yirakucavadana,  122 

Yivriti,  187 

Yratavadanamala,  85 

Yrihat-svayambhu-purana,  7,  102 

Yrishticintamani,  103 

Yogaratria-mFila,  189 


14—2 


212 


INDEX  II. 


INDEX  II. 


NAMES   OF  AUTHORS  AND   COMMENTATORS. 


Abliayakaragupta,  197 
Agvaglaoslia,  96 

Amara,  see  Index  I.,  Amara-ko^a 
Amrita  or  Amritananda,  76 
Anandadatta,  158,  181,  198 
Arya^ura,  92 
Candragomin,  31,  180 
Candraklrti,  114 
grighana,  131,  139 
Dipaiikara,  120 
Dharmagupta,  87 
Ghanadeva,  188 
Gunanand,  171 
Jagajjyotir-malla,  183 
Jyotirrija-malla,  155 


Kahna,  189 
Kambila,  170 
Krishna,  189 
Kskeniendra,  18,  41 
Kuladatta,  183 
Kunugarman,  148 
Manika,  159 
Manikya,  187 
Nagarjuna,  96,  191 
Pratapa-malla,  150 
Yajradatta,  94 
Vasubandhu,  25 
Vilasavajra  (]),  203. 
YaQomitra,  25 


III. 


.    GENERAL  INDEX. 

The  spaced  type  and  thick  figures  denote  references  already  given 
in  Index  I.  This  Index  does  not  include  the  names  of  those  kings 
of  Nepal  and  Bengal  that  are  given  in  the  Tables  at  pp.  xii — xvi. 
Sanskrit  words,  used  in  a  technical  sense  or  otherwise  of  interest  or 
importance,  are  given  in  italics,  where  these  occur  as  chapter  titles, 
(t)  has  been  added.  To  obviate  the  necessity  of  separate  indices, 
several  general  headings  have  been  made,  the  chief  of  which  are  : 
Avadanas,  Dharams,  Inscriptions,  Jatakas,  Kathas  (tales),  Scribes 
(and  their  pati'ons),  and  Viharas. 


Abhidharmakoga-vyakhya, 
25 

abhijTid-caryd,  195 
abhimukhl  {bhiimi),  5 

Abhinava-raghavananda-na- 
taka,  159 

abhisamaya,  (t),  21 

Abhisheka-vidhi,  179 

acald  (bhmni),  5 

Acoka  character,  xlvii,  sqq. 

Agokavadana-mala,  110 

aqraddadhdnata,  206 

Agvaghosha-nandimukhava- 
dana,  118,  119;  (with  ver- 
nacular version),  76 

Acvalayana,  21 

af^vasajjraiilabhd  dharmdh,  the 
four,  206 

ar^vatthddbh  utadharinatd,  11)  2 


ddhdrayogasthdna,  197 

nishtha-y°,  195 

dnudharma-y",  194 

adldmukticaryd  (bhiimi,)  195 

ddhipatya-parigraha,  1 95 

adhydraya  (t),  195 

Adhyagayasancodanasutra,  107 

adirgliakdlika  parigralia,  195 

Adiyoga-samadhi,  39,  46 

Agama  (quoted),  116 

agauravatd,  206 

Aikitjata-stotra,  125 

Ajatacatru,  112 

Ajita,  75 

Akagagarbha-sutra,  107 

akritajnatd,  206 

Akshayamati-sutra,  107,  116 

Alinda,  (queen),  122 

Alphabets,  etc.,  171 


214 


INDEX   III. 


Amara-koca,  52,  61,  118,  149, 

150,151,156, 161, 163, 173, 186, 

187  ;  pvef.  p.  x 
Amcuvarman,  xxxix,  sqq. 
Amitabha,  75 
Amogliapaca-loke^vara-puja, 

97 
Amoghavajra,  14 
Amrita-kanika,  29 
Amntananda  (scribe?),  133,  [cf. 

Index  II.] 
Amrita  Pandita,  76 
Ananda,  7-4 

Anantamalla,king  of  Kashmir,  42 
ananutdpakarand  (dharmdh),  206 
ABavataptahradapasaiikramana- 

sutra,  IIG 
Augulimrdaka,  (cited),  22 
anigrihttacitta,  207 
anulomadharmacravana,  206 
anupalambhadharmaJcshd7itiIi, 20G 
Aparimitayu(dharanl)-sutra, 

38,  81,  141 
UrdcUiana,  154 
AralH,  171 

aranyasamvanmna,  (t)  109 
arcishmatl  (hhumi),  5 
Ariano-Pali  (character),  xx 
Aryacura,  92 
Aryasanga,  23 
Arya-tarabliattarikaya      na- 

mashtottaraeataka,  45 
Aryavritta,  14 
AshtamTvrat  avidhun  a-ka- 

tha,  15,  cf.  73 
Ashtasahasrika  Prajuapara- 

mita,  1,  33,  100, 101,  107, 124, 

143,  151,  182 
Astrology,       fragments       of 

works  on,  164,  165,169,  182 


Astronomical  diagram,  25 
atmabhavaparigi(dcUii  (t),  109 
atmapariksha  (t),  116 
dimaplthay  198 
aupamya  (t),  3 
Avadanacataka,  82,  137,  168 

Avadanas. 

[The  Avadanas  of  the  Avada- 
nacataka, Kalpadrumavada- 
na-mala,  and  Ratnavadana- 
mala  are  not  given  here.  See 
the  lists  of  JNI.  Peer,  cited  on 
p.  131,  137.  Those  of  the 
Divyavadana  are  in  course 
of  publication;  see  p.  1.] 

Acokadamana,  111 

Acokan  ripatipaiiK^upradana, 
'ill 

Agvaghosha-nandimukha,  v.  su- 
jjra  s.  voc. 

Adinapunya,  18,  42 

Ahoratravratacaityasevanu- 
^amsa,  ill 

Ajatacati'u-pitridroha,  19,  43 

Asthisena,  57 

Bhadrakalpa,  88 

Bhavacarman,  43 

Bhavaiubdhaka,  112,  134 

Bodhicaryavataranucamsa,  111 

Bodhisattva,  19 

Cacaka,  19,  43 

Cakracyavana,  19,  43,  112 

Cambuka,  128 

Calistamba,  19,  42 

Citrahasti-^ayyatiputra,  19,  43 

Civi-subhashita,  43 

Conavasi,  42 

Creshtimahajana,  112 

Cuddhodana,  19,  43 


IXDEX    III. 


215 


Avadanas  : 

Dacakarmapluti,  18,  42 
Dliaiiika,  19,  43 
Dharmarajikapratislitha,  43 
Dharmaruci,  19,  43 
Divyannapradana,  112 
Ekagringa  19,  43 
Gargavastha,  112 
Gopalanagadamana,  18,  42 
Hamsa,  112 
Hastaka,  42 
Hasti,  19,  43 
Hetuttama,  19,  43 
Hiranyapani,  19,  43 
HitaishI,  19,  43 
Jambala,  112 
Jimutavahana,  19,  43 
Kaccbapa,  19,  43 
Kaineyaka,  43 
Kanaka,  42 

Kanakavarman,  19,  43,  132 
Kaplca,  61,  121 
Kapiiijala,  19,  43 
Karshaka,  43 
Kathina,  94 

Kausighavlryotsahana,  80 
Kavikumara,  19,  42 
Kritajua,  43 
Kuuala,  18,  43,  112 
Madhyantika,  42 
Madhurasvara,  19,  43,  113 
Mahakacyapa,  18,  42 
Mahendrasena,  19,  43 
Maitrakanyaka,  19,  43 
Mallapataka  112 
Manicuda,  v.  suh.  voc. 
Matsai'ananda,  134 
Nagadutacreshana,  43 
Nagakumai-a,  18,  42 
Naraka-purvika,  19,  43 


Avadanas  : 

Padmaka,  19,  43,  113 
PadmavatI,  42 
Pandita,  19,  42 
Papracekhara,  130 
Pindapatra,  40 
Pracantikaruna,  132 
Pra^nottara,  132 
Pratltyasamutpada,  43 
Pretika,  132 
Prithivipradana,  43 
Priyapinda,  19,  42 
Punahprabhasa,  19,  43 
Punyabala,  18,  42 
Punyaraci  ,112 
Punyasena,  113 
Pahula-karmapluti,  43 
Raivata,  43 
Rasbti-apala,  112 
Ptukmati,  19,  42 
Samudra,  19,  43 
Sangharakshita,  19,  42 
Saptakumarika,  112 
Sarvamdada,  18,  42,  134 
Sarvartbasiddha,  19,  42 
Sattvausbadha,  18,  42 
Sbaddanta,  19,  43 
Simba,  19,  43. 
Snata,  80 
Stfipa,  42 
Subbasbita,  19 
Subbasbitagavesbin,  19,  43 
Sucandra,  65,  84 
Sudbanakinnarl,  19,  43,  (cf.  91) 
Sugata,  35,  78 
Sukarl,  132 

Sumagadba,  19,  43,  129,  134 
Tapasa,  19,  43 

Triratnabbajananncamsa,  111 
Upagiipta,  42,  111 


216 


INDEX  III. 


Avadanas : 

Upaguptaeokaraja,  111 
Uposhad'lia,  135,  137,  139 
Valgusvara,  112 
Yapusbman,  132 
Vidui-a,  43 
Vlrakuea,  122 
Vltacoka,  111 
Vyaghra,  43 
Ya5oda,  18,  42,  90 
Yacomitra,  19,  43 

Avalokanji-sutra,  1 07 
Avalokitecvaraguna-karau- 

davyuha,  9,  34,  47 
Bahubuddha-sutra,  55,  57 
Bali,  41 

Balimalika,  185 
Bali-puja  (I),  131 
handJianani,  four,  207 
Bengali  writing,  xlvii,  etc. 
(Al)-Berunl,  xli 
Bhadracar  I-p  r  a  n  i  d  li  a  n  a  - 

raja,  14,  103,  167 
Bhadrakalpavadaua,  88 
Bliaishajyavaiduryaprabharaja, 

107 
Bhavabhuti,  a  risLi,  11 
Bliava^arman,  113 
Bhavaviveka,  115 
Bhidrika,  a  merchant's  wife,  182 
Bhimasena-piija,  53 
Bhriiigin,  a  rishi,  159,  183 
Bimbisara,  91 
hodhi,  193 
bodhicittaparigraha,  111 

■ 2^'*'^^'^''d(^''i  111 

hodhipaksha-carya,  195  (cf..  194) 
hodh  ipari-pantlinlidrahd  dharmah, 
four  kinds,  206 


Bodhisattva-bliumi,  191 
Bodhisattvavadana-kalpa- 

lata,  18,  41 
Brahmadatta  (a  king),  11,  135 
Brahmapai'ipricclia,  107 
hrakmavihdras  (four),  97 
Buddha-carita,  82 
Buddha-palita  (cited),  115 
huddhadaixana,  192 
huddhadharmaparipaka,  206 
Buddhapratimalaksharia,  102 
Caqajataka,  104 
caccaputa,  a  musical  measure,  150 
Cagilekha,  113 

Caityas,  fragment  on,  201 
Caitya-puiigala,  86 
Cakra-puja,  136 
Cakrasambaradandakastuti, 

186 
Caktis,  five,  153 
Cambara-panjika,  202 
Cambukavadana,  128 
Canda-maharoshanatantra 

45,  (cf.  127) 
candanadi-pilja,  53 
Candragomin,     Candraklrti ;    see 

Index  II. 
Candrakumara,  1 35 
Candraloka,  113 

Candraprabha  (hereof  a  tale),  135 
Candra-pradliiasutra    (?),    4, 

107 
Candravati,  85 
Candravyakarana,     157,     158 

{bis),  180,  181,  198 
Caiikara-deva,    king    of    Nepal, 

xviii 
Carada  writing,  xliv,  sqq. 
carama,  195 
Cariputra,  5,  90 


INDEX  III. 


217 


Cariya-pitaka,  91,  135 
carya,  four  kinds  of,  195 
Catasahasri  Praj  fiaparamita, 

'  143,  145,  146,  148 
^athi/asevanaid,  206 
Catuhpltha-tantra,  197 
ChandomaiijarT,  7G 
Cliando-'mrita-lata,  76 
rikshds,  three,  97 
Cikshasamuccaya,  104 
Cishyaleklia-dharmakavya, 

'  36 

cittotpdda,  192 
Cobha,  113 
Craddhabaladhanavataramudra- 

sutra  (quoted),  107 
Crigbana,  131,  139 
Crilalita-vyuba,  89 
Crimalasimbanada-sutra,  107 
Crutavarman,  113 
(^uddhdcaya-hJnimi,  195 
Cuddhodana,  90,  171 
Curangatnasamadbi-sutra,  107 
Dacabbumi,  107 
Dagabbumicvara,  141 
Dacakugalajam  Pbalam,  129 
ddaa,  nine  kinds  of,  193 
Dana-vakya  (?),  68 
Devaputrotpatti,  135 
dhdrani-pratilahha,  206 

Dbaranis : 

Abbaya-kali  (?),  106 
Aikajata,  99 
Aksbobbya,  125 
Amitabba,  125 
Aiuogbasiddbi,  125 
Asbtamahabbaya-taranT,  70 
Bbimasena,  68 
Bbuta^ambara,  128 


Dbaranis  : 

Buddbabridaya,  169 
Ganapatibridaya,  117 
Grabamatrika,  44,  117,  170 
Hemaiiga,  169 
Hrisbtapratyayab  Stutidbara, 

169 
Jaiigula  mabavidya,  1G9 
Jatismara,  170 
Kalacakra  -  mantra,  127 
Kallajaya,  169 
Laksba,  169 
Mabagambara,  128 
(Arya)mabadbaranl,  169 
(Arya)maba-kala,  127  (cf.  44) 
Maha-sambara-bridaya,  125 
Maiici,  44,  66,  117,  170 
NairatmagubyeQvarl-man- 

tra,  33 
Navagrabamatrika-db",  66 
Pannagapati,  44 
Pbalapb  alabriday  a,  169 
Pratyaiigira,  63,  68,  118 
Samantabbadra,  169 
Samanta-bbadraprajiia,  170 
Sarvamangala,  169 
Sarvarogapracamani,  169 
Sarvaruciranga-yasbti,  169 
Sarvatatbagatabriday  a,  169 
Svapnandada,  169 
(Arya)-tara,  106 
Tatbagatavyaptacatani,  33 
Usbnisbavijaya,  66,  98 
Vajra-manda,  116 
Vajrottara,  169 
"Vasudbara,  65,  84,  169,  176 

Dbarmakara,  74 

Dbarmalabba,  135 

Db  a  r  m  a-1  a  k  sb  m  i-s  a  m  v  a  d  a,  129 


218 


INDEX  III. 


dharniamedya  {-hhunii),  5 
Dbarmapala,  137 
Dliarmasangiti  (quoted),  107 
Dharmasangraha,  96,  191 
DJi  Citu  ka  ra  ?>  da,  169 
DhatuparlksLia,  (t),  115 
( Arya)-dhyapitamiishti-sutra,  116 
Dinajpur  genealogical  inscription, 

iii 
Dipaiikara  (cf.  Index  ii),  7-i 
dlrghakcdika,  195 
Divyavadana,  1,  122,  168 
Divyavadana-mala,  35,  94 
Doslianirnayavadana,  135, 

137 
durangamd  (-bhumi),  5 
Dushprasaha,  11 
Dvatrimcatkalj)a-tantra,  58 
Dvavimcatyavadana-katha, 

36,  50,  139 
Ekagriiiga,  muni,  91 
Ekaravlra-tantra,  45, 103,  186 
Gagauagafijasamadlii-sutva,  1 1 6 
Gaganagaiij  a-sutra,  107 
yambhlradluirmakshdnti-pratila- 

hha,  206 
Ganapati-stotra,  163 
Ganda-vyuha,  23,  102 
Gandhavati,  a  city,  36 
Gangadasa,  76 
gJiargharlkd,  165 
Gopa,  89 
Gopadatta,  20 
Gopl-candra-nataka,  83 
Gorkha  sovereigns,  xi,  etc. 
Gotrabhumi,  195 
Govinda-candra,  a  king,  84 
guhyapitha,  192 
Guhya-samaja    (Aparardlia), 

140 


Guhya-samaja    (Purvarddha 

and  Parardha),  70 
Guhya-samaja  (Purvarddha), 

15,  51 
Guhyavali-vivriti,  188,  190 
Gupta  character,  xliv,  sqq. 
Haragaurl-vivaha-nataka, 

183 
'Harsha-deva-bhupati,'  138 
Hastikaksha  (name  of  a  book),  22 
He-vajra-clakinij  alasambara- 

tantra,  58,  184 
Hiouen  Thsang,  25,  156 
Hiranya-saptaka,  177 
Hitopadega,  161 
Images,  201 
Indo-Pali  alphabet,  xx 
Indra,  114 
Indraprishtha,  36,  86 

Inscriptions  : 
Bareli,  xxv 

Deogarh,  xxv,  xliii,  sqq. 
Dinajpur,  iii 
Dhara,  xxv 
Gopala,  xlv 
Mathura,  xlv 
Morvl,  xliii,  sqq. 
Samangarh,  xxv 
Sarnath,  ii 

Jataka-mala,  51,  92 

Jatakas  : 
Agastya,  92 
Agnlndhana,  115 
Ajfiatakaundinya,  57 
Amaraye  karmarakadhitaye,  56 
Aputra,  93 
Arindama-raja,  57 
Avisajyagreshthi,  92 


INDEX  III. 


219 


Jatakas : 

Ayogriha,  93 

Ayushmata  purnamaitrayani 

putrasya,  57 
Brahmana,  92 
Brahma,  93 
Buddhabodhi,  93 
Caga,  92,  134 
Cakra,  92 
Cakuntaka,  56 
Campaka-nagaraja,  Go 
Candra,  134 
Candraprabha,  134 
Carabha,  57,  93 
Carakshepana,  56 
Cirl,  56 

Cirlprabha-mrigaraja,  56 
Civi,  92 

Creshthi,  92,  93 
Cyama,  56 
Cyamaka,  56 

Dharmalabdha-sarthavaha,  57 
Dharmapala,  56 
Hamsa,  93 
Hasti,  93,  134 
Hastinl,  57 
Hastinika,  57 
Kaka,  57 

Kalmashapindl,  93 
Kinnarl,  56 
Kocalaraja,  57 
Kshanti,  93 
Kumbha,  93 
Mahabodhi,  93 
Mahakapi,  33 
Mahisha,  93 
Maitiibala,  92 
Maksha,  92 
Manjari,  55 
Markata,  55 


Jatakas  : 

Matriposhahasti,  91 

Mayura,  134 

Mriga,  134 

Naliul,  57 

Paucakanam  bhadravargika- 

nam,  57 
PunyavatI,  56 
Pishabha,  55 
Ruru,  93 
Rupyavati,  134 
Sarthavaha,  134 
Soma,  91 

Sudhanakinnari,  see  Avadaiias 
Suparaga,  92 
Supi-iyasarthavaha,  91 
Sutasoma,  93 
Tri9akuniya,  55 
Unmadayanti,  92 
Upaligaiigapala,  57 
Vadaradvipa,  134 
Visa,  93 
Vicvantara,  92 
Vyaghrl,  92 
Yacodhara  Yyiighrlbhuta,  55 

Japanese  forms  of  Indian  writing, 

xliii,  sqq. 
JayagrI,  89 
Jayaditya,  19,  198 
'  Jayadityadih,'  198 
Jayamuni,  134 

Jhera  or  Jhara,  in  Magadha,  iv,  70 
Jhul,  a  village,  xviii 
Jinacrl,  10,  89 
Jinendra,  91,  198 
JMnagupta,  130 
Jfianaketu,  36 
Jiianarnava-tantra,  28 
Jiianavaipulya-sntra,  108 


220 


INDEX  III. 


Kacika-vritti,  198 

Kacyapa,  5,  113 

Kalacakra-tantra,  69 

Kaliiigaraja,  135 

Kalpadrumavadjlna-mala,131 

Irihjimamltra-jyratilahha,  206 

Kamala,  90 

Kanishka  wi-iting,  xlviii,  etc. 

Kaplcavadana,  61,  121 

K  a  r a n  d a-v  y  u  li  a  (prose  version), 
4,  34,  38,  52,  77,  174;  (poeti- 
cal version)  see  Avalokiteg- 
vara-gunakai'° 

harma  (t),  46 

Karmavarana-viguddha-sutra,  107 

Karuna-pundarika,  73 

Kashmir,  iv 

Kathas : 

Ashtamivrata-vidhana,  15 
Bhojana,  37 
Cakyendra-pratyagaraana-sat- 

katha,  89     . 
Dharmagravanaprotsahana,  37 
Dhatvaropa,  37 
Dlpa,  37 

Jlrnoddliaraiiavimba,  37 
Kantamati,  11 
Kricchapa,  56 
Kuiikumrididana,  37 
Manushyadurlabba,  37 
Mandala-k,  37 
PadmavatT,  11 
Panadana,  37 
Pranama,  37 
Punyakama,  37 
Punyaprotsahana,  37 
Punyaprotsahe  danakatlja,  37 
Push  pa,  37 
Snana,  37 


Kathas : 

Ujvalikadana,  37 
Vastra,  37 
Yihara,  37 

Kathinavadana,  94 
Katyayana  (sage),  5 

— —  (grammarian),  21, 158 

Icausidya,  206 
Kausigha-vlryo  tsah  ana  va- 

dana,  80 
Kaushthila,  5 

Khadga-ptijavidhi,  199,  178 
Kirtipataka,  148 
Konch-a-dharanl-caityakarana-vi- 

dhih,  109 
Krakucchandra,  113 
Kriyapaiijika,  183 
Kshemendra,  (see  Ind.  II.) 
Kshitigarbha-sutra,  107 
Kshiti-sutra,  107 
hur^ala,  196 
kuhanalapanata,  206 
Kuladevata,  ix 
Kumudakara,  155 
Kurukulla,  78 
K\irukulla-kalpa,  178 
lahhasatkarddliyavasdiiaiji,  206 
Lalitavistara,  24,  77,  108,  117 
Laiikavatara,  49 
Lexicon,  fragment  of  a,  165 
Lokapalas,  the,  114 
Lokecvaracataka,  94 
Loke9vara-parajika,  95 
Madhnsvara,  113 
Madhyamaka-vritti,  114 
Madhyama-  svayambhu-pu- 

rana,  102,  7 
Magic,  fragments  of  a  work  on, 

167 


INDEX   III. 


221 


Mahakala,  64,  155 
Maliakarunasutra,  101 
Mahasthanaprapta,  75 
Maliatsvayambhupurana,  7 
Mahavagga,  89 
Mahavastu,  55,  135 
mdna,  206 
Manasa,  113 
Mane^varl,  a  goddess,  ix 
Manicudavadana,  11, 78,84,168 
Manjuqribuddhakslietragunavyu- 

halankara-sutra,  107 
( Arya-)manju9rTvikridita-s'',  1 08 
Maiijuglioslia-pujavidlii,  97 
Mantrabala,  113 
mantras,  39 
Marici  (rishi),  11 
Maradamana-sutra,  116 
Matrikas,  tlie  eight,  54 
Maudgalyayana,  5,  90 
Meglia-Butra,  120,  176 
Mena,  183 

Mikira,  a  merchant,  182 
Mitra,  113 
mudras,  39,  171 
viuldpatti,  118 

Nagarjuna  (cf.  Index  ii),  170 
Nagira,  11 
Nakka,  19 
Nalini,  91 

Nama-sangiti,  52,  77,  126,  204; 
(with  Newarl  version),  47 

tika,  203 

tippani,  29 

Namashtottara-9ataka,  26 
Nanda,  132,  135 
Nanda,  113 

Nandimukha-agvaghosha,  67 
Narad  at  ta,  91 
Narayanaparipriccha,  107 


Natyecvara,  161 
Navagraha,  138 
Nepaliya-devata-stuti-kalya- 

napaiicavimcatika,  13 
Newari  Songs,  98 
Nirde^a-sutras,  177 
niraya  (t),  2 
nirvana,  116 
Kishpanna-  yogambara  -  tan- 

tra,  40 
nishtdgamana,  198 
niyata^hhumi,  195 
niyatacaryd-hhumi,  195 
nydsas,  167 
Pagupatas  (sect),  21 
Padraaka,  113 
Padmottara,  11 
paksha,  14 
Pala  dynasty,  ii 
Paiicakara,  188 
Panca-maha  -  raksha-sutraiii, 

126 
Panca-raksha,  33,  48,  99,  105, 

152,  157,  162,  175,  190 
Paucavargika  Bhikshus,  39 
Paiicavimcatika-praj  iiapara- 

mitahridaya,  33,  170 
Pancavimcatisahasrika-pra- 

jiiaparamita,  144  (bis) 
Paniiii,  21,  158,  180,  198 
Pafijabi  writing,  xlix 
papadecana  papacodhana,  109 
Papa-parimocana,  38 
Papraqekhara-avadana,  130 
Paramarthanamasangati    (?), 

63 
Paramegvara-tantra,  27 
pdramitd-caryd,  195 
pdramitds,  (the  ten),  9 
Pai'anirmitavacavartin  gods,  75 


222 


INDEX   III. 


parapitha,  170 

jxirapushfershya  mdtsarycDii,  20G 
2)arartha-stha)ia,  192 
paratiinanyutd,  207 
pariniddhacilasa macdratd,  206 
parifjrulia,  six  kiuds,  195 
parxpaka,  192 
Patafijali,  198 
pinddkrisJiti,  161 
Pindapatravadana,  40 
Pindapatravadaaa-katha, 

120 
pindikd,  201 
Piiigala,  77 

Pitriputrasamdgama  57,  108 
prahhdkarl  (-b/iumi),  5 
prahhava,  192 
Pra^dntavinir^cayaprdtihdryas- 

siltra,  101 
Prajfiapararaita,  108,  116 
Prajiiaparamita  (ill  9   c^lokas), 

170  (see  also  Ashtasahasrika 

Prajfiapo,  Catasab",  Paiica- 

vimgatisah",     Sapta9atika, 

Sarddhadvisahasrika 
Prajnaparamitahridaya,  117, 

128 
2)ra7Hddasevanatd,  207 
prapdta,  four  kinds,  206 
Prasenajit,  112 
Pratapamalla,  103 
piratibaddhaciltasya    kidasamsta- 

vah,  207 
Pratiiiialakshaiia,  199 
Pratiinalakslianavivaraua, 

200 
jjratipatti-bhumi,  1 95 
pratishthd  (t),  195 
Pravrajyauuraya  (°?  anu^aya") 

-sutra,  107 


jyritikarana  dharma,  four  kiuds, 

206 
priyavdditd  svabhdva,  113 
Punyara^mi,  207 
Punyasena,  113 
Punyavati,  36 
Puriia,  5 

pi(,rvdparakotiparlkshd,  115 
rdgarakta-par'iJcshd,  115 
Rahula,  57,  90,  171 
Paivata,  19 

Rajavavadaka-sutra,  108 
Kaiuadasa      (a      magisti-ate      of 

Nepal),  87 
Ramanka-natika,  87 
Rashtrapala,  112,  206 
Raslitrapala-paripriccha,  130, 

206 
Raslitvapala-sutra,  107 
Ratnacuda -sutra,  107,  116 
Ratnaguna-sancaya,  133 
Ratnakaragupta,  155 
Ratuakaraiidaka-sutra,  108 
Ratnakuta-siitra,  108,  116 
Ratnamegha-sutra,  107 
Ratnaraci-sutra,  107 
Ratnavadanamala,  131,  139,  141 
Ravaiia,  87 

Rupaka  (a  fisherman),  129 
Sadd  liar  ma- laiik  avatar  a,  136 
saddkarma-parigraha,  108 
Saddharma-pundarlka,       24, 

48,  107,  172  (bis),  173 
Saddharmasmvityupasthana-su- 

tra,  107 
sddhands,  154 

Sadhana-mala-tantra,  54,  132 
Sadliana-samuccaya,  154 
sddhumati  (-bhilmi),  5 
Sagaramatisutra,  107 


INDEX   III. 


223 


Sahalokadhatu  (region),  75 
Sakalananda,  90 
Saketa  (place),  11 
sakritsatvasatva-jyarigrnha,  193 
Samadhi-raja,  22,  110,  116 
sdmagri  (t),  116 
8ambhava-vihhava-[parivarta)  (t), 

116 
samprajanya  (t),  11 
Samskrita-parikshd,  115 
SaiigTta-tarodayacudamani,  150 
Saiikhyas,  21 

Saptabhidhanottara,  96 
Saptabuddha-stoti-a,  14 
Saptacatika     Prajnaparami- 

ta,  5 
Saptarshi  era,  the,  18 
Saptavai-a,  66 
Sarddhadvisahasrika       Pra- 

jnaparamita,  123 
SarvadliarmapraAa-ittirnirdeca- 

sutra,  107 
(Arya)sarvadharmavaipulyasau- 

graha  sutra,  107 
Sarva-durgati-pariood  liana, 

70,  78,  81,  94,  142 
Sai'vajiiamitra,  35 
sarvasvaparitydga,  206 
Sarva-tath<Xgata-dvdda<iasahasra- 

pdrdjika-vinaya-sutra,  3 8 
sattvaparipdka,  192 
sattvaparipdkacaryd,  195 

Scribes  (with  their  patrons,  etc.): 

Avantapala,  162 
Cikiddhisimlia  (?),  153 
Citrananda,  140 
Daddaka  (queen),  175 
Indramuni,  145 
Jagandala  (patron),  109 


Scribes  (with  their  patrons,  etc.): 
Jambhunanda,  13 
Jinendra,  son  of  Nii-amuni,  9 1 
Jinldev'a,  80 
Jivaylbhadra,  197 
Kacrlgayakara,  188 
Karnajoti,  110 
Ladaka  (queen),  100 
Lalitakrama  (patroness),  191 
Maiijubhadrasudhi,  42 
Mauju§riya  {sk),  182 
Niramuni,  91,  109 
Pa  tide  va,  50 
Piirnacandra,  150 
Ramadatta,  173 
Rama  pasida  (?)  (pati'on),  101 
RatnadevI,  100 
Siddhisena,  26 
Suryadeva,  86 
Vekhananda,  73 
YiQvabhadra,  12 
Vilasimhadeva,  1 75  (z.  e.  Ylras") 

Siddhisara,  155 
Simhaparipriccha  (quoted),  107 
Skandapurana,  49 
Skandha-parlksha,  115 
Snatavadana,  80 
Somendra,   son  of    Kshemendra, 

19 
Sphutartha  (Abhidharniako- 

cavyakhya),  25 
Sragdhara-stotra,    29;     (with 

vernacular    commentary),    35, 

69 
sthdnas,  the  seven,  192 
Stotras,  53,  127,  138 
Stuti-dharma79antu  (1),  99 
Subhuti,  145  etc. 
Subhuti-paripriccha,  116 


22-t 


INDEX   III. 


Sucandra,  45  (cf.  84) 
Sndhlra,  113 
s^ndiirjaija  (bhilmi),  5 
Sukhavatiloka,  99 
Sukhavatl-vyuha,  74 
Sumagadhavadana,  129 
Sumanas,  94 
Sumetra,  113 
Suuanda,  41 
Sunanda,  113 
Suprij'a,  135 
Suiyodaya,  85 

Suvai-nabbasottamatantra,  103 
Suvarnaprabhasa,  12 
Suvarnav^abhasa,  135 
svahhava,  (t),  115 
svdrtha,  192 

Svayambbunatha,  the  hill  of,  20 
Svayambhupuraua,  13S(smaIl- 

est  redaction),  9,  121 ;    (other 

redactions)     see     Vrihat-sv°, 

Madhyama-sv° 
Svayambhutpatti-katha,  102 
Tantric  fragments,  45,  98,  205 
TaradevI,  stotra  to,  127 
'' Tarkikah;'  21 
Tutliagatagiihyaka-sutra,  116 
Tathagata-[guhya]-ratna-sutra, 

108 
tathata  (t),  145 
tattvdrtha,  192 
Tattva-sangraha,  156 
Tlrthas,  the  twelve,  of  Nepal,  139 
nddddna,  195 
Ugradatta-paripriccha,  107 
Ugraparipriccha,  107 
■  Upaliparipriccha,  108,  lir> 
upaiKitti,  (t),  195 
Upasena,  113 
updyakniir^alyamlmnniad  (t),  3 


Upayakau^alya-sfitra,  107 
Uposhadha,  see  Avadauas 
Uposhadha-vrata,  114 
Utpata-lakshana,  64 
VagTcjvara,  34 
Vagl^vara-puja,  34 
Vaieeshikas,  the,  21 
Vaipulya-stras,  177 
Vajracchedika,  108 
Vajradhvaja-sfitra,  107 
Vajragarbba,  158 
Vajra-suci(ofA9vaghosha),96 
Vajravall,  197 
Yajravara-sutra,  108 
Vajrottara,  169 
Valmlki,  21 
Vaipcavall,  31,  205 
Varahamihira,  199 
Vasubandhu,  25,  36 
Vasudharanl-katha,  see  Dha- 

ranis,  Vasudhara-dharanT 
Vasundhara,  a  devl,  67 
Vasundhara-vrata,  85 
vdtsalya  in  seven  foi'ms,  194 
Vicitrakarnikavadana-mala, 

130 
vi(;uddhi,  (t),  2 
vihdras,  the  twelve,  of  the  Bod- 

hisattva,  194 

Viharas  (in  Nepal)  named  in  the 
colophons  of  the  MSS  : 

Cakra-mahavihara(Manadeva- 

samskarita),  148 
(^rllham,  4,  152 
Crinaka,  154 
Crivaccha,  191 
Dharmacakra-mahavihara(colo- 

phon  of  the  reign  ofManadeva; 

cf.  Cakra-mahavi"),  182 


INDEX  III. 


225 


Viliaras  (in  Nepal)  named  in  the 
coloplions  of  the  MSS  : 

Dharmakirti,  151 
Gophalatora,  12 
Harnavarna-mahavi",  197 
Kvatha,  132,  134 
Lham,  spe  Cx'Tlham 
MaitiTpui'I,  81 
Paravarta,  50 
Tarumuva,  143 
Vampi,  173 
Yampi,  91 

Vimald  {hhii.ml),  5 
Vinialaklrtinirdeea  (quoted),  108, 

116 
rina//a,  40,  94 


Vinaya-Pitaka,  89 
Vli-adatta-paripriccha,  107 
Virakuqavadana,  122 
Virupa,  112 
Yiryabhadra,  20 
Vivriti,  187 

Vratavadanamala,  59,  85 
Vrihatsagaranagarajapai'ipriccha, 

108 
Vrihat    Svayambhu-purana 

7,  102 
Vrishti-cintamani,  103 
Yacodhara,  89,  138 
Yajnavalkya,  21 
Yasodhara  (sic),  xviii 
i/ogct-pjtha,  198 
Yogaratna-mala,  189 


tAMBKID3E  :     PRI.NTEu    BY    C.    J.    CLAY,     M.A.    &    SOX,    AT    THE    UNIVERSITY    PKKSS. 

15 


-  i.'i  tVjiiiinBiaiiiMfct 


■^-^^.x niifwiiii 


■mrsr9e>**'*>P^wV'^^?^^ 


*^^^X;^y: 


Pi.ATK   r.    I,      MS.    Adli.    17()2.   leaf  ri'J 


§?J^-«^^^# 


mn^d^^^^l'%'^^-^'^^  ^''^<WHW^!r^m^^^f^^^ 


iirii  ir.il   ii'Wii 'wwntwiii'iiii'i fi-iM"iiii,ityii»ir;Ti>fai>rt ■<"<•  ii^Mti'1fmii''TSrTi'-fVrf-'^'^r--%t 

Platk   I.   2.      MS.   Add.    1049,   leaves  [9],  [G2]. 


Plate  I.  3.     MS.   Add.   SCO,  leiit'  201 


IHJ? 


^ 


p  tV  *^  ^#.Sk  '■ 


II 


^•'  ^  s  w  t^  <^ 


!  i 


•I.    - 


5:^ 


^*  i  if 


T»wJ(ii'lilrfi 


^  i  fr  159 '?'\»* 


\f 


o  ^ 


a 


^9  Mi 


4^i^f^ 


«4t«ft;^ '^^rvn^f^  W'^r^^fefii 


luced). 


ver. 


Platk  hi.    1.      ilS.    Add.    1691.  2,   loaf  22  (slightly  reduced). 


■  -Vi  K.:,_^~  ,j8&^~  "  '.ftv. 


Plate  III.   2.     MS.  Add.   1395,  leaf  113. 


Plate  III.   3.      MS.   Add.    15.56,  leaf  11,  and  ljras.s  cover. 


Lcbrccry 


3lurf?, 


.D.  €■      [/^      i^ot/^ieca 


o/Ae^    /f^-Z/^^yt^. 


'\7uat 
JAan 

<■ 

V 
^ 

5i    ^    c^ 

.V             mv         ^ 

Kd          Ku. 

m9 

(9S/ 

^T 

^6(> 

■^OOS 

^ 

yU^ 

^/^YS 

1    "^w 

^     ax,           ^'  kMx, 

t           nvteu,    ♦            f  > 

/(9/oS 

£1/ 

S^s 

^/3d 

z 

t 

^SS3 

h6s 

?l' 

^  ??  ^ 

4^ 

i/ds 

^ 

r'lkC 

■/S^/.p. 

yyy^ 

51 

*t^S5S§?§6^^^335   £ 

//^^S" 

(Zro-TTudla 

3    M 

/^(9S 

/J^^ 

1 

^4^6 

{v>/4sy 

^ 

^ 

5 

/3p^ 

/SS'S' 

^ 

/yf^ 

'MS^ 

a 

5 

/j^^ 

/S/6 

^ 

5 

^jLt/ 

A.D. 

e 

M 

,^/ 

,./ 

rl 

„y/.- 

r/l 

^ 

^. 

/ 

p- 

^^ 

,1'm'e/f-af      i'i'uv£il. 

I'/hei     -^//f-).4l. 

ySt 

\l^ref,/ 

V 

^ 

^ 

r 

oa) 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

n 

V 

1       .i,?     M^     ^ 

li   ^    T§    «<    i  ^ 

^ 

-WT 

tM 

^ 

ort 

^ 

<t 

\ 

n 

^ 

K 

^ 

it  ifumLJ    / 

1         id            /fa          Ail 

m9 

(9SJ 

^1 

^ 

ttr 

^^ 

wi 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

A 

H 

M 

44^ 

/^^/ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

«[ 

^ 

^ 

A 

^ 

^ 

A 

fw              <, 

^ff-/S 

1 

^ 

^ 

?f 

^ 

8 

<r 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^r^.. 

o5    ^   ^ 

///// 

/i9/pS 

^ 

?^ 

^ 

Vt 

^ 

tr 

^ 

^ 

ST 

«[ 

9       ^ 

/re                AV 

4g8 

^ 

cr 

?l 

<a 

\ 

a. 

?l 

^ 

^ 

H 

«t 

4//.S 

m9 

^ 

^ 

?^ 

in 

a 

tr 

^ 

^ 

rf 

SI 

a 

\ 

/<^J 

///^ 

*l 

^ 

4 

^ 

^ 

9 

A 

3 

5f 

^ 

^ 

K7 

1    K    ^     ^     H 

a,               au             nx                     t                 rm. 

//<r^ 

Ms 

^ 

^ 

§> 

(Tf 

^ 

cr 

?i 

^ 

5r( 

a 

d9/.Z 

///^ 

!3l 

^ 

f? 

<T! 

a 

a 

5 

^ 

« 

a 

^rfn««i§l§QM^335  z 

/6^S' 

(fn-maHa 

•>.  mi 

H 

w 

€^ 

CI 

a 

q 

5 

51 

vr 

? 

H^         J^ 

iff 

Age 

^36^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

<?} 

«r 

*< 

5 

^ 

VI 

g 

if." 

v,//^ 

<^ 

^ 

« 

(a 

?f 

^ 

J> 

^ 

^ 

^ 

s 

/3p 

/SS'f 

^ 

^ 

fi 

^ 

24 

St 

^ 

^ 

St 

$r 

/>y 

/4SfJ 

^ 

CM 

j> 

a 

«i 

^ 

^ 

^ 

5n 

^ 

5 

t 

/33S 

/S/6 

g 

I? 

^ 

5i 

m 

^ 

^ 

IP 

? 

9 

^ 

^ 

5 

/ 
^.^ 

^ 

e 

7                       .5 

.9                      (7^ 

' 

C 

"K   "K 

V 

<>) 

//oz 

\ 

5 

ni 

r 

N 

o 

\ 

n 

r 

^ 

o 

V- 

s 

I 

r 

?i 

ti 

^/4^4- 

.  .' 

4 

^ 

^ 

^ 

o 

y^.93 

^ 

9 

r 

fii 

o 

//44 

" 

s 

7 

r 

^ 

0 

1/^^S 

> 

^ 

'I 

r 

> 

Q 

^/^09 

1-L 

r 

^ 

c 

^ 

o 

^S^S 

1 

^ 

«) 

5 

X 

o 

^yo8 

^  t 

'f — i 

i 

9 

r 

QL 

o 

/SS^ 

%^' 


7?//?/?r'/au}. 


Zcirarx 
Mar*:- 

A.D. 

''    )                        1                         .■)                          ;                        .T                        G             ^             7                        «                        f>                        (O                       Zf                     .If                      W                      r,0                       RD                      10                     SO                     W 

/m 

Soy 

«\ 

^ 

M 

^ 

^ 

y 

^ 

^ 

^f 

CO 

■i 

<5 

/y^2 

IX'f'irm/Mii 

•N 

^ 

•ij 

^ 

€ 

^j^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

'^U 

^ 

nl 

^ 

% 

1 

4 

e9 

09 

jU 
y^s'4-. 

^065 

^ 

\ 

1 

5 

^ 

^ 

^S 

-V 

-^ 

^ 

<!l 

^ 

C 

^ 

a 

^ 

■^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

\ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

\  ^ 

a 

^ 

« 

c 

f 

?    ) 

1^ 

^ 

/444 

c:/^2^ 

~^ 

\ 

'3 

\ 

^ 

^ 

5^ 

^ 

^ 

[^ 

i 

<ij> 

S^ 

d^i- 

c7PS5 

-) 

<^ 

r^ 

y//(^y  yte<^/-   ol^    t^-     <yj/e/^  -    /4^4 

- > 

y^^s 

//3g 

yWiU'^^^  i.'^zsM';  ^^^  €.iic£^-^  .^<!^      D  .        '^r^/d'  ,^&l-?nd   at^y  ^-e*-/^^  t^n^    ^  Q 

-/^93 

//^o 

4 

K 

(3 

a 

g 

^ 

^ 

5 

^ 

^ 

^ 

t^ 

s 

c 

^ 

t 

^ 

*^ 

/{y^4 

/20S 

fs 

CJ» 

% 

^ 

^ 

« 

3 

o 

?i 

^ 

//^<r 

/40^ 

/j/^ 

^ 

(% 

^ 

«* 

^ 

^ 

Qf« 

^ 

(i^ 

151 

a| 

a^       /tf^/        <!<3^!^        /^^3 

739^' 

/3^^ 

c/ 

rs 

? 

% 

r 

3 

^ 

1 

^ 

^3» 

2/ 

f^ 

^ 

C 

f 

1 

o 

« 

/7^r 

'/4<>f 

/SS^ 

VAJs'.^ 

\ 

H 

l^ 

% 

^ 

5 

^ 

5 

^ 

\ 

^ 

3 

9 

G 

1 

.^a^i^.l.U^     ^    Ir^-^M^y  ^/^^  <//^SZ2.    r-^y^/^,U^  -^.-^'-^ TU /^A/^'^^  ^^^^  fx^^^^ 


K.^yAe' 


?i^:^^/?^f. 


'e^ta/j. 


0 

.91' 

5[ 

*9 

09. 

^ 

//<^^^ 

•3k. 

■\ 

H 

^ 

c* 

*^  ^ 

V 

<»> 

//r^Z 

t> 

■^ 

^ 

^ 

"N 

\ 

\ 

^ 

^ 

5 

nn 

r 

N 

K, 

P 

<^ 

^ 

§ 

J(>83 

•\ 

\ 

\ 

^ 

^ 

a 

r 

^ 

O 

D 

H 

*3 

o 

144^ 

\ 

\ 

3 

% 

r- 

s 

I 

r 

N 

ri 

<f4^4-  \ 

1^93 

^ 

\ 

\ 

9 

^ 

^ 

i 

^ 

$ 

o 

y^S3 

/^//^ 

i> 

a 

1 

V 

^ 

^ 

9 

r 

«^ 

o 

y<^4 

\ 

*^ 

? 

^ 

^^^8 

\ 

3 

3 

? 

? 

s 

7 

r 

% 

0 

i/<^'^8 

74-0.9 

1 

^ 

3 

^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

r 

> 

Q 

/^^ 

^^J 

7395 

7 

^ 

\ 

s 

r 

r 

^ 

c 

^ 

o 

/3&0 

3 

H 

«, 

/yo8 

'^ 

Q. 

^ 

K 

3\ 

^ 

0 

« 

X 

o 

//OS 

755(: 

^ 

% 

2 

^ 

sr 

^ 

0 

r 

(». 

o 

/SS^ 

CATALOGUES   OF    MANUSCRIPTS. 

GENERAL. 

A  Catalogue  of  the  manuscripts  preserved  in  the  library  of  the 
University  of  Cambridge.     5  Vols.    8vo.    1856-67.     10s.  each. 

A  Catalogue  of  Adversaria  and  printed  books  containing  MS. 

notes  preserved  in  the  library  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.     8vo. 
1864.   3s.  6d. 

Index  (to  the  preceding  six  volumes).  By  H.  R.  Luard,  M.A. 
8vo.   1867.   10s. 

ORIENTAL. 

Catalogue  of  the  Hebrew  manuscripts  preserved  in  the  Uni- 
versity Library,  Cambridge.     By  Dr  S.  M.  Schiller-Szikessy. 

Vol.  I.  containing  Section  i.  The  Holy  Scriptures.    Section  ii.  Com- 
mentaries on  the  Bible.     8vo.    1876.    9s. 
Vol.  II.  containing  Section  IIL   Talmudic  Literature.     Section  iv. 
Liturgy.     In  the  Press. 

Catalogus  librorum  orientalium  M.SS.  nummorum,  aliorumque 
cimeliorum,  quibus  Academite  Cautabrigieusis  bibliothecam  locuple- 
tavit  Eeverendus  Vir  Georgius  Lewis,  Archidiaconus  Midensis,  1727. 
8vo.    (1727.)     Out  of  print, 

Catalogus  Bibliothecae  Burckhardtianse,  cum  Appendice  libro- 
rum aliorum  orientalium  in  bibliotheca  Academise  Cantabrigiensis 
asservatorum.    Confecit  T.  Prestox,  A.M.    4to.    1853.    5s. 

Catalogue  of  the  Buddhist  Sanskrit  manuscripts  preserv^ed  in 
the  University  Library,  Cambridge,  with  introductory  notices  and 
illustrations  of  the  palceography  and  chronology  of  Nepal  and  Bengal. 
By  C.  Bendall,  M.A.    8vo.    1883.    12s. 


A  Chronological  list  of  Graces,  documents,  and  other  papers 
in  the  University  Registry,  which  concern  the  University  Library. 
By  H.  K.  Luard,  M.A.,  Registrary.    8vo.    1870.   2s.  6d. 


SonDon:   C.   J.  CLAY,   M.A.   &   SON, 

CAMBKIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PEESS   WAEEHOUSE, 

17,   Pateknostee   Eow. 


University  Press,  Cambridge, 
May,  1883. 


CATALOGUE    OF 

WORKS 
PUBLISHED    FOR    THE    SYNDICS 

OF   THE 


Uonlion :  c.  j.  clay,  m.a.  and  son. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY   PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 
17  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


aramiJriUge :   DEIGHTON,  BELL,  AND  CO. 
ILeipjig:    F.  A.   BROCKHAUS. 


6/S/8J 


PUBLICATIONS   OF 


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

THE   CAMBRIDGE   PARAGRAPH    BIBLE 

of  the  Authorized  English  Version,  with  the  Text  Revised  by  a  Colla- 
tion of  its  Early  and  other  Principal  Editions,  the  Use  of  the  Italic 
Type  made  uniform,  the  Marginal  References  remodelled,  and  a  Criti- 
cal Introduction  prefixed,  by  the  Rev.  F.  H.  Scrivener,  M.A.,LL.D., 
Editor  of  the  Greek  Testament,  Codex  Augiensis,  &c.,  and  one  of 
the  Revisers  of  the  Authorized  Version.    Crown  4to.  gilt.     2is. 

From  the  Times.  Syndics  of  the  Cambridge  University  Press, 

"Students  of  the  Bible  should  be  particu-  an  edition  of  the  English  Bible,  according  to 

larly  grateful  to  (the  Cambridge  University  the  text  of  1611,  revised  by  a  comparison  with 

Pressj  for  having  produced,  with  the  able  as-  later  issues  on  principles  stated  by  him  in  his 

sistance  of  Dr  Scrivener,  a  complete  critical  Introduction.     Here  he  enters  at  length  into 

edition  of  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  Eng-  the  history  of  the  chief  editions  of  the  version, 

lish  Bible,  an  edition  such  as,  to  use  the  words  and  of  such  features  as  the  marginal  notes, 

of  the  Editor,   'would   have  been  executed  the  use  of  italic  type,  and  the  changes  ofor- 

long  ago  had  this  version  been  nothing  more  thography,  as  well  as  into  the  most  interesting 

than  the  greatest  and  best  known  of  English  question  as  to  the  original  texts  from  which 

classics.'     Falling  at  a  time  when  the  formal  our  translation  is  produced." 
revision  of  this  version  has  been  undertaken  ,,^,_,-jr.         j, 

by  a  distinguished  company  of  scholars  and  ..     F^m  the  Metlwd,st  Recorder. 

divines,  the  publication  of  this  edition  must  .         This  noble  quarto  of  over  1300  pages  is 

be  considered  most  opportune."  in  every  respect  worthy  of  editor  and  pub- 

From  ^\vi AtJience^im.  i'?K<=«  ^^^^     Th^  name  of  the  Cambridge 

"Apart  from  its  religious  importance,  the  University  Press  is  guarantee  enough  for  its 

English  Bible  has  the  glory,  which  but  few  perfection  in  outward  form    the  name  of  the 

sister  versions  indeed  can  claim,  of  being  the  ^^'^"'^  '^  <=?'lf  ^  guarantee  for  the  worth  and 

chief  classic  of  the  language,  of  having,  in  ^.'^.'^^^^^  °Vp  ^""f^"'^"  ..^ithout  question, 

conjunction  with  Shaks^eare,  and  in  an  im-  ^'  '^  ^.^^  l^^^t  Paragraph  Bible  ever  published, 

measurable  degree  more  than  he,  fixed  the  ^".^  i'^  ^-educed  price  of  a  guinea  brings  1 

language  beyond  any  possibility  of  important  ^^''hin  reach  of  a  large  number  of  students." 
change.    Thus  the  recent  contributions  to  the  From  the  Londoti  Quarterly  RevieTU. 

literature  of  the  subject,  by  such  workers  as  "The  work  is  worthy  in  every  respect  of 

Mr  Francis  Fry  and  Canon  Westcott,  appeal  to  the   editor's  fame,    and  of   the    Cambridge 

a  wde  range  of  sympathies;  and  to  these  may  University  Press.     The  noble  English  Ver- 

now  be  added  Dr  Scrivener,  well  known  for  sion,  to  which  our  countrj'  and  religion  owe 

his  labours  in  the  cause  of  the  Greek  Testa-  so  much,  was  probably  never  presented  be- 

ment  criticism,  who  has  brought  out,  for  the  fore  in  so  perfect  a  form." 

THE   CAMBRIDGE   PARAGRAPH   BIBLE. 
Student's  Edition,  on  good  writing  paper,  with  one  column  of 
print  and  wide  margin  to  each  page  for  MS.  notes.     This  edition  will 
be  found   of  great  use   to   those   who   are   engaged  in   the   task  of 
Biblical  criticism.     Two  Vols.     Crown  4to.  gilt.    31^.6^. 

THE  LECTIONARY  BIBLE,  WITH  APOCRYPHA, 
divided  into  Sections  adapted  to  the  Calendar  and  Tables  of  Lessons 
of  1 87 1.     Crown  8vo.    y.  6d. 

THE   BOOK   OF   ECCLESIASTES, 

With  Notes  and  Introduction.  By  the  Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre, 
D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells.     Large  Paper  Edition.     Demy  8vo.     js.  6d. 

"No  one  can  say  that  the  Old  Testament  which  we  can  point  in  English  exegesis  of 

is  a  dull  or  worn-out  subject  after  reading  the  Old  Testament;  indeed,  even  Delitzsch, 

this  singularly  attractive  and  also  instructive  whose  pride  it  is  to  leave  no  source  of  ilius- 

commentary.     Its  wealth  of  literary  and  his-  tration  unexplored,  is  far  inferior  on  this  head 

torical    illustration    surpasses    anything    to  to  Dr  Plumptre." — Academy,  Sept.  lo,  1881. 

London:    Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS  BOOKS.  3 

BREVIARIUM 

AD  USUM    INSIGNIS    ECCLESIAE   SARUM. 
Juxta  Editionem  maximam  pro  Claudio  Chevallon  et  Francisco 
Regnault  a.d.  mdxxxi.  in  Alma  Parisiorum  Academia  impressam  : 
labore   ac   studio   Francisci    Procter,  A.M.,   et   Christophori 
Wordsworth,  A.M. 

Fasciculus  I.  In  quo  continentur  ICalendarium,  et  Ordo 
Temporalis  sive  Proprium  de  Tempore  totius  anxi,  una  cum 
ordinali  suo  quod  usitato  vocabulo  dicitur  Pica  sive  Directorium 
Sacerdotum.    Demy  8vo.     18^. 

'_'  The  value  of  this  reprint  is  considerable  made  its  cost  prohibitory  to  all  but  a  few.  .  .  . 

to  liturgical  students,  who  will  now  be  able  Messrs  Procter  and  Wordsworth  have  dis- 

to  consult  in  their  own  libraries  a  work  abso-  charged  their  editorial  task  with  much  care 

lutely  indispensable  to  a  right  understanding  and  judgment,  though  the  conditions  under 

of  the  history  of  the  Prayer-Book,  but  which  which  they  have  been  working  are  such  as 

till  now  usually  necessitated  a  visit  to  some  to  hide  that  fact  from  all  but   experts." — 

public  library,  since  the  rarity  of  the  volume  Literary  C/titrchinati. 

Fasciculus  II.  In  quo  continentur  Psalterium,  cum  ordinario 
Officii  totius  hebdomadae  juxta  Horas  Canonicas,  et  proprio  Com- 
pletorii,  Litania,  Commune  Sanctorum,  Ordinarium  Missae 
cum  Canone  et  XIII  Missis,  &c.  <S:c.    Demy  8vo.     12s. 

"Not  only  experts  in  liturgiology,  but  all  this  volume,  we  can  only  speak  in  terms  of  the 

persons    interested    in    the    history  of   the  very    highest     commendation." — The     Ex- 

Anglican  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  will  be  aminer. 

grateful  to  the  SjTidicate  of  the  Cambridge  "Cambridge  has  worthily  taken  the  lead 

University  Press  for  forwarding  the  publica-  with  the  Bre\'iary,  which  is  of  especial  value 

tion  of  the  volume  which  bears  the  above  for  that  part  of  the  reform  of  the  Prayer- Book 

title,  and  which  has  recently  appeared  under  which  will  fit  it  for  the  wants  of  our  time... 

their  auspices." — Notes  and  Queries.  For  all  persons  of  religious  tastes  the  BreW- 

"  We  have  here  the  first  instalment  of  the  arj',  with  its  mixture  of  Psalm  and  Anthem 

celebrated  Sarum  Breviary,  of  which  no  en-  and  Prayer  and  Hymn,  all  hanging  one  on 

tire  edition  has  hitherto  been  printed  since  the  other,  and  connected  into  a  harmonious 

the  year  1557.  .  .  Of  the  valuable  explanatory  whole,  must  be  deeply  interesting," — Church 

notes,  as  well  as  the  learned  introduction  to  Quarterly  Rez'ie^u.>. 

Fasciculus  III.     Nearly  ready. 
GREEK  AND   ENGLISH   TESTAMENT, 

in  parallel  Columns  on  the  same  page.  Edited  by  J.  Scholefield, 
M.A.  late  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University.  Small 
Odlavo.  New  Edition,  with  the  Marginal  References  as  arranged 
and  revised  by  Dr  Scrivener.     Cloth,  red  edges,     js.  6d. 

GREEK   AND   ENGLISH   TESTAMENT, 

The  Student's  Edition  of  the  above,  on  large  luriting paper.  410.12^. 

GREEK   TESTAMENT, 

ex  editione  Stephani  tertia,  1550.     Small  8vo.     3.^.  dd. 

THE   NEW   TESTAMENT    IN   GREEK 

according  to  the  text  followed  in  the  Authorised  Version,  with  the 
Variations  adopted  in  the  Revised  Version,  Edited  by  F.  H.  A. 
Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.  6s.  Morocco  boards 
or  limp.     \2s. 

THE   PARALLEL   NEW  TESTAMENT   GREEK 
AND   ENGLISH. 

being  the  Authorised  Version  set  forth  in  161 1  Arranged  in  Parallel 
Columns  with  the  Revised  Version  of  1881,  and  with  the  original 
Greek,  as  edited  by  F.  H.  A,  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.  Pre- 
bendary of  Exeter  and  Vicar  of  Hendon.  The  Revised  Version  is  the 
Joint  Property  of  the  Universities  of  Cambridge  and  Oxford.  Crown 
8vo.     \2s.  6d. 

London:   Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 

I — 2 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


THE   GOSPEL   ACCORDING   TO    ST   MATTHEW 

in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Northunibrian  Versions,  synoptically  arranged: 
with  Collations  of  the  best  Manuscripts.  By  J.  M.  Kemble,  M.A. 
and  Archdeacon  Hardwick.     Demy  4to.     \os. 

THE    GOSPEL    ACCORDING    TO    ST    MARK 

in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  Versions  synoptically  arranged: 
with  Collations  exhibiting  all  the  Readings  of  all  the  MSS.  Edited 
by  the  Rev.  Professor  Skeat,  M.A.  late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College, 
and  author  of  a  MCESO-GOTHIC  Dictionary.     Demy  4to.     los. 

THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO   ST  LUKE, 

uniform  with  the  preceding,  by  the  same  Editor.     Demy  4to.     \os. 

THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO   ST  JOHN, 

uniform  with  the  preceding,  by  the  same  Editor.     Demy  4to.    \os. 

"  The  Gospel  according  to  St  John,  hi  J.  M.  Kemble,  some  forty  years  ago.  Of 
Anglo-Saxon  and  Northti7nbriaii  Versions:  the  particular  volume  now  before  us,  we  can 
Edited  for  the  Syndics  of  the  University  only  say  it  is  worthy  of  its  two  predecessors. 
Press,  by  the  Rev.  Walter  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,  We  repeat  that  the  service  rendered  to  the 
Elrington  and  Bosworth  Professor  of  Anglo-  study  of  Anglo-Saxon  by  this  Synoptic  col- 
Saxon  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  lection  cannot  easily  be  overstated." — Con- 
completes  an  undertaking  designed  and  tetnporary  Review. 
commenced  by  that  distinguished  scholar, 

THE   POINTED   PRAYER   BOOK, 

being  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  with  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of 
David,  pointed  as  they  are  to  be  sung  or  said  in  Churches.  Royal 
24mo.     Cloth.     \s.  6d. 

The  same  in  square  32mo.  cloth.    %d. 

"The  'Pointed  Prayer  Book'  deserves  and  still  more  for  the  terseness  and  clear- 
mention  for  the  new  and  ingenious  system  ness  of  the  directions  given  for  using  it." — 
on   which  the   pointing  has    been   marked.         Times. 

THE   CAMBRIDGE   PSALTER, 

for  the  use  of  Choirs  and  Organists.  Specially  adapted  for  Congre- 
gations in  which  the  "  Cambridge  Pointed  Prayer  Book"  is  used. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth  extra,  3J-.  6d.     Cloth  limp,  cut  flush.    2s.  6d. 

THE    PARAGRAPH    PSALTER, 
arranged  for  the  use  of  Choirs  by  Brooke  Foss  Westcott,  D.D., 
Canon  of  Peterborough,  and   Regius   Professor   of  Divinity  in   the 
University  of  Cambridge.     Fcap.  4to.    5^. 

The  same  in  royal  32mo.    Cloth  Is.    Leather  Is.  6d. 

"  The    Paragraph    Psalter  exhibits    all  e.xpect  to  find,  and  there  is  not  a  clergyman 

the  care,  thought,  and  learning  that  those  or  organist  in  England  who  should  be  with- 

acquainted   with  the  works  of  the   Regius  out  this  Psalter  as  a  work  of  reference." — 

Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge  would  Morning-  Post. 

THE  MISSING  FRAGMENT  OF  THE  LATIN 
TRANSLATION  of  the  FOURTH  BOOK  of  EZRA, 

discovered,  and  edited  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  and  a 
facsimile  of  the  MS.,  by  Robert  L.  Bensly,  M.A.,  Sub-Librarian 
of  the  University  Library,  and  Reader  in  Hebrew,  Gonville  and  Caius 
College,  Cambridge.     Demy  4to.     los. 

"  Edited    with   true  scholarly   complete-  if  by  the  Bible  we  understand  that  of  the 

ness." — IVestminster  Review.  larger   size  which  contains  the  Apocrypha, 

"It  has  been  said  of  this  book  that  it  has  and  if  the  Second  Book  of  Esdras  can  be 

added  a  new  chapter  to  the  Bible,  and,  start-  fairly  called  a  part  of  the  Apocrypha."— 

ling  as  the  statement  may  at  first  sight  ap-  Saturday  Revievj. 
pear,  it  is  no  exaggeration  of  the  actual  fact. 


London;    Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  5 

THEOLOGY-(ANCIENT). 

THE    GREEK    LITURGIES. 
Chiefly  from  original  Authorities.     By  C.  A.  Swainson,  D.D.,  Master 
of  Christ's  College.  \In  the  Press. 

THE    PALESTINIAN    MISHNA, 
By  W.  H.  Lowe,    M.A.    Lecturer   in    Hebrew   at    Christ's  College, 
Cambridge.     Royal  8vo.     21s. 

SAYINGS   OF  THE  JEWISH  FATHERS, 

comprising  Pirqe  Aboth  and  Pereq  R.  Meir  in  Hebrew  and  English, 
with  Critical  and  Illustrative  Notes.  By  Charles  Taylor,  D.D. 
Master  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge,  and  Honorary  Fellow  of 
King's  College,  London.     Demy  8vo.     los. 

"The  'Masseketh  Aboth'  stands  at  the  in  an  ordinary  critical  edition.  .  .  The  Tal- 
head  of  Hebrew  non-canonical  writings.  It  mudic  books,  which  have  been  so  strangely 
is  of  ancient  date,  claiming  to  contain  the  neglected,  we  foresee  will  be  the  most  im- 
dicta  of  teachers  who  flourished  from  B.C.  200  portant  aids  of  the  future  for  the  proper  un- 
to the  same  year  of  our  era.  The  precise  derstanding  of  the  Bible.  .  .  The  Sayings  of 
time  of  its  compilation  in  its  present  form  is,  the  Je'ioish  Fathers  may  claim  to  be  scholar- 
of  course,  in  doubt.  Mr  Taylor's  explana-  ly,  and,  moreover,  of  a  scholarship  unusually 
tory  and  illustrative  commentary  is  very  full  thorough  and  finished." — Dublin  Uiiiver- 
and  satisfactory." — Spectator.  sity  Magazine. 

"If  we  mistake  not,  this  is  the  first  pre-  "A  careful   and   thorough  edition  which 

cise   translation   into   the   English  language  does  credit  to  English  scholarship,  of  a  short 

accompanied  by  scholarly  notes,  of  any  per-  treatise  from  the  Mishna,  containing  a  series 

tion  of  the  Talmud.     In  other  words,  it  is  of  sentences  or  maxims  ascribed  mostly  to 

the  first  instance  of  that  most  valuable  and  Jewish  teachers  immediately  preceding,  or 

neglected  portion  of  Jewish  literature  being  immediately  following  the  Christian  era.  .  ." 

treated  in  the  same  wav  as  a  Greek  classic  — Contetnporary  Revieiu. 

THEODORE  OF  MOPSUESTIA'S  COMMENTARY 
ON  THE  MINOR  EPISTLES  OF  S.  PAUL. 

The  Latin  Version  with  the  Greek  Fragments,  edited  from  the  ]\ISS. 
with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  H.  B.  Swete,  D.D.,  Rector  of 
Ashdon,  Essex,  and  late  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College, 
Cambridge.  In  Two  Volumes.  Vol.  I.,  containing  the  Introduction, 
with  Facsimiles  of  the  IvISS.,  and  the  Commentary  upon  Galatians — 
Colossians.     Demy  8vo.     lis. 

"  In  dem  oben  verzeichneten  Buche  liegt  handschriften  .  .  .  sind  vortretiliche   photo- 

uns    die    erste    Halfte    einer  vollstandigen,  graphische  Facsimile's  beigegeben,  wie  ubcr- 

ebenso    sorgfaltig    gearbeiteten    wie    schon  haupt  das  ganze  Werk  von  der  University 

ausgestatteten  Ausgabe  des  Commentars  mit  Press  zu  Cambridge  mit  bekannter  Eleganz 

ausfShrlichen  Prolegomena  und  reichhaltigen  ausgestattet  ist."  —  Theologische  Literatur- 

kritischen   und   erlauternden   Anmerkungen  zeitung. 
vor." — Literarisc/ies  Centralblatt.  "It  is  a  hopeful  sign,  amid  forebodings 

"  It  is  the  result  of  thorough,  careful,  and  which  arise  about  the  theological  learning 

patient  investigation  of  all  the  points  bearing  of  the  Universities,  that  we  have  before  us 

on  the  subject,  and  the  results  are  presented  the  first  instalment  of  a  thoroughly  scientific 

with  admirable  good  sense  and  modesty." —  and  painstaking  work,  commenced  at  Cam- 

Guardiaii.  bridge  and  completed  at  a  country  rectory." 

"Auf  Grund  dieser  Qaellen  ist  der  Text  —Church  Quarterly  Revieiv  (J^lti.  1881). 
bei  Swete  mit  musterhafter  Akribie  herge-  "  Hemn   Swete's    Leistung   ist    eine    so 

stellt.    Aber  auch  sonst  hat  der  Herausgeber  tuchtige  dass  wir  das  Werk  in  keinen  besseren 

mit  unermudlichem  Fleisse  und  eingehend-  Handen  wissen  mochten,  und  mit  den  sich- 

ster  Sachkenntniss  sein  Werk  mit  alien  den-  ersten  Erwartungen   auf  das   Gelingen   der 

jenigen  Zugaben  ausgeriistet,  welche  bei  einer  Fortsetzung  entgegen  sehen." — Gottingische 

solchen  Text-Ausgabe  nur  irgend   erwartet  gelehrte  Ajtzeigen  (^^^X.. -liZz). 
werden  konnen.  .  .  .  Von  den  drei  Haupt- 

VOLUME  n.,  containing  the  Commentary  on  i  Thessalonians — 
Philemon,  Appendices  and  Indices.     \2s. 

"Eine  Ausgabe  .  .  .  fiir  welche    alle    zu-  "Mit  deiselben  Sorgfalt  bearbeitet  die  wir 

ganglichen  Hiilfsmittel  in  musterhafter  Weise  bei   dem   ersten   Theile   geruhmt   haben." — 

beniitzt  warden  .  .  .  eine  reife  Frucht  sieben-  Literarisches  Centralblatt  (July  29,  1882). 
jahrigen  Fleisaes." — Tlieologiscke  Literatur- 
zeitung  (Sept.  23,  1882). 

London:    Camlridge   Warehouse^  17  Paternoster  Row. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


SANCTI   IREN^I   EPISCOPI   LUGDUNENSIS 

libros  quinque  adversus  Hsereses,  versione  Latina  cum  Codicibus 
Claromontano  ac  Arundeliano  denuo  coUata,  prcemissa  de  placitis 
Gnosticorum  prolusione,  fragmenta  necnon  Grsece,  S}Tiace,  Armeiiiace, 
commentatione  perpetua  et  indicibus  variis  edidit  W.  Wigan  Harvey, 
S.T.B,  CoUegii  Regalis  olim  Socius.     2  Vols.     Demy  8vo.     \Zs. 

M.  MINUCII    FELICIS    OCTAVIUS. 

The  text  newly  revised  from  the  original  AIS.,  with  an  English  Com- 
mentar)',  Analysis,  Introdudlion,  and  Copious  Indices.  Edited  by 
H.  A.  HOLDEN,  LL.D.  late  Head  Master  of  Ipswich  School,  fonnerly 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.     yj.  bd. 

THEOPHILI     EPISCOPI     ANTIOCHENSIS 
LIBRI    TRES    AD    AUTOLYCUM 

edidit,  Prolegomenis  Versione  Notulis  Indicibus  instruxit  GULIELMUS 
GiLSON  Humphry,  S.T.B.  CoUegii  Sancliss.  Trin.  apud  Cantabri- 
gienses  quondam  Socius.     Post  8vo.     5i-. 

THEOPHYLACTI     IN     EVANGELIUM 
S.  MATTH^I    COMMENTARIUS, 
edited   by   W.  G.  Humphry,  B.D.    Prebendary  of  St   Paul's,   late 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College.     Demy  8vo.     ^s.  6d. 

TERTULLIANUS    DE  CORONA   MILITIS,    DE 
SPECTACULIS,    DE    IDOLOLATRIA, 

with  Analysis  and  English  Notes,  by  George  Currey,  D.D.  Preacher 
at  the  Charter  House,  late  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John's  College. 
Crown  8vo.     5^. 

THEOLOGY— (ENGLISH). 

WORKS  OF  ISAAC  BARROW, 

compared  with  the  Original  MSS.,  enlarged  with  Materials  hitherto 
unpublished.  A  new  Edition,  by  A.  Napier,  M.A.  of  Trinity  College, 
Vicar  of  Holkham,  Norfolk.     9  Vols.      Demy  8vo.     £2,.  y. 

TREATISE  OF  THE  POPE'S  SUPREMACY, 

and  a  Discourse  concerning  the  Unity  of  the  Church,  by  ISAAC 
Barrow.    Demy  8vo.    js.  6d. 

PEARSON'S  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  CREED, 
edited   by  Temple   Chevallier,   B.D.   late   Fellow  and  Tutor  of 
St    Catharine's    College,    Cambridge.      New   Edition.      Revised    by 
R.  Sinker,  B.D.,  Librarian  of  Trinity  College.     Demy  8vo.     I2J-. 

"A  new  edition  of  Bishop  Pearson's  fa-  themselves  have  been  adapted  to  the  best 

mous  work  C«  ^/;<?Cr<'<7^ has  just  been  issued  and  newest  texts  of  the  several  authors — 

by  the  Cambridge  University  Press.     It  is  texts  which  have  undergone  vast  improve- 

the  well-known  edition  of  Temple  Chevallier,  ments  within  the  last  two  centuries.     The 

thoroughly  overhauled  by  the  Rev.  R,  Sinker,  Indices  have  also  been  reused  and  enlarged. 

of  Trinity  College.    The  whole  text  and  notes  Altogether  this  appears  to  be  the  most 

have  been  most  carefully  examined  and  cor-  complete  and  convenient  edition  as  yet  pub- 

rected,  and  special  pains  have  been  taken  to  lished  of  a  work  which  has  long  been  recog- 

verify  the  almost    innumerable    references.  nised  in  all  quarters  as  a  standard  one." — 

These  have  been  more  clearly  and  accurately  Guardian. 
given  in  very  many  places,  and  the  citations 


London:    Cambridge  Warehouse^  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  7 

AN  ANALYSIS   OF  THE   EXPOSITION   OF 
THE   CREED 

written  by  the  Right  Rev.  John  Pearson,  D.D.  late  Lord  Bishop 
of  Chester,  by  W.  H.  Mill,  D.D.  late  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew 
in  the  University  of  Cambridge.       Demy  8vo.     5^. 

WHEATLY  ON  THE  COMMON  PRAYER, 

edited  by  G.  E.  CORRIE,  D.D.  Master  of  Jesus  College,  Examining 
Chaplain  to  the  late  Lord  Bishop  of  Ely.     Demy  8vo.    yj.  6d. 

C^SAR    MORGAN'S    INVESTIGATION    OF    THE 
TRINITY    OF   PLATO, 

and  of  Philo  Judaeus,  and  of  the  effefts  which  an  attachment  to  their 
writings  had  upon  the  principles  and  reasonings  of  the  Fathers  of  the 
Christian  Church.  Revised  by  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D.  late  Head  Master 
of  Ipswich  School,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Crown  8vo.     4^. 

TWO   FORMS   OF    PRAYER   OF  THE   TIME    OF 

QUEEN  ELIZABETH.     Now  First  Reprinted.    Demy  Svo.    dd. 

"From   'Collections  and  Notes'  1867 —  of  Occasional  Forms  of  Prayer,  but  it  had 

1876,  by  W.  Carew  Hazlitt  (p.  340),  we  learn  been   lost  sight   of  for  200  years.'     By  the 

that — 'A  very  remarkable   volume,   in   the  kindness  of  the  present  possessor    of  this 

original    vellum   cover,   and    containing    25  valuable  volume,  containing  in  all  25  distinct 

Forms  of  Prayer  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  publications,  I  am  enabled  to  reprint  in  the 

eachwiththeautographof  Humphrey  Dyson,  following  pages  the   two  Forms   of  Prayer 

has  lately  fallen  into  the  hands  of  my  friend  supposed  to  have  been  lost." — Extract /ront 

Mr  H.  Pjme.     It  is  mentioned  specially  in  the  Preface. 
the  Preface  to  the  Parker  Society's  volume 

SELECT   DISCOURSES, 

by  John  Smith,  late  Fellow  of  Queens'  College,  Cambridge.  Edited  by 
H.  G.  Williams,  B.D.  late  Professor  of  Arabic.   Royal  Svo.    js.  6d. 

"The  '  Select  Discourses'  of  John  Smith,  with  the  richest  lights  of  meditative  genius... 

collected  and  published  from  his  papers  after  He  was  one  of  those  rare  thinkers  in  whom 

his  death,  are,  in  my  opinion,  much  the  most  largeness  of  view,  and  depth,  and  wealth  of 

considerable  work  left  to  us  by  this  Cambridge  poetic  and  speculative  insight,  only  served  to 

School  [the   Cambridge   Platonists].      They  evoke   more   fully  the   religious  spirit,   and 

have  a  right  to  a  place  in  English  literary  while  he  drew,  the  mould  of  his  thought  from 

history." — Mr  Matthew  Arnold,   in  the  Plotinus,  he  vivified  the  substance  of  it  from 

Contemporary  Review.  St  Paul." — Principal    Tulloch,    Rational 

"Of  all  the  products  of  the  Cambridge  Theology  in  England  in  tiie  \Tth  Century. 
School,  the  'Select  Discourses'  are  perhaps  "We  may  instance   Mr   Henry   GrifiSn 

the  highest,  as  they  are  the  most  accessible  Williams's  revised  edition  of  Mr  John  Smith's 

and  the  most  widely  appreciated. ..and  indeed  'Select   Discourses,'  which    have   won   Mr 

no  spiritually  thoughtful  mind  can  read  them  Matthew  Arnold's  admiration,  as  an  example 

unmoved.     They  carry  us  so  directly  into  an  of  worthy  work  for  an   University  Press  to 

atmosphere  of  divine  philosophy,   luminous  undertake." — Times. 

THE  HOMILIES, 

with  Various  Readings,  and  the  Quotations  from  the  Fathers  given 
at  length  in  the  Original  Languages.  Edited  by  G.  E.  CORRlE,  D.D. 
Master  of  Jesus  College.     Demy  8vo.     js.  6d. 

DE     OBLIGATIONE     CONSCIENTI^     PR^LEC- 

TIONES  decern  Oxonii  in  Schola  Theologica  habitse  a  Roberto 
Sanderson,  SS.  Theologiae  ibidem  Professore  Regio.  With  English 
Notes,  including  an  abridged  Translation,  by  W.  Whewell,  D.D. 
late  Master  of  Trinity  College.    Demy  Svo.    js.  6d. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row, 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


ARCHBISHOP  USHER'S  ANSWER  TO  A  JESUIT, 

with  other  Tracts  on  Poper)^  Edited  by  J.  Scholefield,  M.A.  late 
Regius  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University.  Demy  8vo.  ']s.  6d. 
WILSON'S  ILLUSTRATION  OF  THE  METHOD 
of  explaining  the  New  Testament,  by  the  early  opinions  of  Jews  and 
Christians  concerning  Christ.  Edited  by  T,  TURTON,  D.D.  late  Lord 
Bishop  of  Ely.     Demy  8vo.    5^. 

LECTURES    ON    DIVINITY 

delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  by  John  Hey,  D.D. 
Third  Edition,  revised  by  T.  TuRTON,  D.D.  late  Lord  Bishop  of  Ely. 
2  vols.     Demy  8vo.     15J. 

ARABIC,  SANSKRIT  AND  SYRIAC. 

POEMS  OF  BEHA  ED  DIN  ZOHEIR  OF   EGYPT. 

With  a  Metrical  Translation,  Notes  and  Introduction,  by  E.  H. 
Palmer,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law  of  the  Middle  Temple,  late  Lord 
Almoner's  Professor  of  Arabic,  formerly  Fellow  of  St  John's  College 
in  the  University  of  Cambridge.     3  vols.  Crown  4to. 

Vol.  L     The  Arabic  Text.     ios.  6d.;  Cloth  extra.    15^-. 

Vol.  n.    English  Translation.     ios.6d.;  Cloth  extra.    15J. 

"We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  in  "This  sumptuous  edition  of  the  poems  of 
both  Prof.  PalmerhasmadeanadditiontoOri-  Beha-ed-din  Zoheir  is  a  very  welcome  addi- 
ental  literature  for  which  scholars  should  be  tion  to  the  small  series  of  Eastern  poets 
grateful  ;  and  that,  while  his  knowledge  of  accessible  to  readers  who  are  not  Oriental- 
Arabic  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  his  mas-  ists.  ...  In  all  there  is  that  exquisite  finish  of 
tery  of  the  original,  his  English  compositions  which  Arabic  poetry  is  susceptible  in  so  rare 
are  distinguished  by  versatility,  command  of  a  degree.  The  form  is  almost  always  beau- 
language,  rhythmical  cadence,  and,  as  we  tiful,  be  the  thought  what  it  may  .  .  .  Alto- 
have  remarked,  by  not  unskilful  imitations  of  gather  the  inside  of  the  book  is  worthy  of  the 
the  styles  of  several  of  our  own  favourite  beautiful  arabesque  binding  that  rejoices  the 
poets,  living  and  dead." — Sai?irda^  Review.  eye  of  the  lover  of  Arab  art." — Academy. 

THE  CHRONICLE  OF   JOSHUA   THE  STYLITE, 

composed  in  Syriac  A.D.  507  with  an  English  translation  and  notes,  by 
W.  Wright,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic.     Demy  Svo.     los.  6d. 

"  Die  lehrreiche  kleine  Chronik  Josuas  hat  Unterricht ;    es  erscheint   auch  gerade   zur 

nach  Assemani  und  Martin  in  Wright  einen  rechten   Zeit,    da  die   zweite   Ausgabe   von 

dritten  Bearbeiter  gefunden,  der  sich  um  die  Roedigers  syrischer  Chrestomathie  im  Buch- 

Emendation  des  Te.\tes  wie  um  die  Erkla-  handel  vollstandig  vergriffen  und  diejenige 

rung  der  Realien  wesentlich  verdient  gemacht  von  Kirsch-Bernstein  nur  noch  in  wenigen 

hat .  .  .  Ws.  Josua-Ausgabe  ist  eine  sehr  dan-  Exemplaren  vorhanden  ist." — Deutsclie  Lit- 

kenswerte  Gabe  imd  besonders  empfehlens-  teraUirzcitung. 
wert  als   ein    Lehrmittel  fiir  den  syrischen 

nalopAkhyanam,  or,  the  tale  of  NALA  ; 

containing  the  Sanskrit  Text  in  Roman  Characters,  followed  by  a 
Vocabulary  in  which  each  word  is  placed  under  its  root,  with  references 
to  derived  words  in  Cognate  Languages,  and  a  sketch  of  Sanskrit 
Grammar.  By  the  late  Rev.  Thomas  Jarrett,  M.A.  Trinity  College, 
Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  late  Professor  of  Arabic,  and  formerly 
Fellow  of  St  Catharine's  College,  Cambridge.     Demy  Svo.     \os. 

NOTES    ON   THE   TALE   OF   NALA, 
for  the  use  of  Classical  Students,  by  J.  Peile,  M.A.  Fellow  and  Tutor 
of  Christ's  College.     Demy  Svo.     \is. 

CATALOGUE  OF  THE  BUDDHIST  SANSKRIT 

MANUSCRIPTS  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge.  Edited 
by  C.  Bendall,  B.A.,  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College. 

{In  the  Press. 

London:    Cambridge  Warehouse^  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  g 

GREEK  AND  LATIN  CLASSICS,  &c.  (See  also  pp.  24^-27.) 
A  SELECTION  OF  GREEK  INSCRIPTIONS, 

With  Introductions  and  Annotations  by  E.  S.  Roberts,  M.A. 
Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Caius  College.  \Prepnring. 

THE   AGAMEMNON    OF  AESCHYLUS. 

With  a  Translation  in  English  Rhythm,  and  Notes  Critical  and  Ex- 
planatory. New  Edition  Revised.  By  Benjamin  Hall  Kennedy, 
D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek.     Crown  8vo.     6j-. 

"  One  of  the  best  editions  of  the  master-  value  of  this  volume  alike  to  the  poetical 
piece  of  Greek  tragedy." — Atheitixian.  translator,  the  critical  scholar,  and  the  ethical 

"It  is  needless  to  multiply  proofs  of  the        student."' — Sat.  Rei'. 

THE  OEDIPUS  TYRANNUS  OF  SOPHOCLES  with 

a  Translation  and  Notes  by  the  same  Editor.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

"Dr  Kennedy's  edition  of  the  CEdipus  no  more  valuable  contribution  to  the  study 
Tyrannies  is  a  worthy  companion  to  his  of  Sophocles  has  appeared  of  late  years." — 
Agamemnon,  and  we  may  say  at  once  that        Saturday  Review. 

THE  THE^TETUS  OF  PLATO  with  a  Translation 
and  Notes  by  the  same  Editor.     Crown  8vo.     ys.  6d. 

PLATO'S  PH^DO, 

literally  translated,  by  the  late  E.  M.  Cope,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.     Demy  8vo.     5^-. 

ARISTOTLE.— nEPI   AIKAIOSTNHS. 

THE  FIFTH  BOOK  OF  THE  NICOMACHEAN  ETHICS  OF 
ARISTOTLE.  Edited  by  Henry  Jackson,  ALA.,  Fellow  of  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge.    Demy  8vo.     6^. 

"It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  some  of  Scholars  will  hope  that  this  is  not  the  only 
the  points  he  discusses  have  never  had  so  portion  of  the  Aristotelian  writings  which  he 
much  light  thrown  upon  them  before.  .  .  .         is  likely  to  edit." — Athent^iim. 

ARISTOTLE.— HEPI   ^TXH^. 

ARISTOTLE'S  PSYCHOLOGY,  in  Greek  and  English,  with  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  Edwin  Wallace,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor 
of  Worcester  College,  Oxford.     Demy  8vo.     i8j. 

"  In  an  elaborate  introduction  Mr  Wallace  "  He  possesses  a  hermeneutical  talent  of 

collects  and  correlates  all  the  passages  from  the  very  highest  order.  .  .  .  Everywhere  we 

the  various  works   of  Aristotle   bearing  on  meet  with  evidences  of  a  long  and  careful 

these  points,  and  this  he  does  with  a  width  study  of  the  works  of  Aristotle,  and  a  patient 

of  learning  that  marks  him  out  as  one  oi  endeavour  to  arrive  at  his  real  meaning." — 

our  foremost  Aristotlic  scholars,  and  with  a  Mind. 

critical  acumen  that  is  far  from  common." —  "The  notes  are  exactly  what  such  notes 

Glasgcnv  Herald.        _  _  _   _  ought  to  be, — helps  to  the  student,  not  mere 

"As  a  clear  exposition  of  the  opinions  of  displays  of  learning.     By  far  the  more  valu- 

Aristotle  on  psychology',  Mr  W.allace's  work  able   parts  of  the   notes  are  neither  critical 

is  of  distinct  value — the  introduction  is  ex-  nor  literary',  but  philosophical  and  expositor^' 

cellently  wrought  out,  the  translation  is  good,  of  the   thought,   and   of   the   connection   of 

the  notes  are  thoughtful,  scholarlj',  and  full.  thought,  in  the  treatise  itself.     In  this  rela- 

We  therefore  can  welcome  a  volume  like  this,  tinn  the  notes  are  invaluable.     Of  the  trans- 

which  is  useful  both  to  those  who  study  it  as  lation,  it  may  be  said  that  an  English  reader 

scholars,  and  to  those  who  read  it  as  students  maj'  fairly  master  by  means  of  it  this  great 

of  philosophy." — Scotsman.  treatise  of  Aristotle." — Spectator. 


London:    Cambridge   Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 

I— =5 


lo  PUBLICATIONS  OP 


ARISTOTLE. 
THE  RHETORIC.  With  a  Commentary  by  the  late  E.  M.  Cope, 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  revised  and  edited  by  J.  E. 
Sandys,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge, 
and  Public  Orator.  With  a  biographical  Memoir  by  H.  A.J.  MUNRO, 
M.A.     Three  Volumes,  Demy  8vo.     £\.\\s.6d. 

"This  work  is  in  many  ways  creditable  to  "Mr  Sandys  has  performed  his  arduous 

the  University  of  Cambridge.     If  an  English  duties   with   marked   ability   and   admirable 

student  wishes  to  have  a  full  conception  of        tact In  every  part  of  his  work 

what  is  contained  in  the  Rhetoric  of  Aris-  — revising,  supplementing,  and  completing — 

totle,  to  Mr  Cope's  edition  he  must  go." —  he  has  done  exceedingly  well."— i5'j-rtwj»/'r. 
A  caiieniy. 

PRIVATE   ORATIONS  OF   DEMOSTHENES, 

with  Introductions  and  English  Notes,  by  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.  Editor 
of  Aeschylus,  etc.  and  J.  E.  Sandys,  M.A.  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St 
John's  College,  and  Public  Orator  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 

Part  1.  Contra  Phormionem,  Lacritum,  Pantaenetum,  Boeotum  de 
Nomine,  Boeotum  de  Dote,  Dionysodorum.     Crown  8vo.    6j. 

"Mr   Paley's   scholarship   is   sound   and  literature  which  bears  upon  his  author,  and 

accurate,  his  experience  of  editing  wide,  ana  the  elucidation  of  matters  of  daily  life,  in  the 

if  he  is  content  to  devote  his  learning  and  delineation  of  which  Demosthenes  is  so  rich, 

abilities  to  the  production  of  such  manuals  obtains  full  justice  at  his  hands We 

as  these,  they  will  be  received  with  gratitude  hope  this  edition  may  lead  the  way  to  a  moie 

throughout  the  higher  schools  of  the  country.  general  study  of  these  speeches  in  schools 

Mr  Sandys   is  deeply  read    in  the  German  than  has  hitherto  been  possible."— ^Crtrffwy. 

Part  II.    Pro  Phormione,  Contra  Stephanum  I.  II. ;  Nicostratum, 
Cononem,  Calliclem.     'js.  6d. 

"To  give   even  a  brief  sketch  of  these  excellent  running  commentary  ....  and  no 

speeches  IPro  Phormione  and  Contra  Ste-  one     can     say    that    he     is    ever     deficient 

/•hanum]   would   be    incompatible   with   our  in    the   needful   help    which    enables    us   to 

limits,  though  we  can  hardly  conceive  a  task  form   a  sound  estimate  of  the  rights  of  the 

more  useful  to  the  classical  or  professional  case," — Sat.  Rev. 

scholar  than  to  make  one  for  himself.  ....  ' the   edition  reflects   credit   on 

It  is  a  great  boon  to   those  who  set  them-  Cambridge  scholarship,  and  ought  to  be  ex- 
selves  to  unravel   the  thread  of  arguments  tensively  used." — Atheninaii. 
pro  and  con  to  have  the  aid  of  Mr  Sandys's 

DEMOSTHENES    AGAINST    ANDROTION     AND 

AGAINST  TIMOCRATES,  with  Introductions  and  English  Com- 
mentary, by  William  Wayte,  M.A.,  late  Professor  of  Greek, 
University  College,  London,  Formeriy  Fellow  of  King's  College, 
Cambridge,  and  Assistant  Master  at  Eton.     Crown  8vo.    js.  6d. 

"The  editor  has  devoted  special  atten-  full  help  without  unduly  encouraging  'the 

tion  to  the  principles  and  practice  of  Attic  less  industrious  sort;'"  and  they  certainly 

law,  of  which  these  speeches  afford  many  afford  as  much  help,  and  of  the  right  kind 

rich  illustrations.     In  the  notes,  which  in-  as  any  reasonable  student   is   likely  to   de- 

clude  serviceable  abstracts  of  the  speeches,  sire." — The  Scotsman. 
his  object,  he  tells  us,  has  been  "to  afford 

PINDAR. 
OLYMPIAN  AND  PYTHIAN  ODES.      With  Notes  Explanatory 
and    Critical,   Introductions   and    Introductory    Essays.      Edited   by 
C.  A.  M.  Fennell,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Jesus  College.     Crown  8vo 
gs. 

"Mr  Fennell  deserves  the  thanks  of  all  "Considered  simply  as  a  contribution  to 
classical  students  for  his  careful  and  scholarly  the  study  and  criticism  of  Pindar  Mr  Fen- 
edition  of  the  Olympian  and  Pythian  odes.  nell's  edition  is  a  work  of  great  merit  Alto- 
He  brings  to  his  task  the  necessary  enthu-  gether,  this  edition  is  a  welcome  and  whole- 
.siasm  for  his  author,  great  industry,  a  sound  some  sign  of  the  vitality  and  development  of 
judgment,  and,  in  particular,  copious  and  Cambridge  scholarship,  and  we  are  glad  to 
minute  learning  in  comparative  philology.  see  that  it  is  to  be  cont\ni\ed."—Sa tnrif ay 
I  o  his  qualifications  in  this  last  respect  every  Revie^v. 
page  bears  witness." — Athencpiim. 

THE  NEMEAN  AND  ISTHMIAN  ODES.  By  the  same 
Editor.     Crown  8vo.     gs. 

London:    Cambridge   Warehouse,  17   Fa terfi osier  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  ii 

THE   BACCHAE   OF   EURIPlioEs! 

with  Introduction,  Critical  Notes,  and  Archaeological  Illustrations, 
by  J.  E.  Sandys,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John's  College,  Cam- 
bridge, and  Public  Orator.     Crown  8vo.     loj-.  6d. 

"  Of  the  present  edition  of  the  BacchcE  by  its  predecessors.    The  volume  will  add  to  the 

Mr   Sandys  we   may  safely  say  that   never  already  wide  popularity  of  a  unique  drama, 

before    has  a   Greek  play,    in    England    at  and  must  be  reckoned  among  the  most  im- 

least,   had   fuller  justice   done   to   us   criti-  portant  classical  publications  of  the  year." — 

cism,    interpretation,   and   archaeological    il-  AtlieiKeian. 

lustration,  whether  for  the  young  student  or  "  It  has  not,  like  so  many  such  books,  been 

the  more  advanced  scholar.    The  Cambridge  hastily  produced    to   meet    the    momentary 

Public  Orator  may  be  said  to  have  taken  the  need  of  some  particular  examination  ;   but  it 

lead  in  issuing  a  complete  edition  of  a  Greek  has  employed  for  some  years  the  labour  and 

play,  which  is  destined  perhaps  to  gain  re-  thought  of  a  highly  finished  scholar,  whose 

doubled  favour  now  that  the  study  of  ancient  aim  seems  to  have  been  that  his  book  should 

nionuments  has  been  applied  to  its  illustra-  go  forth  totus  teres  atque  rotiuuius.  armed 

ivya."— Saturday  Review.  at  all  points  with  all  that  may  throw  light 

"The  volume  is  interspersed  with  well-  upon  its  subject.   The  result  is  a  work  which 

executed  woodcuts,  and  its  general  attractive-  will  not  only  assist  the  schoolboy  or  under- 

ness   of  form     reflects   great    credit   on    the  graduate    in    his    tasks,    but   will    adorn  the 

University  Press.     In  the  notes  Mr  Sandys  hbrary  of  the  scholar."  .  .  "  The  description 

has  more    than    sustained     his   well-earned  of  the  woodcuts  abounds  in  interesting  and 

reputation   as  a  careful  and  learned   editor,  suggestive  information  upon  various  points 

and  shows  con!;iderable  advance  in  freedom  of  ancient    art,    and    is  a  further   instance 

and  lightness  of  style Under  such  cir-  of  the   very   thorough   as  well    as    scholar- 

cumstances  it  is  superfluous  to  say  that  for  like    manner    in    wliich     Mr  Sandys    deals 

the  purposes  of  teachers  and  advanced  stu-  with    his    subject    at    every    point." —  The 

dents  this  handsome  edition  lar  surpasses  all  Gitardian. 

THE  TYPES  OF  GREEK  COINS.  By  Percy  Gard- 
ner, M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Disney  Professor  of  Archseology.  With  i6  Auto- 
type plates,  containing  photographs  of  Coins  of  all  parts  of  the  Greek 
World.     Impl.  4to.     Cloth  extra,  ^i.  iij-.  dd.;  Morocco  backs,  £2.  2s. 

ESSAYS    ON    THE   ART   OF   PHEIDIAS. 
By  C.  Waldstein,  M.A.,  Phil.  D.,  Reader  in  Classical  Archaeology 
in  the  University  of  Cambridge.     Royal  8vo.     With  Illustrations. 

\  7^?l  tJl6  Pf^BSS* 

M.  TULLI    CICERONIS  DE  FINIBUS  BONORUM 

ET  MALORUM  LIBRI  QUINQUE.  The  text  revised  and  ex- 
plained ;  With  a  Translation  by  James  S.  Reid,  M.L.,  Fellow  and 
Assistant  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College.  [/;z  the  Pf-ess. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  DE  OFFICIIS  LIBRI  TRES, 
with  Marginal  Analysis,  an  English  Commentary',  and  copious  Indices, 
by  H.  A.  HOLDEN,  LL.D.,  late  Head  Master  of  Ipswich  School,  late  Fel- 
low of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  Classical  Examiner  to  the  University 
of  London.  Fourth  Edition.  Revised  and  considerably  enlarged. 
Crown  8vo.     ()s. 

"Dr   Holden   truly    states    that    'Text,  "  Dr  Holden  has  issued  an  edition  of  what 

Analysis,  and   Commentary  in   this  edition  is  perhaps  the  easiest  and  most  popular  of 

have_  been   again   subjected   to  a   thorough  Cicero's  philosophical  works,  the  de  OfficiU, 

revision.'    It  is  now  certainly  the  best  edition  which,  especially  in  the  form  which  it  has  now 

extant.  .  .  .  The   Introduction  (after  Heine)  assumed  after  two  most  thorough  revisions, 

and  notes  leave  nothing  to  be  desired  in  point  leaves  little  or  nothing  to  be  desired  in  the 

of  fulness,  accuracy,  and  neatness  ;  the  typo-  fullness  and  accuracy  of  its  treatment  alike 

graphical  execution  will  satisfy  the  most  fas-  of  the  matter  and  the  language."— ^corfi-w^'. 
tidious  eye." — Notes  atid  Queries. 

M.  TVLLI  CICERONIS  PRO  C  RABIRIO  [PERD- 
VELLIONIS  REO]  ORATIO  AD  OVIRITES  With  Notes  Intro- 
duction and  Appendices  by  W  E  Heitland  MA,  Fellow  and  Lec- 
turer of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     Demy  8vo.     yj.  6d. 


London :   Cambridge  Warehouse,  1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


12  PUBLICATIONS  OF 

M.  TULLTI   CICERONIS   DE  NATURA  DEORUM 

Libri  Tres,  with  Introduction  and  Commentary  by  JOSEPH  B.  MAYOR, 
M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  King's  College,  London, 
formerly  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge,  together 
with  a  new  collation  of  several  of  the  English  MSS.  by  J.  H.SWAINSON, 
M. A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  Coll.,  Cambridge.  Vol.  I.  DemySvo. 
io.y.  6d.  [Vol.  II.     In  the  Press. 

"  Such  editions  as  that  of  which  Prof.  and  is  in  every  way  admirably  suited  to  meet 

Mayor  has  given  us  the  first  instalment  will  the  needs  of  the  student The  notes  of 

doubtless  do  much  to  remedy  this  undeserved  the  editor  are  all  that  could  be  expected 
neglect.  It  is  one  on  which  great  pains  and  from  his  well-known  learning  and  scholar- 
much  learning  have  evidently  been  expended,  ship." — Academy. 

P.   VERGILI    MARONIS    OPERA 
cum    Prolegomenis     et    Commentario    Critico    pro    Syndicis    Preli 
Academici    edidit   BENj.A:\riN    Hall    Kennedy,    S.T.P.,    Graecae 
Linguae  Professor  Regius.     Extra  Fcap.  8vo.    z^s. 

MATHEMATICST^HYSICAL  SCIENCE,  &c. 

MATHEMATICAL   AND    PHYSICAL   PAPERS. 
By  Sir  W.  THOMSON,  LL.D.,  D  C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural 
Philosophy,  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.     Collected  from  different 
Scientific  Periodicals  from  May  1841,  to  the  present  time.     Vol.   I. 
DemySvo.    \%s.  [Vol.  II.     In  the  Press. 

"  ^Vherever  exact  science  has  foimd  a  fol-  borated  and  promulgated  a  series  of  rules  and 

lower  Sir  William  Thomson's  name  is  known  imits  which  are  but  the  detailed  outcome  of 

as  a  leader  and  a  master.     For  a  space  of  40  the  principles  laid  do\vn  in  these  papers." — 

years  each  of  his  successive  contributions  to  The  Times. 

knowledge  in  the  domain  of  experimental  "We  are  convinced  that  nothing  has  had 
and  mathematical  physics  has  been  recog-  a  greater  effect  on  the  progress  of  the 
nized  as  marking  a  stage  in  the  progress  of  theories  of  electricity  and  magnetism  during 
the  subject.  But,  imhappily  for  the  mere  the  last  ten  years  than  the  publication  of  Sir 
learne-,  he  is  no  writer  of  text-books.  His  W.  Thomson's  reprint  of  papers  on  electro- 
eager  fertility  overflows  into  the  nearest  statics  and  magnetism,  and  we  believe  that 
available  journal  .  .  .  The  papers  in  this  the  present  volume  is  destined  in  no  less 
volume  deal  largely  with  the  subject  of  the  degree  to  further  the  advancement  of  phsi- 
djmamics  of  heat.  They  begin  with  two  or  cal  science.  We  owe  the  modern  djTiamical 
three  articles  which  were  in  part  written  at  theory  of  heat  almost  wholly  to  Joule  and 
the  age  of  17,  before  the  author  had  com-  Thomson,  and  Clausius  and  Rankine,  and  we 
menced  residence  as  an  undergraduate  in  have  here  collected  together  the  whole  of 
Cambridge  .  .  .  No  student  of  mechanical  Thomson's  investigations  on  this  subject, 
engineering,  who  aims  at  the  higher  levels  together  with  the  papers  published  jointly 
of  his  profession,  can  afford  to  be  ignorant  by  himself  and  Joule.  We  would  fain  linger 
of  the  principles  and  methods  set  forth  in  over  this  fascinating  subject,  but  space  does 
these  great  memoirs  .  .  .  The  article  on  the  not  permit  ;  and  we  can  only  ask  those  who 
absolute  measurement  of  electric  and  gal-  reallj'  wish  to  study  thermo-dj-namics  to 
vanic  quantities  (1851)  has  borne  rich  ;ind  know  something  of  the  great  theory  of  the 
abundant  fruit.  Twenty  years  after  its  date  dissipation  of  energy  originated  by  the  author 
the  International  Conference  of  Electricians  to  give  his  daj's  and  nights  to  the  volume 
at  Paris,  assisted  by  the  author  himself,  ela-  before  us." — Glasgmu  Herald. 

MATHEMATICAL  AND  PHYSICAL  PAPERS, 
By  George  Gabriel  Stoke.s,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow 
pf  Pembroke  College,  and  Lucasian  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge.  Reprinted  from  the  Original  Journals  and 
Transactions,  with  Additional  Notes  by  the  Author.  Vol.  I.  Demy 
8vo.     15J. 

"  The  volume  of  Professor  Stokes's  papers  and  still  necessarj-,  dissertations.  There  no- 
contains  much  more  than  his  hydrodynamical  thing  is  slurred  over,  nothing  extenuated, 
papers  The  undulatory  theory  of  light  is  We  learn  exactly  the  weaknesses  of  tVie 
treated,  and  the  difficulties  connected  with  theory,  and  the  direction  in  which  the  corn- 
its  application  to  certam  phenomena,  such  as  pleter  theory  of  the  future  must  be  sought 
aberration,  are  carefully  examined  and  re-  for.  The  same  spirit  pervades  the  papers 
solved.    .Such  difficulties  are  commonly  passefl  on  pure  mathematics  which  are  included  in 

over  with  scant  notice  in  the  text-books the  volume.     They  have  a  severe  accuracy 

Those  to  whom  difficulties  like  these  are  real  of  style  which  well  befits  the  subtle  nature 

stumbling-blocks  will  still  turn  for  enlighten-  of  the  s\ibjects,  and  inspires  the  completest 

ment  to  Profes.'sor  Stokes's  old,  but  still  fresh  confidence  in  their  author." — The  Titnes. 

Vol.  II.     Neai'ly  ready. 
London :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  13 

THE  SCIENTIFIC  PAPERS  OF  THE  LATE  PROF. 

J.  CLERK  iMAXWELL.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Niven,  M.A.  In  2  vols. 
Royal  4to.  \In  the  Press. 

A   TREATISE    ON    NATURAL   PHILOSOPHY. 
By   Sir  W.  Thomson,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural 
Philosophy   in    the    University  of   Glasgow,    and  P.  G.  Tait,  AI.A., 
Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy   in   the    University  of  Edinburgh. 
Vol.  I.  Part  I.     Demy  8vo.     16^-. 

"  In  this,  the  second  edition,  we  notice  a        could  form  within  the  time  at  our  diiiposal 
large  amount  of  new  matter,  the  importance         would  be  utterly  inadequate." — Aaiure, 
of  which  is  such  that  any  opinion  which  we 

Part  II.     Demy  8vo.     iS^-. 
ELEMENTS    OF   NATURAL    PHILOSOPHY. 
By  Professors  Sir  W.  Thomson  and  P.  G.  Tait.    Part  I.    Demy  8vo. 
Second  Edition,     (js. 

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  DETER- 
MINANTS AND  THEIR  APPLICATIONS  IN  ANALYSIS 
AND  GEOMETRY,  by  Robert  Forsyth  Scott,  M.A.,  of 
St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     Demy  Svo.     12^. 

"This  able  and  comprehensive  treatise  tant  researches  on  this  subject  which  have 
will  be  welcomed  by  the  student  as  bringing  hitherto  been  for  the  most  pait  inaccessible 
within  his  reacli  the  results  of  many  impor-         to  him." — Atheiiieu»t. 

HYDRODYNAMICS, 
A  Treatise  on  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  the  Motion  of  Fluids,  by 
Horace  Lamb,  AI.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge ; 
Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University  of  Adelaide.  Demy  Svo.  I2.j-. 

THE    ANALYTICAL   THEORY    OF    HEAT, 
By  Joseph  Fourier.    Translated,  with  Notes,  by  A.  Freeman,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     Demy  Svo.     16^. 

"It   is   time  that  Fourier's  masterpiece,  ployed    by    the    author." — Conte)nporary 

The  Analytical   Theory    of  Heat,     trans-  Review,  October,  1878. 

lated  by   Mr  Ale.v.  Freeman,  should  be  in-  "There  cannot  be  two  opinions  as  to  the 

troduced  to  those  English  students  of  Mathe-  value  and  importance  of  the  Theorie  Je  la 

matics  who   do    not  follow  with  freedom  a  Chaletir....\tii,   still  t}ie  text-book  of  Heat 

treatise  in  any  language  but  their  own.     It  Conduction,  and   there  seems  little  present 

is  a  model  of  mathematical  reasoning  applied  prospect   of   its   being   superseded,    though 

to  physical  phenomena,  and  is  remarkable  for  it  is  already  more  than  half  a  century  old." — 

the  ingenuity  of  the  analytical  process  em-  Nature. 

THE   ELECTRICAL   RESEARCHES    OF    THE 
HONOURABLE  HENRY  CAVENDISH,  F.R.S. 

Written  between  1771  and  1781,  Edited  from  the  original  manuscripts 
in  the  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  K.  G.,  by  J.  Clerk 
Maxwell,  F.R.S.    Demy  Svo.     iSi-. 

"  Every  department  of  editorial  duty  satisfaction  to  Prof.  Maxwell  to  see  this 
appears  to  have  been  most  conscientiously  goodly  volume  completed  before  his  life's 
performed;  and  it  must  have  been  no  small        work  was  done." — Athentemn. 

An  elementary  treatise  on  QUATERNIONS, 

By  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Edinburgh.     Second  Edition.     Demy  Svo.  14J'. 

THE   mathematical   WORKS    OF 

ISAAC    BARROW,    D.D. 
Edited  by  W.  Whewell,  D.D.     Demy  Svo.    -js.  6d. 

London:    Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row, 


14  PUBLICATIONS  OF 


NOTES   ON    QUALITATIVE   ANALYSIS. 

Concise  and  Explanatory.  By  H.  J.  H.  Fenton,  M.A.,  F.I.C.,  F.C.S., 
Demonstrator  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Late 
Scholar  of  Christ's  College.     Crown  4to.     "js.  6d. 

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  PLANTS, 
by  S.  H.  Vines,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Christ's  College.  [In  the  Press. 

THE  FOSSILS  AND  PAL^ONTOLOGICAL  AF- 
FINITIES OF  THE  NEOCOMIAX  DEPOSITS  OF  UPWARE 
AND  BRICKHILL  with  Plates,  being  the  Sedgwick  Prize  Essay  for 
the  Year  1879.  By  Walter  Keeping,  M. A.,  F.G.S.  DemySvo.  loj.  6^. 

COUNTERPOINT. 
A  Practical  Course  of  Study,  by  Professor  G.  A.  Macfarren,  M.A., 
Mus.  Doc.     Fourth  Edition,  revised.     Demv  4to.     ^s.  6d. 

ASTRONOMICAL   OBSERVATIONS 
made  at  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge  by  the  Rev.  James  Chalets, 
M.A.,  F.R.S.,  F.R.A.S.,  Plumian  Professor  of  Astronomy  and  Experi- 
mental Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  Fellow  of 
Trinity  College.     For  various  Years,  from  1846  to  i860. 

ASTRONOMICAL   OBSERVATIONS 
from  1861  to  1865.     Vol.  XXI.     Roval  4to.     15^-. 
A  CATALOGUE  OF  THE  COLLECTION  OF  BIRDS 
formed  by  the  late  H.  E.  Strickland,  now  in  the  possession  of  the 
University  of  Cambridge.     By  Osbert  Salvin,  M.A.,   F.R.S.,  &c. 
Strickland  Curator  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Demy8vo.  £1.  \s. 

"The    discriminating    notes    which    Mr  "'The  author  has  formed  a  definite  and, 

Salvin  has  here  and  there  introduced  make  as  it  seems  to  us,  a  righteous  idea  of  what 

the  book  indispensable  to  every  worker  on  the  catalogue  of  a  collection  should  be,  and, 

what  the  Americans  call  "the  higher  plane"  allowing  for  some  occasional  slips,  has  efiec- 

of  the  science  of  birds." — Acndeiity.  tively  carried  it  out." — Xotes  ami  Queries. 

A   CATALOGUE    OF   AUSTRALIAN    FOSSILS 
(including  Tasmania  and  the  Island  of  Timor),  Stratigraphically  and 
Zoologically  arranged,  by  Robert  Etheridge,  Jun.,  F.G.S.,  Acting 
Palceontologist,  H.M.  Geol.  Survey  of  Scotland,  (^formerly  Assistant- 
Geologist,  Geol.  Survey  of  Victoria).     Demy  8vo.     los.  6d. 

"The  work  is  arranged  with  great  clear-        papers  consulted  by  the  author,  and  an  index 
ness,  and  contains  a  full  list  of  the  backs  and        to  the  genera." — Saturday  Kez'ieiv. 

ILLUSTRATIONS       OF      COMPARATIVE      ANA- 
TOMY,  VERTEBRATE   AND    INVERTEBRATE, 

for  the  Use  of  Students  in  the  Museum  of  Zoology  and  Comparative 
Anatomy.     Second  Edition.     Demy  8v-o.    2s.  6d. 
A   SYNOPSIS    OF   THE   CLASSIFICATION    OF 
THE   BRITISH    PALEOZOIC    ROCKS, 
by  the   Rev.   Adam    Sedgwick,    M.A.,    F.R.S.,    and    Frederick 
M'^COY,  F.G.S.     One  vol.,  Royal  4to.    Plates,  ^^i.  is. 

A  CATALOGUE   OF   THE    COLLECTION   OF 

CAMBRIAN    AND    SILURIAN    FOSSILS 

contained  in  the  Geological  Museum  of  the  University  of  Cambridge, 

by  J.  W.  Salter,  F.G.S.    With  a  Portrait  of  Professor  Sedgwick. 

Royal  4to.     7s.  bd. 

CATALOGUE    OF    OSTEOLOGICAL   SPECIMENS 

contained  in  the  Anatomical  Museum  of  the  University  of  Cam- 
bridge.    Demy  8vo.     -zs.  6d. 

l^ndon :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  15 

LAW. 

AN   ANALYSIS    OF   CRIMINAL    LIABILITY. 
By  E.    C.   Clark,    LL.D.,   Regius   Professor    of    Civil    Law   in   the 
University  of  Cambridge,  also  of  Lincoln's   Inn,   Barrister  at  Law. 
Crown  8vo.    ^s.  6d. 

"Prof.   Clark's   little   book   is   the   sub-  sanctions"...      Students   of  jurisprudence 

stance  of  lectures   delivered  by  him   upon  will  find  much  to  niterest  and  instruct  them 

those  portions   of   Austin's   work   on  juris-  in  the  work  of  Prof.  Clark." — Atkenceian. 
prudence  which  deal  with  the  ''operation  of 

PRACTICAL  JURISPRUDENCE 
A   COMMENT   ON   AUSTIN.     By  E.  C.  Clark,  LL.D.     Regius 
Professor  of  Civil  Law.  {^Nearly  ready. 

A   SELECTION   OF  THE    STATE   TRIALS. 
By  J.  W.  Willis-Bund,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Barrister-at-Law,  Professor  of 
Constitutional  Law  and  History,  University  College,  London.     Vol.  I. 
Trials  for  Treason  (1327 — 1660).     Crown  8vo.    iSs. 

"Mr  Willis- Bund  has  edited  'A  Selection  those  of  impeachment  for  treason  before  Par- 

of  Cases   from   the   State   Trials '   which   is  liament,  which  he  proposes  to  treat  in  a  future 

likely  to  form  a  very  valuable   addition  to  volume  under  the  general  head 'Proceedings 

the    standard    literature.     .     .     There    can  in  ParliamenL'" — Tlie  Academy. 
be  no  doubt,  therefore,  of  the  interest  that  "This  is  a  work  of  such  obvious  utility 

can  be  found  in  the  State  trials.     But  they  that  the  only  wonder  is  that  no  one  should 

are  large  and  unwieldy,  and  it  is  impossible  have    undertaken    it     before.  ...  In     many 

for  the  general  reader  to  come  across  them.  respects   therefore,  although   the   trials   are 

Mr  Willis-Bund   has   therefore   done    good  more  or  less  abridged,  this  is  for  the  ordinary 

service  in  making  a  selection  that  is  in  the  student's  purpose   not  only  a  more  handy, 

first  volume  reduced  to  a  commodious  form."  but  a  more  useful  work  than   Howell's." — 

—The  Examiner.  Saturday  Revie-M. 

"This   work  is  a  very  useful  contribution  "Of  the  importance  of  this  subject,  or  of 

to  that  important  branch  of  the  constitutional  the   want  of  a   book  of  this  kmd,  referring 

history  of  England  which  is  concerned  with  not  vaguely  but  precisely  to  the  grounds  of 

the  growth  and  development  of  the  law  of  conbtitutional    doctrines,    both   of  past   and 

treason,  as  it  may  be  gathered  from  trials  be-  present  times,  no  reader  of  history  can  feel 

fore  the  ordinary  courts.     The   author  has  any  doubt." — Daily  Neuus. 
very  wisely  distinguished   these   cases  from 

Vol.  II.     In  two  parts.     Price  \\s.  each. 

'■  But,  although  the  book  is  most  interest-  form  a  judicious  selection  of  the  principal 
ing  to  the  historian  of  constitutional  law,  it  statutes  and  the  leading  cases  bearing  on 
is  also  not  without  considerable  value  to  the  crime  of  treason ....  For  all  classes  of 
those  who  seek  information  with  regard  to  readers  these  volumes  possess  an  indirect 
procedure  and  the  growth  of  the  law  of  evi-  interest,  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  cases 
dence.  We  should  add  that  Mr  Willis-Bund  themselves,  from  the  men  who  were  actors 
has  given  short  prefaces  and  appendices  to  in  them,  and  from  the  numerous  points  of 
the  trials,  so  as  to  form  a  connected  narrative  social  life  which  are  incidentally  illustrated 
of  the  events  in  history  to  which  they  relate.  in  the  course  of  the  trials.  Ou  these  features 
We  can  thoroughly  recommend  the  book."  we  have  not  dwelt,  but  have  preferred  to  show 
Law  Ti»tes.  that  the  book  is  a  valuable  contribution  to  the 

"To  a  large  class  of  readers  Mr  Willis-  study  of  the  subject  with  which  it  professes 

Bund's  compilation  will   thus    be    of   great  to  deal,  namely,  the  history  of  the  law  of  trea- 

assistance,  for  he  presents  in  a  convenient  son." — Atlienceutn. 

Vol.  III.     In  the  Press. 

THE   FRAGMENTS    OF   THE   PERPETUAL 

EDICT    OF   SALVIUS   JULIANUS, 

collected,  arranged,  and  annotated  by  Bryan  Walker,  M.A.  LL.D.. 

Law  Lecturer  of  St  John's  College,  and  late  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi 

College,  Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.     6^'. 

"  In  the  present  book  we  have  the  fruits  English  student,  and  such  a  student  will  be 

of   the    same    kind   of  thorough  and  well-  interested  as  well  as  perhaps  surprised  to  find 

ordered  study  which  was   brought  to  bear  how  abundantly  the  extant  fragments  illus- 

upon   the   notes  to  the  Commentaries  and  trate  and  clear  up  points  which  have  attracted 

the  Institutes  .  .  .   Hitherto  the  Edict  has  his   attention  in  the  Commentaries,   or  the 

been  almost  inaccessible    to    the    ordinary  Institutes,  or  the  Digest." — Law  Times. 


London:    Catnbridge   Warehouse^  17  Paternoster  Row. 


i6  PUBLICATIONS   OF 

THE  COMMENTARIES  OF  GAIUS   AND  RULES 
OF    ULPIAN.     (New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.) 

With  a  Translation  and  Notes,  by  J.  T.  Abdy,  LL.D,,  Judge  of  County 
Courts,  late  Regius  Professor  of  Laws  in  the  University  of  Cambridge, 
and  Bryan  Walker,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Law  Lecturer  of  St  John's 
College,  Cambridge,  formerly  Law  Student  of  Trinity  Hall  and 
Chancellor's  Medallist  for  Legal  Studies.     Crown  8vo.    ids. 

"  As  scholars  and  as  editors  Messrs  Abdy  explanation.      Thus    the    Roman    jurist   is 

and    Walker  have    done   their    work   well.  allowed  to  speak  for  himself,  and  the  reader 

.   .  •  ■  •    For  one  thing  the  editors  deserve  feels  that  he  is  really  studying  Roman  law 

special  commendation.    They  have  presented  in  the  original,  and  not  a  fanciful  representa- 

Gaius  to  the  reader  with  few  notes  and  those  tiou  of  it." — Atkeiiceum. 
merely   by    way    of  reference  or  necessary 

THE   INSTITUTES    OF   JUSTINIAN, 

translated  with  Notes  by  J.  T.  Abdy,  LL.D.,  Judge  of  County  Courts, 
late  Regius  Professor  of  Laws  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and 
formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall ;  and  Bryax  Walker,  IM.A.,  LL.D., 
Law  Lecturer  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge  ;  late  Fellow  and 
Lecturer  of  Corpus  Chri^ti  College  ;  and  formerly  Law  Student  of 
Trinity  Hall.     Crown  8vo.    16^. 

"  We  welcome  here  a  valuable  contribution  attention  is  distracted  from  the  subject-matter 
to  the  study  of  jurisprudence.  The  text  of  by  the  difficulty  of  struggling  through  the 
the /«j7iV«/^i  is  occasionally  perplexing,  even  language  in  which  it  is  contained,  it  will  be 
to  practised  scholars,  whose  knowledge  of  almost  indispensable." — Spectator. 
classical  models  does  not  always  avail  them  "The  notes  are  learned  and  carefully  coin- 
in  dealing  with  the  technicalities  of  legal  piled,  and  this  edition  will  be  found  useful 
phraseology.  Nor  can  the  ordinary  diction-  to  students. " — La-w  Times. 
aries  be  e.xpected  to  furnish  all  the  help  that  "  Dr  Abdy  and  Dr  Walker  have  produced 
is  wanted.  This  translation  will  then  be  of  a  book  which  is  both  elegant  and  useful." — 
great  use.     To  the  ordinary  student,  whose  Atheuceuin. 

SELECTED    TITLES    FROM    THE   DIGEST, 

annotated  by  B.  Walker,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Part  I.  Mandati  vel 
Contra.     Digest  XVli.  i.     Crown  8vo.    ^s. 

"This  small  volume  is  pulilished  as  an  ex-  say  that  Mr  Walker  deserves  credit  for  the 
periinent.    The  author  proposes  to  publish  an  way  in  which  he  has  performed  the  task  un- 
annotated  edition  and  translation  of  several  dertaken.     The  translation,  as  might  be  ex- 
books  of  the  Digest  if  this  one  is  received  pected,  is  scholarly." — Lam  Times. 
with  favour.     We  aie  pleased  to  be  able  to 

Part  II.  De  Adquirendo  rerum  dominio  and  De  Adquirenda  vel  amit- 
tenda  possessione.     Digest  XLL  i  and  11.    Crown  8vo.     6^-. 
Part  III.    De  Condictionious.    Digest  Xll.  i  and  4 — 7  and  Digest  Xin. 
1 — 3.     Crown  8vo.     6j. 

DIGEST.    Book  VII.    Title  I.     De  Usufructu. 

With  Introduction  and  full  Explanatory  Notes,  intended  as  an  Intro- 
duction to  the  study  of  the  Digest.  By  Henry  John  Roby,  M.A., 
Formerly  Fellow  of  St  John's  College.  \_Prepa7-inif. 

GROTIUS    DE   JURE    BELLI    ET    PACIS, 

with  the  Notes  of  Barbeyrac  and  others ;  accompanied  by  an  abridged 
Translation  of  the  Text,  by  W.  Whewell,  D.D.  late  Master  of  Trinity 
College.     3  Vols.    Demy  8vo.'    12s.     The  translation  separate,  6s. 

Lotidon:    Ca?nbridge   Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


17 


HISTORY. 

THE   GROWTH   OF   ENGLISH   INDUSTRY 
AND   COMMERCE, 
by  W.  Cunningham,  M.A.,  late  Deputy  to  the  Knightbridge    Pro- 
fessor in   the  University  of  Cambridge.     With   Maps   and    Charts. 
Crown  8vo.     12^. 


"He  is,  however,  undoubtedly  sound  iu 
the  main,  and  his  work  deserves  recognition 
as  the  result  of  immense  industry  and  re- 
search in  a  field  in  which  the  labourers  have 
hitherto  been  comparatively  few.  "-6"cciii«/rt«. 

"  Mr  Cunningham  is  not  likely  to  dis- 
appoint any  readers  except  such  as  begin  by 
mistaking  the  character  of  his  book.  He 
does  not  promise,   and  does  not   give,   an 


account  of  the  dimensions  to  which  English 
industry  and  commerce  have  grown.  It  is 
with  the  process  of  growth  that  he  is  con- 
cerned ;  and  this  process  he  traces  with  the 
philosophical  insight  which  distinguishes  be- 
tween what  is  important  and  what  is  trivial. 
He  thus  follows  with  care,  skill,  and  de- 
liberation a  single  thread  through  the  maze 
of  general  English  history." — Guardian. 


LIFE    AND    TIMES    OF    STEIN,    OR    GERMANY 
AND  PRUSSIA  IN  THE  NAPOLEONIC  AGE, 

by  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History  in 
the  University  of  Cambridge,  with  Portraits  and  Maps.  3  Vols. 
Demy  8vo.    48^. 


"  If  we  could  conceive  anything  similar 
to  a  protective  system  in  the  intellectual  de- 
partment, we  might  perhaps  look  forward  to 
a  time  when  our  historians  would  raise  the 
cry  of  protection  for  native  industry.  Of 
the  unquestionably  greatest  German  men  of 
modern  history — I  speak  of  Frederick  the 
Great,  Goethe  and  Stein — the  first  two  found 
long  since  in  Carlyle  and  Lewes  biographers 
who  have  undoubtedly  driven  their  German 
competitors  out  of  the  field.  And  now  in  the 
year  just  past  Professor  Seeley  of  Cambridge 
has  presented  us  with  a  biography  of  Stein 
which,  though  it  modestly  declines  competi- 
tion with  German  works  and  disowns  the 
presumption  of  teaching  us  Germans  our  own 
historj',  yet  casts  into  the  shade  by  its  bril- 
liant superiority  all  that  we  have  ourselves 
hitherto  written  about  Steiu." — Deutsche 
Rundschau. 

"  Dr  Busch's  volume  has  made  people 
think  and  talk  even  more  than  usual  of  Prince 
Bismarck ,  and  Professor  Seeley's  very  learned 
work  on  Stein  will  turn  attention  to  an  earlier 
and  an  almost  equally  eminent  German  states- 
man.   It  is  soothing  to  the  national 

self-respect  to  find  a  few  Englishmen,  such 
as  the  late  Mr  Lewes  and  Professor  Seeley, 
doing  for  German  as  well  as  English  readers 
what  many  German  scholars  have  done  for 
us." — Times. 


"  In  a  notice  of  this  kind  scant  justice  can 
be  done  to  a  work  like  the  one  before  us;  no 
short  resume  can  give  even  the  most  meagre 
notion  of  the  contents  of  these  volumes,  which 
contain  no  page  that  is  superfluous,  and 
none  that  is  uninteresting To  under- 
stand the  Germany  of  to-day  one  must  study 
the  Germany  of  many  yesterdays,  and  now 
that  study  has  been  made  easy  by  this  work, 
to  which  no  one  can  hesitate  to  assign  a  very 
high  place  among  those  recent  histories  which 
have  aimed  at  original  research. "-./J  the>uBu»i. 

"The  book  before  us  fills  an  important 
gap  in  English — nay,  European — historical 
literature,  and  bridges  over  the  history  of 
Prussia  from  the  time  of  Frederick  the  Great 
to  the  days  of  Kaiser  Wilhelm.  It  thus  gives 
the  reader  standing  ground  whence  he  may 
regard  contemporary  events  in  Germany  in 
their  proper  historic  light We  con- 
gratulate Cambridge  and  her  Professor  of 
History  on  the  appearance  of  such  a  note- 
worthy production.  And  we  may  add  that  it 
is  something  upon  which  we  may  congratulate 
England  that  on  the  especial  field  of  the  Ger- 
mans, history,  on  the  history  of  their  own 
country,  by  the  use  of  their  own  literary 
weapons,  an  Englishman  has  produced  a  his- 
tory of  Germany  in  the  Napoleonic  age  far 
superior  to  any  that  exists  in  German." — 
£xami7ier. 


THE     UNIVERSITY 
THE     EARLIEST 
INJUNCTIONS   OF 


OF  CAMBRIDGE  FROM 
TIMES  TO  THE  ROYAL 
1535, 


by  James  Bass  Mullinger,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.  (734  pp.),  12s. 


"We  trust  Mr  Mullinger  will  yet  continue 
his  history  and  bring  it  down  to  our  own 
day. " — A  cademy. 

"  He  has  brought  together  a  mass  of  in- 
structive details  respecting  the  rise  and  pro- 
gress, not  only  of  his  own  University,  but  of 
all  the  principal  Universities  of  the  Middle 

Ages We  hope   some  day  that  he  may 

continue  his  labours,  and  give  us  a  history  of 

Vol.  II.     hi  the  Press 


the  University  during  the  troublous  times  of 
the  Reformation  and  the  Civil  War." — Athe- 
?iieu»i. 

"Mr  Mullinger's  work  is  one  of  great 
learning  and  research,  which  can  hardly  fail 
to  become  a  standard  book  of  reference  on 
the  subject. . .  .  We  can  most  strongly  recom- 
mend this  book  to  our  readers." — Spectator. 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


i8  PUBLICATIONS  OF 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLES  of  GREEK  HISTORY. 

Accompanied  by  a  short  narrative  of  events,  with  references  to  the 
sources  of  information  and  extracts  from  the  ancient  authorities,  by 
Carl  Peter.  Translated  from  the  German  by  G.  Chawxer,  M.A,, 
Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  King's  College,  Cambridge.     Demy  4to.     \os. 

"As  a  handy  book  of  reference  fur  gen-        some  particular  point  as  quickly  as  possible, 
uine  students,  or  even  for  learned  men  who         the  Tables  are  useful." — Academy. 
want  to  lay  their  hands  on  an  authority  for 

HISTORY    OF   THE    COLLEGE   OF   ST   JOHN 
THE    EVANGELIST, 

by  Thomas  Baker,  B.D.,  Ejected  Fellow.     Edited  by  John  E.  B. 
Mayor,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St  John's.    Two  Vols.     Demy  8vo.     24J. 

"To  antiquaries  the  book  will  be  a  source  "  The  work  displays  very  wide  reading, 

of  almost  inexhaustible  amusement,   by  his-  and  it  will  be  of  great  use  to  members  of  the 

torians  it  will  be  found  a  work  of  considerable  college  and  of  the  university,  and,  perhaps, 

service    on   questions  respecting   our  social  of  still  greater  use  to  students  of   English 

progress    n  past  times:   and   the   care   and  history,  ecclesiastical, political. social, literary 

thoroughness  with  which  Mr  Mayor  has  dis-  and  academical, who  have  hitherto  had  to  be 

charged  his  editorial  functions  are  creditable  content  with  'Dyer.'" — Academy. 
to  his  learning  and  industry." — Atheiicpum. 

HISTORY    OF    NEPAL, 

translated  by  AIUNSHi  Shew  Shunker  Singh  and  Pandit  ShrI 
Gun.anand  ;  edited  with  an  Introductory  Sketch  of  the  Country  and 
People  by  Dr  D.  Wright,  late  Residency  Surgeon  at  Kathmandu, 
and  with  facsimiles  of  native  drawings,  and  portraits  of  Sir  Jung 
Bahadur,  the  King  of  Nepal,  &c.    Super-royal  8vo.     21s. 

"The  Cambridge  University  Press  have  graphic  plates  are  interesting. " — Nature. 
done   well   m   publishing   this  work.      Such  "The  history  has  appeared  at  a  very  op- 
translations  are  valuable  not  only  to  the  his-  portune  moment  ..The  volume. ..is  beautifully 

torian    but   also    to    the    ethnologist; Dr  printed,    and   supplied   with  portraits  of  Sii 

Wright's   Introduction  is   based  on    personal  Jung  Bahadoor  and  others,  and  with  excel- 

inquiry  and   observation,   is  written    intelli-  lent  coloured  sketches  illustrating  Nepaulese 

gently  and  candidly,  and  adds  much  to  the  architecture  and  religion." — Examiner. 
value  of  the   volume.     The   coloured  litho- 

SCHOLAE    ACADEMICAL: 

Some  Account  of  the  Studies  at  the  English  Universities  in  the 
Eighteenth  Century.  By  Christopher  Wordsworth,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Peterhouse ;  Author  of  "  Social  Life  at  the  English 
Universities  in  the  Eighteenth  Century."     Demy  8vo.     15^. 

"The  general  object  of  Mr  Wordsworth's  "Only  those  who  have  engaged  in  like  la- 
book  is  sufficiently  apparent  from  its  title.  hours  will  be  able  fully  to  appreciate  the 
He  has  collected  a  great  quantity  of  minute  sustained  industry  and  conscientious  accuracy 
and  curious  information  about  the  working  discernible  in  everj' page.  .  .  .  Of  the  whole 
of  Cambridge  institutions  in  the  last  centurj',  volume  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  a  genuine 
with  an  occasional  comp.irison  of  the  corre-  service  rendered  to  the  study  of  University 
sponding  state  of  things  at  O.xford  ...To  a  history,  and  that  the  habits  of  thought  of  any 
great  extent  it  is  purely  a  book  of  reference,  writer  educated  at  either  seat  of  learning  in 
and  a.s  such  it  will  be  of  permanent  value  the  last  century  will,  in  many  cases,  be  far 
for  the  historical  knowledge  of  English  edu-  better  understood  after  a  consideration  of  the 
cation  and  learning." — Saturday  Rezneiu.  materials  here  collected." — Academy. 

THE   ARCHITECTURAL    HISTORY   OF  THE 
UNIVERSITY  AND  COLLEGES  OF  CAMBRIDGE, 

By  the  late  Professor  Willis,  M.A.     With  numerous  Maps,  Plans, 

and  Illustrations.     Continued  to  the  present  time,  and  edited 

by  John  Willis  Clark,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow 

of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  [/«  the  Press. 

London :    Ca7nbridge    Warehouse,   1 7  Faiernoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


19 


MISCELLANEOUS. 

A  CATALOGUE  OF  ANCIENT  MARBLES  IN 
GREAT  BRITAIN,  by  Prof.  Adolf  Michaelis.  Translated  by 
C,  A.  M.  Fennell,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Jesus  College.     Royal  8vo. 

Michaelis  performs  the  same  office  for  the 
still  less  known  private  hoards  of  antique 
sculptures  for  which  our  country  is  so  re- 
markable. The  book  is  beautifully  executed, 
and  with  its  few  handsome  plates,  and 
excellent  indexes,  does  much  credit  to  the 
Cambridge  Press.  It  has  not  been  printed 
in  German,  but  appears  for  the  first  time  in 
the  English  translation.  All  lovers  of  true 
art  and  of  good  work  should  be  grateful  to 
the  Syndics  of  the  University  Press  for  the 
liberal  facilities  afforded  by  them  towards 
the  production  of  this  important  volume  by 
Professor  Michaelis." — Saturday  Revievj. 


I 

"The  object  of  the  present  work  of 
Michaelis  is  to  de.scribe  and  make  known  the 
vast  treasures  of  ancient  sculpture  now  accu- 
mulated in  the  galleries  of  Great  Britain,  the 
extent  and  value  of  which  are  scarcely  appre- 
ciated, and  chiefly  so  because  there  has 
hitherto  been  little  accessible  information 
about  them.  To  the  loving  labours  of  a 
learned  German  the  owners  of  art  treasures 
in  England  are  for  the  second  time  indebted 
for  a  full  description  of  their  rich  possessions. 
Waagen  gave  to  the  private  collections  of 
pictures  the  advantage  of  his  inspection  and 
cultivated  acquaintance   with   art,  and  now 

THE  WOODCUTTERS  OF  THE  NETHERLANDS 

during  the  last   quarter   of  the    Fifteenth    Century.     In   two   parts. 

I.     History  of  the  Woodcutters.     II.    Catalogue  of  their  Woodcuts. 

By  William  Martin  Conway.  \^In  the  Press. 

A    GRAMMAR    OF   THE    IRISH    LANGUAGE. 

By  Prof.  WiNDlSCH.     Translated  by  Dr  Norman   Moore.     Crown 
8vo.     7^.  bd. 

LECTURES    ON    TEACHING, 

Delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  the  Lent  Term,  1880. 

By  J.  G.  Fitch,  M.A.,  Her  Majesty's  Inspector  of  Schools. 

Crown  8vo.     New  Edition.     5^-. 

"  The   lectures   will   be  found   most   in-        has  got  at  hi=  fingers'  ends  the   working  of 

primarj'  education,  while  as  assistant  com- 
missioner to  the  late  Endowed  Schools  Com- 
mission he  has  seen  something  of  the  ma- 
chinery of  our  higher  schools.  .  .  .  Mr 
Fitch's  book  covers  so  wide  a  field  and 
touches  on  so  many  burning  questions  that 
we  must  be  content  to  recommend  it  as  the 
best  e.xisting  vade  mecum  for  the  teacher. 
.  .  .  He  is  always  sensible,  always  judicious, 
never  wanting  in  tact.  .  .  .  Mr  Fitch  is  a 
scholar;  he  pretends  to  no  knowledge  that 
he  does  not  possess;  he  brings  to  his  work 
the  ripe  experience  of  a  well-stored  mind, 
and  he  possesses  in  a  remarkable  degree  the 
art  of  exposition." — Fall  Mall  Gazette. 

"  In  no  other  work  in  the  English  language, 
so  far  as  we  know,  are  the  principles  and 
nieihoQs  which  most  conduce  to  successful 
teaching  laid  down  and  illustrated  with  such 
piecision  and  fulness  of  detail  as  they  are 
here." — Leeds  Mercury. 

"Therefore,  without  reviewing  the  book 
for  the  second  time,  we  are  glad  to  avail 
ourselves  of  the  opportunity  of  calling  atten- 
tion to  the  re-issue  of  the  volume  in  the 
five-shilling  form,  bringing  it  within  the 
reach  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  profession. 
We  cannot  let  the  occasion  pass  without 
making  special  reference  to  the  excellent 
section  on  '  punishments '  in  the  lecture  on 
'Discipline.'  " — School  Board  Chronicle. 


lecture: 
teresting,  and  deserve  to  be  carefully  studied, 
not  only  by  persons  directly  concerned  with 
instruction,  but  by  parents  who  wish  to  be 
able  to  exercise  an  intelligent  judgment  in 
the  choice  of  schools  and  teachers  for  their 
children.  For  ourselves,  we  could  almost 
wish  to  be  of  school  age  again,  to  learn 
histoi-y  and  geography  from  some  one  who 
could  teach  iliem  after  the  pattern  set  by 

Mr  Fitch  to  his  audience But  perhaps 

Mr  Fitch's  observations  on  the  general  con- 
ditions of  school-work  are  even  more  im- 
portant than  what  he  says  on  this  or  that 
branch  of  study." — Saturday  Revie-iv. 

"  It  comprises  fifteen  lectures,  dealing 
\vith  such  subjects  as  organisation,  discipline, 
examining,  language,  factknowledge,  science, 
and  methods  of  instruction;  anu  though  the 
lectures  make  no  pretention  to  systematic  or 
exhaustive  treatment,  they  yet  leave  very 
little  of  the  ground  uncovered;  and  they 
combine  in  an  admirable  way  the  exposition 
of  sound  principles  with  practical  suggestions 
and  illustrations  which  are  evidently  derived 
from  wide  and  varied  experience,  both  in 
leaching  and  in  examining.  While  Mr  Fitch 
addresses  himself  specially  to  secondary 
school-masters,  he  does  not  by  any  means 
disregard  or  ignore  the  needs  of  the  primary 
school ." — Scotsman. 

"  As  principal  of  a  training  college  and  as 
a  Government  inspector  of  schools,  Mr  Fitch 


London:    Cambridge   Warehouse^   17  Paternoster  Row. 


ib  PUBLICATIONS  Of 

STATUTA  ACADEMIC   CANTABRIGIENSIS. 

Demy  8vo.     is.  sewed. 

STATUTES    OF   THE    UNIVERSITY    OF 

CAMBRIDGE. 

With  some  Acts  of  Parliament  relating  to  the  University.     Demy  8vo. 

ORDINATIONES  ACADEMIiE   CANTABRIGIENSIS. 

Demy  8vo.     3^.  bd. 

TRUSTS,  STATUTES  AND  DIRECTIONS  affecting 
(i)  The  Professorships  of  the  University.  (2)  The  Scholarships  and 
Prizes.     (3)   Other  Gifts  and  Endowments.     Demy  8vo.     is. 

COMPENDIUM  OF  UNIVERSITY  REGULATIONS, 

for  the  use  of  persons  in  Statu  Pupillari.     Demy  8vo.    dd. 

CATALOGUE  OF  THE  HEBREW  MANUSCRIPTS 

preserved  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge.  By  Dr  S.  M. 
SCHlLLER-SziNESSY.  Volume  I.  containing  Section  I.  The  Holy 
Saiptiircs;  Section  II.  Couunentaries  on  the  Bible.   Demy  8vo.    9J. 

A   CATALOGUE   OF   THE   MANUSCRIPTS 

preserved  in  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Demy 
8vo.    5  Vols.  lOi'.  each. 

INDEX    TO     THE     CATALOGUE.     Demy  8vo.     los. 

A  CATALOGUE  OF  ADVERSARIA  and  printed 
books  containing  IMS.  notes,  preserved  in  the  Library  of  the  University 
of  Cambridge.     3.!-.  6d. 

THE  ILLUMINATED  MANUSCRIPTS  IN  THE 
LIBRARY  OF  THE  FITZWILLIAM  MUSEUM, 
Catalogued  with  Descriptions,  and  an  Introduction,  by  William 
George  Searle,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Queens'  College,  and  Vicar  of 
Hockington,  Cambridgeshire.     Demy  8vo.     ys.  6d. 

A   CHRONOLOGICAL    LIST    OF   THE   GRACES, 

Documents,  and  other  Papers  in  the  University  Registry  which  con- 
cern the  University  Library.     Demy  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

CATALOGUS  BIBLIOTHEC^  BURCKHARD- 
TIAN.(C     Demy  410.     5^. 


London:    Cambridge  Warehouse    17  Faternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE   UmVERSITY  PRESS.       21 

Cf)e  Cambn'up    ^iW   for   ^cf)Do!e;   anti 

Colleges* 

General  Editor  :    J.  J.  S.  Perowne,  P.D.,  Dean  of 
Peterborough. 


The  want  of  an  Annotated  Edition  of  the  Bible,  in  handy  portions, 
suitable  for  School  use,  has  long  been  felt. 

In  order  to  provide  Text-books  for  School  and  Examination  pur- 
poses, the  Cambridge  University  Press  has  arranged  to  publish  the 
several  books  of  the  Bible  in  separate  portions  at  a  moderate  price, 
with  introductions  and  explanatory  notes. 

The  Very  Reverend  J.  J.  S.  Perowne,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Peter- 
borough, has  undertaken  the  general  editorial  supervision  of  the  work, 
assisted  by  a  staff  of  eminent  coadjutors.  Some  of  the  books  have 
been  already  edited  or  undertaken  by  the  following  gentlemen  : 

Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Wellington  College. 

Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford. 

Rev.  S.  Cox,  Nottingham. 

Rev.  A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hehrerv,  Edinburgh. 

Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Westminster. 

Rev.  A.  E.  Humphreys,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Rev.  A.  F.  Kirkpatrick,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity   College,  Regius 

Professor  of  Hebrew. 
Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.,  late  Professor  at  St  David's  College,  Lampeter. 
Rev.  J.  R.  LUMBY,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity. 
Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.,  Wardenof  St  Augustine's  Coll.,  Canterbury. 
Rev.  H.  C.  G.  MouLE,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Principal  of 

Ridley  Hall,  Cambridge. 
Rev.W.  F.  MoULTON,  D.D.,  Head  Master  of  the  Leys  School,  Cambridge. 
Rev.  E.  H.  Perowne,  D.D.,  Master  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cam- 
bridge, Examining  Chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of  St  Asaph. 
The  Ven.  T.  T.  Perowne,  M.A.,  Archdeacon  of  N'orwich. 

Rev.  A.  Plummek,  M.A.,  T).!).,  Master  of  University  College,  Durham. 

The  Very  Hev.  E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells. 

Rev.  W.  Sanday,  M.A.,  Principal  of  Bishop  Hatf eld  Hall,  Durham. 

Rev.  W.  SiMCOX,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Weyhill,  Hants. 

Rev.  W.  Robertson  Smith,   M.A.,  Edinburgh. 

Rev.  A.  W.  Streane,  M.A.,  Fello^v  of  Corpus  Christi  Coll.,Cambndge. 

The  Ven.  H.  W.  Watkins,  M.A.,  Archdeacon  rf  Northumberland. 

Rev.  G.  H.  Whitaker,  M.A.,  Fello-ui  of  St  John's  College,  Cambrid^ze. 

Rev.  C.  Wordsworth,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Glasfon,  Rutland. 


London:    Cambridge    Warehouse,   17  Pqternp.sfer  Eow. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  &  COLLEGES. 

Continued. 

Now  Ready.    Cloth,  Extra  Fcap.  8vo. 
THE    BOOK     OF     JOSHUA.       By    the    Rev.    G.     F. 
Maclear,  D.D.     With  2  Maps.     is.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES.    By  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A. 

With  Map.     3^'.  6d. 

THE    FIRST    BOOK    OF    SAMUEL.      By    the    Rev. 
Professor  KiRKPATRiCK,  M.A.     With  Map.     35.  6d. 

THE   SECOND    BOOK    OF    SAMUEL.      By  the  Rev. 

Professor  Kirkpatrick,  M.A.     With  2  Maps.    35.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES.     By  the  Very  Rev. 

E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells,     y. 

THE    BOOK    OF    JEREMIAH.      By  the   Rev.  A.  W. 
Streane,  M.A.     With  Map.     4^-.  6d. 

THE  BOOKS  OF  OBADIAH  AND  JONAH.     By  Arch- 
deacon PeROWNE.      2S.  ()d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.    By  Archdn.  Perowne.    is.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.     By  the  Rev.  T.  K.  Chevne, 
M.A.    IS.  6d. 

THE    GOSPEL   ACCORDING   TO    ST    MATTHEW. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.     With  2  Maps.     is.  6d. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MARK.     By  the 
Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.    With  2  Maps.     is.  6d. 

THE    GOSPEL    ACCORDING    TO    ST   LUKE.      By 
the  Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.    With  4  Maps.     4J-.  6d. 

THE    GOSPEL    ACCORDING    TO    ST    JOHN.      By 
the  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.     With  Four  Maps.     4J-.  6d. 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.     By  the  Rev. 

Professor  LuM  BY,  D.D.    Parti.    Chaps.  I— XIV.     With  2  Maps. 
2s.  6d.       Part  II.    Chaps.  XV.  to  end.     2s.  6d. 

Parts  I.  and  II.,  complete.     With  4  Maps.    4.^.  6d. 

THE    EPISTLE    TO   THE   ROMANS.      By   the   Rev. 

H.  C.  G.  MouLE,  M.A.     3.r.  6d. 

THE    FIRST    EPISTLE   TO    THE   CORINTHIANS. 

By  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.     With  a  Map  and  Plan.      is. 

THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 
By  the  Rev.  J.  J.  LiAS,  M.A.     is. 

THE   EPISTLE   TO    THE    HEBREWS.     By  the  Rev. 

F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.     y.  6d. 

THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE   OF   ST   JAMES.     By  the 
Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells,     ij-.  6d. 

THE    EPISTLES   OF    ST    PETER   AND   ST   JUDE. 

By  the  same  Editor,     is.  6d. 
London:  Cambridge   Warehouse,   17  Paternoster  Ro7v. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  23 

THE    CAMBRIDGE    BIBLE    FOR    SCHOOLS    &    COLLEGES. 

Continued. 

Preparing". 

THE  BOOKS  OF  HAGGAI  AND  ZECHARIAH.     By 

Archdeacon  Perowne. 

THE    EPISTLES    OF    ST    JOHN.       By   the    Rev.    A. 
Fi.UMMER,  M,A.,  D.D, 


THE   CAMBRIDGE    GREEK    TESTAMENT, 

FOR   SCHOOLS   AND   COLLEGES, 

with  a  Revised  Text,  based  on  the  most  recent  critical  authorities,  and 
English  Notes,  prepared  under  the  direction  of  the  General  Editor, 

THE  Very  Reverend  J.  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D., 

DEAN    OF   PETERBOROUGH. 

Now    Ready. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MATTHEW.     By  the 
Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.     With  4  Maps.     4J.  ^d. 

"With  the  'Notes,'  in  the  volume  before  us,  we  are  much  pleased;  so  far  as  we  have 
searched,  they  are  scholarly  and  sound.  The  quotations  from  the  Classics  are  apt ;  and  the 
references  to  modem  Greek  form  a  pleasing  feature." — The  Ckurchmatt. 

"  Copious  illustrations,  gathered  from  a  great  variety  of  sources,  make  his  notes  a  very 
valuable  aid  to  the  student.  They  are  indeed  remarkably  interesting,  while  all  explana- 
tions on  meanings,  applications,  and  the  like  are  distinguished  by  their  lucidity  and 
good  sense." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  JOHN.     By  the  Rev. 

A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.     With  4  Maps.     ds. 

"A  valuable  addition  has  also  been  made  to  'The  Cambridge  Greek  Testament  for 
Schools,'  Dr  Plummer's  uotes  on  'the  Gospel  according  to  St  John'  are  scholarly,  concise, 
and  instructive,  and  embody  the  results  of  much  thought  and  wide  reading." — Expositor. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MARK.     By  the  Rev. 
G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.     With  3  Maps.     4J.  6d. 

THE    GOSPEL    ACCORDING    TO    ST    LUKE.      By   the 
Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.  [Preparing. 

The  books  will  be  published  separately,  as  in  the  "Cambridge  Bible 
for  Schools." 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse,   1 7  Paternoster  Ro7v, 


24  PUBLICATIONS  OF 

THE   PITT   PRESS   SERIES. 

I.     GREEK. 

THE  ANABASIS   OF  XENOPHON,  Book  IV.     With 

a  Map  and  English  Notes  by  Alfred  Pretor,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
St  Catharine's  College,  Cambridge  ;  Editor  oi  Pei-shis  and  Cicero  ad  Atiicum 
Book  I.     IS. 

"  In  Mr  Pretor 's  edition  of  the  Anabasis  the  text  of  Kuhner  has  been  followed  in  the  mam, 
while  the  exhaustive  and  admirable  notes  of  the  great  German  editor  have  been  largely  utilised. 
These  notes  deal  with  the  minutest  as  well  as  the  most  important  difficulties  in  construction,  and 
all  questions  of  historj-,  antiquity,  and  geographj-  are  briefly  but  verj'  effectually  elucidated." — The 
E.rajniiier. 

"  We  welcome  this  addition  to  the  other  books  of  the  Anabasis  so  ably  edited  by  Mr  Pretor. 
Although  originally  intended  for  the  use  of  candidates  at  the  universitj-  local  examinations,  yet 
this  edition  will  be  found  adapted  not  only  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  junior  student,  but  even 
advanced  scholars  will  find  much  in  this  work  that  will  repay  its  perusal." — Tlie  ScJwohnaster. 

"Mr  Pretor's  'Anabasis  of  Xenophon,  Book  IV.'  displays  a  union  of  accurate  Cambridge 
scholarship,  with  experience  of  what  is  required  by  learners  gained  in  examining  middle-class 
schools.  The  text  is  large  and  clearly  printed,  and  the  notes  explain  all  difficulties.  .  .  .  Mr 
Pretor's  notes  seem  to  be  all  that  could  be  wished  as  regards  grammar,  geography,  and  other 
matters." — The  Academy. 

BOOKS  I.  III.  &  V.     By  the  same  Editor.    2s.  each. 
BOOKS  II.  VI.  and  VII.    By  the  same  Editor.     2s.  6d.  each. 

"Another  Greek  text,  designed  it  would  seem  for  students  preparing  for  the  local  examinations, 
is  'Xenophon's  Anabasis,'  Book  II.,  with  English  Notes,  by  Alfred  Pretor,  M.A.  The  editor  has 
exercised  his  usual  discrimination  in  utilising  the  text  and  notes  of  Kuhner,  with  the  occasional 
assistance  of  the  best  hints  of  Schneider,  Vollbrecht  and  Macmichael  on  critical  matters,  and  of 
Mr  R.  W.  Taylor  on  points  of  histor^•  and  geography.  .  .  When  Mr  Pretor  commits  himself  to 
Commentator's  work,  he  is  eminently  helpful.  .  .  Had  we  to  introduce  a  young  Greek  scholar 
to  Xenophon,  we  should  esteem  ourselves  fortunate  in  having  Pretor's  text-book  as  our  chart  and 
guide." — Co7itei>tf>orary  Ke^'ie-w. 

THE  ANABASIS  OF  XENOPHON,  by  A.  Pretor,  M.A., 

Text  and  Notes,  complete  in  two  Volumes,     ^s.  6d. 

AGESILAUS     OF     XENOPHON.       The    Text    revised 

with  Critical  and  Explanator}-  Notes,  Introduction,  Analysis,  and  Indices. 
By  H.  Hailstone,  M.A.,  late  Scholar  of  Peterhouse,  Cambridge,  Editor  of 
Xenophon's  Hellenics,  etc.     is.  6d. 

ARISTOPHANES— RANAE.     With  English   Notes   and 

Introduction  by  W.  C.  Green,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School. 
3J-.  6d. 

ARISTOPHANES— AVES.      By   the   same  Editor.     New 

Edition,     y.  6d. 
"The  notes  to  both  plays  are  excellent.    Much  has  been  done  in  these  two  volumes  to  render 
the  study  of  Aristophanes  a  real  treat  to  a  boy  instead  of  a  drudger)-,  by  helping  him  to  under- 
stand the  fun  and  to  express  it  in  his  mother  tongue." — The  Examhier. 

ARISTOPHANES— PLUTUS.    By  the  same  Editor.  z^.6d. 
EURIPIDES.       HERCULES     FURENS.      With    Intro- 

ductions,  Notes  and  Analysis.  By  J.  T.  Hutchinson,  M.A.,  Chri.st's  College, 
and  A.  Gray,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Jesus  College,     is. 

"Messrs  Hutchinson  and  Gray  have  produced  a  careful  and  useful  edition." — Saturday 
Re7!iMv. 

THE   HERACLEID^  OF  EURIPIDES,  with  Introduc- 
tion and  Critical  Notes  by  E.  A.  Beck,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall.    3^.  6</. 

London:    Cambridge   Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  25 

LUCIANI   SOMNIUM   CHARON  PISCATOR  ET  DE 

LUCTU,  with    English    Notes    by  W.  E.   Heitland,    INI.  A.,    Fellow  of 
St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     New  Edition,  with  Appendix.     3^-.  dd. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ARISTOTLE. 

Edited  by  E.  Wallace,  M.A.    (See  p.  30.) 


II.     LATIN. 

M.    T.  CICERONIS     DE    AMICITIA.     Edited   by  J.  S. 

Reid,  M.L.,  Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College, 
Cambridge.     3J. 

"Mr  Reid  has  decidedly  attained  his  aim,  namely,   'a  thorough  examination  of  the  Latinity 

of  the  dialogue.' The  revision  of  the  text  is  most  valuable,   and  comprehends   sundry 

acute  corrections.  .  .  .  This  volume,  like  Mr  Reid's  other  editions,  is  a  solid  gain  to  the  scholar- 
ship of  the  country." — Atheneeum. 

"A  more  distinct  gain  to  scholarship  is  Mr  Reid's  able  and  thorough  edition  of  the  De 
Amicitia  of  Cicero,  a  work  of  which,  whether  we  regard  the  exhaustive  introduction  or  the 
instructive  and  most  suggestive  commentary,  it  would  be  difficult  to  speak  too  highly.  .  .  .  When 
we  come  to  the  commentary,  we  are  only  amazed  by  its  fulness  in  proportion  to  its  bulk. 
Nothing  is  overlooked  which  can  tend  to  enlarge  the  learner's  general  knowledge  of  Ciceronian 
Latin  or  to  elucidate  the  X^yX."  —  S aturday  Revu"ju. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  CATO  MAJOR  DE  SENECTUTE. 

Edited  by  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.     3.;.  6^. 

"The  notes  are  excellent  and  scholarlike,  adapted  for  the  upper  forms  of  public  schools,  and 
likely  to  be  useful  even  to  more  advanced  students." — Gitardian. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  ORATIO   PRO   ARCHIA   POETA. 

Editedby  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.     is.  6d. 

"  It  is  an  admirable  specimen  of  careful  editing.  An  Introduction  tells  us  everj'thing  we  could 
wish  to  know  about  Archias,  about  Cicero's  connexion  with  him,  about  the  merits  of  the  trial,  and 
the  genuineness  of  the  speech.  The  text  is  well  and  carefully  printed.  The  notes  are  clear  and 
scholar-like.  .  .  .  No  boy  can  master  this  little  volume  without  feeling  that  he  has  advanced  a  long 
step  in  scholarship." — The  Academy. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  PRO  L.  CORNELIO  BALBO   ORA- 

TIO.   Editedby  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.  Fellow  of  Caius  College,  Camb.    \s.  6d. 
"We  are  bound  to  recognize  the  pains  devoted  in  the  annotation  of  these  two  orations  to  the 
minute  and  thorough  study  of  their    Latinity,   both   in  the  ordinary  notes  and   in    the   textual 
appendices." — Saturday  Re7'ie~v. 

M.    T.    CICERONIS     PRO    P.     CORNELIO     SULLA 

ORATIO.     Edited  by  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.     y.  6d. 

M.    T.    CICERONIS    PRO    CN.    PLANCIO    ORATIO. 

Edited  by  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D.,  late  Head  Master  of  Ipswich  School. 
4^.  (id. 

"As  a  book  for  students  this  edition  can  have  few  rivals.  It  is  enriched  by  an  excellent  intro- 
duction and  a  chronological  table  of  the  principal  events  of  the  life  of  Cicero  ;  while  in  its  ap- 
pendix, and  in  the  notes  on  the  text  which  are  added,  there  is  much  of  the  greatest  value.  The 
volume  is  neatly  got  up,  and  is  in  every  way  commendable." — T/ie  Scots}>ia>i. 

"  Dr  Holden's  own  edition  is  all  that  could  be  expected  from  his  elegant  and  practised 
scholarship.  .  .  .  Dr  Holden  has  evidently  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the  character  of  the 
commentary  most  likely  to  be  generally  useful ;  and  he  has  carried  out  his  views  with  admirable 
thoroughness." — Acade>ny. 

"  Dr  Holden  has  given  us  here  an  excellent  edition.  The  commentary  is  even  unusually  full 
and  complete;  and  after  going  through  it  carefully,  we  find  little  or  nothing  to  criticize.  There 
is  an  excellent  introduction,  lucidly  explaining  the  circumstances  under  which  the  speech  was 
delivered,  a  table  of  events  in  the  life  of  Cicero  and  a  useful  index."     Spectator,  Oct.  29,  1881. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS   IN    O.   CAECILIUM    DIVINATIO 

ET  IN  C.  VERREM  ACTIO  PRIMA.  With  Introduction  and  Notes 
by  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.A.,  and  Herbert  Cowie,  M.A.,  Fellows  of 
St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     3J. 

London :    Cambridge  Warehouse,  1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


26  PUBLICATIONS  OF 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  ORATIO  PRO   L.  MURENA,   with 

English  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  W.  E,  Heitland,  M.A.,  Fellow 
and  Classical  Lecturer  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge.  Second  Edition, 
carefully  revised.    -3,$. 

"  Those  students  are  to  be  deemed  fortunate  who  have  to  read  Cicero's  lively  and  brilliant 
oration  for  L.  Murena  with  Mr  Heitland's  handy  edition,  which  may  be  pronounced  'four-square' 
in  point  of  equipment,  and  which  has,  not  without  good  reason,  attained  the  honours  of  a 
second  edition." — Saturday  Review. 

M,   T.    CICERONIS    IN     GAIUM    VERREM    ACTIO 

PRI?iIA.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  H.  CowiE,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     \s.  6d. 

M.   T.   CICERONIS    ORATIO    PRO   T.    A.   MILONE, 

with    a  Translation    of    Asconius'    Introduction,    Marginal    Analysis    and 
English  Notes.     Edited   by  the   Rev.  John   Smyth   Purton,  B.D.,  late 
President  and  Tutor  of  St  Catharine's  College,     is.  6d. 
"The  editorial  work  is  excellently  done." — Tlie  AcadeTtty. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  SOMNIUM  SCIPIONIS.  With  In- 
troduction and  Notes.     By  W.  D.  Pearman,  M.A.  \In  the  Press. 

P.  OVIDII    NASONIS    FASTORUM   Liber  VI.    With 

a  Plan  of  Rome  and  Notes  by  A.  SiDGWiCK,  M.A.  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi 
College,  Oxford,      ij'.  6d. 

"  Mr  Sidgwick's  editing  of  the  Sixth  Book  of  Ovid's  Fasti  furnishes  a  careful  and  serviceable 
volume  for  average  students.  It  eschews  'construes'  which  supersede  the  use  of  the  dictionary, 
but  gives  full  explanation  of  grammatical  usages  and  historical  and  mythical  allusions,  besides 
illustrating  peculiarities  of  stj'le,  true  and  false  derivations,  and  the  more  remarkable  variations  of 
the  text." — Saturday  Review. 

"  It  is  eminently  good  and  useful.  .  .  .  The  Introduction  is  singularly  clear  on  the  astronomy  of 
Ovid,  which  is  properly  shown  to  be  ignorant  and  confused;  there  is  an  excellent  little  map  of 
Rome,  giving  just  the  places  mentioned  in  the  text  and  no  more  ;  the  notes  are  evidently  written 
by  a  practical  schoolmaster." — The  Academy. 

GAI  lULI  CAESARIS  DE  BELLO  GALLICO  COM- 
MENT. I.  II.  With  English  Notes  and  Map  by  A.  G.  Peskett,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge,  Editor  of  Caesar  De  BeUo  Gallico, 
VII.     IS.  6d. 

GAI  lULI  CAESARIS  DE  BELLO  GALLICO  COM- 
MENT. III.  With  Map  and  Notes  by  A.  G.  Peskett,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge,     u.  6d. 

"In  an  unusually  succinct  introduction  he  gives  all  the  preliminary  and  collateral  information 
that  is  likely  to  be  useful  to  a  young  student ;  and,  wherever  we  have  examined  his  notes,  we 
have  found  them  eminently  practical  and  satisfying.  .  .  The  book  may  well  be  recommended  for 
careful  study  in  school  or  college." — Saturday  Revieiu. 

"The  notes  are  scholarly,  short,  and  a  real  help  to  the  most  elementary  beginners  in  Latin 
prose." — The  Exaintner. 

BOOKS  IV.  AND  V.  AND  Book  VII.  by  the  same  Editor. 
2J.  each. 

BOOK  VI.  by  the  same  Editor,     is.  6d. 

BOOK  VIII.  by  the  same  Editor.  [In  the  Press. 


London:   Ca?nbridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  27 

P.  VERGILI  MARONIS  AENEIDOS  Liber  II.    Edited 

with  Notes  by  A.  SiDGWiCK,  M.A.  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi  College, 
Oxford.     IS.  6d. 

BOOKS  I.,  IV.,  v.,  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  X.,  XI.,  XII.  by  the  same 

Editor.     IJ-.  6d.  each. 

"  Mr  Arthur  Sidgwick's  'Vergil,  Aeneid,  Book  XII.'  is  worthy  of  his  reputation,  and  is  dis- 
tinguished by  the  same  acuteness  and  accuracy  of  knowledge,  appreciation  of  a  boy's  difficulties 
and  ingenuity  and  resource  in  meeting  them,  which  we  have  on  other  occasions  had  reason  to 
praise  in  these  pages." — The  Academy. 

"As  masterly  in  its  clearly  divided  preface  and  appendices  as  in  the  sound  and  independent 
character  of  its  annotations.  .  .  .  There  is  a  great  deal  more  in  the  notes  than  mere  compilation 
and  suggestion.  ...  No  difficulty  is  left  unnoticed   or  unhandled." — SaUirday  RevieTv. 

"This  edition  is  admirably  adapted  for  the  use  of  junior  students,  who  will  find  in  it  the  result 
of  much  reading  in  a  condensed  form,  and  clearly  expressed." — Caiiibridge  Indepefidetii  Press. 

BOOKS   VII.   VIII.  in  one  volume.     3^. 
BOOKS   X.,  XI.,  XII.  in  one  volume,     zs.  6d. 
QUINTUS    CURT  I  US.     A  Portion  of  the  History. 

(Alexander  in  India.)   By  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.  A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer 

of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge,  and  T.  E.  Raven,  B.A.,  Assistant  Master 

in  Sherborne  School.     3^.  6d. 

"  Equally   commendable   as  a    genuine   addition  to   the  existing  stock  of   school-books  is 

Alexander  in.  India,  a  compilation  from  the  eighth  and  ninth  books  of  Q.  Curtius,  edited  for 

the  Pitt  Press  by  Messrs   Heitland  and   Raven.  .  .  .    The   work   of  Curtius  has  merits   of  its 

own,  which,  in  former  generations,  made  it  a  favourite  with  English  scholars,  and  which  still 

make  it  a  popular  text-book  in  Continental  schools The  reputation  of  Mr  Heitland  is  a 

sufficient  guarantee  for  the  scholarship  of  the  notes,  which  are  ample  without  being  excessive, 
and  the  book  is  well  furnished  with  all  that  is  needful  in  the  nature  of  maps,  indexes,  and  ap- 
pendices." —A  cadeiny. 

M.   ANNAEI     LUCANI     PHARSALIAE    LIBER 

PRIMUS,  edited  with  English  Introduction  and  Notes  by  W.  E.  Heitland, 
M.A.  and  C.  E.  Haskins,  M.A.,  Fellows  and  Lecturers  of  St  John's  Col- 
lege, Cambridge,     is.  6d. 

"A  careful  and  scholarlike  production." — Times. 

"  In  nice  parallels  of  Lucan  from  Latin  poets  and  from  Shakspeare,  Mr  Haskins  and  Mr 
Heitland  deserve  praise." — Saturday  Review. 

BEDA'S  ECCLESIASTICAL   HISTORY,   BOOKS 

III.,  IV.,  the  Text  from  the  very  ancient  MS.  in  the  Cambridge  University 
Library,  collated  with  six  other  MSS.  Edited,  with  a  life  from  the  German  ot 
Ebert,  and  with  Notes,  &c.  by  J.  E.  B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin, 
and  J.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity.  Revised  edition. 
7j.  6(/. 
"To  young  students  of  English  History  the  illustrative  notes  will  be  of  great  service,  while 
the  study  of  the  texts  will  be  a  good  introduction  to  Mediaeval  Latin." — The  Nonconformist. 

"In  Bede's  works  Englishmen  can  go  back  to  origines  of  their  history,  unequalled  for 
form  and  matter  by  any  modem  European  nation.  Prof.  Mayor  has  done  good  service  in  ren- 
dering a  part  of  Bede's  greatest  work  accessible  to  those  who  can  read  Latin  with  ease.  He 
has  adorned  this  edition  of  the  third  and  fourth  books  of  the  "  Ecclesiastical  History"  with  that 
amazing  erudition  for  which  he  is  unrivalled  among  Englishmen  and  rarely  equalled  by  Germans. 
And  however  interesting  and  valuable  the  text  may  be,  we  can  certainly  apply  to  his  notes 
the  expression.  La  sazice  vaut  7nietix  que  le  poisso7i.  They  are  literally  crammed  with  interest- 
ing information  about  early  English  life.  For  though  ecclesiastical  in  name,  Bede's  history  treats 
of  all  parts  of  the  national  life,  since  the  Church  had  points  of  contact  with  all." — Examiner. 

Books  I.  and  II.     In  the  Press. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse^  17  Paternoster  Row. 


28  PUBLICATIONS  OF 

III.     FRENCH. 

LA   GUERRE.     By   Mm.    Erckmann-Chatrian.     With 

Map,  Introduction  and  Commentaiy  liy  the  Rev.  A.  C.  Clapin,  M.A., 
St  John's  College,  Cambridge,  and  I3achelier-es-Lettres  of  the  University  of 
France  ;  Assistant  Master  at  Sherborne  School.     3^. 

LA   PICCIOLA.     By  X.    B.   Saintine.     The   Text,   with 

Introduction,  Notes  and  Map,  by  the  same  Editor,  is.  The  Notes  sepa- 
rate,  \s. 

LAZARE  HOCHE— PAR  EMILE  DE  BONNECHOSE. 

With  Three  Maps,  Introduction  and  Commentarj',  by  C.  Colbeck,  M.A., 
late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge;  Assistant  Master  at  Harrow 
School.     IS. 

HISTOIRE    DU    SIECLE     DE     LOUIS     XIV    PAR 

VOLTAIRE.    Parti.    Chaps.  I.— XIII.    Edited  with  Notes  Philological  and 
Historical,  Biographical  and  Geographical  Indices,  etc.  by  Gustave  Masson, 
B.A.  Univ.  Gallic,  Officierd'Academie,  Assistant  Master  of  Harrow  School, 
and  G.  W.  Prothero,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  King's  College,  Cam- 
bridge.    IS.  6d. 
"Messrs  Masson   and   Prothero  have,  to  judge  from  the  first  part  of  their  work,  performed 
with  much  discretion  and  care  the  task  of  editing  Voltaire's  .S"?V<:/<?  de  Louis  XI V  ior  the  'Pitt 
Press  Series.'     Besides  the  usual  kind  of  notes,  the  editors  have  in  this  case,  influenced  by  Vol- 
taire's 'summary  way  of  treating  much  of  the  history','  given  a  good  deal  of  historical  informa- 
tion, in  which   they    have,  we   think,  done  well.     At  the  beginning  of  the  book  will  be  found 
excellent  and  succinct  accounts  of  the  constitution  of  the  French  army  and  Parliament  at  the 
period  treated  of." — Saturday  Revie^u. 

Part   II.     Chaps.  XIV.— XXIV.     With  Three  Maps  of  the 

Period.     By  the  .same  Editors,     is.  6d. 

Part  III.    Chap.  XXV.  to  the  end.     By  the  same  Editors. 

IS.  6d. 

LE    VERRE    D'EAU.     A   Comedy,    by   Scribe.     With  a 

Biographical  Memoir,  and  Grammatical,  Literary  and  Historical  Notes.     By 
C.  Colbeck,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge;  Assistant 
Master  at  Harrow  School,     is. 
"  It  may  be  national  prejudice,  but  we  consider  this  edition  far  superior  to  any  of  the  series 
which  hitherto  have  been  edited  exclusively  by  foreigners.     Mr  Colbeck  seems  better  to  under- 
stand the  wants  and  difficulties  of  an  English  boy.     The  etymological  notes  especially  are  admi- 
rable. .  .  .  The  historical  notes  and  introduction  are  apiece  of  thorough  honest  work." — journal 
of  Education. 

M.  DARU,    par    M.  C.  A.    Sainte-Beuve,    (Causeries    du 

Lundi,  Vol.  IX.).  With  Biographical  Sketch  of  the  Author,  and  Notes 
Philological  and  Historical.   By  Gustave  Masson.  2s. 

LA  SUITE   DU    MENTEUR.     A  Comedy  in  Five  Acts, 

by  P.  CORNEILLE.  Edited  with  Fontenelle's  Memoir  of  the  Author,  Voltaire's 
Critical  Remarks,  and  Notes  Philological  and  Historical.  By  Gustave 
Masson.     is. 

LA    JEUNE    SIBERIENNE.     LE   LEPREUX  DE  LA 

CITfi  D'AOSTE.  Tales  by  Count  Xavier  de  Maistre.  With  Bio- 
graphical Notice,  Critical  Appreciations,  and  Notes.     By  Gustave  Masson. 

IS. 

London:  Cambridge   Warehouse,  17  Fatertiosfer  Row. 


THE   CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  29 

LE    DIRECTOIRE.      (Considerations    sur    la    Revolution 

Franjaise.    Troisieme  et  quatrieme  parties.)     Par  Madame  la  Baronne  de 

Stael-Holstein.      With  a  Critical  Notice  of  the  Author,  a  Chronological 

Table,  and  Notes  Historical  and  Philological,  by  G.  Masson,  B.A.,  and 

G.  W.  Prothero,  M.A.     Revised  and  enlarged  Edition,     is. 

"Prussia  under  Frederick  the  Great,  and  France  under  the  Directory,  bring  us  face  to  face 

respectively  with   periods  of  history  which  it  is  right  should  be  known  thoroughly,  and  which 

are  well  treated   in   the   Pitt   Press   volumes.     The   latter    in    particular,    an   extract  from  the 

world-known  work  of  Madame  de  Stael  on  the   French   Revolution,   is    beyond  all  praise   for 

the  excellence  both  of  its  style  and  of  its  matter." — Times. 

DIX  ANNEES    D'EXIL.     Livre  IL     Chapitres    1—8. 

Par  Madame  la  Baronne  De  Stael-Holstein.  With  a  Biographical 
Sketch  of  the  Author,  a  Selection  of  Poetical  Fragments  by  Madame  de 
Stael's  Contemporaries,  and  Notes  Historical  and  Philological.  By  Gustave 
Masson.     is. 

"  The  choice  made  by  M.  Masson  of  the  second  book  of  the  Memoirs  of  Madame  de  Stael 
appears  specially  felicitous.  .  .  .  This  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  most  favoured  of  M.  Masson's 
editions,  and  deservedly  so." — Acadetny. 

FREDEGONDE  ET  BRUNEHAUT.    A  Tragedy  in  Five 

Acts,  by  N.  Lemercier.  Edited  with  Notes,  Genealogical  and  Chrono- 
logical Tables,  a  Critical  Introduction  and  a  Biographical  Notice.  By 
GusTAVE  Masson.    2s. 

LE    VIEUX    CELIBATAIRE.     A  Comedy,  by  Collin 

D'Harleville.    With  a  Biographical  Memoir,  and  Grammatical,  Literary 
and  Historical  Notes.     By  the  same  Editor.     2s. 
"  M.    Masson  is  doing  good  work  in  introducing  learners  to  some  of  the  less-known  French 

play- writers.     The   arguments  are  admirably   clear,   and    the   notes  are  not  too  abundant." 

Academy. 

LA  METROMANIE,  A  Comedy,  by  Piron,  with  a  Bio- 

graphical  Memoir,  and  Grammatical,  Literary  and  Historical  Notes.  By  the 
same  Editor,     is. 

LASCARIS,    ou    LES     GRECS     DU     XV^.    SIECLE, 

Nouvelle  Historique,  par  A.  F.  Villemain,  -with  a  Biographical  Sketch  of 
the  Author,  a  Selection  of  Poems  on  Greece,  and  Notes  Historical  and 
Philological.     By  the  same  Editor,     is. 


IV.     GERMAN. 

ERNST,  HERZOG  VON  SCHWABEN.  UHLAND.  With 

Introduction    and    Notes.     By    H.    J.    Wolstenholme,    B.A.     (Lond.), 
Lecturer  in  German  at  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.     3J-.  6d. 

ZOPF  UND  SCHWERT.     Lustspiel  in  funf  Aufzugen  von 

Karl  Gutzkow.     With  a  Biographical  and  Historical  Introduction,  English 
Notes,  and  an  Index.     By  the  same  Editor.     3.^.  6d. 

"We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  notice  a  careful  edition  of  K.  Gutzkow's  amusing  comedv 
'Zopf  and  Schwert'  by  Mr  H.  J.  Wolstenholme.  .  .  .  These  notes  are  abundant  and  contain 
references  to  standard  grammatical  works." — Academy. 


London :    Cambridge    Warehouse,   1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


30  PUBLICATIONS  OF 

©oet^e'a  5?nabenia^re.  (1749— 1759.)     GOETHE'S   BOY- 

HOOD:  being  the  First  Three  Books  of  his  Autobiography.  Arranged 
and  Annotated  by  Wilhelm  Wagner,  Ph,  D.,  late  Professor  at  the 
Johanneum,  Hamburg.     2J. 

HAUFF.    DAS  WIRTHSHAUS  IM  SPESSART.  Edited 

by  A.  SCHLOTTMANN,  Ph.  D.,  Assistant  Master  at  Uppingham  School. 
3^.  6(/. 

DER  OBERHOF.     A  Tale  of  Westphalian  Life,  by  Karl 

Immermann.  With  a  Life  of  Immermann  and  English  Notes,  by  Wilhelm 
Wagner,    Ph.D.,   late  Professor  at  the  Johanneum,  Hamburg.     3^. 

A  BOOK    OF   GERMAN    DACTYLIC    POETRY.    Ar- 

ranged  and  Annotated  by  the  same  Editor.     3^. 

2)er  erfte  iJreujjug  (THE  FIRST   CRUSADE),  by  Fried- 

RICH  VON  Raumer.    Condensed  from  the  Author's  'History  of  the  Hohen- 
staufen',    with  a  life    of  Raumer,    two   Plans    and   EngUsh    Notes.     By 
the  same  Editor,     is. 
"  Certainly  no  more  interesting  book  could  be  made  the  subject  of  examinations.    The  story 

of  the  First  Crusade  has  an  undying  interest.    The  notes  are,  on  the  whole,  good." — Educational 

Times. 

A   BOOK   OF   BALLADS    ON    GERMAN    HISTORY. 

Arranged  and  Annotated  by  the  same  Editor,  ^s. 
"It  carries  the  reader  rapidly  through  some  of  the  most  important  incidents  connected  with 
the  German  race  and  name,  from  the  invasion  of  Italy  by  the  Visigoths  under  their  King  Alaric, 
down  to  the  Franco-German  War  and  the  installation  of  the  present  Emperor.  The  notes  supply 
very  well  the  connecting  links  between  the  successive  periods,  and  exhibit  in  its  various  phases  of 
growth  and  progress,  or  the  reverse,  the  vast  unwieldy  mass  which  constitutes  modem  Germany." 
—  Times. 

DER   STAAT  FRIEDRICHS   DES  GROSSEN.     By  G. 

Freytag.     With  Notes.    By  the  same  Editor      is. 
"Prussia  under  Frederick  the  Great,  and  France  under  the  Directory,  bring  us  face  to  face 
respectively  with  periods  of  history  which  it  is  right  should  be  known  thoroughly,  and  which 
are  well  treated  in  the  Pitt  Press  volumes." — Times. 

GOETHE'S    HERMANN     AND    DOROTHEA.     With 

an  Introduction  and  Notes.      By  the  same  Editor.     3^. 
"The  notes  are  among  the  best  that  we  know,  with  the  reservation  that  they  are  often  too 
abundant." — Academy. 

2)a6  3at)r  1813   (The  Year   18 13),  by  F.  Kohlrausch. 

With  English  Notes.    By  the  same  Editor,      is. 

V.     ENGLISH. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ARISTOTLE. 

Compiled  by  Edwin  Wallace,  M.A.,  LL.D.  (St.  Andrews)  Fellow 
and  Tutor  of  Worcester  College,  Oxford.     Third  Edition  Enlarged. 

4-5-.  dd. 

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  PRACTICE  OF  EDU- 
CATION. Delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  the  Easter 
Term,  1882,  under  the  direction  of  the  Teacher's  Training  Syndi- 
cate.    2S. 

MILTON'S    TRACTATE    ON    EDUCATION.     A   fac- 

simile  reprint  from  the  Edition  of  1673.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and 
Notes,  by  Oscar  Browning,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  King's  College, 
Cambridge,  and  fonnerly  Assistant  Master  at  Eton  College,     is, 

London:  Cambridge   Warehouse^  17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  31 

LOCKE  ON  EDUCATION.    With  Introduction  and  Notes 

by  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Quick,  M.A.     3^.  6d. 

_  "The  work  before  us  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.  It  is  of  convenient  form  and  reasonable 
price,  accurately  printed,  and  accompanied  by  notes  which  are  admirable.  There  is  no  teacher 
too  young  to  find  this  book  interesting;  there  is  no  teacher  too  old  to  find  it  profitable." — The 
School  Bidletin,  New  York. 

THE    TWO     NOBLE    KINSMEN,    edited    with    Intro- 

duction  and  Notes  by  the  Rev.  Professor  Skeat,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow 
of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.     3^-.  6d. 
"This  edition  of  a  play  that  is  well  worth  study,  for  more  reasons  than  one,  by  so  careful  a 
scholar  as  Mr  Skeat,  deserves  a  hearty  welcome." — A  thenceum. 

"Mr  Skeat  is  a  conscientious  editor,  and  has  left  no  difficulty  unexplained." — Times. 

BACON'S    HISTORY    OF    THE    REIGN    OF    KING 

HENRY  VIT.  With  Notes  by  the  Rev.  J.  Rawson  Lumby,  D.D.,  Nor- 
risian  Professor  of  Divinity ;  late  Fellow  of  St  Catharine's  College.     3J. 

SIR   THOMAS  MORE'S  UTOPIA.     With  Notes  by  the 

Rev.  J.  Rawson  Lumby,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity;  late  Fellow 
of  St  Catharine's  College,   Cambridge.      35-.  6d. 

"To  enthusiasts  in  historj'  matters,  who  are  not  content  with  mere  facts,  but  like  to  pursue 
their  investigations  behind  the  scenes,  as  it  were.  Professor  Rawson  Lumby  has  in  the  work  now 
before  us  produced  a  most  acceptable  contribution  to  the  now  constantly  increasing  store  of 
illustrative  reading." — Tlie  Caiitbridge  Rez'ie'M. 

"  To  Dr  Lumby  we  must  give  praise  unqualified  and   unstinted.     He  has  done    his   work 

admirably Every  student  of  history,    every  politician,  everj'  social  reformer,  ever>'  one 

interested  in  literary  curiosities,  every  lover  of  English  should  buy  and  carefully  read  Dr 
Lumby's  edition  of  the  '  Utopia.'  We  are  afraid  to  say  more  lest  we  should  be  thought  ex- 
travagant, and  our  recommendation  accordingly  lose  part  of  its  force." — TJie  Teaclier. 

"  It  was  originally  written  in  Latin  and  does  not  find  a  place  on  ordinary  bookshelves.  Avery 
great  boon  has  therefore  been  conferred  on  the  general  English  reader  by  the  managers  of  the 
Pitt  Press  Series,  in  the  issue  of  a  convenient  little  volume  of  More's  Utopia,  not  in  the  original 
Latin,  but  in  the  quaint  English  Trajislation  thereof  made  hy  Raphe  Robyyison,  which  adds  a 
linguistic  interest  to  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the  work.  .  .  .  All  this  has  been  edited  in  a  most  com- 
plete and  scholarly  fashion  by  Dr  J.  R.  Lumby,  the  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  whose  name 
alone  is  a  sufficient  warrant  for  its  accuracj'.  It  is  a  real  addition  to  the  modem  stock  of  classical 
English  literature. " — Guardian. 

MORE'S  HISTORY  OF  KING  RICHARD  III.     Edited 

with  Notes,  Glossary  and  Index  of  Names.  By  J.  Rawson  Lumby,  D.D. 
Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  Cambridge ;  to  which  is  added  the  conclusion 
of  the  History  of  King  Richard  III.  as  given  in  the  continuation  of  Hardyng's 
Chronicle,  London,  1543.     ^s.  6d. 

A    SKETCH    OF^  ANCIENT    PHILOSOPHY    FROM 

THALES  TO  CICERO,  by  Joseph  B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Moral  Philosophy  at  King's  College,  London,     ^s.  6d. 

"  In  writing  this  scholarly  and  attractive  sketch.  Professor  Mayor  has  had  chiefly  in  view 
'  undergraduates  at  the  University  or  others  who  are  commencing  the  study  of  the  philosophical 
works  of  Cicero  or  Plato  or  Aristotle  in  the  original  language,'  but  also  hopes  that  it  '  may  be 
found  interesting  and  useful  by  educated  readers  generally,  not  merely  as  an  introduction  to  the 
formal  history  of  philosophy,  but  as  supplying  a  key  to  our  present  ways  of  thinking  and  judging 
in  regard  to  matters  of  the  highest  importance. '"-^j1/z'«rf. 

"Professor  Mayor  contributes  to  the  Pitt  Press  Series  A  Sketch  of  Ancient  Philosophy  in 
which  he  has  endeavoured  to  give  a  general  view  of  the  philosophical  systems  illustrated  by  the 
genius  of  the  masters  of  metaphysical  and  ethical  science  from  Thales  to  Cicero.  In  the  course 
of  his  sketch  he  takes  occasion  to  give  concise  analyses  of  Plato's  Republic,  and  of  the  Ethics  and 
Politics  of  Aristotle  ;  and  these  abstracts  will  be  to  some  readers  not  the  least  useful  portions  of 
the  book.  It  may  be  objected  against  his  design  in  general  that  ancient  philosophy  is  too  vast 
and  too  deep  a  subject  to  be  dismis.sed  in  a  'sketch' — that  it  should  be  left  to  those  who  will  make 
it  a  serious  study.  But  that  objection  takes  no  account  of  the  large  class  of  persons  who  desire 
to  know,  in  relation  to  present  discussions  and  speculations,  what  famous  men  in  the  whole  world 
thought  and  wrote  on  these  topics.  They  have  not  the  scholarship  which  would  be  necessary  for 
original  examination  of  authorities ;  but  they  have  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  relations  between 
ancient  and  modem  philosophy,  and  need  just  such  information  as  Professor  Mayor's  sketch  will 
give  them." — TJie  Guardian. 

\Other  Volumes  are  in  preparation?^ 
London :  Cambridge  Warehouse,  1 7  Paternoster  Row. 


• 

LOCAL    EXAMINATIONS. 

Examination  Papers,  for  various  years,  with  the  Regulations  for  the 
Examination.     Demy  8vo.     2j.  each,  or  by  Post,  is.  2d. 

Class  Lists,  for  various  years,  Boys  u.,  Girls  bd. 
Annual  Reports  of  the  Syndicate,  with  Supplementary  Tables  showing 
the  success  and  failure  of  the  Candidates,    is.  each,  by  Post  2s.  2>d. 


HIGHER  LOCAL  EXAMINATIONS. 

Examination  Papers  for  1882,  to  which  are  added  the  Regulations  for 

1883.     Demy  8vo.     2s.  each,  by  Post  2s.  2d. 
Class  Lists,  for  various  years,     i^.     By  post,  is.  2d. 
Reports  of  the  Syndicate.    Demy  Svo.    is.,  by  Post  is.  2d. 

LOCAL  LECTURES  SYNDICATE. 

Calendar  for  the  years  1875—9.    Fcap.  8vo.  cloth.    2s. 
1875-80.       „  „  2s. 

1880—81.       „  „  IS. 


TEACHERS'    TRAINING   SYNDICATE. 

Examination  Papers  for  various  years,  to  which  are  added  the  Regu- 
lations for  the  Examination.     Demy  Svo.     6d.,  by  Post  7^. 

CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY    REPORTER. 

Published  by  Authority. 
Containing    all   the     Official    Notices    of    the    University,    Reports   of 
Discussions  in  the  Schools,  and  Proceedings  of  the  Cambridge  Philo- 
sophical, Antiquarian,  and  Philological  Societies.     3^.  weekly. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  EXAMINATION  PAPERS. 

These  Papers  are  published  in  occasional  numbers  every  Term,  and  in 

volumes  for  the  Academical  year. 

Vol.  IX.  Parts  105  to  119.     Papers  for  the  Year  1879—80,  \2s.  cloth. 

Vol.  X.         „       120  to  138.  „  „  i%Zo—Zi,\i)S.  cloth. 

Vol.  XI.       „      139  to  159.  „  „  1881—82,  15 j-.  r/^^'/^  ' 


> 


Oxford  and  Cambridge  Schools  Examinations. 

Papers  set  in  the  Examination  for  Certificates,  July,  1882.    is.  6d. 

List  of  Candidates  who  obtained  Certificates  at  the  Examinations 
held  in  18S1  and  1882  ;  and  Supplementary  Tables.     6d. 

Regulations  of  the  Board  for  1883.    6d. 

Report  of  the  Board  for  the  year  ending  Oct.  31, 1882.    is. 

Uontion:   c.  j.  clay,  m.a.  and  son. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 
17  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

CAMBRIDGE:     PRINTED    BY   C.    J.    CLAY,    M.A.    AND    SON,    AT    THE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS. 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref .  Index  FU»" 

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


