ARCHIVED RAW COPY (fetched 2026-08-26 via https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-01464)
Title: Sanskrit Manuscripts : Prajñāpāramitāstotra, Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā / Rāhulabhadra

VERBATIM DESCRIPTION PARAGRAPH:

"A palm-leaf manuscripts containing Rāhulabhadra's Prajñāpāramitāstotra and the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā. The 'Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines' (Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā) is one of the earliest Mahāyāna scriptures. [...] This sūtra belongs to the early stratum of the so-called 'Perfection of Wisdom (prajñāpāramitā) literature,' subsequently expanded between the second and fourth centuries CE into other huge scriptures, for instance the 'Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines' (the Śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā). The 'Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Stanzas' enjoyed a central role in the Buddhist cult of the book, and particularly in Newar Buddhism. This palm-leaf manuscript belongs to the Pāla tradition of illuminated manuscripts of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā in the ornamental Pāla script. The manuscript originally had six illuminated folios, each with three miniatures, but unfortunately the original first folio is missing. It has been replaced with a later palm-leaf folio without miniatures and in a different script. The date of the manuscript is controversial since in the colophon it is stated that it was copied in the fifth regnal year of the Pāla king Mahīpāla, but without specifying which of the two Pāla kings named Mahīpāla is meant. The fifth year of either is equivalent to c. 985 or after ca 1070, and since Mahīpāla II most probably reigned only for three years, the earliest date is more probable. The donor, a woman named Lāḍokā, is mentioned in the colophon. The manuscript is protected by two extremely beautiful painted wooden covers, both bearing traces of materials smeared during worship rites."

NOTE: The string "1015" does NOT occur anywhere on this page.
Page also embeds YouTube video "India Unboxed: The Perfection of Wisdom" (item id 4Fw_p31bH7Y).
IIIF manifest: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/iiif/MS-ADD-01464
