ARCHIVED RAW COPY (fetched 2026-08-26 via https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/collections/sanskrit)
Page: "Sanskrit Manuscripts" collection overview, Cambridge Digital Library

VERBATIM KEY PASSAGES:

Motto verse: "जलाद्रक्षेत्तैलाद्रक्षेद्रक्षेच्छिथिलबन्धनात् | मूर्खहस्ते न मां दद्यादिति वदति पुस्तकम् || 'Save me from water, protect me from oil and from loose binding, And do not give me into the hands of fools!' says the manuscript." Anonymous verse frequently found at the end of manuscripts

"In the late 19th century the Library began to acquire Sanskrit manuscripts collected in Nepal and India on the initiative of the Cambridge Sanskritist Edward B. Cowell and his successor Cecil Bendall. The collaboration of other scholars such as William Rhys-Davids and Georg Bühler [...] enriched the collections with manuscripts hailing from different regions of the South Asian subcontinent and written in a wide range of languages, from Middle Indian (Pali and Prakrit) to Dravidian (such as Tamil and Malayalam)."

"While the greater part of collection had thus been constituted by 1900, the acquisitions continued through donation or purchase throughout the 20th century. In 1883 Bendall published a catalogue of Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts in the University Library that included 248 items, and in 1906 Louis de la Vallée Poussin and Caroline Mary Ridding recorded basic descriptions of the remaining manuscripts on paper index cards. However, despite these early efforts, until now the collections have still not been fully catalogued [...]."

"Now the AHRC-funded project 'The intellectual and religious traditions of South Asia as seen through the Sanskrit manuscript collections of the University Library, Cambridge' has begun a systematic investigation aiming to produce a full catalogue of the manuscripts and to digitise a substantial proportion of them. These comprise more than 1,600 works in Sanskrit, Prakrit, Pali, Tamil and other ancient and medieval South Asian languages, produced over a time-span of more than 1,000 years, and written in over a dozen scripts and on different writing materials, such as paper, palm leaf and birch bark."
