ARCHIVED RAW COPY (fetched 2026-08-26 via https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-01643)
Title: Sanskrit Manuscripts : Prajñāpāramitāstotra, Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, Vajradhvajapariṇāmanā / Rāhulabhadra

VERBATIM KEY PASSAGES (from description paragraph):

"An 11th-century composite and multi-text manuscript containing three texts: Rāhulabhadra's Prajñāpāramitāstotra, the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā and the Vajradhvajapariṇāmanā."

"This Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā is a unique item under many aspects. It is an important historical document that provides valuable information about the dynastic history of medieval Nepal. According to the colophon, it was written by a scribe named Sujātabhadra in 1015 CE during the joint reign of three kings, Bhojadeva, Rudradeva and Lakṣmīkāmadeva in the Hlāṃ vihāra (on the joint reign of these three kings cf. Petech 1984: 36-9). The identification of this monastery is still open: according to L. Petech it might be a misreading for Hloṃ, and is 'perhaps connected with present-day Lhom Hit in Tangal Tol, Patan' (Petech 1984: 36-7); on the other hand, J. Locke identifies it with the Lām Bāhā in Kathmandu (Locke 1985: 421). Moreover, it is decorated with 85 miniatures occurring at chapter ends and at the beginning of the entire manuscript (probably the miniatures were originally 88, since the first palm-leaf folio is missing and has been replaced with a paper supplement)."

"The subjects of these miniatures 'are in general different from their Indian Pāla counterparts. Apart from the last eight on the colophon folio […] they are all of specific iconographic representations of the Buddha or Bodhisattvas or other divinities, or of important stūpas or caityas. The majority of places designated are in eastern India, but there are some from far off places-China, Java, Ceylon, Gujarat, southern India' (Losty 1992: 31). Moreover, the manuscript contains notes for the illuminator added by the first scribe, each of which describes the Buddha or the Bodhisattva and the location to be depicted in the miniature."

"The importance of this manuscript is furthermore confirmed by an additional colophon in verses, added in 1139 by a certain Karuṇavajra, who states that he rescued the Prajñāpāramitā from falling in the hands of unbelievers (most probably, people of Brahmanical affiliation). Last but not least, the last folio of this manuscript is the only surviving witness of the Sanskrit original of the Vajradhvajapariṇāmanā, a short hymn hitherto considered to have survived only in its Tibetan translation, the ('Phags pa) Rdo rje rgyal mtshan gyi yongs su bsngo ba' (Formigatti 2014: 14)."

Also on page: featured in Kathmandu Post article 2019-02-26 "Perfection of art"; included in CUL 600th anniversary exhibition "Lines of Thought".
IIIF manifest: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/iiif/MS-ADD-01643
