CATALOG' K 



bU-LLiF & SELECTED PAPER MSS. 

BELONGING TO THE DURBAR LIBRARY, NEPAL, 

BT 

^a^AMAHOPADHYAYA HARA PRASAD SASTRI. MA. 

at Philological Becietary, Aswtk Society, Bengal, and Pi wapiti, 
Sanskrit College, Calcutta. 

TO WHICH HAS BEEN ADDED 

A 

HI8T0RICAL INTRODUCTION 

BY 

Professor CECIL fifiKAALL. M.A. 

Professor of Sanskrit in th« Uniwrtity of Cambridge. 



Vo/ I 



CALCUTTA: 

PRINTED AT THK BAPTIST MISSION PRESS. 
1905. 






f 



v *.\ 



0.. 



1> 



0, 







-2) 



\ 



gt^ I 00 ' 



tf?H 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 









l l at)(. 


Preface 




1-LXXXI1 


Historical Introduction 






1-82 


Catalogue of Palm-leaf MS S. i 
Library, Nepal 


in the Din 


rbar 


V** 


Catalogue of Palm -leaf MSS. recently 
lecteel by the Late Maharaja Sir 
Shamsher Jang Bahadur RSna" 


col- 
Bir 


*t-H 


Detailed description of some 
Palm-leaf MSS. 


i of the i 


rare 


<»"W 



Description of three MSS. in Gupta Charac- 
ter in the Darbar Library \««-\8< 

Description of some rare paper MSS. ^g«-»e^ 

Index I .—Tide of Manuscripts 1 -2< ) 

Index II.— General Index ... ... 1-28 



HIE FACE. 

This contains* names of t-ho palm leaf 

M^- ^ , ' I »J*' Nopal, with short: description* 

of the ra-.> of i.Im-^, t').5i'^cr^i(h i|oti^cs of all the 

•j^ V ^ 'MS, itrid sonic of 

hu'»r <nipr : ' *re iiuho 

palm , with oit^lit. 

M^iur^flWSir V»& .Sunwiior Jung 

.ho. ;o(^ of 10f IftmdJes. These 

flfc MSS., though many of them 

r.i 

'•V- MSS.in the Library paper ami palm leaf 

■o nearly r>.00l>. They contain the Royal 
oin th<> remote. . antiquity, every snee ^s- 
T .r» isdd t the. number. The climate ia vory 
■ion of MISS., and it seems not to 
know vvhf :.ty is. lint still an examination of these M8S. 
phow* th* many of the oldest M'S>S. have been dilapidated and 
there f u«t lumber containing fragments of [mini leaves 

and paper, vh;= , r.hnnl.s to the. interest evinced by the Govern- 
ment and the Librm 1 " staff, has boon carefully preserved and 
not thro '» xi aw»ty is generally done in all collection^ m 
India. An examination of thislnraber may prove extremely 
interesting and a future Hoornle or Stoin may one day dis- 
cover important truths from them. Professor Bondafi 
examined a few atray leavea preserved in a copy of thfc 
MahSbharata and the result was excellent. His examination 
his proved* that Pali was at one time naed m far notify a* 
Kepal, and that what Dr. lloemle calk Oeatrol Asian $$g*jft ■»•■ 



11 PREFACE. 

was not confined to Central Asia alone.— J JUS 1900 ', pp. 
163 and 845, 

Theroare 107 notices of paper MSS. of which some are 
composed Nepal and others in India. Of these o 7 are in 
Nagam, Maitliila, 2 in Bengali and 40 in Newari. 

Out of these eight- in Newari and' Jive in Nagara are undoubt- 
edly composed in Nepal. 

rWu.*:- Yedic scholarship haw for along time been at 
the lowest ebb in Nepal. There are some Yedic works in the 
Librarv, bat they are mostly h boiled Vajdika-mantra-sa 
grahah without any indication :ist* what Veda the Mantras 
belong to. One c mb% mentioued in page 12, No. 1206 V, 
uppei from i\ ^a to be a portion of the Yajur- 

>,da; v umber s page, 1»I leaves only, bo b<> a 

[tori-ion wf the Kg- Veda. N ..m rr 1 T>83 s, ■ 7?*, brains with 
a maim a "pariflaraflhana" which me; wis ir.g the fire- 
altar I' north-east with wet-hand till it reaches north- 

■a-4 in the direction of the right-hand. The mantra 

belong *aj. Samlnta XX. 1 1. 

apathas. pp. 10 -Mid 2'.\, Nos, 278 w, and 787 *, 
belong to me "White Yajurveda. % The MH. in p. 10 ip a 
longisli work containing the ordinary text up to the 7th 
chapter. Saiphita- pallia in p. :j;J, No. 1077 5, contains a 
mantra, Rg.Veda X. M0, 5. 

There are three leaves id- 18, m number 1 Mo 3, page 53. 
There is a mantra in page 10 which belongB to the Kg- Veda 
TV. 58, 9. 

Pagt>s 18, 1 ( J and 84 contain three entries of unspecified 
Yedic mantras, being Nos. 694 % 730 f and 1647 », The 
Puri^atokta figures in page 42, (1 206 %) 

The riteB by which at the end of the rainy season the 
study of the Yedas recommences, *a, those which commence. & 
new session^ the Yedic studies, are known «•: Upftfonua. 
T%* are three MWS. relating to these rites. ^ 

i\0) UpSkarma mantrani, No 1473,*, page jfyjgjws the 
formulae used in these rites with Bacrifioiai ejpla^jioa, . 



PREFACE. ill 

(2) UpSkarmavidhi, No 1473 «, page 56, gives the pro- 
cess of performing these rites. This is dated N.S. 180=1060 
A.D. 

(3) Upakarmasnanavidhi, No 1534 -w, page 63 5 gives the 
manner of bathing for the purposes of these rites* 

The concluding rite in every sacrifice desiring peace and 
happiness to the world is called Santi. The mantras used, in , 
this rite form the subject-matter of No. 1534 u, page 63. 
The commonly -used Santi is very short, but the rite men- 
tioned! in this MS. appears to be a rather long one covering 
27 leaves. Ganayaga-vidhi, p. 35, No. 1113 H, is an incom- 
plete copy of a Vedic work on the sacrifice to the ganas, such 
as the Marutgana. A Ganahoma has been described in Baja. 
Mitra, No. 4101. 

Isti Stltras, forming part of Katyayana's Kalpa-Stltras, 
are to be found in 1559 it, in page 70. 

There are three MSS. of the Grhya Stltras in this Col- 
lection; that in page 33, No. 1077 5, entitled Grhyoktavidhi, 
belongs to the White Yajurveda; that in page 56, No. 1473 H, 
entitled Grhyapaddhati, was copied in N. S. 550 = 1430 A.D. ; 
that in page 59, No. 1473 *r, Grhya parisista, has 38 leaves 
and begins with the Karika " Bit Kalpam va svagrhyoktam, 
&c, &c." 

These are the only entries in the Catalogue of Vedic 
works. The Brahmanas and TJpanisads are unknown. Works 
on V|dic sacrifices too are conspicuous by their absence. 

flhere is only one solitary instance lif a MS. of Mimamsa 
in this vast Collection. It is entitled Nyayaratnakara or 
Nayaratnakara, pp. 30 and 113, No. 1076 % which is, however, 
to be differenciated from the work of the same name in Cat. Cat, 
Vol. I, p. 310 A, and also from that in Cat. Cat. Vol. Ill, p. 66A. 
The MS. is a fragment. It contains an unknown commentary 
on the eleventh chapter of the Jaimini Sfttras. It quotes the 
bhasya, i.e, Savara's bhasya : — " Saumyena vyavayat pflrvasya 
Kr§nasarasya puronuvakya," see p. 796, Mimamsa-daraana, 
Vol. II, Bibl. Ind. Edition. The MS. was copied in La. Sam. 



fir PRBFAOm. 

264, i.e. 9 by the middle of the fourteenth century, by 
Harikara, a student, the son of Mahamahopadhyaya Eatna- 
kara in the village " Kalhau " in Mithila. The author who 
must have preceded the copyist is Sricandra, the son of Maha- 
mahopadhyaya Gunarati of Posali grama, which is a village 
giving its name to a clan of Brahmanas both in Mithila and 
m .Bengal. The author quotes from Srikara, a great writer 
on Mlmamsa. May he not be the same Srikara whose opinions 
are so often refuted by Jlmuta-vahana in the Dayabhaga ? 

Vyakarana. — It is well-known that there were eight ancient 
Schools of Grammar : these are enumerated by Vopadeva in his 
Kavikalpadruma. The Nepal Pandits seem to have cultivated 
the Aindra and the Candra Schools. And in this Catalogue 
have been noticed many works of these two Schools with 
QCCQBional works from the neighbouring districts of North 
Bengal and North Vihar. 

Oandra-vyakarana by Candra GomTn. There are four 
MSS. of this work in the Darbar Library, see pp. 31, 69, 72, and 
75, Nos. 1076 *, 1558, 1583 * and 1608 m. One of them, viz., the 
second, has a commentary down to the end of the second 
chapter. The first was copied in N.S. 441 = 1821 A.D. For 
descriptions of the Candra Vyakarana, see p. 249 J.A.S.B. Vol. 
LXII, Part I.; Prof. Bendall's Cam. Cat., pp. 157, 158, (sic.) 180, 
181, 198 ; also Cat. I. 0., page 198. The author Candra GomTn 
may be the laic who flourished between 630-640 A.D. at Nalanda, 
see pages 129 and 130, Kern's Indian Buddhism in Grundris 
der Ind, Ar., &c f In the page 11 of the same work Candra 
(Jomin, the grammarian, is said to have composed a poem called 
Ipiaya Lekha. Not a single copy of this work has been obtained 
in India; all the copies known came from either Nepal or Tibet. 

Of other grammatical works written by Buddhist 
authors the Subanta-ratna-kara is a curious instance. 
Yhere are two MSS. of this work in this collection, viz., in 
p. i7, No. 468 h, and in p. 38, No. 1152 9, in Newari and m 
^ithite $h&racte?s respectively. The palseography of the 
Newari cagy shows that it was written na&ch earlier than the 



Maithila ofce. The older one begins with an mvoc&tioB to 
Sakya Muni. In the second verse is given the object of the 
work, and in the third an imprecation against wicked hostile 
critics. But in the more modern Maithila copy there is only 
one verse before the subject-matter is introduced, and that verse 
is an invocation to Sarasvatl. The commentary Rupa-sadhana, 
by SubhQticandra, pp. 80 and 128, No. 1076isr, however, explains 
the Buddhist invocation along with the other two verses. This 
is a beautiful example of the Hindu trick of turning Buddhist 
works into Hindu by simply changing the invocation. Subhuti- 
candra appears to have been a Hindu, for at the beginning of 
his commentary he invokes Hindu deities. So there is no 
doubt that the original work contained the Buddhist invocation. 
The work or Manual of Grammar deals with the declensions 
of words. 

The work entitled Tin-bheda too appears to have lost its 
invocation in a similar manner. The MS. is noticed in 
page 90, No. 4, of the new collection, and has a distinctly Bud- 
dhistic invocation, while the same work in page 83, No. 1645 
?, has a doubtful one. 

Durghatavrtti was a work composed by Saranadeva in the 

10 9 5 

Saka year eka-nabho-nava-panca-vitane, i.e., in Saka 1095. 
This is one of the few instances in which the principal Agkasya 
vamS gatih has been neglected in a chronogram. The 
Durghatavrtti has not yet been discovered. But the author 
allowed Sarvvaraksita to revise the work for the benefit of stu- 
dents. The revised edition is noticed in pp. 17 and 105, No. 468 
it. The author Saranadeva seems to have been a Buddhist as 
he invokes Sarvajfia, which, without any qualifying word, means 
£uddha. But the revisor is styled MahamahopadhySya. 
Stein notices the same revised work in pp. 259 and 260. But 
curiously enough in the extracts given by him occurs " iti Raksi- 
liah "; from this it seems revisions are in some instances marked 
i» the yeviso^s own name. From the extracts there giyea, it 
s£§ny* <?M the wprfe belongs tp the Katantr% Slchopl, and tfee 



VI PREFACE. 

author notes on only the Durghata or difficult and doubtful 
points. 

There are three dilapidated MSS. of the Bhasavrtti 
Vyakarana in Maithila character in this collection, viz., No. 
382 3T, in p. 14, No. 1536 hj, in p. 67, and No. 1634*, in p. 81. 
This also is by a Buddhist author, Purusottama Deva, who 
begins with an invocation to Buddha. He gives brief com- 
ments on Panini's rules excluding Vedic Rules. The work is 
still in use in Northern Bengal. But it seems that at one time 
it had an extensive circulation in Mithila too. 

Rupavatara Vyakaranam, by Dharmakirtti, page 60, No. 
1475 ^, begins with the words Sarvajnamanantagunan, but 
there is no such verb as namami, &c. But that need not deter 
anyone from thinking that the author was a Buddhist, as the 
name of a deity pronounced at the commencement is considered 
auspicious. And in this instance the deity is Sarvajiia. It is 
difficult to say to which School of Grammar the work belongs, 
as the author in the first verse says Sukalapam, and then in 
the second verse makes his pranama to Panini. He seemed to 
have started a new School of his own. 

Padasftrya- Vyakarana, by Utsavakirtti, surnamed 
Saranga Upadhyaya, p. 13 and 114, No. 382 h. This belongs 
to the Aindra or Katantra School of Vyakarana, and treats of 
the formation of words and paradigms of roots. The Katantra 
Vyakarana is called Kalapa from the tail of Kartika's peacock, 
and Kaumara from Kartika himself. There are traditions 
how the general-in-chief of the gods produced this work. 
But from the manner in which Guha is mentioned in this 
work he seems to have been a writer of this School. 

RtlpavalT, by Raghavarama Misra, p. 247, No. 1592, is a 
work on the declension of words in Sanskrit. It was written 
in the Saka year 1714, i.e., 1792 A.D., for the benefit of the son 
of Rana Bahadur Shah, the Maharajadhiraja of Nepal. Unique. 

PrakriyakaumudI, by Ramacandra Bhatta, p. 81, No. 
1076 sr, is a Manual of Grammar current in Orissa and the 
Kalinga countries. The author was an inhabitant of the Andhra 



PM1PA0B. Yll 

Dejga or Tailanga. Eggeling in page 167B quotes a long 
passage in Sanskrit from which I cull the following geneology 
of the author. 

In the family of Villhana in the Andhra country was 
born 

Avimukta. 

i 

Anantacaryya. 

Ramasvami. 

Nrhari 

j 

Gopala Acaryya. Kr?na Acaryya. 



Nrsimha. Ramacaiidra. 

This family is still known as the Sesa family, and it keeps 
up its old tradition for scholarship. Colebrooke places Rama- 
candra's son in 1243 AJD. 

Katantravistara, by Vardhamana, in Nagara character, 
p. 158, No. 1549, copied in Sam. 1589 = 1533 A.D. The 
work is mentioned in many Catalogues, but it has never been 
described. A commentary on it by Prthvldhara has been 
described in Raj. Mitra's Gram. Oat., p. 7, but not the text. 
The author Vardhamana is entitled Upadhyaya of Srlmat 
Karnadeva, i.e., some Raja whose name was Karnadeva. 
As this is a very common name of Indian Princes it is diffi- 
cult to say which Karna is meant. Vardhamana, says Cole- 
brooke, is often quoted in Kamadhenu by Vopadeva by the 
middle of the 18th century. 

Sat Karakam, p. 37, No. 1114 ^, in Maithila character, 
was copied in La. Sam 475 in Bhauadagrama by Murari 
Sarma. The Catalogue gives no more information than this. 
But it is known from elsewhere that it was composed by a 
Buddhist variously named as Ballabhananda, Bahasa Nandl, 
and MahesaNandi. The author is sometimes called Rabhasa 
Nandl, too. It treats of the use of cases and consists of four- 
teen verses only with a commentary. Eggeling thinks, p. 208B, 



vm PBB9&GB. 

that the Buddhist invocation belongs to the comtoent&ary. 
The work belongs to the Katantra School v*d is still read in 
East Bengal. 

Manoramakucamardana, by JagannStha, p. 224* No, 
1110. Prakriyaprakasa was a recast of Panini's Stltras in 
practical shape by Krsna Pandita of the Sesa family in the An- 
dhra country referred to in connection with the Prakriya-kau- 
mudl. Krsna Pandita had a student named Bhattoji Diksita 
who wrote another recast of Panini's Stltras entitled Siddhanta- 
kaumudi, with a commentary called Manorama in which he 
adversely criticised his Guru's works. This enraged the 
sons of Viregvara, the son of Krsna Pandita, who defended 
their family work against Bhattoji's attacks. But Jagannath 
Panditaraja, the Pandit at the court of Dara Sheiko, the son of 
Shahjahan, as a student of Viresvara, took up the cudgels 
in his hands and wrote the present work severely criticising 
Manorama. As the word Manorama is in the feminine in 
Sanskrit, he named his critique on it, Manoramakucamardana. 
Akhyataprakaranam, p. 56, No. 1473 w 9 belongs to the 
Katantra School. 

Upayogakramah, p. 85, No. 1647 W. 
TJsmabheda, pp. 31 and 60,Nos. 1076 3F and 1475 3, in 
Newari character, gives rules for spelling words with the three 
S's. The first was copied in N.S. 441. 

Dhatujnanarp, p. 85, No. 1647 ^, treats of conjugation of 
roots in Sanskrit. 

Dhatupatha, pp. 34 and 84, Nos. 1078 * and 1647 *r. 
Sixteen leaves in Gupta character on Grammar, page 
85, No* 1648 m. The leaves are not in order. They seem 
to be the leaves of a long grammatical work. There are 
some Stltras given, but these are not Panini's Stltras nor are 
they from Katantra. 

Krdbhasya, page 88, No. 1693 9. Thirteen palm-leaves* 
part of a large work on Grammar* contain many Stltras. 
Three are noted down in the Catalogue, and they are found in 
the same order in Katantra. So these leaves must belong to 



that work. These are from the chapter on Krt. It is a well- 
known fact that Sarvavarma, the author of Katantra Stltras, 
did not write these chapters. They were written by the Vrtti- 
kara Katyayana. So these leaves contain Stltras by KatyS- 
yana or Vararuci with a bhasya. This proves not only the 
great antiquity of the Katantra Stltras but also of Katyayana. 
The work is called Krd-bhasya. The Stltras noticed, how- 
ever, are the first Stltras of the work in the leaves under 
notice. But they are numbers 84, 85 and 86 of the fifth Pada 
in the chapter on Krts in the Katantra Grammar. 

There are 91 leaves of a work on Grammar, p. 70, No. 
1595 isr. It is most probably a big fragment of the Rupa- 
vatara Vyakarana noticed in p. 60. The chapters are called 
avataras. The matter given in the Prarambha Vakya, in p. 60, 
is what may fit in exactly on one side of a narrow palm-leaf. 
The first leaf is invariably written on one side only. But 
the leaves in question begin with the second page and leave 
out matter which is enough for the one side of the first leaf. 
The chapters are : — 

Sanjnavatara— 4th leaf. 
Samhitavatara — 15th leaf. 
Vibhaktyavatara — 63rd leaf. 
Natvavatara — 71st leaf. 
Satvavatara — 73rd leaf. 
Samasavafcara — 78th leaf. 

Smrti. — Of the Sipjti works, the original Samhitas are 
not very numerous in this collection. Four are worth men- 
tion, namely : — 

(1) Manavadharma-sastra, page 60, No. 1475 m. This 
appears to have been brought from India as it is in Nagara 
character. 

(2) ParaSara-smrti, page 59, No. 1478 u. Complete 
in 12 chapters, is in Newari character. 

(3) Naradiya-dharma-sastr^, p. 44, No. 1230 w. CUarw?^ 
tev Newari, 

2 



X PBEFAOB. 

(4) M5nava-nyaya-Sastram, p. 43, No. 1230 % called 
also Brahmokta-dharma-smrti in the first verse after the colo- 
phon, is the Samhita of Narada on the law-book of Manu. 
[Narada's work is often considered as an appendix to the work 
of Manu]. It is accompanied with a brief commentary in the 
Newari language, entitled Nyaya-vikaginl by Manika, per- 
haps the same as the author of Bhairavananda Nataka, who 
wrote that work at the request of Jayata, the son of Oandana 
Varma and the minister of Jayasthiti Malla, the husband of 
Rajalla Devi, in N.S. 500, i.e., in 1380 A.D. The object was 
to bring the administration of justice more in unison with 
the Smrti than before. The advent of a new dynasty was 
followed by reforms in every direction, and the aim of these 
reforms was Aryanizing the Newars. The literary activity 
of this reign has been touched upon by Prof. Bendall : the 
administration of justice is spoken of here. The composition 
of many new dramas, by Manika, Dharma Gupta and others 
also bears witness to the tendency of Aryanizing. The pre- 
sent MS. was copied by Vajracaryya LUndabhadra, a Sakya- 
bhiksu belonging to the Klrttipunya Mahavihara in BhatgSo, 
This shows that the Buddhist monks who excelled in Cali- 
graphy were extensively employed in copying Hindu MSS. 
In the Durbar Library, too, the Buddhist Vajracaryas are 
still the best scribes. Prof. Bendall obtained much valuable 
information from the post-Colophon statements in this 
MS. 

The most ancient MS. on modern Smrti, t.e., of Smrti com- 
pilations, is Ratnakarandika by Drona. See pages 77 and 
127, No. 1633 ^. This is so old, worn out, and dilapidated 
and so worm-eaten, that it was impossible to take a full de- 
scription. It was however copied in Sam. 1189, i.e., in 1133 
A.D. in Nagara character. This is the oldest MS. dated in a 
non-Nepalese era, and in a non-Nepalese character found in 
this collection. It treats of the rites and ceremonies of the 
followers of Vajasaneya Samhita. It is a curious fact that a 
work of so much importance and so much antiquity is not 



PBBFAOB. XI 

known in quotations ; recently, however, another MS. of the 
work has been found in the collection of MSS. presented by 
A. 0. Biirnell to the India Office, and it is accompanied with a 
commentary, but no description of the work has yet appeared, 
anywhere. 

It speaks volumes of the climate of Nepal, that palm- 
leaves of the 12th and 18th centuries have not yet decayed. 
Works like Dagakarma and Vivahakarmasamuccaya, litur- 
gical works, which are, as a rule, most carelessly kept, have 
lasted in Nepal for more than seven centuries. Of these 
Dasakarmapaddhati, a work on the ten indispensable sacra- 
ments, a short hand-book of an officiating priest, was copied 
in 1176 A.D, See page 65, No. 1536 *r. Vivahakarma- 
samuccaya was copied in N.S. 233, i.e., 1118 A.D., see page 
26, No. 933 **. These belong to the Twelfth century. To 
the Thirteenth belong the following liturgical works, namely, 
Anantavratavidhi, page 46, No. 1320 sr copied in N.S. 405, 
i.e., in 1285 A.D., Pratistha paddhati, page 77-78, No. 1638 
«, copied in N.S. 396 = 1276 A.D. I may remark in passing 
that Prof. Bendall has not taken notice of this date of Ananta- 
malla's reign, which will throw back that king's reign by 
three years. In his list, History of Nepal, &c, &c,, page 25, 
the earliest date of Anantamalla is 399 N.S. But this MS. 
gives the date 396 N.S. Another liturgical work of which few 
ever take any care, i.e., a work on the Sandhya, which is 
always committed to memory, namely Sandhya-vidhi, page 
45, No. 1320 s, is dated N.S. 401=1281 A.D. A fourth 
work, on Parvana Sraddha, i.e., on the propitiation of the 
manes in the full and the new moon, page 20, No. 772, ¥, was 
copied in La^Sam^J7^ or about 1290 A.D. A careful search in 
the private Libraries of Nepal may yet bring to light more 
dated MSS. of this nature. 

Of the more important works, Karmakriya-kanda by 
SomaSambhu, pages 49 and 95, No, 1861 *r, was copied in N.S. 
326, i.e., 1206 A.D. The work was composed in 1073, see Oat. 
Cat, Vol. I, p. 83A., and Biihler's Kssmlra Report, p. 77- It 



»1 PREffAOE. 

is a ritualistic work of the Saiva sect. The author was a dis- 
ciple of Siva, who was the disciple of VimaleSa, the disciple 
Gona, a Saiva saint. The work is on the daily and other 
rites of the sect. 

Sugatisopanam, pages 20 and 131, No. 772 **, by G-aneS- 
vara, was known only in quotations, see Cat. Gat. Vol. I. p. 724A. 
The MS. was copied at Lalita Pattan by a Maithila scribe, 
Thakkura Sri Mati Sarma in La. Sam. 224, about 1340 A.D. 
The date of composition therfore must be earlier. The author 
describes himself as Maharajadhiraja, of which country is not 
known. I may here throw out a conjecture that he was a 
king of Mithila before the commencement of the rule of the 
Srotriya dynasty. He was assisted in his work by his great 
minister Devaditya, the minister of peace and war. It is a 
longish work on Smrti. 

The next Smrti MS. of great antiquity is the Sridatta* 
paddhati, pages 45 and 129, No. 1320 if. It was copied in 
La. Sam 299, i.e., about 1414 A.D. by Dhanesvara who was 
settled at Khaera by Mahopadhyaya Nara. It was composed 
a few years earlier by Sridatta, the son of Nagegvara, a 
Pandit honoured in the court of Raja Devasimha, the eldest 
son of Bhavesa, the third King of the Srotriya dynasty. The 
real name of the work is Ekagnidanapaddhati. This may 
also be Avasathyadhanapaddhati ; see Gat. Oat. p. 668B. 
The author is styled Mahamahopadhyaya and Avasathya, i.e., 
the performer of Avasatha sacrifice. The performance of 
sacrifices often gives the names to different Brahmana families. 
The work deals with the great gifts known as MahadSnas, 
which form the subject of the next MS. 

Mahadananirnaya, pages 36 and 122, No. 1124 nr, is 
by VScaspati, or more correctly by RajS Bhairavendra with the 
assistance of Vacaspati. The MS. was copied in La. Sam. 
892*, about 1506 A.D. The work is not given in the list of the 
author's works in Oat. Oat. page 559B. Professor Bendall 
slakes this work one of the basis for his chronology, of the 
Maithila Kings. It is curious, however, that Bhairavendra is 



called RtlpanSf Syana here, while he is styled HarinarSyana m 
p. 76A., Br. Mus. Oat. 

A MS. of higher antiquity than the Mabadana is the 
Vratapaddhati, page 73, No. 1583 «. It was copied in La. 
Sam 344, about 1458 A.D., by Sudhadhara. For other notices 
of this work see Oat. Cat. Vol. I, p. 530B and Vol. Ill, p. 129B. 
The author is Rudradhara of Mithila. He may be Rudradhara, 
the disciple of Oandesvara and the author of so many Candri- 
kas on Smrti. In that case he must have flourished later 
than 1324 A.D. the age of Oandesvara. 

The Maithila work on Smrti, next in antiquity, is Dana 
VSkyavali by Vidyapati. It is represented in the Nepal 
collection by two MSS., namely, pages 25 and 45, Nos. 910 * 
and 1320 13 copied in La. Sam. 512 and 395 respectively. 
From Raja, Mitra, No. 812, we know that a work of the 
Samskaras was dedicated by the author to one Ratnapani in 
La. Sam. 371. There are various works of the same name, 
Dana-vakyavali, by various authors, many of which have 
recently been acquired by me for the Bengal Government. 
Both the MSS. are mere fragments, the more ancient one 
has only 29 leaves. 

Vivldhavldyavicaracatura is a complete MS. on the propi- 
tiation of angry divinities and bringing about prosperity. It 
treats of ten thousand, hundred thousand and million homas, 
&c. It is attributed to Bhojadeva and is a paddhati. The 
work ends with the consecration of tanks, ponds and wells; see 
page, 65, No. 1536 *§. The MS. was copied by Subhapati 
under the command of Gradadhara Deva, the Prince of Mithila, 
probably the son of Ramabhadra in the town of Ratnadhara, 
in La. Sam 872. The author Bhojadeva does not appear to 
have been a royal personage. He is neither the Bhoja of 
Dhara nor of Nepal. 

Smrti-paribhasa, page 32, No. 1077 *, by Varddhamana, 
copied in La. Sam. 388, by Padmakara and Madhava Sarma in 
the village of Nahosa. Vardhamaina, who appears to have 
been (a judge at the court of Raja Ramabhadra of Mithila, 



XW PBEFAOK. 

and who wrote several works on Smrti, wrote two on the 
technical terms of Smrti, namely, Paribhasaviveka and 
Smrtiparibhasa (Raj, Mitra, No. 1848). 

Vivadacandra, page 45, No. 1280 sr, by Misaru Misra. 
See Raja. Mitra No.. 1859, where it is said to have been com- 
posed by Laksmi Mahadevi, the wife of Raja Candra Simha of 
Mithila, with the assistance of Misaru Misra. The Prince Can- 
dra Simha does not appear in any authentic list of the Srotriya 
Rajas of Mithila. But Misaru mentions him. He may have 
reigned in a part of the kingdom, as Aufrecht, quoting all the 
six introductory verses of this work, makes him the son of 
Darpanarayana, the son of Harasimha, the son of Bhavega. 
It may be said in passing that the identification of Harasimha 
with Harisimha, the invader of Nepal, is most unfortunate, 
because the invader was a Ksatriya Sflryyavamgi while Hara- 
simha was a Srotriya Raja. 

Vivadaratnakara, by CandeSvara, and Vivadanirnaya, per- 
haps Vivadacintamani, by Vacaspati, in this collection are 
well-known works often described by competent scholars. 

Nirnayarka, by Sri Krsnarama, page 199, No. (2) 73, is a 
work composed in Nepal under the patronage of Gorkha 
King Maharajadhiraja Rajendra Vikrama during the middle 
of the last century. The author quotes from Krtya-ratna- 
vali, Kalamadhava, Nirnayamrta, Nirnayabdhi and so on. 
In the Colophon the work has been attributed to the patron 
Rajendra Vikrama. 

For Dvaita-nirnaya, by Vacaspati, pp. 86 and 90, Nos. 
1648 ^, and 12 ^r of the new collection, see preface to Vol. II. 
Notices of Sanskrit MSS., Second Series. 

Sarojakalika, in Bengali character, by Kaviratna, p. 33, 
No. 1077 3, is a complete compilation of Smrti. Raja. Mitra, 
No. 2014, thinks it to be a very ancient compilation as it does 
not seem to quote from any compiler. The name of the 
author seems to indicate that he was a Bengali. The present 
palm-leaf MS. is a mere fragment. 

Dharmasara, page 193, No. 1413, by Puru?ottama, is a 



PBEFAOE. rt 

unique work copied in Saka 1607 = 1685 A.D. It is a long 
work on Smrti compiled from various works, Puranas and 
Smrti. The author styles himself Jyotirvid, and prefaces his 
work with the praise of Vyasa and the puranas. He intro- 
duces the puranas into the compilation of a work on Dharma 
with a long apology — a fact, from which he seems to have been 
one of the earliest writers to utilise the Puranas for the 
purpose of illucidating smrti texts. The scribe, Bala Bhadra 
and his son, were inhabitants of Mithila, though- the MS. 
is written in Nagara and dated in the Saka Era. 

Dharmatattvaprakasa, page 192, No. 1500, by Siva- 
Caturdhara, son of Govinda Suri, son of Nilakantha, son of an- 
other Govinda. The family seem to have come from Pratis- 
thana or Paithana near the Grodavari. The author was born at 
Benares. He composed the work in Saka 1668. The Catur- 
dhara family is still flourishing at Benares as a family of 
learned men. There are four MSS. of this work in the Benares 
College Library. See page 268B, Vol. I. Oat. Cat. 

Dana-vakya-samuccaya by Yogigvara, pages 74, and 105, 
No. 1606 3f, gives the formulae for making gifts and incidentally 
treats of the propitiation of angry planatory deities. This 
seems to be a very ancient compilation, as it has been quoted 
in the Bhoja-deva-samgraha, copied in Sake Samvat 1297. 
The MS. of Dana-vakya-samuccaya in the Darbar Library 
was copied in N.S. 848, though curiously enough it is said to 
be written in Nagara character. 

Danapradlpa, page 185, No. 1238, by Madhava, is unique. 
The MS. is incomplete. The author is daubed Mahamaho- 
padhyaya. He is the son of Visnu-sarma, the son of Rama, 
son of Dhidhana (?), son of Narasimha, regarded as a bearded 
Sarasvati, the son of Vasudeva, who was by Raghava, King 
of Traivarnya Karanapura in Guzerat, brought from Svimganl- 
mdadhi and settled at Tolakirya. Hence his clan obtained 
the surname of Tolakiryya. The work treats of such gifts as 
those of cities, &c. 

Tithyadinirnaya, by Padmanabha, page 184, No. 1294, 



* 

character Nagara, copied in N.S 827=1707 A % D. is unique. 
The author is daubed Upadhyaya and wrote his work at 
Benares. The work should rather be called Pretakrtya- 
nirnaya than Tithyadinirnaya, of which it professes to be a 
part. The latter is a big compilation entitled Yogisvara 
Samgraha. Padmanabha seems to have composed that volume 
of it which treats of Pretakrtya in two parts, one entitled 
PretakarmamahSrnava and the other includes DaSakriya, 
Avasathyapretasauca and the visit to holy men. The pre- 
sent MS. contains both these parts. Is Yogisvara mentioned 
here the same as the author of Danavakya-samuccaya ? 
/ ) Krtyakalpataru by Laksmidhara, son of Hrdayadhara and 

j Foreign Minister to Maharaja Grovindacandra of Kanauj, whose 
| reign extended from 11 15 to 1143 A.D. (See M. Duff., p. 288). 
Page 62, No. 1 508 z notices an incomplete MS. in Newari char- 
acter. The work has been described by Eggeling, p. 409B. 
The MS. therein described belonged to Vidyanivasa, who is 
wellknown.as the father of Visvanatha Tarkapancanana, the 
author of BhasS pariccheda. It was copied by a Kayastha, 

15 i 

named Kavicandra, for him in the VyomenduSaragitamSumite 
Sake, i.e., in Saka 1510=1588. This settles the date of 
Vidyanivasa who was a Banerji and resident of Navadvipa, 
and along with his, that of his son, the author of Bha&aparic- 
cheda. 

Acaradipaka, by Gaijgavisnu, page 153, No. 1500, is an 
unique compilation of Acara, a part of Smrti. The author 
gives his own genealogy and a genealogy of his patron Tri- 
vikrama. The author is the son of Jayadeva, son of Rama- 
bhadra, belonging to Gautamagotra. The geneology of the 
patron Trivikrama is as follows : — 



PREFACE. XVll 

MUKUNDA. 

I 

Bhrngl. 

i 

r __ ^ 

Hambira the Adi Tula the Muk- 

Mahidhara or the hyah or chief 

founder of a dy- King, 

nasty at TriS- I 

fiiga. I 

Pratapa, 
a Yuvaraja. 

r ^ 

Dayalu Raja. Damodara* 

I 
Digvijaya. 

Kamaraja Datta. 

i 

Trivikrama, 
The Patron of the Author. 

Some of the passages in this account are so obscure that 
I have been obliged to put interpretations on them very- 
different from those by Prof* Bendall. The MS. was copied in 
Saka 1674 = 1752 A.D. by Sivadharma and Bhuvanega. The 
work treats of all the principal topics connected with Acara. 

Pratisthatattva by Raghunandana, in Bengali character, 
page 65, No. 1536 sr, is one of the 28 books of the writer's 
great digest, the standard smrti of Bengal. It was composed 
during the latter half of the sixteenth century. It quotes 
from Haribhakti-vilasa of Gopala Bhatta composed in 1562. 
The present MS. was copied in Sapta traya-patri-tarakadhlSaih 
Sanketite Sakabde, i.e., 1537 Saka=1615 A.D. 

Pretaman]arl, page 218, No. 1169, is dated N.S. 827 = 
1707 A.D. It treats of the last rites of man. It is neither the 
same work as the Pretamanjari by Dyadu Misra, Ulwar 1403, 
nor the same as Ulwar 801. 

Brahmanarthaprakasa, page 218, No. (2) 112 gives the 

meaning of the word Brahmana. It is a unique work by Hara- 

datta. Thfere is a curious expression in the Mangalacarana, 

namely Tarn gurum Saradarupam Namami Purusottamam. 

3* 



XYU1 PREFACE. 

It seems that the name of the author's guru was Purusottama, 
and that he is identified with Kali. 

Madana-ratna-pradipe prayascittodyota, page 223, No. 
1 286, is part of a complete digest of religious and civil law of the 
Hindus, compiled by Visvanatha, a Gurjjara of the Srimali 
clan, inhabitant of Benares. His father was Satta. Srimala, 
the small kingdom, of which the poet Magha's grand- 
father was the chief minister, sarvadhikari, gives its 
name to a very influential section of Gurjjara Brahmanas. 
The author Visvanatha belonged to that section. Professor 
Bendall supposes that Madana Simha Deva, the patron, or as 
the authors are pleased to style him, the compiler, of this 
work belonged to Gorakpur-Camparana. But the India Office 
Catalogue, page 53 7 A, makes him- a king of Delhi. This may 
sound strange to historical ears. But in 14*12 died Mahmud 
Togluk who abolished the Empire, gave up sitting on the throne, 
coining money, and the city and the province fell a prey to 
Afghans and Rajputs alike. Madana Simha appears to have 
been an influential Rajput chief in the province and he invited 
four great Pandits of his time to compile a Sinrti digest. 
These are Ratnakara MiSra, Gopinatha, Visvanatha and 
Gangadhara Bhatta. The work is divided in 7 uddyotas of 
which the present MS. contains the fourth, that dealing with 
PrayaScitta. And it has been done by Visvanatha alone. 

The statement in the India Office Library Catalogue 
takes out Sakti Simha, from the Camparana genealogy 
doubtingly placed there by Prof. Bendall and places him in 
Delhi. 

Vajasaneyinamahoratrafrita-dharma-nibandha, page 47, 
No. 1820 % is an incomplete copy of a Smrti work on the 
daily rites of the professors of the white Yajurveda. It be- 
gins with an invocation to Visnu. 

Viramitrodaya, by Mitra Mitfra, Vyavaharakanda only, 
page 251, No. (2) 65. For the date and time of Mitra Misra 
see pp. 438-441 and p. 371 of the India Office Library Cata- 
logue. 



PREFACE. XIX 

Sivaratrividhanam, page 62, No. 1608 sr, derives its 
authority from the Padmapurana. 

Saptamivratakatha, p. 84, No. 1645 iff, copied in N.S. 
508 = 1888 A.D. Kathas are stories in Sanskrit generally in 
Anustubh verses proclaiming the great efficacy of any vrata. 
They are very common in Northern India. The discovery of 
this MS. proves their antiquity. 

Sarasamgraha, p. 48, No. 1380 % was copied in N.S. 375 = 
1255 A.D. It is a part of an unknown work entitled Veda 
Vaisnava-siddhanta rahasya, that is, a work written with the 
object of reconciling the Vedas with Vaisuava doctrines, and it 
treats of such topics as laksahoma in nine chapters. It seems 
to indicate a stage in the process of Tantrika Vaisnavism 
being incorporated into Hinduism. 

Vajasaneyinam Vivahadipaddhati, by Ramadatta, p. 
80, No. 1634 ^. The author is the son of GaneSvara, the son 
of Devaditya. [See supra Sugatisopanaip.] Devaditya and his 
son VireSvara were the ministers of peace and war to an 
unknown kingdom, probably Mithila. The work pertains 
to the white Yajur Veda, and treats of the ceremonies to 
be performed by the professors of that Veda. Ramadatta, 
and his father Ganesvara are described as mahattakas 
or noblemen. In Raja. Mitra No. 1169, Rama-datta is 
said to follow Vacaspati Mi&ra the great Maithila lawgiver. 
The MS. is written in Maithila character and dated in La. 
Sam. 414. These considerations lead me to infer that the 
author was a Maithila. But the work is held in high respect 
by the Yajur-vedis all over .Northern India. As the matter 
stands, if Rama-datta writes a Paddhati based on Vacaspati's 
digest, the date given at the end of the MS. may refer to com- 
position and not to copy. Theodore Aufrecht has changed 
the name of this work into Vivaha paddhati, p. 580B. Vol. I, 
Cat. Oat. But he has no authority for it. 

Agastyavratavidhanam, p. 52, No. 1863 vr speaks of 
the process of worshipping Agastya, the great R?i. 

Ekadasl-vrata-mahatmyam, p. 80, No. 1008 and p. 44, 



XX PREFACE. 

No. 1280 sr. The first was copied inN.S. 558, and the second 
in N.S. 400, during the reign of Anandamalladeva at th6 
temple of PaSupati. Both are in Newari character. 

Ekadasl-vrata-vidhanam, p. 70, No. 1559 $, is in Newari 
character. 

Kanvayanasraddha vidhih, p. 45, No. 1820, H, in Newari 
character, treats of the Sraddha of the professors of the 
Kanvasakha of the white Yajurveda. 

Durgarcanakalpataru, p. 187, No. (2) 110, by Laksmipati 
Sarma, in Nagara character. Complete. Unique. It was com- 
posed under the patronage of Navarat RaghunSth, the son 
of Yuvarat Ranabhima Shaha, son of Krsna Varma, during 
the reign of Rana Bahadur Shah, the Gorkha king of Nepal 
(1777-1799), who is described as having overrun Clna, 
Mithila, Kamarupa, Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Kuru, Maru, 
Yavana. The author is entitled Daivajna Siromani and was 
the son of Krsnananda. 

Kalamadhava-karika-vySkhyanam, p. 160, No. 1294, 
by Vaidyanatha Sflri, son of Bhatta Ramacandra of Benares, 
is a commentary on KarikSs based on the work of MSdhavS- 
carya on the determination of time for religious ceremonies, 
entitled Kalanirnaya, commonly called Kalamadhava. This 
has been published in the Bibl. Ind. The authorship of 
the Karikas is unknown. Vaidyanatha, the commentator, be- 
longed to the wellknown Paygaunde family of Benares. 

Kusandika is the common homa for all ceremonies. It 
is perhaps the shortest homa known. A work on this is to 
be found in p. 56, No. 1478, w. 

Oaturthi- Vidhih, p. 80, No. 1684 h, describes the cere- 
monies to be performed on the 4th day after marriage. Visriu- 
pratisthS-vidhih, p. 52, No. 1868 w, is incomplete and has 85 
leaves only, 

Vyavaharapradipa, p. 258, No.1412, by Krsna is an ele- 
mentary work on astromony as applied to Smrti. This is to be 
differenciated from Kalyana VarmS's work, and also from 
Padma-nSbha MiSra's work on the same subject and of the 



PBEtfAOE. * jtXl 

same name. The author says that in Jyotisa, Tantras, Sid- 
dhantas and Vaidyaka, the meaning only and not grammati- 
cal inaccuracies are to be taken into consideration. 

Suddhadlpika, p. 255, No. 1500, is a liturgical work of 
no value, by Durga Datta. The author seems to have abridg- 
ed a work entitled Prapancasara, an unknown smrti work, 
and treated of the proper method of repeating the Gayatrl. 

Medicine. 

Carakasamhita, p. 86, No. 1648 jt, in Newari charac- 
ter. The description of this MS. has not been given in the 
Catalogue, but from my notes I find that it was copied in 
N.S. 803=1183 in the reign of Ratnadeva. In this case the 
year is given both in figures and in words Samvatsaranam 
trayodhika fotatrayam Agke + + Samvat 803 Caitra Sudi 
Somadine. It was copied by a Srivastava Kayastha Pandita 
named Ratnapala who came from Jejabhukti or Jejhauti the 
cradle of Candela power in Bundelakhanda. The grantha- 
samkhya is given as 12,686. 

One hundred and twenty chapters were spoken by itreya 
to Agnivesa. Then it was revised by Oaraka. But even 
then it was not complete by a third. So Drdhabala of Panca- 
nadapura completed it after propitiating Samkara, 

The medical tradition of this school seems to have begun 
in the Vedic times. Agnivesa compiled the tradition about 
the period of the rise of Buddhism, for among the numerous 
Buddhist sects before Atoka we find one founded by an Agni- 
vesa. Oaraka, whose name the school bears, only revised 
it, and this Oaraka may well be the medical man in the 
court of Kaniska, the Indo-Sythian King, as Professor 
Sylvain Levy surmises, from Chinese sources. Drdhabala's age 
it is difficult to settle. But 1 will hazard a conjecture, that he 
wrote when the last Hindu dynasty was reigning in the 
Panjab. The MS. is complete and it bears a date before the 
Muhammadan conquest of Hindustan. The work has been 
several times printed in Calcutta. 



XX11 PREFACE. 

Cikitsamrta, p. 1 70, No. (3) 76 (see Report, page 9). The 
work is nearly complete, the first leaf only is missing, the first 
leaf as given in this MS. contains the preamble of a work on 
Materia Medica in which the author expresses his dissatis- 
faction with previous works on the subject, some being too 
small, some too difficult and so forth. 

Nidanam, p. 70, No. 1559 ^. From my notes I find that 
the MS. contains a few leaves only and they treat of the 
Ksudraka-roga-nidanam. It was copied in N.S. 571 = 1451 

a.'d. 

Nilakanthasamgraha, p. 200, No. 1185, is a work on 
Hindu medicine by Nilakantha, the son of Narahari and Savi- 
tri, belonging to the Vaidya caste. One of his remote ancestors 
was Tripuraridhana a Mahopadhyaya. His uncle was Srl- 
dhara of the Dhanvantari gotra. The MS. is a Physician's 
Vade Mecum. 

Yogasara, p. 235, No. 1137, by Nagarjjuna. The first 
seven leaves of the MS. are missing. In leaf No. 106 occurs 
the statement Iti Nagarjjunakrte Yogasare Sri + + + 
cikitsa. The MS. is incomplete at the end too. The 
work is a very ancient one and is attributed to the great 
Nagarjjuna, the founder of the Mahayana school. 

Yogaratnasamgrahah, p. 35, No. 1113 is, by Purusottama 
Datta of the Vaidya caste. The MS. was copied in the i§aka 
year 1586 on the full moon day of the month of Magha on 
Tuesday. Sumati-jayajitamitramalladeva of Nepal made 
a gift of this MS. in N.S. 810 = 1690 A.D. The work has 
240 leaves written in Maithila character, though the state- 
ment of the gift at the end is in Nagara aksara. 

Easahrdayah, p. 239, No. (3)118, by Govinda Bhagavat. 
It is a work on Hindu Chemistry, and Dr. P. C. Ray thinks it 
is one of the most aucient works on the subject. The work is in 
the form of a Tantra, being divided into 21 Patalas. Buddistic 
gods and Bodhisattvas are mentioned in this work. After 
the colophon there is a statement that Dhanaiit obtained this 
work from a worshipper of Narayana. 



PREFACE, Xxili 

ViSvanathapraka&i, p. 24, No. 845 *r, was considered rare 
even in Nepal when Lawrence compiled his list of rare MSS. 
in that country. The MS. contains 447 leaves. 

In p. 90 is mentioned a MS. with 180 leaves, being 
No. 14 of the new collection made by Maharaja Sir Vfr 
Sumsher Jang Bahadur, on the medical science. There are 
no colophons in this work, and from the verses quoted in the 
Catalogue, it appears to be a medical compilation, one of the 
verses being the opening verse of the Madhavanidanam. But 
that verse had long become the common heritage of medical 
men in India and is found in many medical works. 

Sarottara nighantu, p. 37, No. 1114 ^. The MS. has leaves 
missing in the middle. There are 179 slokas. It is a work on 
synonyms in the medical science. The MS. begins and ends 
in Buddhist fashion. The opening verse is the same as that 
of Madhavanidana. It was copied in N.S. 200, i.e., in 1080 
A.D. The author's name is lost by a lacuna, but he is de- 
scribed as Acaryavarya. 

No. 1 114 % in pp. 36 and 180, seems to contain two works, one 
incomplete in the earlier and the other in the latter part. The 
two works are by two brothers Ravigupta and Visnugupta, both 
30ns of Durgagupta. Visnugupta's work appears to be a 
nighantu, Siddhasar a nighantu, noticed in p. 86, and the other 
work Siddhasarasamhita by Ravigupta is on general medical 
science. The number of leaves 95 and the extent in slokas 
1212 both refer to the combined MS. The date of the copy 
and reign of the king are both lost by lacuna. 

A complete copy, however, of Ravigupta's Siddhasara 
samhita is noticed in the Catalogue under the name of 
simply Sarasamgraha, in page 21, No. 787. It is complete in 
24 adhyayas, the last chapter being on poisons. It was 
copied in N.S. 494=1374 A.D. The authors of both these 
works seem, from the terms in which the Mangalacarana has 
been couched, to have been Buddhists. 

Todalananda, p. 181, No. (2) 326, is a medical compila- 
tion made under the patronage of Todala Malla, the Finance 



XXIV PREFACE. 

Minister of Akbar. [See infra Horasukha.] This was one of 
the works reported by the Pandits of Nepal to Major Law- 
rence as rare. The present work begins with an obeisance 
to Dhanvantari and the Asvinas. The compilers consulted 
works of Kuntisuta and others. Kuntisuta appears to be 
Nakula who is credited with the authorship of a veterinary 
work entitled Asvacikitsita which has been published as a 
supplement to the Asvavaidyaka in the Bibl. Ind. Prom the 
statement in this MS. it appears that Nakula is said to have 
written a work on medicine too. The present MS. is in three 
chapters. 

Nadipariksa, p. 198, No. (8) 76, was composed by Rama- 
candra Somayajin, son of Samrat Agnicit SomaySjin, in 
Sam. 1405, [See Rep. p. 10.] The author seems to have been 
an inhabitant of Orissa [See Rep. p. 15.] and credited with 
the compilation of a smrti work. The present MS. was copied 
in Samvat 1778. 

Veterinary. — Asvavaidyakam p. 151, No. 1161, by 
Dipankara, has already been fully described in my Report, 
page 10. The author was the son of Nanakara and the 
grandson of Nidhanakara, a Vaidya by caste, belonging to the 
Kantara vasinl Gsi. Dipankara, nay, his family appears to have 
been Buddhists; The Mangalacarana, though it begins with the 
word Siva, does not appear to be an obeisance to god Maha- 
deva, as the word Siva appears to be an adjective to Sarvajna, 
and the next hemistitch "Tajjiiah kimapi yamviduh" 
stamps him as Buddha. The author boasts that his hairs 
were coloured with the dust of the lotus feet of Dipankara 
who may be a Buddha, a Bodhisattva or a great Bhiksu, but 
he cannot be a Hindu deity. The simile Buddhah Suddho- 
danadiva* is also Buddhistic. Few Hindus will have recourse 
to such a simile. The work is said to be in 90 chapters and the 
extent in glokas, is 1300. The author makes his pranama to 
Salihotra, the founder of the Veterinary art and to his 
disciples. He consulted previous works op the subject, and 
his practice was of great use to him. 



PREFACE. xXV 

AsvSyurveda, page 151, No. 765, by Gana. The MS. -it 
incomplete. It is like the previous work, a compilation from 
Salihotra, Garga and others. 

Yogamanjarl, p. 233, No. 816, compiled by Vardhamana 
under the orders of ViSala, a minister. The father of the 
author was Acarya Jnanapati, probably a Buddhist minister. 
ViSala belonged to the reign of King Narendra Malla of Nepal 
who ruled by the middle of the seventeenth century. 

SSrasaipgraha, p. 265, No. 816, by Indusena or Indra- 
sena, who styles himself as a Maharaijadhiraja and Man- 
darendra and whose Viruds Rupanarayana, &c, show that he 
was one of the Brahmana rajas of North Bihara or connected 
with them. It is a short work and was composed in Saka 
1734 or 1812. 

Astronomy. 

Aristanavanita-vyakhya, p. 148, No. 1806, in Newari 
character. It is a commentary on the astrological work 
entitled Aristanavanita by Navanitanarttanakavi, who selected 
all matters relating to Arista, or evil influence of planets, 
from the Hora sastra, which means principles of Astro- 
logy learnt from the Greeks. The present work is a commen- 
tary on Navanlta narttana's work by Srldhara (see Catalogue of 
Ulwar MSS. No. 1711, Extract No. 452). Srldhara is quoted 
twice by Bhaskaracaryya in his Bijaganita, Copied in N.S. 
800 = 1680. 

Ganakamandanam p. 163, No. 1412, by Nandikesvara, 
son of Vedangaraya, in Nagara character, is an elementary 
treatise on astronomy as applied to Smrti. The MS. is incom- 
plete. (See Cat. Cat. Vol. II. p. 28 A. See also Peters IV, p. 44.) 
The genealogy of the author is thus given in Peterson's extract. 
In the Gur jara country there is a Brahminic settlement named 
Sristhala. There was a Brahmana there named Ratna Bhatta, 
whose son was Tigala Bhatta. His son was Malajit who ob- 
tained from Shah Jehan, Emperor of Delhi, the title of VedSnga 
Raya. His son Nandikesvara wrote this work for pleasing hia 

4 



XXVI PREFACE. 

father. The author consulted among other works Muhurta- 
cintamani, Ganakabhusana, Ratnamala, Joytirvidabharana, 
Sajjana-ballabha and Trivikramasata. Vedanga Raya wrote 
the Parasi prakaSa in 1643 A.D. 

Goloddesa, p. 165, No. 1167, by JDamodara. The MS. is 
copied in Nagara character in N.S. 830 = 1710 A.D. This is an 
attempt to reconcile Astronomy with the Puranas. The 
author quoting from Garga and others says that Yudhisthira 
era will remain extant for 3,044 years. Then will! commence 
the era of Vikrama and remain current for 135 years. Then 
the Saka era for 1830. Then will arise a king named 
Nagarjjuna who, killing the Mlecchas, will initiate an era that 
will last for 400,000 years. Then will King Dharmarat 
start an era which will remain in force for 10,000 years. 
Then when the world will be covered with Buddhists and 
Mlecchas will come Kalkl, and in 81 years he will destroy 
them all. 

This is an elementary treatise on astronomy having a 
few chapters on Astrology. Unique. 

Grahadarpana, p. 166, No. 1412, by Gaurlgvara, is based 
on the Suryyasiddhanta. Unique. It says that the astrono- 
mical era, that is, the Saka era, commenced after 8,179 years 
of the Kali Yuga. 

Grahaprakasa,p. 167, No, (2) 32, by Kaslnatha, composed 
in Saka year 1735, the year of the birth of Rajendra Vikrama. 
The author follows the system of Varaha Mihira and of Surya 
siddhanta. He consulted Brahma-siddhanta, Vasistha-sid- 
dhanta, Suryyasiddhanta, Tattvaviveka', Saurabhasya and 
other works. 

Camatkaracintamani, p. 169, No. 1112, by Rsiis an astro- 
logical work giving the effects of the rise, continuance and 
setting of planets on the destinies of men. The MS. has not 
been properly described elsewhere. 

Jataka-paddhati-vyakhyanani, p. 178,No. 1167 by Sttryya- 
deva Somayajin of Nirdhruva gotra, is an -unique commen- 
tary on Srlpati's well-known work the Jatakapaddhati, for 



preface. xxlrii 

which see Bhandarkar's Report for 1882-83, and Cat. Bik., 
p. 338. The present MS. was copied I6tf3 A.D. 

Jatakarnava, p. 179, No. 1578, by Varaha Mihira, is a 
short work on horoscopy, copied in Newari, in N.S. 883 = 1763. 
The MS. though it professes to be complete contains three 
chapters only, namely : — 

1 . Grahamadhyadhikara, 

2. Grahasphutadhikara. 

3 . Triprasnadhikara. 

The third chapter in I.O. MS. is chayadhikara, and the 
last verse of the present MS. treats of the shadow of the 
sun-dial at mid-day. The I.O. MS. contains three more chap- 
ters. The Trinity College MS. contains the second chapter 
only. In the Durbar Library MS. the author is stated to be 
Varaha Mihira. 

Jaimini-sutra-vyakhya, entitled Subodhini, p. 179, No. 
(;{)109, is a commentary by Nilakantha on a work on horos- 
copy in Sutra form, complete in four chapters divided in four 
padas each, attributed to Jaimini. The Sanskrit College Library 
copy is defective in the beginning, while the MS. under notice 
is complete to the end of the second chapter. The Sanskrit 
College copy states that the work was composed in Saka 1676 
in Nepal during the reign of Ranajit Malla Deva of the solar 
dynasty, the last King of Bhatgto in Prof. BendalTs list. 
The Durbar Library copy contains in the second verse from 
the beginning a statement that it was composed at the request 
of Ranabhuj, a King of the solar dynasty. Ranabhuj and 
Kanajit appear to be one and the same person. The author 
Nilakantha is, therefore, a person different from the author of 
the Nilakantha Tajika. There is a complete copy of the 
original Sutras of Jaimini in the Asiatic Society in the 
Government collection with a commentary. 

Jyotihsastram, p. 20, No. 772 ^, appears to be a work on 
divination in Sanskrit and Newari, compiled from various 
sources by the- observation of the positions of dogs, lions, 
mules, snakes and elephants, &c, &c. 



XXYU1 PREFACE. 

Todalauanda, pp. 182-83, No. 1167, or Horasukha, by 
TodalaMalla. The MS. was copied in Samvat 1689 = 1583 
A.D. in Nagara character. Todala Malla, the great Finance 
Minister of Akbar, who is termed Maharajadhiraja here, 
made several compilations, i.e., in Smrti, in Tantra, in Vaidyaka 
and in astrology. The names of his compilations end in the 
word sukha or saukhya. The present MS. is Horasukha or 
Horasaukhya. It relates to Horasastra or Horoscopy. The 
attempt was made, as the author says, to bring together in 
one place, the substance of all such works as Jatakasamhitaby 
Varahamihira. In the preface the author speaks of Vasistha, 
Bhrgu, Grarga, ParaSara and others engaged in spreading 
religion. Unique. 

Naksatrasaravall, p. 194, No. 1188, gives the description 
of the various asterisms or naksatras, the number and position 
of stars in each and such other topics. It is a short work 
in Newari character. Unique. 

Patasaramtika, p. 205, No. 1167, or rather Patasadhana- 
tika, by ViSvanatha Daivajna, the son of Divakara Daivajna, is 
a commentary on the Patasarani by Ganesa Daivajna, son of 
KeSava. For the author and the commentator, see Bhandar- 
kar's Report for 1882-88, p. 29, preface. It deals with the 
rules for compiling Hindu almanacs. The initial year is 1444 
Saka= 1582 A.D. 

Prasnottara-ratnamalika, page 88, No. 1152 *r, is a work 
on fortune-telling from questions. It is on palm-leaf in Newari 
character, 14 leaves only. 

PraSnottaravali, p. 210, No. 1882. The MS. is in Newari 
character copied in N.S. 524 « 1404 A.D. The author is Gana- 
pati Sarma, the son of Kamalapati and Padmini and the grand- 
son of Haripati. It is a work on fortune-telling by means of 
questions. The copyist is DevaSamkara Sarma, the son of 
Ganapati, a resident at Svaniksevanta. 

Bhattotpalaratnamala, p. 229, No. 1188. This is a mis- 
take of the scribe for Jyotisaratnamala, by Sripati, with a 
commentary by Mahadeva. Mahsdeva's commentary seems 



iPREFACB. ttit 

to be very much abridged in this work. (See Ulwar Catalogue, 
extract No. 498.) The genealogy of the commentator is thus 
given in the extract. There was in the family of Sri janyalaya a 
brahmana named Bandhuka, who was a friend of King Karna. 
He had a son named Mahadeva who had three sons — Luniga, 
Ama Sarma and Ajayi. The last was a friend of King Bhima. 
Luniga's son Mahadeva, the commentator, wrote in 1185 Saka= 
1263. His grandfather Mahadeva wrote a commentary on 
the Katantra grammar entitled Sphutasabdasiddhi. 

Horapaddhatikalpavalll, Satlka, p. 278, No. (3)109. 
The text is by Vittala belonging to Krsnatrigotra, and the 
commentary is by Rudra Jyotirvid, the son of Vidyakara. 

Bhojadevasamgraha, pp. 8, 18, 34, 42, 86, 120, Nos. 
226 *, 619 *i, 1078 *, 1206 isr, 1648 « is an abstract of Bhoja- 
deva's great work on Astronomy- Astrology which again is based 
on Varahamihira. Damodara, the author, consults the works 
of Yogisvara and others, but he strictly follows the method of 
Varahamihira. The work treats of the fortune-telling of kings 
only. Professor Bendall says that the MS. in page 34 and 
120 is the earliest work dated in a non-Nepalese era, namely, 
Sake Samvat 1297. 

Mayuracitram, p. 89, Nos. 1176 ^ and 1179 *. This is a 
work on divination. It is written in the form of a dialogue be- 
tween Garga and Bhaguri. The works known on the subject are 
attributed either to Narada or to Varahamihira. The present 
work is in the form of a Purana complete in eight chapters. 

Yavanajataka, p. 40, No. 1180 *ff. The work has been 
fully described by me in Journal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
for 1897, in p. 310, also in my Report, page 8. But at 
that time the colophons of the various chapters were not 
drawn up. From a perusal of these in the present Catalogue it 
appears that the Yavanas could divine at birth whether a new- 
born child would be a monk. This at first sight may appear 
strange, but if the fact that among the missionaries of Asoka, 
two were Bactrian Greeks be taken into consideration* it 
would appear that Greeks in the outlying Provinces of their 



XXX PBEFACE. 

Empire often became bhiksus of the Buddhist religion. I 
take this opportunity of correcting two mistakes which in- 
advertently crept into my Report. For Vrhatjataka 'read 
Vrhat Samhita and for 4,000 slokas read 4,000 Indravajra 
slokas. Some copies of the Yavanajataka have, since the 
publication of my Report, been found in the City of Benares, but 
they are Vrddha Yavana in 8,000 Indravajra slokas, and the 
verse Iti svabhasaracanabhiguptam does not occur in any 
of these, and Vrddhayavana described by Eggeling in p. 1096 
I.O. Cat. is a quite different work from that in the Durbar 
Library. 

Yogayatra, p. 234, No. 505, by Varahamihira. The 
present MS. is defective in the beginning. First four leaves are 
missing. It is complete in 15 chapters, but many of them 
do not agree with these in the I.O. MS., p. 1057A. 

Chapters in the present MS. Chapters in the I.O. MS. 

2. Acaradhyaya. 1. Daivapurusakaradhyaya 

3. Abhiyogadhyaya. 2. Acaradhyaya. 

4. Yogadhyaya. 3. Abhiyoga o. 

5. Migrakadhyaya. 4. Yogadhyaya 

6. Valyupaharadhyaya. 5. Misraka o. 

7. Naksatra snanadhyaya. 6. Valyupahara o. 

8. Agninimittadhyaya. 7. Naksatranimitta o. 

9. Naksatra Kaitabhani 8. Agni nimitta o. 

10. Varilaksanadhyaya 9. Naksatra Kaitabha o. 

11. Hasti saladhyaya. 10. Asvacestitadhyaya 

12. Hastigltadhyaya. 11. Prasthanakiya o. 

13. Madakaranadhyaya. 12. Sri sakunadhyaya. 

14. Asvagitam. 13. Protsaha o. 

15. Khadgalaksanadhyaya. 14. Valotsaha. 

Rantnakalapa, p. 286, No. 1578, is an elementary com- 
pilation of Astronomy- Astrology by Visnudeva, the son of 
Satyavati and Raghunandana, grandson of Vasudeva and 
a great-grandson of Ramadatta belonging to the Karambaha 
family of the Vatsa gotra. Unique. Compiled in Saka 1 568 = 



PREFACE. XXxi 

1646 A.D., copied by Mahadeva Daivajiia in 1612 Saka, i.e., 
1690 A.D. 

Surya-siddhanta-bhasya, pp. 88 and 182, No. 1165 % is 
known to Aufrecht in Buhler's Guzerat lists. The Durbar 
Library copy describes the commentator as a Maithila, a 
Somayajl and a Vajapeyi. It is in Maithila character. The 
text and the commentary are both given in the MS. 

Horasastram, p. 41, No. 1206 *h, appears to be a work 
different from that mentioned by Burnell 79a. This is the 
same as Varahamihira's Vrhajjataka (see Raj. Mitra, No. 
2458). There are ten chapters in this incomplete MS. But 
they are differently arranged from that given in Eggeling, 
1098a. 

Kausalya-kusumavali, pp. 19 and 101, No. 786 ^r, by 
Rajabrahma-varddhana, is in two parts. The first is com- 
plete but the second defective at the end. [See Rep. p. 11.] 

Khandakhadya, p. 89, No. 3, of the new collection, is 
based on Aryabhatas theories. It is by Brahmagupta, son of 
Jisnugupta. He is said to have flourished in the beginning of 
the seventh century. The MS. is complete and it was copied 
inN.S. 470 = 1350 A.D. 

Khandakhadyatlka, p. 26, No. 938 «, and pp. 86 and 
102, No 1648 h, was composed by Sridatta in Nepal for the 
use of the Nepalese Pandits, It commences with the for- 
mula for the reduction of the dates in the Saka era into those 
of the Nepalese era. For a f ullef description of the work see 
Rep. pp. 11 and 12. 

Navaratna, p. 195, No. 1166, by Damodara Bhatta, an 
astronomical treatise with versified colophons, was composed 
at Benares in Saka 1605. The author was the son of Janaki 
and Raghunatha belonging to the Oitpavana race, that is, the 
race of Konkana brahmanas to which the Peswas of Puna be- 
longed. The present MS. was copied by Purnananda, the 
astrologer to the king of Nepal, probably^ a student of the 
author, in N.S. 806. 

The work is divided into ratnas or manikyas. The 



XXX11 PREFACE. 

present MS. contains the Jyotisamanikya divided into five 
prakaSas of the first marlci. These are : — 

Pancadisiddhi marlci prakasa 
Drk-kheta siddhi „ „ 

Triprasna „ „ 

Parva „ „ 

Ganita „ „ 

Srlpati-paddhati Vyakhyanam, p. 18, No. 619 9, in 
Nagara character, seems to be a commentary on the well- 
known Jyotisa work brought from India by the Gorkhas who 

write in Nagara. 

KAvya. 

Kiratarjunlyam, p. 18, No. 844 n, is a MS. in Maithila 
character. 

Kicakabadha Kavyam, p. 75, No. 1608 s, by NitivarmS. 
See Raj. Mitra, Vol. II, p. 57. Written in a highly artificial 
style full of alliteration. 

KumSrasambhavam, p. 12, No. 328, in Maithila charac- 
ter, comes to the end of the seventh canto. 

Nalacaritatlka, p. 91, No. 17, in the new collection by Sir 
Vlra Shamsher, in Maithila character, by Mantrindra Harls- 
vara. The commentator wrote a work in prose and verse on 
the life of Vikramaditya. The commentary was completed 
in the Saka year 1164 = 1242 A.D., and it appears to be one of 
the earliest commentaries on the work which seems to be the 
Naisadhacarita, as it is complete in 22 cantos. 

Naisadhacaritrain, pp. 12 and 87, Nos. 320, incomplete, and 
1648 ^ to the middle of the ninth canto. The latter is in 
Maithila character. 

Yaduvamsa Kavyarn, p. 282, No. 1427, by Kasmatha. 
Leaves 1-19, 24-29, 89-99 are missing. The father of the 
author was Samkara and his mother Rohini and he was a 
Brahmana. It appears to be an imitation of Kalidasa's 
Raghuvaipga and treats of the family of Tadus to which 
Krsna belonged. It is a grammatical work of the nature of 



Pkeface. xxxiii 

Bhatti, the first canto giving examples of Car) and the second 
of Lag, 

Raghuvamgam, p. 21 and commentaries, pp. 12 and 81 
being Nos. 772 w, 823, 1076 *r, all in Newari character. The 
commentary in both the numbers is Sobhan5 by Vaidya Sri- 
garbhacandra ; both incomplete. 

Sisflpalabadham, pp. 56 and 75, Nos. 1473 sr and 1608 m. 

Sisupalabadham, commentary, p. 72, No, 1588 H on the 
first and the sixteenth cantos. 

Sisupalabadham, commentary, Nirnaya Vrhaspati, p. 254, 
No. 1420, by Vrhaspati, a Bengali Brahmana of the Mahintapa 
My a gSi of theRadhiya class. He is therefore no other than 
the well-known Rayamukuta. His Guru was Sridhara who 
gave him the title of Misra. He was greatly honoured by the 
King of Gauda, He styles himself Kavicakravarttl. The 
MS. in paper was copied in N.S. 829 = 1709 by Brahmadeva 
in Newari character. The commentary ends with the sixth 
Canto. 

Saundarananda Kavyarp, p. 74, No. 1585 v 9 8 leaves only. 
Unique. 

Bhaktavijaya Kavyam, p. 229, No. 1480, by Lalitavalla- 
bha. The bhakta in this poem, composed in 108 verses, is 
Prthvinarayana, the Gorkha conqueror of the Nepal Valley. 
He was the great grandson of Prthvlpati, belonging to the 
SomavamSa. It was composed in f*rriSrfirai*rT3rH& i.e., in the 
Saka year 1671. Prthvinarayana had four younger brothers, 
Jisnuprabbava, Dalamardana, Dalajit and Subha. 

Haricarita Kavyam, pp. 75 and 184, No. 1608 ?, in Maithila 
character, copied by Bhanukara in Saka 144. The poem is an 
imitation of Naisadhacarita on the adventures of Krsna, the 8th 
incarnation of Visnu, complete in 13 cantos. The author Oatur- 
bhuja composed the work in 1415 Saka =1493 A.D. at Rama 
kell, a suburb of Gauda, the capial of Bengal, then ruled 
by the Khojas and Habsis, who were put down in 1494 by 
Alauddhin Husain Shah. The author belonged to the KaSyapa 
gotra, and the village from which his line of ancestors in that 
• 5 



XXXIV PREFACE. 

gotra among the Varendra distribution of the Bengal 
Brahmanas, derived their family title is Karaiija. The theory 
is that the five brahmanas from whom the Radhiya and Varen- 
dra brahmanas claim their descent, came in Gaud a in Veda- 
vananga Sake, i.e., in 654 Saka, i.e., 654+ 78 = 732 A.D., i.e., at a 
time when the preachings of Kumarila wrought a great revolu- 
tion among the Brahmanas and Brahminists in India. This 
was just the time when Yasovarma was ruling in Kanoj with 
Bhavabhuti, the pupil of Kumarila, as his court Pandit and court 
poet. Tradition says that application was made by a King 
of Gauda to the King of Kanoj for five Brahmanas to per- 
form a Vedic sacrifice, and five men came to Bengal. Their 
descendants settled on both sides of the Ganges and were in 
course of time divided into Eadhlyas and Varendras. 

Their descendants obtained 156 villages from local kings, 
and these villages gave names to 156 families of brahmanas — 
56 among the Radhiyas and 100 among Varendras. We 
have not as yet got any authentic record about the grants of 
these villages. This work gives us the history of the grant 
of the village of Karaiija to Svarnarekha by Dharmapala (875- 
900). In Svarnarekha's family was born Bhundu Acaryya- 
vara. His son was Divakara Acaryya. In his family was 
Nityananda Kavindra who was an expert in the Mahabharata. 
One of his descendants was the author of Smrtikaumudi who 
got a son, named Siva Dasa, by worshipping Siva at Benares. 
He had four sons — Narayana Misra Mantrin, Madhava 
Pathaka, Bhanu Sarma and the author Caturbhuja. When the 
last was born his father wrote with a golden pen and with 
honey a gloka on his tongue to the effect that he may be a 
poet and so he was a poet. 

Lyric, &c, &c. 

Gitagovinda, p. 16, No. 468 qy, in Newari character, was 
copied N.S. 616=1496 in the reign of Jayaraja Malla. 

Gitapaficagika, p. 16, No. 461, in Newari, dated Saka 
1550=1628 A.D., was composed by Raja Jagajjyotirmalla. 



PREFACE). XXXV 

The MS. also contains two dramas in Newari by the same 
royal author, viz., Kunjavihari and Kubalayagva. 

Gitamala, p. 74, No. 1584 *t, songs in Newari. 

Caurapancasika, p. 88, No. 1152 h, in Newari character. 

Padyasamuccaya, p. 202, No. 1502, composed by RajS 
JagatprakaSa Malla of BhatgEo, the grandson of Jagaj jyotir- 
malla, the literary king. 

Meghadtltam, pp. 31 and 56, Nos. 1076 z and 1478 3, the 
first in Newari and the second in Maithila, incomplete ; the 
former was copied in N.S. 484=1364 A.D.in the reign of 
Jayarjjuna Malla. 

Commentary to Ditto, p. 78, No. 1683 ar, incomplete, in 
Newari character. 

Slokasamgraha, p. 74, No. 1584 nr. 

Slokasarasamgraha, p. 259, No. 1429, collected and com- 
piled by Jagajjyotirmalla, the King of BhatgS, in Newari, 
Samvat 746 = 1626 A.D., copied in N.S. 808=1688 A.D. One 
of the poems is Varanasyastakam, another is Vairagya- 
varnanam. 

Dramas, Indian. 

Nagananda, p. 73, No. 1583 ^, is a well-known work by 
Sri Harsa, the great king of Kanyakubja. The Prastavana 
has many passages which are identical with those in Ratnavali 
reputed to be by the same author. 

The present MS. has the first three leaves missing. It is 
copied in Newari character and the date is N.S. 488=1318 
A.D. when king Jayananda was reigning. 

Uttaracarita, pp. 12 and 69, Nos. 332 and 1537 ^. The 
first is in Maithila and the second is in Nagara character. 

Malatimadhava, pp. 56 and 74, Nos. 1473 * and 1585 m. 
The first is dated N.S. 276 = 1156 A.D. It belonged to a 
Buddhist monk Buddha-raksita. The other is copied in La. 
Sam. 469. 

' Anargha-raghava, pp. 74 and 81, Nos. 1583 s and 1634 
«r. Both are in Maithila character and without date. 



XXXVI PBEFACE. 

Prabpdhacandrodaya, p. 64, No. 1534 $. The MS. 
is in old hand- writing with only a few modern leaves. The 
character is Newari. 

Mudraraksasa, p. 88, No. 1648 is copied in Newari, in 
N.S. 491=1371 A.D., at Lalitapura, by Gomendra Candraof 
the school of the gem of writers when King Jayarjuna was 
reigning. The MS. is complete. 

It has a commentary entitled Mudraprakasa, p. 83, No. 
1645 3", by Vatesvara Misra, son of Mahamahopadhyaya 
Gaurlpati in Maithila character. The MS. contains com- 
mentary of the first and a second Ankas and a portion of 
the third. 

Karpuramanjari-natika, p. 45, No. 1261 v, copied in La. 
Sam. 858. 

Gauridigambara, p. 13, No. 382 5, by Samkara Misra. 
(See notices of Sanskrit MSS. Vol. XI, p. 12.) 

Dramas, Nepalese. 

Amrtodaya-nataka, p. 147, No. 1418, in Nagarl character, 
in Sam. 1848 = 1792 A.D. This appears to have been com- 
posed under the Gurkhas. For the contents of the work see 
Keport, p. 17. 

Asvamedhanatakam, p. 149, No. 1617, by Sumati-Jita 
mitra-deva in N.S. 810 = 1691 (see Report, page 18). 

Gitadigambara, pp. 13 and 103, No. 882 m, by Vamsa- 
mani, the son of Ramacandra of the Vilvapanca race of Mai- 
thila Brahmanas. VamSamanilived in Nepal and wrote this 
work on the occasion of a Tulapurusadana by Pratapa Malla 
Deva of Kathmandu in the Saka year 1677 = 1655 A.D. It 
is in imitation of Jayadeva's Gitagovinda. But it has a hymn 
to the united form of Hara and Parvati in Hindi which has a 
ring of Tulasldasa who died of plague in 1624 A.D. 

It was composed to entertain the Princes and Panditas 
assembled to see the Tulapurusadana in which the King in 
his armours weighs himself against gold and other precious 



metals and gives them away to Brahmanas. Pratapa was 
himself a poet and his Astakas are be to found in all the holy 
places in Nepal inscribed at prominent places on stone. It is 
meet that on an auspicious occasion like this he should 
encourage a Sanskrit dramatic performance. 

DhOrttasamagama, p. 66, No. 1536, by Jyotirisvara 
surnamed Kavisekharacaryya. His grand-father was Rames- 
vara and his father was Dhirasimha. They belonged to the 
clan of Mahisasana and he was the lord of the village named 
Pallijanma. He is called Abhinava Bharata. This is signi- 
ficant. It is known from Report, p. 23, that he was the author 
of a semi- vernacular work entitled Varnana-ratnakara, giving 
the poetic conventions of his age. 

He was contemporary with Harisimha of Simraon (1324) 
who defeated a Sultan (Suratrami), and the work was re- 
presented immediately after the conclusion of peace. This 
appears to be a comedy. 

Pandavavijaya, p. 19 and 115, No. 694 *sr, by Jayarana 
Malla Deva, the husband of Nathalla Devi, the rightful heir to 
the throne of Nepal and the son of Vijaya Malla (see historical 
preface by Prof. Bendall). This is also called Sabhaparba 
nataka, from which it appears to represent the event of 
the Sabhaparva of the Mahabharata. 

Bhairavananda-natakam, p. 84 and 119, No. 1078 ^r, by 
Manika, the son of Rajavardhana who, by the boon of 
Natesvara, was an expert in dramaturgy. This appears to be 
a secular drama, the hero being Bhairava and the heroine 
MadanavatT, a celestial damsel cursed by a Rsi to become a 
manusl. The drama was enacted on an appropriate occasion, 
namely, the marriage of Jayadharma Malla Deva, the son of 
Jayasthiti Malla by Rajalla Devi. About this King and 
his literary tastes see Appendix by Professor Bendall, pp. 11- 
14. He came apparently from Mithila, a place of learning, 
and so he had cultivated a fine literary taste for the display 
of which his new position as King of Nepal afforded him 
ample opportunities. The birth ceremony of his son, the 



XXXV111 PREFACE. 

same Dharma Malla, was celebrated by the performance of a 
four-act Ramayana. Professor Bendall has noted this fact 
from the chronicles. In Cat. p. 246, No. 1418, there is a 
description of a four-act Ramayana, by Dharma Gupta, the son 
of Rama-dasa. Dharma Gupta calls himself Poet Laureate. 
He was commanded by Jayayuthasinha Deva, who does not 
seem to be a King of Nepal though his dominions included 
parts of the valley, on the occasion of the Harigamkara ratha- 
yatra, to enact the drama. The King Yuthasimha is said to 
have been a worshipper of Gopalesvara, Sikharanarayana and 
Jhankesvari. Of these the second is one of the four Narayanas 
who protect the valley, namely, Tsananarayana Visananarayana, 
Cangunarayana and Sikharanarayana. From his title Simha 
he seems to have belonged to the race of Hari Simha, and from 
his worship of Sikharanarayana he seems to have dominion 
in Nepal. What stamps him as a King of Simraon is the 
epithet suraki-kula-kamala-kanana-vikasanaika-bhaskara, i.e., 
he helped in the establishment of the Surki dynasty of Jaunpore. 
The troubles in the then eastern [Shurq] dominion of Delhi 
commenced at the end of the reign of Sultan Firoz Shah of 
Delhi, 1388, and Yatha Simha appears to be one of those Hindu 
Rajas who helped Malik Sharwar, a Khauja, to establish him- 
self as Malik-us-shurq. Yiitha Simha seems to have been a 
contemporary and a relative of Jayasthiti who, by marrying 
Rajalla Devi, made himself master of Nepal. 

The present copy of the four-act Ramayana is written in 
Newari some time after it was composed. Professor Bendall in 
his Cam. Oat. mentions a four-act Ramayana entitled Ramanka 
natika by the same author, son of the same Ramadasa, com- 
posed in 1860 A.D. This was enacted at Lalitapura. Rama- 
dasa was not a magistrate of Nepal as Professor Bendall says, 
but he was the spiritual guide to the Kings of Nepal. The 
drama was composed when the poet was young and his father 
living. He composed it to please his father and, as is common 
with young aspirants of literary fame, he displays his sounding 
titles, Vidyarnava and BalavSglSvara. But the drama 



PREFACE. XXXIX 

noticed in this Catalogue, p. 246, was enacted at a later period, 
in another part of Nepal. This composition is here represented 
as a Nataka, but this is opposed to the rules of dramaturgy in 
which Natika only can be finished in four acts. Many years 
after its composition when the poet was an old man he gave 
up his sounding titles. This very drama appears to have 
been twice more enacted, once on the birth ceremony and once 
more on the initation ceremony of Dharma Malla. 

The fact that the nandls and prastavanas differ accord- 
ing to the occasion raises a nice question. The prastavanas 
are implicitly believed to contain contemporary historical infor- 
mation. That they certainly do. But the* place and the occa- 
sion mentioned in them relates only to one single representation 
during the author's lifetime. The information that this 
drama was enacted four times in 40 years or so, shows its 
immense popularity in Nepal at the end of the fourteenth 
century. 

Anthology. 

Prasannasahityaratnakara, p. 211, No. 1574, by Nandana, 
in Newari character, is an anthology in 1,000 stanzas. The 
compilier is very proud of his knowledge of Panini and 
Sahitya. He says his work is beyond computation. He 
commences with Sivavrajya and quotes a verse of Vasukalpa 
Datta in the beginning. This work is compiled in imitation of 
Kavivacana Samuccaya [See Rep., pp. 20-21] in which colla- 
tions of verses on different subjects are called Vrajyas. That 
is Buddhistic while the present is Hindu. 

Prastavaratnakara, p. 212, No. (2)94, by Haridasa, son 
of Purusottama, of the Karana clan, an inhabitant of the 
Maharajya Kharagada. Purusottama had four sons — Krsna- 
dasa, Damodara, Narayana and Haridasa. Haridasa was a 
worshipper of Ganesa and was proficient in JoytisaSastra, 
Vrhat katha, Smrti katha, Asikya, Samudrika, Sakuna, Panca- 
tantra, Caraka and Kavyas. It was composed in 1614, 
probably of the Vikrama samvat, at Jatapattana, during the 
reign of Varavirasahi, There is a table of contents given in 



Xl PREFACE. 

verses at the beginning of the work, from which it appears 
that the work is complete in 21 chapters — (1) Nlti, (2) Rajanlti, 
(8) Praklrnakakhyanam, (4) Anyokti, (5) Praise of wealth, 
(6) Praise of good men, (7) Gardens, (8) Gods, (9) Censure 
of bad men, (10) Katakhyana, (11) Good manners, (12), 
Righteousness, (13) and (14) Praise and censure of women, 
(15) Trees, (16) Love, (17) Omens, (18) Palmistry (19) Jug- 
glery, (20) Jyotisa, and (21) Book on gems. The MS. was 
copied in Sam. 1890 by Vidyananda the great worshipper of 
Buddha. 

Rhetoric. 

KavyaprakaSa, p. 67, No. 1586 sr, is in Maithila charac- 
ter. 

Kavyadarga, p. 74, No. 1585 *sr, is a dilapidated copy. 

Dasarupakalankara, p. 12, No. 344 g?, is in Maithila 
character, composed by Visnudhanika. 

Sahrdayahrdayavaloka, p. 15, No. 400, in Maithila cha- 
racter, copied in La. Sam. 91. This is well knownas the com- 
mentary by Anandabardhana on Dhvani, a work of unknown 
authorship. 

Lexicon. 

Amarakosa (1) p. 19, No. 772 * ; (2) p. 19, 772 9 ; (8) 
p. 23, No. 802 n; (4) p. 23, 803 w; (5) p. 50, No. 1361 w; (6) 
p. 56, No. 1473 * ; (7) p. 69, No. 1537 * ; (8) p. 71, No. 1559 
s; (9) p. 75, No. 1608 s; (10) p. 75, No. 1608 z ; and (11) p. 
77, No. 1633 w. (1) (2) (3) and (4) are in Newari; (5) is in 
Bengali ? copied in V. Sam. 1511 in Campakaranya during the 
reign of Madanasiinha Deva ; (6) is in Newari copied in 412 
N.S.; (7) is in Maithila character; (8) is a mere fragment ; (11) 
is in Maithila copied during the reign of Bhavasimha Deva. 

Amarakosatippanl, p. 60, No. 1475 h, is in Newari 
character. 

AmarakostikS, p. 28, No. 802 m and «r and 808 nr. The 
first is in Maithila composed by Vrhaspati, commonly known 
as Rayamukuta; the second by Srikara, the Court Pandita of 



PREFACE. xli 

Ramasimha of Mithila, and the third is by these two commen- 
tators. Rayamukuta flourished in the early part of the 
fifteenth century in Bengal. He was highly honoured by 
the Hindu dynasty which rose on the ruins of the Ilias 
shahis of Bengal. Raja Kans was the founder of this 
dynasty, but his son Jadu became a Muhammadan, and even 
after his conversion he patronized Rayamukuta, who speaks 
of his patron as Jalalud-din. The Srikara may be the father 
Srlnatha Acaryya Cudamani, who is reported to be the guru 
of Raghunandana. Raghunandana flourished by middle of the 
Sixteenth Century, and there is nothing to prevent the father 
of his guru going in shares with Rayamukuta about the 
authorship of a commentary on the Amarakosa. 

Medinikosa, p. 79, No. 1683 sr, in Maithila, copied in La. 
Sam. 377. 

Dhanan jaya-nighantu, p. 189, No. 1089. It was copied in 
Sam. 1654-1598 A.D. The present MS. is defective in the be- 
gining. The colophon of the second chapter is the same as in 
I.O. Cat. p. 285 B. 

Fine Arts. 

Sangitasarasamgraha, p. 268, No. 1478, by Jagajjyotir- 
malla, is an abstract of all the works on music, dancing and 
acting known at his time. The work was composed in N.S. 746, 
copied by Siva, the son of Simha-Deva, in the reign of the 
Royal compiler. 

The Royal bard says that it is reported that Bharata wrote 
his work in one hundred thousand slokas, but it is very doubt- 
ful if the work exists in its entirety. He saw certain portions 
and he heard of some other portions from others. VipradSsa 
Bharata collected some portion. Vyasa embodied some por- 
tion in his Puranas. From these and from other sources the 
King made his collection. He did not say anything new, but 
only changed the versification. 

Safigita-candra, p. 260, No. (2) 222, is based entirely upon 
Bharata natya Sastra. It is a comprehensive work on music 
and dancing. The work was brought to Nepala by Jagaj jyotir 
6 



Xlii PREFACE. 

Malla from Southern India, and he, with the assistance of 
Vangamani, wrote a commentary entitled Sangitabhaskara, p. 
262, No. (2)222. The author of the text is Abhilasa. The 
work is interspersed with Newari translation of important 
passages by the Royal author. 

Sangltasarvasva, p. 67, No. 1586 sr, in Newari character. 
. The work was known only in quotations, see p. 686 B. Cat. Cat. 
Vol. I. It quotes from the following works — Natyadarpana, 
Sangitavalll, Sangitasekhara, Natyalocana, Sangitakalpa- 
vrksa, DaSarupa, Ratnakosa and Bharata. The work is by 
Jagaddhara who quotes it in his commentary on Veni 
Samhara. 

Hastamuktavali, p. 270, No. 798, by Subhankara, treats 
of the motions of hand in dancing. It is based on one of the 
chapters of Bharata Natyasastra, supplemented by Kama 
S5stra. This work is explained by a commentary entitled 
Hastamuktavali-sfiLrasamuddhrtika, by Ghanasyama, p. 272, 
No. 1282, written for the edification of the son of Ananta the 
daughter's son of Jagajjyotirmalla, composed in N.S. 795 = 
1675 A.D. 

Ragamala, or Ragalaksanam, p. 67 and 241, Nos. 1586 $ 
(three leaves only) and 1478. By Bharata. Appears to be 
a chapter from Bharata Natyasastra. 

Mayasarngrahah, or Pratisthatattvam, p. 69, No. 1587 *sr, 
is a work on architecture in which the modes of constructing 
palaces and dwelling-houses have been given. 

PraSastiratna, p. 209, No. (2)191, is a letter-writer. In 
the preamble it records the rise of Prthvlpati Varma in the 
GorkhS hills. His son was CandrarGpasaha Varma. His son 
was Visnu Varma, and his son Jiva Saha Varma was the patron 
of the author. 

The letter- writer gives the number of the Syllable Sri to 
be appended before the names of respectable addressees. Six 
are to be added before Guru's name, five before master's, two 
before servant's, four before enemy's, three before friend's, and 
oue before son's or wife's name. The MS. is unique. 



preface. xiiii 

(xayanalocana, p. 164, No. 1412, was copied by KirltamSli 
Sarma in Saka 1706. It is a unique work on elementary 
music of the mediaeval type. It gives the times of the day 
for the various tunes to sing. The MS. ends with an interest- 
ing quotation from the Sangltacudamani. 

Caturangatarangim, p. 168, No. 1612, by Vamsamani, a 
work on the chess play, was composed under the order of 
Krsnananda Raya. Unique. 

Natyasastra, p. 196, No. 173, attributed to Bharata. The 
present MS 4 ends with the chapter on Aharyabhinaya, which 
is marked as the seventy-second. SeeBik. Cat., p. 510. The 
work has been published in its entirety in the Kavyamala 
series. 

Bharatanama-dipaka-nada-Sastram, p. 281, No. 798. 
The same as Raja. Mitra, No. 588, entitled Nada-dipaka, in the 
form of an original fcantra, the interlocutors being Devi and 
Bhairava. It treats of the presiding deities of letters, length 
of vowels, metres, songs, vocal music and different subdivision 
of music. The work ends with the definition of a poet. 
Nada is said to be the messenger of Cupid and takes the 
place of the fifth Upaveda. 

Politics. 

Canakya-Sloka, p. 60, No. 1475 *r, in Maithila character. 

Pancatantra, p. 9, No. 242, is only a fragment. 

Hitopadesa, p. 72, No. 1583 isr, and p. 75, No. 1608 sr. 
The first is a fragment in Newari, and the second was copied 
in the reign of Yaksamalla, in the year 594 of the Nepal era, 
i.e., 1474 A.D. 

EkadasSdyadhikarana, p. 30, No. 1076 % composed 
by Murari Misra — Mahamahopadhyaya, on domestic and 
foreign affairs, as a sequel to his work on Badhabbhyuccaya 
laksana, i.e., on the political obstacles. Unique. The MS. was 
copied by Harikara, son of Mahamahopadhyaya Sri RatnS- 
kara. 

Kamandaklya Nitisara, p. 91, No, 15, of the ne^ 



xliV PREFACE. 

collection, in Maithila character, complete in 81 leaves, copied 
in La. Sam. 4*82. The work has been published in the Biblio- 
theca Indica. The author is said to have been a student of 
Canakya. He speaks of the seven essentials of a reigning 
King. 

KuSopadesatika, p. 85, No.-1647%byBandhava-Sena, in 
, Newari character, copied in N.S. 641 = 1524 A.D. The small 
poem in eight verses known as Kusopadesa or Gunastaka is 
said to have been composed by Angadakumara, and the com- 
mentary is by a Buddhist Vajracarya Bandhava Sen belonging 
to Mahavihara to the east of Kasthamandapa. It was com- 
posed under a tree within the compound of the Mahavihar. 

Bajavidhanasara, p. 244, No. 282, is a work on politics 
in two parts, by Ranganatha Suri the son of Panditaraja 
Brajanatha, for the benefit of Maharajadhiraja Yuddha- 
girvana Sahi of the Gorkha dynasty of Nepal (1799-1816) at 
Kantipura which is another name of Kathmandu. The first 
part treats of the court (sangopanga) and the second part the 
duties of the King. Unique. 

Tantrakhyanakatha, p. 64, No. 1534 sr and p. 74, No. 
1684 m, is an abstract of the Pancatantra with a Newari 
translation, copied in N.S. 725, perhaps by a Buddhist scribe. 

Dhanurveda. 

Dhanurveda, p. 190, No. 557, and Dhanurvedaprakaranam, 
p. 191, No. (2)82, are attributed to Siva and Vikramaditya, 
respectively. For fuller description see Rep. p. 9. 

SamgrSmavidhih, p. 264, No. (2)112, is a work on the 
art of war. It gives a definition of Aksauhini and treats 
of the disposition of the army in war. But it deals destruc- 
tion more with mantras than with weapons. 

Erotics. 

There are five leaves in p. 82, No. 1645 w, in which the 
age of the woman has been taken as a factor in the subject- 
matter of the science. 



PREFACE. 3Jr 

Kamakala, p. 82, No. 1645 % by Kokka, on erotics, written 
for the entertainment of Vainya Datta, is a modern work on the 
enjoyment of the company of females. The opening verse 
shows the aim and object of the work. The work is perhaps 
the same as Ratirahasya ; at least the author and his patron 
are the same. For Ratirahasya see Burnett's Index of Sans- 
krit MSS. in the palace of Tanjaur. 

Rasamaiijarl, p. 32, No. 1077 $, by Bhanudatta, is in 
Maithila, copied in La. Sam. 492. For a commentary on this 
see Rep. p. 11. 

Nagarakasarvasva, pp. 86 and 109, No. 1648 ^r, by Padma 
Sri Jnana, a Buddhist monk, the pupil of a Brahmana named 
Vasudeva (see Report, p. 11). The MS. is complete in 18 chap- 
ters. In the second verse the writer speaks of works on erotics 
in languages other than Sanskrit. His work is in the form of 
a tantra of the left-handed class. One of his authorities is 
Siddhyaika-virama-tantra. He quotes a verse from Mahes- 
vara which to all intents and purposes is a tantrika one. He 
relies also upon Sankara Kamatantra for his materials. 

In p. 196, No. 1464, there is a commentary on this work by 
the King of Bhatgft named Jagaj jyotirmalla. The commentator 
takes great liberties with the text, for instance, in the second 
hemistitch of the first verse the word ladaha in the original 
has been changed into yadiha, because the word being an un- 
known technical term in erotics was rather hard for the 
Royal interpreter to explain. The Hindu Raja takes the 
Buddhist Mafiju Sri as Kamadeva without a word of explana- 
tion. It was a matter of course in his days. Mafiju Sri with 
a sword in one and a MS. in the other hand is at once the 
god of power, god of learning and god of love. The Manju- 
Sri hill near Kathmandu is used by the Hindus as Sarasvati 
hill on the day sacred to that deity. He is worshipped as 
Padma Kumarl in Oooch Vihar. He has a position in Hindu 
tantrika pantheon as the god of poetry. 



Xlvi PREFACE. 

Darsana. 

Anumanakhandatika, pp. 81 and 94, No. 1684 sf, by 
Vacaspati. It begins with an invocation to the child- form 
of Krsna which became an object of general worship after the 
advent of Caitanya, but even before him it had its worshippers. 
The present MS., though labelled Anumanakhandatika in the 
Darbar Library, appears to be an original work by Vascaspati, 
who, in one of the verses in the work, says that he had studied 
the systems both of Gautama and Jaimini. This is possible 
only in the case of Vacaspati, the commentator of the six 
systems. If my surmise be correct this is a brand-new dis- 
covery of a work on anumana by the great Vacaspati. 

Kiranavalltika, p. 50, No. 1861 5, though labelled tlka, is 
really the text by Udayana. It ends with the chapter on 
Dravya. It is a commentary on Prasastapada's bhasya on the 
Kanada Sutras. The MS. was copied at Navadvlpa by Hari 
Sarma in the Saka year 1491 = 1569 A.D. when the literary 
activity of the Naiyayikas at that city was at its highest. 
The work has been published at Benares. 

DravyakiranavalT, p. 85, No. 1118 it, is the same MS. in 
Newari character. 

Nyayakusumanjali, p. 18, No. 882 it, is by Udayana. 
It has leaves 14 to 85, in Maithila character. 

Kusumanjaliprakasa, p. 84, No. 1645 sr, by Vardhamana, 
the son of Gaggesa Upadhyaya, the author of the Tattvacin 
tamani. This is a commentary on Kusumanjali by Udayana, 
a work designed to establish the existence of God. Var- 
dhamana begins his work with a namaskara to his father, 
who was an adept both in Nyaya and Mimamsa. The MS. 
ends with the third stavaka. 

Khandanakhandakhadya, p. 85, No. 1118^, by Sriharsa. 
The MS. contains pp. 109-212 only. It was copied at Vijala- 
pura by Pandita Vasudeva in La. Sam. 116, i.e., about 1288 
A.D., a few years after the death of the author, who flourish- 
ed about the time of the Muhammadan conquest. 



PREFACE. xlvii 

Govindatattvanirnaya, p. 17, No. 619 m, by MahSma- 
hopadhyaya Govinda, in five chapters. The MS. seems to be 
complete. It is difficult to classify it as it partakes of the 
nature both of Tantra and of Darsana. The first chapter 
treats of Adhikarl, this is tantrika. The other chapters are 
(2) on the establishment of non-duality ; (8) on the nature of 
Brahma as Suddha ; and (4) refutation of the theory that Pra- 
krti is the material cause. The MS. is worm-eaten and full 
of lacuna. It is written in Maithila character and dated in 
La. Sam, but the last digit falls in a lacuna 52 -I- . Uniquo. 

Tattvacintamani, p. 45, No. 1261 ?§r. The MS. contains 
the second book only. It was copied in Maithila character 
in La. Sam. 486= about 1548 A.D. 

Tattvacintamanyaloka, p. 16, No. 468 *sr The MS. 
contains a few leaves only. 

Tattvacintamanyalokatika, p. 87, No. 1114 h. Though 
labelled as above in the Durbar Library it is really a 
commentary on Tattvacintamani. The Aloka begins with 
OTTTfinra while this comments upon ipffT^tHttFtar:. It is by 
Rucidatta (see India Office, p. 682). Rucidatta was a pupil 
of Jayadeva known as Paksadhara Misra, the author of 
the commentary known as Aloka. 

Vatsayananyayabhasyam p. 22, No. 787 «sr, contains 
the second chapter only. The MS. was copied in L. Sam. 
298=about 1410 A.D. 

Nyayavarttikatatparyyatlka, by Vaeaspati Misra, p. 48, 
No. 1380 isr. The MS. contains the fifth chapter only. 

Nyayavarttikatatparyatika, by Udayana, p. 49, No. 
1861 ^. This is wrongly called tika. It is really parisuddhi. 
The MS. contains the first and second chapters only. It was 
copied in Sarsapagrama in the Saka year 1410 = 1488 A.D. 

Tatparyya-parisuddhi, by Udayana, p. 81, No. 1076 ^, p. 
46, No. 1261 ^, p. 47, No. 1821 % are in Maithila charac- 
ter; the first was copied in La. Sam 889 and the last in 
La. Sam 408. The first ends with the second, and the last 
with the fifth chapter. The former was copied by Jatadhara 



xlviil PREFACE. 

under orders of Laksmlpati Upadhyaya, and the latter by 
Vacaspati under orders of Vanlnatha Bhattacarya. This is a 
commentary on the fifth remove on the Gautama Sutras:—- 

Gautama Sutras. 

Vatsayana's Bhasya. 

IJdyotakara's Nyaya Varttika. 

Vacaspati Misra's Tatparyyatlka. 

Udayana's Tatparyyaparisuddhi. 

Its full name is Nyayavarttikatatparyya-parisuddhi. It 
has been published at Benares. 

Dharmaputrika, p. 92, No. 86 v of the new collection, is 
a work on Yoga. It partakes of the character both of Philo- 
sophy and of Tantra ; the chapters are marked some as patalas 
others as Adhyayas. It deals with such topics as dhyana, 
dharana, siddhi, antaraya, cikitsa and so on, in 16 chapters. It 
is a short work in 11 leaves only. It appears to have been 
composed in N.S. 189 = 1069 A.D. in the reign of Samkara 
Deva. The last pada of one of the verses appears to contain 
the name of the author, but it is so incorrect that it would be 
venturing too much to base any conclusion upon it. The 
pada is Sri Jajjalasyottaratollakeyah. Unique. 

Nayatattvaloka, p. 49, No. 1861 h ; the correct name 
seems to be Nyayatattvaloka. The MS. contains the third 
chapter and a portion of the fourth. There is a MS. of this 
work in the I.O., being No. 205, p. 610 B., which contains the 
first and second chapters ; and the last treats of thirteen out of 
sixteen topics of Gautama, namely, from Prameya to Ohala. 
The present MS. therefore seems to treat of Jati and Nigrahas- 
thana, of which Jati is exceedingly difficult and deserves a 
fuller treatment than was given to it by Vacaspati in his 
Tatparyyatlka. The MS. was copied in La. Sam. 449 at the 
village of Kako in Mithila. 

Bauddhadhikaravyakhya,p.61, No. 1508 4r, by Narahari, 
is a brand-new discovery of a commentary on Udayana's cele- 
brated work, the Bauddhadhikara. The MS. has 7 1 leaves only. 
The commejitator learned the Bauddhadhikara from his father. 



PREFACE; xlix 

The other commentators of this work are Bhagiratha 
Thakkura, Samkara Misra, Vardhamana Upadhyaya, Raghu- 
natha Siromani and Mathuranatha. Raghunath's commen- 
tary again was commented upon by Gunananda and Gada- 
dhara. 

Vakyasudhatika, p. 249, No. (2)284, by Bramhananda 
Bharati, the pupil of Anandabharati. The Vakyasudha is 
attributed to the great $amkaracaryya. It commences 
with Rupam drsyam and so on. The present is a complete 
MS. of this commentary. But in our MS. the text is attri- 
buted to Bharatitirtha Guru by the commentator Brahmananda. 
Raja. Mitra in Nos. 1247, 1445, Hall page 129, and Burnell, 
91a, from the colophons of their MSS. attributed the work to 
Samkara, but the present commentator attributes it to his 
Guru Bharatitirtha, and his authority seems to be unimpeach- 
able. 

Vijnanadipikavivrtih, p. 250, No. 1318. Padmapada- 
carya, the pupil of the great Samkara, wrote a work entitled 
Vijnanadipika on the usual topics of the Vedantins. The 
present MS. contains this work with an anonymous commen- 
tary. Both Unique. 

Sarirakamlmamsabhasya p. 61, No. 1475 $, by Samkara 
caryya. The MS. contains the fourth chapter only. It is in 
Maithila character. 

Epics. 

Ramayana, p. 29, Nos. 1001 ^ and ^; p. 84, No. 1079 1§; 
p. 62, 1508 ^; p. 71, No. 1559 ^ and p. 88, No. 1645 3. The 
first contains the Fifth Book only in Maithila character, 
copied in La. Sam. 878. The second contains the Uttara 
Kauda only copied in Maithila in La. Sam. 804. The third, 
p. 84, in Newari character, from page 8 to page 806; the 
fourth, in Newari character, copied in N.S. 657 = 1587" A JD. 
The fifth in Maithila contains a few pagey of Book VII only. 
The sixth and last in Maithila is a worm-eaten incomplete 
copy of Book V. 

Mahabharata, p. 25, Nos. 867 and 869 ; p. 29, No. 1001* ; 
7 



1 PREFACE. 

p. 88, No. 1077 *r; p. 54, No. 1864 ; p. 72, No. 1559 « ; p. 81, 
No. 1685; and p. 88, No. 1698 *r. 

The first is in Maithila, copied in La. Sam. 412, at Krsna- 
palli, in Mithila, under the orders of Makhaya Thakkura. In 
N.S. 767, this MS. was used by Pratapa Malla of Kathmandu 
in having it read through for religious purposes, in 15 days. 
It contains the SSntiparva only of the Mahabharata. The 
second MS. in that page contains Book V copied in Maithila 
in La. Sam. 422. 

The third is also in Maithila and contains portions of the 
same parva. 

The fourth contains the last Book in Bengali character 
copied in La. Sam. 485. 

The fifth contains the First Book only. 

The sixth contains the Second Book only in Maithila, 
copied in La. Sam. 885. 

The seventh is an incomplete copy of the Sabhaparva in 
Newari. 

The eighth in Newari contains Salya and Gada parvas only. 

Mahabharatasya Adi-Virata-parva-tika, p. 29, No. 1001 
m 9 is incomplete. 

Danadharma, p. 48, No. 1821 isr, is a part of the Santiparva 
in Newari. It contains 15 chapters only on Vaisnavadharma, 
being a part of Danadharma. Copied in N.S. 169=1049 A.D. 

HarivamSa, p. 15, No. 455, and p. 25, No. 910 isr, both in 
Newari character. The first is incomplete towards the end, 
and the second was copied in N.S. 257 = 1187 A.D. 

HarivamSatika, p. 29, No. 1001 *i, was copied in Saka 
1580. 

BhagavadgitS, p. 19, No. 786 w; p. 88, No. 1176 nr; p. 
89, No. 1179 *; p. 61, No. 1508 * ; p. 62, No. 1508 sr, and p. 
75, No. 1608 m. 

The second is* in Newari, the third is incomplete, the 
fourth is in Newari of N.S. 481 = 1861 A.D., the fifth is in 
Newari, copied in N.S. 888, and the sixth bears the date N.S. 
462-1882 A.D. 



PREFACE. 11 

Anusmrtistava, p. 69, No. 1587 *f, in Newari character, is 
a hymn to Visnu from the Mahabharata " said to be one of 
the five jewels " in that work. 

Visnusahasranamabhasya, p. 75, No. 1608 ^. The text 
appears to be from the Anusasanaparva of the Mahabharata, 
and the bhasya is attributed to Samkaracarya. 

PubAna. 

Visnupurana, p. 26, No. 910 ^ and $, and p. 29, No. 
1001 *r. The last is written in Maithila; and the first, in two 
parts, comes very nearly to the end. 

Bhagavatapurana, p. 18, No. 358 ; p. 13, No. 359 ; p. 19, 
No. 350; p. 25, No. 860 *; p. 28, No. 976 ; p. 82, No. 1077 *, 
and p. 84, No. 1079. The first two MSS. are in Maithila 
character bearing date La. Sam. 897 and contain the tenth 
skandha only. The third is a fragment of the tenth in 
Maithila. The fourth contains from the middle of the first 
to the middle of the tenth skandha. The fifth is a complete 
MS. of the Purana written in beautiful Devanagarl hand 
copied during the reign of Pranamalla Deva of BhatgS, by 
Harivarma, a great astrologer, for Visnusimha, the son of 
Bhavasimha, in the year Kaurppileyagnijasy ebde = N . S. 
658=1538 A.D. The sixth contains a few leaves only of 
the tenth skandha in Bengali character. The seventh con- 
tains the tenth skandha of the Bhagavata in Newari character. 

Bhagavatatika, p. 28, No. 934; and p. 91, No. 14 *sr, of 
the new collection. The first is Srldha/a's commentary copied 
in Maithila character in La. Sam. 472 by Narayana at Koreni, 
inMithila. The second also was copied in the same character 
by Raghupati at the Village Poari in La. Sam 898, It 
contains the commentary on the eleventh and twelfth sk&ndhas 
only. 

Brahmapurana, p. 83, No. 1645 z, and p. 85, No. 1647 m. 
The first in its colophons styles itself the Adi-brahma- 
purana. The second is only a small fragment. 



Hi PREFACE. 

Kurmapurana, p. 24, No. 845^, is in Nagara character 
running through 500 pages. Complete in 6,000 Slokas and 
in 43 chapters. 

Sivapurana, p. 25, No. 872, in Maithila character, is a 
fragment only. 

Skandapurana, pp. 8 and 141, No. 229, is in Gupta charac- 
ter. Professor Bendall and myself carefully examined the 
palaeography of the MS. at the Durbar Library, and we 
came to the conclusion that the work must have been copied 
at least two hundred years before the Paramesvara tantra in 
transitional Gupta character, described by Prof. Bendall in 
his Gam. Oat. So the MS. must have been copied before 
659 A.D., as the Paramesvaratantra was copied in Harsa 
era 252 = 859 A.D. [See my Report, p. 4.] 

Since writing that Report I have carefully compared my 
reconstruction of the Skandapurana in the Darbar Library 
with the copy of the Ambikakhanda of the Skandapurana in 
the Library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and have found 
them to differ as much as any two Pauranika works of any 
cult may differ from each other. 

As there is no mention of Khandas in any of the colophons 
of the Parana as found in the Durbar Library, it may be 
inferred, that it formed the Purana entitled Skandapurana. 
It gradually branched out into so many Khandas and so 
many Mahatmyas, that scholars thought that the Purana hardly 
existed except in Khandas and Mahatmyas. 

Narasimhapurana, p. 29, No. 1001 sr, contains 192 leaves 
in Maithila character, Copied in La. Sam. 889, by Rucinatha 
Sarma, in the reign of Madana Simha Deva at Sipaha Kataka 
in Gorakhpore. 

Brhannaradlya, p. 24, No. 845 or ; p. 25, No. 910 *r ; and 
p. 29, No. 1001 h. They are all in Maithila character. The 
first is incomplete. The second was completed in La. Sam. 
429 and the third in 425. 

PaSupatipurana, p. 208, No. 984, copied in N.S. 824= 



PREFACE. 



liii 



1704 A.D. Unique. Spoken by Pulastya but quoted from 
Vyasa. The MS. is complete. It is much more concerned 
with the origin and the sacred character of the Vagmati on 
which stands the sacred shrine of Pasupati than with PaSu- 
pati himself. It has the following Khandas : — 

1. Tlrthayatra Khanda. 

2. Pradyumnavijaya Khanda. 

3. Gokarnesvarapratisthapana Parvardha Khanda. 

4. Tirthanandapuraue Purvardha Khanda. 

5. A stray chapter containing a hymn on the Vag- 

mati. 

Prahladacaritra, p. 61, No. 1508 *r, from the Visnu- 
purana in Newari character. 

Vasistha-Dilipa-samv3da, p. 51, No. 1368 ^; p. 62, No. 
1508 m ; p. 64, No. 1586 m ; p. 65, No. 1586 s; and p. 72, No. 
1559 h ; are all from Padmapurana Uttara Khanda; and in 
Newari character. The last was copied in NS. 588 = 1468 A.D. 

Haritalika Katha, p. 82, No. 1077 ^, from the Bhavi$- 
yottarapurana, in Bengali character, contains the story of the 
spread of the worship of Hara and Gaurl in a certain form 
by married women. 

Visnudharma, p. 29, No. 1002 *, and p. 80, No. 1002 *, 
both in Newari character, the first was copied in N.S. 167 =< 
1047 A.D. [See J.A.S.B., 1897, p. 312, and my Eeport, p. 5.] 

Devi Mahatmya, (1) p. 18, No. 882 ^; (2) p. 38, No. 1077 
«; (8) p. 54, No. 1368?; (4) p. 55, No. 1376 sr; (5) p. 56, 
No. 1478 «; (6) p. 61, No. 1508 s; (7) p. 63, No. 1584 *; 
(8) p. 63, No. 1534 v; (9) p. 64, No. 1584 ^r; (10) p. 68, No. 
1586 s; (11) p. 69, No. 1587 *; (12) p. 69, No. 1559 *; (13) p. 
70, No. 1559* ; (14) p. 74, No. 1588 s; (15) p. 74, No. 1584 e ; 
(16) p. 75, No. 1608 *; (17) p. 75, No. 1608*; (18) p. 81, 
No. 1645 m; (19) p. 82, No. 1645 if ; and (20) p. 55, No. 1478 h. 

The first is a fragment in Newari character. The 
second is in old Newari, copied in NS. 229=1109 A,D. 
marked in letter numerals. The third is in NSgara, and the 
fourth in Newari, both fragments. The fifth is in Newari 



Kv ' PREFACE. 

character copied in N.S. 519=1899 A.D. The sixth is in 
Nagara dated V. Sam 1492 = I486 A.D. in Campakaranya during 
the reign of Prthvlsimha Deva. The seventh is in Maithila 
copied in La. Sam. 392(?) by Udayakara under the order of 
Kamsanarayana. The eighth is in Newari character copied in 
N.S. 885 = 1265 A.D. by Maninaga, a resident of Nili Sila, 
during the victorious reign of Abhayanialla Deva. The 
ninth is in Newari character copied by Vajracarya Sri Sugata- 
candra in N.S. 118=998 A.D. in the victorious reign of 
Dharma Malla Deva. The tenth and eleventh, in Newari cha- 
racter, are fragments only. The twelfth copied in Newari 
in N.S. 858=1288 A.D. in the victorious reign of Abhaya Malla 
Deva. The thirteenth is in Newari character copied during 
the same reign. The fourteenth is in Newari character. The 
sixteenth is dated N.S. 262 = 1142 A.D. The eighteenth is 
in Newari character copied in N.S. 889=1269 A.D. The 
Devistava forms a part of the MS. The nineteenth is a frag- 
ment in Nagara character. The twentieth is dated N.S. 522. 

Devimahatmyatika, p. 51, No. 1861 5, by Haritamra Sri- 
pitambara, otherwise called Durgasandehabhedika, a commen- 
tary on the Devlmahatmya. This was copied at Haripura by 
Haladhara who seems to have enjoyed the title of Vamsa- 
mani in La. Sam. 873. 

Karttikamahatmya or Vaisnavamrtasaroddhara, p. 6, 
No. 92 and p. 82, No. 1077 ^, both from the Skandapurana 
and both copied in Bengali character ; the first was copied at 
Parihara in La. Sam. 412; and the second in La. Sam. 447. 
The interlocutors are Narada and Brahma and the subject 
Vaisnavism. This appears to be the same work as noticed in 
pp. 217-218 of the MS. Index prepared by Captain Wilford's 
Pandita. [See p. 1414 I.O. Cat.] There are many other 
works bearing the same name from other Puranas, and what 
is curious still there is a work of the same name in the 
Skandapurana itself. [See Sanskrit College Catalogue by 
Castri and Gui, part 4, Nos. 211 aad 252.] 

VaiSSkhamShatmya, p. 61, No. 1508 *r, from the Patala 



PREFACE. lv 

K hand a, Padmapurana, in Newari character. The same as 
noticed by Weber in Vol. I, page 180. 

Ekadaslmahatmyam, p. 70, No. 1559 sr, and Ekadasyut- 
pattih, p. 71, No. 1559 «, give the pauranika legends about 
the sacredness of the fast on the eleventh day of the moon. 

Ramacandranamastottarasatam, p. 51, No. 1368 v, is a 
part of theUttara Khanda of the Padmapurana. [See Ulwar 
2320.] 

Ramopakhyanam, p. 78, No. 1583 $, is from the Vana- 
parva of the Mahabharata, in Newari character. 

Rudramahatmya, p. 82, No. 1645 igr, is from the Var5ha- 
purana, in Newari character. 

Visnujanmanukirttanam, p. 51, No. 1863 it, is a treatise 
on the incarnations of Visnu, from the Bhavisyapurana. 

Sesadharnisamvada, p. 13, No. 882 ^f, is from the Brahman- 
dapurana, In Uriya character. 

Satvavadhaprasamanam, p. 83, No. 1645 sr, is from 
Visnudharma, copied in N.S. 322 = 1202 A.D. during the 
victorious reign of Arimalla Deva. There is a chapter in 
Raja Mitra, No. 2298, entitled Sarvavadhaprasamana- 
vidhikathanam. The work described in that work is Visnu- 
dharma and not Visnudharmottara. [See Oat. Oat. 590B.] • 

Suryyarnava, p. 267, No. 1246, appears to be a Pauranika 
work on the consequences of sins committed in one existence, 
in future existences and their atonements. The interlocutors 
are Narada and Amvarlsa, and they speak of the atonements 
in the various rasis. 

Stotras. 

Nilakanthastava, p. 46, No. 1320 % was copied in 
N.S. 407 =1287 A.D. The hymn was known only in a single 
quotation by Rayamukuta in his commentary on the 
Amarakosa. There are two copies of a work of the same 
name with a commentary in the Oriental Library, Madras. 

Mahapurusastava, p. 51, No 1868 sr, is a part of the 



fcri PREFACE. 

Tenth Skandha of Srlmadbhagavata. It was copied in 
N. S. 696 = 1576 A.D, 

Mahimnah stotra, p. 227, No. 1630, is not the well- 
known work of the same name attributed to Puspadanta, 
the Lord of the Gandharvas, on which there are so many 
commentaries, but an imitation of it by one who, though 
bearing the name of the relentless Muni Tburvasas of the 
Puranas, is a historical person variously named Durvasodeva 
Durvasomuni. He is said to be the first teacher of all the 
Upanisads. The MS. is in Nagara character, extent 317 
slokas, having 13 chapters. 

Kalabhairavastotra, p. 52, No. 1363 $, is from the 
Kasi Khanda. It is a hymn to the grim deity, Kalabhairava, 
who, unless propitiated, would not allow anyone to live and 
die at that holy spot, where death, under any circumstances, 
leads to emancipation. He, with his broomstick, sweeps 
away all sinners from Benares. 

Gajendramoksanastavaraja, p. 18, No. 619 m 9 is one of 
the five gems in the Mahabharata. 

Jyotisanandastava, p. 72, No. 1559 5, is a hymn to 
Siva who is represented in the form of light. It is a tantrika 
hymn. Unique. 

Sanaiscarastava, p. 46, No. 1828 3; p. 48, No. 1861 n; 
p. 79, No. 1688 *r. They all come from the Skandapurana. 
The second was copied in Ramanandayuge, i.e., N.S. 493 = 
1378 A.D. 

m iSaradastava, p. 53, No. 1863 *s, runs through 6 leaves 
and was copied in N.S. 520 = 1400 A.D. 

Stavaraja, p. 89, No. 1176 h and 9. Aufrecht in 
Lip. Oat. No. 1297, says that it is a hymn to Granesa. 

Stavaraja Mahatmya, p. 48, No. 1361 m 9 from the 
Bhavisyapurana, appears to be a glorification of the above. 

Sivapancaksaram, p. 13, No. 882 % is a MS. in TJriya 
character. [Cat. Oat., p. 650 A.] 

Hariharastotra, p. 56, No. 1478 V, is from the Hari 
Vamsa. 



PREFACE. lvii 

Mrtyuiijayastava, p. 68, No. 1584 u, is a part of 
Paramegvaratantra in 84,000 Slokas. This appears to be the 
work entitled Paramesvaratantra in Prof. Bendall's Cam. 
Oat. p. 27. It is not a part of Paramesvara-Samhita in 
Burnell 205A, which is a Pancaratra. The MS. is in Newari 
character. 

Vagisvarlstotram, p. 56, No. 1478 sr, is a hymn to 
VaglSvarl, a form of Sarasvatl, the goddess of learning. 
She is worshipped both by Buddhists and Hindus at Bodh 
Gaya and at Benares, Her glories are related in Svayambhu- 
purana as well as on Kasikhanda. 

Vinayakastava, p. 79, No. 1688 H, is a hymn to (xanesa 
from the Bhavisyapurana. 

Visnupanjarastotraip, p. 46, No. 1820 v, was copied in 
N.S. 400 = 1280 A.D. 

Miscellaneous. 

Varahamihira Samhita, p. 26, No. 983 *?, is a curious 
work copied in Nepal Samvat 280 = 1110 A.D. It begins 
with a long invocation to the god of Love whose influence is 
said to have been felt even by Brahma, Indra and others. It 
treats of the age, auspicious moment and so on, of marriage. 

Vetalapancavimsati, p. 79, No. 1688 is, is translation of 
the well-known work of that name in Sanskrit, into Newari. 

Harimekhala, in Newari language, p. 86, No. 1114 ir, is 

dated N.S. 541 = 1421 A.D. During the reign of Jayajyo- 

tirmalla Deva. 

Tantrika. 

Amrte&ttantrani, pp. 11 and 125, No. 285 ^r. This is 
otherwise called MrtyujidamrtlSavidhanam. This may be the 
same as Mrtyujit-bhattaraka, mentioned by Hall, as quoted 
by Ksemaraja. in his Siva-stttra-vimarsinl. 

The MS. is dated N.S. 820, i.e., 1200 A.D. But as Ksem- 
araja quotes the work in the tenth century, the work, like the 
majority of original tantras quoted by him, must be older 
still. 

8 



lviii 



PREFACE. 



The work is complete in 24 patalas and appears to tra- 
verse the whole ground of Tantrika subjects. Curiously 
enough in this work, which purposes to have been revealed 
by Siva to his consort Parvati, there is a Maggalacarana 
making obeisance to Siva. 

It treats of the God Amrtesa and Bhairava Mrtyujit as 
para and apara phases of one divinity. 

AmrteSvara-devasya Nityapujavidhih,p. 49, No. 1861 sr, 
treats of the worship of Amrtesa, Amrtlsa or Amrtesvara, 
and of the articles required in that worship. This is the 
deity spoken of in the preceding. 

Indrakslstava, in Newari character, and Karpurastotra 
are two Tantrika works mentioned in this Catalogue, being 
No. 1645 « and 1376 ^, pp. 83 and 54. In Cat. Cat. p. 59B 
mention is made of an Indraksl-stava from theNandikeSvara- 
purana. 

Kakacandesvarlmatam, p. 155, No. (3)118, in Nagari 
character, professes to be a new system of Tantra. It treats 
of Medicine, Alchemy, and so on. This is a much larger 
work than that mentioned in I.O. Cat., p. 889, where it is 
also called Maharasayanavidhih. The Vedas being very 
old, the highest bliss cannot be obtained through them. 
Therefore Siva speaks of the highest bliss as Mahajnana, 
and, as opposed to it, Alpajnana, to have recourse to before 
the attainment of Jnanavada. Towards the end of the work 
there are many prescriptions in which mercury has its full 
P%. 

Kalikastotra, p. 52, No. 1368 z, is a hymn to Kalika 
from the Tantrika work Kalikakulasarvasva. This is to be 
differentiated from a work of the same name attributed to 
Satnkaracaryya. The work is in Maithila character. 

Kallkularnavatantra, p. 160, No. (2)180. In Newari 
character. Dated N.S. 867 = 1747. Unique. An Original 
Taiitra in which the interlocutors are Devi and Bhairava.. 
This work begins with "Vir&natha uvSca," "the Lorxtof 
Viras said." The word Vira means one who has attained 



PREFACE. 



ft 



success in the left-handed form of worship. Vlranatha, 
therefore, means the supreme Lord of these Viras. The 
work speaks of Guhya Kali, the great goddess of Nepal, and 
attempts to affiliate, though very clumsily, her worship to the 
Atharva Veda. In Cat. p. 161 there is what purports to be a 
formula of Kali- worship in one hundred letters. 

Kalitattva, p. 161, No. 1539. It has another name, Acara- 
pratipadanatattvam. The first three leaves are missing. 
This with the work mentioned next after it in Cat. p. 162, 
No. 1589, forms an incomplete copy of Kalitattva (see pp. 586 
and 587 of the Bikanir Catalogue). Raghava Bhatta, the 
author, was a great Tantrika writer and commentator whose 
Padarthadarsa, a commentary on the Saradatilaka, is often 
quoted in Smrti and Tantra compilations. The MSS. in the 
Darbar Library treat of Acara and Prayascitta respectively. 
The author characterises his commentary on Saradatilaka, 
in Bik. Cat., p ? 6J9, as Satsampradayakrta-Vyakhya, From 
the last page of the Benares Edition of the work, Sam. 1953, 
it appears that Raghava Bhatta's father came from Nasik to 
Benares, and that the date of the composition of the com- 
mentary is 1550 of the Sam vat Era, as that is used by the 
Marhattas = 1491 A.D. 

Kalottara, pp. 9-10 (called in the colophon Vrhat-kalo- 
ttaramnama Sivasiddhantam), No. 278 *r, pp. 87-88 (Kalottare 
trayodasasatike), No. 1114 5; p. 6 (Kalottara tantram), No. 89, 
p. 73, No. 1583 *; pp. 8 and 96 (Kalottare Mahatantre 
Saptagatike), No. 226 ^; and p. 80 (Kalottara or Kalajnana), 
No. 1634 *. 

Kalottara is a very ancient Tantrika work. Abhinavagupta 
who flourished at the end of the 10th and the beginning of the 
11th Century (see Buh. Kas.Rep., p. 80), quotes this work 
in his Trmsika-tattva-vivarafia. An examination of the MSS. 
in the Durbar Library reveals the fact that there are three re- 
censions of the work, namely, (1) a large recension, (2) a recen- 
sion in 1,800 Slokas, and another (3) a recension in 700 Slokas. 
The name Kalottara. suggests that it is the supplement 



lx PREFACE. 

to a work entitled Kalatantra. The work was hitherto 
known only in quotations. It deals with the worship of Siva. 
The interlocutors are Siva and Karttikeya (see Cat., p. 96). 
The names of chapters, as given in that page, show that it 
traverses the whole ground of a tantrika work. One of the 
chapters, namely the twenty-fourth, is named Kalacakra. This 
work is complete in 82 patalas, while in the Vrhat recension 
(Cat., p. 9-10) there are 40 patalas. It also traverses the whole 
ground of a Tantrika work, but more fully and in a different 
order. Has this anything with the Kalacukra of the Bud- 
dhists ? 

Kulasarasamgraha, p. 162-68, No. 1668, an original tantra 
with Isvara and Devi as interlocutors, is a part of Soma- 
bhujaijgavalli which again is a part of Amrtamathana. The 
work appears to be uniqne and complete in 86 patalas. 

Kaumaripuja, p. 46, No. 1820 $, i.e., the process of wor- 
shipping one of the mothers named Kumarl, was copied in 
N.S. 400=1280 A.D. 

Kriyakalpatarau kriyakandah, p. 14, No 882 m, appears 
to be only a part of Kriyakalpataru, a complete work 
of the Kulasastra, i.e., of the left-handed form of wor- 
ship by Saktinatha surnamed Kalyanakara. He opens the 
work by making obeisance to a succession of Gurus. The 
great teachers of the sect (paramparyaprakasins) were 
Kanthanatha, Gaiigadhara, Munmdra, Mahavala MaheSana, 
Vaglsvarananda, and Devaraja, who was the preceptor of the 
author and Vicitrananda Deva. The materials used are 
Kulasastras and Amnayas. The author explains the words 
of Siva according to tradition and according to sound 
reasoning. In the first place the author mentions a number 
of yogas according to tantrika rites. The MS. is incomplete 
and in Maithila character. Neither the work.Kriya kalpataru 
nor the author Kalyanakara is mentioned by Aufrecht. 

Gurupanktipujavidhih, p. fcO, No. 1361 «r, in Newari 
character, 9 leaves only. Raj. Mitra, No. 4081, speaks of a 
Gurupanktikavaca from the Gurutantra. The present work 



PBEFACE. lxi 

forms a part of Gurupankti worship, being one of the 
Pancangas or five essentials of worship. 

Guhyasiddhisastram, p. 87, No. 1648 s, in Newari charac- 
ter, was copied in N.S. 514=1394*, at BhatgSo, in the reign of 
Jayasthiti Malla. The work is probably one brought by the 
Pandits of that king from India. It is a most violently vama- 
cari work. The matter is obscene, written in a mystic form. 
The language is ungrammatical and in places unintelligible. 

Cincinimatasarasamuccayah, p. 173, No. 769, is an ori- 
ginal Tantra in 1 2 patalas. The first verse obscurely hints that 
the cult of Cincini was originated by Siddhanatha, one of the 
successful Yogis who went by the title Natha. It belongs to 
Vamacara and to Pascima Krama. The language is obscure, 
ungrammatical and unintelligible. In the opening verses it 
enumerates the various forms of religious practices current at 
the time. The work belongs to the early period of Tantrika 
development. 

Chatrayogodbhutadosasantividhih, p. 174, No. 1111. 
It treats of the process of atoning for the defects arising from 
chatrayoga, composed under the order of Emperor Bahadur 
Shah of Delhi in Srisake Sarapuskaravanidharapraleyaro- 
cirmite, i.e., saka 1775 or 1858, just before the mutiny. 
Chatrayoga is a process of worship prescribed by Bhrgu. 

Jayadrathayamala, p. 175, No. 253, a longish work on 
paper, extending to about 8,000 Slokas. The MS. is not very 
old. It is dated Newar Samvat 762 = 1642 A.J). It treats of 
some topics to be found in the Kularnava. It was for a long 
time suspected that the worship of Kali did not originate in the 
higher classes in India. The present work says that the 
Paramesvarl should be worshipped in the house either of a 
potter or of an oilman, two castes holding a very low position 
in Hindu Society. The entire work is said to extend to 
24,000 Slokas. The present MS. then is only a fragment. 
The whole work is divided into four parts of 6,000 slokas each 
called satkas. The present is a portion of the second satka* It 
treats of the worship of various forms of Kali, namely, Dambara 



XIX PREFACE. 

Kali, Gahanesvarl, Ekatara, CandaSavari, Vajravati, RaksSkSlf, 
Indivari Kallka (perhaps the same as Nilasarasvati), Dhanada 
Kali, Ramany5, Jsana Kali and Mantramata. The first part of 
this MS. is named Kalasankarsani, the second Vidyavidyesva- 
rlcakra and the third part Yaksinlcakra. The colophon of the 
work like that of all ancient tantras is too long and appears to 
be a string of names, the import of which, if it existed at all, is 
lost. It runs thus in the present case : — * Iti Sri Bhairava- 
srotasi VidyapJthe Siraschede Jayadrathayamale, Oatur 
vimgatisahasramahatantre dvitiya Satke/ &c, &c. 

Jhankarakaravlratantra, p. 181, No. 109, is a mahatan- 
tra complete in 8,000 slokas. The present MS. therefore 
with 675 slokas is only a fragment. The worship prescribed 
in it is that of Candakapalini, a fierce form of the goddess 
Kali, decked in sculls. The work appears more to be a com- 
pilation than an original tantra. Jhaijkesvari, who has a soli- 
tary temple in the fierce-looking woodland, a few miles off 
Kathmandu, was an object of great worship in Nepal Kara- 
virawith yellow flowers is sacred to Kali, and Jhaijkara means 
a peculiar sort of noise. In this form of worship a noisy 
Karavlra is preferred. This is a relic of tree worship. 

Tattvasara, p. 79, No. 1634 % is an interlocution between 
Sadanana and Siva on the nature of Godhead and emanci- 
pation. See Raj. Mitra, No. 2142. Eggelling, p. 800, describes 
a Tattvasara which is an interlocution between Sata and 
Saunaka. . . • . 

Tararahasyavrttika, p. 31, No. 1076 n, by Sankara, in 
Maithila character, dated L.Sam. 511^1624 A.D. See I.O. 
Cat., p. 908 A. This is a tantrika compilation by Sam- 
karacarya of Gaudadesa, complete in 15 patalas. 

Tripurasundaripratahstotram, p. 54., No. 1876 ^r, is 
from the Rudrayamala. 

Tripurastava, p. 54, No. 1876 n, is also from the same 
source. 

Tripurakavaca, p. 54, No. 1876 h, is also called SarvSrtha 
sadhanaip or the means of attaining all objects. 



PBEFAOE. lxiii 

Tripurajapahomavidhih, p. 86, No. 1648 s, is from the 
Vamakesvaratantra. 

Tripurasnanadi-nityakarmavidhih, p. 74, No. 1584 *r. 
These five complete what may be called a paficaggaof Tripura 
worship. 

Tvaritastotra, p. 8, No. 226 m. Tvarita is a form of KslI, 
the process of whose worship is in the righthanded form 
given in Tantrasara (Cal. Ed., p. 182). She is described as dark, 
and decorated on the head with a peacock's tail, with her cloth 
made of leaves. She bends forward a little towards the front 
owing to the weight of her bosom, over which hangs a garland 
of gunja with the 8 serpent lords forming various ornaments 
of her body. She is in the form of a lady from the border- 
land, with hands raised in the position of granting boon and 
protection. She has three eyes. 

Diksavidhih, p. 19, No. 736 sr, treats of the usual initiation 
ceremony of a votary of tantra. 

Devikasadhanam, p. 7, No. 135 w, treats of propitiating 
Devika by a house-holder. 

Devikavacam, p. 55, No. 1478 *i, is in Newari character. 

Narapatijayacarya, p. 69, No. 1537 ^. Dr. Bhandar- 
kar, in p. 85 of his Report for 1882-83, says, " The author wrote 
this book at Anahilapattana in the reign of Ajayapala who 
occupied the Oaulukya throne from 1174 to 1177 A.D. He 
finished the work on Tuesday the first of the light half of 
Oaitra in the year 1232 of Vikrama corresponding to 1 1 76 A .D." 

Svarodayadipika, p. 41 and 107, No. 1186, by Jaga] jyotir- 
malla, is a unique commentary on the above written by Raja 
Jagajjyotirmalla of Bhatga in Nepal and copied by his court 
Pandit Vamsamani, a Maithila Brahmana. The date of com- 
position is 1536 Saka= 1614 A.D. The King brought the work 
from a distant country. There is a long genealogy of the 
Solar Kings of Nepal in this MS. which has been fully utilized 
by Prof. Bendall in his history of Nepal appended to this 
work. The extent of Yak§amalla*s dominions is given as 
MithilS, Magadha, Gaya, the whole of ^ Nepal^ BangadeSa* the 



lxiv PREFACE. 

Ganges, Gorkha, PalpS and in the North, seven days' journey 
from Nepal, 

Nitya-naimittika-vidhih or Sakti sutra, p. 18, No. 619 u, 
is a work on daily rites of the worshippers of Sakti. 

Nityatantra, p. 8, No. 226 *!. Nitya is a form of Kali 
mentioned in the Tantrasara next after Tvarita. She is dark- 
red with the moon crescent on the forehead, with lotus, 
noose, ankusa, the goad for driving an elephant, and full human 
sculls in her four hands. Her dress, her ornaments and her 
garlands are all red. She has three eyes. She is wife of 
Siva with her frame shaking with lust and wine. This is 
a tantra on her worship. 

Nityahnikatilakam, pp. 45,47, and 111, Nos. 1820 m and 
w, is an unique work on the daily rites of the Tantrikas. The 
MS. in p. 45 was copied in Newari character in N.S. 817 = 
1197, the year of the Muhammadan conquest of Bihar; it was 
copied by Acarya Harihara in the reign of Vijayakamadeva, 
and that in 47 in N.S. 528= 1403_ A.D. The author is Mun- 
jaka, also called Jaya, the son of Srlkantha who was an adept 
in the Pascima Sasana. The ancient tantras are divided as be- 
longing to north, south, east and west Sasanas. The worship 
of Kubjika and the Sastra Kubjikamata (for which see infra) be- 
longs to the Pascima class. This work appears to be a very old 
compilation, — a handbook of the Kubjikamata. It says that 
the Saiva cult is higher than the Vedas, the Daksina is higher 
than the Saiva. The Pascima is the highest of all. The highest 
aim of this cult is said to be proficiency in three kinds of Bhelaka 
or jugglery. The author's father, Srlkantha, appears to have 
been a great writer of this cult. It is difficult to say whether 
Jaya or Munjaka was a son or a disciple of Srlkantha. Per- 
haps he was both, as theNathas, though leading a monastic life, 
are credited with having children. The Nath&s or those who 
attained success in Tantrika cults were recruited from the low- 
est classes and from outcastes, and their Sanskrit therefore is 
incorrect, ungrammatical and often unintelligible, as is the 
case with the present work. 



PREFACE. 



1XT 



NiSv5s5khya Mahatantra, p. 11, No. 279, is in a very 
dilapidated condition. I have pointed out that the Sivaite 
work on architecture is a part of this tantra. The present 
codex professes to be six thousand Slokas in extent, but the 
MS. does not seem to go much beyond the PratisthS tantra. 
It was copied in N.S. 180=1060 A.D. 

Nrtyegvaratantra, p. 201, No. 1322. The Professors of 
dancing, singing and histrionic representations regard Siva 
as the presiding divinity of these arts, and they call him 
NrtyeSvara, NateSvara and so on. This tantra is named after 
him. The subject-matter of a tantra need not have any 
close relation with the name. The present MS. is a mere 
fragment extending to 56 Slokas. It gives the formulae of 
meditating upon 8 Bhairavis and 8 Mahakalis whose names 
are to be found in p. 202. At the end of this MS. there is an 
invocation to all the viras, i.e., successful heroes in the left- 
handed form of worship, and they include Bhargava, Hanffrnat, 
Bhlma among others noted in the Epics and Puranas. 

Nrsimhasundarikavaca, p. 202, No. (8) 48, treats of an 
amulet consecrated to Nrsimhasundari. This is a unique 
work forming a part of a unique tantra entitled Sammilana- 
tantra. 

Parame3varimatatantra, p. 85, No. 1647 sr. There is a 
Paramesvarimatatantra mentioned and described in Prof. 
Bendall's Cam. Oat. p. 27. 

Pithapujavidhih, p. 17, No. 491, is a work on TSntrika 
rituals about the Pithas, places consecrated by the fall of the 
limbs of Sati after her death at the sacrifice of her father 
Daksa. Unique. 

PuragcaranacandrikS, p. 50, No. 1361 s, by DevendrSSra- 
ma, the disciple of VibudhendraSrama, is a Kaula work. The 
author in Raj. Mitra 2399 styles himself MSntrika Cakravarti 
or the Emperor of mystic formulae. 

Puragcaryyarnava, p. 205, No. (2) 376, by Pratapa 
Simhasaha, the MahSrajadhiraja of Nepal, in 1881 Samvat= 
1775 A.D. Unique. The Imperial author consulted many 



l$fl PREFACE. 

Agaffias,Paddhatis, [ TJpanisads, Jyotisa works, works on veteri- 
nary science, Puranas and Smrtis. 

Puspacintamani, p. 207, No. 966, is a tantrika compilation 
on the subject of offering appropriate flowers to various tan- 
trika divinities. Unique. Date of copying N.S. 872 = 1752 A.D. 
The work is divided into 4 prakaSas treating of the flowers 
enjoined and prohibited in the worship of such gods as Siva, 
Visnu, Durga, and Daksinakall. 

Pajavidhih, p. 89, No. 1176- *r, is a tantrika work in 
NeWari character. 

Pllrvamnayatantra, p. 208, No. 109, by Ratnadeva, in 
Newari character, is a short tantrika compilation. From the 
name it appears to be a compilation from those tantras which 
are classed as eastern. It gives the process of performing 
28 tantrika rites. Unique. 

PratisthasSrasamgrahah, p. 78, No. 1688 s. The archi- 
tecture and consecration of temples. It was composed be- 
cause in this iron age people had no access to original tantras. 
Composed in N.S. 778, by Radha, who was a favourite both of 
the King and the Queen. 

Prapancasaratantra, pp. 79 and 117, No. 1633 5, dated 
L. Sam 408. An original tantra in long and flowing verses by 
one who calls himself Acarya, see Eggeling I.O. Cat. 869 B. 
afod H.P. Vol. II. 130. This is a Vaisnava Tantra. The 
present MS. contains 83 patalas. 

Praya3cittasamuccaya, p. 215, No. 1297, character 
Newari. The author is Hrdayasiva, the disciple of Ig vara Siva, 
who belonged to the school of Ranipatra Lambakarna 
belonging to the Mattamayuravaipsa. The last went from 
Ranipatra to Goratikamatha and was at once accepted as his 
own by the Rsja of Dhara. The work is Tantrika as opposed 
to Smartta. Unique. The discovery of this work shows that 
at one time an attempt was seriously made to set up a complete 
code of- Saiva and Tantrika regulation of life. The author says 
that his ^vork is 6ne of many of the kind. It belongs to an 
unknown "mahStmtfo named Bgtfaula which is quoted in 



Madanaparijata, Cal. Ed. p. 47. But the editor, a Mah5- 
mahopadhyaya, calls Bathula a Rsi. Hrdayagiva is compared 
to VidyeSvara in learning. 

Prasadadlpikamantra-tippanam, p. 216, No. 1456. Uni- 
que. It is a Tantrika compilation dealing in the last chapters 
with the consecration of temples. There are altogether 28 
chapters. The name of the work has been taken from the 
Maggalacarana. Aufrecht says that a work of this name has 
been quoted in Madanaparijata. The name therefore is 
Prasadadlpika, and Mantratippana is a case in apposition. 
It traverses the entire field of Tantrika subjects. 

Bhairavarcanam, p. 87, No. 1648 e, is a liturgical work 
in Newari character. Fifteen leaves only. 

Manjusri-Sadhana, pp. 53 and 121, No. 1863 h, is a pro- 
cess of propitiating the Buddhist Bodhisattva ManjuSrI. He 
is sometimes regarded as male and sometimes as "female. 
The Hindus regard him as Sarasvati the goddess of learning ; 
the Buddhists regard him as the lord of power and learning. 
He has a sword in one hand and a MS. in the other ; as the 
presiding god of all learning and skill he is also the god of 
arts, both fine and mechanical, and so the present work 
on Silpa is appropriately called Manjusrisadhanam. It treats 
of such topics as temple architecture, construction of images, 
etc., making of domestic utensils, and so on. The writer of the 
work was absolutely ignorant of Sanskrit and writes in a 
language which is the language of practical SllpaSastra under- 
stood by the Silpa-practisers only. 

Mantroddhara, p. 77, No. 1688 s, treats of the evolution 
of mystic syllables or words from their description given in 
the tantras. The Mantras are generally given in^ mystic 
sentences, each word of which represents some letter in the 
Mantra. This is the most mysterious, difficult and stupid 
part of tantrika literature, There is a work entitled 
Mantrakosa, a modern compilation, which deals elaborately 
irith this mystery. The pre&wt.MS. appears to .be. an 
original tantra on the subject. It has six patalas. 



lxviii PEBFACE. 

Mataiiga-paramegvaratantra, p. 219, No. (2)171, in 
Nagarl character, is a longish work : — an original tantra divided 
into four parts, called padas, namely, Vidya, Kriya, Yoga, 
Carya. The last pada only has nine patalas. The work 
has been noticed by Burnell, p. 205 A ; Cat. I.O. p. 905 A., 
Hullzsch, Vol. II, 958. A commentary on the work has been 
noticedby Hullzsch, Vol.II. 956,and Sans. Coll. Cat. Vol.111. 91. 

The commentator Ramakantha says that the work has four 
padas — Vidya, Kriya, Upasya and Siddhi. MSS. of the 
Siddhipada and the last portion of the Upasyapada have yet 
to be discovered. The Cataloguists have divided it into four 
padas without the Siddhipada, i.e., they have divided the third 
or Upasyapada into two, namely, the Yoga and the Carya. 
The work seems to be a very large one, as the Tanjore MS. 
contains more than 12,000 slokas, and is yet incomplete. 
The present MS. appears to be a smaller recension of the 
work, as nearly the very same number of subjects are dealt 
with in about 4,000 slokas. The I.O. MS. appears to be 
even smaller than this. 

Pandita Hrsikesa is right in his surmise that this is a 
Saiva Agama; — at least so the commentator makes it. On an 
examination of the contents of this MS. and of those of 
Paramesvaxatantra, p. 27, BendalTs Cam. Cat., I cannot help 
hazarding a conjecture that these two works are but larger 
and shorter recensions of the same tantrika work. 

Matasara, p. 222, No. 1512, in Newari character, is unique. 
It treats of the worship of Balakubjika and is complete in 
ten patalas. This appears to be a work related to the Kub- 
jikamata and Kulalikamnaya. The same Pithas are mentioned, 
namely, O^iyana, Jala and Purjpa; but the second is said to be 
to the south of the first and the third to the north of the second. 
The writer evidently confounded Jala with Matanga. •■ 

Mok§asopanatika, p. 228, No. 1498, in Newari character, 
is an anonymous commentary on an unknown work entitled 
Moksa-sopStna, a tSntrika work on emancipation. The text 
begins " Om namastute MahamSye." 



PREFACE. bribe 

Mahalaksmi plays an important part in modern Saiva and 
Tantrika worship. She is regarded as one of the eight matrkas 
and is greatly worshipped in the Marhatta country. She is 
represented in this Catalogue by no less than six works. 
There are: — 

MahalaksmTmata-bhattaraka, p. 47 and 128, No. 1820 ?. 
The MS. is dated N.S. 880=1260 A.D. It was copied by 
Kayastha Udayaharsa rapidly for Samkhyapala's edifica- 
tion. The work is to contain 1,800 glokas, but the MS. contains 
about 1,500. It is a part of a great Tantrika work entitled 
Mahamantrasara containing 24,000 slokas. The cult of 
Mahalaksmi, says the scribe, is the nectar of the rays of the 
great cults, i.e., he thinks this to be the highest Tantrika cult. 

Mahalaksmimahatmyam, p. 54, No. 1876 m. 

Mahalaksmlmahatmya-vratavyakhyanasamuccaya, pp. 52 
and 84, Nos. 1868 ^ and 1645 5. The first was copied in 
N.S. 688 and the second in 505 by Virasimha. They are both 
complete in 16 patalas. The author is said to be Galava a Esi. 
A Galava is quoted in Supadma Vyakaranam. So this is 
another way of attributing Tantrika works to Rsis, 

Mahalaksmlvratam or Laksmlcaritam, p. 46, No. 1320 
sr, by Rama Kaviraja, in five chapters, was copied N.S. 399 = 
1279 A.D. 

Mahalaksmlvratakatha, p. 84, No. 1645 a, was copied in 
N.S. 502. 

Mahalaksmlvratamahatmyavyakhyanam, p. 26, No. 
910 *. 

Mahamaya is represented in this Catalogue in three works. 

Mahamayastavah, pp. 78 and 83, Nos. 1638 % and 1645 
sr, in Newari character. The first was copied in N.S. 391 = 
1271 A.D. and it treats of Siva and Sakti as united in 
pleasure. 

Mahamayastaka, p. 87, No. 1648 nr, in Newari character, 
was copied in N.S. 584= 1464 A.D. 

Malinistuti and Malinistotram, pp. 75 and 82, Nos. 1608 
if and 1645 9, are hymns to Mahamaya in Malini verses. 



lxx PBKJAOH. 

Yuddhajayarnava, pp. 1 and 81, Nos. 72 and 1634 $, both 
in Newari. The second is dated 426 N.S. = 1306 A.D. in 
Jayasthiti Malla's victorious reign. The work noticed in 
p. 81 appears to be the same as in I.O. Cat. p. 1080-81. It 
is a work on svarodaya in ten patalas. But that in p. 1 
appears to be a different work and a tantrika one, treating 
of Puja and similar Tantrika topics. 

Yogaguhya, p. 8, No. 226 $, brought down from 
heaven to earth by Kanthanatha who, as Srikantha, is already 
known from the Nityahnikatilakam, Cat. pp. 45,47 and 111. 
It teaches the mysteries of Tantrika yoga. But unfortunately 
there are only a few leaves in the Darbar library. 

Yoginlvijayastavaraja, p. 286, No. 1542, from the Brahma- 
yamala, is a short work in Newari character copied in N.S. 
811. This was first spoken by Siva to his consort, and then 
Pippalada-muni brought it down from heaven to earth. 
This is one of the ways of affiliating Tantras to the Vedas. 
Pippalada is said in the Puranas to be the propounder of a 
Sakha of the Atharva Veda, and he is now made the revealer 
of this hymn. In the second Sloka of the Maijgalacarana, 
Rama comes in for a share of the Tantrika worship. 

The MS. of Yogapltha, p. 59, No. 1473 *, has only five 
leaves in Newari character containing only two chapters 
and a few verses of the work. It treats of Krama or grada- 
tion, so greatly insisted upon in the JKulalika. 

Ratnapancakavatara, p. 238, No. 1552, is an original tan- 
tra in which Kubjika and Bhairava are the interlocutors. 
The five Ratnas are Kula> Akula, Kaula, Kulastaka and 
Kula§atka. There are eleven patalas in this work. It appears 
to be a treatise of the Kubjikamata, the extent of which is 
stated to be 12,000 and not 24,000 Slokas. The principal 
object of this work are the five jewels, the worship and 
mantras of which are expatiated upon. Copied by Kalidasa 
in N.S. 740=1620 A.D. 

Rajakalpadruma, p. 242, No. (2) 82 by Mah^rSjadhiraja 
RSjendra Vikrama Saha of Nepal (1816 to 1847 AJP«)- [Sw 



PREFACE, lxxi 

my Report, p. 17, and BendalFs History of Nepal, p. 17.] The 
Maharajadhiraja wanted to make an encyclopaedic compilation 
of the Tantras. In the opening line he says that mantras are 
of three classes, viz., Vaidika, Tantrika and MiSra. The Royal 
author gives his genealogy as follows : — 

Vikrama came from the Oitrakflta inBundelkhand to the 
Himalayas. His son was 

Jillaraja. 

Ajita. 

i 

Atallaraja. 

Tutharaja. 

Vimikiraja. 
Hariraja. 
Brahmaraja. 
Mammatha. 
Jainakhan. 

i 

Suryyakhan. 
Micakhan. 

I 

Vicitra. 
Yaso-Brahma Sahi. 
Dravyasahi Saka 1481. Entered the Gorkha Valley. 
Purna SahT. 
Rama Sahi. 
Dambara Sahi. 

i 



lxxii PBBPAOB. 

Krsna Sahi. 

Rudra Sahi. 

I 
Prthvipati Sahi. 

Virabhadra. 

Narabhupala Sahi. 

Prthvlnarayana Sahi conquered Nepal, Saka 1690=1768 A.D. 

r 1 

Pratapasimha Bahadura 

Rana Bahadura. 

i 

Girvanayuddhavikrama. 

I 
Rajendra Vikrama. 

The work is complete in 14 Patalas. Its real name is 
Mantra-kalpadruma, and it is a treatise of MantraSastra. It 
includes Visnumantra in the Tantras. 

Laksmyavatarstotram, p. 46, No. 1320 ^, was copied in 
N.S. 408=1288. 

LalitarcanacandrikS, p. 248, No. 97, was composed by 
Saccidanandanatha. The author was asked by his disciples 
at Jalandar to compile a liturgy of Lalita, a form of the 
Devi. It is a comprehensive work running through about 
5,000 glokas, divided into 25 chapters, called prakagas. The 
work treats of the duties of a TSntrika. It quotes from 
Puranas too. 

VSmakeSvarl in her Tripura image is a form of the 
Devi whose cult is represented by a large mumber A of works 
in the TSntrika literature and by three works in this Cata- 
logue. 

VamakeSvarl-paja-paddhati, p. 49, No. JL861 is, runs 
through 17 pages of Newari writing. . 



PREFACE. lxxili 

VamakeSvarimatatippanam, p. 71, No. 1559 s, appears to 
be a commentary or rather a gloss on a work entitled VamakeS- 
varatantra. [No. 1865 and 1866 of the Bikanir Catalogue.] 
The original work contains 5 Patalas, the first has no name, the 
second treats of the process of worshipping Tripura, the third 
of Mudra, — the various contortions of the fingers and not the 
sauces which appetisein drinking, — the fourth of the practice 
of the three Vija mantras [HS Raim, HS Klrim, HS Rauip] 
appropriate to Tripura Bhairavl, and, the fifth of the homa 
proper to her. The commentator is Manmatha Pati and the 
scribe Narayana Kavi, and the date of copy is N.S. 474=1854 
A.D. The commentator says that the text is 400 Slokas in 
extent. 

VamakeSvarl-stuti-nyasa-pQja-vidhayah, p. 32, No. 1077 
h, was composed by Vatsaraja who is said to have been a 
Vidyadharacakravarttin. The Vidyadharas are first known 
to have ruled in Mysore and then on the banks of the Nar- 
mada. They were a race said to have possessed occult powers. 

Varunapuja, p. 76, No. 1688 *sr* and Varunayagavidhih, 
p. 77, No. 1638 % are parts of NandikeSvaramata [in one MS. 
Nandikesvaraprokta], asystem of tantra and that portion of it 
which deals with the consecration of Temples, &c. As regards 
the existence of Nandikesvaramata there is a Taladhyaya of 
the System in Cat. Cat. p. 276 A, Vol. I. 

Vidyapitha, p. 88, No. 1693 H, is a work on Gruhya Kali 
of Nepal in three chapters. 

Vimalavatl, p. 68, No. 1586 t, is a Tantrika work incom- 
plete both at the beginning and at the end. It treats of PajS 
Homa, Daman and Diksa. 

Vrsasarasamgraha, p. 92, No. 86 *i, of the New Collec- 
tion, in Newari character, is a Sivaite Tantrika work. 

Saradatilaka,pp. 78, 84 and 88, Nos. 1588 m, 1647 ^r, and 
1648 5, is a well-known compilation of Tantra by Laksmana 
Desika. All the MSS. are in Bengali character. The last was 
copied in Saka 1886=1414 A.D. The most valuable commen- 
tary on this work which contains 25 Patalas, representing 25 

10 



lxxiv PREFACE. 

tattvas of the Samkhyas, is the Padarthadarsa by Raghava 
Bhatta, for which see supra my notice of Kalltattva. Com- 
menting upon the geneological verses of Laksmana, Raghava 
says Mahabala was the founder of the family. His son was 
icarya Pandita. His son Krsna and his son Laksmana the 
author. The conjecture of Raj. Mitra that he belonged to the 
Varendra class of Bengal brahmanas is based on a misreading 
of Varanendra. 

Saradatilakatika, p. 12, No. 287, by Punyapala Deva 
Maharajadhiraja, is a unique commentary not known to 
Aufrecht. 

Sivakavaca, p. 54, No. 1376 *, is from the Bhairava- 
tantra. 

Sivadharmasastre Santyadhyaya, erroneously called 
fiivadharma, p. 55 and 128, No. 1876 $, contains one chapter 
only, namely that on Santi spoken of by Nandikesvara. 

Sivadharmasamgraha, p. 92, No. 86 ^r, of the new collec- 
tion, is a collection of Saiva works in Newari character. The 
name has been given by my travelling Pandit Vinodavihari 
Kavyatlrtha. The Government collection in the Asiatic 
Society's Library has a similar collection acquired from Nepal 
with six works. See preface to Vol. XI, pp. 7 and 8. 

Sivadharmottara, p. 92, No. 86 m, in Newari character, 
is a work on Saivaism mentioned by Biirnell in p. 188 B. 
as containing 9,400 Slokas. The present MS. purports to be a 
sequel to that work. It is mentioned by Biirnell in p. 195 A as 
containing about 2,000 Slokas. See also Raj. Mitra, 2208. It 
contains 18 chapters. See Oat. Adhair Library which says 
it has 12 chapters. 

Sri Kapalesvari Bhima Devyah Pujapaddhatih, p. 70, 
No. 1559 ^, otherwise called Pitrnirmocanika, is in Newari 
character. 

Sarvajnanottaratantra, p. 85, No. 1648 m, contains 40 leaves 
in Guptaksara. The MS. is defective both in the beginning and 
at the end. There are no colophons. The interlocutors are 
Siva and SadSnana. This was spoken after the completion of 



PREFACE. lxxV 

the Bathula tantra. As by churning the sea the gods obtained 
the nectar, so was this tantra obtained by extracting the 
essences of all tantras. This appears to be the youngest 
tantra of some cult, perhaps the Bathula school. [For Bathula 
tantra see supra.] The South Indian Batula is perhaps a mis- 
reading for Bathula. See p. 88, Madras Government Lib. 
Oat., and Hullzsch, Vol. II, 1086 and 1097. 

Siddhapancagika, p. 57, No. 1478 *r, in five patalas, appears 
to be a part of the KulalikamnSya. The scene is laid not in 
the Himalayas but on the Mahendracala. One of the 
epithets of Siva is Savara, a low tribe inhabiting the Eastern 
coasts of India, in the Kalinga country. Parvati says, " I have 
already heard Siddhantas, Damaras, Daksinas, Graruda and 
Bhlltatantra and Kulasastras; now I am anxious to hear 
the beginning of KSla, the creation above, below and even 
below that. The MS. was copied by Mahadeva in Newari 
character. 

Siddhasantanasadhana-sopana-paddhati or Srimatapad- 
dhati, p. 67, No. 1586 s, by Yasoraja, the son of Gopa, is a 
tantrika compilation in 15 patalas, and belongs to the 
Srlmata or Kulalikamnayatantra. 

Siddhantasarapaddhatih, pp. 52 and 180, No. 1868 3, by 
MahSrajadhiraja Bhojadeva, was copied in N.S. 187 = 1067 
A.D # It treats of the usual tantrika topics. It is difficult to 
say who this Maharajadhiraja Bhojadeva was. The great 
Bhoja of Dhara reigned in the beginning of the eleventh cen- 
tury, but there was a Bhojadeva in Nepal about the same 
time. The great Bhoja's compilations are Imperial and 
Encyclopaedic. But this is a small work and a hand-book. 
Then again there is no tradition that the Malava Bhoja ever 
made a tantrika compilation. 

Siddhilaksmyarcanam, p. 72, No. 1559 *sr, is a liturgical 
book on the worship of Siddhilaksmi. There is a goddess 
named Siddhilaksmi mentioned both in Visnupurana and 
BrahmSndapurSna. 

SudhStarafiginitantra, p. 266, No. 1589, by Saktivailabha 



Ixxvi PREFACE, 

Bhatt5c5ryya, is fragment of a tantrika compilation by a 
Bengali. The chapters are named Kalloias. 

Saubhagyatarangini, p. 268, No. 1458, in Newari character, 
is a Tantrika compilation divided into four laharis or waves 
by Mukunda on the worship of Sakti for obtaining Saubhagya 
or good fortune. 

Saura-samhita, p. 44, No. 1280 w, is an original tantra, 
the interlocutors being Karttika and Siva. It is an unique 
work. There are several works of this name known in 
Pauranika Literature. But this is a tantra. The work - is 
complete in ten patalas. At the end of the MS. there are two 
leaves in Gupta character giving a number of Tantrika formulae. 
The main work is dated N.S. 61 = 941 A.D. Though a tantra 
the work does not treat of Siva or Sakti but of the Sungod. 
There are so few works on the worship of the Sun, which 
formed one of the five great systems of worship in India, 
that the importance of this work cannot be overrated. 

Saubhagyaratnakara, p. 269, No. 1472, by Vidyananda- 
natha, the disciple of Saccidanandanatha. It is a complete 
MS. in 36 tarangas treating of the left-handed form of worship 
to be taught to Kaulasand not to animals (pasus). Copied in 
Samvat 1952 and composed at Prayaga. The author modestly 
calls himself Avidyanandanatha. [See Bk. Cat. p. 610.] 

Vaisnava Tantras. 

Gopaladhyanaraja, p. 61, No. 1508 H, is a formula 
of meditation on Gopala, the child form of Krsna from an 
unknown tantrika work entitled Gopalatantra. 

Devamrtapancaratra, pp. 84 and 106, No. 1078 *r, is a 
work of Vaisnava tantra written in prefectly ungrammatical 
Sanskrit. The work is unique in 11 patalas. The interlocu- 
tors are Sanat-kumara and Lokapitamaha. It treats of con- 
secration of Visnu images and of Visnu temples, the 
nature of Visnu, whether he is embodied in any form or is 
formless, and such topics. 

JMnatilaka, p. 180, No. 1840, is a small Tantrika work 



pREFACip. bsxvii 

in the praise of Guru. The interlocutors are Narada and 
Visnu. It does not appear to be a part of the'Padmapurana 
as in Biirnell, p. 98B, but a stray chapter from a PaficarStra. 

Tantra Samhitas. 

As I have said elsewhere, the Mahanirvana tantra which 
attempts to regulate tantrika life as completely, as Manu does 
the Smartta life, gives in the first chapter the description of 
a distinct religious literature partly vedic and partly tantrika. 
The writer says that this literature was held binding in the 
Dvapara Yuga. Then came Kali in which the Agamas and 
the Nigamas obtained binding force. Scholars were very un- 
willing to recognize the existence of this literature. But it 
appears to me that the Durbar Library contains at least two 
works which may safely be attributed to this literature, 

namely : — 

Nisvasatattvasamhita, pp. 10 and 187, No. 277, is written 
in transitional Gupta character which may be a century older, 
than the Paramesvara tantra, copied in 859 A.D. The first 
half of the work is called Srauta and the second half Gruhya. 
The leaves were in disorder. I have put them in order 
and it is a complete work running through 114 leaves and 
4,500 slokas. [See. Kep., p. 8.] 

The other samhita work is variously termed Jayakhya 
samhita, Jayaksarasamhita or Jnanalaksmi. There are three 
MSS. of this work in the collection namely: — 

Jayaksarasamhita, p. 1, No. 49; Jayakhyasaiphita or 
Jnanalaksmi, pp. 76 and 77, Nos. 1688 * and *. The second 
in p. 76 is dated N.S. 807 = 1187 A.D. The others are not 
dated. The work is attributed to a human author Sadhaka 
Candra Datta who had received favour from Ekayaua- 
caryya Narayanagarbha. The work is written in ungram- 
matical Sanskrit throughout, and treats of mantrasandarpan?, 
and other tantrika topics, as well as pretaSraddha antyesti, 
prSyaScitta, and other smartta topics. 



kxViii PBEFAOfi. 

KUBJIKAMATA. 

Kulalikamnaye-Kubjikamata, p. 8, No. 226 ? ; p. 11, No. 
285 *; p. 11, No. 285 if ; p. 84, No. 1078.*; p. 58, No. 1868 v; 
p. 54, No. 1868?; p. 55, No. 1478 m ; p. 57, No. 1478?; p. 98- 
99; Manthana-bhairava,p.22,No. 787 if; p. 224, No. (2) 279; 
Kadimatam,p.88,No. 1152 igr, Kubjikamatottara, p. 7, No. 185 
*r; Srimatottara, p. 255, No. (2) 299. These with NityShnika- 
tilakam, pp. 45, 47 and lll,Matasara,p. 222,Yogaguhya,p. 8, 
Yogaphita, p. 59, Ratnapancakavatara, p. 288, SiddhapancS- 
sika, p. 57 and Siddha-santana-sadhana-sopana-paddhati, p. 
67, form a collection of unique MSS. of a Tantrika cult very 
ancient but now nearly forgotten. The works from want of 
time could not be properly described. But the Government 
Collection of MSS. in the Asiatic Society has recently been 
enriched by two copies of the Kubjikamata, one in Gupta and 
the other in Newari character. The former, I thought, was 
copied in the sixth century, but it may be a century later. An 
examination of these MSS. and the impressions left of the 
examination of the Durbar Library MSS., together with the 
meagre notes published in the Catalogue, have brought the 
following matters to light. 

There was a School of Tantra variously named Kubjika- 
mata, Kulalikamnaya, Srimata, Kadimata VidySpitha, 
Divyaugha-sadbhava and so on. It had supplements, Uttaras 
named Srimatottara or Manthanabhairava and Kubjika- 
matottara, and it had its compilations, summaries, &c. The 
original is said to contain 24,000 slokas divided into four parts, 
called Satkas or six thousands each. Whether the Uttara is 
included in the 24,000 it is difficult to decide, but the evidence 
available is in favour of their inclusion. In one place, how- 
ever, the Ratna-pancakSvatara says that the Srimata-samhita 
is 12,000 only. The Government Gupta MS. says that the 
Vedas are not efficacious, and the work in 24,000 slokas is most 
efficacious, and of the 24,000 the first six thousand is the best. 
The antiquity of the School is vouched by the facts that a 



PREFACE. lxxix 

Gupta MS. has been obtained ; that Kubjika (tantra) is quoted 
by Abhinavagupta in his TrimsikS; that the MS. p. 54, was 
copied in the reign of Maharajadhiraja ParameSvara 
Paramabhattaraka Paramasaugata Srimad Kamapala- 
devasyapravardha*** about 1080 A.D. [see Mabel Duff]; the 
MS. in p. 55 was copied in N.S. 155=1085 A.D. The MS., 
p. 98, was copied in N.S. 280=1160 ; that in p. 99, in N.S. 
299=1179, and that Nityahnikatilaka was copied in N.S. 
817 = 1197. The literary activity of the School seems to have 
ceased after that time. 

The School, though very ancient, presupposes the exis- 
tence of other Schools, for in the G.Gr. MS. mention is several 
times made of Parvatantre and " Tantre tantre tu sa Maya 
kathitonekadha " ; and in Srimatottara, p. 256, Nityatantra 
appears to have preceded. 

It presupposes Devayana, Pitryana, and Mahayana, for 
in leaf XLIIIA we get — 

wsfo g *r*T*n*f fawNrr srifto^ i 

The GrGL MS. is a smaller recension of the Kubjikamata. 
In a leaf, the page mark of which has corroded, appears 
this verse. — 

WTO cHT STT^JTcf ^ fafaj^<l^d*l n 

The cult comes from outside the Vedas : — 
VIII A. 4 mim ^m^^jfrn^^f^mtmn i 

It comes from outside India : — 
XIB. ot* sf *m:% ^sfwm *rshp i 



llXX PREFACE. 

^^r^r^ mCHiu*? ^fsreifir *wr*w i 

In several places it is described as the Pascimamnaya, i.e., 
as coming from the west. [The tantras have five Schools from 
the directions from which they come, namely, Uttaramnaya, 
Daksinamnaya Purvamnaya, Pascimamnaya and tTrddhvam- 
naya.] 

Five Pithas there enumerated are : — 

(1) Odiyana, inOrissa; (2) Jala, in Jalandar; (8) Pflrna, 
in the Marhatta country; (4) Matanga, in Srlgaila; and (5) 
Kamakhya, in Assam. 

Its tendency and its attitude towards the professors 
of other religions in India may be inferred from the follow- 
ing, which enjoins prayaScittas for killing the priests of 
various sects : — 

XLII B. 4hi|JU<4 *si ^#t iroi^TOfasft *%^[ 
^fvuftfw *ftp qqftrar rarer* I 

The purport of this obscure and ungrammatical pas- 
sage seems to be that the Sin of killing a Brahmana may be 
atoned by repeating a certain mantra 20,00,000 times; a 
Buddhist Arhat, double as much ; a Nakula or a Raudraka 
8,00,00,000 ; and a guru of the Kubjikamata 6,00,00,000. The 
work has more sympathy for the Buddhists than for the 
Brahmanas. 

The author is afraid J>hat the Magas (who were then 



PREFACE. LKXXi 

probably pouring in India from Scythia and Persia) would 
one day become equal to the Brahmanas. 

The work mentions the following countries in India — 
Konkana Oela, Balhika, Bangala, Kamarupaka, Magadha, 
Saindhava, Gurjjara, Lad a and others. 

Its attitude towards Vedanta, i.e. 9 Upanisads and not 
Saipkara Vedanta, is given thus: — 

L.V.B. %^TO H^WPf H$ ^TlTTf^^WT: 

This MS. will be fully described in its proper place when a 
descriptive Catalogue of the Government Collection will be 
taken in hand. 

From a perusal of the notes in the Catalogue it appears 
that the Sastra had many recensions. The G.G. MS. is a 
recension of 6,000, that in p. 84 contains 150 slokas only, 
those in p. 57 have versified colophons. The Government 
Newar MS. is about 8,500 slokas in extent. 

These are all abstracts of the original. There are seven 
prakarana works, i.e., special treatises. [See supra.] 

Vari Sastra. 
Varisastra, p. 76, No. 1683 n, treats of the prognostics of 
rain, the materials for which were drawn principally from the 
work of Garga. The MS. was copied in N.S. 190=1070 A.D. 

Buddhist Works. 

Astasahasrika prajfiaparamita, p. 88, No, 1693 ^, and p. 
89, No. 2 n, of the new collection. They are both on palm 
leaves and both in Newari. 

Katipaya Bauddhacitranl. |ome Buddhist pictures, p. 12, 

No. 307. 

KSrandavyttha, p. 89, No. 2 w 9 in Newari character. 

JatakamalS, p. 89, No. 2 *, contains only five of the 
Jstakas, namely, (1) Grhajataka, (2) Hamsa,o (3) Yajnaoand 
(4) Vyaghrl o. The entire work has been published in 
America. ■-'..-- 

11 



XXX11 PREFACE. 

Jnanakarika, p. 79, No. 1684 *sr, is atantrika work of the 
Buddhists, attributed to Matsendranatha, commonly called 
Macchindranatha, whose temple at Patan is the great resort 
of all Buddhists, in Nepal, and whose car festival is the great- 
est festival in the valley. The work treats of such topics as 
Dharma and Adharma. 

Divyavadana, p. 89, No. 2 ?f, contains many avadanas, 
notably Eupavatl and not Rupavati as in Cowell's edition, 
Kunalavadana, and Pamsupradanavadana. The reading 
often differs from the printed text. This is the only palm 
leaf MS. of the work known. 

Nispanna-yogavall, p. 34, No. 1113 *r, contains 11 leaves 
in Newari character, copied in N.S. 686 = 1566 A.D., by 
Ravicandra, for his own use at the Sin-komagudl Vihara. 
The scribe was a Vajracarya. The subject-matter treated of 
is the yoga practised by Bhagavan Buddha with success. This 
appears to belong to the Vajrayana system of Buddhism as 
the Bhagavan Vajrasattva is represented as holding Vajra 
and sitting in the midst of a circle protected on all sides by 
Vajras. The great deity of this School is Vajrasattva, the high 
priest of the gods and represented as a form of Buddha. He 
is prominently mentioned in this work. The author is 
Abhayakaragupta. For another work of the same author see 
Bendall Cam. Cat. p. 197. He is called a Mahapandita. 

Prayascitta Saucacaravidhi, p. 214, No. 1103, is a Bud- 
dhist work on expiation of sins such as killing animals, kill- 
ing Vajracaryas, killing Brahmanas, killing Ksatriyas, &c, 
killing cows, intercourse with unclean tribes, eating unclean 
food, touching unclean things, purification and Sraddha. 
This also appears, to be a ^ork of the Vajrayana school of 
Buddhism. This is only a short compilation from previous 
works on the subject. The Buddhists seem to have borrowed 
many of the smrti practices of the Brahmanas. 

Bodhicaryyavatara, p. 21, No. 772 ul The MS. is a frag- 
ment, only 7 leaves; Its tippani, p. 21, No. 772 sr, contains 
notes on difficult passages only. These notes are often 
more useful than more ambitious commentaries. 



HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 

BY 
PROFESSOR CECIL BENDALL, M.A. 

The History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms (1000-1600 A.D.) 
compiled chiefly from MSS, lately discovered. — By Professor Cecil 
Bendall, M.A. (University College, London). Written as an His- 
torical Introduction to Pandit HaraprasId STastki's Catalogue of the 
Nepal Durbar Library. With chronological Tables and a Plate 
(facsimiles of MSS.) 

The Catalogue to which the present Essay forms an introduction 
is the result of a joint expedition to Nepal in the cold weather of 
1898-99 originally suggested by me, and taken part in by myself and 
Mahfimahopadhyaya Haraprasad S'astri, accompanied under the aus- 
pices of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, by his assistant, Pandit Binoda- 
vihari Bhat$acaryya. While co-operating with one another throughout, 
we arranged to divide generally our work so that the archaeological 1 
and historical part of the task should fall to myself, while the Pandits 
dealt with the literary portion. ^ 

A great deal of our time was of course taken up by the examination 
of the Maharaja's collection of MSS., which, as regards the antiquity 
of the documents, are surpassed by no Sanskrit Library known to exist. 
My own necessarily very hurried examination of this remarkable col- 

l I hope to publish my inscription! with my general Report, 



2 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

lection in 1884 led to the first definite account published. 1 Since then 
Pandit Haraprasad visited the Library, and gave some notes on it in the 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. LXVI, Pt. 1 (1897), pp. 
310 sqq. Some further notes were made by Prof. S. Levi 8 of Paris in 1897, 
giving attention "surtout aux colophons des manuscrits, si importants 
pour l'histoire." As, however, Monsieur Levi subsequently informed me 
that his examination of the Library was far from complete, I felt all 
the greater pleasure in seeing the more exhaustive examination taken 
in hand of which the present Catalogue is the result. My own share 
in it was chiefly in helping the Pandits to decipher the figures and 
other chronological data with which acquaintance of nearly 25 years with 
ancient Nepalese MSS. has given me some familiarity. When I was 
at work in the Library, I requested the Pandits always to show me colo- 
phons of MSS. containing kings' names and dates. A considerable 
portion, however, of the present Catalogue had to be compiled by the 
junior Pandit after my departure, and consequently I have been led 
to adopt another method of verification, which, thanks to the kind co- 
operation of the Residents in Nepal, Lieutenant-Colonel W. Loch and 
his successor, Lieutenant Colonel J. C. Pears, has given excellent results. 

This method was to send to the Resident a series of copies made on 
tracing-paper of all the important colophons containing points, numerals 
and the like, requiring verification. No clue was of course given to the 
words or figures expected to be filled in on the blank spaces left ; and the 
fidelity of the tracing was vouched for in each case by the correspon- 
dence of palaeographic peculiarities with the date assigned. 

In my previous attempts 8 to adjust Nepalese chronology by means 
of MS. -colophons, I always endeavoured, as far as possible, to use 
and harmonise the data furnished (1 ) by formal histories and chroni- 
cles, and (2) by the historical notices furnished by the scribes of 

MSS. in their colophons (brief, but valuable as contemporary evidence), 
and also incidental notices given in the body Of Works like dramas. 
Of the latter class a good example is the drama Mudita-KuvalayasvanS- 
taka from which copious extracts are given by Dr. Pischel in his Cata- 
logue of the German Oriental Society's MSS., pp. 7-8. The present 
Catalogue furnishes several more instances of this kind, 

1 See the present writer's " Journey in Nepal and Northern India," pp. 16—20, 
where the previous notices by R. Lawrence and D. Wright are referred to. 

* Rapport, p. 16 [84] (Acad, des Inscrr.Seance du 27 Janr. 1899). 

* Transactions of Fifth Congress Orientalists (Berlin, 1881 ) Verhandlungen If. 
Halite ii, pp.189 sqq. (1882) , " Catalogue of the Buddhist Skt. MSS., Cambridge* 
118813 fPistodcal Infcrod.) ; " Journey in Nepal "f tod.,.. .1880 (Tables), To these test 
two I hereinf ter refer as * Camb. Cat/ (distinguished from ' Cat.', which refers to 
the new Catalogue) and iJourae^' Respectively. , > •'•-■ ; £ •• • ' 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 8 

To the number of extant native chronicles the Maharaja's library 
contains an important accession l in the shape of a small palm-leaf 
MS. of a Vaipiavali discovered by me shortly before I left Nepal. 
Since my return to England owing to the kind negotiation of Col. Loch, 
I have not only received an excellent copy of the MS., but also the favour 
from H.H. the Maharaja of the loan for three months of the original, so 
that I have been able to collate and photograph all important passages. 

My use of the chronicles has been adversely criticized * by some 
scholars, though countenanced by others ; 8 but I venture to think that 

the discovery of the present MS. puts matters in a somewhat new 
light. 

Though written continuously in a single handwriting correspond- 
ing with the time (reign of Jayasthiti-malla, A..D. 1380-1394) 
at which the chronicle ends 4 (see the Plate annexed, figs. 3-10), the 
new Varn^avali really contains three distinct chronicles, designated 
accordingly in the present essay V 1 , V*, V 3 . 

V 1 is in the form of brief annals of the successive reigns not unlike 
the other Vamsavalls, but giving a much greater number of dates, iu 
addition to the lengths of the reigns. The leading events of each reign 
are also noticed in some cases with dates, at first in words and later on 
in numerals. 

The leaf-numbering begins at f. 17 and this portion ends with 
30 a . The language is no doubt intended for Sanskrit, but in obscurity 
and a perfectly wild absence of syntax 5 it rivals the worst colophons of 
Nepalese MSS. that I have seen. I thought at first of printing the 
whole, but after studying my transcript and taking the advice of friends 
I came to the conclusion that I should either have to print the whole 
without spaces, which would be misleading and unsatisfactory, or to 
publish facsimiles. For the division of words and even sentences, 

1 As the present Catalogue gives no description of the MS. the following notes; 
may be of interest. No. 1231* Palm-leafs 11 by 1J inches, leaves 17-63, with an 
extra leaf not numbered, thus 48 in all. 

8 " Journey," p. 93. 

ft eg.> in M. S. Levi's investigations as to the eras of Nepal. 

* The latest dates are N.S. 508, occurring at fol. 63b. and 509 at 58o. It 
will be seen both from my Cambridge Cat. (c/. Intr. p. xxxi), and from the present 
Catalogue that palm-leaf MSS. become rare (owing to the general use of paper) 
within about a century from this time. 

* Scientific students of the vernaculars may probably find 'method in its 
madness.' The frequent locution 3hf 3W: «r OT for q OTTOr °* W 'TOfrf cer - 
tflinly suggests the familiar Hindi tj^ 3 ftw. Towards the end (ff. 296, 30) 
it drops into a form of languge which is practically Newari with an unusually 
large allowance of words borrowed from Aryan sources. 



4 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

when one had no fixed rules of grammar to help in the interpre- 
tation, seemed in many places quite doubtful* I have been conse- 
quently permitted by the Council of the Society to take the latter 
alternative, and have accordingly reproduced a selection of the most 
important leaves, of which I made legible negatives while the MS. was 
lent to me. It will be noted that the selected leaves begin with 3A. 
I only publish now a portion of this leaf, as I reserve for future 
treatment the kings of Nepal before 879 A.D. in connection with my 
recently-discovered inscriptions. 

From the prominent way in which temple-donations are recorded, 
it may be conjectured that this part of the MS. (V 1 ) may be in some way 
connected with the records of the great shrine of Pasupati. 

V* is a document of different orgin ; it is a list of births of royal 
and other distinguished personages. The language is unfortunately 
old Newari ; but one can make out the names and dates clearly enough. 
These extend, not always in strict chronological order, from N.S. 177 
to 396. A specimen is given in the Plate, fig. 10. All the information 
given in this section of the Chronicle, so far as it relates to the kings, 
will be found condensed in the notes to the Table of kings below. 
Towards the end of the section other information besides births* deaths, 
and the like is introduced, but I have been able to make but little use 
of this owing to the difficulties of the language, for which I can get no 
adequate help either in Nepal or in Europe. 

V s is perhaps merely a continuation of V 8 . I have called it a 
separate document, because a slight break with double dandas occurs 
in the original MS. at the end of fol. 36 a , and because at this point 
there is a marked difference of style. The string of short paragraphs 
each recording little more than a birth, is abandoned, and the annals 
become more expanded. The previous section had ended, as I said, 
with JST.S. 396. This, however, begins with N.S. 379 and the history 
would not seem to be treated on a strictly chronological basis, as the 
irregularity of order in the dates noticed in V* is here more pro- 
nounced. The latest date, as already noted, is N.S. 508 (f. 636). 

The events mentioned in V 1 are sometimes described here in fuller 
detail. 1 On the other hand, the chronological details though full seem 
not to be quite so trustworthy.* 

I For example, the famine in the reign of Abhayamalla in N.S. 352 (V*, 39^ 
mentioned at p. 8, note 2, below.) 

* Thnj» v at.40» we get the birth of Jayaiongamalla, aon of Jayarudramalla, 
Sam vat 416 margaiira fakla trayoda& Annradha ghati 17 Sola 37 angararate 
(Tuesday ). But Prof. Jacobi, who has kindly worked out the date, reports that the 
day in question was a. Monday and points out that u Mgrgaiira can never be, 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 5 

Nevertheless I feel sure that this section must contain much 
valuable information, and it is in the hope of drawing the attention 
of the few scholars skilled in the Himalayan languages to the matter 
that I reproduce a specimen -leaf (Plate, fig. 10). The passage refers 
to the invasion of Harisimha of Simraon about which I have more to 
say below. 

Having thus indicated the materials of the present investigation, 
the divisions of the subject may be stated. 

I.- The History of the Nepal Valley, A.D. 1000-1600 (».«, 
Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhatgaon) : 

Chronological notes on the dynasties of the surrounding 
states : 

II.— Western Nepal. III.— Tirhut (Eastern and Western). 

To these notes I have added (as Table IV) a list of a dynasty, which 
I have not been able to recognize. 

The main results of the enquiry are summarized in the Tables at 
the end of this article, which constitute of course its most important 
feature, and will probably provide most students with all that they 
require. The present notes are chiefly intended to elucidate the Tables 
and especially to bring out the relations between the dated series of 
kings obtained from MSS. and the dynasties detailed in the new 
Vamsavali. 

I. The present collection of MSS. affords an example [See 
Plate ; fig. 2, 1. 2] of a date 1 earlier than any hitherto found referable 
to the Nepal era, but unfortunately no dated MS. with a king's name 
occurs earlier than those previously known. 

It is interesting to note that the king Haghavadeva mentioned by 
Cunningham 8 as the traditional founder of the Nepal era of 879-80, 
but passed over in the Vamsavali of D. Wright 8 and by Kirkpatrick,* 
is duly recorded in the new chronicle. Not only so, but the years of 
reign assigned to him and his immediate successors quite accord with 

Anuradha." I have, moreover, noted quite a number of cases where months in cer- 
tain years are called dvi (tlya) where no such intercalation, according to Sewelland 
Diksit's Tables, occurred ; compare Table of Kings, note 10, below. 

1 See Catalogue, pp. 85 (^|) and 140 ( Lanka vatara). The reading 28 must be 
altered to 29 ; nor can I concur in the description 'gupt&ksara-likhitam.' The form of 
h is distinctly post-Gupta ; and the general appearauce of the writing with its closely 
placed akfaras seems to preclude the &ri-Harsa era. The forms of n (guttural) and 
the form of the afcfara-numeral 20 are archaisms that one would expect to find in a 
document written early in the tenth century. 

* Indian Eras, p. 74. 

& • History of Nepal/ Cambridge, 1877. 

* ( An account of the Kingdom of Nepal/ London, 1811. 



6 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

the tradition of his having founded the era. Thus, if we add together 
the duration of his reign and his five successors down to Laksmik&ma- 
deva we get about 135 years. This, again, added to 879-80 brings us 
to the second decade of the eleventh century, when we know from a colo- 
phon that Laksmikama had commenced to rule at all events as joint- 
sovereign, becoming sole king later on. 

The earliest king of Nepal mentioned with a date in the Catalogue 
is Bhaskaradeva ; and it is very satisfactory to find that this date already 
noticed by Pandit Haraprasad (J.A.S.B. for 1897, Pt. I, p. 312) is 
verifiable. Prof. Kielhorn has kindly calculated it for me and it corre- 
sponds to 24th September, 1046. The new chronicle duly records this 
king with a rather obscure note l as to his ' repairing his paternal 
crown.' The other chronicles make him the founder of a new dynasty. 
Of the next king, Baladeva* (called in V 1 Balavantedeva), we have 
a dated MS. 8 

Of Harsadeva's reign we have now two MSS.* A third date 
has been added from the Chronicle, which says of this reign merely: 

tOTT fMt* *♦ V «rfiWll W*FC OT^* *ft***nf I Interpreted in 
the light of the two other dates this rather crudely expressed notice 
gives good sense, if we take it to mean that Harsa died in N.S. 219 
current. This fits also quite well with the duration of the next reigns 5 
as given in our Chronicle. The credibility of the dates in this part 
of the chronicle is further enhanced by its mention of the completion 
in 239 (date in words) of a tank by S'ivadeva, the next sovereign. 

1 See Plate, fig. 3B, line 4, medio $if fqgflVfw W ( ? W )fiWf : " his father's 
diadem was broken up and he destroyed the golden image (to make a crown) ;" or 
*?lfai?lW 3 " the crown was renewed." Kirkpatrick (p. 263) records a similar 
tradition for a king reigning some twenty years later. 

* Name wrongly restored in my previous lists as Baladeva. VI records him 
as the founder of Haripur. Plate, fig. 3 B, last line. 

8 As to Yinadeva the MS. (referred to in the table) of Vanadeva makes my 
identification (Journey, p. 9) more difficult. But the existence of Vanadeva's 
father, the king (bhundtha) Yasodeya, seems to be confirmed by the Tib. notices in 
J. Buddh. T.S. Ind., Vol. I, p. 27, where we learn that a king Anantakirti was 
ruling in the middle of this century in another region of Nepal (Palpa). Babu 
Sarat Chandra Das has favoured me with the original Tibetan of the passage and 

it is just possible that the name 5}JW*4'*(£r*W, grags-pa-mtna-yae* which he 
Sanskritizes as Anantakirti, may be a form of Yaiodeva the king of Bal-po, Nepal 
in general (or the Palpa district in Western Nepal P) The chronology At least would 
agree. 

* See the Table. 

* The supposition would not nt with the allowance of 21 years to [Sada.] 
S'ivadeva, made by " G " in Tab. I, Col. 4, of my < Journey.* 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 7 

XbU wag called after the Yuvaraj (ifttw) ladraor Mahendra-deva, 
Mahemdra-saras. It was otherwise know© ad Madanasaras. 1 It will be 
ateen that this date falls in the year before the writing of a MS. if! 
the same reign, 

I have lingered over these somewhat minute details for two reasons t 
(1) Because it forms a new feature of the present chronicle to find 
go early as this 8 dates expressed both in word$ and figures that accord 
with the contemporary evidence of the scribes; (2) because doubt 8 had 
been expressed whether the Nepal Samvat (of 879-80) was actually 
in use in the eleventh century A.D. It is satisfactory to note that our 
chronicle, following the tradition already known from Kirkpatrick, 
does Indention 4 " the aforesaid Indradeva both as yuvaraja and rqfSt t 
as we have pow a MS. of his reign. It will be seen, however, that tho 
number of years (12 ) assigned to his reign is probably excessive. The 
dates of the next two reigns overlap one another. If this is not a 
case of subdivision of the kingdom of whieh there are so many instan- 
ces, it may be quite well explained by the tradition preserved in the 
records of Wright and Bhagavanlal, that Mahadeva retired early in his 
reign from active sovereignty and Narendra (or Narasiipha) 6 became 
his regent. Of the reign of the next king, Ananda, MSS. are now 
numerous. It is curious that the other chronicles either give his name 
wrongly (Wright, Bh.) or omit his reign altogether (Kirkpatrick) It is 
found, however, correctly spelt at f. 316. of our MS. 6 chronicle. Of Rudra'a 
reign no MSS. are extant. The years assigned by our MS. to his reign 
(8) seem to show the origin of the curious error in the length of the 
reign (80 years) assigned by Kirkpatrick. Equally correctly given is 
the form Amrta, which is now verified by a MS. 7 The * great dearth ' re- 
ft The event is again chronicled with the same date in V*. See Plate, fig. 9, 
I. 4. 

8 Kirkpatrick** dates begin later (thirteenth centnry). Those in Wright only 
become correct somewhat later (invasion of Harisimha). 
S A. Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, p. 28, n. 1. 

4 Ttoe records preserved by Wright and Bhagavanlal (lad. A. XIT. 413) pass this 
king over. ..'*... . > 

* The actually discrepant date is that supplied by the colophon in the Cat., p> 
62. Here there can be no, doubt as to the interpretation of the chronogram, though 
some of the terminations of the other words must be corrected for the scansion* But 
the date seems net to work out. The obscure phrase rqjarajasddrfye may quit* 
possibly refer to regency. 

* Theoofflm6ami8take f Nanda-'devaisfoundatf,2oa(plate,fig.6 f l.U). Rajen- 
dials! Mitra makes the same blunder in his text of Astas. Pr. pref ., p. XXIV. note, 

1 Cat! p. 6& ft}. -I find -from a tracing sent from Nepal by Col. Loch that the 
Rindit'sreacKng ef the ^ear (J0§) ia quite correct, and in that in the ne*t Jin* 
Sri Amrtadevasya is quite clear. ; : *;; 



8 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

corded by Kirkpatrick is duly chronicled in V 1 (Mahllm&ri-durbhiksam- 
bhavati) 25.6. l The next date from MSS. is obtained from a MS. in the 
Maharaja's library noted by myself, but omitted by the Pandit in his 
Catalogue. It is from No. 1648, a M§. of Caraka, I have since sup- 
plemented my note by a tracing kindly sent by Colonel Pears* The full 
date is given in the Table. But as the king Ratnadeva is mentioned 
in none of the chronicles, I am inclined to think that he must have 
been a local raja, or a king of Western Nepal. 1 

After Amrtadeva my previous lists left one of those gaps which it 
is now most satisfactory to find filled in. The tradition reproduced by 
Wright aud Bhagavanlal quite fails here. Kirkpatrick alone gives 
correct, though inadequate, details, which are now supplemented by the 
new chronicle and, what is more important verified by MSS. 

As to SomeSvara-deva, see the Table and note there (p. 25). Kirkpa- 
trick's 'Buz Caum Deo* of course represents Vijayakamadeva; his ' Any 
Mull' is a less recognizable equivalent of Arimalla; but in Nepalese 
documents iT and *c are easily confused. After the reign of 8 Abhayadeva 
which, though called by Kirkpatrick ' inauspicious,' was anyhow fairly 
long as a goodly array of MSS. now shows, the chronicles hitherto 
available quite break down. 

Even if Jayadeva and Anantadeva were brothers, 8 as Wright 
(p. 162) and Bb. state, the latter certainly did not reign at the same 
time. Two kings whose names, Jayabhima and Jaya&hadeva, I bave 
taken from tbe chronicle, * intervened ; and it is extremely satisfactory 

l Supposing the era to be that of Nepal, which I think probable from the writing. 

8 ' The great dearth' recorded by Kirkpatrick for this and the previous reign 
are duly registered in our chronicle (25b ; plate, fig. 6. 1. 3). where famine- prices for 
grain are also mentioned. The prices are given in greater detail in V& (Newari 
portion of chronicle) at fol. 39b for Samvat 352. 

8 The birth-list of the chronicle (V*) makes Ananta not the son of Abhaya, 
but of a certain Sri-Rajadeva and of Budramadevi. 

4 Fol. 26a. The whole passage, following on that reproduced in 256 ; plate, fig. 6, 
ransthus: *l*^pc WTPW ^ll«ll« llf^lffjtN 9*$Q *fl*WH^H|lf^ *TOf 
^gufaT « gwft ** XXm «ft«Hl?l«ft« ** « *T V l formerly thought this date, 
which, as Dr Kielhorn kindly informs me, corresponds to 7th Jnne 1255, referred to 
the coronation of Jayabhima, in spite of the punctuation, which seems not always 
trustworthy in this MS. On re-reading the passage, however, I now consider that 
it must refer to the first shock of the earthquake, which is accordingly stated to 
have lasted at intervals over four months. This accords better with the subsequent 
date, 377, of a MS., once the property of the late Pangit Bhagavanlal Indraji. I 
may here mention that I have made enquiries by letter for this MS. In the Bhagavan- 
lal collection of the Bombay Asiatic Society, but without success. From V* (fol. 866) 
we learn that in 378 Caitra Jayabhimadeva had become raji, with Jayasupha (Siha* 
malladeva) as yuvaraja. 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms, 9 

t# tod |h$t pne of them (Jayabhima) is fully attested by a dated MS; 
so t^at again the ^ew chronicle and the newly-discovered MS. 1 confirm 
one another, . . # . 

Of the next king, Anantamalla we have now a goodly array of 
dates * from MSS. Besides these there is an interesting note in 
Kirkpatrick (p. 264)- stating that "in this prince's reign and in the 
Newar year 408, or Sumbuth 1344, 8 many Khassias (a western tribe) 
emigrated to Nepal, and settled there ; and three years after in the 
Newar year 411 a considerable number of Tirhoot families alqo planted 
themselves there." What this really amounted to may be told in the 
words of the chronicle (f. 266 ; PI. fig. 7) : " 12 years 3 months after [t*** 
after the beginning of Atlanta's reign, or after the last event mentioned, a 
quarrel between his sons] the Khasiya king Jayatari first entered, 
Sanwat four hundred and eight in the month Pausa. After a slaughter 
of (eight ?) hundred Khasiyas the rest retired [to the jungles P] and the 
country resumed its ordinary state. On the 13th of Phalguna sudi 
of the same year Jayatari again entered [the country, as if] for a 
friendly purpose, [but] he burned with fire villages and other places. 
He visited *(?) the Syeipgu-chait[ya], saw the image of LokesVara 
at Bug [a] ma* and visited (?) the Pasupati [shrine]. He got safe back 
to his kingdom. [This happened in] Saipvat four hundred and nine. 
Again the [king] of Tirhut entered [Nepal]. This happened [in] 
Samvat four hundred and eleven in the month Magna." 6 

Kirkpatrick's " emigrations " were thus more or less predatory 
incursions, which as we shall see, became increasingly common later on. 

After the death of Ananta a troublous time ensued, and one that 
has been hitherto extremely obscure. In my previous lists I had to 
note at this time : M Kings uncertain 6 for 60 years." Though much 

1 See MS. of the Mah§lak?mivrata numbered 1320 and noticed at pp 47-8, 123-4 
of the Catalogue. Mr. B. Sewell has kindly verified the date, which works ont to 
2nd April, A.D. 12QO, \ , . 

* One of these is that given at p. 44 ( *f ) of the Cat., and there referred to 
Anandamalla. la my tracing however the name Ananta is quite clear. Wright (pp. 
162-66) makes a similar confusion. 1 have no verification of the date at p. 63 fin. of 
the Gat., which makes Abhayamalla still reigning in N.S. 386. 

* The double date is interesting, though the Yikrama Samvat is not known 
to hav,e been in use in Nepal at this early time. 

* On this celebrated image, see Foucher € Iconographie ■ p. 100 and his pi. IV. 1 
from a miniature in the Library of the As. Soc. of Bengal, where also the village-name 
is spelt Bugama, not * Bungmati ' as now. 

« For the tejtfc see ,Piate, fijr r ?, flaea MS- .->- ".'..- , - .• J 

* The main reason of this uncertainty, «**., the varying accounts of Jyasthiti 
malla'8 ancestors, who never ruled in Nepal proper at all, is suggested teJojr. 

2 



10 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

still remains uncertain, it is satisfactory to find that this long interval is 
shortened on both sides by dated reigns that may be regarded as 
fixed. 

The first of these is the reign of Jayanandadeva which followed l 
that of Ananta and is certified by a date (N.S. 438) in the Catalogue 
(p. 73) which I had previously noted in the MS. The next king, accord- 
ing to the chronicle, was Jayarudramalla % . His accession, the corona- 
tion of his co-regent, and his own death (svargastha) and "suttee" 
of his foiy wives are recorded. It is probably significant that the date 
given in two sections of the chronicle for the last event is only a few 
months s after the invasion of Harisimhadeva of Simraon. 

The history of the next twenty years cannot at present be satisfac- 
torily told, until the Newari of V s has been interpreted. Besides the 
well-attested invasion of Harisimhadeva, several other foreign powers 
made themselves felt at this time. One of these was an invasion by 
Adit[y]amalla. After narrating the death of Jayarudra, V 1 adds merely 
WWt <Hlftfl4f<J t*rra *fw g But V 3 narrates the same event more 
fully. The Newari sentence begins W7J »»e: ifTW* UH TO^t *fWT TTW 
WTftWTO (46a; PL, fig. 10.*), so that we learn the exact date (448 
Phalguna sudi 7) and the interesting fact that Aditya was a king of 
Western Nepal, thus foreshadowing the Gorkha conquest of more recent 
times. 

Returning to the semi-Sanskrit account of V 1 , which curiously 
makes no mention of the invasion of Harisimha, we find (276) that 
an infant son of Jayarudra died a few days after his father's death. 
His daughter Satl-nayakadevi was placed under the guardianship of 
her grandmother Padumalladevi.* The young princess (after being 
crowned Raul, according to Kirkpatrick), was married to Haricandra- 
deva belonging to the royal family of Benares. 5 He appears to have 

1 if*T*rt Km *NnrTiW$* S*3* inpffft I tlgHHm says the chroni. 
cle (27 a fin ) after narrating the events of Ananta's reign. This probably implies 
an interval between the twn latter reigns. Fleet, Gupta Inscrr. In trod, p 186 
contrasts the meanings of antare and anantaram, especially in the records of Nepal. 

* A co-regent of this king was Jayirimalla. The mention of this prince in VI. 
/. 27a fin. 276) is very obscure, bat V* distinctly describes him (45a.) as Samrdja 
(with Jayarndra) between N.8. 440 and 443. He died in 464 (ib. 50b). 

B N.S. 446 (in figures and chronogram) Asadha pfirnami f. 276, Prathama 
A?ad«ia parnima 466 (but Asa, was not intercalated this year). Mnhammadan 
authorities cited in Miss Duff's Chronology of India. 

♦jpft <wV *mt*t mm rM«i*H^^mffi *ftmf%w (276). The 

sentence forms a choice example of the grammar of V* referred to above. 
8 4liWJ<H*l (•*) 2 ^ b - ' ^fr 11 °f Benares,* Kirkpatrick. 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 11 

lived in Nepal some time, but was poisoned 'after some years' 1 (kati- 
payavarsdntare). After this his brother Gtopaladeva accompanied by 
Jagatsimhadeva (called in V 1 Karnatava[m]£aja and in V 3 (4.96) 
"Tirhuti-ya Jagatsimhakum&ra^yireize^the^peTson of Nayakadevi. * 
The allies then appear to have taken Bhatgaon and Patan. GopSla- 
deva was subsequently beheaded by Jagatsimha's followers. After 
this the prince Jagatsimha enjoyed the sovereignty for a few days ; 
but he was afterwards put into confinement, 8 ; by whom we are 
not told. His daughter was Raja[l]adevi 4 ; and her mother 
Nayakadevi died ten days after her birth ; so that (like her mother) she 
was brought up by her paternal grandmother, whose name was Devala- 
devi. I do not understand the reference to Pasupatimal[l]adeva h that 
immediately follows (Plate ; fig. 8, 1. 3). Possibly he was the represen- 
tative of some rival line of kings, as we read directly after, that " by the 
consent of both royal families Jayarajadeva was made king on 467 
SVavana badi 4 " which was subsequently 6 ratified by general consent. 

About the reign of Jayaraja's son and successor Jayarjuna some 
uncertainty remains, though this could probably be removed by the fall 
interpretation of the present chronicle. Passed over by all the histories, 
his existence and reign were first pointed out by the present writer 
from the colophons of Cambridge MSS. Even in the present chronicle 
his reign and its duration are not formally recorded, though he is 
several times referred to as ' Sfri Jayarjuna raja ' and ' Jayarjuna-nrpa.' 

The reason of all this is not far to seek. 

In 474, ? that is while Jayarajadeva was still reigning, took place 

l V3 (47a) gives the exact date of his ' violent death ' 1?W ( Slc ) ^OT, N.S. 
455 Jyestha sttdi 5. 

*Phm<jP^3 3l«wififo ytf* ^ ^ftnf i mr* **rc i # v*f nt^ ito s^ 

^ftraret^ TW I ^irtir ^C UpTO* STJFI *RI I ft^f* *?$**• etc, (see 
plate, fig. 8). 

* We are told in V& (51b) that this princess's mother was Nayakadevi ; so 
that Jagatsimha carried off the bride of his ally's brother. Raj all a was born N.S. 
467 Pau?a badi 10. 

* More is said of him and (possibly the same) * bandhana ' in V& (52 a) under 
date 469 MargaS; su. 12. , 

* The punctuation of fig. 8 1.2 would lead one to suppose at first sight that 
the general ratification preceded the particular one ( Vaiiikha being 3 months earlier) ; 
but the second date doubtless refers ttf the birth. In all birth-entries the date corns 

first .■;-"< " ' • *- "-" 

T I transcribe the Newari of V* (536);* •%• ^TTfiR nfif * flNwfilfirowMh' 



12 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdorks. 

the marriage of the prince Jayasthiti, a descendant of Harisiinha df 

Simraon, with Rajalladevi. Jayasthiti was reigning when the chro- 
nicle was concluded and the chronicler naturally magnifies 'the powers 
that be' and says little of the title of the lawful king whom Jayasthiti 
had managed to defeat and depose. But we see from the colophons of 
MSS. the real state of things. In 484 Karttika, October 1363 (a verified 
date: see the Table) Jayarjuna was on the throne and the colophon 
of the next MS. is fortunately very explicit. The MS. ( see Cat. p. 88) 
was written in a well-known vihar in Lalit-Patan and the colophon 
adds in 491 (A.D. 1371) that Jayarjuna was victoriously reigning (not only 
there but) 'Nepala-mandale' which we may construe to mean the whole 
of the valley. The scribes call Jayarjuna king down to February 1376. ' 
His name is also mentioned in connexion with the initiation-cere- 
mony of Dharmamalla sou of Jayasthiti and Raj alia in 497 Jyes$ha 2 
(summer of 1377). On the other hand about 503 (date of latest event 
in V 1 ) we find a reference to Jayarjuna as Mff $r: «nm«HH*iir vft 3 which 
can only mean his defeat, followed as it is by an acknowledgment of 
Jayasthiti as king of Nepal. 8 That Jayarjuna, however, did not submit 
without a struggle may be seeu from the interesting colophon at Cat 
p. 39, 1 6 (unfortunately not dated) from which we learn that the MB. 
was copied "in the victorious reign of Jayasthiti," and that u at that 
time the king named Jayarjuna was entering, with his ally, the Tripura* 
raja* in great commotion." 

Jayasthiti was evidently a patron of literature ; not only are MSS. 
of his reign more numerous than in any preceding, but we find from 
the chronicle that even before his accession he celebrated the birth -cere- 
mony of his «on Dharmamalla by a performance of a 'four-act Rama- 

qCl^P * *!!*! (if?) M><Pm<J1*W^ 4*J*H for fan m I The princess's 
name is nob mentioned ; bat aUbther marriage hardly would have been mentioned 
in the chronicle. 

i Verified, see note to Table. 1 have re-examined the date in Cambridge Add. 
1498, whioh I formerly published as equivalent to 604 or 1384. The writing is Very 
faint. See now note 3 to table below, p. 27. 

8 The passage is evidently an interesting one, though unfortunately the en d is 
not clear to me: jp** ^J*^ ( W&) OTI^ 8<£« ^* Ijf^ "^flft WWR 1W WlVlty* 

S The words following Vflf are ^I&t?) fWMi*rtT<rttf {l<Ht«*KHl- 
- f 5& ■- Tj^nra-rSJi is several tim** referred to in the chronicle.. 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 13 

yana, ' l which was repeated * on the initiation-ceremony. A revival of 
letters, too, is vonched for by the fact that lengthy Sanskrit inscrip- 
tions in prose and verse, which had disappeared for some five centuries 
or more, now re-appear 3 and are continued in the reign of Jayasthiti's 
son. 4 

Unlike most Indian princes, Jayasthiti had, according to my con* 
jecture, some appreciation of the value of history. When he enters 
on the scene there is a slight change in the style of the present chronicle. 
Newari words become much more frequent. It seems to me as thongh 

the chronicle V l had been finished off by a partisan of the king. In 

the case of the Vam£avali preserved by Wright, traces of manipulation 
seem to me still clearer. After a rather jejune account of his (alleged) 
predecessors this chronicle bursts into sudden eloquence of detail on 
the doings of Jayasthiti. There seems no reason to doubt the accuracy 
of these particulars, though as Dr. Wright points out in his note 
(p. 183) there is a medley of inaccurate and accurate 5 dates (p. 187). 
The king's literary proclivities are even exemplified by a specimen 
of his composition (ibid.) 

So far so good. Where one seems to see the traces of deliberate 
falsification is in the total omission of the real kings 6 of Nepal im- 
mediately preceding and following the invasion of Harisimhadeva, and 

the insertion of a string of ancestors for Jayasthiti with impossible 

reigns and dates. These are tabulated in the Historical Introduction 
to my Cambridge Catalogue, p. xv. There is no agreement in the lists 
of ancestors, except that all seem to show a tradition current at least in 
the XVIIth century 7 A.D. that the family of Jayasthiti was descended 
from Harisimha by the male line, though it should be observed that 
the inscription there cited ignores Jayasthiti and his immediate ances- 
tors and goes, by a considerable mandukapluti from Jayasthiti's grand- 
son Yaksamalla back to ' Harayat'-siraha. Even more suggestive of 
what I regard as the correct facts is the form of Inscription No, 16 of 

1 A dramatized Ramayana appears in the present collection, p. 246. 

* See note 2 to preceding page. 

8 ' Journey in Nepal ' pp. 12, 83. Bhagavanlal and Wright mention an inscrip- 
tion of the king himself ' on a stone near Lalitapa^tan. V 

* Ind. Ant. IX, 183. 

* This (N.S. 515)* it should be observed, is the first date in that VamsaVali tt>at 
is reconcileable with the testimony of MS. -colophons and inscriptions save only 
the memorable date of Harisimha'8 invasion (p. 175). 

* Wright's ' Anandamalla ' (pp. 262-299) seems to be a mixture of AnantamaUta 
and Jayanandadeva* He totally omits Jayabhima, Jayaraja and jajarjuna, all men- 
tioned in the present chronicle and confirmed by MSS. 

7 The inscription and the play cited fall within this century. 



14 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

Bhagavanlal's series which was issued by the son of Jayasthiti, Jyotir- 
malla in N.S. 543. Here there is a short genealogy (tabulated by 
Bhagavanlal), but no ' fancy ' ancestry on his father's side. On the 
contrary, he mentions his father merely as * belonging to the Surya- 
vauisa' and then most significantly adds that he (Jayasthiti) was the 
' husband Of Rajalladevl. 1 The reason is now clear. It was through 
his mother and not through his father that Jyotirmalla bad any 
hereditary claim to the throne. 

We may now turn back to a very important point in this part of 
the history of Nepal, around which a good deal of misapprehension 
has gathered, namely the invasion of Harisimha. 

In spite of the boast of Candesvara, Harisimha's minister that he was 
" victorious over all the kings of Nepal ",* there seems to be at present 
no evidence beyond that of the Vamsavali- tradition preserved by Wright 
and Bhagavanlal to show that Harisimha established himself in the 
valley of Nepal. Against this we may place the testimony of the new 
Vamsavali which was composed within about half a century of the 
event in question and (what is far more convincing) is confirmed by the 
colophons of several MSS. The precise nature of Harisimha's expedi- 
tion may be further explained by the Newari extract forming fig. JO of 
the Plate ; but meanwhile one can see that the effect of his expedition 
could hardly have been permanent, as not many years after we find a 
representative of the old royal family (Jayadeva) 8 on the throne. Until 
more evidence is forthcoming, it seems safer to regard Harisimha and 
his ancestors 4 who reigned in Tirhut,* Simraon and also possibly other 
parts of the Nepal-Tarai as at most titular kings of Nepal, even if 
they really claimed sovereignty over the valley of Nepal at all. 

For Jayasthiti's reign MSS. are, as I have said, numerous. The 
earliest date (N.S. 500) is taken from the Gat. p. 43, where, beside the 

1 Jayasthiti has the very same epithet (Rdjalladevi-pati) daring his lifetime in 
N.S. 500. See Cat. p. 43 1. 23. 

* Danaratnakara, stanza 3 ap. Eggeling, Cat 1.0. p. 412. 

* As to Jayadeva, Pandit Haraprasad has very kindly famished me with a 
tracing of the colophon of the Society's MS. first described by him in J. A. S. B., 
LX1I. i , p. 250. From this it is now plear that Jayadeva (the reading °vijayadeva 
cannot stand) reigned on till N.S. 476, Phalguna. 

* It should be noted that the Wright- Bhagavanlal tradition brings in a long 
line of ancestors for Harisimha and has to stretch out the true chronology of the 
kingdom to work them in. Once regard them as merely kings" of the Nepal-Tarai 
and all becomes simple. As to Nanya-d6va the reputed founder of the Simraon 
dynasty, see Duff, Chronology, p. 134 and add a reference to Kp. Indica, I, 813. 

* Cantfefrara » the Kriyaratnakara, st. 4 merely says that his master * ruled 
over all Mithila' (Cat. Skt. MSS. I.O. p. 410). 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 15 

epithet 'Rajalladevi-pati' already referred to, several additional details 
of interest are supplied. Among them is the name of the miuister 
Jayata who figures also in the chronicle (V 8 ) at f. 54 b, as SriupadhyZ 
[ya"] in connection with the names of the king and queen. 

The next king was Jayasimharama who may well have been a 
regent, as in the year mentioned (516) the eldest son was only 19 years 
of age. 1 

I have elsewhere called attention to the curious triple regency of 
the three sons of Jayasthiti, confirmed as it is by two contemporary 
MSS. It is worth noting that the three princes did not divide the 
kingdom, but all ruled together in the little town of Bhatgaon which 
then was the capital. Three years later Jayadharmamalla is said in 
an inscription at Patan to be reigning as yuvaraj, an expression which 
would imply that Jayasthiti was still alive, in retirement. I give the 
text of the documents below. 2 

Of Jayadharma as actual king we have no trace. The second son 
Jyotirmalla is recorded in the inscription (Bhagavanlal No. 16) already 
quoted to have been reigning in N.S. 533 apparently as sole king, 
though his brothers mentioned. As he restored the Hindu shrine 
of PaSupati and the Buddhist shrines on the Svayambhu hill we may 
perhaps conclude that he reigned over the whole valley. In the three 
MSS. given in the Table Jyotirmalla is mentioned as reigning alone 

1 Born 487, Prathamasadha, V* 54 b. Jayasimhar is mentioned with Jayar- 
juna (as being at Kathmandn;) 54 6 : 3 8«< ^flf^^T Jjfi{ V «? ^tW *tlW\*t- 

■jfapnf^T U In N.S. 507 he joined Jayasthiti and his family at the yitra at 
Bugama (63, b.). With mahdth Dr. Grierson compares the forms mahathd, mahantha 
' great person.' 

3 Compare Cambridge Cat., p. ix., " Journey " pp., 15, 16, and Table. 
The verse written in Camb. MSS. Add. 1664, 2197 runs thus :— 

*Wls5t" ; *^f ^ TOt TO [sic] f^J31^ t 

*r$ *tf** ( *• 2197 ) tfffiN «ta [sic] wwfire% ti 

The opening of the inscription found by me in 1884, as described, but not pub- 
lished,— (for it is chiefly in Newari and much damaged in the lower part), runs thus 
(I print it with all its characteristic errors of spelling, etc.) :— 

The inscription records the repair of a well connected with Kamgaladhipa-Srida- 
ksinavihara ' and setting up of images. * 



16 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

(N. S. 540*547) I Early in the next year Yaksamalla, the eide&t son of 
Jayajyotih, as we find from the above-cited inscription, has succeeded to 
the throne ; and dated MSB. are fairly plentiful for the long reign (4$ 
years) assigned to him by the VamSavali of Wright. 

As to the history of this time some information is given by the 
interesting MS. described at pp. 107-9 of the present Catalogue. The 
author is king Jagajjyotimalla of Bhatgaon, sixth in succession after 
Yaksa. According to this work Yaksa ' went as far as Magadha, con- 
quering Mithila and set in order all Nepal, subduing the Rajas of the 
mountains. The triple division of the kingdom, already known to us, 
is then mentioned, including the assignment to the eldest son Rayamalla 
of the country east of the Vanmati (Bagmati) river with Bhatgaon 
as capital. 

In Table II. I summarize the chronology of the reigns then 
ensuing. 

Dated MSS. are not at first numerous ; but for the Bhatgaon line 
the MS. at Cat., p. 107, just referred to, is valuable, especially as royal 
authorship is attributed to it. The joint-regency of Jita and Prana 
given in the Table is stated in the Catalogue at p. 102 and confirmed 
by an inscription copied by me at Thaiba (olim Thasiba).* That the 
later king Trailokya should have been also known by the synonymous 
name Tribhubana seems at first sight improbable ; but the inscription 
on which I base the statement was found by me at Thimi, which is east 
of the Bagmati and not far from Bhatgaon. After the beginning of the 
XVII century dates from coins become fairly plentiful, see the Table II 
in my "Journey." . - - . ' . - . 

For the line of Kathmandu, dated documents are at first still more 
scarce ; but later on dates are quite numerous. 

I have added in Table II appended to the present article a third 
column for the Banepa dynasty, because the first king at least was a real 
person and from the Cat. p. 115 seems to have been a literary man. 
In any case the separate dynasty of Banepa did not last much more 
than a century, as I find from, copies pf inscriptions recently received by 
me 8 from Panauti a place in the 3anepa valley spmewhat east of 

l Cam Add. 1649 a work on astrology attributed to the king himself and 
copied N.S. 5S2 makes a fourth if the retouched colophon (see my Oat. p. 155) 
be correct, as there seems little reason to doubt. 

8 In a part of the village called Antal tol and near a oaitya. The Village lies 
H. from Patau towards Harsiddhi and Banregaon. 'fa» date runs thus* ^ *tt 

ft Through the kindness of Colonel Pears, the present Resident* 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 17 

Banepa, that the kings of Bhatgaon, Jagatprakasa and his successor 
Jitfimitra (1642-1689 l ) were acknowledged there. 

II.— WESTERN NEPAL. 

The town of Noakot or Nayakot (which I visited in my recent 
tour) seems to have been a kind of frontier between the valley of 
Nepal or Nepal proper and the Western districts. Wright's History (pp. 
223-5) mentions the seizure of the place by a Gorkha sovereign pre- 
vious to the general Gorkha Conquest. 

The MS. in the Wright- collection numbered 1108 seems to have 
been written here. For W^FrtT is doubtless (though the identification 
escaped me when I wrote my Cambridge Catalogue, p. 30) a Sanskri- 
tized form of the town's name. The date of the king (Ratnajyotih) 
has been verified by Dr. Kielhorn and corresponds to January 14th, 
1392. 

During the following century no chronological data are forthcoming. 
I may note in passing that an educated Nepalese told me that inscribed 
stones, which he thought resembled those published by Pandit Bhagavan- 
lal and myself, existed in the valleys of Western Nepal. 

Dr. Wright published (History, Chapter XII) an account of the 
reigning (Gorkha) dynasty from Dravya Sab (A. D. 1559) to the pre- 
sent time. 

It is interesting to find in the present collection (pp. 242-4) a 
MS. giving confirmation of this record ♦ It was composed by Rajen- 
dravikrama Sah, who reigned J816-1847. It might be worthwhile 
to publish extracts from this MS , when further confirmatory material 
(from old MSS. or inscriptions ) comes to light. Meanwhile, it is worth 
noting that Wright's date, 1559, founded on a Vikrama-date, is curiously 
corroborated by a chronogram (vidhu-vasu-nigama-glau*), which gives 
the corresponding S'aka year (1481). At p. 213 of the Catalogue we 
find a MS. written during the reign of Varavira Sahi, in 1614, at 
Jatapattana. This looks like S'aka 1614 (A.D. 1692), when Virabhadra 
Sahi was alive, though, according to Wright, he was only yuvaraj and 
never mah&rdja. 8 

1 For the latter date see Gat. p. 150. N. S. 810, Pau?a. One of the new in- 
scriptions is dated some six years later s 816, Jye§tha. 

* Bead thus p. 242 1. 25. I wns much troubled by the reading fn* gnau. Bat 
on referring to the M.S., through the kind intermediary of the Resident, I found that 
the tracing read glau. This rare word has hitherto been found, in lexicons only, in 
the sense of ' moon ' or ' earth ' ( = 1). 

* BhagavanlaTs Inscr. No. 18 fixes the date of another Gorkha sovereign in 
recording the defeat of Dambara&h by Pratapamalla, N.S. 769 (A.D. 1649.) 



18 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdom* 

HI — TIRHUT. 

There are few regions of India possessing an ancient civilization 
about which we have less definite historic information than the region 
north of the Ganges variously known as Videha, Tirabhukti, or (from 
its capital) Mithila. 

Neither the work of Prinsep, nor its excellent successor, that of 
Miss C. M. Duff, attempts 'Dynastic list ' for this country. Chronolo- 
gical indications are thus peculiarly valuable. There would seem to 
have been a certain degree of literary intercourse between Uepal and 
Tirhut, the frontier state on the direct route to the plains. Accord- 
ingly a large number of the MSS. in the present Catalogue are writ- 
ten by Tirhuti scribes in their characteristic (Maithili) script and 
dated mostly in the common era of the country, that of Laksmana 
Sena. 

On pp. 131-2 we find a case where a MS. is by a Tirhuti scribe 
domiciled in Nepal. For it will be observed that not only are the 
writing and the era those of Mithila, but the scribe goes out of his way 
to describe Lalita-pattan ('Patan*), where the MS. was copied, as 
' situated in the kingdom of Nepal/ 

A notice of far greater interest and importance fe preserved 
through: a case of intercourse in the opposite direction, where a Nepa- 
lese scribe was living in Tirhut. This is the case of the MS. of part 
of the RamSyana, Nd. 1079, briefly noticed at p. 34* of the Catalogue. 
The colophon in question occurs at the end of the Kiskindhyakanda at 
ft 875-(fc As it ifr not given in the Catalogue, I here transcribe 
it from my own notes : Samvat 1076 (\**4) asndha badi 4 mdhfcrdjfr 
dhirfija pufyfoalbka*siomavMnfodbhava-qau(^^ 

bhtyyumSlna-Ttrabhaktan ItalySnavijarSjye' Nep&ladeftya-Sri bMteu sWikct* 
M Anandasya p&tdk&oasthita (kayastha) 1 pandita Sri Sri Kurasytittmaja- 
srf. QopatindMthiddm. Interpreting this according to the some- 
what 'freehand easy* Sanskrit used by scribes, I understand* it to 
mean that in Sam vat 1076 Gopatry son of Sfriknra, (Kayaathfc) pandit 
belonging to the country of Nepal and living* in Anandfc's pa(aka % 
belonging to Bhancu £ali (?), copied this during a victorious reigo m 
Tirhut, when it was ruled by Q§ggeyadeva, the great king, beholder of 
h^iness, sprung from the lunar race, and banner of Gau^a. Tne writing 
of the MS. is the archaic * Lantsa' of Nepal, so that we may qpiite well 

1: Added in a difibreot ban& 

ft Of. Ind. Ant. XVIII. 135, where pdtaha ir inttopeeted to* matr fiber safeoisfe 
soon *£ a village; benoe bh&fieu jffikm may weH contain fee nAme ei tfe*: larger 
village ordfefcriet. 



Sistory of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 19 

refer the Sanwat to the Vikrama era. If this be granted, it must surely 
follow that we may identify the king with Gangeya-deva, Kalacuri of 
Oedi, likewise of lunar lineage, 1 who was thns reigning in A.D. 
1019, or some 11 years before Alberuni* mentions him as ruling in 
Dahala, in 1030. Gangeyadeva's influence has not been hitherto 
traced so far east as Tirhut; but it is noteworthy that his son also, 
Karnadeva, olaimed influence in Gauda, 5 still further east. 

Nothing appears to be known of the rulers of Tirhut from this time to 
the l&th century, when the ThSkur dynasty appeared. A full genealogical 
table of this family was given by Dr. Grierson in Ind. Antiquary XIV, 
p. 196, and this was supplemented by- him with further notes in the same 
journal in March 1899 (XXVIII, p. 57). Our Catalogue gives (p. 63) 
a date, L.S. 392,* for one of the later kings, Kamsanariyana, also called 
Laksminatha, which is the more acceptable as I have elsewhere shown, 5 
that the native chronology for this dynasty is incorrect. In the same 
year, Laksmana Sam vat 392, was copied the MS. described at Oat., p. 122, 
which gives a further confirmation of the succession of this dynasty, 
calling it the S'rotriya (brahmanical ) vainsa. At p. 65 we meet with 
*n interesting confirmation of the correctness of the details given in 
Dr. Grierson's table, as we there find a MS. by order of a non-reign- 
ing prince, viz., Gadadbaradeva* (mahftrajndhirdjavara knmdra) in L.S. 
372 (A.D. 1490), a date whiten fits very well with that last mentioned. 

If Bamasimha, the king of Mithila mentioned at p. 23 med., be 
the same as Bamabhadra, then the composition of S'rikara's commentary 
on the Amorakosa there described falls at the end of the Jr5th century. 

The.prince Indusena, or Indrasena, the author of the work^Lescribed 
*tp. 265, would seem from his biruda Rupanarayana to have belonged 
to this family. 

I subjoin a short table of this dynasty (Table III). 

GoRA«HFUfi-0(H)AMPiEAN. In this region, that is, in the country 
south of Nepal on both sides of the Ganxjak, there reigned -during the 
15th century a dynasty, hitherto not noticed by European writers, %ttt 

l*Bp.Lnd,JI. 9,11. 

• India (tr.) 1. 202 j Gangeya is also known from coins, some of them found as 
far north as Gorakptrr: Rapscw, Indian Coins (Qrundriss, II 3B), p. 33; V. A. 

y^AakiX?«fcJll7;j 
aya. .Ijfc. Jkd. lw.cit. 

*3Q2 ovrent. The date worfea ent, as .Dr. Kieltorji kindly inferms v^i M> 
Wednesday 18th December,- 1510. 

• J. B.A. S. 1898, p. 233. Dr. Bggeling, Gat, I. O., p 875, seems to accept it 
«o*M9?1^4aastj4%. 

• Kum&ra Gadadhara Simha in that ta le. 



20 History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 

apparently connected with that last mentioned. Several of the rulers 
are mentioned in colophons of the present catalogue, and one of 
these must be in all probability identified with the issue of a series 
of coins, unpublished as yet and also undated, but apparently belong- 
ing to this century. 

The first sovereign mentioned is Prthvisimhadeva in whose reign 
in [Vikrama] Samvat 1492 (A.D. 1434-5) at Gampaharanyanagara was 
copied M.S. No. 1508 (*) at p. 61.] 

His successor was probably, as we shall presently see, ffaktisimha. 

Of the next king, Madana or Madanasimhadeva, we have three 
mentions in these MSS. At p. 51. r3 we find him mentioned as reigning 
in Vikrama-Samvat 1511 (A.D. 1453-4) at Campakaranyanagara. His 
epithets are interesting. The first, viprar&ja, seems to point to his 
belonging to the same irotriya vamia which reigned in (Eastern) Tirhut 
and so does the biruda ending in nGr&yana which all the members of that 
dynasty assumed. The pandit is uncertain about the reading daity* 
an&rayana, but I find from my own notes on the same MS. that I read the 
compound thus. I should propose to interpret it like daityanisudana and 
daitydri (both epithets of Visnu) by reference to the Vais^ava faith of 
the king. This would accord well with the legend of a set of coins 
first identified by Dr. Hoey with this same region and at present in the 
British Museum. This legend is #rf^^K^^WWE>T and on the re* 
verse €t" *W«K<$ K The lettering of the coins may well belong 
to the 15th century and I am glad to have the authority of my friend 
Mr. Rapson, to whom I am indebted for my knowledge of the coins, that 
their general style and workmanship is referable to the same period. 

At p. 29 (MS. 1001 «r) we find another MS. of the same reign 
written at Goraksapura in L.S. 339 (1457 A.D.) It is interesting to 
note that the era used is that of Laksmana Sena, as it confirms the 
accuracy of the Vikrama date, and also forms the first instance hitherto 
noted of the employment of the era west of the Grandak, i.e., beyond 
the limits of Bengal. Lastly, Madana appears as a royal author giving 
his name to the Madana-ratnapradipa (p. 223). This work is said in the. 
colophon to have been composed (viracita) by the ' king Madanasimba- 
deva, who was the son of king S'aktisimba [see above], adorned with 
many birudas.' At the beginning of the text, however, the work is only 
said to be 'promulgated (jprahaiyate) by Madana ' and at the end we are 
told that he got the work done (karita : — doubtless a common case 
with Indian royal authors !) by one Visvanatha living at ' Kasi-tirtha, 1 
probably Benares. 

1 Does the prefix Sfri imply the abovementioned town of Campakaragya, rather 
than the mere region so-called ? 



TABLE I. 

Kings of Nepal proper from the commencement of the era of Nepal to the Division of the Kingdom 

(A.D. 879—1474). 




Durbar 

after 

Or 

but calculated. 



Dates with months. 



Nepal era, when 

not otherwise 

specified, 



Raghavadeva 
Jayadeva 
Vikramadeva 
Narendradeva 
Gunakamadeva I. 
, Udayadeva 
Nirbhaya 1 

Badra 1 

Bhoja 

Rudra ( 

Lak^mikarfiadeva I. , 

Lak^aaTkamadeva I. (sole 
ruler.) 



128, Phalguna 
135) fcaitra 



Equivalent 
A.D. 



References to 
MSS., etc. 



\WS 



1015 
1039 



Camb. Add. 866 

„ „ 1643 
„ „ 1683 



Reign ace. 
toV. 



46, 6 mo. 
10. 

8, 9 mo. 

1, 6 mo. 
65, 5 mo. 

5, 5 mo. 

Not named. 



21 



Traditional founder of Nepal era (20th 
October, 879). 



When Camb. Add. 2191 was copied 
(date gone), Bhoja was ruling alone. 

These joint regencies not referred to 
inV. 

* Friday, 30th March 1039' (Kielhorn)l 



1 Communteftfced by letter. Dr.ifcfeBiorn's previous working (Ind. Ant. XVII. 252) of the date as a current year rested on a mis 
print in the NafcjirfcText (not, however, in the Arabic numerals) of my Cambridge Cat., p. 172. 



1 
I 

8 

CO 

i 
1 

I' 



Datub wiift <?***•• 



tfepal era, when Equivalent 
xjofe otherwise \ A .D. 



Eef erenceS to 
MSB., etc 



Reign actJ. 
toV. 




Jtya(<Vijaya*V) 

giMfeatadev* 
BaftdW* 

^iy tt mna-Vamadeva. 

. tfaglrjuna 



gahkaradeva 



V*H**deva 



£a**adera 



givadeva (* 



180 Magna ■ luow 

f 1 185 VaU. 
\ 186 Magna 



1064-5 
1065-6 



, Cat., p. 30 



fl ^ja* 1 1068-9 

} | 198 current, SrSv. I K>77 

I081-S1 



i 



,»^. PB»»» ( ^ 



§40, prathama- I U» 
Agdha. 



Signed over half the kingdom at Wi- 
B^ladeva in inypreviouB hats. 



Kame faded j ^^ (1) wA| «ft Ian. 1(*» <*,). 



2. 



aoo, M«g&» 

aid 0*0*4 W&\ 1090 ' *"* y 

21*e*t»d. C» 

2i9 our*efft* 



Cat:, p. 92 

A.S.B. A 16 

A.8.B. (coll. of j 
1893) 

i Min*ev*tiofl. «M 
1 Petersburg. 

I x§th*&*4ft *°- 

W02. < ■ ' 
€atnb. Add. »* 
Tiftl.*** 



15 



ll09^112«] 



fw. date is confirmed by my own note 

n< £V n ?Ji i 249. Vallee-Poussin, 

J.A.S.B. 1»». »• *** The dafce does 

B °f^Z asD ^.iacIbAnformsme. 

not work out, " 1 ^ wl)HWhSit tmeertKt* 

iWopi** *£ «* *fT? 189TV687. 
in fcrpretataon J.^.,^^ P ^^^ 

v«ri*ed by mysett . 



ar r^KS? 5 *— 



Wo^lii* of date quoted above. 



243 Jvestba 



1123 



Vi« see pUte fig A ) #, 5 mo; 
India-oftice,Hodg- U (about , 
fton.7*A. V 1098-1125) 

Camb. Or 142 ..V 



r See above, pp. 6-7. 



Indradeva (*) 
Manadeva 



Narendradeva 
r. and Bh.-151) 



lfr#* i Na r_ M i9 lha 



*j 



Anandadeva (*) 



c Bndradeva 
Amrtadeva (*) 



249, Pfca}gn,na 

SP***pJ.,Kirtt. 

$&, Bhadrap 

254 expd., Phalg. 

m fausa 
267 Magha 



m Caitra 
278 Bhadrap. 

284 Magha 

285 expd., Phalg. 

vana. 
g86 Ffc|?guna 



296 Caitra 



U38-9 
X198, Oct. 
U39 
1134 

1146,7 



1154-5 

1158 

1163-4 

1165, Peb. 
March. 
J165, July 



1166 



1176 



In4.Qff.2fi2a v 

gamb,, Add. 1643 

Inscription c Jpm> 
ney/ p. 81. 

Oaf p- W , 

Paris, Burn. 104 
J\ 9 foil. ?4-*» 



Oamb. Or. 130 
Qanxb, Add. 28*3 
Wg.sesnatShat 

few*. 40. 2190 

Pamb,A&M69.8 

jAondojn, R.ASL 
Hodgson* 

Cat., p. 65 ... 



12 



C4, 7 mo 

I ■ 



about 
U47-67). 



8, 1 mo. ... 
% H mo. .. 



Omitted by Wright and BhagavanUl, 
tho^gk mentic»n^4by Kirkpatriofc. 
• %^4ay;wthQ^^»»U?8 , ^^* 



As to this date, see the foregoing article, 
page 1, notta $, 

f Yi f , ftfe, Flafce % 4. & I have enpf*s*L 
thia flat* to rale* ft) 1&* *m8s*on o| 
Anairi*, Owmgk % pass aa$ ji0fescni * 

See J.R.A.S. for 1888, p. 551. 

tfpfr purchased; full dat* fc»aaflribed : 

$84 ftfagh* Sakla astftm* s4tyyav4ra. 
Colophon copied (with mistakes) in Raj 

Mitra's A?tas. Pref . p. xxiv, note. 
• Snn4ay»«^ W*. U^$pU*9rn, Jad. 

Ant. XVII. 249. 
fpU date (no* give* fo &4.fr Cat; gftft 

Phalguna audi ekadaiyam adityav. 

Iq^neffec* raading ty 0at. supplemented 
bv a tracing framtusMg. S^ parti- 
cle p. 7^ nftte. 7- 




atands j 

as meaning r „, 

horn informs me) Wednesday, 2nd Fabraary, 1065. 

» Son of STankaradeva, born Sa*«as 177, Asa&a, V 8 *oU. 30b— 31 a. 

* No doubt identical with Mahendradeva the yuvaraj (WhCWT) in SSvadeva/s reign af fcw whom the tank Mahendrasaras 
was named. Vlfol. 246. See plate, fig. 4. The same Mahendra's birth is yeoqrdedm V* as happening is earn, 199 (fol. 31a, where 
Blhadevaparameivarasya puira is apparently an error for Sivad ) See Plate, fig. 9. 1. 3. 

4 Son of a ' Sihadeva' (possibly here Naraaimha Or Narandra) born in 219 Vaisakha. V 2 f. 31b* 

* According to V» (f. 31b), born in 233, Alvina and likewise a son of " Sihadeva. 



8 



Dates with months. 



Nepal era, when 

not otherwise 

specified. 



Equivalent 
A.D. 



References to 
MSS., etc. 



Reign aco. 
toV. 



to 



\S 



[Bfttnadeva]- 



Somesvaradeva (1) 
Gunakamadeva II. 

Laksmikamadeva II. 



Vijayakamadeva 

Arimalladeva (*) 
[RanaSura] 



303 Gaitra. 



307 Phalguna 
313 dvir-Asadha 

316 



317 VaiS 

322 [ezpd.] Asaflha 

326 expd. S'rav. 

336 [expd.] Pausa 
342 Marga 



344, 

358, Jyestha 

367,current,Magha. 



[1183 ?] 
if Nepal era 



1187 



1193 



1196, July 



1197 

1201 May 
1206, July- 

Aug. 
1216, Jan. 
1221 



1223 

1238 

1246 Jan. 
Feb. 



Tracing from 
MS. in Kathm. 
Library. 



Cat., p. 76 

Br. Museum, Or, 
2279 (No. 550 
in my Cat.) 
Br. Museum Or. *\ 
3345 (No. 542 ( 
my Cat.) L 

Cat. p., 113 ... J 
Cat. p., 83. ... ") 
Cat. p. 96 ... f 
Camb. Add. ( 
1618 ... ) 

B.M. Or. 2208 
(No. 512 in my 

Cat.) 
Kathm. No. 214 

Cat. p 69 ••• 



B.M..Or. 
(myCat.No.636) 



Not men- 
tioned in 
any His- 
tory. 

4, 3 mo. 
3 

Not men- 
tioned. 



17 



15 

(about 1201- 
1216) ... 

Not named 



Full date, from tracing (colophon 
being omitted at p. 86 of Cat.) of 
MS. 1648G. at Kathm Library : Samv. 
303 [words and figures] caitra sndi 
pancamyam somadine. As to the 
b king see the article. 

Reading of Cat. verified by tracing from 
MS. 

Date retouched. ' It does not work out ' 
(H. J.) 

Probably Thursday, 11th July 1196. See 
note in B.M. Cat. Sk. MSS. p. 230. 



Beading confirmed by my notes in the 
Library. ' Sunday, 27th May, 1201 (H.J.) 

' Thursday, 14th Jan., 1216/ Kielhorn in 
I.A. xvii, 249. 

Perhaps a raja of another part of Nepal. 

Date (without month) noted by me in 
1 884. The Pandit apparently did not 
see this MS., a copy of the Bharatiya- 
natyasastra. Compare Sylvain Levi 
"Rapport," p. 16. 

Date somewhat indistinctly written. 



Abhayamalla 



Jayadeva 
Jayabhimadeva 



i 



Jiya&ha (siha) maDadeva 



Anantamalla (8) 



367, Phalguna 

373 [Marga] 

375 A&gba 
377, Bhidrap. 
380, expd. Caitra 



399, Phalguna 



1247, Feb. 

[1262]... 

1255, June 

1267 

1260 April... 



1279 
1280 



Kathm. new 
cat. No. 11 

St. Pet. Minaev 
Colin. 

VI, fol. 26a i 

Coll. of Bhaga- ' 
vanlal 1884' 
Tracing from 
MS.1320D.at 

Kathmandn 



Cat. p. 46 (WJ) 

Tracing cor- \- 
recting Cat., | 
p. 44. | 

J 



42, 6 mo. 



2, 8 mo. . 
13, 3 mo. , 

2, 7 mo. 



MS. (Pafica-raksa) not described by 
Pandit. Full date from my notes : 
367 Phalguna Stakla ekadaSI adityav. 
Sunday, 17th Feb., 1247. (H.J.) 
See J.R.A.8.,1891, p. 688. A oopied date 
and doubtless copied wrong : for Dr. 
Jaoobi reports that the week -day works 
out wrong and nakgatra impossible. 
1 Monday, June 7th, 1255' (K), when 
Punarvasu was the Nak?atra ; see the 
article, p. 8, note 4. 
„ See the same note. 
c Wednesday, April 2nd, 1260' (Sewell) ; 
see p. 9, note 1. 

f The second form is taken from V* fol. 
I 35, where the birth of Jayasiham. is 
•i recorded (349, VaiS. ; father ; Jagat- 
I anekamalla) just before that of 
^ Anantamalla.. 

Tracing from MS. confirms reading of 
Cat., but no week-day is decipher- 
able. 

f In the Cat. we mustread, as my tracing 
J shows, Ananta for Ananda ; but Dr. 

(Kielhorn reports that the date does 
not work out correotly. 



f#«i •«?{ W ISfcJ^iI 8 i B ' 0f i b l S i. reigI1 5* extanfc ' Someg ™* a is duly recorded by Kirkpatrick (reign 6 years 3 months) and in Vi 
2tr — «!^ We leAr * th \ fc he was the *>» <>f Mahendra and born in 240 Phalg'una sudi 13, MaghaW ? atra. If the following phra s ! 



years 10 
336, which 



S 

months 

our last date from MSS. will just allow. 

BBornjei^son of Bljadeva. He was apparently childless. For at 26b (Plate; fig. 7. 1. 1) we read that in his reign the 
TiSfSHr. 1 ^^?- * U ^Q K M m *L** 0>w»We) Jayadityadeva imprisoned his uterine brother, Jayanandadeva. Now a 
Jayfiditya, according to V8 (866), was the son of Jayabhima, and was born 368. Probably there is something wrong in this last 



I 
I 

ft 
ft. 

a- 

I* 



to 

Ox 



Anantamalla 

[continued:'] 



Jayanandadeva 



Jayarudramalla i / 

and < 

Jayarimalla (co-regent) C 
Invasion of Nepal by 

Adit[y]a-mal[l]a. 
Dissensions nntil accession 

of 



Dates with months. 



Nepal era, when 

not otherwise 

specified. 



403, Asadha 

405, Vaisakha . 

406, Caitra 

408,orSambatl344 

417, [ e x p d ]. 1 
A?adha. ... j 

422 Vailakha ... 

427 Sravana 
438 Phalguna ... 
badi 15, sukre 

440 Caitra 



446 Asadha 
448 Caitra 



Equivalent 
A.D. 



1283 
1285 

1286 
1287 

1297 June 

1302 

1307 

1318, March 

1320 

1326 
1328 



References to 
MSS., etc. 



Reign ace. 
to V. 



Cat. p. 46 

Tracing, revis- 
ing Cat. p. 46 

(W) 
B.M. Or 1439 

(Cat. No 440.) 
Kirkp. p. 264. 

(VI fol. 27a 
I V* „ 40b 



Add. 



Camb, 
1306. 
V»fol. 42 
Cat., p. 73 
and my notes 



j 



VS 44a (cf. 276) 

VI 27b 
V8 16b 
VI 27 b 



32. 10 mo. VI 

35.11 mo. V« 



Duration not 
stated ... 



405 or possibly 401 ; week-day not given. 



The first recorded double date (in two 

eras). 
Wednesday, 26th June, 1297 (K). Date 

of a donation to Pasupati-shrine of a 

banner, etc., by Ananta. 



Date of a donation ( ? ) to PaSupati. 

From my notes I see that the MS. was 
copied at Manigala-vihara (in Patan, 

cf. Cat., p. 88). The date works out to 

Friday, 13th Mar. 1318 (H.J). 
Date of coronation of Jayarimalla (pusya- 

bhisekha). 

See note 1, below. 






a 



♦^ 

a 



S 



a* 

o 



Jayarajadeva (*) 



Jayarjunamalla (&) 



467 S'ravana 

474 
476 

484 Karttika ... 

491 Bhadrap. ... 

493 Pausa 

494 Bhadrap 
S'aka 1297, Phalg. 



1347 

1353-4 ... 
1355-6 ... 

1363, Oct... 

1371 
1372 

1374 

1376 Febr. 



V (1) 286 Plate 
fig. 8 

Cat. p 71 

As. Soc. Beng. 
(Coll. of 1893) 

Cat. p. 31 

Cat. p. 88 
Camb. Add 

2564. 
Camb, 

1689 
Cat. p. 121 



Add. 



New Dynasty follows. 



"Accession with assent of both royal 
families and with general consent" 
(V (1) 28 b ; Plate fig. 8, line 1). 

Year ( no month) verified by tracing from 
MS. 

See J.A.S.B., LXII. i.,250. MS. omitted 

in Knnjavihari's Cat. Correct king's name 
(VijayarSjadeva) to Jayar° (tracing). 

r Date verified in my notes. ' Monday, 

\ 23rd October, 1363 ; naksatra, etc. cor- 

l reef (H.J.) 

Peterson, Hitopadesa, Pref ., p. ii. 



Earliest MS. dated in a non-Nepalese 
era. Date: Friday, 22nd Feb. 1376 
(H.J.) 



& 



ft 



i 

a, 






statement. For it seems unlikely that Anantamalla should not only have superseded an older heir-apparent, but also have allowed him 
to live on as heir-apparent to himself. Moreover, in V* (366) we find mention of Jayabhima as raja in 378 and Jayasimhamalladeva 
(who seems to have actually succeeded him, according to VI 26a) as yuvardja. This seems very strange if Jayaditya was alive all the 
time. The statement of Wright may be correct in so far as it implies a divided kingdom in Ananta's time. 

L Jayarudra was the son of Jayatungamalla. Jayari iB called svakutumba, a vague phrase for ' kinsman ' perhaps. The full date 
of his death (or of the suttee of his wives — the punctuation would allow of either interpretation) is 446, AsSdha purnami, V8 at 46b 
gives the same date, for the death (^5 perhaps ' time up to which he remained in the world,' a common expression in the 
chronicle), not mentioning the suttee ; bat it makes two suspicious additions : (1 ) The addition of ' prathama ' to the month, though 
Asadha was not intercalated ; (2), the impossible allowance of 30 years 8 months to the king's reign. 

* Born 437, Phdlguna fcrfpa datami dhanesta [sic"], bfhaspati vara ; son of Jayanandadeva by a sangrahani bharya (V8, 456). The 
tracing referred to in the last column was kindly sent me by Maham. Haraprasad SSsfcri. 

5 Son of Jayarajadeva and Rudramadevi, apparently (see p. 11, note) born in 467, Vais*sadi 7. (VI, f. 286 ; Plate fig. 8) According 
to V* (606) he died in 602, Magna badi 5. This may well be correct ; for the date 504 given doubtfully in my Cambridge Cat. p. 119, 
is much too uncertain to form a contrary argument. On re-examination I find the middle word looks more like cihna (not known as a 
numeral word) than bindu. On the other hand, vi$aya=*5 is certain; so that Jaytrjuna was alive in 500 or A.D. 1379-80. 





Dates with months. 


1 

Reference to 
MSS., etc. 


Beign aco. 
toV. 


,, . ' - 




Nepal era, when 

not otherwise 

specified. 


Equivalent 
A.D. 




Nsw Dynasty 
Jajraathitimalla ..".< 


600 Phalguna ... 

Six other dates 
be t w e e n this 
and 

614, dvir-Asa (?) 


1380 
1394 


Cat., p. 43 ... 
Cat., p. 87 


V ends 
here. 


Chronogram and figures ; MS. written 
at Bhatgaon. Jayata was the mantrin. 

( See Cat., pp. 43, 84. Tables in Camb. 

) Cat. and "Journey" also inscription in 

J " Journey " (date verified I. A. 

C XVII, 249.) 

51W^ , if meant for Asadha interca- 
lated, is incorrect by the Tables of 
Sewell. 


Jayasiinharama 

Joint regency of Jaya-f 
sthiti's three sons ... i 


516 

519 Karttika ... 

520 Asvina 


1395-6 ... 

1398 
1400 


Tracing, revising 

Cat., p. 31 
Camb. Add 2834 

„ „ 1664 




In the Oat. read IVt a? ™7 tracing 
shows. No month is legible. 

J. B. A. S. for 1888, p. 551. 


Eegency of Jayadharma- 
malla (alone), as 'yu- 
varaj ' 


523 Vaisakha ... 

532 Margas. 
533expd., Magha 


1403 

1411 
1413, Jan. 


Inscription 

< Camb. Add. 
I 1649. 
Inscr. 


... 


See the article, p. 15, and note. 

A retouched colophon : see Camb. Oat., 
p. 155. 
15th Jan., 1413. Verified I. A.XVH, 247. 


Jayajyotirmalla (1) . . . < 


540 Bhadrap. ... 

541 Bhadrap. ... 

547 (no month)... 


1420 
1421 

1426-7 ... 


Camb. Or. 148... 
Cat., p. 36 . r 

St Peters 
(Minaev) 


... 


Verified by my own notes both in 1884 
and 1899. 
See J. R. A. S., 1891, p. 688. 



QD 



S 
& 









© 





S'aka 1350 Margas 


1428-9 ... 


Cat., p. 23 ... 


••• 


Month supplied from my notes on the 


* 




(Nov. Dec.) 






MS. 




Four other dates 


... 




.•• 


See Cambr. Cat., p. 197 (correcting ^g<& 




(549-590) 








to Wt) and Table ; also * ne present 


Yak^a-malla ... < 


591 Caitra 


1471 


C India Office ... 
1 Hodgson 2743 


... 


Cat., p. 36. 




594 Jye$$ba 


1474 


Cat., p. 75, and 
my notes. 


... 


The full date (from my notes) completes 
the Sloka thus (though badly) :— 


- 










*r$ t*nw^ **ijv *^%ft 1 




(For the divided kingdom see next Table.) 





1 Born N. S. 493 V3 (55b). 






* 






I" 
I 



to 

to 



TABLE II. 

Divided Kingdom of Nepal (1496 to beginning of XVIIth cent.) 

Yaksamalla (reigning in 594 Jyestha = A.D.J474.) 



o 



Line of Bh»tgaon (cf. Oat., pp. 107-9.) 

AJX 

1495-6 ( JayaJ BSya-malla N.S. 616 Chrono- 
gram in C»t. p. 16. 

i 

Bhnvana-malla. 

i 

1524-33 Jita-malla and Prana-malla (joint regency) 
N.S. 644, Bhadrapada N.S. 664, Karttika, Cat. p. 103. 

I 
Prinamalla (sole king). 

I 
Vilvamalla. 

I 
Trailokya or Tribhuvanamalla, (see p. 16.) 
1^72-1585-6 

(Insor.) 



I 



Line of Kathmandu. 
Batna 

i 

Amara 

I 
SQrya 



Line of Banepa. 
(cf. Snpra, p. 16 fin.) 



Jayarana-malla Bh.lal in 
I. Ant. XIII. 414 fin. cf. 
Cat., pp. 115, 19. 

Wife : Nathalladevi. 

Son: Vijayamalla. 



A.D. | 

1551 Narendra, (Camb. Or. 135. N.S. 671, Sravana.) 

1566 Jaya-Mahendra (same MS.) 686, S^ravana. 



1575-6 S'adasiva. N.S. 696. (See Table II in * Journey/) 



1617—1633 Jagaj jyotirmalla f Se f J p"**» PP; l J®- 1600 S'ivadeva. ( Inscr. cited in ' Journey ' Table II.) 

(. lo (oaka 1550.) 



9 

1 

Si* 



1 

1- 



Harihara. 
(Subdivision of this kingdom followed). 



For the remaining Kings of Nepal (with dates from coins), see Journey in Nepal,' Table II, and Cambridge Cat. p. 16. 



History of Nepal and surrounding Kingdoms. 31 

TABLE III. 

Reigning Kings op Tirhut, Eastern and Western. 



EASTERN TIRHUT. 

Compiled from Vardhamana's Oangakrtyaviveha (Br. Mus.; Or. 3567a), 
called i G t below, and Vdcaspati's Mahfiddna-nirnaya CM. 9 ; Oat., 
p. 122.) 

1. Kame£a G. 

[2. Bhogesvara elder son of 1. Mentioned in vernacular records 
only.] 

3. Bhavesa M, [younger] son of 1. G. 

4. (*) Harasiiphadeva, son of 3, M.Gr. 

5. Narasimha (M), Nrsimha (G) called Darpanarayana, son of 4 

(M.G). 

6. (*) Bhairavendra M. Bhairavasimha called Harinarayana G. 
This reign commenced not later than A.D. 1496, when the MS. G. 

was copied. 

7. Ramabhadra G called Rupanarayana G. 

8. Laksminatha called Kamsanarayana, reigning in December 

1510. Oat., p. 63, date verified by Dr. Kielhorn.) 



Dynasty op Gorakhpur-Oamparan (Western Tirhut). 

1. Prthvl-simhadeva, A.D. 1434-35. 

2. Saktisimha. 

1453-54. 

. 1457-58. 



3. Madana (Simhadeva) < . 



I According to several works of Vidyapati, cited by Eggeling, Cat. I. O., 
p. 875-6 (see also Grierson, Ind. Ant., Mar. 1899, p. 57.) BhaveSa was suc- 
ceeded by his elder son, Devasimha, and he by his son, Sivasimha. It is 
significant that not only Vardhamana and Vaoaspati pass over these kings 
in silence, bnt Vidyapati himself does so in Narasunha's reign (Baj-Mitra 
Notices vi. 68). They were perhaps not generally acknowledged. 

* VidySpati (Eggeling 1. c.) and the Chronicle admit the previous reign of an 
elder brother, Dhirasimha, called Hrdayanarayana. 



34 History of Nepal and surtounding Kingdom*. 



TABLE IV. 

An unknown dynasty (Oat., pp. 153-54). 



(From the AcbZradipaka of QahgbZvisnu. ) 
Mukunda 

i 

Bhrngi. 

I 
Hambira. King of Tri3rhgade£a. 

i 

Pratapa. 

I 

Damodara called Digvijaya. 

i 

Kamarajadatfca. 

i 

Trivikrama (patron of the book). 



CATALOGUE OF PALM LEAF MSS. 

IN THE DURBAR LIBRARY, NEPAL. 



( mT<udM T ) **o vsnfm » *rcre - ^arrft i 

«UHr«4J«fdMI Wta^niW ^fujIM ftNsM'ti i wot - 

* i \ xr% i wftf sroi^rnsfffcHnrr u<wwii (?) tmror: toot i 

( nrfaBanrp ) ** xnnfirr i ^rere - %gi€t i 

*i?hn^ *Htawr frofw n^inr tmial j i hwm i i 
vmft mn*St qywiw ^anmrcf 

l 



( * ) 

W& ftrf^tTT Sq^llSTT eJc^fifriT I 

a^rtTira *rer$ar Ararat wfaratarc n 
*?*4N twrcri ^Ti^mi *rtj ^ i 

.... fOT^j inn .... sj^F* ii 
feiprsr^ ?rcnr ssrer afr ^wi . . srranr i (r) 

*M<*l<sMlff % $^ II 

s^raT^ i ( *afara?{ ) 

39 „ h ^uraTOnfwRitt fro ^ ir-xrs^r: i 

*8 

* 8 o iHiTiu i sngg*[ i ^i^rc - %anft » 

SfTW^T3iI¥[ I n$» TOi Fwciih I 

fagf^jrwT^tar *fWMM%ftnfr ti 
irsT^faft ^nn^: ^*n*h^iyfaw i 
otto ^Tift h^i %*ift flwnunflu n 
wra^ q«fa4na sfrtwnr tnrcrit i 



fir sr^fcnrr vmf OT5RfTT^-«nn faro* i 
TiHaqfljufl unfit * gat * trfswrf* it 

g# far gtwiS 3F*"I « 

"f^Tf mi^S" *J*TH*§T 3?tarifr$ ITOtPfr * 

fans nuftginhsK (?) 3a^ii<ft fafaHfaTd n 
tftaro i ifii fomnwf **ra^ tt^r^ ufagm^^an nt inrush 
xnmi i 

„ f5r^pftf5ftnrar*{ i ^ i 

„ mr^dir^y<d^4U4| i * i 

„ 5MdJWUdw i * i 
„ vnrrarcnroTC9t i«i 

„ JBhflTtfGIWrcCT 1^1 



( 8 ) 

„ fuyufuilftltlMUdCn I Hi I 

„ farruiTMUd^i i \$ i 

„ ^PH*i*rwuud<5** i ^o i 

„ £ddTu*MUdCT i 

„ ^rferauHud<si: i 

„ jmiFiMiHjmiidw i 

„ fjfWddiiud^; • 

„ fgyns (?) Tift^i^MdHt » 

„ faid«*^urd^iiORmd«i i 

„ IdHIUJIJMTid^^lMUdtfli I 

„ uTriglMd^n I 

„ uldgitfii% swniTOH i 

„ qn gquiud g ut i 



99 
99 
99 
99 



99 
99 
99 
99 
99 
99 
9* 
99 
99 
99 




( * ) 

fa 41*34 m^Me^: I 
ai4gjTc|«1HTUd<a: I 

^HJIdH^UDUdtsf*' I 
r«H»HHnudd : I 



„ nTHi?rT'rt fatiwcMnwH^wouE^n 



< < ) 

» 5*rw«rfsniru<aTS*!iud<su i 

jrer-tarrfti ***** *<• w^r-^w-^mT^wnf^rfH 

*y\m i <u$ xrsnfki i 
uTOWT«Fr*{ i & «wt TTTnwrnr i 



( * ) 

iiftonccr n^mimr Hic^^ri ftrani^l t 
fsn&jfluqym xn&n qU hhw ii 

mrz tow i 
wTTOg ^mtsfai ijafrsfai *ferag*r i 
Ihm afir $ wr ^shrtsftr ftramr 11 

fori <w?sim$*r *r unuifij tri *S: ii ?«nfe i 

3Fr?GTT3iT7{ I ^TH** JliTVlH $fo MMHfl^JIUcHiJ ^ I 

fan fa*rnreT$* u%^^rt g^rwf n 

*i*m wxw{ ii sraf m* *rsror $fV 5* g ft>gKiH3 11 

ft) ^fafiTWOT^ I 
*n?n?re 1 
«q wmiw( 1 SfeffrorcR ^^^TygrH wim 11 

( j§3l(eir<sf4ilWI$ ) **ftS5H ftrVd^T^f II 

jfiror 1 ¥% i^rrcrftrarw* ff^RFwraftrt f%wrcnrarfi?i ? jrera* . . 



( * ) 

^f?r o xt^j/i . . ^rfronrt to . . tow i 
(j[) (an: ^T5 saw ym^nwr- ^^ftqsyfa ^^ i MmaHHf 

fa) sftm^hii i 

(T) f*KUT?PWl I 

( uif«aH! ) fgarof jrtRJ i 

(■*) wiwt^rtrm*{ i 

( *5l~*Wa*J ) 

qfoqqn i wffl ^nBJfmraHift^ iTwij^ . . i . . . . . . u 



( < ) 



( «r^di«j*( i ) 



too ^reftriw^; i 



55 


35 


35 


^n^H^iwnwsr: i 


55 


55 


55 


twrararorai ' 


55 


55 


55 


nujud^m i 


55 


55 


55 


*nrerm*iud«wt i 


55 


99 


55 


^Hm^rms^dij i 


55 


55 


55 


^Ttjg^^«U^g^5J^q^^ | 


55 


>5 


55 


ITCstttlft Ud^*( 1 


55 


99 


55 


*4HUd<d4£ 1 


55 


55 


55 


H%^«Pc<Ud*r?J 1 


55 


53 


55 


^wrefarf^rtresrjj i 


55 


55 


5> 


HI^^AJ^JIUdSIJ 1 


55 


5) 


55 


M^I<?U^lc!l^irUMdd4{ 1 (?) 


55 


5> 


55 


srownnra^iij t 


55 


99 


55 


f^ftgUUd<d*( 1 


5) 


55 


5> 


. • . . ^fsTO^J I 


55 


55 


55 


<Sn*|lrijlUd<d*l 1 


53 


55 
55 


33 
33 


*U*rtirgMd«tl * 


35 


*l£Ud*l*l 1 


99 


53 


55 


ftijFOTwrasrn i 


33 


33 


53 


n?«fludy*( i 


33 


35 


33 


llffHUMEUJl « 



^fcf ^T^flxTT ^ITH^f RT^idd^H^^T^ 1 


99 


» 


>> 


tftercssn^ i 


55 


55 


55 


^nsrwiudd^r * 


99 


5? 


55 


nmnra*rorani * 


55 


55 


55 


^roarraRtrcswj i 


*y 


55 


55 


^jftTcTTHfUdtfi^ 1 


99 


>9 


55 


^Tnrsni53i?T i 


t, 


55 


55 


^*!^TT^^^^[ 1 


99 


55 


99 


^ewud*i*( ? 


99 


99 


55 


^^ITHt^TO^ t 


99 


» 


55 


far«yu3^iij i 


55 


55 


55 


^j ns^Jiisnrcsni i 


99 


5> 


55 


trftgTrfccNIHJl 1 


55 


55 


55 




99 


55 


55 


#^il^^!Ud^fl^ I 


99 


55 


5? 


*lTTllCH!J«1M<!<a*[ 1 


55 


55 


55 




5> 


55 


5> 


^rcfrcif^&Hpiarfgtrf 



( ^WHTf 4ft??: | (?) ) w^K - ^Gflft \ 

^frtR: i 3rc§ *rnn ^rftr tar wsrftsn i ^J tt^ . . Tt^nncin ^t^jth 



< it ) 

^FTOTOfJ I *fa IHVIH4W *^TH^ IlfHH^ tlftwHW 



^faflAT:, - 


8 


u* i 


(?) 


IT* 1 


*>8 


XJ* 1 


QC 


H* 4 


*<>,• 


q* 1 


(?) 


UW 1 



( w ) 

( narfarenFj i ) 

>~ * « 

ta) vkiai «nft7i*ire*i*j; i 



( \ B ) 

( ^fij^nwr^ i ) 

( qrfflwf* ^wrftr i ) qrere - S^t^ » 
ft) finRVW I 

(*) ^ftf^W^ITZW[ I 



( \* ) 

fa) WOT^frT: I 

UTTO^TWJ I ^ TIT: ifta**^ i 

*IW HplchWSITQm TnTOT2§IT^Tfai% I 

$ U I *UI Tel <t| 1^1 -^raT^ Wf¥ M^DRJ I 

ifriTrft-dfliti«TflT-cirn?« fg?if mil i 
Tdir^^M^diHi xn^TwrfVr^T^ ii 

^ft*THT 5lTrli«llS)«i foil) UJj 411 SJTf^PTT II 
-^Cfg?T- 4?1fag |T II 

( s 3^?)*T^sita*ftomqn 1 




( t* ) 

OTOT? int^STTOT T^T5T (?) f^ranw 9 i 

isrftSHT'rf^T^tfgfisIrr *JW3TO?J I *nS ^ |f«[^T5TlTTVngT- 
goo 

^^T-Sfarfro: ^^pw^epnnmf^^g: i (?) 

<5roTOT *t **ft*>. TOTt || 

«rdj«uicNi t^fMrfn jS ^: TOTsrra-Tjosr 

*5|ntdlcW*T I *ii<fn;ei£«ilci<fa<) H^*J^*JI<ST<!f)*j| qftajl5l&T^ ^eJTT ^ffa: I 
OTIHVTO *^T^T3T5reftaRt WW SRTOT^ngU:: I *f* ** ^N 

88*> 



i \i > 

*>§ fcTCHErft Ht ^TH^ TT^T UNTOI rcHfaft I ) 

( worammi i ) 

8^ 

tjrere — ^Tffr i 









to) qflmKmmi t 

€fjj4i «rnr yfyyi fan hu«W- 

ddJU§Siyi*^1gJ; TO* fRTtOT- 

*rajrcrcis ^pmmi'Siw^TgjMm: it 

frarcrfa $Hfr fsftr^r • w wrfif m 

• • • • . • • . ITOTSRCP llATtldlS 11 

srrnft hrj^ fdiusi^i^i 1 isnfir 1 

jfnpfiT | ^ftf ty4KUdl<H% 4U*t«l^5 MMIH» : * 

■ CI 

3 



( I* ) 

* tRtsfa swnum 

s*g mwfil *ft*sn?j ii 

*ft%sf*i stottIh ^STTfrr qvUFu 

TOTTO-fg^nw-f^rT-Unj: II 

jf^WJ, — ifn ^jfinanjldiir^Q jftf^H^fsnfft ^fvchiUuR^<f* ih n 

W° HT3H«l<y*WHH*( i * i 
<?o d^RTref g^fr* 11 ^ *cpl 1eW K*S I ^ I 
*© UftflU 14 14*4141 WTO ?m I 8 I 
^0 iflf^^rf^fHUnit I ^ I 

( *srfasH: i ) ^rerc — 3dnft » 

ta) *f^^ | ar fadj^fafWRftfa: I 
( h*WF[ i ) srerc - Starts i 

HMHIWH I 

fa) ^^mmy*: i 



( t< ) 

( ^tfHJ-^y^: I ) fddK'JQ UTrfi; I 

(v) ^i-nnsm (?) I 

fa) wcvta i 

Of) ^«i*<hsi: I 

( ^rfhrnrnn*! i ) w%i — ^arft i i^ trerftr i 
Jnwjgiwj i ^ ?nr. ftrarra i 

Hwl^isj r<r oil u fa-aw? Wfr 



i V ) 

fftS?BJ $gnj *TOTfcfl% (?) N 

frsnfr i 
^nw9ro^[ i ^wng* i jot *^t *ni? srfr $ wj? i 

0*) oftftanwi i 

nnwrra^ i i$» mn fat*?* i 

^ tlWHJIUllII I %e|^r*** I >^ TOUHIWfl I WTO 



WTWItf tfrlff *T$ti«cr i inn, — 



^nrerw^j tow n r 

*utoi *4U»^wn3 ^nr gfr tsrca^ fafaTHMj i 

firarr srare Htt srfcraf't? ^ wsrm n 
** *# i *?sren^ s^ir ^jt faTWicf ^JsnrnjinTj, i 

reran* i ^srrorri TOnrg i utjijthuij wnn^ I Wf u*uu totitjj i 

( tm^suuiijujTii^ i ) ^rerc — %<srcffr I 

fa) M^H^I I 

( isifasdi i ) *!rare - %cTrft i 

(S3) wtftTOlfanr. I 

(3!) Ttf^WUhdH' fd^^- I 

( 3<I43«< %^firaT ^^J^HI I ) 

to) wnwiT- i 

*fci g M«i Tf%H* I ^RTT - %cTT^ I 
TOT 1WW TOY glf^W fJJ^T I 

mfagrflr* TTffTfSr (?) fanrrofcri irataifct n . 

sfir *twy* ftrararm? ^fenro: wmrti wirta^ «nn*8<*8 



< << > 

^ 3 9 2- 



( *srf^firei*[ i ) ^rerc — %9Tf> i 
nrowwnw*; i >#> ^wrngitafr (?) «nr: i 

snncn wia^ifij ipn-^r*! frohnj i 

sfha^ g i^ai h^ wilciPirf .... ii wnfir i 

«aii<tiidic!i3 ^Nrgff vftrerat ^sff^f^ra^g^; i 

wTf i JWwtf wro*[ i (?) 



& 



< U > 

to) qfvnmz: i 

(*) sun*!*^ i 

( ^euqcHitrrc^r i ) *rfij^nTW*j i ** u-puHef i 
•l^|di«H-«F«dH8j(5ci4rtfii i ^^rr tf%m i \*\ - *a<* 

w^TTU^icj^**i^n:TOTfijTT^n^^i^[iiV$ciwf ^<?*ji-mT- 
srere - tarft i ( *af^H i?rn i ) 



( v« ) 

«8* 

tjfiraT i ^f?r i^t|i^l19 FsiiifViHtihuiiti* 1 ( hh: u^rg*mfiei 1 ) 

im^cNew^ 1 .. • 

Jflm: fRTs gw-fligq^Udlll^WI& + + + + » 

voltaren*: flucmtajiH ^nftn: ») 

^f<r o ^nwDr^T^^Tf^nT: tow 1 
vfa m^gjfmttK s tot*: 1 



( «u ) 

*rofci fH-gssBTOftironr (?) (wiuiHiui^in . . . • f^rfarr- 
( * yflwMm * m i ) *Hwto*s[ i *ra 8** i 

mat - *ten^ i to* *** ( wwi^i* I y 



( M ) 

( ^J-HJWU^^ I ) 

fa?) W^W^it^T I 

H TT5Tlftr I *JRrc-%cTTff I 

nrcwcTTWj i \^» *mt ^^prt^ i 

sriRnmnin co^ 3g cTrnirarcfcTflgT i?t3ri??Tf - 9i*i«hi<dr) 
*j cilrf i v^hTc? i 

OTTO|cTTO9i I ^^TcT*ifaRtlTOT^fjJtn?fr- 

$htt ^f%^ ^wft nfapw tihi^ 

*19 TT^lftff I ^re*-%sTT€t I 



( ^* ) 

*5rara*rai**reg^uj 

$ < 

4JocflcM4|: tjoo|jfri: H *F3TT^ H 

^^ffta^^Tyngw wafj i 

TjgyisH tfcr JETS' wg: 
h un^fi trg^m^mg it 

( uv% ) junto*) wi^h • . 



tre^ts^r inn i fn ^w |ra 
Wfcilfifa ito ^rurtir^gij II 

^sift r^df i r^HirH n 

T«|HmTWt SlftrcTTi nTd4dlt I 



i 



) 



wsgrar . . . . • . . . w$ 

sg^faTTWH i srwcHi^faffTO $Ht *f%cinri i feFfsni (?) *w ursrnrt 
*nnn i *g<i; **© ( jg mnm^ Tfar ) * mfim ^ i 

( UToTT^f^fg^iT ) ^PteH**iirij*n *f%m I *^0 XJ^nfjS I 
Vft* TOW fafisraft^ 5W«*{ I 

M© vrsnfis i 

SI^ feftWT cHAIdMMI?! II 

cRrfesnroar i 
%ej*iwf wqnrc: tb^rht Tqroro n 



( *< ) 

Off) f^^TTW^ I 

(i) ^fafaa^T i 

( tjntuHw: i) *rfti*r*rat*{ i ot ^ i 
(si) fT^^TT^ I 



( * 



) 



srenc — %on^ i 



<*) 



srpwraram i <$> 'wtj ftranr i srsfldHiTutj^Mccirci arnsrnnjgira^nff ^f 






w 



( *t ) 

(*) wrafhj: i 

($) ^lrofiqifw i 

srnwmwr i >^» *mt w^m i (?) wi im\nn*i?i$i i 

5TW .... I 

(^l) m?q#if^(5f^: I 
(«) flFCTTOrafam I 

(si) sfw^gft I 

(2) iNfffTI 



( <* ) 

fa?) ^tTf^ft^t^T I 

(m) ^rf^nftfV: I 

JT^fo I Heft STWI^filHlT^tHtf ( ^^1^ ) iXn^Fg^sfftrfeg^IT- 

(1) Wl^.l 

c n^ 1 ^fn wqfdfin 1 ( ^rfefe: i§rf*E3cT: 1 ) 
sRTtfram i *re 88$ 1 ^n^ralV u ^jerro^. . i 



( M ) 



HMciTWj i giH^TTf^^jpsnej 



*?rci xt ^t% ^ g'^renrer i 



(3?) ^WH/Ti* I 

( wirfft^^xTo^TT^ i ) ang^tf^rfcrfr^ » *rw 8** i 

X X X X X X I 

^ratf* ^>s^^fi«ni%^imH^ ii *= (?) n 

^ERrrtni«^W 5T%rW ^T*T5tT1J WTTTSt TJ^l \ 

tan?*: < 



( *8 ) 





\ • ^>^ 


to) 


#*W. i 


to) 


^T^«ra*fi*l \ 




faanJnTrwj i 


to) 


^punvcrot j 




faatiD s^tt^ i 


to) 


^f^RiUm^ 1 




fdiHJlJ tJTrT5 1 


to) 


afal^WW 1 




( ^fen: i ) fggr^f r?tT^ i 


to) 


%IT?5W. 1 




t«*< 


to) 


wra^im^Rj: i 




wznt - %St^ 1 


to) 


TTflW^*I 1 






( ^ ) 

5^ f% ^I^^^RT^TT SWferTWTWftmm^r TOOT: 

wscrhnretftcr ^jjt^ mm* «fefrr ^rafTO^ 

n^ih .... fro^ ^eh* i I'snfV i 

ftrfrr i *ra^ 3 C < w^ ^f? st^it f?rot ^m^r*^ %ot 
(*a) vfrrawni: i 

arf^Hsrfr^ w^r jrer^flct iron- 
f^ftr^i^^raTO few .... xnjg : n v^» w: i 
^**ST i qmnq 1 i Heft mrarcftor 

(*0 5^t%T^T^[€t I 

fa) iivuirftt%i: (?) 



V* 



( M > 

• •• • • • at* ••• ••» ••• • • • •••!• 

(*) f%fl*TT«f^T I 

I^H^fe^ljHfHT I ^^TT-^STTT^ I ** iwrfiir I 

^grcj; ftR-^jH v x x ^ x ^t?s?* n grrrot finft i (?) wf 
sr Kcttof? i g*3ro% ^^-^^TTOTfaTTsr-^isft x x x x 
^gtw f^nrtT^ i 

x x mi* i jjf ^tsftw fsf^rcfroii^sifcf ftrf^rrftrfHi 
^ fz$ with 5 i 

(i) *fi$*rar i 



( **> ) 

grTnrfirofaH x X X X X X i 

Waf WgSmfW XXX grH* X 

x * ^pfig x x ifi% fsrcf fsmmv n 

*j*£1b \ ^^Tsremfahd^giinH^H fw^; i ...... f%ipimf%ar: 

OTTO «TIT§^5lf^rferf?rH^T?:^TT^^ I 

Ht^^T . • ft?TWfef T fa^ni^ rTTTftfH^qTq II (?) 

^sr fcp^rg . . . , ii wanfe i 

^rerarnwij i wfn ht^ttt ?rm Twins-- wm: i 

• • . . ^srfer artrsrasftf m*t* i 

ft) *%$wm I 

Sfasm^roj i <aw 8$* <% $fc i 4tare?n# ^TT f<ai4» i D T 
fiSTfisTflT xjfeSifH i 



( ^^ ) 

t fa ^reft^ ^iffcrwwfiral tsw: Tjzmi wh! i 
(*3) ^Tf^ffi^ I 

( Tlf STfa<?ncT**fftl^; I ) * - * S 8 U^Tftl I 5RfwiT^rT^ I 

(*) ^M^TflRiT I 

(*) w^DBira^: i (?) 

fexnf*jti r^s* m ar -f- aRtgnfH^ . . . . i 

inren sr tfterTch' tost^t: xreftfctrm n ^anf?" i 



i ik^fekk (a) 

I JbiiRSJii£lfe ^Jfeiillt H±£ 

II ltliiiislkiuyyfc £i£H£& 

I HUHia^felE^ lyifeiyS^i l»£lttt 

i kuiuu&iJkJu;^ fL&iEj£±l± ijit 

I kk^feit (]fe) 
I 4^i&% - i^ife ( i iiLii&rt>£j&i& ) 

i :yilhikifek|. (4) 
I :£ilfe& (fe) 

I kkki^li (A) 

I ;£llfe& (k) 
i ^i^% - i^fii 
i :i^yii£& (it) 

( >* ) 



8 o ) 



w* 



to) 



fppwwra*[ i 




8 U*,- 


-wfn zrar^raSi ftT^TftT^feftT: 1 


s 


>9 


STf ^Hatf: TT^m? l 


* » 


99 


TftT^reTi: fgrrffa: 1 


11 „ 


5> 


■^gTO^StreTrfte: 1 


'5 „ 


» 


v^ fgftrs i 


** „ 


>5 


^TOT^fgrftr: » 


** „ 


99 


KfH^Tfgftrs, f^fesfarfaftm i 


yy 3> 


99 


fimhrftrfir:, ^^^fgrfw 1 


* c >5 


5> 


*t5T5p*t i 


35 55 


5> 


^ranmiror. I 


*° » 


» 


^*fmfcrfW: 1 


5> » 


J5 


g^stnfarftn i 


** 9, 


J> 


^TlfsJTJT^r^ I 


** » 


35 


5n*TTfaitR*r*[ | 


*8 „ 


55 


^areifsrerang; i 


S° „ 


5> 


vgnftriraii i 


55 » 


>5 


#w*r*PE*rg i 


** 


5> 


( W ^R^3T, fa^, 3RIT, <J*TT, ^fira, 
**3 : , "**, fiW, *?ta,-*rrpqrT XR^TTfqr 1 


SS » 


5> 


*?*piPrf OTTTF^ 1 


*8 „ 


» 


STCTTCTCreffgi 1 


$U „ 


5> 


r^u'ctfta: l 


M „ 


3> 


H?|Wnftai: I 


** » 


» 


* warw*i i 



( «l ) 

3MiU<4idw i 

«Mnd*TN i - - - fe fn fg? i 

^wfaftn otto: i 

nar^nriH% - — — jtItotto: i 

^«3?ci<qiqTl ... ... I 

MM 
i 

Or) itxjvmfi i 

immanent i & n* f^a i 

^T# *: * <tf Its ^fmW^N^of\^t Tfo: II 
6 



XH 


9> 


99 


HO 


V 


V 


^0 


99 


99 


<* 


99 


99 


a* 


99 


*> 


•* 


99 


» 


©8 


» 


» 


a* 


99 


5> 


9* 


99 


>* 


c * 


» 


99 


*=<• 


»> 


*> 


«* 


99 


» 


£8 


V 


» 


90* 


99 


»> 



I ^i£J± - ^^ ( I :H^£in. ) 

I :knai^iiik^| (&) 

I - - - &£ 88 8 !>&& 

i ^ifi% - ±j^& ( i k^meyjsk ) 

i ^ifcj± - 1&& i ntji&ii $\> ( i tii^^iilfe ) 

I :kftftl**H»^| (it) 

I ^lfi^ - i&fc ( I :lislHSfcjfii ) 

I :MlaiiiLbU£fc& " 

i jfcuaiiufciaii " 

i :Mlayt]2SJfc il 

(I) i kfeHiniyiiifii a 

l :^js^AI2 " 

i knsyjst {2k& 
( *8 ) 



( M > 



ft) *?T1*RirqUTW[ I 

( %crift wixmrw 1 ) ** - 18^ innftr 1 ^rerc - %^Tft 1 

wnt\ii ire. .ssjtusii^ ^to^i; (i 
cwir 1%*3T^ -£\w *$•£ %<n*rvmnrT 1 

^sP^tF^^c^ ^rcrsr^ n^r fat tktstij^ 



( 88 ) 

(m) w^srcrereT<Ei*[ i 

*^nc - %arRt i ** u^ifin i 
(3) S^st^T I 

35Tfrt$ta ^dH i 
^Tt rR TO^tT* ...... cHR^T^ II 

^PTOT^m i *fa*f%rrori irotgrRr twit: ra*r: wjh : i 

^•fi«?teT*inri ftrarrfH«r: i 



( 9% ) 

fa) JrffaT?T*em I 

(13) ^nnirnRil' i 

( ^f^n^TOTf^gf ftmft infer i ) 
(1) ^TR^fa: I 

te) qnwm*iTxftfr: i 



I eo8 k&h 




I :fe&fii!fe^^ 


(*> 


i ^112% - 1&& ( i j^u£^i& ) 




1 :k&lfekIL 


(2) 


1 008 fc£B 




1 kk^&hLk^ 


(*) 


i i&iuztt&i ib&gftititoitjs^ jftiiiaimu • • 




I kSjLkixi i »^ laaa 




ii :iim& 




miasyikii ^Jmifejuii^^-Hsyiiiaji • • l^n^jaian jy& 




H ^l^lHiUfellSfe 




(;) L^tt lJiJ2ii& :iiiliJ*Jti^ m|»£ 




i kjLajaaufe ^Bukiife^ia 




mjq& B&mim&MhbLiigi. 1 


kfcfelEUilSi 


1 &£££* k%llfci$feM* 




1 ite^^i* lb I kktej^u&ikfc 


(te) 


l kk]*yki*ikH 


(£6) 


1 MQ&J&&4 &££&* 




uskife j£i*n±u£i* st&i& i * g ^^ 




1 :kjk^fel*fefc 


(is) 


i jeu&Ajfe} ia£4£fcti££i£& • • • • j&aryu&u 








1 ll£&^ll*^ 


(*) 


1 t£llhl£BJ. iftfefrfcttu.t»fo 




i&iijyiiBii ' ' ^aMaimMiiuiSi i £ 8 l>ea 




1 kkJfe^lkJztlfefe 


<*) 



( »8 ) 



( 8* ) 

te) ^T^^fq^T^>^T^Tf^^4t%^r: i (?) 

( ^ftrcmsrar t ) 
fsraaT^ fW^ firn 

(*S) f^^Tf^^ff^^^l I 

*^ *** i 
fa) S^TO^N" I 

feSTTOfrrcfarTT I 1 o % TOTflir I H* 1 8 * I 

U?H«J U^T V^?n ^Wrf ^T^tffrj I 
rTWT: HHT^UmT^T 3iftS7TftT OTTfiWTiJ II 

ytfm ... Mm$£\ *rm to*^ 1 ... rP? *m^ ttstt jftfg^^sft- 
*ra h^j *t#*t *TOmf*r Hwt ?ra tJfrnffr wt^ Trf^pft- 
snffr: xrsjratft *rm rpar ^T^t ^% smjcj H gHmT 

'ji^raT^^ i **fH urcraiTOwn totut i ot u8* i 

(^) ^ura^t^m^i^ff: i 

* 8 trfiftr \ fifwi insure n«HT • 



( 8* ) 



(*) 


*fl[*yi: i 




( Tj^rongq i ) 


gfiTOT 1 


?fH ^Nrafagi«?mr^ «irog>$ sraftafgiff «nni: xift«B?: 




trfronw i spre^ i *crat * s * ' 


w 


«*ll«MlPH*fllHl**idW 1 




( u^muwra i ) gr^fafa^TJn xfenn i 




Mtt ' 


(15) 


^*finTftf%i: i 




( ^rfeH: 1 ) *SHK - %3T^ 1 


(*) 


^I^T^wn^TWi^ | 




( ^TauJ!iimftTli?{ | ) «CRTT - %9T?| > 1 


(T) 








( 8C ) 

fa) T^ldHMl^: I 

( gtftamnmc. ^f^^^farmqrdhn ») 

( f^ftananWhu i ) ST*R*f%m » ststt^t: <m © i i 

isrj-^irsaTsW* - _ -. _ i 

- - - - ZF5& fa f€5jfH tr^ns | 

(*) STO^f^n^ffr: l 



( V ) 

(si) tf^f^Tfefa: i 

( Xirfasm I ) S^fTTOTf^m I 8 8 THTlfar | ^T^Tf^feHT » 

wrfarf^nnrt gr^^f^mt grain^Trfererra^ i 
(3) f^qn^fNT I 

*7§tftr *m^r?$7 g?wf%j fa^tffeiTr n 
qnt ^aj ^n: sr£t hut gnfcTt wuit i 

itot&b fa^ta^ng hb$ *fi5w ronfinr: i ? 

HxlTlT*ro£rnftH*I ?*T f^I^HT T?>H$ 

tff^rTrra^^RfaW5rT5Tc|:^r?J I 

*raTTO ^^^TTT^TUTlTlfTirTPHin WOT^inftfi*: f H tTTTTJT- 

(s) vmtffc i 



I ^>ipfc - *&& ( i kh^pi>^^nnftn ) 

I kb^^likteLfeJ. (it) 
I kkia&lkM&kfc (&) 

l :fe&!akSlkl± (ife) 

1 (d) &*&& Bj£lttiyi±IfiJ£ feUfe^* 
I u>jB^ap&i&& ( I ^ii£L4fe^ltA^H4ul ) 

I lfe^fetaklHJ!^ (2) 

1 iy&ji>jfe}A£ 
-jfey^iryfcfciifeg tei^JB^ikinJ^JtiH ii£i^^^Bji£^Ji±iiyd 

Jtt^j&aitl^ ^JWilfiaiJfeittfcJIt ¥ & Jte&bUiklfcEllfc 1 lift* a£± 1 fcttmi*]* 

( 1* > 



( M > 

irrenarf w* (?) i u © ^^ttPbt i n^t - 3st?* i 

ir^wstf *raT - - - *T$H II ^anfV I 

(3) f%^T5Tl^T?:q^f?i: I 

vta^faHT i a* imftr » srerc-^aT?* i 



( M > 

(s) tf^fwere^?: I (?) 

*5 to, - >£» wn ^g irs^t % t&n w% strt *gftr ^TSRsftfqr i 

n^ ift*: ^^ n^r *m^ w^r tot ?gfiT h<w $ n w?mfT i 

(<s) wt?;^tw i 

(*) q^qrorq i 

©<« TOrftr i *rerc - %^t^ i 
u to, - 

hot: i 

TrfiraT:, — ^fa HOT1TO 1 I * I % I 8 I « HOTTf* » 

^fn h^muw - o i « i <* | <{o TO^rrfir » 



( *8 ) 

*ffl *ii^f Jfft 1TOTJTT I 
( Tsrf^riq I ) *T*TTTOT^ | 

tfta^min^gpaT img - - - - i 
U4« 





*rsr*iT?;a*i i 




( *nTfcg«f*n^ i ) 




***>« 


(*R) 


*T^T^|?faTlT<R|*l 1 


(«) 


f^wnannRfhm i 




( ^JTITCrePfcTCJ 1 ) 


(1) 


ftgrorc i 




( ^rqTW^tu: | ) 


w 


f^^l'<*^Vl 1 




( «ecrfv«ro?t TW I ) 


(¥) 


*r4wN»i i 


W) 


ftaffiTOI 1 




( wraanffcn^i) 



( ** ) 

(w) firaw. i 

( wRTHnmn^rg i ) 

(st) %ffan*T3q*( | 

( ^ferf*J I ) 

fa) $f«nfiTOrT*{ I 

?rm xi^f^nfHH^: hew* i ffk ^flmftwi^w *TuagTTrtt 
sftsfonFTOT* 13ft - - - - tftefgftrf a: TJ^f3fsrfH(rT)*: 

Id s um ^w *n$§ 1 (?) 

(n) wqnnwiwrTf'Jr 1 

8<* tnnfin 1 *n^*-%3Tft 1 

(*!) Mfa^ I 

+ + 5-^i^5rraT^^Tfrar^p(<5)^(?) wt wf qaregsgf — 1\ 



( M > 

( ^ ft ja'w u rHTH^ i ) «!ren: - %md i 

irsx - *tetft i 

tret* - %arff i wan, «"»« wjtFstc - ■ggreffirt fa'ft • 

iffrfirer-*| ^ i fad *u tt*tt«ivUv*( ii 
(3) ^f^[ I 

si^re - %m?t i war?* e«u i 

**rcre - %aift i 
fa) liWZfK I 



( **> ) 

*dr^ *(*r)ar sftf fira xmrsffrnn^ 11 
ufisra wfwr^ suffer w *f^?T it 

suwgiwr » # fafy i wnnir i *: ii 
^#f*f*afftfftffvi 



3m^f%*nfagT^: ^rercf grxit gp?>: u 

5fT5T^f ^TTTT^ aW^TWjfercTCr II 

x sntV^TRxmbrT ^jf* ft? $%jgpc i 

H^o^ ^nr * *nv f*r*rc 3^wj 11 ^nfr 1 
trarenviq[ » f*mj£ wmwj 11 

Tifts^*1*^T$95r ftrfisn^ 11 

^TftjfT^WWTTft5t HOT37Trf $*nfcsr% II 

«mnii wit «m vrefentf ***!* 1. 



i :£& 


a 


4< 


a 


" ih 


ishhh 


« 


<(, 


« 


" kb 


1 :&£fe 


a 


a 


it 


" > 


1 ih\gh 


a 


<€ 


« 


" e 


i:li||&t 


a 


a 


a 


" * 



«+ + + + + + + + 

I + + + + + + itei^S UlSlIIL I fcfcfelfc&slfc 

I iJttfejfcUaiH^ ^HllE 

II £&}££.&>& £J£ llfeiJkj^ 

i jig y^ife i*m£E j±t& &k£ unL&itt 
ii i^^E ihhfe k^ih&L&bBUn 

I fciflUfclt 4bi* e^ | Bt&feiJSJilllJl 

i ^i£^ - *£Jfc 

I ikjifclfcllh (h) 

ii *&ij&± i &£i&iyii&jk hj£ 

ii "k^tt Hia nyuaua m&iH sua 

i nubbins yu* e^ i kfifem^tun 

I jsyi^n a% i ^j£% - *fei* 

I katt£Ljh&2f (k) 

( I lifeti^E ife^feiH ^HH ) 
l :£2A :fc * " " " 

I :£2ii :H I mk ya^ita* &yMHb — • i*^£ 
I ^1££ - }&& l iDyi^li R 

I :2^hii^ (fc) 
( >* ) 



i 



* 9 u*L — wfa ircraTwroref sjro: » 





** *5 5> » 55 


^nj*r: I 




^55 55 5) 55 


*3W: 1 




^o *> 5> 5) » 


?^JT: 1 




* * 5> »> >5 5J 


nznw- i 




^^ 55 5? 5> 55 


•&T1W 1 




^ 8^>^ 




60 






(^1) 


^(5T5lft^: 1 






( ^TTT^ferT: 1 ) ^faSTO^W 


fi^t5?t: «i8C9 i ift^nrc i 




^^^r^^^^t5rm?TTOraw 


1 


<*>) 






(1) 







ft) ^TW^T^^T | 



I kttt>ikll±U>^ (&) 
i ^i£% - *&ife ( i ^^Hamyt ) 

I :tel>klteMh^i (&) 
i ^i£% - i&fe ( l kti^nBiB^) 

i kk^kl^h (it) 

i Hnytotiia Hii^fiiij m^is^taifij. msth nil linsmifettiiiia 

I :&!• bil&pis^iL I fcfifelEtttiUI 

i uyi^n iq i Hii*iiJ&fc±]± i mfl.ij^iH ( 1 ibsu&^j!* ) 

I ll^lteillfejyit^ (Ik) 

I ki^Hl^iytt I J±fc]ltoi&u3Lifi ( I laliiia^^ ) 

I y»i& fc l±&£ltt G^ b£ I :MlH£t :ilHmH2i 
B£& I :lij£ijft$2t I :miiE§H I :|*iIk&&J£J HJ£ 4*£yi£ &£ I kl!fel£i*lfe 

I ££i£>& 1 iifc 8 .fc £ Ik 11U&H 

( ^> ) 



II lg£fr]^tt J^£J£t±bife£fe£. £lfcJtt±lHttiJte% 

( i &£^4&^i& ) i ^m^ - isktk 

I k^kiakjii (2) 

I :kkte!fete» (2) 



I Ik^felitt (i£) 

i ^i£^ - *&& ( i :&j|fo]gfcii^ufci2£ttn ) 

l :^l^h^^aiL^ (£1) 
( i fen^afiiiii ) i ifij^n^XLj^ 

i ^atm h±u± £i&m&& g±m&h,±k i &&!£&& 
i ^ie% - ±&& ( i Bstiifei^a ) 

I kfofcliill (£) 

( ^ ) 



< ** ) 

„ „ fwa«rercr i 

fa) <OTFlflfi*T*lWj: I 
fa) TTTptWPHlfa I 

Stn i ^w wi5^ ^gcj; ^<o m$ ... i 

*sfi * y *f TCTtpoi^iren^Tr sRnfa ^Jtrfnu — ^Ftojtr- 

fa) ^arowfl*: I 

tJW3T3«T*{ I wfH "TTT^^ ^otWOT7^# ii*Tf[ireTa': TORT: II 

fa) ^ffar?TBq*[ I 



( ^8 ) 

( gi'tftariw fafu: fan* ^T^Tsra ^ «fnftrfa<i Tr^fe ^if- 
ftriisrrnf* ^fiff i ) sreri: - %^Tft i 

(Sf) rT^inSITf^^T I 

*jrerc - %aid i 
imwrarra*[ i ^ *w ^osranr i 

wf?W?M^filW rri fTOTWTftT ^^H: II 
Hrft %XTl^t WWT — 

( y^juii^Tiiia^fl^J I ) ^rc - %^tC^ i 



( u ) 



(*a) f^fwfl^Tfl^n^fqTT \ 
toothi » awrtinfiro*pirt ***rfstfW feron i 

*fca fcrairt: to? ht t^ mjftfir h^ *ft*re%5T ^ji: n 
jftron ; — ?% ^w^ft5r^arf^fgrm*TT 1^anrf^nf^JT^gttfuTjRnri 

feftr: i Trf*wron%*rfirftf ii OTravrrf? tYtTOTnfWrarOT- 

On) ^iwrf fH: i 
(*l) nt%ST?W I 

( tnj^Tl ill) ^d 4.U 4*W» I ) ^5T^5TC - %^Tft J 



I JaBt '.Hfelfakj, ££* I &fcfei£lii]fc 

iit^^Hji^||i|ai^a^g^^^kUf^IiiiB%^ti| jh>^> r; bejel 

II :feJLtit& ajj&^i&Hafci ft \r\ h tt^isig&j. 
:myiafik Ajky*£ u>iiy&i& ih^^ Ap^jtuate i £^tsi 

II iXL&hh :£ £iii :£)tItAttt&HJH*± &1*£&W> ill 

(i) i %ima±E £&i& gjfc^n iy + ££uE y^yi + + 
-l&ttmyi i^&& l£&^£jHj2ttt&±£i£ite£i&a 

i im&jMt yii* e^ i k&i&ittiui 

I klfe£lkltlilitWk^ (fc) 
{ *> ) 



i « I mis ^UkfeJbAifciU&fcife 
I S I mis 4i£in%i^^^ " 
i * i mis 4jafer?jfajQ^nS objS 

sttim :llH£ltel2 ll2>£jl^li^i ihii^iifeHyiKgfcj imisiiuy 
-Jt2iSlllSlJtHBlsl!llHlftili£H2BJ. lhiPb.j>bjiDi>(jeh^i^H^lh(i» J^g \ JlJfelHjlL 

I l£iij£llljfit2 ( l lHlfc±J2llteI£l]fr ) 

I :^£tei^k i£ r^lhfelh^fehlfcklte&t&J (2) 

l :i£lifelitellfe (fcE) 
i ki&iijaiyji ( ! ki>?ftjEH*feiife ) 

I ktolMfety.£i&lk (Sk) 

II £bi>&ls± ^^te*teH^&k£il£l§alls 
I kifil|£H^fiH^H^aiIHi^feils 

(I) ii §iifc jsh limS ii^jy^afeiisyft^^tttis 

:Hb^miai$fe ^.b .yain^yifc^is £2* ^^u 

! £jhyo£ & alalia &m^ii h^^Li kit 

^ia^ j^m^j^g lyin^nyanhi^t^ 

t ^i££ - ij^ife 1 ki>£i£iu& ( 1 kppftjpn*ife ) 

I &££tt Jfcl&fcJ il&ife& Ifclg&JJ^I&lUife 

! fiyi^n * 1 j^i&fe - ±&& 
( <** ) 



( 4* > 

„ ^T?TTO^n:fgr^TTt *«? i <u i 

5HW3TO5 i *rar ^if^r^t I 

yan*ftnrf*wm* ^jrft 5#?f ii 

WBjnrortnnftaT *2g + + + + or x v f 
man ai ^fH^T^wTfvr: + + + ^artere?^ 

^ra^fw^^TO^CTOT^IlS^lA^iJ II (?) 

nraiqmT^jgT^tfrrf + + + trepnt n **nf* l 

55 tfhifeftr: i * I 
" nfcrwfefg: I ^ I 

*o5 re;- " ftaifafin i u i 



( 4^ ) 

( fasnftg^rniOT i ) srere - ^rft i 
fa) *in?ifta: i 

( ^fem i ) srw - tgrd i 
fa) ^Tt^TTO^f^TO^ I 

1^8 xnnfor i 
fa) tttW^IcWl I 



I k klfcfe^^JLJfeil (£) 
I kfel^kj. (k) 

I kbt>lkUi^^ (&) 

I \£l&£ - l&lfe ( I &Jfcyi£!tel!fe ) 

I kk&Sil (it) 
( 1 lifetoiS ltel&lfe ^HH ) 

(1) i mm* aubfrjiftfiinfc i &n !>=* 

— ' JUfebyS 
I J^iittl I l^fett 1&&1& l^nus ifeHJiM&h* 

-iaj&iiil&& Aft ittfe£td>£ n*.i i^ni&E^iife i km^mnn £tk& &* 

(r ) I k&ifcfolMte (§*) 

( o<* ) 



u 


u 


a 


a 


« 


« 


« 


a 



( I k&m jn^ij^iU'ft ) 

I :ia^Jfellik (2) 

II £l££j H 4J^A lili 1£ £&& 1JB fifeife 

i mh ££41^ ibIih IS jfei&E i&liti 

I 8<SR 1>E& 

i ^laifi i± ±ti£±ihit 

i Aju&fe i tyinati iste^m j££iAii 

:fei*±y2£ I £*^i &i±in£4*&£j iia(jtft>m&j. ^^|bi£^ 

I tel^llteyaii^ I :l*L&li jJuJ^UUSJ ilih <& i kJt&U&teUti 

I kbto£J.kli^&%iilfe (2) 

I fcl&iikftjli ( I fiymn l^itutii^lte ) (l frss»nfe>upv ) 

I ktoklkll (te) 
( ** ) 



( *>^ ) 

(S) iHTW^fll I 

( wt^i) Sftrercrerw i «ra ^u i 

^n^rar^; i ^j^TFfxr mis $fg ^g* shot *ro i 
u^m nro$ ftra $f% %ff n^^ft ii 

(rl) ^firef^tw^: I 

( ^fnf^^ treiftr i ) srerc - ^tt 5 * i 
( ^faf^ Tisnftr i ) ^ra* - ^cn^ i 
( *-^ twiftr I ) 'srere-^arT?* i 

fa) flI^MM«l%I^t^T ■ 



or 
-ifei^jiniiib^iiiyijaiiysi^fii kfi&iHi =*8 li£ft i fci>fei£}*]& 

I klfe£lb^blklb (te) 
I :ylhkfe (&) 

I &HJ^%1^1&£ ( I ii£^£t ) 

I 1ft Jk&kJl^llIL (fc) 
I 41JJ£!±-m& I JfcJLfcJl 8b-S ( I &JtiJ^2llfiiillHllttl^ll ) 

(i) l :k^h^itife^).fe (A) 

I ;l&ISlI£^m & £ telSfeHlli i£ 
II :tti± $11. £&J1& * * HlsiH^^ 

( ** ) 



( *8 ) 

(?) ^^I^of^T?^^ I 

(i) %mraT I 

(&) %fm%mH i 

ft) fa!pcro*rrf^f%anrif%f*!: i 

*ra Bit i 

( *af*Ba: I ) 

(1) *^PK*W » 
c irarfar j 

MM ' 



( ** ) 



OR) 


^FSfSJT^W^ 1 


<*) 


W^*?faT 1 




*3c£ 8** I 


(T) 


wf^W?t: i 




( *Tfsn?t^p3r*T OTIcftfli: mzRii \ ) 


ft) 


^ftomcsm i 




^qTTX *$* 1 


(30 


^wnpsfor: 1 


W 


^u*^l1%: I 


(5) 


^frrf^Rra^ 1 


(51) 


^ft*niTOT«T | 


(S?) 


flJ^H^^^RT^?^ 1 




( T3feHH 1 ) 


(SO 


f^rfh^u: i 


^F?icrT3»i*j[ i 


^y^u^u^fdhri? ^ um 




VrHTjflftr^fWrft CTsfrffcro 1 




HcBRlS'^'Dfirfi Vfa ftfHtTJ^ST- 




$fta: w^mnfTST^rf^Rrewra: n 




*&c^ - iteii^arTiff i 


(3) 


^i?^rtw: l 




^ftT^nnfT xi^rTftr i 


(?) 


^N^rwwrra»r i 




H^THdAjfiHy. i 


W 


ft^wsranwran i 



11 lifc£i.£a£&J**l.fcl2 ( I i&|Affin> frith ) o>b lifiH 

i tkiymjtt^ij^fujs h.h hbiiL&&& 
ii ^^nJlj^iitS. £%in£Ji £n*Ji 

II & fi^Eliyila^L %lfe ^ ipfclfi 

I &ife^£& Ilk k^L &&m£Jkl»iLLJ^ 

II £&£1I ^1JB.2JL£ inj52H JHJg&ilfit 

ii itittii^iiieis. \&h Lh&h. &UiiH££ 

I 2Ulfc&E IJlls ^ I &&l£fttllll 

I Et±l&b a 
I k&lUlJlfe (It) 
I UttlUfc l£iiiik&l& ^fUlilUn ^tiik^lli Hit I 1£1b^Jl 

I ^l£h - i&fe I Et^H 8 

I li£&iiikl^ (£t) 

I ^l£{± - X&& I fclL&ll ^bl> - *8 ( I mgitiat ) 

I ^&fel& Ik lkk^iStlfcte («a) 
I till 



( >* ) 



i ^i£% - i&ifc i xaai&n o £ 

I ;pjffhiak}li (ft) 

i ^&H£ 

I kl&H&fcJfi 
I Bt££n finely I iHilatik 

I yn£j± - ±iMk ( i iiiliyjatiisUBiijyiiii ) 

I :fe^i*ikihkife (k) 
( <** ) 



( ** ) 

gfHTCiT I ifrT uftTgTTTgfrT: WW I 

TTOPSTOTTgTHt ^frT: **S^ rT^r q*ft II 



u xr^ifinr i ?t%t - ^on^ i 

^IT^T^^T^^HJT Tfefr^ II 
( TslferTT I ) m^n - $mft I 

(3) *ft«ranc«yv I 

fHT faf U^***T*frW <2R £ £* || (?) 

f^qT^iTw?fcft!^(ftr^) **jt w: i 
vi9jTt*uh^ ^i^nr ^J n 

, rat H^T7T^g , (2T ufHfTOgfrT: fcTT II 

it 

vnt toHTRffjfnri faijTwfira 5 ^ i ^rifir i 

^*rn?tsxf irfdijuiiuHW i 



( *>c ) 

^J5?J crf^SW ¥l*TTSl§ srf^qfireT XJ# II 

(3) ^f^fafta: l 

(5) JPTOUFFFWH I 

*Hwuw?j i *rtf 8 0= i fd&iii uttt^ i 
(<q) ^msre^trJifh: i 

(rf) tw^^R: l 

( ufe^JTT^TKJ I ) 

fa) T&^m: I 

tjra* - tan^ i <e vrznfw i 

( fg*rm^ttf«TfH xnnro^w mrT^gT^f §Hre*ftag i ) 

cT^nf?T^aft ^RTOT rf fHJ II 

^TWItJTW 9i*f 3rrfi — — — 3TO*[ I 

- - - - ^ocf^TT^ otit^ii 

qfllMfl vft^ H^: WW *W* TCR*: II 
TjfalSiT I ifH ctaaWIC* TOW I 



II iK^lifefc - - - £&l£life ££& 

I fc&Ultll! I JD^lJ^Jtx £* - S 

I k>R(j*life Ik kblkfelUa 

II *plM I 8 1 8 J*& I iHllta 

I £jU£l i :£U2l2j y>LkH 
ii kiiiJ^kHi&m liHi 4h«ri 4^1 :hjSh 

11 :*kM* £Ji*i*££ i*im£i :&£&i*i&ii 

II :A^aHm^.iHlil^ltiI&lJ^lJblliS 

I Ifi^Hi^lLj^ I :J^i££££M± ( I &li*&£l±&J£l& ) 

I :kjthkpkifefej. 

I ^1J2£ - *J&& ( I iHifrJfi* ) 

II :J^2tL 
ih\g& - - - X±L£±il£m&lhtLlhi£z&£im&)l tlllfeiil^ £J& 






kufemmiin 

<*) 

(li) 

i £n £i» 

i %n ^b 



• a 



( M ) 

wid«i $g$%w srenijj — — — — I 

- - - TJW ^[R f^BIJTO *Tf^T II 

- - - to^C 8*3 I ( OT^rmuj^rfar i ) 

- - - - ^t^^TrfHfu«ig|$g^ f^sroTisr » 

(«0 *vnm«*a*T i 

( ^rf^Hi'tn i ) *rftra*rerflFj i feroif us-h^ i 

(S3) WW*pft: I 

( ^T^r^isrf^HT | ) 5f^nr5TT^ i 

( ^n^r^^irftigH^ i ) *rf*?*fTT^nc?j i 
n 









(1=) 



inT^raij 






i graT *m^ Tfteans^T Hgxrfr n^ft- fsfsrHt insist 

ft) SRTO^T I 

siftaSKtqT ^ w ftrj*qp(?) n 



( *3 ) 

*?rr - - - - - faxf iprftrftni l 

Tff^^T5rTHf»?^T?Tf 1wi $T^" «*W^ II 

\ob - *=* tnrTfar i *rcrc-#m?ti 
sanfasr^rgrrii? ^rarw^firewrrt T^rmfin^H^ i 

(3) ^rarawt i 
(») S ?[nranr: i 



( *8 ) 

**m: i 

*g*nw f%^ w$ fa*ft WW ?&$$& ii ? 

(*0 ^TT^f^PRffrir: i 

3gOT5Tif%H: i ?rfu*r*ra**j[ i 

inT^gTcRij i ( is^ditf^QHni'c^ i ) 

*jnnH?ranrairTq wtaiOTnTfw% i 
w ^mm W$ Wf * war?* sm: n tanfc i 

fa) %^Frorf% i 

(*0 tragus: i 
( caftan; i ) 



( ** ) 

(I s ) WJHTOI I 

jfHi^FT i ^fk graftal sflfireT^ «nryTf «TTTft irgw. 5 $ta»; **rer: 
*ft«B^ : **nn *jft§rft i&«nn*T i *ara, 388 wz$* nfHs?fT% 

($) vwNwi: I 

( an^iT?D^n^ yj 1 ) 

fa) JSJ(^f^f^jf^ ifr?«<HlPU I 
fpnfor 1 tflHH c w*ti st 2tt 1 i&rmn - - - - waftc 1 

fa) *4w*fl"iK« , WRi i 

8® xnTiftr i gHi^KHaTwity i 






- — - - H*t lJ=f[T tJ^£ - - ^ffiR: n 

- - - ^sfsrtqfar: ^o#^f: ^f^imt: I (?) 

_ - _ _ ai^ i 
ho^^t^ttt *rm ^o^h^t - - - ii 

- - - ^J^ OTTIJg-ST firfSfa^ I 

- - - ?i?ra fsrdra *j*it *«r: gug^: i 
^5rf ^thh -grolf rnf i Hn^jrnr*[ ii Y*rrfv i 

( THFTfTT jfWRT T ?^T | ) 

(*r) ^^f^T I 

fa) VUdTCIdtCT I 

^TTTf^rTT I fe^TTrf UTtT^ I 

(gmi^THnsftrir: i ) 11 - $u xpfTftr 1 ^m-%enfl' i 
(^) ilPT^WPWl | 

($) trffwi: I 

(si) Hta^TOjp*: I 

IRK - %gtft I fe&lJB IR^m I 



( **> ) 

TTTTWarT^I^ I ^^T& TO: I 



Shiftily aw ^ wsn^rc^rausj i 

aro^4f*r1w ^^uftfgnTT^r tow ii 

(3) ihpirwii i 



( " ) 

fa) S^PCTWirewi I 
^ra^ — %gr?fr i 

sreifa^ft sftift^T^f^mftraTfara: %fa*F- 

MM i 

^^ xi^Tfiff i ^r^rr - ^anft i 

On) ^CTTll%^T I 

( Tgrf^HT i ) *rerr - ^gfift i 

( igfagHirgraiyiu eeit cii ^it » ) srere - %mf* i 
(*) v^nraq i (?) 

* ^ TrwTftr i Jpn^TTf^f^rrnj i 

inwft vrgfcf i ferei xnsrr van nw hot ^rrarr » tfraraiiT- 
ftrcir^Tdr«jchTlTcn^i^t 3: 1 ^far srfwr OTfa ^f^ fair 3nft 

ht^t trnta: fwrt girost *rgrf?r 1 <ot otottt a^n 

t^n" ^insn 11 

sft^fsfrf^na' 1 ^tftr Tg ^<*ra*jt: far snrot ^rafir 1 msrrfti- 

uftroT 1 fF|OT«ifl* innftswnr. ottot: i 



CATALOGUE 



OF 

PALM-LEAF MANUSCRIPTS 

IN THE COLLECTION RECENTLY MADE BY 

HIS EXCELLENCY 
MAHARAJA SIR BlR SHAMSHER JANG BAHADUR RANA, 

PRIME MINISTER AND COMMANDER-EN-CIIIEF 01 NEPAL. 



(*l) ^g*T^f^TJmW^f*ffiT I 
fa) 3lT?|3F*U«T I 

( ^STTrHli - ^H5TTrT?li - TOOTH* - aTOgftOTcTCTft I ) 



nftprar **t$3 wm^ PdTiyj ftr$r*rofp[ i 

12 



(I &h k iiblap b±lib ) 

I :fctofej.k| 



&uaJ2itiiui 



m 



(tfe) 



&t*i£i*& 



I £JJl£& I 13L2J. &H 1^ £^* 2j& ££ £J*iJ £i* I :H^ 

l££ &kB % ! m^ii ljfc£lifc fc£U2HJ J±ll£fc& ik^iij^ J*H 

I £££&}& ii*ij&i& ^Hzi^H ^akn 



II yLHJ lMh^imJt^.2} 

-Ifc]|£n£itt 0Q8 fe&Bt &S;b& I fcjfeJtei&EkBk 

( O ) 



&li£^ 



*\ 

Uftmnfii^gi ^iitfcyiikyi %^b ^ki& 8 b i^fc ltu* *>* bj* I fc&fena^ik 

(;) 11 ^teyas^ifetuiR teu^ ^lSfe^B 
I mis i^i&ks^^^ ^lABA^S^itin 

I life^kfeklH (&) 



( i> ) 



II :J*2H :Jjj^ mk IlttifellJjJtUililte 4< 

li :&£& i± 4t;i2 fella iEtltj£ H^tfm I±&i 

I la^fikk (fc) 

l fr»Eft>lMfe (U) 

i :k£&tekfeiy. (ft) 
i ^m% - 1&& 



( *? ) 



( M ) 

UfcWT^irTTTITt 5TTR *= 



5> 



DETAILED DESCRIPTION 

OF SOME OF THE 

RARE PALM-LEAF MSS. 

IN THE 

DURBAR LIBRARY, NEPAL. 



( V(^» I 1 j ) *l!FTTOlB#taT . By <3THi^[fcT . 12 x 1 inches. 
Folia, 82. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 2,091 clokas. Character, Maithila. 
Date, (?) Appearance, old. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. & to: fsrar? i 

^retTH: ^RT^Iffrfr falTm^ TflSTtf: ^m^ \ 
W^Nf ^^T?nTferH*T ! (?) 

End. ^fl^onfflfarg^FHTTT fr^ wgariTOtam niiftiira^f mv- 

ST^^fflfgreqajTOnTOWiT II 



( <*, ) 

( ^<\ i ^ I ) qfSrfawraW . By *fhFf*W ♦ 8xH inches. Folia, 
111. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 2,220 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, (?) Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ to. firam I 

mtnRgra nf^ friars fircrsrerejj i 

End. *nr ^njfiqpqi + + + + fareh j 

wmt^tf #^ ^vfrfv *«* ii 

vnf ^sr* TO* ^T ^W ^Tl^T 1 (?) 
SVTftrSaHTiFt x x x x ^iD^f fir ij*^ n 

SitT^ HHlutf<l UWTTTOnzr aT^TRf tf | 

as^ ftnnfor ftaiw wfarfi^ ntaifcfa u 
rTBTTO ftr«fl" fa*%si*TOT 1 
faro>flra x x h *ftnraf: n 

X X X X X 

f^RJqfElig I <sTl $ W dbRftffP 1 

WEff Tili*JI*mdl|*«MTO^il II 

31 9aT x x xi 

x x x x x 
* * x X x 11 



( <M ) 

fosrt *ft*&fts^^J* x x x x wferf* x x x yvi 



( *M I ^ I ) ^T^fhlWpril . 8xH inches. Folia, 39. Lines, 5 on 
a page. Extent, 609 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, 
old. Verse. Correct. 

Beginning. ( inure* mfm fto f^ire*^ f^cftmr^rw stohstw 

VItFZ i) 

W$f£ 5 n f w + + + + ii 
End. + + + + + + + +I 

+ + + + * #Ft SRTTOW II 

Colophon, wfa sft^t^ hvthsh" HirarfiTOT^armt (?) *m ^f*wfer?m: 
tts^t: i with %Twfcn?r .... wratrri tw*rrar?irfH \ 

faW- ! ^frT 5FT*f*T^ OTTtNT HT^lfrT^ ^f^^T^ 1 W- TTOSn I 

» »» » » ^tmiw^t nro * w „ 

3* 55 3> 55 ^ 53 33 

55 >5 35 >5 WtW^lT 8 IT j, 

» » 5 5 , 3 iraHftrftn u *?: „ 

» 55 3 , 55 *ftlW«h*fa: $ f: „ 



5> 5? 51 ® *** 5> 



» " 35 * 55 »* 



( <c*> ) 

wfn *Tsftrr* «r*ra*% ^mfrr% *rupt + *ro \ • «n trc*n i 



>j ?> » 

» >3 55 



35 >5 33 *5 T * 33 It 



mwi^farsk: <u ,, 



3* 5 53 39 ^ 33 3> 

33 3> 3> »3 " 33 33 

33 >3 33 33 ^ ^ J9 3? 

3> 33 3> 35 ^ C 3> >» 



cl^fawi: «i<e „ 



„ 33 33 ;> TOlfiw: *• „ „ 

33 53 33 >3 ^ 33 >» 



gtnft«nrara5T *$ 



,, ,, ,, 5*ih^^hm^^^ «<^ „ „ 



„ „ „ „ *!*!*£ + + *8 „ ,, 

5, 33 ,3 SWflWR ^M. „ „ 

33 3' >3 33 ^* >3 J» 

33 33 33 53 *° >} 3 ? 

33 33 33 33 ^ C ?3 3' 

33 3> 5» 35 ^ 35 35 

35 >3 33 33 ^° 33 33 

53 33 33 33 ^ 33 33 

„ „ „ OTsrfHWTTOri^fy iim(?) ** „ „ 

( ^cs>$ i w{ | ) q?tf&WGI . By ^ramfe. lOxlJ inches. Folia, 38, 
(of which leaves 8-29 are missing). Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, G18 clokas. 

Character, Maithila. Date, Laksmana Era, 426. Appearance, old. Verse. 
Incorrect. 

Beginning. sftinrnifcwni w i 

fjf^fT fasTOTTT fa*rft^!3T*TT*ft (?) 

13 



crnftaTjp:**?rEn:* fcrsjre wirto^* n (?) w<wfc ■ 
End, ^ ^ftrgftfT^^r^s TOwraitf rot 

mvfm TTf^nTxif^ ufarf?*? nar^pr ^jpgg: i 

*H^ ^tf^XT + + + + + ^T^t ^ fe^Tqr^- 

Colophon, sfa ^Ftfa^ptrfafinfaHnrt ^Muaranit ^rg - - w: vqi n 

f^fisTHT (?) TI^ifrT I II 



( ^o^t= i ^ i ) cff^TOcT^* 8x2 inches. Folia, 12. Lines, 5 
on a page. Extent, 180 clokas. Character, Newaii. Date, Newar Era, 
280. Appearance, old. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning, ^ *** wwttoto i 

qntreircrc W ^Wro srar*n«irt q ii 
**gf 5^^ w? fcirarcraq i 

srfiutnq- *i T?<sf st wnrorarffo* ii 

W 5 mui wf t$ct wf wg nmni ii (?) 
^uTg zm^ i 

»Wf tarm scsr iftrmftr win w¥ n (?) wanfir I 



( c< ) 

End. ftoJWftw jj?t ^^Pf^nr^TT^RT i 

Colophon. ?fn mg^fa^T ^ffsr^renTOmfRfrT i *ng*f *r^i*?h i 



inches. Folia, J 52. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 2,964 clokas. Character, 
Newarl. Date. Newar Era, 299. Appearance, old. Verse. Correct. 

Beginning. & **t tototott i 

^^^TTST ^g55B 'STf *Tf OTTO XT^R^Tsq^Efi^[ I 

^fff?§^T *5*f^#N^r*g II 



^iT^^TT^^r fefff^Tsro^raT i 



fag& vrftaR ifcrawT* firasrg 11 (?) 
S^fo gra^OTTTg ironic qiftan m 

End. 'n*? *ff m ?€%*?%§%* fssn* i 



Colophon. wfa 9 *nf«niTOT$ ?t\w<§ %**m*r w^^T^Tcrsfrsrastf- 

fafjot (?) nm Tj^fafsjfcw T73^r: H*m: i *g<* *<£« srtsijst 

fnan i 

W° ^qgSTfidhri I 3 l 

wo ftranw^w^ft (?) *rw i * i 

wo tan *wit(?) «rm st^j^ i i© i 

wo TCTOTTfirailJt 5TTO I 11 I 

wo ssjramfwTgjiR't m? i t* 

w° sfOTTCwrffcEruft srm i 15 1 

w° ^i^ftnfiift 5rm 1 18 1 

wo w&craft iftfvi^fsnffir: 1 1* 1 

WO TCIPIlft TOUFCT^Rt «TO I 1* I 

wo *?g^w*ftrai*ft *m 1191 

WO *§5cfi^ nw*tosi 1 * c » 

w° ^rgwRftrTOt im 1 u 1 

w« ! ^s^ s lxiiarHT5ft srm 1*01 

w° jfhrowft nmiMi 

wo Htrerar^anftrfVragt *ro » ** 1 

wo f%:^r§^anf^wro: 1**1 

wo H^qw^nfeftnrf^TTTtw^H I ** • 

wo wwuw m&*\wm*tfa$vft (?) wro 1 *u I 



( 3^ I *§ I ) ^WaqitfRTsrat . By *T«W^3FT . 10 x 1 iuches. 
Folia, 116. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,740 clokas. Character, Nagara, 
Date, ( ? ). Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ftft jtoxih? i 

vf^fiq i ^trear ^^^OTTTfa^^^nr- 

faTrain^ torto^! ^sgnHftHfewfewR^sfa 

^wrg^iftmT fartfhnftanii rag $% wfe^T^ n vmfir ii 
End. ^h: xjt faaftfrr w^tmnfgrfrj ^ug i 

( 5jm: irf qrfvcn i ) 
fare* I tftr whrarffs^narsii snfiTcT^^frqr^ *ro xnroi ^twrt i 

with* » 
( sh* fytftatan w ^ *fts*H «fir Hfa*rejT grara gfaraT 

WH^TnOT I ) 



< *•* ) 

( \$1i* I * I ) *3*B*3T*J5Ht ♦ By ^t^ff . 10 x 2 inches. 
Folia, 13b 1 . Linos, G on a page. Extent, 3,0G0 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 05 4-. Appearance, tolerable. Prose. Correct. 

Beginning. v^ 3 TOt toutou! i 

t^TCWin?VlforfTOH^fH:^Tl!n*ra- 
^*TT%* *5t^n fg^rq^ f^FTcnW. II 

TORT- II 

mi gftr: ^a<g waftr ++ + + + +« sanftr i 
End. *af f^ JmjarftaOT 1 tttt ^^far i ^nr^rng- <£taRi 

f HftrfH II 



( *•* ) 

Colophon. ^fn ftras^inw^^^nw^^^TTfrft tinwsrTsr 

TjftRfqrifsra: ^fe $qTS^[ ^g^ $U8 *RTf^3WT% ^J3r- 

NO 

fa*W I a^U^lH^ ^ ^ T^rSTTR^^T ^JtfiufwW aTTOTSfq I 



( V^ I ^ I ) jfafifJPRTOF{ . By 3WfilJ . 10 x H inches. 
Folia, 37. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 699 clokas. Character, Maithila. 
Date, Saka, 1577. Appearance, old. Yerse. Generally correct 

Beginning. ^ T«ra*ir i 

smhf gnjsnfsnitTfa mvfv ^^TT^Tfr *m i 
m^an: r^ wnirofewftnq'^ g: w^far^ 

TjfxfT + -fiftwftir ^ITHmTfV^^ x^*: n (?) 
TO ^r^qfa- ernR^^sr srersft $arc: fom: trig tft 
^Hf$*ftf*rOTiTsfg*rTO#^ fzi snrfk n 

*3i StT WJ^reTTT I ^faSHRtfe $^ $*5T faf TTT I 

5«Ffsr cfsroftrre fni ;mt 1 Sfcr $3 ** 9ft «ffT xnt 11 



i &»*&* i i&* 'p^a 

HJS^2:JH %£lk A&H2H HJ21* ^&&lHa l&4§lsj. 

« *m 

( 8^ ) 



( <•* ) 



Uw< 






( \i°i I ^ l ) ^R^l^^^f^: . By VTt^T. . 10 x 1 inches. 
Folia, 28. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 3SG clokas. Character, Nagara, 
Date, (r). Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 



Beginning. 



End. 
Colophon. 



^uftrfn i 



( 8<^ I ?T I ) ^TZ^fxP . By TfcFT%3 . Revised by ^^f^RT ♦ 
14* H inches. Folia, 97. Lines 5 on a page. Extent, 1,94-0 clokas. 
Character, Maithila. Date, (?). Appearance, old. Prose. Generally 
correct. 



Beginning. 



TOT TI^Rr^ HoS^ ^T^tcT^ I 
3*g5f ^T^^TTcftaroWWcIT II 



14 



( * M 



) 



End. 
Colophon. 



fanfavrt ^nftftfrr xsffc wft-^T-^rrtt ztrm ^fa fart 
sfn g^fe ^rgii tn^: n 



( VS>^= I *N ) ^TOcnr^TT^H ( T^fecTiT ) • 8x1 inches. Folia, 
28. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 441 clokas. Character, Newari 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Verse. Incorrect 

Beginning. v#> •rcft ***ra& OT^aro » 

fag JPfagPfort ^T^TTrft ^TTH ^3" ^T I) 



wfir^t hht $cp& ^frgfaeajifir n&mi n want* i 
End. *W *fa*rfr su^ *nrat 5 to 5^^ 1 

Colophon. 1 fa tanjfr h^tt* ^ritviv: rasr: 1 

(*hj tc ^rfasH^ 1) 

ftW I fftf tOTOft tf^Tl% fatftip xre^r: 1 



*5 



?* 



g<?t*p 



99 







( 


\* 


» Q 


) 




rfn 


$STT^ 


TJ^TT# 


*§w. 


TTE^' 1 


79 


5> 




53 


<U^U: 




53 


3? 


33 




>3 


*3*: 




99 « 


3* 


99 




)» 


*ITO: 




»> ' 


>3 


99 




?> 


^HF* 




J5 ' 


33 


99 




>3 


TO*: 




>3 ' 


35 


99 




35 


TSW 




>* ' 


33 


99 




>f 


^WTTOTT* 


99 * 



( ^ v=< i ) i^f^rorofsfaT . ( ^^^fa^T^mt I ) By *rcr- 

^TTtfiWHT ♦ 15 x \\ inches. Folia, 202. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 
4,798 clokas. Character, Maithila. Date, Saka. 1536. Appearance, 
fresh. Prose. Generally correct, 

Beginning", ^ wts^j ^jfinjranrTwmrihir: s 

ITT ^it^^fafaSTOJT^ S^fT ^tt ^fttfcT .... TtSffl I 

■ ttt^t iff a$?si h^5 ^jrr^f ?f^rft" fefiwiit 
qf* *HTTJwmfij spnrfrsft *fts*t?tf ar gar 



I 112 HE^Mfe ££ 11 J£ ii Jtt^l felflt|S£l]l% 

II :H2a 4&l*l*fe*i*ll±ll*iifey*.&fc:ls± J&fc 

ii i^jstt mitt ifc^ m^£^Hjitn4&g ip*Ei2 

5>iisfeH±if& && £%&& ■*]&* ifoynnmi&^is 

4&£te 4&ttH±li:Mlil*fcl£L H±bJEi 4^LSbki^ 4fc£i>H 

II :Hi^%ii^felb±J£i|JtHlftlfe^iy ^U^m'Ei^ti 

-l£||£lMife^iEiBlilHJlt&l&lHl£Elifct*t 1H1£ 

II ',h ^liilJ££ J*±&U£ 4|l.te JtaJ±iHl±ia ^^ftB. :b 
I :JhlHttJ£££|c££&£lm N emH4&£ 4jLi±B£jyfe 

I :^L£lHlfe^£StJtH^£liJ&AkS4HiaHJli£i ijl&ifcmy& > 

(i :ii*n masn jihajBii £i2£in^n 



I :ii& mifc&lifc£& Itmiil^li^iii^ 

i gimji££til£liitt4U&tty5i jtittteS. SfeHyain jiiiifeiiiJB 

II :nifelill5k :&Bbnyfc. :&1H&&& &£ liBlftilUAa 

I :lHl^lfiUt^liilAfiiU^i^ L£Uk a±Hk iamk]sail*& 

(no* ) 



( * *C ) 

famT§ EJ^^TTt fTOtfTfcT ^aTTfift?fH I ^anfe I 

End. ^¥^t ^f nftswcits^u * n^mh i 

Colophon. ifn ^fwor^T^nfe^^r^TT^^T^HTi^f^rTfgf^^^^^^T- 



^TR^ ^^ WT% <U^ *W 8<«8 . . . .^^TITOITtfH^- 



( \<8<= I ^ ) Tnrc^ras^PI . 8xJ inches. Folia, 39. Lines, 5 
on a page. Extent, 487 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appear- 
ance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ^ «WR«^rni i 

<ai?H *?fcrw*ri ^f^if**?*' Wif*: I (?) 

^i^ITT gTOTOlT ^f^^^TT^T^ I 



( u- ) 

sFTO^liTWT: TO qfraanftrfsrihffcnq 1 

f^fti(5tlfH ift fsm UT ITTjftftT WTfTO3 II 

imfwt srifTi ^ht fTTm: ^^Hi ^touht mran* n 3*nftr i 
End. f^rnrferjfgTjnq TarTm^^nr 

h^j ^cj7n%T nfrrg^: *fsfnnTc£ hto?^ i 

tistt tj^TTrfts^j faMrrfrg; •qj&imwi zrsft 
«UHji^r«yrnnHsi*iHw: ^oshr to inn 

Colophon. ^fa TlftBHT^pffl^ri^ff^tf^^ HTJTT^Woi^ l<lt?sft ^TOTf*: 

*fc a^*^l ^Sld^ 1 * flfl * 3m?t II (?) 

VRFW ufc^pr: I 



< l\l ) 

^f?r *ftfFcnhRt •rntng*?: i 

?fH *^fteqt HT^VITV: tjft^: I 

S^nf^pTf* Tar i 

T5J^TTTT^§: I 

^f?T ^f^: ( JgfT^sr: ) xrfc^: I 



(VlVllfl) fa^rf^*™**! • 8xlJ inches. Folia, 78. 
Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,072 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, old. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. & m ircwwt i 



( *\* ) 

m *r%3?t wrft sn^t sferm ufa# ?t II 

■fowro ^f fer^RT^T: ^tf %^wff mm: i 
^ni g^TTfHt'^ faanfegrfa^t^ ii 

awre tjk *T^J sPt^t Tftav*<9*i: ii 
gf %* ftw^ *^ *1xrW mt *g ii 

Sifacf $* ^qf H ^ffalfflj* *$ II 

End. vfisruwiwrttw wgyiifireraf v^i l 

W^nfW wren ^*^fta*^g*n ii 
fafarmrenra^: s^wgip fear 



( IM > 

Colophon. wT* ^s^ftnranH^hrfsranTaa * fa*ref wttt? • ^ta^f^ro- 



By ^fl"** 5 ^" • 10x1 inches. Folia, 52. Lines, G on a page. Extent, 

1,148 clokns. Character, Maithila. Date, Laksmana Era, 264. Ap- 
pearance, old. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *r«it ttttitotii i 

<?WT^W?1^ W^l^T JSI^I tl^C* W* I f <qif=T I 

End. inn gra^t a^mu^: wurnraw h^t + -f + -f 

a»gtr^rt Htn + + + + *faw arerar^ tjsw ^mmuQi 

jflgoTT^IT + + + SfrT ^¥ WSJT^TcTgS^qfafcr II 

Colophon. wfH *vmtfqn2n*rcft^5|Eft sunrarwft TOiTwttfan** 

qUT 1TOT fa^q 5TJT31 cHIT rTOT qfm \ 

jgirfkinTg** <*r ferf fawTora u 
*i*<m*uri?tapa[ ipircfHT$^ q^r sis?*?* i 

J5 



( \\\t } 



"(V"*l*0 TJ^wfsfnTT. By ^Wtfrf, lOXlf inches. 
Folia, 40. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 606 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Prose. Incorrect. 

Beginning, •# fa% : i ^ w- ^Fta*TiTOnra9 i 

^5§sr^ffVT#l5rt *?<t«t?w vt^t^; i 

*n*r>*i fafijTfgfat ^wt^t ^mfiqr 9i(f) 

fwfTfi33ratSt* i* tflw^ros ii 

H^T f%€* ?W fa^Tsf TIT^ || 

*n^ *sft sm H$\m ii vsnfV i 

End. sftsfcftsFi i *srg5T wPh i tskjtt ?ftf farfa: i wfatfvqi « 

HT5f I SHCcft I SN^ II W W£ H^THlfefH I 

Colophon, ^fe «ft - ^f-^Tamii^f^^ urfprofaraurt g^gtwr- 

favnrfifcnrferT Hm mm: ii ( *Tff! lafeHT i ) 



\**s ) 

(<£.« I ?3 I) m^f^TCTC^. By SWOT^^T . 10x1 inches. 
Folia, 44. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 660 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ **ft sn^fcror i 

TT ^T^qirTOT^ ^fa ^fin^: S? TOST ^ H^- 
l!tal*itOT^ ^q-T^t fawifa fefTH: TTT§ *t ^rq*TCP U (?) 



• • • • • • 



hh: nf^fH-^rw: i ^ *gsfc! wot?; tquh . 
^1frinvrmgrf^rrfTft§^rr?irfemiT: i 



• • • • • • 



End. nftror $ ^Jt^^t: i ^j^fr ?^^t^t wtswht i <ra ^ vm — 

Egg: ^fTf^feam - - wftWTOnom: i 



^fn^rw "Hm^* is^"faffl HroFtrrg f g sranraAcirciii i 



( V^<\ l^l) ^rfcT^TcT^Fj; . 8x1 inches. Folia, 37. Lines, 
7 on a page. Extent, 777 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appear- 
ance, very old. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *w far^m i 

+ + + + + + fosn ^rasr i 

flfl: l^w^ fc^rg; f + 4- + + + + tkh ii w*nfr II 

End. f?T^n*T# (?) TT^TrT^T sT^W^ *T^TW$ I 

Colophon. ( iifa* i ) 
fwr i wfa onann% fa^gd ftere^ i 
wfn fe^ + far uwnj i 

WfH fqrfa5«RWnnr(?) U£*TiT i 

^ftr RfHfT^^ «4fVOT uftroura i 

*fn ^^jnnnnsr^ i 

*fir nftrf irT^- g*tprnrc*rt[ i 

^ffn 3arra9 xrf?rgnqjf?r. i 
xf* w (?) grr^rcoq i 



( M^ > 

( \<^ I G I ) T^*ReR3F[ . 12 xl* inches. Folia, 124. Lines' 
6 on a page. Extent, 3, ICO clokas. Character, Bengali. Date, Laks- 
inana Era, 408. Appearance, old. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. \§> ^sfta^nrasmr *w i 

OTTCc?<raT3P q&ftarafgm 

^uwarij ^T¥ft^*ii3T (?jt:) Tin ttot*tc£ y^rm^HT% | 

ipgfi^T SNTrfTS^J ^fgf^fH^nmgfafeg%gT: II 

**<l*Hf ^<^*fh^^WShrT% II 
OT^wWt fg*% TK?nTlIHfeTTf5T& I 

NO 



^frf^f^ffT^TfaT|[^T^^ , Ta^^ 3^": II 



( \\* ) 

End. T8& K^rngnsrere smrere^r- 

Wfsfsfaf!^ q*i5R?lfa WT*T TfsmtSU nui: II 

Zf?im'&i TTffH^WT^Bt fefu^HTTT WT -f nhr?: I (?) 

Colophon. wfa ^mns*i^ ^qfefsifn: xrgr^r: **ns: I 
^frT ^.spj^tt: ww n - - - - 

*T* 8"= cRTfr(3i ^Sfi ----- II 



( V®* I ? | ) U^res^refaT . By *fa . 12x1 inches. 
Folia, 113. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,695 clokas. Character, Bengali. 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning, twi?^ HTg^ ^osjfasnfOTW TOOTTrerftriiTCT: ^^t^t- 

S^rth^^t: ^srervrnrrajr: **K*rrefgshng: wnc^rfirjjqft 

4h*nfr i totI? i 
End. w*jto ^ ^hd-^Tr*: ^^zr& ^othrj i wr^t gif^prrmfH- 

ftrd^aj^u*lTfiJ ii fjfh^T^ *oor$f?T *nsiTOJre*n*Mcd i^ i 



( V**= I ^ I ) *fc W^TMRI . By *rfilW . 6x1 inches. Folia, 98. 
Lines, 4 on a page. Extent, 637 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. \|fe fft ttS^jtut i 

IT^T^f^fuf t^^I^|5ftftTT^f%^ I 



f^TTStrt^r t^n*a^mftpn *ra^f- 

qsnrratriw 'era^retfcn guri««iiraraRft: i 

^ff *SJT I 

f*W¥*T^«mrahKS«nrt WW I 



( w ) 

End. Jsrfigaij i 



( V< I * I ) ( V(8* I sr I ) **fa^f T : . 10 x 1 inches. Folia, 
30. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 600 clokas. Character, Newaii. Ap- 
pearance, old. Prose and vei-se. Generally correct. 

Beginning. >3" ^ : *^"^TO i 

qnca^s^wrfisra ftrftsTrffw eft ftrftrTKftrcr t|^ i 
^s^^r^i^ar^g i^ro^^rftw^ II 



End. wll W3Tc£ <u«*s> wtsijw^f^ftanrt ^srnta^rir ^fr^ 

nmwnftRB to firo* 

ST^T T1HT SRITTC*^ ^# I 

nmm ftp ^otft^ fercfrsfg 



( \^(^ • ^ I ) TSP^t^raT^ . 10 x 1 inches. Folia, 6. Lines, 6 on a 
page. Extent, 12*3 clokas. Character, Nowari. Date (?). Appearance, 
old. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. >#» f* : Ho^nj i fsr^i^pfi *m: i 

g^w^HT^j^gn^f^gw^TT n (?) 

^pfgMtn *ftar*T ff^w ii (?) 
itotsTtw h*itoot *n%sr ^st^no^ i 

End. 5?£re^ fw^g^^ri^rt 

WSJ£ TfTWT lJ^*fa?TO: || (?) 
Colophon. ¥fa *f *?teTO% nfHRT^w TOTHq « 

%TIT^T5^T% + + + + + 4- + I 

+ + + + + 4- ssT^&ri f% f?% ii 

f*rft$ra + + + + **Tfcr*tf f5T3Tf%rffW^r^1^r4T?f%^^r 

^ T TJ _ _ - _ 

16 



( U 5 ^ ) 

( \\R8 HsM) ^ri^TTfaflk: . By ST^WcT . 12x1 inches. Folia, 92. 
Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1900 clokas. Character Maithila. Date, 
Laksniima Era, 392. Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning. v# i*it ^TTTq^m i 

f H^fT factf wftrfH ^faf* ^TOfrT- 

fawm w?h sift ^miTTf^i^^T^ 
* w ^tot^: wre^tf* ^TTOt 



sro w^Rrf* i *«nf? i 
End, sr^ ^fxm^TTTm^m^^if^^Tft^^T^gmg^igTTtT^^iTtfliT- 

Colophon, ^h 5R^"w^TTrarmftT^^nar^ifrTfeTf^tft m'TTTsrf'ns*?: 



(UV! 5l) TOWTCjftwragTW . 9xl| inches. Folia, 78. 
Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 1,504 clokas. Character Newari. Date, 
Newar Era, 380. Appearance, old. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. fd^qlfstag^rtsiqfrct snj^ftiiiiTW 

?T? ^ rf ^TTI# P^aiJJJiH* — — - — — 






i o i i mis 4j»ft&i»ftmiihPjte H|£ 

I a I JlUft IhLtL&bltelllg. B±& 

i g i nut 4ktL&b£iumn^ hi* 

i 8 i mis ^o^i&tiAim^ j^s 
i * i mj± 411&&1 

11 ii*itil&»i* ^iJ^i fui^H fc±|mikj* 

11 :£im& %± 4faJ*fe&y& feifctmnfth g^ftmu^ 
I h&£ BBtim JfcJa£ Bth&h£\J&hi!ai 

II £BlEft2t Itofett %n ^h^^ b±u± 
1 iy£ u&iltt 

(t) II :lli£J±y&l*l^& li&yi&j±tl& 1H£±* 

I :H^J^fellllUilE^ A£fcI&tt£lSifc "pug 

I ££!&>& II klifc£ £&JtRifcfen %^£ JUtJltiltllt& 
I Efclfcli £#£& lkRl&fc 

( 8^* ) 



( u* ) 

( R^* I *§ I ) iZWj^RJZ^twfTOTif Or 0^^%^cT^*[ . 10 x 1 inches. 
Folia, 89. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,335 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 320. Appearance, old. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ w* fararftirfr $to: i 

^¥T xrgirH ^ nifty «ri fi'H^nnnn » 

UJftQl TRW HjRl H'tft^y xrc^pcti II 

wra^ 5aWw sftawnr srjrai* i 
n<j; &w tronrai f rf fcrwrenwg II 

SfiHpf §ttow T¥^ * mfiifarag ti 
^nf^farag «r *ptt (fir) t ^f todi* ^ i 
nlit^ftaiT m%nn ^lTljyi nffinrt irft n 

End. st^st^j $g^ 'gorfaf ircHii 5 » 

nmrcfMW' ^ nt feeing ^aw 11 



* $n vraiftarRt srfftiiri wftrfrt cnn 11 



v \K% > 

w^jxiT^r^TT^ fwfg'wjgin^ i 

htsRT^ **if fg i2^5T^ m^r: ii 
Colophon, wfa *tfn f^f T^^wf^n^ wpr^riuT(*i treren i 

fa^: | WO iWnWTOlftWRR: I 1 I 
W© TOftTTCfaf*: I * I 

wo nsnnfiraTT: i * i 
wo fNnftr^TTJ i 8 i 
W© ^fut^RHnr^nftr^TT: i u i 

W© ^PSnfiOTiT*: I $ | 

*° fJ9l + «nftWFK: I « I 

W* chiVHd^ ^T? I <= I 

W° HTTftl^TfTOTTi I <« I 

W© ^TTTtf5?nftnR7T: I <U I 

W° fraT^rnriftran:: \ i* \ 

w° ^ocfiftraro 1 18 1 

w* *u I 

30 aiTOTfWRTTt | *< 1 

W© xn^TftrWT: I *o 1 
W° ** » 

w© TWR^nftrwr: 1*01 
wo wgrnnwrftranr* 1 *t 1 



( M* ) 



(\°*>i I * I ) TCTOH^Nt. (^fT^T) By ^W, 10 x 11 inches. 
Folia, 94. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,410 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Prose. Correct. 

Beginning. v# to: ftramr i 

End. arejRd>jf tra gsqf ^T^nftrfcr g^^rftrfk + + +i^i 

Colophon, wfn t^r^^iT^frrmt wTwnfwTinqT xnmi sxh n 

ifrT TH^arc^qf WtwnftnURnit Vg: ^ft: TOT&: I 



( \<V I W I ) ^WifiS*! . By sffa • 10 x li iuches. Folia, 200. 
Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 2,500 clokas. Character. Nagara. Date, 
Sam vat, 1189. Appearance, very old. Verse. Correct. 

Beginning. + + + + + 

wow fsrwT farw htttt + + + + + i 

End. igwflamt mrot wrae i 

- - - - rrifcroinft nsra: n 
Colophon, ^fa ^rtif^f^Ht TOJiiftuttiRitrarfiii^g^ij: tow h 
v^> *dftsi — 99?t — **c^ Isthst ^f^ — — — — 

*nftgro*i) 



( M 



) 



(t°^ I *3 I ) ^TOTWH . By 5^ifef^^ . 10xl| inches. Folia, 
96. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 2,160 clokas. Character, Newaii. Date, 
(?). Appearance, old. Prose. Incorrect- 
Beginning. v^ 8 fit OT?1f W I 

4*rarr5j; ^topp;?: h ^hiwh: i iron: inilij ira: grow I 

End. ^^TffTOsnfV i ot; ^fttr: i ^ftt^ wfep i *to u*^rere?f 1 

$* ii ^^iT^r^TTi'tn^iifH^ifjr n 
Colophon, wfa s*jfOT«?FnnwWl*W* ^ircrw* ^tTORrorfir f^nt- 

mf* Tift^iT^ OTitnft ii (?) 



( V*®< I W I ) fiHW* s (UraWTO^T^^ ) . 10 x 1 inches. 
20. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 250 clokas. Character, Newaii. 
Newar Era, 522. Appearance, old. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ f* : ftlani i 

ifailf 'rare i 

irofannnwr wjisuiTnUfst 5^5 ii 



Folia, 
Date, 



( ^c ) 

End. ww««i*fwf pa «r tt *TO *R^f^ * 

ftT^IU TTrTaT ftl^T Wftlrf *TT II 
Colophon. ^frT fsmrSraiQ 1 ^f^^tRlTfiWT^Wm: TOTTP I TOIHI* 
W?TT^^jf^TnqT I 



( V*V I JF I ) ^Tl^f%: . 10x1 inches. Folia, 132. Lines, 5 
on a page. Extent, 2,640 clokas. Character, Maithila. Date, Laksmaaa 
Era, 299. Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Correct. 

Beginning. ^ rro to^t srfirouTOTn 1 

?Tg: **f? ^Wrft ^f^XT^: ^^ftf^ * 

rT5T ^T^TTITHX^T^TTr^^^^f^^?ff^arT^Tft!r^Tffi!JrTTTfi^^T- 

End. pnpTO'STTT^ gsrRrepNrar ^^tt 33^ ff T^imifxr ^ig- 

^W tf^frT + + + + TO * f^ftsTtT I 4 + WTOtrgrft 

<girof^H#gro?TfiT 4 4 4 4 4 1 

srwftrrf 4 4 4 4 4f^i^Tf fw fffftni inreq 11 

4 ^^^^gm^if^^TOT^Rf^* pr 1 *iniftsif 

spa: 1 W**^T I ?*.*** tftwjgfc <£ *4r ^¥txrniTT^5R 

- - - - TOi^pTOTOTJ^TTOra isrecnii ^we^tse 

J7 



( u* ) 

(\\\Z 1^0 fajWTWfTcn . By *falJH . 8 xlf inches. Folia, 
97. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,212 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, 
(?). Appearauce, very old. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *** ^W I 

fitfTfalf UrTITriT fsfScTF cTn3f?IFT <|$T li 

araft' jrwratsTT^ T^rr-i- +fcjcjf?f I (?) 
snftTRTWT: *^ ^STT aimqt *TflT: II 

End. jfs^n ^ftns* *^T*re frtrsf i (?) wfn *fa: I 

( ^IH: lit Tsffasm I ) 



( \W I ^ I ) f^T'WTC'rafeF . By Wfa\? . 10xl| inches. 
Folia, 71. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 1,384 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 187. Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning. >#* ** ; firain i 

treroi^j t«rarS«S foreqr: ^isrg:qnft; | 

----- fafij cTOT I 

nfOTiflwra nfhf iw - - - h iwrfr I 
End. * w zws fawrf?w£iwwii5fin i 



< m ) 

Colophon, wfn TT^TTraTf^T^^^gf^fgann fng-T^wTT^^ sf^T- 
*ft*rfV^ fsrftgraftrfH i ^wr^* i 

^f?r inTnfaf ifaftr i 

^ffl ^TTqfHlTfgflj: I 
?fH ^rSjfHfTfgfTj: | 



(S<&^ | * I ) SJlfa^faWT . By im^K . 10xl| inches. Folia, 
)0. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,800 clokas. Character, Maithila. Date, 
Liaksmana Era, 224*. Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally correct, 

Seginning. ^ ** mrowni i 



( u^ ) 

End, f Ht^^j^T^ hhiw + + + + + + + + 

+ + + ^Tfoftr: UH i&ii ^rT II 
Colophon. SfrT ^nf^qT^^T^Tf^ftrTTf^^^T^mf^T^^rRrT + + 

4- + 4- + + ^m^iftOT^^irfi^Tfrf ^nfHrtxn*- 
j^r^ft?^ tottt i $wt^ faftsrafir? 4- + 4- + + 

*W **8 OTftp *f? 4- + + + 4- I 
H<^sra*njg*T ^ jftcjj H^TSTH: II 



( \V^ 1*0 «»lftn8TTWrail . By W3* . 10x1* inches. 
Folia, 224 (leaves 1 to 10 missing). Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 3,920 
clokas. Character, Maithila. Date, Laksmana Era, 392. Appearance, 
fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning, (w tot* ^^ u^Tfty * *fcr ^rfr fganr? mrow f^HT- 
jiftwi*^*tnHiwT srerai irfntrrg: II 

End. **wr HoTOwrw re^T vun^pm i 

a^T mroi ircsi Ho5rtnxnrcnsnr$ n 

fa^mithtfTsftiif Tnjftftr *nHfl*[ ii 

fraWTO^S^irsr Tird9J<f«dH^^[ II ? 



( *** ) 

g 

* 3hp n?$t ifttft srwroi ^ftrf *w^ i 

wfa HTgm: ifta: i 
Colophon. wfn ^f^^T^^^RSifgnlfaiiSg* i^t wfe*f%& ^r- 

\$» irosrm 1 

W© ^ffCTfffl: I * I 

wo wtmsmrraur: 1 5 i 

?o ^?TTW^TUT?q: I 8 I 
Wo f^ftTTOTunq: I U I 

w° ffepRrajw i 3 i 

wo TnrwfTOTOt i o i 

wo HTTifa^pmirTO: i « i 

w° ^WH^r^T^ngrm^wTm'antr: 1 * i 

WO iJWwTWTg^fH: (?) *o | 
wo ai^tatrrcretmaim: 1 1\ i 
w<> iftaranis i ** ■ 



( \^2 ) 

( V£<>*= I W I ) TfC^fonTOT^ ♦ By ^^T ♦ 14 x 1 inches. Folia, 
87. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 1,250 clokas. Character, Maithila. 
Date, (?). Saka 144 + . Appearance, old. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *nfl" w&mri i 

^fr^Tft?^ - - - - sfm^sfr^^ i 

5TfT| # riff f^^raTTH^ WSTrT TOTOtcQ^oTTCraq II 

----------11 

^frs^sit^ 3pT^T^TT5T: ^^^ftrfr *^t «r — — — n 

^anfr i 
End. ^*sf ftnrfefi^r ^ ftwft^r ^ g^ftr *fr 

Colophon. *fa *fwfttnw 5Tar^(^TaT5?S 

^?t*n«j ^u* ^fn ^5g?mt qft«g:nq i 



I lla£ittiHltt&]2£Sfe Jl 

I &hh lknit ni&& im&i£± an 

II ItiiBL&H lifcJai*$^3lhi£ia 

----- l^kbfe ^LU 

l - _ -, - - - 

I 1£^1^& Jifc£feJ& Jk££ll£l± 

II fe^B^Hjife ^i^tl B1&. 



II --___-___ 

i j&^as Hi^La J2B12 i&^afti^bjaifeH 



( ^i ) 



^?taT%* ^rgwsfr fosnrat *^nnr: » 

wafto?)^^ iron 

#1^ - - - iftrs^I f : l 
sire* ut fqr^ farferesT war 

ufffxrfV vrftrare^ ^spfr ^fwftHr^gjraraTai^tT^ 11 
wi Tmnro - - - srwro jtt^^j i 
— — — wfggrag^ g^rri snar^H^ n 



DESCRIPTION OF THREE MANUSCRIPTS IN GUPTA 
CHARACTER IN THE DARBAR LIBRARY. 



( ^® I ) fc^BcnwfrcTT . Folia, 114. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 
4,500 elokas. Date(?). Appearance, old. Verse. Correct. Complete. 

Beginning. # ^ren faranr » 

+ + + + + + + + ir 
+ + + + otto WT £^J I 

hh s^ifi? wrar? fa if?5 v^ m^ i* 

^firir wm^ w?f + + + ir 
jft ^wfcj HT: iz&i few? tjt*t tctt: it 

HT*rf d$«rtjc| Hoo|aj|ic*fgr5IR?T: I 
5T f5 ^T<£ TTC^TO^ iffoft + + If 

+ + + + + + + +» 

18 



( *<* ) 

Colophons. i to, — sfsr fsrqmiiUH^reftrHrat sftftran*w inm: 

# <u* » 

OTfa'jftrTC I ^g:#cTT: *rt $8* I 
*£ ,, ^f?T fa?fTOHt54Hf%tn*ri 5^H^ WTO: TT^^ft I 

# ** I 

^ftr 3*r$# gafa: tosh i $fta i 9 1 

*fa 3*f* *¥ : **^ : ' tf ( * ) * 1 
?ftr g*rf$ **w xnr^r: 1 # *o 1 
^fe 3*rf^ ^TR: ra*r: 1 3ft *o i 

^tt^k^ gnfa: to^t: i $t *8 » 



*£ 


5> 


*0 


V 


*o 


99 


** 


99 


** 


79 


** 


If 


** 


99 


*8 


V 


*W 


5> 


*« 


» 


*$> 


» 


** 


» 



rasr: i ift i*a » 
^Jta^" 5 ^ otto? i 

*fa SHUU^" M "oo| M^ H *<*n*^p?ta: TITO* I 
5ft *** I 

WfrT 5lf^^I^^^ : I *t*8» I 

*5 „ SfcT f5T^P5Hc=IMT^HmT ^rf5 a^rw **ft- 
*3 9« ^ffaTTcTO 3u3P WTO? I 



8« 


» 


ua 


)9 


U8 


>> 


U9 


» 


3* 


» 


*e 


*> 


©* 


» 


CO 





( l»o ) 

*«5 ,, ^ftr fH^THfr^wf^Hmt §ff!5 u^rt trfrrnif 

+ + + 4- H^rcgitf Sft*F WHTfw V^ ^ II 



(\i**> I ) *IJTW&TO # F ii a9 24. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 
522 flokas. Date, Newar Era, 28. 

Beginning, wiuTh TOQpr + + + + i 

X X x X x X X 

w*w *^tjt *ren ^riwtt h^htt ii 
O^TT^Hgr^g^ef *rerr fsrifhrar ii ^anfe i 

End. **gcj *= (wUHNS^glfir l) OTf%*fSalVcUWTC[ i 

fCT*n I f^rf^^r»nw wiO^wiiir^d^iMinfuftfiq i 



( \*\ ) 

( <R£ I ) ^P^Tfl^ ♦ Folia, 247, Lines, 5 to 7 on a page. 
Incomplete. Leaves are not in order. 

Beginning. mnroron wrfw<£ sftar: i 



gftraTt ; — 


^ft^uu^" 5rf^%^i*T^nrnir wrf^H mjRrcisinTTW ^gfafarc* 






3ftaH5T#T *=<U (?) 




99 


VEjwf^jfj wmm (^«=) ^^jiuuitfcu^irH* i 




99 


qraw Htn OTTfi ^TTirrqr: 1 


$*XT^,- 


"" >9 


5fTO^?ff% *vft mtt i 




99 


snrat^n^ cTrrnff •twt i 


< c » 


99 


sftrf *m T^^^^S^TT^: 1 


** „ ' 


99 


TORSTllft *lT?ft^ 5TW 1 




99 


*H*cHI% rixftfiw 1 


** » 


» 


srT^ar^ ^aaftara ^ro nifty-si »n^ i 


* c » 


99 


"•IK^wWfll 1 8^ 1 




J> 


$ujifcHij<*R Tm i 8U i 




» 


HOTHfrlcHgw •TW 1 (8 tl) 




99 


9KH!r4^ + + SHT?ff: 1 89 1 


c « » 


99 


^TaRR?T% 1 8 (<=) (?) 


c * „ 


?* 


*wrPrtaWTiwi» i 8 («) (?) 




^ttT?h: tnjfir ^ ^tanre^qij i 




Isto^UITit sftfarafwNi: 1 no | 




99 


?FtfiTOSTT^5 IH!(I 




99 


^mfa^RT^cHUHij; i 


*0* „ 


99 


ScH^w^i^ ^pnri^jwnfirani (?) (**o) 


*09 „ 


f> 


^'^f'T^'WipT^ tNrfagsm: » 



( \*\ ) 



i i 1 TO, — ^fr^n^ qfroittra: 



1** 


1 






«m 


I 






11i 


I 










79 


HTT^f^ (ST*)*^ 13 ^ 1 «U* I 


1\o 


1 






1*1 


» 


» 


wnrfgi^ f%<fta: *T3n*: i <u* i 






5> 


«n*fsrcft ^gsb ^ram: i **u i 






*> 


HTRf^XTIM **»| 






*> 


wrofOTt *iro: 55mrnr: i t*< i 






» 


ya^*cicy?Rt *rmi«ng: i i $ © i 






tt 


fwsrv^lHMt^ ^r^nr: i *^ i 






» 


mtidOs^^? 1 (?) 1^8 1 






9J 


A 






99 


JJ^yw: 1 ^^1 


*$U 


9) 


5> 


^rywiHHlsHrnji i 


*M 


9) 


5> 


tf# srani: « 






>J 


gf srww i r a© i 






77 


^ran^r 1*1 vg i 






79 


trf ^narnj: i *8* i 


is* 


99 


5> 


g^TCTOOT^ wvwv i a 8^ 1 






» 


iff *5n3TTO: 1 *88 1 






?> 


5# ^prwmM *8¥ 1 


*88 


JJ 


99 


xrf span*: i *8$ I 






99 


gi^jraw i a 89 i 


*8*= 


79 


» 


gf town i *8 C i 






» 


g#*ran*r i 



* 8 <«(?)*#, — ^rjjtt^ iraratarfinraft spin*: I *uo r 

TO (?)TO^ OTTO: I 1*8 I 

*nmrt*r ottt*j: 1 **u » 

^T^Turnrt otto: 1 i$o 1 
+ + 4- ^<rtr spot*?: 1 IS* 1 
f*TW§r 1 *$* 1 
^^^ ?rww 1 (?) 1 $5 1 



**° » 


?? 


m „ 


» 




11 


*U* „ 


» 


*** ,9 


» 


** c „ 


» 


*u« „ 


>> 




99 




>9 




99 




19 


*** 97 


11 




99 


\%* 1 




**<= v 


19 


*** 11 


» 


\*\ 1 




*&* 1 




*a* 1 




**8 1 




*** „ 


9> 


W „ 


19 


* c * » 


11 


**=* i 




*«8 1 




**=* I 








( \88 ) 



*=<* I 



99 



*«8 ■ 




<KU 1 




*«$ » 


99 


*** I 




*« c „ 


99 


*o* „ 


99 


**8 „ 


19 




99 




99 




» 


*« » 


J> 


*** » 


99 


M* „ 


J> 




» 


M8 „ 


» 


*** v 


>5 


**< >, 


99 


**• „ 


V 


M* „ 


V 


** c » 


>> 


Me „ 


5> 


**° „ 


>5 






«rm (?) wurof ^narm: i iq$ i 
JT^raH^ srwnr: i ass i 

TORY: I **><• I 

rongf I * c 8 i 
rosgi i *<=8 i 
iragf I **=»( | 
*nogf i a<=$ i 
^??d i *«© i 

1FQ39 otto?: ■ *<* ■ 

*ro + + mm** i *« i 



( ^8^ ) 

^W3*riir *hdtj# tramp \ *<** I 
**©*%, — M wn:gf tramp i 1*3 I 

^*jn% *n&Tjf tPw% + + i h<« i 
*** „ „ WDTjfsgraT* trump I *«* i 

**8 » » mog#CT|traitf' trapmraff wihst a^^nnrp ^rg: i 

**8 | 

^si „ „ frejruTir ftrmiw* toto tramp i ^o^i 

*8* I 

*8 8 „ „ ^^WrT^^TlT^^^TK^Vt^rJ^^^T^^'JrwnTJI 

*m „ „ ^wtmrrfW* (?) tramp i vu r 
*** i 

*H* „ „ + + 4- ^WmJil *^ l 

W$ „ „ *HSTC*ITT% tramp I **8 I 

n + + snfr tram: i mhi 

faroni Utot^t tramp i mo i 
f*jT3$ tof ftrjwftfif tramp j **« * 

XI^ITtrWr traTW I **o i 



99 



)r 



19 



( \M ) 



**9 


)5 


» 


**° 


9} 


99 


** c 


99 


91 



DESCRIPTION OF SOME RARE PAPER MANUSCRIPTS 
IN THE DARBAR LIBRARY, 



( \8V= I ) *POTteTT rc^OT . By jftg^sTTTO . 10x5 inches. 
Folia, 30. Lines, 10 on a page. Extent, 900 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Sain vat, 1848. Appearance, new. Prose and verse. Generally- 
correct. 

Beginning. s§> **ft wra& armtara i 

w * ftrafa ^TlffT 3^1TT 

trfraw i vwi tft* ^w^toctiA 3*raf9r tesregrciirar raft hwc 
«T**<it to: i h^i «mnzHtrif *w «n?rw?fwftr#^j 



End. snraro: i tvmnr ijisrTsfw i cnnft**^[ i 

Colophon, sTa* fascism: *4$irerirofHS7 ^w u^Rt$|[: qinipror qw i 



12x2 inches. Folia, 54. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 1,114 clokas. 
Character, Newari. Date, Newar Era., 800. Appearance, fresh. Prose 
and verse. Incorrect, 

Beginning. n#» **ft fa?re^ | 

End. wng^w sran^ff wnfar fe^rw frgsnrei aranftro %^ ftj- 

ftgtr^pr it 

Colophon. wwftj^r#hwiwi% fcf T^nft *cm *# trftqpr: i gmt^ i 



( V8< ) 



( \<V*> I ) ^SfWTT^^. By S^faf^nfa^N 16x4| inches. 
Folia, 37. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 2,015 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Ne\var Era, 810. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning, ^nfi^djinft snifn i ^jtt to* i 

f^nj^^u^rgng i 

JuTii«i*ir*igi!!iT^wii ii 
ipsrffl gnrot var^ar 

^rf^Rrsr^T^OT^ ti 

*rcfa «eihS ^ i^^Han ^ 

^ftyumg Utrsrjj ii 



( **• ) 

creeps T^^it TCwgrro^ fo?rerT*f far§^[ 
?ot: Tiig finer SNT^fisrerfiTT S^Scrt ixfw n 

fir%g*nfc*£tsfiH i i 

*ifa wrafcrat'rf jrRT^wT^nTrTqfirm^r^fg^^r^wnnreTw- 

jrftgmat insurer; n ssnfc » 

End. *^ * <ro T ^I I ... • 

Colophon, *fa ^ftrfsrmrrf **ra*n tt 

gtatav irep* ?wiw «dfir ft ii 
fsrHiftHU^j tftin*r iftrcn i 



( *M ) 

( \V(\ I ) *re*Np«T*I . By ffaT^ . 8 x 2£ inches. Folia, 85. 
Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 1,419, clokas. Character, Newarl. Date, (P). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. n$» to: ^oshrrcr i 

ftraf Tm*q w«T5 Htftli* fwf<r v fey i 

*W*ra* s "sftOTj ffft ^tesnfrar 11 

B^TiH^T^T^i *rerar Hfefaftgnq ii 
T£ocJ9H4dlftu wtgm Tr^tvj^u^-^ ^ II 
Vri: ^FhffrfrlYfrl m^f^ II 

h^t 5^5?Hm ttshj grftre: wto^t5ttj ii ^anfV i 
End. ^ * fiw^ *sro w% ^ wt flw ii 

Colophon, wi w^Hnnffrec $Ui^*$h wnfrg n 



(*{%J) *WW^p. By M. 12x4 inches. Folia, 41. Lines, 
11 on a page. Extent, 1,353, clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 



-ltutfi£&£ i :fci2R4to£ i &jbi^Ji£ I :feiirui*£ i ]±nn*i*irui»ia 

( i Wgftjjgfc in :£& ) i gfth|£i& 

II fclltlit^iJBJ. :&&& Jte%lHH 1U& :£&p 
I fclJfcUlfcE± J&U& UUlliI&lJlAlB 

( >.i\ > 



( tM > 

(^•°|) ^IRffa^. Bj *T??Tfanr . 12x4 inches. Folia, 
59. Lines, 10 on a page. Extent, 1,622 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Saka Era, 1674. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning. Tsftjrih&m *ra: i fafSamij \ 

wrare^u^ *ri*? hoo[^it ^rnfgdg[ » 

f3^fgT3*fT3Rre Sltapffal WERT: I 

End. wu^rt%^ fen^r *rfcTOrc sr f^^rrac^ i 

$ar*r: i swam*? (?) ^fa^ 3 * R^r^rrf^wnw^ 1 

wfa ^Tt f^o JT^prfgr^o w© ?aj^fgf: 1 5 1 

^WKi^f^^icrio^ftiffTTOidiiaiicjHiTt ^^ 11 

20 



( *M ) 

^Tc[ 5^ «tths rrannfrnra i 

g: laciW otiot{ ^^rrsS n 

WHW^^r ^fftait tfhtf grift f*f*tsr*ra; h 
gu*u isii^xf Tro^Rt s^ra^ Hqnw^fl' 

Colophon, sfa ^M^firawhiuwi Ji^ifciwrtrfarefTO-WTC^Witiflq: 
ww 11 

$3%3rron*i 1 

„ Qi'ffiiftHi a r<y fa* 1 



( **A ) 
„ lmirurTiTfefc: i 



(W\\^0 ^T^^E^ffacTCJ ♦ 10x3| inches. Folia, 50. Lines, 
7 on a page. Extent, 700 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, new. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^t««iq toj i 



^: wivti wr ^ ^*n ^05} mittrix h 
*C5rcn^jr tnn ^T5^ tftfji^wgHiqfaR: i 

$f^* ^fo *^£T: $f%T* ^dfti ^JWT: I) 

itf^<«rf^f h^to tlfa^ug^ $«i% i 
*sp t 3aj< a i * I 

sr mrofn it wtorsjst^ ^nrrfironj i 

$TTfT^ ^S^OTR" f fafjpOT feqQ^ II 

tram * 9 *fr wSf farcn wni|t n 



( ***> ) 

fa? $«rfaw$«ir«H mmi c^ 3% wp 11 

*5N*T ^]^ I 

?w ^ *h i qr* i mQ Hrawrai f%H fir? i 
qtolSTTcITT Vft fifcq" wnftfTOtf**: II 

c| W*t *W&J MUgM *fal^ %cT# ^"^ II 



mw w<y±l fcr varans: ^^p: n 




I 

70 ^ ^rararg'sir ^nranrt firf fir? i 
* ^wis fern ftrfg* *itii ^m^gr ^r i 



H*n<* HTOT $%ftl Tfl^' TOTta*: I 

rriN 3Rtrui«jw otswtt f^ef fnt? 11 w<*nftr i 
End. wwrwh#w inn ^psrafMi* r*iswrftw h*( > 

tjifiqii^t uq^Th wei: tot ^r%?gr wiftuqwtti i 
nni<ran% f#?? aT *jh serf arrfsrujirfar ^han ii 
^g n^cHTdq^lf^TR^rr uto"* wis 1 

^nqT^qf^HT^^ Q^UIMd^fMi: II 

Colophon. wfff wiwrtr^wr wmrq ii sjwj^j wtt i 



( W«. I ) ^Tcf^rft^R[: . By ^HIT. 12x3 inches. Folia, 85. 
Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 1,638 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
Samvat, 1589. Appearance, old. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ftantami aron i 

31m: faro3wfliTVrcTj wprorfsnarcs n 



i bum* aj.1 

i " ►,(»» « " 

• ^» ■Jl 

i hBtmn hfon ifeiiife " 

l " " :*!£& " " 

I " " sh^Sj « « 

I tlilUfit :£in :MU1 &±lh " 

I :Hl*& ifc^H :&&& " 

I :MUbfc :fef±& :£§£: " 

i :HiH& :k^ \h\g& " 

I :&lli& :tejft ib\g&L " 

l :ttittfr :te±H 

- ^«j > WftK>jkl»P Hb gt^ J>J5j|>»Kgfeyhhlfia^h|to^lt»ib > t>K|tS < PJ& , UOq(tOXOQ 

II :&}& ij^jfrPlfe 

i ^i&>& ii ^m^a mu±iJfe£ia 

II isfeft] is i^l2>^il :tyH^i^H IDtgLli 
i ££^n £& lfel&Ut J»& :anit^tt|Jii 

( V*i ) 



( M- > 

( \^.B I ) ^ra^TW^TpC^T^T^JTiRJ . 10x4 inches. Folia, 32. 
Lines, 11 on a page. Extent, 990 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose. Incorrect. 

Beginning. Hfl*i>juNnifi*xra$ ii?: i 

•T^T TWR^STIHTSITH *§d — - I 

End. vifaiwi1r<r ^fn i ^H^udi^ ^artrfn faaHrftrfcr^fk i 

Colophon. ifa sflugdjsfisaimiciiClOT — — ^r^m^^w^TOTirwg- 
3rer 5 n*T?[ftfi^ ^renmr^hwnft^TarT?3n% w^w Trcrcnf writs i 



(S) W ^RT^tf^TaT^fH^ ♦ 12x4 inches. Folia, 56. Lines, 
7 on a page. Extent, 1,176 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, Newar 
Era, 867. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^ 'nit iriSTftrtrm i 

otto farwr $ft fegp^ wfti^T t*3 ii 
v|fe ^frwftraiTO i rrinrit w©sfi!reff%rTmT i 

HTRT^J femi $^t ihnf afaraf^TH: I 
i^p# wf^f^T iNft to $^^3 ii 

^srifti^fr *iW §fTT§Hw ornnrq n 



( M* > 

^fn 9^5 h^tt ^cft qnf*r*T Tf^T^rrw^ i 

srcunfiT **n%* jftinftii spraH: ii Y*nfr i 
End. v^ ^f fafg3n^t$ ^Tnnwwcjq^agftf^^TTfTifg^ 

Colophon. ^fa ^^T^f^TT^g hknjj ii 

UTi|ST g^ni? - - - i ^w *ra<£ =4© i?ta *5fr © *ftf- 
1t% ^**uit ferftanfijfH ^jwj i 



( t^£ I ) *l^ld(«l^ (^reT^f^n^ar^JT ^ (^f^rcTT^f?? ) By *T^W£ . 
30x3 inches. Folia, 15 ( leaves 1-3 are missing). Lines, 7 on a page. 
Extent, 177 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. 
Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ( 8*J *^ro u^war^f fsrfifHtf i ) 

afinrw f^rT %fsr ftni ^o^^ asra^ n wfa i 

^t^rPpR^TT'g HTO3iCTt rTCIT TJ*: 1 1 

fssrfa m wmfr ii 
End. f^fm ^ftir-dcifl ^ren f?*w<*wra*mt i 

21 



( M"* > 
Colophon, wfn ^Traw§fcn:fa$ ^w^tH^r vrercnftranR stttot- 



( W*. I > IfT^WJ (TJTOfarrfafa: ) By ll^^f . 30x3 inches. 
Folia, 5. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 60 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^nt nmRa-dTdry^^rl i 

Hftf^fgf^f^gr VTiW UlfOTg II 

gwnrarc: finsp. wnrfWt **^J^5 i 
End. HriimftiTiiHHM!iiaTfii«fT $%^ft i 

Colophon, ^fa ^ftTTsranjgfarefarS' w^rr^t umT^Ttftiift ^j^sihtpI ' 



( \<<^ I ) ir^WPW^J ( *nfiwfiBRF ) ♦ 11x3 inches. Folia, 7. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 107 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. firftf $9" ^ftufireBpTfti hsjhs i 

^h* wnf f$fer Sfa fiwifW *?n5 n 

End. fe^*nwnfa tairtfis *rron*[ i 

srsfiiT femft syf crcg gw wti ijtts ii 



( u< > 

Colophon. *fir ^?tar*4H«nT% wtu«j*i#cj^i j^u^i' TCfifsrfar- 
xntti otto*, n 



( \&\^ I ) *W<kM *g«l*[. By it^^^TC* 12x4 inclies. Folia, 8. 
Lines, 12 on a page. Extent, 252 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning, 41ii9iiiif to: i 

gsorffwT^r ^iPju ht fir* » 

^rat^wfir «n^f ^^hI^khjiFh * ii 

^*rH*i finwfirSsjjvifir.* * v 

jpr *g*r W 3<sn4^Y[ ii- 

^fir otwt^ i wnnf? i 
End. jp** tTTfrer ^fis* w g g^ifH tit: i 

<fliwfagiti?Wt top 9ee|fr|<JTOqp iv 

— — ( TOTTO ^Tfi^rT^T I ) 

fMw i wfir n*wwi*i i 

„ irafanng I 
„ ^taKhijirsrq i 
„ ^firarnsYutta: i- 



( M» ) 






( \«V* I ) ^T^T^t^W . 10x4 inches. Folia, 4. Lines, 8 
on a page. Extent, 80 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, Saka Era, 1706, 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning'. sftjn&snir w i 

UTrnTO^J" ^Heft ^f^THJ trc*!f?fr I 

*T£W f^TTO *JVT ^^ ^o^TT II 
5TTSt iftft ^TTft ^T IJtfsfft ?ftl^ ^ I 

End . ^TRgil^Ti H7T ttlHTf* foSTtf I 

Colophon. wfrT nm^^fr^ ^rtf^ i 



HSRl? TTg^r: iftrfi xr^ wren**: I 
*5RT^ *%#iSr: ^nTTVT^ *gf^* : i» 
a^T-fgeor wtt^tt^ nit fkf f^r *oettt i 
%* *NjftemT#?!r fg^ ;*safrT f^f^H^ n 

ft^Sfor ir$sH% 3% *f>rf ^FTO 5 * rPIT I 

¥T **£ fora *i^ ^ * fcrefcr ^cn *ro ii 

fiTC^R:**: 3ft$fiT * 5TT*TfcT gqpraq II 



( \\< e I ) *fMtt** : • By ^WteT . 11x3 inches. Folia, 62. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 1,589 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
Newar Era, 830. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. Airiifsntr to: t 

- - - *ft*r*^rt gfarfijgi *Rte*i i 

T£«f Traiferer. ^fT: ^fSTOBrm^reT II 
End. iWcfsn^ *t*tt y^prt gftifg*: » 

^088 STT^SWT ^5TTTT5fT faaWT^T ufe*jfcT I 

**u *nf*raTiY ^ift *rro w^ttthj^ to: i 
?m: ^a^g^«5{i«f ^ are? 'gr^rfroifH n 
^c^o «TT*n^fcrcKff *jrft ^^t Ir^iw ?% i 
^g^hrftraT«?Tf^ ^ sra ^rafrrofH 11 

^ytfi«( ^Tn^i* ^raftrafrr ^nwre ii 
HBt sntf ^l#f fMsg vifm*i ¥ft; i 
^ w*sit *33§2n ^nmsr^f: h4t^ ^ftrofH ii 



Colophon.] wfn ^rcft^ffHt ittift^yt w^fsnpnrsft %*fw i* 
wfa JRt^n^uj tremT i ^nr Hitmen a*oo i 

ifeo ^gJirHdl^H Tfa^TC: I U I 

^firo f^y^icii^HTftr^TT: i i i 

^fao iT^^H W I W I HiWTT: I *= I 

^firo thiuTH^sn^jn i 10 i 



(\8\*l) STl^W By ^€Nre. 12x4 inches. Folia, 12. 
Liues, 9 on a page. Extent, 270 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ftwnwrqr to* i ^ftij^ *™ : ' 

tf^ft *ts^ * §ar^: ii 
fir* irinsr feftrfe^^?!^ ip^ '^w^Hg^rtw K^t * 

OTTO Ju^t^T *UW«ftfH a^TH^rf TTCTTOIT?^ II 
WT^r^^HTftr *19<< TO: *R%: 
'snqEnsn^finsrw 5*ttctt^ 1 (?) 



( *<*> ) 

End. TC^ira <l * HTHfelTOtgH rHR 

( *ffH: TIT T§%fT^ II ) 

^fteo i 

*W freTTDf *& 341&I fH^^g^Hllftsfir JTrftrfQ^iTO II 
^^o I 



( R ) V ■ ) 1TOTO { By ^rr^tTT^T ♦ 11 x 4 inches. Folia, 22. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 396 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
Saka Era, 1735. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. *sFtarawnr •res i 3hq«5<*r *ret i Hplsv^uuHTci^Hft *re: i 
otto %s$ ironf ftrfw ftnc $* qfrgtft ftsw 1 



iwifr 1 



End, ^H^ H^ra ^raigyrHy*4iTTf? tT*n$ffopf 

Colophon. WH^S" 4lOTfii4^n8FTW- 

f(wu§3nf^figrf um^ wrr^rreftsftrJTHtsftraTT: i 
fkw* I w^te© i ^Tftmnn'TWTfwnT: n 

„ U^T^q^R^RTftl^fT: II 

„ * wmgSTSTirmftlqFR: II 

„ f^UJJUTsJMyHTftraiTT: II 

„ ^HT^voqfnM'HifiilWTT: II 

„ *TT-$ ^ U «1 fatpnftrtffTT: II 

„ ^^TWi . . Uoct3*Jl1\|*l*: I 

„ tnrRf^t HTO^rfWT: II (?) 

„ ^* i fcw ?nwnfirere: II 



( **< V^ J ) ^RP^Pntf^St By #^P?ftr . 12 x 2 inches. Folia, 
15. Lines, 4 on a page. Extent, 165 clokas. Character, Maithila. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. & m&$ " 

^w# xwm m^s twsh? rrcgr: ^rtth^w 



End. ^*$ *re ^fe^iT^^dtfrsftBr I 

"3REP*i rHg|[TT^ UW^frftTt II 

n^suifacH^ i mum %tf ^gr^cTTf^iift i 

(*AV*0 WWJnCpSfffmftT? . By ^Zfa. 6x3 inches. Folia, 7. 
Lines, 13 on a page. Extent, 182 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?)• 
Appearance, old. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^JHnsrnr w. i 

5T %g^ 9i£3TT: ^iTu^ite 5 ^ i 
1H%^gT ^o6T &$ HTpT rI*W<l II 

sitot h^ ?R?miT3Jrt<i I 

52**? 3?f*niifa5i mtrarfo' 
rarer fjfcqj^n infir nw^Ht: n v^nf? i 
End. firo* ftyro *nrWi * ^r 

fi u n fore wg% x x snfcr- 
*3h ^^ni" srfaiu^r h^ ii 
^fn Sg*iicmt<d*i 11 

22 



( *** ) 



(^)*>i I ) f^fafc^TCcW (*?^H§frl<W . ) By fR*f if ♦ 12 x 5 inches. 
TToHa, 134. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 2,437 clokas. Character, 
Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^n^wnr *iw I 

F3K|T ^tft^r^nmift mrsuii^l 

ftrer wrf *tj Tdrcrufir: *?t an n 
• • • • •• •• 

xfW ^aixgjy ' f** tftwrcprT ^^ft inn wr^ 11 

CT^el jlu9*Ri| qropror: ^sn^^t 11 

( &tanfc fefw3piOT& ftp *r tfn w^r w$t* i to 

... cTT^J I 



f?nn ^qrf%^: f rnrcfofafiwira: . . . .tfgwfcj ir 
w^* l^w ^\Tfw ^f^nfepni i 
wra*i*r?teTT gzin$*infrt« ii sanfe II 
End. W* *T«fa *: Tmmn9 «Rnihiniftsmn 

ussfHTOTTO mftrftf ug3«P5 i 
Colophon. ifH fcftficipizd fa^pTff^ frgiftrarc: u 

^T^^^ftSRtT^W<3Uft?!fHqST^#rir^7Kr- 

finpRfiifcftffAs ^ giiffw ^f 5 ii 

HW fraftgT*T*n 95rreTUfl53lft mw II 

h^«H iporait fiugsR rarPiaM lutren^ > 



( \*^ > 

**i irarc?nir nfg^Trf *?£rirftw II 
iru5*r} %sfrr ipijT f*n*f jtt^etij^ ^ u 

w?t^r: £Unrsnfvrara: r 
nsftsfiJsn sinelfiT? fireijftra*! ii 

„ fsrataiiTftraftt: i 



( *** ) 

tfaro ^THniTTftr^Ti:: | 



» 



( *><! I ) f^f^WranpBIJW . 7 x 2 \ inches. Folia, 69. Lines, 
6 on a page. Extent, 1,428 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. # fft" *n?T*ftsre t 

fe^rera tNsrfsw ( *r ) fag^nni i 



trowr wraf ? wTrff $? *^tt inn irot i 

■KB"* *S** * WW ^nferTOJ M 



( ^8 ) 

5otw i 
*cf *mi *o| iicrann^if I 

^T3 tot* i 
^ %fcr Rcr^Tftr ^^fesn ^s^tt* i 
^pr t*r w wff ^rfwn %ti9^ ft? " iwrfr i 

End. sj^f^f^aipsrTCri f*w ^sm^ fsrd i 

wtort fair tctki d**^ gg^ffl n 

Colophon, wfn ^fafig* 5 **^ *iWf^$ w?iT: xtott: **tih : 11 



10x4| inches. Folia, 9. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 510 clokas. 
Character, Nagava. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. 
Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^Jfiutft srafifHri i 



( \ *> Hs ) 

End, frnTtT-TtR-H^niT!^5TTWtsi^^7m SfT^W^sR ^lT$c^ ?fa- 

Colophon. Sffl ?R*itaft^OTtTOTftlfefa: wm: i 



( 1^ I ) ^MnrnR^N 10x3 inches. Folia, 96. Lines, 7 on 
a page. Extent, 2,520 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, Newar Era, 762. 
Appearance, new. Prose and Terse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. Tftarasns to: i ^aftirafa^rcj^*! i ? 
trsr vnzm^t cftrt *rsr ire farerc^ i 
*^t h^tto gw gNiTsrguqifcf 1% n ? 

ot h ^Gr^fTftr xTTH^arBorsnfgftf i 



I 



( \*>^ ) 

5^% WE3% |IWf N^JclTglTfcMir*3>fl I 

End. OT 5 siTfir $«n<Semujjiif«r nf^a- fin 

Colophon. ?fn ^ft«nr^^^m% fa^jifiS fa%*r^ftfgwfl' srm «f^t i 
^^^ a$* i ^nsrgsffgpntnfa i 

*i^r$ ^WT^Tftr^TH^ faftarojil qwmra: (?) trc^: i 
„ aTdsucRiidly^aw: i 

„ T^nciii^tfcffil^feSi: I 

„ tmsnfeftn n^?w: i 
„ *r^*Jidifafii: 9H?sn i 



( V«>*> ) 

I 




99 

„ fe^nfe^fft^^ tf^tgTr. mm: I 

„ „ „ HriifWinfsrwrwShr: roar: i 

„ „ „ sra^mroTftnFH:: iqw. i 

„ irf^ft^ inm: l 

?) „ uid^ifgrftjj i 



23 



< * 



^>r; 



) 



( \\<* i ) 'TTcraiwdnirT^rwij . By ^f^fN*uf*i«t • 10x3 

inches. Folia, 70. Lines, 11 on a page. Extent, 2,114 clokas. Character, 
Newaii. Date, Newar Era, 803. Appearance, fresh. Prose. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning, ^wngj i Tjftef^rcrrgr^ •nn i ^Tlg^^ft to: i 

#t^Ujtf<**locrgr%nft w* II 

^ocr^rTH^iWT^TTrrm^f^TT fe^ftjcTJ II 
5T^T HT TJ^^HT 'TW4|4JtJ<s|i;ft^%: 35TOT 

ira ^ _ _ _ _ qrfronftfir sn^ro: 11 ^anfir 1 
End, W* finraift^s fptfrfc v&mi 1 

3[rf ^fftrfkngart iT^rthrarfsra^ 11 ^ftefcranij^d to: 1 
Colophon, ^fa ^f[ni^^tar*nfarftrcf%^ ^?tafcnjgf?ram3n% srrasiT- 

^t^t^ u^to* tH^n^rnr: 11 

w^r^ ^=05 qra^sr jjwfWtar innraeift fafrsrafw nsr- 

^a^r^nrisn?* TOransir wxt 1 



( ^c ) 



( \^*= I ) *TTORlh: ♦ By SROTfafWT . 12x2£ inches. Folia, 
13. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 195 clokas. Character, Newaii. Date, 
Newar Era, 883. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 



Beginning. 



End. 



Colophon. 



ft**: I 



isrf%rw j *faf*f^ff^^Hfoaf) , *aratg , cr- 
^5ft *rsgrft*T^R: f*nf*sn§r *ra*ts^;ft?!P n 

iramrmt fe*H *cr^[ $t*t g * T ,aiT lf fawuanrnt n 
^nrif'T^giT^wirawnt ^imfaraT 1%^r f%nr h*tth 1 
fHsrcsr f^mHRTf 5 * isftam *n*t cn?fn Tm&i 11 (?) 

**nr 11 mm «* 5*tiff « faf*rH*^irfiRfcT i ^pq; n 
wfff© ^WT^nftnFTTt hot: 1 

*fifO ?I¥^^Tf^^TTt f^dW I 



(OV*- 1 ) ^faft^<*|UsNl (g^tf^t) By ^fa^. j 0x4 
inches. Folia, 45. Lines, 10 on a page. Extent, 1,069 (jlokas. Character, 
Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose. Incorrect. 

Beginning. *$ftarfirtn* **•• 1 *3rtip^ **•' 1 n|S» **t wra# grraffr*TT* » 
*grgfajfl«dchTff trfnrcfarftrfir. SfaHTin^nft 

qnrorraT f*%*r faran3rafa*r*T nuitM m 



( \v ) 

<PTl*tf §crNrT + + + +£ftrf*T3*: I 

ftra^nir *n^f SRftr ftrft% *tto1h * ftj 

.... 5ncnEsira*ig£T<j ufHsiT^ \ ^anfe 11 
End. fsipra^— <5Rr<£ nffrf Twrgrtf f&g srTWrraifarg ?inir- 

fasnh ii 
Colophon, wfn ^H^y*^^fafa?ftf*f%rTuiT d Tiffa^arrejnri gaY- 

fiiRIT fi^hn^ruiw ^cW ^TTT* II 



(^8« |) ^TTfiraWT, 6x4 inches. Folia, 6. Lines, 7 on a 
page. Extent, 52 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, 
fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^irfiwnr *nr. 1 

*ni? ^^ra i 

^ ^i5T 5? snsnftT TT^rera * fg^rS ii 

wftf + fgr^jTHt srftf *sf$gHT i 



End. firaCTi^ ficr uro laici^i^g y-^J) 1 

fsmWT% frf mif $TOT%5 f^ II 
Tf^TT# ffrf TITlf ^3*%TJt vfgsjfrT I 
^ 5TCT 5R^ mftff *TT3^i?> fit dim : || 
Colophon. W^T ^tfOTO^R^nrfg'T^ ^TJTfif^ra •TW? ^"HT^^ II 



( *m ) 

( V*- I ) ^reG^lfc^ ^WnmnftW tf#T^Tfaft[: . 12 x 5 
inches. Folia, 25. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 675 clokas. Character, 
Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Yerse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. # fViTgqiTftranT i 

w^ ii ^ranf^ i 
End. <ra j y»ran«f ^fl w^^ftirf^mr ^rapn ftnr^n i 

Colophon, sfir ^*i^[[H*<cftunnHi^ vgqrnrf%qiTirt ^ft^CTrnnf^RiT: 



( R ) W I ) et**PW ( tw) ( ^f^cTT^rf:) .16x4 inches. Folia, 
101. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 3,636 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, ( ? ) . Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

.Beginning. ^ftrtmnr to: i 

fira xroro ^nfhf waMfttmiirnvft I 

TchlJri s1<gTI*P9 SW H^^|HM4H«{ II 

^ste^S^cft v&fb gift trflrorit ^ n 

^cr^nj; ^fe ^TTsrcrir: writw ^ro^nr ^g^fa 1 
qn*Mr^ fsnsft^f + + TTW^ffuf^r? H^J || 
UF#l»nJre*Tftr 5<|JTOTftr fir^prifaTfiir fsrft^j *ar *q gf i 



( *** ) 

TYjrra^m^gf^f^tjT — — ^nuarsjuaugrTf- 

^^^rRnrfg^nrnTT w^nff — — — — jpRtxnitar ^rrarcr- 
^h^ i rTfer*! sirii rrer^r: 11 w^nfr i 
End. if** tf** *w5^ shag vrarfn *n^siij[ i 

rP3T <wa sh^mr trfir 5*8$" II 

anfircf fffagl^ trarara*! i 

wfn xireraA: i 
(^ft: tre ^rfetTE( ■ ) 

HHu<a$ntflu% ^^f^fti^T^r^f ^rl^juFB^ftr*5 <£M t»nu <H?tt Ttai^ 
♦ * 

^imfH%5 — — ^^mft^Tar^n?! « 3 ? * T^tTOig^rq*reraF*hra- 

xr?l^T^9i'5i^r^n^Tii|ffHgr^TO ^ro f^Hfanfq": ■ 

^fno u^i^*^^^^ranf^f^^^aIl^iiiiUH^^Tyui*mn^i^r- 



( \Vv° l) ^TO 1 ^ 5 ^T YfclQQ* By EtoCTO* 11x4 inches. 
Folia, 102. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 1,836 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Samvat, 1639. Appearance, tolerable. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. sftarawnr to: i farrfcaf* to? i 

5RSTHT TORTiPff TON*!** ?TIW 



( *'* ) 

BTg^sr^^fti^ fare?! ysinx*^ n 

H<£tUJU33iQT H<*dH I HufH 1*1*: I 

rT^rnm^nr^^f^m^ftcR wits***! n 
End. 5iwT»«iwt grf*7crr^r ifon •f^d^S: iRsnjTii«TOn^ i 

fpT^fTrft TTftra^n^T ^fg^TlfsT Wftdm ftreftrarfiT II 

Colophon. ?fa ^'R^^'TTraTftrTT^r-Hpl^l^^^Tdir^Q 3?fcr) ctr^ ^ftr:- 

CT TI fW Sk ^T^T HlgftHd^dL II TOTO f ¥T WTJf II 









( \*9 ) 



fHTfchlETUT. i $ I 




^ i 

*TT3 , **irW^UI!J*[ ' 

Ssjjinnmsrnj: i 



(\Rt« ftwW'nfo By THFU* . 12 x3£ inches. Folia, 52. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 1,001 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, Newar 
Era, 827. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ftirirani to*, i 

ftrenfl^rt fart^ro ^Thch*! ^gf^H^; ii 



( \*>K > 

firsrff ^ sraift ura*. i ^tf a^rfagra II swfe i 
End. OT^rsnstff ctgr 3*^™ ftro^ 1 

injmifrr «fof ftnrir «re^ ii 

1IHT3?N HUT *3TTcT JpffaT ^^TfeSR^ II 

Colophon, ^fa fH^ifefiroi?- tftjftenrat" nrTfnzrfsr^rd Tj^prrnHqw^; 
**nn*T tpsHfH i **frs^j h4^t i 

( \^V= I ) ^reffa* By WVR . 14x3 inclies. Folia, 99. Lines, 
on a page. Extent, 2,669 clokas. Character, Maithila. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. TsFtonfrsTTO «w i 

^^nflgMiHI^tl H W3HTs it* mc|t<3<|$tT: i 
^^T5f5ciw% fgf^^'q': OT% sfW f%U + 
+ + + iraru arTOcnH^rnrer tow^ n 

2i 



( IM > 

rT9T Hf^ft •TOT •fltfWtf) S*33[*T«?i fil «R ^ftfe 5 I 
«<5Uf^HT: KT^TT tf § Mjhjl *^t?f OT^: II 

5jt§3t Tfta "Rthw I 

g'TilffolHRm gtjTsri ii 

H^n^nr: urnjd<nHm i 
------ ii 



*wi§T gfsr u^En^rg ?ftr u^smrirmT grit: 1 



---------ii 

^TTO#tti: farcfc tMlufihu& *HT II 
*fttfOT*nratsfir yiPrnni ^rfrron- 

h^ 1 snra ^rsptot ii ^unfr i 
End. ^ *3T ^H^iru^i^^im^u i rH^in ** «ro* fami f a a 



( t** ) 

Colophon, ^fff ^^^w^ui^iy-^SH-^rcj^j^^g^^iycirdT^frTin 
^iTOfft ^ftr^T^TT^Tisr H^nnj n w* family, i^wm 
( wr: ttt isrfeag II ) 



(H)U° I ) *pfN 8 raWW By '^ftjNfdSF&T . 12x4 inches. 
Folia, 60. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 1,755 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^fef nilJiiiiira 5tw: i 

sjf^Sfareraf jj^ f%m ^rfjludifTOq i 
zrgvr s? drafter fro 3iw wfrra: n 

i^U^3iliLIUT?T?3^JIUdHI4Jlf?ftT%^fc|<tJI- 
eft*: 3ft$tll!e|Ajl ftuHHI.ITtr-=*4l1«aligt?h5: 



^fTft: ^T ^ Hl^ H I^- Wefild^ll^lgiy ^: *ft*§ II 
tH Niim3Hafa%dl 



( t" ) 

gfayfw: irereWtf ft? n s^nfe i 
End. "§th ^sn¥tfK*r*[ » 

^?arT«j *$ftr^T«j ^f ^r^nriT^T^ rftw^; *ra"?T^: 
fV^^mtTsj^HT <3?ftnrsn%* m mu^HT- 

^T^IdHW^m*fl^5T^^T5TIiglTft?T?: I 

SOT *nftj mftH dgfcHfaci tTTO4i^Tji H% I 

h^ ^wftf^f^jw Tarog ii 



( \*c ) 

„ 1%<ffanf?^*FTffi <B *$ <« aj t — ^Hrj W5 * 8 i 
„ f^rTfwnsfinT^Ftiii ai $ <*j $g*m ■ * * 



( \«< ) 

„ f^TTfw?r*nTHFtiii ai ji <*j $9*9 ■ u i 



( ^< 



) 



( 4,^3 I ) 3«J3T- . 6 x 3| inches. Folia, 49. Lines, 5 on a page. 
Extent, 245 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. 
Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^Jrirtrjffaif ?ro: i 

Ufeflcrc *¥TOTtf STSSfff *raqrof ssg I 

f&zi stotjt m^t HHc^ *g utot: i 

5JH: ^ f^fsa XTTK fWdHtPlId^KliJ^ II 
5TH: W^Tftalirt dtraffta^ *T5TO3 I 

%HTT: TTT%*U*9 H^ITOTOt f^ffacn^ II 
^^tsfTT *T3T TO* nfa|p **TgfgT: I 

^ftr u^nrawT 11 wmfz 1 

5?frt oigfte^ «if ; sffffiW wiping 1 

hwi^st ferjirra ¥^an irraTfiFft 11 
^fn ggTcirw 1 

iR^r^i^ra*[ » trow fa fa: 1 v snu^nf^rara^nini i orRifsr 1 
^yrg^i^nu^ 1 ^jfrgFdmsnj; i *i^sj*reHo*[ i suy^^ i 



End. 



Colophon. 



TJ5gTTT«TT% 



Strang 1 *r^wr^*Rfiyfa: i aSW- 



HTHR3 I |TmftT^5 I f^ITllTHT I ^^irfHt I d^TJ ^ WUfa ? I 

sjcnrratf: i ^rou^: i crnfeOT i fg^wj 1 jftogrog 1 



( R ) ^ i ) ^pfewrcwi. ( fRniCW ) By finmtftw . n x 4| 

inches. Folia, 34. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 486 clokas. Character, 
Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Correct. 



Beginning. *tij*sr trtj i 

TOUT ^TSJT tr^IT 9^$9 fuHlHBHq I 

iiiwmiWT^r frowns ^tt: i 
End. Hu«r5«u\rcnifir n»nreiT| sgi^n i 

H4HI'^jjfF *T3T: ^*T 4M?T£d£U«4lfw I 

Tsjgfg^r ^frHan %Harr ^ftailV«i1 ii 

Colophon, ^fa ^^r^^nT^TftiTT^r^Tfgfgwr?f?(«wjf^^ ^teh^vfta- 
v*jci*H*TOt Tm ^r§*i: m^i qvmr: i ^pro^f ii 

fkW* I ^c*<*41PglflkJ4t I "SftlTOH^Sfftf J I ^5*11411*141 I 5wroroi[ I 

siT^reroij i 5TTTr^wi^Tl*M^i4fl^ i iirfeM^iiy^ i ^nr *h*t- 

unHTfa i «mr g4aygii: i snr ^r^fpn^nnj i ^nr amn: i 

w ^r^pj i 

^fer o mm? in?* i 

*nr TRftftrt i a* midfajii s i faraufNrT | wimra- 

y^i!!4^ I 

^iTTwrefofas i wu *r^jt4M*T«nj[ i ^r^r 3ftyn«t|W4^ i w* 



( *M > 

raw i wfir f^^pwr i ^rfn arrowy: i iftr arrTfegraw; i 



(\^o I ) ^StcTtW^TO: ♦ 9x4 inches. Folia, 267. Lines, 9 on 
a page. Extent, 4,806 9lokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). Appear- 
ance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. Whrm *ro: i ^ht^^t •t^t: i isftij^wft to: i 

^ftf^W* TO: II 

UHJ-d* gtrfU-slR ^TTOTTO^fWcn^ II 
WS *sT*T TOTWarfl?l«fWH!li"*lT ^ftwf^rcTTilrniCriyTHT TO*r- 

guanusium Fh ifdajy t*£? W iroft^nr ^fir 

H^T^cncn^nrraf v^iro ii ^wife i 

End, gT*rcrei^ grral 1 fafarg i 

^>j-iiyy4ji fo^sr . . . . snjanj ii ^fn fiffcnj i 

?r#ft wiwiffefc fwi<sMt "tiflfe^: i 
srfa + + fa^un^n 

anw^ fwi*r ^§TT*Rt w^ap" 11 



( *c* ) 

mrnnwrsspm ^mftcr<i% ^ftufngwd^i? n (?) 

«TWgf%a$nzjsf^" TPsfTStf gurai *ra: II 
Colophon. Tfa ^^ctxTT^^uu^i^^^^^iTO^-^OTgwi^wrflfe'^- 



(\8\^|) H^WTCt. By 5wtWT. 12x4 inches. Folia, 601. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 15,376 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
Saka Era, 1607. Appearance, tolerable. Prose and verse. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning. ^ ^fforfirtrm to: i 

tut jnonifcf gnff sran hPI^^wI^t^ i 

^cf : qmpq $ &vz\ *JtT5T ^R|^: i 
yrfkTHHi fa? ifr yfffireiw %ar ft n 

*nj: iiri g^9 iwgfw foam: i 

HK I H1I TURRET **#* H^WI^ I 

$sFf TOsnftaja 1 HHt wyyHi9^ II 
25 



( *<8 ) 



«t ^ 



End. wf^mTTfi i 

Colophon, *fa ^t^fHfe^w^wfgrf^Ht 5nHWTi!r-HT«mj4i sn^a) t*D 
srfcren:: tow i TsFtsn% i$o* *tt% UHlgmii ift fafarrf 

Tpreftrf S^RI^ ^ft*KT ^^ II 



( W^ I ) T5FHGITO3*ft . 10 x 3 inches. Folia, 14. Lines, 7 on 
a page. Extent, 490 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appear- 
1^, ance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^jtotoS *tr: i 

• * 

SJ^^T TOJR^ qcc|%hft?Q«KUeMl || 

*spt *ngn^rTujiri w% i ^fanft f^rmn i ^rcni 1 ^ fHsr^jpft 1 
tPtaOTr! 1 i ^rtjlfe II 
End. wiftrenftrrtur cf ^jsn ----- gf^ ^rnj i 

*ra# m^fe ? I 



( *C¥, ) 

(\\ii I) *TOT*I. By ^mt^THf . 12x5 inches. Folia, 43. 
Lines, 11 on a page. Extent, 1,300 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
Saka Era, 1603. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ^Jrirtmr «m: i 

rTj-duisHdifffafr stt^rshnj^TO^r. n 
End. spqttwct **9 ina^fTi;rfl^T feraq i 

Colophon. ^fa ^f^Tixng^nrnfta ^T5T^T^rmT^r^r-wf -TTiftTTfgrTf^ 
tototo wnfsnRj siftfcrTOTftraf JiftrH^lftrfH: tots: 
mm: i qriir ( w% ) iSoa *n*tfarT ^f? ^Tf^ft truR^rir 

^ ftrf^Hi i *nw wa^ «< ii 

5 d ^k iwl T^ftrPSr&sftFf ^ n^rfrosir ^di^W^ i 
tgi^r n¥hft stftrataro ftrmpiroi firftra: tow ii 



( IM ) 



(\8^8 I ) *TT*R*M*sl<?l<*l . By ^JTsgq^flrrr^ . 11x5 inches. 
Folia, 53. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 970 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, (P). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. >$* *** : ^hranftafcranii i 

^SWTW^fcTR^T V^T^^T?!! 1 Vol ^r^ i 

End. TOwrfrfOT^npi ^pht^t^ fg^t^i ^ i 

Colophon, ^fa R^n^Tftm^r^^^iT^fffrnRg'^TrfeTf^HTTrt ^nrwosr- 



( V$>^ I ) «n^*uW$ ♦ 16 x4| inches. Folia, 99. Lines, 7 on a 
page. Extent, 2,871 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, 
tolerable. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. >#» **t w%fi i 



( *c*> ) 

qu^Hi 4J"BlcUI«ft ?n^[3<$*ig£Q*[ 11 
*1^T: SHT 9f^4WH,U-j: WW 5T f & II 

*wT^p: fanmrarar n*ffaraTw ^^wj i 
*4^rr^ *nnH^ wto^j aTfftrtfa" " fanfr i 

End. mrnirtfiraifajr* *nn j^t*?: wren: i 

«cth 3>d| na^iTi? ^mT^rf^fnT 5^ 11 

Colophon. W% mint? sn^ra wsnztfftrrot HWiu/iq: ^fafarfHi 1 

(**! XTT^rflBH^ 1) 

*fcT* tn^3<si^<£jt( I 8 I 
*fno ^ol^fef^r: I * I 
WfHO wfcPR<3[: I i I 

sfao vraarfw i a 1 
sfno vnrjr^rcrarci i c 1 
*fao T^rram: 1 « 1 
?fno wiiicij-444114 1 *o « 

sftro tr*ErafoOTnj 1 <u 1 
^fno *rfH - - - 1 ** 1 

wfao ^^fWsnr: 1 *u i 



( ^c^ ) 



(\)&i l) TTft^^T* By ^TO^^ffannf^T . Son of *TOT? fa- 
f^cJ^ar^T^C, 8x3 inches. Folin, 23 Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 194 
clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, Saipvat 1773. Appearance, decaying. 
Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning, ^fhr^sMT? srcr: i 

•pfetwi u ft «jy *Jy 9 h 
^paftsfwj Hf^cl •rnsr* srfft 

End. «™ h^t iwfri flnrat unpA v*r 

urn MivnnryuHiufdFdyl . . . . f^frog^T 
srron^ftfir ^if^ifgfcci vhuiiq-Sra mi 



( *<£. ) 

4- + f^wi^r^in^ faft tpq • 

Colophon. if cT^rif f*jf^ ct^uj ^t^jicM^i irR^r^tft^mfsrfirf •nsnfr- 
trffareniiTO totf^ i *3<* w*$ gnl %3 *nt i 

( * ) *^ PwiwSs • Ry *(\&m*X*1 . 10 x 4 inches. Folia, 94. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 1,316 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ^nr. ^ftarosrn? *w i 

*n wm towc mrfar ^ ^ ^ftfir: 
*tew sriainft iranrairaT wfe^ faffa i 

^fftftTOimd<grcisMJ<JJig9ii9«rnK i 
farrduulf qnmrmaf foranpfq 11 
f^^m^^Tf^^T^ trit^ TOratTO mrem: i 

f^raif awnt OTftr atfjuunww ^ i 

End. *iwuciwiii *jjHir i 

^tn«n4rfi!r ^jfapr in*faft * Td<*j3 it 1% » 
srsrori nar n%^ tirtj wrarmraT i 



( *• • ) 

Colophon. ife ^fnftTT^OT?T*f^*TUTO*nf?f 



(\W l) ^Vrt«iiBW{F*" ! . By ^fa^TCg* 14x3 inches. Folia, 88. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 2,970 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. >$> *nit Tnt^^TOTO i 

^PfaPharanssirticr irfiinrcr 5fa*i i 

^ft^d*^9T^^%1H?1^5 II ? 

fnnFt n*n Hif^Pt Hint *nrft: ^<?t i 
ifis*^?? wn^iHfwsiTft^trar «sr i 

*$: iffan fwr q*nrar % inm m^ i 

^^Rl^H IdqMlgiKhltraWTfbft II 

n* ari^jT iprterf^rfsr^nj wt ferfn: i 
**n%*c €^HrcfwwTOir%ftnrT n 



( vt > 

End. w^PuTi rror $|j n## ^f5fw??j i 

Sire U^faUHJW 35TC^} f^TOs5ftiJ n 

( ^h; *afi»^ ) 



( \W ' ) •M'lUflPWI • 6x2 inches. Folia, 6. Lines, 7 on a 
page. Extent, 56 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, 
fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. & *«> §*zm i vrg^rs ^g*i^Hn^ » 
"5ijrg3*u*>ui f^^ranrafiw g^^nrTwf'tf- 

^tsxf fgnw^ gfowre* ^5 ^b?^ sftfa ii ? 
*ifg*T% I ^ wmftrraro II 
^tti utTTftrsft* wrgfarcnrf Hotsnfer tost 

cf ^ *ftf* wpn wrar » tjftf iftft? w«Bp^^^ ii 

^Hnfr i 
End. *nr 3wjjw i 

?R2ffit ^ireftft gjpffr wfa fwm ii 



Colophon, ifn ^wh^ ^mr^k-^rarpf-^OTi^fty wthij i $v 

26 



f<nre: i ^fytsreft, wfiferaT^r, hittot#, fa%«ra\, insrrmwr- 

SiT*ft, t^TWl^, IvHl^^T^t, ^ratf^T^, IWgfogfcrt 



( ^ ) &<= l ) ^ftPTO^ClfliWl ( ^wfa^nffajj ) ♦ 10 x 4 inches. 
Folia, 8. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 78 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (r). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Correct. 

Beginning, sffaiftsnrcr to: i ^^T^ftfero to: i 

*3T* Wo&ft ^ SfTffiJJ ftR^T ftjgq ii 

^jfftaraw i 

End. H^ #^i^^tt^th f%j ^ft^| cpwj i 

WOT n&^fsS litoftf OTTSTH: II 

Colophon, ^fa ^^^rW^th^ *rgTfafgn$ TOraf'^wt^TS 
l^ftaOT^ i 



( V^ I ) TOWJVP . By TT5TT STO^TST ♦ 8 x 2£ 
Folia, 106. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 954 clokas. Character, 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Yerse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ •wft *ratra$ i 

wrasfttf mn% ot «ft ftra^i f ft* fern: i 
to wn^inq aw ynfa *nw?£ ii 



( <•< ) 

End. Hranf?flTfaflTOT|p9FT- 

to^t^ Kjwft *nfn: » 

«t ^ftrer: **i«j*<q*rfH II 

Colophon. WffT U^TTT^nfOTT^TT^tanTfSr^T^^rrt TJ^TSTJ^n W1H! II 



( £*=8 I ) ^pifatpOTI*! . 12 x 4 inches. Folia, 36. Lines, 9 on 
a page. Extent, 769 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, Newar Era, 824. 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ># ^nr: ^xnjxTH^ i 

smrhr faiT*T %g uigi *j^%^w ii 

*r«t$^ SHcf hw arranr ^ *rerar^ 11 sanf? i 
End. ^ '^ w *y^ ^wnraHgr 

Colophon, ^fa 5Twr^irsJ^T«rt ^xjfrrorcriir Tjsr^jmftraT crrosn: ^f?n 

^FITHT I 

^fa mro#tashmri xispifHjTTO otth ^wg i .... i **«r^ 

<=*8 I I ^tffrirara^^W *TO^T^j f^^q^Tlf^^- 

f TT*[ II ^W^ I 



( ^* 8 ) 

qtran i 



( *A<^ I ) TTcreTOiPt^faT . By f?WTO .9x3 inches. Folia, 11. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 193 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose. Generally correct. 



Beginning, *£hi<uwttt w> i 

End. iTTt: srares: ^r^mn ^th; h *vhi ^H^nra" u 

Colophon. ^fcT ^firir^^wT^nrfsr^n^fg^rfe^f^HT ^Trror^Rf^fH: 



(*)**{ I ) S*wfw. By SRTOrfTOSITr . 14 x 6 inches. Folia, 
372. Lines, 12 on a page. Extent, 10,695 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, new. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^TOum «w » 



I h I ittttn 



i ifcteiy^pimfiiiiiJfey* ufe^iitink 

II H^l^lfe IsjliiiuS i*^]ajii& iaiIfi:H±lte 
I jyimE II gfolfr*? n^hr?fr >hife>iibhU»ial3ofr i& 

i k'^&ytt^fc&it j^iut j^^iH%itl mS 



-life :P»*fej. $ll&^iliiSl^lfitlifiLiaiil^i^ 
I :Jifci£!feUtJ& ^i& :JfHi&H^fe6llia|ittlJatS 



< >•* > 



( 



o >*> 



) 



„ ^TOT5EfUTOT*&feftRf*T i i I 

(«L^l) U*jfa*iWfap. 10x4 inches. Folia, 16. Lines, 11 on 
a page. Extent, 484 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, Newar Era, 872. 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *w sftironarTO *w i 

End. pr^tftrif *i^j fcarefUirefafcr Hrciirftffgtmifc nf^*^ t 

Colophon, wfe TsFtaHrf^rcnift ^§^ : u^ro: tow i to ^g hut 

fisrfarH - - - - SR WJ e%* ^gf: i 
^frT TOf**lTTOt RW; TOW I 



( %*-* ) 

TOfe§TOranH*nftT i *pt nfroTjHiT^rfaTjRTfiT i 



(\o^_ | ) T^rf^T^cT^^. By *j3^I . 12*5J inches. Folia, 10. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 270 clokas. Character, Newaii. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ** : ^l^ingihift *m: i 

wrsi » ^t irertmr a^lra i TBnfr i 
End. H*rar ! ^bnto * sjftrfarorsrg i 

W** i 
„ r^rcKyirqnar? i 



( v< ) 









(OWO STOftWIil . 12 x4| inches. Folia, 33. Lines, 
7 on a page. Extent, 1,567 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?)• 
Appearance, fresh. Prose, Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^Ftorifisrm «to: i 

*i<ym«n^rfHrft^w«ft 4i^«g- 
^4Mfe*jfcijM*ifa fc rei*a*ji<a) 

SW^Ct T&^fami fOTrTT^ II 



iflw u ofo vrphgr i rP3r farer .... ^^jvrerccr^rT . . 

4UH£4Ail • . . • STT^nraxTn^ I HHT .... ^^Hl^dl^l ... 

27 



( n* ) 

End. $n*4 srffl *at*i*[ i ^fe TsPtasgrargfroiraTO^ 

r^Sf i a i 

Colophon, wfn xnrcw wihi: n 



( \^ I ) VafanCHPft . By mOTfirepS?^ . 9x2 inches. Folia, 
12. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 135 eiokas. Character, Newari. Date, 
Newar Era, 524, Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ^nTOsntr «ro: i 

Ur^l^dHy^^T fcH*l<*<*R?nil| m II 
*T^ 3* W%^rflft ftiHI'ilft JTSTRSHJ I 

wf sre^ vsrt vmj + gfrarm fa? n^ n 

End. g^ twrif* CTgT ^OT»^TT5W: I 



( m ) 

v^fin ^nffr: ii 

- - gsta grust Sit THRYrfTre^ n 
Colophon, ^fn ^JTOxrfersn&wT fgrf^m ^^qTr^flx^T^t huihi i 
■gug i *gam* *n * Hsrfsra*. i *ra§ *i ^fasr: 1 wpsr^ tus 

PHT *clT W99RRT1I I 



(W»l) ^^if^^ifflT^T: By T^T . 10x3 inches. Folia, 
204. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 2,856 clokas. Character, Newaii. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ ■rat ^Tift^w i 

TOT^RM^UIlJ FT^ ^T^TcR% TO: II 

u^ zpi *t*i imy lirnftr ^i^tt- 
H^fan^nirei tnftrf5ra%: ^ir^^Tci^jTf^: 



( *\* > 

jw gratify d ^ 1wrht: W^iIWi irfT^p: i 
fajt*ij ^Ptftr ^nrf'tT ircg sifaHT ijw T*i3^ firct 



( O ^ 8 I ) WT3W^ : . By Tft^T^T. 12x4 inches. Folia, 
135. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 1,530 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Samvat 1890. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. T5p.*rin&m «w* i 

n 5ren ^rafte*?: grggrc Ufg *nr^ *m 



sftt sSjj: uso^wt ij5h *g^ ^tw: y 



^rrra rorfaHiT^UHl ^H^^diUTi^ i 

f&W ^UJjNlTHJItUMfdl ITtri lei Vd 19ft: II 

^nrM J*** Tin 3!T i 
^Ti^n^n^^i^ ^c|HsHWfcir*4rHidt I 

Twrren^f su i $Hch u u *rcjf^R *raq i 

^tfH:WT^ Heft WT ra^TT^ *3?F*JH » 
'BET TraOTTO^ giftlHTOWifcfsrfH: II 

*3garairfN??i II ^mfz I 
End. qrfimiroc *^c?t* y«ir^*d^iycfl i 

irfSTJTCi ij# *ftc ?g> Wrf: ^5n fgi^ ii 

WgimEnfa *t^t $9J4mr«aiH: I 

Jrajfa: ^^TlTff^fH Unfair faifat || 



( ^\8 ) 



Colophon, ^fa ^^Wf^T^u5^wtTT^^^ft^THfarTl%# iraraT^T^ 
^gwTOir string « spr ttl i c <£* wrarftH* ^rfrareret- 



(\V^O ^rf^Tnft Wn^fiffa: . 16x3 inches. Folia, 9. Lines, 
8 on a page. Extent, 360 clokas. Character, Newarf. Date, (?). 
Appearance, now. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. •ran ^^H^rrcr i 

yifta^nnTrRa-dTsrimfwnT: wai^ i 

?f* mufiwfirfr rflTORfWl WffWRWftlfif TOU? « 

infisravu i y few fa wrfwm: i 
d^ni^tfc^Tffcroinijfa'rfifr i 

ins fa -a w^to^mu *t ■ 

*fi wuiyfa-dfawaiTOntHti i 



End. 



Colophon. 



f^P 



( <M* ) 

(\^9|) HTOfVTO*JVP . 10x4 inches. Folia, 74 Lines, 
9 on a page. Extent, 1,831 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. # 5 ^ : firani i 

w®*n xron W35JT frf^^^rfg'STnraiTq i 

End. ^FnftranjsT^r §fiw*l m?R w%c^ i 

crenel ^ocrsjiri^r snftTfFH wi^ n 
Colophon, wfir ^m% *ttth^ RTqpB"fnr^f ^wiwy. n 

fre^ %c^ ffHtstorw^fi^^f hut frf?r: n 



IJTTTlrt ^(^ft)*J*f«fc! ±JJ«JsUll^ Ulftjci: II 



( u* ) 

§%3T f€TTfr|cHl3cH4l^l1T- 

^Hgchi Fa U fa Hifi^rf%f^ ii 



( \^i I ) 5rreT^ftfT3ffTO^fem^ . 14x3 inches. Folia, 112. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 3,336 clokas. Character, Newari. Date (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning, ^p to: fsr^itr i sftij^ft to: i 

f^r^R^- H*irer ftro firaf ^tot ip hh: i 

jR^n<^4ish^ ^aTTTg^nf^ ^^Tfr^fw^rnr TnfirareTTm sre- 
jjr^Nrrerwr an: svsiTHri Hecrf^mftr Th^ mn«rH 5?jt*- 

f^Tf ^ II ITqifV i 
End. i|WVf4ii:Q^QiugHgfiniTirfir ^rnwjci5lci ftw H4Mi<( 

^ocmu^TT^ inn: Sirrai: tRnar CTJgciftd^tj: II 
^fa 'renftrfT tot ^rfan^TTOTf^wi n 
nu rmtftigf[f\*ri wnr^sfa irrcnf?^ i ( ^rcn ^rfefRj ) 
t<mw l srroTfe^ 1 * i 
^pa^^n srwT i * i 
$Hiyfytifar i * i 



TjrgrrfOTR tut i & i 

S4H*iTVidiuH •tto * i* i 
?*iH*Tdftnr^T i ** i 

iciilgJW i «rra i *s i 

qu^rdrvHttr i ** i 
ufag i rdrmfa i ** • 

famouTHgT ^mr i ^a i 



( ^* ) 

( *^<L I ) dcfTTS^t . Ilx2£ inches. Folia, 27. Lines, 6 on a 
page. Extent, 753 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, Newar Era, 827, 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verso. Generally correct. 

Beginning, ^fe* I ^tiro^cT? *w i 

End. *2T few*^ fer^T ifT ?3TT?T?*?OTftT% » 

Colophon, ifn 3cWoj?) wnrr i 



0O\V*O W^POresi^nr. (^fi^Pfi:). By**??*. 10 x 5 inches. 
Folia, 10. Lines, 8 on a page. Extent, 125 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^hjTOsmr sw I 

htt§^ cf OT 1JH *T* iff 5T: U^TST^ II 

h tj^ *re7nra *infi? 3^tT«t?j ii 
^R^rf^ h«i i^fwSfTfrfwh&ig iT^w i 

**?** |ifHHT tf T*ptffT*: H*TO^ II 

^* ar*T*n* ^Ttraiaar wfei w* *re * HTg^w TO i i i cife Bgg- 
%h^ ^ffc^f^ *rwr ^nti:w^f *?tf <sn ^r^^n^rs^T^ n 
^anf? I ( *xm ^rfeH^; i ) 
faanr I *n*psr *ftr *«?* tofitemHWAwiifa n^ i an^ ii 



( *uc ) 

( * ) Wl ) ^W*^^^ .16x6 inches. Folia, 153. Lines, 
9 on a pnge. Extent, 3,935 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning-. & w firanr i 

^«rfeTrf^p^ rTQT ^nnTft7T7H$ 5W H 

srnmrwijJH# - - - - ^fsrr&Tcm n 

ire sn^rranf mi w^sn faratta^ n 
3ET5T ^f^ff hY fin* wrrar^ xtxvftv. i 

H^T^ 3fTOT^^TO^|ig!tf%*n«J II 

^nly^jq^i^t ^HWi^rif%HicHc3ii i 

firaHn^?Bf%Tnc*u wrar^fera: ^: n 
•• •• •• •• 

?T3T *^HT fen: ^fta*£ fe^TT^ I 
* H^J TTTTTg^^ ?*H^ ^fHrft ^fe II 

Hgf^F — — — - — ftRrerararfiHrrT i 



giw urgrro h fair H^noi - _ - _ 
arc <*rfa^ fai^f ^ ©m ^rtf^t^ n 



ft ^f*r smgro srfangEre^moTci i* 

TOTO HBT ^ift3n UWflil H^ I W^> I 
( 5RI Igfctcfil I ) 

„ ,, otetcct^ i 

„ , 5 flVRTOmg I 



5> 


>5 


** 


^ 


>5 


>J 



„ „ st^to^ i 

U<sl*JUd<sl+l I 

33 » ^ T 

* 



33 » 

3> „ WM6« n 



» 33 

» 33 

33 33 

33 33 



*3 



,3 ^g^ft^rTTO^r^j i 

33 » ftarnnrenj i 

33 33 3Tmfafg*H^ TC*T3£ | 

5 , „ nd^^iiHUd^rcj i 

,3 » wgTwrenwrowj i taw mmtn i 

„ „ qftlltfUd*^ I 

„ 99 ^miTM^tlUdU^ | 



( m ) 



?fH o 


> ijIttut^ fw^H^tirafsEfTT^^r^ i 


9> 


3> 


JinSrsfanresiTr i 


>9 


J5 


^tfr^HTfrf€%TC5nj i 


^frf 


^zrf ort **nTT^3t*TqrEsrij | 


» 


99 


^rrennrcsrcj i 


)> 


>y 


Jj^t^swrasr^j i 


i> 


» 


TOanf? ? ^ffussr*! i 


*» 


>> 


£<ftafarcn**3*T<FJ 1 


V 


55 


3ft^TO^T?J 1 


>* 


» 


farens^TCSw i 


*> 


>> 


TOTOTCSriT 1 

N 


J) 


?J 





(\ ^1 R l) WraT*; . 12 X 3 inches. Folia, 53. Linos, 7 on a pngo. 
Extent, 1,159 clokas. Character, Newaii, Date, (?). Appearance, 
fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^ ** : ^f fsrwir i 

• • • • • • « a 



< ^ ) 

End. H^gri^5T3?rgw $tmn %m% grf%<£ i 

war ^r«raf fe fwmt m^ *faw n 
Colophon. ^fa *Jcrert ^m: ire^n i QTOoft^T wtih^ i 



inclies. Folia, 259. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 5,565 (jlokas. Character, 
Newari. Date, Newar Era, 848. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. 
Generally correct. 

Beginning 1 . ^ •ran ^TUnaHH? i ^wt^hwt <to: i 

End . Hnrfwrfrfsf W u«j* gvfr + far^f*^: i 

xrft^T f^6 "■ — "- — — **i*nrnti*i ii wfa i 

^oipjTQ^PWC HUlftyTUI*lftrr*[ II 

Colophon, ifa ^3Rte^TiT$Ti%OTfefarfOTfoiOT3^ 

*f%% ii^ri(s(ii^ inqf«[Trfsri wg*i iqgjl a: totr* ii tori 



( ^8 ) 

( \*A° I ) ^'ffrCTTJwt^I • By 5TOWTO. 8x3 inches. Folia, 14. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 112 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose. Correct. 

Beginning 1 . ^tn*wnj to: i 

^gfhJd»dw i 3WdT^i$Tf%rf irfanTniqnsi — — — «raftr- 
End* ( *ra *5rfajH*i i ) 



( * ) W. I ) 'raiTW^^^^ ( I§figcnTl?J ) • 16x7 inches. 
Folia, 168. Lines, 11 on a page. Extent, 4,775 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, new. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. TStaroram w i 



< m ) 

End. *srfeH*[ i 

^fno *JnHisi«*ifcnujaii«H3JRT*TR^i i 

f9 HT^rfWTnftraTTt fWR^i I 
29 



( *M > 

^fg^fe WcJ;&^*l iftl^TTJ I 

^f h 3nfe$$ «^rtt4 1141^141 1 
„ *iT^r* i 



( ^*> ) 

3JUTUJlJ4g£<?|¥[ I 

lTa?HjQ<*fa^Mf tt\ki i 



( \<V I ) *rfVtf ^NH* % ^ocjfasr. 9x3 inches. Folia, 21. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 317 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Yerse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ w: ^ftirasmr i 'sP^t xreswi^ to: i 
End. w^jwifaniinftHgfafiro^ wrarsj i 



( K\* ) 

Colophon, ifa ^fScrWt^rftiiftRf ^TOffwifwiaft^ xr^^n^Twr^- 
^rfn ii 

giUfiu i s^fai? i 

^fno u^if^^fHu^^r^ i 

f^fniraprai **rafc[ i ^fr^ i ( roo ^i^t: i ) 

wfno ^§«i T*fl fcK fa d* ^RTwf if f^dd u-^ rTnnnwu«n<«j g » 

^ri (^ srtar. 1 ) 



( \8£/= 1 ) TrNr^fhn^^T ♦ 9x3 inches. Folia, 34. Lines, 8 
on a page. Extent, 697 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^ 5 ^ : farasrfcRvn^ i 

wgroTgfgfjnjTF ftrsrwf^if srainreq ii 
& ffts^ t tramA ^rfrr i vorrin anwra: v$>*rcw mm- 

End. ^Nhnrr mm *3t*toy«t i 

*rfecf ^^s^*^mnn Hifl^a n (?) 
Colophon. ^fn tfi^rehjiHs^cKr mmn i 



( nc ) 

( W I ) ^atf^nr^T^^ . By ^facTRlFP . 10 X 4 inches. Folia, 
10. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 140 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Saka Era, 1681. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ffan&smr to: i 

fro*!* aftaar% ^'^ i 

fsr^ntnTTgt ?*nrs«n?3ft trareraW ^rfgr^grawr. 11 ^nfr 1 
End, + + *rafaft ^rg^rgr *n*n + + hmi*i<?i fggg? 1 

^al"d<A*flsrdu<ijgTiii ift^T + + ^fa&yJJ^TM 11 
wfn ^Rc^jafluTHgi^^yii^wfi: 
smt: mfeflHunnnwH i iO ^mw 1 

WINstf H^T3J 5RJg ^ndHld^Ufffrg II 

Colophon, ^fa ^^rf^rf^HTg^^ferf^f rcrHf^nrq 1 



( \\ w I ) ^ftdWiWWT ^t^T . By sffafa . 10x3 inches. 
Folia, 251 (leaves 100 to 144 and 229 to 248 are missing). Lines, 7 on a 
page. Extent, 4,392 clokas. Character, Newarl. Date, (?). Appearance, 
tolerable. Prose. Incorrect. 



( ** 



) 



Beginning. ^ ** x ^r^fi^n^ ■ 

fcjI^HTOTclcpll *ra % *fifil5ftsftT I 

End. JJH^rennvfTOfefirfSTcr ^fn tg^H^T - - far*! wra 

Hg: ^ + + + + ^H^TOSTfrT: *t*T^T^TTOT I 

ddjilxlildilMI — — — — — — — — — — — 

5R"gW II 

Colophon, ^r ^hrfH^feT^rTTin wgldi<xUd4JMi*n*T#taTqt fg^nor 

^irfH^TlT^TJff fgaifHHR^SHTni: II ^fWJ^J H«T^raTT II 

*m i i i 
sffno f?rf*m3»nn*[ i * i 
5 , ^inrarc^ i 5 i 
„ tftagqrctQii i 8 i 

„ 3W5U*KTO3R[ | h i 

nff*{ i <u i 



( <m ) 



( ^ I ) *^Tmffa^TT^[TW[ . (?) 10 x 3 inches. Folia, 5. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 111 clokas. Character, Bengali. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^ «nr: isffarafsna to: i 
* * 

faerrfa uftQtft %tot wrtt g: II (?) 

vares^ q«ulmq ipnwmc ftrejprq I 

srat *rerof 5ot slf gur«T ft? w*[ i 

Hcre«r uniQsipt *tft err hj^hshuh: a vvnfe i 

End, j widjqwfa Jna^Bp^t fbrcrcifci (i 
vtt refW *naret ii (?) 



( m > 

snifa ^trfflr •n^j q^usH trite: n 
Colophon, ^fn ^wwrm^xiWR'T^n^' grfsrer^rcf *rm wwngjj ii 

hht ^^ng 1 1 SI'S *% ^fg^r^TO^^rTO" n 



( \«^ | ) ^^TT^J (15%^) . By ^T^TTO . 8 x 3| inches. 
Folia, 64 ( leaves 1-19, 24-29, and 39-99 are missing). Lines, 8 on a page. 
Extent, 1,216 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, 
fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^jnroNr utotottoi i 

fT*3J5§ ^ftnw mcrtiir ^^t von: ii 

to^rt ^r^ httot ia mum* n innfr i 

End. 5fa $fo tf^GiiH Trerrowrot 

faftsM^dcwisTi arfinnt fawsfsn i 

^itfTO^ frirfargTW5rg^r^f&: i 
^fefirat faswfr ugafir <mr: n 



< «* ) 

Colophon, sfa *t*TgOT *TwnFiar ^^t^I^tttu^ yam: *& 11 



(^Ki ^faw^^t- By 3SWT. 8x3 inches. Folia, 99. Lines, 
6 on a page. Extent, 891 clokas. Character, New a ri. Date, Ne war Era, 
846. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. s$> *mt wra& omagra i 

•nrerar fN"%^nr f^^srm f^jTf? i 

WnTHj^TCUTg ^[f^mf9Icllr«% II 
i?f^?!FT c?tS]%3*T anf^RT fi?H$rT% I 

fi{w j«i * i in r i« wftm *fftra^ 11 
wr igniuvim i ^n1r i 
End. m^iara^TT i 

anftf -%m <z *J]H ^? wwt irstsrfc* n 
9tnm nam inn ftrajjT 

30 



( <^8 ) 
Colophon. ^^T^nzT^RTjftT^H^f^rnfflargrmJrf^fdfm xftw§[ft wnrr i 



( V^ I ) ^ftTOTOT • By TOTfafe*: ♦ 8x3 inches. Folia, 34 
(leaves I to 4 are missing). Lines, 8 on a page. Extent, 544 clokas. 
Character. Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally 

correct- 
Beginning. ( * - 8 trarfin 5r Hfcr i sra: ir^nnrsra TTTTOrarrar fafarH^ i ) 

*3ra$i* *f*fft$*j ^^if^^r 



^fn ^qiwi^iuwiTfKTurnft fi^Star: 11 mnfr » 
End. ^^ w<?<rfliufir §*r ^ 



Colophon, wfn iffinir^TOT ^r^rra^ncnwm: u^i?sn i 

( *!IH: xnf ?5TferHJ ) ! 

^cnraT4#arnifiT^TfHt qtinmrat *fffirofarwT?i: i * i (?) 
wfff *ftranmii qtorrernp i 8 i 
^fno fafirannrnj: i * i 
„ a^utiiremrt i s i 

„ ^f*jfaf*TUHn*: i = i 

„ sr^raswj | <° i 

99 ^TRd^mianqr: I q o | 



>9 



99 



ifemtaraiTO: I <U i 






{\\\* sfoKTC : - By ^TUTfT. 10 x3J inches. Folia, 8-129. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 3,193 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect, 

Beginning. ( t - » trsnftr * ^fcr i vBtigmraw HTWfgrstf ftrfarH^ i ) 

fflfera^aftH H3JF*7 *%%?*! n (?) 

unffr — - wf ^rcj ii Yflnf? i 
End. jfsi^n^^Tlci^rT^TftfflH^wI^jHr^ i 

SidfH OTgHTHRf f^T3H% fsTWfijrTT II 

( ^THt ^rfi^H: I ) 

gfiror i a©$ to, *fa Tnn§*f& iftanir^ #t+ + +1%f^T 1 



( *M ) 

U m I ) ^fa^fWTOsnCW ( SWJRWhfi! . ) 8x3 inches. 
Folia, 92. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 625 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 811. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^ w* 'fitetfasw i 

33jt *n«it srerai f^iRTTTftrrra^crrat hum 

^spam?* faratsxr H^^iftrgwit ^*^t an tfttjj ii 

*& nft^cft *™ : * T 3 *®T ^^ W?T II 
g^I^CT na^lfa *W*Hd Tw T$7H9{ I 

wifwrf ?sr?ftr ^3* hyibri ii Ymfr i 
End. «nrt + + ^ra iftffrfWawrerani i 

1ft Tl5^ UT31 MrhAl <ftu -41^*0 r«i(t4 8i: | 

* i&si'gwnjftfH twef ^T^Sjreft^ ii 
Colophon, *fa a^wrt ^rorf^si ------.-__-. 

— — - *ftftl^f^r*ref3 ^HT§ I TOTR I 



(V*^0 T^^tTO*. By ft*l^9. 10x3 inches. Folia, 56. 
Lines, 8 on a page. Extent, 1,120 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
Saka Era, 1612. Appearance, fresh. Yerse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ># ^ftoft *Tv%uftftTiiR*if%*ii'*qi n 

^f^T^^^if^ uirfvOTftre ireisrynTTftr i 

TnfarTT^HhMFH^diHi^nniff^iiHfT^iir: i 



( ^*> ) 

a*nrf|p iftwi wten w^nf sr ftror^ i 
rrsrnft nmfirei**}; i 

End. ftrRniT^ cutflm^ fk^xi trfroihrrft ■ 

*tf%*sii ^%wm^ ^rifr ft^ trot ii 
fafanM^ri {tyg*i 5S^ **rc$<£ ii 

Colophon, wftr HfiTtffcaf$cHd**frt' STrgRifVfgfT*: trir^ww ipa: i 

^TH«TnJH«f*?5THc«ig'cfl^rcH4D^95T I 

srgr^wT'arftraTil ^j*tot$ ^c qmn$ i 

WTtg WTOUffP Wife VaTOan*H^[ II 
HUTf 2 HW f^ftTcRJ II ^JW^ II 

f^rra: i vfao nfanraiwnj i * 1 stwt niy«nn{ i * 1 ift^r- 
fararnr: i 5 1 vgeiAfeMTT: i 8 1 ^reanfaifafir: 1 u 1 irew- 
R^nswj 1 3 i ww^hnfin^'Jwiftiifisr^F*. 1 gm^pnrarc- 
109^ I 9 I ^fgFeMK: l fegr^fij^n: I fi?*nrarcTf?fg^rc: 1 
witraftrere 1 qngrfaif^farerc 1 VRrarfT#4rg: 1 vrrf?- 
finnr* i ffcgifrnwnsRj » $H*jMifefarfat 1 



( *<■ 



) 



( \ Mft I ) *<sPT^T3m*;*J . 6 x 2\ inches. Folia, 71. Lines, 6 on 
a page. Extent, 852 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, Newar Era, 740. 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. n#» ** : fsrarTfsvft ijwj: i 

fW*nra3rnft STOTfi? - - - ^ i 
*^g *arrar i 

*ffir3rarTO I 

N3 

^^t^ *arre i 

End. iftu^W sraifcf ^^f^c^fgtrg n 

Colophon, wfif ^5^prrwv^W9Hi^ T^nf?nn$ ^ottto xrc*n n 

^fn° f^Tssrfsra? i * i 



( <^< ) 



*ftro 


^TC^f*^ 1 ^ I 


99 


srafafira? 1 8 I 


» 


5T1744 ^d Qd Tfty^T^ 1 V 1 


>5 


^arcftgrcf^ft i 5 i 


91 
99 


^aw^Tfirart i « i 


91 


*ftjnr^n?nN!lVfa?!r$ i ^ i 


55 


Tifar^^feTit i %o i 


99 


T^rTpTOrd i ** i 



( ^ ) W*= 1 ) **^^" : • By *ftfa^Wracj[ • 10x4 inches. Folia, 
41. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 574 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). 
Appearance, new. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. ^tirfiwni to: » nTliJwt *nr: i 

^g?$ h ^ Jife^n ^wn mwfivit *rtot ii (?) 
h srafn ^ft^m^T^RTf fg^iHirat^rsgtTgrw:: n (?) 

^jrotfwfifawiuiiuiriTijaf ftremiTWij i 



II 

firari H^g Tcit4<4l *nft*WgwtoiR£ n 
iwnfTOTCTfip£t ^jfw u(d«K^rH4i^r: mm^ i 

^STTOT^ITO fe^TTHan: Wit* II janf* | 



( ^8° ) 
End. *af raHfagt g:?§5rcrafgtTt ipraT«j \ 

?Trrr ^wT-nh^ sqjt ft% a^jpjtfsrftar i 

Colophon, wfa ^^fd^4uidd^i<*FcHf^ wif^? ^fanwfararrfiwn* 

inwrot^^rft xx^nfoi ufr **mi\n n (?) 
faw*n I ^fno mm: ms^r: i 

„ ^rosnftnurc: i 8 » 

„ t^h ? 5mr i <= » 

„ wlmwcsunHH ?rm i * o i 

„ sftarfrd^HlftjcftilO 5TW I * % | 

„ ^T^snftraro i *^ » 

„ H^d^iafltotrVlWI*: I *8 I 

„ fafg*d**Mfefaftr» i *^ i 



< *»* ) 



raWRTOfarai I (?) 

WHcsrfaPTT i 



(\8^|) OTTOTOT or ^TJra^TOOT . By W*T. 10x4 inches. 
Folia, 14. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 233 cjlokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Correct. 

Beginning. *sfhnr%arm «w i 

yum u*cft vm *4tt fsra? ftiar^ i 

n% ifW nraNraT «^r mfH iron* i 
5H^ *€ hw ^ 5ttt bMh Afaq I 

*T^3?Ti[ fit TJ55[ WH1* «5f?V: II ?Tq7f? I 

End. wnrffciilr i 

ott^? wsrags wit: ^firanf 
fe^nsm wnrafQir ^nro 8 !^ mnq 1 

TOW g^TOt^RI yipj 9i)U?f«$- 
31 



Colophon, f fa ^{nrorarnri TTiRTftTWT^^^^ro^slwwsraTiH *m- 
im ii ^frtTg ^fta^ i w^rrg w^t: ii 

fsTOrarq I 



( ^ ) V* ' ) ^T^W^*** • By VR^fflW^raWT . 12x4 inches. 
Folia, 78. Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 1,213 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^irifisini sw i *fNrc^<*j w. i 

raavRY ff srfi^ wura: i 

^P&rTt gf*rginotrf*G5$: II * I 
*SsP"5P5TOTg JpTKrareTTTOTg: II ^ I 

Heft fgfRf^TT^frs^ftn^r^TTTW^r: I 

^^Tra^JT^OT^^TTgtlfcP II 8 I 

sjnsntnsrTsnR^T^ HTftroHW ^^d sprang 



( *M ) 

H9?T3; ^fnareTff^fTftsr f%f?*fr «rra *aw g^r: 

^ftn^lftw$% ^T^ftTftlTHt |p5^gT^TT5ft 

^u^: faiar4§3 f ^nprTJ sft^ft: iif%iTOw *m: i 
H^nwsrt wariTTn^i ya^ln iTTtrarHsft ^fira^ n a * i 

$$ ift ^ran 5ng^?fH^i5r qRTfareraTt mmfe 11 <u i 

OTTOlfc' Y: ITO*ft f% TT5TT T3TTHT g^T|T ^fk USf? : IM * I 

^i?T^^^?^fa^wHifa »r^ ire?^T?gTfmn? *q?«ig I H* 
End. w n* ^wfrfaf f%*ra n4iimH9 i 



( *88 ) 

h grig ^ftfW^J^": ^I^T^ *fircfora: M 
Colophon, ffa ^iWTTfRi%*5j r<a ditrarnrfa < P* 9 u^h*^^ xj^arnr- 

Uigf l\J-\ g^frf im# HT1T^OTf5T ^TW 

sfn Hftfi i rui^Mdi^wft n qnfcigtfattamr 

fare* I sfa ^iTHremsro^featfTOTSf ?T TT^r^q^ ftaunftaTJ 
mm: Tnigr: i 

9 |C| 

„ %* I 



(l) V l) TI3lf?raTreTC: • By Vfc-HSJ^ft . 12x4 inches. Folia, 
30. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 360 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, 
(?). Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 



( \9% ) 
Beginning. sfhn&OTtr *m: i ^^msnurt *m: i 

STTHirHai«t(«f]ei«Dcti«i^^rT^f 

*¥fj *$R*rf ^rawt- fsmm i 
*ro (?) f^ff 5gqfsreror*ft|niiTn 

#irn5r^^rTRff*chipTfii**jf 

sfa^^ iwt^ tf$n*dd*iafl Tck9 ^itotj: n 

wwB^Af^ftwfa srnw ^Sqri^ ii sanf? i 
End. wngSsn sssfc wttaftgro i 

U^t^ *WHvaiPWHW *WWWtt l 
H^TT mrnfTOTnOT ^5TT3§sfir5^}dL I* 
?f?TH: itftUcUltaKHIU^ciT *it ^[IVlS^Hfll- 

tfgmi ^nra^vNfiv^ot ifft ftrcnw: fir n 
Colophon wfft ^h* gftf 3^$*^^^^^^^ W^" 11 ^^ 



( ^m > 

f^nr* I ifn o HT^m^ftrctngt *m muff far*rre: i 
., mradniipft *m i%^q> from: i 



U 8 V s ! ) ^T^-RT^TT^SRW . By 3£f?JH ♦ 12x4 inches. Folia, 43. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 968 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, decaying. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. # wtft *n§^Tnr i 

*tfts^[ ^o^^^Y f^nftrer: sjvf hut i 

farf *t#*T § tt^tt *ntf **f + + + + + i 

TTOlf^ST *1T ITgTTOn gftT^f + HHT4KI4J II 
** 3* + + + + + ^^^Hl^ I 

f^R ?pr HtnUfir ^<q«iinn ^nfrj^r^ ^r^ i 
ifa[TOt *fH3ftaiHra^*T: snwfiar nig «r: n (?) 



•nrwMiJflJJdtiiir #i«^^H^rt^r ^Rtgrera*reran«T*r- 



End. 



( ^8*> ) 

( ^rfuddy, i ) 



( \1« I ) ^RTC^t . By ^TOrewfiRPST • 10 x 3 inches. Folia, 16. 
Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 240 clokas. Character. Nagara. Date, Saka 
Era, 1714. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^jrirarnr w: i 

#taE*IV ^T§T*3T l^^$g?Tg: S?T 

^raT^t trfronrara fir i^n^i j #fttf 

writ anf^TJ HrTTTW^f ftarnrr wfir | ysrrfr n 
End. a*jw*J3*t v^tf* fa^vzii g Wwrrwr ^sratfa^ n 

vitem ipircViw ^fa qw nftfirvq i 

g$ rfW^nffRffrlftT *nnd Idling ii (?) 
Colophon, ^fa ^ij^THaTwftrejfotf^n ^<ra^ qmnuurrcs. v?tm$i 
io<i8 ^fte**^ * c «£ mom ffi" t^ star trcreigtirrcmr- 






(£3 l) ^facH^xtf^T . By ^fWT^TTO. 8x4 inches. Folia, 
140. Lines, 10 on a page. Extent, 4,725 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^*t*&wto to: i 

^rftTcTTm: W7TOT: H^^"S^5T^f^lT^ II ^T(8Tt1V I 

End. wfar*ro*i% i 

* dd L^ ^r ^ d i^ fH stto: ii 

i ajrsTT far^TTJ i 

Colophon, ifa ^tHp§^T^^^T^f^f%rfnTt ^fam^rgrf«5*FTe?t ^faftre- 
^TftrsinftfiT^QTffiTglTijqf ;rm wqfisfa: nmw tow i 

^5n*f*5P*T TOTtfT I $TO^[ » 

f^^^j i ifrfo nmfc&fitf <y fa Unfa grot ir«nTsr: i 
„ fnfipi^^Tirftrftr: i * i 



( ^8C ) 



Sfac 


i ^TT^^nfgftnmt^iJ i u i 


55 


gsmrrcargatasR: i $ i 


*5 


^5nj%in?roftffT5rgtKi^j i q i 


55 


nTgvraranftiiPir: 1 c 1 


99 


xnsrfafwH^^THn vtmi \ <* i 


V 


10 | 


5> 


** » 


55 


tftearomiraftw » «u i 


55 


^^W%^^ ra ^ : ! ** ! 


Jf 


gafaCTUVtaWC 118 1 


55 


w^re^POTsiretosiP i «u i 


5> 


ll^rf^ninfeinPftWr. 1 13 1 


>5 


m^T^T?H!T3fanff: 1 19 1 


55 


WW^^T|f?tlT^T^^trH^^Tngt^^f: HC| 


55 


<U 1 


55 


*0 | 


55 


** 1 


55 


** 1 


55 


** ■ 


55 


**rcrraraftraF: 1 *8 1 


55 


^ft?1%^'5rTftl«RTfTf5T^irarl>7^J I ** I 



WW) *TWSOT?NrT . By TOW^TOft . 12x4 inches. 
Folia, 13. Lines 20 on a page. Extent, 780 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, decaying. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ># ^ft*r6tonr w. \ ^frTftrang^i} to: i 
32 



( *v ) 

End. snreg ^t^sn^r^rift *ra*f TanfVam^ro irarapar wrer- 

Colophon, wfa ^s^-TOn£*^siT^^^-^*^is*m^^ 



(W^i) fawftfiwifrcft:. 11x4 inches. Folia, 45. Lines, 
9 on a page. Extent, 959 9lokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (P). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. shirasmi to: i 



End. sn^refigrr^T^ar jjjtrt fg^wfWraT i 

f^sWOT^TO^n^ i£*ifr ffifr ii (?) 

OT^nsfoi w^TT^t^rt i f fir ^HiwiicTrigiT igronztf: 

w«?t^!5W^th^ ^5<&5T ^fara^rn art faa^nTW **n- 

Colophon. ifH ^^^TT^^fq^fa^q^lyTT^TT^TXqfaT fa d fc l ^ fgT ? !- 



(*)<»j) *W*PTtoP (^W^W). By OwfifW. 21x5 

inches. Folia, 363. Lines, 10 on a page. Extent, 10,890 clokas. 

Character, Nagara. Date, Samvat 1876. Appearance, fresh. Verse. 
Generally correct. 

Beginning, ^irfrarro to? i ^ugTa^njij^^ 4 ^ «ra: i 
TreraTr^d<?lH3T^^ 

fsrer if: f^HT^ tgmiT W ll 

•rt«nf«ninTenuwd^rH«fr CT&igrcrt i^fn? 



qfamrr gfroro romirrct ftrctno^ \ 



mfTdcii*^^^ mrafirewranq ii e i 
fror ^ ***rmi *^fTKwa*rT3raH » 
ihnfire TOfwrRmfii «rw wtot% II c i 

*^?¥*^1 J l tfU Vli: TOW f^ iR^TTfwin II * o l 

faj^T^ faftrera firswrfafitfvni II 11 I 
*n*T uwro w*rt faf^f^ SffiRTTtffr II « I 

f <MWt g HT^nf^r^ra ere ^tf^ra: n n i 

He* €§ ftrtw W^(?) Hl^ fifa^lTHT II 18 I 

mfeuui fafarawifa w»?^5T uummr n ** i 
gf^feroxroTwm traf TOgireraT I 
qflfawmt ottortwt^ Iroimrer II 1 $ I 

fcari)?l*ri$l4<4JI $fl^n^Tfi*wrfTO: I 
rRn^WT HfipfafTOlft fefeUTJ g^TJ II 19 I 

ftarafv ^ w^t^fT^^nraif crprcn i 

*rt$*fi ftrfi(TOS*ft rTT^NN* cm: g^mj II 1* I 

ai^lTW?r^f i^sft f^rgifrr *ra*n*[ i 

iftrt qraraira H^farnrt ftrftrar ftun: u t< i 



End. <*s ^nSrti^Trw Ti^t to^^t ^ i 

n*ftsfer«l Tn& a\$t ^v zn^mmw. n 
Colophon. wfcT ^u<iftiraref ^g^ uto mnvm \ *fa ^ ^^h^h - 

?fn ^arai fcw*^ totf^ n wraqff i *«tc t«M i 



(\B\*l) *WTOpfrP. By OT. 13x3 inches. Folia, 14. 
Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 210 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?), 
Appearance, tolerable. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *** t*r i 

*T* TO?* SR^ WlfSPff: *lf fw*U3 ! 

End. W^ *^ : 3* : *^ : n7TirerT: *S^ ■ 

frqtnqf hit ^s visw aunt fwg: n (?) 

Colophon, iftf wwwnftvjww touis ii 



< *M ) 



14x4 iuches, Folia, 133. Lines, 10 on a page. Extent, 4,156 clokas. 
Character, Newari. Date, Newar Era, 829. Appearance, fresh. Prose. 
Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^ *nsrernr w* i 

tfatf^ftww 1**1111x1 111*11 i 

xTOTWIT WISH** tTO faq|[llftff: II 

— — — *w?*t§3tt; fprrfk WtiKviifonit ^y. i 
tn *m *ra*i*Tf*i]j snurg *re%«T ^snspt mm n 

q: Ste^Tft^W^tT 1 !?!^^ ______ | 

_____ *fffgr-r s^^rf^nrefifTts^ n 

cp5jTOU<£|Tsj^UM^yi|t*liSj 

fa4<ifa fsnnire^qlH5Tm&^ 11 sanfc i 
End. ^^ ^P^^^^Nrfgr^arafT 

tfsfawf *JJ * fr il 






^for. 



( \^° • I ) gsftftr^T . By ^PHT ♦ 10x4 inches. Folia, 10. 
Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 180 elokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Incorrect. 



Beginning. 



End. 



Colophon. 



*5?taHT ^A^T* faWt ■§**% *HT*[ II 

far?«n^ ii tanfc i 

. , T?i^ faro* + + + ^<2|ci^ fo^Hfa; n 
^fn ifm^TT 'su^ftniwT wasif^snfefeftj: tow ii gw?^ 

HojqN l H iq II 



( * ) ^«. I ) ^WhroPPriJ ♦ 16 x 6 J inches. Folia, 263, (leaves 
5 to 13 are missing). Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 6,426 elokas. 
Character, Nagara. Date, Samvat 1893. Appearance, fresh. Verse. In- 
correct. 

Beginning. <1jot4iiot9 to: i 






H'Sref ^T^ $g HWT^faW^ II 

«Fmfdr*n%*fHTTTOnr 

rf W^ t^ft HftnTOT *T?TT<£ II 
fsr^TR^ TJX Wrf fa^R^f ftTCraq*[ I 



( *«,* ) 



*g ^5H ^JH WW UlR^Tf %WD$ I 
a<* h^- qrafirarf* ^1^ ifrftrcf : II 

fimncwri firRnir^ ■ 

t£W =* * $ ^TTcf VClfcl ITT *f II 

sff^sraT^ smr wg arti * wwi* 1 
iftfire 5 oti $3 iftaffcr imtrrrs 11 

• • • • 
sac* *£ wnmfir stt^ot ftratf *tot 1 
«mrHr ust$«! vmr^ ra aijw 11 cmf? 1 
End. H^rcftf? 3fi w**? iftrFgrg; 1 



IJTSRTtl HSf3[mro **& WT«5H UT? II 

fontf wssf f^r entrant ntjsrft^ 1 



33 



( *** ) 

Colophon, sfa ^taatrr* ^s^rcncrcrfdr ^^r^ftTifef5nfr& «ftfn#t- 
f^W> I ... ^srHtrTC^NTOT^ into: tc*p ttoj&j I 

„ ^'Jfar^R jftfsnffllt TOiei 
Ft^^T?Tfffa ttlft 5fT«T I q 8 I 

^ra^TT^SRfTO^ stop? i *<* i 

^T^rofTO^ «rm i ** i 
^m i (?) ** i 






»5 



( **< ) 

(\8R«L t) ^^R^f W : . By ^M| . 10x5 inches. 
Folia, 87. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 1,810 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 808. Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. v#» *nr. '3?taarT5?l3j^u'«nq; i 

*T % ^^TO?T^t U^g WT^TT 'STfe^T 3TOJJT II 

End. wrwiftrjfr #$ wsttot ^a *fte*: 1 

Colophon, ffa ^^^*r^Ttffl*$f§ vftqraTO^ IwirajnurT $5- 



^g^ coc Tigris af? ** * SJWflSJ " 



( **• ) 

( * ) W I ) ^^fa^ 5 *? • 14 x 4 inches. Folia, 215. Lines, 8 on a 
page. Extent, 5,805 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, 
fre?h. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. >$> vgnfisr^TOT *w i 

znjfait mmfif z^vftsfv *wi 

ftp£ '^nawfwwwftnr ^r^nf^pw grew 

*?^f Hwrenmwfl' ^n?5 a: wrt » ( ? ) 
( H Ht vnrr i ) 

WM ^ rT^W? IKHTir ^frsfa 
( flrft W1*T I ) 

• • » • 

fared qtfimrirar fe^wtfir^T ii 






I frffrfr|*ifefr>»2Elftft mj^J^(|t^ 
II JtHSHftn lH&lfftll*y&fc. illfci&l&lil 

ii kfi^abURin&itt ^h jfegr^n && 
i :Jimifcttjte ikiHiy^ElsJ. BUife&JJfcE 

l :!&&£& :lilM^kiaiA^S&iiaii£ 

II & i^lifei±U£fc :ifclSt& %UM^ fi^iJ^SfeiaA 

I k*H :HH ||tU> Ji jjkin ^&±ife & £*& 

II 2*&& &£&£ lfeH* JU*£ ^fiiB^kife 

I jfijy,Ufe^j£ iifeBt^lli && HUaSji 

II kui :H£ k±ifcli]& & ^fcJfc±* 4h£m 

I 4&&jk&& ^S^^ttia ^& lsy* 

II kiH :HH i^l&i2>ll ^fe)& 11LH & j^ittfe 
I k£H|£Jfe IStin :£& J^ ytiy & iajlrfejk 

ii kntn^kj^in^LH ifc&^s&aijtiMjfc 

II kfoJ*}*bfcJtys.lHfc &&& :&£tt :££ 
( ,2 )i kkgfc^is&tfiigft, &&nn^m^iis 



( ^ ) 

wRf vrotntsf^ warn <?f&n: mm 11 

( HHt W*T » ) ^<*nfe I 

End. 'hit wm S^ran^i ^rsr^RTrenn hot i 

( hht *rnrr i ) 
H^nr sf^ ^lufcidfaiH ^mj, i 

inqijfaf*liTVUMlTc|Td %jf ^W* II 
( HHt WXTT I ) 



Colophon, sfn *|fta^5*reT sw tow i 

*ft$*wr Hrgrr *?<^ fefg HgTij ttqi i 

rr^fnt g^TSff FTW |TT^ ^f%?ff^WfT: II 



(^)W l) *<#fa WBRP ♦ By «rn«ft(cl4w • 14x4 inches. Folia, 
192. Lines, 8 on a page. Extent, 5,384 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 751. Appearance, fresh. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ^timmtr toj i 

*^H¥nw«i*| §*& ^ftni *%«* sfttfinq u 



End. ^ffarwiT^ftferofopOT fiT§siumi<n j^tttbt i 






( \8<3<= I ) ^ftcraWBf*: . By smwftfMw. 10x5 inches. Folia, 
72. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 1,539 clokas. Character, Newaii, 
Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning, & ww^tw^nrarofiritf w- i 

HjiM4yi^^r 5 ?^" 9?fa5T : qrarafrgtir: 11 

TT5[$ttf : wraiii: K^ddL 5Rt*ni{|3n I 

asroift^T ^*cr*ft wwft wtoh^tt 11 

srcihrora H^Jragft 5fsr^wn 1 

HW|f ^fa ■wrogf&wfii (?) t^tot: n wnff 1 



( ^8 ) 
End. srenT^rfirfa srre^f^f 

^&§ fwnrm * an 3 *n^n 

*m. *sre[iwi *r*grf ^ q^- fan?m*rcftf?H^ *m 1 

arT^T^^Hmfg^^r sc£ *lf *t^ fefg^^*^i q^ n 

qxT *o5farra*RHWfl^ H^ ^H«ftra ^ftr farf^ I 
35SCRT K 5T wm SkTT qn: ftFg* U^qfta^T f H^ II 



* «rifrr * *ft$«r injqT^ fqftd?^ 11 
Colophon, ifif ^jptawnwjl^jjwif xrft^R 1 ^pri^j wsfai i 



(*KV*0 ^Wftft J t 12x5 inches. Folia, 12. Lines, 5 on 
a page. Extent, 65 clokas. Character, Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, 
fresh. Prose and verse. Correct. 

Beginning. "sftarftsinT *ra: i nv ssrrofeftp i 



End. * *nr #to*r *sr*r H^at 

Colophon, wfa ^TOrofefa; wtttp ii 



(^<l) ^mPEf^TS. By V&ft or PJffN • 6x3 inches. 
Folia, 22. Lines, 5 on a page. Extent, 220 clokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Saka Era, 1734. Appearance, fresh. Incorrect. 

Beginning, v$> ^fef ^ftarfiranir to: i isft^wjjn «w » 
*ta^gnr raw ^^rf (?) gnnfatr^ » 

insS^sjiHta fmvft gwff feftr: ii 

End. ^toh ^ht wm sTORm^T? otottt rfmiwit — - 

5? n ? 
Colophon. iffr ^^ whujju <*i if^-i?^ , TTTWTftRnr-'JhT — — — — |R?t 
^TOT^pgsnftrtffar: tout i $W[ i nhaiill ***g ^ftara*i 

H^t 1 *inpnp&T srTHTtaarni: i 

34 



„ jpnarw ?rm i « i 

„ JRjnfNTT 5TTO i = | 

fsPCt9?s?Tfarftr: I <U I 
ifH 198 1 

^is^Tf^ ( ? ) ^reir. i a^ i 

*fa \ *U \ ** \ ** \ 
^RT^?t ( ? ) gtraiT: I *8 I 



( we. i ) wrwfWtenwi . (^fecTTff^) By «fnwra?um4 • 

10x4 inches. Folia, 16. Lines, 8 on a page. Extent-, 288 clokas. 
Character, Nagara. Date, (?). Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. 
Generally correct. 



( ^$*> ) 

Beginning. ^ftarosmi «m: i 

fT5rTnnt ^W?frf W<e|l ^faicRRT^ H^TrTiJ I 
*1TWiRt ff HTljfa *tf** fOT^tf H: II 

End. (^ferTij i) 



(V*MO ^RBlfaw. 10x3 inches. ¥olia, 15. Lines, 8 on a 
page. Extent, 800 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). Appearance, 
fresh. Verse. Incorrect. 

Beginning. # sfarawrcr *ra: i » r»<ii«i<i<f iihty \m^ \ 
*oaimm wn wim cc^mf i r g wr? i 

sm^tera i ( ? ) 
**l ott ss fr raiij wfar$?t a*i«reg i ( ? ) 



( *** ) 

End. tnfaf ^^#^55 Tfaartf *$fi|* 1 

vr&itt sremaf xmnnsft vrt^ w*t 11 

*cf fafa 5T ^Trai wirew uirsrag 11 ( ? ) 
Colophon, sfa isftfrzi^frir itrc^TtcrftaTOnS *4<r<aui^ tftrafinircr 

*«raf ^^5 11 



55 


<Jff*TfSTOi3f 


if 


* 1 


5? 





55 


% 1 


» 


^^Tfarasr 


*i 


8 i 


U 


fW^TTftnR^T 


55 


u 1 


55 


3Rn*lfsnH*f 


5> 


1 1 


55 


g^fTTTftro^f 


>5 


e i 


» 


^fW^TTfWR^f 


55 


*= » 


*5 


ij^rrftiiRy 


>J 


S l 


» 


w^iTTTfinxR^r 


5> 


*o I 


*> 


f^TTfinw 


55 


1* I 


*5 


jflwfaw 


55 


<U l 



(\8^l) ^TOPntWt^ BySf^* 16x4 inches. Folia, 30. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 980 clokas. Character, Newari. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning, ># w ^u^Tfww^^ i 



TOW***!** 5T Wart?: I • . I SJ^TS!^ 

W%^fTfi^5r^?!r 5T ITCI^tfff Witt TO$f I H* ^TOTOli;- 

sttIh few jprra *fff tot hut $nt n 
Colophon, ^fa ^5J ^fwf*HNrt ^w^Hrfjpgit ^nff sreft 11 



End. 



(\**>R\) ^farapC3TWP. By faWF^TW. 10x5 inches. 
Folia, 389. Lines, 9 on a page. Extent, 8,752 9lokas. Character, Nagara. 
Date, Sainvat 1952. Appearance, fresh. Prose and verse. Generally 
correct. 

Beginning. ^ wt iniaw i 

WTroifn nn^pr h to arrnoT TO q n 

TO, msnwftfcSmi fwshsw ^fwf^ 11 

ufinrari «nw: xr^art ftn&R*rt u% n ( ? ) 
vrahw toWw mmft**wm i 
vqt gtgqrni $*ri Troratv rf^H: H 



Td*u«i ^fr^fcri fsr^fgfaru*! ictj fa: i 
limit nrftiH: iPter $ot feftafwm ^ n 
u^paftH + ifrtmncT^'^rftrwgp^ » ( ? ) 



( ^*>° ) 
End. ^Hrrof^fefti: i 

Colophon. ^fH-^tfe^JR^TT^T raiq«TlJ ftR^f^n I 
mmuu+1 i ^wq I 



©V 



(a**0 l F Hl!IWft. By Wf*. 1 X 3 inches. Folia, 42. 
Lines, 7 on a page. Extent, 955 clokas. Character, Bengali. Date, (?). 
Appearance, fresh. Verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning. ># fw^f^ i 

rflft ^ fag t rrf%r toto w* tftr ^t wire 
%W wsr aft ft? ^fe 5f ^xn4t * u?ft *i*ft i 



( *^ ) 

^T^T*tffa^Tfafaf^*^ms^Hg^rar*f^ 
wifrtrni 3jvr|;fT ?zm%§ ^Ftv^fgriirar^i 

wrqt&Tin *rg mv f%*s ?T$cTqt: ii wanfr » 
End. ^ *T3TTftwft *ffar: ^sgrfitsfo' fagsT** I 

^rif ^tf ^fto^* f^rf^rrf Hf^nr^ 1 
srTfwri wi^p^t fitfwrrr wrratsqren u 

HocT^faFTgTTTO ^f^r^ *TT ferffl: II 

Colophon. *fa w^ifzifzm ?m%TKmsft mam i 

wthwto vTQt ii 
fa**! i hhiw, w^r, ^ilgur, imftg^, ^srero^PF, ftnmm, gfg*, 

^imt-ipw, avrm, wfo^i, f*tre, HT^y, ^?, 3$ «r, 
*wc, *r^t, fwwiT, Tsrtftre, faiTO, c^ffa^, *ht?*t, 



( ^M ) 

up&*n^ft, gj^ns^t, tftfresr, V4j*ta, ^fnfwj. iraiw- 

( ^^ i ) f ^fgMT^^T^^g^fcf 3FT . By Vffm* .12x3 inches. 
Folia, 2G3. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent, 4,950 clokas. Character, Newari. 
Date, Newar Era, 795. Appearauce, fresh. Prose. Generally correct. 

Beginning. v# «nrew i 

v W ^fiwifraiftrd^rf sr^i?^ Sam 
■arrofcr irfn3«t t ^ 5*: rota ^rfaftm i 

srara^ftwffqt *£?&[ thjt tug a: n 

STfjpcT TsFto^nTOro SHSjt iTOTSmTrr # STOW II 

f 5^^ : > «wifr 11 
End. v to wftrf gvrft *: en snftiftH TOftf in *rfm 5?fept 

Ht irfef q^mr* uip^ (i 



( ^*>* ) 

Colophon. 5% ^^TKTar^HTwggftraTgi ^OTtHT*rfarcf%rrnrt **n- 
Tffa^j- 1 ^T?ff5r^iio|-rrg , t n %tn*r wrat 9^1 11 



(*H°£I) ^CTET3ft«IW^ (TOHT). Bj'.ftf^T. 10x4 inches. 
Folia, 11. Lines, 18 on a page. Extent, 742 clokas. Character, Na^ara. 
Date, (?). Appearance, old. Prose and verse. Generally correct. 

Beginning, rfffhg" iftftaFflOT^r rftd^Hg uftnrnr f^ > 

( **i ) far^rr^nr^%5T ^swtfcrfsbr fg?r i 

^T«TT?t faugNrnrnr few«iTO*nir tT^rm^rcfk i *ft^- 

ft?frT II WBTllT I 

End. f flirrftwfrSr gari nftnr vfcraraRfarfir . . arari 1 11 

^t^fi^n: l e. srftarTsrt nrftnrt jprrjjtf warfirfk i Tsftarcnusn* *m: 11 

<*9ii<£jm<£J f gri qintm ii 



35 



r 

7* (I if) im*j:*ihmM&;^&i&2te i ^fc 

a:* ••• ( I it ) l)fc%J£ll*£lfe I • * 

^ '" *•• -•• :*>fe£ll5*te I ?\ 

V&^ ••• •♦. ♦•« ••• ... !f]fcte.fefeijfe i ^ 

78^ •" ••• ••• $*]fc2lfek^&1& I G^ 

■=*8* «• il&ik&^kfekfcijte I $\ 

^8^ * ••• kife21bli^2£fe l>i\ 

78 (ll£):ftJkJli£!i^i^^fe^Bi^2ete I 8* 

>*>** — «•• ^ ••• (|gt)}tk^2tll I fe* 

fe* ( I .fit I ft I jfe ) llfe^k^ttte I fc\ 

«> ••• ( I £ ) ^ta2£4!fe*Mlfe \ \\ 
Cfc *&<* *W ( I k I 2 'a I £ I fc I a 

*?> <» <cT?i 'fcfe ':?* ISDk^lH'ik) :kjjfeltt!fe I • * 

n^ ( I Ife ) :*lftj&Ufcli&*gfe I 7 

"?> •'• ( I It ) :te&k}t&£jfe I a 

87 ••* «~ \* ( I k ) Ufe^a&klit&fe I g> 

>a '*<* (lk!2) k&jaikkmiiaklfe I > 

£ii ( I a ) sftifejfehikk^feyffejfe i >i 

\lk ( I £l ) kkl&£l£fe&kte I 8 

>8 •••(ik) :*ykj££Lkkife i fe 

V* ( i k ) kkikkjpfey-fete i * 

>t» ( I ** ) kklfekj^fe^kfe I \ 
4 & kJl&ikhMkk) iklkSkj I kjljlikh. ] kjiltlk 

I Jfe 



i xaa^i 



H I ^T^Tefsjffa: ( «R | ) ^<= 

^ i ^T^msT**;^ ( ¥ l ) ... *i£ 

^8 I ^T^T^ftT^ W 

%\ 

*H. I S^^t^T ( *fi I ) — <=* 

1< I *f<P??HT( JI I ) ... «• 

V 



^8 
81 



^nffrJTOT: (f l) 


^ 




^in*n&m»OTfar ( *§ i ) ... 


1<L 




OTn^f^f^: ( ^ | ) .., 


Hi 




^xrra^rrcfafa: ( ^ i ) 


& 




*mv (s i ) 


v>i* 




*n 






^r^T^f*renc;*ii*{ 


v 




^^T^rftWfTe^iT ( m 1 ) 


Q9 




^^^TO^mglcBJiJ ( 3T 1 ) 


^o, 88 




*FffKS?facTfraTW (f |) 


<9o 




^T^cqfcT. ( **l ) ... 


•\ 




m\ 






*RfoTmw\'gfamfw 


^ 




*fc&^*nfem ( it i ) 


8«L 




*$CWhPl(*l) 


«U» 




3F^0ff^T^T^s ( ^ 1 ) ... 


8£. 4.4 


^T^rq^CtfcT^ 


«•• 1M ••• ^WL 



Turrfir i *rei^it> i fas?TTi!t ft*rcwiHFif*r ^r I 



9\ 


««ri?!3T«fST«rT5ftra: ( * 1 ) 


*% 




88 1 


^fTsn^f^^rt: 


• • • • . • • • • 


U* 


»1 


Jjnf^JT«TJJ ( ?3 | ) 


** 




8< 


WUPJTOT (f I) 


^ 




8® 


irm^to^tfaifn*:: 


** 




8*= 


<*n35*r* ! (hi) 


«£ 




8*. 


*Tf&tf*rTTT?*r*T ( ¥ 1 ) 


<.V 




V 


*T*nsPWF[ ( ^ 1 ) 


«e 




i\ 


*TOTCTOfa^( W » ) ... 


«1 




W 


<* l^4^3^Tfc*reiT*?JT'W 


••• t • • •# • 


\i' 


H 


ifTfirarrgFrassrer *Tf%*T- 








^i(ei) 


«X 




18 1 


*T^lgi<nnuqciqp|* 


••• » • • ••• 


\i- 


11 


^fT^cT^JJ (^reTOTfain^ QcsntQ 


M\ 


*< 


aRTOfaOTf ( ^T^f^TT^f^: ) 


••• ••• ••• 


*<* 


i^a 


I ^T^TtWiT ( *T 1 ) 


t:o 




!« 


1 ^TOfaPEPITH ( ^ 1 * 1 W I ^ 1 )i, *, ±> V*i *\ 


*< 


It 


i *wranw ( *m ) 


<* 




<• 


*TOR*t ( *§ 1 ) 


«8 




tt 


i mftpRrefti: •.. 


\< 




<^ 


f^T^SIT^tst^T ( 3 1 ) ... 


1° - . 




<^ 


1 fa*icn^^t^reFff ( * ) 


U 




<• 


1 sftrPOTW&TCflT (<S 1 ) ... 


®1 




<* 


i ^fxrecrraiT ( ^t i ) 


^ ... 


<t« 


« 


I fFwwd^'(^r i*i*i) 


V," «JI, %• ... 


«.«,**■ 


<• 


I itf^mcftTne^ ( • i ) ••• 


>a 




C 8 


l gwnFswR** 


\^ 







•rrnifif i wi^ifa i faOTTOifa^wrcrffTfir^ri 


<*l 


gwais^ws 


... ... ••• \A^ 


Qe ] 


^TpST^TWT^T 5 fiim-gife^TOcT?T 




(^ri^i) ... 


\\, 48 


ni 


gwftWTOl^ ^t$ fsWlWr*! 


S|) <= 


©^ i 


^Tt%T^mra^5TT%^T(^ 


0\\ 


•\\ 


gwfawni^fafif: ( jb i ) 


1< 


«8 I 


SWfa^sieWT ( * » ) ••• 


««L 


®M 


iffFRIWf^WW ( *r 1 ) 


^8 


H\ 


l*TOWl(*l) ... 


^e 


©S | 


SifSra^cR: ( Z \ ) 


<■< 


«f^= | 


SigTSFT ( ^ 1 ) 


^ 


*>d 1 


*WT^hgMT ( W 


»< 


Co I 


^«gW*Wift ( *3 I ) 


\«- \.\ 


*\ 1 




) \« 


** 1 


*§?!H§T3F*i*| 


«£ 


^1 


WHWRRfaT ( *K 1 t* 1 ) 


R<, *< V*. 


*=8 1 


11 


VI 


*»J 


ai^^tapraTOW ( *§ 1 ) 


V s 


*<\ 


JHlWWn'FR ... ... 


• •• ••* ... \^^ 


^^ | 


ano*TOlfafa: ( ^ 1 ) 


n 


cc | 


*!T4M*rixM*T 


• •t »•• ... \%to 


*=£ 1 


tffcrotfa^ ( ^ 1 ) 


VC 


*• 1 


iftof^IHWleJ*?? ( *M ) 


w v* 


±\l 


iitcj^Tftpfnf ... ... 


\< 



TWlfiT I *wrfir I fawrat faTW* wtfa * I 

£^ I jftcmreiT ( JT I ) ... S>8 

*8 I gw'fliPjfnfafa: ( ^ i ) mj> 

£y. i gwfafinroRi ( e I ) ... «* 

£.< I JZlftrifer: ( cT I ) ... S4 

*.*> I ^tftfsreiT ( *T I ) ... *£ 

^ i w^n*n*r^5 ( i? i ) ... ^ 

££ I art^ransTCW ( ^ I ) ... <\ 

\°° I 3rNt?9i : ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• \<^l 

V^ I ^f^mfr^ ( ^ I ) ... V® 

VR I ^f^W^reWJ ( W I ) \^ 

V^ I W^TO* ... ... ... ... ... \fy 

\°s i ^t^^ih : ... ... ••• ••• ... \<^ 

v*j ^3^^^n<^ ... ♦.. ^<*= 

^•S | xU^Rpqflwfiui ... ... ... ••• \^£ 

V*= I ^^f^ffT9rT ( 1 I ) ... *=< 

\«d. I ^TOW^^n: ( tf | ) ... ^o 

W I ^l^ITOHW (*l %*!*!) v, <<i, ^, e». 

\\\ I fafanijTOci*! ... ... ... ... ... ^«« 

\\^ I ftfipVwreTW£*« s ... \^ 

\\* I ^fawftCTT ( * I ) ... V= 

an 



... ... t«. 





5fl 








srmifsr i Tn^if»n fJre«TT«tt fa*r*M^tinf*f * I 


u<» 


srej;«j*rTH*W ••• ... 


• • • • • • 


W 


w>l 


sra'T^ncsffTm ... 


\ 




U'l 


snn'S^fTefT ( ^r i ^ i ) 


O^, OS> 




Wl 


5TTcTfiWJSfa5IT^lT1»J 


# • • • • • 


t«c 


w 1 


snci««i«i^! ... ... 


• • • ••• 


\«i 


W I 


<*M*«U«T ( ^ 1 ) 


<=£ 




Wl 


^^awTTrsn^^T^j ( *n ) 


M 




Wi 


srfafa^siu^i 


• t • • • • 


\«t 


v>8 1 


^TTOTftlfT ( *3 1 ) 


<0£ 




\*» 1 


TSTtfsraftJj 


# • • • • • 


v=- 


\Mi 


TawysjJt ( *r i n I ) 


«{•, -as 


# 


\*s l 


saVfeiW^mC ^ i ) ... 


V 




\V*I 


wrtfa*n»i^«ro ( a i ) ... 


•^ 




\1«. 1 


21 


••• *•• 


V 8 * 



^« I E^TI^: ?^J 

HI 

\\^ I ?raN'Tjw<uii*f|*<jHi ( w i") ^» 

*^« I cTW*T* ( * I ) ... ««. 

\^SJ e»^WS|M**jl|(«U 5* I ) it, ^8 

V^< I eTCqakft^fS! ( * I V I « I ) ^\, 8¥, 8« 



•rroiftr I *rcwftr i ft emtt fim:*i<piTirif»m f 

\^s I cTnre^reffrat ( *n i ) ^ 

\y= l fa^?: ( ^ i ) «^, £o 

V^<s. i ftrenfcfsrahr: %*& 

\»» i fa5*Q^ftm<«sfH*t ( 13 I ) 18 

\8\ | fsigTNRVl ( *r i ) ... 48 

\8^ i f^m'nftofafa: (si) ^ 

\8^ I f^S^T^ra: ( JI I ) ... 18 

\ 8 8 I f^f^mHTf^^af 5R^fq: ( ^ I ) 9 8 

^8^1 WfTcTT^ftWJJ ( ^f I ) ... « 



\8« 
\8« 
\8d 

Ml 

VW 

\<* 



tsw^t ( sir i ) ... v= 

*iW4rTOfc!* ( ^ i n i * i ^ | ) ,^ $ Hy ^ 
i^^faf**: ( *n ) 
^fs^fafa-- ( ^ 1 3R I ) V*> ** 

^T^*tfr^T?r: ( ^ i ) ... ^ 

^TO^T: ( *3 I ) ... 8^= 

^H^rrareg^: ( ^ i ) 
^ram^T^ ( *n *3 i ) 

f^T^TOJ ( *f I ) 
Ct^Tfafa: ( ^ I ) 
<£JlH«f^JcW ... 

^^e^ftcs ( * i ) 

^ITOcnWT 5 ** (ill) 

^fTOT*TOT*l ( ^ I ) 
^rav* ( it i ) 



*=S> 



^4. 
\°1 



... ••• 






^^ k^ifek l W* 

* ^ \* — l)fe\J>|tofefc]fel^hlk I "?<A 

"?> ••• ( I a ) Jtefefcl^hlk I =»<A 

fe^ ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• *>teite»bu | e^ 

78 ••• ( I & ) :Jb4Jbll*l2iik I ><A 

*7*l J^fem&fefek iWi 

Ik 

» ( I fe ) ltlb21kttlMtift^k ! 8<A 

8^ <8* '*• ( I it I fe ) :£ hfilH I W* 

>* ••• ( I £ ) kktffc£l& I ^<A 

^7^ ••• ••• ••' ••• ••• :!l&l£il I VA 

V? ••• (Ik) l!fetejfii£& I o^ 

iV* ••• -Tftt teKblto ^ft j 7>^ 

^ kumkii^fia I a^ 



«1N» 



■R^ ••• ( I it ) ^feUttJk*J&li I 9V\ 

V* •" ( i a ) ( i \ftik 

fc» <\a. '** *8& '.» ('I ft I It 1'k '& I & '2 I & I * 

'■?> 'a> '8> '\> '*> 'a 'i 2 I fc I a *a i a i st i a 

'>"* «** 'e* 'fefe 'k\ «*» i * i st i 6t ) tatti*iift\hfe i *>* 

IkleJlJtUthlkifcfcJllelkay IJsjUfelfeJi I J»Jittli» 



9 





«nmf«r i 


tow if* i fawmt fwt*TOWTfa ^r i 


V=*i 


*nit*j%*ofei\m 


... 


• • • • • » • * 


VM 


\*9 1 


^nn^^jz^ ( *r i ) 


• e • 


Q^ 




V=*J 


qitiviuci+l 


• • • 


. • • • . . • • 


\*.i 


V*l 


SfT^faft^TT 


• * • 


... •>• tt 


\e* 


V 8 * 1 


^rcffara£?su^F[ ( ^r 


1) 


88 




\ c,c 


fKf^TSW^l ( «r I ) 


t . • 


^ 




V s *. 


fTOW^Kfaftf: ( * 1 


) 


^ 




VS. 


tWoT^ ( Jl 1 ) 


... 


<C 




VM 


fsTOTf^rfcra^ ( * mr i ) 


81i,S*> 


\\\ 


\«* 


i ^h?i( *i )... 


... 


«Q0 




W 


fininnafi * 


•♦♦ 


v«. 


\i.9 


fsrerrocwsff^cn 


« • • 


V 


\\* 


Wl 


fT^reT^H^Tcf^^T 


( • • 


W 




*£< 


i fSrwra^ffan^ ( ^ I ) 


• • • 


^8 




\&S 


| 4fcp|H03renr : ••• 


t • • 


• • • * • • • 


^•e 


\t« 


1 ^fcPIRS'Grc: ( 3" 1 ) 


... 


8< 




V**- 


i ^hropiwi ••• 


... 


• • • • •• 


V\ 


^0 


i ^ftNri^ftanre^ 


t t • 


• . . • • • t • 


^o^ 


vt» 


■frwiftSU ( ^ ) 


... 


^, ^« 




V* 


^i^pgw^f^: ( m ) 


... 


U 




*•*! 


sgwwram faron^^nOOG i ) ^ 




s^©8 


*!jm<stl*< : ( ^ 1 ) 


Mf 


^ U* 


R°^ 


^T^Tf^cTTfq^zfaT ( 


in 


) 8<= e*. 




*•< 


iT^cPWl 


... 


t 




S^oQ 


i q^pnfifar ( ^ I ) 


... 


<=1 




^OC 


I vwzw ( * 1 * 1 ) 
2 


Ml 


i, IV *i 





10 

^•s. i ire^srrarorai ( *r i ) ... \^ \\» 

^o I T<|ti^^^J ... ... ... • •• ... R°^ 

^i^ i iottRukhmi ••• ... ... • •• ... V^ 

*V* I tJHH^f^W ( *3 I ) ... \£ *A*- 

^\« i mcrercflftftarc *•* 

^\^ i mwiCWwcFwj ( ^ i ) *=* 

^\< I MMWNUjftfr' ( V I ) ••• ^° 

*V& i ifU^Tfaftp ... ... \« 

^\« I SAi^Mhtf^*! ( z I ) ... *L° 

*\<L\ WGpqf**: *•». 

^r* i tfpptPNtt ( *n ) ... 8^ 

^i m«wi(*i) ... br 

"W I TJstf^rJWftj: ^«<8 

Wl I TJflTfafa: ( *! ) ... ^t 

V8 I ^colftj|i|dn^*i ... ^©*= 

*** i ^bri^rawr (si ) ... ^ 

v< i srfspmrMW^O ... *\ 

^r$> i sfer&Tcrer* ( * i © i ) ... ^, {«. 

w i irfiwwnpm ( * i au ) ... ^, 84, <^ ... ^ 

W 1 srfcPSTirgfa: ( *m ) ... w 

R\* I srfcUBT^li^^s (3l) ... .... s* 

^\ I SN^Rcf 5 ^ ( T? I ) ... *£ ^« 

^ I 5R^P^RT3^J ( ^ | ) ^8 

^ i ritrovtaTCv^taT ( «i ) ^ ^ 

^8 I 5|¥lf%^^il ^ # £ 

^4. 1 TOHTO&RnOwri ( *TI ) ^ 



\a 'e> '8^ ( I * I 4t I 1b ) ta^lkll* I ate 

a*s ••• Hfe\2ft»a»ttfr»PI>irHft I G>ltts 

9\ ( | Jfe ) :Us!&Mfcfe]»feltli* I >V* 

V? ••• ( i it ) ufe^feitiit i iTh'i 

*fe '»* *Vh *?\ <±\ — ( I it I * ) kfcfeirin I tfte 
"*• *^> *^> ( i a i la i a 

'"?fe 'afe 'V* i a i a i jfe ) ltytkfeitj* i £to 

U* Wntt>,iu>bh^mub>t» I £te 

?te ••• ljfe^iWLttteiteb^Sj* I Yte 

"?** bfeUfelilek)!Bift l|o"te 

a^ :tti!felSMIftJ^lte I -?8>s 

Tia^a -" ( I J£ I 2 ) kJttlifiJikM I a8fc 

*i> ( I Jfe ) ll&lJfelllfe&Jl£L|fe I ©8*! 

** ••• ( I Jtt ) jliiafe^tewy^Ji Ili8* 

j»^s **>t '8* ( i fc I Jfe I it) kttl!£l4£!UtAfc I 88^ 



a 



>Vfe kbingj^lf I frhJ^lftlS | ^8is 

Vte :fe&&&i*jfcjMis i \tt 

8^ ;ftjfe|>IM^^feJfelJS | o8fe 

\> ••• ( I It ) kfeljfaiL4JS I -?** 

i\>S •" •*• "• ••* ; >tell8»| >lliHS | a fcfc 

tt* siJfeliSlfcLiJl&JaMi I q.^ 

o^fe •'• ' j£fel!l»4&JS I ftfc 



TI 



*tt 



8a'i?ft '" ( I a Ife) :**&* 

8* ( | >b ) kfiiiiiumifeiAtt 

©8 ( I i ) :JfeilSttfiH^felitt 

fea '»<* ( I le I la ) :felMblttlAi± 

ea '•• ( i at ) k*aiMJ4L&lt 

>fc (fit) Ufe^sh21ifeJiJiai2jtlMiJ± 

aa '^a '*© 

'tt 'Vk <?* 'ft* ( lltl ft I Jte I fe ) kfciUftlUt 



**\ 



8^ 
8^ 



Vf. 



•V* 



vu 



to 



>a'*8 
'8fe 'a\ 'a 

8fe 



( I £> ) ;kJ£kk£L^ft 

••• ( I it ) :2^i^l£lil4]± 

'" ( I Jk '& ) kkkj>ll± 

( I & ) :AlttJfel± 

( I 11 ) kfeH*kll£M 

kJsk£feii*]sil£i± 

( I a ) ,'HE^feft 

— ( 1 1> ) kk&m^sdifc 



I ?** 
I \^ 

I 8>* 

Ittfc 



I J± 



I ^ J^l^Uthtoifek) lkU*aiy I kji^lkh 



( ! is \St 
I S I It I & ) '.^l&fe^kJJ* 
( l£)kkMfeli± 
-'- (\£l) k*2iJ»fe!lslfeiJ* 






5T 



18 



^ I ilTWiqjftlRRl ( m, *T I ) 8< 

wi ^rraqjforaron ( en ) ... ^8 

^8 1 *fTOWfoq[ *** 

*5* I *TTWr*W*n ( ^ | ) ... 8*> 

^ i ^TT^^vii^*} ( sir i ) .., 3© 

^<=s i irwranwirom ( ^ i ) *\ 

V** I *T*Tcft*?ra*fT3^ ( Z I ^ ) Hi, W 

**L I HTftf^t^[f%: ( *T I ) ... 3* 

^o 1 w frnwi^ ( S I ) ... *=R 

Wj ?^nwnn:(¥i) ... «* 

^«l* 1 gsn^Tw^ifTe^^ ( *u 1 ) <=<= 

^ I *2<*r^W^ ( ^ I ) ... <^ 

wu %^fer^(ei2i) ... \\,M 

mi 1 %yid<Tl5irT (si) ... 3« 

^t$ I %fMWfa : (si) ... ®4 

rm. 1 ^f«ram^JDT«rt ^sn^ft (*§ 1) <= 

^•« I jft^^taFT^taiT ••• ••• ••• ••• ^5 

V\ I T^FffTST^ ^^ 

^0^1 ^wnaneraif^ ( m 1 ) ... 80 

V^ 1 gswnifc: ( * 1 ) ••• ^^ 



r 



UK 90 
IlK UK 
IX IX 



rtK *X 
IX IX 



|K IX W iW 
eS *S IX IX 



fQf 90 CD 

IX IX IX 



IX 90 

CO 90 

IX IX 



90 

IX 



M 

IX 



IX 



IX 



fee 

5 



f»K 






<>> 



IX 






5 IX 



If 



o 

nx 



» 





I 



y> p' (E fe RE IP 
»v jv ^ »v ^ 




l^ Iff 



r p | » w - 



III 

3 W W 




\y 



9 P 

o o 
f»X (iK nK 



WX 



«K 



<• fX AX 



^ fX UK so a^ «qK P H> ... 

llXllX||Kfl|'|lK*XflX|IK<lKllK|lK|lK«K 



iK ^ ft^ IK i/ fK 
nx hk «k hk «k iik 



e 



IS 



V° I *^ffrft^*r(*n ) ... B ^ 

^\ I *NH«idiuiiHii ( ^ i ) 3^ 

Wl WWTOC: ( *i I ) ... ^ ^ 

W I ^f^cn^f^ff^SRT ^ 

^8 I ^T^fiRfTK^f^cn ( JT I ) ^ 

^Yi i ^ftrefe^tosnn^: ( s i «r i *i\ 9 ^ $a, 

^< I ^l*igyi<?l*T ... ^8£ 

^« I ^MiVyCltcTN^ ( m i ) ... y^ 

^ | *W<^*TWT<Sr5J?t>a ( W I ) 81 

faW (Cl) ... 8$ 

^8o I ^T^T^iRITWraRi ( *§ I ) ^ 

W\ I ^W^Cl^lMjSfdt ( **f I ) 8£ 

W I *m3?^A*wfeuM*i (si) ^ 

ftws(wi) ... ^ 

^88 i 3ifa*u«*i ( * i ) ... *>< 

38* i ^TO«nj5rr ( ^ i ) ... <*{ 

^8< i qnanrra fafa* ( * I ) ... *q 

^8*> | cH*icKTUiVhl ... ... \^ 

^8^ | ftwrftft^T^fcf: ^o 

^8<L I fiKHMte » ( *l ) ... « 

^«i fainnirera: ( a* i ) ... *>£. 

^ I f<WW<MriTOm' ( *n ) ... *>8 



16 



^*3 I fw*?Pl«ft (51) ... i^ 

W I f?ITO*np(ei) ... 9^ 

^48 ! fa^rfalfc: ( 7§ I ) ... £° 

VJU f^^TO*: ( W I ) ••• 8t 

**$ I f^TT^Sreg^' ( ^ I ) m 

^1« I ftwq-Sfa: ( W I ) ••• H 

^ I ftWT^Tf^TSf«T.- (SI ) ... <=° 

^4£ I fM^faaifa'TO^T (Hi) <£* 

^<« I f^psFrresrajra:: ( jt i ) ... ^e 

^<* i f^aff5i s FT5€t^«r»j ( it i ) 4^ 

M^ j faWlfwN* ( ? I ) ... 8< 

^<« I f^^^TlD^ ( *, 3| I1M ) Ri, R<L 

^i^ I f^sfensTfoftn ( *r I ) ^ 

*« I ft*Wre^TO*TOIT ( * I ) *>* 

*<* I ffcfi^fter. ( 3RTTWTW5 ) 5?tjL\ 

y{*\ ^WTCSf^r: ( *T I ) ... <L^ 

^£ I ^dl^M'yfcf^fej ( JS I ) . . . >S£ 

^o I t^^Tfiff ( *R I ) ... *=8 

^ I f f^RS*T*|^: ( * | S | 3T, \* 9 \£, *R 9 

«M * I ¥ I ) ... ^, S^ 

^^ I I^TO5Is(JTl) ... \£ 

^ i tstrairmw^ (^i).„ $\ 

*«»J WPnrfin ( H I ) ... «^ 

^^ I STCTnCUfta* ^g 

^a i mqraivuw( ( ^ i ) ... *>• 





*\ 


8 


I 000 


?A 


ti8 


( i it ) :^j£iiy=Hfe 


1 y?fc 




a 


(!A)(%1& 








-lfefrJlNS ) :ia±l!fel^!l\te 


1 a?fe 




•e> 


( a ) JiyShltek 








:l^ll±^^&^Iiiilk||b 


1 «tti 




tt 


"• ( 1 &) ;ilfe£Jifci&k|L 


I>7* 


nV* 


• • • • t • • • 


lifehJ^feBc 


1 Tttfe 


ai>s 


• » • • • ••• 


Qs&lk 






-J 


B)fck££fcJilkJ ) l)k\2&ia&lhfitej 


1 8"?k 




^G> 


(Ik) l]fej2tU^h&ttJ 


1 k-»^ 




7i> '>* 


( to. | £ ) JfteUfefcfc&lliMy 


1 *?fc 




*> 


'••( 1 is ) kklfe^fejli^ttj 


1 Y?4 




** 


kneOEkiy 


1 o?fc 




^ 


— (ik )kt&ifehfe]y 


1 ?afe 




V? 


••• ( 1 Jh ) k^jftftfettj 


1^ 




*? 


•" ( 1 gQ:gyfrftlyfcfettJ 


1 &»fe 


*±\ 


Yft 


:J£bHy 


l>** 




8Ti 


( i k)kfefeikfeiy 


!>** 




tt 


(li) kteiwaiit^ttifeij^itt 


18** 




*\ 


i}fe\aife^iyi]^m 


I*** 




=^ 'fla 'fe* 


(aiftik) kifejfeiyiiiitt 


1^ 




fe> 


'" ( 1 ft ) JirJlMitUkiiia 


lU 




"?c* '*8 *>8 


( 1 k I IE 1 2 ) :fe£akktt 


1 • ** 




.?( 


! Jfe ) jyifehfij^lSLfeftJlutt 


1 "?&& 




^ 


(ik)khftBpa 


1 a<*fc 


& jsji&ij&iki^fcb) jismatj i Jcji&ijth i jyu»ij« 








l& 





IT 





»\ 


ilfe^klk^k^]* 


I tfee 




^a 


( 1 ft ) kJsk^iy=^l^|sft 


1 ^8 




U 


( 1 2.) llkkjifek.^]* 


1 o^8 




8a, 


( 1 St ) lka^l^ttRl* 1 


"?\8 




>8 


( 1 2) :fcjk)lkefc 


=^8 




** 


•"(Ik ) kWlfc&milska* 


&Yfc 


8?^ 


. • • • • • • • 


:fcjk}]±lll* 


>*8 


fc>fc 





j^jbfcim^i* 


V*8 




G^ 


••• ( 1 is )k&J2£li!^]i 


1 8^8 


*>fc 


•• ••• ... 


1 :li^lJ*^^ 


V\8 


0>* 





:Jkfel^& 1 


Vi8 




tt 'te 'A 


(12161a) :21hlkAJ^ 


^8 




•> 


( 1 fifc ) sh^Uitefea 1 

1 H 


o\8 




tt 


(I It) ( line&lMfiUfe&Jl&iB ) 








lJfe%&L&2k 


"?#8 




±h 


( 1 k ) hlfcAlfi&k 


=io8 




ek 


(Ik) !*Jfe:*lJfe2k 

1 h 


S<>8 


■?** 


.. 


i^lfcil&Jfe^ 


1 £06 




8^ 


( 1 ft ) :AAttJk^ft 


1 Tio8 




tt 


(Ik) :fc^& 


808 




©£ 


(12) :Pj£te}±y& 


^oB 


Tft* 


•• • • • ... 


tfkkP>^M±4Jft 1 


^oB 




^ 


( i n ) klk^H^ 


\o^ 


& JsllillJthlb 


±kkl IkllifeteJ 1 kJl^Jte 


h. 1 J*JllilJ£ 





81 



;fe\ 



fefe "• ( I fe ) l&3feUfcfrJ)P>jaL I ©88 



\k 





^ 


••• ( 1 Jfe ) lklAOyhiyEfc 


1*88 




9\ 


( 1 ]fe ) :frfrftfc(ft 


888 




»8 


( 1 a ) ki2£>L^lJ±kllk^ 


fe88 




"?k 


( 1 k, '&) JkQk^ 


*88 


\b\ 


a 


taliQSfedfe 


\88 




88 


( I lie ) 112^1*:*^ 


088 


?>* 


•• ••• ••• 


iiMmimh^ i 


"?^8 


=>»* 


•• ••• ••• 


ypjyijaittii^ 


la*8 




8<* 


( 1 It ) h M!k±±k£&±\BL 


1 6^8 


©>* 


•• ••• ••• 


;bp>|fr»fr 


!>fe8 


fcV* 


a fc 


k^lhM£llLl^^ 


17.^8 




** v* 


( 1 a 1 & ) ;>*lP>^M>ft 


1 8^8 


tt* 


.. 


k^^^l^kS 1 


U8 


^ 


.* 


•'• ( 1 k ) kklh^^a 1 


^8 


•V* 


ft 


( 1 ik ) JL^J*llEfcfe)£g 


! \U 




"JiQ. 


( i ^ ) kkk^^j^iyiy 


o^8 


fe\ 


Sft 


(1 £):fc^l*M*l£*J 


1 "?^8 


oVl 


ft 


••• ( 1 Jfe ) lk^jiiiUiSjy 


i =k*8 




©> (l 2) :JJjaJU«lli^JiJilliftJ.lMsJiS^ 


G^8 




©fc 


••• ( i & ) ufeByikkay 


>*8 




^ 


••• ( 1 a) :2fc£kJllJ4ilJ* 


Ti*8 


t>y± 


^8 ^ 


•" ( 1 ik life) :i^ft>lft 


8^8 




\h 


( I fit ) :k)M*>llj* 


^8 


I k JsJi&lfchblkJej lhli&b} 1 Jsji&lfeh 


I kjlkik 





61 



20 





srmi^r i 


wwtfa i fawrrot fwcvnciwifH * i 


88« 1 


TfCT^n(iri) 


*< 




88*. 1 


*ftw^(*5i) 


V*>^L 




e<i» | 


sft^tetoT ( it i ) 


1£ 




8iX 1 


*ftraft*m ( * i ) ... 


u 




8^1 


T^njarra^t ... 


• t • 1 • • • • 


^®o 


8^ 1 


^gfp^farrrsigjsfcran 


t . • • • • • » 


W 


8W 1 


fr<rh%9i: ( ^ I «n ) ... 


^9, ^ 




MJU 


^fanreffrarare^ft 


<•• • • t • ( 


^«* 


*M I 


^kTW^flC^i) 


n 




8^® I 


Tfaig^: 


• • ( • • • • 


*^ 



INDEX No. II. 
GENERAL INDEX. 



^M 





^THTftr i 












*n»rffTfsr i 


V 


*rahr#H 


• •• 


... 


. • • 


... 


• • • 


\«* 


*l 


*rj?5$m*; 


• «* 


... 


... 


• •« 


• •• 


««. 


HI 


SlfacT ... 


... 


• • • 


. • . 


• t . 


... 


^8R 


8 1 


^^SKT^T 


... 


• • • 


... 


... 


... 


*e^ 


HI 


Wfr ... 


... 


• ** 


... 


• • . 


... 


W 


<l 


^sfwsr 


... 


... 


• • a 


... 




H> •*» "= 


* 1 


*WTOH^| 


... 


... 


... 


. • • 


<,{!, <£,«•,«* 


^ 1 


3JWTOTJJH 


... 


. •* 


... 


... 


*•• 


** 


«. 1 


5J - - - ^^ 


... 


... 


... 


... 


... 


<\ 


V 1 


*rft*rwr%w 


... 


• • * 


• t . 


... 


• • . 


^^ 


V 1 


^r*ii^f^ 


• •• 


... 


... 


... 


... 


W 


VI 


^follT^TTO 


*t *rf^cT*r^TO 


• •« 


• • • 


• t. 


1<«. 








^Tl 










VI 


^w^n^t 


... 


... 


... 


... 


... 


w 


V l 


*fT*P^Rf[^ 


... 


... 


• *4 


• •• 


... 


8B 


VJ 


wi^«^r 


• . . 


... 


... 


«•• 


... 


U 


VI 


^TOW 


... 


... 

SI 


• •• 


• •• 


• •• 


«t, V* 


VI 


v^ito ... 


... 


... 


... 


... 


... 


*<1 


VI 


1*$* ... 


. « . 


... 


... 


• ♦• 


... 


M* 



SI 

v i ^ai^fft V^*A* 

^\ i s^r^*; ... ••• ... ••• ... ••• i\ 

VK I ^TC ^\, ^H, 8*, 8^, 81 f V* 

^l ^*TT*T *«, V** 

^8 I ^T^fa... ... ... ••• ... ..." l^ 

^U. I ^Kff ... ••• ... ... ... • •• \x^- 












*i 


M I 


^re^ra 


... 


. • . 


**> I 


sfaiTiTTtnii^r 


... 


... 


V=i 


^k^to 


... 


... 


^s. 1 


^fr^TxrfcT 


. • . 


... 


V i 


ircg ... 


... 


... 


*\» 


mx&'zvin 


«»» 


. • . 


V 1 


***Ofi^ 


... 


... 


Wi 


^5i^ ... 


... 


... 


^8 I 


^^arara^; 


». . 


... 


**J 


SRSfWw 


• • • 


... 


*<» 


*fifa*£r ... 


... 


... 


V> 1 


^ftifcp: 


.. . 


... 


V 5 ' 


*T — vfru 


... 


... 



... ... 



8 



^«L I «hlTlH^Tfa^ 

8* i s&rf^rrsCt 

l\ I *HWTOI 

8^ I ^TO^if ... 

8^ I 3iHDfe ... 

88 I Sfnf^RT 

84.1 stm^^T 

8< i ^n^nn^^t 

8« i fapCiCTnfasi^T^ 

8*= I qftf^THSJ 

8£. i gj<i«iq«r . ., ... ««• ... 

^° I «fl*nTJ3< ••• ••• ... ••• ••• 

^8 I €i9IPH(FtalTO 

4^1 U^f^ 3 ^ ... ... ... ... 

45 1 sronfsrofa ... 

4£ I U^FT-T^ ... 

<8 I SWT^TW ^ 

^1 I ^^f^J ••• ••• ••• ••• •*• ••• *^ 





*pnifif«r i 


. .'. 




W 


*«*, 


^88 


,18^ 


• a . 




W 


... 




»«« 


• •• 




a 


... 




w 


... 


\<« 


, w 


. i . 




"=*. 


. • • 




\i» 


. »• 




88 


• • . 




\ w 


• . • 




V>\ 


• • . 




M* 


... 




W 


... 




^ 


. . • 




1^ 


... 




M>* 


... 




\£«. 


... 




*8^ 


. . • 




»*«*■ 


... 




V^ 


... 




M* 


... 




<«L 


... 




^ 


... 




V= 



<3I 
a i *§w ••• ^* 

<S | *§UTJT"G ^ 

^ I ^sft^regp: *^ 

3«l I tothi: ... ^* 

*>© | a^ra^g^s ... ^ 8 

e^l 3T1?Tftw VL^. \1* 

-^ ou tit* 

^ | H^X "*' 

03,| 1US ... ••• ••• ••• •" ••* \^' 5 N^ 

^8 | OTT^f^nB^!^ • •• ••• ••• "• """ ^°' ^^ 

<$>aj toifspi: ••• ••• ••• ••■ ••• ^°» W.> V^ 

*3 I *Psra*^J 3* 

<S>^> | TFT[ • •• ••• ••• •*• •*• *" N 

*«| J& *<,W>V< 

«>i | JI^TSfif ... ... ... ... ••• *•' \°^ 

co| jimpsi m sft*w^ ••• ••• ••• ••• ^ 

^1 *ITO* HR 9 ** 

*=^ i aFtafarfaTO wt *nrf**w *«*> ^ 8 ^ 



<=» I IF 



\\* 



t=^J TT^T^ V^jV^ 

^i I jftg^re •• •■• ^ 

*<s> I Jlfa ... *■*> 

x=*: | ^ffajPC ••• ••• ••• ••• "• ••* *° 

^£. I ^fa ••• ••• ,# ' •*' •*• *** * 



^'Yfi 

a \^ ••• ••• ••• 

:*te 

X o ••• ••• ••• 

^ ••• ••• ••• 

^VTkfcVik^ 

fcVt'fcVt'afc 

W* 

^^ ••• ••• • • < 

tffta'W* 

^^ 

v *te 

»s.\ 

Vte 

% 

*8^ *>A 

^^ ••• ••• •• 



• • • 


• • • 


lltleffifclUkhilfc 


IS^ 


• f • 


... 


££j&fe 


1 W* 


• • • 


'" kgtk&l&h^ti&fei 


Ifctt 


... 


• . • 


••• J^tyfebi 


1 W 


... 


• • • 


••• m^fe 


1 oY* 


«•• 


• * • 


'** k^&& 


1 "?o\ 


• • • 


• . • 


k^fekfeffa 


1*.* 


• . • 


• . • 


ikfeife 


1 ©-« \ 


... 


• •• 





l>.\ 


... 


• • • 




l^ 


Ik 








... 


... 


*•' Jllfokfe 


1 8o\ 


I& 








. • . 


(1 *HjMhptfcl*tt 


Ik.'f 


. . 


• •• 


- 1&^1£ 


I*.** 


••• 


. . • 


*WH* 


l\.* 


• . • 


• 1 • 


a^it 


1 4 


• . • 


. . • 


Ij^fesfej^ 


1 "?•? 


• at 


*§• 


Jkfeitki±fejyt 


1 *? 


•* * 


• • • 


fe-yyt 


1 G^? 


• •• 


• • • 


te^^n 


!>■> 


• • • 


• t • 


tefe|§HJt 


1 *? 


... 


• . • 


••• i^>(j» 


1 8? 


• . • 


• 1 • 


gfttopjinjt 


ito 


• • • 


• • • 


ififei^li 


iv? 


• • • 


t • • 


••• feL>(jr 


iV? 


• • 


t • t 


ksfefe^k 


1 



*rmif5r i wwTfin 



w 


I "fig^nc ... 


• . • 


• • • 


• • • 


• # • 


. • • 


\e* 


u< 




• • • 


•#• 


... 


• • • 


• • • 


w 


u* 


1 T^Tfp ... 


•• • 


... 


• • • 


• •• 


• • • 


^8^ 


«'l 


■ifa 


... 


... 
5TI 


... 


• • • 


t . • 


V 6 * 


u* 


SWaSgt^T 


. • • 


• • • 


t • • 


• • • 


... 


w 


w 


9TJI^?ftfiT*r^ 


... 


8V 


\ m ; 


v*, w w, M"*» *<* 


w 


1 sflT^sranTC 


■ . « 


• «• 


• • • 


• . • 


• • • 


*•* 


\«^ 


1 TJT^C ... 


•• • 


• • • 


• • • 


... 


... 


VL><« 


w 


'RrBTO — 


... 


• 1 1 


• • • 


• • • 


• • • 


w- 


V*8 


^EWK ... 


• • t 


• •• 


• •• 


• . • 


• •• 


*\ 


W 


*m*vm 


••• 


• t • 


. • • 


... 


• • • 


*u 


\M 


l STOWHR 


• • • 


... 


• •• 


• § • 


• • . 


\* 


v*« 


i 5^- 


•• t 


... 


• . • 


• • • 


... 


w 


\^ 


5TO X X X 




• • • 


• . • 


... 


... 


*< 




^ r-*#* w^m 


• • # 


• • • 


• • • 


... 


... 




\1*. 


wtbXiTixjst 


V* 


\VI 


•rid^PFW 


• • • 


... 


• • • 


• »• 


M» 1A> V* 


w 


^^laotTlfW^ 


• • • 


. . • 


• • • 


• • • 


• * • 


\i, v* 


w 


srafaenfaiiW 


• t • 


• • • 


... 


... 


... 


w, w. 


w 


^f^tfcTH® 


• • • 


• . • 


... 


... 


• . . » 


w.** 


V*B 1 


«T^cf 


••• 


• • • 


• • • 


... 


• . • 


8^,88 


WJ 


srafafWTSf 


••• 


• •• 


• . . 


• . • 


• . • 


^ 


\v( 


^Jto^^ 


... 


• • • 


... 


• • • 


ts® 


U" 


sra^w ••• 


• • • 


... 


... 


# • • 


• . • 


VU» 


V 


| STO^^ST 


• . • 


• • • 


• • • 


• •• 


... 


U* 


w- 


i qtrsffratiY 


§ § . 


• • • 


• • . 


• • • 


• •• 


R^L 



wnnflr i TO*rfir , 

\*° i totww v 8 

\n\ i wfa^* ^ 

\ 8 ^ I TOnftfT^ ^ 8 ^ 

\e^ i 3j*nc*msr U,\U 

\88 I TOI«ft» ^ 

\MJ TOWJW ... ^ 

\8< I 3[?rftf* ^ 

\8$ I W%fcr^T5lJTir ^>\\£ 

\9* | SHTH^^ ^ 

\a«. i W + + + TC 



U» I ^rm ^ 

Wi wrj^ *\>W 

\H3, I stih^rt ••• ... ... ... ... ... «£^ 

Vi$ I *n***t ••• ••• ... ... ... ... »«» 

\U£ I ii'siti*. ... ... ... ... ... ... ^ 8 ^ 

vwu (■wift««ti ^ 

\*$ I fafcMl ... ... ... ,,, ,,, ^3^ 

V*s I fmw ^ 

\v= l 'fomg^ ^ 

\«. i ^N^Ttr^r^ ... ^, t 

^•HSlT #•• ••• ••• ••• ,,, #-# R8<? 

\^\ I WPTFT... ... hi ••• ... ... »g 

wftf^Cl^it. ... rfrf 

z\ 

\$\ I TSt^PTTTT^ ••• ••# ••• ••• ... «m 

\^8 I e)«M1« ••• ••• ... ••. ^ »^ 

\^^ I <Jl^^S • • • • • • ••♦ • • • • • • * » 



SI 

^^ I ^«i*: ... ..• ... ... ... ... H 8 ^ 



R8^ 

\W 

• » • • . • %& 

. • . ... ^ * 

... a • • \ N 

\w 

\ 0, = 

... ... ^* 

w 

... ... %*^c. 

v* # » w> \**> *v* 

V£¥L 

\W 

W 

• •• ••• ^ c iL 

vn 

i\, w 

• •• ••• •^Ml 

• • • • • • S,' 



VC«i 


cFtajffR 


\<« 


gsiTCm... 


M«-l 


f| <5f • • • 


\«« 1 


fsra**T*i 


m 


fsrsoftw 


\«^i 


f^nj^frft 


w 


fw^-^nn^ 


\©8 1 


fsfftSflH ... 


w 


f^ro^si 


**< 


1 ^^ftw^R^f 


\«« 


I ^f^rarqf^rac 


^•a« 


1 ^sifacj ... 


\s«. 


1 <*W<4 ... 


V s - 


<*i+TU*: ••• 


V=\ 


1 ^wfawf 


V s * 


I f^rft^w 


V s * 1 


fe<*l*iV ... 


V* 


1 fipn**5TO 


V=i 


l ftmr ... 


\M 


1 ^*JH ... 


V* 


1 %iWX ... 


V s " 


I T&ftufl ... 



m\mfk i w^rf* i 



v*l 


5^faw... 


v« 1 


^q<vn ••• 


Wl 


%TOT ... 


Wl 


%^qpoi^T^ 


\**l 


^f*fe ... 


VS.8 1 


%*Tfem ... 


\£»J 


<«-j!l*m 


\*-<\ 


^5R[ ... 


\&& 1 


*<*WiPl 


V 


*far 


\«.«. 


l Tpr^r ••• 


^•o | 


T&^T. ... 


v\i 


TJWflftfFSf 


^ 


^Sr^tf& 


v^l 


t^tcjh ... 


V» 1 


u^rora ... 


*•«. 


tr&nrsr^w 


V< 


srftrtfw* 


^O^ 


i wa 


V* 


i *?faFr ... 


*•£ 


1 *?W** 


^1° 


i7kM*<... 


w 


i ^fft'a*: ... 


w 


i *5tarc ... 


*v* 


1 *^*fa 




2 



*n 



... ... 



Tl 



... *•« 



»*• 


««» 


• • . 


V s * 


... 


\s 


... 


*\\ 


... 


w. 


... 


'•» w 


... 


V 


... 


\n 


• •» 


^«r 


... 


OS, \^« 




• 


... 


V* 


... 


w 


... 


^o» 


... 


<° 


... 


\9i, ^8« 


... 


w 


... 


<• 


... 


vn 


... 


*vn* 


... 


V s * 


... 


a 


... 


^ 


... 


« 


V*, 


K*%K*fi- 


... 


*i\ 



, • " _v •♦• ...•,•• i&ihk 1 oBV 

••• ••'fi*)fete) s k la^ 

lMIfc^kJjk I fcVfe 

ItJ^feiy^ | £Vfc 

l&klfckj. I life* 

3&skll2>feJ I «V* 

••• lil*.i s ll*l2&:kj I ^^ 

HliiMiklk I ^^ 

^jyifrMllk I \^ 

Jfcfcjftfclllk I «fe>K 

Jkltlfcfclllk I "?** 

... j^j^iiiis | a ^ 

••• >^|Ult> | G^» 

J^Bklk I >^ 

killtlk I^iVfc 

k}>fck£k£^fek I 8^ 

•'• h^fek Ifefefc 

... b^JSi^te | >s^ 

&^k I \^ 

•'• ••• ••• •*• fltellk I oVfe 

••' >j 3.>u | <*Yfc 

^lfc&llilOk I >\* 

X X X X Ik I Ti\^s 

!&%Vjk I *\± 

I kjl&lfeh I kjiaik 



01 



-*8* { ©.\ **8 >V 


8> 


• • • 


• •fc'fcVl 


<?©\ 


88 


• •• 


>«■ 


• • • 


Vfc\ 


... 


liVi 


... 


8.\ 


• •• 


tfc 


• • • 


Tte 


• • • 


W** 


• * • 


©3 '>» *\ 


... 


\* 


... 


\h\ 


• • . 


^\\ 


... 


Ti\>* 


• • • 


a8\ 


• . • 


• Ti 


• • • 


*? 


• • • 


fefe* 


• • • 


'c\* 


... 


>*\ 'fcV* 


* . • 


W* 


... 


o<»V>> 


• •• 


*8* 


• • • 


TV* 


• • • 


VA 


... 



■?w 


\ 


• •• 


• •• 


1 •• • 


" • • • 


* ••» 


*-' ^^\pa i 


Tifcv 


fcafftfe 


• t • 


• •• 


3 , 5 

• • • 


• • • 


^ \ • • 


ibMiik^a i 


8>V 


>-?V 


a^i 


• • » 


• • • 


• • • 


• • ♦ 


• • • 


kfeitell^lfoSi. 1 


fe>v 


*8* 




«•• 


• • • 


• •• 


»»• 


• • • 


^ukj&li 1 


*>* 


8* 




• • • 


• • • 


• •• 


'•• • 


• • t 


fe^H^k&fi 1 


tt* 


^ 




• •• 


• • • 


• • • 


'••• 


• • • 


liifc^kkBL 1 


•>* 


V**' 


• ^ 


'*•* '±i\ 


' • • • 


• •• 


ft* 


Ml^kkSL 1 


?ll* 


Vt 




• •» 


• • • 


' '••• 


• t • 


• •• 


••' talhtfoft | 


*v± 


Y* 




t •• 


... 


• • • 


• • • 


• • • 


•••ikfclkljl 1 


&tc± 


>t* 




• • t 


«•• 


... 


° ' ••» 


• • • 


••• blfrhnhj 


H± 


6>o\ 




»»• 


• •• 


• •• 


• • • 


* ••• 


••• IhMh 


lift* 


*Y\ 




• •• 


• • • 


"" "• t • 


" "• • • 


''""•it 


hhtLHStJh 1 


8Ti>: 


>o^ 




••• 


• •• 


"'• • • 


«••• 


• t • 


•'• fe|kfeh 1 


¥** 


vm^t 




• • t 


• « • 


• •• 


• • • 


... 


l&iyi±il6lii 1 


Vte 


•^ 




• •• 


• • • 


• . • 


• • • 


• •• 


••• \feft)h 


Yte 


>v« 


'.Y* 


• •» 


• •• 


C : •• 

• • t 


• . • 


• •• 


isl^^&h 


1 o^ 


•vi *?.\ 


• • 


• • t 


• • • 


" ••• 


•— 


••• ^ttth 


1 18* 


Yr* 


'o^t 


• • • 


• »« 


... 


... 


• • • 




1 a8* 


8 a* 




»t • 


• • • 


• • 


• • • 


• • • 


••' itlkifch 


1 <*8* 


oY* 




• »• 


• •• 


• • • 


• •• 


• •» 


— ki&&h 


1 >8* 


^ 




• • • 


• • • 


• . t 


• •• 


' • • • 


••• iifefiA 


IW* 


V«A 




• ♦• 


• • • 


• • • 


• • • 


" • • • 


••• ft>h 


1 88* 


8^ 




• •• 


• •• 


• • • 


... 


• •• 


mmuiiiai 


1 ^8* 



ih 



*> *88 ••• 



tegftftMhjg I *8* 
i jymus 



IT 



12 





•rnnfir i 


Rii i 


EssFfaf^S?^ 


^^i 


23fWfa*T^ 


^<=i 


issftf**^ 


*<*.i 


tffalft^lTO 


V« 1 


iffariftjW 


^«H 1 


nsw ... 


W I 


ScHW^f 


*^l 


IRfnTCW 


^d l 


smurftfw 


Wij 


tfcTT^f^^TT 


^< r 


iramni ••• 


^^ i 


srravn^i 


^3* 1 


^t^TCT 3 ^! 


^S*. 1 


TO*Hi*ftaT 


^*=o | 


JnfftaTO 


*<=\ I 


TOPlita 


Wi 


^Sfif^Z 


*«=*! 


*X*&3$to 


**b \ 


WSlfo ... 


V*k\ 


*TO 


^i 


WSRS* ••• 


V* i 


mfa .- 


V*i 


UTOPT ••• 


V*t i 


W««nft 


\d> I 


lT||W{Wtft 



••• ••• 



• •• • •• 



• •• •••• 



*l 



"OH 






... ^8«,t&« 



18 



**« ^* «• 
... *»& 

... *t8\ t *<« 

*»* 

**< 

... H« 

••♦ ••• ttt *«« ^* 

••• #•• •## ••• \^Y* 

• •• ••• •#• ••• •♦^s 

• •• ••• ♦•• •** % %jH 
••• ••• ••• »vt \1X 

• •♦ ••• •♦• ••• \*W> O^t 
••• #•• ••• •*• ^s& 

<«»■«•» V**V»W 

• •• ••• ttt rn B# 

• •* ••• ••• tit ^^ 



*t\l 


*?asnm ... 


^* 1 


*nUlTOT ... 


1**1 


TIB 1 !!* 


*«.» 1 


iwrtrc ... 


«Wkl 


*HW15^t ... 


**.<\ 


Tft^l 


*L*[ 


mjs 


*4«l 


*?<<r«'^^ 


***. 1 


»ran 


VI 


*nfii*ro 


VM 


*n5^nc ... 


V^l 




v*« 


*U3»l«M 


*••! 


iuwtata 


V»l 


*n*f*far ... 


v<l 


*n*R3* 


V«i 


^p? ... 


V* 


1 *jwto ... 


*•*• 


i ipftw. ••• 


*v 


1 Hlft 


*u 


1 *iM*5f ••• 


w 


1 wft*K — 


w 


1 *ffa^[ ••• 


w 


I ^iraiiw 


w 


1 'MtiW ••• 



• •t 



t.t 



14 



umifir i TOvftri 

Wi \ wra ••• ••• ••• ••• 

^o l *Tfa*i&T^[ 

WJ WOTincw--* ... 

^8 I TOWTI^ •••■ 

V* 1 *^. ••• 

v< I *T**rc ... ... 

^^ i Ti^i^^r ...- 

.V*- i *rolft ... - ... 

V* I H^VF* , 

\& I *tor ... 

^= I Jnw^i • 

^c i 5Rra^ ... 

^8\ i fRf^rar ... 

^8^ t fa^ipJ ... 



■ . . - ■> . • . ■ 



•••• - f ... 



...!.-- . . .C " 



..."-9 • • •* e « 



• •••■- o • • r- 



• i . ' a • • • '- 



•\.WV< # ' 


... 


<* 


• • . 


«C« 


... 


u* 


... 


r\«: 


... 


A*^ 


**> 


n> V* 


• • . 


^^ 


t • « 


1<l 


... 


*.«* 


. • • 


•V 


• • . 


V s " 5 


... 


4®, «5 


... 


^« 


... 


«t 


« » . 


«o 


... 


w 


... 


\« 


... 


*:^ 


W V 5 *, l*< 


• «• 


' wl 


... 


V 


... 


\«* 


... 


Vi\i w 


... 


\^t& 


\* # > 


\n> w 



15 



*8*l 
*88 I 

^8* I 

^i I 
^8*> I 
*8* | 



*rnif«r i 
^Jfi^ ... 

3^f ... 



*M 



^8£. 1 


VW*W •••' c 


.••*■ 


... 


... c 


**• 1 


*F*tm ... 


• . * 


• • + - '" 


...< 


Wi 


^f^n^T ••* 


. . .* 


• •; - 


..#< 


Wl 


^TI^KT 


... 


• . f • " 


• ••' 


Wl 


^Tfft^Pl ..*<■■ 


... 


• •i 


• •• 


^8 | 




. . . c 


Wl 


^ftw^ni*K 


. . * i 


. . •"" : c 


«.r 


\*i\ 


ifWl J «T... efi 


• a . 


. . .' 


... 



u 



v& I 


s«»ik« ..." 

>* 


v?l 




^<£. 1 




«'l 




"M\ 1 


Ttimmfc'*' 


W*l 


xtb^twit 


*<*l 


Kmm^: 


^<8| 


cftjtre .•. 


■'*#U 


Ttifa ... 



8^ 
*8< 

... «^o 

... a^ 



... 




©^ 


• • a 




** 


... 




W 


... 




**< 


. • a 




<• 


. . . 


*«^ 


^8i 


a . • 




v^ 


•98, 


A *, 


,V*° 



... <»L,^® 

... ^8,^41. 
R88,^81,>8< 



!«=. 



*8»; 



»0C 



16 



*<* i mwwre 

\$* I TMX^X ... 

*<<• I *f4flH 

y»« i ^fax^ 

*«* I *tw*? 

^•^ I ^nvrcmfRT ••• 

1^3 l ^T^jJS'T • 

^•^ I *W ... ♦♦. 

^8 j *j*r^tarsiw ... 

..3^11 *m*Ti 

^^ i tw^w ... ... 

^£.° i ^cnw5f ... ... 



SPWTfa I 



... 


..t 


M* 


i* 


.0. 


••• 


••» 


Ml 


• • • 


• »» 


»•• 


V,U1 


... 


• »« 


• #♦ 


n,w 


• •• 


• *. 


• •• 


w. 


• •• 


••• 


#•• 


W 


• •• 


... 


. • • 


\<V\<* 


• t. 


... 


• •• 


*8* 


• •• 


• •» 


... 


\H 


••• 


• • • 


#•• 


•*i\H 


... 


••• 


... 


V*» 


tts 


\«*v, 


*8*,*8^*8» 


• •• 


• •• 


*•♦ 


•!»*«* 


•-•• 


$*• 


.... 


«< 


• *• 


.... 


••• 


vtf 


... 


... 


••• 


**v» 


• • « 


• • • 


... 


*»*<• 


• • • 


... 


... 


V 


• •• 


• «v 


• • • 


**? 


... 


... 


... 


*%W 


... 


... 


.♦.#♦ 


M* 


... 


... 


••• 


V* 


»•• 


... 


».. 


V* 


• «. 


... 


.<•• 


W 


... 


... 


• #• 


■W 


.0 • 


... 


*** 


*«<?, W 


• •• 


... 


♦•• 


1» 



17 



VH I ^Tfore; . ... ... i$ 

^£.8 I ^TOHt-f ... ... ... ... ... ... \ 0,c 

^i I TT*n&e ^ 

^.^ I ^faffifft ..• ... ... ... ••• ... V>^ 

^«L^ I *5fa ... ... ... ... ... ... V>\\^ 

H^ I ^pn^H^ V 

V-*- I TOnftfafl^ ^ 

8°° I H^T^ R8^ 

8«\ i ?nsin ... ... ... ... ^8* 

«°^ I *"farat ... ... V s *. 

8°^ i vtfr^t ... t.t ^^ 



*5TI 



8 # 8 I W^t^K ... ••• ... ••• ... ... ^ 

8««i | *srci?fcw;^?rT ... ... ... ... ... v 

8°^ i ^refffaro^f ... ... ... ... ... $• 

8°^ i <^j?fafsr ... ... ... ... ... ^\ 5 V=^ 

8 °^i ^r^i^nr ... ... ••• ... ... ... ^\^ 

8°£ I ^RTTTTff ... ••• ... ... ... \^ 

e^« I *srf^rcrenRT ... ... ••• ... ... ^ 

v\\ I *ifwnpc ... •.. ... ... ... ^ 

8\^ i ^f^Tcn^r«T ... ... ... ... ... r^£ 

81^ ( *5f*^T5J , t# ... .•• ••» ... ... 8", 8 8 

B\8 I ^T*W ... ... ... ••• ... ... 8^, 88 

•VU "fare • \*"* 



3 



• • • • • • 



I • • • • • 



81 
*8* 

88* 

ttHh 

«^'W*W?8'f^ - 

8Si <fe^ «^\ '.•? «>8 <=>8 'ft 
8"?'^=* 

=*o\ 'US 

*\ ••• 

©8* '^8* 

tt 

Vtts 

*o^ 

8** «ttfc «a*V8a «** — 
a8 'fcfe 



• •• ••• • • • 



• • • • • • 



t= 



• • • • • • 



a8 

<*o\ 



k^fcllfekkkj 


1 o80 


k^sklJfeiykJ 


1 7«8 


••• Jtfejlg 


1 =>^8 


fc^&L&WUg 


1 <*^8 


— tt&fej 


l>*8 


• • k^&lk 


1^8 


2^ttigt&ufc 


1 8^8 


tetyj^i^feife 


lfe*8 


lyt&uk 


1 ^8 


••• j^kitifc 


1^8 


feika&^ife 


1 o^8 


Li^^i^fe 


1 "?^8 


J±lM!fe&k 


1 =*fcB 


]il>fa±i]fe&k 


1 Sc8 


••• soyfe 


1 ^8 




1 1i>s8 


k&k 


1 *>z9 


"' \&& 


1 \^8 


rfciyajidjfck 


1 fefcB 


kllftkk 


1 \fc8 


••' !&£k 


1 o>.8 


••• telJt^k 


I "?\3 


••• nya&k 


l=>>8 


••• lL\lkk 


1 <A8 


••• BL}k±&k 


IK** 


1 flails 





Ik 



BT 



19 



8»\ i f^rajwgwn: ... \m 

88R I ft^r^t ... ... ... ... ... ^ 

88^ I faf^T ... ... ... ... ... ... ^S3 

888 I fa^T *^ 

8S<U fa^H^T ^^ 

88^ I f^T*R? ... *^8 

88^ i f^n^^ro ^° 

88^= i frewf^ ^, 8*, 8o,«i<$>, <l<= 

88€. I tfraroo . ... . **• 

8«l° i fag^ra ^8 

&H I faro^ ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• \ 0,G 

8«|L I f^NfFOT ... HJ> 

B^\ I fa*?%9t ... ... ... ... ... ... £Yl 

8^8 1 ftfftfwcra ^8^ 

«1»J fTO£*f ^£ 

84jC I f*W*TCJ ••• ••• ... ... ... ^°8 

84^ I f^^SFTTO ••• ... ... ••• ... ^^ 

BH* I f^PTR^W ... ... ^«*. 

84jL I faso" ... ... ... ••• ••• ^«i 

8^° I fa^UJJH ••• ... ... ... ... ••• ^ 

8^\ I fa*B^«T ••• ... ... ••• ••• ••• ^\i, \*& 

*iR I faOTpW \^ 

*i\ I fttorafVT ... ... ... ... ... t^ 

8^8 I fTOfflTOF&l^ ••• ••• ••• • •• ••• ^°4 

8^^ I faajftfv ••• ... ... ... ... ^c 

8{{ I qfcOT ^8^ 

8<*> i ftefwnfoir \£\ 



20 



8$«= i #te*nfr ..• ... -.. ... ••• ^\^ 

s^£. i ^TTT^nr ••• ••• .... ... ••* ••• ^w 

8o* i ^Tftf^r W,, r*^ 

8*>\ I €\^75pS; , *=• 

8®H I ^ft^^f^^ ... •.. ... ^B 

8S^ I Cta^r ... ... ... ... ... ... ^^ 

8$8 I <S3TP§5J (?) ^4 

8^1 %^TW*TC ... \<^ 

**>i i fNprroBjft \<° 

8$S> I f^Tf ^ 

8S^ | STRt^ ... ... ... ... ... ... ^8 

80£ | 5[5ffiTO ... ... ... ... ... ... ^8$ 



SM 



8^\ I SlfffiftfT 

8^=R I S^f* ••• 

8<=8 I WS^T^TSJ 

8^ I *re*n^ ... 

8« I ftR 

8*=£ I fSFTCTO ... 

8£° I falTO^ ... 

8£\ l fiwftrrt* 

8£.^ I 5H 



... 


M<» *<• 


... 




'W* 


V 


>»■*. 


W 


... 




«* 


i\, 


^»°, 


in 


... 




* 


... 


\*% 


<\'i 


• . • 


W, 


» V« 


**, 


• WM« 


... 




\VL 


... 




\19 


... 




£<= 


. . • 




W 



21 



•**' **** ^. 

••• ... ^^ 

••• ... ... ... 5^8 

w* 

^ u* 

... ... ... ^8 

••• ••• ... ... »t:'9 

••• ... ... ^® 

••• ••• ... ... ^ 

••• ••• ... ... ^o, ^a 

4.°^ I ^fwfT ... ... ... ... ^> \ e ^> \°9, \^4. 

«•« I ?RW: ... V°,**J» 

••• ••• ••• ... ^C 

••• WVt,^( 

• •• ... ... ... 8^ 

••• ••• ••• ••• ^ 



e«t8 i g*rtrf5T ... 

•til itora: 

8d< I S?NW!3 

84« I *?to> 

*£* I ^tliBprfigcT 

8«. I **W|r3p| 

«•• I ^tlW 

*•* i *ffN* 



t«< i 'ftwfa ... 

V® i *?hra ... 
v^i ^*T$ ... 



si 

l*«. I «ifiw ... w 

1\» i tow: ... ^ e 

lU i «fc4H4<MH ^ 8 «, ^t, ^«« 






••• ••• 



*M 



••• ••• ••• •«• ... \ , ®r 

4,^8 | Q^tfrBd ... ... ... it# §#< VH»t°< 

«VU «-lN*K ... U8 

IVC i *4row ... ... ... ... ,„ t£ 

l\® i *rrf*nft .., ... ... ,„ ^, D 



22 



^V= I ^TT^TT^ \^>% ^80 

iU I fs^rtogf? - ^ 

*V I f*l% ^/8 

*.^\ i faimnresir ... ... ... ... ... *£ 

*R^ I S*^ 5 *? <3 

1H^ I IHT^ ^ 

U5« I «*if*TO* V>\V= 

»5» I ^f^rfsTcnftRJT^T ^*s%^W. 

ux< i ^fafacnftnr ^s^ 

U5^ 1 <1W(T ^<8 

UV= I l^f^T ^ 8 { 

u^«i i %nm $$ 

YLV I ^S^ 3 !^ ... ^ 

^\ I ^ ^©^ 

Wl *k«IWM ^8* 

WW I vro« ( ^OTT^ftrffi^ ) ^ 

*$8 I ?SpS^ftWTTp!^ ^^ 

m^s i ^rpR ... ... ... , , . t . , # , # \*r 

«^< i irfrram > 8^,ei. 

*$3 I ^(%^T«riT ^^ 

*V=I ^afo§ ••• • ^8 

»^4 I f^lftT^W^ 8^9, l t \& 

*8* i vwrtair ^ 

W\ i ^fte ... ... ... ... , ft ti- \%3, \*^ 



W I TOTO 



^ 



23 



w\ i v*ftr*^ «>V^ 

*88 i *ft*rc: ^,\\^ 

ra*i ^fere ^V^Vfc^ 1 

*a< I ^ftqfa ... ^V 

*8*> i ffins*: ^ 

18^=1 Tfca^T ^8^ 

*8<l i ^rft^5j ^ 

H^° i vfrnSr^ 1? 

W\ I Tft^KraT^ ^ 

«m i fCte*: £.\ 

M.^ I TTOHC «, 

**8 I TTftcTW ^ 

«m i w^fw rv^l 

*¥<£ I W^'TR^^'T 5^o^ 

w*> I ^tft^r e^ 



