

" William H enry Scott 





non 


ATENEO DE MANILA UNIVERSITY PRESS 



ATF.NEO DE MANILA UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Bellarmine Hall, Katipunan Avenue 
Loyola Hts., Quezon City 
P.O. Box 154, 1099 Manila, Philippines 

Copyright 1994 by Ateneo dc Manila and the author 
First printing 1994 
Second printing 1995 
Cover design by Fidel Rillo 

Earlier versions of certain chapters have been published in Philippine journals; chaptef: 
2 in Phiimnne. Quarled) of Culture and Society (Scott 1990 a); chapter 4 ,n PtoUppma 
Sacra (Scott 1990b); and part of chapter 5, m Kinaadman (Scott 1992 ). 

The illustrations from the Boxer Codex reproduced in this book are taken from the 

article on the Codex by Carlos Quirino and Mauro Garcia in | 

o rknce «7 (1958)- 325-453. For the cover illustration taken from the Boxei Cod , | 
"L p Jded by the Lilly Library of the University of Indiana, winch gav, 

permission for its reproduction. 

National Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Recommended entry: 

Scott, William Henry. 

Barangay : sixteen th-century 
Philippine culture and society / 
by William Henry Scott. - Quezon City 
ADMU Press, cl 994. - 1 v 

1. Ethnology - Philippines. 

I. Title. 

GN308.3P5 305.8009'599 1994 P944000012 
ISBN 971-550-135-4 (pbk.) 

ISBN 971-550-138-9 (pbd.) 


Contents 


Foreword ix 


INTRODUCTION 

The Word. “ Barangay " • The Word "Filipino” 9 The Filipino People 
The Beyer Wave Migration Theory 9 Philippine Languages 
A Word about Orthography 


PART 1 The Visayas 


CHAPTER 1: PHYSICAL APPEARANCE 

Decorative Dentistry. 9 Tattooing 9 Skull Moulding 9 Penis Pins 
Circumcision 9 Pierced Ears 9 Hair 9 Clothing 9 Jewelry 


17 


CHAPTER 2: FOOD AND FARMING 

Rice Fanning 9 Root Crops 9 Sago • Bananas 9 Visayan Farming Terms 
Camote 9 Hunting 9 Fishing 9 Domestic Animals 9 Cooking 
Betel Nut 9 Distilling and Drinking 9 Drinking Etiquette 


.35 


CHAPTER 3: TRADES AND COMMERCE 

Ironworking 9 Woodworking 9 Architecture 9 Boat Building 
Pottery 9 Goldworking 9 Weaving 9 Textiles 9 Domestic Trade 
The Chinese Enigma 9 International Commerce 


.54 


CHAPTER 4: RELIGION 

Nature Spirits • The Unseen World • The Spirit Underworld • Omens 
and Divination • Worship • Idols • Origin Myths • Death and Burial 
Mourning • The Afterlife 

CHAPTER 5: LITERATURE AND ENTERTAINMENT 

The Alphabet • Literature • Epics • Folklore • Musical Instruments 
Vocal Music • Dancing • Gaines <md Gambling 

CHAPTER 6: NATURAL SCIENCE 

Environment • Health and. Hygiene * Ailments • Treatment 
Timekeeping • Wmch and Weather • Seamanship 

CHAPTER 7: SOCIAL ORGANIZATION • 

£)«*« • Timawa • Oripun • Debt and Dependence • Community 
Kinship • Law • Marriage • Inheritance • Property and Labor 

CHAPTER 8: WEAPONS AND WAR 

Sruottfe and Daggers • • Missiles • Defensive Arms • Warfare 

Purpose, and Causes of Wars • Strategy and Tactics • Sea Raiding 
Defense • Peace Pacts • Epic Heroes 

PART 2 Mindanao and Luzon 

CHAPTER 9: MINDANAO 

Caraga • Butuan • Dapitan • Epic Culture • Sarangani Island 
Maguindanao • Sulu 

CHAPTER 10: BIKOLANDIA 

Agriculture • Drinking * Social Structure • Religion • The Alphabet • W. 

CHAPTER 11: TAGALOG CULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY 

The Tagalog’s World • Technology • Trade • The Alphabet 

CHAPTER 12: TAGALOG SOCIETY AND RELIGION 

Kinship • Social Structure • Land and Property • Warfare * Religion 

CHAPTER IS: CENTRAL LUZON 

Pampanga Culture • Pampanga Law • Lawsuits * Pangasinan Culture 
The Zambals and Negritos 

CHAPTER 14: NORTHERN LUZON 

The Igorots • Cagayan Culture 

Afterword 272 • Notes 277 • Bibliographical Essay 282 
• Bibliography 288 • Index 300 



Foreword 



William Henry Scott (1921-1993), distinguished historian and emi- 
nent scholar, puts us in considerable debt with the publication of Barangay: 
Sixteenth-Century Philippine Culture and Society. By bringing to die fore the 
native inhabitants of the archipelago who in colonial documents and sadly 
even in historical writing are relegated to the background, Scott fills an 


189 

217 

243 

257 


l: egregious lack. The book is an ethnography of sixteenth-century Philip- 
ifpine communities that answers the question: What did the Spaniards 
| | actually say about the Filipino people when they first met them? 

Scott derived his information to answer the question from an extensive 
bibliographic base. A major cluster of his sources is the historical docu- 
ments published in five collections. The first three are the colecciones de 
!? documentos ineditos (collections of unpublished documents, cited in this 
volume as CDIA, CDIU, and CVD), published by the Spanish government 
i beginning in 1825 with Martin Fernandez Navarrete’s five volumes and 
i totaling sixty volumes by 1932. The fourth collection is Blair and Robertson s 
The Philippine Islands, 1493—1898 (BR) , fifty-five volumes of translations into 
j English. The fifth collection is the ongoing Historia delaProvinciaAgustiniana 
\ del Smo. Nombre de Jesus de Filipinos (HPAE) by Isacio Rodriguez with volume 
1 20 being the most recent. In addition to these published collections is a 

T 5 vii 


wide array of such other published and unpublished sources as chronicles, 
travel accounts, navigational logs, letters, sermon books, catechisms, j 
reports, and dictionaries. 

Dictionaries figure importantly in this book. In the sixteenth century, 
there were about a million and a half natives and only a small number of 
missionaries. Aware of the acute imbalance between their number and that j 
of the native population and the enormous challenge in teaching the 
natives the Spanish language, the Spanish missionaries decided to commu| j 
nicate in the local languages. They calculated that it was more efficient for j 
them to learn the local languages than to teach Spanish to the entire native j 
population. A consequence of the decision was serious efforts toward the ; 
production of tools in aid of teaching missionaries the local languages. 
Among these tools were Spanish-vernacular, vernacular-Spanish dictionary ; 
ies. Some comprising more than seven hundred printed pages, these 
dictionaries not only list hundreds of local words but also provide in the 
glosses samples of actual usage of the words. In a way not possible for most; 
other sources, these dictionaries open for us a window to how things were; 
perceived in local categories. The Sanchez Samareno dictionary gives the 
phases of the moon for every day of the month; the Lisboa Bikolan(| 
dictionary defines the parts of the backstrap loom; the Menu icla Hiligaynorf 
dictionary contains the most extensive glossary of seafaring terms. And the 
San Buenaventura Tagalog dictionary includes ethnographic data found in 
none of the accounts — details of technology and industry, commercial 
contracts and interest rates, head taking and puberty rites, mortuary rituals 
and sexual mores. 

This ethnography of sixteenth-century Philippines covers a wide geo- | 
graphical terrain. Due to the spread of available sources and the chronol- ; 
ogy of Spanish activities in the early years of colonization, the chapters on 
the Visayan islands comprise the most substantial portion of the book. 
Luzon and Mindanao, however, also get proportionate attention: the; 
second half of the book provides a survey of areas outside of the Visayas— j 
the island of Mindanao, the Cagayan Valley, the Bikol peninsula, and the 
territory of Tagalog, Pampanga, Pangasinan communities. Scott had notes 
for a chapter on the Ilocos, but his passing away prevented its completion;; 

An impressive range of topics is treated in the book. The section on the 
Visayas, for instance, discusses physical appearance, food and farming, 
trades and commerce, religion, literature and entertainment, natural sci- 
ence, social organization, and warfare. Even more impressive than the; 
range of topics is the degree of detail in which the topics are explored* 
Under the heading of Visayan physical appearance, the book describes and 


analyzes decorative dentistry, skull moulding, penis pins, circumcision, ear- 
piercing, hair, clothing, jewelry, and tattooing. The treatment of each item 
goes as far as the documents allow. In the case of tattooing, for example, 
Scott examines various aspects of the custom such as who wore tattoos; 
how, when, and on which parts of the body they were applied; who actually 
applied them; what were their regional variations; what risks to health they 
posed. Most important of all, the author explains what tattoos meant in 
society. 

If the information Scott gathered together in his book is representative 
of what the Spaniards said about the natives, it is clear 1 that they said quite 
a lot — at least, quite a lot more than is normally supposed. A case can be 
made that the Spaniards carefully took note of details in the native world 
so as to destroy or transform native culture the more thoroughly. But 
prescinding from their motives, the Spaniards collected data that now 
allow us to attempt a description of the native world. 

Spanish documentary sources were products of the colonial machinery. 
They were written by Spaniards, for Spanish purposes such as trading, 
evangelization, tribute-taking. But as he shows in Cracks in the parchment 
curtain and other essays in Philippine history, Scott had found a way of catching 
“fleeting glimpses of Filipinos and their reactions to Spanish domination 
. . . unintentional and merely incidental to the purpose of the documents.” 
And particularly in this book, Scott took seriously all available texts in the 
local languages which, despite their Spanish provenance, are indigenous in 
the most basic sense. In them, the nadves are the objects of study and of 
colonial intervendon. Yet, they remain subjects as well, since it is they who 
in the first instance spoke the language the missionaries used. The docu- 
ments conserve the native languaging of the native world. 

Scott ventured to answer the question: What did the Spaniards actually 
say about the Filipino people when they first met diem? Using a wide array 
of sources and a method conducive to gleaning information on native 
inhabitants, Scott lays out an answer to the question in a manner that 
reveals an intensely committed scholarship and an unfailing affection for 
his adopted people. 

—JOSE M. CRUZ, S.J. 


ix 



Introduction 


This book presents a sixteenth-century Philippine ethnography based 
on contemporaneous sources. It does not attempt to reconstruct that 
society by consideration of present Philippine societies, or of features 
believed to be common to all Austronesian peoples. Nor does it seek 
similarities with neighboring cultures in Southeast Asia, though the raw 
data presented should be of use to scholars who might wish to do so. Rather 
it seeks to answer the question: What did the Spaniards actually say about 
the Filipino people when they first met them? It is hoped that the answer 
to that question will permit Filipino readers today to pay a vicarious visit to 
the land of their ancestors four centuries ago. 

History texts in use in the Philippine school system generally include a 
chapter on pre-Hispanic society and culture derived from five main sources 
available in English in the monumental Blair and Robertson compendium 
of translations, The Philippine Islands 1493-1898: these are Antonio Pigafetta’s 
account of the Magellan voyage, Miguel cle Loarca’s 1582 Relation, Juan 
Plasencia’s 1589 treatises on custofn law and religious practices, Pedro 
Chirino’s 1604 Relation, and chapter 8 of Antonio de Morga’s 1609 Sucesos. 
Unfortunately, they also make use of two twentieth-century forgeries attrib- 
uted to sixteenth-century Diego Povedano and nineteenth-century Jose 


Introduction 


Introduction 



Maria Pavon, and misrepresent Pedro A. Monteclaro’s 1907 Maragtas as a | 
pre-Hispanic document. 1 

To the authentic documents may be added four other eyewitness j 
accounts of the Magellan voyage, and a dozen from the other early Spanish 
expeditions. The 1526 Loaysa expedition touched on the east coast of I 
Mindanao, and Alvaro de Saavedra visited Sarangani Island three times in | 
1528. Four accounts, one of them running to a hundred pages, have \ 
survived from the Ruy Lopez de Villalobos expedition, which spent eight- = 
een months in Sarangani, Mindanao, Leyte, and Samar in 1542-1543, and 
circumnavigated both Mindanao and Samar. From the Miguel Lopez de 
Legazpi 1565 expedition which established the Spanish colony, come a 
detailed sixteen-month journal, separate reports of local products and 
customs, and a ream of missionary and conquistador correspondence. And 
from the next century comes Francisco Alcina’s unpublished four-volume 
Historia de las islas elndios de Bisayas, which is invaluable both for its author’s 
descriptions of material culture and his attempt to reconstruct pre- | 
Hispanic Visayan society by interviewing the oldest residents. 

Much information can also be gleaned through what I have called 
“cracks in the parchment curtain” in an earlier essay — “chinks, so to speak, 
through which fleeting glimpses of Filipinos and their reactions to Spanish 1 
dominion may be seen . . . unintentional and merely incidental to the 
purpose of the documents” (Scott 1982, 1) . A peace pact between Magellan’s 
survivors and a ruler in Palawan, for example, indicates that it was trans- J 
lated by a Spanish-speaking Makassarese slave seized from a royal Luzon 
vessel in Borneo. Court proceedings against backsliding Manila converts 
include a description of a Muslim burial, and notarized testimonies by | 
Filipino chiefs reveal that few of them could sign their names. Tagalog | 
sermons by friar missionaries mention deities otherwise unknown, refer to 
the number of days a slave is expected to work for his master, and inveigh 
against the vanity of tooth filing and eyebrow shaving. 

But by far the richest sources of information on Filipino ethnography 
are the early seventeenth-century Spanish dictionaries of Philippine lan- 
guages. By their very nature, dictionaries contain more information than 
any other sort of literature or documentation. Moreover, since those in the 
Spanish colony were compiled by missionaries for the use of other mission- 
aries, their definitions may be incorrect but they would not be deliberately 
dissembling. The Sanchez Samareno dictionary gives the phases of the 
moon for every day of the month; die Lisboa Bikolano dictionary defines 
the parts of the backstrap loom; the Mentrida Hiligaynon dictionary con- 
tains the most extensive glossary of seafaring terms. And the San 


Buenaventura Tagalog dictionary includes ethnographic data found in 
none of the accounts — details of technology and industry, commercial 
contracts and interest rates, head taking and puberty rites, jar burial and 
sexual mores. 

Naturally, these sources must be used critically. Dictionary definitions 
are often tantalizingly brief, and the absence of a particular term may 
reflect the lexicographer’s limitations rather than the nonexistence of the 
concept. Comments on Filipino ethics and morality are hopelessly skewed 
by Spanish ethnocentricity and the reactions of aliens caught in the grip 
of culture shock. On the other hand, missionary deports intended for 
European audiences are often distorted by the desire to prevent converts 
from appearing like naked savages. Reports to the king on products and 
industries suitable for colonial exploitation are obviously more reliable 
than those recounting Filipino belligerence and treachery which might 
excuse conquistador brutality. Information on native religion is especially 
problematic. Direct questions about God, creation, the Flood, the human 
soul, heaven and hell, regularly produced obliging answers contrary to 
actual cult practices. In this ethnography, therefore, all descriptions will be 
based on a synthesis of all the sources available; no data will be presented 
unless they accord with that synthesis. Moreover, with few exceptions, they 
will be derived from primary sources in their original languages, not 
secondary sources or translations. 

Regrettably, these sources contain two significant lacunae — lack of sta- 
tistics and failure to cover the whole archipelago. Vital statistics are com- 
pletely wanting, as well as figures on production and distribution which 
would permit an estimate of Filipino living standards before the imposition 
of colonial burdens. Tagalog and Visayan culture can be reconstructed 
from documents and dictionaries, but there is little information on the 
peoples of northern Luzon, and none at all on the Mindanao and Sulu 
sultanates, which the Spaniards did not visit in the sixteenth century except 
for military attacks. 

It should also be noted that the Philippines was neither isolated nor 
unchanged during the century. A Malaccan prince founded a new sultan- 
ate in Maguindanao, Brunei established commercial and political ties with 
Manila, and Filipinos themselves traveled as far as Burma and Timor as 
merchants or mercenaries. But the many Spanish and Chinese innovations 
of the last two decades of the century cannot be considered part of 
traditional Philippine culture, though they quickly became regarded as 
such. Camote and corn, for example, rice mills and draft animals, were all 
introduced during a single lifetime. 


O 


3 


Introduction 


Among surviving sixteenth-century sources, there happen to be more 
voluminous data on Visayan culture than on the rest of the Philippines 
combined. The Spaniards were in the Visayas fifty years before they reached 
Luzon, and they recorded their observations with the enthusiasm of new 
discoveries. Loarca’s Relacion was written in Iloilo, and Alcina’s Historia in 
Leyte and Samar. Mateo Sanchez’s Visayan dictionary written in Dagami, 
Leyte, is the best of the early Spanish lexicons, and can be supplemented 
by the contemporary Panay dictionary of Alonso Mentrida. However, this 
documentary concentration may be seen as a fortuitous accident for our 
purposes. Visayan culture and languages are the most widely dispersed in 
the archipelago, and Leyte and Samar are the islands farthest removed 
from direct Asian contact. It is therefore possible to regard the civilization 
portrayed in these sources as a kind of basic Philippine society and culture. 

This uneven distribution of data has suggested the plan of this book. Part 
1 describes Visayan culture in eight chapters on physical appearance, food 
and farming, trades and commerce, religion, literature and entertainment, 
natural science, social organization, and warfare. Part 2 surveys the rest of 
the archipelago from south to north — Mindanao, Bikol, Tagalog, Pampanga, 
Pangasinan, Ilocos, Igorot, and Cagayan. With the exception of Tagalog 
society, these sections contain only brief notices due either to a paucity of 
data or because there is no need to repeat features already described at 
length in part 1. An afterword has been added to examine the survival of 
sixteenth-century minorities. And a bibliographic essay locates and de- 
scribes the book’s sources. 


The Word “Barangay ” 

Barangay, or balangay, was one of the first native words the Spaniards 
learned in the Philippines. When Antonio Pigafetta, Magellan’s Italian 
expeditionary ethnographer, went ashore to parley with the ruler of 
Limasawa, they sat together in a boat drawn up on shore which Pigafetta 
(1524b, 118) called a balangai. This word appears as either balangay or 
barangay , with the same meaning, in all the major languages of the Philip- 
pines, and the earliest Spanish dictionaries make it clear that it was pro- 
nounced “ba-la-ngay,” not “ba-lang-gay.” It is also worth noting that Pigafetta 
recorded the word both as balangai and as balanghai, which, of course, he 
would have pronounced the same since Italian had no /z-sound. Unfortu- 
nately, this orthographic oddity gave birth in 1976, with the archaeological 


4 


Introduction 



discovery of an ancient boat in Butuan, to a bastardized Philippine term, 
“balanghay,” which has gained popular currency though no such word is 
known in any Philippine language. 

When the Spaniards reached Luzon, they found this word for boat also 
being used for the smallest political unit of Tagalog society. Franciscan friar 
Juan de Plasencia (1589a, 23v) described it as follows: 

These [datus] were chiefs of but few people, as many as a hundred houses and even 
less than thirty; and this they call in Tagalog, barangay. And what was inferred from 
this name is that their being called this was because, since thesp are known from their 
language to be Malayos, when they came to this land, the head of barangay was taken 
for a datu, and even today it is still ascertained that one whole barangay was originally 
one family of parents and children, slaves and relatives . 2 

No doubt, the ancestors of the Tagalogs reached the archipelago in 
boats, but it is hardly likely that Tagalog communities could have main- 
tained their discrete boatload identities across centuries and millennia. But 
the choice of the term, and the explanation for it, would have reinforced 
the perception of each community as historically distinct from all others, 
and legitimized its captain’s claim to personal allegiance. 

These two meanings of the word barangay call attention to two important 
characteristics of the sixteenth-century Philippines not characteristic of the 
twentieth — dependence on boats and highly localized government. 
“Barangay” is therefore not an inappropriate title for a book about Philip- 
pine society and culture in the sixteenth century. 

With the. exception of sparse populations inhabiting the interior moun- 
tain ranges, all sixteenth-century Filipinos lived on the seacoast or the 
banks of navigable lakes and streams. Their only means of transportation 
were boats: there is no evidence of wheeled vehicles or draft animals. 
Traders and raiders, friends and foes crossed from one side of a river to the 
other by boat, from island to island, and between distant ports on the same 
island. Communities were connected, not separated, by water: it was by 
water that they exchanged foodstuffs, manufactured wares, and foreign 
imports. The eventual clearing off of. interior forests and the opening of 
new land to the plow and population expansion may be seen as an eman- 
cipation from the limitations of the older boat culture. But the new 
economy was dependent, and still is, on an overland road system periodi- 
cally interrupted by the destruction of bridges across waterways that were 
once the arteries of Filipino culture, channels for the movement of people, 
goods, and ideas, not obstacles to it. 


Introduction 


Introduction 


A Tagalog barangay was a group of people fuled over by one datu. It was 
to him they owed allegiance, not to a municipal, provincial, tribal, or 
national government, though datus often joined their barangays in com- 
mon communities, reckoning precedence and making alliances among 
themselves. This was true even in the Muslim sultanates in the south: the 
sultan ruled his datus but they in turn ruled their own communities. After 
Manila became the seat of colonial government, the word spread with its 
Tagalog meaning to other parts of the archipelago where it meant a boat 
in the local languages. 

The Spaniards retained both the term and the institution as a conven- 
ient means of collecting tribute through barangay heads. It should be 
noted, however, that the word continued to mean the people, not the : 
place. Up to the end of the Spanish regime, baptismal registers identified § 
nonelite parents not by their place of residence but as belonging to the 
barangay ot Don So-and-so, some member of the local gentry. Of course, :, 
members of the same barangay usually lived in the same place, but not 
necessarily: they sometimes res ifferent barrios and occasioned jurisdic-| 
tional disputes between tribute collectors. Recently the term has been | 
revived by the Philippine government to replace the colonial term bairio, | 
despite the irony of the native word’s original meaning — a political unit ; 
loyal to a local boss. 

The Word “Filipino ” 

When Spanish expeditionary commander Ruy Lopez de Villalobos 
reached the Philippines in 1542, he named die islands of Leyte and Samar 
Filipinas after the young prince who would become King Philip II, from 
which the later colony would be called Las Islas Filipinos. The Spaniards 
called the natives of the archipelago indios, compounding Christopher| \ 
Columbus’s well-known error of thinking he had reached the Orient — that 
is, the Indies — in the Caribbean. But when it was necessary to distinguish 
die indios of the Philippines from those of the Americas, they were galled 
Filipinos. So Pedro Chirino’s 1604 Relacion has a chapter on “The food and 
terms of courtesy and good manners of the Filipinos” (Chirino 1604, 38), g 
and Juan Francisco de San Antonio devotes a chapter of his 1738 Cr&nicas g 
to “The letters, languages, and politeness of the Philipinos” (San Antonio 
1738, 140), while Francisco Antolm argues in 1789 that “the ancient wealtii 
of the Philipinos is much like that which the Igorots have at present” -j 
(An toll n 1789, 279). In short, the people of the Philippines were called 


Filipinos when they were practicing their own culture — or, to put it an- 
other way, before drey became indios. 

In the nineteenth century, Spaniards born in the colony began to be 
called Espahoks fdipinos to distinguish them from Spaniards born in Spain, 
a designation which was logically contracted to Filipinos when speaking of 
Spaniards. Philippine-born Spaniards, however, often resented being called 
Filipinos by peninsulares, preferring the term hijos del pais — children of the 
land. Sinibaldo de Mas (1843, 138) in his 1842 population estimates more 
neutrally divides Spaniards and Filipinos into the following categories — 
Filipinos (indios) , Espanoles filipinos, and Espaholes europeos. “Indio filipino” 
was just how Francisco Suarez signed himself a century before when he 
engraved a portrait of Philip V for Pedro Murillo Velarde’s 1743 Cursus Juris 
Canonici (frontispiece), and native Filipinos were still using the term in the 
next century. As Jose Rizal (1887, 111) said of the Philippine community 
in Madrid, “Creoles, Mestizos and Malays, we simply call ourselves Filipi- 
nos.” Finally, with the growth of a national consciousness, Filipino patriots 
began to project the term anachronistically into past centuries. Thus, they 
identified all Spanish bishops born in the Philippines as native Filipinos, 
however surprised those bishops would have been to hear themselves 
referred to as such. 

When the Americans seized the Spanish colony as spoils of the Spanish- 
American War, they called its inhabitants Filipinos, and so today citizens of 
die Republic of the Philippines are recognized in international law as 
Filipinos. Common parlance, however, has tended to exclude people 
whose ancestors were never acculturated into the Spanish colony, even 
though diey vote in national elections and travel abroad on Philippine 
passports. Carlos P. Romulo was once burned in effigy by Baguio collegians 
for stating that Igorots were not Filipinos, and many Muslims reject the 
term as a colonial imposition by a foreign power their ancestors resisted. 
Nor does the confusion end there. In 1955, Agnes Newton Keith incorpo- 
rated a popular perception in her Bare Feet in the Palace: “In the nineteenth 
century, by Spanish edict, the native born in the Islands was known as an 
‘indio’ and not called Filipino” (Keith 1955, 74). But no such edict is 
known to serious histoiy, though nonhistorians have not infrequently 
referred to such a restriction. 3 

Despite this somewhat checkered career, the term Filipino will be used 
in this work to refer to those ancestors of the present Filipino citizens, who 
resided in the archipelago in the sixteenth century, and who spoke Philip- 
pine languages. 


Introduction 


Introduction 


111 


The Filipino People 

According to the latest historical study of Philippine populations, there j 
were between one and two million inhabitants in the archipelago at the % 
time of Spanish advent. 4 The Spaniards recognized them as one race of 
medium stature, black hair, and dark skin — though those dark enough to 
be called kayumanggi (brown) in Tagalog were exceptions rather than the 
norm. Individual friars sometimes referred to Filipinos in a particular 
island as being taller, lighter, braver, or more muscular than others, but 
these were subjective comments which reflected value judgments and the 
fact that Spaniards themselves varied greatly in complexion and stature. As 
an early Tagalog dictionary says of the word cayomangi, “There are some 
they call this . . . like Father Domingo de Nieva, and Father Fray Antonio 
they call maitim sa cayomangi [almost black]” (Blancas de San Jose 1610, 
moreno). Otherwise, they distinguished Filipinos by their languages, the 
Visayans by their tattoos, and highlanders as primitive. And they did not 
include those they called negros or negiillos (blacks or “little blacks,” that is, | 
Negritos) under the rubric of indio at all. 

Negritos obviously belonged to a different race from the rest of the | 
Filipino people, though observed variations in pigmentation and stature 
suggested considerable intermarriage with non-Negritos. Spaniards were 
also inclined to refer to Muslim Filipinos — Moros — as a separate race, an 
unfortunate equation of race, language, and religion which persists in 
popular prejudice even today. Christian Filipinos frequently refer to a 1 
nonexistent “Moro language,” and the Taosug Muslims in Sulu fondly 
recall their ancestors as Arabs rather than Filipino converts. The king of 
Spain, however, knew better. Philip II ordered that his indio subjects who 
were converts to Islam should not be enslaved like Moro invaders and 
preachers from outside the colony. 

The Spaniards also recognized die Chinese as another race — like the 
political refugees they found settled on the Tondo waterfront and Manila 
environs. Spanish failure to mention any Chinese trading colonies, except 
for one dubious reference to Chinese men and women in Vigan, comes as 
a surprise, considering their sanguine interest in China as a commercial 
and missionary target. Of course, they would have been unable to recog- f 
nize any descendants of Chinese who dressed like indios and spoke Philip- | 
pine languages. For this same reason, the Chinese will be used in this work 
only to mean people who spoke Chinese and practiced Chinese customs. 

It has often been averred that the Spaniards found highland and low- 
land Filipinos in a state of traditional enmity when they arrived. But the j 

8 


examples cited always involve independent tribes on the one hand, and 
subjugated Filipinos on the other. What the Spaniards did report on their 
arrival was that armed conflict and raiding were commonplace, if not 
endemic, in precolonial Philippine society. No doubt this included high- 
land-lowland warfare, but was not limited to it. A well-known passage from 
Miguel de Loarca’s 1582 Relacion indicates that enmity did not preclude 
mutual trade: 

There are two kinds of men in this land [Panay] who, though they are all one, 
behave somewhat differently and are almost always enemies — [he one, those who live 
on the seacoast, and the other, those who live in the mountains, and if they have some 
peace between them it is because of the necessity they have of one another to sustain 
human life, because those of the mountains cannot live without the fish and salt and 
other things and jars and plates which come from other parts, nor can those on the 
coast live without the rice and cotton which the mountaineers have (loarca 1582, 120). 

Scholarly friars also speculated on the origins of the Filipino people. 
They had no doubt that the Negritos were the aboriginal inhabitants of the 
land, but were unable to account for the highlanders in the interior. 
Perhaps — they speculated — they were also aborigines who withdrew in the 
face of later migrations; or they may have been a mixture of civilized and 
uncivilized tribes, or even the descendants of shipwrecked Chinese or 
Japanese seafarers. But they were agreed that the lowland population came 
from Malay-speaking islands to the south, and they accounted for the 
variety of Philippine languages accordingly — for example, Tagalogs from 
Borneo, Kapampangans from Sumatra, or Visayans from Makassar. These 
Malay origins were based on observed similarities between Malay and 
Philippine languages, similarities arising from the fact that both Malay and 
all Philippine languages are members of the great Austronesian family of 
languages. 

Malay was the trade language of Southeast Asia at the time, and took its 
name from the Sumatran port of Melayu (now Djambi) , once the seat of 
expansive political power. Speakers of this language could be found in all 
tlie trading ports in the Philippines from Sarangani to Manila, either 
professional interpreters or members of the ruling families. When Magellan’s 
Sumatran slave spoke to the ruler of Limasawa, himself a native of the 
trading center of Butuan, “the king understood him,” Pigafetta (1524b, 
114) said, “because in those parts the kings know more languages than the 
other people.” And because of Manila’s Bornean connections, Tagalog 
today has more Malay loan words than any of the other major Philippine 
languages. Indeed, it seems that the Manila elite were speaking Malay as a 


q 


Introduction 


Introduction 


prestigious second language in the sixteenth century. 1 hat is no doubt why 
Tagalog was long considered to be a derivative of Malay, if not an actual 

dialect of that language. i 

The word Malay was also used to mean people of the same physical type 
as Malay speakers, even if they did not speak that language themselves. Sd| 
Austrian Filipinist Ferdinand Blumentritt used it in a famous essay m 1882 
in which he derived the Filipino people from three waves of Malay migra- 
tion into the archipelago. The first wave, he theorized, displaced the 
Negritos they found on the coast, but married their women; the second: 
wave drove the first into interior mountains, and became the progenitors 
of the present lowland population; and the third wave introduced Islam. 
Blumentritt was not the only modern ethnologist who proposed a series of 
racially discrete migrations to account for the island populations of South- 
east Asia, nor would he be the last; In the twentieth century, H. Otley Beyer 
may well be said to have surpassed them all with the grandeur of a wave 
migration theory which is known to every literate Filipino today. 5 


The Beyer Wave Migration Theory 

The well-known theory was produced by Beyer, then head of the Anthro- 
pology Department of the University of die Philippines, for the 1916 
Census, to explain the physical and cultural variations among the Filipino 
people. The physical differences he attributed to genetic commingling, 
among a series of migrating peoples of unlike racial type, and cultural 
differences presumed to be precolonial — like tools and weapons, food? 
crops and agriculture— he assigned to these different waves. At the time, j 
no archaeological fieldwork had been done in the archipelago: it was Beyer | 
himself who would pioneer that field in 1921 with the discovery of Stone | 
Age sites in Novaliches. During the next twenty years, he assigned every j 
bone and artifact recovered to one of the waves, and placed the waves J 
themselves in a chronological sequence from primidve to advanced. And 
since he considered any similarity between Philippine finds and those 
made elsewhere in Asia to be evidence of migrations rather than culture 
contacts, the number of waves steadily multiplied. By 1953 they had reached 
their final count. In Beyer’s own terminology, they were as follows: 

First came the Java Man, and then the “litde people”— Australoid Sakai, 
Negritos, and Proto-Malays— followed by two waves of Indonesians— Type 
A and Type B— with a smaller wave of Papuans, who were succeeded in turn, 
by separate Northern and Southern Malay waves, and finally the Jar burial 


people- To these were added two peoples from nineteenth-century folk- 
lore- — the Orang Dampuan in Sulu, and the Ten Datus of Borneo said to 
have purchased Panay Island from native Negritos. Each of these waves was 
provided with a point of origin, credited with distinct cultural traits, and 
described in physical detail. Migrants of the first waves walked dry-shod into 
the archipelago together with Pleistocene mammals over land bridges 
since submerged, but later ones came from China, Vietnam, Borneo, and 
the Celebes in dugout canoes or plank-built boats. The Proto-Malays car- 
ried blowguns, bows and arrows; the Northern Malays introduced bronze 
and rice terraces; and the Southern Malays were blacksmiths, weavers, and 
potters. Java Man was powerfully muscled and hairy; Type A Indonesians, 
tall, light-skinned, and thin-lipped; and Southern Malays were tattooed. All 
in all, it was an imaginative and comprehensive synthesis. But it was also 
flawed by little evidence, dubious methodology, and simple fantasy. 

Since Beyer’s day, forty years of additional research have cast doubt on 
this synthesis. Geologists question the existence of the land bridges; archae- 
ologists cannot fit lithic finds into his categories; anthropologists demand 
skeletal remains to determine human stature; prehistorians are persuaded 
of the antiquity of trade contacts in Southeast Asia; and linguists believe 
that people speaking Philippine languages were living in the archipelago 
thousands of years ago. Probably none of them would accept Beyer’s 
assumption that by examining living populations you can determine what 
kind of tools their ancestors used, or that by examining tools you can 
determine the race of the men who made them. Beyer also gave little 
consideration to the fact that cultures are dynamic, not static, that they 
survive through change, adjustment, innovation, development, and bor- 
rowing. Thus the fact that Filipinos in Manila eat McDonald’s hamburgers 
but those in Bontoc do not does not require one more wave migration to 
explain it. It is probably safe to say that no anthropologist accepts the Beyer 
Wave Migration Theory today. 6 

Most prehistorians today only postulate two movements of people into 
the islands of Southeast Asia and the Pacific to account for the present 
populations. The first they call Australoid, people whose surviving repre- 
sentatives are generally characterized by very dark pigmentation. Philip- 
pine Negritos are considered to be a specialized physical variation of this 
stock. The second movement is thought to have begun some five or six 
thousand years ago, and to have largely displaced or absorbed the earlier 
population, though whether it reached the Philippines from the north or 
south is a question still being debated with some heat. These people are 
known to anthropologists as Southern Mongoloid and to laymen as the 

11 


Introduction 


Introduction 


I 


brown race, but are also called Austronesian because their descendants 
speak languages belonging to that family. The physical types which ah 
earlier generation of anthropologists provided with a long list of racial and; 
subracial names are now regarded as genetic specializations within the 
normal range of variations of the larger movement. Moreover, many of 
these people have continued to move from island to island up into historic 
times, not as migration waves but as small groups of settlers, ttaders, or 
castaways. All of them would have contributed to local gene pools, but 
those new genes would not have carried language skills or tool-making: 
techniques . 7 

It is important to note that these migrating populations are not considf: 
ered to have been physically homogeneous. This means that Austronesian 
settlers arrived in the Philippines with considerable variations in stature* 
pigmentation, and facial features, though it is not now possible to identify 
these differences. Setdement and intermarriage in small communities 
would cause such genetic traits, as well as those of any strangers marrying 
in from outside, to be shared by an increasing 1 portion of the population' 
in each generation. Thus inhabitants of a whole valley might come tti 
exhibit a kind of family resemblance, and even to be regarded by outsiders 
as a separate race. Conversely, many such differences are not genetically 
significant: It is a common observation that with improved diet and hy- 
giene, younger generations are taller than their parents. In the same vein; 
elderly Igorots often develop enlarged first toes, and so do Tagalog boat- 
men who pole barges walking barefoot along bamboo runways, but their 
children are not born with this deformity . 8 


Philippine Languages 

Philippine languages belong to the Austronesian language family, a 
huge group of more than six hundred languages spread from Madagascar 
off the coast of Africa in the west to Easter Island off the coast of South; 
America in the east. All these languages, like the cultures of which they are 
a part, are dynamic, not static; their vocabularies, grammar, and pronun? 
ciations are constantly changing. When two speech communities diverge^ 
until they are recognizably different but can still understand each other, 
they are said to speak two dialects of the same language; but if they diverge 
, to such an extent that they cannot understand each other, they constitute 
two separate languages. Thus, for example, Banaue and Kiangan are two 


dialects of Ifugao, but Ifugao and Tagalog are two different languages, 
mutually unintelligible. In time, the mother tongue from which daughter 
dialects and languages are derived will disappear, but linguists can theoreti- 
cally reconstruct such extinct protolanguages by comparing the similarities 
between the living languages which are descended from them. 

These similarities are accounted for in two ways — outright borrowing 
from other languages, or inheritance from a common ancestral stock. 
Terms are often borrowed to accompany new cultural introductions — like 
Malay kuda for horse in Manobo and T’boli, or Spanish caballo (that is, 
kabayo ) in Tagalog, Ilocano, and Visayan. Or they may reflect the prestige 
in which the donor language is held. So Malay binibini (female) was taken 
for “princess” in Tagalog, while daddy and papa have replaced ama (father) 
in many Philippine households today. But there would be little need to 
borrow a word like mata (eye) which appears in many Austronesian lan- 
guages. Linguists seeking the relationship of sister languages therefore 
compare a basic vocabulary of concepts like sun and moon, nose and hair, 
and up and down, which would presumably be common to any human 
society. From this exercise, they are able to construct a family tree which 
shows the relationship of the languages belonging to the family as a kind 
of genealogy. 

On an Austronesian language tree produced by this method, Philippine 
languages are found on the lowest branches, meaning to say that 
Austronesian languages were being spoken in the archipelago earlier than 
in places like the Malay Peninsula or the Pacific Islands. By the time of 
Spanish advent, Austronesian speakers had occupied the whole archi- 
pelago, absorbing or displacing the sparse populations already present, as 
their original tongue diversified into three main branches: A northern 
branch included Luzon languages like Ilocano, Ibanag, and those on the 
Cordillera. A southern branch included almost all the languages spoken in 
Mindanao. A central branch had proliferated most widely; it included not 
only Visayan but all the languages between Pampanga and Butuan, as well 
as Taosug in Sulu. In addition, a non-Philippine Austronesian language 
had entered with a boat people the Spaniards called Lutaw or Lutaya, and 
diversified into the Sama-Badjaw languages. With this exception, however, 
all Philippine languages have more in common with one another than any 
one of them does with a language outside the Philippines. This means that 
the Filipinos the Spaniards met in the sixteenth century were speaking 
languages produced within the archipelago, not introduced by separate 
migrations from abroad . 9 


13 



Introduction 


A Word about Orthography 

Spanish orthography confuses b and v, and non-Castilians confuse sand 
. soothe same place in the Philippines appears both as BuayaznA as Vizaya 
so too, Bigan was written Vigan, and Legazpl’s name was often spe ed 
“Legaspi ’’The Spanish alphabet had no wor ng( so Father Chirmo omitted 
these letters from his Philippine alphabet); thus Dr. Morga speUed — , 
“timagua”; and since n and gwere pronounced as separate consonanB, 
Pangasinan (land of salt) came to be pronounced Pang-ga-si-nam 1 - 
deed many of these Spanish mispronunciations have been accepted in | 
modern Philippine languages. Wawa (in Pampanga) ts j 

pronounced “Guagua,” while barangay, wh.ch was always spelled balangay ; 

in Tagalog dictionaries, is now pronounced ba-rang-gay. 

In citing Philippine terms from Spanish dictionaries I have respelled 
them in accordance with normal Philippine usage^Thus I have changed 
and nu to k as appropriate, and gui to gi, replaced u with w and with y , 
before or after vowels, and doubled the g of ng where necessaiy-as in 
kayumanggiCor cayomangi. But I have been unable to solve the Pjobk .r 
u and o, and eand i being used inconsistently even in the same lexico, 
the fact that some dialects have l where others have >, and that r is 
sometimes a variant of d. For Tagalog, however, I have simply adopted the 
conventional modern spelling. 





CHAPTER 1 




Physical Appearance 


i 



Descriptions of the color of Filipinos by Spaniards in the sixteenth 
century were often contradictory. For example, the first Filipinos the 
Spaniards observed were Visayans from Homonhon, Limasawa, and Butuan, 
land were described by the visitors as being of medium stature and dark- 
skinned. As for Pigafetta, he called them oUvastri (in Italian), meaning 
plive-skinned or tanned, and English corsair Thomas Cavendish called 
ijCapul Islanders tawny. But the most frequent designation was “the color of 
looked quince” (Pretty 1588, 42). 

j; On the other hand, Father Alcina said he did not think they were really 
hat dark, though almost, and that the nadves of Leyte and Samar were 
ighter than those of Davao. Mentrida, however, defined Visayan mailurn as 
fi color a bit darker than that natural to the Visayans, though not black like 
he Ate (Negroes or Negritos) . From Cebu, Juan de la Isla reported that the 
| latives were darker than the indios of Mexico, but a contemporaneous 
I iccount written in Mexico said they were lighter, 
r The subjectivity of these descriptions is indicated not only by their 
Contradictions but also by the fact that sympathetic accounts regularly refer 
o Filipinos as light-skinned. Thus the natives of Leyte in whose homes a 

1 



THE VISAYAS 


Physical Appearance 


dozen shipwrecked Spaniards spent seven months in 1 544 were referred tj 
as white. Itis also significant that in such accounts tins color « coupted™| 
other approving adjectives: Loarca said the Visayans were well-bum, ^ood- 
“ook ng and not very dark. Chirino said the same thing, and m the case off 
the Boholanos, said they were not only lighter and more handsome than! 

other Visavans, but braver and more spirited. 

Women were generally lighter than men due to occupations like weaw 
ing which kept them less exposed to the sun. In particular, the seclu ed 
daughters of ranking dams were said to be as light as European ladies and 
so were the slave girls who danced naked to entertain royal vis, tors. Ch i- 
dren were also light at birth, and when men stripped, they revealed a pale 

ar< 0 fTotTse'm be^hT-Irifh, Filipinos were not all the same shade nor were 
they all necessarily darker than Spaniards. In any event, before the devel- 
opme.it of a colonial consciousness, Visayans themselves were unimpr essed 
bv these color differences. Their Iberian invaders were perceived not as 
mapuli, white, but as majmraw, natural or undyed-that is, untattooed. / id 

of! 


plain white teeth, a feature shared with monkeys, dog,, and^ As the 
Visayans said of the smiles of persons who exposed a mouthfu f 
undecorated teeth, these were “baga napkangnan hultg.d [like a chaw of| 
coconut meat]” (Sanchez 1617, 254v). 


Decorative Dentistry 

The idea that only wild animals had white teeth was widespread in; 
southeastern Asia: English businessman Ralph Fitch noted it m Burma in 
1591. Human beings were thought to be distinguished by cosmehc refine, 

ments like filed and stained teeth. . J 

The Visayans called tooth filing sangka, leveling, and 11 ^ one i 
expert with a slender stone file, who sometimes removed half the tooth 
the process. Variations included opening the space between teeth, o 
grinding them to saw-toothed points, but the desired effect was always 
render diem even and symmetrical. This involved correcting or obv.aungt 
natural misalignment, and the reduction of those eye teeth so suggest., 

f Te fHecfithe teeth were colored in different ways Regular chewing j 
anipay root made them black, or the application of a tar-based coatu 


called tapul gave them the appearance of polished ebony, and probably 
had a preservative effect. Red lakha ant eggs were used to color teeth — and 
kaso flowers, both teeth and fingernails — a deep red, an effect heightened 
and preserved by habitual betel nut chewing. 

The most impressive examples of Visayan dentistry were its goldwork. 
Gold-pegged incisors were noted by Pigafetta in Limasawa and by Urdaneta 
in Lianga Bay, and plenty of beautiful specimens have been recovered from 
archaeological digs. Pusadwas the general term for teeth goldwork, whether 
they were inlays, crowns, or plating. The mananusad was the dental worker, 
a professional who got paid for his services. As the Sanchez dictionary 
(1617, 434v) puts it, “Pilay sohol ko nga papamusad ako dimo [How much 
will you charge me for gold teeth]?” 

Halop, covering, included both plating held on by little gold rivets run 
through the tooth, and actual caps extending beyond the gum line, also 
secured by pegs. Bansilwere gold pegs inserted in holes drilled with an awl 
called ulok, usually in a thumbnail-shaped field that had been filed into the 
surface of the incisors beforehand. If they were simple pegs without heads 
they looked like gold dots on ivory dice when filed flush with the surface 
of the tooth. (Si Awi, king of Butuan, had three in each tooth.) But if the 
pegs were tack-shaped, their flat heads overlapped like golden fish scales; 
or if round-headed, they could be worked into intricate filigreelike designs 
similar to beadwork. Of course, this goldwork was considered all the more 
effective if displayed on teeth polished bright red or jet black. 

Such dentistry figures in the epic literature of Mindanao: a common 
image is the flash of golden brilliance when the hero opens his mouth to 
speak or smile. A lyrical passage in the Manobo Ulahingan describes how 
it is highlighted by the blood red of a chew of betel nut: 


He then picked up 

The ready-made mema’an [quid]. 

Tenderly he pushed this through 
His teeth artistically designed, 

Gendy he pressed it in between 
His molars with lovely pattern. 

There is nothing you can see 
Except the flashing of crimson . . , 

No need to be surprised! 

Because what is sparkling 

Are his shining gold-crowned teeth, 

What is glittering all over 

Are the shining empenelek [caps] (Maquiso 1977, 183). 


19 


THE VISAYAS 


Physical Appearance 


Tattooing 

The Spaniards called the Visayans “Pintados" because they wer| 
“painted” — that is, tattooed. Batuk was the general term for tattoos-or 
patih in some places-and it also meant the marking of snakes or lizards, 
or any design printed or stamped on. These tattoos were symbols of male 
valor: they were applied only after a man had performed m battle with 
fitting courage and, like modern military decorations, they accumulated 
with additional feats. Any applied on one who had not killed or capture! 
an enemy were scorned as counterfeit. Moreover, a tattooed man who wj 
considered cowardly was compared to a halo lizard, a large black and yellow 

reptile “tattooed” all over but extremely timid. -1 

Warfare itself was seen as a kind of initiation rite into manhood: ligm 
was a youth’s first taste of war or sex, and tikladws his first conquest eit er 
in battle or love. Tattoos were therefore required for public esteem by 
either sex. Celibate transvestites, however, were socially acceptable mapuraw, 
natural-colored. Not surprisingly, the Visayan vocabulary included termj 
like kulmat, to strut around showing off new tattoos, and hundmoas, stripped 

to the waist for bravado. , , ,, § 

Tattooing itself was painful enough to serve as a test of manhood. lo| 
this reason, some men who were qualified as warriors postponed m 
operation until shamed into it. On the other hand, there were those who 
showed more macho mettle by adding labong scars on their arms with 
burning moxa, pellets of wooly fibers used in medical cautery. Still more 
rugged were those who submitted to facial tattooing. Indeed, those withl 
tattoos right up to the eyelids constituted a Spartan elite. Such county 
nances were truly terrifying and no doubt intimidated enemies in battlejj 
well as townmates at home. Men would be slow to challenge or antagonize 
a tough with such visible signs of physical fortitude. 

Tattoo work was done by a skillful artist who was well paid for his service| 
He began by tracing the designs on the body with an ink made from pitch 
soot, then pricked them into the skin with a small tool set with a numfcgj 
of short needles like the teeth of a comb, and then rubbed soot into th$ 
fresh wounds. Biro was both the soot and the ink, and the Spaniards 
mistakenly thought the reason tattoos were permanent was because thf 
biro mixed with the blood. (Not a few of them also believed tattoos wer| 
burned on with a hot iron.) The operation was not performed all in one 
sitting but in installments, but even so, often caused a high fever and 
occasionally infection and death. Bang or binogok was the healing penoel 
when the wounds were still swollen, and if infection caused the designs to 
be muddied, they were called just that — mud (lusak). 


The first tattoos a person received were applied to the legs beginning at 
the ankles and ending at the waist. Chest tattoos which looked like breast- 
plates — less frequently, tattoos on the abdomen — only came after further 
action in battle; and still later, those on the whole back, widest field for the 
tattooer’s artistry. Facial tattoos from ear to chin to eye were restricted to 
the boldest and toughest warriors. If the illustrations in the late sixteenth- 
century Boxer Codex accurately portray Visayan tattoos, these were char- 
acterized by bold lines up legs and back, and matching geometric floral 
designs on both pectorals and buttocks (see fig.l). 

Different regions were no doubt distinguished by different patterns, but 
a few generalizations can be made. Labid were the distinctive inch-wide 
lines, both the straight ones and those which, in Father Sanchez’s (1617, 
283) words, “go snaking or zigzagging up the leg to the waist.” Ablay were 
those on the shoulder; clubdub, those on the chest up to the throat; and 
daya-daya — or tagur in Panay — on the arms. Bangut (a muzzle or halter) 
were the ones that made of the face such a frightening mask, also called 
langi, “gaping” like a crocodile’s jaws or the beak of a bird of prey. 
Hinawak — from haiuak, a tight, lean waist — were men tattooed below the 
waist, and lipong were heroes tattooed all over (except under the G-string) 
like the fancy linipong porcelain jars from China. Women, however, only 
tattooed their hands, one or both, and the lines were exceedingly fine and 
had the appearance of damask or embroidery. 

Early Spanish descriptions give the impression that Visayan men wore 
long robes which covered them from neck to ankle. It is true that such 
garments existed, sometimes cut from expensive textile imported from 
mainland Asia, but it is hard to believe any pre-Hispanic dress code would 
have dictated the hiding of those prestigious decorations so painfully 
acquired. Of course, Filipinos quickly learned to adjust to colonial require- 
ments — the Boxer Codex shows a Tagalog wearing pantalones instead of a 
G-string — but missionaries addressing European audiences also wished to 
avoid the impression that their converts were naked savages. For example, 
in his Reladon published in Rome in 1 604, Jesuit Pedro Chirino (1604, 18) 
quickly added to his description of Visayan tattooing, “Not for this do they 
go around naked . . . but are always and in all places very circumspect and 
careful to cover their persons with extreme modesty and decency.” How- 
ever, in a later manuscript which his order never published, he said, 

The principal clothing of the Cebuanos and all the Visayans is the tattooing of 
which we have already spoken, with which a naked man appears to be dressed in a kind 
of handsome armor engraved with very fine work, a dress so esteemed by them they 
take it for their proudest attire, covering their bodies neither moi'e nor less than a 


on 


21 


THE V1SAYAS 


U ! 

Skull Moulding 

As mothers and midwives are well aware, the skulls of newborn infants- 
arelo soft that if they are continuously laid in the same posh, on, diem 
heads become flat on one side. Many cultures have taken advantage of this, 
phenomenon to give their children a skull shape which conforms to he- 
focal canons of bLuty. In non-Muslim parts of Sumatra, women used to 
bind babies' heads to produce flat foreheads and noses; the Melanau o? 
Sarawak wanted their children to grow up moon-faced and the Mma a 
of Celebes formerly restricted binding with a forehead boaid to the nobd 

ity. So too, ancient Visayans considered broad fac ^2 ’bTe^ skulls to 
heads and flat noses handsome, and compressed then babies skill to. 

30 Dozens skulls of this sort have been recovered from burial sitestf 
Albav Marinduque, Samar, Cebu, Bohol, Sungao, and Davao. The Aga 
Khan Museum in Marawi displays two complete skeletmis just as they were 
discovered in a Butuan grave: with reshaped skulls with black teeth File 
points. A scientific study of twenty-two Philippine specime^ 
considerable variation according to the amount and locatlon of * e 
sure whether between the forehead and the upper or lowe, part of; the 
occiput Thus some had normally arched foreheads but were flat behind 
others were flattened at both front and back, and a few were asymmetrical 
because of uneven pressure. However, all were short and broad: one even 
rated a cephalic index of 100— meaning it was of equal length and width, 

" Visayan skull moulding was done with a device called tangad, a comMilg 
set of thin rods bound to a baby’s forehead by bandages fastened at . son| 
point behind. (The Bikolanos used a kind of little plate or tablet called 
or a padded one called saop.) This prevented the forward Ifl'-wtli id he 
frontal bone and directed it backward so that the head grew higher at e 
rear. Adults with the desired tangad profile were called tmangad 
flatness of the back of the head was called puyah. The opposite of t ga 
“ as Father Sanchez ( 1617 , 378 , commented, >st t as drere : are 
puraw and binatakan [tattooed], so there are tmangadar id ondo The wo d 
ondo is itself a comment on the Visayan. attitude toward unmoulded skulls, 
it meant tight-packed or overstuffed-like a htmchback s hump. 




THE VISAYAS 


Physical Appearance 



Penis Pins 

Visayan men wore a pin through their penis for the greater stimulation j 
of their sex partners. The custom startled Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, and 
English observers alike, and scandalized missionary clergy of all orders. 
Most of them thought it was literally satanic— “Certainly a device no man ; 
could have invented,” Juan Martinez (1567, 461) said, “were it not by 
revelation of the Devil, the inhumanity of the pain being so great which the 

youths suffer in the piercing.” . | 

The pin was called tugbak and was inserted in childhood: Cavendish 
removed one from the ten-year-old son of a Capul chieftain. Tugbukj 
examined by Pigafetta— and he asked to examine many in order to dispel 
his disbelief— penetrated the urinary canal and therefore had a hole to 
facilitate urination. They were small bars of brass, gold, ivory, or lead, 01 a 
little tube of tin driven across the head of the penis to protrude on both 
sides far enough to receive decorations which ranged in size from simple 
rivets to hold them in place, to rosettes as large as the rowel of a horseman’s; 
spur. But generally they served to anchor a kind of ring or cogwheel with 
blunt teeth called s okra. In the case of the rings, one or more were pressed 
on, like finger rings, behind the pin; but the penis wheels had opposed 
holes to accommodate the tugbuk. One dug up in Dumangas (Iloilo), 
which is now in the Rajah Tupas Collection in Capiz, has eight knobby 
protrusions with a diameter of 5 cendmeters; but some were reported in 
the sixteenth century to have been 7 cendmeters across with a weight of 230;: 
grams. 11 

But, in use, these ornaments required manipuladon by the woman 
herself to insert, and could not be withdrawn undl the male organ was 
completely relaxed, a condition Visayans referred to as kinamakawing 
whether in humans or canines. Although there were twenty or thirty 
different kinds to cater to a lady’s choice, men preferred to leave the pin 
in place after the original operation, both to prevent the hole from growing 
shut and to avoid the discomfort of replacing it, though running the risk 
of calculous formations. (Urdaneta was told in Lianga Bay that virgins were 
always deflowered by slaves not fitted with tugbuk and sakra.) 

Aside from tugbuk and sakra, Martinez reported in Cebu, that “not far 
from here they say others make use of another device.” He was perhaps 
referring to the pellets implanted beneath the skin by men in Surigao or 
by Tagalog mountaineers east of Laguna de Bay. 

Of course, these devices were of sufficient bulk to produce pain and 
draw blood, and could cause crippling complications for both partners. 


Foreign observers, including chronicler Juan de Medina (1630, 58), there- 
fore attributed their use to an inordinate sexual appetite, 

so much so that women considered it a compliment and were proud of it, and in their 
songs during their drunken feast were wont to man a harahoa [warship] with those who 
had been their lovers; and as further evidence of this, they would not let a man 
approach them who did not have a sakra, which is a little spiked wheel like a Catherine 
Wheel, with the point blunted, which was fastened with a bronze pin through it, for 
since childhood they had their male organs pierced through, with which they did it 
T' with women like dogs. . 

Circumcision 

The practice of circumcision was widespread in the Visayas. It was called 
tuli and was technically supercision rather than circumcision — that is, cut 
lengthwise above rather than cut around. (If the prepuce was actually 
removed, the act was called girlo, the same term used for the cutting off a 
piece of a pig’s ear for identification purposes.) The uncircumcised were 
called pisot, an unripe fruit or green youth, a term which was also a polite 
euphemism for the female parts. The operation was performed informally 
with no particular ceremony, and was thought to serve hygienic purposes. 

Spanish missionaries were quick to conclude that the custom had been 
introduced by their Muslim competitors, as it probably had been in some 
areas, but Visayans claimed that their custom was of indigenous origin 
predating any contact with Islam — and so did circumcised natives of Guam. 
Certainly circumcision is too universal a practice to require any Semitic 
origin: it was practiced by the ancient Aztecs in Mexico, and still figures in 
male initiation rites among African tribes and native Australians. In the 
seventeenth century, however, the word islarn came to be used in Visayan 
for circumcision according to the Muslim rite, and magislam meant to 
perform the ceremony. 

ps 

Pierced, Ears 

Both men and women wore earrings. They had their ears pierced — men 
with one or two holes per lobe, while women with three or four — to 
accommodate a variety of ornaments. 

Earrings with or without pendants were held by thin gold pins run 
through the ear and fastened behind, but earplugs required holes as wide 

25 




THE VISAYAS 


Physical Appearance 


as two fingers, or lobes distended into loops through which a person could 
stick his fist. The holes were made in the cartilage, one above the other, and 
women wore jewelry in all of them. The most common style for men, 
however, were single rings worn in the bottom holes. These rings were 
thick as a finger, some hollow and others of solid gold heavy enough to pull 
the earlobe down until the ring actually touched the shoulder. The swing- 
ing motion of these huge gold rings, like that of the glittering spangles 
dangling from the ladies’ earrings, was part of their attractiveness. Among 
ceramic heads found in the Initao burial cave in Lekak (Cotabato), one was 
modeled with holes through elongated earlobes for free-moving rings. J 
The holes -hogar or tosok — were made with a copper needle. The first 
holes in the earlobes were made soon after birth, while the rest of the holes, 
before the second year. A thick cotton thread was looped through the hole 
to keep it from closing. After the wound had healed, the thread was 
replaced with a series of gradually thicker bamboo or hardwood splints 
until the hole was as large as the circumference of the little finger. It was 
then slowly extended to the desired size by inserting leaves tightly rolled 
up, springlike, to exert steady gentle pressure outward. 

If the distended lobes tore out, the ends could be trimmed and the raw 
edges sutured together to heal whole again. This operation was called kulol 
or sisip, and was most frequently requested by women because when two of 
them got in a fight, they would go for each other’s ears first. 

Persons without pierced ears were called bingbing. Those whose earlobe| 
were naturally too short for successful piercing and distending were bibit. 


Hair 

Hairstyles usually differed between one community and another and 
could go in and outoffashion quickly. In the 1520s, Visayans in Homonhon 
had hair down to their waist, while the king of Butuan wore his at shoulde| 
length, and men on the coast of Surigao pulled theirs back into a knot at 
the nape of the neck. In the 1560s, Cebuanos were gathering it up in a 
headcloth; twenty years later, a knot or chignon either on top of the head 
or at the back was the style all over the Visayas. But they all had long hair; 
to cut it was a sign of deepest mourning, or a punishment. J 

Only where Spanish influence was greatest did Filipinos cut their halt 
short, a change Father Alcina (1668a, 1:39) considered part of “taming 
their ancient ferocity with the gentleness of the Gospel.” Manila Muslims 


a lso had short hair, so Visayans considered them alot, shorn, and a rough 
curse to exclaim at a Tagalog was “Inalotan ka [You close-cropped, you] ! ” 
(Ivfentrida 1637a, 18). 

However, facial hair — and in some places body hair, too— was removed 
with tweezers or a pair of clam shells. Both men and women had their 
eyebrows shaved into thin arcs likened to a crescent moon. 

Women took pride in a great mass of hair, gathering up ankle-length 
desses into a chignon as large as the head itself, with curls over the 
forehead, together with additional switches called panta or talabhok which 
were considered their crowning glory. For a man to tou£h such a hairdo was 
a terrible offense, but they were a handy target for other women: sampolong 
meant to grab somebody by the locks, especially the chignon. Flowers were 
worked in for fragrance, as well as sesame seed oil — also believed to 
encourage luxuriant growth— or a perfumed ointment called bulat, com- 
pounded of many ingredients. Datus, however, preferred the bolder scent 
of mammal excretions like ambergris, civet, or musk. A Panay epic waxes 
lyrical about Humadapnon’s perfumed grooming: 

A: Lubricated and oiled 

With oil sweet-scented, 

The scent permeates; 

Add the sweet body scent, 

Increase the permeating scent, 

Scent so breathtakingly strong, 

Odor so sweet, 

Flowing along brooks and streams, 

Drifting along the rivers (Barte 1987, lines 323-31). 

Spanish observers were impressed with the amount of time and care 
Visayans gave their hair, a preoccupation which is still echoed in oral 
literature. Datung Sumanga, the hero of a lost Visayan epic, only manages 
to overcome stubborn Princess Bubung Humasanun of Bohol by threaten- 
ing to come and personally tear off her panta. In the Manuvu cycle of the 
Cotabato-Davao border region, Tuwaang’s wife combs her warrior hus- 
band’s long hair before he sets out on his adventures, braiding it into 
several kinds of knots. In the Suban-on epics, a hero s locks aie oiled by his 
sister and wound into tight coils which should not come undone except in 
the hands of his sweetheart, and Chief Sandayo ofTubig Liyasan goes foi th 
to battle, armed with two victory charms plaited into his hair — one for the 
enemy and the other for the ladies. 


27 


THE VISAYAS 


Physical Appearance 


Clothing 

Visayan clothing varied according to cost and current fashions and so 
indicated social standing. The basic garments were the G-string and tube 
skirt — what the Maranaw call malong— or a light blanket wrapped aroundj 
instead. But more prestigious clothes, lihindihin, were added for public 
appearances and especially on formal occasions— blouses and tunics, loose; 
smocks with sleeves, capes, or ankle-length robes. The textiles of which they; 
were made were similarly varied. In ascending order of value, they were 
abaca, abaca decorated with colored cotton thread, cotton, cotton deco- 
rated with silk thread, silk, imported printstuffs, and an elegant abaca 
woven of selected fibers almost as thin as silk. In addition, Pigafetta men- 
tioned both G-strings and skirts of bark cloth. | 

The G-string (bakag) was a piece of cloth 4 or 5 meters long and 
something less than a meter wide: it was therefore much larger than those 
worn in Zambales and the Cagayan Valley, or by Cordillera mountaineers: 
today. The ends hanging down were called wayaway—ampis in front and 
pakawar behind — and were usually decorated. Binkisivms an expensive on| 
with fancywork called goiuat, and if it had a fringe of three-strand lubid 
cords, it was lubitan. G-strings were of the natural color of the cloth. 
However, in the case of men who had personally killed an enemy, they were 

qualified to wear deep red ones. j 

To put the G-string on, one end was held against the chest while the 
other was passed between the legs, pulled up between the buttocks and 
wrapped around the waist several times, thereby binding the front flap 
which was then allowed to hang down as ampis; the other end was then- 
knotted behind and let fall as pakawar. Care was taken to see that one of 
the wayaway was longer than the other: wearing both of equal length w^ 
considered ludicrous. The word watid was for a G-string dragging on the 
ground, a deliberate sign of mourning. 

Because its size permitted the bahag to be spread out to covei the entiie 
hip, many observers thought it was a kind of kilt from the waist to the knees.; 
And because of its bulk, men removed it in the privacy of their home: 
Sanchez (1617, 45) illustrated with die sentence, “Magbahag kita ay; 
magatubang sa Padre [Let’s put on our G-strings in front of the Father]| 
Men also wore a blanket or another length of doth as clothing. Singal 
was to put one on like a G-string; and tampi was simply to wrap it around; 
the hips, tied with a knot in front, and not passed between the legs. Alampay 
meant to wrap anything around the shoulders or over the head like a cape, 
including G-strings which were then given fewer turns around the waist to 
allow it to extend over the shoulder or head. To lend greater dignity to a 


formal occasion, an ankle-length garment called saob-saob was worn, with or 
without sleeves but open down the front like a cloak. Rajah Humabon put 
on a silk one at Magellan’s request to take his oath of vassalage to the 
Spanish king. 

There seems to have been no Visayan term for the long-sleeved gowns 
depicted in the Boxer Codex, with fine Pintado ankles just peeping out at 
the bottom (see fig. 2) — nor for those tight-sleeved tunics the Tagalogs 
called baro. Perhaps this can be explained by the fact that these pictures 
were painted twenty-five years after Spanish advent. However, though 
references from whatever source were and have been mkde to such clothes, 
these togalike garb could not have been the ordinary Visayan costume. All 
royal datus who had dealings with early Spanish commanders were clothed 
only in tattoos and G-strings — Kolambu of Limasawa, Awi of Butuan, 
Katuna of Bohol, and Tupas of Cebu. Bare-chested exposure to the ele- 
ments was a matter of masculine pride, and even a centuiy later, men’s 
jackets had still not caught on. Writing in 1668, Father Alcina said, 

They rarely used these tunics, or baros; what was common for going out and for 
working was the bahag only, except for old men who would cover up with these baros 
against the cold or extreme heat, or the flies and mosquitoes that bit them (Alcina 
1668a, 1:49). 

The tube skirt was described byjuan de la Isla in Cebu in 1565 as follows: 

The clothes which they wear are a piece of material closed like a sack or sleeve with 
two veiy wide mouths, and they make many pleats of the extra width on the left side, 
and, making a knot of the cloth itself, let the folds fall on the left, and although it does 
not go above their waist, with a tight blouse most of the body and legs are clothed (Isla 
1565, 235). 

This was the lambong , and because it could also be fastened under the 
armpits or over the shoulder, or even around the head, the Spaniards 
called it a sayo (smock or coat) rather than saya (skirt) . The same term was 
extended to include any garment tailored to the body, like the sinulog (i.e., 
Sulu-style) or sinina (Chinese) , a short jacket which exposed the midriff — 
and more, Father Sanchez observed, when they raised their arms. This 
sinina could have originated in Indonesia or Malaysia, since the Visayans 
called all foreigners Sina before the coming of the Europeans. 

Untailored clothes, however, had no particular names. Pandong, a lady’s 
cloak, simply meant any natural covering, like the growth on banana trunks 
or a natal caul. In Panay, the word kurong, meaning curly hair, was applied 
to any short skirt or blouse; and some better ones made of imported chintz 
or calico were simply called by the name of the cloth itself, tabas. So, too, 

29 


OO 



Fig. 2. Visayans in long-sleeved gowns and fine pintado ankles 
(From the Boxer Codex) 


Physical Appearance 


the wraparound skirt the Tagalogs called tapis was hardly considered a skirt 
at all: Visayans just called it habul (woven stuff) or halong (abaca) or even 
hulun (sash). Father Sanchez (1617, 54v) shared their assessment: he 
defined balikuskus as 

the knot which women make in their blanket when they wrap it around instead of a 
real skirt like those they more decently wear in these parts; if it is from Panay, 
Pampanga or the Tagalogs, it is really indecent. 

Open gowns or cloaks were closed in front by cords or gold gansing, a 
kind of hook-and-eye or button, at the throat; or a hulun sash, whence the 
waist or private parts were called ginhunlan. Imported textiles included fine 
white kayo from China and a thin red cotton from Borneo called kalasumba. 
High-quality local abaca or cotton was woven with alternating colored 
stripes (liray), sometimes of silk, or in squares (sokat) like alemaniscos (Ger- 
man stuff). Humabon’s queen walked in procession all in black and white, 
with a gold-striped silk scarf over her head, hat, and shoulders. 

Good lambong, blankets, or other clothes had decorative strips added to 
the edges and ends. Salukap was a checkered design, and potak, little 
rosettes, while luray were separately woven strips that looked like a banister 
of many colors. Datus and their ladies were distinguished by exquisite luray 
on all four sides called libot, a circuit, such as that which the sun appears 
to make around the earth, kalibutan. 

The usual male headdress was the pudong, turban, though in Panay both 
men and women also wore a headcloth or bandana called potlong or 
saplung. Commoners wore pudong of rough abaca cloth wrapped around 
only a few turns so that it was more of a headband than a turban and was 
therefore called pudong-pudong — as the crowns and diadems on Christian 
images were also later called. A red pudong was called magalong, and was 
the insignia of braves who had killed an enemy. The most prestigious kind 
of pudong, limited to the most valiant, was, like their G-strings, made of 
pinayusan, a gauze-thin abaca of fibers selected for their whiteness, tie-dyed 
a deep scarlet in patterns as fine as embroidery, and burnished to a silky 
sheen. Such pudong were lengthened with each additional feat of valor: 
real heroes therefore let one end hang loose with affected carelessness. 

Women generally wore a kerchief, called tubatub if it was pulled tight 
over the whole head; but they also had a broad-brimmed hat called sayap 
or tarindak, woven of sago-palm leaves. Some were evidently signs of rank: 
when Humabon’s queen went to hear mass during Magellan’s visit, she was 
preceded by three girls each carrying one of her hats. A headdress from 
Cebu with a deep crown, used by both sexes for travel on foot or by boat, 
was called sarok, which actually meant to go for water. 


31 



Ij 

i 


THE VISAYAS 


Jewelry 

Both Visayan men and women wore earrings and earplugs, necklaces 
and collars of beads or gold chain, bracelets, wristlets, anklets, and finger 
rings, as well as brooches, clasps, and gold sequins on their clothes, besides 
which men wore arm- and legbands. These ornaments weie made of 
tortoise shell, mother-of-pearl, precious stones, giant clam shells (which 
the Spaniards mistook for marble), and gold. Vegetable fibers and seeds 
were also used by the poor for everyday wear, and as part of male mourning 
ritual. But most of this jewelry was gold. 

From the day Magellan first saw gold earrings, armbands, and spear 
decorations in Homonhon, Spaniards kept reporting gold jewelry in truly J 
astonishing quantities. They were struck not only by its amount and wide 
distribution, but by the fact that it appeared to be part of the normal attire 
of persons otherwise almost naked. A Samar datu by the name of Ibeiein 
was rowed out to a Spanish vessel anchored in his harbor in 1543 by 
oarsmen collared in gold; while wearing on his own person earrings and 
chains, which Bernardo de la Torre estimated to be worth more than a 
thousand pesos, and little else. The impact of this display is reflected in the 
illustrations of the well-appointed Filipinos in the Boxer Codex (see fig. 3): 
it is the only known manuscript from the Philippines to make use 


gold leaf. 

Such jewelry was part of the bahandi heirloom wealth buried with rank- ; 
ing datus. As soon as Spanish soldiers discovered this fact, Legazpi found 
it necessary to issue orders that Filipino graves must not be opened except 
in the presence of His Majesty’s own officers — that is, to make sure that the. 
king got his due fifth. More professional grave robbers have since recov- 
ered much of this buried treasure, including pieces which certainly rank 


among the world’s most exquisite. Goldwork which remained above ground, 
however, rapidly disappeared as upper-class families liquidated ancestral 
property to meet new colonial demands, if not through outright robbery. . 
Nonetheless, Father Alcina a century later officiated the wedding of a 
twelve-year-old Visayan girl he thought was wearing no less than 25 pounds 
of gold. 

Visayan jewelry came in a bewildering variety of forms and styles. Among 
ear ornaments, for example, these were panika, the general term for rings 
and plugs worn in the lower hole (panikaan). Panika were often decorated 
with bunt granules of filigree. In particular, panika was also the term foi 
those finger-thick gold rings which were split on top to be fastened to the 
earlobe “like a letter 0,” Father Alcina (1668a, 1:41) said, “without being 

on 







THE VISAYAS . 

able to see the opening once they were inserted.” Pamarangov toai were 
large gold plugs, sometimes wheel-shaped with a gem set ,n the m.ddte, 
wh le daUn-datin were simple loops. Palbad were more dehcate rose «e 
worn by ladies in the uppermost hole; dmalopang, if shaped like a yellow 
dalopang blossom. Kayong-kayong was any pendant dangling from an ear- 
ring, while sangi was a single ring worn in one ear only. 

Necklaces, in the form of strands, chokers, and collars, ranged from 
dried seeds to precious stones and gold beads. Tigbiwre a kmd of fru.tand 
karobi, any fruits strung like beads. Camelians were the most popular 
predous sines, meat-colored beads that varied in hue from the deep red 
panggi and tarlip to the bright aki and toy™ or the more ^frous 
Garnets and other gems from China were called tahlay and like other 
jewels, were often strung in between gold beads. These gold beads included 
the four-sided matambukaw, long hollow Unaklum, and fancy pmom fin, als 
with granules added to their surface like tiny gold islands (pom). O ers 
were shaped like litde fruits-ortoylikejob’s-tears, tinigbi like Ugh fruit, or 

^nl^OTnlround Aeneck, wrists, or ankles, including the gold bands 
on men's biceps and above the calves of their legs, were called tote m 
general. Kasikas included binukaw bracelets of gold or silver, biaceltts 
made of mat vines, as well as those of rattan fiihil which men ued around 
their neck, wrist, or ankle with an oath not to remove these until they had 
avenged some loved one’s death. Dalak and Immmkamviere either bracelets 
or wristlets— that is, actual cuffs— and gaffs were shell bracelets so snug in 
fit that the hand was greased to slip them on or off. Ladies generally wore 
bracelets in sufficient number to attract attention with their jangling an 
loose; mahalululu was the hour of the day when one's bracelets slid down 

one’s arm if one pointed at the sun. 

The most spectacular item in this Visayan inventory was the kamagi, 
heavy gold chain of such tightly interlocked links it hardly looked like a 
chain at all, but rather as solid and sinuous as a golden serpent. These 
included both what are now called “gear-bead” necklaces and multiple 
“loop-in-loop” chains. They were also the most socially significant, an 
absolute essential for community standing, not simply by their possession 
but by the number and quality a family could display. The individual loops 
were called goar. When woven in their simplest form, they were called, 
sinoyot; but if square, pinarogmok; or if octagonal and with arge loun , 
finials called t ontonan, they were called simwalo. A single large kamagt 
strand was called saay, but the long thin barbar could reach 4 meters and 
so swing grandly to the ground even when doubled or tripled. 



CHAPTER 2 


Food and Farming 


The staple crops of the Visayans were rice, millet, taro, yams, and 
bananas grown in swiddens (kaingin), wild yams and sago. Rice was grown 
everywhere and was the preferred food. But since only in a few places could 
a year’s supply of rice be produced, root crops were therefore the most 
common food for part of the year, or all of the year for part of the people. 
This dearth in rice supply was later even more characteristic of the Spanish 
colony because tribute was collected in rice from the very beginning. As 
Father Alcina (1668a, 8:101-2) observed a centuiy later, “the rice usually 
does not last them longer than the time it takes to harvest it, since the rest 
they pay in tribute or sell to get the cash to pay it.” 

Spaniards made much of the fact that Visayans did not produce a year’s 
supply of rice, and that even datus with many slaves ate root crops in certain 
seasons. Apparently, neither were the Spaniards aware that low-intensity 
farmers wished to distribute to several different crops the risks of bad 
weather or infestation by locusts and other pests, nor did they consider 
that the Filipinos might not have found such annual variation in diet a 
particular hardship in the first place. Adverse conditions did, of course, 
cause food shortages, or even famines so severe that parents would sell 
children for food that was brought in from as far away as Borneo. Such 


35 


THE VISAYAS 


painful exchanges enabled them to provide for other chil dren '"^ 
they lost would be nourished to adulthood either as slaves or foster chil- 
dren Indeed, cases were not unknown of such children returning years 

later, married and prosperous. . • > thaf . 

The fact that Visayans lived in permanent settlements is evidence t at 
their swiddening techniques were not destructive-meaning foat a lavoT ahlc 
balance between their numbers and the land available to them permitted 
new swiddens to be made in the secondary growth on abandoned swiddens 
without cutting into virgin woodland each time. The late twentieth-cen- 
tury observer familiar with the denuded, eroded Visayan ten am can hai y 
imagine the lushness of its sixteenth-century flora and fauna. Fores plants 
and honey were part of normal diet in season, wild game was so plentiful 
swiddens needed fences like little stockades, and pigs gorging on fa 
fruit grew so fat they were easy prey for hunting dogs. Spanish accoun 
speak of the fertility of a soil that produced larger and better corn < :a “°- 
and sweet potatoes than the original specimens introduced from Mexico^ 
In short, it was an environment which was able to carry a sparse Visayan 
population that burned off a small portion of its cover every year. 




m 

Rice Farming 

In the sixteenth century, Visayans called rice humay tipasi, or paray, but; 
did not grow much of it irrigated-that is, in pond fields with stoning,, 
water. The early dictionaries include dozens of terms for rice cultivat g 
and many more for different varieues, but not a word about wet nee or 
more accurately, just one word about wet rice, and that was gam, a seedbed 
for rice to be transplanted to swampland or the floodplain of rivers where., 
it was all too frequently drowned. Instead, they planted dry nee in hillside 
swiddens with natural drainage. This often resulted m a symbiotic relation- 
ship between uplanders and lowlanders on the coast, the former exc . g 
ing rice for seafood, salt, and pottery from the latter- From Cebu^egazg 
sent soldiers to look for rice “in the mountains and highlands of the other; 
islands around” (Paes Soto Mayor, et al. 1597, 157) and eventually Iran ; 
ferred to Panay where “there is a great quantity of rice, and from the sea. 
[the Portuguese] cannot stop it from coming down the river from 

hills.” (ibid., 20) _ , , , , 

Swidden farming called for close attention to the weather: fields had t% 

be dry to bum but sprouting rice needed moisture. Visayans were aware of 
the changing seasons from the appearance of stars, the shifting directio | 
of winds, the flowering of plants, and the songs of birds. Because of varying 


Food and Farming 


exposure to monsoon winds, the best time for beginning the agricultural 
cycle was not the same on all islands and coasts. Magellan was asked for 
help by Rajah Kolambu of Limasawa in a harvest in late March; Berpardo 
de la Torre harvested some Filipinos’ rice under arms on the southern 
coast of Mindanao in October; and Legazpi reported that Panayanos were 
harvesting in October and November. Perhaps crops were grown twice a 
year in Iloilo: Miguel de Loarca gave a four-month schedule for preparing 
swiddens beginning in June — that is, when the Pleiades first appeared — 
which would presumably have been planted in September. 

Available swidden land was, for all practical purposes, unlimited: a 
century after Spanish advent, Alcina (1668a, 3:75) could still write, “Re- 
garding land, here there is no difference between mine and thine . . . 
because it is so great, so extensive, and in almost all places so good.” 
Farmers simply drove a stake in the ground or cut some branches off a tree 
to establish their claim. This claim did not include ownership of the land, 
however, but only of the crops grown on it. But not only crops could be 
harvested, traded, or sold. So could a full field of standing grain — for 
example, “Iyo ako daganihan sining akun taba-taba [Help me harvest this 
rice I have bought] ” (Sanchez 1617, 24v). Two farmers might work a field 
in common (tobong), and all fields were worked by exchange labor (alayon), 
planting or harvesting each one’s field in turn, the owner feeding all the 
workers. 

Most swiddens were made in secondary growth where earlier ones had 
been fallowed (bunglayan or habohabun), or even last year’s field with the 
dried stalks still standing (dinagamian). Balasubas, kalasokas, kanat, and 
higabon all meant the process of clearing off the undergrowth, including 
guro, to slash through bamboo or vines, and harabay or haras, to hack off 
shrubs and small plants at the root. 

Hadhad was to chop down full-grown trees. But not all trees were cut 
down to clear a swidden. Some were left standing with their branches 
removed: small ones to serve as poles for climbing vegetables, large ones 
because they were too laborious to fell — and Inlay or hiklay was to cut those 
branches along the edges of a swidden that would shade the crops. All this 
debris (dorok or dopok) was gathered into large piles called tapong for 
burning when dry, though pieces of wood large enough to be useful were 
dragged off to be saved. The climax came with the actual firing (dobdob) and 
the swidden was then a kaingin, ready to be planted and cultivated as a 
field, uma (or baul in Cebu) . 

All this work would be stopped if it was discovered that there was a 
mound of a termites’ nest (posgo), or some evil portent like a balinkokogo 


37 


Pood and Fanning 


snail which the Visayans considered unnatural because, they said, it made 
a sneaking sound. Once the field was ready for planhng, omens were 
taken to determine if it would be fruitful, and sacrifices offered in the 
middle of the field at a bamboo post called banglan or 
could planting begin (fmgas). A row of men strode across ^ ^mch | 
ing thumb-sized holes with a heavy wooden pole (hasuk or bakoQz s thick .s 
their arm and pointed at tire bottom. They were immediately followed by 
"of women who dropped five or six seeds into each hole and covered 
them over with their toes, all with a speed and accuracy which die. ed 
wonder from foreign observers for three centuries. Some heWs were del v 
erately planted later than others to stagger the time of reaping and d.strib- 
ute the P risk of bad crops. Taro and millet were often planted along the 
edges of the field depending on the type of soil, and weeding was , equired 
two or three times during the season (dalos, gumt, or hilamon) . 

Once planted, swiddens had to be protected from birds, wild boa, and 
d eer-though little protection could be taken agamst a swarm of locusts. 
Sturdy fences were constructed all around: either tarlukmth fence pos s as 
thick as a hasuk dibble stick with thinner ones lashed in between cl >se 
enough together to obstruct a pig’s snout; or saruk, a double row of posts 
with brush and branches piled in between and woven tight to make a 
veritable stockade as high as a man’s chest. Even so, field huts railed 
bugawanor hulayaghzd to be manned daily, and reinforced wh m the 
ripened to drive off birds by beating large pieces of bamboo (kalakofiah), 
or P pulling cords which jerked dangling scarecrows or wooden noisemakers 
at the edge of the field for wild animals, or simply by shouting, clapping, 

OF Harvesting was accompanied by strict religious tabus. For three days 
before, harvesters had to remain continent and keep away from firtt 
Neither could outsiders enter the house: otherwise, they believed, the nee 
would be all straw with very few grains. In some places they even camped 
in the field all during harvest, lest the rice decrease-as they said-by 
running away angry because the house had not been left to it alone. 
Harvesting was usually done by women, and men could not join them even, 
if the crop would be lost for want of reapers. Even where ,t was the custom 
for men to join in, the harvest had to be begun by a woman ntually cutung 
prescribed amount at a specific hour of the day. And once the hmvesn 
finished, more tabus were enforced for seven days-for exampk Rouses 
were closed to outsiders, and cooking fires had to be rekindled each m e 
Rice was reaped panicle by panicle, leaving the stalks standing, with a 
sickle called salat or any kind of knife-for example, sifol, a little paring 



knife women ordinarily carried around with them, or bisong, an even 
fj smaller one for cutting threads or betel nuts. Green ears were separated to 
jj be pounded and toasted as pilipig, and the rest were sunned and stored 
I unthreshed in field granaries called kurob, or olog if standing on a tree 
stump, or under the house in tambobong, a kind of huge basket of woven 
reed mats. It was threshed as needed by being trampled underfoot, gilyuk; 
scraped against a seashell, kagur; or pulled through with the hands, humo, 
a term which also meant to rub ripe grains loose from a growing plant in 
time of hunger, leaving the others to mature. After threshing, it was 
winnowed, milled with a mortar and pestle, then Winnowed again. If 
•y especially white rice was wanted, it was pounded again (hashas). (It was this 
£ plain white rice cooked without condiments or seasoning which the Span- 
pprds came to call morisqueta — because, as Father Colin said, “it was no 
better than a Moro meal” [Alcina 1668a, 1:82].) It could also be pounded 
as fine as flour (binokbok), and mixed with ingredients like honey and grated 
coconut to prepare confections, or fermented into yeast cakes (tapay) for 
j brewing — whence, tinapay: leavened bread. 

Second only to rice in importance and esteem was millet (dawa), which 
in some islands was the main crop, with rice not being grown at all. It was 
| sown by broadcasting (sabuag); and unlike rice, could grow in poorer soil, 
yielded more bountifully, and ripened sooner. But it had the great disad- 
vantage of having seeds so hard they were tiresome to mill by pounding. 
| Sorghum (batar) was also planted and eaten as a cereal but was less com- 
| mon, though it was regularly mentioned in Cebu. The grainlike Job ’s-tears 
| (arlay) was also eaten in place of rice. It grew wild, and had large seeds so 
hard they could be drilled through and strung as necklaces. But whether 
| rice or millet was the preferred food, root crops were actually the most 
common Visayan staple. 


Root Crops 

Among their many root crops, or tubers, the one the Visayans consid- 
ered most nutritious was taro (Colocasia), which required moist soil, even 
mud or standing water, and had large shield-shaped leaves. It was called 
gabi., lagway, gaway, or soli in various places, but one called biga was not 
Colocasia at all, but Alocasia. There were may varieties: Alcina (1668a, 8: 103) 
said he counted seventy-eight, including humnaw, “a kind of yellowish gabi 
so soft and mellow it might have been mixed with butter.” Taro’s promi- 
nent place in Visayan life was reflected by extensive vocabulary for its parts, 


THE V1SAYAS 


uses, ap'd stages of growth. Apayweve the leaves wrapped around other foodj 
for roasting, kon were edible leaves cooked on coals, and dagtnay was an old 
leaf. Hungay was gabi too young to harvest, so they said of little children, , 
“Hungay man an tao,” meaning, “Let him play, he’s still growing (Sanchez ; 
1617, 257). 13 " 

Yams (Dioscores) were the most widespread root crop, growing both wild 
and domestic in four or five different species with dozens of varieties. The 
most common was ubi (D. data); while abobo was D. bulbifem, a species so- 
called from the fruitlike little bulbs which grew on the stem and were | 
cooked and eaten rather than the root itself. But ubi, like the English word , 
yam, was also applied loosely to any bulky edible root. Sanchez (1617, 540v)| 
dossed many Samareno terms with “a root, a kind of ubi,” and defined ubi 
itself simply as “an edible root.” Mentrida (1637a, 422) called it “a camote, 
a certain common species” in Hiligaynon, just as Americans often call sweet 

potatoes “yams.” _ M 

The domestic varieties were planted in hard soil too poor for nee and 

too dry for taro, in holes opened with a stout planting stick; a pole was| 
driven into the ground alongside each plant for the stem to climb. Just asj 
important as any domestic variety was the wild yam called korot or kobong, 
which, when not well cured, was caustic to the taste, intoxicating, or even 
poisonous. It had to be treated by being cut in slices, pounded or scaled, 
soaked preferably in salt water in a wooden tub, and squeezed out by 
fistfulls. Butwa was the stage in this process when it could be eaten even 
though still wet, or pinalagdang, half dry; but if it was kept until it becam^ 
hard, it was buggus— and so was a stubborn man who insisted on having his 

own way. 




Another starchy staple food was a kind of flour made from the inner 
trunk of the sago palm (lumbia), or of a number of other palms like mpa| 
or buri— for example, ambolong , pugahan, or sakol. The trunk was stripped, 
cut into pieces (measured by the ax handle if for sale), pulverized m 
mortars, and then washed, dissolved, and allowed to settle in tubs of water,, 
A reddish sediment (unaw) collected on the bottoms, leaving the lighter - 
bran (olabot) floating on the surface to be skimmed off and discarded. The 
flour (arasip or natuk) was boiled into a paste which could be sunned, di iet , 
and stored in granaries called sonson or olog. In Mindanao and islands to th| 
south, it was the main staple, where it was pressed into moulds to make little 


Food and Fanning 


cakes (landan) which dried as hard as bricks but became soft and palatable 
on boiling — like macaroni from Sicily, Alcina said. These were commercial 
products imported into the Philippines from Makassar packaged in leaves: 
Magellan’s survivors intercepted a boat loaded with them just off Basilan. 

Bananas 


A number of different bananas and plantains (cooking bananas) , boiled 
like rice or yams when still unripe, were also a staple fcjod crop. Spaniards 
regularly praised the flavor and variety of Visayan bananas. Juan Martinez 
(1567, 456) rhapsodized over their Latin name, musa, “There can be no 
doubt that they are the very fruit which Jupiter’s nine sisters [that is, the 
Muses] used to eat in their day, because they gave them the name of musas.” 
Like Spaniards, Visayans ate ripe ones as fruit or between-meal snacks, 
especially the fragrant little ones called todlong binokot, “ladyfingers” — 
though, unlike them, probably not sprinkled with cinnamon or doused 
with wine. But the reason they were cultivated so widely was that before 
ripening, their sugar content was all starch, and so provided a valuable 
staple of diet. 


Visayan Fanning Terms 

Sixteenth-century Visayan farmers knew neither the plow nor the 
carabao — and the rather puny plows which became available in the next 
century would have been of little use in swiddens anyway, because of 
snagging on roots. Farming tools and techniques other than those for 
clearing swiddens included those in the listing below. 


Bahar To till the soil by any method 

Bunyag To water plants by sprinkling 

Damns or napon A field of root crops 

Gibo A crude broom for sweeping a field 

Habuk To cultivate the soil for planting with a bolo 

Kahig A rake or harrow 

Koyog To plant trees, vines, bananas, or camotes in rows 

Lalong To transfer a whole plant, including the roots with soil 

attached 

Pusok To plant a whole field to one crop or one kind of tree 

Sandol A paganilo (religious rite) for rain in time of drought 

Sun-ad or sunag A transplanted tuber 

Tagbung or hamugdas To plant something whole, like a coconut 


41 


THE VISAYAS 


Food and Farming 


Camote 

The camote, or sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), was native to tropical 
America, and is not to be confused with the common potato, Solanum 
tuberosum. It had spread to the islands of Polynesia, and as far south as. 
New Zealand under the name kumara, before the arrival ol the Europe- 
ans — but not to Asia. The Spaniards brought it to the Philippines, at a date 
which cannot be determined because of a confusion of terms— that is, 
because sixteenth-century Spaniards called all Philippine root crops J 

“camotes.” j 

The problem was that when the Iberians started their maritime expedi- 
tions in the fifteenth century, they had no word for such tubers. The only 
root crops they knew were vegetables like radishes and turnips indeed, 
the Spanish word for turnip, nabo, was used for roots in general. The.| 
Portuguese, in turn, did not know what to call the yams they found the 
Africans of Senegal eating, and so they called them inyamis, the local word 
for "eat.” Because of this, later on Columbus himself called the sweet 
potatoes he found in Santo Domingo “names.” However, explorers who 
came after him soon learned the native Taino word, batata, and later in 
Mexico, the Aztec word kamoti , which was Hispanized as camote. Both wordsjp 
subsequently became a convenient way to refer to root crops for which 

there were no equivalent in Spanish. 

Pigafetta reported “batatas” in Guam and Palawan, for instance, but 
used this same word in Tidore to refer to gwmbili, a kind of yam. The 
Legazpi expedition received “two or three batatas or names” in Guam, and 
recorded the same combination, “batatas and names,” like a refrain all 
along the coast of Samar, Leyte, and Bohol, even interchanging the two 
words in the same sentence (Anon. 1565, 484-51). Loarca (1582, 236) saidj 
Visayans ate “some roots like the Santo Domingo batatas they call camotes. 
And Juan de la Isla (1565, 236) referred to “some roots almost like the. 
patatas they call oropisa, names and camotes.” “Oropisa” is presumably 
Oropesa, the old Bolivian province of Cochabamba in the Andes, where; 
potatoes, not sweet potatoes, are still grown. 

During the next fifty years of Spanish arrivals from Acapulco, The; 
Caribbean word batata gave way to its Mexican equivalent, camote. The first 
dictionaries of Philippine languages, dating from the early seventeenth 
century, always used camote as a Spanish word, not as a Bikolano, Tagalog, 
or Visayan one. Sanchez defined halagbungzs “a certain kind of edible root 
or camote,” and Mentrida (1637a, 62) defined biga as “large camotes with; 


wide leaves.” In Bikol, Marcos de Lisboa (1628, 28) called ubi “big brown 
camotes,” and apare “little white camotes like testicles.” The San 
Buenaventura Spanish-Tagalog dictionary equates camotes with gabi, nami, 
luff, and ubi, and the unpublished manuscript dictionary of Francisco 
Blancas de San Jose defines baging as “some wild camotes,” and butil as “the 
jg bud of the camote they call gabi.” The historian therefore cannot tell 
(whether early Spanish explorers — Dasmarinas in Nueva Vizcaya in 1591, 
for example, or Quirante in Benguet in 1623 — reporting “camotes” were 
f: referring to sweet potatoes or some other root crops. , 

• V On the assumption that the “batatas” and “camotes” reported in 1565 
were actually New World sweet potatoes, it has sometimes been suggested 
that they must have been brought over by the Villalobos expedition of 
1543. It is well known that Villalobos’s starving crewmen tried to grow food 
on Sarangani Island, but what they planted was corn, not camotes — and it 
did not grow. What is more likely is that camotes were introduced like corn 
and cacao as new crops for the benefit of the colony only after Manila was 
established as its capital. A reference by English corsair Thomas Cavendish 
in 1588 is suggestive in this connection. He said that while anchored off 
Ijpapul Island (he was hoping to intercept the Manila galleon), “one of the 
chief Casiques . . . brought us patato rootes, which they call camotas” 
(Pretty 1588, 40). These were probably real camotes, since it seems 
ti nlikely that the Filipino chieftain would have applied the alien name to 
a native crop. 

In any event, whenever and however they were introduced, both the 
word and the plant were widespread in the Visayas in Alcina’s day. He 
Improbably gave what was the last word about camotes in 1668: 

|fj The camotes which were brought here from Nueva Espana [Mexico] and keep the 
name, are really what they call batatas in Spain, but these here differ in size, being 
jj| generally much larger. There are red ones and white. The camote is the refuge of the 
poor. These roots are rather sweet but of little sustenance and good only for wind 
U (Alcina 1668a, 8:106). 


Hunting 

!j| Visayans hunted with dogs and nets. The dogs were called ayam, the 
hunters mangangayam, and those who could predict whether the dog would 
be a good hunter by examining the teats at birth were inayam. Good dogs 


THE VISAYAS 


Food and Farming 


were highly valued, and had to be guarded against poison or witchcraft.j 
When their mother or a sibling of the same litter died, a rattan collar wasj 
put around their neck, like a man in mourning, until they took their nex| 
prey Some were raised in the house, where they were pampered and, 
fondled: their masters rubbed noses with them-the local equivalent o| 
kissing — and carried them out to the forest on their shoulders. To file their 
teeth slightly was thought to increase their bravery. (Also thought to make 
dogs bolder was a crocodile tooth or a boar’s tusk grown m a foil circle, 
which was carried by the hunter.) Visayan dogs were small but tearless | 
quick enough to avoid a boar’s tusks and fierce enough to grab one three 
times their size by the ankle and hang on until the hunter arrived to spear 
it Dogs either took a boar in the chase or drove it into a strong net (batung) 
with mesh wide enough for little shoats to pass through but catching large | 

ones (hababatung). m 

Large animals were also caught in pits (arvang) or deadfall traps (atub), 

while smaller animals were caught with snares— balolongm general batyug 
for iguanas, gaiua for monkeys, anihas for wild chickens, and ahkubkub |g 
barang or bitik for birds. The most dangerous trap was the balatik an 
automatic crossbow or ballista which, when triggered by a line stretche| 
across an animal run, could drive a shaft clean through a pig s body. Thi|j 
or forty of these crossbows might be set in a line at different heights. Asi m 
from the regular ones, there were also small balatik for rats. fj 

The balatik was a rather sophisticated machine. Standing on two stouj 
poles driven into the ground in the form of an X, it had a long stock with 
a slot to hold the shaft, a powerful bow or spring to propel it, and a catch 
to hold the string and release it when triggered. It even had a safety lock 
(gpam) to prevent it from firing accidentally: thus, of somebody who was 
restrained from acting they said, “Ginogoom kun balauk And of a mam 
who was all set and "rarin’ to go,” they said, “Bingat kun balatik [ Gock ^I 

like a crossbow]” (Sanchez 1617, 52-5 2v). J 

Hunters stayed out many days, sleeping in huts called hokdung and 
opening trails in the brush to lead the game into the nets. During the® 
absence their wives could not perform labor like weaving or pounding i ice. 

Part of the hunter’s first catch was offered up on a tree-stump altar tir 
Banwanun, the mountain-dwelling spirit. The rest was carried home slung 
on the hunter’s back by a tumpline over his forehead, and later shai ed with 
others. It was never sold or preserved, though it might be exchange | 
informally. All animals whose flesh was considered fit for human consumpj 
tion — for example, deer or civet cat— were referred to as balmy , pig. 


- Fishing 

In the sixteenth century, Visayan waters literally teemed with fish. Fish 
swam upstream to spawn in inland streams, inhabited swamps and thick 
muddy waters, rose to the surface to breathe, and even climbed up onto the 
roots of mangrove trees. Large ones competed with fishermen by attacking 
their nets, and more voracious ones like barracuda actually endangered 
the fishermen themselves. Fish were caught in nets, traps, and corrals at the 
mouth of rivers or dammed-up streams, snared with hook and line, or 
ifjpeared with harpoons. I 

Most fishing was done close inshore, so there was little incentive for 
deep-sea fishing or for the use of nets large enough to require organized 
parties. It was often done at night, because schools of fish could be seen 
shimmering in the moonlight, or because they could be attracted to 
torches in the boats. 

. There was avariety of nets. Paggiyod were dragnets used in shallowwater, 
fastened to the small of the fishermen’s back by a leather brace (paholan) 
like the belt the weaver uses with a backstrap loom. Laya was a casting net: 
Sanchez thought it was a recent introduction in his day, though there was 
a similar net (holos) in use, except that it was lighter and had no lead sinkers. 
Some were 5 meters across and so required considerable dexterity to cast: 
datus were as proud of such skill as they were of their hunting skills. Baling 
were nets woven like loose cloth; fine ones were for catching tiny hipon 
shrimp in the surf; while howar were nets with the widest mesh and were 
used in swamps. Pansag was what is nowadays called a salambaio — a large 
four-cornered net lowered by a simple derrick mounted on a raft. Pagbiday 
was to set nets upright along the edge of thirty or forty boats strung out 
along the shore, which caught fish leaping into the air to escape fishermen 
wading alongside. It was a raucous activity accompanied by much hilarity 
as fish fell all over those fishermen who were in the boats, sometimes even 
wounding them. 

There was quite a variety of ways of catching fish. Rivers were dammed 
to lead fish into nets or traps; for this, weirs or corrals (bakod) were 
constructed as long as 250 meters. The roots, bark, or berries of more than 
a dozen different trees, called tubliin general, were squeezed into the water 
to stun the fish. Rattan basket traps (bobo) were set in creeks. A hook and 
line called rombos was also used, as well as harpoons made in different 
styles — kalawit or isi (also used for hunting) which were barbed like an 
arrowhead; sikap, a two-pronged fork; sarapang, a real trident with three or 


THE VISAYAS 


Food and Farming 


I 




more points; and bonlal, a heavier one for catching duyong, the manatee or 
seacow. These harpoons were thrown with a line attached to the boat, and | 
a powerful fish could pull one out to sea if the line was not quickly cut. 


Domestic Animals 




Seafood was the main source of protein in the Visayan diet; but pigs and. 
chickens were also raised— not just for consumption but also for sacrihcial 


Visayans evidently did not hunt it in sufficient quantity to attract Spanish 

attention. 


Cooking 


m® 


Visayan cooking was done on a clay kalan stove, or three stones (sugang) 
k in an open hearth. Besides flint-and-steel, there were three other tradi- 
I tional methods of bag-id, making fire by friction: by pulling a band of rattan 
i back and forth around a split stick driven upright in tjie ground holding 


offerings. Since deer and wild hogs were also called babuy, domestic P*gs 1 ^ tinder; by rubbing a knife-shaped piece of bamboo along another 
were distinguished as sohong. Different islands had their own breeds,! stuffe 
some of which yielded 120 liters of lard or 240 kilos of pork on butcheimg| 

They foraged between village houses and kept the ground clean of offal, 
or were pastured in nearby woodlands with their ears clipped for 

identification. . , , S 

A pie was often raised in the house, where it was reported to be cleaner 

than a dog, and was called "princess” (binokot) like the secluded daughters 
of upper-class datus because-like them-it never set foot on the gr ound 
There was also a cat in every house to keep it free o( rats, and if a avet caj 
could be caught young enough to tame, it made an even better mouser.l 
Household dogs were provided with a special ladder to come and go as they ! 
pleased, and pet monkeys also acted as watchdogs to give noisy warning of 

approaching strangers. J 

Goats were fare: Spanish explorers observed only a few on the coast of 
Samar and in Cebu. But they were common in Mindanao and areas in 
contact with Muslims in the south-for example, they were raised for trad| 
in the Semirara Islands between Panay and Mindoro, which the Spamarg 
called Islas de Cabras (Goat Islands) because they were populated with 
goats that had been turned loose to breed wild. 

Horned cattle— that is, cows— were only introduced late m the centu j 
from China and Mexico, with a few bulls brought from Spam to improve 

stock ^ ^ 

The absence of the carabao is noteworthy. That it was not used as a draft 

animal is not surprising, but that colonial reports listing natural resources 
do not mention buffalo meat, hide, or horns, is. Mention was made of sma|. 
horn containers for perfume and of one shaman wearing a horn headdress! 
but no mention made of buffalo horn armor or battle trumpets 1 he heap 
was found wild, or feral, in Utzon from Bikol to the Uocos, in all of which 
places it was called nowang or anowang, but in the Visayas it was kumbamg 
,hat. is, Malay herbau. But whether it roamed the Visayan hills or not. the 


stuffed with tinder and held horizontal with the foot; or by rotating 
a wooden rod between the palms, drill-like, against a wooden board. 
The tinder was either fine wood shavings or the lintlike fuzz of various 
palms. 

p Staple foods were boiled; though tubers, bananas, and fleshy leaves or 
leaf stems were also roasted in hot coals. Viands were frequently fried in 
coconut oil, and both meat and fish were barbecued or smoked as tapa. 
Steamed in sections of bamboo were all kinds of food — paylaw in general; 
sakol, if rice flour with grated coconut; and lot-lot, if broken out afterwards 
to retain their cylindrical shape. Grain was also parched in dr)' pots; 
likewise dried were seeds and fruit pits intended to be pulverized to mix 
with rice to stretch a limited supply: lamur was any such mixing with millet, 
sorghum, beans, or nuts. Pili seeds were collected for this purpose, having 
been picked from under the trees where they had been dropped by kalaw 
birds after digesting the flesh. 

j ' Seafood — not only fish but eels, snails, squid, crabs, mollusks, turtles, 
and turtle eggs — were the main source of Visayan protein and was pre- 
ferred to meat. Wild game was considered a typical masculine food and 
little preferred by women. All meat was forbidden pregnant women — and 
so was shark flesh because baby sharks were believed to swim in and out of 
their mother’s womb during her pregnancy. Fish were preserved and 
marketed as sun-dried daing, or split open and salted before sunning as 
bawl. Lasi was fermented fish paste or meat brine; dayoh, danglusi, and 
ginamus were high-flavored adobo-Uke dishes of minced meat or fish. Yaman 
or panakot were any kind of spices and seasonings — all pungent and sour 
foods fit to supplement a bland starchy diet. 

1 loney was also an important food, as indicated by the frequent mention 
of activities connected with it. Seasons were designated by the flowering of 
trees and plants whose nectar fed the bees — like Katparasan from January 
to March when the paraasan rattan was in bloom. Wind and rain could 


47 


Food and Fanning 


destroy the blossoms, and typhoons the bees themselves so the weaker was 
a subject of constant speculation. Conversely, it was believed that for bees 
to swarm low in the trees was a sign of a bad year to come. Similarly, S«j 
a dry honeycomb, was the euphemism for any vain undertaking or time- 
warded labor. In a good year, men could expect to find as many as fifty hives 
in one expedition, during which they would sleep in the forest, drive the 
bees off with smouldering torches, and boil the honey to prevent its 
souring before they got back with it. Hopey was eaten as a food togethe| 
with the white grubs it contained, or made into confections and sauces, 
used as a preservative for meat and fruit, or brewed into the meadhke 

kabarawan. , „ , . 

Rice cakes boiled in a little wrapper of coconut leaves were called jmso 

after the banana flower, and were prepared in a number of different sizes,! 
and shapes— for example, linalahi, masculine; binuwaya, crocodilelike, or 
kumolsin data, “datu’s fistful.” (The normal way to eat rice was to squeeze 
a fistful into a lump-tool.) Tambolviere made with nee flour, kombovnlh 
rice flour and coconut milk, linanggang with rice and grated coconut, and 

handab were deep-fried. , . , 

Though Visayans did not make cane sugar, they obtained an umehi ed 

brown sugar called kalamay— or chancaca in Spanish— from palm sap, and 
peddled it in little square packets of palm leaves called parak, ten parak 
being tied together and sold as one dankay. Sara-sara was rice mixed with 
such sugar, one of a number of snacks or tidbits called doom j 

Salt 4s served in rock-hard lumps to be given a few sharp blows over fly 
food, or stirred a few turns in liquids. It was made by pouring a lye, which 
had been drained off burnt wood earlier soaked in salt water into moulds 
shaped like a little boat (baloto), whence the lump was called binaloto. J 
Meals were served on low tables about 20 centimeters high (nicely 
carved in the case of those of datus) or directly on the house floor on large 
leaves. Tubers and rice-saffron-yellow for feasts— were boiled unseasoned 
so salt, ginger, and other condiments were served for diners to choose then 
& • — whence dolotanwas a medium-sized 



own seasoning. Dolot was one serving 
plate. Gakas was the food a guest carried home; and bahaw was cold foo^ 
left over from a meal, tire usual breakfast. IP the case of feeding workers in 
exchange for group labor, the meat and fish were piled in mounds called 
bonedo (literally, anthills) by families or neighborhoods. In real feasts and 
drinkfests, however, food was taken casually and in small quantities to leave 
time for talk and wine (invitations said “drink,” not “eat ), and it vnjj 
considered good form to place a mouthful of already-chewed food in a 
guest’s mouth. 


Betel Nut 


Betel nut is the fruit of the areca palm, and is chewed together with a leaf 
[j of tlie betel piper vine, from which it has borrowed its name. The nut is cut 
into segments, sprinkled with lime made from shells, wrapped in a leaf, and 
I chewed into a quid which produces a blood-red spittle. In Visayan, the nut 
was called bonga (literally “fruit”); the betel vine was called buyo, and so was 
a prepared quid; to chew it was mama, whence the quid was also called 
jnamun. 

The preparation, exchange, and serving of betel nut was the most 
important social act among Visayans. Men carried the necessary ingredi- 
ents with them in little baskets or pouches, ready to share segments of 
the same nut, hulo, and thus become kakulo with another, an essential 
relationship before beginning any discussion or business. For a house- 
holder to fail to offer betel nut to anyone who entered his house was an 
insult inviting enmity. On formal visits, the quids were prepared and served 
in valuable metal trays or boxes by females of the household — slaves, 
daughters, or the lady herself, depending on the social standing of the 
guest. (The Panay epic of Humadapnon climaxes with a sixty-two-line 
description of betel nut being prepared and served by binokot maidens.) 
A special honor was to add a touch of musk or a slice of cinnamon bark, 
or some other aromatic flavoring. Betel nut also figured in romance and 
Icourtship: to offer a quid partially chewed (upa) was an act of flirtation; to 
send one in response to a man’s clandestine request was an acceptance of 
his advances; to send it unbidden, an open invitation. 

Bonga palms were extensively cultivated, often with a buyo vine planted 
at their base. However, inferior nuts from wild palms were used when 
necessary — such as sanvang, which was not an areca palm at all. 

Youths chewing for the first time usually suffered giddiness like that 
produced by alcohol or korot root, and even a young lady’s first chew was 
a kind of puberty rite. In a Suban-on epic, when the hero Sandayo appears 
before Datu Daugbulawan so young that “the sword at his waist scraped the 
floor,” he is told, “Bata, k’na ginapog: po dapa no p’nlebon [Child, no lime 
for you: you know not woman]” (Resma 1982, 291). 


j Distilling and Dunking 

| One of the first things the Spaniards learned about the Visayans was that 
they were good drinkers. Magellan had no sooner landed on Homonhon, 


49 


THE VISAYAS 


Food and Farming 


when people from nearby Suluan presented him with a jarful of wha^fc^ading by natural propagation to the exclusion of all other vegetation. 
Pigafetta recorded as uraca— that is, arak, the Malay-Arabic word for dis-j pluan was one such island: Pigafetta got the impression that a family of ten 
ilf d liquors In Limasawa Pigafetta drank from the same cup as ^jaM^ld live off two trees there. That is no doubt why Magellan threatened 
Kolambu and his translator, Enrique de Malacca, got so drunk he was not I L apulapu that he would “burn their land and the palm groves off which 
much use- and a few days later, the local harvest was delayed while Kolambgj ^ey supported themselves” (Anon, n.d.a, 11). 
and his brother Awi slept off a hangover. In Cebu, Pigafetta drank paMjj|| 

wine tuba nga nipa, straight from the jar with reed straws together with I Kabarawan. Rabarawan (from baraw, to temper or mediate) was the 
Raiah Humabon, but in Quipit he excused himself after one draught when 1 woG d whose bark was decocted to produce the beverage. The decoction 
Rajah Kalanaw and his companions finished off a whole jar without eating 1 waS f urt her boiled to half its volume, mixed with an equal volume of fresh 
J • * If honey, and left to ferment naturally to become a smooth, strong liquor — 

The Spaniards therefore called Visayan social occasions bacanales, | «< mU y regalado y fuerte,” Father Sanchez said. Unlike more ceremonial 
drinkfests Loarca (1582, 116) commented, however, “It’s good they rarely 1 drinks like pangasi, it was consumed by men gathered around the jar, all 
get angry when drunk,” and Father Chirino (1604, 79) left a well-know|p- pping through straws until the bottom of the jar was visible. Since honey 
tribute to the Boholanos’ ability to carry their liquor: 


It is proverbial among us that none of them who leaves a party completely drunk | 
in the middle of the night fails to find his way home; and if they happen to be buyin| 


r o ^ ~ 

was an important item in the Visayan diet, kabarawan was produced in 
sufficient quantity to market — and its production and consumption were 
no doubt increased by Spanish tribute demands for candle wax. 


in the middle ot the nigni tans nuu ' . ' ’ . , 

or selling something, notonly do they not become con use m t c ; usme .1 Jntus. Sugarcane juice was extracted with a simple one-man press. A long 

they have to weigh out gold or silver for the pnce . . . ^ou^ch dehcate 1 • piv hed over a tree stump and kept bouncing up and down 

thai neither does their hand tremble nor do drey e, r m accuracy. I ^ P ^ ^ a ^ peda[> ^ ^ the £ ther hand , the cane was 

There were basically five kinds of Visayan alcoholic beverages-htfefi inserted to be squeezed n ear the fulcrum The juice was boiled preferably 
i ncic wc Xuba was t he sap of palms ! in a cast-iron baong that held as much as 15 liters, to half its volume. (For 

“fermented natural^ L a few hours and soured quickly. Kabarawan! Spanish consumption it was boiled down to a thick syrup.) It was then 
w n , , , - th a kind of boiled bark. Intus or kilang waft sinubaw, and a small bundle of kabarawan bark was added as seasoning. 

ZSSSSSt ,r P ™ «*» «* * - — » “”*» * —■* - « » 

tthat is toddy) fermented with yeast, but could also be brewed from other 1 ferment and age as intus or kilang. 

erainUike millet all called pitaniUa by Spaniards. And alak was any of the* Visayans did not make sugar itself. Lven after the mtroductton of the 

beverages distilled into hard liquor. Alak was drunk from cups, but the! Chinese sugar m,ll-the one with two rollers geared together and turned 
others with reed straws from the porcelain jars in which they were brewed! by a carabao-when sugar was for sale to those who could afford it, intus 
tnred Pantrasi was required for all formal or ceremonial occasions. I remained the main use for sugarcane. The juice was also drunk as a tonic, 
orsioieu. < g i and served as a substitute for mother’s milk when necessary. Varieties of 

Tnha Nina tuba (i>aog) was made from the sap of wild trees, and wasj cane less suitable for pressing were eaten as food or snacks, and invariably 
,, I trP n„thened— and given a red color— by the addition of ground! offered to visitors upon arrival. Sagaw, for instance, was the sweetest variety, 
usually b 6 coconut palms was considered! but was too hard and fibrous for the Visayan press— though these same 

S»d“ erif^a pX«e ifem of trade.' Distilled into alak, it characteristics were desirable when inserting it between the rollers of the 
could be transported as far as the oil, vinegar, or nuts themselves, bull Chinese mill. 

br tapper^ren ted the trees or were hired to tend them, and where tKfjj Pangasi. Basi was the mash of cooked rice, already leavened with tapay, 
soil was favorable, whole islands became coconut plantations with treW which was placed in the jar to produce the liquid pangasi. It was let stand 


51 


THE VISAYAS 


Food and Farming 


I 


until it became strong and sour, and was drunk with the addition of watc| 
and, as the jar was drained, the addition of more basi. It was dr unk tin ough 
reed str aws called tayuk or halasam, or drawn from the jar with a pool, a node 
of thin bamboo open at the bottom and with a finger hole neat the top| 
which was submerged in the pangasi until it filled, and then withdrawn wiUj 
the finger hole closed to create a vacuum to retain its contents. 'I he mash 
left in the drained jar was called borohu. 

Pangasi drinking began with formality and ceremony. The jars were 
placed in a long row down the middle of the room. Then the mastei of 1 
ceremonies, after invoking the diwata (deity) to drink First, invited th^ 
guests to drink in turn, indicating which guest and which jar. Constantly 
checking the contents of the jars as the drinking went on (a procedure 
called “nesting,” pugad), he would call on drinkers to add a certain amount 
of water. They were then required to drink as much pangasi as the water; 
they added. These selections were made amid increasing banter and chal^ 
lenges, and finally the singing of daihuan, a kind of song in which one mai| 
would be victimized by rough teasing— but, as Loarca noted, was expected 
to show no resentment. In the end, some of the pangasi might be bought — ~ 
that is, the host compensated by filling an emptied jar with raw rice. 

Alak. Alak or alaksiw was anything made with a still— for example, aim 
sa sampaga , sampaguita perfume — and makialak was a confirmed drunkard. 
The still (alakan) was made of a hollow tree trunk (toong) and two Chinese 
vats (baong, kawa, or karahay). The toong was caulked onto the top of the 
vat containing the tuba or intus to be boiled, and the other vat in turii. 
placed on top of the toong. The steam condensed on the upper vat’s round 
bottom and dripped off its lowest point into a shallow wooden plate 
suspended in the middle of the toong, whence the liquid flowed out 
through a bamboo tube ( tadluyan ) run through the side. 

The first liter or two were the strongest and best, and, in the case of intus|| 
had the qualities of brandy. This was called datisay, pure or first-class, a term 
of high esteem for both wine and gold. (A Tagalog dictionary [1613, 601 1 
says, “Metaphorically, 24 karats strong, . . . burns without fire.”) 

Pangasi was not used as a base for alak, though Pigafetta thought he 
tasted distilled rice wine in Palawan. Lambug was to mix, dilute, o|J 
adulterate any of these liquors, and was a common practice. Watered win® 
was thus called linamlmgan, and so was the child of a mixed marriage o| 
adulterous union. 


Drinking Etiquette 

Except for outright alcoholics who suffered poor health and early de- 
mise, Visayans did not drink alone, nor appear drunk in public. Drinking 
was done in small groups or in social gatherings where men and women sat 
0 n opposite sides of the room, and any passerby was welcome to join in. 
Women drank more moderately than men, and were expected to stretch 
their menfolk out, to sleep off any resulting stupor. But men were proud 
of their capacity. Father Alcina had a Samareho parishioner whom “neither 
’Spaniards on a bet nor Filipinos with the same intent” fcould make drunk, 
no matter how much they gave him, and a famous Bohol datu enjoyed the 
reputation of downing three liters fresh from the still with one breath, 
prudent drinkers, however, prepared beforehand by “lining the belly with 
food,” like lining the cooking pot with banana leaves (banig) — “hinanigan 
an ginhawa sin kanun” (Sanchez 1617, 62v). 

I. Drinking etiquette began with agda, exhorting some person, or diwata, 
To take the first drink. Gasa was to propose a toast to somebody’s health, 
usually of the opposite sex, and salabat was a toast in which the cup itself 
Tvas offered, even carried from one house to another for this purpose. Itib 
were milk brothers, and naga itib was for two to drink together from the 
same jar, like two babies nursing at the same breast. Abongwas an honor a 
datu might pay one of his timawav. assals by presenting his own cup after he 
had taken a few sips himself. SumsmnwAS any food taken with the wine (that 
is, pulotan ) , like the plate of pork Rajah Kolambu shared with Pigafetta 
(1524b, 118), who reported, “We took a cup with every mouthful.” And had 
Pigafetta been a Visayan, he would have murmured politely with each 
piece, “Tabi-tabi dinyo [By your leave, sir].” 

Drinking was commonly called pagampang, conversation; and neither 
business deals, family affairs, nor community decisions were discussed 
without it. For this reason, Spaniards often attributed Filipino attempts to 
subvert their occupation to an overindulgence in wine. But Alcina (1668a, 
3:325) assessed the custom more realistically: 

III 

When practical matters come up, whether for public projects, orders from the King 
or his officials, or any other work, and they discuss among themselves the best, 
i quickest and most equitable way to carry it out, if they meet dr)' and without a little wine 
first to enliven their interest, they talk little, discourse poorly and slowly, and decide 
worse; but after drinking something, he who proposes does it with eloquence, those 
who respond, with discretion, those who decide, with attention, and all with fairness. 


CCI 


53 


Trades and Commerce 


CHAPTER 3 




Trades and Commerce 


Visayans who practiced trades like blacksmithy, boat building, or pot | 
making were professionals in the sense of being compensated lor special- 
ized skills, but not necessarily in the sense of supporting themselves by their 
professions. Markets for their wares and services were limited; most 
did their own carpentry and their wives wove their own cloth. It appej| 
that all either farmed or belonged to a farming family, includinf 
fishermen, even members of the datu class. But there were clearly those 
who practiced their crafts full time— experts like shipwrights or goldsmith| 
for example, or the producers of export textiles who were the slaves, 
dependents, or employees of datu capitalists. Traders, too, were full-time! 
professionals— peddlers and itinerant merchants, especially those who| 
owned their own vessels, rented out cargo space, and traveled long dis- 
tances from island to island carrying goods in both directions. 

Ironworking 

Blacksmiths were panday— or. more accurately, panda) sa pulhaw, work- 
ers in iron, to distinguish them from other craftsmen like goldsmiths,! 


master carpenters, and boat builders, all of whom wen’ called panday. 
Smithing was considered the noblest profession, probably because only the 
wealthiest datus had the means to import the raw material. If they were 
indeed the ultimate source of all metal tools, including the swidden fann- 
ers’ bolos, they would have exercised effective control over Visayan means 
of production. As Father Alcina (1668a, 3:105) said, “it is certain that no 
profession among the Visayans is more profitable than this, and so it is the 
most honored and esteemed among them, since the greatest chiefs are the 
best iron-workers.” 

Iron itself had actually been produced in the Philippines in ancient 
times. Iron slag has been recovered in considerable quantities from ar- 
chaeological sites, including Visayan graves, and slag is normally a waste 
product of iron smelting and refining. But to extract the metal from the ore 
by primitive methods is very difficult, and so is the transportation of the 
ore. Thus it is generally more economical to trade local forest products for 
malleable cast iron if available, and it was available at least by the thirteenth 
century. Bornean refineries were then producing it in large quantities in 
Santubong (Sarawak), and Song traders were delivering big Chinese caul- 
drons and pig iron direct. By the sixteenth century, iron was also being 
produced in Sulawesi, but was still so rare and valuable that when the Santa 
Maria del Pcnral ran aground in Sangir in 1526, the natives burned her to 
recover the nails. In the Visayas, those Chinese cauldrons remained the 
major source: they were deliberately broken up to supply local forges. 

The bellows of the forge (hasohas) were two upright cylinders (tayhop) 
about a meter high, hollowed out of small tree trunks, with pistons (tambowh) 
ringed with chicken feathers set. so as to collapse on the return stroke. They 
were alternately raised and lowered by the blacksmith’s apprentice (masaop) 
to produce a steady draft. Both cylinders had a bamboo outlet near the 
bottom which led to a common stone receptacle (lilong) which concen- 
trated their draft into a charcoal fire. The anvil (landasan) was a piece of 
iron set in a heavy wooden block, and the smith’s tools were a two-handed 
stone maul (palo), a stone hammer (palo palo), a pair of tongs (kipit), and an 
assortment of ordinary bolos for cutting the red-hot metal. 

The most important tool manufactured, repaired, or retempered by the 
blacksmith was the bolo. Dohong or dayopak was the ordinary- one; la wad, a 
heavier one for woodcutting; bako or bantok, one with a curved blade for 
weeding or cultivating; and pisaw, one with a short blade and long handle 
to be pressed under the arm or against the ground with the foot to leaver 
both hands free for stripping rattan. The blade had a tang for halting into 
the wooden handle, and was held firm with resinous sap and a ring of rattan 



Trades and Commerce 


THE VISAYAS 




or metal. The head of the ax (wasay) was also hafted into the handle; it wal 
only about two lingers wider and c ould be rotated a quarter turn to be usej 

as an ad/e. .. . , 

More specialized tools included those in the list below. 


flint 


■"g 




: I 


■ 


Ablnxvang Drill, awl 

Balakan A blade tor slicing korot 

Haul A rough piece of iron for whetting tools or striking with 

for fire 

Binkong Curved adze 

Bhong Small knife for preparing betel nut 

Doling Straight adze 

Carol Spurs for fighting cocks 

Kalob Spoon bit 

Sabil or sored Billhook or hoe 
Salat Sickle 

Sipol ' Paring knife 

Sanggut Tuba tapper’s knife for “gelding the buds 

Tigib Chisel 

Tirlos Lancet for bleeding 

Uloh Dentist’s awl 

Two carpenter’s tools which later became common were apparendy miss- 
ing from the sixteenth-century Visayan tool kit— the saw (lagan) and thj 
plane (saiyo). 

::pa 

Woodworking 

Carpenters cut their own timber, carefully observing accepted nature 
lore in selecting it. Different species were felled during different phases of j 
the moon; some were believed to be more solid on the eastern side, and J, 
"male” trees were always stronger than “females” of v the same species. Thj 
trees were cut with an ax and bolo, split down the middle with wedges and 
each half adzed into a single plank, squared with the same tool A| 
carpentry ami house construction were done by skillful joinery wnhoi| 

saws or nails. > , . . . , _ „Jj 

Boards were filled together with mortise-and-tenons, joined end to end 

with scarf joints, or rabbeted into grooves. Lugs called tamfmko were carved 
out of l he" surface of planks to receive other pieces lashed to them; and pegs 
and tenons were glued in place with a resin so sticky these broke oil before, 
coining loose. Large wooden houses stood on hardwood posts (hang | 


chosen for their incorruptibility, with huge pegs set into them to carry the 
floor beams, and wooden walls were fitted into channels chiseled into sills 
above and below. Plates, bowls, spoons, and Indies, urns called hohnn, 
coffins and chests of all sizes were hewn from single bloc ks of wood, and 
often decorated with fine carvings. Rough leaves of the hagopit tree or bin 
palm were used as sandpaper or wood rasps, and the tough tail of the bisol 
ray fish or hide of the dahonan served to smooth even the hardest woods. 


Architecture 

The Visayan word for house was balay; whence habalayan was a settle- 
ment; maghabalay, a man and wife; and minalay meant married. There were 
basically three types — permanent wooden structures that might be called 
town houses, cottages built of light materials near the fields, and tree 
houses. The first were occupied by datus, the second by ordinary people, 
and the third only in time of war. Houses were elevated off the ground on 
posts and dominated by steep roof's, both features appropriate to a tropical 
environment characterized by heavy rains. The prominence of the roof was 
reflected in Pigafetta’s symbol for houses on his maps — a triangle standing 
on legs: • ^ . In addition, there was a variety of huts (balay-balay) and 

temporary shelters for hunters, farmers, and travelers. 

The large town houses were supported on tall hardwood pillars (harigi, 
or togbong if supporting the ridgepole, toko if only reaching floor level) . 
There were five to ten on a side, planted deep in the ground with some 
valuable (sanag) buried under the first one, so sturdy and incorruptible that 
some were known to survive decay and typhoon for two or three genera- 
tions. The upper ends were set into a girder ( sablayan ) which carried the 
main rafters ( saragunting ; so called because they crossed at the ridgepole 
like glinting, shears, to extend beyond the ridge), and joined to the oppo- 
site harigi by a tie beam (ubung-uhung) . A lower girder (sasagangan) which 
carried the floor joists (batangan) and the sills (bakalan) into which the 
wallboards (dingding) were rabbeted, was supported on big pegs (tanor) 
driven into the harigis, or directly on shorter toko. (See fig. 4.) 

The floor (salog) was divided into two sections (pula), one slightly higher 
than the other, by a squared beam (pulhanan) running lengthwise, and was 
made of bamboo, rattan, or cane strips lashed together on top of a wooden 
grill. Both the grill and the rattan strips were called buhlag, and were loose 
enough to permit liquids to run through — and noisy enough to keep 
respectful house members off it while the dam was sleeping. The rool 


57 


pAHOWlDC , PAP NE 06 



Fig. 4. A sixteenth-century Visayan “balay” 

(Artist’s representation by architect Rosario Encarnacion-Tan, 
under the supervision of W. H. Scott) 


0OBOJJ6A hi 




THE VTSAYAS 



(atup) was bamboo or palm leaf shingles lashed to parallel strips of hea 
rattan (katsaw), rising to the ridgepole ( bobongan, from bobong, the ndg 
and its covering) — or, actually to three ridgepoles m the case of largt 
buildings, one above the other with one protruding beyond the ends of thej® 

house like horns, or sayong (see fig. 4). 1 

Finer details of Visayan architecture are revealed by their special terms|l 
Hcigdan, for example, was a house ladder or stairway; balitang, one rung or 9 
step; and alantaga, a landing; but lugdog was a single bamboo used as aj 
ladder with stubs of branches left on; and salugsog was a splmbamboo : 
ladder for house dogs. Pamulong was the decorated facade; pasngawan, th| 
entrance; ganghaan, a door or window large enough to pass through; while 
tarombowanw as a windowjust for looking out. Balaian was a kind of veranda| 
for laundering; saramde , living spaces along the sides of the house, an jj 
sibay , a small room for slaves (isinibay). Pusor was a kind of macrame done 
in rattan which rendered all structural bindings artistic. 

A ruling datu had the largest house in the community— even iOmetersi 
long— and it was not only his dwelling, workplace, and storehouse but alsoj 
served as the community center for civic and religious affairs, with a kind, 
of public lounging platform below or in front. Wooden partitions carve<| 
with foliage in high relief provided separate chambers for him and his wife.j 
family, binokot. daughters, concubines, and house 'slaves. Partial flooring 
laid over the tie beams made a kind of loft or attic. Similar grandeur was 
forbidden other datus: to construct a house large enough to entertain the? 
whole community was in itself a form of competition amounting to lese 

^Non-datus, on the other hand, lived in cottages built of light material 
ready to be moved every few years to be near shifting swiddens— and so did 
datu farmers live in such houses seasonally. They did not stand on hangis 
and contained little timber: instead of the sturdy crossbeams called batangan 
in both houses and ships, they had unsquared poles called sagbat. Much 
time, and many nights, was spent in a variety of field lints and temporary 
shelters convenient to their labor— for example, the ogsoran, which had a f 
sliding roof to serve for either shade, shelter, or sunning. (See hg. o.f 
Travelers, farmers, hunters, and fishers, even seamen beaching their boats 
for the night, put up so many of them that they could usually be found 
already standing along well-traveled roads or river fords. j 

Tree houses were occupied only in time of war, built eithei in a< tua I 
,,-ces 15 or more meters above: the ground, or on tall posts. If they were 
intended only lor male warriors, they were reached simply by a vine which 
could he pulled up; but if a whole family occupied them, they were full| 


*2 




Ti 


Fig. 5. Visayan houses 

(From Alcina’s Historia de las islas e indios de Bisayas) 



Trades and Commerce 


THE VISAYAS 


- 

scale dwellings with a platform midway up reached by a removable ladder, | 
with a second ladder up to the house itself. (See fig. 5.) They all disap- 
peared after Spanish pacification, and so did those datu mansions, as their 
public functions were taken over by government buildings &id churche J 


Boat Building 

Visayan boat builders preferred latoaan because it grew large enough for 
a baroto 120 centimeters wide to be hewn out of a single trunk. The pandayjj 
adzed the outer form of the hull to shape first-sharp at the bottom hke| 
a keel, pointed and V-shaped at both ends, with sides no thicker than a thin | 
board. He hollowed out the interior, leaving the necessary tambuko pro- 
jecting to seat thwarts called agar. To check the thickness of the thinning 
process as he worked, he kept boring holes through the sides, to be 
plugged up watertight later. A good panday could make such a canoe || jfr 
meters long and 1.5 meters wide, working by himself in just ten days. 

Although a baroto could have boards added to increase its freeboard,^ g. 
real ships intended for cargo capacity or seagoing raids were built on 
squared keels with stems at both ends. As long as 25 meters, they had ve j 
or six planks to a side, each carved to the desired curve beforehand, 
preferably in one continuous stroke. Since it was their flare and curvature 
which determined the contour of the hull and consequently the speed of 
the vessel, the skill to produce them was the hallmark of the master panday. 

The planks were edge-pegged together, with thin wooden nails run through j i 
each peg in place, plank and all, and the chinks between the planks . 
caulked tight. The whole shell was then tightened by placing logs across the 
gunwales, running heavy ropes under the hull fastened to the log on each 
side, and driving wedges into the ends of the logs to expand them enough 
to draw the ropes taut. Only then were the ribs added: flexible branches 
forced down in an arc and lashed to the tambukos that they crossed to 
induce prestressed tension in a hull that was strong and light but not j 

rigid. 1 R , 

"a baroto was basically what the Spaniards called a canoa— a dugoutj 

canoe If it was simply a single piece, it was called damlog, or balasiyan if 
small enough for a man to pick up, but if it had bark washboards added for 
increased freeboard, itwas bilos, and ifwooden planks were added, nbmbmo 
or yahit. The well-known barangay was an edge-pegged, plank-built boat 
constructed on a keel: large ones for carrying cargo were biiok, biroko, biray, 
or lapid. 


Flat, open boats were daya or paya (literally, a half coconut shell), but by 
the end of the century they were being called champan from Chinese 
sampan (“three boards”), a term eighteenth-century Europeans would 
extend to any Chinese vessel, even huge seagoing junks. All foreign vessels 
with high freeboard were called adyong — that is, Malay jong. But the most 
celebrated Visayan vessel was the warship called karakoa — a sleek, double- 
ended cruiser with an elevated fighting deck amidships, and catwalks 
mounted on the outrigger supports to seat as many as six banks of paddlers 
(see fig. 6) . They displayed tall staffs of brilliant plumage fore and aft as a 
sign of victory, called sombol on the prow, tongol on tHe stem. 

All these vessels were designed for coastal seas full of reefs and rocks, and 
interisland passages with treacherous currents. They therefore drew little 
water, had low freeboard, had outriggers on both sides and steering oars 
instead of center-line rudders, and their flexible hulls could absorb under- 
water blows that would have stayed in the sides of a more rigid vessel. They 
had one or more tripod masts that carried matting sails woven of palm 
fibers — though ironically, the Manila galleons would later be sailing under 
Philippine canvas woven on backstrap looms. Their sails were wider than 
high and had a yard both top and bottom, a type of lug sail the Spaniards 
called Lutaw after a seafaring people {lutaxv meant floating) in Mindanao 
and Sulu. Paddles, a meter or 120 centimeters long (bugsay) and with a leaf- 
shaped blade, were carved of a single piece of wood. Oars (gaor), however, 
had a blade shaped like a dinner plate. The karakoa could mount forty of 
them on a side, and its speed was proverbial. As Father Combes (1667, 70) 
said, ‘The care and technique with which they build them makes their ships 
sail like birds, while ours are like lead in comparison.” 


| Pottery 

The Visayan potter’s craft was dihoon, and it was practiced by female 
potters using not a potter’s wheel but the paddle-and-anvil technique. The 
maninihon gathered the clay herself (kalot), kneaded it (luyang), and then 
made a lump for each pot shaped like half a coconut husk. She placed this 
over one hand holding inside it a smooth round stone — the anvil (igsosool). 
She then thinned and enlarged the lump of clay into pot shape by giving 
it light blows on the outside with a paddle (dokol or dapi). (From the 
slapping sound, pakpak or pikpik, she was also called mamarakpak or 
mamirikpik.) Sticking the soft pot on a board or basin for easy rotating, she 
widened and smoothed the lip with a wet cloth (igigihit), and then left the 


63 



Fig. 6. Classic Philippine karakoa. 

f (Artist’s reconstruction by Raoul Castro, under the supervision 
ofW. H. Scott; from Philippine Studies v ol.30, 3d quarter) 





THE VISAYAS 


Trades and Commerce 



finished pot to dry in the sun. It was then fired (pagba) without a kiln, while 
still “green” (lunhaw); and it was strictly tabu to make any clicking sounds 
with the mouth within earshot, lest the pot make the same sound by 
cracking. (If it cracked later from long use, however, it might be mende j 

with bayog bark.) < fj 

The common cooking pot was daba or koron, or anglet or tanuk in Panay. 
Bogoy was one with an especially wide mouth; and balanga, a fiat pan 
suitable for frying. The banga water jar was shaped like the poi celains 
preferred for brewing and drinking pangasi. Dulang, a large plate with a , 
foot, had a wooden counterpart by the same name. This is a limited 
inventory, obviously of ordinary household crockery. 

Conspicuously absent from lexicons compiled by the Spaniards are 
names of the elegant ceramics which appeared in ancient Philippine 
graves— all those decorated jars and jarlets, delicate little goblets, bowls J 
standing on three or four legs, and plates raised up on perforated stands 
like serving dishes in a modern Cantonese restaurant. These were evidently 1 
ceremonial or funerary items which ultimately could not compete with the 
trade porcelains introduced from China and Thailand by the tens of 
thousands. By the sixteenth century, even dinner plates were mainly ; | 
chinaware — whether pingan lasa, large ones, lampay, small ones, or sixoit, 
little ones like sauce dishes. 

Fine porcelain, along with gold jewelry and bronze gongs, constituted 
that heirloom wealth which Visayans called bahandi— “property [haci- 
enda] to be distinguished from ginamikun Sanchez (1617, 45v)-said|| 
“which is ordinary jewelry, plates, pots, etc.” Thus, when the people of - 
Sarangani evacuated under Spanish attack in 1543, they carried their 
plates, gongs, and gold with them and buried them in the hills. (Villalobos 
had them dug up to send home, but had to trade them off foi food in 
Samar instead.) The Visayans called large porcelain items— say, 12 or 15 
liters— tadyaw. Thus anything valued at that price was tinadyaxv; and when ] 
a man was enslaved for inability to pay a fine, it might be calculated in j 

tinaradyaw. I 

Naturally there was also a long list of names for specific types of porce- 
lain ware. Ordinary Chinese jars were ang-ang. The ones used for pangasi 
were gining. Abdan and lumbang were large ones. Linoping were the big 
Zheiiang wares with “ears” (handles) the Portuguese called martabanas ; I 
they were called “linoping” because diey were decorated all over like loping | 
men tattooed all over. Hinalasan were dragon jars, so called from the 
“snake” (halos) done in high relief on their sides; they were also call||g 
basingun because they were worth 1 basing, a gold tael. Tinampilak was a j 


large black jar; tuytuy, a small black one; and kabo, a Ming blue and white 
; jarlet. 

Plates had even more names according to their size, shape, and color, 
^ but all the big deep ones were called kawkawun from kawkato, to swish the 
| fingers from side to side; and some were valued at more than 2 taels. Status 
| symbols all, both jars and plates were displayed in a kind of wickerwork 
f holders on the house beams. 


gjp; Goldworking ‘ 

ipsiv 

I! Gold is mentioned in early Spanish accounts more often than any other 
| one substance, evidence not only of their interest in it but of the fact that 
jj they found it everywhere they went. They seem never to have seen a Visayan 
without gold on his person, and said that all of them could tell where any 
gold came from just by looking at it. But the Spanish were surprised at the 
||; low intensity of Visayan mining operations: the Visayans only went to get it 
as needed. ‘They would rather keep it below the ground than in cash- 
K boxes,” Juan Martinez (1567, 463) said, “because since they have wars, they 
| can steal it in the house but not in the ground.” The “wars,” of course, 
included Spanish tribute collecting and looting, and moved Filipinos to 
| curtail or even cease local production. 

I Most of this mining was placer mining — gold panning in streams or 
It riverbeds. Placers were called dulangan from dulang, the wooden pan used; 
If: the activity, pamiling, meaning sifting; and a wooden trough or tub, bilingan. 
j§ There were streams that could be worked in most islands, and Bohol was 
| said to have one in Kabularan where as much as 1 mas (2.4 grams) a day 
j| could be recovered. Kotkot or kali was to mine by actual excavation, whence 
the mine was called kalian, and sabod was a rich vein — like those found 5 
; or 6 meters deep in Masbate. Masbate attracted miners from neighboring 
J islands and supplied the famous itinerant goldsmiths of Bikol, and a 
| Spanish assay in 1567 gave 6 ounces per hundredweight of 15-karat quality. 

Many deposits went unworked for lack of tools and technique, and some 
? in Butuan and Surigao were leased by the month instead to outsiders who 
| came and went by sea. 

The Visayans called gold bulawan and fine gold himulaxvan, presumably 
f: from bulaxv, red or rosy, a color they often produced artificially with porog, 
| ochre. Though they had touchstones (sanitran) to test its quality, most men 
could estimate its content on sight, and they carried little scales and weights 
around with them in a special pouch to make spot purchases. (So the 


THE VISAYAS 



Trades and Commerce 


Cebuanos weighed out the 20 pesos in gold which they paid Magellan 
6 kilos of iron.) The weights were various kinds of seeds or beans, based 
a little red one called bangati, but convertible to standard Southeast Asi 
weights of the time — the mas, the kupang (0.25 mas), and the tael or ta 
(16 mas), which was basing in Visayan. The Visayans, however, leckon 
three different kinds of basing according to the quality of its gold co 
tent —labingsiam worth 12 Spanish reals, labingwalo worth 10 or 11, ~ 

labingpilo , only 9. . 

Gold is a supremely workable metal, especially when pure, and panday 
sa bulawan took advantage of its properties in a number of ways. Sotifl 
lumps they carved, modeled, and hammered into shape, beat out into 
sheets as thin as onionskin to be cut with shears into silhouettes oi wrapped^ 
into beads or sheathing, or drawn out into thin wires to be used in filigree J 
work or “woven” into thick ropes. Or they soldered tiny granules together, | 
several hundred to the square centimeter, a technique in which ancient 
Filipino goldsmiths have never been surpassed. J§ 

The local custom of interring such goldwork with the deceased, and the|| 
universal custom of robbing graves, have provided representative samples 
for examination in modern museums and collections. Many are of stun- 
ning beauty and incredible complexity — like those bahandi necklaces 
called kamagi which contain hundreds of links and rods and wires. Such 
jewelry was obviously not going to be replaced once it disappeaied 
together with the skills to produce it — in the first few generations of g 
colonial occupation. As Alcina said a century later, “one who knows how to 
make them today is hard to find.” 

Alcina arrived in the Visayas in 1634, and at that time noted that the 
number of local jewelers had increased but that the quality of their goldwork | 
had declined. He believed what accounted for this change was the disap- 
pearance of Philippine gold and the introduction of Mexican silver. Nev- g 
ertheless, he had no doubts about the quality of ancient Visayan goldwork: 


expressed that the low level of pre-Hispanic Philippine technology would 
have prevented Filipinos from producing such sophisticated jewelry. But 
the logic is dubious at best: many nomadic barbarians have produced very 
fine jewelry. On the other hand, jeweler Ramon Villegas, leading authority 
on Philippine gold, argues persuasively that many motifs and techniques of 
Philippine goldwork which have origins or similarities elsewhere, are here 
combined and developed in ways not found outside the archipelago. Until 
such examples are found elsewhere; therefore, the easiest way to account 
for the vast hordes of unique goldwork that have bepn uncovered is to 
assume that it was crafted by Filipinos of Philippine gold in the Philippines. 


Weaving 




The many different kinds of large and small beads, all ofwhat they call filigree work 
here ... is clear evidence that they did careful, delicate and beaudfulwork even better 
in their antiquity than now, since all the ancient goldwork is of higher gold content 
and craftsmanship than what is being made how . . . [like the kamagi] , a piece of 
jewelry of greater value and curiosity than could be expected of a people apparently 
so crude and uncivilized (Alcina 1668a, 3:121). 


Alcina would not be the last person to see a contrast between the level 
of Visayan culture and the perfection of their goldwork. As more and more 
elegant goldwork would later be unearthed, the opinion came to be 


A 


The Visayan word for cloth, blanket, or skirt was habul, which was woven 
on a backstrap loom by women or male transvestites. The backstrap loom 
was so called because the warp threads were supported, notin a permanent 
framework, but in one continuous loop around a loom bar held in the 
weaver’s lap by a strap behind her back, and another one suspended from 
a house beam or tree branch as convenient. These two bars were tradition- 
ally about 4 meters apart, and so produced a textile twice that length and 
a meter wide: the standard measure was one birang, half of what came from 
the loom, lakdug .' 7 

The front loom bar was called os-osan and it was coated with a sticky black 
wax to keep the threads from slipping. Gikos were the cords fastening the 
os-osan to a leather or wooden backstrap (paholan). The back loom bar was 
sablayan. Riding on the warp was the reed or comb (salanglan), made of two 
parallel rattan rods (tangkup) about three fingers apart, grooved to hold the 
teeth (salisi) by wrapping a thread around it and in between them; the reed 
could thus be opened by removing the thread in order to insert it, comblike, 
over the upper set of warp threads. Beyond the reed, these warp threads 
passed alternately over and under a bamboo shed rod (bukug), forming a 
shed to pass the weft threads through. The alternate shed, for passing them 
in the opposite direction, was formed by pulling up a heddle (koghon) — a 
heddle stick (borboran) with a thread wrapped loosely around it to pick up 
every other warp thread. And beyond this, each warp thread was wrapped 
once around a cross rod called sankad. — technically a coil rod — to keep 
them taut and evenly spaced. 

The weaving process required a hardwood batten (baiila) shaped like a 
dull sword as long as the fabric was wide. The weaver would insert it flat into 


69 


THE V1SAYAS 


Trades and Commerce 


the shed, turn it on edge to widen the opening, run the shuttle through ir 
front of the reed, then lay it flat again to strike the reed and beat the wef 
tight (hulug or pogawa). The shuttle (sikwan or bosali) was a thin cane th 
same length as the barila, forked at both ends to hold the weft threa 
wrapped lengthwise. And to begin, a temporary lease rod (pug.) was i 
serted in front of the weaver to provide an edge for the first weft threads, 
and removed after a few centimeters of cloth was woven. This equipment 
was sufficient for weaving plain or striped fabric, but to produce designs, 
additional koghon heddles were needed, and for fancy border strips which 
looked like embroidery, one or more pointed rods like oversized knitting jjj 
needles (koging or kohit) were used to separate a few warp threads at a time. 

Since the weaver obviously could not reach the back loom bai when 
seated behind the front one, she had to prepare the warp beforehand. She 
did this by wrapping it back and forth around a series of upr ight stakes, 
including the sankad coil rod to keep the threads in order when transfer- 


fleeting them as tribute for cordage — and were graded according to quality. 
Ganiay fiber was the finest and produced a light fabric called sandulan; 
lapnis was for heavy cloth; and bikil made a canvas like horsehide and also 
strong thread for heddles. Tying these fibers together with fine knots to 
)i oduce thread was the first task little girls learned to perform. More than 
a dozen varieties of abaca were grown, but wild abaca and other hemplike 
fibers, including buri leaves, were also woven into cloth. 

Cotton was gapas — or bunctng or tingkal when spun into thread with a 
| distaff and spindle (tingkalan). Kupangwas one skein, composed of ten boko, 
each of which was ten kaiool, and a kawol was ten threads (lugas); and a baye 
®t'was half a kupang. Cotton cloth was called lompot, both the textile and 
Standard piece or blanket — as in usa ka lompot. The standard measure was 
Wgintas, 3 meters. Cloth straight from the loom (kobal), both cotton and 
abaca, was ordinarily soaked in lime, sometimes with dye added, and then 
^cudgeled to soften it. Dyestuffs were red sibukaw brazilwood made more 


nne them to the two loom bars. The transfer (han-ay) was made by inserting* intense with nino wood; tagum, indigo; dulaw, a yellow gingerlike root; 
the os-osan and sablayan inside the loops of the last two stakes, and lifting j kasuba, a kind of saffron; and an impermanent dye of black soil called Una, 
the warp out on them ready to be set up (hinan-ay or tindug). Once the I Dyed thread was used less to weave colored cloth than to insert colored 
weaver and warp were ’in position, she maintained her seating by pushing j stripes (limy) in plain cloth, including imported silk threads or even threads 
against a footrest (puran or siharan). And she could interrupt her work I of gold. When a cloth was fully covered in alternate stripes, it was called by 

ply by rolling up the warp on the front loom bar— heddles, batten, and j|| a variety of terms which implied such repetition— for example, imong- 


I imong, buruk-bumk, or solot-solot. 


sim rv 0 i i -11. rr 

all — taking down the back bar, and putting it all under her arm to carry oft 

and set aside until ready to continue. I The most e,e « ant textlle < considered a monopoly of Visayan weavers, was 

Weaving was a normal part of housekeeping, and women supplied all I the pinayusan which was the strict prerogative of men who had personally 

• * ’ ’ ’ M J * killed an enemy. It was woven of abaca fibers hand-selected for their 

whiteness and hair-thin texture, and then tie-dyed by binding little pinches 
Of cloth (payos) to leave a fine flowered pattern in natural color on a field 
of deep red. It made gauze-thin pudong whose loose ends heroes let 
carelessly fall over their shoulders to flap in the breeze. 


their menfolk’s clothing: ladok. was either a bachelor or a shabbily dressed 
married man. In epic literature, this is the pastime of even royal ladies, and 
heroes departing on amorous adventures are ritually clothed with magical 
garments by their mothers or sisters. Both cotton and abaca were pre- 
Hispanic exports: the Chinese called Mindoro abaca yu-da, jute, in the | 
thirteenth century. The wives of householding slaves were required to spin 
cotton which their masters supplied them in the boll, and paid workers 
(moo) were employed as domestic weavers. The Spaniards quickly de- j 
manded cotton as tribute for sailcloth or export to Mexico, and a year alter | 
I.egazpi seized Manila, two galleons sailed for Acapulco with 22,600 pesos 
worth of cloth and 3,800 kilos of thread. 

Textiles 

llalml was generally taken to mean abaca cloth— what the Spaniards 
called medrifmque. The cleaned fibers were? lanol- lanote to Spaniards col- 


( Domestic Trade 

The day after Magellan made his first Philippine landing on I lomonhon 
Island off the southern tip of Samar, some fishermen appeared from 
nearby Suluan to trade fish, coconuts, and arrack. Suluan is one of the most 
remote bits of land in the archipelago, and the alacrity with whic h its 
inhabitants initiated trade with unknown foreigners reflected a common 
feature of Visayan life — all communities exc hanged foodstuffs. Moreover, 
the fact that, these Suluanon were tattooed indicates that trade and warfare 


71 


THE V1SAYAS 


in the pre-Hispanic: Visayas, as in (he rest of (he world, were not mutually Jj 
exclusive activities. Indeed, Loarca (1582, 140) listed the betrayal of such j| 
intercourse as a major cause for war — “il they go to trade in other towns as jj 
friends and they offend or maltreat them there and commit treachery | 
against them under cover of friendship.” 

Staple food crops were items of daily trade, due to both need and § 
preference. When Sebastian de Puerto was captured on the Surigao coast j| 
in 1526, his master took him along to sell rice in Cebu. In 1565 Legazpi 
noticed large boats loading rice and tubers in Cabalian (Leyte) and a week ; 
later, encountered a boatload of rice and yams off Bohol which had conic j 
from Sugod (Leyte). When he anchored in Loay, bolus came alongside to ; 
barter fish, wax, and goatmeat— which Legazpi suspected was dogmeat— 
"haggling four hours over a trifle” (Anon. 1565, 476). few Visayan islands 
produced a surplus of rice, so it was traded for long distances: when 
Cebuanos tried to starve the Spaniards out, Muslim merchants supplied 
them with rice from Luzon and Panay. Wild roots were also traded: /tom/ was j 
sold, stripped and ready for curing, by the “ax handle." Coconuts were 
almost a cash crop: they were grown in plantations, shipped by boatloads 
or processed as oil, and tuba tappers rented the trees or were hired to tend 1 
them. Wax and honey were traded by men with professional skill in 
locating the hives, even following the flight of bees through the forest. Wild j 
fruits and nuts, garden vegetables and medicinal herbs, as well as packaged 
foods like palm sugar ( kalamay ), were exchanged in local markets. 

Salt derived from seawater was such an essential item of trade it served j 
as a medium of exchange. One gantang was a cake 5 to 6 centimeters, 
square, worth a ganta of rice (3 liters) . Thus, usa ka gantangoi cloth about 
80 centimeters — was the length for which a weaver was paid such a piece 

of salt. I 

Next to foodstuffs, the most common domestic trade goods were thread, 
cloth, and clothing. Spinning, weaving, and sewing were all women’s work, 
sometimes for hire, and so was the marketing of their products. The 
laborious task of stripping, cleaning, bleaching, and dyeing abaca was also 
done by women, usually working in groups, except for especially tough 
varieties which were carded by men. Cotton thread was sold by the skein 
(kupang), and cloth by the “blanket” (lompot). Cleaned abaca fibers: 
(lanot) , however, were sold by the skein or bundle which could be encom- 
passed by the thumb and forefinger (kumo). Although they could be 
purchased as such, tying them into thread was a normal part of housework. 

Pottery was also a female craft, from gathering the clay to paddling th« 
finished products, but whether they were distributed to other islands b 


>70 


Trades and Commence 


merchants or the potters themselves is not dear. Blacksmiths, however, 
practiced their profession from town to town with an apprentice carrying 
the anvil and bellows, repairing and relempering tools and forging new 
ones out of used iron. 

In the Visayan marketplace, heavy items were weighed with a steelyard 
called sinanta (Spaniards reckoned one chinanta at half an atroba, or 6.3 
kilos), but gold was weighed against little seeds in a pair of balances small 
enough to be carried on the person. Rice was itself a medium of exchange: 
pots were sold for the amount they could hold, and a gantang was the value 
of a ganta of unhusked rice. Expensive items like boats, slaves, or good 
hunting dogs were priced in gold tahil (38.4 grams), or, conversely, in 
bahandi items themselves valued in tahil — for example, pakaagungon, to 
price in gongs (agung), or hinalasan, the value of an imported dragon jar. 

Calculations were made with little wooden counters ( kukot ), every tenth 
one being of different size. But there are no reports of pre-European 
coinage, even though the square-holed Chinese caz was in wide circulation 
in islands to the south. (Martin de Islares brought some back from the 
Loaysa expedition minted early in the fifteenth century.) Cebuanos would i 

not accept copper, silver, or gold coins from Magellan in 1521, but twenty 
years later, Diego de Bustos bought a piece of silk in Abuyo (Leyte) for 2 :: 

pesos, and in 1565, Luzon and Borneo merchants would accept nothing ';] 

but silver. That this change was due to the Portuguese presence in Malacca £ 

is suggested by the fact that the Visayan word for silver coin, salapi, meant Z 

half a peso — that is, a Portuguese tosLon. Indeed, Visayans always calculated 
Spanish currency in terms of a 4-real toston rather than an 8-real peso — 
for example, si kiwalo (0.5 real), an eighth of a toston; or sikapat (1 real), 
a quarter-toston; and the kahati (2-real coin), meaning half a toston. 

To appreciate the vigor and scope of Visayan trade, it is only necessary 
to review its specialized vocabulary. 

Visayan Trade Terms 

Alig-ig 

Ankatangkayan 
A bang 

Alangox botong 

Bakal or palit 
Balias 

Baligiya, balidiya 
Biniyaga 
Botong 

h 7 % 


To buy a little at a time 
To take merchandise on credit 
To rent a house or boat 

To deal in expensive or luxury goods, like boats, slaves, 
bahandi jars, or gongs 
To deal in ordinary goods 
A business partner 

To carry rice, pigs, chickens, or foodstuffs by sea to sell 
To sell notions to women 
The price of alang goods 


THE V1SAYAS 


Dagiya A gathering of people for trade jjj 

Dalawat To deal in grain; to buy at harvesttime 

Doom For a foreign vessel to anchor 

Q a g a To prevent a merchantman from making port or engaging ri|j|j 

business before paying anchorage fees 
Gamit To buy on credit 

Gasa A discount 

Himonghog Gratuity given a boat’s officers 

Hinikayan Freightage or passage by boat (sakayan) 

Holioi To buy hunting dogs . 

Hoyot Lowland highland barter, usually fish for fruit or i ice 

Karakal A traveling merchant 

Labn; hilaba Profit or illicit gain 

jj (0 To sell secondhand goods 

Lokaf) To be overcharged, deceived 

Sahul Anything sold without profit or at a loss 

Samuhcin For two or more to form a business partnership 

Slbo To barter one for one; for example, a ganta of rice for a ganu|| 

of wine 

Talngidyut Small items of bahandi 

TamUangan Marketplace 

Tnngivax To deal in wine; tamngiuayan: tavern or wineshop 

Tarauta To make change, including small things for large 

Tongtong An overcharge or illicit commission 

Tunay To buy for cash 


■S?Wgg 

The Chinese Enigma 

- 

The presence of Chinese trade goods in the sixteenth-century Visayas is 
a well-attested fact, but the presence of the Chinese themselves is more • 
problematic. Early Spanish explorers were told in Lianga Bay that Chinese 
junks came to Cebu and Mindanao every year. In Cebu they were told that 
eight survivors of the Magellan expedition had been sold to Chinese 
traders; in Sarangani, that Chinese traded in Cotabato; and in Abuyo, thaj 
Chinese traders actually resided in Sugod. In June 1544, a Bornean in 
Limasawa reported that two junks were then anchored in Butuan. But the 
Spaniards never saw either these Chinese or their ships: not until L>bJ. 
when Legazpi moved to Capiz did they capture a Chinese vessel and its 
crew — that is, on the far western littoral of the islands. (One of those 
Chinese taught his language to Fray Martin de Rada, and twenty years later 
was the head of the Chinese community in Manila— Don Francisco Zanco 
The problem is that non-Chinese traders who sold Chinese goods wen 
often called Chinese. 


Trades and Commerce 


When Legazpi captured a parao owned by Anton Maletis, a Portuguese 
resident of Borneo, carrying cargo belonging to the sultan of Brunei, its 
chief pilot was interviewed. 

This Moro told the General that two junks from Luzon were in Butuan bartering 
gold, wax and slaves, and that everything they carried is almost the same as the 
Borneans’, and it’s all goods from China, and that since what they cany is goods from 
China, they call Bornean boats and those from Luzon Chinese junks in these islands, 
and they themselves are called Chinese among these islanders, hut in truth Chinese 
junks do not come here because they are very large and not fit for sailing between 
these islands (Anon. 1565,467). ■ 

This testimony appears to be corroborated by the fact that Visayans called 
“foreign nations like the Borneans and Sangleyes [Chinese], Sina and 
that Chinese sailing directions published in 1617 avoided inland Visayan 
waters by passing from Mindoro to Oton (Iloilo) to Dapitan. Moreover, the 
word junk (junco) of early Spanish accounts was actually Malay Jong, a ship 
of Southeast Asian build, not Chinese — whence Visayan cidyong, “a ship of 
high freeboard.” 


International Commerce 


At the time Magellan reached the Philippines, a friend of his was captain 
general to the sultan of Ternate, a Luzon businessman was governor of the 
Muslims in Portuguese Malacca, the sultan of Brunei’s Manila son-in-law 
had a Makassarese slave who could speak Spanish, and the Butuanon ruler 
of Limasawa understood a Malay-speaking merchant from Ciama 


(Champa?). 18 This is impressive evidence of an international commerce 
which extended literally from the Atlantic to the Pacific. By the middle of 
the sixteenth century, the Visayan end was being serviced by traders from 
Borneo, Sulu, and Luzon, and possibly Sangils settled on Davao Bay. 
Chinese goods were delivered to Manila and Borneo in large seagoing 
junks — sometimes taken in piratical action off Mindoro, too — and redis- 
tributed for local retail, preferably in exchange for gold and slaves. That all 


these traders were Muslims, including the Ciama merchant, suggests a kind 
of cultural bonding like that enjoyed by Chinese businessmen. But there 
were also local trading networks sealed with marriage alliances, as illus- 
trated by Rajah Kolambu of Butuan personally guiding Magellan from 
Limasawa to Cebu. 

The greatest bulk of Chinese trade goods was in porcelain, stoneware, 
and unglazed crockery; prior to the galleon trade, silk was limited to 



j- 

k 


75 


THE VLSAYAS 


thinner, cheaper varieties or thread. Common white or black-and-white 
blankets, sarsaparilla (chinaroot), incense, glass beads, tin, and brass ™gjj 
also came from China. Most important, however, were ironware and the 
cast-iron pans which were the major source for Visayan blacksmiths— ' a 
kind of iron,” the Bornean pilot remarked with only slight exaggeration, 
“as easy to break as glass with any blow they give it” (Anon. 1565, 466). 

But Chinese brass (or copper?) gongs were considered inferior to bronze 
ones from Borneo and Sangir. Hardware also came from Borneo— for 
example, small knives and spearheads— and fine steel blades, though the 
best krises and kampilans came from Sangir, and Japanese swords also 
reached the Visayas through Manila. Bornean imports included camphor, j 
fine-woven mats, sago cakes, expensive red cloth and elegant G-strings, and j 
tropical perfumes and drugs, as well as products from farther west like,,. 
Indian chintzes and Javanese batik stuffs, or precious red stones like 
carnelians, garnets, and rubies. Sulu trade was reflected in a style of short 

jacket called sinulog. . . jjj| 

Whatever profit foreign merchants may have made on slaves and gold, 
the bulk of Visayan exports were forest and marine products— wax, civet, 
musk, ambergris, cinnamon, dyewood, and aromatic hardwood, “dragon’s 
blood” (that is, red resin), and red ants for coloring Chinese ink. Covg|| 
shells were used as currency in Cambodia, Siam, and Patani (Sumatra), and 
both abaca and cotton cloth, as well as cotton thread and cottonseed, had|| 
a steady market in China. But the popular picture of a Chinese junk 
anchored in some Visayan port with natives scrambling aboard to barter 
beeswax for porcelain is rather a caricature of what was actually a sophis- 
ticated commerce. In little emporia like Cebu, Filipino and foreign vessels jg 
registered, paid harbor fees, and loaded merchandise which did not origi- 
nate in Cebu. Pearls, coral, and tortoise shell came from islands to the 
south, while deerskins 7 antlers, and caged civet cats destined for Japan 
came from Mindanao, and so did carabao horns from China. Conversely, 
cheap cotton blankets were available from China, where they may well have 
been woven of Visayan cotton, just as their fragrant little boxes may have 
been carved of Visayan sandalwood which had been included among log 5 
transported to Manila and which had served as ballast on homebound 
Fujian junk. As for Chinese jars that arrived in Manila filled with wine or 
preserved fruits they were widely resold empty. 


CHAPTER 4 


Religion 


Visayans worshiped nature spirits, gods of particular localities or 
I activities, and their own ancestors. Religious practitioners were male or 
I female mediums who contacted spirit patrons in a state of trance to 
I determine the cause and cure of illness. Sacrifices included foodstuffs, 
| beverages, and live fowl, hogs or human beings; and ancestors, spirits, and 
I deities were invoked at feasts in which these things were offered up. 
jjjfricestors were also invited to partake of any meal or drinking, and their 
| well-being in the next world depended on sacrifices offered by their 
i descendants both before and after their death and burial. 


| Nature Spirits 

in 

Natural forces like celestial bodies or flowing waters were personified for 
reverence or worship. Chief among them were the sun and moon, espe- 
| the new moon whose regular waxing from a thin silver to full 
| brilliance so strongly suggested prosperity and fertility. Stars and constel- 
| lations connected with the agricultural cycle were invoked for good crops. 
To the winds themselves were addressed prayers for fair weather and 


77 


c:: 

C! 


£5 


THE VISAYAS 


Religion 


favorable winds. There were river gods, both in general and as resident 1 
particular streams, and important gods and spirits ol the sea which receiv 
all these waters. Part of ordinary river traffic were little rafts— or, m the ca 
of community sacrifices, large ones— headed downstream bearing tj| 
offerings and paraphernalia of ceremonies celebrated along their banks 
As for spirits dwelling in the mountains, hunters were sure to offer th 

first catch to them. . 

Crocodiles were held in special veneration because of their obvious 
danger: they were addressed as Grandfather, and were offered symbolic 
foodstuffs by the prudent when crossing rivers or even on entering boats.: 
Pahali, the spirit of the strangler fig, or balete tree, was also given offering 


in 


“there is no ancicm ucc iu wwm — * 

a sacrilege to think of cutting one under any circumstances. Dangerous^ 
cliffs or strange rock formations were also invoked for safe passage: man |j 
porcelain plates that had contained offerings were to be found on a rocky j 
promontory on 


too, a natural formation along the Araut River that looked like a main 
paddling a canoe was venerated as epic hero Labaw Donggon. 


The Unseen World 


place: asjuan de lalsla (1565, 233) said, “in every town they have their god, 
all called Diwata in general, but as a personal name, that of their town.” 
Their number must have been legion considering that individual shamans 
during seances named different ones with whom they were in communica- 
jjon or who took possession of them. 

Some gods constituted a genuine pantheon, a hierarchy with specific 
Holes to play, particularly in connection with birth, longevity, death, and 
the afterlife. Others were the patrons of specific human conditions: 

■ Dalikmata, a diwata with many eyes, was invoked in the case of eye ailments, 
while Makabosog moved men to gluttony. Cebuanos referred to the image 
| of the Holy Child which Magellan gave Humabon’s wife as “the Spaniards’ 


recognition of its sinister powers: as Father Chirino (1604, 53) sa *^, "4 jjl diwata,’’ and supposedly rendered it homage after Magellan’s death, and 
ancient tree to whom they do not attribute divinityand it was | | were said to have taken it down to the shore and immersed it in time of 

drought. 

Our earliest list of Visayan deities was recorded by Miguel de Loarca in 
Panay in 1582: Si Dapa was a diwata who marked out one’s mortal lifespan 
Potol Point, the northwestern headland of Panay, and so, ? | on a tree trunk on Mount Madyaas at the time of birth; Magwayen ferried 

the souls of the deceased across to a kind of Inferno, and Pandaki rescued 
the deserving for a more pleasant fate. Lalahon was the fire-breathing 
| goddess of Mount Canlaon who could be invoked for good crops but who 
fSent out swarms of locusts if angered, while Mayong was the diwata of the 
volcano in Ibalon (Albay) which bears her name. Inaginid and Malanduk 
were invoked for success in battle and plunder, and Nagined, Arapayan, 
and Makbarubak could be appealed to when concocting a poisonous oil. 
r A few were actually hostile to mankind — Makaptan, for example, who lived 
in the highest heavens and so had never tasted human food or drink and, 


I 


Visayans considered themselves vastly outnumbered by a variety of invis- 
ible beings, spirits, and deities. Gods and goddesses were called diwata andg 
ancestor spirits, umalagad, both words still in use among Visayans living m 
the remote mountains of Panay. These were generally benevolent or | presumably for this reason, capriciously caused them death and disease, 
neutral and could be approached ritually for good crops, health, an(P| One t j ie fj rst questions Spanish explorers always asked Filipinos was 
fortune, but they also caused illness or misfortune if not given due respect. 

They thus functioned to sanction approved social behavior. Jjl . _ 

Naturally malevolent beings, on the other hand, had to be avoided or f “did not worship anything but raised their face and clasped hands to 

---- — J — mA rn ' Qr bievnns to the f- heaven, and called their god Abba” (Pigafetta 1524b, 126). This was an 

understandable confusion. Magellan’s interpreter was a Malay-speaking 
| Sumatran and ate was a Malay-Arabic word for father, while in Visayan Aba! 
phers simply called them witches, brujas or hechiceros — a lack which has! was a common expression of wonder or admiration — like “Hail!” in the Ave 
been supplied in modern Visayan by Spanish duende, meaning hobgoblin, I Maria. Five years later, Sebastian de Puerto reported from the Surigao coast 
or encanto enchanted. I l hat the natives sacrificed to a god called Amito — that is, anito, the ordinary 

Diiuatais a Malay-Sanskrit term for gods or godhead, and Visayan | Visayan term for sacrifice or religious offering, 

or magdhoata meant to invoke or deify them, and diya was a Panay synonym. I Father Chirino (1604, 53) , on the other hand, stated that of the multi- 

They had individual personalities and names, which differed from place to I jude of Filipino gods, “they make one the principal and superior of all. 


kept off by precautionary acts, and ranged from the mischievous to the 
ghoulish, the most common and fearful being those who ate away the livers 
of living persons. They had no single name as a class— Spanish lexicogra^ 






THE VTSAYAS 


Religion 


whom the Tagalogs called Balhala Mei-Capal, which means the creator g 
or maker, and the Bisayans, Laon, which denotes antiquity. The Tagal 
Bathala was well known in Chirino’s day, hut he was the first to mentior 
Visayan equivalent, and his statement was repeated verbatim by Jesuits 
the next generation such as Diego de Bobdilla and Francisco Cohn. But n 
by Father Alcina: rather, he devoted one whole chapter to the thesis th 
Malaon was simply one of many names which Visayans applied to the Tru 
Godhead of which they had some hazy knowledge. Thus he equate 
Malaon— whom the Samarenos thought was a female— with the Ancient of 3 
Days, Makapatag (to level or seize) with the Old Testameht God of Venge- | j 
ance, and Makaobus (to finish) with the Alpha and Omega, attributing Jj jg 
these coincidences to some long-forgotten contact with Jews in China or | 

Raom (Laon) appears as a Bohol idol in the Jesuit annual lettei of 1609, jj 
but none of Chirino’s contemporaries mentioned a creator god by this or 
any other name, least of all when recording origin myths. Neithei chc the g 
early dictionaries. Laon was not said of persons but of things: it meant aged 
or dried out like root crops or grain left from last year’ s harvest, or abaneh| 
domestic animal. But Manlaon appears as the name of a mountain peak. 
Thus Laon may well have been the goddess of Mount Canlaon in Negios jjjj 
Loarca’s Lalahon — but it is unlikely that the Visayans had a supreme deity 

by that name. . 

The soul or elan vital was kalag: when people set new nee aside 01 ie 
deceased, they would say, “Himulaw, himulaw, manga kalag: ayaw kamig 
pagsuli [Eat, souls, eat: let it not be bad for us]” (Alcina 1668a, 3:218), and- 
a spirited, forceful man was called kalagan na tao. The kalag might separate 
from the body during dreams, illness, or insanity, or be carried off by ag 
diwata for envy or desire, especially those who were bugus, that is, perfect^ 
handsome, or otherwise enviable. Daay was the diwata s desiie foi such a 
person, a beautiful woman for himself, a powerful man for a son. Women 
were therefore advised, “Dika mag bukas sang pano sa olo mo kay daayon 
ka [Do not uncover your head lestyoube desired]” (Mentrida 1637a, 116)^ 
The loss of kalag might also result in a kind of enchanted death— linahos_ 
inlmmatay — of which Sanchez said (1617, 291 v), “1 here are those among 
the Visayans who remain like dead for two or three days, and afterwar J 

revive and recount visions.” % 

Ancestor spirits specifically were called umalagad, from alagad, a followeij 
or voluntary assistant, and they were venerated as personal guardians oL 
companions. They were invoked on leaving the house and timing agticup 
tural rites in the field, and were considered essential shipmates on any sea. 


ra id, sometimes going on board in the form of a python. Indeed, some 
were said to have been born as snake twins from the same womb as the 
persons they were destined to protect. It was these umalagad and kalag, 
rather than the diwata, who were the main objects of Visayan adoration, 
receiving not only formal worship conducted by priests and priestesses, but 
domestic offerings and routinary acts of reverence on the part of laymen. 


The Spirit Underworld 


| Visayans also believed in a demimonde of monsters and ghouls who had 
the characteristics modern medicine assigns to germs — invisible, ubiqui- 
tous, harmful, avoidable by simple health precautions and home remedies, 
but requiring professional diagnosis, prescription, and treatment in the 
event of serious infections. Twentieth-century folklore considers them 
invisible creatures who sometimes permit themselves to be seen in their 
true shape or in the form of human beings, but sixteenth-century Span- 
iards thought they were really human beings who could assume such 
monstrous forms, witches whose abnormal behavior and powers were the 
result of demon possession or pacts with the devil. But in either case, if 
Visayans became convinced that a death had been caused by one of their 
townmates who was such a creature, he or she was put to death — along with 
their whole families if the victim had been a datu. 

| The most common but most feared were the aswa.ng, flesh eaters who 
devoured the liver like a slow cancer. At the least liverish symptom, people 
said, “Kinibtan ang atay [Liver’s being chipped away],” and conducted a 
tingalok omen-seeking rite to discover the progress of the disease. If it 
appeared that the organ was completely consumed, emergency appeal had 
to be made promptly to some diwata to restore it. Aswang also ate the flesh 
of corpses, disinterring them if not well guarded, or actually causing them 
to disappear in the plain sight of mourners at a wake. Their presence was 
often revealed by level spots of ground they had trampled down during 
their witches’ dance at night, or their singing, which sounded like the 
cackling of a hen — nangangakak. But like all other evil creatures, they were 
afraid of noise and so could be kept at bay by pounding on bamboo-slat 
floors. 

Spanish lexicons listed alok, balbal, kakag, oho, onglo, and wahwah as 
synonyms of aswang, but tihtik as one that llew around at night, and langgal 
one that left the lower half of the body behind, or even the whole body with 
only the head flying off by itself. Mantiw were ghosts or apparitions, and 


Si 


THE VISAYAS 



Religion 


landungwere any imaginary visions or phantoms. iW was a general te 
for demons which came to be adopted for non-Chnstians— for exampl 
“Yawa ka pa [Are you still pagan]?” (Sanchez 1617, 264) . Ogtmawere ma 
shaped demons with the hind quarters of a beast and were therefore ca < 
satyrs or fauns by Father Mentrida (1637a, 274), who soberly reporte 
“Plenty of them were seen in Aklan and Ibahay rn 1600 and before 159S 
Balm was to change— that is, from one thing into another, like Lot s wi 
into a pillar of salt— and a demon by this name had to be kept away ro 
the sick. Binalm was a witch who had become invisible, but also any..,,, | 

suffering a change attributed to divine retribution, like crossed eyes or ag 
withered limb, so that “Binaliw ka!” was one of the worst possible curses. || 


Omens and Divination 

Visavans also believed that supernatural forces filled the natural world 
with signs and portents that it would be unwise to ignore. These wer^j 

indicated by the behavior of birds and reptiles, or c f u1 ^ be ellclte ^ffl| 
casting lots or by omen-seeking ceremonies conducted by babaylan or other 
diviners. Spanish missionaries and commanders often had to cancel their 
plans because Filipino guides refused to continue on after hearing the cry 

of some bird. , 

Any snake or lizard crossing the path, even a common house lizard that 

“spoke to” somebody descending the house steps, was a warning to turn 
back. A sneeze was also enough to interrupt any activity, including business 
transactions that were going badly. If somebody happened to ask them 
about their plans, hunters turned around because their quarry would then 
have been forewarned and hide. A monitor lizard under the housewas^ 
sure sign of impending death or disaster; though if it was killed, en-,. 
shrouded, and buried like a human being, its life might be accepted as ag 
substitute for the householder’s. But the most famous of these omens wa| 


of the hand. (Old folks were said to be “broken” because they had as many 
cracks in their palm as an old pot.) Luknit was to cast lots by four crocodile 
teeth or boar’s tusks, and tali was a stone or egg which the diviner made 
stand upright on a plate. The most popular method of divination was to ask 


the diwata to answer questions by causing some inanimate object to move: 
Abiyog was to swing, like a bolo suspended from a cord, and kibang was to 
move or wiggle, like a winnowing tray or a shield laid convex-side down. 
Mangayaw raiders before putting to sea were sure to board a small baroto 
thout outriggers and, sitting perfectly still on the center line, ask the 
diwata to rock the boat if it was propitious to proceed with the expedition. 
Ilf they received a favorable response, they asked who it was who had rocked 
the boat, naming a list of possibilities, and then offered a predeparture 
sacrifice to the one who had favored them. 

Sorcerers were believed to derive their secret knowledge of black magic — 
I spells and charms — from unnatural forces. Habit was a spell and ginhabit, 
the one bewitched by it: bakurit was a spell by which women detained their 
lovers; lumay, a love potion; and buringot , the opposite. Buringotalso made 
its possessor fearless in the face of danger. Mentala were incantations and 
verbal formulas — for example, to request crocodiles not to bite or hot iron 
not to burn. Awag was a spell put on coconut palms to make a thief s 
stomach swell up; liwtiw made fish follow the fisherman to shore or wild 
boar follow the hunter out of the woods; and oropok caused rats to multiply 
in somebody else’s field. Tagosilangan were persons with a charm which 
enabled them to see . hidden things, and tagarlum was a charmed herb that 
rendered its owner invisible. 

A powerful datu’s power was enhanced by popular fear of his arcane 
knowledge of black magic, sometimes reputed to be handed down from 
one generation to another. Ropok was a charm which caused the one who 
received it to obey like a slave. Panlus was a spear or G-string which caused 
leg pains or swelling in the victim as soon as he stepped over it. Bosong 
caused intestinal swelling in those who crossed the datu. Hokhok was to kill 
simply with a breath or the touch of a hand, and kaykay was to pierce 
somebody through just by pointing a finger at him from a distance. A 
reputation for such powers no doubt both facilitated a datu’s effective 
control over his subjects, and arose from it. 


the limokon, a . 

red feet and beak, also called koro-karo from its call. In a Suban-on epic as 
Taake sinks into the depths of the sea, he laments, Had the limokon | Worship 
sounded I would not have come” (Ochotorena 1981, 420). 

Fortune telling by palmistry was himalad, from palad, the lines in the palm J ^ Anita was a sacrifice, a formal act of worship conducted by a babaylan. 




This same word was reported from Luzon as meaning an idol, ancestor 
JJpirit, or deity — that is, an object of worship — but although Visayan mis- 
sionaries sometimes used the word in this sense, their dictionary defini- 
tions are unambiguous. Anito was the root of the words paganito and 


83 


THE YISAYA.S 


Religion 



established audible communication with spirits. They were conducted for 
fertility of crops, newlyweds, or domestic animals, for rain or fair weather, 



ma<r<mito which both mean an act of sacrifice, paga anito, to perform thJJ|| A solemn paganito in Cebu was described in the sixteenth century as 


lor Victory in war or plunder in raids, recovery from illness or the con lrqfj| gongs, drums, and resonant porcelain plates. The babavlan was an old 

Of epidemics, or the placating Of the souls Of the deceased. Minor paganit||P ; * wearincr a headdress lonned hv a mir of horns and arrnmna»i.*d 

however, could be performed by any householder. When drought threat- 
ened, for instance, pagobo was offered — a wild hen and a bird-shaped rice| 
cake together with leaves or sprouts from the crops threatened— to the 
diwata of the family hearth. When a hunting dog’s poor performance was 
attributed to witchcraft, pabto was conducted: a node of hot bamboo was j 


-were set out on large plates. A live large hog, raised and fattened for this 
I end, lay hound on a grass mat, and cacophonous music was provided by 


woman wearing a headdress topped by a pair of horns and accompanied 
by a second medium, both of them carrying bamboo trumpets which they 
either played or spoke through. They both proceeded to dance around the 
hog with scarfs in their hand, acting out a dialogue between the spirits 
possessing them, drinking wine on their behalf, and sprinkling some of it 
on the hog. 

struck on the ground to explode in front of the dog while the hunter saiijjr Finally, a spear was given the presiding babaylan, and with it she began 
“Palas na an palhi [Out with all spells and curses] !” (Sanchez 1617, 387v). [ a series of feints at the hog as the tempo of her movements increased to a 

But solemn paganito had to be conducted by a babaylan. 

Babaylan were shamans or spirit mediums, given to seizures and ti anc ?|| 
in which they spoke with the voice of diwata or other spirits and acted ogjjj 
conflicts in the spirit world, brandishing spears, foaming at the mouth, an|jj 
often becoming violent enough to require restraint. They were also called| 
daitan, befriended, in recognition of their patronage by a particular diwata. 

They could be either male or female, or male transvestites called asog, buUj 
were most commonly women. They came to their calling through attacks 
of illness or insanity which could only be cured by accepting the call, a||«j 
then attached themselves as alabay, apprentices, to some older babaylan, 
frequently a relative. Their remuneration was a designated share of the 
offerings, usually choice cuts of the hog or the head. But in full-scale 
paganito sponsored by prominent datus, they went home with heirloont 


frenzy, and then, with a sudden thrust, ran the victim through the heart 
jwith unerring aim. The foreheads of the main beneficiaries of the cer- 
emony were marked with the blood of the victim, whose wounds were then 
stanched; and the mat that had been bloodied during the sacrifice was 
5 carefully burned. The babaylan was then divested of her accoutrements 
and awakened from her trance, while the hog was singed, butchered, and 
cooked. The feasting then began, everybody receiving a share, though the 
flesh touched by the spear was reserved for the babaylan. Some of the meat 
was taken down to an altar on the seashore or riverbank where, after 
prayers, it was placed on a little raft together with the altar and all other 
paraphernalia, and set adrift. This brought the ritual to a close though the 
celebrating continued. 

; Naturally these ceremonies had their own vocabulary. Ginayaio were 


valuables like porcelain plates or gold ornaments. There were also outrigfejj offerings of spherical yellow-rice cakes; tinorlok was the hog reserved for 

charlatans. One Bohol babaylan attracted a crowd of worshipers to make c ~ *~ l ^ ^ ** 

sacrifices on the seashore with the promise that their ancestors would 
appear in a golden boat. 

This worship took place in private homes or fields; at grave sites or 
sacred spots outside the community; or along beaches or streams where 
little rafts could be launched, aboard which were disease and bad luck, or 
live pests like locusts or rats. There were no temples, though there werjj 
little platforms or sheds at the entrance to the village where offerings weif 
made. Some paganito were for the benefit of individuals or kindred, sorr^ 
were by nature seasonal, and some sought relief from a public crisis like 
drought or pestilence. 


| sacrifice; and bani was the tabu requiring the mat to be burned. Taruk was 
I the babaylan’s dance; bodyong her bamboo trumpet; and banay, a fan or fly 
whisk with which she kept time. Hola, kulak , or tagdug all meant spirit 
possession, with saob including even animals. Tabo was the wheezing sound 
when the diwata spoke. The little houses or altars on the riverbank were 
latangan, or magdantang if large enough for major community sacrifices. 

; ■ fhe babaylan’s healing prowess was described in dramatic terms: agaw, 
to carry of f by force, was to snatch a pain from the sufferer; tawag, to call 
someone out, was to summon the spirit that had kidnapped the soul; 
and baud, to rescue, was to free the invalid from the grip of the afflicting 
spirit. 


85 


Vi 

. ...I 
■ '■ 
i 

"■ H 

dj 


THE VISAYAS 


Religion 


Pnglehe or magrehe were religious restrictions or tabus, like mourning! 
restrictions following a dam's death, or a seven-day thanksgiving period 
following haivcst during which rice could not be pounded nor outsiders 
emer the house. Ordinary activities which involved risk or doubt werej 
always accompanied by prescribed tabus— planting, setting traps, starting ■ 
dogs on the hunt, the swarming of locusts, or the arrival of alien datus.who 
were considered naturally hostile if not actually bent on mischief. Mission-] 
aries adopted the word lehe for Lenten abstinences and restriction on 
eating meat on Fridays, and also accepted the pre-Christian term harang or 
kalad for offering. So, too, Christians continued darangin, a perfunctory 
invocation of ancestor spirits when leaving the house, only they were 
supposed to murmur “Jesus” instead of “Apo-Apo. 


Visayans kept small idols in their homes called tao-tao, bata-bata, or 
larawan , guardians of family welfare and the first recourse m the case of| 
sickness or trouble. Tao-tao meant a manikin or little tao (human being); 
bata-bata was a little bata (great-grandparent) ; and ladaio or larawan was an 
image, mould, or model. 

Idols of individual diwata with their names and properties, however, did 
not figure prominently enough in Visayan worship to attract ‘Spanish 
attention. Nor were they anointed, perfumed, or decked with gold and 
jewels as they were in the lake district of Manila. Thus members of the ^ 
Legazpi expedition, fresh from Mexico with its monumental Aztec im- 
agery, reported that Cebuanos had neither temples nor idols. But the 
household idols were common enough and visible enough to attract 
Magellan’s disapproving attention. Why were they not all burned? he 
demanded after the mass baptisms he instigated. 

Hernando de la Torre (1528, 280) reported that the natives of Sungao 
worshiped idols of wood— “and they paint them as well as they can, as we 
do Santos.” Pigafetta (1524b, 166) left the following description of one in 
Cebu: 

These idols are made of wood, and are hollow, and lack the back parts. Their arms 
are open and their feet turned up under them with legs open. They have a large face 
with four huge tusks like those of the wild boar, and are painted all over. 

But if these were really the sort of household idols which Humabon s 
queen gave up in favor of Magellan’s Santo Nino, it seems strange that 
Visayans would represent their ancestral spirits in such monstrous form. 


Further confusion is added to the picture of Visayan idol worship by the 
fact that the F.nglish word idol inevitably suggests an actual carved figure. 
But Spanish idolo means not only a graven image, but anything worshiped, 
idolized, or deified — like an ancestor or a balete tree. Father Mcntrida 
(1637a, 132) defines dixoaUi as “God, idol of the pagans, not images because 
they worship the Demon in the spirit.” Thus modern F.nglish translations 
obscure the fact that the “idols” invoked by a babaylan during a solemn 
paganito were not wooden statues, but invisible spirits. 


Origin Myths 

In the beginning there was only sea and sky — so says a Visayan myth well 
known to Spanish chroniclers. The following is the account attributed to 
Legazpi himself in 1567: 

In the beginning of the world there was nothing more than sky and water, and 
between the two, a hawk was flying which, getting angiy at finding no place to alight 
or rest, turned the water against the sky, which was offended and so scattered the water 
with islands and then the hawk had some place to nest. And when it was on one of them 
along the seashore, the current threw up a piece of bamboo at its feet, which the hawk 
grabbed and opened by pecking, and from the two sections of the bamboo, a man 
came out of the one and a woman from the other. These, they say, married with the 
approval of Linog, which is the earthquake, and in time they had many children, who 
fled when their parents got angiy and wanted to drive them out of the house and 
began to hit them with sticks. Some got in the inner room of the house, and from these 
the grandees or nobles are descended; others went down the steps and from these the 
timawu arc descended, who are the plebeian people; and from the children who 
remained hidden in the kitchen, they say the slaves arc descended (San Agustin 1098, 
293-94). 

With local variations, the myth was known all over the Visayas. In a Panay 
version, the bamboo itself was produced by a marriage between the sea 
breeze and the land breeze — probably the primordial pair of deities, 
Kaptan and Magwayen — but in Leyte and Samar, the first man and woman 
issued from two young coconuts floating on the water and pecked open by 
the bird. The highlanders of Panay listed two other categories of fleeing 
children — those who hid in the kitchen ash box and became the ancestors 
of the blacks, and those who fled to the open sea, the progenitors of the 
Spaniards. The most detailed account was recorded by Loarca from the 
coastal people of Panay, probably in Oton (Iloilo) where he was operating 
a Spanish shipyard. 


87 


n 


THE V1SAYAS 


i > 



in (his version, the man and woman who came forth from the bamboo 
were Si Kalak (that is, laid, male) and Si Kabai (female), an<i they had three jj | 
< hiidreti — two sons, Sibo and Pandagwan, and a daughter, Samar. Samar 
and Sibo married and had a daughter named Lupluban, who married her 
uncle Pandagwan, (he inventor of the fishnet, and they, in turn, had a son 
named Anoranor, whose son Panas was the inventor of war. Pandagwan Y? 
first catch was a shark which died when he took it out of the water, (lie first j | 
death in the world; grieved, he mourned its death and blamed die gods 
Kaptan and Magwayen, who, angered, killed him with a thunderbolt. Hut 
thirty days later they revived him from the underworld and restored him to ; 
the land of the living. But during his absence his wife had been won over 
by Marakoyrun with a stolen pig and would not now return to him. So he I 
went back to the land of the dead, setting the pattern of mortality for all I 
mankind. | 

The Visayan origin myth thus describes the creation of man and woman, 1 
accounts for the introduction of death, theft, concubinage, war, and class I 
and race differences into the world, and provides a human genealogy witf 
divine roots. But it does not contain any creator god. Christians, however, 
called the Creator “The Potter,” Mamarikpik, from pikpik, the slaps the 
potter gives the clay in the paddle-and-anvil technique. Father Sanchez 
(1617, 388v) quoted an educated Cebuano as saying, “Kanino pikpik inin 
kalibutan, dile kanan Dios [Who made this world if not God]?” 


Death, and Burial 

When all healing paganito failed to revive the moribund, one last 
desperate rite was performed to call back the departed soul— the Pagidi. A 
coconut shell of water was placed on the stomach of the inert invalid and 
rotated to chants of “Uli, uli, kalag [Come back, soul, come back] ” (Alcina 
1668a, 3:220). In the case of a datu, some of his slaves were sacrificed in the 
hope they would be accepted in his stead by the ancestor spirit who was 
calling him away. Or an itatanun expedition would be sent to take captives 
in some other community. 

These captives were sacrificed in a variety of brutal ways, though after, 
first being intoxicated. In Cebu they were speared on the edge of the house 
porch to drop into graves already dug lor them. In Carigara, a boat was 
rolled over (heir prostrate bodies, in Butuan, they were bound to a cross^j 
tortured all day with bamboo spikes, and finally run through with a spear | 
and cast into the river at dawn— “cross and all,” pioneer missionary Martin g 


QQ 


Religion 


f le Rada wrote, i bis violence indicates the conviction that a dam was the 
ordinary target for vengeful spirits of men he had vanquished, and that 
fitting retribution was therefore required to satisfy bis own ancestors. 

The cadaver was usually anointed and groomed as in life, though in 
Cobu subjected to a ritual haircut: Pigafetta attended a funeral in which the 
widow lay on the body, mouth to mouth, while this mournful ritual was 
performed. So as to be assured of a ready reception in the next life, the 
deceased were bedecked with die jewelry they were accustomed to wearing 
on festive occasions, and as much gold as possible, some even being placed 
in their month and between the layers of as many as ten blankets with which 
they were shrouded. Aromatics like camphor were applied for embalming 
effect, and the house was meanwhile fumigated with burning incense in 
porcelain jars. 

During a wake which lasted as long as the bereaved family could supply 
food and drink for guests, the widow or widower, together with first-degree 
kin, were secluded behind tattered white hangings — actually, mapuraw, 
undyed, not maputi, white. Professional mourners, generally old women, 
sang dirges which emphasized the grief of the survivors (who responded 
with keening wails), and eulogized the qualities of the deceased — the 
bravery and generosity of men, the beauty and industry of women, and the 
sexual fulfillment of either. These eulogies were addressed directly to the 
deceased and included prayers of petition: they were therefore a form of 
ancestor worship, one of such vigor that Spanish missionaries were never 
able to eradicate it. 

Poor Visayans were buried wrapped in a banana leaf in simple caskets of 
thin boards or even bamboo, but the standard Visayan coffin was made of 
a hardwood like ipil, incorruptible enough to outlast its contents. It was 
hewn from a single tree trunk with a lid cut from the same piece, fitted, 
pegged, and caulked airtight with resin. (This hermetic seal was an essen- 
tial feature since coffins were often kept unburied in the house.) These 
were called longon, a term Visayans did not apply to the sort of casket 
introduced by the missionary fathers. All datus or prominent persons 
wanted to be buried in a traditional longon, decorated with fanciful 
carvings often executed by the future occupant himself during his lifetime. 

The corpse was placed in the coffin with all body cavities filled with buyo 
sap, together with its finery and such heirloom valuables as porcelain jars 
or plates and saucers placed under the head like a pillow or over the face 
and breasts. Some wore ac tual masks and mouthpieces of beaten gold, or 
were provided with bcjcwelcd side arms. Aside from these, an ax handle 
was placed in the coffin of a bingil, a woman who had known no man other 


89 


THE VISAYAS 


Religion 


than her husband— just as the hole in the ax handle fit only the axhe 
made for it. Naturally, all this gold and porcelain attracted grave robbe 
in the sixteenth century just as it does in the twentieth: Father Alcina se 
a gold earring to Spain which he purchased from this source. {Ixing 
meant to bury a coffin in a secret location in hopes of protecting it$j 
contents.) 

Infants and newborn or aborted babies were buried in crocks or jars; 
sometimes Chinese porcelains with matching lids; but no Spanish observer 
seems to have witnessed an adult jar burial. Alcina (1668a, 3:237), however, 
was aware of the practice. He said that Visayans buried not only in longon, 
“Imt in large jars, glazed and strong, in which they placed the bodies seated, 
and all the wealth they had when alive.” He received this information from 
Boholano workmen who had dug into a burial site full of them when 
excavating for the Jesuit chapel in Baklongan earlier in the century, a 
discovery which attracted Spaniards from Cebu to do some digging of their ® 
own. Some of these must have been secondary burials since the “dragon 
jars” mentioned — what Visayans called ihalasan from ihas, snake — -would 
have been too small to accommodate an adult body, even with the knees 
drawn up under the chin. 

There was considerable local variation in Visayan grave sites. There were | 
graveyards outside village limits, frequently dug into the banks of upstream 
rivers or the seacoast, where they were often exposed by natural erosioif . 
more than a kilometer of them were revealed along the Mandawi water- 
front in Cebu. Caves were also used where available, or small islands 
reserved for this purpose: the reason Homonhon was uninhabited when 
Magellan landed there was that Visayans considered it haunted. But sha- 
mans and members of the datu class were never buried in these public 
graveyards: their caskets were kept in or under their houses or, in the case 
of babaylan, exposed to the elements in the branches of the balete trees 
where they had established spirit contact. 

Renowned sea raiders sometimes left instructions for their burial. One 
in Leyte directed that his longon be placed in a shrine on the seacoast 
between Abuyog and Du lag, where his kalag could serve as patron for 
followers in his tradition. Many were interred in actual boats: the most 
celebrated case was that of Bohol chieftain who was buried a few years | 


,Ti<>n with permanent positions said, “Baga davo na kila din hi [We are like 
( |ayo here]” (Alcina 1668a, 3:244). Slaves were also saerilieed al a dalu’s 
death, even being killed in the same manner in which be had died — for 
example, by drowning. These slaves were usually foreign captives, but 
occasionally a lifelong personal attendant-r//?/7wig- — who expected to fol- 
low his master to the grave. 

Most prestigious, and regarded as especially respectful and affectionate, 
was secondary burial — that is, the reburial of bones exhumed from a 
primary burial after the body has decomposed. For one year, the coffin was 
kept in the house suspended from the rafters, or in a small chamber 
extended to one side, or in a shed underneath, or in a field. If it was hung 
in the house, putrefied matter was drained off as necessary by caulking a 
bamboo tube into a small hole in the bottom which was resealed after- 
wards. If it was removed from the house, it was not taken out the door — 
lest the spirits of the living follow it — but through a temporary opening in 
the wall. A year or so later, the bones were removed, given a ritual cleansing 
by a babaylan, and placed in a small chest: here they were permanently 
preserved, venerated, and carried along if the family moved. 

The most dramatic expression of grief for a departed parent was to 
dismantle or burn the house in which he died, or cut down trees he had 
planted. All these things, like a slave sacrificed to accompany him, were 
called onong, something which shares the same fate. When placing heir- 
loom wealth — bahandi like gold or porcelain — in the grave, his children 
would say, “Iyonong ta inin bahandi kan ama [May this bahandi accompany 
our father]”; and when men swore by the sun, they said, “May I share the 
sun’s fate [nahaonong ako sa arlawj if I am not telling the truth” — that is, 
disappear at sunset (Sanchez 1617, 379v),,Not surprisingly, missionaries 
Ip applied the term to the Christian sacrifice: “An atun ginoo Yesu Christo 
napahaonong dakwa [Our Lord Jesus Christ took on our fate]” (Sanchez 
1617, 379v). 


Mourning 

Both widows and widowers observed three days of fasting and silence 


life to guard it against robbers or aswang, with the right to feed himself o 
anybody’s field, a security considered enviable in a subsistence economy: 


before Legazpi’s arrival in a karakoa with seventy slaves, a full complement 11 ; 

of oarsmen | during which they neither bathed nor combed, and might even shave their 

A slave called dayo might be stationed at a datu’s tomb for the rest of his 



hair and eyebrows as a special sign of grief; and until the full mourning 
period was ended, they did not eat cooked food. Family members draped 
undyed cloth over their heads when they went out, men let their G-strings 
drag in the dust, and widowers did not don their red pudong or G-strings 


90 


TJX. 


THE VISAYAS 


again until they had contracted another marriage. The house was fenced A 
off, all seeds were taken out and planted lest they be contaminated with 
death, and all fires were extinguished and rekindled for each new use. . 

In the case of the death of a datu, or of one of his wives or children, the| 
whole community was placed under strict mourning interdict, pumard ^M 
Nobody could wear colored clothes, climb palm trees, or fish in certain 
streams; and spears were carried point down and side arms blade up. A : 
mournful silence was to be maintained, and families are said to have been" | 
enslaved as a punishment for breaking the tabu when their dogs barked or 
cocks crowed. The mourning period only ended with the taking ojl 
human life. 

This same requirement pertained to any death by violence, drowning, or 
suspected sorcery, though when the cause was not certain, a wild boar oi|| 
deer could be speared instead. Men charged with responsibility for family 
honor would tie rings of irritating vines around their arms or neck, ai || l 
swear not to remove them or partake of certain food or drink until they hatiji 
completed this duty. Once the requirement was satisfied, the end of the 
mourning period was announced by the ranking lady of the househol|j| 
presenting gifts of wine to allied communities, being rowed there by three 
respected warriors singing victory chants and boasting of their exploit^ 
The oaths were called batata or lalaio, while awul was the promised fastingl 
or abstinence. The fact that these same terms were applied to a pact two 
men would make when one of them was leaving on a trip, swearing to j 
observe awut until they met again, suggests the insecurity of travel outside j 
one’s own community in the sixteenth-century Visayas. 


The Afterlife 

m 

The departing Visayan soul was delivered to the land of the dead, Saad 
or Sulad, by boat. On the other shore, the kalag would be met by relatives 
who had predeceased him, but they accepted him only if he was well 
ornamented with gold jewelry. If rejected, he remained permanently in 
Sulad unless reprieved by the god Pandaki in response to rich paganito 
offered by his survivors. In Panay, Magwayen was the boatman; the lords of 
the underworld were Mural and Ginarugan; and Sumpos, the one who 
rescued the souls on Pandaki’s behalf and gave them to Siburanen who, in 
turn, brought them to where they would live out their afterlife Mount 
Madyaas for the Kiniray-a, or Borneo for the Cebuanos and Boholanos. 


Religion 


In the afterlife, married couples were reunited to continue accustomed 
activities like farming, fishing, raiding, spinning, and weaving, but did not 
bear children. (Babies, who had never engaged in adult activities, did not 
have an afterlife.) In this way, they spent their days for nine lifetimes, being 
reborn each time smaller than die last, until in their final reincarnation, 
they were buried in a coffin the size of a grain of rice. The souls of those 
w ho drowned, however, remained in the sea; indeed, drowning was such a 
common cause of death that Samarenos figuratively used the terms mean- 
ing drowning for any death. Those who died in war, who were murdered, 
or killed by crocodiles, traveled up the rainbow to the sty; in the Panay epic 
Labaw Donggon, the rainbow itself is formed by their blood falling to earth. 
In the sky world they became gods who, deprived of the company of their 
kin, were presumably ready to lend their aid to survivors who undertook to 
avenge their deaths. 

Sulad was therefore not a hell where evildoers as judged by European 
mores were punished, though, as Father Mentrida (1637a, 350) said, 
“because they have no knowledge of the Inferno, they call the Inferno, 
Solar [that is, Sulad], and those who dwell in the Inferno, solanun .” These 
solanun, of course, were simply those who went to the grave without 
sufficient gold and whose relatives could not afford the paganito to rescue 
them. There was also a common belief that there was a deep cave called 
Lalangban which was an entrance to the underworld, and that from it a 
imiH nnke like the slamminff of a door could be heard prior to a ranking 


datu’s death. 

Nor was the sky a heaven where the good were rewarded. It was the 
abode of Makaptan, that deity who killed the first man with a thunderbolt 
and visited disease and death on his descendants. ‘They did not realize,” 
Father Alcina (1668a, 3:175) complained, “that the sky served as God’s own 
house and the abode of the blessed.” Indeed, the Visayans long resisted the 
Christian dogma of a heavenly paradise. Juan de la Isla (1565, 234) wrote, 
They believe that their souls go down below and say that this is better 
because they are cooler there than up above where it is very hot.” A century 
p later, a wise old Visayan told Alcina (1668a, 182-83): 

Father, we do not doubt that there will be a heaven for the Castilians, but not for 
the Visayans, because God created us in this part of the world so very different from 
you; and since, as we see, the Spaniards will not even let us sit down in their houses 
here, nor show us any respect, how much less there where, as you say, all is grandeur, 
majesty and glory without end? 





93 


Literature and Entertainment 


CHAPTER 5 


j-jc .stmt word to the “King of Luzon” that lie would like to open trading 
relations with him. In Alcina’s day it was assumed that Philippine literacy 
was ultimately derived from non-Filipino Muslims because the first literate 
Filipinos the Spaniards encountered were Muslims in Manila. Indeed, the 
Visayans referred to the Philippine script as “Moro writing,” as they re- 
ferred to many Manila imports as “Moro” (for example, granulated salt). 


Literature and Entertainment 


The Alphabet 


Literacy came late to the Visayans. Both Colin and Alcina thought in 
the 1660s that it had been received from the Tagalog only a few years 
before their conversion to Christianity. Antonio Pigafetta said that Rajah 
Kolambu of Limasawa was amazed to see writing for the first time in 1521; 
Loarca said the “Pintados” had no writing at all in 1582; and when Legazpi’s 
royal notary took the sworn testimony of a number of Visayans and Borneans 
in Bohol in 1565 — including the famous Si Katuna — none of them were 
able to sign their names. But by 1597, Jesuits had found their catechumens 
in Ormuc (Leyte) literate enough to copy down their lesson on bamboo 
slips to take home to study. Furthermore, a report attributed to Legazpi in 
1567 states, 



Hut have their letters and characters like those of the Malays, from whom they 
learned (hem; they write them on bamboo, bark and palm leaves with a pointed tool, 
hu* never isanyaneiem writing found among them norwordoftheiroriginand arrival 
in these islands, their customs and rites being preserved by traditions handed down 
f rom lather to son without any other record (San Agusthi 1698, 292). 


Legazpi presumably got this information from those Muslim merchants 
trom Borneo and Luzon from whom he bought rice, and through whom 


The only specimens of Visayan penmanship known today are the signa- 
tures of Bernardino Dimabasa and Maria Mutia of Bantay Island which 
appear in their divorce proceedings of 1647. In addition, four missionary 
fathers recorded the letters the Visayans were using in their day. Alcina 
included them in his 1668 Historia, but unfortunately they survive only in 
late eighteenth-century copy made in Seville by somebody who naturally 
was unfamiliar with them. Those recorded in the Arte de la lengua Visaya of 
Alcina’s vice-provincial, Domingo Ezguerra, contain what are probably 
engraver’s errors — for example, die use of a marginal check mark normal 
to Spanish usage of the time, to represent two different letters of the 
alphabet. And those which appeared in the manuscript Arte Bisaya-Cebuano 
of Father Francisco Encina (who died in 1760) are known only from an 
1895 copy made in Manila by Cipriano Marcilla y Martin. 

Father Mentrida (1637a, 248) made the following comment on Visayan 
script in his 1663 Arte de lengua Bisaya hiliguaina de la Isla de Panay: 


It is to be noted that our Bisayans have some letters with different shapes, which 
I place here; but even they themselves do not agree on the shapes of their letters; for 
this reason, and because we are limited by the types available, I have shown the 
characters according to the Tagalogs. 


The 1818 edition of the Mentrida Arte, however, presents a curious 
alphabet obviously not based on any Tagalog type font. Father Juan Delgado 
(1752, 331), for his part, said in his 1751 Historia sacro-profana , “As a 
curiosity I will place here the Visayan characters, which differ little from the 
Tagalog.” But when the book was published in Manila for the first lime in 
1892, it made use of the same plate as appeared in the 1890 edition of 
Chirino’s Relacion, which shows characters very different from the “Letras 
de los Filipinos” of Chirino’s original Rome edition of 1604. 

It has been a popular belief that Visayans used a different alphabet from 
the Tagalogs, but our sources give little support to such a theory. These 


95 


94 


THE V1SAYAS 


sources themselves are limited to the genuine signatures of two individ 
als — which are indistinguishable from Tagalog signatures preserved 
local and foreign archives— and an alphabet drawn up or copied by f 
different persons who did not use it themselves. None exhibit grea 
differences than could be expected of seven different hands in thr 
different centuries. 

Alcina (1668a, 3:35-37) described the system in considerable detail: 


We will end this chapter with the characters of these natives, or, better said, the 
that have been in use for a few years in these parts, an art which was communicat 
to them from the Tagalogs, and the latter learned it from the Borneans who cai 
from the great island of Borneo to Manila, with whom they had considerable tral 
.... From these Borneans the Tagalogs learned their characters, and from them the; 
Visayans, so they call them Moro characters or letters because the Moros taught them; 
and although the accursed sect did not reach the Visayas, or they did not accept it, they; * 
learned their letters, which many use today, and the women much more than the men, 
which they write and read more readily than the latter. 

Their letters, then, are these: a. e. b. c. d. g. h. 1. in. n. p. r. s. t. nga. All these characters 
or letters without any dot are pronounced with a — e.g., ba, da, ga, etc. — and with a dot 
over them, with i or e, and if it is put below, they are pronounced with oor u— e.g., baM§, 
be. bu. ca. ci. co . — so that they do not have letters for vowels in their writing except when 
two vowels come together or a word begins with a vowel, nor letters for consonants 
when intermediate or final, either, so when there are two consonants— except for fire 
letter nga — the one that is missing is supplied, and the same with all finals. Thus it can 
be said that their reading is more guessing than pronouncing what’s written, so those 
who are not skillful in supplying the consonants, which some, and most women, read 
with dexterity and without stumbling, mumble what they read, guessing and even 
erring more often than not. So for this reason, although it is easy to learn their method 
of writing, reading is more difficult because, as we have said, it is mosdy supplying 
what’s missing. For greater clarity and to make reading easier, they usually place two 
lines II after each word to separate them — though some write without them— since if 
they were all continuous without these divisions, they would be even more confused.- 
In the past, these Indios used to write like the Chinese and Japanese up and down, 
beginning the opposite from the right hand upwards, and then their lines from 
bottom up until they finished on the left hand where we begin. But nowadays they 
begin like us and make their lines in our way from left to right, for the whole page. 


m 


Literature 


Spanish accounts arc unanimous in saying that Filipinos did not use; 
their alphabet for liferary compositions or record keeping: the Boxe 
Codex states unambiguously that they used their script only for letters an 
messages. Visayan literature therefore was oral literature, and as such. 


m 


■ 


Literature and Enteitainment 


not recorded by friar chroniclers or ethnographers who would have con- 
sidered the idea of oral literature a contradiction in terms. But it was well 
developed, sophisticated, and presented by artists rewarded for their skills. 
This is amply shown by Alcina’s (1668a, 3:20) chapter, “Concerning the 
alphabet and manner of writing of the Bisayans [and] the various and 
particular types of poetry in which they take pride,” which includes the full 
summary of what must have been an actual epic. 

There is no evidence of any prose literature, but ordinary Visayan speech 
was itself rich with metaphor and colorful imagery, and. their poetry must 
have been even more so. A high proportion of the dictionary terms have 
both a literal and a figurative meaning, and a wide selection of pejorative 
terms to apply to common objects when angry. Men, women, and children 
are referred to by the names of birds and animals they resemble in 
appearance or behavior, or trees and baskets whose shapes they share. 
Somebody who is articulate and talkative is likened to luxuriant foliage, 
while one who speaks ill of his own relatives is like a big bat — because these 
creatures are believed to defecate in their own face while hanging upside- 
down. The red-faced are like dapdap blossoms; an untattooed man is called 
plain white; undecorated teeth, a chaw of coconut meat; and foreheads not 
sufficiently flattened as a baby, bulging or overstuffed. When irritated, a 
tired oarsman calls his oar a kabkab — the heart-shaped leaf of the malu-iban 
vine — and a cat is called musankagor mosaraiu in such sentences as, “Damned 
cat stole my food again!” 

Naturally, formal poetry had a special vocabulary of its own. Handoy, for 
instance, was the poetic term for damsel, and slaves were called guhay in 
epics and eulogies. But the essence of Visayan poetic skill lay not so much 
in a command of vocabulary as in the ability to use words figuratively to 
create subtle images. Alcina (1668a, 3:28-29) said, 


In their poetry, even if not with the variety of rhyme scheme and meters of ours 
though they do have their own rhymes somewhat different from ours, they no doubt 
excel us, for the language they use in their poems, even most of the words, is veiy 
different from what they use in common everyday speech, so much so that there are 
very few Europeans who understand their poems or rhymes when they hear them, 
even if they are very good linguists and know a lot of Visayan, because, besides the 
words and meaning which they use in verse being so different, even when using the 
ordinary words they sometimes apply to their courtesies, what they say in verse is so 
figurative that every thing is the subtlest metaphor, and for one who doesn’t know and 
understand them, it is impossible to understand them in it. 


To ibis may be added that less sophisticated Visayans were also unable to 
follow “deep” poetry, and that when two lovers sang to each other, their 


THE VISAYAS 


words became mere symbols that were understood by nobody but the two 
of them. 

All this poetry was generally sung or chanted rather than recited, so our 
sources include songs in the same category as poems. Even real songs — that 
is, melodies with lyrics — were poetic rather than musical compositions: the 
singer set his words to common tunes known to all. For community respect, 
a man must have been able to participate in the spontaneous versifying that 
accompanied social gatherings; and for peer acceptance, youths had to 
compete in amatory jousts. The really skillful were practically professionals:' 
they were eagerly sought after for weddings and prestige feasts and were 
rewarded not only with ample food, drink, and public acclaim, but with a 
payment called bayakaw. Many were said to be more articulate in verse than 
in ordinary conversation, and all were able to perform for hours at a time, 
even whole days or nights, “without dropping a syllable or fumbling a 
word,” Alcina (1668a, 3:30) said. Funerals, on the other hand, called forj 
female eulogists able to improvise dirges which combined grief and laud. 

The simplest form of verse, popular among children and adults of both 
sexes, was the ambahan, which used the ordinary vocabulary though often 
figuratively. It consisted of an unrhymed seven-syllable couplet which had 
to contain a complete thought — like a Greek distich — whose two lines 
could be interchanged and still make sense. Some people composed their 
own words, others repeated well-known verses, and listeners could join in 
by repeating the couplet, either as sung or inverted. 

The ambahan was also used in the bolak, a poetic debate between a man 
and a woman on the subject of love. They might also accompany them- 
selves with musical instruments — the woman on the korlong, the man on the 
kudyapi — but in either case they used many subdeties of speech which not 
everybody understood. The bikal was another kind of contest which used 
the ambahan form, a poetic joust between two men or two women in which 
they satirized each other’s physical or moral shortcomings, but were ex- 
pected to harbor no hard feelings afterwards. They could condnue for an 
hour or two, encouraged by raucous laughter and occasional help from the 
sidelines. Since the ambahan was a verse form almost as demanding as a 
Japanese haiku, its wide currency suggests an extremely poedc populace. 

The noblest literary form was the siday or kandu. This was the most 
difficult of all — long, sustained, repeddous, and heavy with metaphor and 
allusion. A single one might take six hours to sing or the whole night 
through, or even be continued the next night, during which rapt audiences 
neither yawned nor nodded, though die frequent repetition of long lines 
with only the variation of a few words struck Spanish listeners as tiresome. 


Literature and Entertainment 


Subject matter was the heroic exploits of ancestors, the valor of warriors, 



(1668a, 4:257-59) recorded the summary of one or two of them with 
tantalizing brevity, like the following from the Pacific coast of Samar he 
{oiew as Ibabao: 

Kabungaw and Bubung Ginbuna 

On the coast of Ibabao were two celebrated lovers, the man called Kabungaw and 
the woman Bubung Ginbuna. Before they were married, these two had been in love 
for a long time, and once when he had to go on a certain /rather long voyage, in 
company with others who were setting out on a pangay aunzxd, he left instructions with 
his sweetheart that she should go straight to his parents’ house to get whatever she 
needed for comfort. (He only had a mother or sister since his father had already died.) 
She went one time when she had to get a little abaca to weave clothes for her lover, 
but was so ill received by her swain’s mother and his sister, who was called Halinai, that 
after abusing her by word, they did not give her what she had come to get, so she went 
back displeased and determined not to return there or even be seen by her lover again. 
He learned this as soon as he returned and asked if she had requested anything, and 
the bad sendoff she had been given instead, so after much brooding, he refused to go 
up into his house until he learned where and with whom his lady was living. 

He did many things and particular deeds (which I am not putting down so as not 
to be too long-winded) until he learned that she was on a little island where she had 
fled with her slaves. He was almost drowned the times he went in search of her and 
escaped only by means of supernatural aid, until on the third attempt lie reached 
there, and pretended to be dead near the house where she was living, until he was 
recognized by a slave who reported it to his lady. She went down drawn by love, and 
in her presence he recovered the life he pretended to have lost in her absence, and 
both rejoicing, they were married. They remained there as lords of that little island, 
which they called Natunawan in allusion to the love they had felt on first sight, because 
natunaxoan means that they melted together with happiness, or Nawadan, which 
means “lost footsteps.” There, they say, not only men followed them from the 
mainland, but even plants, attracted by the goodness of the land and the good 
reception from those settlers. 

The reason why the story of Kabungaw and Ginbuna is so badly trun- 
cated is that it appears in a chapter entitled, “Of the troubles which some 
famous princesses had in their antiquity to get married [and] the efforts of 
men to abduct others” (Alcina 1668a, 4:245) . Thus the whole meat ol what 
must have been an epic-length tale has been excised as being of no service 
to Alcina’s purpose — all those adventures which form the flesh of Philip- 
pine epics that he did not put down so as not to be too long-winded: those 
heroic deeds, shipwrecks, and drownings, the intervention of deities, and 
the flight to distant lands to live happily ever after. Moreover, the incident 


99 


THE VTSAYAS 


ptgig 


■ 


m 


■ 


of Kabungaw’s pretending to be dead sounds suspiciously like a modem 
zation in Alcina’s own day, since the magical revival of dead heroes by the 
wives or sweethearts is a common climax to Mindanao epics. 


Epics 

The siday or kandu must have been what Philippine folklorists nowadays 
call a folk epic. The epic as a literary form is thought to have originated in 
the stories of Indo-European tribal bards regaling a band of warriors 
gathered around a campfire with tales that glorified approved standards of 
male conduct. These warriors historically fought hand-to-hand in cattlejg 
raids which were eventually recast as the rescue of abducted wives in great 
epics like die Iliad and Mahabharata. In the societies that produced Phil-jj 
ippine epics, however, power and prestige were not based on the owner- 
ship of herds of cattle but on the control of slave labor. Thus Visayan heroes ; 
who were celebrated as karanduun — that is, worthy of kandu acclaim— 
would have won their reputations in real life on pangayaw slave raids. As tj 
one kandu says of its heroine, “You raid with your eyes and capture many,, 
and with only a glance you take more prisoners than raiders do with their 
pangayaw” (Alcina 1668a, 4:178). 

Alcina concluded his chapters on the courtship patterns among Visayan 
aristocrats by telling the kandu of Datung Sumanga and Bugbung 
Humasanun, that princess who captured men with her eyes. He said he was m 
presenting it in a faithful translation, but what he presented was obviously 
a mere summary or scenario. A fleeting glimpse of one line, however, is 
incidentally preserved in his chapter on warfare — “The captives he took on 4 
land were 70, and 50 of those who were as weak and delicate as women so 
they led them by the hand, and those taken at sea were 100, so that they 
were 220 in all, not counting the rest of the booty and prizes” (Alcina |j 
1668a, 4:178) . But even in its abbreviated outline, it is possible to recognize f 
stylistic features common to well-known Mindanao epics like the Darangan, r 
Ulahingon, or Agyu, and therefore get some sense of what the original^ 
must have sounded like. Only the ending seems to be deviant: the hero sets 
out to storm heaven itself, fails to do so, comes home empty-handed, but 
then claims his bride, a denouement told in Alcina’s version with inappro- 
priate irony. - jg 

These epics are characterized by highly repetitious plots: battle follows 
battle with only minor variations, and voyage after voyage by sea or air in 
search of a kidnapped princess or some hidden treasure. In Alcina’s!! 


Literature and Entertainment 


resume, Datung Sumanga’s six forays are given only a sentence or two 
apiece, but if this kandu took all night to sing, they must have included 
details like the hero’s flashing gold teeth and magic sword or gong ob- 
tained from deities in a many-layered heaven, and the magnificent plum- 
age at prow and stem of ships miraculously propelled by guardian spirits 
rather than oars or sails. 

Another characteristic of Philippine epics is the amount of space given 
to betel nut. The datu’s followers turn the ground as bloody as a battlefield 
with their spittle, demigods chew bonga of pure gold, ladies make their 
appearance preparing quids for theimtienfolk and serving them ceremo- 
niously, and lovers seal their commitment by exchanging them partially 
masticated. Heroines are royal princesses secluded as inaccessible binokoti n 
their chambers, where they are found spinning, weaving, or embroidering 
their princes’ clothes. They are esteemed for such skills as well as for their 
beauty crowned with a great mass of hair embellished with artificial switches 
which it is a great offense for a man even to touch. And a good epic ends 
with a colorful description of the lavish wedding feast in which its protago- 
nists join to display their wealth and magnanimity. 

Datung Sumanga and Bugbung Humasanun 

There was, so says the singer, a princess in the island of Bohol of great repute and 
fame called Bugbung Humasanun, the most renowned among all the beauties and of 
the greatest fame for her talent among all the damsels, so secluded and enclosed in 
her chamber that nobody ever saw her except by sheerest chance. Her visage was like 
the sun when it spreads its first rays over the world or like a sudden flash of lightning, 
the one causing fear and respect, the other, joy and delight. A great chief desirous of 
marrying her called Datung Sumanga one day arrived below her house and, giving a 
salute, asked for the said princess without going up by calling out her name and 
surname and the other names which she had been given for her beauty. Irritated by 
his call, and either angry at his boldness or pretending to be, she sent a maid to ask 
who he was, and learning his name, acted angrier still that the courtesy had not been 
shown according to their custom, and replied, why had he come in person? Had he 
no negroes to command or slaves to send, perhaps not even someone he esteemed like 
a son whom he trusted as faithful and could send as a friend? So, without replying or 
I speaking a single word, the chief had to go right off rebuffed. 

So, selecting a negro slave, he ordered him to go as intermediary and ask that 
princess for buyos, and told him not to come back without them. The negro go- 
between went with his message and asked for the buyos in his master’s name, 
repeating the words of courtesy and praise which were customarily most polite. To this 
she responded with the same courtesy, saying that she had neither bongas to put in 
the buyos nor leaves to make them, for the bongas which she used came from where 
the sun rose and the leaves which she added from where it set. And she said nothing 


Ifll 


more. 


; s Ui assets 


THE VISAYAS 



■f r;v 


When her reply was received by the suitor chief, he immediately ordered his slaves 
to embark to go and search, some to the east for the bongas, and others to the west 
for the leaves, just as the princess had asked for them. This they did at once, and the 
same one who had brought the message was sent back with them, and handed them 
over and asked her to make the buyos for his lord. To this the lady replied that she 
could not make them because she had no lime, since her lime was only found in a 
certain distant and isolated island. With only this reply he returned. So the datu 
immediately ordered ships launched atsea and sent them flying to find the lime in the 
place indicated. This the slaves carried out promptly, and returned with all speed and 
delivered the lime, which the same experienced messenger took at once and gave to 
the lady on behalf of his master, asking her for those buyos. Her response was that she 
was not about to make them until his master went in person to Tandag town on 
the coast of Caraga and made a mangayaw raid there and brought her those he 
captured. 

So he started out at once, and with his joangas, or barangays, armed with all his 
warriors, embarked for the said Caraga, made his attack, and took 120 persons in all, 
whom, before even disembarking or going to his house, he sent to be handed over to 
that binokot by the same messenger with the necessary guards, who did so immediately 
and asked for the buyos in return for his lord who was exhausted from the battle. 

But still not content with this, she sent back to say she could not make the buyos 
until he did the same thing he had done in Tandag in the islands of Yambig and 
Camiguin, which the chief set out to do at once. Reinforcing his fleet and taking only 
a few days, he brought his ships back full of captives, some 220 persons of all kinds, 
whom he immediately sent to his lady, asking again for those buyos by means of that 
slave, to which, stubborn as ever, she added that he had to perform the same deed with 
the people of the island of Siquihor and the town of Dapitan. 

This he did at once and sent her all the captives, who were no fewer than on the 
past occasions, though still not enough to win her consent or for her to give the buyos 
which the gallant was asking of her. Instead, she sent to tell him that he had to do the 
same thing with the towns subject to Mindanao and those of the island of Jolo. So, 
undaunted by even this challenge, for a lover, unless he is mad, fears as litde as those 
who are, he started out on the fourth expedition. He weighed anchor with his fleet and 
went to Mindanao and Jolo, where he fought valiantly and took many more captives 
than on the other occasions, and sent them all to her, once more asking for his buyos, 
since for these he was giving her she mustsurely say yes and set the wedding for certain. 

But not even this time was she willing to give in, but rather, sent him another 
demand by the fuming go-between, who told him, “Sire, what the princess said is that 
she esteems your favors and admires your valor, but that in order to demonstrate you 
really love her and so your prowess may be better known, she has heard that not very 
far from these islands is the great kingdom of China, a people very rich and opulent 
who chirp like birds with a singsong voice and nobody understands them, and she said 
no more.” 

When her lover heard this, he fitted outhis ships with stronger rigging, added more 
vessels, men, and arms, and undertook the fifth voyage for Grand China, at which 
coast he arrived safely, made his assaults on towns little prepared, captured enough 
to fill the ships, and made the return voyage to his land with great speed, laden with 


109 


Literature and Entertainment 


captives and spoils, which he immediately sent to his lady with the oft-repeated plea 
for the buyos. 

But the lady was not won over by even all of this, but rather, setting her contract 
still higher, asked for the impossible, for the reply which she gave was to say (and here 
the poet speaks in the hyperboles which the Visayans use with much elegance) that 
in due time and without fail she would make the buyos if he performed one more task 
first, which was that he should bring her something from heaven as important as what 
he had brought her from earth. 

On this reply, seeing that she was asking for the impossible, he said, “Come then, 
let’s get started: we will try to conquer heaven. Prepare the ships,” he said, “and we’ll 
go there. We’ll make an attack on the sky; we’ll unhinge a pieqfe of it; we’ll unfold part 
of one of its eight layers or levels, and we’ll seize one of its greatest thunder claps; we’ll 
rob the moon of a bit of its splendor, or if nothing else, at least one ray of those that 
are forged in its workshops. Come then, we’re off, we’re off!” 

So he embarked, but in vain, and so he sailed, but without end, for of all the 
receding horizons, he neither reached one nor could he cover them all, so he 
returned satisfied, and sent word to her that he had done what she had ordered but 
that could only dedicate, not give, the thunder and lightning to her, for throughout 
the many regions he had coursed, many were heard but fewwere found. He added that 
unless she sent him the buyos immediately which had cost him so much and had so 
tired him out, he would come and personally remove her hairpiece and make a sombol- 
plume of it for his ship. 

On receiving this message, she began to cry and moan, terrified in her heart lest 
he dishonor her, and so she decided to make the buyos so many times denied. When 
they were made, she put them in a little casket of marble fashioned with much art, and 
this inside another little case like those in which ladies keep their jewels, and sent them 
with the negro go-between who had so many times come and gone with messages. But 
when he told his lord that he had them, he was unwilling to see or receive them and 
sent them back instead, saying he would not accept them whole but only chewed, and 
that she should send one in a perfumed box of gold, all of which was a sign of her 
consent and pledge of their intended wedding celebrations, which they performed 
afterwards with the pomp and ostentation fit for their class and wealth (Alcina 1 668a, 
4:248-56). 


Folklore 


Visayan folklore is scattered all through Alcina’ s Historia. In the volume 
devoted to botany, he tells the origin myth of the first man and woman, and 
remarks that the makapaag flower was believed to blossom well indoors 
because it was originally a man whom the gods changed into a plant. Under 
zoology, he recounts monkey lore that are still popularly believed — that 
they fish for crabs by using their tails as bait, for example, or form living 
chain bridges by grabbing each other’s tails to cross crocodile-infested 


103 


THE VISAYAS 


rivers — as well as the story of the Monkey and the Tortoise which was later 
given literary dignity byjose Rizal. Describing birds, he mentions in passing 
a moralizing song about a man who kept three in his house — a tabilalang, 
which is always in flight and never known to sleep, a taunting, which keeps 
nervously turning its head in all directions, and a gitgil, which, like a sentry, 
never stops giving its call. (The moral is that a householder who intends to 
protect his wealth and honor must be vigilant.) Speculating about the 
existence of giants, he encapsulates the legend of Pusung of Magtaon, and 
in discussing daragangan, folk heroes, he cites a folk song about fleet-footed 
Parapat. But unfortunately, his collection of 600 riddles (titigoon) has not 
survived. 


The First Man and Woman 

After the world was made and the coconut palms had borne fruit, two coconuts, 
well ripened, happened to fall into the sea on whose shore their palm tree was 
growing, whose waters received them and carried them on its waves for many days 
wherever the wind and current wanted, until one day when the sea was raging, it threw 
them with violence against some rocks. Ready to hatch — as if they were eggs they ^ 
broke open with the blow and — as if preordained — there came forth from the larger 
a man, who was the first one, whom they call Laki, and from the smaller a woman, 
whom they call Baye. And from these two as the first parents of the human race, all 
people are descended (Alcina 1668a, 1:178). 

Why the Bat Is Called Stupid 

We will add a Bisayan fable here which gives [these bats] their name and the reason „ 

they go out at night. This is, that after their creation (the Bisayans in their antiquity 
did not know who created them, though they had some inkling), all the birds got 
together for each one to choose his food, and so that they would not be taking each 
others’, each would choose according to his desire and taste. When this big bat s turn 
came, he chose for his kind the fruit of a tree which is called tabigi here, which is 
beautiful to the eye, as big as a medium melon and, seen from a distance, not dissimilar 
to the big oranges from China. They all made fun of him because this fruit, although 
of nice appearance outside, inside has nothing more than a few seeds as large as eggs, 
although of different shapes to fill the shell; they are very hard, bitter and tasteless 
(although very good for curing loose stool, most especially bloody stool, though the 
birds did not know this quality) . From this incident, he was given the name of Kabug, 
which means dunce / bobo ] in this language, or one who has little sense. They also have 
a saying which selves very appropriately for no few occasions, and it is that when 
somebody selects what pleases the eye without checking its quality — like a beautiful 
woman butfoolish, or a handsome man but stupid, and fruit of good color but rotten, 
etc. — they say of him, “Daw napili sin tabigi, ” which means that, like the Kabug, 
he chose the tabigi fruit, good to look at but for nothing else (Alcina 1668a, 2:233- 
34). 


Literature and Entertainment 


The Tortoise and the Monkey 

From the sayings which are common among these natives about this animal [the 
tortoise] we can deduce its characteristics. In one of them they say of i t what we say of 
doctors over there [in Spain], “He doesn’t want it [even as a gift],” because they tell 
a story and it is this. 

This Tortoise and the Monkey found by chance a bud or sprout of a banana plant, 
which we have already said is called sahan. They fought over who would take the best 
part, and in order to deceive the Monkey, the Tortoise asked for the part which had 
the leaves, which thus seemed best to the monkey and he kept it, giving him the part 
with the root, which is what the latter wanted because it is wha j t sprouts, grows and 
bears fruit, and so he gave signs of wanting the opposite so they would let him have 
what he wanted and was more profitable. 

So to say of somebody that he is a man of intrigues and plots, they say he is like this 
animal’s intestines because they have many twists and turns, and even though small, 
it knows a lot since it was able to hick the Monkey, which is so much larger and wiser 
than it; and also when they give somebody the worstpart, they say they treated him like 
the Tortoise. 

So to continue the stoiy begun above, wc say that when the piece of stalk or root 
which the Monkey had given him sprouted, grew and bore fruit, the Tortoise, since 
he could not climb, went to find the Monkey to climb up and get the fruit, which he 
did gladly, and seated above, began to gather the ripe bananas and to eat them, 
throwing down all the rinds or skins on the Tortoise who was down below, with which 
he tricked him, or revenged the first trick. And from this fable they get the said 
proverbs (Alcina 1668a, 2:202-3). 

Pusong of Magtaon 

I will tell of one brave whose memory was still very fresh because it happened not 
manyyears before the Spaniards arrived here. This one was an Indio of gigantic stature 
called Pusong, a native of the town of Magtaon in the interior of the island of Samar 
andlbabao, who used to make frequent invasions of the towns ofCalbiga and Libunao 
which are on the Samar side, but not so much around Borongan because those on that 
coast were much more feared. Those he had killed were many when they stood up to 
him, and even more those who had been captured in repeated times because he was 
a great raider, or magahat as they call them, until near the town of Calbiga they set a 
trap for him in which he was killed. 

This trap was that in a stream he had to cross, which was all flat stones with very high 
banks of rock, one of the more daring hid below it on the side he usually came from, 
and the other waited for him on the opposite side, with arms ready, though not 
trusting so much in them as in the treachery and trap they had set for him. This one 
challenged him from the side where he was, with the stream in between, and when the 
one from Magtaon jumped over, the one who was hidden below the bank threw his 
spear with such greatforce that it passed through his body, with which he fell. And the 
one who had challenged him came down and they killed him — since “a dead Moro 
gets many blows” — in the very place where he had fallen with the first wound, and 
since this was of very wide flat stones, as I saw when I went there just to see what traces 


urn 


THE V1SAYAS 


Literature and Entertainment 


rcnuuucri on that rock where, stretched out in the same position, they had traced and 
carved out with a chisel the whole body in the very posture in which he had died. 

I have seen these lines or carving which still survive today, and they show that he 
was a remarkable man and husky because although he wore a batole [padded 
breastplate], the rest of his body was naked except for his bahag, and from the lines 
which traced his thighs, legs, arms, head, and body (he had one arm caught 
underneath and one leg twisted or bent), it is clear that he was a giant of a man, of 
greater stature and build than the tallest ordinarily are (Alcina 1608a, 4: 107-69). 

[But] what a Calbigan told me, an intelligent chief more knowledgeable about 
their affairs than the ordinary (he was incumbent governor of his town when he told 
me, as he had been several times before) ... was that they were pygmies they call 
Bongan in their language who killed him, and they were so small that they didn’t 
exceed half a good-sized man’s forearm. The way they did it, they say, was that they 
covered t he streambed wit h nipa leaves, and since these were on top of the slick stones, 
when he crossed the said stream and stepped on those leaves, both feet shot out from 
under him and threw him down on the stones, and immediately many of the said 
Bongan, or pygmies, rushed up — like ants that drag things which weigh ten times 
more than all of them together — and with their little speai sand other arms, they killed 
him (Alcina 1668a, 277-78). 

Parapat 

I will tell an unusual tale which I have heard many times and have repeated not a 
few, both because of the oddity of the subject and the nice language of the wording. 
It says, then, that there was an Indio called — if I remember right — Parapat, who was 
so swift when running along the beach — which over here arc of very fine clean sand — 
he left no trace or footprint by which it could be known that he had run across it, and 
the same song also adds that only on top of the rocks would some grains of sand be 
discovered which had stuck to the soles of his feet or between bis toes, by which those 
who knew his speed and that he was accustomed to pass that way, knew he had passed 
by (Alcina 1668a, 4:181). 

Bingi of Lawan 

There lived in this place a chief called Karagrag, who was its lord and ruler. He was 
married to a lady of his rank called Bingi, a name which had been bestowed on her 
because of her chastity, as we shall see. (I wasnotable to find outifshe came from the 
same town; most probably she was from upstream on the Catubig River, where she was 
the daughter of the chief there.) This lady, according to what they recount, was 
endowed with many fine virtues and gready celebrated for her beauty among these 
natives, so much so that, moved by the fame of her beauty, the Datu, or ruler, of Albay 
got ready a hundred ships. This chief was called Dumaraug, which means the victor, 
and with all those ships he weighed anchor in his land, and within a short time came 
in view of the [Lawan Island] town of Makarato. 

His unexpected arrival excited the town, but since itwas well-fortified by its natural 
location and it was the season of the Vendavales (the best time for going there from 


■ 






Albay) when the force of the sea and its waves were strong and turbulent, he did not 
venture to go straight in but took shelter instead near the beac h which Rawis Point 
makes with very fine sand and free of shoals, where, became of an islet across the 
entrance from the sea, the surf is less obstructive and the sea milder and calm. From 
there he sent a small boat with a sign of peace to announce the purpose of his coming, 
which was simply to carry Bingi away as his wife, the fame of whose beauty alone had 
left him lovestruck and with only this would he then return to his land without making 
any attack and always afterward remain their friend and protector, since being more 
powerful than they, he could do it to their advantage. 

Karagrag, rather than making reply, showed them how well prepared he was by 
entertaining them, and when his wife was informed of Dumaraug’s intentions, she 
responded at once that she was greatly surprised thatfor something ofsuch little worth 
he: had made such a demonstration and launched so many ships, that she was content 
with the husband she had and did not care to exchange him for any other, even one 
much more powerful, and that so long as he was alive, she could not think of leaving 
him; and if it should be her unlucky fate to fall into his hands captive, he should 
understand that though he might carry her off and command her as his slave, that to 
make her his wife, she would never consent and was ready to give her life first. 

Encouraged by so bold a response, her husband Karagrag simply added that he was 
there waiting with his men deployed, and thatalthough they were not many, they were 
very good men, and that the place where they were was very secure, and if he came to 
try his arms in battle, they would do their duty; and if he should defeat them, he would 
be lord of his wife and property, but if not, he would return to his land empty-handed, 
if indeed he escaped from there with his life. 

With this reply, and in view of the strength and impregnability of the place for 
them, with no more arms than spears and shields or at most some arrows, the chief 
reconsidered and hesitated a bit but not for long, and without attempting anything 
more and risking his men, he returned home just as he had come, leaving both the 
chief and his wife Bingi happy. 

This happened a few years before the Spaniards came, and is still fresh in the 
memory of the natives of the Lawan town, who today are their descendants. Not many 
years ago, I buried a chief of the said island, who was more than seventy years old, 
whose parent had been alive when this raid took place; and a son of his who had heard 
it many times, related it to me with all the aforesaid details (Alcina 1668a, 4:20-23). 

A bingi or bingil was a virgin or a woman who had been faithful to one 
man all her life. It must therefore have been bestowed on the heroine of 
this romance sometime after the Albay raid, the first step in an historic 
event’s becoming a legend. The quotation of her and her husband’s noble 
words indicates that the poetic process had already had its effect by the 
time Father Alcina heard the story. Perhaps with retelling over the centu- 
ries and the accumulation of apocryphal embellishments, the tale might 
have grown into a full-fledged kandu. Indeed, had ancient Visayan culture 
not succumbed to colonial acculturation, some Waray bard might now be 
singing the Epic of Bingi. 


106 


1fi7 


THE VISAYAS 


Musical Instruments 


I 


There were basically eight kinds of Visayan musical instruments. Fo- 
were very quiet instruments and so were played indoors at nighttime: 
small lute, bamboo zither, nose flute, and reedjew’s harp. The other fo 
were very loud, and therefore suitable for war, dancing, and public gathe 
ings: bamboo or seashell bugle, metal gongs, skin-headed drums, and 
bamboo resonators. Jj 

The kudyapi was a kind of small lute carved out of a single piece of wood 
with a belly of half a coconut shell added for resonance, with two or three 
wire strings plucked with a quill plectrum, and three or four frets, often of 
metal. 111 The body was called sungar-sungar or burbuwaya; the neck, 
burubunkun; the strings, dittos; the fretboard, pidya; and the tuning pegs, 
birik-birik. The scroll was called apil apil or sayong, the same as the hornlike 
protrusions at the ends of the ridgepole of a house. The kudyapi was only : 
played by men, mainly to accompany their own love songs. The female 
equivalent was the korlong, a kind of zither made of a single node of 
bamboo with strings cut from the skin of the bamboo itself, each raised and 
tuned on two little bridges, and played with both hands like a harp. A 
variant form had a row of thinner canes with a string cut from each one. 

Tolali or lantuy was a nose flute with three or four finger holes, and was 
played in imitation of a mournful human voice with shakes and trills 
thought appropriate to wakes and funerals. Subing was a Jew’s harp — a 
twanging reed plucked between the lips or teeth with the open mouth as 
a variable resonating chamber, and since its sound could be shaped into a 
kind of code words understood only by the player and his sweetheart, it was 
considered the courting instrument par excellence. Bodyong was a conch 
shell or section of bamboo played against the lips like a bugle, used as a 
signal in war or as part of a babaylan’s paraphernalia during a paganito. 
Babaylan also kept time with tambourines called kalatong , a term which 
included war drums (gadang or gimbal), with the huge ones that were 
carried on mangayaw cruisers being fashioned out of hollow tree trunks 
with a deerskin head. Tibongbong was a node of bamboo pounded on the 
floor as a rhythm instrument. 

The most important instrument was the agong, a bronze gong Spanish 
explorers encountered wherever they went ashore. Pigafetta noted an 
ensemble in Cebu — a pair suspended and struck alternately, another large 
one, and two small ones played like cymbals — and in Quipit, three different 
sizes hanging in the queen’s quarters. The natives of Sarangani buried 
theirs in a vain attempt to avoid looting by Villalobos; and thirty Samarenos 


Literature and Entertainment 


boarded Legazpi’s flagship in Oras Bay and danced to the rhythm of one, 
after his blood compact with their chief. Mindanao epics provide a few 
details of their use. Agong were played either on the edge or on the navel 
(that is, the center boss or knob), slowly to announce bad news, faster (by 
the ruling datu himself) to summon the people. Warships approached the 
enemy with all gongs sounding. 

Gongs were given a larger vocabulary than any other instrument. Alcina 
(1668a, 4:129) considered it an evidence of the elegance of the Visayan 
language that there were special terms “even for the cord with which they 
fasten and hang it, which it would be improper to apply/to anything else.” 
Mungmungan was the boss or teat. A flat gong, or one from which the boss 
had been worn off by long use, was panas , including the platelike Chinese 
ones (mangmang). The largest one in an ensemble was ganding. Hototok was 
to play them on the edge with a simple stick, or sarawisaw if more than one 
player alternated strokes. Pagdanaw or pagbasal was to strike them on the 
boss with a padded drumstick called basal. (A governor or chief was also 
called basal, presumably because of his prerogative of sounding a gong to 
assemble his people.) Actual bells from Spain or Asia were linganay, and 
little jingle bells— like those the epic hero Bantungan had on the handle 
of his kampilan — were golong-golong. 

Chinese gongs were little valued: ones from Sangir were worth three or 
four times as much, and those from Borneo three or four times that — 4 or 
5 pesos in 1616. Huge ones said to reach a meter and a half in diameter 
could fetch one or two slaves. The Bornean gong was a standard of value 
when bargaining for expensive goods — for example, “Pakaagongonta ining 
katana [Let’s price this Japanese sword]” (Sanchez 1617, 9v). Indeed, 
assessments like pinipito or pindkapito (both referring to the number seven) 
were understood by themselves to mean seven gongs. 

Gongs were one of four items — along with gold, porcelain, and slaves — 
required for any datu-class dowry, or bride-price, and men mortgaged 
themselves to borrow one for this purpose. The bargaining between the 
two families was done with litde wooden counters placed on top of a gong 
turned boss-up on the floor, and the gong itself became the property of the 
mediating go-between upon the conclusion of a successful settlement. 

Vocal Music 

Visayans were said to be always singing except when they were sick or 
asleep. Singing meant the extemporaneous composition of verses to corn- 


109 


THE VISAYAS 


Literature and Entertainment 



moil tunes, not the performance of set pieces composed by musical special- 
ists. There was no separate poetic art: all poems were sung or chanted, 
including lull-fledged epics or public declamations. Singing was unaccom- 
panied except in the case of love songs, in which either male or female 



singers accompanied themselves on their respective instruments, kudyapil 
or korlong. Well-bred ladies were called upon to perform with the korlong | 
during social gatherings, and all adults were expected to participate in 


0 f grief from the widowed and relatives present. Maya were also called 
anogmor kanogon (“Alas! Woe is me!”), and since they not only praised the 
dead but petitioned them directly for supernatural favor, the missionary 
athers took a dim view of their performance. As Father Sanchez (lb 1 7, 
[27) said, “ Kanogon is also to bewail the deceased and is like paying him an 
ionor, or better said, to sing something which should be prohibited 
)ecause in the singing they invoke the deceased and the diwata." 


group singing on any occasion. 

Awit was the general term for singing and a paraawit was an expert V| 
“considered a professional singer,” Sanchez (1617, 38) said, “like a leader 
whom the others follow.” Biyaw was to sing solo, while a mamamlbat was the 
precentor who set the tune and beat by singing a couplet, to which the :S 
others (mananabat) responded in chorus, batbat meaning to beat metal flat, (j 
Bagaw or dagaw was for two or more singers to reinforce or complement ; 
each other in male drinkfests, during which might be sung daihuan — songs 
in which drinkers made fun of one of their fellows. The narrative content M 
of these songs was called biriyawan — tales or fables — or karanduun if it was 
of epic length and loftiness. Hiya or hele was the shout of men putting their m 
shoulders to a common task like dragging a log or rowing a boat, whence || 
sea chanteys were called otohele. 

When distinguishing different types of song, however, awit was used as 
a specific term for sea chanteys, which were called hilimbanganon in Panay. 
The cantor, himself pulling an oar — a paddle, actually — would lead off 
with an unrhymed couplet and the whole crew would respond in a heavy 
beat with a refrain (hollo) like “Hod-lo, he-le, hf-ya, he-le!” A good paraawitjj 
or parahele had a wide repertoire of tunes with different tempos, some of|j 
them handed down from generation to generation by fathers teaching 
their sons. The content of these sea chanteys, if not their actual wording, j 
was also handed down from ancestral times and so perpetuated and prom-pj 
ulgated Visayan traditions and values. More than one Spanish observer, 
commenting on the lack of written records, said that Filipino history and 
beliefs were preserved in the songs they heard while rowing boats. 

Sabivtas the general term for poetry or song in Panay, especially that with 
a chorus responding to a precentor, but might also refer specifically to 
handum or bat-ar. Handum was to recall somebody departed with affection- jj 
ate praise — “like a good minister or alcalde mayor,” Father Mentrida 
remarked rather fondly — and bat-ar was a dirge or eulogy addressed to the 
deceased at a wake. Dirges in Leyte and Samar were called haya (from 
tihaya, to be face-up like a corpse or a canoe carried on the shoulder), and 
female parahaya were hired to sing mournful tunes which evoked shrieks 


Dancing I 

With the exception of funerals, all Visayan feasts sponsored by datus 
were accompanied by dancing and gong playing — weddings, birth of chil- 
dren, planting and harvesting of crops, preparations for war, and victory 
celebrations afterwards. Sayaw or sabay was the general term — magsalabay 
for men, magkigal for women, magbabanug for a pair of dancers, and 
viagsisibay for group dancing in two opposed lines. 

Sabay suggested birdlike motions with the arms — for men, one arm 
pointing clown and the other up, to be reversed while opening and closing 
the fists; for ladies, extended with slow deliberate finger motions. Tamil 
referred to the delicate foot movements characteristic of dancing by 
women — including babaylan around the pig or wine jar during paganito — 
often only slightly lifting either the heels or toes. Patadrpatad was stomping 
to a light tread by either sex. In the Kigal, a lady held a kerchief in both 
hands, waving it to one side and then the other, placing it around her neck 
from time to time. ( Kigal meant to hold hands: perhaps she and her 
partner joined hands to end the dance, since otherwise men and women 
never touched each other in Visayan dances.) Salabay was actually a war 
dance in which two men armed with shields and spears performed a. 
ritualized but energetic duel with feints and lunges accompanied by gong 
beat. They sometimes became so enthusiastic they had to be separated lest 
intentional or unintentional body contact lead to a real fight. 

Games and Gambling 

Spanish lexicographers gave little space to toys, mentioning only little 
girls’ dolls (bata-bata or kulasot) and a children’s game called kunggit played 
with kigay or buskay seashells — probably modern sungka. But youths — for 
that matter, men of all ages — spun tops, which was the most popular form 


• > 


IW 


110 


111 


THE VTSAYAS 


of gambling. Good top throwing required both skill and muscle, and th 
action was accompanied by much laughter, shouting, and stomping. Ma 
of hardwood, the top was thrown with a strong soft cord of magu 
(gnmowan) wound around its head (ulo), with the object of striking anoth 
top with its point (lagad) to splinter or split — or at least knock °vci-— thaflj 
other top. When a top was spun so that it appeared motionless— or “sleep. -fj 
ing,” as they said in Spanish— it was called tuyong or wok. The top itself was || 
called basing, and its shape was so commonly known that the human heart 1 
was called kasing-kasing. 

Betting during a game of tops varied according to different rules of play 
which included twenty or thirty specific terms— nagbibigay, nagigoway M 
nagdaugay, for example, “and many other names,” Father Sanchez (1617, j| 
132) said, “not used in the pulpit or confessional.” 

Cockfighting was observed by Pigafetta in Palawan in 1521. Philippine \ 
historians would later conclude that the custom had been introduced by • 
the Spaniards themselves, but the practice was already widespread and 
important in Southeast Asian cultures at that time. In pre-Islamic Java, 
cockfights had religious significance in public ceremonies, and they were 
carved in stone in the temple friezes of Angkor Wat in Cambodia m the^ 
twelfth century. Kings sometimes identified so personally with theii favorites | 
that Sultan Iskander Muda of Ache could order a courtier castrated whose 

bird had defeated his own. T 

The Visayan word bulang-was applied in Malay not only to tying the blade j 
to the cock’s spur, but a weapon to a man’s wrist. Similarly, Visayan 
magbubulang meant not only for cocks to fight but also men who had 
challenged one another. (The razorlike blade itself [garot] was also called 

bulang.) . jg 

Cockfighters raised their birds in the house, crossbred them with wild 
ones, imported others from Jolo with a reputation for bravery, and assessed 
their abilities by the color of their feathers— for example, black ones 
fought best in the afternoon, white ones in the morning. The winner took 
the defeated bird — “Binulang ako niya sing tolo kaharangsar [He took 
three cocks from me] ”■ — unless the owner wished to ransom it for healing 
with the milky sap of the gatas-gatas plant (Sanchez 1637a, 80). Whatever 
the size of spectator betting may have been before the Spanish advent, it 
was greatly increased by the introduction of the colonizers coinage. Once, 
when a galleon ran aground in Borongan in 1655, private salvage opera- 
tions flooded the Samar coast with so much Mexican silver that the price 
of a fighting cock rose to 20 pesos and bets to 500 pesos and 1,000 pesos. 


P j 


t 

vj ?;:•••• : ; ;'->i 


CHAPTER 6 


Natural Science 


Visayan society knew no schools or classrooms: children became 
functioning adults through informal instruction within the family. In the 
field of morals, most communities recognized some wise and persuasive 
elder as a kind of pastor, parawaB— probably from Malay-Arabic wali, 
“saint”— who gave advice in household gatherings. But knowledge of the 
physical environment was learned from parents — the movement of heav- 
enly bodies and change of seasons, the direction of winds and recognition 
of storm signals, the nature and habits of different species in the animal 
kingdom. All such knowledge might be called natural science. 


Environment 

The Visayans called their natural environment banwa, a word which 
meant mountain, countryside, terrain, climate, and homeland. (In colo- 
nial times, it was extended to mean town — for example, Hiligaynon “Naga 
binanwa kami pag pakaon sa Hokom [We supply the alcalde with food, 
town by town in turn] ” [Mentrida 1637a, 53] .) Bamoaan meant overgrown 
and napabanwa gone to the hills; binmanwavfZLS a man who could take care 


1 1 


THE VISAYAS 


of himself in the wilds, and banwaanun or tagubanxoa were moun 
dwelling spirits. 

The banwa covered eveiy island from sea to sea, even into the sea wi 
mangroves growing in salt water; Spanish explorers were often unable 
see coastal villages for the trees. A small Visayan population cut its settl 
ments rather precariously out of this banwa but neither destroyed no 
tamed it: its voracious vegetation was always ready to reclaim their fields 
and gardens as its crocodiles and pythons were ready to prey on tliei 
children and livestock. 

The Visayan child probably first learned the names and characteristics 
of wildlife from comparisons with human behavior. People who affected 
gaudy clothes were said to be like the brilliant big kakanog butterflies, evil 
omens that brought swidclening activities to a halt and the abandonment 
of the site. Men who strutted around in blood-red piidong were red-headed 
piyak woodpeckers who pecked any branch they happened to light on, and 
those with an extra turn in their G-strings were like piyas, a baby monkey, 
because monkeys Supposedly tied their young to their breasts with rattan. 
Women who were not good mothers to their babies were like tabon birds or 
sea turtles which did not hatch their own eggs but buried them in the sand 
to be incubated by the sun. A promising youth who died young was like the 
balitnung tree whose leathery bark was easily removed; a boastful man who 
promised much but delivered little was like a biribog crab that moved 
backwards; and if a man said he was like a giant tridacna clam in a certain 
place, he meant he would never move. And both the greedy or voracious, 
and the powerful who “swallowed up everything” were naturally called 
crocodiles (buiociya). 

Later lessons included the information that all albinos — like a deer or 
turtle — were pangasa, bad luck, since their unnatural color must mean they 
were bewitched, and a person could be transformed into a beast just by 
looking at an albino, or even by entering the house of somebody else who 
had seen one. It was taught too that a crocodile’s age could be determined 
from the number of pebbles found in its craw since it swallowed one a year 
as ballast, and that they never hurt villagers on the same stream where they 
lived. Nevertheless, the actual danger of crocodiles was an everyday fact of 
village life: Sanchez (1617, 448) illustrated salciw, parental care or concern, 
with the example, “Like when counseling a son who’s going traveling, they 
warn him there’s a buwaya in a certain place.” In unusual cases— for 
example, a woman swallowed whole while weaving, loomsticks and all — the 
beast was explained as a kind of divine sheriff punishing an infraction of 
some religious tabu. (Missionaries were not wanting who made the same 
prediction for converts who sneaked off to bathe during mass.) 



Natural Science 


wm 




Many of these phenomena which would be rejected by modern science 
were accepted by well-educated missionaries in their day. Father Alcina, for 
example, did not doubt that the ipo tree was so venomous that it killed any 
who passed through its shade or downwind, and that tire tree was therefore 
surrounded by the bones of wild animals poisoned in this manner. Neither 
did he doubt that one of his own parishioners had given birth to a crocodile 
twin. She was the wife of Pakotolini of Tubig, who had been raised in a 
Jesuit house as a church boy, and the little creature was delivered together 
with a normal child. The parents moved away, to get rid of it, but it not only 
I followed them but regularly brought them a wild hog or d£er, or large fish. 

Father Alcina heard the story from the parents themselves and did not 
1 doubt it because, as he said, they were both exemplary Christians and 
I therefore trustworthy. 

Like all peoples in the sixteenth century, Visayans believed in an exten- 
1 sive menagerie of fabulous beasts, or ordinary beasts with fabulous quali- 
ties. Below is a sampling. 


Ip 




A Visayan Bestiaiy 
Bangot or si hop 

Barangitaw 

Basol 

Bxihaxu 

Dumorogmon 

Kolago or kagiuang 

Mago 

Magpopo 

Miro 

Taligatos 

Tigi 


Hawks in whose nests a root or herb could be found, which 
contained the secret of their fishing ability (This root or herb 
cbuld be sold to fishermen for a good price, or to weavers 
because it made their arms light and tireless.) 

A species of small crocodiles friendly to human beings (It drew 
near to listen to their conversations, and allowed them to step 
on its back to cross water.) 

A caterpillar whose hairs caused dangerous infection when 
accidentally touched, but were harmless if it was seen before 
touching 

An owl which was a sure sign of death if it perched on a rooftop 
(It always flew in pairs with its male, and children were told they 
were witches come to eat them.) 

A black snake that made bark-leaf nests, and cured wounded 
snakes of its kind by applying medicinal herbs 
A kind of flying squirrel whose loud clear cry at dawn meant 
there would be no rain that day 
A tarsier that lived on charcoal 

A small viper with a crest and that crowed like a rooster 
A civet cat which charmed roosting hens with its eyes so that they 
fell from the branch 

A snake which was always accompanied by 1 00 others which 
would rash up if it was killed, so nobody dared to touch it 
A snake whose bite was not fatal if the victim called for help and 
somebody responded, who would then suffer the effects of the 
poison instead 


1 1 A 


115 


THE V1SAYAS 


Natural Science 


Tila 

Walo-xualo 


Clams which screeched with a loud voice if left exposed 
receding tides 

A snake which spent eight days on land and eight at 
alternately 


Health and Hygiene 


A feature of Filipino life which always attracted Spanish attention was 
their personal cleanliness, especially the frequency with which they took a 
bath. Dr. Antonio Morga (1609, 174) considered it noteworthy that they 
immersed the whole body, “without considering that it could do them 'jjj; 
harm at any time”; Father Colin thought that the reason Filipinos settled J 
along streams and riverbanks was their fondness for bathing. An attractive ■:{ 
description by Father Chirino (1604, 21-22), which has been repeated by 
many other authors, is worth quoting at length. 


,f vegetable husk for cleaning and polishing the teeth, sipan being fancy 
ones of betel nut bark which ladies often gave their lovers. Bobhow&s a tree 
whose scrapings were used as a shampoo to get rid of dandruff, and puno 
was a fine comb for removing head lice or ringworm scales. But any 
reference to dirt in the ears (atole), under the nails ( atinglig ), or the private 
iarts (burns) was an extreme offense, burason being an insult so serious it 
equired revenge or satisfaction. 




■m 


From the time these islanders are born, they grow up in the water, so both men and 
women swim like fish even when young, and to cross rivers have no need of bridges; 
They bathe at any hour without distinction, for pleasure or cleanliness, and not even 
a woman just delivered refrains from bathing, nor is there a newborn infant which is 
not immediately bathed in the river itself or springs of cold water. And on coming out 

of the bath, they anoint their hair with sesame oil mixed with civet They batfi| 

squatting down almost sitting, with the water up to their neck, taking the greatest care 
not to be visible even if there is nobody who could see them. The most common or 
general hour for bathing is at sunset, because as soon as they quit work then, they go 
to bathe in the river to relax and cool off, and on theirwayback take along ajarofwater 
for household use. For in each house they have a water jar at the door and whoever 
goes up, whether from the household or an outsider, takes water from there to wash 
his feet before entering, especially in the muddy season. This they do with great 
facility, rubbing one foot against the other, and the water runs through the house 
floor, which is all bamboo like a vety tight grating. 


Upper-class Visayans wanted to have a pleasing body odor. They there- 
fore scrubbed their bodies with pumice when bathing, perfuming and 
oiling them afterwards: Pigafetta detected the scent of benzoin and storax 
on the persons of the two Butuan rajahs. Clothes were laundered with 
citrus not only because of its effectiveness in removing stains, but because 
of the fresh odor it left in them. The civet which Father Chirino said was 
mixed with sesame oil was used in making perfume, not because of its own 
pungent odor but because of its property of fixing the fragrance ol the 
flowers that were added. 

They were also careful of personal hygiene. Kulkug or kilikugwds to clean 
out the ears with a feather or swab, and silat was a kind of toothbrush made 


116 


Ailments 


Despite their attention to personal cleanliness, Visayans suffered skin 
diseases as one of their most common complaints. Some of these were 
simple discomforts connected with ordinary activities — n-ugas blisters from 
poisonous plants, aripunga sores between the toes, or chafing from loads or 
clothing — buyook on the throat, bulok or buyok on the groin. More serious 
were alatay or kalamayo, defined by Mentrida as erysipela — that is, an intense 
inflammation accompanied by streptococcus infection. Pocks in general 
were called buti, with pinamrkan being distinguished as “the virulent kind” — 
that is, smallpox. More widespread were banglas, tabahak, or tabukaw ulcers, 
and bidog glandular swelling, all of which the Spaniards called bubas, 
indiscriminately. In was to separate somebody outside the village who was 
offensively buboso, covered with sores. 

The classic meaning of bubas was the lymphatic swellings symptomatic 
of bubonic plague, but following Columbus’s return from the New World, 
it became the common term for syphilis, a disease no doubt confused with 
yaws in the tropics. Spanish lexicographers in the Visayas, however, used it 
to mean any pustules or ulcers, though Loarca (1582, 66) must have been 
referring to an actual contagious disease when he wrote, 


In this island of Panay, the natives say that none of them ever had bubas until the 
Boholanos (who, as was said above, abandoned Bohol because of the Moluccans) 
came to settle here, since when some natives have caught it. 


Saint Lazarus’s disease — leprosy — was called karanga, hagirhil, or luyug, 
with amomotol especially suggesting the loss of lingers or toes. Goar or god- 
on was the stage when the ravages of the disease were still not visible 
externally; bulog, the thickening of the skin; bangag, the loss of the nose; 
and binoftboky wounds so deep they seemed to be eaten by bukbok wood 
borers. Phis specialized vocabulary, however, probably does not reflect the 
incidence of the disease so much as the emotional reaction which it elicits 
in human societies. 


117 


THE VISAYAS 


Ailments localized in internal organs include those related to bagit, the 
spleen and sulok-sulok, stomach; pantog was bladder or scrotal rupture; 
while any complaints pertaining to the liver (atay) was attributed to the 
appetite of witches, so that “Ginitay ka!” was in itself a curse invoking such 
a result. Wati or bituk were intestinal worms; otoi, bloody stool; botboi. 
protruding hemorrhoids; tibak was gout; tiyan, dropsy or edema (that is 
swelling caused by retention of body fluids, which was usually considered 
the result of a spell cast by a datu against one who had deceived him) . Piyol 
were joint pains; and scrofulous swellings or goiter were called bonga after 
the betel nut fruit. Uyangas was an ingrown nail or an infection that caused 
a nail to drop off; atolay, any infected scratch or abrasion; and tayum was 
toothache or gum infection. Malhit and mila-mila were eye ailments, and 
puling was any defect in vision: thus the price the tuba seller asked for his 
wares was himoling because of their expected effect. It is noteworthy that 
recognizable symptoms of tuberculosis like coughing blood are not listed: 
perhaps they were subsumed under respiratory complaints like hukab , 
hubaw, or ubo- cough, asthma, or hoarseness — or perhaps even bugtas, an 
infirmity attributed to hunger or overwork. 


Treatment 

There were five general categories of Visayan treatment of disease — 
massage, fumigating or sweating, prescription of medicine, countersorcery, 
and propitiation of supernatural beings. The first three were indicated for 
recognizable physical symptoms, the latter two for ailments requiring 
diagnosis and treatment by religious specialists. 

Massage was applied for injured or dislocated muscles, or pressure put 
on nerve centers by physical experts called hilot, and their reputation was 
sufficient for Father Sanchez ( 1617, 56v) to use hilotcir as a Spanish veil 
that is to say, “ Halokar : hilotar or to massage a woman’s abdomen to cause 
a miscarriage and abortion.” Mamarokpok was a masseur who simply 
pummcled the back and spine and was usually a datu’s husky slave. 

Abortions were a common form of family planning, practiced by ranking 
ladies to limit their lineage and preserve their heritage, or by others 
because of poverty or poor prospects lor their children. They were induced 
by massage, strong herbal medicines, or probing with a stick, furthermore, 
Visayan s had a custom of abandoning babies born with debilitating defects, 
which led many observers to conclude that Visayans were never born blind 
or crippled. 


Natural Science 


Surgery was limited to suturing or cauterizing wounds and to cosmetic 
surgery to repair torn earlobes. S isip or kulol was to trim the edges of 1 agged 
lobes so the raw surfaces could be sutured together. For flat areas like the 
stomach or scalp where stitches were difficult to make with a straight 
needle— it was said — red animitas ants were used, a species as large as wasps 
which had the characteristic of leaving its head behind with jaws clamped 
in its vicious bite. Tiyunwas “button cautery”— that is, igniting a pellet of 
m oxa, the wooly lint of certain plants, to smoulder on a small wound. 

Atolobvns sweat induced by smoke, steam, or rubbing with hot stones or 
ashes, and was the most popular specific against skin diseases. Toob was to 
fumigate by covering the patient with mats and blankets to concenti ate the 
smoke of medicinal fuels, and oslob was a steam bath in which the patient 
lay enclosed on a rack over containers of water into which hot stones were | 

dropped. The woods used for this purpose were called bulling, meaning *•; 

medicine— China wood (sarsaparilla), obal, was the most effective— from £ 

which was derived the terms bunilngan or bulnganan for the little enclosed ;;;; 

sheds. So, too, hospitals came to be called pamulngagan when they were g 

introduced by Spanish missionaries. 20 1 . : } 

Tambal were all plants, roots, leaves, or bark with medicinal properties, 
for which reason the Spaniards called the tambalan an herbolario, one who ,• 

has knowledge of plants [hierbas], their powers and properties.” (They were 
not to be confused with practitioners of sleight-of-hand who pretended to ^ 

extract a bone or stone from some part of the patient’s body— naga botboi.) : 

Tambal were taken internally or externally, with plasters or poultices 
distinguished as haklup or tampus. Below is a sampling of Visayan materia 
medica. 

Agpbo 

Agusift 
Argent) 

Bangali 
Hagonoy 

I ialiliUm 

I langnpitnn 


A tree whose leaves were a specific against muscle cramps 
(The leaves were applied to the affected part or used for a 
bath.) 

A tree whose bark was a specific for intestinal pains (The bark 
was chewed, or decocted for drinking.) 

Avery medicinal plant (Its shootswere boiled and the decoction 
drunk for stomach ache, its leaves used as a plaster for 
headache; it was also used in baths to bring down fevers.) 

A vine used as a preventative for epilepsy 

A plant prescribed for bladder stones or other urinary 

complaints 

A plant whose leaves were chewed mixed with lime, or mixed 
with oil and hot sulfur as an antidote for poison 
A tree whose toasted leaves were boiled as an antiseptic for 
bathing wounds 


THE VISAYAS 


Natural Science. 


■f sfi 

.i* 


Kalampisaw 

Kataring 

Lagtang 


Lampuyang 
I Minolta or hanono 


Salimbagal 

Tangan-tangan 


A plain whose root and leaves were applied to open sores f 
An antiseptic composed of citrus juice and iron filings, for 
(hying up small sores 
A potent vine whose root was an antidote for poison and when 
sliced, cleared vision (Its fruit was poisonous; its juice filtered^ 
a laxative.) 

A plant with an offensive odor applied to swellings 
A tree whose leaves were masticated, sprinkled with salt, M 
healed, then wrapped in another leal for application u> || 
wounds 

A large tree whose resin was used as a healing balm or j 
ointment 

A plant whose cooked broth was a specific for bloody stool - 
Vety peppeiy seeds from which a medicinal oil was made, and 1 
whose leaves were good for swellings, chills, and sores 
A small tree whose leaves, smoked like tobacco or decoction 
drunk, were good for coughs 


There were also medicines of animal or mineral origin. The soil of 
abandoned termite mounds was good for fumigating; calculous stones 
found in a shark’s head were a cure for similar stones in the human bladder * 
or kidney; and powdered duyong bones were almost a panacea, good tor ^ 
bloody stool, diarrhea, colds, and fevers. A kind of jet-black coral was not 
only taken internally, pulverized, but worn on the wrist as jewelry as a | 
preventative for rheumatic pains. Antidotes for poison often had proper- 
ties more magical than medical — for example, the marginals (bonlok) of 
turtle shells were said to crack in contact with any poison. As for a tincture j 
of python bile, of it Alcina (1668a, 3:347) remarked, “I tried it once, but 
frankly, only by an innate desire to preserve life could such a medicine be ; 
taken.” 

Illnesses attributed to sorceiy had to be relieved either by the sorcerers v 
themselves, by discovering their secret, or by employing the services of 
another sorcerer. By sorcery we mean spells or incantations cast by a : 
normal human being — that is, not a witch through the Use of acquired 
arcane knowledge. Some sorcerers were believed to be so powerful they ; 
could kill with a breath or the touch of a hand (hokhok). Panlus was either 
a spear, G-string, or some other personal possession which caused leg pains 
or swelling in the victim when he stepped over it. Indeed, bosong, swelling 
of the stomach, was immediately suspected of having been caused by an evil 
spell worked by a datu. 

Diseases with no visible symptoms or those which stubbornly resisted 
treatment, as well as chronic or lingering illnesses, were attributed to 


spirits, ancestral or otherwise, who had been willingly or unwittingly 
t offended by the behavior of the person afflicted. These required diagnosis 
I a nd prescription by babaylan or daetan, shamans or mediums able lo 
| contact the spirit world in a state of trance to learn the nature of the offense 
and what was required for satisfaction. In the case of witches, or naturally 
malignant spirits, monsters, or ghouls who could not be reached by this 
technique, the babaylan sought to enlist the intervention of a personal 
patron spirit. Prescriptions were the performance of a specific pagan ito 
involving the sacrifice of a live animal or other food offerings. Omens were 
taken during both diagnosis and treatment to facilitate prognosis, and were 
the last resort in preparing the moribund and their families for the 
inevitable. 

Timekeeping 

The Visayans divided the daylight hours into a dozen or more specific 
Limes according to the position of the sun. Between dawn and noon, they 
reckoned nasirakna, shining, and nabahadna , climbing, and then iguritlogna, 
I time for hens to lay, and makalululu, when your bracelets slid down your 
raised arm if you pointed at the sun. High noon was o dto na an adlaw; 
if followed by two points of descent in the afternoon, palisna and ligasna; until 
f§5 midway to setting, tungana. Natupongna sa lubi was when the sun sank to the 
height of the palm trees seen against the horizon; and sunset was apuna; or 
natoma , when the sun finally disappeared. Day ended with igsirinto , when 
| it was too dark to recognize other people. 

Beyond the day, however, they distinguished no time period shorter 
than one month. This means they did not recognize either the Eurasian 
t seven-day or Javanese five-day week, neither of which, as a matter of fact, 
| was based on any celestial cycle. But they reckoned the days of the month 
precisely — that is, the days from one new moon to the next. Just as they 
divided the hours of the day by the movement of the sun, so they identified 
' the days of the month by the appearance of the moon in the night sky. 

The new moon was subang the first night it could be seen, or more 
| colorfully, kilat-kilat, a little lightning flash. When it appeared as a full 
crescent the next night or two, it seemed to have opened its eyes (gi.ma.ta) 
or, alternately, closed its mouth (ungui) — like a baby’s on a mother’s breast. 
Then came a “three-day moon” or high new moon, hitaas na an subang, 
followed by baling, the fourth or fifth night, and next it was “near the 
zenith” (odto). When it appeared as an exact half disk — what western 
calendars call the first quarter moon— it was directly overhead at sunset, 


121 


THE VISAYAS 


and therefore odto na an bu.lan. Then as it continued to wax, it “passed th< 
barrier” (Mad), and when it was lopsided both before and after full moo 
it looked like a crab shell (maalimangona). 

The full moon was greeted with a variety of names — paghipono, takd 
ugsar— but most significantly as daydw, perfect or praiseworthy, fit recogr 
tion of its spectacular shape and sunset-to-sunrise brilliance. And as 
began to wane — that is, darken (maduhimdulum) — a night or two later, it s> 
on the western horizon just before dawn and so was called banolor, tp 
exchange or take by mistake — like a man who dies just before a son or 
grandson is born. The fifth or sixth night of waning was parik, to level or 
flatten, because it then rose so late the witches had many hours of darkness 
in which to beat down the earth by the stomping of their feet during their 
dances. Kalin was the third quarter, so it had crossed this second barrier t 
(lakad na an magsag-uli) by the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth night, and then | 
got ready for new moon again (malasumbang) about the twenty-ninth. This 
was the dark of the moon, or what the Spaniards called conjuncion 
(meaning the conjunction of the sun and the moon) when the moon 
disappeared for a night or two. To the Visayans, it was then dead, lost, or 
gone hunting. 

These phases of the moon were common time markers known to all 
They would say, for example, “Duldulman an bulan [The moon begins t 
wane today] ” or “Paodtononta an bulan [Let’s wait for the quarter moon] 
(Sanchez 1617, 37, 188). And nasubangnga too was a newcomer or upstart. 
But the Visayan month was a lunar month — 29-ancl-a-half days and 43 
minutes, to be exact — so twelve of them did not add up to a year, but only 
354 days. They were therefore not the equivalent of months in the western 
calendar, which are arbitrary divisions unrelated to the moon, approxi- 
mately one-twelfth of a solar year of 365 days. Thus, unschooled Visayans— 
plebe impenta, as Father Alcina said — calculated months in the Christian 
calendar as beginning with a new moon, and observers familiar with the 
twelve-month year, both sixteenth-century Spaniards and twentieth-cen- 
tury Filipinos, tend to equate the two: the use of a moon-based calendar 
with lack of education. But Miguel de Loarca (1582, 164, 166) wrote more 
carefully in 1582, 

They divide the year into twelve months though they do notname more than seven, 
and these are lunar months because they count them by the moons. The first month 
is when the Little Goats [Pleiades] appear, which they call Ulalen. The next month 
they < all Dagankaimy, which is when they clear olT the trees to plant .The next they 
< all Daganenan ihiian, which is when thrypileup this wood in the fields. I he next they 
call Klkilin, which is when they hut n the field. The next they call Inabuyaii, which is 


Natural Science 


the time of the bonanzas [fair winds when the monsoon is changing]. The next they 
call Kaway, which is when they weed the fields. The next [that is, another] is called 
Irarapun, which is when they begin to harvest the rice. The next they call Manuhilsul, 
which is when the harvest is finished. The other months they take no account of 
because they have nothing to do in the fields then. 

What Loarca called months were seasonal events connected with swidden 
farming: they do not appear in early Visayan dictionaries as the names of 
months, nor do any other names. Rather, the year is defined as the time 
between one harvest and the next, a time which naturally varies according 
to whether the monsoon rains come early or late and i'n what quantity. 
Alcina (1668a, 3:40) explained the word Luig, year, as follows: 


[Ii is a word] with which they also counted (he years, but without computing or 
numbering the months, which from harvest to harvest they would count as eleven or 
twelve distinct and past, and which they called t uig, and although they now confuse 
it with the year, it was not a single year but an indefinite time because that word means 
to them the same as “time” does to us. 

There were three Visayan words for year — taon, (uig, , and dag-on. Taon 
actually meant harvest — “Taon na didto dile [It's already harvest in their 
place]” — and was used for calculating age: old folks were those who had 
seen many harvests (Sanchez 1617, 504v). 7 trig was both harvest (for 
example, tinutuigan, what is ready for harvest) and any recurring period of 
time, not necessarily annual. Tinuig na siya was said of a menstruating 
fH woman, and panuigan sang olan sang habagat was the coming ot the rains 
either from the south or sang amihan , from the north. Dag-on was. used in 
the same way: panog-on sa manga kahahuyan was when everything was in 
bloom. Indeed, it was the flowering of trees and plants which indicated the 
rotation of the seasons. Kalparasan (January-March), hallaloto (March- 
May), katlawaan (June-August), and hatkisiw (October-December) were 
the months during which trees of these names blossomed. The seasonal 
behavior of birds was another indicator: when the kahazo bird gave its 
“kahaw” call in the morning, it was time to plant. 

The agricultural cycle began, as Loarca noted, with the appearance of 
certain stars. Most often these were the Pleiades in the constellation of 
Taurus which can first be seen in June, locally called Moroporo, meaning 
either “the boiling lights” or a flock of birds. Swiddcns were prepared at 
that time, and seeds were sown in September when they were directly 
overhead at sunset, though the exact time depended on local climatic 
conditions. Indeed, because the rainy season varied from island fo island, 
in some places farmers made use of the Big Dipper (f'rsa Major), which 



123 


THF, VISAYAS 


Natural Science 


they called I.osong (rice mortar) or Balauk (balhsta), though m ai 
Balatik was what they called the two bright stars m Gemini. Still othe, 
planted when the Southern Cross was upright at sunset, a constellation th; 
looked to the Visayans it looked like a coconut palm, Lubi, or blowfigj 
Butete. Similarly, the constellation Aries, the Ram, they called Alimango,; 

the Crab. i§U 

Visayans also believed that just as the moon times the human menstrual ^ 

cycle, so its phases controlled all biological growth. Starfish were said to } 
increase and decrease in si/e as the moon waxed and waned; crab shells g 
hardened and softened to the same rhythm; yellow turtles only grew atjj 
nighttime when there was a moon, black ones during the dark of the moon, 
and white ones during the daytime. So too, coconut trees were thoug it to 
produce one new sprout each new moon; the silklike fibers of the itlango 
palm had to be gathered at quarter moon; and stems of boats made from 
dao roots could be expected to outlast the vessel but only if cut during the 
waning moon. Furthermore, Visayans had a prescription for which phase 
of the moon was best for gathering any of a dozen varieties of abaca, though 
the most commonly planted variety was one that could be cut at any time. , j 
The dark of the moon was considered sinister because it was the favonf|J 
of witches and aswang, who fled at the first sight of the crescent moon 
showing its horns. Fieldwork and weaving were accordingly forbidden the 
following day as a precaution against illness during the coming month, and 
a one- to three-day holiday was taken to celebrate the full moon because the 
dnoata came to earth at that time. Nobody doubted that an eclipse (bakunaxoa) 
was caused by a huge saxoa, python, (tying to swallow the moon, and that 
it had to be frightened away by noisy pounding on mortars and house 
floors, followed by another holiday. They treated the sun in the same 
manner during a solar eclipse, but otherwise rendered it no such public 
veneration, nor even recognized the point of its rising as a cardinal com- ; 
pass bearing called East. 

Winds and Weather 

Visayans called the northeast monsoon amHum and the southwest 
monsoon habagat, what the Spaniards called the bmas and vendavales. 
Another major’ai. stream, the northeast trade wind, brought fair weather, 
hui due to the rotation of the earth, it veered in a clockwise direction as it 
moved south, and so smirk the archipelago not only h orn the northeast, 
hu, from the east, southeast, and south as well, or even from the southwest. 
The Visayans called it temog, which Sanchez (Hd7, 515) defined accurate y 


as “wind that blows between Brisa and Mediodia” — that is, between north- 
east and due south. 21 

Leyte-Samarenos called all cool winds blowing in off the Pacific amihan 
in general, and they considered habagat a west wind. Habagat lasted from 
April to September, amihan from December to April. In between, came a_ 
chill north wind, kanaway — or northwest wind, ipo — regularly causing 
respitory ills. Timog was always considered a relief from the monsoons— 
blowing in from the east in July-September, die south in May-June— but 
the south wind itself was properly called salatan or iphag (“the other side ) , 
winds issued from caverns deep in the earth that were opened and closed 
to control them. Visayans, however, did not recognize these winds as the 
Four Winds of western navigators, so Spanish lexicographers selected four 
Visayan terms and applied these to the Four Winds: Kanaway an, Amihan, 
Salatanan, and Habagatan. 

Some old men were renowned for the accuracy of their weather fore- 
casts. They predicted storms, their severity, and the flooding that would 
follow, three or four days in advance, or even a week, by judging from cloud 
formations and the color of the skies, sun, and moon. Dark clouds meant 
a squally storm (onos), but leaden skies meant a real typhoon (bagyo). The 
new moon of October was considered the most likely time for a typhoon; 
conversely, typhoons were said to be rare during the waning of the same 
moon. These men believed, too, that unless a typhoon ended with winds 
from the south, it was sure to be followed by another one. They also 
prophesied whether the coming year would be wet or dry, supposedly by 
observing the position of stars and constellations. 


Seamanship 

Visayans spent a lot of time on the water because boats were their only 
form of transportation . Heavy loads like ships’ hulls or tree trunks could be 
moved on land with log rollers, but neither wheeled vehicles nor draft 
animals are mentioned in any early account or dictionary. So m the 
seventeenth century, the word for a sheave or pulley (galingan) was ex- 
tended to the wheels of Spanish farms (carts) and carrozas (carriages). 

Except for reasons of defense, settlements were built on die coast or 
riverbanks, and nobody lived more than 40 kilometers from salt water. 
Orientation was taken, not from the direction ol the sun, but of the sea- - 
ilawod, downstream, or iraya, upstream. Everybody and everything moved 
by boat, from baxum to fertilize fields to guests to attend weddings, hu met s 
from Bantayan Island went to till fields on the Cebu coast by boat, and 


125 


THE VISAYAS 



miners from the Camarines to work gold deposits in Masbate, and youtl 
learned their people’s traditions listening to sea chanteys while rowing 
boats. Interisland waters were therefore the means of connecting, not 
separating, Visayan society, the avenues by which Philippine culture spread. 

Men were as handy with a paddle as a bolo: they carved their own, and 
made pony-sized models for their sons as soon as they were big enough to 4| 
hold one. Good paddling required both skill and stamina, and harakoaM 
speed required the coordination to get a hundred paddles in the water at 
the same instant. The sound of such swift, well-timed paddling was called | 
vagabmb, but bunkalis was splashing and hagdol was striking the hull. Kabig | 
was to move a boat broadside-to, and sowal was the opposite. Paddling 
against the wind was called bulsa-buha , from halos, to take revenge or pay I 
back in kind. Paddlers were also ready to work in the water. If the boat took 
on too much water, they went over the side and rocked it to slosh the water 
out, and for emergency bursts of speed, they sat on the outrigger floats. 
Outriggers not only enabled boatmen, working up to the waist in the water, 
to bring a swamped vessel to port; outriggers were also the handles by | 
which the vessel was picked up for launching or beaching high and dry g 
when not in use. (People living on the coast showed their orientation by Jg 
calling the Milky Way, Binugsay, “paddled,” because it looked like a ship’s! 
wake across the sky.) 

Sailors in Visayan waters never had to sail out of sight of land in fair 
weather, and so set their courses by piloting rather than by celestial 
navigation — that is, by sighting landmarks and knowing the waters. Their 1 
seamanship thus required an intimate knowledge of depths and types of 
bottom, the configuration of reefs and rocks, and the position of shoals and 
sandbanks which shifted after storms, as well as the ability to interpret the 
color and surf ace appearance of the waters themselves. Most important was 
familiarity with the strong currents typical of both the Pacific coast and 
narrow interisland channels. A 5-knot current flowing down the coast of 
Mindanao could only be avoided by northbound vessels by hugging the 
shore, and San Bernardino Strait between Sorsogon and Samar was char- 
acterized by whirlpools in which unwary boats could be caught For days at 
a time until broken up. The local technique For getting boats across this 
t rea< herons passage was to abandon them to the current with paddles held 
firmly against the hull like leehoards, until catching the stream running in 
the opposite direction. Tints, though Visayans coined a term For the 
mariner’s compass when it was introduced iirthe next century — padaluman, 
"tiling with a needle” -they made little' use of it because it did not tell them 
anything they did not know already. 


19K 


CHAPTER 7 


Social Organization 


Juan de la Isla (1565, 232) described Visayan social structure in 1565 
in one simple sentence: “They have three classes: they call the chiefest, 
datos, who are like knights, and those like citizens, timaguas [timaiuas], and 
the slaves, oripes [orijmn]." Visayans themselves considered this three-tiered 
structure so normative they extended it figuratively to the animal kingdom. 
Little green parrots were kusi nga olipun and green ones with red breasts 
were kusi nga timaioa, but those with resplendant red and green plumage 
all over were kusi nga datu. It was a structure canonized by a well-known 
Visayan origin myth: all three classes were offsprings of a divine primordial 
pair, who fled or hid from their father’s wrath. According to the Boxer 
version, 

they scattered where best they could, many going out of their father’s house; and 
others stayed in the main sala, and others hid in the walls of the house itself, and others 
went into the kitchen and hid among the pots and stove. So, the Visayans say, from 
these who went into the inner rooms of the house come the lords and chiefs they have 
among them now, who give them orders and whom they respect and obey and who 
among them are like our titled lords in Spain; (hey call them datos in their language. 
From these who remained in the main sala of the house come the knights and hidalgos 
among them, in as much as these are free and do not pay anything at all; these they 



127 


Social Organization 


rail litnaguasin ihcir language. From those whogot behind the wallsofllic ( *' c y 

sav come i hose: considered slaves, whom they call onpes in their language. I hose who 
went into the kitchen and hid in thrsioveandamongthepms they say are the negroes, 
claiming th.it all the negroes there are in the hills of Philippine Islands of the Wes 

come from ,hem And from the -hen. c of .he house, they say come aU^| 

the other nations there are in the world, saying that these were many and that they | 
went to many and diverse places. (Boxer Codex 1590b, 351 -»2) 


■ M 




Datu 

The head of a Visayan community was a datu, what the Spaniards called - 
principal, chief or “a lord of vassals,” and hadatoan were those dams re- , 
warded as autonomous, The word meant both a political office and a social 
class, both an incumbent ruler and all members of the ruling class of either 
sex. The right to rule depended on direct descent from former rulers, so 
members of the datu class jealously guarded their hneage: a man who 
became a datu simply by marrying one was called sabah. They married 
within their rank, either at home or abroad, limited their heirs by birth 
control, and kept their daughters secluded as bmokot princesses even . 
their young sons, according to the epic of Humadapnon. The rulers of 
Butuan, Limasawa, Cebu, and Maktan in Magellan s day weie ail related. 

But datus also todk secondary wives ( sandil '.) who produced a lesser order 
of nobility called tumao if they were of high rank themselves, or t.mawa ,f 
they were slaves or commoners. Polli or lubus nga datu meant one of pure 
or unmixed ancestry, and kalibutan ("all around”) meant pedigreed on al 
four sides-that is, all four grandparents. Brothers who were potential 
competitors often married into royal families in other islands or hived oft 
locally, so to speak, to found a new swarm. Alliances, especially marriage 
alliances, recognized rank and precedence. The celebrated Si Katmi.i n 
Bohol had vassals in Leyte but was himself junior to Si Gala, and both weie 

ranked by Dailisan of Panglao. . 

There was no word for a primary datu or paramount chief, bu those 
recognized as primus inter pares were known as pangido, head or leader, 
kabonoan, most sovereign (from puno, root or trunk) ; or makapomsnga data, 
a unifying chief. Those who controlled seaports with foreign trade gener- 
ally took Malay-Sanskrit titles like Rajah (Ruler), Batara (Noble Lot'll. 01 ' 
“Sarripada” (His Highness). Magellan met three chiefs called rajah — wi 
of Butuan, Kolambu of Limasawa, and Humabon of Cebu— a title Span- 
iards always translated as king, though Magellan learned too late that they 
had neither kingdoms nor power over other datus. Sanipada, or 1 ts vai ian s 


Salipada, Sipad, and Paduka, came from Sanskrit Sri Paduka, and was used 
by Humabon and at least three of his contemporaries— Kahmigsuwan’s 
son Makaalang of Maguindanao, Dailisan of Panglao, and the sultan of 
Brunei. Humabon *s brother was his Bendahara (Prime Minister), whose 
s oti Tupas was married to Humabon’s eldest child and was his heir; one ol 
his fellow datus was a Batala, and Humabon himself was married to 
j apulapu’s niece. We do not know what title I.apuiapu claimed, but 
Maktan’s location put him in a position to intercept shipping in Cebu 
harbor. When Magellan tried to force him to acknowledge Humabon as 
overlord, he replied that “he was unwilling to come and do reverence to 
one whom he had been commanding for so long a time” (Anon, n.d.a, 21). 
None of these titles appear in Spanish lexicons, but old Javanese hadi is 
listed as king— though no Visayan chief was named with this title— and 
mantili (minister) as “a rich timawa” or “one who is like a king in a town” 
(Men trida 1637, 264). 

These datus were part of what social anthropologists call a chiefdom — 
a loose federation of chiefs bound by loose ties of personal allegiance to a 
senior among them. The head of such a chiefdom exercised authority over 
his supporting chiefs, but not over their subjects or territory, and his 
primacy stemmed from his control of local or foreign trade, and the ability 
to redistribute luxury goods desired by the others. Philippine chiefdoms 
were usually located at river mouths where they could facilitate the sort of 
highland-lowland exchanges described by Loarca (1582, 120) in Panay: 

Those of the mountains cannot live without the fish and salt and other things and 

jars and plates which come from other parts, nor can those on the coast live without 

the rice and cotton which the mountaineers have. 

A datu’s authority arose from his lineage, but his power depended upon 
his wealth, the number of his slaves and subjects, and his reputation for 
physical prowess. Some were therefore autocratic and oppressive: a coura- 
geous, frightening datu was called pamalpagan from palpag, split and flat- 
tened bamboo. Others were not, those whose subjects were followers rather 
than vassals — “very free and unrestricted,” as Juan Martinez said. A ruling 
datu boasted heirloom wealth called bahandi- — goldwork, imported porce- 
lain, and bronze gongs— but not real estate. Bahandi was required for 
status display, exchanged in marriages, shared among close relatives, held 
as collateral for loans, and loaned out itself to men who mortgaged them- 
selves into bondage to obtain the bride of their or their family s choice. 
Bahandi was originally acquired through raids, the sale of local produce, 
and the control of trade — including bonds, anchorage fees; bihit, taiiffs on 


i on 


I 


THE VISAYAS 


both domestic and foreign imports; and lof rig, discounts on local purchase^ 
running as high as 75 percent. It was this commerce which enabled a data j 
to win and retain the loyalty of subordinate dams. When Tupas lostcontrqj j 
oK ',el>u harbor to l.ega/.pi, his brothers quickly undercut hisauthoi ily, ancjpj 
within one year, datus from I ,eytc to I’anay were paying Spanish tribute andjj 
exchanging rice directly for European manufactures and Latin American jj 
silver. 

A dam was expected to govern his people, settle their disputes, protect ] 
them from enemies, and lead them in battle. Me was assisted by a consid|g 
cable staff. His chief minister or privy counselor was atubang sa datu~~ | 
literally, “facing the dam”— and his steward or majordomo was poragahin f j 
dispenser, who collected and recorded tribute and crops, and distributed \ 
them among the datu’s relatives, retainers, and house slaves, as well as ] 
allocated them for work gangs or public feasts. His sheriff or constable was : 
bilanggo, whose own house served as a jail, bilanggownn. These officers were 
generally tumao, either from the datu’s own clan or the descendants of a 
collateral ancestor, and tumao in general were called sandig sa datu, sup- 
porters of the datu. A kind of town crier, paratawag, however, was a slave. 
He announced proclamations, mantala, either by shouting them out from 
the top of a tall tree, or by delivering them to the persons concerned— for 
example, timawa being summoned for a hunt or sea raid. Both tumao 
“supporters” and timawa “citizens” served as the datu’s military forces, j 

* armed at their own expense. -J 

In return for these responsibilities and services, a datu received labor 
and tribute from his people. They harvested his fields, rowed his boats, and 
built his houses, and joined his hunting parties or fishing crews. They gave 
him a share of their crops, either as regular seasonal tribute or in lieu of 
personal labor, and a variety of “gifts”— for example, himuka from a timawa , 
for permission to many, or bawbaio from any litigant to whom he 
awarded the decision in a lawsuit. Takay was to divide his palay among his 
people to be milled for him, cotton to be spun, or chickens to be raised. 

Sixteenth-century datus seem to have exercised no control over agncujj 
tural land— that is, stridden s— beyond setding disputes between rival claim- 
ants; but their prerogatives included control, or personal use, of communal 
resources. Balwang decrees or interdicts restricted hunting and fishing 
grounds or limited access to public forest, and hikun was a lion’s share in 

making any division of property. j2 

Datus had these advantages which enabled them to specialize then.; 
activities, perfect professional skills, and accumulate wealth; but they did 
not constitute an unproductive leisured class. They could afford the best 


Social Organization 


— 

I 


hunting dogs and were proud of their dexterity in handling lasting nets, 
j, n d among them were skillful blacksmiths working imported metal. I hev 
owned cargo vessels and war cruisers, and all maritime expeditions whether 
for raid or trade were captained by datus with the necessary seafaring skill 
-and experience. Their ladies wove the elegant textiles with ornate borders 
which were the distinctive marks of their class. Butuanon King Awi’s silk 
kerchief was no doubt a Chinese import, but his cotton G-string decorated 
with silk thread was probably produced in his own household. 


Timawa 


Spanish dictionaries always define timawa as freemen (fibres) or freed- 
men (libertos). They were originally the offspring or descendants of a dam’s 
commoner wives or slave concubines, and they were technically free lie- 
cause their progenitor had granted it. But slaves could also be freed 
(mad timawa), so Loarca, in describing this social class, found it necessary to 
call them "true” or “recognized” timawa. All persons liberated by their own 


master were called ginoo, and might be chided, “Dika magpadayaw, kay 
akun ka ginoo [Don’t put on airs, I’m the one who made you ginoo]” 
(Sanchez 1617, 204). 22 In English, “freedmen” has little meaning today: in 
modern societies, all citizens are free. But when Isla referred to timawa as 


| “citizens,” he meant a privileged class, not ordinary people. In sixteen th- 
| century Spain, citizens (ciudadanos) were the nonslave residents of char- 
tered cities (ciudades) who enjoyed its special laws and exemptions. They 
; were not peasants, peons, serfs, tenants, or farmhands — all of whom would 
| have been called oripun in the Visayas. 

Timawa paid tribute called buhis or handug and, in theory at least, were 
free to transfer their allegiance to some other datu. But those attached to 
their lord as personal vassals paid no tribute and rendered no agricultural 
labor: thus the Boxer Codex called them “knights and hidalgos.” They won 
their tattoos beside him in battle, rowed and manned his warship, received 
| his favors, and shared in the public accolade for his victories. Their datu 
was obligated to defend or avenge them at the risk of his own person if need 
be, and to share booty and captives with them. They attended his feasts as 
retainers and familiars, acting as his wine tasters, and were sometimes 
honored by receiving a cup from his own hand from which he had already 
taken a sip. They were sent as his emissaries to open marriage negotiations 
1 for his sons, and at the time of his death, acted as bailiffs to enforce his 
, mourning tabus, and three of the most renowned among them would 



1S1 


THE VISAYAS 



i 

fc:::: 


accompany his grieving womenfolk on a ritual voyage in which they boasted 
of their personal conquests and bravery. 

Timawa were therefore men of consequence in the community. But they 
were not often men of substance: if they were wealthy enough to behave 
like a datu, they were belittled as timindok, a big banana. They had no right 
to booty beyond what their datu gave them, and they were held account- 
able for wounding or killing any captives. Though they could lend and 
borrow money, enter business partnerships, and acquire slaves of their 
own, their children inherited only at their datu’s pleasure. 23 As Loarca 
(1582, 158) said when speaking of weddings, “the timaguas do not perform 
these ceremonies because they have no estate.’ This right to lestrict 
timawa— or oripun— inheritance enabled a datu to reward and indebt his 
favorites, and leave others under threat of the sort ol economic leveisal 
which set downward social mobility in motion. A 12-peso debt could 
plunge a man into the depths of domestic slavery, with the high probability 
of transmitting that status to his offspring because any children born 
during his bondage became the property of his master. 

These warrior roles of both datu and timawa were destined to disappear 
under colonial pacification, of course. Fray Rodrigo de Agancluru Moriz 
(1623, 452) described the changes that had taken place by 1623 as follows: 

The indios of the Hisayas say that before they gave obedience to the King our Lord, 
and became Christians, not only did the Mindanaons not make raids in their territory, 
but that, on the contrary, they would go to Mindanao where they took many captives, 
and terrified them; and now it is the opposite, because since they are Christians and 
it is not licit for them to make those raids, and they are disarmed, they are paying for 
what they did then. 

These changes meant that datus no longer had need of their timawas’ 
Viking-like services or means of rewarding them, nor a fresh supply of 
captives for their own use or sale. Worse, timawa were now paying tribute 
to the colonial government just like datus. These were conditions which no 
doubt gave added incentive for reducing timawa to slave status by usurious 
loans or arbitrary fines. Father Sanchez (1617, 334) said, “For anything at 
all, the datus would fine the timawa heavily . . . and if they had no bahandi 
to give, make them slaves.” By die seventeenth century, timawa were being 
referred to as commoners (plebeyos) or tungan tcauo, “people in-between, | 
and in Ak ilia’s day, the pre-Hispanic timawa were being fondly recalled as 
a “third rank of nobility.” And even that memory was fading. T oday they 
t all everybody timawa who are not slaves,” Aleina (1668a, 4:50) said, a 
practice which ultimately led to the modern Visayan word which means 
“poor, destitute.” 


t $9 


Social Organization 


Oripun 

file word mipun appears to be a transitive form of an archaic root udip 
(to live) meaning “to let live” — for example, to spare life on the field of 
battle, to ransom a captive, or to redeem a debt equivalent to a man’s price. 
The market for these exchanges was provided by a shortage of labor for 
exploiting a rich natural environment; and debt slavery was prevalent 
because agriculture was undeveloped, goods limited, and interest rates 
high, so debtors had little collateral except their own persons. The oripun 
produced by these conditions were legally slaves: they co,bld be bought and 
sold. But that was all they had in common. Some were foreign captives or 
purchases who served as victims for human sacrifice; some were members 
of their master’s household and suckled at the same breast as his own 
children; some were householders who gave their masters or creditors a 
portion of their crops or labor; and some were hardly distinguishable from 
freemen. Sociologically, therefore, they constituted the class which in 
contemporary European society would have been called commoners. 

Individual status within the oripun class depended on birthright, inher- 
ited or acquired debt, commuted penal sentence, or victimization by the 
more powerful. Outright captives were bihag, and they were marketed by 
dealers in along or botong as expensive merchandise like bahandi porcelain 
and gongs, or ships and houses. Oripun who lived in their master’s house 
were hayohay or ayuey, and those with their own house and field were luhay 
or mamahay. Like datus and timawa, they bore children of their same class; 
or in the case of mixed marriages, their children became half- or quarter- 
slaves who served their masters half time or quarter time. Half-slaves were 
called bulan (month) if their owners divided their time by the month. Debt 
slaves, too, only served their creditors part time in proportion to their debt. 
Their owners often paid such partial slaves the balance to take full posses- 
sion of them. As for householding oripun, they supported themselves, 
giving their masters only a share of their labor or crops. With opportunity 
and enterprise, they could earn enough to decrease their debt or even pay 
it off in full. 

Hayohay were at the bottom of the oripun social scale — those “most 
enslaved,” as Loarca (1582, 142) put it, “the ones they mostly sell to the 
Spaniards.” They were domestics who lived in their master’s house, re- 
ceived their food and clothing from him, but were given one day out of four 
to work for themselves. Their children born or raised in his house were 
gintubo, who might become favorites called si. bin or ginogalan, treated like 
his own children and set free on his death. If both parents were house-born 
slaves like themselves, or actual purchases, they were ginlubos, and if of the 


133 


THE VISAYAS 


fourth generation of their kind, tubas nga oripun. But if only one of the 
parents was hayoliay, they were half-slaves (bidan or pikas), or if three < 
their grandparents were nonslaves, they were quarter-slaves (tiloror sagipat 
Hayoliay married off from their master’s house assumed householdin 
tuhay status, owing him only two days out of five. He still had claim to thei 
children, however, though his raising them was often seen as a favor rathe 
than an imposition: a grown ginlubo, Sanchez (1617, 529v) said, “is like 
freed man who lives on his own.” It was normal for offspring of slaves to take 
over their parents’ obligations, who could then move into some more 
favorable status like tumaranpok. 

Debt slavery ranged from outright sale to contractual mortgage. In time 
of famine, men sold themselves or their children, or attached themselves 
to a datu as kabalangay (“crewman”?) for a loan. Datus themselves went into 
bondage for the loan of bahandi to use as bride-price, or became their 
father-in-law’s legal dependent. Debt was commonplace as evidenced by 
the fact that rice was loaned at 100 percent interest compounded annually, 
and crimes were punished by fines. 

A man became tinubos (redeemed or ransomed) to any creditor who 
underwrote his debt, and could be transferred from one to another for 
profit, and his obligations varied with the value of the bond. In Iloilo, a 
tumataban slave could be bonded for 6 pesos in the 1580s, his creditor then 
enjoying five days of his labor per month, while a tumaranpok was valued at 
12 pesos, for which he rendered four days’ labor out of seven. Both 
occupied their own houses with their families but their wives were also 
obliged to perform services, namely, spinning cotton their master supplied 
them in the boll. However, either could commute these obligations to 
payment in palay— 15 cavans a harvest for the former, 30 for the latter. 

Some oripun were hardly distinguishable from timawa. Horohan per- 
formed lower-echelon military services as mangayaw oarsmen or magahat 
warriors, and. as the author of the Boxer Codex (1590b, 362) remarked 
with some surprise, “they were taken into their fdatu’s] houses when they 
give some feast or drunken revel to be received just like guests.” Other 
tuhay or mamahay might also participate in raids, though receiving a 
smaller portion of the booty than timawa. Indeed, if they distinguished 
themselves regularly enough by bravery in action, they might attract a 
following of their own and actually become datus. Although they were 
obliged to come at their datu’s summons for communal work like house 
building they paid a vassalage fee called dagupan instead of field labor. But, 
like the timawa above them and the hayoliay below, their children could 
inherit their property only at the pleasure of their datus. 




Social Organization 


These variations in oripun status and opportunity for upward social 
mobility no doubt reflect local differences in economic conditions — crops, 
markets, demand on labor, and the size of the datu-tumao-timawa popula- 
tion. They also suggest that the majority of Visayans prior to Spanish advent 
were oripun. ■'*■■■ 

Debt and Dependence 

Visayan social fabric was thus woven of debt and de^endence-that is, 
relationships in which one person was dependent on the decisions of 
another, the one exercising choice, the other not. The slave did not choose 
to work for his master, but his master might choose to grant him a favor— 
for example, tagolaling were the days given a slave to work for himself. 
Parents chose their children’s mates as a normal act of social order, just as 
datus had the right to choose the booty their timawa comrades received. 
One’s position in the social scale was therefore measurable by the amount 
of control lie exercised over his own time and labor — the hayoliay at one 
extreme and the timawa or tumao at the other, where they could transfer 
their whole service to another person. Among oripun, such dependence 
was expressed in frank terms of debt. 

The high interest rates which created these debts were: based on the 
natural increase of crops or livestock. Stdil meant a debt without interest, 
a sale without profit, or a crop without increase; the loan of an inanimate 
object like a knife or boat was huram and did not incur utang (debt). A 
debtor’s children were born in debt, his first-degree kin were also liable, 
and any favor received incurred debt. Captured timawa rescued by their 
datu became his personal debtors — unlike the Spaniards ransomed or 
purchased from Filipino captors by Saavedra in 1528 or I on e in 1544. In 
convictions for grand larceny, a whole family could be enslaved: Alcina had 
oripun parishioners whose ancestor’s crime had been to break a borrowed 
bahandi gong. Goon was a kind of involuntary collateral seized until the 
debt was paid, and lokod, “to make sure,” was to collect a debt front 
somebody other than the debtor, who thus effectively acquired a new 
creditor who then had to collect as best he could. 

Community 

A datu’s following was his haop or dotation, Visayan terms to which 
Tagalog barangay was added alter Manila became the colonial capital. 


135 


the visayas 


Social Organization 


rrsj 

Maw"".., 

(*•*"*-„ 
ms 


These terms all referred to . he people themselves, not the place where they* 

one or more haop lived were bang* or 

Hi 

^Memte^ k5ndre< !^ 

Boxer manuscript (1590b, rSis STdatus/' 

tHS»2sl^=55SaS 

n”me d Ife some ring they exchanged or “I 

^ Proner community conduct reinforced social structure. Members of the 
1 P . •, j (n wear garments with luxurious edging, and 

Ihhd'p.Irslm wlnle' mnl" mdv' <bml to spit in their 


a fold of their skirt as if to assure that their private parts were doubly 
covered. And everybody addressed seniors or respec ted persons with politer 
lain expressions like “Tabi sa iyo umagi ako j With your permission, I will 
pass]” (Mentrida 1637a, 365). 

Kinship 

Early Spanish dictionaries of Visayan languages often list Cebuano, 
Hiligaynon, or Samareno variants under a single entry. This is especially 
true of kinship terminology. Thus the word for father is given as amahan, 
c may , and anduyon without distinction, though with a Cebu variant of amba 
or amhuyon; and mother as inahan, indayon, and Hoy, with a Kiniray-a 
variant, inang. Anna and Ina or Jnda were terms of special respect used as 
proper nouns (for example, si Amo ) , and often extended to nonparents for 
that purpose, while “Mama” was what people called their own father. 
Fathers were also addressed affectionately as “Baba,” thus himaba was a gift 
to a go-between by a suitor who wished to establish such a relationship with 
his prospective father-in-law. 

Parents’ brothers and sisters were also differentiated by sex: uncles were 
yoyo, oyo-an, or bata, and aunts were iyaan or dada. But sons and daughters 
were simply anak, offspring; and so, too, brothers, sisters, and cousins of 
either sex were igkaanak, igsoon, igmanhod , igtotood, or otod. (O tod was a piece 
cut off something; hence, kaotoran, relatives of one lineage.) Cousins could 
also be distinguished from siblings as pa, tod or ig-agaio, and second cousins 
in Kiniray-a as igkampor, while bogt.o or boggong tinay, “gut brothers,” meant 
children of the same parents — “like a piece of the same cord.” But siblings 
related through only one parent were mabaxu, and stepchildren or ones 
adopted were hablus. 

Grandparents of either sex, together with their brothers and sisters and 
their spouses, were all afiny, apohan, or owang , or more respectfully, “Laki” 
or “Bai,” sometimes with “Gurang” (mature) added. Great-grandparents 
were apo, or “Bata” with or without laki, bai, or gurang attached. A prudent 
person therefore muttered “Laki-laki” or “Apo-apo” when leaving the 
house in order to invoke his ancestors’ protection against harm or acci- 
dent ■ — a custom continued by Christians, Father Mentrida said, “or they 
say, ‘Jesus.’” Grandchildren were apo, and they and all their descendants 
were kaapohan, though a great-grandchild might be distinguished as apo sa 
tohod just as a great-grandparent was apny sa lohod — sa tohod meaning 
literally “at the knee.” 


137 


THE V1SAYAS 


Social Organization 


Husband and wife were both called asawa in Leyte and Samar, but in 
Cebu and Panay the term was restricted to the wife (the man was bana)— 
or, more accurately, the chief wife: any others were sandil, whether of slave, 
timawa, or datu stock. A son-in-law was nugang and his parents-in-law, i 
■ugangan; and numigang was for him to render bride-service to them prior 
to marriage. Both son- and daughter-in-law were umagad, a term which : 
emphasized their role in uniting their two families into one: agad were the 
thwarts between the two sides of a boat, and alagadun was to adjust or 
conform. Bayaw was a brother-in-law, hipag was sister-in-law. If two men 
were married to sisters, they called each other tolas, while women married |j 
to brothers called each other Idas. Parents who married their children off 
to one another’s children were balaye. 

With the exception of brothers- and sisters-in-law, therefore, and 
honorifics like laid and tod, Visayan kinship terms only distinguished sex inj 
the parental generation. Conversely, there was no term for a parent of 
either sex; parents were simply manyanak. But within the family, there were 
courteous forms of address which made this distinction. Sisters called theirj 
brothers oyo or tiki; brothers called their sisters ahay; and older brothers 
were addressed as magulang, ubo, or aso, older sisters as umbo. ( Oyo was really 
a polite term by which an older man addressed a younger, including a 
father his son or an uncle his nephew.) Parents, especially mothers, also 
addressed their daughters with terms of endearment like owa, warm, or 
paid; in Cebu, mothers called their daughters bubu (actually, “madame ’) or 
ipi in Canclaya, and umboy, idi, or didi in Samar, with tili being a local Giwan 
word. And between mail and wife, oto or otoy was an affectionate name for 
the husband; while an only son was fondly called bo/.o (penis). 


Law 

Laws were part of the customs and traditions handed down from one 
generation to another: they were not considered products of legislation but 
part of the natural order of things. Kabtangan were customs, but hahimtarijm 
was nature or condition, both words derived from butang, to put something 
in its place. The origin myths make it clear that class differences were just 
as natural as color of skin, and mestizos (kalibugan) were the children of a 
datu and timawa or of unmarried parents, as well as of a Spaniard and |j 
Visayan. Alagag was the natural awe which juniors felt in the presence of 
seniors; hilas was ingrained reluctance to contradict parents or superiors; 
and naga kahilas was for an ancestor spirit to keep a disrespectful descend-j 


ant awake with a guilty' conscience. A synonym for kabtangan was kagawiyan, 
from gatoi, to keep or preserve (for example, paragaioi, a steward, or 
gawiyunan, propertied people.) But batas or batman was a decree regulating 
commerce — for example, “Sino in nagbatas sining iyo ipapalit [Who as- 
sessed this merchandise of yours]?”- — and balas-batas was tariff (Sanchez 
1617, 70v). 

A datu acted as judge (hukom) in both civil claims and criminal cases, 
sometimes in consultation with an expert in custom law, by hearing testi- 
I mony of sworn witnesses. If the results were inconclusive, he might order 
f t he litigants to submit to trial by ordeal — for example, retrieving an object 
I from a pot of boiling water with the least injury, or staying underwater 
I longest. Recognized crimes were theft, defamation, murder, witchcraft, 
lese majesty' (that is, offense to a data’s authority) , and malicious vandalism 
like poisoning livestock. 

Penalties were fines set in accord with the litigants’ standing: crimes 
against upper-class persons were fined more heavily, and an oripun who 
murdered a datu was simply killed outright. Killings among high-ranking 
datus could not be setded until a blood feud had run its course, and 
wergeld (man-price) was argued as hotly as bride-price. All fines were 
imposed in terms of bahandi valuables, Loo high to be met by agricultural 
products or handicrafts. 

In theory, nobody was condemned to slavery: they became slaves for 
inability' to meet fines. There were no sentences like imprisonment or 
deportation which would take labor out of production; rather, punish- 
ments realigned labor forces within the community. The only exception 
was the death penalty for convicted witches or sorcerers. 

The most common thefts were of foodstuffs— for example, dangpas was 
for theft of root crops; ugnas for fallen fruit; sorok for bananas, sugarcane, 
or coconuts — and sneak thieves crept into houses naked and oiled so as to 
be slippery if caught. The stealing of valuables, however, was associated 
with raiding and so was rare within the community and punished severely: 
first-generation missionaries were always struck by the absence of locked 
doors and coffers in the homes of the wealthy. 

Any altercation that resulted in wounding had to be compensated with 
hilugo, blood-price, and insult was also valid grounds for litigation. The 
most serious was an accusation of witchcraft, but there were also violent 
curses like “Binaliw ka [Be changed]!” (that is, become crippled or de- 
formed), “Ginanitan ka [Be flayed]!” (like an animal hide), or “Nahahaan 
tinay mo [Get your guts]!” (from haha, to remove marrow, or meat from 
shells). But insults reflecting on a man’s virility required personal satisfac- 


1 


139 



THE \TSAYAS 


lion. When a Leyteano tried to change the price of something he w; 
selling to a Spanish soldier in 1544, the soldier punched him anti said, “Yo 
dog! Did 1 not give you what you asked? Why do you ask for more!” 
the soldier was stabbed to death that evening with his own dagger (Grijal 
I <>24, 56). 

Adultery was not considered a crime but a personal offense, and w< 
settled by the adulterer indemnifying the offended husband; the wife wa* 
not punished at all. Premarital sexual mores were lax: contacts between |1 
single men and women went unremarked unless the girl’s relatives de- f 
manded hingulaw, a shame payment. Some liaisons were publicly known 
and long-lasting; that they were a substitute for marriage to avoid the 
formal expense is suggested by the term kubol, which meant for longtime! 
lovers to marry. There appears to have been no specific term for virginity. 
Dalaga was a young woman of marriageable age whether virgin or not, but jP 
women were admired as bogus, complete, or bing'd, chaste, both for virginity 
and for faithfulness to one man. However, women who gave their favors : 
freely to many men were considered kiral, lewd or prostitutes, and com- 
pared to animals available to any male of the species. Thus the virginity of Jj 
those secluded binokot, who were only glimpsed by men when surrounded li 
by attendants, was part of their allure and mystery. 

Marriage 

Weddings between people without property to share by bequest were j 
simple ceremonies in which the couple partook of the same cup or plate, 1 
and hayohay were simply married off by their masters and given a few pots. J 
But the weddings of datus were the most important social events in a j 
Visayan community. Since they were contracts between families rather than | 
individuals, they were also political events creating new alliances. (They 
were often made when the man and woman concerned were still children, I 
or even before their birth.) Their importance depended on the size and fj 
ritual settlement of a bricle-price called bugay — “bride-price” rather than ;j 
“dowry” because it was set by the girl’s father, bargained down like goods | 
in a marketplace, and was not conjugal property. Spanish dowry (dote), on $j 
the other hand, was property a bride brought into her marriage to be j 
enjoyed by her husband. Visayan bugay was shared within the kin group j 
that set the price and sealed the bargain, including the bride’s brothers-in- 
law if she was a widow, and redistributed to meet their own future needs for 
bride-price. And since it had to be returned in case of divorce, it gave the 
wife’s family a vested interest in the permanence of the union; indeed, a 


Social Organization 


share called kukod went to the bride’s brothers specifically to guarantee her 
ciurn in the event she ran home after a marital squabble. 

The engagement required a relative or friend of the suitor to obtain 
permission from the girl's father to open proceedings. The man’s relatives 
then went to the girl’s house with a respected timawa bearing his spear. 
There they were received with gongs sounding to assemble her relatives 
and give public notice, but not admitted until they bargained with the girl’s 
grandmother to let down the house ladder. Then, with a fine Freudian 
gesture, the spear bearer drove the weapon into the house ladder and 
invoked the ancestors on both sides for fertility. They then entered, pre- 
sented a gift, and fixed the date for negotiating the marriage contract. The 
f father’s acceptance of the gift was his pledge of his daughter’s hand. 

On the date set, the marriage contract was negotiated in the girl’s house. 
| The man’s relatives were accompanied by two or three mediators (kagon), 
who placed a porcelain plate in front of the father containing a number of 
little sticks — the ordinary counters used in Visayan calculations. The father 
tossed a betel nut quid in the bowl to signal the opening of the discussion. 
This began with painful formality, but became less inhibited as drinking 
continued, and often had to be broken off and resumed another day. As 
each item was agreed on — slave, porcelain, or gold — one counter was 
1) placed on top of a gong on the floor. As agreement was reached on the 
schedule of payment, the counters were moved from one side to the other. 
Part of the bugay had to be paid immediately as a kind of down payment, 
but the rest was deferred until later, and some even held in abeyance and 
P only demanded in case of connubial conflict. Still another part of the bugay 
? was really not intended to be paid in the first place: it was only agreed to 
for the sake of the lady’s prestige. Conversely, the hingusal , a fine if either 
| party withdrew, might be demanded in advance if the girl was of much 
higher rank than the man. 

The girl’s father usually asked for the same bugay as he had given for her 
mother; and if the father were a proud datu who refused to lower his 
demand, the match would be canceled unless the suitor agsreed to enter 
his father-in-law’s household for a number of years or even a lifetime. (It 
was normal for a man to serve his father-in-law for one year before his 
wedding, a period of adjustment and trial, or actual training in the case of 
| a young boy.) Once the contract was settled, the mother came forward to 
ask for himaraw, a compensation in gold for all the sleep she had lost while 
the bride was an infant. 

During the wedding celebration, the bride and groom were seated 
beside one another — after her shyness was overcome with suitable gifts. 


1/iA 


141 


THE VISAYAS 



They were tied together by the hair for a short time, then served a plate 
rice, from which they each took a handful and squeezed it into a ball. Sjjj 
tossed hers down the house ladder, the symbol of his coming and going 
support his new family, and he threw his out the window to indicate 
her place was in the home looking out. Then, as they drank together 
old man rose and made public announcement of the match, stated thi 
conditions pertaining to the bride-price in the case either one went astray, 
and called on those present to act as witnesses. He then united their hands 
over a bowl of raw rice, which he then threw over the guests. 

When the newlyweds finally retired to the bridal chamber — that is, the j 
bokot where she had spent her days as binokot — her brother would bar the j 
groom’s entrance until he gave them something; slaves would ignite a I 
smouldering tire underneath until receiving a gift; and others would enter 
the chamber with bright torches and had to be paid to leave. Meanwhile, 
the party went raucously on, and if the bridegroom’s father was a man of 
sufficient rank and means, he presented gifts to all his new in-laws, perhaps 
even their slaves. Guests playfully snatched off one another’s pudong to be 
returned only on payment, and slaves were permitted to keep anything they 
could grab from the bridegroom’s party. These prestige feasts were public 
celebrations and might last as long as ten clays. 

When it came time to fetch the bride, she required another round of 
gifts — before crossing a river, climbing the house ladder, or entering a : 
crowded room. Her father contributed banted to the new household — a 
number of slaves equal to, or even double, the number included in the 
bugay, but only for the newlyweds’ use, not their possession: they remained 
his own property. Any slaves the wife brought along remained her personal 
property just like her gold and jewelry, and if she and her husband 
quarreled, they might refuse to obey him. A wife’s paramount housekeep- 
ing duty was to keep her husband well clothed by weaving, sewing, trade, 
or purchases— just as unmarried women were expected to clothe their 
lovers, as Bubung Ginbuna does for epic hero Kabungaw. As Alcina ( 1668a, 
4:218) said, “Both husband and lovers are accustomed to leave their 
women if they do not do elapi or darapi, which is to give them the clotheS| 


they need.” ; 

Marriage was forbidden between first-degree kin, but a niece could 
many her uncle. (In a Panay origin myth, Lupluban, granddaughter of the 
primordial pair, married her mother’s brother, Pandagwan.) Spanish ref- 
erences to polygamy differ, perhaps because of confusion between second- 
ary wives and concubines: Legazpi said Visayan men took two or three wives ; 
if they could afford it, but Chirino said the practice was very rare. Father 


1 A. 9 


Social Organization 




Chirino also said that husband and wife separated “for the least reason in 
the world” — actually, for incompatibility, neglect, or misconduct — and a 
pian or woman who had been married only once was rather the exception 
than the rule. Pangoli was a gift to attract back a wife who had fled to her 
relatives, and legal divorce was often avoided only because of the difficulty 
of restoring a bride-price that had already been “spent.” Moreover, if 
divorce was common, the premature death of one partner was by no means 
uncommon, so remarriages filled families with half-siblings and adopted 
nephews, nieces, or foundlings. 


Inheritance 

Children of both sexes inherited equally unless their parents specified 
some preference in a will (bili.n). Illegitimate children inherited only at the 
pleasure of the legal heirs. But heritage strictly followed bloodline: step- 
children inherited only from their actual parents, and spouses did not 
inherit from each other. A man and wife might bequeath to each other 
conjugal property which they had accumulated together, but not what they 
had inherited. It was a principle of which Spanish justices were often 
unaware when trying lawsuits over contested inheritance. Two cases re- 
corded by Alcina will illustrate. 

An unmarried girl died who was the only child of a widowed datu, 
leaving six slaves she had inherited from her deceased mother. Her father 
had no claim to those slaves, but some fifty of her mother’s kin gathered 
around to claim their share. “Since there would not have been even a finger 
for each,” as Father Alcina (1668a, 4:227) said, search had to be made for 
the “trunk” (puna) — that is, the ultimate source of the slaves. This proved 
to be the girl’s maternal grandfather, who had had three children- — her 
mother and two sons — each of whom had inherited an equal number of 
slaves, and all of whom were dead. Since the girl was the last in her mother’s 
line, it was the descendants of her two uncles who had the best claim. These 
were more than twenty in all, so each was awarded a quarter-slave. 

In the other case, a childless woman adopted the daughter of her 
brother, raised her as her own daughter, and eventually married her off in 
another town. She then took in a foundling that had been abandoned in 
the forest, whom she also raised as a daughter but could not legally adopt 
because the parents were unknown. When the woman was dying, the 
foundling obtained a certificate from the parish priest stating that she was 
the woman’s heir. The legally adopted daughter had by this time died but 


143 


THE VISAYAS 


her son appeared to claim his grandmother s property, which included j 
three slaves from her original bride-price. But because of the existence^jjj 
the anomalous Spanish paper, the case dragged on for twelve years. It was 
finally settled in the son’s favor, leaving the foundling only her foster 
mother’s personal possessions, not what she had inherited, and even trorn^ 
this the son could claim his grandmother’s expenses in raising the girl, *j 
claim which he refrained from pressing only because of Hubei Alcina s 
intervention. 


Properly and Labor 

The property mentioned in bride-price exchanges or inheritance dis- 
putes was always slaves and bahandi— imported porcelains and gongs and 
gold, especially ornate gold ornaments whose value greatly exceeded their ; 
gold content. Slaves were readily transferable, but bahandi was alienated 
only in case of dire family emergency (an inaccessibility which made it a| 
particular target of raiders), though it was sometimes loaned out in ex- 
change for servitude. 

But all property of whatever value — houses and boats, household fur 
nishings and livestock, even raw materials and the contents of granaries— 
must have been inheritable. Most houses were built of light materials 
highly inflammable, and readily abandoned in case of enemy attack or an 
occupant’s death, but they could be bought or rented. The stately dwelling 
of ranking datus, however, standing on tall hardwood pillars and walled 
with intricately carved planks, often survived from one generation to the, 
next, but were surely never sold. 

All products of human labor were alienable property which could be 
bought and sold, not excluding children. With the notable exception of 
fruit trees, most of them were movable: lumber or rice could be sold, even 
vegetables still in the ground or unharvested grain, but not the forest or 
fields which produced them. Cleared swiddens were also sold or rented- 
though the terms “sold” or "rented” are rather inappropriate because the 
land itself was not owned. Manufactured goods were often jointly owned: 
women might pool their efforts to strip abaca or weave textiles, for exam 
pie. Trees in the forest could be blazed to ripen fruit or for beehives, but 
the claim was only good for one season. 

All these natural resources were themselves public domain although 
subject to a datu’s regulation. He could build fish dams, obstruct liver 
traffic, claim a share of hunters’ catch, or collect all turtle eggs in a 


Social Organization 


restricted stretch of beach. Datus could also lease such resources to outsid- 
ers: Legazpi (1569b, 22n.63) reported of Visayan gold production in 1569, 

In some place where we know there are mines, the natives are not willing to work 
them and do not, butwhen foreign vessels come, in exchange for what they bring, they 
agree to let them work in the mines for the days or period contracted. 

Labor, of course, was itself a commodity that could be bright and sold — 
or, in the case of bonded tinubos, rented. Indeed, it was the commodity in 
which creditors were investing when they underwrote somebody’s debt: lito 
was resale, and liniUto pagtubos was a person whose debt had been trans- 
ferred many times from one speculator to another. Oripun were not 
bondservants working off their debt: lowas was the payment liquidating 
slavery, made either by the slave himself or somebody on his behalf, and 
lubos was a payment which transferred title to the one who paid it. 

Namomoo-was to work in somebody else’s house, most frequently weav- 
ing. Lihogwere hired hands compensated only with meals and with a feast 
when the project was completed. Hiniakdul was compensation given an 
agent or messenger for difficult sendee, and hinguli was a kind of hazardous 
duty pay on expeditions like those called moro-moro after the Spaniards 
introduced the concept. 

In the practice of agriculture, terms distinguished the division of labor, 
not of property. Lan-o or tagolalingwas the work a slave did for himself, and 
lampok (literally, “a precious stone”) was what he did for his master; and if 
he made a sumbi field for himself by stealth alongside his master’s, what he 
was stealing was time, not land. 

Householders had the right of usufruct to the land on which their 
houses and fruit trees stood, but it was not property held in fee simple. 
Under colonial law, however, such occupation eventually became the basis 
for legal title, while datus laid claim to unoccupied land where they had 
exercised jurisdiction. In Manila, land was being sold and mortgaged with 
Spanish title deeds as early as the 1590s. We do not know when this process 
began in colonial centers like Cebu and Iloilo, but in the rural Visayas it was 
just beginning a century after Legazpi ’s arrival. Alcina (1668a, 3:75-76) has 
left the following lucid description of indigenous land rights in his day: 

Regarding land, here there is no difference between mine and thine as in other 
parts, or the usual lawsuits in almost all of them over its dominion and possession; 
because it is so great, so extensive, and in almost ail places so good, in all islands, that 
it is not only more than enough for all their inhabitants, but could be given to 
thousands of farmers of those in other parts who are begging for it and sometimes 

145 


THE VISAYAS 



bIin 


fin 


( ininot farm for lark of land, while heir, on the contrary, there is more than enough 
and very extensive land hut a shortage of those to cultivate it. And although it is true 
that evei y town orvieinity has its own boundaries and they are like their own lands and 
not t hose ofot her towns, nonetheless, to anybody who routes and settles among them, 
even if he was never seen before and is unknown, they give option to choose as he will, 
all and as much land as he wants without giving a penny for it or any contract, so long 
as it is uncultivated. 

Regarding farming or cultivating it, the one who farms or cultivates it is the owner, 
and even more so if he planted coconuts or fruit trees, which are always his, without 
there ever having been disputes or lawsuits among them over it until now. God grant 
that this sincerity and good will might always endure among them, because these days 
it appears there have been some who wish to disrupt it somewhat, some who, by 
bringing in modern ideas / ladinecerj , arc spoiling it with swindling. So the ancient 
good will and trust is being lost with which they used to live without grabbing from one 
another, but readily giving way to the one who made first choice, and much more so 
to the one who first planted coconuts, fruit trees, abaca or other things, to which they 
always had right and dominion, even if they only swear to it and then go live in another 
town. 


CHAPTER 8 


Weapons and War 




Bladed weapons were an ordinary part of Visayan male costume, at 
least a dagger or spear. If bound with gold or set with gems, these consti- 
tuted an essential part of a data’s personal jewelry. Daggers, knives, swords, 
spears and javelins, shields and body armor were found everywhere, but the 
bow and arrow had scattered distribution, and the blowgun was found only 
in Mindanao and Palawan. Stones, occasionally thrown with slings, and 
wooden darts were common missiles everyw here, hut firearms were known 
only to Moros. Set in strategic locations were ballistas — that is, powerful 
crossbows which could drive a shaft through a wild hoar’s body “like a 
gourd” when triggered by a cord stretched across a path. 


Swords and Daggers 

The most intimate weapon was the Madam. This was a short broad 
dagger wi 1 1 1 a single-edged leaf-shaped blade like a soitgil spearhead, and a 
cross-shaped hilt which was grasped with l lie blade protruding between the 


14.A 


I A* 1 


THE VISAYAS 


index and middle fingers. It was 20 to 25 centimeters long, with smaller 
ones made especially for youngsters since even a small boy felt naked J 
without one. They were typically decorated with tassels made of silk or hairs j 
from the bushy tail of the civet cat dyed red or, better, a lock of hair ; 
provided by one’s own sweetheart. Like other bladed weapons, and evjj| 
working bolos, they were strapped to the wrist for use, either by a coid qjjjj 

a tassel called kulili. Jjf 

There were two kinds of swords— kris (Visayan kalis) and kampilan, both| 
words of Malay origin. The kris was a long double-edged blade (modern^ 
specimens run to 60 or 70 centimeters) , either straight or wavy but charac- j 
terized by an asymmetrical hornlike Hare at the hilt end, called kalaw-kalmo; 
after the kalaw hornbill. The wavy kris was called kiwo-kiwo, and so was an 
astute, devious man whose movement could not be predicted. Hilts we||j 
carved of any solid material— hardwood, bone, antler, even shell— and 
great datu warriors had them of solid gold or encrusted with precious| 
stones. Blades were forged from layers of different grades of steel, which 
gave them a veined or mottled surface — damascened oi Watered. Bu|| 
even the best Visayan products were considered inferior to those from 
Mindanao or Sulu, and these in turn were less esteemed than imports frorij 
Makassar and Borneo. Alcina thought the best of them excelled Spanish 
blades. 

The word kampilan came into Spanish during the Moluccan campaigns 
of the sixteenth century as “a heavy, pointed cutlass [alfange. ]”— inappro-, 
priately, however, since a cutlass had a curved blade weighted toward the,; 
tip for slashing blows, while the kampilan was straight. (Modern ones are 
two-handed weapons running to 90 centimeters.) It apparently was never 
manufactured by Visayan smiths but imported from parts of Mindanao,; 
both Muslim and pagan, which had direct culture contact with the Moluccas. 
Like the kris, it was coated with poison before going into battle, and tfrjj 
fiction that the metal itself had been rendered poisonous by some arcane 
alchemy no doubt enhanced its market value. Fine ones were handed down, 
from father to son, bore personal names known to the enemy, and could 
be recognized by the sound of little bells which formed part of their 
tasseled decoration. In the Maranaw epic Darangen, when Prince Ban tugan 
leaves his beloved Bumburan for exile, 


He took his great kampilan, wrapped the strap 

Securely round his hand, and held his shield before him 

While he danced out the road and swung 

His bright kampilan round his head in such a wise 

Could be heard within the palace tower (Laubach 1930, 96). 


Weapons and War 


|| Spears 

The spear, bankaw, was the most important Visayan weapon. It was 
carried both for security and ceremony, and it figured not only in warfare 
but in religious functions and business transactions. Pamankaw was a spear 
the bridegroom’s party gave the bride’s grandmother to let down the 
house ladder. The part of the dowry that was held in abeyance and only 
demanded in case of a breach of connubial harmony was called lantay— to 
throw a spear at a distant target. Marriage negotiations actually began with 
a spear thrust: The man’s father sent one of his timazoa vassals bearing his 
son’s spear to the girl’s father. There, he drove it into the house steps and 
then, while he gripped it in his hand, the ancestral spirits of both families 
were invoked for fertility and prosperity. 

The importance of the Visayan spear is indicated by the special vocabu- 
lary attached to it. The general term for it was bankaw ; while a light spear 
was barobankaxu or bankaway, or pinins if fitted with a short shaft. Men called 
their own spears by more intimate terms: ipambuk or ipanonos had the 
nuance of “my trusty blade”; and bankaras or bankaraw, something like “that 
damned spear of mine.” The shaft, almost 2 meters long, was duldng or ilhi, 
and the spearhead was hafted into it by a tang, tugod, and held firm by a ring 
called pitara if it was metal, bankorong or pikil if rattan. The butt, hele, was 
strengthened by a pointed sheathing (tikala) of brass or even gold for 10 or 
12 centimeters, which permitted it to serve as a staff for climbing, or to be 
conveniently driven into the ground to stand by itself when men met in 
friendly discussion. 

Good spears were kept highly polished, and among them the most 
presUgious was the songil, a leaf-shaped blade 30 centimeters long and as 
wide as a man’s hand, sharpened for as much as halt its length, knifelike, 
on both edges. If it was piniskan or pinamaskan, it had elegant round or 
flamelike inlays of brass, copper, or silver, and could be valued atone slave. 
The binalo was similar in shape but cheaper, while the budiak was longer 
and wider but thinner. The liparak was short and broad, the lumbak me- 
dium-sized, and the lanab the longest and widest of all, while the tinikol, was 
the shape of a tikolXezL Some were thick and heavy: the binusloran was thick 
down the middle, and the pinuso was so called because of its similarity to 
the flower of a banana plant. 

Missiles 

These fine spears were thrown only where it was possible to retrieve 
th em — in face-to-face combat, for instance, or from ambush. Even when 


14Q 


THE VISAYAS 


Weapons and War 


hunting wild boar, any expensive weapon was thrown with a cord attach 
to prevent the animal from running off with it. Normal for open coml 
were bamboo spears with fire-hardened wooden points, their last sectioi 
loaded with sand for better balance, or, most common of all, the sugob, 
length of sharpened bagakay bamboo. From the fighting decks of kata’ 
cruisers, 30-centimeter-long spikes or javelins of heavy hardwood poin 
at both ends were thrown in large numbers with an accuracy which, 
traded the attention of all foreign observers. All these missiles were or. 
narily poisoned with bidit, snake venom, preferably from a viper so deadly 
it was called odto, high noon, because its victims could not expect to survive | 
more than half a day. 

The small role assigned the bow and arrow in Visayan warfare is sug- I 
gcsted by the poverty of its vocabulary. Bow was busog— which basically 
meant full, like ahead of rice or a sail swollen with wind. Odyongv/as arrow; 
and lanangan, quiver. However, in Panay the arrow was called pana, pre- 
sumably from Malay panah, bow. There appears to have been no special! 
word for arrowhead. Arrowheads were made of wood and constituted one- j 
third the length of cane arrows which were unfledged — that is, un feathered, 
and therefore inaccurate in flight. Bows were generally short and weak, 
though Juan de la lsla reported some as long and strong as English bows. 
Archers were reported in most places but in small numbers, and their lack 
of skill was regularly contrasted with the expertise of mountain Negritos, or|t 
Sangil islanders who sent contingents of bowmen to reinforce their 
Mindanao allies when needed. But some Visayans used arrows to good 
effect in naval warfare, pouring volleys into enemy ships at close quarters, 
a use reflected in the expression, “Baga nauran nga odyong [Raining like 

arrows].” wT :! !i|js 

The blowgun (suinpit) as found in Sarangani and Palawan was a rathei| 
sophisticated weapon. A natural tube of hollow cane, it projected a thick 
dart (hahoay or pangodyong) about 20 centimeters long, with a butt of 
softwood to make an airtight plunger and a barbed head often made of 
fishbone— and poisoned, its length permitted great accuracy, and it was 
also fined with an iron spearhead for use after all ammunition had been 
spent. As for firearms, l.cgazpi in ! 567 sent the king a Chinese arquebus, 
“some of which there are among these people.” The Visayans called an 
arquebus or musket hit hang, a Malay word of supposedly Chinese origin. 


Defensive Arms 


The Visayan equivalent of a cuirass, or chain mail, was barote, quilted or 
corded body armor, which the Spaniards called escaupiles after the cotton- j 


padded ones they found in the New World. The barote was woven of thick- 
braided abaca or bark cords, tight enough to be waterproof in. good ones, 
and so intricately knotted that cuts did not spread. A piece similar to burlap 
(habay-habay) was worn next to the body under the barote itself. It extended 
to the elbow and knee, with an ankle-length variety with sleeves for man- 
ning defenseworks, though for greater agility in hand-to-hand combat, 
confident warriors preferred to fit without them. Pakil and batung-batung 
were breastplates or backplates made of bamboo, bark, hardwood like 
ebony, or, in Mindanao, carabao horn or elephant hide from Jolo. Shark- 
skin was used effectively for helmets or monones. I 

The shield, kalasag, was made of a light, corky wood which was very 
fibrous so as to enmesh any spear or dagger which penetrated it, and it was 
generally considered sword-proof. It was strengthened and decorated with 
rattan binding coated with resinous pitch, and of sufficient size to give full 
body protection — about 50 by 150 centimeters. A small round buckler 
called tamin appears to have been copied from the Moluccans or the 
Spaniards themselves. The kalasag was typically painted red and decorated 
with shell sequins and hog bristles on top or, in the case of real braves, the 
jhair of vanquished foes. 


| Warfare 

Visayan life was sufficiently warlike to provide occasion for men to win 
the tattoos which caused the Spaniards to call them pintados, painted. The 
case of Limasawa is suggestive of this warlikeness. A small island of insignifi- 
cant natural resources just off the southern tip of Leyte, it was a Butuan 
satellite. Its overlord, Rajah Kolambu, was the brother of Butuan ruler 
Rajah Awi, and his heir fled to Butuan following a devastating Ternatan- 
Portuguese raid in 1562. Kolambu himself did not reside on the island, but 
only went there when he and his brother wanted to meet and, as he told 
Magellan, “hunt.” What attracted these Butuan rajahs to this tiny island? 
What were they hunting? An answer is suggested by its location: it was 
strategically positioned to control, or prey on, all shipping from the Pacific 
coast to the interior trade centers of Butuan and Cebu. 24 

A Spaniard, who observed Philippine society from within it as a captive 
slave, reported in 1528 that the people of Surigao lived oil the sea “by raid 
and trade,” and were enemies of those of Sarangani Island. Another 
Spaniard, Juan Flores, survived for twenty years in a Leyte village and finally 
disappeared on a raid together with thirty of his town mates. During Legazpi’s 


151 


THE VISAYAS 


I 


first year in Cebu, he twice joined his reluctant vassal Tupas to aven^ 
attacks by enemy villages on the same island, and twice provided esco 
against Panay enemies for clatus come to sell rice from that island. Likewi 
Spaniards happened to learn about the gold mines of Masbate when th 
went there to avenge a Leyte ally who had been attacked. 

These enmities were generally the cause or result of raids which w* 
seasonal in nature because sea raiders want the wind behind them whe 
they attack. Kolambu told Magellan that he had two villages hostile to him 
but that it was not the time to go there then; and Loarca reported from 
Panay that maritime communities made their raids during the fair winds 
between the monsoon, but the uplanders after harvest. Father Martin de 
Rada wrote in 1577, 

Every year as soon as they harvest their fields, they man their ships to go to plunder : 
wherever their luck leads them . . . and this is especially during October and 
November, and later in February and March and April, at which times a great number 
of corsairs go out, and still do today though not so many because of fear of the 
Spaniards (Rada 1577, 479). 

In the next century, Alcina collected a wealth of data on Visayan warfare 
from both folklore and living memories. Favorite Samar targets were Albay 
and Catanduanes, with forays as far north as Casiguran; and marriage 
relations with Burias, Masbate, and Mindanao were the result of wife- 
seeking raids from those places. Datu Karagrag of Makarato on Lawan 
Island, and his beautiful wife Bingi, however, successfully resisted a kidnap ;; 
attempt by Damaraug of Albay at the head of a fleet remembered by their 
descendants as numbering 100 vessels. Father Alcina had parishioners who f_ 
were descendants of Luzon captives. Once, he resettled aSamareno chief- 
tain named Kasilagan and his people in Catbalogan after their release fromjj 
Caraga captivity in Davao Oriental. But not all such migration may have 
resulted from human raids: Leyte-speaking descendants of migrants whom A 
Father Alcina met in Oton explained their presence with a curious story ] 
about their ancestors having been driven from their home in Ormuc Bay 
by an infestation of barracudalike garfish. |g 

The men of eastern Samar, then called Ibabao, were still proud of their 
reputation as warriors in Alcina’s day. “Ibabawkita! ” they would tell each 
other on going into battle — "We are men of Ibabao!” Legend recounted 
the fame of a giant of a man from Magtaon called Pusong who used to raid 
Calbiga and Libunao on the west coast single-handed, and whose form 
chiseled into the rock where he finally fell was shown to Father Alcina. The 
warriors considered to be the bravest of all, however, were the Boholanos, v 


1 KO 


a 


Weapons and War 


men “who formerly would not permit any other nation to abuse them,” 
Alcina (1668b, 396) commented of the Tamblot uprising. That Ternatan- 
portuguese raid on Bohol and Limasawa so memorialized by Spanish 
chroniclers because it involved their colonial competitors, appears simply 
to have been the latest in an ongoing sexies of exchanges between Bohol 
and Ternate. A century later, outnumbered Boholanos successfully 
repulsed one more attack, sending the Ternatan karakoas home with 
colors struck. 


Purpose and Causes of Wars 

Visayan communities had small populations, low levels of production, 
and unlimited access to natural resources like sea and forest products. 
Their dams’ ability to procure iron or prestigious imports depended on 
control of the manpower to exploit those resources. Wars were therefore 
fought to control people, not territory. They were waged by raids intended 
to seize slaves outright, to initiate or enforce alliances for trading networks, 
and to take booty to cover costs in any case. They were fought, not by 
standing armies or navies loyal to some superordinate political authority, 
but by citizen wai'riors owing personal allegiance to leaders who were 
physically present. Visayans were therefore willing to swear allegiance to 
Spanish raiders when it was to their advantage to do so, but were not 
prepared to resist foreign occupation and annexation of their territory. 

Recognized causes for just war were direct raid or attack by another 
community, betrayal of blood pacts or alliances, treachery or abuse of 
traders in a friendly village, and murder or theft by an outsider. Slave 
raiding was the main motivation for unprovoked attack or, in special cases, 
the need for a sacrificial victim to complete mourning rites for some 
powerful datu. Retaliation for injuries received was not only a matter of 
revenge, but a punitive measure intended to discourage repetition of the 
offense. Failure to take revenge not only suggested a timidity which invited 
further enemy action, but ran the risk of supernatural punishment by the 
spirits of unavenged relatives. 


Strategy and Tactics 

Gubat was the general term for warfare, but actual engagements were 
distinguished as gahat by land and mangayaw by sea, or salakay for storming 


153 


THE VISAYAS 


Weapons and War 


a furl ill txl position in distinction to burhi, to take hy treachery. The pn 
ferred tactic on land was ambush — habon, saghid, hoom, or pool — either b 
lying in wait or hy such strategies as exposing a few agile warriors to enem 
view to lure them out into the trap. Sayang waslo pass hy hidden enemic 
unawares. To loot was dahas or dampas , pangawat being the one who tool 
the lion’s share. Dugdugwas to rob on the trail like a highwayman; lingo, if 
it involved killing in an isolated spot. Dakot or bakot was a complete sacking 
of a community. Taban was anything taken hy force, including wives and 
women; sangbay or bansag, any trophy, captive, or goods seized from an g 
enemy; and dan gin was both spoils of war and something set aside for a j 
religious sacrifice. 

Special roles connected with the conduct of war included away, enemy; 
bantay, sentinel; bila, allies; hagon, mediator; and laway, spy. Asdang was j 
hand-to-hand combat. Buhl was a duel. Hulaw was a man known to be on jj 
the lookout for an enemy. Angat was to provoke or challenge— for exam- j 
pie, “Pauli kita sa sulad [Let’s both go to hell]!” (Mentrida 1637a, 350). J 
Pinaorihiyan was for a fleeing warrior to turn and spear his pursuer; naga M 
kamatayan was to fight to the death; and mangin matay was a desperate man: j 
determined to die on the field of battle. Balita was the bad news of death -i 
or captivity, but hugyaw or ugyalt were the clamorous shouts or chants of 
returning victors. 


to-ship contact at sea. Such engagements were called bangga, and ban gal 
was to pursue a fleeing enemy vessel. Ships traveling in company were a bay, 
and a swift sailer sent out in advance of the fleet for scouting was duhiwan 
(“visitor”) or lampilaw. 

Besides slaves, preferred spoils of war were the bronze gongs and Chi- 
nese porcelains which constituted bakandi wealth. Raids were also mounted 
to carry off choice ladies as brides, especially the daughters of men with 
whom it was advantageous to establish collateral ties. Ranking datus jealous 
of their lineage were often unable to obtain brides of their rank locally or 
to satisfy the requirements of families with prestigious pedigrees elsewhere, 
and so would resort to abduction. Raiders came from as far as Mindanao 
and Jolo for this purpose. (Alcina thought the similarity of certain Visayan 
and Mindanao languages was. due to this cross-fertilization.) Once, to 
avenge one such raid, two Bantayan-Samar chiefs made a celebrated attack 
on Jolo, perhaps to settle bride-price and social precedence. Modern 
marketing jargon would have called this procedure a marry-now-pay-later 
plan, for the dowry expenses evaded at the time of abduction would be paid 
eventually when, after the birth of children and further exchange of 
eligible youths and ladies, the two parties would finally unite in amicable 
settlement. 


Sea Raiding 

-M M 

The most celebrated form of Visayan warfare was sea raiding, mangayaw, 
a word which appeared in all the major languages of the Philippines. Its 
root appears to be hayaw (for example, Ilocano kinayawan, captive) though 
Spanish lexicographers extracted ayaw, ngayaw, and agaxo, and it meant a 
raid to bring hack slaves or heads. There is no record of Visayan | 
headhunting — that is, warfare for the specific purpose of taking heads— 
but heads were cut off in the course of battle or murder. Pedro de Arana | 
lost his head during the occupation of Cebu. Luba, pogot, sumbali, and iongol 
all meant to behead, and tongol was also the dress plumage displayed at thejj 
Stern of a warship. 

The sacrifice that was performed on launching a warship for a raid was j 
called pagdaga, and it was considered most effective if the prow and keel 
were smeared with the blood of a victim from the target community. But 
karakoa cruisers were not designed simply for falling on undefended 
coastal communities: they were fitted with elevated fighting decks for ship- ! 


Defense 

The best defense against mangayaw attack was to intercept the enemy at 
sea, but most communities did not have the men-o’-war to do so. They 
would therefore abandon their homes to looting and the torch, and 
withdraw to the hills, returning when danger had passed to rebuild their 
houses of materials readily available. Indeed, settlements were often lo- 
cated in the interior precisely for security reasons. A native guide told 
Garcia Descalante in 1544 that southeastern Mindanao was thickly popu- 
lated with communities that had withdrawn from the coast because of war; 
and thatDawis, a large Bohol town opposite Panglao Island, was completely 
abandoned following the famous Ternatan raid, only to be resettled as 
Baclayon many years later. 

Moog, Hi, or ilihan was any tower, rocky outcropping, or natural pinnacle 
that could be fortified, to which evacuees retreated for defense. Spanish 
soldiers were regularly called upon by local allies to storm strongholds 
which must have been impregnable for less determined and more poorly 
armed invaders. Sometimes they were actual tree houses 15 or more meters 


1 KK 


THE VISAYAS 


Weapons and War 


■mm 


above the ground, occupied only in time of war. If they were intended oi 
for male warriors, they were reached simply by a vine which could be pultgf 
up. Balatik, ordinarily used for large game, were set along the approach* 
and the ground was planted with suyak, ankle-high poisoned spikes, 
fortification was called tambangan, but the Malay word kota seems only to 
have been applied to more permanent forts built by Moros. 

Peace Pacts 

Hostilities were suspended or avoided by sandugo: peace pacts in which; 
the two parties drank a few drops of one another’s blood in a draught of 
wine. All Spanish explorers from Magellan to Legazpi made such pacts with 
Visayan datus. It was a procedure by which two men, not necessar 
enemies, became blood brothers, vowing to stick together through thick 
and thin, war and peace, and to observe mourning restriction whenever 
they were separated from one another. After the Spanish introduction of 
legal documentation, Filipinos were even known to dramatize their com- 
mitment by signing in blood — like the pious Visayan lady who appeared 
before Father Alcina (1668a, 4:275-75). 

Having brought a paper written in her own hand, in which she offered herself as 
a Slave of the Virgin for the rest of her life with a vow of absolute chastity (she had justf 
been widowed a second time) , she pulled out a needle and pierced herself with it over 
the heart, and with the blood that flowed out serving as ink, signed the document, with 
which act she showed she was making it irrevocable and enduring according to her 
custom. 


m 


These peace pacts were made between two datus, however, not between 
two nations or tribes, and so were binding on other members of the 
community only to the extent of the pact holder’s effective authority, and 
in no case on other datus. For this reason, Spanish commanders usuall 
drew blood with more than one chief when making treaties — Magellan ii 
Cebu, Saavedra in Sarangani, Legazpi in Samar, Goiti in Leyte, Rodrigut 
in Negros, li is ironic that the blood compact between Legazpi and Si 
Kanina of Bohol memorialized in Juan Luna’s famous 1888 El Paclo 
Sangrc was an exception to this practice of drawing blood with more that 
one chief. 


prowess and were entitled to wear distinctive attire. Their exploits became 
: stuff of local legend, and the most famous among them were karanduun, 

worthy of being memorialized in those heroic epics called kandu. As a 
I Suban-on epic says, “M’lat gosay dipaya datu di m’glayaglayag [It is not 
fitting that a datu ventures not]” (Resma 1982, 285). 

The Spaniards, of course, considered any such venturing datus simple 
pirates, and defined mangayaw itself as piracy — armed robbery at sea. But 
it is a judgment which might be put in better perspective against sixteenth- 
century European concepts of international law on the high seas. Standard 
^practice for dealing with unidentified ships at sea was io signal them to 
heave to and, if they did not, to open fire and take them “in fair fight,” 
seizing everything on board including personnel. As Charles V (1519, 136) 
ordered Magellan, 

you will decide on those for ransom as best you can, and if there are persons whose 
value exceeds 500 serdfines, such will be held for us because of their value, and the 
others you will have evaluated or putup for auction, and itwould be best if the people 
of that land wished to buy them, you selling them for the best price, to avoid the 
expense of feeding them. 

Such was the Spanish king’s concept of maritime law. Mangayaw was the 
Visayans’. 




Epic Heroes 

Successful mangayaw raiders were regarded as popular heroes and 
enjoyed interisland reputations. They tattooed in proportion to their] 


1 cc 


157 







CHAPTER 9 


Mindanao 


It is unfortunate that we have no early dictionaries of Mindanao 
languages like those that permitted a detailed description of classic Visayan 
culture. However, the northern and eastern coasts of Mindanao were part 
of the Visayan culture area: from Surigao in the east to Sindangan Bay in 
the west, missionaries were able to make themselves understood in Cebuano. 
Moreover, much that has been said of Visayan culture in part 1 is also 
applicable to the coastal populations of Mindanao, and even to many 
communities in the interior. 

Rice was everywhere the preferred food, but recourse had to be made to 
root crops and sago in season. Houses stood on tall posts, men-o’-war were 
edge-pegged karakoas, and weapons were die same as in the Visayas, with 
the addition of small artillery in Maguindanao and Sulu. Power and promi- 
nence depended on the control of slaves taken by debt and capture, and 
chiefs were respected for their warrior skills — but were not all tattooed. 
Ancestors and nature spirits were worshiped, and omens were taken from 
the limokon bird. 

All these features were still to be observed in the seventeenth century. 
Father Francisco Combes described an ornate kris worn by Zamboanga 


lfil 




MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Chief Soksokan which was valued at ten slaves, and a spear in Jolo which 
killed Captain Gaspar de Morales by penetrating his steel-sheathed buck- : 
ler. Traditional nuptial processions, pomp, and coquetry evidently survived j 
conversion to Christianity: Father Combes (1667, 68) attended a two-week 
wedding celebration in which sixteen hundred gallons of wine and morel 
than one thousand chickens were consumed and “the bride took a half 
hour to give her answer, and after having given it, another long half hour 
to reach the altar rail.” 


Caraga 

■ • j 

It was on the Pacific coast in what is now Surigao del Sur and Davao 
Oriental that the Spaniards first learned the name “Vizaya.” Dutch records 
also refer to southeastern Mindanao as Bisaya, and Villalobos in 1543 called 
Davao Gulf, Bisaya Bay. Lake other Visayans, men on these shores were j 
tattooed and wore penis pins, G-strings, and turbans or headbands, red in * 
the case of those who had personally killed enemies, recognized insignia of 
the “nobility.” They fought slave-raiding wars with long narrow shields, 
blowguns and in some places metal-tipped arrows, and the broad-bladed, 
single-edged baladaw but not the wavy kris or kampilan. They took omens 
with crocodile teeth, rocking boats, and the limokon bird, made use of 
charms and poisons, and were reputed to be able to kill with a breath. Half- 
slaves worked for their masters half time, shamans were either male or 
female baylan, and deified ancestor spirits were called humalagar. They had 
neither public idols nor temples — though more than one missionary thought 
that chiefs’ large houses with family altars were the equivalent; and in 
Himologan (Cagayan de Oro), a kind of miniature house called diwataha 
for offering sacrifices stood in the middle of a communal dwelling which 
housed the entire village. Little idols of wood or stone — which friar ac- 
counts always described as diwata, “black and ugly” — were small enough to 
be carried out to planting rituals. The dead were buried in coffins placed 
in caves with thin plates of gold over their mouth and eyes, after a mourn- 
ing period during which people avoided all sites that had been frequented 
by the deceased. 

'I he Spaniards later called the Pacific coast of Mindanao, Caraga, after 
a town of that name. Along this coast they got a generally hostile reception 
their first three expeditions lost three boats, two ship’s anchors, and dozen 
of lives. When one boatload was massacred near Bislig in 1520, dcserte 
Sebastian de Puerto was captured by Chief Katunaw of Lianga Bay. Sebastiai 


i act 


Mindanao 


later described them as living off the sea by “raid and trade,” a people who 
“weigh anchor like Arabs [pulling up stakes] since they move their towns 
from one place to another” (Granado 1529, 472). But they were also 
farmers who sold rice in Cebu (Sebastian himself was taken along on such 
a voyage), and wove a fine burlap out of tree bark. Katunaw had actually 
captured Sebastian while making a raid on his own enemies. He had a 
daughter married to a chief in Baganga Bay, where his Spanish slave finally 
escaped. 

Early in the next century, the Spaniards tried to stop Caraga raids on 
their Leyte subjects by attacking them at Tandag,. eventually freeing some 
fifteen hundred Christians, and building a permanent fort. Four years 
later, the Caragans surrounded and besieged it, a daring attack which no 
doubt contributed to a reputation they shared with Boholanos and 
Samarenos as vaUentes y tirdnicos, an expression of begrudging Spanish 
praise. A single chief by the name of Inuk was reputed to have captured two 
thousand slaves himself. He was said to have been feared and respected by 
. datus all up and down the coast both before and after his submission to 
colonial authority. Whatever the true number of his slaves, they were 
presumably employed in extracting or producing his trade goods, for Fray 
Juan de la Madre de Dios said that at the time of Inuk’s conversion, "he 
permitted trade between his countrymen and the Spaniards” (Jesus 
|.1681, 33). 

Father Alcina and the authors of the Visayan dictionaries always referred 
to slave raiding and human sacrifice in the past tense, but pioneer Recol- 
lect missionaries observed these practices in full vigor. Expeditions were 
launched in an apprehensive flurry of tabus, omens, and invocations: 
Octopus and squid were forbidden as food lest the raiders be blinded 
because these creatures discharge a cloud ol blinding black ink. Fish 
caught by nets were likewise not eaten by raiders for fear of being caught 
themselves. Nor could a light be struck for cooking during the voyage. 
Meanwhile, villagers at home observed a seven-clay holiday. Before depar- 
ture, omens were carefully noted, prayers were addressed to war deities, 
and once underway, dangerous promontories were invoked with mournful 
chants. 

Upon the victorious return of raiders, the best of the captives was 
sacrificed to the c aptain’s humalagar, just as the first fruits of the field were 
offered up at harvest time. In some places, it was said, a second victim was 
dispatched in the victor’s house by his wife. And men who had taken at least 
seven lives were qualified to wear distinctive turbans and (.-strings of 
striped material. 


163 


■STT’ 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


!»• 





Mindanao 


m 






Butuan 

Butuan was a trading port with an illustrious past. It had direct contac 
with Champa in the tenth century. It was also the first Philippine “state 
establish diplomatic relations with China: On 3 October 1003, its envo 
Liyihan and Jiaminan petitioned the Chinese emperor in Peking for tri 
ute status — which simply meant ceremonial recognition of the emperor 
the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, a requirement for legal trade. It was 
serviced from the south by a far-ranging boat people known as Sama 
or Samal, who were centered on Basilan Strait but had outposts as far 
north as Capul Island off Samar, where traces of their language survive to 1 1 
this day. riHal 

Butuanon themselves migrated south to settle in Sulu, where they be- 
came known as “people of the current” — Taosug — established a major ^ 
exchange port on the Moluccan spice route, and were recognized by China 
in 1417. As late as 1600, the sultan of Sulu, Batara Shah Tengah, appears 
to have been an actual native of Butuan. But Butuan was gradually over- iHK: 
shadowed by Borneo’s commercial expansion into Mindoro and Luzon, 
and eventually became a Bornean dependency itself. By the time of Span- *j 
ish advent, its former glory was too long forgotten for the Spaniards to 
learn about it. 

Butuan stands at the mouth of the great Agusan River: behind it lies a |§j§ 
well-watered valley, abundant wild game and forest products, and rich 
deposits of gold. Its reputation was still popular enough to attract the 
Spaniards on their arrival in 1565: Villalobos had been told that it was a % 
port of call for Chinese junks. Legazpi meant to go there “since,” as his f 
chronicler wrote, “it is a trading town, it was impossible that it would not I 
have somebody who understood Malay because that is the most common Jj 
in these parts” (Anon. 1565, 461); however, he was blown off course to --j 
Bohol. 

- 

Limasawa was a Butuan satellite strategically placed to control passage j 
between the Pacific coast and the central Visayas. Its ruler was the brother 
of the rajah of Butuan, and they were related to the royal family of Cebu. 
Limasawa had been devastated by aTernatan-Portuguese raid in 1562, and 
when the Spaniards later met its ruler’s heir in Butuan, he was still in 
mourning. 

Butuan’s reputation did not include “piracy,” however: trading ports do 
not usually make slave raids even though they deal in slaves. This was also 
true of Cebu, Maguindanao, and Jolo — and, ironically, Spanish Manila, 
wherfe Portuguese delivered thousands of African, Indian, and Moluccan 






slaves in the seventeenth century' for resale into Mexico. That is no doubt 
w hy Fray Luis de Jesus (1681, 34) said the Butuanon were “similar to the 
ragans in their customs and rituals, but are not so difficult to deal with.” 


Dapitan 

Mindanao Visayans farther west were mainly Boholanos who migrated 
there following the Moluccan raid. Eight Ternatan vessels with Portuguese 
allies aboard had anchored at Panglao-Dawis under guise of friendly trade, 
and then treacherously attacked, killing ruling datu Sarripada Dailisan, 
plundering and taking captives. They then proceeded to Limasawa for 
more of the same — where they lost four “white men with beards and 
strange clothes” — and on their way home, razed all the settlements on 
Camiguin, then stopped off in Maguindanao to sell Dailisan’s lady for 90 
gold taels. 

Even allowing for exaggeration, the statistics suggest the size and wealth 
of the Bohol community — three hundred killed, including nine chiefs; five 
hundred men, women, and children captured; and three hundred taels of 
gold and two hundred gongs seized along with clothing and merchandise, 
leaving one thousand families to subsequently cross over to Dapitan. The 
fact that the Spaniards found Limasawa deserted three years later also 
illustrates the Visayan custom of abandoning sites associated with death 
and misfortune. 

The exodus was led by Dailisan’s brother, Pagbuaya, with five hundred 
slaves. He settled on an easily defended promontory which commanded 
the western entrance to the Bohol Sea, and from there he proceeded to 
subjugate the Suban-on populadon in both directions, enlisting the aid of 
Sama marines known as Lutaya or Lutaw (“to float”) who had been 
dependents of Maguindanao or Sulu princes. He so quickly allied himself 
with the Spaniards on their arrival that his descendants always believed that 
it was he who had introduced Legazpi to his vassal Si Katuna of Bohol. He 
founded a line of encomenderos whose Lorenzo Kabiling in 1718 was still 
collecting 10 reales for every pagan Suban-on subjugated. 

Like the Caragans, the valor and ferocity of the Boholanos of Dapitan 
became a Spanish legend once it was coopted on Spain’s behalf The great 
Jesuit authority on Mindanao, Francisco Combes (1667, 37), said that his 
contemporary, Pagbuaya ’s great-grandson Pedro, went to war at the age ol 
seven and before he was thirty had personally killed in hand-to-hand 
combat more than two hundred “enemies of Cod and out king.” 


164 




MINDANAO AND LUZON 


*L 


Thus, at die time of Spanish advent, the Suban-on were already subje 
of maritime peoples, their chiefs being clients of Boholano overlords i 
the north of the Zamboanga Peninsula, and Sama Lutaw on the soui 
They were valued as suppliers of forest products like beeswax, cinnamo 
civet, deerskin, dyewood, rattan, and resin — as well as live civet cats ft 
export to Japan, caged. 

On their own turf, however, Suban-on were a warlike people, givir 
precedence to red-turbaned chiefs who had killed other persons, oft 
paying their wergeld afterwards. Taking their name from suba (river), they 
lived in small settlements scattered along the banks of streams: PigafettaJ 
was rowed upstream from Quipit for more than two hours to reach Chief! 
Kalanaw’s house. 

Sixteenth-century Spaniards learned little about them, and even less! 
about the Maranaw on the shore of Lake Lanao, and nothing at all about 
the various Manobo tribes spread from Agusan to South Cotabato. The 
forbidding rain forests and Olympian heights of Mount Apo which they 
inhabited were always intimidating to coastal dwellers, and were peopled ; 
with ogres and monsters by lowland imagination. Pigafetta was told about 
a shaggy tribe called Benaian — perhaps bciyani — who lived on human 
hearts, and Recollect friars described the tekma — tall, ugly forest denizens !j 
with feet turned backwards, so frightening that simply to glimpse one left 
a man permanently cross-eyed. In actual fact, however, these ancient- 
Mindanao cultures as recalled by their own bards live on in an epi|| 
literature which has survived to be recorded by modern scholars. 


Epic Culture 


Mindanao epics are long narrative poems which celebrate the fabulous m 
deeds of culture heroes in apocryphal wars between imaginary kingdoms, 
often for the purpose of rescuing or abducting beautiful women. They are 
an aristocratic form of literature, and so do not give a full picture of the 
cultures in which they were composed. Their protagonists are all members 
of the ruling class — datus or limuay — sometimes accompanied by lieu ten- " 
ants and always attended by slaves and servants, but there are no common- 
ers or farmers. Like the Visayan siday or kandu., they are sung or chanted 
during public celebrations like important weddings, and last all night 
through. 

Folklorists attribute great age to them, but whatever the age of the hero- 
tales themselves, the texts as recorded must have taken form in historic, or 




Mindanao 


even modern, times. Muslims appear as salip or sarip (that is, Malay-Arabic 
sharif, noble); an alien datu is mentioned in Bukidnon who collects tribute 
(buwis); and there is a smattering of Spanish terms like pandyo (that is, pano, 
kerchief) in most. Moreover, in various versions of the Ulahingan, the 
action is set in motion by some hero killing an oppressive Moro or Spanish 
overlord— or even an American schoolteacher. The Darangan of the pres- 
ently Muslim Maranaw, on the other hand, appears to be pre-Islamic, 
though it does refer to a sea people called Samar. 

The epic hero has brilliant gold teeth and lips red from betel nut, but 
is not tattooed, and wears so many rings on his fingers thdt when he reaches 
for another quid, it seems as if “they were dipped in sea foam” (Manuel 
1958, 328-29) . His hair is tightly coiled into four or eight braids, and it is 
considered a great humiliation for them to come loose in a fight. He wears 
trousers — tight in the case of bachelors, loose for married men, and red for 
managku or bahani braves who have slain a specific number of foes— or, in 
some places, the malong tube skirt. The monsala, a kerchief almost a meter 
square and worked with designs of arcane meaning, is worn capelike over 
one shoulder. All this finely, together with padded armor or bamboo 
breastplates, is endowed with magical power when ritually donned before 
going into battle, especially the monsala which can even restore the dead 
B to life. A man should be armed with a minimum offeree weapons: one for 
slashing— the kris or kampilan— and two for piercing— fee dagger and the 
spear. Like his shield, they are decorated wife little hawk’s bells to accom- 
pany his war dance, and are given the names of animals, hardwoods, or 
defeated enemies. 

Musical instruments in the epics include fee usual Visayan flutes, gongs, 
| lutes, zithers, and Jew’s harps, but also a long closed flute (pondag) with six 
I holes (only four of which are fingered) and the sigitan, a bamboo zither 
closed at one end with a hole in the other which is stopped with one hand 
while fee other strikes the strings with a stick instead of plucking them. The 
royal sport is sipa, a game in which a rattan ball is kept in the air by kicking 
with the side of the foot— only in the epics is the ball iron or, in the case 
of Prince Bantugan in fee Darangan, a huge boulder. Large torogan houses 
serve as a datu’s palace, administrative and ceremonial center, but may also 
house an entire community if the settlement contains only one barangay. 
Occupants sit under mosquito nets ( kolambo ), guests on a raised platform, 
and marriageable daughters are secluded in towers called lamin in Maranaw, 
7 pintawan in Suban-on — or pinto-an , a lower one for a younger daughter. 

> Much epic culture would have been familiar to any sixteenth-century 
Visayan. Batara is a title; basal is a drumstick for playing gongs; band), are 


167 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


'lit 


heirloom porcelain jars; and kamahi is a gold chain with lY-shaped links. 
Swiddens arc started on the appearance of certain constellations — like 
Ylolo polo (Ursa Minor). Castor pangasi'xs rice wine, sipped through straw; 
and heroes are expected to have heroic capacity for it — like Chief Sandayi 
who drains eight jars. 

A sixteenth-century Visayan would also have understood the religion c 
the epics. Priests are baylan, shamans subject to spirit possession, and diwala 
are heavenly deities, spirits, or supernatural beings in general; but die word 
humalagarf or deified ancestors does not appear. Rather, heroes themselves 
are apt to be demigods, offspring of a deity and a mortal. The sky has seven, 
eight, nine, or even ten levels, and the underworld is also of many layers, 
one of which is the land of the dead. Anito are more accessible spirits who 
can be invoked in case of illness, while busaw are frightening, malevolent 
demons. War deities are prominent among highlanders: there are 
Mandangan, the Manobo war god, and many other lesser Mandangans to 
take individual bahani under their protection. Gabon and Busung are 
guarantors of proper social behavior; so that busungan is to become bloated 
or wasted away for transgressing accepted norms. Plants, animals, and 
forces of nature with economic significance all have their protector spirits: 
thus, for example, hunters or honey gatherers place offerings at the foot 
of trees inhabited by the ones in charge of bees or wild game. Moreover, 


most Manobo groups consider one deity superior to all others — for exam- 
ple, Manama or Kerenen — though too remote to be approached directly 
or to require sacrifices. 

The most extensive pantheon is found in the Ulahingan, and it is 
hierarchically structured. The six hatulusan in charge of the terrestrial 
world, for instance, outrank the imbayabay, who are just above the lowest 
class, the busaw. There is also an additional paradise for the pure and 
righteous, surugu- — no doubt Malay-Sanskrit surga, “abode of the blessed.” 
Each of the four cardinal compass points has its own deity. Then there is 
the sea goddess Alimugkat who is a mermaid; and the diwata of law and 
justice whose name is Kalcum — that is, Malay-Arabic hukum (judgment). 
One of the names given to the Supreme Being is Alataala, presumably from 
Arabic “Allah ta ala [Allah be exalted].” Like Allah, he is endowed with a 
list of names which describe his attributes: Midlimbag, the creator; Misuara, 
the giver of languages; or Mendayawi, the one who inspires right speech 
and conduct. These acculturative borrowings may be explained by the fact 
that the Ulahingan is the epic of the Manobo communities most exposed 
to prestigious, or even superordinate, Muslim cultures. Conversely, the 



1 


Mindanao 


absence of any such Supreme Being in the Maranaw epic suggests that the 
ales of the Darangan cycle antedate the coming of Islam. 

A sociological feature of Philippine epics not found in Indo-European 
jterature of the same genre is polygynous bilateral kinship. Aristocrats 
a ve more than one wife, and descent is reckoned in both male and female 
jnes, producing a vast network of relationships. (In the Guman of 
Pumalinao, for example, a lady declines a gallant’s offer to be her cham- 
pion simply because they are not related.) The first wife ranks all the 
others: she is titled, and it is her marriage negotiations and wedding 
celebrations which are described in detail. (In the TuWaang cycle, for 
instance, the bride’s family prepares savakan, bundles of rice and chickens, 
which must be redeemed by the groom at a higher value in slaves and 
gongs.) Furthermore, it is the first wife’s father who is the object of special 
deference: a man can become sick merely by treading on his father-in-law’s 
mat. Moreover, genealogies indicate that most of the protagonists are 
related by blood or marriage, often including those in enemy kingdoms. 
So, too, in Nelendangan (paradise), all the immortals are related to one 
another. 

Another characteristic of the epic aristocracy is a concern for proper 
precedence in interpersonal relations. People are not addressed by their 
names, but by polite terms which indicate rank. A man may address 
another as Laggi, or Bela if he is of the same or slightly higher rank, but as 
Bamga (Master) if clearly a superior. Datus and their wives are addressed 
as Aru or Apu, married women as Bai (Lady or Madame). Older siblings 
use terms of affection for younger siblings, who in turn call older brothers 
and sisters by terms of deference. Two friends, or even a man and wife, 
many take a common pet name — for example, a fruit or flower they both 
like, or an experience they shared. 

In the courtly language of the Darangan, all the characters are referred 
to by poetic euphemisms: one Bembaran datu is called Dinaradiya, “Datu 
with a thunderous voice,” and Princess Dalomabi Mindaya is known as Aya 
Paganay Bai, “First among all the ladies.” No less courtly are these aristo- 
crats’ manners: they turn politely to one side when addressing each other, 
are seated according to rank, and arrive and depart with decorum. As a 
Suban-on epic says, “One is not a datu if he leaves abruptly, without 
permission” (Ochotorena 1981, 394). Indeed, the epic hero treats even 
slaves and underlings with courtesy: the first ruler of Bembaran instructs 
his daughter, “When visitors come, entertain them, even if they are slaves” 
(Coronel 1983, 29). 


169 



MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Sarangani Island 



Mindanao 


purpose, and could penetrate Spanish breastplates. The archers were good 
I piarksmen, and killed or wounded eight of the invaders. But Spanish 
The Spaniards occupied Sarangani Island for seven months in firearms — which the Saranganis called hit an — soon turned the tide of 

When they arrived, they found almost a hundred boats along the shore; j battle, and the defenders were driven hack into the hills and pursued, and 
trading with men and women, and they themselves purchased coconuts^ ^eventually evacuated the whole island, fleeing to nearby Candigar (Balm 
fruit, goats, hens, and pigs with tradewares. The largest vessels were tradijj { Island) or the coast of Mindanao. 26 

tional plank-built, edge-pegged karakoas with outriggers and quarter rudl j The men wore large G-strings which hung down over their thighs, and 
ders, but with one slight variation in construction: the pegs were placed ir( j short jackets which left their midriffs bare, with handsomely decorated 
sets of three about four fingers apart with 40 centimeters between each set§| f sleeves. The ordinary textile was “woven palms probably ab.ua but 
There was a protected anchorage where smaller vessels tied up, and locafjj jpthere was also cotton for those who could alford it. Lanioi wata s son 
interpreters called giiibasa were available to communicate directly with- | Babuti, a large man with powerful muscles, wore cotton, and his beautiful 
Malay speakers among the Spaniards. Coconut palms grew all along the light-skinned wife was dressed in silk. I he Spaniards looted gold beads, 
shore and up the hills on both sides of town as far as the eye could see: when J l collars, bracelets, and diadems, as well as a piece of gold fabric woven like 
they finally abandoned the island, the Spaniards claimed to have cut more j chain mail, all of which was a mere sampling of the wealth in gold and 
than thirty thousand for food. Under these trees all houses were built, both i porcelain that was carried off by die manloads during the evacuation. None 
large and small standing on six to ten tall posts, with domestic animals and 0 f this gold was mined on the island: it was all obtained through trade. So, 


fowl penned underneath at night, and reached by ladders which could be 
drawn up for security. The large ones — like senior chief Lamorwata’s 


Lit ctvvil up 1W1 A lit AClAgt U11LO xjuiaavi nuui JU/lOA w O , 1 ^ ^ 

which was located on a commanding crest — were solidly constructed, with (that is, Cotabato) . But when evacuees returned to parley with the invader s 
IJxri nnr niTjrfprs rlivirl^rl in fn rnnms and rnmnarfments. bill “where housed if and make blood comoacts. thev were careful to wear no more gold on their 


living quarters divided into rooms and compartments, but “where houses 
in Spain have windows, these have doors” (Anon, n.d.c, 69). 

The size of the town is not given, but the second largest settlement 
the island, Tolula or Patuko on the northwest coast, was estimated to j 
contain five hundred dwellings, not counting the outbuildings in the \ 
surrounding gardens and orchards. In both settlements the Spaniards 
found good provisions of rice, millet, and sago cakes. 25 

When the Spaniards attempted to land the morning after they arrived, | 
they found that a stockade of palm tree trunks had been constructed along 
the beach, supplemented by boats drawn up on the shore and filled with i 
sand. The Saranganis came out to battle to the sound of war drums off 
different sizes made of tree trunks — “sopranos, tenors and counterten-jf 
ors” — and gongs called sino, shouting and threatening in a kind of dance! 
step with one leg raised, covered by body-length shields and brandishing jj 
swords overhead. ( These sino were played while suspended by being struck^ 
on the boss with a padded drumstick.) They were armed with cutlasses and 
bows and arrows, and wore body armor of quilted cotton or wild boar hide, 
with wooden helmets covered with octopus skin. The shields and helmets 
had waving plumes on top, and both shields and armor were painted in 
bright colors. Their ar rows had points of steel or fish bones which wcr<| 
poisoned, supposedly by having been stung by scorpions kept for that 


| too> a considerable array of aromatics like ambergris, benzoin, civet, musk, 
"* an d storax came from Chinese traders calling at the port of Maguindanao 



and make blood compacts, they were careful to wear no more gold on their 
persons than some thin earrings. 

I The Saranganis worshiped natural objects like the sun or the first bird 
they saw in flight in die morning, and also their deceased parents, whose 
embalmed corpses they placed upright in a kind of niches. These were 
opened at the time of agricultural rites or when going to war or long sea 
voyages, with the burning of much incense and offerings of flowers and 
food. Saranganis also kept enemy heads hanging by the bail in then 
houses, their number determining a family’s social standing and claims to 
nobility. These had generally been taken by young men who, when arrang- 
ing their marriages, bound themselves to present a certain number to tbeii 
father-in-law before being given their brides. It. was a custom leminiscent 
I of that of Visayan families, which made it necessary to settle, during bride- 
price negotiations, the number of lives to be taken as part of a father-in- 

law’s future mourning requirements. 

The people of Sarangani and Candigar had their origins in Sangir Island 
to the south, halfway between Mindanao and the Molu< cas, whose lan- 
guage is still spoken in both islands. Father Combes in the seventeenth 
century even called Sarangani, Sangir. 'They occupied the strategic point 
where the northbound spice route veered westward to Suhi, Borneo, and 
Malacca, and bad direct trade connections with Maguindanao. There 



f; 







T 1f\ 


171 


■ 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Candigar chiefs delivered a dozen small pieces of Spanish artillery, inch 
ing one 450-kilo bronze cannon, which the Saranganis had managed 
steal when they were taken ashore at Patuko to avoid typhoon loss. Wh 
the Spaniards mounted a rescue mission from Tidore the next year 
recover crewmen stranded in Leyte and Samar, Descalante Alvarado 
able to hire a guide in Candigar who was a Chrisdan. The presence o 
nadve Christian no doubt reflected Portuguese proselytizing efforts duri 
the preceding decade, when two Morotai chiefs had been bapdzed ai 
another two in Makassar, as well as six in Mindanao. “And in the sar 
island,” historian Joao de Barros (1628, 592) wrote, “the King of Butuano 
became Christian.” (Some of their children were put in school in Ternate.) 

The trade route along the north side of the Celebes Sea is nicely 
illustrated by the experience of Spaniards who were taken slaves in those 
waters. When the Santa Maria del Pairal ran aground on Sangir in 1526, her 
survivors were all seized by the Sangirese, and five were sold to a boat ffotfjj 
Maguindanao, where they were in turn purchased by traders from Luzon. | 
Two others were ransomed off by Commander Saavedra two years later J 
from some hard-bargaining chiefs on Sarangani. Yet another three were j 
still in Maguindanao when the local ruler — probably the celebrated 
Kabungsuwan himself — notified them that the Portuguese in Malacca had 
requested the sultan of Brunei to intervene on their behalf and send them 
there, and that he would provide them transportation if they wished to go, 
as in fact he did. 

When the Dutch reached the area early in the seventeenth century, the 
ranking Sarangani chief was Mangada of Candigar. He was the son of Datu 
Buisan of Davao, and was married into the royal family of Sangir. He was 
also related to the ruling family of Buayan, a chiefdom in the upper Pulangigj 
Valley whose only free access to the sea was through Buayan Bay — known 
to the Spaniards as Buran or Berian, and now as Sarangani Bay. Mangada 
once acted as Buayan representative to the Dutch in Ternate, and three of 
his sons became Buayan datus. But in 1626 he was driven out of Sarangani 
by a devastating Maguindanao attack, transferring his seat to Cammarianj 
on the opposite shore, and eventually to Sangir, where he was regarded by 
the Dutch as the Sangirese “King of Kandahar” (Candigar), and where he 
finally made peace by marrying one of his daughters to a Maguindanao _ 
sultan. The people of Sarangani had by this time embraced Islam: their 
second- and third-ranking chiefs were now being called by the Malay 
Muslim titles ol Gugugu and Rajah l-aut respectively. It was these officials 
to whom upper-class litigants appealed for justice, rather than to the two 
hukitm (judges) who tried ordinary civil and criminal cases. 


1 ^70 


Mindanao 


The cause of the Sarangani-Maguindanao conflict had been the struggle 
for control over the coastal peoples who supplied the forest products whit'll 
W cre major items of both domestic and foreign trade, especially wax. They 
were also a source of rice, and the Spaniards had a chance to test both the 
fertility of their fields and the valor with which they defended them. For 
three months during the growing season of 1543, Villalobos’s men occu- 
pied almost 40 hectares of rain-fed pond fields along the coast some 10 
kilometers west of Sarangani Bay, under almost constant attack by the 
owners, who lived in villages on higher ground. By the time the Spaniards 
finally brought in the harvest, they had lost fifty lives to native bowmen who, 
as they said, “are good marksmen in the extreme” (Anon, n.d.b, 106). But 
already in the sixteenth century, these coast dwellers were withdrawing into 
the interior in the face of escalating skive raids, where many of then- 
descendants today live on the slopes of Mount Apo. 


Maguindanao 

The Spaniards reported three Mindanao chiefdoms strong enough to 
dominate their neighbors in the middle of the sixteenth century— 
■ Maguindanao, Butuan, and Bisaya. Butuan was considered the wealthiest 
V because of its gold, while Bisaya was considered the least of the three, 
though it is not clear where this Bisaya was. Earlier expeditions had called 
the east coast by this name (Vizaya), but Villalobos thought it was Davao 
Gulf — perhaps an ally or vassal of Buayan in the interior. In least, in the 
belief that it was one of the power centers, he avoided entering the gulf, 
hoping to meet less resistance on some smaller island like Sarangani. 
Maguindanao was the most powerful and best known: its name, in the form 
of Mindanao, was applied to the whole island by the Portuguese, Spanish, 
|| and Dutch alike, and was held in considerable respect in islands to the 
; south. When the Spaniards invaded Cabiao near Sangir a month after they 
had been driven from the Maguindanao river mouth, its taunting defend- 
ers — “for greater insult” — told them to go to Saripara, that is, the lord ol 
Maguindanao. (See fig. 7, an area map of Maguindanao.) 

Maguindanao, from danaio (lake), meant “to he inundated, and re- 
ferred to the low-lying delta of the Pulangi River with its two mouths, the 
location of the modern city of Cotabalo. The valley’s greatest natural 
resources, however, were to be found in the upstream region around 
Buayan — forest products as well as mountain tribes who could he im- 
pressed or enslaved to gather these, or themselves be seized and sold in 



" 11 
" '-it 



173 




Fig. 7. A map of Maguindanao 

(From Thomas Forrest’s illustrated Voyage to New Guinea and 


Mindanao 


f s lave markets. Competition between royal claimants in the upper and lower 
(t valley — sa raya and sa ilud — were endemic and fluctuated between open 
H hostility and marriage alliances, with supporting chiefs shifting allegiance 
tf as political expediency recommended. At the end of the century, the 
1; Spaniards recognized Rajah Sirongan of Buayan as the paramount chief in 
jjlthe valley, and fifty years later still reckoned his followers as the majority 

I population. But direct Buayan access to the sea could be inhibited by 
Maguindanao chiefs at the river mouth, and there the future Sultan 
Kudarat successfully expanded his base of support with alliances and 
conquests among coastal chiefs. These included llamm sea warriors along 
Ulana Bay, who were kinsmen of the Maranaw on Lake Lanao, and far- 
ranging Samal Lutaya traders in contact with Malay cultural centers, as well 
as Samal boat-dwelling fishermen called Badjaw. In fact, Maguindanao 
supremacy depended on the support of these Samal seafarers. As Father 
Combes (1667, 31) wrote of them, 

he who can assemble the most from this nation is considered the most powerful and 
is most feared, for having the means to infest the seas and coasts, taking captives and 
robbing, and controlling the channels and passages necessary for commerce with the 
other islands. 

Unlike the chiefdoms that the Spaniards encountered in the Visayas, 
Maguindanao had a centralized government modeled on Muslim states to 
jj the south. Its ruler was not merely the chiefest among a congeries of 
competing datus — primus inter pares — but a recognized sultan who inher- 

i ited his position by direct descent in a royal bloodline, and as such could 
claim the allegiance of all other chiefs. But as in odier Filipino chiefdoms, 
Jj|he directly governed only his own followers: others were governed by their 
local datus, chiefs who were themselves technically subordinate to him. 
Because of these separate foci of power, such a sultanate is sometimes 
called a segmentary state. However, only the sultan could declare war or 
give permission for others to do so, make decisions affecting the whole 
sultanate, or represent it in dealing with foreign states. Kudarat, for exam- 
ple, received trade missions from the Dutch and military aid from Ternate, 
and made a treaty with the Spanish, and an alliance with Sulu by marrying 
the daughter of Rajah Bongsu. 

The sultan’s court was convoked with ostentation and ceremony. He 
himself sat enthroned on a raised dais with his full entourage seated on the 
floor; foreign emissaries remained on their feet to present official commu- 
nications in lacquered boxes. Small brass swivel guns (lantaka) were con- 




MINDANAO AND LUZON 




spicuously displayed, not so much as weapons but as symbols of power ? 
authority. Gold ornaments were restricted to the royalty and those wh 
the sultan favored with handsome gifts like kris with jeweled gold hilts ; 
gold-encrusted sheaths. 

Members of the royal family and the court were distinguished b, 
variety of honorific titles. The general designation for a prince of the blood 
was katchil, while the crown prince was called Rajah Muda (Young Lord); 
gug'u was a prime minister; and Rajah Laut (Sea Lord) was the third- 
ranking dignitary — an office which would later be called Kapitan Laut affrllS 
the arrival of Europeans. Oranghaya (rich people) formed a kind of nobilitlj 
with the right and means to engage in trade, and pandita were wise men; 
knowledgeable in Islamic law and customs. The sultan was also advised in 
his decisions— and often inhibited— by a council of elders callecjj 
the Bichara Atas, who represented traditional customs and sources of 
power. 

Maguindanao ruled over a great many pagan peoples, and even die J 
celebrated Kudarat was reported to have sacrificed three of his household 
slaves during a terrifying volcanic eruption. But the Maguindanao court 
was clearly a Muslim court. It included members who could speak Arabic, 
and was frequent host to visiting pandita from abroad, and even slaves were jj 
permitted to chide royal masters who were inattentive to their personal J| 
prayers. The sultan himself was expected to be well versed in matters of the 
faidi, an exemplar of its precepts, and scrupulous in observing its rites, j 
They could all speak Malay (and Kudarat also knew the language of his =j 
Ternatan allies) and more than one was able to engage Spanish missionar- i 
ies in religious debate. 

They also behaved with the dignity and magnanimity befitting their 
position. Kudarat’s father, Buisan, fed captured Jesuit Melchor Hurtado 
from his own board in 1603, and Sirongan of Buayan billeted him in a | 
separate house with slaves to serve him, and his wife rendered him a j 
thirteen-course farewell banquet when he was ransomed, with apologies J 
for the lack of pork and wine. 

According to traditional genealogies (tarsila), the Maguindanao sultan- 
ate was founded by a royal prince from Johore named Muhammad 
Kabungsmvan, whose father was an Arab sharif, that is, a descendant of the 
Prophet Muhammad. The sultanate of ‘Johore was founded in 1527 by the 
son of the last sultan of Malacca, who had been driven out of that great 
Asian emporium by the Portuguese in 1511. Kabungsuwan would presum 
ably have arrived between or after these dales, and it was his sou Makaalang 
whom the Spaniards knew as Saripara. The royal families not only of 




Mindanao 


Maguindanao but also of Marawi and Buayan all claim descent 
from him. 

If Maguindanao is the Mindolang of Chinese records, as seems likely, it 
W as already a Chinese port of call in the fourteenth century. Later in 1420 
Chinese emissary established diplomatic and trade relations with nearby 
Kumalarang — that is, he attracted a local ruler to travel to Peking to 
formalize what the imperial court called tributary status. The Pulangi river 
port would therefore have offered commercial opportunities for the scion 
of a displaced Malaccan dynasty. Indeed, early in the Spanish regime, it was 
a regular port of call on a trade route that passed down the western littoral 
of the archipelago through Mindoro, Panay, Dapitan, and Sulu to the 
Moluccas. 


J| The island and archipelago of Sulu were not, of course, part of Mindanao, 
! but they were subject to the same Malay Muslim influence which extended 
to the neighboring shores of that island. Like Maguindanao, Sulu had a 
centralized sultanate, and like Maguindanao, too, its access to overseas 
commerce depended on Sama Lutaw supporters. But the dominant people 
were the Taosug — “people of the current” — who, to judge from the simi- 
larity of languages, had their origin in Butuan. Indeed, Sultan Barafa Shah 
Tengah at the end of the sixteenth century was said to have been a 
Butuanon himself. 


We have no sixteenth-century descriptions of Sulu culture. However, 
when Father Combes (1667, 44) visited the royal court in Jolo on a 
diplomatic mission in the seventeenth, he later described their rice cakes 
with scorn (‘The durian sauce tastes like turpentine”) and their unortho- 
dox Islamic behavior at length: outside the capital, he said, they partici- 
pated in drunken revels. He also wrote that they attributed miracles to the 
relics of their First Teacher, a Muslim pioneer whose venerated tomb made 
Jolo “the Mecca of this archipelago.” 

y He reported that thievery was punished by amputation of fingers or 
hands, and sodomy or incest by drowning, and called the warlike people of 
the interior, Ximbanaos, from gimba, war drum. He also made the signifi- 
cant observation that overlords referred to their vassals as slaves, though 
they may well have been chiefs with their own followings. One of these, for 
example, refused to release a Christian captive for the ransom price agreed 
upon by the sultan and a Jesuit missionary. Combes even conc luded that 



177 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



1 

W?' 


there were only two social classes — chiefs and slaves — not noting that 
overlords (tuam or orangkaya) were of different ethnic groups from th 
vassals — for example, Joloanos (that is, Taosug) dominating Lit Law, 
Lutaw dominating Suban-on and Manobo tribal chieftains. 

flic sultanate of Sulu was founded in the second half of the fifteen 
century by an Arab sharif named Abu Bakr, whose tombstone gives his 
titles as Paduka Maharasi Maulana al-Sultan Sharif ul-Hashim. He marrie 
into the local nobility, and his father-in-law was a Sumatran prince who had § 
also married a Sulu princess. Sulu, however, had already been recognized 
as a Chinese tributary state when three Sulu rulers presented themselves a|jj 
court in 1417, and one, Paduka Batara, was given an imperial jade seal | 
recognizing him as senior to the other two. Such, status was usually granted | 
to petitioners who were perceived as potential sources of trade goods. That j 
Sulu qualified is indicated by the non-Sulu products they were able to 
present during a second mission in 1421 — brazilwood, black pepper, cubebs, 
tin, and more than one kind of camphor. Sulu’s own pearls were legendary 
for their size and quality. Paduka Batara’s younger brother, Paduka Suli,| 
presented one recorded in Chinese annals as weighing 7 ounces; Father i 
Combes (1667, 73) saw one in a sword hilt which he said was “the size of 
a musket ball”; Magellan’s chronicler Pigafetta said that the sultan of 
Brunei had two of them — which he did not see — as big as hen’s eggs. 

Sulu and Borneo were rivals, their royal families were intermarried, and 
in the sixteenth century, Brunei was claiming sovereignty over Jolo. The 
famous Sultan Bulkeiah, who was known to Pigafetta as Saripara, was 1 
married to a Sulu princess named Putri Laila Men Chanei, and personally 
told the Italian chronicler that he had once attacked Sulu with 500 war- 
ships. That he may actually have ruled in Sulu is suggested by a Sulu 
tradition that marks him as their fourth sultan, Amir ul-Umara. When a 
Sulu ruler married the sultan’s daughter in Brunei in 1535, a Portuguese 
officer who was present surmised that the bridegroom was the sultan’s 
vassal. The seventh sultan of Sulu, Pangiran Buddiman, was married to 
Bulkeiah’s granddaughter, the sister of Sultan Saif ur-Rejel; when Pangiran 
Buddiman joined Saif ur-Rejel in resisting a Spanish attack, the Spaniards 
thought that Buddiman was a Bornean himself. Brunei tradition identifies 
Bulkeiah as folk hero Nakhoda Ragam, believed to have conquered the 
Philippines in an expedition during which he gave the name of one island 
to each of a ganta of pepper seeds. In the popular Bornean epic, Sha’er 
Awang Semaun, these conquests are all made by head-taking hero Semautt| 
and produce tribute from Sulu and Manila in the form of Chinese 
porcelain. 


CHAPTER 10 


I 


Bikolandia 


Bikolandia— what the Spaniards called El Bicol — includes the mod- 
ern provinces of Sorsogon, Albay, Camarines Sur, and Camarines Norte. 
The area was first reported as Ibalon from the old name of Sorsogon Bay. 
More particularly, the well-populated valley of the Bikol River in what is 
now Camarines Sur was reported as Camarines (Kamalignon) , derived 
horn Kamalig (now Naga City) . Camarines was no doubt given popular 
currency by the fact that the Bikol kamalig (boat shed) was commonly 
called a camarin by the Spaniards. It was this fertile river valley which 
watered the fields of irrigated rice which were a distinctive feature of Bikol 
culture, and supported communities of four hundred to eight hundred 
households. 27 

The Bikolanos themselves were described as warriors, traders, gold- 
smiths, and almost the same as Visayans. They defended themselves with 
such spirit, Father Martin de Rada (1574, 181) said, “that more people have 
died in that land than in any other part which has been conquered.” They 
traded by both land and sea, and their goldsmiths traveled from place to 
place, working gold mines in Paracale, Catanduanes, and Masbate. They 
tattooed in proportion to their performance in battle, and their general 
similarity to pintado Visayans can be seen from Fray Marcos de Lisboa’s 


1 *70 


179 



MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Bikolandia 


1615 (?) Diccionario y vocabulario de el idioma Espanol y Bicol. Though loc 
variations are worth noting, it is clear that Bikolanos and Visayans sh 
a common culture. 

Certainly Bikolanos looked like Visayans. Dutch Admiral Oliver Va 
Noort (160 1 , 93) met Albay chiefs in 1 600 who were “very nicely, beautifu 
and artistically” tattooed. Elizabethan corsair Thomas Cavendish described 
one whose “skinne was carved and cut with sundry and many strakes and; 
devices all over his body" (Pretty 1588, dl). Bikolanos filed their teeth, 
colored them red or black, and pegged them with gold; they moulded 
infants’ skulls and flattened their noses by head binding. 

Men were circumcised and wore penis pins — with real braves burning 
scars on their arms in addition to their tattoos — and wore G-strings, or 
simply a blanket wrapped around the waist. Lakwegwere the dangling ends; j 
singed, the part that passed between the legs; and pintosan, the bulge in * 
front. A man who was sent back and forth to the same place many times j 


ffliost heavily inundated valleys in the archipelago. It was crisscrossed by 
smaller rivers and creeks which flowed into and out of one another season- 
ally, and evety year the river itself spread as far as 15 kilometers from its 
banks. Deep water, whether in fields or streams, was called sa/og, and what 
jbe Spaniards called the Rio Grande, Bikolanos simply called the Salog, 
P with those living near it being Siminalog. Shifting depths and shallows 
ma( le river navigation treacherous, and considerable hydraulic control was 
required to make even irrigated rice farming practicable. This extensive 
territory unsuitable for swidden farming no doubt inspired many innova- 
tions in agricultural techniques. A masarawat was a farmer who experi- 
mented with seeds by planting out of season, and lataw (to float) was a kind 
of platform or raft of intertwined weeds, covered with soil and planted to 
taro, which rose and fell with the water level. 

Danawan were fields of standing water, especially those that required no 
artificial irrigation; and layaw or kanaw-kanaw, those with especially deep 


might complain, “Nagbabahag naakon dalan, kyaning papapagbalik balika® mu d. Atyan meant to be left dry by receding waters. The general term for 
ako [I kept putting the road on like a G-string]” (Lisboa 1 628a, irrigating — that is, leading water into fields or from one field to another — 


Women wore tube skirts or tapis — called lawns if worn high enough to cover 


the breasts — and both men and women used jackets and ankle-length X on t he irrigation ditches to indicate the division of water into different 


tunics called lambong or yambong, and an artificial switch of hair to add to 
their own. 

Bikolanos shared a common technology not only with Visayans but with 
most Filipinos from Mindanao to northern Luzon. They grew rice without 


plows, harvested it panicle by panicle, and milled it with mortar and pestle;®; burrow into the mud when chased; and salakat, to escape when the field 


extracted sugarcane juice by pressing the cane under a lever; and produced 
alcohol with a still made of a hollow tree trunk. Gold was mined both by j 
excavating and by panning in streams; metal workers used a two-piston'^ 
Malay forge; and women wove abaca and cotton cloth on backstrap looms; 


■m 


nailless houses by joinery, as well as built boats ranging from one-piece 
dugouts to plank-built men-o’-war and cargo vessels, products especially 
well known from Catanduanes, whence boat builders literally peddled 
their wares by sailing them to other islands. 


Agriculture 


Like the Visayans — and most other Filipinos — the Bikolanos grew bo 
rice and root crops in hillside swiddens; but unlike them, they also gr 
rice under irrigation. The Bikol River basin appears to have been one of the 


was posakay. Sagop was a dam; sagobong, a canal; and tangharan, the sign put 

■ • • . • IS a- _ L. J! i. ^ f « i vt-\ fav inf a cl i iTof/s n f 


fields. 


m The additional importance of these fields as a source of protein is 
| indicated by the special vocabulary pertaining to the presence of fish, 
jj Sarang was for fish to collect where the water was in motion; aboab, to 


overflowed after a heavy rain. It may be significant that fields were included 
along with palm trees and houses as gatang, alienable property. 

Tarok was the general term for transplanting, but there were two meth- 
ods of producing the seedlings. One method, sabod, was to sow seeds in a 


and made pots by hand without wheel or kiln. Carpenters constructed j seedbed (pimpin) by broadcasting (sa.buag), with dalogi being the seedlings 


ready for transplanting (hagidhid) in the shallow water along the edges of 
a field. The second method was to wrap the seeds, already germinated by 
soaking, in wet leaves (balanhig) until they sprouted, whereupon they would 
I be placed on inundated trays (tabaw) to put out roots. They would then be 
lj transplanted matted together (tagbong) on the edges of the field. 

As said earlier, transplanting into the soil where seedlings were left to 
grow was tarok; however, a third transplanting (talostos) might be necessary 
to find deeper water. As for harvesting, a unique Bikol technique was the 
use of a conch shell in place of an iron blade, both called gata. 

Other than wet rice farming, Bikol swiddening, hunting, fishing, and 
cooking were the same as Visayan. Millet, taro, and yams, both domestic 


ISO 






181 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


and wild, were eaten in place of rice or mixed with it, and sago flour was 
made from Metroxylon palms. Despite the abundance of rice in some places 
and for some people, the staple Bikol food was root crops: Lisboa (1628b, 
17) glossed them with expressions like “It is the sustenance of these people” 
or “They eat it in times of hunger.” And he called most of them camotes. 

Both deer and wild boar were called balmy (domestic pigs were orig). As 
for wild carabao, their presence in the language is noteworthy: they were 
caught in pit traps (atbong), and even their flayed hide (bange) was eaten. 
They were called anuang or damulcig — or, more elegantly, samayaw — anc| 
ones mature enough to fight with their horns were atandukan (from 
tanduk, a piercing wound) . But the word karabaw was only introduced in 
Father Lisboa’s own time (he arrived in 1585). 


Drinking j 

The production and consumption of alcoholic beverages was an impor- 1 
tant part of Bikol social life. Tabang, to help somebody out, also meant for J 
two men to drink together; silo was to enter somebody’s house with a token 
offering of fish or meat in hopes of getting a drink; and tabad was to return | 
a favor by offering a drink— though tabad itself meant diluted wine. Patulid | 
was a farewell drinkfest for somebody leaving for another town, and patostos J 
was for a crowd to gather in a newly constructed house — “to test if the floor j 
would carry the weight” (Lisboa 1628a, 285). To cause fellow drinkers to | 
overindulge was a normal part of male play during drinkfests. Alap meant t 
to toast somebody after drinking yourself; padagmok was to pass the cup to 
the same person again and again; pintong, to offer an especially large | 
container; and pisaxu, to pass the dipper itself. The standard bamboo cup 
was the half-pint galong. The drinks themselves were the same as those in j 
the Visayas — tuba, pangasi, inlos, and alak — but with certain refinements. || 

Tuba, fermented palm sap, was called paog or lagoy, and a confection^ 
called hi bay was made of it when still sweet by the addition of shredded 
young coconut flesh. Solay was a mixture of seasoning put in the jar where 
rice-wine pangasi was to be brewed — for example, hilkilig toasted, gin 
gered rice — and the mash itself was called nasi. Base was sugarcane juice 
srpiee/ed out with a levered press, boiled to produce inlos, and flavored 
with pogod bark. Inlos was called gabuyo when young and low in alcoholic 
content, and phwhatc if boiled down to a third its volume. A special liquor 
(sitnbog) was made by the admixture to sweet tuba of coconut milk or honey 
The dregs or mash of any these beverages were also eaten, and presented 


1R9 


Bikolandia 


aS a special favor (bayakaw) to dancers at a feast. Arab was any hard liquor 
distilled in a wooden still. 


Social Structure 


Although sixteenth-century Spanish accounts make it possible to de- 
scribe Visayan and Tagalog society in considerable detail, Franciscan mis- 
sionaries in Bikol limited themselves to the comment that the natives had 
o form of government at all — ni rey ni roque (neither king] nor castle) . Fray 
Juan Pobre de Zamora (1595, 398) said, “He who has more gold or more 
people was able to subjugate those who had less, so that many of these 
became slaves,” and Father Marcelo de Ribadeneira illustrated with the 
case of one who was so moved by a sermon on hellfire that he offered to 
restore all his ill-gotten wealth to those whom he had despoiled. Fray Juan 
felt that this lack of social order — “each one lives where and how he 
fancies” — made Bikolanos slow to accept Spanish concepts of law and 
polity (Zamora 1595, 398). Nonetheless, it appears that Bikolanos had a 
three-class social order like their Filipino neighbors to the north and south. 

Lisboa defined both datu and ginoo as “rich and elite (principal)," and 
maginoo or hiyangta as one especially prominent among them. They were 
I addressed as Kagoangnan (elder or senior), the equivalent of Lord and 
Lady, and men of distinguished lineage or accomplishment often assumed 
a flattering alias (bansag) which they passed on as a surname — like Makatikba, 
‘Terrifier.” But these were not political offices. The head of a community 
(duluhan) was called a Imgduluhan; i he ruler of a town ( banwaan — or longsod 
in poetry) was a namamanwa; and one who was recognized by other chiefs 
as sen ior was a pono (first or foremost) — for example, an pono sa bammaan. 
Kings or governors outside Bikolandia, or persons of similarly autocratic 
position, were caller} hade. 

Timawa in Visayan and Tagalog culture were supporters of hiatus who 
accompanied them to war, but who were known after colonial pacification 
simply as freemen or freedmen. Thus, like other seventeenth-century 
lexicographers, Lisboa defined the term as “an ordinary person of the town 
who is neither chief nor slave, |’or | a free man who was a slave.” I he form 
natilimawa reflects Bikol social mobility: “for a c hief to become a timawa, 
or plebeian, by becoming poor, for) for a slave to become- free” (Lisboa 
1628a, 393). These timawa would presumably have included the dahlia, 
poor people, and pido, people of low estate*. But the* presence of another 
word for a “fret! mail who is not a slave ” — bat ah (binahatah: to be heed) — 


183 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 




suggests that the Bikol word timawa may have undergone the same shift 
meaning as its Visayan- l agalog equivalent (Lisboa 1628a, 61). 

Slaves were called aripun in general, or pandmmn in poetry, or pejo 
lively as pongka and salpok. Gintnbo was a horn slave or one inherited; . 
was one stationed at his master’s tomb to protect the body against witch 
arid .sYnw/wasone sacrificed in mourning for a chief. These slaves came ii 
their condition through capture, debt, or inheritance, and were bong 
and sold. Bihag was a captive; sapod, a person seized while lost. Salem was tof 
deal in slaves, boats, or dogs. Nalubos was for a captive to be ransomed or 
a debt redeemed; lumas, to be freed from slavery or debt; and hinabstos was 
fora part owner to pay the remaining price to take full possession. Kadangan 
was one who lived alone with a slave, but slave concubinage with an upper- * 
class owner was called kalit, payat, or ot.ay, all words which implied deceit or J 
fraud. 


Religion 

Juan Pobre de Zamora felt that the absence of Mexican-style temples and % 
idolatry left the Bikol religious consciousness such a blank page-tamquam 1 
tabula rasa — that the very concepts of deity and worship had yet to be 4 
inscribed upon it. All they had, he said, were “superstitions, auguries, and J 
some tricks the Devil played on them.” In like vein, his Franciscan contem- :j 
porary’s dictionary reduces Bikol religion to the worship of ancestral spirits ' 
called anito. It gives the following definitions: 

m 

Anito: [So] they called the souls of their ancestors, to whom they made figures of 

wood Nagaanito: to make a sacrifice, or drinkfest as a fiesta, to such anitos. . . . jj 

Naatang: to offer food to the anitos, as they did in ancient limes, and afterwards they 
would eat it (Lisboa 1628a, 26). 

Lisboa said that these figures, like the spirits themselves, were also called 
diwata, and thought that they included all idols or fetishes, large or small 
lagdong, pararangpan , tango, latawo, and tinatawo. He did not name any 
nature spirits or individual gods— nor any Supreme Deity— but listed a 
number of guardian spirits or demons —alagad, gugurang, okot, even bathala, 
of whom he wrote: “They say it was an anito that brought good luck to the | 
one it accompanied” (Lisboa 1628a, 61). Thus, if a man was never hit by 
objects thrown at him, he was said to be batalaan. But Iisboa was also aware j 
that Bikol religion was suffering attrition in his own day. Alagad was now 
being applied not to spirits but to any constant companion, and Mala, to 


184 


Bikolandia 


go out to check one’s crops, had originally meant an anniversary pig 
sacrifice at the grave site of some departed relative. 

However these supernatural forces were explained, they intervened in 
human affairs to sanction proper social behavior. If an upper-class lady, 
especially a real beauty, went out to the fields or into a strange community, 
she would become sick (nadaay), and if a man was tattooed without having 
defeated an enemy in war, he would sicken or even die unless he per- 
formed a sib&ng cleansing rite. If one person’s fields flourished ahead of 
other people’s, it was considered a sign of impending disaster or bad crops. 
If a person showed hesitation or repugnance while enshrouding a parent’s 
corpse, he would develop a facial tic or palsied limbs. Dawat was a destruc- 
tive storm brought on by incest in the community. In addition, there were 
dangerous creatures such as the ghoulish aswang or silagan, and sorcerers 
(agivahang) who could cast spells. Even some chiefs might be so endowed 
with occult power (pohon) that any lower-class person who ate from plates 
or drank from cups that such a chief had used, would become ill. 

Religious practitioners were female shamans called baliyun, or male 
transvestites called asog. They wore gold ornaments on their forehead, look 
ritual baths, spoke with the voice of departed spirits, and delivered prayers 
in song — though the people’s response, “Ahom!” may have been derived 
from die Christian amen. Healing ceremonies included chicken sacrifices 
or smearing the patient’s forehead with masticated betel nut. The precari- 
ous nature of infancy is reflected in the number of such rites performed for 
children — for example, kannga, the sacrifice of a pig carefully raised since 
the birth of the child. Serious illness required calling back the patient’s 
wandering soul (kalag), which was then restored by shaking an anahaxv 
sprout over the body. Shoots of the anahaw palm (Palma brava) were 
symbols of the life force itself: they were placed on the prow of cruisers 
departing on a raid, and brandished by returning victors, and might be 
stuck on the grave of the one whose death was avenged by the raid. 

During a Bikol wake, the cadaver was exposed, fastened on a seat as if 
alive, while relatives donned mourning attire, began a fast, and cut their 
hair. There were two kinds of coffins — a wooden casket called kabaong, and 
a longon hollowed out of a whole log, and these were either buried or 
placed in a shed called kalang. The house in which an especially powerful 
chief died was abandoned, leaving his body in it. Gold ornaments which 
accompanied a body to the grave were often removed before interment, in 
which case they had to be disinfected by a sprinkling rite called basbas. After 
tile grave was filled in, the ayay rite was performed in which the grave was 
covered with unhusked rice. In the case of a slave sacrifice (hagol), the 


185 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


double burial was called lonlog, a word which meant the additional su 
required by an underweight measure of gold. 


The Alphabet 

Missionary accounts make it clear that the Bikolanos were using 
alphabet by the end of the sixteenth century. Juan Pobre de Zamo 
preserved the translation of a Bikol letter written by a chief in Gumaca 
letras tagalas, and Father Ribadeneira (1601, 61) said that many Christi 
converts made little booklets “in their characters or letters” of lessons th 
learned in church. Fray Juan said the same thing, but added, “Never in 
their paganism did they ever use books” (Zamora 1595, 400). They called 
letters or any writing guhil; and the alphabet, basahan. They made the vowel 
signs— Tagalog kiidlit — as little \Zshaped marks called kaholowan. They 
distinguished three vowels and fifteen consonants, one more than the 
standard baybayin because of the addition of the letter r. Lisboa (1628a, 36) 
intended to illustrate these letters in his dictionary, but unfortunately the 
first edition ( 1 754) has only blank spaces where the Bikol characters should 
be, presumably because of printing difficulties. The following is a typical 
entry: 

Bn: So they pronounce the B in their A B C’s, and they write it with this character [ 
including B and A in the same character. And to say Be or Bi, they put a dot or comma; 
on the left side like this [] and to say Bo or Bit, they put the comma or dot on the right 
side of the character like this [] because they read and write from the bottom up. 


Warfare 

Father Rada (1574, 181) referred to Bikol bravery unambiguously in 
1574: 

They are the most valiant and best armed people of all these islands, because, 
although they never attacked the Spaniards, they defended themselves in all their 
towns, and were unwilling to give up unless they were conquered by force of arms. 

Kota was any wall or fortification of a town, while bantam was a bamboo 
tower for archers armed with bows (sikarom) so long they had to be held 
under the foot to put the bowstring on. Bikolanos went into battle pro- 
tected by carabao-hide armor and long wooden shields, and fought i 


Bikolandia 


hand-to-hand combat with kris, baladaxv (garod if mounted on a shaft like a 
spear), or a wide shortsword (baed), with a knife (laglip) held in the shield 
hand. Any of these weapons might be decorated with locks of hair dyed red 
(bangol) if carried by chiefs. But the arquebuses, artillery, helmets, and full 
body armor of iron which were reported from the Salcedo expedition of 
1573 were no doubt a confusion with Japanese weapons which that con- 
quistador encountered the year before in a naval engagement on the Ilocos 
coast. 

Bikol belligerence, however, was not limited to defense. Gubat was to 
conquer and raid, and mangayaw to do so by sea, either with L lone cruiser 
(mongsad) or ships in company (a bay). Tarok (to transplant) was a rite in 
which a palm frond brought back from war was stuck on a relative’s grave 
“as a sign that they had killed somebody to avenge his death” (Lisboa 
1628a, 385). But raiding was usually a more businesslike venture — as 
I evidenced by the word hampil, which was a contract for a joint raid where 
a shipowner and his partner split the outfitting costs between them but the 
owner received two-thirds of the booty. 

Belligerence also had its place within the community. Gagasod was to 
I swagger around boasting and threatening; angat was to challenge a man to 
1 come down from his house and fight; raxval, to enter the house for the same 
purpose; and angag was for two men to fight over one woman. Naiad was 
feuding between clans, and tokol was a victim taken in revenge for a 
I grievance committed by some other member of his family or community; 
but bolaw was a vendetta between two towns, and budhi was to kill an 
outsider. 

The Lisboa dictionary contains one of the richest vocabularies of martial 
terminology in early Spanish lexicons of Philippine languages. It is worth 
sampling at some length. 

Bonglo For a ship’s captain to buy or ransom a captive taken by one ot 

his comrades 
Banlolan Reinforcements or substitutes 

% Dahog To shout at the defeated 

Ip Dongas An enemy attack on a town 

Qal/a A surprise attack, or to lake a victim by stealth 

Hagbo To finish off an enemy without leaving one alive or any goods 

after plundering 

Laban Foe, opponent; to Fight 

| Labha or dahas To take by violence 

Libon For a highwayman to kill on the road, or steal livestock 

i Limbaga To exercise with arms in preparation for war 

|| Limo To kill by trcacheiy 


187 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



Night raiders who enter houses to kill 

dood fortune on a sea raid 

A head, hand, or foot cut from the body 

Kor a captain to be the first to die 

To come out of battle wounded 

One about to fall into i aiders’ hands 

To despoil captives or corpses of their clothes 

A night attack on a sleeping target, or hunting l>efore dawn 

To cut off a head 

To confront the enemy face to face, waiting for the signal t< 


Maghat 

Maray 

Pogol 

Puli 

Rarong 

Sabo 

Tangkas 

Taojj 

I'ongoX or pogol 
Tonob 




CHAPTER 11 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


Tagalog geographic terminology reflected their physical environ- 
ment. It differed from that of the Visayans, most of whose islands were 
divided by north-south mountain ranges that produced an east-west 
dichotomy between upstream and downstream, ilaya and ilawod. 


1 


1 


i 


The Tagalog’s World 

The Luzon Sierra Madres to tin; east of the Tagalogs descended not to 
a seacoast. but to the riverine plains of Bulacan, Laguna, and Manila Bay. 
Ilaya simply meant higher ground, with the highest being the mountains 
between Laguna de Bay and the Pacific: — Kalaylayan — hut it was not con- 
trasted with ilaot. Loot meant the high seas, tlagal being any salt sea, and 
wain, waters farthest from the land. Similarly, the Tagalogs were not ob- 
sessed with the Pacific monsoons and trade winds which struck the Visayas 
from the northeast, east, and southeast. They recognized itilaga as the 
north wind; balm as the northeast; amihan, the east; lining, the south; and 
habagat, the west. However, they gave special attention to the weather they 
encountered on the South China Sea which was their commercial highway 


I 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


to Borneo and Malacca: balaklawol was the northwest wind in general, bi 
agu.yoy was a gentle wind from the same bearing, and dayaday, a stormy on 
They also distinguished among bagyo (typhoon); sigwa, a hearty rainstor 
blowing from one direction only; and hangin , a squall at sea. 

The word taga meant a native inhabitant, and tagalog was apparently 
contraction of taga Hog, river dweller, presumably in distinction bom tag 
bundok, the mountain dwellers between Nagcarlan (Laguna) and Lanioi 
Bay, though they spoke the same language. Not all speakers of Tagalo 
called themselves by that name,- however: Father Juan de Oliver, preac.hin o 
to Batanguenos on God’s being Father of all people, distinguished 
Kumintang (Batangas) from Tagalog, Spanish, and Chinese. Bundok were 
high forested mountains; gulod, a lower cordillera; and laluktok, its upper 
slopes; the Spaniards called them all Ungues from the Malay word for high, : 
and coined the term tingivianesiox their inhabitants. The plains of Lumban, 
Pila, and Santa Cruz below Mahayhay were real savannas called Parang , 
from the word meaning any unforested grasslands suitable for agriculture. 
Bakmuocl was high land that remained dry in time of Hooding. 

Tagalogs called themselves tawo (person, a term they did not apply to 
other tribes or nations: foreigners who spoke other languages were called 
samotov samok. Blacks living in the mountains were called ayta— or dumagat 
(sea people) if they lived on the east coast— but agla in Manila, or ita by the 
more sophisticated, presumably from Malay Ham (black). Blacks from 
Africa introduced by Portuguese slave traders were called pugot. Batugawzsf 
the offspring of two different races — for example, an Ayta and a non- 
Negro, or a Spaniard and a Filipina. Chinese were called sanglay from two 
Chinese words— chang and lai in modern orthography— meaning “regu-jj 
larly come,” that is, itinerants who could be trusted to keep commercial j 
contracts from one trading season to the next. Old folks, however, called 

■ • 98 .f? 

them langlang, which also meant pirate or corsair. 

A Tagalog’s primary identity was with his bayan (town or community) 
and loyalty to his kababayan (townmates). (Father Oliver [1590a, 214] ■ 
called heaven, “Bayan nang Dios” in contrast to this world, “Bayan nang 
lull a [land of tears] .” Hospitality distinguished between inviting townmates 
(palnugot) and taking in travelers (tuloy) — for example, “Saan dito ang 
tinutuloyan nang manga ibangbayan [Where do strangers put up here] ? — 
though hospitality itself was so highly valued that the word tawo could als| 
mean guest — nagatataioo was to invite guests (San Buenaventura 1613 
357). So, too, outsiders who settled in town (salayo or salyo) were distin 
guished from settlers who married in (dugang). Bayan also meant the 
atmosphere — “Malinaw ang bayan [The weather’s clear]” — but it did no 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


mean a people or language group (San Buenaventura 1613, 574). Indeed, 
even clear geographic regions were referred to by different names accord- 
ing to who was speaking; thus, Laguna de Bay was called Pulilan in Manila 
but Dagat by those who lived on its shores, while taga bundok neighbors 
called it Duungan, a place where boats tied up. And Lusong, what the 
Chinese and Malays called the Manila area, simply meant to come down 
from the heights. 

Naturally, Tagalogs in the mountains had some customs different from 
those of the lowlanders. They fought wars with slings, carried babies hung 
from the shoulder in blankets, and communicated from mountain to 
mountain by beating resonant blocks of wood which could be heard long 
distances. In selling cotton thread, they counted eighty-four thread strands 
to the skein instead of seventy, and men still wore heavy shell bracelets 
which had disappeared from more “civilized” areas. Special vocabulary 
reflected their swidden farming techniques — bakalwzs a dibble stick; gusamos, 
to weed between rice plants; gusad, to pull up the roots of last year’s straw; 
and any field under culuvation was linang. Old men counted isa, alwa, atlo, 
pal — one, two, three, four — instead of isa, dalawa, tatlo, apat. But many 
dialect variations were no more than those between any two Tagalog 
regions. Wild amaranth was called bayangbang in the hills, but haloni in 
Pililla and Moron; banlowag (to water the wine) was talas in the bundok; and 
suhol (remuneration for a witness swearing in one’s favor) in Laguna meant 
gifts a groom gave his bride’s relatives, but was also called talas by highlanders. 

The Borneo connection. The chiefdom of Manila, located in the present 
Intramuros district, was probably founded as a Bornean trading colony 
about 1500, with a royal prince marrying into the local ruling family. This 
was a common practice by which Islam spread throughout insular South- 
east Asia: the first sultan of Sulu was the son-in-law of a Sumatran prince, 
and the sultanate of Maguindanao was founded by a scion of the Malaccan 
royal family. Chinese records list Mindoro (Ma-i) as a dependency ol 
Brunei in the fourteenth century, and when Spanish Governor Francisco 
Sande invaded Borneo in 1578, Mindoro chiefs in his company acknowl- 
edged the Brunei sultan’s uncle, Panguiran Salalila, as their overlord. The 
Manila ruler known to the Spaniards as Rajah Matanda was the grandson 
of Sultan Bulkeiah of Brunei, the Saripara whom Pigafetta had met there 
fifty years earlier. Brunei folk history identifies Bulkeiah as Nakhoda Ragam, 
die reputed conqueror of the Philippines, and tradition even names the 
cannon with which he was said to have taken Manila — Si-Gantar Alam, 
“Kart.hshaking Thunderer.” 


191 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


When the Spaniards arrived in 1570, the port of Manila had three 
recognized rulers — Ache, the old rajah (Ladyang Matanda) , and his nephew, 
Solitnan, the young rajah, and, in Tondo north of the Pasig River, Banaw 
Lakandula, Ache’s cousin. Lakandula monopolized trade with two or three 
annual junks from China, but Manila vessels retailed the goods through the 
central Philippines, for which reason they were known to the Visayans as 
“Chinese.” For the same reason, when Legazpi in Cebu wished to open 
trade relations with Manila, he sent Ladyang Matanda a diplomatic gift 
addressed to “the King of Luzon.” _ : 

Ache’s maternal grandfather was the Bornean sultan, and in 1521 he was 
in Brunei to command a naval task force for his grandfather and to marry 
a cousin, but was captured by the survivors of the Magellan expedition. 29 He 
was released on payment of a princely ransom. However, a Makassarese 
slave of Ache called Pazeculan was not freed, but he spoke enough Spanish 
to later conclude a peace pact between his Spanish captors and Tuan 
Maamud of Palawan. 

Back in Manila, Ache experienced a deathbed conversion to Christianity 
in 1572, and named Rajah Soliman as his heir, his only son having prede- 
ceased him. Lakandula died three years later and was succeeded by his 
grandnephew, Soliman’s adopted son Agustin Legazpi — evidently spon- 
sored for baptism by Adelantado Miguel cle Legazpi himself — who married 
the daughter of Sultan Bulkeiah’s uncle Salalila. 

When Governor Sande invaded Borneo in 1578, he took along two 
Balayan (Batangas) chiefs who had had long residence in that island, both 
of whom were captured by Panguiran Salalila during a naval engagement 
at the mouth of Brunei Bay. One of these Balayan chiefs was Martin Magad- 
china who had spent eight years in Borneo on trade, and who was killed 
following the battle; the other was Francisco Magat who was captured but 
ransomed off by a Bornean relative. 

There were also resident Tagalogs who fought on the Bornean side. 
Matelin Magat Buxa Amat had lived in Borneo since childhood, and was 
related to both Martin and Francisco: his wife recovered Martin’s body and 
buried him in her family grave, and Matelin himself ransomed off 
Francisco for a 175-kilo culverin. There was also Ami Gikon of Tondo, who 
had been there since 1565; he commanded an eighty-four-man warship 
mounting twelve guns during the action, but was not actually a chief: 
rather, he was a slave of Agustin Legazpi’s. Following the Spanish victory, 
the governor demanded that Lakandula’s and Soliman’s property and 
slaves being held in Borneo be delivered to their heirs, and took twenty- 
seven vessels and an unspecified number of captives back to Manila, 
including Salalila and the daughter who became Agustin’s bride. 



mo 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


However, in 1585 Agustin was deposed and jailed by the colonial govern- 
ment, together with his brothers and relatives, for having given his mother 
a Muslim burial. Not surprisingly, he headed an abortive uprising against 
the Spaniards the next year and was executed, the last Manila ruler to hold 
a royal office. 

The town of Manila — or more correctly, Maynila — occupied what is now 
the Intramuros district, with a stockaded fortress on the site of Fort San- 
tiago and a gun foundry in which the invaders found moulds for cannons 
and one large piece in the process of manufacture. Parj; of the present 
Intramuros, however, was then uninhabited swampland — the location of 
Letran College, for example. The present Ermita district was covered with 
sand dunes, and Bagumbayan (“New Town”) was built by Filipinos dis- 
placed by the Spanish occupation of Manila. Upstream was another chiefdom 
in Namayan (Santa Ana) supposedly governed by a Rajah Kalamayin. To 
the south, Pasay was said to have been settled by a distant relative of his by 
that name, the child of a Bornean slave. 

The Manila population was about six thousand, with forty Chinese and 
twenty Japanese, including two Christians. 30 The Chinese were actually 
political refugees who had fled to Japan before coming to the Philippines, 
and had been settled as fishermen and farmers by Lakandula in Longos 
(Tondo), where they promptly diked, drained, and reclaimed land along 
the waterfront, which was later known as Baybay. 

The presence of Spanish customers willing to pay for merchandise in 
Mexican silver quickly attracted thousands more. There were only four 
junks anchored in Manila in 1570, but nine arrived in 1577, twenty-one in 
1580, and forty-eight in 1588, with four thousand resident Chinese in 1586, 
and twenty-four thousand in 1598, even after thirteen thousand had been 
deported. This phenomenal growth of immigration profoundly affected 
the local economy by the introduction of new plants and fowls, horses and 
cows, and technology like the rice mill and two-roller sugarcane press, 
perhaps even the plow. 


The Malay connection. Malay was the trade language from Malacca to 
the Moluccas in the sixteenth century. Indeed, it was in Malacca that 
Europeans first met Filipinos, ten years before Magellan died in Maktan. 
They called them Luzones — which the Portuguese spelled Lugoes — and 
who were no doubt Tagalogs since they were Muslims and were at first 
mistaken for Borneans. Tome Pires (1515, 377) said in his Summa Oriental 
that Borneans and Tagalogs “were almost one people.” There was also a 
colony of some five hundred Tagalogs at Minjam on the west coast of the 



Tagalog Culture and Technology 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


mm 

i 


Malay Peninsula (where the Chinese had noted Mmdoro cotton in th 
fourteenth century), and the Luzones community in Malacca had I hi 
own shops and included a tnunber of prom, not I, us, ness, nan. One 
them, Regimo Diraja, was appointed temenggmg (pohec comm, ss, oner ■ 

magistrate) by the Portuguese governor. 

Luzon traders carried foodstuffs, wax, honey, and low-grade gold t 
Borneo, whence they proceeded to Malacca, but had only two or thru 
ships on the run. But they ranged much farthe, aheld than Malacca. 
pJafetta noted a Luzon vessel loading sandalwood in I "nor, (L 1ft 
362 ) describing the Chinese port of Canton before any I ortuguese had 
n it commented, “This the Lucres say who have been there, and Bras 
Bayao (1540), the Portuguese king's factor in Borneo, sa.d there were 
many good pilots there, “mainly some called Lutjoes, who are discoverers 
u may be worth noting that Canton, Malacca, and Timor describe a mangle 
which included all of insular Southeast Asia. And since Magellan was one 
of the Por tuguese who took Malacca in 151 1 , one wonders if he could have 
been unaware of the existence and location of Reg, mo Diraja s ho.nela, d 
Perhaps the “discovery of the Philippines” was made m Malacca. 

The fortunes of the Malacca Filipinos were not based on such petty 
commerce as the Philippines trade. Rather, they came from shipowmng 
and the underwriting of large-scale export ventures m the China mat ke , 
even letting out small shares which illiterate Portuguese sadors couldy 
afford. Regimo was the head of this community; he had migrated there 
from Luzon, married into a local family, and received the tide of dtiaja, 
then attracted his counttymen to follow him. A genuine tycoon who 
junks to Brunei, China, Pasai (Sumatra) , Siam, and Sunda, he d ' ed ^ 3 ’ 
leaving his widow, sons, and father-in-law to continue h,s business. Another 
Filipino magnate was Surya Diraja who paid the Portuguese 9,000 cruzados 
in gold to retain his plantauon and country estate, and annually sent 1 
tons of pepper to China. One of his junks sailed in the hist Portuguese fleet 

to pay an official visit to the Chinese empire. , , 

But what impressed the Portuguese more than the Luzones trade, was 
their participation in the local wars to control the Straits ;of Malacca Luzon 
mercenaries took part in an unsuccessful attempt by theex'led sultan of 
Malacca to retake that port from the Portuguese m 1525, during which 
“captain of the Lu f 6es” sailed in the flagship with warriors whom chrom- 
clerjoao de Barros considered “the most warlike and valiant of these pai ts 

(Barros 1628; Teixera 1961, 166). . J 

In 1529 Filipinos formed part of a Batak-Menangkabau army which, 
besieged Atjeh, as well as of the Atjenese fleet which raised the siege under 


command of Turkish Hcrodim Mafamede. When this fleet later look Am 
on the straits, Luzones were among four thousand Muslims aboard. Follow- 
ing his victory, Mafamede left a hand-picked garrison there under the 
command of a Filipino by the name of Sapetu Diraja. Luzones also fought 
on the mainland of Asia. They were in the ranks of the Burmese king when 
he took Martaban, and they faced the same king’s war elephants during the 
defense of Aynthia in 1547. And they also showed up as members of pirate 
crews — like those of Coja AchenTs that Mendes Pinto encountered 
someplace off the Chinese coast north of Quanzhou in 1540. 

By the time of Spanish advent, parts of Luzon with direct Bornean-Malay 
contact — Manila, Mindoro, the Batangas coast, and the Betis valley in 
Pampanga — had received Islam though Spaniards reported that the per- 
sonal practice of the religion was limited to the proscription of pork flesh, 
if even that. The account of the taking of Manila comments, 

It is true that some who have been in Borneo know something [of the faith] and 
can read a little of the Koran, but these are few; and it is the opinion among them that 
those who have not been to Borneo may eat pork, and I have heard many of them say 
this (Anon. 1572, 94). 

But in Balayan, Franciscan friars met Filipinos who were determined to 
make the pilgrimage to Mecca. Futhermore, the royal family of Manila 
obviously had a better understanding of the Islamic faith. Their hunters 
tried to reach the game before the dogs tore the flesh because of the ritual 
requirement that meat be bled before butchering. And, as said earlier, 
Agustin Legazpi’s mother was given a proper Moro burial. Her body was 
wound with a white sheet and interred in a grave with a board on top to 
prevent contact with the soil, and two ornamental grave markers about 30 
centimeters high. The mound was then sprinkled with water while prayers 
were offered by a siyak or faqih (expert in religious law) — “Allah ta ala 
[Allah be exalted].” 

Malay loan words. The most lasting heritage of the Malay connection 
was the contribution of loan words to the Tagalog language. High on the 
list were trade terms such as talaro scales and kaban and tsupa measures, and 
many others which must have supplemented concepts already existing — 
for example, lako (peddle), utang (debt), mamamayar (slave dealer) from 
bayar (payment) — along with others which actually replaced native words — 
karabaw (buffalo) for anowang, nila (indigo) for tayom. Other words desig- 
nated new pleasures of urban dining like alak (spirits) , atsara pickles, and 
pii.to cakes; or new conveniences like halan and tungko stoves, kawa caul- 
drons, balanga jars, and sandok ladles. 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Intellectual and religious terms constituted another significant portion j 
ofilir list— like ami (learning), kawani (clerk), and pagsamba (adoration). Jj 
It is significant, that the majority of these were already Malay borrowings 
from civilizations farther to the west at the time of their introduction into | 
Tagalog. Ilasa (read), gum (teacher), and diwa (spirit) were ultimately of g 
Sanskrit origin, while huhom (judgment), asal (custom), and agimal (amu-Jj 
let) came from Arabic. Indicative of the political changes which accompa- 
nied the new vocabulary were words pertaining to rule and social order- 
titles of royalty like raja and hari, expressions of deference like taU (excuse 
me) and po (sir), and superior weapons like balaraw daggers, to/guns, and 

lantaha cannons. , M 

The presence of Portuguese as an intermediary between Indian lan- 
guages and Malay, and of Arabic-Malay terms which are Islamic, suggest ! 
that the major Malay impact on Tagalog occurred in the sixteenth century. j 
The whole list of loan words reflects a process of urban sophistication 
which must have made it socially prestigious to speak the new language or 
at least to adopt some of its words. Well-bred ladies were now being called 
by the Malay word for female, binibini. Gusali, a blacksmith’s shed, came to j 
mean a large hall, and biyaya (disbursement) became “gracious gift in J 
Tagalog and thus the appropriate term for heavenly grace. 

Because of this Malay influence, some Spaniards thought Tagalog was j 
simply a Malay dialect, and Francisco de la Llave, who first served in Manila | 
as a page boy to Governor Dasmarihas, concluded that the lagalogs were 
themselves Malay immigrants. Thus, the Tagalog spoken in Manila in foe 
late sixteenth century was a cosmopolitan dialect to whose speakers Malay 

was a second language. , 

It took years, however, for its novelties to reach the provinces. Banyagi | 
for instance, originally meant “tradesman who goes from town to town, 
but came to mean “foreigner” after it spread outside Manila. Experienced 
Spanish friars were well aware of foe situation, and so always sent new 
missionaries out to the “boondocks” to learn the language from Filipinos 
who had not yet shifted from bahag to pantaUmes. The introduction to the 
famous Noceda and Sanlucar Vocabulario of 1753 (prologo) says, “It is a 
common and true saying that to learn the Tagalog language reqmres 
almost one year of study and three of G-string.” 


Physical appearance. The most obvious physical feature which distin- 
guished Tagalogs from “pintado” Visayans was their lack of tattoos. Nor did 
they reshape infants’ skulls by head binding, though they filed and colored 
their teeth and pegged them with gold, had lips reddened by betel nut 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


chewing, and distended their earlobes to the shoulder with heavy gold 
earrings — malambing na talinga. They cut their hair short and removed 
facial hair but grew mustaches to the extent they could, perhaps due to 
foreign influence. They did not wear penis pins, though Tagalog moun- 
taineers east of Laguna inserted little pellets under the skin. They also 
practiced both circumcision and a Bornean custom called sonal, an inci- 
sion in the clitoris sometimes called “female circumcision,” a practice 
which survived into the eighteenth century in Pampanga, where it was 
called gitang. Tagalog ladies were well supplied with makeup — tana eye- 
brow paint, pupol face powder, red hamuntigi nail polish,’ and yellow barak 
root to rub on the body as a skin lotion. As a matter of fact, Father Blancas 
tie San Jose inveighed against the vanity of their plucking their eyebrows 
every month. 

The basic male garment was the G-string (bahag or balabal ) . This was 
large and wide enough to hang over the hips and thighs with a flap behind 
long enough to inspire facetious Spanish comments like, “Nababasa ang 
palawit mo [You’re getting your tail wet]” (San Buenaventura 1613, 166). 
A silk one called kalikot came from Borneo, and so did a highly decorated 
one of silk and cotton called kalikam, which was restricted to upper-class 
chiefs. Both men and women wore a short-sleeved, collarless shirt or jacket 
(baro), and a cloak or long-sleeved gown on formal occasions — yambong if 
ankle-length. A special piece of male finery was a scarf (salampay) thrown 
over the shoulders, intricately worked by their wives. There was also a 
mantle called tapi in which men wrapped up, but it was already considered 
old-fashioned in the colonial period and so then was only used by old men. 
The turbanlike putongwas the normal male headdress, red in the case of 
those who had personally killed an enemy, or decorated with a plume of 
feathers, sagisag for chiefs, and tambulok for anyone sworn to avenge the 
death of a close relative. 

The female dress was a rectangular wraparound skirt called tapis — or, 
more accurately, two tapis, an ankle-length white one, with a shorter, 
colored one over it, perhaps of kayo (Chinese cotton) , taluki (silk) , kandaki 
(fine black linen), or red bangkumhan (named after the bark with which it 
was dyed) . All fancy tapis worn for show were talampukan, among which the 
most prestigious were elegant silk-and-gold kalumpata from Borneo and 
sinagitlong patterned stuffs from Japan. Sukob was a tube skirt of colored 
abaca, not worn as a garment, however, but used as bedclothes, and mm was 
an undergarment worn during menstruation. Above the tapis, women 
might wear a baro, an, anib cloak, talukbong shawl, or loose smock called 
kubong or kulubong in Manila, inuwak in Laguna. An additional glossary 
suggests considerable clothing consciousness. 


1Q7 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Basahan 

Damit 

Giliio 

Gimay 

Halos 

Panapin (from sapin, lining) 
Tah dang 


Ordinary work clothes 
Clothing of either sex 

Sackcloth or rough clothing j 

Poor, worn clothes 

Expensive clothes worn only for festive occasions 
Underclothes worn by fastidious persons to protec 
new clothes from perspiration 
Any garments worn below the waist 


The upper class, both male and female, fumigated their clothes with . 


incense. 


By the end of the sixteenth century, both styles and language had been 
affected by foreign influence. Dr. Antonio de Morga said Tagalog gent e- 
men were then adopting balloon pants (cakones baton*) m place of the 
bahag, and he knew the baro as chinanas (Chinese). Baro itself was simply 
the Malay word for clothing (baju). Malay taiyok was a tuft of feathers or| 
fragrant blossoms stuck in a man’s putong, and Tagalog paruka (wooden 
shoes) were Malay paduka. (The Malay-Sanskrit honorific address forroyg 
alty, Sri Paduka— or Sarripada in the Visayas— actually meant Tour High^ 
ness’ foot.”) Spanish zaragiielles (trousers) appeared as salawihs, zapatos j 
(shoes) as patos kahuy (wooden clogs), and ladies’ tapis were now eing 
called saya (skirt) . Silk appeared not only as taluki, but as Malay sutla and 
Spanish sedas; Hokkien husi was a fine red silk woven only in Tondo. ■ 
Indeed, clothing being a symbol of social status, it may not be surprising 
that the Malay word for wearing apparel, pakayan, came to mean all 
household possessions in Tagalog. 


Technology 


Tagalog technology, like that of Luzon in general, was much the same 
as Visayan. Blacksmiths used the two-cylinder Malay forge, and obtained 
raw iron from China in bars, ingots, or cast-iron pans; copper was reported 
in Lubang Island, but the Spaniards believed, rightly or wrongly, that 
Filipinos did not have the technical skill to extract it from the ore. Trans- 
portation was by water and there were no draft animals; heavy objects were 
moved on land with log rollers. Judging from the absence of the potter s 
wheel and the fact that potter)' was fired in the open air with straw as fuel, g 
Tagalog potters used the common Philippine paddle-and-anvil technique. 
Little is known about architecture beyond the names of such house pargj 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


l 


like posts, beams, rafters, roofing, and a long list of cottages, huts, and 
1 shelters in the fields or forest. Nonetheless, there are some particular 
features worthy of description. 

Agficulture. The staple food crop of the Tagalogs was rice, though millet 
was common enough for fine jeweler’s work to be called “milletlike” — 
dawa-dawa. Twenty-two varieties of rice were recognized, among which 
karataw was both a quick-maturing type and the general term for diy rice 
grown without irrigation, and kanin (cooked food) was ordinarily taken to 
mean plain boiled rice — what the Spaniards called moi'isqyetaT The impor- 
tance of rice is revealed by an extensive vocabulary of specialized terms 
connected with its growth, processing, and use — for example, there are 
four different words for a pile of unthreshed palay according to its size — 
sipok, lampok, mandala, and salansan — and one for any pile of rice whether 
threshed or not, timbon. 

Root crops were also common but considered second choice as staples, 
however desired as vegetables. Spanish lexicographers listed six of them — 
ubi, tugi, gabi, kamoti, and two wild ones, lahsa and nami — all of which they 
referred to as camotes, though they were aware that real camotes — that is, 
sweet potatoes — were introduced from the New World: as San Buenaventura 
(1613, 139) commented, “they did not have them before.” All these crops 
were grown in swiddens. 

Saka. was the general term for fieldwork. Tabtab was to work fields in 
savannas; gasak was removing grasses and undergrowth, but not full-grown 
trees: that was hapay. Lawag was “to look for fields to farm every year as 
' Tinguianes do” (San Buenaventura 1613, 127), and salapsapvws to rework 
a swidden that had been fallowed. Kaingin meant to cut branches and small 
trees; pagsisiga, burning; panting, removing roots; and dolok, piling up for 
j second burning. Gusad was to pull up the roots of harvested grain; kuhit, to 
I uproot grass with a broad-pointed stick and scatter it so as not to take root 
| again; linlin, an actual bundle of uprooted grass to spread out for the same 
| purpose; and halambat was fencing the completed field with wood cut 
| during its preparation. Swiddens planted to rice were bukid — as distinct 
| from irrigated fields, palayan. Budbud was to drop the seeds into holes 
drilled with a hasik dibble stick. Root crops, however, were planted with 
large baligway or bahoay digging sticks, usually in mounds, while millet was 
planted by broadcasting (sabog). 

Rice was also grown under irrigation by a sophisticated, labor-intensive 
| method. Seasonal flooding of swampland, river plains, and lake shores 
often provided natural irrigation. For example, until Father Chirino per- 


199 


wrm 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



■ 


suaded its people to move to higher ground, Taytay (Laguna) was inun 
dated from August to November; farmers harvested from boats in a mete 
and a half of water. 

Opening a new pond field was called bagbag, and to channel wate 
though canals was alulod or salulo , the latter term being the actual bambo, 
or palm-wood conduits. The preparation of a field already harvested began 
with hapaw, removing last year’s stalks and roots by cutting the straw and 
throwing it down, and himuno, pulling up any roots still fixed, to be 
followed later by kamkam, removing newly sprouted weeds. Then came 
timbunin, piling up, followed by palispis and pagi cleaning, which left the j 
field ready for planting after the soil had been soaked, without plowing. | 
Pinpin and bungton were dividing mounds which served both as boundaries 
and pathways, and pilapilwere ones made by piling up debris from the field 
itself. Tarakwere stakes set out as boundary markers, but with the disadvan-| 
tage that they could be moved surreptitiously, all Each of these divisions | 

was one luwang or habas. | 

Seeding and transplanting was accomplished in five distinct stages, first, ^ 
the seeds were soaked in a sack called baluyot until they germinated 
(nagbabatad), whereupon they were transferred to a basket to put out roots | 
(umuugat). Next came dapog, placing them on inundated banana-leaf trays 
until the roots were long enough for transplanting. Third was palan, 
transplanting these seedlings ( bulubod ) ‘‘for the first time’ into the field, 
matted together; and fourth was punla or salip, transplanting them the 
second time “by little handfuls.” Fifth and last was durol, transplanting the 
third time by individual seedlings, inserting them into the muddy soil with 
a tool called pandurol. They might be spaced close together (dasik) with the 
intention of thinning them out later by further transplanting (bugnos ) | 
Butikas was the stage of growth when the head began to enlarge on the 
stalk; turo, when it broke out; basag or baslay, when it was just beginning to 
flower. When the plant had staminate blossoms, it was maymuta, mwtobeing 
the mucous matter in the human eye; and while it was still green, it was 


called mangagatas, “milky.” 

Once die plants began to bear heads, placed in the fields were scare- 
crows, wickerwork or palm-leaf pendants kept moving by the wind, in a 
variety of different shapes — pamanay, balian, palawit, salidangdang, bankiyaw, 
or pakanlog. Even so, bugawan huts were constructed to shelter persons wh<j 
stayed in the field to drive birds away. Finally, when the field of grain was 
kinog na totoo (fully ripe) , harvesting was done stalk by stalk with a pan-ani 
knife or a blade of wood about 20 centimeters long called gapas. Day wages 
for such labor was called nulang. 


OAA 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


Two presses were used to process agricultural products— the alilisan for 
sugarcane and the hapitan for coconut oil. The alilisan was made of two 
horizontal beams, the lower one fixed, the upper one pivoted at one end 
so as to move up and down and squeeze the cane near the fulcrum. The 
juice was boiled for wine, not sugar, though the syrup and solidified 
molasses were used as confections. The hapitan was a pressing bag pinched 
in a split beam tightened with cords; it was typically used in the hills where 
much coconut oil was produced. More common in the lowlands was to soak 
grated coconut meat before squeezing it, and then boil the juice. 

The wheel was evidently unknown, even the potter’s wheisl. The Tagalog 
words, biling giling, or gulong, were always illustrated in dictionaries by 
imported examples employing beasts— the Spanish cart and Chinese sugar 
press or rice mill. Native devices that rotated were limited to pulleys, 
reelers, rollers, and spindles. Nor was the carabao domesticated; rather, it 
was hunted wild for its flesh and hide. The Spaniards quickly provided a 
new market: by the end of the century, the Audiencia of Manila was 
providing arquebuses to licensed hunters under contract to supply at least 
one animal a day for butchering. 

It is well known that Spanish missionaries introduced plows to Filipino 
farmers, a transfer of technology which is memorialized by the word for 
plow in modern Philippine languages — Spanish arado. But the plow they 
introduced was most probably Chinese. In the 1680s, Dominican Fray 
Domingo Perez used to beg alms in Manila to buy plows for the Zambales 
natives he was trying to relocate: on one occasion he bought thirty plows 
(for 20 pesos), and on another was given fifty carabaos. It is unlikely that 
these plows were imports from Spain or Mexico warehoused in Manila 
when there were so many Chinese artisans ready and able to supply 
cheaper tools. Besides, the sixteenth-century European plow was much 
heavier than the Chinese implement: it required more than one beast to 
pull, and was characterized by a coulter, a knife-shaped “cutter” mounted 
in front of the blade. This was not the arado found in the Philippines in 
historic times. 

Goldwork. Spanish accounts report of Tagalogs, as they do of other 
Filipinos, that everybody handled gold with dexterity, weighing and assess- 
ing it accurately, not only goldsmiths but even children. The Tagalog term 
was ginto (presumably Chinese ^ , jinzi or kintoy) though Blancas 
de San Jose also gave the northern Luzoh term, balitok, as “a kind of gold.” 
And to ginto, the San Buenaventura (1613, 456) dictionary adds the follow- 
ing curious entry under balitok: 


201 



MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Like the preceding, but since a chief is wont to be called Ginto so as not to « 
him, they called gold balitoh, [for example] nag kahabahtok— to have gold, after he 
died, ginto reverted to its meaning. 

Pure gold was called dalisay or urin buwo (“absolute standard”), butalsp. 
lata (soft) because gold is hard in proportion to the admixture of baser 
metals. Seven classifications were distinguished. 

Dalisay 24 karats 

Ginugulan 22 karats 

Hilapo 20 karats 

Panangbo Somewhat less than 20 karats 

Paniha 1 8 karats 

Linggingin 1 4 karats 

Bislig 12 karats 


Each of these categories was called “senior" or “junior (matanda or 
nabata) in relation to the ones above and below it— for example, j 

matanda was dalisay nabata, and ginugulang bata was hilapo matanda. A id 
below all these were malubay (weak), mixed with copper and leckone asg 
no karats at all, and Imtok (bent over) , mixed with silver and copper, hai dly 
gold at all, Such adulterated gold was simply called copper (lumbago), and 
so was any copper alloy like brass or bronze. Notary Hemando Rjque 
(1573, 240) commented, ‘They mix it with copper so skillfully they will 
deceive the best artisans of Spain.” Cheap jewelry was made of pamka, but 
no higher-grade gold was used in trade. Rather, it was reserved for expen- 
sive heirloom jewelry with which no Filipino would willingly part- 
although conditions of the Conquest often left them with no choice. | 
Some of these terms seem to reflect actual goldwork.ng techniques:; 
ginugulan, for instance, means “purified. ” Fanika is a kind of hollow earring | 
made by hammering a thin sheet of gold over a wax-resm ™>uld, and it 
must be at least 18 karats to be soft enough to work. Hilapo (to wipe thej 
face) may refer to the fact that 20-karat gold leaves a clear mark when - 
rubbed on a touchstone, and bislig (hardened, petrified) suggests the stony 

hardness of the base mixture of 12-karat gold. , 

Gold dust was used as a form of currency, being weighed out wlienj 
making purchases with little weights and scales carried by the customer 
The basic weight was a little red seed called saga, probably Indian Oconee 
(Aims precatmous), known in English as jequirity beans, which are corn, 
monly used in the tropics as beads or weights. Thus, sumasagaws extended : 
to mean buying any cheap items. Tagalogs reckoned them at three palay, 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


from sangpalay or kapalay, a grain of rice. A larger bean was bahay, worth 
three saga; and a still larger one, bulay, was equal to three bahay. 

Heavier weights were those standard to Southeast Asian commerce — the 
kupang, mas, and tahil. The tahil, tael, or tae was the Chinese ounce (Hang), 
and the mas — amas in Tagalog from Malay emas — was reckoned at 16 to the 
tahil. The kupang was one-fourth of a mas, but which San Buenaventura 
recorded as 3 to the mas, and converts to the native scale at 3 bulay. Blancas 
de San Jose more plausibly gave the mas as 4 kupang, and as the equivalent 
of 16 saga. The Tagalogs also called half an amas, ba/abato; 4 mas, sapaha; 
and 8 mas — that is, half a tahil — paningan. If the sixteenth-century Philip- 
pine amas was the equivalent of the tenth-century Javanese gold masa coin 
stamped via, it weighed 2.4 grams. 

Hunting and fishing. Both coastal and inland waters were exploited by 
Tagalogs for their protein content in a variety of ways — an aspect of life for 
which they had an extensive vocabulary. To fish with a certain kind of small 
net was sim; with a long net at river mouths, lambat ; while salap was a purse 
seine. Casting nets varied in the size of their mesh for different species — 
for example, pamanakior skates and panamaw for conger eels — with sinkers 
called bamndala if they were made of lead. Basket traps included the 
salahan — “wide below with many prongs and narrow above with a hole for 
inserting the hand to get the fish” — or the Laguna bubo, for which channels 
(bubohan) were especially constructed. Fish-trap corrals were placed in 
mountain streams (tain), in canals (bangkato r tire longer and larger bankatan), 
or along the seacoast (pusocl) where fish were trapped when the tide went 
out. Biwas was to fish with hooks; nilay, with hook and line; and pataio, with 
hook-loaded rattan lines extended at sea or in rivers. Under favorable 
conditions, it was possible to spear fish with harpoons like the barbed bulos 
or three-pronged salapang. Tangad was to fish by moonlight to locate the 
schools before dropping the net; and Haw, to fish by torchlight. Tuba was 
a tree whose fruit when rotten “makes fish drunk.” 

To go hunting with spears was altar; and if accompanied by hounds, 
nangangaso. If the dogs were used to drive game into nets, that was bating, 
and nets for fold boar might be as long as 60 meters. Balaon or baton pits 
were dug for large animals with bamboo spikes set in the bottom, but less 
laborious to construct were bamboo spring-powered automatic crossbows 
or arbalests set along runs frequented by game. Balatik and balms were the 
general terms, with paraig being designed for pigs and deer, or even dogs, 
and pasulo made for carabao. Small arbalests for rats were the pasipit and 
paitbong, while the panloob was an ordinary' bamboo rattrap with no moving 


OAQ 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


parts. Birds were caught in snares (sagad) or a sticky birdlime (patda) mad, 
of iackfruit juice, reeds, and a little clay, and were valued not merely as foo. 
but for their decorative plumage. So, too, civet cats were taken not so muc 
for their flesh as for their perfume-fixing civet (dins). 



Tagalog Culture and Technology 


mm. 




m 


Weaving. The main Tagalog textile was cotton. Abaca was largely usey 
for cordage, decorative fringe, and lightweight bedding. The cotton was 
received in the pod in exchange for rice from provinces like Bulacan-^ 
literally, “place of cotton” (bulak)— and as finished cloth from the Visayas 
It was also imported from China where, ironically, it could be produced 
from Philippine cotton more cheaply with spinning and ginning machines 
and large frame looms than in the Philippines with distaff and backstrap 
loom. Cotton was quickly demanded as tribute by the Spaniards for saihS 
cloth and export to Mexico both as thread and as piecegoods since, j 
because of the limitations of the backstrap loom, it was marketed by the 
piece rather than as yardgoods in bolts. The first Spanish shipment to | 
Acapulco included 11,300 such pieces collected as tribute and valued at 
gold pesos each. Meanwhile, Governor Dasmarinas also notified the king . 
that there was no need for shipping blankets from Mexico. Ordinary^ 
Tagalog blankets were called kumot; large red ones, mmalon; those made mg 
the Visayas, lumpot; and tinalaban was striped cloth in different colo *jj| 

sabasabat if black, blue, and white. . 

Harvesting the pods from the tree was bitin. To remove the cotton inside y 
was baynos, or pipis or putpot if done with a sort of rolling pm on a table. | 
Nutnot was to untangle the wool with the fingers; and pakpak to cudgelit 
to make it fluffy. Spinning with spindle and distaff was sulid, and one distaff- j 
fill was busugsodlan. Cotton thread was simply called sinulid—that is, spun 
and the general term for thread, lubid, always referred to cotton unless 
otherwise specified. Galungang and labayan were reels for winding thread, 
Hugos was to wash it for dyeing, and sapad was to soak it in blue dye Dyestuffs 
included suga (saffron or pomegranate) , tayom (indigo), and red agusip or 
talab roots and bangkuro bark, while cotton husks themselves made a bright 
red dye. In preparation for weaving, doubling the threads was called Umbal | 
to wax them, hagod, higod, or pagkit; and to starch them with cooked rice 

paste was pangas. 

Weaving was accomplished with the backstrap loom. The whole para- 
phernalia was called tandaya, including the heddles, lease rods, balila j 
batten, and loom bars. The warp was set up on a simple warping frame 
' (palatohat) and once it was transferred to the two loom bars, with one loom 
bar suspended from a partition of the house, it was called hanay. The we 


was hilig; the piece of bamboo which kept the shed open when the loom was 
at rest, bahay-kilig (weft-house) ; and the heddle for making the opposite 
ihed, anak-hilig (weft-child) or guyonan (from guyon, the thread wound 
around the heddle to pick up alternate warp threads) . Lease rods — that is, 
lat or round reeds inserted into the warp to prevent tangling and to 
■preserve tension — included the pugi on the weaver’s side of the shed and 
the lilitan coil rod on the far side. The shuttle, sikwan, was also called a 
weaving harpoon (bulos sapaghabi), and the bobbin inside was the pingi or 
sinikwan. Unlike the Visayan loom, there appears to have been no reed or 
comb, a feature the Tagalog loom shared with backstrap lboms still ii 
in the mountains of northern Luzon. 


in use 


Baskehy. Baskets ranged from fine, split-bamboo weaving like the bugsok 
clothes hamper and tight-woven bakay for carrying rice — “wide above, 
narrow below” — to the rattan alat with openings as large as latticework. 
Tight weaving also appeared in the bilaioo winnowing tray, mitay “mattress,” 
kupit knapsack, and large or small abubot “suitcases,” but not in the ordinary 
bamboo carrying basket, bangkat. Only one hat was actually woven — the 
sawing; the others were all plaited of leaves — for example, the ladies’ salip 
or the large, wide tankulok. A container for carrying rice was also made of 
leaves sewn together, the tuhog, named after the palm from which the 
leaves were taken. Papag was a sort of ubiquitous frame or tray made of 
canes with their ends inserted into rectangular bamboo or wooden frames, 
and served a wide variety of uses — beds, tables, seats, rowing benches, 
house parts, trays for soaking rice seedlings or, in general, any light 
substitute for boards. Ships’ sails were also woven of palm matting, though, 
ironically, the famous Manila galleons would carry sails of locally woven 


canvas. 


Caipentry. Woodworking and carpentry for the Tagalogs were limited 
to — and they excelled in — hewing, joinery, and carving. That is to say, 
timber was squared (pagpag) and reduced to boards with an adze (darns) 
rather than with a saw, fitted together with mortise-and-tenon joints or 
rabbeting made with a chisel (pail), and given esthetic form by knifework — 
liso for carving in general, or lilok with a fine knifepoint. Kuko was mortising; 
pasak and lapatwere wedges or tenons; and pako and tilos were bamboo pegs 
or nails. Benches and tables required such joinery, and so did the great 
dalfim chief s houses with carved wooden walls. But by far the most highly 
developed skill was employed in the construction of boats and ships with 
long, curved strakes handhewn to shape all in one piece. 




MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


m 


wst 


■ 


} Jnfor Tta t *cVi%as e 

SS were also TaW , '"'"ty;™ XjE# 

UmL*nt!S^t he^^ndo^ 

. 1Ild arme d for the Spanish defense. Dictionary entries make it o< a mat | 

r e^ofUoiLg strakes, ca.dkod wa,, 

s :sp 

fimMWmk 

distinguished. -Ig 

. ;;.vS5 

Batencay A wooden vessel sewn with rattan 

Vlian A small but strong boat seating five persons 

Bank. General term for all tads of boats 

a „ n A boat hewn of one piece of wood, laigei man ouog 

“ A dugout canoe, a small boa, hewn of one piece of wood, commonly 

A brgTvesre", g also called a fragala (frigate), therefore probably . 
B,my 'includes the wardups Spaniards called karakoa, that is, ln.lones.an 

kora kora 

Birok or biruko A large, well-made vessel 

A large boa! ImHmdly^d for trade, more poorly made than the 
A wide boat, used around Manila for carrying 

ralangkas Alight vessehvlrich can sail against the wind, swift and does not carp. 

Xapak Ap)ank-builtboatwilhadug(nitkeel, enlarged withnipa washboards, 

used for trade 


Birok or biruko 

Kujrit 

Malo 


Tatangkas 


'Trade 

At the time of Spanish advent, Manila was the main entrepot in the 
archipelago: here exports were accumulated and imports redistributed. A 
few of these goods were carried in Luzon bottoms to or from Borneo, 
Malacca, At je, and the Moluccas, hut most of them were handled by foreign 
merchants — Malay, Bornean, Chinese, Japanese, Siamese, or Cambodian, 
even Portuguese. (The first ship the Spaniards seized in Philippine waters 
was a Bornean vessel owned by a Portuguese but loaded with cargo that 
belonged to the sultan of Brunei.) The Chinese sent anniial junks direct to 
the Philippines, but most Southeast Asian trade goods reached this remote 
region after being carried horn island to island, often by petty traders who 
rented cargo space and bought and sold from port to port in response to 
local supply and demand. International commerce in Manila was therefore 
not limited to Philippine products but included the resale of exotic mer- 
chandise like Timor sandalwood, Bornean camphor, and rhinoceros horns 
from Siam. Slaves were also brought from Siam and Borneo; indeed, the 
Malay word for payment, boyar, became the root of the Tagalog word for 
slave dealer — mamamayad. 

Nevertheless, Manila lay far to the north of the lucrative spice route. 
Native Philippine products were of limited variety and value, and handling 
them was not profitable enough to attract a resident Chinese colony. The 
few Chinese the Spaniards found married into Tondo in 1570 were politi- 
cal refugees and recent arrivals. Two or three seagoing junks a year were 
enough to supply what the local market could afford — and, indeed, to 
flood the archipelago with tens of thousands of pieces of porcelain. 

But the situation changed' dramatically with the arrival of Spanish cus- 
tomers willing to pay in coined silver. Thirty years after Legazpi occupied 
Manila, the Chinese quarter had four hundred shops and eight thousand 
residents, and it is estimated that almost 4 million Mexican pesos had been 
carried to China by that time. Chinese policy changes also facilitated the 
new trade: in 1567 licenses were issued to legalize what had been one 
hundred and fifty years of clandestine trade, two the first year and forty- 
four by 1587. 

Political developments ill Japan also favored increased trade. A century 
of civil war — and overseas piracy — ended with the establishment of a 
central regime in 1590 and the regulation of foreign trade in licensed “red 
seal” ships. By the turn of the century, friar missionaries bound for Japan 
could book direct passage in Manila. 


CIA^7 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


m 


Most Philippine exports were forest products— wax, honey, dyewoo 
deerskins and leather, civet and live civet cats, and heavy timber for a 
in Chinese junks that had arrived heavy-laden with porcelain and hap 
ware. Carabao horns and raw cotton also went to China, and pa m win 
rice and other foodstuffs to Borneo. Some commod.ties moved in bo. 
directions: gold, for instance, was traded by the Chinese for silver, at 
purchased by Japanese with their own silver. Cotton cloth went to Japan, 
Borneo, and Malacca, while expensive Indian pnntstuffs the major:, 
eastbound tradeware in Southeast Asia-entered through Borneo 
Cambodia Java, Malacca, Siam, and Sumatra. The Japanese also purchased 
Chinese silks and porcelain in Manila, and supported a cunous trade m 
little unglazed pots which had rough appeal for Zen tea ceremonies 

Philippine imports, on the other hand, were largely manufactured, 
goods— silk and cotton textiles, porcelain and crockery, fine mats, lar - 
ware, gongs, kettles, and swords Japanese katana). Other commodities^ 
included benzoin, camphor, copper, pepper, sago, sugar, and exotica like 
rubies, camelians, sapphires, and-no doubt for the China uade-rhinoc- 
eros horns, hides, hoofs, and teeth. Many imports listed in Spanish 
accounts were probably for their own, notFilipino consi.mption-b.scui s, 
butter, cattle, ham, horses, and wheat flour-although many of the hints 
they imported no doubt spread to local culuvation— chestnuts, figs, 
oranges pears, pineapples, plums, and pomegranates. It is no^or'J 
however that Chinese foods which are common in modern Tagalog life 
like Uhon, hopiya, mami, pansit, and petsay do not appear in seventeenth- 

century dictionaries. , , 

In addition to retailing Chinese imports in the Visayas, Tagalogs also 
traded as far north as the Cagayan Valley. In 1572, Juan de Salcedo found 
a Manila vessel on the coast of Ilocos Norte whose crew provided him a 
More guide familiar with that region. Moreover, local business practices 
were well developed and specialized. Kalakalvns the ordinary term for a 
merchant and lako was merchandise in general, though maglalako was 
taken to mean a dealer exclusively in clothes. Dagangan was bulk merchan- 
dise. especially expensive goods like silk. Utay was retailing; bahwas was 
hawking; and tango was buying or selling one item at a time Banyaga^ 
an itinerant peddler of petty inerchandi.se. Ilayad was dealing m slaves, 
tukal, in textiles. IhMagms selling foodstuffs in other localities, lint This was 
called sugal if the producer simply earned vegetables to the markt l| . 
for sale. Apia was to buy grain from the field. Wwas a bus, ness partner- 
ship (for example, “Nagsasama kamo nitong inyong lako [Areyou partners 
in this merchandise]?), and tapa was the capital invested (for example, 


“Mamolang salapi ang aming pinag tapa [We each putin ten t os tons] ”) (San 
Buenaventura 1613 , 175 , 152 ). 

Parian appears in the early dictionaries as the ordinary Tagalog word for 
marketplace, not only the Chinese Parian in Manila — for example, 
“Mamariang ka [Go to market] ” or “Sumaga ka nang pinya sa parian [Buy 
some pineapples in the market]” (San Buenaventura 1613 , 177 ). Here, 
customers often purchased cheap items like fish and fruit by weighing out 
bits of gold or silver in their own scales, a procedure called sumaga from the 
saga seeds which were the smallest weight for gold. (The scales and weights 
were carried in a purse called karay, but the gold itself was^ tied very tight 
in a kind of money belt called unton.) Here, too, marketing procedures 
might involve tazoad, to beat the price down by haggling; sahol, to overprice; 
viura, to underprice; or kagyot, to misrepresent goods. Angka was to corner 
the market by buying out a particular item, amam was petty pilfering or 
shortweighting, and daha or pig-it was to detain merchandise en route to 
manipulate the market price — “as they do along the Pasig River and 
in Taguig,” San Buenaventura said, “and then sell it much dearer in 
Manila.” 

Debt slavery and peonage being an important determinant in Tagalog 
social structure, interest rates were high. Palaba was a loan at 20 percent 
interest per month ( pahigil if calculated daily) and ganda, 100 percent per 
annum; while talinduzua was any loan at 50 percent, ibayiw, at 100 percent, 
and dalawa-lima , 150 percent. Another word, bintang, as defined by San 
Buenaventura (1613, 59), was “to add more and more every day to the debt 
a person owes, as if it were buzuis [tribute], by lending him more with the 
intention that he will not be able to repay it and so become a slave.” Actual 
coins were called pilak (silver) and prior to the Spanish arrival were based 
on the Portuguese toston (salapi), the equivalent of half a peso, or 4 reales. 
Thus, 2 reales or half a toston was kahati or hinting; 1 real was saikapat; and 
half a real, saikawalo. Since all these denominations were too large for 
ordinary market purchases, they were chopped into pieces — lamok in 
general, tatak-tatak if silver. A few of the famous Chinese coppers with a 
square hole in the middle (pitis) were also in circulation. 


The Alphabet. 

The Tagalogs had an indigenous script called haybayin when the Span- 
iards arrived. 32 The best description of their literacy is contained in the 
Boxer Codex (1590b, 371): 


c>nr» 



MINDANAO AND LUZON 


whatever they wish. They ditto ^ ery when t hey wri 

ssssissssgSssM^ 

In using such a tablet, which is foiu mg bamboo, and make the 

but only letters and reminders to one anothei .... [And io\ J y 
with them. 


Father Chirino (1604, 39) rather fondly stated, 'These islanders are sp 

were no professional senbes arcliw . , executed Affidavits in Map 

bly incorrect. Among eight Ilocano chi Narvacan— and of 

1591, only one could sign his name Juan -ai * During the 

eleven in Pampanga, also only one— ‘ c( ^ as ^ ( Lagun a) “and those 
1599 plebiscite, 155 chiefs swore oaths m Uunban (Lag J , 

SsSSSSKS 

^S^Sl-dinBotninicanarchlves, there -some who* 

Wi NonefoeTess, Whatever the ^og ^ "“"puhlth 

sixteenth century, it was *°^ a . s Doctlina Christiana* 

mini de nJlra Senora delRosano, of which no 

Father ifopeh suhstitutio.t of / or ,/ produced such Uocano ha, hurts, ns , 


j3-a behTho-Vu. (p$ QScf c5 ctL 

lE^a tdc , di do clu .Jj~a Pc-fv-fcfu. 

iS’tt-eui cp.ie-n gum gy on gun 4ba» 
\)o \)i J70 Jni.JSa je jf jojCi. iLlale . 
ti Id lu. ( 3|[b?i mcmi mo. 
nSru no nil pc pi pop u . . 

que qui quo qu/^R^n vctT *5 iu.Sa 
sc s l s o s ti . ‘Sk tc ti to -tti . *&] a v e * 
vl bit. 3£,?{occxTaco xu.yapc. 
yi yd yu. 3 q -553130 3 u. |-$V- 

«c £/t a hc.cnleguTbagala.r^o 
w \\4^<zr rh q fc^iL> 
^L>Dii ■ cC £1 p 5i tcv ri 6 £bc? . G XS 
Pa D J3JE tmeftto quo eftas eu. 

Fig. 8. A page from Plasencia’s Doctlina Christiana 
en lengua Espanol y Tagala 





I - 


Si? 


. ' ' 




- fr 

3 

3 


V 

13. <;■ 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



read the Bornean script, which was probably Arabic. A few years later 
Tagalog conspirators hoping to expel .heir Spantsh tttvaders co.nm„ m , 
catch aiming themselves and their Bornean allies it. writing, a, tel even sen, 
a letter to Japan. Naturally none of this correspondence has survived, l«| 
the Spanish translation of a Bikola., n letter “en let, as tagala, whtch coj 
tains a scathing condemnation of Spanish misconduct, is preserved tjj 
Franciscan archives in Madrid. The Doctnna Christiana contains the only , 
known example of the baybayin from the sixteenth century, but there are 

many from the seventeenth. 

Use. At least three books made use of Tagalog movable types early in the 
seventeenth century. Blancas de San Jose used them m h.s 1610 Artsy Regia, 
to show the separation ofsyllables-that is, syllables that begin mth vowld 
San Buenaventura placed the appropriate one at the beginning ch 
alphabetic division of his 1613 dictionary (see fig. 9) ; Franctsco Urpei 
published his whole Ilocano Doctnna in Tagalog type in | 621 J heal P ’ 
itself was illustrated in Chirino’s 1604 Macion, and MelchisedecThevenot s 

1646 Relation de divers voyages curieux. S 

In 1895 Marcilla y Martin published two rather crude examples rora 
1 Augustinian manuscripts of 1602 and 1699 in his Esludio de bs anUgm 
alfabetos Filipinos, the former from a Zambales grammar in Bohnao jj 
latter from a letter written in Bacolor, Pampanga. Between these dates, 
more than a hundred Filipino signatures appear in title deeds, donat.ons 
and petitions from provinces around Manila, usually written m Spanish 
and preserved in archives in Manila, Madrid, and Mexico. J 

With the exception of a few Tagalog deeds written in baybayin in full, 
none of the above examples are documents or texts— and even those tew 
deeds in baybayin used Spanish form and dates. But Caspar de San Agusm 
stated in his 1703 Compendio that the nauve script was still m use for poetry 
in Batangas at that time. Also, identifying letters were scratched presum- 
ably by common sailors, on the surface of water jars recovered from the 
wreck of the eastbound galleon Nuestra Senrna de la Consolaaon which went 
down off Guam in 1638. Moreover, the baybayin must have been in 

common use for chronicler Domingo Martinez (1756, 1:102) to have given 

credence to the following story about a plague of locusts: 


Tagalog Culture and Technology 


What happened was that on their innenrings, which were white, they had written 
in the Tagalog language and letters the following words: on the one w.ng the wo, 
gaftC which means to say “ire” or “anger,” and on the other the phrase nangDios, tvhicli 
means “of God,” so all together, “the anger of God. 


Thomas Ortiz described the ‘Tagalog dun al ters” in his 1740 Arte y 
}{eglas. However, his contemporary, Melehor de Oyangnrcn, said, “Nowa- 
days these letters are being forgotten” (Oyangnrcn 1742; I.mnbera 1968, 
631), and the only known samples of Filipino penmanship from the 
eighteenth century are the signatures in a 1792 document from Mindoro, 
gut these involve Mangyans, a people who, like the Taghanwa of Palawan, 
have continued to use their script up until the present day. There are no 
other references to the use of the baybayin in the nineteenth century, 
although the memory clearly survived. In the absence of written records, 
Spanish observers often recorded alphabets, unaware that each character 
represented a separate syllable. Thus, a table of “Ancient characters with 
which these natives of the Tagalogs and Camarines used to write,” dating 
from the time of Governor General Pascual Enrile (1830-1835), gives the 
following example: “Big man CpCp /J) Ory 

lalaquing dacola,” but which actually reads lalakinaga clakola (Enrile 1835). 

In 1841, Spanish traveler Sinibaldo de Mas was able to collect five 
samples of the alphabet from Pangasinan, Pampanga, Tondo, and Bulacan, 
and one Ilocano example, though not as used in any texts (see fig. 10) . He 
was himself aware that these were simply variants of a single alphabet; but 
they have come to be popularly regarded as distinct alphabets from differ- 
ent provinces, just as the Tagalog type font of the Lopez Ilocano Doctnna 
has frequendy been reproduced as an “Ilocano alphabet.” Naturally, hand- 
written letters differ considerably from printed types, and from one an- 
other. But far from being different alphabets, these half-dozen anachronis- 
tic examples simply illustrate different hands, as evidenced by comparison 
with the many genuine specimens of Tagalog penmanship in the archives 
of the University of Santo Tomas. As Dominican Father Albert Santamarfa 
(1938;\ 184) commented after an exhaustive study of all of them in 1938, “it 
has been most interesting, for, despite all having been written by Tagalogs, 
we found greater variations among them than, in general, among the 
different alphabets represented as coming from different regions.” 


Description. The baybayin is one of about a dozen indigenous alphabets 
from such Southeast Asian islands as Sumatra, Java, and Sulawesi, which are 
ultimately derived from ancient India, and share the Sanskrit characteristic 
that any consonant is pronounced with the vowel a following it, diacritical 
marks being added to express other vowels. It contained seventeen letters, 
three of which were the vowels a, e-i, and o-u — or rather, the vowels a, e-i, 
and o-u preceded by a glottal stop, since they were used in this way to begin 
syllables. The other fourteen were radical signs representing the conso- 


213 


ir ir 
Q O 
tP, X •£ 
ist k c 

n 31 Ji 


0 w 


«=• w nz 


T T 


m tn w> 

n m <n 


tT* */) 
V5 V< 
H to 


to to b 



ii if it 




V* — > 1 i/M I 1 -V 


J c3 j y j 

O ^ £) o c 

viX 6xz~> uZ^ -Z Z~~ ‘ ^ 


J?? JJ 


tr 2; 


71 n J\ 



'V > zp 
^ t70 

^ 4 
X 

cr 

IzJ V3 


cr t ^r 

tr V' 

<p T yf\. 


t/° iX 

v J ^5 

V- 2, 

^ 9 





Tagalog Culture and Technology 

Hants £, d, g, h, k, l, m, n, ng, p, s, i, w, and y, which wore pronounced ba, 
da, ga, ha, ka, la, nia, na, nga, pa, sa, la, wa, and unless a mark called kudlit 
(which the Spaniards spelled corlit) was placed over them, in which ease 
their value was modified to a front vowel like cor i, or under them, in which 
case they were pronounced with a back vowel like o or u. When writing 
vertically rather than horizontally, however, the kudlit were placed to the 
left or right of the letters rather than above or below them, and there was 
evidently no set rule for the direction of the writing. Completely wanting 
was any mark — like the Sanskrit virama, or what Dutch scholars call a 
gUnkerdoder, “vowel killer” — to cancel the vowel value of a letter and permit 
it to stand as a consonant alone. Consonants therefore could not be 
expressed at the end of a syllable, a considerable shortcoming, since /wand 
la, for instance, could be read “batay” as well as “bata,” depending on the 
context. 

The baybayin was in common enough use to develop such orthographic 
conventions as the use of one letter with two kudlit to represent two 
different syllables. The bold and distinctive signature of Don Dionisio 
Kapolong, son of Lakandula, for example, places kudlit both under and 
over the letter d to represent the do of “Don” and di of “Dionisio,” respec- 
tively, and a tide deed of 1613 places two kudlit under the letter t to 
represent both the to and tu of "nitong tubigan [in this wet field].” When 
spelling aloud, Tagalogs called their letters baba, dada, haha, etc. The 
inability of the baybayin to represent the wgof nitong illustrates its inad- 
equacy for recording spoken Tagalog faithfully, probably a sufficient expla- 
nation for its limited use and the absence of Filipino documents, written 
records, or monumental inscriptions. Father Blancas de San Jose, after 
having published one book in Tagalog script, explained in the introduc- 
tion to his 1605 Memorial, de la vida Christiana en lengua Tagala that he now 
considered it impractical. And when Father Lopez used it in his Doctrina, 
he introduced a kind of virama in the form of a little cross under the letters 
to cancel their vowel value, a reform which seems never to have been 
adopted by any Filipino. As he himself explained, 

the reason for putting the text of the Doctrina in Tagalog type . . , has been to begin 
the correction of the said Tagalog script, which, as it is, is so defective and confused 
(because of not having any method until now for expressing final consonants — 1 
mean, those without vowels) that the most learned reader has to stop and ponder over 
many words to decide on the pronunciation which the writer intended (Lopez 1621, 
| LXII). 



215 








MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Examination of all the native scripts of Southeast Asia suggests that th 
are local developments, share some common ancestor in southern In 
but are not directly ancestral to one another. Perhaps the baybayin 
derived — however imperfectly— from some intermediary script which 
longer exists: Butuan, Borneo, Sulu, and Kumalarang (Mindanao) w 
once able to present memorials to the Chinese court engraved on g 
tablets but have had no native script in modern times. It may be not 
however, that the Buginese-Makassarese alphabet of Sulawesi to the south 
share the Philippine characteristic of not using— indeed, not needing— 
any “vowel killer,” a fact which recommends them as the intermediate 
source of the baybayin. In any event, whatever the form of die first Philip-: 
pine alphabet and wherever it came from, there is no reason why Tagalojg 
merchants should not have brought it back from their trading voyages 
themselves. 



CHAPTER 12 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


The Tagalog father was avia; the mother, ina; and the two of them 
were mangaama , that is, parents. Children referred to their father as Bapa 
(Beloved), a term of respect and affection which elders also applied to 
youngsters, and which, indeed, was a general expression of admiration — 
for example, “Galing bapa [Oh, what a fine thing]!” Others addressed 
fathers with a derivative of ama which meant the father of so-and-so — for 
example, a-Maria, ami-Tiba, or ada-Lamba. Similarly, the mother of 
Francisco was addressed as i-Siko. A mother’s own children addressed her 
with the honorific Bayi (Lady) if they had no surviving grandmother 
entitled to this name. 


Kinship 


Both husband and wife were asawa, with inaasawa being a secondary 
wife or concubine, usually of lesser rank than her husband. A slave 
concubine was called pangapol, however, and her children would not 
be heirs except in the case of a father’s special affection. As for ranking 
wives, they commonly employed wet nurses for their offspring: because of 


91 


217 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



Tagalog Society and Religion 



this one of Father Blancas’s sermons specifically praised the Virgin M: 
for having nursed the infant Jesus with her own milk The importance 
both parents to the family unit was reflected in the term kaanaktikk, 
persons who married dead siblings’ spouses even if both they and their new 
spouses already had children— for example, a widower with children who 
married his brother’s widow, also with children. 

Grandfather was amba and grandmother was mdo-terms which mea 
father and mother on the east coast-and both were called None who 
they were old enough to be considered truly venerable, but not after their 
death Grandparents and grandchildren were called by the same term, apo, 
and were reckoned to the third generation: great-grandparents were aposa 
luhod literally, "grandparents at the knee”-or in the case of grandmoth- 
ers, apo sa sinapiLponan, "grandmothers in the lap”-and 
parents were apo sa kalapakan, “grandparents at the sole of the foot I 
was the head of an especially prolific lineage, he was called just that- 

1U1 Children were anak—anak sa inaasaxoa, if born to a secondary wife, or 
anak sa para, if both parents were of equal ^-panganay being thejrst 
son and bungso, the youngest. Siblings were kapatid—kambal, if twins, 
dugtong, if bom to the same mother; labot, any babes suckled at the same 
breast, and they all called their eldest brother Kaka. Consangumal cousins 
were pinsan, nephews and nieces were pamangkin. They addressed then 
aunts as Ali and their uncles as Mama-or Kaka, in the case of their parents 
eldest brothers— but referred to aunts as daga and uncles as amam. 

All these blood relatives were hinlog, or, more colorfully, kamgtongblluka | 
meaning "connected innards.” Collateral relatives were kabalayr father- or -I 
mother-in-law were biyanan; kipagbemg sister-in-law; bayaw brother-in-law, 
and parents of a married couple called each other Baysar A son-in-law was I 
maZgang, and was required to do a year’s service m h,s father-, n-law s | 

residence before taking away his bride. . 

Adoption was common among upper-class Tagalogs. Rajah Soliman of 
Manila adopted a deceased brother’s three children after his own son was 
executed by the Spaniards. One who was adopted by a childless parent w 
inaanak naboo, a sole heir, but more common were kalunsak, joint hem 
together with the adoptive parent’s own children or brothers and siste . 
This was a contractual investment on the part of either the person being 
adopted or his parents, for the mutual benefit of both parties-on the one 
hand for the child to join a well-to-do family and, on the other, for the 
adoptive parents to enlarge their family. Adoption was done in one of three 
ways: ibayrn was an agreement for the adopted child to inherit twice the 


sum that was given at the time of adoption; talinduwa was to receive half as 
much as the adoption fee, also over and above that same fee; and mulaying 
was to receive a still larger share in case the family’s fortunes increased. 

Illegitimate children were called anak sa kinaligawan or anak sa kaagulo, 
from ligaw (passerby) and agnlo (lover), respectively. Sexual mores were 
lax, and sanctioned a promiscuity which Father Chirino attributed to the 
belief that women could not enter the afterlife without the help of their 
lovers. Kinadalagalian was a man who deflowered a virgin, whether lover or 
husband, and Father San Buenaventura (1613, 510) ^explained, “They 
do not consider the easy, unstable women they call handa na babayi, 

harlots [It comes] from handa, which means prepared, because so they 

are.” But those who were too ready and too frequent with their favors were 
scorned as gibon (wobbly) or lagap (common to all) . Abangwe re the worst — 
lascivious, depraved, and completely profligate, “than whom no goat or 
hen gives herself more freely to all” (San Buenaventura 1613, 511). And 
antol was one with “body sickness.” 33 


Social Structure 


Like the Visayans, the Tagalogs had a three-class social structure. The 
ruling class was called maginoo, including datus, who were the heads of 
barangays; and their supporters were timawa or maharlika. Everybody else 
was alipin — slaves, bondsmen, or debt peons. Moreover, the difference 
between the serflike householding slaves, alipin sa namamahay, and the 
more lowly domestic slaves, alipin sagigilid, was so great that Father Plasencia 
described them as two separate classes. He also considered the maharlika a 
separate class. 


Maginoo and data. The Tagalog aristocracy or upper class were called 
“maginoo,” those who could claim noble descent; one of the chiefs who 
surrendered the port of Manila in 1570 was Maginoo Marianaway. Ginoo 
was a title of respect for both sexes, while Gat or Dayang preceding a proper 
name was the equivalent of Lord or Lady. Panginoon were those with 
lordship over many slaves and valuable property like houses or boats, more 
commonly called may-ari (one with plenty of possessions), or even dalam, 
which was actually a large, well-staffed house and household. Poon was an 
honorific contraction when addressing them — for example, “Oo poon [Yes 
sir]” or “Aba poon [Greetings, lord]” (San Buenaventura 1613, 551). But 
nouveaux riches were scornfully referred to as maygintawo, “fellow with a lot 


01 Q 


01 A 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


of gold” — or, as San Buenaventura (1613, 351) put it, “hidalgo l>y gold, not 
lineage, a 'dark knight, - as we would say." /ta (root) was the founder of|- ; 
a descent line (lalad), whose identity had to be established in reckoning , 
precedence or settling dowries, with ritual boasting being a normal part of 
formal gatherings. (Bansag was boasting ol lineage and wealth, hngas, of 
wealth and ferocity.) Careless claims to being ma/tai— well-born gentry— 
could evoke caustic comments like, “Sinn ang nagpuno sa myo d> ahpm dm 
[Who founded your line if not a slave]?” (San Buenaventura 1613. 17Z). j 
Maginoo with personal followings were called datus; nagdarato meant to J 
rule a barrio or barangay,” that is, a community or following (San g 
Buenaventura 1613, 130) * They usually had a public lounging platform gj 
called gulang-gulang under their houses for the discu^ton of community 
affairs and the exchange of news and gossip. A data s following or faction .3 
was called a dulohan, or more popularly, a barangay, literally a boat Father 3 
Plasencia was told that the latter name came from the fact that Filipino 
settlers first arrived in the archipelago in boats each captained by a sing e 
data with his whole family and retainers, though it is hardly like y that the 
entire Tagalog population could have maintained discrete boatload iden- 
tities across centuries or millennia. But whatever its origin, this picturesque 
term was adopted by the colonial government to mean a tribute-collecting 
unit: right up until the end of the Spanish regime, bapusmal registers 1,sted 
parents not by their place of residence but as belonging to the barangay 

of Don So-and-so.” jfi 

Barangays ranged in size from a few households to as many as a hunch ed. 

Tavtay (Rizal), for instance, had four hundred families under four datus . 
when Father Chirino arrived there in 1591. A settlement which consisted | 
of a single barangay was called pook, but usually from four to ten chiefs with 
their dulohan lived together in a bayan (town), giving precedence on the g 
basis of wealth or military prowess. When they met together on mutua 
business, such a gathering was called Upon, Upon, or pulong - a mun.cpal j 
council, so to speak. Large bayan might be the seat of actual chiefdoms with | 
paramount rulers called Lakan or Rajah, like the two at the mouth of the . 
Pasig River, Tondo on the north and Manila on the south. The role of such j 
a chief was revealed in a description of Si Banaw Lakan Dula by his great- , 
grandson, Juan Macapagal, in 1665. , 

Don Carlos Lacandola ... was Lord and most principal of the town of Tondo, and I 
of the other surrounding towns, whose natives paid him tribute and vassalage and 
other recognition as their natural lord, and when ships from China came to this bay, : 
they similarly paid him duties and anchorage fees, he removing their sails and rudder 
for this purpose, and taking their merchandise by paying half its value at the time and 



Tagalog Society and Religion 


the other half the next year, without any other natives being aide to buy anything from 
theSanglayes | Chinese | but only from the said Lacandola, from which he had much 
profit (Macapagal l (>(>5, 219)/* 

The datu’s duties. A datu was expected to govern his people, lead them 
in war, protect them from their enemies, settle their disputes, and — as 
good administrator Dr. Morga (1609, 191) said — “succor them in their 
struggles and needs.” His authority was reflected in his being called basal , 
| the drumstick with which he beat a gong to summon bis people. As captain 
I either ashore or afloat — or pilot — he was called tuway; though as captain- 
owner of a large vessel he might take the more prestigious Bornean title of 
B anakora; and when acting as guide for other datus, he was called panugot or 
kanulo. 

But datus were not cal’ed kings (hari), not even paramount chiefs; that 
I term was known only in reference to foreign monarchies (kahanan) and 
their viceroys (halili). It is significant that Spaniards called them pnncipales 
(chiefs), not regulos (rulers). Plasencia likened them to Caballeros (knights), 
that is, beneficiaries of a caballena, and a caballeria was an encomienda, an 
assigned commission together with its duties, privileges, and. income. This 
is precisely the role in which the colonial government would cast the 
Filipino principalia of later generations. 

As a judge (hukom), a datu convoked the litigants, heard sworn testi- 
mony, and handed down a decision, all in foe presence of his people, and 
•.sometimes with the assistance of older men. His decision could be 
appealed, however, to an arbiter of foe contestant’s choice from another 
community, even a non-datu. If he himself was sued by one of his peers, he 
appeared before a wise legalist acceptable to him and his accuser, but if 
such arbitration failed, the plaintiff initiated a blood feud which ran its 
violent course until mutual exhaustion satisfied honor and both parties 
agreed to a financial settlement. The law itself was handed down by 
tradition, but was liable to amendment by consensus among leading datus, 
and to circumvendon by any among them powerful enough to do so. 

Penalties varied with the social status of foe parties (for example, alipin 
could be put to death for offending maginoo) , and were usually fines heavy 
enough to result in debt slavery. Adultery was settled by indemnification of 
the offended husband, which sum was taken as future dowry and signified 
his adoption of any resulting child as his own. Capital punishment for 
offenders was prescribed only for witchcraft or infraction of religious tabus, 
in which case the presiding datu took possession of foe condemned man’s 
children, as he also did in the case of total enslavement, compensating the 
plaintiff himself. 


991 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Control over available arable land was vested in the datu, but only | 
irrigated land was distributed among his barangay widi right of usuffuctjj 
hillside swiddens could be worked freely by any resident, or even aliens. - j 
The datu also had the right to retain certain land use for himself— fojj 
example, the restriction of access to fisheries, or the collection of market ' 
fees at a strategic passage on a waterway. Indeed, upstream datus wer |jj 
known to manipulate Manila market prices by delaying the delivery of ™|||| 
He could also convert his rights into regular payments from his people, as 
the ruler of Pila (Laguna) did after he purchased that place in gold 
its former chief, charging his maharlika a regular fee for use of the lan® 
It is noteworthy that the rate was fixed at 4 cavans a year rather than at some 
percentage of the produce or size of the holding, making the holder his 
vassal, not his tenant. 


The dahTs privileges. A datu received services, agricultural produce, and 
respect from his people. The respect was shown by such deferential behavior 
as covering the mouth with the hand when addressing him, or conti acting j| 
the body in a deep bow on entering his presence indoors and raising the 
hands alongside the cheeks, and he was never addressed as “O hoy!” or 
“Oya!” the ordinary greeting among friends. The same deference was 
shown his family and descendants, in office or out— all maginoo, in short— j 
and slander against any of them was severely punished. He received a sha|j| 
of harvests as tribute from the lower classes, and additional contribution M 
such as ajar of sugarcane wine or tuba on such occasions as his feasts or j 

funerals. 

Personal services were of two kinds: seasonal field labor from whidj| 
nobody was exempt of any class, participation in maritime and military j 
expeditions, and unscheduled occasions like house construction or open- 
ing new land, for all of which labor the laborers were fed or feasted. 
Seafaring duties in service of a datu were especially demanding: to equip 
and supply the vessel and then to row it, either as slaves or as warriors, or 
to come, provisioned and armed, as soon as he called and as often, and tqj 
x follow wherever he led. 


Timawa and maharlika. A datu’s nonslave followers were freemen called 
timawa and maharlika: they could not be legally bought and sold— for 
which reason the Boxer Codex and Plasencia called them “hidalgos”— and 
had the theoretical right to attach themselves to the datu of their choice.| 
The earliest accounts called timawa “commoners” (hi genie, comun) or “ple-| 
beians" (plebeyos), both terms . suggesting in sixteenth-century Spam meligi-| 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


bility to marry a person of noble or royal blood. They enjoyed agricultural 
rights to a portion of the barangay land, both to use and bequeath, and to 
harvest without paying tribute. Although contractual reladons with their 
dams varied and even included tribute in some cases, (licit datus were 
basically their lords, not their landlords. Their normal obligation was 
agricultural labor worked off in groups when summoned for planting or 
harvesting; but they might also be liable to work fisheries, accompany 
expeditions, or row boats. Like members of the alipin class, they, too, could 
be called out for irregular services like supporting feasts or building- 
houses. I 

Timawa were born into their class, but their ultimate origin lay in the 


maginoo class above them and the alipin below. From the former they 
absorbed the illegitimate offspring of maginoo with their unmarried slaves — 
or married serfs — and from the alipin, those who had successfully repaid 
debts, completed indenture, or literally purchased their freedom in gold. 
The definitions in the early dictionaries are unambiguous. San Buenaventura 
(1613, 389) defined timawa as “without servitude [esclavoma], the common 
people after the magnate,” and illustrated with the example, “Titimawain 
kita [I’ll set you free].” His contemporary, Blancas de San Jose (1614a, 
timawa) , was even more illuminating: 


A free man who was formerly a slave, and from this they say timawa of one who 
escapes death by chance, like one in the hangman’s noose and the rope breaks, or the 
bull that cannot be captured because of his bravery, and, changing the accent, 
naglitimaioaki s a slave who has freed himself by running away from his master, and the 
same with animals. 


The word maharlika is ultimately derived from Sanskrit maharddhika, a 
man of wealth, wisdom, or competence, which in precolonial Java meant 
members of religious orders exempt from tribute or taxation. In the 
sixteenth-century Philippines, they were apparently a kind of lower aristoc- 
racy who rendered military service to their lords. The maharlika accompa- 
nied their captain abroad, armed at their own expense, whenever he called 
and wherever he went, rowed his boat not as galley slaves but as comrades- 
at-arms, and received their share of the spoils afterwards. 

Plasencia is the only sixteenth-century observer known to mention the 
maharlika, and he did not explain the origin of their status. They may well 
have been a sort of diluted maginoo blood, perhaps the descendants of 
mixed marriages between a ruling line and one out of power, or scions of 
a conquered line which struck this bargain to retain some of its privileges. 
At any event, they were subject to the same requirements of seasonal and 



i! 


1 | 


223 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


feast and pay their darn from 6 to W forwar .» 

Plasencia (1589a, 25) added, it cou disappear under colonial! 

This maharlika P rofess.on was de * "w as feed disap. 

pacification, of course, just as tie ia already evident in Plasencia’s 

peared. Indeed, the effects of the change ^”^ h 3sTervices into feudal 
day; die lord of Pila had commute lexicons. Blancas de; 
dues. The process is reflecte in , ‘‘freemen though with a 

San Jose (1614a mal ‘“ rl ^ th ey mayTot leave the bamngay: they are the 

certain subjugation in that y y • countryfolk living on 

people called villeins ^ ^ n g"“ aventura (1613,389) illustrated with 
some nobleman s villa. , rp m 0 ne-quarter free]. At ^ 

the example, “Sa lkapat ang ama ar 1 „ F one who was ij 

th e end century Dc (1738, 159) i 

^d rsa e co.lon etpresston,' Minahadhka ako nang panginnon ko [My 

master freed me].” 


Alipin. Alipin was always (translated pdwty" btt 

men and d err.t ^e a nse*ey wereall debtors: that is, they had their price, 

Their subordination was ther efoi e° g th eir lords, 

and their masters were technically 

The alipin had birthright clam, to work a P^Ohe bam g y_ ^ a 
could not be taken away from him ^ dy J d slave . Alipin 

commuted death sentence by w „ vwere called mntubo—i but what 

might be born as such-in which the, ^ g inde nture, or 

they really inherited from d and Sold, their debt 

sentence. Although they could not ^ g “ ,y another for profit . For this 
could be transferred from one cr become alipin to his own 

reason, a man who fell into deb ‘ ment exttem? penury might 
relatives if possible. As a matter o > ^ ^ become na paaalipin as 

voluntarily seek d « security o “ ^ on a debt slave was even considered 
opposed to naaahpin .) ind , ma n with man y 

;l form of succor: Father sakop, and « all 

rneam t^nSrite" debt in exchange for bondage, occasions which no 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


doubt proliferated under colonial tribute demands— for example, “Paaraan 
ro o ako nitong ambagan [Pay for me and cover this tax I owe] (ban 
Buenaventura 1613, 459). 

Since the degree of alipin indebtedness could vary, when that debt was 
nassed on to heirs it varied according to the debts of either parent or even 
those inherited from preceding generations. In the case of a mixed mar- 
riage between alipin and timawa, their offspring’s condition was deter- 
mined by their saya, and saya was defined as 

dependence of the children of slaves: if the father is free, so is the' first child, and the 
second is slave like .he mother, etc, contrariwise, if the mother is free, feel Brstwstave 
like the father and the second is free like the mother, and so on with all the « est, and 
if they are an odd number, the last one is half-slave and half-free (San Buenaventu 

r 1613 , 478 ). 

Moreover, if alipin had three non-alipin grandparents, they were quar- 
ter-slaves. What all this meant in practical terms was that such alipin on J 
worked off half their father’s, or one-quarter their grandfather s indebted- 
ness during alternate months. Such partial alipin also had the right to 
enforce their manumission if they could afford the price. 

The ordinary alipin with land rights was called namamahay, house- 
holder; and one who had lost that right, or never had it-ior example a 
gintubo, captive, or purchase-was called alipm sa gigihd, hearth slave. In 
addition, the Boxer manuscript made the curious remark that there was a 
kind of slave of both namamahay and gigilid status called tagalos If this was 
not a flat error, it may have been obtained from some informant of 
Bornean descent and thus reflected a perceived relationship between the 

two peoples. 

Alipin namamahay. Spanish accounts consistently translated alipm as 
“slave, but their authors just as consistently deplored the illogic of includ- 
ing the namamahay in the same category as the gigihd, or even in 
category of esclavo at all. It was obvious that the gigilid-or at ^ast some 
gigihd-were chattel house slaves, “like those we have, as Morga (1609 
192) said but it was just as obvious that the serflike namamahay were not. 
One of theTongest entries in the San Buenaventura (1613, 299) dictionary 
1 belabors the point, and includes the following passage: 

These namamahay slaves in Silanga, which is on the way to GUing-gUmg from 
§ Lumban, make one field called tungo [contract], and it is to be ' 

no further obligation to their master; mPila, Bay, Pdhla [Pih a] a y 


225 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


almost free for they serve their ... aster no more than from time to l, me, and they say 
he almost has to beg them to go with him to other places or to help hm, w„h 
something, the samt as he does with the freemen; in all the hills as far as Calaylayao, 
ttey serve their master from time to time if he rails them, but ,1 he calls them too often 
it’s considered an abuse. 


Father Plasencia solved the problem directly and senstbly: he called 
them fecheros (tribute payers). The pecho they paid was called Armband 
amounted to half their crop, though the Visayan term bums was ... more 

common use; hence, nunuwis, tribute payer, and palmmsan, encom.end 
In addition, the namamahay was expected to present a measure of threshed 
rice or ajar of wine for his master’s feasts, and generally a share of any 
special foodstuffs he might acquire for himself-l.ke the leg of a deer»M 
in the hum. I .ike everybody else, he came at hts master s call to plant and 
i.arvesl his fields, build his houses, carry hts cargo, equip hts boat, and row 
it when he went abroad— not as a warrior but as an oarsman, unless relieved 
of this status as an accolade for bravery-and in any emergency such as hts 
muster's being sick, captured, or flooded out. He owned hts own house, 
personal belongings, and gold, and bequeathed them tohl * h ™-^ t ^ 
ownership of the land he used was restricted: he could not alienate tt. If his 
master moved out of the settlement, he continued to serve him as a ktnd 
of absentee landlord, and if his master dted, he was obligated to all 
mister’s heirs and had to divide his services among them. Upon hisown 
S his "edhor had the right to take one of his children for gig.hd 
domestic service in the creditor’s own house, but if such cred.tor took 

more, he was considered a tyrant. . . o 

Namamahay came into their condition in three ways: inheritance fro 
namamahay parents, dropping down from timawa status, or nstng up from 
rigilid If one’s debt arose from legal aetton or insolvency, he and hts 
creditor agreed on the duration of the bondage and an equivalent cash 
value for ifs satisfaction. In Plasencia's day this never exceeded 10 taels in 
gold or roughly the market value of 320 cavans of nee at Manila prices. 
Those who rose from the ranks of the gigilid hearth slaves might actually 
have purchased their freedom, but mainly they were transferred to 
namamahay householding status for their master’s convenience when they 
married. For this reason, captives and purchased slaves may have been set 
up in namamahay housekeeping status from the beginning. 


Alipin sa gigilid. and was the “nethermost part of the house where the 
hearth is,” but also where the family made their toilet and so was a 
deprecatory term in contrast to duyo, entrance or front. These lowly altpin 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


were members of their master’s household and ate out of their master’s 
pot. They were as dependent on him as his own children, and from this 
circumstance arose his moral right to sell them. In actual practice, how- 
ever, he rarely did so. He might transfer them to some other creditor, but 
raw material for the slave trade or human sacrifice was not procured from 
the household, or even from the alipin labor pool which implemented a 
datu’s public and private projects. Quite the opposite, they might be 
rewarded at their master’s pleasure, or his hope of motivating them, by 
being permitted to retain some of the fruits of their labor, even to the 
extent of eventually purchasing their liberty. Indeed, if theyjcould accumu- 
late enough gold — say, through the trade of goldsmith or by participating 
in raids — they could buy their way not only into namamahay status, but 
even timawa. Juan San Antonio (1738, 160), reporting the old 30-peso 
manumission price 130 years later, commented, “And if he gave 60 or 
more, he was free of everything and became a hidalgo.” 

The main source of alipin sa gigilid recruitment were the children bora 
in their master’s house, not infrequently natural children by his own alipin 
of either status, as well as those of men under such financial straits they 
could not afford to raise them. Once a hearth slave grew up and married, 
it was more practical and profitable to set him up in his own house instead 
of feeding and housing him and his new family. For namamahay, house- 
hold status only fell to married alipin; domestic gigilid slaves were single. 
The author of the Boxer manuscript described the situation with some 
surprise: 

His master can sell him because none of these slaves who are in their master’s house 
are married, but all maidens and bachelors, and in the case of a male who wishes to 
marry, the chief does not lose him, [for] such a one is called namamakaywhen married 
and then lives by himself, but rarely would they give the [female] slaves who were in 
the chiefs house permission to marry, though they would hinder none of the men 
(Boxer Codex 1590b, 383). 

The terms gigilid and namamahay therefore distinguished a man’s place 
of residence and marital status, and were incidental to a sliding scale of 
downward social mobility occasioned by punitive disenfranchisement and 
economic reversal. The condemned man’s debt to society and fiscal obli- 
gations could be underwritten by some other man motivated by kin loyalty 
or hope of gain. If both were alipin and neighbors and relatives, their new 
relationship might be no more evident than a redistribution of their labor. 
But the social stigma was considerable, for the gigilid of a namamahay was 
called by the insulting term bulisik , “vile, contemptible.” Still worse, the 



227 


MINDANAO AND L UZON 




S;' ‘ . j 

M. <:>». 
1 ; - 

m 


“exposed” like the private parts when one dress* ^ a house . 

?£«** down to jj 

t01 sTavt a p»rXardfrom outside the theTarenal I 

or raids could be real chattel without even *e t security ff ^ | 

affection of some ^r ‘s^criflc'I ' 'they would literally be nonpersons in j 
destined for resale or MOtoce,™ y . a s functioning al.pm, 

S&gsssgsssxs*: - — > - 

amelioration fortune might offer the >" . hat percentage of the 

In the absence of statistics, itis not poss or how much social 

Tagalog population be J° n S^ °" h downward . Moreover, our sources 
mobility was upward and h advent* and during that quarter j 

were all written a generation after Spam d > rol „ u „dly affected 

century, historic changes had taken pta* whmh had p ^ ^ 

Tagalog society. There were ^ a "ased tenfidfand colonial police 

demands to meet; Chinese tra - Tnpnt of captive slaves. These were aU| 

power was preventing further procu of Pjcal slaves, and providedl 

changes which would have inflated , nd ^amahay to 

incentive for reducing timawa o na . Y suggested by another 
madid. That this was taking place in the l^us SS 

passage in the Boxer Codex (1590b, 38 ). 


If they have many children, when chiefs house to | 

consider it a tyrannical abuse, anc once service than the namamahay 

m arrydoleave,theydonot ? mrntorend^2"; rannyinaS muchastheywere | 

to^ave^^ hbuseand he makes them return to it; and these slaves | 
inherited these customs from their ancestors. 


A nice assessment of this kind °f ^veiy is P~^ C ^ F ^^ndments 
Juan de Oliver m a hortatory exp ^ ton in 1590 . Addressing his j 
intended for the Taga °g : jn rhetor i C ally: What rich man with alipin 
listeners as Maginoo, he ask and did that man not have 

would not get angry if they .did not 7 ^ ^ what Js right? After all, 

the duty to order them what to . « t ta ^ e care of something, 

it was he who “took them in —inahla, meaning to take 





Tagalog Society a nd Religion 

“ Si™, rnWtt. I...I l«." 

un eT r . . j th days j That is why God likened men to the fishes of the sea, 
rtter^obbling'up the smaller.’,’ But the householding alipin was 

entioned under the commandment to keep the Sabbath holy: Just as he 
mentioned una ter divided h is working days alternately 

bXeenThem, si the infinitely more generous overlordship of God 

divided labor in man’s favor, six to one. 


1 Land and Property 

1 .. ‘ ’ n( - 0 n i qa\ hke many earlier observers, stated unambiguously, 

(kamanahanj was illus - 

Sth examples like “Mag kano kaya ang gintong kamana han mo sa 
daga mo 

hm^ude^en^trmA “goods withjjoo^^fi^eimm^le^cocmiutpl^antahnn^ 

tods But these were lands held in usufruct, not m fee s,m P le-that is, 
^ water sources 

sssssjg gi-ss 


229 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


. V - v-l Sgl 

debt slavery. Such slaves may very well have continued to live in their owi 
houses and work the same fields, giving their creditors a share of the; 
crops though they could also have been assigned elsewhere. Ruling data,, 
however, could dispose of unfilled land for their own profit— by restricting 
fishing rights, for example, or taxing forest products. Rajah Lakandula 
permitted Chinese refugees to settle on the Tondo shore, a grant which 
became the basis of individual land claims in the next century. 

These prerogatives enabled datus to take quick advantage of the Spanish 
concept of real estate introduced by the colonial government— aliena|g 
private property, registration of transactions and wills, and issuance of title 
deeds. By the 1590s, religious orders had need of land, private speculators 
were hungry for it, and datus were ready to supply it. A datu could logicaM 
claim and sell land his family, ancestors, and slaves had been working, jjj 
also— if less logically — all uncultivated land in his barangay domain. What 
happened to the land which had been divided so that “each knows his own” 
is not clear, but at least all early title deeds identify landowners as 
pnncipales — that is, chiefs or maginoo. In most cases the land being sold of| 
donated was not under rice cultivation, or even under cultivation at ^ 
When Bartolome Alison and Andres Duarte made a donation to the 
Franciscan hospital in Los Banos in 1608, they stated that it was “to make 
use of and dispose the said land as the said Hospital most desires and 
considers most suitable for advantage from it” (Alison 1608). But when 
Rajah Matanda’s granddaughter Catalina gave the Augustinians 200 pesos 
worth of land in 1621, this presumably represented the value of the crops 
m own on it. One wonders if this donation involved the dispossession of any . 
timawa or namamaliay tribute payers supporting Doha Catalina’s family 
At the time of the conquest, the Spanish government only recognized 
land actually being farmed as alienable, and even then, m a vain attempt, 
to protect Filipino property rights, the law required a specific justification 
for legal sale— for example, the owner was too old to farm, or the land was 
too hilly. But Tagalog sellers soon learned to collude with Spanish buyeis 
to circumvent the law. On 13 January 1620, Dionisio Kapolong, son of 
Lakandula, obtained permission to sell a piece of land measuring 40 by 100 
brazas (about 1 hectare) in Kinabayanan on the outskirts of Tondo to one 
Luis de Torres to cover debts amounting to 200 pesos. Dionisio presented 
witnesses who variously swore that the land was his, that it was inconven- 
iently located, unsuitable for agriculture, or only had fruit trees growing on 
it- though one of them opposed the sale, and two others subsequently 
claimed payment for having planted the fruit trees. Torres promptly resold 
the land for the same price to Juan Pangiligan, who paid 100 pesos 




8 


outright, bound himself to deliver the balance within three months and 
took possession on the 5th of February as Torres’s inquiUno (tenant). 

But on the 4th of February, Agustin Wika of Tondo had filed claim to the 
land and so had his wife Monica Sayan the next day, and on the 8th they 
brought suit against both Torres and Don Dionisio. They testified that they 
had purchased part of the land at legal sale and inherited the rest from 
Wika's father, Ama ni Kalaw; that as soon as they learned of this sale, they 
had rushed to the Tondo court but found the records missing; that Luis de 
Torres was a Spanish bully who had threatened them, compromised the 
court, and had so intimidated other Filipinos that they were afraid to testify 
against him; and that Juan Pangiligan was his employee and being used as 
a dummy to circumvent Governor Juan de Silva's decree against Spaniards 
residing in Tondo or Binondo. They also swore that it was public knowl- 
edge that Don Dionisio was a ne’er-do-well who had squandered his patri- 
mony in profligate living and had been selling off both his own and other 
people’s property. They were therefore appealing to the Royal Audiencia 

Manila for justice. Whatever the merits of the case or the decision of the 
court (the records have not survived), Luis de Torres seems to have 
prevailed in the end; the next year he sold the property to the Dominicans. 

m Warfare 

Father Martin de Rada (1577, 484) said the Tagalogs were “more mer- 
chants than warlike,’’ but this did not mean that they did not fight wars, th 
early accounts are unanimous in saying that one of a vassal s duties was 
follow his datu to war. They made raids, avenged grievances, waged vendet- 
tas, seized captives, and took lives in mourning for prominent chiefs. 
Attacking forces taunted “those who were about to be defeated with 
victory chants called dayam or tagumpay (San Buenaventura 1613 14 ). 
Real tuaves — bayani — were honored with special feasts in which they danced 
with a headdress made of gold-plated carabao horn, and were addressed as 
Bayani the rest of their lives. Indeed, one of the few Chinese words to e 
Tagalog in the sixteenth century was hukbo (ambush), the Hokkien wor 
foAriny. More than one observer equated male valor with the accumu a- 
tion of wealth, and Rada (1577, 484), after saying the Tagalogs were less 
warlike added, “But in robberies, thefts [and] tyrannies of property and 
— . . tiny exceed all others.” By this he meant high interest rates, 
debt slavery even among relatives, dispossessing orphans, collecting from 
debtors’ barangay-mates, and plundering vessels driven ashore. Nor did 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


' • 


(1613, 349) — d with^ee^e^ 

£ “s -? -V r.te“rsi « 

often led to poisoning, especially m the case oi P 

... .“"it 

of their enemies and their injuries (Morga 1609,175). 

Tagaloas fought with the usual Philippine weapons-the sing^dg^ 

rr r;^, =t=-“, P =: - s 

=#=sfji=sl 

mmE=s=a 

- a — p" d "■ Uh 1 , ; ,gs r d 

bamboo bu! to"b Malay technology built more substanual forufica- 
tions (fertzj with the palisades standing on raised earthworks surro ^ n J 
a fosse or actual mom (fengta*. and, at least in the case of one fort on 


bubang Island, a drawbridge. In the Moro region, these square stockades 
"mounted small artillery — what the Spaniards called falconetes and versos 
usually three pieces to a side. The Manila fort contained a gun foundry 
where the Spaniards found evidence of considerable industry aftei it was 
burned in 1570— clay and wax moulds and one 4-meter piece in the 
process of manufacture. They took twelve damaged pieces back to Panay, 
ten of bronze and two of iron, and recovered six from the river wheie they 
had been thrown to avoid capture, which were sent to Spain. The quantity 
an d quality of Manila ordinance is indicated by Governor Sande’s (1579, 
147) collecting 18,000 kilos of bronze artillery from to\yns surrounding 
Manila, and his employment of Filipinos to cast him a 4,000-kilo cannon 
of which he reported, “There is not in the castle of Milan a piece so well 
made." Fortunately, one example of Filipino workmanship has survived: it 
is a swivel gun (lantaka) in the Museu Militar in Lisbon (see fig. 11). 


1 

i! E 


Religion 

Our earliest surviving account of Tagalog religion is a remarkable two- 
paragraph summary by encomendero Miguel de Loarca, remarkable in 
that it sounds much like what is nowadays called folk Catholicism. It 
presents a creator god who can only be approached through inter cessoi s 
like deceased relatives or the patron deities of farmers, seafarers, oi wairi- 
ors, all of whom are worshiped in the form of idols which receive sacrifices 
and adornment. It stands in marked contrast to his lengthy description of 
Visayan religion with its origin myths, divine genealogies, pantheon of 
deities, and realms of the dead, a description obviously derived from 
personal observation and contact with worshipers themselves, rather than 
a native apologist. It must be said at the offset, however, that it is difficult 
to account for the actual practice of Tagalog religion within this theologi- 
cal framework. Missionaries in the field— and in the confessional— evinced 
no doubt that the multitude of deities, spirits, and ancestors being invoked 
by Tagalog shamans were objects of worship in their own right, not mere 
intercessors. A plausible explanation for the discrepancy might be that 
Spanish Christians like Loarca were predisposed to find concepts in other 
religions which were normative in their own. 

| Worship. Loarca and Chirino said that the Tagalogs recognized a 
creator god they called Bath ala— though other informants named 
Molayri or Diwata — but Father Plasencia (1589b, 598) simply said, 


233 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


•The one they principally adored among many other tdols was °newhoJ 
they called Badhala.” The name itself is apparently derived from Sanskm 
bhlttara (noble lord), which appeared as the sKteendvcentmy Ude MM 
in the southern Philippines and Borneo. Bathala was descnbed as may 
kapal sa lahat [maker of everything]," kapal meaning to : 

between the hands like clay or wax. Dr. Antonio de Morga, 
thought it meant an omen bird, but the author of the Boxer Codex (1590b 
379) was advised not to use it in this sense “because they did not <ons« ta 
it God, but only [his] messenger.” He was also told that the Brst word of th, s 
god to reach the Philippines was brought by male prophets as rea rs o. 
die scriptures of God [taga pagbasa nang sulatan a (?) dios] (Boxer & <s 
1590b 367) . If the story is to be taken seriously, it may be worth not g a 
in Malay, Lara means holy, and was a tide applied to the greater Hmdt 
gods in ]ava, and was also assumed by the ruler of Majapahit. 

There was no single word in Tagalog for the other deities to whom 
Bathala was superior: when necessary, Spanish lexicographers refe r to 
them all as anito. So Father San Buenaventura (1613, 255) commented of 
Bathala “According to some he was considered to be the greatest of their 
“’Some of them had names descriptive of their functions, l a an 
Baked, the lord of fences (baked), was invoked to keep animals out of 
swiddens; and Aman Sinaya, father of Sinaya who became the mventor o 
fishing gear, was named when first wetting a net or fishhook. These were 
the kind of gods the Loarca summary explained as Bathala s agente. o, 
too the early dictionaries used the word abogado (advocate) when defining 
their realms— for example, Lakambini, the abogado of the throat, invoked 
incase of throat ailments. But in actual prayers, they were pehtione 
directly not as intermediaries. During sacrifices made m a new field 
Lakapati, a major fertility deity, the farmer would hold up a 
“Lakapati, pakanin mo yaring alipin mo; huwag mong 8"“"““ JffTi 
feed this thy slave; let him not hunger]” (San Buenaventura 1613, 361| 
Prominent among deities who received full-blown sacrifices were fe> U ijr 
gods. Lakapati, fittingly represented by a hermaphrodite image with both 

male and female parts, was worshiped in the fields at ^ 

Lakanbakod, who had gilded genitals as long as a nee stalk, was .offered e ^ eh 
when fencing swiddens-because, they said, his were the strongest of al 
fences, “Linalakhan [fid niya ang bakod nag bukid (San Buenaventu 

16 proprieary deities were appeased both for fruitful produce and protec- 
tion from harm in their special domains-like Aman Ikabh, the patron o 
hunters, or Dian Masalanta, of lovers and childbirth. Tuba tappers w 







> l it i il 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


failed to make offering to Mankukutod, protector of coconut palms, befor 
c limbing a tree, ran the risk of a fall from the trunk. Nobody entere 
grasslands or forests without acknowledging the overlordship of Uwina 
Sana lest they be regarded as trespassers, nor did seamen set sail befoi 
sponsoring a major ceremony to call on 1 laik, the sea god, for fair weathe 
and favorable winds. The Tagalog environment was also peopled wit' 
lesser deities like Linga and Bibit who caused illness if not given recogn 
lion in the ordinary course of daily activities. 

Images of these deities were properly called likha, but also larawan, 
model or form. Wooden ones were often crudely anthropomorphic in j 
form and large enough to be adorned with gold chains or have actual fbodjj 
placed in their mouth. Others were small enough to be carried around like 
talismans, and were made of stone, gold, shell, or clay not necessarily 
always a figure but sometimes a crocodile tooth, a boar’s tusk, or an 
unusual stone. Little earthenware figures in the shape of a man or cat, 
imported from China, were held in the hand to swear an oath. But images 
of deceased persons were called anito, which Father Blancas de San Jose 
defined as “idol or soul of their ancestors.” 

On the other hand, Father Ribadeneyra thought such anito were be- 
lieved by the Tagalogs to have been conceived together with human beings, 
good ones for ordinal*)' people, evil ones for slaves and the less fot tunate. 
Other missionaries, however, regularly applied the term to all idols as well 
as the “false gods” they represented. Father Oliver (1590b, 32), preaching 
in Batangas in the 1590s, likened the Old Testament “great anito called 
Beelzebub” to a local deity, Lakan Balingasay— “malaking Anito ang \ 
pangala n si Belzebu, na kun baga dito Lakan Balingasay. 

Father Buenaventura (1613, 361), however, insisted that the term really 
meant an act of worship: 

More appropriately would itbe called an offering because anitodoes not signify any 
particular thing, such as an idol, but an, offering and the prayer they would make Up- 
deceased friends and relatives . . . [or] an offering they made to anything they finished, 
like a boat, house, fishnet, etc., and it was mats, cooked food, gold, and other things. 

Thus, naga-anito meant to perform such an act, and pinagaanitohan was 
the soul petitioned. So penitents in the confessional were asked, “Naga- 
anito ka [Did you make anito]?” or “May pinaga-anitohang ka [Have you 
invoked some soul]?” (San Buenaventura 1613, 361). Naga-anito also 
included any act calling on the supernatural— for example, malimakan, 
taking auguries by balancing one oiled cowry shell on top of another, g 


Celestial bodies were also venerated as deities — Tala, the Morning Star; 
Mapulon, the Pleiades; and Balatik, the Big Dipper — and the new moon 
was always invoked for material increase and wealth. Crocodiles were 
especially feared and venerated: offerings of food were set out for them, 
and the salaksak bird was considered sacred because it was permitted to 
pick a crocodile’s teeth without harm. Some Tagalogs believed crocodiles 
had the souls of deceased human beings, and so anointed, shrouded, and 
buried them when dead. In Batangas, the same obsequies were given a Hat- 
headed lizard called tuko, believed to be poisonous. The balete tree was 
reverenced as the abode of spirits: there the most solemn community 
sacrifices were made, and there prominent chiefs were sometimes given a 
secondary burial. 

Omen birds and lizards were considered divine messengers, particularly 
the tigmamanukan bird, manuk being the general term for any bird, lizard, 
or snake that crossed the path as an omen. All such encounters were called 
salubong. If the tigmamanukan bird flew across from right to left when men 
were starting out on an expedition, it was giving the labay sign of successful 
plundering, but if from left to right, a sure warning that they would never 
return. If they happened to catch one in a trap, they would cut its beak and 
release it with the words, “Rita ay iwawala, kun akoy mey kakawnan, lalabay 
ka [You are free, so when I set forth, sing on the right] ” (San Buenaventura 
1613, 95). 

The greatest religious attention was given to ancestor worship — that is, 
veneration of the spirits of the departed. These were generally parents or 
grandparents, but occasionally a popular hero known for his bravery, 
ferocity, and active love life. The former were considered die immediate 
cause of illness or misfortune, and had to be placated by sacrifices to likha 
kept in the house (those who could afford to do so set food aside for them 
at every meal), or the intervention of shamans called katulunan. Their 
memory was carefully kept alive by himakas, a personal garment or piece of 
jewelry preserved as a memorial, and pahiyin tabus against mentioning 
their name, eating from a plate they had used, or sitting in some spot they 
had frequented. At several points along the Pasig River, porcelain plates 
were set out with offerings by descendants who trafficked along that route. 

The conviction that postmortal well-being depended on the religious 
ministrations of living descendants is reflected in the readiness of Christian 
Tagalogs to donate land to the church — for example, Rajah Ache Matanda’s 
granddaughter Catalina, who donated 200 pesos worth to the Augustinians 
in 1621 for four masses a year for the repose of her soul. In a sense, the dead 
were considered merely absent: both himakas and palok (abstinence from 


C\C\(2 


237 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


a certain food) applied both to deceased loved ones and those only gon 
away on a trip. The same was true of a more serious kind of oath calle< 
balata, which might include not only abstinence but a promise to tak 
vengeance or kill: the term alsd meant a deerhicle or carabao collai whir 

was worn until the oath had been fulfilled. . 

The mortal soul was called kalulmoa and the life spirit diwa, but the inner 
consciousness was lagyo: thus, two persons who took the same name were 
kalagyo, "soul mates.” Each person also had an individual protecting sptn|' 


a kind of guardian angel, called katutubo or bathalangkatutubo. The kaluluwa 
could wander off or be seized or endced to some strange place, thereby 
causing a fatal illness. After a death, therefore, a naga-amto was performed, 
to determine where the soul had been afflicted, and the survivors would 
then go to that spot with an offering of gold and a live cock and i eques die 
soul not to come back to haunt. In the afterlife, souls went either to Maka, 
a place of rest, or Kasaanan, a place of anguish. Father Plasencia (158g| 






dressed in red for greater preeminence,” a preeminence which, like the| 

fed clothes, no doubt arose from having taken a human life, father J 
Chirino, on the other hand, called the place of rest Kaluwalhatian whence| 
luwalhaU entered Spanish lexicons as “glory” by analogy to the pious I 
euphemism for the dead as being “in glory.” Virgins, however, could not \ 
enter Kaluwalhatian because they had no lovers to help them cross ajj 
narrow plank over a raging torrent en route, and women who died i| 
childbirth remained in this world as ghosts who could be heard moaning 

at night. 


a rawhide collar as warning they were on the warpath. Until this 
the mourning period, those under oath observed such dietary 
restrictions as not eating rice or hot food. 


the custom for close relatives to refrain from merrymaking for at least two 
years, until given a gift of gold or silver to end their despondency. 

Graves were dug alongside houses or fields, and each mourner threw a 
handful of soil in, saying, “Dumamay sa iyo ang sakit ko [In thee, let my 
sorrows end]” (San Buenaventura 1613, 292), and on the way home they 
took a bath in running water. But the elite were entombed, together with 
gold and valuables, under their own dwelling in a coffin or boat with a 
shade above it, around which smoky fires were kept burning for days. 
Secondary burial was called Bangkay: the bones were exhumed, placed in 
ajar or other container, and either deposited at the fdot of a balete tree 
or kept in the house. If a boat served as the bier, male-female pairs of 
chickens, goats, or deer served as oarsmen with a slave assigned to feeding 
them. If the deceased had been a great warrior, a slave was placed under 
his body. For that matter, all maginoo-class deaths, or those of people killed 
by violence, required the taking of additional human lives, few or many 
602) said* that those who qualified for Maka were “the just, the brave, and«j | depending on die deceased’s status or dowry stipulation. Male survivors 
those who had lived without doing harm and had other moral virtues.” carried out this requirement, sticking a tambuyok plume in their putong and 

The Boxer Codex (1590b, 374), however, probably more realistically donning 

attributed the division, not to morality, but to social condition-that is to ended th 

say, the seamen “who are dressed in white,” and the others Vho are | 

1 • J nrppminpnrp ” a nreeminence which, like their f 

Shamans. Katulunan could be of either sex, or male transvestites (bayugin), 
but were usually women of prominent families who were wealthy in their 
own right from the practice of their shamanic profession. Their remunera- 
tion ranged from foodstuffs to cotton and gold, depending on the means 
1 of their clients: one was said to have made 350 pesos in a two-year period. 
They came to their calling through training and kinship with other 
katulunan. As spirit mediums, they conducted seances during which they 
spoke with the voice of deities or spirits, assisted by an alagar (personal 
I attendant) to carry on a dialogue with the supernatural, or sent their own 
d ' =®fil kaluluwa to seek literally lost souls. They performed public ceremonies for 
Death and burial. At the time of death, the cadaver was wrappe 1 jl JjK? 0111 m u n i ty prosperity, fertility, or seasonable weather as well as private 
shroud and covered with a pall for a four-day wake 01 , m t e ca se o services to diagnose and cure ailments. They were respected for these 

prominent, for many days during which the deceased was disp aye ^ sse I functions and for producing charms (saulupong or kabal) which rendered 
as in life. (“Though it smelled bad,” San Buenaventura ( , J men or fighting cocks invincible; but they were also feared as sorcerers able 

marked, “they suffered it for love.”) The wake ( pidaw ) was char actei rze y, t wor j c ma gi c . Their numbers, too, were large enough to put them 
extemporaneous dirges (sambitan) and heavy drinking (tibaw). inapagttaxo 1 j n com p et j t j on w ith one another: Father Chirino (1604, 112) said that in 
was a drunkard who frequented funerals for this reason. Exequies [wa as) i San Juan del Monte “there was scarcely a lane where there were not three 
held after the burial to assure the departed soul s safe airiva in * Sjjjgor four, or more.” Individual success was attributed to the power of the 
afterworld were full-scale feasts with a pig sacrifice and food conti ibute y | deities with whom they identified, and who took possession of them in their 
guests, and so were Bangkay ceremonies for a secondary burial. But it was I fr enzied dancing. 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Tagalog Society and Religion 


iiS 

if n 
:A:; 


ir-w:: 

isifc I! 




There were no temples: family idols were kept in little spirit houses | 
constructed at the corner of the dwelling or connected to it by a kind of | 
catwalk. Community sacrifices were held in open fields, or, in the case of J 
especially solemn riles — like one called pandot under a halete tree. For g 
such a festival, tabus on labor or travel were proclaimed (pangilin). Further- 1 
more, the participants all contributed food and valuables for a feast, the | 
katulunan’s pay, and offerings called galal— a term missionary fathers 
would later adopt for their sacramental bread and wine. A rich datu might 
also sponsor a pandot, for which temporary roofs were constructed along 
both sides of his house, but in either case the feast included a fattened hog. j 
By the end of the sixteenth century, if not before, some katulunan were j 
using written incantations in these services, like “reading all night” by 
torchlight during wakas rites. 

Curing ceremonies were performed in private homes, with the katulunan 
wearing a gold diadem (basongbasong) for first-class services, a simple one 
of palm leaves for the poor. She would begin by making her prognosis by 
augury, stating whether the case was serious or even fatal— by walking 
around the patient, for example, dangling a kind of rosary (talihan) withj j 
thick beads and observing their slight movements. During the healing rite 
itself, she would smear the patient’s forehead with betel nut she had 
chewed, or with blood from a padugo sacrifice, such as two chickens mated | 
before cutting their throats. The climax came when she fell into a trance 
and sent her kaluluwa to call the truant spirit of the patient, or that of the 
ancestor responsible for the affliction. 

Katulunan presided over all “rites of passage” — for example, from the j 
womb into the world, youth into marriage, or life into death. One of the 
most important was dating, the rite for a girl s first menstruation. The gill 
was blindfolded, secluded, and attended by the old woman for four days, 
and fed only a few mouthfuls of rice and two eggs morning and night, while 
her relatives feasted and celebrated. Then at dawn, she was led down to the 
river or a stream of flowing water for a ritual bath, without hci feet touching 
dry ground, being either carried or guided across an elevated walkway of I Uswang 

planks. I Jpon her return home, her body was rubbed with oil and civet or 1 
musk — traditional male scents — followed by two days and nights of exclu- | 
sively female company and singing. She was then a marriageable damsel, j 
no longer a girl. 


giancas de San Jose (l(>Ma, layas) said. Pavmyinan was a charm against 
harm by wild animals; lagisama was one to make a person hate; tawak was 
lo be rendered invulnerable to harm, eveti snake venom; and dapa was to 
be killed by witchcraf t. Mantala were exorcisms or magic formulas, consid- 
ered most efficacious if in “the language of Borneo” — that is, Malay. If 
sorcery made life risky, the presence of a host of witches, ghouls, and 
monsters made it actually dangerous. The worst of these were the flesh 
eaters, those who ate away the liver of living persons or drew it tint through 
the anus, doubly dangerous because they might reside in a Tagalog com- 
munity as normal citizens. Spanish friars did not doubt their existence: a 
suspect might be asked in the confessional, “Nag-uuswang ka namang para 
nang ina mo [Do you become a witch like your mother]?” (San Buenaventura 
1613, 122). Fray Juan de Merida also reported burying a Spanish notary 
whose intestines had been extracted in this gruesome manner. A select 
roster of such creatures will illustrate their nature and variety. 


( 

; 


The most powerful kind ofwitch, able to kill or cause unconsciousness 
simply by greeting a person 

A liver-eating witch that travels through the air, leaving half its body 
behind, and which also appears at night without head or entrails, or 
carrying its head 

A sorcerer able to heal, cause harm, or kill 
A sorcerer able to prevent one from being loved 
A witch who appears at night as if burning, setting fires that cannot 
be extinguished, or wallows in the filth under houses, whereupon 
some householder will sicken and die 

A woman who died in childbirth and reappears as a hobgoblin, 
passing under houses calling people by name, and whoever replies, 
dies 

An earthbound liver eater 

A winged forest phantom that kidnaps men and either starves or 
releases them; appears as a tall, long-haired figure with very small feet 
and a beautiful G-string, and leaves a distinctive odor behind 
General term for liver eaters 
Ghost 


Foreign influence. By the time of Spanish advent, Tagalog had absorbed 
a number of religious terms from Borneo, Ilinyagw as a kind ritual washing 


Hukluban 


Matatangal 


Mangagaioay 

Mangisatat 

Mankukulam 


Palumak 


Silagan 

Tigbalang 


Not only katulunan could make charms and cast spells, but also sorccr- {manga binyag were those so purified); and samba (to worship) was Malay 

ers— dial is, ordinary mortals who could work both black magic and white j | xmbah, a worshipful prostration, the modern simbakan (churc h) being a 
without special appeal to deities. They themselves might disappear for two| corruption of sambahan. Siyak, a teac her or guide of youth, who San 

days at a time— “ilinalayas nang Dimcmio | carried off by the Devil 1,” Father § Buenaventura thought was a Moro “bishop,” was actually the caretaker of 



1 


O/ll 


* tig i tf 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


a mosque. Mantala (exorcism or incantation) was Malay mantera f 
Sanskrit mantra. There were also jars (suubari) from Borneo in the shap 
little figures with holes in the top to serve as a thurible. The psalters 
prayer books of Christian worship quickly had their effect, too. A back 
jug but repentant convert in 1590 handed over ‘a book of certain po 
which they call gulo, very pernicious for including an express pact with 
Devil” (Chirino 1604, 47). And Christian or Islamic influence seems apf 
ent in the following description of Bathala: 

They say that this god of theirs was in the air before there was heaven or earth 
anything else, that he was ab demo [from eternity] and not made and created 
anybody from anything, and that he alone made and created all that we have 
mentioned simply by his own volition because he wanted to make something so 
beautiful as the heaven and earth, and that he made and created one man and one 
woman out of the earth, from whom have come and descended all the men and their 
generations that are in the world (Boxer Codex 1590b, 367). 


CHAPTER 13 


Central Luzon 


g&gis 


Sixteenth-century Pampanga was simply the basin of the great river 
system of that name from the Candaba Swamp to the Manila Bay delta. The 
rest of the modern province, and “Upper Pampanga (Nueva Ecija), was 
the forest land with mountains on the west, north, and east inhabited by 
headhunting Alaguetes, Ilongots, Negritos, and Zambals. 


Pampanga Culture 

The valley itself produced a surplus of rice, and the forests unlimited 
deerskins, basic to an extensive trade and the wealth ol communities with 
H high concentration of chiefs. (A 1616 report lists 60,000 deerskins a yeai 
Collected as tribute for export to Japan.) In the low-lying western delta 
where counterflooding by salt water from the bay limited rice production, 
nipa wine was a commercial product. 

All Kapampangans wore cotton— “chiefs, timaguas [.sic] and slaves, with- 
out distinction of rank” (Dastnarinas 1591, 84)— though it was not grown 
locally: it. was acquired raw from provinces to the south in exchange for rice 
and gold. The gold came down the river front its headwaters on the 


243 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Caraballo Sun Dionisio Kapolong of Candaba regularly traveled that route 1 
to deal with Isinay chiefs in the upper Magat River valley (Nueva Vizcaya) . I 
He made good use of these connections when he accompanied four j 
Spanish expeditions across the Caraballo and into the Cagayan Valley i n i 
the 1590s. The fact that Macabebe was able to attack Legazpi’s fleet with J 
forty karakoas only two weeks after he landed in Manila also suggests that J 
Kapampangans may have been among the “Luzones” who traded with | 
Borneo, Malacca, Sumatra, and the Moluccas in pre-Hispanic times. j 

These vested interests gave Pampanga chiefs a special incentive for j- 
submitting to colonial authority once the superiority of Spanish arms had 
been demonstrated. Fortified Moro towns like Beds and Lubao with siriM 
bronze artillery, made initial resistance, and a Macabebe fleet actu|H 
challenged Spanish naval power in the disastrous Battle ol Bankusay 
Channel on 3 June 1571. After they failed to inflict any damage on the ; 
Spanish ships— no doubt because Southeast Asian gunnery at the time w|| 
simply a matter of pointing guns at the enemy without taking aim— the j j 
Spaniards closed to arquebus range, and by nightfall had sunk all the j 
Filipino vessels. 

Four years later Pampanga was die granary of the colonial capital, and 1 
in 1586 while Tagalog chiefs were plotting a revolt, Pampanga chiefs were 
in Manila appealing for colonial courts not to enforce the manumission of 
their slaves. That same year, ten-year-old Martin Sancho was sent to Rome, 
where he eventually became a Jesuit, and in the seventeenth century, the 
only Filipino residents of San Jose College in Manila were the sons ol 
Pampanga noble families— and their slaves— who were “paying generously 
for their sustenance” (De la Costa 1967, 505). By this time, the skill of| 
Pampanga archers had made them regular auxiliaries in the consolidation 

and extension of Spanish conquest. J| 

The Pampanga nobility were closely allied with the royal family of j 
Tondo. The energetic Dionisio Kapolong of Candaba was Rajah 1 «tkandula s 
son, and one of his brothers and two cousins were among the captives taken | 
in the Bankusay battle. Lakandula himself mediated the peaceful submis- 
sion of local chiefs, and persuaded them to support the Spaniards against 
Chinese invader Liinahong. 

Moreover, Pampanga and l’agalog cultures were very similar. As late as 
1732, Diego Bergano’s Vocabulario de la lengua Pampanga provided many 
concepts Kapampangans and Tagalogs held in common, but with 
Kapampangan words— for example, mangapia, the nobility or well-to-do, 
and pungapul, a freedman who continues to serve his former owner— and ! 
a religious vocabulary which Christian converts were slow to give up. They 


}TiWr. 


Central Luzon 


would request masses for the repose of their kaladduwa (souls), and called 
the prophet Moses siak ning Dios, from Malay Muslim siyak. Missionary 
friars still had to contend with belief in the batala omen bird, and secret 
worship of anitos, “spirit of the Nono [grandfather],” and diwata , “idols or 
false gods.” Considering these close Kapampangan-Tagalog connections, 
the limited spread of literacy is surprising: when eleven chiefs of Lubao, 
Guagua, Mexico, and Macabebe executed sworn statements in Bacolor in 
1591, only one could sign his name. 

i 

Pampanga Law 

We are fortunate to have an early Spanish treatise on Pampanga law. 
Following the aborted Tagalog conspiracy of 1586, the Spanish governor 
ordered pioneer missionary Juan de Plasencia to submit a report on local 
customs for the guidance of colonial magistrates trying native cases. 
Attached to Plasencia’s account, written in Nagcarlan (Laguna) in 1589, 
was an appendix entitled “Information on die customs which the natives 
of Pampanga anciently held” (Ynstmccion de las costumbres que antiguamente 
lenian los naturales de la Pan Panga). These probably had wider application 
than Pampanga, however, since custom law was similar, though not iden- 
tical, throughout the lowland Philippines. According to Plasencia’s 
account, a distinctive feature of Pampanga law was the absence of any 
provision for commuting death sentences to debt slavery. If accurate, this 
is surprising, since labor must have been at a premium in the fields that 
were a major source of Manila rice. 

Chiefs rendered justice to their barangay, settling disputes on appeal, 
and summoning, judging, and sentencing lawbreakers, but if they failed to 
take action against a known criminal, other datus intervened. They them- 
selves were judged by their peers, who selected one among them with high 
status or a reputation for impartiality and good judgment, banding to- 
gether to enforce his decision by arms if necessary. Such intervention was 
called for, too, in a conflict which was restricted to the chiefly class — 
arguments over planted fields. 

In all cases, chiefs were compensated either as judges or enforcers, 
usually by half the fine or property involved. Laws were handed down by 
oral tradition and applied by precedent, and although a judge might 
interpret them in particular cases, there was no mention in Plasencia’s 
account of any process for legislative amendment. Nor was there any 
reference to trial by ordeal, or arbitrary action by powerful chiefs for 



245 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 




persona! aggrandisement. Neither were slaves mentioned as having an 
rights under the law at all. 


Lawsuits 


Timawa could bring suit against one another before their chief, whd| 
would first try to arrange an amicable settlement between them, failing 
this he tried the case, examining both parties — “orally, since among them >. 
there is no writing in any suit” (Plasencia 1589c, 27)— and hearing their 
witnesses. The decision was given the one who produced the greater | 
number of witnesses swearing by the crocodile, the sun, or the moon, who 
were then paid off, together with the chief, according to their rank. Those 
on the losing side received nothing, and if they had been paid in advance M 
it was taken away from them. 

Murder. If a chief murdered a member of his own class, the aggiieved 
family immediately went to war, and the conflict continued violently until 
both sides were exhausted. The other chiefs would intervene to make a 
settlement and restore peace, requiring the guilty party to pay his 
wergeld (“man-price”), which ranged from 70 to 100 taels in gold, or eveijl 
more, depending on rank— at a time when a first-class slave was valued agj 
10 taels. Half the wergeld went to the victim’s heirs, the other half to his 

timawa and the intervening chiefs. • 

If a chief was killed by a timawa, no wergeld was acceptable: the chief s 
relatives put the timawa to death, together with his wife and children, and 
seized all his property. If a timawa was murdered, his wergeld was from 10 
to 20 taels, whether the murderer was a chief or another timawa, but if a 
convicted timawa could not pay, he was executed by spearing. If a man 
killed a first-degree kinsman— a brother, uncle, or nephew— all his prop- 
erty was given his victim’s heirs. In the case of witchcraft, any chief could 
execute the alleged murderer, taking half his property and giving the other 
half to the dead man’s relatives. The law was the same for women as for 
men, and in any case where there were no direct heirs, the judge or 
executioner took half the murderer’s goods. 

Insult. Insult was considered a serious crime, especially among chiefs. 
They could bring suit for satisfaction before one of their peers acceptable 
- to both parties, and the penalty was a heavy fine depending on their relative 
social standing. If either refused to accept the decision, they would both 




Central Luzon 


resort to a series of costly di iukfests to establish their prestige, a procedure 
which often resulted in war. Hut in the cast' of a chief insulting a timawa, 
the fine was vety light, or there was no fine at all. 

Theft. An apprehended thief, whether chief or timawa, was required to 
return the stolen goods and was lined; in the case of the former, he was 
fined by other chiefs. If a timawa could not pay, he was sold into slavery, and 
in the case of a slave, his master had to pay for him or deliver him to the 
on e robbed for punishment. A thief caught in the act by the owner of the 
goods could be killed or whipped without trial. I 

Arson. In the case of fire breaking out in the village or fields, the one who 
set the fire was made to pay for the damage as assessed by the chiefs in the 
neighborhood. A chief might thus be reduced to penury; and a timawa was 
executed, and his property seized and wife and children sold into slavery, 
if necessary, to cover the damages. 

Marriage and divorce. A man had only one wife, to whose parents he 
gave dowry — that is, bride-price — but if they separated, he could marry 
another, and a third or a fourth one besides, all of whom bore him 
legitimate children who figured in his inheritance. The one with whom he 
was actually living was considered his legitimate wife. Divorce was easy for 
either partner, but if the husband left the wife, he forfeited the bride-price, 
and if she left him, her parents had to return it double. And if she had 
borne him no children by the time of his death, it was also returned. It was 
this dowry, Plasencia (1589c, 28v) said, “which constituted their marriage, 
[together with] some gatherings in which they would drink.” 

Inheritance. All legitimate children inherited equally, though some 
favorite might receive 3 or 4 taels extra, or some strips of land. Children 
who were underage at the death of either parent were placed, together with 
their inheritance, in the custody of their grandparents and if they died as 
minors, that property went to those grandparents or other relatives of the 
deceased, not to the child’s surviving parent. That is to say, property 
remained within a direct bloodline: a man’s wife did not share his inher- 
itance, nor he hers. 

Slaves inherited their parents’ condition, becoming the property of 
their parents’ master. In the case of the parents belonging to different 
masters, the children were divided alternately, the first going to the father’s 
owner, the second to the mother’s, and so on; and if there were an odd 



247 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


number of children, one of the owners paid the other one-half the child’: 
value. Similarly, in the case of a mixed marriage between a slave and ; 
nonslave, the first child inherited the father’s status, the second the moth 
er’s, an odd-numbered last child becoming a half-slave. 


Pangasinan Culture 1 

Sixteenth-century Pangasinan was the coast of Lingayen Gulf ff om Bolinao 
(Zambales) to Balaoan (La Union) , and the delta of the Agno River, where 
the largest settlement— Binalatongan (San Carlos) with some two thou- 
sand houses — was only 20 kilometers inland. Bolinao was a poit of call for 
Chinese junks: when Chinese-speaking Father Bartolome Martinez was 
shipwrecked on the coast nearby, he was able to baptize twenty Chinese 
traders he found there. This direct China trade was reflected in the 
Pangasinan use of porcelain jars for wine consecrated in religious ceremo- 
nies, and a Spanish complaint that not only chiefs but even ordinary people 
were wearing Chinese silks and cotton. It was presumably the proximity of 
the Zambales mountains which caused Miguel de Loarca to think the 
people of Pangasinan used the same language and costume as the Zambals, 
but were “more intelligent” due to their contact with Chinese, Japanese, 
and Bornean merchants. Agoo (La Union) was an emporium for the 
exchange of Igorot gold, which the Spaniards called Poit of Japan . 
because Salcedo found several Japanese ships there. Deerskins and civet 
were also objects of their trade. There was also an instance when a Domini- 
can friar was captured by Japanese “pirates” upon returning from Manila. 

Domestic trade included pigs, wild game, and carabaos, wax, pottery, 
and sugarcane wine called hila (that is, kilang). Farmers on the narrow • 
coastal plain of La Union grew cotton and traded textiles for rice grown in 
the delta. Igorots brought down gold both to the coast and to the Agno 
River basin in exchange for pigs and carabaos which they took back to the 
mountains on the hoof. Traders went overland to Manila, crossing the ; 
forests to the tributaries of the Rio Chico of Pampanga. Salcedo was guided 
on his northern expedition by one he met in Manila trading gold for silver, 
while pioneer missionary Bernardo de Santa Catalina was befriended by 
another who had been baptized in Manila as Juan de Vera, brother of thej 
chief of Calasiao. In early colonial days traders earned cash by escorting 
travelers through dangerous passages along this route. 

But Pangasinans were also a warlike people who were long known for 
their resistance to Spanish conquest. Sixteenth-century accounts regularly 




Central Luzon 


referred to them as either unconquered or rebellious, leading Bishop 
Diego Aduarte (1640, 2:53) to therefore boast that Dominican missionaries 
had won the hearts of those whom “Spanish arms could not dominate.” 
One conquistador characterized them as a “rebellious and indomitable 
people . . . very warlike and free, and fond of human blood” (Baeza 1597, 
128). Bishop Domingo de Salazar described them as "really the worst 
people — the fiercest and crudest in the land — an unconquered tribe 
whose fiestas were cutting off one another’s heads” (Aduarte 1640, 1:131) . 36 

Tagamwas a war dance — or cockfight — dakep meant to take captives, and 
ngayaw was “to go out looking for anybody they wanted to ^ kill” (Cosgaya 
1731, 225). Pangasinans themselves were subject to attack by Igorots, 
Zambals, and Negritos, but were able to defend their overland trade routes, 
and to take Zambal slaves for sale to Chinese. 

Pangasinan culture appears to have been the same as that of Luzon 
groups to the south. Rice was grown in both swiddens and pond fields, 
where it was planted either by broadcasting or by transplanting seedlings 
from a seedbed. One manload of harvested palay — ten bundles (betek) of 
five smaller bundles (tanay) — was reckoned as one G-string (son be-el), 
presumably because it could be tied with one. Men practiced circumcision 
(galsim) or supercision (segat), wore G-strings, and blackened their teeth. 
They considered undecorated teeth ugly, and once told a friar that their 
war god, Apolaki, had scolded them for receiving “foreigners with white 
teeth” (Aduarte 1640, 1:130). Shamans were old women and the ceremo- 
nies they performed were maganito, but the practice of reserving a jar of 
vintage wine for their sacramental use, with small quantities being carried 
home by worshipers — “like holy water,” Bishop Aduarte said — suggests 
missionary influence. Mourning rites required a human death, and there 
was an unusually strict sanction against adultery: both adulterers were 
buried alive. After colonial authority made this punishment impractical, a 
cer tain Chief Lomboy once killed his own sister for this crime. There was 
evidently the usual three-class social structure, with ruling chiefs being 
called anakbanwa; their supporters, timawa. And the fact that the chiefs 
were generally the most warlike moved Aduarte to cite a Spanish adage. 
Viva quien vince — “Let him live who wins.” 

'Hie Yambals and Negritos 

/ 

Zambals and Negritos living in Zambales mountains and forests in the 
Central Plain were known to fanners in Pampanga as head-taking raiders. 



249 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



Early Spanish accounts described both groups in the same simplistic terms— I 

hunter-foragers who wandered through the wilds like beasts with no fixed 
place of abode, and who took heads because rank among them depended 
on the number taken, and no woman would marry a man who had not jj 
taken any. Nothing is said about their agriculture, trade with other Filipi- 
nos, or the source of their gold, iron tools, and weapons. Seventeenth- jj 
century missionary accounts, however, made more detailed descriptions yj 

possible. 

The Zambals. The Spaniards first met the Zambals when Juan de Salcedo jj 
rescued some who had been sold as slaves to a Chinese ship anchored in g| 
Bolinao. Four years later they appeared to repay the favor when the j 
Spaniards were besieging a Chinese invader fortified at the mouth of the 
Agno River. As Father Rada (1577, 484) described the contact, 

when we were taking the field against the corsair Limahong, a chieftain of the Zambals 
came to us with 100 archers, saying he wanted to go to war with us, and that he wanted | 
as his whole prize no more than simply the Chinese heads. 

Similar contact continued into the next century. In 1610 during the|j 
Spanish-Dutch wars, Zambals presented the governor with the heads of six jj 
Dutchmen who had gone ashore near Iba. Fifty years later, when Chief 
Tumalang converted to Christianity, he returned die head of General 
Felipe de Ugalde he had taken along the coastal trail. By this time, the 
name Zambal had been extended to all head-taking tribes north of thejj 
Central Plain, including those around Gapan (Nueva Ecija) and the Igorots . . 

ofBenguet. m 

Some Zambals grew rice, taro, and sugarcane in swiddens, but others 

lived off hunting, no doubt in an exchange that provided a healthy diet of 
starch and protein for both parties. The bolos and metal-tipped arrows diey r 
traded with Negritos may also have been for fresh meat. The significance 
of rice is indicated by the list of deities worshiped for good crops. Aniton 
Tawo (“Human Spirit”) received the most important sacrifices; Dumagan 
was invoked to cause the rice to head, Kalaskas to cause it to ripen, and j 
Damolag to prevent storms while it was in flower. But one called Kalasokos 
only needed to be placated in time of drought. In the early colonial period, 
Zambal fields were large enough to use Negrito labor, either as outright 
slaves or as vassals whose overlords paid their tribute for them. But as 
Spanish need for lumber increased, many Zambal farmers quit their fields 
and undertook to supply it, also with Negrito help. 


Central Luzon 




Zambal society. Zambal communities were small, and both economically 
and politically undeveloped. Their clothing was limited to G-strings, short 
skirts, and jackets; men shaved the front half of their heads to leave long 
locks hanging behind, and nobody wore heavy gold jewelry (see fig. 12). 
Bride-price was paid in gold, and those who could afford it took gold with 
them to the grave, but not in large quantities. Men moved to their wives’ 
residence, and marriages were strictly monogamous: both erring parties 
could be executed for adultery. They practiced infanticide if necessary to 
limit their offspring to one boy and one girl. Their houses were simple 
enough for Spaniards to call them huts, but permanent enbugh to permit 
the display of human heads taken— though surely not the hundred Martin 
de Rada claimed to have seen in one of them. Class structure was not 
obvious enough to attract friar attention. There were individuals reckoned 
in society as the descendants of slaves, but no chiefly class with inherited 
right to rule and receive tribute. Rather, chiefs were men respected or 
feared for the number of heads they had taken, but they exercised no 
authority outside their kin group and little within it. They could call on kin 
support, however, for vengeance or payment of debts, even to the extent 
of handing over a lesser member as wergeld. Many of them also had close 
ties with individual Negritos — like Chief Kalignaw who was accompanied by 
a Negrito archer by the name of Kibakar when he killed Dominican Fray 
Domingo Perez in 1683. 

Head taking was an expected part of Zambal male conduct, and men 
who did not comply with the custom were treated with scorn. Head taking 
was called ga?ro or mangaw (that is, mangayaw), and skulls were fashioned 
into cups. Raids were thought to be made under the protection of a 
guardian spirit called Manalagar, and participants always afterwards ad- 
dressed each other as aroak, “my comrade.” Father Perez estimated that not 
one in four died a natural death. Men carrying out a mourning duty for a 
deceased parent wore aheadcloth called balata until they accomplished it. 
Reconciliation with the victim’s relatives was attempted through sacrifices 
to Manglobar, a spirit who soothed angry hearts— compensation in gold or 
valuables, or a slave to kill. A brave credited with fifteen deaths was entitled 
to wear a bantakan legband of fruit seeds, adding more for seventeen, and 
bright-colored siguey shells for nineteen or more, and all of them would 
wrap an anahaw leaf around the haft of their iwa dagger. Fathei s wei e 
known to kill a Negrito slave in front of a young son to instill a proper thirst 
for blood. Perhaps it was such childhood indoctrination that produced the 
following incident: 



251 


litwsfefefiiai 


pt*'" 

•s'* 

>: ;>*•«., 4 ' 

i«c," : 

)}?*■•• Mkl *' 

l^Kv" 


., ... 


Central Luzon 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


On one occasion, Fa.he, Fray Domingo Ptewas MUng wi.h .wo /ambals one in 

front and the other behind. The one in back said, “look out. Father, 1 will go in front. 

I lr asked him if there were some enemies or danger, and the Zambal replied that 
there was nothing except his overpowering temptation to cm oil his head, staring a, 
the nape of his neck so well placed tor it (Peguero 1691,42). 


Zambal religion. Zambal religion consisted mainly m the worship of 
ancestral spirits called anitos and individual deities with personal names, 
Malyari seems to have been the only one represented by an actual idol- 
a wooden head with straw body and arms constructed and clothed by a 
shaman for the occasion. Rice deities without such corporal representation z 
escaped friar idol-smashing ministries and thus contmued to be worshiped 
by Christian converts. Included among their deities, perhaps because of ; 
Tagalog influence, was Bathala Mey Kapal, "whose false genealog.es and 
fabulous deeds they celebrated in certain tunes and verses like hymns (San 
Nicolas 1664, 420). There were also fetishlike figures small e * lou S h * 
held in the hand. Certain stands of bamboo were considered sacred and 
therefore dangerous to cut, and omen b.rds were called salaksak or J 


always referred to as inhabiting the interior mountains, though in fact the 
first one the Spaniards saw was along the seacoast ol Negros— and lie ran 
uvay so fast, “a horse could not have caught him’ (Anon. L>6.), 4.)0). l ht. 
island of Negros— Buglas before Spanish advent— was so called, not be- 
rause it was mainly populated by blacks, but because there were more of 
them in the mountains than in other islands. Despite this presumed 
isolation, however, Negritos obviously had contact with lowland Filipinos. 

I They possessed iron tools and weapons, and in many places were suppliers 

I 0 f wax, and probably other forest products valued in domestic and foreign 

II trade, and certainly medicinal plants. Chirino told the story of a Negrito 
who had regular dealings with a lowlander of Tigbawan (Panay) , whom the 
Negrito eventually killed by treachery, sparking a little tribal war after 
which the lowlanders celebrated their victory by displaying the losers pasa 

scalps as trophies. 

The Negritos’ speed and accuracy with bow and arrow were proverbial, 
making unwary travelers or field workers easy targets. When the Zambal 
chief Kalignaw and his Negrito companion Kibakar lulled Fathei Perez, the 
r-f 1 1 Uin ♦ir’fTP f Kir a hair bur the Negrito drove a shaft through 


cnieiixaiigiiaw Mia — , c , , 

— O- Zambal missed his target by a hair, but the Negrito drove a shaft through 

pasimanuken. n , . , ; , friar’s chest to protrude a hand’s breadth on the other side. When 

Religious services (maganito) were conducted by shamans afi d b y * 3., survivors seized a Bornean overlord in southern Palawan, upon 

* c whn nonetheless wore weapons at then waisi ukc a ; 1Ucl & , , , , tv,,. ^tnm nf his cams as 


Religious services [maganuu; — , ... -mm 

male transvestites who nonetheless wore weapons at their waist like a > 
man-a cutlass on the left, a head-taking iwa on the right. Each bayok was I 
dedicated to a particular deity or spirit, and consecrated m an expensive . 
ceremony attended by his relatives, in which he sacrificed a pig and 
anointedthem with its blood, and then snipped off the ends of h.s long hair 3 

wound with gold ornaments to toss into the air for them to catch. 

® i • 1, : knvinlz nmnlrl make three 


wound with gold ornaments to toss into the air for them to^calcfo A | upright the ground with the head protruding, and 

maganito was basically a before int0 then set out to take anoiher head. In Panay they were captured both for 


-mm 




holes in the ground with a spear and fill them with wine before falling into 
a trembling trance to speak with the voice of the spirit that possessed him. 
Bayok were paid well enough for their services to recoup the costs of their 
initiation-for example, 1 0 taels for a funeral ritual in which the deceased 
was offered rice, buyo, wine, and tobacco so as not to return to haunt 

living. 

Negritos. Spaniards reported blacks or “little blacks”-^ or neg rittos- I 
in Mindanao, Palawan, Calamianes, Panglao, Negros, Pana^ M.ndoio, | 
Pampanga, Zambales, Pangasinan, the modern provinces of Nueva Ec.ja 
ami Ri/.al, and the Cagayan Valley. T hey we e ol smaller stature than other 
Filipinos, some of them desc ribed as robust, others as ol delicate build, and 
not so dark as the natives of Guinea but with the same negroid Ittaturcsand 
pasa (raisin) hair-.hat is, crinkled like raisins (sec fig. IS). They were 


tne iriai s uicst lvj [jiviliumo ~ 

Magellan’s survivors seized a Bornean overlord in southern Palawan, upon 
paying the ransom demanded, he begged for the return of his guns as 
protection against local blacks. But their small numbers, primitive economy, 
and lack of political organization also made them easy prey for better 
organized groups. Zambals seeking slaves took advantage of the internal 
feuds which resulted from their mourning customs: Negritos were said to 

. ^ » .t -i r^vrvtriinincr arm 


bury tneir aeceascu upngm ^ ^ A ~ 

then set out to take another head. In Panay they were captured both for 
domestic service and for sale to China and Borneo, and unlike Visayan debt 
slaves, had little chance of manumission. As Legazpi (1570, 51 52) wrote, 

these negroes are slaves among these pagans and will be for their whole life because 
the negroes do not ransom them, [so] they never expect to go free as indios do. 


Some early accounts called Negritos “black Chichimecos,” a Mexican 
word loosely applied to any unsubdued tribes. There were, indeed, non- 
negro tribes living in the same ranges inhabited by Negritos, and outsiders 
frequently confused them with each other because of their common dis- 
similarity to lowland Filipino cultures. The Mangyans ol Mindoro, lor 
example, were so called from a word whirl, meant “savage or runaways 
[dmammesU like blacks” in Hiligaynon, or “little blacks w.ldet than the 









MINDANAO AND LUZON 








others” in Bikolano. Brief notices also referred to both groups as subsisting 
only on game, wild fruits, and roots, but l)r. Morga (1609, 172) wrote more 
perceptively of 'Luzon Negritos: 

They do not havehoust.’S or fixed settlements |l>ut] wander through the mountains! 
and crags in huts and campsites, moving from one place to another according to the 
season; living off a few deal ings and planting of rice, which they make in swiddens,||j 
and the game which they bring down with their bows, at which they are very skillful 
and good marksmen, and the honey of the mountains, and roots which the land 
produces. 

Spanish authors were persuaded that the Negritos were the original 
inhabitants of the islands where they lived, driven into the interior by 
usurping non-Negrito invaders. This may have been true, but it is also true 
that Negrito life-styles enabled them to exploit forests as sedentary agricul- 
turists could not. They thus occupied an ecological niche which they were 
able to defend at least well enough to discourage further encroachment. 


CHAPTER 14 


Northern Luzon 


The Spaniards heard reports of gold mines in the Ilocos even before 
they reached Manila, and Governor Legazpi’s grandson, Juan Salcedo, 
died looking for them in 1576. Three months after Salcedo’s death, these 
gold mines were discovered in the Benguet mountains near the present 
Baguio City, where they were being worked by Igorots — that is, Igolol, 
“people of the mountains,” a word cognate with Tagalog golod (mountain 
range). 


The IgoroLs 

But neither in this expedition nor in four more which they mounted 
during the next fifty years were the Spaniards able to solve the logistic and 
military problems connected with occupying them. A report from the first 
attempt neatly summarizes their motivation and reaction: 

I was sent with 40 soldiers and 200 indios to discover the gold mines of the Ygolot 
province from which it is understood all the wealth comes which is known throughout 
the land, and I do not know by what chance it was that after such great fame and 
expectations, not even one grain of gold was obtained after discovering more than 200 


256 


257 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


mines, but only a In, of hardship and spear- thrusts, and t he land was .nos. rugged ami | 
almost uninhabitable for want of provisions and being 80 leagues born Manila 
(Ce hallos 1076. 2). 

Mining communities. Igorot mining communities occupied an ecological 
niche suited to their profession. They lived in mine fields at heights up to 
1 ,000 meters above sea level, on some of the most precipitous terrain m the 
archipelago, where temperatures could drop to near freezing and forest 
cover was largely pines. They devoted little energy to either agriculture or A 
animal husbandry, but obtained their food through trade— nee, cattle, and 
hogs from the lowlands, root crops and vegetables from highland neighbors, j 
Nor did their women weave : miners dressed in bark G-strings— even women, 
according to one account— and purchased cotton blankets m the Ilocos. 
They built their villages on crests and open slopes that commanded all 
approaches from below, where they could release boulders and logs torolJJ 
down on invaders. It was a life-style very different from that of the Cordillera j 
terrace builders whom the Spaniards would only discover two centimes 

later. 

The mine fields drained into the Agno and Angalacan Rivers, carrying] 
enough gold to make panning in riverbed placers profitable m the rainy 
season. Actual veins, however, were followed with tunnels provided with | 
good drainage but so low that miners had to work sitting down, using 
pickaxes fitted with only small iron points because of the scarcity of tMj 
metal The raw ore was pulverized on flat stories set in the ground, and then 
carried to running water to be sluiced three or more times to remove the 
particles, which were readily seen sparkling in the bright sunshine of the : 
dry season. The crudely refined gold was then bartered with Pangasman 
and Ilocano partners for rice, domestic animals, cloth, and crockery, with 
the Pangasinans and Ilocanos completing its refining and marketing the 
finished product at 20 or 22 karats. In this way, “it passes,” Dr. Morga (1609, 
183) said, “through the whole land through their hands. 

Igorot houses were built on the ground and closed up tight against the 
cold climate. Windowless, with heavy thatched roofs that almost reached 
the ground, they had to be entered through low doors on all fours, and 
occupants slept in a kind of second floor made of planks. They were built 
on sites chosen for easy defense, and all approaches would be planted with 
sharp bamboo spikes in time of war. (The mining community of Boa was 
protected by a dry moat backed with solid planking.) 

But Igorots who practiced agriculture periodically moved their houses ... 
when fallowing the swiddens in which they grew root crops like games (that 
is, names, yams) and camotes. They timed their planting season by the 


Northern Luzon 


appearance of a star in the west called Gaganayan — presumably in the 
constellation of Orion — as they themselves were called by neighboring 
tribes. 37 

The people. Igorots had lighter skin than lowlanders and shoulder- 
length hair, and wore narrow bark G-strings only about 25 centimeters 
wide. They were also muscular and warlike. They fought with body-length 
wooden shields; and reed spears with sharpened bamboo points, or wooden 
ones with shafts almost 2 meters long and iron spearheads. They took 
heads in war — and sometimes captives for slave labor in the, 1 mines — and 
handed down the skulls as heirlooms. Victories were celebrated with feast- 
ing off sacrificial hogs and cattle, whose skulls and bones were hung on 
houses afterwards as displays of chiefly prestige. Their ferocity made them y 

feared by both lowland and neighboring tribes, a reputation of which they J, 

were themselves well aware. Expeditionary commander Garcia de Aldana III 

reported in 1620 that when he told them that he had come to impose a 20 jj 

percent tax on their mineral production, “they laughed at what I said and * 

asked when I would be leaving” (Aldana 1620). jj» 

The Igorots reacted vigorously to interference with their commerce by jj 

Spanish occupation of lowland communities, subjugation of their trading || ; 

partners, and attempts to control their traffic in gold. It is noteworthy that | 

while sixteenth-century reports by both friars and government officials * 

concentrated on this lucrative highland-lowland trade, seven teen th-cen- it I 

tury accounts regularly inveighed against Igorot raiding, head taking, and l! 

kidnapping, and justified total war against them on the grounds that they 
impeded free passage along the coast to His Majesty’s subjects, both 
Spanish and Filipino. Indeed, the 35-kilometer stretch from Pangasinan- 
speaking Magaldan to Ilocano-speaking Agoo had to be crossed by colonial 
travelers at forced march for fear of attack. Yet the profits of the gold trade 
to both highland producers and their lowland customers were such that 
Igorot raiding never put a stop to them. Father Juan de Medina’s 1630 
assessment would remain valid for the next two centuries: 

When peaceful they bring down gold which they extract there from their mines 
... but when the Igorots are oil the warpath . . . then these mountaineers come down 
to hunt heads, in which they take great pleasure (Medina 1630, 150). 

Government and religion. Igorot chiefs were family heads of eight or ten 
households, whose main duties were to settle local disputes and make 
peace with enemy villages. They were distinguished by gold plating on their 
teeth and their use of expensive Ilocano blankets, and were ranked accord- 


259 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



f 

1 


ing to the number of animals they had butchered during a lifetime c 
prestige feasts. Such rank was given terminal validation by wakes that coul 
last up to one month, during which the cadaver was repeatedly pricked 
drain off putrefied matter. The valiant were buried seated against the 
shields in caves or rock ledges stopped up with stones afterwards, or i 
trees — though whether in hollow trunks or on branches is not clear. Bi 
age and wisdom were highly respected in both sexes, and real leadership , 
in public affairs could only be exercised by those who enjoyed a reputation 
for such virtues. 

Commander Alonso Martin Quirante, who spent four months examin- : 
ing the gold mines in 1624, commented of Igorot religion, “They say that 
their god is in the sky, whom they call Cabunian and to whom they make 
offerings and sacrifice pigs and carabaos at their banquets and feasts”Jj 
(Quirante 1624). But from this it cannot be concluded that they did not j| 
worship other spirits and their own ancestors, like other Filipinos and likejj 
their descendants in more modern times. Don Alonso also said they were . 
idolatrous, and that their old men and women held conversations with the | 
devil — that is, performed seances. 

Religious ceremonies were prestige feasts with the sacrificial victims > 
tethered around the house of the person wealthy enough to feed partici- 
pants and guests lavishly for two or three days, following which the skulls 
and bones picked clean would be mounted on the house walls as perma- 
nent escutcheons of high social status. Ancestor worship is indicated by the 
expensive obsequies such aristocrats received at the time of death, the food 
offerings made at their grave sites, and the fact that heads were taken as 
part of their mourning requirements. 


Ifugao epic culture. The Ifugao — whom the Spaniards also called Igorots — 
lived on the southeastern face of the Cordillera Central, where their 
streams all drain into the Magat River. Ifugao is actually a lowland mispro- 
nunciation of Ipugaw, the people of Pugaw, the earth world — that is, 
mortals. To the east is Lagod, “downstream,” and to the west, Daya, “up- 
stream,” to which theological cosmography adds the supernatural regions 
o( Dalom, the underworld, and Kabunyan, tin' sky world. All five of these 
regions are peopled with a host of deities, spirits, ancestors, ghosts, and 
demons, all of which must be regularly placated with the odor ol sacrificed 
pigs, chickens, and rice beer. 

The Ifugao epic cycle is called fludhud, and individual episodes are 
often called harvest songs because they are most commonly chanted to 
relieve the tedium of this labor by a female soloist, echoed by the other 


OCA 


7 Northern Luzon 



harvesters in chorus. Like other Filipino epics, it is an aristocratic form of 
literature: its protagonists are all members of an elite class. But unlike other 
Philippine epics, they are not nobility or royalty with individual titles like 
“Datu” or “Rajah”; they are all kadangyan, wealthy aristocrats who have 
qualified for their status by the performance of a requisite number of 
extravagant prestige feasts. They dominate non-kadangyan by feeding 
them during public feasts and by usurious loans of foodstuffs, but do not 
rule them in a political sense. It is a casual form of government which might 
be called a plutocracy. And their wealth lends Hudhud heroes and hero- 
ines an almost mystical nature. When Bugan goes out looking for a suitable 
mate, she carries her brother’s prestigious sword belt, which will only fit a 
man of acceptable class. Just so, when it fits Daulayan, who is a poor man, 
everybody knows he will turn out to be the scion of some wealthy lineage 
though he does not know it himself. 

The base of this wealth is the possession of irrigated rice terraces, a form 
of land which is private property par excellence: like houses, textile, 
basketry, or pottery, it is the product of human labor. They may be owned 
by either men or women, and do not become conjugal property unless 
acquired jointly by husband and wife. They produce the rice — page, as 
distinct from bakan, swidden rice — which is essential to religious ceremo- 
nies, both to attract supernatural imbibers and to inebriate guests and the 
priests performing the rituals. Indeed, the Hudhud hero often sways with 
a staggering gait which reveals his ability to afford such intoxication. The 
beverage is called bayah, and for large feasts, sugarcane juice is added— 
bahi; only the lower classes would think of adding water. 

Ifugao religious practitioners are male priests, not female shamans — 
that is, they learn their profession by mastering a specialized field of 
knowledge, and do not fall into trances or speak with disembodied super- 
natural voices. Female shamans there are, but they are only called on for 
healing rites. Priests must be familiar with a bewildering number and 
variety of deities, and memorize long myths which are recited during 
religious ceremonies. It is they who interpret omens and set the time for 
rice planting. There is constant demand for their sendees, not only for 
funerals, weddings, or harvest rites, hut household rituals like activating 
the wooden buhl figures which guard the granaries, sanctifying newly 
polished heirloom jewelry and restrung beads for status display, or con- 
ducting bone-washing ceremonies for secondary burials. 

Ifugao material culture. Hudhud Ifugao appear to share a common 
technology with sixteenth-century lowland Filipinos — backstrap looms, one- 



MINDANAO AND LUZON 


lever sugarcane presses, two-cylinder Malay forges, nailless carpentry fo 
house construction, rice reaped panicle by panicle and stored unmilled m 
bundles, G-strings and rectangular wraparound skirts, and an addiction tj 
betel nut. But there are significant differences. Most obvious is the con- 
struction of stonewalled rice terraces tier on tier up the most inhospitable 
slopes of mountains, irrigated by an intricate hydraulic system. Further- 
more, Ifugao houses display a style unique to their culture area— one-room 
wooden cubicles standing on four posts with cylindrical rat guards, and a 
pyramidal thatched roof which descends to the level of the floor outside. 

So standardized is this style that not even the most wealthy deviate from it: 
to build a larger dwelling, though the greatest kadangyan are distinguished 
by a heavy, animal-headed lounging bench underneath. 

The Hudhud hero’s finery is only displayed during the rare Uya-uy feast ; 
in which he and his wife regale the whole community with the meat of pigs 
and chickens sacrificed to the deities and carabao sacrificed to their 
ancestral spirits. (These nowang are kept only for this purpose; they are noty 
used as draft animals.) He wears a G-string of an elaborate design restricted 
to his class, a fancy hip bag with long tassels, and a sword belt decorat^ 
with large shell disks, and in his ears, kidney-shaped gold earrings and 
around his neck five or six more, together with a necklace of glass-encased 
gold leaf beads. And on his head, the ultimate kadangyan symbol— a big- 
beaked kalaw bird’s skull painted red, set off by a kind of crescent qjjj 
carabao horn, and a G-string worn like a turban. His wife wears an elegant • 
skirt, lady’s handbag, heavy tasseled belt, gold earrings, and three or four | 
strands of amber beads, and in her long hair secured with strings of red and 

white beads, a little brass statuette. | 

The shell disks originally come from the seacoast and the glass beads 
from abroad, but the gold earrings are made locally by the lost wax process. . 
The G-strings are also local products, and may display a white-on-blackf 
lizard design dyed into the warp threads before weaving, a techmqujp 
known in Southeast Asia as that, but not mentioned in lowland Spanish 
accounts. The Ifugao weaver is held in high esteem, and in the Hudhud he 
baliga batten is actually magical: one mythic hero uses his wife s baliga t 
dig a hole which gains him entrance to the spirit underworld. 

The Hudhud weapons are: spears, both elegant metal ones and plai 
sharpened reeds; a double-edged sword with hilt forged from the san 
steel; and long, narrow shields. In real life, the Ifugao were renowned f 
mangayaxo raids and ambushes in which they took heads, whose skulls thv 
displayed on their houses afterwards, either to avenge the loss of son- 
relative’s or neighbor’s head, or to gain a warlike reputation attractive 


I 


I 


Northern Luzon 


the opposite sex. But in the epics, the battles are rather ritualized spear- 
throwing contests between individual champions, to win a bride or to 
rescue a kidnapped beauty. Like traditional head takers, they sleep outside 
their houses the night before a raid, examine the gall bladder of sacrificed 
chickens before starting out, and turn back if the omen bird flies across 
their path. On the field of battle, the best fighters catch enemy spears in 
their bare hands rather than on their shields, and throw them back, 
including even Bugan when, in one episode, she fights alongside her 
brother Dinulawan and displays just as great skill and courage as his. But 
when she pursues and catches her humiliated, fleeing enemy, slhe cuts off, 
not his head, but the end of his G-string. 


1 


Cagayan Culture 

The Cagayan Valley in northern Luzon was one of the most fertile 
regions of the Philippines in the sixteenth century. Protected by the Sierra 
Madre mountains on the east, the Cordillera Central on the west, it enjoyed 
a mild climate. Its soil was deep and rich, and the Cagayan River, fed by the 
Chico and Magat Rivers rising on the Cordillera, carried a volume of water 
greater than any other river system in the archipelago. It produced rice that 
was considered the best in the land, millet, tubers, sugarcane, cotton, and 
hemp, wax, palm wine, hogs, goats, and fowl. Its forests abounded in 
timber, deer, wild boar, birds, and carabaos, and its upper tributaries gave 
access to Igorot gold mines. All this wealth quickly attracted Spanish 
attention, despite its distance from the colonial capital. A 1586 memorial 
reported that 2,000 casks of meat could be collected in a few days, and 
recommended the construction of a granary to hold 100,000 cavans of rice. 
Five years later, Governor Gomez Perez. Dasmarinas sent out an expedition 
from Pampanga, headed by his son Luis and guided by the prominent 
Dionisio Kapolong and a native woman of Tuy (Nueva Vizcaya) . 

Don Luis followed the Pampanga River up to its source on the Caraballo 
Sur, crossed over into the Magat headwaters through Balete (Dalton) Pass, 
and then followed a trade route down the Magat to its junction with the 
Cagayan River at Gamu (Isabela). Settlements averaged sixty to eighty 
households loyal to a single chief— Tuy itself had seventy-two houses and 
forty-two granaries — though there was a community of some five hundred 
houses near the present site of Aritao with two chiefs, one of whom, Ibarat, 
was Kapolong’s friend. Blood compacts were made, or a ceremony in which 
each part)' threw an egg to the ground and swore that just as those eggs 


263 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 


Nonhem Luzon 


were broken, so might they be broken if they did not keep their word” 
(Anon. 1591, 467) . Well-made wooden houses with four large images as the 
corners, three of them in human form, were surrounded by earthen fences, 
and some communities were protected by bamboo-backed trenches. Hillg 
side swiddens were planted to rice, vegetables, and root crops the Span- 
iards calk'd camotes or batatas— probably yams. Tribute was collected in gold 
chains, earrings, and bracelets, necklaces of bluc-and-white or various 
colored beads, or carnelians that had been handed down as heirlooms, in 
exchange for cheap trade goods and what the Filipinos called Chinese 
blankets. 

The Ibanags. The Cagayan River below Gattaran was called the Bannag, 
and the people living along its banks and their language were accordingly 
Ibanag. Non-Ibanag enemies were called Kalinga, a term which later came 
to mean non-Christian. There were also Negritos in the hills and hinter- 
land, and the Ibanag attitude toward them is revealed by a belief connected 
with the dalmu bird, or golden oriole. Only real braves could take omens 
from this bird because, it was said, just as the dalaw defeats the crows, so the 
braves defeated the Negritos “and drove them from the land.” Nonetheless, 
they had trade with them: pagujjinan was a patron or partner of Negritos, 
and mnayatwds a love potion which could only be obtained from them. The 
Chinese were called Daddal, and trade contacts with them, either direct or 
through the Ilocos, are reflected in the elegant black textiles with gold- 
embroidered lions which were placed on the stomach and chest of de- 
ceased chiefs and buried with them. 

Cagayan men wore G-strings (bag) and headbands of bark or cotton, a 
smock that reached to the thighs, and on gala occasions a sash large 
enough it) be wrapped around food to serve as a knapsack, lhey wore 
shoulder-length haircut in bangs across the forehead, filed their teeth level 
and blackened them with a coating of boiled vitriol and pili sprouts, a 
process referred to as “firing,” like clay pots. They practiced circumcision 
(kogit) and supercision (gatub), and considered slender waists an essential 
feature of male beauty, often restricting their diet or suffering a tight 
waistband to achieve such a figure. 

Tattooing applied with hog bile and ink was restricted to the back of the 
hands, which were then called appaku because of the similarity of the 
design to the pahu fern. It was evidently also applied to warriors’ wives since 
the souls of women who were not so decorated could not enter the land of 
the dead. Such ladies also wore red overskirts with white lining as a sign of 
their station, and both men and women wore earrings. A child whose ears 


were being pierced was called inakawan after the rice straw (akaw) which 
was placed in the holes to keep them open while healing; while gitang or 
j gilay was an earlobe torn out by heavy earrings or abuse. 

Technology. Cagayan settlements were bounded on one side by forest, on 
the other by water, either the sea or the river. The importance of the forest 
is indicated by its many uses. Besides providing timber for buildings and 
boats, rattan and bamboo for tools and utensils, it was a source of food, 
medicine, and even clothing, served as a refuge from enemies, and con- 
tained sacred spots for worship and healing. Deer, carabaos, hogs, and wild 
fowl were taken with hounds, traps, nets, and a crossbow ballisla called bale.t. 

Ibanags had an impressive inventory of woods distinguished for then- 
specialized uses— ships’ masts, planks, and thwarts; house beams, rafters, 
and pillars; dyewoods in black, red, and yellow; bark fibers for cordage; and 
bark removed in whole sheets to be pounded and bleached into cloth 
abutag G-strings so named from the species of tree from which they were 
made, or sinitu for a fine white bark cloth. 

Pharmaceuticals included a broth boiled from bark to remove the 
congealed blood from bruises, a sap to heal sores and wounds, a plant 
chewed to a poultice with saliva to cure boils, leaves rubbed on the body to 
relieve itches, and the juice of the wild jasmine ( makabbuling, literally, to 
make blind) as an antidote for poison and an abortifacient for dead fetus. 

The Cagayan River system and the waters of the Babuyan Channel 
provided the Ibanags with fish as well as avenues of trade as far as the Ilocos 
coast, so that boats were an ordinary part of daily life. The common word 
for boat was barangay, a term sometimes extended to the crew. Boats were 
plank-built and sewn, fitted with outriggers, oars, or paddles, and steering 
oars rather than center rudders. Large vessels were biray or biwong. Tahuli 
were canoes hewn from a single tree trunk; da la hit. was a raft; and gahil, any 
bundle of bamboo temporarily tied together to serve as one. There are no 
references to full-scale karakoa men-o’-war, or to naval engagements and 
| sea raiding. 

Rather, river traffic was not intended for the open sea. It was often 
characterized by sluggish vessels overloaded to the gunwales, with leaf 
washboards added to increase freeboard, and bamboo lashed to the hull of 
the outriggers to increase buoyancy. The intimate place of all this boating 
in riverine Cagayan society is reflected in special terms like apayag, to carry 
passengers on the shoulder to or from vessels anchored in shallow water. 
A woman dancing opposite a male partner with evasive movements from 
side to side was called ay aw, which meant the yawing of a boat. And whei eas 




. 


HE; 




P 




MINDANAO AND LUZON 


European languages like Spanish and English speak of the male of a species Jj 
mounting a female, the Ibanag expression was tab* . to boaid. jj 

Cagayan industries may be considered pan-Philipp, ne. Blacksmiths MM 
worked with a two-piston Malay forge and stone mauls using cast-iron 
Chinese karahay cauldrons as raw material. Goldsmiths adulterated gold . 
(bulawan) with baser metals (tubbaga), and gave it a good color wdh an j | 
ochrelike earth called fula. Potters used the paddle-and-anvil technique: . 
the process itself was fun; the potter, manun; and the paddle, ana„un 
Cotton was important both for local consumption andtrade: it wascgj j 
kapot, and kapok pillow stuffing was kapot nad daddah- Chinese cottom j 
The bolls removed from the pods were cudgeled and the seeds removed by . 
hand, fluffed up with a bow, and spun into thread with distaff and spindle, . j 
then starched and burnished with coconut husk. Weaving (tannun) was 
done on a backstrap loom which included a reed, after warpmg on a simple , 
two-stake warping frame. Traders from China and Japan were leguar 
customers for these textile. 

Agriculture. Tilling the soil, as distinct from cutting down trees for 
swiddens, was done without metal tools. Weeding and rooting up grasses or 
harvested rice stalks were done with a length of bamboo sharpened to a flat 
blade; and soil was leveled with a kind of rake called 
from Spanish arado (plow). Dibble sticks were ca led Mu fiom the fete 
holes for seeds, which were distinguished from balu holes for planting 
sugarcane; bikangms to spread the holes far apart. To broadcast seed was 
cafled sikkop. or batabat if the seeds were scattered wide and sparse. Roman 
was the ordinary word for field; ugad, hillside swiddens— when . 
planted by dibbling; and pond fields were sometimes specified as payaw. 
These irrigated fields were worked in the swamps or lagoons along the j 
edges of the Cagayan River or its many tributaries, with dams and dikes oi j 
pounded earth, though these were often destroyed in seasonal flooding ; 
Noisemaking scarecrows were placed in ripening gram fields, and fires 1 

were lighted at night in swiddens planted to root crops. 

Staple foods were rice (ammay), taro (gabit), millet (nanna), and by the j 
middle of the seventeenth century, two American crops— corn (mcmgwU) ( 
and sweet potatoes (hamosi). (The earliest Ibanag dictionary defines gabit, jj 
taro, as “native potato.”) There were also two edible wild grasses 
“ricelike,” and ammae na man “goblin’s rice.” Mushrooms were also called 
pinayunganna aran, “what goblins use for parasols/’ The bus, pa ttee a so 
yielded a nut like filberts or hazelnuts which could be pounded into Hot . 
But the crop that received the most attention and esteem was nee, espe- 1 


Northern Luzon 


dally a short-stemmed variety called kuritay, which yielded abundantly but 
had to be grown in standing water. 

Rice was the only crop that had a special word for planting— patok, 
whence appapatok was planting season, and tattok, sowing a seedbed for 
transplanting. Planting other grains simply used a verb form of their 
names. Mula, on the other hand, meant to plant something other than 
cereals. Gatab was harvesting; tabbag, early harvesting of rice that had 
matured too soon; and ignb was roasting before storage if the grains were 
too damp. Granaries in the house were called agnbuwan, but those in the 
fields standing on posts with disk-shaped rat guards were called alang. After 
milling in a mortar, rice was called baggat; soft rice was balugo, and glutinous 
rice cakes boiled wrapped in leaves were atatan. But despite Cagayan’s rich 
harvests, the uncertainties of cultivation are reflected in a special vocabu- 
lary — dappok: knocked over because of dry stalks; kupot: a head with few 
grains, or Imhaw, with none at all; and payakan: stunted— “as if frostbitten,” 
a Spanish dictionary says. 

Salt was boiled from seawater on stoves dug out of coastal banks, and the 
same device was used for distilling alcoholic beverages in a wooden still, 
barayang, whence liquor was called binarayang. The ordinary Cagayan drink 
was sugarcane bassi: properly aged, it was called pinaUtaw and likened to 
claret by the Spaniards, but when still not setded, it was pangajo. If it was 
distilled to a high alcoholic content, it was called umafuafuy, inflamma- 
ble,” and was said to sting— like a merciless flogging. The production and 
marketing of nipa wine was only introduced in 1581 by Visayan, Tagalog, 
and Pampanga auxiliaries settled in the "wild palm groves as compensation foi 
their participation in a Spanish expedition to drive out a Japanese pirate. 

Man and society. Leadership was exercised by chiefs whose authority 
depended on their reputation as maengel (braves) , not on claims to noble 
lineage. They revalidated their positions by leading warriors on head- 
taking ngayaw raids, but also by feeding their followers in times of hunger. 
Non-maengel members of society were simply called kaelian, membei of 
the same Hi, settlement. Thus, to liberate a slave was pahaelian— literally, 
make him a townmate. The earliest surviving Ibanag dictionary— Father 
Jose Bugarin’s, who died in 1676— lists neither datu nor timawa, but gives 
kammaranan for chief (that is, principal) and buwit for tribute. Such 
kammaranan had to be wealthy enough to afford the hospitality and 
display of gold ornaments required of their class during ritual occasions 
like harvest feasts, but the claim of the people of Camalaniugan that they 
had a chief who weighed out his gold with steelyard no doubt expi essecl the 
ideal rather than the fact. 


MINDANAO AND LUZON 



Maengel raiders set out with the plumes of the dalaw bird on their heads 
and the hair of defeated foes on their spears, to which they added gold 
ornaments during victory dances around their trophies. An illustration in | 
the Boxer Codex shows a Cagayan warrior with two little human figures and 
two birds on his headband (see fig. 14). If the battay bird sang on the 
side of their trail, they turned back no matter how far they had gone, and 
if they were traveling by boat they cast food offerings into the water. They • 
carried shields large enough to cover the whole body, and went into battle 
clad only in G-strings, with bodies well oiled in case of hand-to-hand 
grappling (although quilted armor was known upstream in Gaddang ter- 
ritoiy — that is, modern Isabela). Their weapons were leaf-shaped daggers j 
20 to 30 centimeters long (inalag), spears (supp'd if plain, saffunngif barbed) , | 
and one which in modem times would be called a head zx—bunang, 
“machete of the natives,” Father Bugarin (1676, 80) said, “like a cresce^§j| 
moon with a long point.” Unlike the inalag, the bunang could not be put 
in a scabbard (alag). Maengel made little use of the bow and arrow, winch | 
was a weapon the Negritos wielded with great skill and deadly effect. Any j 
sort of fortification was called kuta; amata was a watchtower or guard post; jj j 
and kagakuwan were special places of refuge when a village was expecting ;|j 
an attack. Trails would be blocked up with underbrush, stakes, and ditches, | 
and those left open were planted with sharpened bamboo spikes, and | 
waterfronts were defended by stakes offshore. 

The frequency of ngayaw raiding made intervillage feuds endemic. 
Peace could only be restored between warring communities by the shed- | 
ding of blood: poyud was a person handed over to be beheaded for this 
purpose. Warriors’ young sons would be taken along to participate in the 
kill to instill a thirst for blood at an early age. The fact that the object of ; 
ngayaw raids was the taking of human heads suggests that slave labor was | 
not a significant part of Cagayan economy. It also earned Ibanags the | 
reputation of sparing no victims— man, woman, or child. In fact, however, 
they did take captives ( biyag) and hold slaves (aripan), and taliw meant to j 
market slaves or livestock. Labor was also supplied by kobung, relatives or 
servants taken into the household, whose social status was ranked in - 
between servant and slave, and by mangalu, hired hands who worked foi 

their food. . 3JI 

Sometimes one maengel could dominate others until he was recognized 

as a kind of king (patul). Inangnguwa was the ordinary Ibanag word for ; 
customs, but negagangay were traditions handed down from the time of a 
legendary King Wamba. Such warlords were respected for both their 
ferocity and their magnanimity, Bishop Diego Aduarte (1640, 1:229) 
described one of them in the following terms: 





Fig. 14. Cagayan warrior 
(From the Boxer Codex) 



MINDANAO AND LUZON 



( )„ that great rive, a valiant indio named ( Juiab had risen up over the others and, j 
with oniv 300 indios — inasmueh as he did not wish to lead more— was making himsdr M 
lord ol that province, and would soon have done so had the Spaniards not arrived. He | 
was an indio so determined that nothing was too difficult for him to overcome with jj 
those few brave indios who accompanied him, and so wrathful that when he wished M 
to address them, at first he could not speak for sheer wrath until little by little he would j 
calm down and go on with hisspeech. I le ruled his men like a great captain, rewarding | 
them with great largesse at others’ cost from the much he had looted, and punished ; 
any liberty or disrespect they showed him with great rigor or for not obeying the orders j 
lie gave them. 

Marriage was characterized by bride-price and public feasting, but sepa- 
ration was easy: divorce could be initiated by either partner, and a person 
who had been married only once was the exception rather than the rule. 
But an adulterer caught flagrante delictu was killed by the offended husband. 

A newborn infant was bathed in the river, and the father cut the umbilical 
cord and preserved it in a pouch containing bits of gold. 

Wedding feasts sponsored by those who could afford it might last twenty 
or thirty days, and were judged a success by the amount of wine consumed. 
Inebriated men were carried off by their slaves or womenfolk to recuperate | 
enough to return for more, but women themselves did not imbibe: they 
were known to Spanish observers as sober and hardworking. Dancing wasp 
accompanied by the beat of gongs called gassa, with men and women m 

opposed lines engaging in poetic debate. 

Music for more intimate gatherings, however, was provided by the 
kuntang, a bamboo lyre with strings cut and raised from the skin of the 
bamboo itself. Father Bugarm (1676, 58) commented admiringly, Not 
even Orpheus could invent a musical instrument with all its strings and 
frets made from a single piece of bamboo.” 

Religion. Friar accounts use anito as a catchall term for any object o|j 
Ibanag worship. These included deities that possessed shamans or spoke to 
them during seances, spirits that inhabited sacred groves, personifie|j 
forces of nature, and any supernatural apparition. (Starfish were called 
kugita na anitu— anito’s squid.) Offerings were made to benevolent anito 
for fertility, good health, and prosperity, fair weather, and success in war. 
Evil anito were propitiated to avoid illness, crop failure, storms, accident, 
and death, or defeat at enemy hands. .Insanity or grave illness was attribute d| 
to the soul being enticed away from the body. Just as the Ibanag world was 
filled with potential head-taking enemies, so it was filled with soul-snatch- 
ing evil spirits. Aran and anani were goblins, and ngata were devils so 
terrifying that the first person to see one would become nginata— sick o| 




Northern Luzon 


moribund. The prudent therefore conducted cleansing rituals before bring- 
ing any purchase or object into the: house from another settlement, and 
wore magic beads on the wrist when venturing outside home territory 
themselves. So, too, they observed all omens carefully on leaving the 
house — a sneeze or a bird, snake, or lizard — and if an omen bird alighted 
on the roof, appropriate ceremonies were conducted to forestall its por- 
tent; if it returned, the house would be abandoned. 

Shamans were generally old women, occasionally male transvestites, 
who sang, danced, and fell into trances during both public and private 
worship. Public ceremonies like a three-day preharvest rite required the 
display of gold jewelry by those who had it, and victor)' dances included 
ritual boasting by maengel participants. Private healing services were fol- 
lowed by neighbors begging for leftover ritual food and drink for their 
supernatural effects. Dishes used in especially solemn ceremonies were 
never used again, but broken and discarded; porcelain plates in which 
offerings were made to forest spirits were left there — even gold — safe from 
all pilferage. To cut wood or foliage from sacred groves or hills was a 
sacrilege which invited public calamity like typhoons or plague. When Luis 
Dasmarinas ordered such branches gathered for making camp one night 
along the Babuyan Channel, a sudden storm came up which drove heavy 
seas over the site, from which the Spaniards only escaped with the loss of 
all possessions. It was just what the Ibanags had predicted. 

Mourning restrictions included fasting which, in the case of the loss of 
an especially beloved and respected wife or child, might last for years. The 
bereaved would eat no rice nor drink any wine, and his companions would 
restrict their own consumpdon of alcohol as a sign of sympathy — “which 
must have been a real hardship,” Aduarte (1640, 1:243) rather snidely 
remarked, “for a people so fond of it.” If a chiefs fasting took too obvious 
a toll on his physical strength, his community would provide him a slave to 
behead to end the mourning period, preferably an enemy captive. One 
early Christian convert confessed that he had dispatched twelve slaves in 
this manner on different occasions. The deceased was provided with food, 
clothes, and body oil for use in the other world, and gold for expenses en 
route — for example, payment to the old boatman who ferried souls across 
a river or lake, although he would not perform this service for any woman 
whose hands were not tattooed. Maengel expected to go to the grave 
accompanied by one or two slaves to serve them in a future life of feasting, 
drinking, and dancing. Bishop Aduarte also said they believed they would 
eventually return to this world after enjoying that paradise, but whether 
this is correct or not, it is a belief which was reported nowhere else. 


271 


Afterword 


This survey of sixteentli-century Philippine culture and society may 
well elicit some surprise among modern readers. The nose flute is nowa- 
days beloved of Filipino tourists who are unaware that their ancestors 
played the same instrument, and slavery is abhorred as a Moro aberration 
by the Christian descendants of Filipinos who regularly conducted slave 
raids. A few comments to explain this phenomenon will therefore not be 
out of place. 

The Spaniards were shocked when they first saw Filipinos wearing both 
gold and G-strings. In their view, nakedness— including men in G-strings— 
was lli(! final degradation of Adam’s children, while gold jewelry in Spam 
was associated with a well-clothed Christian elite. Yet here they were com- 
bined in the same persons. So, too, modern Filipinos would be shocked to 
meet their sixteenlh-ccntuiy ancestors. In the sharp distinction they make 
between civilized and uncivilized, G-strings are characteristic: oi the latter. 
Yet their forefathers were proudly wearing the bahag from Sarangam to 
Aparri, slaves and dams alike*. Worse, Rajah Humabou’s tattooed body, 
decorated teeth, shoulder-length hair, and distended earlobes would now 
be regarded as marks of sheer savagery. This disparity is to be accounted 
for by the profound changes which have occurred in Philippine society and 


Afterword 


culture during the past four centuries, changes which affected not only 
clothing styles but value judgments. 

It was these changes that produced the Philippine past which is recalled 
today with nostalgia and depicted in Christmas cards and romantic novels: 
Farmers in short pants follow the plow across irrigated rice fields, and 
carabaos drag their produce to market and turn sugarcane presses. Cloth 
is woven on upright treadle looms, and pots are thrown on wheels and fired 
in kilns. Men do not wear earrings or long hair, and nobody tattoos or files 
his teeth. The deceased are buried in Christian cemeteries, and no cadav- 
ers are left in houses to be abandoned, or disinterred for secondary burial. 

Yet these changes did not reach the interior hinterlands, and many pre- 
Hispanic customs have survived up to the present time among Filipinos 

t whose ancestors were never assimilated into the life of the Spanish colony. 
The late archaeologist and social anthropologist Robert B. Fox once 
planned a book to be called The continuity of Philippine culture. The book was 
never written, but it would have examined the cultures of the ethnic 
minorities for clues to ancient Philippine practices which have disappeared 
among the Christian majority. This afterword will attempt to do the oppo- 
site — that is, look at those minority cultures today for surviving features of 
I the sixteenth-century ethnography already presented. And because mod- 
ern changes have affected even these cultures, some will be examined as 
they existed with their traditions still flourishing earlier in the century. 

Dr. Fox meant to write about minority cultures like that of the Mangyans 
of Mindoro: The Mangyans are sedentary agriculturists who farm without 
plow or carabao, growing rice, root crops, and vegetables in hillside swiddens 
cleared on such carefully integrated schedules that the surrounding forest 
cover is not destroyed. Rice is planted by communal labor, with a line of 
men punching holes with a dibble stick, a line of women following to drop 
the seeds in. Game is taken with spears forged with an upright two-cylinder 
bellows, and bows shooting poisoned arrows. Salt is made by pouring 
seawater over burning logs, washing out the ashes, and boiling the resulting 
brine. Cotton is spun with distaff and spindle, and woven on backstrap 
looms for G-strings, skir ts, and jackets dyed blue with indigo and elabo- 
rately embroidered. It is, in short, a genuine sixteenth-century Visayan 
technology. 

As a matter of fact, this sixteenth-century technolog)' survived into the 
twentieth century from one end of the archipelago to the other, ft is almost 
standard practice among rice swiddeners for men to precede women across 
the fields, punching holes for them to seed: the Kalingas do so in the 
Mabaca and Saltan valleys and the I tnegs in Apayao subprovincc, and so, 


273 


Afterword 


too, do the Bagobo in the mountains of Davao. The two-piston forge is used 
by the Tugaya brass casters in Lanao del Sur, and by the T boli of South j 
Cotabato to forge blades unexcelled in temper and keenness, as well as by j 
the blacksmiths of the Cordillera Central of northern Ur/on, where an- j 
thropologisi Alfred E.Jenks photographed a miniature version in Bontoe | 
in 1905 used exclusively for making gold earrings. And like their sixteenth- | 
century predecessors, all these metal workers use raw materials procured 1 
through trade, even breaking up cast-iron vats for this purpose. Cotton and 
abaca cloth are still woven on backstrap looms among the Mindanao | 
Lumad from Davao to Agusan, and so are the elegant textiles and decora- j 
tive edgings reserved for the elite and royalty in Malawi and Cotabato, m 
while backstrap weaving has almost become a cottage industry in Ifugao j 
and the Mountain Province to supply a tourist market. : fj|| 

The G-string remained the preferred male garment on the Luzon j 
Cordillera up until the Second World War, and the rectangular wrapa- 
round skirt for women. Among the Bontoe and Ifugao, elaborately deco- | 
rated G-string flaps were indications of high economic status, and expen- 
sive blankets worn as mantles or burial shrouds were strictly presciibed by 
social class and lineage. Warrior status was indicated in the Mountain j 
Province and Kalinga not by clothing but by extravagant tattoos, and a man J 
who tattooed without qualifying feats of valor could expect such divinp| 
retribution as illness or misfortune. So, too, the Bagobo believed that a 
man who participated in communal ritual boasting without having killed 
an enemy would be struck down by some terrible malady. 

The T’boli also tattoo, and, in a further show of manliness, bum scars 
on their forearms with hot coals. Manobo braves called bagani were until 
recently set off by red garments— a red turban for those who had taken 
seven lives, a red shirt for twice that number, and completely red attire for 
fifteen or more. 

If Father Alcina could return to the Philippines today and attend a 
Taosug marriage, he would recognize most of its elements. The arrange- 
ments are made in a series of ritual visits to the bride s parents by the 
suitor’s go-betweens and relatives: to seek permission to open negotiations, 
to ask for the girl’s hand, to fix the engagement, to settle the bride-price 
and later to deliver it, to set the wedding date, and finally for the wedding 
itself— following which, the bride’s shyness must be overcome by repeated 
personal gifts before she unites with her husband. Among the Agusan 
Manobo, such visits and bargaining could go on for months and even years. 
John Garvan recorded a case in Pilar begun in 1898 in which the bride- 
price was only setded in 1904 at ten slaves, haggled down four months lat|j 


Afterword 


to four slaves and the equivalent of six others in goods and valuables, and 
delivered the next year lacking one slave, for which deficiency the man was 
still working for his prospective father-in-law in 1910. In Apayao, a proud 
father may demand that his son-in-law join his household, or at least settle 
in his village, a demand that can lead to heated exchanges. In 1968, a young 
American anthropologist, John Smart, accompanied a suitor’s party that 
was so intimidated during negotiations that they jumped through a window 
and fled. 

Pre-Hispanic burial practices also continued up into the American 
regime. Traditional burials in Sagada, Mountain Province, aris made in 
coffins with lids carved from the same tree, placed at the mouth of lime- 
stone caves or on almost inaccessible cliffs. The Kalinga bury below or 
between houses, and so do the Bukidnon, who may also abandon a house 
in which a death has occurred, as the Manobo also do, while the Mandaya 
burn such a building. The Mangyan, Suban-on, and Panay Sulod practice 
secondary burial, sometimes in ceramic jars, and so do the Ifugao. The late 
H. Otley Beyer’s remains were interred in Banaue in 1967 and later 
disinterred for a traditional bone-washing ceremony. The Bagobo and 
Suban-on used to sacrifice a slave as a mourning requirement, and a 
Tagakaolo widower could not remarry without performing such a ritual. 
And the belief that those who die by the sword or in childbirth go to a 
separate afterworld is held by old folks in societies as far apart as the 
Bagobo in southern Mindanao and the Ifugao in northern Luzon. 

These similarities give impressive testimony to the continuity of Philip- 
pine culture across three centuries. But even more impressive than its 
endurance is the extent of its distribution — from the mouth of the Cagayan 
River in the north to Saragani and Sulu in the south, from the seacoasts of 
Samar and Manila Bay to the heights of the Cordillera Central and Mount 
Apo. This does not mean, however, that all sixteenth-century Filipinos 
shared one and the same culture. After all, they spoke many different 
languages and had adjusted to many different environments; and commu- 
nities stimulated by overseas trade, supplies, and ideas had developed more 
1 sophisticated societies than mountain villages. Igorot blacksmiths may have 
;; used the same tools as their Tagalog contemporaries but they did not have 
the same access to raw materials, and their chiefs certainly did not operate 
gun foundries or collect harbor fees. But the similarities do indicate pre- 
Hispanic culture contacts from one end of the archipelago to the other. 
They also suggest that lowland Filipinos in the sixteenth century had more 
in common with highland minorities in the twentieth than with their own 
! Christian descendants. 


275 


Naturally, this common heritage did not survive intact the imposition of 
colonial authority. Subjugated Filipinos responded to military and moral 
suasion by abandoning customs which were offensive to their foreign 
conqueror — not only slave raiding and human sacrifices, but even G- 
strings and decorated teeth. As Father San Buenaventura (1613, 390) said, 
“Whoever files his teeth, I will certainly punish.” So profound were these 
changes that by the beginning of the twentieth century, Filipinos who had 
grown up under Spanish domination considered themselves a different 
people from those who had not. The final triumph of this acculturative 
process can be seen in the fact that those whose ancestors experienced it 
are unaware that it took place. It is precisely this social amnesia which today 
stigmatizes as cultural minorities those Filipinos who resisted colonial 
acculturation. 

flj 

A Select Bibliography on Twentieth-Century Minority Cultures 

Barton, Roy Franklin. 1946. The religion of the Ifugaos. Menasha (Wis.). 
Casal, Gabriel. 1977a. ‘The legacy of Ginton,” Filipino heritage 2:455-60. 

Manila. $§jj 

. 1977b. ‘The high-fashion world of the T’boli,” Filipino heritage 

3:729-37. Manila 

Cole, Fay-Cooper. 1913. The wild, tubes of Davao District, Mindanao. Chicago. 
Conklin, Harold C. 1957. Hanunoo agriculture. Northford (Conn.), 1975. 
Finley, John Park. 1913. The Subanu: Studies of a suFVisayan mountain folk of 
Mindanao. Washington. 

Garvan, John M. 1929. The Manobos of Mindanao. Washington, 1931. 
Jenks, Albert E. The Bontoc Igorot. Manila 

Jocano, F. Landa. 1964. “Notes on the Sulod concept of death, the soul, and 
the region of the dead,” Philippine studies 12:51-62. 

Manuel, E. Arsenio. 1973. Manuvu social organization. Quezon City. 

. 1975. “The wake and last rites over H. Otley Beyer in 

Ifugaoland,” Philippine studies 23:120-89. 

Postma, Antoon. 1977a. “Please pass the salt,” Filipino heritage 2:487-89| 

Manila. ij 

. 1977b. ‘The unchanging Mangyan,” Filipino heritage 2:554-60. 

Scott, William Henry. 1958. “A preliminary report on upland rice in 
northern Luzon,” Southwestern journal of anthropology 14:87-105. 

Smart, John E. 1967. ‘The flight from Agiwan: A case study in the sociocul- 
tural dynamics of an Istieg marriage negotiation,” Philippine, quarterly of 
culture and society. 


Notes 


1. La islade Negros y las coslumbres delos Visayasy Negritos, attributed to sixteenth-century 
encomendero Diego Lope Povedano, and Las antiguas leyeudas de la isla de Negros and Los 
cuentos de los indios de esta isla, attributed to nineteenth-century Spanish clergyman Jose 
Maria Pavon, were donated to the Philippine National Library in 1913 byjose E. Marco 
of Pontevedra (Occidental Negros) .Theyhave since been shown by internal contradictions 
and anachronisms to be deliberate forgeries, but the fantastic “Code of Kalantiaw,” which 
is part of the forgeries, has been incoiporated into standard Philippine history texts. 
Maragtas is a copyrighted 1907 local history of Panay by Pedro Alcantara Monteclaro, 
which contains a legend which has carelessly been considered a pre-Hispanic document. 
See Scott 1984. 

2. It will be noted that the word boat does not appear in this text translated from the 
original in the Archives of the Indies. But the text given by Santa Ines (1676,2-3:592) has 
an additional clause which BR (7:174) translate as “which is a boat, thus called. 

3. See, for example, Eric San Juan’s (1987, 112) statement, “When the term ‘Filipino’ 
later came into use, it was reserved for Spaniards on the archipelago.” 

4. See “The population of the archipelago, 1565-1898” in Corpus 1989, 1:515-70. 

5. The theory was first published in 1918, tipdated in a historical introduction to 
Manuel’s 1948 Chinese elements in the Tagalog language, and popularized in a 1947 
newspaper supplement, Philippine saga, and in Pictorial histoiy of the Philippines (Reyes, et 
al. 1953). 

6. .SVeBennet Bronson’s ( 1 977) devastating “Against migration: A negative perspective 
on population movements in Southeast Asia." 


277 





Notes 


7. What are regarded as the definitive study of population movements into Southeast 
Asia and the Pacific are Belhvood 1978 and 1985. The northern-vs-southem argument 
over the Austronesian migration route into the Philippines was joined at the Twelfth 
Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association in Penablanca (Cagayan) in 1985; see 
Belhvood, Meacham, and Solheim 1988. 

8. Anthropologists call this unnatural formation a “casco foot” from the barges (cascosj 
which these men poled. 

9. The best summary for the nonlinguist is Zorc’s (1984) ‘The Philippine language scene.” 

10. Visayan terms are taken mainly from the Mateo Sanchez Leyte-Samareno (Waray) 
dictionary, and the Alonso Mentrida Panay dictionary (Hiligaynon with Aklanon and 
Kiniray-a variants notes) . No early Cebuano lexicon is known. 

11. Cakra is the Spanish word for wheel or disk, and a variety of penis inserts are 
mentioned from southern India in the erotic classic, Kama Sutra. Penis pins called. 
palang, with or without knobby fmials, are still known in Borneo, but the penis wheel 
secured with a crossbar has only been reported from the Philippines. For a modern 
survey, wBrown, Edwards, and Moore 1988. None of these actual implants, however, are 
to be confused with the condomlike devices nowadays called ticklers or exciters. 

12. Splendid illustrations in full color of all this goldwork can be found in Villegas 
1983. Itis possible that such jewelry was exported. The royal regalia of the Makassar Gowa 
dynasty on display in Sungguminasa (Sulawesi) includes a gold chain necklace said to 

’ll have come from Manila. 

13. Taro was evidently farmed in huge quantities, even if Father Alcina (1668a, 1:103) 
was exaggerating when he wrote, “An indio may ordinarily plant ten or twelve thousand, 
and some good workers more, to eat and sell; they give 1 00 for a real if they are medium- 
sized, and if they’re very large, 60 or 80 proportionately.” 

14. BR (5:44) misread as part of the sentence, “Tienen . . . unas raices como batatas 
de sancto domingo que llaman camotes,” the beginning of the next sentence, “En esta 
islay en todas las que se han descubrierto,”etc. giving the misleading translation, “a kind 
of root resembling the potatoes of Sancto Domingo, called by the [Philippine] natives 
camotes." 

15. Like cows, horses were imported into the archipelago by the Spaniards from 
Mexico and China. But the presence of the Malay word for horse, kuda, in Mindanao and 
Sulu languages suggests an introduction from the south unknown to the Spaniards. 

16. For a more detailed description, see “Boat building and seamanship in classic 
Philippine society,” in Scott 1982a, 60-95, and Horridge’s Alcina translation in National 
Maritime Museum Monograph no. 5. 

17. The conversion of sixteenth-century measurements to modern equivalents must 
be undertaken with some reservation since Spanish units of measure have varied 
considerably over the centuries. The braza (“embrace"), for example, now reckoned at 
1.67 meters, was probably somewhat shorter. 

18. The fact that Magellan’s Sumatran slave, Enrique de Malacca, was also understood 
by the 1 .imasawa ruler, persuaded Magellan biographer Stefan Zweig that he must have 
been a native Visayan, now returned to the land of his birth. “What an amazing moment, 
one of the most remarkable in the history of mankind! For the first time since our planet 
had begun to spin on its axis and to circle in its orbit, a living man himself circling the 
planet, had got back to his homeland” (Zweig 1938, 234). Though this fantasy is 


278 


Notes 


unsupported by any historical evidence, the idea that it was a Filipino who First 
circumnavigated the globe has had irresistible appeal in the Philippines, most recently 
to F. Sionil Jose in his novel, Viajero. 

19. San Buenaventura (1613, 509), however, defines the codyapi as “Rabel or violon 
which they play with a bow.” Perhaps this was the Chinese two-stringed er-hu. 

20. The most famous was at Los Banos in Luzon, whose thermal springs had attracted 
Filipinos to their medicinal qualities in pre-Hispanic times. 

21. Because the sun never appears directly overhead in European latitudes, it is due 
south of the observer at high noon. Mediterranean sailors therefore used midday 
(mediodia) for the compass bearing of due south. 

22. Alcina (1668a, 4:60) gave a similar expression: “Akon ka ginoo; akun ka gintubo 
[1 set you free; I held you as a slave].” 

23. 1 use money to mean gold, goods, or any other medium of exchange. 

24. This island was called Mazaua or Mazagua in the Spanish accounts, and there has 
recently been some controversy over its location. I see no reason to doubt its identification 
with Limasawa. Pigafetta placed it at 9 2/3 degrees north latitude, 25 leguas (150 
kilometers) from Humunu (Homonhon) , andAlbo gave the same latitude butestimated 
the Homonhon-Masawa distance as 20 leguas (120 kilometers). In 1565, Legazpi pilot 
Esteban Rodriguez logged the distance from Cabalian (Leyte) at 8 or 9 leguas, and when 
Captain Ortiz de Rueda visited the island in 1543, he thought it was about 60 kilometers 
from Butuan. Considering the fact that these observers thought that Panaon Island was 
a continuation of Leyte, Limasawa is the only island found in this position. Its exact 
latitude is 9'54’58", but sun-sight readings were known to be a bit low in the early 
sixteenth century; Rodriguez (1565, 398) himself noted, “I always add a quarter ol a 
degree to the sun sight according to the Mexican tables and not the Spanish.” It may also 
be worth noting that the names Masawa and Limasawa have the same root — saxoa 
(python); perhaps they mean Python Place and Five Pythons respectively. 

25. Tolula is presumably Turang (Ibran) on the southeast coast, which was confused 
in the Villalobos account with Patuko and its fine harbor on the northwest. 

26. I am indebted to linguist Ken Maryott for the following explanations of these 
names: “Candigar (i.e., Balutl.) looks verymuch like itmightbe Sandigang in Sangirancl 
Sangil [languages], which means ‘located nearby (Mindanao).’ To this day, both 
languages use a synonym of Sandigang to refer to Balut” (personal communication 13 

| April 1993). 

27. Members of Salcedo’s expeditionary force of 1572 also reported one town that 
“seemed to have more than three thousand houses” (Ortega 1573, 1 35) , a rather unlikely 

| figure. 

28. The Chinese characters US appear on an illustration of a “Sangley” couple 
in the Boxer Codex (1590a, pl.V). Langlang is probably tan-nnng, a colloquial term by 
which Kujianese in the Philippincsdistinguishtheinselvesfrom other Chinese immigrants. 

29. Pigafetta (1624b, 222) said of him, “This captain was much feared in those parts, 
hut more so by the pagans because they were enemies of that Moro king, (.inesde Mafia 
said he was in Borneo to marry the sultan’s daughter, hut I here follow the Agandtn u 
Mom account of 1 623. This account, despite Moriz’s own embellishments, preserves a 
Manila tradition that was current at the beginning of the seventeenth century, and is 
therefore worth quoting at length: 


279 


Notes 


What had happened was that this Prince had been left without a father because he 
had died when he was newborn, and the government fell to the Queen mother whom 
the King ofTongdo, her nephew, challenged because she was a woman; he did not pay 
her much heed nor did the principal lords of Manila since each of them was trying to 
be king and lord of what he could. 

The Prince grew up, and as he was raised with his own cousin, the King ofTongdo, 
who kept slyly encroaching on his land, when he was older he had a quarrel with him, 
for which reason he returned to Manila, offended that the King his cousin had no 
respect for him and presumed to bully him like an elder brother. He complained to 
his mother, who tried to soothe him and patch the thing up, but as the Prince was now 
a young man of high spirits, and understood how the King ofTongdo after his father’s 
death had been encroaching on the kingdom of Manila, he discussed with some 
principal lords, relatives of his who looked on him as on themselves, that he wanted 
to go to Borneo and ask help from his grandfather, who was King Saripada, to return 
and recover his lands. He told this to his mother, who would like to have kept him with 
her and dissuade him from the voyage, but on seeing his determination, she gave him 
permission and a quantity of gold, and taking ships accompanied by some lords, he 
went to Borneo with them, where he was very well received by his grandfather, 
Saripada, in whose court and palace he was treated like a royal person so that he was 
able to put almost 200 ships under sail, both junks and galleys, and as many as 6,000 
spirited Bornean soldiers. With this he set out shortly before General Juan Sebastian 
del Cano made port in Borneo and, since the Prince found himself with so fine a fleet, 
he wanted to take some prizes in order to return to Manila more powerful, giving 
pleasure in this to the Bornean soldiers who were dead set on robbery. This fleet, then, 
was the one that turned on our two galleons. 

The General took the flagship and captured the Prince aboard her; he learned his 
plans and where he was going with his fleet, about which he had also had word in 
Borneo, and having learned that he was King Saripada’s grandson, graciously gave 
him his liberty. Declining a sum of gold which he had first been offered for her, he 
returned the ship to him and what he had taken from him, telling him how much he 
owed the King of Borneo, since when he reached his port in need of food, he had 
succored him with great generosity, for which he was so obligated that, if it would not 
go against his King’s orders who had commanded him to go out to the Malucos 
islands, he would interrupt his voyage to go and serve him until he restored him to his 
kingdoms, but that he could not delay. He asked him for a guide and pilot for Maluco 
[and] the Prince of Manila, grateful for the General’s good treatment, gave him a 
good pilot, a slave of his and his freedom so he could guide them. The pilot was from 
Makassar, who after having been captured and passed from one master to another, 
had wound up in the service of the Prince of Luzon — or Manila, which is the same. 

The island is called Luzon, where the kings had their court; the Ladyas [Rajahs] 
were called Kings of Manila. Greatformalid.es having passed between the General and 
the Prince, Juan Sebastian del Cano asked him that, so the liberty he had given him 
should not go unrepaid, if perchance some Spaniards sometime made port in his 
lands and reigns, he should remember the nobleness with which he had been treated 
by His Highness in the present occasion and therefore treat them well; to this the 


9«f) 


Notes 


Prince swore according to his custom and he kept his word very well as we will see in 
the conquest of Manila, for this is the King Ladya Matanda who received Maestre-de- 
Campo Martin de Goiti hospitably (Moriz 1623, 78:59-60). 

30 Our earliest populadon figure for Manila is two thousand in 1572, excluding the 
women and children-though BR translate dexado as “including.” This figure I have 
increased to ten thousand, by reckoning five women and children to each man, but then 
arbitrarily lowered to six thousand to exclude the environs. The passage in question 

reads: 

The natives were many and of different classes, although not so many as has been 
said in Nueva Espana [Mexico], where they said that there were eighty thousand 
Moros gathered in this town of Manila when this [occupation] took place; because 
from the eighty thousand, seventy-eight thousand had best be removed, leaving two 
thousand which there could have been in the said town and the other towns around, 
besides the children and the women, who would have been many (Anon. 1572, 79). 

Nonetheless, the tendency to exaggerate the size of Manila at the time of Spanish 
advent continued into the next century. In 1664, Andres de San Nicolas (who was never 
in the Philippines) wrote: “When Adenlantado Miguel Lopez de : Legazp, took it by force 
of arms on 19 May 1570 [sic], ten thousand houses adorned it (San Nicolas 1664, 415)^ 

31. In an earlierwork, I mistakenly thought these twenty-two varieties were all swidden 
rice— that is, unirrigated (Scott 1992a, 75) . I regret the error. 

32. Like Sanskrit, Arabic, and Hebrew, the Philippine senpt has separate chaiac ers 
for die consonants but represents vowels with diacritical marks; I therefore call it, 

! them, an alphabet rather than a “syllabary.” 

33. Kinship terms of Chinese origin which appear in certain Tagalog dialects today 

like ate (eldest sister) , Imya (eldest brother) , dikof. second eldest brother) , or sangse (thtrd 
eldest sister)— do not appear in early dictionaries. m _ 

34. San Buenaventura here curiously spelled balangayzs barangay, pei haps eflecU g 
a contemporary sound shift. I have regularly used barangay m this work to accord wit i 

modern usag c t ^ chiefe were not kings was cited by Rajah Soliman as an excuse 

for having betrayed his peace pact with Legazpi: 

You know that in this land there is no king nor single head but each one holds Ins 
own views and opinion and so they do what seems best to them . . . and were I king of 
this land rather than only lord of my own estate, the word which I gave would not 
been broken (Riquel 1573, 234). 

36. I regret that in several earlier works I incorrectly attributed this quotation to 

Archbishop Miguel de Benavides (see Scott 1974, 49; 1992a, 9). 

37. In 1974, 1 speculated that Gaganayan was Kankanaey, a Cordillera ethnolmguistic 
group (Scott 1974, 43n4), but have since learned that Ilocano gagon-ayan (warpmg 
frame) also means the constellation “commonly called the Three Mai las (Gan o 

116). 


281 



m 

■*Tll 


1 

1 

m 


A major font of sources for this book is five collections of published historical 
documents. The Spanish government published three colecciones de dociimentos ineditos 
(collections of unpublished documents), beginning in 1825 with Martin Fernandez 
Navarrete’s five volumes, and totaling sixty volumes by 1932. These are indicated in the 
present bibliography asCDIA.CDIU, and CVD. A fourth collection is Blairand Robertson's 
The Philippine Islands 1493-1898, fifty-five volumes of translations into English between 
1903 and 1907 (BR), which include the original texts of several of earlier more important 
documents. The fifth collection is the ongoing HisUrria deia provincia Agusliniana delSmo. 
Nomine de Jesus de Filipinos (HPAF) by Isacio Rodriguez which has reached volume 20 to 
date. The Augustinians were the pioneer missionaries in the colony, so their presence 
and activities figure not only in their own correspondence but in official records. Father 
Rodriguez presents an exhaustive, carefully edited, and extensively annotated selection. 

When Portuguese invaders— including Ferdinand Magellan— occupied Malacca in 
1511, they found a community of l.uzon merchants engaged in business there. 
Correspondence with the Portuguese king referring to them was summarized by Manuel 
Teixera and 1 .uis Felipe Thomaz, while Tome Pires’s 1 515 Snma (Mental providesa more 
accurate description. References to both Lu/.ones and Maguindanaons in the early 
sixteenth century are scattered all through Fernao Mcndes Pinto's piciures<pie/Vn?g?7M«f«0, 
a travel account which incorporates all bis sources as personal experiences. Ternate 
Governor Antonio Galvan and historian Joaode IVarros mentioned Portuguese excursions 
to Mindanao in the 1 530s, and a letter from Bras Bayao, the king’s factor m Borneo, gives 
a brief description ofSuIn in 15-10. 


Bibliographic Essay 


Spanish accounts begin with the Magellan expedition of 1521. Magellan was a 
Portuguese adventurer under contract to the Spanish king to find a westward passage to 
the spice islands, but he was killed in Maktan and most of his men were massacred in 
Cebu. The survivors escaped in two vessels, one of which was captured by the Portuguese 
together with all of Magellan’s papers, which were subsequently lost in a Lisbon fire. The 
other ship managed to continue westward and finally reached Spain: five firsthand 
accounts have survived from this inadvertent circumnavigation of the world. 

The best of the five is Antonio Pifagetta’s justly celebrated Primo viaggio intorno al 
mondo of 1524, one of the most observant travel documents of the sixteenth century. 
Pigafetta’s original manuscript has not survived, but four copies are known, two of them 
identical enough to be regarded as faithful to the original, one in Italiafi and the other 
I in French. The so-called Ambrosian text was published by Blair and Robertson in Italian, 
and the beautiful Nancy (or Beinecke) text in facsimile by R. A. Skelton in French. The 
former contains a few careless non sequiturs, the latter a number of mistranslated words 
but is nonetheless considered the preferred text. Unfortunately, these manuscripts 
remained unknown to scholars until the nineteenth century, so Spanish historians in the 
Philippines had to rely on garbled paraphrase in French printed in 1525 as Le voyage el 
navigation faict par les Espaignols, and then translated into Italian and given wide 
circulation in Giovanni Battista Ramusio’s 1550 Della navigation i et viaggi. It is this 
mutilated text which has given rise to the modern Philippine controversy over a supposed 
Magellan visit to Butuan, an event nowhere mentioned in the primary texts. 

Pilot Francisco Albo’s navigational log has also survived, as well as a running account 
by Gines de Mafia (who would visit the Philippines again twenty-two years later with 
Villalobos) , along with two anonymous undated Portuguese accounts. These provide a 
number of gossipy details like the fact that the rulers of Butuan, Limasawa, and Cebu— 
Awi, Kolambu, and Humabon— were all related, and that Lapulapu of Maktan was the 
uncle of Humabon’s wife. They also regard Magellan’s death as having been caused by 
an act of foolhardy aggression on his part, an opinion evidently shared by the Spanish 
court since the viceroy of Mexico, Hernan Cortes, tried to send the “Ring of Cebu ’ an 
apology. 

Three more Spanish expeditions made landfalls on the east coast of Mindanao but 
could not reach Cebu because of adverse winds and currents, and wound up in 
Portuguese hands in the Moluccas. Two accounts are extant from the 1526 Juan Garcia 
Jofre de Loaysa voyage, one by Hernando de la Torre, who assumed command following 
the deaths of Loaysa and three of his successors, the other by a daring Basque seaman by 
the name of Andres de Urdaneta, who was to return to the Philippines forty years later 
as an Augustinian friar. The little Santa Maria del Parral got separated from Loaysa’s fleet, 
and her crew mutinied, killed their officers, ran aground on Sangir Island, and were all 
seized and sold into slavery. From the 1528 expedition of Alvaro de Saavedra Ceron there 
are three accounts — two by Vicente de Napoles and one by Francisco Granado. On the 
Davao coast, Saavedra recovered four of the Spanish slaves but hanged three of them as 
mutineers. 

The 1543 Ruy Lopez de Villalobos expedition was the first to attempt an actual 
settlement in the Philippines and therefore carried a contingent of friar missionaries, but 
during eighteen tragic months lost more than two hundred men to hunger, disease, or 
hostility. Father Geronimo Santisteban has left one account, and senior officer Garcia 


283 


Bibliographic Essay 


Bibliographic Essay 





Descalante Alvarado another, while an anonymous undated and incomplete account 
recently discovered in the Biblioteca Nacional in Madrid and published by Consuelo - 1 
Varela, runs to more than a hundred pages of detailed activities and local customs. It must 
also be the most frustrating document in Philippine historiography because the dozens i® 
of diagrams and maps it originally contained are all missingfrom the present manuscript. 

An even more detailed account written in the next century by Rodrigo Aganduru Moriz 
is evidently based on some original source now unknown, but is larded with imaginary fl 
conversations between parleying Filipinos and Spaniards. 

Finally, in 1565 Miguel Lopez de Legazpi successfully duplicated Magellan’s Samar H 
landfall, entered the archipelago through Surigao Strait, and established a permanent 
Spanish settlement in Cebu to begin 333 years of colonial occupation. There is a fine 
journal of the events — anonymous but probably written by royal notary Hernando 
Riquel — which includes careful observations of the islands and people contacted. Its first 
six months appear in HPAF, the next twenty-five months in CDIU, the former being 
profusely annotated with references to other documents, such as financial accounts with 
specific names, dates, and goods handed out to ingratiate Filipino chiefs. There are more 
than a dozen reports of local resources and products — and conquistador abuses — : ;|§§ 
written by both civil officials and friar clergy, and Legazpi himself, of which the most 
useful for our purposes are those ofjuan Martinez andjuan de la Isla, the latter also being 
incorporated into a later report by Diego de Artieda. BR also give the text of an 
anonymous report, Copin de una carta venida de Sevilla, printed in Barcelona in 1566. 

In 1571 Legazpi shifted to Manila for greater access to provisions and trade, and I hree 
accounts of the voyage and conquest contain our only descriptions of that emporium at 
the time of Spanish advent: one anonymous, one by Legazpi, and the third by Riquel. 
Biographical details of its three rulers can be gleaned from these, together with two of 
the Magellan accounts, reports from the 1578-79 attacks on Borneo, letters to the king 
from royal auditor Melchor de Avalos, a tale recorded in the early 1600s by Aganduru 
Moriz, and eighteenth-century genealogies preserved in the Philippine National Archives, 
all of which data have been skillfully exploited by Luciano Santiago (1990) in his ‘The 
houses of Lakandula, Matanda, and Soliman.” Regular reports by the governors general 
for the rest of the century translated in BR add to increasing knowledge of Luzon 
conditions, and so do passing details in sworn testimonies to the role of the Augustinians 
in the Conquest. (See, for example, Baeza, Mann, Roman, and Sotomayor.) Of special 
value among early sources is the correspondence of pioneer missionaiy Martin de Rada, 
an energetic, well-educated friar with close contacts with both colonial authorities and 
Filipino elite, but shocked by the social mores of a culture so different from his own. 

The first-generation descriptions were written in response to a royal order to make ifj 
reports on native conditions and customs. Miguel de Loarca’s 1582 Relacion was never 
published but its full text appears in BR. It reviews the whole archipelago but, inasmuch 
as Loarca operated a Spanish shipyard with Filipino labor in Oton (Iloilo), it is much 
better informed about the Visayas than Luzon. Franciscan Fatherjuan de Plasencia wrote 
succinct treatises on Tagalog religion in 1589; 1 have used the Archivo General de Indias 
(AGI) originals for the first two but an appendix in Santa Ines’s Cronicas for the third. 
Plasencia also wrote a Relacion published in 1 592, whose only known copy is in the British :| 
Library. = 


Perhaps the richest source of Filipino detail is the “Boxer Codex,” named for its 
scholar-owner, C. R. Boxer, because its title page is missing, though it can be dated to 1590 
on internal evidence. It includes separate sections on Cagayan, Zambales, the Tagalogs, 
and the Visayans, as well as treatises on other regions of Indonesia and southern China, 
and is profusely illuminated with gold leaf— our only illustrations of sixteenth-century 
Filipinos. Readers should be aware, however, that, like other early Spanish documents, 
it regularly refers to Tagalogs as Moros, although their culture is clearly described as non- 
Muslim and animist. 

The two best books for our period are Dr. Antonio de Morga’s 1609 Sucesos de las Islas 
Pilipinas, and Father Pedro Chirino’s 1604 Relacion de las IslasFilipinas. Morgawas a highly 
placed colonial officer — once acting governor — with access to documentation of the 
"events” (that is, sucesos) about which lie wrote. His work includes the most thorough and 
objective account of the archipelago and its inhabitants written in the sixteenth century. 
(He referred to Filipinos as naturales— natives— rather than indios, a term suggesting 
cultural inferiority.) Chirino’s work is a history of the early Jesuit missions, and portrays 
Filipinos sympathetically for a European audience. He reported them as ready and 
faithful converts, lauded their cleanliness and ability to cany their liquor, and exaggerated 
their modesty of dress and extent of literacy. The Jesuit story was continued by Francisco 
Cohn in his 1 663 Labor evangelica from Chirino’s own notes and a longer version of the 
Relacion, which is happily reproduced almost in full in the annotations to Pablo Pastells’s 
1900 edition of Cohn. 

Since the Dominicans were given charge of missionary work in northern Luzon, 
Bishop Diego de Aduarte’s 1640 Historia de laprovmcia del Santo Rosario is the best source 
for Pangasinan and Cagayan culture. Early Franciscan writers like Marcelo de Ribadeneira 
andjuan Pobre de Zamora, however, gave much less detail about the Bikolanos, devoting 
most of their space to glowing reports of native responses to their proselytizing efforts. 
Our earliest accounts of life in northeastern Mindanao are Recollect Fathers Andres de 
San Nicolas’s 1664 Historia general de los religiosos descalzos del orden de los Emitanos and 
Luis de Jesus’s 1681 continuation. Jesuit Francisco Combes’s 1667 Historia de las islas de 
Mindanao, Ioloysusadyacentes ranks asa classic of Spanish reporting of Philippine culture, 
being characterized by careful personal observations and rich recording of oral histories. 
And a curious little 1673 book by Pedro Mercado called Vida de tin mancebo indio llamado 
Miguel Ay aiumo, natural deBohollo (Life of an indio youth called Miguel Ayatumo, a native 
of Bohol) contains a few unique references to religious practices on that island. 

There are two books written in later centuries which are also valuable for information 
about the sixteenth— Gaspar de San Agustm’s 1698 Conquistas de las Islas Filipinos and 
Juan Francisco de San Antonio’s 1738 Cronicas de la aposlolica provincia de S. Gregorio. San 
Agustin made use of contemporary documents of the Conquest, and preserved many 
details otherwise unknown, even a description of native culture by Legazpi himself 
(complete with date of dispatch to Mexico) whose original is not catalogued in the AGI. 
And San Antonio made a careful study of the work of earlier writers before producing his 
own descriptions of Philippine culture and society. 

Special insight into Tagalog language and culture is provided by the sermons and 
hortatory expositions written by Spanish friars who were masters of the idiom. Unlike 
dictionary definitions, these specimens of prose illustrate how the language was actually 


284 


QQK 


Bibliographic Essay 



spoken: their examples, common expressions, turns of phrase, and elegant metaphors j 
must have been meaningful to a particular audience in a particular time and place. Juan j 

de Oliver’s exposition of the Christian faith — Declaration de la doctrina Christiana en idioma i 

Tagalog — is found in a manuscript collection (now in the University of Indiana) which j 
was looted by British officers during the 1762 occupation of Manila. A collection of :i 
sermons by Father Francisco Blancas de San Jose in the Rare Books and Manuscripts i 
Section of the Philippine National Library (PNL) contains one for eveiy Sunday of the IB! 
church year from Advent to Easter. An Explication de los siete sacramentos de la Santa Iglesia |§§| 
by the same author is also found in the PNL. It had been carried away from the church 
in Meycauayan during the Fil-American War by an enemy soldier who returned it in his j 
presumably conscience-stricken old age. 

The most important single work for this study has been Francisco Ignacio Alcina’s 
unpublished 1 668 Hisloria de las islas e indios de Bisayas, which indeed is one of the most 
remarkable literary products of the whole Spanish period. It is an ethnographic study 
which remained the most extensive work of its kind until the twentieth century, and a 
unique testimony to a missionary’s intimate knowledge of his parishioners and then- 
culture. It has been frequently quoted in this work. Part 1 contains four books on flora, 
fauna, and ethnography, totaling 1,485 pages; but part 2 on history only exists in 
fragments. A transcription of part 1 was made available in 1962 by the Philippine Studies 
Program of the University of Chicago, and the surviving books of part 2 were published 
by Kobak and Fernandez in Philippiniana sacra 14-20 (1979-1986). The first two books j 
of part 1 were also published in facsimile by Martin-Meras and Higueras in Madrid in Ifl 
1974. 

All these sources of information can be made more useful by recourse to early Spanish 
lexicons of Philippine languages, not only from the definitions themselves but, more i 
revealingly, from the grammatical examples which illustrate their use. (The same may be 
said of the early Spanish grammars — artes or compendios.) Pedro de San Buenaventura’s 
Vocabulario de lengua Tagala was printed in Pila (Laguna) in 1613, but the one by his 
contemporary, Francisco Blancas de San Jose, was never published, though there are 
three known manuscript copies — one each in the University of Santo Tomas, the .->] 
Biblioteque Nationale in Paris, and the National Archives in Vienna. The Tagalog §y 
dictionary of Miguel Ruiz (d. 1 630) is known only from a manuscript in King’s College, i 
London, which institution also preserves the manuscript of the Ilocano dictionary of j 
Francisco Lopez who died in 1631. Mateo Sanchez’s Bocabulario de la lengua Bisaya was 
completed in Dagami (Leyte) in 1617 and printed in 1711, while the Hiligaynon j 
dictionary of Alonso de Mentrida (d. 1637) and the Bikolano dictionary of Marcos do j 
Lisboa (d. 1628) were reissued in the nineteenth century. Jose Bugarin’s Ibanag 
dictionary dates from later in the century, and the Pampanga and Pangasinan dictionaries 
of Diego Bergano and Lorenzo Fernandez Cosgaya come from the eighteenth. They \ 
must therefore be used critically, since lexicons written so long after Spanish advent will \ 
have perforce incorporated semantic changes produced by colonial domination, especially ijgjj 
in matters of religion, government, and warfare. 

A word of explanation may be offered about the use of these dictionaries. In the first J 
place, they have been used in conjunction with one another and with all other sources 
of information. The variation in thenumberof technical terms in different dictionaries, I 


o or- 


Bibliographic Essay 


for example, no doubt reflects the interests of their lexicographers rather than different 
levels of technology in the language groups involved. San Buenaventura mentioned 
neither potter’s wheels nor any other implements for pot making, though there were 
obviously Tagalog potters, but Visayan and Bikol dictionaries give the terms for the 
paddle-and-anvil technique. On the other hand, the fact that Tagalog and Bikol 
dictionaries contain extensive vocabularies for wet-rice farming but that Visayan 
dictionaries do not, certainly point to different agricultural technologies in these areas. 
Again, the absence of any Philippine terms for cart, sledge, yoke, or plow from a 
particular lexicon may not be significant, but that these terms are missing from all the 
early dictionaries, as well as from other accounts, persuasively argues that the carabao was 
not being used as a draft animal in pre-Hispanic limes. I 

In addition to these historical sources, recourse has been made to the oral literature 
of Filipino groups occupying the interior mountains of Mindanao, Panay, and Luzon, 
where they were less exposed to colonial acculturation. It is not possible to date these 
epics, but they preserve the idealized memory of an earlier way of life in compositions of 
truly epic scope and style. Whenever they were composed, they depict an un-Hispanized 
Philippine culture and society with obvious parallels to the Philippine culture and society 
described in this work. 

From the Cordillera of northern Luzon, Francis Lambrecht and Francis Billiet have 
published the Ifugao Hudhud and Kalinga Ullalim; and from Panay, F. Landajocano has 
published part of the Hinilawod; while Gina Barte has kindly made available her 
unpublished translation of part of the Humadapnon. Musicologist Elena G. Maquiso has 
produced a book-length study, Ulahingan: An epic of the southern Philippines , from the 
Manobo of South Cotabato; while their Manuvu neighbors’ Agyu cycle has been the 
subject of studies and recordings by E. Arsenio Manuel. From Bukidnon comes Ludivina 
R. Opena’s recording of the Olaging; and from the Suban-on, Esterlinda Mendoza 
Malagar, Gaudiosa Martinez (^>choterena, and Virgilio Resma have published three epics 
in Kinaadman. In a class by itself for epic grandeur and literary sophistication is the 
Darangan of Marawi, which was first brought to public attention by Frank Laubach’s “An 
Odyssey from Lanao” in 1930. The whole cycle is now being published by the Folklore 
Division of the Mindanao State University Research Center under the direction of Sister 
Ma. Delia Coronel; six luxurious volumes have been published to date, totaling 80,225 
lines of elegant Maranao verse. 

The Ilocano epic of Lam-ang— which might better be called a metrical romance — 
strangely does not depict an un-Hispanized culture: its hero performs his magical feats 
in a settingwhich might easily be that of a nineteenth-century Spanish colony. Similarly, 
a nineteenth-century Spanish poem which incorporates Bikol folklore has been 
passionately believed by Bikolano scholars to be a translation from a lost epic called 
Handiongoflbalon. But whether translation or not, the poem is not written in the literary 
style of other Philippine epics: it lacks the rich repetitions of petty details which would 
permit the reconstruction of an archaic Philippine society. Neither of these works have 
therefore served the purposes of the present study. 


9R7 



Bibliography 



II 


m 

BBn 

1 

i 
*• 
'b 

> 

! 


Common Abbreviations 

AFIO Archivo Franciscano Ibero-Oriental, Madrid. 

AGI Archivo General de Indias, Seville. 

AHHA Archivo Historico Hispano-Agustiniano. 

HR Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson. The Philippine islands 1 493- 

1898, 55 vols. Cleveland 1903-1907. 

CD LA Coleccion dedocumentos ineditos relalivos al descubrimienlo, conquistay colonization de 
lasposesionesen America y Oceania, sacada ensu mayor parte del Ileal Archivo de Indias, 
42 vols. Madrid 1864-1886. 

CDIU Coleccion de documenlos ineditos relalivos al descubnmien/o, conquisla y organization 
de las antiguas fmesiones Espa holes de Ultramar, 13 vols. Madrid 1885-1932. 

CV1) Martin Fernandez Navarrete, Coleccion de los viages y desrubiimientos que hitieron 
pur mar las Espa holes desde fines del siglo XV, 5 vols. Madrid 1825-1837. 

I IRAK Isacio Rodgi iguez, Historia de la provintia Agusliniana de Smo. Nomine de Jesxis de. 
Pilipinas , 19 vols. 

Note: Sixteenth century Spaniards are listed under the name by which they arc 
commonly known today. Miguel Lopez de Lcgazpi, for example, is listed under l.egazpi 
rather than his surname, Lopez de Lcgazpi. Modern authors, however, are listed under 
their lirst api'Uido — f or example, Cayelano Sanchez Kuertes under Sanchez. Documents 
are listed under their date of writing and published works under their first edition, but 
where these dates are unknown, an estimated date has been supplied, or the date of the 
author’s death. 


OQQ 


Bibliography 


Abella, Domingo. 1971. “From to indio to Filipino,” Philippine historical review 4 (1971): 
1-34. 

Aduarte, Diego de. 1 640. Historia de la Provintia del Santo Rosaiio de la Orden de. Predicadores 
en Filipinos, Japony China. Ed. Manuel Ferrero, 2 vols. Madrid 1962. 

Albo, Francsco. 1522. “Diario o derrotero del viage de Magallanes desde el cabo de San 
Agustfn en el Brasil, hasta el regreso a Espaha de la nao Victoria.” CVD 4: 209-47. 

Alburquerque, Agustin de. 1575. “Carte del P. Agustin . . . comunicando el suceso del 
corsario Limahon.” Campo de Pangasinan 5 June 1575. HPAF 14: 234-61. 

Alcina, Francisco Ignacio. 1 668a. Historia de las islas e indios de Bisayas. Part 1 , books 1-4. 
Victor Baltazar transcription. University of Chicago Philippine Studies Program 1962. 

. 1668b. Historia de las islas e indios de Bisayas selected by Cahtius Kobak and 

Pablo Fernandez. Philippiniana sacra 14—20 (1978-1985). 

. 1668c. La hislmia de las islas e indios de Bisayas del Padre Alcina 1668. Ed. Ma. 

Luisa Martin-Meras and Ma. Dolores Higueras. Madrid 1974. 

Aldana Cabrera, Garcia de. 1620. “Relacion.” Aringay 20 May 1620. AGI Pilipinas 7. 

Alison, Bartolome. 1608. “Recaudo y donacion de tierras al Hospital de Los Banos.” 
Tabuco 4 April 1608. AFIO MS. 

Alonso, Carlos. 1989. Primer viaje misional alrededor del mundo (1542-1549): Una gesta 
Agusliniana. Valladolid. 

Alva, Juan de. 1570. “Carta del P. Juan de Alva al Virrey de la Nueva Espana dandole 
cuenta de las islas.” Panay 28 July 1570. HPAF 14: 59-62. 

Alvarado, Garcia Descalante. 1548. “Relacion del viage que hizo desde la Nueva Espana 
a las islas del poniente Ruy Lopez de Villalobos.” Lisbon 1 August 1548. CDIA 5: 117- 
45. 

Anon, n.d.a. Um roteiro inedito de circumnavegafdo deFernao de Magalhaes. Ed. M. De Jong, 
Coimbra 1937. 

Anon, n.d.b. El viage de Don Ruy Lopez de Villalobos a las islas del poniente. Ed. Consuelo 
Varela. Milan 1983. 

Anon. 1524. “Navegagam e vyagem que fez Fernando de Magalhaes de Sevilha para 
Maluco no anno de 1519 annos,” Collecfao denoticiaspara a historia egeografia das naedes 
ultramarinas, que vivem nos dominios Portuguezes 4 (1): 147-76. Lisbon 1826. 

Anon. 1565. “Relacion del viaje yjornada de su magestad hizo en el descubrimiento de 
las islas del poniente . . . que fue por general el muy ilustre serior Miguel Lopez de 
Legazpi.” HPAF 13: 406-51 1 . 

Anon. 1566. Copia de una carta venida de Sevilla a Miguel Salvador de Valencia. Barcelona. 
BR 2: 220-30. 

Anon. 1567. “Relacion de lo que occurrido en el real y campo de la isla de Zubu de las 
Islas Philipinas desde 10 de Junio de 1565 . . . hasta el mes de Julio de 1567.” CDIU 3: 
91-225. 

Anon. 1570. “Relation of the voyage to Luzon.” BR 3: 73-104. 

Anon. 1572. “Relacion anonime de la conquista de la isla de Luzon.” Manila 20 April 
1572. HPAF 14: 73-99. 

Anon. 1574a. “Relacion de lo sucedido en las Islas Felipinas desde primero de julio del 
aho de 1573.” Manila 16July 1574. HPAF 14: 217-22. 

Anon. 1574b. “Relacion del orden que la gente Espanola ... a tenido y tiene en pacificar 
la tierra y sustentarse en ella.” 17 September 1574. HPAF 14: 222-32. 


289 


Bibliography 


Anon. 1578. “Reiacion de la Isla de Burney y Jornada que alia hizo el Doctor Francisco 
de Sande.” Manila 29 July 1578. HPAF 14: 511-25. 

Anon. 1591. “Reiacion de lajornadaque hizo donLuysDasmarinas. . . al descubrimiento 
de la Nueva Tuy y sus provincias.” Manila 7 July 1591 . HPAF 15: 447-98. 

Antolin, Francisco. 1789. Notices of the pagan Igorots in the interior of the island of Manila. 
Trans. William Henry Scott. Manila 1988. 

Avalos, Melchor de. 1585. “Dos cartas al rey contra losrnorosde las Filipinas, 20 dc junio 
de 1 585.” In Lewis I lanke, Cuerpo de documenlos del sigln XVf sobre los detechos de Espana 
en las Indiasy las Filipinos. Mexico 1977. 

Baeza, Melchor de. 1597. “Informacion hecha en Manila . . . acerca de los servicios 
prestados en Filipinas por los religiosos Agustinos.” Manila 10 March 1597. HPAF 16: 

1 14-220. 

Barros, Joao de. 1 628. Deco da terftera de Asia de lodno de Banos dosfeitos que os Porlugueses 
fezardo no descobrimiento e conquista dos mares e tenas de Oricnte. Lisbon 1777. 

Barte, Gina. 1987. Humadapnon. Unpublished ms. Manila. 

Bayao, Bras. 1540. Letter to the king dated Goa 1 November 1540. Arquivo Nacional de 
Torre de Tombo: Corpo Cronologico, parte 1, maco 68, doc. 68. 

Belhvood, Peter. 1978. Man's conquest of the Pacific. Auckland. 

. 1985. Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago. Sidney, New York, London. 

. 1988. “A hypothesis for Austronesian origins,” Asian Perspectives 26 (1984— 

1985): 107-18. 

Beltran, Alonso, et al. 1578-1579. “Expeditions to Borneo, Jolo, and Mindanao.” Borneo 
and Manila. BR 4: 148-303. 

Bergano, Diego. 1729. Vocabulario de la lengua Pampanga en romance. Manila 1860. 

Bertuccioli, Giuliano. 1979. A Florentine in Manila. Manila. 

Beyer, H. Otley. 1918. ‘The non-Christian people of the Philippines,” Census of the 
Philippine Islands (Manila 1919) 2: 209-957. 

. 1948. “Historical introduction” to E. Arsenio Manuel, Chinese elements in the 

Taga/og language (Manila 1948): ix-xxv. 

Beyer, H. Otley and Jaime C. de Veyra. 1947. Philippine saga: A pictorial histoiy of the 
a rch ipelago. Manila. 

Billiet, Francis and Francis Lambrecht. 1979. Studies on Kalinga uUalim and Ifugaw 
orthography. Baguio. 

Blancas de San Jose, Francisco. 1605. Postrimenas; o libro de los audio mwissimos en lengua 
tagala. Binondo. 

. 1608. 1 .ibrong pinagpinala m nanyto nanglavongChristianosapagcoconfesar, also 
pagcoconiulgar ("Trulado dc la Cornu nion "). Binondo. 

. 1610. Alley reglas de to lengua Tagala. Bataan. 

. 1614a. Vocabulario de la lengua Tagala. Ms. Archives, University of Santo 
I omas. Manila. 

. 1614b. Semiotics. Ms. Philippine National Library. Manila. 

. ! 6 1 4c. Kxplicacibn de lossiete sacramentosde la Santa Iglesia. Ms. Philippine 

National Library. Manila. 

Blnincntntt, Ferdinand. 1882. Vo such ciner ethnographic del- Philippinen. Gotha. 

Boxer Codex. 1590a. C. R. Boxer, “A late sixteenth-centuiy Manila ms.,” Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society (195(1): 37-19. 


Bibliography 


. 1590b. Carlos Quirino and Mauro Garcia, ‘The manners, customs, and 

beliefs of the Philippine inhabitants of long ago; being chapters of ‘A late sixteenth- 
century Manila manuscript,’ transcribed, translated, and annotated,” The Philippine 
jou rnal of science S'? (1958): 325—453. 

Bronson, Bennet. 1977. “Against migration: A negative perspective on population 
movements in Southeast Asia,” Philippine quarterly of culture and society 20 (1992) : 341- 
57. 

Brown , Donald E. 1 970. The structure and histoiy of a Bornean Malay sultante. Brunei Museum 
journal monograph 2:2. 

. 1984. "Brunei through the Sha’er and the Silsilah,” Solidarity 99 (1984): 10- 

15. 

Brown, Donald E., James W. Edwards, and Ruth P. Moore. The penis inserts of Southeast Asia: 
An annotated bibliography with an oveiview and comparative perspectives. Berkeley. 

Bugarin, Jose. 1676. Diccionario Ibanag-Espahol compuesto en lo antiguo por el R. P. Fr.Jose 
Bugarin. Manila 1854. 

Calleja-Reyes, Jose. 1968. “Ibalon: An ancient Bicol epic,” Philippine studies 16: 318-47. 

Carro, Andres. 1790. Vocabulario Iloco-Espahol. Manila 1849. 

Castanojose. 1 895. “Breve noticia acerca del origen, religion, creenccias y supersticiones 
de los antiguos indios del Bicol.” In W. E. Re tana, Archivo del Bibliofilo I'iliphio 1 (1895). 
Pp. 1-77. 

Castro, Jovita Ventura, et al., ed. 1 984. Anthology of ASEAN literatures: Epics of the Philippines. 
Manila. 

Ceballos, Sancho Diaz de. 1576. Letter to the viceroy of Nueva Espana dated Manila 4 
June 1576. AGI Filipinas 34. 

Charles V. 1519. "Instruccion que dio el Rey a Magallanes y a Falero para el viage al 
descubrimiento de las islas de Maluco.” CVD 4: l2l-41. 

Chen, Shao-hsing. 1962. “The migration of the Chinese from Fukien to the Philippines 
under the Spanish colonization and to Taiwan under the Dutch colonization: An 
analysis of their pattern of developmental their correspondences,” Proceedings of the 
2d biennial conference, International Association of Historians of Asia. Taipei. 

Chirino, Pedro. 1 604. Reiacion de las Islas Filipinas i de lo que en ellas an trabajado los padres 
de la Compama de Jesus. Rome. 

Colin , Francisco. 1 663. Labor evangelica ministerios apostolicos de los obreros de la Compama de 
Jesus, fundacion y progresos de Islas Filipinas. Ed. Pablo Pastclls, 3 vols. Barcelona 1900. 

Combes, Francisco. 1667. Historia de las islas de Mindanao, Ioloysus adyacentes. Ed. W. E. 
Retana. Madrid 1897. 

Coronel, Ma. Delia. 1983. “Stories from the Darangen,” Mindanao art and culture 5. 

. 1986-1990. Darangen , 6 vols. Mal awi City. 

Corpus, Onofre D. 1989. The roots of the Filipino nation. Quezon City. 

Cortes, Hernando. 1 527. “Carta que escribio Hernan Cortes a! rey de Cebu, manifestandole 
el objeto de la expedition que iba al Maluco mandada por Alvaro de Saavedra. 28 May 
1527. CVD 5: 426-27. 

Cosgaya, Lorenzo Fernandez. 1731. Diccionario Pangasinan-Espanol. Manila 1865. 

Cushner, Nicholas P. 1976. Landed estates in the colonial Philippines. New Haven. 

Daguio, Amado. 1952. “Hudhud hi Aliguyon (The harvest song of Aliguyon).” M.A. 
thesis, Stanford University. In Castro, et al. 1984. Pp. 7-56. 


291 


Bibliography 



Dasmarinas, Gomez Perez. 1591. “Ordinance forbidding the Indians to wear Chinese | 
stuffs” dated Manila 9 April 1591. BR 8: 78-95. 

Davalos. See Avalos. - 

De la Costa, Horacio. 1967. The Jesuits in the Philippines 1581-1768. Cambridge (Mass.). 
Delgado, Juan J. 1751. “Historia general sacro-profana, politica y natural de las islas del 
poniente llamadas Filipinas.” In Biblioteca hislorica Filipino, 1. Manila 1892. 

Diaz, Casimiro. 1745. Conquistas de las Islas Filipinas . . . Pane Segunda . Valladolid 1890. 
Diaz-Trechuelo, Lourdes. 1978. “Evolucion urbana de Manila,” Cuademos del Centro 
Cultural no. 5. Manila. 

Dingwall, Eric John. 1925. Male infibulation. London. 

1931. Artificial cranial deformation: A contribution to the study of ethnic mutilations. 

London. 

Eggan, Fred and E. D. Hester. 1957. The Robertson translations of thePavon manuscripts of 
1838-1839. University of Chicago Philippine Studies Program transcript nos. 5-a, 5- 
b, 5-c, 5-d. Chicago. 

Encina, Francisco. 1760. Arte de la lengua Zebuana, sacada del queescribio (Julian Bennejo]. 
Manila 1836. 

Emile, Pascual. 1835. “Caracteres antiguos con los que escribian estos naturales del 
Tagalog y Camarines.” Biblioteca del Museo Naval: Coleccion Enrile 18, ms. 2287, 
doc. 32: 214-21 4v. Madrid. 

Espallargas, Joseph C. 1 974. “A study of the ancient Philippine syllabary with particular . 

attention to its Tagalog version.” MA. thesis, Ateneo de Manila University. Quezon City. 
Espinas, Meri to B. 1 968. “A critical study of Ibalong: The Bikol folk epic fragment,” Unitas 
41: 177-239. 

Espfritu Santo, Andres de. 1645. “Relacion de la fundacion y progrcsos de esta Santa 
Provincia de S. Nicolas de Tolentino,” Boletin de la Provinda de S.N. de Tolenlino de 
Filipinas 54 (600: 1965): 67-179. 

Ezguerra, Domingo. 1663. Arte de la lengua Bisaya en la provincia de Leyte. Manila 1747. 
Francisco, Juan R. 1964. Indian influences in the Philippines with special reference to language 
and literature. Quezon City. 

Galvao, Antonio. 1544. 8 treaty on the Moluccas (c. 1544), probably the preliminary version of 
Antonio Galvdo's last Historia das Moluccas. Ed. Hubert Jacobs. Rome 1971. 

. 1563. Tratado das descobri memos anligps e modemos. 3d ed. 173L reprint 1944. 

Porto. , „ ; 

( '.ran ado, Ft ancisco. 1 529. “Relation del viage que hizo Alvaro de Saavcdi a, 1 527- 1 528. 

CVD 5: 427-74. 

Grijalva, Juan cle. 1 624. Cronica de fa Ordeu de N. /» .S'. Aguslin en los pwvincias de la Nueva 
Espahu. Mexico. 

Harrison, Tom and Stanley J. O’Conner. 1969. “Excavations of the prehistoric iron 
industry in West Borneo,” Cornell data paper no. 72, Southeast Asia Program. Ithaca. 
Herrera, /'ntot.io de. 1601. Historia general de los hedios de los Castellanos en las islas y 
terra (trim: del mar Occano: Ihrada intern. Madrid. 

Hester, Even D. 1954. Ihe Robertson text and translation of the Povedano manuscript of H72. 
University of Chicago Philippine Studies Program. Chicago. 

_ . \\HU. “Al/.ina’s Historia de Visayas: A bibliographical note,” Philippine studies 

10 : 331 - 65 . 



Bibliography 


Horridge, G. Adrian. 1982. “The lashecl-lug boat of the Eastern archipelagoes, the Alcina 
ms., and the Lomblen whaling boats.” National Maritime Museum (Greenwich UK) 
monograph no. 5. 

Huerta, Felix de. 1855. Estado geogrdfico, lopogrdf/co, estadfstico, historico, religioso de la Santa 
y Apostolica Provincia de Sun Gregorio Magna. Manila. 

Isia,Juan de la. 1565. “Relacion de las islas del poniente.” CDIU 3: 226-43. 

Jesus, Luis de. 1681. Historia general de los reUgiosos descalzos del orden de los Ermilahos. 
Madrid. 

Jocano, F. Landa. 1957. “Hinilawod — epic of Panay,” Sunday Times Magazine (9 June 
1957). Reprinted in Castro, et al. 1984. Pp. 107-83. 

. 1964. “Notes on the Sulod concept of death, the soul, and the region of the 

dead, ” Philippine studies 12 (1964):51 -62 . 

Keith, Agnes Newton. 1955. Bare fee I in the palace. Boston, Toronto. 

Kern, Hendrik. 1897. “Een Spanisch schrijver over den godsdienst dcr hcidensche 
Bikollers” and “Een mythologisch gedicht uit de Filippijnen,” Bijdragen lot den taal- 
land-en volkenhunde van Nederlandsch-Indie 47 (1897) : 224-38, 498-507. 

Klciweg de Zwann, J.P. 1917. “Kunstmatige sc hedclvo lining bij de inlanders van den 
Indischen Archipel,” Nederlandsch-Indie Oud & Nieuw 2: 279-302. 

Laarhoven, Ruurdje. 1989. Triumph of Moro diplomacy: The Maguindanao sultanate in Ihe 
seventeenth century. Quezon City. 

Lambrccht, Francis. 1 960. “Hudhud of Aliguyun who was bored by the rustle of the palm 
tree at Aladugen,” Folklore studies 19: 1-173. 

. 1 967. The Hudhud of Dinulawan and Bugan at Gunhaclan: A critical study. 

(Baguio 1967). Reprinted from Saint Louis quarterly 5: 267-713. 

Laubach, Frank. 1930. “An Odyssey from Lanao,” Philippine public schools 3: 8. Reprinted 
as “How Bantugan died below the mountain by the sea” in Asuncion David-Madamba, 
cd., Early Philippine literature. Manila 1971. 

Lavezares, Guido de. 1574. “Carla del Govemador General de Filipinas. ..a S. M.dandole 
relacion del estado de dichas islas.” Manila 30 July 1574. HPAF 14: 193-205. 

Legazpi, Miguel Lopez dc. 1565. “Bando sobre los que hubiesen abierto sepulchros y 
extraido de ellos oro, joyas y otras preseas.” Cebu 16 May 1565. CDIU 2: 355-57. 

. 1569a. “Carta . . . al Virrey de Mexico, Marques de Falces.” Cebu 7july 1569. 

IIPAF 14: 17-24. 

. 1569b. “Relacion de lasyslasFelipinasy de la calidady condi cionesde la gente 

della para su magestacl,” 7 July 1569. HPAF 14: 22n63, n65. 

. 1570. “Copia de algunas capitulos de carta de Legazpi al Virrey de Nueva 

Espana." Panay 25 July 1570. HPAF 14: 49-53. 

. 1572. “Copia de carta que el general . . . scrive al Virrey de la Nueva Espana.” 

Manila 11 August 1572. HPAF 14: 117-31. 

I ; eiz, Paul S. 1962. “More about Alzina’s Historia de Visayas," Philippine studies 10: 366-75. 

Lisboa, Marcos de. 1628a. Vocabulario de la lengua Bicol. Manila 1865. 

. 1 628b. Diccionarioy vocabulario deelidiomaEspanoly Bicol. Bound together with 

Lisboa 1628a. Manila 1865. 

Llavc, Antonio de la, 1622. Chronica primitiva de esta provincia de S. Gregorio . . . fecha en 
Manila en 4 de Mayo de 1622. AFIO. 

Loarca, Miguel de. 1582. Relacion de las Yslas Filipinas. BR 5: 34—187. 



293 


Bibliography 



I .ope/, Fiinrisco. 1 02 i . Libro a naisurdlan omm li b/tgds (i Bochina Cnsliana nga naisiimt 
Hi libra h Caul nud a agnagan Belarmino. Manila 1895. 

. ] (,27. A tie dc la lengua Horn. Ed. Andres ( iai ro, Ccamalica Jlocana compuesta por 

cl I’. Prediradnr Fr. Francisco Lopez. Malabon 1895. 

. 1 631 . Vocabnlario de la lengua Horn. Ms. King’s (College 1 -ondon. 

Low, Hugh. 1880. "Salesilah (Book of the descent of di<r rajas of Brunei ),' * Journal of the 
Si utils Branch of the Raya / Asiatic. Society 5: 1-31. 

Lucarelli, Juan Bautista. 1592. “Viaggio,” Sinica Franciscatm 2 (1933): 3-47. 

Lumbcra, Bienvenido. 1968 . "Assimilation and synthesis (1700-1800):Tagalogpoetryin 
the eighteenth century,” Philippine studies 10: 622-62. 

Macapagal, Juan. 1660. Petition dated 24 November 1660. In Isabelo de los Reyes, El 
folklore Filipino 1. Manila 1887. Pp. 219-21. 

Maceda, Marcelino N. 1972. “Artificial skull deformation: Its practice in the past in some 
Bisayan islands in the Philippines.” Paper read at the Seminar on Southeast Asian 
Prehistory and Archaeology, National Museum mimeo. Manila. 

. 1973. “Some remarks on artificial cranial deformation,” Philippine quarterly of 
culture and society 1:58-59. 

Mafra, Gines de. 1549. “Libro que trata del descubrimiento y principio del estrecho que 
se llama de Magallanes.” In Aitonio Blazquez y Delgado Aguilera, Tres Relaciones. 
Madrid 1920. Pp. 179-212. . 

Magdalena, Augustin de la. 1679. Arte de la lengua Tagalasacada dediversas artes. Mexico. 
Malagar, Esterlinda Mendoza. 1980. “TheGuman ofDumalinao: ASuban-on folk epic,” 
Kinaadman 2: 253-380. 

Maldonado, Juan de. 3572. “Carla en relacion . . . tocante al viage y poblacion de la Isla 
de Luzon en Filipinas.” Rip de Panay 6 May 1 572. IIPAF 14: 100-109. 

Manila, Cabildo de. 1576. “Copia de una carta que escrive la Ciudad de Manila al Virrey 
de la Nueva Espana.” Manila 2June 1576. HPAF 14: 365-78. 

Manuel, E. Arsen io. 1958a. The maiden of the Buhongsky. Quezon City. 

. 1958b. Tuwaang al tends a wedding: The second song of the Manuvu’ ethnoepic 

Tuwaang. Quezon City: Aleneo de Manila University Press. 

. 1969. “Agyu: Epic of Mindanao,” Unitas 42 (2): 1-104. 

Maquiso, Elena G. 1977. Ulahingan: An epic of the southern Philippines. Dumaguete City. 
Marcilla y Martin, Cipriano. 1895. Estudio de los antiguos alfabctos Filipinos. Malabon. 
Marin, Esteban, ct al. 1591. “El (into dc losAgustinosen I locos,” AH HA 15 (1921): % 207* 19. 
Marin y Morales, Valentin. 1901. Ensayo de una sintesis de los trabajos realizados por las 
corporaciones rehgiosos en Filipinas, 2 vols. Manila 1911. 

Martinez, Domingo. 1 756. Compendia bistbrico de la Apostolica Provinda de San Gtegorio de 
Pbilipinas de Rehgiosos Menaces Descahos de N. P San Francisco. Madrid. 

Martinez, Juan. 1567. “Relacion dctallada de los sucesos durante el viaje de la nao San 
Jeronimo.” CDIll 3: 371-475. 

[ M as y Sans, Sin ibaldo do. | 1843. / nfomesobre el esladode las Islas Filipinas en 1812. Vol. I. 
Madrid. 

Mastma. Michael (). 1977. The Maguirulanao core lineage and the Dmnatos,” Notre 
Dame journal! (2): 9-24. 

Meat ham, William. 1988. “On the improbability ol Ausironosian origins in South 
( Ihina.” Asian peispa lives 26 (1984 1985): 89 106. 


OQ/t 


Bibliography 


Medina, Juan de. 1630. “Historia de los sucesos de la Orden de N. Gran P. S. Agustin de 
estas Islas Filipinas.” In Biblioteca historica Filipina 4. Manila 1893. 

Mendez, Martin. 1521. “El libro que trajo la nao Vitoria de las amistades que hicieron con 
los reyes de Maluco.” In Mauricio Obregon, Laprimera vuelta al mundo. Bogota 1984. 

Mentrida, Alonso de. 1637a. Bocabulario de la lengua Bisaya-Hiliguepia y Haifa de las islas 
de Panay y Sugbu, y para las demds islas. Manila 1841. 

. 1637b. Arte dela lengua Bisaya-Hiligayna dela isla de Panay. Tambobong 1894. 

Mercado, Pedro de. 1673. Vida de un mancebo inclio llamado Miguel Ayatumo natural de 
Bohollo en Filipinas. Madrid. 

Monteclaro, Pedro Alcantara. 1907. Maragtas kon (historia) sgpulo nga Panay kutub sg iya 
una nga pamuluyd tobtob sg pag-abut sg mga taga Borneo nga amd ang ginhalinan sg mga 
Bisaya, kag sg pag-abut sg mga Kaslila. Iloilo. 

Morga, Antonio de. 1609. Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas. Mexico. Ed. W. E. Retana. Madrid 
1910. 

Moriz, Rodrigo de Aganduru. 1623. “Historia general de las islas occidentales a la Asia 
adyacentes ilammadas Philipinas,” Coleccion de documenlos ineditos para la historia dc 
Espana 11: 1-546, 79: 1-230. Madrid 1882. 

Murillo Velarde, Pedro. 1743. Cursus Juris Canonici. 

Napoles, Vicente de. 1534A. “Relacion que presento en Madrid el ccno 1534 Vicente de 
Napoles sobre los sucesos de la armada Saavedra.” CVD 5: 438-48. 

. 1543b. “Relacion de todo lo que descubrio el capitan Alvaro de Sayavedra.” 

CDIA 5: 68-96. 

Noceda, Juan Jose and Pedro de Sanlucar. 1753. Vocabulano de la lengua Tagala. Manila 
1860. 

Ochotorena, Gaudiosa Martinez. 1981. “Ag Tobig nog Keboklagan: A Suban-on folk 
epic,” Kinaadman 3: 343-543. 

Oliver, Juan de. 1590a. Declaracion de la doctrina Christiana en idioma Tagalog. Ms. 
21537, lot 527, Lilly Library, Bloomington (Indiana). 

; 1590b. “Declaracion de los mandamientos de la Ley de Dios.” In Rosales 1984. 

Opena, Laudivina R. 1979. “Olaging: The battle of Nalandangan: ABukidnon folk epic,” 
Kinaadman 1: 151-227. 

Ortega, Francisco de. 1573. “Carta al Virrey de Nueva Espana.” Manila 6June 1573.HPAF 
14: 133-48. 

Ortiz, Thomas. 1729. Alley reglas dela lengua Tagala. Samloc 1740. 

Oviedo y Valdes, Gonzalo Fernandez de. 1557. Historia general y natural de las Indias, islas 
y tieire-firme de mafocea.no, 14 vols. Asuncion del Paraguay 1945. 

Oyanguren, Melchor de. 1742. Tagalysmo elucidadoy reducido (en loposible) a la Latinidad- 
de Nebiija. Mexico. 

Pastrana Riol, Apolinar. 1982. “Fr. Bernardino Melendreras, OFM. (1815-1867), y su 
obra poetica sobre la region del Bicol (Filipinas),” Missionalia Hispanica 39: 85-181. 

Pavon. See Kggan and Hester 1957. 

Peguero,Juan. 1691. ‘Vida del Ven P. Fr. Domingo Perez.” In Honorio Munoz, Un heroe 
dominicano montaries en Filipinas, part 1. San tander 1951. 

Perez, Domingo. 1680. “Relacion de los indios Zambales de la Playa Honda: su sido, sus 
costumbres.” In Honorio Munoz, Un heroe dominicano montahes en Filipinas, part 2. 
Santander 1951. 


295 



Bibliography 



Perez, P. Lorenzo. 1933. “Un codice desconocido, relativo a las Islas Filipinas,” Erudition 
Ibero-Ultramarina 4 (15-16): 501-29; 5 (17: 1934) : 76-1 08. 

Picornell, Pedro M. 1986. “Two early sixteenth-century Spanish landfalls on Mindanao,” 
Kinaadman 8: 9-17. ~ 

. 1990. “Thevoyageof thepatache ‘San Lucas’ 1564-1565,” KinaadmanYl'. 1-13. 

Pigafetta, Antonio. 1524a. 

. 1524b. Primo Viaggio intomo almondo. BR 33: 26-366; 34: 38-180. 

_. 1524c. R. A. Skelton, “Magellan’s voyage: A narrative account of the first 

circumnavigation . . . from the ms. in the Beinecke Rare Books and ms. Library of Yale 
University.” New Haven 1969. 

. 1525. “LevoyageetnavigationfaictparlesEspaignols.”Paris. In PaulaSpurlin 

Paige, The voyage of Antonio Pigafetta. Englewood Cliffs (N.J.) 1969. 

. 1550. “La Detta navigatione per messer Antonio Pigafetta Vicentino.” In 

Giovanni Battista Ramusio, Della navigationi et viaggi. Venice. Pp. 380-98. 

Pinto, Fernao Mendes. 1614. Peregrinafdo. New York, London 1891. 

Pires, Tome. 1 5 15. A suma oriental de TomePires e o livro deFrancisco Rodriguez: Leitura e notas 
de Armando Coriesao. Coimbra 1978. 

Plasencia, Juan de. 1 589a. “Relacion de las costumbres que los yndios solfan tener en estas 
yslas.” AGI Filipinas 18-b. 

. 1589b. “Relacion del culto que losTagalogs tenian.” In Santa Ines 1676. Pp. 

598-603. 

. 1589c. “Instruccion de las costumbres que antiguamente tenian losnaturales 

de la Pan Panga en sus pleytos.” AGI Filipinas 18-b. 

[Plasencia, Juan de. 1592.] Relation de las Islas Philipinas. Madrid. In Cayetano Sanchez, 
“The first printed report on the Philippine Islands,” Philippiniana sacra 26 (78: 1991) : 
473-500. 

Povedano. See Hester 1954. 

Pretty, Francis. 1588. ‘The admirable and prosperous voyage of the Worshipful Master 
Thomas Cavendish.” In Richard Hakluyt, The principal navigations, voyages, traffiques, 
and discoveries of the English nation, vol. 16. Edinburgh 1890. 

Quirante, Alonso Martin. 1624. “Relacion del descubrimiento de las minasy pacificacion 
de los Ygolotes en la provincia de Pangasinan.” AGI Filipinas 30. 

Quirino, Carlos and Mauro Garcia. 1958. “Narrative of Mr. Juan Masolong, first Christian 
of Lilio, Laguna, and the founding of the town in 1572,’ an eighteenth-century 
manuscript translated and annotated, with a complete transcription of the original 
Tagalog text,” Bulletin of the Philippine Historical Association 4: 13-49. 

Rada, Martin de. 1569. “Copia de carta . . . al Virrey de Mexico, dandole importante 
noticias sobre Filipinas.” Cebu 8 July 1569. HPAF 14: 24-32. 

. 1572. “Copia de una carta . . . al Virrey de la Nueva Espana.” Manila 10 August 

1572. HPAF 14: 110-17. 

. 1574. “Carta al Virrey de Mexico . . . dandole cuenta de como juan de Salcedo 

fue a la conquista de Vicor e Ilocos.” Manila 30 June 1574. HPAF 14: 181-86. 

. 1577. “Carta al P. Alonso de la Veracruz . . . dandole noticias de las 

costumbres, ritos y clases de esclavitud que hay en Filipinas.” HPAF 14: 476-94. 

Resma, Virgilio. 1982. “Keg Sumba neg Sandayo: A Suban-on folk epic,” Kinaadman 4: 
259-426. j 

296 


Bibliography 


Reyes, Pedrito, Mercedes Grau-Santamaria, H. Otley Beyer, andjaime C. de Veyra. 1953. 
Pictorial histoiy of the Philippines. Manila. 

Ribadeneira, Marcelo de. 1601. Historiade las islas del archipielago Filipino yreinosde la Gran 
China, Tartana, Cochinchina, Malaca, Siam, Camboge y Japon. Ed. Juan R. Legisma. 
Madrid 1947. 

Riquel, Fernando. 1565. “Informacion deldaiioy fuerzas que los Portugueses de Maluco 
hizieron en las Yslas Philipinas.” Bohol 25 March 1565. CDIU 2: 284-305. 

. 1571. Act of taking possession of Manila, incorrecdy dated 18 May 1572. AGI 

Patronato, Leg. 24, No. 24. 

. 1573. “Las Nuevas quescriben de las yslas del poniente Hernando Riquel y 

otros.” Manila 1 July 1573. BR 3: 230-48. 

Rizaly Mercado, Jose. 1887. Letter to Ferdinand Blumentritt dated Berlin 13 April 1887. 
Epistolario Rizalino 5 (Manila: 1938): 110-13. 

Rodriguez, Estevan. 1565. “Relacion muy circunstanciada de la navegacion que hizo el 
armada de S. M. a cargo del General Miguel Lopez de Legazpi.” CDIU 2: 373-427. 

Roman, Phelipe. 1591. “El fruto de los Agustinos en la Pampanga.” AHHA 16 (1921): 
257-79. 

Rosales, Antonio Ma. 1984. A study of a sixteenth-centuiy Tagalog manuscript on the Ten 
Commandments: Its significance and implications. Quezon City. 

Ruiz, Miguel de. 1630. Bocabulario Tagalog. Ms. King’s College London. 

San Agusfin, Andres de. 1 647. Arte de la lengua Bicolporla ensanza de idioma en la provincia 
de Camarines. Sampaloc 1795. 

San Agustin, Gaspar. 1698. Conquistas de las Islas Filipinas. Ed. Manuel Merino. Madrid 
1975. 

. 1703. Compendio de la lengua Tagala. Sampaloc 1787. 

San Antonio, Juan Francisco de. 1738. Cronicas de la Apostolica Provincia de S. Gregorio de 
Religioso Descalzos de N. S. P. S. Francisco en las Islas Philipinas, China, Japon etc. Parte 
Primera. Sampaloc. 

San Buenaventura, Pedro de. 1613. Vocabulario de lengua Tagala. Pila. 

San Jose, San Joseph. See Blancas de San Jose. 

San Juan, Eric A. 1987. “Philippine ethnohistory: Anthropology, history, and the 
conception of the human as political agent, ” Philippine development fiorumA (2-3: 1987) : 
105ff. 

Sanchez, Mateo. 1617. Bocabulario de la lengua Bisaya. Manila 1711. 

SanchezFuertes, Cayetano. 1984. “Moros y Cristianosen Filipinas: IncursionesMusulmanas 
contra comunidades Cristianas del sur de la isia de Luzon, s. XVII,” Missionalia 
Hispanica 41: 209-47. 

Sande, Francisco de. 1575. “Informe de Gobernador Sande a Felipe II.” Manila 6 April 
1575. In Rafael Lopez, The Christianization of the Philippines. Manila 1965. Pp. 182-224. 

. 1576. “Carta a Felipe II del Gobernador de Filipinas ... da cuenta de su 

llegada y accidentes de su viaje.” Manila 7 June 1576. HPAF 14: 387-441. 

. 1577. “Relation and description of the Philippine Islands.” Manila 8 June 

1577. BR 4: 98-118. 

. 1579. Letter to the king dated Manila 30 May 1579. BR 4: 144-47. 

Santa Ines, Francisco de. 1676. “Cronica de la provincia de S. Gregorio Magno.” In 
Biblioteca Historica Filipina 2, 3. Manila 1892. 


997 


Bibliography 



San tamaria, Alberto. 1938. “El ‘Baybayin’ en el Archivo de Santo Tomas,” Unites 14: 154- 
94. 

. 1949. “Notas historicas y filologicas,” Unitas 20: 193-95. 

Santiago, Luciano P. R. 1990. ‘The houses of Lakandula, Matanda, and Soliman (1571- 
1898): Genealogy and group identity,” Philippine quarterly of culture and society 18: 39- j 
73. 

Santisteban, Geronimo. 1547. “Carta escrita a Don Antonio Mendoza . . . relacionando 
la perdida de la armada que salio . . . al cargo de Ruy Lopez de Villalobos.” Cochin 22 
January 1547. CD1A 15 (1870): 151-65. 

Santos, Domingo de los. 1703. Vocabulario de la lengua Tagala. Sampaloc 1794. 

Scott, William Henry. 1974. The discovery of the Igorots: Spanish contacts with the pagans of 
northern Luzon. Quezon City. 

. 1982a. Cracks in the parchment curtain and other essays in Philippine history. 

Quezon City. 

. 1982b. “Why then the Butuan tradition?” Kinaadman 4: 163-65. 

. 1984. Pre-Hispanic source materials for the study of Philippine history. 2d ed. 

Quezon City. 

. 1 986. “Why did Tupas betray Dagami? ” Philippine quarterly of culture and society 

14: 12-31. 

. 1990a. “Sixteenth-century Visayan food and farming,” Philippine quarterly of 

culture and society 18: 291-311. 

. 1990b. “Visayan religion at the time of Spanish advent,” Philippiniana sacra25 

(75): 397-415. 

. 1992a. Looking for the pre-Hispanic Filipino and other essays in Philippine history. 

Quezon City. 

, 1992b. “Lost Visayan literature,” Kinaadman 14: 19-30. 

Shaariffuddin, P. M. 1969. “Brunei cannon,” Brunei Museum journal 1 (1): 72-93. 

Solheim, Wilhelm G. II. 1988. “The Nusantao hypothesis: The origin and spread of 
Austronesian speakers,” Asian perspectives 26 (1984-1985): 77-88. 

Sotomayor, Juan Paes de, et al. 1597. “Informacion hecha en Manila . . . acerca de los 
scrvicios prestados en Pilipinas pot los religiososAgustinos. ' [Madrid] HPAF 16: 1 14- 
220. 

Teixera, Manuel. 1961. The Portuguese missions in Malacca and Singapore (1511-1958). 
Lisbon. 

Tello, Francisco. 1599. Letter to the king dated Manila 14 July 1599. BR 10: 245-92. 

Thomaz, Luis Kilipe F. R. 1979. “Los Portugais dans les mors do Parchipel au XVlestecle,” 
Archipel 18: 105 25. 

1986. “Malacca’s society on the eve of the Portuguese conquest." Paper 
presented at the International Conference on Malay Civilization. Kuala Lumpur. 

Torre, I lernando de la. 1528. “Deri etero del viage y navigaeion de la armada de Loaisa." 
C.VI) 5: 24 1 313. 

Totanes, Sebastian de. 1 748a. Arte de la lengua Tagala. Binondo 1865. 

. i 748b. Manual Tagalogpot auxilio de los leligiosos deesla provincia de S. Gregorio 

Mogno. Binondo 1865. 

Lrdaneta, Andres de. 1536. “Relation del viajede la armada del Comendador Garcia de 
Loaisa a las isla.s de la espe< ieia o Moluccas en 1525.” HPAF 13: 3-187. 

ono 


Bibliography 


. 1537. “La relacion que Andres de Urdaneta aze a V. S. M. de la armada que 

V. M. mando para la especeria con el comandador Loaysa . . . es lo siguiente.” 
Valladolid 26 February 1537. HPAF 13: 218-72. 

Urdaneta, Andres de, et al. 1536. “Relacion de lo que dixeron ciertos testigos con 
juramento que se les tomo por los del consejo de las yndias sobre el viaje del 
Comandador Loaisa a los Molucos.” HPAF 13: 187-218. 

Van Dijk, L. C. D. 1862. Neerland’s vroegste betrekkingen met Borneo, den Solo-Archipel, 
Cambodja, Siam en Cochin-China. Amsterdam. Selections translated in J. Heuschen, 
“Relations of the East Indies Company with Borneo (Brunei), the Sulu Archipelago, 
Mindanao, etc.,” Brunei Museum journal 5 (1984): 6-34. 

Van Leur, J. C. 1955. Indonesian trade and society: Essays in Asian social and economic history. 
Dordrecht 1983. 

Van Noort, Olivier. 1 60 1 . De reis om wereld door Olivier Van Noort 1599-1 601. ’s Gravenhage 
1926. 

Vera, Santiago de. 1587. “Carta del Governador de Pilipinas . . . al Virrey de Mexico, 
dandole cuenta del estado de las Islas Filipinas.” Manila 25 June 1587. HPAF 15: 265- 
85. 

. 1589. “Carta . . . refiere la rebelion que intentaron algunos principales de 

Filipinas.” Manila 13July 1589. HPAF 15: 370-87. 

Villegas, Ramon N. 1983. Kayamanan: The Philippine jewelry tradition. Manila. 

Wernstedt, Frederick L. and J. E. Spencer. 1967. The Philippine island world: A physical, 
cultural, and regional geogr aphy. Berkeley, Los Angeles. 

Wicks, Roberts. 1992. Money, markets, and trade in early Southeast Asia. Ithaca. 

Yabes, Leopoldo Y. 1935. The Ilocano epic. Manila 1935. Reprinted in Philippine social- 
sciences and humanities review 23 (1958): 283-337. 

Zamora, Juan Pobre de. 1595. “Historia de la perdida y descubrimiento del galeon San 
Felipe," chapters 15-16. In Fidel de Lejarza, “Los indios de Camarines en el siglo XVI,” 
Missionalia Hispanica 9 (1952): 394-403. 

Zorc,R. David. 1984. “The Philippine language scene — die sociololinguistic contributions 
of historical linguistics Philippine journal of linguistics 14-15: 135-48. 

Zuniga, Joaquin Martinez de. 1798. Estadisrno de las Islas Filipinas, o mis viajes por este pais. 
Ed. W. E. Retana. Madrid 1893. 

Zweig, Stefan. 1938. Conqueror of the seas: The story of Magellan. New York. 


9QO 


Index 


) 



Ablay, 21 

Abu Bakr, 178 

Ache (Rajah), 192 

Aduarte, Diego (Bishop), 249, 268 

Agar (sea thwarts), 62 

Agong, 108-9 

Agriculture, 35-43, 180-81, 266-67 
AM, 52 

Alcina, Francisco, 2, 4, 1 7, 29, 32, 35, 37, 38, 
53, 55, 68, 80, 90, 93, 95, 96, 97, 99-100, 
103-7, 109, 115, 122, 123, 132, 143-44, 
152, 153, 156 
Aldana, Garcia de, 259 
Alimugkat, 168 
AUpin, 219, 224-29 

Alphabet: Bikol, 186; Tagalog, 209-16; 

Visayan, 95-96 
Avia (father), 217 
Aviayat (love potion) , 264 
Aviba (grandfather), 218 
Avibahan (verse), 98 
Amihan (east wind), 125, 189 


Anak (children), 218 
Anakbanxua (Pangasinan ruling chief), 249 
Ancestor worship, 237, 260 
Anipay root, 18 

Anito(s), 83-85, 168, 184, 252, 270 

Aniton Tawo (human spirit), 250 

Antolin, Francisco, 6 

Apayag, 265 

Apo (granchild), 218 

Arab, 50 

Architecture (Visayan), 57-62 
Arte Bisaya-Cebuano, 95 
Arte de la lengua Bisaya Hiliguaina de la isla de 
Panay, 95 

Arte y reglas de lengua Tagala, 213 
Asawa, 217 

Asog (male transvestite), 185 
A swung, 81 
Alolob, 119 

Atub (animal traps) , 44 
Australoid, 11 
Austronesian, 11-12 


AA 


Index 


Austronesian languages, 1 3 
Awang (animal pits), 44 
Awi (Datu) of Butuan, 19, 29, 151 
Axoit, 110 
Ayam (dogs), 43 

Babaylan, 82, 84-85, 121 
Babuy, 182 
Bacanales, 50 
Backstrap loom, 69 
Badhala, 233-34 

Bag-id (making fire by friction) , 47 
Bagyo, 190 
Baling, 22, 28, 272 
Bahandi (heirloom), 32, 66, 129 
Baladaxv, balaraui (dagger), 147, 232 
Balas (northeast wind), 189 
Balalih, 44 

Balay, 57, 58-59 (illustration) 

Balet (crossbow) , 265 
Baliyan (female shamans), 185 
Balolong, 44 

Banaw Lakandula (Datu), 192 
Bangui, 21 
Banhaxu, 149 
Bansil, 19 

Bantara (bamboo tower), 186 
Banuia, 113-14 

Barangay (balangai, balangay), 4-6, 14, 62, 
102, 219, 220, 265 
Bare feet in the palace, 7 
Barote, 150-51 
Baroto, 62 

Basahan (alphabet), 186 
Basing, 68 
Balak, 183 

Batara Shah Tengal (Sultan ofSulu), 164 
Bathala Mei-Capal, 80, 252 
Battle of Bangkusay Channel, 244 
Bang, binogok (healing period), 20 
Bayan (town), 190 

Baybayin (Tagalog script), 209-10, 213-16 

Baylan, 168 

Bayok (shamans), 252 

Bergano, Diego, 244 

Betel nut, 49 

Beyer, H. Otley, 10 


Beyer Wave Migration Theory, 10, 11 
Bibit, 26 

BicharaAtas (council of elders) , 176 
Bihag 133 

Bikolandia: agriculture, 180-81; alphabet, 
186; area, 179; belligerence, 187; 
common culture with Visayas, 179-80; 
drinking, 182; fishing, 181; gold mines, 
179; martial terminology 187-88; 
people, 179; religion, 184-86; rites, 185; 
social structure, 183-84; terms, 182; 
tuba, 182; warfare, 186-88 
Bingbing, 26 
“Bingi of Lawan,” 106 
j Bingy, bingil (virgin), 106 
Binohol maiden, 49, 60 
Birang (standard measure) , 69 
Biro (soot and ink), 20 
Blair and Robertson, 1 
Blancas de San Jose, 8, 43, 218, 223, 224, 241 
Blood brothers, 156 
Bongto, 136 
Boat building, 62-63 

Boxer Codex, 21,29,32, 127, 131, 134,209, 
222, 227, 232, 234, 238, 268 
Bride-price, 270 
Bmjas, 78 

Bugarin.Jose (Fr.), 267, 268 
Bugay, 140 

Buglas (Negros Is.), 253 
Buhis, 131 s 

Bulaxuan, 67 
Bulit, 150 

Bulkeiah (Sultan), 178, 192 

Bungso (youngest), 218 

Burial practices, 88-91, 238-39, 275 

Busaxu, 168 

Butang, 138 

Butuan, 164-65 

Caballena, 221 
Cabunian (Igorotgod), 260 
Cagayan: agriculture, 266-67; Ibanags of, 
264-65; religion, 270-71; society, 267- 
68; technology, 263-64 
Cagayan Valley, 263 

Caraga (Pacific coast of Mindanao), 162 

801 


/ OF 


Index 


Cavendish, Thomas, 17, 43, 180 
Ceballos, 258 
Chiefdoms, 129 
Chinese, 8 

Chirino, Pedro, 1, 6, 18, 21, 50, 78, 79-80, 
116, 142-43, 212, 233, 238, 239, 253 
Circumcision, 25 
Clothing (Visayan) , 28, 30 
Cockfighting, 112 

Combes, Francisco (Fr.), 63, 161-62, 165, 
175, 177 

Compendio arte de la lengua Tagala, 212 
Cordillera Central, 263 
Cursis Juris Canonici, 7 

Dagupan, 134 

Dailisan (Datu), 128, 129, 165 
Dapitan, 164-65 
Darangen (epic), 148, 167 
Dasmarinas, Gomez Perez (Governor) , 43, 
243, 263 

Datu(s): 127-31, 183; Awi of Butuan, 29; 
Banaw Lakan Dula, 220; from Samar, 
32; Gala, 128; Katuna of Bohol, 29, 128; 
Kolambu of Limasawa, 29; Soksokan, 
162; Tupas of Cebu, 128 
Datu, duties and privileges of, 221-22, 
230 

‘Datung Sumanga and Bugbung Humasa- 
nun,” 100-103 


Daya-daya, 21 
Debt slavery, 134 
Deities (Tagalog), 234, 236-37 
Delgado, Juan (Fr.),95 
Diccionarioy vocabulario de el idioma Espaiiol 
y Bicol, 180 

Dictionaries of Philippine languages, 2, 3 
Dihoon (potter’s craft), 63 
Dimabasa, Bernardino, 95 
Dixoata, 78, 87, 168, 184, 245 


Doctrina Christiana, 210-12 


Domingo de los Santos, 224 
Drinking, 182 
Dubdub, 21 


El Pacto de Sangre, 156 
Encina, Francisco (Fr.), 95 


Encomienda, 221 

Enrile, Pascual (Governor general), 213 

Epics, 100-103, 166-73 

Espahol Filipinos. See Filipin os 

Estudios de los anliguos alfabetos Filipinos, 212 

Filipino(s) people, 5, 6-8 
Food shortages, 35-36 
Forts, 232-33 

Francisco de Sail Antonio, Juan, 224 
Forge iron, 55 

“TheFirstMan andWoman" (legend), 104 
Fitch, Ralph, 18 

G-string. See Bahag 
Gahat (warfare by land), 153 
Gani, 36 

Gatang (alienable property), 181 
Gano (head taking), 251 
Gaspar de San Agustin, 212 
Ginamukun, 66 
Girlo (circumcision), 25 
Goldworking, 67-69 
Grijalva, 140 

Gubal (to raid and conquer), 153-54, 187 

Habagat (west wind), 125 

Habul, 69, 70 

Halop (covering), 19 

Hampil (contract for a joint raid), 187 

Hangin (squall at sea), 190 

Harigi, 57 

Haop, 135 

Hasohas, 55 

Hayohay. SteOripun 

Head taking. See Garro 

Hijos del pats, 7 

Hilaga (north wind), 189 

Himalad, 82 

Hinawak, 21 

Historia de las islas e Indios de Bisayas, 2 

Historia sacro-profana, 95 

Hogar, 26 

Horokan, 134 

Household crockery, 66 

Hudhud (Ifugao epic) , 260, 262 

Huhbo (ambush), 231 

Hukom, 221 


QftO 


Index 


Humabon (Rajah), 128, 129 
Humadapnon (Panay epic) , 49 
Hundawas, 20 

Ibalon, 179 
Ibanags, 264-65 
Iberein (Datu) from Samar, 32 
Ifugao culture, 260-63 
Igorot(s) , Igolot (people of the mountains) , 
257-63 

I lay a (higher ground), 189 
Ina, 217 

Inalag (daggers) , 268 
In do (grandmother), 218 
“Information on the customs which the 
natives of Pampanga anciently held, 245 
Initao burial cave, 26 
International commerce, 75-76 
Intus, 51 

Iron smelting, 55 
Ironworking, 54-56 

Isla.Juan de la, 17, 29, 79, 93, 127, 131, 150 
Islam (circumcision) , 25 

Jewelry, 32, 34 

Kabaong, 185 
Kabaraioan, 51 
Kabiangan, 138 

“Kabungaw and Bubung Ginbuna” (tale), 
99 

Kabungsuwan, 176 
Kahimtang, 138 
Kaingin preparation, 37 
Kalag, 80 
Kalan, 47 

Kalanaw (Chief), 166 
Kalasag, 151, 232 
Kalinga, 264 
Kaluluwa, 238 
Kamagi, 34 

Kammaranan (principal), 267 
Kandu, 157 

Kapampangan(s), 243-56 
Kapolong, Dionisio (son of Lakan Dula) , 
230, 244, 263 

Karakoa, 63, 64-65 (illustration) , 150, 154- 
55, 161,170 


Karandmm, 100 
Katulunan. See Shaman 
Katuna (Datu) of Bohol, 29 
Kasikas, 34 

Keith, Agnes Newton, 7 
Kinamahawing 24 
Kinship, 217-19 

Kolambu (Datu), 29, 37, 151, 152 
Korlong, 108 

Kota (fortification), 186, 268 
Kris, 232 ! 

Kudarat (Sultan), 175, 176 

Kudyapi, 108 

Kulmat, 20 

Kulot, 26 

Kuritang, 270 

Labid, 21 

Ladyang Matanda. (Ache, Rajah), 192 
Lakan (paramount ruler), 220 
Lagdug, 69 

Lalad (lineage), 218, 220 
Lambong, 29, 52 
Land, 229-31 
Lang, 21 

Languages, similarities in, 13 
Lanlaka (swivel gun), 175, 233, 235 
(illustration) 

Laon, 80 
Loot, 189 

Law, 138-40, 245-48 

Lapulapu, 129 

Legazpi, Agustin, 193 

Libra de nuestra Senora del Rosario, 210 

Lihin-lihin, 28 

Limasawa, 151 

Lipong, 21 

Lisboa, 2, 183 

Loarca, Miguel de, 1, 9, 18, 37, 50, 72, 79, 
87, 122, 129, 133, 233 
Loaysa expedition, 2 
Longon (casket), 89, 185 
Lopez de Legaspi, Miguel, 87 
Lopez de Legazpi expedition, 2 
Lopez de Villalobos expedition, 2 
Lopez, Francisco (Fr.), 212, 215 
Luthang, 150 


808 


Index 



B.' 

m 


Macapagal,Juan, 220 
Maengel (braves) , 267-68, 271 
Magellan, 32 

Magellan voyage, eyewitness account, 2 

Maginoo (aristocracy), 219-20 

Maginoo Marianaway, 219 

Maguindanao, 173-76 

Maguindanao Sultanate, 176-77 

Maharlika, 219, 222-24 

Malaon, 80 

Malay language, 9, 10 

Malay people, 10 

Malong, 28 

Manunusad (dental worker), 19 
Mandangan (Manobo war god), 168 
Mangaama (parents), 271 
Mangapia (Kapampangan nobility), 244 
Mangaw (head taking) , 251. See also Garro 
Mangayaio, 153-54, 157 
Mangula (Chief) of Candigar, 172 
Mangyans, 213 
Manila, port of, 192 
Mantala, 130 
Maragtas, 2 
Marcilla y Martin, 212 
Marriage rites, 140-43 
Martin de Rada, 88-89, 152, 179, 231 
Martinez, Domingo, 212 
Martinez, Juan (Fr.), 24, 41, 67 
Mas, Sinibaldo cle, 7 
Mayginlawo (nouveaux riches), 219-20 
Medicinal plants, 119-20 
Memorial de la vida Christiana en lengua 
Tagala, 215 

Medina, Juan de, 25, 259 
Mentrida, Alonso, 2, 4, 17, 40, 42, 82, 87, 
93, 95, 137 

Merida, Juan de (Fray), 241 
Migration Theory. .SVcBeyerWave Migration 
Theory 

Mindanao, 161-78 

Mines and mining, 67-69, 179, 258-59 
Mining, 67 

Monteclaro, Pedro A., 2 
Moog, 155 

Morales, Gaspar de, 162 


Morga, Antonio de, 1. 116, 232, 231, 256 
Murillo Velarde, I’edro, 7 
Music, vocal, 109-1 1 
Musical instruments, 108-9, 167 
Mutia, Maria, 95 

Nature spirits, 77-78 

Negritos, 252-53, 255 (illustration), 256 

Ngayaio raids, 268 

Nose flute. &?Tolali 

Nueslra Se nora de la Consolation, 2 1 2 

Olivar, Juan de, 228 
Otido, 22 

Orangkaya (rich people), 176 
Oripun, 127, 133-35, 184 
Orthography, 14 
Ortiz, Thomas, 213 
Oyanguren, 213 

Paes, 36 
Paganito, 83-85 
Paganitohan, 84 
Pagbuaya, 165 
Pagdaga, 154 
Paglehe, 86 

Pampanga, 243. See also Kapampangan 
Panday, 54-55, 62 
Pandila (wise men), 176 
Pandony, 29 

Pandot (solemn rites) , 240 

Pangapol (slave concubine), 217 

Pangasi drinking, 51-52, 66 

Pangasinan culture, 248-49 

Pangulo, 128 

Parang, 190 

“Parapat,” 106 

Paray. See Rice 

Pavon, Jose Maria, 1-2 

Peace pacts, -156 

Pecheros (tribute payers), 225 

Penis pins, 24 

Perez, Domingo (Kray ), 251-53 
Philippine epics, 169 • 

Philippine ethnography sources, 1-1 
Philippine languages, 12, 13 
The Philippine Islands, 1 
Piercer! ears, 25 


9A/t 


Index 


i Pigafetta, Antonio, 1 , 4, 17, 19, 28, 42, 50, 
53,57,79,86,94, 116, 166 
j Pinayusan, 7 1 
1 “Pintados,” 20, 151 
| Pisol, 25 

Plasencia.Juan (Fr.), 1, 219, 223-24, 226, 
229, 232, 233-34, 238, 245, 247 
Pooh, 220 

“Port ol Japan," 248 
Posgo, 37 

Pottery, 63, 66-67 
Property and labor, 145-46 
Povedano, Diego, 1 
j Prestige feasts, 260, 261 
j Prindpales, 221 
| Pudo ng pudong 31 
: Pulaxv, 238 
Pumaraw, 92 

Pungapul (Kapampangan freedman), 244 
Pusad, 19 
I Pusong, 152 
“Pusong of Magtaon,” 105 

Quirante, Alonso Martin (Commander), 
43, 260 

Rajah (paramount ruler) , 220 
Rajah Humabon, 29 
Rajah Sirongan of Buayan, 175 
Rajah Soliman, 192, 218 
Rajah. See Datu(s) 

Rajah Tupas Collection, 24 
1 K elation de divers voyages curieux, 212 
Religion, 77-93, 184-88, 233-34, 236-42, 
259-60,270-71,275 
Ribadeneira, Marcelode (Fr.), 183 
\ Rice-growing, 35, 180-81, 191, 199-200, 
249, 250, 264, 267 
“Rites of passage,” 240 

: Saavedra, Alvaro de, 2 
•: SiitW, 110 
Sacra, 24 
j Sago, 40 
i Salakay, 153 

\ Salcedo, Juan de, 250, 257 
| Salog, 57 

j Santa Lutaw, 165, 166 


Sail Antonio, Juan Francisco de, 6, 227 
San Buenaventura, Lucas, 2-3, 43, 190, 
212, 219, 223, 224, 225-26, 229, 234, 
236, 237, 238 

Sanchez, 2, 4, 18, 21, 22, 29, 31, 37, 40, 42, 
44, 53,66, 82, 84, 114, 131,34 
Sande, Governor, 210 
Sandugo, 136, 156 
Sangir Island, 171-72 
Sangka, 18 

Santa Maria del Parral, 172 
Saob-saob, 29 
Sarangani(s), 170-71 
Sarangani Island, 170-73 
Sarangani-Maguindanao conflict, 173 
Saripara. See Bulkeiah (Sultan) 

Saroh, 31 
Sayap, 31 

Shaman (spirit meduim), 239, 249, 261, 270 
Siday, 98 

Sierra Madres (Luzon), 189 
Sigwa (rainstorm), 190 
Sipa, 167 
Sisip, 26 

Skull moulding, 22 

Social structure: Bikol, 183-84; Cagayan, 
263; Igorots, 259-60; Maguindanao, 
175-77; Sulu, 177, 178; Tagalog, 213- 
30; Visayan, 127-46 
Songil, 149 
Sorcerers, 240-41 
Sorcery, 120 

Southern Mongoloid. See Austronesian 

Spanish expeditions, 2 

Suarez, Francisco, 7 

Subang, 121 

Suban-on epic, 49 

Suban-on(s), 166 

Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas, 1 

Sugob, 150 

Sulad., 93 

Sulu (Sulu Sultanate), 177-78 
Suluanon, 71 
Sumpit, 150 
Surugu, 168 

Swiddens, 35, 168, 180, 191, 266 

.305 





mm 



Index 


Tagalog(s) : alphabet, 209-16; appearance, 
196-98; chiefdom (of Manila), 191; 
language, 195-96, 241-42; kinship, 217- 
19; land and property, 229-31; religion, 
233-34, 236-42; social structure, 219- 
30; technology and trade, 198-209; 
warfare, 232-33 

Tagalog-Borneo connection, 191-92 
Tagam (war dance) , 249 
Tagbanwa (Palawan), 213 
Tagur, 21 

Tambal. See Medicinal plants 
Tambangan, 156 
Tambuko, 62 
Tangad, 22 
Taosug, 164, 274 
Tapul, 19 

Tarindak. See Sayap 
Taro, 39-40 

Taroli (transplanting), 181 
Tarsila( s), 176 

Tattoo (s) (batuk, paltik), 23, 264 
Tatuo (person), 190 
Technology, 263-64 
Textiles, 29, 31 
Theyenot, Melchisedec, 212 
Tigma, 20 
Tildad, 20 

Tima, 127, 131-32, 183, 219, 222-23 

Timog (south wind) , 189 

Tinangad, 22 

Tingalok omen, 81 

Tipasi. See Rice 

Tolali, lantuy (nose flute), 108 
Torogan house, 167 
‘The Tortoise and die Monkey,” 105 
Tosok, 26 

Trade, domestic, 71-75 
Trades and commerce: boat building, 62- 
63; fishing,. 181; goldworking, 67-69; 
ironworking, 54-56; mining, 67-69, 179; 
pottery, 63, 66-67; weaving, 69-70 



i 


'free houses, 60, 62 . ; I 

Tuba, 50-51, 182 
Tubalub, 31 
Tugbuk, 2'1 

Tuli (circumcision). 25 
Ulahingan (epic), 19, 167-68 
Ulnk, 19 
Umalagad, 78 
Urdaneta, 19, 24 

Villalobos expedition, 43 
Villegas, Ramon, 69 

Visayan(s): alphabet, 95-96; architecture, 
57-62; bestiary, 115-16; clothing, j 
28, 30 (illustration); distilling and i 
drinking, 49-53; domestic trade, 71- i 
75; international commerce, 75-76; 
literature and entertainment, 94-112; 
musical instruments, 108-9; natural 
science, 113-26; physical appearance, 
15-34; religion, 77-93; rice and rice 
cultivation, 37-39; social organization, 1 
127-46; trades and commerce, 54-76; 
weapons and war, 147-57 
Visayan culture area, 161 
Vocabulano de la lengaa Pampanga, 244 

Warfare, 147-57, 186-88 
Watul (bahag), 28 
Weaving and textiles, 69-71 
Wergeld (man-price), 246, 251 
“Why the Bat Is Called Stupid,” 104 
Woodworking, 56-57 

Ximbanaos, 177 
Yams, 40 

Ynstruccion de bis cost u m bres que ant igna mente i 
tenian los naturales de la Tan Tanga > ■ 
245 

Zambal(s) 249-52, 254 (illustration) 
Zamora, Juan (of Narvacan, Ilocos), 210 
Zanco, Francisco, 74 






