
STOP 



Early Journal Content on JSTOR, Free to Anyone in the World 

This article is one of nearly 500,000 scholarly works digitized and made freely available to everyone in 
the world byJSTOR. 

Known as the Early Journal Content, this set of works include research articles, news, letters, and other 
writings published in more than 200 of the oldest leading academic journals. The works date from the 
mid-seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries. 

We encourage people to read and share the Early Journal Content openly and to tell others that this 
resource exists. People may post this content online or redistribute in any way for non-commercial 
purposes. 

Read more about Early Journal Content at http://about.istor.org/participate-istor/individuals/early- 
journal-content . 



JSTOR is a digital library of academic journals, books, and primary source objects. JSTOR helps people 
discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content through a powerful research and teaching 
platform, and preserves this content for future generations. JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit 
organization that also includes Ithaka S+R and Portico. For more information about JSTOR, please 
contact support@jstor.org. 



Notes on the Making of Palm-Leaf Manuscripts in Siam. — 
By Montgomery Schuylee, Jr., American Embassy, St. 
Petersburg, Russia. 

There is no more common sight in any of the temples or 
' ' wats " in Bangkok, or indeed in any part of Siam, than that 
of one or more Buddhist students or priests squatting on the 
floor of the balcony of their houses and engaged more or less 
busily in preparing palm-leaf manuscripts of some of the sacred 
books of Siam. 

Printing has of late years made a little headway in displacing 
hand work for the reproduction of the sacred books of the 
priests, but it is still looked upon with some disfavor by the 
more conservative members of the priesthood, and is moreover 
much more expensive than the writing on palm leaves, which 
costs nothing at all unless it be a great deal of time. Of that, 
however, Siamese, like other Buddhist priests, have a great deal 
to spare. 

A few words on the method and materials employed in the 
manufacture of palm-lea"f manuscripts among the Siamese may 
not be without interest to those who have never been in a Bud- 
dhist land. 

The process is about as follows : The leaves of the palm tree 
are brought in from the country in large bundles, each leaf 
being about eighteen inches long and doubled in the middle. 
These leaves are given to the priests by the peasants as a means 
of "making merit.'" The first operation in converting the 
leaves into the finished manuscript is to divide them by cutting 
out the midrib, thus making two leaves of each leaf of the tree. 
These leaves are then made up into bundles of some hundred 
pieces each and are then placed between boards tightly tied up 
and wedged in a press. While still there the edges of the 

1 Sometimes the preliminary operations just described are done by 
persons outside the wats and tlien the products sold or given to the priests. 
It was from such outside persons that I used to obtain the leaves which 
my scribe needed in his copying of manuscripts. 



282 M. Sohuyler, Jr., [1908. 

leaves are trimmed smoothly with a semi-circular knife which is 
in a handle some two feet long. After sanding the leaves to 
give them a smooth surface for writing or rather inscribing, the 
bundles are then ready for the next stage in the book-making 
process. 

After the surface of the leaves has been sanded and made in 
good condition for receiving the strokes of the scribe's stylus, 
the actual copying of the books can begin. Each copyist has 
in front of him, as he squats on the floor of the temple, a frame 
about eighteen inches in height somewhat resembling an artist's 
easel, on one ledge of which rests the manuscript to be copied 
and on the other ledge the blank leaves for the new volume. 
The pen or rather stylus is a needle point like the needle of a 
sewing machine, inserted in a wooden handle like an enormous 
cigar about eight inches in length. Before doing any writing the 
scribe marks lines, usually five in number, on each leaf by means 
of strings which are placed in a frame with the ends tied and 
the rest loose. These strings are then blackened with soot from 
the bottom of a rice pot and the strings are placed in position 
over the palm leaf and then snapped. The result is a series of 
lightly marked black lines on the leaf which serves the writer 
as a guide for his stylus. The copyist then holds the blank 
leaf in his hand and with the needle point scratches the letters 
of the text on the prepared surface of the leaf. It is remark- 
able how the writer holds the leaf in his hand and does not rest 
it upon any surface for steadiness. The letters when scratched 
are of course almost invisible unless carefully examined, as no 
coloring matter is put on the pen point. In order to render the 
writing clearer the entire surface of the leaf is smeared with 
soot and then wiped oflE and scoured with clean sand. The 
black adheres to the scratches and is removed from the rest of 
the surface by the sand. When a sufficient number of pages 
are ready they are placed in a press and the edges trimmed ofE 
and sometimes gilded. The leaves are formed into volumes by 
being tied together by a string running through holes in the 
middle of the leaf. Each leaf is usually written on both sides, 
so that there are two pages of five lines each on every palm leaf. 
A book almost always consists of twelve, and a double book 
of twenty -four leaves. 



Vol. xxix.] Making Palm-Leaf Manuscripts in Siam. 283 

During my stay in Siam I nearly always had a scribe work- 
ing at copying Siamese Pali manuscripts of the chief works of 
the modern Buddhism of Siam. The manuscripts in the posses- 
sion of the priests or temples in Siam are considered so holy 
that it is only with the greatest difficulty that the priests can be 
induced to part with them. The result is that it is necessary to 
copy nearly everything that is desired for purposes of study 
and research. 

I was particularly favored in obtaining, through the kind 
offices of H.R.H.' Prince Damrong, himself a very keen stu- 
dent of the antiquities of Siam, the loan of a number of rare 
and beautiful manuscripts of Buddhist works. I was also for- 
tunate in receiving from several missionary friends copies of 
old a.nd valuble Shaii and Laos manuscripts and one fragment of 
a Peguan text. The script employed in these is very similar to 
that used in the- Siamese manuscripts proper, but varies from 
them to the degree, to be expected in a writing which has 
suffered such vicissitudes of fortune as the Shan and, Peguan 
scripts. 

It is to be hoped that the project of establishing a national 
library at Bangkok for the purpose of preserving the ancient 
manuscripts, which was taken up just before my departure from 
Siam in the early part of 1906, will not be allowed to drop. If 
the library is established, it will be a worthy complement to the 
Wang Nah Museum in Bangkok, where through Prince Dam- 
rong's influence a most creditable collection of inscriptions, cylin- 
ders, and other archeological specimens of ancient Siam are 
gathered together and suitably exhibited. 

A systematic search through the temples scattered so plenti- 
fully over Siam would doubtless reveal the presence of many 
manuscripts of great value for the scientific study of Siamese 
Buddhism and might even bring to light some works altogether 
unknown to scholars. This search should be made by properly 
accredited agents of the Ministry of the Interior, and the manu- 
scripts when found should be loaned by the priests to the 
national library in Bangkok, where they would be accessible to 
all students. If necessary, copies could be made and left with 
the temples whence the originals had been taken. 



