--- Page 1 ---
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX IN HOLES AND SCRATCHES:
THE LATEST STAGE OF KUGYOL RESEARCH
LEE Yong
Korea Foundation & University of Ljubljana
leeyonghu@hotmail.com
Abstract
The first part of this article reviews the differences between the Chinese, Korean and Japanese
languages, and explains the importance of Buddhist texts in the history of these languages,
especially in the development of written languages in Korea and Japan. The kugyol tradition (a
convention for adding Korean grammatical markers at appropriate places to aid the reading of
originally Chinese texts) is then explained with concrete examples in three parts: eumdok
kugyol (transliteration kugyol), seokdok kugyol (translation kugyol), and jeomto seokdok-kugyol
(traslation kugyol with point marks). The latest developments in kugyol research were seen in
the 21st century, after the discovery of Yugasijiron in the year 2000, including the detailed point
maps. Some questions concerning the jeomto seokdok-kugyol are still open.
Keywords
interpretation of Buddhist texts, Korean, classic Chinese, eumdok kugyol, seokdok kugyol,
jeomto kugyol, jeomto
Izvleček
Prvi del članka obravnava razlike med kitajskim, korejskim in japonskim jezikom ter poudarja
pomembnost budističnih besedil v zgodovini omenjenih jezikov, zlasti pri oblikovanju pisnih
jezikov v Koreji in na Japonskem. V glavnem delu razlaga tradicijo kugyol (konvencijo, po
kateri se dodajajo slovnični znaki na ustreznih mestih kot pomoč pri branju prvotno kitajskih
besedil) z dejanskimi primeri v treh delih: eumdok kugyol (transliteracijski kugyol), seokdok
kugyol (prevajalski kugyol) in jeomto seokdok-kugyol (prevajalski kugyol z dodajanjem pik).
Najnovejše v raziskavi kugyol tradicije je bilo narejeno v tem stoletju, po odkritju Yugasijiron v
letu 2000, npr. Podrobna porazdelitev pik idr. Nekatera vprašanja v zvezi z jeomto seokdok-
kugyol ostajajo odprta.
Ključne besede
interpretacija budističnih besedil, korejščina, klasična kitajščina, eumdok kugyol, seokdok
kugyol, jeomto kugyol, jeomto
Acta Linguistica Asiatica, 1(1), 2011.
ISSN: 2232-3317, http://revije.ff.uni-lj.si/ala/
DOI: 10.4312/ala.1.1.53-70

--- Page 2 ---
54 LEE Yong
1. Introduction (Historical background)
At present, each of the three countries of East Asia, China, Korea and Japan, has
its own independent writing system. Before the 7th century however, the Korean and
Japanese peoples, though they possessed their own languages, had no writing systems
of their own. Later, they developed their own writing systems, based on Chinese
characters. This paper is related to the history of the development of these writing
systems.
The languages of these three peoples differ. Typologically speaking, Chinese is an
SVO language but Korean and Japanese are SOV languages. In addition, Korean and
Japanese are different in many respects, and there exists no concrete theory to prove
that they are related in the sense of European comparative linguistics.
In general, literature written in Korea falls into three categories: 1) works written
in the early transcription systems, 2) those written in hangul, and 3) those written in
Chinese. (cf. Encyclopaedia Britannica, Academic Edition) In this article, we will
concentrate on the first category of Korean writings of which the content is typically
Buddhist teachings from 8th century on.
Some Buddhist texts are common to both Korean and Japanese. Korean and
Japanese scholars from around the 6th century and later were eager to learn from China
in order to unite their peoples. Buddhism was one of the strongest means available.
However, the original Buddhist teachings written in Chinese needed translation and
interpretation into languages which were otherwise spoken among people but had no
writing system of their own. It means that the interpretation of Buddhism coincided
with the formation of the written languages of these peoples.
The understanding of Korean kugyol tradition may demonstrate how a nation may
develop devices in order to understand foreign data when lacking their own writing
system. These devices are characterized by additions of phonetic, semantic and
syntactic markers made by brush and ink, as well as holes and scratches made by a
stylus on paper.
2. Modern writing systems of China, Korea and Japan
Firstly, we need to examine simple sentences in today’s Chinese, Korean and
Japanese to demonstrate how they differ, especially syntactically. See example
sentences below:
(1) Chinese: 我 愛 你
wə ai ni
I to love you
“I love you.”

--- Page 3 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 55
(2) Korean: 나 는 너 를 사랑하 다.
Na nɨn nə rɨl sarangha nda
I [topic] you [acc] to love [ending marker]
“I love you.”
(3) Japanese: 私 は あなた を 愛し ます。
Watasi wa anata o aisi masu
I [topic] you [acc] to love [ending marker]
“I love you.”
As we can see, Korean and Japanese sentences are rather similar in word order,
SOV, and the functions of particles (or postpositions). On the other hand, Chinese has
no such particles, and the word order is SVO.
As for the letters and characters, while the Chinese have used logographic
characters since around 3000 years B.C., the Japanese have retained some logographic
Chinese characters which are used today in combination with syllabic characters called
kana. This Japanese system has developed from the 8th century on and is generally still
in use. The Koreans today use hangul, which has developed since the 15th century, a
phonemic alphabet organized into syllabic blocks (cf. example sentence (2) above and
Figure 1 below).
Letters letters
sound value sound value
(consonants) (vowel)
[g, k] [a]
[n] [ya]
[d, t] [ə]
[r, l] [yə]
[m] [o]
[b, p] [yo]
[s] [u]
[ŋ] [yu]
[ʤ/ʧ] [ɨ]
[cȹ] [i]
[kȹ]
[tȹ]
[pȹ]
[h]
Figure 1 hangul alphabet

--- Page 4 ---
56 LEE Yong
Each block of hangul letters consists of at least two of the 24 hangul letters (jamo
字母), with at least one each of the 14 consonants and 10 vowels. These syllabic
blocks can be written horizontally from left to right, as well as vertically from top to
bottom in columns from right to left.
But before the development of this hangul system, the Koreans started writing
down their language around the 5th century by using Chinese characters. Then they
developed their own transcription systems, idu1, hyangchal2 and kugyol. The present
article examines the kugyol system.
3. Kugyol (口口口口訣訣訣訣)
Kugyol has two kinds of meaning. One refers to the letters which are used in
kugyol texts. The second refers to texts with kugyol letters. In the former case, kugyol
were the Korean markers added to purely Chinese text (Chung, 2003). In Korea, when
reading a text written in literary Chinese, there was a convention for adding Korean
grammatical elements at appropriate places to aid the reading of the text. These added
elements were called kugyol. In other words, kugyol letters were the devices used to
read and understand Chinese texts (Kim, 2001). Usually, a kugyol letter is made by
taking a part of an original Chinese character and it is then slightly changed in form to
form a kugyol marker : ex.
, ,
. The principle of the formation of kugyol letters
closely resembles the
formation of kana in
Japanese. (See Figure 2
and Figure 3.)
Figure 2 Seokdok-kugyol
letters and original Chinese
characters
1
Idu is an archaic writing system that represents the Korean language by using hanja (Chinese characters).
The term idu is used in two senses. It may refer to various systems of representing Korean
phonology through Chinese characters. In this sense it includes hyangchal and kugyol writing. In the
narrower sense it refers solely to the system which was used in official documents.
2
Hyangchal is the most highly developed form of Korean transcription in Chinese characters. It can be
found in the vernacular poetry known as hangga.

--- Page 5 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 57
Figure 3 Kana letters and original
Chinese characters
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kana)
The kugyol letters were used to
denote grammatical elements and
inserted into originally Chinese texts
for easier interpretation among
Koreans. There are largely two kinds
of kugyol texts in Korea. One is
eumdok kugyol (=transliteration
kugyol), the other is seokdok kugyol
(=translation kugyol); the latter are
older than the former. The oldest text
with kugyol interpretation is
Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol (華嚴文義
要 訣 ), the annotation of the Hwaeomkyeong 3 . The Korean original of
Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol is lost but a copy has existed in Japan since the 8th century.
There exist many Buddhist sutras in Korea, all of them with kugyol interpretation
using kugyol letters. Of these, five seokdok-kugyol texts are especially important in
kugyol study. 4 One of the representative texts with kugyol is Kuemkwang
myeonggyeong (金光 経).5 Kuemkwang-myeonggyeong includes seokdok and jeomto
kugyol. We will explain this point in the next chapter.
3 Hwaeumkyeong ( 經, The Avataṃsaka Sūtra) is one of the most influential Mahayana Sutras of East
Asian Buddhism. The title is rendered in English as Flower Garland Sutra, Flower Adornment Sutra, or
Flower Ornament Scripture. The Avataṃsaka Sūtra describes a cosmos of infinite realms upon realms,
mutually containing one other.
4 These are five seokdok kugyol texts.
1) Taebanggwangbul-hwaeomkyeongso (大 廣 經(cid:1)), vol. 35: Xylographic book, Presumed to be a
12th century publication.
2) Taebanggwangbul-hwaeomkyong (大 廣 經), vol. 14. Xylographic book. Presumed to be a late
12th-early 13th century publication.
3) Keumgwangmyeonggyeong (金光 經), vol. 3. Xylographic book. Presumed to be a 13th century
publication, and considered to have belonged to the same category as Yugasajiron. The first and the last
two pages of the volume are assumed to have been written by a different writer from the rest of the text.
4) Kuyoek-inwanggyong (舊 經) vol. 1. Xylographic book. Only 5 page remain. 25 lines per page,
and 17 characters per line. Presumed to have been written in the 13th century.
5) Yugasajiron ( 伽 Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra), also known as Discourse on the Stages of Yogic
Practice is the encyclopaedic and definitive text of the Yogācāra school of Buddhism. It is thought to have
been composed in India between 300 and 350 CE. Vol. 20. Xylographic book. This book shows the latest
linguistic characteristics among the existing Seokdok-kugyol material.
5 Kuemkwangmyeonggyeong (金光 經, The Suvar(cid:1)aprabhāsa-sūtra) is a Buddhist text of the Mahayana
branch of Buddhism. Its first reading as a court ceremony was around 660 AD, when the Tang Dynasty of
China and Silla ( 羅) of Korea had defeated Baekche ( ) of Korea and were threatening Japan.

--- Page 6 ---
58 LEE Yong
In the following sections, we will explain exactly how the system of kugyol
interpretation is organized.
3.1 Eumdok kugyol (=Transliteration kugyol, 音音音音讀讀讀讀口口口口訣訣訣訣)
Let us look at an example of eumdok kugyol from the Analects of Confucius.6 (See
Figure 4)
Here we can see two kugyol letters. One is and the other is . The
former has the meaning ‘if’ in English and the latter has the function of
interrogative marker. The main characteristic of the eumdok-kugyol is the
position of kugyol letters at the end of each phrase or sentence. As we see,
the main functions of eumdok-kugyol letters are case markers and sentence
ending markers.
The eumdok-kygyol letters were used from the end of the Goryo
dynasty (13th century) to the Chosun dynasty (14-20th century). These
eumdok-kugyol texts were studied only by a handful of people.
Figure 4 An example from the Analects
(4a) classical Chinese:
學 而 時 習 之 不 亦 悅 乎
to learn and time, often to learn it not too glad [interrogative]
“Is it not pleasant to learn with constant perseverence and application?”
(4b) with eumdok-kugyol :
學 而 時 習 之 不 亦 悦 乎
to learn and time, often to learn [if, 면[myen]] not too glad [interrogative, 아[a])]
“Is it not pleasant to learn with constant perseverence and application?”
(4c) Korean translation:
배우 고 때때로 익히 면 또한 기쁘지 아니 한가?
to learn and time, often to learn if too glad not [interrogative]
“Is it not pleasant to learn with constant preseverence and application?”
6 Noneo 論 (Lún Yǔ, English: Analects), also known as the Analects of Confucius, are considered a
record of the words and acts of the central Chinese thinker and philosopher Confucius and his disciples, as
well as the discussions they held. Written during the Spring and Autumn Period through the Warring
States Period (ca. 475 BCE - 221 BCE).

--- Page 7 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 59
3.2 Seokdok-kugyol (=Translation kugyol, 釋釋釋釋讀讀讀讀口口口口訣訣訣訣)
The discovery of Kuyeok-inwangkyeong (舊 經) (See Figure 5, footnote 4,
number 4) which is one of seokdok-kugyol texts changed the situation in the study of
kugyol. This text was found in the temple Chungcheongnamdo seosan munsu (忠淸南
道 瑞山 文殊寺) in 1973. Scholars saw that the kugyol in this text was more
complicated and detailed than eumdok kugyol. The seokdok-kugyol system has the
following characteristics:
• Kugyol letters are placed not only on the right, but also on the left side of the
original rows of Chinese text.
• There are some purely syntactic markers which are never pronounced (and
they mean “do read”, “skip reading”, “return and read the skipped part now”
etc.)
• Seokdok-kugyol markers are introduced to point out the meaning of the
original Chinese character and instruct for phonetically Korean reading.
• Additional markers are introduced for modality, aspect etc. to be read in
Korean.
Below is an example of Chinese classics read in Korean with kugyol devices. To
read kugyol texts, we need to know the following rules:
• kugyol letters on the right side must be read in the first phase,
• kugyol letters on the left side must be skipped in the first phase,
• the reversal mark ( ) is the key of reading and means “go back from this
point to the kugyol character on the left side.”
Therefore, one can read from the first purple line to the second purple line in
Figure 5 as below:

--- Page 8 ---
60 LEE Yong
Figure 5 kuyeok-inwangkyeong
(5a) original text ([ ] marks kugyol letters on the left side):
有[ ] to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
五 five
道 way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生 living things (subj.)
“all living things of five directions exist”
(5b) in Korean word order:
五道 [s] Five way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生 [i] living things (subj.)
有 [s-kyə-myə] to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
“all living things of five directions exist”
(5c) reconstruction:
五道 Five way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆 生 living things (subj.)
有 to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
“all living things of five directions exist”
(5d) translation in modern Korean:
五道 Five way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生 이 living things (subj.)
잇겨며 to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
“all living things of five directions exist”
When we read this part, we will first meet [ ] . In [ ] , [ ]
represents the kugyol on the left side, so we do not need to read this in the first phase of
reading. The first kugyol which we read is . And then we meet and . Here
is a reverse marker. When we meet this marker, we should go back to [ ]. We
can see the result in (5b). (5a) is the arrangement in Chinese word order but (5b) is the
arrangement in Korean word order. If we just follow indications by kugyol devices, we
can translate Chinese classics into Korean.
We can read the rest of the text with the same method.
< Kuyeokinwangkyeong; 02:01>

--- Page 9 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 61
(6a) original text ([ ] marks kugyol letters on the left side):
復 Also(part of adv.)
有[ ] to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
五 five
道 way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生 living things (subj.)
復 Also(part of adv.)
有[ ] to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
他方 other directions (gen.)
不[ ] not (part of neg.+noun+gen.)
可[ ] can (part of adj.+suf.+mod.)
量 to count (suf.+dev.)
衆 living things
“Also there are all living things of five directions and also in other directions there are
uncountable living things”
(6b) in Korean word order ({} marks a character not to be pronounced in {可}):
復 [hʌn] Also (part of adv.)
五道 [s] five way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生 [i] living things (subj.)
有 [s-kyə-myə] to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
復 [ hʌn] Also (part of adv.)
他方 [s] other directions (gen.)
量 to count (suf.+dev.)
{可} [homs-hʌn] can (part of adj.+suf.+mod)
不 [an-dji-nʌs] not (part of neg.+noun+gen.)
衆 living things
有 [ s-kyə-myə] to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
“Also there are all living things of five directions and also in other directions there are
uncountable living things”
(6c) reconstruction:
(part of adv.)
五道 five way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生 living things (subj.)
잇겨며 to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
Also (part of adv.)
他方 other directions (gen.)
量 홈짓 to count (suf.+dev.) can (part of adj.+suf.+mod)
안디이 not (part of neg.+noun+gen.)
衆 living things
잇겨며 to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
“Also there are all living things of five directions and also in other directions there are
uncountable living things”

--- Page 10 ---
62 LEE Yong
(6d) translation in modern Korean:
또 Also
五道의 five way (gen.)
一切 entire, every
衆生이 living things (subj.)
있으며 to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
또 also
他方의 other directions (gen.)
헤아릴 수 없는 uncountable
衆生이 living things
있으며 to exist, to have (part of verb+perf.+conj.)
“Also there are all living things of five directions and also in other directions there are
uncountable living things”
3.3 Jeomto Seokdok-kugyol（（（（點點點點吐吐吐吐釋釋釋釋讀讀讀讀口口口口訣訣訣訣））））
This kind of marking was first discovered in 20007 in the text Yugasajiron ( 伽
, cf. footnote 4, number 5). We have seen that different kugyol letters mark
various syntactic, morphological and phonetic help for interpretation and translation of
the original text. Jeomto, which means “point marks to translate into Korean” and are
actually holes and scratches on paper, play the same role as that of the kugyol letters.
Each jeomto corresponds to one kugyol letter or a group of kugyol letters (Chang,
2002).
Because jeomto is marked with a very sharp pointed pen which is called a stylus
(Figure 6), it is difficult to find jeomto marks for us without special instruments
(Kobayashi 2002). Scopes are used as special instruments to light texts (Figures 7a, 7b,
7c).
Figure 6 Stylus (reconstruction /
Kobayashi Yoshinori)
7 In the year 2000, Kobayashi, a researcher of Japanese kunten texts (see also footnote 10), found
additional markers which were not made by brush and ink, but made by the use of a stylus in Yugasajiron
vol 5, 8.

--- Page 11 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 63
Figure 7a Scope instruments
Figure 7b Inspecting a text
with scopes on the desk
Figure 7c Enlarged text
When Korean read Chinese characters, they made small holes and scratches with a
stylus on paper to read the text more fluently but with strict rules. In the following
photos, we can find small holes and scratches.

--- Page 12 ---
64 LEE Yong
a b a b
<Yugasajiron 08 01:06:08> <Yugasajiron 08 01:15:12>
Figure 8 (a) and (b) (characters 三、行 with points and lines) (Lee, 2004)
In Figure 8, a is the original picture and b is a painted picture. If somebody cannot
see holes or scratches, he can get a hint from picture b. We can see points in a, , and
points and lines in b, .
Of seokdok-kugyol texts, Keumkwangmyeongkyeong (cf. footnote 4, number 3) is
the only text which contains both kugyol letters and jeomto marks. So we can compare
kugyol letters and jeomto by observing the Kuemkwangmyeongkyeong text.
Figure 9 The positions of kugyol points
As shown in Figure 9, the jeomto seokdok-kugyol markers in small dots
correspond to the markers made by kugyol letters. This may mean that the help for
interpretation of the original text is doubly marked in Keumkwangmyeongkyeong. If we
concentrate on the character道, we can find two dots. Two dots are located on the right
side of 道. One is in the upper position, another in the central position. These dots
correspond to each and . is a coordinating conjunctive marker, and is an
objective marker.
After some research, all possible positions of jeomto points which correspond to
various syntactic, morphological and phonetic markers were mapped as in Figure 10:

--- Page 13 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 65
Figure 10 The point map of Yugasajiron (Chang, 2002)
By looking at existing texts closely, the researchers found out that approximately
15 additional texts were marked by holes and scratches.8
4. The latest findings and open questions
In this section we will examine Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol 華厳文義要訣 which is
presumed to be a text from the Silla dynasty (57 BE – 935 AD). Before examining
Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol, we need to know Tōdaiji Fujumonkō (東大寺諷誦文稿,
Tōdai Temple Buddhist Prayers Manuscript).
Tōdaiji Fujumonkō is an early 9th century Buddhist text and is best known as a
valuable resource for Japanese historical linguistics as well as Buddhist history. It was
composed some time between 796-830. The manuscript was designated as a National
Treasure of Japan in 1938, but destroyed in 1945 in fires resulting from the war. Only
reproductions remain. Tōdaiji Fujumonkō is primarily important as a resource for Early
Middle Japanese. It is the oldest example of text written in kanji (Chinese characters)
with katakana (phonetic alphabet) annotations. In addition, it exhibits many elements
of Old Japanese grammar and vocabulary, as well as maintaining the phonetic
distinction between /ko1/ and /ko2/. It also contains accounts in several dialects. (cf.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Tōdaiji_Fujumonk)
8 Jinbon Hwaeumkyeong (晋本華嚴經) vol. 20: The late 9 AD- the early 10 AD, Seomam koseo museum.
Yugasajinron (瑜伽師地論) vol. 3: The first half of 11 AD, Horim museum.
Yugasajinron ( 伽 論) vol. 5, 8: The first half of 11 AD, Seomam koseo museum.
Jubon Hwaeum kyeong (周本華嚴經) vol. 6, 22, 36, 57: The late 11 BC or The early 12 BC, Seomam
koseo museum.
Jubon Hwaeum kyeong ( 經) vol. 31, 34: The late 11 BC- the early 12BC, Horim museum.

--- Page 14 ---
66 LEE Yong
This important text was actually written on the reverse of an
older text, Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol (written by a Silla monk,
P’yonwon) in the early 8th century. The latter is of interest in the
context of jeomto kugyol. Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol has points and
lines made by brush (Kobayashi, 2002). The jeomto points and
lines on this text must have been made in late 8th century. Since a
very similar method of interpretation and translation of Buddhist
texts exists in Japan and in Japanese (the kunten system9), scholars
did not know in which country the marks were made, i.e. in Korea
or in Japan, or at which time the text was imported to Japan from
the Korean peninsula. The scholars are also very curious about the
identity of the writer, P’yonwon and if he was Korean or Japanese.
But Kobayashi (2002) insists that the points and lines in the
text Hwaeummuneuiyogyeol are to be read in Korean. How this
text can be read in Korean is shown below.
Figure 11 Hwaeom muneui yogyeol
Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol text:
(7a) original text with jeomto:
六 品 [23(•)] 四卷 [33(•)]
six articles (top.) four volumes (declarative)
“Six articles ard (written) in four volumes”
(7b) Korean interpretation with kugyol letters:
六品 四卷( )
six articles (top.) four volumes (copula) (declarative)
“Six articles ard (written) in four volumes”
(7c) reconstruction:
六品 四卷
이다
six articles (top.) four volumes (copula) (declarative)
“Six articles ard (written) in four volumes”
(7d) translation in modern Korean:
六品 은 四卷
이다
six articles (top.) four volumes (copula) (declarative)
“Six articles ard (written) in four volumes”
The point in the character 品, made by red ink, represents a subject (or topic)
marker. But this text can be read in Japanese, too. The important point in this
9 Kunten: Guiding markers for rendering Chinese classics into Japanese.

--- Page 15 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 67
discussion is that the syntax markers (for example, the subject marker) are common to
both languages and in reading it may be pronounced in Korean or Japanese.
Because Japanese syntax is similar to Korean syntax in many respects, it is
difficult to decide if it is a Korean text or a Japanese text.
However, Kobayashi (2002) insists that Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol is a Korean text
because:
• Its point map is similar to the point map of the 12th century Korean
Hwaeomkyong. (Figure 12)
• We can find subject/topic markers in Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol, but there are no
subject markers in Japanese texts before 8th century.
(Kim 2003) (Park 2006)
Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol Hwaeomkyeong
Figure 12 Point map of Hwaeommuneuiyogyeol and Hwaeomkyeong
Since Korean and Japanese are similar to each other, the following questions still
remain open:
• Who made these points and lines and when?
• In what language did they read these texts?
References
Chang, K. (2002). Jeomtoseokdokkugyol Jaryo-e Giipdoen Kugyeolja-wa Daeeung
Kugyoljeom-e Daehayeo －Yugasajiron Kwon 5, 8eul Daesangeuro (A Study on
Correspondences between Kugyol Characters and Kugyol Points which are recorded in
Yugasajiron vol. 5, 8 ), Kugyol Studies, 9, 205-225.
Chang, K.(2003). On the ‘indicator line’ used in the Yuqie shidi lun( 伽 )’s point-
attached seokdokkugyol, Kugyol Studies, 11, 189-209.

--- Page 16 ---
68 LEE Yong
Chung, J. (1999). Sǒkdokkugyǒl in the Koryǒ Period, Seoul Journal of Korean Studies, 12,
Institute of korean studies, Seoul national university.
Chung, J. (2001). On Jinbon Hyayangjing( 經) vol. 20 at Sung-am Archives of
Classical Literature, Kugyol Studies, 7, 33-56.
Chung, J. et al. (2003). Hanguk Gakpil Buhokugyol Jaryo-wa Ilbon Hunjeom Jaryo Yeongu -
Hwaeomgyeong Jaryoreul Jungsimeuro- (A Study on Korean Gakpil Buhokugyol Texts
and Japanese Kunten Texts – focused on Hwaeomgyeong Texts-. Seoul, Korea: Taehaksa.
Kim, Y. (2001). Decoding methods on the Dots and Lines in Yuga-sagi-lon, Kugyol Studies, 7,
57-77.
Kim Y. (2003). A linguistic study of Hwa.eom.mun.eui.yo.gyeol, Kugyol Studies 10, 47-78.
Kim, Y. (2004). A Korean linguisitic study of Pan-bi-lyang-lon, Kugyol Studies, 12, 81-97.
Ko, J. (2004). A review of the study on Kugyol, Kugyol Studies, 12, 5-44.
Ko, Y. (1998). Seokdok Kugyol-ui Gugeosajeok Gachi (On The Value of Seokdok Kugyol in
the History of Korean Language), Kugyol Studies, 3, 1-28.
Kobayashi, Y. (2002). Hanguk-ui Gakpiljeomto-wa Ilbon-ui Kohunjeom-ui Gwangye (A Study
on Gakpiljeomto in Korea and The Old Kunten in Japan), Kugyol Studies, 8, 21-76.
Kobayashi, Y. (2003). Silla Gyeongjeon-e Giipdoen Gakpil Munja-wa Buho - Kyoto·Otani
Daehakjang Pan-bi-lyang-loneseoui Balgyeon (Charcters and Marks recorded in Silla
Buddhist Sutra Pan-bi-lyang-lon of Kyoto·Otani University), Kugyol Studies, 10, 5-30.
Lee, S. (2001). On the Symbol-Kugyol ( 口訣) noted on a text of Huayanjing ( 經),
Kugyol Studies, 7, 1-32.
Lee S. (2003). On Korean Versions of Surangama-sutra ( 經), Kugyol Studies, 11, 153-
188.
Lee S. (2004). Some remarks on Gakpil (角 ) Bujeom-Kugyol ( 口訣), Kugyol Studies,
13, 289-316.
Lee S. et al. (2005). Gakpil kugyeol-ui Haedok-gwa Beonyeok 1 - Chojodaejanggyeong-ui
<Yugasajiron> Kwon 5·8eul Jungsimeuro- (Dicipherment and Translation of Cipher
Kugyols 1-foucused on <Yugasajiron> vol. 5·8 in Chojodaejanggyeong ). Seoul, Korea:
Taehaksa.
Lee, S. et al. (2006a). Gakpil kugyeol-ui Haedokgwa Beonyeok 2 - Jubon Hwaeomgyeong
Kwon Je 36 - (Dicipherment and Translation of Cipher Kugyols 2 - <Jubon
Hwaeomgyeong > vol. 36 ). Seoul, Korea: Taehaksa.
Lee, S. et al. (2006b). Gakpil kugyeol-ui Haedokgwa Beonyeok 3 - Jubon Hwaeomgyeong
Kwon Je 6, 57 (The Dicipherment and Translation of Cipher Kugyols 3 - <Jubon
Hwaeomgyeong > vol. 6, 57 ). Seoul, Korea: Taehaksa.
Lee, Y. (2003). On Function of Negative Markers in Seokdok-Kugyol ( 讀口訣) Texts of
Koryo dynasty period, Kugyol Studies, 11, 153-188.
Lee, Y. (2004). The Present Condition of Studies on Cipher Kugyol, Hanguk munhwa, 33,
Seoul National University Kyujanggak Institute for Korean Studies.
Lee, Y. (2010). Grammatical Negation in Jeomto Seokdok Kugyol Texts of the Koryo period,
Kugyol Studies, 24, 97-131.
Nam, P. (2000). Koryosidae-ui Jeomto kugyeol-e daehayeo (A Study on Jeomto kugyol in
Koryo period ), Seojihakbo, 24, Hangukseojihakhoe, 5-45.
Nam, P. (2002a). Sillasidae Kugyol-ui Jaegu-reul Wihayeo (A Study for Reconstruction of
Kugyol in Silla period), Kugyol Studies, 8, 77-93.
Nam, P. (2002b). Koryosidae Gakpiljeomto Seokdok kugyeol-ui Jongnyu-wa geu Haedok-
Jinbonhwaeomgyeong Kwon 20-ui Jeomto seokdok Kugyol-eul Jungsimeuro (Several

--- Page 17 ---
Morphology and Syntax in Holes and Scratches: … 69
Kinds of Gakpiljeomto Seokdok Kugyeol Texts and Their Decipherment on
Jinbonhwaeomgyeong vol 20), Joseonhakbo, 183, Joseonhakhoe, 1-22.
Park, J. (2003). Interpretation of Mark Gugyeols Written in Zhouben『Huayan jing』 volume
36 - With Special Interest in Correspondence with Character Gugyeols, Kugyol Studies,
11, 211-248.
Park, J. (2004). Duplication of Cipher Kugyols on the Same Position and Various Marks in
Zhouben ( ) 《Huayanjing ( 經)》 volume 6, Kugyol Studies, 13, 129-148.
Park, J. (2006). Interpretation of Cipher Kugyols Written in Jinben 《Huayanjing》 volume 20,
Kugyol Studies, 16, 173-209.

--- Page 18 ---