Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_06\documents\1994-Zulkifli-SufismJavaPesantren.pdf
Total Pages: 144
Statistics: Chars=189893, ThaiWords=37978.6, EnglishWords=44271

--- Page 1 of 144 ---
SUFISM IN JAVA:
The Role of the Pesantren in the Maintenance of Sufism
in Java
A thesis
submitted in partial fulfilment of the degree of 
Master of Arts
of The Australian National University 
February 1994

--- Page 2 of 144 ---
I d eclare th a t th is th e s is is m y ow n co m p o sitio n , 
a n d th a t all so u rc e s h av e b e e n acknow ledged
Zulkifli

--- Page 3 of 144 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This thesis has grown out of an academic effort that has 
been noursihed by the support, encouragement and advice of many 
people to whom I am grateful. I shall record the great debt I owe 
the Australian Government, especially the Australian International 
Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB) for the scholarship I have 
received for two years, and my thanks to all AIDAB officials for 
assistance given to me. I am also greatly indebted to Professor 
James J.Fox, my supervisor, who invited me to study Anthropology 
at the Australian National University. Since the year of my 
coursework in 1992 I received his guidance and supervision which 
extended my understanding of the Anthropology of Islam. Further, 
in the period of my thesis writing he not only offered valuable 
criticisms and suggestions on the content of my thesis but 
tirelessly corrected my English mistakes as well. In regard to 
English problems, I also express my gratitude to Katy Bellingham 
for her assistance. I am also grateful for the help given by 
Dr.Douglas Miles who had been my second supervisor before he 
left this university. My gratitude is also expressed to Dr. Nicholas 
Peterson who gave suggestions during my coursework. My thanks 
also go to all staff of the Department of Archaeology and 
Anthropology, Faculty of Arts, and the Department of 
Anthropology, Research School of Pasific Studies, who always 
offered help during my studies. I owe special thanks to Pak Achdiat 
Kartamihardj a who permitted me to use his personal collections on 
Pesantren Suryalaya. Last, but not least, is my gratitude to my

--- Page 4 of 144 ---
wife, Ai Juariah Zulkifli, who patiently accompanied me to 
Canberra and gave her personal encouragement; and I thank her 
for assistance in translating a Sundanese text.

--- Page 5 of 144 ---
ABSTRACT
T his th esis considers Sufism in Jav a, co n cen tratin g on the 
role of th e pesantren (a traditional Islam ic in stitution) in the 
m ain ten an ce of Sufism in Jav a. The stu d y exam ines th e historical 
b ack g ro u n d of Sufism u n d ersto o d a n d p ractised w ithin the 
pesantren tradition, general featu res of Sufism w ithin the 
pesantren tradition, an d th e w ays the pesantren m ain tain Sufism 
in Jav a.
The stu d y h a s show n th a t Sufism in J a v a w as greatly 
influenced by the developm ent of Sufism in M ecca an d M edina, the 
two cen tres of Islam ic orthodoxy, d u rin g th e latter p a rt of the 
n in eteen th and early tw entieth cen tu ries, th a t Sufism w as 
m ain tain ed by fam ous Indonesian 'ulama' living in M ecca during 
th e period and spread to Jav a, an d th a t th e hap (pilgrimage) played 
a significant role in th e spread of Sufism in Ja v a du rin g th e period. 
In Ja v a Sufism is practised an d m ain tain ed by th e pesantren.
The stu d y also show s th a t w ithin th e pesantren tradition 
concepts u sed w ithin th e realm of Sufism have been redefined, and 
th a t th e pesantren u n d e rsta n d Sufism as a dim ension of Islam 
w hich is deeply rooted in th e Q u r'an an d H adith, th e two principle 
so u rces of Islam ic doctrine. The stu d y also estab lish es th a t the 
pesantren m ain tain th e inseparability of Sufism an d shari'ah 
(Islamic ju risp ru d en ce) in w hich shari'ah becom es a precondition 
for Sufi practices as well as the sta n d a rd of Sufi texts u sed to teach 
th e stu d e n ts of pesantren.

--- Page 6 of 144 ---
The role of pesantren in the maintenance of Sufism in Java is 
seen to be two-folds. Firstly, the role of the pesantren as a 
traditional Islamic institution is, in general, to maintain Sufi 
teachings without being nesessarily affiliated with a particular Sufi 
order. The pesantren in this function provides indirect support to 
the spread and development of Sufi orders in Java while exercising 
control of Sufi practices to prevent deviation from Islamic 
orthodoxy. Secondly, the role of the pesantren as a centre for the 
teaching of a particular Sufi order is to directly maintain and 
develop the teachings and practices of a Sufi order. There is no 
doubt about the extreme importance of the pesantren in the 
maintenance of Sufism in Java.

--- Page 7 of 144 ---
NOTES ON FOREIGN WORDS AND NAMES
The system of transliteration for Arabic words in this thesis 
basically follows that of Abdullah Yusuf Ali's T he M eaning o f the 
H oly Q ur'an , New Edition with Revised Translation and 
Commentary, Brentwood, Maryland: Amana Corporation. I have, 
however, simplified the system by ommitting all dots and dashes. I 
have also followed his system of abbreviation in regard to the 
writing of chapters [surah) and verses [ayah) of the Qur'an. 
Similarly, English translations of verses of the Qur'an quoted in 
the thesis are his. I do not add an 's' when using Arabic, 
Indonesian, Javanese and Sundanese words in the plural. Words 
such as 'ulam al, kh a lifa h and p esa n tre n , for instance, can 
represent either singular or plural forms.
vii

--- Page 8 of 144 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS iii
ABSTRACT v
NOTES ON FOREIGN WORDS AND NAMES vii
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION
A. General Features of Pesantren 1
B. Sufism 5
C. Sufism in Java before the Nineteenth Century 9
D. Organisation of the Thesis 14
CHAPTER II THE ROLE OF THE HAJJ IN THE SPREAD OF
SUFISM IN JAVA 17
A. The Role of the Hajj 17
B. Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas and the QadiriyyahNaqshabandiyyah Order 23
C. Successors of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas and the 
Spread of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah
Order in Java 32
D. Some Famous Indonesian 'UlamcC in Mecca and Sufism 36
CHAPTER III GENERAL FEATURES OF SUFISM WITHIN THE
PESANTREN TRADITION 41
A. Tasawwuf and Tariqah 41
v iii

--- Page 9 of 144 ---
B. Doctrinal Bases of Sufism understood in the Pesantren 45
C. Sufism and Shari'ah in the Pesantren 52
D. Sufi Texts Used in the Pesantren 56
CHAPTER IV PESANTREN TEBUIRENG AND SUFISM 62
A. Kyai Hashim Ash'ari: The Founder of Pesantren
Tebuireng 62
B. Development of Education in Pesantren Tebuireng 68
C. Aspects of Sufism in Pesantren Tebuireng 70
D. Pesantren Tebuireng and the QadiriyyahNaqshabandiyyah Order 78
CHAPTER V PESANTREN TAREKAT OF SURYALAYA 85
A. Abah Sepuh: the Founder of Pesantren Suryalaya 86
B. The Spiritual Power of A bahA nom 93
C. The Teaching and Rituals of the QadiriyyahNaqshabandiyyah Order of Suryalaya 101
D. Pondok Remaja Inabah 109
E. Education in Pesantren Suryalaya 112
CHAPTER VI CONCLUSION 117
BIBLIOGRAPHY 122
GLOSSARY 131
ix

--- Page 10 of 144 ---
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
A. General Features of Pesantren
This thesis considers Sufism in Java, concentrating on the 
role of the pesantren in the maintenance of Sufism in Java. 
Generally the Pesantren is known as a traditional Islamic 
educational institution in Java. In this thesis the term pesantren is 
not just understood as an educational institution or Islamic 
boarding school even though the main function of the pesantren is 
in the fields of education and teaching, rather the pesantren is 
understood as a religious and socio-cultural institution. This is in 
accordance with K.H.Saifuddin Zuhri's term, followed by Dhofier, 
in regarding the pesantren as 'benteng pertahanan nmmat Islarrt 
(fortresses for the defence of the Islamic community) and 'pusat 
penyebaran Islam ' (centres for the spread of Islam) (Zuhri 
1981:616; Dhofier 1982:7). I do not see this understanding 
contradicts the fact that the pesantren is a ’sub-culture', a term 
proposed by K.H.Abdurrahman Wahid. By this Wahid means that 
the pesantren is a unit of Javanese culture which has its own 
characteristics different from Javanese culture as a whole 
(1988:39-60). As Wahid realises this is an over-generalisation 
about the varieties and complexities of pesantren. The Pesantren as 
a cultural institution functions to maintain and develop 'pesantren 
culture', the term that is necessary to understand the virtues of 
pesantren.

--- Page 11 of 144 ---
2
Very little is know n ab o u t th e origins of p e sa n tre n in Jav a.
M adjid sp eculates th a t the origins of p e sa n tre n in Ja v a can be
regarded as a continuation of th e system of z a w iy a h or k h a n a q a h
in th e Middle E ast, th a t is, places w here followers of Sufi orders
stopped an d practised dhikir. Like za w iy a h , p e sa n tre n developed
a n d becam e Islamic educational in stitu tio n s (1988:104). In
accordance w ith th e role of Sufis in th e process of Islam isation in
Ja v a, the Islam ic institution th a t w as first established w as sim ilar
to a z a w iy a h or k h a n a q a h as a centre of Sufi teachings. This
in stitu tio n th en tau g h t several b ran ch es of Islam ic knowledge
w hich were very im p o rtan t for its followers. F u rth er, it is believed
th a t Islam w as bro u g h t to Ja v a by th e so-called Wali S a n g a (the
nine saints). A lthough little is know n ab o u t th e early developm ent
of p esa n tren , m any Jav an ese scholars seem to believe th a t th e Wali
S a n g a first established them . H .A bubakar Atjeh writes:
S haikh M aw lana Malik Ibrahim know n as S haikh 
M aghribi from G ujerat, India, is regarded as th e founder 
of first p esa n tren . The p e sa n tre n produced M uslim 
p reach ers who spread th e holy religion th ro u g h o u t Ja v a 
(1958:43).
At least, according to Dhofier, in th e fifteenth cen tu ry th ere 
m ight have been Islamic in stitu tio n s from w hich p e sa n tre n 
originated (1984:20). W ahid assu m es th a t th e tradition of Islam ic 
in stru ctio n in p e sa n tre n began in th e th irteen th cen tu ry along w ith 
th e com ing of Islam (1984:7).
Van B ruinessen, on the other h an d , is certain th a t 
in stitu tio n s appropriate to be called 'p e sa n tre n' did not exist before 
th e eighteenth century. He argues th a t th ere is no reliable evidence

--- Page 12 of 144 ---
3
of the existence of pesantren before Pesantren Tegalsari in East 
Java, which is the oldest pesantren established in 1742. He points 
out that in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries there was 
religious instruction in mosques, palaces, hermitages and at holy 
graves (1992b:76-77). This view does not necessarily contradict 
other views if we imagine that pesantren in its early years was 
much simpler than it is today.
Since the middle of nineteenth century pesantren have been 
important objects of study although a comprehensive account of 
pesantren does not exist due to the large variety of pesantren. The 
earliest scholar who conducted research on pesantren was 
probably Brumund in his account of the educational system in 
Java in 1857. Brumund was then followed by other scholars 
including missionaries. At the end of nineteenth century van den 
Berg (1886) carried out a survey of the pesantren in Java. Raden 
Ahmad Djajadiningrat (1908), the bupati of Serang (1901-1917) 
also wrote an account of pesantren life and its traditions in Banten, 
West Java. Recently there have been a number of studies on 
pesantren as well as studies on Javanese religion and society 
which include the development of traditional Islamic institutions.
An understanding of the pesantren in Java became wide 
spread in Indonesia with the publication of Dhofier's Ph.D.thesis in 
Indonesian (1982). This historical and ethnographic book, which 
focuses on the roles of the Kyai in the maintenance and spread of 
the traditional ideology of Islam, is one of the most complete 
accounts on pesantren. Reviewing the book, Shohibul Hikam

--- Page 13 of 144 ---
4
(1982) credits it as th e first book th a t co n cen trates on th e 
traditional Islam w hich is often neglected since sch o lars in 
Indonesia generally paid great atten tio n to 'm odem ' Islam.
A lthough som e critiques of Dhofier's stu d y have em erged, in 
th is introduction it is im portant to note th e basic elem ents of a 
p e sa n tre n as Dhofier describes. G enerally th ere are five basic 
elem ents of p esa n tren , nam ely pondok, m esjid, p e n g a ja ra n kita b 
kuning, sa n tri and kgai. P ondok w hich varies from one p e sa n tre n to 
a n o th er is a hostel w here stu d e n ts ( santri) live together. M esjid 
(mosque) is a centre of Islamic education in th e p esa n tren . It is 
com m on th a t the estab lish m en t of a p e sa n tre n originates from th e 
estab lish m en t of th e m osque. It is a place w here sa n tri perform 
Islam ic ritu als, learn kitab kuning (traditional Arabic script) an d so 
forth. Traditionally, a p e sa n tre n teaches classic Islam ic books by 
the system of sorogan (individual system of learning) an d 
b a n d o n g a n or w e to n a n (group learning). Today, secu lar su b jects 
are ta u g h t and the m a d ra sa h (classical) system is used. S a n tri or 
the stu d e n ts of a p e sa n tre n are generally classified into sa n tri 
m u kim or those who stay in th e hostel an d sa n tri kalong or those 
who come to p e sa n tre n to stu d y and re tu rn to th eir hom e after th e 
study. K gai is the essential elem ent of p e sa n tre n who decides all 
activities of p e sa n tre n (Dhofier 1982:44-60). It is im p o rtan t to note 
th a t th e p e sa n tre n tradition h a s to be und ersto o d as a dynam ic
institution.

--- Page 14 of 144 ---
5
B. Sufism
In this thesis Sufism is understood in its broadest sense and 
it is far broader than that understood by m ost w estern scholars as 
Muslim Mysticism'. Based on Sufi teachings it includes both 
asceticism (including piety and devotion) and mysticism. The Sufis 
can be classified into individual Sufi w ithout being affiliated to a 
Sufi order and those affiliated with a Sufi order. Both individual 
Sufi and those affiliated with an order intermingle. In this thesis 
the role of the p e sa n tre n in the m aintenance of Sufism in Java 
involves the way the p e sa n tre n functions to m aintain Sufism in 
term s of individual Sufism and Sufi orders as well as to preserve 
some aspects of asceticism and mysticism in Java.
Asceticism was the origin of Sufism. In the early development 
of Sufism ascetics were called ahl a l-S u ffa h (literally 'people of the 
Verandah') which points to some of the Prophet's Companions who
actively inspired to attain a sim ilar knowledge of the
Divine Presence, and who were often m entioned in the
Traditions for their piety and ascetic tendencies" (AlAttas 1963:5).
Neither the term Sufism nor tariqah actually appeared 
during this period. 'N u s sa k (pi.nasik), 'u b b a d (piZabid) or 'z u h h a d 
(pi.zahid) which can be translated as 'ascetics' or 'devotees’ are the 
term s usually applied to those who practised such a way of life 
(Abdullah 1990:82). Hasan al-Basri (d.728), Ibrahim ibn Adham 
(d.778), and R abfah al-Adawiyah (d.801) are some early ascetic 
figures (Abdullah 1990:82). Abu Hamid M uham m ad al-Ghazali 
(d. 1111) was the m ost im portant figure who reconciled Sufism with 
orthodoxy. Al-Ghazali is regarded as the founder as well as the

--- Page 15 of 144 ---
6
protector of Sunni Sufism (Abdul Muis 1985:22). Therefore, Sunni
Sufism is sometimes known as ta s a w w u f al-G hazali (Sufism of alGhazali) because of his great influence on its teachings (Dahlan
1991:29). Fazlur Rahman writes:
The influence of al-Ghazali in Islam is uncalculable. He 
not only reconstituted orthodox Islam, making Sufism 
an integrated part of it, but also was a great reformer of 
Sufism, purifying it of un-Islamic elements and putting 
it at the service of orthodox religion. As such he 
represents a final step in a long developing history. 
Sufism received, through his influence, the approval of 
lim a or consensus of the community (Rahman 
1979:140).
A later development of Sufism was in mysticism. Commonly 
this is strongly associated with philosophical or speculative Sufism 
because it originated when Islamic civilisation had developed and 
observed various streams of Greek philosophy. Muhyi al-Din al- 
'Arabi (d.1240) was the greatest Muslim mystic when Islamic 
mysticism reached its culminating point. The central core of his 
Sufi teachings is the doctrine of w a h d a h a l-w u ju d or 'the unity of 
Existence’ which basically espresses the Sufi denial of all existence 
but God (Al-Attas 1963:10).
The Sufis described above were not organised in a certain 
organisation. They were individual Sufis. From the thirteenth 
century Sufi orders (brotherhood) emerged. In Southeast Asia this 
is sometimes called 'ta s a w w u f ta re k a t (Abdullah 1990a: 146). 
Trimingham views it as an institutionalisation of Sufi schools 
which derive from Sufi resting-places named ribat, z a w iy a h and 
k h a n a q a h (1971:5-10). Trimingham's account is one of the most 
comprehensive books on Sufi orders which includes almost all of

--- Page 16 of 144 ---
7
th em since th e early days of th eir establishm ent. Some fam ous Sufi 
orders are th e Q a diriyyah order a ttrib u ted to 'Abd al-Q adir al- 
Jila n i (d. 1166), th e R ifa iy y a h order deriving from A hm ad ibn Al- 
R ifai (d.1182) and the N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order associated w ith 
M uham m ad B aha' al-Din al-N aqshabandi (d.1389) an d m any 
o th ers (Trim ingham 1971:14). C ertain chief Sufi orders b ran ch ed 
into n u m ero u s corporations (Trimingham 1971:103) an d two or 
m ore Sufi orders were united.
In regard to th e developm ent of Sufism G ilsenan w rites
a b o u t th e two m ain stream s:
The first, beginning in the early cen tu ries after th e 
P rophet M uham m ad's death, is th a t individuals who felt 
a call to the m ystical or devotional life. The second ... is 
th e corporate p u rsu it of the 'way', the tariqa (pl.turuq), 
by groups of M uslim s who cam e together in th e Sufi 
B rotherhoods following one of th e great S ain ts of 
medieval Islam (Gilsenan 1973:1).
Similarly, H .A bubakar Atjeh p u ts it in th is way:
The Sufis are classified into two groups: The first is 
in d ependent 'ulam a' who do not follow a certain Sufi 
order w hich ties their stu d e n ts an d brings them into a 
school of Sufi doctrines. These Sufi figures are know n 
for th eir w orks w hich are regarded as special featu res in 
producing a stan d p o in t in the field of Sufism ... The 
o th er is the Sufis who are bound to certain teachings or 
Sufi orders w hich are followed an d propagated by th eir 
disciples. A lthough changes m ight occur in the order, 
its principles rem ain as were established by the founder 
(Atjeh 1980:17).
S tudies of Sufism usually follow a p articu lar asp ect of 
Sufism . S tudies of Sufism in Ja v a m ainly concentrate on asp ects of 
m ysticism . Some D utch scholars su ch as K raem er (1921) an d 
Z oetm ulder (1935) exam ined Jav an ese m ysticism for th e fulfilm ent 
of th eir Doctor degrees. Similarly, J o h n s (1965) analysed a

--- Page 17 of 144 ---
8
Javanese text on mysticism. Unlike these accounts, a 
contemporary study by Woodward includes the discussion of both 
asceticism and mysticism. What is important in this study is that 
Woodward clearly makes a distinction between asceticism in the 
sa n tri population and mysticism in the Javanese Royal Court and 
village. An important publication work which deals with a Sufi 
order is a study of the historical, geographical and sociological 
aspects of the N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order in Indonesia by van 
Bruinessen (1992a). Consideration of the development of the Sufi 
order in Java is included in van Bruinessen's study. This thesis 
includes the discussion of both individual Sufism and Sufi orders.
This thesis intends to analyse the role of the p e sa n tre n in the 
maintenance of Sufism. Describing several Sufi orders, Geertz 
shows the importance of Sufism in the p e sa n tre n (1960:182-184). 
Similarly, Dhofier has shown the importance of Sufi elements 
within the p e sa n tre n tradition and examined several Sufi orders 
maintained by k y a i in Central and East Java (1982:135-147). 
Dhofier however stressed that his data on Sufism was very limited 
both in locality and content, and that, as a result, further research 
on it was needed (1980a:xxviii). This might be a reason why in the 
published translation of Dhofier's thesis (1982) some parts of the 
chapter on K yai a n d T a reka t were excluded. This thesis attempts 
to fill in some of these gaps as well as to examine some 
assumptions in Dhofier's study. Although some criticism may be 
directed to Dhofier's study, this thesis is inspired by his work.

--- Page 18 of 144 ---
9
In order to understand the importance of Sufism in the 
pesantren the general features of Sufism m ust be considered in 
this thesis. This is important to relate an understanding of Sufism 
within the pesantren tradition to Sufism in general.
The role of the pesantren in the m aintenance of Sufism can 
be seen both in the way pesantren m aintain Sufism without 
necessarily specialising in the development of Sufi orders as well as 
in the way some pesantren specialise in upholding a particular 
Sufi order. This thesis provides accounts of Pesantren Tebuireng as 
a representative of the first category and Pesantren Suryalaya as a 
representative of the other category.
C. Sufism in Java before the Nineteenth Century
This thesis considers the development of Sufism in the 
second half of the nineteenth and in twentieth centuries. It firstly 
aims at examining the relationship between Sufism in Java and 
international Islam represented by Mecca and Medina as centres of 
Islamic orthodoxy during the second half of the nineteenth and 
early twenteth centuries. During this period, there took place in 
Java a so-called 'Islamic Revival' indicated by the very enthusistic 
teaching of Islam. It is important not to isolate Islam in Java from 
Islam in general. Aspects of history of the pesantren during the 
period are theefore also included. As a historical background, I 
shall describe the development of Sufism in Java before the 
nineteenth century.

--- Page 19 of 144 ---
10
Most scholars studying the history of the spread of Islam in 
Indonesia agree that Sufi played a m ajor role in the Islam isation of 
the Indonesian archipelago. Tanja writes th at "the Islam th at first 
spread in the Indonesian archipelago was Sufi Islam" (1982:21). 
Johns, a fam ous writer on the history of Sufism in Indonesia 
(1955, 1957, 1961, 1965, 1975), suggests th at Arab and Muslim 
m erchants had been visiting Indonesia since the eighth century 
although no Muslim communities appeared until the thirteenth 
century. He describes how im portant the role of Sufism was in this 
process:
It [Sufism] was directly involved in the spread of Islam 
to Indonesia, it played a significant part in the social 
organisation of the Indonesian port towns, and it was 
the specific nature of Sufism which facilitated the 
absorption of non-Muslim com m unities into the fold of 
Islam (1961:13).
It seem s that no Indonesian scholars or 'ulama' deny the 
great role of Sufis in Islamisation of Indonesia although this view is 
still rather speculative. Johns assum es th at from the thirteenth to 
the eighteenth centuries the activity of Sufi m issionaries brought 
about the spread of Islam in Indonesia. This is in accord with the 
dom inant influence of the Sufi orders in the Islamic world after the 
fall of Baghdad to the Mongols in 1258. The Sufi m issionaries were 
forced to leave Baghdad and seek peaceful areas in the east 
(Koentjaraningrat 1984:53). During the period Islam could put 
down roots among the people of local Indonesian states and 
incluenced their rulers (Johns 1961:13-14).
Most scholars point out to the significant role of Sufi in the 
process of Islamisation because of sim ilarities in Sufism with pre-

--- Page 20 of 144 ---
1 1
Islam ic Indonesian cultures. Jo h n s w rites of the ch aracteristics of
th e Sufi who succeeded in th e spread of Islam in Indonesia:
They were peripatetic preachers ranging over th e whole 
know n world, voluntarily espousing poverty; they w ere 
frequently associated w ith trad e or craft guilds, 
according to th e order ( ta rika h) to w hich they belonged 
to; they ta u g h t a complex syncretic theosophy largely 
fam iliar to th e Indonesians, b u t w hich w as su b o rd in ate 
to, although an enlargem ent on th e fu n d am en tal 
dogm as of Islam; they were proficient in m agic an d 
possessed powers of healing; and not least, consciously 
or unconsciously, they were prepared to preserve 
continuity w ith th e past, and to u se th e term s an d 
elem ents of pre-Islam ic cu ltu re in an Islam ic context 
(1961:15).
In Ja v a it is believed th a t Islam w as first b ro u g h t by th e W ali 
S a n g a (the nine saints) who played a great role in th e process of 
Islam isation. The nam es of th ese Nine S ain ts are said to be 
M aulana Malik Ibrahim , S u n an Ampel, S u n a n Bonang, S u n a n 
D rajat, S u n a n Giri, S u n an K udus, S u n a n M uria, S u n a n Kalijaga 
an d S u n a n G unung J a ti (Zuhri 1981:247-352). M any scholars, 
m ainly Indonesians, believe th a t th e W ali S a n g a ta u g h t orthodox 
Islam . However, no scholars who would suggest th a t th e Wali 
S a n g a were followers of Sufi orders. R ather, they w ere Sufi who 
followed th e teachings of al-G hazali. Zarkasyi points o u t th a t one of 
th e m ost im pressive Sufi teachings for th e W ali S a n g a w as al- 
G hazali's I h y a 'U lum al-D in (1977:61). The influence of al-G hazali's 
teaching w as greater th a n al-'A rabi an d th e like. S teen b rin k 
suggests th a t "the Sufi teachings of al-G hazali is longer and 
stronger in Indonesia th a n pantheistic teachings" (1984:174). To 
S u n an Bonang, for instance, is attrib u ted a Sufi text th a t 
su p p o rted th e teachings of al-G hazali while criticising th o se of al-

--- Page 21 of 144 ---
12
Arabi and the like (Drewes 1969:17). In the oldest Javanese code
of Muslim ethics, published by Drewes, the author elaborates some
of al-Ghazali's BicLayah ai-H idayah (1978:6). Steenbrink concludes
that the author of the book had to be a follower of al-Ghazali's
teachings, not al-'Arabi's (1984:174). Hamka supports these views.
Sufism at the time [of its first spread in Indonesia] was 
in accordance with and/or united with M a zh a b a h l al- 
S u n n a h w a a l-J a m a a h , particularly the Shaffite 
tradition which came here. In the history of the 
development of Sufism in Indonesia, the influence of al- 
Ghazali al-Shaffi was greater than that of al-Halaj al- 
Shfi (1984:233).
The mysticism of al-Arabi also spread in Java. Steenbrink
argues that the teaching of w a h d a h al-w u ju d spread along with the
spread of the S h a tta riya h order in the seventeenth century
(1984:174). The S h a tta riy a h order travelled from Aceh, where Abd
al-Ra'uf of Singkel firstly propagated it, to West Java. Here his
disciple named Abd al-Muhyi of Karang established the Sufi order.
From there it spread to Central and East Java (Kartodirdjo
1966:144). The S h a tta riy a h order had a very strong speculative
basis, mainly upholding the seven grades of being (Steenbrink
1984:174-175). There is a Javanese version of Muhammad ibn
Fadl Allah's teachings which contains a system of 'seven grades of
being'. Johns critically edited and translated the text (1965).
Thus it is not pressing probability too far to suggest 
that the spread of the S h a tta riy a h order and knowledge 
of the T u h fa h went hand in hand, and this together with 
the other circumstances referred to above, makes a 
Javanese version of the work theoretically possible by 
1680 at the last (Johns 1965:12).

--- Page 22 of 144 ---
13
It is important to note that the teachings of w ahdah al-wujud
influenced several works in nineteenth century Javanese literature
such as the Serat Centini, Wind Hidayat Jati and so forth.
In addition to the Shattariyyah, the Qadiriyyah order might
have appeared in Java before the nineteenth century. Hamzah
Fansuri who was a famous Qadiriyyah mystic visited various
places including Java (Kartodirdjo 1966:145). Hamzah Fansuri was
strongly influenced by al-'Arabi. He was even regarded as the
Malay interpreter of al-'Arabi. His thought was that there is no
being other than God. God is not in the world but is the world. His
system of the world is a series of emanations from Divine Being
and the number of emanations is not limited (Johns 1955:75-76).
'Purification' efforts to restore the emphasis on ethics and
obedience within the realm of orthodoxy as taught by al-Ghazali
already existed from the sixteenth century (Wahid 1984:7). This
purification effort is narrated in several Javanese literary works.
Soebardi, writing about the Serat Centini which is assumed to have
been written in early nineteenth century, and in particular about
the punishment of Shaikh Among Raga who was accused of having
spread heterodox Sufi teachings, concludes:
In the present book of Centini we see the presentation 
of Syaikh Among Raga as the symbol of an aristocratic 
shaikh who adopted a syncretic religious life as a result 
of the conciliation and harmonisation of two religious 
currents in Javanese society, i.e. traditional Javanese 
mysticism as propagated by Shaikh Siti Jenar and 
Sunan Panggung, and orthodox legalistic Islam 
(1971:349).
With a close relationship with Mecca and Medina in the 
second half of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, new

--- Page 23 of 144 ---
developments in Sufism took place in Java. A new Sufi order was 
established in Mecca, namely the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h 
order which became the most powerful Sufi order in Java. The role 
of the p e sa n tre n in the maintenance of Sufism in Java closely 
relates to the development of this Sufi order.
D. Organisation of the Thesis
The thesis is organised in six chapters including an 
Introduction and Conclusion. Chapter I, Introduction, describes 
general features of p e sa n tre n in Java in order provide an idea of 
the term p e sa n tre n as used in the thesis. It then examines the 
term Sufism as it is used in the thesis. Before describing the 
organisation of the thesis, the thesis describes the development of 
Sufism before the nineteenth century as historical background for 
the thesis. The main body of the thesis is described below.
Chapter II discusses the relationship between Java and the 
Middle East, particularly Mecca during the second half of the 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, concentrating on the role 
of the hqjj in the spread of Sufism in Java. The chapter begins with 
the analysis of the role of the hatf in general. Then, it discusses a 
famous Indonesian 'ulamcC in Mecca during the later part of the 
nineteenth century, Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas, and his 
relation to the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order, followed by the 
description of successors of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas and 
their role in the spread of the order in Java. Finally, the chapter

--- Page 24 of 144 ---
15
closes with the analysis of some Indonesian 'ulama! and their 
relation to Sufism, but not to Sufi orders.
The discussion of the role of the hajj in the spread of Sufism 
in Java during the latter part of the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries shows the relationship between Islam in Java with 
international Islam. This relates to general features of Sufism 
within the pesantren tradition as provided in Chapter III. In detail, 
this chapter includes the discussion of the term ta sa w w u f and 
tariqah in the pesantren, the description of doctrinal bases of 
Sufism, the analysis of the importance of Sufism and shari'ah in 
the pesantren and the description of Sufi texts used in the 
pesantren.
Chapter IV aims at examining the role of the pesantren in the 
maintenance of Sufism in Java as offered by Pesantren Tebuireng. 
The chapter begins with the description of the establishment of the 
pesantren concentrating on the role of Kyai Hashim Ash'ari. 
Tebuireng is a major pesantren which played a great role in Islamic 
education in Java. The chapter describes the development of its 
educational system. The main parts of the chapter consist of an 
analysis of some aspects of Sufism understood and practised in 
Pesantren Tebuireng and the relationship between this pesantren 
and the development of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in 
East Java.
Chapter V examines Pesantren Tarekat of Suryalaya. It 
begins with a description of the founder of the pesantren including 
the development of the pesantren during his period. Afterwords, it

--- Page 25 of 144 ---
16
describes the spiritual power of A b a h Anom , the present leader of 
the p esa n tren , and his influence, followed by the teaching and 
rituals of the Sufi order. The chapter also provides a discussion of 
the development of education in the p e sa n tre n and an analysis of 
P ondok In a b a h as a unique aspect of Pesantren Suryalaya.
Chapter VI, Conclusion, provides a summary of the thesis.

--- Page 26 of 144 ---
CHAPTER II
THE ROLE OF THE H A JJ IN THE SPREAD OF SUFISM IN JAVA
Mecca and Medina are two Muslim holy cities and are 
regarded as the centres of Islamic orthodoxy. The hqjj or pilgrimage 
to Mecca is the fifth pillar of Islam which must be performed by 
those who have the ability to do so. In this chapter I shall examine 
the relationship of Mecca, and also Medina, with Java, particularly 
with regard to the spread of Sufism in Java during the second half 
of nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. First, I shall discuss 
the role of the hqjj in the process of the Islamisation in Java. Then, 
I shall discuss a famous 'u la m ä named Shaikh Ahmad Khatib 
Sambas and his role in the founding of the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order and the role of his successors in the 
spread of the order in Java. Finally, I shall examine the 
relationship between some famous Indonesian 'ulama! and Sufism.
A. The Role of the H ay
Since the sixteenth century, according to Johns, Indonesian 
'u la m a ' have had a contact with 'ula m a ' in the centres of orthodoxy 
in Arabia, Mecca and Medina. The Indonesian 'ulam a', particularly 
Acehnese 'ulam a', often invited 'ulam a' from South Asia and the 
Islamic heartland who brought books for explication and 
commentary. Some Acehnese 'ulam a' made the pilgrimage to 
Mecca and studied Islam in some cities in the Hijaz and the Yemen 
(1980:168). Johns, however, did not discuss the relationship

--- Page 27 of 144 ---
18
between Java and the Middle East during this period. He mentions 
Banten, the oldest Islamic port city in West Java, which has 
remained a centre of Islamic learning since 1524 (1980:176). When 
the peoples of Java first began to perform the hay remains 
unanswered. Yet van Bruinessen points out that, to the people of 
Java, the hay has been considered extremely important since Islam 
first came to the island and it was not limited just to the sa n tri 
population but also to other Muslims. Van Bruinessen describes 
that in the seventeenth century kings in Java began to seek 
political legitimacy in Mecca. In the 1630's rulers of Mataram and 
Banten competed in sending their deputies to Mecca in order to 
gain recognition of their kingdom and to receive the title 'sultan'. 
These rulers regarded the Great S h a rif at Mecca and Medina as 
someone who had authority over the Muslim world. In their return 
to Java, the deputies brought a piece of k is w a h — black fabric 
which covers the k a 'b a h (the cubical stone structure in Mecca that 
is the chief object of the hqy and towards which Muslims face in 
prayer). This cloth is changed annually and a piece of this cloth 
was regarded as effective amulet. Some years later a son of Sultan 
Ageng Tirtayasa of Banten, Abd al-Qahhar went to perform the 
hqy in Mecca. He was then known as Sultan Haji. He was, 
according to van Bruinessen, the first p riy a yi who performed the 
pilgrimage to Mecca (1990b: 43). Thus in this case, the hqy had not 
only a ritual function but also a political function.
Apart from those functions, to the peoples of Java, sa n tri as 
well as non-santri, Mecca was regarded as a spiritual centre. There

--- Page 28 of 144 ---
19
are m any k y a i in Java who, according to their followers, spiritually 
w ent to Mecca to perform Friday prayer at the Masjid al-Haram . In 
several Javanese legends famous figures are often described as 
visitors to Mecca who learned their Islamic knowledge in the holy 
city (van Bruinessen 1990b: 43).
Mecca was also regarded as a place in which one could learn 
several branches of Islamic knowledge, either fiq h , ta fsir or Sufism. 
Although m any writers argue that Islam was first brought from 
India and, therefore, was influenced by Indian culture, the 
teaching of w a h d a h al-wujucL, which is often considered as 
pantheism , was studied by its propagators in Mecca or Medina. 
'Abd al-Ra'uf of Singkel, the first propagator of the S h a tta riy y a h 
order in Aceh, learned about the order in Mecca, not in its original 
place in India (van Bruinessen 1990b:44-45).
From the second half of the nineteenth century the 
relationship between Java and the Middle East became closer. The 
development of steam ship travel m ade it possible for a great 
num ber of Javanese to make the hay to Mecca (Woodward 
1989:135). Vredenbregt (1962) reports an increasing num ber of the 
pilgrims from Indonesia during the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries. Between 1875 and 1884 the num ber was 
5,958 people w hereas between 1905 and 1914 it reached 15,390. 
The num ber of pilgrims from Java was the largest. Between 1875 
and 1884 there were 3,675 pilgrims from Java and between 1905 
and 1914 the num ber increased to 9,969 (Vredenregt 1962:91- 
154). Java thus had a relatively large num ber of pilgrims as

--- Page 29 of 144 ---
20
compared with other islands; and, compared with other countries,
Indonesia has always had a large number of pilgrims. It is true that
in Indonesia the people who hold the title hqji have high esteem
and great prestige. Van Bruinessen writes:
To Indonesian Muslims, the hqjj, for a long time, has 
played an important role. There is an impression that 
Indonesians considered the ho// more importantly than 
most other peoples and that the society greatly 
appreciates the hqji. This situation might be linked to 
the traditional culture of Southeast Asia (1990b; 43).
It should be emphasised that, in addition to making the
pilgrimage, a number of people from Java settled at Mecca and
Madina for several years to learn Islamic knowledge. The pilgrims
were usually classified either as general pilgrims who came to
Mecca and stayed for several months only to perform the hqjj and
the muqimin , namely those who settled there for years ['menahun')
to learn several branches of Islamic science. Some students
became followers of a particular Sufi order (Suminto 1985:95).
Some of the muqimin became prominent 'ulamol and teachers
teaching at Mecca and Medina. Hurgronje observes that during the
late nineteenth century the Indonesian colony in Mecca was large.
He concludes:
... here lies the heart of the religious life of the East- 
Indian Archipelago, and numerous arteries pump from 
thence fresh blood in ever accelerating tempo to the 
entire body of the Muslim populace of Indonesia 
(1931:291).
The great number of the pilgrims during the period was, as 
Kartodirdjo points out, one of the main manifestations of the 
religious revival in Java. Other manifestations were the 
phenomenal growth of religious schools and the revival of Islamic

--- Page 30 of 144 ---
21
m ysticism . These three phenom ena were interrelated and the role
of the hcyj in linking them to the international developm ent of
Islam w as very great. The hatf h as bridged "... the gap betw een the
M eccan teacher and the comm on sa n tri of the village" (Kartodirdjo
1966:153) in Java. Van B ruinessen writes:
We see several sociological functions of the hqjj. 
Indonesians sought knowledge in Mecca and M edina 
and after returning to their country they tau g h t their 
com m unity the knowledge they learned in the holy land. 
Religious practices in Indonesia m aintained to get 
corrections from there as well (1990c: 45).
Kartodirdjo p u ts it in this way:
Religious revivalism ... w as a wide spread phenom enon 
in the latter p art of the 19th century... It would be a 
m istake to regard the religious m ovem ent in Indonesia 
during this period as a parochial happening. W ithout 
adopting a M ecca-centric point of view, it is necessary to 
point out the m any ties which linked the Islamic world 
in Indonesia with th a t religious centre. M ecca-trained or 
Mecca inspired ula m a or Hadjis, either personally or 
through their disciples, instigated and cham pioned the 
revival m ovem ents in various p arts of indonesia. These 
social core of these revivalists w as to be found in the 
D jaw ah com m unity (Kartodirdjo 1966:153).
It is interesting to note th a t stu d en ts from Ja v a chose the
'ulama! and teachers from Java. After returning to Java, they
becam e k ya i who led the p e sa n tre n th a t attracted stu d e n ts who
later becam e teachers and k y a i as well. Although it is the fact th a t
the p e sa n tre n h as become a powerful agent in prom oting Islam
thro u g h o u t Java, it is also true th a t power of the p e sa n tre n becam e
stronger since the latter part of the nineteenth century. U nder the
conditions created by the religious revival, according to
Kartodirdjo, new strength and popular attraction to the p e sa n tre n
em erged during the period (1966:155).

--- Page 31 of 144 ---
22
K artodirdjo also w rites th a t "... the pilgrim age was a social
force of the revitalisation of religious life" (1966:148). In th is
connection, it is a m istake to regard, as m any w rite rs do, only the
influence of the hcyj on the m odernist or re form ist m ovem ents in
Indonesia as a re su lt of contacts between Indonesian pilg rim s w ith
Pan-Islam ic m ovem ent propagated by the E gyptian M uham m ad
A bdu h. One should, however, bear in m ind th a t the hatf also
played a great role in the process of the tra d itio n a lisa tio n o f Islam ,
p a rtic u la rly in Java. W ith regard to the spread o f S ufi orders in
Java the hay played a significant role, as K artodirdjo suggests:
These three Sufi orders [the Q a d iriy y a h , the 
S h a tta riy y a h and the N a q s h a b a n d iy y a h ] emerged as the 
spearhead of Islam ic revival in certain parts of 19th 
cen tu ry Java. The m ain m issionary force consisted of 
h a d jis who returned home as adepts o f one of the 
ta re k a ts, since direct com m unication w ith Mecca was 
not only m aintained b u t also increased in the la tte r 
parts of the 19 th century, propaganda was considerably 
strengthened. Moreover, the ta re k a ts introduced d ire ctly 
from Mecca contributed a great deal not only to fervent 
religious practices b u t also to intolerance and 
fanaticism (1966:158).
D hofier describes six prom inent ' iila rn a ' who had a close 
connection w ith and played a great role in the m aintenance and 
spread of the tra d itio n a l Islam in Java d u rin g the second h a lf of 
nineteenth cen tury and the early tw entieth century: S haikh A hm ad 
K hatib Sambas, S haikh Nawawi Banten, S haikh 'A bd al-K arim , 
S haikh M a hfud h al-Tarm asi, Kyai K h a lil Bangkalan and H adrah 
al-S h aikh H ashim Ash ari (1982:85-99). W hile S haikh A hm ad 
K hatib Sambas and S haikh 'Abd al-K arim were w ell-kn ow n as 
leaders of the Q a d iriy y a h -N a q s h a b a n d iy y a h order, others 
m aintained Sufism w ith o u t being affiliated w ith a p a rtic u la r S ufi

--- Page 32 of 144 ---
23
order. It is these two traditions that have been developed and have 
been maintained by the majority of p e sa n tre n in Java.
B. Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas and the Q adiriyyahN a q sh a b a n d iy y a h Order
One of the most famous Indonesian 'ulamcC during the 
nineteenth century was Shaikh Ahmad Khatib 'Abd al-Ghaffar 
from Sambas, Kalimantan. His career was deeply bound to the 
establishment of the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order, today’s 
most widespread Sufi order in Java. This Sufi order is a
combination of the Q a diriyyah and N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h orders. In 
the history of Sufism it is common that some 'alamo! practised two 
or more different orders. But in Indonesia the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order is not merely a combination of two 
different orders that are practised together, but rather is itself a 
new order (van Bruinessen 1992a:89).
In Indonesia it is believed that the Q adiriyahN a q sh a b a n d iy a h order was first taught by Shaikh Ahmad Khatib 
Sambas (van Bruinessen 1992a:89-90). Little is known about this 
prominent 'ulama!. In Indonesia he is famous as a leader of Sufi 
order and as an expert in Sufism, but he was an Islamic scholar 
who mastered various fields of Islamic knowledge such as the 
Hadith, the Qur'an and fiq h , and transmitted them to many 
students in Mecca (Dhofier 1982:17-18). This is proved by the fact 
that Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas had at least nine famous 
teachers in Mecca who mastered various branches of Islamic

--- Page 33 of 144 ---
24
knowledge: Shaikh Daud ibn M uham mad al-Fatani, Shaikh Sham s 
al-Din, Shaikh M uham mad Saleh Rais, Shaikh 'U m ar Abd al- 
Rasul, Shaikh 'Abd al-Hafiz Ajami, Shaikh Bashir al-Jabarti, 
Sayid Ahmad al-Mazuqi, Said Abd Allah al-Mirghani and Shaikh 
TJthm an al-Dimyati (Abdullah 1990:46).
Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas was born in 1217 A.H (1805 
A.D). Little is known about his early life. Most of his life was spent 
in Mecca. Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas became and rem ained a 
teacher at the Masjid al-Haram until he died either in 1875 
(Hurgronje 1931:262; Dhofier 1982:85) or in 1878 (van B ruinessen 
1989:74). It is the fact that for centuries Mecca has been a centre 
of Islamic education in which m any Indonesians not only have 
become students but also became 'ulamcC and teachers. It was 
Shaikh Daud ibn M uham mad al-Fatani, a m urshid of the 
S h a tta riy y a h order, who introduced Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas 
to Shaikh Sham s al-Din, a m urshid of the Q a d iriyya h order. The 
question rem ains why Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas did not join 
the S h a tta riy y a h order, to which his first teacher belonged before 
he m et Shaikh Sham s al-Din and was the m ost dom inant Sufi 
order in Southeast Asia before its spread was countered by the 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h and the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h orders in 
the latter part of the nineteenth century.
Shaikh Sham s al-Din greatly influenced the life of Shaikh 
Ahmad Khatib Sam bas, particularly the Sufi order he developed. 
Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas was the best among Shaikh Sham s

--- Page 34 of 144 ---
25
al-Din's students so that it was appropriate that he succeed to his
teacher's position after the latter's death.
Since that time S h a ik h Ahmad Khatib Sambas was 
already appointed to be a S h a ik h m u rsh id kam il 
m u ka m il [the most perfect S h a ik h murshid] in the 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order which was based 
on the teachings of Shaikh Shams al-Din (Abdullah 
1980:181).
It is said in F ath al-'Arifin that the Sufi order was 
transmitted from Shaikh Abd al-Qadir al-Jailani, the founder of 
the Q a d iriyya h order, through his sons Abd al-'Aziz and 
Muhammad al-Hattak, to Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas' teacher 
Shaikh Shams al-Din. Van Bruinessen suggests that before Shaikh 
Shams al-Din, there are several names that are not found in other 
sources (1989:73). It is not known from whom Shaikh Ahmad 
Khatib Sambas actually received the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h ijazah. Nor 
is it clear whether his teacher was also a N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h 
teacher or whether Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas himself 
practised elements of the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order. If he did receive 
the ija za h of the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h from Shaikh Shams al-Din as 
well, then the view that Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas was the 
founder of the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h must be incorrect. If 
we examine the above quotation from Abdullah, it does seem more 
likely that Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas received both Sufi orders 
from Shaikh Shams al-Din. In Java, however, Shaikh Ahmad 
Khatib Sambas is regarded as the founder of the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order.

--- Page 35 of 144 ---
26
It is important to list the silsilah (chain) of the Sufi order up
to Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas. A llah and then Gabriel are
mentioned in the silsilah: they are then followed by:
Muhammad S.A.W 
'Ali ibn Abi Talib 
Husain ibn Ali 
Zayn al-Abidin 
Muhammad al-Baqir 
Ja'far al-Shadiq 
Musa al-Kazhim
Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha 
Ma'ruf al-Karkhi 
Sari al-Saqati
Abu al-Qasim Junayd al-Baghdadi 
Abu Bakr al-Shibli 
Abd al-Wahid al-Tamimi 
Abd al-Farajal-Tartusi 
Abu al-Hasan 'Ali Hakkari 
Abu Sa id Makhzumi 
Abd al-Qadir al-Jailani 
Abd al-'Aziz 
Muhammad al-Hattak 
Shams al-Din 
Sharif al-Din 
Nur al-Din 
Wali al-Din 
Husam al-Din 
Yahya 
Abu Bakr 
Abd al-Rahim 
Uthman 
Abd al-Fattah 
Muhammad Murad 
Shams al-Din
Ahmad Khatib Sambas (van Bruinessen 1992a:90-91).
Al-Attas suggests that Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas is an 
author of the twelve-page F ath al-'Arifin (Victory of the Gnostics), 
the most important and popular treatise on Sufi practices among 
Malays (1963:59). According to van Bruinessen, however, the book 
was not written by Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas. He suggests
that

--- Page 36 of 144 ---
27
Sahikh Ahmad Khatib himself did not write any single 
book, but two of his students loyally recorded his 
teachings in a short Malay treatise, which explicitly 
explained techniques of this Sufi order (van Bruinessen 
1992a:90).
Fath al-'Arifin was compiled by his student and khalifah 
nam ed M uham m ad Ism a il ibn Ibrahim al-Bali, a Balinese Muslim, 
and was based on Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas' teachings (van 
Bruinessen 1989:72). It was firstly printed in Mecca in the year 
1323 A.H or 1325 A.H (1908 A.D) (Shallebear 1930:359). According 
to van Bruinessen, M uham mad Ma ruf ibn al-Shaikh Abd Allah 
Khatib Palembang, another of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas' 
students, wrote a treatise called Tariqa yang dibangsakan kepada 
Qadiriyah dan Naqsyabandiyah (Sufi order attributed to the 
Qadiriyyah and Naqsyabandiyyah order) (1992a:90,n.2).
Shallebear (1930) might have been the first scholar to have 
translated Fath al-'Arifin into English. Later, Archer (1937), 
followed by al-Attas (1963), reviewed some parts of the text. These 
scholars paid particular attention to aspects of the treatise 
concerned with the Naqshabandiyyah order. In his biography of 
Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas, Abdullah (1980) translates Fath al- 
'Arifin and concentrates on those aspects of the treatise practised 
in the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order. Van Bruinessen (1989) 
gives another translation of parts of Fath al-'Arifin in accordance 
with the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order.
In order to understand Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas’ 
teachings, it is im portant to describe the basic rituals explained in 
Fath al-'Arifin as translated by Abdullah (1980) and van 
Bruinessen (1989). There are three basic rituals of the Sufi order.

--- Page 37 of 144 ---
28
The first is to recite istighfar (forgiveness)- that is, astaghfir Allah 
al-Ghafur al-Rahim (I ask forgiveness from God, the Forgiver and 
the Merciful) either twenty to twenty-five times (according to 
Abdullah 1980:187), or two to twenty times (according to van 
Bruinessen 1989:73). This is followed by reciting salawat 
(invocation), Allahumma salli 'ala sagyidina Muhammad wa 'ala 
alih wa sahbih wa sallam (O God, bless the Prophet Muhammad, 
his family and his companions, and give them salvation) the same 
number of times. The third is to perform dhikir by reciting la ilah 
ilia Allah (There is no god but God) after each of the five obligatory 
prayers everyday (Abdullah 1980:187; van Bruinessen 1989:73).
Fath al-'Arifin also teaches the method of reciting la ilah ilia 
Allah. The performance of dhikir begins with pronouncing the word 
'la! while imagining that it is drawn up from below the navel and 
finishes in the brain. From the brain the word 'ilah immediately 
follows and is extended until it finishes in the right side of the 
body. From here, the words 'ilia Allah follow and finish in 'hati 
sanuban! (one's inner self) which the Malays usually call the 
'jantung' (heart), thus strongly emphasising the formula. This is to 
be chanted while keeping in mind the meaning of the formula, that 
is, la maqsud ilia Allah (there is nothing intended except God, the 
only One). Then comes a stage in which one imagines the form of 
one's shaikh who helps the person in tawcyjuh (ecstatic union). If 
the shaikh is present, he just waits for the shaikh's blessing. It is 
then suggested that this dhikir, known as dhikir nafy ithbat, be

--- Page 38 of 144 ---
29
practised either jahar (aloud) or sirr (secretly) (Abdullah 1980:187; 
van Bruinessen 1989:73).
After completing dhikir according to the prescribed number 
of times, one should recite sayyiduna M uhammad Rasul Allah salla 
Allah 'alaih w a sallam (our lord Muhammad, Messenger of God 
whom He blesses and saves). Then salaw at is read, Allahumm a 
salli 'ala Sayyidina M uhammad salat turyina biha min ja m i al- 
ahwal w a al-afat (O God, grant our lord Muhammad blessing with 
which You save us from all disasters and destructions). Finally, the 
ritual is ended by reciting Surah al-Fatihah - the first chapter of the 
Qur'an - for the Prophet Muhammad, his Companions and all 
shaikh of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order, and in 
particular for Shaikh 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jailani, Shaikh Junaid al- 
Baghdadi and Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas. It is also recited for 
fathers, mothers, and all Muslim brothers, dead and alive 
(Abdullah 1980:187; van Bruinessen 1989:73).
Van Bruinessen points out that this basic ritual is strongly 
influenced by the Qadiriyyah order, particularly regarding body 
movements when performing dhikir. The influence of the 
Naqshabandiyyah order on the ritual is also substantial. The first 
influence is the concentration of lata'if (’subtleties'), namely centres 
of the body with which man is equipped for performing dhikir. The 
lata'if (pi. form of latifah) which Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas 
applied in the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order, according to 
van Bruinessen, are not known in the Qadiriyyah order. Thus, this 
is clearly taken from the Naqshabandiyyah order (1989:73). Fath

--- Page 39 of 144 ---
30
al-'Arifin describes ten lataif. Five of them are the qalb (heart), ruh 
(spirit), sirr (inner heart), kh a fi (secret) and akhfa! (most secret) 
which are known as 'a la m al-am r (World of Command). The other 
five la ta if are n a fs (subtlety of the soul) and the four elements: 
water, air, earth and fire. These are called 'alam al-khalq (World of 
Creation) (Archer 1937:96; al-Attas 1963:59). I quote below 
Archer's translation of F ath al-'Arifin on la ta 'if (which al-Attas also 
quotes). Shellabear (1930:360-370), Archer (1937:98) and al-Attas 
(1963:60) maintain that the origin of la ta if can be traced to Saikh 
Ahmad Faruqi al-Sirhindi, the eighth successor from the founder of 
Naqshabandiyyah order.
... [T]he subtlety of the heart [latifah al-qalb ] is below 
the left breast, two fingers breadth to the left, and ... its 
colour is yellow, and it is the seat of the authority of our 
lord Adam, and its origin is water, air and earth. The 
subtlety of the spirit [latifah al-ruh] is below the right 
breast, two fingers breadth to the right, its colour is red, 
and it is the seat of the authority of our lords Abraham 
and Noah, and its seat of origin is fire. The subtlety of 
the inner heart [latifah al-sirr] is located opposite the left 
breast, two fingers breadth towards the chest, its colour 
is white, it is the seat of the authority of our lord Moses 
and its origin is water. The subtlety of the secret [latifah 
al kh a fi] is opposite the right breast, two fingers breadth 
towards the chest, its colour is green, it is the seat of 
the authority of our lord Isa (Jesus), and its origin is 
air. The subtlety of the most secret [latifah a l-a kh fa'] is 
located in the middle of the chest, its colour is black, it 
is the seat of the authority of our lord Muhammad, and 
its origin is earth. The subtlety of the soul (brain) 
[latifah a l-nafs al-natiqah ] is located in the forehead and 
the whole head (Archer 1937:96).
Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas taught both the d h ikir ja h a r 
and the d h ikir sirr [khafi). The practice of d h ikir sirr is clearly 
another influence of the N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order because the 
Q a d iriyya h order teaches the dhikir ja h a r only. Another strong

--- Page 40 of 144 ---
31
influence of the Naqshabandiyyah order is tawcyjnh (ecstatic 
union) or rabitah shaikh before and/or during dhüdr. This 
generally does not occur in the Qadiriyyah order (van Bruinessen 
1989:73). The explanation of Muraqabah or spiritual communion in 
Fath al-'Arifin is another striking influence of the 
Naqshabandiyyah order.
A very clear influence of the Qadiriyyah order on the 
Qadiriyyah-Naqsyabandiyyah order is seen in Fath al-'Ariflhs list 
of silsilah since only the silsilah from the Qadiriyyah order is listed. 
The silsilah of the Naqshabandiyyah order is not mentioned. The 
influence of Qadiriyyah on the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order 
is very striking in the rituals of the latter, particularly manaqiban. 
The manaqib of Shaikh 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jailani is always recited 
whereas that of Shaikh Baha' al-Din al-Naqshabandi is never read. 
Further, the shaikh or murshid of the QadiriyyahNaqshabandiyyah order are likely to stress elements of Qadiriyyah 
rather than that of Naqshabandiyyah (van Bruinessen 1989:73). 
Therefore, it is often understood that the QadiriyyahNaqshabandiyyah order is the Qadiriyyah order into which certain 
Naqshabandiyyah practices have been incorporated. It is also 
understood why Hurgronje regards Shaikh Ahmad Sambas 
Sambas merely as a shaikh of the Qadiriyyah order (1931:262). 
Similarly Karodirdjo, in his accounts of Shaikh Abd al-Karim al- 
Bantani (Ahmad Khatib's successor), describes him as a 
Qadiriyyah Shaikh (1966:177-183).

--- Page 41 of 144 ---
32
C. Successors of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas and the Spread of 
the Q ajdiriyyah-N aqshabandiyyah Order in Java
During his life Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas appointed 
many khalifah, but after his death, his position as the sh a ik h of 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sya b a n d iyya h in Mecca was filled by Shaikh 'Abd 
al-Karim from Banten. Since an early age Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim 
had been steeped in the teaching of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas 
and was the best among Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas' students. 
Therefore he was considered suitable to propagate the Sufi order. 
For few years Shaikh Abd al-Karim was appointed as a k h a lifa h of 
Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas in Singapore and then in Banten, 
and finally as successor to Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas in Mecca 
just before his teacher's death.
Before he moved to Mecca to succeed his teacher, Shaikh 
Abd al-Karim played an important role in spreading the 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sya b a n d iyya h order in Java. The early development 
of the Sufi order in Java was tied up with the career of Shaikh Abd 
al-Karim as a religious teacher and a m u rsh id of the Sufi order 
(Kartodirdjo 1966:177). Van Bruinessen points out that it was the 
charisma of Shaikh ‘Abd al-Karim that led the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sy a b a n d iy y a h order to spread widely, not only in Banten, but 
also in other areas from South Sumatera in the west to Lombok 
Island in the east (1989:74).
Shaikh Abd al-Karim also established a p e sa n tre n in Banten 
to which he attracted many followers whose loyalty, devotion and 
obedience were unquestioned. In addition, with both material and

--- Page 42 of 144 ---
33
spiritual support from his followers, he w andered from one place to 
another to spread the Sufi order and preach religious revival. His 
preachings strongly influenced the population of Banten, including 
m any civil servants. The dhikir which was performed in m any 
places, particularly in m osques and langgar (prayer room), becam e 
the focus of revitalised life (Kartodirdjo 1966:178). Kartodirdjo 
writes:
In this spiritual climate it is quite natural th at there 
should be a strong reverence for a m an such as Hadji 
Abdul Karim. It was generally believed th at he was a 
Wali A llah who had been granted b a ra k a t and 
consequently had the power to transm it k era m a t or 
m iraculous grants. Later on he became better known as 
K ja iA g u n g, the Great Kyai (1966:179).
Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim was considered, by the Dutch, very 
influential in the revolt of Banten residents against the D utch in 
1888, even though he was not directly involved in it. He left Banten 
on 13 February, 1876 and he was therefore in Mecca during the 
outbreak of the revolt in Banten. Kartodirdjo gives an interesting 
account of the influence of his teachings and preachings on the 
m ass population. He writes:
Meanwhile Hadji Abdul Karim's serm ons, prom ises and 
prophecies kept the people in a state of excitement. 
Evidently his predictions about the 'Last Judgem ent', 
the coming of the Mahdi, and the d jih a d, gave rise to 
general religious fermentation; the d jih a d spirit was 
anim ated by vivid awareness that their country was to 
be considered as a d a r al-Islam tem porarily 
adm inistered by foreign rulers, and that one day it had 
to be reconquered. The ultim ate goal that the Great Kjai 
had in view was the foundation of an Islamic state 
(1966:180).
The influence of Shaikh Abd al-Karim on the followers of 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order in Java was very great. After

--- Page 43 of 144 ---
34
he became the s h a ik h at the centre of the Sufi order in Mecca his
influence increased (Hurgronje 1931:276-278). Hurgronje writes:
Not only Jawah from the entire Archipelago, pilgrims 
and settlers, educated and uneducated thronged for the 
blessing of his spiritual lead but even bred and born 
Mekkans (1931:278).
In addition to Shaikh Abd al-Karim, two other important 
k h a lifa h received ija za h from Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas. They 
were Shaikh Tolhah Cirebon and Shaikh Ahmad Hasbullah ibn 
Muhammad from Madura who settled in Mecca. During the life of 
Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim they still recognised him as the leader of 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h . After the death of Shaikh 'Abd al- 
Karim, however, there was no central leadership. As a result, the 
Sufi order developed into several important local branches (van 
Bruinessen 1989:74). Little is known about the two sh a ikh . Their 
influence was limited to local branches of the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order. Hurgronje mentions two important 
members of Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h from Banten, namely 
Tubagus Isma il and Haji Marzuki, and Shaikh Ahmad from 
Lampung who played a significant role in the spread of the Sufi 
order. It is not known, however, whether these three influential 
k y a i were kh a lifa h of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas. With regard 
to the two Bantenese k y a i and another k y a i named Haji Wasid, 
Kartodirdjo has given interesting accounts, particularly of their 
influence on the revolt in Banten. By means of Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h to which these three k y a i belonged, they 
succeeded in attracting many other prominent k y a i and local

--- Page 44 of 144 ---
35
populations to carry out a jih a d against the Dutch colonial 
government (Kartodirdjo 1966).
What is known about Shaikh Tolhah is that he began to 
spread the teaching of the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order in 
Pesantren Rancang, which belonged to his father, Kyai Tolabuddin. 
Shaikh Tolhah first founded a p e sa n tre n in Begong Cirebon in 
1825 before he went to Mecca. But this p e sa n tre n was destroyed 
by flood when he was in Mecca. He then established Pesantren 
Kalisapu, the first centre of the teaching of the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order in the Cirebon area, where Shaikh 
Abdullah Mubarak or A b a h Sepuh, the founder of Suryalaya, 
became his student (Dasuki 1990:23-25).
It is the three kh a lifa h of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas who 
spread the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order in Java and 
through these three lines, this Sufi order has separated. During 
the 1970's there were four p e sa n tre n that were the centres of 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h : Pesantren 'Darul UlunT Rejoso, 
Jombang, East Java, Pesantren Futuhiyah Mranggen, Central 
Java, Pesantren al-Falak Pangentongan, Bogor, and Pesantren 
Suryalaya, Tasikmalaya in West Java (van Bruinessen 1989:74). 
Dhofier observes that besides these four p esa n tren , Tebuireng was 
also a centre of this Sufi order (1982:90). These four p e sa n tre n 
became separate centres of the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h order 
through Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas' three khalifah; Rejoso 
through the line of Shaikh Ahmad Hasbullah Madura, Suryalaya 
through that of Shaikh Tolhah, and Mranggen and al-Falak

--- Page 45 of 144 ---
36
through the line of Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim (van B ruinessen 
1989:74-75).
D. Some Fam ous Indonesian 'Ulama' in Mecca and Sufism
D uring the second half of the nineteenth and early tw entieth
centuries Mecca an d M edina were im portant centres of Islamic
scholarship. Several 'ulama! from Indonesia becam e fam ous
teachers in the two holy cities and this attracted a large n u m b er of
stu d e n ts from Indonesia to study several bran ch es of Islamic
knowledge. It is im portant to em phasise th a t only a portion of
stu d e n ts and 'ulama! from Indonesia joined a p articular Sufi order.
The m ajority of them followed the tradition of al-Ghazali w hich w as
very strongly rooted in Islamic orthodoxy. H urgronje observes th a t
during the latter p art of the nineteenth century the w orks of alGhazali becam e the prim ary texts of Sufism tau g h t at the Masjid
al-H aram in Mecca (1931:200-203).
Accordingly a t the lectures which are given on 
m ysticism on Fridays and Tuesdays, b u t also w henever 
on other days, Law is not the chief item of the 
program m e, we find for the m ost p art the older m en and 
far advanced students. The books used are all m ore or 
less excerpts or com pilations from the w orks of Ghazali 
(Hurgronje 1931:201).
M acDonald suggests th a t the im portant of al-G hazali's 
teachings emerged a t the end of the eighteenth century, the period 
of the em ergence of W ahabism . W ahabism as a b ran ch of the 
school of Ibn Taymiyyah, which w as prom oted by M uham m ad ibn 
‘Abd al-W ahhab, strongly rejected the teachings of al-G hazali and

--- Page 46 of 144 ---
3 7
every practice of Sufism (1965:283-284). Al-Ghazali's influence,
however, remained strong, as MacDonald writes:
The second movement is the revival of the influence of 
al-Ghazali. That influence never became absolutely 
extinct and it seems to have remained especially strong 
in al-Yaman. In that corner of the Muslim world 
generations of Sufis lived comparatively undisturbed, 
and it was the Sayyid Murtada, a native of Zabid in 
Tihama, who by his great commentary on the Ihya of al- 
Ghazali practically founded the modern study of that 
book.... [Thus] there can be no question of the wide 
influence which he is now exercising (1965:284-285).
Therefore, the Sufi teachings of al-Ghazali influenced the
Islamic tradition in Mecca. Many Indonesian students and the
'ulamcC in Mecca were strongly bound to the teachings of alGhazali in the field of Sufism. Shaikh Muhammad Nawawi Ban ten,
born in 1230 A/H (1815 A/D) in the village of Tanara in West Java,
settled in Mecca until he died probably at the end of the nineteenth
century. His father was Omar ibn Arabi, a p en g h u lu (Muslim
leader) in Tanara, who taught Nawawi together with his brothers,
Tamim and Ahmad. Then they went to Mecca at an early age
(Hurgronje 1931:268).
In Mecca Shaikh Nawawi Banten first studied under the 
older generation of great Indonesian teachers such as Shaikh 
Ahmad Khatib Sambas and Abd al-Ghani Bima, then with the 
famous 'u la m a', Yusuf Sumbulaweni, Nahrawi and \Abd al-Hamid 
Daghestani (Hurgronje 1931:268-269). After thirty years improving 
his knowledge of Islam, Shaikh Nawawi Banten became a teacher 
at the Masjid al-Haram in Mecca, besides being active in writing. 
Shaikh Nawawi Banten's interest was in the literary sphere and he 
became a prolific writer who wrote more than forty books dealing

--- Page 47 of 144 ---
3 8
with jurisprudence, Sufism, Arabic grammar and divinity, 
including a two-volume commentary on the Quran known as T afsir 
M urah Labib. Most of his books were published in Cairo, whereas 
some were printed in Mecca (Johns 1980:176). Shaikh Nawawi 
Banten is well-known in Indonesia and all his books are widely 
studied in p e sa n tre n in Java (Dhofier 1982:89).
Shaikh Nawawi Banten did not join or lead a Sufi order as 
did Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas, his teacher. Neither did he 
counsel his students to join a Sufi order nor did he prevent them 
from doing so. He however taught his students the works of Sufism 
that focus on ethics rather than on philosophical or speculative 
thought (Hurgronje 1931:271). He himself however continued to 
practise Sufi teachings, particularly those of al-Ghazali. Hurgronje 
notes that
... the mysticism practiced by Nawawi himself is the 
moderate, ethical Sufism of al-Ghazali in the more 
formalistic shape which it adopted in later times. His 
literary activity again evidences this, for in 1881, there 
was printed a commentary by him on Ghazali's B id a y a t 
a l-H idayah and 1884 a commentary upon a mystic 
poem of Zain al-Din al-Malibari ... (1931:272).
Other 'u la m d nearly as old as Shaikh Nawawi Banten were
Shaikh Mahfudh from Tremas and Kyai Khalil from Bangkalan,
Madura, both in East Java. Like Shaikh Nawawi Banten, Shaikh
Mahfudh settled at Mecca and became a famous teacher at Masjid
al-Haram. Although in Java this prominent writer is well-known as
a Hadith scholar, he maintained the Sufi tradition, like Shaikh
Nawawi Banten (Dhofier 1982:90-95).

--- Page 48 of 144 ---
39
Kyai Khalil Bangkalan also studied at Mecca during the 
second half of the nineteenth century. Unlike Shaikh Nawawi 
Banten and Shaikh Mahfudh Tremas, he did not teach at Mecca 
but became a prominent leader of p e sa n tre n in Madura. The 
majority of famous k y a i and founders of famous p e sa n tre n in Java 
during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were Kyai 
Khalil's students. Some of them were Kyai Hashim Ash ari of 
Pesantren Tebuireng, Shaikh Abdullah Mubarak of Pesantren 
Tarekat of Suryalaya, Kyai Munawwir of Pesantren Krapyak of 
Yogyakarta, Kyai Manaf Abd al-Karim of Pesantren Lirboyo, Kyai 
Maksum of Pesantren Lasern and Kyai Muhammad Siddiq of 
Jember (Dhofier 1982:92).
Kyai Khalil was similar to Shaikh Nawawi and Shaikh 
Mahfudh in that he practised Sufi teachings without being 
affiliated with a Sufi order. He had, according to Dhofier, a 
combination of the characteristic of Shaikh Abd al-Karim in terms 
of spiritual charisma and of Shaikh Mahfudh in terms of 
intellectual achivement, even though in quality his position was 
below theirs. He was known as a W ali in Java although he never 
led a Sufi order and was not an expert in Sufism (Dhofier 1982:91- 
92). H.Abubakar writes:
As we know it, Kyai Khalil was very pious and z u h u d 
[ascetic], so that he was loved by his students and he 
was called W aliynllah Kyai Khalil with the purpose of 
paying respect and loyalty (1957:141).
The role of Kyai Khalil in the spread of traditional Islam and 
the p e sa n tre n tradition in Java was continued by many of his 
students. One of the most important figures was Kyai Hashim

--- Page 49 of 144 ---
40
Ash'ari, the founder of Pesantren Tebuireng. His great role in the
process of the Islamisation of Java and in the continuation of the
tradition of Indonesian 'ulamal in the late nineteenth century is
described by Woodward in this way:
It is likely that the combination of the dominance of 
'sober' Sufism in Mecca in the late nineteenth century 
and the prestige and organisational abilities of 
K.H.Hashim A shari were responsible for the 
transformation of the textual and theological 
orientations of traditional Javanese Islam (Woodward 
1 9 8 9 : 136 ).

--- Page 50 of 144 ---
CHAPTER III
GENERAL FEATURES OF SUFISM WITHIN 
THE PESANTREN TRADITION
Sufism has various aspects, two important ones being 
asceticism and mysticism. In the previous chapter I have examined 
aspects of Sufism practised by Indonesian 'ularnain Mecca in the 
latter part of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In this 
chapter I shall examine general features of Sufism within the 
pesantren tradition. I shall discuss the concepts of tasawwuf and 
tariqah understood within the pesantren tradition, the doctrinal 
bases of Sufism understood in the pesantren, the position of 
Sufism and shari'ah in the pesantren, and examine Sufi texts used 
in the pesantren.
A. Tasawwuf and Tariqah
The kyai in Java have attempted to redefine concepts used 
within the realm of Sufism. The links to al-Ghazali's Sufi tradition 
were maintained by several 'ulamcC such as Shaikh Nawawi 
Ban ten, Shaikh Mahfudh, Kyai Khalil Bangkalan and Hadrah al- 
Shaikh Hashim Ash ari on the one hand and several shaikh of Sufi 
orders such as Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas and Shaikh Abd al- 
Karim on the other.
Within the pesantren tradition the concepts of tasawwuf 
(Sufism) and tariqah are often used interchangeably. It is true that 
they basically possess a similar meaning. "The Tariqah or Spiritual

--- Page 51 of 144 ---
42
Path which is usually known as T asaw w uf or Sufism is the inner
and esoteric dimension of Islam" (Nasr 1988:121). K.H.Syansuri
Badawi describes Sufism as follows: "T asaw w uf is tashftyah alqalb 'an al-shtfat al-madhmumat, the purification of the soul from
disgraceful characteristics" (1985:38). Similarly,
K.H.A.Shohibulwafa Tajul Arifin or Abah Anom suggests that
Sufism cleanses the heart from passion and disgraceful
characteristics by controlling passion, possessing a noble
character and following all the teachings of the Prophet (1988:107).
These two formulations are appropriate when they are formulated
as the aim of Sufi practices. The kyai in Java, according to Dhofier,
comprehend Sufism in accordance with such aims, namely,
...the teachings and rituals of moral perfectness based 
on the Qur'an and the Hadith (the Prophet’s tradition) 
and the acts of devotion to God and of avoidance of 
worldly life ... and performing obligatory rituals as well 
as recommended rituals as much as possible, but not 
necessarily performing dhikir (remembrance) and 
salaw at (invocation) according to Kutub al-Awliya! 
(books of saints) (Dhofier 1978:9-10).
Thus, Sufism, as understood in the pesantren, includes 
teachings on fada'il al-'amal (the best rituals). The best rituals 
such as a number of ibadah sunnah (recommended rituals) and 
aspects of morality are performed to complete obligatory duties 
prescribed in the shari'ah, particularly the five basic principles of 
Islam — pronouncing the Confession of Faith (shahadah), prayers 
{salah) five times a day, fasting (saw n) during the month of 
Ram adhan (the ninth month of the Lunar Calendar), paying alms 
[zakah), and performing pilgrimage in Mecca {hay).

--- Page 52 of 144 ---
43
Tariqah (or in Javanese ta reka t) means 'path'. Within the
p e sa n tre n tradition tariqah is understood similarly to Sufism as
a scrupulous observance of Islamic rules either in ritual 
and social matters, that is, by observing w ira'i [a world 
view in which the observer always avoids doing both 
h a ra m (forbidden) and m a k m h (undesirable) things], 
performing recommended rituals before and after 
performing obligatory prayers and practising riyalah [an 
attitude in which one eats and dresses minimally] 
(Abdul Jalil 1963:11).
Based on this definition of tariqah, Dhofier however notes that
...within the p e sa n tre n tradition, the term t a s a w w u f is 
used to indicate only the intellectual aspect of Sufism, 
while its ethical and practical aspects, which are 
regarded as more important than its intellectual aspect, 
are referred to by the word ta re k a t (1980:256).
That tariqah is a practical method (Trimingham 1971:3) is
generally agreed. Madjid provides a reason for the interchangable
use of both terms, that is, because Sufism in Indonesia seems to
be limited only to its practical aspect, whereas its philosophical
aspects are no longer developed. As a result, the term tariqah is
more commonly used than the term ta s a w w u f, particularly among
ordinary Muslims (Madjid 1988:105). In addition, tariqah does not
take account of the philosophical aspect of Sufism (Madjid
1988:107). Madjid's opinion is true when it refers to Sufism in the
p e sa n tre n . Definitions of ta s a w w u f and tariqah given by some k y a i
exclude the philoshopical or speculative aspects of Sufism.
Nicholson's conclusion that "now, the essence of Sufism is best
diplayed in its extreme type, which is pantheistic and speculative
rather than ascetic or devotional" (1975:27) is unfortunate when
applied to Sufism within the p e sa n tre n tradition.

--- Page 53 of 144 ---
44
Thus, within the p e sa n tre n tradition ta s a w w u f or Sufism is
not synonym ous with mysticism. Nicholson points out th at "... Sufi
has a specific religious connotation, and is restricted by usage to
those m ystics who profess the M oham m edan faith" (1975:3).
Trim ingham 's suggestion th at "from it [the the term Sufi first
applied to Muslim ascetics] comes the form t a s a w w u f for
’mysticism"' (1971:1) is inappropriate w hen applied to Sufism in
the p e sa n tre n . As a comparison, Trim ingham stresses the dorm ant
and latent aspect of mysticism. He writes:
Mysticism is a particular m ethod of approach to Reality 
(Haqiqa, another special Sufi term), m aking use of 
intuitive and emotional spiritual faculties which are 
generally dorm ant and latent unless called into play 
through training under guidance (1971:1).
Trim ingham does not suggest the intellectual aspects of
m ysticism as does Dhofier in relation to ta s a w w u f in the
p e sa n tre n . Trim ingham ’s concept of m ysticism is so general th at its
m anifestation can be any form of m ysticism. Sufism is often
translated as 'Islamic mysticism' which is not acceptable in the
p e sa n tre n because this gives the im pression of the great influence
of non-Islam ic culture.
Still regarding the m eaning of ta s a w w u f and tariqah, 
K.H.Syansuri Badawi pointed out th at tariqah m eans the way to 
achieve Sufi conditions (1985:38). Tariqah can be divided into two 
types: th ariqah 'a m m a h (the general) is any pious act which is 
continually performed (istiq a m a h) with good intention, and 
thariqah k h a s s a h (the special) is a set of d h ikir which is continually 
performed and is received from a certain Sufi teacher who is linked

--- Page 54 of 144 ---
4 5
to a n d /o r transm its the knowledge from the Prophet M uham m ad
(1985:38). In other words, within the p e sa n tre n tradition the term
tariqah has two m eanings. In its generic m eaning tariqah m eans
the way toward perfectness and closeness in order to gain the love
of God. In its second m eaning it refers to the practice of certain
dhUcir and w irid as practised by Sufi orders (Dhofier 1978:10).
Thus, the term tariqah in the p e sa n tre n is used wider than
...a practical m ethod (other term s were m a d h h a b , ri'aya , 
and suluk) to guide a seeker by tracing a way of 
thought, feeling, and action, leading through a 
succession of 'stages' (m a q a m a t , in integral association 
with psychological experiences called 'states, a h w a l) to 
experience o f divine Reality (haqiqa ) (Trimingham 
1971:3-4).
In his attem pt to distinguish t a s a w w u f from tariqah, Dhofier 
m akes the distinction th at "a follower of tariqah is also a Sufi, b u t a 
Sufi does not have to be a follower of tariqah' (1978:9). Al-Gazali, 
for instance, was not a follower of any tariqah b u t he performed 
Sufi teachings. B ut this could be true if the term tariqah was used 
to refer only to Sufi orders. In fact, it also indicates teachings and 
practices outside of Sufi orders. It includes all paths to achieve 
closeness to God.
B. Doctrinal Bases of Sufism understood in the P esa n tren
Sufism is frequently regarded as an obligation within the 
p e sa n tre n tradition as suggested by K.H.Syansuri Badawi 
(1985:38). It is an aspect of Islamic orthodoxy. In other words, 
everyone has to practise ways to achieve closeness to God. In fact, 
m ost kyai, both as followers and non-followers of a certain Sufi

--- Page 55 of 144 ---
46
order, propagate Sufism as a d o m in an t value in th e p e sa n tre n .
This is b ecau se w ithin th e p e sa n tre n trad itio n Sufism is considered
as b ased on teachings of th e Q u r’ a n an d H adith. To borrow
M adjid's term , it is b u ilt on the Q ur'an. M adjid w rites:
The dim ension of ta s a w w iif h a s actually very strong 
roots in th e Q ur'an, far stro n g er th a n th e legal 
orientation. Islam ic law, a s a discipline of knowledge, 
w as b o rn as a n ecessary answ er to th e political and 
m ilitary expansion of Islam . The law itself, does n o t 
actually have m u ch to say a b o u t religion (1985b:4).
M adjid goes on to explain th a t in th e Q u r'an it is said th a t it
is h u d a n li al-m uttaqin (guidance to th e pious), b u t piety itself is
alw ays d iscu ssed u n d e r fa d a 'il a l-'a m a l (the b e st ritual) w ithin the
realm of Sufism . Ikh la s (sincerity) an d ta q w a (tru st in God),
according to M adjid, are a b sen t in law texts, b u t are found in Sufi
texts (1985b:4).
K .H .Syansuri Badaw i suggests th a t sh a ri'a h is essential, b u t
th a t it does n o t solve all problem s in religious life.
It is a p p aren t th a t the M uslim com m unity n eed s to 
enrich itself w ith inw ard holiness. Inw ard corruption, 
for in stan ce, is th e source of m an y d isasters, especially 
if leaders suffer from it (1985:39).
The p a tte rn of life b ased on Sufism u n d ersto o d in the 
p e sa n tre n is regarded as th a t p ractised by the Prophet. 
Additionally, th ere are a g reat n u m b er of the P rophet's sayings 
w hich em phasise the im portance of prayers, d h ikir an d m oral 
teachings su c h as sincererity, god-w ariness, patience, m odesty and 
so forth. So th e Prophet him self is regarded in th e p e s a n tr e n as a 
Sufi. The P rophet w as th e m ost pious m an am ong all m an k in d who 
alw ays m ain tain ed all th e b e st ritu a ls d u rin g h is life. The

--- Page 56 of 144 ---
47
excellence of th e P rophet is w ell-know n n o t only in th e p e sa n tre n 
b u t also am ong all M uslim s over th e world. His m orality w as also 
the best. There is a H adith generally m em orised in th e p e sa n tre n 
th a t his m orality is th e Q u r’ an itself. In th is regard I quote 
D an n er's conclusion th a t
th e Q u r'an is really the first an d forem ost m ystical text 
of Islam an d th a t th e P rophet is the first an d th e 
g reatest of the Sufi sages an d sain ts, even th o u g h th e 
term Sufi, in reality, is of later origin (1987:242-243).
M any scholars, however, deny th e existence of th is sp iritu al
dim ension of Islam . Nicholson w rites th a t
It is right to regard th e Sufis as esoteric stu d e n ts of the 
Q uran, b u t not, I think, to see in Sufism th e p u re re su lt 
of Q uranic stu d y (1952:212-213).
In the p e sa n tre n, th ere are at lea st th ree Islam ic concepts 
w hich are considered as the doctrinal b asis of Sufism : ih sa n 
(excellence), ikh la s (sincerity) an d ta q w a (god-wariness). The k y a i 
in Ja v a stre ss th a t Sufism is an elaboration of th e H adith on ihsan. 
Ih sa n is one of th e th ree dim ensions of th e religion: islam, im an 
an d ihsan.
Isla m is th a t you b ear th e w itness th a t indeed th ere is 
no god b u t Allah an d indeed M uham m ad is His 
m essenger, perform prayers, pay alm s, fast du rin g the 
m o n th of R am ad h an and perform pilgrim age in M ecca if 
you are capable. Im a n is th a t you believe in God, His 
Angels, His Sacred Books, His m essengers, th e Day of 
Ju d g em en t, and His p redestination. Ih sa n is th a t you 
w orship Him as if you w ere to see Him. If you do n o t see 
Him, He indeed sees you (Hasyim 1984:18-19).
Everyone who ad h eres to isla m as h is religion is called a
M uslim , b u t he is n o t necessarily M u'm in b ecau se th e level of im an
is higher th a n th a t of islam . Im a n co n tain s elem ents of piety and
co n tin u al relations w ith God. Ih sa n is the h ig h est level in th is

--- Page 57 of 144 ---
48
religion which penetrates to the core of the religion (Dhofier 
1982:146). Isla m essentially means submission or surrender to the 
Divine Will, whereas im an is faith in the Divine Presence. Ih sa n 
operates upon the three dimensions of the religion and transforms 
them into Sufism (Nasr 1988:133-134). In other words, while islam 
is regarded as a m a l za h ir (external act) and im a n is a m a l batin 
(internal act), ih sa n is the soul of both of them (Hasyim 1984:22). 
The definition of ih sa n as "to adore Allah as though thou didst see 
Him, and if thou doest not see Him He nonetheless sees thee" is 
the essential meaning of Sufism (Nasr 1988:134).
In his elaboration of the Hadith, K.H.Achmad Siddiq points 
out that isla m is included in fiq h , im a n in ta u h id and ih sa n in 
t a s a w w u f (Sufism). He further stresses that every one is obliged to 
practise Sufism as he is obliged to practise the teachings of fiq h 
and tauhid. Unlike fiq h and tauhid, Sufism may be practised in 
accordance with one's own ability (1992:1-2).
As an elaboration of the meaning of islam , im an and ihsan, 
Kyai Shamsuri of Tebuireng in his Friday preaching distinguished 
four levels of ta u h id : T auhid zindiq is the ta u h id of a person who 
has professed the s h a h a d a h (the Confession of Faith) - 'I bear 
witness that there is no god but Allah and I bear witness that 
Muhammad is His messenger' - but has not performed the real 
teachings of tauhid. Then, ta u h id m u'm in is the ta u h id of a Muslim 
who attempts to be devoted to God. Third, ta u h id sid d iq in is the 
ta u h id of a Muslim whose aims and activities of life are given only 
to God, but he still likes the worldly life. Finally, ta u h id m uqarrabin

--- Page 58 of 144 ---
49
is the ta u h id of aw liya' whose life is totally given to God (Dhofier 
1982:146).
K y a i as well as sa n tri always expect to achieve ta u h id 
m uqarrabin or, at least, ta u h id siddiqin. To obtain either of them, it 
does not suffice only to perform all obligatory rituals as the 
minimal teachings of Islam, it has to be completed with various 
recommended rituals and other rituals practised by the Prophet. In 
addition, morality plays an important role in Islamic teachings.
K y a i frequently associate ih sa n with ikh la s (sincerity) as the 
highest teaching of Islam (Dhofier 1982:146). In the first chapter of 
R iy a d al-Shalihin on ikhlas, Imam Nawawi quotes some verses of 
the Qur’an from three chapters that need quoting.
1. And they have been commanded no more than this: 
to worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion, being 
true (in faith); to establish regular prayer; and to 
practise regular charity; and that is the religion right 
and straight (98:5).
2. It is not their meat nor their blood, that reaches 
Allah: It is your piety that reaches Him (22:37).
3. Say: "Whether ye hide what is in your hearts or reveal 
it, Allah knows it all (3:29).
Imam Nawawi provides thirteen Hadith with regard to the 
importance ikh la s in worshipping God. One of them is: "Indeed God 
does not see your body and face, but He directly sees your 
intention and sincerity" (Bahreisj 1983:17). When elaborating the 
meaning of the Hadith on the three dimensions of the religion, 
Hasyim also suggests that in Islam ih sa n means ikhlas. Ik h la s is 
defined as performing religious rituals with full pleasure and 
happiness with God s command, without expecting any reward and 
respect from anyone (1984:22). It also means "religious piety" or

--- Page 59 of 144 ---
50
"devotion to a higher cause w ithout any consideration of self- 
interest" (N akam ura, 1977:14). W oodward quotes H asyim 's 
discussion of the m eaning of ikhlas.
W hat is this ikh la s? Ik h la s m eans: th a t all 
devotions are perform ed only because of Allah. T h at is, 
the devotion of a m u k m in [I., from A.; believer], w hich 
one calls taqarrub, is directed exclusively tow ards Allah, 
not perform ed for h u m an s, to obtain the praise of 
h u m an s, the love of h u m an s or any purpose other th a n 
being taqarrub to Allah.
Therefore, ikhlas m eans to cleanse the deed from 
the desire for h u m an attention (1989:84).
Ikh la s is therefore the central m eaning of religion. In the
Q ur'an the term ikh la s is perpetuated in a ch ap ter called al-ikhlas
(the Purity of Faith) w hich contains the teachings of the unity of
God.
Say: He is Allah, the One and Only; Allah, the eternal,
Absolute; He begetteth not, nor is He begotten; and
there is none like un to Him (112:1-4).
K.H.Abdul Jalil distinguishes three levels of ihklas. The 
lowest level of ih kla s is the ikh la s of a M uslim who sincerily 
perform s religious duties and expects th a t God will give him the 
rew ard of b etter life both in the world and in the hereafter. The 
second is the ikh la s of a M uslim w ho sincerily perform s his 
religious duties and expects God's rew ard of b etter life in Paradise 
only. The highest level is the ikh la s of a M uslim w hose aim in 
perform ing religious duties is only to achieve the state of closeness 
to God (1963:28-29).
In al-H ikam , one of the m ost im portant texts on Sufism in 
the p e sa n tre n, ilchlas is explained as follows:
Perform ance of religious rituals is a standing fram e.
Ikh la s is its soul. Ik h la s com prises several levels in

--- Page 60 of 144 ---
51
accordance with one's position and spiritual capability.
The ikhlas of al-Abrar ('good people') is that they 
perform Islamic rules in order to expect the rewards 
which God has promised. This level of ikhlas is a 
realisation of the Qur'an: iyyaka na'bud , "Thee do we 
worship" (1:5) which means that we never make You an 
ally in our worship. Then, the ikhlas of al-Muqarrabun 
('people close to God'), which is higher than the ikhlas of 
al-Abrar, is an application of la haula w a la quw w ata 
ilia bi Allah, there is neither ability nor power to do 
anything but God's direction. All they do is because God 
has directed them. This is a realisation of the Qur'an: 
iyyaka nasta'in, "Thine aid we seek" (1:5). The act of 
devotion of al-Abrar is called li Allah, to act because of 
Allah, whereas that of al-Muqarrabun is called bi Allah, 
to act with the help of Allah. The first category results in 
reward whereas the other penetrates into heart and 
feeling (Bahreisy 1977:13-14).
Thus, the core of ikhlas is performing religious duties only 
because of God. It is clear that the concept of ikhlas is the 
foundation of Sufism which is strongly rooted in both the Qur’an 
and Hadith. Ikhlas also reflects the esoteric dimension of Islam. 
After discussing extensively Hasyim's exegesis of four verses of the 
Qur'an on ikhlas, Woodward concludes that in Islam one's inner 
states are as important as one's external acts of devotion 
(1989:87).
In addition to ihsan and ikhlas, the word taqw a which can
be translated as 'god-wariness' is often used to apply to Sufism.
The root of the word taqw a has two interwoven senses: 
to fear and to protect oneself. The basic meaning in the 
Kuranic contexts is to stand in awe of God, to fear the 
consequences of acting against His will, and to do 
everything in one's power to protect oneself from these 
consequences. The term implies observing the religion 
meticulously, sincerely, and with full presence of mind 
(Chittick 1992:12).
In both the Qur an and Hadith the word taqw a is mentioned 
far more frequently than either ihsan or ikhlas. Both the Qur'an 
and Hadith often command the Mu'min to have taqw a because

--- Page 61 of 144 ---
52
ta q w a is regarded as the highest quality of m an k in d before God. 
The w ord ta q w a also dom inates th e kita b k u n in g u sed in the 
p e sa n tre n m ilieu. In the p e sa n tre n it is u n d ersto o d as observing all 
G od's com m andm ents while avoiding all h is prohibitions in all 
circu m stan ces. T hus, ta q w a includes b o th th e in n er an d outer 
a sp ects of w orship.
To su m up, b ased on th e th ree concepts, th a t is, ihsan, 
ikh la s an d ta q w a th a t have strong roots in th e Q u r'an an d H adith, 
th e two basic so u rces of Islam , Sufism is n o t a n additional 
dim ension of Islam . Like 'a q id a h an d s h a r ia h , Sufism is an 
original dim ension of Islam .
C. Sufism an d S h a ri'a h in the P esa n tren
P esa n tren continue to stre ss the inseparability of Sufism and
sh a ri'a h . B oth Sufism and sh a ri'a h are im p o rtan t in religious life.
Dhofier observes th a t the k y a i claim to follow M alikite tradition
concerning relatio n sh ip s betw een Sufism an d sh a r i'a h w hich
K .H .Syansuri Badaw i (1985:39) also stresses.
He w ho learn s Ju risp ru d e n c e and neglects Sufism 
becom es a reprobate; he w ho learn s Sufism and 
neglects ju risp ru d en c e becom es an apostate; an d he 
w ho com bines b o th a tta in s the realisation of th e T ru th 
(Dhofier 1980a:278).
T his show s th e ap p ro p riaten ess of W oodw ard's first 
proposition in w hich Sufism can n o t replace sh a ri'a h , regardless of 
one's achievem ent in Sufism . The p e sa n tre n m ain tain s th a t 
sh a r i'a h is im p o rtan t for everyone who en ters an d m aste rs Sufism . 
By th e sam e token, it rejects his second proposition w hich

--- Page 62 of 144 ---
53
distinguishes students from masters of Sufism in terms of the 
importance of shari'ah. This proposition might be applicable to the 
so-called Islam Ja w a , which holds that aspects of shari'ah other 
than life crisis ceremonies are optional (1989:7), but not to the 
pesantren. Nicolson's statement below is unapplicable to the 
pesantren as well.
Many walis, however, regard the law as a curb that is 
indeed necessary so long as one remains in the 
disciplinary stage, but may be discarded by the saints.
Such a person, they declare, stands on a higher plane 
than ordinary men, and is not to be condemned for 
actions which outwardly seem irreligious (1975:127).
Generally speaking, contradictions between sh a ria h and
Sufism do not appear in the pesantren. This is in accordance with
Nasr's view that within Sufism there exist not only shari'ah
doctrines to protect Sufism from deviation but also a mechanism
to keep it following shari'ah (1988:121-146). Shari'ah holds a
dominant position within the pesantren tradition as Wahid
describes it:
A dominant position in forming values in the pesantren 
is held by fiq h law, then followed by the Sufi tradition. 
Values contrary to fiq h law, although small matters 
(such as money interest), certainly do not have a room 
in the pesantren. Therefore, it is not appropriate to view 
pesantren with things outside it (1988:51).
It is understood in the pesantren that disregarding shari'ah 
will abolish the basic principles of Islam. This is considered very 
dangerous for the Islamic faith. Zuhri points out that
One will not gain the level of Sufi if he does not master 
'aqaid and fiqh. If one claims to be a Sufi while his faith 
is depraved, his tauhid is wrong, his fiq h is avoided 
such as leaving prayers and fasting during the month of 
Ramadhan, he is actually a Javanese mystic who is 
exempted from religion [Islam], or adheres to

--- Page 63 of 144 ---
54
'k e p e rc a y a a h (belief) o u tsid e Islam . He follows a d e v ia n t 
w ay a lth o u g h h e is w ell-know n a s a 'd u k u n keram at' or 
'ahli n u ju m ' w ho claim s to k n o w s u p e r n a tu r a l m a tte rs , 
ngreti sa d u ru n g w inarah. O ne w ho follows only th e 
b a tin p a th b u t leaves th e sh a r i'a h is c o n tra ry to th e 
c h a ra c te ris tic s of h is fitr a h (n atu re), b e c a u s e m a n is n o t 
j u s t a s p iritu a l c re a tu re , b u t c o n s is ts n o t only of batin 
e le m e n ts b u t also of lahir e le m e n ts (Z uhri 1987:71).
T h is clearly in d ic a te s th e im p o rta n c e of sh a r i'a h in th e
p e sa n tre n . It m a k e s c le a r a s well th e p e sa n tre n a ttitu d e to w a rd s
one w h o av o id s it. S h a ri'a h is m u c h m o re d o m in a n t t h a n S u fism
b e c a u s e it is th e b a s is of Islam ic p rin c ip le s w h ic h every M uslim
h a s to p ra c tis e . S u fism , o n th e o th e r h a n d , is p ra c tis e d to com plete
sh a r i'a h in o rd e r to b e close to God. O ne is n o t b la m e d if h e does
n o t h o ld Sufi te a c h in g s , b u t h e is n o t co m p lete. In o th e r w o rd s, in
o rd e r to achieve fa d a 'il a l-'a m a l one h a s to p e rfe ct it w ith th e
r itu a ls re g a rd e d b y th e Sufi a s th e b e s t r itu a ls (W ahid 1988:51).
W ah id also m a n ta in s t h a t
W hile fiq h p re s c rip tio n c a n b e c o m p a re d w ith th e 
b o d y / w a d a h k a s a r , th e ex cellen t r itu a ls p e rfo rm ed a re 
th e so u l of th e body; th e c o m b in a tio n of b o th e le m e n ts 
is th e h ig h e s t c u lm in a tio n of v a lu e s developed in th e 
p e sa n tre n (1988:52).
In th e p e sa n tre n s u b je c ts on fiq K 'a q id a h a n d a kh la q a re 
first ta u g h t to all s tu d e n ts . It is m a in ta in e d t h a t th e te a c h in g s of 
S u fism m u s t b e p ro ce ed e d b y sh a ri'a h b e c a u s e only th e one w ho 
h a s u n d e rs to o d a n d p ra c tis e d sh a ri'a h c a n e n te r S u fism (Madjid 
1988:106). Kyai H a sh im A s h 'a ri stro n g ly fo rb ad e M u slim s to e n te r 
th e w orld of S u fism b efore th e y m a s te re d sh a r i'a h (M adjid 1985:6), 
w h ic h le a d s one to h av e a n im p re ss io n t h a t h e w a s n o t involved in 
Sufi p ra c tic e s .

--- Page 64 of 144 ---
55
The main reason not to teach Sufism to all students is 
basically to maintain the existence of Islamic orthodoxy. Another 
reason is because the pesantren is generally a school for young 
boys in which they learn basic religious knowledge (Woodward 
1989:146).
Many orthodox kijqjis consider it [tasawwuf] somewhat 
dangerous to teach, particularly to younger students, 
because it is difficult and because too much philosophy 
or mysticism in the hands of the young tends to lead to 
heresy (Geertz 1960:186).
It is deviation from Islamic orthodoxy such as leaving fiqh 
regulations that the kyai means by the 'danger' of teaching Sufism. 
One is required to comprehend not only the basic teaching of Islam 
but also some advanced knowledge of Islam. Further, one has not 
only to have strong faith but also to apply the best character in his 
life if he is to learn and practise Sufism. Dhofier writes that 
Javanese kyai
...regard Sufism as an essential part of Islamic teaching 
that must be taught to mature students who have some 
advance knowledge of Islam. They agree that it is 
dangerous to teach Sufism to immature students of 
Islam. In general, they discourage young people from 
becoming involved with tarekat , while they encourage 
middle-aged people, who have abandoned interest in 
achieving material gain, to join tarekat ((1980b:266).
Similarly, Woodward observes that
most kyai discourage young santri from becoming 
involved in the more esoteric aspects of Sufism. It is 
thought to be dangerous and improper to reveal 
mystical truths to students before they have mastered 
the basics. To do so would confuse them, and might
their soteriological progresspermanently impede 
(1989:146).
That the pesantren maintains the inseparability of Sufism 
and shari'ah is due to the fact that fiq h books used in the

--- Page 65 of 144 ---
56
pesantren are m ostly Sufi oriented; vario u s Sufi teach in g s are also 
ta u g h t in hadith an d akhlaq. M any kyai, w ell-versed in fiqh, also 
teach various books on Sufism . Kyai B isri S yansuri, for in stan ce, is 
a fiqh kyai w ho ta u g h t Sufi an d ethics-oriented books of fiqh su c h 
as Qatr al-Gha'ith, Bidayah al-Hidayah an d al-Nasa'ih al-Diniyah 
(Wahid 1984:9). Dhofier a ssu m e s th a t th e reaso n th a t th e term 
kyai is m ore com m on th a n th e term 'ulama! is b ecau se th e title 
w ithin th e pesantren trad itio n is u sed to indicate a sch o lar who 
m aste rs b o th shari'ah an d Sufism (1982:34-35). "The 'ulama' 
ta u g h t the shari'ah, the w ay of daily life [andl the Sufi ta u g h t the 
tariqah, th e w ay of m ystical life" (Hodgson 1974:219). T hus, the 
term kyai in Ja v a indicates bo th 'ulama! an d Sufi.
To su m up, th e pesantren trad itio n is a trad itio n in w hich 
b o th shari'ah an d Sufism are n eith er opposed to one a n o th e r nor 
sep arate from one an other. Piety as regulated by b o th shari'ah and 
Sufism are u sed as ceriteria to m easu re one's loyalty to his 
pesantren.
D. Sufi Texts u sed in th e Pesantren
In h e r acco u n t of M as R ah m at's autobiography, K um ar h a s 
show n th a t m ost of th e M alay an d Ja v a n e se literatu re containing 
th e doctrine of wahdah al-wujud and th e system of seven grades of 
being w as studied in som e pesantren in the n in etee n th cen tu ry 
(1985:64-72). Then, as n in eteen th c en tu ry Sufism in M ecca w as 
strongly attrib u ted to al-G hazali, th e teachings of al-G hazali 
strongly influence the pesantren trad itio n u p to th is p resen t. The

--- Page 66 of 144 ---
57
direct relationship between pesantren and the centres of Islamic 
orthodoxy was a factor that made al-Ghazali's works essential 
within the pesantren tradition (Woodward 1989:135). This then 
reduced pantheistic teachings which had also influenced some 
pesantren in Java.
The interpretations of verses of the Qur'an and the Hadith
containing a Sufi understanding never lead to pantheism. To
illustrate, I quote some examples below.
There is nothing I (God) prefer except the way My 
servants worship Me as I commanded them. And My 
servants shall not stop worshipping Me until I love 
them. When I love them, I shall be an ear with which 
they hear, eyes with which they see, hands with which 
they hit and feet with which they walk (Madj id 
1988:106).
This Hadith Qudsi is, however, not understood as "God 
manifest in men". Instead, it indicates the possibility of being the 
closest servant of God (Madjid 1988:106). "Return unto thy God" 
(89:27) is interpreted as "come closer to Me or take a place beside 
me". "Prostrate yourselves before Adam" (2:34) is understood as 
"pay respect to Adam". Similarly, the wise saying "He who knows 
himself knows God" is understood as a teaching that commands 
men to know themselves as the servant of God as well as to know 
their limitations in order that they know the greatness of God 
(Dhofier 1980a:277,n. 18).
Woodward points out that the decline of pantheistic
teachings was a result of changes in the textual and theological
orientations in Islam in Java. Woodward observes:
The [wahdah al-wujud ] textual tradition is not used as 
instructional material in contemporary pesantren. Many

--- Page 67 of 144 ---
58
younger santri are unaware of the existence of the 
tradition ... The theological orientation of santri Sufism 
has changed largely because of shifts in the textual 
basis of the tradition (1989:134-135).
Madjid is also certain that the majority of pesantren today
are not only free from this pantheistic tendency, pesantren now
also view such a tendency suspiciously. He writes that
... expecting that the followers of Sufism in the 
pesantren understand Javanese mysticism is useless. 
Generally they do not know types of literature as known 
in kebatinan or kejawen, they even view them with 
suspicion. The performer of tawassul is based only on 
Arabic sources as taught by kyai or teachers 
(1988:105).
As al-Ghazali's influence on pesantren became greater, the 
impact of speculative and pantheistic Sufism declined. Van 
Bruinessen observes that
Other dimensions of classic intellectual tradition which 
disappeared from pesantren are philosophy and 
metaphysics. Van den Berg notes that there are no 
books on wahdah al-wujud. These books may still be 
studied in some pesantren, but are only taught to 
sellected santri, as in several places today (1992b: 79).
The Serat Centini which was written in the first quarter of the
nineteenth century still mentions the book of al-Insan al-Kamil fi
ma'rifah al-Awakhir wa al-Awa'il of \Abd al-Karim ibn Ibrahim alJili, in addition to al-Ghazali's IhycC 'Ulum al-Din and al-Malibari's
a l-A d h kiyaas Sufi books used in the pesantren (Soebardi
1971:339-340). In his research on books used in the pesantren in
Java and Madura in 1886, Berg does not mention any pantheistic
Sufi books. He lists five Sufi books regarded as orthodox — alHikam of Ibn Ata' Allah al-Iskandari, Shu'aib al-Imam of
Muhammad ibn 'abd Allah al-Iji and Hidayah al-Azkiya' ila Tariq
al-Awliya' of Zain al-Din al-Malibari besides three books of al-

--- Page 68 of 144 ---
59
Ghazali, th at is, Ihya' 'Ulum al-din, Bidayah al-Hidayah and Minhaj 
al-'abidin (Berg 1886).
The latest data on the books used in the pesantren today
shows the great influence of al-Ghazali's works as suggested by
van Bruinessen. Van Bruinessen, who conducted research on the
kitab kuning used the pesantren milieu in Java, Sum atera and
South Kalim antan, observes:
The section on tasawwuf is strongly dom inated by Abu 
Hamid al-Ghazali and his Ihya, Bidayat al-Hidaya and 
Minhaj al- 'Abidin. There are various pesantren th at 
specialise in the teaching of the Ihya: all three works 
m entioned have been translated, at least in part, into 
several Indonesian languages (1990a:258).
Al-Ghazali who was a great Sufi, theologian and a doctor of
law gave strong support to AslTarite theology so th at it has become
well established in Islam. This theology has become deeply rooted
in the pesantren. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi who was not a Sufi regarded
Sufi as the best group among m ankind (Nasr 1988:126). He also
supported Shafi'ite fiqh tradition. Shafi'ite tradition is the system
of fiqh which is generally adhered to in the pesantren, and it is
known th at Imam al-Shafi'i once pointed out th at he w as pleased
with three m atters: "giving up of pretence, tem pering of the
personality with kindness and following the path of the Sufi" (Nasr
1988:126). Further, Al-Ghazali is regarded as the one who has
succeeded in uniting the rational scholastic A sh'arite theology and
Shafi'ite rigid fiqh with flexible and intuitive Sufism (Madjid
1988:107). He "elevated Sufism to an exalted position within the
fold of 'orthodoxy'" (al-Attas 1963:9). His excellence has been
adm ired not only by M uslims b u t also by m ost scholars in the

--- Page 69 of 144 ---
60
world. It is reasonable that he received the title "Hujjah al-Islam!' 
which means "the reason of Islam" or the protector of Islam (Madjid 
1988:102).
In studies of Sufism in pesantren, al-Ghazali's Ih ya ' 'Ulum al- 
Din is regarded in most pesantren as the most important 
achievement for students (Dhofier 1980a:279). It is seen as the 
final result of his journey which is begun with studying fiq h 
followed by theology, then philosophy and ends with Sufism. In 
other words, it is "a spectacular tiring long complete record of the 
result of an intellectual and spiritual journey in order to achieve 
the so-called "truth" (Mas'udi 1985:77). It contains an invitation to 
revive Sufism in Muslim life. Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din reinterprets Islamic 
laws as a guide for spiritual life in order to gain salvation and to 
obtain the secrets of God through full love of God (Von Grunebaum 
1953:137).
It is important to note that due to the influence of the 
teachings of al-Ghazali, within the pesantren tradition the 
separation between Sufism and akhlaq (morality) rather blurs. It 
has already been emphasised previously that Sufism is taught to 
mature students. This does not mean, however, that aspects of 
Sufism are not at all taught to younger students. Aspects of Sufism 
are indeed transfered to them and are known as akhlaq (morality). 
In the educational system of pesantren, aspects of Sufism are 
taught under the heading a k h la q /ta sa w w u f A khlaq is often 
included under tasaw w uf. Akhlaq is taught from the very 
beginning of instruction in all pesantren, whereas "Sufi texts are

--- Page 70 of 144 ---
61
taught to the most advanced students" (Dhofier 1980b:271,n.9).
Sometimes akhlaq is considered sufficient for students. However,
the pesantren can hardly distinguish teachings of akhlaq from
those of Sufism. This is proved by van Bruinessen.
The borderline between the subjects of akhlaq (morality) 
and ta sa w w u f (mysticism) as taught in pesantren is 
extremely fuzzy. The same work may be studied under 
the heading ta sa ivw u j in one pesantren , and under that 
of akhlaq in another. The subject of akhlaq also shades 
into tarbiya '(the imparting of) good manners'; the word 
has connotations of proper, respectful behaviour and 
unostentatious piety (1990:256).
W hat is clear is that akhlaq teachings form a basis for Sufi
teachings. The Sufi teachings of al-Ghazali clearly emphasise the
importance of akhlaq. The pesantren regard akhlaq as more
im portant than knowledge. To have good akhlaq is a pre-condition
of becoming a k y a t The importance of akhlaq within the pesantren
tradition is described by Dhofier as follows:
The success of pesantren leaders in producing 
num erous highly qualified Islamic scholars is due to the 
kyai's method of learning. The intention is not to fill the 
minds of students with information, but to refine their 
morals, educate their spirits, propagate virtue, teach 
them propriety, and prepare them for a life full of 
sincerity and purity. Each student is taught to regard 
religious ethics above all else (1980b:265).

--- Page 71 of 144 ---
CHAPTER IV
PESANTREN TEBUIRENG AND SUFISM
Pesantren Tebuireng is located in the village of Cukir about 8 
kilometers southeast Jombang. This p e sa n tre n is known as a 
p e s a n tr e n sh a ri'a h which functions as a centre for Islamic 
knowledge in general and this indicates that it never admitted 
students to study the teachings of any Sufi order. However, it is 
still important to discuss the role of this p e sa n tre n in the 
maintenance of Sufism. In this chapter I shall provide a biography 
of Kyai Hashim AsITari as the founder of Pesantren Tebuireng, 
describe developments and changes in the p e sa n tre n, examine 
some aspects of Sufism in the p e sa n tre n and discuss the 
relationship between Pesantren Tebuireng and the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order, the most widespread Sufi order in Java.
A. Kyai Hashim AsITari: the Founder of Pesantren Tebuireng
A prominent Javanese k y a i who played a great role in the 
maintenance and spread of the p e sa n tre n tradition in Java was 
Kyai Hashim AsITari, known as Hadrah al-Shaikh ('the great 
Shaikh'), the founder of the most famous major p e sa n tre n in East 
Java, namely Pesantren Tebuireng. Kyai Hashim AsITari was born 
on the 14th of February, 1871 in Nggendang in Jombang. His 
father, Kyai AsITari, came from Demak, Central Java, and was a 
k y a i and the founder of Pesantren Keras. His grandfather — his 
mother's father — Kyai Usman, was the founder and leader of

--- Page 72 of 144 ---
63
Pesantren Gedang and a leader of a Sufi order having more than a 
thousand followers in the third quarter of the nineteenth century. 
Kyai Usman's father, Kyai Sihah, was the founder of Pesantren 
Tambak Beras. This kyai was a descendant of King Brawijaya IV 
(Atjeh 1957:55-61).
In several hagiographic accounts of Kyai Hashim AslTari it is 
often mentioned that some signs at his birth and in his childhood 
indicated that Kyai Hashim AslTari would become a famous kyai 
and Muslim leader. Early in his life he was famous for his 
intellegence, diligence and piety which attracted many people. Kyai 
Hashim AslTari grew up and was trained in his father's pesantren 
in Gedang until he was six years old when his parents moved to 
Keras and established a pesantren. He studied fiq K tauhid, tafsir, 
Arabic and so on under the guidance of his father in Pesantren 
Keras. Due to his intellegence, Kyai Hashim AslTari started to 
teach at the age of thirteen (Atjeh 1957:61-63; Dhofier 1982:92).
Afterwords, Kyai Hashim AslTari began his wandering to 
several pesantren to seek various branches of Islamic knowledge. 
Dhofier describes this tradition as that of 'a knowledge-seeking 
wanderer’ (1982:24). The first pesantren that he visited was 
Pesantren Wonokojo (Probolinggo), then he moved to Pelangitan 
and Bangkalan. After he had spent two years studying in these 
pesantren , Kyai Hashim AslTari studied in Pesantren Siwalan 
(Sidoarjo) under the leadership of Kyai Ya'kub for five years. Kyai 
Ya'kub then took him as a son-in-law. Kyai Hashim AslTari, 
together with his wife, Khadijah, and father-in-law, went to Mecca

--- Page 73 of 144 ---
64
to continue his studies. After a year’s stay in Mecca his wife and 
his child died. He returned to Java with his father-in-law, but three 
months later he returned again to Mecca with his brother-in-law, 
Muhammad Alwi (Atjeh 1957:65-70; Dhofier 1982:93).
His second stay in Mecca lasted seven years. Kyai Hashim 
Ash'ari and his brother-in-law studied under some famous 
teachers at Mecca such as Shaikh Nawawi Banten, Shaikh 
Mahfudh Tremas and Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Minangkabau. The 
teacher who greatly influenced Kyai Hashim As'ari was Shaikh 
Mahfudh and he was the best student of this Hadith scholar. Like 
his influential teacher, Kyai Hashim Ash'ari then became a Hadith 
scholar (Dhofier 1982:93).
It is important to emphasise that during the nineteenth 
century the reformist ideas of Egyptian Muhammad \Abduh gained 
a high reputation in the Middle East. The so-called modernist or 
reformist movement was greatly influenced by Muhammad 
'Abduh's thought. Although Muhammad \Abduh's thoughts were 
strongest in Egypt, they also attracted Indonesian students 
studying in Mecca. Even Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Minangkabau, who 
like Shaikh Nawawi Banten and Shaikh Mahfudh achieved the 
highest ranking position as a teacher at the Masjid al-Haram in 
Mecca, was influenced by these reformist ideas. He agreed with 
Muhammad \Abduh in regard to the abandonment of the practices 
of the Sufi orders. In this regard Shaikh Ahmad Khatib 
Minangkabau stood in contrast to Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas, 
Shaikh \Abd al-Karim, Shaikh Nawawi Banten, and Shaikh

--- Page 74 of 144 ---
65
M ahfudh. B ut he rejected M uham m ad ‘A bduh's ideas with regard 
to abandonm ent of the traditional scholastic scholarship since he 
him self taught S h a fi'i m a d h h a b at the Masjid al-Haram (Dhofier 
1982:93-95). Noer writes:
As Imam of the Sjafi'i m a d zh a b it would be impossible 
to expect from Shech Ahmad Chatib the abandonm ent 
of this school of law. However, he did not prohibit his 
students from reading Abduh's writings (such as A l 
U n va t a l-w u tsq a and his exegesis of the Quran), 
although he did this with the intention of refuting the 
ideas of this Egyptian reformist. On the other hand, he 
was familiar with Sjafi'i's w arning which urged the 
people in general to abandon his (sjafi'i's) f a t w a if these 
happened to be in contradiction with the Sunna of the 
Prophet (Noer 1973:32-33).
Many students of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib M inangkabau who 
were interested in M uham m ad ‘A bduh's ideas w ent to the 
university of al-Azhar and other universities in Egypt. After 
returning to Indonesia, they spread M uham m ad ‘Abduh's 
reform ation ideas and established some m odernist organisations. 
As a student of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib M inangkabau, Kyai Hashim 
A sh‘ari was, therefore, familiar with and, to some extent, was 
influenced by M uham m ad ‘Abduh's thoughts. He supported 
M uham m ad ‘A bduh's ideas th at Islamic teachings needed to be 
purified and th at it was necessary to develop an Islamic 
institutional structure capable of counteracting w estern influence. 
He however rejected M uham m ad ‘A bduh's ideas about abondening 
traditional scholastic scholarship (Woodward 1989:136). Kyai 
H ashim Ash‘ari described it impossible to understand the 
m eanings of the Q ur'an and Hadith w ithout consulting the 
interpretations of former scholars. In this regard Kyai Hashim

--- Page 75 of 144 ---
66
A sh'ari was sim ilar to his teacher, Shaikh Ahmad Khatib 
M inangkabau. Unlike M uham m ad 'Abduh and Shaikh Ahmad 
Khatib M inangkabau, he m aintained the im portance of Sufi 
practices. In this regard it is clear th at Kyai H ashim A sh'ari was 
strongly influenced by the tradition of Shaikh Nawawi Banten, 
Shaikh M ahfudh Trem as and Kyai Khalil Bangkalan (Dhofier 
1982:94-95).
Kyai Hashim A sh'ari returned to Java in 1899. He had 
briefly taught at Pesantren Gedang, which his grandfather, Kyai 
Usm an, founded, before he founded his own pesantren, Pesantren 
Tebuireng. He took twenty-eight students from Pesantren Gedang 
to Tebuireng. This, according to Dhofier, is usual within the 
pesantren tradition. First, it is a sign of perm ission from the senior 
kyai to the young k y a t In addition, the young kyai can start his 
teaching and get help from his students (Dhofier 1982:95). On 26 
Rabi’ al-Awwal 1899 Kyai Hashim A sh'ari established a pesantren 
in Tebuireng and he him self was then known as Kyai Tebuireng 
(Atjeh 1957:76).
W ithin ten years Pesantren Tebuireng developed to be a 
m ajor pesantren. W ithin a relatively short time it becam e a m ajor 
supplier of teachers to other pesantren. Its m ost im portant 
contribution was that it produced kyai who were prepared to found 
pesantren. This is, according to Dhofier, because Kyai Hashim 
A sh'ari concentrated on the education and training of a relatively 
sm all num ber of advanced students in order th at they could 
become founders and leaders of new pesantren. His efforts were

--- Page 76 of 144 ---
67
su ccessful an d he becam e m ore an d m ore w ell-know n in Jav a. 
M any of the p esa n tren , w hich Kyai H ashim A sh 'ari's stu d e n ts 
founded, su c h as P esan tren Lasern in R em bang in cen tral Jav a, 
P esan tren D arul Ulum , Peterongan, P esan tren M am ba'ul M a'arif, 
D enanyar, b o th in Jom bang, P esan tren Lirboyo in Kediri and 
P esan tren A sem bagus in S itubondo becam e large Islam ic 
in stitu tio n s having m ore th a n a th o u sa n d s tu d e n ts (Dhofier 
1982:95-96).
Kyai H ashim A sh 'ari continued to lead P esan tren T ebuireng 
u n til he p assed aw ay on 25 Ju ly 1947. His role, however, w as not 
only as a leader of the p e sa n tre n b u t also as a leader of M uslim s 
who played a great role in the sp read of trad itio n al Islam in 
Indonesia. Kyai H ashim A sh 'ari lau n ch ed strong criticism of the 
m o d ern ist groups w hose influences becam e stro n g er after 1926 
an d he th en activated th e trad itio n al M uslim organisation, 
N a h d a tu l 'Ulama. His great influence on th e Ja v an e se of C entral 
an d E a st Ja v a w as indicated by th e fact th a t he, together w ith his 
son Kyai W ahid H ashim , w as appointed by b o th m o d ern ist and 
trad itio n alist groups as th e head of M ajlis Isla m A 'la In d o n esia (the 
S uprem e Council of M uslim s of Indonesia). In 1944 he w as 
appointed by the Ja p a n e se colonial governm ent as h ead of the 
Office of Religious Affairs in Ja v a an d M adura. For h is great 
services to th e Indonesian people and th e state du rin g th e struggle 
a g ain st th e D utch, Kyai H ashim A shfari is also regarded as an 
Indonesian natio n al hero (Atjeh 1957:107-119; Dhofier 1982:96- 
99).

--- Page 77 of 144 ---
68
B. Development of Education in Pesantren Tebuireng
Dhofier notes that there were several k y a i who also played a 
significant role in the development of Pesantren Tebuireng. Among 
them were Kyai Muhammad Alwi, Kyai Ma'sum, Kyai Baidawi, Kyai 
Ilyas and Kyai Wahid Hashim, all of whom were in fact Kyai 
Hashim Ash'ari's relatives. Dhofier also points out that until 1916 
the p e sa n tre n followed sorogan (the individual system of learning) 
and b a n d o n g a n (the group system of learning) in its instruction, in 
addition to a discussion system for advanced students (1982:103- 
104).
A reform of the educational system took place in the 
p e sa n tre n . In 1916 the classical [m adrasah) system was introduced 
by Kyai Ma'sum, a son-in-law of Kyai Hashim Ash'ari. Then 
general subjects such as Malay, mathematics, geography, Dutch 
and history were taught in the p esa n tren . In 1926 a nephew of 
Kyai Hashim Ash'ari, Kyai Ilyas who graduated from H.I.S 
(Hollandsch Inlandse School or Dutch language elementary school) 
Surabaya came to Pesantren Tebuireng and became a teacher 
there. He replaced Kyai Ma'sum as the director of m a d ra sa h when 
he was appointed as the leader of Pesantren Seblak. Together with 
Kyai Wahid Hashim, Kyai Ilyas then went to Mecca in 1931 (Atjeh 
1957:83-86; Dhofier 1982:104). Steenbrink has paid considerable 
attention to Kyai Ilyas whom he regards as an important figure in 
the reform of education in Tebuireng (1986:69-71).

--- Page 78 of 144 ---
69
The reform of education in Pesantren Tebuireng continued. 
As a son of the leader of the p e sa n tre n who succeeded his father, 
Kyai W ahid Hashim played an im portant role in the m odernisation 
of Islamic education in the p esa n tren . He established m a d ra sa h 
N izo m iy y a h whose curriculum was m ainly general subjects. He 
established a library which provided m any books and journals. 
After he becam e a politician and M inister of Religious Affairs 
(1949-1952), he still paid great attention to education in Indonesia. 
One of his legacies is the existence of the subject of religious 
education in general schools (Dhofier 1982:104-107).
The discussion class disappeared after the death of Kyai 
H ashim A sh'ari. Kyai Idris attem pted to restore the tradition but 
he left for Arabia in 1973. This ended the system of teaching th at 
Kyai Hashim A sh'ari first concentrated on in his pesantren. The 
p e sa n tre n no longer continued as an advanced pesantren that 
aim ed at producing k y a i as it used to (1982:108-109). Dhofier 
suggests:
In the past, the educational purpose of Tebuireng was 
to train 'ulam a'. In present day Indonesia, the 
educational purposes of Tebuireng has been 
reform ulated, i.e, to train students who can later 
develop them selves to become 'u la m a ' in telektu a l 
['u la m d who m aster secular knowledge) and in telektu a l 
'ulam a' (scholars of m odern knowledge who also m aster 
Islamic knowledge) (1980a:81).
The leadership in Pesantren Tebuireng changed as well. After 
the death of Kyai Wahid Hashim in 1953, Tebuireng was headed by 
his brother, Kyai Khaliq Hashim until 1965. Since then the 
p e s a n tr e n has been directed by Yusuf Hashim. Unlike his father 
and his brothers, Kyai W ahid Hashim and Kyai Khaliq Hashim,

--- Page 79 of 144 ---
70
Yusuf Hashim has been active in politics from an early age. As a 
politician who was educated in the arm y tradition, he is not an 
Islamic scholar and leader, b u t skilled in organisation. Under his 
direction, Pesantren Tebuireng has considerably developed and 
changed. In 1967 Yusuf Hashim established the University of 
Hashim Ash ari which provided no separation between male and 
female students. This clearly breaks a long tradition of the 
pesantren. In 1971 he founded a school for huffaz (memorisers) of 
the Q ur’an. Similarly, he opened a Sekolah Menengah Pertama 
(Junior High School) and a Sekolah Menengah Atas (Senior High 
School) in 1975 (Dhofier 1982:109-111).
Thus, by 1978 Pesantren Tebuireng had ten types of 
educational activities which included both Islamic education and 
general education: Bandongan class, Madrasah Ibtidaiyah (Islamic 
Elem entary School), Sekolah Persiapan Tsanawiyah (Preparatory 
School for Islamic Junior High School), Madrasah Tsanawiyah 
(Islamic Junior High School), Madrasah Aliyah (Islamic Senior High 
School), Sekolah Menengah Pertama (Junior High School), Sekolah 
Menengah Atas (Senior High School), Madrasah al-Huffaz (School 
for M emorisers of the Qur'an) and Jam'iyah (Training Centre for 
Organisational Activities) and University of Hashim A sh'ari 
(1982:113-122).
C. Aspects of Sufism in Pesantren Tebuireng
Kyai Hashim A stfari was a Sufi although he was not 
affiliated to a particular Sufi order and he never received students

--- Page 80 of 144 ---
71
to stu d y Sufism w ith him. Hagiographie accounts of his life are 
filled w ith various stories which indicated th a t he w as a Sufi. 
H .A bubakar Atjeh writes about Kyai H ashim A sh'ari w hen he 
stayed in Saudi Arabia:
During his stay in Mecca he never w asted his time on 
useless m atters. All efficacious places were visited su ch 
as the grave of Prophet Ibrahim, H ajar Aswad (black 
stone) next to K a'bah, M ount R ahm ah in Arafah 
dessert. In these places he prayed in order th a t his 
aspirations were gained. His eyes were filled w ith tears 
in front of the grave of the Prophet M uham m ad in 
Medina. On S aturdays he also once stayed all day in 
Ja b a l Nur in Hiro cave where the Prophet M uham m ad 
m editated and received the first revelation (Atieh 
1957:71-72).
K.H. Saifuddin Zuhri (1974) describes Sufi characteristics of
this fam ous kyai during his life su ch as zuhud (asceticism), warn
(avoidance of all forbidden, undesirable and unclear things),
taw addu (modesty), sabar (patience), ikhlas (sincerity), taw akkal
(absolute tr u s t in God). In this regard H .A bubakar Atjeh writes:
...his Sufi personality prevented him [Kyai H ashim 
Ash ari] from doing things contrary to riycC [worship to 
be show n to other people] and takabur [arrogance] and 
other disgraceful characteristics according to Sufism.
S uch characteristics led him to perform ritu als secretly 
so th a t not m any people knew his rituals except those 
who were close to him ... (1957:107).
Dhofier points out th a t Sufi life was m aintained in P esantren 
Tebuireng. Zuhud (asceticism), Wira'i or warn' (to avoid all 
forbidden, undesirable and unclear things), khushu 
(concentration), ikhlas (sincerity), taw addu (modesty), sabar 
(patience) and taw akkal (absolute tru s t in God) as im portant Sufi 
teachings were very im portant teachings in P esantren Tebuireng 
(Dhofier 1982:165). All these concepts are interrelated and

--- Page 81 of 144 ---
72
associated with zu h u d (asceticism). In the majority of kitab kuning 
used within the p esa n tren tradition, zu h u d as a type of morality is 
often emphasised (Mas'udi 1985:69). According to Dhofier, "almost 
the whole text of al-Hikam ...is devoted to the discussion of this 
zu h u d world view" (1980b:271,n.8) even though its content is not 
as complete as al-Ghazali's Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din.
In Pesantren Tebuireng zu h u d does not necessarily mean a 
hatred of life in the world, but rather emphasises a lack of love for 
wordly life (Dhofier 1980b:269). The case of wealth serves to 
illustrate zuhud. Kyai Shamsuri, a famous k ya i in the p esantren 
explained:
If you have wealth, you must not love your wealth and 
neglect the zu h u d world view in which wealth is only an 
a m anat (trust) from Allah that you must spend your 
wealth for the sake of your life in the hereafter. You 
must not spend your wealth excessively (berlebih- 
lebihan) and for your own entertainment (h a n ya u n tu k 
kesen a n g a n m u sending; if your neighbours are too poor 
to buy meat, chickens, beautiful clothes, etc., do not 
spend your wealth on these things; do not neglect to 
spend your wealth for religious purposes; pay your alms 
for the poor and the orphans and contribute your am al 
jariah, i.e. for building mosques, m adrasah, etc. 
(Dhofier 1980b:269).
This quotation means that wealth is not the aim of life, but 
only a means to complete life. The essential aim of life is to obtain 
the pleasure of God which can be achieved by means of wealth 
(Mas'udi 1985:70).
Still related to this, K.H.Shansuri Badawi quoted a Hadith 
well-known in Sufism, that is, al-D unya sijn al-M uslimin w a ja n n a h 
al-Kafirin, "the world is a prison for Muslims and a heaven for non
believers" (1985:40). He further elaborated this as follows.

--- Page 82 of 144 ---
73
The purpose of this Hadith is not that a Muslim may 
not be wealthy and have a good life or that wealth and 
pleasure can be identified with unbelief. This is not 
true. It is also true that life in the world is not hell for 
Muslims, especially the wealthy, while the world is 
heaven for the non-believers even if they are poor. What 
is true is that rich and poor Muslims must have a 
strong desire for God (1985:40).
According to Mas'udi, in almost all kitab kuning used in the 
pesantren the importance of wealth is never denied. One is obliged 
to work in order to fulfil basic needs. One is forbidden either to fall 
into poverty or to exceed the limit of those needs (1985:69). 
K.H.Shansuri Badawi distinguishes four types of Muslim attitudes 
toward wealth. The first and the highest is al-zahid, that is, a 
person who is not sad if he does not receive wealth. But he is sad if 
he gets it because he sees wealth as a heavy trusteeship. Then, al- 
radi is a person who is never sad whether or not he receives 
wealth. The third is al-qanU that is, a person who is not sad if he 
does not receive wealth and happy if he receives it. The last is al- 
harisK that is, a person who moans and complains if he does not 
receive wealth, but is very happy receiving wealth although it is 
forbidden wealth (1985:41).
Dhofier observes that zuhud must be completed with some
important rituals which include:
An intensive practice of non-obligatory rituals such as 
solat sunnat (recommended prayers), p u a sa sunnat 
(recommended fasting) and dzikir (recollection of Allah's 
names associated with salat as an extra, personal 
practice (Dhofier 1980b:269).
This can be understood because within the Sufi tradition 
obligatory rituals as constituted in the five pillars of Islam are seen 
only as the minimal standard of Islam which has to be

--- Page 83 of 144 ---
74
complemented by a variety of recommended rituals which are 
mainly based on Islamic doctrines, the Qur'an and the traditions of 
the Prophet. K.H.Saifuddin Zuhri observed of religious life in 
Pesantren Tebuireng.
Outside the time of congregational prayers the mosque 
was never free from people who performed s u n n a h 
prayers, prayers for the excellence of worship. Others 
chanted w iridan, that is, a set of Divine words at certain 
time and in a certain number, according to y a z a h given 
by their teachers. W iridan is also a kind of 
remembrance of God (dhikir) to plead for his 
forgiveness, mercy and blessing (1974:96).
In this connection Dhofier has described the daily activities of the
sa n tri of Pesantren Tebuireng. He notes that prayers, d h ikir and
istig h a th a h (a d h ikir that mentions some of the Ninety-Nine Names
of God) are practised after the five daily prayers. Dhofier also
records a type of d h ikir that the students of Pesantren Tebuireng
practise. He stresses that the d h ikir is also commonly practised by
followers of Sufi orders.
Praise belongs to God, the Lord of all Being,
Forgive me God, You who are magnificent, who is no 
God but the Alive and The Self-Subsisting and I ask 
forgiveness from You (three times).
There is no God but Allah, The unique who has no 
partner or equal, who governs the Law, and Praise only 
belongs to Him, the Lord of all Being.
Bring me, O God, peace, and only from You peace, and 
Peace is returned to You, and give me life full of Peace, 
and take me to the Heaven, your house of Peace, you 
bless me, O God, the Lord of Majesty and Bounty.
Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all Being (thirtv- 
three times)
Allah the Great (thirty-three times)
Forgive me God, You who are magnificent (thirty-three 
times)
There is no God but Allah (one hundred times) 
(1980a: 183).

--- Page 84 of 144 ---
75
Ziarah or visiting the graves of saints and those of kyai is
another important ritual observed in Pesantren Tebuireng. During
his life Kyai Hashim Ash'ari practised ziarah. This type of ritual
often confuses many scholars so that they regard it as worship of
the dead. Geertz, for instance, considers it as "ancestor worship"
which is, as a result, classified as a type of 'abangah (syncretic
Javanese Muslim) ritual. Geertz writes:
Javanese "ancestor worship" ... amounts to little more 
than a pious expression of respect for the dead plus a 
lively awareness of the necessity of being on good terms 
with one's own deceased father and mother and of being 
sure to feed them some rice or flowers when they appear 
in one's dreams (1960:76).
This is a misleading view because visiting of graves has a
doctrinal basis in Hadith. Imam Nawai lists four Hadith that
recommend the visiting of graves. The prophet said: "Those who
want to visit graves are recommended because it reminds you of
the hereafter" (Bahreisj 1983:484). In other three Hadith the
Prophet teaches the ethics of visiting graves such as the prayer
pronounced when visiting graves which is:
Praise be unto you, the population of Mu'min (believers) 
and Muslims. We, God's willing, we will follow you. I 
pray salvation for us and for you (Bahreisj 1983:485).
This is a do'a (prayer) when visiting graves well-known
within the pesantren tradition. Geertz's description is however
appropriate if seen from the modernist view. It is true however that
the practice of ziarah among the Javanese has been 'javanised', as
Fox observes, "pious practice has been combined with various
traditional ideas and extended, in some cases, beyond the realm of
orthodoxy" (1991:19).

--- Page 85 of 144 ---
7 6
Within the pesantren tradition ziarah is often associated with 
kramat, which is the Arabic word for 'holiness'. Kramat is one of 
four supernatural attributes within Islam in general. First, m u jiza t 
is an extrordinaiy attribute granted by God to all Prophets as proof 
of their prophethood. Istidraj is that given to non-Muslims just to 
spoil them. Finally, m a'unah is that given to Muslims for his 
goodness (Mastuhu 1990:89). According to Madjid, the Prophet 
Mohammad possessed m u jiza t, barakah (blessing) and shafa'ah 
(helpfullness). Some 'special' people can, however, inherit them 
from the Prophet. Kramat is possessed by wali who receive it from 
the characteristic of m u jiza t of the Prophet so that its position is 
right after m u jiz a t In other words, kramat is spiritual power 
granted by God to certain people because of their devotion to God 
(Madjid 1988:110).
The kyai are often regarded as persons possessing the
quality of w a it particularly by their own santri and community. "...
Almost all kyai and great 'ulamct are believed as wali who possess
kramat' (Prasojo et.al. 1974:41). In this regard, Dhofier relates
kramat to the leadership of the k y a t
Most kyai also foster the public image that some kyai 
are extraordinary persons possessing the spiritual 
attributes of karomah (a man who is greatly loved by 
Allah) and so becoming sources of barakah (Allah's 
blessing) for their followers. Having karomah and being 
a source of barakah allow kyai to develop charismatic 
leadership. Karomah, barakah and 'ilm (Islamic 
knowledge) are essential elements for pesantren 
leadership. Almost all well-known kyai who have been 
able to develop big pesantren are classified as kyai with 
extraordinary karomah and barakah (1980c: 53).

--- Page 86 of 144 ---
77
Kyai Khalil B angkalan for exam ple is regarded as a w a ll The 
word w a li originally m eans friend or one who loves and is loved by 
God. Kyai H ashim A sh'ari explained th a t the m eaning of w a li is 
classified into two aspects: first, w a li is one who is protected by 
God from doing both serious and sim ple sin, from being controlled 
by h is n a fsii (passion) and from negligence of repentance if he 
conducts m inor sin. W ali is m a h fu z w hich m eans th a t he m ight do 
m inor sin b u t he quickly repents. Then, w a li is one who 
continually w orships and devotes him self to God. Therefore, 
according to Kyai H ashim A sh'ari, one is not a w a li if he practises 
things contrary to the Q ur'an and H adith (1975:2-11).
W ali and those who are regarded as possessors of k ra m a t 
can give b a ra k a h not only during their life b u t also after they are 
dead (Madjid 1988:110). Ziarah is therefore an im portant ritual 
w ithin the p e sa n tre n tradition. The practice of zia ra h to the graves 
of w a li and k y a i can be also seen as an elaboration of the concept 
of w a sila h . In th is regard there is a chain th a t links one to a k y a i 
or w a ll either alive and dead, and finally to the Prophet. The 
Prophet is the closest one to God. (van B ruinessen 1992b:75).
Friday as a holy day w ithin the p e sa n tre n tradition is the 
m ost com m on tim e of ziarah. In addition, in som e p e sa n tre n on the 
k y a i's k h a u l (the day of death) zia ra h m assal or com m unal zia ra h 
is often conducted by the k y a i's sa n tri and the com m unity 
(Steenbrink 1986:113). Almost all p e sa n tre n in Ja v a have a k h a u l 
cerem ony, and zia ra h to the graves of w a li and k y a i is a p a rt of a

--- Page 87 of 144 ---
78
pesantren's annual program (van Bruinessen 1992b: 75).
Steenbrink also observes that
During Mauludan (the Prophet’s birthday) ceremony 
many alumni of pesantren visit their kyai even though 
they are dead. This ziarah is also performed at the end 
of the month of Ramadhan. The graves are often visited 
during the whole year, particularly in case of special 
needs such as ilness, difficulties before marriage and so 
on (1986:113).
The grave of Kyai Hashim Ash'ari in Tebuireng is often 
visited by the kyai santri and community members because, as a 
great kyai who was known for his piety, he is regarded as a source 
of blessing.
D. Pesantren Tebuireng and the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah 
Order
In his treatise entitled Taburan Permata yang Indah Kyai 
Hashim Ash'ari describes eight difficult conditions in practising a 
Sufi order: one must have true purpose, namely being a servant of 
God. One must also trust his teacher that this teacher possesses a 
special secret which might allow the students to approach God. 
Then, one must have morality regulated by shariah. One’s conduct 
must be in accordance with the teachings of the Prophet. One 
must respect his teachers. One must give good service to his 
teacher and fellow Muslims. One must glorify his aim, that is, to 
know God. Finally, one must perpetuate his aims (Ash'ari 1975:18- 
20). Kyai Hashim Ash'ari also regulates conditions of teachers of 
Sufi orders, namely understanding the Qur'an and the Hadith, fiqh 
and other branches of Islamic knowledge, piety and other difficult

--- Page 88 of 144 ---
79
conditions (1975:22-24). Kyai Hashim AslTari further suggests that 
one who seeks a teacher of a Sufi order m ust be obliged to 
acknowledge th at the teacher understands the attributes of God, 
has true i'tiqad (belief), understands the laws of God and obeys 
God's rules (1975:24-25).
These difficult conditions give the im pression th at Kyai
Hashim AslTari did not practise the teachings of a Sufi order. In
fact, according to his grandson A bdurrahm an Wahid, he personally
practised various d h ikir from various Sufi orders. A bdurrahm an
W ahid, reports th at his grandfather practised rituals of the
Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order and wirid of the T ija n iyya h
and others (Abdussalam 1993:45). W ithout m entioning a specific
Sufi order, K .H .Shansuri Badawi explains:
Personally he [Kyai Hashim AslTari] joined a Sufi order, 
b u t he did not perform it publicly and did not receive 
students. It is true th at very few people knew th at he 
practised w irid b e rsa n a d [wirid which has links to the 
Prophet] like a follower of a Sufi order (1985:40).
Further, K .H .Shansuri Badawi explains two reasons for Kyai
H ashim AslTari doing so. First, Kyai H ashim AslTari considered
th at the activities of Sufi orders would disturb learning and
teaching activities in the p e sa n tre n because the p e sa n tre n would
hold several ceremonies and he him self would receive guests and
fulfill invitations. Another reason is th at he avoided falling into a
m aterialistic tendency or h u b b a l-d u n ya (love of the live in the
world rather th an in the hereafter) (1985:40).
The conditions elaborated by Kyai Hashim AslTari are
extremely difficult to achieve. This gives the im pression th at he

--- Page 89 of 144 ---
80
only trained students to be scholars of shari'ah and was hostile to
Sufi orders. This is misleading, however. It is true that he strongly
forbade his students to join any Sufi order before they had
mastered shari'ah. He did not give permission to Kyai Adlan 'Ali
and Kyai Mansur Anwar to join the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah
order when both of them were still young (Dhofier 1980a:281). An
important centre of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in East
Java is in Pesantren Rejoso, Jombang, and its development was
closely related to the role of Pesantren Tebuireng.
During his life Kyai Hashim Ash'ari was emphatic in his
warning against false and degenerate leaders of Sufi orders. In his
al-Nahyu an M uqata'ah al-Arham (Prohibition on breaking the
Relationship with Friends), Kyai Hashim Ash'ari illustrated his
experience with Kyai Khalil, a leader of the QadiriyyahN aqshabandiyyah order in Pesantren Rejoso:
There was a learned 'ulama' who had frequently made 
the pilgrimage to Mecca. After some years of study with 
a learned shaikh in Mecca, he was permitted to 
establish a branch of the Tarekat Qadiriyyah wa'l 
Naqshabandiyyah in Jombang. After some years' 
preaching, he became famous and attracted thousands 
of students. However, he then changed. He rarely went 
to the mosque to lead Friday and communal daily 
prayers. He also became easily displeased and resentful.
He did not go out much to meet people. All these things 
were done to impress upon people that he was a wali 
(saint). However, when a bupati (regent) came to see him 
to ask his 'blessing', this 'ulama’ enthusiastically gave 
the bupati certain formulae of dhikir "to preserve his 
position as bupati". In return, the bupati presented him 
with valuable gifts.
When people reported all this information to me, I came 
to see this 'ulama'. At first, his wife met me at the door 
telling me that her husband did not want to see me. I 
told her that I was Hashim Ash'ari and would like to 
give her husband some advice. She let me in and I met

--- Page 90 of 144 ---
81
her husband. I told him that he had deviated from the 
true teachings of the tarekat. "My dear friend, you are 
supposed to humble and kind, especially to ordinary 
people. You are also supposed to keep away from the 
government officials to avoid suspicion from the people.
Now you have done all these and I believe that you have 
been cheated by Satan".
A month later, this 'ulama' came to see me and thanked 
me for my advice. He had realised his mistakes and 
wished sincerely to follow the teachings of the Tarekat 
(Dhofier 1980a:280-281).
Pesantren Tebuireng played a great role in the spread and 
development of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in East 
Java although the pesantren never permits any one to teach any 
Sufi orders. It is clear that Kyai Khalil was under the close control 
of Kyai Hashim Ash'ari in the practice of the order. When Kyai 
Ramli, a successor to Kyai Khalil, led the order, Kyai Hashim 
Ash ari controlled him by restricting the number of Sufi texts 
taught to Kyai Ramli's students (Dhofier 1980a:284-285).
Dhofier points out that the success of Kyai Ramli in 
attracting thousands of followers was owing to, besides his 
organisational abilities, Kyai Hashim Ash'ari's support through his 
permission to his students to become khalifah of Kyai Ramli, such 
as Kyai Adlan Ali, in recruiting and organising mass followers in 
East Java regions. The development of the Qadiriyyah- 
N aqshabandiyyah order in the region relied heavily on Pesantren 
Tebuireng. During the period of his leadership from 1930 to 1958, 
Kyai Ramli appointed four first-rank badal murshid : Kyai Adlan 
Ali, Kyai Mansur Anwar (the leader of Pesantren Paculgowang in 
Jombang), Kyai Muhdar (a teacher of Pesantren Rejoso in 
Jombang) and Kyai Makky, who were all the students of Kyai

--- Page 91 of 144 ---
82
Hashim A sh'ari. Sixty four of his eighty second-rank and third- 
rank b a d a l m u rsh id were graduates of Pesantren Tebuireng 
(Dhofier 1980a:285-288). Thus, the m ajority of k h a lifa h of the 
Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order in E ast Java were graduates of 
Pesantren Tebuireng. Although Pesantren Tebuireng does not 
directly advance the Sufi movement, in fact it has produced 
alum ni who have become m u rsh id or k h a lifa h of Sufi order (Dhofier 
1978:15).
Kyai Ramli's son, Kyai M usta'in Ramli then succeeded to the 
leadership of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order in E ast Java. 
Under his leadership the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order 
increased markedly. In E ast Java the Sufi order had fifteen sectors 
each led by a b a d a l with about fifteen thousands m em bers. His 
prestige, then, reached the national level because his position as 
the leader of J a m 'iy a h A h li Thariqah M u ta b a r a h - Federation of 
the Genuine Sufi orders under the N ahdhatul Ulama of Central 
and E ast Java, which was founded on 10 October 1957 (Madjid 
1977:61-62). Since the foundation of the organisation in 1957, the 
influence of Pesantren Rejoso has been dom inant. Kyai M usta'in 
Ramli was the m ost charism atic am ong s h a ik h in E ast Java and 
his p e sa n tre n was fam ous at the national level (van B ruinessen 
1992a: 172).
Kyai M usta in Ramli then established a relationship with 
G olkar (the dom inant political party in Indonesia) and received ten 
hectares of land in Jom bang and money with which he built the 
University of Dar aK U lum . In the 1977’s general election Kyai

--- Page 92 of 144 ---
83
Musta'in Ramli supported and compaigned for Golkar (Dhofier 
1980a:285-286). The majority of Sufi order members were affiliated 
to Nahdhatul 'Ulama which was at the time represented by the 
Partai Persatuan Pembangiman. Because the majority of khalifah 
of the order were graduates of Pesantren Tebuireng and the 
pesantren is the main headquarters of Nahdatul 'Ulama, Kyai 
Musta'in Ramli lost his influence over his followers and the kyai in 
East Java. Dhofier explains:
The kyai reaction to Kyai Musta'in Romly was 
straightforward. He was regarded as abusing his 
position as the General Chairman of the Jam'iyyah and 
as an influential leader of the Tarekat for personal 
material benefit (1980a:286).
Kyai Adlan 'Ali who was first a khalifah of Kyai Musta'in 
Ramli in his region suddenly became famous because the majority 
of kyai in the region encouraged Kyai Adlan 'Ali to take over Kyai 
Musta'in Ramli’s leadership of the Sufi order (Dhofier 1980a:287). 
Kyai Adlan 'Ali, who joined the Sufi order in the 1940’s, studied 
under Shaikh Mushlih bin Abdurrahman Mranggen, a prominent 
shaikh of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in Central Java, 
who then gave him his ijazah irshad (licence to be a leader of a Sufi 
order) (Dhofier 1978:12). He therefore was a murshid, a similar 
position to that of Kyai Musta'in Ramli’s. Dhofier describes that 
when Kyai Adlan 'Ali served as a khalifah of Kyai Musta'in Ramli 
he had only 52 followers. The number, however, increased sharply 
to about 1,500 in November 1977 when many khalifah of Kyai 
Musta’in Ramli swore a vow of alligiance to him (1980a:289).

--- Page 93 of 144 ---
84
Based on the role of Kyai Adlan 'Ali in attracting followers of 
Kyai Musta'in Ramli, Dhofier describes Pesantren Tebuireng as a 
new centre of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in Java. The 
establishment of the Sufi order in Tebuireng took place after the 
organisation of the general assembly on 16 January 1978 
(1980a:290). Van Bruinessen, however, does not entirely agree with 
Dhofier. He writes:
Pesantren Tebuireng always takes an ambivalent 
attitude towards Sufi orders: to teach Sufi orders is 
never permitted in Pesantren Tebuireng, but personally 
the santri are allowed to learn it in other pesantren 
provided the murshid already regard that the santri are 
mature enough for it (1992a: 172).
This means that formally Pesantren Tebuireng maintains its 
tradition of non-affiliation to any Sufi order. Since its founding, the 
pesantren has concentrated more on developments in education 
and training. In practice many of its graduates become followers 
and representatives of a Sufi order. But this does not mean that 
Pesantren Tebuireng can be regarded as a pesantren tarekat like 
Pesantren Suryalaya. Dhofier himself notes that the weekly 
gathering held by Kyai Adlan 'Ali was performed in a mosque 
outside the Pesantren Tebuireng complex, not in the complex. This 
suffices to emphasise that ethical or 'sober' Sufism is more 
dominant than are Sufi orders in Pesantren Tebuireng.

--- Page 94 of 144 ---
CHAPTER V
PESANTREN TAREKAT OF SURYALAYA
The pesantren complex of Suiyalaya is located in an isolated 
kampung called Godebag, D esa T anjungkerta, K ecam atan 
Pageregeung, Regency of Tasikm alaya in W est Jav a. The location is 
about 90 kilom eters from the provincial capital of B andung and 35 
kilom eters to the no rth of Tasikm alaya (Galba 1991:14-15). A bout 
9.5 kilom eters from the m ain B andung-T asikm alaya road, it is 
situ ated in a beautiful valley, located betw een two m ountains, 
M ount C ak rab u an a and M ount Sawal. B ehind the complex flows 
the river C itanduy w hich separates the regencies of T asikm alaya 
and Ciamis. As an area at about 700 m eters above sea level, its 
clim ate is cool and its soil is very fertile (Soebardi 1978:218).
Since its founding, alm ost ninety years ago, P esantren 
Suryalaya h as been well-known as a centre of the Qadiriyyah- 
Naqshabandiyyah order in W est Java. Even today it is the only 
pesantren w hich m aintains this as one of its prim ary functions not 
only in W est Ja v a b u t in the entire island of Jav a. The prestige of 
S uiyalaya reaches not only to the national level b u t also 
th ro u g h o u t S o u th east Asia. Therefore, it is n o t exaggerating to 
label Suryalaya as a pesantren tarekat (pesantren of a Sufi order). 
In th is ch ap ter I shall provide a sh o rt biography of the founder the 
pesantren and the developm ent of the pesantren during his period, 
consider the spiritual power of Abah Anon% and d iscu ss the 
teachings and rituals of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order of 
Suryalaya, its pondok inabah and the education offered in

--- Page 95 of 144 ---
86
P esantren Suryalaya. W here it is possible and required, a 
com parison w ith Pesantren Tebuireng is provided.
A. A b a h S e p u h : The Founder of P esantren T arekat of Suryalaya
Suryalaya — a nam e w hich derives from two words: su ry a 
m eaning S u n and lay a m eaning 'place' so th a t Suryalaya roughly 
m eans 'place of su n set' — w as founded by Shaikh A bdullah 
M ubarak bin Nur M uham m ad on 7 Raj ab 1323 A.H or 5 
Septem ber 1905 (Dasuki 1990:28-29). S haikh A bdullah M ubarak, 
who w as know n as A b a h S epuh, the old kya i, w as born in in 1836 
in K am pung Cicalung, another k a m p u n g still w ithin Desa 
T anjungkerta. Pesantren Suryalaya differs from the m ajority of 
m ajor p e sa n tre n in Ja v a w ith regard to the principle of heredity in 
the establishm ent of the p esa n tren . Dhofier h a s show n th a t alm ost 
all m ajor p e sa n tre n were built by hereditary k y a t T hirty k y a i who 
were the founders or leaders of m ajor p e s a n tr e n in Ja v a were the 
offspring of the sam e ancestors, nam ely Kyai Sihah, the founder of 
P esantren T am bak Beras, E ast Ja v a in 1831 (1982:63-65). A nother 
anthropologist, Hiroko, observes th a t the kyai of a n u m b er of 
p esan tren in Cipari, W est Java, were the descen d an ts of Zainal 
Abidin who founded the village (1976:186-191). Unlike Kyai 
H ashim A stfari, S haikh A bdullah M ubarak w as not a descendant 
of a k y a i family, b u t a descendant of a p riy a y i family. His father 
w as R aden Nur M uham m ad, also know n as N urapraja or Eyang 
U pas, and his m other w as Em ah. R aden Nur M uham m ad 
possessed high sta tu s in his com m unity because he worked as a

--- Page 96 of 144 ---
87
security official at sub-district level and because he w as a rich m an 
who had relatively m uch land (Sanusi 1990:93-94). For these 
reasons and with the title Raden, this family was considered as 
p r iy a y t
A b a h S e p u h at first received his basic Islamic knowledge 
from his parents. He learned the recitation of the Q ur'an, prayers 
and very basic fiq h and ta u h id at his home (Sanusi 1990:94). Then 
he was sent by his parents to a p e sa n tre n in Sukam iskin, near 
B andung where he studied fiq h , ta u h id and ilm u a la t (Arabic 
gram m ar). Like Kyai Hashim A sh'ari, he continued his education 
at a p e sa n tre n in Bangkalan, M adura, E ast Java under the 
leadership of Kyai Khalil. Then, A b a h S e p u h w ent to Pesantren 
Kalisapu, near Cirebon, on the northeast coast of W est Java. The 
p e s a n tr e n was run by a fam ous 'ulama! and a s h a ik h of the 
Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order nam ed Tolhah. Shaikh Tolhah 
w as a k h a lifa h (assistant) of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas, the 
founder of the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order. At this 
p e s a n tr e n A b a h S e p u h first studied the teaching of the Sufi order 
(Soebardi 1978:219-220). As Dhofier has shown, it is common in 
the p e sa n tre n tradition th at students move from one p e sa n tre n to 
another to m aster various fields of Islamic science. Dhofier 
describes such students as 'knowledge-seeking w anderers' 
(1982:24). As he was interested in Sufism, A b a h S e p u h m ade 
Pesantren Kalisapu the last stop in his wandering.
Soebardi suggests th at A b a h S e p u h went to Mecca to perform 
pilgrimage and stayed there to study the Q adiriyyah-

--- Page 97 of 144 ---
88
N aqshabandiyyah order with a very famous shaikh, that is, Shaikh 
'Abd al-Karim, the successor of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas 
(Soebardi 1978:220). During the second half of nineteenth and 
early twentieth century many students from Java stayed in Mecca 
and Medina and learned various branches of Islamic science. 
Soebardi assumes that the duration of A bah Sepuh's stay in Mecca 
was from 1876 to 1905 the date of the establishment of Pesantren 
Suryalaya (1978:220). This would be a period of twenty-nine years. 
This assumption is questionable, however, because in other 
sources it is suggested that Suryalaya was not the first pesantren 
A bah Sepuh established. When studying at Pesantren Kalisapu, 
A bah Sepuh already had a pesantren at Tundangan, which he 
founded either in 1871 (Djamily 1990:6) or in 1890 (Sanusi 
1990:96) so that at the time he did not stay permanently in 
Kalisapu. Sometimes he stayed to teach at Pesantren Tundangan, 
which was another centre of the teaching of the Qadariyyah- 
N aqshabandiyyah order. Abah Sepuh was once imprisoned by the 
Dutch Colonial government for two reasons: first, because he did 
not have a letter of permission to offer Islamic education to his 
community. Another reason, according to the Dutch government, 
was that he taught his community teachings that deviated from 
Islamic doctrines. This threatened social harmony and peace in the 
community. After he was freed, his pesantren was moved to Cisero, 
Pagerageung but there the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order did 
not develop well. As a consequence, he chose to move his 
pesantren again to Godebag, its present location which was later

--- Page 98 of 144 ---
89
named Suryalaya. There he becam known as K y a i G odebag. When 
he established Suryalaya A b a h S e p u h was already 65 years old 
(Dasuki 1990:26-29). Thus, if he had already founded a p e sa n tre n 
and moved it twice, he must have returned to West Java before 
1905.
It is not clear whether Shaikh ~Abd al-Karim appointed A b a h 
S e p u h as his khalifah. Sources such as Djamily (1987; 1990), 
Sanusi (1990) and Jahja (1990) never mention that Shaikh 
Abdullah Mubarak studied the Sufi order with Shaikh \Abd al- 
Karim in Mecca. Nor does the silsila h of the Sufi order of Suryalaya 
mention Shaikh \Abd al-Karim as one of its sh a ik h . A b a h S e p u h 
was not only appointed by Shaikh Tolhah as a k h a lifa h of the Sufi 
order but entrusted to be his successor as a sh a ik h of the 
Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order. The ceremony of his 
installation as a new sh a ik h known as hirqah was held in 1908 in 
Shaikh Tolhah’s house, the village of Trusmi, Cirebon (Dasuki 
1990:30). Before A b a h S e p u h became a sh a ik h of the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order, in 1907 Shaikh Tolhah who was 115 
years old had visited Pesantren Suryalaya to evaluate the 
development of the Sufi order. He witnessed that it was more 
progressive than that of Kalisapu. This is probably a reason why 
Shaikh Tolhah appointed A b a h S e p u h as a sh a ik h . The later 
development of Suryalaya as a centre of the teaching of the 
Q adiriyyah- N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order became more and more rapid 
(Dasuki 1990:29).

--- Page 99 of 144 ---
90
A b a h S e p u h led P esantren Suryalaya for about forty-five 
years or until 1950, the year he w as no longer able to lead it due to 
his old age (Djamily 1990:6). He passed away on 25 Ja n u ary , 1956 
at the age of 120 years and w as buried in the u p p er p a rt of the 
grounds in the p e sa n tre n complex. The tom b of A b a h S e p u h is an 
im p o rtan t place of zia ra h not only for the stu d e n ts an d the 
com m unity b u t also for visitors to the p e sa n tre n who seek b a ra k a h 
(blessing). The grave h as a roof and a stone wall w ith a locked door. 
The tom bstone is in the shape of a lotus flower m ade of ceram ic 
m aterial (Soebardi 1978:221). The tom b w hich is located a t the 
centre of its building is always w ell-m antained. In the front p a rt of 
the building exists a special room for visitors (Galba 1991:18).
D uring the period of A b a h S e p u h 's leadership P esantren 
Suryalaya achieved significant progress, particularly regarding the 
spread of the teachings of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order 
to the Islam ic com m unity. D uring his life he already w itnessed its 
wide spread not only in W est Ja v a b u t also in C entral and E ast 
Ja v a (Galba 1991:18). The developm ent of education and learning 
activities during the period was, however, not reported.
Hagiographie accounts of A b a h S e p u h 's life are filled with 
stories of his patience, firm ness and piety. His daughter, Siti 
R esidah, tells th a t A b a h S e p u h w ent to a M a u lu d a n (the Prophet's 
birthday) cerem ony in w hich he w as not given food so th a t he w as 
extrem ely hungry. B ut he w as so patient th a t he did not ask for it. 
On the way he w ent hom e A b a h S e p u h m et an old w om an who 
invited him to eat a t h er house (1985:13-15).

--- Page 100 of 144 ---
91
A story about the Project of Rawa Lakbok shows the strong
belief in Abah Sepuh's magical power. Sanusi reports that at first
the swamp functioned as a shelterred forest. Then it was planned
to be productive irrigated rice field. It needed extremely heavy work
to clear Rawa Lakbok which was famous to the surrounding
community for its eerieness. In fact, many workers were sick and
some of them died. As a consequence, many were scared and
stopped working. This confused the Regent of Ciamis who was then
told to seek the help of Abah Sepuh's prayer. The kyai fulfilled the
request. Afterwords, people returned to their work and no one
became sick and died (Sanusi 1990:101-102).
Siti Residah reports that all of Abah Sepuh's predictions
about the future became realities. She writes:
One day, after Rama [a name that Siti Rosidah calls his 
father] had had a drink, I was invited to have a walk. 
While we were walking, Rama said: "Nyai, one time in 
the future this place will be busy and the hill side will 
be torn down by Noor Anom to build a school. He will be 
its director. Now he is still a child and will be sent to 
Islamic schools. And this road will be paved in order 
that vehicles can pass. And this place will become a 
small town which is lit up by electricity and filled with 
buildings of my descendants. Guests from everywhere 
will come to visit your elder brother as mv successor.
The number will be much more than today (1985:3)
An important unforgotten legacy of Abah Sepuh is that he
wrote in 1954 a Sundanese treatise called Tanbih (religious
admonition) as a w asiat (exhortation) to his students and followers
which basically contains the admonition to be careful in all matters
and not to behave contrary to Islamic doctrines as well as
Government rules (Galba 1991:18). The Tanbih recommends four
basic kebajikan (good deeds) which derive from purity: first, one

--- Page 101 of 144 ---
92
has to pay respect to 'higher' people in either physical or spiritual 
matters; Second, one has to be modest and cooperate with the 
fellow human beings in performing both the rules of God and the 
rules of the state and avoid any conflicts and fights; Third, one is 
forbidden to humiliate and to be arrogant to the 'lower' people. 
Instead, one has to love and guide them in full mercy. Finally, one 
has to love, be friendly and good to the poor to show that one is 
conscious that the poor never expect to be poor (Nurol Aen and 
Mubarok 1990:355-356).
On the Tanbih the Rektor of Islamic Institute of Latifah
Mubarokiyyah, as quoted by Djamily, points out:
This Tanbih is an exhortation directed by Shaikhuna 
Almarhum Shaikh H. Abdullah Mubarak ibn Nur 
Muhammad in Patapan Suryalaya Kejembaran 
Rahm aniyah (the complex of the beloved and famous 
Suryalaya), which is given to all students, male and 
female, old and young. The exhortation m ust be obeyed 
in its full by all students in order to gain salvation in 
this world and the Hereafter (Djamily 1990:124).
The Tanbih is an exortation of Pesantren Suryalaya that
must be understood, mastered as well as believed and practised as
the proof of devotion to the teacher and as pleasing to God in
conducting all God's commandments and the government's rules.
In this sense, therefore, the Tanbih has a close relationship to the
national development (Djamily 1990:127). Since the proclamation
of the Republic of Indonesia Pesantren Suryalaya has become a
partner with the government in the realisation of national
development aims. The Tanbih is a valuable legacy of Shaikh
Abdullah Mubarak which continues to constitute the formal rule in
Pesantren Suryalaya.

--- Page 102 of 144 ---
93
B. The Spiritual Power of A b a h A n o m
After A b a h S e p u h died, Pesantren Suryalaya was headed by 
his son named Ahmad Shohibulwafa Tadjul Arifin known as A b a h 
A nom , the young kyai as distinct from his father who was known 
as A b a h S ep u h , the old kyai. A b a h A n o m , the principle leader of the 
Pesantren Tarekat of Suryalaya at present, began to lead the 
p e sa n tre n in 1950, six years before his father died. A b a h A n o m was 
born on 1st January, 1915, ten years after the establishment of 
Suryalaya (Djamily 1990:6). So Abah Anom was 35 years old when 
he assisted his father in leading the p e sa n tre n . This age is 
relatively a n o m (young) to lead a p e sa n tre n and a Sufi order. On 
the other hand, A b a h S e p u h 's age was more than a hundred years 
at the time, an age that is normally regarded as s e p u h (old). Thus, 
a n o m and se p u h were used to make the distinction between the 
two leaders (Sanusi 1990:104-105).
As Soebardi mentions, unlike his father and the majority of 
famous k y a i in Java during his period, A b a h A n o m never went to 
Mecca or to Cairo for his Islamic education, He was educated in 
several p e sa n tre n in Java as well as by his educated father 
(1978:221). After finishing primary school, A b a h A n o m went to 
T s a n a w iy a h (Islamic secondary school) in Ciamis for two years. 
From 1930 to 1931 he continued his education in Pesantren 
Cicariang where he learned fiq h , the Qur'an and Hadith. Then 
A b a h A n o m learned fiq h , n a h w u (Arabic syntax), s a r q f (Arabic 
morphology) and b a la g h a h (Arabic literature) in Pesantren 
Jam budipa for one and a half years. His wandering continued to a

--- Page 103 of 144 ---
94
p e sa n tre n in G entur for the sam e duration. This p e sa n tre n was led 
by a fam ous a jen g a n nam ed Shatibi who m astered fiq h , tauhid, 
tafsir, H adith and ilm u a la t (Arabic grammar). These three 
p e sa n tre n were located in Cianjur, W est Java. A b a h A n o m then 
spent two years studying at Pesantren Cireunghas in Sukabum i 
with Ajengan Atjeng Mumu who was fam ous for his ilm u h ikm a h 
(magical knowledge from the collections of prayers and spiritual 
training) and sila t (traditional self-defence arts). Afterwords, he 
steeped him self in ilm u h ikm a h and sila t with another fam ous k y a i 
at Pesantren Citengah in Panjalu (Saleh 1985:74; Praja 1990:115- 
116).
W hen A b a h A n o m was 23 years old, his wondering form one 
p e sa n tre n to another ended with his m arriage with Euis Siti 
Ru yanah. Then between 1938 and 1939 he w ent to Mecca for the 
pilgrimage and stayed there for seven m onths. During this period 
A b a h A n o m participated in h a la q a h (b a n d o n g a n) learning at the 
Masjid al-Haram in which he studied ta fsir and Hadith. It is not 
m entioned who his teacher was at the mosque. In addition, as 
Praja describes, in Jabal Q ubaish a k h a lfa h of A b a h S e p u h from 
G arut, nam ely Shaikh Ramli often held discussions on Sufism, 
particularly the books of Sirr al-Asrar and G h a n iy y a h al-talibin of 
'Abd al-Qadir al-Jailani. A b a h A n o m also participated in these 
discussions (Praja 1990:116-117).
During the leadership of A b a h A nom , Pesantren Suryalaya 
developed not only in its capacity for formal education, which today 
consists of various levels of schooling from kindergarten to an

--- Page 104 of 144 ---
95
Islamic university, but also in non-formal training, besides
representing the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order. As a son of
famous sh a ik h , A b a h A n o m inherited his father's charisma. This is
in striking contrast with other p e sa n tre n which used to be centres
of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order in Java such as al-Falak
Pangentongan, Futuhiyah Mranggen and Darul Ulum Rejoso.
Unlike A b a h A nom , the successors of these p e sa n tre n are not able
to maintain their founders' charisma so that they are no longer the
important centres of the Sufi order. A b a h A n o m 's position as the
successor of A b a h S e p u h is described by Soebardi as follows.
Thus he continues his father's task, and inherited 
'baraka' (spiritual power, divine grace) from him. 
Continuing the teaching of his father, the spiritual 
power is maintained by him and guarded and 
strengthened by all the members of the ta rika t by 
visiting the grave of his father. Thus the tomb of S h a ik h 
Mubarak in the p e sa n tre n complex is regarded as a holy 
tomb and an important factor in the continuation of the 
ta rika t by A b a h A n o m (1978:221).
In addition, A b a h A n o m is expert in the three important 
branches of Islamic knowledge: ta u h id (theology), fiq h (Islamic law) 
and ta s a w w u f (Sufism). His excellence in Arabic as an important 
standard for a k y a i within the p e sa n tre n tradition as well as in 
Sundanese and in Indonesian also supports his success in leading 
the p e sa n tre n and the Sufi order (Soebardi 1978:222). Further, he 
has strong personal magnetism. In his seventies today which is an 
u zu r (old and weak) age for the average Indonesians, he appears 
much younger and this impresses his followers and visitors to the 
p e sa n tre n (Galba 1991:19).

--- Page 105 of 144 ---
96
Due to the great influence of A b a h A n o m as the leader of the 
p esa n tre n , the p e sa n tre n has a large number of followers from 
different regions, social strata and occupations. The followers of 
the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order of Suryalaya are found not 
only in Indonesia, but also in Malaysia and Singapore. In the 
province of West Java, apart from Tasikmalaya regency, many 
members of Pesantren Suryalaya are found in the Bandung region. 
Here several students of Abah Sepuh such as Haji Sewaka (an ex- 
Governor of West Java and ex-Minister of Defence during 
Soekarno's regime) and Raden Rachmat Wiratanumadja (an ex- 
Secretary of the province), played a significant role in spreading the 
Sufi order. The role of another famous and rich student of A b a h 
S ep u h , H. Sobari, should be mentioned as well. It is in one of his 
houses in Tasikmalaya that A b a h S e p u h stayed several years 
before he died. The number of A b a h A n o m 's students is very large. 
To mention some, Ahmad Sanusi (a professor and ex-Rektor of the 
State Institute for Educational Studies of Bandung), Oteng Sutisna 
(a professor in the same institute) and Eddy Nurhadi (a professor 
in the Institute for Technology of Bandung). In the Jakarta and 
Bogor areas, in addition to high status followers such as General 
Yoga Soegama, several famous artists such as Eddy Sud, Titik 
Puspa and Hetty Koes Endang became members of Pesantren 
Suryalaya (Praja and Anwar 1990:201-212). In Central Java, in 
Pekalongan regions, the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order of 
Suryalaya was first introduced by a student of A b a h S ep u h , H. 
Anwar bin H.Abdurrahman (who died in 1988) in 1929. His

--- Page 106 of 144 ---
97
relationship with Abah Sepuh was so close that he was married to 
one of Abah Sepuh's daughter, Sofiyah. Their son is Zainal Abidin, 
the present chief of the division of science and missionary activities 
in Pesantren Suryalaya and one of A bah Anom's khalifah in 
Pesantren Suryalaya. Zainal Abidin is very active in the 
development of the pesantren. In East Java the pesantren also 
attracts some followers, including several lecturers of the State 
Institute for Islamic Studies of Sunan Ampel (Praja and Anwar 
1990:203-205). There is no available information on the 
relationship of members of Pesantren Suryalaya with other 
members of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in Pesantren 
Pangentongan, Pesantren Mranggen and Pesantren Rejoso.
The followers of Pesantren Suryalaya are also scattered 
throughout South Sumatera, Kalimantan and Lombok. In these 
regions some followers of the Q adiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order, 
who received it through other khalifah of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib, 
have become the members of Pesantren Suryalaya. K.H.Abdurrani 
Mahmud from Pontianak, West Kalimantan, for instance, became 
A bah Anom's badal in 1977 (Praja and Anwar 1990:205; Nuro Aen 
and Noor Anom Mubarak 1990:350-351).
In Singapore and Malaysia there are many followers of 
Pesantren Suryalaya. In Singapore the Sufi order was first 
introduced by a student of Abah S e p u h H.Ibin Sarbini. With its 
rapid development, in 1975 A bah Anom installed a badal named 
H.Ali bin H.Muhammad. The relationship between the two regions 
then became closer. Several famous preachers such as H.Abubakar

--- Page 107 of 144 ---
98
Atjeh and K.H.Zainal Abidin Anwar were sent to Singapore. In 
1987, according to Praja and Anwar, there were about three 
thousands of members of Pesantren Suryalaya in Singapore 
(1990:213). The number of members in Malaysia is much larger 
than that in Singapore. In Malaysia they are scattered in Kedah, 
Kuala Lumpur, Trengganu, Sabah and Serawak. A b a h A n o m has 
appointed four b a d a l to Malaysia: H.Muhammad Said bin
Muhammad Al-Attas (Sabah), H.Muhammad Trang Issa (Sarawak), 
H. Muhammad Otsman bin H.Abd.latif (Trengganu) and 
H.Muhammad Zuki bin Shafie (Kedah)(Praja and Anwar 1990:214- 
221; Nurol Aen and Mubarak 1990:350-351).
A b a h A n o m as the teacher and leader of the Sufi order has 
the charge of several faithful b a d a l [khalifah) whoi are scattered 
throughout various districts in Southeast Asia. The b a d a l are 
authorised to take new students' oath to become the followers of 
the Sufi order. They are selected, trained and installed to spread 
and lead the Sufi order in their own region. The b a d a l are actually 
not organised in a formal way with the central authority of A b a h 
A nom , but are bound by ties of common devotion and by the 
methods of spiritual discipline as well as by enthusiasm (Soebardi 
1978:222-223). The b a d a l play important roles in spreading the 
Sufi order and accelerating the process of Islamisation.
A b a h A n o m is the leader of the p e sa n tre n and as such is 
known as the S e s e p u h within the structure of the Suryalaya 
organisation. To organise the daily activities of the p e sa n tre n and 
implement its programs, Y a s a s a n S erb a B a k ti P ondok P esa n tren

--- Page 108 of 144 ---
99
Suryalaya was established in 1961. Its establishment was initiated
by H.Sewaka and his first chief executive was H.Sobari. In 19901992 it was headed by H.Tutu Ruhiyat Mintapradja. Today, the
branches of foundation are scattered in 29 cities in Java, South
Sumatera and West Kalimantan. The main duties of the foundation
are to organise formal and non-formal education and to manage
the missionary activities and preachers, economic activites of the
members, pondok inabah and so on (Praja 1990:126-130). Because
its position is underneath the SesepuK the foundation has,
however, no authority to judge and evaluate the leadership of Abah
Anom (Dasuki 1990:31-32). Thus, the pattern of leadership of
Pesantren Suryalaya involves, to a large extent, in what Mastuhu
has called charismatic leadership (1990:88). This is quite different
from the type of leadership in Pesantren Tebuireng which is
directed by a politician, Yusuf Hashim.
The success of A bah Anom's leadership is not only indicated
by the large number of his students and followers but also by the
fact Pesantren Suryalaya regularly receives praise and honours
from the government for its success in supporting national
development. The pesantren often receives material contributions
from the government to assist its educational development and
training in the Sufi order as well. Moral support is also given the
pesantren , as Soebardi observes:
Both the local as well as the central government officials 
are most conscious of the potentialities of the pesantren 
and follow its activities very closely. By means of the 
regional branch of the Ministry of Religious Affairs and 
the regional administration, the central government 
indicated its interest in the development of the

--- Page 109 of 144 ---
100
pesantren as testified by the visits by local government 
officials, both civil and military, to the pesantren at the 
time of important religious ceremonies (1978:230).
On the other hand, the pesantren, in accordance with its
ideals and aims, as written in the Tanbih, always follows
government rules in addition to the doctrines of Islam. Pesantren
Suryalaya tries to cooperate with the government in all matters.
During the Darul Islam movement led by Kartosuwiryo in 1950's
Abah Anom organised his followers against the movement. As
result, Abah Anom received an award from Kodam VI Siliwangi (the
Siliwangi military division of West Java) on 17 September 1961 and
he was entrusted by the military authority of West Java to give
education and guidance to the remnants of the Darul Islam
guerillas. Similarly, in 1967 Abah Anom was given the task by the
Head of the Office of Religious affairs of the Siliwangi division of
West Java of giving Islamic instruction to former members of the
Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) (Soebardi 1978:229). Pesantren
Suryalaya has made great efforts to spread Pancasila (the basic
ideology of Indonesia). Abah Anom also supports the Golkar (the
government political party) and urges his followers to join and vote
for the party. After the 1982 general election, he was rewarded by
the government for the success of the party and in 1984 he was
appointed as a Pinisepuh Golkar (Elder of Golkar) (Praja 1990:124).
In this regard, it is important to quote Abah Anom's suggestion to
his followers.
Let us hope that the Head of the State will steadily 
increase his glory and greatness, so that he can give 
protection and guidance to the whole people in an 
atmosphere of peace, justice and prosperity, spiritually 
as well as materially. I, as leader of this brotherhood,

--- Page 110 of 144 ---
101
wish sincerely to offer counsel to all m em bers th at it is 
the responsibility of each one of you to take care in all 
circum stances, not to do anything which is against the 
rules of religion as well as those of the state. Be loyal to 
both religion and state. Such is the attitude of a person 
who is strong in faith and who is able to express 
gratitute to God and to the governm ent (Soebardi 
1978:230-231).
The position of A b a h A n o m is unconditionally obeyed and 
even strengthened by his followers because within the Sufi 
tradition whatever is said by the sh a ik h m ust be obeyed. To 
disobey him is a kind of sin. This is in striking contrast to the case 
of Kyai M usta'in Ramli who was desserted by m any of his 
followers.
C. The Teaching and Rituals of Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h of 
Suryalaya
The doctrine of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order 
taught by Pesantren Suryalaya is basically th at taught by its 
Founder, Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sam bas. The leader of Pesantren 
Suryalaya stresses th at his Sufi order is based on the Q ur'an and 
Hadith, two basic sources of Islam, which are the foundation of the 
teaching of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order. In his book 
M iftah al-Sudur, A b a h A n o m (1988) quotes a large num ber of verses 
of the Q ur’an and Hadith as the basis of the Sufi rituals such as 
dhikir, talqin and bai'ah and silsilah. In this regard he also refers to 
several fam ous Sufis such as Shaikh 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jailani, 
Shaikh B aha’ al-Din al-N aqshabandi and al-Ghazali. To the 
followers of the Sufi order, the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order 
which is developed in Pesantren Suryalaya is not at all contrary to

--- Page 111 of 144 ---
102
the basic teaching of Islam, nor is it an additional element to it. It 
has very strong roots in Islamic doctrines. In addition to the 
Qur'an and Hadith, the followers of the Sufi order hold two other 
sources of Islam which are also held within the realm of orthodoxy, 
that is, ijma' (the consensus of 'ulama') and qiyas (analogy). These 
are used with regard to matters which are not explained by the 
Qur'an and Hadith (Djamily 1990:110).
The Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order is practised with, at 
least, three purposes, as describes in Abah Anorris treatise entitled 
Azaz Tujuan Thoreqat Qodiriyyah Naqsyabandiyyah. These 
purposes are expressed in daily prayers which are performed at 
least twice every day after obligatory prayers. One prayer says, 
Ilahy anta maqsudy wa ridaka matluby, a tiny mahabbatak wa 
ma'rifatak, "O God, it is you that I intend and your pleasure that I 
seek, grant to me abilities to love you and know you (Dasuki 
1990:46; Djamily 1990:24). This prayer is well-known to the 
followers of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order. Thus the first 
purpose of the teaching of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order 
in Suryalaya is taqarrub ila Allah or to approach God as closely as 
possible so that there is no separation between God and His 
creature. The second purpose is to follow the Path which is blessed 
by God both with regard to worship; obeying all His 
commandments and avoiding all His prohibitions to achieve His 
pleasure. The third purpose is mahabbah (love) and ma'rifah 
(knowledge) of God which are gained through the blessed Path. It is 
understood that mahabbah and ma'rifah contain firmness and

--- Page 112 of 144 ---
103
honesty. When one loves and knows God, a variety of hikmah 
(wisdom) arise. One will be accustomed to perform both outer 
(lahir) worship and inner (batin.) worship. Their manifestation 
involves justice in all matters. In addition, the reflection of 
mahabbah and m arifa h results in love and affection to fellow 
creatures of God, including love of one's homeland (Praja 
1990:137-138; Dasuki 1990: 46-47).
These purposes are the core of Islamic teaching. Like other 
Sufi orders in Islam, the principle ritual practised by the followers 
of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order is dhikir which is 
practised regularly and orderly, either individually or together. 
Within the Qadiriyyah- N aqshabandiyyah order in Suryalaya dhikir 
is understood as the core of ibadah which means remembrance of 
God by forgetting all others because He is the only one who 
possesses excellence. Always performing dhikir means always 
remembering God. The best formula of dhikir is, la ilah ilia A llah 
"There is no god but Allah" which is usually known as the kalimah 
tayyibah (originally meaning 'the good word') because it denies all 
other gods and maintains the confession of the unity of Allah. 
Followers of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in Suryalaya 
should chant the kalimah toyyibah at any time and in any 
conditions, but especially after obligatory prayers (Dasuki 
1990:50). A bahA nom writes of the several functions of the kalimah 
tayyibah :
The kalimah tayyibah can cleanse one who chants it 
from great shirk as well as small shirk and make him 
become an sincere and pure man. It can also break the 
separation between man's heart and God and cleanse

--- Page 113 of 144 ---
104
his soul from all impurity and disgraceful 
characteristics .... [It] also grants one k a sh f, in addition 
to true and sincere character, ilm u la d u n n i [knowledge 
which is not learned but is granted by god], spiritual 
secrets, and m u sh a h a d a h [witness] as God's blessings 
(1988:15-16).
There are two kinds of d h ikir practised by the Q adiriyyah- 
N a q s h a b a n d iy y a h order: d h ikir ja h a r or 'loud dhikir1 and dhikir 
k h a fi (sirr, qalbi) or 'mental dhikir1 . D hikir ja h a r is taught by the 
Q a d iriyya h order whereas the d h ikir k h a fi by the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h 
order which forbides the d h ikir ja h a r. In Pesantren Suryalaya the 
d h ikir ja h a r is recited as loudly as possible. Soebardi has the 
impression that the d h ikir ja h a r is more important than the dhikir 
k h a fi which is recited softly in a low voice or mentally. The dhikir 
ja h a r is practised together every day after M aghrib prayer. The 
d h ikir khafi. is usually carried out only after the d h ikir ja h a r. 
Soebardi points out that the practices of the Sufi order in 
Pesantren Suryalaya are basically the Q a d iriyya h practices to 
which the practice of d h ikir k h a fi of the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order is 
united (1978:225-226). To the followers of the Sufi order, the dhikir 
k h a fi is as important as the d h ikir ja h a r because it is performed in 
any conditions every day (Munawar-Rahman and Ismail 1991:103). 
A b a h A n o m has discussed several famous Sufis' views on which 
d h ikir is better (1988:39-47). He concludes that each d h ikir is 
important in its own circumstance. The d h ikir k h a fi is better if it 
disturbs other people who are performing prayers or sleeping. 
Otherwise, the d h ikir ja h a r is better because it enhances one's 
enthusiasm, directs hearing, and reduces sleepiness and 
listlessness (1988:46-47).

--- Page 114 of 144 ---
105
In a c c o rd a n c e w ith th e te a c h in g of S h a ik h A h m a d K h atib
S a m b a s in F a th al-'Arifin, th e d h ik ir ja h a r s h o u ld b e p erfo rm ed in a
c e rta in m a n n e r (I follow S o e b a rd i's tr a n s la tio n in 1978:225):
th e w o rd la s h o u ld b e g in below th e n a v el a n d rise to th e 
b r a in in th e h e a d ; a fte r th a t, on e s h o u ld s a y ilaha, from 
th e b r a in w hile low ering th e h e a d slow ly to th e rig h t 
sh o u ld e r. T h e n one s h o u ld b e g in to s a y illallah w hile 
low ering th e h e a d from th e rig h t s h o u ld e r to w a rd th e 
b a s e of th e c h e s t on th e le ft-h a n d sid e, c o n c lu d in g w ith 
th e in n e rm o s t h e a r t b e n e a th th e rib, a n d e x h alin g w hile 
p ro n o u n c in g th e n a m e of A llah a s stro n g ly a s p o ssib le 
u n til th e v ib ra tio n s a re felt th r o u g h every p a r t of th e 
b o d y a s if th r o u g h o u t th e b o d y evil w o rk s a re b u r n t u p 
a n d lig h t s h in e s u n til all p a r ts of th e b o d y a re p u rified 
w ith th e Light of God (Tajul A rifin 1988:33).
T he rh y th m of dhikir ja h a r is also c a rrie d o u t in a c e rta in
w ay. It b e g in s w ith a slow rh y th m a n d th e n , th e lo n g er th e d h ikir
goes o n th e f a s te r th e r h y th m b eco m es. It s to p s w h e n its in te n s ity
is a t th e c u lm in a tin g p o in t, w h ic h is u s u a lly sig n a lled b y a slow
rh y th m a g a in (van B ru in e s s e n 1 992a:96). S o e b a rd i o b se rv es t h a t
th e r itu a l is co m m only c a rrie d o u t u n d e r th e le a d e rs h ip of a s h a ik h
or Im a m w ho le a d s c o m m u n a l p ra y e r (1 978:225).
It is su g g e ste d t h a t th e b o d y m o v e m e n t of d h ikir ja h a r h a s
tw o fu n c tio n s . T he first is to b a la n c e th e m o v e m e n t of iblis (evil) to
te m p t m a n a s sa id in th e Q u r'a n .
He said : B e c a u se T h o u h a s t th ro w n m e o u t of th e w ay, 
lo! I will lie in w a it for th e m on T h y s tr a ig h t w ay. T h e n 
will I a s s a u lt th e m from before th e m a n d b e h in d th e m , 
from th e ir rig h t a n d th e ir left. N or w ilt T h o u find, in 
m o s t of th e m , g r a titu d e (for T hy m ercies) (7:16-17).
T h e P ro p h e t M u h a m m a d once su g g e s te d t h a t iblis h a s
d e stro y e d m a n b y h is te m p ta tio n to s in w h e re a s m a n h a s
d e stro y e d iblis w ith th e k a lim a h ta y y ib a h a n d istighfar (ask in g for
forgiveness). A n o th e r fu n c tio n is m erely for th e p le a s u re of th e

--- Page 115 of 144 ---
106
followers which cannot be gained w ithout body movem ent (Djamily 
1990:114).
The dhikir jahar is usually chanted 165 tim es or more, but 
always an odd num ber of times. In busy situations one may 
perform it at least three times. The num ber 165 is based on qiyas 
(analogy) from a Hadith of the Prophet, which teaches M uslims to 
recite subhan Allah (holiness of God), alhamdu li Allah (praise to 
God) and Allah akbar (God is the greatest) 33 tim es each. Because 
m an has five latifah (subtleties), every subtlety is given the kalimah 
tayyibah 33 tim es (Djamily 1990:111). The dhikir jahar m ay be 
practised either individually or publicly. In his book entitled Uqud 
al-Juman, Abah Anom describes in detail the daily ritual known as 
wiridan which should be performed every time after the five daily 
prayers. The daily ritual basically consists of recitation of the 
kalimah tayyibah, invocation to the Prophet, prayers and tawassul 
which are practised in certain num ber of times.
In addition to the daily ritual, the weekly ritual known as 
khataman and the m onthly ritual known as manaqiban are 
practised in the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order of Pesantren 
Suryalaya. Khataman, which basically contains prayers to God, is 
performed minimally once a week and m ay be performed 
individually or together. It is usually carried out in the houses of 
followers of the Sufi order arranged in turn. The time and 
frequency of khataman depend on them (Galba 1991:61-62). In 
Pesantren Suryalaya khataman is usually performed twice a week 
between Maghrib (Sunset) and Isha (Night) prayers. Like daily

--- Page 116 of 144 ---
107
w irid a n, as described in Uqud a l-Ju m a n , k h a ta m a n consists of 
invocation, prayer and ta w a s s u l but they are performed a large 
number of times.
A very important ritual is m anaqiban. In Pesantren 
Suryalaya m a n a q ib a n is carried out at the meeting day on the 
eleventh of each month of the Lunar Calender. Therefore, it is 
called se b ela sa n . The m a n a q ib a n consists of the ritual of reciting 
the life story of the Prophet Muhammad or of Shaikh \Abd al-Qadir 
al-Jailani emphasising the virtues and miraculous aspects of their 
lives (Soebardi 1978:226). In the m a n a q ib a n ceremony, the Tanbih 
of Shaikh Abdullah Mubarak is also recited. As it is never 
neglected in every ritual of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order, 
ta w a s s u l is chanted in the m a n a q ib a n ceremony. The meeting is 
usually completed with a cera m a h or instructions on Islamic 
teachings (Praja 1990:144). Soebardi observes that the m a n a q ib a n 
ceremony in Pesantren Suryalaya is always attended by a large 
number of participants consisting of peasants, public servants, 
merchants and even military not only from the district of 
Tasikmalaya but also from other regencies such as Ciamis, Garut, 
Cianjur, Bogor, Bandung (1978:223).
Like other Sufi orders, to become a member of the 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order of Pesantren Suryalaya, one 
must follow an initiation rite called bai'ah. It involves an 
individual's expression of a full vow of allegiance and loyalty to the 
sh a ik h to practise all rituals and rules regulated by the s h a ik h 
(Tajul Arifin 1988:48). An initial element in the process of b a i'a h is

--- Page 117 of 144 ---
108
that the novice is given secret instruction called talqin. Talqin, 
which originally means instruction, is a process of reviving the 
heart which forgets God by filling it with the dhikir khafi so that the 
heart always remembers Him (Munawar-Rahman and Ismail 
1991:102). In this process the novice is instructed about the seven 
latifah (subtleties) as described in Fath al-'Arifin of Shaikh Ahmad 
Khatib Sambas. Then, the novice receives a course of progressive 
training in the dhikir jahar. When he is well-prepared, the bai'ah is 
carried out (Soebardi 1978:226). Abah Anom has discussed the 
importance of talqin and bai'ah in his Sufi order citing several 
verses of the Qur'an and the Hadith (1988:48-68).
Talqin might be performed individually or in a group and its 
place depends on the number of the novices. In Pesantren 
Suryalaya it is often carried out by Abah Anom at the mosque after 
obligatory prayers. Every Muslim can be imparted the instruction. 
In fact, as Galba observes, the pesantren is always busy with the 
novices who come for instruction. These novices are not only the 
students of the pesantren and the community but also visitors to 
the pesantren. Those who have been given talqin and have sworn 
bai'ah are regarded as ikhw an (brethren) of the pesantren (Galba 
1991:16).
To give talqin in other regions is performed by wakil talqin or 
badal (deputy). They are entitled to receive the initiation vow and 
give secret instruction to the novices in their own district. Abah 
Anom has twenty three badal scattered throughout West, Central 
and East Java, as well as South Sumatera, Lombok, Malaysia and

--- Page 118 of 144 ---
109
Singapore. The b a d a l have completed a training course organised 
by A b a h A n o m in Pesantren Suryalaya and have been given y a za h 
(certificate). Every m onth some b a d a l return to Pesantren 
Suryalaya and are given further instruction from A b a h A n o m 
(Soebardi 1978:227).
D. P ondok R em a ja In a b a h
A unique characteristic of Pesantren Suryalaya is its 
function as the centre for the treatm ent of narcotic addicts and 
delinquent youths. The centre is known as the P ondok R em a ja 
Inabah. The institution was established in 1972. The centre is 
regarded as offering effective treatm ent. According to a report 
quoted by M unawar-Rahm an and Ismail, between 1981 and 1989 
alm ost all patients were successfully cured (93.424%) (1991:105). 
There have been an increasing num ber of patients and as a result, 
Pesantren Suryalaya has, in 1990, established 23 branches of 
P ondok R em a ja In a b a h scattered throughout Java with two in 
Kedah (Malaysia) and Singapore. This effort was m ade in order that 
the P ondok R em a ja In a b a h can be easily reached by the needy 
(Galba 1991:31-33).
The method of curing in the P ondok R em a ja In a b a h is based 
on the teaching of the Q a d iriy ya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order and 
Islamic teachings in general. This is in accordance with the 
m eaning of the word in a b a h which is "return to the Path of God". It 
aim s at returning addicts and the like to the Path th at God has laid 
down for m ankind. It is probably not exaggerated to suggest that

--- Page 119 of 144 ---
n o
P esantren Suryalaya is the only place in the world th a t provides 
trea tm en t by su ch a method. Abah Anom conpiled a curriculum 
and syllabus as a guide to treatm en t entitled Ibadah Sebagai 
Metoda Pembinaan Korban Penyalahgimaan Narkotika dan 
Kenakalan Remqja which contains full ibadah (worship). He also 
provides three verses of the Q ur'an (17:82; 10:57; 13:28) and two 
H adith as the doctrinal bases of the method.
1. We send down (stage by stage) in the Q ur'an th a t 
w hich is a healing and a mercy to those who believe. To 
the u n ju st it causes nothing b u t loss after loss (17:82).
2. O mankind! there h a th come to you a direction from 
your Lord and a healing for the (diseases) in your h ea rts 
and, for those who believe, a guide and a mercy (10:57).
3. To those who believe, and whose h ea rts find 
satisfaction in the rem em brance of Allah; for w ithout 
doubt in the rem em brance of Allah do h ea rts find 
satisfaction (13:28).
The two H adith are translated as follows: 1. Rem em brance of God 
is a healing to hearts. 2. Indeed every disease h a s medicine and 
the medicine to the h earts is rem em brance of God (Nurol Aen 
1990:397-398).
In P esantren Suryalaya the process of trea tm en t usually 
begins with s diagnosis of the patient by Abah Anom through 
inform ation from the patient's p arents or relatives and Abah 
Anom's spiritual knowledge. It depends on Abah Anom in which 
pondok inabah a patient may be treated. In other pondok inabah 
however inabah chiefs, as Abah Anom's deputies, are responsible 
for the decision. Within the first week a p atient stays in one of the 
pondok inabah, the pondok inabah chief can confirm the category 
of a patient's sickness. It is then decided w hether a p atien t can be 
given talqin of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order. A patient's

--- Page 120 of 144 ---
Ill
sickness is generally categorised as either minor (ringan) or serious 
[berat). The minor patients usually need forty days or less for 
treatment whereas the serious patients need six months. All 
patients are treated according to the curriculum that Abah Anom 
has composed (Nurol Aen 1990:410-411).
Dr.Su'dan who has conducted research on the process of 
curing in Pesantren Suryalaya reports that day and night the 
patients perform mandi tobat or a bath for repentance, obligatory 
prayers five times a day, a series of recommended prayers such as 
Sunriat Tahajjud, Sunnat Tasbih and Sannat Witir at night, and 
Sunnat Duha in the morning and a large number of Sunnat 
Rawatib performed before and after obligatory prayers, and both 
dhikir jahar and dhikir khafi so that they do not have any 
opportunity to think of anything except God (1991:75-77).
The doctor also examined the scientific aspects of the curing. 
First, isolating the patients in a certain place, like the Pondok 
Remaja Inabah. means total isolation from drugs which are at the 
same time replaced by remembrance of Allah. Then, having a bath 
at night [mandi tobat) in such a cold temperature in Tasikmalaya, 
according to Su'dan, can improve blood circulation. This is very 
important for the brain, heart and liver to function effectively. In 
addition, the dhikir jahar is effective for the lungs since breathing 
is at maximum when the dhikir jahar is performed in the way 
taught by the Qadiriyyah- Naqshabandiyyah prder of Pesantren 
Suryalaya (Su'dan 1991:77-78).
Through the continuous dhikir performed every day, one
is able to gain what C.G.Jung calls the deepest

--- Page 121 of 144 ---
112
unconsciousness archetype, that is, Allah. It is in the 
consciousness of Allah that a patient of Inabah can 
transform his soul in the direction of mature spiritual 
development (Munawar-Rahman and Ismail 1991:105).
Thus, by the methods of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah
order, Pesantren Suryalaya has become a successful participant in
national development, particularly with regard to narcoticism and
delinquency. For its success, Pesantren Suryalaya has received
several awards and praise from the government and society.
E. Education in Pesantren Suryalaya
Besides being a centre for the teaching of the Qadiriyyah- 
N aqshabandiyyah order and a centre for the treatment of addicts 
and delinquents, Pesantren Suryalaya, like the majority of 
pesantren in Java, is also a centre of education and learning from 
kindergarten to university levels. But this development is relatively 
new when compared to the educational development in Pesantren 
Tebuireng. It is not reported if there was a m adrasah established in 
the period of A bah Sepuh. It seems that Abah Sepuh was much 
more concerned with the spread of the teaching of his Sufi order 
than with the spread of Islamic teachings in general. In the period 
of A bah Sepuh only the traditional system of teaching was used, 
namely the weton system. Thus, compared to Pesantren Tebuireng, 
development and change in Islamic education were relatively slow.
It is since the period of Abah Anom that m adrasah and 
schools have developed well. The first m adrasah established in 
Pesantren Suryalaya was M adrasah Diniyyah Aw w aliyah 
(Elementary Religious School) in 1957, one year after Abah Sepuh

--- Page 122 of 144 ---
113
died. This madrasah was initiated and led by K.H. Noor Anom 
Mubarak, one of Abah Sepuh's sons (Hamzah 1990:374). It is 
acknowledged that K.H. Noor Anom Mubarak played a great role in 
the development of education and schooling in Pesantren 
Suryalaya. Within the structure of Pesantren Suryalaya he is the 
chief of the educational division. It is K.H. Noor Anom Mubarak as 
well who established the Sekolah Meneng ah Pertama (Junior High 
School) in 1962 and the Madrasah Tsanawiyah (Islamic Junior 
High School) in 1964. When they were founded he became the 
principal of both schools. Since 1983 the Sekolah Meneng ah 
Pertama has been headed by Issak Swandana and the Madrasah 
Tsanawiyah by Ondi Rosadi. However, K.H. Noor Anom Mubarak 
continues to lead the Madrasah Diniyah Awwaliyah until today 
(Hamzah 1990:374).
A training school for Islamic teachers, known as Pendidikan 
Guru Agama was established in 1967 under the leadership of M. 
Amin. Since 1980 its status, however, has changed to that of a 
Madrasah Aliyah (Islamic Senior High School) and is headed by 
Ahdi Nurudin. At the same level as the Madrasah Aliyah, the 
pesantren also established a Sekolah Menengah Atas (Senior High 
School) in 1976 with Ayat Hidayat as its chief. Today the school is 
led by H. Tutu Ruhiyat Mintapradja, the daily chief executive of 
Yayasan Serba Bakti Pondok Pesantren Suryalaya (1990-1992) 
(Hamzah 1990:374).
To provide for the needs of the community, the pesantren 
also has a Taman Kanak-kanak. This kindergarten was founded in

--- Page 123 of 144 ---
114
1978 under the leadership of Abah Anom's former wife, Euis Siti 
Ru'yanah (who died in 1980). Today this kindergarten is headed by 
Euis Maryam. At a higher educational level Pesantren Suryalaya 
established an institute for Islamic preachers known as Perguruan 
Tinggi Da'wah Islam (PTDI) in 1963. General Sudirman, an 
Indonesian national hero, inaugurated the institute. Several years 
later however the institute closed (Praja 1990:127). No reasons are 
given for its closure in the sources on Pesantren Suryalaya. A new 
Islamic institute known as Institut Agam a Islam Latifah 
M ubarokiyyah (LAILM] was then established in 1988. It has three 
faculties: Faculty of Islamic education, Faculty of Islamic Law, 
(which are founded in 1986) and Faculty of Islamic Theology 
(founded in 1988). Since its founding the Rektor of the Institute 
has been ex-Major General Oepa Soeparja Adimaja (Praja 
1990:127; Hamzah 1990:375).
Thus, today, in addition to the weton (bandongan) system of 
teaching, Pesantren Suryalaya has seven schools which, like 
Pesantren Tebuireng, can be classified into two major divisions. 
The first is Islamic-oriented schools or m adrasah consisting of the 
M adrasah Diniyah Awwaliyah, M adrasah Tsanaw iyah and 
M adrasah Aliy ah in addition to an Islamic university. At M adrasah 
Diniyah Aw w aliyah only basic fields of Islamic knowledge, such as 
fiqh, the recitation of the Qur'an, tauhid and morality, are taught to 
the students. At the M adrasah Tsanaw iyah and Aliy ah the 
curriculum consists of both Islamic subjects and general subjects 
such as arithmetic, natural science, geography, English and so on,

--- Page 124 of 144 ---
115
but the general subjects are of no more than a supplementary 
character. Such is the case too with the Islamic university. The 
other educational division consists of general-oriented schools 
such as Taman K anak-kanak , Sekolah Menengah Pertama and 
Sekolah Menengah Atas. The two latter schools mainly teach 
general knowledge except one subject called Pendidikan Agama 
(Religious Education).
Such a division is a result of the dualism of the education 
system in Indonesia, that is, religious education which is under the 
authority of the Department of Religious Affairs and general 
education which is under that of the Department of Education and 
Culture. Therefore, schools such as Kindergarten, Junior High 
School and Senior High School in the Pesantren Suryalaya are 
registered in the Department of Education and Culture and, as a 
result, must follow the regulations of that department. Conversely, 
the other Islamic schools and the Institute are registered in the 
Department of Religious Affairs with all its regulations. Thus, by 
providing schools of both educational orientations, Pesantren 
Suryalaya can fulfill the needd of society for education.
The students of Pesantren Suryalaya not only receive formal 
education but also non-formal education. The pesantren provides 
training in a large number of skills such as sewing, electricity, and 
farming. There also exist training centres for typing, with courses 
on Secretarial work, Administration and Management, which 
prepare the students with administrative knowledge and skill. In 
addition, Pesantren Suryalaya regularly organises training for

--- Page 125 of 144 ---
116
muballigh or preachers and directors of pesantren who will be sent 
to various regions of Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore (Djamily 
1990:118). Today there are more than two thousands from 
preachers of Pesantren Suryalaya scattered throughout these 
regions (Praja 1990:130-131).
To sum up, Pesantren Suryalaya has managed to survive in 
modern Indonesia and, as a result, has suceeded in attracting 
rural as well as urban followers in Southeast Asia. It has also 
gained a large number of followers from various social ranks and 
occupations. Apart from its primary function in promoting the 
Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order, it has also organised both 
formal education and non-formal education and has been involved 
in other social and political activities.

--- Page 126 of 144 ---
CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSION
The relationship between Java and Mecca through the hajj 
during the latter half of the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries not only inspired the modernist movement but also 
influenced the spread of traditional Islam, including Sufism, in 
Java. In regard to Sufism, during the period, Mecca which became 
a centre of Islamic scholarship was dominated by the teachings of 
al-Ghazali and orthodox Sufi orders mainly the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h 
and the Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iyya h orders. The influence of the 
teachings of al-Ghazali then become dominant in Java. Further, 
the two Sufi orders replaced the widespread of the S h a tta riy y a h 
order which had been the most developed Sufi order in Southeast 
Asia during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. While the 
Q a d iriyya h -N a q sh a b a n d iy ya h order has become the most 
widespread Sufi order in Java, the N a q sh a b a n d iy y a h order is the 
most dominant order in outer islands.
As fortresses for the defence of the Islamic community and 
centres for the spread of Islam, the p e sa n tre n play a significant role 
in the maintenance of Sufism in Java. In general, in regard to 
Sufism, the p e sa n tre n in Java can be classified into two groups: 
the first is p e sa n tre n that maintains Sufism without being 
nessessarily affiliated to a particular Sufi order. The majority of 
p e sa n tre n in Java belong to this category. The other category is the 
p e sa n tre n that specialises in the teaching and development of a 
Sufi order. Only a small number of p e sa n tre n belongs to this

--- Page 127 of 144 ---
118
category. This classification correlates the classification of Sufi 
w ithin general Islamic civilisation, nam ely the individual Sufi and 
the founders and followers of Sufi orders.
The w orks of al-Ghazali m ainly Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din, Bidayah 
al-Hidayah and Minhqj al-'Abidin dom inate the field of Sufism in 
the m ajority of pesantren. Since the n in eteen th century they have 
reduced the influence of the speculative teachings of aK A rabi and 
al-Jilli, w hich are regarded as pantheism , in the pesantren. Today 
these teachings have alm ost disappeared in the pesantren. W ith 
the influence of al-Ghazali, Sufism is an obligatory duty in the 
pesantren, in addition to shari'ah. Sufism is not regarded as 
m ysticism , b u t as m oral teachings based on the Q ur'an and 
H adith. Sufism is seen as the teachings of piety and complete 
devotion to God. To the m ajority of pesantren, the Sufi aim is not to 
achieve unity w ith God, b u t to gain closeness to God as His 
servant. This is because in the pesantren the theology of A sh'ari 
w hich teaches the uniq u en ess of God from His creatu res is 
dom inant. Shari'ah is never abandoned in the pesantren and its 
im portance is totally em phasised because Sufism cannot replace 
shari'ah. To becom e a Sufi, one m u st first practise the teachings of 
shari'ah. It is im portant to em phasise th a t the teachings of Sufi 
orders particularly those of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order 
also accept the teachings of al-Ghazali.
The Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order, the m ost 
w idespread Sufi order in Java, w as established by Shaikh Ahm ad 
K hatib Sam bas in Mecca during the nineteen th century. From

--- Page 128 of 144 ---
119
Mecca the Sufi order was brought to Java through three khalifah 
(representatives) of Shaikh Ahmad Khatib Sambas: Shaikh \Abd al- 
Karim Banten, Shaikh Tolhah Cirebon and Shaikh Wahab 
Hasbullah Madura and their students. This Sufi order played a 
significant role in the 1888 revolt in Banten. Although only a small 
num ber of pesantren specialise in the development of Sufi orders in 
Java, it is through the pesantren that the Qadiriyyah- 
N aqshabandiyyah order has spread widely and is maintained in 
Java. Pesantren al-Falak Pangentongan, Pesantren Futuhiyyah 
Mranggen, Pesantren Darul Ulum Rejoso and Pesantren Suryalaya 
are four famous pesantren which have become centres of the 
Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in Java.
The role of the pesantren in the maintenance of Sufism in 
Java can be seen in two famous pesantren , that is, Pesantren 
Tebuireng and Pesantren Suryalaya. These pesantren are very 
different from one another. The former was established to educate 
its students to become 'u la m d. The latter was established as a 
centre for the teaching of the Q adiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order 
and therefore aims at educating its students to become Sufis. In 
the field of education Pesantren Tebuireng is well known for its 
reforms. In contrast, Pesantren Suryalaya established madrasah 
and schools only in the 1950’ s. Today both Pesantren Tebuireng 
and Pesantren Suryalaya have various schools and a university, in 
addition to their bandongan (weton ) system of instruction. The 
schools include both Islamic schools and general schools.

--- Page 129 of 144 ---
120
Pesantren Tebuireng which is famous as a pesantren 
shari'ah maintains the teachings of Sufism. Prayers, dhikir and 
wirid similar to those of Sufi orders are practised in Pesantren 
Tebuireng. Similarly, Sufi teachings such as zu hud , warn \ 
ta w a d d u , ikhlas, sabar and so forth are maintained in the 
pesantren. Pesantren Tebuireng also played an important role in 
the spread of the Qadiriyyah-Naqshabandiyyah order in East Java. 
On the one hand, it functions to control the practices of the leader 
and followers of the Sufi order from deviation from Sufi teachings 
and Islamic doctrines. The pesantren produces the teachers and 
followers of the Sufi order. The majority of khalifah or leaders of 
the order in East Java graduated from Pesantren Tebuireng. This is 
because the pesantren teaches its students the teachings of 
Sufism. Thus, the development of Sufi orders has been heavily 
dependent on pesantren. All khalifah and leaders of Sufi orders are 
pesantren graduates and there is no Sufi order in Java that could 
spread without the support of pesantren.
Pesantren Suryalaya has, since the beginning of its 
establishment, become a centre of the teaching of Qadiriyyah- 
Naqshabandiyyah. Under the leadership of A bah Anom the 
pesantren has achieved significant progress. Due to the influence 
of A bah Anom, the pesantren has thousands of followers and more 
than twenty representatives throughout Southeast Asia. The 
followers of the pesantren consist of people from various social 
strata: farmers, civil servants, artists and so on. Pesantren 
Suryalaya is also known for its pondok inabah, a centre for the

--- Page 130 of 144 ---
121
treatm ent of narcotic addicts and of delinquent youth. In regard to 
the process of Islam isation in Jav a it is im portant to recognise th a t 
a pesantren tarekat, like Suryalaya, carries out the prim ary 
function of a pesantren. It functions to spread Islamic culture to 
the villagers who do not get an education or training at a 
pesantren. Pesantren in general recruit young stu d en ts who are a 
minority of the population while the followers of Sufi orders come 
from an older age group which m ay not have studied at a 
pesantren.

--- Page 131 of 144 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abdul Jalil, K.H. 1963 Tuhjah al-Asfiya'. Semarang: Toha putra.
Abdullah, A.R. 1990a Pemikiran Umat Islam di Nusantara: Sejarah 
dan Perkembangannya Hingga Abad ke 19. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan 
Bahasa dan Pustaka Kementerian Pendidikan Malaysia.
Abdullah, H.W.M.S. 1980 Perkembangan Tasawuf dan Tokoh- 
tokohnya di Nusantara. Surabaya: Al-Ikhlas.
--------- 1990b Syeikh Daud bin Abdullah Al-Fatanb 'Ulama dan
Pengarang Terulung Asia Tenggara. Shah Alam: Penerbit Hizbi.
Abdul Muis, G. 1985 "Menyimak Tasawuf Sunny" in Pesantren 
No.3 Vol.II: 18-25.
Abdurrahman, M. 1985 "Kesyahduan Sufi dalam Transformasi 
Sosial: Suatu Pengamatan Perkembangan Tarekat" in Pesantren 
No.3 Vol.II: 49-59.
Abdussalam. 1993 "Berbeda, tetapi Tujuan Sama" in Editor No. 45: 
45.
Al-Attas, S.N. 1963 Some Aspects of Sufism as Understood and 
practised Among the Malays. Singapore: Malaysian Sociological 
Research Institute Ltd.
--------- 1966 Raniri and The Wujudiyyah of 17th Century Acheh
Monograph of the Malaysian Branch, Royal Asiatic Society III. 
Singapore: Malaysia Printers Ltd.
Ali, A.M. 1987 "Meninjau Kembali Pesantren Sebagai Lembaga 
Pendidikan Ulama" in Pesantren No.2 Vol.IV: 19-27.
Anonim. 1989 "Tasawuf, Mutiara yang Mulai Diingatkan lagi" in 
Ulumul Qur'an No. 1 Vol.I: 92-97.
Archer, L.R. 1937 "Muhammadan Mysticism in Sumatera" in 
Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society Vol.XV 
Part II.
Ash'ari, K.H.M.H. 1975 Taburan Permata yang Indah Translated 
into Indonesian by M. Tolchah Mansoer. Kudus: Menara Kudus.
Atjeh, A. 1957 Sedjarah Hidup K.H.A. Wahid Hasjim dan Karangan 
Tersiar. Jakarta: Panitya Buku peringatan aim. K.H.A. Wahid 
Hasjim.
1970 Tasawwuf (Pelajaran Achlak). Semarang: Ramadhani.

--- Page 132 of 144 ---
123
--------- 1979 Tarekat dalam Tasawwuf. Kota Bharu: Pustaka Aman
Press.
--------- 1980 Pengantar Ilmu Tarekat dan Tasauf. Kota Bharu:
Pustaka Aman Press.
Badawi, K.H.S. 1985 "Tarekat, Suatu Keniscayaan" in Pesantren 
No.3 Vol.II: 38-42.
Bahreisj, S. 1977 Terjemahan al-Hikam Surabaya: Balai Buku.
--------- 1983 Tarjamah Riadhus Shalihin Vol.I and II. Kuala
Lumpur: Penerbit ’Pustaka Antara'.
Bowen, J. 1987 "Islamic Transformations: From Sufi Doctrines to 
Ritual Practice in Gayo Culture" in R.S.Kipp and S.Rodgers (eds) 
Indonesian Religions in Transition. Tucson: The University of 
Arizona Press.
Brumund, J.F.G. 1857 Het Volksonderwys onder de Javanen. 
Batavia: van Haren Noman and Kolff.
Chittick, W.C. 1992 Faith and Practice of Islam: Three Thirteenth 
Century Sufi Texts. New York: State University of New York Press.
Dahlan, A. 1991 "Tasawuf Sunny dan Tasawuf Falsafi: Tinjauan 
Filosofis" in Ulumul Qur'an No.8 Vol.II: 26-32.
Danner, V. 1987 "The Early Development of Sufism" in S.H.Nasr 
(ed) Islamic Spirituality: Foundations. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul: 239-264.
Dasuki, H.A.H. 1990 Biografl K.H.A. Shohibul Wafa Tadjul Arifin di 
Propinsi Jawa Barat. Jakarta: PUSLITBANG Lektur Agama, 
Deparemen Agama R.I.
Dhofier, Z. 1978 "Pesantren dan Thoriqoh" in Dialog Edisi Khusus: 
9-22.
--------- 1980a The Pesantren Tradition: A Study of the Role of the
Kyai in the Maintenance of the Traditional Ideology of Islam in Java. 
Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis Dep. Anthropology, the Australian 
National University. Canberra.
--------- 1980b "Islamic Education and Traditional Ideology on Java"
in J.J. Fox (ed) Indonesia: the Making of a Culture. Canberra: 
Research School of Pasific Studies: 263-271.
--------- 1980c "Kinship and Marriage among the Javanese Kyai" in
Indonesia No.29: 47-58.
--------- 1982 Tradisi Pesantren: Studi tentang Pandangan Hidup
Kyai. Jakarta: LP3ES.

--- Page 133 of 144 ---
124
--------- 1984 "Relevansi Pesantren dan Pengembangan Ilmu di
Masa Depan" in Pesantren Nomor Perdana: 20-25.
--------- 1992 "Sekolah al-Qur'an dan Pendidikan Islam di
Indonesia" in Ulumul Qur'an No.7 Vol. II: 86-95.
---------and Abdurrahman Wahid 1978 "Penafsiran kembali Ajaran
Agama: Dua Kasus dari Jombang" in Prisma 3: 27-34.
Djamily, B. 1987 Latarbelakang dan Perkembangan Pondok 
Pesantren Suryalaya. Bogor: Hj.M.Ibrahim.
--------- 1990 Dari Pondok Pesantren Suryalaya ke Ka'batullah.
Bogor: Ummi Hajjah Mar Ibrahim.
Djajadiningrat, P.A.H. 1958 "Islam in Indonesia" in Kenneth 
W.Morgan (ed) Islam, The Straight Path. New York: the Ronald 
Press Company: 375-402.
Drewes, G.W.J. 1968 "New Light on the Coming of Islam to 
Indonesia" in Bijdragen tot de Taal, land en Volkenkunde 124: 433- 
459.
--------- 1969 The Admonitions of Seh Bari: A Sixteenth Century
Javanese Text Attributed to the Saint of Bonan. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
--------- 1976 "Indonesia: Mysticism and Activism" in Gustave E.von
Grunebaum (ed) Unity and Variety in Muslim Civilisation. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press: 284-310.
--------- 1977 Directions for Travellers on the Mystic Path. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
--------- 1978 An Early Javanese Code of Muslim Ethics. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
--------- and R.NG. Poerbatjaraka 1990 Kisah-kisah Ajaib Syekh
Abdulkadir Jailani Translated by M.Amir Sutaarga. Jakarta: 
Pus taka Jaya
Fox, J.J. 1991 "Ziarah Visits to the Tombs of the Wali, the 
Founders of Islam on Java" in M.C.Ricklefs Islam in the Indonesian 
Social Context. Clayton, Victoria:Centre for Southeast Asia Studies, 
Monash University: 19-38.
--------- and Prajarto Dirjosanjoto 1989 "The Memories of Village
Santri from Jombang in East Java" in R.J.May and W.J. O'Malley 
(eds) Observing Change in Asia. Bathurs: Crawford House Press: 
94-110.

--- Page 134 of 144 ---
125
Galba, S. 1991 Pesantren Sebagai Wadah KomunikasL Jakarta: 
Proyek Inventarisasi dan Pembinaan Nilai-nilai Budaya, 
Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan.
Geertz, C. 1960 The Religion of Java. Illinois: The Free Press.
--------- 1968 Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and
Indonesia. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gilsenan, M. 1973 Saint and Sufi in Modern Egypt: An Essay in the 
Sociology of Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hakim, K.H.M.L. 1985 "Mengenal Pondok Pesantren Futuhiyah 
Mranggen, Demak, Jateng", Makalah Sarasehan Pengembangan 
Pusat Informasi pada Pondok Pesantren 5 Februari 1985 di 
Pesantren Futuhiyah Mranggen, Demak. Semarang: Kanwil
Departemen Penerangan Propinsi Jawa Tengah.
Hamka 1984 Tasauf: Perkembangan dan Pemumiannya. Jakarta: 
PT.Pustaka Panjimas.
Hamzah, Y. 1990 "Organisasi dan Kelembagaan pondok Pesantren 
Suryalaya" in Harun Nasution (ed) Thoriqot Qodiriyyah 
Naqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, Asal-usul, dan Perkembangannya.
Tasikmalaya: Institut Agama Islam Latifah Mubarokiyyah: 361Hasyim, U. 1984 Hadis Arba'in An Nawawiyah, dengan Teijemah 
dan Penjelasannya dalam Bahasa Indonesia. Surabaya: Bina Ilmu.
Hiroko, H. 1976 A Traditional Leader in a Time of Change: the Kyai 
and 'Ulama in West Java. Ann Arbour: University Microfilm 
International.
Hodgson, M.G.S. 1974 The Venture of Islam 3 volumes. Chicago 
and London: the University of Chicago Press.
Hurgronje, C.S. 1931 Mekka in the Latter Part of the 19th Century 
Translated by J.H.Monahan. Leiden: E.J.Brill.
Jahja, H.M.Z. 1990 "Asal-usual Thoriqoh Qodiriyyah 
Naqsabanadiyyah dan Perkembangannya" in Harun Nasution (ed) 
Thoriqot Qodiriyyah Naqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, asal-usul dan 
Perkembangannya. Tasikmalaya: Institut Agama Islam Latifah 
Mubarokiyyah: 57-88.
Jayadiningrat, A. 1908 "Het Leven in een Pesantren", in Tijdscrift 
voor het Binlandsch Betuur Vol.XXXIV: 1-22.
Johns, A.H. 1955 "Aspects of Sufi Thought in India and Indonesia 
in the first half of the 17th Century" in Journal of the Malayan 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society Vol.XXVIII pt. 1: 70-77.

--- Page 135 of 144 ---
126
--------- 1957 "Malay Sufism as illustrated in an Anonymous
Collection of 17th Century tracts" in Journal of the Malayan Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society Vol. XXXpt.2: 1-110.
--------- 1961 "Sufism as a Category in Indonesian Literature and
History" in Journal of Southeast Asian History No.2 Vol.II: 10-23.
--------- 1965 Gift Addrressed to the Spirit of the Prophet Canberra:
Faculty of Asian Studies, Australian National University.
--------- 1975 "Islam in Southeast Asia: Reflections and new
Directions" in Indonesia No. 19: 33-55.
--------- 1980 "From Coastal Sttlement to Islamic School and City:
Islamization in Sumatra, the Malay peninsula and Java" in J.J.Fox 
(ed) Indonesia: the Making of a Culture. Canberra: Research School 
of Pasific Studies, Australian National University: 163-181.
Kartodirdjo, S. 1966 The Peasants' Revolt of Banten in 1888: Its 
Conditions, Course and Sequel: A Case Study of Social Movements 
in Indonesia. The Hague: Nederlandsche Boek- en Steendrukkerij 
v/h Smiths.
Koentjaraningrat, R.M. 1984 Kebudayaan Jawa. Jakarta: P.N. 
Balai Pustaka.
Kraemer, H. 1921 Een Javaansche Primbon uit de Zestiende Eeuw. 
Leiden.
Kumar, A. 1985 The Diary of a Javanese Muslim: Religion, politics 
and the pesantren 1883-1886. Faculty of Asian Studies 
monographs: New Series No.7. Canberra: Faculty of Asian Studies, 
Australian National University.
Lings, M. 1975 What is Sufism? Barkeley: University of California 
Press.
MacDonald, D.B. 1965 Development of Muslim Theology, 
Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory. New York: Russel & 
Russel.
Madjid, N. 1977 "Pondok Pesantren 'Darul 'Ulum' di Rejoso, 
Peterongan, Jombang, Jawa Timur" in Bulletin Proyek Penelitian 
Agamadan Perubahan Sosial. Jakarta: LEKNAS, LIPI: 53-66.
--------- 1985a "Merumuskan Kembali tujuan Pendidikan
Pesantren" in Dawam Rahardjo (ed) Pergulatan Dunia Pesantren: 
Membangun dari Bawah. Jakarta: P3M: 3-15.
--------- 1985b "Tasauf Sebagai Inti Keberagamaan" in Pesantren
No.3 Vol.II: 3-9.

--- Page 136 of 144 ---
127
--------- 1988 "P esantren d an T asau f' in D aw am R ahardjo (ed)
Pesantren dan Pembahaman 4 th edition. J a k a rta : LP3ES: 94-120.
M a stu h u 1990 "Gaya d an S uksesi K epem im pinan P esantren" in 
Ulumul Qur'an No.7 Vol.III: 88-97.
M as'udi, M.F. 1985 "M engenal Pem ikiran K itab Kuning" in D aw am 
R ajardjo (ed) Pergulatan Dunia Pesantren: Membangun Dari Bawah. 
J a k a rta : P3M: 53-70.
--------- 1985 "Ihya, H asil Final Proses P eran tau an " in Pesantren
No.3 Vol.II: 77-82.
M unaw ar-R achm an, B and Asep U sm an Ism ail 1991 "Cinta T u h an 
di T em pat m a ta h a ri Terbit: T arekat Q adiriyah-N aqsyabandiyah di 
Suryalaya" in Ulumul Qur'an No.8 Vol.II: 100-105.
N akam ura, M. 1977 "Professor Haji K ahar M uzakkir an d the 
D evelopm ent of the M uslim R eform ist M ovem ent in Indonesia" in 
B.R.O'G. A nderson et.al. Religion and Social Ethos in Indonesia. 
Clayton: M onash University: 1-20.
--------- 1980 "U nsur Sufi dalam M uham m adiyah? C a ta ta n Dari
K ancah" in Prisma No.8: 92-98.
Nahid, A, et.al.(eds) 1992 Pemikiran K.H.Achmad Siddiq. S urabaya: 
Y ayasan M ajalah AULA Ja w a Tim ur.
Nasr, S.H. 1988 Ideals and Realities of Islam. London: Unwin 
h y m an Inc.
N icholson, R.A. 1952 "Mysticism" in T hom as Arnold an d Alfred 
G uilaum e (eds) The Legacy of Islam. London: Oxford U niversity 
Press: 210-238.
--------- 1975 The Mystics of Islam. London: R outledge an d Kegan
Paul ltd.
Noer, D. 1973 The Modernist Muslim Movement in Indonesia WOO- 
1942. K uala L um pur: Oxford U niversity Press.
Nurol Aen, I. "Inabah" in H aru n N asution (ed) Thoriqot Qodiriyyah 
Naqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, Asal-usul, dan Perkembangannya. 
T asikm alaya: in s titu t Agam a Islam Latifah M ubarokiyyah: 391- 
420.
---------an d K.H.Noor Anom M ubarok 1990 "TQN d a n K om ponenkom ponennya" in H aru n N asution (ed) Thoriqot Qodiriyyah 
Naqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, Asal-usul, dan Perkembangannya.
T asikm alaya: In stitu t A gam a Islam Latifah M ubarokiyyah: 255-

--- Page 137 of 144 ---
128
Pijper, G.F. 1934 Fragmenta Islamica: Studien over het Islam ism e in 
Nederlandsche-Indie. Leiden: E.J.Brill.
Praja, J.S. 1990 "TQN Pondok Pesantren Suryalaya dan 
Perkembangannya pada masa Abah Anom (1950-1990)" in Harun 
Nasution (ed) Thoriqot Qodoriyyah N aqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, Asal- 
usul, dan Perkem bangannya. Tasikmalaya: Institut Agama Islam 
Latifah Mubarokiyyah: 113-196.
--------- and Zaenal Abidin Anwar 1990 "Pengaruh TQN Pondok
Pesantren Suryalaya didalam dan diluar negeri" in Harun Nasution 
(ed) Thoriqot Qodiriyyah N aqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, Asal-usul, dan 
Perkem bangannya. Tasikmalaya: Institut Agama Islam Latifah 
Mubarokiyyah: 197-221.
Prasodjo, S. et.al. 1974 Profit Pesantren: Laporan Hasil Peneliiian 
Pesantren Al-Falak dan Delapan Pesantren Lain di Bogor. Jakarta: 
LP3ES.
Rahardjo, D. 1975 "The Kyai, the Pesantren, and the Village: A 
Preliminary Sketch" in Prisma 1: 32-43.
--------- 1982 "Kehidupan Pemuda Santri: Penglihatan dari Jendela
Pesantren di Pabelan" in Taufik Abdullah (ed) Pem uda dan 
Perubahan Sosial. Jakarta: LP3ES: 90-112.
---------(ed) 1988 Pesantren dan Pembaharuan 4th edition. Jakarta:
LP3ES.
Rahman, F. 1979 Islam 2nd edition. London: Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson.
Residah, S. 1985 Hirup K um buh A bah Sepuh di Pondok Pesantren 
Suryalaya. Tasikmalaya: Pesantren Suryalaya.
Salam, S. 1977 Sekitar Wali Songo. Yogyakarta: Menara Kudus.
Saleh, A. 1985 "Suryala, Alternatif Pendekatan Moral" in Pesantren 
No.4 Vol.II: 73-78.
Sanusi, A. 1990 "Abah Sepuh dan Pembentukan TQN Pondok 
Pesantren Suryalaya" in Harun Nasution (ed) Thoriqot Qodiriyyah 
N aqsabandiyyah: Sejarah, Asah-usul, dan Perkem bangannya. 
Tasikmalaya: Institut Agama Islam Latifah Mubarokiyyah: 91-109.
Shellabear, W.G. 1930 "An Exposure of Counterfeiters" in The 
M oslem World No. Ill Vol.XX.
Shohibul Hikam, M.A. 1982 "Pesantren dan perubahan Sosial, 
Tinjauan Buku Zamakhsyari Dhofier, Tradisi Pesantren, Studi 
tentang Pandangan Hidup Kyai" in M asyarakat Indonesia, M ajalah 
Ilmu-ilmu Sosial Indonesia. Jakarta: LIPI: 249-254.

--- Page 138 of 144 ---
129
Sim uh 1985 "Antara Tasawuf dan Batiniyah" in Pesantren No.3 
Vol.II: 10-17.
Soebardi, S. 1971 "Santri Religious Elem ents as Reflected in the 
Serat Tjentini" in Bydragen tot de Tall, land, en Volkenkunde No.3: 
331-349.
--------- 1976 "The Place of Islam" in McKay (ed) Studies in
Indonesian History. Pitman, Australia: 39-63.
--------- 1978 "The Pesantren Tarikat of Suryalaya in W est Java" in
S.Udin (ed) Spectrum: Essays Presented to Sutan Takdir
Alisyahbana on his Seventieth Birthday. Jakarta: Dian Rakyat: 
215-236.
Steenbrink, K.A. 1984 Beberapa Aspek tentang Islam di Indonesia 
Abad ke-19. Jak arta: Bulan Bintang.
--------- 1986 Pesantren, Madrasah, Sekolah: Pendidikan Islam
dalam k u ru n Moderen. Jakarta: LP3ES.
Su'dan, R.H. 1991 "Penyem buhan Penderita K ecanduan Narkotika 
di Pesantren Suryalaya" in Sindu Galba Pesantren Sebagai Wadah 
KomunikasL Jakarta: Proyek Inventarisasi dan Pem binaan Nilai- 
nilai Budaya, Departem en Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan: 73-80.
Sum into, H.A. 1985 Politik Islam Hindia Belanda: Het kantoor voor 
Inlandsche zaken. Jakarta: LP3ES.
Tajul Arifin, K.H.A.S. 1988 Kunci Pembuka Dada. Selangor; 
Thinker's Library.
Tanja, V. 1982 Himpunan Mahasiswa Islam. Jakarta: Sinar 
H arapan.
Trimingham, J.S . 1971 The Sufi Orders in Islam. London: Oxford 
University Press.
van B ruinessen, M. 1987 "Bukankah Orang Kurdi yang 
M engislam kan Indonesia?" in Pesantren No.4 Vol.IV: 43-53.
--------- 1989 "Tarekat Qadiriyah dan Ilmu Sheikh Abdul Qadir
Jailani di India, K urdistan, dan Indonesia" in Ulumul Qur'an No.2 
Vol.II: 68-77.
--------- 1990a "Kitab Kuning: Books in Arabic Script Used in the
Pesantren Milieu" in Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land en Volkenkunde 
No. 146: 226-269.
--------- 1990b "Mencari Ilmu and Pahala di T anah Suci: Orang
N usantara Naik Haji" in Ulumul Qur'an No 5 Vol.II: 42-49.

--- Page 139 of 144 ---
130
--------- 1992a Tarekat Naqsyabandiyah di Indonesia: Survei
Historis, Geograpis dan Sosiologis. Bandung: Mizan.
--------- 1992b "Pesantren dan Kitab Kuning: Pemeliharaan dan
Kesinambungan Tradisi Pesantren" in Ulurrau Qur'an No. 4 Vol.III: 
73-85.
van den Berg, L.W.C. 1886 "Het Mohammedaansche 
Godsdienstonderwijs op Java en Madoera en de daarbij gebruikte 
Arabische boeken" in Tijdschirfi voor Indische Taal-Land en 
Volkenkunde, uitgegeven door het Bataviaasch Genootschap van 
kunsten en Wetenschappen No.31: 518-551.
von Grunebaum. 1953 Medieval Islam. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Vredenbregt, J. 1962 "The Haddj: Some of its Features and 
Functions in Indonesia" in Bydragen tot de Taal, Land en 
Volkenkunde. No.118: 91-154.
Wahid, A. 1984 "Asal Usui Tradisi Keilmuan di Pesantren" in 
Pesantren Nomor Perdana: 4-11.
--------- 1988 "Pesantren Sebagai Sub-kultur" in Dawam Rahardjo
(ed) Pesantren dan Pembaharuan. Jakarta: LP3ES: 39-60.
Woodward, M.R. 1989 Islam in Java: Normative Piety and Mysticism 
in the Sultanate of Yogyakarta. Tucson: the University of Arizona 
Press.
Zarkasy, E. 1977 Unsur Islam Dalam Pewayangan. Bandung: Al- 
Ma'arif.
Zoetmulder, P.J. 1991 Manunggaling Kawula Gusti: Panteisme dan 
Monisme dalam Sastra Suluk Jawa Translated by Dick Hartoko. 
Jakarta: Gramedia.
Zuhri, S. 1974 Guruku Orang-orang dari Pesantren. Bandung: Al- 
Ma'arif.
--------- 1981 Sejarah Kebangkitan Islam dan Perkembangannya di
Indonesia 3rd edition. Bandung: Al-Ma'arif.
--------- 1987 Berangkat Dari Pesantren. Jakarta: Gunung Agung.

--- Page 140 of 144 ---
GLOSSARY
abangan: syncretic Javanese Muslims. The term is used in some 
areas of Central and E ast Java and sometimes has negative 
connotations
ahl al-sunnah wa al-jamaah: in general, Sunni distinguished from 
the S hfah; In Java it refers to traditional Islam w hich basically 
follows A sh'arite theology, Shaffite fiqh and al-Ghazali's Sufism
ajengarv. Islamic teachers or kyai among the Sundanese
akhlaq: Islamic morality, ethics
'amal jariyah: contributions of wealth for God's purposes whose 
reward continues after the contributors' death
amanat: tru st
'aqidah: Islamic theology
badal (or khalifah): assistants of shaikh in Sufi orders 
bai'ah: vow of allegiance 
balaghah: Arabic literature
bandongan (or weton): group system of learning; a system of 
learning in which a group of students ranging in num ber from five 
to five hunderds listens to a teacher who reads, translates and 
explains the Arabic texts
barakah (or berkat): blessing or reward from God
batin : internal
ceramah: religious talk
da'wah: Muslim m issionary activity
dhikir. rem em brance or recollection of God's nam es
din: religion; or surrender which refers to Islam in the m ost general 
sense
do'a: prayer for a blessing from God 
al-Fatihah: the first chapter of the Qur'an 
fiqh: Islamic Jurisprudence
halal: legal, perm itted according to Islamic Jurisprudence

--- Page 141 of 144 ---
132
hqjj: the pilgrimage to Mecca
hajt title for Muslims who have performed a pilgrimage to Mecca
hadith : traditions of the Prophet; report of the Prophet's words, his 
deeds and approvals and disapprovals
haram: illegal, strictly forbidden according to Islamic
Jurisprudence
'ibadah : worship, obedience with absolute humility 
iblis: evil
ihsan : to do something good; to obey and practise God’s commands 
in the best way, the highest level of religious life in Islam
ijazah: license to be a member or khalifah of the Sufi order
ijm a : consensus of 'ulam cC used as a source of Islamic
Jurisprudence
ikhlas: sincerity, to obey God sincerely and only for His pleasure 
ilmu alat: Arabic grammar
ilmu hikmah : magical knowledge from the collection of prayers 
ilmu ladunnt knowledge that is not learned but is granted by God 
imam : leader of communal prayers 
iman : faith
islam: performing basic Islamic rituals including the five basic 
principles of Islam; Islam or din includes iman, islam and ihsan
ishd : night prayer
istighathah: dhikir that mentions some of the Ninety-nine Names of God
istighfar. forgiveness; to recite "I ask forgiveness from God, the 
Forgiver and the Merciful"
i'tiqad: belief
jihad: holy war; literally "the struggle in the path of Allah"
kalimah tayyibah ; the word of la ilah ilia Allah (there is no god but God)

--- Page 142 of 144 ---
133
kampung: subdivision of village
karam ah [or kramat): honour; miracles granted to wali or kyai 
kashf. intuition; literally: the raising of a curtain or veil 
kebatinan (kejawen or kepercayaan): Javanese mysticism 
kecam atan: subdistrict
khalifah: deputy, viceregent, successor, see badal 
khanaqah (or zaw iyah or ribat): cloister or centre for Sufi orders 
khatam an: weekly ritual 
khaul: the day of death
kitab: book; kitab kim ing: books written in arabic script
kyai: a title for Muslim scholars in Java who generally lead a 
pesantren
khushu: intimate feeling and remembrance of God 
lahir (or zahir): external 
latifah (plural, lata'ij): subtlety
m adrasah: Islamic schools organised on the Western educational 
system
maghrib: sunset prayer 
m akm h: undesirable 
m ahabbah: love
mahfiiz: protected by God from doing serious sin
manaqiban: monthly ritual
ma'rifah: knowledge, gnosis
m auludan: the Prophet Muhammad's birthday
muballigh: Islamic preacher
muraqabah: contemplation
murshid: teacher in Sufi orders
m ushahadah: witness

--- Page 143 of 144 ---
134
nqfsii: passion 
nahw u : Arabic syntax
pancasila: (Five Basic Principles), the ideological and political 
foundation of the Rupublic of Indonesia
pesantren : traditional Islamic school, Islamic cultural institution 
pondok : hostel or student residences in the pesantren complex 
p riya yt members of the Javanese bureaucratic class 
p u a sa (or saum ): fasting
qiyas: analogy; analogical reasoning in Islamic Jurisprudence 
rida: pleasure
riya': worship for other people's respect 
sabar. patience
salat: the precribed form of prayer in Islam 
salawat: invocation
santrt students of pesantren ; refers to pious Muslims in Java
saraf. Arabic morphology
shahadah: the Confession of Faith
shaikh : teacher and leader of Sufi order
shari'ah: Islamic law, rules, seefiq h
shirk: associating other beings and powers with God; heretics 
silat: traditional self-defence arts
silsilah: chain; a spiritual chain connecting the followers of a Sufi 
order with all teachers and founders of the order back to the 
Prophet
sorogan : individual system of learning; traditional method of 
instruction in reading and translating classical Islamic texts for 
elementary students. A student goes to a Muslim teacher or kyai 
who will read some passages of the Arabic texts and translate them 
into Javanese. The student repeats and translates the passages as 
correctly as possible

--- Page 144 of 144 ---
135
sunnah : recommended; similar to Hadith, the way the Prophet 
lived
tafsir. Qur'an exegesis 
takabbur. arrogance
talqin: impartation of secret instruction to a new member of the 
Sufi order
tanbih: religious admonition
taqwa : piety; god-wariness
tariqah (or tarekat): path to God; Sufi order
tasawwuf. Sufism
tauhid: belief in the unity of God, or Islamic theology 
tawaddu: modesty; humility 
tawajjuh: ecstatic union
tawakkal (or tawakkul ): trust in and reliance upon God 
tawassul : thinking of God by remembring shaikh or teachers 
'ulama': Muslim scholar
wahdah al-ivujud : the belief that all existence is one; pantheism
wajib ; obligatory
wait Muslim saint
wali sanga: Nine Saints
warn: abstinence
wasiat : exhortation
wirid: routine programme of dhikir
zakat: obligatory almsgiving
ziarah: visiting of graves
zuhud: asceticism