Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_06\documents\2017-Mukaffa-AsmarakandiSufismJava.pdf
Total Pages: 26
Statistics: Chars=50858, ThaiWords=10171.6, EnglishWords=9968

--- Page 1 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
175 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
A NEW ACCOUNT ON THE POTRAIT OF IBRAHIM 
ASMARAKANDI AND HIS SUFISM APPROACH IN 
ISLAMIZATION OF JAVA 
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
UIN Sunan Ampel, Surabaya – Indonesia | zumrotul_mukafah@yahoo.com 
Abstract: This paper tried to show that Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi is one of the important preachers in the early 
era of Islamization in Indonesia. In addition , since 
Samarkandi is originated from Sama rkand, the paper also 
tried to show the relation between Islam in Samarkand and 
Java in the 15 CE. Other important findings shown in the 
paper is that the islamization of Samarkandi has succeeded 
to the extent that it is accepted by both the common and 
elites. Interestingly, t he Sufism is proven to be effective in 
his islamization effort. One of the key is his successful 
strategies, resulted from Sufism approach, is the tolerant 
attitudes towards other religions particularly Hindu as the 
biggest religion in Java at the time. 
Keywords: Java, Champa, sufisme, Ibrahim Asmarakandi, 
Samarkand, Islamization. 
Introduction 
One of the greatest figure with great contribution in the success of 
islamisation in Java is Ibrahim Asmarakandi . He is mentioned as a 
Muslim intellectual as well as a Sufis who is a decendant of asmara -
kandi (Samarkand) 1 He is also popularly known as one preachers that 
focuses on Champa and Indonesia particularly Java. He is also the 
father of Raden Rahmat (Sunan A mpel), one of the famous nine saints 
(Sembilan wali) who also succeeded in spreading Islam not only in Java 
but also in Indonesia. 
 
1 Samarkand that is now is part from Uzbekistan has a great role in the islamization 
processes in Indonesia since the 15 CE. 
DOI: 10.15642/JIIS.2017.11.1.175-200

--- Page 2 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
176 
Ironically, his success in being one of the prominent ulama 
especially in the islamization efforts that also connected Samar kand, 
Champa and Java has been overlooked by historians. One evidence is 
the fact that the name of Samarkand is never mentioned as an 
important figure in the early islamization process in Indonesia. 2 The 
arrival of Islam as well as its spread have always b een correlated with 
Gujarat, Malabar, Bengal, Colomader, Persia and Saudi Arabia.3 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi offers a new direction that the islamization 
in the early era in Indonesia actually is originated from S amarkand. 
Additionally, the study also shows that his approach in his preaching is 
Sufism. Hence, even if the result of the study does not necessarily 
change the commonly believed fact regarding the origin of the first 
spreaders of Islam in Nusantara, it will at the minimum gives the 
strong position for a new insight and view that Samarkhand undeniably 
has played an important role in the islamization process within 
Nusantara (Indonesia). Ibrahim, along with his family and colleagues, 
has been the front man in the islamization processes within Java and 
other areas in Indonesia since the 15 CE. Hence, it is relatively true if 
Samarkhand is granted an equal position with Gujarat, Malabar, 
Bengal, Colomander, Persia and Saudi Arabia in regards to roles of the 
early era of islamization in Indonesia. In addition , the study also will 
result in the acknowledgment of Sufism is a quite effective approach in 
 
2 Islam in the early era in Indonesia and Melayu-Nusantara is quite difficult to be put in 
to the periodic phases. With archeological evidences and the historical documents, 
historians offer diverse opinions. First one is that islam has had its early era in 
Indonesia and Nusantara since the 6th or &th CE and was brought directly by the 
preachers from the generation of the the Prophet companions from Makkah and 
Madinah. The second opinions states that early era of Islam is estimated to be at the 9 -
11 CE and w as brought by Arab traders who stopped by Gujarat and Malabar. The 
third opinion stated that the beginning of Islam was at the beginning of the 14 CE and 
was brought by the sufi leaders from Persia. See Azyumardi Azra, Jaringan Ulama Timur 
Tengah dan Kepul auan Nusantara Abad XVII dan XVIII (Bandung: Mizan, 1994); S. Q. 
Fatimi, Islam Comes to Malaysia (Singapore: M.S. R.I., 1963 ); A.H. John, “ Muslim 
Mystics and Historitical Writings,” D.G.E. Hall (ed.), Historians of South East Asia 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1961); G .H.W. Drewes, “ New Light on the 
Coming of Islam to Indonesia ,” BKI (1968) ; R.O. Winstedt, “ The Advant of 
Muhammadism in Malay Paninsula and Archipelago ,” JMBRAS (1971); T.W. Arnold, 
The Preaching of Islam: A Histo ry of Propagation of the Muslim Faith (London: Constable & 
Company, 1913); Nur Syam, Islam Pesisir (Yogyakarta: LKiS, 2005). 
3 See for instance Husaini Husda, “Islamisasi Nusantara; Analisis Terhadap Diskursus 
Para Sejarawan,” Adabiya, 18: 35 (August 2016): pp. 17-29.

--- Page 3 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
177 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
the history of the islamization processes in Indonesia. This is due to 
the fact that Ibrahim is a great Sufi and also due to histor ical facts 
showing that Ibrahim indeed used sufism as the approach of his 
preach. 
 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi: A Father of Islamizing Java 
Eventhough there is a common view that Islam begun to arrive in 
Indonesia since the time it developed in Macca and madina, in the 
period of shahaba , the historical record only found the data since the 
coming of Ibrahim Asmarakandi. This is evidenced by the acceptance 
of Javanese society, from the lower class of society to the elites, 
towards Islam and towards Asmarakandi as well as his decendants and 
here includes Sunan Ampel. Therefore, it is quite relevant to call him 
the pioneer and father is Islamization in java. 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi or Ibrahim Al-Samarkandi is estimated to be 
born in the early half period of the 14 CE. He is known as the father 
of Raden Ali Rahmatullah who is also known as Sunan Ampel.4 
Based on babad tanah Jawi, he is known as Makdum Brahim 
Asmara or Maulana Ibrahim Asmara. The “Asmara” or Asmarakandi 
seems to be a result from pronouncing it in Javanese dialek. In addition 
to that, it is also quite apparent that the coming of Asmarakandi to 
Champ, just before his coming to java, uses the trade medium in Asia 
centered in Samarkand. 
Islamic historiography recorded clearly that Samarkand has been 
the important part before the 15 CE of islami history. This can not be 
separated from the acceptance and also the support from the authority 
at the time to the development of knowledge in Samarkand. Ibnu Atsir 
stated in “Al -Lubab” that “bal inna al-mulu>ka anfusahum ka >nu> yuh}ibbu>na 
al-‘ilma wa al-ta‘allum, wa ka>nu> ah}san al-mulu>ki sira>t}an, yarji‘u>na ila ‘adlin wa 
di>nin wa ‘ilmin”.5 
The authority or the rulers at the time do not merely limit their 
roles in running the governance but also have support for the 
development of knowledge. 
 
4 Ronit Ricci, “Conversion to Islam on Java and the Book of One Thousand 
Questions,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 165: 1 (2009): pp. 8–31 
5 Muhammad Mu’awwidl, “Muqaddimah al -Tahqi>q,” Abu al -Laits Nashr Muhammad 
bin Muhammad bin Ibrahim al -Samarqandi, Tafsir al -Samarqandi al -Musamma Bahr al -
Ulum, Vol. 1 (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyah, 1993), p. 8.

--- Page 4 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
178 
The era of migration of Ibrahim Asmarakandi is estimated to 
happen at the era of Timurid Dinasty (1370 M-1506 M). Samarkand, 
particularly under Timur Lenk’s authority (1336- 1405 M), has not only 
been the center of Islamic development but also the center of 
architectural art, modern secular science. It also plays an important role 
in trade within Asia and is strategic trade area connecting two 
continents.6 Ulugh Bek (1409–49) who replaces Timur Lenk’s is 
popularly known for having a deep and vast knowledge in Islam as 
well as for his active role in knowlegde development in particular 
through the higher edu cational institution, or commonly known as 
Madrasah, in Samarkand.7 
It is one important point of the paper is that Ibrahim Asmara -
kandi, unlike commonly held believe, was not Syeikh Maulana Malik 
Ibrahim who was popular in M uslim Nusantara as the first p ropagator 
or preacher spreading Islam in Java. 8 Even within historiography of 
Java, Ibrahim is being identified as Maulana Malik Ibrahim. This wrong 
identification ‘causes it complex to study his life story including his 
genealogy and family tree. As a ma tter of fact, this false also leads to 
another consequence that is the denial of Ibrahim Asmarakandi as a 
history figure on his own. Intersertingly, “the sites of graves and gate 
as well as the mosque chamber that exist within the archaeological area 
show different location as well as different era from those of of 
Maulana Malik Ibrahim. 9 
 
6 Dilip Hiro, Inside Central Asia, A Political and Cultural History of Uzbekistan, 
Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Iran (New York: Overlook 
Duckworth, 2004), pp. 19-20; Thomas R. McCray, Uzbekistan (Philadelphia: Chelsea 
House Publisher, 2004), pp. 27-28; UNESCO, Samarkand, The Place of Crossing and 
Synthesis of World Cultures (Paris: United Nat ions Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 2000), p. 25. 
7 Salah Zaimeche, Samarkand (Manchester: Foundation for Science and Technology, 
2005), p. 8. 
8 Agus Sunyoto, Wali Songo, Rekonstruksi Sejarah yang Disingkirkan (Jakarta: 
Transpustaka, 2011), p. 54. 
9 Sunyoto, Wali Songo, p. 55. Historiography often identified Ibrahim Asmarakandi as 
Maulana Malik Ibrahim that resulted in the confusion and it seemd to also resourced 
from Babad Tanah Jawi . In Babad, it is mentioned that Maulana Malik Ibrahim that is 
also often called as Syeikh Maghribi is Makdum Ibrahim Asmara. Ridin Shofyan, 
Wasit, and Mundiri, Islamisasi di Jawa, Walisongo, Penyebar Islam di Jawa menurut Penuturan 
Babad (Yogjakarta: Pustaka Pelajar, 2000), p. 23; Wiji Wicaksono, Mengislamkan Tanah 
Jawa, Telaah Atas Metode Dakwah Walisongo (Bandung: Penerbit Mizan, 1995), p. 24.

--- Page 5 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
179 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
For example, Babad Cirebon told a story that Ibrahim is the son of 
Syeikh Karnen’s originated from Tulen. If the data is authentic and 
that is the case, then it is conclu ded then that Ibrahim is a non 
aboriginal inhabitant but an emigrant who stays in Samarkand. This is 
due to the fact that Tulen is also frequently mentioned as “the name of 
Tuylen, an isle in northeast Kaspia which is a part of Kazakhtan, or 
specifically in northwest Samarkand area. 10 
Interestingly, Naskah Negarakertabhumi Sarga IV argues differently. 
It is mentioned in this manuscript that Ibrahim Asmarakandi has 
another name that is Molana Ibrahim Akbar with title of Syeikh 
Jatiswara. He is known as a father of Ali Musada (Ali Murtadha) and 
Ali Rahmatullah; the two brothers who will be know later as as Raja 
Pandhita or Sunan Ampel.11 
In addition to the fact that it is very difficult to get certainty in 
defining and deciding the real or original name of Ibrahim Asmara -
kandi, and this is because of flaws made by Java historiography that 
identified him as Maulana Ibrahim, it is also even more difficult to 
trace his family tree. One argument is put by Jamaluddin mentioning 
that Ibrahim Asma rakandi is the 21 st generation of Prophet 
Muhammad and gives his family tree is as below: 
 
Table 1. The First version of Genealogy of Ibrahim Asmarakandi12 
1. The Prophet Muhammad SAW 
2. Fatimah al-Zahra 
3. Imam Husein al-Sabt 
4. Ali Zainal Abidin 
5. Muhammad Baqir 
6. Isa al-Naqib 
7. Muhammad Naqib 
8. Ali Uraidi 
9. Jafar Sadiq 
10. Ahmad Muhajir Ilallah 
11. Ubaidillah 
12. Alwi 
13. Muhammad 
14. Alwi 
 
10 Sunyoto, Wali Songo, p. 55. 
11 Ibid. 
12 Moch Jamaluddin Ahmad, Napak Tilas Auliya’ (Jombang: Pustaka Al -Muhibbin, 
2011), p. 10.

--- Page 6 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
180 
15. Muhammad Sohib Marbat 
16. Ali Khola’ Qosam 
17. Alwi 
18. Amir Abdul Malik 
19. Abdullah Adhomat Khan 
20. Ahmad Syah Jalal 
21. Maulana Jamaludin Akbar Husein 
22. Ibrahim al-Samarqandi. 
 
A different genealogy is proposed by Asmudiyaningsih who 
identifies that Ibrahim Asmarakandi is not Jamaluddin Akbar Husein’s 
son; instead he is identified as Jamaluddin Jumadil Kubro’s son. 
 
Table 2. The Second version of genealogy of Ibrahim Asmarakandi13. 
1. Syekh Ibrahim al-Samarqandi bin 
2. Jamaluddin Jumadil Kubro bin 
3. Mahmudil al-Kubro bin 
4. Abdurrahman bin 
5. Abdullah bin 
6. Hassan bin 
7. Syama’un bin 
8. Najmudil Kubro bin 
9. Namuddin al-Kubro bin 
10. Zainal Kubro bin 
11. Zainal Alim bin 
12. Zainal Abidin bin 
13. Hussen bin 
14. Ali bin Abu Tholib. 
 
Sofwan et al. states that both Kitab Purwaka Caruban Nagari and 
Kitab Hikmatil Asyirah mention Syekh Ibrahim Asmarakandi as Syekh 
Jamaluddin Jumadil Kubro’s son and Sunan Ampel’s father. Here, the 
name of Ibrahim Asmarakandi is mentioned as Ibrahim Zainal al -
Akbar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 Asmudiyangsih, Sang Pemberi Arah dalam Sejarah (Tuban: n.p., 1996), p. 10.

--- Page 7 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
181 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
Tabel 3. The third version of Genealogy of Ibrahim Asmarakandi14 
1. Nabi Muhammad Saw 
2. Fatimah and Ali RA 
3. Husein al-Sabti 
4. Zaenal Abidin 
5. Muhammad al-Baqir 
6. Jakfar Saddiq 
7. Kasim al-Kamil (Ali al-Uraidl) 
8. Muhammad al-Nagib (Idris) 
9. Isa al-Bisri (al-Baqir) 
10. Ahmad al-Muhajir 
11. Ubaidillah 
12. Muhammad 
13. Alwi 
14. Ali al-Gayam (Gazam) 
15. Muhammad 
16. Alwi Amir Faqih 
17. Abdul Malik 
18. Abdullah Khan Nuddin (Amir) 
19. Al Amir Ahmad Syaikh Jalalludin 
20. Jamaluddin al-Husein 
21. Ibrahim Zainal Akbar. 
 
Admittedly, it is quite difficult to determine which genealogy or 
which data can be justified as the valid one. One of the biggest reason 
is the absence of document that can support each data mentioned 
above. To give illustration, sources that actually tells a story on 
biography of Maulana Jamaludin Akbar Husein, Jamaluddin Jumadil 
Kubro, or Jamaluddin al -Husein that are claimed as Ibrahim’ s father’s 
name are almost impossible to find. This means that the family tree of 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi is still a mystery till recent days. 
In spite of that, it is important to note that there is no single 
historian denies the birth of Ibrahim in Samarkand. 15 There are several 
 
14 Shofyan, Wasit, and Mundiri, Islamisasi di Jawa, pp. 38-39. 
15 Interestingly, different argument proposed by Nur Syam. Referring to the folklore of 
the people at Gisikharjo, he argued that Ibrahim was not from Samarkand. Instead, he 
is believed to be originated from Hadramaut Yaman. This i salso due to the similarity 
of ratib at the ritual of Syeikh Ibrahim Asmarakandi with that of the scholars from 
Hadramaut in Jakarta. See Syam, Islam Pesisir, p. 103.

--- Page 8 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
182 
evidences prove that and one of them is the existence of manuscript 
“Usul Nem Bis” consisting six chapters that spread widely in many 
traditional schools (pesantren). In this manuscript, every chapter is 
consistently begun by “Bismilla>h al-rah}ma>n al-rah}i>m”.16 This script is 
written by Ibrahim Asmara whose last name is verbasteering taken 
from the spelling of al -Samarkandi as his origin from Samarkand in 
middle Asia. The adding of the name of home region of the writer as 
the last name was common and is still common till nowadays.17 
The uniformity of Sunan Ampel’s genealogy also supports the 
assumption that Ibrahim Asmarakandi is originated from Samarkand. 
Here Sunyoto states as follows 
“Assumption that Ibrahim al -Samarkandi is originated from 
Samarkand in Asia is based on three things: fact that the term Al -
samarkandi is pronounced Asmarakandi, the existence of the book 
Usul Nem Bis , the uniformity of Sunan Ampel’s genealogy. In 
various genealogies, the figurehas always been corrrelated with the 
name of Husein bin Ali bin Abi Thalib whose genesis is widely 
known in several big countries outside Arab particularly in 
Khurasan. To be noted that Khurasan in that era covered most 
part of middle Asia including Samarkand. 18 
In addi tion to that, the finding of Suluk Ngasmara or Asmara; a 
tasawuf book, which is dated in 15 CE, also supports the existing data. 
This Suluk is strongly believed as being written by Ibrahim Asmara -
kandi’s which is also used by Zoetmulder (1990), as a compa rative data 
in discussing Sunan Bonang Book. Here, Eventhough he only does the 
comparison between the document of Sunan Bonang Book and Suluk 
Ngasmara from the literature perspective, there is a quite strong 
indication that the writer, Mahdum Ibrahim Asmar a, is the grandfather 
of Sunan Bonang.19 
Another important historical aspect of Ibrahim Asmarakandi is the 
location of the grave. Most historians have the same perspective about 
the burial of Ibrahim Asmarakandi. Historically, after his success in 
Islamizing the community at Champa, he intended to open the new 
 
16 Sunyoto, Wali Songo, p. 56. 
17 Agus Sunyoto, Sunan Ampel Raja Surabaya: Membaca Kembali Dinamika Perjuangan 
Dakwah Islam di Jawa Abad XIV-XV M (Surabaya: Diantama, 2004), p. 52. 
18 Ibid., p. 53. 
19 Ibid.

--- Page 9 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
183 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
preaching area in java that was under the Majapahit authority at that 
time. He came to Java trough the Tuban harbor and moved to to the 
east side of harbor to begin his islamization effort in Gisik. 
Unfortunately, his dream to make that area as the centre of 
islamization has not yet realized. After staying in Gisik, he finally 
passed away and was buried in the beach front. The grave has always 
been perceived sacred by the surrounding community as well as most 
traditional Muslims. This grave is well known as Makam Sunan 
Gegesik or Sunan Gesik. 20 Now, Gisik has changed into Gisikharjo 
which is administratively considered as area of Palang subdistrict, 
Tuban-East Java. 
All discussions above offer ve ry important clues that Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi is one of first Islam preachers in Java, whose profile and 
history remained unclear up to now. Java historiography which 
identifies and personifies Ibrahim asmarakandi as Makdum Ibrahim is 
mentioned to be one of the factors behind the mysteri. 
This wrong personification has resulted in various historian 
opinions on Ibrahim’s family background and genealogies. Despite 
that, there is one same perspective among theirs and that is Ibrahim is 
a preacher originated fro m Samarkand. Additionally, the grave that is 
in Gesik beach shore is also another thing agreed by most historians. 
 
Islamizing Local Elites and the Contribution of Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi 
There are many historiography transcripts of Islam in the first 
period stating that Ibrahim was successful in promoting Islam in the 
community and establishing Muslim community that actually bridge 
Samarkand, Champa, and Java. This success can not be separated from 
the routes he took during the activities of islamization eff ort he was 
doing. To give illustration, before he focused on Java, he stayed for 
long time in Champa and succeeded in establishing Muslim community 
in that area. After Islamizing champa, he continued his islamization in 
Sumatera and then finally stayed in Gisik. 
The process of establishing Muslim community in Champa which 
involves Ibrahim Asmarakandi begun when he arrived in that area 
 
20 Agus Sunyoto, Atlas Walisongo, Buku Pertama yang Mengungkap Walisongo sebagai Fakta 
Sejarah (Jakarta: Pustaka IIMaN, 2014), p. 76.

--- Page 10 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
184 
around 1300 CE .21 Despite a long route he had to take to go to 
Champa from his origin, his journey to Champa is considered a s logic 
considering the good re lation between Turkistan and the emperor of 
China from Yuan Dinasty. One of evidences is the fact that by the 
appointment of several Turkistan persons as officials in the state’s 
palace. In addition, it is also strongly assu med that they also build 
genealogical link in Champa area considering the fact that Muslim 
communities were already found in Champa since the 10th century. 
They have had their autonomy to the extent that many Indonesian and 
Chinese known as Islamic preache r figures became the aides of the 
china’s emperor since the15th century. Here, One of them is the 
famous Laksamana Cheng Ho.22 
In the 14 th to 15 th CE century, Champa was known as large 
kingdom and was a confederation of five provinces; each is ruled by 
one prince. Those provinces are Indrapura, Amarawati, Vijaya, 
Kauthara, and Panduranga. The glory of that kingdom occured in Che 
Bong Nga era 1360-1390 M. Ibrahim Asmarakndi was succussful in 
converting him to Islam and his name was changed to Sultan Zainal 
Abidin.23 This area was a famous city which was visited by many 
 
21 Bisri Mustofa, Tarikhul Auliya’ (Rembang: Gama Media, 2004 ), p. 3. This data 
requires further study as there is also another source stating that Syeikh Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi was born in the second half era of the 14 CE. Su nyoto, Wali Songo, p. 54; 
Sunyoto, Atlas Walisongo, p. 73. In addition, according to Asrori and Rachmat, there is 
another source suggesting that Ibrahim was esti mated to be born at 1420 CE. Purwadi 
and Enis Niken, Dakwah Walisongo, Penyebaran Islam Berbasis Kultural di Jawa 
(Yogyakarta: Panji Pustaka, 2007), p. 23. 
22 Sunyoto, Sunan Ampel, p. 54. 
23 Unfortunately, the Champ kingdom has vanished with tragic lost from its enemies. 
As amatter of fact, there are also no traces left from the kingdom to be studied 
nowadays. Danny Wong Tze Ken, The Nguyen and Champa during 17th and 18th Century, 
A Study of Nguyen Foreign Relations (Paris: International Office of Champa, 2012), p. 53. 
After being lost to the Dei Viet, many citizens moved to other save areas and among 
them are moving to the south while others stayed at Delta M at An Giang province 
which is nea r to the Cambodia. Wan Zailan Kamaruddin Wan Ali, Ahmad Zuhdi 
Ismail, and Jasamad Han, “ Masyarakat Muslim Melayu Cham di Vietnam: Kajian 
Mengenai Isu dan Cabaran dalam Pemikiran Islam Era Globalisasi ,” Jati, Vol. 18 
(December 2013): pp. 129-143, p. 131. Interestingly, as told by Hikayat Hasanuddin and 
Sejarah Melayu, the two sons of the king of Cham (Pau Kubah) who also left Champa 
were moving to the areas of Nusantara. One of them, Pau Liang went to stay in Aceh 
while the other one, Indra Berma, moved to Malaka in the Kingdom of Sultan Mansur 
(1458-1477). In addition, many of the Champ people migrated to areas that are now 
known as Muslim populated such the port areas in East java and North Sumatra.

--- Page 11 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
185 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
traders around the world in the first 15 CE century, concluding India 
and mid dle east. 24 Champa was briefly figured by Ming dinasty from 
China. It was proven by Cheng Ho and his troops visitation about 
three times.25 
It is important to note that the arrival of Asmarakandi and his 
effort in preaching islam bothered the authority at t he time. Several 
rulers even issued instruction to punish everyone in the area who 
follows or converts to Islam. He also issued instruction to punish 
Ibrahim.26 This condition made Ibrahim decided to stop and moved to 
stay in Singasari mountain which actual ly is still in the Champa area. 
He started islamizing the community in that new area. His activity, 
preaching islam, in this new area also cause anger among the rulers at 
the time who then decided to punish him with the death penalty. 
Fortunately, before I brahim was being executed, the ruler of Champa 
died. Another fortune for Ibrahmi is that the new king had a very 
different view on Islam and Ibrahim Asmarakandi. As a matter of fact, 
he later converted to Islam and even married off his daughter to 
Ibrahim. Here, Ibrahim had two sons and they are Ali Murtolo (Ali 
Murtadho) and Ali Rahmatullah who are now known as Raja Pandhita 
and Sunan Ampel. These stories can be found in Babad Tanah Jawi, 
Babad Risakipun Majapahit, and Babad Tjirebon.27 
The success of Ibra him Asmarakandi in becoming the inner circle 
of the family of the emperor was undeniably playing the important role 
in the helping the islam preaching in Champa. it can not be denied that 
Islam has already existed in that area since the 10 CE and this was 
 
Denys Lombard, “Champa Dipandang dari Selatan ,” Jurnal Terjemahan dan Tamadun 
Melayu, 3:1 (December 2011): pp. 3 - 11 and p. 7. 
24 One of the factors that made Champ became a very strategic International 
International shipping line is the fact that the shpping line at the time was very difficult 
and dangerous. Many traders at the time, just like those from China, di d not take the 
route directly from the Phan-rang route to Guangzhou. Rather, they chose to go along 
the Champa coast and avoid the dangerous areas of the Paracel Islands. This is as 
shown on European maritime maps until the 18th century . Lombard, “Champa Di 
pandang dari Selatan”, p. 5. 
25 Sjamsudduha et al., Sejarah Sunan Drajat dalam Jaringan Masuknya Islam di Nusantara 
(Surabaya: PT Bina Ilmu, 1998), p. 114. 
26 Yudi AW, Babad Walisongo (Yogyakarta: Penerbit Narasi, 2013), p. 42. 
27 Sunyoto, Atlas Walisongo, p. 75.

--- Page 12 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
186 
before Ibrahim’s arrival in the area. 28 However, the spread was still 
insignficant and the spread of Islam as well as the established Muslim 
community was signifcantly stronger when the so called Syarif Auliya’ 
came to the area. He is recently known as -Syarif Ibrahim Zainuddin 
al-Akbar. Some sources as like babad and serat state that Syarif Auliyah 
is Syeikh Mahdum Ibrahim Asmara or Ibrahim Asmarakandi.29 
After staying in Champa for about 20 years, Ibrahim decided to 
open a new dakwah area and the choice was to open it in Java. One of 
the reasons behind this choice is the optimism that the effort would be 
successful because Java was mostly under the Majapahit authority at 
the time and there was a close relation between Champa and the 
kingdom of Majapahit. This is because one of the rulers of Majapahit is 
his wife’s brother in law. Dewi Darawati, Dewi Condrowulan’s 
younger sister, got married with Prabu Brawijaya ( King of Majapahit). 
Babad Walisongo describes that Ibrahim’s journey to Java was 
accompanied by big his family and here including his two sons, Raden 
Burereh (his nephew) as well as a number of his relatives and friends. 
They made a journey along Sumatera to Palembang harbour.30 
In palembang, the arrival of Ibrahim was welcomed by Adipati 
Arya Damar. Adipati Arya Damar was actually one of the princes from 
Majapahit who was trusted as a ruler in Palembang. Interestingly, 
during their meeting, Ibrahim took a chance to have discussion about 
their beliefs; they are Islam and Hindu. Here, Ibrahim put emph asize 
on the aspect of Tasawuf and Islam spiritual that had similarities with 
that of Hindu. It is told in the history that Adipati Arya Damar was 
moved with the discussion to the extent that he finally converted to 
Islam and changed his name to Ario Abdul lah.31 His decision to be a 
Muslim has undeniably opened for the spreading of Islam and the 
establishment of Muslim community among the elite society in 
 
28 A strong opinion suggesting that islam has been in Champ at the 10 CE is due to an 
evidence that is the Tombstone inscribed with Arabic lett ers Khufi that has similar 
structure to that found at 1039 CE in Pandurannga (Phan-Rang, the capital of Champ). 
Additionally, there is a historical records show that there were already Muslims live in 
Champ at the time Cheng Ho did his expedition to Champ at 1405. Sjamsudduha et 
al., Sejarah Sunan Drajat, 116. 
29 Sjamsudduha, Sejarah Sunan Drajat, p. 118. 
30 Purwadi, Babad Tanah Jawi (Yogyakarta: Penerbit Gelombang Pasang, 2005), p. 23. 
31 Sunyoto, Atlas Walisongo, p. 74.

--- Page 13 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
187 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
Palembang; the rulers and the nobles. Consequently, Islam was then 
accepted by most of the societies at the lower level of status. 
Based on the report from a Portugese adventurer, Tome Pires, 
Ibrahim only stayed for 3 years in Palembang and then continued his 
journey to Java in 1443 CE. 32 Here, He stayed in Gesik to continue his 
spreading of islam and then l ived there for the rest of his life. Here, 
laying on stories from the natives, Nur Syam tells as follows: 
Gesikharjo, according to stories told by natives, was the village 
visited first by Ibrahim Asmarakandi. After that, it became the 
first village for h is islamization or preaching efforts. Syeikh 
Ibrahim Asmara came to the area now called as Karang 
Gemulung. He is told by stories to have some rest here before 
conyinuing his journey to other areas. It is also told that, before he 
continued his journey, he nggulung keloso (folded a plaited mat) and 
therefore that place was then called dusun Gemulung. After that, 
Syeikh Ibrahim went to north area and made a well over there 
(this well then is popularly known as Sumur Ombe). In addition, He 
also did some prayers overthere and raised the land around it but 
unfortunately that land seep in the water and therefore it was 
called Dusun Rembes. He continued his journey to the west area. 
In that area he made two wells; one in the mosque and one in the 
north. That area was called Gesikharjo.33 
It is strongly believed that Ibrahim was successful in islamizing the 
society in Gesikharjo not only among the lower level of society but 
also the elite society here including Tuban rulers and nobles. 34 Babad 
Tuban here explains that the rulers (the regent) in that area, untill the 
15th century, was Hariyo Leno. After his passing away, Then Raden 
Hariyo Dikoro succeede him and later he converted to islam after his 
daughter, Raden Ayu Hariyo Tejo is married to Sy ekh Ngadurrohman, 
the son of Syekh Jali/Syeh Jalaluddin/Kyai makam dawa/Ngalimur -
tolo. Since then, all regents of Tuban are Muslim.35 
All the stories told above resulted in important conclusion that is 
the fact that Ibrahim Asmarakandi did take a very imppo rtant role in 
the first islamization process both in Champa and Java. He has 
 
32 Purwadi and Niken, Dakwah Walisongo, p. 23. Another source states that this arrival 
at Tuban wa around 1410 CE. Asmudianingsih, Sang Pemberi Arah, p. 14. 
33 Syam, Islam Pesisir, pp. 105-106. 
34 Edi Sedyawati, Tuban, Kota Pelabuhan di Jalan Sutera (Jakarta: Depdikbud, 1992). 
35 R. Soeparmo, Catatan Sejarah 700 Tahun Tuban (Tuban: n.p., 1983), p. 42.

--- Page 14 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
188 
succeeded making islam not only spread and accepted by the common 
society from the low class but also by the elite society. It is evidenced 
by the convertion of king of Champa to be a Muslim and also by 
Ibrahim’s marriege to his daughter, Dewi Condrowulan. Not only in 
champa, Ibrahim also succeeded in establishing Muslim community in 
Palembang. It is evidenced by the convertion of the regent of 
Palembang, bupati Arya Damar, to be a Muslim. The spreading of 
Islam in all levels and classes of Muslim society in palembang also 
happened in Tuban. Ibrahim and his family were successful in 
maintaining the good relationship with the elites and one of the 
strategies is by through his choice to marriege his grandchild to bupati 
Tuban’s son. 
 
Practicing Sufism as an Approach to Islamization 
The success of Ibrahim Asmarakandi in Islamizing Champa and 
java cannot be separated from his Sufism approach. 36 Zoetmouder’s 
research has found that he was one of the famous Sufis in his era and 
even had completely compiled his book about Sufism that was well -
known by the title “ Suluk ngasmara”. This book was estimated to be 
older than the “Suluk Wujil” authored by Sunan Bonang:37 
//Ngalap pawarta kang ening/ pawartane> wong kang mulya/ anrasani ing 
jatine>/tafsir ing napi lan isbat/ kang satuhu ning ora/ napi jinis 
wastanipun/ kapindo napi nakirah// 
//Tegese> kang nampi jinis/ sejati -jatine> ning ora/ apa tan ana wujude >/ 
tegese> napi nakirah/ ana lawan pinurba/ orane > kalawan tuduh/ iku jatine 
nakirah// 
//Kang ingaran napi jinis/ atuduh ing de>we>kira/ pan tan ana ing de>we>ke/ 
yogja sami waskit}a/ de>ning basa nakirah/ nora wujud nora makdum/ pan 
tan keno winicara// 
 
36 The sufism approach in the process of Islamization in Nusantara turn out to be not 
only used by Samarkand but also by his son (Sunan Ampel ). As a matter of fact, there 
are many studies suggesting that this very approach is the key to the success of the 
preaching and islamization efforts of the walisongo in Java. Sunyoto, Atlas Walisongo, p. 
350; Sunyoto, Walisongo, p. 91; Sunyoto, Sunan Ampel, p. 120; Wicaksono, Mengislamkan 
Tanah Jawa, p. 191; Sofyan, Islamisasi di Jawa, p. 191. 
37 Kod. 1796 Univ. Bibl. Leiden; P.J. Zoetmulder, Manunggaling Kawulo Gusti, Pantheisme 
dan Monisme dalam Sastra Suluk Jawa (Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka, 1990), pp. 103-104.

--- Page 15 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
189 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
//Nanging si malih sire >ki/ sampun mboten amicara/ ing roro iku raose >/ 
iku ing aranan ora/ apan tan ana pisan/ iku kajatine> suwung/ liyep 
datanpa tamahan// 
//Sakat}ahe kang dumadi/ Ing ngaran napi nakirah/ atuduh anane> de>we / 
pan dudu anane> dawak/ napi jinis ingaran/ tan ana mamad }a iku/ lawan 
sipat ing pangeran// 
//Sakarone iku napi/ kelawan tegese > ila/ iya iku w awangene>/ karone 
sinelo-selo/ tanpa we >h ye>n kumpulo/ napi roro nora kumpul/ lawan isbat 
ing pangeran// 
//Yen tan mawalera malih/ nopo roro lawan isbat/ yekni kumpul ing 
karone>/ karone> sinela-sela/ tan ake>h ye>n kumpula/ tege>se Ilallah iku/ iya 
isbat kalamiyah// 
//Lir ing kalamiyah iki/ inggih isbatan balak/ ngarani arane > de>we>/ 
kalawan isbat makripat/ ana anane > d}awak/ sampurna ujar puniku/ 
anging pange>ran kang ana// 
//Wonten kapanggih ing tulis/ lamu roro sipat ing Hyang/ ye >n sampun 
weruh tatane>/ tuhu sipat ing pange >ran/ napi kalawan isbat/ saking kitab 
bilihipun/ pange>ran kasipat adam// 
//Aran napi kang kakiki/ majaji iku pange >ran/ johar awal ing 
makame>/ jamane> ingaran ora/ nora no ing pange >ran/ ngadamna wujudno 
kupur/ kupure> patang matdahab// 
//Sipat ing Hyang kang kakiki/ iya sipat subudiyah/ kaun ngalimun 
sake>he/ majajiku ing pange >ran/ kang ajal lawan ngadam/ ana ning asyira 
iku/ sawab de>ning kanyataan// 
//Mangkana wujuddire >ki/ ingaran wujud abngal/ saking pange >ran 
wujude>/ ngadame> saking pange>ran/ tan ana ing de >we>knya/ tegese> abangal 
iku/ de>ning wujud lawan ngadam// 
//Mangkana kang napi jinis/ tan kena ingaran abngal/ de >ne> ngadam ing 
wujude>/ kuneng wujud ing pange>ran/ gih de>de> wujud abngal/ mangkana ing 
wujudipun/ tan kaworan de>ning adam// 
//Mangkana wujude> yekti/ dudu napi lawan isbat/ karone > dudu de>we>ke>/ 
yogja sami wakit }aa/ de>ne> basa nakirah/ datan wujud tan makedum/ pan 
tan kena winicara// 
//Nanging ta mengke>ne> malih/ sampun ora winicara/ ing roro iku arahe >/ 
lamu wasis ing wicara/ wujude > kang nakirah/ wujud ing Hyang 
maharuhur/ ye>ku rahsa kang sampurna//

--- Page 16 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
190 
//Sampun ta sira mrih singgih/ apan ika sedya ning Hyang/ de >n weruh 
marang tegese>/ kang nurat pang de >re>ng wikan/ lawan kang gad }ah serat/ 
de>n tangguh wong ngund}uh waluh/ lawan wong d}ud}uk kate>la// 
//Apuranen kang nulis nunulis/ inggih guyonan ke >wala/ jar luput de >ntutugake>/ anenggih ing ananira/ tan wonten ing pange>ran/ ing de>we>ke> apan 
suwung/ sapisan-pisan pan ora// 
//Mangkana wujudire >ki/ anarima lawan ngadam/ lan amare > kang 
agawe>/ duk asilian tingalira/ ya tak iku kawasa/ aningali kang andulu/ 
katon kang anduwe> tingal// 
//Sakat}ahe kang dumadi/ mokal ye >n anaa d }awak/ badan kalawan 
nyawane>/ iku minangka pae >san/ ing sipat kamalullah/ badan ing manuso 
iku/ apan kinarya tulad}a//.38 
Suluk Ngasmara essentially gives important direction and guidance 
regarding the unification. It states that the unification of a human 
being with God in the level of ascetic (meditation) and the singleness 
as well as the transcendence of God has always been and will be 
maintained well. At the same time, doctrine about The Creator will not 
sink or mingling with His creation. Although Asmarakandi’s thought is 
almost similar to Al-Hallaj about shat}ah}a>t (spiritual ascetic), the basic 
idea about the existence of G od and the existence of His creatures are 
different. There is a similarity with Al-Gazali that the God as the 
creator and He never needs to another. Meanwhile, the creature is 
creature who, unlike God, always needs to the other. God created the 
creature because of His Greatness and independence. God creates the 
creature also in order to be respected and loved. The doctrine of the 
Asmakarandi above is inspired by the theory of the Javanese mysticism 
of universal monism. This process is known as the sevel le vels of 
emanation. However, Asmarakandi does not recognize perfect equality 
between God and his creation. This is called as ‘single but not a single’ 
or ‘one but not one’. 
The emanation of ‘existence’ in various forms here should not be 
perceived as the re al and substantive ‘existence’. Rather, it has to 
viewed as just a form of ‘virtual existence’. This emanation theory 
consists of seven levels. The first one is (1) Ah}adiyah (singleness). At 
this stage, the absolute Substance or the nature of God has neit her 
known individuation nor ideas. This level is also called as the level of 
 
38 Ibid.

--- Page 17 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
191 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
hidden level. (2) The level of Wah}da (one and only) is the first phase of 
the emanation. At that point, the nature of the God began individuated 
in the form of the Light of Muhammad hidden in the secret of Allah 
Swt (the Lord of universe). (3) The level of Wa>h}idiyah (singleness, one 
only without equality, No comparison) is the second individuation. At 
this stage, all the ideas have been steadily in the knowledge of God. 
The existence of essence that comes out ( 'ayankharija), is in line with 
the the knowledge ('ayansabita’). Thus, His substance and His attributes 
become visible. The three levels are called as inner level or secret circle. 
External or physical leves consist of arwa>h} (soul, deceased, departed 
spirit), mitha>l (example or comparison), ajsa>m (bodies), and ka>mil (the 
perfect human being). Research of Zoetmulder indicates that these 
four levels display the permanent substance. The conception of level in 
order to achieve the highest perfection for a Sufi in Abraham 
Asmarakandi’s view seems to be completely different from that of 
Hamzah Fansuri and al-Sumatrani Syamsuddin and Islamic Javanese.39 
Consequently, the position of a creature and here includes humans 
as en ablio, as , having no authority to claim the him -self (truth claim of 
self-being), attitudes, knowledge, and behavior as the right one (always 
true) and has authority “to judge ” another (the other self being). In 
every man, there is “a dependence” on another, and another one has 
potentiall to become “the complementary ” for “that depende nce”. 
This very doctrine of emanation is the one that leads famous figures 
among the Sufis from previous era such as Ibn Arabi and al -Hallaj 
have the very tolerant attitudes towards others even thos e from other 
faiths.40 
The tolerance to other religions that has already developed in 
Tuban can be traced back from the reception book “the Nem Bis ” 
which is one of the works of Asmarakandi. There are many technical 
vocabularies originated from Hindu being adopted by the book, 
among them is “Hyang-Prince (The Lord of th world) ” used for 
 
39 Latifah Ratnawati, Tasawuf Kontekstual (Palembang: Dramata, 2011), pp. 20-21; 
Sangidu, Wachadatul Wujud, Polemik Pemikiran Sufistik Antara Hamzah Fansuri dan 
Syamsuddin al -Samatrani dengan Nuruddin al -Raniri (Yogyakarta: Gama Media, 2003 ); 
Simuh, Mistik Islam Kejawen Raden Ngabehi Ranggawarsita (Jakarta: Penerbit Uinversitas 
Indonesia, 1988). 
40 Abu al-Wafa al-Ghanimi al-Taftazani, Madkhal ila al-Tas}awwuf al-Isla>mi> (Cairo: Da>r alThaqafah li al -Nasyar wa al -Tauzi’, 1979); Jamal al-Bana, al-Ta’addudiyah fi al -Mujtama’ 
al-Isla>mi> (Cairo: Da>r al-Fikr al-Islami>, 2001).

--- Page 18 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
192 
“Allah” (God), “sholatthe ( ritual prayers and actions performed five 
times daily )” called as “sembahyang” (worship), “shaum” (fasting) 
translated to “poso”, “poropendhita (Hindu priests) ” is used to call 
“Ulama (pious Muslim) ”, and so forth. 41 The adaptation of the 
technical vocabulary of Hindu such as pendhita for ulama can be argued 
as one clear form of the attitude of tolerance of Asmarakandi towards 
other religions. Arguably, such behavior play important role in helping 
his mission to spread Islam and made the preach quickly appreciated 
and accepted by the local society as they are not feeling intimidated.42 
The work of Nem Bis also illustrates the importance of 
understanding the social context of the society. The text was originall y 
Arabic with the outline structure consisting a question -answer model. 
Later, it was translated into the Javanese. As one illustration, here is 
one example taken from the book as follows: 
Question: If you are asked, “What is faith?” then the answer is: “I 
believe in God, His angels, His books, His messenger, the Last 
Day, and that fate —for good or bad —is ordained by God 
Almighty. 
Question: If you are asked, “How do you believe in the books?” 
then the answer is: “God Almighty has revealed a book for his 
prophet.43 
According to Laffan, the structure of the book Nem Bis is very 
appropriate to be used as learning material for the beginner in studying 
Islam because they are in the forms of “easily memorized questions 
and answers”. That was definitely easier rather than the Islamic texts in 
 
41 Uka Tjandrasasmita, Islamic Antiquity of Sendang Duwur (Jakarta: The Archeological 
Foundation, 1975), p. 76. 
42 Pendhita, a tec hnical term frequently found in Nem Bis, is neither from Islam nor 
from Arab. Instead, it is from H indu tradition that is rooted from sanskrit. The term 
pendhita is rooted from the word pandita which is an honor label for the elites within 
the Brahman class. They are the ones considered authoritative to read learn and 
interpret as well as spread the content of the Sacred and holy book, texts regarding law 
and ancient philosophy. Bruce M. Sulliva n, Historical Dictionary of Hinduism (Maryland: 
Scarecrow Press, Inc., 1997); Klaus K. Klostermaier, A Concise Encyclopedia of Hinduism 
(Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 1998); Karel Werner, A Popular Dictionary of Hinduism 
(Suney: Curzon Press, 1997). 
43 Michael Laffan, The Makings of Indonesian Islam, Orientalism and Narration of A Sufi Past, 
(New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2011), p. 33.

--- Page 19 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
193 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
the form of narrative -descriptive.44 The success of the book and the 
model of explanation is also supported by the fact that Asramarakandi 
has managed to Islamize the society from all classes within Tuban 
district; both the lower class as well as the elites. 
Picture 1. Three layers of roof of the Tajug mosque of Ibrahim Asmarakandi 
 
In addition to the adaptation of the technical terms from Hindu, 
there is also another proof showing the acceptance of Asmarakandi to 
local culture and that was the architecture of the Masjid (mosque) ( see 
picture). Despite having undergone renovation several times, the 
mosque’s architectural style is retained and unchanged from the 
original model. Here, as seen in the picture, the r oof of the mosque, 
the tajug-shaped, actually represents the pyramid three layers and at the 
peak, there were mustoko or memolo. The construction of the building in 
the shape of a pyramid and mustoko are the the manifestation of 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi’s accom modations to the style of Hindu temple 
during the Majapahit era in to the architecture of the mosque. 
From the picture above, it is important to note that the roof that 
has Tajug -shape is well known as part of the Hindu temple 
architectural especially in Bali (Balinese meru roof) on the 15th and 16th 
CE. The tajug temple symbolically represents processes or stages in 
which a human takes in his journey to reach the Mahameru (The top of 
Semeru mountain). Mahameru is believed by the people of Hindu as 
the paradise or heaven. They believe that the whole kahyangan give life 
and human life, are on the Mahameru. Thus, the pyramid the temple, 
 
44 Ibid., p. 38.

--- Page 20 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
194 
eventhough is in a slimmer shape than a mosque, is the climbing 
process to achieve the unification with the gods in heaven.45 
Interestingly, despite the adoption of the pyramid of the temple 
architectural style adapted by Ibrahim Asmarakandi in to the mosque, 
he just took three levels. And here, these three levels serving form of 
tajug (crown) of a mosque actually also represent the three processes 
or phases towards God taken from the the tradition of Sufism in Sunni 
Islam. In Sunni Sufism, there are three stages that must be traversed by 
any Muslim who wants to go reaching towards the God and they are; 
the Shari>‘ah (law in Isla m), t }ari>qah (path for mystics to follow esp. 
Sufism), and h}aqi>qah (the truth or essence) . Al -Malibari in his book 
Mandzu>mah Hida >yah al -adzkiya> describes the relation of the three 
stages.46 
The book gives important clues that there are three stages a person has to 
take in his or her spiritual journey towards God. The three stages are a single 
entity that could not be separated in the process. Shari'ah (Islamic law) is 
illustrated as boat while the thariqah is as the ocean and the hakikat is 
illustrated as the pearl in the bottom of the ocean. 
Here, any human who intended to take journey reaching Allah Swt 
(God) is described as a person who is looking for pearl in the deepest 
bottom of ocean, and here syariat (law in Islam) is like a boat 
functioning as a tool or device to be able to take journey throughout 
ocean, and thariqoh is like the ocean that contains pearl (diamond), 
while hakikat (the truth or essence) is like the pearl (diamond) which is 
the goal of the journey or the object has been looked for from inside 
the ocean. Therefore, whoever intended to look for the pearl 
(diamond) must make or have the boat first and here is the syariat (law 
in Islam). Hypothetically, if the boat is damaged or is not good it can 
sink in the ocean and here means the t ariqah. As a consequence, they 
will not be able to find the pearl (diamond) or the hakikat. As a matter 
 
45 Ashadi, Antariksa, and Purnama Salura, “ Syncretism in Architectural Forms of 
Demak Grand Mosque,” Journal of Applied Environmental and Biological Sciences, Vo. 5, No. 
2 (2015), pp. 26-30. Many studies suggest that tajug of the mosque is an evidence of 
islam’s acceptance towards hindu’s architecture that is the temple. Ahmed E.I. Wahby, 
The Architecture of the Early Mosques and Shrines of Java: Influences of the Arab Merchants in the 
15th and 16th Centuries?, Vol. 1 and 2 (Ph.D Dissertation: der FakultätGeistes und 
Kulturwissenschaften (GuK) der Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg, 2007). 
46 Abdul Jalil Hamdi al-Qudusi, Tuhfah al-Ashfiya>’ ala> Mandzu>mah Hida>yah al-Adzkiya>’ ila> 
Thari>q al-Auliya>’ (Semarang: Penerbit Toha Putra, 1963), pp. 9-12.

--- Page 21 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
195 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
of fact, the journey as well as the person can go astray and lead astray 
(d}illun mud}illun) because he or she has too much confidence that he or 
she is on the right path for the search of hakikat without Syariah. More 
ironically, those also can mislead others.47 
The process of the spiritual journey is symbolized by the three 
pyramids model of ro of of the mosque which is believed to finally 
bring a human to the perfect closeness with God. In the Hindu 
tradition, such perfect closeness is called as mustoko or memolo while 
in Islamic Sufism it is known as mustaqa (see two pictures). 48 In both 
the arc hitecture of the mosque or Hindu temple of Asmarakandi, 
“mustaka” (mustaqa) is put as a symbol representing the highest 
achievement of a human in the presence of their Lord (Allah). In 
Hinduism, the highest achievement is being manifested by human who 
reach awareness (moksha) or get spiritual awareness (kamoksan).49 
Meanwhile, according to the concept of Ibrahim Asmarakandi, 
reaching the spiritual awareness (moksha) is manifested into the degree 
of achievement of perfe ction of a man ( al-insa>n al -ka>mil) and a holy 
person (waliyullah loved by Allah) who got the emanation of God ’s 
attributes.50 This is similar to the explanation that Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi uses the perspective of Ghazali’s sufism thought who 
refused the concept of ittiha>d, hulu >l, and wushu>l to reconstruct his 
perspective os sufism. His -Sufism symbolically manifested into the 
mustaqa mosque. This explanation is consistent with his views 
contained in Suluk Ngasmara that are explained previously. 
 
47 Ibid., p. 10. 
48 Wahby, The Architecture, p. 122. 
49 In Hindu tradition, just like in Islam, there are many ways in intepreting the journey 
towards the Mustaka (moksa/kamoksan). Similar to Sunni sufism tradition, the journey 
in Hindu tradition also requires the taking of a quite difficult path. For any person who 
wanted to reach moksa, he has to take the path of lelaku to reach the destination of 
dharma (truth), artha (wealth), kama (the desire and lust) ). Kemenristek Dikti, Pendidikan 
Agama Hindu (Jakarta: Direktorat Jenderal Pembelajaran dan Kemahasiswaan -
Kementerian Riset, Teknologi, dan Pendidikan Tinggi Republik Indonesia, 2016), pp. 
24-25. See also W. Kandi Wijaya, Panca Balikrama Besakih (Denpasar: Pustaka Larasan, 
2014), p. 63. However, there are also ways to reach the Moksa trough meditation or 
yoga and this is mostly known among the Hindu -Budhist. Ahmad Fahruddin and Y. 
Hanan Pamungkas, “Siwasiddhanta Penelusuran Aliran Siwaisme di Jawa Timur 
Periode Klasik,” Avatara, Vol. 1, No. 2 (2012): pp. 241-254, p. 249. 
50 Simuh, Sufisme Jawa, Transformasi Tasawuf Islam ke Mistik Jawa (Yogyakarta: Pustaka 
Pelajar, 2002), pp. 95-96.

--- Page 22 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
196 
Picture 2. Mustoko/Memolo Candi51 Picture 3. Mustaqa of mosque of 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi52 
 
One of the most important point here is that the Sufism approach 
used by Ibrahim Asmarakandi which accommodates the local 
indigeneous tradition including the architectural style of Hindu 
tradition did have a great impact for the development of Islam in Java. 
The impact is even more apparent in the the field of architecture. 
Almost all the mosques built by the the early Islamic preachers in Java 
known as Walisongo used the pyramid -shaped roof as architectural 
style (tajug). This, for example, can be traced back from the 
architecture of mosques in Ampel Denta, Cirebon, Sendang Duwur 
Lamongan, Drajat, Bonang, Panjunan, Demak and Banten. 
Genealogically, these holy preachers are connected to Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi. 
 
Conclusion 
Ibrahim Asmarakandi was one the first preachers who spreaded 
Islam in Champa and Java. Many evidecens show that he has 
succeeded in Islamizing the society from all classes both the low class 
society to the government high officials or nobleman on both areas. 
Genealogically, Javanese historiography noted that he is originated 
from Samarkand and is from the family lineage of citizens purely 
“Tyulen” (Kazakhstan) who then migrated to the area that is currently 
located in the country of Uzbekistan. 
There is only very few data that gives information about Ibrahim 
Asmarakandi. Consequently, there is still a high uncertainty, some will 
cal it mystery, in regards to the exact time and place of his birth. This 
 
51 Wahby, The Architecture, p. 385. 
52 Sunyoto, Atlas Walisongo, p. 74.

--- Page 23 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
197 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
has lead to diverse opinions among historians. Smilarly, there is also a 
high uncertainty in regards to his genealogic and hence there is various 
opinions. Neverthelless, it can be argued that he is the descendant of 
the Prophet Muhammad from the Husein ibn Ali Ibn Abi Talib/-
Fatimah. In this regads, all historians share one common agreement. 
If there is a high uncertainty regarding his birth place and time as well as 
his genealogy, there is an agreement among historians that Ibrahim indeed had 
played a very important role to the efforts of Islamisation in early era, exactly 
in the late 14 th century and early 15 th CE. He was not only successfull in 
spreading to the lower class, but also was able to convice the local elites in 
Champa, Palembang and Java. One interesting point is the strategy he uses and 
it is the approach of Sufism. 
The Sufismis is an approach that is used by Ibrahim Asmarakandi to 
Islamize Cham pa and Java. This approach tends to put him as the Muslim 
missionary who is tolerant of local culture, including the Hindu that has been 
present and growing before. In the context of IslamisationJava, Sufismas an 
approach can be seen of adaptation vocabula ry that commonly used in 
Hinduism such as Hyang-Pangeran (the Lord), semhahHyang (prayer to Allah the 
Lord of the world), Poso (fasting), Pendhita (Hindu priest) and set forth as 
integral part of the Islamic doctrine that is written down in his work Nem Bis. 
Moreover, Sufism approach looked real on the architectural style of the 
building of the mosque. He did not adapt the architecture of mosques that 
existed in Uzbekistan, but the enshrinement of Hindu manifested into the 
pyramid roof construction and “mustaka, memolo, or mustaqa” as the peak. 
The success of Ibrahim Asmarakandi, of course become the sign 
of the formation of the partnership between Samarkand, Champa, and 
Java. The rapid development of Islam, especially in Champa and Java is 
not simply the r eal contribution of Islamic spreaders of India and the 
Arabian peninsula, but also of Samarkand is now a part of Uzbekistan 
(Central Asia), including through Ibrahim Asmarakandi. Therefore, 
historical studies about Islamization in Southeast Asia, especiall y in 
Indonesia at the beginning of the era (the first period), it is proper to 
take into account the Samarkand as one of the resource or source. [] 
References 
Books and Articles 
Ahmad, Moch Jamaluddin. Napak Tilas Auliya’. Jombang: Pustaka Al -
Muhibbin, 2011.

--- Page 24 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
198 
al-Bana, Jamal. al-Ta’addudiyah fi al-Mujtama’ al-Islami>. Cairo: Da>r al-Fikr 
al-Islami>, 2001. 
al-Qudusi, Abdul Jalil Hamdi Tuhfah al-Ashfiya>’ ala> Mandzu>mah Hida>yah 
al-Adzkiya>’ ila> Thari>q al-Auliya>’. Semarang: Penerbit Toha Putra, 
1963. 
al-Taftazani, Abu al-Wafa al-Ghanimi. Madkhal ila al-Tasawwuf al-Islami. 
Cairo: Dar al-Tsaqafah li al-Nasyar wa al-Tauzi’, 1979. 
Arnold, T.W. The Preaching of Islam: A History of Propagation of the Muslim 
Faith. London: Constable & Company, 1913. 
Ashadi, Antariksa, and Purnama Salura . “Syncretism in Architectural 
Forms of Demak Grand Mosque .” Journal of Applied 
Environmental and Biological Sciences, Vo. 5, No. 2 (2015): pp. 2630. 
Asmudiyangsih. Sang Pemberi Arah dalam Sejarah. Tuban: n.p., 1996. 
AW, Yudi. Babad Walisongo. Yogyakarta: Penerbit Narasi, 2013. 
Azra, Azyumardi. Jaringan Ulama Timur Tengah dan Kepulauan Nusantara 
Abad XVII dan XVIII. Bandung: Mizan, 1994. 
Drewes, G.H.W. “New Light on the Coming of Islam to Indonesia.” 
BKI (1968). 
Fahruddin, Ahmad and Y. Hanan Pamungkas. “Siwasiddhanta 
Penelusuran Aliran Siwaisme di Jawa Timur Periode Klasik.” 
Avatara, Vol. 1, No. 2, (2012): pp. 241-254. 
Fatimi, S. Q. Islam Comes to Malaysia. Singapore: M.S. R.I., 1963. 
Hiro, Dilip. Inside Central Asia, A Political and Cultural History of 
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkey, and Iran. New York: Overlook Duckworth, 2004. 
John, A.H. “ Muslim Mystics and Historitic al Writings.” D.G.E. Hall 
(ed.). Historians of South East Asia . London: Oxford University 
Press, 1961. 
Kemenristek Dikti. Pendidikan Agama Hindu. Jakarta: Direktorat 
Jenderal Pembelajaran dan Kemahasiswaan -Kementerian Riset, 
Teknologi, dan Pendidikan Tinggi Republik Indonesia, 2016. 
Ken, Danny Wong Tze. The Nguyen and Champa during 17th and 18th 
Century, A Study of Nguyen Foreign Relations. Paris: International 
Office of Champa, 2012.

--- Page 25 of 26 ---
Sufism Approach in Islamization of Java 
199 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
Klostermaier, Klaus K. A Concise Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Oxford: 
Oneworld Publications, 1998. 
Laffan, Michael. The Makings of Indonesian Islam, Orientalism and Narration 
of A Sufi Past. New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2011. 
Lombard, Denys. “Champa Dipandang dari Selatan.” Jurnal Terjemahan 
dan Tamadun Melayu, 3:1 Disember (2011): pp. 3 - 11. 
McCray, Thomas R. Uzbekistan. Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publisher, 
2004. 
Mustofa, Bisri. Tarikhul Auliya’. Rembang: Gama Media, 2004. 
Purwadi and Enis Niken. Dakwah Walisongo, Penyebaran Islam Berbasis 
Kultural di Jawa. Yogyakarta: Panji Pustaka, 2007. 
Purwadi, Babad Tanah Jawi. Yogyakarta: Penerbit Gelombang Pasang, 
2005. 
Ratnawati, Latifah. Tasawuf Kontekstual. Palembang: Dramata, 2011. 
Sangidu, Wachadatul Wujud, Polemik Pemikiran Sufistik Antara Hamzah 
Fansuri dan Syamsuddin al -Samatrani dengan Nuruddin al -Raniri. 
Yogyakarta: Gama Media, 2003. 
Sedyawati, Edi. Tuban, Kota Pelabuhan di Jalan Sutera. Jakarta: 
Depdikbud, 1992. 
Shofyan, Ridin, Wasit, and Mundiri. Islamisasi di Jawa, Walisongo, 
Penyebar Islam di Jawa men urut Penuturan Babad. Yogyakarta: 
Pustaka Pelajar, 2000. 
Simuh. Mistik Islam Kejawen Raden Ngabehi Ranggawarsita. Jakarta: 
Penerbit Universitas Indonesia, 1988. 
----------. Sufisme Jawa, Transformasi Tasawuf Islam Ke Mistik Jawa. 
Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar, 2002. 
Sjamsudduha et al., Sejarah Sunan Drajat dalam Jaringan Masuknya Islam di 
Nusantara. Surabaya: PT Bina Ilmu, 1998. 
Soeparmo, R. Catatan Sejarah 700 Tahun Tuban. Tuban: n.p., 1983. 
Sullivan, Bruce M. Historical Dictionary of Hinduism. Maryland: Scarecrow 
Press, Inc., 1997. 
Sunyoto, Agus. Atlas Walisongo, Buku Pertama yang Mengungkap Walisongo 
sebagai Fakta Sejarah. Jakarta: Pustaka IIMaN, 2014.

--- Page 26 of 26 ---
Zumrotul Mukaffa 
JOURNAL OF INDONESIAN ISLAM 
Volume 11, Number 01, June 2017 
200 
----------. Sunan Ampel Raja Surabaya: Membaca Kembali Di namika 
Perjuangan Dakwah Islam di Jawa Abad XIV -XV M. Surabaya: 
Diantama, 2004. 
----------. Wali Songo, Rekonstruksi Sejarah yang Disingkirkan. Jakarta: 
Transpustaka, 2011. 
Syam, Nur. Islam Pesisir. Yogjakarta: LKiS, 2005. 
Tjandrasasmita, Uka. Islamic Ant iquity of Sendang Duwur. Jakarta: The 
Archeological Foundation, 1975. 
UNESCO. Samarkand, The Place of Crossing and Synthesis of World Cultures. 
Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 2000. 
Wahby, Ahmed E. I. The Architecture of the Early Mosques and Shrines of 
Java: Influences of the Arab Merchants in the 15th and 16th Centuries?, 
Vol. 1 and 2. Ph.D Dissertation: der Fakultät Geistes und 
Kulturwissenschaften (GuK) der Otto -Friedrich-Universität 
Bamberg, 2007. 
Wan Ali, Wan Zailan Kamaruddin, Ahmad Zuhdi Ismail, and Jasamad 
Han. “ Masyarakat Muslim Melayu Cham di Vietnam: Kajian 
Mengenai Isu dan Cabaran Dalam Pemikiran Islam Era 
Globalisasi.” Jati, Vol. 18 (December 2013): pp. 129-143. 
Werner, Karel. A Popular Dictionary o f Hinduism. Suney: Curzon Press, 
1997. 
Wicaksono, Wiji. Mengislamkan Tanah Jawa, Telaah Atas Metode Dakwah 
Walisongo. Bandung: Penerbit Mizan, 1995. 
Wijaya, W. Kandi Panca Balikrama Besakih. Denpasar: Pustaka Larasan, 
2014. 
Winstedt, R.O. “ The Advant of Muhammadism in Malay Paninsula 
and Archipelago.” JMBRAS (1971). 
Zaimeche, Salah. Samarkand. Manchester: Foundation for Science and 
Technology, 2005. 
Zoetmulder, P.J. Manunggaling Kawulo Gusti, Pantheisme dan Monisme 
dalam Sastra Suluk Jawa. Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka, 1990.