Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_06\documents\2022-Riyadi-DemakSufismSulukSyehBari.pdf
Total Pages: 20
Statistics: Chars=34331, ThaiWords=6866.2, EnglishWords=6697

--- Page 1 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 25 
 
 
KALAM, P-ISSN: 0853-9510, E-ISSN: 2540-7759 
http://ejournal.radenintan.ac.id/index.php/KALAM 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
Volume 16, No. 1 (2022), p. 25-44 
 
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century In 
the Study of The Manuscript of Suluk Syeh Bari 
 
 
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi 
Ponorogo State Islamic Institute, East Java, Indonesia 
ir-riyadi@yahoo.com 
 
Muhammad Harir Muzakki 
Ponorogo State Islamic Institute, East Java, Indonesia 
harir@iainponorogo.ac.id 
 
Nurul Khasanah 
Ponorogo State Islamic Institute, East Java, Indonesia 
khasanah@iainponorogo.ac.id 
 
Abstract : Islamization of the archipelago, especially in Java, took place peacefully in 
Demak period of the XV - XVI centuries. The retribution of walisanga with 
its sufism teachings was able to embrace Javanese mysticism in the embrace 
of Islam. The realization of this attitude of peace (penetration pacifique) 
without conflict shows that sufism has played an attitude of moderation 
such as appreciation, tolerance, and inclusive attitude so as to attract the 
sympathy of Hindu -Javanese mystics into Islam. This paper is intended to 
reveal how Islamic moderation occurs in Demak, for it is studied by an 
authentic Sufi manuscript published by Demak written by Sunan Bonang 
under the title Suluk Syeh Bari. This manuscript is studied using the content 
analysis method by priori tizing the concept of moderation. This study 
concludes that Suluk Syeh Bari by Sunan Bonang is the foundation for the 
teachings of moderate Islamic Sufism since the beginning of Islamization in 
Java. His moderation teachings include 1) inclusive attitude s in the spirit 
of divinity, 2) perfection of the soul, realizing noble, wise, and open minded. 
3) Open attitude and tolerance towards others through the teachings of 
Sufism, Ridlo, and always happy. 4) Respect religious acculturation. This 
attitude will b e inherited by his two students, namely Sunan Kalijaga and 
Syeh Siti Jenar, who gave birth to acculturative Islam (Islam of the 
archipelago). 
Keywords : Moderation, Sufism, Script, Suluk Syeh Bari.

--- Page 2 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
26 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
Abstrak : Islamisasi Nusantara, khususnya di Jawa, berlangsung secara damai pada 
periode Demak abad XV - XVI. Para wali dengan ajaran tasawufnya 
mampu merangkul mistik Jawa dalam rengkuhan Islam. Terwujudnya 
sikap perdamaian (penetration pacifique) tanpa konflik ini menunjukkan 
bahwa tasawuf telah memerankan sikap moderat seperti penghargaan, 
toleransi, dan sikap inklusif sehingga mampu menarik simpati para 
mistikus Hindu -Jawa ke dalam Islam. Tulisan ini bertujuan untuk 
mengungkap bagaimana moderasi Islam di Demak, u ntuk itu dikaji 
sebuah naskah sufi otentik terbitan Demak yang ditulis oleh Sunan Bonang 
dengan judul Suluk Syeh Bari. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode analisis 
konten dengan mengedepankan gagasan moderasi. Penelitian ini 
menyimpulkan bahwa Suluk Syeh Bar i karya Sunan Bonang merupakan 
peletak dasar ajaran tasawuf Islam yang moderat sejak awal Islamisasi di 
Jawa. Ajaran moderasinya meliputi 1) sikap inklusif dalam semangat 
ketuhanan, 2) kesempurnaan jiwa, mewujudkan budi pekerti luhur, 
bijaksana, dan berpik iran terbuka. 3) Sikap terbuka dan toleransi 
terhadap sesama melalui ajaran tasawuf, rid ho, d an selalu bahagia. 4) 
Menghargai akulturasi agama. Sikap inilah yang akan diwarisi oleh kedua 
muridnya, yaitu Sunan Kalijaga dan Syeh Siti Jenar, yang melahirkan 
Islam akulturatif (Islam Nusantara). 
Kata Kunci : Moderasi, Sufisme, Naskah, Suluk Syeh Bari 
 
 
A. Introduction 
In the discourse of Javanese Islamization during the Demak era of 
the XVI century, historians agree that the mystical contribution of Islam 
(Sufism) is very fital. Walisanga played an essential role in the spread of 
Islam by utilizing the mystical contribution of Islam ( Sufism).1 So that 
Islam succeeds in entering Java or Nusantara peacefully with other terms 
penetration pacifique. 2 This term is in line with the word peace, which is 
 
1 According to De Graaf, the Process of Islamization is effective through 
three channels, namely: 1) Trade, 2) Tasawuf Teachings and, 3) Political Channels. 
The first two contributed greatly to the peaceful Islamization. N or Huda, Islam 
Nusantara: Sejarah Sosial Intelektual Islam Di Indonesia (Yogyakarta: Ar -Ruzz Media, 
2007). 
2 Penetration pacifique is a term in the peaceful spread of culture, accepting 
each other without confict. As opposed to penetration violente, the spread of culture 
by coercion and violence. G
 PAMATOR 13, no. 2 (n.d.).

--- Page 3 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 27 
 
the actual condition achieved as a result of moderation because there is 
tolerance, openness, and mutual understanding of religiosity and diversity.3 
The success or failure of the Java Islamization is determined by the 
genius of the walisanga (the early da'i in Java) in summarizing the teachings 
of Islamic Sufism in the concept of acculturative mysticism in Java. It 
succeeded in constructing an inner as pect ( esoteric) that can enrich the 
spiritual dimension, conceptual thinking and even the traditions of 
Javanese cultural patterns. 4 It formed a spiritual perception between 
Islamic Sufism and Javanese mystics based on Hinduism in Javanese 
society.5 
Authentic evidence of the indisputable relics of walisanga includes 
archaeological sites in the form of tomb and mosque buildings that, until 
now, continue to be the center of pilgrimage of traditional Sufi teaching 
activists, in addition to historical objec ts and cultural traditions that 
continue to be maintained and developed in the religious behavior of the 
supporting community. 6 Furthermore, Javanese Sufism manuscripts, such 
as Suluk Martabat Pitu , Suluk Sheikh Siti Jenar, Suluk Sheikh Malaya, Suluk 
Dharmo Gandul, Suluk Sheikh Bari, and others are also the evidence of 
walisanga relics. 
Slamet Mulyana suspects that the statement of successful 
Islamization of the Demak era is problematic historical logic because, 
according to him, Demak in the era of Raden Patah (Prince Jinbun) to XV - 
 
3 
Rousyan Fikr: Journal Studi Ilmu Ushuluddin Dan Filsafat, 2017. 
4 Adnan Wahyudi, Kisah Walisongo Penyebar Agama Islam Di Tanah Jawa 
(Surabaya: Bina llmu, n.d.). 
5 Meaning of Sufism in this article that is, the philosophy of life and certain 
ways of human behavior in an effort to realize moral perfection of Islam. an 
understanding of the nature of reality and achieving the highest ruhaniah happiness. 
A
 -Tsawwuf Al-Islam. Kairo: Dar Al-Tsaqafah Li 
Al-Nashr Wa Al-
 While Acculturation Religion Javanese, mixed between 
Islam and Hinduism that have developed since the Majapahit era, Heddy Shri Ahimsa 
Putra, "Islam Jawa dan Jawa Islam: Sinkretisme Agama di Jawa", Makalah Seminar 
Sejarah, Yogyakarta: Depdikbud, 1995, p. 16. 
6 A. 
 Journal Bimas Islam Vol. No. 2 (2015): 389 - 411

--- Page 4 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
28 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
XVI century, has experienced a stalemate in the process of Islamization, 
except for the northern coastal areas of Java. So during his reign, he tended 
to spend time expanding to Malacca. Even his son, Adipati Yunus or well -
known as Prince Sabrang Lor, has been a victim of his ambition to confront 
the Portuguese in Malacca early XVI century. That indicated that Demak 
was not concentrating on Islamization but economic expansion and trade. 
At that time, Islamization was still limited to the northern coastal area of 
Java, where royal and wali sites still exist today. Indeed, the success of 
Islamization, in fact, occurred in the era of Pajang, and the peak was in the 
Mataram era in XVII century.7 
This writing did not intend to a nswer all the accusations of Slamet 
Mulyana above. The writers believe the allegations are partially true and 
partially false. Still, historical facts prove that there is no religious-horizontal 
conflict that supports Slamet Mulyana's argument in the proce ss of 
Javanese Islamization in Demak era, so whatever the results of Islamization 
achieved by Demak proved that it had been done peacefully; other words, 
the emergence of moderation values. Even if there was a conflict, it was a 
political conflict that aro se due to responding to the establishment of the 
Demak kingdom counter to Majapahit instead of social -religious. As a 
result, moderate Islamic Sufism in Demak is superiorly upright above royal 
politics foundation. 
This paper tries to reveal how the patte rn of moderate Sufism 
applied in Demak so that penetration pacifique was achieved. So based on 
authentic sources of XVI century manuscripts, the first manuscript 
discovered in that century was Suluk Syeh Bari . This manuscript is called 
authentic because in the colophon is mentioned that the manuscript was 
written by or base d on the thoughts of Sunan Bonang, one of the primary 
guardians in the land of Java. It is called the first manuscript because Dutch 
merchants first discovered it in 1595. So based on this manuscript, the 
profile of the manuscript, the concept of moderati on teachings, how 
successful in leading the moderation of Demak Islamization in that era, and 
its impact on the Islamization of the next era will be studied. 
 
7 Slamet Mulyana, Runtuhnya Kerajaan Hindu Jawa Dan Timbulnya Negara -
Negara Islam Di Nusantara (Yogyakarta: LkiS, 2005).

--- Page 5 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 29 
 
This study is essential and actual because it is expected to be able 
to elaborate on the legacy of genuine, authentic, and smooth past thoughts 
to provide solutions to hot conflict situations due to religious-politic 
penetration from Hindu Majapahit to Demak, who are Muslim which has 
the potential to arise radical-conflict. Still, it can be passed quic kly and 
peacefully. The potential conflict of this religious-politic realm remains 
actual until today's modern era, because it is constantly targeting and 
becomes a virus of division in heterogeneous societies such as Indonesia. 
 
B. The Concept of Moderation in the Teachings of Islamic Sufism 
Art It can briefly be explained here that moderate is an adjective, a 
derivative of the word moderation , meaning middle, not exaggerated or 
medium. In the Indonesian dictionary, the word borrowed becomes 
moderasi. Moderat ion is defined as reducing violence or the avoidance of 
extremes. Whereas in Arabic, moderation is called wasath or wasathyah, has 
a word equivalent to tawassuth (middle), i'tidal (fair), and tawazun 
(balanced). 
If moderation is added with religious word will become religious 
moderation. Religious moderation refers to avoiding extremism ( ghuluw) 
or avoiding violence ( tasyaddud) in religious practice. It refers to the 
meaning of religious moderation in Lukman Hakim Syaifuddin in the book 
"Religious Moderation" published by the Ministry of Religious Affairs, 
2021. In Arabic terminology, a tawassuth's perspective, attitudes, and 
behaviors are in the middle among the extreme choices. 
In religious attitudes, the meaning of religious moderation is a 
religious attitude that is balanced between violent religious behavior 
(extreme) and strictly on its religion as a form of obedience by considering 
the behavior of adherents of other religions with openness ( inclusive), 
respect or tolerance, and apprecia tion (empathy). This attitude will foster 
peace in religious life in the community. 
While the meaning of Moderation of Sufism in the concept of 
Islam is a formulation of Sufism teachings and behaviors that respect each 
other, are open, tolerant of religiou s concepts and behaviors, and become 
an example to others. Generally, Sufism is divided into three; tasawuf 
akhlaki, tasawuf irfani, and tasawuf falsafi. Tasawuf akhlaki focuses on moral

--- Page 6 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
30 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
teachings, worship, and remembrance (dzikr) that can produce attitudes of 
honesty, sincerity, and disregard towards the world ( zuhud) or maqam 
syariat and tarekat; While tasawuf irfani discusses the highest achievements 
of Sufis who have gained mortality to unite with God ( takhalli, tahalli, and 
tajalli), or maqam hakekat and makrifat.8 While tasawuf falsafi is the study 
of Sufism that uses philosophical terminology. The concept of Islamic 
Sufism teachings in Demak through the manuscript of Suluk Syeh Bari will 
later be explored using content analysis to find values and mo derate 
attitudes. 
Several studies try to interpret moderation in Sufism. One of them 
was Nanang Mizwar Hasyim "Tasawuf dan Internalisasi Moderasi Beragama 
dalam Menghadapi Problematika Bangsa ". His article proposes to apply the 
concept of Sufistic transformation, as proposed by Muhammad Zuhri, 9 
because from there will appear an attitude of respect, openness, and 
tolerance will even be achieved rahmatan lil basyar (mercy for all humans) 
or increase rahmatan lil alamin as the central pillar of moderation. 
Muhammad Faiz also wrote " Said Nursi Sufism Concept: 
Implementation of Moderate Islam Values" . This paper concludes that Said 
Nursi is a Sufism figure who is scientific, contextual, easy to app ly, and 
inclusive. The core concept in Sufism will show the nature of tadharru' 
(humble), tahmid (always praising Allah), prayer, khusyu, feeling 'ajz (weak 
before Allah), faqr (depending only on God). These attitudes generate 
appreciation, respect, and positive judgment in others that push towards 
Sufism moderation.10 
Muzakkir wrote "Moderasi Beragama dalam Perspektif Tasawuf ". In 
his view, the primary purpose of Sufism is the realization of a close 
relationship ( taqarrub) with God. By building self -awareness in a clean, 
healthy, and perfect soul. It is where the concept of tazkiyatun nafs is 
achieved. Tazkiyatun nafs is a mental state that results in a wise, noble, and 
 
8 Rosihan Anwar, Akhlak Tasawuf (Bandung: Pustaka Setia, 2010). 
9 Muhammad Zuh
Al-Mada; Jurnal Agama, Sosial Dan Budaya 2, no. 2 (2019). 
10 
Studi Agama Millah 19, no. 2 (n.d.).

--- Page 7 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 31 
 
takhalluq bi akhlak al -karimah that aims to respect fellow creatures as the 
implementation of Sufism moderation.11 
As for Suluk Syeh Bari, as far as contemporary historical studies are 
carried out on the manuscript, no one has done anything related to his 
Sufism moderation thought. Some of the writings about the Bonang 
manuscript include the author himself M. Irfan Riyadi in a book entitled 
Fatwa Sunan Bonang: Membedah Otentitas Tasawuf Walisanga dalam Suluk 
Syeh Bari , published by STAIN Po Press, 2015 12 then Muha mmad Isa 
Anshory, et al. "
 " in Jurnal 
Pendidikan Agama Islam Ta'dibuna vol. 9, No. 1, April 2020, pp. 049 -067,13 
and some freelance writing in particular blogs do not need to be discussed 
here. 
 
C. Suluk Syeh Bari Manuscript 
1. Script Writer 
Suluk Syeh Bari's author is Sunan Bonang. His little name is 
Makhdum Ibrahim. He is also known as Ibrahim Asmara, Ratu Wadat, 
Sultan Khalifah, and others. Given the title Ratu Wadat because he did 
wadat, that is never marri ed or single during his life. 14 Also called Ratu 
Wahdat because he was very firm in fighting for the oneness of God. It is 
believed that the scriptwriter of Suluk Syeh Bari is Sunan Bonang because in 
the colophon found some evidence: first, the sentence " Tammat carita 
cinitra kang pakerti pangraning Bonang " means that it has ended the story 
told by the Prince in Bonang; Secondly, this manuscript was found not far 
from the Bonang area of Tuban. The manuscript was discovered in Sidayu 
by a trade t raveler from the Netherlands, Amsterdam named Van Dulmen, 
in 1595 AD, then well cared for in the maintenance manuscripts of Leiden. 
Sunan Bonang was estimated to have died in 1525 AD, then the difference 
 
11 
 
12 Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Fatwa Sunan Bonang: Membedah Otentisitas 
Tasawuf Walisanga Dalam Suluk Syeh Bari (Ponorogo: STAIN Po Press, n.d.). 
13 
 9, no. 1 (n.d.). 
14 Purbatjaraka, Ajaran Rahasia Sunan Bonang (Jakarta: Depdikbud, 1981).

--- Page 8 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
32 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
in years with the discovery of the manuscript is not too long, which is about 
65 years. 
When Sunan Bonang was born cannot be ascertained. B.J.O. 
Schrieke estimates that he was born in 1465 AD. According to Moertadji, a 
Tuban cleric and pioneer of Sunan Bonang haul at Kauman Mosque 
Tuban, Sunan Bonang was born in 1448 AD and died in 1525 AD. 15 In the 
news of Sam Po Kong temple, Slamet Muljana wrote that Raden Rahmat 
Cu in 1447 then Sunan Bonang, as the first child, of course, it was born 
afterwards. Based on the three sources mentioned, Sunan Bonang was born 
between 1448-1465 AD and died around 1525 AD. 
Sunan Bonang is a religious figure who was also active in writing. 
According to several sources including B. Schrieke (1916), Poerba tjaraka 
works other than Suluk Sheikh Bari are Suluk Wujil, Suluk Khalifah, Suluk 
Regol, Suluk Bentur, Suluk Wasiyat, Suluk Ing Aewuh, Suluk Pipiringan, Suluk 
Jebeng and others.16 
2. Suluk Syeh Bari Profile 
Suluk Syeh Bari's manuscript was found in handwriting on the 
lontar leaves. The manuscript was discovered in East Sidayu Tuban by a 
trade traveler from the Netherlands, Amsterdam named Van Dulmen, in 
1595 AD. Then, it was well cared for at the maintenance of the Liedsche 
Universiteitsbibliotheek since October 1597 AD. and placed under 
catalogue no. XVII kal. Octob. 1599 M. 
There are three scientific studies that have made the Bonang 
manuscript "Suluk Syeh Bari" as the object of a dissertat ion in the 
Netherlands. First, Dr. J.G.H. Gunning in 1881 in Een Javaansche Geschrift 
uit de 16 de Eeuw at Leiden University of the Netherlands; 17 Second, 
Dr.B.J.O. Schrieke in 1916 entitled Het Boek Van Bonang at Leiden 
 
15 NurKholis and Ahmad Mundzir, 
Bonang (Tuban: Mulia Abadi, 2013). 
16 
 -
(unpublished paper, n.d.). 
17 J. G. H. Gunning, Een Javaansche Geschrift Uit de 16 de Eeuw (Belanda: 
Disertasi Universitas Leiden,1881, 1881).

--- Page 9 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 33 
 
University in the Netherlands. 18 So that this text is categorized as an 
authentic text that has been proven to pass in academic studies. Third, in 
1969. G.W.J Drewes has also rewritten in his book The Admonition of Syeh 
Bari: A Sixteenth Century Javanese Text Attributet to the Saint of Bonang , 
(Denhaag: Martinus Rijhoff, 1969).19 
3. The Summary of the Suluk Syeh Bari contents 
The content of the teachings and prayers contained in the book of 
Primbon by Sunan Bonang can be seen in the chart: 
Chapter Number of 
Paragraphs 
Content Summary Type of 
thinking 
 Acknowledgement 
The words of Basmalah, 
hamdalah, shalawat of the 
Prophet (Peace be Upon 
Him), and reference sources 
 
I 12 
paragraphs 
Faith, oneness and 
understanding nafi isbat in the 
syahadat. 
Tauhid / 
ushuluddin 
II 11 
paragraphs 
Criticism of the teachings of 
Abd al -Wahid Ibn Makkiyah 
on the oneness of Allah and 
the understanding of Allah's 
hospitality towards His 
creation. 
Falsafi Sufi 
III 20 
paragraphs 
 attributes, especially the 
nature of al-salbi that firmly 
rejects the likeness of the 
nature of God with His 
creatures in manunggaling 
kawula-Gusti. 
The science 
of kalam and 
falsafi Sufi 
IV 5 Literary explanation of the Falsafi Sufi 
 
18 B. J. O. Schrieke, Het Boek Van Bonang (Belanda: Disertasi Universitas 
Leiden, 1916). 
19 G W J Drewes, The Admonition of Syeh Bari: A Sixteenth Century Javanese 
Text Attributed To The Saint of Bonang (Denhaag: Martinus Rijhoff, 1967).

--- Page 10 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
34 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
paragraphs meaning of ishq, ashiq, and 
ma'shuq. The nature of God, 
the essence of God, and the 
af'al of God and emanation. 
V 15 
paragraphs 
Criticizing the kawibataniyah 
deviant sect, which teaches 
the likeness of God's nature 
with His creatures. 
Falsafi Sufi 
VI 7 
paragraphs 
Differences in nature and 
essence. Rejecting the 
teachings of 'Arabiyah (Ibn 
'Arabi) which expresses the 
nature of Allah qadim while 
af'al Allah muh das that are 
emanated to creatures. 
The science 
of Kalam and 
Sufi falsafi 
VIII 9 
paragraphs 
The teachings of getting closer 
to Allah so will get the 
sweetness of life. 
Tasawuf 
moral 
IX 15 
paragraphs 
Teachings about perfection, 
the meaning of sapatemon 
(meeting) with God and 
finding the right teacher. 
Tasawuf 
moral 
X 11 
paragraphs 
Explanation of the ru'yat of 
Allah, with the eyes of the 
heart or seeing in the 
Hereafter 
The Science 
of Kalam and 
Sufism 
XI 5 
paragraphs 
Perfecting iman (zuhud), stay 
away from rejoicing in the 
world, turn to love for God. 
Sufism 
XII 8 
paragraphs 
Ma'rifat fi Allah: ma'rifat Dzat, 
ma'rifat shifat and ma'rifat 
af'al. 
Sufism 
XIII 27 
paragraphs 
Criticism of misguided 
thinking and the emanation of 
the teachings of Mu'tazilah. 
Kalam and 
Sufism 
XIV 21 Understand the nature of God sufi falsafi

--- Page 11 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 35 
 
paragraphs while in the void ( Awanguwung). It must be 
distinguished between ' adam 
mumkin (seeing phenomena 
such as seeing God) and 
ma'dum sir (lawh, qalam, 
'arsh). 
XV 17 
paragraphs 
Understand the rights of the 
attributes of Allah mumtani alwujud, ja'iz al-wujud and wajib 
al-wujud. 
Kalam and 
Sufism 
XVI 11 
paragraphs 
Advice to routinely practice 
prayers and shadaqah secretly. 
Tasawuf 
moral 
XVII 12 
paragraphs 
Understand taraqqi's dignity 
to achieve abandonment with 
the term gharaqtu fi bahr al -
'adamy. 
sufi falsafi 
XVIII 25 
paragraphs 
Advice to pursue the science 
of Sufism. To reach Rijalallah 
in order to always be with 
God, through the teachings of 
the shari'ah imitate the 
teachings of the Prophet 
PBUH. 
Tasawuf 
moral 
- Cover Tammat Carita cinitra who like 
Princeing Bonang 
Final 
description 
From this chart, it can be known that the teachings of Sunan Bonang not 
only contain Sufism but also there is kalam science (oness), ahlaki Sufi 
(syar'i), 'Irfani Sufi, and Falsafi Sufi. 
 
D. Teachings of Sufism in Suluk Syeh Bari 
Suluk Syeh Bari manuscript, which was used as an object in this 
study, is a manuscript that had been transliterated by Schrieke into the old 
Javanese latin letter. The manuscript is not in the pages of Schrieke's 
dissertation book but is contained in attachments without page numbers,

--- Page 12 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
36 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
so page numbering cannot be done by following the pages of the book, but 
separately in the form of prose texts divided into chapters and paragraphs. 
The reference does not follow the pages of the book, but follows the pages 
of chapte rs and paragraphs in the manuscript that have been marked by 
Schrieke (Please check in the Schrieke Dissertation). The teachings of 
Sufism in Suluk Syeh Bari are: 
1. The existence of God 
As mentioned in the witness of the shahada, according to Sunan 
Bonang, the witness is a recognition of the form of God who is One 
(singular) solely, most holy, supreme, none resembling Him ( Kawroehana 
jen Sira Pangeran Toenggal, tan kakalih, saksenana jen sira Pangeran asipat 
saja, Soekma Maha suci Toenggalira, tan an a papadanira, kang Maha 
Loehoer). 
 nafi and a form of isbat. The 
nafi form means "nora" (no) does not mean negating the form of God but 
eliminating the form of God other than God, and there is no likeness of 
God as G od (lan norana papadaning Allah Pangeran ), that is, the truth of 
God, the One, who is worshipped, the praised who creates and the Most 
Great. While the form of isbat, in the form of determination that directly 
exists with nafi, when mentioning " ora ana Pan geran" it has begun to isbat 
"anging Allah Pangeran kang sabenere" (but Allah is the real God). 
In interpreting form, Sunan Bonang determined that the form of 
God is an absolute transcendent, oneness, independent, not similar to 
anything, eternal since anc ient times ( awang-uwung) until now. He does 
not recognize the existence of an immanent form, a form that permeates 
the creatures. Sunan Bonang firmness towards that opinion led him to be 
crowned with the title "Wali Wahdat", 
 . 
2. Creature Form and Human Creation 
Understand the seven dignity to know the concept of tanazzul -
taraqqi. Tanazzul explained the concept of God's impression in man 
through stages of decline as much as seven levels ending with the human 
form as the estuary of God's immantiation, so that human form is God's 
creation as well as being part of God Himself, because human beings are 
created from God's impression. Taraqqi is a process of ascending, in which 
an obedient servant always seeks perfection in order to reu nite with God. 
The path will be reached through seven stages to have a union between a 
man and God. According to Sunan Bonang, the form of beings and the 
form of God are different. The form of God is absolutely transcendent

--- Page 13 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 37 
 
there is no union between the tw o immanently. Man is not the impression 
of God, but a creature of God. 
Sunan Bonang strongly criticized the opinion of Abdul Wakhid 
Dzat was actually a 
worshiped God, independent without allies. It happens wh en Allah has not 
created, has not written in writing, and no one has praised but His own 
substance, before creating the Prophet Muhammad. But after creating the 
Prophet Muhammad as a reality of Himself, then from there the beginning 
of the nugrahaning Allah (grace of Allah) all that exists and is created is a 
clue to the existence of Allah ( tuduhing Allah).20 Abdul Wahid's concept in 
understanding the "seven dignity" is Nur Muhammad, that is, the essence 
created first of all existing creations, that essence becomes the forerunner 
of all those in the world, he is the main cause ( causa prima) of all existing 
creations. Sunan Bonang rejected that opinion and regarded it as disbelief. 
The nature of God's prayer confirms the difference between creatures and 
God (Padudoning Kawulo Gusti ), meaning that the nature of God is not 
similar to creatures, the nature of beings is not similar to the nature of God 
(Sifating Pangeran tan kadi sifating makhluk, sifating makhluk tan kadi 
sifating Pangeran).21 
Sunan Bonang interprets the phrase " seven dignity " about 
tanazzul-taraqqi which states that everything comes from God and returns 
to Allah ( tekane saking Allah, ulihe maring Allah). Or the phrase "coming 
from nothing and return to nothing also" ( tekane s aking tan liyan, ulihe 
maring tan liyan ) in addition to Allah Himself. Here, firmly Sunan Bonang 
rejected the view that man is the shadow of God, where often in the 
concept of seven dignity likened that man is a reflection of the form of God. 
This expression can be said to be an interpretation of the Qur'anic verse: 
Inna lillahi wa inna ilaihi raji'aun (indeed we belong to Allah and to Him 
we will return). 
God's nature is to create, there is no intermediary between God 
and the created, there is no process that precedes (tan ana kari karoehoen ), 
meaning to create it on the basis of His will, not the process of dignity as 
 
20 Text chapter II, pa ragraf 7 -8. As explained at the beginning of the sub -
chapter, the description of this manuscript is contained in the attachment of Schrieke's 
writing that does not have a page. Because it is a Latin transliteration manuscript from 
the original manuscript. So, this manuscript is given a chapter and paragraph number 
by schrieke, to prove it please open Schrieke's dissertation. 
21 Chapter III, paragraph 11.

--- Page 14 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
38 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
understanding the seven dignity, creation is enough with the sentence of 
Allah Kun fayakun according to Allah's will ( khaliqu al -makhluq ku n fa 
yakun).22 
Rejecting the existence of a relationship between God and man, for 
Sunan Bonang, the view is misguided. He stated: 
"Kadi angroepakaken sifating Pangeran, kadi angapesaken sifating 
Pangeran, kadi aketjap: sakathahing dumadi iki sifating Pang eran. 
Kadi anganaaken in nora, kadi ama'dumaken ing Allah 
 iku koepoer! 
aketjap: endi sifating Allah? Kang angoetjap ikoe dadi kapir".23 
Like calling out the nature of God, weakening the nature of God 
like saying all that is in the nature of Allah, such as creating what is not 
there, and abolishing Allah. It is a disbeliever. Saying which is the nature of 
God, it's disbelief). 
3. Achieving Perfection (Rijalullah) 
The perfect person is called washil or rijalallah (man of God's 
beloved). The person who wants to achieve the perfect degree must be 
qualified in the form of carrying out religious teachings correctly until 
reaching a special relationship with Allah. 
a. Ikhlas, do not count the merits and good done. Not glorifying his 
ability to be seen and praised by human, not to excel in knowledge, 
exhibited here and there, broadcast to hunt for praise ( adoewe 'ilmu 
agepeh den wedjangaken aboeroe alemaleman). 
b. One must be trust and compassion; must not take away the rights of 
others, and must not deny the good ( asih) that others have done to 
him, which is meant by asih is in the form of teachings to the right 
way. If the opposite happens, denying the Lord, then you should 
immediately return to the right path by repenting. With fellow 
Muslims should love each other and take care of each other to avoid 
the nature of dhalalah (heresy) and 
 (add-up in the teachings of 
worship). 
c. Always taqarrub and zuhud to Allah, carrying out ( ngestokaken) His 
commandments in a zuhud way. It means that do not like to h ave a 
spree, do not like to decorate and luxurious in food and clothing in the 
world. His heart should not face anything other than Him (musyrik), 
 
22 Chapter IV, final paragraph 17

--- Page 15 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 39 
 
but instead have fun (always feel happy) with God. To achieve glory 
as a human being wants to taste and proce ss var ious flavors into 
sweetness: 
1) Mamanising asepi (sweetness is lonely) means that he feels happy 
to make friends with God in a lonely situation. 
2) Mamanising aloewe/lapa (sweetness of hunger). 
3) Mamanising oerip/agesang (sweetness of life) means that in 
human life it is always ridla in the maintenance ( poerba-wasesa) 
of God. 
4) Mamanising rame (sweetness in a crowd): it means that in 
crowded conditions all human behavior is a marker of God's 
grace only. 
5) Mamanising lara (sweetness of pain) it means that in pain it 
should be a remembrance, the complaints become a compliment 
to the Lord. 
6) Mamanising pati (the sweetness of death): it means that in death 
the reality of life will be obtained, there is nothing but meeting 
Him who is always missed. The person who is incapab le of 
feeling such a situation is no different from an animal, outwardly 
a human being but an animal mind ( tingale dhahire, batine wong 
ikoe sato uga ). While those who can do the six things will have 
their eyesight to come to God, there is no death for him , as long 
as living in the world and in the Hereafter.24 
In order to reach and see God with the eyes of his heart, one will 
experience a degree and dignity. Sunan Bonang likened it to a banana from 
raw to ripe, starting with raw , nyadam, ripe and dalu. He also likened the 
development of the date in the month. A person will like the first date, go 
up the second, go up the third date until it reaches the degree of 
poernamasada (perfection). The more his dignity rises the more perfect his 
vision until his vision becomes one vision with 25dzat, nature and af'al of 
God. To those who see bila tasybih , who see also bila tasybih (without 
such). 
 
 
 
24 Naskah, chapter VIII, paragraph 33. 
25 Ibid, chapter X, paragraph 39

--- Page 16 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
40 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
d. Ma'rifat in Lord 
In the case of ma'rifat, Sunan Bonang rejects the view that when a 
voyager (salik) reaches the degree of ma'rifat, it does not mean that his 
vision is lost and then changes with God's vision as in the concept of hullul 
(change of place), fana'-baqa' (lost and change), or ittihad (unification), 
but his vision is still a vision of himself. 
"Anapon ma'rifat dede kabeh ndene si awase paningale (ikoe) who 
toenggal maring pangeran ikoe, dede sedjatine tingale dadi sjoeh sirna 
tingale dening kandeh kaganten kalingan tingale dening tingali(ng) 
kang sadja aningali tiningalan tan lijan paningalira oega toenggal 
kang aningali kabeh".26 
That understanding indirectly rejects the concept of trans (loss of self -
awareness) or majdzub (taken consciousness) in the form of a sense of one 
with God or other terms syatahat. 
Sunan Bonang taught ma'rifat as the culmination of a chievements 
in Sufism, in the form of a knowledge that must be understood correctly 
about the nature of God. Sunan Bonang explained that the essence of 
ma'rifat are three: 1) Ma'rifatu dzatillah, namely knowing that the essence 
of God is singular, not two, transcendent with its nature, the holiest, 
without bodies, without gathering, without soul, and no one giving soul. 
His eternal state in His kingdom has not changed in the slightest. 2) 
Ma'rifatu nature, namely knowing that God is eternal life without using life, 
thinking and knowing without the mind, power without with parts of the 
body, seeing without eyes, hearing without ears, willing without using 
wishful thinking, speaking without using th e voice of the tongue. Nothing 
compared Him. 3) Ma'rifatu af'alillah, which is to know the nature of God's 
deeds, doing and working without utilizing tools, giving without using 
hands, killing without using weapons, turning on and ruling over life as a 
whole. 
 
E. Moderation of Islamic Sufism in Suluk Syeh Bari 
1. Inclusive attitude in the nature of monotheism 
Monotheism, according to Sunan Bonang is a witness to the form 
of God who is One (single) solely, holiest, supreme, and no one resembles 
Him ( Kawroehana jen Sira Pangeran Toenggal, tan kakalih, saksenana jen 
 
26 Ibid, chapter XI, paragraph 43

--- Page 17 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 41 
 
sira Prince asipat Saja, Soekma Maha suci Toenggalira, tan ana papadanira, 
kang Maha Loehoer ). It is thus recognized that the beginning of the 
nugrahaning of Allah (the grace of God), all that exists and is created, is a 
clue to the existence of God ( tuduhing Allah).27 With the recognition that 
everything created is a clue to the existence of God raises an inclusive and 
open attitude to fellow beings because the existence of all beings is the 
existence of God. so that whoever God's creatures are likened to any 
religion, any belief, whatever form he is proof of the existence of God. 
Because He Himself who created them. As the Word of God QS. al -Rum: 
30 
"Then turn your face singlemindedly to the faith and adhere to the true 
nature on which Allah has created human beings. The mould 
fashioned by Allah cannot be altered. Thet is the true, straight faith, 
although most people do not know." 
2. Man processes towards the per fection of the soul so that noble 
morality, compassion, wisdom, and open-minded achieved. 
In order to achieve the perfection of the soul (towards God), one 
will experience a level and dignity. Sunan Bonang likened it to a banana 
from raw to ripe that begin s with raw, nyadam , ripe and dalu. Or the 
development of the date in the month, a person will like the first date, go 
up the second, go up the third date until it reaches the degree of 
poernamasada (perfection).28 The more his dignity rises, the more perfect 
his vision until his vision becomes one vision with dzat
af'al. A man with a perfect vision will have a noble ethics, affection, a wise 
attitude, and courtesy towards everyone. In the hadith o f the Prophet 
PBUH: 
"Whoever believes in God and in the last day, should he not hurt his 
neighbor, whoever has faith in God and in the last day, should he 
glorify his guest, whoever believes in Allah and to the last day, should 
he say good or silent" (Muttafaq 'alaih). 
3. Open attitude and tolerance towards others through Ridlo's 
teachings and always happy and make others happy in various 
 
27 Chapter II, paragraphs 7-8. 
28 Ibid, chapter X, paragraph 39

--- Page 18 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
42 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
circumstances. Always smiling even in a lonely state, hungry, sick, 
crowded, and just longing for God. 
According to Sunan Bonang, people who achieve perfection always 
feel happy with God ( ridla). To achieve glory as man wants to taste and 
process various kinds of flavors into sweetness: 1) Mamanising asepi 
(sweetness is lonely),: the meaning is that in a lonely condition he feels 
happy to make friends with God. 2) Mamanising aloewe / lapa (sweetness 
of hunger) 3) Mamanising oerip / agesang (sweetness of life) means that in 
human life it is always ridla in t he maintenance (poerba-wasesa) of God. 4) 
Mamanising rame (sweetness in crowd): it means that in crowded 
conditions all human behavior is a marker of God's grace alone. 5) 
Mamanising lara (sweetness of pain): it means that in the pain it should be 
a rememb erence, the complaints become a compliment to the Lord. 6) 
Mamanising pati (the sweetness of death): it means that in death that the 
reality of life will actually be obtained, there is nothing but meeting Him 
who is always missed. 
4. Appreciate Religious Akulturation. 
Sunan Bonang quotes the qur'anic verse: " maraja al -bahraini 
yaltaqiyan, bainahuma barzahun la yabghiyan ". This verse is clearly 
explained like the meeting of two sea waters between the salty and the 
fresh, which are different but essentially the same in the ocean. This 
concept is like being the basis of acculturation because acculturation is the 
meeting of two cultures that form a new culture, but basically the two 
cultures are different and still seems their main characteristics. Like Islam 
with Hinduism, meet in the culture of selamatan, but the nature of Islam 
and Hinduism is still clearly displayed. 
 
F. Conclusion 
Suluk Syeh Bari by Sunan Bonang is the foundation for the 
teachings of Islamic Sufism moderation since the beginning of Islamization 
in Java. His moderation teachings include 1) inclusive attitude in the spirit 
of piety, 2) perfection of the soul, realizing noble morality, love sayings and 
wisdom. 3) Open attitude and tolerance towards others, throug h teachings 
for Ridlo and always happy. 4) respect for religious acculturation. This 
moderate teaching will be very influential on two great students, namely

--- Page 19 of 20 ---
Sufism Demak: Moderation of the Java Islamization in XVI Century 
 
KALAM, Volume 16, No. 1 (2022) 43 
 
Sunan Kalijaga with his acculturative mystical teachings when preaching in 
Pajang-Mataram, and Sy eh Siti Jenar with his syncretist mystical teachings 
when preaching in Pengging. Both of them enlivened the Islamization of 
Java during the Pajang-Mataram era and became pioneers in the formation 
of Archipelago Islam. [.] 
 
 
References 
 
-Tsawwuf Al -Islam. Kairo: Dar Al -
Tsaqafah Li Al-Nashr Wa Al-
 
Al-Mada; Jurnal Agama, 
Sosial Dan Budaya 2, no. 2 (2019). 
Anshory, Muh
 9, no. 1 (n.d.). 
Anwar, Rosihan. Akhlak Tasawuf. Bandung: Pustaka Setia, 2010. 
PAMATOR 13, no. 2 (n.d.). 
Rousyan Fikr: Journal Studi Ilmu Ushuluddin Dan Filsafat, 2017. 
Drewes, G W J. The Admonition of Syeh Bari: A Sixteenth Century Javanese Text 
Attributed To The Saint of Bonang. Denhaag: Martinus Rijhoff, 1967. 
Studi Agama Millah 19, no. 2 (n.d.). 
Gunning, J. G. H. Een Javaansche Geschrift Uit de 16 de Eeuw . Belanda: 
Disertasi Universitas Leiden,1881, 1881. 
-
unpublished paper, n.d. 
Huda, Nor. Islam Nusantara: Sejarah Sosial Intelektual Islam Di Indonesia . 
Yogyakarta: Ar-Ruzz Media, 2007. 
Mulyana, Slamet. Runtuhnya Keraja an Hindu Jawa Dan Timbulnya Negara -
Negara Islam Di Nusantara. Yogyakarta: LkiS, 2005. 
 
NurKholis, and Ahmad Mundzir.

--- Page 20 of 20 ---
Muhammad Irfan Riyadi, Muhammad Harir Muzakki, Nurul Khasanah 
44 DOI://dx.doi.org/10.24042/klm.v16i1.6069 
 
Bonang. Tuban: Mulia Abadi, 2013. 
Purbatjaraka. Ajaran Rahasia Sunan Bonang. Jakarta: Depdikbud, 1981. 
Riyadi, Muhammad Irfan. Fatwa Sunan Bonang: Membedah Otentisitas 
Tasawuf Walisanga Dalam Suluk Syeh Bari . Ponorogo: STAIN Po 
Press, n.d. 
Schrieke, B. J. O. Het Boek Van Bonang. Belanda: Disertasi Universitas Leiden, 
1916. 
Wahyudi, Adnan. Kisah Walisongo Penyebar Agama Islam Di Tanah Jawa . 
Surabaya: Bina llmu, n.d.