--- Page 1 ---
PATHAMASAMBODHI original version, which not only is
rendered to Tai Lue, Tai Khoeun,- Lao
IN NINE LANGUAGES:
and Northern Thai, but evolved over
THEIR RELATION AND
centuries to become the three newer
EVOLUTION1
Pali recensions which later were
rendered to northeastern Thai, Mon and
Siamese Thai. The latter version was
Anant Laulertvorakue
finally rendered to Cambodian. The
content of Pathamasambodhi was
Abstract gradually enhanced in three phases
with different genres: 1) the legend of
the Siddhattha Bodhisatta in the Pali of
Pathamasambodhi is widespread in at
the Lanna region, the Northern Thai
least 5 countries in Southeast Asia.
the Lao, the Tai Khoeun and the Tai
Hundreds of manuscripts and not less
Lue versions; 2) the legend of the
than 10 versions have been
Gotama Buddha in the two late Pali
discovered. They are composed in 4
versions as well as the Mon and the
languages: Pali, Mon, Cambodian and
northeastern Thai versions; and 3) the
Tai, including Tai vernaculars:
legend of the Gotama Buddha's sasana
Siamese Thai, Northern Thai
or teaching in both Pali and Siamese
Northeastern Thai, Lao, Tai Lue, and
Thai versions by His Supreme
Tai Khoeun. The styles of
Patriarch Prince Paramanujitjinorot and
composttlon dramatically vary
the Cambodian version. The Northern
between detailed enumeration and
Thai version is the transition link
concision, prose and verse, translation
between the first and the second phase.
in the style of nissaya and non
The result of this study also provides
nissaya, single language and dual
the genesis of Pathamasambodhi.
languages- Pali and another
language. The comparative study of
Abbreviation
the different versions, with emphasis
on their content, reveals their relation
cs
Culasakaraja "the Little
and the evolution of Pathama
Era"(= AD- 638)
sambodhi. The Pali version fo~nd in
AD Anno Domini
the Lanna region is the oldest
BE Buddhist Era(= AD+ 543)
complete version. It is probably the
CBD Cambodian version of
Pathamasambodhi
I I am grateful to Oscar von Hiniiber for LAO Lao version of Pathama
reading a draft of this paper and giving sambodhi
useful suggestions, to Jacqueline LPL Lanna Pali version of
F:illiozat for providing useful
Pathamasambodhi
information, and to Anatole-Roger
LPR Late Pali Recensions of
Peltier and Oliveier de Bemon for
Pathamasambodhi
making copies of manuscripts written in
;ai Khoeun and Cambodian respectively. LPRa Late Pali Recension of
Lecturer, Department of Thai, Facuity Pathamasambodhi with
of Arts, Chulalongkom University, 16-19 chapters
Bangkok, Thailand.
11

--- Page 2 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
LPRb Late Pali Recension of suggested in his words to Ananda a
Pathamasambodhi with while before his death:
22 chapters
LPRc Late Pali recension of maya dhammo ca vinayo ca desito
Pathamasambodhi with pafifiatto so vo mamaccayena sattha
30 chapters composed by yatha. (D. II. 141)
Prince Paramanuj i tj inorot
"The dhamma which I have preached
LVV Lao verse version of
and the vinaya which I have set forth
Pathamasambodhi
will be your teacher soon after I am
MON Mon version of Pathama
gone."
sambodhi
NET Northeastern Thai version
This is why there is no complete
of Pathamasambodhi
hagiography of Gotama Buddha found
PLN Pali-Lao nissaya version in either a Buddhist canonical text or
of Pathamasambodhi non-canonical text. Among the
SMT Siamese Thai version of biographical literature on Buddha, the
Pathamasambodhi Lalitavistara of Sarvavasativadin, the
composed by Prince Buddhacarita of Asvagho~a, the Mala-
Paramanujitjinorot
lailkaravatthu of Burma, and
TKN Tai Khoeun version of
Pathamasambodhikatha of His
Pathamasambodhi
Patriarch Prince Paramanujitjinorot
TL Thai Lue version of
are very well known by scholars.
Pathamasambodhi However, the stories of Gotama
TLC Thai Lue concise Buddha as a single piece of literature
subversion of Pathama are fewer in number than the J a taka
sambodhi stories.
TLE Thai Lue enumerated
subversion of Pathama The original meanmg of
Pathamasambodhi is nothing else but
sambodhi
the life story of Buddha. Its literal
TY Thai Yuan version of
meaning is "the recent Perfect
Pathamasambodhi
Enlightenment (of the Buddha)". It is
TYC Thai Yuan conc1se
puzzling why the whole text of
subversion of Pathama
Pathamasambodhikatha by Prince
sambodhi
Paramanujitjinorot does not focus
TYE Thai Yuan enumerated
only on the struggle of the Bodhisatta
· sub-version of Pathama-
for Enlightenment as its title suggests
sambodhi but on the complete life story of the
Buddha. An assumption is that apart
Introduction from Prince Paramanujitjinorot's
Patharpasambodhikatha, there exist
For Buddhists the existence of the other versions of Pathamasambodhi.
Gotama Buddha 1s much less The content of the very old version
important than his teachings; this is should coincide with its title,
Pathamasambodhi.
12

--- Page 3 ---
Pa~hamasambodhi
Louis Finot is the first to mention, in (1968) ts the pioneer m the
AD 1917, the manuscript of comparative study ~f the different
Pafhamasambodhi written in Lao. versions of Pafhamasambodhi. His
With the passage of time, more article, "Une Vie Indochinoise du
manuscripts in various versions of Buddha: La Pathamasambodhi",
Pafhamasambodhi were reported. In published in 1968, contributes
AD 1944, Sthirakoses and S. Salitul significantly to the history of Buddhist
mentioned two Pali versions: the literature. By studying some
Prince Paramanujitjinorot's version manuscripts, mainly written in Pali
and the older one. In AD 1968, and another written in Thai Yaun,
George Credes wrote about the Thai Credes claims that Pafhamasambodhi
Yuan or the Northern Thai version is the Southeast Asian version of the
and the other Pali version. In AD Buddha's life story. He also assumes
1987 Anatole-Roger Peltier its evolution, which caused Prah Maha
mentioned the Tai Khoeun version. Surapol Singkirat (1998) to later do
In the same year, Nattinee the model of the evolution of the Pali
Phromkerd published her study of the version. My study owes a lot to the
Mon version. Her research also above mentioned people. By studying
inspired Canya Khongcarern to as many manuscripts as circumstances
discover and study the Isan or allowed, a much clearer picture of the
Northeastern Thai version, in AD relation among the various versions
1989. Bampen Rawin transliterated and the evolution of Pathama
and first published the Thai Yuan
sambodhi is presented, which is the
version in AD 1989, and nine years
main point of discussion of this
later he again transliterated its
article.
concise version written in dual
languages: Pali and Thai Yuan ..· In
The Manuscripts
AD 1992, the Center for Promotion
of Arts and Culture, CMU discovered
A considerable number of manuscripts
the very old Lanna Pali version. In
of Pafhamasambodhi and recensions
AD 1999, Prah Maha Jana
have been reported by researchers.
Dhammadhajo transliterated the Lao
The regions where Pafham(:lsambodhi
version, which was written in verse.
has been discovered is quite a big
In AD 200 1, Kumiko Kato and Isra
area, covering Sibsongpanna in the
Yanatan reported the Tai Lue
south part of China, Chiang Tung in
version. Moreover, Ecole Frans;aise
Shan State in Burma, Lao, Cambodia
d'Extreme-Orient (EFEO) discovered
and in the northern, northeastern and
the Cambodian version, which no
central part of Thailand. Each
one had ever heard of before. Many
manuscript of Pafhamasambodhi
manuscripts, such as the Lao, the Tai
provides a piece of the jigsaw to form
Lue, and the Tai Khoeun versions
have not been studied yet. the whole picture -of Pathamasam
bodhi in different dimensions. To
present the whole picture of Pafhama
Among those who mentioned
Pafhamasambodhi, George Credes sambodhi, I would like to briefly give
13

--- Page 4 ---
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 6.1, 2003
more details about the manuscript of asaaiJwajkhamchuusaatsanaa prac
each version.
aw6::>thaw 5 phanwatsaalc c]
1. The Lanna Pali Version
"The year 954 of Cillasakkaraja in the
(LPL):
Ruangmaw year, the upfisika called
Mukda had Patharnasambodhi written
The Preservation of Northern Thai
to support Buddhism so that it would
Manuscripts Project (1992) and the
last till the year 5000."3
Social Research Institute, CMU
reported that three fragment
It is most important that the first word
manuscripts are kept at 1~1 'I HHh-1
of bundle no. 2 is the continuation of
[watlajh1n], Lampang Province. The the last words of bundle no. 1. The last
first manuscript, written in CS 936, line of bundle no. 1 is as follows:
consists of 3 of 4 bundles; bundle no.
1, no. 2, and no. 3, have been Yojanappamane thane aganta
discovered but the last bundle, bundle pathavigatarp. nidhidassana
no. 4, has not been found yet The samattharp. gahapatiratanarp.
second and the third manuscripts patu bhavati. Aggamahesiya ...
were written in the same year, CS
954. The only bundle, no. 1 of the "The householder-gem, who is capable
second manuscript, has been found, of seeing the treasure which flows
and bundles no. 2, no. 3 and no. 4 of beneath the earth even if it is a yojana
the third manuscript have been found. deep, was born. Of the chief queen ..."
According to the Preservation of And the first line of bundle no. 2 is as
Northern Thai Manuscripts Project, follows:
there ·is no complete Pali version
found in Lanna. It should be ... kucchirnhi nibbattetva
considered whether the manuscript sa(ka)l araj j a man(u ss) asasana
CS 954, kept at 1~hHii1u [watHtjh1n] samatthajenhaputta
is really a fragment manuscript. The saii.khatarp.
colophons of all 4 bundles show the parinayakaratanarp. patu
same passage with little variation as bhavati.
follows:
" .. .The adviser-gem, who is the eldest
.
'lt.HWn'lf1~ o!r1ct ~1 1u1ln~ son that came out from the womb (of
.
ll1,jl~1 tlmHUIL.' WB v\Jl~m the chief queen) a_nd is capable of
. teaching all men and kings, was born."
1.1n~1 iitl'lalna'l'umil~ H~1t1
Having read all the 4 bundles of the
~
alaUl'W'll~l~tmh r1 ~ui'aa1 manuscript written in CS 954, I have
come to the conclusion that they are
ll~
[cunlasakkaraatdaj 954 taunajpii
ruaiJmawtau Pathamasambodi ?ub 3 It had been predicted that the year 5000
(BE 5000) would be the end the end of the
aasl.kaamukdaamiiprasaathasattha
Gotama Buddha's religion.
14

--- Page 5 ---
Pa~hamasambodhi
one single manuscript of the same Museum in Phnom Penh. The third
set. It is the oldest and the most one, belonging to Princess Somavadei,
complete manuscript of Pathamasam is now lost. (Ccedes in press: xxii).
bodhi known to date. The forth manuscript written in BE
2331 is kept at Mat:l<;iiradhamrna
There are two other fragment Chapel (muJruLiia·m'i'HJ) in the Royal
manuscripts preserved at Rajja
Palace, Bangkok. The last one, of
mangalabhisek National Museum,
which the call no. is 2195, is kept at
Chiangmai Province. One is the
the National Museum, Bangkok.
oldest but is a fragment written in CS
839; the other is undated but 1~a~uru 2.b The 22 Chapter Recension
• u
[wats'iibunri.ai)thaa- (LPRb)
s5oj] is inscribed on its cover. Their
Only one manuscript of this recension
texts show that they are the same
has been found. It is mentioned by
version of those kept at 1~ 1'Hcii1u several Thai scholars: Sthirakoses and
[watlajh'in]. S. Salitul (1994: (14)), Kasem Bunsri
(1957: 183-4), Natthawut Suddhi
songkram (1972: 496), and Prah Maha
2. The Late Pali Recensions
Suraphol Singkitrat (1998: 27-9t
(LPR)
2.c The 30 Chapter Recension
Apart from the Lanna Pali version,
(LPRc)
three later Pali recensions have been
found.
This Pali recension is clearly edited
and composed by Prince
2.a The 16--19 Chapter
Paramanujitjinorot. Not less than
Recension (LPRa)
seven complete manuscripts have
been found. Except one in Mon script,
This recension consists of 15 to 19
all are in Khom script. Five
paricchedas or chapters. The
manuscripts are preserved at the
variation of the total number of the
National Museum in Bangkok
chapters is due to the fact that one or
more new chapters were added at the Another one is kept at 1~-w'i::Lb'Gl'W'U
beginning or the end of each [watpracheettuphon], Bangkok, and
recension. (Ccedes 1968: 220) At
another IS kept
least five complete manuscripts are
[w atsuthaawaat], Mahasarakham
reported. Three . manuscripts are
mentioned by George Ccedes (1968),
and two others are reported by Prah
Maha Suraphol Singirat (1998). The
first manuscript, which is undated, is 4 According to Prah Maha Suraphol
kept at Ecole Franvaise d' Extreme Singkirat (1998), this manuscript is kept
Orient (EFEO) in Hanoi. The second in the National Library in Bangkok. Its
call no. is 2233 and is kept in cabinet no.
manuscript, which used to be kept at
I 0, compartment 2/2, but it has not been
Wat Roka, is kept at the National
found.
15

--- Page 6 ---
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 6.1, 2003
Province. It was first published m consists of 30 bundles, and another of
AD 1994. 3 1 bundles. The variation in number is
due to the fact that the last bundle,
Plenty of fragment manuscripts are with the title Singattaracetiya, was
mentioned by Credes ( 1968) and added to the second copy. Moreover,
Filliozat (n.d.) and are recorded in the story of Visakhapuja and
title cards of the National Library, Maghapuja are added at the beginning
Bangkok. It is too hard to classify to of some manuscripts.
which recension each manuscript
belongs. 5. The Siamese Thai Version
(SMT)
3. The Mon Version (MON)
There are a number of this version.
Two fragment manuscripts are kepf Prince Paramanujitjinorot translated it
at i~fHAl'$lll [watkhoiJkhaaraam], from his own LPRc. The date of the
translation is unclear but should not be
Ra~aburi Province. One comprises 7
before BE 2388, the year in which he
bundles, bundle no. 2-8, and the
finished the LPRc.
other consists of bundles no. 1-9, but
they are compiled from different sets.
These two manuscripts are not those 6. The Thai Yuan or Lanna Thai
which Nattinee Phromkerd (1987) or Northern Thai Version (TY)
studied for her MA thesis. Filliozat
(n.d.) also mentioned three fragment This version has two sub-versions: the
manuscripts kept in EFEO. A more detail enumeration version comprising
complete manuscript, consisting of seven chapters (TYE) and the short
12 bundles, is kept at i~ma1u~~Ll1Utl summarized version in only one
bundle (TYC). A large number of
[watsaalaadcciJnia], Pathumthanee
manuscripts of TYE were found by
Province. All manuscripts are the Preservation of Northern Thai
translated from the Pali version. Manuscripts Project (1992) at
monasteries in every province, except
4. The Cambodian Version Uttaradit Province, in the northern
(CBD) part of Thailand. The Lao
Preservation of Manuscripts
EFEO-FEMC (2001: 1) lists seven Programme (1995-6) found one
complete and three fragment manuscript in Lao. The oldest
manuscripts of Parhamasambodhi manuscript of the TYE is one which is
written in Cambodian. They are kept now preserved at i~'lhW'rl'ln
in the library of EFEO, the National
[watbaanluk], Lampang Province. It
Library, and the National Museum in
was written in CS 1142. Bampen
Phnom Penh, and several monasteris
Rawin transliterated a manuscript of
in ~ambodia. One more manuscript,
both the TYE and TYC. The
written in BE 2489, which is not on
the list of EFEO-FEMC, is kept at manuscript of the former is kept at i~
· Wat Saravantejo. Its call no. is ~tmth [watkankecw], Chiangmai
F.E.M.C. 1/2 iii 1. One copy of CBD
16

--- Page 7 ---
Pat)zamasambodhi
Province, but he did not give any 8. The Lao Version (L)
details about the latter manuscript.
8.a The Pali-Lao Nissaya (PLN)
7. The Northeastern Thai or
Is an Version (NET) Louis Finot (1917), Pierre-Bernard
Lafont (1959), Thao Kene (1958), The
Canya Khongcarern (1989) studied National Culture Research Institute or
the manuscript consisting of 30 NCRI (1988), the Royal Institute of
bundles - kept at i~htliflti·H'I'h~ Lao (cited in NCRI 1988), and the
Lao Preservation of Manuscripts
[watmajth::>::>IJsawaaiJ], Ubonratja
Programme (1995-6, 1996, 1998)
thanee Province. Canya also
mentioned a large number of
mentioned two fragment manuscripts
manuscripts found in the Lao
kept at i~nr~-r~ [watbai)wat], in the Kingdom, but no details are given.
same province and another kept in 1~ The number of bundles varies from 1
to 31, but a lot of manuscripts consist
unl!afl [watbokn6oj], Yasothorn
of ten bundles. It is possible that there
Province. At present, the manuscript
is more than one version or rencension
of i~1VIlifl8~C'Ii1~ (watmajth::>::>IJ- of the Lao version. Both the TY and
saWaaiJ] is now lost. I found a nearly the TL versions have an enumerated
subversion and a concise subversion.
complete manuscript consisting of 31
Thus, it can not be concluded that all
bundles at i~'lhu~mJ [watbaan-
single bundle manuscripts are
doon ], Ubonratjathanee Province; fragmentary; some could be concise
only some folios of the last part of subversions. A conclusion can be
bundle no. 8 are lost. Other made from the study of the manuscript
manuscripts have been found: one at kept at Vat Mai Suvannabhumaram
i~u1uf1 [watbaam:fiw], Khonkaen (of which I made a copy from the
microfilm of The Lao Preservation of
Province, three at the Rajjamanggala
Manuscripts Programme) and those
bhisek National Library, Chiangmai
mentioned by Jacqueline Filliozat
Province, and ten at the National
(n.d.) that the manuscripts consisting
Museum m Nakhon Phanom
of 10 bundles are Pali-Lao Nissaya.
Province. All are fragments. The
The oldest manuscript is the one
NET is a quite new version. The
written in CS 1188 and is kept in the
colophon of many manuscripts
Museum at Luang Prabang. Although
suggests that none was written before
the manuscripts with 30 bundles and
AD 1920. The date of scribing is
31 bundles have not been investigated
given in BE instead of CS. It is
yet, there is a possibility that they are
possible that they were copied from
the same as the NET.
the original manuscript of the Lao
Kingdom. The manuscripts, with 30-
8.b The Lao Verse Version
31 bundles written in the Lao
(LVV)
language, which were found in the
Lao Kingdom, may be the same
Prah Maha Jana Dhammadhajo (1999)
version.
found a manuscript written in BE
17

--- Page 8 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
2411 in Lao but in the form of poetry single concise version have been
at a· La~tian monastery in Brisbane, found. The TL version has two
Queensland, Australia. Prah Maha subversions: the enumerated version
Jana transliterated and published it in and the single version. The former is
AD 1999. This version is quite usually called Pathomsamphot Luang
similar to that published in Vientiane (tlolJcllJLw5mn~) or Pathomsamphot
in AD 1974, which was later edited
( tlolJcllJLWB) (TLE); the latter is called
by Prah Maha STla Vrlavong with his
o~ suppiementary. Pathomsamphot Kai-Phu-Ton ( tlmJ
cllJLw51ri~~au) (TLC). These
9. The Tai Khoeun Version
manuscripts are written on palm
(TKN)
leaves, wual [p6psaa], and paper.
We lmow very little about the TKN.
There is only one copy belonging to The Relation among versions
Anatole-Roger Peltier, who kindly
told me that he had made his copy
All versions of Pa~hamasambodhi are
from the manuscript at a monastery
broadly classified by their content into
in Chiang Tung, Shan State, Burma.
two groups. All versions of
The synopsts m the Khoeun
Pa~hamasambodhi in each group are
Literature (Peltier 1987) is not
closely related. The first group
exactly the same as the copy made by
consists of the LPL, the PYE, the
Peltier. It can be deduced that there
PYS, the PLN, the TKN, the TLE, and
are a lot of manuscripts in the
the TLC which recount the story of
Khoeun monasteries in Chiang Tung.
Buddha's life no further than the first
preaching of the Buddha to the
10. The Tai Lue Version (TL)
paficavaggiya or the Five Ascetics.
The second, which includes the LPR,
·Three manuscripts of the TL are
the MON, the CBD, the LVV, the
found at Wat Mai Suvannabhlimaram
NET, and the SMT, adds the story of
(LPMP 1998). According to Kumiko
Buddha's life after the first preaching.
Kato and Isra Yanatan (2001), 13
manuscripts of the TL have been
The first group:
found in Sipsongpanna, Yunan,
PRC5 • The title has four variations: The LPL, the TYC, the PLN, the
Pathomsamphot (tlmJcllJL'Yj5), TKN, the TLE, and the TYC share the
Pathomsamphot Kai-Phu-Ton ( tlolJ same story. This group of
Pa~hamasambodhi does not cover the
cllJLw51ri~~au), Pathomsamphot
whole life story of the Gotama
Luang (tlolJcllJLWBlHn~), and Buddha; instead, they tell the story of
the Siddhattha Bodhisatta who is
Parama-samphot ( tl')lJcllJLW5). Like
referred to as "the present life of the
the TY, an enumeration version and a
one who struggles to attain the
Perfection to become Buddha". Only
the TYE tells a bit more of the story
5 People's Republic of China
18

--- Page 9 ---
Pat)zamasambodhi
after the Buddha attained visankhiiragatarp cittarp
Enlightenment. Except for the TYC, ta.Qhiinarp. khayamajjhgii 'ti. [36]
which is under the constraint on
giving details, all depict the whole It is the verse which the Buddha
life of Siddhatta Bodhisatta from his uttered immediately after he attained
descent from the Tusita heaven to the Enlightenment; thus it is called the
moment of his Enlightenment in udiinakathii or the ecstatic utterance.
which he transforms his status from Except for the TYE, all versions of
Bodhisatta to Buddha. All versions Pathamasambodhi in the ftrst group
except the TYC start immediate after employ the udiinakathti as the ending
the prar).l'imavacanakathii, an of the story.
obeisance, in the Pali verse praising
the great virtue of the Bodhisatta who As the oldest complete version, it is
abandoned his happiness to renounce induced that the LPL is the original
the world in order to search for the version of Pathamasambodhi. It is
way to Enlightenment. The verse is rendered to the TYE and the PLN.
as follows: Although the TYE tells a bit more of
the story, both the TYE and the PLN
setiitapat tarp. j anatiibhipatthitarp. strictly follow the LPL. Everything
pahiiya yo sattvasuhi ma.Q.<;litarp. told in the TYE and the PLN can be
hitiiya nekkhammam akiisi found in the LPL. The following
kappa/uno satthu nama 'tthu tassa ve. example is the passage which exists in
no other literature but only in
This verse does not exist in any Pathamasambodhi. It shows how
canons except in Pathamasambodhi. identical the LPL, the TYE, and the
It belongs to an unknown author who PLN are.
ftrst composed this literature. The
ftrst word setiitapattarp varies in the PPL [phuuk] 3, page 35-66
each version. According to the
translation in the PYE and the PLN,
ayarp pana paiiho hetthiito piidesa
it may be setacchattarp or the white
mukhito tipitakaculiiyathera na
royal canopy. And again the author
visajjitova mahiipuriso patha(vi)yti
put a verse at the end of the story.
gato mahiijanassa maharp. iikiise
This verse is not new but quoted
gacchante viya ahosi. dissamtinagatti
from the Dhammapada, Abhisam
mahiijanassa maharp adissamiino viya
bodhivagga. The verse is:
ahosi. avelake mahiijanassa manarp.
a/arpkatapatiyatto viya upaltisi.
anekajiitisarp.siirarp.
dasiirova gato mahtijanassa mahar:tt
sandhiivisarp. anibbisarp.
solasavasudesikakiilo viya ahosi.
gahakiirarp. gavesanto
pacchii puna baladiilakova ahosi na
dukkhti jtiti punappunarp.
tiidisoti. parisii yassa buddhena viya
gahakiira ditthosi
puna geharp. na kiihasi. [35]
sabbti te phtisukti bhaggti
6 The manuscript which is kept at i'lilh HilitJ
gahakulam visailkhatam
[watlajhl.n], Lampang, cs 654
19

--- Page 10 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
hutatva sotherena pafiho kathito ti
attamano ahosi.
pafiho ilu11i1tJJ'I11LLH..JW~::U'111ValLJJEJEJ
the PLN [phuuk] 3, page 67 um,JlLL H..Jt~1if. kathito atu,J1»1nncinuri
1imva..Jm'lv;..Jif sadhu vata hoti rfttlu
ayarp. pana pafiho ci?uaui1ru'l11auif ~BUfi'JU..J1UUn buddha na viya hutva
'l
t I J V 1 JU'I1lLO~Lv 1 1 V VIUtf .,J 1 1I vL/lEJE/Lfl~ '111f1 '11Y ttlu tl~VIvi..Jw~::wmu,J7maaulJuun~»ir
n ' a ' '
U..J L VI 'lura '11 t1 ~1 ff1 VI rh rn El 'l vlLL 1 tta 11;..JJu ahesurp. rfi1LLa8
visajjitova Hilrf'l11nttn·hvf..Jif maha
TYE [phuuk] 2, page 15-69
puriso au11um~5a pathaviya gato rf
1t fvf1EJt11VIfi1..J~1JL '11UtJLLeJU~1JLL mta Lr h
5-JiJrumaucnui..Jif riiJw1v MTaMtl~::alVI
-i1vf1EJiJLL n'l1ln1h1f1VIL '11UL tfut..J 1V vl1Eit11
z , , & l: , aa umrlit!VIn¥'1411lvw~t,r1au.;n:satfulttn
nlVIUU Ltn '11 Ufl1Jri..J'I1CtlEJU11J1J1J Lta ff11J
" fl o ll / J J U f1 o M l il1 J1V rc I. v .J . 1 J J ' W~U'MlaV c /L v v v ll J Jl : J . L . U J tJ
;..J,,JlZtlJu dissamanagato rf1tlvi'-;vau ZW V " IJ ' EIE/Vl fllVIU : l ; J fl. '1 J 1 tJ t1 ~l f1 VI LLfl . f llJri. : . ; J 'MolE/
1itl·nnVIL'I1ULLa adissamano viya
LUUvl..J 1W vJ'JEILLNlJ~UJutLa autl~lfiVILta 1w
ahos i rf m nt tlutl~VI v;..JJtl~ 1 nVI LL ,j'-3 uri
' WtJE!tVlJvl..JUU~lf1VILLnfllJJ..J'I1a1EJLLa '-!'111
fl1Jn. y . J'I1CtlEI1hVrftJfllEJ U•t 'I1ULLnfiUn..J"'' I1a1EJ
ffVI tl-; e1 w Fi t1 ~l nV I" ri fluJ..J »a 1 v' tlu i..J
Lta chu;..JVIULLH..JU'I11t15m,J1Ju avelako
' tl~iuVI uLLaJLLa Zw JuLLa 'tlueJuav1w
rfJti..Jm..Jv..Ju7r.lauanau rfmt1~1nV1t i--ru
' tf~lf1VILLnfllJ~'I1a1EJaumn Lt fu aUU'111ffVI
LLrifluJ..J'I1a1EJ alarp.katapatiyatto viya
,.;1t1u 1vi' G)v tliiuu"L' La-; ri1wuuy LLa w .J a
"'tl"':;
Lt l1Jt l ~ ::~vvVI..4J'I )~..JLfl~tJ-3 ~VItJUULLa W.JtJ .
WlEJa uJu wamtlum~f1LVI f1UvE/MtJEJ
t.J'l1t1Ju daharova gato t,j'1rf1tlvl-;mwVI
uttlumtri ri1wLLa tl5ai..JMa1vaumtl~au
auMtiuauuamfu rfmt1~1nVIttrifl u " ' '
'
~'11et1EJ solassavasuddesikakaro viya
ttlutl~VIv;..Jmatiiattlunumu Zi 0b tv1 f1 cil'J fllfffl LfftJEJfiEI tJU'1110UtJ f1 ¥'1411ll ElL tJ ~
' ' Hi'1-i1 Vl~ltf1Jt~1~'11a1EJL'I1EI ffJu-ili1ru»1
Jutta paccha tiiaW1CJ~u ,,r1rft1~1nV1LLri "
fl1JJ..J '11 Ct1 evf-; EJL WVI a 1J Lt fu UUt J El Ju LLa
"
L if t J U'1 11 LCI5L ,}7 vlV I iJ tlJ '111 a1 J ifLL a-; L,} 7 rf' 111 n 8 Due to the richness of vowels, especially
diphthongs, it is difficult to transliterate
1fftitfU1LLn'1 'lit 'i4a 1i tt .J'..Jttriflu~ '11 a1ei..Jif the Khoeun, Lao, Mon, Cambodian script,
LLa parisapi chuauu5ff'VIn.. " J ' 'I1a1v etc. into a Romanization system. The
passages written in Khoeun, Lao, Mon,
attamana rfi11vtiuduvu~ pasasita rf
Cambodian, etc. are transliterated into
Siamese Thai script, but the Pali words
are easily noticed for transliterating by a
Romanization system.
7 The manuscript which is kept at Wa t 9 The manuscript which is kept at iVIV'tmth
.
Mai Suvannabhumaram (1V11 l1l-iaiuu::w..
[watkhankh£ew], Chiangmai Province,
~nm.J ), Luang Prabang, CS 1195 cs 1196-7
20

--- Page 11 ---
Pa~hamasambodhi
.,
tiuiJ '-IM?W'iL.j?urifi?ttlutiwluJu~un sambodhis of the second group. The
Indra's lute of the LPR, the MON, the
ttlui·nv5awwwwt.j?uriwit51J-3urnau~
~ v SMT, the CMD, the NET, and the
nr a~u unrn cvu
l
e
"
.
l
cf
'
C
-
V
I 'J
~
u uuu~ Ltn
IV
L L~ L VV has three strings instead of one.
Indra played his lute in order to guide
The author's skill in the translation of the Bodhisatta to turn away from self
the TYE is higher than that of the mortification. In the TKN version,
PLN. Some mistakes in the PLN Indra played his lute three times in
indicate that its author translated it different degrees of string tension: too
from the LPL without consulting the stiff, too tight, and neither too stiff nor
TYE, even though the manuscript of too tight. Unlike the TKN, each of
the TYE (CS 1142), which has Indra's three lute strings, in the LPR,
recently been discovered, is older the MON, the SMT, the CBD, the
than that of the PLN (CS 1195). NET, and the LVV, was tighten to a
different degree: too tight, too stiff,
It is not clear whether the TKN and and the suitable tightenness.
the TYE are also directly translated
from the LPL. Some passages in the At present, it can not be determined
TKN are so identical to the TYE that yet which version had influence on the
we can not dismiss the link between TLE, and which version was further
these two versions; however, some influenced by it. It is probable that the
long Pali passages in the TKN show TKN and TLE were composed from
its relation to the LPL, whereas, the oral version of Pa~amasambodhi.
except for the Pali verse, there is no The following are the extracts from
long Pali passage in the TYE. Some the TKN and the TLE which are the
stories in the TKN do not exist in the same episode as in the LPL, the TYE,
LPL, the TYE or the PLN. They are and the PLN which have already been
the stories about the lamentation of presented.
Queen Maya when she had to depart
from her husband, King Suddhodana, TKN [phuuk] 610
to visit her parents' city, the
LaO.karapura, and the story about
Indra and his one-string-lute. It is .,
very surprising that the MON is also FiT'hvi-3aui1fiiiu~ tiui'"'"'''aau,.j,~u G)
called LaO.kiirapura or the drA.o~;t,.O. .ol l: l"lJff'lJU?LLnI V
'lJJ1'J~nt5mn-t1tnEJLflEJUUU
DevalaO.karapura instead of '
V-3ttlau?tiutfuvi7EJR?i?auif tiui?umtl~
Devadaha. The story about Indra and '
his one-string-lute is not common in aT}utfui? tt:.iui1Z wvf1aue.iuwuautfu ri
Pa~hamasambodhi. Although it is an tffiiai-31w Zumrn~ fitl5n~urimttn-3AlJ
undated manuscript, the story of "' ./Q ., ,J .I ' 1:
uuu~ umu5ffLv?AUvu'in~unRlJYI-3»~1EJ
Indra and his one-string-lute might '
have prevailed among the Tais in the 1vfnufi1 wnuu~
past. It was transferred from one
generation to another orally, and was
eventually first recorded in the TKN
10 An undated manuscript copied from
and had an influence on Pa~hama- Anatole-Roger Peltier
21

--- Page 12 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6./, 2003
TLE [phuuk] 2, page 16-711 the story after the Enlightenment of
the Buddha was composed and.added
to the TYE. No manuscripts written in
UJ11ffVl auiJ L,f 1j) n'I/J-3"JH'i1EIU1v1nlJ 1u
P~ili with a story as long as the TYE
Te~mh1cnVJff'uiJ tiiemuu~t!DnywnEJ1n5 have been discovered. On the other
LoJ1VllJr165-3U!Jn~ en auiln'l!ivua1mnn hand, other versions, including the
. TYC, show that the TYE is a newer
51Vl6lJ1LLrirhauiJmnvWIIWEILOEIULLrirh
version than those which preserve the
auiJ·flmft.La Vl51LoJ1~'11C/1EIUU1tJ5ffVJLoJ1 old theme of Parhamasambodhi
v •
m-ivL 51Vluthtt/VJ ri u1 n Lrf EJ11 wwLLeiu~u focusing on the incident of the Perfect
Enlightenment of the Buddha. More
umLCJ ti1avlvfu r-mivuCJ1EJLtluvlv~n1w
manuscripts should be investigated to
.
wvi1vmmVJti1auu1tf'5ff'V~LoJ1~naan,.mfv find out whether any versions written
at.i1 tlnuuv ,ifa&i1t ~a' .J1rimEJtlV~aanu1 in Thai Yuan are restricted to the old
v • v theme ofParhamasambodhi.
'.J1ri em Vlvvu ay r~uivH CJ1EJnuriL tlu
.
vl-Jf/65-J' r~~a.., ama u tfuua uu1tljffVJL .J1 The following chart shows the relation
.
LU U Lo J151£fn U'-11 lJ fJ fJ n' -11 LL nLLa FlU of all versions of Parhamasambodhi in
. the first group.
~Ha1EJUUttluvi'vLoJ1UV1uau 1ut.i iia1EJ Zvi
ifu b tJiiJu f!v1mril~LLCJ i1LV1£f mmffVI (an oral version ofParhamasambodhi)
Jv
'.J1 m nL tlu tp.J m utia m iL tfu vi'vlfu u r11 EJ
rr'~··· -~--~L :;~.~::~:;.····
U'wtr~ umWmtwnn ywnvmiiEJJJLoJ1 ,./
ifcuH1ffuuuriiln'llLLCJ uuVI1ffVIivua1EJ Zu ...,
v •
.·· ·. :
rh mmiJEJUL oJ1LLnUf!j'l11 aU lftJtJ riiim1u ... PLN ..... ..- } ....... \
lfU~uvu~mnun vi1EJrhiff!jmauiJttlu ········ ..
. • •• ......... : . · .... ....... • . T . L 1111 E •
BlJlff)tJ LUUtJUvl-3W5::Wr . J . 6LoJ1 H1nLtlfflJ1 TLC _. ............... ······.;·; .............. ·"
"' .
...
LLri1fULLC/Lri'JVl1nvUC/1tJUU 1111Lf1JimJLLCJ
RUiv UC /1 El fi '] f iJ flJl. . / . 1 tJn Va v1fl./ J/j Lf fEIVl TYE·:. .. ···
uu1LiiEJutoJ1rimiuuuLLo
The TYE alone has evolved a little.
keys to the symbols
-
The story of Siddhattha Bodhisatta's
A B A was translated
life in the TYE version was
into B
translated from the LPL version, but
........
A B A had an influence
onB
.........
A B A had an influence
11 The manuscript written in Saa paper on B, and vice
(~tHn) which is preserved at the rl'uiu (~ versa
~), Meng La (~flii), Sibsongpanna, an
undated manuscript.
22

--- Page 13 ---
Pa~hamasambodhi
The second group: such as the lamentation of Princess
Yasodharii and the legend of the
Like the first group, the Pali version afrhakesadhiitu or the eight hair relics,
is the main version, especially the which became new chapters. Again
LPRa with 16-19 chapters. Ccedes the LPRc has more details and
(1968: 222) assumed that it originally elaborates the incidents between the
had only 15 chapters covering the first preaching and the visit to
whole story of the Buddha from his Kapilavatthu city, and the incidents
birth to the parinibbiina. The added between the event in the Kapilavattu
chapters include the one or two episode and the Parinibbana, which
chapters about the auspicious makes it nine chapters longer.
marriage between King Suddhodana
and Queen Maya in the beginning, The story of the Vasudhara-vanita in
and one to three chapters at the end, the Mara episode and the struggle of
which contain three stories: the Mara's daughters with the Bodhisatta
distribution of Buddha's relics, the just before the struggle of Mara with
fighting between Mara and an elder the Bodhisatta also are the distinct
called Uppagutta, and the story of the characteristics of almost every version
vanishing of all relics. The oldest of Pafhamasambodhi in the second
manuscript of the LPRa is the one group. The story of Indra and his lute
which Ccedes reported was kept at in the TKN is changed in its detail.
the EFEO in Hanoi. It was written in The three-string-lute is used instead of
AD 1786, two years before the the one-string-lute. The close relation
manuscript kept at MaQ.<;liradhamma between the LPRa and the MON, the
Chapel (l1vl.Jrutcna')5')'HJ), which, LPRc and the SMT, and the SMT and
according to the colophon, was CBD are noticeable.
written in AD 1788. But it is also
stated in the colophon that the The manuscript of the MON kept at
MaQ.<;iiradhamma Chapel (l1ill.JWtc$ia') 1VII"mmLVI~Ll1ua [watsaalaadcciJniu]
lJ')')l.l) version was edited from an is entitled Lathlfll.Jal.!1 Y 'lG or "Pafhama
older manuscript, which suggests that sambodhi, the translated summary
the LPRa should have come into version". Although its colophon does
existence in the late Ayutthya period not tell from which version it was
(AD 1351-1767). However, a translated, it is quite clear that the
manuscript older than the EFEO MON was translated from the LPRa.
manuscript has not been discovered The Pali passages in the MON version
yet. are the same as those in the LPRa. As
it is a summarized translation, the
Unlike the first group, we can not MON does not elaborate as much as
find a unity in various versions of the LPRa; thus, although their stories
Pafhamasambodhi in the second are identical, the LPRa is longer than
group. The variation does not depend the MON, such as can be seen in the
following example:
on the new stories, but on the details.
Compared with the LPRa, the LPRb
gives more details to some incidents,
23

--- Page 14 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
tj.f1ma Tn6ffVJVJ1VJfltfniJunl!VJ t/.f,1tlt11YJ
the LPRa, [phu~ uk ] 9 , page U)Jl-GJ•1 2 TwcrffVI~L'i~ff ?Jf1Iw6muAcu1VIW1ufal! u~
• • t • " " •
tasmirp. khaf).e pafifiiisa-yojana-
ppamiif).arp. rarp.sisahassa-
The MON is influenced by neither the
pasobhitarp. suriyamaf).Qalarp.
LPRc nor the SMT. It might have
cakkaviilagabbhe khira siigare
been composed before the LPRc
nimujjhiipitarp. ratanacakkarp. viya
developed. The story which is found
hatthappamiif).arp. thitarp. nemiyarp.
in the MON but is not found in other
gahetvii pacchimacakkaviilarp.
versions is the previous life of the
ogacchamiinarp. ekuf).a
Bodhisatta when he commited an
pafifiiis ayoj anappamiif).arp.
immoral act that caused him to be
pabhiisafamujjalantarp. vissajjentarp.
born as a woman and obtain the name
nemiya · gahetvii anilapathe
Ailgirasa.
ulaUiipitarp. rajatp.cakkarp. viya
canda-maf).Qalarp. 'pi
In general, the content of the three
piicinalokadhiituto uggacchamiinarp.
recensions of the LPR-the LPRa, the
thitarp. caldkaviila-majjhe attano
LPRb--and the LPRc are identical
pabhiiya suvaooa-vaf).f).iiya because the newer recension uses the
upasobhiyamiif).arp. tarp. padesarp. old one as the basis. The big
suvaf).f).ararp.sf nimujjiipayamiino difference between the LPRa and the
viya rajatp.khandha-sadisarp. LPRb is the latter gives more details
bhodhirukkharp. piWzito katvii to some important stories, which
apariijitarp. varapalailkam iiruyha become new chapters.
mahiisatto nisinno ahosi.
As for the PLRc, Prince
the MON, [phuuk] 6, page ~::13 Paramanujitjinorot informs us at the
end of the text that he was asked by
tasmirp. khaf).e n ') u .., ~ u 1 n ') a ') i :a VI
pafifiiis ay oj anappamiinii [krommilnkrajsoora-wiclllt] in the
rarp.sidasasahassa ca sobhitarp. name of King Rama ill to edit and
suriyarp. maf).Qalarp. tasmirp. khaf).e correct mistakes in the Pali version in
tj.f1 m a fJ l1 t/5 u Of'11 a (5) 'fij ~VI tf l!i nn tJ BE 2387. In the beginning of the
SMT, he also said:
nTu rro Ta11u1uunaEinmmrun61unM
• • • • • •• • • t
r
. if.n f) m ff fl n t 51VI t./1 1 U1~CIIflf.f ffA. ».U A. A:: v:: 1~fuw5::51?Jmuvncncru1a TV~aw'i::
~
U1aLUW'i::Aun{tfjUffU f Wcr ijmcn
..r
U'i::CIIl:.JW'i::'iGVo' /lJVIQ'i,lf l tJf!L' UfJ~VItllJ LLf/" 1 LLffVI~
12 The manuscript kept at l1il).Jt'IH-tia"l L~fJ~A11UVI1Uih~u1tf'i1...
li"l"l).J [h5omonthiantham], BE 2331
'1 will now explain Pathamasam
13 The undated manuscript kept at 1~
bodhi, based on the Pali version. Its
~·Hml~~ll1i1il ( watsaalaade 8l)nia) , three-gem obeisance IS m the
Pathumthanee Province
24

--- Page 15 ---
Par.hamasambodhi
beginning. Let's continue with the and the Thai and Cambodian co
story ... " existing words are unchanged. Some
Thai words are used in the CBD
The SMT is exactly like the LPRc. version but some are replaced by
For example: Cambodian words. Almost every
corresponding chapter of the two
the LPRc, Dukkarakiriyaparivatta versions begins and ends with the
(Paramanujitjinorot 1994a: 80) same line. The following examples
from the CBD depicting the story of
atha sakko vii).arp. gahetvii. vii).iijiyarp. lndra and his three-string-lute begin
vihafifiati. thaddhajiyarp. chinadittha with the same line of the SMT, which
mudujiyarp. asii.dhukarp. saddarp. has already been presented. Due to the
sundararp.. so vii).iisaddarp. sutvii. bad quality of the microfilm, some
nimittarp. gaQ.hiiti. tato sayarp. words are unreadable.
jambuchii.yii.ya nisinno bhii.vesi esii.
dukkarakiriyii. bodhiyii. maggo na the CMP, [phuuk] 7, page ~-il::14
hotiti fiatvii. ...
1ftlJ::l! ::d'! ,£1, a '! 5t!tJ 516511/?f511J fJ 11., t!f!,
the SMT, Dukkarakiriyaparivatta
(Paramanujitjinorot 1994b: 134-5) t155VJn Yf5::Tw6'lf1tlJ.gtyU1::fiytEJ fJ5-1EJn
LlJ1WJ!YifiytEJUl'IJLL1fff en y::unfi'lJCJI1Elyt5::
7"
'Z/flJ::lJ~'I J mJL~,dtCJUV5<'1QJ Y/51i55<Q1 1frl"i11J 'IJ'ZitJ UH1tfiqffi[Jj LL1Jff G) ~-1flJ1fffj'lJLY11 ... LL1Jff
t155(;mvi.,tfu ~.,m._,;d.,wrufiwthnurr1mN
a cvfl' ff1EJHlJ .J -1 LA5- , 1'1 . J ., n G) zy11flJ1fffjcytY11 niJUffl'lJffL UEJ-1 ... LL1fff G)
'-11~~011EJW5::U'I-11ffm 1!:: iJu~"iJuzy11nl!£J1a fi'lftmnmdti1m
wa~~nv1~aan 1tl mvHif.,.,tiam7n ~~
i'i'ifi;Jt 5U~Ii]VI yt5::1JiU f W6ffli]VIUllJ t]5-1Yf
LV1n1uuuNatifEJ-1 ua::fflEJHif.,Ju ZutA'i-1
5::fft~mudt i1v-1 WJ!YinJ!£J1a 71:: nt}5-1EJn
zu.,tiau t11una1-1 ~~ti1nuuNari'wn .
vnuuiJvJU:: Y. 15-1W,15flJ1tiJ.w., v. aff1/1 U1.1 Di
1W L 51::L ,j'lf~VI W5::UH1cfVI':i1vi'nvi'tJttfEJ-1
utl5uuVJ~u::1f1 ua1w5::Tw6w1ruwV1v tnu
• •v • .., •
WflJ naEJW1tfluuiJVJeJUtfu rmW,l'iflJl
tifutt:;.,·h u1!tiiutlflu~tfu tfluHurn"
1fW5W5n Yl5-11f511JLHV/1f1 fivv1unnn5fi5EJ1
w1:: r w 6'lflflJ ~., '"'~,ua11u1m5 ru mv7 vi • v . . . ' . • .
u:: iJuuuu1!156tJaiW5::Tw6w1rutuEJ
. . u . ..,
1J1El11f~mwq m/ m-1W5::£J1 TnA?'I"iltJLHVI
"' .
Vl'i::m7n"i1 nvm1-1nmn5v1if 11i5aw5:: Prince Paramanujitjinorot consulted
the Nidii.nakathii. and the Tipi!flka. He
himself placed the struggle of the
Buddha with Mara's daughters, which
The SMT was later translated into the
comes before the Enlightenment of the
CBD. The translator translated it
Buddha m every versiOn of
strickly word by word. The sentence
structure and choice of word and
style of the CBD are those of Prince
Paramanujitjinorot. The Pali words 14 The manuscript preserved at Vat Sara
vantejo, Cambodia, BE 24 73
25

--- Page 16 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
Pa~hamasambodhi, after the U1-1cn:n tJVI
Enlightenment Without intention, he
W"i::t'IJVI"iWitm 'lfaufi'-1d1LLEN
changed the ancient structure and
broke the important indentity of the
LPL and all later versions.
u1-1nc:
The NET and the L VV, which differ
considerably from other versions, are L'lf'lf11Jr1U V11En.J'IJ1EliJEJ
very alike. Their structures are based tiffff2iaUB-1»U1 T~nn1-1T~n
on the LPRc but have been '
influenced by the SMT. Like the
the NET, [phuuk] 7, page 10 to
LPRc, the NET and the L VV, they
place the incident of the struggle of [phuuk] 8, page 115
the Bodhisatta with Mara's daughters
before the struggle with Mara, but
details are added to the stories of
ffu·-nuuthtiiVI fvwi1w"iu?VIt~?ci'nnf1m1
Yasa, three ja~ilas, SarTputta and v v
Moggallana, and Y asodhara as they uff-1aTi'hm1tttf1R1m-3LLAUFf'-3w"iifr11VIrhu
'
are in the SMT. Nevertheless, the a • 1 U1VIV1 ' '1JLMU 4 iJ 'IJLL r1,V~I-3 VI1EJ 'IJ1-3nR4 VIR,-:3,
NET and the L VV have their own
ttYi'u1u1vt~EJVIffu ttv-31v11 ~u1H'BVIH titi
way of development. Both the NET
and the L VV not only give details to w-3 u1-1EJniJtJ?fuwm-3ff-1tnuffauri?1;u 1vi
the lamentation of Yasodhara when LiJ1J1tthRuiJum?fu LM'IJfl'IJWVIffHaUri11
she first met the Buddha but also
wuw1ifcf'-1iJti?u1n;uafuf1-3 tJVUL211 lu
soon after she heard the news that the v
Bodhisatta went forth on the great M1nVJ1EJLtnWcua1 tiRVJ1tJVJ»U w1nii
' .,
renunciation, as in the following fl11UUrlnvi'tJ-3HUtaf U11cf-3 L~1t5VItfuf1
example: '
" .,
the LVV (Dhammadhajo 1999: 85-6) n~n?n-hwmv?fJ"iufifn.JenEJu?ufnnfJ cf'-1
., v .,
u?mo» a?EJR-43f m"in L<at« ENantJr BU na 4 n1m r 1
v
., W"irliJUn11 1Bv::fnVIUU 11WUW1ifti1 lff ;j1
W ... U W?LLnl v v
mnj)hni'u
mfmi'1
In the introduction, the NET tells the
ti'trh story ofKingAjatasattu's invitation to
·.r
eJ. .u ht 2ftJ Ananda to recite the Buddha's
v biography. This is identical with the
tmmh
LPRa. The incidents which exist in the
Tvutn-1an
'
... .J
R"i'IJLUiJ
15 The undated manuscript kept at i fl
wa m n1 vi
UTUfltl'U [watbaand::>::m], Ubon
U1LLCf1
ratjathanee Province
26

--- Page 17 ---
Pathamasambodhi
NET but do not exist m other versions in the second group. Here is
versions are: the incident of the chart of relation.
Yasodhara's refusal to marry the
Bodhisatta because the Bodhisatta the first group
did not treat her well in the life of
Vessantara, the patricide by Prince
Ajatasattu, and the legend ofp etta.
The following chart shows the the second group LPRa
relation among versions of Pafhama
' sambodhi in the second group. keys to the symbols
A ..... .,. B = A had an influence
onB
LPRa
················~LVV A.-- B = A developed into B
~ ~ ··.. 1-~-
~ ·········· .... .;
The Characteristics of
MON LPRb NET
I Pathamasambodhi
LPRc SMT Pathamasambodhi is the biography of
/ the Buddha in a traditional way.
Almost all of the stories already
CBD existed in the Nidiinakatha- the
biography of the Buddha which serves
keys to the symbols as the introduction of the JiitakaWza
-
kathii, the Mahiivagga of the Vinaya,
A B = A was translated
and some suttas such as the Mahii
into B
padiinasutta and the Mahapari
A B = A had an infh.ience
······~ nibbiinasutta. Credes (1968: 223-7)
onB
indicates that the incident of the
A B = A had an influence
~····~ fighting between Mara and the elder
on B, and VlCe
Upagutta, which exists in the LPRa
versa
and in other versions of the second
A - B A developed into
group, was influenced by the
B
Lokapafifiatti, whereas the story about
the Vasundharii-vanitii. or
The TYE plays an important role as
[naaiJthooranii] who made Mara and
the transitional link between the LPL
as.the major version of Pathamasam his army flee from the Bodhisatta is a
bodhi of the first group and the LPRa new one. I found that the author of the
as the major version of the second LPL, the first vers10n of
group. As the LPL was retold with Pathamasambodhi, is the retold
the addition of life stories after the version of the Avidurenidiina (the
·Enlightehment, the content of the event in not distant epoch) of the
LPRa became twice as long. The Nidiinakathii. Apart from the story of
story of Indra and his lute in the TKN Vasundarii-vanitii., one difference
still exists in the LPRa and other between the LPL and the Nidiina-
27

--- Page 18 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
katha is the order of the incident of correspond with the Nidanakatha and
the struggle with Mara's daughters. the Tipitaka. He unintentionally
In Nidana-katha this incident does eliminated the characteristics of the
not belong to the Av idurenidana, but earlier versions of Pathamasambodhi.
to the Santikenidana or the incidents
in the near past. The Nidanakatha is
The Evolution
followed by the Maradhftasutta in
the Marasailyutta of the
A very old complete manuscript of the
Sarp.yuttanikaya, and the
LPL written in CS 954, which was
Magandiyasutta and the Magandiya
discovered at i'~1~~ei~u [watlajhl.n],
suttanidesa of the Kud'dakanikaya,
Lampang Province, shows the original
which mention the victory of the
Buddha over Mara's daughters while themes of Pathamasambodhi. Its story
he sat under the Ajapalanigrodha which is the same as in the PLN, the
tree soon after he attained TKN, and TLE, makes it possible to
Enlightenment. Inspite of the fact conclude that the original form of
that Pathamasam-bodhi ends Pathamasambodhi is not the
immediately after the Buddha uttered biography of the Buddha as in the
the escetic utterence, the author LPR the STM, the MON, the CBD,
likely wanted to emphasize the virtue and the NET. The original theme of
and the great deed of the Bodhisatta, Pathamasambodhi is the biography of
that he completely renounced all the Siddhattha Bodhisatta, not the
ki/esas or sinful desires. Thus, he biography of the Buddha. We can
reordered that incident by placing it notice the gradual evolution from the
before the struggle with Mara; and original theme of Pathamasambodhi to
moreover, the struggle with Mara's the modem one.
daughters is given in detail. Mara's
three daughters, Arati, Raga and The original version of Pathamasam
Tanha, are presented in front of the bodhi has 6 chapters:
Bodhisatta one by one. They tried to
lure him with their skills. The chapter Gabbabhinikkhamana
argument between the Bodhisatta and 2 LakkhaQ.apatigahaka
them was composed in the form of
3 Mahiibhinikkhamana
verse and cannot be found in any 4 Dukkaracariya
Buddhist literature except
5 Maravijaya
Pathamasambodhi. The story of
6 (Pathamasambodhi)
Vasundhara-vanita, Mara's daughters
of the LPL, and the story about Indra
Both the LPL and the PLN use the
and his lute of the TKN are the most
same title for each chapter, except for
distinct charateristics of the earlier the last chapter. It can be inferred
versions of Pathamasambodhi, from the content and by comparing it
which all later versions keep as their to that of the TYE that the last
prototype. Both the LPRc and SMT chapter's title is Paramabhisambodhi,
of Prince Paramanujitjinorot place the same title as the work itself.
the incident of Mara's daughters after Inspite of the fact that Credes (1968:
the Enlightenment of the Buddha to 222) knew neither the LPL nor the
28

--- Page 19 ---
Paf}zamasambodhi
LPN, he could correctly make an sambodhi. On one hand, the TYE is
assumption from the meaning of the the first version of Pal:hamasambodhi
title, Pathamasambodhi "the recent which has the potentaility for
Enlightenment of the Buddha" that evolving; on the other hand, it is the
the original version of Pal:hamasam prototype for later versions in which
bodhi should end with the Buddha details are added to Pathamasambodhi
attaining Enlightenment. The LPL, to become the complete biography of
the PLN, the TYC, the TKN, and the Buddha.
TLE end right after the Buddha
uttered udiinakathii or the ascatic Around the 17th century, the
utterence. The two verses of the enthusiasm for Buddha's life story
udanakatha, which are also quoted at may have been the result of the impact
the end of the Durenidana, originally of the teaching of Jesus's biography
occur in the Abhisambodhivagga of and his religion by European
the Dammapada. missionaries in the Ayuttha Kingdom.
Pal:hamasambodhi, as the most
Pal:hamasambodhi in the genre of the popular version of Buddha's
biography of the Siddhattha biography, is dramatically composed
Bodhisatta forms the first phase of into a complete biography of the
Pathamasambodhi. From this phase, Buddha. The incidents after the
it evolves a little with the addition of preaching of Dammacakka were
two new chapters: the composed and attached to the old
Brahmajjhesana and the Dhamma version of Pathamasambodhi. The
cakkavattana, as m the TYE. LPL was used as the basis of the LPR.
Moreover, the chapter Maha Both are written in Pali. It is clear that
bhinikkhamana is split into two the Pali version, especially the LPR,
chapters: the Rajabhiseka and the was composed for monks as a text for
Mahabhinikkhamana; thus the TYE preaching. We do not know the role of
consists of 9 chapters. The TYE Pal:hamasambodhi in the Ayutthaya
changes the orginal genre of period (AD 1350-1767), but in the
Pathamasambodhi to become Rattanakosin period (from AD 1782)
Buddha's biography with focus on King Rama V (1990: 91-2) recorded
the emergence of the Buddha and the that Pal:hamasambodhi was preached
Dhamma which was preached for the by monks as an activity to celebrate
first time to the Paficavaggiya. Due Visakhapuja day in the reign of King
to the Lalitavistara, ends with the Rama II and King Rama ill. The
incident of -the preaching of the preaching of Pathamasambodhi is an
Dhammacakka, like the TYE. It is. important activity on Buddhist days,
possible that the Lalitavistara had like the narration of Jesus's life story
inspired the author of the TYE to by Christian priests on Christmas day.
enlarge the older genre of Pal:hama At this point Pal:hamasambodhi
sambodhi. Although the story is evolved to the second phase, the
longer, the theme of Pal:hama complete biography of Buddha. The
sambodhi is kept and the whole story number of chapters increased from 9
is still relevant to the title, Pal:hama- to 15. There are 6 more chapters; three
29

--- Page 20 ---
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 6. I, 2003
were newly composed and three were state, Buddha's reponsibility to his
split from former chapters. The three family, the competition with other
new chapters-the Pafica doctrines, and the prophecy about the
sakiyapabbajja, the Desana, and the future Buddha. As a result, this phase
Nibbanasutta- are attached consecu of Pathamasambodhi transforms from
tively to the Dhamrnacakkappa the Budda's biography into the whole
vattana. The split chapters consist of story of Buddhism, which will last
the Gabbanikkamama from the first until the Dhamma as the heart of the
part of the LakkhaQ.apatigahaka, the religion disappears by the year 5000.
Buddhapiija from the last part of the As the symbol of Buddha's teaching,
Dukkarakiriya, and the the relic disappearance is the main
Bodhisabbafifiii from the first part of story told in the last chapter of
the Brahmajjesana. And then three Pathamasambodhi. The LPRc, the
more chapters- the Vivahamangala, SMT, the CBD, and the LVV are the
the Dhatuvibhajjana, and the Mara representatives of this phase of
bandha-were composed and Pathamasambodhi.
attached to the beginning and the end
of Pathamasambodhi. After that, one
more chapter, the Dhatunibbana, was
Conclusion
composed, and three more chapters
the Atthakesadhatu, the Bimbavilapa,
The original Pathamasambodhi is the
and the Devorohana- were split
Pali version comprised of six chapters
from the Brahrnajjhesana, the Pafica
telling the life story of the Siddhattha
satasakiyapabbajja, and the Desana,
Bodhisatta. It was composed in the
respectively. The versions which are
Lanna Kingdom. The oldest fragment
the second phase of Patbamasam
manuscript is more than 500 years old.
bodhi are the LPRa, the LPRb, and
The complete one was written more
the MON.
than one hundred years later. The Pali
version was translated into Thai Yuan,
Pathamasambodhi finally evolves Lao, Tai Lue and Tai Khoeun and
into the last phase with eight more simultaneously spread throughout the
chapters: the Yasapabbajja, the Lanna Kingdom, the Lanxang
Uruvelagamana, the Aggasavaka Kingdom, Chiang Tung, and
pabbajja, the Kapilavatthugamana, Sibsongpanna. Except the Thai Yuan
the MetteyyabuddhavyakaraQ.a, the version, all versions of the Tai people
Buddhapitunibbana, the Yamakapati are the story of the Siddhattha
hariya, and the Aggasavakanibbana. Bodhisatta (known among the Tais as
The last phase of Pathamasambodhi ai51vHl8nlJl'll (sJ.ithaat'?2J::>kbuat]).
is not only the story of the birth of
The Pali version of the Lanna
the Bodhisatta, the emergence of the
kingdom also evolved into the later
Buddha, the discovering of Dhamrna,
Pali version consisting of 16-18
the occurrence of the first Buddhist
chapters. This version is not
monk, and the end of the life of the
Siddhattha's life story but Buddha's
Buddha, but also the settlement of
biography. On one hand, the later Pali
the Buddhist religion in the Magadha
version, which was composed in the
30

--- Page 21 ---
Pa~hamasambodhi
Ayutthaya Kingdom, was rendered References
into the Mon version; on the other
hand, some new chapters were
Primary Sources
composed and fused into the former
The Cambodian version of Pat:hama
Pali version. The final phase of
sambodhi kept at Wat Saravantejo,
Pathamasambodhi is the Pali version
Cambodia, 30 bundles (complete),
of Prince Paramanujitjinorot, which
BE 2473.
was again transformed into the
The Cambodian version of Pat:hama
legend of Buddhism. This lastest Pali sambodhi kept at the National
version was rendered into Siamese Library, Cambodia, 30 bundles
Thai, which was later translated into (complete), undated manuscript.
Cambodian. Prince Paramanujit The Cambodian version of Pat:hama
jinorot's versions had influence on sambodhi kept at W at Prampi
the composition of the Northeastern chorn, Cambodia, 30 bundles
(complete), BE 2488.
Thai version by either a Northeastern
The Lanna Pali version of Pat:hama
Thai author or a Lao author.
sambodhi kept at the Rajja
However, no matter how it changed
mangalaphisek National Libra-ry,
and how many new chapters were
1 bundle (fragmant), CS 839.
added the Northeastern Thai version
The Lanna Pali version of Pat:hama
maintained the original sequence of sambodhi kept at the Rajja
incidents, with the episode of Mara's mangalaphisek National Libra-ry,
daughters placed before the 1 bundle (fragment), undated
Enlightenment. The original title, manuscript, formerly kept at Wat
Pathamasambodhi, and the titles of Sribunrueng Tha Soi.
The Lanna Pali version of Pat:hama
the original chapters remain
sambodhi kept at Wat Hai Hin, 3
unchanged. On the other hand, the
bundles (fragment), CS 936.
original meaning of Pathamasam
The Lanna Pali version of Pat:hama
bodhi gradually changed from "the sambodhi kept at Wat Hai Hin, 4
recent Perfect Enlightenment of the bundles (complete), CS 954.
Buddha" to the story of the The Mon version of Pat:hama-sambodhi
Enlightenment of the Buddha and the kept at Wat Saladaeng Nue,
Dhamma, and finally to the Pathumthanee Province, 12
traditional legend of the Buddha's bundles (com-plete), undated
manuscript.
life and religion. Even today, new
The Mon version of Pat:hama-sambodhi
recensions of the legend of the
kept at W at Kongkararn,
Buddha are composed. All use the
Ratchaburi Province, 7 bundles
old title, Pathamasambodhi. It is
(frag-ment}, undated manuscript.
inferred from the discovered The Mon version of Pat:hama-sambodhi
manuscripts and their relation that kept at Wa t Kongkararn,
Pathamasambodhi is an immortal Ratchaburi, Pathumthanee
heritage of the Lanna people which Province, 8 bundles (fragment),
undated manuscript.
was disseminated widely not only
The Northeastern Thai version of
among the Tais, but also to their
Pat:hamasambodhi kept at W at Ban
neighbours the Tais.
Don, Ubonratchathani Province, 30
31

--- Page 22 ---
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanittes 6.1, 2003
bundles (com-plete), undated Credes, George. 1968. "Une Vie Indo
manuscript. chinoise du Buddha: La
The Northeastern Thai version of Patb.amasambodhi." Melanges d'
Patb.amasambodhi kept at Wa t lndianisme a Memoire de Louis
Ban Ngiw, Khonkaen Prov-ince, Renou. Paris: Ed. De Boccard,
12 bundles (fragment), BE 2505. pp. 217-27.
The Pali version of Pathama-sambodhi --, ed. 2001. The Par)zama-sambodhi.
kept at Mal)<;lra-dhamma Chapel, Oxford: The Pali Text Society.
the Royal Palace, Bangkok, 17 Dhammadhajo, Jana, Prah Maha. 1999.
bundles (complete), BE 2331. Lan Xang Version of Klong Slin
The Pali version of Patb.ama-sambodhi Pat)zamasambodhi. Bangkok:
kept at the National Library, Dharnmasabha.
Bangkok, 18 bundles (complete), EFEO-FEMC. 2001. Les Le<;ons Khmeres
undated manu-script. de La Pathamasambodhi dans les
The Pali-Lao Nissaya version of Bibliotheques du Cambodge. (Un
PaJhamasambodhi kept at Wat published Manuscript)
Mai Suvannabhumararn, Luang Fausboll, V., ed. 1925. Buddhist Birth
Prabang, 10 bundles (complete), Stories [Jataka Tales]: the Com
cs
1195. mentarial Introduct-ion Entitle
The Tai Khoeun version of Patb.ama Nidana-katha, The Story of the
sambodhi, 26 bundles (complete), Lineage. Davids, T. W. Rhys, tr.
undated maim-script. London: George Routledge.
The Tai Lue version of Pathama Filliozat, Jacqueline. n.d. A Selected
sambodhi kept at Min Wui, Bibliography for Further Studies
Sibsongpanna, Yunnan, PRC, 8 on Pat)zamasambodhi. Ecole
bundles (complete), undated Franc;:aise d'Etreme-Orient.
manuscript. Finot, Louis. "Recherches sur Ia
The Thai Yuan enumerated subversion of Litterature Laotienne." Bulletin de
Patb.ama,sam-bodhi kept at Wat l'Ecole Fran<;aise d'Etreme
Khan Kaew, 7 bundles Orient. 17 (1917): 1-218.
(complete), CS 1142. Hundius, Harald. "The Colophons of
Secondary Sources Thirty Pali Manuscripts from
Northern Thailand." Journal of the
Alabaster, Henry. 1971. The Wheel oft he Pali Text Society. XIV (1990): 1-
Law. Teipei: Ch'eng Wen. 173.
Bunsri, Kasem. 1957. "Patb.ama- Jayawickrama. N. A. 1951. The Nidtina
sambodhi katha." Lecture on kathti of the Jataka Commentary.
Advance Thai. Bangkok: Colombo.
Gurusabha, pp. 182-366. Kato, Kumiko and Yanatan, lsra. "Present
Caroline, A. F. and Davids, T. W. Rhys, State of Tai-Lue Documents in
ed. and tr. 1929. Stories of the Sipsongpanna." A Paper
Buddha: Being Selections from Proceeding of Conference on
the Jataka. London: Chapmar Studies of History and Kiterature
and Hall. of Tai Ethnic Groups, Chiangmai
Center for the Promotion Arts and University, 22-23 March 2001.
Culture, CMU 1992. The Kene, Thao. 1958. Catalogue des
Project for the Preservation of Manuscrits de Ia Litterature du
Northern Thai Manuscripts Lao. Ministere de I' Education
Lists of Microfilms for Lampang Nationale Comite Litteraire Lao.
Province. n.p. Khongcarern, Canya. 1989. A Study of the
Northeastern Version of the
32

--- Page 23 ---
Pathamasambodhi
Pathomsomphodhi from the Text Society. XXIII (1997): 43-81.
Manuscript of Wat Mai Thong Phromkerd, Nattinee. 1987. A Study of
Swang in Ubonrajathani Prov Pathomsomphodhi from the
ince. M.A. Thesis Submitted to Manuscript of Wat Kongkaram in
Department of Oriental Ratjaburi Province. M.A. Thesis
Languages, Silpakom Submitted to Department of
University. Oriental Languages, Silpakorn
King Rama V. 1990. The Twelve-Month University.
Royal Ceremony. vol. II. 2nd Preservation of Manuscripts Programme.
reprinting. Bangkok: Gurusabhli. 1995-1996. Microfilm List of
Lafont, Pierre-Berna.rd. 1959. lnventare Manuscripts Kept at the Museum
des Manuscrits des Pagodes du in Luang Prabang. n.p.
Laos. Vientiane. - - . 1996. Microfilm List of Manuscripts
La Loubere, Simon de. 1969. The Kept at the National Library,
Kingdom of Siam. K.L.: Oxford Vientiane. n.p. ·
University Press. --. 1998. Microfilm List ofM anuscripts
Laulertvorakul, Anant. "The Lan Xang Kept at Wat ~uwanphilmtiram,
Version of the Luang Prabang Province. n.p.
Pa)hamasambodhi." Bulletin of Puiliiabibidha, Dad. 1925. Pathamasam
the Faculty of Arts, bodhi Vitthara. Bangkok: n.p.
Chulalongkorn University. vol. I Rawin, Bampen. "Pathomsomphot." A
(Jan-Jun 2002}: 54-82. Paper Proceeding of the 2nd
Mahlimakufarii.javidylilaya. 1928. National Conference on Buddhist
Syamaran.hassa Tepi~akarp Literatures in the Lanna Region.
Suttantapi~ake Kuddakaniktiya 4-6th June 1998. Chiangmai.
Kuddakapa~a, Dhammapada, 1989. The Lanna Version of
Udana, lti-vuttaka, Suttanipata. Pa~amasambodhi. Chaingmai:
Bangkok: Mahlimakufarlija Chiang-mai University.
vidylilaya. The Research Project on Manuscripts
1992. Syamara~~assa Tepi~­ Found in Northern Part of
Thailand, the Social Research
kat~akathti Dhammapada~a­
katha. Vol. II. Bangkok: Mahli Institute, CMU. 1991. The List of
makufarlijavidyalaya. Manuscripts Found in the Lanna
The National Research Institute for Arts Region. Chiangmai: the Social
and Literatures. 1988. The I st Research Institute, Chiangmai
Seminar on Palm Leaves Found University.
Throughout Lao (10-17 March). Saddhatissa, H. 1974. "Pali Literature of
Vientiane. Thailand." Buddhist Studies in
Paramlinuji~inorot, His Patriarch Prince. Honour of !.B. Horner, Dordrecht.
1994. Pa~amasambodhikatha. Dordrecht, Boston: D. Reidel, pp.
Bangkok: Sahadhammik. 211-25.
19_79. "Pali Literature from Laos."
1994. The Piili Version
Studies in Pali and Buddhism.
Pa~amasambodhi: Transliterated
from Khom Script. Bangkok: Wat Delhi: B. R. Pub. Corp., pp. 327-
Prajetupol. 40.
Peltier, Anatole-Roger. 1987. The "Pali Literature in Cambodia."
Journal of the Pali Text Society.
Khoeun Literature. Bangkok:
vol. IX. (1981}: 178-97.
Duang Kamol.
1989. "A Survey of the Pali
Penth, Hans. "Buddhist Literature of Llin
Literature of Thailand." Amalii
Na on the History of Llin Nli's
Prajfiii: Aspects of Buddhist
Buddhism" Journal of the Pali
33

--- Page 24 ---
MANUSYA: Journal ofH umanities 6.1, 2003
Studies. Delhi: Sri Satguru von Hiniiber, Oskar. "The Pali
Publications, pp. 41-6. Manuscripts Kept at the Siam
Seth, Ved. 1992. Study of Biographies of Society, Bangkok: a Short
the Buddha: Based on Piili and Catalogue." Journal of Siam
Sanskrit Sources. New Delhi: Society. 75. (1987): 9-74.
Book Corperation. "Chips from Buddhist Workshops
Singkirat, Surapol, Prah Maha. 1998. Scribes and Manuscripts from
Pa~hamasambodhi Chapters 1-7: Northern Thailand." in Journal of
a Critical Edition and Analytical the Pali Text Society. XXII
Study. M.A. Thesis Submitted to (1996a): 35-57.
Department of Eastern 1996b. A Handbook of Pii.li
Languages, Chula-longkorn Literature. Berlin: Walter de
University. Gruyter.
Suddhisongkram, Natthawut. 1972. The "Un Na as a Centre of Pali
Biography of His Patriarch Literature During the Late 15th
Prince Paramii.nujitjinorot and Century." Journal of the Pali tex.t
His Works. Bangkok: Ak.sara Society. vol. XXVI. (2000): 119-
borikan. 137.
VIravong, Sila, Prah Maha. 1975. Prah
Pathomsomphot Kam Klon.
Vientiane: n.p.
34