Title: bpga28-17.pdf

URL Source: https://cool.culturalheritage.org/coolaic/sg/bpg/annual/v28/bpga28-17.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 09 Nov 2021 22:10:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009) 83 

> Presented at the Book and Paper Group session, AIC 37th Annual
> Meeting, May 20–23, 2009, Los Angeles, California.
> historical background

Illustrated Buddhist manuscripts of South Asia are books 

that were produced in abundance throughout the eleventh 

to thirteenth centuries. These illustrated Buddhist books are 

monastic products transcribing Buddhist sutras, and near -

ly all of the manuscripts in existence cite the  Ashtasahashrika 

Prajnaparamita  or  The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand 

Lines  (Leidy 2008, 137), one of the most important and earli -

est Mahayana texts put down in writing as early as the second 

century B.C.E. This vast body of literature referred to as the 

Prajnaparamita  is essentially a compilation of philosophical and 

metaphysical teachings on the nature of reality and the uni -

verse. The basic premise is a radical non-dualism, in which 

every and any dichotomist way of seeing things is denied, so 

phenomena are neither existent, nor non-existent, but are 

marked by  sunyata , emptiness, and an absence of any essential 

unchanging nature. The sacred character of the manuscripts 

is revealed not only in the writing but also through beautifully 

illustrated representations of important deities to whom the 

text was dedicated and who were brought to mind while recit -

ing the texts. The illustrations contained in the manuscripts 

embody the earliest surviving Indian painting in existence and 

date from the late Pala period (1000–1200 AD) (fig. 1). 

The illustrations provide rare glimpses for historians, fol -

lowing the stylistic development of the paintings by compar -

ing them to extant sculptures, with their sinuous and flowing 

line, as well as to rare and fragmentary paintings that survive 

in archeological temple and monastic complexes, such as at 

Ellora and Aganta. They are truly rare keystones and funda -

mental sources in the understanding of the development of 

Indian painting. From at least the tenth century, the manu -

scripts were beautifully illustrated, typically with an expan -

sive pantheon of deities whose spirits were evoked through 

its recitation and study. Narrative themes such as the scenes 

from the life of the Buddha occur more rarely (narrative 

scenes are found more often on the book covers) and the 

painting style in these earliest surviving manuscripts evolved 

out of styles developed in Indian temples and monastic mural 

> abstract

During the summer of 2007, a collection numbering over 

a thousand leaves of rare and important Indian paintings 

on palm leaf and paper were rediscovered during a renova -

tion and storage relocation project within The Metropolitan 

Museum of Art’s Asian Art Department. The first exhibi -

tion, in a series of permanent collection rotations, focused 

on a remarkable select group of forty-five early palm leaves 

that cite the Buddhist Sutra of  The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight 

Thousand Lines (Ashtasahashrika Prajnaparamita). 

Historic evolution of the structure, the sacred ceremo -

nial functionality and utility of the manuscript traditions, 

and technical background, material composition, support 

preparation, painting techniques, pigment analysis, condi -

tion assessment, and inherent deterioration mechanisms of 

both the support and media will be examined and described. 

Conservation treatment materials and procedures—such as 

structural stabilization of the aged palm leaf, including ethical 

considerations in compensation and reintegration of design, 

mounting, housing, display and storage, and topics pertaining 

to the care and understanding of these early Indian paintings 

on palm leaf—will be discussed in detail. 

> introduction

Every art lover knows that many works of art contain a 

special inner force. It cannot be defined in the usual esthet -

ic terms because it goes beyond the representational, sym -

bolic, and decorative. Some civilizations refer to this force as 

the so-called magic content or aura. If magic is too strong, 

we might speak of this indefinable force as the mysterious -

ly enticing power within the object. Let us begin by turning 

the leaves and allowing the knowledge and the sacred lure of 

these objects to be understood. 

yana van dyke 

# Sacred Leaves: The Conservation and Exhibition of Early Buddhist 

# Manuscripts on Palm Leaves 84  The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009) 

Cults of different kinds have been born out of Buddhist 

devotees, and the worship and veneration surrounding books 

of wisdom assumed and still assume an important role in 

the temple ritual. The public recitation and sanctification 

of texts, as well as the display of the manuscript itself—the 

physical vessel of the teaching—still form an important part 

of Buddhist worship. The emergence of a book-cult was cer -

tainly modeled after the  stupa -cult (the  stupa  serving as a pro -

tective container of Buddha relics and often adorned with 

painting now almost completely lost (Guy 1982, 14–17). The 

paintings are typically of a linear iconic style; images of dei -

ties placed alongside the text are there to increase the spiri -

tual potency and magical power of the book by their sheer 

presence. The images are not necessarily illustrative, but their 

auspicious and protective presence alludes to their talismanic 

power and incites the mind to associate the images with the 

attributes of enlightened ones (fig. 2). 

The  Astasaharika Prajnaparamita,  or  The  Perfection of Wisdom 

in Eight Thousand Verses,  the most illustrated Buddhist text of 

the eleventh through thirteenth centuries and one of sever -

al texts explaining the development of perfect insight, states 

that the text itself should be an object of veneration, and val -

ued as much as, if not more than, relics, sculptures, and other 

icons that also allude to the presence of Buddha. 1 The teach -

ing in the last chapter of the  Prajnaparamita  does not men -

tion much about the philosophical concepts of emptiness but 

rather emphasizes the importance in the worship of the book. 

The Buddha instructs: 

> When through the Tathagata’s sustaining power it has been
> well written, in very distinct letters, in a great book, one
> should honor, revere, adore, and worship it, with flowers,
> incense, scents, wreaths, unguents, aromatic powders, strips
> of cloth, parasols, banners, bells, flag and with rows of lamps
> all round, and with manifold kinds of worship. This is our
> admonition to you Ananda. For in this perfection of wisdom
> the cognition of the all-knowing will be brought to perfection
> (Conze 2001, 299).

The sacred power of the manuscript also lies in the fact 

that it is the embodiment of the Buddha, the words spo -

ken by him. Evolving into objects of veneration in their own 

right in the Pala period, the cultic status of the  Prajnaparamita 

(Perfection of Wisdom ) manuscripts became so prominent that 

they became objects of worship, featured among the ritual 

offerings, evidenced in surviving pedestal sculptures of the 

period. Devotees of the book cult could direct their devotion 

to the wise goddess of the same name,  Prajnaparamita , who 

represents the personification of the text; one of her principal 

attributes is a sacred book in hand (Kim 2007).       

> Fig. 2. Green Tara Bestowing Boons . Folio from a manuscript of the
> Ashtasahasrika Prajnaparamita Perfection of Wisdom) . Image copyright the
> Metropolitan Museum of Art (detail 2001.445i)
> Fig. 3. Bodhisattva Padmapani offering protection . Folio from a
> manuscript of the Ashtasahasrika Prajnaparamita (Perfection of Wisdom) .
> Image copyright the Metropolitan Museum of Art (1986.25.4)
> Fig. 1. Enshrined Image of Bodhisattva Maitreya. Folio from a manuscript of the Ashtasahasrika Prajnaparamita (Perfection of Wisdom) . Photograph by Yana
> van Dyke (all photographs taken by author). Image copyright the Metropolitan Museum of Art (2001.445g) Van Dyke Sacred Leaves 85
> leaf biology and preparation

Substances used for the reception of writing in the 

ancient world were numerous: wooden tablets, lead tablets, 

papyrus, bamboo strips, paper birch bark; whatever was most 

conveniently available could be used for writing (Diringer 

1982, 354–62). The inherent instability of these biochemi -

cally decaying materials consequently results in an incom -

plete understanding of the materials used in and the volume 

of writing produced from the ancient world. Although it is 

difficult to say exactly when the palm leaf first began to be 

used for writing, there is ample literary evidence that in both 

Greece and Rome, the use of leaves for writing was quite 

familiar. In his  Naturalis Historia , Gaius Plinius Secundus 

(23–79 AD), better known as Pliny the Elder, documents the 

use of palm leaves for writing materials. 4 The word “leaf ” 

still holds its place in the descriptive lexicon of manuscripts 

today—as with the term “folio,” from the Medieval Latin 

folium , meaning a leaf—and defines many things related to 

books, pages, and paper within a book, as do the terms “folia -

tion” and “to foliate.” 

Critically important to understanding these manuscripts 

is the primary substance from which they are built. All ele -

mental and fundamental attributes are linked to the natu -

ral structure of the palm leaf itself: the book’s unique shape, 

form, and design layout; orientation of the script, collation 

and direction; size and placement of images; media interac -

tion and adhesion; binding style; state of preservation; how 

they have survived; how they have aged; and the conservation 

challenges they present. 

Arecaceae , also know as the palm, is a family of flowering 

plants belonging to the monocot order,  Arecales . There are 

roughly 202 known genera containing an expansive 2600 spe -

cies of palms. The taxonomic group of the  Corypha  is a genus 

of six or seven species of palms native to India, Indonesia, and 

the Phillipines. They are the fan palms with leaves contain -

ing long petioles terminating in a rounded fan of numerous 

leaflets.  Corypha umbraculifera  is one of the largest palms in the 

world with gigantic petioles or stalks measuring from two to 

five meters in diameter, with thirty to forty leaves per stem 

each measuring up to fifteen feet in diameter and reaching 

heights of 20–40 meters. It is cultivated throughout southeast 

Asia and north towards southern China (Wilson 2000). 

Although gymnosperm, dicot, and monocot leaves are all 

used in a variety of artifact construction, the monocot leaves 

are the most versatile and heavily utilized. Reasons for this 

can be attributed to their greater size and durability, but more 

importantly to their strength, suppleness, and ease of split -

ting imparted by their long parallel fiber and fibrovascular 

bundles. From the monocot leaf, the leaf fibers comprise the 

vascular bundles (xylem, phloem, sclerenchyma fibers) and 

fiber bundles. They are often referred to as hard fibers, as dis -

tinguished from the soft fibers obtained from the inner bark 

flags), and in a parallel way acknowledges the physicality of 

the book as a physical container of the teaching that is equated 

with a dharma relic. 2 Goddesses such as  Prajnaparamita  and 

Tara  are symbols of the texts and the advent of the Mahayana 

female deities, and their bearing on the book cult cannot be 

underestimated; the idea of a female Bodhisattvas such as  Tara 

was being developed during this time (fig. 3). 

The Pala Empire was a dynasty in control of the north -

ern and eastern Indian subcontinent, mainly the Bihar and 

Bengal regions, from the eighth to the twelfth century. The 

Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools 

of Buddhism. They often intermarried with the Gahadvalas 

of the Kannauj region. They created many temples and 

works of art and supported the Universities of Nalanda and 

Vikramashila. Their proselytism was at the origin of the estab -

lishment of Buddhism in Tibet. 

Colophons often survive and document the patron who 

commissioned the manuscript’s production, providing dates 

and monastic place of creation, artisans and monks who made 

the book and performed rituals around it, and the subsequent 

footsteps of its provenance, tracing later owners and donors 

who safeguarded the book. Following its history over hun -

dreds of years and many generations, the book continues to 

be bequeathed, read and studied, proofread with scrupulous 

corrections of the writing (text), and repaired time and time 

again. Because such manuscripts were considered sacred 

objects and were heavily used both for teaching and as a focus 

of devotion or meditation, rededications and repairs were 

common (Leidy 2008, 136). 

Small, lightweight, and easily transportable objects of ven -

eration, they have survived through times of danger, perse -

cution, peril, and threat. 3 Sometimes, although rarely intact 

in their protective wooden enclosures, the sacred leaves 

live to tell the tale. As is often the case of dispersed manu -

script folios containing abstruse, mysterious, and impenetra -

ble scripts from diverse cultures—now living in a museum 

collection or in private hands—text blocks have been dis -

carded along the way and the images themselves taking cen -

ter stage, often responsible for the survival of the singular 

leaves. Valued within the art museum setting for their picto -

rial style, they provide evidence that is reflective of the evolv -

ing philosophies of the culture from which they are born and 

take their place in the evolution and development of struc -

ture and style of later Indian miniature painting to follow. 

Twenty-first-century technology that has rapidly embraced 

digitization and preservation projects worldwide is enabling 

researchers and scholars to share previously isolated esoter -

ic information. Transmissions from the powerful tool of the 

World Wide Web will facilitate the linking together of dis -

persed fragments, translations of previously impenetrable 

texts, and a host of other puzzles yet to be solved in relation 

to these early manuscripts. 86  The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009) 

turmeric paste. In Sri Lanka, fresh, young leaves are boiled in 

water or lime water for a few hours and dried in the shade. 

In Thailand, the golden leaf from the Lopburi region is pre -

ferred. Leaves are dried in the shade, the midrib is removed, 

and the blades cut to uniform size. Bundles of leaves are 

placed in a kiln for twenty-four hours, causing a black oil to 

exude from the leaf edges. The oil is wiped off, the leaf is 

held over a fire for a few minutes, and finally polished. The 

removal of the oil is believed to make the leaves more durable 

(Agrawal 1984, 27–31). 

> construction of the manuscript

The manuscripts are made of long and narrow leaves of 

various fan palms, the average size being 22 ½ by 2 ½ inch -

es. The loose leaves are held together between two wood -

en cover boards, with holes being pierced either through the 

center, or with two at each end of the leaves and boards. A 

of herbaceous and woody plants. They may in fact be harder 

as they tend to be more heavily sclerified and lignified, but 

they are also mechanically stiffer. As the fibers grow in dis -

crete fiber bundles, leaves are usually processed to extract the 

whole bundle, which is a compact complex of many cells. The 

strength, color, and abrasion resistance of monocot leaf fibers 

vary greatly depending on inherent characteristics and on 

processing methods. Generally they tend to be smooth fibers 

with a surface sheen that in book production is often further 

enhanced and beautified through burnishing. Waxes control 

water permeability and excessive swelling of surrounding 

mechanical tissues, such as fibrous sheaths around vascular 

bundles in palm. Pectin is another important structural com -

ponent that is protected by cuticular waxes and cutin in leaves 

(Florian et al. 2001, 112–16). 

The leaflets from these fan palms are separated from one 

another by a thick rib that extends from the hastula along 

the leaflet, creating a corrugated structure with remarkable 

mechanical and physical strength. Under magnification key 

elements of the structure become evident and, like all plant 

forms, they are abundantly more complex than your naked 

eye perceives. 

Three regions are clear and distinguishable, namely the 

epidermis, the mesophyll, and the vascular bundles or veins. 

The outer membrane, known as the epidermis, covers the 

lower and upper sides of the leaf and protects the internal tis -

sue from injury. Each side is composed of a single layer of 

closely packed rectangular cells, covered with a cuticle on the 

outer wall, preventing water loss. There are many stomata, 

formed by pairs of guard cells, perforating the lower surface 

(more on the lower than upper epidermis) whose function is 

to allow for gaseous exchange for photosynthesis and respira -

tion as well as to regulate excess water. The vein system of the 

leaf consists of branched vascular bundles containing xylem 

and phloem and surrounded by a bundle sheath. The veins 

strengthen the lamina, the xylem conducts water and dissolved 

ions to the mesophyll tissue, and the phloem conducts organic 

food such as glucose from the mesophyll to other parts of the 

plant (Kern 1947) (fig. 4).The way in which veins are arranged 

is known as “venation” of the leaf and can contribute to the 

species identification of certain genera of palms. Manuscripts 

have been written on leaves from only a few varieties of palm 

trees:  Borassus flabellifer  Linn and  Corypha umbraculifera  Linn. 5

Production processes differ across regions: the palm leaves 

can be processed by retting, soaking, and softening; boil -

ing in water; smoking; wafting over a charcoal fire; and air, 

sun, or kiln drying, after which the leaves are then polished 

and wiped with a cloth of oil. In Indian states, leaves are 1) 

dried in the shade and rubbed with gingili oil to make them 

smooth; 2) hung in smoke for several days, then the surface 

smoke deposit is wiped off, sometimes followed by rubbing 

with turmeric paste; or 3) dried in the sun, buried in pond 

mud for ten to fifteen days, cleaned, dried, and rubbed with     

> Fig. 4. Photomicrograph (20x) of underlying mesophyll and vascular
> bundles structure
> Fig. 5. Bound manuscript of palm leaves. Image copyright the
> Metropolitan Museum of Art (1953.123) Van Dyke Sacred Leaves 87

saturation or staining by the media, held on by cohesive and 

chemical forces at the surface. 

The text of the Buddhist manuscripts is beautifully writ -

ten by skillful scribes without any separation between words 

in a careful and consistent hand; a single folio seems like 

an overwhelming ocean of letters (fig. 7). Here and there 

punctuation marks break the  scriptura continua  (writing with -

out separation) with a narrow strip or band of empty space 

around the binding holes functioning like aeration, not nec -

essarily breaking the sentences into meaningful units, but 

nonetheless giving visual breaks between many clustered let -

ters. The paintings are usually found centered on the leaf and 

are placed at the end of each chapter. The paintings also mark 

points of rest in between the chapters so that during the read -

ing and reciting of the text, they also serve as spiritual sign 

posts by which the essence of the book could be remembered 

and recalled (Kim 2007, 315–16). 

The calligraphy within these Buddhist manuscripts is 

Sanskrit, a historical Indo-Aryan language, one of the litur -

gical languages of Hinduism and Buddhism, and one of the 

twenty-two official languages of India. Classical Sanskrit is the 

standard register as laid out in the grammar of Panini, around 

the fourth century. Its position in the cultures of South and 

Southeast Asia is akin to that of Latin and Greek in Europe and 

it has significantly influenced modern languages of Nepal and 

India.  The writing is read left to right and top to bottom. 8

cord or cords are passed through these holes and wrapped 

around the bundle. 6 The leaves are read from left to right, top 

to bottom, and then lifted, turned, and stacked face down one 

leaf over another (fig. 5). Such openness in the format of the 

binding structure has certainly made it easier to disperse the 

text block without initially causing physical damage to singu -

lar leaves, although this leads to textblocks found mixed and 

out of order, making it especially challenging to analyze, con -

textualize, and collate them. 

Additionally, this practice has invariably led to covers 

being separated from their textblocks and there are many 

examples of detached and decorated wooden cover boards in 

the Metropolitan’s collection (fig. 6). The manuscripts’ cover 

boards are usually of wood, with finishes that range from 

simply stained and waxed to elaborately composed narrative 

painting programs that are highly polished and lacquered. 

Closed bundles were traditionally wrapped in several layers 

of cloth and stored in chests. Palm leaves may also be joined 

by tying at the edges so that they can be folded and unfolded 

in accordion fashion. 

> calligraphy

Palm leaves have traditionally been written upon in two 

ways: either the text has been incised into the surface or 

written on the surface. However, there are no examples of 

inscribed leaves in the group of early Buddhist manuscripts 

that were selected for the exhibition. 7 The other technique 

of writing on the surface is with a pen, most likely made of 

reed, utilizing an ink composed of flame carbon with a bind -

er. The smooth, slick, oiled, flat, and dense epidermal layer 

allows for the reed pen to flow smoothly and distribute the 

ink fluidly and uniformly on its surface. Unlike other organ -

ic writing supports, this ink does not penetrate, embed, or 

stain a fibrous matrix as in birch bark, paper, or parchment. In 

general, the writing ink is chemically stable and only inher -

ently susceptible to microscopic instability or losses due to 

mechanical abrasion in the stack. This also holds true for the 

paint layers, as the combination of the processed, oiled sur -

face and natural cuticular waxes act as a protective barrier on 

the surface of the epidermis, inhibiting the penetration and    

> Fig. 6. One of a pair of manuscript covers with Buddhist deities. Nepal, Karnata-Malla period, eleventh to twelfth century, distemper on wood.
> Image copyright the Metropolitan Museum of Art (1983.555.2)
> Fig. 7. Detail of calligraphy 88 The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009)
> painting

In all examples, the images are built with thickly applied 

opaque paint applied directly to the palm leaf with no prepa -

ration layer or ground. Examination with infrared reflectogra -

phy revealed no evidence of any underdrawings, although in 

some cases, examination through the binocular microscope 

revealed a simple, linear outline underdrawing in pale red or 

dilute black. Adhesion of the paint layer to the leaf is usually 

strong and at first glance paintings appear flat and the limited 

palette is deceiving. On closer inspection, quite a bit of volu -

metric gradation exists (fig. 8). Forms are created by the appli -

cation of a broad, overall, base color and built up in stages with 

an economic linear outline of less thickly applied mixtures. 

Illustrations from three different texts were selected for 

pigment identification and were categorically identified. All 

pigments within the three selected manuscripts were found 

to be consistent, as well as customary or expected for this 

time period. The limited use of exclusively pure pigments, 

as well as a combination of these pigments in mixtures, var -

ied to some degree from manuscript to manuscript: some 

exploiting the possibilities of expanding the palette, gradu -

ally building up volumetric forms. 9 Blacks were identified 

as carbon-based, flame carbon; blue was indigo; yellow was 

orpiment; red was vermilion; and white was calcium car -

bonate. Admixtures are prevalent throughout; use indigo 

and orpiment for green; and white is added to many of the 

pigments for varying shades. Sinuous and graceful, mod -

eled figurative forms are extremely reflective of Pala sculp -

tures and honor their ancestry of the humanistic naturalistic 

painting styles of the past. 10 

> condition and conservation

In general, all of the palm leaf supports were very dry and 

particularly vulnerable to damage around the edges. Fraying, 

delamination, and splitting of the structure are to be expected 

around the binding holes and from the edges; tears are much 

less common. Losses are primarily located around the perim -

eter of the leaves and planar distortions vary from none to 

moderately wavy. Separation from their protective covers and 

exposure to less-than-ideal climatic conditions have certainly 

contributed to their compromised conditions (fig. 9). 

Overall, a conservative conservation strategy addressed the 

essential and fundamental physical stabilization needs of the 

leaves, making the objects safe to handle and display while 

respecting their age and signs of use. Utilizing natural prod -

ucts with good aging properties whenever possible, consider -

ations included how the treatments would ultimately affect 

the structural, chemical, and mechanical characteristics and 

long-term stability of the object. Comparatively straightfor -

ward conservation procedures were carried out—the dif -

ference in this case being the extraordinary level of delicacy      

> Fig. 9. Before treatment group of desiccated and deformed palm
> leaves
> Fig. 10. Photomicrograph (20x) showing losses within flaking paint
> layer
> Fig. 8. Detail of volumetric shading. Image copyright the
> Metropolitan Museum of Art (1986.25.5) Van Dyke Sacred Leaves 89

Russia” (1993). Additionally, we have been practicing a useful 

technique for several years of depositing freshly made isin -

glass into disks or wafers and allowing them to dehydrate for 

preservation and storage. In turn, these dehydrated disks of 

isinglass can easily be brought back into solution as needed, 

simply reducing the laborious, two-day process of cooking 

and extracting to once or twice a year (fig. 12). 

To make isinglass, follow the basic instructions and 

techniques provided in Petukhova and Bonadies’ article. 

Specifically, the following guidelines provide the approximate 

weight of the dried Salianski sturgeon bladder membrane and 

volume of water to make a large quantity of isinglass (1 L) 

involved, especially when treating the support problems. The 

object’s before and after slides will not offer any great dramatic 

visual response and they do not necessarily present challenges 

that require new inventions in materials or techniques, but 

rather adaptations of standard practices with greater neces -

sity of delicacy and sensitivity. These conservation challenges 

demand patience, and patience on a level that seemed appro -

priate with regard to their dharmic contents. 

> media problems

Unstable media in the form of flaking and, less often, fri -

able paint layers, existed in all in the palm leaf illustrations 

(fig. 10). This instability can be attributed to poor adhesion 

to the waxy cuticle, desiccation of the binder upon aging, and 

abrasion and stress caused to the paint layer as the leaves of 

the book are turned. Aims and considerations in consolidat -

ing unstable media are understood: to secure, stabilize, and 

ensure that no future losses take place without altering the 

visual character of the paint layers. Desired functional work -

ing properties are also important and include strength, flexi -

bility, aging properties, effect on the original, viscosity, surface 

tension, penetration, and elasticity once applied. 

Empirical testing on the manuscript leaves with consoli -

dants and adhesives for either media consolidation or for 

use of consolidating and adhering delaminating palm leaf 

structures included: laboratory-grade gelatin at concentra -

tions of 1% and 2%; Dow methyl cellulose 4C; Dow methyl 

cellulose 4M in 1%, 2%, and 3% concentrations for con -

solidation and in 5%, 6%, 7% for adhesion; and isinglass 

at approximately 1%, 2%, and 3% weight/volume for paint 

film consolidation. Gelatin and methyl celluloses in con -

centrations that were successful at adhesive bonding proved 

unacceptable, visually creating tidelines and a glossy surface 

sheen. Methyl cellulose concentrations at or above 5% have 

an unfortunate side-effect of leaving crystalline residues that 

appear as sparkles in reflective light. 

Consolidation of the paint layer was carried out with a 

warm solution of 1% brush-applied isinglass while work -

ing under the magnification of a binocular microscope (fig. 

11). No visual alteration of any pigments occurred (including 

orpiment and admixtures thereof). 

> isinglass: consolidant for paint and palm

Empirical testing found that the best consolidant for both 

the media and the palm leaf support was isinglass. It met all 

of the criteria discussed for consolidating media and proved 

effective in the self-mending of delaminating and fraying leaf 

structures, as well as attaching reinforcement paper in mend -

ing breaks and splits. For a complete discussion of this mate -

rial, consult the article by Tatyana Petukhova and Stephen 

D. Bonadies, “Sturgeon Glue for Painting Consolidation in    

> Fig. 11. Consolidating the paint layer with the aid of the binocular
> microscope
> Fig. 12. Isinglass in various forms: (clockwise from upper left)
> desiccated raw bladder, in solution ( bain-marie ), and dehydrated
> purified disks 90 The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009)

production to once or twice a year. Because of the increas -

ing difficulty and cost of obtaining Russian sturgeon blad -

der, the flexibility and ease of making smaller quantities are 

also conservatively advantageous. Isinglass can be refriger -

ated to postpone mold or bacterial growth and subsequently 

warmed back into solution in a  bain-marie .

> support problems and rehydration

Similar to the demands of papyrus, the aged palm leaf can 

be very desiccated and brittle, especially around the edges that 

have been most exposed to oxidation processes. Rehydration 

of the leaves is considered one of the most important first 

steps in addressing support problems. Eight-hundred to 

one-thousand years of hydrolysis and oxidation deteriora -

tion mechanisms result in an extremely dehydrated, inflex -

ible, and brittle material with considerable planar distor -

tions. Humidification and rehydration of these desiccated 

leaves with the use of a Gore-Tex humidification package has 

many benefits: reducing distortions, relaxing creases, achiev -

ing original planarity, increasing suppleness to the leaf, and 

maintaining planarity between the support and the slightly 

sensitive media layer while the reintroduction of moisture 

content takes place. Another advantage of this slow, gentle, 

and effective vapor humidification procedure is the signifi -

cant reduction of the all-too-present risk of causing stains and 

tidelines with direct applications of water or mist. Folds and 

flaps existed in the corners of many leaves. These folds and 

creases were relaxed and opened by introducing a localized 

fine ultrasonic mist humidification, avoiding breakage of any 

tissue before overall humidification. 

The Gore-Tex barrier is a micro-porous membrane of 

polytetrafluoroethylene laminated to non-woven polyes -

ter or polyester felt (Purinton and Filter 1992). Gore-Tex 

that will ultimately be cast into disks, preserved, and stored 

for future use; one can certainly adjust the weight/volume 

ratio according to need. 11  We normally start the procedure 

with thirty grams of dried sturgeon bladder, and end up with 

one liter, or 1000 ml, of extracted collagen liquor to be cast. In 

practical terms we have found it easier to divide the operation 

into three portions, especially for working ease of the double 

boiler system as well as beaker sizes. Additionally, when it is 

time to cast the liquid into the disks, three people help to dis -

tribute all the liquid onto the silicone-release Mylar sheets, 

making the whole process faster. Break the thirty grams of 

dried bladder into pieces no bigger than three to five grams 

each and place approximately ten grams of the dried bladder 

pieces into three separate beakers and cover with just enough 

deionized water to top off the bladder. Cover the beaker with 

a watch glass or Parafilm and let it soak overnight. 

Next, pour off the water and gently gather together the 

swollen bladder mass into an even cluster and add 333.5 ml 

of deionized water; this will cover the bladder enough to sur -

round and allow the pieces to float. Put this beaker into a larg -

er container of water and make a  bain-marie  or double boil -

er. Heat the double boiler on low temperature, just enough 

to release the collagen extract from the fiber of the bladder. 

Be mindful of the heat; there should be no steam or bubbles 

released as this will in part denature the protein. 12  The fiber 

of the bladder will shrink as it releases the collagen. To keep 

the water from evaporating off, cover with a watch glass. After 

a few hours, the collagen will be extracted from the fibrous 

membrane of the bladder. Sieve or decant through cheese -

cloth (doubled or tripled) or silk. Decant into a clean beaker. 

Find a safe and undisturbed area to deposit the liquid into 

disks; this process will require a fair amount of space in a dust-

free environment with enough air to flow and circulate around 

them during drying. Place several medium-sized sheets of 

silicone-release Mylar on a flat surface where you intend to 

carry out dispensing of the disks (fig. 13). Disposable pipettes 

or eye droppers have been found to be the best tools for dis -

tributing the liquid. Deposit and form a circular puddle of the 

liquid approximately one and a half inches in diameter onto 

the silicone-release Mylar, spaced out with enough room in 

between so the disks don’t run together. Finding solutions to 

protect the disks while they dry can be a little tricky to avoid 

disturbing the liquid as it dries. We make tents of blotters, 

folded in half so that they span the width of the Mylar, and 

taped or weighted in place onto the counters to protect the 

disks as they dry. Once dry the dehydrated disks can be peeled 

off the Mylar and kept stored in a glass jar. 

Dehydrated isinglass disks can now be weighed out 

and dissolved to make precise concentrations of solutions 

in small quantities for specific purposes. Casting the disks 

has proven to be an extremely valuable and time-saving 

procedure, as the process of extracting the adhesive from 

the membrane is rather laborious and this step limits that    

> Fig. 13. Disposal pipettes dispensing the isinglass liquid into disk
> shapes to be dehydrated and stored for future use Van Dyke Sacred Leaves 91

As in most instances while consolidating, the conservator can 

make empirical judgments as to the volume of consolidant 

that is sufficient and necessary by observing and being sensi -

tive to the object itself. 14 

Edges of thick, porous palm leaves are often crushed and 

frayed, and lead to horizontal breaks along the leaflet. Usually 

these breaks are too weak or sprung to make a strong, self-

mended joint. Therefore it is not only desirable to consoli -

date and strengthen these ends and breaks but also to provide 

additional mechanical security through reinforcement strips. 

A small selection of Japanese handmade  tenjugo  papers were 

toned with air-brushed acrylic paint in a variety of tones and 

employed judiciously for reinforced repairs, attached with a 

2–3% isinglass (fig. 15). 15  In most cases, leaves being exhibited 

had a discrete recto and verso, with paintings present on one 

side only, thus repairs were limited to the verso side of the 

leaf. The tonality and the thinness of the tenjugo made them 

visually harmonious and they cannot be readily detected with 

the naked eye. 

has been used for some time in the conservation profession 

and it has become increasingly difficult, if not impossible, 

to purchase. The membrane transmits water in the form of 

vapor while preventing the passage of liquid water, thus giv -

ing extra protection and control in introducing moisture to 

sensitive objects. When Gore-Tex is used in the blotter sand -

wich, two sheets of Gore-Tex are placed dry, one on either 

side of the object. The smooth membrane side of the Gore-

Tex sheet is thus in contact with the object’s recto and verso. 

Moist sheets of blotting paper rest on either side of the felted 

side of the Gore-Tex, and Mylar sheets are placed on top of 

the damp blotters to retain moisture levels. Humidification 

times varied between twenty to forty minutes for complete 

relaxation of the leaves, after which they were placed into a 

blotter drying pack between tissue and shuffled over several 

weeks while drying. 13 

> stabilization of support

After the leaves have undergone humidification and dry -

ing, they are rehydrated, more supple, flexible, and planar; 

structural stabilization can now be undertaken with consid -

erably less risk of breakage. Additionally, the humidification 

process can often lead to improved alignment of sprung tears 

as well as to invigoration of the natural binding materials 

within the leaf itself, resulting in an adhesion and reattach -

ment of slightly delaminated areas. 

Mending methods chosen should be those least likely to 

cause permanent alteration of the basic fabric of the object. 

The choice of method is more immediately dictated by the 

work of art itself, location of the damage, and condition of the 

materials. Mending methods should be chosen for the item’s 

intended use, future handling and storage, and compatibility 

in strength with the work of art so that they are strong enough 

to give support and physical integrity, yet weak enough to 

yield under stress before the work of art does. Repairs should 

be visually subtle yet discernible upon examination and differ 

from original or historic repairs that cause no harm. 

Securing loose and delaminated layers of the leaf requires 

not only the utmost patience and delicacy but also a fluid form 

of adhesive that can be delicately applied. A slightly stronger 

solution of isinglass (approximately 3–4%) was chosen from 

that which was used to consolidate the media. When consoli -

dating the palm leaf itself, the consolidant liquid needs to pen -

etrate into the tiny crevices and pores in order to make a satis -

factory adhesive bond. Increased flow is achieved by keeping 

the liquid warmed on a coffee cup warmer in a water bath 

(bain-marie ) (fig. 14). While working under 10x magnification 

from the binocular microscope, careful attention was paid to 

the interior spongy core of the leaf as the brush-applied con -

solidant was observed to flow and coat the mesophyll and vas -

cular-bundled veins through capillary action, without causing 

them to expand, swell, or shrink to any discernible degree.      

> Fig. 14. Consolidation of leaf with 2–3% isinglass while working
> under binocular magnification
> Fig. 15. Toned tengujo reinforcement 92 The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009)

Surface accretions of smoke, dirt, and oils are deposited 

and absorbed onto the surface of most of these leaves from 

use and handling, turning, and reading. In addition, the item 

showed signs of the aforementioned veneration within reli -

gious rituals: being anointed, buried, sprinkled with unguents 

and candles, and incense burned around them. Most surface 

accretions were left alone and respected as evidence of their 

use and history. In very few cases, where the surface accretions 

were particularly disturbing to the overall reading of a deity or 

the foreign matter was identified as insect deposits, the accre -

tions were removed mechanically under binocular magni -

fication with especially fine surgical tools (fig. 16). In some 

instances, attachments and accretions covering over images 

were fragments of offset leaves and these were also delicately 

removed in order to reveal the painting underneath. 

> imaging and cataloging

The entire collection of palm leaves recently discovered, 

except a large Indonesian bound book, have been captured 

with a scan-back camera called the Betterlight on a copy stand 

set-up. The lights are LED lights made by Scott Geffert, our 

consultant from CDI (Center for Digital Imaging), for the 

stand. The images were captured at 600 dpi, resolution set at 

100%, with a color profile of ProPhoto RGB. These imag -

es are now incorporated into the Metropolitan Museum’s 

Media Bin, the museum’s image database, which will even -

tually be made accessible in the public domain via the World 

Wide Web. Following the digital image capture, the objects 

were catalogued into the Museum System (TMS) for muse -

um staff access. 

> mounting and display

Art museums have a long tradition of displaying dispersed 

folios from manuscripts out of context in a two-dimensional 

format. Hinged and matted leaves and bifolios displayed in 

frames are more common than presenting detached leaves in 

a book cradle. Valued in the museum setting for their artis -

tic expression and far removed from their original function, 

these objects required a systematic and thoughtful approach 

to hinging and mounting. 

The uniquely long horizontal format of the leaves creates 

challenges for exhibition and two-dimensional design dis -

play. Although there would have been enough room to dis -

play three pages together within the standard-sized mat and 

frames chosen, the curators believed it best for the viewer’s 

experience to limit the number to two leaves and, thus, two 

windows per mat. Observing reactions of the leaves after 

removing them from the drying presses and sensing that with 

any minor to moderate fluctuations in humidity that these 

objects will respond as sensitively as parchment, deep-mat 

windows were considered appropriate for exhibition and safe 

> questioning intervention

Knowing the composition and properties of all the mate -

rials used in the creation of the manuscripts is essential to 

understanding their present physical condition and needs, 

as well as help to predict how the objects will respond to 

conservation treatment and the museum environment. 

Correspondingly important is to be sensitive to the object’s 

historic and cultural context in order to acknowledge the 

intangible properties with which it may have been invested, 

as well as to recognize alterations that may have taken place 

through its use and function. 

Ethical considerations and principles of conserving 

sacred objects meshed with curatorial attitudes in regards 

to loss compensation—all agreed to an approach not to fill 

losses. From monastic creation to museum display, with 

few exceptions, most of the leaves are no longer part of a 

complete manuscript and are appreciated for their visual 

potency and are safely mounted for two-dimensional dis -

play. Objects chosen for the exhibition did not display egre -

gious losses, but even so, all agreed to accept the object 

with its losses, respect it for its age and wear, and to treat 

the leaves with physical stabilization as the primary concern. 

Considerations also included their end use and how infre -

quently these objects will be handled or originals request -

ed for study. In addition, all the leaves have been captured 

and digitized in high-resolution image files.  In those cases 

where the loss would promote or exacerbate a further injury, 

the thin, toned, Japanese paper was left to fill the void and 

bridge the break (Nichols 2004). 

Fraying, especially around the perimeter and binding 

holes, was minimally addressed to prevent losses but not 

consolidated to the degree of aligning fractured internal 

structures. It was respected as the evidence of use damage 

caused by the binding cords around the holes.    

> Fig. 16. Micro-surgical tool used to remove accretions Van Dyke Sacred Leaves 93

mino-gami  paper hinges to the palm leaf. Following hinge 

attachment the areas were immediately placed under poly -

ester webbing and blotters, under glass squares and lightly 

weighted until thoroughly dried. Once hinges were attached 

to the palm leaves, they were in turn V-hinged to a two-ply 

museum board (Rising Natural 2-ply) with a 2.5cm border all 

around. When attaching the palm leaf to the secondary, two-

ply board, wheat starch paste was used in the typical manner, 

and in the same method described above except for the addi -

tional piece of polyester webbing placed between the hinged 

object and the secondary support board. Once the hinges were 

completely dry, the small pieces of polyester were removed 

with a pair of very fine tweezers. Objects on their two-ply 

supports were attached into their museum exhibition mats 

with a pressure-sensitive linen tape (Filmoplast SH). The 

mats also serve as permanent housings. 

> exhibition

Following common museum practice, these leaves, like so 

many other detached and dispersed manuscript folios, were 

mounted and presented in frames with glazing and hung on 

the walls of a small, rotating-display gallery devoted to works 

on paper in the South Asia wing of the museum (fig. 18). 

They were presented in the low and atmospheric lighting of 

3–5 footcandles (30–50 lux). Simple, profiled wooden frames, 

stained with a walnut color, were outfitted with Optium glaz -

ing (a non-glare, anti-static, UV filtering, Plexiglas sheeting), 

all contributing to a beautifully clean presentation overall. 

> storage

The folios chosen for exhibition and display were matted 

in one of a limited number of standard housing and storage 

sizes: 19 by 14 inches, 20 by 16 inches, and 22 by 28 inches. 

Once the exhibition rotation came to an end, the objects were 

taken off view, unframed, interleaved, and stored in a stan -

dard-size Solander boxes in the Department of Asian Art’s 

storage facility. There are numerous groups of leaves that 

are fragments of what was once a complete manuscript not 

recently or yet chosen for exhibition or display. Inspired by 

the simple approach to covers that the creators of the manu -

scripts took, we chose a similar simple solution for their stor -

age and housing within the museum. These dispersed folios 

are kept together as discrete bundles and are more often than 

not missing their covers. Folios that have not yet been chosen 

for exhibition and display are kept together in accessioned 

numbered sets, stacked and housed between two rectangu -

lar boards of acid-free corrugated board with identification 

labels attached to the top board, wrapped, and tied with cot -

ton twill cordage (fig. 19). 

When working out these housing solutions it became clear 

why for so many reasons two simple boards, tied around the 

housing. The mat board window was composed of a double-

step, four-ply window followed by an occasional four-ply lift, 

for an average total of twelve plies of mat board per window. 

Rather than hinge the chosen pairs of palm leaves directly 

to the four-ply back board of the mat package, leaves were 

hinged individually to a two-ply museum board (fig. 17). 

This approach performs several functions: it allows for opti -

mal flexibility in exhibition (arrangements or juxtapositions 

can be changed in future rotations if desired) and minimizes 

the need for handling, cutting hinges, removal from the mat, 

and reattaching new hinges 

Small rectangles measuring approximately 5.0 x 3.0 cm of 

light-weight  mino-gami  paper (Hiromi HP 04) were attached 

around the perimeter of each leaf. Because of the potential 

staining concerns with the wheat starch paste (perhaps due to 

its large globule size proportionate to the fully dissolved fluid 

form of isinglass), isinglass was chosen to attach the Japanese   

> Fig. 17. Preparing leaves for exhibition: hinging to two-ply board
> Fig. 18. Early Buddhist Manuscripts: the Palm Leaf Tradition . Gallery
> installation view. Image copyright the Metropolitan Museum of Art

94  The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009) 

> notes

1. In his seminal essay,  Notes on the Cult of the Book in Mahayana, 

Indo-Iranian Journal,  Gregory Schopen discusses the emergence of a 

book-cult modeled after the  stupa -cult (the  stupa  container of relics), 

acknowledging the physicality of the book as a physical container of 

the teaching that is equated with a dharma relic. Goddesses (female 

Bodhisattvas such as  Tara ) are symbols of the texts and the advent of 

the Mahayana female deities and their bearing on the book cult were 

being developed during this time. Buddhist female deities were cre -

ated in response to the competition with other religious systems such 

as Brahmanism and other esoteric cult practices (Conze,  Remarks on a 

Pala manuscript , 5 –12). 

2. Buddhist female deities were created in response to the competition 

with other religious systems such as Brahmanism. For a discussion of 

the book cult, see Schopen,  Figments and fragments,  147 –181, and Kim, 

Unorthodox Practice,  chapter 5. 

3. The defeat of the Pala dynasty in the mid-twelfth century by neigh -

boring Sena rulers, and in turn the rapid collapse of the kingdom to 

Muslim Islamic forces, collapsed the monastic establishments respon -

sible for the production of Buddhist manuscripts. Combination 

of aggressive Islamic campaigns coupled with expanding populist 

embrace of Hinduism broke the Buddhist hold on Eastern India, the 

last stronghold; monks sought refuge in Nepal and Tibet and took 

their portable sacred texts with them as well as other small relics and 

accoutrements. The eleventh-century invasions by Islamic Muslims 

into India is beyond the scope of this paper, but see Paul,  The Early 

History of Bengal,  33, for an historical account. 

4. Diodorus Siculus relates that judges in ancient times in Syracuse 

were accustomed to writing exile sentences on the leaves of olive trees 

(Pliny,  Natural History,  69). 

5. For an in-depth investigation into the types and identification of 

various palm leaves used in the manufacture of these types of manu -

scripts see Freeman,  Turning over old leaves , 99 –102. 

6. Fibers were collected from a fragment of binding cord clinging to 

one of the binding holes of a single leaf, TMMA object 1986.25.4. The 

sample was dampened with water on a microscope slide to tease apart 

the fibers and then was examined with a stereobinocular microscope 

to evaluate the general composition of the fiber. Examined both damp -

ened and after drying and staining with Graff C-stain, the sample was 

analyzed under 100 –400 times magnification and determined to con -

sist of bast fibers, resembling hemp (Graff,  Color atlas ). 

7. In Burma and Sinhalese, scribes would employ an iron stylus or 

some sharp-pointed instrument to scratch the letters. The nature of 

the material compelled them to avoid long, straight lines because any 

scratch along the longitudinal fiber (running from stalk to point) would 

split the leaf. Perhaps this characteristic treatment of writing on this 

particular plant can be in part responsible for the rise or development 

of the distinct curvilinear shapes in the Burmese rounded hand script. 

In order to make the writing or decoration clear and legible in the 

inscribed leaf, ink prepared from lampblack and oil was rubbed over the 

surface of the leaf, filling up the finely incised lines to make the writ -

ing visible and relatively permanent. Cloth pads were used to smear on 

leaves, was ultimately the best approach of protection. Edges, 

especially the right and left, are particularly susceptible to 

fraying. Because of their brittle and vulnerable nature, if the 

leaves are stored in a four-walled or even a drop-spine box, 

the edges will be abraded, stressed, and potentially at risk for 

further damage. The damage potential is further increased 

with challenging access and handling issues. The corrugated 

boards are cut with a slight overhang on all sides, allowing 

and accommodating for even slight shifting or uneven stack -

ing, maintaining a force of even pressure from the top and 

bottom and protecting the textblock leaves from undulations 

by restricting their movement to slight changes even within 

the museum environment. 

> conclusion

The previously described case study only begins to scratch 

the surface of conserving the rare and important collection of 

early Buddhist manuscripts in the Metropolitan Museum of 

Art’s collection. Future conservation treatments will contin -

ue to be steadfastly approached with unwavering respect for 

the objects, understood for their sacred and powerful nature 

and conserved with patience and techniques that do no harm. 

Stronger and healthier, the  Prajnaparamita , the Bodhisattvas, 

and the Buddhas all live to tell their powerful tale, enlighten -

ing us now and for future generations. 

> acknowledgments

Sincere thanks are due to many people who were helpful 

with this project: John Guy, Marjorie Shelley, Kurt Behredt, 

Lyndsey Tyne, Rona Chang, Akiko Yamazaki Kleps, Martin 

Bansbach, Rebecca Capua, and Stephanie Porto. 

Fig. 19.  Housing and storage solutions Van Dyke  Sacred Leaves  95 

web and covered with a sheet of Plexiglas. This seems like an accept -

able means of humidification, but the most suitable is the Gore-Tex 

package as it keeps the substrate and the media layers from flexing 

and distorting too much. Finding the balance in the delicate treatment 

of vulnerable and sensitive objects often requires creativity, especially 

when dealing with limited resources and materials. 

14. Judgments will also be formed from perspectives of timing, when 

to introduce areas to localized drying and pressing, reassessment, and 

evaluating the number of campaigns of consolidation necessary to 

achieve stability without inducing stresses or harm to the original. 

15. HM-1 Tengucho from Hiromi Paper Inc is  tengucho  of the finest 

quality, the kozo fibers cooked with wood ash making the paper opti -

mal for conservation use. 

> materials

Salianski Kremer Isinglass Glue 

(Product Number 63110) 

Kremer Pigments 

247 West 29th Street 

New York, NY 10001 

http://www.kremerpigments.com 

Tengucho Paper 

(Product number HM-1) 

Hiromi Paper Inc. 

2525 Michigan Ave, Unit G-9 

Santa Monica, CA 90404 

http://www.hiromipaper.com 

Surgical tools 

Roboz Surgical Instrument Company, Inc. 

PO Box 10710 

Gaithersburg, MD 20898–0710 

Fine Science Tools (USA) Inc. 

373-G Vintage Park Drive 

Foster City, CA 94404–1139 

finescience.com 

> references

Agrawal, O.P. 1984.  Conservation of manuscripts and paint -

ings of South-east Asia.  Boston: Butterworths and Co. 

(Publishers) Ltd. 

—–. 1981. Problems of preservation of palm-leaf manuscripts. 

ICOM Committee for Conservation, 6th Triennial Meeting, 

Ottawa, September 21 –25, 1981,  1–7 . Paris: International 

Council for Museums. 

Barrett, Douglas, and Basil Gray. 1963.  Painting of India .

Geneva: Skira. 

and wipe off the black flame carbon soot mixed with wood oil that fills 

in the inscribed characters. Fine sand or rice bran is cited to have been 

used to assist in wiping off the soot and resin from the top surface with -

out disrupting the ink now sitting in the troughs of incised lines. 

8. The preclassical form of Sanskrit is known as Vedic Sanskrit, with 

the language of the Rigveda being the oldest and most archaic stage 

preserved. Its oldest core dates back to as early as 1500 BCE, quali -

fying Rigvedic Sanskrit as one of the oldest attestations of any Indo-

Iranian language, and one of the earliest attested members of the Indo-

European language family (Maurer,  Sanskrit language ). 

9. Micro-samples were acquired and analyzed through polarizing light 

microscopy (PLM) as well as through non-destructive x-ray fluores -

cence (XRF). XRF spectroscopy was carried out by the author using 

a Bruker ARTAX open-beam ED-XRF unit, at a kVof 50 and 500 μA 

through air, using no filter, with a live time of 100 seconds (Eastaugh 

et al.,  Dictionary and optical microscopy of historic pigments  and  Dictionary 

of historic pigments ). 

10. On the changing nature of the painting styles of India, see Guy, 

Palm leaf and paper , 14 –17, and Bhattacharyya,  Notes on the techniques .

Filling in the color is said to make the picture blossom. The painting 

is compared to an opening flower as the image first burgeons forth as 

color is being applied to it; and in the likeness of the blossoming paint -

ing is also the moment of both shown and not shown, related to the 

paradoxical manifested state of things as they are in themselves. 

11. The Salianski Kremer isinglass glue is made from the fresh air 

bladder of the sturgeon (species of origin:  Acipenseridae ). It does not 

include any equine, ruminant, swine, or avian species or their byprod -

ucts, and is of German origin. It is a byproduct of sturgeon farming 

for caviar production. The production, trade, and use of isinglass is 

not regulated by CITES. 

12. Denaturation of proteins involves the disruption and possible 

destruction of both the secondary and tertiary structures. Since dena -

turation reactions are not strong enough to break the peptide bonds, 

the primary structure (sequence of amino acids) remains intact. 

Denaturation disrupts the normal alpha-helix and beta sheets in a 

protein and uncoils them into a random shape. Four types of bond -

ing interactions between side chains are possible in tertiary structures: 

hydrogen bonding, salt bridges, disulfide bonds, and non-polar hydro -

phobic interactions. The most common observation in the denatur -

ation process is the precipitation or coagulation of the protein. Two 

procedures in the preparation and use of protein-based consolidants 

that a conservator should be mindful of are: heat, which can disrupt 

hydrogen bonds and non-polar hydrophobic interactions; and alcohol, 

which will disrupt hydrogen bonding between amide groups in the 

secondary structure and side chains in the tertiary structure, increasing 

the risk of darkening upon aging. Therefore, use the lowest amount 

of heat necessary when dissolving solid proteins into solutions, and if 

alcohol is needed to break surface tensions, apply it before and always 

separately from the protein being employed in the procedure. 

13. Alternative humidification techniques to this procedure could be 

pursued with a humidification chamber prepared in plastic photo trays 

with sheets of moistened capillary pads, placed underneath plastic egg 

crating onto which the object is placed on a piece of smooth polyester 96  The Book and Paper Group Annual 28 (2009) 

Guy, John. 1982.  Palm leaf and paper: Illustrated manuscripts of 

India and Southeast Asia.  Melbourne: National Gallery of 

Victoria. 

Joshi, Binduvasini R. 1989. Preservation of palm-leaf manu -

scripts. In  Conservation of cultural property in India,  vol.  22, 

120–127. New Delhi: Indian Association for the Study of 

Conservation of Cultural Property. 

Kern, Frank, D. 1947.  The essentials of plant biology . New York: 

Harper Brothers. 

Kim, Sinah. 2007.  Unorthodox practice . Berkeley, CA: 

University of California, Center for South and Southeast 

Asia Studies. 

Lawson, Peter. 1987. Palm leaf books and their conservation. 

Library Conservation News  16: 5–7. 

Leidy, Denise Patry. 2008.  The art of Buddhism: An introduction 

to its history and meaning.  Boston: Shambhala. 

—–. 1987. Palm leaf books and their conservation, part 2. 

Library Conservation News  17: 3–5. 

Losty, J.P . 1982.  The art of the book in India . London: British 

Library Reference Division Publications. 

Maurer, Walter H. 1995.  The Sanskrit language: An intro -

ductory grammar and reader . Richmond, Surrey, England: 

Curzon Press. 

Nair, M. Velayudhan. 1985. A new method for relaxing brittle 

palm-leaves. In  Conservation of cultural property in India , vol. 

18-20, 1–4.  New Delhi: Indian Association for the Study 

of Conservation of Cultural Property. 

Nichols, Kimberly. 2004. An alternative approach to loss com -

pensation in palm leaf manuscripts.  The Paper Conservator 

28: 105–9. 

Norstrand, Ove K. 1958. Some notes on procedures used 

in the Royal Library, Copenhagen, for the preservation 

of palm-leaf manuscripts.  Studies in Conservation  3 (3): 

135–40. 

Rao. V. Pandit, B. Naga Padma, and M.C. Gandrish. 1992. 

A study of Indian palm leaf manuscripts. In  Conservation 

of cultural property in India , vol. 25, 20–24. New Delhi: 

Indian Association for the Study of Conservation of 

Cultural Property. 

Pal, Pratapaditya.  Indian painting . 1993. Los Angeles: Los 

Angeles County Museum of Art. 

—–. 1988.  Buddhist book illuminations . New York: Ravi 

Kumar Publishers. 

Paul, Pramode Lal. 1939.  The early history of Bengal: From the 

earliest times to the Muslim conquest.  Indian Research Institute 

Publications, Indian History Series, nos. 2–3. Calcutta: 

Indian Research Institute. 

Petukhova, Tatyana, and Stephen D. Bonadies. 1993. 

Sturgeon glue for painting consolidation in Russia.  JAIC 

32 (10): 23–31. 

Pliny. 1940.  Natural History,  vol. 3, book 8–11. Loeb Classical 

Library no. 353. 69. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Batton, Susan Sayre. 2000. Separation anxiety: The conser -

vation of a 5th century Buddhist Gandharan manuscript. 

WAAS Newsletter  22 (1): 15–17. 

Beck, Charles. 2005.  An introduction to plant structure and devel -

opment: Plant anatomy for the twenty-first century . Cambridge, 

MA: Cambridge University Press. 

Bhattacharyya, D.C. 1995. Notes on the techniques of 

Buddhist manuscript painting. In  Indian painting: Essays 

in honor of Karl J. Khandalavala,  66–70. New Delhi: Lalit 

Kala Akademi. 

Chandrasekhar, K.V., and K.V. Rao. 1982. On Indian palm 

leaf manuscripts. In  Birla Archaeological and Cultural Institute: 

Contributions to archaeological chemistry , Research Bulletin 

4:1–10. Hyderbad: India. 

Conze, Edward. 2001.  The perfection of wisdom . San Francisco: 

Grey Fox Press. 

—–.1985.  The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom . Berkley: 

University of California Press, Center for South and 

Southeast Asia Studies. 

Conze, Edward. 1948–9. Remarks on a Pala manuscript in the 

Bodleian Library.  Oriental Art  1: 5–12. 

Coomaraswamy, A.K. 1934.  The transformation of nature in art .

Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Crawfurd, John. 1867. On the invention of writing materi -

als in reference to ethnology.  Transactions of the Ethnological 

Society , vol. 5, 155–161. London: Royal Anthropological 

Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. 

Crowley, Alfred. 1969. Repair and conservation of palm-leaf 

manuscripts.  Restaurator  1(2): 105–114. 

Das, J.P ., and Joanna Williams. 1991. Palm leaf miniatures: 

The art of Raghunath Prusti of Orissa, India. New Delhi: 

Abhinav Publications. 

Dean, John F. 1999. Conservation of palm-leaf manuscripts. 

Paper Conservation News  89 (March): 10–11. 

—–. 1997. The preservation and conservation needs of the 

upper regions of Southeast Asia.  Libri  47 (3): 124–138. 

Diringer, David.1982.  The Book before printing: Ancient, medi -

eval, and Oriental.  New York: Dover Publications, Inc. 

Eastaugh, Nicholas, Valentine Walsh, and Tracey Chaplin. 

2008.  Pigment compendium: A dictionary and optical microscopy 

of historic pigments.  Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. 

—–. 2008.  Pigment compendium: A dictionary of historic pigments. 

Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. 

Florian, Mary Lou, Dale P . Kronkright, and Ruth E. Norton. 

1991.  The conservation of artifacts made from plant materials.  Los 

Angeles: Getty Trust, Getty Conservation Institute. 

Freeman, Rachel. 2005. Turning over old leaves: Palm leaves 

used in South Asian manuscripts.  Book and Paper Group 

Annual  24: 99–102. 

Gilmartin, Philip M., ed. 2002.  Molecular plant biology . New 

York: Oxford University Press. 

Graff, J.H. 1940.  Color atlas for fiber identification . Appleton, WI: 

Institute of Paper Chemistry. Van Dyke  Sacred Leaves  97 

Purinton, Nancy, and Susan Filter. 1992. Gore-Tex: An intro -

duction to the material and treatments.  Book and Paper 

Annual  11: 141–155. 

Sah. Anumpam. 2003.  Indigenous methods and manuscript preser -

vation . New Delhi: National Mission for Manuscripts. 

—–. 2002. Palm leaf manuscripts of the world: Material, tech -

nology, and conservation.  Reviews in Conservation  3: 15–24. 

Schopen, Gregory. 2005.  Figments and fragments of Mahayana 

Buddhism in India: More collected papers . Honolulu: 

University of Hawai’i Press. 

Suryawanshi, D.G., P .M. Sinha, and O.P . Agrawal. 1994. Basic 

studies on the properties of palm leaves.  Restaurator  15: 66. 

van Gulik, Robert. 2001.  Siddham: An essay on the history of 

Sanskrit studies in China and Japan.  Repr. New Delhi: Aditya 

Prakashan, International Academy of Indian Culture writ -

ten at Nagpur. 

Veidlinger, Daniel. 2006.  Spreading the Dhamma: Writing, oral -

ity and textual transmission in Buddhist Northern Thailand. 

Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 

Wilson, Karen. 2000.  Monocots: Systematics and evolution. 

Sydney: CSIRO Publishing.   

> YANA VAN DYKE

Associate Conservator 

Sherman Fairchild Center for Paper 

and Photograph Conservation 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art 

New York, NY 

yana.vandyke@metmuseum.org
