Source URL (Puppeteer): https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4907/14/9/1775/htm

=== Plain Text Content ===

Next Article in Journal Forest Cover Change Monitoring Using Sub-Pixel Mapping with Edge-Matching Correction Previous Article in Journal Selection for Both Growth and Wood Properties in Chinese Fir Breeding Parents Based on a 6-Year Grafted Clone Test Journals Active Journals Find a Journal Journal Proposal Proceedings Series Topics Information For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers Open Access Policy Institutional Open Access Program Special Issues Guidelines Editorial Process Research and Publication Ethics Article Processing Charges Awards Testimonials Author Services Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series About Overview Contact Careers News Press Blog Sign In / Sign Up Notice You can make submissions to other journals here. clear Notice You are accessing a machine-readable page. In order to be human-readable, please install an RSS reader. Continue Cancel clear All articles published by MDPI are made immediately available worldwide under an open access license. No special permission is required to reuse all or part of the article published by MDPI, including figures and tables. For articles published under an open access Creative Common CC BY license, any part of the article may be reused without permission provided that the original article is clearly cited. For more information, please refer to https://www.mdpi.com/openaccess. Feature papers represent the most advanced research with significant potential for high impact in the field. A Feature Paper should be a substantial original Article that involves several techniques or approaches, provides an outlook for future research directions and describes possible research applications. Feature papers are submitted upon individual invitation or recommendation by the scientific editors and must receive positive feedback from the reviewers. Editor’s Choice articles are based on recommendations by the scientific editors of MDPI journals from around the world. Editors select a small number of articles recently published in the journal that they believe will be particularly interesting to readers, or important in the respective research area. The aim is to provide a snapshot of some of the most exciting work published in the various research areas of the journal. Original Submission Date Received: . You seem to have javascript disabled. Please note that many of the page functionalities won't work as expected without javascript enabled. clear zoom_out_map search menu Journals Active Journals Find a Journal Journal Proposal Proceedings Series Topics Information For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers Open Access Policy Institutional Open Access Program Special Issues Guidelines Editorial Process Research and Publication Ethics Article Processing Charges Awards Testimonials Author Services Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series About Overview Contact Careers News Press Blog Sign In / Sign Up Submit Search for Articles: Title / Keyword Author / Affiliation / Email Journal All Journals Accounting and Auditing Acoustics Acta Microbiologica Hellenica (AMH) Actuators Addiction & Prevention Adhesives Administrative Sciences Adolescents Advances in Respiratory Medicine (ARM) Aerobiology Aeronautics Aerospace Agriculture AgriEngineering Agrochemicals Agronomy AI AI and Precision Agriculture (AIPA) AI Chemistry AI for Engineering AI for Society AI in Education AI in Medicine AI Materials AI Sensors Air Algorithms Allergies Alloys Analog Analytica Analytics Anatomia Anesthesia Research Animals Antibiotics Antibodies Antioxidants Applied Biosciences Applied Mechanics Applied Microbiology Applied Nano Applied Sciences Applied System Innovation (ASI) AppliedChem AppliedMath AppliedPhys Aquaculture Journal Archaeological Studies Architecture Arthropoda Arts Astronautics Astronomy Atmosphere Atoms Audiology Research Automation Axioms Bacteria Batteries Behavioral Sciences Beverages Big Data and Cognitive Computing (BDCC) BioChem Bioengineering Biologics Biology Biology and Life Sciences Forum Biomass Biomechanics BioMed Biomedicines BioMedInformatics Biomimetics Biomolecules Biophysica Bioresources and Bioproducts Biosensors Biosphere BioTech Birds Blockchains Brain Sciences Breast Cancer Research and Care (BCRC) Buildings Businesses C (Journal of Carbon Research) Cancers Cardiogenetics Cardiovascular Medicine Catalysts Cells Ceramics Challenges ChemEngineering Chemistry Chemistry Proceedings Chemosensors Children Chips CivilEng Clean Technologies (Clean Technol.) Climate Clinical and Translational Neuroscience (CTN) Clinical Bioenergetics Clinics and Practice Clocks & Sleep Coasts Coatings Colloids and Interfaces Colorants Commodities Complexities Complications Compounds Computation Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum Computers Condensed Matter Conservation Construction Materials Corrosion and Materials Degradation (CMD) Cosmetics COVID Crafts Craniomaxillofacial Trauma & Reconstruction (CMTR) Crops Cryo Cryptography Crystals Culture Current Issues in Molecular Biology (CIMB) Current Oncology Dairy Data Dentistry Journal Dermato Dermatopathology Designs Diabetology Diagnostics Dietetics Digital Digital Health and Innovation (DHI) Disabilities Diseases Diversity DNA Drones Drugs and Drug Candidates (DDC) Dynamics Earth Ecologies Econometrics Economies Education Sciences Electricity Electrochem Electronic Materials Electronics Emergency Care and Medicine Encyclopedia Endocrines Energies Energy Storage and Applications (ESA) Eng Engineering Proceedings Entropic and Disordered Matter (EDM) Entropy Environmental and Earth Sciences Proceedings Environmental Remediation Environments Epidemiologia Epigenomes European Burn Journal (EBJ) European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education (EJIHPE) Family Sciences Fermentation Fibers FinTech Fire Fishes Fluids Foods Forecasting Forensic Sciences Forests Fossil Studies Foundations Fractal and Fractional (Fractal Fract) Freshwater Fuels Future Future Collections, Libraries, Archives, and Museums (FCLAM) Future Internet Future Pharmacology Future Transportation Galaxies Games Gases Gastroenterology Insights Gastrointestinal Disorders Gastronomy Gels Genealogy Genes Geographies GeoHazards Geomatics Geometry Geosciences Geotechnics Geriatrics Germs Glacies Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease (GUCDD) Grain Science Grasses Green Green Health Gynecologic Cancer Hardware Health Economics and Policy (HEP) Healthcare Hearts Hemato Hematology Reports Heritage Histories Horticulturae Hospitals Humanities Humans Hydrobiology Hydrogen Hydrology Hydrometeorology Hydropower Hygiene Immuno Industries Infectious Disease Reports Inflammation Journal Informatics Information Infrastructures Inorganics Insects Instruments Intelligent Infrastructure and Construction International Journal of Cognitive Sciences (IJCS) International Journal of Environmental Medicine (IJEM) International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health (IJERPH) International Journal of Financial Studies (IJFS) International Journal of Medical Devices (IJMD) International Journal of Molecular Sciences (IJMS) International Journal of Neonatal Screening (IJNS) International Journal of Orofacial Myology and Myofunctional Therapy (IJOM) International Journal of Plant Biology (IJPB) International Journal of Thermofluid Science and Technology (IJTST) International Journal of Topology International Journal of Translational Medicine (IJTM) International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power (IJTPP) International Medical Education (IME) Inventions IoT Iron ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information (IJGI) J Journal of Aesthetic Medicine (J. Aesthetic Med.) Journal of Ageing and Longevity (JAL) Journal of CardioRenal Medicine (JCRM) Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease (JCDD) Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology (JCTO) Journal of Clinical Medicine (JCM) Journal of Composites Science (J. Compos. Sci.) Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy (JCP) Journal of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease (JDAD) Journal of Developmental Biology (JDB) Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses (JETA) Journal of Eye Movement Research (JEMR) Journal of Fast-Track Health (JFTH) Journal of Functional Biomaterials (JFB) Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology (JFMK) Journal of Fungi (JoF) Journal of Genome Biotechnology and Genetics (JGBG) Journal of Gerontology and Geriatrics (JGG) Journal of Imaging (J. Imaging) Journal of Innovation Journal of Intelligence (J. Intell.) Journal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to Medicine (JDReAM) Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications (JLPEA) Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing (JMMP) Journal of Marine Science and Engineering (JMSE) Journal of Market Access & Health Policy (JMAHP) Journal of Mind and Medical Sciences (JMMS) Journal of Molecular Pathology (JMP) Journal of Nanotheranostics (JNT) Journal of Nuclear Engineering (JNE) Journal of Optical Materials Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine (JOHBM) Journal of Parks Journal of Personalized Medicine (JPM) Journal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech Industry (JPBI) Journal of Phytomedicine Journal of Respiration Journal of Risk and Financial Management (JRFM) Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks (JSAN) Journal of Superintelligence Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association (JAPMA) Journal of the Oman Medical Association (JOMA) Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research (JTAER) Journal of Vascular Diseases (JVD) Journal of Xenobiotics (JoX) Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens (JZBG) Journalism and Media Kidney and Dialysis Kinases and Phosphatases Knowledge LabMed Laboratories Land Languages Laws Legumes Life Lights Limnological Review Lipidology Liquids Literature Livers Logics Logistics Low-Altitude Economy Lubricants Lymphatics Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction (MAKE) Machines Macromol Magnetism Magnetochemistry Marine Drugs Maritime Materials Materials Proceedings Mathematical and Computational Applications (MCA) Mathematics Medical Ethics and Bioethics (MEB) Medical Sciences Medical Sciences Forum Medicina Medicines Membranes Merits Metabolites Metals Meteorology Methane Methods and Protocols (MPs) Metrics Metrology Micro Microbiology Research Microelectronics Micromachines Microorganisms Microplastics Microwave Minerals Mining Modelling Modern Mathematical Physics Molbank Molecules Multimedia Multimodal Technologies and Interaction (MTI) Muscles Nanoenergy Advances Nanomanufacturing Nanomaterials NDT Network Neuroglia Neuroimaging Neurology International NeuroSci Nitrogen Non-Coding RNA (ncRNA) Nursing Reports Nutraceuticals Nutrients Obesities Occupational Health Oceans Onco Optics Optoelectronics Oral Organics Organoids Osteology Oxygen Pandemics Parasitologia Particles Pathogens Pathophysiology Peace Studies Pediatric Reports Pets Pharmaceuticals Pharmaceutics Pharmacoepidemiology Pharmacy Philosophies Photochem Photonics Photovoltaics Phycology Physchem Physical Sciences Forum Physics Physiologia Plants Plasma Platforms Pollutants Polymers Polysaccharides Populations Poultry Powders Precision Oncology Primary and Hospital Care (PHC) Proceedings Processes Project Management Horizons Prosthesis Proteomes Psychiatry International Psychoactives Psychology International Publications Purification Quantum Beam Science (QuBS) Quantum Reports Quaternary Radiation Reactions Real Estate Receptors Recycling Regional Science and Environmental Economics (RSEE) Religions Remote Sensing Reports Reproductive Medicine (Reprod. Med.) Resources Rheumato Risks Robotics Romanian Journal of Preventive Medicine (RJPM) Ruminants Safety Sci Scientia Pharmaceutica (Sci. Pharm.) Sclerosis Seeds Semiconductors and Heterogeneous Integration Sensors Separations Sexes Signals Sinusitis Smart Cities Smart Fisheries Social Sciences Société Internationale d’Urologie Journal (SIUJ) Societies Software Soil Systems Solar Solids Spectroscopy Journal Sports Standards Stats Stratigraphy and Sedimentology Stresses Stroke Reports Surfaces Surgeries Surgical Techniques Development Sustainability Sustainable Chemistry Sustainable Packaging Swiss Archives of Neurology, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (SANPP) Symmetry SynBio Systems Targets Taxonomy Technologies Telecom Textiles Thalassemia Reports Theoretical and Applied Ergonomics Therapeutics Thermo Time and Space Tomography Tourism and Hospitality Toxics Toxins Transplantology Trauma Care Trends in Higher Education Trends in Public Health Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease (TropicalMed) Universe Urban Science Uro Vaccines Vehicles Venereology Veterinary Sciences Vibration Virtual Worlds Viruses Vision Waste Water Welding Wild Wind Women World World Electric Vehicle Journal (WEVJ) Youth Zoonotic Diseases Forests Article Type All Article Types Article Review Communication Editorial Abstract Book Review Brief Communication Brief Report Case Report Clinicopathological Challenge Comment Commentary Concept Paper Conference Report Correction Creative Data Descriptor Discussion Entry Essay Expression of Concern Extended Abstract Field Guide Giants in Urology Guidelines Hypothesis Interesting Images Letter New Book Received Obituary Opinion Patent Summary Perspective Proceeding Paper Project Report Protocol Registered Report Reply Retraction Short Note Study Protocol Systematic Review Technical Note Tutorial Urology around the World Viewpoint All Article Types Advanced Search Section All SectionsForest BiodiversityForest Ecology and ManagementForest Economics, Policy, and Social ScienceForest Ecophysiology and BiologyForest HealthForest HydrologyForest Inventory, Modeling and Remote SensingForest Meteorology and Climate ChangeForest Operations and EngineeringForest SoilGenetics and Molecular BiologyNatural Hazards and Risk ManagementUrban ForestryWood Science and Forest ProductsGeneral All Sections Special Issue All Special IssuesForests for a Better Future: Sustainability, Innovation and InterdisciplinarityA Decade of Forests Open Access PublishingAdaptation of Forests and Forest Management to Climate ChangeAdvanced Technologies in Wood-Adhesive BondsAdvances in Plant Science Research: Celebrating Nanjing Forestry University’s 120th AnniversaryApplications of Landsat and Satellite Remote Sensing DataApplications of Remote Sensing to ForestryBiodiversity and Conservation in ForestsBiodiversity and Ecosystem Functions in Forests—2nd EditionClimate Change and Forest FireClimate Change Impacts on the Dynamics of Forest EcosystemsClimate Effects on Forest Tree/Stand Predisposition to Biotic DisturbanceDecomposition of Forest Litter and Its Links to Carbon Sequestration and Nutrients' DynamicsDetection, Identification and Control of Plant PathogensDynamics and Management of Boreal ForestsEcosystem Feedbacks and Nitrogen Fixation in ForestsEcosystem Services from ForestsEffects of Post-Fire Management Activities on ForestsEucalyptus and Pine Nutritional Diagnosis and Fertilizer PrescriptionsExotic and Invasive Plant Species Impacting ForestsExpanding Forests’ Benefits: Forest-based Recreation and TourismFeature PapersFire Regimes: Spatial and Temporal Variability and Their Effects on ForestsForest and Wood Vegetation Carbon Stores and SequestrationForest Governance and REDD: Challenges for Policies and Markets in Latin AmericaForest Ground Observations through Terrestrial Point CloudsForest Growth Response to Environmental StressForest Management and Water Resources in the AnthropoceneForest Pathology and Plant HealthForest Restoration and RegenerationForest Soil Microbe and Biogeochemical Cycling: Biogeochemical Processes in Forest SoilsForest Soil Respiration under Climate ChangingForest Sustainable Management in EuropeForests Research in Beijing Forestry University: Commemorating the University’s 70th AnniversaryFORMEC/FEC 2023—Improving Access to Sustainable Forest Materials in a Resource-Constrained WorldFusiform Rust Disease—Biology and Management of ResistanceFuture ForestsGenomics for Sustainable Forestry - Selected Papers from IUFRO Genomics and Forest Tree Genetics ConferenceGoverning Forest Landscapes: Challenges and Ways ForwardGoverning Forest Restoration: Social, Environmental and Institutional DimensionsGreenhouse Gas Fluxes from Below and Aboveground Forest DeadwoodHistorical Wood: Structure, Properties and ConservationImage-Based Point Clouds for Forest Inventory ApplicationsImpact of Ozone on ForestsImproving Wood Quality from Planted ForestsIncentives and Constraints of Community and Smallholder ForestryIntensity of Forest Management—Selected Papers from FowiTa German Forest Sciences Conference (Sessions 10–14)Interaction and Synergy of Carbon Sink, Storage and Substitution in Forest Value ChainsInteractions between Bark Beetles and ForestsInterplay of Human and Natural Disturbances on Pattern and Process in Forest EcosystemsJoint IUFRO 7.02.02 “Foliage, shoot and stem diseases of forest trees” and 7.03.04 “Diseases and insects in forest nurseries” Working Parties MeetingLiDAR and Other Remote Sensing Applications in Mapping and Monitoring of Forests Structure and BiomassLiDAR Remote Sensing of Forest ResourcesLong-Term Effects of Fire on Forest SoilsManagement Strategies for Forest Ecosystem ServicesMycorrhizal Fungi of ForestsNitrogen and Phosphorus Nutrition of Trees and ForestsNutrient Cycling and Plant Nutrition in Forest EcosystemsOptimizing Forest Inventories with Remote Sensing TechniquesPlant Diversity and Phytogeography in ForestsREDD+ Crossroads Post Paris: Politics, Lessons and InterplaysResponses of Forest Trees to DroughtScience, Society and Innovation Nexus in Forestry: Pathways to Global SustainabilitySelected Papers from the 2nd International Electronic Conference on Forests (IECF2021)Selected Papers from the 3rd International Electronic Conference on Forests (IECF2022)Selected Papers from the 5th International Electronic Conference on Forests (IECF 2026)Soil Carbon Sequestration in ForestsStand Dynamics of Forests Managed Using Variable Retention Harvesting SystemsSustainable Biofuels From Forests: Woody BiomassSustainable Forest Management: Past, Present, FutureThe 24th IUFRO World Congress: Session 118 Providing Ecosystem Services under Climate Change: Community of Practice of Forest Decision Support SystemsThe 24th IUFRO World Congress: Session 13 Salamanders: World Icons of Aquatic Biodiversity in ForestsThe 24th IUFRO World Congress: Session 64 What Future for Tropical Silviculture?The 24th IUFRO World Congress: Session 79 Sustainable Management of Spruce Dominated Ecosystems in Response to Climate ChangeThe Conservation and Management of Agro- and Forest Ecosystems in a Changing ClimateThe Effects of Invasive and Exotic Plants on ForestsThe Potential Role for Community Monitoring in MRV and in Benefit Sharing in REDD+The Role of Forests for Carbon Capture and StorageTree Defense Physiology to Bark BeetlesTree Species, as Major Drivers of Forest Ecosystems FunctioningTropical Forest Ecology and Management for the AnthropoceneUrban and Periurban Forest Diversity and Ecosystem Services All Special Issues Volume Issue Number Page Logical OperatorOperator AND OR Search Text Search Type All fields Title Abstract Keywords Authors Affiliations Doi Full Text References add_circle_outline remove_circle_outline Journals Forests Volume 14 Issue 9 10.3390/f14091775 Submit to this Journal Review for this Journal Propose a Special Issue ► ▼ Article Menu Article Menu Recommended Articles Related Info Link Google Scholar More by Authors Links on DOAJ Chu, S. Lin, L. Tian, X. on Google Scholar Chu, S. Lin, L. Tian, X. on PubMed Chu, S. Lin, L. Tian, X. Article Views 4425 Citations 25 Table of Contents AbstractIntroductionMaterials and MethodsResults and DiscussionConclusionsAuthor ContributionsFundingData Availability StatementAcknowledgmentsConflicts of InterestReferences Altmetric share Share announcement Help format_quote Cite question_answer Discuss in SciProfiles Need Help? Support Find support for a specific problem in the support section of our website. Get Support Feedback Please let us know what you think of our products and services. Give Feedback Information Visit our dedicated information section to learn more about MDPI. Get Information clear JSmol Viewer clear first_page Download PDF settings Order Article Reprints Font Type: Arial Georgia Verdana Font Size: Aa Aa Aa Line Spacing:    Column Width:    Background: Open AccessArticle Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma by Shimin ChuShimin Chu SciProfiles Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar 1,2, Lanying LinLanying Lin SciProfiles Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar 2 and Xingling TianXingling Tian SciProfiles Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar 1,* 1 China Academy of Cultural Heritage, Beijing 100029, China 2 Research Institute of Wood Industry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing 100091, China * Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Forests 2023, 14(9), 1775; https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 Submission received: 24 July 2023 / Revised: 21 August 2023 / Accepted: 29 August 2023 / Published: 31 August 2023 (This article belongs to the Section Wood Science and Forest Products) Download keyboard_arrow_down Download PDF Download PDF with Cover Download XML Download Epub Browse Figures Versions Notes Abstract Palm leaf manuscripts were a prevalent literary medium from South Asia and Southeast Asia prior to the widespread use of paper. This study focuses on the analysis of historical palm leaf manuscripts from South and Southeast Asia. Sample palm leaf manuscripts from Burma were used as a case study; simulated palm leaf manuscripts were also created as a reference for comparison. The anatomy, chemical composition, and mechanical properties of the manuscripts were analyzed to find various forms of deterioration, including damage, fractures, pollution, acidification, and microbial deterioration. Specifically, the S1–S3 layers of the cell walls exhibited complete cracking, and the S2 layer showed numerous circular or nearly circular cavities caused by microbial erosion, while the middle lamella remained intact. The severe degradation of polysaccharides and pectin, accompanied by an increase in the relative content of lignin, caused the historical manuscripts to become more brittle. Additionally, the tensile strengths of historical palm leaf manuscripts were markedly reduced; their longitudinal tensile strength was significantly greater than their transverse tensile strength. This study can contribute to a better understanding of the deterioration process of historical palm leaf manuscripts and provide valuable insights for their restoration and preservation. Keywords: palm leaf manuscripts; physicochemical structure; mechanical properties; deterioration 1. IntroductionPalm leaf manuscripts were a popular literary medium from South Asia and Southeast Asia, which were widely used before the advent of paper [1]. They were made from the leaves of Corypha umbraculifera, a particularly tall and sturdy arborescent plant with long and wide leaves that have a dense texture [2,3,4,5]. Palm leaf manuscripts were produced in a stepwise process that includes collection, cutting, steaming, polishing, flattening, air-drying, writing, inking, and binding. Palm leaf manuscripts contained knowledge spanning various domains such as history, mathematics, literature, astronomy, art, and medicine. Valued for their historical, cultural, and relics significance, palm leaf manuscripts are considered precious world cultural heritage [6,7].Currently, research work on historical palm leaf manuscripts mainly focuses on collection and preservation, cataloging, reproduction, and heritage preservation [8,9]. However, due to the small number and preciousness of the palm leaf manuscripts, they have only been studied in a relatively simple manner and not in depth. Some scholars have conducted preliminary deterioration assessments and explored measures for the protection of palm leaf manuscripts [10]. Zhang et al. [6,7], for example, investigated the types of damage, surface damage, and pH of palm leaf manuscripts at the Potala Palace in Tibet, as well as the deterioration of palm leaf manuscripts in different preservation environments. Singh et al. [11] analyzed the composition of pigments in palm leaf manuscripts, improving our understanding of pigment usage in such manuscripts and providing fundamental data for preventive protection measures. Agrawal and Sah [12,13] systematically summarized the production methods, materials and techniques, deterioration, and protection of palm leaf manuscripts. In summary, previous studies on the deterioration of palm leaf manuscripts have focused on the macroscale, including surface diseases, pH, moisture content, etc., ignoring their complex structure and chemical composition, and without in-depth studies on the deterioration process.The state of deterioration of the palm leaf manuscripts is closely related to the environment in which they are preserved. Most palm leaf manuscripts are preserved in museums and libraries across the globe; certain countries, such as India, have hundreds of these manuscripts in private collections [6]. Traditionally, palm leaf manuscripts were stored by wrapping them in cotton or silk cloth for protection against insect damage. More valuable manuscripts were wrapped and then stored in sandalwood boxes for additional safeguarding [7]. However, certain palm leaf manuscripts are susceptible to various forms of deterioration beyond insect damage due to their inherent characteristics and environmental factors [6,7]. Nevertheless, current research on the deterioration of historical palm leaf manuscripts focuses only on epiphenomena. It is crucial to assess their deterioration state and analyze their deterioration characteristics for appropriate repair and conservation measures.Therefore, the structural, chemical composition, and tensile properties of historical palm leaf manuscripts from Burma were analyzed in this study, while utilizing simulated palm leaf manuscripts as a control group. A comprehensive range of techniques including optical microscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy–energy-dispersive X-ray (SEM–EDX), attenuated total reflectance–Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (ATR–FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and mechanical testing machines were applied to investigate these aspects. This study makes an important contribution to unravelling the mechanisms of palm leaf manuscript deterioration through an exploration of the multiscale characteristics exhibited by historical palm leaf manuscripts. In addition, it provides a valuable theoretical basis for the conservation and preservation of these historically important artifacts. 2. Materials and Methods 2.1. Experimental MaterialsThe experimental samples in this study consisted of historical palm leaf manuscripts and control samples. The historical palm leaf manuscripts, sourced from Burma, were stored in a library. Four representative historical palm leaf manuscripts and a control sample were selected for deterioration analysis. Figure 1 provides details regarding their identification numbers, appearance, and observed deterioration. To gain a better understanding of the anatomical structural characteristics of the palm leaf, fresh leaves of Corypha umbraculifera were collected from Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture in Yunnan Province. Additionally, simulated palm leaf manuscripts, denoted as BP-R, were prepared as control samples. It was prepared as follows: Fresh leaves of Corypha umbraculifera were subjected to steaming in boiling water at 100 °C, supplemented with sour angle (an acidic agent), aimed at extracting the green sap, starch, and impurities. Subsequently, the steamed leaves underwent thorough scrubbing to ensure the complete removal of the acidic components. Following this, the leaves were meticulously cut into refined rectangles and exposed to gentle sunlight for the purpose of drying. Figure 1. Historical palm leaf manuscripts and simulated palm leaf manuscripts. 2.2. Optical MicroscopyEach mature leaf was carefully treated using a surgical blade to remove any unwanted tissues, leaving only the upper and lower epidermises. Transverse sections of the leaf approximately 20–30 μm in thickness were obtained using a slide-away slicer (SM2010R, Leica, Weztlar, Germany). To facilitate microscopic analysis, the upper epidermis, lower epidermis, and cross section of leaves were subjected to a series of procedures including staining, dehydration, transparency enhancement, and mounting. The prepared segments were observed under an optical microscope (CX31, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) to analyze their microstructural features. 2.3. Physical CharacterizationThe surface pH values of the palm leaf manuscripts were measured on a portable pH meter according to GB/T 13528-2015: Paper and board—Determination of surface pH. A drop of distilled water was placed on the surface of the sample, and a flat-tipped electrode was immersed in the drop of water so that the pressure of the electrode on the specimen was kept constant, and the test value at 5 min of immersion was read. Each sample was tested five times, and the average of the five measurements was taken as the result.The moisture content of the manuscripts was determined in accordance with GB/T 462-2008: Paper, board, and pulp—Determination of moisture content of analytical sample. The mass of the sample before drying was weighed, then the sample was dried to constant weight and weighed again. The ratio of the difference between the mass of the sample before and after drying to the mass before drying is the moisture content of the sample. Each sample was repeated three times, and the experimental results were the average of the three measurements.The surface color of historical palm leaf manuscript samples and control samples was measured by a colorimeter (CR-400, Minolta Holdings Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a D65 light source. The automatically recorded CIELAB color system consists of L* (lightness parameter), a* (red–green coordinates), and b* (yellow–blue coordinates). The test result of each sample was the average of 20 test data.Any surface diseases or abnormalities on the historical palm leaf manuscripts were observed using a 3D ultra-depth-of-field microscope (VHX-7000, KEYENCE, Osaka, Japan). 2.4. SEM–EDXThe samples were cut into pieces with a size of 5 mm × 5 mm and dried completely in an oven, used for surface morphology observation. The manuscripts were embedded into small squares of 5 mm × 5 mm × 5 mm using hot-melt adhesive, and the cross sections of the manuscripts were obtained using a slide-away slicer. The samples were then mounted onto a conductive carrier and made conductive by sputter-coating them with platinum. A scanning electron microscope (S-3400, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) and EDX analyzer (7021-H, Horiba, Kyoto, Japan) were used to investigate the microscopic morphology and elemental distribution on the surface of the palm leaf manuscripts. The acceleration voltage during the analysis was set to 10 kV. 2.5. AFMAtomic force microscopy (AFM) was conducted to clearly observe fiber cells in the cross section of the palm leaf manuscripts. In order to obtain a smooth surface and avoid sample damage during sample preparation, the samples were cut into strips approximately 1 mm × 1 mm × 5 mm in size and embedded using a resin mixture consisting of SPI-PON812 epoxy resin (16.2 mL), dodecenyl succinic anhydride (10.0 mL), nadic methyl anhydride (8.9 mL), and tris (dimethyl amino methyl) phenol (0.7 mL). Smooth cross sections of the embedded samples were obtained with an ultramicrotome (Ultracut UCT, Leica, Germany) equipped with a diamond knife. The morphological characteristics of fiber cells in the samples were then examined by AFM (Dimension Edge, Veeco, New York, NY, USA) with standard tapping mode probes (RTESP-300, Veeco, New York, USA) at a cantilever length of 125 μm, and the resonance frequency was 300 kHz. 2.6. ATR–FTIRThe palm leaf manuscript samples were sliced into thin pieces measuring 5 mm × 5 mm and placed in an infrared spectrometer equipped with diamond attenuated total reflectance (ATR) crystal accessories for detection. The scanning parameters included 32 scanning times with a resolution of 4 cm−1. The absorption range of 400–4000 cm−1 was recorded during the analysis. 2.7. XRDThe palm leaf manuscript samples were prepared as 10 mm × 30 mm slices, then dried to a constant weight of 60 °C. The dried samples were affixed to the sample table using double-sided tape. The cellulose crystal structure of the samples was characterized using an X-ray diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with a voltage of 40 kV, a current of 40 mA, a scan rate of 0.1°/s, a scan step of 0.05°, and a scan range of 5° < 2θ < 45°. Three rounds of testing were performed for each group of samples, and the mean spectra were derived. The cellulose relative crystallinity of samples was determined according to the Segal method (Equation (1)) [14]: 𝐶𝑟𝐼=𝐼200−𝐼𝑎𝑚𝐼200×100%CrI=I200−IamI200×100% (1) where CrI denotes the relative crystallinity of cellulose, I200 is the maximum intensity of the lattice diffraction angle of (200) near 2θ = 22.4°, which signifies both the crystalline and noncrystalline regions, and Iam is the minimum intensity near the 2θ angle of 18°, indicating the noncrystalline region. 2.8. Tensile StrengthWith reference to GB/T 1938-2009, GB/T 14017-2009, and GB/T 12914-2018 of the China National Standard, rectangular samples of the palm leaf manuscripts were prepared, measuring 15 mm × 40 mm in both the parallelogram and transverse orientations. The tensile strength of the manuscript samples was measured using a universal mechanical testing machine at a speed of 5 mm/min. The tensile test was repeated three times for each sample, and the result was the average of the three measurements. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Anatomy of Palm LeafFigure 2 shows the anatomical structure of a palm leaf, including its strong network skeleton which is responsible for its high mechanical stability. The leaf has not only parallel longitudinal veins but also numerous transverse veins. The transverse veins are highly sinuous and irregular; the veins are short and connected to the longitudinal veins. Although well-developed transverse veins can serve as stringers connecting the ribs of the leaf, providing resistance against lateral loading forces, they are not as strong as the longitudinal tensile properties of palm leaves from a biomechanical standpoint. This network is comprised of not only veins but also nonvascular fibers that typically aggregate in bundles located adjacent to the surface layers (Figure 2c). Similar to plywood [15], the cross-laminated surface layers exhibited equalized in-plane strength and enhanced load-bearing capacity. The lower epidermis of leaf has more stomas than the upper epidermis. Interestingly, the cells of the upper epidermis are predominantly elongated, rectangular cells with sinuous walls (Figure 2a), which enables adjacent cells to interlock like pieces in a jigsaw puzzle. This characteristic serves to augment the mechanical strength of the epidermal layer. The cells of the lower epidermis, conversely, are predominantly rectangular and hexagonal in shape (Figure 2b). Overall, these histological characteristics can offer substantial mechanical support and are the primary cause of mechanical differences in different directions of palm leaves [16], which will be elaborated on in Section 3.5 Mechanical Properties and Analysis. Figure 2. Optical microscopy of (a) upper, (b) lower epidermises and (c) transverse section of palm leaf. 3.2. Basic Physical ParametersTable 1 lists the basic physical parameters of the historical palm leaf manuscripts and their corresponding control samples. Color changes are often utilized as an initial assessment of deterioration in cultural relics, such as archaeological wood and paper [17]. Colorimetric analysis of the palm leaf manuscripts was conducted in the L* (luminance), a* (red–green index), and b* (yellow–blue index) chromaticity spaces. The L* of BP-R was 70.52, indicating a larger luminance value. In comparison, the historical palm leaf manuscripts exhibited lower luminosity values due to aging caused by factors such as light exposure, temperature, humidity, oxygen, and biological processes. The a* values of the historical palm leaf manuscripts differed significantly with a more red-oriented color, while the b* values indicated a more yellow-oriented color compared to the control samples. Table 1. Basic physical parameters of historical palm leaf manuscripts and control samples. It is worth noting that all palm manuscript samples showed signs of acidification compared to the control samples. The pH of BP-3 was only 4.85, much lower than that of the control sample. This can be attributed to the oxidative hydrolysis of lignin, leading to the formation of acids and chromogenic groups [18,19,20]. Additionally, substances added during the production process, such as tamarinds, lemon, and sour rice water, may have contributed to the acidification. Acidified palm leaf manuscripts are prone to fiber hydrolysis, resulting in a reduction in the degree of polymerization and a decrease in mechanical strength. Therefore, deacidification of historical palm leaf manuscripts is necessary during the conservation process.Moisture content serves as a crucial indicator of the strength, durability, and structural stability of palm leaf manuscripts [21,22]. All samples exhibited moisture content ranging from 7% to 10%. Manuscripts with lower moisture content, such as BP-3, were more brittle. 3.3. Morphology AnalysisThe surface condition of the historical palm leaf manuscripts was examined using a nondestructive ultra-deep field microscope, as depicted in Figure 3. The palm leaf manuscript BP-1 appeared to be well preserved but exhibited fragility and brittleness (Figure 3a). BP-2 had a significant amount of dust deposited on its surface (Figure 3b). Although the dust contaminated the manuscript, it also acted as somewhat of a protective “coating”. BP-3 displayed a substantial amount of white powder on its surface (Figure 3c), which will be further discussed below. BP-4 showed superior preservation, possibly due to the presence of a “film-like substance” on its surface (Figure 3d). Figure 3. Diseases on surfaces of historical palm leaf manuscripts: (a) BP-1, (b) BP-2, (c) BP-3, (d) BP-4. Figure 4 shows SEM images of the surfaces of the palm leaf manuscripts. BP-1 exhibited cracks primarily extending from the carved words, along the longitudinal direction of the manuscript’s body, as shown in Figure 4a. Ink in the carved areas appeared as irregularly granular material (Figure 4b), mainly composed of vegetable carbon. A considerable amount of dust particles adhered to the surface of BP-2, obstructing the stomata on the palm leaf (Figure 4c). However, wiping the surface with 75% alcohol effectively removed most of the dust (Figure 4f). The surface of BP-3 showed exfoliation, exposing internal mesophyll cells and fibers (Figure 4d,e). The palm leaf consists of three longitudinally and horizontally interlaced layers, which can be easily separated and flake off from one other, significantly compromising the integrity and structural stability of the artifact. Figure 4g,h show the microscopic morphology of the white powdery substance on the BP-3 surface, which is a uniformly spherical material with a diameter of approximately 2.5 μm, primarily composed of carbon, oxygen, and calcium. Figure 4. SEM images of historical palm leaf manuscripts: (a) cracks in BP-1 manuscripts, (b) ink in BP-1 manuscripts, (c,f) surface of BP-2 manuscripts before and after alcohol wiping, (d,e) exfoliation of BP-3 manuscripts surface, (g,h) white powdery substance in BP-3 manuscripts, (i) EDX images of white powdery substance. The cross-sectional micromorphology of the palm leaf manuscripts with different degrees of deterioration was observed, as shown in Figure 5. BP-R displayed an intact fiber cell wall structure (Figure 5a,d). Partial collapse of the cell wall and fiber cell wall dehiscence was observed in BP-1 (Figure 5b,e). BP-3 exhibited severe degradation, with most of its cell walls broken and numerous circular holes in the S2 layer, attributed to microbial erosion (Figure 5c,f) [23,24]. In addition, cracks appeared in the secondary wall, and the direction of crack extension extended from layer S3 to S1 (Figure 5f). However, the middle lamella was intact due to the relatively high lignin content [25]. Figure 5. Cross-sectional micromorphology of palm leaf manuscripts: (a,d) BP-R, (b,e) BP-1, (c,f) BP-3. 3.4. Chemical Component AnalysisFigure 6a shows the spectra of the palm leaf manuscripts obtained by ATR–FTIR between 4000 cm−1 and 500 cm−1. Similar to wood, palm leaves consist mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, along with other substances such as fats and proteins [26,27]. The bands at 2927 cm−1 and 2855 cm−1 correspond to asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of CH2 groups, respectively, and are attributable to the methylene groups in fats and waxes [28,29]. The peak absorption intensity of BP-1 and BP-3 was lower than that of BP-R due to the effect of degradation. The presence of dust on the surface of BP-2 resulted in a slower degradation rate; the film-like substance on the surface of BP-4 had a similar effect. The band observed at 1735 cm−1 can be attributed to substances such as hemicellulose and pectin, whereas the peak at 1168 cm−1 is representative of ester compounds [30]. The absence of these peaks in the historical palm leaf manuscripts, except for BP-4, suggests the degradation of hemicellulose and pectin to some extent when compared with BP-R. A membranous substance was found on the BP-4 surface, resulting in an increase in the peak intensity at 1735 cm−1. Figure 6b shows the ATR–FTIR spectra of the film-like substance on the surface of BP-4. The presence of C-O stretching vibrations at 1086 cm−1 and 1237 cm−1 suggests the presence of triglycerides, which may be the plant oil used to preserve the toughness of the historical palm leaf manuscripts. Additionally, the 1650 cm−1 peak is associated with the conjugated carbonyl group of lignin [31]. The increased peak intensity in all historical palm leaf manuscripts, compared to BP-R, suggests an increase in the relative amount of lignin due to the degradation of hemicellulose and cellulose [32]. Figure 6. ATR–FTIR spectra between 4000 cm-1 and 500 cm-1 of (a) palm leaf manuscripts and (b) membranous substance. Figure 7a presents the XRD patterns of historical palm leaf manuscripts and control samples. Noncellulose diffraction peaks, primarily attributed to the crystalline substances of Ca and Si, were observed in the historical palm leaf manuscripts. In the control curves, the overlapping diffraction bands located in the 2θ range of 14°–17° are mainly composed of a combination of (1–10) crystallographic plane and (110) crystallographic plane near 14.5° and 16.5°. The diffraction peak with the highest intensity appearing near 2θ = 22.2° corresponds to the (200) crystallographic plane. In addition, the weaker diffraction peak appearing near 2θ = 34.5° may be jointly composed of multiple diffractions including the (040) crystallographic plane [32]. The application of Gaussian profiles in the deconvolution of XRD diffractograms proves beneficial for discerning potential alterations within the cellulose crystal structure. Four main peaks, including (10–1), (110), (002), and (040) at around 14.5°, 16.5°, 22.2°, and 34.5°, respectively, were selected for deconvolution (R2 > 0.98). The position of cellulose diffraction peaks in the historical manuscripts was similar to that in the control samples, indicating the presence of a type Iβ cellulose crystalline structure [33]. However, variations were observed in the intensity of the (200) diffraction peak, indicating changes in the relative crystallinity of cellulose. The relative crystallinity of the samples is illustrated in Figure 7b. BP-3 exhibited a significant decrease in cellulose relative crystallinity (37.4%) compared to the control samples (45.6%) due to degradation of the cellulose crystalline region [34]. However, the degradation of hemicellulose and amorphous cellulose also led to a significant increase in the relative crystallinity of cellulose in BP-1, BP-2, and BP-4 [35,36]. An increase in the relative crystallinity of cellulose may also be attributed to the recrystallization of cell wall degradation products or the formation of new chemical bonds [37]. In summary, hemicellulose degradation occurred preferentially under aging effects, followed by the degradation of amorphous cellulose and crystalline cellulose. Figure 7. Cellulose crystalline structures of historical palm leaf manuscripts and control samples: (a) X-ray diffractograms, (b) relative crystallinities. 3.5. Mechanical Properties AnalysisLeaves retain their original structure in a manner unlike paper; as a result, the fibers in the palm leaf manuscripts were not crushed, resulting in varying tensile strengths in different directions. Figure 8 shows the load–displacement curves of longitudinal and transverse tensile tests on palm leaf manuscripts. The tensile strength of the manuscripts is dependent on both fiber length and the bonding force between fibers [38]. In longitudinal tensile tests, BP-R samples exhibited a simulated displacement of 2.37 mm and a force of approximately 190 N (Figure 8a), whereas transverse tensile fracture resulted in a displacement of 1.42 mm and a force of approximately 34 N (Figure 8b). Historical palm leaf manuscripts exhibited lower longitudinal and transverse tensile strengths compared to BP-R, and the mechanical strength decreased as the degradation intensified. Compared with simulated palm leaf manuscripts, the longitudinal tensile strength of the historical palm leaf manuscript BP-4 decreased by 78%, while its transverse tensile strength decreased by 85%. The palm leaf manuscripts experienced an increase in relative lignin content and a reduction in the degree of cellulose polymerization as they degraded, which may be a crucial factor in their decreasing in tensile strength [39]. Longitudinal tensile strength was considerably higher than transverse tensile strength in the historical manuscripts, which can be attributed to the leaf’s anatomical structure. Longitudinal strength exceeding the transverse strength also led to the cracking and expansion of the historical palm manuscripts along the longitudinal direction. Figure 8. The load–displacement curves of the longitudinal (a) and transverse (b) tensile tests of palm leaf manuscripts. 4. ConclusionsThe analysis of Burmese historical palm leaf manuscripts in this study may provide insights into the structure and performance of such manuscripts during prolonged aging. Samples of historical palm leaf manuscripts exhibit various problems such as brittleness, incompleteness, fracturing, contamination, and erosion by microorganisms. In highly degraded palm leaf manuscripts, cracking occurred in the secondary cell wall layer, and the direction of crack extension extended from the S3 layer to the S1 layer, while the composite middle layer was unaffected. Microbial erosion caused round or nearly round holes to appear in the S2 layer of the cell wall in the samples observed in this study. Degradation of the hemicellulose and amorphous cellulose in most degraded palm leaf manuscript samples led to an increase in cellulose relative crystallinity. Even the crystalline cellulose region also degraded, resulting in a decrease in cellulose relative crystallinity. Polysaccharide degradation increased the relative content of lignin, contributing to the brittleness of palm leaf manuscripts. The unique anatomical structure of the leaf provides greater tensile strength along the grain than across the grain. However, both longitudinal and transverse tensile strengths of historical palm leaf manuscripts were markedly reduced when compared with simulated palm leaf manuscript samples. Severely degraded historical palm leaf manuscripts exhibited a 78% decrease in longitudinal tensile strength and an 85% decrease in transverse tensile strength compared to their simulated counterparts. With an understanding of the multiscale structure and mechanical properties of historical palm leaf manuscripts, it is possible to determine the preservation and conservation of palm leaf manuscripts. Author ContributionsConceptualization, S.C., L.L. and X.T.; methodology, S.C.; software, S.C.; validation, L.L. and X.T.; formal analysis, X.T.; investigation, S.C.; resources, X.T.; data curation, S.C.; writing—original draft preparation, S.C.; writing—review and editing, L.L. and X.T.; visualization, S.C.; supervision, L.L.; project administration, X.T.; funding acquisition, X.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.FundingThis research was funded by the National Key Research and Development Program of China, grant number 2022YFF0903903.Data Availability StatementThe data presented in this study are available on request from the corresponding author.AcknowledgmentsThe authors express their gratitude to Liusan Li, Li Li, Xiangdong Li, and Bingfeng Zhang for their assistance with this study.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.ReferencesVijaya Lakshmi, T.R.; Sastry, P.N.; Rajinikanth, T.V. Feature selection to recognize text from palm leaf manuscripts. Signal Image Video Process. 2018, 12, 223–229. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Wang, K.; Xia, W.; Ren, J.; Yu, W.; Feng, H.; Hu, S. Wind energy harvesting inspired by Palm leaf flutter: Observation, mechanism and experiment. Energy Convers. Manag. 2023, 284, 116971. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Junio, R.F.P.; de Mendonça Neuba, L.; Souza, A.T.; Pereira, A.C.; Nascimento, L.F.C.; Monteiro, S.N. Thermochemical and structural characterization of promising carnauba novel leaf fiber (Copernicia prunifera). J. Mater. Res. Technol. 2022, 18, 4714–4723. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Abdel-Azim, M.S. Development of prototype structure for low-cost and energy-efficient house by utilizing palm tree fronds. Build. Environ. 1997, 32, 375–380. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Wiland, J.; Brown, R.; Fuller, L.; Havelock, L.; Johnson, J.; Kenn, D.; Kralka, P.; Muzart, M.; Pollard, J.; Snowdon, J. A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: A historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British Library and the common types of damage. J. Inst. Conserv. 2022, 45, 236–259. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhang, M.; Song, X.; Wang, Y. Two Different storage environments for palm leaf manuscripts: Comparison of deterioration phenomena. Restaurator 2021, 42, 147–168. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhang, M.; Song, X.; Wang, J.; Lyu, X. Preservation characteristics and restoration core technology of palm leaf manuscripts in Potala Palace. Arch. Sci. 2022, 22, 501–519. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Alexander, T.J.; Kumar, S.S. A novel binarization technique based on Whale Optimization Algorithm for better restoration of palm leaf manuscript. J. Ambient. Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 2020, 1–8. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Subramani, K.; Subramaniam, M. Creation of original Tamil character dataset through segregation of ancient palm leaf manuscripts in medicine. Expert Syst. 2021, 38, e12538. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Wiland, J.; Brown, R.; Fuller, L.; Havelock, L.; Johnson, J.; Kenn, D.; Kralka, P.; Muzart, M.; Pollard, J.; Snowdon, J. A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 2: Historic and current conservation treatments, boxing and storage, religious and ethical issues, recommendations for best practice. J. Inst. Conserv. 2023, 46, 64–91. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Singh, M.R.; Sharma, D. Investigation of pigments on an Indian palm leaf manuscript (18th–19th century) by SEM-EDX and other techniques. Restaurator 2020, 41, 49–65. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Agrawal, O.P. Conservation of Manuscripts and Paintings of South-East Asia; Butterworths: Boston, MA, USA, 1984. [Google Scholar]Sah, A. Palm leaf manuscripts of the world: Material, technology and conservation. Stud. Conserv. 2002, 47, 15–24. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Segal, L.; Creely, J.J.; Martin, A.E.; Conrad, C.M. An empirical method for estimating the degree of crystallinity of native cellulose using the X-Ray diffractometer. Text. Res. J. 1959, 29, 786–794. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Giraud-Guille, M.M. Plywood structures in nature. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 1998, 3, 221–227. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Horn, J.W.; Fisher, J.B.; Tomlinson, P.B.; Lewis, C.E.; Laubengayer, K. Evolution of lamina anatomy in the palm family (Arecaceae). Am. J. Bot. 2009, 96, 1462–1486. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] [PubMed]Schnabel, T.; Zimmer, B.; Petutschnigg, A.J. On the modelling of colour changes of wood surfaces. Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod. 2009, 67, 141–149. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Shahani, C.J.; Harrison, G. Spontaneous formation of acids in the natural aging of paper. Stud. Conserv. 2002, 47, 189–192. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Sugano, J.; Linnakoski, R.; Huhtinen, S.; Pappinen, A.; Niemelä, P.; Asiegbu, F.O. Cellulolytic activity of brown-rot Antrodia sinuosa at the initial stage of cellulose degradation. Holzforschung 2019, 73, 673–680. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Tanabe, J.; Ishiguri, F.; Ohshima, J.; Iizuka, K.; Yokota, S. Changes in lignocellulolytic enzyme activity during the degradation of Picea jezoensis wood by the white-rot fungus Porodaedalea pini. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2016, 110, 108–112. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Mo, W.; Li, B.; Chen, K. Low-temperature thermal drying-induced pore expansion effects of cellulosic fibers. Cellulose 2023, 30, 3441–3453. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Mvondo, R.R.N.; Meukam, P.; Jeong, J.; Meneses, D.D.S.; Nkeng, E.G. Influence of water content on the mechanical and chemical properties of tropical wood species. Results Phys. 2017, 7, 2096–2103. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Björdal, C.G. Microbial degradation of waterlogged archaeological wood. J. Cult. Herit. 2012, 13, S118–S122. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Björdal, C.; Nilsson, T.; Bardage, S. Three-dimensional visualisation of bacterial decay in individual tracheids of Pinus sylvestris. Holzforschung 2005, 59, 178–182. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Guo, J.; Chen, J.; Meng, Q.; Ploszczanski, L.; Liu, J.A.; Luo, R.; Jin, T.; Siedlaczek, P.; Lichtenegger, H.C.; Yin, Y.; et al. Molecular and crystal structures of cellulose in severely deteriorated archaeological wood. Cellulose 2022, 29, 9549–9568. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Tang, Z.; Yang, M.; Qiang, M.; Li, X.; Morrell, J.J.; Yao, Y. Preparation of cellulose nanoparticles from foliage by bio-enzyme methods. Materials 2021, 14, 4557. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Fang, S.; Lyu, X.; Tong, T.; Lim, A.I.; Li, T.; Bao, J.; Hu, Y.H. Turning dead leaves into an active multifunctional material as evaporator, photocatalyst, and bioplastic. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14, 1203. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] [PubMed]Mahdi, A.S.; Abd, A.M.; Awad, K.M. The role of nano-selenium in alleviating the effects of salt stress in date palm trees (Phoenix dactylifera L.): A fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy study. BioNanoScience 2023, 13, 74–80. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Kayabas, A.; Yildirim, E. Biochemical fingerprints of some endemic plants growing in gypsum soils: Attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopic study. Eur. J. Biol. 2021, 80, 97–106. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Gorgulu, S.T.; Dogan, M.; Severcan, F. The characterization and differentiation of higher plants by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. 2007, 61, 300–308. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Ivanova, D.G.; Singh, B.R. Nondestructive FTIR monitoring of leaf senescence and elicitin-induced changes in plant leaves. Biopolym. Orig. Res. Biomol. 2003, 72, 79–85. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Wang, Z.; Xu, E.; Fu, F.; Lin, L.; Yi, S. Characterization of wood cell walls treated by high-intensity microwaves: Effects on physicochemical structures and micromechanical properties. Ind. Crops Prod. 2022, 187, 115341. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Fernandes, A.N.; Thomas, L.H.; Altaner, C.M.; Callow, P.; Forsyth, V.T.; Apperley, D.C.; Kennedy, C.J.; Jarvis, M.C. Nanostructure of cellulose microfibrils in spruce wood. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, E1195–E1203. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] [PubMed]Zhu, Y.; Li, W.; Meng, D.; Li, X.; Goodell, B. Non-enzymatic modification of the crystalline structure and chemistry of Masson pine in brown-rot decay. Carbohydr. Polym. 2022, 286, 119242. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] [PubMed]Lin, Q.; Huang, Y.; Yu, W. An in-depth study of molecular and supramolecular structures of bamboo cellulose upon heat treatment. Carbohydr. Polym. 2020, 241, 116412. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] [PubMed]Zhang, J.; Li, Y.; Ke, D.; Wang, C.; Pan, H.; Chen, K.; Zhang, H. Modified lignin nanoparticles as potential conservation materials for waterlogged archaeological wood. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2023, 6, 12351–12363. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Guo, J.; Xiao, L.; Han, L.; Wu, H.; Yang, T.; Wu, S.; Yin, Y. Deterioration of the cell wall in waterlogged wooden archeological artifacts, 2400 years old. IAWA J. 2019, 40, 820–844. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Volkmer, T.; Arietano, L.; Plummer, C.; Strautmann, J.; Noël, M. Loss of tensile strength in cellulose tissue on the surface of spruce (Picea abies) caused by natural photodegradation and delignification. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2013, 98, 1118–1125. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhai, S.; Horikawa, Y.; Imai, T.; Sugiyama, J. Anatomical and mechanical characteristics of leaf-sheath fibrovascular bundles in palms. IAWA J. 2013, 34, 285–300. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] Figure 1. Historical palm leaf manuscripts and simulated palm leaf manuscripts. Figure 2. Optical microscopy of (a) upper, (b) lower epidermises and (c) transverse section of palm leaf. Figure 3. Diseases on surfaces of historical palm leaf manuscripts: (a) BP-1, (b) BP-2, (c) BP-3, (d) BP-4. Figure 4. SEM images of historical palm leaf manuscripts: (a) cracks in BP-1 manuscripts, (b) ink in BP-1 manuscripts, (c,f) surface of BP-2 manuscripts before and after alcohol wiping, (d,e) exfoliation of BP-3 manuscripts surface, (g,h) white powdery substance in BP-3 manuscripts, (i) EDX images of white powdery substance. Figure 5. Cross-sectional micromorphology of palm leaf manuscripts: (a,d) BP-R, (b,e) BP-1, (c,f) BP-3. Figure 6. ATR–FTIR spectra between 4000 cm-1 and 500 cm-1 of (a) palm leaf manuscripts and (b) membranous substance. Figure 7. Cellulose crystalline structures of historical palm leaf manuscripts and control samples: (a) X-ray diffractograms, (b) relative crystallinities. Figure 8. The load–displacement curves of the longitudinal (a) and transverse (b) tensile tests of palm leaf manuscripts. Table 1. Basic physical parameters of historical palm leaf manuscripts and control samples. No.Color ParameterspHMoistureContent (%)L*a*b*BP-144.46 (±1.30)10.10 (±0.64)24.12 (±0.87)4.95 (±0.21)8.13 (±0.30)BP-238.59 (±2.67)8.23 (±0.84)18.36 (±2.33)5.96 (±0.28)10.20 (±0.43)BP-343.91 (±0.86)9.63 (±0.17)24.03 (±0.75)4.85 (±0.25)7.13 (±0.25)BP-456.86 (±2.25)5.58 (±0.74)24.39 (±1.25)5.81 (±0.33)9.00 (±0.16)BP-R70.52 (±0.55)0.91 (±0.31)17.96 (±0.50)6.36 (±0.04)8.87 (±0.21) Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.© 2023 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Share and Cite MDPI and ACS Style Chu, S.; Lin, L.; Tian, X. Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma. Forests 2023, 14, 1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 AMA Style Chu S, Lin L, Tian X. Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma. Forests. 2023; 14(9):1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 Chicago/Turabian Style Chu, Shimin, Lanying Lin, and Xingling Tian. 2023. "Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma" Forests 14, no. 9: 1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 APA Style Chu, S., Lin, L., & Tian, X. (2023). Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma. Forests, 14(9), 1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here. Article Metrics Yes Citations Crossref 23 Scopus 25 Web of Science 22 ads 1 Google Scholar [click to view] No Article Access Statistics Created with Highcharts 4.0.4Article access statisticsArticle Views2. Jun3. Jun4. Jun5. Jun6. Jun7. Jun8. Jun9. Jun10. Jun11. Jun12. Jun13. Jun14. Jun15. Jun16. Jun17. Jun18. Jun19. Jun20. Jun21. Jun22. Jun23. Jun24. Jun25. Jun26. Jun27. Jun28. Jun29. Jun30. Jun1. Jul2. Jul3. Jul4. Jul5. Jul6. Jul7. Jul8. Jul9. Jul10. Jul11. Jul12. Jul13. Jul14. Jul15. Jul16. Jul17. Jul18. Jul19. Jul20. Jul21. Jul22. Jul23. Jul24. Jul25. Jul26. Jul27. Jul28. Jul29. Jul30. Jul31. Jul1. Aug2. Aug3. Aug4. Aug5. Aug6. Aug7. Aug8. Aug9. Aug10. Aug11. Aug12. Aug13. Aug14. Aug15. Aug16. Aug17. Aug18. Aug19. Aug20. Aug21. Aug22. Aug23. Aug24. Aug25. Aug26. Aug27. Aug28. Aug29. Aug30. Aug0k1k2k3k4k5k For more information on the journal statistics, click here. Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view. Zoom | Orient | As Lines | As Sticks | As Cartoon | As Surface | Previous Scene | Next Scene Cite Export citation file: BibTeX | EndNote | RIS MDPI and ACS Style Chu, S.; Lin, L.; Tian, X. Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma. Forests 2023, 14, 1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 AMA Style Chu S, Lin L, Tian X. Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma. Forests. 2023; 14(9):1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 Chicago/Turabian Style Chu, Shimin, Lanying Lin, and Xingling Tian. 2023. "Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma" Forests 14, no. 9: 1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 APA Style Chu, S., Lin, L., & Tian, X. (2023). Evaluation of the Deterioration State of Historical Palm Leaf Manuscripts from Burma. Forests, 14(9), 1775. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14091775 Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here. clear Forests, EISSN 1999-4907, Published by MDPI RSS Content Alert Further Information Article Processing Charges Pay an Invoice Open Access Policy Contact MDPI Jobs at MDPI Guidelines For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers MDPI Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series Follow MDPI LinkedIn Facebook X Subscribe to receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI journals Accounting and Auditing Acoustics Acta Microbiologica Hellenica Actuators Addiction & Prevention Adhesives Administrative Sciences Adolescents Advances in Respiratory Medicine Aerobiology Aeronautics Aerospace Agriculture AgriEngineering Agrochemicals Agronomy AI AI and Precision Agriculture AI Chemistry AI for Engineering AI for Society AI in Education AI in Medicine AI Materials AI Sensors Air Algorithms Allergies Alloys Analog Analytica Analytics Anatomia Anesthesia Research Animals Antibiotics Antibodies Antioxidants Applied Biosciences Applied Mechanics Applied Microbiology Applied Nano Applied Sciences Applied System Innovation AppliedChem AppliedMath AppliedPhys Aquaculture Journal Archaeological Studies Architecture Arthropoda Arts Astronautics Astronomy Atmosphere Atoms Audiology Research Automation Axioms Bacteria Batteries Behavioral Sciences Beverages Big Data and Cognitive Computing BioChem Bioengineering Biologics Biology Biology and Life Sciences Forum Biomass Biomechanics BioMed Biomedicines BioMedInformatics Biomimetics Biomolecules Biophysica Bioresources and Bioproducts Biosensors Biosphere BioTech Birds Blockchains Brain Sciences Breast Cancer Research and Care Buildings Businesses C Cancers Cardiogenetics Cardiovascular Medicine Catalysts Cells Ceramics Challenges ChemEngineering Chemistry Chemistry Proceedings Chemosensors Children Chips CivilEng Clean Technologies Climate Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Clinical Bioenergetics Clinics and Practice Clocks & Sleep Coasts Coatings Colloids and Interfaces Colorants Commodities Complexities Complications Compounds Computation Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum Computers Condensed Matter Conservation Construction Materials Corrosion and Materials Degradation Cosmetics COVID Crafts Craniomaxillofacial Trauma & Reconstruction Crops Cryo Cryptography Crystals Culture Current Issues in Molecular Biology Current Oncology Dairy Data Dentistry Journal Dermato Dermatopathology Designs Diabetology Diagnostics Dietetics Digital Digital Health and Innovation Disabilities Diseases Diversity DNA Drones Drugs and Drug Candidates Dynamics Earth Ecologies Econometrics Economies Education Sciences Electricity Electrochem Electronic Materials Electronics Emergency Care and Medicine Encyclopedia Endocrines Energies Energy Storage and Applications Eng Engineering Proceedings Entropic and Disordered Matter Entropy Environmental and Earth Sciences Proceedings Environmental Remediation Environments Epidemiologia Epigenomes European Burn Journal European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education Family Sciences Fermentation Fibers FinTech Fire Fishes Fluids Foods Forecasting Forensic Sciences Forests Fossil Studies Foundations Fractal and Fractional Freshwater Fuels Future Future Collections, Libraries, Archives, and Museums Future Internet Future Pharmacology Future Transportation Galaxies Games Gases Gastroenterology Insights Gastrointestinal Disorders Gastronomy Gels Genealogy Genes Geographies GeoHazards Geomatics Geometry Geosciences Geotechnics Geriatrics Germs Glacies Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease Grain Science Grasses Green Green Health Gynecologic Cancer Hardware Health Economics and Policy Healthcare Hearts Hemato Hematology Reports Heritage Histories Horticulturae Hospitals Humanities Humans Hydrobiology Hydrogen Hydrology Hydrometeorology Hydropower Hygiene Immuno Industries Infectious Disease Reports Inflammation Journal Informatics Information Infrastructures Inorganics Insects Instruments Intelligent Infrastructure and Construction International Journal of Cognitive Sciences International Journal of Environmental Medicine International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health International Journal of Financial Studies International Journal of Medical Devices International Journal of Molecular Sciences International Journal of Neonatal Screening International Journal of Orofacial Myology and Myofunctional Therapy International Journal of Plant Biology International Journal of Thermofluid Science and Technology International Journal of Topology International Journal of Translational Medicine International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power International Medical Education Inventions IoT Iron ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information J Journal of Aesthetic Medicine Journal of Ageing and Longevity Journal of CardioRenal Medicine Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology Journal of Clinical Medicine Journal of Composites Science Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy Journal of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease Journal of Developmental Biology Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses Journal of Eye Movement Research Journal of Fast-Track Health Journal of Functional Biomaterials Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology Journal of Fungi Journal of Genome Biotechnology and Genetics Journal of Gerontology and Geriatrics Journal of Imaging Journal of Innovation Journal of Intelligence Journal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to Medicine Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing Journal of Marine Science and Engineering Journal of Market Access & Health Policy Journal of Mind and Medical Sciences Journal of Molecular Pathology Journal of Nanotheranostics Journal of Nuclear Engineering Journal of Optical Materials Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine Journal of Parks Journal of Personalized Medicine Journal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech Industry Journal of Phytomedicine Journal of Respiration Journal of Risk and Financial Management Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks Journal of Superintelligence Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association Journal of the Oman Medical Association Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research Journal of Vascular Diseases Journal of Xenobiotics Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens Journalism and Media Kidney and Dialysis Kinases and Phosphatases Knowledge LabMed Laboratories Land Languages Laws Legumes Life Lights Limnological Review Lipidology Liquids Literature Livers Logics Logistics Low-Altitude Economy Lubricants Lymphatics Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction Machines Macromol Magnetism Magnetochemistry Marine Drugs Maritime Materials Materials Proceedings Mathematical and Computational Applications Mathematics Medical Ethics and Bioethics Medical Sciences Medical Sciences Forum Medicina Medicines Membranes Merits Metabolites Metals Meteorology Methane Methods and Protocols Metrics Metrology Micro Microbiology Research Microelectronics Micromachines Microorganisms Microplastics Microwave Minerals Mining Modelling Modern Mathematical Physics Molbank Molecules Multimedia Multimodal Technologies and Interaction Muscles Nanoenergy Advances Nanomanufacturing Nanomaterials NDT Network Neuroglia Neuroimaging Neurology International NeuroSci Nitrogen Non-Coding RNA Nursing Reports Nutraceuticals Nutrients Obesities Occupational Health Oceans Onco Optics Optoelectronics Oral Organics Organoids Osteology Oxygen Pandemics Parasitologia Particles Pathogens Pathophysiology Peace Studies Pediatric Reports Pets Pharmaceuticals Pharmaceutics Pharmacoepidemiology Pharmacy Philosophies Photochem Photonics Photovoltaics Phycology Physchem Physical Sciences Forum Physics Physiologia Plants Plasma Platforms Pollutants Polymers Polysaccharides Populations Poultry Powders Precision Oncology Primary and Hospital Care Proceedings Processes Project Management Horizons Prosthesis Proteomes Psychiatry International Psychoactives Psychology International Publications Purification Quantum Beam Science Quantum Reports Quaternary Radiation Reactions Real Estate Receptors Recycling Regional Science and Environmental Economics Religions Remote Sensing Reports Reproductive Medicine Resources Rheumato Risks Robotics Romanian Journal of Preventive Medicine Ruminants Safety Sci Scientia Pharmaceutica Sclerosis Seeds Semiconductors and Heterogeneous Integration Sensors Separations Sexes Signals Sinusitis Smart Cities Smart Fisheries Social Sciences Société Internationale d’Urologie Journal Societies Software Soil Systems Solar Solids Spectroscopy Journal Sports Standards Stats Stratigraphy and Sedimentology Stresses Stroke Reports Surfaces Surgeries Surgical Techniques Development Sustainability Sustainable Chemistry Swiss Archives of Neurology, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Symmetry SynBio Systems Targets Taxonomy Technologies Telecom Textiles Thalassemia Reports Theoretical and Applied Ergonomics Therapeutics Thermo Time and Space Tomography Tourism and Hospitality Toxics Toxins Transplantology Trauma Care Trends in Higher Education Trends in Public Health Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease Universe Urban Science Uro Vaccines Vehicles Venereology Veterinary Sciences Vibration Virtual Worlds Viruses Vision Waste Water Welding Wild Wind Women World World Electric Vehicle Journal Youth Zoonotic Diseases Select optionsAccounting and AuditingAcousticsActa Microbiologica HellenicaActuatorsAddiction & PreventionAdhesivesAdministrative SciencesAdolescentsAdvances in Respiratory MedicineAerobiologyAeronauticsAerospaceAgricultureAgriEngineeringAgrochemicalsAgronomyAIAI and Precision AgricultureAI ChemistryAI for EngineeringAI for SocietyAI in EducationAI in MedicineAI MaterialsAI SensorsAirAlgorithmsAllergiesAlloysAnalogAnalyticaAnalyticsAnatomiaAnesthesia ResearchAnimalsAntibioticsAntibodiesAntioxidantsApplied BiosciencesApplied MechanicsApplied MicrobiologyApplied NanoApplied SciencesApplied System InnovationAppliedChemAppliedMathAppliedPhysAquaculture JournalArchaeological StudiesArchitectureArthropodaArtsAstronauticsAstronomyAtmosphereAtomsAudiology ResearchAutomationAxiomsBacteriaBatteriesBehavioral SciencesBeveragesBig Data and Cognitive ComputingBioChemBioengineeringBiologicsBiologyBiology and Life Sciences ForumBiomassBiomechanicsBioMedBiomedicinesBioMedInformaticsBiomimeticsBiomoleculesBiophysicaBioresources and BioproductsBiosensorsBiosphereBioTechBirdsBlockchainsBrain SciencesBreast Cancer Research and CareBuildingsBusinessesCCancersCardiogeneticsCardiovascular MedicineCatalystsCellsCeramicsChallengesChemEngineeringChemistryChemistry ProceedingsChemosensorsChildrenChipsCivilEngClean TechnologiesClimateClinical and Translational NeuroscienceClinical BioenergeticsClinics and PracticeClocks & SleepCoastsCoatingsColloids and InterfacesColorantsCommoditiesComplexitiesComplicationsCompoundsComputationComputer Sciences & Mathematics ForumComputersCondensed MatterConservationConstruction MaterialsCorrosion and Materials DegradationCosmeticsCOVIDCraftsCraniomaxillofacial Trauma & ReconstructionCropsCryoCryptographyCrystalsCultureCurrent Issues in Molecular BiologyCurrent OncologyDairyDataDentistry JournalDermatoDermatopathologyDesignsDiabetologyDiagnosticsDieteticsDigitalDigital Health and InnovationDisabilitiesDiseasesDiversityDNADronesDrugs and Drug CandidatesDynamicsEarthEcologiesEconometricsEconomiesEducation SciencesElectricityElectrochemElectronic MaterialsElectronicsEmergency Care and MedicineEncyclopediaEndocrinesEnergiesEnergy Storage and ApplicationsEngEngineering ProceedingsEntropic and Disordered MatterEntropyEnvironmental and Earth Sciences ProceedingsEnvironmental RemediationEnvironmentsEpidemiologiaEpigenomesEuropean Burn JournalEuropean Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and EducationFamily SciencesFermentationFibersFinTechFireFishesFluidsFoodsForecastingForensic SciencesForestsFossil StudiesFoundationsFractal and FractionalFreshwaterFuelsFutureFuture Collections, Libraries, Archives, and MuseumsFuture InternetFuture PharmacologyFuture TransportationGalaxiesGamesGasesGastroenterology InsightsGastrointestinal DisordersGastronomyGelsGenealogyGenesGeographiesGeoHazardsGeomaticsGeometryGeosciencesGeotechnicsGeriatricsGermsGlaciesGout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition DiseaseGrain ScienceGrassesGreenGreen HealthGynecologic CancerHardwareHealth Economics and PolicyHealthcareHeartsHematoHematology ReportsHeritageHistoriesHorticulturaeHospitalsHumanitiesHumansHydrobiologyHydrogenHydrologyHydrometeorologyHydropowerHygieneImmunoIndustriesInfectious Disease ReportsInflammation JournalInformaticsInformationInfrastructuresInorganicsInsectsInstrumentsIntelligent Infrastructure and ConstructionInternational Journal of Cognitive SciencesInternational Journal of Environmental MedicineInternational Journal of Environmental Research and Public HealthInternational Journal of Financial StudiesInternational Journal of Medical DevicesInternational Journal of Molecular SciencesInternational Journal of Neonatal ScreeningInternational Journal of Orofacial Myology and Myofunctional TherapyInternational Journal of Plant BiologyInternational Journal of Thermofluid Science and TechnologyInternational Journal of TopologyInternational Journal of Translational MedicineInternational Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and PowerInternational Medical EducationInventionsIoTIronISPRS International Journal of Geo-InformationJJournal of Aesthetic MedicineJournal of Ageing and LongevityJournal of CardioRenal MedicineJournal of Cardiovascular Development and DiseaseJournal of Clinical & Translational OphthalmologyJournal of Clinical MedicineJournal of Composites ScienceJournal of Cybersecurity and PrivacyJournal of Dementia and Alzheimer's DiseaseJournal of Developmental BiologyJournal of Experimental and Theoretical AnalysesJournal of Eye Movement ResearchJournal of Fast-Track HealthJournal of Functional BiomaterialsJournal of Functional Morphology and KinesiologyJournal of FungiJournal of Genome Biotechnology and GeneticsJournal of Gerontology and GeriatricsJournal of ImagingJournal of InnovationJournal of IntelligenceJournal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to MedicineJournal of Low Power Electronics and ApplicationsJournal of Manufacturing and Materials ProcessingJournal of Marine Science and EngineeringJournal of Market Access & Health PolicyJournal of Mind and Medical SciencesJournal of Molecular PathologyJournal of NanotheranosticsJournal of Nuclear EngineeringJournal of Optical MaterialsJournal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance MedicineJournal of ParksJournal of Personalized MedicineJournal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech IndustryJournal of PhytomedicineJournal of RespirationJournal of Risk and Financial ManagementJournal of Sensor and Actuator NetworksJournal of SuperintelligenceJournal of the American Podiatric Medical AssociationJournal of the Oman Medical AssociationJournal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce ResearchJournal of Vascular DiseasesJournal of XenobioticsJournal of Zoological and Botanical GardensJournalism and MediaKidney and DialysisKinases and PhosphatasesKnowledgeLabMedLaboratoriesLandLanguagesLawsLegumesLifeLightsLimnological ReviewLipidologyLiquidsLiteratureLiversLogicsLogisticsLow-Altitude EconomyLubricantsLymphaticsMachine Learning and Knowledge ExtractionMachinesMacromolMagnetismMagnetochemistryMarine DrugsMaritimeMaterialsMaterials ProceedingsMathematical and Computational ApplicationsMathematicsMedical Ethics and BioethicsMedical SciencesMedical Sciences ForumMedicinaMedicinesMembranesMeritsMetabolitesMetalsMeteorologyMethaneMethods and ProtocolsMetricsMetrologyMicroMicrobiology ResearchMicroelectronicsMicromachinesMicroorganismsMicroplasticsMicrowaveMineralsMiningModellingModern Mathematical PhysicsMolbankMoleculesMultimediaMultimodal Technologies and InteractionMusclesNanoenergy AdvancesNanomanufacturingNanomaterialsNDTNetworkNeurogliaNeuroimagingNeurology InternationalNeuroSciNitrogenNon-Coding RNANursing ReportsNutraceuticalsNutrientsObesitiesOccupational HealthOceansOncoOpticsOptoelectronicsOralOrganicsOrganoidsOsteologyOxygenPandemicsParasitologiaParticlesPathogensPathophysiologyPeace StudiesPediatric ReportsPetsPharmaceuticalsPharmaceuticsPharmacoepidemiologyPharmacyPhilosophiesPhotochemPhotonicsPhotovoltaicsPhycologyPhyschemPhysical Sciences ForumPhysicsPhysiologiaPlantsPlasmaPlatformsPollutantsPolymersPolysaccharidesPopulationsPoultryPowdersPrecision OncologyPrimary and Hospital CareProceedingsProcessesProject Management HorizonsProsthesisProteomesPsychiatry InternationalPsychoactivesPsychology InternationalPublicationsPurificationQuantum Beam ScienceQuantum ReportsQuaternaryRadiationReactionsReal EstateReceptorsRecyclingRegional Science and Environmental EconomicsReligionsRemote SensingReportsReproductive MedicineResourcesRheumatoRisksRoboticsRomanian Journal of Preventive MedicineRuminantsSafetySciScientia PharmaceuticaSclerosisSeedsSemiconductors and Heterogeneous IntegrationSensorsSeparationsSexesSignalsSinusitisSmart CitiesSmart FisheriesSocial SciencesSociété Internationale d’Urologie JournalSocietiesSoftwareSoil SystemsSolarSolidsSpectroscopy JournalSportsStandardsStatsStratigraphy and SedimentologyStressesStroke ReportsSurfacesSurgeriesSurgical Techniques DevelopmentSustainabilitySustainable ChemistrySwiss Archives of Neurology, Psychiatry and PsychotherapySymmetrySynBioSystemsTargetsTaxonomyTechnologiesTelecomTextilesThalassemia ReportsTheoretical and Applied ErgonomicsTherapeuticsThermoTime and SpaceTomographyTourism and HospitalityToxicsToxinsTransplantologyTrauma CareTrends in Higher EducationTrends in Public HealthTropical Medicine and Infectious DiseaseUniverseUrban ScienceUroVaccinesVehiclesVenereologyVeterinary SciencesVibrationVirtual WorldsVirusesVisionWasteWaterWeldingWildWindWomenWorldWorld Electric Vehicle JournalYouthZoonotic Diseases Subscribe © 1996-2026 MDPI (Basel, Switzerland) unless otherwise stated Disclaimer Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content. Legal Notice Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Accessibility We use cookies on our website to ensure you get the best experience. Read more about our cookies here. Accept Share Link Copy clear Share https://www.mdpi.com/2460342 clear Back to TopTop
