
--- PAGE: 1 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.1) ---


--- PAGE: 2 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.2) ---


--- PAGE: 3 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.3) ---
The Social World of Batavia

--- PAGE: 4 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.4) ---
New Perspectives in
Southeast Asian Studies
Series Editors
Alfred W McCoy
R. Anderson Sutton
Thongchai Winichakul
Associate Editors
Warwick H. Anderson
Katherine Bowie
Ian Coxhead
Michael Cullinane
Paul D. Hutchcroft
Courtney Johnson
Kris Olds

--- PAGE: 5 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.5) ---
THE SOCIAL
WORLD OF
BATAVIA
Europeansand Eurasians
in ColonialIndonesia
Jean Gelman Taylor
Second edition
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN PRESS

--- PAGE: 6 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.6) ---
The University of Wisconsin Press
1930 Monroe Street, 3rd Floor
Madison, Wisconsin 53711-2059
www.wisc.edu/wisconsinpress/
3 Henrietta Street
London WC2E 8LU, England
Copyright © 1983,2009
The Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any format or by any means, digital, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, or conveyed via the Internet or
a Web site without written permission of the University of Wisconsin Press, except
in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles and reviews.
5 4 3 2
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Taylor, Jean Gelman, 1944-
The social world of Batavia : Europeans and Eurasians in colonial Indonesia /
Jean Gelman Taylor. - 2nd ed.
p. cm. - (New perspectives in Southeast Asian studies)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-299-23214-6 (pbk. : alk. paper)-ISBN 978-0-299-23213-9 (e-book)
1. Jakarta (Indonesia)-Ethnic relations. 2. Jakarta (Indonesia)-Social conditions.
3. Interracial marriage-Indonesia. 4. Elite (Social sciences)-Indonesia-Jakarta­
History. 5. Netherlands-Colonies-Indonesia-History. I. Title. II. Series.
HN7l0.J23T39 2009
303.48'25980492-dc22
2008043756
The illustrations in this book are reproduced with kind permission from the Rijks­
museum Amsterdam and the KITLV/Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast
Asian and Caribbean Studies, Leiden.

--- PAGE: 7 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.7) ---
For Howard Gelman,
Whose companionship is better than gold

--- PAGE: 8 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.8) ---


--- PAGE: 9 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.9) ---
Contents
List of Illustrations IX
List of Maps Xl
Acknowledgments XUI
Guide to the Text xv
Preface to the Second Edition xvii
Introduction xxv
1: Origins of the City of Batavia 3
Population, 3
Institutions and Laws, 20
114
135
159
175
199
6: The Inner Life of Late Colonial Society
Epilogue
New Explorations of European-Asian Encounters
Maps
2: Growth of the Settlement Society 33
3: The Web of Colonial Society: Batavia and Environs in the
Eighteenth Century 52
4: The Assault on Indies Culture 78
The Enlightenment in Batavia, 78
The British Interregnum, 96
5: The Destruction of VOC Society and the Creation of the
New Colonial
vii

--- PAGE: 10 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.10) ---
CONTENTS
Appendix 1: Family Trees
Appendix 2: Governors-General and Their Wives
Appendix 3: Family and Position in VOC Batavia
Notes
Glossary
Selected Bibliography
Index
viii
205
221
225
231
257
259
273

--- PAGE: 11 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.11) ---
Illustrations
"A VOC Senior Merchant and His Wife" 38
"The Cnoll Family" 40
"View of Batavia's Town Hall" 55
"Batavia Evening at Home" 63
"Dutch Wedding in Batavia" 65
"View of the Castle at Batavia" 89
"Roosje" 121
"Tobacco Planter and Family" 124
"Members of the Foltynski family in
their pavilion in Bandung" 133
"Mevr. 1. van Kloppenburg- Versteegh" 137
"Teacher Miss. A. Johan with
her pupils" 143
"Regent of Blora, R.M.T. Tjokronegoro
II and Family" 164
"Transfer of Technology" 190
"Indonesian law students in the
Netherlands" 194
IX

--- PAGE: 12 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.12) ---


--- PAGE: 13 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.13) ---
Maps
1: The Netherlands and VOC Asia 199
2: The Indonesian Archipelago 199
3: VOC trading posts in India and Ceylon 200
4: Java, early seventeenth century 200
5: Java, eighteenth century 201
6: Jacatra, 1619 202
7: Batavia, 1627 203
8: Batavia and southern suburbs,
early nineteenth century 204
Xl

--- PAGE: 14 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.14) ---


--- PAGE: 15 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.15) ---
Acknowledgments
This study could not have been made without help from many quarters. No one
can write on Indonesia's colonial history without acknowledging an immense
debt to the Dutch archivists and historians, and in particular to the late Drs. F.
de Haan and J. A. van der Chijs. Nor can I begin without acknowledging the
help of Dr. John R. W. Smail of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, who
guided me over a long period of research and writing. He was a most careful
critic, and his stimulating perspective and relish for the English language can­
not be forgotten. lowe him the special debt of student to mentor.
During my student days at Wisconsin, Mr. John Little and Mr. Mathew
Charles elucidated many Dutch terms for me, while Dr. Bana Kartasasmita and
Mr. Toenggoel Siagian guided me in Indonesian and encouraged my interest in
"Old Batavia." My thanks go to Dr. Bana also for assistance in preparing the
photographs which accompany the text. I would like to thank Ms. Dorothee
Buur, Reference Librarian of the Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde in Leiden, for her many kindnesses during my stay in the Nether­
lands. The staff of the Instituut library were particularly helpful to me. I thank,
too, Professor Rob Nieuwenhuys and Dr. M. A. P. Meilink-Roelofsz, who set
aside time to advise me in my studies; also Professors Paul W. Van der Veur
and William Frederick of Ohio University, Professor Robert Frykenberg of the
University of Wisconsin, and Mr. Giok-Po Oey of Cornell University Li­
braries. I wish particularly to acknowledge Dr. Robert Clodius, Ms. Janet
Franke, and the late Mrs. Liesl Tarkow of the University of Wisconsin Indo­
nesian Higher Education Projects, for whom it was a privilege to work.
The University of Wisconsin Graduate School awarded me a fellowship and
travel grant that allowed me to study in the Netherlands, for which I am
properly grateful. I wish to thank also the staff of the University of Wisconsin
Press, and particularly Ms. Mary Maraniss, for encouraging me to bring this
text to print.
And finally to my family: to my late father, the Reverend George Stewart
Taylor, to my mother, Louisa Jean Taylor, and to my husband, Howard
Gelman, my gratitude and sense of obligation.
XlII

--- PAGE: 16 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.16) ---


--- PAGE: 17 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.17) ---
Guide to the Text
For ease of reading, common English variants are used in the text for some
place names in Europe and in Asia. Thus the English form The Hague is em­
ployed, rather than the Dutch 's-Gravenhage, and the Celebes rather than the
Indonesian Sulawesi. Other place names in the Indonesian archipelago appear
in standard Indonesian spelling. Sri Lanka is referred to in the text by the name
the Dutch knew, Ceylon. The capital of Indonesia, Jakarta, is represented as
Batavia when it was a Dutch city and as Jacatra for the Sundanese town of the pre­
1619 period. Place names cited in the text are located on maps grouped together
following the text.
The spelling of personal names has not been altered. An asterisk beside a
surname indicates that the family tree is given in appendix 1. Abbreviations are
few: Mr. preceding a name represents the Dutch abbreviation of Meester in
de Rechten and is the lawyer's title; Drs. represents Doctorandus and is an aca­
demic title; VOC stands for Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie or United East
Indies Company. Foreign terms are translated into English when they first
appear in the text. Those used several times are listed in the glossary.
xv

--- PAGE: 18 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.18) ---


--- PAGE: 19 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.19) ---
Preface to the
Second Edition
This study of the social world that grew out of relationships between Eu­
ropean men and Asian women in ports along the trade routes of the Dutch
East Indies Company was first published in 1983 with the subtitle "Eu­
ropean and Eurasian in Dutch Asia." In his review of the book, Michael
Adas called for further research to broaden the social profile of colonial-era
communities and their urban settings.! This second edition, now subtitled
"Europeans and Eurasians in Colonial Indonesia," introduces in an added
chapter succeeding studies of that social world by another generation of
scholars with new skills, approaches, and interests.
Images stored in paint and photograph proved to be a turning point
for me in understanding what visitors and insiders meant when they called
people and habits "Indies" (Indische). I first encountered photographs of
Indies peoples when the late John R. W Smail gave me his copy of Tempo
Doeloe: Fotografische documenten uit het oude Indie, the photographic al­
bum assembled by Rob Nieuwenhuys under his pen name of E. Breton de
Nijs. The photographs and accompanying text span the years 1870-1914.
At the time I was making a close study of Raden Ajeng Kartini's letters.
The Nieuwenhuys photographs encompassed Kartini's brief lifespan,
1879-1904. Looking at those photographs (and they included one of Kar­
tini), I was struck by the men and women with European features who were
wearing variants of Javanese clothing and by the men and women with
Indonesian features who wore variants of Western clothing. On the pages
were officers of the colonial government, civil and military, Dutch and
Indigenous; there were Javanese and Dutch families, servants, street sell­
ers, craftsmen, entertainers, picnickers, club members, and amateur actors;
there were descendants of Java's royal and aristocratic houses and their
retainers. In short, here were the kinds of men, women, and children who
peopled Kartini's world.
Nieuwenhuys gave consecutive volumes of Tempo Doeloe the subtitle
"een verzonken wereld," a world gone, swept away. Indeed, the title Tempo
Doeloe is suggestive. It combines words from Dutch and Indonesian
xvii

--- PAGE: 20 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.20) ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
vocabularies and can be translated as "Time Past" or "Bygone Days."
Perhaps the late Rob Nieuwenhuys intended a subtle reference to Proust's
A la recherche du temps perdu; for him photograph, rather than madeleine
cookie, was the key to his past. Nostalgia might also be induced in readers
whose roots lie in the former colony of the Netherlands.
The Tempo Doeloe collection made me ponder for the first time about
the woman to whom Kartini wrote such long letters and whom she ad­
dressed as "darling Mama" and "my dear, sweet Angel." Dutch people who
were the recipients of Kartini's letters preserved them. Perhaps they sensed
that the writer was a remarkable personality, or Holland's long history of
literate culture had engendered in them habits of storing the written word.
On the other hand, their letters to Kartini do not seem to have been pre­
served by her descendants; at least, none has come to light in the century
that scholars have been studying this ardent recorder of lava's emerging
modernity. Nieuwenhuys's book prompted me not to indulge in elegiac
musings on someone else's past but to ask who were the colonial Dutch and
what was it in the women that elicited such outpourings from Kartini and
inspired so many ideals and ideas.
A passing inclination to find out about European women in official cir­
cles of the colony led me all the way back to 1610 and the arrival in Ambon
of a party of thirty-four women (of a completely different social class)
who had survived the ten-month sea journey from Holland. The Dutch
directors of the United East Indies Company (VOC) had sponsored them
to establish hearth and home and raise babies in the East. But by 1632 the
Company's directors took a less sanguine view of Holland's female pio­
neers. There were too many reports of the failure of mothers and babies
to thrive, of drunkenness, lewd behavior, the pursuit of riches, and the
powerful pull of home. That was pretty much the end of sponsored female
emigration from Holland. Now the directors and their delegates in the East
turned to legislating that "immoral conduct" with Asian women should
be made lawful, channeled into permanent unions, registered with civic
authorities, blessed by the (one true) church and monitored by its synod.
Could a history be written that took these beginnings up to the communi­
ties living between the covers of Tempo Doeloe?
The decade of the 1970s was a period when female postgraduates ap­
plied themselves to discovering women's history, questioned conventional
periodization, and judged narratives that were event-driven and political as
incomplete. It was also a dynamic period for the study of ex-colonies. There
was the challenge to reconceptualize histories that were organized around
the linear sequence of early kingdoms, the coming of Europeans, imperial­
ism, national awakening, and birth of Asian nation-states. A new genera-
xviii

--- PAGE: 21 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.21) ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
tion asked how the short period of European rule could be integrated into
the long histories of Asian societies.
Two scholars who profoundly influenced new writing on former colonies
were 1. C. van Leur and John Smai1.2 They argued that colonial construc­
tions of history had placed the Dutch at center stage. In the spotlight were
Dutch actions and Dutch motives, and the European historical context
was studied to explain history making in Indonesia. Van Leur used ship
and shore to illuminate his argument. Writers of colonial history, he ar­
gued, placed themselves in Indonesian islands to tell the story of Hindu
and Islamic kingdoms; then, as soon as Dutch ships were sighted on the
horizon, the historians clambered aboard and wrote Indonesian histories
looking over the shoulders of Dutch men. In a memorable lecture to his­
tory students at the University of Wisconsin, John Smail took the meta­
phor of a motorcar's headlights. Imagine a dark road, he said to us; the
car's headlights pick out what is on the road, but whatever is taking place
in the spaces alongside the road is in darkness, unremarked. Both Van Leur
and Smail made the point that colonial history gave clarity to Europeans,
while Asians melted into a "grey and undifferentiated" background, to use
Van Leur's words.
In my doctoral thesis, which subsequently became The Social World of
Batavia, I focused on contacts between Europeans and Asians and on cul­
tural transformations flowing from these encounters. The knowledge that
European men were fathers and husbands in Asia, as well as merchants and
sailors, drove my attempt to introduce women into this history and to ask
what were the consequences. The Social World of Batavia drew on archival
material that had already been published and, for the seventeenth and eigh­
teenth centuries, on sources such as inscriptions on tombstones, memorial
plaques, and specially commissioned silver trays and ceramic plates. I also
used colonial-era publications that included albums of paintings, portraits,
and drawings of people who lived in the years before the invention of the
camera. For the nineteenth and twentieth centuries I turned to newspapers,
colonial fiction, and photographs.
Nieuwenhuys's Tempo Doeloe had appeared in 1961. Some of the pho­
tographs in it were borrowed from private collections, but many were held
in the Documentation Center of the KITLV.3 When I first studied there
in the 1970s, the photographs were stored in filing cabinets, and I leafed
through folders marked "Views," "Mosques," "Cities," "Nobility," "Peas­
ants," and the like. In later years the researcher could trawl through data
cards on which were pasted small copies of the archived photographs and
such information as was known about provenance, date, and the names of
the people and places photographed. In recent years a project of putting
XIX

--- PAGE: 22 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.22) ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
the entire collection online now brings these important sources to everyone
with access to the Internet.
In 1978 Edward Said's Orientalism was published. In it he argued that
"the West" had created the image of a timeless, static, backward "East,"
had employed academics to acquire knowledge in order to subdue it, and
had deprived colonized peoples of the ability to represent themselves. Said's
Orient was Egypt and other Arabic-speaking societies to its east, not Asia.
Specialists in Arabic and Islamic studies criticized Said's partial and biased
reading of select texts. Scholars such as Robert Irwin point out that, until
very recently, for many English Protestants, "the territories of Islam were
remote and they knew little about them. A French or Catholic 'Other' was
much closer at hand."4
Said had not included in his reading works by non-Europeans, so he
was not able to discern a corresponding "accidentalism" when Arabs and
Asians wrote about the European Other. Nor was he acquainted with
scholars, such as the Dutch Jacobus Bontius, who worked alongside Asian
colleagues and wrote of them and their knowledge with respect. But Said's
book, which soon appeared in numerous reprints, influenced a whole new
generation of scholars of those parts of the world that had been colonized
by Western European states. A major consequence of his work was to re­
focus attention on white imperialists. Through this perspective Indigenous
peoples again took a secondary role in their own history, while material
about the colonized that had been accumulated under the auspices of co­
lonial rule was often discounted.
By the 1990s, colonial-era photographs, which were so crucial to my
analysis, had become as suspect as anthropologists' case studies were
thought to be in the 1980s.New specialists detailed how the intrusive cam­
eraman "othered" Natives, presented them as nameless "types," debased
them through poses amid fanciful collections of objects, and commodified
people through the mechanical reproduction of their images on thousands
of postcards that were distributed across the world without their permis­
sion or even knowledge. 5 There is no denying the camera's intrusive and
degrading stare in "ethnographic" photographs of naked people lined up
against yardsticks. But most of the photographs that Nieuwenhuys had
assembled were of fully clothed people. They were Europeans and Javanese
who hired a professional to photograph them in their own parlors, front
verandas, gardens, and workspaces. These photographs were intended for
the family album, to be displayed with pride in the home to its occupants
and visitors, to be sent as remembrances to friends and relatives.
Nieuwenhuys did not censor his material. He included photographs of
colonial regiments on the move, prisoners, the war dead, and judicial ex-
xx

--- PAGE: 23 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.23) ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
ecutions. He also included samples of photographs that had been taken
for specialized clienteles who wanted titillation from images of prostitutes
presented as alluring, ever available "types." He also included ambiguous
photographs of naked boys splashing in rivers with the family buffalo.
Such images tell a history of unequal power relations across divides of race,
age, gender, and income. They form a small part only of the photographic
record for Indonesia within the years framed by Tempo Doeloe. My anal­
ysis was based on photos that Javanese and Dutch had personally commis­
sioned for their albums and had placed into frames for display in their own
living spaces. I was not interested in fathoming what the European photog­
rapher was thinking. My interest was in the content of the photographs,
how the commissioners of the photographs chose to present themselves,
what they tell that complements or challenges or adds to records from the
conventional documentary sources of the historian.
Since 1983, when The Social World of Batavia was first published, there
have been an enormous number of studies exploring themes, times, and
topics essayed in the book. New generations of scholars have drawn on
unpublished archival material as well as on the visual record. This rich
corpus and my own further studies inevitably bring modifications to my
conceptualization of Mestizo society of the VOC years, as becomes evident
in the new chapter at the end of this second edition. I also now think that
the term concubine that I used for the Indonesian word nyai in chapters
on Indies life of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries did not accurately
capture the condition and status of the women to whom this label was
applied. Concubine was not appropriate because it carries exotic or pejora­
tive connotations, but I have not succeeded in finding a more appropriate
term. Partner in modern English usage refers to couples who live together
outside a legally registered marriage, but it carries today's connotations of
equality, which was not the case for the nyai. Common law wife does not
accurately convey the status either. Other writers have settled on the terms
housekeeper or mistress for nyai.
It seems to me that a term should be found that signals not the uniqueness
of the relationship but its ubiquity within Javanese society. The temporary
female in wealthy Javanese and Dutch households performed servant-type
duties, provided sexual services for the master, and could be the mother of
some of his children. Motherhood status did not necessarily guarantee the
woman permanent residence or honor. Partini Djajadiningrat relates in her
autobiography, for instance, that when she was two her mother was sent
away from the royal residence by her father, the future Mangkunegara VII.
Although Partini grew up in a household of many women, she describes
hers as the experience of being motherless. Later, when she was a teenager,
XXI

--- PAGE: 24 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.24) ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
Partini's mother was recalled into service. A photograph in the autobiog­
raphy shows Partini seated on a chair, her mother on the floor at her feet
alongside a current partner to Partini's father. 6
Twenty years after the publication of The Social World of Batavia came
my book Indonesia: Peoples and Histories. In it I tried to realize Smail's
concept of "autonomous history" by placing Indonesians at the center of
a narrative of the making of Indonesia. I conceived it as many histories of
many communities living in parallel worlds, their lives touching and inter­
secting, absorbing foreigners and the things foreigners brought or imposed
into their lives. In contrast to my first book, the Dutch were almost written
out of Indonesia. The chapter that closes this new edition of Social World
extends it by sampling a number of mainly English-language studies con­
nected to and developing themes in my 1983 study. In this new chapter I
signal the breadth and insights of these studies for Indonesian and Dutch
histories, and also for the broader "thickening of the human web."7
In Social World I tried to see what was going on in the dark spaces
alongside the highway. Histories from today's specialists draw on numerous
Indonesian and European languages and also on sources in Arabic to chal­
lenge large generalizations about European and Asian relationships; they
substitute the stuff of daily life for the big and politicized picture. In the
past, Dutch-language sources overwhelmed the more elusive sources extant
from Asian societies, so that our perceptions were (and are) often skewed or
lopsided. But Company and colonial Dutch men and women belonged to a
culture that preserved knowledge of all kinds in writing and thus produced
evidence that allows ordinary people to walk on to the historical stage. Past
and present are rich in endeavors of many to make sense of Indonesian his­
tories. I am grateful to all my colleagues and to the University of Wisconsin
Press for this opportunity of taking stock and continuing to learn.
NOTES
1 Michael Adas, Journal of Asian and African Studies 20, nos. 1-2 (1985): 124-26.
2 Van Leur's reflections on perspective in historiography had been made in a thesis de­
fended in 1934. They found a wider readership when his work appeared in English trans­
lation in 1955 as Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social and Economic
History (The Hague, Bandung: Van Hoeve). Smail's influential essay on Southeast Asian
historiography, "On the Possibility of an Autonomous History of Southeast Asia," fol­
lowed in the Journal of Southeast Asian History 2, no. 2 (July 1961): 72-102. The article is
reprinted in Autonomous Histories, Particular Truths: Essays in Honor of John Smail, ed.
Laurie Jo Sears (Madison: University of Wisconsin, Center for Southeast Asian Studies,
monograph no. 11, 1993), pp. 39-70.
3 The Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land-en Volkenkunde, or KIT LV, was founded in
1851 and is known in English as the Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and
Caribbean Studies.
XXll

--- PAGE: 25 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.25) ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
4 Robert Irwin, For Lust of Knowing: The Orientalists and Their Enemies (London: Pen­
guin, 2006), p. 291.
5 See, for example, essays in Elizabeth Edwards, ed., Anthropology and Photography, 1860­
1920 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), and Anne Maxwell, Colonial Photogra­
phy and Exhibitions: Representations of the «Native" and the Making of European Identi­
ties (London: Leicester University Press, 1999).
6 Partini: Recollections of a Mangkunagaran Princess, 2nd ed., as told to Roswitha Pamoen­
tjak Singgih (Jakarta: Djambatan, 1990), p. 81.
7 Concept and term are taken from 1. R. McNeill and William H. McNeill, The Human
Web: A Bird's-Eye View of World History (New York: Norton, 2003).
XXll1

--- PAGE: 26 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.26) ---


--- PAGE: 27 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.27) ---
Introduction
This study describes a colonial society that was formed in Dutch settlements on
the coasts of Asia and that evolved for a brief period into a ruling caste in the
Indonesian archipelago. It surveys aspects of colonial life that are seldom treated
in the general histories of Indonesia, where greater attention is given the political
and economic relations between Dutch and Indonesian. The aim is to comple­
ment these histories by showing a further dimension of Dutch colonial experi­
ence in Asia. Colonial society is viewed here as an autonomous entity between
the Muslim Indonesian world and Netherlands society, which at the beginning of
our period was Calvinist and newly independent of Roman Catholic Spain. The
book therefore does not discuss Netherlands society, the economic history of the
East Indies Company, or relations between Dutch and Asian rulers; nor does it
treat the histories of those Asian states that lay outside the reach of the Dutch, or
give ethnographic data on Indonesian peoples and cultures. Rather, it concen­
trates on the interaction between special groups of Asians and Europeans from
which a distinctive culture evolved.
At first glance" the book may seem like an old-fashioned history of Dutch
colonial society in the East, for the names of governors-general and of senior
merchants of the Netherlands East Indies Company are sprinkled through its
pages. Such characters as these have yielded place in recent histories to local
peoples, the peasantry and elites who were often depicted by earlier historians as
foils to the heroes of a European history staged in Asia. Since publication of
essays by J. C. van Leur and J. R. W. Smail,· Western historians of Indonesia
have concerned themselves with questions of perspective, and now write more
than fonnerly from the point of view of Indonesian peoples. This reorientation in
historical thinking has opened up new subjects of study and thereby expanded our
knowledge of Indonesia. It has led to a revision of the former characterization of
the colonial past as "three hundred and fifty years of Dutch role in Indonesia" by
looking for evidence of the extent and nature of that rule in the local histories of
Indonesia's ethnic groups. Still, the nature of Dutch society in Indonesia remains
somewhat obscure. In studying that society as it developed principally in the
colonial capital, Batavia, my book returns to an old subject but from a contempo-
xxv

--- PAGE: 28 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.28) ---
INTRODUCTION
rary point of view, tempered by the perspectives of van Leur and Smail. Using
such an approach, the history of Europeans in Indonesia sheds light not on
conquest but on Dutch social relations with Asians and on the influence of
Asia-born women on the colonial ruling elite.
In the older histories but passing mention was made of the social characteris­
tics of the Dutch administrative and trading centers established on the fringes of
Asian states in the seventeenth century. Nepotism was allegedly rampant in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but actual family relationships were nei­
ther detailed nor explained. More recently, Holden Furber and M. A. P. Meilink­
Roelofsz have pointed to the need for studying Company personnel in order to
enlarge our understanding of the Dutch overseas, and F. Lequin, writing in 1979,
signalled the "importance and possible influence of family-relations" as an
interesting variable to be anticipated from his analysis of data on Company
employees in Bengal in the eighteenth century. 2 In this book I have taken these
family relationships as an organizing center for study of Dutch colonial society.
Whilst this is a preliminary study based on published sources, it can be shown
that there developed an Indies clan system, one in which descent may be traced
through locally born women of mixed Asian and European ancestry, and through
which Dutch male immigrants forged alliances among themselves for control of
positions of power and wealth in the Company. My return to the govemors­
general, then, serves to inject into the story of the Dutch overseas the role of
Asians in shaping colonial culture.
The presence or absence of Europe-born women in the Dutch Asian settle­
ments is one measure of the nature of Dutch social life overseas; yet to date, the
subject of women has scarcely been examined in the general histories, and
information on Dutch female emigrants rarely appears in published documents.
There are, furthermore, few reliable figures for the number of women having
European status in many places of Dutch settlement before this century. Late­
nineteenth- and twentieth-century heirs to Dutch colonial culture have left ample
record of it in memoirs, novels, newspapers, paintings, and photographic collec­
tions, but Asian, European, and Eurasian women of East Indies Company times
have left scanty evidence of their contribution to the society of the settlements.
The sources I have used for such information are genealogical data, legal
decrees, inscriptions on tombstone and memorial plate, travelers' narratives, and
albums of old paintings, those available in the United States and those which I
could consult during a brief visit to the Netherlands. During my period of study,
the Batavian church registers of baptisms, marriages, and deaths that have been
acquired by the Genealogical Society of Utah were not catalogued and available
to the general public for research. When they are available and combined with
study of the personnel records stored in the Royal Netherlands Archives in The
Hague, these church registers, which date from 1619, should provide valuable
insight into the composition at all social levels of households in the chief Dutch
xxvi

--- PAGE: 29 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.29) ---
INTRODUCTION
settlement in Asia. The nature of the material that I could consult necessarily
limited my study to the Dutch elite, and the treatment of elite women, whether
European, Eurasian, or Asian, is episodic and selective here; but my findings
should give an indication of the possibilities for further research in this field.
The duration and intensity of contact between Europeans and Asians varied
considerably in the colonies of the fonner Western imperial powers. The Dutch
case pennits study of that interaction over a long period of time. Throughout this
history, colonial culture evolved in response to two key related conditions: the
changing perception of the settlements' distance from Europe and the growing
proportion, over time, of women among the immigrants from Europe. When the
political authority of the Netherlands seemed most remote and Asia-born women
dominated the female population of the settlements, there grew up a society with
interests of its own and a singular family system and network of clans whose
development is a major theme of the first part of my study. In the second half of
the nineteenth century, colonial society grew away from these roots in the East
Indies Company settlements. Now there developed a greater distinction between
the European and Eurasian components of colonial society. The Europeans, who
monopolized the senior levels of government, did not see themselves as the elite
of an autonomous society, but tended to retain their identity as immigrants and
their dependence on Europe, whilst the Eurasians were divorced from the
symbols of status of the colonial elite.
Indonesian societies were affected by the colonial culture of the Dutch in the
nineteenth century, too, for it spread with the expansion of Dutch territorial
power in the archipelago. Colonial culture, which combined parts of the cultural
legacies of European and Asian, was the medium through which Dutch and
Indonesian came to know each other. The epilogue to this book suggests
directions for further research into relations between the two in the period before
Indonesian nationalism brought an end to Netherlands rule and before remnants
of the old colonial society were absorbed within a new Indonesian order.
In this book I have used the word Mestizo throughout for persons of mixed
Asian and European ancestry and for the culture that grew up in the Dutch
settlements in Asia from the meeting of the two. Mestizo (feminine Mestiza) was
one of the tenns employed by the Dutch in the seventeenth and eight~nth
centuries to describe people of mixed birth. As used here, it signifies Eurasian,
but without the old Dutch distinction as to degree of proximity to a white male.
The tenn Mestizo characterizes a culture made up of many influences, extending
beyond the Dutch and Indonesian. It underlines the fact that the migrants on
Dutch ships represented many states in Europe and that the local peoples amongst
whom they lived included Indians, Japanese, Indonesians of all sorts, and people
descended from an earlier meeting of East and West, from unions between
Asians and the Portuguese.
For the purposes of my work, I use Indonesia and Indonesian in the geographic
xxvii

--- PAGE: 30 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.30) ---
INTRODUCTION
sense, for there existed, in the period under examination, no nation-state and no
archipelago-wide concept of Indonesian identity. India and Indian are similarly
geographic expressions in this text and period. I use Netherlands East Indies for
those parts of today's nation-state of Indonesia then under direct Dutch rule.
Indiesman denotes a European who partook of Mestizo culture in marriage
practice, habit, and loyalty. European here refers to a person born in Europe. The
tenn European community is u~ in the legal sense and could include, as will be
explained, persons born in Europe or Asia and certain persons of mixed,
Eurasian ancestry. Creole is used to mean a person born in Asia of Europe-born
mother and father.
The focus for my study of Mestizo culture is Batavia, the chief city of the
Dutch, one that within years of its founding dominated the Asia trade and the
Indonesian archipelago. In order to explain the nature of colonial society,
however, it is necessary from time to time to move out of Batavia and even the
archipelago, for Company officials and their families moved between the settle­
ments subsidiary to Holland's Asian capital. The framework for the study of
Dutch colonial society is greater than Indonesia, then, but it is also less than
Indonesia, for Mestizo culture had not spread into all parts of the archipelago
before war and revolution in the twentieth century ended Dutch rule. The
redefinition of the Netherlands Asian Empire early in the nineteenth century itself
made its mark on the development of colonial culture, since the actors were now
exclusively Indonesian and European, and since it coincided with a change in the
type of authority exercised by Holland and in the composition of the immigrant
group from Europe.
The principal trading settlements outside the archipelago that provide this
broad framework for the first part of the study were on the Malabar and
Coromandel Coasts of India, at Bengal and Surat, at Malacca, on Taiwan, and on
Ceylon, with the chief settlement at Colombo after Dutch conquest of the
Portuguese in 1656. Dutch merchants and soldiers numbered in the hundreds in
some of these trading posts, whereas other settlements, such as Hirado and later
Deshima in Japan, had at anyone time only tens of East Indies Company
employees. Most of these trading posts were planted between the years 1638 and
1663, when the Dutch were engaged in expelling the Portuguese from the Asian
trade. Within the archipelago itself the same process ofestablishing Dutch power
began with attacks on the Portuguese at Ambon (1605) and on the Spanish in the
Temate-Tidore islands.
The Indonesian world which the Dutch came to know in the seventeenth
century was the zone that comprehended the port cities on Java's north coast, the
southern ann of the Celebes, and the spice islands further to the east, with highly
mobile traders living in wards in the ports according to their areas of origin. The
Dutch made contact, too, with the agriculture-based kingdom of Mataram,
whose court was in Central Java. Traders from many parts of Asia exchanged
xxviii

--- PAGE: 31 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.31) ---
INTRODUCTION
Indonesian luxury goods for textiles, porcelain, coins, and medicinal products
from China, India, and the Arab world, and for the rice which Matamm' s rulers
collected from a settled, homogeneous peasantry controlled through a bureau­
cracy of appointed officials and fietbolders. Rulers of the ports were Muslim, as
were rulers of Mataram, but the court life of the latter was deeply influenced by
the Hindu-Buddhist culture of earlier genemtions of Brahmanic religious special­
ists. In the early seventeenth century when the Dutch first arrived in Indonesian
waters, Mataram was attempting to enforce actual rather than nominal suzerainty
over sultanates on the north coast of Java and beyond.
In the course of establishing trading settlements, the Dutch became the
dominant naval power in the Indonesian archipelago. Their Asian trade was
organized through the United East Indies Company (Verenigde Oost-Indische
Compagnie, referred to frequently here by the Dutch initials VOC). It had
received from the Netherlands States-General in 1602 an exclusive charter for
trade and enforcement of Dutch interests against competitors. Since the East
Indies Company was a commercial as well as a governing agent in Asia, its
business was conducted by a hierarchy of officials called merchants, with
headquarters in Batavia after 1619.
The Company ended in bankruptcy late in the eighteenth century. By that
time, however, its Asian empire had ceased to consist of the network of trading
settlements, and its navy had yielded control of the inter-Asian trade to the
English East India Company. The Dutch company, instead, had acquired territo­
rial power through a long process of intervention in local dynastic disputes and
wars between Indonesian states. Increasingly, trade goods for the Company's
European markets were acquired as tribute from the Indonesian peoples under its
rule, rather than through commerce.
At the time of the VOC's financial collapse, its territorial power was limited
largely to Java, but under rule from the Netherlands through the ministry of
colonies in the nineteenth century, Dutch territorial power slowly expanded into
the hinterlands of the coast settlements in the archipelago. In the nineteenth
century, the agent of Dutch power was the civil servant rather than the VOC
merchant, but the colonial capital remained Batavia.
The origins of Dutch colonial society and culture in Indonesia lie, then, in the
Asian trading settlements of the East Indies Company. Colonial society's devel­
opment can be traced with greatest continuity in the chief of these settlements,
Batavia, which was built over the sixteenth-century port, Jacatra, in whose
memory the capital of today's Republic of Indonesia is named. In addition to
continuity of settlement, there are threeother reasons for focusing on Batavia for
a study of the development of colonial society: Batavia's population, Asian as
well as European, was imported; this population developed in a degree of
isolation from the homelands of its original, imported peoples, cut off from the
rest of Java by high city walls and by jungle; and Batavia was to its European
XXIX

--- PAGE: 32 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.32) ---
INTRODUCTION
community a world in itself, with interests quite distinct from those of the VOC
in Holland. Concentration on the capital of Dutch Asia allows comprehension of
the Dutch in Indonesia on their own terms rather than as the corrupt despots and
smugglers of some Dutch texts, or the imperialists of the Indonesian. It is to the
early history of this settlement that we now tum to study the formation of Dutch
society and culture in Asia.
xxx

--- PAGE: 33 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.33) ---
The Social World of Batavia

--- PAGE: 34 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.34) ---


--- PAGE: 35 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.35) ---
1
Origins of the City of Batavia
POPULATION
WHEN THE DUTCH NAVIGATOR Comelis Houtman first put in at Jacatra on 13
November 1596, the town was a minor port lying across the mouth of the
Ciliwung River on the northwest coast of Java. Its inhabitants, principally
members of the Sundanese ethnic group and numbering several thousands,
lived within a bamboo enclosure; there was a small settlement of Chinese
traders and arrack brewers outside the wall on the north side. Jacatra was a
vassal of Bantam, which was at the time a major port in the pepper trade and
one of the sultanates defying claims by the Central Javanese kingdom of
Mataram to suzerainty over the entire island.
The Dutch were the first Europeans to stop at Jacatra. Portuguese traders
never settled there. The town's chief harbor master spoke Portuguese, how­
ever, which illustrates how that tongue had established itself as a major lan­
guage of international commerce in the markets of Asia. From 1596 to 1610
Dutch ships called at Jacatra for provisions. In the latter year a contract was
signed between the town's ruler, Wijaya Krama, and Jacques I'Hennite, agent
for the Netherlands East Indies Company, giving the Dutch land in the Chinese
quarter and pennission to build a stone house within a walled compound.1
The first years at Jacatra passed peaceably enough. Towards the end of 1618,
however, agents of England's East India Trading Company were also assigned
land and privileges in Jacatra, and Jan Pieterszoon Coen, then second-in­
command for the Dutch Company in Asia, determined to establish supremacy
over the town. He would make it a rendezvous for shipping, the chief entrepOt
for Dutch warehouses, and the seat of Dutch government in the East. The
Company's directors had been urging this course since their first appointment
of a governor-general nine years earlier. Late in 1618, then, Coen withdrew to
the Moluccas to assemble a fleet that was to destroy the Jacatrans and Bantam­
mers and their English allies.
On 23 December 1618, while the Dutch compound at Jacatra was under
siege from the groups leagued against the VOC, a roll call had been taken by
senior merchant Pieter van den Broeck of all residing within its walls. Already
3

--- PAGE: 36 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.36) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
the Dutch were showing characteristics that were to be enduring features of
their settlements in Asia and for which they had no precedent in their native
city-states in the Netherlands: they were owners of slaves and took concubines
from among the local women. Thus those answering to the roll call, some 350
in all, were found to include both free and slave Asians, as well as European
merchants, settlers, women, and soldiers. 2 These were the key elements of
colonial society throughout Company times. They will be reviewed here in the
categories originally assigned to them within the Company's system of
governance.
Principal among the inhabitants of the beleaguered Jacatra settlement and in
all the Dutch settlements in Asia was the group known as merchants. They
derived their authority from the central board of directors of the VOC, whose
policy decisions, taken at their twice-yearly meetings in Holland, were binding
on all their representatives in the East. The six commercial chambers which
composed the East Indies Company outfitted their own ships and recruited their
own personnel for service in Asia. But appointment of the chief of these, the
governor-general, his second-in-command the director-general of trade, and the
councillors of the Indies-who together made up the supreme government of
the Dutch in Asia-was made by the directors.
The governor-general and his Council were required to report annually to the
Company's directors and to submit for their approval all appointments, regula­
tions, and edicts enacted locally. In the East, however, in the VOC centuries,
when the interval between reporting decisions taken and receipt of confirmation
or disallowance could be as long as thirty months, the governor-general and his
colleagues on the Council held near-absolute powers over the inhabitants of
Dutch settlements.
In the first years of settlement the most senior officials were sent out directly
from Holland to conduct the Company's business. But soon they were chosen
also from among men with years of experience in Asia who were promoted
locally, although such promotion always required confirmation from the
Europe-based directors. Just below this group of senior officials were the mer­
chants in three descending ranks: senior merchant, merchant, and junior mer­
chant. A trading post might be headed by a man with rank of senior merchant or
governor, according to its size and importance in the Company's Asian empire.
Governors were named councillors extraordinary of the Indies.
All Company officials in the East were subordinate to the hierarchy at
Batavia, as Jacatra was renamed following Coen's destruction of the town. It
was from Batavia that appointments to the subsidiary settlements were made
and general orders issued, and it was to Batavia that officials looked for transfer
and promotion. All senior boards of the VOC in Asia were located in Batavia:
4

--- PAGE: 37 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.37) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
the governing Council of the Indies, the supreme court, the chief bookkeeper's
office, and warehouses.
If we now look at the civilian ann of the Dutch East Indies Company in Asia
from the bottom up, we find at the lowest level copyists and clerks. In the early
years of Batavia they were quartered at the Castle that replaced the original
Dutch compound. They ate at a common table, for it was as a bachelors'
society that the settlement was first run. Their hours were long and exacting,
taking no more account of the climate than of the food they ate or of the heavy
woollen clothing they clung to.
In theory, a clerk possessed of diligence and wit could move up the ranks of
the Company to assistant and then bookkeeper, and by degrees to junior mer­
chant and then merchant. He could next expect to act as administrator of one of
the Company's warehouses or be sent to head one of the other settlements.
Later he could be raised to governor of one of the more important settlements
such as Ambon or Malacca. With good health and luck the fonner clerk could
then be transferred back to Batavia as councillor and eventually even become
governor-general. In fact some did. Governors-General Hendrik: Zwaarde­
croon, Jacob Mossel, Johannes Thedens, Abraham Patras, and Reynier de
Klerk, in the eighteenth century, started as either ship's boy or soldier, switch­
ing to the civilian, clerical service when they arrived in Batavia. Govemor­
General Antonio van Diemen took this route in the first half of the seventeenth
century, closer to the period we are discussing.
Those so succeeding were few in number. :Death took a great many men
within years of their leaving Holland, and patronage and connections also
played their part in a man's rise. Mattheus de Haan, for instance, who became
governor-general in 1725, spent twenty-four years in climbing from assistant to
senior merchant and fifty-three years altogether in reaching highest office.
Gustaaf Willem van Imhoff, on the other hand, rose through the ranks of junior
to merchant and then senior merchant in only four years, and was installed as
governor-general after just fifteen years of service. His promotions were accel­
erated by his powerful connections with the Company's directors in Amster­
dam.
Also influencing a man's climb in the hierarchy was his nationality. Many
states in Europe were represented among the Company's employees, but it was
only the Dutch who held the highest posts. Exceptions to this rule were few: a
couple of Gennans, in Thedens and van Imhoff; a descendant of French Hugue­
nots, in Patras; a Eurasian, in Dirk van Cloon, for instance. A man's religion
also influenced his career. Civilians were required to be of the Refonned faith,
although even in the seventeenth century a man like Governor-General Joan
Maetsuyker, who was rumored to be a Roman Catholic, could reach the top. It
was not until the middle of the following century, however, that a govemor-
5

--- PAGE: 38 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.38) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
general could afford openly to display allegiance to a Protestant denomination
other than the Dutch Reformed.
Civilians signed renewable contracts committing them to five years of ser­
vice. Coen, when governor-general, constantly complained to the directors of
incompetence in men sent out and on occasion returned them to the Netherlands
in disgrace, but others who signed contracts renewed them again and again, and
some chose to remain as free townsmen and settle permanently in Indonesia. As
time went on, the consequence which senior officials had enjoyed while in
office compelled recognition after their retirement, and they continued to take
precedence over lesser men in public ceremonies.
For some, the confines of Batavia were the confines of the world. Others had
more varied careers, moving between the secondary settlements, accompany­
ing embassies to China and Japan, journeying into the interior of Java to the
Mataram court, or following VOC armies. In whatever position, the merchant
group stood at the apex of European communities in the Asian settlements, and
they remained, throughout the VOC era, superior in rank, authority, and social
distinction to the captains of the Company's army and navy. A few among this
merchant group were also men of learning, and recorded in prose or verse the
momentous events in which they took part, or dedicated themselves to translat­
ing the Bible into Asian tongues. The history of their intellectual pursuits and
growing knowledge of the world in which they found themselves will unfold
with the narration of the growth of colonial settlement. Throughout the VOC
era, however, while dominating colonial life in the East politically and setting
social standards for all the Company's subjects, the merchant group constituted
but a fraction of the populations of Batavia and the subsidiary settlements.
More numerous among the European group were the soldiers of the VOC army.
Approximately seventy of those responding to senior merchant van den
Broeck's 1618 roll call in the Jacatra compound were in fact soldiers. They
were not all Dutch, if we are to judge from figures C. R. Boxer gives for the
year 1622.3 The Batavia garrison was then 143 strong and 77, or half, were
Germans, French, Scots, English, Danes, Flemings, and Walloons. The pres­
ence of other nationalities than Dutch was to be a constant feature of the Indies
army. The Norwegian Frederik Andersen Bolling, who signed up with the
Dutch Company's army in 1669, for instance, explains daily brawls among
soldiers as arising because "there were so many different nationals," and
another foreigner in the VOC army, Johann Gottlieb Worms, says that in 1710
there were only ten Dutchmen in all Batavia's militia.4 Clearly it was not a
distinctively Dutch culture that was transmitted in contacts with local people.
This fact partly explains why Dutch was not naturally used as the language of
Company settlements.
Seventeenth-century Europe was a battleground for politics and religion.
6

--- PAGE: 39 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.39) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
Many of those signing the five-year bond of service as Company soldiers were
displaced persons and the destitute. They were often in poor health before they
undertook the sea journey to Batavia. In the seventeenth century the voyage
could last as long as ten months. Confined quarters and spoiling food further
undermined the soldiers' health.
We have descriptions of conditions aboard the East Indiamen from Nicolaus
de Graaff, who in the course of his long life and many years at sea made five
journeys to Indonesia. As ship's surgeon he was in an excellent position to
observe the fevers that struck passengers and crew as they neared the equator.
De Graaff first saw Batavia on 10 September, 1640 after a voyage lasting eight
months and four days. Eighty of the 300 leaving Holland had died. "It was as if
the plague was in the very Ship," de Graaff later recalled, "and the men were
tormented and half-crazed. Some of them had to be tied to their Bunks.
. . . Teeth simply fell out of the mouths of many because of Scurvy, and their
gums were so swollen, blackened and rotted that we had to cut and wash away
the flesh every day. Many of our Crew also had serious, cancerous ulcera­
tions. "5 Many died within months of setting foot on shore.
It has been common to suppose that the Company's soldiers were men of low
character in addition to being poorly educated and without resources. Such a
view starts principally with Coen. Writing to the directors in 1628, he com­
plained of the soldiers' laziness, stupidity, and smutty language.6 Some recruits
were orphaned boys, sent by the charity houses of Dutch towns on ten-year
bonds and at a few guilders a month. But others were men of education and
standing in their communities. These, however, were soon transferred to the
civilian ann of the Company's service and rose through the ranks as book­
keepers and merchants.
Of the ordinary soldier we catch only glimpses, and then from sentences
passed by the supreme court that was established in Batavia in 1617. The most
common crimes were insubordination, blasphemy, brawling, and drunkenness,
and punishments included branding, labor on the chain gang, and execution.
More than a century passes before a soldier's voice is heard, and then it is
through letters begging release from the contract and repatriation.7
The common soldier also makes his appearance in records the Batavia church
kept of baptisms, communicant membership, and weddings. In pages of the
Marriage Register reproduced in E. C. Godee Molsbergen's illustrated history
of the Dutch East Indies Company, one can still read the entry for 10 February
1630. On that day Claes Jacobsz. of Gouda, soldier, married Wybrecht Jansd.
of Amsterdam, widow of one Jan IJsbrantsz. Another entry states that in 1622
Abraham Strycker, Hcaptain of this place," married Aeltjen Lubberts of Am­
sterdam, who had reached Batavia on the ship Heusden. 8
It will be noted that both Strycker and Jacobsz. married women who had
emigrated from Holland, though that is not the usual image we have of Batav-
7

--- PAGE: 40 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.40) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
ian life in the early seventeenth century. Few Dutchwomen migrated before the
opening of the Suez Canal (in 1869), with the result that ordinary soldiers
usually took local women as their partners. It became common in ballads to
celebrate the pleasures of wine, "black women," and the walks of Batavia.
The hostility and contempt for Asian women that are such striking features of
some ballads, however, may also reflect the ordinary soldier's point of view.
Take, for instance, these verses from "Farewell to Batavia":
I give to you Batavia
As I depart for my Fatherland.
There lives my soul, my joy, my heart and life
On Netherlands' sweet strand.
India, you may parade your harlots.
Those black, lewd cattle never shall
Lead me from out the citadel of virtue
However beguilingly they eye me. 9
Soldiers were always the largest European component in Dutch settlements
in Indonesia. From sheer numbers, theirs was the group to have most contact
with local peoples, and this mainly through their liaisons with Asian women.
But since there were few among them possessed of an education, there is none
to tell us of the exact nature of relations struck between soldiers of the Honor­
able Company and Asians. One can only conjecture that little in the way of
European civilization was transmitted. Bereft of formal education, stemming
from the deprived of Europe, soldiers could not pass on a typically Dutch
bourgeois culture to their wives, mistresses, or children.
Few of these children grew to adulthood counting themselves as part of the
European group. A handful might find their way to the Company's poorhouse
or orphanage. The majority, it must be assumed, were abandoned by the father
through either his death, his desertion of the mother, or his escape to the
Netherlands. to Such children grew up in the mother's ethnic ward of the city or
perhaps eked out an existence in one of the Christian Indonesian quarters.
There the boys became candidates for companies of militia formed as early as
1622 for night watch duty and fire prevention and as auxiliaries in the Com­
pany's campaigns. The girls were brides for new generations of soldiers and
men of that mixed group designated variously by the Dutch as Mardijkers
(free[d]men) and Christian Natives (to be introduced in the next chapter).
It is unlikely that changes in living patterns-in food, entertainment, vocabu­
lary, and so forth-which European soldiers acquired through their Asian
wives and mistresses had much influence beyond the barracks. The social gap
between them and civilians stretched wide, particularly after 1650 when the
governor-general no longer felt beholden to call army officers to his table. Until
that time it had been customary for governors-general to give dinners to officers
8

--- PAGE: 41 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.41) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
departing for battle, captains of the return fleet, and envoys to the courts of
Asia.
Few soldiers can have achieved the promise held out in F. G. Drieduym's
song, written around 1670, that "if everything works out right / You can
become a lord there." II But some men did make fortunes in Asia, causing a
number of their fellow soldiers and merchants to stay on in Indonesia as "free
townspeople" after their contracts had expired.
We first hear of townspeople in 1616 stationed in the eastern part of the
archipelago, and two years later as part of the group under siege in the Jacatra
settlement. The terms under which they settled are described in a report Coen
sent the VOC's directors in 1616: "To promote the Company's business and
acting upon Your Excellencies' resolution, we have approved the request for a
discharge from the Company's service of various persons who have served their
time, provided they make their residence in the Moluccas, Ambon, or Banda,
and we have granted them permission to sail yachts, junks or other small craft
between these islands with cargoes of rice and other provisions and confec­
tions, but they may not trade in clothing, silk or silken garments. ' ,12
Settlement in Indonesia upon expiration of one's bond, or as a migrant,
required written permission. In Holland this was sought from one of the mem­
ber chambers of the VOC, but in Indonesia application had to be made to the
highest -ranking merchant. The new burgher had to swear an oath of loyalty and
obedience to the Company's laws before the aldermen's council. 13 Burghers
also vowed to engage only in such business as the directors pleased. In time the
list of places in which free townspeople might lawfully reside was expanded,
with most choosing Batavia or settlements in Ceylon. They were liable to
military duty in defense of the Company's possessions, and they might not
marry or repatriate without written permission. Furthermore, for actions judged
troublesome, burghers could be forcibly repatriated, reduced to soldiers' ranks,
or placed before the mast.
Coen often complained of the behavior of free citizens. Governor-General
Comelis van der Lijn was another. His complaint, made in a letter to the VOC
directors, affords us a glimpse of Batavia at mid-century: "While Batavia is
progressing daily in trade within its walls, as well as in agriculture outside
them, due to the assembly of many nations within and to the Chinese who
cultivate the fields round about, the Dutch burghers apparently have little
interest in any of it. All they want is to grab riches in the easiest possible
manner so they can fritter them away in the Netherlands, instead of committing
themselves for a while to stabilize Batavia. ' ,14
The circumstances were these. Free townspeople found little scope to earn a
livelihood. Most land around Batavia was already owned by senior Company
9

--- PAGE: 42 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.42) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
officials and leased to Chinese sugar cultivators, IS while in commerce few
legitimate areas were open to private trade and "Heathens and Moors" were
favored over free settlers. These complaints and others the burghers set out in a
letter to the Company's directors on 10 January 1650. This was one of the rare
occasions when they spoke out as a group. The directors were not sympathetic,
but renewed the obligation of free townspeople to submit to Company rules and
authorized the governor-general to dispatch back to the Netherlands any "dis­
turbers of the general order in the East Indies, without having to give any
reason other than maintaining the well-being and authority of the Indies
government. "16
Some burghers profited nevertheless. They might be appointed vice-president
of the city aldennen or captain of the militia, the two highest offices to which a
burgher could aspire in all the long history of Company rule. The aldennen's
council, composed of leading free townsmen, had been fonned in Batavia as
early as 1620, signaling the city's rapid growth and the need for an authority to
collect taxes, maintain the canals, organize fire prevention, and the like. Unlike
the case in Holland's municipalities, the town hall where aldennen convened was
never the center of Batavia's civic life. Power lay always in the Castle, which
housed the governor-general and councillors of the Indies. A councillor of the
Indies always acted as president of the aldennen and attended their meetings. All
decisions of the town council had to be approved by the governor-general.
Aldennen usually held their post for two years, and new members were sworn in
each year on May 30, the anniversary of Coen' s victory at Jacatra in 1619 and
most important of the public holidays celebrated in Batavia.
Militia officers were chosen in the week following the May 30 festivities.
The companies they commanded were composed of adult males with the status
of free townsmen. In the earliest days of settlement, companies of European
burghers were called to join in the defense of Vex: possessions and their very
lives-for example, during the siege of Batavia by Matanlm troops in 1628.
Dipping into instructions from that year one reads that "Bartholomeus Cunst,
burgher of this town, shall take several musketeers to the new town ramparts
near the Gelderlandt redoubt in order to defend the bulwarks and bridges. "17
Later, when the Dutch were well entrenched, burghers' military duties became
largely ceremonial and the numbers under anns shrank.
Population estimates are extraordinarily difficult to make for the entire Com­
pany period, as there were no regular head counts of municipal residents. Coen
says there were 2,000 in Batavia in 1620, and another source has it that the
city's inhabitants totalled 8,000 just four years later. IS Throughout the Vex:
period the proportion of burghers to Company employees was small, and they
were always few in number. Figures from 1673, for instance, give 340 of the
total population of 7,286 living outside the walls of Batavia as adult Dutch
burghers. 19 In part, the small numbers can be explained by the high mortality
10

--- PAGE: 43 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.43) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
rates and by the failure of the Company to retain burghers who at first applied to
stay. However, the size of the free community in the seventeenth century
depended primarily on the colonization policies favored by the Company's
directors.
Their scheme was simple, if ambitious. An absolute monopoly on trade in
the Indonesian archipelago was to be enforced by Dutch naval might. Spices
and other goods would be delivered to the Company warehouses at fixed prices
under agreements with local rulers or arrangements with Dutch lessors of land,
as in Banda. All goods would be exported on Company ships to Europe or to
other ports and factories in Asia and the Middle East. To avoid private trading,
strict controls would be placed on the number of persons sent from Holland,
while the baggage of those repatriating would be regulated for amount and
contents. It was soon found, however, that clerks, merchants, soldiers, and
seamen needed the services of other specialists, and already on Govemor­
General Pieter Both's fleet, which reached Indonesia in 1610, there were
shipwrights, carpenters, sailmakers, and other artisans.
The directors had no vision of planting colonies of Dutch settlers around the
world. In their earliest instructions they spoke only of the need for a central
"rendez-vous" in Indonesia's islands. Among their employees were men
whose more expansive views had been shaped by actual service in the East.
Coen was one. In dispatch after dispatch he called for types of migrants needed
to build a pennanent settlement and a civilization as he knew it: fanners,
craftsmen of all sorts, clergy, and schoolteachers. Not that it was to be an
authentically Dutch colony, for slave labor held an important part in his
schemes.
Pitching his appeal to the legendary niggardliness of the directors, Coen
explained how colonies would save money. Migrant settlers would provide
generations of men for the VOC's annies and for clerical jobs. And he advo­
cated that colonists be drawn from the orphanages of the Netherlands, which
had control of parentless minors living on municipal charity. Coen was confi­
dent that orphans, having no relatives, fortune, or ties of sentiment to draw
them back to Holland, would become pennanent residents of the Indies. He
also hoped that as products of strict Calvinist upbringing, they would be less
vicious elements in the Dutch settlements than the adult immigrants.
While Coen was always the most astringent in his judgments of the character
of the Dutch settler, he understood that certain conditions were needed before
rough settlers could be trnnsfonned into peaceable citizens. One was a secure
means of livelihood, and he therefore urged on the directors a more liberal
policy on private trade. At times the directors acted on this advice, but in 1676
they banned nearly all private commerce as "a pestilence and cancer in the
Company's body" that was to be stamped out "with all vigor. "20 Burghers,
they opined, should become fanners or small shopkeepers.
11

--- PAGE: 44 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.44) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
There was another inducement needed to build up a settlers' colony. Coen,
who was never a man to mince words, put it this way: "Everyone knows that
the male sex cannot survive without women. And yet it seems that Your
Excellencies have planted a colony without wishing to. To make up for this
lack we have looked for funds and have had to buy many women at high prices.
Just as you, Sirs, would only send us the scum of the land, so people here will
sell us none but scum either.... Should we expect to get good [citizens] from
rejects, as you apparently expect? Shall we have to die out to the last man? We
therefore request Your Excellencies, that if you cannot get honest married folk,
then send us young girls, and we shall hope that things will go better than our
experience with older women to date. ' '21 This letter raises another issue in the
debates of the seventeenth century on burghers and colonization, and brings to
the fore the category "women" listed in the roll call of 1618.
Thirty-six women had sailed with Both's fleet in 1609. Two of them did not
survive the journey, which lasted more than ten months. These women pioneers
were wives to soldiers and sailors in the VOC's employ. Most were sent to
Ambon, the oldest of the Company's pennanent settlements. Perhaps some also
found their way to Jacatra and are among those identified only as "some
women and children" by senior merchant van den Broeck. Of the surviving
thirty-four we know nothing. The women were probably illiterate and have left
no record of their own. Although selected to be progenitors of the Dutch
settlements in Asia, they rarely obtrude in the records of Company business,
which deal with the weighty matters of commerce,22 and so it is only through
the unsympathetic eyes of men that we catch an occasional glimpse of them,
and primarily through Coen. "As far as domestic matters are concerned," he
writes the directors, "you will have heard from the Governor-General [Both]
how ill your good intentions have turned out, that is, with the arrival here
[Ambon] of the married couples. Our reputation has suffered badly and the
Indians are absolutely scandalized by them, because of their bestial living, their
constant drunkenness and lewdness. "23
It seems that Coen was convincing in his arguments advanced in behalf of
colonization by "decent, married folk." By 1621 the directors had decided to
further his vision of recreating Holland in Asia. They wrote Coen that same
year with the encouraging news that three families would sail for Batavia on the
Mauritius bringing several young girls with them.
Girls so transported received a set of clothing from the Company, and it later
became customary to give each a dowry upon marriage. They received no
wage, but signed a contract in the ordinary way of VOC employees binding
them to five years in the East. If they were already married upon emigrating
they were bound to stay fifteen years, and the Company made special allow­
ances to such wives in clothing and extra rations.24 The Batavian government
12

--- PAGE: 45 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.45) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
was obliged to provide suitable housing and other assistance to these pioneer
families.
The first six girls so provided for arrived in 1622. They were called "Com­
pany daughters," a name which stuck and which never shed its pejorative
overtones, despite the great social jump many of them made through marrying
into the merchant group. That same year a letter from the Amsterdam chamber
announced the departure of a large party of women, most of them single. This
is one of the earliest records of its type, and unlike most entries in the Dagh
Register or Daily Register which was kept at Batavia, it lists the women by
name, age, and place of birth where known. "Various persons, married and
single, are being sent on the Leyden," the letter reads: "Maritjen Jacobs from
Briel, wife of Claesz. Pietersz. Verslepen, visitor of the sick, who has already
gone out on the 'Gouden Leeuw' .... The aforementioned Maritjen Jacobs
has agreed to act as midwife if necessary, and for that the Company has granted
her a chemise and other articles of clothing .... Gilles van Mol, master brick­
layer, has been engaged at 12 guilders a month, and his wife Madaleen at 8
guilders a month .... Hans van der Voorde has been engaged as an authority
on silks, porcelain and other rare objects at f. 18 a month; and his wife has been
hired for f. 12 a month as mother and supervisor of all the young girls.... "
The list of the unmarried girls began: "Anneken Meynerts from Jeveren, about
20 years old; Angnietje Coninck from Antwerp, aged about 12; Maritjen Jans
from Munster; Elsjen Barents from Husum, 13; Trijntjen Jans from Embden,
11; Anneken Claes from Bergen in Norway, 16.... "25
The girls must have been orphans or members of extremely poor families. It
is not to be expected that daughters of the prosperous would be allowed to head
for the Indies. Even if they survived the sea voyage and diseases of Batavia, life
was full of dangers for the young and unattached. Letters of the Company's
senior officials afford an occasional glimpse of the conditions female immi­
grants had to expect in the settlements early in the seventeenth century, and
these included prostitution and the denial of rights to repatriation. 26
A few women of good family did travel to Indonesia, the dangers notwith­
standing, even in the earliest days of settlement. They came as wives of senior
officials. Margaretha Nicquet was one of the very first.27 She accompanied her
husband, Gerard Reynst, to Indonesia in 1614 when he succeeded Both as
Governor-General. She lived for the most part on board ship, sailing between
fortified factories in the Moluccas and Bantam. Governor-General Reynst died
in December 1615. The date of Margaretha's death is not known; we know only
that it was before 1619 and occurred in the factory at Jacatra.
Living on board ship and constantly moving, Margaretha Reynst-Nicquet
could not promote a Dutch style of life in Indonesia. Coen had something quite
different in mind when he wrote urging the directors to include several socially
prominen t families among the migrants. 28 From the first experiments with
13

--- PAGE: 46 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.46) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
colonization, he knew the Company daughters were not likely to recreate the
God- fearing, sober circles of Holland's bourgeoisie amidst the drunkenness and
displays of wealth that were a part of settlement life from the beginning. He
himself insisted that he be given pennission to take a wife out East before he
would accept a second tenn as governor-general. His choice was Eva Ment. In
1627 she sailed to the Indies, accompanied by her brother and sister, to take up
the task of "civilizer." She was then just twenty-one.
Not every official in the Company's Indies service was of the same mind as
Coen. Hendrik Brouwer, although he returned to Indonesia as governor-general
in 1632 bringing his wife, her sister, and two maids, yet opposed female
immigration. He felt Coen had been too liberal "from blind obsession with
Batavia's growth. " Burghers worked to make money and repatriate rather than
to settle pennanently overseas. "Many believe," he continued in a letter to the
directors, "that it is the Dutch women who are most responsible for this tum of
events. They come here poor and, having prospered, never stop complaining
until they can return home and appear before old acquaintances in their new
riches .... There are good households here where the men are married to
Indian women, their children are healthier, the women have fewer demands,
and our soldiers are much better off married to them. "29
Earlier that same year, 1632, the directors had decided to cease sponsoring
women as migrants to Dutch settlements east of Africa. 30 Small numbers of
women did continue to migrate to Indonesia and other settlements throughout
the seventeenth century, as entries in the Batavian Daily Register and church
records show, but their numbers were always tiny. The largest party sent out at
one time totalled eighty-two, and that was in 1623. If we are to believe Nico­
laus de Graaff, the small number of Dutchwomen in Indonesia was due entirely
to the Company policy of strictly controlling their admission. 31 This remark is
set in a context of vilifying women migrants as "riffraff," come out from
Europe to get rich and parade as nobly born. His contention that some emi­
grated disguised as soldiers and sailors is corroborated occasionally in VOC
records. The record-keeper at Batavia made this entry for 6 June 1675, for
instance: "This morning the ship' t Eylant Mauritius berthed here, sent out by
the Delft Chamber via the Cape, leaving the fatherland on 2 September of last
year with 289 souls, to wit: 156 sailors, 119 soldiers, 6 women, 7 children and
1 free emigrant .... During the voyage 6 sailors, 13 soldiers, 2 women and 3
children died; and on the other side a child was born and a woman was found
among the soldiers. "32
The men heading the VOC continued to debate the question of female migra­
tion from the Netherlands. By 1652, however, the directors had adopted a
policy which with modifications was to remain the Company's position: restric­
tion of immigration by Dutchwomen, preference for bachelorhood in European
recruits, and limitations to marriage with Asia-born women. Their position was
14

--- PAGE: 47 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.47) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
spelled out in a directive to the Batavian government, banning the carrying of
Dutchwomen on Company ships except for wives of "senior merchants, cler­
gymen, visitors of the sick, sergeants, and only those others who (having
offered good reasons for it) get special leave from the Seventeen [Directors] in
session. ' ,33
In 1669 the policy of promoting limited female migration seems to have been
revived briefly, and new contracts for unmarried women were lengthened to
fifteen years. By and large, however, the question of female migration was
settled for the next two hundred years. Some of the Indies clans that grew up
derive in the female line from Dutchwomen who emigrated in the first half of
the seventeenth century, but the overwhelming majority of families were quite
different, built as they were around male immigrants from Europe and the
Asian or part-Asian women who were their slaves or wives.
From the beginning there was the freest intercourse with slave women. Most
were household servants, and there were already upwards of eighty slaves of
both sexes in the Jacatra fort recorded in the 1618 roll call. One man who
survived the long siege has left a journal noting nightly orgies within the Dutch
compound and marriages rowdily celebrated between Company servants and
"black women," the Reverend Evert Hermans conveniently being one of the
company.34 From Both's official correspondence we know, too, that senior
merchants of the Company took local women and imported slaves as concu­
bines. 35
At first little could be done to control the situation. Soldiers and sailors had
been uprooted from their homeland, bereft of female society, and deposited in
beleaguered factories on the fringes of strange civilizations. They heard sketchy
rumors of harems from the first encounters between the Company's merchants
and Asian princes; their own senior officers acquired slaves for personal ser­
vice. In such peculiar circumstances the moral constraints learned from their
homeland no longer seemed to apply.
Coen, therefore, on being appointed to his first term as governor-general, set
about transforming the "scandalous living" of the Indonesian factories into
civilized society. One measure, binding on all who "reside within this our
republic of Jacatra or come under its jurisdiction," was a prohibition on main­
taining "one or more women slaves, concubine or concubines, in one's house
or in any other place, on whatever pretext. "36 One reason for this ban is worth
quoting here because it is a very early expression of views held of Asian
women, views which, two hundred and fifty years later, were still being re­
peated in the novels of Fran~oise Junius and P. A. Daum. In Coen's words,
there were "all too many lamentable and well-known cases of abortion, and of
a concubine attempting to murder [her master] with phenyl or some other
poison. " The ban was not effective and had to be renewed before two years had
15

--- PAGE: 48 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.48) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
passed,37 this time with a clause specifying that it applied to all ranks of men.
And not to men only; no Christian woman, so ran the text, might have sexual
relations with "Heathens or Moors. "
At the same time as it proscribed extramarital relations, the Batavian govern­
ment promoted lawful unions between its low-ranking employees and the slave
women imported into its settlements. It required that such marriages be licensed
in writing by the local authority and that the banns be posted threeweeks before
the ceremony. Furthennore, the prospective groom was obliged to purchase his
bride's freedom and have her baptized with a new, Christian name. In time, a
knowledge of Dutch was also made a fonnal requirement before marriage could
take place. 38
Not only did the government give its blessing to such unions; it also pur­
chased women in the markets of Asia for transport to Batavia, where they were
advertised for sale as brides. At first they were housed in a building which was
also used as a school, but later special lodgings were acquired for the purpose.
Occasionally, and in uncharacteristic generosity, the Batavian government
would make over such women to men eager to marry but lacking ready cash,
and deduct the bride's price in monthly installments from their salaries.
Two other decisions of the Batavian government touching on marriage must
be related at this point. Customarily, a portion of each bachelor's wages was
held back for deposit in the Netherlands. Whenever a man married overseas,
however, his salary was paid him there in full. The other regulation, whose
object was also to discourage Dutchmen from returning to the Netherlands,
forbade wives and children of Asian heritage from going to Holland. In this
way it was hoped that the pull of Europe on low-ranking Company employees
would be slight and that a stable community of settlers would grow up around
the Company's factories.
Promoters of settlement based on Eurasian rather than immigrant burgher
families advanced several reasons in support of their preference. One already
mentioned proclaimed that Asian women had fewer material wants than their
European counterparts. The Company, so ran this argument, would save both
from dropping the expensive, sponsored female migration and because wives
with presumed simpler tastes would not encourage low-paid employees to
increase their income through illegal trade. Nor would the Company lose the
services of immigrants, for Asian wives would dissuade their husbands from
repatriating. Another justification advanced was that children of mixed parent­
age thrived in the tropics, whereas children born in the tropics to immigrant
mothers and fathers (and called Creoles by the Dutch) had a far lower chance of
survival. Governor-General Pieter de Carpentier, who was of this opinion,
attributed the differing mortality rates to race, although he also believed that in
time, Europeans would acclimatize to tropical conditions. 39
The supporters of colonies based on mixed marriage sought to ensure the
16

--- PAGE: 49 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.49) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
descendants' loyalty to the Netherlands by granting European status to the bride
and her offspring. This is why Asian women had to be freed from slavery and
christened before their marriages to European men could be solemnized. At
baptism they took European names, usually Dutch, but sometimes Portuguese.
A convention grew up whereby the new Christian would take the name of her
sponsor. If baptism immediately preceded marriage, the woman convert's
name was often composed of some part of the groom's. In illustration of this
practice is an entry in the marriage register for 27 December 1629. Here a
woman appears under the Christian name of Magdalena Goossens, widow of
Goossens Thomasz. 40
Thus through marriage Asian women joined the European community, bear­
ing Dutch names and assuming their husbands' nationality. But it was not
according to Dutch practice that they raised their children. The dominant cul­
tural influence in the household was Asian. It has already been noted that
marriage to a woman of Asian background cut off a man's right to repatriate,
and eventually the Company also denied him the privilege of sending his
Eurasian sons and daughters to Europe. Men of rank and wealth always had
their way, sending their boys to the Netherlands for schooling, taking a part­
Asian wife home, but they were the minority. For most married men, the
settlement overseas became home and the only homeland their children knew.
In the early years of Dutch settlement, then, progression from slavery to
mistress of a household could be rapid for some Asian women. Later, the
preferred marriage was with Eurasian girls, although most female slaves were
kept as maids and concubines anyway. Laws had to be framed to meet this
situation, regulating the status of the woman and the children she had by her
European owner. No such legislation needed to be devised for male slaves.
They had no avenue for escaping life servitude other than their skill in some
craft or the arbitrary circumstance of emancipation by their owners.
Slaves constituted a large element in the population of Company settlements.
Many of the men were household slaves or were engaged in crafts and retailing
on their owners' account. Others were employed as valets, honor guards, and
musicians. The Company purchased slaves for its own purposes, too, having
them sink canals, lay roads, and erect the new buildings that marked the
prosperous early years of Batavia. Many a slave labored in forges and carpen­
ters' shops in the artisans' quarter of the Castle under supervision of European
master craftsmen.
Some slaves were paid a small wage in addition to their rations, and a few
salaried slaves were able to purchase their manumission. Others were released
as acts of piety by their owners, either following the slave's conversion to
Christianity or to confonn to a provision of the owner's will. Freed slaves then
fell under the Company's jurisdiction in the same way as burghers, requiring a
17

--- PAGE: 50 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.50) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
license to reside in VOC settlements and to marry and being obligated to serve
in the citizens' militia.
Most slaves died in servitude, undernourished, ill-housed, and ill-clothed.
Punishments were harsh, the most ferocious reserved for striking an owner or
overseer. Company documents often note that slaves ran amuck, and at times
measures were taken which reflect the fear Europeans felt before the slave
populations of their settlements. One restricted the import of certain categories
of adult males as slaves. Makassarese and Balinese were deemed particularly
vicious; after 1685 none above the age of twelve might be brought to Batavia.41
Slaves came from many other parts of the archipelago too, and also from the
coasts of India and from Arakan in northwest Bunna. They were also acquired
through capture in land and naval engagements. The following is a typical entry
in Company documents:
"Captured in September 1616 with the frigate Ceylon: Pasquael Denis, Francisco
Fernando, Domingo Parang, Francisco Rodrigo, all married; Rodrigo Rodrigo,
Deremia Grande, Gregorie de Sine, Ysmael, Salvador Fernando, all single."42
This diversity of origin is worth stressing because of its consequences for the
history of the Dutch in Indonesia. First of all, daily Dutch intercourse was with
Asians of widely assorted backgrounds and generally representing the eco­
nomically and socially deprived of their home territories. The Netherlanders
did not enter an orderly society with a civilization of great antiquity, such as the
Javanese. Indeed, the Company banned Javanese people from living within
Batavia's walls and did not use them as slaves. The culture that evolved with
the growth of Batavia and other Asian settlements fused manners from a great
many parts, assumed by individuals all displaced from their points of origin
whether by choice, social and economic rejection (the case for many Euro­
peans), capture, or sale.
From the first, the Malay language was used by the Dutch to communicate
with the many peoples they encountered, although Portuguese was often
spoken in the seventeenth century. Official correspondence between Indonesian
rulers and Company officials was often conducted in Portuguese, and Portu­
guese could also be heard on the streets, in the markets, in church, and in the
households where European men kept Asian mistresses. Its dominance in those
early decades has been explained by the fact that many slaves were bought on
the Coromandel and Malabar coasts of India, where they had become familiar
with the Portuguese language. Some, as shown in the examples above, had
Portuguese names and were Christian. At the time, however, different explana­
tions for the prevalence of Portuguese were given. Governor-General Maet­
suyker, for one, discounted the extent of contact with the Portuguese and
attributed adoption of their language as a lingua franca to certain peculiarities of
the Dutch national character. ' ,We are constantly encouraging the spread of the
18

--- PAGE: 51 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.51) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
Netherlands tongue," he wrote to the Directors in 1674, "both here and in
other places within the Company's possessions, conscious that the security of
the state is bound up in it, but apparently in vain so far, as [use of] the
Portuguese language is growing and it easily holds the upper hand, mostly
through the idiocy of our own Netherlanders, who hold it for a great honor to be
able to speak a foreign language, however badly and corrupted.... They
speak no other language but Portuguese with their slaves, although most of
them come from the East [eastern Indonesia] and have never heard that
tongue. "43
We shall return to this matter of language later. For now it need only be
stressed that, outside the Company's offices, neither the culture nor the lan­
guage was Dutch. Moreover, most inhabitants in the settlements were not
Dutch by birth. The servant, underling, and guardian of children with European
status were all Indians or Indonesians, and their presence was a fundamental
influence on colonial life.
The cast of characters as it appeared in the 1618 roll call is now complete:
soldiers and civilians from many parts of Europe; free citizens; Asians, all
lumped together as "blacks"; and women, whether Dutch, inhabitants of the
archipelago, or from India. These were important elements of the urban popula­
tion throughout Company times. Three groups are missing. One is the Chinese
who settled in Batavia in great numbers only after it had become the hub of
VOC power in Asia. The other two are still invisible; they spring from groups
named above. The first of these are the Eurasians, or Mestizos, who derive
from unions between European and Asian. The other, the Indonesians, are
more difficult to identify. They emerged as a cultural category from among the
peoples of Batavia: imported slaves; Eurasians deserted as children by white
fathers; and peoples from all parts of the archipelago drawn to the city by the
prospect of new opportunities. At the time, this group classified as "Natives"
was by no means homogeneous, for it included Christian and Muslim, and
later, people for a while identified separately as Mardijkers.
All these groups came together in Batavia and grew from it. In conquering
Jacatra, Coen had destroyed the town's original twin centers, the kabupaten, or
official residence of the local Sundanese ruler, and the mosque. On Jacatra's
ruins he had built a walled fortress, the Castle of Batavia, replacing the Indo­
nesian kabupaten and the Islamic mosque as the new center of authority and
prestige. Within the city itself there grew up this special society in isolation
from other peoples of Indonesia.
Another wall contributing to the society's isolation was that fonned by the
surrounding jungle. Wild animals were bold enough to come right to the city's
outer walls and snatch laborers from the sugar fields..)Premiumsfor captured
19

--- PAGE: 52 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.52) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
tigers were discontinued only in 1762. Runaway slaves and hostile Bantammers
also made the environs of Batavia dangerous to Europeans. In 1642, women
were expressly forbidden to pass beyond the city's limits, under penalty of a
fine, because of the risk of attack from "people lurking in the jungle, ruffians,
Javanese, and others of our enemies. "44 For a long time, then, the city's chief
outlet was by sea, which the Dutch dominated and which linked Batavia to
Holland and its other Asian settlements.
Culturally, Batavia was isolated too. Many of the original Sundanese inhabi­
tants had fled in 1619. All Javanese, the major ethnic group on the island
(principally in the center and east), were excluded from the city, and a new
population was brought in from many parts of Asia and Europe. Later, when
peace treaties had been signed with Bantam and Mataram, the suburbs immedi­
ately outside Batavia expanded, and wealthy people began moving further from
the city, laying out pleasure gardens for themselves and taking trips upriver.
Gradually the web of society that was fonning within the settlement moved
beyond it also. In the first half of the seventeenth century, however, attention
was turned towards Holland.
This immediate and rapid growth of Batavia compelled senior Dutch officials
in Asia to devise laws and institutions that could control the city's inhabitants.
Quite naturally, the model they chose was that of the Dutch municipality, just
as in the design of the earliest buildings and layout of the city they strove to
recreate the appearance of a Dutch town. The circumstance of a polyglot
citizenry, however, demanded laws and institutions for which there was no
precedent in Holland, and from the first, local practice took on a unique charac­
ter and molded Batavia's residents in ways uncharted at home. Laws and
institutions created in this early period were to govern Batavia and its subsid­
iary settlements with little real change for the next two hundred years. It is to a
review of these that we now turn.
INSTITUTIONS AND LAWS
The mid-century visitor to Batavia would have noted stone churches rising
amidst the Dutch-style houses of the city. All were intended for worship in the
manner of the Refonned Church, the only denomination pennitted by the
Company's directors in their overseas possessions. 45 At first, public worship
had been conducted in the town hall, and the official character thus lent this
Calvinist church was further strengthened by the custom of morning and eve­
ning prayers in the Castle which all had to attend. Sunday rest, decreed as early
as January 1620, stamped Batavia with the externals of a godly city. Further­
more, it was habitual for the governor-general to mark events such as the
departure of the fleet for Holland by special days of prayer and fasting. Prayer
days might also be called to celebrate a military victory, abate an epidemic, or
20

--- PAGE: 53 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.53) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
avert heavenly wrath from the citizenry. Pious declarations are scattered
through official correspondence of the Company and other records such as the
Batavian Daily Register; policy was often couched in terms of religious aspira­
tions or imperatives.
The Indies church represented both the lofty and sordid elements of Dutch rule
overseas. In organization it was modelled on the Netherlands church, but it
acquired other characteristics that reflected its subordinate position, in the Asian
settlements, to a commercial company. In Holland the church, while supporting
the state, maintained a certain independence in matters of faith, internal organi­
zation, and the social institutions it sponsored. In the Indies, however, the church
was made subservient to local government from the beginning.
A political commissioner of Batavia's government sat in at the first session of
the Batavia synod, on 21 January 1621 and at every meeting thereafter in
Company times. No spiritual regulation could be decided upon without written
approval of the temporal powerst,£ven such matters as the number of sermons a
week and their hours were established by decree of the governor-general in
Council. Nor might clergy correspond with their countetparts in Holland with­
out first submitting all documents for the political commissioner's inspection.
For the government's convenience, Batavia's synod was made supreme in the
Company possessions; its decisions and practices became the rule for all mat­
ters of church life. In this, church and secular organization were inspired with
the one hierarchical and autocratic spirit, although the Dutch models­
provincial synods and city-states--sprang from quite other convictions.
Clerics were salaried employees of the VOC, fitting into the Company hier­
archy below junior merchants and above sergeants. No parish had the right to
,'call" its own minister, although that privilege was an article of faith of the
Protestant movement in Europe. Instead, Batavia's church council assigned
clergy to parishes throughout the Company's territories, and its appointments
had to be confirmed by the government. The government did not hold its
powers of confinnation lightly, and on occasion it assigned clergy without
consulting the synod, or it overrode the synod's decisions.
Not unexpectedly, high officials abused their power over the clergy.
Governor-General Jacques Specx was able, for instance, to dictate to Batavia's
synod whom it must exclude from the celebration of communion. In the closed
society of the seventeenth century, exclusion from the sacraments cast sinners
into social obloquy as well as denying them the means of grace according to
church doctrine. Specx, however, enforced exclusion on three councillors of
the Indies in a private feud over the honor of his illegitimate part-Japanese
daughter Sara. A few ministers of the church did pursue matters of faith with
rigor. The Reverend Georgius Candidius was one, and his opposition to concu­
binage cost him his post in the Moluccas in 1627. But most clergy trod safely,
and their sennons caused the VCX:'srepresentatives no alann.
21

--- PAGE: 54 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.54) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Few ministers found service in the tropics alluring. In all, about nine hundred
were engaged during the two centuries of Company rule, to serve Dutch settle­
ments from southern Africa to Indonesia.46 Some served Christian communi­
ties for tenns far exceeding the five and ten years they had contracted for, but
most worked their contracts and repatriated, or stayed in Asia in some other
capacity than minister. Andreas Lambertus Loderus, for instance, exchanged
pulpit for government printing house in 1701 and continued as town printer
until his death in 1719. Many engaged in illegal commerce, including trade in
slaves, to expand their incomes. They grew wealthy, buying up pleasure gar­
dens beyond the city walls when it became fashionable in the second half of the
seventeenth century. Joost Tielen, a native of Rotterdam, was one dominie who
was caught and his fortune confiscated. Other clergy fell foul of the law be­
cause of the conduct of their private lives. Forced repatriation might follow, or
the miscreant might, like the Reverend J. L. Scotanus, be jailed in cells deep
within the walls of the Batavia Castle.4 7
Because of the limited number of clerics and because of Company policy,
which was to keep peace and save "unnecessary" expense, Holland's Re­
formed Church never regarded Indonesia as a mission field. Pastors were ap­
pointed to serve Dutch settlements and to convert those Asians who had turned
to Roman Catholicism as a result of contact with the Portuguese. Batavia
always had the largest number of resident clergy in all Dutch Asia. In 1683 the
capital's quota was set at ten. Elsewhere there were few, and beyond permanent
posts such as in Ceylon and Ambon, Dutch settlements might be visited by a
touring minister only once in several years. Semarang, on Central Java's north
coast, for instance, did not have a pastor until 1753.
When there were no men of the cloth in colonial settlements, Europeans
were obliged to live without such "technical" services of the church as the
solemnizing of marriages, burial of the dead, and invocation of blessings on
state occasions. There were other consequences of this lack of clergy too. In
Europe, ministers were the inheritors of a tradition of learning; in their com­
munities they sponsored a veneration of the intellect and an ideal of civiliza­
tion. Their absence from Dutch settlements in Indonesia before the nineteenth
century explains in part the slowness of European culture to root itself and the
dominance of the Asian contribution to the manners and ways of colonial
society.
It would be a mistake to consider the role of church and cleric without
mentioning the lay worker. Variously called visitor or comforter of the sick,
these officers of the Company were hired to lead prayers in the absence of
ordained clergy, to minister to the condemned criminal, and to superintend the
charitable institutions of the Indies church. Most were emigrants from the
Netherlands, men of little fonnal education, who would sign a five-year con­
tract for employ in Dutch Asia. Public opinion of sick-visitors was never high,
22

--- PAGE: 55 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.55) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
and they, too, might be repatriated as morally unfit, or degraded to serve the
Company as soldiers.
For a time the Company attempted to solve the problem of staffing the Asian
churches by financing the religious studies of Dutch students who in return had
to sign for double the usual term in the East. A training school had been opened
by the Company in Leiden in 1622 with twelve candidates. One, Nicolaus
Molinaeus, was to minister to Batavia's Portuguese parish. The experiment was
discontinued in 1634, however, at the same time that the Company renounced
sponsored female emigration.
As a group, ordained and lay servants of the Asian churches were poorly
educated men, often prejudiced against the lower socioeconomic classes of the
settlements, against those of other faiths, and against Asians generally. A few
were men with scientific interests and commitment to intellectual pursuits. It is
primarily through them that knowledge of Asian languages and civilizations
was first acquired and scientific study of tropical environs fostered.
From the first, churchmen in the Indonesian archipelago had to resolve the
problem of which language to use. Vel)' early on they settled on two: Malay,
which was widely used as a language of commerce, and Portuguese, which was
used as a lingua franca between Asians and Europeans along many stages of the
Asian trade routes. Use of these two languages also reflects the fact that the
Asian peoples with whom the Dutch had most contact in these early years were
residents of the port cities, not subjects of the inland, agriculture-based king­
doms such as Mataram, where Javanese was spoken.
Services were conducted in Malay in the fort church on Ambon in 1614, and
the first in Batavia's Malay church was led on 30 January 1633 by Drs. Sebas­
tiaen Danckaerts. One of the earliest word lists, Nederduitsch en Maleisch
Woordenboek (Dutch and Malay Dictionary), comes from Drs. Caspar Wil­
tens, who was the first ordained minister of the Dutch Reformed Church in
Asia. It was published in 1623. Another Batavian minister, Justus Heurnius,
compiled a dictionary and translated the Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, and
some of the Psalms into Malay. In 1653 Johannes Roman translated the cate­
chism into Malay, the Ten Commandments, and a number of prayers. His
Malay grammar was printed at the Company's expense in 1674.
Beyond these vel)' practical contributions there were also the linguistic
studies of Herbert de Jager, a former minister engaged as a merchant by the
Company. He devoted his enquiries to the relationship between the Old Java­
nese, Sanskrit, and Tamil languages. Melchior Leydekker's Malay translation
of the Bible was printed in both the Latin and Arabic scripts. And one of the
major sources for seventeenth-century colonial history and social life, the five­
volume Dud en Nieuw Oost-Indien (Old and New East Indies) was the work of
yet another minister, Fran~ois Valentijn, who was stationed in Ambon from
1685 to 1695 and again during the years 1707 to 1713.
23

--- PAGE: 56 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.56) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Such scholars were not typical of the average clergyman or sick-visitor. They
had been highly educated at home, and in the Indies they were well connected
with the ruling class; Leydekker, for instance, married a sister of Governor­
General Abraham van Riebeeck. Nor did the scholar-ministers leave a deep
impression on the seventeenth-century settlement. Their endeavors attracted
interest in a restricted circle only. Yet their study of Malay and promotion of it
as a lingua franca were in themselves to be lasting contributions to Indonesian
life. It was to their lesser colleagues that the church's more immediate tasks
were left: care of the poor and sick, oversight of community morals, and
education of the youth.
The first Dutch school in Indonesia was opened in Ambon by the VOC
admiral Cornelis Matelief, one of those early adventurers of expansive vision
who dreamed of a Netherlands Asian empire. Assimilation of Dutch cultural
heritage and religious credo was a necessary part of his plan, and to give it form
he appointed as teacher one Johannes Wogma at eighteen guilders a month.
Wogma's duties were to teach Ambonese children reading, writing, arithmetic,
and prayers of the Reformed Church in the Dutch tongue for four hours daily.
Use of Dutch as the medium of instruction was quickly found to be impracti­
cable. Nevertheless, it was also the language of instruction in Jan van den
Broecke's little school in the Jacatra factory in 1617, although his pupils
included "Native Christians" as well as Dutch children. This sthool, predating
the founding of Batavia by some two years, had been called into existence by
the directors. Article 34 of their instructions to Governor-General Reynst had
stipulated, "The Governor-General and Councillors of the Indies shall issue all
appropriate ord~rs for the planting of the Christian religion, establishment of
good schools and other germane matters. "48
In order to appreciate this policy, one should remember that in the Nether­
lands schools were foundations of local churches. In viewing promotion of
schools as a duty of government, the directors adopted a policy radical in its
time and implications. It was a course consistent with their broader aim, which
was to control all aspects of life in the Asian settlements. Precisely how schools
fitted in with this conception may be perceived in the duties spelled out for
schoolmasters in regulations of 1643: "The duty of the schoolmasters is pri­
marily to sharpen in the young a fear of the Lord, to teach them to pray, sing,
attend church and to catechize them; next, to teach them obedience to their
parents, the authorities and their masters; thirdly, to teach them to read, write
and do arithmetic; fourthly, to teach them good morals and manners, and finally
to see to it that no tongue other than Dutch is used in the schools."49
In time the Company operated four schools in Batavia, two of them in its
poorhouse and orphanage. Beyond making pious and loyal subjects, the Com-
24

--- PAGE: 57 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.57) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
pany had no greater educational plans for pupils. Male graduates could hope for
nothing more than employment as soldiers, artisans, or copyists. Men ambi­
tious for their sons had them educated in the Netherlands, since it was not VOC
policy to employ the locally-schooled in positions of trust. In all the history of
the Dutch in Asia, few men rose to positions of prominence in government
without schooling in Europe.
Company schools always lacked qualified teachers and teaching materials,
especially texts in Malay. Not that the VOC entirely neglected the matter; by
1617 school books for the Indies were actually being printed in the Nether­
lands, some of them in Malay. Texts for Indies schools were also printed in
Batavia by the Company's press. J. J. Steendam's "Songs of Morality for the
Batavian Youth" appeared in Dutch in 1671, for instance, and explanations of
the Gospels in Malay, translations of prayers, and the like were published there
in the eighteenth century. 50
Van Diemen's tenure as governor-general (1636-1645) signals a time of
consolidation and of the strengthening of institutions of municipal life. When
this ninth governor-general turned his attention to education, therefore, he was
receptive to the Reverend Johannes Stertemius's proposal that a Latin school be
established. Twelve orphans of both Dutch and Eurasian heritage commenced
their studies in 1642. They were to converse in Latin alone, the language of
Europe's educated elite, although beginners might also use the Dutch tongue
•'and none other." Costs were to be shared by the government, the orphanage
treasury, and the church's charitable funds.
The identity of two of the pupils is known. They were sons of the Frisian
minister Tiberius Ravesteyn, who set out for Java in 1652. Ravesteyn and his
wife died during the voyage, but their three children reached Batavia safely.
The daughter was placed in the household of a lay minister, while the boys
were lodged in the orphanage and enrolled in the Latin school as wards of
government. Their school career was not long, however, for in October 1656
the institution was closed on executive order, and the pupils, then numbering
eleven, were taken into the Company's employ.
The closing of the Latin school had already been foreshadowed in a letter
which Governor-General Maetsuyker wrote to the directors in 1654. The pu­
pils, he reported, showed "slight inclination" to study, "so that we very much
doubt if any good can be expected of this school to begin with, which would
make the expense worthwhile, particularly since the youth of these lands do not
have a decent upbringing as do their counterparts in the fatherland, because of
their intercourse with men and women slaves who have vile, abject natures. "51
The directors blamed the school's failure on parents who preferred sending
their sons to the Netherlands. This desire, they opined, was "in no way in
hannony with service in the Company, since it displaced those born and bred to
25

--- PAGE: 58 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.58) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
the climate and who should look on the country as their homeland.' '52 At the
directors' urging the school was reopened in 1666, but it was shut down for
good in 1671, when the number of pupils had dwindled to one.
The directors' response explains why pupils of the Latin school were exclu­
sively orphans and sheds light on attitudes,-in the middle years of the seven­
teenth century. It would have been logical to build up the schools and seek
future employees for all levels from their graduates. This the Company never
did. It continued to send out Dutch males for offices of trust, in order to ensure
loyalty to the Netherlands. At the same time, it aimed to keep the immigrants in
Asia all their working lives by encouraging them to establish families with
locally born women. To the immigrants' daughters the Company offered a
secure and promising future as brides; to the sons very little. Consequently,
throughout the VOC period schools were always to fail in tenns of duration,
quality of education, and cultural influence.
Throughout the Company period the condition of schools depended on the
whim and interest of the governor-general of the day. Johannes Camphuys was
one who paid more than passing attention to schools, but his regulations of
1684 still laid stress on religion and manners over general knowledge. The
intellectual qualifications stipulated for teachers were limited to the ability to
read "without stumbling, write in a good hand, sing the Psalms of David well,
and be able to do arithmetic passably. " Teachers were to see that there was no
blasphemy and that boys and girls sat apart in the classroom to discourage "all
improprieties. ' , Finally, special provisions were appended for the school
housed in the orphanage. Each Sunday following morning wQrshipthe unfortu­
nate orphans were to answer questions from the catechism put to them by
members of the congregations of the Dutch-language, Portuguese, and Malay
churches of Batavia, churches which the orphans attended according to their
origins. S3
Orphans were one of the long-standing concerns of Batavia's government.
Already in October 1624, just five years after the founding of Batavia, the first
orphanage had been established. Its early date suggests the existence of grave
social problems arising from high death rates that left children without parental
care as well as from the presence of numerous abandoned children of mixed
race. From the beginning, Batavia's orphanage cared for the fatherless among
Indonesian Christians, Eurasians, and Dutch of the city. In creating the orphan­
age in 1624, the government stated that it was acting to promote an orderly
society "in this Republic which is growing enonnously every day" and to
fashion it after Netherlands' usage "as far as possible."54
Supervision of the orphaned children and their property was entrusted to
several townspeople chosen annually by the governor-general from a list, sub­
mitted by the town council, of the most pious, wealthy and distinguished
26

--- PAGE: 59 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.59) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
burghers of the city. Theirs was the duty of registering property of all Chris­
tian orphans and of investing it on the orphans' behalf (the profits going to the
orphanage treasury) or of supervising its management by an approved guard­
ian. Orphans might be raised in the homes of their guardians or placed in foster
care of "good, pious townswomen," who had to report regularly on their charges
to the trustees. All major decisions, such as choice of spouse, had to win the
trustees' consent.
Other children were reared in the orphanage itself. In general, propertyless
orphans were a charge on the community until their early teens. Girls might be
placed as servants with town families or earn their keep in the orphanage by
sewing and housework. They were given a dowry upon marriage. Those still
single at eighteen had to become self-supporting and were given their marriage
portion in advance, if they were deemed deserving. Boys were apprenticed in
some trade-saddle and sail-making, cobbling and tailoring were vocations
thought particularly suitable-or were taken on as ships' boys at twelve.
By the time they left the orphanage, the children were expected to be grate­
ful to society, respectful to their betters, and fluent in Dutch. This often-noted
stress on fostering Dutch illustrates important aspects of social life in the
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century settlement. Firstly, it records the obvious:
the Dutch were not able to establish their tongue in Asia in the ordinary manner
by passing it on to their children. Within two decades of settlement the Dutch
language was being maintained and spoken only by male immigrants from
Holland in the VOC office.
Now the significance of Dutch to the government was this: it was a stamp
of political allegiance, as was profession of Christianity. This is the reason
why senior officials tried to make it the language of daily intercourse, not only
for the native Netherlander but for the Creole, Eurasian, and Asian Christian
and for the slave retainers in their households. Maetsuyker put it this way:
"We have wholeheartedly encouraged the spread of the Dutch tongue ... know­
ing full well how much the stability of the state lies therein, but apparently
in vain to date . . . so that we shall have to think up more efficacious
means ... and thus be able to assure ourselves more of the trustworthiness of
the native subjects."55
It must be remembered that the settlements were frequently under attack
in the first half of the seventeenth century. One can see in the early years an
attempt by the Company to win populations to itself. Thus decrees and other
documents refer to part-European children who had been found living with
their Asian mothers in Indonesian residential quarters. Some were removed and
placed in the orphanage, that they might be raised as Europeans. 56 The munici­
pal orphanage, then, was not only a haven for the bereaved and expression of
VOC beneficence. It was a means of making citizens, an instrument of state
policy.
27

--- PAGE: 60 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.60) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
This is not to argue that Batavia's authorities made no distinction between
European, Eurasian, and Indonesian. While religion was a unifying bond, Asian
and part-Asian ranked lower socially. It is true that wealthy, highly placed men
could promote their part-Asian sons and that Eurasian men in settlements
subsidiary to Batavia, and in Batavia itself in the eighteenth century, did rise to
positions of influence and authority. Many part-Asian women also achieved high
social status through marriage. But as far as the majority were concerned, the
principle of racial superiority was maintained by institutions as by individuals,
and this can be seen in the clothing allowances for orphans.
According to orphanage regulations of 1752, clothing was allocated in the
following manner. To European girls were given each year: 2 blouses of ordi­
nary bleached cotton; 4 bodices of Chinese linen; 2 chintz skirts; 2 sailor-style
kebayas (overblouses); 2 kebayas of Surat cloth; 1Makassar sarong; 3 handker­
chiefs; 3 pairs of stockings; 2 pairs of shoes; and 2 pairs of sandals. Every
second year they were to receive 1 cotton floral frock and 1 pair of stays. The
clothing rations for Mestiza girls consisted of: 2 fine blouses of guinea cloth; 1
coarse blouse of bleached cloth; 3 bodices of Chinese linen; 2 sailor-style
kebayas; 4 fine Bengali head veils; 1 fine garment of Indian cloth; 2 handker­
chiefs; 2 pairs of shoes; 2 pairs of sandals; and 3 pairs of stockings.57 It will be
noticed that the Mestizas' issue had no article of distinctively European dress,
such as the corsets; instead, Mestizas received more items of Asian costume,
such as the head veils.
No distinction was made in the regulation clothing for European and Mestizo
boys. I believe the reason is this: in the eyes of the Company locally born boys of
all races shared the same lowly status and could be used for the same ends, as
manpower for the army and as scribes. Their way upward was barred; Dutch
males were sent out from Europe to fill the posts with a future. Women were not
directed to the Asian settlements after 1632. Those who migrated with husband
or father occupied instantly, by virtue of origin, the uppermost rank in colonial
society; hence the distinctions made between orphan girls on the basis of race.
A great many more institutions were devised in seventeenth-centu!)' Batavia
than can be touched on here. There has been passing mention of the municipal
council and court, which persisted also until the Company's dissolution, but
none at all of such institutions as the hospitals, poorhouse, women's reforma­
tory, and commissions established for smooth conduct of the city's affairs.
Those selected for particular attention here have this in common, that they were
created to serve multi-racial clienteles. Christian Asians, Eurasians, and im­
migrant Dutch came together in Batavia's orphanage, as in its schools and
poorhouse.
It is now time to clarify colonization policy, and this will be done by refer­
ence to laws promulgated in seventeenth-century Batavia having to do with the
28

--- PAGE: 61 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.61) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
city's expansion and administration. As this review of Batavia's laws proceeds,
it will be found that they always stand for increase in the city's population and
for binding European inhabitants to pennanent residence. They might include
denial of entry and settlement to certain categories of migrants from the Nether­
lands, and they were subject to alteration by successive boards of directors. But
a general consistency of principle can be distilled from particular regulations
issued as circumstance demanded, confinning that Company lawgivers settled
on a society ruled by European males whose mates were selected from local
population groups. 58
From the beginning, women were not allowed to join husbands stationed in
any VOC trading post without especial dispensation. This ban was of general
application, but restated at times for specific categories of employees. In 1642,
for instance, the spouses of sick-visitors were so singled out. After 1652,
however, general practice was to allow men above the ranks of soldier and
assistant in the civilian hierarchy to bring out their families, but they had to
continue in the Company's service ten years above the usual tenn. A man
marrying a Dutch immigrant in the East was bound to an additional five years'
service upon expiration of his current bond.
All widowed female immigrants had to remain in the East a minimum of five
years after remarriage, and no Dutchwoman might return to the Netherlands at
her own inclination. In 1629 it was decreed that European women attempting to
join a husband who had gone to the Netherlands on business or leave would be
jailed until his return or news of his death arrived. Girls of immigrant families
also fell under Company regulations, being obliged to continue on in the East a
minimum of five years after contracting a marriage there. After 1632, assisted
female migration from the Netherlands was cut off. When relaxed in 1669 the
law required a fifteen-year residence in Asia of all women immigrants.
In view of the limited supply of European brides, Company employees and
free citizens alike had to tum to the locally born for mates. Again Company law
intervened, and again with the aim of establishing stable settlements. No
married employee, for instance, might take a leave in Europe unless he had
served a full five years from the date of marriage. Nor, after 1633, could he
depart without first depositing funds sufficient for the wife's maintenance in his
absence. No man, married or single, could repatriate without written permis­
sion from the governor-general. Burghers, furthermore, must have lived at least
three years in a settlement and were required to deposit the price of passage in
advance.
From 1639 on, no man married to an Asian or part-Asian woman might
repatriate while his wife and their children still lived. Men discovered on ship
were to be put off at the Cape and returned by the next outgoing vessel. In 1716
the ban on repatriation was extended to all men, married or bachelor, who had
part-Asian children.
29

--- PAGE: 62 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.62) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Nor could a locally born woman accompany her Dutch husband in retirement
to the Netherlands without especial dispensation. This ban was enacted by
Governor-General C. van der Lijn's government in 1649 and covered all
women, "whether slave or free, Mestiza or other natives of these lands."
Equally, it was forbidden them to travel to Europe aboard ships of any other
nation. The precarious position of the Asia-born is illustrated in the case of the
Eurasian Susanna Muller, who was married to the Creole Cornelis van Out­
hoorn. Although the marriage made Susanna sister-in-law to Governor-General
Willem van Outhoorn (1691-1704), and although she had European status, yet
she still had to apply for citizenship for herself and her three children upon
arrival in the Netherlands as a widow in 1709.59
The Company's administrators attempted to keep its Asian communities
permanently settled, too. Free Asians had to gain permission to leave as well as
to settle. No Asian might travel to Europe nor go aboard a VOC ship without
permission. By the 1640s, however, it was already the practice of departing
Europeans to take slaves with them. Van Diemen forbade slaves accompanying
their owners to Europe, but within thirteen years his ban was relaxed to permit
repatriating families an Asian wet nurse, provided the cost of her return journey
was deposited in full.
The many modifications of this ban in subsequent years show how impos­
sible it was to coerce the wealthy into reducing their suite, and indeed Batavia's
government was sympathetic on this point. In 1734, retiring members of the
supreme government were allowed four slave attendants for the voyage, lest
they be like everyone else "to the decrease of the splendor and honor of the
government. " Nine years later all former employees from clerks up were
permitted slaves aboard, the number varying according to the individual's rank
and marital status.
The success of these laws meant the great and constant increase in the
Company's Asian communities and the establishment of a locally rooted colon­
ial society. According to population estimates, Batavia's population, for in­
stance, increased tenfold in the century following Coen' s 1620 figure of two
thousand, wi~h another ten to fifteen thousand people in the suburbs grouped
about the city walls. 60 But while simple increases in totals demonstrate growth,
they tell us nothing of the permanence of groups such as the European. For
certainty on this point we have to tum to a different source.
Tombstone inscriptions from the graveyards of European communities fit
this purpose. Often, in addition to the usual names and dates, they give the
places of birth and some clues to the worldly importance of the deceased. Such
epitaphs enable one to descry little settlements along the coasts of Asia whose
members reared children, moved between settlements in the course of career
30

--- PAGE: 63 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.63) ---
ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
and marriage, and came to die and so record their existence in one or other of
them.
The epitaphs below demonstrate the effects of the laws just reviewed. They
have been chosen from a compilation of inscriptions for the European commun­
ity in VOC settlements on Ceylon dating from 1638, when the first trading post
was established, until 1796, when the island passed under British control. They
therefore illustrate the links between outlying settlements and Batavia, as well
as the autonomous life of a subsidiary community:
Hercules Lindeman of Drontem, free burgher and vice-president of Colombo civic
council, died May 1664 at Colombo, aged 42.
Juff. Adriana Alebos, born Tayouan [Taiwan] December 1656, died at Colombo
Castle September 1684. Wife of Floris Blom, merchant and secretary of Ceylon's
government.
Juff. Johanna Margarita Schilhoom, born Batavia, died Colombo October 1695,
aged 17 years. Married to Gerrit van Toll, junior merchant.
Comelis van der Parra, born and died Ceylon, 1687-1719. Merchant and secretary
of Ceylon's government.
Anna Henrietta van Beaumont, born Cape of Good Hope 1716, died Colombo
1755. Married at Batavia to Joan Gideon Loten, Councillor of the Indies and
Governor of Ceylon.
Henrlkus Philipsz., born and died Ceylon 1733-1790. Clergyman.
Susanna Engelberta Schreuder, born Surat 1743, died Colombo 1760, with new­
born daughter. Wife of Joan Schreuder, Councillor Extraordinary and Governor
and Director of Ceylon.
Mr. Imam Willem Falk, born Colombo 1736, died there 1785. Councillor, Gover­
nor and Director of Ceylon.
Nicolaas Brasser van Heuvel, born 1701 at Triconamele [Ceylon], died Galle 1721.
Assistant. Youngest son of Nicolaas van Heuvel, Commander.
Ursula Theodora Petronela Mooyaart, died Jaffnapatnam 1847, aged 60. Grand­
daughter of Commander Anthony Mooyaart. Married to Capt. French Gray of the
Ceylon Regiment. 61
These inscriptions, selected from several hundreds, illustrate certain features
of colonial society in the days of the Company. First, they establish the fact of
female immigration from Holland. Second, they show that Dutchmen settled in
Asia to raise families while in the VOC's service or as burghers; that they
recognized their offspring, giving them Dutch names and guarding their place
in European society. Third, they show that daughters of such men were sought
as brides by new migrants and they often, through marriage, ranked high
socially. Fourth, they illustrate that, despite laws to the contrary, men born in
Asia of European fathers could and did find employment with the Company, as
31

--- PAGE: 64 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.64) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
high as commander with the rank of councillor extraordinary. (In time, this
pattern established itself in the very capital of Dutch Asia; in the seventeenth
century, however, the exception to the rule was more commonly found in the
subsidiary settlements.) The little list given above closes with the example of a
woman tracing residence in Asia at least three generations back in the paternal
line and who, through marriage, bridges the change in regime from Dutch to
British.
In this manner was the character of colonial society laid down. The basic
institutions that were to serve Batavia and its subsidiary settlements for the
entire period of Company rule were already legislated for in the first four
decades <?f the seventeenth century. Batavia's earliest lawgivers defined per­
missible relations across racial lines and brought certain groups together in the
institutions they created for a multiracial colony. Laws on residence, marriage,
and the like, appearing haphazardly, nevertheless succeeded in promoting
stable and expanding communities. The European component soon developed
Creole and Eurasian subgroups. The type of society that evolved from these
conditions will be examined in the following chapter through biographical
sketches of representative European immigrants, Eurasians, Creoles, and
Christian Asians.
32

--- PAGE: 65 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.65) ---
2
Growth of Settlement Society
FROM THE MATERIAL PRESENTED thus far, one can see that the categories of
actors composing Dutch colonial society were already detennined by the
1640s, and that the laws directing their lives and the institutions giving their
lives shape were set by that time. Also detennined by the middle years of the
century was the economic system of monopoly and control. It is thus clear,
from the first decades of settlement, that the only way for a European man to
gain wealth and worldly success was through employment in the civilian ann of
the Company.
Salaries paid to medium- and low-ranking VOC employees were always
notoriously low, and it is well known that many men augmented their incomes
through private trading, or 4 'smuggling, " as the VOC directors perceived it.
Because trading on one's own account was illegal, only those in high positions
could engage in it with some assurance of immunity, while their senior posi­
tions naturally offered the best opportunities for illegal commerce on a vast
scale. The goal of the ambitious man was, therefore, to climb the VOC hier­
archy.
The political structure of colonial society, too, was settled by the 1640s. The
first governors-general were men sent out by the Company's directors for
several years and then recalled to the Netherlands. In the very first stage of
settlement, of course, all officials came directly from Holland. The third gover­
nor-general, Laurens Reael (1616-19), however, began a tradition in recom­
mending his director-general of trade as his successor, a practice that was to be
overturned only infrequently by the directors. Coen's death during his second
term in office (1627-29) occasioned the development of another practice that
shaped relations between Batavia and Amsterdam fundamentally: Indies coun­
cillors voted immediately upon a successor (usually the director-general as the
most senior councillor and member of the inner group) and then notified Hol­
land of their choice for confinnation. 1 By 1636, with the appointment of
Antonio van Diemen as governor-general, all these lines of action were fused in
an enduring pattern, the accession to highest office of men with years of
experience in Asia. Beginning with Comelis van der Lijn's appointment in
33

--- PAGE: 66 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.66) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
1645, moreover, one sees accession by men with years of service in Asia
unbroken by leave in Europe. Not until H. W. Daendels's appointment in 1808
is an outsider selected. Consequently, there is a very long period when political
control is locally detennined, and when government is virtually immune from
immediate direction from the Netherlands on account of the vast distances
between Batavia and Amsterdam and the slowness of sea transport.
Given that power and fortune were only to be made through senior appoint­
ment with the Company and that control of promotions lay largely in Batavia,
how was the colonial elite fonned? The answer to that question goes to the heart
of the making and development of colonial society. The seventeenth century is
a period of search for connecting links between men of good health, longevity,
and ability. Material presented in chapter 1 makes it clear that the connections
between such men could not be based on birth into noble families in the
Netherlands, nor on an "old school" network, nor even on common home city
or region. The links between men were arbitrary, so that the Council of the
Indies often divided into opposing cliques. This gave the distant directors a
measure of power, as one group would lodge allegations of smuggling against
the other and the directors would intervene, recalling one party or refusing to
confirm the majority choice of the Council. By the second half of the eighteenth
century, however, Batavia's ruling clique was virtually independent of direc­
tion from Holland; Governor-General Willem Arnold Alting (1780-97), for
instance, could expressly oppose the directors in appointing his son-in-law
Joannes Siberg as his director-generaL
Over the course of time, the ties between men were increasingly based upon
family: men promoted their relatives. The rules governing immigration and
employment determined the peculiar characteristic of the family system and
hence the distinctive nature of colonial society, for VOC policy had settled on
marriage of its employees with local women and it denied full opportunities to
their sons. Hence the important links between men were based, not on passing
position (and access to wealth) from father to son, but on passing it to brothers­
in-law and other kin by marriage. This family system is properly an eighteenth­
century development and will be examined in chapter 3. But women were
already important in the seventeenth centuIy in linking powerful men to each
other in a way that was secure from treachery. It is instructive, for understand­
ing colonial society, to see who they were and how they, too, changed over
time.
In the earliest days, women accompanied their husbands for their tenns as
governors-general. Like their husbands, these women had no prior connections
with Asia, and they returned to Europe when their husbands were recalled. In
Batavia they held a modest court, were attended by ladies-in-waiting, and
performed the public rites of state such as laying foundation stones. With van
34

--- PAGE: 67 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.67) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
Diemen's appointment in 1636, however, there came a change in the type of
first lady presiding over Batavia, too, for his wife, Maria van Aelst, had already
spent at least fourteen years east of the Cape of Good Hope.
It is not clear when she first migrated nor under what circumstances. Possibly
she was already married to her first husband, Johan Libener, who in 1622
appears in Company records as senior merchant at Batavia. Her second hus­
band was Bartholomeus Cunst, whom we have already met defending the
Gelderlandt redoubt. He had been chief of the Jambi factory and then a leading
free burgher, holding many hononuy posts, including that of orphanage trustee.
Cunst was dismissed from that post following a scandal in the orphanage's
financial management, and he died soon after. A year later, in 1630, his widow
married again, this time van Diemen, who had been one of her husband's
judges and who at that time held the rank of councillor of the Indies.
Maria van Aelst's career throws light on certain aspects ofVOC society. The
Company felt some responsibility towards widows, continuing to pay them
their food allowances until the departure of the fleet for Holland or until they
remarried. Van Aelst's decision to stay upon being widowed suggests that the
Indies held a more promising future for her than did Holland. Widowed a third
time, however, and being now the dowager van Diemen, she found the Nether­
lands sufficiently attractive to return. Clearly, marriage offered the few Dutch­
women who journeyed to the Company's settlements in the seventeenth century
the possibility of social advancement and fortune.
By mid-century, the wives of senior officials came from among immigrants
who had spent the greater part of their lives in Asia or who were born there.
Governor-General Maetsuyker's first wife, Haasje Berkmans, for instance,
accompanied him East at the start of his Indies career and spent twenty-nine
years in Batavia, dying there in 1663. His second wife, Elisabeth Abbema, had
emigrated at fifteen with her family and lived nineteen of her thirty-six years in
eastern Indonesia and Batavia. Fran~oise de Wit, who was wife to the eleventh
governor-general, Carel Reyniersz., had been born to Dutch migrants at Masu­
lipatnam on India's Coromandel Coast in 1634. In 1648, when the marriage
took place at Batavia, Reyniersz. was forty-four, once-widowed and director­
general. Two years later he was governor-general, and the sixteen-year-old
Fran~oise, who had never seen Europe, was first lady of all the Netherlands
eastern possessions. Her father's promotion to governor of Coromandel oc­
curred the following year.
This pattern of senior officials cementing alliances through family ties and
supporting each other had already started with Governor-General Coen. His
wife had brought a younger sister, Lysbet Ment, to the Indies with her in 1627.
Within months the sister was wife to one of Coen's councillors. Thus during
Coen's second tenn his Council consisted of three personal proteges and his
brother-in-law, Pieter Vlack. "Dynastic" rule was a later development, dis-
35

--- PAGE: 68 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.68) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
cemible once Indies clans were established with a network of ties stretching
across the VOC's Asian empire. Even in the early period, however, senior
employees marrying in the East chose women with useful connections. In
Elisabeth Abbema, for instance, Maetsuyker married the widow of the gover­
nor of Ambon and sister-in-law of Mr. Andries Boogaert, governor of Banda
and later director of Sural. Governor-General Willem van Outhoorn married the
daughter of a councillor extraordinary.
The first complaints about the character and style of living of Batavian ladies
came from the VOC directors in the 1640s, precisely when all the detennining
circumstances of colonial society were flowing together. Maria van Aelst is the
first to draw notice. Until she assumed residence in the governor-general's
quarters in the Castle, first families lived soberly, with few attendants or other
marks of worldly pomp. This simplicity reflected the personalities of early
office-holders, but it also reflected daily living conditions-the dangers from
without, rough life within the walls, the few persons of education and leisure in
Batavia, and the absence of such centers of social life as theaters and coffee
houses. By the 1640s, life was more settled and the governor-general could
take his recreation with pomp, before the citizenry. The Daily Register contains
references to the first official riding out with a suite composed of senior Com­
pany servants, their wives, and visiting dignitaries.
The grand style that begins with the van Diemen-van Aelst period is under­
lined by Valentijn. He says that on his deathbed van Diemen extracted promises
of the councillors in attendance that Maria would be continued in the state she
had come to expect, including use of the governor-general's residence, until the
return fleet should lift anchor from Batavia. All this was granted, and Maria
was allowed "out of pure liberality," in the words of the Company's biogra­
pher, J. P. I. du Bois, to take to the Netherlands all the furnishings and effects
she had accumulated "in extraordinary quantity."2 She had apparently in­
dulged a taste for outings, too. The directors responded by forbidding her
successors to use the state carriage. 3
Maria van Aelst's immediate successor was Levijntje Polet (written Livina
Poleth in some sources), a native of Breda. It was in Batavia that she married
Cornelis van der Lijn in 1630. In the course of many years in Asia both husband
and wife had acquired a taste for luxury that the directors could never hope to
legislate away. There exists an account of the state they maintained written by
the Parisian-born merchant-adventurer Jean-Baptiste Tavernier. Shortly after
his arrival in Batavia in 1648, Tavernier was invited by Governor-General van
der Lijn to dine with him and his party and then to join them in an outing.
"Two trumpets began blazing," he writes:
"My Lord Governor and My Lady with the four wives of the Councillors stepped
into a carriage drawn by six horses and the Councillors mounted horses. One was
led to me, saddled and bridled in the Persian style, with an extremely attractive
36

--- PAGE: 69 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.69) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
harness. There are always forty or fifty horses in the General's stables, for there is
not a ship that does not bring in several, whether from Arabia, Persia or other
places. A company of cavalry rode before the General's carriage; each horseman
having a collar of buffalo hide and scarlet breeches with silver braid, a plumed hat
and a sash of silver lace, sword-sheath and spurs of solid silver, and all their horses
in vel)' handsome harness. Three guardsmen marched alongside each carriage with
halberd and vel)' well hatted. Each wore a doublet of yellow satin and scarlet
breeches trimmed with silver stripes, yellow silk hose, and fine linen. A company
of infantry marched behind the carriage; another had left an hour earlier in order to
reconnoitre the route. "4
Passages describing the governor-general's procession occur repeatedly in
ac~ounts of settlement life. On the surface the display seems to confirm the
reasoning used to combat sponsored female migration from Holland: that
Dutchwomen would make excessive demands on their husbands' purses. In
fact, female immigration had little to do with it. Men who spent thirty and more
years in Asia could not fail to be influenced by their immediate surroundings
more than they were by the manners of a country they had left as children.
Senior officials of the Company assumed great pomp in dress and in number
and variety of attendants when waiting on Asian rulers, and on these occasions
no woman was present.
The habits of European men were quite different from those of their parents
in the Netherlands. In place of the Dutch maidservant were numbers of re­
tainers of a different race, owned not hired, who shared no common culture
with the household head. Within the Batavian household there could scarcely
develop that family life so celebrated by Dutch artists of the seventeenth cen­
tury, who depicted homogeneous groups of kin, soberly dressed, engaged in
domestic activities in small, simply furnished chambers. When officials of the
Company came to marry, as distinct from selecting a concubine, they chose
their brides from among the daughters of their peers or superiors, girls therefore
often many years their junior. It should be noted that Batavia's senior officials
did not seek to demonstrate their status by bringing proxy brides from the
Netherlands. The accession of Creoles to the dignity of first lady, as the century
wore on, testifies to the development of a settled society with its own distinctive
habits.
The colonial female elite was greater, of course, than the sum of its first
ladies. It included, broadly, the wives, widows, and daughters of men ranking
as senior merchants, warehouse administrators, presidents or chiefs of facto­
ries, fiscals, justices, and councillors. Some of these great ladies had their
portraits painted. One was Maria Isaacs Scipio, second wife of Jan van Rie­
beeck, who was then secretary of Batavia's government (1665-1677), a former
president of Malacca and founder of the Cape settlement.5 The portrait shows a
37

--- PAGE: 70 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.70) ---
VJ
00
"A VOC Senior Merchant and His Wife," painted by Ae1bert Cuyp after 1641. This portrait, painted in Holland,
places a Dutch couple against an imagined background of Batavia's harbor. Their slave holds the Asian status
marker, the parasol, above them. (Rijksmuseum Amsterdam SK-A-2350)
....,
~
m
Vl
on
5=r
~
~
rU
o
"Tj
to
>
~<:
5=

--- PAGE: 71 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.71) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
heavy-set woman in black, the usual costume worn by Dutch ladies in portraits
painted in Holland at that time. Where Maria Scipio's portrait differs from the
ladies of Frans Hals, for example, is in the quantity of jewelry which the
Batavian lady selected for the sitting. The same costume with ornaments of
pearl and amber is recorded in a portrait, painted by Albert Cuijp, of a Batavian
woman and her husband sometime in the decade 1640-50. 6 Behind them a
dark-skinned servant in European dress holds a payung or parasol, the Asian
symbol of status, above them.
In addition to the evidence of the portraits and the complaints of the directors
about this quickly established, wealthy colonial class, there are letters in family
archives that suggest its style of living and values. One that survives was
written by Cornelia Johanna van Beveren, a Dutchwoman who was married in
Batavia to the Malaccan Juriaen Beek on 27 October 1689. The letter gives an
account of the wedding celebrations, her costume, and the furnishings of the
house which Beek gave her. He was twenty-nine and a free townsman at the
time. "My bridal gown," Cornelia wrote to her aunt, "was of black velvet
with a train one and a half yards long. The underskirt was of white satin
embroidered from top to bottom with gold lace, and the undersleeves were of
the same material and lace, with bows of pearls and diamond buttons. The
crowns that I was married with were made entirely of mother-of-pearl and
diamonds which my bridegroom had given me for the purpose. Seven ropes of
pearls were twisted through my hair, and the jewels at my throat and bosom
were alsd very costly. " 7
The tone of self-congratulation courses throughout the letter, which de­
scribes in detail the decorations of the church and the bridal apartment. What
makes this fragment so remarkable is its very rarity, and the glimpse it gives
into the life of the female elite by a member of it. For the most part one has to
rely on the accounts of all sorts of men for information about upper-class
women. On this subject the opinions of the men are curiously uniform in
wholehearted condemnation and even revulsion.
One passage that occurs again and again in the narratives of travelers to
Batavia is the description of a grand lady proceeding to church. The focus on
this single event stems from the fact that church attendance was one of the few
outings elite women took. The tendency to cloister women of the upper class
became characteristic of Dutch society in Asia within a few decades of settle­
ment. It grew, not from imitation of the bourgeoisie in the Netherlands, but
from increased familiarity with Asian civilizations and with the habits of the
Portuguese overseas. For such a description one can do little better than tum to
Nicolaus de Graaff. The scene he paints is a composite of the Iberian and South
Asian, and shows how quickly the two mingled to produce a Mestizo culture
that was to be most fully developed in Holland's Asian cities of the following
39

--- PAGE: 72 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.72) ---
.,J:::..
o
"The Cnoll Family," painted by 1. 1. Coeman in Batavia c.1665. The artist suggests the opulence of this Batavian
Dutch-Japanese family in his painting of their clothing, jewelry, Asian slaves,and luxury possessions that include
fans, a betel box, Chinese porcelain, and cut flowers. (Rijksmuseum Amsterdam SK-A-4062)
....,
~
m
Vl
on
5=r
~
~
rU
o
"Tj
to
>
~<:
5=

--- PAGE: 73 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.73) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
century. "What most astounds one in Batavia," he says by way of introduc­
tion,
"is the extreme splendor and hauteur which the women in Batavia-Dutch, Mes­
tiza and Half-Caste too-display, especially upon going to and from church ...
for on such occasions each is decked out more expensively than at any other
time.... Thus they sit by the hundred in church making a show like lacquered
dolls. The least of them looks more like a Princess than a burgher's wife or
daughter, so that Heaven itself is filled with loathing, especially as they go and
come from church, when even the most inferior has her slavefollow behind to carry
a parasol or sunshade above her against the fierce heat. Many of these have great
hanging silken flaps embroidered with golden dragons and ornamental foliage."8
It remains for Tavernier to complete the picture with a further description of
the ladies' attendants. In addition to the parasol bearer would be several slave
women carrying their mistress's hymn book, fan, betel box, and cuspidor. Of
betel he adds:
Men and women always chew it when they go out, even in church; and that's how
these ladies piously say their prayers. It is an infamous sight, for their mouths are
always full of red spittle, as if their teeth had been smashed. 9
Every traveler comments with disgust on addiction to betel and on its charac­
teristic of stimulating the flow of saliva and staining the saliva red. Taking betel
was peculiar to Eastern cultures; its appearance among the Dutch signals a
mingling of the races and adoption of both the indulgences and the symbols of
status of the Asian. One of these symbols was the betel box, which was not
merely a receptacle for the nut, lime, and leaves but often an elaborately em­
bossed and jeweled container. The betel box is prominently displayed in paint­
ings of wives of Dutchmen of this time.10
Another perversity noted by European visitors-for they could discern no
virtue worth recording-was the custom of women raised in Asia of bathing
several times daily. It was long before Dutch migrants adopted habits of per­
sonal cleanliness in the tropics. They were scandalized by the sight of their
mistresses washing themselves in public view in the Ciliwung. Old Batavia
houses had bathing boxes built beside the canals for this purpose, with a closed
room for changing and steps leading to the water.
The other characteristic of local women with European status, one that was
to become legendary in histories and novels, was indolence and its opposite face,
viciousness. De Graaff introduces the idea with these lines:
These little ladies in general, Dutch, but also Half-Castes and Mestizas, and espe­
cially in Batavia ... let themselves be waited on like princesses, and some have
many slaves, men and women, in their service who must watch over them like
guard dogs night and day ... and they are so lazy that they will not lift a hand for
anything, not even a straw on the floor close to them, but they call out at once for
one of their slaves to do it, and if they do not come quickly they are abused, called
41

--- PAGE: 74 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.74) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
"common whore," "whore's child," "child of a dog," and sometimes even
worse; and if their slaves displease them in any way, even a minor offense, they
have them bound to a stake or pole and flogged and beaten with a sharp jagged
rattan till their blood flows and the skin hangs lacerated. 11
The expression "with European status" used above to single out certain
Asia-born women draws attention to another point. All women followed the
national status of their husbands, so that at any time the European group could
include among its female members native Netherlanders, Creoles, Eurasians,
and Asians. Not that residents were blind to a person's racial heritage; de
Graaff's vulgar definitions and their complexity should settle that question. 12
But upper-class Eurasian women, in these early decades of VOC rule, took on
the appearance of Europeans in the dress they donned for their outings and in
social consequence, as well as in their names.
Such women are represented in a family portrait by 1. 1. Coeman which
hangs in the Rijksmuseum. The group has been identified as Cornelia van
Nieuwenroode with her husband Pieter Cnoll and two of their nine daughters. 13
Cornelia was one of two daughters born to a Japanese woman by Cornelis van
Neyenrode,14head of the Hirado factory in southern Japan from 1623 to 1632.
In 1632 he sent the girls to Batavia. There Cornelia was to marry Cnoll, who
held the lucrative post of first senior merchant of the Castle and was to leave her
an enormous fortune upon his death in 1672. The portrait shows a thickset
Dutchman by the side of a slender, obviously part-Asian woman. Cornelia
stands dressed in black, her face a delicately drawn oval, eyes slanted. The
painter's attention to visual truth is continued in the depiction of one of the
daughters, whose features closely resemble the mother's. The three women are
richly gowned in the European style; one of them holds a jeweled box. It is one
of the most opulent portraits from Batavia.
At this point one can profitably diverge to consider how the young were
being raised in this growing municipality of Batavia. Travelers were eloquent
on the subject. They were as little able to divorce themselves from racial
prejudice in their efforts to describe child-rearing as in their evocation of
Mestizo manners. Nevertheless, some passages are worth consulting as testi­
mony to a characteristic of settlement life already noted, the predominance of
Portuguese or Asian tongues as the languages of daily life. De Graaff explains
the situation in this passage:
Those born in the Indies especially are incapable, or rather too lazy, to raise their
own children. Instead, as soon as they come into the world [the mothers] hand them
over to a Black wetnurse, a slave whore, or to one of their women Slaves to nurse
and rear, so that they trouble themselves little with their own children; which is why
children prefer being with their Black nurse and the men and women slavesto being
with their parents. Since they are raised by [slaves] and imbibe all their manners,
42

--- PAGE: 75 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.75) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
their nature and all their qualities, they therefore speak Malabarese, Singhalese,
Bengali, and pidgin Portuguese as well as the slaves themselves, and when they
reach adulthood they can scarcely speak a word of Dutch decently, far less maintain
a rational conversation without mixing many words of pidgin Portuguese in it. 15
Governor-General Maetsuyker was in complete agreement with de Graaff on
the ill consequences of raising children among slaves. Maetsuyker also attri­
buted the fault to the supposed character of individual slaves rather than to the
institution of slavery itself and the relationship of owner and owned. He saw
well-run schools and careful supervision by parents as means to combat vice in
the Indies-born, however. 16 In this he differed from de Graaff and others of his
contemporaries who found in mixed racial heritage itself the major cause of the
defects of character they listed.
The point to be settled here is not the relation of character to race, but the fact
that in Batavia the offspring of European men were raised by people with
non-European origins, manners, tongue, culture, and religious beliefs, people
whose relation to their charges, that of chattel, did not exist in the Netherlands.
Men who wished to pass on their own cultural heritage to their children sent
them to Europe at the early age of two or three years.
The fortunes of the Caron children illustrate these points. They were born in
Hirado, part-Japanese through their mother and part-European through their
father. The latter was Fran~ois Caron, who spent twenty-two years as a Com­
pany employee in Japan, rising from assistant and interpreter to president of
Hirado in 1639. In 1641 Caron pere was back in Batavia with his children and
their mother. As a convert to Roman Catholicism, the Japanese mother had
been forced to leave her country of birth under the terms of Iyemitsu's expul­
sion edicts. Five of their six children were still living. Caron had publicly
acknowledged them, giving them Dutch names and raising them as Europeans
and Christians. In 1643, however, upon returning from leave in Holland, Caron
took a further step and applied to Batavia's government for a certificate of
legitimacy for the five. His request described government action as the only
way in which he could accomplish his aim: he had hastened his return to
Batavia, he said, in order to marry the children's mother and thus make their
social position secure, but she was, "to his excessive sorrow," already dead.
The government complied, legitimizing Daniel, Tobias, Fran~ois, Petronella,
and Maria by a decree of 26 September 1643. A similar act of legitimation was
later obtained from the directors in Holland also. 17
With his children thus securely European and legitimate by proclamation,
Caron set about promoting their futures. The two surviving boys he sent to
Europe for schooling (Tobias had died some time after 1643). Daniel (b. 1622)
was enrolled in Leiden in the very respectable school of theology in 1643;
Fran~ois (b. 1634) entered Leiden University some eleven years later. In 1649
43

--- PAGE: 76 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.76) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Daniel enlisted in the VOC's service as a common soldier. The interlude was
brief, however, for he applied to the church authorities in Batavia for pennis­
sion to enter the ministry, and was examined and accepted as a candidate for
ordination in August of 1650. In 1658 he was assigned to Taiwan, where his
father's brother-in-law, Frederik Coyett, was governor (1656-62). It is pro­
bable that Daniel lost his life during Koxinga' s attack in 1661.
Caron's other son, Fran~ois, set out for the Indies in 1660, where he was to act
as dominie in Ambon for fourteen years and become known as a Malay scholar,
composing many religious works in the island's dialect. In 1673 he requested
permission to "repatriate," by which he meant return to the Netherlands, not
Japan. He departed for Europe with his Asia-born wife and family in 1675. It
seems that his ethnic origins were no obstacle in Holland, for he was called to the
pulpit of Leksmond near Tiel. A collection of his Malay religious tracts was
published in Amsterdam in 1693, and he died in Holland twelve years later.
By contrast, neither Petronella nor Maria Caron was sent to the Netherlands
for schooling. They were raised in Hirado and Batavia, and destined to be
wives to native Hollanders. Very little is known about them, and the infonna­
tion we have is contradictory. According to Wijnaendts van Resandt, Maria
was married in Batavia to the merchant Nicolaas de Voocht, and in 1657
accompanied him to Tonkin (northern Vietnam), where he was head of trade.
Boxer has her sister Petronella marrying de Voocht, living in Batavia over the
years 1657-65, and later marrying justice Jacob van Dam. He says that Maria
Caron was married to Isaac Soolman around the year 1668.18
The actual details are of little importance here. What matters is the contrast
between the careers charted for part-Asian children of distinguished VOC offi­
cials. In the case of the Caron girls we see that Eurasian daughters remained in
Asia. Although they had European status and privileges, they were destined for
a lifetime in one or the other of the VOC's Asian factories. Caron left these
half-Japanese daughters behind when he was recalled to Holland by the direc­
tors in 1650 on charges of smuggling. He did, however, take back to the
Netherlands all the children, daughters as well as sons, born to his Dutch bride,
Constantia Boudaen, whom he had married by proxy and had brought out to
Batavia in 1645.
Nothing is known of Daniel Caron after 1658. The younger Fran~ois Caron
married a woman who was either Ambonese or of mixed race. While a part­
Asian woman could improve her status by marriage to a European of good
ranking in the Company, a part-Asian male had to achieve his status through
employment. In the case of the Caron boys, neither was taken into the Com­
pany on the one route to high position, the civilian hierarchy of merchants. It
can be argued that in 1666, when Fran~ois went out as a minister, he had no
powerfully placed relatives to promote him, his father having been dismissed
and his step-uncle exiled to Ay in the Banda Islands. But Daniel was only a
44

--- PAGE: 77 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.77) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
soldier in 1649 when his father was at the height of his VOC career, but one
step away from the governor-generalship itself.
Many examples could be brought forward in support of the conclusion that
very early on, some rich and powerful officers of the Company acted upon
paternal inclination in favor of their illegitimate Eurasian children. For the boys
there was schooling in Europe, and many never returned, or if they did, spent
only a part of their careers in Asia, looking to the Netherlands as their home­
land and the country of their descendants. The girls were usually left in Asia,
but married Netherlanders. Their final resting place was then detennined by
their husband's career and disposition. The Eurasian man reared in the Indies
could hope for employment by the Company and marriage to a Eurasian
woman. It was rare for Eurasian men to marry immigrants, both because of the
small numbers of such women available as brides and because such a match
was regarded as demeaning the ""oman. Evidently these matches did take
place, however, when the man's origins were compensated for by wealth, as in
the case of the Beek-van Beveren alliance. Upon occasion, Creole daughters
might also be sent to the Netherlands. In 1659, for example, Cornelis Speelman
won permission from the Indies Council to "send his little daughter, aged about
two, to the fatherland, together with her amme or wetnurse." 19
These examples are, however, exceptions to Company policy, which was to
keep Creoles and Eurasians in the settlements as an intennediate group between
the mass of Asians and the thin layer of immigrants in the top positions. Those
senior servants of the Company who bent rules to their needs still thought of an
Asian settlement as the proper place for their daughters, and attempted to
secure their girls' future by marriage to men who.were white and privileged
office-holders. Their sons they groomed either to become members of Dutch
society in Europe, by removing them as lads from their homeland, or to hold
positions of modest respectability in the colony. In either case, it was the boys
who were trained to look upon Holland as their home country.
The Christian Asian community also represents a new social and cultural
group springing from the contact between East and West. It came into existence
in the most natural way. Portuguese religious had taken the Gospel to Indo­
nesia's islands from their bases in India all during the sixteenth century. They
established Christian settlements in the islands east of Java, especially in Flores
and Timor, and in the Moluccas. Francis Xavier, for instance, arrived in the
Moluccan islands in 1545. Indonesians who adopted the new religion symbol­
ized their spiritual rebirth by exchanging their personal names for those of the
saints or biblical characters, in their Portuguese form.
This nucleus of a Christian community was the object of especial attention
from the Dutch. In their homeland they were fighting a national and civil war
against Roman Catholic Spain and Portugal, so it is understandable that they
45

--- PAGE: 78 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.78) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
should concern themselves with local peoples who had taken the faith of their
enemies. Portuguese religious were expelled and conversion to the beliefs and
practices of the Dutch Refonned Church demanded. Some converts still took
Portuguese names, but many more adopted Christian names in their Dutch
form.
Still, Portuguese remained the tongue of Asian Christian communities in
areas like Timor where priests and friars continued to guide congregations, and
in Batavia where a separate parish was created for people from Indian ports and
their descendants. Malay quickly displaced Portuguese as the language of reli­
gion among Indonesian Christians, however. A knowledge of Malay or Portu­
guese was required of clerics appointed to work with Asian converts.
Since Malay was not usually the first tongue of Indonesian converts, Euro­
pean dominies expressed doubts about the efficacy of their preaching and of
catechism classes. Indonesians came to be appointed as lay officers with the
duty of giving religious instruction in the vernaculars. Some were men of
considerable learning, such as the Ambonese Amos Pieterszoon Thenoe, who
had been a pupil of Valentijn, spoke Dutch fluently, and wrote Malay in both
the Roman and Arabic scripts. Most, however, had little education, were
poorly paid by the Company, and were treated with scorn by the European
clergy, who at first doubted the very fitness of any Asian to partake of the
sacraments. That debate was resolved in favor of confinning Asians as mem­
bers of the church. Their lay officers, however, were never admitted to church
synods and rarely ordained into the ministry.
European views were never solidly united, so that there were some among
the Dutch who sought to foster learning and truth as they saw it among the
Asians with whom they lived. It had begun with Xavier, who took several
Indonesian boys to Goa in India in 1547 with the intention of training them as
evangelists to their home communities. From time to time small groups of
Indonesians were sent to the Netherlands at the Company's expense for the
same purpose.
The names of certain Hollanders in particular have been associated with the
European education of Indonesians early in the seventeenth century. Matelief
took three Ambonese to the Netherlands in 1608, in the hope that they would
return as schoolteachers to spread Dutch culture as well as religion. Another
five were taken to the Netherlands in 1630 in the care of the lay officer Johannes
Gerritszoon Bloem. The first Javanese to be sent to study theology in the
Netherlands went under the baptismal name of Pieter Ducot. He was a nephew
of the harbor master of Japara, and had converted while a prisoner of the Dutch
on Banda.
From the first, religion and culture were understood as inseparable; hence the
efforts made to associate Christian Asians with the Dutch. The first schools and
church services for Asians were conducted in Dutch, a fact reflecting not
46

--- PAGE: 79 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.79) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
cultural chauvinism and ignorance of local tongues so much as a desire to foster
the Dutch tongue among all political allies of the Netherlands. It is amply
documented that in the late-nineteenth century colony many Dutch people
resented Indonesians speaking their tongue; but Company officials thought
quite differently on the matter and sought to expand its use during the VOC
centuries. They gave lucrative and prestigious civic posts only to those Asians
who could speak Dutch, and only Dutch speakers were entitled to wear certain
exceptional articles of dress such as the Western hat. Furthermore, Christians
might manumit only such slaves as could speak Dutch.20 As late as the 1770s
VOC officials made attendance at language classes mandatory for all Indo­
nesian lay officers of the church, punishing the laggards with deduction of half
their monthly pay. 21
Some Asian Christians prospered under the Dutch, and their relatives and
friends were able to raise monuments to their memory that are impressive in
their size and claims. These monuments were erected in the churchyards of the
Malay and Portuguese communities that grew up within and around the original
walls of Batavia. They proclaim the offices once held, and sometimes combine
initials of spouses with designs to fonn a family crest in the Dutch manner.
Other relatives gave the church vessels and plate stamped with the names and
worldly degree of the person they so honored. De Haan has included in his
album a photograph of a large silver baptismal font bearing the inscription (in
Dutch), "In memory of the Native Burgher Thomas Anthonits bequeathed to
the Portuguese Church in Batavia on 15 February 1733, valued at 755 reales 9
stuivers.' '22
The deceased and the mourners cherishing his memory belonged to the group
of non-Indonesian Asians whose members were the principal patrons of the
Portuguese church. They were known as Mardijkers, which is an old Dutch
rendering of the Portuguese version of Maharddhika (Sanskrit for "great
man," "high and mighty") and which acquired in Indonesia the meaning of
free(d) person. For a long time this group was distinct from the Indonesians, as
freed slaves of non-Indonesian descent and as baptismal members of the Re­
formed Church. Most traced their history back to the coasts of India and
settlements dominated by the Portuguese in the sixteenth century. In Batavia
they clung to their separate status, encouraged by the Company, which legis­
lated for them as a distinct group.
As heirs to a Mestizo culture formed in Portugal's Indian settlements, Mar­
dijker men typically combined elements of the European and Asian in their
costume; that is to say, they wore Portuguese silk shirts and plumed hats but
went without shoes. In the eyes of some of their Dutch contemporariesit was an
absurd and pretentious apparel. Every visitor to Batavia commented on the
appearance of Mardijker men, at times in a language as spiteful as that used to
depict Eurasian women. The traveler Jacob Haafner was most struck by the
47

--- PAGE: 80 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.80) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
bare feet, and has left us this description: "The black Portuguese who are rich
parade it excessively, especially in their dress; still, for those not used to such a
sight there is no stranger or more contradictory display to be seen than these
people in the richest clothing, with ruffles at their wrists, but bare feet, wander­
ing along the streets with neither shoes nor stockings. ' ,23
In Batavia the men were self-employed as traders and shopkeepers or they
raised sugar on estates ringing the city, estates which they purchased or leased.
Since all groups of any size were required to live in their own quarters of the
city, Mardijkers were able to maintain their own language, a fonn of Portu­
guese. They helped perpetuate Creole Portuguese as a lingua franca of Dutch
settlements far into the late eighteenth century, as did the Company itself by
appointing Portuguese speakers to their pulpits and to the catechism classes
organized for their children.
Batavia's first Portuguese church had been built next to the vegetable and
poultry market in 1634. In 1693 a new church was begun outside the city walls
on the southeast side, its first stone laid by the retired councillor Pieter van
Hoorn. The Portuguese churches were to have patrons from the highest ranks of
VOC society. Many of Batavia's distinguished citizens were honored after their
death by memorial plaques hung on the walls of the inner church, 24 and Gover­
nor-General Hendrik Zwaardecroon chose to be buried there rather than in the
Dutch church. Another patron was Camphuys, who left a set of silver plate to
the parish in 1695 inscribed, "In honor of the new Church for the Portuguese or
Native community endowed and bequeathed by Joannes Camphuys, born in
Haarlem 18 July 1634, being from 11 January 1684 to 24 September 1691
Governor-General of Netherlands India, died at Batavia 18 July 1695. "25
It is interesting to note the description of the Mardijkers as the "Portuguese or
Native community" in this inscription. This was at the close of the seven­
teenth century. The Mardijkers were to remain a separate group for nearly
another century, but the association with Indonesians accurately foreshadowed
the trend to come. To retain a separate identity, there had to be a constant influx
of Asians from India having some acquaintance with Portuguese language and
culture. Even had this been so, there was still the developing metropolitan
culture of Batavia that came to envelop all its inhabitants as the years wore on.
Within the Asian quarters differences between the many ethnic groups became
less marked. Daily mixing, use of Malay, common experience of Company
law-all contributed to the making of the Batavian.
The disappearance of a distinct Mardijker community through fusion of
Mardijker and Indonesian Christian groups was a natural development. The
Company recognized it in 1797 when it dissolved two of the four militia
companies of Mardijkers on account of the declining numbers of those so
identifying themselves. 26 In organization, Mardijkers yet survived the Nether­
lands East Indies Company by a decade or two. In 1808, when Abraham
48

--- PAGE: 81 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.81) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
Anthonij Engelbrecht, minister to Batavia's Portuguese church, died, there was
none to succeed him. Services and catechism classes in Portuguese ceased from
that time. The post of Mardijker captain, or head and spokesman for the
community, continued a little longer. Its last bearer was the wealthy landowner
Augustijn Michiels. With his death in 1833 the post was allowed to lapse. But
from the beginning some Mardijkers had taken the ultimate step towards com­
plete assimilation with the Asian majority of Batavia by becoming Muslim.
And some had never been Christian at all. Among the Indian slaves captured
from the Portuguese (listed in chapter 1) there was an Ysmael, along with the
Rodrigos.
In sum, then, there was no ethnic or racial unity among Asian Christians in
the seventeenth century. Individuals came from the smaller islands of Indonesia
or from India's coastal cities. Their establishment in Batavia was the result of
various circumstances. Some had come as free settlers, expecting economic
advantage from their common religious profession with Batavia's rulers.
Others were fonner slaves, freed upon conversion. Some had reached Batavia
through capture and had there been transfonned, at least externally, from
Roman Catholics to Protestants. Still others had taken up the new religion as a
result of evangelization or upon legal marriage to a European man. Some Asian
Christians had a command of the Dutch language and an insight into Dutch
culture, while a very few had seen it at first hand in Europe. But all Asian
Christians had a special relation to the Company as co-religionists of the Dutch.
This attachment gave them certain privileges such as a claim on poor relief, an
opportunity for fonna! schooling, and the chance for employment as religious
teachers.
In daily living, converts differed less clearly from the other Indonesian
inhabitants of Batavia. Women, particularly, differed little in dress, and in
habit and manners not at all. Many classified as Mardijkers may have been
Indonesian, since under Dutch law women followed the nationality of their
husbands. In the Mardijker wards, they raised their children not according to
the Indian customs of their husbands' home cities, nor yet exactly as in their
own ethnic communities in Indonesia, but in the ways of the population indige­
nous to Batavia that was coming to develop a culture of its own. Only the
wealthy few stood out in any marked way, the ones who fashioned coats-of­
arms for themselves and modeled their manners on those of the Dutch colonial
elite. The great majority of Mardijkers and Christian Indonesians passed their
lives in Batavia in the same manner as their fellow Asians.
The average VOC clerk and soldier knew little about the religions and
histories of the Asians amongst whom they lived. All the same, they were not
entirely ignorant of the world around them. The daily stroll made them aware of
the great variety of peoples and customs, and many gained more than a passing
familiarity with Asian languages and traditions from their slaves, mistresses,
49

--- PAGE: 82 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.82) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
and part-Asian kin. Valentijn's description of the languages heard in Batavia
may be taken as a summary of the average Hollanders' reckoning with their
environs at the close of the century: ""The languages one ordinarily uses in
Batavia are Portuguese, low Malay, and Dutch. There are also Javanese,
Chinese, and all the other languages of the peoples who reside here; but these
are used only when speaking among themselves, never being used by other
nationals: but Portuguese and Malay are the two languages one can communi­
cate in easily with all manner of peoples, not only in Batavia, but throughout all
India as far as Persia. "27
The seventeenth century closes on societies very different from those planted
in its opening years. The larger of them had the appearance of cities, with
streets laid, churches and hospitals built, and a visible government. Batavia
was now secure and expanding beyond its outer walls, as new fields were
brought under cultivation and sugar mills erected along the Ciliwung. Its in­
habitants were similarly transformed. The rough and ready soldiers and mer­
chants had become a more orderly citizenry. Domestic habits had triumphed in
some circles, so that adventurers were now family men bent on promoting the
future of their children and relatives by marriage. From a Dutch Calvinist point
of view, of course, senior officers of the Company set a lamentable example
still, taking concubines, then late in life marrying young girls for political or
fi nancial reasons.
Daily life in all the VOC settlements involved a recognition of the diversity
of human behavior and traditions. Some consciously exchanged one code for
another: Europeans adopted language and slavery from Asians; some Asians
acquired names, dress, manners, occupations, religion from the Europeans.
New alliances had been formed between groups, based, not on mutual esteem,
but on shared attachment to belief and power. One cannot therefore readily
distinguish in the mature seventeenth-century settlement such clearcut groups
as Dutch, Indonesian (in the geographical sense), and Foreign Oriental. More
complex and numerous groups than these had developed, sharing some charac­
teristics but differing in others.
In the middle years of the century there was still considerable movement by
Europeans between Holland and the Asian settlements. Between the years 1645
and 1651 Constantia Caron-Boudaen, for instance, traveled from The Hague to
Batavia, to Taiwan, to Batavia, and back to the Netherlands before finally
settling in Paris. Holland was still the homeland of the migrants and the adopted
land of their children. Even a man like Comelis Speelman, who spent forty of
his fifty-seven years in Asia, made several plans for a return to Europe and
remained in the East only by reason of successive appointments to lucrative and
prestigious posts.
With Camphuys is revealed a new development within colonial society, that
50

--- PAGE: 83 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.83) ---
GROWTH OF SETTLEMENT SOCIETY
of an elite choosing pennanent settlement on Java, a choice less-fortunate
Europeans had been unable to reject. Camphuys, too, spent the greatest part of
his life in Asia. Having survived the first years of governor-generalship and
looking fOlWard to a life in retirement, he recognized, perhaps, that Europe had
little attraction for him anymore, or perhaps that he was unfitted by his long
sojourn in Asia to take up life there again. His wish to retire in Indonesia was
granted by the directors. Camphuys set a pattern in a preference for Indonesia
over Holland, a taste for seigneuriallife on a country estate, an appreciation of
oriental civilization. This style, most fully developed in the eighteenth century,
represents the culmination of trends already apparent in some Company settle­
ments by the fifth and sixth decades of the seventeenth. In some respects it was
to be a closed society, isolated from Europe and elaborating those aspects
borrowed early from an Iberian and Asian cultural medley. This development is
the subject of the next chapter.
51

--- PAGE: 84 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.84) ---
3
The Web of Colonial Society: Batavia
and Environs in the Eighteenth Century
THE COMPANY SEAMAN AND POET Jan de Marre first sailed to Batavia early in
the eighteenth century. Something of the impression the city made on the
visitor after months at sea can be felt in this excerpt from his long poem
"Batavia":
o lovely Batavia, that holds me spellbound,
There your Town Hall with its proudly arching vaults
Rears its profile! How splendid is your situation!
Your broad Canals, replenished with fresh water,
beautifully planted, J
Need bend before no city in the Netherlands ...
The Tiger's Canal, of which Batavia well may boast,
Throws up proudly to the skies a row of Palaces
And glitters from end to end with jewels of architecture . . .
0'ershadowed by an avenue of eternal spring green . . .
How does Batavia charm the stroller then! 1
These were to be the last years of the city's prosperity, although individuals
made fortunes at the Company's expense throughout the eighteenth century.
Conditions in Batavia itself-its location on malarial swamps, its crowded
quarters, the unsanitary life style of the immigrant Dutch-combined with
cholera and typhoid epidemics to decimate the city's population. Such mortal
dangers emptied Batavia of its wealthy, encouraging them to build spacious,
airy villas beyond the limits of the old settlement. By mid-century the country
houses of Batavia's elite extended as far south as Bogor. It was not merely
health they sought. Landed estates gave rich Batavians novel ways to display
their fortunes and provided a fresh context for the elaboration of a peculiarly
Eurasian culture.
The move away from the old city had, in fact, begun long since. Petronella
Speelman-Wonderaer described herself in 1680 as living on her "estate, named
Wonderwel, outside this city of Batavia. "2 Thirty years earlier Tavernier had
spoken of councillors as "each one having his garden" along the river to which
they journeyed by boat. De Graaff had also noted the preference for a residence
52

--- PAGE: 85 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.85) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
in the country lying south of Batavia. HOutside the Town," he had written,
Hone finds many beautiful Pastures, Rivers, Rice and Sugar fields and Estates,
all of them planted to fruit trees, and some with splendid houses and delightful
pleasure gardens. "3
At first, country estates were principally used for a few hours' relaxation, the
owner returning to the safety of Batavia's walls by nightfall. Outings by the
city's prominent citizens are often noted in the Daily Register, as in this entry
for 27 September 1648: "This afternoon the noble Governor-General [van der
Lijn] and his wife and children, together with the Councillors of the Indies and
their wives, journeyed in two large praus upriver to Mr. Caron's newly laid out
estate, being invited there by that gentleman, and were splendidly entertained
and regaled, floating back down the river in the cool of the evening, and the
whole company arrived back here inside the castle at 8 0'clock."4
Only in the eighteenth century did fashionable society spend weeks at a time
in the country and retired officials take up permanent residence in country
villas. This change in living habits depended in part on two conditions. One
was the accord signed with Bantam in 1684 which guaranteed Batavia from
attack. The other was the transformation of Batavia's environs into cultivated
fields. 5 The advance on the heavy vegetation surrounding the city lessened the
dangers to life and property from wild animals and from runaway slaves.
Accordi~gly, colonial society, which in the seventeenth century had been
merely perched on the edge of Java and Houtward-looking," connected by sea
lanes to the European homeland, now turned to look inland, extending beyond
the city's walls in ever-widening arcs.
Around 1700 the Dutch painter Come lis de Bruijn began his travels round
the world, reaching Batavia early in 1706. He carried letters of introduction and
so was at once presented to the current governor-general, Joan van Hoom, to
other high officials, and to former governor-general Willem van Outhoorn, who
was living in retirement in a Hvilla situated a little distance from the town. "
One of de Bruijn's social engagements was a dinner given by Councillor
Abraham van Riebeeck in celebration of his wife's birthday at his estate situ­
ated, in the traveling time of the day, "about one and a half hours to the
South. " "The whole countryside is planted to rice," de Bruijn wrote. "One
also sawall sorts of fruit and other trees on this estate, although they had not yet
reached maturity, and the land was being worked daily. Although the house is
already completed, the stables and kitchen have still to be built. "6
De Bruijn was also a guest of Cornelis Chastelein on his Depok property.
Chastelein (1657-1714) had emigrated with the rank of accountant, accom­
panied by his sisters. He continued in the Company's employ until his death, by
which time he was a full councillor. He had started his Indies career in the
privileged capacity of son of an important shareholder in the Company, and
smoothed his climb up the hierarchy by marrying the Indies-born daughter of
53

--- PAGE: 86 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.86) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Councillor Cornelis van Qualberg. His legitimate son Anthonij married a
daughter of Mattheus de Haan (governor-general 1725-29). Chastelein also
recognized Maria and Catharina as his daughters by the slave Leonora van Bali.
De Bruijn described Chastelein's villa as two-storeyed and constructed of
wood, set amidst fields under sugar and pepper cultivation. He noted that the
slave retainers were numerous and included many Balinese. Chastelein eman­
cipated them in his will, and Depok was to remain a distinct Indonesian Chris­
tian community for two centuries.7
Besides the traveler's narrative, there is information on the country estate
from ground plans of villas and their gardens, con temporary paintings, and
photographs, taken this century of such houses as still existed. The work of
Johannes Rach and beautiful photographic records assembled by V. I. van
de Wall and F. de Haan are particularly instructive. Three distinctive country
houses will be briefly described here in connection with their principal owners.
Gunung Sari was built by Frederik Julius Coyett in the third decade of the
eighteenth century.8 Coyett was a grandson of Governor Frederik Coyett of
Taiwan and of Susanna Boudaen, sister of Caron's proxy bride. The grandson
Coyett had been born in Asia, but went to Holland in 1707 after commencing
employment with the Company as an assistant. Upon his return he swiftly
reached high offices-senior merchant, governor of Java's North Coast Prov­
ince, councillor extraordinary (1737)-amassing a fortune along the way. He
journeyed further into Java than most of his contemporaries, visiting Solo in
1733 and touring the Mataram territories. Given his family history (he was
second generation Indies-born) and long years in Java, it is understandable that
the house he built should incorporate Indonesian features. Gunung Sari was
made up of a closed inner core, to which were added large front and back
pillared verandas with marble floors and peaked roofs,-a modification of the
Javanese pendopo or reception hall. Into the walls and about the grounds were
placed Hindu statues from the Prambanan temples which Coyett had fancied
during his travels and transported to Batavia.
On Coyett's death Gunung Sari passed to Geertruida Margaretha Goossens,
to whom he was betrothed. The house was to change owners another four times
before being sold to Batavia's Captain China of 1761, Lim Tjipko. From that
time on it served as a temple and burial ground for the capital's Chinese and
was called Klenteng Sentiong.
Gunung Sari was fairly modest in size and ornamentation, and so the contrast
with the house that Governor-General P. A. van der Parra built himself is
startling. As Rach drew it,9 the building was imposing in its size and fantas­
tic appearance, with a central part of two storeys topped by eagles, and with
ornamental pots and arches. Heavy monumental gates fronted it, again with a
variety of statuary. To both sides and set back were separate buildings-guest
accommodations, slaves' quarters, stables, and so forth-a typical feature of
54

--- PAGE: 87 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.87) ---
VI
VI
"View of Batavia's Town Hall," drawing by Johannes Rach, late eighteenth century. Rach places "typical"
Batavians in this scene. (KITLV 5lC003)
....,
~
m
~mto
o
"Tj
noroZ
>r
Vl
ontij....,
--<

--- PAGE: 88 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.88) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
the Indies house and again a development on Javanese styles. The house gave
on to the Ciliwung River, and bathing stalls were erected at its edge, with the
whole approached by an avenue of tamarind trees.
Now van der Parra, like Coyett, came from a well-established Asian family.
His tenn as governor-general (1761-75) coincides with the period of the col­
ony's greatest insulation (or independence) from Europe, when Eurasian cul­
ture was its most elaborate. It is not surprising, then, that the ostentation and
pomp van der Parra and his contemporaries brought to their houses should be
quite distinct from another architectural type, exemplified by men who asso­
ciated themselves publicly with ideas stemming from the Enlightenment move­
ment in Europe.
The mansion which Reynier de Klerk erected around 1760, and which has
survived through many hands to house the archives of the Republic of Indo­
nesia, is such an example. It is a solid, well-proportioned building, two­
storeyed, with great ornamental doors and deep mullioned windows. 10 Gone
are the embellishments, as are also the verandas, in favor of the close privacy of
the Dutch house. By a peculiarly Indies coincidence, de Klerk's wife was
daughter to the Geertruida Goossens of Gunung Sari, and the house passed to
his protege J. C. M. Radennacher, who was husband of de Klerk's wife's
daughter, Margaretha Sophia Verijssel, by an earlier marriage.
While they differed markedly in design, eighteenth-century villas all shared
certain characteristics. First, they were set in huge grounds. Second, they were
built beyond the Castle's walls, in the heart of today's Jakarta but at that time
often one or two hours' distant by boat or carriage. Third, they were maintained
by large retinues of slaves and their owners continued traditional Indonesian
practice in drawing upon the labor of inhabitants of the lands they leased or
purchased. Their owners lived in a grand seigneurial manner that struck the
eighteenth-century observer forcibly. That living style will be examined in the
following sections dealing with the great property owners of the period, mem­
bers of all the major divisions within the colonial elite: native European, Eu­
rasian, Creole, and Asian Christian.
Let us first take a look at the position of a VOC official after his appointment
as governor-general. We have already seen the governor-general in Tavernier's
Travels (pp. 36-37), riding out with his trumpeters, guard, liveried attendants,
and suite of ladies and gentlemen. This entourage, larger and more elaborate,
accompanied the eighteenth-century chief official. After 1719 it became obliga­
tory for all to alight from their carriages or to dismount upon announcement of the
progress of the governor-general or a councillor. 11 Every group was required to
make obeisance in the manner of its culture: men with European status would
make their bow, baring their heads; Indonesians squatted, hands clasped, as they
did before their own nobility. The same attentions were paid wives of members
56

--- PAGE: 89 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.89) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
of the government. In this manner the congested, narrow streets of the inner
city were used for enhancement of the governor-general's position. Another
regulation issued in the early days of Batavia and originally introduced for
reasons of state security was similarly adapted for display. After 1729 only the
highest officials and their wives might enter the Castle on horseback or by
carriage. 12 All lesser mortals had to cross the bridge into the Castle on foot.
Governors-general carried their need for public respect into the realm of
religion, too. When a governor-general entered church, at whatever point dur­
ing the service, the entire congregation was expected to rise and bow until he
had taken his seat. 13 The same consequence attended his wife. The ceremony,
slightly modified, extended to councillors, for whom men alone had to rise
from their devotions.
Some who reached the lofty position of governor-general had odes composed
in their honor. Verse in praise of Governor-General Willem van Outhoom
(1691-1704) will be quoted here. Van Outhoorn was one of only seven men born
outside Europe who reached the governor-generalship in all Indonesia's colonial
period. He had been born at Larike on Ambon in 1635 to Cornelis van Outhoorn
and the Dutch immigrant Agnetha Tielmans. His schooling was in the Nether­
lands and he returned East in 1659 asjunior merchant at Malacca. A year later he
was transferred to Batavia, where he was posted until his retirement from the
governor-generalship in 1704. He had climbed the ranks and held such honorary
posts as colonel of the town's militia before passing his last fifteen years on his
country estate south of Batavia. His poet was the Company surgeon Abraham
Bogaert. After van Outhoom had elevated Bogaert to the supervisory post of
grand inspector, his protege penned these lines in his patron's praise:
Thus noble Outhoorn, thus rose, thus mounted
Your glorious sun above the horizon yonder in the East . . .
The entire kingdom fell to its knees before this luster,
And knew no limit or measure in admiration.
What speak I of Siamese, Timorese,
Amboners, Malays, Makassars?
What speak:I of Bengalis, Singhalese,
And Malabars, and other Barbarians?
The entire East, gladdened by your glory-sun
Bathed in the light of your mighty power,
Burned incense on the altar of your virtue
With deep reverence and downcast eyes. 14
The apotheosis of the governor-general was well underway. Valentijn says of
the Africa-born Abraham van Riebeeck that he was a "hater of all pomp"; but
he, too, took advantage of his wealth and position to indulge a passion for
acquiring race horses, and he liked to be followed, when he rode out, by a great
train of slave women on donkeys. I S
57

--- PAGE: 90 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.90) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
The massive, intricately carved furniture found in colonial collections of
museums and photographed in de Haan's Platenalbum and other books on this
period 16 also attests to the wealth and tastes of Batavia's elite. So do the fine
porcelain sets members ordered from China. Often the plates were painted with
Asian designs, but frequently they bore the insignia of the VOC or the pur­
chaser's family. Governors-general, and all who aspired to follow their style,
had memorial trays or plates inscribed with their names to mark special occa­
sions in their families, and issued medals to their colleagues commemorating
accession to office. 17
More than any other, Petrus Albertus van der Parra epitomizes the magnifi­
cence of the eighteenth-century Company official and the remoteness of Ba­
tavians' lives from native Dutch practice. He had been born in Colombo in
1714, son of Cornelis Romboutsz. van der Parra and of the Dutch-born Geer­
truida Susanna Spanuyt (or Spanijt). * His father Cornelis had also been born in
Ceylon, where he was secretary to that island's colonial government, and his
father before him had been a VOC employee in Ceylon also. This founder of
the clan, Rombout van der Parra, had married there a Henrietta Wichelman,
who had been born to Dutch parents in Ceylon in 1676. In the paternal line,
then, P. A. van der Parra had strong roots in Asia. His father died when he was
young, and his mother followed the VOC habit in quickly remarrying. Van der
Parra's stepfather was the Netherlander Adriaan Maten, who rose to be com­
mander of Malabar in 1731 and was later called to Batavia as councillor.
The future governor-general entered the VOC's service at fourteen. He had
had no schooling in Europe, and doubtless owed his employment as clerk and
his swift rise to junior merchant at Colombo to family connections. For, it
should be noted, he was taken on in 1728, the same year that Batavia's govern­
ment reissued a decree banning the hiring of Creoles and Eurasians. In 1739
van der Parra was transferred to Batavia with the rank of merchant and was
never to leave that city during his remaining thirty-six years. He climbed the
hierarchy in the usual way: second secretary of government in 1741, councillor
ten years later, and director-general of trade from 1755 until his assumption of
the chief post in 1761.
The formal inauguration did not take place until 29 September 1763. Van der
Parra's predecessor, Jacob Mossel, had died in office, so that some time
elapsed while the directors were notified and could send letters of confinnation,
and then there was a further postponement of three months because of van der
Parra's desire that the ceremony should fall on his natal day. When the installa­
tion finally occurred it took the fonn of a great festival, and it was attended not
only by all the notables of Batavia but also by Indonesian officials, the bupat;s,
* All names marked with an asterisk in the text will be found in a family tree of appendix 1.
58

--- PAGE: 91 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.91) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
who administered,the VOC territories in Priangan, Cirebon, along Java's north
coast, and Madura. Representatives of the Solo and Yogyakarta sultanates were
also present. 18 The occasion was celebrated, too, in all the Dutch settlements
from Africa through Persia, India, and the archipelago to Japan. Van der Parra
had a medal struck on the occasion. The text, which was in Latin, read, "To
mark the inauguration of the noble and mighty man Petrus Albertus van der
Parra, Governor-General of the Netherlands Indies; it was his forty-ninth birth­
day."19
The Batavian chronicler P. de Roo de la Faille gives a very full account of
the evening audiences van der Parra presided over in the Castle. Men were
received by the governor-general in the veranda and sat
in a long row . . . each one according to his rank; and should it happen that one
among them does not observe this, he will be addressed by the Commander [van
der Parra] thus: "Sir, that is not your place, you must sit there." ... Then the
conversation begins, but in such a manner that one talks only with on~' s neigh­
bor ...
The ladies are received by the Governor-General' s lady and remain apart from
the gentlemen. They, too, sit according to their husband's rank with the Governor's
wife at the top. According to Indies ways, they are served tea in fine little Japanese
cups with lids by smartly dressed slave women. 20
Such experience of Batavian life amused and shocked eighteenth-century
travelers and fed their convictions of the superiority of European birth and
breeding. The contempt need not delay us here, except to note that it probably
encouraged the colonial elite to ignore the behavior of upper-class circles in
Dutch cities. A distinctively Indies pattern can be seen in this account: the
reception of men took place in the front, public part of the residence, as in any
Javanese kabupaten; women sat in the inner apartments.
It is not difficult to understand this segregation. Most of the ladies were
part-Asian or Creole and all had been reared by Asians. Their model of be­
havior could not be that of the Calvinist housewife and mother. Both of van der
Parra's wives, for instance, were Batavians by birth and spent their whole lives
in VOC settlements in Asia. The first, Elisabeth Petronella van Aerden, had
wed van der Parra in Colombo in 1733 while he was still a bookkeeper. She did
not survive by long their transfer to Batavia, dying in her home city in 1741.
Van der Parra's second wife, and first lady of Holland's Eastern possessions,
was Adriana Johanna Bake, daughter of the Dutch governor of Ambon and of
the Indies-born Ida Dudde. She married van der Parra in 1743. Seventeen years
later the only child of the marriage was born, the younger Petrus Albertus, who
was to be the governor-general's sole heir, for his children by Elisabeth van
Aerden had died in infancy. On one side of a medal issued by Govemor­
General van der Parra in 1768 on the occasion of his twenty-fifth wedding
anniversary this surviving child was shown in the manner of a prince, placing a
59

--- PAGE: 92 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.92) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
floral wreath on the family coat-of-anns. The boy was then eight. By thirteen
he was on the VOC payroll as clerk to the government secretariat, and by the
time of van der Parra's death, the twenty-three year old was VOC inspector.21
Van der Parra's term as governor-general-fourteen years-was long by
eighteenth-century standards. He had come to that office at forty-nine. His
whole world was bounded by Ceylon and Java, and it was in the Indies that he
sought to promote his son, rather than using his influence to make a place for
his heir in Netherlands society. The governor-general was not admired by
contemporaries in Europe whose judgments have passed into acceptance.
"Vain, self-important, and autocratic" are the terms describing him in the New
Netherlands Biographical Dictionary. 22 In his own society, however, one qual­
ity of the grand courtier was particularly esteemed, his generosity as patron of
the church.
Most governors-general patronized the church in one way or another. Joan
van Hoorn, for instance, rewarded the Reverend Godefridus van Holten with
the sum of 1,000 rix dollars for a gratifying sermon preached on the occasion of
his third marriage. Wives and widows of governors-general also endowed the
church. But van der Parra consistently favored the clergy, making them gifts of
clothing and money, taking on the cost of educating their sons, and generally
easing the way of ministers into the tight little societies of other settlements. He
was also capable of signaling special favor with eclat. The Reverend Theodorus
Vermeer's first sermon, preached in Batavia in 1771, was followed by the gift
of a gilded carriage, two Spanish horses, and a coachman.
The major "direction of van der Parra's charities reveals him to be a man of
Dutch Asia. He never forgot to look upon Ceylon, rather that the country of his
great-grandparents, as his homeland. His chief legacy went to the widows of
Colombo and a smaller one to the poor of Batavia. Moreover, when he com­
missioned a new translation of the Psalms and Gospels and had it published at
his own expense, the text was in Portuguese, the language van der Parra him­
self may habitually have spoken in his early years.
While many of the colony's elite modeled themselves on memories of Euro­
pean grands seigneurs, P. A. van der Parra and others like him who had never
lived in Europe were more immediately influenced by the living styles of some
members of the Mardijker group. Descendants of settlers from Portugal's terri­
tories in India who grew wealthy in trade rose to social prominence in Batavia
in the eighteenth century, and they, too, bought estates in the city's environs,
where they lived according to their memories of Asian-Iberian grandees. F. de
Haan has traced the fortunes of the most distinguished of these Mardijker clans,
the Michiels family. 23
It began when the free man Titus van Bengala (from Bengal) took the
baptismal name of Titus Michielsz. upon conversion in 1694 in Batavia.
60

--- PAGE: 93 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.93) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
Through marriage to the Indian Christian Martha Pieters he had numerous
descendants. His sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons held high posts under
the Company as spokesmen for the Mardijker community and as heads of their
militia companies. The clan reached the peak of fashion with Jonathon
Michielsz. (1737-88), a contemporary of van der Parra. He took a family
coat-of-arms and consolidated the clan's fortunes through acquisition of large
landholdings. The fortune passed to the most famous of all the clan, Augustijn
Michiels (he dropped the "z" from the surname), who was a great-grandson of
the Bengali Titus and who as head of the Mardijkers was popularly known as
"Majoor Jantje."
The family was still almost wholly Asian, being composed of descendants of
the original immigrants from India and their Indonesian wives and concubines.
Its first member with European status was admitted in 1809, when the Creole
Jacobus Anthonij Beijvanck married Augustijn Michiels's legitimate daughter
Agraphina Augustijna. 24 At the same time, the alliance gave a descendant of
Mardijker immigrants full European status in her own right. But there was
already considerable social mixing between members of the two elites. While
Augustijn Michiels maintained a house in Batavia's Mardijker neighborhood,
which was located around the Portuguese outer church, he spent much of his
later years at his favorite country estates, Citrap and Semper Idem. There he
entertained leading members of the Dutch community including, in 1828,
Governor-General L. P. J. du Bus de Gisignies.
Michiels's arrival on one of his estates was like the triumphant progress of
royalty, with inhabitants of his lands playing the gamelan (an ensemble of
Javanese musical instruments) in welcome and all the hamlet heads in proces­
sion. Michiels dressed in Indonesian costume and preferred to sit on a mat
rather than a chair. His food was Indonesian and his day punctuated with the
afternoon siesta. Female slaves waited at table, and his guests were entertained
with music from his slave orchestras and by troupes of ronggeng (women
dancers). At Citrap he also kept topeng (masked) dancers in his employ, and his
retainers there numbered 117 house slaves and 48 free servants, in addition to
the stable hands and outdoors staff.2s
Colonial society of VOC times and a little later, then, was made up of groups
whose externals alone were European. Since Asian, Eurasian, and Creole con­
stituted the majority, they strongly influenced the immigrant minority of Dutch­
men in manners, style of living, and recreation. When an immigrant married
into one of these local groups, that influence extended into domestic arrange­
ments, styles of furniture, and the like. And of course, whatever the bride's
nationality, the Asian influence was never absent on account of the household
slaves. The eighteenth-century contribution to colonial culture was the very
public elevation of such styles to the govemor-general's court. Of all the first
ladies in that century, one alone was Dutch by birth.
61

--- PAGE: 94 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.94) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
The eighteenth century yields a little information on the grand ladies of VOC
settlements from sources as various as marriage odes and funeral orations, wills
and portraits. Then there are the accounts of travelers, records of family alli­
ances, and decrees issued from the Castle dealing particularly with women.
From such sources one can piece together an idea of the manner of their lives,
without, however, the benefit of a direct observation from one of their number.
This is hardly surprising. The Company's major endeavors to promote school­
ing for girls came late in the century. For the most part, girls raised in the
colonies had no formal education outside the household, and their training in
the home was supervised by slave women or by mothers who were themselves
unschooled.
As first lady, Adriana Bake* emerges partway from the obscurity that hides
most eighteenth-century women. We have already seen that she was a daughter
of Ida Dudde (who was probably part-Asian) from the mother's second mar­
riage to the Hollander David Bake.26 Adriana was the widow of VOC com­
mander Anthonij Guldenarm when she married van der Parra in 1743. We see
her in paintings by Rach, standing before the governor-general's great house,
surrounded by ladies, a parasol held above her by an Indonesian slave. It is her
costume that attracts attention, for each time she wears voluminous skirts, as do
her companions. 27
This selection in dress is not the contradiction it may seem. European cos­
tume is but one more example of the medley of elements making up Mestizo
culture in Batavia and all the Dutch settlements in Asia. The point is more
clearly grasped from another Rach painting, this one of Willem Arnold Alting
and his wife standing before their Batavia residence.28 Once again the woman
is shown in European dress, a walking-out costume with narrow skirt, a hat,
and a patch on her cheek. Quite naturally complementing this picture of Euro­
pean privilege are the Asian symbols of status: the slave attendant and the betel
box.
It is possible that the woman on Alting's side is Maria Susanna Grebel. *
Alting's first wife, the abandoned daughter of a Company soldier who was
baptized and reared as Hendrina Maria Knabe, died in 1774. She had married
the Dutch lawyer and merchant Alting at thirteen (when he was thirty), and had
borne him ten children. Five girls survived to adulthood, and they married
Netherlanders who subsequently received appointments to lucrative posts. In
1776 Alting remarried. Maria Grebel was the daughter of the freed slave Su­
sanna van Makassar and the widow of Alting's fellow councillor, Huybert
Senn van Basel, who was the founder of a family that was to be prominent
in Batavia at the turn of the century. She died in 1780, the year of Alting's
elevation to the governor-generalship. Maria's daughter from her first mar­
riage, Maria Wilhelmina Senn van Basel, was later married to Alting's
nephew, Nicolaas Engelhard. Whatever the identity of the woman in Rach's
62

--- PAGE: 95 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.95) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
"Batavia Evening at Home," drawn by Jan Brandes, 1779-1785. Batavian men so­
cialize while their female companions and slaves sit apart. (Rijksmuseum Amster­
dam NG-1985-7-2-8)
63

--- PAGE: 96 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.96) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
painting, the point remains that in the eighteenth century, grand Eurasian and
Creole ladies did not discard the symbols giving them status in the eyes of the
Asian population when they moved in public as Europeans.
The supreme government took care to uphold the dignity of members' wives,
resolving on procedures for their suites and on the deference to be paid them.
All councillors, for instance, wore black for Catharina Huysman, wife of
Governor-General van Imhoff, when she died in 1744, and by decree they
observed mourning for six weeks. In other ways, too, government members
elevated their female kin. Mossel named forts Philippineburg and Grietenburg
for two of his daughters, and Governor-General van Hoorn's daughter Petro­
nella laid the foundation stone of Batavia's new town hall in 1707. Few eight­
eenth-century governors-general had sons surviving to adulthood. It was for
their daughters that the great expenditures and public celebration of family
events were made.
Nor were the illegitimate daughters of ruling families necessarily forgotten.
Mossel recognized a girl born to one of his household slaves named Jasmina
van Soembawa. This daughter, Arnolda, was born in 1751 and given the
surname Schulp, a name that indirectly states the family connection, for schulp
translates as "shell" and mossel is Dutch for "mussel"! Mossel left her a
country property and house named Batenburg at his death in 1761. Eighteen
years later, some 10,000 rix dollars were restored to her by the trustee of wills,
confinning Amolda's status of acknowledged child. 29 She was accorded the
dignities of her half-sisters, including the title juffrouw. 30 She survived them
all, dying in Batavia at the age of seventy-three.
All these women represent the Creole and Eurasian branches of colonial
society. Asian women were sometimes counted among the elite too. Take
Anjelina Catharina Valentijn, one of the owners of the Citrap estate before it
passed to Augustijn Michiels. She had been born into slavery as Anjelina van
Batavia, but had been baptized at three under the sponsorship of one Mar­
garetha Catharina Wargaren 31 and raised as a European. She married the Ger­
man burgher and militia ensign Johan Samuel Heinrich Wiistenberg, owner of
Citrap since 1790. After Wiistenberg's death Anjelina married two more times,
and again, European men. Baptism, emancipation, and marriage to wealthy
European men combined to make of Anjelina a woman of some consequence in
colonial Batavia.
On the whole, race was irrelevant in determining the style of the female elite,
since all of its members were raised by the same Asian retainers. European
visitors confinn this point by describing them, Eurasians and Creoles, in much
the same way. To summarize this section on elite women we can therefore
conveniently tum to Stavorinus. Most ladies, he says,32 were married at twelve
and thirteen, had no notion of running a household, could neither read nor
write, and had no idea of religion or of the social proprieties. Early marriage
64

--- PAGE: 97 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.97) ---
0\
VI
"Dutch Wedding in Batavia," color drawing by Jan Brandes, 1779-1785. "Europeans" of Batavia's Mestizo society formally
greet a new bride, as female slaves serve refreshments and a slave orchestra performs. (Rijksmuseum Amsterdam NG-369)
....,
~
m
~mto
o
"Tj
noroZ
>r
Vl
ontij....,
--<

--- PAGE: 98 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.98) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
and premature childbearing robbed them of their looks. He noted that all
women raised in the East sat at ease on their feet. Their dress he described as
composed of the Indonesian sarong and a kebaya which reached the knees.
When they visited a lady with the rank of councillor's wife, they exchanged the
shorter kebaya for one falling to their ankles. On Sundays they would wear
European costume, but looked, to Stavorinus, gauche and uncomfortable. For
the rest, all Indies ladies passed lives bent on the pursuit of pleasure and lavish
consumption, never admitting men into their society except at weddings.
Wealth and its public demonstration preoccupied Batavia's government too.
Concern did not arise from distaste, as with the travelers, but rather from an
aversion to the notion that members of a hierarchically ranked society should
appear equal in affluence. With the prescriptions of Javanese and Japanese
court societies as their models, Batavia's rulers set about spelling out degrees
and forms of magnificence appropriate to each rung in society for Company
employee and free burgher alike.
Governor-General Rijcklof van Goens (1678-81) is one of the earliest to
legislate on personal habiliments, reserving for members of the supreme gov­
ernment and their wives and children the right to wear pearls, other jewelry,
and gold and silver trimmings on their apparel.33 He also banned lower grades
of officials and all free burghers from keeping a carriage.
Such inhibitions on personal pride were evidently not suffered gladly and
were disregarded, leading Governor-General Diederik Durven to lament that it
was impossible to distinguish councillor from tavern-keeper. To set matters to
rights he legislated privileges to two of the most visible symbols of wealth,
carriages and parasols. 34 But the great codifier of the eighteenth century was
Jacob Mossel. One hundred and twelve years after his predecessor Antonio van
Diemen set about introducing order to Batavia's existing statutes and decrees,
Mossel devoted himself to a similar undertaking, but this time with the purpose
of standardizing personal vanity. The two codifications of statutes mark, then,
distinct grades in VOC history and in the course of settlement. The one,
established to deal with questions of municipal organization, was intended to
bring practice into line with Dutch habits, while the other marks a colony that
had renounced the pretense of being Dutch in spirit.
Mossel's code, entitled "Measures for Curbing Pomp and Circumstance,"
was issued on 30 December 1754.3s It is an immense piece of legislation,
containing twelve major clauses, each subdivided into articles, and is a remark­
able document on colonial society. Not surprisingly, the code opened with
articles dealing with "carriages and related matters, horses, etc.," some
twenty-nine in all. Reserved to the governor-general and councillors alone were
glass coaches and coupes with family crests emblazoned on them. Six horses
might draw the governor-general's coach, four, the councillors. Within three
66

--- PAGE: 99 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.99) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
months of the date of promulgation, persons lower than retired directors of
secondary settlements must strip their carriages of gilt and silver. All must
dismiss coachmen who were native Europeans; the privilege of employing
Europeans was reserved for the governor-general and councillors and their
wives and widows and for the president of the supreme court, fonner gov­
ernors, secretaries to the government, and the brigadier of the VOC militia. A
curious sidelight, this, on the eighteenth-century view of race and status, for it
set service by a European above that of a slave, and that service was often to
non-Europeans. Mossel's wife was already dead, but wives of his colleagues in
Council-Sophia de Klerk-Westpalm, Hendrina Alling-Knabe, Adriana van
der Parra-Bake, and Adriana van Riemsdijk-Helvetius-were none of them
European by birth. Nor was the Governor-General van der Parra.
Other regulations on transport dealt with the carriage tax and reserved the use
of litters to members of the supreme government and their wives and children;
only the relatives of such celebrated persons might dress their carriages and
attendants in mourning at their decease. By contrast, the section on parasols
relaxed restrictions, pennitting junior merchants the privilege of a parasol
carried by a slave, and allowing wives down to those of ensigns, as well as of
,'native, Chinese, and Mohammedan officers, " the same. All others must carry
their own small umbrellas.
Van Goens's code had introduced hierarchy into matters of carriages, para­
sols, and jewelry. Mossel's paid particular attention to dress. The clause on
men's apparel is composed of nine articles. The first of these reserves em­
broidery in gold and silver to the high government and president of the bench.
One gold or silver button might adorn the clothing of fonner governors, secre­
taries to Batavia's government, all justices, and directors of subsidiary posts,
and these dignitaries could also wear shirts and camisoles made of silk. None
below the rank of junior merchant could wear golden shoe buckles.
The item on women's apparel dealt chiefly with jewelry, not spelling out
European or Indonesian costume according to rank and race. To those on the
top rung-the wives and widows of the governor-general, councillors, and
court president-were reserved diamond necklaces, diamond-studded watches,
massive gold betel boxes and boxes set with precious stones, necklaces of top
quality pearls in two strands, and costly jewels. Those a step lower, the wives
of directors of the outlying posts, could wear pearls not exceeding 6,()(X) rix
dollars in value, while pearls owned by wives and widows of senior merchants
could be worth no more than 4,000. Frocks of velvet, silk., and linen, and lace
trimmings, were reserved to these ladies. In recognition of the social mobility
of women, a bride was pennitted to dress in the manner allowed a lady of her
husband's rank rather than of her father's.
Another item dealt with the numbers of female slaves permissible in public
gatherings and the quality of their apparel and ornaments. Three were assigned
67

--- PAGE: 100 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.100) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
wives and widows of the supreme government and chief justice, and they could
be adorned with diamond earrings of average quality, a gold hairpin, chains of
gold and corral, and gold and silver gauze cloth. For the women in senior
merchants' families were reserved two female attendants, and for all lower, one
dressed in cotton and linen, false pearls, gold hairpins, and small diamonds.
The liveries of coachmen and male attendants were also prescribed by rank of
the employer.
A new feature was the tax imposed on family celebrations, bearing heaviest
on the socially inferior. The tax was assessed on the number of coaches pro­
ceeding to a christening and on the number of guests at a wedding feast.
Anyone wishing to erect festive arches for a daughter's wedding had to pay fifty
rix dollars to the mid-century theological seminary. No such charge was made
on members of the supreme government, however. Furthermore, they alone
could have trumpets, tympans, and drums in the orchestras playing at their
dinner tables.
It would be tedious to relate all the other provisions, which have to do with
ceremonial at the graveside, announcement of wedding banns, number of
bridesmaids, and so on. Needless to say, the higher the rank, the greater the
pomp and quantity of costly items or attendants allowed. Attention should,
however, be directed to the last section entitled "On the Outer Offices of the
Indies, " for it is here that the legislators explicitly recognized the dominant
Asian influence in daily life in the VOC settlements. There, from the director
down, VOC employees might dress "according to native custom." So, too,
might their wives. But when any of these officials came to Batavia, they and
their spouses had to observe the proper distinctions in tenns of silks and
velvets, gold buttons, attendants, and the like, and the men were expected to
don European costume.
It is easier to understand the intention of this type of legislation than estimate
its effect. Certainly it could be promulgated only in a society that was autocratic
and hierarchic. It portrayed and catered to a society whose members knew their
place. To a far greater degree than Netherlands society at the same period,
colonial society was one in which habitual relations were understood as be­
tween superior and inferior. It was, in fact, a society superficially like the
Javanese but without its "mystical" underpinnings. Colonial society was a
medley of borrowed fonns; it created its own meanings that can be understood
as neither Dutch nor Asian but as Mestizo.
Sumptuary laws did not survive the Company. They were revoked by
Governor-General Alting in December 1795 in response to new demands for
abolition of outer distinctions between citizens. 36 Their revocation reflects the
contradictory nature of Indies society; privileges regarding horse and carriage
were maintained, and new sumptuary laws were devised in the nineteenth
century assigning Javanese titles to Dutch civil servants and setting the number
68

--- PAGE: 101 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.101) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
and color of parasols allowed each in ceremonies. No succeeding government
ever brought in such all-encompassing regulations as the Mossel code, how­
ever. The 1754 sumptuary laws mark the triumph of a style of society as surely
as they signal its inner nature.
The sumptuary laws caught up all residents, since none could escape Com­
pany edicts. Not even the clergy was exempt, but ranked with surgeons in
matters of gold buckles and braid. There were few ministers who railed against
the vanity and pomp of eighteenth-century colonial society. Even the Reverend
Johannes Lipsius, who criticized the extravagance and self-indulgence of his
Semarang parishioners, spoke with evident satisfaction of his manse as being
"save the Governor's residence, the most distinguished building of the whole
town. "37 Nor did he scruple to accept van derParra's gifts.
From decrees passed at Batavia in the second half of the century come traces
of official concern or small proofs of a movement away from the dominant
morality of earlier decades. Religious enthusiasm was wanting even in the
Batavia synod itself, so that the government in 1755 determined on fining
church elders half a rix dollar for failure to attend meetings, and two shillings
for late arrival. In 1768 the government complained to the directors that there
were too few ministers, and that they were too sickly and unable to keep the
populace from turning to Islam or "popery" or from lapsing into heathendom.
Poor attendance forced ending of the Wednesday evening selViceafter 1776.38
The protests of certain clerics and travelers against impiety and superstition
should be taken cautiously, however, since their standard of judgment was the
"true religion. " When Stavorinus, for instance, said that Batavian ladies with
European status had no idea of religion or of the social proprieties, he was
thinking of Dutch Christianity and the European drawing room. It is evident
that these ladies were well rehearsed in civilities of a different kind-the tea
ceremony, for instance, offering of betel, observance of rank, discreet with­
drawal from the company of men. It is difficult to demonstrate, but still argu­
able, that those who did not know the Heidelberg Confession did know the
divining of good and evil days and proper observance of ritual to propitiate the
spirits, and that through their maids they had been steeped in a folklore that
carried its own morality. Such were not the conclusions of the eighteenth­
century observers whom we read today. They were alike in pointing to the
decline in public observance of Christianity and in describing Batavians as
obsessed with accumulating wealth and with its display.
Wealth, and the leisure following from it, were demonstrated by the owner­
ship of slaves. This is the other face of the society of sumptuary codes and of
country estates. In the discussion so far, we have considered slavery chiefly as a
symbol of status for Europeans, and little has been said of the treatment of
69

--- PAGE: 102 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.102) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
slaves or of the laws governing them. The Batavian government, which em­
ployed vast numbers, was not moved to deal with such matters as fair rations
and decent accommodations until 1803. Before that time there is scant refer­
ence to conditions of those enslaved, and the compassionate or outraged ob­
server is usually wanting. Occasional references in the Daily Register, how­
ever, suggest that slaves were often grossly mistreated and that there was
shocking loss of human life.
Slaves always made up a large part of Batavia's population. In 1757 a limit
of 1200 was set to the number of slaves within the Castle and of 300 on Onrust
Island (one of the islands in Jakarta Bay now called Pulau Kapal). After
January 1, 1758, no slaves from the archipelago younger than fourteen years
might be brought into Batavia because of the "enormous number" then in the
city.39 The slave market was a Batavian institution until import and trade in
slaves was stopped in 1818. It was not until 1860, however, that slavery was
finally abolished on Java. Like all major articles of commerce, slaves were a
monopoly of the VOC, although illegal slave trading was both profitable and
apparently common.
Batavia's slaves were purchased by residents for household use and were
totally under their control. There being no provisions on slavery in Dutch
charters, Roman law was followed in the Asian settlements. It underwent
modifications having to do with resale of slaves and with rights of slaves in
Christian households. In principle, slave owners of European status were to
seek to convert all slaves in their possession and to manumit the new Chris­
tians, or at least provide for eventual emancipation in their wills. This was in
fact done. Sophia Westpalm, for instance, was found to have granted release to
many of her slaves when her last testament was opened in 1784; but she
directed that many more-over one hundred-be put up for sale. 40
Emancipation gratified only the conscience; economically it was a complete
loss. Laws were still necessary forbidding the sale of slaves from Christian
households to Jews, Muslims, and "Heathens. "41 Nor did a filial relationship
give slave children any privileges. Under Roman law they followed the nation­
ality and status of their mothers. Not until 1766 was a law passed forbidding the
sale of children begotten by Christians on slave women, and then because of
,'concern for Christian blood." And only in 1772 was a decree enacted auto­
matically freeing a woman upon the death of a Christian master if she had borne
him children. 42 Unrecognized children and children of male slaves would be
put up for sale, with their mothers, in batches.
A few among the slave-concubines prospered by the connection. Augustijn
Michiels's second wife, Davida Elisabeth Augustijns,43 is an example. For
many years she was a concubine, described in an early will Michiels made with
his first wife as the "freed Christian woman living in his house." Michiels
70

--- PAGE: 103 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.103) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
married her in 1819 when their daughter Augustijna, whom he had already
formally adopted, was eighteen years of age.
Davida Michiels-Augustijns represents the favored minority. Reality was
much grimmer for most, with harsh punishments and lurid tortures within the
privacy of the house the order of the day, if Stavorinus is to be believed. At any
rate, the government in the second half of the eighteenth century concerned
itself this much: it required removal and sale of all slaves related to one killed
by their owner. 44 Perhaps this decree was designed to protect the owner from
revenge; but in certain cases the government came down clearly on the side of
the enslaved. In 1742, for example, a burgher was exiled from all VOC terri­
tories for having shot one slave dead and tortured three others. Occasionally a
person with European status would be banned from slave ownership altogether
because of grotesque abuses. 45
Nineteenth-century apologists argued that household slavery was milder than
the plantation system and even a benevolent institution in Indonesia. 46 Never­
theless, the Dutch in Batavia feared their slaves. This is the reason, quite as
much as overcrowding, for limits set to the slave population within the Castle.
It is also the motive behind such legislation as that banning slaves from gather­
ing in public places, carrying concealed weapons, and purchasing alcohol and
opium. 47
The foregoing is not in denial of another aspect of Indies slavery: lives of free
and enslaved were closely entwined. It exists side-by-side with the fact that
slave men and women reared the children of their owners, thereby creating
ambiguous ties. From their slaves the "Europeans" absorbed much that was
reflected in how they lived and what they thought important or prestigious.
Slaves might be bequeathed to children rather than emancipated, which could
mean loss of shelter and sustenance and forced reliance on municipal charities.
Whatever the nature of individual relationships, VOC society was based on
slave ownership. The concept was a borrowed one for the Dutch. Its incorpora­
tion into colonial settlements altered the Europeans and profoundly shaped the
culture of succeeding generations.
The glue that held this society together was the family system. Under the
VOC political and economic structure, promotions were largely controlled by
patronage in which family relationship played a key part. Because- of the
Company's peculiar policies on immigration and intennaniage, the crucial
family links were not those between father and son but between a man and his
in-laws. At the heart of the Indies clan were women, locally born and raised,
who brought men into relationships of patron and protege as father-in-law,
son-in-law, and brothers-in-law. Such alliances could be far-reaching when
high death rates and remarriage meant that spouses circulated. And since, under
71

--- PAGE: 104 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.104) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Dutch law, women could be named sole inheritor of a man's property, widows
were sought after for the fortune they brought to a marriage.
The mode of family and political alliance was ordained as the seventeenth
century turned into the eighteenth, years when Governors-General Willem van
Outhoorn, Joan van Hoorn, and Abraham van Riebeeck governed. The pivotal
figure in this trio is van Hoorn. He had migrated with his family at nine and
owed his early rise in the VOC's service to his father, who was a councillor.48
He served as secretary to the Indies Council under van Goens, Speelman, and
Camphuys and was a full member of the Council and supporter of the latter in
the feuding that was to mark Councils over the next four decades. From his
marriage to Anna Struijs, daughter of a Batavia burgher, van Hoom had ac­
quired a fortune. By 1691, however, she was dead, and van Hoorn, who was
then first councillor and director-general of trade, lost no time in marrying
Susanna van Outhoorn, daughter of the ruling governor-general. Within ten
years his father-in-law had nominated him as successor. Van Hoom insisted on
permission to add three supporters to the Council before accepting the position
from van Outhoorn in 1704.
On the Council, Governor-General van Hoorn met with continuing opposi­
tion from several members, led by Councillor Abraham van Riebeeck. The
governor-general was able to control his opposition through a marriage alli­
ance. Widowed providentially a second time, he chose as his new bride Jo­
hanna Maria van Riebeeck, daughter of his chief opponent and widow of Gemt
de Heere, governor of Ceylon. That this was a political match is clear from
Valentijn, who was in the Indies at the time and says that it was contracted "to
everyone's astonishment. "49 Evidently it was a successful strategem, and the
governor-general's father-in-law followed him in office in 1709.
All this was too much for the directors. They responded by insisting that van
Hoorn repatriate immediately upon retirement rather than emulate father-in-law
van Outhoom by spending th~ rest of his life in the country where he had
already passed forty-six years. And they decreed that no men related by blood
or marriage might sit together on governing boards. In the small, closed society
of Batavia, this provision would have been impossible to enforce, even had
there been the will in the elite to do so. The VOC's Asian empire continued to
be governed by cliques that feuded among themselves and used marriage to
cement alliances.
The control of Holland's towns was also in the hands of oligarchies at this
period. What was distinctive about the Indies pattern was the small number of
actors involved and the type of woman who linked the men together. A list of
some of the beneficiaries named in the will of Governor-General Abraham
Patras (1735-37) provides a brief illustration of the first point: Anthonia
Lengele, widow of his predecessor, Dirk van Cloon; Johannes Thedens, then
councillor and later acting governor-general (1741-43); councillor and future
72

--- PAGE: 105 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.105) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
governor-general G. W. van Imhoff; and Geertruida Goossens, who was wife
successively to two councillors and an acting governor-general, mother-in-law
of Councillor Hugo Verijssel and of future governor-general R. de Klerk, and
godmother of the children of Governor-General Jacob Mossel.
The van Riemsdijk clan* most clearly demonstrates the political importance
of family alliances and the contribution of part-Asians to colonial culture. It
begins with Jeremias van Riemsdijk, a native of Utrecht born in 1712, who
enlisted as a sergeant in the VOC's army. He was twenty-three years old when
he reached Batavia. Immediately upon his arrival he was transferred to the
civilian service, and within seven years he had been raised to first senior
merchant of the Castle. Promotion as councillor extraordinary and full council­
lor followed, and in 1775 the fonner soldier succeeded P. A. van der Parra as
governor-general. He died in office in 1777 after forty-two years of unbroken
service to the Company, all of them passed in Batavia.
In the course of his life van Riemsdijk married five times. His first three
wives all died in childbirth within a year or two of marriage. The fourth wife,
Adriana Louisa Helvetius, was to survive eleven births and twenty-one years of
married life. In 1774 van Riemsdijk married a fifth and final time, his choice
being Theodora Rotgers.
Reviewing van Riemsdijk's career in the light of his family connections, it is
clear that in his early career he was promoted by his uncle, councillor and then
governor-general Adriaen Valckenier. Van Riemsdijk's continued rise was
slowed by his patron's fall, but obstacles were removed when he made his
fourth marriage. Up to that time his wives had been daughters of middle-level
VOC employees, but Adriana Helvetius was granddaughter of a councillor and
daughter of Batavia's chief justice. One of her sisters had been wife to a
governor of Ceylon. Within four years of marriage to Adriana, van Riemsdijk
was made councillor extraordinary. Theodora Rotgers also brought van
Riemsdijk the advantage of connections to important men in Batavia. Her
second husband had been the lawyer Maurits Theodorus Hilgers, councillor
extraordinary, president of the orphanage trustees and a relative by marriage of
the Hartingh-Mossel families.
It should be noted that all of van Riemsdijk's marriages were contracted with
women born in Batavia. Politically speaking, their connections were all in the
capital city and in secondary settlements of the VOC empire. Culturally, it is
important to note that none was a Hollander. Van Riemsdijk chose women who
had no firsthand knowledge of his home country, culture, and tongue. All had
been raised by Asians, led the semisegregated life of the Indies lady, and were
probably more familiar with legends, stories, and religious beliefs of the East
than with those of northern Europe. These facts are important, for the fourth
and fifth wives were leading ladies in Holland's Asian empire, setting standards
of manners and taste. And since van Riemsdijk shared nothing with his brides
73

--- PAGE: 106 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.106) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
except his privileged status as a European, he was unable to reproduce in
Batavia the household atmosphere and spirit of his native Holland. Little is
known of his first wives beyond their names and the fact that their fathers were
Netherlanders, but the background of his fourth wife is open to inspection, and
it tends to confirm the assumptions just made.
It stretches back five generations to an unknown Asian woman who in 1664
gave birth to a daughter by a Company soldier surnamed de Bollan. De Bollan
recognized the girl, christened her Johanna Magdalena, and raised her as a
member of the European group. In 1685 she married the Netherlander Johannes
Maurits van Happel, a former commanding officer of Sumatra's west coast and
head of the Japan factory in 1688 and 1689. One of their daughters, Anna
Catharina, married the Dutch lawyer and councillor Laurens Tolling. Their
daughter, Egidia Cornelia Tolling, in her tum married a Dutch lawyer and
president of Batavia's supreme court, Willem Vincent Helvetius. Adriana was
one of the children of this marriage.
Underlining the political significance of her marriage to van Riemsdijk is
Adriana Helvetius's age. She was just fifteen, her husband thirty-nine. Her
youth at marriage is to be attributed to Indies custom. Borrowing from Oriental
societies' prescriptions concerning seclusion of upper-class unmarried girls and
their early marriage, Batavia's leading families married their daughters off
when they were barely teenagers. They made matches for their girls with much
older men, men who were colleagues in government and who offered advan­
tages of secure partnership if it were sealed through family ties.
The development of Indies clan patterns can be traced in the next generation.
Six of van Riemsdijk's children survived infancy. The oldest surviving son was
Isebrandus Johannes Faber van Riemsdijk, one of three children born to Cor­
nelia van Vianen, the second wife. His career followed a course now familiar in
that he was sent in early childhood to the Netherlands. He was never to return to
Indonesia, instead settling permanently in the Netherlands and marrying there.
Johanna Maria, daughter of the third wife, was raised in Batavia. At fifteen,
also according to form, she was married to a native Netherlander, Paulus
Godefridus van der Voart. At the time of their marriage he was first secretary to
Batavia's government and was later raised to the governorship of Makassar
(1770-80).
By this time Jeremias van Riemsdijk lived in grand style. He celebrated his
designation as director-general by ordering a new glass carriage from Europe to
add to his two other glass coaches, his "English carriage with gauze netting
instead of glass, three Berlins able to hold four, a Phaeton, four small carriages
and two chaises." His Batavian household on the Tijgersgracht depended on
the services of a "European coachman, two European caretakers and a Euro­
pean cook, besides 200 men and women slaves and their children. "50
74

--- PAGE: 107 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.107) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
Four of van Riemsdijk's children by Adriana Helvetius lived to adulthood.
The one daughter, Catharina Louysa (1758-1823), married an immigrant
Netherlander. This was Mr. Arnoldus Constantijn Mom, a member of the
Dutch nobility who migrated young and spent his whole life in the Indies. Two
of the sons married Batavians. They died in their twenties in the VOC's service
in the insignificant ranks of clerk and ensign, the approved levels, under VOC
law, for part-Asian men with European status.
The career of the remaining son, Willem Vincent Helvetius van Riemsdijk
(1752-1818), suggests a trend in Indies family and political life, a trend away
from a matrilineal system and towards a system in which sons followed their
fathers. W V. H. van Riemsdijk, despite his Batavia schooling and reputation
as a "stupid and ignorant man,"51 rose to become a councillor in 1799, amassing
a fortune from his Company posts along the way. He was the progenitor of a
large clan whose members in the nineteenth century stand for the ultimate
development of Mestizo culture, when, as will be shown in chapter 6, Eur­
asians were cut out of political life by the new Dutch policies. Some of his
descendants continued to marry Dutchmen, but most married among their own
ethnic and social class or merged wholly with the Indonesian community.
The preceding notes illustrate the large and steady contribution of Asians and
part-Asians to the culture of VOC settlements. The only way to break the hold
of Mestizo society was to dispatch children to Europe. That recourse ceased to
be desirable to some important Batavians in the second half of the eighteenth
century. A pattern of promoting sons' careers in the VOC hierarchy has already
been noted of officials in settlements subsidiary to Batavia. Too few leading
officials had sons surviving infancy for a similar claim to be made convincingly
for the Batavian elite, and its ascendancy was cut off early in the nineteenth
century. All the same, a trend towards furthering a son's career in the East
appears in some families in the late eighteenth century. Jeremias van Riems­
dijk, for instance, was prompted to send only one of his boys to Holland and
to fix him permanently there. The son, I. 1. F. van Riemsdijk, was, moreover, a
child born early in van Riemsdijk's Indies career, possibly before he had come
to look on Java as his adoptive homeland. The other five children were to
remain in Java and their descendants after them. It is possible that 1. van
Riemsdijk was planning an eventual succession by W V. H. van Riemsdijk, as
Governor-General van der Parra appears to have been planning one for his son,
whose likeness he struck on medals and whose early climb in the VOC hier­
archy he fostered.
This chapter opened with a look at the "breaching" of the city's walls, the
movement of the elite to villas on country estates in the environs of Batavia.
The significance of the movement is this: owners of estates brought into the
75

--- PAGE: 108 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.108) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
countryside new populations in their slaves from Bali, Makassar, and India.
The importance of these new inhabitants surpasses their actual numbers (per­
haps fifty to one hundred to each great house), for the slaves introduced new
ways and set new examples for the local population. At the same time, local
peoples were caught up in the life of the estates too, principally as laborers and
concubines, and they came into contact with a Mestizo culture that had first
developed within the walls of Batavia. Country estates provided a new arena
for that culture to develop, for local inhabitants deferred to the newcomers in
their traditional Sundanese ways.
The new country elite were not so much landed gentry as they were land­
owners, since they displayed no real attachment to particular areas. Estates
changed hands frequently, rarely remaining in a family's possession for more
than a score of years. I have therefore described these owners in tenns of office
and family history and as patrons, and stressed the lack of lineage in the sense
of office and property handed down from father to son.
The ruling elite was preoccupied by the definition of "European." Techni­
cally, included under the term were all persons born in Europe, all born in Asia
to European parents (Creoles), women married to European men, legitimate
children of European fathers, and all illegi~imate children acknowledged by a
European man. Fathers officially acknowledged illegitimate offspring by pur­
chasing a certificate of legitimation or by formally adopting them before a
notary.
The matter was never clearcut, however. While the government might occa­
sionally "retrieve" children from their Asian mothers and place them in the
orphanage when their European fathers were dead or had repatriated, it also
discriminated against the part-Asian members of the European group. An ex­
ample of distinction made between "Europeans" is the decision passed in a
case heard to determine a point of etiquette. It involved two men of equi~alent
rank in the VOC hierarchy, Stephanus Versluys and de Witte van Schooten,
and the problem was to determine which of them should walk ahead in public
procession and should take the higher seat at table. The case was settled in
favor of Versluys on the grounds that he alone had legitimate issue.52
To European visitors the Mestizo culture of the colonial settlement was
foreign and disturbing. Their disapproval was communicated principally
through books published in Europe, however, so that it had but fleeting effect
on the local elite or went unnoticed altogether. Yet colonial society was never
totally insulated from the Netherlands. Always there were zealots working to
bend it to particular molds. In the first century of contact their efforts had been
chiefly in the direction of establishing Dutch Calvinist culture. In the following
century the assaults on colonial manners by a Coen or Candidius in the name of
the "true religion" were succeeded by assaults from men who saw themselves
76

--- PAGE: 109 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.109) ---
THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY
as part of the Enlightenment movement of Europe. In the name of reason and
science they sought to transform Mestizo society culturally through innovations
in Batavia's school system, introduction of a newspaper, and establishment of
learned societies. Their efforts and the results and the style of the reformers are
subjects of the next chapter.
77

--- PAGE: 110 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.110) ---
4
The Assault on Indies Culture
THE ENLIGHTENMENT IN BATAVIA
BY THE MID-EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, when Baron van Imhoff took office, Indies
society was formed. Its culture was clearly not Dutch any longer. Netherlands
society at the time may be defined broadly as racially homogeneous, Calvinist,
and patriarchal, its cities run by oligarchies of prosperous businessmen and its
industries controlled by guilds. Thrift and sobriety were highly prized qualities.
Average Hollanders lived in narrow, closed houses and their diet was based on
red meats, cheeses, and bread. The upper classes were literate in French and
German as well as in Dutch.
By contrast, Indies society was exceedingly polyglot in composition, and its
"European" elite secular before agnosticism was a common condition in Eu­
rope. This spirit did not derive from any intellectual revolt against established
doctrine but was the result of life in a transplanted settlement. It was also a
consequence of the immediate influence of Asian nursemaids, guardians, ser­
vants, and wives.
Nor was the colonial elite patriarchal. Landed property did not remain with a
family for more than one or two generations; similarly, fathers did not usually
pass positions to their sons but sent their heirs to Holland in earliest youth to
make them members of Dutch society in the homeland. Economic life was not
controlled by guilds of master craftsmen and merchants, but dominated by a
monopolistic corporation. The route to wealth lay through promotion to senior
posts in the East Indies Company bureaucracy, the office-holder winning at
once power, prestige, and opportunity for illegal gain on a vast scale.
By the eighteenth century, access to these privileged positions was governed
by connections, and the basis of connections was marriage into Indies families.
The colonial ruling class was matrilineal in the sense that men passed on posts
and privilege to their sons-in-law, the husbands of their daughters whom they
kept in Asia. Women-based clans absorbed the immigrant males who came
without wiv~s; the clan enfolded the newcomer in a network of immigrants with
locally born wives, Mestizo and Asian kin. At the same time, the clan eased
adoption of Indies manners for the newcomers.
In contrast to the Calvinist, bourgeois thrift of Holland, there was the Mes-
78

--- PAGE: 111 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.111) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
tizo luxury, the spending on a grand scale, the importance of display. The Indies
elite lived in spacious, open villas and alongside Dutch food often ate spiced
Indonesian dishes and rice. Many members, especially the women, were not
literate; the languages they spoke were Malay and Portuguese, and they spon­
sored no written literature. In the arts they patronized woodcarvers, assembled
slave orchestras, summoned ronggengs, and held perfonnances of Indonesian
and Chinese puppet plays. That is to say, the entertainments and arts enjoyed by
the colonial elite were not yet divorced from the tastes of their Asian retainers.
The man set on changing this was Gustaaf Willem baron van Imhoff, mem­
ber of an East Frisian patrician family who entered the VOC's employ in 1725.
Well connected with the Company's directors and soon to be with the VOC
Huysman family, van Imhoff rose swiftly in the hierarchy. Within a few
months he was promoted from junior to merchant and chief of the accounts
office. By 1730 he was senior merchant and second secretary to the govern­
ment, and in 1736 he was sent to Ceylon as governor with the rank of council­
10r.1 The background to his elevation as governor-general (1743-50) is the
massacre of Batavia's Chinese, which occurred in 1740 when van Imhoff was
back in the capital. From 1741 to 1743 the baron was in the Netherlands,
explaining away his part in government actions that led to the murders and
drawing up for the directors his Considerations on the Present State of the
Netherlands East Indies Company. 2
Van Imhoff's colonial program recalls J. P. Coen's proposals in many
points, for he too wanted to develop a distinctively Dutch character in the
colonial capital by bringing in burgher families as settlers and allowing them to
trade in categories of goods and in ports hitherto under Company monopoly.
Van Imhoff's program was also addressed to establishing conditions that would
make pennanent settlement attractive to the immigrant Dutch. Thus the early
business of his government was to restore the Company's trade and revenues,
encourage a return of Chinese retailers and market gardeners, build a second
hospital, and provide for more medical assistants. The second part of his plan
was devoted to keeping alive the culture of the homeland among immigrants
and to supplanting the Mestizo culture among leaders of the locally born men
with European status. This latter task was to be accomplished principally
through establishing special schools for sons of selected Creole, Eurasian, and
Asian Christian families.
The first of these schools was a theological seminary which was opened in
1745. As stated in the governing regulations,3 the seminary's "foremost aim
(with God's blessing)" was "to help foster the establishment of the Christian
reformed religion in these parts" through training a "sufficient number" of
young men for the ministry. Admission roles required that students be aged
between eight and twelve, with no further discrimination as to "nation or race"
79

--- PAGE: 112 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.112) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
save that they be sons of "honest folk." Students were to follow a five-year
course of study that would include Latin and would be equivalent to instruction
offered by Dutch academies. Three or four outstanding graduates would be sent
annually to the Netherlands at the Company's expense to complete their educa­
tion and return to serve the Indies church.
The seminary was a boarding school, its rector, assistant, and junior master
residing at the college too. Twelve male slaves were allocated from Company
personnel to run the seminary, although teachers might also bring slaves for
personal service. A lay religious officer was to supervise the pupils' spiritual
growth. At the same time, the school was to admit paying day and boarding
pupils enrolling for a general education.
The governor-general signalled the importance of the seminary by attending
the opening ceremonies, which were held at the inner Portuguese church, a fact
drawing attention to the school's cultural setting and illuminating van Imhoff's
aims. The seminary is in no way to be thought of as a gentlemen's academy,
training the sons of Batavia's elite for high office in the VOC hierarchy or
fitting them as cultivated members of an overseas colony. Indeed, the school's
founder sent his son Jan Willem van Imhoff, who was illegitimate and part­
Indonesian, to the Netherlands before he was a year old, rather than have him
reared in Batavia and educated there.
The school was, in fact, designed for a lower social class. This is patent from
the article opening it to all classes and races of boys, as well as from its
religious aims. The school's first rector, the Reverend Johan Maurits Mohr,
was certainly a distinguished scholar and amateur astronomer, and he held a
prominent position in Indies society. But most VOC clergy could never reach
beyond their hierarchical slot, which was approximate to that of a merchant.
Furthermore, seminarians could not aspire to a pulpit in the Netherlands nor
think of their education as equipping them for a career in Europe. They were to
be a locally bred and trained intelligentsia, Dutch in tongue, culture, and
loyalties, and were to foster the VOC's interests, without hope of attaining a
controlling voice in its Asian government.
As it turned out, the school did not survive to realize these aims. It was
closed by executive order in 1755, after a peak enrollment of fifty-three day
students and eighteen boarders in 1752.4 One alone fulfilled van Imhoff's plan
of study in the Netherlands and service in the Indies. This was Nicolaas (de)
Graaij, who was enrolled at Leiden University and later returned as minister to
Batavia's Asian Christian parish.
More remarkable than the theological seminary was van Imhoff's ma­
rine academy, for it had no precedent in colonial practice. Its first object was
to train Indies-born cadets in navigation and to improve technical knowl­
edge of European youths already signed up with the Company. To this
end a course of instruction was designed which included formal classroom
80

--- PAGE: 113 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.113) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
work in mathematics, charting, navigation, and languages, and practical train­
ing at sea. Beyond raising the standards of seamanship, the academy was
founded to create a naval officer caste that would not disgrace polite society. In
giving their approval to the academy's regulations, the directors expressed the
conviction that the new school would produce "experience, good manners, and
polish among the Company's sea officers." 5
The first class was to open with twenty-four1boys from "respectable fami­
lies" and of "regular birth"; that is to say, members of the future officer caste
were not to be sons of concubines. They were to be boarders, subjected to the
discipline of a resident governor and deputy drawn from the Company's navy.
Ten to twelve paying boarders were to be admitted also to help the school's
finances, and a few amateurs might follow instruction for a fee upon consent of
the school board. OthelWise, classes were closed to the public. In this matter
the marine academy differed from the theological seminary: it was strictly
vocational and exclusive.
The academy's special orientation may be seen in the regulations concerning
domestic arrangements. Household tasks were to be perfonned not by Asian
slaves but by Europeans. Article 17 of the constitution puts it this way: "No
natives or slaves shall be admitted into the Academy's house; its servants will
comprise one European cook, taken from the fleet, one assistant cook, one
house steward, also from the fleet, and six to eight European youths. "6 In other
words, non-European cultural influences were to be held at bay. No Asian,
Christian or otherwise, was to be enrolled. Admission was to be the privilege of
the Creole and Eurasian of legitimate birth. In proscribing the Asian slaves and
childhood companions of pupils from the academy, van Imhoff showed how
well he understood the strength of Asian-derived beliefs, attachments, and
manners.
It is not surprising, then, that article 18 should decree, "there shall be no
native tongues spoken in the house." This meant that the new officer corps
should use Dutch with ease in daily conversation, although it was assumed that
recruits probably could not. It was not intended that they be ignorant of Asian
tongues altogether; cadets had to study Malay, Malabar, and Persian in order to
be able to command sailors used on Company ships. "Nevertheless," it made
clear, "no use is to be made of the aforesaid languages in daily exchange
among the others in the Academy without express leave from the Governors. "7
Another innovation sponsored by Governor-General van Imhoff was in­
tended to make men with European status conscious of a bond among them.
This was a newspaper with the name Bataviasche Nouvelles (Batavia News). Its
opening number was published on 7 August 1744 by J. E. Jordens, first adjunct
clerk in the general secretariat. The venture met with "tolerable success, " and
Jordens was commissioned by the governor-general in Council to bring out a
weekly edition of the paper for the next three years. 8 Thereafter the Nouvelles
81

--- PAGE: 114 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.114) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
was published every Monday afternoon and distributed from the Castle. Its
news was of shipping, of domestic events in the leading families of Batavia and
Holland, and of arrivals and departures, and it carried advertisements, mainly
announcements of household goods and staff for auction.
The weekly's life was short. Responsibility for the license had been taken by
the Batavian authorities, who then informed their superiors in Amsterdam. The
directors' response was contained in a letter dated 20 November 1745 ordering
the paper's charter revoked forthwith. Their views were known in Batavia by
the middle of the following year, and on 20 June 1746 pennission to publish
was duly cancelled. 9
The paper merits more attention than its brief existence would imply. In the
first place, its publication was an event without parallel in Indies history. True,
there had been an attempt at producing an announcement sheet in 1668, and
occasionally a leaflet of advertisements was circulated. What was novel about
van Imhoff's paper was its intention to carry news of Europeans to a particular
audience. The readership defines itself by the language of the Nouvelles, which
was Dutch; it did not pretend to be a paper of all Batavians, but of the male
immigrants and graduates of the city's two academies. The Nouvelles thus
created a link between Dutch speakers while communicating news concerning
only the readers' kind. And since the paper also printed news of events in
Holland, it served to keep alive a tie, or at least an orientation, to Europe.
Moreover, newspaper reading was a very Dutch habit.
Taken together, van Imhoff's reforms may be described as an attempt to
promote in Holland's chief settlement in Asia a specifically Dutch urban
culture. Company employees who were imnligrants and free s~ttlers would
retain their cultural heritage through the link of newspaper, through new
municipal amenities-for example, better health facilities, more taverns, a
short-lived postal system, greater religious tolerancelo-and through provi­
sion of exclusive schooling for sons of permanent settlers. The locally born
would be made more European, eschewing the Asian and Mestizo tastes of
their female kin.
Despite these deliberate efforts to transform Indies society, van Imhoff was
unable to make any lasting change. In the first place, the governor-general
failed to win his fellow councillors to his side, men with whom he had worked
for almost two decades. Those reforms surviving the directors in Amsterdam
were abolished in Batavia by his colleagues within a few years of his death.
Governor-General Mossel saw the theological seminary and marine academy as
"useless" and "too costly," and he ordered both closed in 1755. It was left to
van der Parra to close down the hospital van Imhoff had built at Cipanas in
order to allow VOC employees recuperation in a healthier climate and at
mineral springs. 11 The main reason for the failure of van Imhoff's program,
82

--- PAGE: 115 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.115) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
however, may be found in the strength of Mestizo culture, which proved able to
withstand the deliberate attacks of a self-conscious crusader.
Van Imhoff's approach to government must also be considered a reason for
the short-lived impact of his ideas, for the baron was thoroughly the Indies
governor-general, autocratic and ruling by fiat. Moreover, despite all his aspi­
rations for change, the inner conditions of colonial society were not to be
tampered with; distinguished immigrants would still send their sons to Europe
and make their marriage alliances locally. The ultimate aim of van Imhoff's
colonial program was to foster among lower-class subjects an educated citi­
zenry which knew its place, that of loyal subordinate and supporter of the
senior officials who would, all of them, be native Dutchmen.
Van Imhoff was succeeded in office by Jacob Mossel of the sumptuary code
and then by the Ceylonese-born van der Parra. It was not until Reynier de
Klerk's accession in 1777 that another self-conscious refonner held the highest
post in Batavia. De Klerk was then sixty-seven, however, and ill, and he was to
die in office within three years. Nevertheless, during his brief tenn he at­
tempted to make the city's inhabitants more Dutch by adding to the number of
schools for the Asian group and by aiding private schools designed for children
of the European community. Furthennore, de Klerk understood that it was not
enough to keep Asians at a distance from efforts directed at turning Creoles and
Eurasians into Dutchmen. Locally born girls, the bride pool for immigrants,
must be made more European too. To accomplish this goal de Klerk's govern­
ment requested. the directors' pennission to use a Company property for a
young ladies' academy. 12
VOC schools had always enrolled girls as well as boys, but there had never
been a select school for girls comparable to the Latin schools of the mid-seven­
teenth century or to van Imhoff's seminary. What became of the request is
unclear. We know that three private schools were opened by women for daugh­
ters of the communities centered on the Portuguese outer church, on the old
Chinese-Eurasian neighborhood of the Spinhuisgracht, and on the Tijgers­
gracht, long the best address for Europeans in Batavia. The latter school was
run by the widow of the Reverend J. Brandes and enrolled thirteen pupils. Most
of the girls were part-Asian; all belonged to that elite group in which husbands
and fathers were Dutch.
The names of some of them have come down to us by means of an award
instituted for pupils of Batavia's private schools while de Klerk was still in
office. The first school prize list was announced on May 1, 1778, the winners
reading like a Who's Who of Batavia. Receiving awards from Widow Brandes's
little school were Johanna and Constantia Alting, youngest daughters of then
director-general W. A. Alting, as well as his step-daughter Maria Senn van
83

--- PAGE: 116 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.116) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Basel; Christina Marci, who was to marry Councillor Wiese; Jacoba Maria
Lodisio, future first wife of Governor-General P. G. van Overstraten and sub­
sequently of A. H. Wiese when he was governor-general; Susanna Maria
Janke, who married a member of the large and powerful Senn van Basel clan;
and Johanna Everdina Maria van Blijdenberg, a Creole from Ambon who
married Daniel van Son, first administrator of Batavia's warehouses.13
We can only guess at the nature of the education offered in a private girls'
academy in Batavia in 1778 and i.ts impact. The course of study certainly
included Dutch, for Maria S. van Basel's prize was a volume in Dutch on
manners and morals. Attendance was not lengthy. Maria, for instance, was
eight when she received her prize; by thirteen she was a married woman. Her
step-sisters were eleven and eight in 1778, and Christina Marci was also eight.
The three were brides at fifteen.
Through other decisions in Council, de Klerk attempted to promote fluency
in Dutch and a more thorough understanding of Dutch Calvinism among Ba­
tavia's Asian Christians, as well as to carry the Gospel to slaves on the private
estates ringing Batavia. In these efforts the governor-general was less of an
innovator, but to carrying out traditional policies of VOC governments he
brought a new urgency and several novel methods. First, he reversed van
Imhoff's decree requiring lay Christian leaders to learn Malay, and ordered
Batavia's synod to instruct its "native teachers" in Dutch. He forbade its hiring
any Indonesian as catechizer or sick-visitor who was not already proficient in
Dutch. Then, in separate regulations for the schools, de Klerk designated the
ministers Venneer and Reinking to examine and coach all Asian teachers in
Dutch and religion. 14 Next, de Klerk turned his attention to the pupils, for
enrollment was low and attendance sporadic. His remedy was to institute a
regular roll call and to cut offVOC rations to the parents of truants.
Further measures issued by de Klerk make it clear that the results of his
educational refonns were disappointing. An order requiring-and reminding­
school children to speak Dutch during recesses had to be passed in 1780.15
Since Indonesian teachers were not attending language and catechism classes
regularly, future absences were to be punished by a fine amounting to half their
monthly salary. And finally, because graduates of the Company schools still
seemed ill-fitted for employment, adult education for young men was instituted
through evening classes held twice a week at the private school run by Isaac
Boterkoper on the Rua Malacca. 16 Tuition was free; classes were conducted in
Dutch and concentrated on the rudiments such as arithmetic.
It remained for Governor-General Alting to revoke most of de Klerk's edu­
cation measures. In 1786 he withdrew the requirement that Dutch be the lan­
guage of instruction in all VOC schools, of which there were then four.
Henceforth, only classes in the poorhouse and orphanage must be conducted in
84

--- PAGE: 117 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.117) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
Dutch. Of th~ two other Company schools, Portuguese was to be used in one,
Malay in the other, because the majority of pupils knew no Dutch and so could
not follow lessons. The decree admitted that many of the children's parents had
no command of the language of Batavia's rulers either. Two years later per­
mission was granted the poorhouse schoolmaster to teach in Portuguese too.
When the Company was dissolved in 1799, then, after one hundred and ninety­
seven years in Asia, only one .of its schools in Batavia could conduct classes in
Dutch. Attempts at promoting Dutch through the Asian churches had also been
renounced. After 1788, catechism classes for Indonesians were taught in Portu­
guese. 17
The female elite of the colony proved as little receptive to endeavors to make
it more European in thought and habit as the Asian Christian group. Nor,
apparently, did the experiment in girls' formal schooling convince Batavians of
its necessity. Widow Brandes's school closed after only six years, and it had no
immediate successor. Nearly one hundred years were to pass before the appear­
ance of government schools and private girls' schools which could last more
than two or three years.
The assaults on Indies culture considered thus far had chiefly to do with
attempts at making Asians, part-Asians, and Creoles feel a sense of loyalty and
kinship to the Netherlands based on shared belief, tongue, knowledge (in the
sense of shared curricula in the schools), and daily habits. Save the year-long
newspaper and licensing of taverns, little had been done for male immigrants,
who were evidently prone to absorption into Mestizo culture and who were
unable to pass on their mother tongue to their own offspring. The Company had
always recognized this tendency of its servants to assimilate into Mestizo
culture, in repeatedly issuing regulations that limited posts above assistant to
men born in Holland. Towards the end of the Company period, however, there
lived in Batavia a few immigrants who attempted to establish conditions for
themselves that would allow them to remain European and to follow the habits
of the eighteenth-century ideal of the European gentleman. Because of the self­
conscious nature of the group and its very public activities, this period has
come to be known in Dutch colonial histories as the Indies Enlightenment.
It centered upon Jacobus Comelis Mattheus Radermacher (1741-83), who
founded the colony's first Masonic lodge and the Batavian Academy of Arts
and Sciences, the first association for intellectual pursuits established in a
tropical European settlement. Radermacher was the son of a prominent Dutch
family. At sixteen he left Holland for Batavia as junior merchant. He rose to
senior merchant, improving his connections through marriage to Margaretha
Verijssel, daughter of the late director-general, Hugo Verijssel, and step­
daughter of Reynier de Klerk, who was then a councillor extraordinary. In 1762
85

--- PAGE: 118 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.118) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Radermacher formed the lodge La Choisie. From 1763 to 1767 he was in the
Netherlands studying law, and then returned to Batavia, where he engaged in
the many activities of the public man.
The colonial government was unfailingly solicitous toward Radermacher.
His father-in-law, who was then governor-general, encouraged all senior of­
ficials to join the Academy of Arts and Sciences by sending out a circular
announcing its formation and accepting the post of chief director of the society
when it was formed on 24 April 1778. There were 103 Batavians enrolled as
members that first year, with an additional 77 resident in the colony's depen­
dencies joining also, and there were several corresponding members in the
Netherlands. The government also promoted the scientific interests of the
society; it ordered all employees to submit written answers to questions put
them by academicians and to collect animal, plant, and mineral specimens for
its museum. 18
The Academy's interests can be followed by looking at its most active
members and the titles of their articles published in the society's Transac­
tions. 19 Chief contributors to the first four volumes were members of Rader­
macher's coterie. The Reverend Josua van Iperen, during his single year's
residence in Batavia, wrote essays on natural curiosities and on Javanese his­
tory and historiography. The Lutheran pastor Johannes Hooyman was a fre­
quent contributor, writing on wheat and peanut cultivation on Java, cotton, and
harvesting edible birds' nests. Hooyman also wrote a description of the Danish
church's mission on India's Coromandel Coast. Many articles describing In­
donesia's plant and animal life were contributed by the German immigrant
Frederik baron von Wurmb, who was the Academy's first secretary. Tropical
diseases, Batavia's sewage system, and the city's housing were subjects of
articles by Jacobus van der Steege and the retired anny lieutenant Jan Andries
Duurkoop. Radermacher's many essays included anthropological and geo­
graphic descriptions, a glossary of plants, animals, and minerals, comparisons
of calendrical systems, and suggestions for improvementsto sea charts. He also
contributed an article arguing for an end to the use of torture by courts and the
abolition of capital punishment.
The Academy also served as a debating club for gentlemen who had been
born into prosperous families in the Netherlands and educated there. It served
as meeting place for them and social center, for in Batavia there were still no
coffee houses or other places where upper class men could gather informally, as
there were in Dutch cities. Before acquisition of a special building, Rader­
macher's gift to the Academy, the only place for men to congregate was the
front veranda of private houses, and there formality reigned and Indies manners
controlled all intercourse.
In attending a meeting at the Academy, members left the Indies world
physically to enter a club dedicated to the pursuit of progress and where Dutch
86

--- PAGE: 119 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.119) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
was the language of communication. For core members, who regarded a tenn
in the Indies as but one stage in their careers, an important function of the
Academy was to maintain their sense of being part of an intellectual community
of Europeans. Radennacher, for instance, upon resigning from the Company in
1783, had no intention of retiring in the Indies, but planned to resume public
life in the Netherlands. He was only forty-two when assassination during a
mutiny at sea on the voyage home destroyed these ambitions.
This is not to say that there were no members prominent in the Academy who
had not in some measure accommodated to the dominant Mestizo culture and
committed themselves to long-tenn residence. Drs. Hooyman, for instance,
carried out his agricultural researches on the properties he had acquired through
marriage to the heiress Elisabeth Odilia Weijennan, India-born daughter of a
commander of Malabar. Duurkoop was another. This fonner ship's mate and
army man had also become a wealthy landowner through marriage, and he used
his riches to support the studies of scholars like van Iperen. For such men the
Academy helped preserve their sense of being European.
In the same way, membership in the Academy offered the Indies-born but
Holland-educated a means of continuing interests learned in the Netherlands
and of fonning a social link with the immigrants. Consider the case of academi­
cian David Johannes Smith. He had been born in the eastern archipelago in
1740, but was sent at five to the Netherlands upon the fonnal request of his
maternal grandmother and the mother-in-law of P. A. van der Parra, Ida
Dudde. Smith returned in 1762-one year, that is, after his uncle by marriage
had been made governor-general. Van der Parra was a generous supporter of
family members, even those distantly connected. Smith profited, becoming
councillor extraordinary at thirty-two and a full councillor at forty-one. To the
Academy he was a liberal patron, donating money and a costly collection of
manuscripts in eastern languages, maps, and paintings.
Approximately one-third of the first members were also Masons,20 initiates
of La Choisie or of the two lodges which replaced it. All three lodges were in
Batavia. The first outside the capital was opened at Semarang in 1789, where
Nicolaas Engelhard, son-in-law of Governor-General Alting was governor and
the lodge's first worshipful master. Membership lists compiled by D. de Visser
Smits 21 bear out the contention that Masons were among the colony's higher
social ranks. There were the membership dues for one thing; but in the Nether­
lands Freemasonry had already established itself as the association of the pros­
perous and the distinguished.
Like the Academy, the Masonic lodge provided men with a place for social
congregation. It appealed quite naturally to a society that was habitually segre­
gated by sex, with the added intimacy of being a Dutch-speaking club in a
non-Dutch world. Membership in a lodge, like a card in the Academy and
professed concern with municipal welfare, horticultural experiments, and local
87

--- PAGE: 120 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.120) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
history, are examples of the "very Hollandish" behavior that P. de Roo dis­
cerned in eighteenth-century Batavia.22 Both institutions were the products of
outsiders who were sufficiently wealthy and conscious of the European model
to attempt to re-create in an alien environment the sociability remembered from
the homeland.
But they could not totally exclude the world around them. Membership lists
show Eurasians and Creoles alongside the expatriates. For the most part they
were sons of rich men, for whom Masonic brotherhood was a mark of belong­
ing to the European group, identification with its values, and outward rejection
of Mestizo culture. For men like Jacobus Beijvanck, Creole son-in-law of the
Mardijker Michiels, and the India-born Comelis Andries Cantervisscher,23 the
Masonic movement was a guarantee against relegation to the fringes of colonial
society.
It might be suggested that the rituals and secret practices of Masons were
particularly attractive to the Indies-born as compared to the austere rites of
Dutch Calvinism; but while the mystical aspects of Freemasonry may have
been a source of appeal, the badge of European identity which lodge member­
ship conferred was probably of greater importance, when one considers that
many of the lodge members born in Asia were government servants. One looks
in vain through lodge rolls for the names of van der Parra's descendants, for
instance. Their wealth and connections could have opened membership to
them; but it is likely that the purposes of lodge and Academy evoked little
sympathy in them. Their lives were passed largely apart from the Company,
their concerns were not those of immigrants. The importance of having a
command of Dutch may be mentioned here too, as also a sense of belonging in
a social gathering of men whose references were to a country the Indiesman's
great-grandfather had left in his teens. For them that other attribute of lodge and
Academy-opportunity for a personal acquaintance with those in positions of
authority and the consequent jockeying for promotions--was irrelevant.
Both Indies Freemasonry and the Academy depended for survival in large
measure on their founder. Within a few years of Radennacher's departure the
Academy had almost ceased to function, while the lodges had a checkered
career, dissolving, reforming, fusing. Their near-demise is instructive. Both
institutions were formed by immigrants basically for immigrants, and their
most active members were outsiders too. They had no links with the colony's
past. Dr. de Haan has noted of the Academy, for instance, that it did not evolve
from the Reverend J. M. Mohr's scientific interests in the 176Os, nor center on
his observatory. 24 Indeed, the Academy made no use of it. After Mohr's death
in 1775 the observatory he had built in 1768 was turned into a boarding house
for bachelor clerks of the Company, and still later it was used as a barracks for
troops. The Academy did not, then, build upon earlier activities of prominent
88

--- PAGE: 121 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.121) ---
00
\0
"View of the Castle at Batavia," drawing by Johannes Rach, 1767. VOC officials, attended by a slave,check on
goods being taken into the castle, while local women saunter by. (Rijksmuseum Amsterdam NG-400-J)
....,
~
m
>Vl
Vl
~
~
oz
Zu
tij
Vl
nC
~C
~
m

--- PAGE: 122 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.122) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Batavians. Like the actions of Governor-General van Imhoff and of Mohr,
Radermacher's were essentially isolated and discrete.
The debates and researches of academicians were, moreover, confined to a
small clique of men. They held, in common, birth in the Netherlands or Ger­
many, profession of Calvinism or Lutheranism, European education, Masonic
brotherhood, and in Batavia, prosperity. Here is a further reason for the hesitant
beginnings of lodge and Academy. The small number of European men of
culture and learning, the irrelevance of both institutions to Indonesia generally,
political upheavals in government, and the British interregnum of 1811-16, all
hampered or interrupted their development. The real growth and importance of
Indies lodges as a branch of international Freemasonry and of the Academy as a
learned society came in the later-nineteenth-century colony. There were then
far more immigrants, closer contact with Europe, and a government whose
highest members eschewed cultural accommodation and were self-consciously
European.
Lodge and Academy were formed by migrants asserting their own culture's
ideals and as deliberate assaults on the Mestizo culture of Batavians with
European status. In considering their failure to thrive in the last two decades of
the eighteenth century one has, therefore, to reflect again on the strength of
Indies colonial culture and its absorptive power. Radermacher and his col­
leagues failed, not only because their ideas took no natural root in Batavia and
their activities were confined to a small clique but also because they had all of
them in some measure become Indiesmen themselves. It is a striking but little
remarked fact that all the men whose names are prominently linked with Ba­
tavia's Enlightenment were married to Mestizas and that they fully conformed
to the colonial pattern by taking as brides young girls, often many years their
juniors, who brought them connections and wealth but not necessarily sym­
pathy for their ideals.
A description of the domestic arrangements of van Imhoff* must begin with
the wife he selected in Batavia in 1727. She was Asian by birth, baptized
Catharina Magdalena Huysman at Casimbazar in northeastern India. At the
time of marriage, Catharina's father, Anthonij Huysman, was second only to
the governor-general as director-general of trade. His early career and rise in
the VOC hierarchy had been in India, where he was director of the Bengal
trading settlement from 1709 to 1716. Huysman was a beneficiary of the
father-son chain of command in the outer settlements, being the son of a
director of Bengal (Marten Huysman), as well as son-in-law of another. A.
Huysman had, moreover, been born in northern Ceylon at Jaffnapatnam. In the
paternal line, then, Catharina Huysman's family had a long record of distin­
guished service in the Company's employ, while she belonged to the second
generation of children born in Asia.
90

--- PAGE: 123 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.123) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
Her mother, Johanna Catharina Pelgrom, was in fact a Netherlander by birth,
but had been taken to India at the age of two by her family and had been mised
in Asia. Johanna Pelgrom had important connections on her own account. Her
father as we have seen, had also been a director of Bengal (1701-05) and had
then served as chief tax collector in Batavia. The Asia-born-and-bred Catharina
van Imhoff-Huysman became first lady of all the Netherlands' Asian posses­
sions in 1743. A year later she died in Batavia.
Van Imhoff gave no proof of a desire to replace Catharina with a wife who
had a more direct knowledge ofEurope and ofDutch culture, or to give Batavians
a new first lady who could assist him in his crusade for refonn. Rather, he
consoled himself, during the six years that he continued in office after his
bereavement, with the Celebes concubine whom he had had baptized as Helena
Pieters. The mistress fonns a direct link between the baron and Radennacher's
coterie, for the wealth that she inherited from van Imhoff was put to supporting
the researches of the latter group after her marriage to J. A. Duurkoop.
The Academy's first chief director, Reynier de Klerk, * was also married to a
Mestiza whose relatives included many members of the colony's elite. She was
Sophia Francina Westpalm (1722-85), who had been born at Batavia to
Director-General Michiel Westpalm and to the Geertroida Goossens who was
godmother to the Mossel children and first lady in her own right by her third
marriage. On her father's side Sophia Westpalm was the daughter of an immi­
grant, but her mother had also been born in a VOC trading settlement and her
mother before her, Sophia Fauconier, spent her life in Ceylon and Batavia.
Sophia Westpalm was widow of the councillor Hugo Verijssel when she mar­
ried de Klerk in Batavia in 1754. It was a daughter from this prior marriage to
Verijssel who brought the Academy's organizing genius, Radennacher, into a
family relationship with de Klerk.
Margaretha Radennacher- Verijssel died in Batavia in 1781. In Europe, many
of the debates of the intellectual elite, the playreadings and theatricals, took
place in salons run by educated women who used their social position and
wealth to draw together the leading spirits of the day. Radennacher had no such
role in mind for his second wife. He remarried the same year, again an Indies­
woman or rather girl, for Anna Jacoba Bosch was only thirteen at the time
(Radennacher was then forty). Anna Bosch's father was another Dutchman,
her mother the Batavia-born Catharina Louisa Galles. By a later marriage,
Catharina Galles became the third wife of Councillor David Smith and was thus
considered a member of the family of van der Parra, in whose household Anna
Bosch was briefly placed. In lineage and upbringing, then, both Radennacher's
wives belonged to the Mestizo culture that had its roots in the seventeenth­
century settlement.
The same could be said of the wives of Governor-General Alting, the Acad­
emy's second chief director and patron, since he married, successively, part-
91

--- PAGE: 124 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.124) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Asian women who were raised in European households in Batavia. Nicolaas
Engelhard, a leader of Indies Freemasonry, likewise was husband to a Mestiza,
Maria Wilhelmina Senn van Basel, daughter of the Senn van Basel patriarch,
Councillor Huybert S. van Basel, and granddaughter of the freed slave Susanna
van Makassar. Maria Wilhelmina was one of Batavia's richest landowners.
Hooyman's marriage to Elisabeth Weijennan has been recorded. There are also
examples like that of Dirk van Hogendorp, governor of the North Coast of
Java, critic of the VOC's principles of administration and crusader against
domestic slavery, who married the thirteen-year-old Eurasian Elisabeth BartIo,
daughter of his army commander at Surabaya. Or take Mohr, whom van Imhoff
selected to run his seminary. He was married to the Batavian heiress Anna
Elisabeth van 't Hoff. Their only daughter was the fourth wife of Councillor
Smith. 25
In taking young Eurasian wives with whom they shared no cultural affinity
nor language for weighty discourse, these men of the Enlightenment defeated
their own purpose of promoting Dutch culture in Asia. Their decisions regard­
ing their children had the same result, for they removed their offspring, at least
their sons, from the Indies. Van Imhoff arranged for all his children to be sent
to the Netherlands. Moreover, in settling property on Helena Pieters in Java, he
clearly intended that she should not be reunited with them in the Netherlands.
De Klerk had no legitimate issue. Of the children he recognized by slave
mothers (named, without imagination, Willem Comelis and Wilhelmina Cor­
nelia), he sent the boy to Europe. Hooyman died in a shooting accident on his
estate Pondokgedeh in 1789. His five-year-old son was removed from his
mother's care and sent to Holland the same year, the widow remarrying by
October 1789, and like Helena Pieters, remaining pennanently in Batavia with
her new husband, the Netherlander Godfried Christoffel Fetmenger. Rader­
macher's son Frans was sent to the Netherlands at twelve and was never to
return. The Eurasian Smith was similarly an ambitious parent, sending the boys
to Europe, keeping the girls by him in Batavia.
It has therefore often been argued that there is no continuity in Indies families
before the nineteenth century. This conclusion is reached, first, by demonstrat­
ing that most European men in the settlements were soldiers, signed on for brief
terms only and suffering high mortality rates, and second, by counting genera­
tions in the male line. Where distinguished men sent sons to Europe there was,
of course, no growth of an Indies clan, no Radennachers for instance. There is
continuity within the Indies-based group if one counts in the female line,
however. By considering the daughters of these same servants of the Company,
one may conclude that there was an Indies family system and that kin ties
crisscrossed the top rungs of colonial society.
Consider Radennacher's first wife instead of his son. Margaretha Verijssel is
92

--- PAGE: 125 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.125) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
the Batavia-born daughter of Sophia Westpalm, Batavia-born daughter of Geer­
truida Goossens, Batavia-born daughter of Sophia Fauconier. Sophia had mar­
ried the Batavia-based merchant Johannes Goossens, and after his death, an­
other Dutch immigrant in Gaspar van Mansdale. Her sister Judith Fauconier
was the first wife of Abraham Douglas, councillor and later director-general of
trade (1708-15). Beyond Sophia Fauconier the record is obscure, but she was
the sole heiress of the Colombo-born and Holland-educated Frans Casteleyn,
director of the Persia trade and then director-general of trade for all VOC Asia
from 1715 to 1722. In marrying Sophia Fauconier's great-granddaughter,
Radermacher was joining an Indies family whose female members belonged to
Batavia's elite. His ties by marriage made him son-in-law of the govemor­
general and brother-in-law to the government secretary, Mr. Johan Hendrik van
Panhuys. His marriage to Anna Bosch brought him Carel Joost baron van
Neukirchen and Carel van Naerssen as brothers-in-law, second administrator of
the warehouses on Onrust and head of the Grisek residency, respectively.
Through his first marriage Radermacher was also connected to the dowager
Thedens.
Thus in their own lives the self-styled reformers continued the very elements
that had gone into the formation of Mestizo culture. They made marriages that
gave them the necessary family connections, patronage, and wealth, but also
partners who had no firsthand notion of European culture or of its currents.
Immigrant men understood that their sons would never be Dutchmen if they
remained within the Batavian household; consequently they sent them to Eu­
rope rather than urge on the Company directors a policy of support for good
schools, libraries, and other institutions that would have helped to preserve
Dutch culture and identity in a tropical setting.
By the last quarter of the eighteenth century, then, Batavia's elite, which
Governor-General van Imhoff had hoped to reorient towards Europe, was more
autonomous than before. Candidates for high office came from a pool of men
who were connected by marriage to Indies women and who perceived their
interests primarily as members of Batavian society rather than as subordinated
to the interests of the VOC in Holland. Members of the most senior board of
government, the Council of the Indies, were drawn from a very small circle.
This fact is clearly illustrated by a review of membership of the Council as
constituted under Governor-General van der Parra in 1775.
Links between councillors are detailed in appendix 3. In summary, there sat
on the Council in 1775 uncle and nephew (van der Parra and Smith); father-in­
law and son-in-law (de Klerk and Radermacher); men married successively to
the same woman (Fockens and Smith); men whose children were to marry (van
der Parra and Breton; van Riemsdijk and Craan); one whose nephew married a
colleague's child (Alting and van Riemsdijk); brothers-in-law (Smith and Vos);
93

--- PAGE: 126 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.126) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
one married to a colleague's niece (Vos and van der Parra); one whose step­
daughter married a colleague (Smith and Radennacher); a man and his son's
guardian (van der Parra and Smith); and other more distant associations. In all
cases the wife brought connections to men in high office, and in all cases the
wives were born and raised in Asia alone. The circulation of spouses is clearly
demonstrated, even within such a small sample as the Council in 1775. And it
is no accident that the relatives are sometimes kin once removed; that is, uncle
and nephew, where the nephew is actually the son of a half-sister; or father-in­
law and son-in-law, where the son-in-law is connected through a daughter from
an earlier marriage. Other ways can be devised to demonstrate the crisscrossing
ties of office and family at many periods during the VOC centuries. The
Council of the Indies, as the highest organ of government, neatly encapsulates
the nature of Indies society .
On 31 December 1799, the Honorable Company was dissolved in the face of
its huge indebtedness and of the political change in Europe following upon the
French Revolution. Governors-general now acted in the name of the Batavian
Republic under its Council of Asiatic Possessions, located in The Hague.
The Indonesian settlements became more isolated from Europe as English
ships made the seas unsafe for Dutch vessels. In Batavia the ruling families
settled ever more finnly into power. Alting' s long tenn came to an end in 1797
when he retired to his country estate. His successor was his government secre­
tary of many years, P. G. van Overstraten, husband to a fonner schoolmate of
the Alting girls. Concentration of power within a small group became even
more evident in the accession of Joannes Siberg following van Overstraten's
death in office in 1801. Siberg was Alting's son-in-law as second husband of
Pietemella, and it was over forty years since he had seen Europe. He, too,
preferred retirement in the Indies to repatriation, and the man to whom he
turned over the government, A. H. Wiese, was another old colonial hand,
veteran of thirty-four years of unbroken residence in Batavia. Wiese's mar­
riages with the Indies-born Christina Marci and then with Jacoba Lodisio, as we
have seen, had enlarged his fortune and connected him to old Batavian fami­
lies.
The expansion of the French Empire under Napoleon overtook these conve­
nient arrangements made by Batavia's elite for dividing up the highest offices
and gains among themselves. The Netherlands was annexed in 1806, and with
Napoleon's selection of Marshal Hennan Daendels, a new, self-conscious re­
fonner stepped into the governor-generalship. When the marshal took up his
post in 1808, he was the first governor-general in the two hundred years since
Governor-General Laurens Reael (1616-19) who had had no Asian experience.
Daendels considered himself a son of the Revolution, and it was as repre-
94

--- PAGE: 127 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.127) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
sentative of the new spirit of the age that he took office. In his brief tenn he set
about remaking Batavia. He did this by completing the move from the old city
to the southern suburbs, laying out a great public park and promenade for the
European citizenry, building the Hannonie as a clubhouse for a select group of
men who would all be Europeans, and planning a palace which was to be the
new residence of the governor-general. In 1809 he razed the Castle. More than
any other deed, this symbolized the end of an era. For the Castle had repre­
sented the Company in the East, its system of monopolies, and the history of its
servants in Asia.
Daendels had planned to alter the Company relationship with Indonesians,
ending the old tributary relationships and cutting off the "feudal" aspects by
prohibiting Europeans from using on their estates the unpaid cOlVeelabor of the
inhabitants. Lack of resources and the need to prepare Java's defenses against
the expected British attack made him turn to pressed labor gangs as the means
of building the Great Java Road, while his measures concerning domestic
slavery were likewise directed to mitigating its most flagrant abuses rather than
to abolishing the institution itself. Similarly, his hope of strengthening Eu­
ropean identity among the elite was modified by the necessities of war.
Given the small numbers of immigrants, Daendels sought to increase the
group he might count on in a showdown with British forces by promoting
admission of part-Asians to the European community. In this, Daendels simply
followed VOC traditions as expressed through rounding up abandoned Eurasian
children for placement in the otphanage. Daendels' method was to make chil­
dren legitimate upon fonnal acknowledgment by their fathers and payment of a
sum set at 10 percent of the parent's salary. 26
In expressing his policy on legitimation, Daendels noted that there were very
few immigrants among the colony's women residents, and that even the most
senior officials were married to illegitimate Mestizas or lived in concubinage
with Asian women. A glance at the members of Daendels's Council of the
Indies illustrates the accuracy of the obselVation, as well as revealing the ability
of the Batavian clique to sUlVive seemingly drastic changes of regime. His
director-general, Wouter Hendrik van Dsseldijk, was married to Johanna Maria
Magdalena Oland, acknowledged part-Asian daughter of the immigrant Pieter
Oland. The senior Council member Willem V. H. van Riemsdijk was fifth­
generation Indies-born on his mother's side. His wife, Catharina Margaretha
Craan, was second-generation Indies-born on both father's and mother's side,
and she had three half-brothers born to Indonesian women. In addition to their
fourteen children, W. V. H. van Riemsdijk fonnally acknowledged six illegiti­
mate children. Councillor Extraordinary Abraham Coupems was married to the
Eurasian Catharina Johanna Koek of the Malacca Koek family. A final example
is that of Councillor Extraordinary Willem Wardenaar, who had six children by
95

--- PAGE: 128 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.128) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
a Javanese concubine. Wardenaar had her baptized Johanna Margaretha Filius
and married her in 1800, thereby legitimizing the children. Several of them
later served under Daendels as ensigns and low-level officers in his anny.
Daendels was withdrawn from office in 1811 before he could have any
lasting impact on colonial culture. The term of his successor, Jan Willem
Janssens, was a matter of months only. Before the year was out, he had been
forced to surrender to the English East India Company's forces headed by Lord
Minto and his deputy, Lieutenant Governor Thomas Stamford Raffles.
The British officials who now took over the ruling of Batavia represent as
self-consciously reforming a group as any set of Dutchmen in the eighteenth
century. Their efforts constitute the second major assault on Indies culture as it
had evolved in the VOC centuries. They were very different, however­
outsiders with no ties to Batavia's past. During the years they controlled Indo­
nesia, colonial culture was for the first time openly attacked by the entire ruling
caste.
THE BRITISH INTERREGNUM (1811-16)
In several important respects this new ruling class differed from its VOC
predecessors. It was an officers' caste, composed of younger sons and lesser
branches of old English families, their commissions purchased in regiments
with long traditions and with assiduously cultivated esprit de corps. Or they
were civilian officials of Britain's East India Company, educated men, repre­
senting Britain and the Indian Empire at a time of its rising ascendancy, when
confidence in British morals and manners was not yet shaken. They were
disposed to look on all "foreigners" with sympathy and on Dutch colonials in
particular with condescension. Some senior officials, moreover, civilian as well
as military, were accompanied by their wives, who were not Anglo-Indians or
Eurasians but Englishwomen of the same social stams as their husbands who
habitually mingled with gentlemen at public receptions and in drawing rooms.
From their own imperial traditions the British inherited an identity as a ruling
caste, a growing disdain for part-Asians, and a lively curiosity regarding Asian
civilizations and peoples. In 1811, an influential minority was on the crest of an
enthUSIasm for abolishing slavery and bringing "progress" to the benighted
wherever they found them.
And so officials of the English Company stand in marked contrast to the
VOC Dutch. Although Indies marriage alliances bound senior officials to­
gether-indeed, one is hard put to discover a prominent Dutchman not tied to
his colleagues by marriage-it is difficult to characterize leading families as
composing a caste in quite the same sense as the British Company's officer
corps. For one thing, the social, economic, and educational backgrounds of
Dutch officials were too various; and since the Batavian ruling class had gener-
96

--- PAGE: 129 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.129) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
ally sent its boys to Europe for advancement, it did not pass on traditions of
political and intellectual leadership to sons and sons' sons.
By Raffles's count, there were 376 European men in Batavia when the
British arrived and 176 women. A further 706 men and 779 women were
reckoned as descendants of Europeans, giving a total of 2,028 persons in
Batavia with the status of Europeans in 1811. Alongside this group were the
Asian residents, 45, 189 of them in all, both slave and free.2 7 All Europeans had
been fairly cut off from the Netherlands during the two previous decades. This
isolation had followed on the Company's inability to send out staff, owing to its
economic troubles, to the Anglo-Dutch wars, and to the turmoil caused by the
annexation of Holland to France. It is profitable to recall here too that of all the
eighteenth century's first ladies, Elisabeth van Oosten alone had been born in
Europe, and she had died a hundred years earlier in 1714.
Given this period of isolation imposed on Batavia's elite by upheavals in
Europe, and considering the contrasting backgrounds of the two ruling groups,
it is not surprising that there was shock on both sides at contact. Moreover, the
British came suddenly and in such numbers that their differences could not go
unnoticed. Not all of the 324 British officers and 5,144 noncommissioned
officers and privates28 were quartered in Batavia, of course, but most of them
were, and many of the most senior, so that the composition of the city's
European community was profoundly altered for the five years of British rule.
Batavia was also the headquarters of government and center for the institutions
introduced by the new rulers. For these reasons the Indies European community
was inevitably caught up in the life of the British in Batavia and as the object of
the victors' reforming zeal.
Batavia's Mestizos have left us no written record of their own for this time,
but the British had much to say of the contact and how they felt about Indies life
and people. In general, they found Batavia's Dutch quaint, backward, even
downright vulgar. Their harshest strictures were directed against the women,
who struck them as most alien in manners and culture. Many Britishers were
particularly affronted by the mixed racial heritage of the wives of their Dutch
colleagues and by the poverty of their education, as they saw it, which resulted
in there being no common language through which they might communicate.
Lord Minto, to whom Batavia's ladies with European status were presented at a
ball given on the eve of his return to India, found nothing pleasing in their
looks, manners, dress, opinions, or breeding. "The Dutch did not encourage,
nor indeed allow freely, European women to go out to their colonies in India, ' ,
he wrote his wife.
The consequence has been, that the men lived with native women whose daughters,
gradually borrowing something from the father's side, and becoming a mixed
97

--- PAGE: 130 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.130) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
breed, are now the wives and ladies of rank and fashion in Java.... They are
attended from their cradles by numerous slaves, by whom they are trained in
helplessness and laziness; and from such companions and governesses, you may
conceive how much accomplishment and refinement in manner or opinions they are
likely to acquire ....
An elderly Batavian lady's upper garment is a loose coarse white cotten jacket
fastened nowhere but worn with the graceful negligence of pins and all other
fastenings or constraints of a Scotch lass, an equally coarse petticoat, and the
coarsest stockings, terminating in wide, thick-soled shoes; but by standing behind
her you find out her nobility, for at the back of the head a little circle of hair is
gathered into a small crown, and on this are deposited diamonds, rubies, and
precious stones often of very great value. It is well with this if they can speak even
Dutch, many knowing no language but Malay.29
Such sentiments of distaste produced in the British by Mestizas were not
confined to the letters they wrote home or the memoirs they brought out in
England years later. They were expressed directly at the time to all Batavians
having European status, with the intention of assisting them to change. To
follow this crusade we have to introduce its chief vehicle, which is at the same
time one of the most illuminating records of Indies social life under the British.
This is the Java Government Gazette, a weekly newspaper published in
Batavia. As the official organ of the administration, the Gazette announced new
edicts and regulations, carried lists of appointments and transfers in govern­
ment and army, and gave notice of taxes. It was conceived, too, as a news sheet
of the English Company's Indian Empire, so that it also gave its readers news
of England, reports on the struggle against Napoleon and on the war in
America. It included news from India, announcements of marriages in Cal­
cutta, for instance, and there were notes on the royal family and fashionable
society in London. The Gazette carried news of Batavian social life too. Certain
columns were open to the public. There were essays, letters, and a ~~Poet's
Corner. " English officers and their wives were thereby kept in touch with the
fortunes of their homeland and deeds of their compatriots in India, Europe, and
America, as well as given the opportunity to discuss the issues agitating them.
An instinct for "Englishness" was thus maintained, as opposed to the '~Indian­
ization" that increased with isolation.
Though the paper was obviously very Indo-British, it was never intended for
a British readership alone. Some government edicts were also printed in Dutch,
as were parts of articles, and there were essays and commentaries directed
specifically to the Indies Dutch. These dealt with facts of Batavian life that the
British found peculiarly repellent, chief of which were the daily habits of elite
women of the European group and the institution of household slavery. It is in
articles of this type that the Gazette's duty as instrument for civilizing Batavian
society is revealed.
98

--- PAGE: 131 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.131) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
Editors of the Gazette urged Batavia's female elite to adopt European cos­
tume, for instance. Like Stavorinus, the British were forcibly struck by the
modified Indonesian clothing habitually worn by women with European status,
viewing the sarong as a petticoat and the kebaya as merely a chemise. Articles
such as "Female Fashions for April" describing styles in gowns in vogue in
Paris and London therefore found their place in the weekly's columns.3o
Astonished as the British were by the sight of ladies going out in their
"'underwear," they were yet more struck by "'the distinct separation" of the
sexes at parties. "'This must be changed," one British letter-writer declared in
the Gazette's letters' column, referring to the semisegregation which, in the
VOC settlement, was a modification of Indonesian and Ibero-Asian upper-class
behavior and one consequence of leaving the training in morals and manners of
children with European status solely to Asians.3 t
Once they brought Batavian ladies into mixed company, however, it was
immediately apparent to the British that their efforts at improving the" 'tone" of
society were at nought unless their protegees were qualified to contribute.
Consequently, the Gazette's pages carried essays on female education and the
need for girls' academies. Improvement of the female character was also ex­
pected to follow from the crusade to root out slavery.
The issue of slavery was a popular one with the British in the Gazette. In
essay and letter, writers either appealed to the consciences of the Dutch or
roundly castigated them; but invariably their starting point was Dutch obduracy
before a new, enlightened stage in Western philosophy and practice. And the
Batavian Dutch reacted. Slavery was one of the few issues that provoked
Dutchmen to respond in the Gazette. Defenders of Dutch practice claimed an
intimacy between owners and slave retainers that they contrasted with the cruel,
degrading treatment handed down to ""free" servants whom the British brought
from India; or they sought hidden economic motives in the abolitionists'
cause. 32
As individuals, the British repeated their lessons to the Batavian Dutch.
Olivia Mariamne Raffles, first wife of the lieutenant governor and principal
female of Batavian society during the interregnum, ordered all cuspidors out of
the governor's official residence, for instance, and refused to offer betel to
ladies who waited on her at her fortnightly drawing rooms. In omitting the
ceremonious offering of betel, she deliberately contravened Indies civilities.
Nor did she conceal her displeasure at ladies calling on her in Indonesian
costume.
In other ways, too, British newcomers of senior standing set examples of
conduct they wished to see generally adopted by Batavia's elite. To their
dinners, balls, and levees they invited the ""chief,respectable Dutch inhabitants
of the Settlement." At such occasions the van Riemsdijk, Senn van Basel, van
IJsseldijk, Alting, and other leading ladies of Batavia would be expected to act
99

--- PAGE: 132 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.132) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
according to British notions of civilized behavior, eating with knife and fork,
sitting on chairs, and mixing with men in conversation and dance.
Balls and parties were not the only forums where Batavia's British and Dutch
communities met socially and where British notions reigned. On 17 October
1814, the Military Bachelors' Theatre was opened in Weltevreden, the new
southern suburb of Batavia, its announced purpose being "the amusement of
the ladies" and provision of civilized diversion in the capital. The plays se­
lected were chiefly comedies popular in England at the time. Again, the audi­
ence aimed at was not English alone but all Batavian society with European
status. Announcements of coming productions in the Gazette were accom­
panied by a synopsis in Dutch, to encourage the widest possible audience.33
Standing back, one can see several direct consequences of the new social
etiquette prevailing in the theater and at balls, as one can from the twin crusades
concerning elite women and domestic slavery. In summoning Batavian ladies
into mixed company, the British did more than require them to give up betel.
They trampled notions of propriety in the relations between men and women
that were fundamental to Mestizo society. For the first time, Indies manners
were openly derided, not just in books for a readership in Europe, but directly,
in Batavia. And since the British were at the head of local society, their
manners became the standard for Batavia's "Europeans." Batavian women
could neither avoid nor ignore them, for now social life revolved around Olivia
Raffles and other senior ladies of the settlement like Flora Nightingall, wife of
the army commander succeeding Gillespie. So from the interregnum there dates
a tendency to confine Mestizo manners to the household while adopting Euro­
pean manners for public view.
The introduction of British etiquette and the newly awakening British horror
at slavery had further consequences too. On the one hand, Batavian Dutch lost
an important symbol of status when they could no longer be followed by slave
attendants whose number and type of clothing all indicated the owner's rank
and wealth. On the other, Batavian Dutch were deprived of their lifelong and
daily companions. This separation was particularly important for women. Eu­
ropean men had always moved between the twin worlds of the household,
where the majority of members were Asian and enslaved, and the office, where
there was a preponderance of men who were migrants from Europe. What the
British period began was the introduction of that distinction more sharply into
the lives of upper-class women who had European status.
This last point can best be illustrated by considering the theater and its
implications for Indies life. Amateur theater was a European entertainment
where perfonners were often the social equals of the audience and the plays
were products of European culture. And so it was a very different fonn of
diversion from that offered by Indies households: the slave orchestra, Indo­
nesian dance troupe, and puppet theaters of Asia. These latter entertainments
100

--- PAGE: 133 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.133) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
were staged in the household for the family and guests and were enjoyed, from
a discreet distance, by their Asian retainers. The Military Bachelors' Theatre
was the product of an alien culture, located physically outside the sphere of the
house in a special building for the European group alone.
All these efforts directed at changing Mestizas apparently had some success.
At least one English observer reported, with a certain smugness, "After the
arrival of the English, the younger ladies, and those who mix much in society
with them, adopted the fashionable habiliments of our fair countrywomen, and
in their manner as well as dress they are improving wonderfully. 34
But it was not enough to alter the women. Indies men also came under the
reforming zeal of the new ruling caste. Many, of course, were employed by the
British administration. At the same time, the British met with them socially,
welcoming them into the associations, such as the Equestrian club, which they
formed. The British sought also to involve Dutchmen in societies of a chari­
table nature that they founded in Java for goals to which they believed a
gentleman ought to be committed. In 1814, for instance, the Java Auxiliary
Bible Society was founded, and late in 1815, the Java Benevolent Institution
was formed as an antislavery society, with the lieutenant governor presiding
over both.
The desire to remake the Dutch extended to their personal habits of dress,
cleanliness, and exercise too. Individual Britishers suggested through the Ga­
zette how Dutchmen should change their ways. It began with a series of essays
on causes of the old city's unhealthiness as compared to conditions in the new,
southern suburbs. "Benevolus," a prolific letter writer, spoke of the narrow
streets, small windows, cramped living quarters, and thickly curtained beds
that prevented circulation of air, and argued that Dutchmen had only to change
their habits for Batavia to be a safer place to live. Such opinions drew a derisive
response from one Dutch inhabitant, who wrote that sea breezes and "noxious
vapors" were the true causes of Batavia's high mortality rate. 35
This apparent incongruity in Indies society-of women with European status
wearing a form of Indonesian costume, speaking Malay, and eating Asian food,
while married to men who refused to adapt to the Asian custom of frequent
bathing or to modify their dress, consumption of alcohol, or working hours-­
may be explained by the key feature in that society. Women were Asia-born
and bred but always married to men who were immigrants. It is one of the
ironies of history that the rijsttafel (Dutch version of the Indonesian meal), the
afternoon siesta, and the wearing of colonial whites are late-nineteenth- and
early-twentieth-century adaptations to a tropical environment, introduced by
Europeans who at the same time strove to maintain ties to their homeland. The
immigrant of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, by contrast, clung to his
Dutch habits in the isolation of his port city and country estate.
Other consequences of the demographic makeup of Indies society have al-
101

--- PAGE: 134 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.134) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
ready been noted: the semi-purdah of upper-class ladies, the lack of a gentry,
and the absence of such institutions as schools. These considerations were not
clear to newcomers at the time. William Thorn's remarks, for instance, were
limited to noting the absence of schools, without seeking an explanation (be­
yond the implied barbarity of the Dutch), and we can suppose that his remarks
accurately reflected British opinion of the time. "Public teachers of any note
are not to be found in Batavia," he wrote, "and therefore the culture of the
youthful mind of either sex is, at the present day, most shamefully ne­
glected. ' '36
It is only to be expected, then, that in addition to the theater, racing club, and
charitable organizations, the British administration should encourage public
education (though the administration did not open schools). Raffles's govern­
ment imported English spellers, grammars, geography texts, the Polite Precep­
tor, copies of Aesop's fables, and French primers. A consignment of books for
adults announced in the Gazette in 1814 included "new novels," essays on
government and literature, prayer books, dictionaries, and "pamphlets, etc."
Reading was not a habit of Mestizo society, and so the contrast with the British
in this respect is strong. Individual Britishers had private libraries of their own
too. In some cases the quantities of books were considerable. Raffles, for
instance, on quitting Java in 1816, had a catalogue of titles in,his library printed
and sold 420 of the books.
By 1816 Batavia appeared altered. The number of Europeans educated and
raised in Europe was much greater, to begin with; and the British among them
had the power and the will to make changes. To cater to these Europeans and
thus preserve a European identity, a network of institutions had been estab­
lished. There were the weekly newspaper, the theater, clubs and societies, and
all these were complemented by banquets and dances at which English roles of
propriety reigned. English and French were the languages of polite society;
Malay speech, costume, and habits were unwelcome in European elite circles,
and slave-owning was increasingly regarded with contempt. The line between
the worlds of Asian and European were drawn more sharply by British efforts
to make Mestizas securely a part of a Western community. And finally, the men
in highest office were all publicly committed to a belief in the superiority of
Western civilization and to spreading its recently discovered troths and its most
radical benefits to their Indies subjects. This was a very different concept of
administration from that of the old V~ governors.
Given these pronounced differences in policy, convictions, background, and
style, it might be expected that the British would shun contact with the Batavian
Dutch altogether, leave Mestizas to their ways, and prefer their own kind, but
they did not. The newcomers' idea of civilized society inspired them to bring
Mestizas out of their partial confinement. One reason was simply that British
102

--- PAGE: 135 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.135) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
entertainments required the presence of women as hostesses and company.
Another compelling motive for their attention to Batavians with European
status was political, the need to guarantee a degree of loyalty and cooperation
of Dutchmen in the daily administration of the colony. A review of those
Dutchmen employed in important posts by Raffles's administration and of those
with whom the British mixed socially allows a deeper understanding of the
period, while illustrating at the same time what prompted the British onslaught
on colonial culture.
In 1811 the councillors of the Indies through whom Daendels and Janssens
had governed were J. A. van Braam, H. W. Muntinghe, H. A. Parve, P. T.
Chasse, W. van Hoosen, J. J. Vogelaar, J. M. Baljee, F. J. Rothenbuhler, W.
J. Cranssen, J. C. Romswinckel, and names already familiar here-We H. van
IJsseldijk, W. V. H. van Riemsdijk, C. A. Cantervisscher, W. A. Senn van
Basel, N. Engelhard, and W. Wardenaar.
Raffles retained only one of these men for his own board of advisors. He was
the Groninger Willem Jacob Crans sen,* who rankedthird on the British Coun­
cil. Cranssen's rise in the VOC hierarchy had occurred during the seventeen­
year term of Governor-General Alting, culminating in the governorship of
Ambon. His wealth in land and goods was accumulated in the usual way of
position and marriage. His wife was Maria Eleonora Hartman, who was a
first-generation Indies woman on her father's side but whose mother was simi­
larly a Batavian by birth and daughter of a Dutchman. Cranssen's legitimate
son Willem Leonard was raised in the Indies and married a cousin of a Makas­
sar branch of his father's family, while his full sister, Rica Catharina, married
Petrus Theodoros Couperos, eldest son of the fonner governor of Malacca.
Crans sen also kept an Ambonese woman whom he had had baptized, fonning
her Christian names upon his own: Wilhelmina Jacoba, the feminine equiva­
lents of Willem Jacob, and turning Cranssen backwards to fonn her surname
Nessnarc. One of the children from this liaison whom Cranssen legally adopted
was Wilhelmina Niclasina Cranssen, who became principal lady of the Indies
through her second marriage to Mr. Pieter Merkus, governor-general from
1841 to 1844.
Raffles's chief justice was also a Netherlander, Hennan Warner Muntinghe,
but one who had been schooled in England. Unlike his Dutch colleagues, he
had had no experience in the VOC's service; he had not come to Batavia until
1806. Muntinghe is best known as Raffles's close advisor and kindred spirit but
also for his many papers debating colonial policy and propositions for refonn.
Nevertheless, he too was fully the Indiesman, having chosen for his bride
Wilhelmina Adriana Senn van Basel, who was part-Asian and seventeen years
his junior. She brought Muntinghe valuable connections as the daughter of the
fonner councillor W. A. Senn van Basel by his first wife, Anna Maria Hoore­
man. Wilhelmina's mother was herself the daughter of a councillor, while her
103

--- PAGE: 136 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.136) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
maternal grandmother had been born at Negapattinam. Through both sides
Muntinghe 's wife allied him to the powerful Indies clique of the van Riemsdijk,
Engelhard, Alting, Wiese, and S. van Basel clans.
The advocate-fiscal during the interregnum was Jan Isaak van Sevenhoven,
another Dutch immigrant who was a member of Indies families through mar­
riage. His first wife was Catharina Amoldina Mom, daughter of the councillor
Mr. Arnoldus Constantijn Mom by Catharina Louysa van Riemsdijk, and
granddaughter of W. V. H. van Riemsdijk and the Japara-born Catharina
Craan.
The most powerful of the old Company officials---men like Joannes Siberg,
Nicolaas Engelhard, and W. H. van Usseldijk-were kept at a distance from
the new administration. This is not to say that there was no contact at all.
Nicolaas Engelhard was Raffles's vice-president of the Bible Society. Ordinary
members included a few van Riemsdijken, Cantervisscher, and van Braam, and
a Couperus, while on the committee were such old Indies names as Roms­
winckel, Coop it Groen, and Parve.
We can profitably pause to consider the family history of Mr. Roelof Coop it
Groen, * for he was also associated with Raffles as fellow committee member of
the Academy, renamed the Batavia Literary Society during the interregnum.
Coop it Groen's Indies antecedents stretched back to the seventeenth century, at
which time his great-grandfather, Drs. B. Coop it Groen, emigrated to serve as
minister in Malacca, Paliacutta, and then Batavia. His wife accompanied him
to the East, bearing two children in Asia, both of whom made their careers
there. The son, Bernardus, was born in Batavia around 1690, was reared there,
and served the Dutch East Indies Company in various positions, ending up as
senior merchant and chief of the Japara factory. He retired from active service
in 1736 and died in Batavia four years later.
During his life this Coop it Groen married three times and had ten children.
The two daughters surviving to adulthood were married to immigrants from the
Netherlands. The sons were educated in Europe. One returned and was chief
official of the VOC's settlements at Japara and Surabaya. The other, Mr.
Willem Egidius C. it Groen, was born from his father's third marriage to
Johanna Stul, daughter of a governor of Banda. He made his career in the
Netherlands, but his son, Roelof, who was Raffles's colleague, emigrated to
Indonesia. Roelof's European education allowed him to swpass his grandfather
in the VOC hierarchy. By the time of the interregnum, Roelof C. aGroen was
living in retirement in Batavia, after leaving the governorship of Banda and
then of Ternate.
Van Usseldijk and Cranssen regularly entertained Raffles, Major-General
Nightingall, and other British dignitaries and their wives at dinners and recep­
tions. The British were also entertained by members of Batavia's European
community, who combined many of the characteristics (such as mixed ances-
104

--- PAGE: 137 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.137) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
try, Asia-bred wives, concubinage) that the newcomers so disliked. Raffles and
his entourage were principal guests at a ball given by Lieve Willem Meyer, for
instance, in 1814. This Meyer was the son of Dr. Johannes Jacobus Meyer, a
Eurasian from Ceylon sent by the VOC to Leiden University to study theology.
Upon graduating, Meyer had returned to minister to Colombo and later to
Batavia. Following charges against his character, he had been suspended and
sent to the Netherlands, where Lieve Meyer was born. Lieve reached Batavia in
1791 in the role of ship's steward. In Batavia he was employed as a government
clerk and there married a local woman of European status. Raffles used him as
secretary and translator. One month after receiving the lieutenant governor and
his suite in his Batavia house, Lieve Meyer legally adopted a child he had had
by a Balinese woman.
Another Indies man admitted to Raffles's inner circle was Jan Andries van
Braam. Born in India to a VOC naval captain, van Braam's rise to positions of
power had come about after his marriage in 1800 to Ambrosina Wilhelmina van
Rijck, daughter of the VOC commander at Pasuruan. Orphaned early, she had
been raised in the household of Councillor Extraordinary Anthonij Barkeij. Van
Braam's brother-in-law, Gerardus Carolus van Rijck, was married to a van
Riemsdijk. Van Braam received special favor from Daendels, being designated
governor-general ad interim, although this honor was rightfully van Usseldijk's
as second-in-command. During the interregnum van Braam was in Bengal and
the Netherlands, but spent 1814 in Batavia and returned again late in the
following year. While resident in Batavia he was frequently host to all the
distinguished British at what the Gazette described as his "superb mansion."
Only at gatherings of the Benevolent Institution was there little contact
between Dutch and British. The group represented by van IJsseldijk, van
Sevenhoven, Muntinghe, van Braam, Cantervisscher, P. T. Couperus, W. A.
Senn van Basel, and N. Engelhard, who all rejoined the Literary Society,
visited the Hannonie, subscribed to the Bible Society, and so on, stayed away
from Raffles's anti-slavery association. So did fonner governor-general Siberg.
The three Dutchmen listed as founding members of the Benevolent Institution
were aides-de-camp and under-clerks.
Only one representative of Batavia's leading families was persuaded to be­
come a member, and that was Cranssen. He joined in 1816 in the society's last
months when the membership totalled seventy. The number of Dutch partici­
pants had only climbed to ten. The distinctly anti-Dutch tone of many of the
antislavery proponents accounts for the distance, as well as the underlying
threat to the fortune and status of Batavia's elite. Nicolaas Engelhard, for
instance, had reckoned his wealth in slaves at 20,942 rix dollars, nearly equal
to his wealth in gold and jewels, estimated at 28,941 rix dollars and far exceed­
ing his property in carriages and horses (2,500 rix dollars).37
In their abstention from the antislavery movement, which was one of the
105

--- PAGE: 138 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.138) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
chief crusades of Raffles and his circle, Batavia's Dutch showed a sense of
group identity. The examples given above of high-ranking Dutchmen in the
British administration and of Dutchmen who mixed socially with the British are
representative of the Batavian European community at the beginning of the
nineteenth century. That is to say, members were linked by marriage, by
partnerships in the old VOC hierarchy, by long residence in Asia, by family
histories reaching back generations in the matemalline, and by assimilation of
Mestizo cultural values and habits. What the British found, as Daendels and
Janssens had before them, was a closed society, fully functioning through all
the changes in government brought about by political events in Europe, and
continuing to absorb immigrants and transform them. This strength and inner
cohesion is an important consideration in assessing the impact of the interreg­
num and in understanding the history of the first fifty years of the nineteenth
century, when the colony passed directly under the control of the Netherlands
monarchy.
In describing the British period in Batavia it is not intended to suggest that
the new rulers were interested only in their own world and in transforming the
city's HEuropean" elite. They had a curiosity about Indonesia's islands that
expressed itself in mountain-climbing expeditions and in parties to excavate old
temples. Some collected plants, animals, and mineral specimens and made
maps of various localities. There were others interested principally in the in­
digenous inhabitants of the islands. John Crawfurd, who assumed the position
of resident, or European administrative head, of Solo, for instance, gathered
ethnographic data for his three-volume History of the Indian Archipelago.
The government promoted such researches. Raffles's part in the excavation
of Borobudur is perhaps best known, but his interests were more extensive than
that. The lieutenant governor joined expeditions, promoted collection of in­
formation which was later summarized in his two-volume History oj'Java, and
aided in the dissemination of such knowledge. His addresses to the Academy
discussed the work of the American botanist and naturalist Thomas Horsfield,
and he was a generous patron of the naturalist, orientalist, and antiquarian Sir
CoHn Mackenzie. In addition to advancing the researches of others, Raffles
found time for the study of Javanese texts. In September 1813 his secretary,
Thomas Travers, recorded: ""At the moment of my now writing, the Governor
is translating a poem tenned the "Brata Yudha" or '''Holy War," which would
have been an ornament to the works of the Grecian, Italian, or even [!] English
bards of old. " 3H British contributions to the Academy's Transactions during
the interregnum included transcriptions of old Kawi texts and suggestions for
their interpretation, a report on the Prambanan temples, descriptions of the
geography of various regions, chemical analyses of certain fruits, and an essay
on the principles of Malay spelling.
106

--- PAGE: 139 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.139) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
Nevertheless, where there was a will to discover and describe the Indonesian
world there was equally the wish to change and refonn it. One part of Raffles's
attack on Mestizo culture was an attempt to alter the Dutch style of dealing with
their Asian subjects and to impart British ideals of conduct to those Asian
subjects too. These motives are behind Raffles's efforts to introduce the land­
rent system in the areas of Java that had been ruled directly by the VOC. The
lieutenant governor saw as part of his mission bearing this message of change to
the very heart of Javanese civilization itself. He thus undertook what no Dutch
governor-general save van Imhoff ever did, and that was to tour Java exten­
sively and enter into personal relations with the rulers of Solo (also called
Surakarta) and Yogyakarta. Such considerations of civilizing duty may have
prompted him to include Olivia in his entourage, not just as companion of his
travels but as first lady with ceremonial roles in her own right.
The extraordinary results can be followed in the Gazette. 39 Late in 1813 we
read that Raffles's party traveled by boat to Semarang and then overland to
Solo. They were met by civilian and military representatives of the susuhunan
(ruler), Pakubuwono IV, and by the assistant resident, Lieutenant J. Eckford. A
nineteen-gun salute was fired and then the entire party traveled to "Clutchoo,"
country seat of the susuhunan, where the ceremonies of meeting were to take
place. The Gazette reports:
On alighting from their carriage, the Hon. the Lt. Governor and Lady Governess
conducted by the Emperor and Empress proceeded to seats prepared for them in a
commodious apartment, where the suite of the Hon. the Lt. Governor and the
Officers of his Staff and Escort arranged themselves on one side, whilst the Crown
Prince with the Sons of the Emperor, the prime minister and other Officers of the
Court occupied the other side of the room. A table was laid in the centre covered
with refreshments which were handed round by female slaves. After mutual con­
gratulations and a few complimentary toasts, his Highness the Emperor conducted
the Lt. Governor to the state coach (Kia Doodoo), the Empress having handed the
Lady Governess to another state coach immediately preceding the Emperor's.
[Emphasis added.]
All then proceeded to the kraton or palace of Surakarta, "the wife of the
Resident [Hugh Hope] or chief European lady of Solo" joining the company in
her own carriage. The principals were then seated in the audience hall of the
palace, where toasts were proposed as the "gomblongs" (gamelan) played. At
the conclusion of ceremonies Raffles and Olivia withdrew to the residency,
where "'all the Civil and Military Servants as well as the European Ladies and
Gentlemen residing at Solo were assembled. "40
The evening of December 6 included staging of a "Javanese comedy" at the
residency and the reception of the susuhunan and his consort. All the local
Europeans attended the evening's festivities, at which there were a fireworks
display, a conjuring demonstration, and an exhibition of dancing by palace
107

--- PAGE: 140 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.140) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
women who had been transported to the residency in enclosed palanquins.
Supper ended with toasts to "Mrs. Raffles" proposed by the susuhunan and to
"Her Highness the Empress," "Souracarta and prosperity to it," and "the
Ladies of Java" proposed by the guests. "These and some other toasts having
been drunk," the report continues, "the party adjourned to the Ballroom,
where his Highness the Emperor led off a country dance with the Lady Gov­
erness. The Ron. the Lt. Governor danced a few couple with the Empress.
Reels concluded the festivities of the evening." [Emphasis added.]
The seventh opened with tiger fights staged by the Javanese and attended by
Raffles, Olivia, and the susuhunan. From there, all moved into the kraton.
"The Emperor and Empress then conducted the Lt. Governor, with his Lady
and their Suite, to an interior chamber of the Palace, where the Daughters and
other female relatives of their Highnesses were presented in form." The day
following, Raffles and his party went on to Yogyakarta, where similar cere­
monies and entertainments were staged. Here, too, the sultan's chief wife, the
"Ratoo-Kanchono" (Ratu Kencana), took part in greeting Olivia and visited
the residency to drink toasts. As at Solo, "the Lt. Governor and his Lady were
conducted by the Sultan and the Ratoo into the interior of the Palace where they
were introduced to his Highness' mother and to the Princesses of the Court. " 4 t
It is outside the scope of this discussion to explore the political intrigues and
uneasy relations between the sultans and the new rulers of the Indies which
prompted Raffles's journey into Central Java. What is important to an under­
standing of Mestizo society and culture is the form which these official meet­
ings took and which will now be examined more closely. In taking Olivia with
him on these visits of state, Raffles obliged his hosts to produce a counterpart
from among their wives to partner her. In this, Raffles had no precedent, for
representatives of the British government in India never attempted to meet elite
women, while his knowledge of the Malay world told him that upper-Class
ladies were generally also maintained in seclusion. In this way, Raffles estab­
lished a new trend in relations between Batavia-based European and Asian, for
his styIe of social intercourse with the Javanese nobility was not to be a singular
event. Speaking of Pakubuwono IV, Thorn had this to say of the susuhunan's
relations with Calcutta's Solo-based representative: "The Emperor, who is
about fifty years of age, is courteous in his manners; and in his visits to the
British Resident, he is generally accompanied by his favourite wife." 42
Before the interregnum, relations between European men and Asian women
had generally been confined to the coastal settlements and had been those of
superior and inferior, of owner and slave-concubine. The Asian woman in
European households was liable to abuse, abandonment, or sale. Now some
European government officials were publically trying to deal with certain Asian
women outside the colonial enclaves as their social equals. It is worth noting
the details of this contact and their consequences. Not only was a secluded lady
108

--- PAGE: 141 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.141) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
required to greet foreigners; when the susuhunan's consort danced a few steps
with Raffles, she was obliged to enter into a degree of physical contact with a
strange man that was forbidden by religion as by custom, and to do so before
the entire court. Then there, is the unprecedented admission of European men
into the susuhunan' s and sultan's inner apartments for introductions to "other
female relatives. "
The demands of religion were also contravened by the drinking of wine. It is
clear, from the accounts of contemporary observers,43 that this was not a new,
sudden break with the law. Raffles remarks: "the ceremonies and state of the
native courts have lost much of their genuine character, from the admission of
European customs, introduced by the Dutch after the last Javan War [1755]."44
He attributes the taking of alcohol to the new familiarity with European ways,
and adds this interesting detail on the overlaying of foreign manners with
Javanese notions of correct behavior: "When the Susuhunan drinks wine with
the Governor, the rest of the company are offered white wine, while they alone
drink red, and a flourish of trumpets sounds as the glass approaches their
lips.' '45
It is useful to compare the Gazette's account of the 1813 visit with the
second, which was made in January 1816 and described in the diary of Thomas
Travers. In most respects little was outwardly different. There were the recep­
tions, the ceremonious compliments, the dances, tiger fights, and parties. What
was different was the role of the chief Javanese ladies. Olivia had died the
previous year, and in her absence the part played by the susuhunan's wife at
Solo was subtly altered. Having no counterpart in the lieutenant governor's
wife, she was not brought forward. Thus, neither at the ceremonies where wine
was handed round in the palace nor at the ball given in the Solo residency did
the chief wife appear. It is not to be supposed that all contact had ceased,
however. Travers states: "After partaking of refreshment and wine, the Gov­
ernor was led by the Emperor to the harem and presented to the Empress, after
which the different gentlemen present were introduced and shook hands; with­
out sitting we all returned to the hall of audience, and took our seats as
before. "46 European men, senior in government, then, still entered the
women's quarters. There was physical contact in the European form of greet­
ing, the handshake, but now the meeting was momentary.
The entry of upper-class Indonesian ladies into the public arena was to be
dependent upon a profound change in the demographic composition of colonial
society. Only when there was a greater proportion of European women in the
colony and of recognized families among the Dutch did this take place. So long
as Dutch colonial policy restricted the immigration of European women, Asian
notions of decorum prevailed and men from Europe conformed to them, keep­
ing their concubines and wives largely out of sight, as did a Javanese official his
secondary wives and consort.
109

--- PAGE: 142 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.142) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
The situation we are describing was especially true for the Batavia-based
Europeans, whose ruling elite was Dutch and who had limited opportunities for
contact with upper-class Javanese. In the subsidiary settlements and port cities
where an Asian elite ruled, the behavior of the Dutch was different, regulated
according to the dictates and personality of the local ruler. Even so, if travelers
such as Comelis de Bruijn are to be believed, senior Dutch officials and their
wives seldom met publicly with the women of the elite, and his admission to
the presence of the sultan of Bantam's consort was a singular event.47
Once the sex and race ratio altered, Java's elite modified its behavior to
conform with European ideas. Here lies the ultimate significance of the British
interregnum for Mestizo culture: it opened up new relations between Europeans
on the one hand and Asians and part-Asians on the other. Mestizos and Indo­
nesians alike were required to change and adjust in order to meet British ideas
of civilized social intercourse, and the changes made involved in each case
deliberate breach of tradition, religious sentiment, and custom. This is not to
deny any modifications on the British side. On the whole, however, British­
style manners dominated during the interregnum because power lay with the
newcomers and because they brought with them their wives and a detennina­
tion to impose their own codes on public behavior.
The British interregnum lasted five years. In April of 1816 the commis­
sioners-general for the Kingdom of the Netherlands arrived in Batavia, and they
formally accepted transfer of the government from Lieutenant Governor John
Fendall (Raffles's successor) on August 19 of that year. The British, in writing
of this period, have always dwelled on the land-rent system. So, too, have
Dutch historians, although with the rather different object of modifying the
former's claims and disputing the extent and success of the so-called refonn.
Change in terms of the altered social relations that this section describes has
received little or no attention, and yet the British had attempted to transfonn
Dutch colonial culture radically. As part of this goal they had required their
Dutch counterparts to introduce their Eurasian and Creole wives into society.
Such changes in the accustomed social role of women could not leave the
Batavia Dutchman unaffected. The British crusade against the semi-purdah of
Indies society obliged him to accept a more public role for women, to modify
his own behavior accordingly, and consciously to follow northern European
styles in dealing with them. This change in the Indies Dutchman is illustrated
by the habit of announcing family affairs through the columns of the news­
paper. Van Sevenhoven, W. A. Senn van Basel, and Willem Nicolaas Ser­
vatius, for instance, announced the death of their wives--Catharina Mom,
Dorothea Jacoba van Riemsdijk, and Sara Catharina Senn van Basel respec­
tively-in the Gazette; and had notices printed extolling their "amiable quali­
ties. "48
110

--- PAGE: 143 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.143) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
The point here is more than to note the regular appearance of a newspaper in
Batavia with personals columns. The placement of notices concerning wives,
marriage of daughters, and the like signals a new attitude of Batavian men
towards Indies women: to mention them by name md description in a public
paper effectively brought them out of the semi-seclusion hitherto characteristic
of the Indies lady, and suggests changing views of the role of women with
European status in colonial society.
Similarly, dancing in the European style became an established part of Mes­
tizo culture during the interregnum and remained a pennanent feature there­
after, though adapted to Indies notions of decorum in that the sexes continued
to sit in separate rooms between dances. The frivolity of this cultural borrowing
should not obscure its significance. From the interregnum dates the ascendancy
of a European-style of entertainment, while the slave orchestra and ronggeng
troupe declined in popularity. Furthennore, this pastime of dancing marked the
entrance into society of ladies with European status, and it ensured them a
permanent, visible place in it. At the same time, it was a break from their slave
women.
The impact of the British was therefore immediate and visible in the related
issues of the role of women and the institution of slavery. Their impact was also
strongly felt by Batavia's Europeans in a broader sense. A whole generation of
Indies people had grown up in the last years of the eighteenth century and early
years of the nineteenth quite cut off from Europe. In the four years of Gov­
ernor-General Wiese's tenn (1808-11), for instance, not one ship had arrived
from the Netherlands. Local government had been left without new employees
and the infusion of new migrants whose habits and loyalties had not yet been
reworked by life in the colony. The recurring reminders of Dutch ways were
absent. Consequently, more Creoles and Eurasians were taken into government
employ, while the upper class was left to make and remake family alliances and
to promote locally born men and rule in its own way, without interference or
checks from overseas.
The British victory of 1811 admitted hundreds of Europeans to Batavia of a
sudden. Indies society was wrenched out of its isolation by their very numbers
as by their sense of mission. The British victory also lifted the blockade on
supplies of goods from Europe, the absence of which had rendered life particu­
larly bleak for the upper class. Stores of wine and oil, for instance, had been so
depleted that Daendels and Janssens had prohibited illumination of private
houses and the staging of large parties. 49 Since the new rulers immediately
threw balls to honor Lord Minto and others of their heroes and invited the
principal Dutch to them, there was generated a new excitement in Batavian life.
It is probably not an exaggeration to assume that the newcomers particularly
gratified Batavian familes, dependent as they were on immigrant males for
husbands to their daughters. The first Dutch-British match, between Jacoba
111

--- PAGE: 144 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.144) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Maria Goldman and William Barrett, was celebrated before the first year of the
interregnum was out and reported in the Gazette in tenns of its promise of
happy relations between the two European communities.50
Some Batavian Dutch were enthusiastic admirers of the Britons and ex­
pressed their sentiments in extravagant epithets in public speeches. The most
outrageous demonstration (and evidence) of Anglophilia was a penchant for
baptizing children with the names of the new heroes. P. T. Couperos, for
instance, seized the opportunity in the birth of a son to christen him Willem
Jacob Thomas Raffles Couperus (the first set of names honoring the boy's
maternal grandfather, W. J. Cranssen). Couperus's brother-in-law named a
daughter born in September 1813 Olivia Mariamne Timmennan Thyssen. 51
Outdoing them all in zeal, Raffles's comptroller had his daughter baptized
Olivia Mariamne Stamford Raffles Villeneuve!
The five years of British rule did not succeed, however, in wresting Indies
life out of its established patterns, for three basic reasons. In the first place, the
contact was too fleeting. Five years were not sufficient to undo a culture that
had been two hundred years in the making. By the time British rule was into its
third year, it was known that it would be an interregnum only and that the
Dutch would reclaim the seat of power. Consequently, those with an eye to the
future could not be excessively tied to a caretaker regime. And there were
always leading Batavians who were never much touched by British role but
deliberately held themselves aloof.
A second reason lay with the character of the British rulers themselves.
They, too, were cultural hybrids, coming to Java not directly from England but
via India and from an "Indianized" culture that had developed over two cen­
turies. Thus while Raffles and his reform-minded officials fulminated against
the barbarities of slave-owning, the Java Government Gazette continued
throughout the interregnum to print lists of slaves for sale. Nor were individual
Britishers without slaves in their households. The following notice, for in­
stance, appeared in the Gazette about the time of Major-General Gillespie's
return to India: "His Slaves, not mentioned in the fonner advertisement [a list
of household goods], will also be sold on the same day, of which a separate list
and description will be circulated previous to the sale."52 Travers, Raffles's
secretary and confidant, also had slaves on his household staff.53
Furthermore, many Britons lived openly with Asian concubines. The
William Robinson who is recorded by the Gazette feting Olivia Raffles on her
birthday, for instance, had fathered three children by an Asian woman while in
Penang. They were baptized with his surname in Batavia some nine months
after his death in 1815. And it is one of the ironies of history that the liaisons
between Asian women and European men that have passed into novels and to
the stage date precisely from the interregnum and involved Englishmen. The
first example is of Alexander Hare, Raffles's political commissioner for the
112

--- PAGE: 145 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.145) ---
THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
Native states of Borneo and resident of Banjermasin, whose use of Javanese
slave labor on his properties in southern Borneo brought scandal to the British
administration. Hare's notoriety as lord of a harem was the subject of a 1963
novel.54 Another example illustrating the case for the Englishman as "India­
man" is the liaison between Edward Williams and a Sundanese woman, immor­
talized in Mestizo stories and theater (the Komedie Stamboel) as Njai Dasima. 55
The third cause of the immediate failure of the British crusade lies in Mestizo
culture itself. The Dutchmen who flocked around Raffles-Muntinghe, Crans­
sen, Couperus, van Braam, and the rest-were all Batavians in habit and
mentality. The old clan system was stronger and further-reaching than ever,
and could not be undone by five years of hectoring on manners and morals.
Only a complete replacement of Indiesmen with immigrants in high positions
could break the political power and cultural influence of Batavia's elite. Raffles
did not have the necessary numbers of British officials at his command and was
forced to rely on the heirs to the VOC system and society. As the first all­
encompassing cultural attack on Mestizo society, then, the British interregnum
revealed that society's strengths.
In 1816, when the British returned control of Java to the Dutch, the old
family system in the capital was still intact and able to dominate Batavia's
governing councils a little longer. For this reason the nineteenth century, which
opens with the appearance of dramatic change, saw a slow flowing back into
the ways of the Company, in methods of rule and administration as in indi­
vidual taste and habits. Thus was Mestizo culture afforded the opportunity
of expansion into the interior of Java, which process continued in the second
half of that century at the same time that it was under the assault of organized
Dutch culture. These contrary trends and the tensions between them compose the
subject of the final chapters.
113

--- PAGE: 146 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.146) ---
5
The Destruction of VOC Society
and the Creation of the NewColonial
THE THIRD IN THE SERIES of assaults launched on Mestizo society by outsiders
began in 1816 when the British transferred the Indies government to commis­
sioners-general of the Netherlands monarch. This assault was to succeed in
destroying the Company's legacy, for it was political as well as cultural.
Neither van Imhoff nor Radennacher and his friends had ever seriously con­
sidered altering the Batavian ruling system that had raised them to their posi­
tions of power and wealth. They limited their activities to efforts at trans­
planting European habits and civilities, whereas the commissioners deliberately
attacked the political strength of the local elite. One consequence was that the
Indies clan rapidly diminished in political importance; the upper-class Mestiza
could no longer offer ties to inner circles and was replaced as social model by
immigrant Dutch titled ladies.
Raffles and his two immediate predecessors had been moving in the same
direction. Lack of time and manpower, and withdrawal of backing from home,
had prevented their accomplishing much. Raffles, for instance, had been ob­
liged to use Indiesmen in his administration because he had too few Englishmen
at his disposal, but he had selected them for their talents and loyalty, not for
their family connections. The same is true of the regimes of Daendels and
Janssens. A. H. Wiese was the last governor-general to appoint and promote
men because of their membership in the Indies family network. Viewed in this
light, it is apparent that the political power of the Batavian elite ended forever
in 1808. The fact that men bearing the surnames Senn van Basel, Engelhard,
and Cranssen continued awhile to figure among senior appointments conceals
this political reality.
Newcomers serving the Dutch Crown tended to return to Europe upon com­
pletion of a tour of duty in the Indies. The matrilineal character of Indies
society was thus broken. For hitherto, Mestizas had married immigrants whose
lives were spent in the Indies, and the family line had continued through the
daughters of these unions who in their tum married immigrant men. Mestizas
who now married Hollanders disappeared from Indies history by retiring to
Europe with their husbands when these resumed careers in Europe. Continuity
114

--- PAGE: 147 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.147) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
in the Indies family now passed to the male line. The colonial family, thus
reoriented, refonned on the fringes of European,society as its male members
were displaced from the administration by civil service requirements of birth
and education in the Netherlands.
The appointment of outsiders to senior positions in Indies government, be­
ginning with Daendels, also had another very important effect: it prevented
realization of a trend just discernible in Indies society for sons of the political
elite to climb the Batavian hierarchy rather than being detached and sent to
Europe. As previously noted, Governors-General van der Parra and van Riems­
dijk seem to have hoped to found dynasties, and the careers of Councillors W.
A. Senn van Basel and David Smith seem to confinn that the ruling elite was
developing a patriarchal cast as Batavia became more isolated from Europe.
Under political attack, however, Mestizo culture retreated into the private
domain, and this development was frozen. The group designated European
changed considerably in composition and economic occupation during the nine­
teenth century, and one segment became self-consciously a group apart. At the
same time, a new colonial type was born from the interaction of newcomers
with their environment. Many of the political changes were wrought overnight.
Cultural change always follows more slowly, the old order lingering on, dis­
guising the reality of the new. It was not until the catastrophes of war, occupa­
tion, and revolution in the twentieth century that the political and cultural came
suddenly together, resulting in the disappearance of the Mestizos as a special
community.
The Dutch who moved into Java in 1816 looked very much like their British
predecessors. For one thing, they were all men born and educated in Holland
and their most senior officers were members of prominent Netherlands fami­
lies, titled, drawn away from careers in Europe for limited tenns in Indonesia.
These newcomers had received their posts from the new Dutch monarch on the
basis of their birth and educational qualifications, and in their promotion there
was no supporting or confinning voice from Batavia's leading families. As
officers of a newly independent kingdom, they were united in a nationalism
directed towards the homeland, sharing the mission of administering the colony
for the benefit of the Netherlands middle and upper classes rather than the old
Batavian cliques. And, finally, like their British predecessors, the chief author­
ities were accompanied by wives who were themselves titled ladies, convinced
of their worth and the righteousness of their values and manners.
Immediate signs that Indonesia's new rulers were direct heirs of the British
rather than of the VOC regime were the bookshops, libraries, schools, sporting
and theatrical societies, and weekly newspaper that were soon established in
Batavia. As under the British, their function was to keep alive a sense of
identity, forge a bond of origin across class and religious denomination, and
115

--- PAGE: 148 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.148) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
protect migrants from absorption into local traditions and cultures. Thus among
the multitude of edicts and official pronouncements carried in early issues of the
Bataviasche Courant l were directives to churches requiring prayers for the
Dutch royal family at all services, an insistence on use of Dutch in the newly
created government school system, and a revival of Raffles's Bible Society and
of clubs for European pursuits. Like the Gazette, the Courant announced events
designed for the European group alone and occasionally opened its columns to
poems and essays from readers. The paper reveals, too, another aspect in which
the new Dutch resembled the British, and that is in the crusade against Mestizo
manners and the celebration of European habits of sociability.
Again, the shock of contact is described wholly from the immigrants' side.
Many of the new Dutch officials felt the same revulsion as the British in their
dealings with leading ladies of Batavia's European community. There is, for
instance, Ver Huell's account of the morning call he paid on Johanna van
IJsseldijk-Oland, whom he found sitting, "in sarong and kebaya, her hair
hanging down, on a mat, on the floor, ringed by a number of women slaves,
each one occupied with some kind of work, while the lady of the house was
cleaning vegetables. Close by her ladyship stood a great silver cuspidor, into
which she spat whole streams of blood-red spittle every now and then. She
addressed me in Dutch, and then appeared to be describing me briefly to her
chief slave in Malay; and I heard the words "baroe datang," that means a
newcomer or one who has just arrived. . .. All now looked on me with greater
interest, and I was extremely relieved when I had acquitted myself of this first
call on an East-Indian lady. ' ,2
Highly placed individuals, including baroness van Tuyll van Serooskerken,
wife of Governor-General G.A.G.P. van der Capellen, and jonkvrouw Theo­
dora de Salve de Bruneton, who was wife to Governor-General D. J. de
Eerens, took up the task of civilizing this segment of colonial society with all
the zest of the late Olivia Raffles. "Mevrouw de Eerens," according to the
traveler J. B. J. van Doren, "spares no pains from her side to persuade the
ladies to adopt a more suitable and less bizarre costume, and as a result the
manner of paying calls and receiving visitors has undergone a considerable
change. "3
Such reactions and crusades point to the fact that Batavia's culture was still
predominantly Mestizo, even under exacting lady governesses like mevrouwen
van der Capellen and de Eerens. If they forbade sarong and kebaya in their
reception rooms, it was because Batavian ladies habitually wore that modified
Indonesian costume at home and on outings. Five years of insults from the
British had not sufficed to make Johanna van IJsseldijk conceal her Mestizo
manners from Ver Huell's horrified gaze. She remained on her mat, occupied
with her betel. Confidence in her world had not yet evaporated, even though its
underpinnings were being swept away.
116

--- PAGE: 149 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.149) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
The new Dutch authorities showed from the first that they had learned the
lessons of the past. In place of the old joint stock company was the newly
created ministry of colonies responsible for selecting the governor-general and
for all senior appointments. The VOC's directors had also reserved to them­
selves the power of appointment, confirmation, and dismissal; but since 1639
their role had often been that of approving appointments long since made by the
men in Asia. The nineteenth-century governor-general arrived to serve a lim­
ited term and depart, his future career in Europe depending on performance
acceptable to his patrons at home. None was to choose Indonesia for retire­
ment. The chief official came without debts, for Batavians no longer elected
him; and he came, too, without entree into their inner circles. Consequently, he
relied on the men he brought in his suite and had no use for all the brothers-in­
law who had fonnerly divided up the spoils of office.
Nowhere is the new policy better illustrated than in decisions of the ministry
of colonies in 1840 and in 1844 following the death in office of the ruling
governors-general. Senior Councillor Carel Sirardus Willem graaf van Hogen­
dorp took over as acting governor-general upon the passing of Dominique
Jacques de Eerens, which was standard practice from Company days, when
councillors chose one of their number, usually the most senior, and sent the
nomination to Holland for approval. This councillor was uniquely qualified for
permanent appointment, being the son of the reformer and ex-governor of the
East Hook (East Java), Dirk van Hogendorp. C. S. W. van Hogendorp had
been born in Bengal to the Eurasian Elisabeth Bartlo and been raised in Java,
but had completed his higher education in the Netherlands and had married
there a native Dutchwoman. He returned to Indonesia in the wake of the
commissioners-general and began his colonial career in the important position
of resident of Bogor. From 1837 he sat on the Council. Despite these creden­
tials, van Hogendorp was passed over by the minister of colonies, and he
stepped down in 1841 with the arrival of the new chief from Holland.
The jonkheer Joan Cornelis Reynst's Indies career had been built up over
thirty-one years when he became acting governor-general upon Mr. Pieter
Merkus's death in office in 1844. Reynst had emigrated to Java at eighteen and
had served the colonial government in such posts as resident of Palembang
(1823-26) and councillor (1836). Once again, in place of experience, prefer­
ence was given to a man who had not seen Indonesia before his arrival there in
1845 to take up his new duties.
At the same time that the post of governor-general was altered and a new
type of officer selected, the Netherlands monarchy, through the ministry of
colonies, struck at that other seat of Indies power, the Council. Acting upon
instructions, the commissioners had decreed in 1818 that councillors must be
Dutch, legitimate, and recorded in the civil registers of their birthplaces. Fur­
thermore, Council members might not be related to each other by blood or law
117

--- PAGE: 150 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.150) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
within four degrees of kin.4 Constitutional Law Number 48 of 1836 sealed the
Council's fate by reducing it from its former position as co-legislative body to
an advisory board to the governor-general. 5
The laws most effectively excluding members of Indies families from polit­
ically influential posts in government, however, were those on the selection of
civil servants. After 1825 all positions were reserved to men born and educated
in the Netherlands. 6 It is true that in the VOC centuries, senior positions had
only rarely been held by Creoles and Eurasians who had not been schooled in
Europe; yet the native Dutch office-holders were often men like Rijcklof van
Goens and Joan van Hoorn who had left Europe at nine and ten and whose
careers had developed in the Mestizo society of Batavia and its outposts. With
the new educational qualifications this pattern was broken. Eleven years later,
the highest posts to which Creole and part-Asian men might aspire were spelled
out: commissary and inspector third class. 7 Again, in 1849, government regula­
tions decreed that, with few exceptions, all posts in the civil service were
reserved to those educated entirely in Europe.8 Eurasian and Creole men edu­
cated solely in Indonesia were thenceforth confined to low-level and low­
paying employment. They became a class of petty clerks whose incomes dic­
tated that they live more according to Asian ways and on the fringes of
European neighborhoods in the cheaper housing. The impoverished Eurasian
was to become the subject of government enquiry late in the nineteenth century.
All these decrees had announced specific qualifications in terms of subject
matter and standard of excellence, and in 1842 a school had been opened in the
Netherlands with a curriculum designed for career officers in the colonial
service. This was former governor-general Jean-Chretien Baud's Delft Acad­
emy, called into being specifically to serve the needs of the Culture System and
closed in 1864 when that system of agricultural production was running down.
In its brief twenty-two years, however, the Delft Academy started a tradition of
teaching aspiring Indies officers to look upon Indonesians as children needing
protection rather than as subjects with rights and duties. This had typified the
attitude of the commissioners too. With the notions of "child-like" and the
associated benevolence having to do with "uplift," "moral duty, " and protec­
tion of the indigenous population from the harsh modem world came a greater
debasement of Indonesians than before.
In addition to its influence on attitudes and expectations of the nineteenth­
century colonial servant, the Delft Academy concentrated colonial service
training in Holland. The damage to the livelihood and prospects of Creoles and
Eurasians lacking the means to acquire the expensive Delft diploma was
quickly advertised and protested in May 1848.9 The authorities were unmoved,
compelling the group's leader, the Reverend Wolter Robert baron van Hoovell
(1812-79) to repatriate, and entrance requirements for the civil service re­
mained unchanged until 1864.
118

--- PAGE: 151 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.151) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
Thereafter, eligibility for posts in the Indies civil service was freed of re­
quirements of origin and place. Instead of the Delft diploma, two qualifying
examinations were instituted, the grootambtenaarsexamenthat admitted suc­
cessful candidates to senior posts and that could be taken either in Leiden or
Batavia, and the kleinambtenaarsexamenfor junior levels and given exclu­
sively in Indonesia.t° Preparation for the senior officials' test in Indonesia
could be had through private tuition or secondary school. Indonesia's first high
school opened only in 1860, however, and for a long time had no successor.
Prestigious and powerful positions continued in the hands of immigrant Dutch­
men, with only the exceptional locally educated man rising beyond the lower
rungs of government.
It is true that two of the nineteenth-century governors-general were actually
born in Indonesia. Mr. Pieter Mijer, forty-eighth to take office since Govemor­
General Both, was a Batavian, but was sent at the age of eight to the Nether­
lands for schooling. Upon return, he spent twenty-two years in government
service as a lawyer and was responsible for framing many of the colony's
regulations. Later, he resigned to take up a political career in the Netherlands
Lower House. He twice served briefly as minister of colonies before returning
to Indonesia as governor-general in 1866. When he left office he retired, not in
his native land but in Holland, where he was to write on colonial history
entirely from the Dutch imperialist point of view.
Similarly, jonkheer Carel Hennan Aart van der Wijck, although born in
Ambon (1840), was educated in the Netherlands. He returned, with his Delft
diploma, for a career of twenty-seven years which included the posts of assis­
tant resident and resident in Solo, Tegal, and Surabaya. He, too, sought the
Netherlands for retirement, but returned to Indonesia for business reasons and
was later installed as governor-general in 1893. In 1899 he settled pennanently
in the Netherlands. It is safe to say of both men that although Creoles they were
spiritually Dutch. Years of schooling in Europe and the changed conditions of
the nineteenth century lifted such men socially and economically far above the
Creole/Eurasian male fringes of the colony.
A review of the history of a well-established colonial family, the van Riems­
dijken, 11 demonstrates concretely this sudden demise in political importance of
the Indies clan. In Chapter 4 I traced the family from its founder, the Utrecht
native Jeremias van Riemsdijk, who emigrated as an enlisted man to Batavia in
1735 and rose to be governor-general forty years later. His son Willem Vincent
Helvetius van Riemsdijk* (1752-1818) was the last of the clan to hold presti­
gious appointments in the colony. By nineteen he had been on the VOC payroll
ten years and ranked as merchant, with the lucrative post of first administrator
of the Company's warehouses on Onrust. Two years later, in 1773, he was
promoted to senior merchant and harbor master of Batavia. Then, while his
119

--- PAGE: 152 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.152) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
father was governor-general, W. V. H. van Riemsdijk held the posts of com­
missioner for native affairs, hospital regent, and member of the dike reeves'
commission. Later he was made councillor extraordinary (1793), chief customs
officer, postmaster general, and in 1799, full councillor.
It was largely owing to his father's influence that W. V. H. van Riemsdijk, a
Batavian by birth and education, rose so high. Jeremias van Riemsdijk had,
after all, been second in command since 1764 and governor-general in 1775.
W. V. H. van Riemsdijk's position had also been strengthened by his marriage
in 1763 to Catharina Margaretha Craan. She brought an Indies history of her
own, born as she was fifteen years earlier in Japara to Johanna Henriette
Breekpot, a Japara woman in her tum, and to Jacobus Johannes Craan, a Creole
born in Ambon in 1728 to a Dutch minister. The dominie had been expelled
from the VOC's possessions upon accusations of "scandalous behavior" and
had left Jacobus Craan behind in Batavia. Craan had subsequently defied dis­
crimination against Creoles or been part of new trends in Batavian political life
of the eighteenth century, for he held posts normally reserved for men born or
educated in Europe, such as chief administrator of Makassar and, after removal
to Batavia, councillor extraordinary (1772). He also held the lucrative director­
ship of the opium monopoly. He died in Batavia in 1780, the year that he
became full councillor. Craan was also related to the director-general, Hendrik
Breton. It might be noted in passing that Catharina's three half-brothers, born
to Indonesian women in Craan's household, were all sent to the Netherlands for
schooling, a privilege not extended to legitimate daughters because unneces­
sary for their social advancement.
Given the connections leading into Batavia's most prominent families from
this van Riemsdijk/Craan alliance, it might be expected that the next generation
would contribute sons to high posts in the inner circles of government, in line
with the new trends, and would bestow its daughters as brides on councillors.
On the contrary, not one van Riemsdijk son so figures; neither did the daughters
make splendid matches. Already the process of withdrawal from public life had
begun with W. V. H. van Riemsdijk. After the fall of the family-style govern­
ment of Wiese, the senior van Riemsdijk devoted himself to the management of
his estates and sugar mills and to the affairs of his numerous offspring. Perhaps
he recognized the changing times and the declining ability of the old Batavian
clique to further its members' interests in government. He directed the sons to
private landownership and to plantation agriculture. W. V. H. van Riemsdijk
stands as a forerunner to those Creole and Eurasian men who in the nineteenth
century became a class divorced from government.
Consider, now, W. V. H. van Riemsdijk's provisions for his children. He
recognized twenty-one in all, fourteen from his marriage to Catharina Craan,
six by freed Indonesian women in his employ, and one adopted, the child of a
sea captain by an Indonesian woman. Fifteen lived more than twenty years,
120

--- PAGE: 153 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.153) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
"Roosje," colored drawing by Jan Brandes of his slave companion, 1779. (Rijksmu­
seum Amsterdam NG-1985-7-2-72)
121

--- PAGE: 154 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.154) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
some into their sixties and beyond. It is not possible here to give accounts of
all. For our purposes of establishing the development of a landowning gentry
among the Indies-born with European status in the nineteenth century, it is
sufficient to concentrate on only two. Suffice it to say of the rest that none of the
sons was sent to Europe for school and that all the adult daughters married
either immigrants or Creoles, who were outside government service.
The two selected here are Daniel Helvetius van Riemsdijk (1783-1860) and
Scipio Isebrandus Helvetius van Riemsdijk (1785-1827). Both were legitimate
and passed their entire lives on Java. Taking Daniel first, he had three daughters
by the Javanese woman Mea, and gave them Christian names and his own
surname. A fourth child died in infancy. About the time he came to marry off
the oldest daughter, Dina Cornelia, Daniel applied for letters of legitimation for
the three girls, and this application was granted in 1827. Dina married the
immigrant Tjalling Ament, becoming through this marriage the founder of a
large Indies clan in her own right. 12 Both Ament and the husband of the second
daughter, Sophia Wilhelmina, were to rise in the service of the Indies govern­
ment, Ament becoming resident of Cirebon in 1843, and Sophia's husband,
Carel Marinus Visser, rising to governor of the Moluccas. Perhaps the impor­
tance of his daughters' connections inclined Daniel van Riemsdijk, now in his
sixties, to regularize his relationship with their mother. Accordingly, in 1844,
Mea was transfonned into a Dutchwoman under the baptismal name Christina
Simans. That same year Daniel married her and again officially acknowledged
his daughters. The fortunes of the youngest are intertwined with the family of
Scipio I. H. van Riemsdijk, to whom we may now tum.
Scipio also preferred concubinage and the company of Asians to the un­
kn~wn Dutchwomen who started immigrating in his lifetime. From his union
with the free, non-Christian Bamie he had one daughter, baptized Maria
Susanna van Riemsdijk in 1808. His six other children were born to the free,
non-Christian Manies van Bali. Scipio had them baptized, thus formally recog­
nizing an obligation to rear them as Europeans in his own house, rather than
have them raised by Indonesian relatives in a kampung (village). Unlike
Daniel, however, Scipio did not marry Manies; nor did he give her children his
own surname. Rather, he adopted an expedient that his father and Cranssen had
used, turning his own name backwards and calling them Kijdsmeir. His chil­
dren were still illegitimate. To strengthen their social position, Scipio formally
adopted them once they had survived babyhood. An important distinction be­
tween his solution and his brother's was in the status of the Asian mothers. In
Daniel's case, marriage meant that Mea/Christina might now appear publicly
with him, and she was, on her death, buried at his side in the European
graveyard. None of these honors, so important in colonial society, was con­
ferred on either of the mothers of Scipio's offspring.
The fortunes of the children surviving to adulthood in the two families are
122

--- PAGE: 155 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.155) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
subtly different. Daniel's two eldest daughters married men with distinguished
careers in the new officialdom. Three of Scipio's daughters married Nether­
landers too, but none was prominent in government circles. Of his two sons
who reached their majority, one had a Chinese concubine named Bibiet. The
other, Willem Martinus, joined the two families in marrying his cousin
Catharina Petronella. From this union of cousins and surnames, Kijdsmeir­
Riemsdijk, were born eight children, of whom it may confidently be said that
the Indonesian side of their heritage was predominant and immediate, through
their half-Indonesian parents, their Indonesian kin, and their family retainers.
Within three or four generations, then, we see descendants of Jeremias van
Riemsdijk moving easily towards the Indonesian, not in defiance, like Pieter
Erberveld, the eighteenth-century Eurasian rebel-turned-Muslim, but naturally,
by reason of remoteness from European culture and of daily contact with the
Indonesian. By then the chief distinction from Javanese of the same economic
standing lay more in name, boasts of ancestry, and occupation than in real
differences in way of life. And there are examples of Eurasians who were proud
of their Asian ancestry, claiming descent not from patrician European families
but from Oriental princesses. The linguist H. N. van der Tuuk was one, insist­
ing that the Koek family of Malacca were Eastern grandees.
In the van Riemsdijk family history, then, can be traced the larger history of
Mestizo society. Starting in the eighteenth century with the immigration of
Jeremias van Riemsdijk, the family acquires power and wealth through senior
positions in the VOC hierarchy and marriage into Batavian clans with long
roots stretching, on the female side, into the seventeenth century. With the
advent of government officials inimical to the aspirations of Indies cliques,
wealthy Indiesmen such as the van Riemsdijken withdraw from government
and tum to plantation agriculture as their source of income and occupation.
This shift in orientation coincides with a shift in residential patterns from
cities of the north coast into the interior of Java. The divorce from government
position and its prestige prevents members of Indies families from marrying
upward in colonial terms. Van Riemsdijk sons continue to seek Creoles and
Eurasians as brides if they marry, the women to take immigrants as husbands,
but their partners are similarly often outside government circles. Now their
family alliances are with other landholders of similar descent too, and unions
appear in the marriage registers with men surnamed Arnold, van Motman,
Ament, even Michiels. Legal marriage in the European style ceases to be
sought by the men, and the family completes its return to one part of its heritage
with the full assimilation of descendants into Indonesian communities.
While the political power of the Indies clan was quickly disposed of, cultural
changes followed several steps behind, and VOC Mestizo influencelingered on
well into the middle of the century. Clear evidence of the Mestizo world comes
123

--- PAGE: 156 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.156) ---
~
N
.,J:::..
"Tobacco Planter and Family" B1itar, photograph taken between March 1901 and July 1902. The photog­
rapher assembled elements from the portrait genre: a "classical Greek" building, the remains of parapets,
and branches laden with flowers for this family formed from marriage between a Dutch immigrant and an
Ambonese, their children, and Javanese nannies. (KITLV 2521)
....,
~
m
Vl
on
5=r
~
~
rU
o
"Tj
to
>
~<:
5=

--- PAGE: 157 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.157) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
from that very example of "Europeanness," the Javasche Courant. There is,
first of all, the language. It was Dutch, but certain Malay words are habitually
used in the Courant's columns, words (such as toko for --shop") that would be
immediately understood by the readers. Sarongs are offered European ladies in
lists of stock in hand, along with shawls and frocks. And then there are the
advertisements for slaves.
The Constitutional Law of 1818 forbade international commerce in slaves;
that is, it prohibited import of slaves for sale to Indies households. It did not
outlaw thecSaleof slaves within Indonesia itself until 1855.13 Typical would be
this notice placed by Catharina ten Cate- van Riemsdijk in the Courant in 1840,
announcing the sale of several servants: "For sale from the estate of F. J. ten
Cate: Lafleur, cook's apprentice; Julia, seamstress and personal maid, with her
three children, the oldest of whom is four; Juria, seamstress, personal maid,
and hairdresser, with her eight-month-old child; and Augusta, seamstress and
personal attendant, aged eighteen years." 14
Another indication of the multiracial character of colonial society and of the
ambivalence as -to lines and barriers is a notice periodically placed in the
Courant by government officials and directed to -'all Europeans and
gelijkstandige" (those of the same status). Usually such notices had to do with
regulations for registering births, with visitors to a residency, and the like, and
the persons so identified were Europeans by birth and all those grouped in the
European category: Creoles, Mestizos, recognized illegitimate children, and
Asian wives.
Now all this was a normal part of daily life to the old-timer. Newcomers like
Ver Huell were struck by the continuing force of the old Mestizo culture, as in
his recollection of wedding festivities for a "wealthy Ambonese Jufvrouw":
"Towards evening we betook ourselves to the bride's house, and were received
by a procession of young men decked out with sprays of flowers on their
chests. . . . They escorted us into an apartment where the bride, splendidly
gowned and glittering with jewels sat on a throne.... Like a queen, she was
ringed by a suite of young girls.... With my officers I approached the steps
of the throne and made my humble compliments in Malay, to which the lovely
bride responded with a proud bow. The ball was opened by the young pair. ' ,15
Ver Huell notes that most of the young ladies preferred to tackle Western
dancing in their bare feet.
In the passage just quoted and many others of Ver Huell's Memoirs there is
the tone of the amused observer, one who does not forget to regale his Dutch
readers of the 1830s with scenes of Eurasians barefoot at a ball. He touches on
what European immigrants perceived as outlandish and tasteless, hints that
Eurasian pride in family and social position is without justification, and alto­
gether puts forward a view of this group as barely civilized. Through this point
of view one can appreciate the European visitor's first sensations, but the effect
125

--- PAGE: 158 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.158) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
is to make scenes of everyday life bizarre. All sense of proportion is thereby
lost, for Ver Huell was observing the daily nonns of an affluent sector within
the European group.
The influence of Oriental civilizations was present in all levels of the
nineteenth-century colonial settlements. The wives of Governors-General Baud
(1833-36), Merkus (1841-44), and J. J. Rochussen (1845-51) were Mestizas
whose surnames recalled the heyday of Indies family alliances and isolation
from Europe. J.-C. Baud, * to take him first, was no stranger to the Indies world
when he took up the duties of governor-general. He had first journeyed to
Batavia in 1810 as Governor-General Janssen's secretary and then joined the
new Indies civil service with the rank of second-level officer. He survived the
transfer to British rule, acting as translator and head of Raffles's secretariat.
Under the commissioners Baud became government secretary and later general
secretary to Governor-General van der Capellen. Upon return to Holland he
guided the new Netherlands Trading Company, became director of East Indian
Affairs in the ministry of colonies, and then went to Indonesia in 1833 as
governor-general.
Baud's rise up the colonial ladder was swift. He had established himself with
the Batavian elite by marrying Wilhelmina Henrietta Senn van Basel in 1815.
The surname Senn van Basel by now evokes old Company families with links
running to all the rich and powerful in immigrant and female Eurasian circles.
To particularize, this Wilhelmina was daughter to the Indies-born, Holland­
educated councillor Willem Adriaan S. van Basel, whose stepsister was wife to
Nicolaas Engelhard. Her mother was Theodora van Riemsdijk, a granddaughter
of the governor-general in the legitimate line. Her stepsister Wilhelmina
Adriana was wife to Muntinghe, and her full sisters brought into the clan
Servatius and Mr. Simon Hendrik Rose, resident of Cirebon. Her stepmother
(W. A. Senn van Basel's third wife) was one of the Wiese family. It would be
tedious to enumerate further the links to the powerful and prestigious that this
marriage brought Baud. Suffice it to say that it opened doors to the old VOC
elite by bringing him into intimate union with families with long-established
Asian roots. In his bride was a woman whose Creole ancestress in the maternal
line had been born in Japara in 1738.16
Wilhelmina Baud-Senn van Basel had been born in Batavia in 1798 and was
raised by an Indies-bred mother and Asian slaves. It is safe to assume that she
spoke Malay more fluently than Dutch, and that her manners resembled those
of Johanna Oland more than those of the baroness van Tuyll. Little from her
Indies background can have prepared Wilhelmina for life in the Netherlands,
where she spent her last years. Four of her nine children were born in Indo­
nesia. Only the two Batavia-born sons made their lives there, whilst the daugh­
ters were established in Holland. The trend of events noted for the nineteenth
126

--- PAGE: 159 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.159) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
century Mestizo community is further reflected here in that neither son of a
fonner governor-general made a name for himself in government. Both were
landowners and died on their estates in Java.
Baud pere had made brevity of tenn in Indonesia a condition of his accepting
the post of governor-general. It might be expected that in remarrying he would
choose a woman eager to retire in Holland. As it turned out, he waited until his
return to Batavia before choosing his second wife. The man who had seen his
first marriage smooth his way was to follow the same sage course again. His
choice fell on Ursula Susanna van Braam, Batavia-born daughter of J. A. van
Braam, Raffles's old associate and councillor under Governor-General van der
Capellen. In Ursula's mother there was also an Asian background and links to
the van Riemsdijk, Barkeij, and Engelhard families.
Mr. Pieter Merkus generally enters colonial histories as an opponent of
Governor-General Johannes van den Bosch and is sometimes credited with
giving Indonesia its first divorced woman as chief lady. It is not usually noted
that mevrouw Merkus was also a recognized daughter born out of wedlock to a
freed Ambonese slave. She was Wilhelmina Niclasina Cranssen, illegitimate
daughter of the councillor and of Wilhelmina Nessnarc, born in Ambon and
eighteen years Merkus's junior. Together with her own children, Wilhelmina
Merkus-Cranssen raised one Henriette Elisabeth Merkus, who had been born to
a Christian Ambonese woman while Merkus was governor of the Moluccas.
One week before his marriage, Merkus had Henriette legitimized. After his
death, Wilhelmina took this stepdaughter to the Netherlands. There she was to
marry a former first lieutenant in the colonial anny, and later, after a divorce,
this part-Ambonese stepdaughter entered the Dutch nobility through her mar­
riage to Mr. Rene Frederik Willem baron Sloet tot Toutenborgh. In the case of
Wilhelmina Merkus-Cranssen, again we see the nineteenth-century pattern of
removal of Mestizas from the Indies as a consequence of their marriages to
immigrants and the disappearance from Batavia of Indies families in which
descent is traced in the female line.
Of Rochussen it may be quickly said that governor-generalship of the Indies
was merely a six-year interlude in a diplomatic career centered in Europe. He
returned to the Netherlands to resume his fonner interests and only renewed his
Asian connections to serve as minister of colonies from 1858 to 1861. He was
already forty-eight and a widower when he reached Batavia. There he was to
marry the twenty-one-year-old Elisabeth Charlotte Vincent, who had been born
in Padang to the secretary of the residency. She was connected to the prominent
and racially mixed Indies families Dupuy, Janke, Engelhard, and Senn van
Basel, while her brother was married to Anthoinette Pahud, daughter of the
future governor-general and whose mother and grandmother had been born in
India. 17
After Elisabeth Vincent, the wives of ruling governors-general were all
127

--- PAGE: 160 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.160) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Dutchwomen save one,18 and so were those of senior officials. The standards
they set as acceptable were of Dutch, not Asian, inspiration. Their efforts at
reproducing Dutch bourgeois society in Indonesia were reinforced by the sheer
numbers of Europeans moving into Java's cities during the nineteenth century.
When the British took over Java, they estimated the number of inhabitants
with European status at about 4,000. A half-century later (1852) the figure for
Europeans, excluding the military, was reckoned as 17,285 on Java and 4,832
scattered among other islands. In 1870, restrictions on immigration from
Europe were lifted entirely with the passage of agriculture laws abolishing the
Culture System and opening Indonesia to private entrepreneurs. 19 Population
figures reveal these changes to the economic system and to the demographic
structure of the European group. In 1872 the number of Europeans in Indonesia
was 36,467. In 1882 it was 43,738, and it had reached 58,806 a decade later.
By 1900 those with European status in Indonesia totalled 75,833, with privately
employed individuals far outstripping government employees in number.
Part of the growth of the European group-from 4,000 in 1812 to 76,000 in
1900--was the result of natural increase, with many persons part-Asian. But
after 1870 there was heavy immigration, with some 10,000 new migrants
entering Indonesia in the decade 1870-80 alone. Had the European immigrants
been dispersed evenly to all areas of the archipelago, the influx would have
been barely noticed. As it was, most people with European status were concen­
trated in a few key spots, with 62,477 of them on Java and only 13,356 in all
the rest of Indonesia. 20
Women were part of the new wave of immigrants. The majority came as
wives and daughters of government employees and private entrepreneurs, but
some few, discernible through the advertisements they placed in Java's news­
papers, entered the Indies on their own to eam a living.21 Women migrants
were always far fewer than men, and it was not until the 1930s that the sex ratio
among new arrivals was approximately equal. Over the period 1900-30 the
proportion of Europe-born women to Europe-born men in Indonesia rose from
471: 1000 to 884: 1000. In actual numbers this meant an increase from about
4,000 Dutchwomen at the tum of the century to around 26,000 in 1930. As late
as 1930, however, 70 percent of all persons legally classified as Europeans in
Indonesia had been born there. 22
Most immigrants lived in cities, Batavia foremost, then Semarang, Sura­
baya, and Medan. As such, living in European residential quarters, they created
a culture of their own. It was for this immigrant group, as well as for the
exploitation of Indonesia's resources, that the communications grid was ex­
panded in the second half of the nineteenth century. Innovations in the fields of
medicine, the telegraph, publishing, and transport networks affected the daily
life of migrants in important ways. First of all, immigrant men trained for the
128

--- PAGE: 161 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.161) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
civil service and coached to view Indonesians as inferior to themselves could
now have a degree of contact with each other-by sheer numbers in the cities,
and by train, tram, and telegraph-not possible before. The Dutch-speaking
club had expanded. Secondly, contact with the Netherlands through telegraph
and fast ship meant that there was no longer a sense of total isolation from the
homeland. Through imported newspapers and periodicals, the new Dutch in
Indonesia could follow developments in European theater and the arts; they
could even keep abreast of the races.
The introduction of the furlough system gave government and military offi­
cials paid leave of two years' duration in Europe, and more generous pensions
permitted retirement there. Furlough meant more than just a chance for physical
recuperation. It offered the opportunity for intellectual and spiritual renewal at
the source. It was a break in Indies employment to be anticipated and planned
for. The attitude thus engendered was far different, then, from that of one such
as Johannes Thedens, acting governor-general from 1741 to 1743, who at
sixteen enrolled in the YOC's army with slight expectancy of ever seeing
Europe again in a life that was to run another forty-odd years.
Boat, letter service, rail, and telegraph all brought contact with one's own
kind. Goods and ideas passed along'these channels too. From the columns of
newspapers it is clear that shops catering exclusively to immigrants were
opened in the second half of the century. In their way they assisted in keeping
the newcomers European and minimizing the dependence on local products and
hence local ideas. Tinned biscuits and chocolates could now replace Indonesian
snacks, and Christmas could be made more like home with purchases of Saint
Nicolaas gifts and gingerbread. Children's toys from Holland and picture books
might counteract the influence of the Indonesian nursemaid, and there were
now novels and essays available in bookstores for adults. Evidence of the influx
of European women comes from advertisements too, such as those for medi­
cines and for Dutch-language pamphlets on the proper rearing of children in the
tropics. Like innoculation against smallpox, which had been introduced in
1803, these were to stand consciously against Indonesian and Mestizo cures
that combined medical and spiritual or magical knowledge in remedies.
Notices of property auctions, numerous in all Indies papers, also convey an
idea of the immigrants' housekeeping. It is worth comparing these notices with
those from the first half of the century. The latter always included slaves,
described by name, type of employment, sometimes by age. After 1854 such
advertisements disappeared; the cessation of trading in Asian lives was one
more indication of an increasingly authentic Dutch style of living in Indonesia.
Greater numbers of immigrants and larger concentrations meant that there
were more local branches of Masonic lodges, associations for sports and music,
and men's clubs, too. Club life has a long history in nineteenth-century Indo­
nesia. 23 It stretches back to the time of Daendels, who established the Har-
129

--- PAGE: 162 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.162) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
monie in Batavia and promoted it by obliging all civilian and military officials
to join. Clubs spread to other cities, wherever there were numbers of European
men. Yogyakarta's club, De Vereeniging dates, therefore, from as early as
1822, but there is no clubhouse at Surabaya before 1843 and none at Bandung
until 1895.
Serving a similar purpose of marking off and identifying were the amateur
groups devoted to music and drama and the learned societies. By 1840,
Batavia's Europeans were offered a weekly play or opera in French by the
resident Theatre Fran~ais. The Courant announced "grand vocal and instru­
mental concerts" and "soirees musicales" from time to time. Then there were
public lectures sponsored by the Academy, and a brief-lived magazine, Lak­
schmi, devoted to verse. After 1850, a male immigrant might meet his fellows
to discuss the capital's cultural events in the newly established coffee houses.
All these resources-theaters, libraries, clubs, shops selling pianos, and so
forth-obviated dependence on local entertainments. Immigrants amused
themselves as they had done in Europe, and so preserved tastes based on
childhood upbringing in another hemisphere. The attitude they now displayed
towards Indonesians was one of scientific interest when it was not one of
humorous contempt. Whatever the attitude, European immigrants to Indonesia
were deeply conscious of living in an alien land. Their understanding of it and
accommodations to it were defined by the colonial culture, which in the nine­
teenth century expanded far beyond its territories of origin, the port enclaves
and immediate environs of Batavia.
Indies culture in the nineteenth century grew away from its VOC heritage.
For one thing, its key components were now altered. At the conclusion of the
Napoleonic Wars in Europe, Britain had returned to the Dutch only their
territories in the Indonesian archipelago. Gone forever were their settlements at
the Cape and in India, Ceylon, and Malaya. While these political deals meant
little at first to many archipelago peoples, the impact on that legal category of
persons known as Europeans was immediate and pennanent. For them, the
policy decisions taken in London and The Hague signified not only the need to
adjust to another political regime but also the need to reorder both their inner
lives and their relationship to Indonesia.
Neither Java, nor yet Indonesia, had been the total VOC domain. Company
employees were linked by occupation, family ties, sometimes birth, to a num­
ber of Dutch settlements in Asia and Africa. The early eighteenth-century
governor-general Abraham van Riebeeck, for instance, was born in southern
Africa; he spent a part of his childhood in Holland and his adult life in Batavia.
His mother died in Malaya. His father's second marriage brought into the
family a woman who had lived in Japan and west Sumatra. The marriages of his
130

--- PAGE: 163 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.163) ---
THE DESTRUCTION OF VOC SOCIETY
sisters and daughters removed them to Batavia, Ambon, and Ceylon. He was
buried in Java.
After 1816 ties were cut with Africa, India, and Ceylon, and after 1824, with
Malaya. Only the link to Japan was left, but the settlement at Deshima declined
greatly in its economic importance to the colonial exchequer and hence in the
social consequence the post of local chief could confer on colonial officials.
Attention was thereafter focused on Indonesia. The archipelago became the
natural habitat for settlement, transfer, posting of sons, and bestowing of
daughters in marriage. It was the archipelago that was the arena for the expan­
sion of Mestizo culture. Henceforth only Indonesian peoples and immigrants
direct from Europe contributed to its development. Quite naturally Malay tri­
umphed over Portuguese as the language of intergroup communication and of
the immigrant male's household. Nor did any of the old avenues of contact with
the coasts of India and Bunna remain: import and sale of slaves from outside
the islands ceased completely in 1818, and no longer did families removing
from, say, Jaffnapatnam bring local slaves in their suite.
With this change in colonial boundaries also came a change in residential
patterns for the group with European status. At the start of the nineteenth
century members of the group were predominantly urban dwellers esconced in
port cities along the coasts. By the end of the century a greater variety of
settlement could be discerned, comprising a movement out of the cities and also
into the other islands. Land was taken up by private settlers and entrepreneurs.
The chief expansion followed on the Agriculture Law of 1870.
Well before that time, however, some individuals had purchased or enlarged
their private estates. Sale of land on Java had begun in 1808 under Daendels,
who was seeking added sources of revenue. Raffles continued this expedient for
adding to the treasury, setting up commissions to sell land east of Batavia and
coffee estates in Priangan. During the same period, individuals with European
status acquired large estates in the Solo and Yogyakarta principalities. By 1854
8 percent of Java was owned privately, and after 186310ng-tenn leases brought
Europeans to east Sumatra too. 24
In Java's interior, in isolation, the evolution of a Mestizo culture began
anew, or rather continued in new locations. Immigrant whites, coming into
contact with Indonesians, especially from the lower classes, and detached from
church and white society, borrowed from the Javanese, and discarded parts of
their own culture. A Mestizo style was established in small towns and on
estates, even though the prime actors were not actual descendants of VOC
Eurasians themselves.
Consider the following description of an immigrant planter and landowner
near Semarang, as set down by van Doren and relating to the year 1840:
,'Manuel entertained his habitues in a truly oriental manner, especially when it
131

--- PAGE: 164 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.164) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
was his own or one of his children's birthday, at which occasions things
sometimes went beyond all bounds, and yet with due deference to the fair sex,
for apart from a Chinese Nyai [mistress] with whom he had been married in the
Eastern way, beneath a coconut tree between heaven and earth, he maintained a
small harem for his pleasure. "25 In short, Manuel was not so different in his
mode of living and values from one of the van Riemsdijken. And he, too, later
married his Chinese mistress in order to legitimize his daughters and make good
matches for them.
To generalize, the key elements needed for the evolution and continuation of
the Mestizo style on Java were white men, Indonesian mistresses, Eurasian
wives. Then there were the distant, competing models of upper-ClassEuropean
and Javanese aristocracy to be reverenced, imitated in some fonn where pos­
sible. There were the part-European, part-Asian children, some entering the
Dutch group, others raised as Indonesians. There was the awareness of the
colonial caste system that judged living as an Indonesian and being accepted as
such to be a degradation to the part-European. There was the distance from
concentrations of Europeans and their culture, and there was the immediacy of
the Indonesian. There was the lack of reading materials with the tie of thought
and language. In their place was the emphasis on the oral and visual arts. There
were the numerous slaves, thinly disguised after 1860 as free servants. There
was the daily intercourse in Malay or Javanese. There was the distance from
church and its social functions of sanctifying marriages and blessing the dying.
In its place were local values, sayings, reliance on divining good and evil days.
In the absence of European doctors there was the trust in Indonesian magical
and herbal forms of medicine. There was the cooler Indonesian costume and
Indonesian food. There was the seigneurial styIe of living for the wealthy that
European status and exploitation of local peoples made possible. Mestizo, too,
were the practices concerning women: the Indonesian mistress remained hidden
from public view; the partially confined Eurasian wife was surrounded by
women attendants; the daughter was married off when barely in her teens.
This was the reality of the nineteenth-century colony, the context for Euro­
peans in Indonesia. In describing a similar process, the absorption of immigrant
Chinese into an Indonesian-Chinese culture, G. W. Skinner has spoken of
"intermediate society. "26 The concept is useful here. Newcomers did not
adjust to an Indonesian style of life, whether variants of Sundanese, Javanese,
Ambonese, or whatever. Their adaptations were conditioned, molded and
guided, by all the years of earlier responses that had resulted in a Mestizo
culture which had taken on a life of its own. All Europeans participated in it to
some extent, from ardent devotees of the opera to the great-grandchildren of
immigrants and Asian women. Similarly, Indonesians who had any contact
with Europeans participated in it too. This was as true for the upper class whose
132

--- PAGE: 165 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.165) ---
~
VJ
VJ
"Members of the Foltynski family in their pavilion in Bandung with three Indonesian boarders and their
father," photograph by Kreuger & Austermiih1e studio, 1925. (KITLV 15949, Collection: M. Foltynski Jr.)
....,
~
m
Um
Vl....,
en....,
oz
o
"Tj
dn
Vl
ontij....,
--<

--- PAGE: 166 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.166) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
members could afford pianofortes as it was for the women entering the white
man's household as mistresses and domestic servants.
Mestizo culture was pervasive. "Mestizo" refers to a style, and like the term
"Eurasian," is not always a label of biological identity. W. F. Wertheim has
pointed out that Mestizo culture might embrace not only the physically mixed
but also the Creole and the European migrant who chose the Indies over
Holland as a permanent home. 27 The latter was also called a blijver (expatri­
ate). It is common to contrast the blijver with the trekker, the person planning
on only a limited stay in Indonesia with the ambition of permanent settlement in
Europe. Associated with the term trekker, therefore, is the idea of shunning
Indies manners, abhorring "Indianization." And yet the trekker was inevitably
altered. In a tropical colony where immigrants were a decided minority, though
a privileged one, there was no escaping adjustment.
Thus the old VOC culture and type were destroyed in the nineteenth century
and a new Indies colonial character formed. Nineteenth-century colonials dif­
fered from their VOC predecessors in one other respect not yet discussed: they
described their life patterns through newspaper advertisements and they wrote
down their experiences in a volume that had never before existed in colonial
literature. The final chapter will take this written record as its subject, for it
gives an inner view of the last stage of Mestizo culture, as genealogical data
does for the VOC centuries. The chapter concludes with an outline of the
Indonesian response that was to destroy that culture forever.
134

--- PAGE: 167 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.167) ---
6
The InnerLifeof LateColonialSociety
UNLIKE THE COMPANY PERIOD, the nineteenth century is rich in personal rec­
ords that have survived from members of the rapidly expanding Indies-based
European group. No longer was the capturing of experience left to the traveler.
Now the new settlers from various levels of colonial society felt compelled to
commit their opinions to paper. Many of the writers were struck by the fact that
Netherlanders were not able to maintain in Indonesia the coherence and integ­
rity of their own culture, even for a few decades. I have tried, in preceding
chapters, to show that this was so partly because demonstration and mainte­
nance of status required adoption of Mestizo values ~d manners. And in
addition, there was the onslaught of a colonial, polyglot society.
Nineteenth-century immigrants surveying the colonial culture described in
chapter 5 sought reasons for the sudden changes in their culture elsewhere.
From Johannes Hennus to Bas Veth, they pour out a constant stream of criti­
cism of prevailing conditions of Indies life and of what they saw as the degener­
acy of Dutch settlers there. l Their explanations for cultural change range from
the alleged refusal of immigrants to respect class privilege and birthright to
miscegenation and the supposed "pull of the blood. " Concubinage with Indo­
nesian women was sometimes said to cause the loss of Dutch values, to under­
mine home life, and to re~ult in the abandonment of many part-European
children who grew into adults dangerous to law and order.
Other critics blamed the sudden alteration in living styles and beliefs on
white women, whom they perceived as idle, arrogant, and worldly, once trans­
planted to the Indies. Others railed against a supposed loss of piety, and
characterized immigrants as obsessed with money, rank, and precedence. It
became fashionable with critics to deride the reading habits of Indies Europeans
as lacking direction and serious purpose. Or they would attribute cultural
change to daily contact with part-Indonesians and urge parents to send their
children to Holland for schooling. They wrote with shock of Europeans who
visited Javanese wayang (shadow puppet theater) perfonnances and took de­
light in other fonns of Indonesian arts.
The greatest contempt was reserved for those European migrants who took to
135

--- PAGE: 168 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.168) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
living as Indonesians. Such "horror stories" were traded in all accounts of
Indies life. Their cautionary note reminds us that in colonial society outer
badges of identification carried many implications. Alteration in costume meant
also alteration in the way people earned a living, dictated which legal system
ruled their conduct, described different sets of privileges and obligations, raised
or lowered status within separate groups.
At a later date another set of writers extolled virtues and habits they per­
ceived as specifically Indies. 2 These writers spoke of "our Indies hospitality,"
which was a liberality of purse towards friends and relatives and a graciousness
towards house-guests, who were entertained royally and suffered to stay for
lengthy visits. They discerned an elegance to life in the slow pace of daily
affairs, the long hours of conversation outdoors in the evening, the carriage
rides and balls. They found a wannth and eagerness to help each other among
the Europeans where the critics saw only backbiting and hypocrisy. They
waxed eloquent over the Indies rituals of morning coffee, midday sleep, and
ceremonious exchange of visits. Against those who complained of a lack of
intellectual stimulation in the colony, they spoke of a broadening of mind and a
new generosity of thought. And there were some who sang praises to the
faithful nyai (Indonesian mistress) who stuck by her master and who revealed to
him the "mysteries of the Orient." Still others immortalized their Javanese
cooks or nursemaids in their writings.
These writers gloried in Indies habits that characterized the colony in the
second half of the nineteenth century, particularly the costume, bathing, and
rijsttafel. As noted earlier, it was precisely when immigrants were able to keep
in close touch with the homeland, by furlough, telegraph, libraries, and so
forth, that they ostentatiously adopted Indonesian practices. The VOC male
immigrant who would probably never revisit his home country stuck to his
layers of clothing and his wig, shunned bathing and frequent changes of linen,
and worked steadily throughout the afternoon. But, starting from the late nine­
teenth centul)', the Dutch civil servant wore colonial whites, left the office at
two in the afternoon, and donned batik pyjamas after a siesta and an Indonesian
meal.
So it is odd that yet others should characterize their sojourn in Indonesia as
basically the same as their life in Holland.3 C. W. Wonnser, for instance, only
remembers mixing with European immigrants, and the intimacy of the family
circle which revolved around mother and housewife, its members devoted to
the virtues of hard work and thrift. It is easiest to pull apart that kind of record,
to note a blindness that made Indonesians invisible, without even the faithful
nyais of the devotees or the inscrutable, menacing hordes of the detractors. By
the tum of the centul)' that Wonnser was recalling, the modest Dutch house­
hold was maintained by a staff of four to six Indonesian servants who lived,
according to Indies practice, in the home compound with their spouses and
136

--- PAGE: 169 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.169) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
"Mevr. 1. van K1oppenburg-Versteegh," photographed c. 1915. She was the author
of books on Javanese herbal medicines. (KITLV 15369)
137

--- PAGE: 170 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.170) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
children. The average Hollander, therefore, lived among at least a dozen Indo­
nesians.
The many photographs preserved from the last quarter of the century show
European immigrants at their ease, the women in sarong and kebaya, the men
in batik pants and collarless jackets. They posed for the photographer with their
servants cross-legged on the floor in Indonesian styIe. At the office and court
room one sees the European seated on the grandest chair, dignitaries of the
Indonesian and Chinese communities on stools to left and right, the lowest
Asians in attendance on the floor.4 As late as 1900, Augusta de Wit observed
that it was customary for lower-class Indonesians to squat in the streets, hands
clasped, before passing Europeans, giving them the deference due a Javanese
of rank, whilst even Western-educated Indonesian members of the colonial
civil service were expected to sit on the floor before the junior Dutch officials to
whom they reported. 5
These are but a few examples taken from colonial life which dispose of the
versions of the "isolationists" such as Wormser. Similarly, the prejudices of
the critics can be readily answered. More elusive, because more charming, are
the glorifications of Indies life. Ev~ry memory of liberal hospitality and gener­
osity must be countered by statistics on the growing impoverishment of the
majority of Java's inhabitants or the corruption based on the all-pervasive racial
categories. In seeking to gain a just appreciation of colonial life, one has to tum
away from such carefully contrived narratives to other sources, first of all to the
newspaper and principally to its personals columns: the advertisements, letters
to the editor, and essays submitted by readers.
The printed advertisement can be viewed as a source for the candid opinions
of members of the European community and as almost the sole such source
available. There has been occasion to remark on the censorship exercised by
colonial authorities on all forms of private and public utterance. Correspon­
dence with acquaintance in Europe had to be submitted to official inspection in
the VOC period, and there were forced delays to publication of such works as
Valentijn's Oud en nieuw Oost-Indien, or outright bans, as in the case of
Governor-General van Imhoff's Nouvelles. Nineteenth-century governments
kept strict surveillance of the press, and would not tolerate even mild protests
such as van Hoevell' s in 1848. It is well to emphasize again that all the frank
characterizations of Indies life and people quoted in preceding chapters were
published in Holland, not Indonesia.
The printed advertisement deserves study for reasons beyond its value as a
vehicle for the unfettered expression of opinion, however. It was the repository
of attitudes, not of the published author or person of affairs but of the average
resident. It was here that those whose opinions ordinarily are not recorded
138

--- PAGE: 171 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.171) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
voiced their preferences, described what they took to be their strong points,
unselfconsciously stated their prejudices. In this respect, a newspaper reflects a
living society, garners the experience of the entire European community­
immigrants, Creoles, and Eurasians alike. Viewed in this light, the newspaper
is superior, as a source, to the books listed above and to such scholarly exposi­
tions as Colijn's Neerlands Indie. In that carefully organized compendium, the
realities of colonial society are concealed both through omission and through
the separating out of groups for special consideration as "problems. "6 There is
no such self-censorship evident in subscribers to regional newspapers, nor
tailoring of views to create an impression. Semarang's Locomotiefwill be the
chief source here, for it is representative of newspapers of the European com­
munities that in the nineteenth century were expanding in Java's provincial and
district capitals.
Advertisements have already been introduced as evidence of the influx of
Europeans and of organizations catering to them exclusively. Turning now to
their content, the following examples are typical of advertisements for govern­
esses: "Wanted: a governess, aged between thirty and forty, of the Refonned
faith, to teach young girls in the inland"; and "Wanted: a Governess for two
girls aged twelve and nine, to tea~h French, Dutch and music."7 Note that
there is no requirement that the applicants have teaching diplomas. Indeed, it is
uncommon to find such a stipulation. Qualified teachers were scarce outside
Batavia, but it is also true that to the majority of parents, conversational powers
and accomplishments were more important than a grounding in arithmetic, for
example, and formal qualifications in the teacher. Far from being merely im­
plied, this preference might be stated quite explicitly, as in this notice:
"Needed: a refined European lady, not a certificated Governess, to teach two
young children. "8
It is the statement of qualifications that makes this and many other advertise­
ments so valuable as records of colonial society. There is evidence that by 1885
people no longer saw a Christian name, frock, and hat as sufficient indication of
status and communal identity. Piano and French had replaced betel box and
slave retinue as symbols of status in the late-nineteenth-century colony, a status
now most forcefully pressed on the growing European community. No longer
were Java's upper classes the point of reference; nor did Indonesian opinions
seem important as compared with the immigrants' .
With the stress on European languages we return to a theme first discerned in
the early decades of Batavia's history. Young children did not grow up fluent in
Dutch; that still had to be acquired. Stress on Dutch in advertisements for
governesses signals that competence" in that language was now becoming a
necessity for girls hoping to strengthen their claims to European status, as it had
always been a prerequisite for boys aspiring to a position in government.
139

--- PAGE: 172 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.172) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Reports of nearly every Netherlander traveling to Indonesia in the nineteenth
century include cruel humor at the oddly accented Dutch of the locally born and
their transposition of certain consonants.
To counter these gibes, parents no longer left the entire care of their children
to Indonesian servants, but sought out nannies and teachers who could speak a
European language. A family would advertise for "a Nursemaid, speaking
good Dutch or German, to take care of a child of two," or there would be a
notice for an assistant teacher having a "refined pronunciation of the Dutch
language. "9 Applicants, aware of this criterion, would describe themselves as
"fresh from Holland," "European," or "Netherlander by birth." The same
promise of proper speech regardless of actual birthplace is contained in this
notice: "A young Lady, having been educated in Europe from her childhood,
offers herself to a family to give young children lessons in the four languages
and music." 10 For some households, being educated in Europe was insuffi­
cient; birth in Europe was also a desired qualification in the employee, so that
one frequently sees this type of notice: "Wanted: a Nanny, preferably Euro­
pean, for two young children. "II
Expressions of preference concerning race and birthplace were by no means
confined to advertisements for governesses, nor can they simply be interpreted
as signs of concern for good speech habits. Considerations of race permeated
colonial life. Just as Governor-General Mossel's sumptuary laws had reflected
honor on the highest officeholders by reserving the employment of native
Europeans as domestic servants to them alone, so too did the nineteenth­
century Dutch associate race with station in life. Advertisements for male
tutors, clerks, sales assistants, and the like would often carry the requirement of
,'European" or "Hollander by birth," the desirable quality in the urban office
employee or the mentor of sons. On the plantation, it was another matter. Here
owners looked for men capable of directing large numbers of Indonesian la­
borers, and would ask of applicants that they be an inlandsch kind (native child,
literally, meaning, in this context, Eurasian or Creole) and able to speak Dutch
as well as Javanese. 12 If European applicants were sought, then a fresh attribute
would be attached: that they be bachelors. 13
Single status was a common requirement in the hiring of white men through­
out Indonesia's colonial history, from VOC to state rule. But there were mo­
tives behind this demand by planters that differed from such reasons as the
supposed expense of a European wife and her unsuitability as a settler. First of
all, landowners were often married to Eurasian women, or like the planter
Manuel, maintained several Asian consorts. A white woman as wife to a junior
employee would complicate the hierarchy on an estate, since her origins would
seem to dictate that she be ranked above the owner's chief lady. In the second
place, there was the notion that white women established a distance between
the employee and his Indonesian subordinates.
140

--- PAGE: 173 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.173) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
Such a conviction was based on the belief that easy relations with Indo­
nesians in general were primarily achieved through the white male/Indonesian
mistress relationship, and there was no conclusion that friendship between men
of the two races might substitute for the sexual union when a European wife
was introduced to the estate. The conviction probably arose from the awkward­
ness that white men long absent from European drawing rooms felt in their rare
dealings with immigrant women, as much as from the attitudes of the incoming
wives themselves towards Indonesians.
Thus identification of preferred racial category in candidates for positions
indicates more than a colonial system which assigned occupation by ethnic
group. It also shows with whom the advertisers felt most comfortable. Such is
the interpretation to be made of the following notice of a housekeeping position
vacant in 1885: HWanted: a middle-aged Lady (preferably Indische), knowing,
and able to oversee, the preparation of Indies as well as Dutch dishes"; or of
this advertisement for a nursemaid: "European girl wanted to look after ditto
children. ' ,14
It was only natural that people so accustomed to associating personality and
race should have definite preferences about the race of their spouses too. These
biases made their way into advertisements for marriage partners. A European
announcing his quest for a bride would state his preferences this way: "An
engineer wishes to make the acquaintance of a Young Widow (European) to
enter into a legal marriage. ' ,15
Some of the most remarkable and informative statements on the nature of
colonial society were made by way of advertisements for housekeepers in
families where there was often no legal wife. Placed by women seeking such
posts as well as by prospective employers, they shed light on everyday realities
and commonplace attitudes to race, sex, and family. Consider this sampling of
notices which appeared in the Locomotief during 1885: "A middle-aged lady,
fully acquainted with Indies housekeeping, seeks a position as housekeeper to a
widower or unmarried man;" "A young bachelor is seeking an Indies lady
[Indische dame] to keep house"; "A Dutch lady seeks a position with a married
family looking after children. . .. "; "A Juffrouw needs employment helping
with cooking and housekeeping for a married family in the inland"; "A refined
Dutch lady is seeking a job housekeeping for a gentleman with or without
children. ' ,16
Precision as to racial category within the European group is again a common
feature in these notices. What obtrudes here is the qualification as to the
household. There is the novel formulation of "married family, " and of gentle­
man, not widower, Hwith or without children." Some are thinly disguised
marriage advertisements placed by women whose sense of delicacy forbade
them from describing their wishes baldly. Yet all acknowledge in their notices
an awareness that many men requiring housekeepers did have illegitimate chil-
141

--- PAGE: 174 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.174) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
dren in the house and perhaps their Indonesian mother as well. This almost
offhand acceptance demonstrates the existence of intergroup relations with
greater immediacy than statistics drawn from the Civil Registers, and counters
the dominant impression of separation by race and social distance given by
many writers on the nineteenth-century colony.
A generation later the hints, implications, and tastes of the 1880s advertise­
ments are translated into concrete detail. Thus, 1904 issues of the Locomotief
yield the following: "Wanted: Refined European lady, about thirty to forty
years old, to raise a little girl and take over the housekeeping for an unmarried
man"; "A young lady wishes a position keeping house for a bachelor, prefer­
ably full-blooded European and in a government job"; "Needed in the inland: a
nursemaid, speaking pure Dutch; only those making no objection to the pres­
ence in the house of the Native mother will be considered." 17
It would be inaccurate to assume that the realities of Indies domestic life
were not laid bare until the twentieth century, however. The Locomotiefs
readers had been fully acquainted with the so-called hidden details of Indies life
for years. Since its first issues in the 186Os, the paper had published birth
records from the Civil Register monthly under such headings as "Acknowl­
edged Natural Children" and "Born out of Wedlock." And the facts of colo­
nial life were sometimes announced forthrightly, as in these samples from the
lavasche Courant: "Married: J. F. Thierbach to the Mother of his children.
Semarang, 18 April 1850"; and, less graciously, "Married, in order to legiti­
mize his children, George Weijnschenk, Jogja, 7 September 1850." 18 The
same matter-of-fact acceptance of a polyglot world, so different from the
homogeneous society of nineteenth-century Holland, is evident in the many
notices directed at "Europeans and those on the same footing." All bore on the
daily reader the constant message that for many, their position in society was
tenuous, maintained only by choice and effort.
Occasionally that message was conveyed stridently, as in the Locomotief s
report on the recovery of a seventeen-year-old girl, Henriette Meeng, who had
been feared abducted from her home in the European quarter of Surabaya.
,'Fortunately, " the story continued, "the sheriff van Ham was able to discover
her yesterday in one of the kampungs [villages, Indonesian residential quar­
ters], in the company of the Native Kardi. The girl had dressed herself in
Javanese clothes and had represented herself as named Sadinem.' ,19
One does not need to rely on sensational items or the job vacancy column in
the Locomotief to conclude this argument concerning the inner nature of colo­
nial life. The newspaper is a mirror of living society. On every page are
stamped its characteristics. Not only did Europeans purchase "finely embroi­
dered kebayas" as well as Western bridal frocks, or read advertisements for
furniture in the Indonesian language; they also sprinkled their notices with such
142

--- PAGE: 175 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.175) ---
~
.,J:::..
VJ
"Teacher Miss. A. Johan with her pupils, daughters of Paku Buwono X of the Principality of Surakarta,
Java, Indonesia," c. 1926. Dutch women still wore kain kebaya at home in the 1920s, but it was unusual to
be photographed barefooted. (KITLV 33917)
....,
~
m
ZZm
~
r
~m
o
"Tj
r
2:3m
no
5z
5=r
Vl
on
tij....,
--<

--- PAGE: 176 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.176) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Malay words as obat (medicine) and laki (male), and even described Dutch
manners, customs, and laws by their Malay tenn as "ouradat."
Thoughtful members of the immigrant community might confront the real­
ities of "colonial adat" and offer solutions. Here is the contribution of one who
joined a debate being conducted among Locomotief readers on the reasons for
the poor quality of education in the Indies. While conceding to earlier writers
that ill-qualified teachers and the low level of school certificate examinations
were contributing factors, he gave as the chief cause the fact that children of the
European group were being taught in Dutch. "Are not the children here," he
asked, "if not speaking in Malay, always thinking in Malay-barring excep­
tions? And is it not then irresponsible-I almost said insane-that people
should address such children in Dutch, teach them in Dutch from the begin­
ning, whether they understand or not?" His solution was to use Malay in
teaching children with European status in their first school years, introducing
Dutch as one of the subjects for study before using it as the medium of instruc­
tion at higher levels. 20
This seemingly sensible suggestion drew protests from readers who felt
Malay was an "unworthy" vehicle for a Western education. One of the more
moderate respondents could still aver: "I give as my decided opinion that
schools for children of Europeans in the Netherlands Indies ought to be good
schools, where the Dutch language reigns, where classes are taught in Dutch.
. . . European parents, he ended, must give up the "inexpressibly perverse
habit" of turning their children over to Asians to raise.21
Though he might not have suspected it, this writer was defending a point of
view that has its origin in letters Joan Maetsuyker sent the Company's directors
as long past as the 1640s. There exists in the colonial history of the Dutch in
Indonesia an unbroken tradition of promoting the Dutch language and of attrib­
uting defects of character to the habit of leaving child-rearing to Asian subordi­
nates. Almost as unalterable as the judgments themselves is the very custom of
employing Asians as nursemaids and guardians. The hostility expressed by
European commentators is testimony to the enduring influence of Asians and
their steady contribution to colonial culture. Nevertheless, a command of Dutch
continued to be prime in conferring European status. It remained the sole
language of instruction in schools for all classified as European, even though a
survey of 1,476 beginning pupils classified as European, conducted in 1900,
showed that only 433, or 29.3 percent, understood a little Dutch, in comparison
with their command of an Indonesian language, while 621, or 41.5 percent,
knew no Dutch at all. 22
If the facts of colonial life thus proven caused no upheaval or reconsideration
in education policy, they did become the subject of analysis and of refonns
proposed by a group of thinkers proceeding in quite a different manner. In the
144

--- PAGE: 177 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.177) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
last quarter of the nineteenth century a score of novels written by Dutchwomen
were published whose chief subject was the evils of the colonial society of their
day. In commentaries on the nineteenth-century colony, these now-forgotten
authors are sometimes mentioned in remarks introducing discussions of E. F.
E. Douwes Dekker, P. A. Daum, and Louis Couperus, whose Indies novels
have had a lasting appeal.23 In such treatments the works of the women are
characterized as "boarding school literature" or "women's books."24 It is not
difficult to understand the origin of this disparagement. It lies in the effusive
sentimentality of the authors, the grotesqueries of plot, the abundant coinci­
dences and infelicities of style. Twentieth-century tastes have caused scholars
to overlook the descriptions of colonial society which these novels contain and
to concentrate on the male novelists.
The livelier narrative of Daum and Couperus came in part from the substitu­
tion of storytelling for the moralizing of the female authors, whose sense of
outrage forced plots to fit the lesson. In so doing, however, the women reveal
of a sudden a wholly new point of view in and on colonial society. We are
dealing with crusaders whose sympathies are engaged for the Indonesian and
part-Indonesian, perceived as victims of the authors' own class and kind.
It must immediately be said that there is, in the novels by these women
authors, no call to the barricades in the cause of an altered relationship between
Indonesia and the Netherlands. Their writings do not have the breadth of the
twentieth-century novelist Madelon Lulofs, for instance, whose subject was the
plantation economy of Sumatra. 25 Nor are there to be found the large-scale
descriptions of the colonial regime that form the core of Daum's How He
Became Councillor of the Indies. The subject matter of their books is circum­
scribed, particular, for they wrote about what they knew. And that, for the
nineteenth-century lady, was the domestic circle.
Reading the books of Marie Vanger-Frank, Fran~oise IJzerman-Junius, Mina
Kruseman, Therese Hoven, and Nicolina Marie Sloot, we discover what consti­
tuted the daily life of the colonial in Indonesia: the complicated racial relation­
ships, the intricacies of status, the pressures of an alien environment, and the
threats to continued home life from colonial wars, attacks by Indonesians,
frequent transfers, and distance from kin in Holland. The constant themes of
these novels are the problems of concubinage, the relationship between the
immigrant bride and her husband's children from previous alliances with Indo­
nesian women, tensions between legitimate and illegitimate children of a white
father, marriages of convenience, loneliness and isolation, the role of the
housewife in Indonesia, the obsession of many Europeans with promotion and
money, and the personal feelings of Europeans towards Indonesians.
The titles of their works reflect the intimacy and circumscription of the
subject matter. For example, there is A Natural Child and Other Netherlands­
Indies Tales from Marie Frank under her pen name Katja-Mata, and Indies
145

--- PAGE: 178 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.178) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Marriages, a collection of stories by Franc;oise Junius, who published all her
works under the name Annie Foore. Mina Kruseman's A Marriage in the Indies
manages to cover the ill-fated match between a Creole and an immigrant, the
neglect of illegitimate, part-European children, impoverishment and helpless­
ness of abandoned mistresses, a crusade against animal sports and an appeal to
end war. Therese Hoven's In Sarong and Kabaya is a collection of sixteen
Indies sketches which mostly give the viewpoint of the immigrant woman
newly arrived, while the theme of Estranged and the title story of Nonnie and
Other Tales is the impact of sneers and insults by Europeans on the person­
ality of Eurasians. This is also a chief subject of Marie Sloot's The Resident's
Family, which she wrote using the name Melati van Java.26
Marie Sloot breaks out of the narrow domestic world of her colleagues in
her historical novel, Soerapati. For she moves away from a contemporary set­
ting to make as chief character of her fiction a hero of the Javanese. It is true
that there is little of the Indonesian in her portrait of the opponent of the VOC.
Surapati (c. 1650-1706) is, in her hands, "the noble savage," attracted instinctively
by all that is finest in European civilization and repulsed by the coarseness, rac­
ism, and arrogance of its bearers. 27 A far more successful portrayal of an Indone­
sian was later to be undertaken by Marie van Zeggelen in her biography Kartini,
A Pioneer for Her People,28 for she attempted to enter the world of an upper­
class Javanese family and show this social reformer on her own terms.
Empathy of this quality was a late development in the lives of the writers
themselves and in the unfolding of character in their stories, as it was a late
development in colonial sentiment and then shared by a very few. Turning to a
closer examination of the novels, we see that as newcomers, Hoven, Junius,
and Frank had experienced markedly different reactions. Sentiments of distaste
and fear had arisen from the strangeness of the country, from ignorance, and
from the absence of relations between the immigrants and the Indonesians and
Eurasians as peers. The initial impression of being alone in a sea of hostile or
callously indifferent Indonesians is conveyed in Franc;oise Junius's Bogoriana,
for example. Here a newly arrived bride is alone on her first day in Bogor,
supervising the unpacking of furniture: "She sees the half-naked men, the
brutal brown faces, distorted further by the wad of tobacco all have tucked in
their mouths; she hears the rough noises which sound more like the grunts of
beasts than men's voices, especially when one understands not a single word of
the language, and ... she becomes terribly afraid."29
And there it was that the knowledge of many immigrants rested. Such entrap­
ment in ignorance is presented in story form by Marie Frank. The occasion is a
visit of condolence paid by an immigrant woman to the home of a Eurasian
widow. From her outsider's point of view there are "swarms" of relatives,
"ostentatious" displays of grief succeeded by apparent indifference on the part
of the mourners, "pagan" pieties of burning incense by the body and placing
146

--- PAGE: 179 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.179) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
rice and dishes of food close by. All these details are laid side by side until the
visitor thankfully escapes with her own thoughts: "To each his own; but no
matter how I sympathised with the bereaved, everything struck me as ludicrous
and excessive, rather than imposing or tragic. The dignified composure, the
quiet that prevails among us in a home where there's been a death I find more
appropriate in such solemn hours than all that hubbub. Can you believe that all
that grief is genuine! And eating and drinking by a dead body!." [Emphasis
added] 30
Confronted by such evidences of a colonial culture quite distinct from Hol­
land's, many newcomers simply accepted racially based myths of the blood
affinities linking Asian and part-Asian. They attributed all that was foreign and
puzzling to the "Oriental inscrutability" that so bedevilled Couperus and to the
alien force that he descried smoldering in every Easterner. Frank and Junius
had shown how surely distaste could arise. Their explanation for the immi­
grants' sentiments-as growing out of ignorance-was grounded in the ra­
tional, and is therefore more infonnative than Couperus's perspective on
colonial life. The same impulse led these women authors to look beyond first
impressions and to examine and interpret everyday realities of colonial life.
Preeminent among those realities was the widespread practice of concu­
binage.
The situation with respect to concubines had already changed considerably
by the time our novelists begin their chronicle of colonial society. In the VOC
centuries men had made free with the Asian slave women of their households.
After 1860, however, there was no more domestic slavery. Men living in
concubinage now sought their companions among the free population of the
Indonesian villages. The woman selected assumed management of the Euro­
pean's household and staff, a position that gave rise to the common colonial
euphemism for concubine, "housekeeper." It became customary for the con­
cubine to exchange her colored or indigo kebaya for a white one and to wear
slippers, the clothing symbolizing her new status and passage from the Indo­
nesian to the halfway world of a bachelor-centered Indies society.
It seems that government officials and plantation staff were urged by their
superiors to take a housekeeper. (Soldiers had always been encouraged to find
local women to cook for them and tend their needs. Until early in the twentieth
century, when a new colonial morality preferred prostitution to regular union,
concubines were pennitted to live in the barracks with the troops.) The reason
commonly advanced was that a concubine would charge herself with the care of
her man's health, food, and clothing. She would promote a more orderly life by
keeping her master from causing trouble roaming the Indonesian residential
quarters at night. And she would teach him the region's dialect and customs.31
Colonial values dictated that the housekeeper be unseen, retiring to the back
part of the house after serving European guests. Such invisibility gave currency
147

--- PAGE: 180 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.180) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
to extravagant notions about the mistress. The Indonesian nyai swiftly entered
myth in the nineteenth century, the subject of fantasies as seducer of hapless
European men by means of potions and magic, and popularly suspect as poi­
soner of the rival or bride who replaced her. Newspapers carried stories of
alleged murders by nyais, and a novelist like Daum helped create the image of
the concubine possessed by evil and cunning.
Once a man had reached a rank and income that could support a woman with
European status, he was expected to dismiss his concubine and to marry.
Discarding an Indonesian mistress for a legally wed European caused grave
social problems, for the rejected woman lost her means of support, and young
children might be suddenly bereft of paternal care or left to the uncertain
welcome of an immigrant stepmother.
The license colonial society allowed European men was an immediate prob­
lem that forced itself upon every immigrant bride, and so it is not surprising that
the nyai should play a central role in the novels of the female writers. Upon
occasion, the plot might include the systematic poisoning of a European master
by his housekeeper. This is the point of action in a tale from Fran~oise Junius.32
It occurs, however, not out of any innate malevolence in the woman. Marie is
part Dutch, but had not been acknowledged by her father and so is Indonesian
in status and stands in relation to the European immigrant Henri as concubine
rather than wife. When he proposes separation after a relationship of some
twenty years and taking their teenaged daughters with him to Holland, Marie
seizes on poison as her only weapon against him. This was not, in fact, so very
fanciful. Articles 40 and 354 of the Civil Code of 1848 had settled that mothers
with Indonesian status had no rights over children recognized by a white man.
Nor might they lay claim to guardianship of minor children in the event of the
father's death. 33 In this light, the Marie of Junius's story is a mother struggling
to keep her children by her.
Marie is by no means elevated to sainthood, but is portrayed as jealous and
unprincipled. All the same, Junius attempts to explain her character's motives
through the injustice of concubinage and assumption of racial superiority by
whites. She shows, too, how far-reaching the consequences could be: a pact is
struck whereby in return for marriage, Marie agrees not to use poison again.
Marriage obliges Henri to permit his wife to appear in public. After years of
modest withdrawal, Marie now presides in her own home, receiving guests
instead of serving them. While she must endure slights, nothing can take from
her the Dutch title mevrouw, (reserved for married ladies of the middle classes),
her Western dress, and her appearances in public.
Other women writers took up the defense of the concubine unequivocally. In
so doing they created a new stereotype in the eternally faithful, greatly wronged
housekeeper. From Marie Frank there is a vignette in this vein under the title
"The Englishman's Error. "34 An Englishman in his seventies boasts of the
148

--- PAGE: 181 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.181) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
Indonesian mistress with whom he has been living for the greater part of his
life yet disdains to marry. The woman leaves him, following a grievous insult.
Faced with a dirty house, meals never on time, and unmanageable servants, the
old man attempts to woo her back and eventually pays her price, which is a
lawful marriage. Through this story the author suggests that there is a common
humanity and moral code between Europeans and Asians. In her hands, the
mistress wants marriage, not in order to give herself the privileges of a legal
European, but to satisfy her yearning for a social respectability that race pre­
judice had long denied her.
Despite the slightness of the tale, Marie Frank was able to show a moral truth
that had been wanting in Indies belles-lettres ever since the diatribes of
Tavernier and de Graaff in the seventeenth century. In the hands of Therese
Hoven, the contrasts of character and situation were driven to extremes, reduc­
ing the human truth but making the points more explicit. Such a story is that of
Sima, the illegitimate daughter of a Chinese man and a Javanese woman. Her
fate of servitude commences at the age of twelve, when she becomes nursemaid
to a Chinese girl. Soon, however, she is forced to flee to avoid becoming her
employer's concubine. Alone, she is made wretched by poverty, and finally
makes her way to the quarters of bachelor European army officers. There she is
taken in as mistress by a young Dutch lieutenant, and dons the uniform white
kebaya along with the sarongs and jewels he gives her. Sima has become a
concubine, the fate she had sought to avoid. But in surrendering to the demand
of poverty, she avoids a further loss of status, in colonial terms, by concu­
binage with a European rather than a fellow Asian.
As the story continues, Sima learns to love her officer and follows him to
war in Aceh in northern Sumatra. There she searches the battlefield, finds her
wounded man, and nurses him back to life. Her devotion is later rewarded with
dismissal, for the lieutenant becomes engaged to an immigrant Dutchwoman.
Sima returns to the Indonesian quarter of the city which occasions this aside
from Hoven: "Sima would no longer be able to wear white blouses, as that was
not allowed the wife of a Native." Married to a Javanese, she again falls victim
when her Muslim husband decides to take a second wife. Our heroine's moral
outrage forces her out, and having nowhere to go she wanders by the house of
her former officer, who is sitting on the front veranda, ringed by his wife and
children. This is the final blow. Sima dies in the backyard, clasping a lock of
his hair. Noone takes much notice, since in the words of the story's title "it was
just a nursemaid."35
In Mina Kruseman's treatment of the long-suffering mistress, attention is
focused on the poverty and distress arising from abandonment. 36 Representa­
tives of this sad lot are two women, one Indonesian, one Creole. Their lives are
linked by their relationship with a Dutch immigrant, Stevens van Langendijk.
The Indonesian Mina is his housekeeper, acquired during his days as inspector
149

--- PAGE: 182 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.182) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
and by whom he has two sons. Louise is the Creole he takes as wife upon his
promotion to resident, chief European official in the area, and after banishing
Mina and the boys to the kampung. In time, Stevens divorces Louise. She is
taken in by another Dutchman and cares for his household as his mistress.
Bereft of any protection from the state, both women suffer tragic fates. Mina
dies as a result of a brutal beating from Stevens. Upon his death, Louise is
thrown out of her lover's house, along with their child, and is left penniless
because he had made no provision in his will for her.
The sympathies of readers of colonial novels by female authors were often
enlisted in behalf of children born to concubines. From Marie Frank comes the
"autobiography" of Fransie, who is the "natural child" of the title story of her
col~ected Indies tales. 37 Oppression is seen as handed down from generation to
generation in the group of outcasts. Fransie's mother is similarly a natural
child, daughter of an Indonesian mother and a Dutch official. Following the
father's death, Fransie's mother had been taken into the local resident's employ
as household help and had in time become the resident's mistress and borne him
children, amongst whom was Fransie. After the death of the resident's wife,
Fransie 's mother had presided over the house and had been like a wife in all
respects "save that she neither paid nor received visits; in the eyes of the world
my father lived as a widower, but at home everything was subject to the will of
my mother. "38 Fransie had been raised with the resident's legitimate daugh­
ters, had shared their tutor, learnt French and music, while her brothers had
been sent to boarding school in Europe.
Once the resident died, however, Fransie and her mother were immediately
evicted by the legitimate children and left to fend for themselves. At once all
worldly relations had altered. The resident's daughter, for all her French and
piano, was now a Javanese. Accordingly, her fiance of yesterday would take
Fransie only as his mistress. By the time Fransie was pregnant, he was ready to
shed her and take as his lawful wife a legitimate Creole, Fransie's own step­
sister.
A different approach was taken by Fran~oise Junius in the short story
"Willie's Mama". 39 The Willie of the title is about three years old when this
sermon begins. He is the son of Otto Donnan by his Javanese housekeeper,
who had died in giving birth. Donnan is now eager to marry the legitimate
European Cecile Haakstra, but meets opposition when admitting his "prob­
lem" to the girl's father. At first it is a matter-of-fact "naturally you'll pack the
kid off to the kampung?" soon replaced by an enraged "throw the ape out!"
Dorman protests that Willie is his own flesh and blood, but finds no sympathy
in his fiancee either. Eventually Donnan comes to a compromise: he will have
the boy raised out of sight in the kampung; in return Cecile will agree that
Dorman should make regular payments for Willie's upkeep.
Over the next three years Donnan pays furtive visits to his son, who, without
150

--- PAGE: 183 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.183) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
proper acknowledgment as a European, is being mistreated. When Cecile
finally has a child of her own, she comes to understand what Willie, his race
and birth forgotten, meant to his father. This new perception of Willie as a
human being causes Cecile to seek him out and bring him into her own home to
be raised as her son. Cecile's entreaty to her father to accept Willie allows
Junius many paragraphs of elaboration on her call to conscience, which is that
Dutchwomen should seek out their husbands' offspring by Indonesian women
and wipe out the "stain" of their birth by raising them as Europeans and
Christians.
This is not a principle that finds favor now, but in 1887, when "Willie's
Mama" first appeared in print, it was without parallel in commentaries on the
colonial and racial relationship between Dutch and Indonesian. Being aimed at
a female, politically nonexistent audience, Junius's little homily attracted no
public attention. In those receptive to her pleas on behalf of the innocent
offspring of unregistered unions, however, there must have been nurtured a
disposition to accept the need for greater efforts towards improving the welfare
of Indonesians and part-Indonesians. Women writers, then, were creating a
sentiment in favor of change and "uplift" a decade and more before such
public figures as Pieter Brooshoeft and C. T. van Deventer openly joined in this
cause. 40
Against the conviction of racial superiority implicit in the benevolence of a
Fran~oise Junius are seeming instances of its opposite in the work of Marie
5100t: a belief in the innate moral superiority of the Indonesian and part­
Indonesian over Europeans. There is her portrayal of Surapati, for instance.
The same perception of the "untouched native" shapes her Resident's Family.
In this novel, she puts into the mouth of Dr. Gordes a description of those
Javanese still "unspoilt" by contact with Europeans as being "good, simple,
and willing. "
We may take this characterization as part of Sloot's campaign against the
racial attitudes of her contemporaries. In itself it brought the reader no closer to
perceiving Indonesians as fellow human beings. Her characterization is note­
worthy, however, in presenting a notion wholly contrary to the image of Indo­
nesians as liars, layabouts, and fanatics, an image often purveyed in the travel
books of visiting Dutchmen. In inclining all her Indonesians instinctively to­
wards the Europeans' culture, Sloot, of course, betrayed her own faith in the
supremacy of Western civilization. This is one part of her message in Family.
The heroine bearing out this troth is Constance, recognized daughter of van
Welven by a Javanese housekeeper. Most of her girlhood is spent in boarding
school in Holland. The action of the novel commences after her return to Java
to make her home with her father, who now holds the post of resident, and with
her European stepmother. The situation allows the author many opportunities to
show the bigotry of Europeans. The stepmother, for instance, attaches impor-
151

--- PAGE: 184 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.184) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
tance only to Constance's skin color and disregards the girl's learning and
attainmen ts.
One of the many melodramatic scenes of the novel has an Indonesian running
amuck, a favorite subject for Daum and Couperus meant to exemplify the
uncontrollable passions of the Oriental. In Sloot's book there is a rational
explanation for the sudden upsurge of grief and rage. Its place in the novel is to
allow Constance the role of nurse and sympathetic friend to Indonesians. Dr.
Gordes finds her in the kampung, binding the wounds of the injured, and
expresses his amazement at such an act by a woman with European status. The
exchange that follows carries Sloot's appeal to Eurasians obsessively insistent
on their Dutch status: Constance says to Dr. Gordes, "The Javanese are just as
much my compatriots as the Hollanders," to which he replies, "Are you proud
of that?" "No," Constance answers, "but I'm not ashamed of it either. I never
forget that my mother belonged to their people."41Gordes thereupon decides to
marry Constance, discovering in her the partner who would assist him in his
mission to "uplift" the Javanese. Later he must defend her against the insults
of full Europeans. Sloot puts her conviction of Eurasian superiority into the
doctor's defense of Constance: "My experiences have taught me this much,
that an Indies woman with a brush of civilization stands far above the Dutch
woman, however much polish she has."42
It comes as no surprise to learn that Sloot was born on Java. It is rare to find
her point of view voiced publicly before the twentieth century, rarer still that
it should come from a victim of prejudice. All the same, she muted sentiments
of anger and resentment in her novelistic treatment of relations between Indo­
nesian, part-Indonesian, and European. Hurt, bewildered surprise at ill­
treatment is the extent of her response.
The passion of feeling was there in some Indies novels. Therese Hoven
caught it. In Estranged she shows a hatred for whites that was also a form of
self-hatred, poisoning the lives of Eurasians. In the central character, Reewald,
there is no warmth for the Indonesian mother who gave him his darker skin and
Asian features. He sees the Indonesian part of his heritage as a blot to be
erased, and he does this by marrying an immigrant. "Mr. Reewald was in love
with her of course," Hoven remarks,
but for him it had also been a sort of promotion, in a certain sense an improvement
to his social standing, to be married to a full-blood European.
Also he thought that through this mingling his family would make progress-in a
few more generations, by degrees, the dark blood would dwindle away. This Mr.
Reewald was a Sinjo with strongly pronounced anti-Sinjo sentiments and preju­
dices. He hoped that the children, begotten of a blond, white woman, would take
after their mother and depart from the Indo type.43
All these complex sentiments between Indonesians and the native Dutch were
bound to end up in the associations of the second decade of the twentieth century
152

--- PAGE: 185 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.185) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
which emphasized the special interests of the Eurasian under such mottoes as
,'the Indies for those who make their home there." 44 It has no echo in the
novels. As I noted at the outset, there is no revolutionary impulse in the
writings of these women. They appeal for reform of discrete, immediate
evils, for legislative protection for children, a change in attitudes concerning
color, and so on. Only in 8100t's work is there a vision of something entirely
different. It comes early in her historical romance and is vouchsafed to Sura­
pati:
No future more beautiful could dawn on Java, he mused, than if the two peoples
fused together, just as once Islam had gathered up the old Hindu ways of worship
into itself. More glorious yet would the victory be, then only would Java be mighty,
mighty and one in the material and spiritual matters of state and of religion.
There would be no more rulers, neither ruled anymore; the frightful arbitrary
power of the native courts, the mindless oppression, the needless greed would be
checked and, lovely as the morrow, would break the shining, splendid future over
Java, which he would help build through his loyal help and assistance offered the
Hollanders. 45
Such a vision was doomed from the beginning since the Dutch were the flawed
partners. This was made plain in the novel and was of course obvious from the
events which had passed between the period of Sloot's story and her reader's
own present.
It is not in blueprints for the future that the value of these novels and short
stories lies, however, but in the facts of colonial life they reveal and the
attitudes they bring to light. As the authors tell their tales, they impart an
extraordinary wealth of detail about colonial society in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century. In Junius's novel The van Sons it was entirely conscious.
Here the author takes her newly arrived couple, Dora and Emile van Sons, on a
round of formal visits to leading inhabitants of a small town in the inland of
Java. Principal among them are the Javanese bupati (administrative head of a
district under a Dutch resident) and his raden ayu, or chief wife. This visit
gives the reader an unusual glimpse into the household of a Javanese aristocrat
of the period:
The Regent [Dutch term for the bupati] is already coming fOlWardto his guests, and
escorts them-with the great courtesy that is peculiar to the upper-class of Java­
nese-to an inner apartment furnished entirely in European fashion.
The Rhaden-ajoe and the three daughters who are present (another eight women
and about fifty children live in the dalem [palace, or women's quarters in the
palace]) are typical of the Javanese nobility .
The girls offer bouquets, good port wine, and delicious cakes. Fortunate that
they understand Dutch, although they don't dare speak it, so that Dora does not
have to make mistakes in Malay. Emile speaks Javanese with the Regent and has
little trouble making himself understood. Both are very glad when the visit is over
without any major clumsiness or grave transgressions against the Javanese adat.46
153

--- PAGE: 186 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.186) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
A much easier visit is that paid the patih, or Indonesian second-in-command
in the district, and his wife Fatimah, who is also the bupati's eldest daughter.
She has been reared by Dutch governesses, so that she is "European in all her
wishes and thought" and living proof of "the modest simplicity of the Eastern
woman paired with the cultivation and talents of the Western. "47 She had
fallen in love with a young Dutch official, but the colonial government had
intervened to forbid the marriage. Dora can readily sympathize with love
thwarted, and the two become genuinely friendly. In contrast is Fatimah's
old-style husband; he will not open up to the alien, and limits his conversation
to conventional expressions of subservience.
Dr. Broks follows in the local hierarchy. His wife is a Eurasian, her language
full of Indonesian words. She had made Broks give his illegitimate, half­
Indonesian son a proper education by sending him to the Netherlands. Unable
to bear children herself, she has sought out a fair-skinned little girl in the
kampung, the abandoned daughter "of a great man, " to raise as her own. Mrs.
Broks keeps this child at home, fearing to send her to school lest she be called
"Indo bastard" by the other pupils, and engages instead a European governess
to make a Dutch lady of her.
Another little tragedy is glimpsed in the visit to the town's notal)' and his
wife:
The notary was married to "the mother of his children." She must have been a
beautiful Javanese woman once, but little was left of her looks now. Half-ashamed,
she sat hunched up in a comer of the sofa where she motioned Dora to sit. She said
very little, and then so diffidently and in such bad Dutch that she was difficult to
understand.
It wasn't much that she told, drawn out by the friendly look of her lady visitor.
Her sons were in Holland, all four; her only girl was in the Indies, but she was
allowed to see her only infrequently lest the girl become too native. The notary was
repatriating to Europe in two years and she would have to go with him! . . . and
the great black eyes expressed so much fear, so much sorrow, that the visitors, to
their amazement, began to feel sympathy for the ex-housekeeper.48
One more character in The van Sons deserves mentioning. He is known
simply as Oom Jan, or Uncle John, and is manager on a tobacco plantation. He
had taken in the daughter of a deceased friend and the Javanese mother,
Kamisah. In time Jan had discovered the refining influence of a child and the
benefit to a household stemming from a good mother. He had formally adopted
the girl and given her a Western education. Emile van Sons is astonished to
learn that the Javanese mother is still with Jan. "What sort of a man do you
think I am, Emile?" is the reply, "that I would toss Kamisah out when she
stood by me faithfully in bad times, now that things are going well? No, dear
boy, I married her as soon as it was at all possible, and we live together as
happily and contentedly as it's possible for anyone on this earth!"49
154

--- PAGE: 187 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.187) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
The reader of this Indies romance cannot fail to be impressed by the charac­
ters thus marshalled, the combination of partners, the circumstances and private
histories. It makes statistics on mixed marriages, legitimations, and "equaliz­
ing at law" come alive. It gives credence and substance to all those newspaper
advertisements placed by governesses requesting positions with "married
families," or posted by parents asking for refined pronunciation in nanny and
schoolmistress. It gives meaning to aloof government reports on the declining
welfare of Indonesians and Eurasians. It is a window on a society that was
extremely mixed and that by the tum of the century was breaking down under
constant assault from outside.
In her Indies novels and short stories Junius records these facts, but as
incidentals to her main interest: the delivery of a sermon through a love story.
In the same way another key point about colonial society is made incidentally in
the novels of Sioot, Frank, and Kruseman: that women could sometimes pass
between ethnic communities, cross lines drawn by color and caste, and enter
slots for which they had no birthright, depending on their alliances with men. A
second look at the convoluted plot of "A Natural Child" will illustrate this
point.
It will be recalled that Fransie had been raised with her father's legitimate
daughters until his death, when she and her Dutch-Javanese mother had been
evicted. Without money to rent a house in the European quarter and without the
patronage of a man of European status, they are obliged to live in the town's
Indonesian neighborhood and therefore to act as Indonesians. It is now that the
Dutch fiance alters his proposal to match Fransie's new, Javanese, status. He
installs her in his house as mistress, not wife. Now Fransie wears the white
kebaya of the concubine. She no longer attends social functions for Europeans
but remains invisible, immured in his house. All old ties and acquaintance are
lost.
When Karel marries, he takes a bride from the European group to which
Fransie had once belonged. Dismissed, Fransie can only return to her mother,
shedding the symbols of concubine status for the Javanese again. Later she
meets a Frenchman who asks for a legal marriage. This relationship has the
effect of making Fransie a European once more, entitled to be addressed as
"mevrouw," to wear frocks and hats, and to mix with Europeans socially.
After a number of misfortunes, Fransie turns to her old nurse in the kampung.
Our repentant heroine now takes on her final identity as a Javanese. She goes to
work for a European household as a seamstress, where once she had been
entertained as a guest. Here Fransie remains identified as a Javanese by her
occupation, her clothing, her seat on the floor, and the Indonesian terms used to
address her.
When Eurasian men with European status assumed Indonesian clothing for
public outings, it was always a furtive act and was a way whereby a man who
155

--- PAGE: 188 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.188) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
kept his position in the European world might yet enjoy the Indonesian part of
his cultural heritage. For Indonesian clothing was not a badge for the status of
the woman to whom he was attached. Indonesian clothing was assumed when
Eurasian men visited the kampungs to attend Javanese theater perfonnances
and to spend their evenings with ronggengs; it facilitated easy relations with
Indonesians. Women had no such avenue for fusing two worlds. Indonesian
costume on a woman of European parentage meant a usually irreversible step
down the colonial social ladder.
The little melodrama of Fransie reveals the nature of colonial society. In
general, Asians were born into their respective ethnic groups, which governed
their dress, the type of fonnal schooling they received, their mode of occupa­
tion, the law regulating their daily lives, and so on. For most Asians there was
no escape from destiny, save for the very few men, in the areas of heavy
European settlement, who might consciously seek to stamp out their Asian past
and be made European under the law. From the Dutch point of view that was to
move upwards. The contrary movement, of men with European status becom­
ing assimilated with Indonesians, was never the result of application at law. It
was more apt to be involuntary, the result of loss of employment in an occupa­
tion reserved for persons with European status and impoverishment. It was
perceived by the immigrant Dutch as a degrading, downwards course.
The movement by men between compartments was slight enough to allow
for the development of a theory defining the early twentieth-century Indies as a
plural society, one in which groups of diverse cultural and racial heritage lived
"side by side, yet without mingling, in one political unit. "SO Introducing
women into consideration overturns this orderly hypothesis, for their national­
ity had always been, in the Dutch settlements, inherently unstable, dependent
upon the man to whom they were attached. Thus it was possible for one and the
same person to be now Indonesian, now European, now Mestiza, according to
circumstances. What were plural and separate were the laws regulating each
group. The separate legal system was most elaborate in the second and third
decades of the twentieth century, obscuring actuality by creating the impression
of cultural separation.
Eurasian children who were born out of wedlock similarly introduce a dis­
orderly element to definitions of pluralism. Their status, like women's, de­
pended entirely on their white fathers. When they were acknowledged, such
offspring were Europeans; when not, they were Indonesians. To be accepted as
European required, generally, Christian baptism with a Dutch name, Dutch
schooling, and Dutch costume. What only the novels make clear, however, is
an additional condition: pennanent residence in a European household until
adulthood. Once claim to European status was lost by a Eurasian man, there
was slight opportunity for retrieving it. Women, on the other hand, could
sometimes shed their Indonesian status by their ability to marry white men.
156

--- PAGE: 189 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.189) ---
THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
True pluralism requires a natural sex ratio within the ruling group. In Indo­
nesia this was never the case (although the immigrant European community in
large cities was moving closer to a balance by the 1930s). Hence there were
many individuals who spanned groups. As shown earlier, when immigrants
from Europe were predominantly male, they were absorbed into a society
whose stable element was the local woman and her European kin. The route to
power, wealth, and prestige lay through acceptance into a Mestizo clan. In the
nineteenth century, however, monopoly of high-level positions passed to those
educated in Europe. And in the last quarter of the century a new path to wealth
was created for migrants, that of private enterprise in business or in plantation
agriculture. At the same time, the demographic pattern began to alter as more
women were among the new arrivals. In areas of heavy European settlement
these women were able to transplant their home culture, albeit necessarily
altered.
Thus the means to power and wealth and the moral reference point were
wrenched from local Mestizo society and anchored finnly in the Netherlands.
When once that happened, Eurasians and Creoles became dependent for social
acceptance upon the immigrants. Since the key to prestige lay in being reck­
oned European, Mestizo society broke up. It left as the record of its existence in
Indonesia only a curious medley of cultural elements in the upper class of
Indonesians.
Mestizo culture lived on intact for a little longer inland than in the coastal
cities, but with its members now divorced from European government service,
it showed all the signs of imminent collapse, or rather of reabsorption into the
Indonesian world. The great Indies landowning families, distantly descended
from immigrant men, are shown in P. A. Daum's Indies novels, especially his
"Ups" en "Downs" in het Indische Leven. In his treatment, the Indies family is
still shown as based upon ties between female kin and their relations traced
through their mothers. Writing of the Lugtens family, Daum shows us the home
compound in the European residential section of town: the large house for the
Dutch immigrant and his Eurasian wife and, in the servants' quarters to the
side, the Indonesian mother of the lady of the house. She is maintained there by
the daughter, who has gained pennanent footing in European society for herself
because her tie to a white is that of marriage, not concubinage.
All that was fascinating by its oddity or that called for refonn became, in the
novels of Eurasian authors, parts of a natural whole, a fusion of worlds and
civilizations that was the Mestizo culture of colonial Indonesia. The tone of the
memoirs of Nieuwenhuys's Yellowed Portraits and of Maria Dennout's The
Ten Thousand Things and YesterdayS! was neither moral outrage nor titillating
gossip, but tender recollection, a rendering of a beloved Mestizo world. They
wrote when that culture had dissolved, separated back into its original elements
157

--- PAGE: 190 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.190) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
of Indonesian and Dutch. It was not possible before. Mestizo culture, by its
nature, did not produce a written literature. To write about themselves, Eur­
asians had to be drawn into one or other of the literary heritages and languages,
and that was possible only after the creation late in the nineteenth century of
extensive, fonna! education systems in Indonesia. That, however, inducted the
individual irrevocably into the Dutch or the Indonesian, and in the process
transfonned the pupils. Nieuwenhuys and Dennout both wrote of Mestizo
culture from Holland after political events had brought the colony to an end.
Those events-the increasingly plural character of the law codes, education
systems, and employment slots; the Indonesian nationalist movement; world
war and occupation--all forced individuals to take sides, to choose loyalties,
and to obliterate ambiguities. With worldwide acceptance of Indonesia's inde­
pendence in 1949, Indies society was ended forever. In the renamed capital
Jakarta the development of a national culture proceeds, one that fuses the many
cultures of Indonesia, the colonial past, and elements of Western or "inter­
national" culture.
158

--- PAGE: 191 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.191) ---
Epilogue
TO RECOUNT IN DETAIL the final dissolution of Mestizo culture and of colonial
society as a whole entails quite a different study from this one, which has
focused on the Dutch of Indonesia as a distinct community with values and
folkways of its own. It requires an examination of the Asian communities of the
archipelago on their own tenns and the introduction of new sets of actors, such
as segments of the Javanese aristocracy and representatives of Indonesia's other
ethnic groups who came to Batavia to study and stayed to lead the country to
independence. The first response of these groups to the Dutch came about as a
result of the expanding communications grid and of increased contact with the
Dutch as European communities spilled out of their coastal enclaves and into
the interior. That first response was to adopt parts of the colonial culture, so that
the bupati families on Java, for instance, appeared to be blending into Mestizo
society. In this light they added to the composition of Mestizo society an
ingredient hitherto missing, an upper class of Indonesians who mixed more
nearly as social equals with the colonial ruling elite. Upper-class Indonesians
had not had to deal regularly face to face with the Dutch elite of VOC Batavia.
But in the nineteenth century ritualized contacts with Holland's new representa­
tives, as distinct from the old VOC embassies to their courts, became custom­
ary for upper-class Indonesians and an established part of colonial culture.
This apparent fusion partially obscured the opposition of interest between
Indonesian and Dutch. As traditional leaders on Java, bupatis and lesser of­
ficials in the Indonesian ann of the colonial civil service were the first to come
into close contact with the Dutch and their culture. Some bupatis came to see in
it, and particularly in a Dutch education, a means to revive their social standing
and to reassert over the populace that political authority which they had lost to
the European administration during the first half of the nineteenth century. Such
a definition of interest was too narrow to satisfy some of the junior officials and
the Indonesians representing communities in other parts of the archipelago.
They were to deny the privileges of tradition and to chum leadership not over
Java alone but over the entire territory of the Netherlands East Indies by virtue
of a new political vision.
159

--- PAGE: 192 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.192) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
It is possible here only to sketch the early responses to the Dutch in which lie
antecedents to the nationalist movement that was to destroy the old colonial
society. Without them the story of Mestizo culture and society is incomplete,
and the impression is given that changes within the European community alone
were key to political developments in the twentieth century.
Some members of Java's upper classes deliberately sought close contact with
the Dutch during the course of the nineteenth century. They were no longer
preoccupied solely with their own civilization and past, but now wished to
understand the culture of the colonial rulers and were attracted by parts of it. In
most cases, their contact with the European heritage was filtered through the
Mestizo culture that predominated in areas of European settlement. Few of their
number actually saw European culture firsthand in Europe, at least before the
1920s. Therefore the shock of contact was lessened, the new easy to grasp by
reason of its assimilation by generations of people who were part-European and
part-Indonesian.
This interest in the European dates approximately from the mid-nineteenth
century. By that time the Dutch were supreme on Java, and their senior officials
were men who were Europe-born and who intended to repatriate. Some among
them entertained notions of "moral duty" and "uplift" towards Indonesians.
Translated into colonial practice, this meant the beginning of a school system
for upper-class Indonesians that would make the Dutch language their tongue.
For the first time in colonial history there would be a language for communica­
tion, in the sense that both parties would be able to speak it well and could
engage in conversation as peers, rather than using the highly stratified Javanese
or the insulting coarseness of colonial Malay.
A. W. P. Weitzel had observed in 1858 that the reason for the absence of
intercourse between cultivated Indonesians and "respectable" Dutch was the
lack of a tongue in common. 1 The majority of contacts were between Dutch
employers and Indonesian subordinates, carried on in a coarse Malay or pidgin
Javanese and chiefly concerned with giving and taking orders. This lack of
cross-racial contacts between peers is particularly noticeable in the novels of
colonial life. Only Fran~oise Junius, of the novelists surveyed, speaks of visit­
ing a bupati's residence, the kabupaten, and this may be explained by the fact
that she was the wife of a senior government official. As such, she had fonnal­
ized and ritualistic contacts with distinguished Javanese. Still, she does not
devote much attention to those encounters, offers no description of the interior
of the kabupaten, and says little abouts its inhabitants.
We know from other accounts of Indies society from this period-the re­
cords of travel books and photographs 2-that European and Javanese digni­
taries and their respective spouses met regularly on state occasions. While there
was little intimacy of contact, both groups altered their behavior to meet the
160

--- PAGE: 193 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.193) ---
EPILOGUE
other's expectations and codes of politeness. This became fixed colonial prac­
tice by the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Before that time, isolated
individuals among the Javanese had learnt Dutch, interested themselves in
European arts and hobbies, and mixed in European circles.
Raden Saleh is the best known of this groUp.3 His long life spanned the
nineteenth century and compressed within it the experiences of several genera­
tions of distinguished Indonesians. He was born in 1814 in Semarang, at an
early age came into contact with Europeans in the Directorate of Agriculture,
Arts, and Sciences, and was sent to Holland at sixteen as a protege of
Governor-General van der Capellen to study Western painting and lithography.
His sojourn in Europe stretched to twenty-one years, during which time he
became a celebrity in the courts of Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands and
his paintings-in grand empire style-were hung in the major galleries of
Europe.
After returning to Java, Saleh was able to impose his reputation upon the
colonial Dutch and was feted in Batavia and Bogor, where he mixed with the
upper levels of the European community. He was an honorary member of the
Batavian Academy of Arts and Scien~es and curator of the State Portrait Col­
lection. Saleh set a precedent for a later generation of Indonesians who studied
in Holland by marrying a woman with European status upon his return to
Indonesia. She was a wealthy Eurasian who owned extensive property in the
Weltevreden district of Batavia. By 1867 his marriage to juffrouw Winkelman
had ended in divorce, and Raden Saleh then married a woman belonging to the
ruling family of Yogyakarta. She entered the world of the European with him,
under the title Raden Ayu Danoediredjo, and accompanied him to Europe in
1875. By February 1879 Raden Saleh was back in Bogor, and he died there in
the following year.
In Raden Saleh we are dealing with the extraordinary. More usual were the
contacts between Dutch and Javanese officials that became the practice follow­
ing Olivia Raffles's entry into the women's quarters of the Solo and Yogyakarta
ruling families. Ver Huell made an extensive tour of Java in 1818 and has left
us a record of these encounters. Early in the year he was a guest of the sultan of
Madura. His party, which included several Dutch gentlemen, two of them
accompanied by their wives, was met by the sultan himself to the strains of
gamelan music. "His Highness," says Ver Huell, "offered his arm to one of
our ladies and led her to a sofa under a Pandoppang [pendopo, the reception
pavilion]. A great number of crystal chandeliers, mirrors, English engravings
in gilt frames, and other items of furniture filled this airy apartment. All the
mighty in the kingdom and courtiers came to greet us, after having bowed low
before the Sultan. "4
In this meeting the seemingly trifling circumstance of the sultan's offering
his arm should be noted. It was a public transgression of an Islamic sense of
161

--- PAGE: 194 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.194) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
propriety concerning contact between the sexes, as it was a departure from
Javanese etiquette, which forbade any touching of the sultan's person on fonnal
occasions. It was, furthennore, the adoption of an infidel courtesy, and pushed
to special prominence not a male, but a woman, in an audience hall where no
Indonesian lady was present.
Later, Ver Huell was to visit the bupati of Lamongan in northeast Java.
"What really amazed me," he writes of this call on Adi Arjo Negoro, "was
that we were received by the Radinaio [raden ayu], wife of the Adi Patti, and
her daughter-in-law, since in general, women of consequence in these regions
never leave the harem. . . . This Regent, who seems to be more polished than
other Native Princes, insists that his wives, contrary to custom, appear in
company with foreigners. ' ,5
To prepare themselves and their family members for these encounters, Java's
bupatis undertook to learn the intricacies of Dutch manners by appointing
Netherlanders as tutors and governesses to their children, and they sometimes
included their wives in such instruction. Pangeran Ario Tjondro Negoro, bupati
of Demak, is the most famous Javanese aristocrat to take this step. His choice,
C. E. van Kesteren, was to become known for his role as mentor to the father
and uncles of Raden Ajeng Kartini, and for his later activities as an Indies
schoolmaster and as editor of such influential newspapers as de Indische Gids
(Indies Guide). From the mid-1860s, a number of Javanese government offi­
cials sought tutors through the now-familiar route of newspaper advertise­
ments, of which the two following are examples: "Needed: In a Javanese
family in Japara Residency: a Dutch man, unmarried, capable of giving instruc­
tion in the Dutch language and basic arithmetic," and "Sought by the Regent
of Brebes, a European lady, middle-aged, to give conversation lessons in Dutch
to the Radenajoe and daughters. "6 Bupatis used the weight of rank to press for
admission of their sons into the primary schools reserved for Europeans, and
they placed the boys as lodgers in Dutch households, that they might acquire an
intimate knowledge of Dutch language and manners.
The newspapers yield evidence of increasing social contact between the
immigrant and Javanese elites. Thus a notice from the Semarang subcommittee
for the Arts and Crafts Exhibition that was held in Batavia in 1865 publicly
thanks, "above all, Radhen Mas Trengono, son of the Pangeran of Demak,
who deserves special credit, both for contributing numerous Items and for his
services to the Subcommittee." 7 Furthennore, Western-educated Javanese
were now ready to offer their opinions abroad. One describing himself in a
letter to the Locomotief as a "Dutch-minded (Hollandsch-gezind) Javanese in
the Principalities" wrote of the abuses of feudal corvee rights, and urged the
colonial government to interfere in the affairs of the sultanates to alleviate the
general exploitation. 8 In much the same vein, a fellow Javanese addressed the
162

--- PAGE: 195 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.195) ---
EPILOGUE
Locomotief's readers the following year, distinguishing himself by signing his
own name, Tommowiegono. 9
Criticism of the susuhunan of Solo and the sultan of Yogyakarta as backward
and oppressive rulers of the Javanese had become common among Dutch
liberals in the second half of the nineteenth century. It was to be a theme, too,
in those bupati circles whose members were acquiring, along with their West­
ern schooling, an ambition to become leaders of the Javanese liberated from
both the European administrator and the descendants of the fonner rulers of
Mataram. Such interests were expressed in the second and third decades of this
century through the Regentenbond, an association of bupatis. They pointed to
their Western schooling, their fluency in Dutch, their adaptations in dress and
behavior, and their efforts to improve popular welfare as evidence of their
fitness to rule. And as proofs to the Dutch of their genuine assimilation of
European cultural values, they were willing to extend a Western schooling to
their daughters and to relax the etiquette that had regulated the lives of upper
class Javanese ladies.
What did the immigrants think of Javanese who were showing such interest
in their manners and learning? Some expressed approval and satisfaction, for
example in obituaries that appeared in newspapers following the death in 1885
of the bupati of Brebes. They spoke of the "purity" of his Dutch and lauded
him as a promoter of popular welfare. He was depicted as "enlightened,"
"dependable," and abhorring "creeping servility." One writer concluded his
remarks with the hope that the Tjondro Negoro family would "continue to
bring forth many such fine descendants who will be a blessing to Java. ' ,10
This wish was soon to be fulfilled by the deceased's niece, Raden Ajeng
Kartini (1879-1904). Possibly because it was difficult to find a suitable person
for governess in the small town of Japara, her father had taken the unprece­
dented step, around 1885, of enrolling Kartini and her younger sisters in the local
primary school for Europeans. But it was a step in keeping with the response of
Java's upper classes to the nineteenth-century Dutch. They were the daughters of
the bupati class, however, and so represented elite values to the Javanese and had
to confonn, to a degree, to the demands of tradition. Accordingly, Kartini's
father withdrew his daughters from school as they became teenaged, for the
seclusion from society that was expected of girls before marriage, whilst he sent
his sons to Semarang to continue their studies in a European high school. In his
plan, the girls should reenter society as consorts to fellow bupatis, trained in
Javanese traditions but also equipped by their fluency in Dutch and familiarity
with Dutch manners to take their place in colonial society.
To accomplish his purpose, and as a result of his daughters' ardent response
to their brief acquaintance with the culture of the Dutch, Kartini' s father modi­
fied their seclusion in important ways. Javanese custom covered a Javanese
163

--- PAGE: 196 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.196) ---
~
0\
.,J:::..
"Regent of B10ra, R.M.T. Tjokronegoro II and Family," c. 1900. The photographer, summoned to the of­
ficial residence of the district head, captures symbols of modernity such as the piano, tricycle, and Western
clothing of the children in this living room photograph. (KITLV 4184)
....,
~
m
Vl
on
5=r
~
~
rU
o
"Tj
to
>
~<:
5=

--- PAGE: 197 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.197) ---
EPILOGUE
world only; its prescriptions did not comprehend the Mestizo society that was
coming to absorb the upper class. While Kartini and her sisters might not enter
their own society before marriage, they were pennitted to meet Dutch people,
those men as well as women whose social position in the colonial elite gave
them access to the kabupaten. They were also pennitted to leave the kabupaten
on several occasions to attend special events in the colonial world. They at­
tended the dedication of a church, for instance, and a perfonnance by a Dutch
orator in a Semarang theater. They appeared in 1898 at a ball honoring the
coronation of Holland's Queen Wilhelmina, and as recognition of their becom­
ing spokeswomen for Western education for Javanese girls of their class, Kar­
tini and her sisters were invited to spend a week meeting officials in Batavia and
Bogor to discuss their own further study.
In addition to these fonnal contacts, Kartini maintained the acquaintance of
several Dutch people through private meetings and through a large correspon­
dence. The experience of intellectual exchange as between equals, as opposed
to the ritual contacts of colonial society, was a powerful influence in shaping
the ideas for which Kartini was to become famous: ideas concerning polygyny,
marriage practices, divorce, vocational and professional training for Javanese
women and men, advocacy of Dutch as the lingua franca, revival of Javanese
arts and crafts, reform of administrative practices in promotion and preroga­
tives, changes in the role and status of women at all social levels, removal of
race and color prejudice, and association between high-ranking Dutch and
Javanese to raise the standard of living of the rural majority of Java.
Kartini 's reflections on colonial society, radical and original for her class and
time, were expressed in many forums, including meetings and correspondence
with such Dutchmen as J. H. Abendanon, director of education, cottage indus­
try, and religion from 1899 to 1905, and H. H. van Kol, a member of the
Netherlands Lower House. There were also her occasional essays printed in
Indies magazines (Yogyakarta's de Echo, for instance), in the Bijdragen tot de
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde (Contributions to Linguistic, Geographical, and
Anthropological Studies), then published in The Hague, in The Dutch Lily, a
feminist journal published in the Netherlands, and in a memorial to the Dutch
government. II The best-known expression of her thoughts is contained in the
collection of her letters to Dutch friends first printed in the Netherlands in
1911. 12
W. F. Wertheim has said that in 1911 Kartini exploded on a colonial Dutch
public that was totally unprepared for a Javanese woman using a fluent Dutch to
argue for reforms in Indies society.13 But she was already a well-known,
controversial figure on Java in her own lifetime, at least in circles reading
Dutch-language newspapers. The Java Bode, for instance, printed a long article
on Kartini and her sisters Roekmini and Kardinah in 1904. A hint of the quality
of Dutch approval for Indonesians who adopted their learning and ways can be
taken from this same article's description of the teaching methods employed in
165

--- PAGE: 198 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.198) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
the school for Javanese girls which the sisters had established in 1903. Kartini's
sisters, the reader is infonned, squatted down, Javanese style, beside their
pupils. "They want European culture and learning, but they remain Javanese.
. . . They are one with their own people! A lesson for many." 14
Nevertheless, the adoption of Dutch manners, the habit of speaking Dutch,
and the growing acquaintance with Dutch learning on the part of the Javanese
aristocracy drew hostility and opposition from some quarters in the immigrant
community. P. A. A. Djajadiningrat, who was one of the first Indonesians to
complete his secondary education in a school for Europeans in Batavia, has left
in his Memoirs 15 a record of slights and prejudices experienced as members of
his class mixed more with the Dutch. In 1896, the year he entered the senior
grade of primary school in Batavia, attendance by an Indonesian was still quite
new. The school's headmaster, fearing opposition from parents of the pupils,
devised a solution peculiar to the society we have been studying: Achmad
Djajadiningrat, scion of an old and honorable Sundanese family, could only be
acceptable in the guise of an illegitimate but acknowledged Eurasian, for that is
the implication of the name under which he was enrolled, Willem van Bantam
(William of [or from] Bantam). Kartini encountered race prejudice too, in the
Japara school as well as in the drawing rooms of Europeans, and spoke of it
often in her letters. 16 The experience led her to stress the need in the colony's
schools for moral training and character development, along with regular sub­
ject matter.
Stages in the adoption of Dutch practices can be followed through a perusal
of announcements concerning their domestic affairs placed by high-ranking
Javanese. It was already transgressing Javanese propriety to bring one's wife
forward for public notice, as instanced in the following advertisement, even
though the lady's own names are not disclosed: "Given birth to two Daughters:
the Wife of Radhen Toemenggoeng Danoe Koesoemo, Regent of Malang"
(1866). Established decorum was again renounced in the desire to conform to
Dutch practice in this announcement: "On the 17th of this month died sudden­
ly, after giving birth to a healthy daughter, my beloved Wife, the Raden Ajoe.
Hadiningrat, Regent of Demak" (1885). In time, women's names came to be
included in the personals placed by their male kin. For example, a death notice
is inserted in 1904 for "my beloved mother, the Raden Ajoe Pangeran Hario
Gondosiwojo," and the age of the deceased is also given. The next step was for
announcements to be issued jointly by husband and wife. In heavy type comes,
"The Regent of Toemenggoeng, R. M. T. Tjokro Adi Koesoemo and Raden
Ajoe announce the birth of a daughter" (1904). In a later issue, the Regent of
Magelang and Raden Ayu announce the approaching marriage of their daugh­
ter, whom they mark by name, Raden Ajeng Patemah. And finally, in announc­
ing the death of Kartini, her parents described her by both her marriage title and
the single names under which she had become a public figure: "The under-
166

--- PAGE: 199 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.199) ---
EPILOGUE
signed beg to express their thanks for the great sympathy they have been shown
on the loss of their daughter, R. Ajoe Adipatie Djojo Adiningrat (Raden Ajeng
Kartini), Sosroningrat and Raden Ajoe, Japara" (1904).17
Bupatis' families also adopted the habit of sending good wishes for the New
Year to the public at large, their names joining those of local notables of the
European and Chinese communities on the front page of regional newspapers.
They began setting reception days, which they also announced through their
daily papers. The rooms into which European guests were conducted were
furnished as Mestizo parlors, showing a combination of elements: heavily
carved Javanese furniture and screens; velvet draperies and carpets from
Europe; stuffed animals; collections of Javanese krises (daggers) alongside
Chinese porcelain; Japanese lacquer work; and portraits of members of the
House of Orange on the walls. 18
In illustration of increasing social exchange between the upper classes of
European and Javanese communities is the solicitation of the local bupati or the
sultan and their consorts as patrons of clubs for the Dutch. There were also the
contributions from the Indonesian side to Dutch charitable causes. For instance,
a fancy fair in aid of impoverished Eurasians was organized by the bupati of
Semarang in Augltst 1904. A string orchestra played pieces by Verdi and
Rubinstein. The players, according to the Locomotief, were all members of the
royal family of Solo and proved that Indonesians had aptitude for "the musical
conceptions of European composers. " 19 This local report suggests the extent
and scope of deliberate borrowing on the part of Java's upper classes. Such
borrowing from the customs of the colonials made them appear to be like their
counterparts in Eurasian society.
Opposition to these trends, and anxiety, was the response of Europeans
concerned about "white status." They had always expressed themselves
through the newspapers on the need to inculcate the virtue of hard work in
Javanese laborers, whom they predictably saw as slothful. When it came to the
upper classes, Dutch responses took a different tum. They knew enough of
Javanese social codes and etiquette to introduce a variation of their own: ad­
dressing a Western-educated Javanese in Dutch, but pennitting responses only
in Malay or High Javanese. In the matter of social contacts, it was natural that
such enemies of the Javanese should first object to encounters between Indo­
nesian men and European women and blame the women for "uppityness" in
Javanese men. From the many examples in the papers, one must suffice.
It concerned editorial discussion of a letter criticizing European ladies for
accompanying their husbands to the rooms of Solo's Habiprojo, a club for
Javanese government servants who were, in 1904, all men. One female guest
had, on a later occasion, been "accosted" by an Indonesian whom she had met
at the club and who had offered to escort her, this frightful exchange taking
place in the language of the colonial rulers. In concluding remarks, the editor
167

--- PAGE: 200 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.200) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
urged that serious thought be given to the question whether the prestige of
European ladies was affected by their transgressing the rules of propriety gov­
erning the behavior of aristocratic Indonesian women.20
This incident is noteworthy for another reason too. Not only does it show an
apprehension concerning interracial relations and European "prestige"; it also
illustrates the function of the waning Mestizo culture as a middle, mediating
arena between European and Indonesian. It will be remembered that at the turn
of the century over three-quarters of the Europeans on Java had been born
there, and that locally born women with European status still far outnumbered
female immigrants. Consequently the wives of many officials were Creoles or
part- Indonesians who in their early years had been raised almost exclusively by
Indonesians. What this meant for colonial society was that receptions in 1900
were still segregated between the sexes. Ladies sat together in an inner parlor,
the men outside in the front gallery. This was the way a proper Eurasian woman
was raised and the way she conducted parties as mistress of a household. Thus
when upper-class Javanese women became customary guests in the houses of
their European counterparts, the break with traditional seclusion was already
cushioned. They were not left in a drawing room crowded with men after
formal greetings had been exchanged, but rather led to a room with women who
sat, as in any kabupaten, according to their husbands' rank. Mestizo codes also
allowed for distinct entertainments in different areas for the various groups of
guests. For Europeans there would be champagne and a waltz band in a pavi­
lion isolated from the sitting rooms, and elsewhere a gamelan would play and
guests would arrange themselves before and behind the screen of the puppet
theater according to rank and sex.21
Mestizo manners had ceased to dictate public behavior by the second and
third decades of the twentieth century. By that time immigrants had clustered
in cities in sufficient numbers to order their lives as nearly as they could in the
Dutch manner. Furthermore, while the number of immigrant men and women
remained small in proportion to the total European community in the Indies,
yet they dominated the upper levels of government and society and they set the
tastes and fashions for the rest.
The Indonesian upper classes were left to reconsider the experience of
the preceding few generations. Whilst superficially they appeared most like
wealthy Indies Dutch, they too were withdrawing into their own society and
concentrating on defining an "Indonesian" identity. For the bupatis like Djaja­
diningrat, this was accomplished through the Regentenbond and through a
campaign to impose adherence to the principle of sons succeeding their fathers
in the office of bupati. The debates of the Regentenbond were conducted in
Dutch and were predicated on a continuing association with the Netherlands
within a commonwealth. By contrast, out of the debates of the youth associa­
tions representing the lower ranks of the Javanese aristocracy and young people
168

--- PAGE: 201 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.201) ---
EPILOGUE
of Indonesia's other ethnic groups there developed the goal of a state indepen­
dent of any ties to the Dutch. In 1928 they made the seemingly perverse choice
of Malay, pidgin of the VOC and tongue used to degrade, as the language of the
new nation they aspired to form. Malay was, at the same time, becoming the
language of a new, Indonesian, colonial literature that was as single-mindedly
devoted to reform as any Dutch-language Indies novel of our women writers.
Only the problems were different. Where Dutch female authors spoke of
abandoned children and concubines, Indonesian authors wrote of the alienating
effects of Western education and how to overcome them. They wrote of con­
flicts between the behavior expected by Indonesian customary law and Islam
and the manners acquired from Dutch schools and European friends. There
were the evils of polygyny and child marriage to be combatted through the
novel, and the sensitive subject of cross-racial marriage as well as of marriage
between Indonesians of widely separated social classes and different ethnic
groups. 22
All these issues were debated in the 1920s and '30s. Parallel developments in
the political arena can be briefly related. By 1908 an association of distin­
guished, Western-educated Javanese had been formed. Under the name Budi
Utom0 , which is often translated as ~ 'Glorious Endeavor," they sought a re­
vival of Javanese culture, but-and this is an instance of seeming "Mestizo­
ness' ,- through a society run on European rules with committee chairmen and
the rest. Within the next few years, others joined together in similarly organ­
ized bodies, taking as the key to their band their common ethnic or religious
identity. By 1922, some were ready to merge the local and regional for an
association based on an Indonesia-wide identity. Simultaneously there was a
movement winning adherents primarily among Eurasians. With several prom­
inent Indonesians, they joined in an "Indies homeland" party. That aspiration
was defeated, and the several communities withdrew into parties representing
the chief social and political divisions of the colony in the 1930s: Indonesian
nationalist parties, aiming for political independence; Eurasian parties, which
would give leadership of an independent Indies to the part-European; the parties
of immigrant Europeans that in the late 1930s were fascist and based on race
supremacy; and organizations for two groups omitted from discussion here, the
immigrant Chinese and the Indonesian Chinese. (The latter was another "Mes­
tizo" group that was known under the Indonesian term peranakan, or mixed
race.)
Membership in all these groups apparently became more fixed and the plural
aspects of colonial society more fully developed in the 1930s. In evidence are
the separate pay scales, occupation slots, law codes, and education systems.
All the same, there was "passing" from one community to the other. In the
case of movement into Asian groups there are no figures. The passage across
race lines into the European group is, however, open for inspection.
169

--- PAGE: 202 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.202) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
It remained exceedingly mixed. The Constitutional Law of 1818 had in­
cluded in the European category all Christian Indonesians who had joined the
European group socially. By 1854, however, a new regulation specifically
excluded Christian Indonesians from enjoying privileges reserved for the
European community. Henceforth they would be counted among the indigen­
ous Indonesian population. 23 After 1871 individual Asians could apply for
European status. This was conferred by administrative decree on those who
were Christian, used Dutch as their daily language, dressed as Europeans, and
were "Dutch" in manners and occupation. 24 Finally, in 1886, all who lived as
"Europeans" and were regarded as such by their associates were confirmed in
that status. 25
The extremely mixed nature of the group with European status, persisting
during the period when colonial society was apparently the most plural, is best
illustrated by figures collected by A. van MarIe. In explaining the increase in
the European group over the period 1881 to 1940 from causes other than
immigation, he presents the following numbers: legal assimilation (gelijkstel­
ling), 16,500; mixed marriage (for example, counting an Asian bride as Euro­
pean), 16,000; offspring of mixed marriages, 29,000; recognition of illegiti­
mate, part-Asian children, 48,000; and Creoles, 210,000. 26
The Japanese occupation of the Indonesian archipelago (1942-45) made all
that meaningless. Henceforth there were only Indonesians, Asians born outside
the archipelago, and Europeans. Europeans were interned for most of the
Pacific war, their number including all those Eurasians who remained attached
to their special status as Europeans. World war was followed by a national
revolution whose outcome, in 1949, was an Indonesian republic independent of
political ties to the Netherlands. Once again Mestizos were faced with a choice:
to apply for citizenship of Indonesia and accept the Indonesian side of their
heritage or to take up a new future overseas. Many persisted in preferring
identity as Dutch, and they scattered across the world, principally to Holland
and the United States. Another group had made a brief experiment in founding
a Eurasian homeland in West New Guinea, one that had ended, for all practical
purposes, with the Second World War. It ended as a dream when West New
Guinea was incorporated in the Republic of Indonesia in 1963, first as Irian
Barat and later under the name Irian Jaya. One other Mestizo society in the
archipelago that had been cut off for three centuries from the Dutch through
Portuguese rule, and that had developed its own distinctive culture, is now
being absorbed into Indonesia as the twenty-seventh province, Timor Timur.
Thus ended Mestizo society. Its special character as a fusion of East and
West under the status of European is no more; its legacy remains as one element
in the national and regional cultures of Indonesia.
We have now traced the social life of the Dutch, from earliest days in port
170

--- PAGE: 203 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.203) ---
EPILOGUE
cities on the coasts of Asia, through development of settled community life in
enclaves with a distinctive culture, to a period characterized by direct rule over
a territorial empire stretching out to the limits of the Indonesian archipelago.
We have watched a condition of isolation and uncertainty be replaced by a
network of communities from southern Africa to Japan whose members were
linked by marriage and position in the VOC hierarchy and whose daily life was
imbued with Asian practices. In tum, we have seen this network dismembered,
and a new separation between European and Asian worlds develop in the
nineteenth century, based on government policies of plural development and
influenced by technological advances and demographic changes in the makeup
of the dominant immigrant group.
In the earliest days, the Dutch struggled to establish for themselves a niche in
the ports along the Asian trade routes. Their arrival caused no upheaval in the
cultural life of the Asian states; they were probably regarded by the royal court
of Matararn as one more troublesome and vulgar species of tribute-bearer. Life
in the early settlements may be characterized as tumultuous: bachelor commu­
nities cut off from their homeland by the vast distances of sea, menaced by
tropical diseases whose remedies were not yet known, and vulnerable to attack
from Asian states and their European allies who were hostile to Dutch econom­
ic aims. Attitudes to Asian peoples in this period were of the coarsest kind.
Unions with Asian women, in the absence of a normal proportion of women
among the European immigrants and in the absence of the institutions of civic
life, were disorderly and exploitative.
The impulse to transfonn adventurers into citizens very quickly asserted
itself, and the development of municipal life took place within walled, fortified
cities. Attempts at colonization by sending out batches of families and or­
phaned girls or giving pennission to those with rank in the merchant hierarchy
of the Company to bring out their wives and other female relatives never
provided enough women for the growth of colonies of Dutch families. Misce­
genation was officially sanctioned by the Company by 1642 and was practised
on all social levels but particularly the most senior. By contrast, unions with
Asian women fonned by the largest component of the European group, the
soldiers and sailors, were often irregular and fleeting, despite efforts by the
VOC's directors to keep in the settlements those men who had married local
women and fathered children there. Children abandoned by the father were
usually absorbed by the Asian community to which the mother belonged.
On the other hand, among the elite there developed a peculiar family pattern
and system of descent. Characteristically, a man delayed marriage (as opposed
to concubinage) until he had risen in the merchant ranks of the civilian hier­
archy. His marriage partner was usually the Asia-born daughter of a colleague,
a girl barely in her teens if it was her first marriage, the product of a secluded
upbringing supervised by Asian slaves, in which styles of dress, personal
171

--- PAGE: 204 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.204) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
hygiene, training, entertainment, and language were all Asian and Asia­
derived. Such women were themselves part-Asian by descent as well as by
upbringing and culture. Their daughters were kept in Asia as brides for new
generations of immigrants, while their sons were sent to the Netherlands to
make their careers and livelihood. Despite years of residence, then, men did not
command patriarchal families nor did the Indies Dutch become landowning
gentry attached to property held within the same family over generations.
Promotion to positions of power and wealth came to men connected to each
other through their wives.
In the VOC centuries many men succumbed to disease, their resistance
lowered by their clinging to clothing and hygiene more suitable for northern
Europe and by their intemperate use of alcohol. Women, living more nearly
according to Asian styles and often being many years junior to their husbands,
tended to survive them. In these conditions there was pressure to remarry,
especially when the widow was the sole inheritor of marital property. Some
women married two and three times, so soon consoling themselves that Ba­
tavia's government adopted, for regulation of European behavior, a Koranic
law observed by Indonesians that forbade remarriage by women before three
months of widowhood had elapsed.
In this, as in many other instances, the Dutch showed themselves profoundly
influenced by the Asian context of their lives. The position of women with
European status is another example, for the semi-purdah of women showed
accommodation to Muslim and Hindu-derived notions of female propriety and
stood against the Calvinist model of virtuous housewife ,and mother in society.
The seigneurial style of living of senior Company officials on country estates,
where the officials were surrounded by slave retainers and took rights to corvee
labor from the local population, owed more to the Javanese nobility than to the
style of the respectable classes of eighteenth-century Netherlands society.
It is interesting to note that before the nineteenth century there was little intel­
lectual exchange between Dutch and Indonesian. Senior representatives of the
Dutch did not impress the Javanese nobility as bearers of a higher civilization,
as they were to do in the late colonial period. The origins and status of the VOC
Dutch were regarded with contempt, and this prevented their mixing, in their
brief encounters with court members, on tenns of equality. During the first two
centuries of contact, then, the Dutch were not able to influence Java's nobility,
nor were they qualified by their own education to admire the culture of the
Indonesian courts.
The greatest contact Dutch people had with Asians was with the subject
populations of their settlements, who were themselves also generally members
of dispossessed social groups. Intellectual exchange between the two was
necessarily limited. Moreover, in considering mutual influence, the intimacy
that existed between European men and Asian women in the settlements must
172

--- PAGE: 205 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.205) ---
EPILOGUE
be balanced against the inequality of their status and rights. The Asian context
was predominant in detennining how the immigrant Dutch lived, and in the
Asian settlements the cultural fonns transmitted by the Dutch were few. De­
spite directives from successive governors-general, the Asian majorities of
Dutch cities never became Dutch speakers or Christians. What was Dutch was
the public architecture of the cities and their layout, and the male life of the
government office.
Mestizo society took on folkways of its own. It was neither European nor
Asian, nor was it static. By the second half of the eighteenth century there
appeared a trend towards development of patriarchal families, and a desire to
cut remaining ties with Europe. As it turned out, the VOC directors were fairly
successful in enforcing the rule that denied senior office to the locally born and
so prevented the development of independent colonies, but the impulse towards
such a development is discernible. The destruction of these ambitions and of
the Mestizo alliance of position and family connection was quick and complete.
It sprang, not out of the history of the Dutch in Indonesia, but from the history
of Netherlands society in Europe, a society that had been transfonned by the
French Revolution and Napoleonic Empire. Earlier pressures on Mestizo soci­
ety--described under the rubrics' 'Enlightenment," "Interregnum," which are
drawn from European history --can best be seen as assaults on Mestizo society
that could not succeed because not aimed at the nexus of post and family
alliance.
New barriers to cultural comprehension, formed in the nineteenth century,
sharpened by a heightened sense of race. The separation was encouraged by the
formation in the European community of families on the Dutch model, as
women emigrated in increasing numbers. Mestizo culture had always been the
medium through which Dutch and Indonesian came to know each other. When
it was under attack, new gulfs opened up, for there was no substitution for the
old immediacy of contact. The very factors which improved the quality of
Dutch life in Indonesia-the links to other communities and to Europe provided
by rail, telegraph, newspaper, library, and the like-all combined to foster
self-sufficient communities among the immigrants who now dominated the top
level of the government hierarchy. These same conditions served to foster new
identities among Indonesian groups that were to be drawn in sharp opposition to
the colonial regime as the twentieth century opened.
Within the European group in the nineteenth century, the elite were divorced
from the mass. The ranks of senior officials ceased to be occupied by men who
spent the greatest part of their lives in Asia and who married Asia-born women.
Now members of the elite were immigrants and transients. Mestizo culture
became more closely associated with lower socioeconomic classes; members
became a distinct subgroup within the European, marrying amongst them­
selves. Absotption into the Indonesian world followed on poverty or a total
173

--- PAGE: 206 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.206) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
separation from the European community and its badge of status, white skin
color.
Nevertheless, the Dutch in Indonesia remained exceedingly mixed. Members
of the new elite boasted of their European identity, yet were not European in the
manner of compatriots who did not emigrate. Their lives were passed in a
tropical setting where they were a privileged minority ruling a majority who
had no say in their governance. In this situation, sexual exploitation and irre­
sponsibility of male immigrants towards Indonesian women servants and their
offspring were condoned. European women, as wives, had to deal with that
indulgence and the social problems that followed. Because they, in their time,
were not yet political members of European society, their views were expressed
first through the colonial novel, before the issues of concubinage and deserted
children were taken up by the male members of the Netherlands' States­
General. In their novels, Dutch women authors revealed an aspect of colonial
life that is nonnally hidden from view.
In the rural areas we see Mestizo society evolving anew in the same condi­
tions of isolation and union of Dutch immigrant men with Indonesian women,
but it was different from the society of the VOC days. For one thing, the
immigrants were now more likely to be planters and private entrepreneurs, with
only a minority representing the Batavian government. For another, a European
reference group was now closer at hand, and there was no avenue for political
life or the need for secure connections, when men could pursue wealth openly
and legally. Assimilation towards the Indonesian side was a greater pull for
Eurasian men, and the marriage partners of Eurasian women were more likely
to be lower-ranking Dutchmen or men from the Eurasian community.
In the twentieth centul)' events overtook Dutch society of the Indies. No
longer the self-contained zone of the VOC centuries, colonial society was split
within and subjected to pressures from without-from the Netherlands and
increasingly from Indonesian groups that sought to take over the seat of power
in Batavia for themselves. Once the ultimate claim to status for the Eurasian
was severed, the tie to the European and the prestige of race, Mestizo society as
a separate entity could not endure. It disappeared in 1942 to live on only in the
sentimental evocations of the Tempo Doeloe writers and recorders.
174

--- PAGE: 207 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.207) ---
New Explorations of
European -Asian Encounters
THE HISTORY NARRATED IN the first edition of The Social World of Batavia
ended with Sukarno's proclamation of Indonesia's independence on 17 Au­
gust 1945. Then the distinctive culture that I had termed Mestizo dissolved
into its constituent parts, and Indonesians and Dutch went their separate
ways. From 1949 the Republic of Indonesia set about distancing the new
state from Holland: English was made the preferred second language in
place of Dutch in school curricula; streets and cities, including Batavia, lost
their Dutch names and acquired Indonesian ones; public symbols of Dutch
rule were erased; new heroes filled the pantheon, and the entrance to every
town acquired a memorial to its fighters for independence. In 1957 Dutch
businesses were seized by the state; in 1959 Dutch people who did not em­
brace Indonesian citizenship were expelled. These were the measures of a
government determined to develop an Indonesian identity and to make
people forget the intertwining of Dutch with Indonesian histories. All the
same, in Indonesia, academic and popular histories, the press, cinema, and
politicians' speeches present the past as a country the Dutch ruled for 350
long years.
In the Netherlands the past also lives on. Explorations of many of the
themes touched on in the earlier edition of The Social World of Batavia
have been published over the last three decades. Celebrations in Holland
in 2002 to mark the four-hundredth anniversary of the VOC's founding
provoked in Indonesia formation of the National Committee for the In­
donesian Nation's Dignity, and official protest to the Dutch by Indonesia's
state minister for national development planning. The opinion page of the
Jakarta Post, the capital's English-language daily, carried an article on 4
May 2002 by historian Asvi Warman Adam of the Indonesian Institute
of Sciences, entitled "Can Indonesia Sue the Netherlands for History?" In
it he called on historians to support demands for compensation by docu­
menting the process whereby the Dutch East Indies Company, or VOC,
began delivering "riches and golden age to the Dutch, but brought poverty,
misery and death to the Indonesians."
175

--- PAGE: 208 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.208) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Asvi Warman Adam's article raises the question of the relevance of
VOC studies for Indonesians today. VOC studies published since The So­
cial World of Batavia come from Western, not Indonesian, universities and
academic presses. Yet it can be argued that they hold more than antiquar­
ian interest for modern Indonesians. VOC-era surgeons, artists, linguists,
botanists, and mapmakers worked with Asian counterparts. Mostly, we
only know the names of Asian colleagues and co-workers from the nine­
teenth century, but H. A. van Reede tot Drakenstein, principal author of
the multivolume Hortus Malabaricus (published 1678-1679, 1682-1693),
named Ranga Botto, Vinaique Pandito, and Apu Botto, all from Goa, as
his collaborators. The specialist knowledge of many Asians was recorded,
preserved, and disseminated through publication of numerous dictionar­
ies, compendia, natural histories, and illustrated encyclopedias in Holland.
Learned works such as Georg Rumphius's Ambonese Curiosity Cabinet
(published in 1705) and his Ambonese Herbarium (published posthumously
in 1741) and Franc;ois Valentijn's Oud en Nieuw Oost-Indien (1721) went
through several editions and were brought to widening circles of readers
through translations into other languages. European publications preserved
the knowledge of many Asians. Libraries and modern editions give back
that knowledge to their descendants in Indonesia's academies today.
Historical studies in Indonesia are not richly resourced, supported by
research libraries and specialist librarians; scholars have limited opportuni­
ties, either of time or grants, for extensive studies, travel, and publication.
Since the downfall of President Suharto in 1998, Indonesia's historians
have been called on to "straighten" the record of the past (meluruskan seja­
rah).! Many of the academic and popular studies from Indonesian presses
today focus on reinterpreting official heroes and developing regional and
community histories. 2 Interest in the VOC appears limited to a small circle
of specialists, such as the curator of Jakarta's museum, Candrian Atta­
hiyyat, who published VOC: Armada Kapal dan Mitologi (VOC: Fleet and
Mythology) in 1991 and has written numerous articles on the preservation
of "Kota," the "old town" of today's megapolis of Jakarta. 3
Translations by Indonesians of historical studies by contemporary
Western academics show there is renewed interest in Indonesia in foreign
scholarship on the nation's past. 4 And in Holland, too, decades after the
severing of Indonesia from the Netherlands, there is recognition that Dutch
history includes narratives of Indonesia and Indonesians. Dutch govern­
ment ministries now finance research that documents the experiences and
actions of Dutch people in the East and a spate of books aimed at Dutch
citizens whose family roots lie in Indonesia. 5
In 1986 Gerrit Knaap published a detailed study of the VOC in Ambon,
the end point of a historic trade route, under the title Kruidnagelen en Chris-
176

--- PAGE: 209 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.209) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
tenen (Cloves and Christians).6 In it he traced demographic impacts on the
Ambonese from their encounters with the new global player. Contributors
to Ships, Sailors and Spices examined the history of Dutch shipping and the
personnel of the floating worlds of the East Indiamen, as the ships built for
Asia voyages were called.7 Femme Gaastra's 1982 Geschiedenis van de VOC,
published in English in 2003 as The Dutch East India Company, covers the
founding and operations of the VOC, with details on directors, financing,
and early expeditions to Indonesian islands, and on trading settlements
in India and mainland Southeast Asia. He discusses connections between
these far-flung outposts, gives biographical sketches of VOC "characters,"
and traces the rise and decline of the Company. 8 Harm Stevens's study,
Dutch Enterprise and the VOC, focused on the worldwide commerce con­
ducted by the VOC.9
Leonard Blusse's studies enlarged understanding of VOC-era Batavia
through his special attention to the city's Japanese and Chinese commu­
nities. In a 1981 article he had described Holland's Asian headquarters
as a Chinese colonial town because it was a manufacturing and commer­
cial hub, within Chinese shipping and trading networks in Southeast Asia,
producing almost exclusively for the China market. 10 (Carl Trocki sub­
sequently described Southeast Asia as China's zone of offshore produc­
tion for mining, agriculture, and financial services.)11Susan Abeyasekere's
Jakarta: A History brought the narrative of Indonesia's premier city up
to 1985.12
In 1923, Batavia's archivist, F. de Haan, had brought out a volume of
plates to accompany his Oud Batavia Gedenkboek, published the previous
year. In addition to drawings and paintings of places, he included pho­
tographs of old canvases showing Batavia street scenes and VOC "per­
sonalities." Both volumes were reprinted in 1935. In 1982 Adolf Heuken
published an illustrated Historical Sites of Jakarta (what was left of them
in Jakarta's rapid redevelopment), complementing De Haan's old photo­
graphs with colored contemporary shots.13 An update on De Haan's work
can be seen in Batavia in Nineteenth Century Photographs published by
Scott Merrillees in 2000.14 His emphasis was on Batavia's growth between
the 1860s and 1890s and how the built environment shaped and reflected
the city's residents. In this book Merrillees gives the location and a brief
history of each building with notes on its demolition or renovations and
function in today's Jakarta. In 1985, the Rijksmuseum acquired 578 works
by Batavia's premier illustrator, Jan Brandes; 198 of them are reproduced
in color in The World of Jan Brandes, 1743-1808, edited by Max de Bruijn
and Remco Raben. 15 Here are Batavians, Batavian residences, including
Brandes's own villa, street and market scenes, and local flora and fauna,
along with chapters on Brandes's life and art.
177

--- PAGE: 210 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.210) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Brandes left portraits of himself and, it is believed, of Roosje, an Indo­
nesian domestic in his employ, with whom he formed a long-term sexual
relationship. In 2006 I published meditations on VOC society flowing from
a consideration of the Cnoll family portrait, painted in 1665 by Jacob
Jansz. Coeman,I6 and the following year I made a study of a handful of
seventeenth-century portraits that survive of women whose livestook them
from Holland to Cape Town, Melaka, and Batavia.17 All these women were
elevated far above Roosje's status, secure as wives and daughters of Euro­
pean men. They are painted in outdoors settings, framed by curtains and
balustrades. A background of sea and shipping detaches them from their
immediate context. With the exception of the Cnoll portrait, no object
links the painted ladies to place; only their dress locates them in time.
In the first edition of Social World I made the case that VOC society
became detached from Holland and developed a distinct identity that was
neither Dutch nor Asian, but Mestizo, and I argued that this society had
fully evolved by the middle years of the eighteenth century. No portraits
of VOC ladies apparently survive from that century. Realistic portraiture
was not characteristic of the Indonesian societies that bordered Batavia.
Javanese ladies were known by titles derived from father or husband. They
were not exposed to public gaze either in person or via the counterfeit form
of the portrait. Considering the portraits we do have from the seventeenth
century, noting the attention their artists paid to facial features to reveal in­
dividual identity and personality, so typical of portrait painting in Holland
of the time, I now see in these early VOC portraits evidence of the sitters'
inclination to remain Dutch and claim Dutch status.
Thirteen letters, written by Johanna Maria van Riebeeck in 1710 to her
parents in Batavia from on board ship bound for Holland and from the
long stopover at the Cape, also suggest a reconsideration of my construc­
tion of Mestizo society.I8Johanna was second-generation VOC, having
been born and raised in Batavia. Her mother, Elisabeth van Oosten, from
early childhood was also a Batavian. Johanna's father had been born in the
VOC settlement at the Cape of Good Hope. After a spell in Ceylon where
her first husband was governor, Johanna returned to Batavia. She spent
three years as first lady of Dutch Asia following her marriage in 1706 to
Governor-General Joan van Hoorn. She was not one of those VOC ladies
who lacked command of Dutch. She not only spoke it, but she was also
capable of composing in it. From her pen there are: reports on the state of
health of passengers on the return fleet; lists of goods taken aboard and
acquired at the Cape to be dispatched to Batavia relatives; description of
the VOC's Cape settlement and of a trip to the governor's country estate;
impressions of VOC employees at the Cape and recommendations for ca­
reer moves to her father (then the governor-general in Batavia). All this is
178

--- PAGE: 211 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.211) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
interspersed with formulaic hopes for God's blessing and anticipation of
the "dear patria."
Patria was not Java. The homeland so reverently invoked was the Hol­
land Johanna van Riebeeck had never seen. She was only traveling to it
because her husband was under orders from the Company directors to sail
with the return fleet on stepping down from the highest VOC office. The
couple's request for retirement in Batavia had been denied. Johanna's let­
ters suggest consciousness of rank and assimilation of a Netherlands iden­
tity that transcended the local. In her we find the Creole lady who insists on
a European identity to preserve status wherever her marriage career might
take her in Asia, Africa, or Holland. The publication of her letters by Bos­
man in 1952 was part of a project of celebrating "Riebeeckiana."
Bosman's volume also contains family records drawn up by Jan van Rie­
beeck, the Cape's founder, notes of a return visit there by Abraham van
Riebeeck in 1676, and three of his letters to his daughter, plus Johanna's
provisions book. That context gives to the letter reader of today a sense of
Johanna's being a part of Netherlands history more than of VOC Asian
societies. We hear her voice when she has left Batavia forever and is prepar­
ing for a new beginning in Europe.
In 1991 John Landwehr and Peter van der Krogt published a compre­
hensive bibliography of all printed works produced by the VOC in the
Netherlands and by VOC-licensed printers in Batavia and Ceylon. 19 The
materials are grouped into three categories: single-page items such as plac­
ards and poems; pamphlet-length publications of sailing instructions, sal­
ary lists, collections of prayers and the like; and books. The compilers give
the full title of each entry, provide brief notes on contents, and identify the
archive where the original is held. Indexes of titles and authors offer entry
to this massive bibliography. It yields the unexpected detail. For example,
the painter of the Cnoll family emerges as subject of a poem penned by
Jacob Steendam and printed on satin in honor of Coeman's marriage to
Juffr. Judith Augustynus in Batavia in 1671 (entry 1553).
Landwehr's bibliography of printed books establishes the VOC as a ma­
jor sponsor of scholarship in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The
Company financed printing of histories of new regions in which its em­
ployees now worked, such as Japan. It underwrote the cost of natural his­
tory investigations. It preserved Asian knowledge of marine life and botany
through publication of expensive volumes, lavishly illustrated, and through
the setting up of curiosity cabinets. The VOC's role as producer of scientific
information is examined by the contributors to Bethlehem's and Meijer's
VOC en cultuur. 20 It includes biographical studies of early Japan scholars
Engelbert Kaempfer and Isaac Titsingh and chapters on the VOC's impor­
tant contribution to knowledge of Asian societies by financing translations
179

--- PAGE: 212 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.212) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
from Asian languages into Dutch and publication of many dictionaries. In
the Bethlehem and Meijer collection Jurrien van Goor examines the close
connection between trade and science, and this theme is explored at great
length in Harold 1. Cook's Matters of Exchange. 21 The VOC and the physi­
cal and social sciences are the subject of a recent collection of essays by
Leonard Blusse and Ilonka Ooms, Kennis en Compagnie.22
It is also important to establish that the VOC put printed books into In­
donesian hands from early in the seventeenth century. For example, 10,000
copies of the Reformed Church's catechism were printed in Ambonese in
1623. This multiplication of books occurred at a time in Islamic history
when bans on printing in Arabic language and script, issued and upheld by
successive Ottoman caliphs until the nineteenth century, restricted books
for a Muslim readership to handwritten form and therefore to very limited
numbers. VOC publications also shed light on the progress of Islamizing
in the archipelago. For example, Batavia's press gives a picture of Islamic
practice in the archipelago in the middle of the eighteenth century in its
compendium of Muslim customary laws then being observed or recalled,
including those concerning marriage and inheritance. The numbers of
printed books in Malay were sufficient to warrant a bibliography by 1736.
In that year, Landwehr's compilation tells us, Batavia's VOC press pub­
lished a bibliography of Malay books by both European and Indigenous
authors and also a list of unpublished manuscripts in Gothic, Roman, Ara­
bic, and Malay characters (entry 759).
The VOC Bibliography contains 1,674 entries. Inevitably, the well-to-do
and the litigious found their way into print. They figure in numerous plac­
ards, regulations, instructions, and poems of circumstance. Book-length
biographical studies of VOC personnel and their Asian colleagues remain
scarce. There are short studies of Dutch, Chinese, and Indian merchants in
All of One Company: The VOC in Biographical Perspective. One of them,
the merchant Jan Albert Sichterman, developed a love for Chinese porce­
lain, Japanese lacquer ware, and Indian ivory. His biographer, Christiaan
1. A. Jorg, tells us that Sichterman's possessions filled two ships of the return
fleet to Holland in 1745 and were displayed in a grand house built to his own
design in Groningen. 23 The subtitle of Karel Schoeman's Afrikaans-language
Kinders van die Kompanjie is "Cape Life in the Seventeenth CenturY,"24but
many of the people he selected for mini-biographies traveled widely within
VOC Asia. There are entries, for instance, for the scientists and administra­
tors Rumphius, Willem ten Rhijne, and Rijcklof van Goens, but also for
"Sijmon die Arabier, tolk" (The Arab Simon, interpreter) and "Angela van
Bengale, vryswartin" (Angela from Bengal, free Black woman).
Eyewitness accounts of a range of VOC employees are assembled in
Roeper and Van Gelder's In dienst van de Compagnie. 25 Alfons van der
180

--- PAGE: 213 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.213) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
Kraan has published studies of Rijcklof van Goens and Jeremias van
Vliet.26 Leonard Blusse developed a chapter from his 1986 collection of
essays27into a full-length study of Cornelia van Nieuwenroode, the central
lady in the Cnoll painting by Coeman. 28 Asian royals are the subject of
biographical chapters in Hoi en handel (Court and Commerce). Mention
can be made of Leonard Andaya's study of Sultanah Safiatuddin Shah,
ruler of Aceh between 1641 and 1675.29 Aceh's succession of female rulers
is the subject of a doctoral thesis from the University of London, "Rule
behind the Silk Curtain: A Study of the Sultanahs of Aceh 1641-1699" by
Sher Banu Khan.
Other scholars have studied individuals who negotiated multiple worlds,
such as female traders, free burgers, and the religious. Dhiravat na Pombe­
jra took as subject Osoet Pegua, a Mon woman whose business life as a
broker between the VOC and the Siamese court is established in Company
records, as well as details of her domestic life that included bearing children
to two Dutch men stationed in Ayutthaya in the first decades of the seven­
teenth century.30In 2003, William Bradley Horton revived interest in the
part-Siamese, part-German Pieter Erberveld whom the VOC had convicted
of conspiring with the Javanese Raden Kartadria to kill all Christians in
Batavia and had subsequently executed in 1722.31 Horton's article reviewed
Dutch scholarship on the facts and fiction of the Erberveld story, but his
major focus was on Malay and later Indonesian language versions of it.
He traced accounts from an 1889 Chinese-Malay newspaper (reproduced
in the article in full) through to an Indonesian television drama version
from the 1960s. Mayumi Yamamoto complemented this study by investi­
gating Japanese-language sources relating to Erberveld. Her focus is on the
monument erected by the Dutch as a deterrent to other would-be rebels.
She explains that the Japanese military, during their occupation of Java, re­
interpreted Erberveld as a "half-caste" independence fighter.32 Erberveld's
head and a plaque detailing his crimes had remained a fixture of colonial
Batavia. De Haan's Platenalbum shows the Erberveld monument as it was
in colonial times; Heuken's photograph is of the same monument following
its reinstallation in the 1980s.
Other scholars have mined VOC handwritten documents in Holland and
overseas archives. For example, Ruurdje Laarhoven went through volumes
of receipts and bills of lading to study the trade in textiles between In­
dia and Java. Her study demonstrated the importance of the Java market
and how the VOC sought to identify and satisfy the tastes of Javanese
consumers. 33
Notary records provide source material for important new studies. Hen­
drik Niemeijer has scrutinized manumission records from the wills made by
Asian and European owners in a study of Batavia's free(d) Asian Christian
181

--- PAGE: 214 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.214) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
community. He has also established that VOC institutions provided mecha­
nisms for Indigenous peoples to air and possibly resolve disputes over land,
house title, and other property. 34 Remco Raben has also investigated the
communities that grew up around Batavia's walls.35 He argues that mobility
was key to the emergence of the Betawi as a distinct community, and he
dates its formation to the eighteenth century. Old Dutch documents de­
scribe Batavia's environs as a series of villages, each inhabited by a separate
ethnic group under its own headman. In reality, Raben finds villages had
constantly changing, multi-ethnic populations. Men left for stints in Dutch
armies. Emancipated slaves and newcomers moved in. Individuals crossed
ethnic and residential boundaries through marriage, assumed different
identities, fused into Betawi or Batavians. Not so, argue representatives of
this group today. They descend from princes of Sunda Kelapa, Banten, and
Demak who introduced Islam to the region.36 Most importantly, they claim
Indigenous rights to valuable real estate in today's Jakarta.
Eric Jones turned to another source, the records of local law courts to
which Asian residents of Batavia and environs brought their slaves to de­
mand punishment for behaviors ranging from rudeness, assault, and theft
to flight. Clerks took down sworn statements by owners and also slaves;
they recorded testimony from the accuseds' friends and accomplices who
were themselves slave personnel from an array of Batavia's businesses and
households. The court's clerks translated their testimony into Dutch and
recorded the aldermen's judicial rulings. Here, in the trials Jones recon­
structs of Danie, Poedak, Christina van Ambon, Sitie van Makasar, and
Esperanca van Bugis, can be heard the voices of slaves, long ago punished
and dead, complaining of ill treatment, describing their feelings of hurt,
offense, or rage, justifying their actions against perceived injustices. Oc­
casionally there is a hint of a Dutchman's personal views on slavery in the
magistrates' rulings as they comment on the alleged crimes and give expla­
nations for the thinking behind the sentences they issued.37
In the seventeenth century the Dutch were more on sea than on land.
Port settlements were turned outward: the sea was their lifeline. When the
rulers of Banten and Mataram sent armies to attack the fledgling Dutch
settlement, it was ships and sea lanes that saved the tiny republic, and it was
ships that connected each settlement in the Indonesian archipelago to the
others set down across southern Africa, Iraq, India, Indochina, Malaya,
and Japan between the 1630s and 1660s. VOC ships carried the Company
personnel and their female kin who circulated between settlements in the
course of office and marriage careers. Historians of the Indian Ocean have
popularized the concept of littoral societies. Remco Raben has made a
comparative study of the inhabitants of Batavia and Colombo. 38 New stud­
ies await scholars who would bring all the VOC societies together.
182

--- PAGE: 215 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.215) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
One of the most innovative research projects of the last decade was
TANAP (Towards a New Age of Partnership), launched by the Na­
tional Archives of the Netherlands and the Research School for Asian,
African, and Amerindian Studies of Leiden University. The overall aim
was to further the development of early modern world history by mak­
ing accessible the 25 million pages of VOC documents generated by VOC
officials and the Asian kings, nobles, merchants, harbor masters, and
seamen with whom they interacted. Goals included the preservation or
recovery and study of VOC documents in depositories around Asia and
Africa, scholarships for training a new generation of scholars, and tran­
scription of documents important for local histories. In this project, young
historians from twelve universities in Asia participated in a master's de­
gree that included training in deciphering seventeenth-century Dutch
handwriting.
TANAP graduates subsequently embarked on academic theses based on
VOC documents in the national libraries and archives of their home coun­
tries. The first published results expand our knowledge of Asian-European
interactions in the early modern period. Anjana Singh's social history of
the VOC settlement at Fort Cochin and its surroundings on the Malabar
Coast develops local and regional histories and traces the emergence of
new social groups such as Christian Mestizas.39 She shows how Indigenous
people and traveling Asian merchants made use of VOC legal institutions
to resolve commercial and personal disputes. Hoang Anh Tuan's Silk for
Silver focuses on trade, political, and cultural relations between Vietnam­
ese of the Trinh-ruled state and the VOC in the years 1637 to 1700.40 In it
he documents how the VOC stimulated local silk and ceramic industries
and integrated Tonkin merchants and goods into the intra-Asian trade. He
identifies VOC goals and Vietnamese ambitions: the Dutch wanted trade
goods they could not easily obtain from China; the Trinh rulers wanted
Dutch firearms, ammunition, and military expertise to further campaigns
against the rival Nguyen southern state.
In Cape Town a group of transcribers for TEPC (Transcription of Es­
tate Papers of the Cape) have been making available online inventories of
wills and auctions made there between 1652 and 1795 by VOC officials,
European settlers, freed Africans, and also Indonesians and Chinese. These
last two communities stemmed from exiles and convicts sent by Batavia to
the Cape. There, in the lists of spoons and teacups, pictures, books, chairs,
clothes, and other items of material culture, is a wealth of information that
opens up possibilities for discovering histories of the ancestors of today's
South Africans. Like Jones's work with slave testimonies, this transcrip­
tion project brings to the fore social groups hitherto part of the "grey and
undifferentiated" mass.
183

--- PAGE: 216 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.216) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Two recent studies of the Cape settlement are M. A. M. Verstegen's
De Indische Zeeherberg (The Indies Tavern by the Sea)41 and Dan Sleigh's
Afrikaans-language Die buiteposte (The Outer Settlements).42 Nigel
Worden assesses recent scholarship in his "New Approaches to VOC His­
tory in South Africa."43Fresh work on VOC settlements includes a study of
Galle by Lodewijk Wagenaar. 44 "Biographies" of settlements are comple­
mented by studies of Asian kingdoms and capitals. Dhiravat na Pombejra
mined VOC sources for studies of Ayutthaya and the Dutch trading center
there.45 In 1656 the VOC's Rijcklof van Goens had written a report for
the Company's directors on his five postings to Java's Mataram kingdom
between 1648 and 1654. It was first released to the general reading public
in 1667 as Javaense Reyse (Java Journey) and republished in 1995 with an
introduction and annotations by Darja de Wever. In it Van Goens gives
detailed descriptions of the Javanese countryside, Mataram's administra­
tive apparatus, and the complicated and dangerous life of courtiers serving
Amangkurat 11.46
Luc Nagtegaal drew on VOC eyewitness accounts to detail the workings
of Javanese royalty in his doctoral thesis that was published as Riding the
Dutch Tiger in 1996.47 Merle Ricklefs's detailed studies of Java, for example,
his The Seen and Unseen Worlds in Java, are based on a close comparison
of Javanese and VOC records. 48 Peter Carey and Vincent Houben used
Javanese chronicles, letters, and genealogies to investigate the contribution
of women to Javanese palace life.49 They concluded that women connected
to the royal families and the nobility had greater freedom and input into
political life at the beginning of the nineteenth century in comparison with
protocols governing elite women at that century's end. Ann Kumar, in an
extensive study, presented court life through the special female perspective
of a royal guard. 50 Her comparison of Javanese and VOC chronicles estab­
lished that their authors had very similar concerns and judgments on such
contemporary issues as declining prosperity, increasing social violence, and
outbreaks of smallpox. 51 Overall, she concludes that while in Europe the
VOC was a force for modernization, in Java the consequences of its modern
methods of accounting, reporting, and organization were to tie Javanese
more firmly to the land, entrench despotic rule, and suppress inquiry.
Chapters in Jakarta-Batavia, such as "JABOTABEK Place Names" and
"Jakarta Greenery" draw on VOC and later Dutch records to link past to
present. 52 Van Gelder and Wagenaar identify the VOC's lingering impact
in the Netherlands on Dutch material culture and society through chapters
on old warehouses, shipyards, food, and drink in Sporen van de Compagnie
(Traces of the Company).53 The late Professor M. A. P. Meilink-Roelofsz
and her colleagues highlighted the impact of Dutch scholarship on Asian
historiography in an anthology of English translations of excerpts from
184

--- PAGE: 217 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.217) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
work written between 1865 and 1976. An example is De Haan's "Everyday
Life in Batavia."54
Commemoration in Holland of the four-hundredth anniversary of the
VOC's founding resulted in a spate of books, many of them lavishly il­
lustrated, pitched at readerships scholarly and popular. Mention can be
made of the Vademecum van de Oost- en West-Indische Compagnie of Peter
van Wiechen,55 The Colourful World of the VOC by Leo Akveld and Els
Jacobs,56Hollanders uit en thuis (Hollanders Abroad and at Home),57 and
two major volumes from Kees Zandvliet. The Rijksmuseum's historian and
archivist with special interest in the Indonesia collections published Map­
ping for Money in this quatercentenary year.58 It traces the expansion of
European knowledge of Asian and American coastlines, discusses char­
acteristic perspectives of maps, gives vignettes of important figures in the
history of cartography, as well as discussing the VOC's substantial contri­
butions to mapmaking. He also assembled, in The Dutch Encounter with
Asia, an extraordinary array of paintings, portraits, and objects made by
Dutch artists between 1600 and 1950.59 Some of the inclusions, such as
marine scenes and Andries Beeckman's 1657 painting of Batavia's market
and castle, are well known, but Zandvliet has brought from obscurity such
important works as the portrait by an unknown Dutch artist of Sultan
Saifudin of Tidore (r. 1657-1707). His is one of the few Indonesian faces
known to us from the seventeenth century.
In 1999, Marie-Odette Scalliet and her fellow contributors produced a
treasure trove of artwork in Pictures from the Tropics.60 The scope of the
term "Dutch Colonial Period" in the subtitle covers VOC works as well as
those created in the Netherlands Indies era. Haks and Maris had performed
an important service for historians seeking documentation on the foreign
artists who worked in the Indonesian archipelago through publication in
1995 of a comprehensive listing of them together with mini-biographies. 61
Fascination with pictures from the past and recognition of their value
for history writing continue in a number of recent works. Annabel Teh
Gallop edited an important collection of early nineteenth-century illustra­
tions made by artists and engravers working in the Raffles era of Java's
history.62The accompanying text is in both Indonesian and English. There
are drawings of Javanese laborers stripping back vines and creepers from
the Borobudur, sketches of pony transports and ferry crossings, paintings
of Javanese plowing and planting rice fields, relaxing around food stalls,
or intent on a cock fight. In one remarkable watercolor by John Newman,
two men, a European and a Javanese, sit stiffly on chairs opposite each
other, wine glasses raised as in a toast, retainers on hand, and a framed
painting of European sailing ships on the wall. The painting suggests the
impact on this artist of the Javanese two-dimensional style of illustration.
185

--- PAGE: 218 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.218) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
Gallop's album is also significant because it includes botanical studies that
are the work of anonymous Indian and Chinese artists working in Euro­
pean styles and paintings by unknown Javanese artists. Some of the latter
are examples of Java's illuminated manuscript tradition. In addition there
is a detailed representation, dating from the early nineteenth century, of
a royal procession painted in wayang-style, but showing the influence of
European three-dimensional techniques.
VOC-era materials continue to support new fields of research in South­
east Asian Studies. An example is the work now starting on sensory his­
tory. Alain Corbin, Roy Porter, and other historians of Europe have shown
how sensory evidence can be extracted from histories of technology, mu­
nicipal regulations, diaries and novels, and landscape design. Raquel Reyes
and Peter Boomgaard are pioneering Southeast Asian sensory histories
through studies of urban smells and sound. Johannes Rach's drawings
of eighteenth-century Batavia's streets, rutted by carriage-wheels, and of
canals that were receptacles for human waste and urban detritus provide
material for the resourceful researcher. 63
I have focused on sampling studies using VOC sources in this review
of the past quarter century of research because it is the VOC chapters of
the first edition of Social World that made the greatest impact. I brought
my history of Mestizo society to an end through its slow unmaking in the
nineteenth century. For insights into that century I drew on newspaper ad­
vertisements in the "personals" columns, on colonial literature in the broad
sense of travelers' accounts, pamphlets, magazines, stories, and novels, and
on photographs in Nieuwenhuys's 1961 collection and in the KITLV Ar­
chive. Nieuwenhuys subsequently brought out three more photograph al­
bums to form a Tempo Doeloe series: Baren en oudgasten (Newcomers and
Old-Timers) in 1981, Komen en blijven (Coming and Settling) in 1982,
and Met vreemde oogen (Through Strange Eyes) in 1998.64 Wim Willems and
his colleagues followed in the tradition of Nieuwenhuys by enriching their
1997 book of Indies family histories with drawings, paintings, and photo­
graphs from VOC and later eras.65
The work of important photographers, such as Woodbury and Page,
and Jean Demmeni, was showcased by Steven Wachlin66 and Leo Haks 67 in
the 1980s and 1990s. In 1991 Gerrit Knaap introduced Indonesia's first In­
digenous professional photographer, Kassian Cephas, through a biography
richly illustrated with his works.68 Cephas was a bridge between worlds: the
Javanese who mastered the colonial's technology, who became a Christian,
who won commissions from Yogyakarta's royals to immortalize them in
photographs, who left a visual record of Java's antiquities as well as of its
modern world of steam locomotive and gas light. His application to be-
186

--- PAGE: 219 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.219) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
come "equalized" -that is, made European in legal rights and status-was
granted by the colonial government in 1891.
Peter Boomgaard has tapped into the huge photographic collection of
the Tropenmuseum with his 2001 Het Indie Boek. 69 Gajah Mada Univer­
sity's Bambang Purwanto, a specialist in nineteenth-century economic his­
tory and peasant studies, has also turned to the Dutch photographic record
to develop histories of daily life of the past century.70
Some descendants of Indies clans, with branches in the Netherlands and
in Indonesia, have published their own family's albums. A recent example is
Het album van Mientje, a collection of 105 photographs assembled on the
occasion of her marriage in Batavia in 1862.71 Mientje was Wilhelmina van
der Hucht, member of a group of Indies families (Van der Hucht, Holle,
Van den Berg, and Kerkhoven) who were closely connected by marriage
and by business interests in tea plantations in West Java. They form the
subject of Hella Haase's Heren van de Thee (Lords of Tea).72Their diaries,
letters, and memoirs also furnished source material for her collection of
short stories on Indies life that was published in English translation as
Forever a Stranger.73
The late Pramoedya Ananta Toer collected Malay-language fiction writ­
ten by Javanese, Chinese, and Eurasians that revealed interactions and mu­
tual influences between these communities from the reverse perspective. In
1982 the Jakarta publishing house Hasta Mitra published an anthology of
these stories and rhymed fiction with a historical introduction. Pramoedya
called this collection, salvaged from his personal library, Tempo Doeloe.74
He also demonstrated his wide and deep knowledge of historical mate­
rials in the quartet of novels tracing the birth of Indonesia: Bumi Manu­
sia (1980), Anak Semua Bangsa (1981), Jejak Langkah (1985), and Rumah
Kaca (1988),75and in his lengthy novel of Majapahit, Arus Balik, to which
he gave the subtitle "An Epic of the Maritime World."76
There have been numerous studies of colonial fiction by scholars such as
E. M. Beekman, Tessel Pollmann, Elsbeth Locher-Scholten, Tineke Hell­
wig, Charles Coppel, and Christine Pitt. 77 In particular, the figure of the
nyai has been explored. Nyai stories were also standard fare in the popular
Komedie Stamboel. Touring theater companies with Eurasian actors and
Chinese finance performed plays from a varied repertoire in the Malay lan­
guage to audiences composed of a broad ethnic and social band in Java's
towns large and small. The troupe founded in Surabaya in 1891, of which
Auguste Mahieu was the most important of its actor-managers, first per­
formed the famous Nyai Dasima in 1900.78 In versions of the nyai story by
Indies and Indonesian authors and playwrights the heroine was variously
a tragically wronged woman, a romantic figure, a shrewd operator, or a
187

--- PAGE: 220 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.220) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
symbol of colonial exploitation. The 1970 Indonesian movie Samiun dan
Dasima covered all these themes and also portrayed the nyai as longing for
reunion with her own people and the freedom to perform her Islamic obli­
gations openly.79In a 1996 article I compared versions of the Nyai Dasima
story published between 1896 and 1965 in Dutch and variants of Batavia
Malay with the film version of Nyai Dasima and discussed changes to the
story in relation to the period of their production. 80
For the historical anthropologist Ann Laura Stoler, the nyai was a start­
ing point for exploring colonial conditions of race and gender. In research­
ing Capitalism and Confrontation in Sumatra's Plantation Belt Stoler docu­
mented that most incidents of violence among the plantation work force
were not cases of exploited coolie striking back at capitalist manager, but
were in fact between the laborers themselves.81 Chinese and Javanese men
fought each other over sexual access to the few women workers among
them. In a transposition of "nyai studies" to Sumatra, Stoler found that
women's salaries were lower than the men's because employers judged
them, as many Indonesians did, to belong to society's dregs, women who
would casually and entrepreneurially supplement their wages through sell­
ing themselves to fellow coolies after the day's work in fields or factory was
done. Stoler has explored race and gender relations in colonial contexts of
the Netherlands Indies and Vietnam in numerous publications, and she has
developed themes of race, gender, and power in major studies such as her
2002 Carnal Knowledge and Imperial Power.82 The translation into English
and reprinting in 1979 and 1982 of novels from the 1930s by the Szekely
pair, with introductions by historian Anthony Reid, also contributed to the
interest in social relations within tropical colonies.83
Pramoedya Ananta Toer made a nyai the dominant character of the
story-within-the-story in Bumi Manusia. In the colonial-era novels of
P. A. Daum, the nyai had figured as teacher: through her the European
man learned Malay language and norms and how to go about managing his
domestic staff and workforce. Nyai as white man's teacher pervades all the
tangled plots of love, lust, superstition, revenge attacks, and suicide. Most
commentators on Pramoedya's fiction have dwelled on the Ontosoroh story
as exemplifying the evil of colonial racism. But in Pramoedya's historically
grounded treatment of the Indonesian woman/European man relation­
ship, it is important to note that he shows the white man as the teacher
who guides the nyai into European culture and skills. Nyai Ontosoroh has
learned Dutch from him, so that she speaks, reads, and writes with fluency
in the language of the colony's rulers. She has learned how to manage his
dairy business-how to market its products, keep the accounts, and run a
profitable enterprise. She has also learned how to shoulder the burden of
career and child raising alone, for her partner is sunk into alcohol-induced
188

--- PAGE: 221 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.221) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
stupor by the time the story begins, and it is Nyai Ontosoroh who steers the
course through Indies society for their Eurasian children.
The photographic record that Nieuwenhuys first popularized similarly
demonstrates the dynamism of interaction, rather than the passivity of
the Native in colonial history. As one example we may consider the sewing
machine. The improved version by I. M. Singer was first manufactured in
1850. After 1870, when migration to the Indies by Dutch women took off,
the sewing machine arrived in Java. The immigrant mistress quickly turned
it over to her Javanese seamstress, who learned how to operate the sewing
machine and supply the household's needs. Here, in the humble images of
the seamstress seated on the floor before a Singer, is evidence of a rapid
transfer of technology and a willingness to acquire new skills. Singer's
machine was operated by hand or foot pedal; it was portable. Javanese
women put this latest technology to use in Indigenous homes and home­
based businesses. They transferred the technology to Indigenous men who
staffed the tailors' shops that sprang up in colonial towns across the archi­
pelago as European and Asian customers alike demanded ready-to-wear
work clothes and uniforms.
Sewing technology and the textile and garment industry have proved
productive sites for exploring relationships between the various communi­
ties of the Netherlands East Indies. Inger McCabe Elliot, Robyn Maxwell,
Alit Veldhuisen-Djajasoebrata, M. 1. de Raadt-Apell, and the contributors
to volume 8 of Indonesia Indah are some of the specialists who have ex­
plored developments in the batik industry in terms of mass production,
improved cottons and dyes, and new designs and designers.84 Batik studies
naturally led to studies of who wore batik, how, and in which settings. In
the first edition of Social World I focused on the kain kebaya, on changes to
style of blouse and batik patterns of the wrap, and on the women who wore
this costume. It seemed a distinctive characteristic of Dutch colonialism
that European women adopted and popularized variants of Indigenous
costume for wear at home and in commissioned photographs. By contrast,
English women in colonial-era India are not generally associated with
wearing the sari or shalwar kameez. I traced a history of change as kain
kebaya became relegated to house wear for women with European status
by the late nineteenth century. Simultaneously it became "traditional" dress
for Javanese women because cheap batik cloth was then coming within
their purchasing power. The technique of applying patterns on to cloth by
metal stamps replaced hand painting of designs. Production through the
putting-out system and factory quickly brought batik lengths to shops and
market stalls across Java.
Following Indonesia's independence, the kain kebaya was propelled to
the national stage by President Sukarno and later by Siti Hartinah Suharto
189

--- PAGE: 222 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.222) ---
~
\0
o
"Transfer of Technology," 1913. Operation of the sewing machine passed from European mistress of the
house to her servants, and through them the technology spread to village households and to tailor shops
in the new colonial towns. (KITLV 32970)
....,
~
m
Vl
on
5=r
~
~
rU
o
"Tj
to
>
~<:
5=

--- PAGE: 223 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.223) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
when she was first lady of Indonesia. In a 1996 article I examined how the
Western suit for men also changed meaning in the colony.85In the Nether­
lands it was the dress of the middle-class man who had won the vote, the
preferred clothing of the Dutch democrat-in-making; but in the colony it
was the dress of Dutch men in civil service, armed forces, and commercial
enterprises who exercised near autocratic powers over Indonesians. It be­
came the desired dress of Indonesian men who aspired to replace them. In
photographs of the historic moment of the declaration of independence,
Sukarno and his male leadership group wear the Western suit, the single
female politician among them and the principal women onlookers wear
kain kebaya. At the moment of the nation's birth, men seem to be grasp­
ing the future as a modern-day governing class, whereas women seem to
represent the nation's essence, a particular and local past rather than the
contemporary and global.
In later publications, dress was interpreted more broadly to include ac­
cessories and body adornment, and researchers further explored histories
of modernization and modernity. In Outward Appearances: Dressing State
and Society in Indonesia, uniforms, shoes, trousers, and head cover drew
attention to ethnic and gender relations; to changing patterns of religious
practice; to the ability of the individual, through dress, to demonstrate mul­
tiple affiliations; and to dress as badge of an individual's class and political
affinities.86
In the years of New Order government, kain kebaya was the habitual
dress worn by Mrs. Suharto in Indonesia and on state visits abroad, and it
became the uniform of women in their state-defined "functions" as wife,
manager of the household, mother, socializer of children, and citizen. Fol­
lowing President Suharto's fall from power in 1998 the kain kebaya seemed
a tainted symbol of KKN, the trio of letters that in Indonesian stands for
collusion, corruption, and nepotism. Now the kain kebaya has traveled to
the pages of Indonesia's glossy fashion magazines and wealthy women's
wardrobes, reinterpreted by a new generation of fashion designers for the
young individualist's nightlife and conspicuous display.87
Raden Ajeng Kartini and her sisters habitually wore kain kebaya and
saw it as demonstrating that they remained authentically Javanese even as
they adopted for their own Western ideals of individual liberty and devel­
oping personal potential. Kartini studies flourished in the 1980s. The late
Syumanjaya directed the film R. A. Kartini, which was released in 1983.88
This film forms an interesting counterpart to the letters and Kartini studies
for it downplays the relationships Kartini conducted with Dutch people
through correspondence in favor of the more visually dramatic relation­
ships conducted directly with members of her family circle. The demand
of the film medium for action sets Kartini firmly in a Javanese context of
191

--- PAGE: 224 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.224) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
home, family, retainers, and dependents. From a historical point of view,
her interactions with Europeans were far fewer than with her immediate
relatives and acquaintances, though no less influential for their brevity.
In 1993, Danilyn Rutherford reviewed the copious Kartini literature
in "Unpacking A National Heroine."89 Advancing understanding of this
observer of Java was the transcription in full of all Kartini's handwritten
letters to members of the Abendanon family and their preparation for pub­
lication by the late Fritz Jacquet in 1987.90 These letters provided answers
to questions vexing the Kartini scholars, such as details concerning her
parentage. Most important for me was the extensive commentary Kartini
made on Java in the years 1900-1903. 91 Joost Cote extended Jacquet's work
by translating and publishing the complete text of her letters to Stella Zee­
handelaar. 92
New material for the study of the Netherlands Indies in the years of
competing nationalisms can be found in Cote's 1998 article on the letters
Kartini's younger sisters wrote to the Abendanons following her death and
until 1936.93 Cote's edition of them in English under the title Realizing the
Dream of R. A. Kartini, his extensive annotations, and his commentary
represent a major contribution to the intellectual history of modern In­
donesia. 94 Mia Bustam's translation of a selection of these letters from the
original Dutch into Indonesian ensures an Indonesian readership for this
graphic record of rapid social and political change in the last decades of
colonial rule.95
Kartini is an ambiguous heroine for many Indonesians. Her intimate
friendships with Dutch people, her ambition to be a single career woman,
and her denunciation of polygamy and child marriage did not find sym­
pathy from nationalists and Islamists, either in the years immediately fol­
lowing her death or now. Another disconcerting figure from colonial times
is the artist Raden Saleh (1807-1880). His paintings and life have been
the subject of several studies by Indonesian authors,96 but a definitive bi­
ography remains to be written. How Saleh negotiated the twin worlds of
colonial and Javanese elites remains to be explored. For example, through
what form did he marry the Christian Eurasian Anna Winkelman? Did she
lose her European status on marriage to a Javanese Muslim? How did Saleh
arrange a divorce from her and subsequent marriage into the extended
Yogyakarta royal family? Can his paintings be interpreted as subtle anti­
colonial, "proto-nationalist" statements? Did he "orientalize" himself as
an Eastern prince in the petty courts of central Europe?
During the same period there were Dutchmen in the colony "orientaliz­
ing" themselves. Theosophists worshipped an ancient Java of their imagin­
ing and pursued studies of Sanskrit and old Javanese literature; they wore
robes and renounced eating meat. Dutch and Javanese of similar affinities
192

--- PAGE: 225 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.225) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
met for study and socializing in theosophical societies. They supported the
Java Institute, founded in 1919 to further philological studies, collect and
collate manuscripts, and publish Java's literary heritage. They promoted
knowledge of Javanese culture through support for Yogyakarta's Sonobu­
doyo Museum, which was established in 1935. Admiration for a pre-Dutch
past found political expression in the notion that a people capable of self­
rule must reconnect with their roots. Theosophists were comfortable in
considering Islam a foreign religion that had weakened Javanese culture
and thus helped create conditions that led to Javanese backwardness in
comparison to Dutch dynamism.
Iskandar P. Nugraha reveals the substantial support theosophists gave
to Indonesian students in a master's thesis titled "The Theosophical Edu­
cational Movement in Colonial Indonesia."97 Membership subscriptions
of the Theosophical Society supported the studies in Java and in Holland
of a number of Indonesians who were to become prominent in the na­
tionalist movement. Mohammad Hatta, Indonesia's first vice-president,
for example, received support from the colony's theosophists for university
studies in Holland. Photographs in the KITLV archive show beneficiaries
of the theosophists in Holland, the men dapper in suits, women in frocks
and bobbed hair. Rudolf Mrazek uses the term "Indonesian dandy" for the
men. He explored newspapers, magazines, catalogues, photographs, and
fiction for his study of the Indonesian variant of the dandy and the politics
of clothing. "People were struggling," he writes, "to find outfits through
which they could make a statement about the modern age."98
Kees van Dijk's study of soap in the colony complements this study,
for he constructs a history of hygiene that incorporated Indies inhabitants
into new modes of modernity. New products and advertisements for them
altered personal habits, created new attitudes to the body, one's own and
others', and entangled purchasers in consumption patterns engendered by
advertising. 99 The KITLV images archive has again proved for me an im­
portant source of information and ideas for a study of bathing and hygiene
practices and of inter-community relations. lOo
There were other Indonesians untouched by these trends. They rode
the colonists' trains through a Javanese landscape remade by commer­
cial plantation agriculture to pursue quite different ambitions. Ann Ku­
mar has followed one Mas Rahmat, who documented, in Malay written
in the modified Arabic script called jawi, travels through Java to meditate
in caves, receive those who acknowledged his special powers to heal and
foretell the future, deliver opinions on correct religious practice, and medi­
ate conflicts.WI Mas Rahmat was a well-to-do landowner, had connections
to the Yogyakarta royal family, and had received a solid pesantren (Islamic
school) education. It was the 1880s, a highpoint of colonial rule, when the
193

--- PAGE: 226 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.226) ---
~
\0
.,J:::..
"Indonesian law students in The Netherlands," c. 1932. Second from the viewer's right is Maria Ullfah, who
was to serve as a cabinet minister of the republican government during Indonesia's struggle for indepen­
dence. (KITLV 31525)
....,
~
m
Vl
on
5=r
~
~
rU
o
"Tj
to
>
~<:
5=

--- PAGE: 227 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.227) ---
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
grip of the foreigner on the Indonesian archipelago was strong. And yet
the Dutch barely enter the consciousness of the diarist. Rahmat lived in a
parallel thought world, even as he assimilated into his lifestyle eating with
knife and fork and comparing the living standard of imams with that of
high Dutch officials. The material culture and transformations to Javanese
lifestyles that the cash economy brought and that engulfed Javanese such
as Rahmat are detailed in data collected from 2,900 households distributed
among 24 villages in the Comal district of East Java at the end of the nine­
teenth century and analyzed by a group of scholars in Beneath the Smoke
of the Sugar-Mill. 102
Dutch scholarly techniques of textual criticism turned some Javanese
to the past. Alan Feinstein, discussing preservation of manuscripts in In­
donesia, notes the importance of sustaining the interest of future genera­
tions in their literary heritages. These are documented in Illuminations,
the beautifully illustrated study of the writing traditions of Indonesia's
peoples. 103 But many Indonesians, in the last decades of colonial rule, no
longer sought inspiration in chronicles of former kings. They began to
think about the future in political terms derived from study of European
thinkers. They wanted separation from the weight of the past, Indigenous
and foreign, and to develop a new, Indonesian identity and a people that
would stand alone.
The tools of modernity, such as mechanized transport, roads, telegraph,
newspapers, postal service, and radio, encouraged and facilitated a simi­
lar separation among the Dutch. Frances Gouda explored Dutch culture
overseas through prisms of colonial rhetoric, exhibition, and practice in
the years 1900-1942. 104 Immigrants could live differently, more connected
to Holland in mentality than before. Elsbeth Locher-Scholten charts the
outer signs of this change in "Summer Dresses and Canned Food."105
Henk Schulte Nordholt calls this phenomenon "Tropical Netherland" in
contrast to the Indies of Tempo Doeloe. The letters his own mother wrote
from 1937 to her mother-in-law in Holland typify how Headrick's "tools
of empire" transformed Dutch life styles.106 In these letters written from
the fringes of the colony, from Sumbawa, Flores, and Timor, Oet Schulte
Nordholt-Zielhuis gave accounts of the Dutch-language sermon broadcast
over the radio each Sunday, the cost of fruit in the market, and hanging
new curtains. She mentioned in passing her visits paid to the ladies of lead­
ing local families, but detail was reserved for things, thoughts, and actions
she shared in common with her relative in Zwolle.
Here we see the dissolution of the Mestizo world from the Dutch
side, the commitment to remain Dutch. In the letters from Oet Schulte
Nordholt-Zielhuis's near contemporary, Soematri Sosrohadikoesoemo,
written between 1901 and 1936, we see the same pulling apart, the rejection
195

--- PAGE: 228 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.228) ---
THE SOCIAL WORLD OF BATAVIA
by elite Javanese of the in-between person, the Eurasian and Mestizo cul­
ture. Instead, we find personal attachment of Javanese to individual Euro­
peans but the sense that husbands, at least, must make their way against all
career obstacles, be they Eurasian or Dutch. 107
And for the Eurasian? Ulbe Bosma and Remco Raben take a long view
in Being "Dutch" in the Indies. I08 They use the term Indische (Indies) to
underline that Eurasians, Creoles, and long-term European residents in
the Indies partook of a broad culture and orientation. Indische was not
a racial classification, although being of mixed ancestry and heritage was
a major component. Bosma and Raben narrate and analyze what I called
Mestizo history from the "inside." They stress that over time Eurasians and
long-term residents became part of the many regional societies in which
they lived. The authors substantiate their argument through biographies
of Indische families. What stands out in this study is that the lives explored
and retold are not just from Java, but from across the archipelago. We en­
counter the Messman family, whose members were knit into Bugis families
and histories, and the Neijs of Ternate, as well as the Dezentje clan, who
were part of the entourage of the Surakarta principality. Sinjo Frederik, a
Eurasian of Surabaya, became known as Pangeran Timoer and a devout
Muslim. Other lives can only be documented as members of groups, such
as the Eurasian children in orphanages and military barracks.
Bosma and Raben argue that in the years leading up to World War II
the impact of American motion pictures was pre-eminent among the many
influences drawing Indische people more firmly into the European commu­
nity. This "in-between" group became more Westernized, rather than more
"Dutchified." And so, when the politics of nationalism brought an end of
Mestizo society, those opting for a future as Europeans dispersed across
the world. Memoirs of a lost homeland, bitter memories of the terrors of
Indonesia in revolution, the failed vision of a new homeland in West New
Guinea, and the golden age conjured up by Tempo Doeloe remain for the
Indische while Europeans and Asians pursue new encounters and relation­
ships in the twenty-first century.I09
196

--- PAGE: 229 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.229) ---
Reference Matter

--- PAGE: 230 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.230) ---


--- PAGE: 231 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.231) ---
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN - MADISON
1. The Netherlandsand VOC Asia
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY,UNIVERSITYOF WISCONSIN - MADISON
2. The IndonesianArchipelago
199

--- PAGE: 232 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.232) ---
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY, UNIVERSITYOF WISCONSIN - MAOISON
3. VOC Trading Posts in India and Ceylon. Adapted from end map, W. Wijnaendts van Resandt
De gezaghebbers der Oost-Indische Compagnie.
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY, UNIVERSITYOF WISCONSIN - MADISON
4. Java, Early Seventeenth Century
200

--- PAGE: 233 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.233) ---
5. Java, EighteenthCentury
201

--- PAGE: 234 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.234) ---
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY,UNIVERSITYOF WISCONSIN - MADISON
6. Jacatra, 1619. Adaptedfrom H. A. Breuning,Het voormalige Batavia, Fig. 1.
202

--- PAGE: 235 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.235) ---
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY, UNIVERSITYOF WISCONSIN - MADISON
7. Batavia, 1627. Adaptedfrom H. A. Breuning,Het voormalige Batavia, Fig. 5.
203

--- PAGE: 236 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.236) ---
CARTOGRAPHICLABORATORY, UNIVERSITYOF WISCONSIN - MADISON
8. Batavia and southern suburbs, early nineteenth century. Adapted from H. A. Breuning, Het
voormaligeBatavia,Fig. 12.
204

--- PAGE: 237 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.237) ---
betr.
T
C
GO
Appendix 1
Family Trees
The genealogical tables in this appendix are not complete, but chart only certain lines that
have been selected to show family alliances and descent and marriage patterns. The
following are included:
1. Van der Parra Family
2. Alting Family
3. Van RiemsdijkFamily, part I
4. Baud-Senn van Basel Family
5. Huysman-van Imhoff Families
6. Descendants of Sophia Fauconier
7. Cranssen Descendants
8. Coop itGroen Family
9. Van Riemsdijk Family, part 2
Tables 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 7 should be read vertically, and tables 3,8, and 9 horizontally.
The abbreviations used are as follows:
b. born
d. died
m. married
liaison
betrothed
born in Europe
Creole
governor-general
205

--- PAGE: 238 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.238) ---
No
0\
Table 1. VAN DER PARRA FAMILY
Descent in the Male Line
ROMBOUT van der PARRA T
d. Ceylon
m. Henriette Wichelman c
I b. & d. Ceylon 1676-1697
CORNELIS ROMBOUTSZ. van der PARRAC
b. & d.Ceylon, 1687-1719
merchant & govt. secretary
m. Geertruida Susanna Spanuyt T
I
(she rem. Adriaan MatenT , commander
I~----------- of Malabar 1731, councillor extr.)
Maria Henriette van der Parrac PETRUS ALBERTUS van der PARRAC
m. Willem Bernard Albinus T , govr. & b. Ceylon, d. Batavia 1714-65
directorofMalacca, 1743-49 GG 1761-65
m. (1) at Colombo, 1733,
Elisabeth P. van Aerden ,
b. & d. Batavia
3 children,
d. in infancy
m. (2) at Batavia, 1743,
Adriana Johanna Bake,
b. &d. Batavia
PETRUS ALBERTUS v.d. PARRA de jonge
b. & d. Batavia
chief accountant of Indies 1781
m. Catharina Geertruida Breton
b. Surabaya
daughter of Director-Gen. Hendrik Breton
many descendants in Java

--- PAGE: 239 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.239) ---
Bake Antecedents and Some In-Laws
Lambertus Dudde T
bailiff, Batavia
r?
IDA DUDDE
m. (1) Constantijn Coomans T
I junior merchant, Ambon
m. (2) DAVID JOHAN BAKE T
govr. & director of
Ambon, 1732-36
No
-.l
Arnoldus C. Mom
resident of
Cirebon, councillor
DAVID SMITH*
ord. councillor
1781
Mr. Johan W. Bake
educ. in Neths.
d. Batavia
m. Sara Lelievelt
b. Ternate
ADRIANA JOHANNA BAKE
m. (1) Anthony Guldenarm T m. (2)PETRUSA. v. d. PARRA c
I GG 1761-65
P. A. v. d. Parra de jonge
* Smith's first marriage connected the governor-general to Ordinary Councillor Michiel Romp and Councillor Extr. J. R. van der Burgh.

--- PAGE: 240 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.240) ---
Table 2. ALTING FAMILY
Descent and Offices through First Marriage
EnsignT
Tslave woman
daughter, adopted by
Netherlanders & baptized
HENDRINA MARIA KNABE
GO 1780-97
(rem. Maria Susanna Grebel)
No
00
(1)
Elisabeth Fockelyna
m~ (1) Mr. Joachim Wiggerts T
(2) Steven Poelman T
councillor extr. (rem.
Philippina M. Th.
Senn van Basel)
(2) (3)
Constantia Cornelia
m. Johan UmbgroveT
(4)
Wilhelmina Hendrina
m. (1) Lamoraal van
GesauT
(2) Samuel van HoesenT
(5)
Johanna Maria
d. Netherlands
m. Godfried Carel
GockingaT
5 sons
died in
infancy
m. (1) Samuel Abeleven T
(2) JOANNES SIBERGT
IGO 1801-05
Jkhr.Pieter Gerhard Siberg
career in Netherlands
m. (1) Maria Anna Reynst (2) Johanna Sara gravin van Limburg-StirumT

--- PAGE: 241 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.241) ---
Second Marriage of GG Alting
Susanna van Makassar
1Benjamin Grebel
T
MARIA SUSANNA GREBEL
(1) Huybert Senn van BaselT* (2) WILLEM ARNOLD ALTINGT
councillor GG 1780-97
r
Maria Wilhelmina Senn van Basel
m. Nicolaas EngelhardT
nephew of GG Alting,
councillor & govr. of
North Coast of Java
No
\0
Maria Susanna Engelhard
d. in infancy
* Huybert Senn van Basel's son Willem Adriaan, from his first marriage, brought into the family members of the van Riemsdijk and Wiese clans
through his second and third marriages.

--- PAGE: 242 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.242) ---
Table 3. VAN RIEMSDIJK FAMILY, part 1: Jeremias van Riemsdijk
(for part 2 see table 9)
m. 1738 (1) Martina van den Briel ---1. HelenaJohanna, 1741-46
1720-41
m. 1744(2)COrneliavanVianent= .. 2. Scipio Cornel is, 1745
1730-47 3. CorneliaCatharina, 1747
4. Mr. Isebrandus Johannes F. van Riemsdijk
(raised in Netherlands, m. & d. there)
m. 1748 (3) Maria Lucretia Wentink --- 5. Johanna Maria, 1750-70
?-1750 m. Paulus Godefridus van der VoortT
N
~
o
JEREMIAS v. RIEMSDIJK T
1712-77
GG 1775-77
m. 1751 (4) Adriana Louisa Helvetius
1736-72
m. 1774 (5) Theodora Rotgers
?-1777
6. Unnamed, 1751
7. Willem Vincent Helvetius v. Riemsdijk
m. Catharina Margaretha Craan
8. EgidiaCornelia, 1754-56
9. Adriaan Cornelis, 1755-58
10. Catharina Louysa, 1758-1823
m. Mr. Arnoldus Constantijn MomT
11. Daniel Frederik, 1760-84
m. Bartha Johanna Schultz
12. Scipio Cornelis, 1761-81
m. Laurentia Jacoba Schultz
13. Jeremias Egidius, 1763-68
14. Adriaan Jacob, 1766
15. Unnamed, 1767
16. Johanna Adriana, 1770-80

--- PAGE: 243 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.243) ---
Table 4. BAUD-SENN VAN BASEL FAMILY
Indies Family in the Male Line
JEAN-CHRETIEN BAUDT
GO 1833-36
m. (1) Wilhelmina Henriette Senn van Basel
b. Batavia, d. Netherlands
(2) Ursula Susanna van Braam
b. Batavia, d. Netherlands
N
~
~
Mr. Willem Abraham baron Baud
d. Priangan 1879
Willem Hendrik Baud
d. Batavia 1857
7 children
m. & d. in Netherlands
3 children surviving
to adulthood: m. & d in Netherlands

--- PAGE: 244 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.244) ---
Table 4, continued Descent through the Female Line
Direct Female Descent Maternal Line
N
~
N
Margaretha Sophia Ongewassen
descended from Eurasian family in Ceylon
m. Cornelis BreekpotT
I
Johanna Henriette Breekpot
b. Japara
m. Jacobus Johannes Craanc, 1753
I
Catharina Margaretha Craan
m. Willem Vincent Helvetius van Riemsdijk, 1773
I
Theodora Jacoba van Riemsdijk
m. Willem Adriaan Senn van Basel
I
Wilhelmina Henriette Senn van Basel
m. Jean-Chretien BaudT
I
female descendants m. & d. in Netherlands
?
TsoldierT
daughter baptized as
Johanna Magdalena de Bollan
m. Johannes Maurlts van HappelT
I
Anna Catharina van Happel
m. Mr. Laurens TollingT
I councillor
Egidia Cornelia Tolling
m. Mr. WillemVincentHelvetius T
I· justiceat Batavia
Adriana Louisa Helvetius
m. Jeremias van RiemsdijkT
I GO 1775-77
Willem Vincent Helvetius van Riemsdijk
councillor
m. Catharina Margaretha Craan
I
Theodora Jacoba van Riemsdijk
m. Willem Adriaan Senn van Basel
I councillor
Wilhelmina Henriette Senn van Basel
m. Jean-Chretien BaudT
I7 of9 descendants m. & d. in Netherlands

--- PAGE: 245 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.245) ---
N
~
VJ
Table 5. HUYSMAN-VAN IMHOFF FAMILIES
showing Indies family passing offices to sons in subsidiary settlements
Anthony HuysmanT
emigrated 1646
m.·Lea van WaesbergheT
I c_------Marten Huysman
_----------- director of Bengal
- Susanna van Bengalen -------- m. MagdalenaChasteleyn
Islave I b. & d. Batavia i
1
Marten Lea Anthony Huysman Henriette Susanna
b. Batavia m. (1) Pieters Willeboorts director-general m. (1) Ferdinand de Groot T
d. young director of Bengal m. (1) Cornelia Adriana van Dishoeck councillor extr.
(2) Mattheus Schenkenburg daughter of director of BengalT (2) Cornelis Hasselaer T
govr. of Banda (2) J h C th· niT director-generalr 0 anna a· anna ce grom
I raised in Asia from age 2
Catharina Magdalena Huysman
b. & d. Batavia, ?-1744
-Sulawesi slave woman---------------------------- m. GUSTAAF WILLEM BARON van IMHOFFT
baptized as I GG 1743-50
Helena Pieters Jacob Willem Balthasar v. Imhoff
I r b. & d. Ceylon l735-~6
Jan Willem baron v. Imhotf Wilhelmina Sophia Isabella Antonia
raised in Netherlands 1749-50 1750
m. Jkvr. Christine Emerence LeweT

--- PAGE: 246 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.246) ---
Table 6. DESCENDANTS OF SOPHIA FAUCONIER
showing marriage alliances within ruling class
Sophia Fauconier
m. (1) Johannes GoossensT
senior merchant at Batavia
(2) Gaspar van MansdaleT
councillor extr. 1723
Geertruida Margaretha Goossens
N
~
.,J:::..
m. (1) MICHIEL WESTPALMT
I director-general
Sophia Francina Westpalm
betr. (2) FREDERIK JULIUS COYETT m. (3) JOHANNES THEDENS T
councillor GO 1741-43
m. (2) REYNIER DE KLERKT
GG 1770-80 u-u-------by sre(s) i
m. (I) HUGO VERIJSSEL T
I councillor
Margaretha Sophia VeriisseI
m. Jacobus C. M. Radermacher T
(rem. Anna Bosch, stepdaughter of
Councillor David Smith
Frans Radermacher
sent to Neths. at 12
Willem Cornelis
educe in Neths.
Wilhelmina Cornelia

--- PAGE: 247 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.247) ---
m. Maria EleonoreHartman
I daughterof BataviajusticeT
I I
WillemLeonard RicaCatharina
m. WilhelminaJ. Burghgraaf, m. PetrosTheodorusCouperus
cousin, b. Makassar I sonofgovemorofMalacca
Table 7. CRANSSEN DESCENDANTS
showing descent through legitimateand illegitimatelines
_-- WILLEM JACOB CRANSSENT
_-----~- councillor
----------_ slave freed & baptized _....-_--#10
I WILHELMINA JACOBA NESSNARC
Wilhelmina Niclasina Cranssen
b. Ambon, d. Netherlands
1-1848
m. (1) Carel Lodewijk BlumeT
divorced
Henriette E. C. Merkus
legitimized 1830
raised in Netherlands
m. (1) Charles H. F. RieszT
divorced
(2) Mr. Rene Frederik Willem
baron Sloet tot ToutenborghT
N
~
VI
<r =~US!.----------freed jbonese
4 children, all
raised in Neths.
WillemJacobThomas RafflesCouperus

--- PAGE: 248 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.248) ---
Catharina c -[1. Mr. Joan Leonard de Hartogh
b. Paliacutta educ. in Netherlands
m. Johannes de HartoghT councillor 1753
2. Christoffel Laurens de Hartogh
career in Netherlands
N
~
0\
Drs. Bemardus C. aGroen T
minister at Batavia 1687-1706
m. Johanna Maria van der
Hage T
BERNARDUS
Table 8. COOP A GROEN FAMILY
m. (1) c1717 Clara Th. Cml t 1. d. young
b. & d. Batavia 2. d. young
3. ClasinaHelenaC. aGroen 1722-57
m. Pieter van den VeldeT
councillor
m. (2) 1723 AnnaM. van LimburgT r 4. d. young
5. Mr. Joan Everhard C. aGroen
educ. in Netherlands
chief officer in Surabaya
m. MariaCatharina v. Wognum
6. d. young
7. d. young
m. (3) 1729JOhannaStul~8. JacobaMartha, 1730-58
daughter of govr. of m. (I) Hendrik J. van Suchtelen T
BandaT councillor extr.
(2) Roelof BlokT
govr. & dir. of Makassar
(rem. Anna Bosch)
9. d. young
10. Mr. Willem Egidius C. it Groen
career & m. in Netherlands
I
Roelof Coop it Groen
Govr. of Banda & Temate

--- PAGE: 249 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.249) ---
N
~
-.l
WILLEM V.H. van
RIEMSDIJK
1752-1818
5th gen. Indies-born
on mother's side
m. Catharina M.
Craan, 3rd-gen. Indies­
born on both sides
Table 9. VAN RIEMSDIJK FAMILY, part 2: Willem Vincent Helvetius vanRiemsdijk
(for part 1 see table 3)
1. Henriette Adriana Theodora, 1774
2. TheodoraJacoba, 1775-1815
m. Willem Adriaan Senn van Basel I Sara Catharina S. v. Basel
m. Willem N. ServatiusT- - - - - - - - -Pieter Nicolaas
Wilhelmina Willems
both by slave mothers
WilhelminaH.S. v. Basel--- 9 children
m. JEAN-CHRETIEN BAUDT
2 children, d. in infancy
3. Jeremias J.H. v. Riemsdijk
m. JohannaM. de Bruyn
daughter of govr. of Malacca
4. WillemAmoldusH.v.R., 1777-91
5. Catharina Johanna, 1770-1833
m. (1) Andries JonkerT
(2) Pieter EngelhardT
(3) Pieter van Heemstede
Cappelhoff T---------------------. daughter adopted by
ex-slave Semiera
(4) Godfried J. HolsmanT

--- PAGE: 250 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.250) ---
Table 9, continued
6. PieterW.H. v. R., 1780-1857 ~ 3 children, d. in infancy
m. Sophia Cornelia Bangeman Willem H.H. v. Riemsdijk
Catharina Johanna Reiniera
m. (1) Folkert J. ten CateT 4 children
(2) GerritJ. vanCapelle--- 1 child
Sophia Catharina
m. Pieter van SwietenT 13 children
7. JacobusJ.H. v. R., 1782-1854
m. JohannaM. van AIken
N
~
00
W.V.H. van
RIEMSDIJK
m. Catharina
Craan
8. Daniel C.H. v. R., 1783-1860
- Mea ---------------------------
later baptized Christina
Simans
Dina Cornelia, 1807-77---­
m. Tjalling AmentT
Sophia Wilhelmina -----­
m. Carel M. VisserT
9 children
9 children
Catharina Petronella 8 children
m. Willem Martinus Kijdsmeir
cousin
9. W. V.H. v. Riemsdijk de jonge
1784-1847
m. Wilhelmina M.R. Martens
10. Scipio LH. v. R.
- Bamie ----------------------------- Maria Susanna van Riemsdijk
-Manies van Bali ------------------[ SophiaC. Kijdsmeir 2 children
m. WillemJ. vande GraatI T
Willem M. Kijdsmeir
m. Catharina P. v. Riemsdijk--- 8 children

--- PAGE: 251 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.251) ---
Table 9, continued
10. Scipio I.H. v. R.
- Manies v. Bali (contd.) ------------
Abraham P. Kijdsmeir
- Bibiet -----------------------1son, stillborn
- Saiba----------------------- 1daughter
JacobaMariana,d.young
Theodora M. Kijdsmeir 2 children
m. Gideon M. van de Graaff T
Catharina J. Kijdsmeir 4 children
m. Dr. GeerlofWassink T
W.V.H. van Scipio I. Kijdsmeir, d. young
1 daughter, d. young
11. Adriana Hendriette L. 1787-1878
m. Jan M. van BeusechemT
RIEMSDIJK
m. Catharina
Craan 12. IgnatiaCorneliaM. 1789-1816----­
m. Gerhardus van Rijck
13. Adriaan Frederik, 1791-93
14. Egidius Arnoldus, 1792
- Misschien van Batavia ----15. Jan Joseph Kijdsmeir
adopted 1812
N
~
\0
-Ramoena van Soembawa --16. Jan Sam, 1805-?
adopted 1814
17. Wilhelmina Rosina, 1807-72
adopted
daughter of Klaas Jager & ?
m. (1) Albert N. CoblynT
(2) Jkhr. Edward L. LeyssiusT

--- PAGE: 252 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.252) ---
NNo
Table 9, continued
W.V.H. van
RIEMSDIJK
Dekkan van Mandhaar----18. Lieve Benjamin(s), 1812-65
- Antje------------------------------ 1daughter
m. Arira, baptized
ChristinaWillemse 12 children
- Oranina van Batavia ----- 19. Oranina Bloemenstiena, 1813-54 11 children
m. FriederichN. von EndeT
Dekkan van Mandhaar----20. WilhelmusD. Benjamins, 1815-58
m. (I) FredericaW.G. Kemper 9 children
(2) PetronellaJ. CoblynT 2 children
- Mietje van Mandhaar- - - - -21. Maria Catharina, 1815-88 9 children
m. FrederikH.C. van Motman

--- PAGE: 253 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.253) ---
1610-14
1614-15
1616-19
1619-23
1623-27
1627-29
1629-32
1632-36
1636-45
1645-50
1650-53
1653-78
1678-81
Appendix 2
Governors-General and Their Wives
PIETER BOTH
wife did not emigrate
GERARD REYNST
Margaretha Nicquet
Dr. LAURENS REAEL
bachelor
JAN PIETERSZOON COEN
bachelor
PIETER DE CARPENTIER
bachelor
JAN PIETERSZOON COEN
Eva Ment
JACQUES SPECX
Jkvr. Maria Odilia Buys
HENDRIK BROUWER
Cecilia van Dorp
ANTONIO VAN DIEMEN
Maria van Aelst, m. in Batavia
CORNELIS VAN DER LIJN
Levijntje Polet, m. in Batavia
CAREL REYNIERSZ.
Judith Bara
Fran~oise de Wit, b. India
Mr. JOAN MAETSUYKER
Haasje Berkmans
Elisabeth Abbema, m. in Batavia
RUCKLOF VAN GOENS
Jacomina Bartholomeusdr. Rosegaard, m. at Batavia
Esther de Solemne, b. India
Johanna van Ommeren. m. in Batavia
221

--- PAGE: 254 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.254) ---
APPENDIX 2: GOVERNORS-GENERAL AND THEIR WIVES
1681-84 CORNELIS SPEELMAN
Petronella Maria Wonderaer, b. Batavia
1684-91 JOANNES CAMPHUYS
bachelor
1691-1704 Mr. WILLEM VAN OUTHOORN, Creole
Elisabeth van Heijningen, m. in Batavia
1704-9 JOAN VAN HOORN
Anna Stmijs, b. Batavia
Susanna Agneta van Outhoom, b. Batavia
Johanna Maria van Riebeeck, b. Batavia
1709-13 Mr. ABRAHAM VAN RIEBEECK, Creole
Elisabeth van Oosten, m. in Batavia
1713-18 CHRISTOFFEL VAN SWOLL
Geliana van Swoll?
1718-25 HENRICUS ZWAARDECROON
?
1725-29 MATIHEUS DE HAAN
Francina Thivart, m. in Asia
Catharina Lurelius, m. in Asia
1729-32 Mr. DIEDERIK DURVEN
Jacoba van Breda, m. in Asia
Anna Catharina de Roo, b. Asia
1732-35 Mr. DIRK VAN CLOON, Eurasian
Anthonia Adriana Lengele, b. in Asia
1735-37 ABRAHAM PATRAS
N. van Brakel, m. in Ambon
(some sources give wife as Gehasia Cnipping)
1737-41 ADRIAAN VALCKENIER
Johanna Alida Tolling, b. Batavia
Susanna Christina Massis, b. Batavia
1741-43 JOHANNES THEDENS
Anna Susanna Moerbeek, b. Batavia
Geertruida Margaretha Goossens, b. Batavia
1743-50 GUSTAAF WILLEM baron VAN IMHOFF
Catharina Magdelena Huysman, b. India
1750-61 JACOB MOSSEL
Adriana Appels, b. Batavia
1761-75 PETRUS ALBERTUS VAN DER PARRA, b. Ceylon
Elisabeth van Aerden, b. Batavia
Adriana Johanna Bake, b. Batavia
1775-77 JEREMIAS VAN RIEMS9IJK
Martina van den Briel (all wives b. in Asia)
222

--- PAGE: 255 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.255) ---
1777-80
1780-97
APPENDIX 2: GOVERNORS-GENERAL AND THEIR WIVES
Cornelia Catharina van Vianen
Maria Lucretia Wentink
Adriana Louisa Helvetius
Theodora Rotgers
REYNIER DE KLERK
Sophia Francina Westpalm, b. Batavia
WILLEM ARNOLD ALTING
Hendrina Maria Knabe, b. Batavia
Susanna Maria Grebel, b. Batavia
1797-1801 Mr. PIETER GERHARDUS VAN OVERSTRATEN
Jacoba Maria Lodisio, b. Batavia
1801-5
1805-8
1808-11
1811
1816-26
1826-30
1830-33
1833-36
1836-40
1841-44
1845-51
1851-56
1856-61
1861-66
JOANNES SIBERG
Pieternella Gerhardina Alting, b.- Batavia
ALBERTUS HENRICUS WIESE
Christina Elisabeth Marci, b. Batavia
Jacoba Maria Lodisio, b. Batavia
HERMAN WILLEM DAENDELS
wife did not emigrate
JAN WILLEM JANSSENS
widower
Mr. GODERT A. G. P. baron VAN DER CAPELLEN
Jacoba Elisabeth barones van Tuyll van Serooskerken
LEONARD P. J. burggraafDU BUS DE GISIGNIES
Marie Anne C. B. de DeulWaerder
JOHANNES VAN DEN BOSCH
Catharina L. de Sandol Roy, b. Cape of Good Hope
Rudolphine A. E. de Studer
JEAN-CHRETIEN BAUD
Wilhelmina H. Senn van Basel, b. Batavia
Ursula Susanna van Braam, b. Batavia
DOMINIQUE JACQUES DE EERENS
Jkvr. Theodora J. H. de Salve de Bruneton
Mr. PIETER MERKUS
Wilhelmina Niclasina Cranssen, b. Ambon
JAN JACOB ROCHUSSEN
Elisabeth Charlotte Vincent, b. Padang
Mr. ALBERTUS J. DUYMAER VAN TWIST
Maria Joanna Beck
CHARLES FERDINAND PAHUD
Catharina J. W. Bogaardt, b. Bengal
Mr. LUDOLF A. J. W. baron SLOET VAN DE BEELE
Jacoba Maria Visscher
223

--- PAGE: 256 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.256) ---
APPENDIX 2: GOVERNORS-GENERAL AND THEIR WIVES
1872-75
1875-81
1884-88
1881-84
Mr. PIETER MUER, Creole
Jeannette A. Pietennaat, childhood on Java
Mr. JAMES LOUDON
Jkvr. Louise W. F. F. de Stuers, m. in Indonesia
Mr. JOHAN W. VAN LANSBERGE, b. in South America
Rafaela del Villar
FREDERIK s'JACOB
Jkvr. Leonie S. C. van Hogendorp, m. in Indonesia
OlTO VAN REES
Johanna Henriette Lucassen, b. Java
Johanna S. W. van Braam Morris, b. Batavia
1888-93 Mr. CORNELIS PIJNACKER HORDUK
Theodora E. C. van Bijnkershoek van der Koog
1893-99 Jkhr. CAREL H. A. VAN DER WUCK, b. Ambon
1899-1904 W. Rooseboom
All spouses of twentieth-century governors-general were Dutchwomen
1866-72
1904-9
1?Q9-16
1916-21
1921-26
1926-31
1931-36
1936-41
J. B. VAN HEUTSZ
A. W. F. IDENBURG
Mr. J. P. graafVAN LIMBURG STIRUM
Mr. D. FOCK
Jkhr. Mr. A. C. D. DE GRAEFF
Jkhr. Mr. B. C. DE JONGE
Jkhr. Mr. A. W. L. TJARDA VAN STARKENBORGH STACHOUWER
224

--- PAGE: 257 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.257) ---
Appendix 3
Family and Position in VOC Batavia
Political office and family alliance linked members of the VOC elite. While there was in
VOC Batavia no dynastic system along patriarchal lines, candidates for high office came
from a pool of men who were connected by marriage to Indies women. Governor­
General P. A. van der Parra's Council exemplified this web of office and family relation­
ship. Uncle and nephew, father-in-law and son-in-law sat on his Council in 1775. Such
links can be established between twelve of the thirteen members. Only two members
were Asia-born, one being the governor-general himself. To van der Parra belongs the
further distinction of being the .only head of Holland's Asian possessions who never saw
Europe. The others confonn to the usual pattern as immigrants, manying locally, keep­
ing daughters in Asia as brides for their colleagues, and sending their sons to Europe.
The Council of the Indies in 1775 consisted of Govemor-Geneml Petrus Albertus van
der Parra, Reynier de Klerk, Willem Arnold Alting, Hendrik Breton, Johan Vos, Willem
Fockens, Thomas Schippers, Jacobus Johannes Craan, David Johan Smith, J. C. M.
Radermacher, Hendrik van Stockum, Jan Hendrik Poock (or Pook), and First Councillor
and Director-General of Trade Jeremias van Riemsdijk. Links between Council members
will be outlined below.
1. PETRUS ALBERTUS van der PARRA (governor-general 1761-75) was born in
Ceylon in 1714, the son of Cornelis Romboutsz. van der Parra, secretary of Ceylon's
government, and of the Dutch-born Geertroida Susanna Spannijt. His paternal grand­
father was Rombout van der Parra, himself a VOC employee on Ceylon and husband of
the Ceylonese-born Henriette Wichelman. Her father, Magnus Wichelman, had served
the Company in Ceylon and Malabar, and finally as director of Persia.
P. A. van der Parra's mother remarried the Netherlander Adriaan Maten in 1721.
Maten was administrator of Colombo by 1729, and served as commander of Malabar
during the years 1731-34.
Van der Parra married twice. His second marriage was to Adriana Johanna Bake,
widow of the VOC commander Anthonij Guldenann. Her father was David Johan Bake,
who had migrated from Holland in 1718 with the rank of junior merchant. Most of
Bake's working life was spent in the Moluccas and included governorship of Ambon
(1732-37). He died in Batavia in 1738 with the rank of councillor extraordinary ~
Bake's wife and the governor-geneml's mother-in-law was Ida Dudde, daughter of a
Batavian burgher and widow of a low-level VOC employee, Constantijn Coomans. A
daughter from her first marriage, Agatha Geertroida Coomans, married the Batavia VOC
225

--- PAGE: 258 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.258) ---
APPENDIX 3: FAMILY AND POSITION IN VOC BATAVIA
employee Johan Smith, and their son, DAVID SMITH, sat on van der Parra's Council in
1775. Another daughter, Ida Constantia Coomans, married Gemt Mom, and their
daughter was grandmother to the future governor-general A. H. Wiese (1805-11).
Ida Dudde's son from her second marriage, Willem Jacob Bake, had a daughter
christened Ida Wilhelmina. She married Johan Frederik baron van Reede tot de Parkeler,
whose first wife had been a daughter of Councillor JOHAN VOS.
The marriage of P. A. van der Parra and Adriana Bake produced only one child, a son
born in 1760 and known as Petrus Albertus van der Parra de jonge. He died in 1783, but
by that time was already chief fiscal officer of the Indies and husband of Catharina
Geertruida Breton, daughter of Councillor HENDRIK BRETON.
2. REYNIER de KLERK sailed to the Indies as a ship's boy in 1710. On his third
voyage he reached Batavia in December 1730 and entered civilian service as a book­
keeper. His career took him to south Sumatra, Surabaya, Semarang, and Banda. His
appointment as councillor extraordinary came in 1754, followed by full councillor in
1762, director-general, and then governor-general from 1777 until his death in office in
1780.
The same year as his appointment as councillor extraordinary, de Klerk married
Sophia Francina Westpalm in Batavia. She was the daughter of Michiel Westpalm, who
was first councillor and director-general under Governor-General Dirk van Cloon (1732­
35), and of Geertmida Margaretha Goossens. Geertruida Goossens was the daughter of
the Batavia VOC merchant Johannes Goossens and of Sophia Fauconier. Following
Goossens's death, Sophia Fauconier remarried Gaspar van Mansdale, who was nomi­
nated councillor extraordinary in 1723. Geertruida Goossens married, in order, Michiel
Westpalm and Johannes Thedens, who was acting governor-general from 1741 to 1743.
In 1736 she had been betrothed to Frederik Julius Coyett, grandson of the governor of
Ceylon and son of the governor of Banda and Ambon. She was, too, godmother to the
children of Governor-General Jacob Mossel.
A sister of Sophia Westpalm, Geertruida Johanna Westpalm, married the Dutch
lawyer Mr. Johan Hendrik van Panhuys. Their son, Johan Michiel, was head of the
Japara residency in the 17808.
Sophia Westpalm (1722-85) had been married to Councillor Hugo Verijssel. One of
the three children from this marriage, Margaretha Sophia Verijssel, was the first wife of
the J. C. M. RADERMACHER who sat on the Council in 1775. Radermacher's second
wife connected him to DAVID SMITH, as will be outlined below.
De Klerk had no legitimate issue. He was buried in 1780 in the family mausoleum of
Hugo Verijssel. His widow recognized Radermacher's son, Frans Reinier, as her heir.
3. WILLEM ARNOLD ALTING went out in 1750 with the rank of junior merchant
and climbed the ranks of the VOC hierarchy in Batavia. He was made a councillor
extraordinary by 1759 and full councillor in 1772. He was the senior member under
Governor-General R. de Klerk and was governor-general from 1780 to 1797, another
period of family government marked by alliances, particularly between the Alting, van
Riemsdijk, and Senn van Basel families.
Alting had ten children by his first wife. Five survived to adulthood, all girls, and all
married native Dutchmen who held posts as senior merchants and residents of Java
226

--- PAGE: 259 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.259) ---
APPENDIX 3: FAMILY AND POSITION IN VOC BATAVIA
districts. The most prominent was the second husband of Alting' s daughter, Pieternella
Gerhardina, who married Mr. Joannes Siberg. Siberg was to follow his father-in-law as
governor-general during the years 1801-5.
Alting's second wife was Maria Susanna Grebel, whose first husband was Councillor
Huybert van Basel, patriarch of the Senn van Basel clan. Alting' s stepdaughter, Maria
Wilhelmina Senn van Basel (1770-1821), married his nephew Nicolaas Engelhard,
governor of the North Coast of Java and later a councillor. Another relative of Alting' s,
Pieter Engelhard, was to many a daughter of Councillor Extraordinary Anthonij Barkeij
and later a van Riemsdijk, which brought further links to the Senn van Basel clan also.
4. HENDRIK BRETON was married to Sara Maria van Oordt. During his tenn as
resident of Surabaya a daughter, Catharina Geertmida, was born. She was to many P. A.
van der Parra de jonge in Batavia in 1778. Their descendants were very numerous in the
nineteenth century. Breton was first councillor and director-general under GG Alting
until his death in office in 1780.
5. JORAN VOS held among other posts those of senior merchant and governor of
Java's North Coast {1765-7 1), and was appointed full councillor in 1777. His first wife
connected him to the governor-general's family, for she was Adriana Agatha Smith,
sister of DAVID SMITH. They had married in 1753. She died sometime before 1762,
when Vos married Ida Wilhelmina Bake, niece of Governor-General van der PARRA.
His daughter, Ida Petronella Jacoba Vos, married F. H. van Reede tot de Parkeler, as
noted above.
6. WILLEM FOCKENS served as councillor extraordinary and full councillor during
van der Parra's governor-generalship. He died in office in 1780. His wife, Catharina
Tobison, was to remany fellow councillor DAVID SMITH.
7. THOMAS SCHIPPERS went out to the Indies in 1740 as a junior merchant. His
career took him to Bantam and Malacca, where he was governor over the years 1764-72.
In the latter year he was appointed councillor extraordinary and president of the court in
Batavia. He became a full councillor in 1778 and died in Batavia in 1780.
Schippers's third wife was Catharina Cornelia van Mijlendonck, widow of Councillor
Hendrik van Ossenbergh and daughter of Johan Elias van Mijlendonck, governor of
Ternate 1755-56 and councillor extraordinary. This marriage connected Schippers to the
Reynst family, whose members were numerous in the Indies.
8. JACOBUS JOHANNES CRAAN was born in Ambon in 1728, son of the Dutch
minister Petrus Craan. He joined the VOC's service as a clerk in 1741 and worked his
way up in Malacca and on Java until his appointment as councillor extraordinary. This
was followed by full councillor in 1780, the year of his death in Batavia.
Craan was an uncle of HENDRIK BRETON. He married the fifteen-year-old Johanna
Henrietta Breekpot in 1753. She was the daughter of Comelis Breekpot, commander of
Malabar during the period 1764-69. From Craan's marriage to Johanna Breekpot was
born Catharina Margaretha Craan, who was to many the son of JEREMIAS van
227

--- PAGE: 260 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.260) ---
APPENDIX 3: FAMILY AND POSITION IN VOC BATAVIA
RIEMSDIJK in 1773 and be the mother of fourteen of his children. The children from the
van Riemsdijk -eraan alliance are listed in appendix 1, table 9.
9. DAVID JOHAN SMITH, as noted in section 1, was the son of Governor-General
van der PARRA's wife's half-sister, Agatha G. Smith-Coomans. He was sent in 1745 at
age five to the Netherlands for schooling on the request of his maternal grandmother, Ida
Dudde. He returned in 1762, and profited from his uncle's position as governor-general,
being promoted from the rank of junior to senior merchant without the intermediate post
of merchant. At thirty-two he was made councillor extraordinary, and full councillor by
1781. By 1789 he was senior councillor and due to be appointed second-in-command as
director-general, but withdrew from government service and died on his estate in 1792.
Smith manied four times. His first wife (1763) was Hester Petronella Romp, daughter
of Ordinary Councillor Michiel Romp and sister of the wife of the future councillor
extraordinary Johan van der Burgh. One of their children, Maria Petronella Smith, was
to marry Jacobus Theodorus Reynst, which allied the family to the van Mijlendonck and
SCHIPPER's clans.
Smith's second wife was Catharina Tobison, widow ofWll..LEM FOCKENS.
The third wife was Catharina Louisa Gallas, mother, through a previous marriage, of
Anna Jacoba Bosch, who was the second wife of J. C. M. RADERMACHER. Catharina
died in 1782, and Smith had his stepdaughter Anna placed in van der PARRA's house­
hold until her marriage at thirteen to Radermacher.
Smith's fourth marriage lasted longest. It took place in 1782 and was to Johanna
Mauritia Mohr, daughter of the well-known Batavia clergyman and astronomer and of
Anna Elisabeth van't Hoff.
Finally, Smith was designated guardian of P. A. van der Parra de jonge in the will the
governor-general had drawn up in 1773.
10. J. C. M. RADERMACHER has already been recorded as son-in-law of councillor
and future governor-general de KLERK. Radermacher had first gone out to the Indies at
sixteen as a junior merchant. His marriage to Margaretha Verijssel took place in Batavia
in 1761, when de Klerk was already councillor extraordinary. In 1763 Radermacher
returned on furlough to the Netherlands. Margaretha accompanied him and probably died
in the Netherlands. The only child of the marriage, Frans Reinier Radermacher, was
named Sophia de Klerk -Westpalm' s heir.
After his return to Batavia in 1767 Radermacher was appointed councillor extra­
ordinary (1776), and full councillor one year later. His second wife, Anna Jacoba Bosch,
has already been noted as DAVID SMITH's stepdaughter. She accompanied Rader­
macher when he repatriated in 1783, but remained at the Cape after his murder at sea,
and was to remarry there Christiaan Anthonie Ver Huell, son of the Indies traveler and
chronicler. Anna Radermacher-Bosch' s sisters were married to men who headed resi­
dencies on Java.
11. HENDRIK van ST<X:KUM went out as ship's boy in 1754 and transferred into
the civilian ann of the VOC as a junior assistant in Batavia. By 1768 he was made junior
merchant and had climbed the hierarchy to first senior merchant of the Castle by 1771.
His appointment as councillor extraordinary came in 1776, followed by that of full
228

--- PAGE: 261 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.261) ---
APPENDIX 3: FAMILY AND POSITION IN VOC BATAVIA
councillor in 1786. Three years later he was senior councillor and director-general, and
died in Batavia in 1793.
Van Stockum did not marry until 1779. His bride was Catharina Elisabeth Roms­
winckel, widow of Otto Frans Nicolaas Marci, who had been in charge of artillery and
warehouses for the VOC. A daughter from this first marriage, Christina Elisabeth Marci,
was to many the future governor-general A. H. Wiese. From the van Stockum-Roms­
winckel marriage was born Catharina Wilhelmina van Stockum, who married Joost Carel
Romswinckel at Batavia in 1801. He had been born in the Netherlands, but emigrated
and died in Batavia in 1846 after a career culminating in appointment as councillor
extraordinary.
As noted above, the Wiese family was connected with the Senn van Basel, van
Riemsdijk, and Alting families as well as with the Romswinckel family. Wiese's sister
Ida Adriana Helena married Willem Adriaan Senn van Basel, who was half-brother of
Maria Wilhelmina Engelhard, step-daughter of Governor-General Alting. W A. Senn
van Basel's second wife was a legitimate daughter of W V. H. van Riemsdijk, while his
sister, Philippina Maria Theodora Senn van Basel, had married Steven Poelman, widow
of GG Alting's oldest daughter, Elisabeth Fockleyna Alting.
12. JAN HENDRIK POOCK was the VOC's bailiff in Batavia in 1774 and councillor
extraordinary under Governors-General van der Parra, van Riemsdijk, de Klerk, and
Alting. I have not established any family connections of this council member yet.
13. JEREMIAS van RIEMSDIJK first went out to the Indies in 1735 as a sergeant in
the VOC army. He was the nephew of Governor-General Adriaan Valckenier (1737-41).
Valckenier's first wife, Johanna Alida Tolling, was aunt of Jeremias van Riemsdijk's
fourth wife, Adriana Louisa Helvetius.
1. van Riemsdijk left the army upon arrival in Batavia and, benefiting from his
connections, reached the rank of senior merchant by 1740. He survived Valckenier's
disgrace, and was councillor extraordinary by 1753 and full councillor by 1760. He served
as van der Parra's director-general from 1764 until his election by unanimous vote of the
Council upon van der Parra's death in office in 1775. Van Riemsdijk died in office in 1777.
Van Riemsdijk married five times. His alliances are laid out in appendix 2, table 3.
The most important family connections were made on his fourth and fifth marriages.
Adriana Helvetius's father was president of Batavia's court, while her maternal grand­
father was Councillor Laurens Tolling. One of her uncles was Willem Maurits
Bruininck, governor and director of Ceylon from 1740 to 1742. The fifth wife, Theodora
Rotgers, had been married previously to a member of Batavia's court and then to
Councillor Extraordinary Mr. Maurits Theodorus Hilgers. His brother-in-law Nicolaas
Hartingh had married a daughter of Governor-General Jacob Mosse!.
Van Riemsdijk's daughter Johanna Maria (by his third wife) married Paulus
Godefridus van der Voort in 1765. He rose to be governor and director of Makassar
during the decade 1770-80. His son Willem V. H. van Riemsdijk, who was a councillor,
married Catharina Craan, daughter of Councillor JACOBUS 1. CRAAN. Their daughter
Jacoba Dorothea was the second wife of W A. Senn van Basel and mother of
Wilhelmina Henriette Senn van Basel, who married the future governor-general Jean­
Chretien Baud.
229

--- PAGE: 262 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.262) ---


--- PAGE: 263 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.263) ---
Notes
INTRODUCfION
1 J. C. van Leur, Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social andEconomic
History (The Hague, Bandung: W. van Hoeve, 1955); and John R. W. Smail, "On
the Possibility of an Autonomous History of Modem Southeast Asia," Journal of
Southeast Asian History 2 (2):72-102 (July 1961).
2 Holden Furber, Rival Empires of Trade in the Orient, 1600-1800 (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1976), chapter 7, esp. pp. 309-10; M. A. P. Meilink­
Roelofsz, "De Europese expansie in Asie: Enkele beschouwingen naar aanleiding
van Holden Furbers Rival Empires of Trade in the Orient, 1600-1800," Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 135 (4):403-42 (1979); and F. Lequin, "A New
Approach to the History of the Dutch Expansion in Asia: The Personnel of the Dutch
East India Company of the XVillth Century," Journal of European Economic His­
tory 8 (2):431-37 (Fall 1979).
CHAPTER 1: ORIGINS OF THE CITY OF BATAVIA
Wijaya Krama is tenned the "king of Jacatra" in old Dutch records, and was vassal
to the sultan of Bantam. L'Hennite was acting on behalf of Admiral P. Verhoeven,
whom the East Indies Company directors had empowered to make contra~ts with
rulers in the archipelago. The text of this contract can be found in app. 1 of Jacobus
A. van der Chijs, De Nederlanders te lakatra (Amsterdam: F. Muller, 1860), pp.
201-3.
2 Van derChijs, De Nederlanders te lakatra, p. 60.
3 C. R. Boxer, The Dutch Seaborne Empire 1600-1800 (London: Hutchinson, 1965),
p.80.
4 Friderici Bollingii, "Oost-Indisch reisboek, uit het Deensch vertaald door Mej. Joh.
Visscher," Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 68 (1913):297. Parts of
Wonns's Ost-Indianische und Persianische Reisen (Dresden and Leipzig, 1737) are
quoted by J. de Hullu, "De matrozen en soldaten op de schepen der Oost-Indische
Compagnie," ibid. 69 (1914):318-65. On the composition of the VOC's employees
see also J. R. Bruijn, "De personeelsbehoefte van de VOC overzee en aan boord,
bezien in Aziatisch en Nederlands perspectief," Bijdragen en Mededelingen betrej­
jende de Geschiedenis der Nederlanden 91 (1):218-48 (1976). His figures show that
231

--- PAGE: 264 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.264) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 6-10
non-Dutch nationals represented a large part of the VOC's anny and navythroughout
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
5 This passage is taken from the narrative of his firstjoumey. J. C. M. Wamsinck, ed.,
Reisen van Nicolaus de Graaff gediJan naar aUe gewesten des Werelds, beginnende
1639 tot 1687 incluis ('s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff, 1930), p. 6.
6 Letter of 3 November 1628 in H. T. Colenbrander, Jan Pietersz. Coen, bescheiden
omtrent zijn bedriffin lndie ('s-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1923), 5:130.
7 See, for example, the letters collected by N. J. Krom in his "Het Leidsche weeshuis
en de Oost-Indische Compagnie, " Leidsche jaarboekje 1936 (Leiden, 1936), p. 68.
8 See E. C. Godee Molsbergen, Geschiedenis van de Nederlandsch Oost-Indische
Compagnie en Nederlandsch-Indte in beeld (Weltevreden: N.D.I. Topografische
Inrichting, 1925), no. 67. Seventeenth-century Dutch personal names were often
composed of a patronymic, for example, Jacob's son, John's daughter, written as
Jacobszoon, Jansdochter and often abbreviated as Jacobsz. and Jansd. The period in
the personal names given here reflects the shortened patronymic.
9 Edgar du Perron, De muze van Jan Compagnie (Bandung: A. C. Nix, 1948), pp.
190-91. India or Indie was often used by seventeenth-century Dutchmen to refer to
the Indonesian archipelago.
10 By resolution of Governor-General A. van Diemen and Council no European married
to an Asian woman might repatriate before her death and the death of any children
from the marriage. ReaUa: Register op de generale resolutien van het kasteel Batavia
1632-1805 (Leiden, The Hague: Kolff, Nijhoff, 1885-86), 3:127 (23 September
1639).
11 Du Perron, Muze, p. 57.
12 Letter of Coen to the VOC directors, 10 December 1616, Colenbrander, Coen,
1:245.
13 The text of the first oath is to be found in vol. I of the Nederlandsch-Indisch
Plakaatboek 1602-1811, 16 vols. plus index, ed. J. A. van der Chijs (Batavia,
's-Gravenhage: Landsdrukkerij, M. Nijhoff, 1885-1900), pp. 360-63.
14 Letter written late in December 1649, included in J. K. J. de Jonge, De opkomst van
het Nederlandsch gezag in Oost-Indie, 13 vols. ('s-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1862­
88),6:ii.
15 On the development of the Chinese community in and around Batavia and on eco­
nomic relations between the Chinese and VOC officials, see Leonard Blusse, "Bata­
via, 1619-1740: The Rise and Fall of a Chinese Colonial Town," Journal ofSouth­
east Asian Studies 12 (1):159-78 (March 1981).
16 Part of the text of the burghers' letter is given by de Jonge, Opkomst, 6:iii. The
directors' response is in 6:xxv. "Moor" was used to describe non-Indonesian
Muslim traders. "Heathen" meant non-Muslim Indonesians.
17 Instruction of Govemor-General Coen and Council, 19 October 1628, Colenbrander,
Coen, 5:710. Coost (or Kunst) had reached the rank of senior merchant and head of
the Jambi factory before retiring from the VCX:'s service. He held many of the
honorary posts awarded burghers.
18 Coen, writing to the directors on 31 July 1620: "Counting the burghers, Malays,
Klings, women, children, slaves, artisans, and the fort's garrison, we estimate the
population at about 2,000. " Colenbrander, Coen, 1:574. The figure of 8,000 is used
232

--- PAGE: 265 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.265) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 10-16
by C. A. L. van Troostenburg de Bruyn, De Hervormde Kerk in Nederlandsch
Oost-Indie (Anthem: H. A. Tjeenk Willink, 1884), p. 15. The tenn Kling meant
people from continental India trading or settled in the Malay Peninsula or the archi­
pelago, and their descendants.
19 See the section "Statistics," in chap. 4 of Pauline D. Milone, "Queen City of the
East: The Metamorphosis of a Colonial Capital" (Ph.D. diss., University of Cali­
fornia, Berkeley, 1966), pp. 141-47.
20 Order from the VOC Directors, 16 October 1676, de Jonge, Opkomst, 6:163-64.
21 Coen to directors, 11 May 1620, Colenbrander, Coen, 1:555.
22 See, for instance, the correspondence of the governors-general with the directors, as
edited by W. Ph. Coolhaas in Generale Missiven van Gouverneurs-Generaal en
Raden aan Heeren XVII der Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, vol. 1, 1610-1638
('s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff, 1960).
23 Coen to directors, 1 January 1614, Colenbrander, Coen, 1:9. By "Indians" Coen
meant inhabitants of the Indies-that is, of Indonesia.
24 Wages were paid Company employees in cash monthly and in necessities such as
firewood, salt, rice, and spices, the amounts being set according to the individual
wage-earner's rank. The Batavia government was always nice in its distinctions
between ranks. Many of the decrees in the Plakaatboek regulated ration allowances.
25 Letter of directors of the Amsterdam chamber to Coen, 7 December 1622, Colen­
brander, eoen, 4:736-38. The total number of married couples was eight, and there
were thirty-one single girls.
26 See, for instance, the letter of Governor-General Both to the directors, 1 January
1614, in P. A. Tiele and J. E. Heeres, Bouwstoffen voor de geschiedenis der Neder­
landers in den Maleischen archipel, 3 vols. (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1886-95),
1:40-41.
27 In Dutch usage a woman legally retains her own surname, that is, her father's name,
after marriage. A woman's married name is written giving the husband's surname
first, followed by the father's. A hyphenated name such as M. Reynst-Nicquet
indicates the person is the wife of Reynst and daughter of Nicquet. In this text women
are generally referred to by their maiden names.
28 Coen to directors, 20 June 1623, Colenbrander, Coen, 1:975.
29 Governor-General Brouwer to directors, 1 December 1632, de Jonge, Opkomst,
5:196. '
30 Instructions of directors to Brouwer, 17 March 1632, Plakaatboek, 1:271.
31 "Oost-Indise spiegel, " in Wamsinck, 00. , Reisen van Nicolaus de Graaff, p. 21.
32 Dagh-Register gehouden int Casteel Batavia (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1898),
1675 vol., p. 151.
33 Directors to Batavia government, 13 April 1652, de Jonge, Opkomst, 6:xxiv. The
number of the VOC's directors was set at seventeen and they were often called the
"Gentlemen XVII. "
34 The author of the journal is not known. De Jonge reproduces it in vol. 4 of Opkomst.
See esp. pp. 148-54, which cover the period from late March to early April 1619.
35 Both to directors, 1 January 1614, Tiele and Heeres, Bouwstoffen, 1:36-41.
36 Plakaatboek, 1:82 (11 December 1620).
37 Plakaatboek, 1:99-101 (20 July 1622).
233

--- PAGE: 266 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.266) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 16-30
38 Code for Commissioners of Marriage Affairs in the Statutes of Batavia, 1642, Pla­
kootboek, 1:542: "the above-mentioned commissioners are expressly forbidden from
henceforth to grant marriage licenses to Dutch men and Native women unless the
latter can understand and speak Dutch well." The test was not applied rigorously;
mostly the women were coached in a verse from the Bible in Dutch or in the Ten
Commandments.
39 Governor-General P. de Carpentier to directors, 3 January 1624, de Jonge, Opkomst,
5:28.
40 GodeeMolsbergen, Geschiedenis, accompanying note to doc. 68. The woman's full
name is given as Magdalena Goossens van Byssaya. The "van" in personal names
means "of" or "from." In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries Asian converts
to Christianity were often named by giving them a Christian personal name followed
by "van" and place of origin for surname. Van Byssaya suggests that widow Goos­
sens was from Visaya in the central Philippines.
41 Plakilatboek, 3:145-46, decree of April-May 1685.
42 Colenbrander, Coen, 3:546.
43 Letter of Governor-General Maetsuyker to directors, 17 November 1674, de Jonge,
Opkomst, 6:125.
44 Plakaatboek, 1:27 May 1642,471.
45 Plakilatboek, 1:474-75. This decree was binding on "Heathens and Moors" too,
and anyone openly worshipping differently was threatened with confiscation of prop­
erty, the chain gang, exile, or death, "according to the circumstances. "
46 Van Troostenburg de Bmyn, Hervormde Kerk, p. 216.
47 Tielen's sentence, dated26 November 1620, is cited in Colenbrander, Coen, 4:240­
41. Scotanus was sentenced for an indefinite period of confinement on 28 February
1640 (Realia, 3:84).
48 Plakootboek, 1:39.
49 Art. 79 of church regulations, 7 December 1643, Plakaatboek, 2:52.
50 See titles for J. d'Outrain and T. Vermeer in J. A. van der Chijs, Proeve eener
Ned.-InJische Bibliographie (1659-1870) (Batavia: W. Bmining, 1879).
51 Letter dated 19 January 1654, de Jonge, Opkomst, 6:42-43. Regulations for the
Latin school are to be found in P/akQatboek, 2:3-7 (2 December 1642).
52 Directors to Maetsuyker, 7 May 1661, de Jonge, Opkomst, 6:1xx.
53 Camphuys' s school regulations are dated 4 April 1684, P/akQatboek, 3:125-30.
54 Resolution of Governor-General P. de Carpentier and councillors, 1 October 1624,
de Jonge, Opkomst, 5:56. Instructions for the Orphans' Chancery were issued mid­
1625, Plakaatboek, 1:173-87.
55 Maetsuyker to directors, 17 November 1674, de Jonge, Opkomst, 6:125-26.
56 See, for example, resolutions of 3 January and 10 December 1708, Realia, 1:466,
and of May 1726, Realia, 2:114.
57 Regulations for the orphanage, dated 23 May 1752, Plalwatboek, 6:215-16. This list
is found in art. 42.
58 All decrees and laws cited below are to be found in the first four volumes of the
Plakaatboek under such headingsas "marriage," "native wives," "repatriation," etc.
59 Susanna Muller was baptized at Malacca in 1666. Her father, Nicolaas, had been
born in Hirado, Japan, and was son of a VOC employee there and of a Japanese
234

--- PAGE: 267 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.267) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 30-42
woman. He was a Batavia aldennan at the time of his death. Susanna married C. van
Outhoorn in Batavia in 1683.
60 The figures are taken from Colenbrander, Coen, 1:574, and from F. de Haan, Oud
Batavia: Gedenkboek, 2 vols. (Batavia: G. Kolff, 1922), 2:348, respectively. See
also Pauline Milone, "Queen City," pp. 14 ff.
61 Leopold Ludovici, Lapidarium Zeylandicum, Being a Collection of Monumental
Inscriptions ofthe Dutch Churches and Churchyards ofCeylon (Colombo: Maitland,
1877). All tombs and headstones are shown in photograph, together with Ludovici' s
translation of the original Dutch or Latin. This summary of biographical detail in ten
inscriptions is taken from pp. 4-91. This evidence from the tombstones both con­
finns and amplifies deductions made by G. Knaap on the composition of Colombo's
population, which he made by analysis of a list of households in the Colombo castle
and town in 1694. See G. Knaap, "Europeans, Mestizos and Slaves: The Population
of Colombo at the End of the Seventeenth Century, " Itinerario 5 (2):84-101 (1981).
CHAPTER 2: GROwrn OF SETILEMENT SOCIETY
1 Acting upon instroctions from the VOC's directors, Coen had nominated his suc­
cessor (his brother-in-law Pieter Vlack) in a letter that was to be opened upon his
death. Apparently unaware of these instroctions, the councillors who met at Coen' s
deathbed viewed Coen's action as improper and overturned it, voting Jacques Specx
as the succeeding governor-general. See W. Ph. Coolhaas, "Reael, Coen, De Car­
pentieren Specx, " Bijdragen tot de Tool-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 129 (1973):269-76.
2 Fran~ois Valentijn, Oud en nieuw Oost-Indien, 5 vols. (Dordrecht, Amsterdam: Van
Braam, Onder de Linden, 1726), 4:295; and J. P. I. du Bois, Vies des gouverneurs­
generaux (The Hague: de Hondt, 1763), p. 134.
3 Realia 1:469(9 March 1647).
4 Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, Travels in India, trans. from the original French ed. of 1676
by V. I. Ball (London: Macmillan, 1889), B.3 pp. 502-4.
5 Maria Scipio was born in Alkmaar. She had been widowed twice before manying
van Riebeeck in 1666. The careers of her husbands took her to Malacca, Batavia,
Japan, and the we,st coast of Sumatra. Her portrait is reproduced as L5 in de Haan's
Platenalbum, which accompanies his 2-volume Oud Batavia, and is painting no. 33
in J. de Loos-Haaxman, De Landsverzameling schilderijen in Batavia (vol. 1, text;
vol. 2, paintings) (Leiden: Sijthoff, 1941).
6 This painting is lA of de Haan, Platenalbum.
7 Letter to Maria Sweers de Weerd and Johanna Margaretha van Beveren, dated
Batavia 14 December 1689, quoted in G. D. J. Schotel and H. C. Rogge, Het
Oud-Hollandsch huisgezin der zeventiende eeuw, 2d. rev. ed. (Amsterdam: Streng­
holt and Amhem, Gijsbers and van Loon, 1968), p. 284.
8 Wamsinck, ed., "Oost-Indise spiegel," pp. 17-18.
9 Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, "Histoire de la conduite des Hollondois en Asie," sec. 5 of
Recueil de plusiers relations et traitez singuliers et curieux (Paris: n.p., n.d), p. 263.
10 See, for example, M3 of de Haan, Platenalbum.
11 Wamsinck, ed., "Oost-Indise spiegel," pp. 13-14. The tenns of abuse de Graaff
puts into the mouths of his Batavian ladies are fonns of Portuguese in the original
text. Minute descriptions of the barbarities women inflicted on their slaves are a
235

--- PAGE: 268 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.268) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 42-48
constant feature of travelers' narratives. It might be noted that men do not ascribe
these barbarous practices to other men when writing of old Batavia. We have no
female chronicler with whom to check these accounts.
12 Differences in terminology for individuals of mixed race depending on degree of
relationship to a native European are spelled out in the "Oost-Indise spiegel," p. 13.
Comelis de Bruijn gives a similar list in less offensive language in his Reizen over
Moskovie, door Persie en lndie (Amsterdam: Goeree, 1711), p. 393.
13 The identification was made by J. de Loos-Haaxman, and a copy is reproduced in her
Landsverzameling, 2, no. 30.
14 Rules of orthography were not yet rigid in the seventeenth centwy. The father's
surname appears in Company records as van Neyenrode and van Nieuwenrode, while
a government decision of 22 December 1676 granting Cornelia pennission to prose­
cute her second husband gives the surname as van Nieuwenroode.
15 Wamsinck, ed., "Oost-Indise spiegel," p. 14.
16 These views are expressed in a report on general colonization policy, quoted by de
longe, Opkomst, 6:xviii.
17 Decree of September 1643 cited by W. Wijnaendts van Resandt, De gezaghebbers
der Oost-Indische Compagnie op hare buitencomptoiren in Azie (Amsterdam:
Liebaert, 1944), p. 127; confinned by an act of legitimation issued 18 December
1646 (Realia, 1:3). Caron's application is quoted by C. R. Boxer in the introduction
to his edition of A True Description of the Mighty Kingdoms of Japan and Siam
(1663; London: Argonaut press, 1935), p.lxviii.
18 Wijnaendts van Resandt, Gezaghebbers, p. 128, and Boxer, True Description, bio­
graphical appendix on the Caron family.
19 The decision was recorded on 5 December 1659. See the Nieuw Nederlandsch
biograjisch woordenboek, 10 vols. (Leiden: Sijthoff, 1911-37), vol. 6, entry 1256.
The daughter Hadewyna did not survive the voyage. Amme is a rendering of the
Portuguese ama, meaning "nurse." In Southeast Asia and Hong Kong a woman
tenned ama(h) is usually of Chinese origin.
20 Plakaatboek, 1:459-60 (June 1641).
21 Plakaatboek, 10:149 (10 May 1778). In 1777 the Batavia synod had been ordered to
teach all Asian catechizers Dutch and not to engage any more who could not speak it
(X, p. 106).
22 De Haan, Platenalbum, D14. See also plates showing tombstones of Asian Chris­
tians, E13, E14, and E15.
23 Quoted from Haafner's Lotgevallen en vroegere zeereizen, in F. de Haan, "De
laatste der Mardijkers," Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 73
(1917):229.
24 For example, memorial plaques were hung for Elisabeth de Haas-van Riebeeck, wife
and sister to councillors of the Indies (d. 1704); Councillor Extraordinary Joan Elias
van Meijlendonk (d. 1762); Christina Marci, wife of Director-General A. H. Wiese
(d. 1805); and Vrouwe Johanna Louisa van Gotzhuisen (d. 1805), wife of Councillor
Extraordinary Pieter Walbeek.
25 One of the set bearing this inscription is included in de Haan' s Platenalbum, D15.
26 A third was dissolved in 1803. The remaining company was only 31 strong. This
236

--- PAGE: 269 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.269) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 48-57
should be compared with figures for 1777, when there were six Mardijker companies
totalling 1,200 men. See de Haan, "Laatste der Mardijkers, " p. 238.
27 Fran~ois Valentijn, Dud en nieuw Dost-Indien, 4:366-67.
CHAPTER 3: THE WEB OF COLONIAL SOCIETY:
BATAVIA AND ENVIRONS IN THE EIGHTEENlH CENTURY
1 The lines are quoted by du Perron, Muze, pp. 154-55.
2 The direction is taken from her will. See "Testament van Mevrouw Petronella
Wonderer," app. 6 of F. W. Stapel, "Comelis Janszoon Speelman," in Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, lAnd-, en Volkenkunde 94 (1936):189. Petronella's maiden name is
spelled Wonderaer and Wonderer in VOC texts.
3 Tavernier, Travels in India, B.3, p. 509; and Wamsinck, ed., "Oost-Indise
spiegel," p. 8.
4 Dagh-Register, 1647-48 vol., p. 140, entry for 27 September 1648.
5 Fig. 4, 9, and 12 in H. A. Breuning, Het voormalige Batavia (Amsterdam: Allert de
Lange, 1954), show how the jungle was steadily pushed back and the extent of the
city in 1622, 1632, and 1740, respectively.
6 De Bruijn, Reizen, p. 366. The reference to the kitchen not being completed at the
same time as the house is explained by the building design adopted from Indonesian
architecture. This has the kitchen built apart and at some distance from the main
dwelling. Van Riebeeck' s wife was the Netherlander Elisabeth van Oosten (1660­
1714). She had first married Jan van Heden, chief VOC official on Timor. In 1678
she married van Riebeeck in Batavia.
7 The history of Depok is given by J. W. de Vries, "De Depokkers: Geschiedenis,
sociale structuur en taalgebruik van een geisoleerde gemeenschap," in Bijdragen tot
de Taal-, lAnd-, en Volkenkunde 132 (1976):228-48. Anthonij Chastelein failed, as
executor of his father's will, to register the Depok properties in the names of the
twelve families to which the 120 slave beneficiaries belonged before his death in
1715. Anna Chastelein-de Haan' s second husband, Councillor Mr. Johan Fran~is de
Witte, (referred to on p. 76) attempted to overturn the will and get back the lands for
his wife's family. It was not until 1850 that the Depok estates were legally declared to
belong to the descendants of the original twelve families.
8 A photograph is given in V. I. van de Wall, Dude Hollandsche buitenplaatsen van
Batavia (Deventer: W. van Hoeve, 1944), p. 28. See also B9 of de Haan, Platen­
album. Gunung Sari's floor plan is given in fig. 16 of Breuning, VoormaligeBatavia,
p.75.
9 Several reproductions of Rach' s painting and details of it are in J. de Loos-Haaxman,
Johannes Rach en zijn werk (Batavia: Kolff, 1928), pp. 37, 39, 59, and 97, and in de
Haan, Platenalbum, K29.
10 See van de Wall, Buitenplaatsen, pp. 81, 82; de Haan, Platenalbum, BI0; and de
Loos-Haaxman, Rach, p. 119. The design of the house is discussed in Breuning,
Voormalige Batavia, pp. 93-95, and its floor plan is drawn in fig. 17, p. 93.
11 Plakaatboek, 4:136 (24 June 1719).
12 Plakaatboek, 4:240-41 (28 December 1729).
237

--- PAGE: 270 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.270) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 57-61
13 J. S. Stavorinus, Voyage par Ie Cap de Bonne Esperance aBatavia (Paris: Jansen,
1798), p. 219. The custom of bowing de Haan attributes to Japanese influence on
senior officials, many of whom had worked at the settlement there early in their
careers (Oud Batavia, 1:176). Three of the seventeenth-century governors-general
had been heads of the Japan factory (Specx, Brouwer, Camphuys), and two in the
eighteenth century (Thedens and van Imhoff). Twenty councillors and six councillors
extraordinary had also been heads of the Japan post in the VOC centuries.
14 du Perron, Muze, pp. 122-23.
15 Valentijn, Oost-lndien, 4:340; and du Bois, Vies, p. 287, for the story of the donkey
train.
16 Examples of VOC furniture such as four-poster beds, chairs, and chests may be seen
in Dutch and Indonesian museums. VOC furniture was often carved from Javanese
teak, highly polished, and combined European styles with Javanese ornamentation in
foliage and fruits. Many chairs bear the VOC crest. See, for instance, V. I. van de
Wall, "Het oude koloniale meubel in het land van herkomst," Cultureel lndie 4
(1943):51-59.
17 For examples of porcelain, again the museums and de Haan, Platenalbum, D22, and
012-15 and 018-21 for examples of silver and glassware. See also articles by C.
Steinmetz on medals and trays, "Cultureele gegevens uit familiepapieren, " p. iii and
iv, in Cultureellndie 5 (1943):31-46 and 128-37, respectively.
18 Large areas of Java had been transferred to VOC suzerainty in the course of the
previous century. Following on Speelman's successes against Truna Djaja, Krawang,
part of east Priangan, and Semarang had been ceded to Batavia. In 1705 Batavia
gained control over the rest of Priangan and Madura, and over the Surabaya area in
1743. Finally, in 1755, the government under Mossel was able to make permanent a
division of the old Matararn. Henceforth the sultanates of Solo and Yogyakarta were
known to the Dutch as the Vorstenlanden, the so-called independently ruled prince­
doms.
19 The text, translated into Dutch, is given in de lndische Navorscher 1(6):42 (Septem­
ber 1934).
20 P. de Roo de la Faille, lets over Oud-Batavia (Batavia: Kolff, 1919), pp. 45-46. The
description is quoted from an unknown observer who set down his recollections
around 1780.
21 See de lndische Navorscher 1(6):42 (September 1934) for the medal and inscription.
Petrus A. van der Parra de Jonge married Catharina Breton in 1778. She had been
born in Surabaya and was the daughter of Hendrik Breton, director-general under
Alting. Both husband and wife spent their entire lives in Asia, as did their many
descendants. The van der Parra clan in Asia spans the seventeenth through the
nineteenth centuries in the direct male line.
22 Nieuw Nederlandsch biografisch woordenboek, 7, entry 941.
23 De Haan, "De laatste der Mardijkers," in Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volken­
kunde 73 (1917):219-54.
24 Agraphina (1792-1875) was the daughter of Michiels's first wife, Maria Wilhelmina
de Bruyn (d. 1803). Beijvanck was adjunct-secretary to the exchequer. He had been
born in Batavia in 1780. After his death Agraphina married the Netherlander Petrus
Henricus Menu. Her daughter Anna Elisabeth Augustijna Beijvanck married into the
238

--- PAGE: 271 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.271) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 61-71
patrician van Braam family, which held high offices under the colonial government.
Descendants of the Michiels clan with European status were numerous in Batavia and
the Netherlands by the twentieth century .
25 See J. B. J. van Doren, Reis naar Nederlands Oost-Indie, 2 vols. Cs-Gravenhage: J.
and H. van Langenhuysen, 1851),2:164, for a description of Citrap. Photographs of
Citrap may be seen in van de Wall, Buitenplaatsen, pp. 121-22. He gives the history
of Citrap's owners on pp. 142-53.
26 Ida was the daughter of Lambertus Dudde, burgher and administrator of estates, and
later bailiff and president of the aldermen's council in Batavia in 1698. Her first
marriage had been to Constantijn Coomans, who was a junior merchant in Ambon.
Of the four children from this marriage, one, Ida Constantia (d. 1788), married into
the Indies branch of the Mom family. Her husband succeeded to the title "heer van
Maurik" in 1768.
27 De Loos-Haaxman, Rach, pp. 25,39.
28 De Haan, Platenalbum, K32.
29 Resolution of 23 March 1779, Realia, 1: 166.
30 An advertisement in the Java Government Gazette on 4 December 1813 describes a
country house and estate for sale as bordering the property of "juff. Arnolda Schulp. "
31 She was probably the wife ofa W. Wargaren, a notary at Batavia in 1764.
32 See pp. 238-44 of Voyage aBatavia. The account is repeated practically word for
word by J. J. Stockdale in his Sketches, Civil and Military, of the Island of Java
(London: S. Gosnell, 1812), pp. 109-17), withoutacknowledgmentofStavorinus.
33 Decree of July 1680, Plakaatboek, 3:47.
34 Decree of 28 December 1729, Plakaatboek, 4:239-42.
35 The code is in Plakaatboek, 6:773-95.
36 Plakaatboek, 12:137-42 (11 December 1795).
37 The quotation is taken from a letter reproduced in van Troostenburg de Bruyn,
Hervormde Kerk, pp. 257-58.
38 See decrees of 7 February 1755, Plakaatboek, 7:6, 27 September 1768, 8:542-44;
and 23 August 1776, 10:47.
39 The 1757 limits were set by decree of 16 August (Plakaatboek, 7:231). The ban on
importing children was passed in February/March 1757 (7:211).
40 See V. 1. van de Wall, Figuren en feiten uit den Compagniestijd (Batavia: n.p.,
1932), pp. 161-83, for a discussion of the will.
41 Resolution of 31 July 1714, Realia, 3:207. After 1758 Indonesian Christians might
no longer be sold as slaves in punishment for various offenses but were to work for
the government as free labor. Plakaatboek, 7:361 (14 December 1758).
42 The 1766 decree is in Plakaatboek, 8:109. That protecting the mother was issued on
17 January 1772 (8:734). Normally slaves were sold, with other forms of property, to
cover debts of the deceased.
43 It will be noted that Davida formed her surname Augustijns on Michiels's first name,
Augustijn. His first wife had been dead sixteen years when their marriage took place.
44 Decree of21 March 1766, Plakaatboek, 8:121.
45 The ban exiling burgher Caspar de Wit is dated 2 October 1742 (ReaUa, 1:63). On 24
February 1808 a decree was passed empowering town courts to supervise and prevent
"excesses" against slaves (Plakaatboek, 14:610-11).
239

--- PAGE: 272 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.272) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 71-81
46 See, for example, letters published in the Java Government Gazette in 1816 (4:102);
and Dr. Strehler, Bijzonderheden wegens Batavia, trans. from the German (Haarlem:
Wed. A. Loosjes Pz., 1833), pp. 141-44.
47 See laws on assembly and weapons of 20 August 1762 (Plakaatboek, 7:568-71), and
31 March 1778 (10:159-74). The ban on alcohol and opium is in ReaUa, 1:369 (16
January 1798).
48 Elsewhere I demonstrate that important men usually promoted their sons' careers by
sending them to Europe. In this case van Hoorn pere, a failed munitions merchant,
was sent to Java with the rank of councillor to recoup his business losses.
49 Valentijn, Oost-Indien, 4:236. Feuding among the various cliques allowed the distant
VOC directors a measure of control. What these feuds and the family alliances
suggest is the development of a world of interests in Batavia that were quite distinct
from those of the VOC in the Netherlands.
50 The quotations are taken from a letter J. van Riemsdijk sent one of his children. It is
cited by Breuning, VoormaUge Batavia, p. 68.
51 F. W. Stapel, Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch-Indie (Amsterdam: J. M. Meulenhoff,
1930), pp. 182-83.
52 Decision of 1 June 1729 (ReaUa, 1:473). Versluys and de Witte were brothers-in-law
as husbands to two daughters of Governor-General Mattheus de Haan. Versluys's
first wife had been Adriana (d. 1727); de Witte married Anna, widow of Anthonij
Chastelein, who was one of the heirs to the Depok properties (see n. 7 above and
related text).
CHAPTER 4: THE ASSAULT ON INDIES CULTURE
On van Imhoff as governor of Ceylon and in particular his attention to reforming the
schooling provided by the Company to local boys of European, Tamil, and Singhal­
ese origin, see Jurrien van Goor, Jan Kompenie as Schoolmaster: Dutch Education in
Ceylon i690-/795 (Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff, 1978), chap. 4. The VOC
played a far greater role in promoting Western education in Ceylon than in its other
settlements, including its capital, and sent numbers of seminarians for theological
studies in the Netherlands. Some were later to serve in parishes in Dutch Asia,
including Batavia.
2 The Consideratien over den tegenwoordigen staat van Nederlandsche Oost-Indische
Maatschappij were presented to the Directors on 24 November 1741. They are
discussed by N. J. Krom in his Gouverneur-Generaal Gustaaf Willem van Imhoff
(Amsterdam: van Kampen en Zoon, 1941), pp. 84-97.
3 Constitution of the theological seminary at Batavia, 25 June 1745, Plakaatboek,
5:241-47.
4 Plakaatboek, 7:147-48 (11 November 1755). The figures for pupils are given in de
Haan, OudBatavia, 2:271-72.
5 Directors to van Imhoff, 6 September 1745, Plakaatboek, 5:87. The regulations for
the academy, issued on 25 August 1743, are in pp. 78-86 of that volume. The
program of study was spelled out on 17 October 1745 (5:309-13).
6 Article 12 of marine academy regulations, Plakaatboek, 5:81-82.
7 Article 19, Plakaatboek, 5:82.
240

--- PAGE: 273 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.273) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 81-97
8 The charter was issued on 9 February 1745 (Plakaatboek, 5:189). The first page of
issue 10 is reproduced in de Haan, Platenalbum, H8.
9 Plakaatboek, 5:335-36.
IOU nder van Imhoff's regime Lutherans were pennitted to worship publicly, and in
1745 they were allowed to build a church.
II The order to close the convalescent home was dated 30 June 1761, when mineral
springs were declared useless for restoring health (Plakaatboek, 7:500 ff.).
12 Request dated 25 October 1777, Realia, 1:345.
13 The prize list is given in de lndische Navorscher 1 (19):157-58 (October 1935).
14 Decree on "native teachers" is dated 25 November 1777 (Plakaatboek, 10:106).
Instructions to Venneer and Reinking are in the school regulations of 19 December
1777 (10: 124-25).
15 5 February 1780, supplement to school regulations, Plakaatboek, 10:425-27.
16 Twenty-one girls with European status attended Boterkoper's school in 1778, along
with 48 boys, 13 Chinese, 13 Muslims (Le., free Asians), and slaves (de Haan, Oud
Batavia, 2:261). The Rua Malacca or Malacca Street ran north-south on the west side
of the Ciliwung. It was so named for the many Portuguese Asians who settled there
round the inner Portuguese church in the 16405, after the Dutch victory over the
Portuguese in 1641 at Malacca.
17 Permission for Portuguese and Malay to be used in schools is contained in decision of
28 July 1786 (Plakaatboek, 10:849-50). Pennission for classes in the poorhouse
school to be taught in Portuguese is in decree of 12 August 1788 (11:35). Decision on
catechism classes is dated 9 September 1788 (11:54).
18 Plakaatboek 10:343-45 (December 1788).
19 Titles of the Transactions are listed in Lian The and Paul W. Vander Veur, The
Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap (Athens: Ohio University Center
for International Studies, 1973), by author, with a brief description of contents, and
by volume, pp. 27-128. Pages 1-26 give a brief history of the Academy.
20 The and Van der Veur, Verhandelingen, p. 3.
21 D. de Visser Smits, "Naamlijst van vrijmetselaren in Ned. Oost Indie van 1760 tot
1860, " in his Vrijmetselarij: Geschiedenis, maatschappelijke beteekenis en doel, pp.
298-309. The membership list was sent me by Dr. Paul W. Van der Veur.
22 De Roo de la Faille, lets over Oud-Batavia, p. 27.
23 Cantervisscher was the son of Tammerus Cantervisscher, junior merchant on Coro­
mandel in 1751, and of Carolina Susanna Simons. Under the Company, C. A.
Cantervisscher rose to be a councillor. He married a Petronella Hattingh from
Semarang in 1790, founding a large Indies clan that was very mixed racially. Canter­
visscher was initiated as a mason in 1790, Beijvanck in 1809.
24 De Haan, Oud Batavia, 2:280.
25 Smith married four times. In order, his wives were (1763) Hester Petronella Romp,
daughter of Councillor Michiel Romp; (1780) Catharina Tobison, widow ofCouncillor
Willem Fockens; (1781) Catharina Louisa Galles; and (1782) Johanna Mauritia Mohr.
26 Decree of 25 August 1808, Plakaatboek, 15:145-46.
27 Thomas Stamford Raffles, The History of Java, 2d ed., 2 vols. (London: John
Murray, 1830),2:270.
241

--- PAGE: 274 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.274) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 97-112
28 These figures are given by William Thorn, Memoir ofthe Conquest ofJava (London:
T. Egerton, 1815), p. 8. In addition to the Europeans, the invading force included
5,777 soldiers who were sepoys of the Madras, Bengal, and Bombay annies.
29 Lord Minto to his wife, in Lord Minto in India (London: Longmans, Green, 1880),
pp. 304-5, 306.
30 See, for example, the Java Government Gazette 4 (1815), no. 195.
31 Unsigned letter to the editor, printed in the Gazette 2, no. 53 (27 February 1813).
32 See letters to the editor, Gazette 4, nos. 198, 199 (1815).
33 See, for example, the Gazette 3, nos. 139, 143, 147 (1814).
34 Thorn, Conquest ofJava , p. 248.
35 Gazette 4, esp. nos. 175, 184 (1815).
36 Thorn, Conquest ofJava, p. 249.
37 F. de Haan, Priangan (Batavia, 's-Gravenhage: Kolff, Nijhoff, 1910), vol. 1, pt. 2
("Personalia"), p. 80.
38 Thomas Otto Travers, The Journal of Thomas Otto Travers 1813-1820, ed. John
Bastin (Singapore: Government Printer, 1960), p. 57.
39 Gazette 2, no. 95 (18 December 1813).
40 According to the Java Annual Directory and Almanac for 1816 (Batavia: Govern­
ment Press, 1816), 112 males in the Solo region had European status. Women were
not counted in the Almanac as residents or in any other statistics.
41 The visit to Yogyakarta, 8-12 December 1813, is recounted in the Gazette 2, no. 98
(8 January 1814).
42 Thorn, Conquest, p. 290.
43 See Thorn, Conquest, p. 239, and John Crawford, History ofthe Indian Archipelago
(Edinburgh: Archibald Constable, 1820), 2:268, for remarks on the Javanese and
alcohol.
44 Raffles, History ofJava, 1:347. The "last Javan war" refers to the dynastic wars of
the mid-eighteenth century in which the Company played a role and eventually
enforced a division of Mataram into the sultanates of Solo and Yogyakarta.
45 Ibid.
46 Travers, Journal, entry for January 1816, p. 65.
47 Comelis de Bruijn, Reizen over Moskovie, pp. 379-80.
48 See Gazette 2, no. 60 (17 April 1813); 4, no. 170 (27 May 1815); and 3, no. 124 (16
July 1814). This trio was all of one family: Dorothea van Riemsdijk was the mother
of Sara Senn van Basel and aunt of Catharina Mom.
49 See, for instance, edicts of 8 August 1810 (Plakaatboek, 16:296-97), and 22 July
1811 (16:718).
50 Gazette 1, no. 7 (April 1812). Barrett, a commissioner of the court of requests, died
in Batavia in September 1814. His widow, who was the daughter of a fonner senior
merchant of the VOC, married J. I. van Sevenhoven after the death of his first wife,
Catharina Mom.
51 Jan Samuel Timmennan Thyssen was head of the fimi Timmennan Thyssen and
Westennan in Batavia during the British period, and a member of the Bible Society
and Harmonie Club. He succeeded his father-in-law, Abraham Couperus, as gov­
ernor of Malacca from 1818 until his death there in 1823. Gesina Couperus (1785­
1812) was his second wife.
242

--- PAGE: 275 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.275) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 112-125
52 Gazette 2, no. 84 (2 October 1813).
53 See entry for July 1815 in Travers's Journal, p. 53.
54 David Divine, The Daughter of the Pangaran (Boston, Toronto: Little, Brown,
1963). The novel centers on the relationship between Hare and the title character.
55 Williams was the administrator of a private estate west of Batavia and later a member
of a trading company in the capital. A Dutch-language version of Njai Dasima was
written and published by Alvares Theodorus Manusama at Batavia in 1926. It has
been republished by Tong-Tong International at San Francisco in 1962. Komedie
Stamboel was a Malay language theater putting Western and Middle Eastern stories
into dramatic fonn with Indonesian and part-European actors. The name is formed
from a contraction of "Istanbul" to Stamboel. "
CHAPTER 5: THE DESTRUcnON OF VOC SOCIETY
AND THE CREATION OF THE NEW COLONIAL
The Bataviasche Courant (Batavian Journal) was published by the government press
in the capital. Its first issue appeared on 20 August 1816. In time its name was
changed to lavasche Courant in recognition of the island-wide community it served,
and it became a daily paper.
2 Q. M. R. Ver Huell, Herinneringen van eene reis naar de Oost-Indie, 2 vols.
(Amsterdam: Zweesardt, 1835), 1:32.
3 J. B. J. van Doren, Reis naar Nederlands Oost-Indie, 2 vols. ('s-Gravenhage: J. and
H. van Langenhuysen, 1851),2:43.
4 Staatsblad van Nederlandsch-Indie ('s-Gravenhage: A. D. Schinkel, 1839-86), 1818
vol., no. 87, art. 7, p. 217.
5 Staa~blad, 1836,no.48,art.2,p. 115.
6 Staatsblad, 1825, no. 32,pp. 110-14.
7 Staa~blad, 1836, no. 35,pp. 103-5.
8 Staatsblad, 1849, no. 19, 8 April. Page numberings in this and later volumes are for
individual laws only rather than being continuous. For these volumes, therefore, laws
are identified by number and date only.
9 On the "May movement" of 1848 see J. Th. Petrus Blumberger, De lndo­
Europeesche beweging in Nederlandsch-Indie (Haarlem: H. D. Tjeenk Willink en
Zoon, 1939), pp. 13 ff.
10 Staatsblad, 1864, no. 194, 10 September. See also W. M. F. Mansvelt, "De positie
der Indo-Europeanen," in Koloniale Studien 16 (1):298 (1932). The Dutch terms
stand for senior and junior officials' examinations, respectively.
11 The many branches of the family, numbering around 2,000 persons in the 19208,
were traced in accordance with provisions ofW. V. H. van Riemsdijk's will concern­
ing divisions of property in land, and the findings were published by P. R. Feith and
P. C. Bloys van Treslong Prins in De bekende landheer van Tjampea c.a. Willem
Vincent Helvetius van Riemsdijk (Batavia: Kolff, 1933).
12 Ament was a Netherlander who settled permanently in Java. He had nine children by
Dina van Riemsdijk. Their descendants were still living in Batavia in the 19208.
13 Staatsblad, 1818, no. 8, art. 113, p. 234; and 1855, Government Law no. 2, 4
January 1855. Article 115 declared that slavery would be abolished throughout the
Indies on 1 January 1860 (though not debt-slavery) (pp. 27-28).
243

--- PAGE: 276 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.276) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 125-135
14 lavasche Courant 24,21 March 1840. This van Riemsdijk was a granddaughter of
W. V. H. van Riemsdijk in the legitimate line. She had four children by ten Cate,
who was a native Netherlander and husband number one, and a fifth by her second
husband, Gemt Jacobus van Capelle, who stemmed from Ambon.
15 VerHuell, Herinneringen, 1:197-98.
16 The generations descending on Wilhelmina's mother's side were (1) Johanna Henri­
ette Breekpot, 1738-80; (2) Catharina Margaretha Craan, 1754-92; and (3)
Theodora Jacoba van Riemsdijk, 1775-1815.
17 The generations descending on Anthoinette' smother's side were (1) Catharina Her­
mina Regel, born Madras; and (2) Catharina Johanna Wilhelmina Bogaardt, born
Bengal.
18 This was Johanna Sara Wilhelmina van Braam Morris, Batavia-born wife of Gover­
nor-General Otto van Rees (1884-88).
19 The Agriculture Law permitted Indonesians to lease their land to private planters on
short-term contracts, and also allowed planters to obtain government-owned, unculti­
vated land on Java and Madura on heritable lease for periods of up to seventy-five years.
20 The figures cited above are taken from two sources: John S. Fumivall, Netherlands
India: A Study in Plural Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1944),
p. 212; and B. H. M. Vlekke, Nusantara: A History of Indonesia, rev. ed. (The
Hague and Bandung: W. van Hoeve, 1959), p. 314. The last census in which an
attempt was made to distinguish groups within the European category was 1854. Of
the 18,000 Europeans, 9,360, or half, were counted as being "visibly" part-Asian,
and another large portion of the remainder were )regarded as Eurasian. See A. van
MarIe, "De groep der Europeanen in Nederlands Indie," Indonesie 5 (5):487 (1955).
21 Advertisements placed by women seeking employment as governesses, midwives, and
in retailing start appearing in Indies newspapers around 1840. Their activities can be
traced througll the private, regional newspapers thatdate on Java from the 18608as well.
22 R. Nieuwenhuys, "OverdeEuropesesamenlevingvan 'tempodoeloe' 1870-1900,"
de Fakkell (1940/41):777, 782.
23 For a detailed survey of Indies clubs, see Hein Buitenweg [pseudo for H. C. Meijer],
Soos en samenleving in tempo doeloe (The Hague: Servire, 1965). The book is richly
illustrated with photographs of the years from about 1870 to the 19308.
24 A different style of Mestizo culture evolved in Sumatra, influenced by the model of
nearby British Malaya. A picture of colonial society in Deli before World War IT has
been drawn by Lily Clerkx in Mensen in Deli (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press, 1961).
25 van Doren, Reis, 2:229.
26 G. W. Skinner, "Change and Persistence in Chinese Culture Overseas: A Compari­
son of Thailand and Java," Journal of the South Seas Society 16 (1960):86-100.
Quotation from p. 95.
27 W. F. Wertheim, Het sociologisch karakter van de Indo-Maatschappij (Amsterdam:
Vrij Nederland, 1947), p. 5.
CHAPTER 6: THE INNER LIFE OF LATE COLONIAL SOCIETY
This summary of critiques of colonial life is based on: J. Hennus, Eene stem uit
Oost-Indie in gemeenzame brieven aan zijnen vader (Utrecht: van der Post Jr., 1847);
244

--- PAGE: 277 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.277) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 135-140
A. W. P. Weitzel, Batavia in 1858 (Gorinchem: Noorduijn, 1860); "Oudgast," Onze
Oost (Amsterdam: J. A. Sleeswijk, 1897); B. Veth, Het leven in Nederlandsch-Indiif
4th 00. (Amsterdam: P. N. van Kampen en Zoon, [c. 1900]); J. Chailly-Bert, Java et
ses habitants (Paris: Annand Colin, 1900); Hendrik P. N. Muller, "De Europeesche
samenleving," in H. Colijn, 00., Neerlands lndiif (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1912),
2:371-84; and E. Stark, Vit Indiif, Egypte en het Heilige Land, 2d ed. (Amersfoort:
Veen, 1913).
2 See the following works: Augusta de Wit, Java, Facts and Fancies (London: Chapman
and Hall, 1905); Marie van Zeggelen, De Hollandsche vrouw in lndiif, 2d ed.
(Amsterdam: Groesbeek and Nijhoff, [c. 1910]); and the exponents of "tempo doeloe"
(the good old days): Victor Ido [Hans van de Wall], lndiif in de goede oude tijd (The
Hague: van Hoeve, 1966); E. Breton de Nijs [Rob Nieuwenhuys], Tempo Doeloe
(Amsterdam: Querido, 1961);and Hein Buitenweg [H. C. Meijer], Kind in tempo doeloe
(Wassenaer: Servire, 1964), and Wat wij in om hart sloten (The Hague: Servire, 1962),
this last with Willem Krols. See alsoHet meisje uit lndiif, published by Tong-Tong, the
magazine of Eurasians in Holland (The Hague: Uitgeverij Tong-Tong, 1966).
3 See the collection of essays Zoo Leven wij in lndiif, 3d 00., ed. C. W. Wonnser
(De venter: van Hoeve, 1943). The "wij" (we) and "ons" (our) in the titles of
chapters and texts refer only to immigrant Europeans, and there is considerable
discussion of avoiding "lndianization." On this subject see also Rob Nieuwenhuys's
quotations from the Indies journalist Ritman in Tussen twee vaderlanden (Amster­
dam: G. A. van Oorschot, 1959), p. 16.
4 See, for example, pp. 58, 88, and 116 of R. Nieuwenhuys, Tempo Doeloe; also the
photograph of Mevrouw Junghuhn, guests, and servants in C. Steinmetz, "Cul­
tureele gegevens uit familiepapieren n: Dr. Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn (1809-1864), "
Cultureellndie 4 (1942):175.
5 Augusta de Wit, Java, Facts and Fancies, pp. 250-54. The Westem-educated bupati
of Serang and later of Batavia, Achmad Djajadiningmt, comments on behavior
expected of Indonesians by their Dutch superiors in the administration in his Kenang­
Kenangan (Batavia: Kolff-Buning-Balai Poestaka, 1936), p. 154. This is the Indo­
nesian translation of his memoirs, which appeared in 1936 as Herinneringen van
Pangeran Aria Achmad Djajadiningrat (Amsterdam, Batavia: Kolff).
6 See esp. H. P. N. Muller, "De Europeesche samenleving," in Neerlands lndiif,
2:371-84, for a good example of omission. See also D. M. G. Koch, Verant­
woording (The Hague: Bandung: van Hoeve, 1956). In this book, the teon European
always means that minority born in Holland, although this is never explicitly stated.
7 De Locomotief, Samarangsch HandeLs en Advertentie-Blad 14, no. 8 (27 January
1865), and 34, no. 17 (21 January 1885).
8 Locomotief34, no. 204 (26 August 1885).
9 Locomotiej34, no. 7 (9 January 1885), and 13, no. 97 (5 December 1864), respec­
tively.
10 Locomotiej 34, no. 68 (18 March 1885). The "four languages" were Dutch, Ger­
man, French, and English.
11 Locomotief34, no. 17 (21 January 1885).
12 Examples of this kind of advertisement may be found in Locomotief 14, nos. 26 and
34 (31 March and 28 April 1865).
245

--- PAGE: 278 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.278) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 140-146
13 See, for example, Locomotief 14, no. 36 (5 May 1865), and 35, no. 147 (26 June
1866).
14 Locomotiej 34, nos. 9 and 41 (12 January and 16 February 1885), respectively.
44Indische" means Eurasian or Creole, in this context.
15 Locomotiej34, no. 207 (29 August 1885).
16 Locomotiej34 (1885), nos. 206 (28 August), 246 (12 October), 27 (31 January), 130
(1 June), and 144 (17 June), respectively.
17 Locomotiej 80 (1904), nos. 14 (11 January), 205 (3 September), and 181 (5 August),
respectively.
18 lavasche Courant, 1850, nos. 39 and 83 (15 May and 16 October), respectively.
19 Locomotiej80, no. 286 (7 December 1904).
20 Locomotiej 14, no. 17 (27 February 1865), signed "P. R."
21 Locomotiej 14, no. 20 (10 March 1865), signed ••K. " •• K" seems to be using
"European" in two distinct ways in his argument, meaning in the first use children of
parents classified as European, and in the second, immigrants.
22 I. J. Brugmans, Geschiedenis van het onderwijs in Nederlandsch-Indie (Groningen,
Batavia: J. B. Wolters, 1938), p. 295.
23 E. F. E. Douwes Dekker is the author of the most famous novel of colonial life, Max
Havelaar (8th ed., Rotterdam: A. D. Donker, 1967). It was first published in 1860
under the pseudonym Multatuli. P. A. Daum' s Indies novels appeared first in serial
fonn in the Batavioosch Nieuwsblad above the name Maurits. The editions used are:
Goena-Goena, een geschiedenis van stille kracht (Amsterdam: Querido, 1964), first
published in 1887 (1889 in book fonn); Hoe hij Rood van Indie werd (Semarang,
Dorp; 1888); Uit de suiker in de tabak (Amsterdam: Salamander, 1962); and "Ups"
en "Downs" in het Indische Leven (5th ed., Amsterdam: Contact, 1946), first pub­
lished 1890 (book fonn 1892). Louis Couperus' s Indies novel De stille kracht, 1900,
was first published in English in 1922 as The Hidden Force: A Story ofModern Java,
trans. A. Teixeira de Mattos (London: Jonathon Cape, 1922). Two other Indies
novels by male authors which have been used as sources for the social history of the
Indies are Jan ten Brink's Oost-Indische dames en heeren (Amhem: D. A. Thieme,
1866), and G. Valette'sBaren en oudgasten ('s-Gravenhage: H. J. Sternberg, 1880).
24 See Rob Nieuwenhuys, Oost-Indische spiegel (Amsterdam: Querido, 1972), sect. 9,
44Romantiek in sarong kabaja"; and J. M. van der Kroef, "The Colonial Novel in
Indonesia," Comparative Literature 10 (2): 215-31 (Summer 1958).
25 Madelon Lulofs, Coolie, trans. G. J. Renier and Irene Clephane (New York: Viking,
1936); and White Money, same trans. (New York, London: Century, 1933).
26 The titles and editions used are: Katja-Mata [Marie Frank], Een natuurlijk kind en
andere Nederlandsch-Indische verhalen (Leiden: Noothaven van Goor, 1875); Annie
Foore [Fran~oise IJzennan-Junius], Indische huwelijken, 2nd ed. (Rotterdam: 1895),
De van Sons, een verhool uit Indie (The Hague: Sternberg, 1881), and Bogoriana, 3d
ed. (Haarlem: Tjeenk Willink en Zoon, 1908); Mina Kruseman, Een huwelijk in
Indie (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1873); Therese Hoven, In sarong en kabaai
(Amsterdam: Veen, 1892), Vervreemd, (Amersfoort: Valkhoff, n.d.), and Nonnie en
andere verhalen (Tiel: Campagne en Zoon, n.d.); and Melati van Java [Marie Sioot] ,
Dejamilie van den Resident, 3d ed. (Schiedam: H. A. M. Roelants, n.d.).
27 Marie Sloot, Soerapati, 3d ed. 2 vols. (Schiedam: H. A. M. Roelants, 1928).
246

--- PAGE: 279 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.279) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 146-157
28 Marie van Zeggelen, Kartini, een baanbreekster voor haar volk, 3d ed. (Amsterdam:
J. M. Meulenhoff, 1947).
29 Fran~oise Junius, Bogoriana, p. 39.
30 Marie Frank, "In een sterfhuis, " eighth in the collection Een natuurlijk kind, p. 271.
31 See G. Valette, Baren en oudgasten, pp. 41-53; Oudgast, Onze Oost, pp. 42, 90
(Oudgast is a pen name and means "old-timer"); and Rob Nieuwenhuys, "Over de
Europese samenleving van 'tempo doeloe' 1870-1900," de Fakkell (1940/41):778.
32 Fran~oise Junius, "Geketend," the final story in the collection Indische huwelijken,
pp. 1()4·-207.
33 Quoted by W. F. Wertheim, Indonesian Society in Transition, 2d rev. ed. (The
Hague, Bandung: van Hoeve, 1959), p. 138, n. 1.
34 "De vergissing van den Engelschman," no. 6 in Frank's collection Een natuurlijk
kind, pp. 202-34.
35 Therese Hoven, " 't was maar een baboe," last story in In sarong en kabaai, pp.
201-23. The quotation is from p. 215.
36 Mina Kruseman, Een huwelijk in Indii.
37 Marie Frank, "Een natuurlijk kind," title story of the collection, pp. 1-73.
38 Ibid., p. 21.
39 Fran~oise Junius, "Willie's Mama," Indische huwelijken, pp. 39-103.
40 Mr. Conrad Theodor van Deventer published "A Debt of Honor" in de Gids of
August 1899. Brooshoeft was for many years the editor of the Locomotief. His
famous pamphlet "The Ethical Course in Colonial Policy" was first published in
1901. Those accepting his and van Deventer's convictions about colonial reform
were called Ethici.
41 Marie Sioot, Defamilie van den Resident, p. 104.
42 Sioot, Familie, p. 122.
43 Therese Hoven, Vervreemd, pp. 98-99. Sinjo (new spelling sinyo) is derived from
the Portuguese senhor, and was used in colonial times as a pejorative term for
Eurasian men. Indo is the common abbreviation of the Dutch Indo-Europeaan mean­
ing Eurasian.
44 See J. Th. Petrus Blumberger, De Indo-Europeesche beweging, and P. W. Van der
Veur, "E. F. E. Douwes Dekker, Evangelist for Indonesian Political Nationalism,"
Journal ofAsian Studies 18 (4): 551-66 (August 1958).
45 Sloot, Soerapati, p. 23. Surapati is the modem Indonesian spelling.
46 Junius, De van Sons, p. 118.
47 Ibid., p. 120.
48 Ibid., p. 145.
49 Ibid., p. 209.
50 J. S. Fumivall, Netherlands India (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1944),
p.446.
51 E. Breton de Nijs [Rob Nieuwenhuys], Vergeelde portretten uit een Indischfamil­
iea/bum, 5th ed. (Amsterdam: Salamandar, 1963); Maria Dermout, De tienduizend
ding en, trans. into English by Hans Koningsberger as The Ten Thousand Things
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1958), and Nog pas gisteren, trans. by Hans
Koningsberger as Yesterday (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1959).
247

--- PAGE: 280 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.280) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 160-167
EPILOGUE
A. W. P. Weitzel, Batavia in 1858 (Gorinchem: Noorduijn, 1860), pp. 157-58. He
says that the Dutch spoke Indonesian languages so badly that they always offended
Indonesians of good family.
2 A small sampling might include Therese Hoven's "Een inlandsch feest" and "Bij
onze gestaarte broeders op visite," both in the collection In sarong en kabaai, pp.
147-53 and 111-21, respectively. For photos, see Rob Nieuwenhuys, Tempo Doe­
loe, pp. 101, 102, 106; andH. C. Meijer, De LaatstetempodoeLoe, pp. 66,136,146.
3 For articles on Raden Saleh, see Tamar Djaja, Pusaka Indonesia, 4th ed. (Djakarta:
Bulan Bintang, 1966), 2:470-76 (no. 44); J. de Loos-Haaxman, VerLaat rapport
lndie (The Hague: Mouton, 1968), chs. 14, 15, and paintings 58-66; and V. I. van
de Wall, ~ ~Beschrijving van eenige werken van Raden Saleh," in CuLtureeLIndie 4
(1942): 159-67. The seven paintings under discussion are reproduced in the article.
4 Q. M. R. Ver Huell, Herinneringen, 2:61-62.
5 Ver Huell, Herinneringen 2:82-84. "Regent" was the teon used by the Dutch for
the Javanese official, the bupati, who headed an administrative unit immediately
below the residency, in tum headed by a European official with the title resident. The
regent or bupati reported to the resident.
6 Locomotief 15, no. 41 (22 May 1866), and 53, no. 107 (7 May 1904), respectively.
7 Locomotief 14, no. 65 (14 August 1865).
8 Locomotief 14, no. 90 (supp. to the issue for 10 November 1865).
9 Locomotief 15, no. 18 (2 March 1866).
10 Locomotief 34, no. 119 (18 May 1885). Much of the Locomotief obituary was
reprinted from the TegaLschAdvertentiebLad.
11 See, for instance, R. A. Kartini, "Het huwelijk bij de Kodjas," in Bijdragen tot de
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 1899, fasc. 6, pt. 6, pp. 695-702. Excerpts from her
essays are quoted by Hendrik Bouman, Meer Licht over Kartini (Amsterdam: H. J.
Paris, 1954). Her memorial to the Dutch government entitled "Geef den Javaan
opvoeding!" has been translated into English by Jean Taylor as "Educate the Java­
nese!" and printed in Indonesia 17:86-98 (April 1974).
12 Her collected letters to Dutch acquaintances were edited by J. H. Abendanon as Door
duisternis tot licht, 4th ed. ('s-Gravenhage: "Luctoret Emergo," 1923).
13 W. F. Wertheim, Indonesian Society in Transition, 2d rev. ed. (The Hague, Ban­
dung: van Hoeve, 1959), pp. 292-93.
14 The Java Bode article was reprinted in Locomotief 53, no. 18 (22 January 1904).
15 Herinneringen van Pangeran Aria Achmad Djajadiningrat, (Amsterdam, Batavia: G.
Kolff, 1936). They were published in Indonesian translation that same year under the
title Kenang-Kenangan.
16 See letters to Stella Zeehandelaar of 12 January 1900 and to R. M. Abendanon­
Mantri of 27 October 1902, in Duisternis.
17 These advertisements are taken from the Locomotief as follows: 15, no. 38 (11 May
1866); 34, no. 76 (26 March 1885); 53, no. 27 (2 February 1904), for death notice on
the mother; 53, no. 154 (4 July 1904); 53, no. 178 (1 August 1904), for marriage
announcement for R. A. Patemah; and 53, no. 271 (19 November 1904).
248

--- PAGE: 281 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.281) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 167-177
18 Photographs of reception rooms of Javanese aristocrats may be seen in Rob Nieu-
wenhuys, Tempo Doeloe, pp. 105, 106, Ill.
19 Locomotief53, no. 179 (3 August 1904).
20 Locomotief53, no. 180 (4 August 1904).
21 The colonial novels are a major source of information on party manners. The works
of 1. ten Brink, Daum, and Couperus all reveal the persistent Mestizo custom of
segregation. This, of course, had deep roots in colonial history.
22 As examples see Merari Siregar, Azab dan Sengsara (Torment and Trouble) 4th ed.
(Jakarta: Balai Pustaka, 1965); Marah Rusli, Siti Nurbaya (Miss Nurbaya) 2d ed.
(Kuala Lumpur: Pustaka Melayu Baru, 1966); Abdul Muis, Salah Asoehan (A Wrong
Upbringing) (Weltevreden: Balai Pustaka, 1928), and Pertemuan Djodoh (The Cou­
ple's Meeting) (Bukittinggi, Jakarta: Nusantara, 1964 ed.); Takdir Alisjahbana, Lajar
Terkembang (With Sails Unfurled) (Jakarta: Balai Pustaka, 1928); and Hamidah,
Kehilangan Mestika (Loss of the Jewel) (Jakarta: Balai Pustaka, n. d.).
23 Staatsblad, 1855, no. 2 (4 January), publication of Constitutional Law No. 129 in the
Nederlandsch Staatsblad, 2 September 1854. See chap. 6, art. 109, pp. 26-27.
24 A. van Marle, "De groep der Europeanen," Indonesie 5 (2):99.
25 Ibid., p. 109.
26 Ibid. (5):500.
NEW EXPLORATIONS OF EUROPEAN-ASIAN ENCOUNTERS
1 Gerry van Klinken, "The Battle for History after Suharto: Beyond Sacred Dates, Great
Men, and Legal Milestones," Critical Asian Studies 33, no. 3 (September 2001): 323-50.
2 See, for example, Saleh A. Djamhari, Strategi Menjinakkan Diponegoro: Stelsel Benteng,
1827-1830 (Jakarta: Yayasan Komunitas Bambu, 2003);and Onghokham, Riwayat Tiong­
hoa Peranakan di Jawa (Jakarta: Komunitas Bambu, 2005).
3 Candrian Attahiyyat, VOC: Armada Kapal dan Mitologi (Jakarta: Dinas Museum dan
Sejarah DKI Jakarta, 1991).
4 See, for example, Joost Cote and Loes Westerbeek, eds., Recalling the Indies: Kebudayaan
Kolonial dan Identitas Poskolonial (Yogyakarta: Syarikat Indonesia, 2004); and John
Ingleson, Tangan dan kaki terikat: Dinamika buruh, sarekat kerja dan perkotaan masa
kolonial (Jakarta: Komunitas Bambu, 2004).
5 See, for example, Louis De Jong, The Collapse of a Colonial Society: The Dutch in In­
donesia during the Second World War (Leiden: KITLV Press, 2002); Fridus Steijlen,
comp., Memories of «The East": Abstracts of the Dutch Interviews about the Nether­
lands East Indies, Indonesia and New Guinea (1930-1962) in the Oral History Project
Collection (Leiden: KITLV Press, 2002); and Marieke Brand, Henk Schulte Nordholt,
and Fridus Steijlen, eds., Indie Verteld: Herinneringen, 1930-1950 (Zutphen: Walburg
Press, 2005).
6 G. 1. Knaap, Kruidnagelen en Christenen: De Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie en de
bevolking van Ambon, 1656-1696 (Leiden: KITLV Press, rev. ed., 2004).
7 1. R. Bruijn and F. S. Gaastra, eds., Ships, Sailors and Spices: East India Companies and
Their Shipping in the 16th, 17th and 18th Centuries (Leiden: KITLV Press, 1993).
8 F. S. Gaastra, The Dutch East India Company: Expansion and Decline (Zutphen: Walburg
Press, 2003).
249

--- PAGE: 282 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.282) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 177-181
9 Harm Stevens, Dutch Enterprise and the VOC, 1602-1799 (Zutphen: Walburg, 1998).
10 Leonard Blusse, "Batavia, 1619-1740: The Rise and Fall of a Chinese Colonial Town,"
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 12, no. 1 (March 1981): 159-78.
11 Carl Trocki, "Chinese Pioneering in Eighteenth-Century Southeast Asia," in The Last
Stand of Asian Autonomies, ed. Anthony Reid (New York: Macmillan), p. 87.
12 Susan Abeyasekere, Jakarta: A History (Singapore: Oxford University Press, 1987).
13 Adolf Heuken, Historical Sites of Jakarta (Jakarta: Yayasan Cipta Loka Caraka, 1982).
14 Scott Merrillees, Batavia in Nineteenth Century Photographs (London: Curzon, 2000).
15 Max de Bruijn and Remco Raben, The World of Jan Brandes, 1743-1808: Drawings of a
Dutch Traveller in Batavia, Ceylon and Southern Africa (Suffolk, UK: Antique Collectors'
Club, 2005).
16 Jean Gelman Taylor, "Meditations on a Portrait from Seventeenth Century Batavia,"
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 37, no. 1 (February 2006): 23-41.
17 Jean Gelman Taylor, "Painted Ladies of the VOC," South African Historical Journal 59
(2007): 47-78.
18 D. B. Bosman, Briewe van Johanna Maria van Riebeeck en ander Riebeeckiana (Amster­
dam: Noord-Hollandsche Uitgevers, 1952).
19 Peter van der Krogt, ed., VOC: A Bibliography of Publications Relating to the Dutch East
India Company, 1602-1800 (Utrecht: HES, 1991).
20 1. Bethlehem and A. C. Meijer, eds., VOC en cultuur: Wetenschappelijke en culturele relat­
ies tussen Europa en AzU! ten tijde van de VOC (Amsterdam: Schiphouwer en Brinkman,
1993).
21 Harold 1. Cook, Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and Science in the Dutch
Golden Age (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007).
22 Leonard Blusse and Ilonka Ooms, Kennis en Compagnie: De VOC en de moderne weten­
schap (Leiden: Balans, 2002).
23 All of One Company: The VOC in Biographical Perspective; Essays in Honour of Prof
M A. P. Meilink-Roelofsz (Utrecht: HES, 1986), p. 18I.
24 Karel Schoeman, Kinders van die Kompanjie: Kaapse lewens uit die sewentiende eeu (Pre­
toria: Protea Boekhuis, 2006).
25 Vibeke Roeper and Roelof van Gelder, eds., In dienst van de Compagnie: Leven bij de VOC
in honderd getuigenissen (1602-1799) (Amsterdam: Athenaeum-Polak en Van Gennep,
2002).
26 Alfons van der Kraan, "On Company Business: The Rijckloff van Goens Mission to
Siam, 1650," in Itinerario, issue 2 (1998); Chris Baker, Dhiravat na Pombejra, Alfons
van der Kraan, and David K. Wyatt, eds., Van Vliet's Siam (Bangkok: Silkworm Books,
2005).
27 Leonard Blusse, "Butterfly or Mantis? The Life and Times of Cornelia van Nijenroode,"
in Strange Company: Chinese Settlers, Mestizo Women and the Dutch in VOC Batavia
(Dordrecht: Foris, 2006), chapter 8.
28 Leonard Y Blusse, Bitters bruid: Een koloniaal huwelijksdrama in de gouden eeuw (Amster­
dam: Balans, 1997). It was published in English translation as Bitter Bonds: A Colonial
Divorce Drama of the Seventeenth Century (Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener, 2002).
29 Leonard Andaya, "'A Very Good-Natured but Awe-Inspiring Government': The Reign
of a Successful Queen in Seventeenth Century Aceh," in Hof en handel: Aziatische vor-
250

--- PAGE: 283 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.283) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 181-184
sten en de VOC 1620-1720, ed. Elsbeth Locher-Scholten and Pieter Rietbergen (Leiden:
KITLV Press, 2004), pp. 59-84.
30 Dhiravat na Pombejra, "VOC Employees and Their Relationships with Mon and Siamese
Women: A Case Study of Osoet Pegua," in Other Pasts: Women, Gender and History
in Early Modern Southeast Asia, ed. Barbara Watson Andaya (Honolulu: University of
Hawaii, Center for Southeast Asian Studies, 2000), pp. 195-214.
31 William Bradley Horton, "Pieter Elberveld: The Modern Adventure of an Eighteenth­
Century Indonesian Hero," Indonesia 76 (October 2003): 147-89.
32 Mayumi Yamamoto, "Spell of the Rebel, Monumental Apprehensions: Japanese Dis­
course on Pieter Erberveld," Indonesia 77 (April 2004): 109-44.
33 Ruurdje Laarhoven, "The Power of Cloth: The Textile Trade of the Dutch East India
Company (VOC) 1600-1780," PhD thesis, Australian National University, 1994.
34 Hendrik E. Niemeijer, "The Free Asian Christian Community and Poverty in Pre-Modern
Batavia," in Jakarta-Batavia: Socio-Cultural Essays, ed. Kees Grijns and Peter 1. M. Nas
(Leiden: KITLV Press, 2000), pp. 75-92; and Hendrik E. Niemeijer, "Slavery, Ethnicity
and the Economic Independence of Women in Seventeenth-Century Batavia," in Other
Pasts: Women, Gender and History in Early Modern Southeast Asia, ed. Barbara Wat­
son Andaya (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Center for Southeast Asian Studies, 2000),
pp. 174-94.
35 Remco Raben, "Round about Batavia: Ethnicity and Authority in the Ommelanden,
1650-1800," in Grijns and Nas, jakarta-Batavia, pp. 93-113.
36 Yasmine Shahab, "Aristocratic Betawi: A Challenge to Outsiders' Perceptions," in Grijns
and Nas, jakarta-Batavia, pp. 93-113.
37 Eric Allan Jones, "Fugitive Women: Slavery and Social Change in Early Modern South­
east Asia," Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 38, no. 2 (June 2007): 215-45.
38 Remco Raben, "Batavia and Colombo: The Ethnic and Spatial Order of Two Colonial
Cities 1600-1800," PhD diss., University of Leiden, 1996.
39 Anjana Singh, "From Amsterdam via Batavia to Cochin: Mid-Eighteenth Century Indi­
viduals and Institutions of the VOC," in Contingent Lives: Social Identity and Material
Culture in the VOC World, ed. Nigel Worden (Cape Town: University of Cape Town
Historical Studies, 2007), pp. 209-31.
40 Hoang Anh Tuan, Silk for Silver: Dutch- Vietnamese Relations, 1637-1700 (Leiden: Brill,
2007).
41 M. A. M. Verstegen, De Indische Zeeherberg: De stichting van Zuid-Afrika door de VOC
(Zaltbommel: Europese Bibliotheek, 2001).
42 Dan Sleigh, Die buiteposte: VOC-buiteposte onder Kaapse bestuur, 1652-1795 (Pretoria:
HAUM, 1993).
43 Nigel Worden, "New Approaches to VOC History in South Africa," South African His­
torical Journal 59 (2007): 3-18.
44 Lodewijk Wagenaar, Galle, VOC-vestiging in Ceylon: Beschrijving van een koloniale samen­
leving aan de vooravond van de Singalese opstand tegen het Nederlandse gezag (Amsterdam:
Bataafsche Leeuw, 1994).
45 Dhiravat na Pombejra, "Ayutthaya at the End of the Seventeenth Century: Was There a
Shift to Isolation?" in Southeast Asia in the Early Modern Era: Trade, Power, and Belief,
ed. Anthony Reid (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993), pp. 250-72; and Dhiravat na
251

--- PAGE: 284 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.284) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 184-186
Pombejra, Court, Company, and Compong: Essays on the VOC Presence in Ayutthaya
(Ayutthaya: Ayutthaya Historical Study Centre, 1992).
46 Rijklof van Goens, Javaense Reyse: De bezoeken van een VOC-gezant aan het hof van Ma­
taram, 1648-54, ed. Darja de Wever (Amsterdam: Terra Incognita, 1995; first published
1667).
47 Lucas W Nagtegaal, Riding the Dutch Tiger: The Dutch East Indies Company and the
Northeast Coast of Java, 1680-1743 (Leiden: KITLV Press, 1996).
48 M. C. Ricklefs, The Seen and Unseen Worlds in Java, 1726-1749: History, Literature and
Islam in the Court of Pakubuwana II (Sydney: Allen and Unwin, 1998).
49 Peter Carey and Vincent Houben, "Spirited Srikandhis and Sly Sumbadras: The Social,
Political and Economic Role of Women at the Central Javanese Courts in the Eighteenth
and Early Nineteenth Centuries," in Indonesian Women in Focus: Past and Present Notions,
ed. Elsbeth Locher-Scholten and Anke Niehof (Dordrecht: Foris, 1987), pp. 12-51.
50 Ann Kumar, "Javanese Court Society and Politics in the Late Eighteenth Century: The
Record of a Lady Soldier," part 1, Indonesia 29 (May 1980): 1-46, and part 2, Indonesia
30 (October 1980): 67-111.
51 Ann Kumar, Java and Modern Europe: Ambiguous Encounters (Honolulu: University of
Hawaii Press, 1997).
52 Kees Grijns, "JABOTABEK Place Names," and Luc Nagtegaal and Peter 1. M. Nas, "Ja­
karta Greenery: An Essay on Urban National Development," both in Grijns and Nas,
jakarta-Batavia, pp. 211-27 and 263-90, respectively.
53 Roelof van Gelder and Lodewijk Wagenaar, eds., Sporen van de Compagnie: De VOC in
Nederland (Amsterdam: De Bataafsche Leeuw, 1988).
54 M. A. P. Meilink-Roelofsz, M. E. van Opstall, and G. 1. Schutte, eds., Dutch Authors on
Asian History: A Selection of Dutch Historiography on the VOC (Dordrecht: Foris, 1988).
55 Peter van Wiechen, Vademecum van de Oost- en West-Indische Compagnie (Utrecht: An­
tiquariaat Gert Jan Bestebreurtje, 2002).
56 Leo Akveld and Els M. Jacobs, The Colourful World of the VOC: National Anniversary
Book VOC 160212002 (Bussum: Thoth, 2002).
57 M. H. Bartels, E. H. P. Cordfunke, and H. Sarfati, eds., Hollanders uit en thuis: Arche­
ologie, geschiedenis en bouwhistorie gedurende de VOC-tijd in de Oost, de West en thuis:
Cultuurhistorie van de Nederlandse expansie (Hilversum: Verloren, 2002).
58 Kees Zandvliet, Mapping for Money: Maps, Plans and Topographic Paintings and Their
Role in Dutch Overseas Expansion during the 16th and 17th Centuries (Amsterdam: Bata­
vian Lion International, 2002).
59 Kees Zandvliet, The Dutch Encounter with Asia, 1600-1950 (Amsterdam: Rijksmuseum;
Zwolle: Waanders, 2002).
60 Marie-Odette Scalliet, Koos van Brakel, David van Duuren, and Jeannette ten Kate, Pic­
tures from the Tropics: Paintings by Western Artists during the Dutch Colonial Period in
Indonesia (Amsterdam: Koninklijk Instituut voor de Tropen, 1999).
61 Leo Haks and Guus Maris, Lexicon of Foreign Artists Who Visualised Indonesia (1600­
1950) (Utrecht: Gert Jan Bestebreurtje, 1995).
62 Annabel Teh Gallop, Early Views of Indonesia: Drawingsfrom the British LibrarylPeman­
dangan Indonesia di Masa Lampau: Seni Gambar dari British Library (Honolulu: Univer­
sity of Hawaii Press, 1995).
252

--- PAGE: 285 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.285) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 186-187
63 Peter Boomgaard, "Strange Smells of a City: Batavia, Java, in the Seventeenth and
Eighteenth Centuries," and Raquel Reyes, "The Stench of Urine and Rotting Corpses:
Odours in Nineteenth Century Manila," papers presented at "Towards a Sensory History
of Southeast Asia," International workshop at the British Museum, 19-20 May 2007
(forthcoming publication).
64 Rob Nieuwenhuys, Baren en oudgasten: Tempo Doeloe-een verzonken wereld; Fotografis­
che documenten uit het oude Indie, 1870-1920 (Amsterdam: Querido, 1981); Rob Nieu­
wenhuys, Komen en blijven: Tempo Doeloe-een verzonken wereld; Fotografische docu­
men ten uit het oude Indie, 1870-1920 (Amsterdam: Querido, 1982); Rob Nieuwenhuys,
Met vreemde oogen; Tempo Doeloe-een verzonken wereld; Fotografische documenten uit
het oude Indie, 1870-1920 (Amsterdam: Querido, 1998). James Siegel has written an ap­
preciation of the Nieuwenhuys photographs of Indies inhabitants in his review, in In­
donesia 74 (October 2002): 179-83, of the photographs of Batavia assembled by Scott
Merrillees (see work cited in note 14 of this chapter).
65 Wim Willems, Remco Raben, Edy Seriese, Liane van der Linden, Ulbe Bosma, eds., Vit
Indie geboren: Vier eeuwen familiegeschiedenis (Zwolle: Waanders, 1997).
66 Steven Wachlin, Woodbury and Page: Photographers Java (Leiden: KITLV Press, 1994);
and Steven Wachlin, with Liane van der Linden, De westerse kijk op Nederlands-Indie
(1839-1939) (Den Haag: CIP Gegevens Koninklijk Bibliotheek, 1989).
67 Jean Demmeni, Indonesia: Images from the Past, Photos, text by Leo Haks and Paul Zach
(Singapore: Times, 1987).
68 Gerrit Knaap, Cephas, Yogyakarta: Photography in the Service of the Sultan (Leiden:
KITLV Press, 1991).
69 Peter Boomgaard and Liane van der Linden, Het Indie Boek (Zwolle: Waanders, 2001).
70 Bambang Purwanto, "Menulis Kehidupan Sehari-hari Jakarta: Memikirkan Kembali Se­
jarah Sosial Indonesia," in Perspektif Baru Penulisan Sejarah Indonesia, ed. Henk Schulte
Nordholt, Bambang Purwanto, Ratna Saptari (Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia/KITLV­
Jakarta, 2008), pp. 245-76.
71 N. P. van den Berg and Steven Wachlin, Het album van Mientje; Eenfotoalbum uit 1862
in Nederlandsch-Indie (Bussum: Thoth, 2005).
72 Hella S. Haase, Heren van de Thee (Amsterdam: Querido, 1992).
73 Hella S. Haase, Forever a Stranger and Other Stories (New York: Oxford University Press,
1996).
74 Pramoedya Ananta Toer, Tempo Doeloe: Antologi Sastra Pra-Indonesia (Jakarta: Hasta
Mitra, 1982).
75 Pramoedya's novels have been published in English as This Earth of Mankind (Ringwood,
Vic.: Penguin, 1982); Child of All Nations (Ringwood, Vic.: Penguin, 1990); Footsteps
(Ringwood, Vic.: Penguin, 1992); and House of Glass (Ringwood, Vic.: Penguin, 1992),
all translated and introduced by Max Lane.
76 Pramoedya Ananta Toer, Arus Balik: Sebuah Epik Maritim Nusantara (Kuala Lumpur:
Wira Karya, 1995).
77 See, for example, E. M. Beekman, Troubled Pleasures: Dutch Colonial Literature from the
East Indies, 1600-1950 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996); TesselPollmann, Bruidstraantjes
en andere Indische geschiedenissen (The Hague: SDU, 1999); Elsbeth Locher-Scholten,
Women and the Colonial State: Essays on Gender and Modernity in the Netherlands
253

--- PAGE: 286 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.286) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 187-192
Indies, 1900-1942 (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2000); Tineke Hellwig, In
the Shadow of Change: Women in Indonesian Literature (Berkeley: University of Califor­
nia at Berkeley, Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, 1994); Charles A. Coppel,
Studying the Ethnic Chinese in Indonesia (Singapore: Singapore Society of Asian Studies,
2002); and Christine Pitt, "The Agony of Love: A Study of Peranakan Chinese Court­
ship and Marriage" in Chinese Indonesians: Remembering, Distorting, Forgetting, ed. Tim
Lindsey and Helen Pausacker (Singapore: ISEAS, 2005), pp. 165-84.
78 Matthew Isaac Cohen, The Komedie Stamboel: Popular Theater in Colonial Indonesia,
1891-1903 (Athens: Ohio University Center for International Studies, 2006).
79 Samiun dan Dasima, Chitra Dewi Film Production, 1970, starring Chitra Dewi,
W D. Mochtar, Sofia W D., Wahid Chan, and Fifi Young.
80 Jean Gelman Taylor, "Nyai Dasima: Portrait of a Mistress in Literature and Film," in
Fantasizing the Feminine in Indonesia, ed. Laurie Jo Sears (Durham: Duke University
Press, 1996), pp. 225-48.
81 Ann Laura Stoler, Capitalism and Confrontation in Sumatra's Plantation Belt, 1870-1979
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985; rev. ed. 1995).
82 See, for example, Ann Laura Stoler, "Sexual Affronts and Racial Frontiers: European
Identities and the Politics of Exclusion in Colonial Southeast Asia," Comparative Studies
in Society and History 34, no. 3 (1992): 514-51; and Ann Laura Stoler, Carnal Knowledge
and Imperial Power: Race and the Intimate in Colonial Rule (Berkeley: University of Cali­
fornia Press, 2002).
83 Ladislao Szekely, Tropic Fever: The Adventures of a Planter in Sumatra (Singapore: Ox­
ford University Press, 1979); and Madelon Szekely-Lulofs, Coolie, translated from the
Dutch by G. 1. Renier and Irene Clephane, with a foreword by Anthony Reid (Kuala
Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1982).
84 Inger McCabe Elliot, Batik, Fabled Cloth of Java (New York: Clarkson N. Potter,
1984); Robyn Maxwell, Textiles of Southeast Asia: Tradition, Trade and Transforma­
tion (Melbourne: Oxford University Press/Australian National Gallery, 1990); Alit
Veldhuisen-Djajasoebrata, Bloemen van het helaal: De kleurrijke wereld van de textile op
Java (Amsterdam: Sijthoff, 1984); M. 1. de Raadt-Apell, De batikkerij Van Zuylen te Peka­
longan, Midden-Java (1890-1946) (Zutphen: Terra, 1980); and Indonesia Indah, vol. 8:
Batik (Jakarta: Yayasan Harapan Kita, 1997).
85 Jean Gelman Taylor, "Images of the Indonesian Revolution," in Indonesian Independence
Fifty Years On, 1945-1995, ed. Jane Drakard and John Legge (Clayton, Vic.: Monash
Asia Institute, Annual Indonesian Lecture Series, no. 20, 1996), pp. 13-36.
86 Henk Schulte Nordholt, ed., Outward Appearances: Dressing State and Society in Indone­
sia (Leiden: KITLV Press, 1997).
87 See the video-performance-based master's thesis of Victoria Cattoni, "Through the Ke­
baya," Charles Darwin University, 2003, and Jean Gelman Taylor, "Identity, Nation and
Islam: A Dialogue about Men's and Women's Dress in Indonesia," in The Politics of
Dress in Asia and the Americas, ed. Mina Roces and Louise Edwards (Brighton: Sussex
Academic Press, 2007), chapter 6.
88 R. A. Kartini, directed by Syumanjaya, starring Jenny Rachman and Nani Wijaya, 1983.
89 Danilyn Rutherford, "Unpacking a National Heroine: Two Kartinis and Their People,"
Indonesia 55 (April 1993): 23-40.
254

--- PAGE: 287 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.287) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 192-195
90 F. Jacquet, Kartini, brieven aan mevrouw R. M Abendanon-Mandri en haar echtgenoot
(Dordrecht: Foris, 1987). The letters were subsequently translated into English and pub­
lished with an introduction by Joost Cote as Letters from Kartini: An Indonesian Feminist,
1900-1904 (Clayton, Vic.: Monash Asia Institute; Melbourne: Hyland House, 1992).
91 Jean Gelman Taylor, "Once More Kartini," in Autonomous Histories, Particular Truths:
Essays in Honor of John Smail, ed. Laurie Jo Sears (Madison: University of Wisconsin,
Center for Southeast Asian Studies, 1993), pp. 155-71. In an earlier article I had com­
pared Kartini with a male member of her class and generation: Jean Gelman Taylor,
"Kartini in Her Historical Context," Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 145,
nos. 2 and 3 (1989): 295-307.
92 Joost Cote, trans. and ed., On Feminism and Nationalism: Kartini's Letters to Stella Zee­
handelaar, 1899-1903 (Clayton, Vic.: Monash Asia Institute, 1995).
93 1. Cote, "The Correspondence of Kartini's Sisters: Annotations on the Indonesian Move­
ment, 1905-1925," Archipel, Etudes interdisciplinaires sur Ie monde insulindien 55 (1998):
61-82.
94 Joost Cote, trans. and ed., Realizing the Dream of R. A. Kartini: Her Sisters' Lettersfrom
Colonial Java, Research in International Studies, Southeast Asia series, no. 114 (Athens:
Ohio University Press, 2008).
95 Mia Bustam, trans., Surat-Surat Adik Kartini (Jakarta: Djambatan, 2005).
96 For example, Soekondo Bustaman, Raden Saleh, Pangeran di antara para pelukis romantik
(Bandung: Abardin, 1990).
97 Iskandar P. Nugraha, "The Theosophical Educational Movement in Colonial Indone­
sia," MA thesis, University of New South Wales, 1995. The thesis has been published
in Indonesian translation as M engikis Batas Timur dan Barat: Gerakan Theosofy dan
Nasionalisme di Indonesia (Jakarta: Komunitas Bambu, 2001).
98 Rudolf Mrazek, "Indonesian Dandy: The Politics of Clothes in the Late Colonial Period,
1893-1942," in Outward Appearances: Dressing State and Society in Indonesia, ed. Henk
Schulte Nordholt (Leiden: KITLV Press, 1997), p. 121.
99 Kees van Dijk, "Soap Is the Onset of Civilization," paper presented at the 21st KITLV In­
ternational Workshop on Southeast Asian Studies, "Conceptions of Cleanliness," 29-31
August 2007 (forthcoming publication).
100 Jean Gelman Taylor, "Bathing and Hygiene: Histories from the KITLV Archive," paper
presented at the 21 st KITLV International Workshop on Southeast Asian Studies, "Con­
ceptions of Cleanliness," 29-31 August 2007 (forthcoming publication).
101 Ann Kumar, The Diary of a Javanese Muslim: Religion, Politics and the Pesantren, 1883­
1886, Faculty of Asian Studies Monographs, New Series no. 7 (Canberra, ACT: Austra­
lian National University, 1985).
102 Hiroyoshi Kano, Frans Hiisken, and Djoko Suryo, eds., Beneath the Smoke of the Sugar­
Mill (Yogyakarta: AKATIGA and Gadjah Mada University Press, 2001).
103 Alan Feinstein, "The Preservation of Manuscripts in Indonesia," in Illuminations: The
Writing Traditions of Indonesia, ed. Ann Kumar and John H. McGlynn (Jakarta: Lontar
Press, 1996), pp. 257-65.
104 Frances Gouda, Dutch Culture Overseas: Colonial Practice in the Netherlands Indies,
1900-1942 (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1995).
105 Elsbeth Locher-Scholten, "Summer Dresses and Canned Food: European Women and
255

--- PAGE: 288 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.288) ---
NOTES TO PAGES 195-196
Western Lifestyles in the Indies, 1900-1942," in Schulte Nordholt, Outward Appearances,
pp.151-80.
106 Henk Schulte Nordholt, ed., Het dagelijks leven in IndU!, 1937-1947: Brieven van o.
Schulte Nordholt-Zielhuis (Zutphen: Walburg Press, 1999);Daniel R. Headrick, The Tools
of Empire: Technology and European Imperialism in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford: Ox­
ford University Press, 1981).
107 Joost Cote, "Letters from Soematri," in Cote, Realizing the Dream, pp.241-302.
108 Ulba Bosma and Remco Raben, Being «Dutch" in the Indies: A History of Creolisation
and Empire, 1500-1920 (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2008).
109 See, for example, Ernest Hillen, The Way of a Boy: A Memoir of Java (Toronto: Viking,
1993); Paula Gomes, Let It Be (Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1993); Dieuwke
Wendelaar Bonga, Eight Prison Camps: A Dutch Family in Japanese Java (Athens: Ohio
University Center for International Studies, 1996); Rob Nieuwenhuys, Vergeelde por­
tretten, translated into English as Faded Portraits (Amherst: University of Massachusetts
Press, 1982); and the magazine Moesson of Holland's Indies community (first published
in 1956 as Onze Brug, then as Tong Tong, and, since 1978, as Moesson). Back issues have
been digitalized. See www.moesson.nl.
256

--- PAGE: 289 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.289) ---
Glossary
The tenns listed below are from Indonesian languages (J) or from Dutch (D).
adat (I)
bupati (I)
gamelan (I)
kabupaten (I)
kampung (I)
kebaya (I)
mardijker (D)
nyai (I)
raden (I)
raden ajeng (J)
raden ayu (J)
ronggeng (I)
susuhunan (J)
wayang (J)
custom, tradition, law, and lore
head of an administrative district on Java lower than a province
Javanese orchestra
administrative district headed by a bupati
residence of the bupati
village
Indonesian residential quarter in city
overblouse, woman's blouse
free(d) person, usually a Christian of non-Indonesian Asian
origins
tenn used by the Dutch to denote a concubine to a European; a
housekeeper
title of a senior Javanese official
title of an unmarried daughter of a senior Javanese official
title of a consort of a senior Javanese official
dancing girl
title of the ruler of Solo
shadow puppet theater
type of theater using human actors in puppet styles
257

--- PAGE: 290 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.290) ---


--- PAGE: 291 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.291) ---
Selected Bibliography
Note: The authorities on which this study is founded are generally acknowledged in
footnotes to the text. The sources for the family histories are not usually cited, however,
since the relationships described have been detennined by drawing on various studies of
several authors. The following note outlines the nature of the material used to establish
family trees.
The principal sources used to establish Indies clans are the Dutch scholars P. C. Bloys
van Treslong Prins, P. R. Feith, F. de Haan, M. A. van Rhede van der Kloot, and W.
Wijnaendts van Resandt. Bloys van Treslong Prins collected texts from tombstones of
the European community on Java and began publishing them in 1934. The epitaphs are
grouped by geographic region, but there is an index of surnames. In collaboration with P.
R. Feith, the same author published the complete genealogical table for the van Riems­
dijken down to the 19208, a task commissioned for testamentary purposes. Wijnaendts
van Resandt published summaries of the careers of all heads of settlements subsidiary to
Batavia, in which he gave the names of spouses and children, and appended a register of
family names. The posts of senior merchant and governor were common stepping stones
to higher office, so that his work ties in with similar compilations by F. de Haan for
officials in Priangan and by van Rhede van der Kloot for the governors-general.
Additional sources were L. Ludovici' s collection of Dutch tombstone inscriptions
from Ceylon, Steinmetz's notes on the texts on china and memorial trays that summarize
family alliances, and notes in Dutch genealogical journals.
The sources I have used dictated that the family histories discovered be those of local
elites. The same reasons of worldly distinction made the senior officials and their fami­
lies the subjects of paintings, odes, descriptions by travelers, and legal regulations, and
again more accessible for study than the soldier and sailor.
The bibliography that follows is divided into seven sections for ease of reference. All
titles in foreign languages are also given in English in my translation. Authors' names are
listed according to Dutch practice.
DICfIONARIES, BffiLIOGRAPHIES, ENCYCWPEDIAS
Bruggencate, K. ten. Nederlands-Engels woordenboek (Dutch-English dictionary). 6th
ed. Groningen: J. B. Wolters, 1963.
Buur, Dorothee. Persoonlijke documenten Nederlands-Indie/lndonesie (Personal docu­
ments from Netherlands India/Indonesia). Leiden: Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-,
Land- en Volkenkunde, 1973.
259

--- PAGE: 292 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.292) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chijs, J. A. van der. Proeve eener Ned. Indische bibliographie (1659-1870): Ver­
meerderde en verbeterde herdruk voor de jaren 1659-1720, supplement en ver­
beteringen voor de jaren 1721-1870 (Sampling of a Netherlands Indies bibliography,
1659-1870: Enlarged and improved reprint for the years 1659-1720, supplement and
revisions for 1721-1870). Batavia: W. Bruining & Co., 1879.
Coolhaas, W. Ph. A Critical Survey of Studies in Dutch Colonial History. Koninklijk
Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde Bibliographic Series, no. 4. 's-Graven­
hage: M. Nijhoff, 1960.
Echols, John M., and Hassan Shadily. An Indonesian-English Dictionary. 2d ed. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1963.
Encyclopaedie van Nederlandsch-Indie (Encyclopedia of the Netherlands Indies). 's­
Gravenhage, Leiden: M. Nijhoff and E. J. Brill, n.d.
Meilink-Roelofsz, M. A. P. "Sources in the General State Archives in The Hague
Relating to the History of East Asia between c. 1600 and c. 1800." In Felicitation
Volumes of Southeast-Asian Studies presented to His Highness Dhaninivat Kromamun
Bidyalbh Bridhyakorn on the occasion of his 80th birthday, 1:167-84. Bangkok, The
Siam Society, 1965.
Middelnederlandsch woordenboek (Middle Dutch dictionary). Compiled by E. Verwijs
and J. Verdam, completed by F. A. Stoett. 11 vols. 's-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff,
1885-1941.
Pluvier, J. M. "Recent Dutch Contributions to Modem Indonesian History." Journal of
Southeast Asian History 8 (2):201-25 (September 1967).
Santa Maria, Luigi. I Prestiti Portoghesi' nel Malese-Indonesiano (Portuguese loan
words in Malay-Indonesian). Naples: Seminario de Indianistica, 1967.
The, Lian, and Paul W. Van der Veur. The Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Ge­
nootschap: An Annotated Content Analysis. Athens: Ohio University Center for Inter­
national Studies, 1973.
Yule, Henry, and A. C. Burnell. Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary ofColloquial Anglo-Indian
Words and Phrases, and of Kindred Terms, Etymological, Historical, Geographical
and Discursive. 2d ed. London: John Murray, 1903.
ARCHIVAL MATERIALS
Collectie Kartini (Kartini Collection). Leiden. Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde. No. 897.
Leiden. Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, H853. B. van den
Ende- van Huffel, "Jeugdherinneringen uit tempo doeloe" (Memories of youth in the
olden days).
Leiden. Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, Hl007. E. Houtman­
Mesman and A. Bouman-Houtman, "Uit tempo doeloe" (In Olden Times).
VOLUMES COMPILING PRIMARY I><X:UMENTS,LAWS,
LEITERS, PAINTINGS, AND PHOTOGRAPHS; NEWSPAPERS
Bastin, John, and Bea Brommer, eds. Nineteenth-Century Prints andIllustrated Books of
Indonesia, with particular reference to the print collection of the Tropenmuseum,
260

--- PAGE: 293 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.293) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Amsterdam: A Descriptive Bibliography. Utrecht, Antwetp: Het Spectrum, 1979.
Bataviasche Courant (Batavianjournal), 1816, nos 1-20 (20 August-28 December).
Bland, Robert Noonan. Historical Tombstones ofMalacca, mostly ofPortuguese Origin,
with the inscriptions in detail and illustrated by numerous photographs. London:
Stock, 1905.
Buitenweg, Hein. See Meijer, H. Chr.
Chijs, J. A. van der. De Nederlanders te Jal«Jtra. Vit de bronnen, zoo uitgegevene als
niet uitgegevene (The Dutch in Jakatra. From both published and unpublished
sources). Amsterdam: F. Muller, 1860.
Chijs, J. A. van der, ed. Nederlandsch-Indisch Plal«Jatboek1602-1811 (Collection of
Netherlands Indies edicts 1602-1811). 16 vols. and index. Batavia, 's-Gravenhage:
Landsdrukkerij, M. Nijhoff, 1885-1900.
Colenbrander, Hennan Theodoor. Jan Pietersz. Coen: Bescheiden omtrent zijn bedriffin
Indie (Jan Pietersz. Coen: Documents on his undertakings in the Indies). 5 vols.
's-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1919-23.
Coolhaas, W. Ph. Generale Missiven van Gouverneurs-Generaal en Raden aan Heeren
XVII der Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie (General correspondence from gov­
ernors-general and councillors to the Gentlemen XVII of the United East Indies
Company). Vol. 1, 1610-1638. 's-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1960.
Dagh-Register gehouden int Casteel Batavia vant passerende daer ter plaetse also over
geheel Nederlandts-India (Daily Register kept in Batavia Citadel on events there and
in all Netherlands India). 28 vols. 's-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1896-1912.
Elliott, Gilbert. Lord Minto in India: Life and Letters of Gilbert Elliot, First Earl of
Minto from 1807 to 1814 while Governor-General of India. London: Longmans,
Green & Co., 1880.
Godee Molsbergen, Everhardus C. Geschiedenis van de Nederlandsch Oost-Indische
Compagnie en Nederlandsch-Indie in beeld (History of the Netherlands East Indies
Company and of Netherlands India in pictures). Weltevreden: Topografische In­
richting, 1925.
Haan, F. de. Oud Batavia Gedenkboek Platenalbum (Album of plates, Old Batavia
commemorative volume). Batavia: C. Kolff & Co., 1923.
Henige, David P. ed. and comp., Colonial Governors from the Fifteenth Century to the
Present. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1970.
Hennus, Johannes. Eene stem uit Oost-lndie in gemeenzame brieven van Johannes
Hennus ao.n zijnen vader (A voice out of the East Indies in private letters from
Johannes Hennus to his father). Utrecht: van der Post, 1847.
Hoynck van Papendrecht, P. C. "Some Old Private Letters from the Cape, Batavia and
Malacca (1778-1788)." Journal of the Malayan Branch o/the Royal Asiatic Society
2, pt. 1 (June 1924):9-24.
The Java Annual Directory and Almanac for 1816. Batavia: A. H. Hubbard, Govern­
ment Press, 1816.
Java Government Gazette 1, no. 45, through 5, no. 234 (2 January 1813-17 August
1816), plus Extraordinary Issue of 19 August 1816.
Javasche Courant (Java journal), 1830, nos. 1-154 (5 January-30 December); 1840, nos.
1-105 (1 January-30 December); and 1850, nos. 1-104 (2 January-28 December).
261

--- PAGE: 294 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.294) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jonge, 1. K. 1. de. De opkomst van het Nederlandsch gezag in Oost-Indie: Verzameling
van onuitgegeven stukken uit het oud-koloniaal archief (The origins of Dutch rule in
the East Indies: Collection of unpublished documents from old colonial archives). 13
vols. 's-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1862-88.
Kartini, Raden Adjeng. Door duisternis tot licht: Gedachten over en voor het Java­
ansche volk (From darkness into light: reflections on and for the Javanese people). 4th
ed., introduced by 1. H. Abendanon. 's-Gravenhage: "Luctor et Emergo," 1923.
De Locomotief· Samarangsch Han deIs en Advertentieblad (The Locomotive: Semarang
trade and advertising paper) 13 (1864), nos. 69-104 (29 August-30 December); 14
(1865), nos. 1-104 (2 January-29 December); 15 (1866), nos. 1-52 (2 January-29
June); 34 (1885), nos. 1-315 (2 January-31 December); and 53 (1904), nos. 1-305 (2
January-31 December).
Loos- Haaxman, 1. de. Dagwerk in Indie: H ommage aan een verstild verleden (Daily
work in the Indies: Homage to times past). Franeker: T. Wever, 1972.
Loos-Haaxman, 1. de. Johannes Rach en zijn werk (Johannes Rach and his work).
Batavia: Kolff, 1928.
Loos-Haaxman, 1. de. De landsverzameling schilderijen in Batavia: Landvoogdspor­
tretten en compagnieschilders (The state collection of paintings in Batavia: Portraits
of governors-general and Company painters). Vol. 1, text; vol. 2, paintings. Leiden:
Sijthoff, 1941.
Loos-Haaxman, 1. de. Verlaat rapport Indie: Drie eeuwen westerse schilders, tekenaars,
grafici, zilversmeden en kunstnijveren in Nederlands-Indie (Record of the Indies:
Three centuries of Western painters, sketchers, graphicists, silver-smiths and crafts­
men in Netherlands India). 's-Gravenhage: Mouton & Co., 1968.
Ludovici, Leopold. Lapidarium Zey Iandicum, being a Collection of Monumental In­
scriptions of the Dutch Churches and Churchyards of Ceylon. Colombo: Maitland &
Co., 1877.
Meijer, H. Chr. De laatste tempo doeloe (The Last Bygone Days). The Hague: Servire,
1964.
Meijer, H. Chr. Soos en samenleving in tempo doeloe (Club and society in the good old
days). The Hague: Servire, 1965.
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. Batavia, koningin van het oosten (Batavia, Queen of the East). 2d
ed. 's-Gravenhage: Thomas & Evas, 1977.
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. Tempo Doeloe: Fotografische documenten uit het oude Indie 1870­
1914 (Times past: Photographic documents from the Old Indies 1870-1914). Amster­
dam: E. M. Querido, 1961.
Nijs, E. Breton de. See Nieuwenhuys, Rob.
Perron, Edgar duo De muze van Jan Compagnie: Overzichtelijke verzameling van Neder­
lands-Oostindiese belletrie uit de Companjiestijd (1600-1780) (John Company's
muse: General sampling of Netherlands East Indies belles lettres from the Company
times 1600-1780). Bandung: A. C. Nix & Co., 1948.
Realia: Register op de generale resolutien van het kasteel Batavia 1632-1805 (Realities:
Register of general resolutions from Batavia Citadel 1632-1805). Vol. 1, A-H.
Leiden: Kolff, 1882. Vol. 2, 1-0. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1885. Vol. 3, P-Z. The
Hague: Nijhoff, 1886.
Staatsblad van Nederlandsch-Indie (Statute book of the Netherlands Indies). Vols. for
262

--- PAGE: 295 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.295) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
1816, 1817, 1818, 1825, 1836, 1849, 1855, 1864, and 1885. 's-Gravenhage: A. D.
Schinkel, 1839-86.
Tiele, P. A., and J. E. Heeres. Bouwstoffen voor de geschiedenis der Nederlanders in
den Maleischen Archipel (Materials for the history of the Dutch in the Malay archi­
pelago). 3 vols. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1886, 1890, 1895.
JOURNALS, MEMOIRS, AND TRAVELERS' NARRATIVES
Bollingii, Friderici. "Oost-Indisch reisboek, uit het Deensch vertaald door Mej. Joh.
Visscher" (East Indian travel book, translated from the Danish by Miss. Joh.
Visscher). Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 68 (1913):291-381.
Bruijn, Cornelis de. Reizen over Moskovie, door Persie en Indie (Travels through Mus­
covy, Persia and the Indies). Amsterdam: Goeree, 1711.
Chailly-Bert, J. Java et ses habitants (Java and its people). Paris: A. Colin & Cie., 1900.
Coolsma, S. Teru8blik op mijn levensweg (1840-1924) (Retrospect on my life, 1840­
1924). Rotterdam: Bredee, 1924.
Djajadiningrat, P. A. A. Kenang-Kenangan. (Memoirs) Batavia: Kolff-Buning-Balai
Poestaka, 1936.
Doren, J. B. J. van. Reis naar Nederlands Oost-Indie of Land- en zeetogten gedurende
de twee eerste jaren mijns verbliifs op Java (Journey to Netherlands East India, or land
and sea travels during the first two years of my sojourn on Java). 2 vols. 's-Graven­
hage: J. & H. van Langenhuysen, 1851.
Hamner, Jacob. Travels on Foot through the Island of Ceylon. Translated from the
Dutch. London: Sir Richard Phillips & Co., 1821.
Huysers, Ary. Beknopte beschrijving der Oostindische etablissementen (Brief descrip­
tion of the East Indian settlements). 2d enl. ed. Amsterdam: Roos, 1792.
Koch, D. M. G. Verantwoording: Een halve eeuw in Indonesie (Rendering account: Half
a century in Indonesia). 's-Gravenhage, Bandung: W. van Hoeve, 1956.
Maurik, Justus van. Indrukken van een "Totok": Indische typen en schetsen (Impres­
sions of a newcomer: Indies types and sketches). Amsterdam: van Holkema & Waren­
dorff, 1897.
Meijer, H. Chr. Kind in tempo doeloe (The child in bygone times). Wassenaar: Servire,
1969.
Meijer, H. Chr., and Willem Krols. Wat wij in ons hart sloten (What we locked up in our
hearts). The Hague: Servire, 1962.
Money, J. W. B. Java; or How to Manage a Colony, showing a Practical Solution ofthe
Questions Now Affecting British India. 2 vols. London: Hurst & Blackett, 1861.
Naber, Johanna W. A. Onbetreden paden van ons koloniaal verleden 1816-/873. Naar
nog onuitgegeven familiepapieren (Untrod paths of our colonial past 1816-1873.
Based upon unpublished family papers). Amsterdam: van Kampen & Zoon, 1938.
"Oudgast." Onze Oost (Our East). Amsterdam: J. A. Sleeswijk, 1897.
Stark, E. Vit Indie, Egypte en het Heilige Land (From the Indies, Egypt and the Holy
Land). 2ded. Amersfoort: Veen, 1913.
Stavorinus, J. S. Voyage par Ie Cap de Bonne-Esperance aBatavia, aBantam et au
Bengale, en 1768, 69, 70 et 7/ (Journey via the Cape of Good Hope to Batavia,
Bantam and Bengal, in 1768, 69, 70 and 71). Translated from the Dutch by H. J.
Jansen. Paris: Jansen, 1798.
263

--- PAGE: 296 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.296) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Stockdale, John Joseph. Sketches, Civil and Military, of the Island of Java. London: S.
Gosnell, 1812.
Strehler, Dr. Bijzonderheden wegens Batavia en deszelfs omstreken: Vit het dagboek,
gedurende twee reizen derwaarts in 1828-1830 (Particulars on Batavia and its envir­
ons: From the diary during two journeys there in 1828-1830). Translated from the
German. Haarlem: Wed. A. Loosjes Pz., 1833.
Tavernier, Jean-Baptiste. Recueil de plusieurs relations et traitez singuliers et curieux de
J. B. Tavernier, qui n' ont point este mis dans ses six premiers voyages (Anthology of
several accounts and treatises both singular and curious by J. B. Tavernier not in­
cluded in his first six voyages). Paris: n.p., n.d.
Tavernier, Jean-Baptiste. Travels in India. Translated from the original French edition of
1767 by V. I. Ball. London: Macmillan, 1889.
Thorn, William. Memoir of the Conquest ofJava, with the Subsequent Operations of the
British Forces in the Oriental Archipelago. London: T. Egerton, 1815.
Thunberg, Charles Peter. Travels in Europe, Africa and Asia Made between the Years
1770 and 1779. Vol. 2. London: F. &C. Rivington, 1795.
Travers, Thomas Otto. The Journal of Thomas Otto Travers 1813-1820. Edited by John
Bastin. Singapore: Government Printer, 1960.
Valentijn, Fran~ois. Oud en nieuw Oost-Indien (Old and New East Indies). Vols. 4,5.
Amsterdam: Dordrecht, 1726.
Ver Huell, Q. M. R. Herinneringen van eene reis naar de Oost-Indien (Memoirs of a
journey to the East Indies). 2 vols. Amsterdam: Zweesaardt, 1835.
Veth, B. Het Leven in Nederlandsch-Indie (Life in the Netherlands Indies). 4th ed.
Amsterdam: van Kampen & Zoon, n.d.
Warnsinck, J. C. M., ed. Reisen van Nicolaus de Graaff gedaan naar aile gewesten des
werelds, beginnende 1639 tot 1687 incluis (Journeys of Nicolaus de Graaff to all
quarters of the world, beginning in 1639 up until 1687 inclusive). 's-Gravenhage: M.
Nijhoff, 1930.
Weitzel, A. W. P. Batavia in 1858 of schetsen en beelden uit de hoofdstad (Batavia in
1858, or sketches and pictures of the capital city). Gorinchem: Noorduijn, 1860.
Wit, Augusta de. Java, Facts and Fancies. London: Chapman & Hall, 1905.
Wormser, Carel Willem, ed. Zoo Leven wij in bulie (How we live in the Indies). 3d ed.
Deventer: van Hoeve, 1943.
Zeggelen, Marie van. De Hollandsche vrouw in Indie (The Dutchwoman in the Indies).
2d ed. Amsterdam: K. Groesbeek & Paul Nijhoff, n.d.
NOVELS AND SHORT STORIES
Brink, Jan ten. Oost-Indische dames en heeren: Vier bijdragen tot de kennis van de zeden
en usantien der Europeesche maatschappij in Nederlandsch-Indie (East Indian ladies
and gentlemen: Four contributions to knowledge of the morals and manners of the
European community in Netherlands India). Amhem: D. A. Thieme, 1886.
Couperus, Louis. The Hidden Force: A Story of Modern Java. Translated by Alexander
Teixeira de Mattos. London: Jonathon Cape, 1922.
Daum, P. A. Goena-Goena, een geschiedenis van stille kracht (Guna-Guna: A stOI)' of
black magic). Amsterdam: Querido, 1964.
264

--- PAGE: 297 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.297) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Daum, P. A. Hoe hij Rood van Indiii werd (How he became councillor of the Indies).
Samarang: Dorp and Co., 1888.
Daum, P. A. Uit de suiker in de tabak (From sugar to tobacco). Amsterdam: Sala­
mander, 1962.
Daum, P. A. "Ups" en "Downs" in het Indische Leven (Ups and downs in Indies life).
5th ed. Amsterdam: Contact, 1946.
Dennout, Maria. The Ten Thousand Things. Translated by Hans Koningsberger. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1958.
Dennout, Maria. Yesterday. Translated by Hans Koningsberger. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1959.
Divine, David. The Daughter of the Pangaran. Boston, Toronto: Little, Brown and
Company, 1963. '
Douwes Dekker, Eduard F. E. Max Haveloor, of de koffieveilingen der Nederlandsche
Handel-Maatschappij (Max Havelaar, or the coffee auctions of the Netherlands Trad­
ing Company). 8th ed. Rotterdam: A. D. Donker, 1967.
Fabricius, Johan. Haljbloed (Half-Caste). 's-Gravenhage: H. P. Leopold, 1946.
Foore, Annie. See IJzennan-Junius, Fran~oise.
Hertog, A. den. Vrouwen naar .Tacatra (Women bound for Jakarta). Leiden: Sijthoff,
1934.
Hoven, Therese. In sarong en kabaai (In Sarong and Kebaya). Amsterdam: L. J. Veen,
1892.
Hoven, Therese. Nonnie en andere verhalen (Nonnie and other tales). Tiel: Campagne
en Zoon, n.d.
Hoven, Therese. Vervreemd: Indische roman (Estranged: Indies novel). Amersfoort:
ValkhoffenCo., n.d.
IJzennan-Junius, Fran~oise. Bogoriana (World of Bogor). 3d ed. Haarlem: H. D.
Tjeenk Willink en Zoon, 1908.
IJzennan-Junius, Fran~oise. Indische huwelijken (Indies marriages). 2d 00. Rotterdam:
D. Bolle, 1895.
IJzennan-Junius, Fran~oise. De van Sons, een verhaal uit Indiii (The van Sons, a story
from the Indies). The Hague: Sternberg, 1881.
Katja-Mata. See Vanger-Frank, Marie C.
Kruseman, Mina. Een huwelijk in Indie (A marriage in the Indies). 's-Gravenhage:
Nijhoff, 1873.
Maurits. See Daum, P. A.
Het meisje uit Indie: Een eerste keuze uit de duizend-en-een bijdragen voor Tong-Tong
van' 'Sheherazaden uit oud-Indie" (The young Indies girl: a preliminary choice from
the thousand and one contributions for Tong-Tong' s "Sheherazades from the Indies of
Olden Days"). The Hague: Uitgeverij Tong-Tong, 1966.
Melati van Java. See Sloot, N. Marie C.
Multatuli. See under Douwes Dekker, Eduard F. E.
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. Vergeelde portretten uit een Indisch familiealbum (Yellowed por­
traits from an Indies family album). 5th ed. Amsterdam: Salamander, 1963.
Nijs, E. Breton de. See Nieuwenhuys, Rob.
Norel, K. Janmaats en sinjeuren (John Tars and lords). Leiden: Sijthoff, 1941.
265

--- PAGE: 298 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.298) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Robinson, Tjalie. Piekerans van een straatslijper (Reflections of a loafer). 4th ed.
Bandung: N. V. MasaBaru, n.d.
Sioot, N. Marie C. De familie van den Resident (The resident's family). 3d ed. Schie­
dam: H. A. M. Roelants, n.d.
Sloot, N. Marie C. Soerapati: historisch romantische schets uit de geschiedenis van Java
(Surapati: historical romance from the history of Java). 3d ed., 2 vols. Schiedam:
Roelants, 1928.
Valette, G. Baren en oudgasten: lndische schetsen (Newcomers and oldtimers: Indies
sketches). 's-Gravenhage: Sternberg, 1880.
Vanger-Frank, Marie C. Een natuurlijk kind en andere Nederlandsch-Indische verhalen
(A natural child and other Netherlands Indies tales). Leiden: Noothaven van Goor,
1875.
Vrankrijker , A. C. J. de. Fran{ois Caron: Een carriere in het verre Oosten (Fran~ois
Caron: A career in the Far East). Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1943.
Walraven, Willem. "De Clan" (The clan). Orientatie, Special Walraven Issue, no.
23-24 (August-September 1949): 30-41.
Walraven, Willem. "Op de grens" (On the borderlines). Orientatie, Special Walraven
Issue, no. 23-24 (August-September 1949): 18-29.
PERSONAL AND FAMILY HISTORIES
Bloys van Treslong Prins, P. C. "Aanvullingen of 'De Gouverneurs-Generaal en Com­
missarissen-Generaal van Nederlandsch-Indie (1610-1888) door M. A. van Rhede
van der Kloot" (Supplement, or "The governors-general and commissioners-general
of the Netherlands Indies, 1610-1888, by M. A. van Rhede van der Kloot"). De
Nederlandsch Leeuw 47(11):343-46 (November 1929).
Bloys van Treslong Prins, P. C. "Bio-genealogische studien III: Gerrit Willem Casimir
van Motman en zijn nazaten" (Bio-genealogical studies III: G. W. C. van Motman
and his descendants). Ons Nageslacht6 (1):5-17 (April 1933).
Bloys van Treslong Prins, P. C. "Die Deutschen in Niederlandisch-Indien" (Germans in
Netherlands India). Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fUr Natur- und Volker­
kunde Ostasiens 39, D, 1937.
Bloys van Treslong Prins, P. C. Genealogische en heraldische gedenkwaardigheden
betreffende Europeanen op Java (Genealogical and heraldic memorabilia on Euro­
peans in Java). Vol. 1. Batavia: Albrecht, 1934.
Feith, P. R. and P. C. Bloys van Treslong Prins. De bekende landheer van Tjampea, c.a.
Willem Vincent Helvetius van Riemsdijk: Zijn naaste familie en zijne afstammelingen
(The well-known owner of Tjampea property W. V. H. van Riemsdijk: His closest
relations and descendants). Batavia: Kolff, 1933.
Godee Molsbergen, E. C. Jan van Ri~beeck en zijn tijd: Een stuk zeventiende-eeuws
Oost-Indie (Jan van Riebeeck and his times: A piece of seventeenth-century East
Indies). Amsterdam: vanKampenenZoon, 1937.
Haan, F. de. "De laatste der Mardijkers" (The last of the Mardijkers). Bijdragen tot de
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 73 (1917):219-54.
Haan, F. de. "Personalia der periode van het Engelsch bestuur over Java 1811-1816"
(Staff during the period of English role on Java 1811-1816). Bijdragen tot de Taal-,
Land- en Volkenkunde 92 (1935):477-669.
266

--- PAGE: 299 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.299) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Haan, F. de. Priangan: De Preanger-Regentschappen onder het Nederlandsch bestuur
tot 1811 (Priangan: The Preanger regencies under Netherlands rule until 1811). Vol. 1,
pt. 2, "Personalia" ("Staff"). Batavia: 's-Gravenhage, Kolff, Nijhoff, 1910.
De lndische Navorscher (The Indies inquirer) I, no. 1, through 6, no. 3 (April 1934­
March 1940).
Maignien, Edmond. Abraham Patras, gouverneur-general des Indes Neerlandaises et sa
famille (Abraham Patras, governor-general of the Netherlands Indies and his family).
Grenoble: Joseph Baratier, 1892.
De Nederlandsche Leeuw (The Netherlands Lion) 48 (1930): nos. 6,9,10.
Nieuw Nederlandsch biografisch woordenboek (New Netherlands biographical diction­
ary). 10 vols. Leiden: Sijthoff, 1911-37.
Rhede van der Kloot, M. A. van. De Gouverneurs-Generaal en Commi~sarissen­
Generaal van Nederlandsch-Indie 1610-1888 (The governors-general and commis­
sioners-general of Netherlands India 1610-1888). 's-Gravenhage: Stockum en Zoon,
1891.
Stapel, Frederik_Willem. De Gouverneurs-Generaal van Nederlandsch-Indie in beeld en
woord (The governors-general of Netherlands India in pictures and text). The Hague:
Stockum en Zoon, 1941.
Troostenburg de Bmijn, C. A. L. van. Biographisch woordenboek van Oost-Indische
predikanten (Biographical dictionary of East Indies clergymen). Nijmegen: Milhorn,
1893.
Wijnaendts van Resandt, Willem. De gezaghebbers der Oost-Indische Compagnie op
hare buitencomptoiren in AzUl (The administrators of the East Indies Company in the
outer offices in Asia). Amsterdam: Liebaart, 1944.
OTHER BOOKS AND ARTICLES
Barnard, Lady Anne. South Africa a Century Ago: Letters Written from the Cape 0/
Good Hope (1797-1801). London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1901; reprinted by the
Scholarly Press, St. Clair Shores, Michigan, 1972.
Barnouw, Adriaan J. The Pageant of Netherlands' History. London: Longmans, Green
and Co., 1952.
Berg, N. P. van den. "Het toneel te Batavia in vroegeren tijd" (Theater in Batavia in
earlier times). In Vit de dagen der Compagnie, geschiedkundigeschetsen(FromCompany
days: historical sketches), pp. 97-191. Haarlem: Tjeenk Willink en Zoon, 1904.
Blusse, Leonard. "Batavia, 1619-1740: The Rise and Fall of a Chinese Colonial
Town." Journal o/Southeast Asian Studies 12 (1):159-78 (March 1981).
Bois, J. P. I. duo Vies des gouverneurs-generaux, avec l' abrege de l' histoire des etablis­
sements hollandois aux Indies Orientales (Lives of the governors-general, with a short
history of the Dutch settlements in the East Indies). The Hague: de Hondt, 1763.
Bouman, Hendrik. Meer Licht over Kartini (More Light on Kartini). Amsterdam: H. J.
Paris, 1954.
Boxer, C. R. The Dutch Seaborne Empire 1600-1800. London: Hutchinson, 1965.
Boxer, C. R. "Ledger and Sword: Cornelis Speelman and the Growth of Dutch Power in
Indonesia 1666-1684." History Today 8 (1958), no. 3.
Boxer, C. R. The Portuguese Seaborne Empire 1415-1825. New York: Alfred Knopf,
1969.
267

--- PAGE: 300 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.300) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Boxer, C. R. Race Relations in the Portuguese Colonial Empire /4/5-/825. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1963.
Boxer, C. R., ed. A ,True Description of the Mighty Kingdoms of Japan and Siam by
Fran{ois Caron and Joost Schouten. Reprinted from the English edition of 1663.
London: Argonaut Press, 1935.
Breuning, H. A. Het voormalige Batavia: Een Hollandse stedestichting in de tropen,
anno 1619 (Batavia of old: A Dutch town founded in the tropics, 1619). Amsterdam:
Allert de Lange, 1954.
Brugmans, I. J. Geschiedenis van het onderwijs in Nederlandsch-Indie (History of
education in Netherlands India). Groningen: J. B. Wolters, 1938.
Bruijn, Jaap R. "Between Batavia and the Cape: Shipping Patterns of the Dutch East
Indies Company." Journal of Southeast Asian Studies II (21):251-65 (September
1980).
Bruijn, J. R. "De personeelsbehoefte van de VOC overzee en aan boord, bezien in
Aziatisch en Nederlands perspectief" (Personnel requirements of the VOC overseas
and on board ship, viewed from Asian and Dutch perspective). Bijdragen en mede­
delingen betreffende de geschiedenis der Nederlanden 91 (1): 218-48 (1976).
Butcher, John G. The British in Malaya, 1880-1941: The Social History of a European
Community in Colonial South-East Asia. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Castles, Lance. "The Ethnic Profile of Djakarta, " Indonesia 3:153-204 (April 1967).
Clerkx, Lily. Mensen in Deli: Een maatschappijbeeld uit de bellettrie (Society in Deli:
Portrait of a community from the belles lettres). Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press, 1961.
Coolhaas, W. Ph. "Reael, Coen, De Carpentier en Specx." Bijdragen tot de Taal-,
Land- en Volkenkunde 129 (2 & 3):269-76 (1973).
Coolhaas, W. Ph. "Zijn de Gouverneurs-Generaal van Imhoff en Mossel juist beoor­
deeld?" (Are governors-general van Imhoff and Mossel judged correctly?). Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 114 (1) (1958):29-54.
Collis, Maurice. Raffles. London: Faber and Faber, 1966.
Crawfurd, John. History of the Indian Archipelago. Vol. 2. Edinburgh: Archibald Con­
stable and Co., 1820.
Day, Clive. The Policy and Administration of the Dutch in Java. New York, London:
Macmillan, 1904.
Deventer, Marinus L. van. Geschiedenis der Nederlanders op Java (History of the Dutch
on Java). Vol. 2. Haarlem: Tjeenk Willink, 1887
Edwardes, Michael. Bound to Exile: The Victorians in India. London: Sidgwick and
Jackson, 1969.
Furber, Holden. Rival Empires of Trade in the Orient, /600-/800. Minneapolis: Uni­
versity of Minnesota Press, 1976.
Fumivall, John S. Netherlands India: A Study of Plural Economy. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1944.
Graaff, E. A. van de. De statistiek in Indonesie (Statistics in Indonesia). 's-Gravenhage,
Bandung: van Hoeve, 1955.
Graaf, J._ H. de. Geschiedenis van Indonesie (HistoI)' of Indonesia). 's-Gravenhage,
Bandung: van Hoeve, 1949.
268

--- PAGE: 301 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.301) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Goor, Jumen van. Jan Kompenie as Schoolmaster. Dutch Education in Ceylon 1690­
1795. Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff, 1978.
Haan, F. de. Oud Batavia: Gedenkboek (Old Batavia: Commemorative volume). 2 vols.
Batavia: Kolff, 1922.
Haan, J. C. de, ed. Nederlanders over de zeeen: 350 jaar Nederlandsche koloniale
geschiedenis (Netherlanders overseas: 350 years of colonial history). 2d 00. Utrecht:
W. de Haan, 1942.
Klaveren, J. J. van. The Dutch Colonial System in the East Indies. 2 vols. Rotterdam:
Benedictus, 1953.
Klerck, E. S. de. History ofthe Netherlands East Indies. 2 vols. Rotterdam: W. L·. and J.
Brusse, 1938.
Knaap, G. "Europeans, Mestizos and Slaves: The Population of Colombo at the End of
the Seventeenth Century." Itinerario 5 (2):84-101 (1981).
Koop, John Clement. The Eurasian Population in Burma. Cultural Report Series, no. 6.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1960.
Koopman-Smit, M. Het paradijs der vrouwen: Tegenschrift op Veth's "Leven in Indie' ,
(The women's paradise: Rebuttal of Veth's "Life in the Indies"). 's-Gravenhage:
Veenstra, 1900.
Kroef, Justus M. van der. "The Colonial Novel in Indonesia," Comparative Literature
10 (3):215-31 (Summer 1958).
Kroef, Justus M. van der. "The Indonesian City: Its Culture and Evolution," Asia 2
(8):563-79 (March 1953).
Kroef, Justus M. van der. "The Indonesian Eurasian and His Culture," Phylon 16
(4):448~2 (1955).
Krom, N. J. Gouverneur-Generaal Gustaaf Willem van Imhoff (Governor-General
GustaafWillem van Imhoff). Amsterdam: van Kampen en Zoon, 1941.
Krom, N. J. "Het Leidsche weeshuis en de Oost-Indische Compagnie" (The Leiden
orphanage and the East Indies Company). In Leidsche jaarboekje 1936 (Leiden year
book for 1936). Leiden: n.p., 1936.
Ledyard, Gari. The Dutch Come to Korea. Seoul: Royal Asiatic Society, 1971.
Lequin, F. "A New Approach to the History of the Dutch Expansion in Asia: The
Personnel of the Dutch East India Company in the XVIIIth Century." Journal of
European Economic History 8 (2):431-37 (Fall 1979).
Leur, J. C. van. Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social and Economic
History. The Hague, Bandung: van Hoeve, 1955.
Loos-Haaxman, J. de. "Een portret van de landvoogd Adriaan Valckenier" (A portrait
of Governor-General Adriaan Valckenier). Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volken­
kunde 112 (1956):267-70 and reproduction of the portrait.
Lubberhuizen-van Gelder, A. M. "Hendrik Veeckens, een ambtenaar van den ouden
stempel" (Hendrik Veeckens, an official of the old school). CultureelIndie 7 (1945):
89-106.
Lubberhuizen-van Gelder, A. M. "Onze voorouders op de Coromandelkust" (Our
forefathers on the Coromandel coast). CultureelIndie 3 (1941):201-16.
Lubberhuizen-van Gelder, A. M. "Een oude Indische inventaris" (An Old Indies inven­
tory). CultureelIndie 8 (1946): 211-20.
269

--- PAGE: 302 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.302) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mansvelt, W. M. F. "De positie der Indo-Europeanen" (The position of Indo-Euro­
peans). Koloniale Studien 16 (1):290-311 (1932).
MarIe, A. van. "De groep der Europeanen in Nederlands-Indie: lets over ontstaan en
groei' , (The European group in the Netherlands Indies: Remarks on origins and
growth).lndonesie 5 (2):77-121; (3):314-41; and (5):481-507 (1955).
Marsden, Peter. The Wreck ofthe "Amsterdam." New York: Stein and Day, 1975.
Masselman, George. The Cradle of Colonialism. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1963.
Meilink-Roelofsz, M. A. P. "De Europese expansie in Azie: Enkele beschouwingen
naar annleiding van Holden Furbers Rival Empires of Trade in the Orient, 1600­
18()()" (European expansion in Asia: some introductory remarks to Holden Furber's
rival empires of trade in the orient, 1600-18(0). Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 135 (1979):403-42.
Milone, Pauline D. "Indische Culture and Its Relationship to Urban Life." Comparative
Studies in Society and History 9:407-26 (July 1967).
Milone, Pauline D. "Queen City of the East: The Metamorphosis of a Colonial Capi­
tal. " Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1966.
Muller, Hendrik P. N. "De Europeesche samenleving" (The European community). In
Neerlands Indie, edited by H. Colijn. 2:371-84. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1912.
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. "Drie vertellers van het Indische leven" (Three raconteurs of Indies
life). Orientatie 22:20-33 (July 1949).
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. Oost-Indische spiegel: Wat Nederlandse schrijvers en dichters over
Indonesie hebben geschreven vanaf de eerste jaren der Compagnie tot op heden (East
Indies mirror: What Dutch writers and poets have written about Indonesia from the
first years of the Company until the present). Amsterdam: Querido, 1972.
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. "Over de Europese samenleving van 'tempo doeloe' 1870-1900"
(On European society in 'the olden days' 1870-1900). de Fakkel 1(1940/41):773-803.
Nieuwenhuys, Rob. Tussen twee vaderlanden (Between two fatherlands). Amsterdam:
G. A. van Oorschot, 1959.
Petrus Blumberger, J. Th. De Indo-Europeesche beweging in Nederlandsch-Indie (The
Indo-European movement in Netherlands India). Haarlem: Tjeenk Willink en Zoon,
1939.
Raffles, Thomas Stamford. The History of Java. 2d. ed. 2 vols. London: John Murray,
1830.
Reksonegoro, Kardinah. "Kartini-de feiten" (Kartini-the facts). Bijdragen tot de
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 122 (1966):283-87.
Res ink , G. J. Indonesia's History between the Myths: Essays in Legal History and
Historical Theory. The Hague: van Hoeve, 1968.
Ricklefs, M. C. A History of Modern Indonesia, c. 1300 to the Present. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1981.
Roo de la Faille, P. de. lets over Oud-Batavia (On Old Batavia). Batavia: Kolff, 1919.
Skinner, G. W. "Change and Persistence in Chinese Culture Overseas: A Comparison of
Thailand and Java," Parts 1 and 2. Journal of the South Seas Society 16 (1960):86­
100.
Smail, John R. W. "On the Possibility of an Autonomous History of Modem Southeast
Asia," Journal ofSoutheast Asian History 2 (2):72-102 (July 1961).
270

--- PAGE: 303 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.303) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Soewondo-Soerasno, Nani. Kedudukan wanita fndonesia dalam hukum dan masjarakat
(The position of Indonesian women in law and society). Djakarta: Timun Mas, 1955.
Spear, Percival. The Nabobs: A Study of the Social Life of the English in Eighteenth­
Century India. London: Oxford University Press, 1963.
Stapel, F. W. "Comelis Janszoon Speelman, " Cultureel fndie 2 (1940):235-42.
Stapel, F. W. Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch-Indte (History of the Netherlands Indies).
Amsterdam: J. M. Meulenhoff, 1930.
Steinmetz, C. "Culturele gegevens uit familiepapieren II: Dr. Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn
(1809-1864)" (Cultural data from family papers II: Dr. Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn
(1809-1864). CultureellOOie 4 (1942):60-72, 173-82.
Steinmetz, C. "Culturele gegevens uit familiepapieren III: Van trouwen en sterven onder
de Compagnie" (Cultural data from family papers III: On manying and dying in
company times). Cultureel fndie 4 (1942): 274-83, and 5 (1943):31-46.
Steinmetz, C. "Culturele gegevens uit familiepapieren IV: Zilvere gendenkborden"
(Cultural data from family papers IV: Silver memorial trays). Cultureel fndte 5 (1943):
128-37.
Swaan-Koopman, C. Vrouwen in fndte (Women in the Indies). Amsterdam: H. J. Paris,
1932.
Taylor, Jean. "Educate the Javanese!" Translation from the Dutch of a memorial by
Raden Adjeng Kartini. Indonesia 17:83-98 (May 1974).
Taylor, Jean. --Raden Adjeng Kartini." Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
1 (3):639-61 (Spring 1976).
Terpstra, H. --Anthonij van Diemen." Cultureel fndie2 (1940):163-68.
Terpstra, H. "Tropische levenskunst in de XVIIe eeuw" (Way ofHfe in the tropics in the
seventeenth century). Cultureel fOOie 8 (1946): 199-210.
Thomassen it Theussink van der Hoop, A. N. J. "Vergeelde portretten" (Yellowed
portraits). Bijdragen tot de Taal-, LaOO- en Volkenkunde 114 (1958):121-32.
Toussaint, J. R. "Dutch Ladies Who Lived in Ceylon," Journal of the Dutch Burgher
Union ofCeylon 29 (2):31--43 (October 1939).
Troostenburg de Bruijn, C. A. L. van. De Hervormde Kerk in NederlaOOschOost-fndie
onder de Oost-Indische Compagnie (/602-/795) (The Reformed Church in the
Netherlands East Indies under the East Indian Company, 1602-1795). Amhem:
Tjeenk Willink, 1884.
Van der Veur, Paul W. "Cultural Aspects of the Eurasian in Indonesian Colonial Soci­
ety," Indonesia 6:38-53 (October 1968).
Van der Veur, Paul W. Education and Social Change in Colonial Indonesia. Athens:
Ohio University Century for International Studies, 1969.
Van der Veur, Paul W. "The Eurasians of Indonesia: A Problem and Challenge in
Colonial History," Journal of Southeast Asian History 9 (2):191-207 (September
1968).
Vlekke, Bernard H. M. Nusantara: A History of Indonesia. rev. ed. The Hague, Ban­
dung: van Hoeve, 1959.
Vreede-de Stuers, Cora. "Kartini: Feiten en ficties" (Kartini: Facts and Fancies). Bij­
dragen tot de Taal-, LaOO- en Volkenkunde 121 (1965):233--44.
Vries, J. W. de. "De Depokkers: Geschiedenis, sociale structuur en taalgebruik van een
geisoleerde gemeenschap" (The Depok people: history, social structure and language
271

--- PAGE: 304 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.304) ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
usage of an isolated community). Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 132
(1976):228-48.
Wall, V. I. van de. "Beschrijving van eenige werken van Raden Saleh" (Description of
several works of Raden Saleh). CultureelIndie 4 (1942): 159-67.
Wall, V. I. van de. Figuren enfeiten uit den Compagniestijd (People and facts from the
Company period). Batavia: n.p., 1932).
Wall, V. I. van de. "Het oude koloniale meubel in het land van herkomst" (Old colonial
furniture in its country of origin). CultureelIndie 4 (1943):51-59.
Wall, V. I. van de. Oude Hollandsche buitenplaatsen van Batavia (Old Dutch country
villas of Batavia). Deventer: van Hoeve, 1944).
Wall, V. I. van de. Vrouwen uit den Compagnie's tijd (Women in the Company period).
WeltevrOOen, Amersfoort: Visser, 1928.
Wertheim, W. P. Indonesian Society in Transition: A Study ofCultural Change. 2d rev.
00. The Hague, Bandung: van Hoeve, 1959.
Wertheim, W. P. Het sociologisch karakter van de Indo-Mootschappij (The sociological
character of the Eurasian community). Amsterdam: Vrij Nederland, 1947.
Zadoks-Josephus Jitta, Annie N. "Medische pioniers der V.O.C." (Medical pioneers of
the VOC). CultureelIndie 8 (1946):55-59.
Zeggelen, Marie van. Kartini, een boonbreekster voor hoor volk (Kartini, a pioneer for
her people). 3ded. Amsterdam: J. M. Meulenhoff, 1947.
272

--- PAGE: 305 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.305) ---
Index
Achin (variant of Indonesian Aceh), 177
Aelst, Maria van: as first lady, 35-36, men­
tioned, 66
Alting, Willem Arnold: appoints son-in-law as
director-general, 34; family connections,
62,63,67,83-84,92, 186-87,204;po~
trait of, 63, fig. 4; revokes Mossel's sump­
tuary laws, 68; revokes de Klerk's
education refonns, 84-85; on van der
Parra's Council, 93-94, 203
Asian women: soldiers' views on, 8, 15-17; in
Jacatra compound, 15; marriage with Euro­
peans, 16-17; banned from the Nether­
lands, 16, 30; status as brides, 17, 29, 122,
148; nationality of, 42, 156, 170; influence
on segregation of elite women, 59, 168; sta­
tus as mothers, 70, 122, 148; changing rela­
tions with Europeans, 108-9. See also
Slaves
Bake, Adriana Johanna: family connections,
59-60,62, 184
Bantam (variant of Indonesian Banten), 179
Baptism, 16; baptismal name, 17, 17n40
Batavia: established by Coen, 3, 10, 19; size,
seventeenth century, 10, eighteenth century ,
30, 30n60, 50, 52, 75-76, nineteenth cen­
tury, 97, 102, 129-130; emergence of the
Batavian, 19, 48-50; women forbidden to
leave, 20; move to southern suburbs, 20, 52,
95; in poem of circumstance, 52
Batavia Castle, 5, 6; as seat of VOC power,
10, 19; worship in, 20; numbers of slaves
in, 70; razed by Daendels, 95; mentioned,
22,36
Batavia Church: records of, 7, 14; organiza­
tion of, 20-24; as arena for display of
status, 41; promotes Dutch language, 46-
273
47, 84. See also Clergy; Dutch Refonned
Faith
Batavia elite: style of, 36-42; female costume,
37-42,67, 97-99, 116; Cornelia van
Beveren on, 39; seclusion of women, 39, 59,
102, 168, 172; childrearing practices, 45;
countJy villas of, 52-56; Asian influence on,
54, 58, 60, 76, 168; at mid-eighteenth cen­
tury, 78-79; viewed by British, 97-102; and
by nineteenth century Dutch, 115-116; dis­
placed from political power, 117-19, 120,
123
Batavia Town Hall: worship in, 20; second
building, 64
Batavian Academy of Arts and Sciences: 85­
87, 88, 90; renamed Batavia Literary Soci­
ety, 105; during British interregnum, 106;
mentioned, 161. See also Enlightenment
Bataviasche Courant (renamed Javasche
Courant), 116, 125
Bataviasche Nouvelles, 81-82, 138
Baud, Jean-ehretien: founds Delft Academy,
118; family connections, 126-27, 195
Benevolent Institution, 101, 105
Betel: adopted by Europeans, 41; as civility,
69; opposed by Olivia Raffles, 99; usedby
Johanna van Dsseldijk-Oland, 116
Betel box: as status SYmbol,41, 139; in paint­
ings, 40, fig. 2,42,62,63, fig. 4; in sump­
tuary laws, 67
Beveren, Cornelia Johanna van: describes her
wedding, 39; mentioned, 45
Blijver: defined, 134
Borneo (variant of Indonesian Kalimantan),
177
Both, Pieter: composition of his fleet, 11, 12;
on women settlers, 12, 13n26; on concubin­
age, 15; mentioned, 13, 119

--- PAGE: 306 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.306) ---
INDEX
Brandes Girls' School, 83-84, 85
British interregnum: ruling caste compared
with VOC elite, 96-97; attitudes toward
Batavian European community, 97-98; at­
tacks on Mestizo culture, 98-102; revival of
Batavian Academy, 105, 106; scholarly in­
terest in Indonesia, 106; impact on Javanese
elite, 107-9; judgments of, 110; Dutch re­
actions to, 112; British as Indiesmen, 112­
13
Brouwer, Hendrik: favors Eurasian colony, 14;
in Japan, 57n13
Bruijn, Cornelis de: visits Batavia, 53-54; visits
Bantam court, 110
Bupatis: at van der Parra's installation, 58-59;
response to Dutch, 159-67; and Regenten­
bond, 163, 168
Burghers (also called Free Townsmen): 9-12;
van der Lijn on, 9; as orphanage trustees,
26-27; repatriation rights limited, 29; in
subsidiary settlements, 31. See also Private
trade
Camphuys, Johannes: on education, 26; as
patron of Portuguese church, 48; retires in
Indies, 51; in Japan, 57n13; mentioned, 72
Caron, Fran<;ois:family history, 43-45; re­
called for private trade, 44; mentioned, 54
Celebes, the (variant of Indonesian Sulawesi),
177
Ceylon (renamed Sri Lanka), 178
Chastelein, Cornelis: country villa of, 53-54;
family connections, 53-54; and descen­
dan ts, 54n 7, 76n52
Christian Asians: forbidden sexual relations
with non-Christians, 16; in VOC schools,
24; obligation to learn Dutch, 24, 84; status
of, 49, 76, 170; community of Depok, 54;
prohibition of sale as slaves,70n41; ex­
cluded from marine academy, 81; men­
tioned, 8, 19,24
Clergy: 21-24; subordinate to VOC, 21; pro­
mote Malay language, 23; views of Asian
lay workers, 46; sumptuary laws on, 69. See
also Batavia Church; Dutch Reformed Faith
Cloon, Dirk van: as Eurasian governor­
general, 5; mentioned, 72
Clubs, 129-30
Coen, Jan Pieterszoon: colonization policies
of, 3, 9, 11; on soldiers, 7; and burghers, 9;
attacks Jacatra, 10, 19; on Dutchwomen, 12;
on Asian women, 12; husband of Eva Ment,
14,35; Brouwer on, 14; on concubines, 15.
16; succession to governor-generalship, 33,
33nl; promotes brother-in-law, 35-36;
mentioned, 79
Colonization policies: of VOC directors, 3, 11,
12, 14-15, 24, 25-26,28-30, 33-34,45; of
Coen, 3,9,11; of Brouwer, 14; of de
Carpentier, 16; of Mate1ief,24; on employ­
ment of locally born men, 25, 31, 85, 118­
19; laws, 28-30; of van Imhoff, 79
Concubinage: practised by Dutch, 4; banned,
15-16; opposed by Candidius, 21; status of
concubines, 70-7 1; status of concubine
mothers, 70, 141-42, 147; concubines' sons
excluded from marine academy, 81; and
British, 112-13; viewed as cause of de­
generacy, 135; as cultural mediators, 136,
147; costume, 147; in nineteenth century,
147-48; in Indies novel, 145-47 passim
Contract: VOC contracts for civilians, 6; for
soldiers, 7,9; for Dutchwomen, 12, 15; for
clergy and lay workers, 22, 23; extension
required on marriage, 29
Coop aGroen family, 104, 194
Costume: of Dutchwomen, 37-42, 62-64, 65,
97-98,99,101,138,142, 143, fig. ll;of
Mardijker men, 47-48; of Augustijn
Michiels, 61; of Adrian Bake, 62; and
Alting's wife, 62, 63, fig. 4; of Mestizas, 66;
in sumptuary laws, 67-68; European style
promoted by British, 99, 101; and by
Mevrouw de Eerens, 116; of mistresses, 147
Country villas: described, 52-56, 55, fig. 3,
61; as center of Mestizo culture, 75-76;
mentioned, 20, 22, 51
Couperus family: Abraham, 95, l12n51;
Petrus Theodorus, 103, 112, 193; Louis
(novelist), 145, 147, 152
Coyett, Frederik Julius: owner of Gunung Sari,
54; family connections, 54, 56, 192
Craan family: Jacobus Johannes, 93-94, 120,
190,205-6; Catharina Margaretha, 95, 120
188, 190, 195
Cranssen, Willem Jacob: family connections,
103, 112, 193; member of Benevolent Insti­
tution, 105; mentioned, 104, 112
274

--- PAGE: 307 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.307) ---
INDEX
Creole: defined, xx; de Carpentier on, 16; re­
quired to know Dutch, 27; employment re­
strictions on, 118. See also Eurasian Child­
ren
Daendels, Hennan Willem: as governor­
general, 94-96; Council of, 103; men­
tioned, 34, 111, 114, 115, 131
Daily Register, 13, 36, 53, 71, 152
Daum, P. A., 15, 145, 152, 157
Delft Academy, 118
Depok: described by Comelis de Bruijn, 53­
54; inheritance disputes concerning, 54n7
Diemen, Antonio van: early beginnings in
VOC, 5; promotes Latin school, 25; forbids
slaves on return fleet, 30; appoinbnent as
governor-general, 33; husband of Maria van
Aelst, 35, 36
Djajadiningrat, Achmad, 138n5, 166, 168
Doren, J. B. J.: on Augustijn Michiels, 61n25,o
on costume of Batavian ladies, 116;on
planter Manuel, 131-32
Dutch language: required of Asian brides, 16,
16n38,oDutch names required of Asian
brides, 16-17; required in schools, 24, 25,
80, 81, 84, 116, 143-44; promoted among
orphans, 27; as language of male immi­
grants, 27; Dutch names required of Asian
converts, 46; promoted among Asian Chris­
tians, 47, 83, 84; privileges for Dutch
speakers, 47; VOC attitudes to promoting
Dutch, 47-48; as language of marine aca­
demy, 81; and of Bataviasche Nouvelles,
82; required use in VOC schools revoked,
84-85; language of Batavian Academy, 88;
as status symbol, 139; and qualification in
employees, 139-40; debates on use in
schools, 144; ability of European children
in, 144; acquired by bupati class, 160, 162,
166; advocated as lingua franca by R. A.
Kartini, 165
Dutch Reformed Faith: required of VOC of­
ficials, 5-6; and for all VOC Asia, 20,
20n45,otaught in VOC schools, 24, 79; as
sign of political allegiance, 27; conversion
from Roman Catholicism required, 45-46,
49; decline in observance of, 69. See also
Batavia Church; Clergy
Dutch women: first settlers, 12-15; VOC con-
275
tracts for, 12, 15; repatriation rights limited,
13, 29; forbidden sexual relations with non­
Christians, 16; costume of, 37-42, 62-64,
65,97-98,99,101,138,142, 143, fig. 11;
in sumptuary laws, 67-68; as single immi­
grants, 128;nineteenth century views of,
135-36, 140-41; as Indies novelists, 144­
57; relations with educated Indonesians,
160-61, 167-68
Duurkoop, Jan Andries: member of Batavian
Academy, 86, 87; marries Helena Pieters, 91
Emancipation: as requirement for marriage to
European men, 16; for male slaves, 17-18;
Dutch language required for, 47; of Anjelina
Valentijn, 64; by Sophia Westpalm, 70; on
conversion, 70
Engelhard, Nicolaas, 62, 92, 103, 104, 105,
127
Enlightenment, 56, 78, 85-90; leaders of, 90­
93. See also Batavian Academy of Arts and
Sciences
Eurasian: defined, xix
Eurasian children: abandoned by European
fathers, 8; distinctions between boys and
girls, 8, 28,43-44,45; Brouwer on, 14; de
Carpentier on, 16; banned from Netherlands,
16,30; status of, 16-17,43-45, 76, 156,
170;placed in Batavia orphanage, 27, 76,
95; VOC regulations for parents of, 29-30;
speak Asian languages, 42-43; rearedby
Asians, 42-43; ban on hiring, 58, 85, 117,
118-19; education plans for 80-81; im­
poverishment of, 118; in Indies novels, 144­
57 passim; Achmad Djajadiningrat as Eur­
asian, 166
European: defined, xix, 76, 125, 128, 156-57,
170
European community: composition of, 17, 42,
76, 169-70; character of, 96-98, 125-26;
imPact of British on, 110-13; size of, 128,
128n20,oresidential patterns of, 128-30. See
also European; Mestizo
Fauconier, Sophia: family history, 91, 192
First Ladies: in seventeenth century, 34, 35­
37; in eighteenth century, 59, 62-64, 73-74;
in nineteenth century, 116

--- PAGE: 308 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.308) ---
INDEX
Frank, Marie, 145, 146, 147, 148-49, 150,
155-56
Free Townsmen: See Burghers
Freemasonry: in Indies, 85-88; membership
of, 87-88
Goens, Rijcklof van: sumptuary laws of, 66;
mentioned, 72, 118
Goossens, Geertruida Margaretha: owner of
Gunung Sari, 54, 65; family connections,
54,73,91,93,192
Graaff, Nicolaus de: describes voyage to Indo­
nesia, 5; on Dutch female immigrants, 14;
on European women in church, 39, 41; and
on their treatment of slaves, 41--42;on child
rearing, 42; on racial terms, 42; on country
villas, 52-53; mentioned, 149
Gunung Sari, 54, 56
Haan, Mattheus de: early beginnings in VOC,
5; family connections, 54, 54n7, 76n52
Helvetius, Adriana Louisa: family connec-
tions, 67, 73-74, 188, 190
Hoevell, Wolter Robert baron van, 118, 138
Hogendorp, Dirk van: family of, 92, 117
Hoom, Joan van: family connections, 48, 72;
as patron of church, 60; mentioned, 118
Hooyman, Johannes, 86, 87,92
Hoven, Therese, 145, 146, 149, 152, 160n2
Huysman, Catharina Magdalena: family con-
nections, 90-91, 191; mentioned, 64
Hygiene: habits of male immigrants, 41, 52,
101
IJsseldijk, Wouter Hendrik van, 95, 99, 103,
104
Imhoff, Gustaaf Willem baron van: swift rise
in hierarchy, 5; in Japan, 57n13,. honors
Catharina Huysman, 64; in Ceylon, 79n1;
colonization policies of, 79, 83; as gover­
nor-general, 79-83; disposition of illegiti­
mate children, 80, 92; style of government,
83; family connections, 90-91, 191;Helena
Pieters as mistress, 91; mentioned, 73, 90,
114, 138
Indies clan: defined, xviii; origins of, 15, 34;
at mid-eighteenth century, 71-72, 76, 78­
79, 92-93; dynastic tendencies of, 72, 75;
changes in, 75,114-15,131-32, 133;de-
276
mise in political importance of, 119-20,
123
Indies Council: established, 4; succession
issues, 33-34, 33n1, 72, 94; resPeCtdue
members, 56-57; van der Parra's Council as
microcosm, 93-94, 203-7; Daendels's
Council, 95-96; and Raffles's Council, 103­
4; revised membership of, 117;becomes
advisory board, 118
Indiesman: defined, xx; 90, 113
Jacatra: early Dutch contacts with, 3-4; first
Dutch school at, 24; mentioned, 10, 13, 15,
19
Jacatra roll call, 3-4, 6, 12, 15, 19
Janssens, Jan Willem, 96, 111, 114
Java Government Gazene, 64n30, 71n46, 98,
99,102,105,107-8,109,110,112,116
Junius, Fran~oise, 15, 145, 150, 151, 153, 155
Kartini, Raden Ajeng, 162, 163, 165-67
Kijdsmeir family, 122, 123, 196-97
Klerk, Reynierde: early beginnings in VOC, 5;
country villa of, 56; education reforms, 83­
84; promotes Dutch among Christian
Asians, 84; family connections, 85, 91, 192,
204; as patron of Batavian Academy, 86;
illegitimate children of, 92
Kling: defined, 10n18
Kroseman, Mina, 145, 146, 149-50, 155
Lay visitor (also called sick visitor, lay
worker): duties of, 22; character of, 23; ban
on wives emigrating, 29; mentioned, 25
Lay visitor, Asian: 46; required to learn Malay,
84; and Dutch, 84
Legitimation: for Caron children, 43; and for
van Riemsdijk children, 122;examples of,
70-71,76,95,96,125,142,170
Lijn, Cornelis van der: on burghers, 9; bans
Asian and Mestiza women from VOC ships,
30; succession as governor-general, 33-34;
luxurious style of, 36; visits Caron's country
villa, 51
Locomotief, de, 139, 141, 142, 144, 162, 163,
167
Maetsuyker, Joan: nunored to be Roman
Catholic, 5; on prevalence of Portuguese

--- PAGE: 309 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.309) ---
INDEX
language, 18-19; promotes Dutch as lingua
franca, 18-19, 27; on Batavia's Latin
school, 25; on pernicious influence of
slaves, 25,43; his wives, 35-36; men­
tioned, 144
Makassar (renamed Ujung Pandang), 177
Malay Church: in Ambon and Batavia, 23;
mentioned, 26
Malay language: religious texts in, 6, 23; used
by Dutch as lingua franca, 18, 50; used by
clergy, 23-24, 46; school texts in, 25, 44;
displaces Portuguese, 49, 132; language of
locally born EuroPeans, 79; taught in
marine academy, 81; promoted by van Im­
hoff, 84; in VOC schools, 84-85, 144;
British attitudes to, 102; loan words in
Dutch, 125, 142; promoted by Indonesian
nationalists, 169; and novelists, 169
Mardijkers: defined, 47; Batavian community
of, 47-49; assimilation with Indonesians,
49; influence on Dutch, 60; Michiels family,
60-61; mentioned, 8, 19
Marine Academy, 80-81
Marriage: VOC roles on mixed marriage, 16­
17, 16n38, 29; mixed marriage promoted by
de Carpentier, 16; VOC regulations on, 29­
30; British views on mixed marriage, 97
Merkus, Pieter: 103, 126, 127, 193; illegiti­
mate daughter, 127; mentioned, 117
Mestizo: defined, xix; as new population cate­
gory, 19; Iberian-Indian influence, 47; van
der Parra period as Peak of Mestizo culture,
56; characteristics of Mestizo culture, 68,
78-79,93, 101,102, 106, 109, 132; spreads
out from Batavia, 75-76, 113, 123-26,
130-34; van Imhoff s assaults on, 80-82;
absorbs immigrants, 85; manners confined
to household, 100, 115; assimilation of
Mestizos with Indonesians, 123; as inter­
mediate society, 132, 134, 160, 168, 173;as
ideal type, 151; self-hatred of, 152; Mestizo
novels, 157-58; dissolution of Mestizo
society, 158, 170; bupati class as cultural
Mestizos, 159-68 passim; political debates
of, 169, 170. See also Batavia Elite; Eur­
asian Children; Indies Clans
Michiels, Augustijn: as Mardijker captain, 49;
family history, 60-61; first European family
member, 61; family connections, 61n24,
277
70-71; mentioned, 123. See also Mardijkers
Ministry of Colonies: appointment policy of,
117
Minto, Gilbert Elliott, Earl of: on Eurasian
women, 97-98; mentioned, III
Mohr, Joban Maurits: rector of theological
seminary, 80; observatory of, 88, 89, fig. 6;
family connections, 92; mentioned, 90
Mossel, Jacob: early beginnings in VOC, 5; in
Mataram, 59n18; honors daughters, 64; il­
legitimate daughter, 64, 64n30,.sumptuary
laws of, 66-69; revokes van Imhoff's re­
fonns, 82; mentioned, 58, 73,140
Muntinghe, Hennan Warner: family connec­
tions, 103-4, 126
Newspaper advertisements: 128n21,.examples,
as sources on Indies life, 110-11, 112, 129­
30, 138-44, 162-63, 166-67
Novels: by Dutch authors, 145-57; by locally
born authors, 157-58; by Indonesian
authors, 169
Oland, Johanna Maria Magdalena; 95, 99, 126;
described by Ver Huell, 116
Orphanage: established, 26-27; clothing regu­
lations of, 28; trustees, 37, 73; mentioned,
24
Orphans: as soldiers, 7; and settlers, 11; female
orphans as brides, 12-13; in schools, 25, 26;
care of, 26-27
Outhoom, Willem van: family connections,
30, 36, 72; ode to, 57; mentioned, 53
Parasol: in paintings, 38, fig. 1, 39, 40, fig. 2;
as status symbol, 39; described by N. de
Graaff, 41; in sumptuary laws, 66--67,69
Parra, Petrus Albertus van der: country villa of,
54-55; family connections, 58, 59-60, 184;
European judgments on, 60; as patron of
church, 60, 69; dynastic tendencies of, 75;
revokes van Imhoffs refonns, 82; Council
of, 93-94, 203; mentioned, 61,62
Parra de jonge, Petros Albertus van der: his
image on medal, 59-60, 6On21;family con­
nections, 94, 184;descendants outside gov­
emment, 88; mentioned, 75
Patras, Abraham: early beginnings in VOC, 5;
will, 72-73

--- PAGE: 310 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.310) ---
INDEX
Pieters, Helena: mistress of van Imhoff, 91;
and wife of Duurkoop, 91; separated from
children, 92; family connections, 191
Plural society, 156-57
Portuguese Church: Nicolaus Molinaeus first
minister of, 23, 46-48; Europeans honored
in inner church, 48n24; and Mardijker com­
munity, 47-49, 61; van Imhoff at, 80; men­
tioned, 26,46, 84n16; outer church men­
tioned,83
Portuguese language: spoken by Jacatra harbor
master, 3; used by Dtitch as lingua franca,
18-19; Maetsuyker on, 18-19; Portuguese
names for converts, 17, 18,45,47; used by
Dutch Reformed church, 23; and by locally
bomEuropeans, 42-43, 79; language of
Christian Asians, 45-47; and of Mardijkers,
47-48; religious texts in, 60; used in VOC
schools, 85; and catechism classes, 85; dis­
placed by Malay, 131
Private trade (also Illegal Trade, Smuggling):
VOC policy on, 9-10, 11; favored by Coen,
11; practiced by clergy, 32; Council politics
and, 34; Caron recalled for, 44. See also
Burghers
Race: and status, 8, 27, 28,42,67, 138, 140,
143, fig. 11; prejudice of clergy, 23; and
occupation, 24-25, 31, 80-81, 118-19,
140-42; and costume, 37-42, 67, 97-99,
116, 142, 148, 149, 155-56; and household
composition, 43, 136, 138; and female elite,
64; British and mixed marriage, 97; rela­
tions between European men and Asian
women, 109-110; and between European
women and Asian men, 109-110, 140-41,
167-68; Dutch female novelists on, 146-57
passim; plural society, 156-57, 169-70;
Kartini on race prejudice, 166; Djajadi­
ningrat on race prejudice, 166; and political
parties, 169, 170
Rach, Johannes: his painting of van der Parra's
country villa, 54, 55, fig. 3; his painting of
Adriana Bake, 62; his painting of Alting and
wife, 62, 63, fig. 4
Radermacher, Jacobus Comelis Mattheus:
family connections, 56, 85, 91-93; founds
Academy and Freemasonry, 85-87; on van
der Parra's Council, 93-94,206; coterie of,
86,91; mentioned, 114
278
Raffles, Olivia: opposes betel, 99; and Indo­
nesian costume, 99; journeys to Solo and
Yogyakarta, 107-8; mentioned, 100, 109,
112
Raffles, Thomas Stamford: Council of, 103-5;
scientific interests of, 106; visits Solo and
Yogyakarta, 107-9; mentioned, 97, 101,
102, 110, 131
Riebeeck, Abraham van: family connections,
37, 37n5, 53, 53n6, 130-31; Valentijnon,
57; succeeds son-in-law as govemor­
general, 72; mentioned, 24
Riemsdijk, van (family): Jeremias, 73-75,
115, 119, 120, 188,207; Willem Vincent
Helvetius, 75, 95, 103, 119-23, 188, 190,
195; Dina Cornelia, 121, fig. 7, 122; Daniel
Helvetius, 122-23; Scipio Isebrandus Hel­
vetius, 122-23
Saleh, Raden, 161
Schools: early schools, 24; VOC regulations
on, 24-26; Latin school, 25-26; texts for,
25; Dutch language in, 24, 25, 84-85; em­
ployment of graduates, 25, 80, 118-19; lack
of schools for girls, 62; in Ceylon, 79nl;
theological seminary, 79-80; marine acad­
emy, 80-81; Brandes girls' school, 83-84,
85; Boterkoper's school, 84n16; first high
school, 119; language debates on, 144. See
also Dutch Language
Scipio, Maria Isaacs: portrait of, 37, 39; con­
nections,37n5
Segregation of sexes: Asian influence on, 39,
59; characteristic of Mestizo society, 87, 99,
102; breaking down among Mestizos, 100,
110-11; and among upper-class Javanese,
107-10, 161-68
Senn van Basel family: Maria Wilhelmina, 62,
83-84, 92, 187; Huybert, 62, 92; Willem
Adriaan,99, 103, 104, 110; Wilhelmina
Adriana, 103, 126; Wilhelmina Henriette,
126, 189, 195
Siberg, Joannes, 34,94, 104, 186
Sick visitor: See Lay Visitor
Slaves: owned by Dutch, 4, 71; conversion of,
16; emancipation of, 16-17, 132; treatment
of, 18, 41-42, 42nll, 69-71;resbictionson
import of, 18, 71; bearers of Portuguese
influence, 18; required to learn Dutch, 27,
47; banned from VOC ships, 30; as status

--- PAGE: 311 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.311) ---
INDEX
symbol, 30, 67-68, 100, 139; rear children,
42-43; "pernicious influence" of, 42-43;
on country estates, 56, 61, 74; abolition of
slavery, 70, 147; ban on slave trade, 70,
125, 129, 131; in theological seminary, 80;
excluded from marine academy, 81; de
Klerk promotes Dutch language among, 84;
under Daendels, 95; British views on, 96,
98,99; Gazette on, 99; Benevolent Institu­
tion, 101, 105; owned by British, 112, 113
Slaves, female: 15-17; as suite, 57; in sump­
tuary laws, 67-68; separated from European
ladies, 99-101
Slaves, male: 17-19; treatment of, 69-71. See
also Emancipation
Sloot,~arie, 145, 146, 151-52, 153, 155
Smith, David Johannes: family connections,
87, 92n55, 185,192; on vanderParra's
Council, 93-94, 206; mentioned, 115
Soldiers, 6-9
Specx, Jacques: abuses powers over clergy,
21; succession, 33n/ ,. in Japan, 57n/3
Speelman, Cornelis: sends daughter to
Europe, 45; wife, 52; in Japan, 57n/3; and
~ataram, 59n/8; mentioned, 72
Stavorinus, J. S.: on Batavian ladies, 64, 66,
69; on treatment of slaves, 71;'mentioned,
99
Subsidiary Settlements: relationship with Ba­
tavia, 4; opportunities for Creole and Eur­
asian men, 28,31,32,90; composition of,
30-32; in sumptuary laws, 68
Sumptuary Laws: of van Goens, 66; and Dur­
ven, 66; of~ossel, 66-69; revoked by AI­
ting, 68; in nineteenth century, 68-69
Tavernier, Jean-Baptiste: on van der Lijn, 36­
37; on betel, 41; on country villas, 52; men­
tioned, 56, 149
279
Tempo Doeloe, 137n2~ 174
Thedens, Johannes: early beginnings in VOC,
5; in Japan, 57n/3; family connections, 72,
93, 129, 192
Theological Seminary: 79-80; Mohr as rector,
80
Tombstone Inscriptions: as source on European
communities, 30-32; and on Christian
Asians, 47
Trekker: defined, 134
Valentijn, Fran~ois: as source, 23; on van
Diemen, 36; on languages of Batavia, 50; on
Abraham van Riebeeck, 57; on van Hoom's
third marriage, 72; mentioned, 46, 138
Ver Huell, Q. M. R.: describes Johanna Oland,
116;on Ambonese wedding, 125-26; on
sultan of Madura, 161; and on bupati of
Lamongan,162;mentioned,206
Verijssel, Margaretha Sophia: wife of Rader­
macher, 56; family connections, 91-93,
192
VOC Directors: role in VOC, 4-6; oppose pri­
vate trade, 9-10, II; on female emigration,
12-15; on control of church, 20-21; on
evangelization, 22; promote education, 24;
on employment of Eurasians and Creoles,
26,34,45,58, 78, 117-19; on widows, 35;
oppose luxury, 36
Westpalm, Sophia Francina: family connec­
tions, 56, 91-93, 192; frees slaves, 70;
mentioned, 67
Wiese, Albertus Henricus: family connections,
48n24, 84, 96; mentioned, 94, Ill, 114,
126
Zwaardecroon, Hendrik: early beginnings in
VOC, 5; buried in inner Portuguese church,
48

--- PAGE: 312 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.312) ---
New Perspectives in
Southeast Asian Studies
From Rebellion to Riots:
Collective Violence on Indonesian Borneo
Jamie S. Davidson
Amazons of the Huk Rebellion:
Gender, Sex, and Revolution in the Philippines
Vina A. Lanzona
An Anarchy of Families:
State and Family in the Philippines
Edited by Alfred W McCoy
Pretext for Mass Murder:
The September 30th Movement and
Suharto's Coup d'Etat in Indonesia
John Roosa
The Social World of Batavia:
Europeans and Eurasians in Colonial Indonesia
Jean Gelman Taylor
Vi t N am: Borderless Histories
Edited by Nhung Tuyet Tran and Anthony Reid
Modern Noise, Fluid Genres:
Popular Music in Indonesia, 1997-2001
Jeremy Wallach

--- PAGE: 313 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.313) ---


--- PAGE: 314 (Source: 2000-Taylor-The_Social_World_of_Batavia_Europeans_Eurasians.pdf p.314) ---

