--- PAGE: 1 ---
 
 
http://perak.uitm.edu.my/simpora9  
Organized by:
Centre for Knowledge & Understanding of Tropical Architecture & Interior (KUTAI)
Centre for Islamic Thought & Understanding (CITU)
Faculty of Architecture, Planning & Surveying (FSPU)
Universiti Teknologi MARA (Perak)
11 & 12 December 2012    
Al-Khawarizmi Lecture Hall UiTM(Perak)
FSPU
Revisit Islamic Civilization and Built Environment In The Malay World
SIMPOSIUMNUSANTARA 9
THE 9TH REGIONAL SYMPOSIUM OF THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO
conference proceeding

--- PAGE: 2 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
338 
 
PAPER CODE : AR230 
 
THE STUDY OF TRADITIONAL MALAY DECORATIONS & 
WOOD CARVING: A CASE STUDY OF THE ISTANA 
KENANGAN, KUALA KANGSAR, PERAK. 
 
Afzanizam Muhammad,Anuar Talib, Mohd Sabrizaa Abdul Rashid, 
Abdul Hamid Mohamed, Noor Faiza Rasol 
Faculty of Architecture, Planning and Surveying, Universiti Teknologi MARA (Perak), Malaysia 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Wood carving in Malaysia started as early 14 th century.  But most of the earlier works do not exist today because of the wood 
properties itself that are not durable due t o weather, moisture and fire.  Conservation of traditional timber buildings and 
documentation is needed as a step to preserving this inheritance.  The Istana Kenangan (Memory Palace) in Kuala Kangsar, Perak 
is built mainly out of timber and enveloped by ke laraiwalls(Traditional bamboo wall) .  The significance of the building is not 
just as a typical traditional building but it is also a part of the Perak state history during the reign of the Sultan Iskand ar Shah 
Sultanate (1918-1938).  The aim and objectiv es of this study is to identify the  components of the palace that has a traditional 
decorations and wood carving motifs in order to establish the inventory of patterns on Istana Kenangan.  The inventory of the  
patterns and motifs on Istana Kenangan is supported with measured drawings on the plans, elevations and decorative components 
detail drawing.  The „case study method‟ is applied in this research.  At the end of this research the uniqueness of this bui lding is 
revealed and the significance of this pala ce is realized to be more important to conserve traditional architecture especially for the 
Perak regional style. The inventory produced can ensure this inheritance will remain for future generation and further studies. 
 
Keywords:Traditional Decorations, Documentation, Inventory, Conservation 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The early record of Malay architecture only can be found in old literature such as SulatusSelatin 
andHikayatMisaMelayu that illustrate the palace as a house for the Sultan that was built and decorated fr om wood. 
(Abdul HalimNasir 1986)  Here is where the documentation of the inheritance is important in conservation works.  
This to ensure the next generations can know and study in detail.  The documentation work for historic buildingsis 
important toensuret he next generationcan studyand encourage the awarenessofappreciating their heritage.  The 
characters of traditional wood carving today are influenced from Hinduism that existed from  first century until 14 th 
century until it evolved into pure Malay identity .  Malay wood carving again, was adapted from strong influence of 
Islamic characters in the 14 th century. Islamic belief made big changes in traditional architecture especially in 
woodcarving elements. All animal characters were no longer used and were sim plified. What we can see today is the 
product of a long evolution that has been at work since the first century.(Abdul HalimNasir 1986)  As early as the 
14th century, woodcarving has been a significant craft in vernacular architecture practiced by Malay cr aftsmen in 
Peninsular Malaysia (Ismail & Ahmad, 2001; Fee, 1998). The Istana Kenangan (Memorial Palace), is built mainly 
out of wood butthere are in some parts are use othermaterialssuch as bambooand metalplateas adecoration. It is also 
known as “Istana Le mbah” and occasionally as “Istana Tepas”.   Located south -east of Istana Iskandariah, it was 
planned and built in 1926, after the great flood.  It is an art of partially removing wood from a board or a plank 
following specific motifs and orders. By imitatin g a carved masterpiece, a woodcarver gradually modifies the motifs 
and produces his own manifestation onto the timber piece. This pattern becomes the trademark, both for the craver 
and for his architecture or craft. (Ismail Ahmad,2004).  Wallsconsistof wovenbamboo (tepas)isdominant character in 
Perak state architecture.  Tepaswallsare widely usedinhouseconstruction in Perak state.   The research is about to 
produce the inventory of decoration elements in Istana Kenangan, Kuala Kangsar, Perak.  
 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
339 
 
Background of the Palace 
The Istana Kenangan (Memorial Palace), is built mainly out of wood.   It is also known as Istana Lembah and 
occasionally as Istana Tepas.   Located south-east of Istana Iskandariah, it was planned and built in 1926, after the 
great flood. 
 
 
Plate 1.1: Istana Kenagan Kuala Kangsar 
The carpenter who built the palace was Haji Suffian who, with his two sons ZainalAbidin and Ismail, came from 
SeberangPerai. (Raja Nazrin,2006:34)   The architecture of the palace is based on the shape of a sword.   The walls 
are made of woven sliced bamboo in a diamond shaped pattern (kelarai) and the roofs are in the shape of "five 
ridges of a traditional Malay house and the ridge of a row of bananas" 
(perabunglimadanperabungpisangsesikat).  The design and the craftsmanshi p adopted in the palace construction 
reflects the fine art of Perak Malay handicraft. 
When the palace was completed in 1931, Sultan Iskandar Shah (1918 -1938) the 30th Sultan moved to this palace 
because the official palace at the time, Istana Negara, was t o be demolished and the new palace to be build was to be 
on its site at Changkat Negara, Bukit Chandan.  The new palace is the present Istana Iskandariah. 
 
Plate 1.2: Istana Iskandariah, Kuala Kangsar (source: District Office of Kuala Kangsar)  

--- PAGE: 4 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
340 
 
 
The construction of Istana Iskandariah was completed in 1933 and Sultan Iskandar Shah moved into it while other 
members of the family went to stay in the Istana Lembah which later became known as the Istana Kenangan.  
 
Plate 1.3: Sultan Iskandar Shah (1918-1938). (source: M.A. Fawzi Basri,1986)  
Istana Kenangan was originally known as Istana Lembah (Valley Palace) and Istana Tepas (Plaited Bamboo Palace).  
Its name Istana Kenangan was given to the palace after its renovation in the 1960‟s.  The then Prime Minister of  
Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra Al-Haj, was involved in the restoration of the palace and its maintenance as a 
heritage building.  
The palace later was converted into the MuziumDiraja (Royal Museum), which was officially opened by Sultan 
AzlanMuhibbuddin Shah (r. 1984 – Present) in 1986. Exhibition on display include the throne used during the 1985 
installation of Sultan AzlanMuhibbuddin Shah, The regalia and photographs of the Perak royal family, and 
documents and artifacts relating to earlier sultans.  (Raja Nazrin,2006:34)Istana Kenangan was opened again in July 
2008 after many years of restoration work. It has now become the Royal Museum of Perak.  
Influences  in Malay Decorations and Architecture 
The Malay people have lived in Peninsular Malaysia whic h has been known to be influenced by Hinduism until the 
Islam era in the 14 th century which brought a big influence to their culture and arts. Islam forbids any animal or 
living character representation in its art and culture and created every artwork incl uding architecture and decoration 
that not just emphasized on function, but made living more creative whilst emphasizing Islamic religious 
symbolism.  This makes the Malay art obviously different with ancient Greek, Egypt and Roman art and 
architecture.(JumaatMohd. Noor,1992) 
Malay traditional wood carvings are rich with beautiful motif.  The natural property of wood which have grain 
patterns contributes to its aesthetic value.  The selection of timber species strongly depend on the function and 
application of the work piece such as outdoor or indoor use.  It also depends on the price of the species that finally 
will reflect the status of the owner (for example penghulu house or palace). It also reflects the owner‟s financial and 
social status. 
However wood is not the first material for carving work founded in Malaysia. Through recorded history people in 
peninsular Malaysia carved on stone since Buddhism and Hinduism came to influence the culture of the local 

--- PAGE: 5 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
341 
 
people.  In Perak state of Malaysia, statues and o thers prayer equipments have been found that are believed to be 
from the fifth to sixth century period. (A. HalimNasir, 1977) Which started from the „ Dong Song  Drum‟ in the 
Bronze era (1500 – 300 BC) to stone carvings in LembahBujang. 
The traditional masterpieces from 500 years ago are made from a fragile material from nature that is not long lasting 
and cannot be preserved for the next generation.(JumaatMohd Noor, 1992).   Timber is among the main material in 
Malay art works.  It is the main material to bu ild houses and other buildings like mosques and palaces.  These 
buildings are decorated with fine wood carving. There is no exact era or time period to show when the Traditional 
wood carving started in the Malay civilization.  The earliest Malay Manuscript  that can be used as evidence is the 
SejarahMelayu (Malay History) by Tun Sri Lanang, in the 15 th Century.  In his book he wrote about the Sultan 
Masor Shah of Malacca palace and how beautiful it was built, which later on caught fire and was destroyed.  
“ adapunbesarnyaistanaitutujuhbelasruang; padaseruangtigadepaluasnya. Besartiangsepemeluk, 
tujuhpangkatkemuncaknya. Padaantaraitudiberinyabertingkap, danpadatingkap -tingkapdiberinyaberbumbung dab 
bergajahmenyusu.  Sekaliannyabersayap laying -layangberukirdanbersengkuap di perbuatnyabelalangbersegi; 
sekaliannyabergunung-ganangandanberjurai-juraibelaka.Adapuntingkapistanaitusekaliannya di cat 
sertadibubuhiairemasdankemuncaknyaberkacamerah.Apabilakenasinarmatahari, menyala -nyalarupanya, 
sepertimanikam.  Sementarad inding-dindingituberkambi, maka di tampalidengancermincina yang besar -
besar.Apabilakenapanasmataharimenyala-nyalarupanya.Kilau-kilauan, tiadanyatabahnadipandang 
orang.Adapunrasukistanaitusehastalebarnyasejengkaltigajaritebalnya.Akan biraiistanadua hasta 
lebarnyasehastatebalnya; diukirjenangpintuitudanempatpuluhbanyakpintunya.Sekaliannyadicatdandibubuh air 
emas.Terlaluindah-indahperbuatannyaistanaitu. Dan istanaitulahdinamaimahligai, 
atapnyatembagadantimahdisirip.” 
This huge and luxury the Malacca Sultanate has been rebuilt according to this manuscript by Malacca Museum 
Board as Malacca sultanate Museum to show the public how unique the Malay palace architecture and Sultanate of 
Mansur Shah era from 1456 to 1477  
(http://www.perzim.gov.my/istana_kesultanan.htm, 2008). 
 
 
Plate 1.4: Malacca Sultanate Muzium (MuziumBudaya) located near St. Paul Hill, Melaka. (source: PERZIM, 2008) 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
342 
 
Another old Malay literature called „ MisaMelayu‟ also describes the Sult an IskandarDzu‟lkarnain palace. In circa 
1750‟s the writer, Raja Chulan has wrote:  
 …..  Istana yang indahpermai, dipagariolehempatpenjurutembok yang kukohsebagaikubu, sepanjang 240 
kaki sabelah -sebelah, dan di tiap -tiappenjuruterdirimenara yang tersergam denganmeriam-meriamnyasekali, 
telahsiapdibina di Chempaka Sari.  Dan di dalamtembokistanaitu pula terdiritigabuahistanalagi yang 
lengkapdengansegalarupaperhiasannya. ….. (Raja Chulan,1968:12) 
In this literature the writer elaborated how wonderful the Palace of Perak that built with four sides of protective wall. 
The wall was built along 240 feet each. There is a minaret at every angles complete with canons in Chempaka Sari.  
Inside the palace area are built three of full decorated blocks. In both literature s wrote about the design of the 
sultan palaces that describes their power and richness. 
Symbolism in Malay Traditional Timber House 
In the Malay social structure and cultural life, good behavior and respect to other people especially to the older and 
higher social status like Penghulu (village head) and Sultan is very important.  Wood carving patterns and motifs 
which is symbolizes to represent certain meaning. Strong Islamic beliefs and humble feeling to God (Allah) also 
brings influence to the motifs in wood carving and its application in Malay Houses or Palaces. 
Islam erased the Hindu -Buddhist influence in Malay life since the 14 century. Islam forbids man make crafts from 
having natural representations and the human face.  Because of that abstract and ge ometrical motifs are employed. 
(Muhammad Afandi Yahya,1995:9) 
Among the good example of this fact is awanlarat (meandering clouds: Traditional wood carving motif) which is 
widely used in most traditional and contemporary Malay buildings.„ Awanlarat’ is a motif of wood carving that uses 
waving, twisting, and flowing like patterns to represent the moving clouds in the sky. Normally, this type of wood 
carving motif is combined to become a complete pattern (HalimNasir, 1986).  Awanlarat motifs are always carved 
to bend at its end to show respect and humble feeling to God.  Awanlarat can be identified by it continuous motif 
which is started at the center of the panel or work piece  (Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993:).  The starting point in awan 
larat is called punca (Mohd Sabrizaa Abd Rashid, 2008).  
Type of ‘Silat’ In Traditional Wood Carving 
Shape of motifs and patterns in Malay wood carving is importance.  For the bungatimbul (embossed) and 
shaped tebuktembus (cut through) carvings the technique of cutting or stroke is called silat.  Silat emphasizes the 
carving motifs in three dimensional shapes.  There are five types of silat, which are „ Silatbelahrotan‟, „silat dada 
tuma‟, „silatserong’, „silat leper‟ and „silatminangkabau‟. (Hassan Mohd. Ghazali, 1992:122) 
 
Figure 1.1: Silatbelahrotan: curved edges (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
343 
 
 
Figure1.2 :Silat Leper: flatten curve shape (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) 
 
 
Figure 1.3: Silatminangkabau have a sharp pitch (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) 
 
 
Figure 1.4: Silat dada tuma have concave on the middle (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) 
 
Figure 1.5: SilatSerong have sharp pitch on one side and low curve cutting on the other side. (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) 
The photograph below is an example of cut through ca rving on Istana Kenangan floor fascia panel.  The top part of 
the fascia is a carving with silat and the low part of the fascia is a carving without silat technique. 
 
Plate 1.5: Istana Kenangan floor fascia 

--- PAGE: 8 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
344 
 
Weaving Wall (Tupas/Tepas) in Traditional House 
Traditional weaving art in Malay culture started a long time ago.  It was invented without influence from outsiders.   
It started with rope, roots and rattan as its first basic material in Malay weaving crafts.  Several designs can be 
created from pandanus species of plant (pandan and mengkuang).  The design is comes from its functions for 
example the farmers and fishermen, the weaving activities can be basket, hat, tudungsaji, mat, fan and other utility 
equipments.  Weaving crafts contain pattern called Kelarai. 
(http://memorikedah.net/page_pengenalan.php?p=1&idstopic=5&mtopic=1, 2008).  
 
Plate 1.6: Pandan tree (left) and mengkuang tree (right) (source: Hassan Mohd. Ghazali, 1992:63)  
 
Figure 1.6: Motifs in kelarai weaves (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) 
 

--- PAGE: 9 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
345 
 
 
Figure 1.6: Motifs of kelarai weave (source: Hassan Mohd Ghazali,1993) (continue)  
 
Ketupat is a one of Malay traditional food made from weaved young coconut leaves filled with rice.  There are 
several shapes of ketupat weaves called hulupengayuh, pasa r, pasarpahang, bawangmerah, bawangputih, 
buahkeras and serinegeri (Syed Ahmad Jamal, 1992).   
Kelarai wall panels are also made as interior dividers and exterior walls for traditional Malay houses which are most 
popular in the west coast region of peninsu lar Malaysia especially in the Perak state.  The kelarai wall is normally 
made from split bamboo, bertam (engeissonatritis),  Rumbia and pelupuh due to their durabilities.  These materials 
are ripped and planed before they are preserved by being dipped in mud.  Some of it is painted in various colours.  
The Istana Kenangan of Kuala Kangsar is the most famous example of a kelarai wall building. The other examples 
of these type of buildings which still remain are Masjid Kuala Dal, Kuala Kangsar, Perak; and ho use number 20 off 
Jalan Kota Lama, Sayung, Perak .(Syed Ahmad Jamal, 1992). 
 
METHODOLOGY 
On-site Building Measurements 
Physical measurement on site and production of scale drawings is required in this method of study.  Autocad 
software is used to produce d rawings that include floor plans, elevations and detail drawings of every building 
element that have decoration and carving motives.   
The palace is measured to get the accurate scale drawings. Since this study is about patterns and carvings on the 
palace, the measured drawings are important to indicate the decorations and wood carvings located throughout the 
plan and elevation. The profiles on the building are measured and recorded through photos and working drawings.  
Certain parts of the building that ca nnot be reached, for example the roof, are measured using the comparison 
method from photographs. The comparison is made between a measured object and an unmeasured object to identify 
the ratio of size.  
 
 

--- PAGE: 10 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
346 
 
Plans and Elevations of Istana Kenangan 
 
From the observation on site, the Istana Kenangan position is in west -south direction with the entrance facing the 
west side. The overall west-south length of the palace is 42.2 meters of column to column measurement. The overall 
width of the palace is 10.4 meters of column to column measurement. The total height not include the 
tunjuklangit(pointed pitch) is approximately 12 meters from the ground level. The plans and elevations of the Istana 
Kenangan are produced to show the placement of wood carvings and pattern on the exterior and in the interior of the 
palace. The drawing numbers indicate the carvings and patterns located.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 11 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 12 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
348 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE: 13 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
349 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE: 14 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 15 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
351 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 16 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
352 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 17 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
353 
 
 
Wood Carving and Decoration Inventory 
 
This inventory table shows the placement and its quantity of the carvings andpatterns in Istana Kenangan. Every 
carving and pattern is indicated with drawingnumber to identify the locations on plan and elevation drawings. This 
table iscomplete with the specification and finishing as additional information.  
 
 
Figure 4.17: Istana Kenangan inventory of carvings and decorations. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
From the research that I  have done, I found that Istana Kenangan is a unique architectural heritage because of its 
main purpose of why it was built.  According to the history, Istana Kenangan is a temporary palace for the Sultan 
Iskandar Shah while the new permanent palace is und er construction.  The permanent palace is Istana Iskandariah 
and serves as the administrative block and Sultan Azlan Shah Gallery (formerly known as Istana Hulu) building 
today actually is a palace that served as the Sultan‟s Residence before.  Both palace s are made from concrete. It 
shows the concrete construction technology was brought to Perak during that time.  Istana Kenangan was not the 
latest technology when it was built in year 1926.  Perhaps it means that Istana Kenangan was made from cheaper 
materials and only acted as a temporary palace.  There is a big difference in the size of the Istana Kenangan and 
Istana Iskandariah.  Istana Kenangan is much smaller compared with Istana Iskandariah.  Istana Iskandariah still 

--- PAGE: 18 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
354 
 
remains as a state palace until to day.  But Istana Kenangan was used as a state palace for three years only and then 
became a royal family house for a certain period of time before turned into the RoyalMuseum today.  The 
conclusion which I can make here is that Istana Kenangan is not the h ighest achievement of timber buildings that 
sultan could afford to build, but the Istana Kenangan that we see today is built from the second class budget as a 
temporary building.  We can‟t say this building can be used as a benchmark to estimate the state financial level in 
that era because at the same time the actual palace was under construction with more luxury and grandness.  
However we still can say that Istana Kenangan has it own unique characteristics that not only in the workmanship 
but also the materials that were used for this palace, compared to buildings of the same age of timber building in the 
Perak state.  This puts Istana Kenangan on the higher standard with other rich houses or buildings at that time.  
The roof tiles is from Belian timber which is a very high quality of tropical timber because of it durable property.  
Most of the traditional buildings that were built in the same era were used atap (palm leafs) or zinc for it roofing.  
The roof for Istana Kenangan is decorated with metal plates  such as perabungatap (pitch crown) and cucuratap 
(fascia) of the roof.  The roof fascia is made from decorated metal plates with embossed pattern and painted in 
yellow color. 
The finishing of Istana Kenangan exterior part is in referrence to the Perak fla g colors.  Most of the traditional 
buildings in Perak state are from timber or bamboo natural color with oil or wax applied. Istana Kenangan is painted 
with glossy opaque finish except for the timber floor.  Tepas wall for this palace is made from the Bertam tree which 
is more durable and difficult to find compare with bamboo material that usually is used to make houses.   The colors 
and materials used in Istana Kenangan made an obvious difference compared to other traditional houses in the Perak 
state. 
Because of this uniqueness, Istana Kenangan is the only building in Perak state as it is.  It is also a part of Perak state 
history.  The conservation and restoration works should be conducted from time to time for this building.  The 
originality of the build ing should remain for the next generation to study and understand this heritage.  Changing 
this building is like changing the history records, it is not fair for our next generation to see and observe.  This is 
what conservation ethics is all about. 
Timber is a material from nature and is biodegradable due to exposure to weather and decay agents. This makes 
timber buildings not long lasting like concrete buildings.  It also can be destroyed by fire. The ability to shrink and 
swell due to moisture content ma ke the jointing of timber structure fails after certain period of time.  Special 
attention from experts is needed to make sure this heritage can stand forever.  In the same time further research and 
documentation is needed for this building.  The informati on from the previous and further research will help to 
develop the understanding and appreciation of national heritage among the new generations.  
 
REFERENCES 
Abdul HalimNasir& Wan Hashim Wan Teh,(1997). Warisan senibina melayu. University Kebangsaan Malaysia. 
 
Abdul Halim Nasir (1985) rumah traditional melayu Semenanjung Malaysia. Darulfikir, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
Abdul Halim Nasir (1996) ukiran kayu melayu tradisi. Dewan Bahasa Dan Pustaka, Kementerian Pelajaran 
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
Dr Zulkifli Hanafi.(1996). Alat-alat pertukangan tradisional melayu. Amber-Solara Publication, Kulim,Kedah. 
 
Farish A. Noor &EddinKhoo.(2003) Spirit of wood: the art of Malay woodcarving.Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd. 
 
Hassan MohdGhazali (1993) pendidikanseni, Pustaka Delta Pelajaran, Kuala Lumpur. 

--- PAGE: 19 ---
The 9th Regional Symposium of The Malay Archipelago 2012 (SIMPOSIUM NUSANTARA 9 2012) 
11-12 December 2012, Perak, MALAYSIA 
355 
 
 
Ismail Said.(2004). Beauty of material: selecting timber species for Malay woodcarving. UniversitiTeknologi 
Malaysia. 
 
Kathleen Chee (2006) pendidikanseni visual, Pelangi Publishing Group Bhd, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
M.A. FawziBasri (1986) Cempaka sari: sejarahkesultanannegeriperak, Yayasan Perak, Ipoh, Perak. 
 
MohamadTajuddin Haji MohamadRasdi (2006) The discontinued traditions of Malay wood carvings in modern and 
post-modern architecture in Malaysia: a failure to develop the discourse on ornamentati on in architectural works. 
JurnalAlamBina, Jilid 8, No.2,UniversitiTeknologi Malaysia, Malaysia 
 
MTIB ((1990).Beauty in Traditional Use of Timber. Malaysian Timber Industry Board, Kuala Lumpur.  
 
Muhammad AfandiYahya (1995) SimbolismeDalamSenibinaRumahMelayu, DewanBahasadanPustaka, Kuala 
Lumpur. 
 
Raja Chulan (1968) MisaMelayu, PenerbitanPustakaAntara, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
Raja Nazrin (2006) Landmarks of Perak.RNS Publications, Kuala Lumpur. 
