--- PAGE: 1 ---
Available Online at www.e-iph.co.uk 
Indexed in DOAJ and ScienceOPEN 
  ASLI 2018 
AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland
http://www.amerabra.org; https://fspu.uitm.edu.my/cebs 
6th AMER International Conference on Quality of Life 
Pulau Perhentian Resort, Malaysia, 03-04 March 2018 
"Quality of Life in the Built & Natural Environment 6 ”
eISSN: 2398-4287© 2018. The Authors. Published for AMER ABRA cE-Bs by e-International Publishing House, Ltd., UK. This is an open access article under the CC 
BYNC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- nc-nd/4.0/). Peer–review under responsibility of AMER (Association of Malaysian Environment-Behaviour 
Researchers), ABRA (Association of Behavioural Researchers on Asians) and cE-Bs (Centre for Environment-Behaviour Studies), Faculty of Architecture, Planning & 
Surveying, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Malaysia. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.21834/e-bpj.v3i7.1227 
Preserving the Characteristics of Urban Heritage: An insight into 
the concept of Malaysian Royal Towns 
Noor Aimran Samsudin 1, Muhamad Solehin Fitry Rosley 2, Raja Nafida Raja Shahminan 3, Sapura Mohamad 4 
1 Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Faculty of Built Environment, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia 
2 Landscape Department, the University of Sheffield, S10 2TN Sheffield, United Kingdom 
3 Centre for the Study of Built Environment in the Malay World (KALAM), Faculty of Built Environment, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia  
4 Department of Landscape Architecture, Faculty of Built Environment, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia 
nooraimran@utm.my, msfrosley1@sheffield.ac.uk, b-nafida@utm.my, b-sapura@utm.my 
Tel: +6013-7549381 
Abstract 
Royal towns in Malaysia are the finest examples of traditional Malay towns, which are strongly associated with the long history of Malay Sultanates in 
Malaysia. This study aims to identify the significant characteristics that perhaps homogenously shared by the Malaysian Royal Towns to be inferred as 
the symbol and identity of the place. The study begins with thorough literature reviews of historical Malay manuscripts for some insights into how the 
traditional Malay towns were during the early 14th to the 19th century. From this, the study managed to identify three prominent characteristics that 
shaped the whole physical images of Malaysian Royal Towns. T hese characteristics are known as the king’s palace, traditional Malay settlements 
known as kampongs and lastly, traditional Malay fortification system. Nevertheless, these characteristics are being threatened due to improper planning 
and modernisation of the Royal Towns. A conventional conservation approach, however, seems insufficient to address the whole idea of a Malaysian 
Royal Town. These identified characteristics, in this case, are interrelated and thus required in-depth study of each Royal Town to investigate the 
traditional knowledge lies within the culture and a new comprehensive in-depth method of conservation and preservation in order to sustain the image 
of the place as a cradle of the Malay civilisation.  
Keywords: Royal Towns, Urban Heritage, Traditional Malay Towns 
eISSN: 2398-4287© 2018. The Authors. Published for AMER ABRA cE-Bs by e-International Publishing House, Ltd., UK. This is an open access article under the CC 
BYNC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Peer–review under responsibility of AMER (Association of Malaysian Environment -Behaviour 
Researchers), ABRA (Association of Behavioural Researchers on Asians) and cE -Bs (Centre for Environment -Behaviour Studies), Faculty of Architecture, Planning & 
Surveying, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Malaysia. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.21834/e-bpj.v3i7.1227 
1.0 Introduction 
The existence of ‘Royal Towns’ in Malaysia is significant to our unique intangible and tangible heritage identity. Nevertheless, these 
heritages will be diminishing throughout time without any proper actions taken to protect them. Given this situation, the Malaysian 
government has actively listed at least 35,000 units of heritage buildings; most of them were built before the World War II in almost 265 
urban areas in Malaysia. Some of the buildings were used to be in worse condition, and most of them were classified as the vernacular 
Chinese shop houses (Syed Zainol Abidin, 1995). The ‘Royal Town’ existences in Malaysian cities found was not so much promoted 
and unclearly defined locally. Therefore, led by the National Heritage Department, more buildings that associated with multi-diversity 
local cultures have been gazette and recognised as heritage buildings. In fact, some of these identified buildings are connected to our 
long history of nine (9) traditional Malay sultanates that existed in modern Malaysia. These buildings were royal palaces, mosques, 
mausoleums, traditional Malay fortification system and traditional kampongs that located in a unique Malay traditional city known as the 
‘Royal Town’. However, in nowadays context, continuous debates of what is a ‘Royal Town’, its characters and identities are the major 
concerns for many researchers, planners and historians. This is because the overall idea of what is a ‘Royal Town’ has not clearly been 


--- PAGE: 2 ---
Sansudin, N.A., et.al.  / 6th AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland, 03-04 March 2018 / E-BPJ, 3(7), Mar. 2018 (p.277-283) 
 
278 
defined and recorded.  It is important to preserve these royal towns, as they are testament to the greatness of the monarchy system o f 
the Malay Royal Institution (Muslim et al., 2013). Thus, these hiccups contribute to non -holistic approaches in preserving the identity of 
Malaysian Royal Towns. 
Therefore, the main objective of this paper is to discuss the relevance of three (3) important physical elements , namely, the royal 
palaces, traditional Malay fortification system  and traditional settlements (known as kampongs) in portraying the image of Malaysian 
Royal Towns in nine cities, namely as Arau (Perlis), Anak Bukit (Kedah), Kuala Kangsar (Perak), Klang (Selangor), Seri Menanti (Negeri 
Sembilan), Muar (Johor), Pekan (Pahang), Kuala Terengganu (Terengganu) a nd Kota Bharu (Kelantan) . The term ‘Royal Town ’ 
represents a unique concept that relates to the Malay civilisation. It can be solely perceived  as an urban setting that has a sense of 
‘royalness’ or the presence of the sultan or king resided and integrated into the whole philosophical concept of the urban planning. 
Proclamations of a place to be a ‘Royal Town’ mostly by a king’s decree, such as Muar Town, the Royal Town of Johor Modern Sultanate. 
In this case, His Majesty Sultan Ibrahim ibn Almarhum Sultan Iskandar had proclaimed Bandar Maharani (Muar Town) as a Royal Town, 
during his birthday celebration in 2012. Apart from the Johor Sultanate, Malaysia is homed for eight traditional Malay polities, and all of 
them have their own distinctive Royal Towns. These Royal Towns symbolised their royal seats and a ‘daulat’ concept - a spiritual concept 
represents the mutual interaction between a king and his subjects .  According to the PLANMalaysia (previously known as the Federal 
Department of Town and Country Planning), there are officially six (6) Malay states had proclaimed their royal seats as the Royal Towns. 
These states are Perlis (Arau), Perak (Kuala Kangsar), Selangor (Klang), Negeri Sembilan (Seri Menanti), Joho r (Bandar Maharani, 
Muar) and Pahang (Pekan). The Malay states of Terengganu (Kuala Terengganu) Kedah (Anak Bukit) and Kelantan (Kota Bahru) , 
however, their royal seats are equivalent to other neighbours Royal Towns in term of  roles and functions, but only without a formal 
proclamation.  
This Royal Town concept is a unique identity inherited from the previous Malay sultanates that used to be established across the 
Malay Archipelago. The Melaka Sultanate, for instance, was the finest example of how Malay Royal Towns were in the 14 th century. It 
was a centre for Islamic teaching propagations, Malay culture and etiquette, economic and power for the sultanate  (Adil, 1973) . 
Unfortunately, lack of proper documentation  and colonialization occurred after the fall of Melaka in the 16 th century contributes to the 
diminishing roles of a Royal Town  as what it should be (Adam, 2016). This is still happening to many forgotten historical places 
associated with the local Malay Sultanate as most of them were not recorded and described in the proper ways of documentation. Thus, 
aspects such as local elements  of the place, urbanisation characters and local activities that used to enliven the place could only be 
traced from foreign a ccounts and descriptions. This information  somehow is not accurate to capture the real essence of the Malay 
traditional Royal Towns’ characteristics. This research used the qualitative technique to explore the concept of Malaysian Royal Town. 
Series of the  site visit to nine (9) existing Royal Town purposely for site observation, documentation and inventory reveal the local 
concept of Royal Towns. There are three (3) prominent characteristics that shaped the whole physical images of Malaysian Royal Towns 
namely as the king’s palace, traditional Malay kampongs and lastly, traditional fortification system selected through library r esearch 
process. 
 
1.1 Definition of Malaysian Royal Towns 
A royal town is defined as a town that has high value in terms of historic al and cultural significance, and shows a strong relationship 
between the growth of the community and the development of the urban landscape, especially in terms of the built elements (Royal City 
Comprehensive Plan, 2009). Locally, t he 2nd National Urbanis ation Policy (NUP) report prepared by P LANMalaysia (2016) described 
the ‘Royal Towns’ locally as towns with special features and functions under the ‘Tourist Town’ category. Formally, it is believed that the 
concept of the Royal Town was introduced in the late 18th century in order to segregate the authority between a local ruler and colonial 
dictatorship. Syed Zainol Abidin  (1995) provides an insight into some understandings regarding these problems. He views that a 
historical and old town or a city needs to integrate the existing intangible and tangible values in its local planning and development. The 
place has to portray its outstanding local identities such as diversity of cultural and local activities, customs and local heritage and being 
able to highlight its distinctive urban form features such as buildings, landscape and spaces.  
In addition, Lynch (1960) proposed five (5) different elements that could be raised during this identification process. He pointed out 
that elements namely paths, nodes, edges, districts and landmarks are very important in understanding the spirit of the place, especially 
in the urban areas. However, his theory needs to be supported by the local insights as the urbanisation process in the Malay civilisation 
is different from  the Western culture. Therefore , Idris et  al. (2010) believe that other elements are known as natu re and the local 
environment, people and place interaction and geographical location of the place are equally important with the other proposed elements. 
Harun, N.Z. (2015) proposed  to understand the physical pattern of the urban fabric in detail, understanding of the urban townscape 
elements may help the researcher . These listed elements could be part of the framework process in identifying the image of the 
Malaysian Royal Towns.  
 
 
2.0 The Characteristics of the Malaysian Royal Towns 
The research draws a similarity of Malaysian Royal Towns with the traditional Malay towns, to provide a fundamental concept of a Royal 
Town. Existing Malay manuscripts such as the Malay Annals, Bustanus Salatin and Tuhfat al-Nafis, described that geographically and 
physically both of these two urban settings were immersed to one another.  According to Arbi (1985), the traditional Malay towns were 
at one point, consist of Sultan’s palaces, aristocrats’ residential areas, royal mosque and being surrounded by a group of Malay traditional 
kampongs. In fact, m ost of them were located to nearby rivers and water, reflecting their roles as the maritime centres and traditional 
harbours. These ideas, supported by Hamid (1988) cited in Dilshan et al. (2010), while he listed several numbers of ‘Malay Town’ such 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
Sansudin, N.A., et.al.  / 6th AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland, 03-04 March 2018 / E-BPJ, 3(7), Mar. 2018 (p.277-283) 
279 
as Kota Bahru, Kuala Terengganu, Pekan, Johor Lama, Bandar Maharani, Klang, Kuala Selangor and Kota Setar. Harun and Jalil (2012) 
identified Kota Bahru, Kuala Terengganu, Alor Setar, Johor Lama, Pekan, Kuala Dungun, Muar, Kelang and Kuala Selangor as ‘Bandar 
Kuala’ (Estuaries Town). The term ‘Kuala’ and ‘Muara’ were repeatedly used as name of place in Malay Towns which it relates to the 
river estuary area. Some of them were already recognized as the Royal Towns.  
These traditional Malay towns according to Dilshan et al. (2010) were founded by the Malay rulers. This study managed to see a 
similar pattern of urban morphology that associated some of these traditional Malay towns with the seats of various Malay Sultanates in 
Malaysia. For instance, Pekan, Kelang and Muar are some of the Royal Towns that physically known to possess many unique 
characteristics of traditional Malay towns. However, w ith the Sultan’s decree, these cities were upgraded into a new royal status, 
reflecting their roles as the Royal Towns. The basic unit of urbanisation in the Malay culture started from a clustered of houses that 
identified their community as a kampong. Nor mally, the kampong was located to nearby water resources such as rivers that are later 
becoming a traditional fishermen village. A group of these kampongs evolved into a small town known as pekan. This small town or 
locally known as ‘ Pekan’ begins to attract other people from nearby areas, will be a good place for people to market  their traditional 
products and sources from the hinterland. As the time passed by, th is place became more vibrant with daily and economic activities, 
and due to its strategic location, it becomes famous among the traders and merchants. Since the traditional Malay polities benefited 
from maritime activities, this place later was being developed into the sultanate‘s capital and royal seat.  Other royal buildings such as 
palaces, mosques, mausoleums, open area and fortified with walls to protect the place from intruders’ invasions.  The cosmopolitan yet 
traditional settings of the Malay cities and later Royal Towns have become the distinctive characteristics of the place. According to Syed 
Zainol Abidin (1995), there are six (6) main characteristics of a traditional Malay city or a Royal Town, which are: 
a) Palace as a symbol of king’s authority 
b) Traditional Malay kampongs that served as community and residential areas 
c) Traditional Malay fortification system  
d) Mosque as a centre of Islamic teaching propagations  
e) Traditional market as a place for economic and social interactions 
f) Water bodies such as rivers and seas- mode of transportation and food source 
There are nine Royal Towns in Malaysia has been visited severally in order to recorded, observed and reconfirmed the existences 
of significant characteristics on site. Nevertheless, this paper will only highlight three major characteristics of Malaysian Royal Towns, 
which are the king’s palace,  traditional Malay kampongs and traditional Malay fortification system. The reasons are 1) some of the 
characteristics has started to be diminished due to improper planning and development 2) no comprehensive study  discussing these 
characteristics from urb an planning ‘s perspectives and lastly to identify to the relationship of these physical characteristics in 
strengthening the image of Malaysian Royal Towns.  
 
2.1 Palace 
A palace represents the king’s presence in the Royal Town, either spiritually or physically. According to Sulatus Salatin, the first Melakan 
king, Parameswara decided his subjects and followers to build for him a palace that could be seen from far and in a very magn ificent 
look. This probably was some of his political strategies to strengthen his authority and sovereignty of his new laid kingdom. In fact, this 
was very common for the house of Melaka’s descendants to build more grandeur and majestic royal palaces from their forefather s. 
Sultan Mansur Shah, the sixth ruler of Melaka, resided in  a very sophisticated Malay palace, with its magnificent pillars were painted 
with gold and adorned with precious gems that impressed the foreigners and locals (Adil, 1973). Unfortunately, it will be quite impossible 
for many historians, architects and planners to visualise this opulence and richness look of the palaces due to their non -sustainable 
material construction, which was using timber. Only in the 18 th century, most of the Sultans’ palaces across the Malay Archipelago 
started to be built using bricks and mortars, a modern technique introduced by the colonials.  The architecture, appearance and materials 
of a king’s palace were highly inspired by colonial-touch but heavily blended with local taste and culture  (Rahmat, 2008). Malaysia is 
homed for some palaces that belonged to nine (9) different royal houses.  These palaces have their functions mainly to cater formal and 
informal occasions, related to each sultanate and its subjects. Table 1, shows  the list of the existing palaces, their location and status 
that are representing their specific roles for the sultanates. 
 
Table 1: The list of palaces around Malaysia 
State Capital state Royal town Palaces District Functions 
Perlis Kangar Arau 
Istana Arau Arau Official Palace  
Istana Perlis Kuala Lumpur Retreat Palace  
Kedah Alor Setar Anak Bukit, Kota Setar Istana Anak Bukit Alor Setar Official Palace 
Perak Ipoh Kuala Kangsar 
Istana Iskandariah Kuala Kangsar Official Palace 
Istana Kenangan Kuala Kangsar  Royal Museum  
Istana Kinta Ipoh Royal Residence 
Selangor Shah Alam Klang 
Istana Alam Shah Klang Official Palace 
Istana Bandar Jugra / Alaeddin Kuala Langat Official Palace (Before Istana Alam 
Shah) 
Istana Bukit Kayangan Shah Alam Royal Residence 
Istana Mestika Shah Alam Retreat Palace 

--- PAGE: 4 ---
Sansudin, N.A., et.al.  / 6th AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland, 03-04 March 2018 / E-BPJ, 3(7), Mar. 2018 (p.277-283) 
 
280 
Istana Melawati Putrajaya Retreat Palace 
N.Sembilan Seremban Seri Menanti 
Istana Lama Seri Menanti Kuala Pilah Royal Museum 
Istana Besar Seri Menanti Kuala Pilah Official Palace 
Istana Hinggap Seremban Retreat Palace 
Istana Munawarah  Seremban Royal Residence 
Johor Johor Bahru Bandar Maharani Muar 
Istana Besar Johor Bahru Royal Museum 
Istana Bukit Serene Johor Bahru Official Palace  
Istana Pasir Pelangi Johor Bahru Royal Residence 
Istana Tanjung Muar Retreat Palace 
Istana Sri Lambak, Kluang Kluang Retreat Palace 
Istana Shooting Box Segamat Retreat Palace 
Pahang Kuantan Pekan 
Istana Abu Bakar Pekan Official Palace 
Istana Mahkota Kuantan Royal Residence 
Istana Abdul Aziz Kuantan Royal Residence 
Istana Pahang Kuala Lumpur Retreat Palace 
Istana Sri Udara Temerloh Retreat Palace 
Istana Seri Angkasa Cameron Highland Retreat Palace 
Istana Hinggap Kuala Lipis Retreat Palace 
Istana Kota Beram Pekan Royal Museum  
Terengganu KualaTerengganu KualaTerengganu 
Istana Maziah Kuala Terengganu Official Palace 
Istana Badariah Kuala Terengganu Retreat Palace 
Istana Syarqiyyah Kuala Terengganu Official Palace  
Royal Resident 
Kelantan Kota Bahru Kota Bahru 
Istana Balai Besar Kota Bahru Official Palace 
Istana Jahar Kota Bahru Royal Museum  
Istana Telipot Kota Bahru Royal Residence 
Istana Kota Lama Kota Bahru Royal Residence 
Istana Negeri Kubang Kerian Kota Bahru Official Palace 
Istana Mahkota Kota Bahru Royal Residence 
Istana Batu Kota Bahru Royal Museum  
 
The status of the palac es varied according to their function and location. Most of the official palaces for the nine s (9) hereditary 
Malay rulers are located in their Royal Towns except for Johor. Interestingly about Johor, the Royal Town of Johor is  located in the 
northern part of the state. Regardless its status as the Royal Town, it only served as a symbol rather than function. Most of the royal 
ceremonies are conducted in both palaces of Istana Bukit Serene and Istana Besar in Johor Bahru, specifically in both palaces of Istana 
Bukit Serene and Istana Besar. This probably due to the historical value of Johor Bahru that strongly associated with the establishment 
of Johor Modern Sultanate in the 19th century by Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim. The official palaces served as the centre of political and 
cultural of the sultanate, and a symbol of Sultan’s sovereignty.  Usually, royal ceremonial functions, such as a coronation, royal weddings, 
royal funerals, royal guest receptions and state’s occasions taken place within these palaces. These ceremonial events took place not 
only in the palace but also surrounding area including padang (communal ground area), courtyard, perimeter road  (protocol road) and 
plaza nearby palaces. In addition to these palaces, there are secondary palaces that ser ved as the royal residence.  The Sultan’s 
household and family members occupy this type of palace. In some case, this palace located within the same compound with the official 
palace. It was common for the Sultan to provide his households with different palaces according to their ranks and status within the royal 
circle (Matheson, 1989). 
In Tuhfat Al- Nafis, a Ma lay manuscript written in the 19 th century, briefly described how the Sultan of Johor -Riau awarded his 
offspring with palaces and villages due to their significant contributions to the Sultanate. In fact, this is almost similar to nowadays 
situation, as so me of the crown princes from the existing Sultanates have  their royal residences, separately located from the official 
palaces.  On the other hand, almost every district in the states of Johor, Selangor, Pahang and Terengganu has its retreat pa lace. The 
retreat palace purposely built to accommodate Sultan and his households during their royal tours and private retreats. In contr ast to 
other palaces, the retreat palace somehow is smaller in scale and usually located in the centre of the district’s capital. S ome of these 
retreat palaces , especially in Johor Sultanate,  used to be old government quarters and buildings that were purchased by the royal 
families and later, converted into the royal buildings. In several Malay states, the Sultans commissioned to tran sform many of old and 
historic palaces into their state’s royal museum. The museum exhibits royal regalia, memorabilia and personal items belonging to the 
recent rulers and their predecessors. The establishment of the royal museum helps to connect the subj ects with their rulers as well as 

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Sansudin, N.A., et.al.  / 6th AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland, 03-04 March 2018 / E-BPJ, 3(7), Mar. 2018 (p.277-283) 
281 
to promote royal tourism, especially in the Royal Towns. In addition, the museum itself creates a sense of belonging and pride for the 
people as it represents the mutual interaction between the king and his subjects.  
 
2.2 Traditional Malay Settlements - Kampongs 
A kampong is the smallest unit of community settlement in Southeast Asia. According to Widodo (2010), kampong may ‘refer to the area 
on the riverbank near the landing point and on the path to the settlement a bit further uphill from the waterfront’. Such organic settlement 
nowadays may surround by urban area (known as an urban village) or in a rural area. An establishment of an early Malay kingdom and 
Malay Sultanate in the archipelago could be traced from the group of house expansion into a group of kampongs and later into a bustling 
capital city of the kingdom.  In the early stage, the kampongs were populated to nearby rivers and sea as most of the populat ions were 
engaged in fishing and maritime activities. This could be influenced by the geographical location and physical attributes of landform 
across the archipelago. These hilir kampongs also operated as an important hub to distribute forest resources gained from the hinterland 
to traders and merchants (Kathirithamby-Wells, 1993). According to the Malay Annals, most of the populations in these hilir kampongs 
were sea gipsies, and they were the most loyal subjects to the maritime empires such as Srivijaya and Melaka Sultanate. Due to their 
significant contributions and loyalty to the kingdom, their statues were elevated by inter -marriage with the Malay aristocrat families and 
to some extent, the royal households.    
It was common during those time ; the villages were divided according to the occupant’s status, rank and political influences. For 
instance, in many traditional Malay cities, the kampongs can be divided into two different categories based on their political and cultural 
hemispheres (Tajudeen, 2005). The kampongs that located within the inner walls of the city belonged to high rank s officials known as 
‘Bendahara’, ‘Temenggong’, ‘Laksamana’ and ‘Shahbandar’. These were the most four important ranks reflected the social hierarchy 
status in Melaka Sultanate. The kampongs were populated by their loyal followers and had their distinctive  laws system that binds the 
whole community in the kampongs. In the royal capitals such as the Sultanate of Malay Pattani, many of houses in these kampongs 
were almost lavishly decorated, reflecting their status, but still can’t compare with the majestic look of the king’s palace (Noone, 1948).  
Nevertheless, for the commoners, their houses were more simple and modest . In Hukum Kanun Melaka,  a legal laws for the Melaka 
Sultanate, the commoners were not allowed to build a house with certain architectural elements that represented the status of Melaka's 
aristocrats and royalties (Ahmad, 1984). Therefore, their houses’ architecture and space planning were standardized. Their houses were 
clustered within unclear boundaries and sometimes sharing a same common space such as a front yard. The main route used to connect 
the houses in the kampongs with other places such as markets, mosques, madrassah (Muslim religious schools) located in the heart of 
the kampongs. Each kampong had their traditional organisation observing the local laws and adat (norms) among the villagers. The 
kampongs were headed by a chief man, assisted by selected elderly who were experts in the local laws  (Wiryomartono, 2013). They 
were the protectors of kampong’s adat and sort of moral behaviour of the people. Interestingly, most of the villagers came from close-
knit family members that later formed a community of the kampong. In addition to this, most of them shared similar expertise in a specific 
profession and profoundly their kampongs named after their profession.  In terms of planning, these kampongs usually located at outer 
walls of the king’s compound or capital. Abundant fruit orchards, paddy fields and farms, surrounded the kampongs and provide the city 
population with continuous food supplies. However, these kampongs used to be vulnerable during a period of hostilities and famines. 
This was due to improper fortification system to protect the kampongs and their occupants from these issues.     
 
2.3 The Malay Fortification System 
Next, fortification system was pivotal for a tradition al Malay town . Nasir (1990) stated that the Malay forts purposely built for military 
needs, a centre of political power, and as a defence against internal and external confrontations. It was common for many early Malay 
kingdoms from the Indianisation period in the 11 th century to the establishment of Islamic Melaka Sultanate to strengthen their capitals 
with defensible walls made up from materials such as bamboo, stones and mortars and logs. The fortification system was equipped with 
numerous and latest version of long-range cannons produced by the locals or imported from different parts of the world. This is clearly 
described in the Malay manuscripts such as the Malay Annals and the History of Pattani Darussalam, where both rulers from the 
sultanates are ambitiously arming their capitals with the strongest and modern long-range cannons.  
The Malay fortification system uniquely consists of several layers of walls, and in some cases, made up from a series of stockades 
and earthworks. During the chronicles of war between Melaka Sultanate and Portuguese in the 16th century, the Portuguese were having 
difficulty to penetrate into the city of Melaka. The reason was due to  continuous resistance from the Melaka warriors stationed in many 
stockades along the main access to the city centre. However, the whole ideas of how traditional Malay towns being surrounded by many 
strong fortified walls are  very tricky to be visualised in nowadays situation. Almost all of the mentioned fortification structures were 
diminished or destroyed due to colonialization and continuous wars between several kingdoms in the archipelago especially from the 
15th to 19th century. Theoretically, there is a difficulty in describing the meanings and characteristics of the Malay fortification system 
from the Western perspectives due to unavailable precise and accurate terms to represent this concept . In the Malay civilization, the 
Malay fortification system can be divided into three different terms, known as  ‘kota’, ‘kubu’ and ‘bandar’. The ‘kota’ is a fortified palace 
complex; fully equipped with several royal buildings and features such as ‘Balai Penghadapan’, ‘Balai Besar’ and ‘Balairung Seri’ (these 
buildings are almost similar to the nowadays coronation room, hall of royal assembly and hall of commoner). In addition to these unique 
spaces, the royal palace is erected and connected to these spaces, pro viding exclusive access to the Sultan.  Other elements such as 
the royal garden, king’s mosque and noble houses are commonly been found in the king’s citadel.  
The ‘bandar’ or city proper basically plays a significant role in pumping the fortune to the kin gdom. It is a centre of economic and 
social interactions among the king’s subjects. Nevertheless, it is usually surrounded by a series of earthworks or palisades,  as its 
fortification system. Major elements in the  bandar are the market, commoners’ and trad ers’ houses, food storage for the whole city, 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Sansudin, N.A., et.al.  / 6th AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland, 03-04 March 2018 / E-BPJ, 3(7), Mar. 2018 (p.277-283) 
 
282 
warehouses, community mosque, open space and other elements that used to support the people’s activities  (Ahmad, 1984). Most of 
the bandar was located in nearby ports or rivers, as most the kingdom’ economic highly depended upon maritime activities.  
The ‘kubu’, or fortress is a centre for military activities. The size of the fortress depends on its roles as well as its location. Prior to 
colonialization, the Malays were highly regarded as the highly skills seafarers and traders. Thus, most of their wealth and fortunes came 
from a very sophisticated maritime trade route connecting both  the East and the West. To secure this profitable industry , the rulers  
commissioned fortress’ construction  along their trading posts . The reason is to keep their trading posts from  being plundered and 
attacked by their rivals. The fortresses were the first defensive system that protecting bandar and its inhabitants as most o f them 
commonly built next to one another.  
 
 
3.0 Discussion 
The route of preserving and conserving the identified characteristics required thorough methods that able to  safeguard all of these 
remaining outstanding elements. This method needs to include diff erent conservation approaches either maintenance, preservation, 
restoration, reconstruction, readaption and others. These approaches aim to sustain all the physical elements for the future generations. 
Apart from these conservation, tourism approach could be used to enhance the sustainability of historical and heritage sites. The well-
being of these elements in displaying the identity of Malaysian monarchs and their historical legacy play a significant role in boosting 
tourism development and tourist experi ence. A new concept of tourism based on the royal identity need to be introduced as this will 
provide an added value to the Royal Towns. Existing old palaces such as Istana Jahar ( Kota Baharu, Kelantan), Istana Kota Beram 
(Pekan, Pahang), Istana Kenangan (Kuala Kangsar, Perak) and Istana Lama Seri Menanti (Seri Menanti, Negeri Sembilan) are some 
of the premier products that could help to promote this royal tourism industry. The adaption process of the buildings from a very exclusive 
area to a public space provide a meaningful experience for the tourists. Visitors  could explore and feel the lifestyle, etiquette and royal 
culture that somehow are always being misinterpreted due to lack of information and exposure. The museums too,  are among the good 
platforms for the monarchs to establish and renewing a mutual interaction between him as the king and his people. Emotionally, people 
will feel closer to their monarch as they are being exposed to the daily life of their king via this unique experience. 
A well preserved traditional Malay kampong, on the other hand, provide an opportunity for the tourists to immerse into a charm, the 
traditional way of the Malay community. In contrast to the royal museums, the kampong’s identities are focussing on the inta ngible 
values of the Royal Towns. A typical traditional kampong usually encompassed several unique features such as its pristine landscape, 
local wisdom, and how the kampong is reflecting a mutual relationship between the people with their surroundings. It is probably sort of 
living museum that displaying the daily life of the people, their expertise and local-based products.  Co-existence of kampong and royal 
palaces is significantly determine the character of a royal settlement. Several traditional kampongs located in the Royal Towns of Kuala 
Kangsar, Pekan and Seri Menanti possed these unique identities. Kuala Kangsar is well-known for its famous ‘labu sayong’, a fine clay-
based bottle gourd produced by a kampong named Sayong, within Kuala Kangsar. This bottle gour d was used to store drinking water 
and currently famous as the local tourism product.  Pekan in contrast is famous for its traditional weaving industry known as ‘Tenun 
Pekan’, produced by several kampongs in Pekan . It is similar to songket- weaving process but believed to be brought by Buginese 
royalties to Pahang as part of their royal attire. Thus, it has become the symbol of Pekan and its people. S eri Menanti, the Royal Town 
of Negeri Sembilan offers a very distinctive experience as it is the cradle of ‘Adat Perpatih’ in Malaysia. The ‘Adat Perpatih’ is a matriarchy 
based customary laws, practi sed by the local people of Negeri Sembilan. The system itself projecting the richness of Seri Menanti, a 
Royal Town that heavily influenced by the ‘Adat Perpatih’. 
The traditional Malay fortification system, however, is among the vulnerable elements of the Royal Towns. It is already disappeared 
in many of the Royal Towns due to several factors such as colonisation, a series of hostilities , land acquisition with the uncontrolled 
development and extreme weather condition. Neither a stone wall citadel nor a basic Malay traditional sto ckade is barely survived due 
to these conditions. Such situation may led to the disappearance of the traditional Malay fortification system through time. We could only 
visualise the architecture, form and design of the system based upon the surviving Malay manuscripts and foreign records. According 
to the Malay Annals, it was common for many traditional Malay towns to be fortified with the best material that they could have, to protect 
their states during warfare. The stone blocks were the best material that could be found, followed by many layers of walls made up of 
sturdy and a big sized log. Living things such as trees and animals were long disappeared due to improper and insufficient conservation 
treatment. Therefore, excavation, reconstruction and restoration methods are the best ways to the recovery the Malay fortification system 
and technology.   
 
 
4.0 Conclusion 
This paper is addressing  three (3) important keywords in parallel to the outcomes of the Malaysian Royal Towns Convention in 2013,  
which are: 
1) To propose a capable approach to preserve and conserve the heritage values that ha ve been treasured as the identity and 
legacy of Malay Sultanates in Malaysia. 
2) To propagate the king’s palace as the cradle of the Malay culture, social values and heritage. Thus, this requires a strong 
commitment to preserving  the traditional Malay settlements, especially that located nearby to the palace. Their unique 
elements, for examples, traditional architecture and landscape setting, as well as socio-cultural and economic activities, need 
to be protected and prospered. 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
Sansudin, N.A., et.al.  / 6th AicQoL2018PerhentianIsland, 03-04 March 2018 / E-BPJ, 3(7), Mar. 2018 (p.277-283) 
283 
3) To streng then the significant roles of Islam and Malay culture as the identity of the Royal Towns . This will include the 
propagation of the Malay culture, social and economic development as a strategy to increase the growth of tourism industry 
in the Royal Towns.  
Thus, these resolutions could provide a framework for the authorities and the experts to be more sensitive towards the planning and 
development of Malaysian Royal Towns. A better understanding of the existing characteristics and identities of the Royal Towns will 
ensure these places are well preserved and conserved for the future generations. The Royal Towns are the symbol of the legacy of both 
Malay ruler and his subjects in portraying the concept of ‘Raja dan rakyat berpisah tiada’ or ‘King, and his subjects remain as one’ into 
the context of local planning and urban development. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Department of National Heritage Malaysia and Center for the 
Study of Built Environment in the Malay World (KALAM), Universiti Teknologi Malaysia. 
 
 
References  
 
Adam, R. (2016). Pemerintahan Beraja di Alam Melayu Merentas Zaman. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.  
 
Adil, B. (1973). Sejarah Melaka dalam zaman kerajaan Melayu (1st ed.). Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 
 
Ahmad, A. (1984). Sejarah Melayu (1st ed.). Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 
 
Arbi, E. (1985). Petempatan Serta Bandar-bandar Awal di Tanah Semenanjung. Fakulti Alam Bina, UTM. Unpublished.  
 
Dilshan Remaz, O., Zul Azri, A. Z. and Syed Zainol Abidin, I. (2010). The Islamic Traditional Towns, Learning Through the  Attributes Special Emphasis on Johor 
Bahru, Malaysia. 1st International Conference for Urban & Architecture  Heritage in Islamic Countries: It’s Role in Cultural and Economic Development, 23 -28 May 
2010 organised by The Saudi  Commission for Tourism and Antiquities in Cooperation with Research Center for Islamic History, Art and Culture (IRCICA). 
 
Hamid, I. (1985). Peradaban Melayu dan Islam. Petaling Jaya: Fajar Bakti.Sdn. Bhd.  
 
Harun, N.Z. & Jalil, RAJ 2012, ‘The morphological history of the Malaysian urban form’, Proceedings of the International  Economics Development and Research, 
International Economics Development and Research Centre, vol. 48, no. 24, pp.  111 – 116. 
 
Harun, N.Z. Fairuz D.N. and Nordin, N. A. (2015). The Roles of Urban Heritage in Determining the Image of the Royal  Town of Sri Menanti, Negeri Sembilan. 
Planning Malaysia, 13, 85-100. 
 
Kathirithamby-Wells, J. (1993). Hulu-hilir Unity and Conflict: Malay Statecraft in East Sumatra before the Mid-Nineteenth  Century. Arc hipel, 45 (1), 77 -96. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3406/arch.1993.2894  
 
Lynch, K. (1960). The Image of the City. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
 
Matheson, V. (1989). Pulau Penyengat: Nineteenth-Century Islamic Centre of Riau. Archipel, 37(1), 153-172.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3406/arch.1989.2567 
 
Muslim, N., Wan Hassan, W. Z. & Umar, A. (2013). The Role of the Malay Royal Institutions According to the Constitution on  Safeguarding Malay Position 
from the Higher Education Perspective. Educational Journal of Humanities and  Social  Science, 3(13), 267-272. 
 
Nasir, A.H. (1993). Kota-kota Melayu. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.  
 
Noone, R.O. (1948). Notes on the Kampong, Compounds, and Houses of the Patani Malay Village of Banggul Ara, in the  Mukim of Batu Kurau, North ern Perak. 
Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 21(1), 124-147. 
 
PLANMalaysia. (2016). 2nd National Urbanisation Policy. Kuala Lumpur: Ministry of Urban Wellbeing, Housing and Local  Government.  
Rahmat, H. (2008). Portraits of a Nation, the British Legacy for Malay Settlements in Singapore, Indonesia and the Malay  World. Indonesia and The Malay 
World, 36(106), 359-374. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13639810802513634 
 
Royal City Comprehensive Plan (2009). Draft city of Royal City Comprehensive Plan-2009 update. Ellenburg, Washington: Plan IT  Consulting. 
 
Shaharudin, I., Abdul Samad, H. and Abdul Hadi, H.S. (2010). Dayahuni Bandar: Hubungkaitan Bentuk Fizikal Bandar  dan Dayahuni  Setempat. Journal 
of Southeast Asia Social Sciences and Humanities, 79 (1), 19-42. 
 
Syed Zainol Abidin, I. (1995). Pemeliharaan Warisan Rupa Bandar. Kuala Lumpur: Badan Warisan Malaysia. 
 
Tajudeen, I. (2005). Reading the Traditional City of Maritime Southeast  Asia: Reconstructing the 19th century Port Town at Gelam -Rochor-Kallang, Singapore. Journal 
of Southeast Asian Architecture, 8.  
 
Widodo, J. (2012). Urban Environment and Human Behaviour: Learning from History and Local Wisdom. Procedia - Social and  Behavioral Sciences, 42, 6-11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.04.161  
 
Wiryomartono, B. (2013). Urbanism, place and culture in the Malay world: The politics of domain from pre-colonial to post  colonial era. City, Culture and Society, 4(4), 
217-227. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccs.2013.05.004 
