--- PAGE: 1 ---
THE PALACE VANISHES: ASPECTS OF INDIGENOUS 17TH AND 18TH 
CENTURY PALACES OF THE MALAY WORLD 
Puteri Shireen Jahn Kassim (1), Harlina Md Sharif (2), Norwina Mohd Nawawi (3), Noor 
Hanita Abdul Majid (4), Tengku Anis Qarihah Raja Abdul Kadir (5), Muhammad Harith 
Wafiy Mohmed Halimmudin  (6) 
 
(1)  And (2) Department of Applied Arts and Design, IIUM; 
 (3) And (4) Department of Architecture, IIUM; 
(5) Ph.D. Candidate; 
(6) Research Modeller, IIUM. 
Kulliyyah of Architecture and Environmental Design 
International Islamic University Malaysia 
 
ABSTRACT 
Malay architectural legacies that survive until present time are cases of built heritage that are 
mainly a combination of palaces, mosques, public structures and houses. While there are many 
houses that survive in their original forms due to its large numbers, several key palaces in the 
Malay world; particularly before the early 1800s have unfortunately been decimated due to 
conflicts, wars and fire incidences. The paper presents a visual and drawn reconst ruction of 
mainly 17th and early 18 th century palaces from historical documents and archival material. 
These are those which can be defined as indigenous as these structures are what historians and 
travellers have described as architectural construction de picting ‘original without a trace of 
outside influence’ language and form. The vanished palaces of Pattani, Terengganu, Selangor 
and Kelantan are discussed. These depict several common traits that can contribute to the 
definition of Malay architecture and its rules of language before its grammar and expression 
have absorbed external influences. These early palaces are revisit and rebuilt in visual and 
artistic terms by various other parties in order to serve as a documented heritage. The paper 
highlights th at in search of key identity parameters and that aesthetic and architectural 
parameters, one must crucially define and classify palatial architecture in the Malay world. It 
is found that these palaces contain key common traits and parameters that can be semantically 
termed early Classicalised forms of the Malay region.  
  

--- PAGE: 2 ---
INTRODUCTION 
The era between early 18th (1700s) and early 19th century (1800s) is known as the ‘pre -
colonial’ period in South East Asia,  including the Malay region (Andaya, 2008), which can be 
defined as parts of Indonesia, south Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, South Philippines. Though 
presently the region is divided into nations, in fact, past colonial writings (Reid, 2012, and 
Milner, 2001) have identified and observed the common heritage, culture and communal traits 
amongst the communities and settlements of this subregion. This includes general features and 
key elements of its vernacular architecture, which have been discussed by researchers such as 
Rasdi (2007), Nasir (2000) and others. Palaces have been less discussed than residential houses 
and mosques, as it is a typology and heritage marked by extreme and considerable  colonial  
influence.  
The palaces are the public typologies of the Malay Sultanates of Sumatera and Malaysia which 
can be argued as having weathered rapid changes as the region fell gradually into  the control 
of the English and the Dutch by the late 1800s. As these tumultuous changes occurred, either 
these fragile timber palaces – which represents the patterns of core administrative buildings – 
were decimated in associated wars and hazards or been renovated and reconstructed from its 
original form. These changes occurred until the early 1 900s, when it is argued that the unique 
balance of power between the colonialists and the ruling class allowed the Malay aristocrats to 
exert their  own sphere of influence and while this preserved the Malay powers, they also 
preserved the apotheosis of their culture – the vernacular palaces and aristocratic houses. 
Gullick (1987) identifies that the period after the 1920s and beyond, is when colonisation 
prevailed and speeded up the diffusion of European Modernity to the demise of the Malay 
vernacular. These palaces are thus  visual pointers of these profound changes, yet to measure 
the change one must reconstruct the baseline or the original forms of these palac es.    From 
then on, one can measure the shifts and evolution in the lifestyle and socio-cultural conditions 
which arise from the tensions and the balance of power between the Malay Sultanates and the 
Colonialists. Many of these palaces have been decimated or changed yet what is left serves as 
a reminder when stylistic tendencies are no longer rooted in vernacular or local tradition,  the 
building are thus representative of  a form of imitation, be they t he Classical cut -and-paste 
variant of Greco-Roman Colonial style, or a kitsch form of architecture  of Chinese and Arab-
Islamic. Their prevalence is  a signal and the beginnings of a disappearing way of life, social 
structure and culture.  
The palaces of the 1700s are thus some of the forms of core or centre of communities which 
survive from the local past. From the early years which the Colonial representatives have  
already set foot in the region, it was a time when the local polities still had the balance of power, 
up to 1824 when the Anglo Dutch treaty seve red the region into two centres of control, and 
brought about the onset of the division of the original Riau-Lingga polity. In some regions, era 
between the late 1800s to late 1800s is still considered ‘ pre-colonial’ by many historians. It 
was only after the Pangk or Treaty in 1874 and the Anglo Siamese Treaty in 1909, that the 
power over socio political and socio economic structures and administration became effectively 
controlled by the colonials. 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
 
Therefore the era after 1874 was  marked by the strong  influence of external stylistic trends 
onto local vernacular a rchitecture. Jahn Kassim et al . (2019) characterise  these early 
precolonial palaces and mosque as the original timber stylistic language, which is essentially 
elevated and ornamented and replete with refined hand carved elements. It signalled a time 
when the reigning Sultan was close to his ‘rakyat’ including the carvers and craftsmen and had 
himself overseen the construction his palace by local builders and craftsmen.  However as the 
1800s progressed, the colonial gradually and subtly took control of economic centres, external 
builders and contractors.  
 
Figure 1: Location of Malay Vernacular Palaces in the Malay Archipelago. 
THE CASE STUDIES AND ITS REGIONS 
2.1. HISTORY OF PATTANI 
Pattani (Patani) or the Sultanate of Pattani was essentially a Malay Muslim Sultanate in the 
historical Pattani Region. It covered approximately the area of the modern Southern Thai 
provinces of Pattani, Yala, Narathiwat and much of the northern part of modern Malaysia. The 
6–7th-century Hindu state of Pan Pan may or may not have been related. 
 Bougas (1990) discussed that Pattani rose by around the mid -13th century CE, as a 
distinctive kingdom with its own government and its golden age was during the reign of its 
four successive queens from 1584. These queens are known as Ratu Hijau (The Green Queen), 
Ratu Biru (The Blue Queen), Ratu Ungu (The Purple Queen) and Ratu Kuning (The Yellow 


--- PAGE: 4 ---
Queen), during which the kingdom's economic and military strength was greatly increased. It 
had links with the eastern Malay kingdom of Pahang and the southern Malay Sultanate of Johor 
(Bougas, 1990).  
 
2.2. HISTORY OF MELAKA 
The Malacca (Melaka) Sultanate was a  Malay sultanate  centred in the modern -day state 
of Malacca, Malaysia. Conventional historical thesis marks c. 1400 as the founding year of the 
sultanate by a renegade  Malay Raja of Singapura , Parameswara who was also known 
as Iskandar Shah. At the height of the sultanate's power in the 15th century, its capital grew 
into one of the most important entrepots of its time, with territory covering much of the Malay 
Peninsula, Riau Islands and a significant portion of the east coast of  Sumatra. As a bustling 
international trading port, Malacca emerged as a centre for Islamic learning and dissemination, 
and encouraged the development of the  Malay language , literature and arts. It heralded 
the golden age  of Malay sultanates in the archipelago, in which  Classical Malay  became 
the lingua franca of the Maritime Southeast Asia and Jawi script became the primary medium 
for cultural, religious and intellectual exchange.  
It is through these intellectual, spiritual and cultural developments, the Malaccan era witnessed 
the enculturation of a  Malay identity, the Malayisation of the region and the subsequent 
formation of an Alam Melayu. In the year of 1511, the capital of Malacca fell to the Portuguese 
Empire, forcing the last Sultan, Mahmud Shah (r. 1488–1511), to retreat to the further reaches 
of his empire, where his progeny established new ruling dynasties, Johor and Perak. The legacy 
of the sultanate's political and cultural legacy remains to this day. For centuries, Malacca has 
been held up as an exemplar of Malay -Muslim civilisation. It established systems of trade, 
diplomacy, and governance that persisted well into the 19th centu ry, and introduced concepts 
such as  daulat – a distinctly Malay notion of sovereignty – that continues to shape 
contemporary understanding of Malay kingship. The fall of Malacca benefited Brunei when its 
ports became a new  entrepot as the kingdom emerged a s a new Muslim empire  in the Malay 
Archipelago, attracting many Muslim traders who fled from the Portuguese occupation after 
the ruler of Brunei's conversion to Islam.  
  

--- PAGE: 5 ---
3.0  ISTANA MELAKA (MID 1400s)  
3.1  History 
 
The Malacca Sultanate Museum depicts the architecture and design of the palace of Sultan 
Mansur Shah, who reigned from 1456 to 1477, at the height of the Malacca Sultanate, as 
described in the Malay Annals.  
 
 
1.2 Reconstruction through Archival Sources 
 
The Malacca Sultanate Palace Museum reflects the traditional craftsmanship of the Malays in 
the 15th century. T engku Anis (2017) stated t he roof structure s were built of tough ‘belian’ 
wood from Sarawak while the walls were of ‘resak’  wood. In addition, the ventilation panels 
also have  its own uniqueness. The design of the double -slope roof is its gable ends. The 
ventilation allows air to flow into the roof space and cool the house , thus providing thermal 
comfort to its visitors. The gable ends with ventilation in Istana Melaka have var ious designs 
and can reach up to about 5 to 9 meter high.  
 
The facades of Istana Melaka have its own speciality where the art and decorative patterns have 
its own meaning. It highlights on the subtlety of the floral and carnivorous art of art as seen on 
wall carvings and castles- as well as calligraphy of Jawi writing.  It exhibits  the function and 
role of the castle at the time by displaying the Balairong Seri, Royal Jubilee Room and the 
hallmarks symbolizing the civilization of the Malay community  (Tengku Anis,2017). Apart 
from being a castle replica, the building also functions as the first cultural museum in Malaysia. 
 
 
2. ISTANA KOTA WANG, PATANI (LATE 1700s) 
2.1 History 
Kota Wang Palace is located in the Citadel of Kota Raja,  Pattani,  a fortified area where the 
royal family and orang kaya lived. The citadel area was rectangular in shape and measured 
approximately 1000 meters long and 500 meters wide and covered approximately 10 
hectares.The citadel had two gates which are large enough for elephant to pass through, which 
was located at its western wall and its eastern end. The western gate was called ‘Pintu Gerbang’ 
while the eastern gate was called ‘Pintu Gajah’ or the Elephant Gat e.  The Istana Kota Wang, 
or Kota Wang Palace was the most prominent building in the citadel. It was also known as 
‘Mahligai Kota’. Since there was none of the 17 th century palace in Patani survived, it is 
extremely puzzling on describing what it may looke d like. Bougas (1990) stated that the 
reconstruction offered in the journal is based on passages from the Tawarikh Raja Kota and the 
Hikayat Patani, 17 th century Dutch accounts and oral traditions. Other palaces in Patani, 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Malaysia and Indonesia, as well as traditional East Coast Malay house forms help to complete 
the picture.  
 The palace of Kota Wang was described by Bougas (1990) as a rectangular building 
rose on hundreds of supporting pillars made up of Chengal wood. Its floor was elevated at a 
height that allows a man to walk under it. The walls are made of planks of Chengal woods, 
decorated with gold panels and wood carvings that can be traditionally found over windows 
and doorways in Malay houses. It also had tiered roofs which are assumed  by Bougas (1990) 
to be made from sago palms tied with rattan.  
 
2.2 Reconstruction through archival sources 
 
2.2.1 RECONSTRUCTION OF SUPPORTING PILLARS 
Kota Wang Palace was described to be raised on hundreds of supporting pillars made of 
Chengal wood. However, it is unclear as how high the floor is elevated from the ground. To 
find the height of the supporting pillars, reference was made from Bougas (1990):   
 
“…floor was so high that a man may have been able to walk under it.” 
 
The information in text above is used to made assumption on standard height of supporting 
pillars of Istana Kota Wang. Since a normal, able man stands tall at 1.7 m, we can conclude 
that the height of the supporting pillars may be about 1.8 m to 2 m height.  
2.2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ROOF FORM AND MATERIAL 
Kota Wang Palace has  been described as having a pitch roof form, very similar to  the other 
Nusantara palaces.  However, another reference was made from the journal text to further 
determine the roof form of Kota Wang Palace accurately, according to Bougas (1990):  
 
“The roof may have resembled the tiered roof on Patani’s oldest widen mosque located at 
Kampung Teluk Manok.” 
 
Quoting from the text, it can be assumed that the said mosque is Masjid Wadi al-Hussein, 
because it is the only mosque that has been constructed at that time at Kampung Teluk Manok.  
Wadi al-Hussein al -Hussein Mosque is an old mosque located at Kampung Teluk Manok, 
Patani which was built around 1624. The mosque blends in the architecture style of traditional 
Siamese, Chinese and Malay.Bougas (1990) states that:  
“The roof of the palace was probably made of sago palms tied together with rattan.” 
 
Unlike the mosque roof, which are made up of arrangement of shingles, Kota Wang palace 
roof are made up of sago palms, which is tied with rattan. This is most probably because of the 
nativity of the plants to the area. 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
 
2.2.3 RECONSTRUCTION OF FLOOR LAYOUT 
The building form of Kota Wang palace as Bougas (1990) stated:  
 
“The palace may have been divided into at least three parts: 1) an outer audience hall or balai 
where the queen received guests and 2) an inner hall where she conducted affairs of state and 
3) an istana where the royal family lived.”  
 
It is assumed that the palace is a complex consists of 3 buildings arranged in a line, where the 
first one consists of the balai (audience hall), the second one also consists of balai, maybe a 
smaller one due to its usage on discussing matters pertaining the state, which is considered 
private and the last one consists of room for the Queen and her family. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Site Plan of Istana Kota Wang. 
 


--- PAGE: 8 ---
 
Figure 3: Reconstruction through archival sources of Kota Wang palace, Pattani (1700s). 
 
3. ISTANA BALAI BESAR, KEDAH (1700s) 
3.1 History 
The Balai Besar of Alor Setar is an adjacent structure to the palace extending into a public zone 
and functions as the welcoming space. Originally Balai Besar was a wooden structures built by 
Sultan Muhammad Jiwa Zainal Adilin Shah (1710-1760). Fadzidah and Mansur (2017) stated 
in their study that the palace was modified and modernized over the two centuries till it reached 
its present form and structure of masonry, timber and cast iron. Spatially it is a space within an 
urban public space and is a palace that is accessible to the public within a palatial complex. It 
is sometimes known as “Balai Penghadapan” (Grand Audience Hall). It is located in front of 
the main Kedah Royal palace is called “Istana Pelamin” which housed the “astaka” (pavilion) 
and the Sultan’s throne. This wide open air space extended from the main body of the palace. 
       
Figure 4 and 5: Site Plan and Front view of Palace of Balai Besar, Alor Setar, Malaysia. 
Functionally, during meetings, courtiers and ministers would sit cross legged and report to the 
Sultan on government matters. Kedah was historically a state that paid tribute to Siam and thus 
the palace alone had survived several attacks from Siam and Bugis forces which had caused 


--- PAGE: 9 ---
the building to be severely damaged. Siam had  attacked Kedah when the latter delayed the 
delivery of the “Bunga Emas” to Bangkok in 1767, during which the Balai Besar was partly 
destroyed, it was still used as an audience hall however it could not survive the Bugis attack in 
1770, Balai Besar was bur nt down and government affairs were transferred to Kota Kuala 
Kedah in 1774 (Fadzidah and Mansur, 2017). 
3.2 Reconstruction through Archival Sources  
3.2.1 RECONSTRUCTION OF ARCHITECTURAL STYLE  
 According to Fadzidah and Mansur (2017), on the later years,  Balai Besar was being 
reconstructed   with an eclectic mix of Malay, Javanese, Thai and Colonial influences. Yet it 
never lost the sense of proportion, scale and harmony   which essentially typifies the Malay -
Nusantara style. The extension of the Dewan re call the deep recesses afforded by the large 
verandas and stilts of the Malay and South East Asian vernacular while its openness aligns both 
form and structure to the tropical climate. It also represents how Western influences were also 
fused with  traditi onal forms such as in the Audience Hall of Alor Setar (Balai Besar) where 
the language and vocabulary is a hybrid between  Greek  pillars, Flat Renaissance arches, 
sweeping Viennese staircase and a Malay/Thai roof (Fadzidah and Mansur, 2017).  
3.2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ROOF FORM 
The original structure of the Balai Besar was based on the proportions of a Malay house with 
the distinctive “bumbung panjang” (oblong roof). 
3.2.3 RECONSTRUCTION OF FLOOR LAYOUT 
Although the scale is palatial, the Balai Besar reflect s a sense of proportion, balance and 
symmetry reminiscing the Malay traditional house with various spaces and areas, dedicated to 
it required purposes and functions. Fadzidah and Mansur (2017 found there is a symmetrical 
and centralized organization of space with the Dewan Balai Lepau, representing a focal from 
which space and structure emanate and gravitate.  The Dewan is a central ceremonial space 
where foreign envoys are received and state matters discussed while the Sultan’s Singgahsana 
or the Astaka is located. 
The Dewan Balai, which are the South and North extension wings and Pejabat Dewan Balai,  
occupy the ground floor beneath  . The Pejabat Balai Besar, located under Balai Siak were 
formerly used to administrate and monitor all events in Balai Besar . However during the 18 th 
century, spaces at the ground floor were used as a storage area to store rice and fire wood. 
Verandas are located adjacent of the audience hall, on its both left and right side (Fadzidah and 
Mansur,2017).  
Presently, the South wing is reserved for the royal families for any occasions in Balai Besar, 
while the North wing is used for banquet room for the Sultan and his guests. The two wings 
are separated and linked through the dominant Dewan Balai Lepau. 

--- PAGE: 10 ---
4. ISTANA KERATON KADRIAH, KALIMANTAN BARAT (1771) 
4.1 History 
Kadriah Palace is located in Kecamatan Pontianak Timur, Kota Pontianak, Kalimantan Barat, 
Indonesia. It can be accessible through two modes of transport, which is water (river) and land 
transport. The area surrounding the Kadriah Palace has high density of population, where most 
of the residential houses were raised on stilts due to situating on top of Sungai Kapuas 
floodplain.  According to Widodo (2017), Kadriah Palace began its construction on October 
1771 and located at the intersection of three rivers, namely Sungai Landak, Sungai Kapuas 
Kecil and Sungai Kapuas. It was built by Syarif Abdurrahman Alkadrie, a religious magistrate 
of Kerajaan Matan and a leading schol ar of Kerajaan Mempawah. He was later undergone 
installation as the first Sultan of Pontianak.  
4.2 Reconstruction through Archival Sources 
4.2.1 RECONSTRUCTION OF ARCHITECTURAL STYLE 
The architecture of the palace portrays a blend of Malay, Dutch Colonial and Middle Eastern. 
Crescent-shaped with stars and the symbol of Kadriah Sultanate  can be seen on the wall of 
balcony facing the river. 
4.2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ROOF FORM 
Its roof has three tiers and has elongated form and steep angle. Almost every part of the building 
was constructed from Belian timber or ironwood which can last for hundreds of years. 
4.2.3 RECONSTRUCTION OF FLOOR LAYOUT 
Typical Kalimantan traditional houses floor layout was adapted in to the palace layout design 
(Widodo, 2017). The ground floor is surrounded by porch to reduce the sun ray penetration to 
the palace. Kadriah Palace serves as a royal family residence, a place for musyawarah 
(discussion), a place of tradition and a place of refuge during its past days. 
 
Figure 6: The SketchUp model of Kadriah palace which is used to reconstruct the Kadriah palace. 
(Reconstructed by Tengku Anis from literary sources) 
 


--- PAGE: 11 ---
 
Figure 7: Front elevation of Kadriah palace after reconstruction through archival sources.  
 
Figure 8 and 9: Site Plan and Floor plan of Kadriah palace.  
 
5. ISTANA SULTAN MANSUR II, TERENGGANU (1833) 
5.1 History 
The Palace of Sultan Mansur II of Terengganu was approximately built during the earliest years 
of Sultan Mansur II reign from  1831-1837. As described  by Muhammad Salleh et al. (1992), 
it was built  immediately  after Sultan Mansur II ascended to the thron e by replacing Sultan 
Daud as the Sultan of Terengganu.  
5.2 Reconstruction through archival sources 
5.2.1 RECONSTRUCTION OF ARCHITECTURAL STYLE 


--- PAGE: 12 ---
Sejarah Darul Iman Hingga 1361H=1942M by Awang et al. (1992) shows a sketch of an 
isometric drawing of the palace of the  Sultan Mansur II, the Seventh Sultan of Terengganu, 
which is drawn by Dato’ Seri Nara Wangsa (Encik Muhammad Ali bin Abdul Rahim).  
5.2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ROOF FORM  
The roof form of Sultan Mansur II palace can be seen on Figure 9 as typical pitched roof of 
Malay traditional house, but with more inclined angle. The Balairung has elongated roof with 
large overhang.  
5.2.3 RECONSTRUCTION OF FLOOR LAYOUT 
The palace of Sultan Mansur II can be assumed to have the tripartite floor layout according to 
Figure 9, which consists of the Balairung Seri, the Inner Balai as well as the house of the royal 
family. The Balairung Seri and the inner Balai are separated with internal wall that extends as 
external wall at the palace yard.  
    
Figure 10 and 11: Dato’ Seri Nara Wangsa impression of Sultan Mansur II palace. (Source: Sejarah Darul Iman 
Hingga 1361H=1942M) and  Reconstruction of the palace of Sultan Mansur II (1833) through archival sources. 
 
6. ISTANA SULTAN ABDUL SAMAD, SELANGOR (1876) 
6.1 History of Selangor Sultanate 
Sultan Abdul Samad palace is located in Bandar Langat. It was constructed on 1876, that is 
two decades before the Bandar Jugra palace was constructed. The palace has the conventional 
tri-cameral layout of a Malay royal Istana of the period.  
 At the front part there was a porch and an entrance to the balairung or the audience 
hall. The balairung floor layout may be square in shape and were surrounded by columns that 
supported the roof of the space. It was enclosed by wall made of wood that was stacked and 
assembled in a unique way, unlike other Malay royal Istana. The roof was two -tiered and was 
covered by shingles that were most probably made of baked soil (terracotta). The other two 
parts of the building was harem and dwellings of the Sultan and his royal family. The palace 
was connected by open passageways, where some of the parts were covered with roof.  


--- PAGE: 13 ---
6.2 Reconstruction through archival source 
6.2.1 RECONSTRUCTION OF ARCHITECTURAL STYLE 
 
The architecture style of Sultan Abdul Samad palace was traditional Malay architecture, was 
usefully described by Gullick (1975) as the palace has the purest style of Malay architecture 
without any western influence appears anywhere. According to Gullick (1975), the palace was 
in rich brown red colour, most probably Chengal timber due to its durability and strength.  
 
 
6.2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ROOF FORM  
The roof of Sultan Abdul Samad palace is pitch roof, and slant at a high degree (Gullick, 1975). 
Such roof can be.  
6.2.3 RECONSTRUCTION OF FLOOR LAYOUT 
Multiple spaces existing in the palace are connected with passageways while keepi ng the 
spatial hierarchy intact, as a study of Gullick (1975) found:  
 
“The dwelling consists of the Sultan’s house, a broad  open passage, and then the women’s 
house or harem. At the end of the above passage is the audience hall, and the front entrance to 
the Sultan’s house is through a large porch which forms  a convenient reception room… from 
this back passage a ladder with rungs about two feet apart, leads into the Sultan’s house, and 
a step-ladder into the women’s house.” 
 
As applied to the tri-cameral layout, it can be concluded that the palace was divided into three 
main parts, which is the audience hall or balairung, the harem and the  dwellings of the royal 
family. 
 
Figure 12 and 13: Photograph of Sultan Abdul Samad’s original palace at Bandar Langat. (Source: The 
Bloomfield Douglas Diary Selangor 1876) and Reconstruction of Sultan Abdul Samad’s original palace (1876) 
through archival sources. 
 


--- PAGE: 14 ---
 
Figure 14: Reconstruction of Sultan Abdul Samad’s original palace with reference from text. 
 
7. ISTANA TENGKU SERI AKAR, KELANTAN, 1886 
7.1 History 
Tengku Seri Akar Palace was built on 1886 by Almarhum Sultan Muhammad II as a gift for 
his granddaughter wedding, that is Tengku Mariam Tengku Kembang Putri. According to 
Nuradli Zakaria (2015), t he palace was originally named as Istana Tengku Puteri, or Tengk u 
Puteri palace. It was later  changed to Istana Tengku Seri Akar on 1933, because it is used as 
the eldest children of Tengku Puteri, Tengku Seri Akar Ahmad Zainal Abidin’s dwelling.  
7.2 Reconstruction through archival source 
7.2.1 RECONSTRUCTION OF ARCHITECTURAL STYLE 
 Nuraidil Zakaria (2015) stated that Seri Akar palace was believed to be the twin of 
Istana Tengku Bongsu  (Figure 14) , which is now located in Taman Pantun, Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). Structurally, Tengku Seri Akar palace is mainly influenced by 
western architecture. This is because it was not built on stilts, unlike the traditional Kelantan 
house, where the h ouse of the people and aristocrat or nobles can be differentiated by the 
number of stilts. If the house has 12 stilts, then it is the house of the nobles or royal family.   
 
Figure 15: Elevation drawing of Istana Bongsu. (Source: http://pp-sk.blogspot.com/2015/03/istana-
kelantan-tersergam-sebalik-hutan.html) ( i think this came from KALAM ) 
 
7.2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF ROOF FORM 


--- PAGE: 15 ---
Istana Tengku S eri Akar still  maintains its traditional Malay architecture throughout its roof 
form. The roof of the balairung or audience hall is a pitch roof and having three tiers.  
7.2.3 RECONSTRUCTION OF FLOOR LAYOUT 
 Tripartite floor layout existed in this palace just like other Malay royal palaces (Nuraidil 
Zakaria, 2015). The front most part is the audience hall, then the inner hall and at the rear end 
is the Sultan’s and his royal families’ dwelling. The palace is made of both wood and masonry.  
The partially-exposed isometric drawing from ‘Pencinta Sejarah Kelantan’ (Figure 15) is used 
and referred to reconstruct Istana Tengku Seri Akar elevation due to both palaces is known as 
‘twin palaces’. 
 
 
Figure 16 and 17: Isometric drawing of Istana Tengku Seri Akar. (Source: http://pp-
sk.blogspot.com/2015/04/siap-2-istana-tengku-sri-akar-robohnya.html) and Reconstruction of 
elevation and floor plan of Istana Tengku Seri Akar through archival sources. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
There are mainly three classifications of plan and typology observed, and the reconstruction of 
indigenous palaces done with references through archival sources, three typologies can be 
observed which can be described as follows:  
1. The Compact typology 
This is the layout in which both public and private domains of the palatial complex are 
closed and physically part of one complex. The building such as Istana Pattani, Istana 
Tengku Sri Akar and Istana Lembah Kuala Kangsar are part of this typology. 
Throughout the year, a gate or wall was built to separate the public and private domains.  
 


--- PAGE: 16 ---
 
TYPE 1: Compact form and divided by internal gate (Istana Tengku Seri Akar, Istana Tengku 
Bongsu). 
The example of type 1 palace which still survived till present day is the Kadriah Palace, 
which is located in Kecamatan Pontianak Timur, Kota Pontianak, Kalimantan Barat, 
Indonesia and  Tengku Seri Akar Palace that is located in Kelantan.  
 
                             
 
Example of type 1 palace: 1) Kadriah Palace, Kalimantan; and 2) Tengku Seri Akar Palace, 
Kelantan 
 
Both palaces are categorized under the same typology, but its floor layout is a bit different to one 
another. Istana Kadriah has elongated form, which the spatial zoning starting with the public area 
(entrance porch), then progressing to the semi-public space, which is the main hall of the palace. The 
private spaces of the palace, mainly room, are located at each side of the main hall.  
Istana Tengku Seri Akar has elongated floor layout, with the spatial zoning starting from the 
balairung seri as the public space, the inner balai as semi-public space and then the dwelling of the 
royal family as the private space.  


--- PAGE: 17 ---
2. The T-Shaped typology 
This refers to the typology and layout in which the frontal part of the palaces is 
elongated and the back sections are arranged perpendicular to the frontal part. Istana 
Rokan, Istana Balai Besar Alor Setar, Istana Langkat of 1920s, and Istana Bandar of 
1909 are the example of palaces categorized under this typology.  
 
This typology has evolved into major architectural and urban heritage in Malaysia and 
Indonesia, such as Balai Besar Alor Setar. Various challenges and limitations arisen 
during the study, with the structures had been burnt, razed or merely destroyed through 
human choice, neglect and the hazards endemic of the humid tropical context.  
  
TYPE 2: T-shaped and divided by internal separation (Istana Kota Wang and Istana Bandar Jugra). 
 
 
Example of  type 2 palace: 1) Istana Rokan, Riau; and 2) Istana Balai Besar, Alor Setar 
 
Istana Rokan and Istana Balai Besar were categorized under the type 2, which means both 
palaces are divided by internal separation, yet both palaces have distinctive floor layout from 
one another. Istana Rokan has its balai at its first floor, which can lead to two semi-public 
spaces, which is room, located at both side of the building. Its private space, which is the 
bedroom of the Sultan, is located upstairs. Istana Balai Besar spatial zoning is kind of unique, 
because its public space, the balai of the palace is bigger compared to other palaces. From the 


--- PAGE: 18 ---
balai, there is a passageways leading to both right and left side of the building, which are 
believed to be private spaces for the royals.  
3. The Split typology 
This is a typology in which the front public zone of the istana seem completely detached 
from the back part.  This refers to palatial forms such as the famed Istana Melaka and 
Istana Seri Menanti.  
 
 
TYPE 3: Plane two parts linked by bridge-like structure (Istana Sultan Mansur II and Istana Istana 
Sultan Abdul Samad). 
 
Example of  type 3 palace: 1) Istana Melaka, Melaka; and 2) Istana Seri Menanti, Negeri 
Sembilan.  
 
Istana Melaka and Istana Seri Menanti have quite the same floor layout. Starting from the entrance, it 
is a public space, until the balai. The right and left part of the building houses small semi-public zone, 
which is inner balai or discussion place for the government matters. At the rear end of the building 
located private space, that is the dwelling for the royal family.  
CONCLUSIONS 
Palaces are urban core forms of th e vernacular past of settlements in the South East Asian 
tropics. They were in existent before the advent, visits and advancement of the Colonial powers 


--- PAGE: 19 ---
into the region. Their morphologies and configuration refer to the original ingenuity,  
inventiveness and predilections of the local communities and cultures of the region.  
Palaces that undergone renovation did not have proper documentation, making it more difficult 
to identify its true form. The effect of Colonialism on Tanah Melayu also induced a 
modernisation but disturbance to design at the same time.  Indigenous Malay Palace s were 
characterized by the typical tripartite bui lding design of the Malay world  with each pala ce 
speaking on its own through its architectural languages. The layouts of these palaces are then 
assumed to be classified into 3 typologies discussed before. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the Transdisciplinary Research fund 
(TRGS16-03-001-0001- Characterization of Rules of Malay Architectural Language and Its 
Environmental Performance) from Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia (MoHE) for the 
support of this research.  
 
REFERENCE 
Abdullah Fadzidah, Salleh, Nurul Hamiruddin, (2005). Measured drawings and Heritage 
Studies Heritage Report of Balai Besar, Alor Setar, Kedah.  Kulliyah of Architecture and 
Environmental Design (KAED) IIUM Heritage Center.International Islamic University 
Malaysia.  
Amaroso, Donna J., (2014).   Traditionalism and the Ascendancy of the Malay Ruling Class 
in Malaya, National University of Singapore Press. 
Andaya, B.W., Andaya, Leonard, Y., (2017). A History of Malaysia, Palgrave Macmillan 
Publishers, Third Edition. 
Andaya, Leonard, (2010). Leaves of the Same Tree – Trade and Ethnicity in the Straits of 
Malacca. NUS Press. Singapore. 
Bougas, W. (1990). Patani in the Beginning of the XVII Century. In: Archipel, vol. 39, pp. 
123-125.   
Fadzidah Abdullah; Mansur Ibrahim (2015) The Genius of Tradition: Reminiscing the Balai 
Besar of Kedah, Malaysia., In: The Resilience of Tradition: Allusions and Abstraction of 
Malay Culture, Values and Forms in Contemporary Architecture and Design, Chapter 5.  
Gullick, J.M. (1975). The Bloomfield Douglas Diary Selangor 1876 – 1882. In: JMBRAS, 
vol. 48, Part 2, p. 10.   
Gullick, J.M. (1987). Malay Society in the late Nineteenth Century, the Beginnings of 
Change, Oxford University Press.  

--- PAGE: 20 ---
Milner, A. (2011). The Malays. Wiley Blackwell. United Kingdom. 
Mohamad Rasdi, Mohamad Tajuddin and Mohd. Ali, Kamarudin and Syed Ariffin, Syed 
Ahmad Iskandar and Mursib, Gurupiahand Mohamad, Ra’alah (2005). The Architectural 
Heritage of the Malay World the Traditional Houses. Penerbit UTM, Skudai, Johor Bahru. 
ISBN 983-52-0357-1 
Mohamed Jusoh (2013), Lagenda Bukit Puteri, Impiana Publication & Distribution Sdn Bhd, 
Petaling Jaya, Selangor. p. 48 
Muhammad Saleh bin Haji Awang; Mohd Yusof bin Abdullah; Mohamad bin Abu Bakar; 
Othman bin Ali, (1992) Sejarah Darul Iman Hingga 1361H=1942M. p.138.  
Nasir, Abdul Halim, Wan Teh, Wan Hashim, (1997). Warisan Senibina Melayu, Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi. Malaysia ISBN 9789679423433 
Nuraidil Zakaria (2015) Istana Tengku Sri Akar – Robohnya Binaan Asli Kelantan: Siri 
Binaan Bersejarah Kelantan. 
Retrieved from: http://pp-sk.blogspot.com/2015/04/siap-2-istana-tengku-sri-akar-
robohnya.html on 12th May 2019. 
Nuraidil Zakaria (2015) Istana Kelantan Tersergam Sebalik Hutan Bangi: Siri Binaan 
Bersejarah Kelantan.  
Retrieved from: http://pp-sk.blogspot.com/2015/03/istana-kelantan-tersergam-sebalik-
hutan.html on 12th May 2019. 
Puteri Shireen Jahn Kassim; Noorhanita Abdul Majid; Harlina Mohd Shariff;  Tengku Anis 
Qarihah (2019) The Hybrid Aesthetics of the Malay Vernacular: Reinventing Classifications 
through the Classicality of South East Asia’s Palatial Forms, In: International Journal of 
Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE) vol. 8, Issue 1S, ISSN: 2277-3878, pp. 340-
344.  
Puteri Shireen Jahn Kassim; Norzalina Harun; Elias Salleh; Anis Qarihah Abdul Kadir (2018) 
Rooting the ‘ Classical Vernacular’ in a South-East Asian Culture Modernity and Colonial 
Hybridity in Northern Malay-Nusantara states in the early 1900s. pp. 17-19.  
Reid, A. (2004). Understanding Melayu (Malay) as a Source of Diverse Modern Identities. In 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 32(3), 295-313. 
doi:10.1017/S0022463401000157Semper,  
Sherwin, M.D (1981). The Palace of Sultan Mansur Shah at Malacca. In: Journal of the 
Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 40, No. 2 , pp. 101-107 
Widodo, N. (2017) Istana Kadriah Kesultanan Islam Cikal Bakal Pontianak.  
 Retrieved from: https://seruji.co.id/khazanah/sejarah-islam/istana-kadriah-kesultanan-
islam-cikal-bakal-pontianak/3/ on 27th June 2019. 
