--- PAGE: 1 ---
 
7:2 (2020) 79–89 | ijbes.utm.my | eISSN 2289–8948| 
 IJBES 
 
International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 
Published by Penerbit UTM Press, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
IJBES 7(2)/2020, 79-89 
 
Recreating Historical Malay Architecture with BIM 
Process 
 
Muhammad Hadi Mustafa  
Department of Quantity Surveying, Kuliyyah of Architecture and Envi ronmental Design, International Islamic University Malaysia, 53100, 
Gombak, Selangor  
 
Maisarah Ali 
Department of Civil Engineering, Kuliyyah of Engineering, International Islamic University Malaysia, 53100, Gombak, Selangor 
 
Khairusy Syakirin Has Yun Hashim and Mohamad Saifulnizam Mohd Suhaimi  
Department of Quantity Surveying, Kuliyyah of Architecture and Environmental Design, International Islamic University Malaysi a, 53100, 
Gombak, Selangor 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
In South -East Asia, the Malay architecture is among the popular subject of research 
because of its historical importance within the region, apart from many others. To 
some researchers, the Malay architecture is unique because of its intangible meaning 
and historically rich design characters. It is difficult to be reproduced, and only limited 
numbers of people are acknowledged as experts. With the introduction of technology 
such as BIM, it is hypothesized that the gap ca n be minimized. The idea of this paper is 
to outline the process of recreating cultural architectural design using a modern 
process such as Building Information Modelling (BIM) platform in specific, from data 
collection using Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TL S) and digitalization process in Revit 
software. This paper employs observation approach using data from laser scanner 
collected from case study and content analysis technique. While normally most of the 
cultural architecture is undocumented, the findings of this activity are aimed to provide 
guideline to develop geometrical information for heritage-enthusiast in practicing their 
undertakings.  It is hoped that more historical and cultural architecture can be 
recreated and appreciated for the use and inspiration of current construction industry. 
 
 
Article History  
 
Received : 29 November 2019 
Received in revised form : 4 February 2020 
Accepted : 7 March 2020 
Published Online : 30 April 2020 
 
Keywords:  
 
HBIM, malay architecture, terrestrial laser 
scanning, case study, process 
 
Corresponding Author Contact: 
 
maisarah@iium.edu.my 
 
DOI:  10.11113/ ijbes.v7.n2.504 
© 2020Penerbit UTM Press. All rights reserved 
 
 
1.  Introduction  
 
Across the world, the rate of decline and disap pearance of 
historical buildings such as wooden traditional Malay houses in the 
Malay archipelago, churches in the European countries,  castles in 
Japan and China or even mosques in the Middle East is 
accelerating. Designs on historical building are often intricate and 
difficult to reproduce, even by experts. Up until recent years, the 
re-production of as -built drawing for historic buildings are often 
being done by hand measuring, which is very tedio us and time -
consuming (Foxe,2010 ). At the end of the acti vity, most people 
are left with inaccurate and incomplete data because of 
unavoidable factors such as financial and time constraints. With 
the introduction of laser scanner, a highly accurate three - 
dimensional model of the complete interior and exterior o f any 
building can be created in a shorter time (Pesci et al., 2012) Using 
the data, it is possible then to use any BIM software such as 
Autodesk Revit to reproduce the plans, elevations and sections of 
the designs and buildings. These documents can then b e used as 
references for recreating the architectural design. Therefore, this 
paper intends to outline the process of recreating cultural 
architectural design using a modern process such as Building 
Information Modelling platform in specific, from data col lection 

--- PAGE: 2 ---
80        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
using Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) and digitalizati on process 
in Revit software. 
 
1.1  Historical Buildings and Styles of Malay 
architecture in Peninsular Malaysia  
 
The Ministry of Cultural , Art and Heritage defined historical 
buildings as tang ible heritage under the static category, which 
consists of monuments and buildings such as palaces, fortress, 
tombs, and towers. Any building which is more than 50 years of 
age and gazetted by the Department of National Heritage can be 
considered as herita ge building whereas non -gazetted building is 
considered historical building. Fielden (2003)  defined a historic 
building as any building that could give an impression and make a 
person curious about the race and culture that built them. He also 
said all bui ldings over 100 years old should be deemed historic 
buildings. In brief, a historic building can be described as a 
building that can depict particular values such as its history, 
architecture, symbolism, and feelings to local individuals.  
 
The styles of M alay architecture in Peninsular Malaysia  were 
comprised of many typologies such as buildings for 
administration, institutions, religious buildings, homes, and many 
more. Most of the buildings are beautifully decorated and have 
distinctive designs that are not found in most present buildings.  
Among historical buildings that exist i n Peninsular Malaysia are 
shown in Table 1. These historic cultural buildings should be 
properly conserved and preserved as these national treasures are 
irreplaceable to our natio n. Failure to manage and preserve these 
historic buildings can have a detrimental impact on our nation. 
This is because owing to any poor decisions or actions, a century 
of wealthy history that could be translated from a building can be 
destroyed by a split second. It can be seen nowadays that historical 
buildings such as shophouses, townhouses, and traditional Malay 
houses are now fighting for survival owing to factors such as 
demolition, neglect, and lack of effort to preserve them. 
According to Akadiri et al. (2012), damages that occur to building 
indirectly will affect their structural integrity and its fabric. It will 
also affect the façade, which gives negative impacts for tourism 
sectors, and it will eventually also give negative impression 
towards th e conservation industry in Malaysia ( Harun,2011). 
Historical buildings are prone to damages owing to many factors, 
and the damage must be correctly resolved according to 
conservation principles, philosophy, and ethics. All historic 
buildings must be continually preserved, not only when damage is 
noticeable. Regular check-ups should be performed, and adequate 
monitoring through technology such as BIM can be helpful. 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2  Digitalization Using Laser Scanner: Scan-to BIM 
 
Global trends are making AEC proj ects more complex, while 
advances in technology are helping industry professionals work 
more efficiently and effectively.  The power of BIM is how it 
allows architects, engineers, and contractors to collaborate on 
coordinated models, giving everyone better insight into how their 
work fits into the overall project, ultimately helping them to 
work mo re efficiently. Traditionally, buildings have been 
documented by sending a team out into the field where the teams 
take measurement to their nearest centimetres or  inch and 
produce hand -drawn drawings, which can take a long time to 
produce. Instead, a site can be scanned in a matter of hours or 
days and plans can be studied from those scans (Ali et al., 2018).  
 
The BIM is increasingly being accepted and practiced i n most part 
of the world; whether to assist in designing a project or to 
develop an operating system in constructing a building efficiently. 
Other countries, including Finland, Singapore, Denmark and 
Norway, have also adopted BIM (Ali et al ., 2018). However, in 
the Malaysian industry, Zahrizan et al. (2013) found that the 
adoption of BIM in Malaysia needs  attention. They highlighted 
that “Due to the lack of knowledge of BIM and the low level of 
BIM uptake by the Malaysian construction players, the 
implementation of BIM in the Malaysian construction industry 
thus lies between BIM level 0 and BIM level 1. This statement is 
later supported by CIDB BIM Report  2016. It was mentioned that 
the adoption is still low because the Malaysian cons truction 
industry has ve ry slo w development in using the application  of 
Information Communication Technology (ICT). The challenges 
are the unavailability of sufficient experts within the country, 
relevant equipment for practicing are scarce, limited availability of 
trainers, and financial-related challenges ( Del Giudice & Osello, 
2013; Ha run, 2011 ; Zahrizan  et al.,  2013; Abbasnejad & Moud 
2013). These challenges, however, sh ould not prevent, or even 
discourage construction players from taking advantage of this 
technological advancement in different ways. 
 
The low adoption in implementing BIM has caused losses to the 
current industry in Malaysia as the benefit of BIM does not only 
improve the technology itself; it also changes the process of design 
and builds ( Kymmel, 2008 ; Maina , 2 018). Through the 
implementation of BIM, any vital information like the design 
information can be prepared and evaluate at a much faster time; 
enabling any decision-making process related to the project can be 
done in a much easier and efficient way ( Mustafa et al. , 2018 ; 
Maina, 2018). Moreover, BIM also conveniences to the project  
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
81        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
Table 1  The example of different typologies of historical buildings that exist in Peninsular Malaysia 
Sources: 1- Ministry of Agriculture and Agro‑based Industry ,  
2- https://www .maisinggah.com/bangunan-bersejarah-di-malaysia/ 
3-https://www .orangnogori.com 
 
Name of 
state 
Building typology 
Palaces Aristocrats’ house Commoners’ house 
Perlis 
 
Istana Arau Rumah Tetamu Kangar 
 
Rumah Bumbung Panjang 
Perlis 
Kedah 
 
Istana Balai Besar Seri Mentaloon, Alor Star 
 
Rumah Peladang Kedah 
Kelantan 
Istana Balai Besar Rumah Menteri Besar 
 
Rumah Kelantan 
Terengga
nu 
 
Istana Tengku Long Rumah Dato Biji Sura Rumah Limas Bungkus 
Johor 
Istana Besar Johor 
  
Rumah Menteri Besar Rumah Johor Atap Limas 
Perak 
Istana Kenangan, 
 Baiturrahmah Rumah Kutai 


--- PAGE: 4 ---
82        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
Selangor 
Istana Bandar Carcosa Seri Negara Rumah Pak Ali 
Pahang 
Istana Leban Tunggal Rumah Penghulu Hj Ismail bin 
Khatib Bakar 
Rumah Serambi Pahang 
Negeri 
Sembilan 
Istana Seri Menanti Rumah Dato Kelana Syed Abdul 
Rahman 
Rumah Negeri Sembilan 
Melaka 
Replika Istana Melaka 
Rumah Penghulu Ghani Rumah Melaka 
Penang 
Seri Mutiara 
Rumah Tuan Guru Haji Othman, 
Bukit Mertajam 
Rumah Serambi Gajah 
Menyusu 
 


--- PAGE: 5 ---
83        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
team to make any variation or changes to the project at any time 
along with the phase of work due to its parametric mod elling 
capability (Autodesk, 2019). All the data needs to be formatted in 
the right way and available at the right time is not act ing as 
barriers to its full adoption. BIM software makes up about one -
half of the components in the whole process.  
 
BIM, however, has not been extensively applied to all aspects of a 
construction project (Mustafa et al., 2018; Seghier, Lim, Ahmad 
and Samu el, 2017 ). According to Kymmel (2008), the clearest 
benefit from BIM is that a 3D model improves the presentation 
ability in visualizing (understand) the model better. Many persons 
have difficulty understanding 2D drawing, and according to Maina 
(2018), th ere is  an inadequate supply of qualified staff to meet 
specialised skills . While ac cording to Eastman et al. (2008) and 
Rozana et al. (2018) , the 3D model made by the BIM software is 
designed rather than generated from multiple 2D views. It is used 
to visualize the layout at any stage of the process expecting it will 
be consistent in every view. 
 
Through virtual design and construction, BIM can provide an 
advantage to the Malaysian heritage industry by enhancing the 
cooperative level among various stakeholders. In the inspiration of 
‘renaissance’ which means the revival of o r renewed interest in 
something, clients will be able to have a wider range of design 
choices that reflec ts their cultural architecture (Autodesk, 2019; 
Ali et al., 2018 ). To achieve this , there is a need for a library of 
collected data on Malay architectural design to be made available, 
hence increasing the production efficiency and reduce the cost. 
Among data collection approach is by using a 3D laser scanner. 
 
1.3  Dimensional Laser Scanner 
 
The idea behind 3D laser scanning is LIDAR ( light detection and 
ranging ) and remote sensing. LiDAR is a remote sensing method 
that uses a laser to measure elevation  and laser scanner works on 
the same principle (Quattrini et al. ,2015). Essentially , LIDAR is 
a beam of light that analyses the reflective light. The scanner then 
registers how long it takes for light to make its return, and using a 
set of an internal mirror and establishes horizontal and vertical 
angle by collecting point with correct x  y and z coordinates. The 
collection of points taken by a single scan will be reco rded as 
point clouds (Baik, 2017).  
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
This paper employs observation approach using data from laser 
scanner collected from case study and content analysis. To achieve 
this, the research conducted an action -based research using a real 
case study and employs a qualitative approach in describing the 
findings. Observation has been used as a method for collecting 
data about people, processes, or even cultures (Kawulich, 2012).  
 
 
 
 
 
2.1   Selection of Case Study: Istana Balai Besar 
Alor Setar 
 
Digitalizing historic Malay building is different from other 
buildings because of its unique characters . Its architecture has a 
blend of influences which has created its unique  building forms 
(Endut, 1993). In this paper, a more complex building such as the 
'Istana' (palace) will be studied as compared to traditional  Malay 
house because it can provide more data as compared to the latter 
which is too simple . This is also because  Istana also carries more 
significance as compared to the normal cultural house because 
more historic events take place there.  
 
According to a report from  Kedah's state Archive retrieved by 
researchers on July 2018, The Grand Palace (Istana Balai Besar) is  
a unique hall which was built in 1735 by order of Sultan 
Muhammad Jiwa Zainal Adilin Muazzam Shah, the 19 th Sultan of 
Kedah (1710 - 1778). Its original function was to act as "Balai 
Penghadapan" for the king's official activities. The components 
were orig inally constructed from timbers, and after some 
incidents due to attacks from the Siamese (1821) and Bugis 
(1770), some part of the components were changed to steel and 
concrete. The building was re -constructed displaying the 
astonishing Malay's woodcarvin g at that time, and until now, its 
uniqueness still inspires many architect and tourists. This palace is 
among the oldest and the finest traditional Malay palaces which 
remains intact until today. However, it is subjected to the threats 
of natural decay, major flood and was once destroyed by fire, thus 
preserving its architectural and historical significance has become 
of paramount importance for posterity.  
 
The process of reproducing the documentation comprises of two 
(2) main stages. The first stage is d ata collection on -site, where 
measurements need to be taken by the use of laser scanning 
technology. Laser scanning was selected as the technique of data 
collection because it is among the latest available measurement 
technology. The output from the laser scanner can be integrated 
with another technology such as BIM. In this research, 29 stations 
sites were used to capture data around the building, as shown in 
Figure 2. The second stage is the reconstruction of the building in 
the BIM platform, such as Auto desk Revit using the data collected 
from the laser scanning activity. In this study, Autodesk Revit was 
used because of the software's interface, which is user-friendly and 
easy to learn.  
 
The scanner used is a TopCon GLS -2000. The specifications of 
the scanner are presented in Table 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
84        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
Table 2   The specification of the scanner used for the 
scanning activity 
 
SCANNER/ 
CHARACTERISTIC 
Topcon GLS-2000 
Laser Class 3R and 1R 
Scanning method Time of Flight 
Vertical field of view (º) 270º 
Horizontal field of view (º) 360º 
Range (m) and reflectivity Up to 350m; 90 % reflectivity 
(minimum range 0.4m) 
Scan Speed (pts/sec) 120,000 points per/second 
3D scanning accuracy 3.5 mm at 150m 
Camera(single image pixel 
  resolution) 
5 megapixels  
 
Processing software JRC 3D RECONSTRUCTOR  
Tilting Sensor Dual-axis compensator 
 
2.2   The Point Cloud Workflow On The Project 
 
Commissioning a point cloud is similar to a traditional 2D survey. 
It is only the deliverable that is different. The scan itself will 
render with intensity. Although point cloud is just discrete points, 
the density actually causes them to mimic a solid surface. 
However, because the laser only uses visible light, rather than 
infrared, it only records the surface it hits, rather than what i s 
hidden behind the structure. Thus, it is important to acknowledge 
that laser scanning is a line -of-sight technology. Hence, because it 
only records whatever it hits, the users actually need to reposition 
the scanner around the site in order to capture th e object all 
around (Quattrini et al.,2015). In this research, 29 stations sites 
were used to capture data around the building, as shown in Figure 
1. However, most importantly, there must be an area of overlap 
between all of the sites. This can be done by using targets.  
 
In order to create a complete point cloud, the scanner needs to be 
moved around both the inside and the outside of the building that 
is being scanned to fill in the missing areas. Befo re capturing the 
next scan, targets are placed in the d irection where the scanner is 
moving. The main usage of the targets is to tie a scan location to 
the next. These targets will be used to automatically combine the 
multiple scans into a single data set of the complete as the as -built 
condition. Finally, onc e all the data was collected, they will be 
joined using ScanMaster software and forms a comp lete building 
as point clouds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  29 scan stations are used during the data collection 
process (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Istana Balai Besar frontage in point clouds  (Authors, 
2019) 
 
 
After all of the scans have been registered using the targets in the 
field, the complete point cloud can be seen, as shown in Figure 2. 
Next, the point cloud can be exported to an application used i n 
design such as Autodesk Reality Capture or also known as 
Autodesk Recap. Recap is a high -performance point cloud 
visualization engine that can be used to view and navigate the 
point cloud by cutting sections of the data. By having point 
clouds, it is pos sible to view the model in ways that would 
otherwise be difficult if using data collected with traditional means 
of as-built surveying and measuring (Quattrini et al., 2015).  
 
In Recap, it is possible to look at the scan in a planar view by 
taking the sphere of data, unrolls it to look at the entire scan  and 
manipulate the data. From this view , as shown in Figure 3 , direct 
measurements can be taken by measuring from the layout, and the 
dimension is broken out to provide true m easurement as our 
primary data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
85        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  Measuring the dimension of building components 
can be carried out in the Recap platform (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Cross-section of the building in point cloud 
 (Authors, 2019)   
 
 
In Figure 4 , a cross -section of the building is made in order to 
view the floor to floor relationships and to determine the distance 
between the floors. By doing this, understanding of spaces within 
the building can be achieved (Abidin,1981) before modelling it in 
Revit. Measure ment of the building also can be computed by 
point-to-point distance. For laser scanner TOPCON GLS -2000, 
the precision of measurement is up to 3.5mm. 
 
Next, the point cloud is transferred into Autodesk Revit, where 
the point cloud is attached to a project as a link. After importing 
the point cloud, the plan section is cut all the way to the floor 
level so the floors' area can be clearly seen. From the floor plan, 
materials and finishes are recorded, and the building is modelled. 
As more information is neede d for the modelling of the building, 
data from the point cloud in Recap is referred. The result in the 
form of as-built drawing is produced and presented. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Point cloud in Revit (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Layout floor plan of building  (without roof)  in Revit  
(Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Positioning of Leica T errestrial Laser Scanner P16 
during scanning (Authors, 2019) 
 
 


--- PAGE: 8 ---
86        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Building layout converted fr om point clouds to BIM 
using Revit (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Building layout converted from point clouds to BIM 
using Revit in 3D view (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
  Figure 10: BIM model of Istana Balai Besar (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
Figure 11 : The process flow of digitalization using point clouds 
for Autodesk Revit(Authors’ work) 
 
 
3.0   Digitalization Result and Analysis of Istana 
Balai Besar from Point Cloud Data 
 
One of  the most useful aspects of BIM is that it can extract 
attributes data indicating, for example, the floor area of existing 
construction, or the variation of building components used for the 
building. Figures 5,6,7, 8,9 and 10  are the results from the effort  
of modelling in BIM platform using the point clouds collec ted by 
laser scanning exercise meanwhile Figure 11 highlights the flow of 
digitalization using point clouds using  Autodesk Revit . The as -
built drawings of a traditional Malay building which has exi sted 
since 1735 have been successfully reproduced, with a variation of 
3.5mm accuracy. The point cloud is invaluable for this case study 
because there is no ambiguity at all. This effort has simultaneously 
produced 2D drawings and 3D models successfully in  a single 
work. By having data from laser scanning, it eliminates the need 
to have a frequent site visit, and the details of the building can be 
further explored from our workstation.  


--- PAGE: 9 ---
87        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
The result of this digitalization process has contributed to the 
know-how and know-what, especially in the management of point 
clouds for the documentation of historic building. The case study 
consists of a symmetrical design with two floors. During the 
modelling process, it was found that the building has used variant 
types of component. For example, the variations of the column 
found are five (5) and are shown in Figure 12. 
 
 
 
Figure 12:  The numbers of column ’s variant found using point  
clouds for Istana Balai Besar (Author’s work) 
 
 
This case is considered to be another parameter to understand the 
advantage of technologies via action -based research. As another 
contribution from this action based -research activity, it can be 
extracted that the ground floor area of the building is 
approximately 2341 m2 and the first -floor area is 1341m2 as 
shown in Figure 13 and Figure 14 . The information can serve as 
the basis for further research to understand the profitability and 
benefits involved in using TLS for historic buildings in all regards. 
 
 
Figure 13: The extraction of Balai Besar Alor Setar’s ground-
floor layout area using BIM tool (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: The extraction of Balai Besar Alor Setar’s   first-
floor layout area using BIM tool (Authors, 2019) 
 
 
This research has provided a process flow on data collection using 
laser scanner and managing the data for the purpose of 
documenting the details of historic building.  It is also found that 
there is still room for improvisation on this approach; for 
example, the automation from laser scanning into the BIM model. 
Terrestrial laser scanner also has diffi culty in capturing high rise 
building, but this is not a major problem since the point cloud can 
be obtained with the help of laser scanning using an Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) such as the drones. At the current state of 
development, it is not possible to directly convert point clouds 
into a BIM model as it only acts as references. It is anticipated 
future development might focus on producing the BIM model 
straight away from their main references without the need to 
remodel them again manually in other software. 
 
 
4.0  Conclusion and Recommendations  
 
BIM has become an integral part of the way for new businesses, 
and it can be seen that greater client engagement is possible with 
the use of these technologies. The ability to have visual access to 
information through 3D illustrations without having to be on the 
site is deemed to be a ground-breaking process in AEC. Point 
cloud surveying is although a rapid process but the programming 
of the modelling need to be understood, managed and discussed 
with other parties who will rely on the information. The ability to 
produce accurate building information now forms a core part of 
our construction industry. From this research, it can be con cluded 
that laser scanning is an effective approach to producing plans  and 
elevations for any buildings, especially for historic buildings  due 
to the reduced time on -site as compared with the conventional 
approach. Embracing BIM is not anymore about adapting to 
the local government’s vision and mandate, i t is more about 
recognizing the potential to become more efficient and effective 
in the operation and to  compete effectively on the international 
level. Lastly, this research would like to suggest for heritage -
enthusiast in practicing their undertakings by:  
 
i. Organizing appropriate and adequate training service on 
modelling of historical buildings, as simple methods 


--- PAGE: 10 ---
88        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
need to be developed to obtain BIM models that 
guarantee accuracy, accuracy and quality at the same 
time. 
 
ii. Integrating BIM with current historical buildings 
database within the conservation practice, which still is 
documented in a conventional approach. 
 
iii. Encouraging young employees to  possess competencies 
and qualities in utilizing technologies to increase the 
productivity and efficiency of their practice. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This rese arch was supported by a grant 
(TRGS/1/2016/UIAM/01/5/3) from the Ministry of Higher 
Education Malaysia (MOHE). This research is also supported by 
Kuliyyah of Architecture and Environmental Design (KAED) and 
Kuliyyah of Engineering of International Islamic University 
Malaysia. 
 
References 
 
Abbasnejad, B., & Moud, H. I. (2013). BIM and Basic Challenges 
Associated With Its Definitions, Interpretations, And Expectations . 
International Journal of Engineering Research and Application. 3(2): 287-294. 
 
Abidin, W.B.b.W. (1981). The Malay House: Rationale and Change 
(Master Thesis). M.I.T., Massachusetts. Cambridge. 
 
Akadiri, P. O., Chinyio, E. A., & Olomolaiye, P. O. (2012). Design of A 
Sustainable Building: A Conceptual Framework for Implementing Sustainability in 
the Building Sector . 126–152. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings2020126 
 
Ali, M., Ismail, K., Suhaimi, M.S, Hashim, K.S.H.Y, and Mustafa, 
M.H., (2018), Heritage Building Preservation through Building 
Information Modelling: Reviving Cultural Values th rough Level Of 
Development Exploration. Journal of the Malaysian Institute of Planners . 
16(2): 62 -72,  http://dx.doi.org/10.21837/pmjournal.v16.i6.461  
 
Ali, M., Ismail, K., Hashim, K.S.H.Y, Suhaimi, M.S, and Mustafa, 
M.H., (2018), Historic Building Infor mation Modelling (HBIM) For 
Malaysian Construction Industry, Journal of the Malaysian Institute of 
Planners. 16(3): 332-343. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21837/pmjournal.v16.i7.522 
 
Autodesk. (2019). Autodesk Knowledge Network. Accessed 
18.08.2019, from https://knowledge.autodesk.com: 
https://knowledge.autodesk.com/support/revit-products/getting-
started/caas/CloudHelp/cloudhelp/2019/ENU/Revit-
GetStarted/files/GUID-03565843-BB48-4707-B54C-39D6E8E51880-
htm.html 
 
Baik, A., Alitany, A., Boehm, J., & Robson, S. (2014). Jeddah Historical 
Building Information Modelling "JHBIM"; Object Library. ISPRS Annals of 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing, and Spatial Information Sciences . II-5(May): 
41–47. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-41-2014 
 
Baik, A. (2017). From point cloud to Jeddah Heritage BIM Nasif 
Historical House – case study. Digital Applications in Archaeology and 
Cultural Heritage . 4(January 2016) : 1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.daach.2017.02.001 
Del Giudice, M., &  Osello, A. (2013, September). BIM for Cultural 
Heritage. XXIV International CIPA Symposium. September 2 -6, 2013, 
Strasbourg, France. 
 
Bicara Seni Visual. (2014). Seni Bina Melayu Tradisional. Accessed 
18.4.2020, from bicarasenivisual.blogsp ot.com: 
http://bicarasenivisual.blogspot.com/2014/09/seni-bina-rumah-
melayu-tradisional.html 
 
Eastman, C. Teicholz, P. Sacks, R., & Liston, K. (2008). BIM Handbook 
A Guide to Building Information Modeling for Owners , Managers, 
Designers, Engineers, and Contractors. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 
Endut, E. H. (1993). Traditional Malaysian Built Forms: A Study of the 
Origins, Main Building Types, Development of Building Forms, Design Principles 
and the Application of Traditi onal Concepts in Modern Buildings . University of 
Sheffield. 
 
Foxe D.M. (2010). Building Information Modeling for Constructing the 
past and its Future. A pt Bulletin: Jou rnal Of Preservation Technology. 
41(4): 39-45 
 
Fielden, B. M. (2003). Conservation Of Hi storic Buildings . 3rd ed. 
Oxford: Elsevier.  
 
Harun, S. N. (2011). Heritage Building Conservation In Malaysia: 
Experience And Challeng es. Procedia Engineering . 20: 41–53. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2011.11.137 
 
Taman Botani Negara Shah Alam. (2019). Kampung Idaman. Accessed 
18.08.2019, from www.tbnsa.gov.my: 
http://www.tbnsa.gov.my/web/guest/kampung-idaman 
 
MaiSinggah. (2018). 49 Bangunan Bersejarah Di Malaysia Yang Menarik | 
Jom Pulang Ke Masa Lampau. Accessed 18.08.2019, from 
www.maisinggah.com: https://www.maisinggah.com/bangunan-
bersejarah-di-malaysia/ 
 
Kawulich B. (2012): Doing Social Research: A Global Context Chapter: 
Collecting Data Through Observation Publisher. McGraw HillEditors: C. 
Wagner, B. Kawulich, M. Garner 
 
Ismail, S. A., Bandi, S., & Maaz, Z. N. (2018). An Appraisal into the 
Potential Application of Big Data in the  Construction Industry. 
International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability . 5(2): 145–154. 
https://doi.org/10.11113/ijbes.v5.n2.274 
 
Rahman, M. F. (2003). Laluan Tempt Bersejarah di Bandar Alor Setar: 
Bangunan-Bangunan Bersejarah. Alor Setar: Arkib Negara Malaysia 
Cawangan Kedah.Retrieved July 2018 
 
Malaysia Building Information Modelling Report (2016), CIDB Technical 
report Publication No 1217, Lem baga Pembangunan Industri Pembina an 
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 2017 
 
Maina, J. J. (2018). Barriers To Effective Use Of CAD And BIM In 
Architecture Education In Nigeria. International Journal of Built Environment 

--- PAGE: 11 ---
89        Muhammad Hadi Mustafa et al. - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 7:2 (2020) 79–89 
 
 
and Sustainability . 5(3): 175–186. 
https://doi.org/10.11113/ijbes.v5.n3.275 
 
Mustafa, M.H., Ali, M., Ismail, K., Hashim, K.S.H.Y, and Suhaimi, 
M.S. (2019). BIM Backed Decision Support System in the Management 
of Heritage Building. International Journal of Built Environment and 
Sustainability. 6(2): 63–71. https://doi.org/10.11113/ijbes.v6.n2.357 
 
Jabatan Warisan Negara, 2016, National Heritage Act 645, accessed 
online (Accessed  
18.08.2019) http://www.heritage.gov.my/index.php/ms/2016-06-14-
02-33-04 
 
Pesci, A., Bonali, E., Galli, C., & Boschi, E. (2012). Laser scanning and 
digital imaging for the investigation of an ancient building: Palazzo 
d’Accursio study case (Bologna, Italy). Journal of Cultural Heritage . 13(2): 
215–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2011.09.004 
 
Quattrini, R., Malinverni, E. S., Clini, P., Nespeca, R., & Orlietti, E. 
(2015). From TLS to HBIM. High -quality semantically -aware 3d 
modelling of complex architecture. International Archives of the 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Infor mation Sciences - ISPRS 
Archive., 40(5W4): 367–374. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprsarchives-
XL-5-W4-367-2015 
 
Rozana Mohamed Salleh, N. E. M., Nafisah Abdul Rahiman, H., & 
Liyana Tajul Ariffin, N. O. (2019). The Propensity Of Building 
Information Modelling And Integrated Project Delivery In Building 
Construction Project . International Journal of Built Environment & 
Sustainability. 6(1-2): 83–90. https://doi.org/10.11113/ ijbes.v6.n1 -
2.386  
 
Seghier, T. E., Lim, Y. W., Ahmad, M. H., & Samuel, W. O. (2017). 
Building Envelope Thermal Performance Assessment Using Visual 
Programming and BIM, based on ETTV requirement of Green Mark and 
GreenRE. International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability . 4(3), 
227–235. https://doi.org/10.11113/ijbes.v4.n3.216 
 
W. Kymmel  (2008), Building Information Modeling. Planning and 
managing construction projects with 4D CAD and simulations, McGraw -
Hill. 
 
Zahrizan, Z., Ali, N. M., Haron, A. T., Marshall -Ponting, A., & Hamid, 
Z. A. (2013). Exploring The Barriers And Driving Factors I n 
Implementing Building Information Modelling ( BIM) In The Malaysian 
Construction Industry: A Preliminary Study . Journal - The Institution of 
Engineers, Malaysia. 75(1):1- 10. 
 
 
 
