--- PAGE: 1 ---
from either outside Southeast Asia or long after the period we study. We wonder 
at the flowering of culture in the tropics. We observe the imperial threats from 
the north and admire the heroic defence of their land boundaries. We speculate 
on the stratification of external cultural layers; Hindu-Buddhist, Muslim, 
Chinese, Christian; and are fascinated by what was accepted and what was 
rejected among the competing values, ideas and institutions which pressed their 
attention among the Southeast Asians. And most of all, we argue about whether 
the region was a meaningful unit, whether it was Further India or a Chinese 
trading zone, or whether, in fact, it had always been the "Balkans of the East" 
where "things fall apart; the centre cannot hold". 
From the essay above on Southeast Asian history between 1200 and 1800, 
a survey of the past through present eyes, it is hoped that some of the reasons 
for our questions become clear. The period was a long one and many changes 
occurred which the Southeast Asians themselves determined and many others 
which they could do little to control. But one thing was clear by the end of the 
period. Outside the region, sharp differences in the rates of social and techno­
logical change were becoming obvious. An India conquered by the Islamic 
Mughals was being conquered anew by a distant power from Western Europe, 
a power with unlimited ambitions to stretch until the end of the earth. A passive 
but prosperous China was about to lapse into another of its periods of stagnation 
and decay. As the 18th century came to an end, forces for a new kind of change 
had entered Southeast Asia. A new political and cultural stratum was about to 
be laid upon the region. It was a layer which had the power to re-make and 
transform. It is a measure of the strength of Southeast Asian traditions that the 
re-making and the transformation could only be done within the framework the 
peoples of Southeast Asia had already established for themselves. When we look 
at the problems of the region today, we cannot help but be struck by our need 
to turn to the six centuries before 1800 to see how the Southeast Asians had 
quietly and imperceptibly packed their foundations so firmly and well. 
12 
The lslamization of 
Southeast Asia 
-------------_..f\NTHONY REID 
l
IKE a~y. other religious tradition, Islam in Southeast Asia presents us with 
both mside and outside evidence about its history. The inside evidence of 
Muslim s?urces the_mselves is necessarily of a pious nature, as is, for 
exam?le, _the mterna) eV1dence about the conversion of Britian to Christianity. 
No histoncal event could more obviously be a part of God's purpose for man, 
and therefore tlie aspects of the story recalled by Muslim writers are naturally 
those which show the Divine purpose at work. While aimost all the Southeast 
Asian chronicles describe supernatural events which accompany the conversion 
of a state to Islam, the differences between the type of Divine intervention is 
certainly instructive. Malay chronicles like those of Pasai Melaka and Patani 
do not. diffe_r _markedly from accounts from other part; of the ;,,arid. They 
emphasize Divme revelation through dreams such as those of the rulers of Pasai 
and Melaka in turn; or the miraculous po~ers of a holv man of God such as 
Shaikh Sa'id of Pasai in his healing of the ruler of Patani.1 A!thou'gh these 
chromcles are not averse to describing the powers of rulers and the origins of 
states in older pre-Islamic terms of magical potency (sakti} they keep their 
description of the Islamization process within bounds which would probably 
have been acceptable to Muslims in most parts of the world. In the Javanese 
Islamic tradition, and its Banjar off-shoot, however, one finds more frankly 
pre-Islamic religious elements. The clearest religious motive for conversion 
'Sejarah Melayu or "Malay Annals". A translation of Raffles MS 18', ed. C.C. Brown, 
JMB_RAS 25(1953), pp. 41-2 and 52-4; 'Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai; a revised romanized 
version of Raffles MS 67. together with an English translation', ed. A.H. Hill, JMBRAS 
33 (1961), Pt. 2, pp. 116-120; Hikayat Patani: The Story of Patani, ed. A. Teeuw & 
D.K. Wyatt (The Hague, Nijhoff, 1970), I pp. 71-5. See also the discussion of these 
texts in G.W.J. Drewes, 'New Light on the Coming of Islam to Indonesia' BKl 124 
(i968), pp. 436-8. • 
13 

--- PAGE: 2 ---
offered in the Hikayat Banjar is that the chief of I>jipang, in East Java, 'was very 
astonished when he saw the radiance ( cahaya) of Raja Bungsu (i.e. Raden 
Rahmat). He knelt at Raja Bungsu's feet and requested to be converted to 
Islam' .2 From the babads emanating from what Ricklefs calls the 'quasi-Islamic 
tradition' of Java,3 come stories still more frankly heterodox in the type of 
powers which they attribute particularly to such great mystics as Sunan Kali 
J aga and Sheikh Si ti J enar. 
In comparison with most great religious changes in world history, we are 
comparatively well endowed also with outside sources basically unsympathetic 
or hostile to the Islamization process. Ever since Marco Polo reported that: 
the people of Perlak (Nth Sumatra) used aU-to be id91aters, but owing to contact 
with Saracen merchants, who continu'1f!Y resort here in their ships, they have all 
been converted to the law of Mahomet 
there have been Christian observers committed to excluding any religious expla· 
nation of the change. Tome Pires and the other 16th century Iberians who took 
a great interest in this subject tended to follow Marco Polo in emphasizing that 
contact with Muslim merchants from the West was a sufficient explanation of 
Islamization. 
It is tempting to the polemicist to raise one or the other of these two points 
of view into an adequate explanation for Islamization, so that a somewhat false 
debate has emerged. On the one hand we have Van Leur and Schrieke stressing 
the alteration in trading patterns and the dominance of Muslims in Indian Ocean 
trade of the 12th-16th centuries; and going on to make political factors even 
more crucial than commercial ones. Van Leur, who rather absurdly refuses to 
allow that Islam offered any 'higher civilization' to Southeast Asia, insists that 
the struggle between Portuguese and Muslims confirmed an already established 
pattern whereby Islam was hardly more than a symbol of political alliance with 
one side against the other. 5 On the other side of the debate, A.H. Johns and 
Fatirni took more seriously the evidence of the 'inside' sources, and used it to 
develop into a rival explanation of the Islamization process mystical Sufi 
preachers, who 
were proficient in magic and possessed powers of healing; and not least ... were 
prepared to use the terms and elements of pre~Islamic culture in an Islamic spirit. 6 
This antithesis stands in need of a rigorous synthesis. The rival explanations 
both contain much truth, but they are talking about different phenomena. The 
Islamic presence was of course brought by trade, and often consolidated 
2 
3 
4 
6 
Hikajat Bandjar. A Study in Malay Historiography, ed. J.J. Ras (The Hague, Nijhoff, 
1968), p. 420. 
M.C. Ricklefs, Modern Javanese Historical Tradition (London, SOAS, 1978), p.2. 
The Travels of Marco Polo, trans. R.E. Latham (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1958), 
p. 225. 
J.C. van Leur, Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social and Economic 
History (The Hague, Van Hoeve, 1955), pp. 110-4; B.J.O. Schrieke, Indonesian 
Sociological Studies (The Hague, Van Boeve, 1955-7), I pp. 1-82; II, pp. 230-67. 
A.H. Johns, 'Sufism in Indonesia', JSEAH 2, no. 2 (1961), p. 15. Also' S.Q. Fatimi, 
Islam Comes to Malaysia (Singapore, Malaysian Sociological Research Institute, 1963), 
esp. pp. 92-9. 
14 
by political and military power. Without the mercantile success of Muslims 
Southeast Asians could never have been confronted with the option of Islam 
at all, and without the backing of state power the option would not have 
reached those outside the trading centres. Yet every Southeast Asian who 
embraced Islam had to undergo his own process of inner conversion, his own 
reconciliation between long-held assumptions about the shape of the world 
and the central features of the new doctrine. Given the paucity of autobio­
graphical evidence on this personal dimension we would be wise at the outset 
to acknowledge the limitations of any discussion of motivations. Nevertheless, 
by combing the evidence of history on the period in question with the insights 
of anthropologists on the nature of Southeast Asian religious experience and 
conversion, the debate can be advanced in a number of key areas. 
Dealing with the Dead 
The ethnographic works of the last hundred years on the remaining 'animist' 
traditions of Southeast Asia have made certain consistencies of religious belief 
very clear. The most striking common feature of these religious systems is the 
continuing involvement of the dead in the affairs of the living. Disease, mis­
fortune and crop failure are held to be caused by the displeasure of ancestral 
spirits who have not been honoured with the appropriate rituals, or by the 
malevolence of restless or unhappy spirits of the dead which may be counter­
acted by the protection of the 'good' or happy ancestors. The ritual expression 
of this belief is the centrality in all such religious systems of elaborate feasting 
for tl1e dead, and of the subsequent invocation of ancestral spirits at every irn· 
portant rite de passage or agricultural ritual of the calender. Not unnaturally, 
when names were required to distinguish this traditional religion from Islam or 
Christianity, it was frequently designated the 'Way of the Ancestors' (Sa'dan 
TorajaA/uk to Do/o; East SumbaMarapu) 7 . 
We have 16th and 17th Century evidence from Spanish and Portuguese 
sources on the religious beliefs of the people of Luzon, the Visayas, and South 
Sulawesi (Bugis and Makassarese) before their conversion to Christianity and 
Islam respectively. This confirms that death-rituals and propitiation of the 
ancestral dead were remarkably similar to the pattern we know among non­
Muslim peoples of Borneo and Sulawesi in modern times.8 The Hinduism of 
7 Among an abundant anthropological· literature, see especially Richard Huntingdon and 
Peter Metcalf, Celebrations of Death: the Anthropology of Mortuary Ritual (Cam. 
bridge, 1979); Peter Metcalf, A Borneo Journey into Death: Berawan Eschatology 
from its Rituals (Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1982); Uchibori 
Motomitsu, 'The Leaving of this Transient World: a study of Iban eschatology and 
Mortuary Practice1, Unpublished Ph. D. thesis, ANU, Canberra, 1978; H. Schiirer 
Ngaju Religion: The Conception of God among a South Borneo People, trans. R'. 
Needham (The Hague, Nijhoff, 1963); Edwin M. Loeb, Sumatra: Its History and 
People (Vienna, lnstitut filr Volkerkunde, 1935), pp. 74-93; Gregory L. Forth,Rindi: 
An Ethnographic Study of a Traditional Domain in Eastern Sumba (The Hague, 
Nijhoff, 1981), pp. 83-103 and 171-213; W. Sti:Jhr and P. Zoetmulder,LesReligions 
d'Indo'!esie (Paris, Payot, 1968), esp. pp. 119-226; Roland Werner, Mah·Meri of 
Malaysia: Art and Culture, Kuala Lumpur, Penerbit Universiti Malaya, 1974. Janine 
Koubi, 'La premii!.re ffite funeraire chez les Toraja Sa'dan', Arehipel 10 (1975), pp, 
105-19. Toby Volkman, 'The Riches of the Undertaker', Indonesia 28 (1979), pp. 
1-16. 
8 On the pre-Hispanic Philippines see Antonio de Morga, Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas, 
15 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
Bali appears to have demanded little alteration to the ways in which the dead 
were regarded there, with offerings and death-rituals even today as central as 
in the 'animist' little traditions.9 In a less overt manner, the popular religious 
practice of even the people of tlle archipelago who have been Muslim or 
Christian for centuries reveals the continuing importance of tlle dead in the 
ritual pre-occupations of the living. In silort, it is possible to conclude 
that the dominant religious belief-system of the Southeast Asia to which Islam 
came in the 14th-17th centuries was one of deep ritual concern for the pro· 
pitiation of the dead. In comparison witl1 this popular pattern, the Bralunanic 
influence at many of the royal courts was very much more limited in scope, 
save perhaps in parts of Java. 
Such concern for the ritual well-being of the ,dead would appear to be in· 
compatible with Islam, with its intolerance of idolatry and polytheism, and 
its consequent insistence that burials should be simple and immediate, the dead 
returning to God as unadorned as they came from him at birth. Indeed the 
abrupt change of burial practice with the acceptance oflslam appears to be one 
of the most striking successes of the new religion. In those parts of Sulawesi 
which accepted Islam in the 17th Century, valuable ceramics were buried with 
the dead to accompany them in their journey to the hereafter, and these can 
be dated to various periods in the !0th-16th centuries, but appear to cease 
abruptly with Islam. The extravagant feasting which non-Muslim parts of the 
archipelago associate pre-eminently with death-rituals, was transferred among 
Muslims to weddings, and to a lesser extent to circumcisions. With some notable 
exceptions, such as tlle rulers of Melaka, early Aceh and Mataram,10 the graves 
of Muslims even in the earliest period of Islam were relatively modest. 
Nevertheless Islam demonstrated to Southeast Asians that it had its own 
ways of ensuring that the spirits of the dead were at peace, and even of invoking 
those spirits for the well-being of the living. It is now well-known that it was in 
the mystical form brought by initiates of the Sufi orders (Arabic tariqa; Malay 
tarekat) tllat Islam primarily recommended itself to Southeast Asians of the 
14th-17th centuries. We will be mistaken, however, if we think of this Sufism 
only in terms of the path to direct or ecstatic union with God taught in many of 
the early Malay and Javanese Islamic texts. 11 During tlle period of most rapid 
trans. J.S. Cummins (Cambridge, Hakluyt Society, 1971), pp. 278-Sl;Pedro Chirino, 
Relacion de las Islas Fllipinas, trans. R. Echevarria (Manila, Historical Conservation 
Society, 1969), pp. 327-9; Antonio Pigafetta in C.E. Nowell (ed.) Magellan's Voyage 
around the world: Tliree Contemporary Accounts (Evanston, Northwestern University 
Press, 1962), pp. 163-7; J.L. Phelan, The Hispanization of the Philippines (Madison, 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1959), pp. 23-4. On pre-Islamic South Sulawesi, see 
Christian PeJras, 'Celebes·sud avant l'Islam, scion les premiers temoignages etrangers', 
Archipel (1989), pp. 153-84. 
9 Ingela Gerdin, 'The Balinese Sidikara: Ancestors, Kin~hip, and Rank',BKI 137 (1981), 
pp. 17-34; C. Hooykaas, 'Counsel and Advice to the Soul of the Dead', Review of 
Indonesian and Malayan Affairs 10, i (1976), pp. 39-50. 
10 For the rich tombs of the Melaka kings see The Commentaries of the Great Afonso 
Dalboquerque, ed. W. de Gray Birch (London, Hakluyt Society, 1875-84), III;p. 136; 
and for those of Aceh, John Davis in Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchase His Pilgrimes 
Vol. II (Glasgow, James Maclehose for Hakluyt Society, 1905), pp. 321-2. 
11 A good selection of such texts have now been edited, including C.A.0. van Nieuwen· 
huijze, Samsu'l·Din van Pasai (Leiden thesis, 1945); G.W.J. Drewes, The Admonitions 
of SelJ Bari (The Hague, Nijhoff, 1969); A.H. Johns, The Gift Addressed to tlie Spirit 
16 
conversions to Islam in Southeast Asia, Sufism at the popular level had become 
a means of linking the individual believer with the spiritual power (Ar. baraka; 
Malay berkat) of holy men, apostles, rulers, founders of orders, and others 
whose baraka was manifested in numerous miracle stories. From this period, as 
Trimingham puts it, 'No clear distinction can henceforth be made between the 
orders and saint-veneration, since God's proteges (awliya1i1/ah) are within the 
orders' .12 The spiritual power of these dead saints was invoked to help the living 
partly through the chain (silsila) of spiritual genealogy which linked each Sufi 
teacher ultimately to the venerated founder of his order, but also through 
visitations (ziyara) to the tombs of holy men, where offerings were frequently 
made. 
The mystic carries out a ziyara for the purposes of muraqaba (spiritual commu­
nion) with the saint, finding in the material symbol an aid to meditation. But the 
popular belief is that the saint's soul lingers about his tomb and places (maqam) 
specially associated with him whilst he was on earth or at which he had 
manifested himself. At such places his intercession can be sought. 13 
These features of Sufism were to be found throughout the Muslim world, 
but were especially marked in India and Southeast Asia, where the expanding 
faith tended to take the form of 'a holy-man Islam' .14 The seeking of the berkat 
of holy men at their tombs has of course been a very marked feature of South­
east Asian Islam in modern times, wherever a stricter spirit of modernism has not 
taken root. Many of the tombs now most widely venerated are those of the 
apostles thought to have introduced Islam to each area, such as those of the nine 
walis of Java, or of Dato ri Bandang in Makassar. Still more honoured are the 
graves of those who popularized a particular sufi order, such as Abdar-Rauf of 
Singkil, the 'Shaikh Kuala' beloved of the Acehnese, who introduced the 
Shattariyya tariqa to Indonesia in the 17th Century, or Shailch Yusuf, the great 
teacher of the Kha/watiyya order, who even in Iris lifetime was held by the 
people of Makassar 'in such great love and awe as though he was a second 
Muhammad' .15 Although the earliest Sufi orders in Southeast Asia appear not 
to have been as highly structured as in other parts of the Muslim world, the 
extreme reverence for such figures and their graves confirms that it was indeed 
Sufi masters and practices which made the greatest impact in the region. An 
orthodox Muslim code of ethics from 16th Century Java warns its readers against 
the most popular of all the orders, the Kadiriyya, and goes to proclaim, 'It is 
unbelief to say that the great imams are superior to the prophets, or to put the 
saints (wali) above the prophets, and even above our lord Muhammad'.16 
of the Prophet (Canberra, Australian National University, 1965); Syed N aguib al·Attas, 
The Mysticism of Hamzah Fansuri (Kuala Lumpur, University of Malaya Press 1970). 
12 J. Spencer Trimingham, The Sufi Orders in Islam (Oxford Clarendon Press' 1971) p. 26. . . . 
13 Ibid. 
14 Ibid., p. 22. 
15 Governor Hartsink of Makassar, 1689, as cited in Leonard Y. Andaya, The Heritage of 
Arung Palakka. A History of South Sulawesi in the Seventeenth Century (The Hague, 
Nijhoff, 1981), p. 277. The title by which Yusuf is known in Makassar, Tuanta 
Salamaka (our lord who preserves us) indicates the intentions of the hundred of visitors 
bringing offerings daily to his tomb. 
16 G.W J. Drewes (ed.), An Early Javanese Code of Muslim Ethics (The Hague, Nijhoff, 
1978), pp. 38-9. 
17 

--- PAGE: 4 ---
Whether living or dead, the holy men of early Islam in Southeast Asia were 
accepted as having supernatural power similar to that of the ancestors; their 
graves replaced the resting places of the spirits of the dead as centres of pilgrimage, 
meditation, and petition. 1? 
The words of prayer were changed into an Islamic form much more quickly 
than the purposes to which prayer was put. To exorcise a malevolent spirit 
or to invoke a protective ancestral one, an Arabic prayer was at least as powerful 
as the mantra it replaced. For the most part Arabic terminology was quickly 
introduced in the religious area - baca do'a (to read an [Arabic] prayer) 
becoming the standard term for an invocation or blessing; roh (plural arwah) 
becoming accepted as the Islamic equivalent of the key Austronesian concept of 
semangat (soul-substance or spirit); and such )'lords as berkat and kramat 
describing the power that emanated from the graves of the saints. There are 
however some interesting indigenous survivals. The word ngaji (kaji, mengaji}, 
normally used for recitation of the Koran, for the souls of the departed as well 
as for other purposes, is an Austronesian word probably from the same root as 
the ngaji still used by animists in Flores in recent times to describe the ritual 
prayers addressed to the ancestors.18 Similarly, Southeast Asian Islam took over 
an older indigenous word sembahyang (sembah = veneration; hyang = god(s), 
lord} as the most usual term for personal prayer, including the daily sa/at).19 
Also worthy of further study is the role of the prayer litany known in 
Indonesia as the Tahlil (the first words of the confession of faith, La ilaha ilia 
Allah), because that phrase is repeated many times in its opening chant. The 
form of this prayer is popularly attributed to Abd al-Kadir Jilani, the most 
widely venerated of all the Sufi masters, which leads us to suspect that it may 
have been spread through Indonesia by the earliest adherents of Kadiriyya 
mysticism in the 16th and 17th Centuries. In the Moluccas, where this is the 
litany normally used for the dead, it takes the form of a prayer for the spirit of 
the Prophet, then for the spirits of the ancestors of the host family, especially 
the recently deceased, then for the ancestors of all present, and finally of all 
those who have died in the faith. It is recited not only at funerals, but at the 
specified intervals after death (3, 7, 40, 100 days) when ritual meals are held, at 
visits to graves, and at the annual commemoration of the dead.20 Whether or not 
in the same form, a Tahlil chant for the dead was also practised widely in 
Malaya, Sulu, Java and Sumatra.21 
17 For a 19th Century missionary view of the process of Islamization in an animist 
Indonesian culture, see Gottfried Simon, The Progress and An-est of Islam in Sumatra 
(London, Marshall Brothers, 1912). More modern anthropological accounts are 
Douglas Miles, 'Shamanism and the Conversion of the Ngadju Dayaks', Oceania 37, 
i (1966), and Cutlass and Crescent Moon: a case study in socfal and political change in 
outer Indonesia (Sydney. University of Sydney Centre of Asian Studies, 1976). 
18 Albert Novena, 'Tradition and Catholicism: Prayer and Prayer Groups among the 
Sikkanese of Flores' (B. Lit. thesis, ANU, 1982), pp. 13-24. For a review of the Litera~ 
ture on semangat and its relationship with Sufi concepts of ro/J, see Kirk Endicott, An 
Analysis of Malay Magic (Oxford, Ciasiendon, 191._0), esp. PP· 28-51. 
19 I owe this point among others to Ann Kumar, whose unpublished paper, 'A Javanese 
Kiai', stimulated my thinking on these questions. 
20 I am grateful to M. Shalleh Putuhena, of the IAIN Ujung Pandang, for this information 
on practice in the Moluccas. 
21 For Malaya see W.W. Skeat, Malay Magic; being an introduction to t/Je Folklore and 
Popular Religion of t/Je Malay Peninsula (1900; reprinted New York, Dover Publica· 
18 
The way in which the elaborate pre-Islamic feasting of the dead on their 
way to the land of the spirits gradually gave way to Islamic practice is easier to 
observe in a relatively recently Islamized area such as South Sulawesi. When 
James Brooke was in the Bugis area in 1840, he noted that there was still a 
40-day period of public feasting at the death of important people, with relatives 
of the deceased slaughtering buffaloes, goats, and chickens to feed all who 
attended.22 Even today many Bugis continue to distinguish a proportion of their 
property under the name of ampikale, the original purpose of which was to 
cover the substantial costs of this 40-day feasting after death. Today this portion 
goes to reward the member of the family who has borne most of the burden of 
caring for the deceased in old age.23 
As Snouck Hurgronje saw it, after the ritual meals for the dead on the 3rd, 
7th, !OOth (o~.in !~va up to !OOOth) day after their death, the spirit of the dead 
was no longer md1v1dually remembered and propitiated, but rather merged into 
the collective 'spirits of the departed'. These are especially remembered through­
out Islamic Southeast Asia on the 8th month of the lunar calendar (Sha'ban), 
known in Java as Bulan Arwah (the month of the spirits), and in Aceh and else­
where as 'the month of the rice feasts', since every family must hold a feast in 
honour of its ancestors during that month. 
According to the official or learned conception this is done in order to bestow on 
the .dec~a~ the recompe~se earned by his good work; according to the popuPl 
notion it IS to let them enJOY the actual savour of the good things of the feast. 
In the Arab world the month regarded as most appropriate for honouring the 
de~d.is the 7th, though the practice is by no means on the Southeast Asian scale. 
Snouck Hurgronje, noting that South India shared the Southeast Asian 
preference for the 8th month, saw this as further evidence for the Indian origin 
of Indonesian Islam. Equally significant, however, is the popular association 
between the honouring of the ancestors and the rituals associated with the 
fasting-month (the 9th) and the feasts which end it at Idulfitri Southeast Asian 
Muslims in general (though this is nowhere so marked as in Sulawesi and the 
Moluccas) concentrate their visits to the family graves in tlte last few days of the 
8th month, and the first days of the 10th, the latter being part of an Indonesian 
tradition at Idulfitri of asking forgiveness of one's elders, living and dead, for the 
misdeeds of the past year. It may therefore be that the preference of the 8th 
month for honouring the ancestors derives from an earlier transitional phase in 
which the feasting of Idulfitri, and the ritual of fasting and of breaking the fast, 
was replacing the feasts which traditionally had accompanied death rituals and 
tions, 1967), pp. 406-8; for Java, Ann Kumar, 'A Javanese Kiai' (unpublished); for 
Sumatra G.F. Pijper, Fragmenta lslamica (Leiden, Brill, 1934), pp. 178-81; for Sulu 
T.M. Kiefer, T/Je Tausug (New York, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1972), p. 132. 
22 James Brooke, Narrative of Events in Borneo and Celebes down to t/Je Occupation of 
Labuan, ed. R. Mundy (London, John Murray, 1848), I, pp. 87-8. For similar extra· 
vagant feasting in Bengkulen in the 1920s see Pijper, op. cit., pp, 179-81. 
23 Muslich Maruzi, 'Persamaan Hak dan Perimbangan Jasa: Studi Kasus tentang pola 
pewarisan tanah di kalangan masyarakat Bugis Desa Ompo, Kabupaten Dati II 
Soppeng' (Ujung Pandang, Stencil PLPIIS, 1981), p. 74. 
24 C. Snouck Hurgronje, The Ac/Jehnese, trans. A.W.S. O'Sullivan (Leiden, Brill, 1906), 
I, p. 221. 
19 

--- PAGE: 5 ---
offerings to the ancestors. 
Urbanization and Social Change 
If we have learned anything from the intense debate sparked by Weber's 
Tlze Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, it is that profound religious 
change in a society is accompanied by major changes in the social and economic 
order. The causal relationship between the two is highly complex, so that we 
must be on guard against simplistic explanations which either see religious change 
as purely a consequence or rationalization of economic change, or which by 
contrast see actions in the economic area flowing solely from the ideal types 
presented by religion and ideology. We are on safer ground in understanding 
changes in the social area as mutually reinforcing, )Vith an infinite variety possible 
m die mix. At least for the relatively self-contained world of the animist, however, 
this process of mutually reinforcing change seems often to have been initiated by 
the invasion of economic and political forces from outside. The last century has 
witnessed a period of such inescapable change for many interior or upland 
peoples of Southeast Asia.25 I suggest that the period when many of the major 
South'.'ast Asian states accepted Islam was similarly one of inescapable change, 
to which the growth of trade and of trading cities was the initial spur. 
Although our knowledge of the earlier period is still very sparse, there can 
be no doubt that the scale of Southeast Asian trade began to expand very 
rapidly in the late 14th century, and continued to do so into the 17th century. 
The reasons were in part the 'spice-orgy' which began to affect Europe after the 
crusades, and the organization of the Red Sea-Suez route to the Mediterranean 
for spices and Chinese goods by the Mamelukes about 1345; in part the great 
mcrease of Chinese activity in Southeast Asia, both official and unofficial, in 
connection with the early Ming dynasty. As a result of this trade cities developed 
with astonishing rapidity. Melaka, Grisek, and Makassar we know to have 
developed from little more than villages to cosmopolitan cities with populations 
of 50,000 or more within a century. Aceh, Banten, Patani, and Ayudhya also 
grew to great conurbations.26 Like any great cities, they were markets for ideas 
as well as merchandise. The Chinese brought much new knowledge of material 
culture, bronze-casting, gunpowder, scales, shipbuilding, and also some new 
tastes in food and drink; Indian merchants brought accounting and business 
methods as developed as any in the world; 'the Arabian arithmetic' was being 
studied in Aceh in 1620;27 the Makassarese prince Pattingalloang a little later 
insisted on obtaining from the Europeans at his court the latest in scientific 
knowledge from Europe, including an expensive new telescope with which 
Galileo had begun to revolutionize the view of the cosmos.28 Although Arabic, 
25 See, e.g., Simon, Progress and Arrest, esp. pp. 46-7 and 70-1; J.J.P. Cote, 1The Colo-
nization and Schooling if the To Pamona of Central Sulawesi, 1894 to 1924' (M. Ed. 
Thesis, Monash University, 1979); Miles, Cutlass and Crescent Moon. 
26 Antho~y Reid, 'The Structure of Cities in Southeast Asia, Fifteenth to Seventeenth 
Centunes',JSEAS XI, 2 (1980), pp. 235-9. 
27 'Memoires du Voyage aux Indes Orientates du General Beaulieu dresses par luy­
mesme', in Relations de Divers Voyages Curlew:, ed. 'Melch. Thevenot (Paris, Cramoisy, 
1666), p. 99. 
28 Anthony Reid, 'A Great Seventeenth Century Indonesian Family: Matoaya and 
Pattingalloang of Makassar', Masyarakat Indonesia 8, i (1981), pp. 19-24. 
20 
Italian, and Portuguese were spoken in many of the bigger cities, it was Malay 
above all which made it possible for Southeast Asians to learn of each other's 
cultures and of the visitors from outside the region. Magellan could make good 
friends in the Visayas because the Malay-speaking Sumatran slave he had brought 
around the world was well understood there.29 His colleague Pigafetta appeared 
to think that 'these Moors' had only one language, whether it was ;}/;' the 
Philippines, Borneo the Moluccas or Timor, and that of course was Malay. 
We know much less about the hinterlands behind these interconnected 
urban cities of Southeast Asia, but enough to see that the gulf from town to 
country was an immense one. The Melaka case is the most extreme, with little 
but forest once away from the urban and coastal area. Before the rise of Aceh 
the commercial cities of northern Sumatra are always described as enclaves 
surrounded by tatooed cannibals. Since Sultan Iskandar Muda is described as 
meeting a crafty bow-legged Balak when he was out hunting, even Aceh in his 
days cannot have extended far into the interior.31 In South Celebes, despite its 
apparent homogeneity of culture, the picture is the same. 'The nearer we drew 
to Makassar ... the more civilized we found the people', remarked Navarette as 
he followed the coast down from the north in 1657. 32 To the Engiish in 
Makassar, the Bugis who periodically disturbed the J'eace of the city appeared 
like wild men who 'amaze and terrify' the city.3 Even in Java, where the 
modern convention is the reverse one of contrasting the refmed kraton culture 
of inner Java with the more gauche and materialistic pasisir, there is much 
evidence to suggest that Demak, Cirebon, Tuban, Grisek and Surabaya were the 
real centres of Javanese civilizat\on at least until they fell before the arms of 
Sultan Agung in the 17th century. 34 
The gulf between civilized city and primitive countryside can partly be 
explained by the strong foreign element in the early growth of these cities. 
Chinese are now admitted to have had a major part in the founding of Grisek, 
Japara, Ayudhya, and Nakhon seri Thammarat (Ligor) in the late 14th and early 
15th centuries. They had much to do with the growth of Melaka and Patani in 
the same .period, though Javanese and Gujeratis soon became even more 
numerous. Malays and Javanese in Ternate, Malays and Portuguese in Makassar, 
Malays, Chinese and Gujeratis in Banton all contributed much to the urban 
population and the emerging urban culture. Yet it would be a great mistake to 
minimize the importance of that new culture by seeing the new cities as some 
sort of disaggregated pastiche of foreign elements. All of these cities shared a 
culture which was Malayo-Muslim and an urban settlement pattern which was 
very distinctively Southeast Asian. 
The pressures of rapid urbanization and social change can be viewed from 
the perspective of the villager drawn into the rapidly growing trade centres, or 
from the point of view of whole societies exposed to rapid social change as 
29 Pigafetta, ed. Newell, pp. 136-7. 
30 Ibid. pp. 227-36. 
31 Teuku Iskandar (ed.), De Hikajat Atjeh ('s-Gravenhage, Nijhoff, 1958), pp. 146-8. 
32 The Travels and Controversies of Friar Domingo Navarrete 1618-86 ed. J.S. Cummins 
(Cambridge, Hakluyt Society, 1962), I, p. 111. 
33 India Office Library G/l 0/1, ff. 82. 117, 202. 
34 H.J. de Graaf & Th. G. Th. Pigeaud, De Eerste Moslems Vorstendommen op Java 
('s-Gravenhage, Nijhoff, 1976), pp. 165-6. 
21 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
their role in world trade grows. The latter is perhaps best seen in Makassar, 
where we are particularly well provided with internal and external sources 
covering its rise from a local animist village at war with all its neighbours in the 
early 16th century, to the great metropolis and trading centre of Eastern 
Indonesia by the early 17th. The city must have had a population approaching 
50,000 by 1615, when 1260 houses were burned down without disrupting the 
city as a whole, and when the En§\lish saw the king review 36,000 fighting men 
called up at only 24 hours notice. 5 The Makassarese may have been an extreme 
case of openness to change and to new ideas because of the very speed of their 
urbanization pattern. The Gowa chronicle reads like a series of 'firsts', as it notes 
which King was the first to erect brick walls, which the first to caste guns, to 
organize a new aspect of government, and of course to conquer and make 
tributary each surrounding state. Despite this fapid change, when the first 
substantial Dutch description of the city gives us a glimpse in 1607, just after 
the formal acceptance of Islam, it was still a largely animist culture. 
The various fruits of India abound there, also goats, buffaloes, and pigs, though 
these are now difficult to obtain, because the King accepted the Mohamedan Law 
four years ago ... The men carry usually one, two, ~r 1!1ore ballsin ~1eir penis, ?f 
the same size as those of Siam, but not hollow or clink.mg, rather of ivory or solid 
fishbone which is now also declining among them because of the change of sect; 
while th~y were heathen the women cut off their hair with a comb, but they now 
have it washed long, and bind it in the manner of the Malay wom~n; the female 
slaves whom one sees carrying water in the back streets have their upper body 
with the breasts completely naked, and wear trousers which come up to the navel. 
When they wash they stand mother-naked, the men as ~ell as the women, which I 
have seen in no other place in the Indies as I have here. 6 
Just forty years after this report, another visitor to Makassar noted that, 'there 
are ... no hogs at all because the natives who are Mohammedans, have extermi­
nated the1n entirely fro1n the country', while 'the women are entirely covered 
from head to foot, in such fashion that not even their faces can be seen'. 37 The 
change in every aspect of life was profound and rapid. Despite the seemingly 
very short history of urban civilization in South Sulawesi, European accounts 
agree that the 17th Century Makassarese were 'a very good people to deal with 
and to live by; and which hold good right and justice, and order after their 
manner'.38 
If the Islamization of Makassar was exceptional, it was less because of the 
speed of the social change which accompanied it, then because there was a real 
choice for Makassar between Christianity and Islam. This is the point of the 
widespread European accounts, current as early as the 1640s, about a decision 
35 India Office Library, G/10/1, ff. 5 and 9. 
36 Oost-Indische Reyse onder den Admirael Steven van der Hagen, p. 82, in Begin ende 
Voortgang van de Vereenigde Neederlandtsche Geoctroyeerde Oost-lndische Com-
pagnie (Amsterdam, 1646 - reprint 1976) Vol. ~II. . 
37 Rlzodes of Vietnam: The Travels and Missions of Father Alexander de Rhodes in China 
and other Kingdoms of the Orient, ed. Solange Hertz (Westminster, Md., Newman 
Press, 1966), pp. 206-7. . 
38. Hugh Frayne to Downtown, 1610, in Letters Received by the East Indui Company 
from its Servants in the East, ed. F.C. Danvers (London, Sampson, Low & Marston, 
1896-1902) II, p. 71. 
22 
by the Makassar elite to let God decide for them between Islam and Christianity 
by means of a contest, to see whether Muslim Aceh or Christian Melaka would 
be the first to respond to a request for missionaries. 39 The 'race' as such may be 
a legend, as Noorduyn has convincingly argued,40 but the Portuguese were 
correct in lamenting that they had had a chance to Christianize Makassar and 
had lost it largely by default. The Makassarese profited from both Portuguese 
and Malay trade and had some knowledge of the doctrines upheld by each. At 
least in the case of the great Arung Matoaya, who guided Makassar into a wider 
world through Islam, there is no doubt that there was a conscious weighing 
of two rival world-views, and an intellectual decision between them. 41 
For most Southeast Asians there was no such conscious decision between 
rival systems of equal relevance. Rather was it a question of a new ilmu, a new 
system of controlling the supernatural forces around them, to be judged 
primarily in terms of its results and its consonance with the new and desired life­
style. An anthropologist has recently described the constant religious experimen­
tation on the part of Ngaju Dayaks in Borneo, deserting one shaman or one set 
of spirits for another in accordance with the perceived results. A Dayak Christian 
missionary described their approach as follows to this field-worker: 
Dayaks play politics with supernatural beings. No one could deny that they are 
religious. But their interest in religion is a matter of tactics. The more a man 
knows about ritual, the more he can do for his own and his family's welfare. A 
person's wealth is proof of his theologi~.l knowledge. They are continu.ally 
changing their adherence from one set of sp1nts to another. If the! make the r_ight 
moves they will die rich and buy their way into Heaven with h14~e arumal 
sacrifices. If they die in poverty they may remain in eternal Purgatory. 
Islam is perhaps of all great world religions the most congenial to trade, and both 
the Quran and the Hadith heap praise upon the 'trustworthy merchant' who 
trades profitably for the benefit of himself, his family, and worthy causes.43 In 
Southeast Asia Islam was brought by traders, and quickly associated itself with 
the relatively opulent and sophisticated life-style of the mercantile cities. In 
Luzon, when Islamization was still at an early stage, it was reported that, 
some are Moros and they obtain much gold, which they worship as a God. All 
their possession; are gold and a few slaves ... · They b~lieve that ~a:adise and 
successful enterprises are resetved for those who submit to the re~gion of the 
Moros of Borney of which they make much account ... These are a f.ftet people, 
because they are :rierchants, and with their slaves, cultivate the land. 
Islam, in other words, was identified with wealth, success, and power for many 
39 Rhodes of Vietnam, p. 207; C.R.. Boxer,Fran;isco Vieira deFi~eiredo: A Portuguese 
Merclwnt·Adventurer in South East Asia (s-Gravenhage, N1Jhoff, 1967). p. 3n.; 
Navarrete I, p. 113. 
40 J. Noorduyn, 'De Islamiseering van Makasar', BKI 112 (1956), pp. 247-67. 
41 Ibid. Also Reid, 'Matoaya and Pattingalloang', pp. 13-18. 
42 Douglas Miles "Shamanism and the Conversion of Ngadju Dayaks', p. 5. See also 
Volkman in I~donesia. 28 (1979), p. 4 for wealth as a sign and product of spiritual 
43 ~~~er~ost recently, Maxime Rodinson, Islam and Capitalism (Harmondsworth, 
Penguin, 1977), pp. 16-19. 
44 Francisco de Sande, Relation of the Filipinas Islands 7 June 1576, in E.H. Blair and 
J .A. Robertson (ed.). The Philippi'ne Islands 1493-1898 (n.p., n.d.), IV, pp. 67-8. 
23 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
Filipinos. It is scarcely surprising that those who were ambitious, particularly in 
the area of trade, began to assimilate towards Islam even before they understood 
anything about its central doctrines. The early Spanish chroniclers often spoke 
as though all of the lowland people of Luzon were 'Moros', although this can 
only have been in terms of the most superficial cultural borrowing. 'In the 
villages nearest the sea' many did not eat pork, although they could not explain 
why to the Spanish and appeared not even to know the name of Mohammad.45 
For other reasons too the more commercially inclined must quickly have 
been attracted towards the new faith. The spirits of the ancestors, the trees and 
the mountains did not travel easily. The trader who moved from place to place 
needed a faith of broader application. If he moved beyond his own island he 
needed the Malay language and he needed acceptance and contacts in the trading 
cities. Islam provided both a faith and a social system for such traders. Few 
Visayans, for example, entered the markets of Melaka, Brunei or Banten clad 
only in a loin-cloth of tree-fibre cloth, tatooed and long-haired like his coun!rY­
men at home. Modification of dress towards the Malay pattern probably 
preceded formal acceptance of Islam by such traders. 
Wherever an earlier Bhramanic influence had not reached, with its exalted 
sense of kingship sanctioned by religious ritual, there was little to oppose the 
steady assimilation towards the faith of the traders who brought new wealth 
and power. This was the case in the Philippines in the 16th century, and pre­
sumably also in the Moluccas in the 15th. Some Ternate traditions as later 
recorded make no distinction between the coming of the Muslim traders and the 
formal acceptance of Islam: 
They say that they took these [royal] titles from the Javanese who made them 
Muslims and introduced coinage into their country, as well as the gong, the 
sernn~~ ivory, the kris (dagger), and tlte law, and all the other good things they 
have. 
The Major States 
Elsewhere, in the major city-states, a situation quickly developed where 'the 
king is a pagan; the merchants are moors'. 47 This is how Rui de Brito described 
Brunei in 1514, and the same must have applied to Samudra in 1282 (when a 
non-Muslim king sent Muslim envoys to China), to Patani in the 14th century~ 8 
Melaka in the early 15th, Banjarmasin in the early and Makassar in the late 16th 
45 'Relation of the Conquest of the Island of Luzon', 20 April 1572, in Blair& Robertson, 
III p. 165;Also Blair & Robertson III, pp. 74, 297, 300; V, p. 83. 
46 A Treatise on the Moluccas (c. 1544), ed. Hubert Th. Th. JacoOs (Rome, Jesuit Histo~ 
rical Institute, 1971), pp. 104-5. This text and other Portuguese sources date the 
introduction of Islam to Ternate at about 1460-70. The Ternate chronicles used by 
Valentijn and other Dutch writers, place the beginning of Islamic rule in the reign _of 
Sultan Zainal Abidin (1486-1500?), though listing earlier 14th Century chieftams 
also with Arabic names and Javanese connections. This may suggest a two-stage process 
of Is1amization the first being very superficial. F.S.A. de Clercq, Bijdrage tot de Kennis 
der Residentie 'Temate (Leiden, Brill, 1890), pp. 148-50; Z.J. Manusama, 'Hikayat 
Tanah Hitu' (Leiden dissertation, 1977), pp. 6-7, 45-6, 86-7. 
47 Rui de Brito Patalim to King, 6 January 1514, in A.B. de 53. (ed.) Documentac'iT'! para 
a Historla das Missoes do Padroado Portugues do Oriente: Inmlindia Vol. I (Ltsboa, 
Agencia Geraldo Ultramar, 1954), p. 68. 
48 Hikayat Patani, II, p. 222. 
24 
century. 49 Even in 14th century Majapahit and 15th-17th century Ayudhya, 
great centres of Buddhist civilisation, Muslim traders were firmly established 
at the capital, and appeared to have better links with the court than any other 
commercial element, including non-Muslim Chinese. Nevertheless, such courts 
possessed sacral traditions of Kingship which were clearly incompatible with 
Islam, and typically they looked down on the whole commercial community as 
of relatively low status. How then did the conversion of such courts come 
about? 
Intermarriage between wealthy traders or Shahbandars and the court circle 
has been frequently mentioned in this connection. In a sense this is to beg the 
question however. Bhramano-Buddhist rulers mi~t readily take girls of ~ow 
estate into their palace as concubines or lesser wives, but to accept a marriage 
partner as of equal status was to set the seal on Isl_amizati~~, rather tlian to bring 
it about. There had usually to be either a consc1ous dec1S1on to accept the new 
faith and social system, or else an element of force. 
An important factor here was that each of these proud states which declined 
to accept Islam was in danger of being outflanked by rival states. Samudra-Pasai 
was not tl1e first state in North Sumatra to adopt Islam - all sources agree that 
at least Perlak and Aru preceded it by a few years. Similarly Patani was probably 
preceded by Terengganu and Melaka by its neighbour Pahang not to mention its 
more distant rival Pasai. so In South Sulawesi it is Luwu, surprisingly not a 
particular centre of trade at all, which is acknowledged as the first Muslim state, 
a few years ahead of Makassar. On the one hand these pioneer Muslim states 
must have helped to make Islam respectable in the eyes of the more stubbornly 
Bhramanic courts, in some cases even apparently attracting rival members of the 
ruling dynasty to their side. On the other they posed the danger of a wholesale 
desertion by Muslim traders to the alternative centre. 
In Java and in Javanised Banjarmasin, this sort of pressure and example was 
clearly insufficient. In some cases tl1e Muslim kauman, as it would now be called, 
ceased to give allegiance to the ruling dynasty and entered a state of civil war 
from a rival capital. Grisek was apparently in such a state in the early 16th 
century when it was described by Tome Pires. 51 The ruler of one side of the 
river, Pate Cucuf (Patin Yusuf), was born in the trading community of Melaka 
of mixed Javanese-Malay parentage, and had command of much more wealth and 
men. His antagonist on the other side of the river, who must have been defeated 
soon after these words were written, 'sets himself up as a knight' (presume de 
cava/eiro) - obviously having a better claim to priyayi status. In Banjarmasin 
the great length of the Barito river gave better opportunities for the rival 
elements to keep out of each other's way. Raden Samudra, claimed by the 
Hikayat Banjar to be a nephew of the ruler, set up his rival capital much lower 
down tlie river near the site of the present Banjarmasin, and quickly attracted 
or forced (the Hikayat mentions only force) the traders to join him there. After 
49 Hikajat Bandjar, pp. 262, 370, 430. Anthony Reid, 'The Rise of Makassar', (un-
published paper for SSRC conference on South Sulawesi, Melbourne, 1981), pp. 18-
21. 
50 Hikayat Patani I, pp. 3-4. . 
51 The Suma Oriental of Tome Pires, ed. Armando Cortesao (London, Hakluyt Society, 
1944), p. 193. 
25 

--- PAGE: 8 ---
this it was only a short step for him to make an alliance with the crusading 
centre of Demak, accept Islam, and make war against his more stubborn rival 
with the help of all these Islamic elements. 52 
Almost all the indigenous chronicles are at pains to establish continuity 
between the new Islamic rulers and the earlier dynasties - sometimes through 
rather transparent devices. The Portuguese on the other hand are inclined to 
stress the lowly origin of the Muslim rulers, particularly in Java. The truth may 
be closer to the former than the latter. Tome Pires' informants on Java were 
presumably Javanese, and their low estimate of the antecedents of the coastal 
rulers may have been in part a product of dynastic and political rivalries. Un­
doubtedly some Islamic centres, such as Banten, Grisek, and perhaps Demak, did 
break altogether with the Hindu dynasty, but IJ10St of the larger states were 
anxious to preserve tradition not only in their· chronicles but in their court 
ceremonial, regalia, and etiquette. The magical aura of sovereignty (dau/at), 
which surrounded a ruler of the correct credentials, was itself his major weapon 
in any contest for the throne. At least in the difficult case of Java we must give 
some attention to the ways in which Islam may have penetrated into the court 
circle itself. 
Islam and the Court of Majapahit 
According to Javanese traditions, recorded in a variety of forms from the 
17th century onwards, the major external sources of Islamic influence were 
Champa and Pasai. The principal figure in these stories is the Puteri Cempa, a 
daughter of a ruler of Champa who became the bride of the King of Majapahit. 
According to the Javanese stories, the sister of this princess married a wealthy 
Arab trader in Champa, from which union sprang one or two sons who 
combined Islamic piety with the required exalted blood. The eldest of these 
sons, in the versions where he appears, went to Java to become Imam of the 
mosque of Grisek. The younger (or only) son was the famous Raden Rahmat, 
who visited his aunt at the court of Majapahit, where he was received with great 
favour. Eventually he was allowed by the ruler to proceed to Ampel, near 
Surabaya, to found a religious community and make converts of anybody he 
chose.53 
In one tradition, the Hikayat Banjar, Pasai rather than Champa is given as 
the origin of Raden Rahmat. The Javanese traditions give Pasai as the origin of 
two other famous wali (apostles) of Java, Maulana Iskak (father of Sunan Giri) 
and Sunan Gunung Jati, the pioneer of Islam in Banton and Cheribon. This 
connection, however, appears to be later than the Champa one - early in the 
16th century in the latter's case.54 
The citations of Champa and Pasai in Javanese accounts of Islarnization are 
too frequent to be ignored, particularly as neither kingdom was significant at 
the time the accounts were recorded. There is a problem however that the dates 
even of Raden Rahmat and Puteri Champa, which Pigeaud and De Graaf place 
52 Hikafat Bandfar, pp. 45-9 and 398-439. 
53 De Graaf & Pigeaud Eerste Moslems Vorstendommen, pp. 19-21. T.S. Raffles, The 
History of Java (London, 1817 - reprinted Kuala Lumpur, Oxford University Press, 
1978), II, pp. 115-118. 
54 De Graaf & Pigeaud,EersteMoslems Vorstendommen, pp. 170 and 111-18. 
26 
in the middle of the 15th century, are too late to account for the growth of 
Muslim centres at Grisek and Japara as recorded by the Chinese, or for the 
Muslim graves at Troloyo near Majapal!it, which cover the period 1376-1475. 
The latter indicate that there were Muslims of high status at the court of 
Majapal!it in this early period, who were either Javanese or at least Javanised 
foreigners. 5 5 
A factor not sufficiently considered in the discussions of this difficult 
period in Javanese history is the relationship between Majapahit's externa1 
relations and Islamization. The evidence of the Nagarakertagama that the tribu­
taries of King Hayam Wuruk extended as far as north Sumatra, Malaya, Champa, 
and the Moluccas56 has been seen in terms of the possible influence of Java on 
these areas. We know, however, from the 'tributary' relationships of China, 
Siam, Melaka and elsewhere that the exchanges were mutual. Regular political 
and commercial relations between Majapal!it and these distant kingdoms 
certainly occurred, since these are confirmed by the non-Javanese sources at the 
other end - the Hikayat Raja-raja Pasai, Sejarah Melayu, Silsilah Raja-raja 
Sambas, Hikayat Banjar, as well as numerous oral traditions from the eastern 
islands. In view of the predominance of Muslims on the trade routes of the 
archipelago, these relations cannot have been maintained without using at least 
some Muslim ships, mariners, and traders. Some of the states claimed as 
Majapahit tributaries were themselves Muslim, including Haru, Perlak, Samudra 
(Pasai), Lamuri and Barus in Sumatra, and probably Terengganu in Malaya. In 
many others there. would have been a significant commercial minority of 
Muslims likely to play a role in diplomatic as well as economic relations between 
the states. Just as China under the Yung-lo emperor made use of Muslim 
admirals and seamen to spread its influence abroad, Majapahit very probably 
mobilized the Muslim shipping in many ports it conquered or influenced to take 
part in missions yet further afield. One surviving example of the process are the 
orang Timur of Jambi, said to be the descendants of men from Sarawak and 
Brunei who came to J ambi as members of an invading Majapahit army in the 
14th Century.57 It may be possible to explain the evidence for a superficial and 
short-lived Muslim influence in 14th century Ternate (and much more problem­
atically for a similar phenomenon in Brunei and Sulu), a century before a 
continuous tradition of Islam begins, by a burst of expansionist activity on the 
part of Majapahit which made use of Muslim seamen and soldiers. 
As the Hikayat Raja-raja Pasai reported of Majapahit, 'there was a ceaseless 
coming and going of people from the territories overseas which had submitted 
to the king'. 58 Some of tliese were certanly Muslims, including the captives 
brought back by Majapahit's successful expedition against Pasai: 
As for the Pasai prisoners, the Emperor made a decree ordering them to remain in 
Java but allowing them hOerty to settle in it anywhere they pleased. That is why 
55 L.C. Damais, 'Etudes Javanaises 1. Les Tombes Musulmanes Datees de Tralaya', 
BEFEO 48 (1954), pp. 353-415. S.O. Robson, 'Java at the Crossroads', BKI 137 
{1981), pp. 271-2. 
56 The list of tributaries is given in Th.G. Pigeaud, Java in the Fourteenth Century {The 
Hague, Nijhoff, 1960). III, pp. 16-17. 
57 J. Tideman,Djambi (Amsterdam, de Bussy, 1938), p. 78. 
58 'Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai',J.11.fBRAS 33, ii (19610, p. 161 (Malay text p. 102). 
27 

--- PAGE: 9 ---
there are in Java so r:wqy keramat (holy graves) dating from the time of conquest 
of Pasai by Majapahit. 
Although such captives undoubtedly contained men of high rank, it is not there 
that we should look for the means by which Islam eventually penetrated to with­
in the highest Javanese court circles. In the dynastic marriages which cemented 
relations between the most powerful 'tributary' states and Majapahit, on the 
other hand, this access could be expected. Although the Hikayat Raja-raja Pasai 
has a fanciful tale of the abortive suit of a Pasai prince by a Majapahit princess, 
it is with Champa that these marriage relations are most significant. 
Just as Javanese records show the Majapahit king marrying a Cham princess, 
it is Cham records which show the reverse process, in the marriage of King J aya 
Simhavarman III of Champa to a Javanese princess at the beginning of the 14th 
century. These dynastic relations were close enough for a Cham king to take 
refuge in Java after a Vietnamese attack on his capital in 1318.60 The Sejarah 
Melayu goes further, claiming that a ruler of Champa journeyed to Majapahit 
to make his homage, fathering there a child by a Majapahit princess who later 
grew up to become the last ruler of Champa before its capital at Vijaya fell to 
the Vietnamese in the mid-15th Century.61 Certainly relations between the 
Cham court and the courts of Java and the Malay world appear to have been 
exceptionally close, regardless of religion, and despite the earlier relation with 
Java it was with Malaya-Muslim courts that the Chams became associated after 
the fall of Vijaya. According to the Sejarah Melayu the defeated princess of 
Champa then fled to Melaka and Aceh, where they became Muslim,62 while 
Makassar sources show Cha ms flaying an honoured role there among the 
Malaya-Muslim merchant group.6 In 1607 a Dutch fleet found that the vestigial 
kingdom of Champa still had exceptionally close and cordial relations with 
Johor, and that although the king was Hindu much of his court was Muslim or 
pro-Muslim.64 The Cham aristocrats who found refuge in 15th Century Melaka 
became Muslim very readily (although t?at st~t~ was always tol_era~t o_f Hindu~s' 
yet they allegedly retained a taboo agamst killmg a cow or drmking its milk. 
All of this suggests that even though the Champa court retained a high sense of 
the sacral purity required of a Bralunanic ruler, it was very closely tied to the 
Muslim commercial element both within its own kingdom and in the wider 
S9 Ibid. p. 159 (Malay text p. 100). It seems possible ~hat t~1e wri~er of the origina~ 
Hikayat Rafa-Raja Pasai was himself amo.ng t~ese caJ?hves, since. his acc~unt .of Pa~a1 
ends with a sympathetic account of the mvaston of 1t by a glorious MaJapah1t, while 
the only known text was copied in 1814 from a text then in the possession of the 
bupati of Demak, one of the heirs of Majapahit's power in Java. 
60 S.O. Robson, 'Java at the Crossroads', BK/ 137 (1981), p. 276. I cannot, howev~r 
follow Robson in accepting Maspero's dismissal of Islam in Champa before 1471 m 
apparent disregard of the contrary evidence assembled by Fatimi, pp. 42-57. 
61 'Sejarah Melayu', pp. 109-10, 
62 Ibid. pp. 110-11. . . 
63 Sedjarah Goa, ed. G.J. Wolhoff and Abdurrahim (Makassar, J a.iasan Kebudajaan, n.d:): 
p. 28.; Sja'ir Perang Mengkasar (The R~ymed Chronicle of the Macassar War) by Entjl 
Amin, ed. c. Skinner ('s-Gravenhage, N1Jhoff, 1963), pp. 146-7 and 269. . . 
64 'Historische Verhaal van de treffelijcke Reyse ... door den Manhaften AdmU"al Cornehs 
Matelief de Ionge', p. 120, in Begin ende Voortgangli (1976 reprint Vol III) . . 
6S 'Sejarah Melayu', p. 109. Aslo ibid. p. SS, where the Cham nakhodas are gwen a very 
high ceremonial position at court. 
28 
Malay world beyond. The Javanese story of Raden Rahmat and Putri Cempa 
expresses exactly this situation, the marriage links leading from the Majapahit 
court to the Champa court to the Champa Muslim minority. It is in general 
through tribute and trading missions, and in particular through the Champa 
connection, that Islam appears to have gained respectability at the very heart of 
the Javanese state. 
Force 
Arnold's Preaching of Islam inaugurated a very salutary reaction against the 
crude caricature of an Islam spread by the sword. We risk distortion of another 
kind, however, if we overlook the extent to which relatively small but deter­
mined Muslim forces were able to impose their will on substantial areas of 
Southeast Asia. The chronicles themselves are usually not averse to emphasizing 
the victories of Muslim arms in the holy cause. In those areas where there was 
serious resistance to Islam, which included the whole of inland Java, South 
Sulawesi (with the Makassarese crusade against Wajo, Bone, and the other 
Bugis states), and Banjarmasin, war was required either to destroy the old 
dynasty completely or to persuade it to accept the new dispensation. Even in 
the Philippines the physical superiority of the Muslims did no harm to their 
cause. Without such wars Islam would have spread more slowly, and in such 
places as West and East Java might never have spread at all. 
There are two elements in the superiority of Muslim arms against their 
Hindu-Buddhist adversaries. The first is the superior weaponry which wealth and 
international contacts made available to the Muslims. Although some of the most 
spectacularly large cannon did come from the Middle East, like the Turkish 
cannon which helped Aceh win many battles in the 16th century, most guns 
were probably either Chinese or home-made. Small Chinese brass guns, culverins, 
were in use by Muslims all over the Philippines, in Brunei, and probably in 
Melaka. Chinese Muslims themselves were often among the most useful gunners 
and manufacturers of guns in the Southeast Asian cities, notably in Giri, Gresik, 
and Banton. But from at least the 16th century the knowledge of gun-making 
was widespread among the commercial elements of Southeast Asia. When the 
Spanish sacked Manila in 1570 they found next to Raja Suleiman's house a 
foundry for making bronze guns. 'Some small and large cannon had just been 
begun. There. were the clay and wax moulds, the largest of which was for a 
cannon 17 feet long, resembling a culverin' .66 Similarly the Javanese in Melaka 
at the Portuguese conquest were reported to be active in 'the making of 
arquebusses and all other kinds of firearms'. 67 Traders were ready to defend 
their ships wherever they sailed, and many vessels appeared to be equipped with 
small guns. Foreign merchants were expected to assist the ruler of the port they 
were in during his campaigns, and of course proved useful allies. The Malays 
\Vere often mentioned as prominent in the forces ofMakassar, the Javanese and 
Gujeratis in Melaka, the Chinese in Java and a whole range of foreigners in 
Banjarmasin. Later, Europeans would find the same role expected of them. 
66 'Relation of the Voyage to Luzon', May 1570, in Blair & Robertson III, p. 103. 
67 The Book of Duarte Barbosa, ed. M.L. Dames (London, Hakluyt Society, 1918), p. 
193. 
29 

--- PAGE: 10 ---
The other element was the Muslim faith itself. Where Muslims were in a 
small minority their faith gave them both solidarity and the confidence that 
heaven was on their side. When we consider the very religious conception of 
power among all the peoples of Southeast Asia this latter factor is not to be 
minimized. The magical potency of a ruler or war-leader, his skill at choosing 
auspicious days, invulnerable charms, and ritual preparations, had as much to do 
with success in battle as the weight of numbers or armaments. The first few 
casualties in a battle were therefore likely to decide the outcome. Whenever a 
determined force confident of its own destiny appeared in Southeast Asia, 
whether Muslim or Christian, it was able to achieve victories out of all propor­
tion to its numbers. 
The Mainland Example 
Muslim trade also played a major role in Thailand and Cambodia in the 16th 
and 17th centuries. The commercially-oriented Cham who fled their homeland 
and setted around the Cambodian capital near modern Pnom Penh were all 
Muslim, or at least had become so by 1600. The western Muslims, particularly 
Persians and Chulias from South India, dominated the trade routes overland 
from Mergui, Junkceylon (Phuket), and Kedah to the ports on the East Coast, 
and thence to Bangkok and Ayudhya. All along this route the governors of 
towns, nominally under Ayudhyan sovereignty, were Persian or Indian Muslims. 
In the middle of the 17th Century a Persian Muslim, Okphra Sinnarat, was the 
dominant official in charge of commerce (Barcalon) even in the capital, 
Ayudhya. The third and most numerous Muslim element was the community 
of Malay traders conducting trade between the Thai and Cambodian capitals and 
such ports as Patani, Johar, Aceh, Banten and Makassar. As the Dutch squeezed 
Muslim (and Portuguese) trade out of more and more centres in the Archipelago, 
Ayudhya and Cambodia tended to receive an increased number of politico­
economic refugees. 
The question therefore should be asked, why these ports too did not 
become Muslim in the 17th century. The factors which account for this 
difference shed a good deal of light on the process of Islamization in the 
remainder of Southeast Asia. 
Firstly, it is of course true that commerce was less important to these two 
states than to those of the Archipelago. The option of closing themselves off 
altogether to outsiders, Europeans as well as Muslims, which the mainland states 
eventually took in the late 17th century, was not really open to the archipelago 
states - however hard Sultan Agung and his successors may have tried in Java. In 
the case of Thailand, but not Cambodia, we would have to add that a higher 
degree of integration of the country around the central institutions of Kingship 
and the Buddhist Sangha had probably been achieved by the 17th century than 
in any archipelago state. Yet even with these two factors taken into account, it 
was still an open issue whether these states would fall to the superior power of 
Muslim arms. 
The Muslim element first showed its strength in the confused period in 
Cambodia following a Siamese invasion of 1593. Malays, Chams, Chinese, 
30 
Japanese, Spanish and Portuguese were all competing for influence in the 
Cambodian capital in the decade that followed, though it was the European 
adventurers who behaved with the greatest violence and greed. In 1598 the 
Spanish briefly placed their candidate on the Cambodian throne, earning the 
particular enmity of the Malays and Chams who had previously formed the basis 
of the royal guard. When this king sent his European mercenaries against the 
Muslim group, led by a Malay Laksamana from Johar, the Muslims succeeded in 
first routing the Europeans and then killing the king himself. As the Cambodian 
chronicle put it: 'The Cham named Chara and the Chhvea [Malay] named 
Laksamana, put the King to death'. 68 The Muslims had successfully foiled the 
Spanish bid for power, but no other force was strong enough to assume power 
until a measure of order was restored in 1602-3 by the renewed intervention of 
Ayudhya in support of a Thai-educated Cambodian prince.69 
The Muslim element had however emerged from this crisis with some claim 
to being the real defenders of Cambodian independence, and so they remained 
through much of the l 7tl1 century. Their principal antagonists now became the 
Dutch VOC, here as throughout Southeast Asia. The Regent in authority in 
Cambodia in the period 1625-42 leaned towards concessions to the Dutch, who 
of course wanted a monopoly position in Cambodia. He thereby alienated the 
Muslims, who supported a coup d'etat against him in 1642. This placed on the 
throne a usurper apparently named Chan, who ruled in conditions of consider­
able disorder, leaning ever more heavily on his Muslim supporters whom he 
further wooed by taking a Malay wife. A party of Dutch traders was massacred 
in !643, and Dutch attempts to obtain revenge either directly or by stirring up 
Cambodia's neighbours were not entirely successful. Heavily dependent on 
Muslim arms, the new King himself became a Muslim, adopting the title Sultan 
Ibrahim and establishing on the Mekong a replica of a Malay court. Eventually 
his enemies became too numerous, however. The Dutch forced him to sign a 
humiliating treaty in 1653, and internal Buddhist opposition increased. This 
made it easier for the Vietnamese in turn to intervene in 1658-60, replacing 
Sultan Ibrahim with another Cambodian prince who had a Vietnamese mother. 
Cambodia remained a battleground for the rest of the century, but Vietnamese 
and Siamese influence was now more important than either Muslim or 
European.70 
Thailand was of course in a better position to defend itself, yet the same 
pattern of rivalry between the Dutch and the Muslims for dominant external 
influence made itself felt there. Whereas Persians, Malays, and for that matter 
Portuguese, Chinese and Japanese, were willing to enter the service of rulers 
such as Prasat Thong (1630-56) and Narai (1658-88), the Dutch always 
68 Francis Garnier, 'Chronique Royale du Cambodge', Journal Asiatique 6e Serie, 18 
(1871), p. 359. 
69 Gabriel Quiroga de San Antonio, Breve et Verldique Relation des Evenements du 
Cambodge, ed. Antoine Cabaton (Paris, Ernest Leroux, 1914). C.R. Boxer and B.P. 
Groslier, Angkor et le Cambodge au XVIe siecele (Paris, Presse Universitaire de France, 
1958). Antonio de Morga, Succesos, pp. 119-36. 
70 Hendrick Muller (ed.), De 0.1.C. in Cambodja en Laos. Verzameling van bescheklen 
van 1636tot1670 ('s-Gravenhage, Linschoten Vereeniging, 1917). Garnier, 'Chronique 
Royale', pp. 364-6. Dagh·reglster gehouden int Casteel Batavia ('s-Gravenhage, 
Nijhoff, 1896-), 1643-4, pp. 17-18, 22-4 and 42-3; 1656-7, pp. 36-7. 118-19, 
146-50, 
31 

--- PAGE: 11 ---
loomed as a dangerous monolith working in the interests of monopolizing the 
trade of Southeast Asia for the VOC. This was a major reason why Thai kings, 
among others, tended to Jean towards Muslim traders who offered both 
economic and military support against the Dutch. Muslim influence appears to 
have reached its peak towards the end of Prasat Thong's reign and the beginning 
of Narai's. The major Persian source for events in Siam insists that Persians had 
a large part in Narai's seizure of power, and were leading this king towards 
Islam in the early part of his reign. 71 Okphra Sinnorat was regarded by the 
Dutch, even after his conversion to Buddhism, as the centre of a very powerful 
pro-Muslim lobby at court. 72 In 1668 ambassadors from Golconda and Aceh 
arrived in quick succession at the Thai capital, both hoping that King Narai 
would accept Islam. They were well received wi!h customary Thai hospitality, 
leading to great concern on the part of French missionaries who had been led 
to hope for great things by that same hospitality. 73 
There was apparently no overt military bid for Muslim power in Ayudhya, 
however, until it was clearly too late, with Muslim influence definitely on the 
wane. The supremacy of Constance Phaulkon at the Thai court after 1680 with 
his pro-French policy, pushed the Muslims into a corner in a similar manner as 
had occurred in Cambodia almost a century earlier. As in the Cambodian case, 
there must also have been sympathy for the Muslim rebels on the part of 
factions at court who resented the strength of European influence, and who 
were to revolt successfully against that influence in their turn in 1688. The 
Muslim revolt, however, came two years too early, in 1686, and ended in dis­
array. Whatever help had been expected either from within the country or from 
Malay forces outside it failed to materialise, and the only effective rebel force 
became the small Makassarese refugee community, at most a few hundred 
strong. Even so, the remarkable success of the Makassarese in holding out for 
several days against the Siamese army and its substantial European reinforce­
ments, indicates once again the military potential of a determined Muslim 
minority. 74 
The mainland evidence appears to suggest that without the complication of 
powerful foreign intervention, by Europeans, Thais and Vietnamese in Cambodia, 
and Europeans in Ayudhya, the Muslim element might have palyed a similar role 
in these states as it had earlier in Java. By the seventeenth century European 
power was already in the ascendent and the Muslims were making their last 
stands at one point after another. We do not know whether or how far ethnic 
Thais and Cambodians were assimilating into the Muslim/Malay community of 
successful traders, as was happening elsewhere. Even if this were not occurring, 
however, the history of these countries confirms the importance of military 
power as one of the factors most critical in the rise of Islam in Southeast Asia. 
71 J. O'Kane (ed.), The Ship of Sulaiman (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972), 
pp. 77-8 and 94-106. 
72 Records of the Relations between Siam and Foreign Countries in the 17th Century 
(Bangkok, Vajiranana National Library, 1915-16), II, pp. 208-12. 
73 Ibid., p. 92. John Anderson,En.slishintercourse with Siam in the Seventeenth Century 
(London, Trubner, 1890). p. 233; The Ship of Sula/man, passim. 
74 The Ship of Sulaiman, pp. 136-8; M. Turpin, History of the Kingdom of Siam, trans. 
B.0. Cartwright (Bangkok, Vajiranana National Library, 1908), pp. 53-64. 
32 
In conclusion, then, we need to distinguish between the gradual progress 
made by Islam at a popular level, and its victory in the royal courts of the 
already-Indianized states. The key factors at a popular level were the rapid social 
change Southeast Asia was undergoing and the ability of Sufi practice as filtered 
through India in the 13th-16th centuries to cater for the world of spirits with 
which Southeaat Asians were familiar. The fali of the Indianized courts to Islam, 
however, required some additional factors, including the network of commercial 
and tributary relations established by Majapahit, and the particular power 
balance prevailing in the Archipelago. 
33 
