--- PAGE: 1 ---
Copyright©2019
P-ISSN: 1978-8118
E-ISSN: 2460-710X
99
Lingua Cultura, 13(2), May 2019, 99-105
DOI: 10.21512/lc.v13i1.5326
LANGUAGE CODE CHOICE OF MALE ABDI DALEM
OF KARATON NGAYOGYAKARTA HADININGRAT 
Hanova Rani Eka Retnaningtyas1; Mangatur Rudolf Nababan2; Dwi Purnanto3
1,2,3Post Graduate of Linguistic Department, Universitas Sebelas Maret
Jl. Ir. Sutami No. 36-A, Kentingan, Surakarta 57126, Indonesia
1hanovarani57@gmail.com; 2Amantaradja@yahoo.com; 3dwi.purnanto@yahoo.com
Received: 25th January 2019/Revised: 26th March 2019/Accepted: 16th April 2019
How to Cite: Retnaningtyas, H. R. E., Nababan, M. R., & Purnanto, D. (2019). Language code choice of male
abdi dalem of Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat. Lingua Cultura, 13(2), 99-105.
https://doi.org/10.21512/lc.v13i1.5326
ABSTRACT
This research aimed to show the language code choices of male abdi dalem of Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat because 
each community had its own language code choice in their daily lives, including every individual. This research was a 
descriptive qualitative study conducted to determine the language code choice of abdi dalem Karaton Ngayogyakarta 
Hadiningrat. Data were taken using questionnaires. The form of questions used was closed questions to find out the language 
codes choice. In addition, the open questions were used to find out the reason for selecting particular language codes. The 
data were in the form of an informant’ s answer about the choice of a language code and the reason for the selection. This 
research conducted in Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat based from UU Republik Indonesia Nomor 13 Tahun 2012 
concerning the DIY Specialities. It finds that the use of Javanese Kromo dominates the language code choice used by male 
abdi dalem. The dominance of the use of Javanese Kromo language is considered to be the most polite language code rather 
than other languages presented by the researchers in the questionnaires. The next order after Javanese Kromo is Indonesian, 
Javanese Ngoko, Bagongan, and lastly is a foreign language.
Keywords: language code choice, abdi dalem, Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat, Bagongan Language 
INTRODUCTION
The language phenomenon is always an interesting 
thing to be studied. This area is very dynamic. The 
development can go either in a positive direction or a 
negative direction depending on which point of views. 
Each community has its own language characteristics, as 
well as every individual. Every individual has the freedom 
to use language code. The choice of the term code is more 
appropriate to be used in this research because, in addition 
to the use of language, the researchers also need to find 
out the use of language variations, especially Javanese 
language. Language variations consist of regionals, social 
classes or social dialects or sociolects, various varieties and 
styles, also the uses or registers variations.
This also applies in Karaton Ngayogyakarta 
Hadiningrat environment . It is one of the kingdoms in 
Indonesia that still exists nowadays and even recognized 
by the NKRI government with the issuance of privileged 
laws (Republic of Indonesia Law Number 13 of 2012 
concerning DIY Specialties). Besides being inhabited by a 
royal family, keraton is also a place for thousands of abdi 
dalem. Who is a person who chooses to devote himself to 
the Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat . Abdi dalem  is 
also called the cultural agent because he/she is expected to 
be able to maintain and preserve the culture so that it can be 
a role model for the society in general. Based on these, the 
researchers are interested in investigating language used in 
these communities.
Abdi dalem also has their position and each function 
which are divided into several sections. The sequence 
position is starting from the lowest position to the top in 
the structure in Kraton, those are Jajar, Bekel Anem, Bekel 
Sepuh, Lurah, Kliwon, Wedana, Riya Bupati Anem, Bupati 
Anem, Bupati Kliwon, and Bupati Nayaka. Each level of the 
position is taken for five years for abdi dalem who work as 
Caos (they present to wait for assignments or orders), while 
for those who serve in the Tepas (office) usually will get the 
promotion for 3-4 years.
Abdi dalem based on its duties is divided into two 
namely Abdi dalem Punakawan  and Abdi dalem Keparak . 
The first is Abdi dalem Punakawan . They come from 
ordinary people and are not employees of the Regional 
Government of Yogyakarta. Abdi Dalem Punokawan 
consists of Abdi Dalem Punokawan Sowan (working in the 
office, every day at work except holidays) and Abdi dalem

--- PAGE: 2 ---
100
LINGUA CULTURA, Vol. 13 No. 2, May 2019, 99-105   
Punokawan Caos namely Abdi dalem Punokawan  who go 
to work only every three days, seven days, 10 days, and 12 
days once every month. The second is Abdi dalem Keparak, 
a woman who generally fulfills her obligations at Kraton 
Kilen (Keputren). In general, they work with preparing tools 
such as sesaji when there are kraton events.
As mentioned, Abdi dalem  in the Karaton 
Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat includes male and female. The 
number of male abdi dalem is higher that will certainly help 
researchers during the data collection process. In addition, 
the issue is also related to a little limited access to meet 
the females abdi dalem who are placed inside the kraton. 
The females abdi dalem  need special permits and special 
procedures to be accessible to the general public. Another 
thing that strengthened the researchers’ decision to choose 
males abdi dalem because they are easy to meet and make 
communication with the general public. In addition, they 
are placed in the front row, so the male abdi dalem have the 
possibility to use a more variety code choice rather than the 
females ones.
There are many relevance research with this 
research; one of them is Sari and Wedasuwari (2014) that 
have discussed the language choice of high school students 
in Denpasar, Bali. While the research related to the use 
of language in the Kraton’ s environment is carried out 
among others by Asih (2015) and Yogatama (2017), both 
are using qualitative research. Asih (2015) has used the 
listening method with notes and record techniques followed 
by proficient methods with interview techniques, while 
Yogatama’s (2017) research has used record recording 
techniques. Then it is identified and analyzed based 
on Leech’s courtesy principles, Brown and Levinson’s 
politeness strategies, Pranowo’s politeness indicators, 
Duncan’s non-verbal language theory, and complemented by 
non-verbal language forms Ruben and Stewart (Yogatama, 
2017).
The difference from all three, researchers chose to 
use a questionnaire to collect research-related data. Another 
thing that distinguishes these two researches from this 
research is the main focus of the research. Asih’s (2015) 
research focuses on the form of chit-chat (linguistic and 
non-linguistic markers and language-speaking intentions 
in that location), while highlighted’s Yogatama (2017) 
is about verbal and nonverbal politeness in abdi dalem 
Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat. The main purpose is 
to describe the use of verbal and nonverbal language as a 
marker of language politeness. Yogatama’s (2017) research 
is also a qualitative descriptive study that the main location 
of the research is in Tepas Dwarapura.
Other researches related and similar in terms of 
research focus are conducted by Khotimah (2014), Putri 
(2017), Dewi and Setiadi (2018), and Mahsusi, Djatmika, 
and Marmanto (2017). Their focus relates to language 
code choices. Khotimah’s (2014) research is a qualitative 
research with ethnographic models of communication. The 
research aims to describe the form of language choice and 
to describe factors that determine language choice of the 
Sukaparna village community. The data in the research are 
in the form of direct speeches and interviews. Putri’s (2017) 
research is a qualitative research using Dell Hymes theory. 
The purpose of the research is to describe the form of mixed 
code variation in speech and its code variations, code-
switching, and code mixing in public speech and social 
factors that determine code switching and code mixing.
The research of Sari and Wedasuwari (2014); 
Kiswadi (2016); Kholidah and Haryadi (2017); Darwati and 
Santoso (2017); and Dewi and Setiadi (2018) are related to 
the domain of education. The research conducted by Sari and 
Wedasuwari (2014) aims to describe the form of language 
choices used by students of grade XI IPA 2 SMA (SLUA) 1 
Saraswati Denpasar and the factors that cause it. Kiswadi’s 
(2016) research uses 10 records of lecturers’ oral languages 
at educational seminars. The purpose of this research is to 
analyze the form, variety, and then implement the results of 
the analysis of code usage and the type of spoken sentence 
by the lecturer in the official situation as teaching material 
in junior high school.
The other research belongs to Kholidah and Haryadi 
(2017). They have described the form of code choice used 
by Aceh’s students of friendship domain in Semarang. In 
another research, Darwati and Santoso (2017) has aimed 
to know the form of code choice and identify some factors 
that influence the advice and counsel discourse of student 
for the teacher in SMK Ma’arif 4 at Kebumen. Then the 
research conducted by Dewi & Setiadi (2018) has aimed to 
determine the language attitude and factors that influence 
the language choice of English Department students at Bina 
Nusantara University.
The research of Sari and Wedasuwari (2014), 
Kholidah and Haryadi (2017), Kiswadi (2016), Darwati and 
Santoso (2017) use descriptive qualitative methods, while 
Dewi and Setiadi’s (2018) research is a quantitative study. 
In Sari and Wedasuwari (2014)’s research, the method of 
data collecting is observation, interviews, and recording. 
Kiswadi (2016) and Kholidah and Haryadi’s (2017) 
research are similarly used listening technique and noted, 
but Kholidah and Haryadi (2017) have added Simak Bebas 
Libat Cakap‘s technique (SBLC) and recording technique. 
In Darwati and Santoso’s (2017) research, the data are 
collected by using Simak’ s technique or listening technique 
and interview. This technique is completed by Sadap’ s 
technique or recording technique as the main technique 
during the interview process.
The data collected by Sari and Wedasuwari (2014) 
is analyzed using three stages of the flow model (data 
reduction, data presentation, and data verification), while 
Kiswandi’s (2016) research used Agih’ s method to analyze 
the data. In Darwati and Santoso’s (2017) research, the form 
of code choice is analyzed by Baca Markah’s technique or 
reading marked technique, the factor that influence code 
choice uses the contextual technique.
Last is the research conducted by Sari, Putra, and 
Ramendra (2016), Agasi, Putra, and Ramendra (2016), 
Suktiningsih (2017), Mahsusi, Djatmika, and Marmanto 
(2017), Chuchu and Noorashid (2015), and Choudhury 
(2018). Sari, Putra, and Ramendra (2016) have aimed to 
find out the kind of codes (code mixing, code-switching, 
code selection, and calling rules) that are used by Bugis 
people when communicating and to find out how the Bugis 
society on Serangan Island, Bali uses codes to communicate 
with other Bugis communities and the community around 
Serangan Island. The instruments used in this research are 
record instruments and checklists instrument. The subjects 
are Bugis people at Serangan Island, Bali.
Next is the research conducted by Agasi, Putra, and 
Ramendra (2016) which aims to analyze the use and form 
of code used by Balinese families in Nusasari village. In this 
research, the data are collected in three domains of language 
use. These domains include family, environment, and 
friendship. Observations, interviews, and documentation 
are carried out by researchers to obtain the data needed 
with recording technique, field notes, and cameras. The

--- PAGE: 3 ---
101
Language Code Choice.... (Hanova Rani Eka Retnaningtyas, et al.)      
researchers conduct interviews with two families to get 
data about the code used in the village. The data collected 
is transcripts and analyzed. While Suktiningsih (2017) has 
aimed to identify the factors of language choice among 
Sasak adolescents in speeches. This research is a qualitative 
research. Data are collected using observation, recording, 
and interview methods.
Mahsusi, Djatmika, and Marmanto’s (2017) research 
has aimed to identify code choice and to know the influence 
code choice in the interaction between Riau students living 
in Yogyakarta. While Chuchu and Noorashid’s (2015) 
research has aimed to identify the choice of ethnic code in 
intercultural communication, and their need and motivation 
to practice the codes in the ethnic minority multilingual 
environment in Brunei Darussalam. The research is 
conducted on 60 indigenous Brunei ethnic groups in Mukim 
Ukong, Tutong District. This research uses purposive 
sampling to select informants. Both of these researches 
use recording techniques and interviews to collect data, but 
Chuchu and Noorashid (2015) have added a questionnaire 
to supplement the data on the research. Last but not least 
is research conducted by Choudhury (2018). It tries to 
formulate code choice as linguistics style and show that the 
speaker is sensitive to code choice.
Based on these researches, it can be seen that there 
are still a few researchers who try to examine the language 
phenomenon in Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat . The 
choice of location is also related to the researchers’ interest 
in indigenous Indonesian culture, especially in the field of 
language. Therefore, the researchers have decided to raise 
the issue of language code choice as the object of research. 
Researchers assume that this can be a good start for further 
linguistic research in Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat.
METHODS
This research belongs to a descriptive qualitative 
research. The method used is the equivalent method. The 
equivalent means comparable or comparing or comparative, 
which is to compare the relevant discourses compiler 
aspects. The basic technique uses in determining the 
determinants elements technique or commonly mentioned 
as PUP. The researchers use a questionnaire to collect data. 
The questionnaires questions are in the form of closed 
questions to capture the code choice of language and semi-
open questions to obtain the data regarding the reason 
for the code choice of language. Thus it is expected that 
it will show suitable data in accordance with the research 
objectives.
The questionnaire consists of 25 semi-open 
questions. Questions number 1-5 are related to language 
code choices in the family domain, while questions 6-25 are 
related to language code choices in the workplace. These 
questions are displayed in the form of tables to make it 
easier for informants to give answers. Informants only need 
to mark the column according to the choice of language 
code used based on the situation raised in the question. The 
choice of code raised by researchers is bahasa Jawa Ngoko 
(BJN), bahasa Bagongan (BB), bahasa Jawa Kromo (BJK), 
bahasa Indonesia (BI), and bahasa Asing (BA). Then the 
informant is asked to write down the reasons for choosing 
the language code in the column provided.
The data in this research are divided into two parts; 
they are primary data and secondary data. Primary data 
are obtained during the research, while secondary data are 
obtained before the researchers are starting to collect the 
primary data. The secondary data in this research are in the 
form of information related with abdi dalem obtained from 
Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat  database (literature 
and personal data of employees who become courtiers). 
Meanwhile, the primary data are the responses from the 
questionnaires filled by abdi dalem . As the interviewees 
who are chosen with a purposive random sampling system.
This research was conducted in July-August 2018 
at Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat . It is located in 
the Special Region of Yogyakarta (DIY). DIY is located at 
8º 30 ‘- 7º 20’ South Latitude, and 109º 40 ‘- 111º 0’ East 
Longitude which borders Central Java (South: Indian Ocean, 
Northeast: Klaten Regency, Southeast: Wonogiri Regency, 
West: Purworejo Regency, Northwest: Magelang Regency). 
DIY has a total area of 3185,80 km2. DIY consists of 4 
districts and 1 city, namely Sleman Regency, Kulonprogo 
Regency, Bantul Regency, Gunung Kidul Regency, and 
Yogyakarta City. This location is chosen because of the 
abdi dalem  are considered as the cultural agent in the 
environment, thus the researchers assume that the location 
is still the right location to obtain the data in accordance 
with the research objectives. This is closely related to the 
researchers’ desire to find out how the obedience towards 
the abdi dalem’ s language norms who live closely with 
Javanese cultural functionary.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
There are 25 informants who are abdi dalem  in 
Kraton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat.  They are asked to 
answer the 25 semi-open questions in the questionnaire. 
Table 1 shows the responses from one of the informants that 
is referring to Informant 24 or abbreviated into (I-24).
Question number 1 is what the language used by (I-
24) during communicating with parents or parent’s in-law. 
Based on Table 1, the informant prefers to use Javanese 
Kromo language with the reason to pay respect because the 
Javanese language is full of politeness. Question number 
2 is what language code is used when speaking with a 
husband or wife, (I-24) prefers to choose a mixture of Kromo 
language to respect each other. Question 3 is regarding the 
language used when communicating with the boys, (I-24) 
chooses to used Javanese Kromo language. According to the 
informants, this is deemed necessary to set an example and 
to preserve the culture. Not much different from the previous 
questions, question number 4 is asks about what language is 
used when communicating with the daughters. The response 
given is more or less the same as the answer to the number 
4 question with the reason to set an example and preserving 
the culture. The question number 5 is about what language 
is used in communicating with others relatives (brothers, 
sisters, uncle, aunt, etc.), (I-24) chooses to use Javanese 
Kromo with the reason of preserving the manners. Question 
number 6 is about the used language when talking to male 
colleagues who are older and have a higher position, (I-24) 
chooses to use Javanese Kromo to pay respect to the older.
Question number 7 is about the language used when 
talking to older male colleagues with an equal position. (I-
24) chooses to use Javanese Kromo to pay respect to the 
elder. Question number 8 is regarding the language used 
when talking to male colleagues who are older and have 
a lower position. (I-24) chooses to use Javanese Kromo to 
maintain a sense of courtesy. Question number 9 is about 
the language used when talking with the older female

--- PAGE: 4 ---
102
LINGUA CULTURA, Vol. 13 No. 2, May 2019, 99-105   
coworker with a lower position. (I-24) chooses to use the 
Javanese Kromo to pay respect and maintain the sense of 
courtesy. Question number 10 is about the language used 
when talking to older female coworkers, but has an equal 
position. (I-24) chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language 
for harmony and manners. Question number 11 is regarding 
the language used when talking to older female coworkers, 
but has a lower position. (I-24) chooses to use the Javanese 
Kromo language to maintain manners.
Question number 12 is about the language used when 
talking to male colleagues who are of the same age, but have 
a higher position. (I-24) chooses to use the Javanese Kromo 
language to cultivate manners together. Question number 
13 is regarding the language used when talking to male 
Table 1 Code Selection Used by Informant 24
I Q BJN BB BJK BI BA
24 1 √
The informant prefers to use Javanese Kromo language with the reason to pay respect because the Javanese 
language is full of politeness. 
2 √
The informant prefers to choose a mixture of Kromo language to respect each other.
3 √
The informant prefers to use Javanese Kromo language with the reason to set an example and to preserve 
the culture.
4 √
The informant prefers to use Javanese Kromo language with the to set an example and preserving the cul-
ture.
5 √
The informant prefers to use Javanese Kromo language with the reason preserving the manners.
6 √
The informant chooses to use Javanese Kromo to pay respect to the older.
7 √
The informant chooses to use Javanese Kromo to pay respect to the older.
8 √
The informant chooses to use Javanese Kromo to maintain sense of courtesy.
9 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanse Kromo to pay respect and maintain the sense of a courtesy.
10 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language for harmony and manners.
11 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to maintain manners.
12 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to cultivate manners together.
13 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese language Kromo, both of them are cultivating the manners.
14 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to maintain harmony as a work colleague.
15 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to maintain and respect each other's manners.
16 √
The informant chooses to use a combination of Javanese Kromo languages to respect each other's culture of 
manners.
17 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo languages, respect and maintain cultural courtesy.
18 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to respect and be polite to the young.

--- PAGE: 5 ---
103
Language Code Choice.... (Hanova Rani Eka Retnaningtyas, et al.)      
Table 1 Code Selection Used by Informant 24 (Continued)
I Q BJN BB BJK BI BA
24 19 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to cultivate culture.
20 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese language Kromo to keep respecting coworkers and to save dan-
ger.
21 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language because it has become a culture, to maintain 
manners.
22 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to preserve the culture of manners (better).
23 √
The informant chooses to use Javanese Kromo to maintain harmony and maintain culture.
24 √
The informant chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to show that Javanese could also be understood 
by other regions.
25 √
The informant chooses to use the Kromo language because to show the Javanese language already belonged 
to the people.
Total 0 0 25 0 0
Acronyms:
I : Informant
Q : Question
BJK : Bahasa Jawa Kromo
BJN : Bahasa Jawa Ngoko
BB : Bahasa Bagongan
BI : Bahasa Indonesia
BA : Bahasa Asing (includes all languages other than the Javanese and Indonesian language variants)
colleagues who are of the same age and have equal positions. 
(I-24) uses the Javanese language Kromo, both of them are 
cultivating the manners. Question number 14 is about the 
language used when talking to male colleagues who are of 
the same age, but who have a lower position. (I-24) chooses 
to use the Javanese Kromo language to maintain harmony as 
a work colleague. Question number 15 is about the language 
used when talking to female colleagues who are of the same 
age, but who have a higher position. (I-24) chooses to use 
the Javanese Kromo language to maintain and respect each 
other’s manners. Question number 16 is regarding the 
language used when talking to female colleagues who are of 
the same age and have an equal position. (I-24) chooses to 
use a combination of Javanese Kromo languages to respect 
each other’s culture of manners.
Question number 17 is regarding the language used 
when talking to female colleagues of the same age, but have 
a lower position. (I-24) chooses to use a combination of 
Javanese Kromo languages, respect and maintain cultural 
courtesy. Question number 18 is about the language used 
when talking to younger male colleagues and having a 
higher position. (I-24) chooses to use the Javanese Kromo 
language to respect and be polite to the young. Question 
number 19 is regarding the language used when talking to 
younger male colleagues, but who have an equal position. (I-
24) chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to cultivate 
culture. Question number 20 is about the language used 
when talking to younger male colleagues who have a lower 
position. (I-24) chooses to use the Javanese language Kromo 
to keep respecting coworkers and to save danger. Question 
number 21 is regarding the language used when speaking 
with female colleagues who are younger and have a higher 
position. (I-24) chose to use the Javanese Kromo language 
because it had become a culture, to maintain manners.
Question number 22 is about the language used 
when talking to younger female coworkers and having 
equal positions. (I-24) chooses to use the Javanese Kromo 
language to preserve the culture of manners (better). 
Question number 23 is about the language used when 
talking to younger and lower-ranking female coworkers. (I-
24) chooses to use Javanese Kromo to maintain harmony 
and maintain culture. Question number 24 is regarding 
the language used when talking to domestic tourists. (I-
24) chooses to use the Javanese Kromo language to show 
that Javanese could also be understood by other regions. 
Question number 25 is regarding the language used when 
talking to foreign tourists. (I-24) chooses to use the Kromo 
language because to show the Javanese language already 
belonged to the people.
Based on the previous elaboration of (I-24) answer, 
it can be known that (I-24) prefers to use Javanese Kromo 
language because it is considered more polite and respectful. 
This is with no exception for male and female coworkers 
and is not age bound, although in the certain situations (I-
24) chooses to use Javanese Ngoko as the language used to 
communicate with the younger coworkers.

--- PAGE: 6 ---
104
LINGUA CULTURA, Vol. 13 No. 2, May 2019, 99-105   
Thus, Table 2 is the result data tabulation from the 25 
informants who filled out the questionnaires.
Table 2 Code Selection Used by 25 Male Abdi dalem
Informants BJN BB BJK BI BA
1 6 1 22 24 1
2 12 0 4 9 1
3 5 18 7 0 0
4 12 0 21 19 1
5 2 0 6 17 0
6 14 0 9 1 1
7 14 0 9 2 0
8 9 0 23 8 0
9 16 0 17 1 2
10 6 11 6 1 1
11 14 0 21 20 6
12 2 5 9 8 1
13 16 3 10 10 1
14 10 0 12 3 1
15 2 2 8 13 0
16 15 0 9 19 1
17 2 0 22 0 1
18 14 0 10 20 1
19 16 0 1 8 0
20 3 18 20 2 1
21 4 18 23 4 2
22 4 14 22 1 1
23 6 2 24 5 0
24 0 0 25 0 0
25 0 0 14 10 1
Total 204 92 354 205 24
From Table 2, it can be seen that the code order that 
commonly used by the informants is the Javanese Kromo, 
followed by Indonesian language, then thinly continued 
with the use of Javanese Ngoko, next is Bagongan language, 
and lastly is the foreign language. The foreign language is 
all languages other than Javanese and Indonesian included 
other regional languages.
Based on Table 2, it can be seen that the usage of 
Javanese Kromo dominates the code choice of languages 
chosen to be used by the male Abdi dalem. The dominance 
of the Javanese Kromo usage is because of the Javanese 
Kromo language considered to be the politest code choice of 
language compared to the other languages codes presented 
by the researchers in the questionnaires. Furthermore, 
the Javanese Ngoko is used as a familiarity marker. The 
politeness referred in this research is as a proof of speech 
level variations application in Javanese languages that 
Javanese Kromo language is used to pay respect to the 
older speech partner and or have higher positions. Foreign 
languages are the least used code choice of language 
because the informants claim that they lack or do not master 
languages other than Javanese and Indonesian languages.
The code choice used by the informants is appropriate 
if it is based on the commonly Javanese speech leveling 
rules. In addition, it will not be appropriate if it is based 
on the rules in the Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat. 
Abdi dalem and all Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat’ s 
residents are expected to use Bagongan language in all 
situations. Even, Bagongan language must be used as a 
written language for correspondences or documents in 
Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat . The findings show 
that the Bagongan language is still lack in usage and it raises 
questions about things that might cause the phenomenon. 
This phenomenon may be due to Bagongan and Javanese 
Kromo not much different.
Basically, the difference between them is only in a 
few vocabularies. The Bagongan language is combining 
between the Javanese Kromo with 11 vocabulary markers of 
the Bagongan language. In addition, it is accompanied by the 
replacement of the suffix -ipun to the suffix –e or –ne. Eleven 
of this vocabulary are between. First, henggeh [heŋgeh] 
generally means hinggih or enggih means iya in Indonesian, 
yes in English. Second, mboya [mboya] generally means 
mboten or ora means tidak in Indonesian, no in English. 
Third, manira [manirͻ] or menira [mǝnirͻ] generally means 
kula or aku means aku in Indonesian, me in English. Fourth, 
pakenira [pakǝnirͻ] or pekenira [pǝkǝnirͻ] generally means 
sampeyan or kowe means kamu in Indonesian, you in 
English. Fifth, penapi [pǝnapi] or punapi [punapi] generally 
means punapa or menapa means kenapa in Indonesian, why 
in English. Sixth, puniki [puniki] generally means punika 
or menika or iki means ini in Indonesian, this in English. 
Seventh, puniku [puniku] generally means punika or menika 
or iku means itu in Indonesian, that in English. Eighth, 
wenten [wǝntǝn] generally means wonten or ana means 
ada in Indonesian, there is in English. Ninth, nedha [nǝdhͻ] 
generally means suwawi or sumangga or mangga means 
silahkan in Indonesian, please in English. Tenth, besaos 
[bǝsaͻs] generally means kemawon or wae means saja in 
Indonesian, only in English. Last, seyos [seͻs] generally 
means sanes or seje means bukan or beda in Indonesian, not 
in English. It can be seen in Table 3.
Table 3 Examples of Sentences in BJK and BB
No. Lan-
guage 
Code
Example of sentences
1. BJK Mboten dados menapa.
BB Mboya dados punapi.
English No problem.
2. BJK Buku menika kagung-
anipun
sinten?
BB Buku puniki kagung-
ane
sinten?
English Whose book is this?
3. BJK Sepatunipun sae.
BB Sepatune sae.
English Nice shoes.
The example in Table 3 shows that the difference 
between BJK and BB is very thin. In the example of the first 
sentence, the word mboten in BJK is changed to the mboya

--- PAGE: 7 ---
105
Language Code Choice.... (Hanova Rani Eka Retnaningtyas, et al.)      
in BB. Then the word menapa in BJK turns into a punapi at 
BB. Both are vocabulary that only exists in the Bagongan 
language. In the second sentence, there is a change in 
the word menika into puniki and the word kagunganipun 
becomes kagungane. The change in the word menika into 
puniki in the second sentence is occurred by changing the 
variant of the BJK vocabulary into BB. Whereas the word 
kagunganipun there is a substitution of the suffix - ipun 
the suffix - ne as a BB vocabulary marker. The same thing 
happens in the third example, sepatunipun is changed to 
sepatune. The marker of change in the third example is in 
the substitution of the suffix - ipun the suffix – ne. Based 
on these three examples, it can be seen that the difference 
between BJK and BB is not too much. Therefore, it is not 
strange if there are still Abdi dalem  who do not use BB, 
especially those who are new.
CONCLUSIONS
This research is related to the language code choice 
used by abdi dalem’s men in KNH. Male AD was chosen 
as an informant because there were more male abdi dalem 
than female AD. This can help researchers in obtaining data 
from informants. This is also related to the limited access to 
get data from females abdi dalem. But female abdi dalem 
can be used as an informant in the subsequent language 
research.
This research concludes that not all of the abdi 
dalem use Bagongan language when interacting in Karaton 
Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat. The abdi dalem prefers to use 
Javanese Kromo because it is considered more polite than 
the other code choices. As the familiarity marker, the code 
choice used is Javanese Ngoko language. Furthermore, the 
Indonesian language becomes the second choice to show 
the politeness because the informants think it is better to use 
Indonesian rather than using the Javanese language that is 
not appropriate.
Abdi dalem especially those who are still new have 
difficulty in adjusting with the rules. The external factors 
such as the residential environments and social environments 
are also suspected as the factors causing the abdi dalem 
for not mastering the Bagongan language. However, all 
these allegations still have to be verified by doing further 
observations. Thus, it can be alternative advance research 
for the researchers themselves or other researchers.
This research is important because it helps the readers 
to get to know about the other variations of the Javanese 
language which is Bagongan language that is applied in 
Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat . Consequently, it 
can improve the circulated information’s in the community 
regarding the paradigm about the life in the palace 
environment, and also in terms of language.
REFERENCES
Agasi, I. G. A., Putra, I. N. A. J., & Ramendra, D. P. (2016). 
An analysis of codes used by the Balinese families 
of Nusa Sari village, Melaya, Jembrana. Pendidikan 
Bahasa Inggris Undiksha, 3(3).
Asih, M. B. (2015). Basa-basi berbahasa Abdi dalem 
Kasultanan Yogyakarta . Yogyakarta: PBSI 
Universitas Sanata Dharma Yogyakarta.
Choudhury, M. (2018). Accommodation of conversational 
code-choice. Proceedings of The Third Workshop 
on Computational Approaches to Code-Switching. 
Melbourne, Australia. pp. 82–91.
Chuchu, F., & Noorashid, N. (2015). Code choice within 
intercultural communication among ethnic minority 
in Brunei. Indonesian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 
5(1), 86–94. https://doi.org/10.17509/ijal.v5i1.835.
Darwati, D., & Santoso, B. W. (2017). Pilihan kode pada 
wacana konsultasi siswa kepada guru di SMK 
Ma’arif 4 Kebumen. Seloka: Jurnal Pendidikan 
Bahasa Dan Sastra Indonesia, 6 (1), 93–99. https://
doi.org/10.15294/seloka.v6i1.14770.
Dewi, U. P., & Setiadi, C. J. (2018). Language attitude 
and language choice in bilingual academic learning 
environment. Lingua Cultura, 12 (4), 369–373. 
https://doi.org/10.21512/lc.v12i4.4288.
Kholidah, U., & Haryadi, H. (2017). Wujud pilihan kode 
tutur mahasiswa Aceh pada ranah pergaulan di 
Semarang. Seloka: Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa 
Dan Sastra Indonesia, 6 (2), 208–217. https://doi.
org/10.15294/seloka.v6i2.17288.
Khotimah, D. K. (2014). Pemilihan kode bahasa pada 
masyarakat tutur di kelurahan Sukapura, kecamatan 
Kiaracondong, kota Bandung: Kajian Sosiolinguistik. 
Bahtera Sastra Linguistik, 1, 386-397.
Kiswadi. (2016). Kode, bahasa, dan jenis kalimat bahasa 
lisan dosen pada situasi resmi: Sebuah kajian 
sintaksis serta implementasi sebagai bahan ajar di 
SMPN 2 Kartasura Publikasi. Surakarta: Universitas 
Muhammadiyah.
Mahsusi, J., Djatmika., Marmanto, S. (2017). Pemilihan 
kode pada mahasiswa Riau di Yogyakarta: Kajian 
sosiolinguistik. Lingua, 14(2), 267–284.
Putri, N. A. (2017). Pilihan kode dalam masyarakat 
dwibahasa: Kajian sosiolinguistik pada SMP-SMA 
Semesta Bilingual Boarding School, Semarang. 
Riksa Bahasa: Jurnal Bahasa, Sastra, dan 
Pembelajarannya, 3(1), 78–82.
Sari, E. P., Putra, I. N. A. J., Ramendra, D. P. (2016). An 
analysis of code used by Bugis diaspora in Serangan 
island, Denpasar. Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris 
Undiksha, 3(3).
Sari, N. W. E., & Wedasuwari, I. A. M. (2014). Pilihan 
bahasa siswa kelas XI IPA2 SMA (SLUA) 1 
Saraswati Denpasar. Bakti Saraswati, 3(2), 40–47.
Suktiningsih, W. (2017). Language choice among teenager 
ethnic Sasak of Mataram. Retorika, 3(2), 211–219. 
https://doi.org/10.22225/jr.3.2.334.211.
Yogatama, T. T. (2017). Kesantunan berbahasa verbal dan 
non verbal Abdi dalem Karaton Ngayogyakarta 
Hadiningrat. Yogyakarta: Universitas Sanata 
Dharma.
