DOCUMENT ID: S-2021-west-01
SOURCE FILE: 2021-West-Bujangga_Manik_Java_in_the_15th_Century.pdf
TOTAL PAGES: 327

--- PAGE: 1 ---
Cover Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The handle http://hdl.handle.net/1887/3163618 holds various files of this Leiden 
University dissertation.  
 
Author: West, A.J. 
Title: Bujangga Manik: or, Java in the fifteenth century: an edition and study of Oxford, 
Bodleian Library, MS. Jav. b. 3 (R) 
Issue date: 2021-05-20

--- PAGE: 2 ---
BUJANGGA MANIK 
or, Java in the Fifteenth Century 
An Edition and Study of Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R) 
 
Proefschrift 
 
ter verkrijging van 
de graad van doctor aan de Universiteit Leiden, 
op gezag van rector magnificus prof.dr.ir. H. Bijl, 
volgens besluit van het college voor promoties 
te verdedigen op donderdag 20 mei 2021 
klokke 10 uur 
door  
Alexander Joseph West 
geboren te Leamington Spa, Engeland 
in 1987

--- PAGE: 3 ---
* 
Promotor: Prof. dr. Bernard Arps 
Copromotor: Dr. Aone van Engelenhoven 
* 
Promotiecommissie: Dr. Helen Creese (University of Queensland) 
Prof. dr. Jos Gommans 
Prof. dr. David Henley 
Dr. Jiří Jákl (Heidelberg University) 
Prof. dr. Willem van der Molen (Universitas Indonesia) 
*

--- PAGE: 4 ---
A Note on the Text 
This work includes  words and quotations in several languages, some of which are  not written in the 
Roman alphabet. The transliteration of Old Sundanese is discussed at length below.  Old Javanese is 
presented as in Zoetmulder’s Old Javanese-English Dictionary (OJED – 1982). Indic and Dravidian 
languages are transliterated according to the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration (IAST). 
Literary Sinitic (‘Classical Chinese’) is transliterated using Hanyu Pinyin (except where other Sinitic 
languages/topolects are u sed). Middle Chinese spellings are taken from Kroll (2017) , ’Phags-pa 
Chinese/Yuán Mandarin  ones from Coblin (2007)  and Pulleyblank (1991), and Míng 
Guănhuà/Mandarin ones from Coblin (2000) . Old East Slavic is presented in Cyrillic  or where 
necessary in Sc ientific transliteration (as in ISO 9:1995 ). Arabic is transliterated according to the 
Library of Congress standard. The spellings in medieval and early modern European texts have not been 
regularised, except where I have been unable to access an original text and have relied on the already -
regularised spelling in an edition. Editions and manuscripts for the primary sources cited are explained 
in the Introduction, and primary source quotations in the original may be found in Appendix A; these 
are marked in the text with superscript ‘A’ with the relevant number as listed in the appendix (e.g. ‘A61’). 
Translations are my own unless otherwise indicated. References to lines in Bujangga Manik are given 
in the form ‘BM [number]’.  Dates are in the Common Era unless otherwise specified.  All botanical 
identifications are taken from The Plant List  (http://www.theplantlist.org/) and World Flora Online  
(http://www.worldfloraonline.org/); the latter is intended to be more complete in tracking and listing 
synonyms than the former, but as of the writing of this thesis The Plant List  appears to have more 
complete information for many Southeast Asian species. 
*

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Abbreviations 
3PRON. – A third-person pronoun  not marked for 
number or gender (siya). 
ACD – Austronesian Comparative Dictionary. 
ACT – Active or agent-focus verb. 
AN – Austronesian (language family). 
BAV – Bibliotheca Apostolica Vaticana. 
BKI – Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 
BL – British Library. 
BM – in italics: Bujangga Manik  (the text); not in 
italics: introduces line numbers in Bujangga Manik. 
BP – Before Present. 
CE – Common Era. 
CMP – Central Malayo -Polynesian (hypothesised 
language family). 
CP – Carita Parahiyangan (OSd prose text). 
GNB – Greater North Borneo (proposed branch of 
Malayo-Polynesian). 
Jv – Javanese. 
kab. – kabupaten (‘regency’ – regional subdivision 
in Indonesia). 
MC – Middle Chinese. 
MP – Malayo-Polynesian (language family). 
MSd – Modern Sundanese. 
OJED – Old Javanese -English Dictionary 
(Zoetmulder 1982). 
OJv – Old Javanese. 
ÖNB – Austrian National Library (Österreichische 
Nationalbibliothek). 
OSd – Old Sundanese. 
PAn – Proto-Austronesian (reconstructed 
language). 
PASS – Passive or patient-focus verb. 
PIE – Proto-Indo-European (reconstructed 
language). 
PMP – Proto-Malayo-Polynesian (reconstructed 
language). 
PNRI – Perpustakaan Nasional Republik Indonesia 
(the National Library of Indonesia in Jakarta). 
RR – The Sons of Rama and Rawana  (OSd poetic 
text). 
SA – Sri Ajñana  (OSd poetic text , aka ‘The 
Ascension of Sri Ajnyana’). 
SD – Séwaka Darma (OSd poetic text). 
Sd – Sundanese. 
SEP.PART – Separating particle. 
Skt – Sanskrit. 
SSKK – Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (OSd 
prose text). 
TTms – Tanjung Tanah manuscript. 
UBL – Universiteitsbibliotheek Leiden (Leiden 
University Library). 
WMP – Western Malayo-Polynesian (now-rejected 
language family).
*

--- PAGE: 6 ---
CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION          1 
0.1. Background         4 
0.1.1. The Text         6 
0.1.2. The Literature        7 
0.2. Sunda          9 
0.2.1. The Sunda Kingdom       12 
Physical Remains       13 
Inscriptions        15 
Manuscripts        16 
Pantun and Pajajaran       18 
Sunda and Java        20 
0.3. Approaching Bujangga Manik       22 
0.3.1 The Hemispheric Middle Ages      23 
The Columbian Exchange, Colonialism, Islam    25 
Manuscript Scarcity       27 
A ‘Pre-Columbian’ Approach      29 
0.3.2. The Sources        30 
PART I: CODICOLOGY, PALAEOGRAPHY, AND LANGUAGE   37 
I.1. Codicology          37 
I.1.1. The Box         38 
I.1.2. The Page         41 
Preparing Lontar       43 
I.1.3. Foliation         44 
Marginal Numbers       48

--- PAGE: 7 ---
I.1.4. The Age of the Manuscript      49 
I.2. Palaeography         50 
I.2.1. Terminology        51 
I.2.2. Features of Brahmic Scripts      52 
I.2.3. Describing the Writing System in MS Jav. b.3. (R)    53 
General Characteristics       53 
The Graphemes        56 
Aksara Nglegena       56 
Aksara Swara        58 
Aksara Pasangan       60 
Special Forms        61 
Aksara Sandhangan       62 
The Uses of the Pamaéh and Panolong     64 
Numerals        66 
Punctuation        67 
I.2.4. The Correction of Errors       68 
I.2.5. The Second Hand        70 
I.2.6. Comparing Old Sundanese Scripts      72 
What Makes a Script a Script?      72 
Old Sundanese Scripts and Hands     73 
Origins of the Lontar Script      79 
I.3. Language          81 
I.3.1. Overview         82 
I.3.2. Origins         84 
I.3.3. Phonology        85 
I.3.4. Syntax         87

--- PAGE: 8 ---
I.3.5. Nouns         89 
I.3.6. Verbs         92 
I.3.7. Metre and Poetics        95 
I.3.8. Greetings and Parting Phrases      96 
PART II: TRANSLITERATION AND TRANSLATION     99 
PART III: PLACE IN BUJANGGA MANIK      165 
III.1. Listing Places         166 
Mountains as ‘Pillars’       169 
Encyclopaedism       169 
III.2. Toponyms and Routes        170 
III.2.1. The Landscape        172 
III.2.2. Javan Toponymy       181 
Pakuan         182 
Jawa         182 
Jawa’s States and Cities       184 
III.2.3. Extra-Javan Place Names      187 
Nusa         187 
The List        188 
PART IV: PEOPLE IN BUJANGGA MANIK      195 
IV.1. Titles and Kinship Terms        197 
Kinship and Gender       198 
IV.2. The Characters         200 
Bujangga Manik       201 
Jompong Larang       203 
Bujangga Manik’s Mother      204 
Ajung Larang        204

--- PAGE: 9 ---
PART V: TRAVELLING BY SEA        206 
V.1. The Ships          206 
Parahu         207 
The First Parahu       207 
The Second Parahu       208 
The Jong        209 
V.2. The Crews and Their Tools        213 
Crew Members from Sumtra and Environs    214 
Malay Blowgun Masters      215 
Fighters from Makassar and Masalembu     217 
Master Gunners from Bali      220 
Chinese Master Archers       222 
Bailing Water        224 
Musicians?        224 
PART VI: THINGS IN BUJANGGA MANIK      227 
VI.1. Plants and Animals        228 
VI.1.1. Textiles         228 
Fabric         229 
Dyes         230 
VI.1.2. Jompong Larang’s Gifts       231 
Betel         232 
Resa Flowers        234 
Civet and Oak Gall Powder      235 
Jaksi and Kamisadi       236 
Benzoin        236 
Sesame and Rosewater       237

--- PAGE: 10 ---
Narawastu (and?) Agur-agur      238 
Barus Camphor        238 
VI.1.3. Plants En Route to Heaven      240 
VI.1.4. ‘Signs of Heaven’       242 
Opium         242 
Sandalwood        243 
Massoy Bark        243 
VI.1.5. After Dorakala’s Assent       246 
VI.2. Metals and Miscellaneous Items       247 
Keris         247 
Khorasani Iron        249 
Umbrellas        249 
Mirrors         250 
Chinese Manufactured Goods      250 
PART VII: EPILOGUE         252 
* 
Appendix A: Primary Source Citations        254 
Appendix B: Place Names and Place Name Elements      264 
Appendix C: Plant and Animal Species and Products      276 
Bibliography           279 
Manuscripts          305 
Acknowledgements          309 
Résumé            310 
*

--- PAGE: 11 ---
Figures and Tables 
Figure 0.1 – Java as depicted in a manuscript of Marco Polo’s travels.    2 
Figure 0.2 – A sketch-map of Java.        11 
Figure 0.3 – Cloves in a manuscript of Dante’s Inferno.      24 
Figure I.1 – Diagrams of the kropak.        39 
Figure I.2 – Sketch of the interior of the bottom of the kropak.     40 
Figure I.3 – Sketch of the damage to the kropak’s side.      40 
Figure I.4 – A diagram showing the orientation of the leaves.     42 
Figure I.5 – A photograph of the central hole of the leaf (from f.5v).    43 
Table I.1 – Foliation of MS Jav. b.3. (R).       45 
Figure I.6 – Numbers in the leftmost margins of f.27v.      48 
Table I.2 – Line numbers in MS Jav. b.3. (R).       49 
Figure I.7 – Illustration of the use of aksara sandhangan.     52 
Table I.3 – Aksara nglegena in MS Jav. b.3. (R).       56 
Table I.4 – Aksara swara in MS Jav. b.3. (R).       59 
Table I.5 – Aksara pasangan in MS Jav. b.3. (R).      60 
Table I.6 – Special forms in MS Jav. b.3. (R).       61 
Table I.7 – Aksara sandhangan in MS Jav. b.3. (R).      62 
Figure I.8 – The use of the pamaéh.        64 
Figure I.9 – An example of the use of the panolong.      64 
Figure I.10 – A second example of the use of the panolong.     65 
Figure I.11 – The panolong at the end of a line.       65 
Table I.8 – Old Sundanese numerals in MS Jav. b.3. (R).      66 
Table I.9 – Punctuation marks in MS Jav. b.3. (R).      68 
Figure I.12 – Examples of error correction.       69 
Figure I.13 – A cross used to indicate error correction.      69

--- PAGE: 12 ---
Figure I.14 – An example of the conversion of one aksara into another.    70 
Figure I.15 – The interlinear text on f.17r.       70 
Figure I.16 – A comparison of the aksaras in the second hand.     71 
Figure I.17 – A comparison of aksara ra in the second hand.     71 
Figure I.18 – The Rumatak inscription.        74 
Figure I.19 – Part of the Kawali III inscription.       74 
Figure I.20 – Part of the Carita Waruga Guru manuscript.     75 
Figure I.21 – Part of the gebang SSKK manuscript.      75 
Table I.10 – A comparison of some Old Sundanese scripts.     75 
Figure I.22 – Comparison of the aksaras ka, ga, and ta.      80 
Figure I.23 – A repeated component in the lontar script.      80 
Table I.11 – The consonants of Old Sundanese.       85 
Table I.12 – The vowels of Old Sundanese.       86 
Table I.13 – Common Old Sundanese noun affixes.      90 
Table I.14 – Old Sundanese free pronouns.       91 
Table I.15 – Old Sundanese bound pronouns.       91 
Table I.16 – The nasalised verb prefix.        93 
Table I.17 – Common Old Sundanese verb affixes.      94 
Figure III.1 – Java in Jean Rotz’s Boke of Idrography (c.1535-1542).    173 
Figure III.2 – A house depicted in a relief at Borobudur.      176 
Figure III.3 – Three types of lingga from medieval Java.      180 
Figure III.4 – An inscription from Candi Sukuh (1441).      185 
Figure IV.1 – A photograph of a palm-rib broom.      202 
Figure V.1 – A junk depicted in the Catalan Atlas (c.1375).     211 
Figure V.2 – Blowguns in medieval Java and Europe.      216 
Figure V.3 – The Sukuh forge relief.        219

--- PAGE: 13 ---
Figure V.4 – A Javanese swivel cannon in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.   221 
Figure V.5 – A comparison of Central Javanese and East Javanese depictions of bows.  223 
Figure V.6 – A nipple gong depicted in a relief at Sukuh.      225 
Figure VI.1 – Betel chewing depicted in a cookbook from Central India (c.1500).   233 
Figure VI.2 – Red Cordyline fruticosa in the Kuala Lumpur Botanic Garden.   241 
Figure VI.3 – A side view of the ‘Knaud Keris’ (1342).      248 
Figure VI.4 – An East Javanese-era copper-alloy mirror handle.     250 
Table B.1 – Common Javan toponym elements.       264 
Figure B.1 – A map of major mountains in Java as they appear in Bujangga Manik.  269 
Table B.2 – Rivers in Bujangga Manik.        270 
Table B.3 – Mountains in Bujangga Manik.       271 
Table C.1 – Plant and animal species and products in Bujangga Manik.    276 
*

--- PAGE: 14 ---
Introduction 
1 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In August 1511 the Portuguese conquistador Afonso de Albuquerque conquered the wealthy Sultanate 
of Melaka on the Malay Peninsula with a small force of European and Indian soldiers.  The battle was 
hard-fought, with many of Albuquerque’s men succumbing to  poisoned blowgun darts and bullet 
wounds, and the eventual Portuguese victory was secured through a combination of brutal street fighting 
and negotiation with the city’s many ethnic factions.  Soon after the conquest an expedition under the 
command of Antonio de Abreu, who had been shot in the mouth  during the battle, was sent to Banda 
and Maluku in eastern Indonesia, the fabled islands where alone nutmeg and clove trees grew. In 1513 
another expedition was dispatched to Java in hope of establishing alliances with non-Islamic powers on 
the island – powers like the Hindu kingdom of Sunda in what is now West Java, Banten, and Jakarta. 
For the first time shipments of eastern Indonesian spices began to make their way to Europe in the hulls 
of European ships, bypassing the well -developed network of ports a round the Indian Ocean that had 
relayed the goods to the north and west throughout the Middle Ages. Soon – particularly after the first 
circumnavigation of the world by the Magellan-Elcano fleet in 1519-1522 – ships were arriving in the 
archipelago with cargo from the Americas; the European newcomers initiated and mediated contacts 
between Southeast Asia and the Western Hemisphere, introducing new crops to the archipelago and 
forever altering the environment and demography of the entire region. The  European presence 
exacerbated tensions between Muslim and non-Muslim people and polities and assisted paradoxically 
in the dramatic spread of Islam throughout the islands. The succeeding four centuries in island Southeast 
Asia were defined by the impact of American crops and European contact and colonialism. 
The conquistadores had been attracted to the region by the desire to wrest from Muslim hands 
the trade in luxury goods: Spices, certainly, but also silks, porcelains, talking birds, and precious stones. 
Since the return of Marco Polo to Venice at the end of the thirteenth century Europeans had read of an 
island called Jaua or Iava or Iana that was the biggest in the world, visited constantly by massive 
Chinese and Indian ships and abounding in spices of all kinds (Figure 0.1). Later reports added 
fantastical details: The Franciscan friar Odoric of Pordenone (c.1330) claimed that the Great King of 
Java had seven crowned kings as vassals and lived in a palace made of gold and silver, while Niccolò 
de’ Conti, a Venetian merchant whose adventures were recorded for posterity in the middle of the 
fifteenth century, described two islands two weeks’ sail east of Java – Bandan and Sondai – where 
nutmeg and cloves grew in profusion and white parrots the size of seag ulls (white or sulphur -crested 
cockatoos) could be procured.

--- PAGE: 15 ---
Introduction 
2 
 
 
Figure 0.1. Java as imagined in medieval Europe: a treasury surrounded by spice-producing plants. From a manuscript of the 
travels of Marco Polo in the recension of Thibault de Cépoy (c.1333-1340). London, British Library, Royal MS 19 D I, 
f.122r. 
The archipelago had been known across Afro -Eurasia for centuries as a source of fabulous 
wealth and exotic luxury, inspiring the Sanskrit name for Southeast Asia – ‘Land of Gold’ 
(Suvarṇabhūmi) – and spurring reports that reached as far as the Roman Empire in the first century of 
islands named Chryse and Argyre where the soil comprised gold and silver respectively. The tenth -
century Arabic writers al -Mas‘ūdi and Abū Zayd al -Sīrāfī wrote of a mihrāj, or ‘great king’ (from 
Sanskrit mahārāja), whose kingdom, al-Zābaj, was the most powerful and densely populated of all 
those between India a nd China, and the fifteenth -century Russian traveller Afanasij Nikitin heard in 
India of an island in the east called Šabat (шабат) – etymologically ‘Java’ but more likely to have been 
Sumatra – where elephants were sold by the cubit and ‘everything is che ap’ (‘всe дeшeво’). As a 
fifteenth-century English version of the Travels of John Mandeville put it, in Java grew ‘all manner of 
spices more plenteous than elsewhere, like ginger and all other spices. Everything is there in plenty but 
wine’.A1 These reports were garbled attempts at truth: The situation of the archipelago at a pivotal point 
on the seaways between the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean meant that it was constantly visited 
by people and traversed by ships and goods from across Afro -Eurasia, the regular cycling of the 
monsoon winds lending a predictability to ocean travel to and from the islands even while ineradicable 
piracy introduced unavoidable risk; and the region really did possess an abundance of valuable 
commodities, including benzoin,  camphor, cloves, cubebs, mace, nutmeg, and white sandalwood, 
consumed hemisphere-wide in a bewildering array of different recipes.

--- PAGE: 16 ---
Introduction 
3 
 
In 1292-3 Java was assaulted by a force sent by the Yuán (Mongol) Emperor of China, Qubilai 
Qan. The invasion was repelled but it led to the founding of a new incarnation of the Javanese state and 
a new capital at Majapahit in what is now the Indonesian province of East Java. Under its mid -
fourteenth-century king, Hayam Wuruk, and his prime minister, Gajah Mada, this  Hindu-Buddhist 
kingdom aggressively expanded its borders as the preceding Javanese polity, Siṅhasari, had attempted 
to do decades earlier. By 1365, when the Javanese writer Mpu Prapañca wrote his Deśawarṇana 
(‘Depiction of the Districts’ , aka the Nagarakrtagama), a work that survives in manuscripts of 
considerably later date, Majapahit claimed territory as far east as New Guinea and as far north as North 
Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, thriving on the international trade in the archipelago’s extraordinary 
produce – although in truth these claims of suzerainty far outside Java are hard to verify. Little in the 
way of documentary evidence has survived  from Java  itself when compared to the more complete 
historical record of contemporaneous societies in temperate climes , and no local texts whatsoever are 
known from Indonesia east of Sumbawa from before 1521.1 Works describing daily life and the social 
texture of the archipelago before the arrival of the Portuguese are also rather lacking: Local voices and 
concerns are known to us through obtuse medieval inscriptions, a handful of fourteenth- and fifteenth-
century manuscripts, and (usually Balinese) copies of longer texts dating to the colonial period , most 
within a fairly restricted range of surviving genres. We do not know about the impact of the Black Death 
on Java or the rest of the archipelago, or even whether the Black Death had any impact at all. We have 
no medieval Javanese cookbooks to consult.  The main reason for this is climatic: Java’s hot, humid 
climate and abundan ce of leaf -chewing insects are not conducive to the preservation of organic 
manuscript material. Manuscripts rarely lasted more than a single century (Creese 2004:13). 
 Javanese power ap pears in any case to have diminished rapidly from the beginning of the 
fifteenth century up to the arrival of the first Portuguese ships in Southeast Asia in 1509, with Melaka 
rising as a new Muslim power on the Malay Peninsula, and port-cities on Java’s north coast – notably 
what had by c.1475 become the Sultanate2 of Demak – filling the vacuum left by Majapahit’s decline. 
The historiography of this period is one in which legends of Muslim saints and scraps of information 
gleaned from foreigners’ accounts have largely taken over from  true documentary history . What 
emerges from the texts that we do have is a world of violence  contrasting starkly with  the gleaming 
palace of the Javanese king described by Odoric. An inscription from Mount Lawu in Central Java dated 
1441 (1363 Śaka) speaks of internecine war; Niccolò de’ Conti , in the area at roughly the same time,  
says that people in Java killed one another for fun. 
 
1 See e.g. Barnes (2001:280) for Majapahit colonies in eastern Indonesian folklore, however.  
2 Whether Demak is appropriately described as a ‘sultanate’ at the time is unclear, as the title of ‘sultan’ does 
not appear to have been used in Java at this time, although it was elsewhere in the archipelago (Wayan Jarrah 
Sastrawan, p.c.).

--- PAGE: 17 ---
Introduction 
4 
 
This was approximately the situation when the Portuguese came to Southeast Asia, with divided 
local kingdoms and cities vying with one another for the riches of international commerce.  For much 
of the history of this period we are reliant on texts written by Portuguese soldiers and visitors, and for 
much of the rest we de pend on texts written or copied decades – in many cases centuries – after the 
events they purport to descibe.  The arrival of Portuguese ships itself triggered greater changes, and 
Indo-Malaysian material culture and daily life were soon radically altered by th e combination of  
European colonialism, Islamic expansion, and the introduction of American commodities and ideas 
(‘the Columbian Exchange ’) that struck the region at the beginning of the sixteenth centur y. T he 
medieval past is almost lost to u s; we cannot simply project our understanding of the modern region 
into the Middle Ages, and the documentary record is lacking. The onset and fusion of these processes 
thus marks a distinct break between modern Southeast Asian culture and that of the  Southeast Asian 
Middle Ages – a poorly documented but hugely important place and period in world history. 
 
0.1 Background 
Bujangga Manik is an Old Sundanese narrative poem about a Hindu ascetic’s travels composed in West 
Java during the unrest and transition of the late fifteenth century. It is a codex unicus, its sole surviving 
lontar-leaf manuscript, MS Jav. b.3. (R), having been preserved in the Bodleian Library at the 
University of O xford since 1627. The unfinished text, consisting of 16 30 extant lines, most of them 
eight syllables long, inscribed scriptio continua on both sides of thirty thin leaves, opens a rare window 
onto a world otherwise known through the eyes of foreign observe rs and later copies of potentially 
unreliable chronicles in local languages. 
Bujangga Manik has been known to the wider world since the late twentieth century , when it 
was first analysed by the Dutch scholar Jacobus Noorduyn. Its encyclopaedic character and naturalism, 
and its terse presentation of daily life and material culture, make it a useful corrective to accounts of 
medieval Indo -Malaysia that concentrate on political histor y and legend . The text is dated to the 
fifteenth century on the basis of its references to the polities of Melaka, Demak, and Majapahit, which 
only co-existed in the mid -to-late fifteenth century. The Portuguese, who conquered Melaka in 1511, 
are not mentioned, providing a terminus ante quem for the poem’s composition; precisely when the text 
was composed is unknown, although differences between Bujangga Manik and the ethnohistoric record 
place it earlier in the fifteenth century , perhaps around 1470 or so.  The name ‘Bujangga Manik’ was 
bestowed by Noorduyn: it is merely one of the three names by which the poem’s protagonist is known, 
although a text apparently named Bujangga Manik is mentioned in another Sundanese lontar text, the 
Sanghyang Swawarcita (Jakarta, PNRI, L626), indicating that that may have been the poem’s original

--- PAGE: 18 ---
Introduction 
5 
 
title. There is no title or author attached to the manuscript and no colophon explaining its creation due 
to the absence of the manuscript’s theorised final folio(s). As it was collected by an English merchant 
in the 1620s, almost certainly on the coast of Banten or West Java , it is unlikely the scriptorium in 
which it was written can be conclusively identified. 
 This work will examine Bujangga Manik/MS Jav. b. 3.  (R) from several perspectives: as a 
physical object made of wood, cordage, and palm leaves; as a handwritten text in a particular  form of 
Old Sundanese script; as a poem documenting an early stage of the Sundanese language;  as a literary 
work representing the productive collision of indigenous and ‘Indianised’  narrative and spiritual 
traditions; and, perhaps most importantly, as a window onto a hitherto poorly understood late-medieval 
period in the history of the Indonesian archipelago. I aim to make the poem – the manuscript of which 
has now been digitised – more accessible both to people in Indo-Malaysia and to scholars working on 
the late Middle Ages elsewhere in Afro-Eurasia. 
In this introduction I will describe what Bujangga Manik is about, provide a necessarily brief 
literature review, give some background on Sunda (where the poem was composed ), and dissect the 
theoretical assumptions behind my analysis of the work. The thesis is divided into six main parts: Part 
I is concerned with the codicology, palaeography, and language of  Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Jav. 
b.3. (R), the Bujangga Manik manuscript, including detailed descriptions of its box, leaves, script, and 
language. Part II contains the edited Romanised text of the poem with an original page-facing English 
translation and accompanying footnotes. A  short discussion of the transliteration of Old Sundanese 
precedes the edited text.  
Parts III, IV, V, and VI are concerned with different aspects of the contextualisation of the text. 
Part III, Place in Bujangga Manik, is about the role of place and place names in Bujangga Manik, and 
as these are the poem’s defining feature this section is also concerned with the categorisation of 
Bujangga Manik within Old Sundanese a nd, indeed, Austronesian literature s. This builds on work I 
began in my 2017 MA thesis. In this section I also examine the route followed by the ascetic, largely 
following Noorduyn (1982), as well as the features of the landscape a traveller through Java a nd Bali 
would have seen and experienced in the fifteenth century. 
 Part IV, People in Bujangga Manik, discusses the people who populate these places, from their 
(usually brief) physical descriptions to their probable roles and duties. The  poem has  few named 
characters and most appear only briefly ; t he only character present throughout is Bujangga Manik 
himself. There are nonetheless some interesting features to be drawn out with the assistance of the 
ethnohistoric sources. Part V, Travelling by Sea , is concerned with the ships, crews, and passengers 
described in Bujangga Manik, including the enormous jong or junk on which the ascetic travels from 
Bali back to Java. The ethnic and religious composition of the crews receive particular attention.  Part

--- PAGE: 19 ---
Introduction 
6 
 
VI, Things in Bujangga Manik, is a description of the smaller items of material culture of late-medieval 
Java as they appear in the poem, including particularly perfumes, narcotics, metals, and dyestuffs. 
Three appendices summarise key information: Appendix A contains original-language texts of 
the primary source quotations that appear at different points in the thesis , numbered from A1 to A7 5. 
Appendix B summarises the poem’s  toponymic information  using both tables and maps . Finally, 
Appendix C summarises the poem’s botanical information (to the extent that genera and species can be 
identified from the text). 
* 
0.1.1 The Text 
Although Bujangga Manik  is about a man’s quest to attain godhood, t he story  itself is 
undramatic. It begins as Jaya Pakuan (‘Pakuan’s victory’?), a nobleman from Pakañcilan in Sunda (near 
modern Bogor, West Java, Indonesia), travels east into Javanese -speaking territory to learn how to 
develop himself spiritually and become an ascetic. The bulk of the story is told in the first person from 
his perspective, and his voyage east is narrated in the form of a list of places through which he walks. 
After studying at the Javanese sanctuary of Rabut Palah (identifiable with the Majapahit sanctuary now 
known as Candi Panataran, built and enlarged at various points between 1197 and 1454), Jaya Pakuan 
feels homesick and returns to Kalapa (modern-day Jakarta, then the pre-eminent Sundanese port-city) 
by ship, acquiring a new name , Ameng Layaran ‘sailing novice’, in the process. After arriving home, 
his mother and another noblewoman, Ajung Larang, conspire to marry him off to the latter’s daughter, 
Jompong Larang,  who has fallen for him  owing to his handsomeness, attire, and ability to speak 
Javanese. Ameng Layaran is presented with marriage prestations, all of which he rejects along with the 
prospective bride. Now named Bujangga Manik ( ~‘jewel serpent’, although bujangga could have a 
number of other meanings), he disowns his mother for attempting to corrupt his spiritual path and leaves 
for the east again, carrying a book entitled Siksaguru (‘instructions of the teacher’), as well as a walking 
stick and a rattan whip. He passes numerous mountains, goes to the Majapahit capital, and makes it as 
far as Bali in search of peace and quiet (which he nonetheless fails to find).3 
After travelling around East and Central Java, again narrated in the form of listed place names, 
the ascetic ends up back in Sunda, where he ascends Mou nt Papandayan, a volcano south of present-
day Bandung. From the summit he enumerates the mountains and villages of Java and the renowned 
places of the known world from Dilih (Delhi) to Cina (China) and Ba(n)dan (Banda in eastern 
Indonesia). Bujangga Manik’s vision from the mountaintop appears to be a manifestation of his spiritual 
accomplishment, part of a theme in the poem linking holiness with knowledge of the mundane world. 
Following this ascent he retires to  a hermitage, where he dies. His death , or final liberation from the 
 
3 This may be the first recorded instance of a complaint about overcrowding in Bali.

--- PAGE: 20 ---
Introduction 
7 
 
cycle of rebirth (kamoksahan, from Skt mokṣa), is framed as an accomplishment, a task completed after 
ten years of concerted effort.  Bujangga Manik then ends up in a well -organised and se ttled afterlife 
replete with beautiful foliage. 
After a lacuna lasting two folios, the ascetic finds himself at the entrance to heaven guarded by 
Dorakala, the door guardian. Dorakala eventually allows Bujangga Manik to enter due to the ascetic’s 
physical and spiritual perfection. Bujangga Manik  then proceeds through a land resembling  a more 
perfect version of his own world. After another lacuna, t he poem ends with the ascetic sitting atop a 
white yak (camara putih), listening to heavenly instrumental music as lightning and rainbows light up 
the scene. As the text ends mid-sentence, it is clear there was more to the poem than has survived in the 
manuscript. It is unlikely these leaves will ever be recovered, and so the enigmatic image of a Sundanese 
ascetic riding a yak through a bejewelled blossoming heaven represents the finale of the text as it now 
stands. 
In its listing of so many place names, Bujangga Manik  makes use of an ancient Malayo -
Polynesian trope wherein a description of a journ ey or of geographic knowledge is narrated by means 
of listed toponyms (similar to what James Fox [1997 a, 1997b] called a ‘topogeny’; see my 2017 MA 
thesis on the same subject). The text will seem unfamiliar and perhaps even boring to a reader unused 
to this structure, but the focus on place is one of the poem’s more intriguing aspects.  Bujangga Manik 
is a rich ‘encyclopaedic’ text:  The world encountered by the ascetic is brought vividly to life by 
references to items of material culture and things-in-the-world, including different types of curtains; the 
woods and rattans used to build inter-island ships; the ethnic origins of the ships’ crews; the many kinds 
of betel and areca; spices and perfumes from Persian oak galls to massoy bark from New Guinea; and 
the names of hundreds of rivers, settlements, and volcanoes in Java and beyond. Few animals appear in 
the poem and humans in general are portrayed as a nuisance to be avoided. 
As there are comparatively few dateable texts from this period in island Southeast Asian history, 
one of the aims of this work is to mine Bujangga Manik for its trove of information about material 
culture and daily life, and to compare this information with that taken from other textual sources, 
especially the Portuguese geographical/ethnohistoric texts written shortly after Albuquerque’s conquest 
of Melaka in 1511, and also with the archaeological record, in particular the numerous contemporaneous 
shipwrecks in the Java Sea and elsewhere in the region. 
0.1.2 The Literature 
 The academic literature on Bujangga Manik is not extensive, the most important work being 
the 2006 transliteration and English translation with an introduction and notes in Three Old Sundanese 
Poems, a landmark of English -language scholarship on West Java,  by Noorduyn and Andries Teeuw 
(2006). The manuscript wa s found to be a Sundanese (rather than Javanese) text in the middle of the

--- PAGE: 21 ---
Introduction 
8 
 
twentieth century by Noorduyn, who wrote an article in the BKI detailing the ascetic’s journey through 
Java in 1982. This marked the first extensive academic discussion of the text. A later publication in the 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society discussing the Bodleian palm-leaf manuscripts shelf-marked ‘MS 
Jav.’, including MS Jav. b.3. (R), was published in 198 5; this deals with the collecting history of the 
manuscript and may be considered the final word on th at subject. Noorduyn found that the texts had 
been donated to the Bodleian in 1627 by  Andrew James, a merchant from the Isle of Wight, and he 
noted that at the time the texts were described collectively as vetustissima ‘most ancient’, implying that 
they were considerably older than the date of 1627 suggests.  While we cannot come to any firm 
conclusions as to the manuscript’s precise age, it is quite possible that the manuscript itself dates to the 
fifteenth century. 
Noorduyn had transliterated the text in the Bodleian, but microfilm of the manuscript was later 
sent to Indonesia, where it was  later examined and transliterated by the Sundanese scholar Undang 
Darsa. The two transliterations largely agreed and, edited and introduced by Teeuw (assisted by Stuart 
Robson and Wim van Zanten, among others), formed the basis of the 2006 publication, which included 
the Romanised text of Bujangga Manik with a side-by-side English translation. Two other equally early 
Old Sundanese poems, which Noorduyn and Teeuw christened The Ascension of Sri Ajnyana (aka Sri 
Ajñana – SA) and The Sons of Rama and Rawana (RR), were published in the same volume (Noorduyn 
and Teeuw 2006). An Indonesian translation of this book followed in 2009, pushing Bujangga Manik 
into public consciousness. References to Bujangga Manik  are now routine in discussions of early 
Indonesian and Sundanese literature (see e.g. Gallop and Arps 1991:74; Zahorka 2007; M. Danasasmita 
2001). The poem has even been the subject of a musical review at a Jakarta venue. 4 I worked on the 
poem for my MA thesis ( A. J. West 2017), concluding that its deployment o f listed toponyms 
(‘topogeny’) was part of a widespread pattern or trope in Austronesian or more specifically Malayo -
Polynesian literatures, something I explain in more detailed in section III.1 of this work. 
 Academic discussion of Old Sundanese palaeography and codicology has been surprisingly 
limited, in contrast to the work that has been done (especially recently by Aditia Gunawan  and Ilham 
Nurwansah) on editing Old Sundanese manuscripts. Concise English-language overviews of Sundanese 
codicology can be found in Ekadjati (1996)  and Gunawan (2015) , although in my dissection of the 
codicology of Bujangga Manik I have also relied on studies of Balinese and Javanese manuscripts 
(Hinzler 1993; van der Meij 2017; van der Molen 1983; Rubinstein 1996). The most widely cited study 
of Old Sundanese script is brief and based on later inked texts, quite unlike the early inscribed palm -
leaf manuscript of Bujangga Manik (Darsa 1997). This short study was used as the basis for Noorduyn 
and Teeuw’s (2006:433-435) discussion of Old Sundanese script as well. Tables presenting variants of 
 
4 Natakusumah, Kareem. 30 May 2015. Berita Satu. ‘“Bujangga Manik”, Kolaborasi Musikalisasi Sastra 
Indonesia-Prancis.’ http://www.beritasatu.com/budaya/278549-bujangga-manik-kolaborasi-musikalisasi-sastra-
indonesiaprancis.html. (Accessed 11-08-2020.)

--- PAGE: 22 ---
Introduction 
9 
 
this script from Old Sundanese manuscripts can be found in Indonesian -language works, including 
Ma’mur Danasasmita’s history of Sundanese literature (2001), but they give little indication of how the 
script worked in practice and provide little information about ductus, composition of the letters, or the 
scripts’ origins. There is now a thriving culture of studying and discussing Sundanese manuscripts on 
the internet, however, particularly on Facebook, led in part by the excellent amateur scholar Panji Topan 
Bahagia, and a recent visual analysis of several Old Sundanese scripts has been put together by Eka 
Noviana (2020). 
 In the next section I will provide a brief overview of the landscape of West Java and the nature 
of the Sunda kingdom in which Bujangga Manik was written. The historiography of this region is rather 
fraught, reliant on a small number of sources, many of them of comparatively recent date. Controversies 
of dating a nd interpretation are normal and accounts of the history of the Sunda kingdom can differ 
dramatically depending on the writer’s inclination, and the description below is only one interpretation 
of the sources. 
 
0.2 Sunda 
The island of Java is home to two major languages with tens of millions of speakers (arguably three, if 
Malay/Indonesian is included), both of them in the Malayo -Polynesian branch of the Austronesian 
language family: Javanese, spoken in Central and East Java, and Sundanese, spoken in the w est. 
Javanese has many more speakers and a considerably older and larger written record, with inscriptions 
going back to the eighth century; written Sundanese is evidenced only from the fourteenth century on. 
Because Javanese has a much more extensive lite rature, and because it was collected along with two 
other Javanese palm-leaf manuscripts in the 1620s, the Bujangga Manik  manuscript was initially 
believed to have been Javanese as well (Noorduyn 1985). The ‘Jav.’ shelfmark reflects this. 
Sundanese is one of the most-spoken languages of the Austronesian language family, with over 
30 million speakers. It is closely related to Malay and more distantly to Javanese, but both the modern 
language and the Old Sundanese represented in Bujangga Manik contain a host of loanwords from  
different stages of Javanese. The vast majority of Sundanese speakers live in West Java, now the most 
populous province in the Republic of Indonesia, as well as in Banten Province to the west, which has a 
significant Javanese-speaking minority. At the time Bujangga Manik was composed Sundanese was 
also spoken on the coast in Jakarta, now the capital of Indonesia and then a busy port known as Kalapa 
(and to the Portuguese as  Calapa), and the toponymy of western Central Java also suggests that 
Sundanese was also spoken f urther east. Together Jakarta, Banten, and West Java make up around 
47,000 square kilometres of land area (Whitten, Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 1996:7) – a little larger than

--- PAGE: 23 ---
Introduction 
10 
 
the Netherlands. Today most Sundanese people are Sunni Muslims, a result of a series of invasions and 
conversions between the sixteenth century and today. A small minority in the mountains of West Java, 
known to the outside world as the Baduy or Badui  (ostensibly from Arabic badawī [بَدَوِي] ‘Bedouin’ 
[Rigg 1862:31]) and to themselves as Urang Kanékés, keep their own religious traditions, albeit with 
some Islamic influence (Hasman and Reiss 2012; Waterson 1997:96; Wessing 1977; 1978; 1979). 
Sundanese people have often been stereotyped as hardy people of the highlands , and indeed 
were frequently called orang gunung ‘mountain people’ by the people of the coast in colonial times 
(Ekadjati 1995:9). Thomas Raffles, who accompanied British forces invading Java in 1811, noted that 
‘[t]he Súndas exhibit many features of a mountainous race. They are shorter, stouter, hardier, 
and more active men, than the inhabitants of the coast and eastern districts. In some respects 
they resemble the Madurese, who display a more martial and independent air, and move with a 
bolder carriage than the natives of Java’ (Raffles 1817:I:67 – italics in original). 
Raffles further compared the difference between the Javanese and Sundanese to that between the 
English and Welsh  respectively, believing that Sundanese was ‘the most ancient vernacular of the 
country […] a simple uncultivated dialect, adapted however to all the purposes of the simple and 
uneducated mountaineers who speak it’ (Raffles 1817:I:399). Such comments are echoed in later texts 
as well (see e.g. Kunst 1968:1). 
The notion of the Sundanese as hardy mountain people lacking a sophisticated high culture and 
international connections does not accord with either the extant Old Sundanese texts or the ethnohistoric 
record, however, from which they emerge as  reasonably well-connected and prosperous, at home on 
the sea as well as in the mountains. The Portuguese apothecary Tomé Pires, who visited Sunda in  the 
first expedition to the island in 1513, remarked that  
‘Sunda is [a land of] chivalrous  and bellicose seafarers. They say more so than the Javanese, 
all in all , that th ey are men of goodly figure, ruddy, robust men’ ( adapted from Cortesão 
1944:167, 413).A2 
In the interim between Pires’ time and Raffles’, Sunda’s ports were conquered by largely Javanese -
speaking Muslims, and Sundanese speakers ceased to be ‘bellicose seafarers’ – thought of thereafter as 
unsophisticated and possibly idolatrous mountain folk (in spite of the eventual profusion of mosques 
and religious schools in Sunda’s mountain districts). 
In Sundanese, Javanese, and Malay, the word ‘Java’ (Jawa) used to be reserved exclusively for 
the Javanese-speaking portions of the island. West Java (Mal/Ind, Sd Jawa Barat) was known simply 
as Sunda (whence ‘Sundanese’) even in European languages until the nineteenth century. The origin of 
the word ‘Sunda’ is mysterious: Jonathan Rigg, writing in West Java in the middle of the nineteenth 
century, speculated that the term could have come from the combination of tunda ‘to set aside, to put’

--- PAGE: 24 ---
Introduction 
11 
 
and saha ‘a particle and prefix signifying union’, whence Sunda ‘a place of deposit, an entrepôt’ (Rigg 
1862:464) – although this seems unlikely on morphophonological grounds. Others believe it to derive 
from Sanskrit śuddha ‘clean; pure; white’, applied originally to a mountain or mountains near Bandung 
and used as a pars pro toto for the Sundanese-speaking parts of the island (Ekadjati 1995:3). The Dutch 
geologist R. W. van Bemmelen (1934; 1949) argued that the name was coined after the white ash blown 
out by an exploding supervolcano, the huge volume of which would have rendered the land itself white 
– whence śuddha/Sunda. This prehistoric volcano, Gunung Sunda (‘Mount Sunda’), is the theorised 
ancestor of Tangkuban Perahu,  an active volcano near Bandung prominent in Sundanese folklore 
(Whitten, Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 1996:97). 
 
Fig. 0.2. A sketch map of Java. 
Volcanism in West Java has had a powerful impact on the region’s economic and agriculture 
development. The ejecta from Sunda’s volcanoes is predominantly andesite, richer in silica and more 
liable to cause volcanic explosions when compared to the more basaltic lava and consequently gentler 
eruptions in Central and East Java’s volcanoes. There are different physiographic regions in West Java, 
but overall Sunda’s soils are poorer in nutrients than those found in the rest of the island as a result of 
this more acidic andesitic ejecta (Cribb 2000:19; Whitten, Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 1996:95). Volcanic 
explosions have transformed the landscape since the time Bujangga Manik was composed, and o ther 
changes in the landscape over the centuries can also be attributed to volcanic activity; soft volcanic rock 
causes Java’s short rivers to silt up easily, and their deltas tend to grow outwards from the shore while 
their banks narrow. Demak in Central Java – a key player in the Islamisation of Java c.1500 – was once 
a coastal city, but it is  now over twenty kilometres from the sea. The river mouth at Banten, reported 
by the Portuguese to be wide and navigable in the 1510s, is now large enough only for small boats to 
pass (Cribb 2000:14). Such progradation of the coastline is common in islands with high rainfall and a 
tall mountain cordillera so close to the shore ; a similar situation prevails on the south coast of New 
Guinea, for instance (Skelly and David 2017:xx).

--- PAGE: 25 ---
Introduction 
12 
 
Sunda is a rainy land. Bogor , the medieval capital of the Sunda kingdom,  has been said to 
experience 322 thunderstorms a year – a world record, it is claimed – but these storms are normally 
represented by heavy rain rather than lightning (Cribb 2000:21; Vlekke 1945:xiv). Java is just seven 
degrees south of the equator, and seasonal variation manifests less in temperature differences and more 
in wind direction and rainfall. The dry season in East Java can last as many as nine months in the middle 
of the year; in much of West Java it lasts less than a month (Whi tten, Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 
1996:124). Government studies in agroclimate label the region around Bogor ‘permanently wet’; much 
of the rest of West Java is classed as ‘permanently moist’. Only the northern plain near Jakarta is 
categorised as ‘seasonally  dry’ (Whitten, Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 1996:128). This near -constant 
rainfall means that the soil is leached of its nutrients more quickly than in Central and East Java (Cribb 
2000:19). Combined with the already nutrient-poor ejecta of Sunda’s volcanoes, it is not surprising that 
the region had a lower premodern population density than the Javanese-speaking parts of the island. 
The landscape Bujangga Manik’s ascetic would have wandered through in the fifteenth century 
would have been more verdant,  wilder, and potentially more hostile to a lone traveller than modern 
Java. The island  once counted among its wildlife  a number of large mammals, including tigers 
(Panthera tigris sondaica , Sd maung), leopards ( Panthera pardus melas , Sd maung tutul ), Javan 
rhinoceroses (Rhinoceros sondaicus, Sd badak), and banteng (a species of wild cattle – Bos javanicus, 
Sd banténg). All survived in large numbers into the nineteenth century, when Dutch and local hunters 
contributed to their near extermination. Elephants (Elephas maximus sondaicus, Sd gajah) also used to 
live in Java, and they are mentioned in Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (SSKK), an Old Sundanese 
text whose oldest dated manuscript was copied in 1518, as having been tamed to serve in war, a practice 
inspired directly by Indian tradition s (Trautmann 2015 :ch.7). Monkeys, of which Java is home to 
several species, are mentioned as a hazard on the archipelago’s roads in several medieval texts written 
by foreigners, though they are rarely m entioned as such in Javanese or Sundanese works.  It is 
remarkable that none of these potentially dangerous animals are recorded directly in Bujangga Manik, 
standing in marked contrast to the more fraught portrayal of the landscape in later texts, like the 
seventeenth-century Javanese Islamic narrative Serat Jatiswara (Behrend 1987). Volcanic activity per 
se is also noticeably absent  (although the poem is one of the oldest texts to mention Krakatau [OSd 
Rakata] by name). Indeed, the only hazard mentioned on the road is fatigue (BM 60-61). 
0.2.1 The Sunda Kingdom 
Sunda was home to a t least two  named kingdoms in the Middle Ages . These are , however, 
rather poorly documented and, in contrast to the relief -covered temples and other ruins ( ‘candi’) of 
Central and East Java, famed archaeological sites in Sunda are few and far between. The first kingdom 
in the region was known as Tārūmanagara, the oldest polity attested on the island of Java, dating to the 
early/mid-first millennium. The connection between this early kingdom and the later polity of Sunda,

--- PAGE: 26 ---
Introduction 
13 
 
which is first evidenced epigraphically in the tenth century and which survived into the sixteenth, is not 
known precisely; we have little to go on aside from folklore.  Folklore also posits a third Sundanese 
kingdom known as Galuh, centred in eastern Priangan  (as in the Wawacan Sajarah Galuh, a pseudo-
historical text written in Ciamis between 1847 and 1851 [Ekadjati 1996:125]) ; all the early evidence 
suggests, however, that this was a district of Sunda and not a kingdom. 
In this section I will tease apart the layers of oral tradition and contemporary evidence to show 
what we know, and how we know what we know, about medieval Sunda. It would be hard to overstate 
the importance of oral tradition in the public understanding of Sundanese history in West Java, or its 
significance in structuring early interpretations (e.g. Raffles 1817) , parti cularly as manuscripts and 
inscriptions only began to be studied by outsiders towards the end of the nineteenth century. I will begin 
here with a discussion of the archaeological and documentary records, addressing some of the persistent 
framings of medieval Sunda derived from oral tradition afterwards. 
Physical Remains 
West Java does not abound in ruins  and inscriptions as Central and East Java do. While the 
earliest inscriptions in Java, dated to the fifth century on palaeographic grounds, have been found in the 
west, they are few in number and refer enigmatically to a kingdom, Tārūmanagara, based on the Citarum 
(‘indigo river’, from  Sd tarum ‘indigo’ and ci-, a cliticised form of cai ‘water’). A small number of  
candis5 remain from this period, but even th ose – like Cangkuang, near Garut, and Batujaya, in 
Karawang, on the coast  – are hard to date . Batujaya appears to have been built in the early first 
millennium, and is thus around a thousand years older than Bujangga Manik, while Cangkuang seems 
to be somewhat younger.  A mix of Buddhist and Hindu ritual objects have been found at these sites, 
many of which can be seen in the Museum Sri Baduga in Bandung. 
Other Sundanese archaeological sites are more enigmatic and harder to interpret  than these 
recognisably candi-ish structures. Such sites are scattered throughout West Java and typically consist 
of rammed-earth embankments and standing stones; some of the stones are inscribed, though most are 
not. Many of these stones appear to represent linggas (Skt liṅga) – aniconic or phallic representations 
of the god Śiva (OSd Siwa) (Blurton 1992:76-84) – but it is difficult to say whether all of them represent 
linggas and to what extent indigenous religious beliefs melded with Śaivist practice in their erection. 
Standing stones are put up e lsewhere in the Austronesian world, a practice hyperdiffusionist 
anthropologists in the early twentieth century  dubiously tried to connect to a global ‘Megalithic’ 
tradition (W. J. Perry 1918; Bellwood 1997:153). Some of the stones are reminiscent of standing stones 
in Austronesian-speaking southern Taiwan, for instance, and of the sacrificial stones encountered in 
many parts of eastern Indonesia  (e.g. Keo in Flores, discussed in Forth 2001 :58-61). It may be that 
 
5 The Indonesian word candi is now used to refer to almost any stone structure from the pre-Islamic period, 
whether Hindu, Buddhist, or otherwise.

--- PAGE: 27 ---
Introduction 
14 
 
Sundanese people were already erecting standing stones and re -analysed such stones as representing 
Śiva after contact with Indian religions. 
We know that some of these stones represented linggas because some of them say so – they are 
inscribed with the word lingga. These inscribed stones are found only at a small number of sites , the 
most notable of which is known as Astana Gedé (‘Great Cemetery’), about a kilometre outside Kawali 
in kab. Ciamis, West Java, where there are six inscriptions, most barely a sentence in length, along with 
the remains of probable noble residences and other ritual features . These are now inside a well-
maintained complex in a patch of forest. There are several standing stones – some labelled as linggas, 
some clearly intended as such – and a sort of altar, the Palinggih, which local folklore maintains was 
used as the coronation stone of the ‘kings’ of Galuh or Sunda , as well as a deep pool surrounded by 
stones some hundred metres or so from the main site and claimed to have been used by the royal family 
as a bathing place. The stones are believed to have been erected and inscribed in the fourteenth century, 
although there are no inscribed dates at the site. Several Islamic tombs at Kawali attest to its importance 
into the sixteenth century, when Muslim missionaries w ere reportedly sent from the Sultanate of 
Cirebon on the north coast of Java to convert the Sundanese to Islam. A survey of the Astana Gedé site 
can be found in a short book by Nina Herlina (2017; see also Hasan Djafar 1995). 
Other sites are  even less clearly dateable. Some are probably prehistoric, as with the Taman 
Purbakala Cipari site in kab. Kuningan, where there are some stone box  or slab graves (Bellwood 
1997:290), and the site at Gunung Padang (kab. Cianjur), often believed to have some relationship with 
the Sunda kingdom but which is more likely to have been built before the Common Era  (Bellwood 
1997:290).6 A little down the road from Kawali is a site known as Karang Kamulyan, which consists of 
a set of undated and frankly mysterious stones in various formations. These formations have been given 
an equally enigmatic set of names (e.g. Sang Hyang Bedil ‘The Holy Gun’). The similarity of many of 
the stones with those at Kawali, and the fact that it was probably a rammed -earth fort, ostensibly like 
Kawali (Panji Topan Bahagia, p.c.), suggests that the site is also possibly dateable to the fourteenth 
century. A discussion of the possible function of Karang Kamulyan may be found in Munandar 
(2017:67-102). These sites appear to have been in use  for long periods, though, and  so-called 
‘megalithic’ Sundanese statues often show Hindu influence; one statue from Cikapundung, northeast of 
Bandung, now in the Museum Sri Baduga, even bears a date equivalent to 1341 CE (Bellwood 
1997:290).7 Miksic (2010:276, citing N. J. Krom ) says that this art style derived in large part from 
Central Javanese-era (c.700-928) precedents without later East Javanese influence. 
 
6 Gunung Padang has the dubious distinction of having been featured on an episode of the History Channel’s 
Ancient Aliens (season 9, episode 10, originally aired in 2015), a TV show that purports to reveal evidence of 
alien contact in prehistory. 
7 The museum calls the statue arca tipe Pajajaran, a ‘Pajajaran-type statue’.

--- PAGE: 28 ---
Introduction 
15 
 
Inscriptions 
The language of the  Kawali inscriptions is Old Sundanese, evidently closely re lated to the 
variety found in Bujangga Manik, but in fact the earliest inscriptions in West Java are in Sanskrit and, 
aside from place names, Sundanese is unattested until the late Middle Ages. Sunda is infrequently 
encountered in medieval travel texts, and the extant literature in Old Sundanese amounts to a handful 
of works and inscriptions on both stone and copperplate . Only a couple of the inscriptions may be 
securely dated, as with the Rumatak inscription (dated 1333 Śaka, equal to 1411 CE8): most dates have 
been established by comparison with Sundanese oral traditions recorded in the nineteenth century , as 
with the stones at Kawali. 
The date of  the most famous of all Sundanese inscriptions, the Batutulis inscription ( aka 
‘Batutulis Bogor’ inscription) now within the city limits of Bogor, is in doubt due to poor preservation 
of the relevant letters.  The chronogram is a candrasengkala, meaning that the date is represented by 
words that stand for numbers in a positional notation system, a cryptic  and traditionally Javanese way 
of inscribing dates based on the Śaka era (see Raffles 1817:I:416 for an early description  and van der 
Meij 2017:443-446 for a list of terms ). The word representing the century on the Batutulis is difficult 
to read and quite controversial; I favour an interpretation placing it in the early fourteenth century (1255 
Śaka, or 1333 CE), making it the oldest extant text in Sundanese, although an alternative interpretation 
dates it to 1455 Śaka (1533 CE), which would make it the latest significant non-Islamic inscription on 
the island of Java (Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:1). This stone is in situ and is accessible from the centre 
of Bogor by public transport. It is treated as a sacred object and visitors must remove their shoes before 
entering the small hut that now houses it. There are other stones at the site, including two that must be 
linggas and one with a triangular indentation that is interpreted as a yoni (an aniconic /vulvic 
representation of the goddess Śakti). 
The total number of Old Sundanese inscriptions of any significant length is in the low double 
digits. Few have wholly legible Śaka dates and must be dated on grounds of content and palaeography. 
The Kabantenan copperplates (Jakarta, Museum Nasional, inv. nos. E.42 -E.45), perhaps the most 
significant of these, likely date to within a century or so of the Batutulis.  While some inscriptions have 
come to light only recently, including the fascinating Nagara Pageuh  copperplate inscription (Aditia 
Gunawan, p.c.), several key inscriptions have disappeared, including the Kebonkopi II stone inscription 
of 932 (854 Śaka) , which was trans literated and photographed  before the Second World War but 
disappeared in the tumult (Zahorka 2007:30). The inscription is a brief text in a mix of Old Malay and 
Old Javanese discovered near Bogor that provides the earliest -known use of the name Sunda in the 
 
8 The Śaka calendar is a solar one of South Asian origin, and Śaka dates can be converted into Common Era 
ones reasonably easily: the calendar begins in 78 CE, and to derive the Common Era  date one simply adds 78 to 
the Śaka numerals (e.g. 1400 Śaka = ~1478 CE). As the Śaka year begins on Gregorian March 21st/22nd, the 
year is approximately established by this simple method. See Casparis (1978).

--- PAGE: 29 ---
Introduction 
16 
 
region (Bosch 1941). The short text indicates that Sunda was a kingdom  and not merely a region or 
ethnic group, as it had its own king (hāji Sunda, from OJv haji ‘king, prince’ – OJED 572:9).A3 The use 
of Old Malay may point to some sort of connection with the Sumatran kingdom of Śrīvijaya (Andaya 
2001:321; Zahorka 2007:31). 
Manuscripts 
 According to Aditia Gunawan, there are 2058 surviving Sundanese manuscripts in archives and 
libraries around the world, the greatest number stored in the PNRI in Jakarta.9 Old Sundanese palm-leaf 
manuscripts – vaguely defined as those in ‘Old Sundanese’ language and script and usually dealing 
with non/pre-Islamic topics – make up a small minority of these  (see Gunawan and Holil 2010 for an 
overview). The extant Old Sundanese manuscripts may be divided into prose works and poems , and 
further into texts written on lontar (for ordinary use) and those written on gebang (for storage in an 
archive – Sd kabuyutan). These texts span the period between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries. 
A list of the longer Old Sundanese texts known to scholars can be found on Kairaga.com, a 
website dedicated to the study of Sundanese manuscripts run by Ilham Nurwansah ,10 as well as in 
Gunawan and Holil (2010). Similar (but less complete) lists can also be found in Noorduyn and Teeuw 
(2006). The most prominent  prose works noted in the latter  are Carita Parahiyangan and Fragmen 
Carita Parahiyangan  (Jakarta, PNRI, L406), narrative histor ies of Sunda nese royalty dated to the 
sixteenth century (Atja and Danasasmita 1981b; Noorduyn 1962); Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian 
(or ‘SSKK’ – PNRI, L630), a compendium of knowledge on gebang leaves with a colophon dating the 
text to 1518 (Atja and Danasasmita 1981c); Amanat dari Galunggung11 (Jakarta, PNRI, L632, probably 
fifteenth-century), a set of religious instructions given by one Rakéyan Darmasiksa, only six leaves of 
which survive (Atja and Danasasmita 1981a; Danasasmita et al. 1987); Kawih Paningkes (PNRI, L419), 
a text containing religious advice; Jatiniskala (PNRI, L422), another set of religious instructions, this 
time for attaining ‘the true state of immateriality’; and Ratu Pakuan (PNRI, L410), a historical text 
(Atja 1970). Other manuscripts are, however, frequently brought to light by archivists and philologists, 
particularly in the last decade ; another manuscript of the Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian has 
recently reemerged in the PNRI, this time on lontar leaves (L624 – see Nurwansyah 2020b) and another 
fascinating prose text, Sanghyang Sasana Mahaguru (PNRI, L621), is currently being edited by Aditia 
Gunawan (see his earlier version – Gunawan 2009). Texts written in Sundanese scriptoria but in Old 
 
9 As outlined in an article on his Academia.edu page: Gunawan, Aditia. 2011. Naskah Sunda: Khazanah, akses, 
dan identitas. Academia.edu. 
https://www.academia.edu/5533911/_2011_Naskah_Sunda_Khazanah_Akses_dan_Identitas . (Accessed 19-08-
2020.) 
10 Nurwansah, Ilham. 2020. Penelitian Naskah Sunda. Kairaga. 
https://web.archive.org/save/https://www.kairaga.com/naskah-
sunda/penelitian?fbclid=IwAR2FY3mFBBb1_vX0vGF_GdsU1rocKd5I8wetTRXFfC6p1LmvZs8Gad0ANUE . 
(Accessed 11-08-2020).  
11 The title of this text is an Indonesian description of the contents – there is no title attached to the kropak itself.

--- PAGE: 30 ---
Introduction 
17 
 
Javanese are also known, as with the Sanghyang Hayu, a religious text in the same inked script as the 
gebang-leaf SSKK, dated 1431 Śaka (1509 CE). The Dharmma Pātañjala, an Old Javanese version of 
the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali with a colophon dating it to 1467 CE  (now Berlin, Staatsbibliothek, MS 
Schoemaan I 21), is perhaps the most famous of these (Acri 2011), although there are others, including 
a recension of the Old Javanese Bhīma Svarga (Gunawan 2016). 
 Bujangga Manik (Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R)) is one of several surviving Old 
Sundanese poems in octosyllabic metre. Others include The Sons of Rama and Rawana  (named by 
Noorduyn and Teeuw, aka Pantun Ramayana – originally Jakarta, PNRI, L1102, now in the Sri Baduga 
Museum, Bandung), an Old Sundanese narrative poem based on the lore of the Sanskrit Rāmāyaṇa 
(Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006); Sri Ajnyana (Jakarta, PNRI, L625), telling the tale of a god who for his 
sins has been made to wander the mundane world; Séwaka Darma (Jakarta, PNRI, L408), a narrative 
poem written by a nun about a student’s lessons in attaining liberation ( kalepasan), probably dated to 
the fifteenth century ; several of the Ciburuy texts, known from photographs and diplomatic 
transcriptions of leaves from Sundanese kabuyutan (archives or repositories of old texts), of unknown 
age; and Poernawidjaja’s Hellevaart 12 (two ma nuscripts of which, Jakarta, PNRI, L416 and L423, 
survive), apparently an eighteenth -century adaptation of the Old Javanese Kuñjarakarṇa, a copy of 
which from Merapi-Merbabu is one of the oldest Javanese manuscripts in existence (fourteenth century 
– Casparis 1975:94; Kern 1922; van der Molen 1983 ). Together these Old Sundanese texts reveal a 
largely Hindu kingdom ruled from Pakuan, modern -day Bogor, and influenced by Javanese language 
and literature. 
 In addition to these local manuscripts and inscriptions useful information is also to be found in 
descriptions written by foreigners to the region. The account of Sunda written by the Chinese 
administrator Zhào Rŭkuò (趙汝适, aka Rŭguā) in c.1225 is the oldest of these . Zhào says that the 
people of Sunda ‘ have a penchant for robbing and plundering, [so] foreign merchants rarely come to 
trade’.13 He also notes, however, that Sunda produced fine black pepper ( 胡椒, Piper nigrum), better 
than in East Java, a point corroborated almost three centuries later by Duarte Barbosa (2000[1516]:382) 
and by the terms of 1522 treaty between Sunda and Portugal, in which a thousand sacks of pepper (mill 
saquos de pimenta) were among the tribute supposed to have been sent from Sunda to the Portuguese 
(Lisbon, Arquivo Nacional da Torre do Tombo, Gav. 15, mç. 8, n.º 2). Barbosa says that the other major 
‘commodities’ traded in Sunda’s ports w ere enslaved human beings ( escravos). Portuguese sources, 
principally Tomé Pires, tell us that Sunda possessed several ports of international standing, including 
 
12 ‘Purnawijaya’s journey to Hell.’ The Dutch title was given by Pleyte (1914). 
13 See my 2019 translation of the text from Zhào’s Zhūfān Zhì (諸蕃志): West, A. J. 2019. Zhao Rukuo’s 
account of Sunda. Medium. 
https://web.archive.org/web/20191222110824/https://medium.com/@siwaratrikalpa/zhao -rukuos-account-of-
sunda-748ab2c0f40b?. (Accessed 11-08-2020).

--- PAGE: 31 ---
Introduction 
18 
 
Jakarta and Banten, and, oddly, was known for the volume of its commerce with the Maldives (ilhas de 
Diva – Cortesão 1944:172; Pires 2018:192; Noorduyn 1976) – a claim finding some corroboration in 
François Pyrard de Laval’s (admittedly later) report of a ship from Sunda, filled with spices and the 
largest he had ever seen, wrecked in the Maldives (1619:270-271). 
Pantun and Pajajaran 
Much of wha t is thought to be known of early Sundanese history is derived from later oral 
traditions, chiefly comprising the carita pantun (Sd carita ‘story’, from Skt ‘deeds, adventures’ and Sd 
pantun ‘rhyme’), tales in a generally octosyllabic metre told by a lone storyteller accompanied by his 
own zither over the course of a single night (Meijer 1891; Rosidi 1973; Williams 2001:39-40, 145; van 
Zanten 1984:290; 2008). Most are romances. Such stories have only been set down in writing since the 
nineteenth century, although pantun existed in pre-colonial and pre-Islamic times: the word s pantun, 
ma(n)tun ‘to tell pantun stories’, and prepantun ‘a pantun storyteller’, as well as a list of titles given to 
pantun stories, can be found in Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian, the aforementioned sixteenth-
century Old Sundanese prose work (Atja and Danasasmita 1981c:10, 14). The exploits of  pre-Islamic 
Sundanese royals represent the main subject matter of such stories, as in the classic pantun Mundinglaya 
di Kusumah, although there are others that recount the adventures of gods who have fallen from heaven, 
as with Lutung Kasarung, the story of a deity who falls to earth and becomes a monkey (specifically a 
Javan lutung, Trachypithecus auratus) (Eringa 1949; van Zanten 1984:291). 
The royal figure most commonly encountered in carita pantun is Siliwangi, King (MSd prabu) 
of Pajajaran. In such stories Pajajaran (Sd ‘place of rows/alignment’), the name given in oral tradition 
to the Sunda kingdom, is a kind of Camelot, and Siliwangi is its Arthur: a powerful and morally upright 
king whose rule represents a golden age. Siliwangi’s folkloric importance is so great that his name has 
been given to a regiment of the Indonesian army a s well as to countless roads, shops, and companies 
throughout West Java . Siliwangi is mentioned in Bujangga Manik under the name Silih Wangi (BM 
321 and 733), and it is apparent from these references that he was a legendary (and certainly deceased) 
figure by the time of the poem’s composition in the fifteenth century. This conflicts somewhat with 
Siliwangi’s traditional characterisation. 
Interpretation of pantun has changed over time : In the nineteenth century, Siliwangi was 
believed to have lived in the thirteenth century, as evidenced by London, Bri tish Library, MSS Malay 
F 1, a Malay -language text presenting the genealogy of the kings of Pajajaran written in Batavia in 
1887.14 Jonathan Rigg’s 1862 A Dictionary of the Sunda Language  of Java, an important source for 
Sundanese language and literature, and one the only source s to have preserved the name ‘Bujangga 
Manik’ prior to the modern analysis of MS Jav. b.3. (R), also places Siliwangi in the thirteenth century, 
 
14 http://www.bl.uk/manuscripts/Viewer.aspx?ref=mss_malay_f_1_f001r (accessed 14-01-2019).

--- PAGE: 32 ---
Introduction 
19 
 
dating the founding of Pajajaran to coincide roughly with the establishment of the Javan ese kingdom 
of Majapahit in 1293 (Rigg 1862:333). In modern times, however, attempts have been made to connect 
Siliwangi with the Sri Baduga Maharaja mentioned in the Batutulis  inscription and to claim that the 
inscription is of sixteenth-century date (as in Zahorka 2007; see also Danasasmita 1973; Pleyte 1911). 
In some pantun Siliwangi leads the Sundanese to convert to Islam; if these traditional stories were 
correct the king could not have reigned two centuries or more before the first large -scale conversions, 
and so the dates appear to have been emended to fit better with the newly invented tradition . The 
evidence for Siliwangi is assessed in an article by Agus Aris Munandar (2017:1 -42), who concludes 
that it is not possible to identify him with any known Sundanese king . The legend of Pajajaran is  
nonetheless found in several colonial European accounts of Sunda, including Raffles’s History of Java 
(1817) and Rigg’s  1862 Dictionary, both written before the decipherment of the Old Sundanese 
inscriptions and manuscripts – which perhaps shows how important the pantun tradition has been in the 
historiography of Sunda. 
The name ‘Pajajaran’ is recorded in some medieval inscriptions (specifically the Kabantenan 
copperplates and Batutulis inscription) – but, while the word ‘Sunda’ appears several times in Bujangga 
Manik, the name ‘Pajajaran’ never does. On the Ci éla map, an eighteenth -century Sundanese map in 
Cacarakan (modern Javanese) script from Garut, West Java, Pajajaran is the name of a town identifiable 
with Bogor; it is not the name of a kingdom (Panji Topan Bahagia, p.c.). In sixteenth-century Portuguese 
sources the kingdom is known as Çumda (vel sim ), and in the earliest Javanese sources, too, 
Sunda/Suṇḍa and not Pajajaran is found (as in Deśawarṇana [42.2], Kidung Sunda [Berg 1927], and 
others – Ekadajti 1995:7).15 On the Miller Atlas (aka ‘Atlas Miller’ or ‘ Lopo Homem-Reineis Atlas’ - 
Paris, BnF, GE DD-683), a set of Portuguese maps dating to 1519, the area is labelled SVNDA INSVLA. 
The Selden Map – Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Selden Supra 105, a seventeenth -century Chinese 
map depicting the coastlines of China and Southeast Asia, ostensibly based on earlier material (Brook 
2013) – gives shùndā (順搭) as the name of West Java, and the aforementioned thirteenth-century 
account by Zhào Rŭkuò refers to Sunda as the country of Xīntuō (新拖國 Yuán-era Mandarin: sin-thɔ 
[Pulleyblank 1991]). ‘Sunda’ also appears in a 1489-90 seamanship manual by the Arabian navigator 
Aḥmad ibn Mājid (ماجد بن أحمد ,)as both Sundah bāri (ﺒﺎﺮﻯ  ﺴﻨﺪﻩthe Strait of Sunda between Java and 
southeastern Sumatra, and Jabal Sundah (ﺴﻨﺪﻩ ﺠﺒﻞ ‘ ,)Mount Sunda’ (Tibbetts 19 81:498).16 Evidently 
Sunda was the most common name for the region we now call West Java and for the kingdom 
established there in the Middle Ages in both foreign and local texts.  Galuh, supposedly a kingdom in 
the east of West Java and referenced sporadically in some Old Javanese inscriptions and Old Sundanese 
 
15 In later Javanese chronicles, Pajajaran became an important name and concept, and is used consistently in the 
babads as the name for Sunda. It was even used by the Javanese as a way of referring metonymically to the Dutch, 
whose capital in the archipelago, Batavia, was in what had been Sundanese territory (Ricklefs 1974:371).  
16 The precise referent of the phrase ‘Sunda Mountain’ is unclear, although Tibbetts presents several theories.

--- PAGE: 33 ---
Introduction 
20 
 
manuscripts, does not appear in these foreigners’ accounts, and the impression they give is of a unitary 
Sundanese kingdom. This is also the impression given by Bujangga Manik. Pajajaran appears to have 
been one of the names by which the capital was known. 
It has been claimed that Sunda’s capital shifted between different towns, most notably Kawali 
in Sunda’s east and Bogor (Pakuan, Pajajaran, or Pakañcilan) in the west, resulting from a dependence 
on dry rice  – a crop which requires fields to lie fallow for long periods, especially in mountainous 
regions of poor soils like West Java (Andaya and Andaya 2015:105; Ekadjati 1995:6; Miksic 2010:278). 
As there is little evidence of any site other than Pakuan having be en designated a capital by the 
Sundanese, however, this seems rather unlikely; Kawali probably was not a capital, and the word prebu, 
applied in the Kawali inscriptions to the area’s ruler(s), probably did not mean ‘king’ (Noorduyn 
1976:470). In any case, the capital seems to have been known colloquially by the name dayeuh ‘city’ 
in Sundanese, perhaps from proto -Austronesian *daya ‘up river, towards the interior ’ (ACD 7210).  
Tomé Pires, the aforementioned  sixteenth-century Portuguese apothecary, referred to the capital as 
Dayo, placing it ‘two days’ journey’ from Calapa (modern-day Jakarta), fitting the location of Bogor 
(Cortesão 1944:173; Pires 2018:194).17 
Folk interpretations of the past can be  extremely flexible and it  is not wise  to rely on oral 
tradition when interpreting the evidence of six centuries ago. 18 Carita pantun cannot be considered to 
faithfully record the politics and way of life of the medieval Sundanese,  and although the tales are 
invaluable documents of later Sundanese thought and culture in themselves, I suggest that we would be 
making an orientalist mistake if we assumed that Sundanese pantun were inherently more reliable than, 
say, European oral traditions in the reconstruction of the medieval past. 
Sunda and Java 
Sunda may have been a Javanese vassal under the Siṅhasari kings in the thirteenth century (as 
stated in the Deśawarṇana [42.2]), but it seems to have remained politically independent of Java in the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries . Sunda is not listed as a vassal of Majapahit, the powerful late -
medieval Javanese state (1292-c.1500?), in either the Classical Malay Hikayat Raja Pasai (thought to 
date to c.1390) or the Deśawarṇana, composed by Prapañca in 1365 (Jones 1987; Robson 1995). Both 
texts list toponyms in eastern and western Indonesia as Javanese dominions, including Malayu, Maluku, 
 
17 In fact the distance is walkable in half that time if one walks hard, as the Urang Kan ékés still do. It is about an 
hour by slow commuter train from Gambir in the centre of Jakarta. 
18 Even where sources are plentiful folk memories can be swiftly transformed – see, for instance, the change in 
attitudes to Richard III of England (r.1483-1485) in the early twenty-first century, after his skeleton had been 
exhumed from a car park in Leicester. Richard III had been thought of as a cruel, murderous hunchback, but his 
exhumation prompted thousands of people to line the streets to welcome his remains into Leicester Cathedral in 
2015.

--- PAGE: 34 ---
Introduction 
21 
 
and Banda – but in the late Middle Ages  Sunda appears to have been claimed by nobody except the 
Sundanese. 
However, according to a small number of Javanese and Sundanese texts, notably the probably 
sixteenth-century Carita Parahiyangan (Atja and Danasasmita 1981b), Kidung Sunda (Berg 1927), and 
Pararaton (a text with a complex history – see Sastrawan 2020), an important conflict took place  
between Java and Sunda in the year 1357. The Pararaton refers to this as the pa-Suṇḍa Bubat, and it is 
usually known today as the Bubat Incident  or the Battle of Bubat . The premise of all the accounts is 
that Hayam Wuruk, the Javanese king, was supposed to marry a Sundanese princess, but a disagreement 
occurred when she arrived at Bubat, north of the Majapahit capital (mentioned incidentally in BM 801). 
The Carita Parahiyangan says that pan prangrang di Majapahit  ‘so [the common people] fought in 
Majapahit’ because of a refusal to marry (mumul nu lakian di Sunda). The account in the Kidung Sunda 
is considerably more elaborate and suggests that some among the Sundanese delegation egregiously 
insulted Gajah Mada, Hayam Wuruk’s prime minister. All the Sundanese are the n said to have been 
killed. This is not mentioned in the Deśawarṇana nor, for that matter, in Bujangga Manik, but the 
story’s appearance in both Javanese and Sundanese texts strengthens its  claim to truth . The event is 
often claimed to have coloured Java-Sunda relations into the modern era (see Muhibbuddin 2018). 
Sunda was nonetheless receptive to influences from Java in the Middle Ages, and the depiction 
of Java (Jawa) in Bujangga Manik suggests that it was considered a civilised place; to ‘speak Javanese’ 
(carék Jawa) appears to have been a mark of sophistication and an attractive characteristic in a noble 
spouse (BM 328). As noted above, m anuscripts in Old Javanese are known to have been written in 
Sunda in the fifteenth century, and the account in Bujangga Manik suggests that travelling east to study 
at Javanese sanctuaries was a possibility for Sundanese people at the time. 
* 
Sunda’s early years are murky due to a lack of epigraphic al evidence, but by the fourteenth 
century it appears that Sunda was an independent kingdom based at or near modern-day Bogor, strongly 
influenced but never politically dominated by the more populous Javanese to the east. Black pepper and 
enslaved people were reportedly its main exports, although neither features frequently in local texts.  
The upper crust were what we would now probably call Hindus, as Hindu deities  and practices are 
referenced in the surviving Old Sundanese texts; Prapañca seems to imply in the Deśawarṇana (16.2) 
that Buddhism was not practised in Sunda in his day, and certainly few identifiably Buddhist artefacts 
are known from the region after the Tārūmanagara period.  Pires reports that by the time of the 1513 
Portuguese expedition to Java the Sundanese would not allow many Muslims into their country for fear 
that they would do to Sunda what had already happened in Java (Cortesão 1944:173; Pires 2018:195) – 
a fear that would ultimately prove justified . Having previously agreed to an alliance with Portugal in 
1522, commemorated by the erection of a padrão at Kalapa, now in the Museum Nasional (inv. no.

--- PAGE: 35 ---
Introduction 
22 
 
18423/26), Sunda was conquered by the armies of coastal Java’s Muslim polities in a piecemeal conflict 
between the 1520s and 1570s (Zahorka 2007:47ff.). The Banten Sultanate, based in what had been 
Sundanese territory, completed the conquest in 1579 (Cribb 2000:89). 
The sparse historical record, overwhelmingly royal and spiritual, tells us only very little of what 
people ate and drank, what kinds of families they lived in,  what laws they followed  and how they 
followed them, or the status of gender non-conformists and religious minorities. There is no significant 
numismatic evidence. There are no extant records of court cases or soup recipes and no songbooks, 
liturgies, or martial arts treatises. The texture of life in medieval Sunda must be inferred from references 
in what survives, and  Bujangga Manik is a particularly interesting source in this regar d. In the next 
section, I will turn my attention to the theoretical backdrop behind my analysis of the text, the essential 
principle behind which is that Sunda – and the Indo-Malaysian archipelago more generally – was part 
of a much wider medieval world that stretched across the entire Afro-Eurasian hemisphere. 
 
0.3 Approaching Bujangga Manik 
Bujangga Manik  is a terse text and its 16 30 surviving octosyllabic lines, containing at most six 
phonological words apiece, do not allow much elaboration. The poem is nonetheless surprisingly 
informative about life and times in late-medieval Java. In Parts III-VI of this work I will attempt to 
place Bujangga Manik  in a wider medieval context . Below I will discuss the nature of this 
contextualisation and justify the use of the oft-controversial term ‘medieval’ in this work.19 
By the ‘Middle Ages’ I mean simply ‘Afro-Eurasia before the Columbian Exchange’; Bujangga 
Manik is a ‘medieval’ work because it was written before Afro-Eurasia and the Americas came together 
as a globe in the wake of Christopher Columbus’ first voyage in 1492 and, more pertinently to the local 
situation in Southeast Asia, before the arrival of the first Portuguese ships in 1509. The historical 
importance of Bujangga Manik lies in the fact that it was written before Southeast Asia was reshaped 
by the introduction of new plants, animals, and pathogens from the Americas – a process accompanied 
by the establishment of the first European colonies and a backlash from Islamic polities in the region, 
both of which led to radical changes in life and culture in Sunda and elsewhere. Island Southeast Asia 
has been transformed over the last five centuries by this combination of colonialism, Islam, and the 
Columbian Exchange; this transformation, combined with the paucity of manuscript texts,  has meant 
that the world in which Bujangga Manik was composed is no longer easily accessible. In my view this 
 
19 The term has been applied to Indonesia in the past – Vlekke, for instance, speaks of 1045-1222 as ‘the 
Javanese Middle Ages’ (1945:39), similar to Wisseman Christie’s application of it (1993) – but inconsistently 
and with local rather than hemispheric framing.

--- PAGE: 36 ---
Introduction 
23 
 
world is properly described as ‘medieval’ instead of merely ‘traditional’ , ‘pre -colonial’, or ‘pre -
modern’: This was a hemisphere of increasing interaction, as will be seen in the analysis of the material 
culture of Sunda as described in Bujangga Manik, but there was little -to-no interaction between the 
Americas and Afro-Eurasia at the time. The relative lack of textual evidence of everyday life from the 
tropics means that we must be more creative in our methods than historians of the temperate world 
when attempting to access this medieval Southeast Asian world  (as I argue in A. J. West 2019) , but it 
also means that works like Bujangga Manik are more important witnesses to it than they may seem 
prima facie . I will begin here by explaining what I mean by ‘Hemispheric Middle Ages’ before 
examining some more practical aspects of the contextualisation of this Old Sundanese poem. 
* 
0.3.1 The Hemispheric Middle Ages 
 When Bujangga Manik was composed in the mid-to-late fifteenth century CE, Afro-Eurasia 
was coalescing into a single cultural-economic space in which long-distance trade and intercontinental 
cultural/linguistic connections were unexceptional. Africa, Eurasia, and island Southeast Asia w ere 
linked to varying degrees  in disease, commerce, religion, and language, among much else.  Cloves 
(Syzygium aromaticum ) and nutmeg  (Myristica fragrans ) – commodities from Maluku and Banda 
respectively, both in eastern Indonesia  – routinely found their way into texts of all kinds  in medieval 
Europe, China, North Africa, and the Middle East, as did Sumatran camphor and Javan cubebs (Figure 
0.3). Before 1500 it would have been possible to find a speaker or reader of Arabic in Oxford, Delhi, 
Beijing, Kilwa Kisiwani, Gresik, and Ternate, not to mention the Middle East and Central Asia. Travel 
between all these centres was not unusual : in the fifteenth century sev eral Europeans – among them 
Niccolò de’ Conti in the 1430s and Ludovico di Varthema at the tail end of the century  – made well-
documented voyages to India, Africa, Central Asia, and China, and the so-called ‘treasure ships’ (寶船 
bǎochuán) under Admiral Zhèng Hé (鄭和) were voyaging as far as East Africa and Mecca up to the 
1420s (Bracciolini 2004[1448]; Levathes 1994).  Undocumented voyages of similar distance and 
duration must have been immeasurably more common than the sparse textual record suggests. Southeast 
Asia was a lynchpin of this hemispheric interconnectivity, not ancillary to it and, indeed, it is 
commonplace to suppose that Malay or other Indo -Malaysian sailors were a driving force behind the 
Indian Ocean/South China Sea trade that made up a significant chunk of the hemispheric economy at 
this time (see e.g. Hall 1985 ; Hoogervorst 2011; see also the literature on the ‘southernization’ of the 
medieval world – Allsen 2019:6; Shaffer 1994).

--- PAGE: 37 ---
Introduction 
24 
 
 
Figure 0.3 – Cloves (gharofano) from eastern Indonesia appear in Dante’s Inferno (1308-1320 – canto XXIX, line 128), 
where a decadent new use for them in roasting meat is said to have condemned Niccolò Bonsignori of Siena to Hell. London, 
BL, Egerton MS 943, f.53r. 
Given these inter- and intracontinental connections, the ‘Global Middle Ages’ has emerged as 
a rising movement in medieval studies – expanding the concept of the Middle Ages to encompass the 
whole world rather than merely Europe  and the Mediterranean.20 There has been criticism of the term 
as Eurocentric, based as it is on Petrarch  and Bruni’s notion of a ‘Middle’ period between ‘Classical’ 
antiquity and the ‘Renaissance’ – and the word ‘medieval’ is  of course often used as a pejorative. 
‘Medieval’ and ‘Middle Ages’ nonetheless serve as simple and comparatively content-free shorthands 
for the period up to the beginning of the sixteenth century, when the Columbian Exchange and inchoate 
European imperialism transformed the planet at large . These terms are already in common use in the 
historiography of the Middle East and Africa, and arguments have also been put forward for regularising 
the use of ‘medieval’ in the historiography of South Asian (see Ali 2014), where traditionally the term 
has been used in reference to an ‘Islamic’ period beginning in the early second millennium and 
continuing in some cases until the Battle of Plassey and the fall of the Mughals (emphatically not how 
I am using the word here) . Ultimately ‘medieval’ is preferable to any alternatives yet suggested  for 
referring to Afro-Eurasia before the Columbian Exchange, and it has an added advantage in Southeast 
Asia, where periodisation has too often taken religion as a focal point (e.g. the ‘Hindu -Buddhist’ or 
‘pre-Islamic’ period) in a region where religious syncretism has long been the norm and where Muslims, 
Hindus, and heathens of various stripes – and even Jews and Christians – have mingled for centuries. 
I too take issue with the idea that the Middle Ages was ‘Global’, however – not because the 
term is inappropriately European but because the medieval world was emphatically hemispheric. Before 
Columbus, and with the exception of  short-term contact between medieval Scandinavians and pre -
Columbian North Americans, the worl d was broadly divided into two hemispheres with little direct 
interaction between them: Afro -Eurasia on the one hand and the Americas on the other.  In a certain 
 
20 See http://globalmiddleages.org/ (accessed 21-01-2019) for a set of current projects under the Global Middle 
Ages rubric. Other projects to have made use of the term include the November 2018 special edition of Past & 
Present (volume 238); Hermans (2020); and Peter Frankopan’s keynote address at the ‘Interconnected Medieval 
Worlds’ conference (UC Santa Barbara, 2017).

--- PAGE: 38 ---
Introduction 
25 
 
sense human history could only be described as truly ‘global’ beginning in  the sixteenth centur y. 
‘Hemispheric Middle Ages’ is thus my preferred term, and there is precedent for this in Monica Green’s 
use of the term  ‘history in a hemispheric mode’ with reference to the ‘Global’ Middle Ages (Green 
2017).21 
Island Southeast Asia in the fifteenth century was a microcosm of the Hemi spheric Middle 
Ages. The Sultanate of Melaka on the Malay Peninsula was particularly diverse and, in Southeast Asian 
terms, unusually well-documented. Portuguese sources written shortly after Albuquerque's conquest of 
Melaka in 1511 tell us that the city ’s population  (of between 100,000 -200,000 people  – Thomaz 
1993:71) was extremely multicultural : Melaka had districts reserved for Persians, Chinese, Thais, 
Armenians,22 and people from the Ryukyu Islands; the military was run by a Javanese mercenary; and 
the Italian traveller Ludovico di Varthema tells us that the people of Melaka dressed ‘in the style of [the 
people in] Cairo’A4 (cf. the comments on Southeast Asian dress in Jákl and Hoogervorst 2017:212).  
People came to Melaka to trade from Seram, Luzon, Makassar, Pegu, all over India, southern China (in 
spite of imperial bans on overseas trade known as 海禁, pinyin: hǎijìn [Lam 2002:43]), and East Africa 
– known in Old Javanese and Old Sundanese as jĕṅgi/jenggi (OJED 740:4) ; occasional European 
visitors like Ludovico made an appearance. There may even have been a small Jewish population in the 
city. We know from Bujangga Manik , too, that ships voyaged  to Melaka from other parts of the 
archipelago as a matter of routine – and it is clear from the poem that cosmopolitanism was less an 
ideological position and more a fact of life. 
The Columbian Exchange, Colonialism, Islam 
Albuquerque’s conquest of Melaka ended this period in the archipelago’s history and 
introduced the region to a global post -Columbian modern world in which European ships and people 
could be found on nearly every continent, and in which cloves – to take but one example – were no 
longer traded in long multi -ethnic relays from Maluku to Alexandria (etc.) but now travelled aboard 
European ships from their sources to Lisbon and beyond. This represented a radical transformation of 
the archipelago’s economy and culture, and it can be compared to changes that happened elsewhere in 
the world as part of the Columbian Exchange. 
The Columbian Exchange is or was a global phenomenon in which sustained contact between 
Afro-Eurasia and America s brought about change on a massive scale to every sphere of human life, 
especially in cuisine and epidemiology but also in the balance of power and the global economy (Crosby 
1972). It was not instantaneous and to some extent the process is not over, but in a proximal sense it 
 
21 As I understand it, Green’s views differ from mine on this subject. I outline my view of the ‘Hemispheric 
Middle Ages’ here: West, A. J. 2019. The Hemispheric Middle Ages. Medium. 
https://medium.com/@siwaratrikalpa/the-hemispheric-middle-ages-part-i-173779f237f6 (accessed 18-06-2020). 
22 Whether actual Armenians or (so-called) Nestorian Christians from Iraq is unclear (Thomaz 1993:81).

--- PAGE: 39 ---
Introduction 
26 
 
began when Christopher Columbus fi rst went to the Caribbean in 149 2, as from that point on contact 
between the hemispheres did not abate. There were enormous differences between the two halves of the 
planet in the availability of plants and animals prior to this; among many other things, the Americas had 
bell peppers,  manioc, quinoa,  tomatoes, tobacco, and turkey s, while Afro-Eurasia had rice, millet, 
garlic, peas, dates, and aubergines. Before 1492 no one in Afro-Eurasia had ever seen a tomato or corn 
husk and nobody in the Americas had seen a lemon or dairy cow. The differences were perhaps greatest 
in disease and especially disease resistance: Afro -Eurasians harboured and were often immune to 
diseases indigenous Americans did not and were not, including smallpox, measles, and plague. The 
consequences of the two hemispheres coming together at an ecological and demographic level were  
thus enormous (see Mann 2011  for a fascinating overview ). It is not wrong to think of these post -
Columbian interactions as inaugurating a new era in global human history (which I would refer to 
simply as ‘modernity’). 
 Island Southeast Asia was as profoundly affected by the Columbian Exchange as anywhere else 
on the planet. Modern recipes in the region commonly call for chilli (Malay cabe/cabai, formerly the 
name for a species of pepper, Piper retrofractum), peanuts (Malay kacang, originally meaning simply 
‘nut’), and maize ( jagung, formerly referring to ‘ sorghum’, Sorghum bicolor ), and some of these 
products have been indigenised to the extent that they are regarded as  having local rather than exotic 
origins: In Biak, off the coast of New Guinea, origin myths recorded in the early twentieth century say 
that tobacco – Nicotiana spp., another Amazonian product like peanuts and chillis – was the first plant 
to grow after the creation of the world by Tefafu, the creator  deity (Kamma 1975:A:20). Smoking 
tobacco is now more popular among men in Java than  the traditional pastime of  chewing betel, and 
indeed kills more Indonesians than nearly any other cause (Rooney 1993:67).  While some of these 
things are commonly known to be post -Columbian arrivals, it is not uncommon for editors of early 
Indo-Malaysian texts to translate terms whose meanings have changed since the Middle Ages with their 
post-Columbian/modern meanings, perhaps because of the strength of this indigenisation. 23 It will be 
noted that no American products of any kind occur in Bujangga Manik. 
 When examining life in Southeast Asia beyond disease and cuisine, though, it can be difficult 
to disentangle the Columbian Exchange from the effects of European colonialism, and in any case the 
latter mediated the former: it was often through the Portuguese or Dutch that New World species were 
introduced to the Indo -Malaysian archipelago. The transformations wrought by European colonial 
powers are well-documented: the planting of tea and coffee as cash crops in Java orchestrated by the 
Dutch (neither was planted in Java prior to early modernity, even though both are Old World species); 
the intensification of wet rice agriculture on as many islands as could bear it (Geertz 1964); the use of 
Roman letters to write Indo -Malaysian languages; the destruction of native  Javanese shipyards, 
 
23 See e.g. Pigeaud’s translation of OJv cabe as ‘capsicum’ in the second Biluluk copper-plate charter (1960-
63:I:116, III:167).

--- PAGE: 40 ---
Introduction 
27 
 
formerly used for building ocean-going jongs  (Manguin 1980; Reid 1992); and much else. In parts of 
eastern Indonesia Europeans had a profound impact on local flora and fauna, notably introducing the 
domestic cat (Felis catus) to Flores and Timor (Forth 2016:98). There is simply no part of life in the 
archipelago that has not been touched in some way by colonialism and the Columbian Exchange. 
 Islam, which probably first found large numbers of adherents in the archipelago in the thirteenth 
century, has also had a comparable transformative effect on certain parts of the region. Several foreign 
accounts mention that well into the fifteenth century people in Java and Sumatra regularly ate bugs and 
other non -halal foods ; though it is possible to find these in Java today, they are considerably less 
popular. Pork has all but disappeared from menus outside Bali and Christian ised parts of the 
archipelago. The rhythm of life and the sounds of the landsca pe must also have been transformed by 
the presence of mosques in towns and villages throughout the island and the introduction of the adhan. 
Like the Columbian Exchange, the introduction of Islam was not instantaneous and was affected by and 
integrated into existing pre-Islamic ways of life  (Riddell 2001:101), and it is particularly notable that 
places that seem to have harboured religious communities in the pre -Islamic period have retained this 
reputation for religiosity into the Islamic period.24 Nonetheless, the combination of colonialism, Islam, 
and the introduction of American species in early modernity has resulted in widespread and fundamental 
changes to life and society in Sunda/Java since the time Bujangga Manik was written – and it is in this 
context that the text’s true importance is revealed. 
The fifteenth century, or parts of it, has often been included within the rubric of ‘early 
modernity’ in Southeast Asia. It is notable that the recent History of Early Modern Southeast Asia by 
Andaya and Andaya (2015) takes 1400 as the beginning of the period, and Reid’s Southeast Asian ‘age 
of commerce’, so -called, starts in 1450 (or perhaps with the first of Zhèng Hé ’s voyages – Reid 
1992:186) and ends in 1680 (as in Rei d 1988). It is undeniable that there was considerable continuity 
in Southeast Asia from the fifteenth century into the sixteenth, but it seems to me that the changes 
wrought by European colonisation and the Columbian Exchange are underestimated by an appro ach 
that seeks the roots of early modernity in Southeast Asia at some point prior to 1511  – and there is in 
any case more evidence of continuity between the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in Java than is often 
thought (as argued by J. G. de Casparis 1997). 
Manuscript Scarcity 
The fifteenth century in island Southeast Asia is  a particularly poorly documented  period. 
Indigenous texts are few and far between; those that were composed at this time, like the last Old 
Javanese kakawin, the  Śiwarātrikalpa (‘observance of the night of Śiva’ – Teeuw et al. 1969), are 
 
24 The area around Mount Galunggung in West Java, for instance, where the pre-Islamic Old Sundanese 
religious text Amanat dari Galunggung appears to have been composed, is today home to a large number of 
pesantren (religious schools) and Qur’an reciters.

--- PAGE: 41 ---
Introduction 
28 
 
preserved in manuscripts copied centuries after their original composition. Few manuscripts (as 
opposed to texts) date to this period save for the late -fourteenth-century Tanjung Tanah manuscript 
(TTms, aka Nītisārasamuccaya), a short legal text in Malay written in a Brahmic (‘Pallavo -
Nusantaran’) script and archived in a house in Kerinci, Sumatra (Kozok 201 5), and perhaps some of 
the earliest Old Javanese manuscripts from the Merapi-Merbabu archive in Central Java (van der Molen 
1983; Wiryamartana 1993; Wiryamartana and van der Molen 2001) and the aforementioned kabuyutan 
of Ciburuy in West Java.25 Fewer inscriptions are known from Java and Sumatra in this period compared 
to earlier times and, indeed, few of any significant length are known after 14 86 (Casparis 1997:52 ; 
Noorduyn 1978). Those that do exist, like the enigmatic stone inscriptions from Sukuh and Ceto in 
Central Java, provide only sparse and impressionistic descriptions of events. 
The reason for the scarcity of manuscripts is that the climate did not and does not make it easy 
to preserve organic matter over long periods of time. Java is not far from the equator and is subject to 
year-round high heat and humidity . As the fifteenth-century Chinese translator  Mǎ Huān put it, ‘[in 
Java] the weather is  always as hot as summer’.A5 Insects abound, and many of them munch on 
manuscripts. In temperate climes it is possible to preserve a manuscript for a thousand years by doing 
little more than placing it in a box. 26 In the tropics manuscripts must be deliberately preserved; t hose 
that have survived were either kept as heirlooms (as with the Tanjung Tanah manuscript, preserved 
above a hearth, where smoke deterred insects) or stored at altitude, where heat is less of a problem , as 
perhaps with the Merapi-Merbabu collection. 
The Indian Ocean was in some sense the beating heart of the medieval world, and that made 
Indo-Malaysia an indisputably key part of the Hemispheric Middle Ages , and in the fifteenth century 
its people lived in some of the best-connected and most cosmopolitan towns in Afro-Eurasia – but it is 
a place we can only dimly see in the historical record. Bujangga Manik is a useful corrective for this, 
but to unlock its treasures it must be placed in a wider context, a context accessible through ethnohistoric 
and archaeological data. In approaching the history and society of this poorly documented time and 
place useful models can be found in the techniques used to study pre-Columbian societies by historians 
of the Americas – comprising philology writ large, fusing text ual analysis  with archaeological, 
ethnographic, and ethnohistoric evidence. This is what I refer to as a ‘pre-Columbian’ approach to island 
Southeast Asia, although in truth it is close to what at an earlier time would simply have been labelled 
‘philology’. 
 
 
25 Digital copies of many of these manuscripts, of indeterminate date, can be found online courtesy of the British 
Library: https://eap.bl.uk/project/EAP280/search (accessed 18-06-2020). Some of these have been studied by 
Suryani et al. (2017). 
26 There is of course more to it than this, but it is true that manuscripts do not necessarily decay in temperate 
zones in the way they do in humid lowland tropical and equatorial regions.

--- PAGE: 42 ---
Introduction 
29 
 
A ‘Pre-Columbian’ Approach 
 The incompleteness of the  medieval Indo-Malaysian historical record forces us to use 
unorthodox methods to forge a complete picture of the past – unorthodox, at least, from the perspective 
of Europe -focused manuscript-based narrative history . To give an example: Leonard Andaya made 
consistent use of oral history and linguistics alongside ethnohistoric sources, most of them in 
Portuguese, in piecing together the history and society of the islands around Halmahera before and 
during contact with European s in early modernity in his World of Mal uku (1993). In an Indonesian 
context this approach was new and potentially controversial (‘ unusual and sometimes a tad too 
ambitious, but […] generally effective’, in the words of Charney [1996:146]). In the study of other 
poorly documented places, however  – places like pre -Columbian Mesoamerica and the pre -colonial 
Pacific – the use of transdisciplinary frameworks is accepted as an inarguable necessity. 
The methods developed for the study of such times and places are templates that could 
productively be followed by scholars of the medieval (pre-Columbian Afro-Eurasian) tropics. In truth 
these methods are not so different from those of Victorian classical philologists, who used a wide range 
of methods available to them , including folklorist ics, ethnography, and archaeological research, to 
historicise, contextualise, and better understand ancient writings, or to ‘make sense of texts’ (as Sheldon 
Pollock puts it – 2009:934). A well-evidenced claim is after all one about which multiple independent 
lines of evidence concur, and this is especially so when researching subjects as complex as human 
history and society. The expansion of philological practice into ethnography and history in the broadest 
sense is anticipated, too, by Bernard Arps (2016) , whose work on a contemporary Javanese wayang 
performance of the Dewa Ruci, a play/text with fifteenth-century origins, is likewise an attempt to re-
insert an old text back into the world from which it came, exploring how and why it was produced in 
the first place. 
In researching the pre-Hispanic Mēxihca civilizations (the ‘Aztecs’), it is not sufficient to rely 
on post -conquest documents – so-called ‘ethnohistoric’ sources, like the Historia General  of 
Bernardino de Sahagún – to put together a coherent pi cture of social life on their own. Sahagún was 
after all a Franciscan friar describing indigenous Mēxihca religion that conflicted with his own 
Catholicism, and which was often seen by other European observers as Satanic and idolatrous ( albeit 
less so, per haps, by Sahagún himself – see the discussion in  Dodds Pennock 2008). Archaeological 
interpretation alone may be misleading as well; no archaeologist of pre-Columbian Mexico expects to 
operate without acknowledging evidence from ethnohistory and ethnograph y (see M. Smith 2017). 
Ethnography among modern Nahua people – the great bulk of whom are Catholic, and who have been 
influenced by Spanish-speaking colonists and overlords for the past five centuries – is equally unlikely 
to lead to significant insights on its own  (Sandstrom 2000).  If we want to know about poorly 
documented societies we cannot expect one type of evidence to provide all the answers  – and this has

--- PAGE: 43 ---
Introduction 
30 
 
been taken to heart by those working on pre-Columbian America in a way that it has not among those 
working on the medieval tropics. 
Among Americanists i t is commonplace  to test conclusions from the archaeological record 
against the ethnohistoric sources, and to incorporate linguistic evidence and ethnography to verify or 
falsify claims abo ut times and places with little extant documentation.  An excellent example of this 
method, albeit on a different continent, is Thomas Besom’s Of Summits and Sacrifice (2009), in which 
claims about Inca human sacrifice made in the sixteenth-century Spanish ethnohistoric texts are tested 
against the archaeological evidence (and show a remarkable concordance, strengthening rather than 
falsifying the Spanish claims). The Pacific archaeologist Patrick Kirch calls this trans -disciplinary 
mélange ‘triangulating’ the evidence (Kirch 1984, 1997). In my view, this is an approach that must be 
used in studying fifteenth- and early-sixteenth-century Indo-Malaysia to put flesh on the bare bones of 
the manuscript record. 
 In pre -Columbian America and the pre -colonial Pacific, the intention is often to study the 
entirety of pre -colonial or pre -Columbian history, extending in some cases far into prehistory and 
beyond the conventional range of ethnohistory (as in Kirch  1997). With Bujangga Manik, however, I 
am chiefly interested in reconstructing life and times in a more restricted period  (Indo-Malaysia, and 
Java more specifically, in the fifteenth century), and so both the nature of the evidence and the objective 
of the project is different. Nonetheless, the triangulat ion of evidence is a vital part of this thesis, 
particularly in Parts III-VI. 
Bujangga Manik is a pre-colonial, pre-Columbian Indonesian text. It is ‘pre-Islamic’ in that it 
shows us a world before most people in Java and Sunda converted to Islam (although Muslims do appear 
in the background). The poem preserve s an image of life in the archipelago prior to the impact of the 
Columbian Exchange, European political overlordship, and Muslim spiritual dominance – in the context 
of a medieval Afro-Eurasia and a p re-Islamic, pre-colonial Sunda. This is the context in which I will 
place the poem’s information about daily life and material culture.  Opening up the text in this way 
requires the use of a considerable amount of comparative material from medieval texts wr itten across 
the hemisphere; I will provide a  brief overview of these in the next sectio n. (Texts that do not feature 
here will be described when relevant.) 
0.3.2 The Sources 
While I will make use of evidence from archaeological sites not mentioned in the preceding sections on 
the archaeology of Sunda, particularly Javanese temples (and their reliefs) and medieval shipwrecks in 
Southeast Asian waters, I will focus here on written sources, of which there are broadly speaking two 
types, each with their problems and biases: local Indo-Malaysian sources, mostly in Old Javanese and

--- PAGE: 44 ---
Introduction 
31 
 
Classical Malay (in addition to the Sundanese texts discussed above), and ethnohistoric texts in a wide 
range of different languages from Literary Sinitic (Classical Chinese) to Old French. 
The fundamental problem of the longer locally written texts is that the surviving manuscripts 
often date to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and are thus questionable as witnesses on the 
Middle Ages. This is notably not true of the Nītisārasamuccaya, the Tanjung Tanah manuscript, a legal 
text whose sole surviving manuscript – a copy on daluwang from the late-medieval kingdom of 
Dharmaśraya and now housed in Kerinci, Sumatra – has been radiocarbon-dated to the late fourteenth 
or early fifteenth century (Kozok 2015). It is, however, true of the vast bulk of the surviving Classical 
Malay material. Some of these texts, like the  Classical Malay Sulalat al-salāṭīn or Sejarah Melayu 
(‘Malay Annals’  – for a full translation see Brown 1952 ), contain obvious anachronisms when 
describing pre-1511 events, like the use of words like senapan for ‘gun’ – in that case derived from the 
Dutch snaphaan (‘pecking rooster’, English ‘snaphance’), which referred to a kind of mechanism that 
only began to appear on European guns in the middle of the sixteenth century.  This is perhaps 
unsurprising as the ‘standard’ text appears to have been put together in the early seventeenth century 
and its oldest surviving manuscript dates to 1799 (Chambert -Loir 2017a, 2017b). Other useful Malay 
texts presenting similar problems include the Undang-undang Melaka (Liaw 1976) and the Hikayat 
Raja-raja Pasai  (Jones 1987) – the former a legal text supposedly representing the laws of pre -
Portuguese Melaka but extensively modified in the centuries following its fall and the latter a narrative 
work imprecisely dated to the end of the fourteenth centur y (perhaps even as late as the seventeenth – 
Wayan Jarrah Sastrawan, p.c.) that recounts the history of Pasai, a medieval kingdom in North Sumatra 
also known from ethnohistoric texts in other languages.  A list of relevant Classical Malay texts with 
their probable dates of composition and the dates of the oldest surviving manuscripts can be found on 
the Malay Concordance Project website.27 
Many of the same problems affect the Old Javanese material, much of which is represented by 
manuscripts of recent date – although there are exceptions, like a manuscript of the Kuñjarakarṇa from 
Cirebon, whose colophon tells us was copied in 1256 Śaka (1334/5 CE). M any of the Old Javanese 
sources are kakawins (long-form narrative poems with metres taken from Sanskrit models ) and these 
necessarily represent elite Indianised  (and probably almost entirely male)  perspectives (the 
historiographical difficulties inherent to which are discussed at length in Creese 2004). Some of these, 
including the kakawin Deśawarṇana (Pigeaud 1960-63; Robson 1995), written  in 1365, share traits 
with Bujangga Manik, notably the emphasis on place and place names (see Part III). Others contain 
useful and fascinating information about the landscape – not to mention theological matters – including 
the Śiwarātrikalpa (‘the observance of the night of Śiva’ – Teeuw et al. 1969) by Mpu Tanakuṅ, the 
last known Old Javanese kakawin written in Java (c.1470), which includes some wonderful descriptions 
 
27 Malay Concordance Project. http://mcp.anu.edu.au/Q/texts.html. (Accessed 18-06-2020).

--- PAGE: 45 ---
Introduction 
32 
 
of misty mornings and fallen temples. The text was based on a late-medieval South Indian model. A list 
of other kakawins with dates and ascribed authorship may be found in Creese (2004:10). 
Several Old Javanese prose texts can also help to contextualise Bujangga Manik (see Johns 
1966 for Javanese literature at this time). The Tantu Paṅgĕlaran (fifteenth century – Pigeaud 1924) is 
of particular note as it makes use of a large number of toponyms, including several also found in 
Bujangga Manik (e.g. Damalung, the old name for Mount Merbabu in Central Java ). The Nawanatya 
(fourteenth century?), an Old Javanese prose work outlining the obligations placed upon those wishing 
to visit the Majapahit capital, provides some interesting information about rituals and material culture. 
The text is known from Leiden, UBL, MS Or. Leyden 5091, a partial transliteration of which was 
published in Pigeaud’s Java in the 14 th Century (1960:I:81-86). A reference to a work with this title 
appears in the Deśawarṇana, which is securely dated to the fourteenth century , but it is not certain 
whether these works are one and the same. Of greater importance for the study of Java’s political history 
is the post-1481 Pararaton (Brandes 1896; Phalgunadi 1996; Sastrawan 2020 ), a late Old Javanese 
historical narrative preserved in several Balinese manuscripts and one of the few extant local sources 
on the decline of Majapahit in the fifteenth century. In addition to these manuscript texts there are also 
a number of fifteenth -century inscriptions in Old Javanese, although there are fewer of these than in 
earlier periods, and none of significance after 1486 (around the time Bujangga Manik was composed). 
An inventory of dated inscriptions can be found in Nakada (1982); a number of both stone and copper-
plate inscriptions have recently been published in transliteration and Indonesian translation by Edhie 
Wurjantoro (2018). 
Manuscript material is much more likely to survive in temperate climes than in equatorial 
Southeast Asia, so medieval texts from Europe, the Middle East, and China often survive in manuscripts 
actually copied in the Middle Ages. Foreign accounts of Southeast Asia often focused on details of daily 
life – the processing of sag o, for example – that do not appear to have been considered worthy of 
recording in local texts, and this makes such accounts particularly important for the study of daily life 
and material culture. Such ethnohistoric sources present other problems, however, including the 
possibility (and in some cases outright certainty) of fabrication or exaggeration, as with the description 
of Southeast Asia in th e Travels of Sir John Mandeville or the account of the mythical kingdom of 
Ṭawālisī in Ibn Ba ṭṭūṭa’s Riḥla (Gibb and Beckingham 1994:884-887). With Java in particular the 
problem is one of identification; names related to ‘Java’ were routinely applied to other Southeast Asian 
islands, or even the archipelago as a whole, so it is not always clear that medieval descriptions of ‘Java’ 
are in fact describing the island we know as Java. Medieval travellers from many countries were also 
wont to exaggerate the weirdness of the places they visited, and this accounts for at least some of the 
fabulous stories told of Southeast Asia before the arrival of the Portuguese.

--- PAGE: 46 ---
Introduction 
33 
 
Nevertheless, the medieval European sources on Southeast Asia contain much of interest (see 
O’Doherty 2013 for an overview). They begin with Li Divisiment dou Monde (‘The Description of the 
World’), attributed to Rustichello of Pisa, writing on behalf of Marco Polo in around 1300.  Although 
Polo probably did not visit Java himself, the Divisiment was the first work in a European language after 
Claudius Ptolemy’s Geographia (c.150) to mention a place called ‘Java’ by name.28 The version I have 
used in this thesis is the  oldest manuscript of the so -called ‘Franco -Italian’ tradition – Paris, BnF, 
Français 1116, copied in c.1310.29 After Polo came the Relatio de Mirabilibus Orientalium Tatarorum 
written in Latin  c.1330 by the Fr iulian monk Odoric of Pordenone  (Marchisio 2016), who famously 
describes the palace of the great king of Java as covered in gold and silver and of fabulous size. 30 A 
little over a century after Odoric the Venetian merchant Niccolò de’ Conti recounted his travels around 
the Indian Ocean, including Java, to the Florentine humanist Poggio Bracciolini. This became the fourth 
book of Bracciolini’s De Varietate Fortunæ (2004[1448]) – the first European text to describe the durian 
(in that case probably Durio graveolens), among others things.31 Conti’s testimony also inspired several 
captions on the Fra Mauro world map (Venice, c.1459).32 The last traveller to describe island Southeast 
Asia in detail prior to the arrival of the Portuguese was Ludovico di Varthema, whose Itinerario was 
first printed in Rome in 1510.33 Varthema claimed to have gone as far as Banda and Maluku, although 
whether he actually did so is not clear (see translation in Hammond 1963). 
Several medieval Europeans maps also provide information of interest, including the Catalan 
Atlas (Paris, BnF, Espagnol 30), a multi-page world map drawn by the Mallorcan cartographer Elisha 
ben Abraham Cresques in 1375, based in large part on Odoric and Polo; the aforementioned Fra Mauro 
map, now in the Museo Correr in Venice (Falchetta 200 6); and the so-called ‘Genoese’ world map of 
1457 (Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Portolano 1), based in part on Conti’s written testimony. 
These maps frequently refer to commodities for sale in Southeast Asian ports, and two of them include 
descriptions of junks (see section V.2). 
The ‘Journey on the Three Seas’ (Old East Slavic: Хoжєнїє зa Трї Мoрѧ) by Afanasiy Nikitin 
(Афанасий Никитин), a man from Tver, is the only significant original medieval Russian work to 
 
28 It is not certain that Ptolemy’s Iabadiou (Ἰαβαδιοῦ) actually referred to Java – it may have been Sumatra 
instead. 
29 A complete critical edition of the Franco-Italian version of the work in six volumes has been published 
(Boutet et al. 2009), but for my purposes Français 1116 (commonly known as ‘F’) is more appropriate – in part 
because it preserves the local toponyms more accurately than other texts.  
30 Odoric’s Relatio is remarkable for the variation in its manuscript tradition. If there were an ‘original’ text, it 
was modified so swiftly and completely that it can no longer be reconstructed from the extant manuscripts.  
31 See my short article on the topic: ‘Knowledge of the Durian’ 
https://medium.com/@siwaratrikalpa/knowledge-of-the-durian-39f89a6c871f (accessed 19-06-2020). 
32 A complete edition of this account was put together by Michèle Guéret-Laferté in 2004. The version I use in 
this work is Rome, BAV, Urb.lat.224, a manuscript of 1460. It has been digitised and is therefore easily 
accessible. The relevant sections begin on f.46r. 
33 I am using an edition printed in Venice in 1535 here (Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, It. sing. 1095), 
largely because it has been digitised and is therefore easily accessible. It differs only in abbreviations from the 
1510 text.

--- PAGE: 47 ---
Introduction 
34 
 
contain extended descriptions of Southeast Asia. Nikitin visited India in the 1460s and died on his return 
at Smolensk in 1472. In his diary Nikitin recorded some basic facts about ‘Java’ (шабат ⟨šabat⟩ – 
whether Java or Sumatra is not clear)  received secondhand while in India, perhaps from someone 
familiar with Arabic sources. The relevant sections of this text have been translated by Vladimir  
Braginsky (1998 :374-375), and a  critical edition complete with a  facsimile of the  1563 Troitsk 
Recension (Троицкий Список) has recently been published by Sebastian Kempgen (2020). 
 Often more useful than these bona fide medieval sources , however, are the early-sixteenth-
century Portuguese descriptions. These begin with the the Cantino Planisphere (Modena, Biblioteca 
Estense, C.G.A.2), a world map drawn in or before 1502 and based on Arabic sources . This contains 
information not found on earlier maps, including the earliest known European reference to Singapore. 
The post -1511 sources con tain the most information about the archipelago, however, for obvious 
reasons. Foremost among these is the Suma Oriental, an account of Asia written in Melaka before 1515 
by the Portuguese apothecary Tomé Pires, which survives in two manuscripts , the most complete of 
which is in Paris (Bibliothèque de l'Assemblée nationale, 1248 (ED 19) – Cortesão 1944; Pires 2018; 
Ptak 2018). Duarte Barbosa’s account, written in India in  around 1516 and traditionally known as O 
Livro de Duarte Barbosa, contains similar descriptions of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago, including a 
brief but interesting account of Sunda . In this work I have used the critical edition edited by Maria 
Augusta da Veiga e Sousa (Barbosa 2000 [1516]). The Commentarios do grande Afonso Dalboquerque 
by Brás de Albuquerque, Afonso ’s son, also has much to say about the archipelago at the time of the 
conquest. The text was first published in  1557 and revised in 1576. The work  was based on the elder 
Albuquerque’s letters and the recollections of his companions, and is thus some distance removed from 
the events it purports to describe.  I have used a copy of th e 1576 text now in the John Carter Brown 
Library at Brown University (see Earle and Villiers 1990:25 -49 for the text’s history ). Antonio 
Pigafetta’s account of the first circumnavigation of the world under Magellan is another useful early-
sixteenth-century source, although unlike these others accounts the author was an Italian in the service 
of Spain rather than Portugal, and the principal manuscript witness for the text, and the one used in this 
thesis, New Haven, Yale University Library, Beinecke MS 351, was written in French in 1525. 
 The Chinese sources most commonly exploited by historians of Southeast Asia are records of 
embassies and tribute described in dynastic histories (e.g. the Míng Shílù [明實錄] – Wade 2005).34 
These are informative with regard to toponyms and political history but are perhaps less useful for the 
purpose of elucidating the trappings of daily life. Descriptions of foreign lands are more valuable in this 
regard, particularly the account of the thirteenth -century administrator Zhào Rŭkuò (趙汝适), known 
 
34 The Southeast Asian sections of the Míng Shílù have been translated by Geoff Wade and hosted online: 
Southeast Asia in the Ming Shi-lu. An open access resource. Singapore: Asia Research Institute and the 
Singapore E-Press, National University of Singapore. http://epress.nus.edu.sg/msl/ (accessed 19-06-2020).

--- PAGE: 48 ---
Introduction 
35 
 
as the Zhūfān Zhì (諸蕃志, lit. ‘Record of All Barbarians’, c.1225 – Hirth and Rockhill 1911); the Dǎoyí 
Zhìlüè (島夷誌略 – ‘Summary Record of the Island Foreigners’, c.1349) by the traveller Wāng Dàyuān 
(汪大淵 – ‘the only record written from the viewpoint of a Chinese trader-traveller’ [Heng 2001:134]); 
the Yíngyá Shènglǎn (瀛涯勝覽 – c.1451) by the translator Mǎ Huān (馬歡), who took part in several 
of the ‘treasure ship’ voyages in the early fifteenth century  under the command of Zhèng Hé  (Mills 
1970); and the Xīngchá Shènglǎn (星槎勝覽) by Fèi Xìn, also a traveller on the treasure ships  (Fei 
1996). These include extensive descriptions of Java and other parts of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago, 
in some cases comprising the first texts written about certain islands and regions (as with Wāng 
Dàyuān’s account of Banda and Zhào Rŭkuò’s of Sunda).35 Not all of these texts are available in up-to-
date translations, although collaborative critical editions based on the Qīng-dynasty Sìkù Quánshū (四
庫全書) texts can be accessed on the Chinese Text Project webs ite (see Heng 2019 for the challenges 
and opportunities presented by the digitisation of this Chinese material).36 The Mao Kun map (鄭和航
海圖  Zhèng Hé hánghǎi tú  ‘Zheng He navigational map’ ), a set of maps depicting Afro -Eurasia 
published in 1621 as part of the military treatise Wǔbèi Zhì (武備志) by Máo Yuányí ( 茅元儀) but 
supposedly based on  information from the  early-fifteenth-century voyages of Zhèng Hé ( 鄭和), is 
another interesting Chinese sour ce from the perspective of Chinese interactions in the region, and it 
includes a number of toponyms not encountered in other texts . A 1644 copy of the atlas has been 
digitised and hosted online by the Library of Congress. 37 Also relevant is a Chinese -Malay (‘Melaka 
language’) word-list compiled alongside glossaries in twelve other languages at the end of the fifteenth 
century for the mid-Míng-dynasty Interpreters Institute (會通館). London, SOAS Library, MS 48363 
is a particularly early version of the text; this served as the basis of an annotated translation by Edwards 
and Blagden (1931; see also A. C. West 1988:23-24). 
There is  surprisingly little Middle Eastern material on Southea st Asia in this period  (see 
Wheatley 1966:216-251). The most important medieval works in Arabic on the region are the ninth- 
and tenth-century texts of al -Mas‘ūdi, Abū Zayd al -Sīrāfī, and Sulaymān the Merchant,  which were 
copied and used in cartography  throughout the Middle Ages , with the most significant original 
information added to these between the tenth and thirteenth centuries  being the accretion of fantastic 
 
35 I translated and annotated this description here: West, A. J. 2019. Zhao Rukuo’s account of Sunda. 
Medium.com. https://medium.com/@siwaratrikalpa/zhao-rukuos-account-of-sunda-748ab2c0f40b (accessed 21-
06-2020). A complete translation of the Zhūfān Zhì, citing my post for the description of Sunda, has recently 
been put online: Yang, Shao-yun. 2020. A Chinese gazeteer of foreign lands. 
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/39bce63e4e0642d3abce6c24db470760. (Accessed 21-06-2020). 
36 For Fèi Xìn’s Xīngchá Shènglǎn see https://ctext.org/wiki.pl?if=en&chapter=436710 (accessed 21-08-2020). 
Mǎ Huān’s Yíngyá Shènglǎn see: https://ctext.org/wiki.pl?if=en&chapter=566144 (accessed 19-06-2020). 
Wāng Dàyuān’s Dǎoyí Zhìlüè: https://ctext.org/wiki.pl?if=en&chapter=232328 (accessed 19-06-2020). 
Zhào Rŭkuò’s Zhūfān Zhì: https://ctext.org/wiki.pl?if=en&res=520299 (accessed 19-06-2020). 
37 Mao, Yuanyi. 1644. Wu Bei Zhi. Washington D.C., Library of Congress, E701.M32.1. 
https://www.loc.gov/item/2004633695/ (accessed 19-06-2020).

--- PAGE: 49 ---
Introduction 
36 
 
lore and scribal errors (Hourani 1995:83; al-Sirafi 2017; see Rapoport and Savage-Smith 2018 for the 
cartographic tradition). For the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, however, there are a small number of 
useful original sources, particularly the Riḥla of Ibn Baṭṭūṭa, written in the late fourteenth century (see 
Gibb and Becking ham 1994:873 -887 for the sections on island Southeast Asia ), and the works of 
Aḥmad ibn Mājid (c.1432 -c.1500), including  ‘The Book of the Benefits of the Principles and 
Foundations of Seamanship’ (والقواعد البحر  علم أصول في  الفوائد كتﺎب  – Kitāb al-Fawā’id fī uṣūl ‘ilm al-
baḥr wa’l-qawā’id), a sailing manual written in 1489 -90 documenting the routes used on the Indian 
Ocean from an Arabian perspective (Tibbetts 1981). 
* 
My approach in this thesis is to compare and contrast references in as many te xts in as many 
languages and from as many traditions as possible to make inferences about life  and things in late-
medieval Java, using Bujangga Manik as a starting-point and vital emic perspective. The description 
above does not exhaust the available sources by any means  and is intended only as an overview. T he 
nature of research on the medieval tropics, where many few er manuscripts texts are available than in 
the temperate world, necessitates an intensive rather than extensive approach to the sources we do have 
– an excellent recent example of this being Elizabeth Lambourn’s detailed examination of the luggage 
list of Abraham Ben Yiju, a  North African Jewish merchant in South India in the twelfth century  
(Lambourn 2018). Archaeological evidence is also vital , and for my purposes  East Javanese temple 
reliefs depicting articles of material culture – clothing, houses, weaponry – are particularly important 
(see Kieven 2013 for an in -depth study of reliefs roughly contemporary with the composition of 
Bujangga Manik; Kinney, Kieven, and Klokke 2003 contains a large number of excellent photographs 
and descriptions as well). The images of reliefs and temples used in this thesis will principally be taken 
from photographs of the former  Archaeological Survey of the Netherlands Indies ( Oudheidkundige 
Dienst in Nederlandsch-Indië, abbreviated as ‘OD’) now held by Leiden University Library (UBL).38 
This information applies principally to the contextualisation of the text of Bujangga Manik in 
the last three parts of the thesis. Before these, however, I will examine the constitution and features of 
the manuscript (Part I) and present the edited text and English translation (Part II). 
* 
  
 
38 The overview of the OD Collection on the Leiden University Library website has more details: Gerda Theuns-
de Boer, Marie-Odette Scalliet, and Silvia Compaan-Vermetten. 2012. Collection Photographs Oudheidkundige 
Dienst in Nederlandsch-Indië. https://digitalcollections.universiteitleiden.nl/view/item/1887211. (Accessed 21-
06-2020.)

--- PAGE: 50 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
37 
 
 
PART I 
Codicology, Palaeography, and Language 
 
Here in Part I I will show how the manuscript is constituted physically, how it ought to be read, and 
how its writing system works, before analysing the text’s phonology, lexis, syntax, and metre. My aim 
is to make the manuscript legible to any interested parties and to render any conclusions reached about 
the text more verifiable and this project necessarily more empirical. 
 Part I is arranged into three sections: 
1. The first deals with the codicology of MS Jav. b.3. (R)  – the physical properties of  the 
manuscript from its box (kropak) and leaves to its line markings and foliation. 
2. The second section concerns the palaeography of MS Jav. b.3. (R). This is an attempt to 
document the features of the ‘Old Sundanese’ lontar script inscribed on the leaves. I aim to 
describe the writing system so thoroughly that a layperson could study the description and be 
able to transliterate the inscribed text. A short section on the script’s probable origins follows 
the description. 
3. The third and final section of Part I concerns the use of language in the poem. This includes a 
description of the phonology, vocabulary, and syntax of Bujangga Manik. The intent here is 
not to produce a complete reference grammar of Old Sundanese but to show how the 
interpretation of the text in Part II was arrived at and how it could be improved in the future. 
These sections are arranged so that each builds on the one preceding it. Part II is intended to put 
the interpretations of social and cultural life derived from information in Bujangga Manik on a firmer 
footing and to provide a well-developed case study of Old Sundanese bookbinding, script, and language 
for further study and comparative research. 
 
I.1 Codicology 
Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R) is a manuscript consisting of 30  leaves of the lontar palm 
(Borassus flabellifer) inside a teak (Tectona grandis) box lacquered black on the top and sides. As with

--- PAGE: 51 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
38 
 
other Southeast Asian palm-leaf manuscripts, the leaves were once attached by cords, but their original 
order appears to have been disrupted at some point and the reading order is not obvious from the current 
physical arrangement. Nor is it immediately clear to non-specialists how the leaves should be oriented 
and turned, and when the manuscript was digitised about half the images were  taken with the leaves  
upside-down as a result. 
In this section I will discuss the materials of the box and leaves; the foliation of the manuscript 
(that is to say, how the leaves are supposed to be arranged in relation to one another); their dimensions; 
the line markings on them; the age of the manuscript; and how each leaf should be read. There are some 
significant issues with the foliation that will require extended commen t. The folios themselves are, as 
with most palm-leaf manuscripts, not bound into a book or codex shape recognisable to European or 
Chinese codicologists and are instead separate leaves with th ree holes punctured in the centre and at 
each end by which they can be tied together so they do not come apart. Pace Dick van der Meij’s claim 
that Sundanese lontar manuscripts bear only one hole in the centre of the leaves (2017:153), Bujangga 
Manik, like other Sundanese manuscripts, in fact has three such perforations. 
I.1.1 The Box 
 The manuscript is contained within a box or kropak (see van der Meij 2017:211-220), which is 
made of two roughly equal-sized components made of lacquered teak joined to one another by a single 
tongue-and-groove joint. This kropak wholly encases the leaves and affords a greater level of protection 
from the elements than the more-common method of binding palm -leaf manuscripts with simple flat 
boards. There has , however,  been some damage to the box: the lacquer  (presumably sap of 
Toxicodendron vernicifluum) is scuffed on the tops and sides; the tongue of the interior joint has been 
worn down on the inside of the bottom piece; and a long section roughly 1 centimetre wide has split off 
one side, exposing the leaves. When complete, however, the manuscript would have been contained in 
a snug box 36.9 centimetres l ong, 4.2 centimetres wide, and 2.5 centimetres high. The kropak was 
probably made for the manuscript, as it fits tightly – the leaves will not fall out of their own accord – 
and seems to have a cavity suited perfectly for the number of leaves originally present (at least thirty -
four, given the surviving thirty leaves and the apparent loss of four others) . A shallow decorative line 
border with a width of one millimetre has been impressed into the box on the four long sides parallel to 
and roughly 0.6 millimetres away from the edges. This is the only apparent decoration aside from the 
application of a thin layer of black lacquer to the outside (Figure I.1). The inside of the box is bare and 
untreated, and even when one takes into account the damage to the object it is clear that significantly 
less care and attention went into the interior. The surface is not planed smooth. There has  also been 
some staining from the application of glue or shellac (perhaps after acquisition by the Library).

--- PAGE: 52 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
39 
 
 
Figure I.1. Diagrams of the kropak: a) The largely undamaged exterior of the bottom piece – how the box would have 
appeared before the damage. Dimensions: 36.9 cm L X 4.2 cm W. The hole is bored 18.1 centimetres from one end and 18.7 
centimetres from the other. b) The undamaged side of the box – again showing how the box would have appeared before it 
was damaged. Note the close seal between the two parts. Dimensions: 36.9 cm L X 2.52 cm H. c) The interior of the bottom 
half of the box. Hatching indicates the presence of lacquer. The area next to the hatching is the tongue of the tongue-and-
groove joint (see Figure I.1.2). d) The lacquered exterior of the bottom half showing the shallow incised decoration. e) The 
interior of the damaged top half, of which roughly a centimetre of material has broken off the side. 3.2 cm W at the end. f) 
The structure of the groove in the top half – a cross-section of e. Here hatching only indicates the area of the cross-section. 
Dimensions: 1.7 cm H at the end; the groove is 0.35 cm deep and 0.25 cm wide. 
The two sides of the box were connected to one another with a type of tongue-and-groove joint 
– a common feature on Sundanese kropaks. A tongue originally about three millimetres in height and a 
millimetre or two wide protruded around the inside walls of the bottom section, although it is now badly 
worn down and in some parts has disappeared entirely  (Figure I.2). A corresponding groove has been 
cut on the inside of the top piece . When intact this would have ensured a close fit between the two 
halves all the way around (Figure I.3). A hole roughly a millimetre across has been bored near the centre 
of each half – 18.1 centimetres from one end and 18.7 from the other – corresponding neatly to the off-
centre holes of the leaves and probably originally threaded with cords.

--- PAGE: 53 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
40 
 
 
Figure I.2. A sketch of the interior of the bottom half, showing some of the damage to the tongue of the joint, the 
unlacquered and unfinished interior, and the scuffing of the lacquer on the outside. 
 
Figure I.3. A sketch of the damage to the kropak, showing the worn-down tongue; the damage to the top half, now visible in 
cross-section; and the empty space revealed by the loss of at least four of the leaves. 
Raechelle Rubinstein  (1996:133-134), whose discussion of lontar texts forms the basis for 
many of my remarks here, says that Balinese kropaks and boards are usually made from one of three 
possible timbers, ‘sawo (Mimusops39 kauki), teak (Tectona grandis), [or] intaran (Azadirachta indica),’ 
and this seems to apply to Javan palm-leaf manuscripts as well, narrowing down the range of possible 
woods considerably. The bare untreated wood on the inside of the box is a light brown with a coarse 
striated texture consistent with teak ( T. grandis, Malay/Sd/Jv jati). Research in online xylotheques – 
specifically those of Kew Gardens40 and the Tervuren Xylarium Wood Database41 at the Royal Museum 
 
39 This tree has been reassigned to the genus Manilkara. 
40 https://www.kew.org/science/collections/economic-botany-collection/explore-the-collection/wood-collection-
xylarium (accessed 15-01-2019). See also here for a large number of good-quality images of teak wood grain; 
the wood in MS Jav. b.3. (R) is somewhat lighter than average but it is identifiable as teak: 
http://web.archive.org/web/20200304094817/http://www.hobbithouseinc.com/personal/woodpics/teak.htm  
(accessed 04-03-2020). 
41 http://www.africamuseum.be/research/collections_libraries/biology/collections/xylarium  (accessed 15-01-
2019).

--- PAGE: 54 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
41 
 
for Central Africa in Tervuren, Belgium – appear to confirm that suspicion. Teak is, in any case, durable 
and weather -resistant, and because of its ruggedness even without oiling it was often used in ship 
construction in medieval Southeast Asia (as, indeed, in the description of the ships in  BM 898). The 
same wood was also used in other Old Sundanese manuscript boxes/kropaks, including that of a pair of 
texts called Serat Séwaka (Jakarta, PNRI, L633 – Ilham Nurwansah, p.c.), the colour of the interior of 
which is strikingly similar to that of MS Jav. b.3. (R) (as indeed is the structure of the kropak). 
The use of teak, the lacquer ing, and the tight seal between the two halves of the box suggest 
that the manuscript  was put together with care and that effort was made to protect the fragile leaves 
from the humid environment of West Java. The damage, too, i s suggestive: It is unlikely the majority 
of this damage was incurred during the manuscript’s stay in the Bodleian, as other seventeenth-century 
acquisitions have not been damaged in this way ; MS Jav. b.1., another of the manuscripts  from West 
Java donated by Andrew James in 1627, is in excellent condition. The original cataloguer’s description 
of the manuscript as vetustissima ‘most ancient’ suggests that the lacquer was already scuffed and the 
side split off prior to purchasing. 
I.1.2 The Page 
Several palm species are said to have lent their leaves to the creation of Sundanese manuscripts, 
including – as Ekadjati lists them – ‘palmyra (lontar [Borassus flabellifer]), sugar palm (enau [Arenga 
pinnata]), coconut palm ( kelapa [Cocos nucifera]), pandanus (pandan [Pandanus spp.]), and thatch 
palm ( nipah [Nypa fruticans ])’ (1996:103).  The latter appears to have been a misidentification , 
however; so-called ‘nipah’ manuscripts are instead made of gebang (or gewang) palm (Corypha utan), 
and in a Sundanese context these were usually written on with ink and a  reed pen (see the elegant 
argument in Gunawan 2015). The most common manuscript material between Lombok and Sumatra, 
as Aditia Gunawan points out, is the leaf of Borassus flabellifer, known in Sundanese and Malay as 
lontar, a loanword from Old Javanese combining Javanese ron ‘leaf’ with Sanskrit tal ‘Borassus 
flabellifer’ (and having subsequently undergone metathesis) (Gunawan 2015:250). Lontar and gebang 
are the two main surviving varieties of Old Sundanese writing support; MS Jav. b.3. (R) is certainly an 
example of the former. Part of the Old Sundanese prose work Sanghyang Sasana Mahaguru (Jakarta, 
PNRI, L621, f.14v) states explicitly that lontar (taal) manuscripts were intended to be handled and used 
for public readings and that inked gebang manuscripts were the more highly valued type ‘suitable for 
putting in an archive’ (pikabuyutanen). The colouration, size, and the style of the manuscript as a flat 
four-lined inscribed (rather than inked) text with three holes for cords all confirm that Bujangga Manik 
is written on lontar (Rubinstein 1996:133). It must have been intended for public recitation and reading. 
Lontar palms – described by James Fox as ‘massive dioecious palm[s] with solitary trunk[s] 
and thick, broadly based, spiny -edged leafstalks that mount wide, fan -like fronds’ (1977:209) – grow 
in the drier parts of South and Southeast Asia, and they have a range of uses that go beyond providing

--- PAGE: 55 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
42 
 
writing materials: the rachis can be tapped for sugar, the leaves can be woven into mats and clothing, 
and the sturdy timber is use d in  construction.42 Lontar palms occasionally appear in Old Javanese 
kakawin as proverbiall y thick and massive objects, as in  the late -fifteenth-century kakawin 
Śiwarātrikalpa (21.1), where Antaka’s club is compared to a lontar: ‘he grasped his club, great as a 
lontar palm [tal], and hard as a thunderbolt’ (sambut gadā nira satal kadi bajra riṅ twas – Teeuw et al. 
1969:107). Few lontar trees grow in West Java due to its rainy climate, and the leaves for many 
manuscripts were probably imported from further east (Ekadjati 1996:103). Madura, the low -lying 
island immediately of Surabaya in East Java, has a particularly dry climate perfect for the cultivation of 
lontar palms, and even after paper had long superseded lontar as a medium for writing in Java, lontar 
products – mats made from twined leaves, for example – were still being exported from t he island to 
population centres further west (Fox 1977:223 -227). It is possible (but hopelessly unverifiable) that 
Madura was the source of the leaves used in the Bujangga Manik manuscript. Lontar can certainly be 
seen further west; on a train journey from Jakarta to Yogyakarta in 2018 I noticed lontars appearing on 
the landscape shortly after leaving Purwokerto in Central Java. 
MS Jav. b.3. (R) is in most respects typical of a Javan lontar manuscript. The leaves are roughly 
35 centimetres long but rather n arrow – around three centimetres wide – meaning that the letters 
(aksaras) themselves are between about three and five millimetres in height. The leaves do not taper; 
each leaf is approximately the same width throughout its length, and deviation from this is due to 
damage rather than intent.  When the end of the page is reached the leaf is turned over from top -to-
bottom – that is to say, along the y axis rather than the x axis (Figure I.4). 
 
Figure I.4. Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R), f.30, showing the way in which the leaf should be turned when 
reading the text. f.30r is on the bottom and f.30v is on the top. Identifying damage is highlighted. 
* 
 
42 See Fox’s Harvest of the Palm (1977) for the lontar’s important role in subsistence arboriculture in Roti and 
Timor.

--- PAGE: 56 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
43 
 
 
Figure I.5. The central hole and the line markings around it. MS Jav. b.3. (R), f.5v. 
On all but one of the leaves, and as normal with this type of lontar manuscript, four straight 
lines have been incised longitudinally on both sides of the leaves approximately seven millimetres apart. 
The central holes in the leaves are marked off by faint lines drawn seven millimetres to the right and 
left of the hole (Figure I.5), and the holes on the far left and right of the leaves are outside the inscribed 
margins. These line markings are faint on some folios – including the first page of text, f.1v – but they 
nonetheless serve to order all of the text except for one aberrant line in a different hand to the rest of 
the text on f.17r (see section I.2.7). In common with other Southeast Asian palm-leaf manuscripts, the 
aksaras are placed below these lines, not on or above them, meaning that when graphemes are stacked 
on top of one another, as occasionally happens, the stacks protrude downward from the marked lines. 
The script is read from left-to-right. 
Preparing Lontar 
Balinese lontar processing – a living tradition – has been described by Rubinstein (1996:136-
137) and in more complete form by Hedi Hinzler (1993:446-450). While there are no guarantees that 
modern Balinese processing was the same as medieval Sundanese practice, there are few other fruitful 
avenues open to us, and as the leaves were probably imported anyway it is unlikely the earlier stages of 
processing were performed by Sundanese people. 
The objective of processing the leaf is to turn it into a useable writing surface that will resist 
insects and humidity (Hinzler 1993:446). The lontar leaves are cut and sun-dried whole, changing their 
colour from green to yellow, before they are soaked in water, changed daily, for three to four days. The 
leaves are dried again in the sun and trimmed, the central rib removed to create a flat surface; they are 
then cut into the shape appropriate f or the kind of manuscript they are destined for (less prestigious 
texts would receive worse-quality and smaller leaves) and boiled ‘in a herbal solution for approximately 
eight hours’ (Rubinstein 1996:136). They are cleaned and dried again before being moistened and left 
to cool in the evening air. The leaves are then pressed flat in bundles in a device designed for the purpose

--- PAGE: 57 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
44 
 
(known in Balinese as a pamlagbagan) over the course of a week. After this process is complete, holes 
are cut into three points along the leaves’ spines and they are carefully planed along their entire length 
to make them flexible. The line markings are then added. In Bali this is done with a panyipatan, a tool 
‘made from two bamboo sticks joined by threads of equal length’ (Rubinstein 1996:137). In nearly all 
cases four lines are marked onto each leaf, as we find in MS Jav. b.3. (R); these lines also mark off the 
margins of the pages, which normally contain page numbers (on the left -hand side of the page – see 
Rubinstein 1996:139) and the two holes on either side. Manuscripts, both finished and uninscribed ones, 
are often stored above the hearth, where the smoke serves to gently preserve the leaf and repel insects. 
Lontar manuscripts are usually inscribed with a knife. In Sundanese the knife is named péso pangot, or 
simply pangot (péso meaning ‘knife’), an implement mentioned in SSKK as one of the ganggaman 
sang pandita ‘weapons of the sage’. 
Lontar manuscripts may appear humble compared to contemporary European  and Islamicate 
manuscripts – MS Jav. b.3. (R) is no Très Riches Heures . The making of a lontar manuscript has 
nonetheless been recognised for some decades as a precision craft. The line marki ngs, as Willem van 
der Molen showed (1983:90 -93), are consistently drawn and  are frequently accurate to within a 
millimetre, and the use of such consistent measurements across multiple manuscripts can even be used 
to identify the output of the same scripto rium. The holes in Balinese lontar manuscripts are placed 
slightly off-centre so that when the manuscript is picked up by its cord it will ‘lean to the right; otherwise 
it has been picked up upside-down’ (Rubinstein 1996:133); this is also the case with MS Jav. b.3. (R), 
where the ‘central’ hole is six millimetres off-centre. 
I.1.3 Foliation 
The foliation of MS Jav. b.3. (R) is a little messy and, while I have a managed to arrive at an 
ordering of the material that accords with what seems to me is the ‘original’ order of the text, there are 
nonetheless some peculiar points requiring explanation. 
The published transliteration in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006) is correct with regard to the 
reading order of the material but incorrectly supposes that the first side of text is on folio 1 recto, when, 
as usual with Javan palm -leaf manuscripts, f.1r is blank . The text begins on f.1v.  This perturbs the 
foliation such that half the text is ascribed to the wrong leaf in the 2006 text. Moreover,  it seems that 
more folios are missing than are accounted for in the published version. The Bodleian digitisation of 
the material43 was also peculiarly ordered, at least from the perspective of reading the text , although 
most of the peculiarities appear to have resulted from the a pparent disorder of the leaves of the 
 
43 The digitisation was finished on April 16 2018 and subsequently amended, on the basis of my 
recommendations, on May 24, 2018. It can be found on the Digital Bodleian site: 
https://digital.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/inquire/Discover/Search/#/?p=c+0,t+,rsrs+0,rsps+10,fa+,so+ox%3Asort%5Easc
,scids+,pid+ad204470-7490-4316-a015-1063f1513523,vi+c45ef672-cbfb-4ab4-bc77-eb2fdf97dd08. See 
Introduction for more information.

--- PAGE: 58 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
45 
 
manuscript at the time of digitisation. At some point somebody must have shuffled the leaves and left 
them in the wrong order. Half of the images were hosted upside -down as the leaves had been turned 
along the x axis before the photographs were taken. I prepared a short dossier explaining the problems 
with the digitisation and the curators corrected the hosted images on that basis, turning certain images 
the right way up and adopting the reading order as the order of the photos hosted on the site. However, 
the Bodleian curators retained their original foliation in the catalogue notes in order to give a semblance 
of the current physical order of the manuscript. This means that three foliations of MS Jav. b.3. (R) can 
be encountered: 
1) my foliation, which I have used in the transliteration in Part II;  
2) the one in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006), which preserves the reading order but not the 
physical order and is a little off-kilter due to f.1r; and 
3) the Bodleian foliation, which replicates the current physical order of the leaves but not the 
reading order (presumably the original arrangement of the leaves). 
I have put together a table (Table I.1) attempting to show the concordance between the current 
series of images on the Digital Bodleian site (the first column); my revised foliation of the manuscript 
(the second column - bold); the foliation as found in the published transcription in Noorduyn and Teeuw 
(2006) (the third column); and the foliation used in the Digital Bodleian notes (the fourth column). 
Notes have been added where necessary to explain any out standing issues with the manuscript, 
including the absences of the theorised folios 28, 29, 32, and 34 and the presence of the Sundanese 
numerals explained below (the fifth column). 
Table I.1. Foliation of Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
1. Digital 
Bodleian 
Image 
No. 
2. Revised 
Foliation 
3. Foliation 
as per 
Noorduyn & 
Teeuw (2006) 
4. Digital 
Bodleian 
Foliation 
5. Notes 
2 1r - ?v Not in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006). The page is 
blank, now marked with a Bodleian stamp. 
3 1v 1r ?r A question mark ⟨?⟩ appears pencilled in the 
margin, almost certainly added by a Bodleian 
curator. 
4 2r 1v 1v  
5 2v 2r 1r A pencilled ‘1’ and an OSd ⟨1⟩ appear in the 
leftmost margin. 
6 3r 2v 2v  
7 3v 3r 2r Pencilled ‘2’ and OSd ⟨2⟩ on left. 
8 4r 3v 3v Discolouration – bottom, right of centre.

--- PAGE: 59 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
46 
 
9 4v 4r 3r Pencilled ‘3’ and OSd ⟨3⟩ on left. 
10 5r 4v 4v Water damage? Darkening and yellow 
discolouration. 
11 5v 5r 4r Pencilled ‘4’ and OSd ⟨4⟩ on left. 
12 6r 5v 5v  
13 6v 6r 5r Pencilled ‘5’ and OSd ⟨5⟩ on left. 
14 7r 6v 6v  
15 7v 7r 6r Pencilled ‘6’ and OSd ⟨6⟩ on left. 
16 8r 7v 7v  
17 8v 8r 7r Pencilled ‘7’ and OSd ⟨7⟩ on left. 
18 9r 8v 8v  
19 9v 9r 8r Pencilled ‘8’ and OSd ⟨8⟩ on left. 
20 10r 9v 9v  
21 10v 10r 9r Pencilled ‘9’ and OSd ⟨9⟩ on left. 
22 11r 10v 10v Small patch of water damage. 
23 11v 11r 10r Pencilled ‘10’ and OSd ⟨10⟩ on left. Small patch of 
water damage. 
24 12r 11v 11v  
25 12v 12r 11r Pencilled ‘11’ and OSd ⟨11⟩ on left. 
26 13r 12v 12v Some dark patches, top-left. 
27 13v 13r 12r Pencilled ‘12’ and OSd ⟨12⟩ on left. 
28 14r 13v 13v  
29 14v 14r 13r Pencilled ‘13’ and OSd ⟨13⟩ on left. 
30 15r 14v 14v  
31 15v 15r 14r Pencilled ‘14’ and OSd ⟨14⟩ on left. 
32 16r 15v 15v Cord attached to central hole. 
33 16v 16r 15r Pencilled ‘15’ and OSd ⟨15⟩ on left. 
34 17r 16v 16v Vegetable fibre around leftmost hole – species 
unknown but resembles bast more than e.g. coir. An 
interstitial line of text is found between lines 3 and 
4 left of central hole. 
35 17v 17r 16r Pencilled ‘16’ , OSd ⟨16⟩ on left . Natural fibre in 
leftmost hole. 
36 18r 17v 17v  
37 18v 18r 17r Pencilled ‘17’ and OSd ⟨17⟩ on left. 
38 19r 18v 18v Diagonal crack on left. 
39 19v 19r 18r Pencilled ‘18’, OSd ⟨18⟩ on left. 
40 20r 19v 19v Yellow patch right of central hole. 
41 20v 20r 19r Pencilled ‘19’, OSd ⟨19⟩ on left.

--- PAGE: 60 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
47 
 
42 21r 20v 20v Brown blotches. 
43 21v 21r 20r Pencilled ‘20’, OSd ⟨20⟩ on left. 
44 22r 21v 21v Natural fibre in leftmost hole. 
45 22v 22r 21r Pencilled ‘21’ , OSd ⟨21⟩ on left . Natural fibre in 
leftmost hole. 
46 23r 22v 22v  
47 23v 23r 22r Pencilled ‘22’, OSd ⟨22⟩ on left. 
48 24r 23v 23v Long crack, bottom right. 
49 24v 24r 23r Pencilled ‘23’ and OSd ⟨23⟩ on left. Long crack, top 
right. 
50 25r 24v 26v Discolouration, top right. 
51 25v 25r 26r Pencilled ‘26’ and OSd ⟨24⟩ on left. 
52 26r 25v 25v Dark patch near the top, left of centre. 
53 26v 26r 25r Pencilled ‘25’, OSd ⟨25⟩ on left. 
54 27r 26v 24v Long crack, bottom left. 
55 27v 27r 24r Pencilled ‘24’ , OSd ⟨26⟩ on left . Long crack, top 
left. 
56 30r 29r 29v The numerals on the verso identify this as f. 30, not 
f.29. 
57 30v 29v 29r Pencilled ‘29’ , OSd ⟨29⟩ on left . If f.1 has no 
number and f.2 has OSd ⟨1⟩, we are missing two 
folios between f.27 and f.30. 
58 31r 30r 30v  
59 31v 30v 30r Pencilled ‘30’, OSd ⟨30⟩ on left. 
60 33r 32r 32v Chunks taken out of top and bottom on left. 
61 33v 32v 32r Pencilled ‘32’, OSd ⟨32⟩ on left. 
 
 This first folio in particular confused the curators at the Bodleian. The verso has a question 
mark ⟨?⟩ pencilled into the margin, and the Digital Bodleian site continues to list this folio as ‘folio ?’. 
Folio 1v nonetheless begins with a piece of punctuation that serves to introduce the first line of a text 
(Fig. I.6 – see section I.2.3) and it is in any case clear that this piece of text is the start of the narrative, 
commencing as it does with Jaya Pakuan leaving the palace. Similar punctuation marks may be seen in 
contemporary or earlier Old Sundanese texts, as in the late-fourteenth-century Kebantenan copperplates 
(Hunter 1996:11) and the encyclopaedic Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (Ekadjati 1996:107 figure 
123), as well as in the eighteenth-century Old Sundanese text Carita Waruga Guru (Ekadjati 1996:122). 
Less elaborate punctuation serves to introduce texts elsewhere in Indonesia, as in – among others – the 
Rejang Ka-Ga-Nga texts from South Sumatra , which are remarkably simila r to the mark at the 
beginning of the Kawali I inscription  (Jaspan 1964:17). A blank f.1r is a lso standard in Sundanese 
manuscripts, both lontar and gebang. It should be clear, then, that f.1v is the first page of text in MS 
Jav. b.3. (R).

--- PAGE: 61 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
48 
 
 One of the reasons the Digital Bodleian version retains its original foliation in the online notes 
is due to the numbers found outside the inscribed textual margins. These numbers are not on their own 
a useful guide to the ordering of the pages, as they appear to follow convention and begin on the second 
folio rather than the first and appear on the versos rather than the rectos, but they do have some 
implications for our understanding of the manuscript and, more particularly, of its lacunae. 
Marginal Numbers 
 Numbers appear in the leftmost margins of the versos of nearly all the folios of MS Jav. b.3. 
(R). A discussion of the Sundanese numerals themselves is found below, but in this section I intend to 
show what these marginal numbers imply about the foliation of the manuscript. Importantly, these 
numerals suggest that two leaves are missing after folio 27 – not one as previously believ ed. The 
numerals do not appear in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006). 
 
Figure I.6. The numbers in the leftmost margin of f.27v. The numeral at the top is ⟨2⟩ and the numeral in the black box is ⟨6⟩ 
- not ⟨4⟩ as implied by the European '24'. 
The most visible of the marginal numerals are the pencilled European 44 numbers presumably 
added to the manuscript by a Bodleian curator assessing the foliation. Above or around these, however, 
are numerals in the Old Sunda nese script. For the most part the two sets agree with one another.  The 
exceptions are my folios 25v and 27v: the pencilled numbers identify the former as folio 26 and the 
latter as folio 24, while the Old Sundanese numerals are ⟨24⟩ on the former and ⟨26⟩ on the latter (Figure 
I.6). This difference suggests that the curator number ed the folios in the order that they found them 
rather than following the Old Sundanese system. 
As with other Old Sundanese manuscripts, there are no numerals on the first folio, whether on 
the blank recto or the inscribed verso, and the numbering (both the European and Old Sundanese) begins 
on f.2v with a number ⟨1⟩. This means that the Old Sundanese page numbers are a digit behind the 
revised foliation. The leaf labelled ‘1’/⟨1⟩ is actually the second folio; the one labelled ‘2’/⟨2⟩ is actually 
 
44 That is to say so-called ‘Hindu-Arabic’ numerals such as are used in Europe. The Old Sundanese numerals are 
also descended from the ‘Hindu’ positional notation system and so ‘Hindu -Arabic’ seems an inappropriate 
designation for the European numbers here.

--- PAGE: 62 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
49 
 
the third; and so on throughout. Following this reasoning, the leaf labelled ‘29’/ ⟨29⟩ ought to be folio 
30 in the revised ordering, rather than f.29 as Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006) and the Bodleian both have 
it. This means that two folios, and not one as supposed by Noorduyn, are absent between ff.27 and 30, 
and one is missing between ff.31 and 33. The manuscript is unfinished, lacking at least one more folio 
at the end. MS Jav. b.3. (R) is therefore missing a minimum of four leaves: 28, 29, 32, and 34. 
This larger lacuna has implications for the numbe ring of the metrical lines . Noorduyn and 
Teeuw (2006) give Bujangga Manik 1757 lines in total, with 1629 surviving lines and two proposed 
missing folios. Taking the larger lacunae and the average number of lines per leaf (55)  into account, I 
end my edition of Bujangga Manik on line 1809 instead. In Table I.2 I give the line numbers and the 
number of lines per leaf for each of the extant folios. These are the numbers I have adopted in my 
transliteration of Bujangga Manik, beginning with line 1 on f.1v and ending with line 1809 on f.33v.  
As it is unlikely the missing leaves  have survived elsewhere since 1627, these numbers will have to 
suffice as an estimate of the poem’s original length. 
Table I.2. Line numbers and the number of lines per leaf (in parentheses) in Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R).  
Folio No. Lines Folio No. Lines Folio No. Lines 
f.1 1-29 (29) f.11 525-579 (54) f.21 1093-1153 (60) 
f.2 29-92 (63) f.12 579-636 (58) f.22 1153-1212 (59) 
f.3 92-149 (57) f.13 636-691 (55) f.23 1212-1268 (56) 
f.4 149-204 (55) f.14 691-748 (57) f.24 1268-1324 (55) 
f.5 204-257 (53) f.15 748-804 (56) f.25 1324-1378 (54) 
f.6 257-311 (54) f.16 804-859 (55) f.26 1379-1430 (53) 
f.7 312-362 (49) f.17 859-918 (59) f.27 1430-1479 (49) 
f.8 362-418 (56) f.18 918-979 (61) f.30 1589-1641 (52) 
f.9 418-470 (52) f.19 979-1035 (56) f.31 1642-1697 (55) 
f.10 471-525 (54) f.20 1035-1093 (58) f.33 1753-1809 (56) 
 
I.1.4 The Age of the Manuscript 
 Unfortunately the risks of radiocarbon -dating MS Jav. b.3. (R) outweigh the benefits  and the 
Bodleian curators have decided against subjecting the fragile leaves to the invasive procedure. The date-
range for the creation of the manuscript, between the mid/late fifteenth and early seventeenth centuries, 
is still poorly calibrate d, and the results of any form of chemical dating are likely to be inconclusive . 
However, as mentioned above, the manuscript was described as ‘most ancient’ ( vetustissima) upon its 
acquisition by the Library, and there is significant damage to the box enclosing the l eaves, including 
scratches in the lacquer, a section missing from the lid, and wear on the inside tongue -and-groove 
construction. It is unlikely that this damage was received while in the care of the Library, if only because 
other items of similar age in the Bodleian have not suffered quite such dramatic wounds. I would suggest

--- PAGE: 63 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
50 
 
that the manuscript was made at least several decades before 1627, although we probably cannot be 
more precise than that. The palaeographic evidence is of unfortunately little help here, although it should 
be noted that the kropak is extremely similar in design to other Old Sundanese kropaks, including that 
of the gebang SSKK, which bears a colophon dating it to 1518. Nothing precludes the manuscript from 
dating to the time of the composition of the text – i.e. to c.1470. 
It is not known how Bujangga Manik came into Andrew James’ hands, but it may be presumed 
that he purchased it on the coast – probably at Banten, where the English had a factory. It may be that 
the manuscript was taken as loot during the conquest of Hindu Sunda between the 1520s and 1570s and 
brought to the coast, although there is little in the way of positive evidence for this. 
* 
To summarise: MS Jav. b.3. (R) consists of lontar (Borassus flabellifer) leaves arranged in a 
stack inside a black-lacquered teak (Tectona grandis) box. There are 30 extant folios (1-27, 30-31, and 
33) and four missing folios hypothesised on the basis of punctuation, metre, language, and the marginal 
numbers (28, 29, 32, and 34). All of the leaves are punctured in three places along the central x-axis 
and are inscribed un-charcoaled on both sides, with the exception of folio 1, the recto of which is blank. 
Faint ruled marks delineate the written space, and numbers in Old Sundanese script are found in the 
leftmost margins of the versos of every leaf b ut folio 1. The leaves, almost certainly imported from 
outside Sunda, were once strung on a cord through the central hole, and were read by turning the page 
over from bottom to top once the end of the side was reached. Much of this is entirely standard for  
Southeast Asian lontar manuscripts, and aside from the absence of charcoaling or inking MS Jav. b.3. 
(R) is an unremarkable lontar text in the western Indonesian tradition. Indeed, many of these features 
are also found in the oldest surviving palm-leaf manuscripts from mainland Southeast Asia, the earliest 
of which is a Jātaka fragment in Pali from Thailand dated to 1477; this is also four -lined, unlike later 
manuscripts from the mainland, which can have as many as thirteen lines of text (five being standard).45 
 
I.2 Palaeography 
In this section I will examine the script and writing system of Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. 
(R). The script – a Brahmic one, related to the great majority of writing systems in pre -colonial Indo-
 
45 For this information I am indebted to the participants in the palm-leaf roundtable at the International 
Convention of Asia Scholars (ICAS) in Leiden on July 17, 2019 – particularly Volker Grabowsky, Silpsupa 
Jaengsawang, and Alexey Kirichenko.

--- PAGE: 64 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
51 
 
Malaysia46 – is a particularly old and uninked example of what is now conventionally called ‘Old 
Sundanese script’ (Malay/Sd aksara Sunda kuno/kuna), the most prominent study of which was based 
on later inked manuscripts (Darsa 1997). As such, the  lontar script found in MS Jav. b.3. (R) requires 
a more detailed discussion than its identification as ‘Old Sundanese script’ might suggest. 
I.2.1 Terminology 
 A terminological point should be made at this point regarding ‘scripts’, ‘writing systems’, and 
‘hands’, following Sproat (2000). By script I mean ‘a set of distinct marks conventionally used to 
represent the written form of one or more languages’ (Sproat 2000:25). A writing system, by contrast, 
is the way a script is used to write a particular language. In an Indo -Malaysian context this distinction 
is particularly fraught but nonetheless necessary: lots of related scripts have been used to write 
dissimilar languages, each of which have their own writing systems, and lots of languages in the region 
have been written in a range of distinct scripts, including Sundanese. The Old Sundanese language first 
appears to have been written in variants of Javanese scripts, and these had probably evolved – or been 
deliberately molded – into identifiably Sundanese forms by the end of the fourteenth century. There are 
at least two distinct scripts found in surviving Old Sundanese manuscripts, with significant variants 
within those categories, and there are a few more on top when Old Sundanese inscriptions are included. 
A hand is used here to refer to an indiv idual’s way of writing a script; this is perhaps a less 
relevant category in the context of medieval Southeast Asia than in medieval Europe or the Middle East 
as few manuscripts have survived to allow us to differentiate hands. In the Bujangga Manik manuscript, 
however, two hands can be differentiated: one makes up the bulk of the text and the other, also an ‘Old 
Sundanese’ one, is found in only a peculiar interstitial pair of lines on f.17r. A cursory analysis of this 
hand is found below. The main text of MS Jav. b.3. (R) appears in any case to have been written by a 
single scribe. 
 Scripts are made up of graphemes, the smallest units of writing in a script. Graphemes are not 
precisely analogous to phonemes in a spoken language and they do not necessarily m ap neatly on to 
one another,47 and there has consequently been some discussion of the utility of the grapheme concept 
(see Sproat 2000:28). Nevertheless, ‘grapheme’ serves here as a convenient label for all the different 
kinds of marks that can be encounte red when reading a Southeast Asian manuscript – perhaps more 
useful in this context than when describing an alphabet, for reasons that should become clear. In the 
study of Indonesian manuscripts these different graphemes have conventional labels, most derived from 
the traditional Javanese terminology. Here the Sundanese names will be used for the diacritics, although 
 
46 The principal exception is Jawi, a version of the Arabic script adapted for writing Malay first attested in a 
stone inscription from Terengganu, Malaysia, dated to the beginning of the fourteenth century. 
47 This can be demonstrated with reference to many English words – e.g. ‘ought’, which consists of five 
graphemes ⟨o u g h t⟩ but only two phonemes /ɔ:t/.

--- PAGE: 65 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
52 
 
some Javanese terms have been retained in order to accord better with the existing literature on Indo -
Malaysian writing systems, including the term sandhangan with its modern Javanese spelling.48 These 
terms will be defined in detail below but two stand out as requiring definition at this point: aksara 
(Malay, Jv, Sd ‘letter; script’, from Skt akṣara), which refers to the primary syllabic characters ⟨ka ga 
nga⟩ (etc.) used in the Old Sundanese scripts, and sandhangan (Jv ‘clothing’), which refers to the 
diacritics that modify the aksaras. Sandhangan are found in various positions around the aksaras and 
are generally smaller and less prominent than them (Figure I.7). 
 
Figure I.7. The syllable ⟨hǝ t.⟩ het in the word dipahetken on f.31v. The rectangles delineate the aksara nglegena ⟨ha⟩ and 
⟨ta⟩. Sandhangan are circled. The sandhangan at the top (Sd paneleng) changes the vowel to ⟨e⟩/[ǝ] and the final one (Sd 
pamaéh) cancels the vowel sound in ⟨ta⟩. 
Aksaras come in two flavours, conventionally called nglegena and pasangan respectively. 
Aksara nglegena – ‘naked aksaras’ – are used in the vast majority of cases; aksara pasangan (‘paired 
aksaras’) are used to create consonant clusters (e.g. ⟨kt⟩), usually with one aksara stacked on top of the 
other. In many Javanese scripts all the aksaras have nglegena and pasangan forms, bu t the Old 
Sundanese scripts, including the  one used in  MS Jav. b.3. (R), only make use of a small number of 
aksara pasangan, most differing in only minor ways from their aksara nglegena counterparts. 
I.2.2 Features of Brahmic Scripts 
The script used in MS Jav. b.3. (R) is derived ultimately 49 from Brahmi, a South Asian script 
of uncertain origin best known from the Edicts of Aśoka (250 -232 BCE). Brahmi was an abugida or 
‘alphasyllabary’ (Sproat 2000:45) or a ‘semisyllabary’ (Behrend 1996:161) – a script in which, instead 
of representing phonemes , as ideally in an alphabet, the basic graphemes represent syllables. As 
mentioned briefly above, in Indo-Malaysian languages whose scripts derive from Brahmi, the primary 
 
48 This is an academic rather than political decision and does not imply Javanese authority over Sundanese 
subject matter. The Sundanese term for sandhangan is rarangkén, but this is considerably less well-known to 
non-Sundanese scholars than sandhangan. 
49 Whether Brahmi had an earlier Near Eastern (‘Southern Semitic’) ancestor is a matter of some controversy. 
While it seems plausible that Brahmi letters were themselves derived from Proto-Sinaitic and ultimately from 
Egyptian hieroglyphs, whether by direct inspiration or stimulus diffusion, it is not a firm conclusion. For the 
purposes of this text the Old Sundanese scripts may be considered to derive ‘ultimately’ from Brahmi. See 
Salomon (1998:19-30).

--- PAGE: 66 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
53 
 
syllabic graphemes are known as aksaras (from Skt akṣara ‘letter, syllable’). Each aksara represents a 
consonant paired with an inherent vowel (usually /-a/) or alternatively an independent vowel (known in 
Javanese as aksara swara , from Sanskrit svára ‘sound, voice’ ). The syllable /ka/, for instance, is 
represented using only one grapheme ⟨ka⟩ in Brahmic scripts, as is /a/ in a syllable -initial position or 
when preceded by a glottal stop ⟨a⟩. 
These aksaras are modified by subsidiary graphemes – the sandhangan ‘clothing’ mentioned 
above – that change the inherent vowel of the aksara or modify it in other ways. The sandhangan can 
be used to: 
• ‘kill’ the inherent vowel (⟨ka⟩ → ⟨k∅⟩); 
• change it from ⟨-a⟩ to another vowel (⟨ka⟩ → ⟨ku⟩); 
or perform functions that would be the purview of independent graphemes in alphabetic writing 
systems, like adding a glottal fricative [h] ⟨ka⟩ → ⟨kah⟩ or a velar nasal stop [ŋ] ⟨ka⟩ → ⟨kaŋ⟩ to the 
syllable coda. 
 The sandhangan signs can be found above the aksara, as with ⟨-i⟩ and ⟨-ng⟩; below it, as with 
⟨-u⟩; to the right of it, as with ⟨-h⟩; or both left and right of it, as with ⟨-o⟩. These signs are generally 
smaller than the aksaras in most Brahmic scripts, although in MS Jav. b.3. (R) and in OSd manuscripts 
generally the sandhangans are quite large and may occasionally be confused with aksara nglegena. 
Below I will use the modern Sundanese names of these sandhangan/rarangkén signs as given in Darsa 
(1997) and Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:433-435), and the models Darsa and Noorduyn used will appear 
in the tables of graphemes below (Tables I.3-I.9). 
I.2.3 Describing the Writing System in MS Jav. b.3. (R) 
General Characteristics 
An overview of the salient features of the script is  worthwhile before examining the forms of the 
graphemes. Readers intending to grapple with the script themselves should probably skip ahead to the 
tables of characters, referring back to these points if they encounter problems with the intepretation of 
the text. 
• The script is made up of 18 aksara nglegena ⟨ka ga nga ca ja ña ta da na pa ba ma ya ra la wa 
sa ha⟩; five aksara swara ⟨a é i o u ⟩; seven aksara pasangan ⟨ca na ba ma ya wa mpa ⟩; four 
special forms ⟨re le tra k⟩; eight aksara sandhangan (pamaéh, panolong, and ⟨é i u e h ng r -r-
⟩); and ten numerals ⟨1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0⟩. There are also three punctuation marks ⟨· /0/ //0//⟩. 
• The text is written scriptio continua in the sense that words within the same metrical line are 
not distinguished by spaces or punctuation. However, a short dash or dot is used to indicate the 
beginning and end of the metrical lines.

--- PAGE: 67 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
54 
 
• MS Jav. b.3. (R) makes  no distinction between ⟨e⟩ and ⟨eu⟩. Current Sundanese orthography 
has both ⟨e⟩, representing the sound [ə], and ⟨eu⟩, representing [ɤ] (similar to Old Javanese ⟨ö⟩), 
but this distinction is not typically marked in Old Sundanese manuscript s. Aditia Gunawan 
suggests that it is ‘[neither] necessary nor […] desirable to distinguish between the two in 
transcription’ (2015:251). 
• There is also no independent vowel (aksara swara) for ⟨e⟩. This sound appears as a sandhangan 
vowel ⟨-e⟩ above the aksara swara ⟨a⟩ instead. 
• There are three ways to transcribe the sound [o]: 
o using the taling-tarung combination found in Javanese scripts (Sundanese: panolong), 
in which the aksara is placed between two characters, the one on the left ( panéléng) 
normally representing ⟨é⟩ and the one on the right normally representing a long vowel 
in Javanese scripts and the panolong in Old Sundanese (see below);50 
o with the aksara pasangan ⟨wa⟩, which sometimes also represents that sound – whether 
it should be interpreted as [wa], [ua], or [o] depends on the metre and the modern 
Sundanese pronunciation; 
o using pasangan ⟨wa⟩ in combination with a panéléng (sandhangan ⟨é⟩) preceding the 
aksara. Unlike pasangan ⟨wa⟩ on its own, this only ever seems to represent the sound 
[o]. 
• There are two ways to ‘kill’ the inherent vowel of aksara nglegena ⟨ka⟩ in MS Jav. b.3. (R): 
o using a pamaéh after the aksara, the same method used with every other aksara (see 
below); or 
o by deploying a special character consisting of a ⟨ka⟩ with an additional dash underneath 
– shorter than the dot used to represent a  sandhangan ⟨-u⟩ (panyuku) and positioned 
closer to the centre. In Darsa’s type script of Old Sundanese, this appears as a separate 
and more elaborate grapheme ⟨k⟩ (Darsa 1997; Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:434). In 
MS Jav. b.3. (R) it is less elaborate and similar in form to ⟨ku⟩. 
• No long vowels are marked in the script – a considerable difference between the Old Sundanese 
scripts and the ones used to write Old Javanese and Old Malay (in which long vowels, not 
present in Malay phonology, are nonetheless marked in the script – see Mahdi 2015). 
• No aspirated or retroflex forms ⟨dha tha ṇa⟩ (etc.) are found, either – a major difference between 
Old Sundanese scripts and Javanese ones. This cannot be explained on a purely phonological 
basis: while it is true that Old Sundanese lacked retroflexes and aspirates, so did Old and 
Classical Malay, and retroflexes are nonetheless found in Old Malay texts. Medieval Sundanese 
 
50 The use of one element either side of the aksara to represent [-o] is a feature of the Brahmi script and is found 
in the great bulk of Brahmic scripts in both South and Southeast Asia.

--- PAGE: 68 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
55 
 
scholars must have made a deliberate decision to eliminate these aksaras from the script, even 
when writing Sanskrit loans (except in some specific cases, as in the gebang SSKK). 
• A grapheme with the same form as the OJv aksara ⟨ṭa⟩ (representing retroflex /ʈ/) is found in 
the MS Jav. b.3. (R) script but it should be pronounced [tra] – a consonant cluster with an 
inherent vowel – rather than as a retroflex. 
• Nasal stops are not always marked in the text but may be interpolated on the basis of modern 
Sundanese pronunciation. Precisely why they do not always appear – as in the subject of the 
first line of the poem, ⟨ma ha pa di ta⟩ for mahapandita – is not known. Usually the missing 
phonemes/graphemes are homorganic nasals before stops, but this does not on its own explain 
the absences. Hypothesised nasals are marked in the transliteration with round brackets (…) – 
e.g. mahapa(n)dita. 
• Occasionally the panolong is found at the end of a line of text, perhaps to indicate that the end 
of the orthographic line of text on the page does not represent the end of the metrical line. 
• Disyllabic complex graphs  with only one aksara nglegena present are occasionally 
encountered. This happens when an aksara nglegena/pasangan combination is modified by 
sandhangan such that the resulting complex graph actually represents two syllables – something 
that cannot/does not happen in Old Javanese. An example would be the ⟨miyang⟩ in Tamiyang 
in BM 128  in which the aksara ⟨ma⟩ is modified by  a combination of  pasangan ⟨ya⟩, 
sandhangan ⟨ng⟩ (panyecek), and sandhangan ⟨i⟩ (panghulu). Aksara pasangan are normally 
used in consonant clusters and do not contribute an additional vowel, but in these cases two 
vowels are present – and for metrical reasons the sounds cannot be collapsed into one as in 
Javanese (e.g. ⟨ya⟩ → ⟨é⟩). This principle is also found in inscriptions, as in the hiyang on 
Kawali inscriptions III and IV.  It means that transliterating Old Sundanese according to the 
International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration (IAST), as some propose (Acri and Griffiths 
2014), would result in misreadings; the -miyang above would be written -myiṃ in IAST, rather 
different from the likely OSd pronunciation. 
• Successions of like vowels (as in  ⟨twah ha an ⟩ tohaan ‘lord’) are separated in the modern 
spoken language by glottal stop s and do not represent long vowels (Robins 1983:59). In Old 
Sundanese scripts these glottal stops are not explicitly marked but should perhaps be considered 
inherent features of the aksara swaras; such a feature is known for Javanese aksara swaras of 
the Islamic period (Bernard Arps, p.c.). 
• Finally, two Old Sundanese hands are present in MS Jav. b.3. (R), one of which appears in an 
odd interstitial line between lines 2 and 3 on 17r. This hand more closely resembles (a cursive 
version of) the Old Sundanese script outlined by Darsa (1997), drawn from more modern inked 
manuscripts, and on that basis I believe it was inscribed later than the rest of MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
It is not present in the Noo rduyn and Teeuw (2006) transliteration, and my  tentative

--- PAGE: 69 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
56 
 
interpretation of the line comes from discussion with Sundanese specialists Aditia Gunawa n, 
Ilham Nurwansah, and Panji Topan Bahagia in June 2018. It appears to be a pair of metered 
lines commenting on lust and asceticism by a relatively unskilled scribe. 
The Graphemes 
 The marks found on the leaves of Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R) have been sorted 
into separate tables below: Consonantal aksara nglegena (Table I.3); aksara swara (Table I.4); aksara 
pasangan (Table I.5); special forms (Table I.6); sandhangans (Table I.7); numerals (Table I.8); and 
punctuation (Table I.9). An image from a clear folio of MS Jav. b.3. (R)  (first column) is compared 
side-by-side with the same image overlain with black lines to bring out the form  (second column), 
followed by images of the version found in Darsa (1997) and Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:433 -435) 
(third column); and two transliterations (fourth and fifth columns), one in the International Alphabet of 
Sanskrit Transliteration (IAST) and the other a system closer to modern Sundanese orthography. The 
principles behind the transliteration used in this edition are discussed in the introduction to Part II. For 
the probable phonetic values of these graphemes see part I.3.2 below.  A table comparing the MS Jav. 
b.3. (R) script with other Old Sundanese scripts follows the description of the graphemes. 
Aksara Nglegena 
 The order of the Old Sundanese script at the time of Bujangga Manik’s composition is not 
known but the  aksaras are here arranged according to that of the modern version of the Sundanese 
script: ka, ga, nga, ca, ja, ña (nya), ta, da, na, pa, ba, ma, ya, ra, la, wa, sa, and ha. Each aksara will 
be represented by an image taken from photographs of particularly clear folios; most examples have 
been taken from f.7r. 
Table I.3. Aksara nglegena in MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Aksara Highlighted Darsa 
(1997) 
IAST My Transliteration 
 
  
ka ka 
 
  
ga ga

--- PAGE: 70 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
57 
 
 
  
ṅa nga 
 
  
ca ca 
 
  
ja ja 
 
  
 
 
ña ña 
 
  
ta ta 
 
  
da da 
 
 
 
na na 
 
  
pa pa

--- PAGE: 71 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
58 
 
 
  
 
ba ba 
 
  
ma ma 
 
  
ya ya 
 
 
 
ra ra 
 
  
la la 
 
  
va wa 
 
  
sa sa 
 
  
ha ha 
 
Aksara Swara 
 Aksara swaras stand for independent vowels. Here (Table I.4) they are ordered according to 
the list in Darsa (1997). Aksara swara ⟨e⟩, the second grapheme in the table, is exceptional in that it

--- PAGE: 72 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
59 
 
only appears as a sandhangan ⟨-e⟩ attached to aksara swara ⟨a⟩. As noted above, aksara swara should 
probably be thought of as preceded by an unmarked glottal stop. 
Table I.4. Aksara swara in MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Aksara Swara Highlighted Darsa 
(1997) 
IAST My Transliteration 
 
 
 
 
a a 
 
 
 ǝ/ĕ51 e 
⟨ae⟩ 
 
 
 
 
e é 
 
 
 
 
i i 
 
 
 
o o 
 
 
 
u u 
 
 
 
51 This vowel is not found in Sanskrit and so it has no consistent IAST representative. The forms here are those 
used in the transliteration of Old Javanese, which does use the sound and graph.

--- PAGE: 73 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
60 
 
Aksara Pasangan 
Aksara pasangan are used to create consonant clusters. The aksara nglegena is usually on top, 
just under the ruled headline, and the aksara pasangan is usually placed underneath. In most cases the 
pasangan form is identical to the nglegena one; Table I.5 shows only those forms that differ. The 
combinations -nca- and -nja- (in modern Sundanese orthography and the normalised transliteration) 
always use the aksara nglegena ⟨ña⟩, representing a palatal nasal – ⟨ñca⟩ and ⟨ñja⟩. This originates in 
Brahmi usage and, indeed, in Indian phonological theory.  Aksara <ca> and <na> both lose their top 
strokes when used as aksara pasangan; <ba> acquires a unique form; <ma>, <ya>, and <wa> all closely 
resemble contemporaneous Javanese forms. 
Table I.5. Aksara Pasangan in Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Aksara Pasangan Separate Darsa (1997) IAST My Transliteration 
 
 
 
- ca ca 
 
 
 
- na na 
 
 
 
- ba ba 
 
 
 
- ma ma

--- PAGE: 74 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
ya ya 
 
 
 
 
va wa/ua/o 
(see above) 
 
Special Forms 
 There are five special graphemes in the script in MS Jav. b.3. (R) . They  represent unique 
combinations of sounds that could be written in other ways but usually are not (Table I.6). Two of them 
feature an inherent vowel which is not ⟨a⟩ but ⟨e⟩; the others are special consonant forms . The third 
grapheme in the table below , ⟨tra⟩, is of particular interest: Derived from a variant of the Javanese 
aksara ⟨ṭa⟩, which represented a retr oflex consonant not present in Old Sundanese phonology, in 
Bujangga Manik (and other OSd texts)  it is clearly intended to represent the sound [tra], as in sutra 
‘silk, thread’. The fifth item in the table  is an amalgam of ⟨ma⟩ and ⟨pa⟩; as the final component of 
aksara ⟨ma⟩ is similar to the first of ⟨pa⟩ the two parts are easily combined, but they take on a unique 
form when put together. 
Table I.6. Special forms used in the script in Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Special Form Highlighted Darsa 
(1997) 
IAST My Transliteration 
 
 
 
ṛ re 
 
 
 
 
ḷ le

--- PAGE: 75 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
62 
 
 
 
 
ṭa tra 
  
 
k k 
 
  
- mpa mpa 
 
Aksara Sandhangan 
 Aksara sandhangan ‘clothe’ aksara nglegena, changing their attributes. As mentioned above, 
aksaras can take on a number of sandhangans that will change or add features, and on occasion this 
can create a complex graph representing more than one syllable even though only one aksara nglegena 
is present (a feature not found in the scripts used to write OJv and Skt). It is conventional with Brahmic 
scripts to use aksara ⟨ka⟩ as the base for illustrating the functions of the sandhangan, and I will follow 
this convention with the examples below. The drawings in the second column represent idealised forms 
of the aksara sandhangan as found in MS Jav. b.3. (R).  In the order of the graphemes in Table I.7 I 
follow Darsa (1997) and Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:434): 
Table I.7. Aksara sandhangan in MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Sandhangan Separate Darsa’s Version Name IAST My 
Transliteration 
 
  
panéléng e é 
 
  
 
panghulu i i 
 
 
 
panolong o o

--- PAGE: 76 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
63 
 
 
 
  
panyuku u u 
 
 
 
 
 
paneleng ə e 
 
  
 
pangwisad ḥ h 
 
 
 
panyecek ṃ/ṁ52 ng 
 
 
 
panglayar r r 
 
 
 
panyakra -r- -r- 
 
  
 
 
pamaéh . The pamaéh is not 
marked in my 
transliteration; it 
cancels the inherent 
vowel of an aksara 
and its presence is  
marked by absence. 
 
  
panolong / 
avagraha 
(Skt) 
’ For the use of the 
‘avagraha’ – 
actually the right -
hand side of the 
panolong – see 
below. I have not 
marked it explicitly  
in the transliteration. 
 
 
52 The latter is used in the more up-to-date Indic transliteration in ISO 15919.

--- PAGE: 77 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
64 
 
 The Uses of the Pamaéh and Panolong 
 A brief aside is necessary to explain the uses of the pamaéh and (second half of the) panolong 
(or, as in Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006, the avagraha). The pamaéh is simple: It cancels the inherent 
vowel of an aksara. This allows a word to end in a consonant, and it can also be used to form consonant 
clusters without using aksara pasangan. An example of the use of the pamaéh can be seen in Figure 
I.8: 
 
Figure I.8. The use of the pamaéh (examples from f.9v). L: The word kilat, where the aksara ⟨ta⟩ is modified by the 
pamaéh, killing the inherent vowel. R: The word ditaña, where the aksara ⟨ta⟩ is unmodified by pamaéh, meaning that it is 
pronounced with its inherent vowel as [ta]. 
The panolong performs at least two functions in MS Jav. b.3. (R), the most common of which 
is as the second part of the split digraph for sandhangan ⟨o⟩. In Javanese scripts this function is taken 
by the grapheme normally indicating a long vowel (Jv tarung); as no long vowels occur in Old 
Sundanese (or at least in Bujangga Manik) this function is not found. The other use of the panolong, 
one not found in the Javanese scripts, is to introduce a gap between the consonant of an aksara nglegena 
and its vowel  at word boundaries. This can be thought of as ‘doubling’ the affected aksara while 
cancelling the vowel of the first iteration, but because consonant gemination probably was not a feature 
of Old Sundanese phonology in practical terms the panolong simply serves to separate the inherent 
vowel from the consonant of the aksara it modifies. This is an unusual feature but its use is fairly 
straightforward, and it seems to have been used principally to save space on the page . I have provided 
two examples below. 
 
Figure I.9. A line from f.17r: bawaing apus satambi ‘I have a book with me’. 
Figure I.9 shows an example taken from BM 863 on f.17r. The line ought to be read bawaing apus 
sata(m)bi ‘I brought a book with me’  – but only one aksara ⟨sa⟩ is present. The text actually reads 
(where an apostrophe represents the panolong): 
⟨ba wa ing a pu sa’ ta bi⟩

--- PAGE: 78 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
65 
 
The panolong tells us that the features of the aksara ⟨sa⟩ are spread across the words apus and sata(m)bi. 
This is simpler than writing the aksara twice with a pamaéh to cancel the vowel in between.  This 
phenomenon can only occur at word boundarie s, and it is reasonably common: almost every instance 
of the phrase cunduk ka ‘arrived at (toponym)’ is formed using an panolong, for instance. 
 
Figure I.10. A line taken from f.9v illustrating the use of the panolong (circled). It ought to be read ken aing naña si utun, 
but the characters are: ⟨ke na’ ing na ña si u tu n.⟩. 
In Figure I.10 we have BM 456 on f.9v.2: ken aing naña si utun ‘I’ll ask my boy’. Using an apostrophe 
to represent the panolong, the text actually says: 
⟨ke na’ ing na ña si u tu n.⟩ 
The word boundary between ken (~‘let’) and aing (‘I, me’) is marked by the panolong, such that even 
though the [a] of aing is formed by the inherent vowel of the ⟨na⟩ at the end of ken it ought to be 
considered part of the next word. The [n] of the ⟨na⟩ is part of the word ken while the [a] is part of the 
word aing. One could transliterate the pair as ken naing following the same principle found in apus 
sata(m)bi and the pronunciation would probably be unaffected . An alternative method of writing the 
same line would be to use a pamaéh after ⟨na⟩, thereby cancelling the inherent vowel, and then writing 
aing with an initial aksara swara ⟨a⟩, as passim in MS Jav. b.3. (R). The panolong is more efficient and 
just as clear, however. 
 
Figure I.11. An example of the use of the panolong at the end of the page lines. Third line of f.5r. 
The panolong also appears at the end of some orthographic lines  on the far right-hand side of 
the leaf to indicate that the metrical line has not finished and continues onto the next orthographic line 
(e.g. at the end of the third line in f.5r in the middle of the word kalangkang – Figure I.11). This use is

--- PAGE: 79 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
66 
 
not entirely consistent but it occurs frequently enough to suggest that it was a normal part of Old 
Sundanese orthography. 
Numerals 
 The only numerals to appear in MS Jav. b.3. (R) are in the left-side margins of the versos of 29 
of the 30 extant leaves. A system of base-10 positional notation derived from South Asian models was 
used in medieval Java as elsewhere in the late medieval world, meaning that the number 10 is denoted 
by two numerals ⟨1⟩ and ⟨0⟩, and this concept is employed in the manuscript’s OSd numerals. However, 
the numerals in MS Jav. b.3. (R) are all syllables written using the same Old Sundanese script found in 
the rest of the manuscript – e.g. ⟨1⟩ is just aksara ⟨ga⟩. These syllables do not represent the Sundanese 
words for the numbers; they  appear to be rather arbitrarily chosen combinations of sounds, although 
there may be an underlying rationale (which it is beyond the scope of this thesis to explore). This system 
is unusual for a medieval Javan number system – numeral graphemes 0-9 based on Indian forms are 
more common, as are candrasangkala chronograms in which words represent numbers – but it is also 
found in other Old Sundanese texts. By the seventeenth century or so the numerals had evidently turned 
into more arbitrary symbols, however; see ⟨2⟩ and ⟨9⟩ in Darsa’s script in particular. 
Table I.8. Old Sundanese numerals in Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Numeral Highlighted Darsa 
(1997) 
European 
Numeral 
Pronunciation 
  
 
1 ga 
  
 
2 ro 
  
 
3 le

--- PAGE: 80 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
67 
 
  
 
4 ru 
  
 
5 rur 
  
 
6 u 
  
 
7 la 
  
 
8 ca 
  
 
9 da 
  
 
0 0 
This zero consists of a simple 
circle, much like zeroes in other 
parts of medieval Afro -Eurasia. 
It cannot be broken down into 
components and has no apparent 
phonetic value. 
 
Punctuation 
 By far the most common punctuation mark is an octosyllable marker in the form of an  
interpunct ⟨·⟩ found at the beginning and end of the vast majority of metrical lines in the manuscript. 
There are some exceptions to this scattered throughout MS Jav. b.3. (R) – places where the mark should

--- PAGE: 81 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
68 
 
probably be present but is not, the bulk of these probably due to space limitations.  These have been 
marked in the transliteration using round brackets (·). Other punctuation marks are used less freely : 
Only three ⟨//0//⟩ and eight ⟨/0/⟩ marks are found in the text. Both of these marks appear to indicate that 
a break has occurred in the story. 
Table I.9. Punctuation marks used in Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
Punctuation Mark Transcription Notes 
 
· 
(interpunct) 
By far the most common mark, this is used in 
MS Jav. b.3. (R) to divide the  text into 
metrical lines (usually but not invariably of 
eight syllables). 
 
 
/0/ This mark is most similar to a Javanese pada 
adeg-adeg in that it serves to divide the text 
into sections or chapters (although not 
entirely consistently).  Note that this mark is 
always preceded and followed by the 
octosyllabic marker/interpunct. Found before 
lines 158 (f.4r), 332 (f.7r), 398 (f.8v), 548 
(f.11r), 609 (f.12v), 1279 (f.24r), 1294 
(f.24r), and 1430 (f.27r). 
 
 
 
 
//0// This mark is followed by an interpunct in 
every case, although in its appearance in line 
it is not preceded by one.  Found before lines 
1 (f.1v), 456 (f.9v), and 1357 (f.25v). 
 
* 
I.2.4 The Correction of Errors 
 A small number of error corrections appear in MS Jav. b.3. (R) , most of which have been 
marked in the transliteration in italics placed within square brackets. There are three common kinds of 
correction in MS Jav. b.3. (R) , at least two of which can be found  in other Indo-Malaysian palm-leaf 
manuscripts (see van der Meij 2 017:314-340 for an overview of the subject ). None of these involve 
scratching out the offending syllable or striking it through , a method  found reasonably frequently in 
paper manuscripts.

--- PAGE: 82 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
69 
 
The first method is to create a nonsense syllable – a syllable impos sible in Old Sundanese 
orthography – in order to cancel the syllable as a whole. This is done by providing the syllable with too 
many sandhangan, usually a panyuku ⟨-u⟩ and a panghulu ⟨-i⟩ together, a technique known from 
Javanese manuscripts dating back t o the sixteenth century (van der Meij 2017:324)  and often used in 
the Balinese tradition, wh ere it is known as suku-ulu marking. Three examples of this  from MS Jav. 
b.3. (R) can be seen in Figure I.12: 
 
Figure I.12. L-R: f.27v.3; f.20v.1; f.9r.2. As can be seen in the first two examples, the panyuku in error-aksaras is frequently 
given its full and unambiguous form – a crooked bar – instead of merely appearing as a dot as it usually does in MS Jav. b.3. 
(R). 
Dick van der Meij does not record the use of the second method of error correction in Javanese and 
Balinese manuscripts. This involves the use of a small cross above the headline to indicate that two 
aksaras have been written in the wrong order, as can be seen in Figure I.13, where the scribe has written 
⟨a ing bu ⟩ instead of ⟨a bu ing ⟩ for the phrase a(m)buing ‘my mother’. The cross appears a bove the 
headline in anticipation of the incorrectly ordered text to indicate the error and prompt the reader to 
read the aksaras in a different order. This is not the same use to which such crosses appear to have been 
put in Javanese and Balinese manuscripts, where they serve simply to indicate the presence of a mistake 
indicated by other means (van der Meij 2017:328). 
 
Figure I.13. f.12v.4: ⟨aX ing bu⟩, an error for a(m)buing. A cross has been used to indicate that two aksaras should be 
swapped. 
The third method of correction employed by the MS Jav. b.3. (R) scribe was to convert one aksara into 
another by adding strokes. The resulting text can present difficulties in reading, although context usually 
makes these surmountable. A pair of examples can be seen in Figure I.14:

--- PAGE: 83 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
70 
 
 
Figure I.14. L-R: f.15v.3 (<gu> converted into <ku>) and f.18r.3 (<pa> turned into <ma>). 
* 
I.2.5 The Second Hand 
 The description above concerns the dominant hand in Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R), but another , 
seemingly younger, hand occurs in what appears to be a piece of off -hand interlinear commentary on 
the left-hand side of f.17r in between the second and third lines (Figure I.15). This pair of octosyllabic 
lines has yet to be conclusively deciphered and does not appear in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006). I 
believe it is a more recent hand than that found in the rest of the text, although it is hard to be certain of 
that. It is nonetheless clear that it was added by a different scribe after the completion of the main text. 
 
Figure I.15. The interlinear commentary on f.17r. The two parts are in fact placed above the same headline; I have stacked 
them for reasons of space, and to separate the text into the component octosyllabic lines. 
 My interpretation of these lines was arrived at in collaboration with Sundanese scholars Aditia 
Gunawan of the PNRI, Ilham Nurwansah of the Dreamsea Project, and Panji Topan Bahagia, an amateur 
scholar based in Garut . After making contact on Twitter, I alerted Panji to the existence of these 
interstitial lines and sought his help in understanding them. Within hours he had produced an 
interpretation of the line as a commentary on Bujangga Manik’s rejection of the female ascetic in lines 
860-868, which he posted to Facebook, where the discussion continued. I believe this interpretation to 
be accurate, although the details are confusing and it took us a while to arrive at a satis factory 
transliteration. The decipherment hinges on the first word, hurung ‘glowing, blazing up’ (Rigg 
1862:152.6), which echoes the poem’s notion of romance between men and women as as inevitable as 
a fire spreading to dry thatch.  Ilham Nurwansah noted th at there are punctuation marks for the 
octosyllabic lines; Gunawan pointed out that the third aksara is almost certainly ⟨tə⟩ te ‘not’; I

--- PAGE: 84 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
71 
 
contributed the interpretation of the final word in the first section as ngalérén, from OJv aleren ‘to stand 
still, stop, halt, rest, dwell’ (OJED 1022:7.1). Some problems remain, however. 
Several of the graphemes can be compared to those found in the rest of the text ; the seventh 
and twelfth aksaras closely resemble aksara ⟨nga⟩ as found in other Old Sundanese texts, including the 
rest of MS Jav. b.3. (R) (Figure I.16). I believe, too, that the confusing portion near the end of the second 
line is ⟨ra ra⟩, two aksara ⟨ra⟩ in succession (Figure I.17). 
 
Figure I.16. A comparison of aksara ⟨nga⟩ in the main text of Bodleian MS Jav. b.3. (R) (right) with what appears to me to 
be the same character in the interstitial line on f.17r (left). 
 
Figure I.17. A comparison of what appear to be doubled aksara ⟨ra⟩ in both the main text of MS Jav. b.3. (R) (right) and the 
interstitial line in f.17r (left). 
After we had identified the first two words in the second line as ⟨ku nga ing ⟩ ku ngaing ‘by me’, it 
became clear that the final word would have to be a passive verb, meaning that what appears to be ⟨de⟩ 
is probably ⟨di⟩ instead. Other problem areas are the ⟨hen na⟩ in the first line and the ⟨kah⟩ at the end; 
one would expect ⟨-ken⟩ to be the  final syllable  of this phrase – the same formula, ku ngaing 
dirarasaken, appears in BM 862 and BM 1301. 
I tentatively decipher the lines as: 
⟨hu rung te he n. na nga lé ré n. · ku nga ing de ra ra sa kah⟩ 
hurung te hen na ngalérén. · ku ngaing d(i)rarasak(en) 
With some accounting for the possibility of poor grammar and penmanship, I translate it as follows: 
‘the burning does not abate · I have experienced it’ 
Again, this appears to be a comment on the metaphoric treatment of lust in Bujangga Manik. A more 
precise interpretation eludes us all at present, in any case. 
*

--- PAGE: 85 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
72 
 
I.2.6 Comparing Old Sundanese Scripts 
 Sundanese writing culture has been nothing if not diverse. The language has been written in a 
number of different scripts  in addition to the one outlined above , including pégon, a variant of the 
Arabic script initially developed for writing Javanese (eighteenth and nineteenth centuries); cacarakan, 
a form of the modern Javanese alphasyllabary (eighteenth and nineteenth centuries); the Roman 
alphabet (nineteenth century to the pr esent); and finally a codified form of Old Sundanese script 
developed in the 1990s by a committee in West Java and now used alongside the Roman alphabet on 
road signs and for a limited range of other official purposes. The ‘Old Sundanese’ script(s) is/are defined 
in opposition to these. 
The scripts used to write the Old Sundanese language are rather diverse themselves, however, 
and there is more to them than the simple appellation of ‘Old Sundanese script’ may suggest.  Below I 
will argue that Bujangga Manik is written in a unique hand of the Sundanese uncharcoaled inscribed 
lontar script that was created from a hybrid of forms taken from the script represented on the Kawali 
stones and the Sundanese inked gebang script respectively. These forms have all been treated in the 
past as variants of ‘Old Sundanese’ script,  and while it may be true in a Ship -of-Theseus sense that 
these are ‘the same’ script, they are sufficiently different in practical terms to justify separate treatment 
and classification. I will explain this below. 
What Makes a Script a Script? 
 Scholars of Indonesian palaeography have historically had a propensity to ‘lump’ rather than 
‘split’53 when classifying writing systems  – see, for instance, the eclectic collection  of scripts and 
writing systems labelled ‘Kawi’ in J. G. de Casparis’s landmark Indonesian Palaeography (1975). 
These scripts are  ‘the same’ in that their formal properties (i.e. being alphasyllabaries, using similar 
grapheme inventories) are the same, but they are very often not ‘mutually intelligible’, in the sense that 
being able to sight-read one would not necessarily allow one to be able to read others – surely a basic 
heuristic for distinguishing hands or scripts. 54  ‘Kawi’ is a misleading label and it gives a false 
impression of the uniformity and legibility of pre -colonial Javanese texts; ‘Old Sundanese’ is only 
marginally better. Tim Behrend makes a similar point with regard to the modern forms of so -called 
‘Javanese script’: the diversity of styles 
‘almost makes it seem that “Javanese Script” is in fact the name of a family of scripts, and not 
just one. Indeed, certain forms or styles of the so-called Balinese, Sasak, and Madurese scripts 
 
53 See Simpson (1945:22-23) for the distinction between ‘lumpers’ and ‘splitters’. 
54 Mutual intelligibility is a problematic way to differentiate languages and dialects because it is affected by 
other factors, like attitude and prior exposure, and the mutual intelligibility of scripts is surely subject to the 
same issues. As a basic first-order heuristic, however, it seems sound: Can you read this script based on your 
knowledge of that script? How long does it take to acquire competence in it? How secure is your interpretation?

--- PAGE: 86 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
73 
 
might be easier for some literate Javanese to read than select ed examples of “Javanese” script 
originating from a distant place or time’ (Behrend 1996:162). 
 In European palaeography the criteria for naming and differentiating scripts are more strictly 
applied, and I suggest that they be studied as models for research on Southeast Asian writing systems; 
the terminology and precision employed allows for circumvention of the vexing question of the 
definitions of ‘script’ vs ‘hand’ (etc.) per se. Scripts and hands are defined according to a variety of 
still-unstandardised typologies and the names employed in such systems can be unwieldy – e.g. littera 
gothica cursiva anglicana documentaria media ‘an English [late-]fourteenth century cursive […] of a 
type used for both documents and books, of medium quality’ (Brown 1993:96 ) – but they are at least 
attempts to accurately characterise the range of types that can be encountered without excessive 
‘lumping’. These scripts are defined according to the size of the minims, the thickness of ascenders and 
descenders, the arrangement on the page, and even the flatness or otherwise of the ‘feet’ of the letters 
(see e.g. Brown 1993:82) – and such fine differentiations assist in the accurate dating of text and in the 
study of the social lives of scripts and hands (which blanket categories like ‘Kawi’ obscure). 
Old Sundanese Script(s) and Hands 
I would therefore suggest along these lines that a category as capacious as ‘Old Sundanese 
script’ is rather useless for scholarly purposes. At least two broad categories of ‘Old Sundanese’ script 
are differentiated by scholars: Lontar script, the kind cut into lontar (Borassus flabellifer) leaves, as in 
MS Jav. b.3. (R), and gebang script, a type written with pen-and-ink on the leaves of the gebang palm 
(Corypha utan). This corresponds to the distinction Ekadjati (1996:106) makes between ‘square’ and 
‘rounded’ scripts respectively. That the distinction between the two was made in late -medieval and 
early modern Sunda is supported by the reference in Sanghyang Sasana Mahaguru (PNRI, L621, f.14v) 
mentioned above. That the two scripts were used contemporaneously is supported by the survival of at 
least one text, the Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (SSKK), in both lontar (PNRI, L624) and gebang 
versions (PNRI, L630). 
The gebang script is often called aksara Buda gunung or aksara Buda ‘(mountain) Buddhist 
script’, and variants of it are also found in some of the oldest surviving Old Javanese manuscripts ; 
indeed, a form of this script is preserved on the Gajah Mada inscription, a text inscribed in East Java in 
1351, strongly suggesting a Javanese origin. MS Jav. b.3. (R) uses an Old Sundanese lontar script, and 
these tend to vary in only minor ways , some of them summarised in Holle’s 1882 Tabel van oud- en 
nieuw-Indische alphabetten: In some cases (as with Jakarta, PNRI, L626 – Sanghyang Swawarcinta) 
the text has been charcoaled to enhance the aksaras, while in others (as with some of the Ciburuy 
manuscripts only now being digitised) the sandhangan are very different, with the panghulu 
(sandhangan -i), for example, being represented by two short horizontal strokes stacked one on top of

--- PAGE: 87 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
74 
 
the other. As the variation is nonetheless minor it seems fair to classify the Bujangga Manik script as 
an uncharcoaled Old Sundanese lontar script. 
It may be instructive to c ompare the script in MS Jav. b.3. (R)  described above with those in 
the figures  below. Figure I.18 shows one of the earliest known Old Sundanese texts, the Rumatak 
inscription (1411); Figure I.19 shows one of the inscriptions at Kawali in Ciamis, West Java, possibly 
dated to the fourteenth century; Figure I.20 is taken from a photograph of the first page of a Sundanese 
paper manuscript written at the beginning of the eighteenth century , identical to the ‘Old Sundanese’ 
type-script outlined by Undang Darsa (see above); and Figure I.21 is a photograph of an excerpt from 
the gebang manuscript of Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian, dated 1518. All four of the script-forms 
in these images have been referred to as ‘Old Sundanese script’  in the past , although it should be 
apparent that they are visually distinct and ‘mutually incomprehensi ble’: I suspect it  would not be 
possible to read them all satisfactorily armed only with the description of the Bujangga Manik script 
above. 
 
Figure I.18. The text on the Rumatak inscription of 1333 Śaka. Adapted from Leiden, UBL, KITLV 162747. 
 
Figure I.19. The Kawali III inscription: sanghiyang lingga hyang. Adapted from Leiden, UBL, KITLV 87616.

--- PAGE: 88 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
75 
 
 
Figure I.20. Part of the first page of Carita Waruga Guru (Leiden, UBL, Jav. MS No. 74) – an eighteenth-century inked Old 
Sundanese manuscript written in what appears to be an adaptation of the lontar script (Pleyte 1913:362). 
 
 
Figure I.21. A section of text from the gebang manuscript of Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (1518). Leiden, UBL, 
KITLV 162235. 
The materials on which the texts were written differ: The Rumatak inscription is cut into a piece of 
andesite, as are the Kawali texts; Carita Waruga Guru is written in ink on daluwang (paper mulberry 
bark); and this manuscript of Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian is written on gebang leaves. The 
differences between the scripts run deeper than this, however, and the variation in the forms of the ‘Old 
Sundanese scripts’ cannot be explained by attempts at writing the ‘same script’ on different surfaces. 
This can be seen in Table I.10, which shows the lontar script in MS Jav. b.3. (R) (fifth column) in side-
by-side comparison with the gebang script from Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (fourth column); 
the script on the probably fourteenth-century Kawali stones (which is incidentally very s imilar to the 
script on the Kebantenan copperplates – third column); and the script on the Batutulis inscription from 
Bogor (dated 1333 CE, and similar to the Rumatak type – second column): 
Table I.10. A comparison of the graphemes in the Batutulis and Kawali inscriptions with those in MS Jav. b.3. (R), complete 
with equations of the components employed in the latter. 
Grapheme Batutulis Bogor Kawali SSKK (gebang) MS Jav. b.3. (R) 
ka 
 
  
  
  
ga

--- PAGE: 89 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
76 
 
nga 
 
  
  
  
ca 
 
  
  
  
ja 
 
  
  
  
ña 
 
  
  
  
ta 
 
  
  
  
da 
 
  
  
  
na 
 
  
  
  
pa 
 
  
  
  
ba 
 
  
  
  
ma 
 
  
  
  
ya 
 
  
  
  
ra 
 
  
  
  
la 
 
  
  
 
wa 
 
  
  
  
sa 
 
  
  
  
ha 
 
  
  
  
k 
 
_ -

--- PAGE: 90 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
77 
 
ca 
(pasangan) 
_ _ 
 
  
na 
(pasangan) 
_ _ 
 
  
ba 
(pasangan) 
_ _ 
 
  
ma 
(pasangan) 
_ _ 
 
  
ya 
(pasangan) 
 
  
 
  
wa 
(pasangan) 
 
_ 
 
  
re 
 
  
 
 
le _ _ 
 
 
tra _ _ 
 
  
mpa – – 
 
  
a 
 
  
  
  
é – _

--- PAGE: 91 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
78 
 
i 
 
  
 
 
o _ _ 
 
  
u – 
 
  
  
-i 
 
  
  
 
-e – 
 
  
  
-u 
 
  
  
  
-é 
 
  
  
  
-o 
 
  
  
  
-ng 
 
  
  
  
-h _ 
 
  
  
-r _ 
 
 
 
-r- 
 
_ 
 
  
-ø

--- PAGE: 92 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
79 
 
panolong / 
avagraha 
_ _ 
 
  
0 _ _ 
 
  
 
It should be clear, then, that the ‘Old Sundanese’ scripts used to write Old Sundanese were not 
all of one type, and should be distinguished carefully. In the case of MS Jav. b.3. (R) we are dealing 
with a particular hand of lontar script, whose proximate origins I will now attempt to disentangle.55 
Origins of the Lontar Script 
Comparison of the graphemes in Table I.10  suggests that MS Jav. b.3. (R)’s lontar script is a 
hybrid. Some of BM’s aksaras closely resemble those on the Kawali stones (specifically ⟨nga ca da na 
ya ra sa a ⟩ and some of the sandhangan) while others appear to be derived from forms found in the 
gebang script (including ⟨ka ga ta ba ha é⟩). There are some differences in grapheme inventory between 
these scripts, too; the gebang script has equivalents for all the graphemes employed in the lontar script 
(as well as some not noted in the table above, including very occasional retroflex consonants), but the  
avagraha is absent from the script used in the Kawali inscriptions. The MS Jav. b.3. (R) script has an 
angular uniformity not present in the other scripts, and many of the zig-zagging elements repeat across 
different aksaras. 
I suggest that the script in MS Jav. b.3. (R) is the product of a fusion of forms from both the 
Kawali and gebang scripts (or scripts similar to these), with the resulting forms ‘standardised’ through 
the use of the same or similar strokes and components across the script. The Kawali-type script appears 
to be the source for most of the aksaras in the lontar script; this was probably originally used for writing 
on lontar leaves, as it also appears with few differences on the Kebantenan copperplates (see  Hunter 
1996:Fig.11), and it  probably developed locally in Sunda over the course of the Middle Ages, 
presumably from Javanese precedents . Hunter (1996:10) suggests that this early Sundanese script 
‘probably evolved’ ultimately from a Central Javanese Kawi of the ninth century. It is notable that long 
vowels and retroflex and aspirated consonants had been lost from the grapheme inventory of Sundanese 
scripts by the time of the first Old Sundanese inscriptions in the fourteenth century. 
Other features of the lontar script are not found in the Ka wali-type script and seem to come 
from adaptations of the gebang script, which appears to have had a proximate origin in fourteenth -
 
55 A work on the origins and development of the Old Sundanese script(s) has just been completed by Eka 
Noviana (2020). This contains descriptions and analyses of the characters found on various media, including 
stone, bamboo, lontar, and gebang. Some features of her descriptions disagree with mine – her attribution of a 
sixteenth-century date to the Batutulis inscription, for instance – but either way I became aware of the work only 
after writing this section and shortly before submitting this thesis to the examiners.

--- PAGE: 93 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
80 
 
century East Java , as mentioned above.  The aksaras ⟨ka ga ta ⟩ in the lontar script all have a 
characteristic component on the right-hand side, and it seems that this results from an attempt to write 
the gebang form of these characters on lontar using the same ductus (Figure I.22): 
 
Figure I.22. Three aksaras ⟨ka⟩, ⟨ga⟩, and ⟨ta⟩ in different texts. From L to R: (1) as inscribed into the Gajah Mada 
inscription (East Java, 1351 CE – Leiden, UBL, OD-741a); (2) as found in the aksara Buda gunung or gebang script; and (3) 
the variants used in MS Jav. b.3. (R). 
This would appear to explain the appearance of these aksaras, and it suggests that the lontar script as 
found in MS Jav. b.3. (R) represents a conscious amalgam of these two scripts. 
 That is not the complete story, however. The features on the left-hand side of ⟨ga⟩ and ⟨ta⟩, for 
instance, do not seem to have resulted simply from attempts to write the gebang versions on lontar. It 
will be noted that the left-hand component in ⟨ta⟩ is the same as the panéléng, and that it is also found 
in the aksaras ⟨ba⟩, ⟨le⟩, ⟨ña⟩, and others (Figure I.23); the leftmost component in ⟨ga⟩ is identical to 
the form of the pamaéh; and ⟨ra⟩, ⟨sa⟩, and the right-hand side of ⟨ba⟩ all share a component that looks 
like a barred ‘7’. These components repeat throughout the script, accounting for the apparent uniformity 
of the letters used in MS Jav. b.3. (R) and for the aesthetic consistency of the script as a whole. 
 
Figure I.23. The same component appearing on the left-hand side in various graphemes of the MS Jav. b.3. (R) script. L-R: 
ña, ta, ba, ya, panéléng. 
I suggest that the Old Sundanese scripts were the products of deliberate attempts at standardisation by 
scholars in medieval Sunda , first by excising characters unnecessary for  the writing of Sundanese 
(retroflexes, long vowels, and the like) and secondly by combining aksaras from multiple scripts, 
rearranging their strokes and components to ensure an evenness of form and style. 
*

--- PAGE: 94 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
81 
 
In my view, therefore, the dominant MS Jav. b.3. (R) writing system makes use of a unique hand of Old 
Sundanese uncharcoaled inscribed lontar script, a family of scripts which resulted from the apparently 
deliberate standardisation of the fusion of a Kawali-type script (which probably developed locally in 
Sunda from Central Javanese-era precedents) with forms adapted for the lontar writing surface from 
the inked gebang or Buda gunung script (which probably developed in East Java in the fourteenth 
century). It was written left -to-right into the manuscript’s leaves using a  pangot, and differs 
substantially in the forms of its graphemes and the sounds they represented from scripts then in use in 
Central and East Java. Though manuscripts of this sort appear to have been intended for public recitation 
and were less highly valued than their  gebang counterparts, the script used in Bujangga Manik  
nonetheless appears to have been the product of a fascinating process of script development that 
occurred locally within Sunda in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 
 
I.3. Language 
In this section I will look at some of the features of the language used in Bujangga Manik. The intent is 
not to explain every divergence from modern Sundanese; Old Sundanese is not clearly the direct lineal 
ancestor of modern Sundanese and it appears to be a specific and somewhat-Javanised register that may 
or may not have corresponded well with the language spoken by ordinary people at the time . I hope 
instead to describe the language on its own terms such that someone new to the text – but perhaps with 
some understanding of Malay/Indonesian or a related language – could identify the parts of speech and 
common vocabulary items and make steps towards their own interpretations. I cannot hope to address 
all of the relevant features of the language, particularly the many affixes and the multifarious uses of 
reduplication, nor all of the ( sometimes exceptional) use cases in Bujangga Manik; for the former the 
reader should consult the literature discussed in I.3.1, and about the latter I hope there will be continued 
discussion in future works. I have noted some of the linguistic oddities in the notes to the translation in 
Part II. 
 I will begin with an overview of the features of Old Sundanese as encountered in Bujangga 
Manik before looking briefly at the origins of Sundanese and its relationships to other languages in the 
Austronesian language family. I will  then go over salient features of phonology and syntax, present 
some of the derivational affixes applied to nouns and verbs, discuss the poetics of Bujangga Manik, and 
provide a short overview of the greetings and other colloquial expressions used by the poem’s 
characters. The description of and principles behind my transliteration of the text can be found in the 
introduction to the transliteration and translation in Part II.

--- PAGE: 95 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
82 
 
I.3.1 Overview 
The language used in Bujangga Manik  is rather simple. Almost every line consists of an 
independent eight-syllable sentence comprising a verb and a subject, although some consist entirely of 
noun phrases or serialised verbs.  Subjects are frequently dropped.  Many of these lines are formulaic 
and are repeated throughout. The majority of lines are verb-initial, as in Old Javanese; this feature may 
have already been archaic when BM was composed, as word order in modern Sundanese  is generally 
SVO (as with modern Javanese and Malay). BM contains few if any complex sentences with multiple 
dependent clauses, and metrical lines are typically related to one another through parataxis.  There are 
also no compulsory inflections for tense, gender, evidentiality, or number, although an optional infix (-
ar-) can be applied to verbs and adjectives (and less commonly nouns) to denote a plural subject. As 
with most of its closest relatives, however, including Malay and Javanese, Sundanese makes use of  
several derivational affixes that can be applied to nouns, verbs, and adjectives, changing their valency, 
voice, or word class  (among much else) . There are significantly more of these in Sundanese than in 
Malay, however. 
Phonologically the Old Sundanese language differs slightly from modern Sundanese, notably 
in lacking the  vowel /ɤ/ (represented in modern Sundanese spelling as ⟨eu⟩). As noted in section I.2 
above, this vowel is not marked in the scripts used in Old Sundanese texts; as the script in BM appears 
to have been modified deliberately to more accurately reflect Sundanese phonology at the time, we may 
infer that the vowel itself was not present in the spoken language.  In any case, t he most significant 
difference between modern Sundanese and Old Sundanese is that modern Sundanese has two language 
levels – meaning that the vocabulary (and even syntax) used when speaking formally or to elders (basa 
lemes ‘refined language’) is different to that used when speaking informally or to those younger than 
oneself (basa kasar ‘rough language’) (see Anderson 1998). There is no indication that such language 
levels were in use when BM was composed, and indeed it has been suggested that  they only became 
part of ordinary Sundanese speech in the twentieth century (Müller-Gotama 2001:3). 
Resources for the study of Old Sundanese (OSd) are limited and, while glossaries of common 
OSd terms not found in MSd have been put together (e.g. Danasasmita et al. 1987:133-174; Noorduyn 
and Teeuw 2006:331-429), there is as yet no comprehensive dictionary of the language. Nor has  there 
been a complete grammatical survey, although the brief description in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:29-
112) covers many of the major points.  For the interpretation of OSd we are therefore reliant on 
dictionaries and descriptions of the modern languag e. Foremost among the  former are Danadibrata’s 
Kamus Basa Sunda (2006) and the Kamus Umum Basa Sunda (‘KUBS’ – Lembaga basa jeung sastra 
Sunda 2007), both Sundanese-Sundanese dictionar ies; Sierk Coolsma’s  Hollandsch-Soendaneesch 
woordenboek (‘Dutch-Sundanese d ictionary’ – 1913); Hardjadibrata (2003), a Sundanese -English 
dictionary; and Jonathan Rigg’s Dictionary of the Sunda Language of Java (1862), a Sundanese-English

--- PAGE: 96 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
83 
 
dictionary. Rigg’s dictionary does not appear to have been consulted by Noorduyn and Teeuw, but his 
interpretations occasionally appear to have greater value for the study of OSd  than those in other 
dictionaries, and the work has some ethnographic and historical value as well . No modern reference 
grammar of Sundanese has  yet been published, although there are a number of older or more limited 
descriptions, including Coolsma’s Soendaneesche spraakkunst (‘Sundanese grammar’ – 1904); 
Hardjadibrata’s analysis of Sundanese syntax (1985) ; Franz Müller -Gotama’s excellent-but-brief 
description of S undanese (2001); and Robins’ Sistem dan struktur bahasa Sunda  (‘The system and 
structure of the Sundanese language’ – 1983), a collection of essays on Sundanese grammar notable for 
its table of common affixes with examples (94-129). 
Comparative material from related languages is vital  in the absence of a complete Ol d 
Sundanese dictionary. The profusion of Old Javanese  (OJv) vocabulary in (and possible grammatical 
influence on) Old Sundanese means that OJv materials are  essential, particularly Zoetmulder’s Old 
Javanese-English Dictionary (OJED56 – 1982). Malay is close to Sundanese lexically and a number of 
words of Malay origin can be identified in BM (although the lexical and phonological similarities 
between the two languages make it difficult to conclusively identify loans). D ictionaries of Malay are 
also helpful, therefore, especially Wilkinson’s encyclop aedic 1932 Malay-English Dictionary.57 For 
Sanskrit terms I have relied upon Monier-Williams (1899), and for Tamil and other Dravidian languages 
I have used Burrow and Emeneau’s Dravidian Etymological Dictionary  (1984). A small number of 
loans from other languages are also present: The word masui ‘massoy’ (see section V.3.3) may be from 
a language of Southeast Seram or the Gorong Archipelago in Maluku, for instance (Roy Ellen, p.c.) , 
and there are also a few words of Arabic or Persian origin in the poem, including one, ke(r)tas ‘paper’, 
originally from Greek.  The Austronesian Comparative Dictionary  (ACD) compiled by Robert Blust 
and Stephen Trussel (2016 [2010]) 58 is also a useful resource, as it supplies comparative information 
that can assist in the interpretation of peculiar OSd forms not found in the modern language.  Used 
together these resources can strengthen our interpretations of OSd texts, including Bujangga Manik, but 
it should nonetheless be clear that these interpretations are at times tentative and contingent in the 
extreme. There is little doubt that the interpretation and translation of Bujangga Manik will change, in 
its details at least, as more work is done on other OSd material. 
 
 
 
56 Accessible online: Zoetmulder, P. J. 1982. Old Javanese-English dictionary. Leiden: KITLV. 
http://sealang.net/ojed/index.htm (accessed 03-07-2020). I found Willem van der Molen’s An Introduction to 
Old Javanese (2015) especially helpful as a concise overview. 
57 A searchable version is accessible online: Wilkinson, Richard James. 1932. A Malay-English dictionary. 
SEALang Library. http://sealang.net/malay/dictionary.htm (accessed 03-07-2020). 
58 Online edition: https://www.trussel2.com/acd (accessed 03-07-2020).

--- PAGE: 97 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
84 
 
I.3.2 Origins 
Sundanese is a member of the Austronesian (An) language family, one of the world’s primary 
language families. Austronesian probably originated on the island of Taiwan in the mid-Holocene, with 
a branch of it, now known as Malayo -Polynesian (MP), expanding into island Southeast Asia and the 
Pacific c.4200 BP  (as suggested by the a rchaeological evidence – Bellwood 2013:193-194). Every 
Austronesian language historically spoken outside of Taiwan is Malayo -Polynesian, including 
Sundanese, Malay, and Javanese as well as Hawaiian, Malagasy, and many others (for overviews of the 
family see Adelaar and Himmelmann 2005; Blust 2013; Kikusawa 2015). 
The relationships between the Malayo-Polynesian languages have yet to be fully worked out : 
Sundanese and most of the other languages of western Indonesia and Malaysia ha ve in the past been 
grouped in a proposed Western Malayo-Polynesian (WMP) family (as in Bellwood 1997:96-127), but 
the only characteristic appearing to unite this grouping was the use of a nasal prefix to form agent-focus 
or active verbs (e.g. Sundanese tanya > nanya ‘ask’). WMP has now been broken up, with some support 
instead given to a smaller clade called ‘Western Indonesian’ (WI) alongside a number of other separate 
branches (A. D. Smith 2017 a, 2017 b). The situation is clearer at a lower level. Sundanese is now 
grouped by most linguists within the Greater North Borneo (GNB) family proposed by Robert Blust 
(2010) and expanded upon by Alexander Smith (2017a). Sundanese is thus significantly more closely 
related to the Malayic languages, Cham, and the languages of northern B orneo than to Javanese, the 
language with which Sundanese has long shared the island of Java.  Under an earlier proposal by 
Alexander Adelaar (2005), the language  had been placed in a  branch called ‘Malayo -Sumbawan’, 
although Adelaar has now put his support behind GNB instead (2019). In Smith’s proposal Sundanese 
is a GNB language along with Malay, while Javanese occupies its own branch within Western 
Indonesian. (Under Adelaar’s Malayo-Sumbawan family Sundanese was also grouped with Malay and 
not Javanese.) 
The evidence for the Greater North Borneo proposal is principally lexical; for philological 
purposes this is important as it means evidence from Malay, certainly the best-known and best-studied 
of all the GNB languages, is likely to be helpful in r econstructing the meanings of hapaxes and 
problematic terms. Characteristic of GNB languages is the replacement of PAn *pitu ‘seven’ with tujuh, 
a feature of both Malay and Sundanese but not Javanese ( as in  OJv pitu) and also evident in Old 
Sundanese (e.g. BM 97). A reader of BM with knowledge of Malay/Indonesian will recognise many 
words in the text, including di ‘in, at’, datang ‘come’, and pañjang ‘long’, among many others. Malay 
and Sundanese are similar in other ways – forming patient-focus/passive verbs with the prefix di-, for 
instance, and using unmodified adjectives as stative verbs . Javanese has, however, had a significant 
influence on the development of Sundanese at several points in its history, and a large number of OJv 
loanwords are evident in Bujangga Manik.

--- PAGE: 98 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
85 
 
The term ‘Old Sundanese’ (OSd) is applied to a stage of the language represented by a written 
literature spanning the period c.1300-c.1700, roughly between the inscribing of the Batutulis stone and 
the introduction of new forms of modern-Javanese-influenced literatures in pégon and Javanese script 
in the eighteenth century, after which Old Sundanese appears to have fallen out of use. There are some 
differences between Old and modern Sundanese, including the aforementioned acquisition of the vowel 
/ɤ/ or ⟨eu⟩, but some formulae used in poetry recorded in modern times have almost exact parallels with 
formulae in Bujangga Manik and in other OSd texts.59 The line separating OSd and MSd is somewhat 
unclear, therefore, and OSd is perhaps defined more by the use of Sundanese script and the non-Islamic 
subject matter of the surviving texts than by strictly linguistic criteria. 
I.3.3 Phonology 
 Sundanese phonology is conservative, retaining m ost proto-Malayo-Polynesian phonemes 
unchanged (with the important exception of /w/, which underwent an interesting sound change  in 
prehistory). The phoneme inventory of Old Sundanese appears to have been essentially the same as that 
of Malay/Indonesian, and as represented in BM the language has six vowels and nineteen consonants 
including the glottal stop (which is not explicitly marked by the script  but whose presence may be 
inferred). No long vowels, aspirated stops, or retroflex consonants are found in the script used in MS 
Jav. b.3. (R), although they can occasionally be encountered in OJv and Skt loanwords in other OSd 
texts. (Whether they were pronounced according to their original values is not clear.) I have decided to 
omit them from the tables and disc ussion below, as this section is intended as a description of the 
language of Bujangga Manik rather than the OSd corpus as a whole. The phonemes that do appear in 
the poem are in any case laid out in Tables I.11 and I.12 using their IPA approximations; the symbols 
in angled brackets are the letters used to represent the phonemes in the transliteration. 
Table I.11. The consonants of Old Sundanese as found in Bujangga Manik. 
 Labial Alveolar Post-
alveolar/Palatal 
Velar Glottal 
Nasal m 
⟨m⟩ 
n 
⟨n⟩ 
ɲ 
⟨ñ⟩ 
ŋ 
⟨ng⟩ 
 
Voiceless plosive/affricate p 
⟨p⟩ 
t 
⟨t⟩ 
tʃ 
⟨c⟩ 
k 
⟨k⟩ 
ʔ  
Voiced plosive/affricate b 
⟨b⟩ 
d 
⟨d⟩ 
dʒ 
⟨j⟩ 
g 
⟨g⟩ 
 
Fricative  s 
⟨s⟩ 
  h 
⟨h⟩ 
 
59 Compare, for instance, BM 470-495 with the MSd poem in Rosidi (1995:146-148).

--- PAGE: 99 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
86 
 
Central approximant   j 
⟨y⟩ 
w 
⟨w⟩ 
 
Lateral approximant  l 
⟨l⟩ 
   
Trill  r 
⟨r⟩ 
   
 
Table I.12. The vowels of Old Sundanese as found in Bujangga Manik. 
 Front Central Back 
Close i 
⟨i⟩ 
 u 
⟨u⟩ 
Mid e 
⟨é⟩ 
ə 
⟨e⟩ 
o 
⟨o⟩ 
Open  a 
⟨a⟩ 
 
 
 The precise values of these phonemes at the time are unclear, and there have certainly been 
some changes in Sundanese pronunciation since the composition of the text, particularly with regard to 
nasalisation (see Müller-Gotama 2001:11) and vowels. All the vowels can appear initially, medially, 
and finally. Sequences of like vowels were probably separated by a glottal stop, as in MSd (Müller -
Gotama 2001:11), and vowels indicated in the script by aksara swara probably had underlying initial 
glottal stops (e.g. ruum [ruʔum]). MSd and OSd forms are often identical, but the vowels can differ 
unpredictably (as can the consonants, albeit less often). One could compare OSd deuk [dəʔuk] (BM 60) 
with MSd diuk ‘sit, be seated’, or, inverted, OSd bikas ‘hoist’ (BM 942) with MSd beukas [bɤkas] ‘go 
off, release ; mark, trace ’. Some of this unpredictable variability may be  due to  a combination of  
diachronic change, dialect differences, or  Javanese or Malay influence, but either way it means that 
some leeway must be given for interpretations of OSd hapax legomena. The word cugenang (BM 287), 
for example, is only attested in toponyms in MSd, but I suggest that it is related to MSd cungakang ‘lift 
something by its tip’, which has several variants, including cungkedang and cunggakang (Danadibrata 
2006:151; KUBS 100). Arguments such as these are not watertight, however, and further studies in 
Sundanese dialectology and historical phonology may change our understanding of these OSd texts 
considerably. 
 An interesting Sundanese sound change not shared by other MP languages is the development 
of PMP /*w/ into S undanese /tʃ/ (written ⟨c⟩), which is sometimes pre-nasalised. This occurs most 
notably in cai ‘water’ (and its proclitic form ci-), from PMP *wahiR ‘fresh water, river’ (ACD 5918).

--- PAGE: 100 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
87 
 
More work will be needed to understand the contexts in which the change occurred ; loanwords and 
dialect variants appear to confuse the issue and reflexes of the same protoform both exhibiting and not 
exhibiting the change can be found in MSd. The terms batang and catang occur in different contexts in 
modern Sundanese, for instance, and both come from the PMP root *b ataŋ ‘fallen tree, log’ (ACD 
6481), in the latter case by way of OJv wataṅ (OJED 2220:10). (This implies, incidentally, that the 
sound change occurred after Javanese began loaning words into Sundanese , although precisely when 
this occurred is difficult to ascertain.) The phoneme /w/ does occur in OSd and in BM, however; all 
such appearances seem  to be loans, most from OJv (but also warna ‘form, appearance’ [BM 1314], 
from Skt varṇa, and wedil ‘gun’ [BM 97], from Tamil veṭil [வெடில ்]).  
OSd syllable structure  is not substantially different from  that of  MSd ( nor from 
Malay/Indonesian, for that matter). With the exception of a number of polysyllabic loanwords, chiefly 
but not exclusively from Sanskrit (e.g.Skt ākāśa > akasa ‘sky’ [BM 1623]), most OSd words are built 
on disyllabic roots modified by derivational affixes (e.g. timur ‘east’ > nimurken ‘(going) eastwards’ 
[BM 1467]), as in MSd. Several monosyllabic words with a CV structure represent prepositions ( ti 
‘from’, di ‘in, at, on’, ka ‘to’, etc.), and some verbs are based on monosyllabic roots ( ser ‘spin, whirl’ 
[BM 1410]), although these are rare. Some monosyllabic words may be loanwords ( jong ‘large ship’, 
from OJv and possibly ultimately from Minnan Chinese), although this is not diagnostic. Syllables may 
end in glides or approximants (-w, -y), as in tuluy ‘then’ (BM 210), as well as in nasal stops, which are 
inconsistently marked in the script. The longest words in BM consist of five syllables (e.g. sapilaunan 
‘take care’ [BM 963]), although longer words can be encountered in other OSd texts (e.g. pikabuyutanen 
‘appropriate for putting in an archive’ in Sanghiyang Sasana Mahaguru, based ultimately on the root 
buyut ‘elder; relative three generations removed from ego [great-grandparent/great-grandchild]’). 
I.3.4 Syntax 
 A typical line of Bujangga Manik is both a syntactic and metrical unit consisting of an eight -
syllable sentence with a subject and a predicate. This is not true of all lines, however, as some consist 
of simple noun phrases with no complements, and the absence of the octosyllabic line marker ⟨·⟩ may 
in some cases indicate that multiple lines ought to be read together as a single unit. A metrical line may 
contain more than one sentence (hir na angin bar na layar ‘the wind rose, the sail swelled’ [BM 937]), 
but lines are rarely formally related to one another ; relationships between lines are largely paratactic. 
There are no inflections and relationships between arguments  are established through word order.  
Adjectives invariably follow the nouns they modify ( e.g. kamuning Keling ‘South Indian kamuning 
wood’ [BM 107]). The majority of lines are predicate-initial or VSO, as in Old Javanese and Tagalog 
(and in stark contrast to MSd [Müller-Gotama 2001:31]):

--- PAGE: 101 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
88 
 
(1.1) masang wedil tujuh kali 
 ACT-engage gun seven times 
 
 ‘The guns fired seven times’ (BM 97) 
The subject comes second and, if it is a pronoun, is frequently attached to the verb as an enclitic  or 
bound pronoun (subject to metrical requirements). Here is an example with the free 1.SG pronoun aing: 
(1.2) me(n)tas aing di Cikéñcal 
 ACT-cross I on Cikéñcal 
 
‘I crossed the Cikéñcal River’ (BM 134) 
And an example with the bound form -ing: 
(1.3) me(n)tasing di Cihaliwung 
 ACT-cross-1SG on Cihaliwung 
 
 ‘I crossed the Ciliwung River’ (BM 141) 
Serial verb constructions are common. These may violate the VSO principle outlined above, as with 
BM 873 (where we might expect dék aing numpang ka Bali):  
(1.4) aing dék nu(m)pang ka Bali 
 I want ACT-travel to Bali 
 
‘I want to travel to Bali’ 
There are a small number of other exceptions to the verb-initial sentence structure outlined above. This 
may be due to topicalisation (or possibly scribal error), but it is notable either way that such lines more 
closely correspond to MSd than OSd syntax . An example of SVO word order can be seen in  BM 965 
(sentence 1.5); here the reader/listener might expect to hear the pronoun aing ‘I, me’, and not siya ‘she, 
he it, they’, and it may be that the pronoun has been fronted for emphasis: 
(1.5) siya turun ti parahu 
 3PRON. descend from ship 
 
‘He left the ship’ (BM 965)

--- PAGE: 102 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
89 
 
Separating particles, like OJv ta and pun or the ma frequently encountered in OSd prose , are 
rare in BM outside of copula sentences.60 OSd has no copula verb, and the particle ta is used to separate 
copula subjects and complements: 
(1.6) itu ta bukit Caremay 
 that SEP.PART peak Caremay 
 
 ‘That is Mount Ciremai’ (BM 1196) 
As in OJv, however, this particle is not obligatory. It is left out if it would cause the line to exceed eight 
syllables: 
(1.7) itu Tangkuban Parahu 
 that Tangkuban Parahu 
 
‘That is Mount Tangkuban Parahu’ (BM 1203) 
The same applies to the optional definite article na, which precedes the noun (as in BM 937, mentioned 
above). Subject pronouns may likewise be dropped if the line is too long. 
 Existential sentences are created by the existential markers waya, aya, and anten ‘there is/are’, 
as in a(n)ten lewih ti sakitu  ‘there was more than that’ (BM 38 1). There are no postpositions, only 
prepositions, most but not all of them monosyllabic.  Verbs, nouns, and adjectives may all be negated 
by hante ‘no, not, without’ (see BM 62 4, 632, and 633 for examples of all three), or by hamo and its 
common short form mo ‘no, will not, in no way’. These negators immediately precede the negated: 
(1.8) na ura(ng) ha(n)te dibapa 
 DEF.ART person NEG. PASS-father 
 
 ‘The person without a father’ (BM 627) 
There is a single relative pronoun, nu ‘that, which, who’ (from PMP *anu ). I t is common 
throughout. Nu can be used without an antecedent to form a copula subject, as in nu ni(m)ba urang 
Kalapa ‘those who bailed were Kalapa people’ (BM 117). 
I.3.5 Nouns 
 Most of the nouns in Bujangga Manik comprise unmodified di- or trisyllabic roots, although 
they are subject to a complex set of derivational affixes (see Robins 1983:94-129 for a list and Müller-
Gotama 2001:12-26 for analysis of MSd derivational morphology). T here are affixes that turn verbs 
 
60 See van der Molen (2015:6-7) for separating particles in OJv.

--- PAGE: 103 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
90 
 
into nouns or nouns into different kinds of nouns (e.g. buyut ‘elder, grandfather’ > ka-buyut-an 
‘sanctuary, archive’), and nouns can be made into verbs by applying affixes as well, particularly the 
passive (PASS) prefixes di- and ka- and allomorphs of the pre-nasalised active/agent-focus (ACT) affix 
described below. Active verbs formed from nouns can themselves be transformed into nouns; pani(m)ba 
‘bailer, scoop’ in BM 93 3, for instance,  is formed from nimba ‘to bail, scoop  (ACT)’, which in turn 
comes from timba ‘bucket, pail’. Reduplication of roots does not usually indicate pluralisation, although 
initial syllable reduplication (jojo(m)pong ‘hairdo’ < jompong ‘mane (of a horse) [BM 257]) is common 
with both verbs and nouns  with a range of different possible meanings  (see Robins 1983:111 for 
examples). Pluralisation is instead marked on verbs and adjectives by the optional infix -ar-. As in MSd, 
nouns are followed by modifiers, whether nouns or adjectives, and possessive pronouns can be attached 
to nouns as enclitics. Nouns can be preceded by an optional definite article na (for which see Noorduyn 
and Teeuw 2006:53-59). 
 The noun affixes are summarised in Table I.13 and illustrated with examples from BM; several 
of these can be applied to both nouns and verbs and, as Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:42) note, it can be 
difficult to say whether a verb or noun is intended due to the ‘poetical compactness’ of OSd texts. The 
list has been taken in large part from Robins (1983) and Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:33); a number of 
the affixes discussed in those works are absent from BM, and Table I.13 shows only those that appear 
in the text: 
Table I.13. A summary of common noun affixes in Bujangga Manik. 
Affix Example Function & Notes 
-an jajah ‘inspect on foot, examine’ > jajahan ‘district, 
territory’ (BM 713) 
Most frequently used to 
form nouns from verbal 
roots, although it can be 
applied to nouns as well. 
-en tuñjuk ‘point, show’ > tu(ñ)juken ‘way/means of showing’ 
(BM 1292) 
Similar to pi-…-en – 
‘something to be used as 
something, serve as, be 
used as’. 
ka-…-an datu ‘chief, king’ > kadatuan ‘palace’ (BM 237) Used to make nouns from 
other nouns, verbs, or 
adjectives. 
paN- esi ‘content’ > pangesi ‘inhabitant, something contained’ 
(BM 1605) 
Can be applied to both 
nouns and nasalised verbs  
to make concrete nouns. 
pa-…-an panday ‘blacksmith’ > Papa(n)dayan ‘place of 
blacksmiths’ (a mountain – BM 1177) 
Forms abstract nouns from 
adjectives and nouns ; 
common in toponyms, 
where it means ‘place of x’ 
(e.g. Pakuwukan ‘place of 
wild cats’).

--- PAGE: 104 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
91 
 
paN-…-an impi ‘to dream > pangi(m)piyan ‘a dream, dreaming’ (BM 
649) 
The activity of, ‘…-ing’ 
pi-…-an laun ‘gentle’ > sapilaunan ‘take care (?)’ (BM 963) Rare and obscure in OSd  – 
this is the only example in 
BM. Robins (1983:118 -
119) notes only the use of 
this circumfix to make 
locations from other nouns 
(e.g. pianakan ‘womb’ < 
anak ‘child’). See also 
Noorduyn and Teeuw 
(2006:43). 
pi-…-en kaén ‘cloth’ > pikaénen ‘textiles, material to be used as 
cloth’ (BM 506) 
‘Something to be used 
as/for something else’ 
sa- dalem ‘palace’ > sadalem ‘the whole palace’ (BM 8) ‘the whole…’ , ‘one…’; 
‘wearing a…’; etc. 
 
 Modern Sundanese personal pronouns vary by number and politeness but not gender, and they 
are frequently multisyllabic, especially the polite ( lemes) variants . The polite  third-person singular 
pronoun, for instance,  is manéhna, lit. ‘its/her/his self’, formed by modifying manéh ‘self’ with the 
third-person singular bound pronoun -na; the third-person plural, maranéhna ‘they’ (lit. ‘their selves’), 
uses the same form modified by the plural infix -ra-. In OSd, however, the situation is rather different, 
and the personal/possessive pronouns used in BM and other OSd texts, seemingly in formal or honorific 
situations, would now be considered kasar (‘rough’) speech. These pronouns are not marked for gender 
and can have both singular and plural referents.  The free forms are summarised in Table I.1 4 and the 
more limited bound forms, found as enclitics, are shown in Table I.1 5. The latter type can be used to 
indicate possession ( anaking ‘my child’) but they more  commonly signify the subject of the verb to 
which they are attached (ngalalaring ka ‘I passed through’ [e.g. BM 783]). 
Table I.14. Old Sundanese free pronouns as they appear in Bujangga Manik. 
Person Singular Plural 
1 aing, kami urang, kami 
2 siya, kita kita 
3 siya, iña 
 
Table I.15. Old Sundanese bound pronouns as they appear in Bujangga Manik. 
Person Singular Plural 
1 -ing -rang 
3 -na, -ana

--- PAGE: 105 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
92 
 
Kami and kita are found in OJv with the same meanings. Urang, meaning ‘person/people’, is 
also used as a personal and possessive first-person plural pronoun ‘we/our’, as in the title taan urang 
‘our lord/lady’  (BM 30 8). Iña occurs more frequently with the meaning ‘there’ ( di iña ) than as a 
personal pronoun, but it does appear in BM in its pronominal sense (e.g. BM 1625: iña nu ngingetken 
rasa ‘they who reflect upon (their) feelings’). Kami appears only twice, kita eleven times, and siya 
fourteen times under both its second- and third-person meanings. It is possible that aing could also be 
a first-person plural pronoun; BM 96, bijil aing ti muhara ‘I emerged from the harbour’, for instance, 
may make more sense if we take aing as referring to the ship on which the ascetic is travelling and its 
crew. I have invariably translated aing as ‘I, me’, however, as this seems to be its usual meaning. As in 
MSd the bound 3SG pronoun -na has an allomorph, -ana, which is used after the noun suffix -an (e.g. 
dayehan ‘settlement’ > dayehanana ‘its/their residence’). 
A final point on aing/-ing: OSd does not have an arealis form, unlike OJv, which forms arealis 
clauses through the application of the suffix -a to nouns, verbs, or adjectives indiscriminately (van der 
Molen 2015:32-34). As far as I know, this is not found in OSd.  A small number of  BM’s sentences, 
however, have a cliticised 1SG pronoun -éng rather than the usual -ing in contexts where an arealis 
meaning would be appropriate . An example of this may be found in hidepéng karah mo waya  ‘I had 
thought there would not be’ (BM 971), where hidep is an OJv loan (from hiḍĕp ‘the mind as the seat of 
cognition’ [OJED 623:1]) – but the form is found with native OSd words as well, as in lamun diturut 
carékéng ‘if my words be followed’ (BM 55 1, 580). It is possible that the -éng is the result of elision 
via sandhi (à la OJv) of the OSd bound 1SG pronoun -ing and the OJv arealis suffix -a. An arealis 
interpretation is speculative but it is otherwise rather hard to explain this phenomenon; aing is not 
regularly contracted to éng outside of such contexts. 
I.3.6 Verbs 
 As noted above, verbs can be formed from nouns and adjectives through the use of affixes , a 
reasonably thorough discussion of which can be found in Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:32 -40). There 
are many possible modifications to verb roots; most increase valency or change the meaning of the verb 
rather than adding information about tense, gender, evidentiality, or number (with the exception of the 
aforementioned -ar- infix). The most important distinction is between pa ssive and a ctive affixes.61 
Transitive verbs may be made definitively passive by adding the prefixes di- or ka- or the circumfixes 
di-…-an or ka-…-an to the root; in MSd the latter is more common than ka-, which is notably similar 
to the OJv passive prefix, but all four can be found in BM. Di- is the most common of these. As can be 
seen in Table I.17 below, di- also has a variant (there labelled di-2) which can be applied to intransitives, 
rendering them stative verbs, although the most common use of the prefix is in forming passive verbs. 
 
61 Although it could be argued these affixes indicate patient-focus and agent-focus verb forms respectively, the 
passive/active terminology is standard in studies of Sundanese grammar (e.g. Müller-Gotama [2001:31-33]).

--- PAGE: 106 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
93 
 
The agents of passive verbs can be added with the preposition ku ‘by’ (e.g. didulur ku pupur kapur ‘be 
accompanied by limestone face powder’ [BM 382]); this preposition can also be used in the same sense 
with unmodified intransitives (e.g. bogoh ku nu mawa iña ‘be attracted by/admire those it carried’ [BM 
115]), implying that intransitives without affixes should be analysed as passive or patient-focused. With 
active verbs ku can also be used to mean ‘with’ or ‘by means of’, as in ngaburang ku ramo ‘make spikes 
with the fingers’ (BM 306). 
 Active verbs are typically formed by nasalisation of the initial consonant of the root after which 
other affixes may be added, including the transitiviser -ken (MSd: -keun).62 There are three allomorphs 
of this nasal prefix, summarised in Table I.15: 
Table I.16. The nasalised verbal affix in Bujangga Manik. 
Morpheme Allomorphs Sounds Affected Examples 
N- replacement by the 
homorganic nasal 
initial voiceless stops and 
affricates and /s/: 
c-, k-, p-, s-, t- 
carék > nyarék 
kahanan > ngahanan 
pecat > mecat 
sebut > nyebut 
temu > nemu 
nga- voiced stops (b, d, g, j) and 
h, l, r, w, (y)* 
burang > ngaburang 
dangdanan > ngadangdanan 
giling > ngagiling 
jajar > ngajajar 
husir > ngahusir 
laan > ngalaan 
rasa > ngarasa 
wastu > ngawastu 
 
ng- initial vowels adeg > ngadeg 
ukir > ngukir    etc. 
* y- > ngay- is unattested in Bujangga Manik. 
If initial vowels are taken to have a preceding glottal stop in OSd then the last category in Table I.15 
should be included within the first, i.e. as having their glottal stops replaced by the homorganic nasal 
/ŋ/. MSd analyses (Hardjadibrata 1985; Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:33) typically treat them separately, 
however. In any case, there are several exceptional cases that would appear to violate the rules outlined 
in Table I.16, including maca < baca ‘to read’ and mangkat < angkat ‘to depart’ (see Noorduyn and 
Teeuw 2006:33 for more); most of these appear to be OJv loans. Another rarer method of forming active 
or agent-focus sentences is the infix -um-; this is also found in OJv, and at least some of the cases in 
which it appears in BM seem to be OJv loans as well: gumanti ‘on the contrary’ (BM 97 3) from OJv 
 
62 This nasalisation of active/agent-focus verbs is the closest Sundanese gets to inflection. Müller-Gotama 
(2001:19-20) nonetheless argues that it ought properly to be considered derivational.

--- PAGE: 107 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
94 
 
‘replace, succe ed’ (OJED 489:8.2), for example , or gumilap ‘gleam, glisten ’ (BM 1782  – OJED 
525:4.1). 
 An interesting  structure found in both OSd and MSd uses benang (MSd beunang) ‘result, 
product; get’ with a nasalised verb to create a passive meaning – e.g. li(ñ)car benang ngaj(e)rinang ‘the 
skirting boards were painted red (with dragon’s blood’) (BM 152). In BM and other OSd texts we also 
find batri filling the role of benang in such sentences, as in batri mauc di haregu ‘worked by stroking 
on the breastbone’ (BM 476). Batri seems to have no direct equivalent in MSd, although Danasasmita 
et al. (1987:136) suggest that it carries an implication of effort and fatigue, and Aditia Gunawan (p.c.) 
proposes a relationship with MSd bati ‘profit’. 
The list of verbal affixes in Table I.17 below is taken from Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:32-33), 
Hardjadibrata (1985), Müller -Gotama (2001), and Robins (1983) . Examples are all taken from BM. 
Affixes addressed in detail above are omitted from the table. 
Table I.17. A summary of common verbal affixes in Bujangga Manik. 
Affix Example Notes 
di-2 tapa ‘asceticism, seclusion’ > ditapa ‘be in 
seclusion, practise asceticism’ (BM 841)  
A ‘stative’ verb formed from an 
intransitive. This is a rare affix 
but it is  also found in MSd  (e.g. 
digawé ‘(be at) work’). 
di-…ken tinggal ‘remain, be left’ > diti(ng)galken ‘leave 
(something) behind’ (BM 90) 
-ken acts as a transitiviser, 
increasing the valency of the 
verb. A variant involves the 
reduplication of the first syllable 
of the root : dinanagaken ‘be 
formed into the shape of a 
dragon (naga)’ (BM 899). 
N-…-ken inget ‘awareness, memory’ > ngingetken ‘reflect 
upon (something)’ (BM 1625) 
The active/agent -focus form of 
the type above. 
di-…-an tali ‘rope, cordage’ > ditalian ‘be tied up with’ 
(BM 365) 
The -an suffix appears to have 
several uses. See Noorduyn and 
Teeuw (2006:37). 
ka-…-an lempang ‘go, walk, travel’ > kale(m)pangan ‘to 
have been walked by’ (BM 51) 
This forms resultative passives. 
ba- layar ‘sail’ > balayar ‘to sail’ (BM 95) This form may  have been a  
Malay loan, taken from the ber- 
prefix in Malay (cf. the ba- for 
ber- in the Tanjung Tanah 
manuscript [Kozok 2015; Mahdi 
2015]). The root goes back to 
PAn *layaR (Bellwood 
2013:208n50). 
mi- dua ‘two’ > midua ‘to part’ (BM 952) 
dadampar ‘seat’ > midada(m)par ‘be supplied with 
seats’ (BM 907) 
This is the active/agent -focus 
derivation of pi-, the functions of

--- PAGE: 108 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
95 
 
which are multifarious and often 
obscure. 
dipi- kingkila ‘sign, omen’ > dipikingkila ‘be taken as 
the sign to do something’ (BM 939) 
A variant with -ken is found in 
other OSd texts (but not in BM). 
In BM dipi- seems to mean ‘be 
taken as (something)’. 
mang-…-ken bongbong ‘an opening made in the jungle’ > 
ma(ng)mongbongken ‘to (do something so as to) 
open up the jungle’ (BM 617) 
Still somewhat mysterious  in 
OSd. Coolsma (1904:80 -81) 
suggests that  it means ‘to do 
something on behalf of  
something else’. 
ñang-…-ken wétan ‘east’ > ñangwétanken ‘to walk eastwards’ 
(BM 242) 
Also occurs without -ken. It 
seems to refer to movement in a 
particular direction. 
pa- jeeng ‘vision, seeing’ > pajeeng benget ‘see each 
other’s faces’ (BM 17) 
A reciprocal – ‘to [verb] each 
other’. 
sa- diri ‘leave’ > sadiri ‘having left’ (BM 24) Implies completed action , and 
may be related to the idea of  
wholeness expressed by the 
equivalent noun prefix sa-. Cf. 
Malay se-. 
Root 
reduplication 
+ …-en 
tépok ‘to pat’ > tépok-tépoken ‘to pet each other’ 
(BM 326) 
Also a reciprocal, apparently an 
affectionate one. 
 
 Finally, a number of common verbs in Bujangga Manik form phrasal verbs with prepositions. 
These phrases are invariant and are used in formulae which make up much of the poem. Cunduk ‘arrive’, 
datang ‘come’, nepi ‘approach’, ngahusir ‘proceed’, and ngalalar ‘pass through’ all take the preposition 
ka (lit. ‘to’); me(n)tas ‘cross’ and deuk ‘sit’ take di (lit. ‘in, at, on’); and diri ‘leave’ takes ti (lit. ‘from’). 
These prepositions and their complements follow the subject (if present), as in ngalalaring ka Larangan 
‘I passed through Larangan’ (BM 78 6). The poem’s focus on places and travel between them means 
that many of the formulaic lines found in BM are of this type. 
I.3.7 Metre and Poetics 
 Throughout this work I have referred to Bujangga Manik as a poem. It has no rhyme, however, 
nor a  consistent pattern of alliteration.  There are few parallelisms.  It is poetry or verse in that it is 
artificially constrained by rules that mark it off as different from ‘normal’ non-poetic language (as used 
in M. L. West 2007:26; cf. the poetry described in Fox 2005) – but even that is somewhat questionable. 
The poem’s only metrical requirement is that every line should be a largely independent unit of language 
(a sentence or noun phrase) comprising eight syllables. 63 It is difficult to draw an absolute distinction 
 
63 Compare the syntactic/metrical overlap described for Javanese kidungs by Gonda (1958).

--- PAGE: 109 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
96 
 
between poetry and prose in OSd literature; much of the Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian, a text 
commonly described as ‘prose’, in opposition to the ‘poetry’ of BM et al., is arranged into octosyllabic 
lines separated by interpuncts , and could thus be considered ‘poetic’  (although ‘violations’ of the the 
octosyllabic principle, if that is what they are, are considerably more common in SSKK and other 
‘prose’ works). It seems unlikely that the people of fifteenth -century Sunda actually spoke to one 
another using strict eight-syllable lines, however, and in that se nse the poetry of BM is likely to have 
been distinct from ordinary speech. The corollary is that ‘prose’ and ‘poetry’ are somewhat artificial 
categories when applied to OSd. 
 Was Bujangga Manik composed orally? Certainly it shows every sign of having been recited 
or intoned, and its octosyllabic structure is, as mentioned in the introduction, similar to that of modern 
carita pantun, which are  indeed orally transmitted  (cf. Lord 1987) . BM survives in written form, 
however, and while it draws on a tradition of telling stories infused with place and place names that 
must have oral antecedents ( see Part III), similar things could be said of most written literature.  BM 
appears to have been composed and/or set at a definite poin t in history  and t he gap between the 
composition and the copying of the surviving manuscript does not appear to have been large. It is even 
possible that the manuscript itself dates to the fifteenth century, when other surviv ing Sundanese  
manuscripts are k nown to have been copied. Whether it was originally transmitted orally or not  
therefore seems moot. 
 The text is made up of formulaic lines, though, and BM’s poetry is most evident when it is read 
aloud. Many of BM’s formulae also occur in other OSd texts that may or may not be of similar date and 
age, and some have parallels in MSd carita pantun . These are not limited to the aforementioned 
formulae based on verbs of motion ; others, including such seemingly obscure lines as diteñuh ku aér 
mawar ‘sprinkled with rose-water’ (BM 389, 502), also crop up elsewhere. A complete study of OSd 
formulae and their relationships with modern pantun has yet to be conducted, and such an end eavour 
may have to wait for the publication of more manuscript material. It seems likely, however, that most 
of BM’s lines can also be found in other Sundanese texts and oral compositions. 
* 
I.3.8 Greetings and Parting Phrases 
 The conversations that occur in BM are, with one exception, rather brief. Most involve the use 
of basic functional language – greetings and other phatic expressions . The most respectful of these 
greetings occurs when Jompong Larang visits Bujangga Manik’s mother, bringing gifts as a first step 
towards negotiating a marriage to her son . Jompong greets her prospective mother -in-law by saying  
sangtabé namasiwaya (BM 447); sangtabé is a Javanised form of the Sanskrit kṣāntavya ‘pardon me’ 
(OJED 903:8; Monier-Williams 1899:326 sub kshantavya), and namasiwaya is a Sundanisation of the

--- PAGE: 110 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
97 
 
the Śaivist mantra namaḥ Śivāya ‘salutations unto Śiva’. It is notable that the greeting used by one 
seemingly high -status Sundanese woman to speak to another (of even higher status) is Javanised 
Sanskrit. In BM 446 it is said that this expression is ‘entirely proper’ (sakayogyana). 
A more common greeting is samapun, which occurs six times (BM 318, 960, 962, 1019, 1634, 
1645). Like sangtabé, samapun means ‘forgiveness’ or ‘beg your pardon’; the first element is the Skt 
kṣamā ‘patience, forgiveness’ (OJED 902:6), and the second Sd pun, likewise meaning ‘forgive(ness)’ 
or ‘pardon’  (as i n MS d – KUBS 375). Rigg (1862 :386) notes that pun is ‘ often used at the 
commencement of an invocation’, and it is reportedly still used for opening and closing ceremonies in 
Kanékés communities (Hasman and Reiss 2012:12). I t is presumably derived from PMP *ampun 
‘pardon, forgiveness’ (ACD 175 – cf. Malay ampun). Jompong Larang uses the phrase in speaking to 
her mother (BM 318); Dorakala, the guardian of heaven, greets Bujangga Manik’s holy soul by saying 
samapun (BM 1634); and the ship’s captain Séla Batang says samapun to say goodbye to the ascetic, 
whom he refers to by the title mahapa(n)dita (BM 960). The precise meaning of the phrase is difficult 
to ascertain; it seems to mean ‘forgive me’, ‘hello’, and ‘goodbye’ depending on the circumstances. The 
same can be said of sumanger, a word Bujangga Manik uses when parting angrily from his mother after 
rejecting Jompong’s attempt at negotiating a marriage. Sumanger comes from PMP *sumaŋed ‘soul of 
a living being’ (ACD 8815); in MSd it appears to have been replaced by its Malay cognate semangat 
(Danadibrata 2006:658; KUBS 455; Rigg 1862:461 sub samang’at [sic]; see Winstedt 1950:19). Both 
forms mean ‘spirit’ or ‘soul’. In BM 643 the meaning is evidently a parting phrase akin to ‘farewell’. 
Another parting phrase used by the ships’ captains is rampés nu sapilaunan, which Noorduyn 
and Teeuw (2006:377 sub laun) translate as ‘good luck, farewell!’. It appears to have been a respectful 
way of saying goodbye. Sapilaunan is derived from laun ‘slowly, gently’ (Rigg 1862:245; KUBS 257), 
and a more literal translation of the entire phrase might be ‘good is (he) who takes care’ (although the  
meaning of the pi-…-an circumfix is unclear – see Table I.13 above ). The expression is in any case 
entirely Sundanese, and it is hard to imagine a Javanese captain sailing between Java and Bali being 
aware of or using it. Of course, Bujangga Manik’s metrical constraints mean that it is difficult to judge 
whether or not its greetings and  expressions – or, more broadly, any of the language in it – reflects 
Sundanese as actually spoken in the late fifteenth century. 
* 
Bujangga Manik ’s Old Sundanese  sentences are short and simple. The constraints of an 
octosyllabic metre on a language built around disyllabic roots; the lack of inflections or other markers 
of formal syntactic relationships ; the dropping of subject pronouns; and the relative obscurity of the 
text’s language and the paucity of resources for its study present significant challenges of interpretation 
and translation. The text’s frequent recourse to formulae aids in decipherment, however. The differences 
between Old and modern Sundanese are slight enough that modern Sundanese materials can be applied

--- PAGE: 111 ---
Part I. The Manuscript 
98 
 
(with caveats) to texts like this one , and the presence of O ld Javanese loanwords and the close 
relationship between Sundanese and Malay open up other avenues down which philological research 
on Old Sundanese literature can proceed. Many questions remain with regard to the vocabulary and (to 
some extent) grammar of Old Sundanese, but it is by consulting such materials that I have arrived at the 
translation of Bujangga Manik found in the next part of this work. 
*

--- PAGE: 112 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
99 
 
 
PART II 
The Transliteration and Translation 
of 
Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R) 
aka Bujangga Manik 
 
The transliteration of early Indo -Malaysian texts has become a controversial subject  in the last few 
years, and some remarks on transliteration are required here. The reason for the controversy is more to 
do with disciplinary boundaries than with any difficulties in the interpretation of the scripts used in the 
texts or the phonologies of the languages themselves. As can be seen above, Old Sundanese had a small 
phoneme inventory and the functions of its script(s) are reasonably clear and consistent. OSd phonology 
also seems to have been close to that of MSd, and it would not be inappropriate to use modern 
orthography as a basis for the transliteration of the Old language – although in my view Noorduyn and 
Teeuw (2006) took this too far, interpolating a seventh vowel, ⟨eu⟩, unwarranted by the orthography of 
OSd as it appears in the surviving texts. Nevertheless, I see no particular reason to follow Indological 
standards and transliterate OSd according to the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration 
(IAST) or something akin to it , as Acri and Griffiths (2014) argue. It would only serve to complicate 
matters, and in any case OSd orthography diverges from typical Brahmic scripts in the representation 
of certain features, notably in the spellings of words li ke siya and hiyang in which only one aksara 
nglegena is present but two syllables are represented (as explained in section I.2). Some aksaras have 
different pronunciations in OSd and OJv as well, particularly aksara ⟨ṭa⟩ which – as described above – 
was adopted in OSd for writing the consonant cluster [tr] (e.g. sutra ‘silk’ – IAST suṭa). These features 
are more obscured than revealed by rigid adherence to Indological expectations. 
 An interesting proposal has recently been put f orward by Wayan Jarrah Sastrawan (2020) 
whereby Sanskrit (and other Indic) loanwords in OJv and OSd would be transliterated using IAST and 
native words would be given in a system closer to that of the earlier Old Javanese standard (as found in 
OJED) – so, for instance, ⟨v⟩ should be used in svasti ‘luck’ (from Skt) but ⟨w⟩ should be used in wwaṅ 
‘person’ (from OJv). While I agree that some knowledge of proper Sanskrit pronunciation must have

--- PAGE: 113 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
100 
 
been present even in late -medieval Java, perhaps to the extent that words of Skt derivation  were 
pronounced differently by many OJv native speakers, for OSd  – and for BM more specifically – this 
approach seems unnecessary. While some OSd manuscripts contain occasional OJv and Skt loanwords 
that are spelled using special characters – aspirated or retroflex consonants not otherwise found in OSd 
phonology or orthography – this is not true of Bujangga Manik, which is written entirely according to 
OSd standards. There are no retroflexes, aspirates, or long vowels. I am loath to introduce complicating 
elements into what ought to be a simple situation, and it seems superfluous to include variant readings 
of the same characters based on etymology. 
Transliteration should be a pragmatic affair intended to open texts up to their readers rather 
than a Procrustean bed imposed on disparate languages, and I expect there are readers who would like 
to read the original text for pleasure and not simply as an academic exercise. The system I use below is 
an attempt to balance readability and fidelity to the text as written . Tables I.11 and I.12 above present 
the equivalencies between the phonemes and t he letters used in the transliteration, and tables and 
descriptions of the letters (aksaras) of the script can be consulted in Part I.2. These should give an idea 
of how the text is to be read and the correspondences between my transliteration and the lines inscribed 
into MS Jav. b.3. (R). Below I have summarised further principles behind my text of BM and its English 
translation: 
• Disagreements between my transliteration and that of Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006) are noted in the 
footnotes. I have used N to refer to the  2006 text  as a whole (e.g. ‘N : mahapandita’).64 Only 
disagreements that constitute divergent readings are noted; other differences from N and from MSd 
orthography that result from the application of different principles are not noted (e.g. esi instead of 
N’s eusi). 
• Velar nasals  are denoted by the  digraph ⟨ng⟩. This is used for both the aksara ⟨nga⟩ and the 
panyecek, the distinction between the two marked by their position in the syllable. Where both 
occur in the script, as they frequently do in intervocalic positions, I have used only one ⟨ng⟩; it is 
extremely unlikely that these were pronounced as geminates in spoken OSd. 
• Palatal nasals are denoted by ⟨ñ⟩ in all cases. This is not as in MSd spelling, which uses the digraph 
⟨ny⟩ before vowels and ⟨n⟩ in consonant clusters. It seems important to mark the distinctions 
between different kinds of nasals as they appear in the manuscript, and in the manuscript a palatal 
nasal appears before palatals in consonant clusters. The reading of ⟨ny⟩ would be unclear to many 
readers in such cases , so I have opted for e.g. pañjang (‘long’) rather than panjang (MSd, N) or 
panyjang.  
 
64 The text was in fact a collaborative effort between Noorduyn, Teeuw, Undang Darsa, Stuart Robson, Wim 
van Zanten, and others, but Noorduyn’s readings were used as the basis of the published text. I do not want to 
imply by the use of his initial that he was the only contributor.

--- PAGE: 114 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
101 
 
• Glides are often marked in the manuscript but left out in N. I think it best to note their pr esence. 
Where N has sia, for instance,  I have opted for siya, as both the vowel ⟨i⟩ and the glide ⟨y⟩ are 
frequently marked in the manuscript and, where they are not, the word is usually lacking the ⟨i⟩ and 
not the ⟨y⟩. Thus also h(i)yang and séyah rather than hiang and séah.  
• The pronoun aing ‘I, me’ frequently occurs with an epenthetic initial consonant or glide. After the 
verb mungkur, for instance, it often has the form ⟨raing⟩. After pronouns aing acquires the form 
⟨ngaing⟩ (e.g. ku ngaing ‘by me’). In the former case N leaves out the ⟨r⟩ but in the latter N opted 
for ngaing. This seems inconsistent and it may obscure an interesting feature of OSd orthography, 
especially if we assume that aksara swara are intended to be preceded by a glottal sto p. I have 
therefore opted for raing and ngaing (and other similar spellings) where those appear in the 
manuscript. This affects other words as well, notably the ngatma in BM 1634 (from Skt ātma). 
• N differentiates between the two vowels ⟨e⟩ and ⟨eu⟩; this d istinction is not marked in OSd 
orthography and I follow Aditia Gunawan’s recommendation not to make it in the transliteration.  
Where ⟨e⟩ and ⟨u⟩ occur together they should be read as distinct vowels separated by a glottal stop 
– e.g. deuk [dəʔuk]. 
The nasals require sensitive handling : Nasalisation of vowels is common in MSd, even those not 
preceding nasal stops (Müller-Gotama 2001:11), and some common words in modern Sundanese and 
Javanese have variants with or without nasal s (e.g. usir and ungsir in Javanese, cf. OSd husir). Nasal 
stops are often absent where they would be expected in this and other OSd manuscripts.  The word 
le(m)pang is never spelled with ⟨m⟩ in MS Jav. b.3. (R), but on comparative grounds it must have been 
pronounced with the nasal and not as lepang (cf. OJv lampah [OJED 971:12], MSd leumpang). On the 
other hand, the word sudah is spelled without a nasal in BM; Noorduyn inserted an ⟨n⟩, su(n)dah, basing 
his decision on other OSd texts, particularly The Sons of Rama and Rawana , in which the word is 
spelled ⟨sundah⟩. I have opted to leave the ⟨n⟩ out of the transliteration on the grounds that it may 
represent a difference in dialect. The source of the word is Sanskrit śuddha (Gonda 1973:565), which 
notably lacks a nasal stop, as does Malay sudah. An editor could in any case easily arrive at a different 
decision with regard to this and other nasals. 
The text is arranged according to the following principles: 
• The text below is arranged by folio, such that the OSd text of each leaf (both recto and verso) 
appears on one page with a facing English translation. Metrical lines are separated by interpuncts 
representing the marks used in the manuscript. Where those are not present and must be conjectured, 
I have encased them in round brackets (·). Line numbers appear every five metrical lines and are 
noted in square brackets in smaller font – e.g. [805]. 
• Each side of each leaf has four rows of text inscribed across it; a vertical bar | in the transliteration 
indicates the end of each such row.

--- PAGE: 115 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
102 
 
• Elements that probably should be in the text but are not are indicated by round brackets () – e.g. 
mahapa(n)dita. Elements that are in the text but probably should not be are indi cated by square 
brackets [] – e.g. duh ameng [ta] ti mana éta (BM 250), where the ta does not fit metrically. As BM 
is a codex unicus, all of these emendations are essentially conjectural. 
• The scribe’s own corrected errors are noted in italics within square brackets – e.g. [niu]. I have kept 
these in the edited text both to aid in studies of OSd error correction and to better represent the text 
as it actually appears in the MS. 
• Ellipsis … indicates a lacuna of any length. 
• Proper nouns are capitalised in both transliteration and translation, although it should be noted that 
some toponyms could be either proper nouns or descriptions – e.g. leweng langgong ‘dense forest’ 
(BM 130). 
• BM contains three types of speech: (1) that of an external narrator; (2) that of Bujangga Manik, who 
recounts his journeys in the first person (as, briefly, does Jompong Larang); (3) and that of the 
people who converse with Bujangga Manik. These  different speakers  are not marked in the 
manuscript itself and must be inferre d. In the transliteration I have not indicated these different 
speakers and have kept to the text as found in the MS . In the translation, however, (1) I have 
presented the narrator’s voice without punctuation to indicate it; (2) I have put what I believe to be 
Bujangga Manik’s non-diegetic first-person narrative in single quotation marks ‘…’; and (3) I have 
placed all diegetic speech, including conversations between characters and Bujangga Manik’s 
comments to himself (e.g. BM 63-64), in double quotation marks “…”. 
• The commentary in Parts III-VI should cover plenty of the poem’s content, so I have kept footnotes 
to a minimum. Some titles and the names of plants and musical instruments are left untranslated . 
For these the reader should consult the relevant sections of the commentary. 
The translation is ‘literal’ in that I have attempted to convey my interpretation of the meaning as clearly 
as possible ; it  is not intended to be a l yrical translation. The interpretation of Old Sundanese will 
improve as more texts are published and translated, and some of my interpretations will doubtless be 
invalidated by fu ture research.  There are several challenging sections and in some cases several 
interpretations are possible. Though this is the second published English translation, it is still 
nonetheless preliminary. 
*

--- PAGE: 116 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
103

--- PAGE: 117 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
104 
 
f1r [blank] 
f.1v //0// · saur sang mahapa (n)dita65 · kumaha girita ini  · mana sinarien teing · téka cedem cekrem 
teing · [5] mo ha(n)te nu kabé(ng)kéngan · saur sang mahapandita · di mana éta gesanna · e(n)der nu | 
cerik sadalem · séok nu cerik sajero · [10] midangdam sakadatuan · mo lain di Pakañcilan · tohaan eker 
nu ma(ng)kat (·) P(e)rebu Jaya Pakuan · saurna karah saki|ni · [15] a(m)buing tatanghi ti(ng)gal · tarik-
tarik dibuhaya · pawekas pajeeng benget · kita a(m)bu deng awaking (·) héngan sapoé ayena · [20] aing 
dék le(m)pang ka wétan · saa(ng)ge|s ñaur sakitu · i(n)dit birit sudah diri · lugay sila sudah le(m)pang 
· s adiri ti salu panti  · [25] saturun ti tungtung surung  · ulang panapa k k a lemah  (·) kalangkang 
ngab(i)yantara · rejeng deng dayehanana · mukaken 
  
 
65 N. has mahapandita.

--- PAGE: 118 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
105 
 
f.1r [blank] 
f.1v //0// · [1] The mahapandita66 said: · “What’s all this commotion? · why, most unexpected · this 
utter gloom and doom? · [5] It must be that people are upset.” · The mahapandita said: · “Where’s this 
happening? · The trembling of the palace weeping · the shaking of the court weeping · [10] the king’s 
residence lamenting: · (it can be) none other than Pakañcilan · a Lord67 is just now leaving.” · Master68 
Jaya Pakuan · this is what he said: · [15] “Mother, stay and keep watch · (though) you pull and pull out 
of love · this is the last time we’ll see each other · you and me, mother. · The deadline’s today. · [20] 
I’m walking to the east.” · After having said that ·  (he) raised his rump and left · stretched his crossed 
legs and walked. · Having left the pavilion · [25] (he) descended from the edge of the bamboo floor ·  
(and) put his feet on the earth. · His shadow came with him · together with its residence. ·  (He) opened 
up 
  
 
66 A title, from Skt mahāpaṇḍita – lit. ‘great pundit/sage’. 
67 Tohaan – a title. Not gendered, but here translated as ‘lord’ and ‘lady’ as necessary. 
68 Prebu – a title. See section IV.1.

--- PAGE: 119 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
106 
 
f.2r panto kowari · [30] sau(n)dur aing ti U(m)bul (·) sadiri ti Pakañcilan · sadatang ka Wi(n)du Cinta · 
cu(n)duk aing ka Mangu(n)tur · ngalalar ka Pañcawara · [35] ngahusir ka lebuh ageng · na le(m)pang 
sace(n)dung kaén · séok na janma nu ñarék69 (·) to|haan nu dék ka mana · mana sinarien teing · [40] téka 
le(m)pang sosorangan · ditaña ha(n)te dék ñaur · nepi ka Paken Caringin (·) ku ngaing téka kaliwat · 
ngalalar ka J(e)rah70 Anak · [45] datang ka Tajur Ma |ndiri · sacu(n)duk ka Suka B erus71 · datang ka 
Tajur Ñanghalang · ñanglandeh aing d(i)72 Engkih · me(n)tasing di Cihaliwung · [50] sana(ñ)jak aing 
ka Bu(ng)gis73 · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · nepi ka Talaga Hening · ngahusir raing | ka Pesing · na 
le(m)pang megat mor éntang · [55] me(n)tas aing di Cili(ng)ga  · s ane(pi) ka Putih Birit  · pañjang 
ta(ñ)jakan ditedak · ku ngaing dipe (n)ding-pe(n)ding74 · s adatang aing ka Pu ñcak · [60] deuk di na 
mu(ng)kal datar · teher ngahihidan75 a- 
f.2v wak · teher s(i)ya né(ñ)jo gunung · itu ta na bukit Ageng (·) hulu wano na Pakuan · [65] sadiri aing 
ti i ña · datang ka alas Éronan · nepi aing ka Cinangsi  · me(n)tas aing di Citarum  · k u ngaing g es 
kale(m)panga|n · [70] me(n)tas di Cipunagara · lurah Medang Kah(i)yangan · ngalalar ka Tompo Omas 
· me(n)tas aing di Cimanuk · ngalalar ka Pada Benghar · [75] me(n)tas di Cijerukmanis · ngalalar raing 
ka Conam  [niu] · katu|kang bukit C(e)remay  · s acu(n)duk ka Luhur Agung  · me(n)tasing di 
Cisinggarung · [80] sadatang ka tungtung Su(n)da · me(n)tasing di Cipamali · datang ka alas Jawa · ku 
ngaing ges kaideran · lurah-lirih Majapahi|t · [85] palataran alas Demak · sanepi ka Jati Sari  · datang 
aing ka Pamalang · di iña aing te hebel · katineng na tuang a(m)bu  · [90] lawas teing diti(ng)galken · 
tosta gera pulang dei · mumul 
  
 
69 N: carék. 
70 N: Nangka. MS is difficult to read here. 
71 N: Suka Beureus. 
72 MS: ⟨da⟩ 
73 N: Banggis. 
74 N: dipeding-peding. 
75 N: ngahididan.

--- PAGE: 120 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
107 
 
f.2r the bamboo gate. · [30] ‘After I had withdrawn from Umbul · had left Pakañcilan · had come to 
Windu Cinta · I arrived at the outer courtyard. · Passing through Pañcawara · [35] (I) proceeded to the 
main road · walking with a cloth on my head. · The sound of the people who spoke: · “ Where’s this 
lord off to? · Why, most unexpected · [40] is he walking all alone?” · Questioned, (I) didn’t want to say. 
· (I) got to Paken Caringin · by me it was passed. · Passing through Jerah Anak · [45] coming to Tajur 
Mandiri · having arrived at Suku Berus · coming to Tajur Nyanghalang · going downhill at Engkih · I 
crossed the Cihaliwung. · [50] Having ascended to Bunggis · by me it was walked · (I) got to Talaga 
Hening · I proceeded to Pesing. · Walking straight ahead · [55] I crossed the Cilingga · (and) had got to 
Putih Birit · a long ascent to be tackled · by me step by step. · After I had come to Puñcak · [60] (I) sat 
on a flat boulder · then fanned 
f.2v my body.’ · Then he looked out on the mountains: · “That there is the Great Mountain · head of 
the settlement of Pakuan.” · [65] ‘After I had left from there · (I) came to the area of Éronan · I got to 
Cinangsi · I crossed the Citarum. · By me it was walked. · [70] (I) crossed the Cipunagara · the district 
of Medang Kahiyangan · passing through Tompo Omas · I crossed the Cimanuk · passing through Pada 
Benghar · [75] (I) crossed the Cijerukmanis. · I passed Conam · looked back at Mount Ceremay. · Having 
arrived at Luhur Agung · I crossed the Cisinggarung · [80] Having come to the farthest point of Sunda 
· I crossed the Cipamali · (a nd) came to the land of Java. · I wandered through it: · the districts of 
Majapahit · [85] the plain of the region of Demak. · Having got to Jati Sari · I came to Pamalang. · I 
wasn’t there long · I missed my dear mother · [90] left behind too long · It’d be best to hurry home · 
(But I was) unwilling

--- PAGE: 121 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
108 
 
f.3r ñorang urut aing · itu parahu Malaka · tur(u)n aing ti Pamalang · [95] tuluying nu(m)pang balayar 
· bijil aing ti muhara · masang wedil tujuh kali · bung76 na goong brang na gangsa · séyah na ge(n)dang 
sarunay (·) | [100] séok nu kawih tarahan  · nu kawih a(m)bah-a(m)bahan · ba(n)tar kali buar p élang · 
surung-sarang suar gading · mañura ditedas u(ñ)cal · [105] mibabahon awi go(m)bong · mitihang awi 
ñowana · | kamudi kamuning Keling77 · apus dangdan ho é muka (·) paselang deng hoé omas · [110] 
pabaur ho é walatung · t ihang layar kayu laka  · hurung b enangna ngahi (ng)gul · s(i)yang b enang 
ngaj(e)rinang · beteng bogo|h ku sakitu · [115] bogoh ku nu mawa iña · nu badayung urang Ta(ñ)jung · 
nu ni(m)ba urang Kalapa · nu babose urang Angké · bosé rampak bosé layang · [120] dengen bosé susu 
landung · balayar satengah bulan · ba- 
f.3v ñat aing di Kalapa  · n garaning Ameng Layaran  · u (n)dur raing ti parahu  · [125] sadatang ka 
pabéyaan · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · ngalalar ka Ma(n)di Rañcan · datang ka A(ñ)col Tamiyang 
· ngalalar raing ka Sa|mprok · [130] sacu(n)duk ka leweng langgong · me(n)tas aing di Cipanas · ngalalar 
ka Suka Kandang · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · me(n)tas aing di Cikéñcal · [135] sacu(n)duk aing ka 
Luwuk · me|(n)tas aing di Ciluwer  · s acu(n)duk ka P etey Kuru  · ngalalar ka Ka(n)dang S érang · 
sacu(n)duk aing ka Batur · [140] ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · me(n)tasing di Cihaliwung · sacu(n)duk 
ka Pak en Tubuy  · | ngalalar ka Pak en Tay em · s acu(n)duk ka Paken Teluk 78 · [145] sadatang ka 
Pakañcilan · mukaken panto kowari · ngahusir ka lamin ading · lamin ading pañcatulis · balé réñcong79 
  
 
76 N: ing. ⟨i⟩ and ⟨bu⟩ are easily confused. 
77 N: kamudi kamudi Keling. 
78 N: sacu(n)duk aing ka Batur. 
79 N: réncéng.

--- PAGE: 122 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
109 
 
f.3r to retrace my steps. · There was a Melaka ship · I went down from Pamalang · [95] and right away 
sailed as a passenger. · I came out of the river mouth · the guns fired seven times · the gongs boomed, 
the flat gongs branged · the din of drum and shawm · [100] the sound of work songs · which were sung 
as we left port: · “Smooth river, sound80 of a cargo boat” · “Bamboo flooring, ivory torch” · “Peacock 
badly wounded by a deer.” · [105] Fitted with a boom of gombong bamboo81 · spars of young bamboo · 
a rudder of South Indian kamuning wood · rigging of muka rattan · alternating with golden rattan · [110] 
mixed with walatung rattan · a mast of laka wood · glowing with a ‘writhing fish’ pattern 82 · (like) 
dawn, made so by dragon’s blood.83 · I stopped admiring these things · [115] to admire those it carried. 
· Those rowing were Tañjung people · those bailing were Kalapa people · those paddling were Angké 
people · sets of paddles, flying paddles · [120] with ‘saggy breast’ paddles. · Sailing for a fortnight · I  
f.3v alighted at Kalapa. · My name was Ameng Layaran . · I withdrew from the ship. · [125] (I) had 
come to the customs house. · By me it was walked. · Passing through Mandi Rañcan · coming to Añcol 
Tamiang · I passed through Samprok. · [130] Having arrived at a dense forest · I crossed the Cipanas · 
passing through Suka Kandang · by me it was walked. · I crossed the Cikéñcal · [135] having arrived at 
Luwuk · I crossed the Ciluwer. · Having arrived at Petey Kuru · passing through Kandang Sérang · 
having arrived at Batur · [140] by me it was walked · I crossed the Cihaliwung. · Having arrived at Paken 
Tubuy · passing through Paken Tayem · having arrived at Paken Teluk · [145] having come to Pakañcilan 
· (I) opened up the bamboo gate · (and) proceeded to the marital hut84 · the fully painted marital hut · 
the decorated hall 
  
 
80 Based on OJv bor ‘descriptive particle (for the emergence of fire and its sound)’ (OJED 252:11).  Extremely 
speculative interpretation. Buar, bor, bwar – none of the possibilities are found in MSd. 
81 See Appendix C for identifications of plant and animal species. 
82 Based on Mamat Sasmita’s interpretation of ngahi(ng)gul as a pattern based on a writhing fish. See Gunawan 
(2019:88). 
83 J(e)rinang – a red-coloured resin taken from certain rattan species or, in this case perhaps, the natural colour 
of the laka wood (Myristica iners) itself. See Appendix C. 
84 The term here, lamin ading, is tricky. It refers to a freestanding house, likely related to weddings and 
marriage.

--- PAGE: 123 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
110 
 
f.4r pangrékaan · [150] pamikul b enang ngahi (ng)gul · pangheret benang miseret · li(ñ)car b enang 
ngaj(e)rinang · suhunan benang marada · saré galar betung tuha · [155] dijejetan kawat Jawa · u(ng)gah 
tohaan ka manggung | · pa(ng)guh lu(ng)guh di palangka · /0/ · a(m)buing kaso(n)dong ngeyek · buat 
nu di tepas bumi · [160] eker ngeyek eker meber · eker ñula(ng)gé mihané · nelem nuar ñangkuduan · 
ngara(ñ)cét ka|(n)téh pamulu · ngela sepang ngangen hayam · [165] ñoréyang ka lamin ading · ngadele 
Sali(ng)ger beheng · katuluyan dele teteh · saur a(m)buing sakini · itu ta egen si utun  · [170] ayena | 
cu(n)duk ti timur  · ayena datang ti w étan · datangna ti Rabut Palah  · anaking dedeukanan · anaking 
papalayanan · [175] aing dék ñiar sepahen · na heyek tuluy ditu(n)da · dipauc85 apus 
f.4v dada(m)par · loglog caor ti na to(ng)gong · diri hapit ti na pingping · [180] kedalan diri ti da(m)pal 
· net na(ñ)jer ngajuga hangsa · saasup s(i)ya ka bumi · ñi(ng)kabken kasang carita · | e(n)der na rarawis 
kasang · [185] kumare(ñ)cang kumare(ñ)cong · ni(ng)gang ka na papan ja(n)ten  · bogoh ku na ngaran 
kasang (·) kasang tujuh kali ñi(ng)kab · kasang seni tambi lu(ng)sir · [190] kasang Pahang ta(m)bi laka 
| (·) bédong dita(m)bi bayabon · balang ditambi kaca(m)bang · sau(ng)gah ka manggung ra( ñ)jang · 
gapay ka karas larangan  · [195] dicokot na pasileman · (pasileman) pasi bo(n)téng86 · digapay | sereh 
tangkayan · pinang ta cangcian kénéh · pinang tiwi pinang ading · [200] ker mejeh patemu angen · tuluy 
ngaha(ñ)ceng sepahen · dituruban sara(n)tangan (·) benang ngaharémas · a(ng)ge- 
  
 
85 N: diparac. 
86 N removed this line. It can be reconstructed by comparison with 359, a similar line.

--- PAGE: 124 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
111 
 
f.4r built of branches. · [150] The frame was done with a ‘writhing fish’ pattern · the cross-beams stuck 
fast · skirting boards red from dragon’s blood · a gilded ridge pole · flooring mats of old bamboo · [155] 
interwoven with Javanese wire.’ · The lord ascended to the top · (and) gracefully sat on the bed. · /0/ · 
‘My mother was found weaving · doing that on the veranda of the house · [160] making ready and tying 
up threads for dyeing · netting and rolling the thread on the pihané87 · dyeing black, yellow, and red88 · 
pressing the flossy yarn · boiling brazilwood, stewing hayam (wood?).89 · [165] (She) glanced towards 
the marital hut · looked, craning her neck · then looked intently. · This is what my mother said: · “Look, 
there’s my boy now! · [170] Now arrived from the east · come now from the east. 90 · He’s come from 
Rabut Palah. · Sit yourself down, my child. · Have a rest, my child. · [175] I’ll look for the betel quids.”’ 
· The weaving was set down · the frame’s cords 
f.4v were stretched out · the backstrap91 wiggled off her back · the cloth beam left her lap · [180] the 
footrest left her soles. · She got up, rose like a goose. · After she had entered the house · she drew the 
curtains decorated with stories. · The curtain tassels rustled · [185] rattling and clattering · (as) they hit 
the teak boards. · (I?) admired the (many) kinds of curtains: · Curtains folded seven times · delicate 
curtains edged with silk ( lungsir) · [190] Pahang92 curtains edged with laka red · bédong edged with 
bayabon · net mesh edged with kacambang. · Having ascended to her bedroom · (she) fetched her 
private writing board93 · [195] the betel tray94 was taken · (she) fetched betel leaves by the branch · areca 
nuts still on their twi gs · tiwi areca, ivory areca · [200] in harmony with one’s thoughts. · Then she 
portioned out the betel · (and) enclosed it in a lidded hamper95 · done up with gilding. · After  
  
 
87 A device around which yarn is threaded to form a pattern for weaving. A diagram can be seen in Gunawan 
(2019). See also Rigg (1862:374-375) and Danadibrata (2006:530). 
88 N has ‘blue, yellow, and red’; ‘black’ is Aditia Gunawan’s interpretation. 
89 N: ‘making chicken soup’ but hayam is probably a dyestuff. 
90 OSd has two words for ‘east’ in OSd: timur (Sd) and wétan (OJv). 
91 Caor – backstrap used to apply pressure to the bars of the loom.  
92 ‘Pahang’ may refer to Pahang or the Malay Peninsula as a whole (as in OJv). 
93 Karas is tricky; it is not found in MSd. In OJv it means ‘writing board’ (OJED 1805:3), which can be 
compared to BM 260 (karas tulis). N interpreted karas larangan to mean ‘private chest’, suggesting that the 
betel tray was kept therein, but this is not a given (see discussion of betel paraphernalia below – section VI.1.2).  
94 Tricky. ‘Betel tray’ is from N. 
95 N prefers ‘ceremonial cloth’ for saratangan, but cf. Malay rantang ‘lidded hamper’ (Wilkinson 1932 
#28927).

--- PAGE: 125 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
112 
 
f.5r s ngaha(ñ)ceng sepahen (·) [205] dicokot pamérés jati · a(ng)ges nu mérésan ra(m)but · digapay na 
e(m)bal96 ageng · dicokot kupa saranggey (·) die(n)tepkan (·)97 [210] tuluy e(ñ)cem ka na pe(n)te | · tuluy 
sari ka na pipi · ti(m)b(u)r(u) na kahiyasan98 · sajingjing boéh cali(ng)cing · saka(n)dar boéh harega · 
[215] saturun ti manggung rañjang · garudag di tengah imah · garedog di balik pan|to · karekét ni(ñ)cak 
tarajé · ulang panapak ka lemah (·) [220] kalangkang ngab(i)yantara · rejeng deng dayehanana · séyah 
na lemah katiñcak · e(n)der na Ratu Bañcana · ngeraken99 tuang kalang|kang · [225] cab ruy tapih mebet 
keneng · ngeret ka na bitis kon éng · ngahusir ka lamin ading  · u(ng)gah tohaan ka manggung  · deuk 
téohen palangka · [230] na sepahen diya(ng)seken (·) 
f.5v saur a(m)buing sakini · anaking nu mucang onam · saurna Ameng Layaran (·) a(m)bu aing sadu 
mucang · [235] i(ng)ken mangka o(ng)koh mucang · caréken si Jo(m)pong Larang · saturun ti kadatuan 
· nga|lalar Carogé Ageng · ñangla(n)deh ka Pa ñcawara · [240] mukaken pa(n)to kowari  · ngalalar ka 
Paken Dora · le(m)pang aing ñangwétanken · me(n)tas di Cipakañcilan · sacu(n)duk ka Paken Te|luk · 
[245] sadatang ka Pakañcilan · mukaken panto kowari · dingaran si Jo(m)pong Larang  · ñoréyang ka 
lamin ading · carékna si Jo(m)pong Larang · [250] duh ameng | [ta] ti mana éta100 · ameng ta datang ti 
wétan · sakaén poléng puranténg · sasali(m)but sulam Baluk · sasa(m)pay sutra Cina · [255] sapecut hoé 
walatung · dige(m)peng-ge(m)peng ku omas · jojo(m)pongna madé 
  
 
96 Or ebal, which Danadibrata (2006:53, 188) gives as a rarely heard form of bal, a ball of India rubber (sap of 
Ficus elastica) filled with air. An implement for applying making up? But cf. Malay ambal ‘rug, carpet’? 
97 N added ka na ceuli ‘to the handles’. I am not convinced the extra words are required, or even that dientepkan 
should be separate. These lines are difficult to interpret. 
98 MS has ti ba ra na; N emended this to timburu nu. 
99 N: ngeunakeun. 
100 Longer than eight syllables but grammatical.

--- PAGE: 126 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
113 
 
f.5r she had arranged the quids · [205] (she) took a teak comb · (and) after that combed her hair with it. 
· She took hold of a large rug · (and) taking a branch of kupa · perched it on top. 101 · [210] Then she 
made up her face · then she powdered her cheeks. · The adornments were enviable · with a hanging 
calingcing cloth · with a length of precious cloth. · [215] (She) had descended from the bedroom · rattling 
through the middle of the house · shimmying behind the door · creaking she set foot on the ladder · 
(she) put her feet on the earth · [220] (and) her shadow came with her · together with its inhabitant. · 
The din of the trod-on ground · (as) shuddering Ratu Bañcana · hastened forward her esteemed shadow. 
· [225] Chap, whee! the sarong hit her heels · cutting into (her) yellow calves. · Proceeding to the marital 
hut · the Lady102 ascended to the top · (and) sat down on the couch. · [230] The betel quids were offered. 
f.5v · ‘My mother spoke as follows: · “Take a quid, my child.” · Ameng Layaran said: · “Mother, 
pardon me for chewing.” ’ · [235] Let’s leave them chewing alone. 103 · Jompong Larang spoke out: · 
‘Having descended from the palace · (I) passed through the great hall. · Going downhill to Pañcawara 
· [240] opening up the bamboo gate · passing through Paken Dora · I walked eastwards. · Crossing the 
Cipakañcilan · having arrived at Paken Teluk · [245] having come to Pakañcilan · (I) opened up the 
bamboo gate.’ · The one named Jompong Larang · glanced towards the marital hut. · Jompong Larang 
spoke: · [250] “Oh! Where is that novice from? · The novice who came from the east · with a puranténg-
pattern cloth · with a sacred thread of Baluk embroidery · with a Chinese silken shaw l · [255] with a 
whip of walatung rattan · banded with strips of golden (rattan) · his mane looking 
  
 
101 Based in part on N’s emendation. The metre and punctuation are odd here, with no separation between 207 
and 208 (or, for that, 209). 
102 The same title applied to Bujangga Manik – tohaan, a non-gendered noble title. 
103 It is interesting that there is no punctuation here to mark a break in the narrative.

--- PAGE: 127 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
114 
 
f.6r to(ng)gong · teher lu(ng)guh di pala(ng)ka · sila tumpang d eng sideha · [260] ngagigirken karas 
tulis · teher ñepah lumageday · dingaran si (Jom)pong Larang · na bogoh ha mo kapalang · diilikan 
dibudiya|n · [265] didele diteteh-teteh · ti manggung dikaha(n)dapken · ti ha(n)dap dikamanggungken · 
bogoh ku na pangawakan · giling bitis pa(ñ)cuh gelang · [270] taréros na tuang ramo · para(ñ)jang | na 
tuang ta(ng)gay · be(n)tik halis sikar dahi · suruy hu(n)tu be(n)tik tungtung · sumaray dadu ku sepah · 
[275] dingaran si Jo(m)pong Larang (·) gupuh sigug ga(m)pang kaer · le(m)pang bitan | gajar104 Jawa · 
sadatang ka kadatuan · tohaan kaso(n)dong nge(y)ek (·) [280] eker ngeyek eker meber · eker ñula(ng)gé 
mihané · nelem nuar ñangkuduan · ngara(ñ)cét ka(n)téh pamulu · tohaan  
f.6v na Ajung Larang (·) [285] Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · ngaléké ébréh na cangkéng (·) cugenang tuang 
pinarep · teherna lu(ng)guh di kasur · ngagigirken ebun Cina · [290] ebun Cina diparada · pamuat ti a|las 
pe(n)tas · t ohaan Ajung Larang  · ñoréyang ti jokjok panon  · ngadele Sali(ng)ger b eheng · [295] 
katuluyan dele teteh · itu ta egen si Jo(m)pong (·) na naha éta béjana (·) mana | gera-gera teing · dingaran 
si Jo(m)pong Larang · [300] cat-cat gék deuk di lemah (·) saur taan Ajung Larang (·) Jo(m)pong naha 
béja s (i)ya (·) mana sinari en t eing · d ingaran si Jo(m)pong La |rang (·) [305] umun sadekung ka 
manggung · bérés ngaburang ku ramo  · carékna si Jo mpong Larang · taan urang Ajung Larang  (·) 
Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · [310] ra(m)pés teing jeeng aing · la(n)tara teing nu kasép (·) 
  
 
104 Gajar is odd but N interprets it as ‘elephant’ (normally gajah).

--- PAGE: 128 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
115 
 
f.6r all heaped up · remaining seated on the couch · cross-legged and resting on one arm · [260] abutting 
a writing board · unwinding, continuing to chew.” · The one named Jompong Larang · her attraction 
was unimpeded. · (He was) regarded, surveyed. · [265] Overpowered she beheld him · from top down 
to bottom · from bottom up to top. · (She) admired his figure: · Round calves, graceful anklets · [270] 
his fingers all tapering · his nails all long · the curve and separation of his eyebrows · his comb of round-
edged teeth · crooked and pale red from chewing betel. · [275] The one named Jompong Larang · hurried, 
rigid, easily frightened · walking like a Javanese elephant · had come to the palace. · The Lady105 was 
found weaving · [280] making ready and tying up threads for dyeing 106 · netting and rolling the thread 
on the pihané · dyeing black, yellow, and red · pressing the flossy yarn. · The Lady 
f.6v Ajung Larang · [285] Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · was carelessly dressed, her waist visible · her breasts 
propped up. · She sat, too, on a quilt -mattress · abutting a Chinese box · [290] a gilded Chinese box · 
cargo from overseas. · Lady Ajung Larang · glanced out of the corner of her eyes 107 · looked, craning 
her neck · [295] then looked intently. · “Look, there’s Jompong now! · What might her message be? · 
Why such haste?” · The one named Jompong Larang · [300] went up the stairs (and) sat on the floor. · 
Lady Ajung Larang said · “Jompong, what’s your message? · Why (come) so unexpectedly?” · The one 
named Jompong Larang · [305] gave greetings on bended knee · making neat spikes with her fingers. · 
Jompong Larang spoke: · “Our Lady Ajung Larang · Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · [310] very good is what 
I saw. · A handsome one so overwhelming ·  
  
 
105 Jompong’s mother. 
106 N: ‘engaged in weaving, in ikat dyeing’. MSd meubeur is not ‘dyeing’ but tying up threads in preparation for 
dyeing (Coolsma 1913:76 sub BĔUBĔUR). 
107 Jokjok – N says that this is not found in MSd, but the meaning of ‘corner’ seems clear from context (cf. Mal 
pojok ‘corner’). Rigg (1862:177) has ‘the place for putting rice in a native's house’ for jokjok; it is hard to relate 
this to eyes or glancing.

--- PAGE: 129 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
116 
 
f.7r iña kasép iña pélag (·) ker mejeh pasiepan deng (·) taan urang Ajung Larang · [315] saur taan Ajung 
Larang (·) Jo(m)pong saha ngaranna  · s anémbal si Jo(m)pong Larang  · s amapun ngaranna Ameng 
Laya|ran · la(n)tara teing na kasép · [320] kasép manan Bañak Catra · lewih manan Silih Wangi · liwat 
ti tuang ponakan · agengna sé(ng)sérang panon · [ker mejeh] pauc-paucen | di a(ñ)jung108 · [325] timang-
timangen di rañjang · tépok-tépoken di ko(m)bong · édék-édéken di réngkéng · teher bisa carék Jawa · 
w(e)ruh di na esi tangtu · | [330] lapat di tata pustaka · w(e)ruh di darma pitutur · bisa di sanghi(y)ang 
damma · /0/ · saa(ng)ges kapupulihan (·) taan urang Ajung Larang · [335] Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · tuluy 
minger tuang hi- 
f.7v dep (·) na rasa kalejon bogoh · na rasa karejay hayang · na he- [aiu] -yek109 tuluy ditu(n)da · [340] 
dipauc apus dada(m)par · loglog caor ti na tonggong · diri hapit ti na pingping · keda|lan diri ti da(m)pal 
· net na(n)jer ngajuga hangsa  · [345] saasup s(i)ya ka bumi  · ñi(ng)kabken kasang carita · e(n)der na 
rarawis kasang (·) kumare(ñ)cang kumare(ñ)cong (·) ni(ng)gang ka na papan ja(n)ten | · [350] bogoh ku 
na ngaran kasang (·) kasang tujuh kali ñi(ng)kab · kasang seni ta(m)bi lungsir · kasang Pahang ta(m)bi 
laka · bédong dita(m)bi bayabon · [355] balang dita(m)bi kaca(m)bang  · sau(ng)gah ka | manggung 
ra(ñ)jang · gapay ka karas larangan  · dicokot na pasileman  (·) pasileman pasi bo(n)téng110 (·) [360] 
digapay sereh hesenan · tohaan tuluy nu né(k)ték · nu né(k)ték 
  
 
108 Longer than eight syllables but grammatical. 
109 A nonsense syllable intervenes. 
110 N removed this line. It is eight syllables long, however, and while the meaning is still doubtful it is not 
obvious that this was written in error.

--- PAGE: 130 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
117 
 
f.7r he’s handsome, he’s extraordinary · in harmony with the wishes of · Our Lady Ajung Larang.” · 
[315] Lady Ajung Larang said · “Jompong, what’s his name?” · Jompong Larang replied: · “Forgive me 
– his name’s Ameng Layaran. · A handsome one so overwhelming · [320] more handsome than Bañak 
Catra · more than Silih Wangi · beyond your (Lady’s) nephews.111 · His height is alluring to the eye · 
just right for stroking one another on the veranda · [325] caressing one another in bed · petting one 
another in private · cuddling one another in our room. · (He) can also speak Javanese · knows the 
contents of the scriptures · [330] (things) rarely heard in the order of the books · knowledgeable in 
dharma and doctrine · skilled in the holy damma.”112 · /0/ · After this account · Our Lady Ajung Larang 
· [335] Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · then turned it over in her 
f.7v mind · the feeling of being overcome by attraction · the feeling of the working113 of desire. · The 
weaving was then set down · [340] the frame’s cords were stretched out · the backstrap wiggled off her 
back · the cloth beam left her lap · the footrest left her soles. · She got up, rose like a goose. · [345] After 
she had entered the house · she drew the curtains decorated with stories  · the curtain tassels rustled  · 
rattling and clattering · they hit the teak boards. · [350] Attractive were the kinds of curtains: · curtains 
folded seven times · delicate curtains edged with silk (lungsir) · Pahang curtains edged with laka red · 
bédong edged with bayabon · [355] (and) net mesh edged with kacambang. · Having ascended to her 
bedroom · (she) fetched the private writing board · the betel tray was taken · the betel tray and cucumber 
slices.114 · [360] (She) fetched betel leaves one by one115 · which the Lady then folded · which in folding 
  
 
111 Ponakan ‘nephew(s)’. The term is not gendered and number is not indicated. Is this a reference to a 
preference for cousin marriage? 
112 A form of dharma with doubled ⟨mma⟩. 
113 Karejay – connected to MSd jorojoy ‘(of desire) to suddenly appear’, or perhaps to Skt kāryá. 
114 N removed this line. 
115 N went for ‘pack of betel’ (seureuh heuseunan). As the last word (hesenan) is doubtful in meaning I have 
chosen to interpret it along the lines of MSd ésé ‘piece, individual’. Such vowel changes are not unprecedented, 
and the line works with the formula in BM 197 (‘betel leaves by the branch’). Aditia Gunawan suggests 
comparison with MSd deuheus ‘nearby’, thus ‘the betel offered/made near’.

--- PAGE: 131 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
118 
 
f.8r menang salaw é · nu m (a)uc116 menang sapuluh  · ngaga(n)tul m enang dalapan  · [365] ditalian 
ra(m)bu tapih · diletengan leteng karang · leteng karang ti Karawang · leteng susuh ti Malayu · pamuat 
aki puhawang · [370] dipinangan pinang | tiwi · pinang tiwi ngubu cai · pinang ading asri kuning · ker 
mejeh patemu angen · dipasi nu kalakatri  · [375] pasi lepas jadi dua  · pasi gantung jadi t elu · pasi 
(re)mek117 jadi g(e)ne|p · dihañceng di pasileman · ra(m)pés na b enang ngahañceng · [380] dituruban 
sara(n)tangan · a(n)ten lewih ti sakitu · didulur ku pupur kapur · candana ruum sacupu · bunga resa di 
na | juha · [385] dédés dengen ma(ñ)jakané · jaksi dengen kamisadi · jaksi pa(n)dan deng kameñan · dua 
buah ca(ng)ci lenga · diteñuh ku aér mawar · [390] narawastu agur-agur (·) bubura pe(n)tas sa- 
f.8v gala · aya liwat ti sakitu  · digapay na e (m)bal ageng · dicokot na bo éh limur · [395] dicokot na 
sabuk wayang · keris maléla sapucuk · awaya saréyana(na) · pahi dengen buah re(m)bey | · /0/ · saur 
taan Ajung Larang · [400] Jo(m)pong s(i)ya pulang dei (·) ini bawa pa(ngi)riming · bawa ma ka tuang 
a(m)bu · ci(ng) kurang na picaréken · sepahen panaña tineng · [405] ti na taan Ajung Larang · | Sakéyan 
Kilat Bañcana · lamun puguh katanggapan (·) tohaan majar ka luar · majar nu datang ku manten · [410] 
dingaran si Jompong Larang  (·) saa(ng)ges katala |tahan · sale(m)pang ti kadatuan  · le(m)pangna 
sasuhun ebun (·) teher nangg ey pasileman  · [415] teherna saais bo éh · n galalar carog é ageng · 
ñanglandeh ka Pañcawara · mu- 
  
 
116 The MS has muuc. 
117 The first syllable appears below the ⟨ma⟩.

--- PAGE: 132 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
119 
 
f.8r made twenty-five · which in combing out made ten · rolling quids made eight · [365] tied up with 
threads from a tapih’s fringe · salted with lime made from rocks · rock lime from Karawang · sea snail 
shell lime from Malayu · elder sea captains’ cargo. · [370] (The quids) were areca’d with tiwi areca · 
tiwi areca expressing water · ivory areca, radiant yellow · just in harmony with one’s thoughts. · (They) 
were chopped with betel scissors: · [375] Chopped free they became two · chopped while hanging they 
became three · chopped into pieces they became six. · (They) were arranged on the betel tray · (They) 
were arranged nicely. · [380] (They were) enclosed in a lidded hamper. · There was more than this: · 
(These quids) were accompanied by limestone face powder · a round box118 of fragrant sandalwood · 
resa flowers in a container119 · [385] civet and oak gall powder · jaksi with kamisadi · jaksi pandan with 
benzoin · two branches of sesame · sprinkled with rosewater · [390] vetiver (and?) agar-agar · foreign 
perfumes  
f.8v all. · There was more than that: · A great rug was fetched · the silk (limur) cloth was taken · [395] 
the wayang-decorated waistband was taken · (and) a keris blade of crucible steel. · There were so many 
things120 · together with a selection of fruits. · /0/ · Lady Ajung Larang said: · [400] “Jompong, you go 
back again. · This I entrust (you) to bring · bring it (all) to the esteemed mother.121 · And don’t miss out 
what you have to say: · “(These are) quids to ask for your thoughts · [405] from Lady Ajung Larang · 
Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana. · If they are indeed accepted · the Lady says she will come out · (she) says that 
she’ll come over herself.”” · [410] The one named Jompong Larang · after these instructions · had 
walked from the palace. · She walked carrying the box on her head · and also holding the betel tray in 
her hands · [415] and also with the cloth on her back. · ‘(I) passed through the great hall. · Going downhill 
to Pañcawara · opening 
  
 
118 From Tamil cĕppu (Burrow and Emeneau 1984 #2772). 
119 Juha ‘container’ is known from other OSd texts where it contains cosmetics; Danasasmita et al. (1987:146) 
translate it as ‘wadah (utk. bedak), cupu’. N tentatively went for ‘vase’ here, but that does not work in other OSd 
contexts. 
120 Darsa emended the text from awaya to adwaya, Skt ‘non-duality, unity’. In N this line is translated as ‘all of 
them wonderful (?)’. I have interpreted this word instead as a variant of waya ‘there is’, although this is about as 
speculative as Darsa’s intervention. 
121 Tuang ambu – see section IV.1 for the interpretation of this and other kinship terms.

--- PAGE: 133 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
120 
 
f.9r kaken pa(n)to kowari · ngalalar ka Paken Dora · [420] le(m)pang ngaing ñangwétanken · me(n)tas 
di Cipakañcilan · sacu(n)duk ka Paken Teluk · sadatang ka Pakañcilan · mukaken pa(n)to kowari · [425] 
dinga|ran si Jo(m)pong Larang (·) ngahusir ka tepas bumi · tohaan kaso(n)dong lu(ng)guh [di kasur] · 
ñoréyang Sali(ng)ger beheng (·) katuluyan dele teteh · [430] saurna na tuang a (m)bu [niu niu] · itu ta 
egen si | Jo(m)pong (·) na naha éta béjana · ruana sasuhun ebun (·) teher na(ng)gey pasileman · [435] 
saur tohaan sakini · Jo(m)pong ra(m)pés deukanan · gera nu u(ng)gah ka manggung · sau(ng)gah si | 
Jo(m)pong Larang · na sepahen diangseken · [440] saur tohaan sakini  · Jo(m)pong naha béja s(i)ya · 
mawaken aing sepahen · sané(m)bal si Jompong Larang · bérés ngaburang ku ramo · [445] umun 
f.9v teher s(i)ya ñebut · né(m)balan sakayogyana · sangtabé namasiwaya · pun kami titahan taan [ti 
kadatuan]122 · taan urang Ajung Larang · [450] Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · sepahen | panaña tineng · lamun 
puguh katanggapan · tohaan majar ka luar  · majar nu datang ku ma(n)ten  · [455] saurna (na) tuang 
a(m)bu (·) ken aing naña si utun · //0// · saur a(m)buing sakini (·) | Rakaki Bujangga Manik (·) Rakéyan 
Ameng Layaran · [460] utun kita ditañaan · ditañaan ku tohaan (·) ku na taan Ajung Larang · Sakéyan 
Kilat Bañcana · éta | sepahen di imah (·) [465] bawa si Jo(m)pong bihini · ti dalem ti na tohaan · sepahen 
diwéla-wéla · dihañceng di pasileman  · dituruban sara (n)tangan · [470] ra(m)pés na b enang 
ngaha(ñ)ceng · 
  
 
122 Longer than eight syllables but grammatical.

--- PAGE: 134 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
121 
 
f.9r up the bamboo gate · passing through Paken Dora · [420] I walked eastwards. · crossing the 
Cipakañcilan · having arrived at Paken Teluk · having come to Pakañcilan · (I) opened up the bamboo 
gate.’ · [425] The one named Jompong Larang · proceeded to the veranda of the house. · The Lady was 
found sitting on a quilt-mattress.123 · (She) glanced to the side, craning her neck · then looked intently. 
· [430] The esteemed mother said: · “Look, there’s Jompong now! · What’s her message? · Looks like 
she’s carrying a box on her head · and holding a betel tray in her hands.” · [435] The Lady said this: · 
“Jompong – you’re welcome to sit. · Come up to the top right away.” · Jompong Larang had gone up. 
· The betel quids were offered. · [440] The Lady said this: · “Jompong, what’s your message · bringing 
me betel quids?” · In response Jompong · made neat spikes with her fingers · [445] and got on her knees, 
f.9v then pronounced · replying in full propriety: · “Pardon me, in homage to Śiva! · So!124 We are sent 
by the Lady from the palace 125 · Our Lady Ajung Larang · [450] Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · (with) betel 
quids to ask for your thoughts. · If they are indeed accepted · the Lady says she will come out · says 
that she’ll come out herself.” · [455] The esteemed mother said: · “I’ll ask my boy.” · //0// · My mother 
said this:126 · “Venerable Bujangga Manik127 · Rakéyan Ameng Layaran · [460] Boy, you’ve been asked 
· been asked by the Lady · by Lady Ajung Larang · Sakéyan Kilat Bañcana · Those betel quids in the 
house · [465] Jompong just brought them · from the palace, from the Lady · betel quids as can be seen · 
arranged on the betel tray · enclosed in a lidded hamper. · [470] They’re beautifully arranged. · 
  
 
123 Longer than eight syllables but grammatical. 
124 Pun – a word found at the beginnings of invocations. 
125 Longer than eight syllables but grammatical. 
126 Back to Bujangga Manik’s perspective. 
127 This is the first time in the text that the protagonist is referred to as ‘Bujangga Manik’ . It is interesting that 
his own mother calls him rakaki ‘venerable’.

--- PAGE: 135 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
122 
 
f.10r naha ngaran(n)a ku ha(n)te · ga(n)tal tu(ng)gal ga(n)tal Jawa · tékték batri ñaré-ñaré · batri ñela 
batri ñelu (·) [475] batri ngagiling di pingping · batri mauc di haregu · dianggesken di | pinarep · ditaliyan 
ra(m)bu tapih · panali na boñcah laki · [480] paken berejakah hayang · tékték si ratu manggaé (·) mo 
méré mo ma kadaék · ga(n)tal si ratu manglayang · | mo méré mo ma kahayang · [485] batri ngaraket-
palidken (·) batri no(ng)gong-siloken128 · benang ñila-bataraken · tékték kasih pala kasih  (·) jurung-
jarang kapur si(ñ)jang (·) [490] se|kar agung pala bukan · lulu(ng?)kut deng kadal meteng · ratu ga(n)tal 
di Pakuan · pinang tiwi pinang ading  · pinang tiwi ngubu cai  · [495] batri ñengcem di kasturi · kapur 
Barus di na cupu · bunga resa di na juha · 
f.10v dédés dengen ma(ñ)jakané · jaksi dengen kamisadi (·) [500] dikukup ratna ko(m)bala · dua buah 
ca(ng)ci lenga (·) diteñuh ku aér mawar · narawastu agur-agur · bubura pe(n)tas sagala · [505] sepahen 
bawa | si Jo(m)pong · éta dengen pikaénen · pikaénen buah rembey · sepahen panaña tineng · ti dalem 
ti na tohaan · [510] anaking haja lañcanan · karuña ku na tohaan · lamun ki|ta majar daék · aya lewih ti 
sakitu · pangirim ti na tohaan · [515] a(n)ten limur pikaénen · sabuk wayang na pakéen · keris maléla 
sorénen · lamun ki|ta majar da ék · a(n)ten lewih ti sakitu  · [520] di kiriman sesebutan · kapur Barus 
ta(m)ba geruk · batri ñe(ng)cem di cipinang · dibalunan ku hasiwung · ngaran(n)a rakit candana · [525] 
a- 
  
 
128 N has no(ng)tong-silo(ka)keun. The MS has ⟨gong⟩. See also Rosidi (1995:148).

--- PAGE: 136 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
123 
 
f.10r What kinds aren’t there? · Single quids, Java quids · quids worked continuously · (those) worked 
in spurts, worked one after the other · [475] worked by rolling on the thighs · worked by stroking on the 
breastbone · (and) finished off on the breast · tied up with threads from a skirt’s fringe · the means for 
tethering a young man · [480] for a bachelor’s desire · quids prepared for a king 129 · not given unless 
wanted · quids (called) the soaring king · not given unless desired · [485] worked into drifting rafts · 
worked with the back turned towards the sun 130 · made sitting cross-legged like a god · betel quids of 
love, the fruit of love · helped along by camphor and cloths131 · [490] great flowers (and) opening fruits 
· “mosses” and “pregnant lizard” · king of quids in Pakuan · tiwi areca, ivory areca · tiwi areca 
expressing water · [495] having been soaked in musk132 · Barus camphor in a round box · resa flowers 
in a container ·  
f.10v civet and oak gall powder · jaksi with kamisadi133 · [500] covered with gems and tassels · two 
branches of sesame · sprinkled with rosewater · vetiver (and?) agar-agar · foreign perfumes all. · [505] 
The quids Jompong brought · those and the fabrics · fabrics and a selection of fruits · betel quids to ask 
for my thoughts · from the palace, from the Lady. · [510] My child, don’t resist · having compassion for 
the Lady. · If you say you want it · there’ll be more than all that · sent from the Lady. · [515] There’ll 
be silk (limur) for making into cloth · a wayang figure sash for wearing · a crucible steel keris to wear 
at your side. · If you make it known that you agree · (then) there’ll be more than that · [520] among the 
symbolic gifts: · Barus camphor, the remedy for malice · soaked in areca water · wrapped in cotton 
wool · named a “sandalwood raft”. · [525] My 
  
 
129 480-482 are obscure. I broadly follow Darsa (also Aditia Gunawan, p.c., who suggests ‘the king’ for si ratu). 
130 This line is similar to Rosidi (1995:148, line 3), as Teeuw and Darsa noted. 
131 N has ‘rare camphor for cloths’; I prefer an interpretation based on MSd jurung ‘assist/befriend’, although 
the translation is still somewhat doubtful and the line obscure. 
132 Kasturi ‘musk’, from Skt kastūrī (ultimately PIE *kestor ‘musk’, cf. Greek κάστωρ ‘beaver’). To be 
differentiated from dédés, an MP word for ‘civet’, musk produced by civet-cats. 
133 Kamisadi - a mystery.

--- PAGE: 137 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
124 
 
f.11r naking mulah mo sebut (·) karuña ku na tohaan · lamun kita majar daék · a(n)ten liwat ti sakitu · 
tohaan majar ka luar · [530] majar nu datang ku ma(n)ten · baruk carékna to|haan · lamuning datang ka 
luar · aing dék miken awaking · dék ña(m)ber bitan na helang · [535] ngarontok bitan na méong · ménta 
ditanggapan jalir · anaking haja lañca|nan · karuña ku na tohaan · sugan s(i)ya hamo ñaho · [540] tohaan 
gelis warangan · ra(m)pés rua ra(m)pés tuah · teher gelis u(n)dahagi · hapitan karawaléya · cu|uk134 ragi 
hideng telem · [545] ceta hamo diajaran  · na gelis bawa ngajadi  · na é(n)dah sabor135 ti pangpang · 
ha(n)te papahiyanana · /0/ · sané(m)bal na berejakah · [550] eh a(m)bu kumenep teing · lamun di- 
f.11v turut carékéng (·) dara barang pati(ng)timken · éta na carék larangan · sugan hamo kaawakan · 
[555] le(m)pang bawa pulang d ei · le(m)pang r ejeng deng si Jo(m)pong · ka dalem ka na tohaan  · 
sepahe|n ta bawa d ei · buah rembey bawa d ei · [560] piburaten pihiyasen (·) éta bawa pulang d ei · 
pikaénen pisabuken (·) kalawan keris maléla · le(m)pang bawa pulang dei · [565] éta carék | sesebutan · 
carék cangkrim na tohaan · aing ñebutan ngaran(n)a · carék di na rakit sakit · carékna di na candana · 
[570] tohaan sakit salama · carékna di na cipinang (·) | éta cimata tohaan · carékna di na hasiwung · leles 
awakna tohaan · [575] balas mitineng awaking · sakit mu(ng)ku dilañcanan · héman ku benanging bakti 
· ku talatah nu mitutur · ta- 
  
 
134 N emends this to buuk. I am not so sure. Could be related to curuk ‘finger’. 
135 N has sabot.

--- PAGE: 138 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
125 
 
f.11r child, don’t fail to show · your compassion for the Lady. · If you make it known that you agree · 
(then) there’ll be more than that. · The Lady says she’ll head out · [530] says she’ll come herself. · How 
the Lady136 speaks of it! · “If I come outside · I will devote myself · I’ll swoop down like a hawk · [535] 
leap like a tiger · asking to be seen as your lover.” · My child, don’t resist · having compassion for the 
Lady. · Perhaps you don’t know: · [540] (She’s) a beautiful nubile lady · (with) good looks and a good 
character · beautiful and skilled too · (with a) tough grip (on the loom) · (her) fingers and body 
understand dyeing · [545] expert without having been taught. · Beauty she has carried since bi rth · 
loveliness sown from the beginning.137 · She is without compare.” · /0/ · The bachelor replied: · [550] 
“Ah, mother is very single-minded. · If my 
f.11v words had been obeyed · discussing any maiden · that would be forbidden speech. · May it not 
come to pass! · [555] Go and bring (these things) back again. · Walk together with Jompong · to the 
palace, to the Lady. · Take back the betel quids · take back the fruit selection · [560] those unguents, 
those adornments. · Take them back! · The textiles, the sashes · together with the crucible steel keris – 
· go and take them back again. · [565] They speak in symbols · speak the Lady’s riddles. · I’ll tell you 
what they mean: · The word in the raft (rakit) is sickness (sakit) · the sandalwood says that · [570] “the 
Lady is always sick”. · The word in the areca water (cipinang) · that’s the Lady’s tears (cimata). · The 
cotton wool speaks of · the weakness of the Lady’s body · [575] caused by her longing for me · a sickness 
that cannot be resisted. · I love the results of my piety · the directives which have been prescribed · the 
  
 
136 i.e. Jompong. 
137 A difficult line – sabor ‘sown, scattered’, cf. PMP *sabuR ‘sow, scatter’ (ACD 9605); pangpang ‘on high; 
cause, reason’ cf. MSd pangpangna (Danadibrata 2006:496). N has ‘fair since she came forth from the womb’ 
based on sabot, a misreading.

--- PAGE: 139 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
126 
 
f.12r latah mahapandita · [580] lamun diturut carékéng · le(m)pang bawa pulang dei · le(m)pang rejeng 
deng si Jo(m)pong · ka dalem ka na tohaan · datang ma kita ka dalem (·) [585] mulah salah bawa béja · 
pihalang rerekan aing · a|(ng)kul-a(ng)kulken ku carék · ma(ng)ka cita sa(m)bat wala (·) samodana ka 
tohaan · [590] a(m)bu picaréken kita · aja rang si utun mumul  · palias pista codéya138 · ha(n)te acan | 
kapiteneng · me(n)ding hayang berejakah · deng dei kakara cu(n)duk ti gunung · [595] kakara datang ti 
wétan · cu(n)duk ti gunung Damalung · datangna ti Pam(e)rihan · datang ti lurah pajaran · [600] asak 
benang ngojar139 warah (·) | asak benang maca siksa  · pageh benang maleh pateh  · tuhu benang nu 
mitutur · asak benang pangguruan · [605] ma(ng)kaing140 diri deng jugi · mana le(m)pang deng tétéga · 
nurut dengen déwaguru · pa(n)dita deng nu pu- 
f.12v rusa · wageyéng ameng sagala · /0/ · [610] paéh aing hamo mangku(k)141 (·) aing di na dayeh ini 
· ja kitu tuah a(m)buing  · a(m)buing salah ngarambut [ka pamunuhan]142 · magahan jalan ka sema  · 
[615] ngaliarken | tales gatel · dék di urang cacab tapa · ma(ng)mongbongken mangutasken (·) jalan ka 
na kapapaan · a(m)bu soréyang bengeting · [620] ku naha ña mana kitu · mo nili(k) na huis putih  (·) | 
mo ñasar na awak tuha · salah pangajar ka boñcah · ha(n)te panggerahan aing · [625] teteing ogé teteing 
· n a urang anak pahatu · na ura(ng) ha(n)t e dibapa · aya dii(n)dung kasarung  · manghuluke|n ku 
boboñcahen · [630] a(m)buing143 katarujangan · téka geyung ha(n)te ñepah · were ha(n)te nginum tuak 
· téka sasar ha(n)te gering · a(m)bu ja mo kita édan · [635] manana ca(n)teng bahuleng · ho- 
  
 
138 N. has nodéa, an inexplicable hapax. 
139 N has ng[w]ajar, assuming the pasangan ⟨wa⟩ to be an error (which it may be). 
140 MS has mangkuing. N is right to emend this to mangka. 
141 The ⟨-k⟩ is N’s emendation, making mangkuk ‘be perched on, live with (etc.)’. An alternative is to read it as 
is – mangku ‘to be held on the lap, carried (etc.)’, cf. OJv paṅku* (OJED 1261:10). 
142 This line is longer than eight syllables but is entirely grammatical. 
143 The beginning of this line is actually aingbu; the scribe has added an X-shaped mark above the word to 
indicate that the last two syllables should change places.

--- PAGE: 140 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
127 
 
f.12r directives of the mahapandita. · [580] If my words are followed · (you will) go and take 
(everything) back again. · Go together with Jompong · to the palace, to the Lady. · When you come to 
the palace · [585] don’t bring the wrong message. · Forestall my interrogation (by the Lady?) · bolster 
(my message) by your speech. · Though her heart may lament · be kind to the Lady. · [590] Mother, you 
must say: · “We shouldn’t do it; my boy is unwilling.” · Heaven forbid reluctant love be compelled. · 
That should not even be dared. · (I) prefer to be a bachelor. · [595] And, again, I have just arrived from 
the mountains · just come come from the east · arrived from Mount Damalung · come from Pamrihan 
· come from the district of hermitages. · [600] Instructed well in the teachings · well-read in the 
instructions · firmly imbued with the rules144 · true to what has been instructed · thorough the result of 
my instruction. · [605] That’s why I left with the yogis · why I walked with the ascetics · followed along 
with the déwagurus · the pandits and the saintly 
f.12v ones.145 · My companions would all be monks.” · /0/ · [610] “My death won’t settle on · me in 
this city. · But that’s my mother’s mischief · my mother wrongly drew me to this place of killing · 
taught me the way to the cemetery. · [615] (She) spread the “itchy taro”146 · among those immersed in 
ascetic practice · tantamount to opening up and a nd clearing the jungle · for the road to sinfulness. · 
Mother, look at my face · [620] how has it come to this? · Let’s not regard (your) white hair · nor probe 
(your) old body. · (You) taught the lad wrongly · not for my happiness 147 · [625] (It’s all) muc h too 
much! · To be an orphan · someone without a father · to have a mother gone astray · to guide me out 
of childhood. · [630] My mother felt overwhelmed148 · so became dizzy without chewing betel · 
intoxicated without drinking palm wine · so became crazed without being ill. · Mother, you are indeed 
not mad. · [635] That’s why (you’re) so stable and have a firm grasp.149 · (But) it turns 
  
 
144 N’s interpretation. 
145 Nu purusa. N has ‘sages’. 
146 A metaphor for spreading rumours (MSd: taleus ateul). 
147 Based on panggerahan as related to MSd gerah ‘happy’ rather than OJv grah ‘weak, powerless’ (OJED 
540:17). 
148 Katarujangan – ‘overwhelmed’ is based on Rigg (1862:483 sub Tarajang). Undang Darsa suggested 
emending the text to tarañjang ‘naked, exposed’. 
149 This line is obscure.

--- PAGE: 141 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
128 
 
f.13r réng nini[ng]ing te pantang · bihari basana ñiram · horéng dihakanken jantung · horéng sawan 
jalalang · [640] horéng dihakanken be(n)ter · dihakanken lauk mijah · horéng manana sakitu · a(m)buing 
kara|h sumanger (·) paw(e)kas pajeeng benget (·) [645] a(m)bu kita deng awaking · sapoé ayena ini · 
pajeeng benget deng ngaing · mo ñorang pacarék dei · mo ma ti na pangi(m)piyan · [650] pajeeng benget 
di bulan | · patempuh awak di [awak di] angin · saa(ng)ges ñaur sakitu · dicokot ka(m)pék karañcang · 
diesiyan apus ag eng · [655] dihurun deng Siksaguru · itek aing pa ñcasirah · sape|cut hoé walatung · 
a(m)buing tatanghi ti(ng)gal (·) tarik-tarik dibuhaya · [660] dék le(m)pang ka Balungbungan · wétanen 
Talaga Wurung · di na tungtung lemah ini · di tungtungna tébéh wétan · ñiar 
f.13v lemah pamasaran · [665] ñiar tasik panghañutan · pigesanen aing paéh · pigesanen nu(n)da raga · 
i(n)dit birit sudah diri  · lugay sila sudah l e(m)pang · [670] sadiri ti g esan calik · sa|turun ti tungtung 
surung · galasar di panahtaran · sadiri ti salu pant i · samu(ng)kur ti Walang Sangha · [675] mukaken 
panto kowari · sadiri ti Paka ñcilan · na U(m)bul Medang katukang  · [niu] | ka to(ng)gongna Umbul 
So(ng)gol · samu(ng)kur ti Lewi Nutug · [680] sadiri ti Mulah Malik (·) éta jalan ka Pasagi · na jalan ka 
Bala I(n)dra  · diri aing ti paniis  · s amu(ng)kur a |ing di Tubuy  · [685] me(n)tasing di Cihaliwung  · 
na(ñ)jak ka sanghiyang Darah · nepi ka Caringin Be(n)tik · sana(ñ)jak ka Bala Gajah · ku ngaing ges 
kale(m)pangan · [690] na(ñ)jak aing ka Mayanggu · ngalalar ka

--- PAGE: 142 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
129 
 
f.13r out my grandmother did not keep the taboos · back when she was pregnant. · It turns out that 
banana flowers150 were eaten up · it turns out she had the ‘squirrel fits’ 151 · [640] it turns out beunteur 
fish152 were eaten up · spawning fish were eaten up. · It turns out that this is why. · So, mother – peace!153 
· It’s the last time we’ll see each other face-to-face · [645] you, mother, and me · this day today · meeting 
face-to-face with me. · Never again will we speak · except in dreams · [650] seeing each other’s faces 
in the moon · grasping each other’s bodies on the wind.” · After having said that · the open-work 
container was taken · containing within it a great book · [655] bundled with Siksaguru. · ‘My walking 
stick was five-headed · with a whip of walatung rattan. · “Mother, stay and keep watch · (though) you 
pull and pull out of love · [660] (I) shall go to Balungbungan · east of Talaga Wurung · at the end of this 
land · at its easternmost end · looking for 
f.13v a land of exile · [665] looking for a sea to be cast away on · a place for me to die · a place to set 
my body down.” · I raised my rump and was already gone · stretched my legs and was off walking. · 
[670] Having left where I was sitting · and descended from the end of the flooring · (I) glided through 
the courtyard. · Having left the pavilion · having turned away from Walang Sangha · [675] I opened up 
the bamboo gate. · Having left Pakañcilan · looking back on Umbul Medang · on Gonggong and Umbul 
Songgol · having turned away from Lewi Nutug · [680] having left Mulah Malik · that’s the way to 
Pasagi · the way to Bala Indra. · I left Paniis. · After I had turned away from Tubuy · [685] I crossed the 
Cihaliwung · ascending to holy Darah · approaching Caringin Bentik · having ascended to Bala Gajah. 
· By me it was walked. · [690] I ascended to Mayanggu · passing through 
  
 
150 This taboo is recorded in later dictionaries. Jantung also means ‘human heart’, interestingly. 
151 An unexplained turn of phrase – ‘squirrel convulsions’ or ‘fits’, apparently another kind of taboo. The animal 
in question, jalalang, is the black giant squirrel (Ratufa bicolor) – rodents c.40 centimetres long with black fur 
on their backs and buff underparts (Shepherd and Shepherd 2012:118). 
152 Barbodes binotatus, the common barb. A silvery freshwater fish found in many Southeast Asian river s. 
153 Sumanger – lit. ‘soul, spirit’ (cf. Mal semangat, etc.), here  ‘farewell’ or ‘goodbye’.

--- PAGE: 143 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
130 
 
f.14r Ka(n)dang S érang · na jalan ka Ratu Jaya  · ku ngaing g es kal e(m)pangan · datang ka Kadu 
Kadaka154 · [695] me(n)tas aing di Cilengsi · ñangkidul ka gunung Gajah · sacu(n)duk ka bukit Caru · 
sakakala Tuhan | Cupak · ñangwétan ka-Citerep-ken · [700] datang ngaing ka Tandangan · me(n)tas aing 
di Cihoé · me(n)tas aing di Ciwinten · nepi aing ka Cigentis · sana(ñ)jak aing ka Go|ha · [705] sacu(n)duk 
aing ka Timbun · sacu(n)duk ka bukit Timbun · datang ngaing ka Mandata · me(n)tas aing di Citarum 
· ngalalar ka Ramanéya · [710] sanepi ka bukit Se(m)pil · ka to(ng)gongna bu|kit Bongkok · sacu(n)duk 
ka bukit Cungcung · na jajahan Saung Agung · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · [715] le(m)pang ngaing 
ñangwétanken · me(n)tasing di Cilamaya · me(n)tas di Cipunagara · lurah 
f.14v Medang Kahi(y)angan · ngalalar ka To(m)po Omas · [720] me(n)tas aing di Cimanuk · ngalalar 
ka Pada Benghar · me(n)tas di Cijerukmanis · ngalalar raing ka Conam · caremay a(ng)ges katukang · 
[725] ti(m)bang dengen Hujung Barang (·) | Kuningan Darma Pakuan · pahi a(ng)ges kale(m)pangan · 
sacu(n)duk ka Luhur Agung · me(n)tasing di Cisinggarung · [730] sadatang ka tungtung Su(n)da · nepi 
ka Arega Jati  · sacu(n)duk ka Jalatunda  · sakaka|la Silih Wangi  · s amu(ng)kur raing ti i ña · [735] 
me(n)tasing di Cipamali · ka kidul na gunung Agung  · ka kéñca lurah Barebes · ngalalar ka Medang 
Agung · me(n)tasing di Cibula(ng)rang · [740] ngalalar ka Gu|nung Larang · dusunen lurah Gebuhan · 
ngalalar aing ka Sangka · ka Suci ka Agi-Agi · ka Moga Dana K(e)reta · [745] samu(ng)kur raing ti iña 
· me(n)tas aing di Cicomal · me(n)tas di Cipakujati · ngalalar- 
  
 
154 N has Kanaka.

--- PAGE: 144 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
131 
 
f.14r Kandang Sérang · the road to Ratu Jaya. · By me it was walked. · Coming to Kadu Kanaka · [695] 
I crossed the Cilengsi · going south to Mount Gajah · having arrived at Caru Peak · the memorial for 
Tuhan155 Cupak · (I) went east, went Citerep way. · [700] I came to Tandangan · I crossed the Cihoé · I 
crossed the Ciwinten · I approached the Cigentis. · After I had ascended to G oha · [705] after I had 
arrived at Timbun · having arrived at Timbun Peak · I came to Mandata · I crossed the Citarum · passing 
through Ramanéya · [710] having approached Sempil Peak · to the back of Bongkok Peak · having 
arrived at Cungcung Peak · the territory of Saung Agung. · By me it was walked. · [715] I walked 
eastwards · I crossed the Cilamaya · crossed the Cipunagara · (in the) district 
f.14v of Medang Kahiyangan. · Passing through Tompo Omas · [720] I crossed the Cimanuk · passing 
through P ada Benghar · crossing the Cijerukmanis · I passed Conam. · Looking back on (Mount) 
Caremay · [725] Timbang and Hujung Barang · Kuningan Darma Pakuan · (I) had walked through them 
all. · Having arrived at Luhur Agung · I crossed the Cisinggarung. · [730] (I) had come to the end of 
Sunda · approaching Arega Jati · having arrived at Jalatunda · the memorial to Silih Wangi. · After I 
had turned away from there there · [735] I crossed the Cipamali · to the south Mount Agung · on the left 
the district of Barebes. · Passing through Medang Agung · I crossed the Cibularang. · [740] Passing 
through Gunung Larang · back country of the district of Gebuhan · I passed through Sangka · passed 
through Suci, passed through Agi-Agi · passed Moga Dana Kereta. · [745] After I had turned away from 
there · I crossed the Cicomal · crossed the Cipakujati. · I passed 
  
 
155 Tuhan ‘God; lord’ in modern Malay/Indonesian (related to OSd tohaan).

--- PAGE: 145 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
132 
 
f.15r ing ka Sagara · nepi aing ka Balingbing · [750] jajahan Arega Séla · na Kupang dengen na Batang 
· ka kéñca na Pakalongan · sacu(n)duk aing ka Gerus · na Tinep deng na Tumerep · [755] ku ngaing ges 
kale(m)pangan · datang | ka lurah Tabuhan · cu(n)duk ka Darma Tumulus · ngalalar ka Kali Go(n)dang 
· sacu(n)duk ka Mano Hayu · [760] ngalalar ka Pajinaran · nepi aing ka Pañjalin · sacu(n)duk aing ka 
Se(m)bung · ngalalar ka Paka(n)da |ngan · s adatang ka Pa (n)danara(ng) · [765] nu(ñ)juk gunung 
ñangkidulken · itu ta na gunung Rahung · ti kulonna gunung Dihéng · itu ta gunung Sundara · itu ta na 
gunung Kedu · [770] ti kidul | gunung Damalung · iña na lurah Pantaran · itu gunung Karungrungan · 
sakakala na batara  (·) basa mitineng batari · [775] ti wétan bukit Marapi  · sakakala Darmadéwa · iña 
lura- 
f.15v h Karangiyan · diri aing ti Danara(ng) (·) datang aing ka Pidada · [780] sadatang ngaing ka Jemas 
· ka kéñca jajahan Demak · ti wétan na Welahulu · ngalalaring ka Pulutan · datang ka Medang Ka|mulan 
· [785] sacu(n)duk ka Rabut Jalu · ngalalaring ka Larangan · sadatang ngaing ka Jempa156 · me(n)tasing 
di Ciwuluyu  · cu(n)duk ka lurah Gegelang · [790] ti kidul Medang Kamulan · cu(n)duk ka bangba|rung 
gunung · s adatang ka Jero Alas  · me(n)tas di bagawan Cangku  · ngalalar raing ka Daha  · [795] 
samu(ng)kur raing ti iña · sacu(n)duk aing ka Pujut · me(n)tas di Cironabaya · nga|lalar ka Rambut157 
Merem · sacu(n)duk aing ka Wakul · [800] sadatang ka Pacéléngan · ngalalar raing ka Bubat · cu(n)duk 
aing ka Mangu(n)tur · ka buruan Majapahit · ngalalar ka Dar- 
  
 
156 N has Jempar. 
157 The ⟨m⟩ in Rambut appears to have been converted from ⟨ba⟩.

--- PAGE: 146 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
133 
 
f.15r through Sagara · I approached Balingbing · [750] territory of Arega Séla · of Kupang and of 
Batang. · On the left was Pakalongan. · Having arrived at Gerus · at Tinep and at Tumerep. · [755] By 
me it was walked. · Coming to the district of Tabuhan · arriving at Darma Tumulus · passing through 
Kali Gondang · having arrived at Mano Hayu · [760] passing through Pajinaran · I approached Pañjalin 
· I had arrived at Sembung. · Passing through Pakandangan · having come to Pa(n)danara(ng) · [765] (I) 
pointed southwards to the mountains: · “That there is Mount Rahung 158 · Mount Dihéng to the west · 
that there is Mount Sundara · that there is Mount Kedu · [770] to the south , Mount Damalung · over 
there the district of Pantaran · that’s Mount Karungrungan · the memorial of the god · when longing for 
the goddess · [775] to the east is Marapi Peak · the memorial of Darmadéwa · there the district 
f.15v of Karangiyan.” · I left Danara(ng) · I came to Pidada · [780] I had come to Jemas · to the left the 
territory of Demak · to the east of Welahulu. · I passed through Pulutan · coming to Medang Kamulan. 
· [785] Having arrived at Rabut Jalu · I passed through Larangan · I had come to Jempa · I crossed the 
Ciwuluyu. · Arriving at the district of Gegelang · [790] to the south of Medang Kamulan · arriving at 
the threshold of the mountains159 · having come to Jero Alas · crossing the Cangku River160 · I passed 
through Daha. · [795] I had turned away from there · I had arrived at Pujut · crossing the Cironabaya · 
passing through Rabut Merem · I had arrived at Wakul. · [800] Having come to Pacéléngan · I passed 
through Bubat. · I arrived at the great courtyard · at the square of Majapahit · passing through Dar- 
  
 
158 N suspects that this is an error for Mount Prahu near Dieng in Central Java.  
159 N has ‘Bangbarung Gunung’, as if it were a toponym. It would be an ungrammatical name for a mountain, 
however, and bangbarung means ‘threshold’. 
160 Bagawan, probably a corruption of bangawan ‘(great) river’ (OJED 206:1).

--- PAGE: 147 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
134 
 
f.16r ma Añar · [805] na Karang Kajramanaan  · ti kidulna Karang Jaka  · sadatang ka Pali(n)tahan  · 
samu(ng)kur ti Majapahit  · na(ñ)jak ka gunung  [siu kwai niu ·] Pawitra · [810] rabut gunung Gajah 
Mu(ng)kur · ti ké(ñ)ca | na alas Gresik · ti kidul gunung Rajuna · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · ngalalar 
ka Patukangan  · [815] datang ka Rabut Wahangan  · le(m)pang ngaing ñangwétanken · l a(m)bung 
gu|nung Maham éru · disorang kal érenana · d atang ka gunung B(e)rahma  · [820] datang ngaing ka 
Kadiran · ka Tandes ka Ranobawa · le(m)pang ngaing ngalér ngétan · sacu(n)duk aing ka Dingding (·) 
éta | hulu déwaguru · [825] samu(ng)kur raing ti (i)ña · datang ka Pañca Nagara · sacu(n)duk aing ka 
Sampang · sanepi aing ka Ge(n)ding · me(n)tas di Cirabutwahangan · [830] sadatang ngaing ka Lésan · 
iña lurah 
f.16v Pajarakan · le(m)pang aing ngidul wétan · ngalalar ka Kaman Kuning  · ngalalar ka gunung 
H(i)yang · [835] disorang kalérenana · sadatang ka gunung Arum · na lurah Talaga Wurung · ti kalérna 
Panarukan (·) | ka k éñcana Patukangan  · [840] sadatang ka Balungbungan  · di i ña aing ditapa  · 
sa(m)biyan ngerenan palay · teher(ing) m(e)rela(k) najur  · teher(ing?) na(ñ)jerken li(ng)ga 161 · [845] 
tehering puja ñangraha · puja ña|pu mugu-mugu · ma(ng)ña(m)bat-walaken manéh · di (i)ña aing t e 
hebel · satahun d eng sataraban  · [850] téka waya na b añcana · d atang ti yagi (wa)don 162 · na rua 
mamarayaen · té|ka béka mulung lañcek · carékna kaka lañceking · [855] Rakaki Bujangga Manik · haup 
aing ebon-ebon · aing na pitiagien · manan hésé ku mamanéh · rusuh ku na panga- 
  
 
161 This line is shorter than eight syllables; -ing makes the line scan. 
162 Even after emending don to wadon this line is still one syllable short. Aditia Gunawan (p.c.) suggests datang 
ti tiyagi (wa)don ‘(disaster) came from the female ascetic’, but the definite article na or separating particle ta 
would also be appropriate.

--- PAGE: 148 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
135 
 
f.16r ma Añar · and [805] Karang Kajramanaan · to the south of Karang Jaka. · Having come to 
Palintahan · having turned away from Majapahit · ascending Mount Pawitra · [810] the holy mountain 
of Gajah Mungkur · to the left the land of Gresik · Mount Rajuna to the south. · By me it was walked. 
· Passing through Patukangan · [815] coming to Rabut Wahangan · I walked eastwards. · The flanks of 
Mount Mahaméru · were passed along the north side. · Coming to Mount Brahma · [820] I came to 
Kadiran · to Tandes, to Ranobawa. · I walked northwards, eastwards · I had arrived at Dingding – · 
that’s the seat of an abbot. · [825] I had turned away from there. · Coming to Pañca Nagara · I had arrived 
at Sampang. · I had reached Gending. · Crossing the Cirabutwahangan · [830] I had come to Lésan · 
there the district of 
f.16v Pajarakan. · I walked southwards, eastwards · passing through Kaman Kuning · passing by Mount 
Hiyang · [835] (which) was passed along the north side. · Having come to Mount Arum · the district of 
Talaga Wurung · to its north Panarukan · to its left Patukangan · [840] I had come to Balungbungan.163 
· There I was in seclusion · while recuperating from fatigue. · I then gardened and planted · I then raised 
a lingga · [845] I then made ready for worship · worshipped by sweeping diligently 164 · lamenting to 
myself. · I wasn’t there long · a year and a bit. · [850] There was then an ordeal. · A female ascetic came 
· in the guise of kinship. · Apparently that nuisance had adopted me as her elder brother.’165 · She spoke: 
“Elder brother! · [855] Venerable Bujangga Manik! · Look on me as a nun. · I’m here to become an 
ascetic – · that’s better than struggling with myself · troubled by human 
  
 
163 Modern Blambangan, known in the Portuguese accounts as Bulambuam. 
164 The word ‘diligently’ here is in fact mugu-mugu, a hapax and a peculiar one. N thought it was derived from 
puguh ‘assuredly, definitely’, which it may be. 
165 Pithier in the original.

--- PAGE: 149 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
136 
 
f.17r wakan · [860] héman ku na karuaan · carékna Bujang(ga) Manik · ku ngaing dirarasaken · bawaing 
apus sata(m)bi · ngaran(n)a na Siksaguru · [865] carék di na apus t éya · kad(i)yangganing ring geni · 
lamun padeket deng | e(ñ)juk · mu(ng)ku burung éta senget · kitu lanang dengen wadon · [870] sadiri 
aing ti iña · le(m)pang ngaing kalautken · sugan aya nu balayar · aing dék nu(m)pang ka Bali · sadatang 
aing ka laut |  [hurung tehenna ngalérén · ku ngaing dirarasakah]166   · [875] kumuliling turut tasik 
· kumacacang turut ta ñcang · nañaken nu d ék ka Bali  · m omogana t éka waya  · k asa(m)pak aki 
puhawang · [880] na puhawang Séla Batang · dék me(n)tas ka nusa Bali · dé|k tuluy layar ka Bangka · 
aing dék nu(m)pang ka Bali · saurna Bujangga Manik (·) [885] Rakéyan Ameng Layaran · akiing juru 
puhawang · aing dék nu(m)pang ka Bali · lamuning datang ka iña (·) aya panggerahan a- 
f.17v ing · [890] carék aki Séla Batang (·) lamun hayang nu dék me(n)tas (·) sui dipawalangati · u(ng)gah 
onam ka parahu · tu(m)pak di na jurung pangkuh (·) [895] deuk di gagarebongan · saa(ng)ges u(ng)gah 
ka ma(ng)gung parahu · bo|goh ku tawas [tawas] parahu  · parahu jati diukir · ka luhur dinanagaken · 
[900] téka be(n)tik ti kamudi · bogoh aing ku parahu · ra(m)pés benang ngadangdanan · mibabahon a|wi 
go(m)bong · mitihang awi ñowana · [905] mipanggiling haur kuning  · misaré kawung caw éné · 
midada(m)par haur séyah · kamudi kamuning167 Keling · tihang layar kayu laka · [910] hurung benangna 
ngahi(ng)gu|l · siyang benang ngaj(e)rinang · apus dangdan hoé muka · pabaur hoé walatung · diselang 
deng hoé omas (·) [915] tali bubut kenur Cina · carénang dayung na e(n)teng · dayung salawé salaya · 
beteng rees ku sa- 
  
 
166 This pair of lines appears in the interstices and seems to have been added later in a different hand. 
167 N has kamudi.

--- PAGE: 150 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
137 
 
f.17r bodies · [860] in love with outward appearances.” · Bujangga Manik spoke: · “I’ve felt this myself. 
· I brought a book with me. · Its name is Siksaguru. · [865] This book speaks of this: · “Just as with fire 
· if it approaches sugar palm fibre · it will not fail to ignite it · so it is, men with women.”” · [870] ‘After 
I had left from there · I walked seawards · in case there were anyone sailing. · I wanted to travel to Bali. 
· I had come to the sea [ Interlinear note: the burning does not abate · I have experienced it] 168 · [875] 
went around following the coast · roamed about following the shore · inquiring for one who would go 
to Bali. · It happened that there was one. · (I) encountered an elder captain · [880] Captain Séla Batang 
· who was crossing to the island of Bali · (and who) would then sail to Bangka. · I wanted to travel to 
Bali.’ · Bujangga Manik said · [885] Rakéyan Ameng Layaran: · “Grandfather, master seaman · I want 
to travel to Bali. · If I get there · there’ll be (something 
f.17v to show) my gratitude.” · [890] Grandfather Séla Batang spoke: · “If your desire is to cross · (I) 
insist that you not be anxious. · Come right onto the ship · come up to the passenger deck169 · [895] (and) 
sit in the cabin.” · ‘After I had gone up to the deck · I admired the shape of the ship · the ship of teak 
built · to the top in the form of a dragon · [900] that curved around from the rudder. · I admired the ship: 
· The rigging was done well · (it was) fitted with a boom of gombong bamboo · with spars of young 
bamboo · [905] with yellow bamboo rollers170 · with a floor of sugar palm saplings · with seats made of 
séyah bamboo · a rudder of Indian kamuning wood · a mast of laka wood · [910] glowing with a ‘writhing 
fish’ pattern · (like) dawn, the result of dragon’s blood · the rigging was made of muka rattan · mixed 
with walatung rattan · alternating with golden rattan · [915] the halyards were Chinese rope · the oars 
pocking the mirror (of the sea) · twenty-five oars on each side. · (I) stopped marvelling at those 
  
 
168 See section I.2.5. 
169 This line is tricky; jurung pangkuh has not been satisfactorily deciphered. 
170 Panggiling – defined by Rigg (1862:347) as ‘a roller; […] name of the long bambu, with a short spoke 
through the lower end, by which, in native sea-going boats the mat sail is rolled up perpendicularly, and which 
can thus be partly or wholly furled or reefed, according to the wind’.

--- PAGE: 151 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
138 
 
f.18r kitu · bogoh ku nu mawa i ña · [920] bibijilan para nusa · nu badayung urang Marus · nu babosé 
urang Angké · nu balayar urang Bangka  · juru batu urang Lampung  · [925] juru mudi urang Jambri  · 
juru wedil urang Bali · juru panah | urang Cina · juru tulup ti Malayu · juru amuk ti Sale(m)bu · [930] 
pamerang urang Makasar · juru kilat urang Pasay · nu ni(m)ba jo(m)pong sagala · pani(m)ba u(n)dem 
salaka · putih kajang pucuk nipah · [935] langgang ti|hang pakajangan · na layar ma(ñ)je(r)171 ke(m)bang 
· hir na angin bar na layar  · masang wedil172 tujuh kali · sarunay dipikingkila · [940] bung173 na goong 
brang na gangsa · goong kuning tumalapung · kingkila nu bikas | layar · séyah na ge(n)dang sarunay · 
séok nu kawih tarahan  · [945] nu kawih a(m)bah -a(m)bahan (·) ba(n)tar kali buar p élang · b uat di 
manggung parahu · balayar taraban poyan · sadatang ka nusa Ba- 
f.18v li · [950] saurna Bujangga Manik · akiing juru puhawang · éboh midua rahayu · é(boh) ta174 urang 
papasah · dahini kaén aing · [955] ini pangwidiyan aing · éboh midua rahayu · kita ma ma(ng)gih k(e)reta 
· awaking | ma(ng)gih rahayu · carék aki S éla Batang · [960] samapun mahapa(n)dita (·)kami néma 
pangwidiyan · samapun mahapa(n)dita · ra(m)pés nu sapilaunan · saa(ng)ges ñaur sakitu · [965] s(i)ya | 
turun ti parahu · sacu(n)duk s(i)ya ka dayeh · ti iña lunasing usma · moha teing nu ti hela · téka sarua 
réyana · [970] na lanang dengen na wadon · hidepéng karah mo waya (·) ja dini di te|ngah nusa · gumanti 
lelewih oman ·  réya ma(na)n urang Jawa  · [975] ti(m)bun manan di Malayu  · di (i)ña aing te hebel · 
satahun deng sataraban · pulang dei ka uruting · sacu(n)duk ka si- 
  
 
171 The ⟨ma⟩ was converted from ⟨pa⟩. 
172 MS has wedel. 
173 N has ing. 
174 Scribal error; éta does not work here, but éboh ta does.

--- PAGE: 152 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
139 
 
f.18r things · (and) admired those carried there · [920] originating from many countries: · Those rowing 
were Marus people 175 · those paddling were Angké people · those sailing were Bangka people · the 
experts in sounding were Lampung people · [925] the helmsmen were Jambri people · the master gunners 
were Balinese · the master archers were Chinese · blowgun masters from Malayu · master duellists 
from Salembu · [930] the warriors were Makasar people · the masters of the sheets were Pasay people · 
those bailing were all youths · their bailers silver coconut shells. · White were the roofing mats of nipah 
sprouts · [935] wide apart the matting poles · the sail stood upright like a flower. · The wind rose, the 
sails swelled. · the guns fired seven times · the shawms were treated as a signal · [940] the gongs boomed, 
the flat gongs branged · the brass gongs interrupted them · the signal for loosing the sails. · The din of 
drum and shawm · the sound of work songs · [945] which were sung as we left port: · “Smooth river, … 
cargo boat”. · Stowed aboard the ship · sailing for part of the day · (I) had come to the country of Ba- 
f.18v li.’ · [950] Bujangga Manik said: · “Grandfather, master seaman · let’s go our separate ways · let’s 
part properly. · Here’s my cloth · [955] it’s what I owe. · Let’s part properly · you finding good fortune 
· me finding goodness.” · Grandfather Séla Batang spoke: · [960] “My respects, mahapandita. · We 
accept your gift · My respects, mahapandita. · Take good care of yourself.” · After saying these things 
· [965] he176 alighted from the ship. · After (that) he had arrived at the city. · ‘There my passion was 
exhausted. · (I was) more bewildered than ever. · It turned out there so many · [970] the men and the 
women. · I hadn’t thought there would be – · alas! here in the middle of the land · (there were) instead 
many, many more · more people than the Javanese · [975] more heaped up than in Malayu · I wasn’t 
there long · a year and a bit. · Retracing my steps back · having arrived at the  
  
 
175 ‘People’ replicates non-gendered OSd urang, although it sounds a little odd here in English. 
176 That is, Bujangga Manik.

--- PAGE: 153 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
140 
 
f.19r si laut · [980] kasa(m)pak aki puhawang · puhawang Béla Sagara · dék balayar ka Palé(m)bang · 
dék tuluy ka Parayaman  · s aurna Bujangga Manik  · [985] Rakéyan Ameng Layaran  · a kiing juru 
puhawang · aing | dék nu(m)pang di kita · dék si(n)dang di Balungbungan · carék aki(ing)177 puhawang 
(·) [990] lamun puguh nu dék nu(m)pang (·) ulah dipiwalangati · ra(m)pés gera ka parahu · sau(ng)gah 
haing ka manggung · deuk di gaga|rebongan · [995] bogoh ku tawas parahu · parahu patina ageng · jong 
kapal buka dalapan · pa(ñ)jangna salawé depa · sadiri ti nusa Bali · [1000] saur puhawang sakini · boñcah 
pari|ket-pariket (·) parahu réya buatna · sugan ni(n)dih mu(ng)kal ma(n)di  · sugan mangpéng karang 
bé(ng)péng · [1005] sugan ni(ng)gang karang bajra · sugan nebu(k) karang nu(ng)gul · sugan no(ñ)jo(k) 
karang añcol (·) 
f.19v sugan m ebet karang s eket · karuña ku na tohaan  · [1010] Rakaki Bujangga Manik  · kakara 
numpang di urang · balayar sapoé réngrép · sacu(n)duk ka Balungbungan · saurna Bujangga Mani|k · 
[1015] akiing juru puhawang · éboh ta urang papasah · éboh midua rahayu · carékna aki puhawang  · 
samapun mahapa(n)dita (·) [1020] ra(m)pés nu sapilaunan · saturun ti na jong tutu|p · diri aing ti parahu 
· sacu(n)duk ka gunung Raung  [miu] (·) ka lurah Talaga Wurung  · [1025] samu(ng)kur raing ti i ña · 
sacu(n)duk aing ka Baru  · éta na lurah kat égan · sadiri aing ti i |ña · ngalalar ka Padang Alun  · [1030] 
cu(n)duk ka gunung Watangan  · nu awas ka nusa Barong  · samu(ng)kur aing ti i ña · datang aing ka 
Sarampon · sacu(n)duk aing ka Cakru · [1035] sadiri aing 
  
 
177 The scribe originally wrote ⟨aingki⟩. An X-shaped mark appears above.

--- PAGE: 154 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
141 
 
f.19r seashore · [980] (I) encountered an elder captain · Captain Béla Sagara · (who) was sailing to 
Palémbang · (and) was then going to Parayaman.’ · Bujangga Manik said · [985] Rakéyan Ameng 
Layaran: · “Grandfather, master seaman · I want to travel with you · want to stop at Balungbungan.” · 
The elder captain spoke: · [990] “If you’re sure about wanting to travel (there) · don’t be anxious. · It’s 
all good – come right on the ship.” · ‘After I had gone up to the top · (I) sat in the cabin. 178 · [995] (I 
was) impressed by the ship’s shape · a particularly large ship – · a junk eight (fathoms) across · twenty-
five fathoms in length.’ · Having left from the land of Bali · [1000] the Captain said this: · “Quick about 
it, lads! · The ship’s got a heavy cargo. · Perhaps (we’ll) run aground on dangerous rocks · (we) may 
strike exposed rocks · [1005] (we) may hit diamond-hard179 rocks · (we) may knock against rising rocks 
· (we) may bump into protruding rocks ·  
f.19v (we) may be dashed on sharp rocks. · Have compassion for the Lord · [1010] venerable Bujangga 
Manik · sailing with us for the first time.” · (We) sailed for a whole day. · Having arrived at 
Balungbungan · Bujangga Manik said · [1015] “Grandfather, master seaman · let’s go our separate ways 
· let’s part properly.” · The elder Captain spoke · “My respects, mahapandita. · [1020] Take good care 
of yourself.” · ‘Having descended from the closed junk · I left the ship · Having arrived at Mount Raung 
· at the district of Talaga Wurung · [1025] (and) after I had turned away from there · after (that), I had 
arrived at Baru · that’s the district of a hermitage. · After I had left from there · I passed through Padang 
Alun · [1030] (and) arrived at Mount Watangan · which faces the land of Barong. · After I had turned 
away from there · I came to Sarampon. · After I had arrived at Cakru · [1035] (and) after I had left 
  
 
178 The precise meaning of this is unclear, but it appears to be related to OJv and MSd words for ‘covered 
(wagon)’ (cf. OJv grĕboṅ). 
179 Bajra – ‘diamond; thunderbolt’, an object of superlative hardness.

--- PAGE: 155 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
142 
 
f.20r ti iña · le(m)pang aing marat ngidul  · datang ka lurah Kenep  · cu(n)duk ka Lamajang Kidul  · 
ngalalar ka gunung H(i)yang · [1040] datang a(ing) ka Pacira · la(m)bung gunung Mahaméru · disorang 
kidulenana · s adatang ka Rano |bawa · ngalalar ka Kayu Taji  · [1045] samu(ng)kur raing ti i ña · 
sacu(n)duk aing ka Kukub  · datang ngaing ka Kasturi  · cu(n)duk ka Sagara Dalem  · ngalalar ka 
Kagenengan · [1050] sumengka ka gunung Kawi  · diso|rang kidul enana · s adatang ka Pamijahan  · 
le(m)pang aing kabaratken · ngalalar ka gunung Añar · [1055] cu(n)duk aing ka Daliring · sadatang ka 
gunung Ka(m)pud · datang ka Rabut Pasajén · éta | hulu Rabut Palah · kabuyutan Majapahit · [1060] nu 
dise(m)bah ku na Jawa · maca (a)ing Darmawéya · pahi deng Pa(n)dawa Jaya · ti iña lunasing jo(m)brah 
· aing bisa carék Jawa · [1065] bisa 
f.20v aing [ciu] ngaro basa · di iña aing te hebel · satahun deng sataraban · ha(n)te betah kage(n)teran 
· datang nu puja ng añcana · [1070] nu ñe(m)bah ha(n)te pegatna · nu ngideran ti nagara  · le(m)|pang 
ngaing marat ngidul (·) nepi aing ka Waliring · ngalalaring ka Polaman · [1075] datang aing ka Balitar · 
me(n)tasing di Cironabaya · ngalalar ka Pasepahan · ka Luka ka Saput Talun  · sadatang | [datang] ka 
Pajadangan · [1080] ngalalaring ka Kalang Brét · sacu(n)duk ka Pasugihan · di pipirna gunung Wilis · 
ku ngaing tébéh kidulna · datang ngaing ka Dawuhan · [1085] ngalalar ka gunung Lawu (·) iña | na lurah 
Urawan · s amu(ng)kur raing ti i ña · le(m)pang aing marat ngidul  · ngalalar ka Pamanikan  · [1090] 
sadatang ka Sida Lepas · ña(ng)landeh aing ka Oyong · samu(ng)kur ti gunung Lawu · datang ngaing 
ka Ca(m)paga-

--- PAGE: 156 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
143 
 
f.20r from there · I walked southwestwards · coming to the district of Kenep · arriving at South 
Lamajang · passing through Mount Hyang. · [1040] I came to Pacira. · The flanks of Mount Mahaméru 
· were passed by the south. · Having come to Ranobawa · I passed through Kayu Taji. · [1045] Having 
turned away from there · after I had arrived at Kukub · I came to Kasturi · arriving at Sagara Dalem · 
passing through Kagenengan · [1050] rising up at Mount Kawi · (which) was passed by the south. · 
Coming to Pamijahan · I walked westwards · passing by Mount Anyar. · [1055] I arrived at Daliring · 
had come to Mount Kampud · came to Rabut Pasajén180 – · that’s the head of Rabut Palah · the sanctuary 
of Majapahit · [1060] which is venerated by the Javanese. · I read the Darmawéya · together with the 
Pandawa Jaya. · From there I was fully satisfied.181 · I could speak Javanese. · [1065] I could  
f.20v translate the language. · I wasn’t there long · a year and a bit. · Not tolerating the rumbling · of 
those who came to offer up gold · [1070] who paid homage without break · who wandered over from the 
capital · I walked southwestwards. · I got to Waliring · I visited Polaman · [1075] I came to Balitar · I 
crossed the Cironabaya. · Passing through Pasepahan · Luka, and Saput Talun. · having come to 
Pajadangan · [1080] I passed through Kalang Brét. · Having arrived at Pasugihan · on the side of Mount 
Wilis · which I passed by its south · I came to Dawuhan · [1085] I passed through Mount Lawu · there 
(in) the district of Urawan. · After I had turned away from there · I walked southwestwards · passing 
through Pamanikan182 · [1090] (and), having come to Sida Lepas · I descended at Oyong. · Having turned 
away from Mount Lawu · I came to Campaga- 
  
 
180 ‘Holy Place of Offerings’ – cf. OJv saji ‘requisites, esp. for rituals and ceremonies, offerings’ (OJED 
1600:5). 
181 The term here, jo(m)brah ‘sum, whole’, may be an Arabic loanword (cf. Malay/Indonesian jumlah), although 
the origin is uncertain. Aditia Gunawan favours a derivation from MSd jarambah ‘go/play far away from home’ 
(p.c.). 
182 ‘Place of Beads (or Jewels)’, from manik.

--- PAGE: 157 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
144 
 
f.21r n · ngalalar ka Pamaguhan · [1095] sacu(n)duk aing ka Pahul · samu(ng)kur raing ti iña (·) datang 
(a)ing ka Caturan · sacu(n)duk aing ka Roma · me(n)tasing di Ciwuluyu · [1100] iña na lurah Bobodo · 
ngalalar raing ka | Taji [ka Taji]  · nepi ka gunung Marapi  · disorang kidulenana · cu(n)duk aing ka 
Janawi (·) [1105] éta lurah déwaguru · le(m)pang aing marat ngidul (·) sanepi aing ka Wedi · ngalalar 
ka Singhapura · sadatang | ngaing ka Ma(ta?)ram · [1110] me(n)tas aing di Cibérang · datang ka lurah 
Paguhan · ngalalar ka Kahuripan · ka gédéngna Rabut Bésér · me(n)tas di Cilohparaga · [1115] sanepi 
aing ka Pahit (·) | sadatang ka Taal Pegat · nepi aing ka Kulisi · me(n)tas di Ciwatukura · ngalalar ka 
Pakuwukan · [1120] sacu(n)duk ka lurah Danuh  · datang ngaing ka Lanabang  · ka Wawarah183 [ka] 
Tadah Haji184 · ka Tarungtung 
f.21v ka Walakung  · s adatang(ing) ka Kalangan  · [1125] sanepi ka Pamarisan  · datang ngaing ka 
ta(m)bangan (·) me(n)tas aing di Cilohku  · na(ñ)jak ka gunung Sangkuan · datanging ka (A)dipala · 
[1130] le(m)pang (aing) ka-baratken · datang ngaing ka Sa|wangan · ka muhara Cisarayu · ku ngaing 
ges kale(m)pangan · datang ka Ma(n)dala Ayah · [1135] le(m)pang ngaing turut pasir · datang ka Pala 
Buaja · mu(ng)kur ti Tegal Popoken · sadatang ka Karang | Siling · me(n)tas di Cipaterangan · [1140] 
sadatang ngaing ka Mambeng  (·)cu(n)duk ka Dona Kalicung  · gédéng alas Nusah é · me(n)tas di 
Sagaranak(an?) · ngalalar ka Batu Lawang · [1145] di pipi(r)na batu tulis · karang | tu(ng)gul [·] karang 
bajra185 · sacu(n)duk aing ka Bakur · ka muhara Cita(n)duyan · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · [1150] 
datang ngaing ka Cimedang · me(n)tas di Cikutrapi(ng)gan · cu(n)duk aing ka Pana(ñ)jung · ka gédéng 
nusa 
  
 
183 N has Jawarah. 
184 Grammatical but longer than eight syllables. 
185 I have retained this pair as a single line in spite of the MS.

--- PAGE: 158 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
145 
 
f.21r n. · I passed through Pamaguhan. · [1095] After I had arrived at Pahul · (and) after I had turned 
away from there · I came to Caturan. · I had come to Roma. · I crossed the Ciwuluyu186 · [1100] there in 
the district of Bobodo. · I passed through Taji · got to Mount Marapi · (which) was passed by its south 
· (and) I arrived at Janawi · [1105] that’s the district of a déwaguru.187 · I walked southwestwards. · 
Having got to Wedi · I passed through Singhapura. · I had come to Ma(ta?)ram.188 · [1110] I crossed the 
Cibérang · coming to the district of Paguhan. · Passing through Kahuripan · (and) the steep slopes of 
Rabut Bésér · crossing the Cilohparaga · [1115] I had got to Pahit. · Having come to Taal Pegat · I got 
to Kulisi. · Crossing the Ciwatukara · passing through Pakuwukan · [1120] having arrived at the district 
of Danuh · I came to Lanabang · to Wawarah, (to) Tadah Haji · to Tarungtung,  
f.21v to Walakung. · I had come to Kalangan. · [1125] Having got to Pamarisan · I came to the ferry. · 
I crossed the Cilohku. · Ascending Mount Sangkuan · I came to Adipala. · [1130] I walked westwards. 
· I came to Sawangan · to the mouth of the Cisarayu. · By me it was walked. · Coming to Mandala 
Ayah · [1135] I walked along the ridge. · Coming to Pala Buaja · turning away from Tegal Popoken · 
having come to Karang Siling · crossing the Cipaterangan · [1140] I had come to Mambeng. · I arrived 
at Dona Kalicung · uplands of the region of Nusahé. · Crossing the Sagaranakan · passing through the 
rock gates189 · [1145] on whose side was a rock inscription · banner rock, diamond-hard rock. · I had 
arrived at Bakur · at the mouth of the Citanduyan. · By me it was walked. · [1150] I came to the 
Cimedang. · Crossing the Cikutrapinggan · I arrived at Panañjung · uplands of the land of  
  
 
186 Bengawan Solo River. 
187 Déwaguru – the head of a religious community,  ~‘abbot’. 
188 Noorduyn (1982) suggests emendation after the historical region of Mataram. 
189 Batu Lawang, lit. ‘Gate Rock(s)’ – from OJv lawaṅ ‘door, gate’ (OJED 993:7).

--- PAGE: 159 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
146 
 
f.22r Wuluhen · me(n)tas aing di Ciwulan  · [1155] bañating di Cilohalit  · na muhara Pasuketan  · 
ta(ng)geran na Hujung Pusus · ku ngaing ges kale(m)pangan · ka to(ng)go(ng)na gunung Co(n)dong (·) 
[1160] di pipi(r) gunung Parasi (·) ku ngaing (té)bé|h kidulna · sacu(n)duk ka Hujung Galuh (·) ngalalar 
ka Geger Gadung · me(n)tas aing di Ciwulan · [1165] le(m)pang aing marat ngalér (·) sadatang ka Saung 
Agung190 · sadiri aing ti i ña · Saung Galah kale(m)pangan · kapungkur | gunung Galunggung · [1170] 
katukang na Panggarangan · ngalalar ka Pada Benghar · katukang na Pamipiran · ngalalar ka Ti(m)bang 
Jaya · datang ka bukit Cikuray  · [1175] ñangla(n)deh aing ti i ña · datang ka Ma |ndala Puntang  · 
sana(ñ)jak ka Papa(n)dayan · ngaran(n)a na Pané(ñ)joan · ti iña aing né(ñ)jo gunung · [1180] déné191 ja 
dangka ri kabéh · para manuh para dangka · pani(ng)gal Nus(i)ya Larang · aing milang-melang i- 
f.22v ña · ti kidul na alas Danuh (·) [1185] ti wétan na Karang Papak · ti kulon Tanah Balawong · itu ta 
na gunung Ageng · ta(ng)geran na Pager Wesi · éta na bukit Patuha · [1190] ta(ng)geran na Majapura (·) 
| itu bukit Pam(e)r(i)han192 (·) ta(ng)geran na Pasir Batang · itu ta na gunung Kumbang (·) ta(ng)geran 
alas Maruyung · [1195] ti kalér alas Losari  · itu ta bukit Caremay  (·) tanggeran na Pada B enghar · ti 
kidul | alas Kuningan (·) ti barat na Walang Suji (·) [1200] iña na lurah Talaga · itu ta na To(m)po Omas 
(·) lurah Medang Kah(i)yangan · itu Tangkuban Parahu · tanggeran na Gunung Wangi  · [1205] itu ta 
gunung Ma|rucung (·) ta(ng)geran na Sri Manggala · itu ta bukit Burangrang (·) ta(ng)geran na Saung 
Agung · itu [ta na] bukit Burung Jawa · [1210] ta(ng)geran na Hujung Barat  · itu ta bukit Bulistir (·) 
ta(ng)geran na gu- 
  
 
190 N. emends this to Saung Galah. I prefer to keep to the MS. 
191 N. has déréja. 
192 MS has pamrehan.

--- PAGE: 160 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
147 
 
f.22r Wuluhen. · I crossed the Ciwulan. · [1155] I alighted at Cilohalit · the harbour of Pasuketan · pillar 
of Hujung Pusus. · By me it was walked · to the back of Mount Condong · [1160] on the side of Mount 
Parasi · which I skirted to the south. · Having arrived at Hujung Galuh · passing through Geger Gadung 
· I crossed the Ciwulan. · [1165] I walked northwestwards · having come to Saung Agung · (and) after I 
had left from there · walking through Saung Galah · turning away from Mount Galunggung · [1170] 
looking back on Panggarangan · passing through Pada Benghar · looking back on Pamipiran · passing 
through Timbang Jaya · coming to Cikuray Peak · [1175] I went downhill there · coming to Mandala 
Puntang. · Having ascended Papandayan193 · its [other] name “Panéñjoan” · from there I surveyed the 
mountains · [1180] and the settlements all over as well. 194 · All those human beings and all those 
settlements · remnants of the Forbidden One.195 · I enumerated them  
f.22v there in turn: · “In the south the area of Danuh · [1185] in the east Karang Papak · in the west 
Tanah Balawong. · That one’s Mount Ageng · pillar of Pager Wesi. · That there’s Patuha Peak · [1190] 
pillar of Majapura. · That’s Pamrehan Peak · pillar of Pasir Batang. · That one’s Mount Kumbang · 
pillar of the Maruyung area · [1195] to the north the Losari area. · That’s Caremay Peak · pillar of Pada 
Benghar · to the south the area of Kuningan · to the west Walang Suji · [1200] there the district of Talaga. 
· That one’s Tompo Omas · district of Medang Kahiyangan. · That’s Tangkuban Parahu · pillar of 
Mount Wangi. · [1205] That’s Mount Marucung · pillar of Sri Manggala. · That’s Burangrang Peak · 
pillar of Saung Agung. · That one’s Burung Jawa Peak · [1210] pillar of Hujung Barat. · That’s Bulistir 
Peak · pillar of Mount 
  
 
193 ‘Place of Smiths’ – a volcano near Garut. 
194 N read déréja, but the MS has ⟨de ne ja⟩. I read the first as déné (cf. OJv denya, OJED 390:3.1). The 
remainder of the line is also OJv. Dangka, which N translates as ‘settlements’, could refer specifically to 
religious communities (cf. OJv ḍaṅka – OJED 363:7). 
195 Nus(i)ya Larang – presumed by N to be Śiva.

--- PAGE: 161 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
148 
 
f.23r nung A(n)ten · itu bukit Naragati (·) ta(ng)geran na Batu H(i)yang · [1215] itu ta na bukit Karang 
(·) ta(ng)geran na [alas] Kurung Batu196 · itu bukit Banasraya · ta(ng)geran na alas Sajra · ti barat bukit 
Kosala | · [1220] itu ta na bukit Catih  · ta(ng)geran na Catih H (i)yang · itu bukit Hulu Mu(n)ding  (·) 
ta(ng)geran na Demaraja · ti barat bukit Parasi · [1225] ta(ng)geran na Tegal Lubu · ti wétan na Sédaca|ra 
· nu awas ka alas Si(n)day  · éta ta na gunung Kembang (·) gesan tiyagi sagala · [1230] ti kidul na alas 
Maja · éta na alas Rumbia · ti barat na Wates Mener (·) ta(ng)geran na Bojong Wangi · | itu ta na gunung 
Hijur (·) [1235] ta(ng)geran na Kutra Jaya · itu ta na gunung Su(n)da (·) ta(ng)geran na Karangk(i)yang 
· itu ta na bukit Karang (·) ta(ng)geran na alas Karang · [1240] itu gunung Cinta Manik (·) ta(ng)geran 
na alas Rawa · itu ta 
f.23v na gunung Ke(m)bang (·) ta(ng)geran Labuhan Ratu · ti kalér alas Pañawung · [1245] ta(ng)geran 
na alas Wa(n)ten · itu ta na gunung (Ka?)lér (·) ta(ng)geran alas Paméksér · nu awas ka Ta(ñ)jak Barat 
| · itu ta pulo Sangh(i)yang · [1250] helet-helet197 nusa Lampung · ti timur pulo Tampurung · ti barat pulo 
Rakata · gunung [t]di198 tengah sagara · itu ta gunung J(e)reding · [1255] ta(ng)geran na | alas Mirah · ti 
barat na l éngkong Gowong · itu ta gunung Su (n)dara (·) na gunung Guha Ba(n)tayan  · tanggeran na 
Hujung Kulan · [1260] ti barat bukit Cawiri  · itu ta na  | gunung Raksa (·) gunung Sri Mahapawitra · 
ta(ng)geran na Panahitan · ti wétan na Suka Darma  · [1265] ti barat na gunung Manik  · awas ka nusa 
Kambangan · nusa Layaran  · nusa Di- 
  
 
196 Longer than eight syllables but nonetheless grammatical. 
197 The first ⟨he⟩ here was written as aksara ⟨ta⟩ then converted into ⟨ha⟩. 
198 The ⟨da⟩ appears underneath the ⟨ta⟩ (written in error).

--- PAGE: 162 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
149 
 
f.23r Anten. · That’s Naragati Peak · pillar of Batu Hiyang. · [1215] That one’s Karang Peak · pillar of 
the Kurung Batu area. · That’s Banasraya Peak · pillar of the Sajra area. · To the west is Kosala Peak. 
· [1220] That’s Catih Peak · pillar of Catih Hiyang. · That’s Hulu Munding Peak · pillar of Demaraja. · 
To the west Parasi Peak · [1225] pillar of Tegal Lubu. · To the east Sédacara199 · which faces the Sinday 
area. · That there’s Mount Kembang · place of all the ascetics. · [1230] To the south the area of Maja. · 
That’s the area of Rumbia. · To the west the boundary of Mener · pillar of Bojong Wangi · that one’s 
Mount Hijur · [1235] pillar of Kutra Jay a. · That one’s Mount Sunda · pillar of Karangkiyang. · That 
one’s Karang Peak · pillar of the Karang area. · [1240] That’s Mount Cinta Manik · pillar of the Rawa 
area. · That one’s  
f.23v Mount Kembang · pillar of Labuhan Ratu. · To the north the Panyawung area · [1245] pillar of the 
Wanten area. · That’s Mount (Ka?)lér · pillar of the Paméksér area · which faces Tañjak Barat. · That 
one’s the Holy Island · [1250] halfway to the land of Lampung · to the east the island200 of Tampurung 
· to the west the island of Rakata · mountain in the middle of the ocean.201 · That’s Mount Jreding · 
[1255] pillar of the Mirah area · to the west Gowong Bay. · T hat’s Mount Su ndara · Mount Guha 
Bantayan · pillar of Hujung Kulan. · [1260] To the west Cawiri Peak. · That one’s Mount Raksa · Mount 
Sri Mahapawitra · pillar of Panahitan · to the east Suka Darma · [1265] to the west Mount Manik · facing 
Nusakambangan · the land of sailors · the land of 
  
 
199 N has Sédanura. 
200 Pulo (cf. Malay pulau), which contrasts with nusa ‘land, country; island’. 
201 Pulo Rakata is the island/volcano commonly known as Krakatau or Krakatoa.

--- PAGE: 163 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
150 
 
f.24r lih · nusa Bini · [1270] nusa Keling · nusa Jambri202 · nusa Cina Ja(m)budipa · nusa Gedah deng 
Malaka · nusa Ba(n)dan Ta(ñ)ju(ng)pura · [1275] Sakampung deng nusa Lampung · nusa Baluk nusa 
Buwun · nusa Cem|pa Ban(i)yaga · Langkabo deng nusa Solot · nusa Parayaman · /0/ · [1280] beteng 
bogoh ku sakitu · saa(ng)gesing milang gunung · sale(m)pang ti Pané(ñ)joan · sacu(n)duk ka gunung 
Se(m)bung · éta | hulu na Citarum · [1285] di iña aing ditapa · sa(m)biyan ngerenan palay · tehering puja 
ñangraha · puja ña(pu) mugu-mugu · tehering na(ñ)jerken li(ng)ga · [1290] tehering ñi(y)an hare|ca · 
teher ñi(y)an sakakala · ini tu(ñ)juken sakalih · tu(ñ)juken nu ka pa(n)deri (·) maring aing pa(n)t ég 
hañca · /0/ · [1295] a(ng)ges aing puja ñapu (·) liñ(i)h benang ngaing ñapu (·) ku- 
f.24v macacang di buruan (·) nguliling asup ka wangun  · ngadungkuk di palu(ng)guhan (·) [1300] di 
(s)iwi203 teher samadi · ku ngaing dirarasaken · ku ngaing dititinengken · benang ngaing adu angka · 
nu mang|ka kasorang tin eng · [1305] ku ngaing dipajar i ña · langgeng tita d eng purusa (·) ña mana 
kasorang tineng · kéna kitu nu ti hela · guna sang mahapandita · [1310] nu bisa mu(ñ)cakan tapa · milih 
| miji di sarira · ngawastu rasa wisésa · nurutken sakaja(n)tenna · ha(n)te kabawa ku warna · [1315] atos 
wani alot rasa · laksana mahapurusa · ña mana pam(i)ya|ktaan · a(ng)ges ngud(i)yan sarira · Rakaki 
Bujangga Manik (·) [1320] ngalér ngidul marat nimur · di tengah kapala cakra · ñ(i)ar pigesanen matuh 
· ñ(i)ar lemah pamut(i)yan · ñ(i)ar cai 
  
 
202 The metrical markers here seem intended to mark the list of place names as different from the rest of the text. 
I have thus preserved them here. 
203 N. has dibiwi here, emended then to disiwi – but ⟨si⟩ appears to have been the intent of the scribe anyway. 
This is not so much Noorduyn’s emendation as a hasty correction by the scribe.

--- PAGE: 164 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
151 
 
f.24r Delhi · the land of women · [1270] the land of Keling · the land of Jambi · the land of China, of 
Jambudipa · the lands of Kedah and Melaka · the land of Bandan, of Tañjungpura · [1275] Sakampung 
and the land of Lampung · the land of Baluk, the land of Buwun · the land of Cempa, Baniyaga · 
Langkabo and the land of Solot · the land of Parayaman.”’ · /0/ · [1280] ‘(I) stopped admiring all of this. 
· After I had enumerated the mountains · (and) having walked (down) from Panéñjoan · having arrived 
at Mount Sembung · that’s the source of the Citarum · [1285] there I was in seclusion · while recuperating 
from fatigue. · I then made ready for worship · worshipped by sweeping diligently. · I then raised a 
lingga · [1290] I then made a statue · then made a monument: · This shows everyone · shows for posterity 
· (that) I was on the way to completing my task. · [1295] I finished worshipping by sweeping · made 
clean by my sweeping · restlessly  
f.24v around the yard. · (I) went around and entered the building · (and) hunched over204 on the seat in 
silence · [1300] in reverence, then in meditation. · I contemplated · I thought things over.205 · The result 
of the weighing up of my thoughts · to which my longing was committed: · [1305] I learned there · 
imperishable permanence with the Supreme Being ( purusa). · That’s what my I had longed for.’ · 
Because that’s how it ever was: · the virtue of mahapanditas · [1310] who had been able to reach the 
peak of asceticism · choosing to focus on the self · realising the supreme essence · obeying their innate 
reality · not carried by appearances · [1315] firm in courage and abiding intention · marks of a great sage 
· which he manifested. · After exerting his body 206  · venerable Bujangga Manik · [1320] went 
northwards, southwards, westwards, eastwards · in the middle of his head chakra: · ‘Searching for a 
place to remain · searching for a land of abstinence207 · searching for water  
  
 
204 The verb here is ngadungkuk ‘to sit quiet cowered in a heap, with the head hanging down as if in deep 
thought or in trouble’ (Rigg 1862:300). It comes from a PMP root *duŋkuk, reconstructed by Blust with the 
meaning ‘hunched over’ (ACD 2283). N went for ‘sat in silence’. 
205 Lit. ‘it was contemplated by me / it was thought over by me’. 
206 Sarira – a Sanskrit word for ‘body’ or, less often, ‘self’. In this it is similar to the OSd awak. 
207 Pamut(i)yan – ‘abstinence, sobriety, purity’. Ultimately from putih ‘white’. Compare MJv mutihan ‘place 
where pious Muslims live’.

--- PAGE: 165 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
152 
 
f.25r pamorocan208 · [1325] pigesanen na aing paéh · pigesanen nu(n)da raga · di (i)ña aing te hebel (·) 
satahun deng sataraban · me(n)ding katepi ku aré (·) [1330] datang nu ti lala(n)dehan · me(n)ding waya 
na bañcana · sadi(ri) a|ing ti iña · le(m)pang ngaing ngalér barat · tehering milangan gunung · [1335] itu 
ta bukit Kare(s)i · itu ta bukit Langlayang · ti barat na Palasari  · ngalalar ka bukit Pala  · sadatang ka 
kabu|yutan · [1340] me(n)tas di Cisaunggalah · le(m)pang ngaing ka -baratken · datang ka bukit 
Paté(ng)géng · sakakala Sang Kur (i)yang · masa d ék ñitu Citarum  (·) [1345] burung te(m)bey 
ka|s(i)yangan · ku ngaing g es kale(m)pangan · me(n)tas aing di Cih éya · me(n)tas aing di Cisokan  · 
datang ka lurah Pamengker · [1350] cu(n)duk aing ka Mananggul · ngalalar ka Li(ng)ga Lemah · tuluy 
datang ka É- 
f.25v tonan209 · na(ñ)jak ka Le(m)bu Hambalang · sadatang ka bukit Ageng · [1355] éta hulu Cihaliwung 
· kabuyutan ti Pakuan · sangh(i)yang Talaga Warna · //0// · eh kumaha awaking ini · mu(ng)ku | ñorang 
tulus datang (·) [1360] ngahusir ka i(n)dung bapa · [éiu] ngahusir ka pa(ng)guruan · awaking ka Hujung 
Kulan · ja réya hadanganana · le(m)pang ngaing ñangkidulken · [1365] ngahusir bukit Bu|listir · éta hulu 
Cimari(ñ)jung · sakakala Patañjala · ma(n)ten burung ngadeg ratu  (·) di (i)ña aing t e hebel (·) [1370] 
satahun deng sataraban · me(n)ding katepi ku ar é · | datang nu ti lala(n)d ehan · me(n)ding waya na 
bañcana · sadiri aing ti i ña · [1375] le(m)pang ngaing ngidul wétan · me(n)tasing di Cimari(ñ)jung (·) 
me(n)tasing di Cihadéya · me(n)tasing di Cicaréngcang · 
  
 
208 N has pamorocoan – a typo. 
209 N has Éronan.

--- PAGE: 166 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
153 
 
f.25r to slip away on · [1325] a place for me to die · a place to lay down my body. · I wasn’t there long 
· a year and a bit. · Increasingly approached by outsiders · [1330] who came from the lowlands · 
increasingly there was trouble. · After I had left from there · I walked northwestwards · (and) I then 
enumerated the mountains. · [1335] “That’s Karesi Peak. · That’s Langlayang Peak · with (Mount) 
Palasari to the west.” · Passing through Pala Peak · having come to a sanctuary · [1340] crossing the 
Cisaunggalah · I walked westwards · (and) came to Paté(ng)géng Peak · memorial to Sang Kuriyang · 
when he wanted to dam the Citarum · [1345] (and) failed at the first light of day. · By me it was walked. 
· I crossed the Cihéya · I crossed the Cisokan · Coming to the district of Pamengker · [1350] I arrived at 
Mananggul. · Passing through Lingga Lemah · then coming to É- 
f.25v ronan · ascending to Lembu Hambalang · (I) had come to Ageng Peak · [1355] that’s the source 
of the Cihaliwung · sanctuary of Pakuan · the sacred Coloured Lake.’ · //0// · ‘“Ah, what’s up with my 
body? · (It’s) unable to walk straight ahead.” · [1360] Proceeding to my mother and father · proceeding 
to the place of my teacher · my body (went) to Hujung Kulan · because many were things waiting there. 
· I walked southwards · [1365] proceeded to Bulistir Peak · that’s the source of the Cimariñjung · the 
memorial to Patañjala · when he failed to become king. · I wasn’t there long · [1370] a year and a bit. · 
Increasingly approached by outsiders · who came from the lowlands · increasingly there was trouble. · 
After I had left from there · [1375] I walked southeastwards · I crossed the Cimariñjung · I crossed the 
Cihadéya · I crossed the Cicaréngcang ·

--- PAGE: 167 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
154 
 
f.26r me(n)tas aing di Cisanti · [1380] sana(ñ)jak ka gunung Wayang · sadiri aing ti iña · cu(n)duk ka 
Mandala B etung · ngalalar ka Mulah B enghar · ñanglandeh ka Tigal Luar  · [1385] katukang bukit 
Malabar · ka(gé)déng210 | bukit Bajogé · sacu(n)duk ka gunung Gu(n)tur (·) ti wétan Mandala Wangi · 
nu awas ka gunung K é(n)dan · [1390] ngalalar ka Jampang Manggung  · sadatang ka Mulah Mada  · 
ngalalar ka Ta|pak Ratu · datang ka bukit Patuha · ka sangh(i)yang Rañca Goda · [1395] dipunar dijiyan 
batur · kapuruyan ku mandala · di iña aing te hebel · satahun deng sataraban | · sadiri aing [ti i] ti iña211 
· [1400] sacu(n)duk ka gunung Ratu  · sangh(i)yang Karang Car éngcang · é ta hulu na Cisokan  · 
la(n)dehan bukit Patuha · helet-helet Li(ng)ga Payung · [1405] nu 
f.26v awas ka Kreti Haji · momogana téka waya · nemu lemah kabuyutan · na lemah ngali(ng)ga manik 
· teherna dék sri ma(ng)liput · [1410] ser manggung ngali(ng)ga payung · ñangharep na Bahu | Mitra · 
ku ngaing ges dibabakan (·) dibalay diu(n)dak-u(n)dak (·) dibalay sakulili(ng)na · [1415] ti ha(n)dap ku 
mu(ng)kal datar · ser manggung ku mu(ng)kal bener · ti luhur ku batu putih · diya|wuran manik asra · 
carénang helet-heletna · [1420] wangun tujuh guna aing · padangan deng pakayonan · dengen la(m)bur 
pamepehan · roma(n?) h(i)yang paténgtongan · la(m)bur ta | dua ngadengdeng · [1425] taman mihapitken 
dora · tajur eker ngara(m)pésan · eker dék sereng dibuah · na keke(m)bangan sar(i)yang · na wangun 
te acan bobo · [1430] balay ha(n)te 
  
 
210 The aksara ⟨ga⟩ appears to have been forgotten by the scribe and reinserted below the ⟨da⟩. 
211 The ⟨ti i⟩ is repetitious – scribal error.

--- PAGE: 168 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
155 
 
f.26r I crossed the Cisanti · [1380] (and) had ascended Mount Wayang. · After I had left from there · 
arriving at Mandala Betung · passing through Mulah Benghar · going downhill at Tigal Luar · [1385] 
looking back on Malabar Peak · to the slopes of Bajogé Peak · having arrived at Mount Guntur · to the 
west Mandala Wangi · which faced Mount Kéndan · [1390] passing through Jampang Manggung · 
having come to Mulah Mada · passing through Tapak Ratu · coming to Patuha Peak · to sacred Rañca 
Goda · [1395] (where) land had been cleared (and) a batur212 built · reserved for a religious community. 
· I wasn’t there long · a year and a bit. · After I had left from there · [1400] (I) had arrived at Mount Ratu 
· sacred Karang Caréngcang · that’s the source of the Cisokan · downhill from Patuha Hill · halfway to 
Lingga Payung · [1405] which  
f.26v faced Kreti Haji. · And suddenly there it was: · (I) found the land of a sanctuary. · The land had 
a jewelled lingga. · Then, wanting to provide it with a splendid cover · [1410] it became a parasol lingga, 
whirling upwards · facing Bahu Mitra. · It was colonised by me. · It was paved in terraces · paved all 
the way around · [1415] from below with flat rocks · whirling upwards with true rocks · from the top 
with white stone213 · strewn with beads and gems · pocked between them. · [1420] Seven buildings for 
my use: · a kitchen and a woodshed · with a place for threshing.214 · A god’s figure standing upright215 
· standing in front of two buildings216 · [1425] doors either side of a garden · plants thriving · on the cusp 
of bearing fruit · the flowers in full bloom. · The buildings hadn’t yet fallen apart · [1430] the pavilions 
hadn’t 
  
 
212 A raised stone platform. 
213 N has ‘marble’. The term is batu putih, lit. ‘white stone/rock’. In modern Indonesian this refers specifically to 
tuff, a common volcanic stone.  
214 This is Noorduyn’s interpretation, based on MSd peupeuh ‘to strike, knock, hit’. The glossary in Noorduyn 
and Teeuw (2006:395) suggests that this is more to do with pressing oil than threshing rice or millet.  
215 N left this untranslated. Both N and Undang Darsa interpreted roma here as meaning ‘hair’, but in MSd and 
modern Indonesian the word can also mean ‘figure’ or ‘form’. Although the interpretation is somewhat 
speculative, I am inclined to view this as a reference to a lingga. 
216 This is a tricky one. N has ‘[t]wo buildings stood in the way (?)’.

--- PAGE: 169 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
156 
 
f.27r acan urug · /0/ · sate(m)bey datang ka masa  · datang ka ukur -ukuran · ditapa salapan tahun  · 
kasapuluh pa(n)tég ha(ñ)ca · [1435] awak eker berat pa(n)deng217 · eker mejeh ngara(m)pésa|n · lamun 
bulan lagu tilem · panon poé lagu surup · berang kasedek ku wengi · [1440] tutug tahun pa(n)tég hañca 
· nu pati di walang suji  · nu hilang di walang sanga  | · awak ña(m)pay ka na balay (·) mikarang hulu 
gege(n)dis · [1445] paéh ñanghulu ka la ñcan · pati yaing ha(n)te gering · hilang tanpa sangkan lara  · 
mecat sakéng kamo|ksahan · diri na aci wisésa · [1450] mangkat na sarira ageng · ngaloglog a(ng)ges nu 
poroc · atma mecat ti pasa(m)bung · aci mecat ti na atma · pahi masah kale(m)pangan · 
f.27v  [1455] ragaing ñurup ka petra · kali wara218 jadi déwa · pasa(m)bung ñurup ka suwung · atmaing 
dalit ka lentik219 · sarua dengen déwata · [1460] tuluy ñorang jalan caang · nemu jalan | gedé bongbong 
· u (ng)gal sa(m)pang dila(m)buran  · lamun220 lebak dicukangan  · sumaray ditata(ngga ?)an · [1465] 
maléréng dipasigaran · tapak sapu bérés kénéh | (·) bare(n)tik marat nimurken · [liuwa] golang-golang 
situ mu(ng)kal · patali patalu(m)bukan · [1470] ke(m)bang patah cumaré(n)tam · nambuluk apuy-apuyan 
· tajur pinang pu|marasi · pinang tiwi pinang ading  · pinang tiwi kumarasi  · [1475] pinang ading asri 
kuning · di tengah bantar ngajajar · ha(ñ)juang sasipat mata · ha(n)delem salaput hulu · ha(n)dong bang 
deng ha- 
f.28r (ndong ijo ·) […] 
 A lacuna of two leaves appears here. 
f.28v […] 
  
 
217 N has pading, which would be an unexplainable hapax. I prefer to amend it to pa(n)deng, a variant of 
pandang. 
218 N keeps these together as one word: kaliwara. 
219 The le in lentik is written with an aksara ⟨la⟩ and sandhangan ⟨e⟩ rather than with the special form ⟨le⟩. 
220 N has laun.

--- PAGE: 170 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
157 
 
f.27r yet tumbled down.’ · /0/ · Soon the time came · the appointed (time) came. · Nine years in 
seclusion · in the tenth the task was completed. · [1435] ‘(My) body was then weary of gazing · was then 
done with flourishing. · When the month was at its darkest · (and) the day’s eye was se tting · (and) 
daylight was chased by night · [1440] the year ended, the task completed: · the dead one was in walang 
suji221 · the deceased one was in walang sanga. · The body was draped on a low wall · with a walking 
stick cushioning his head. · [1445] ‘Dead, my head resting facing forwards 222 · I died without illness · 
deceased without cause of suffering · being released through final liberation ( kamoksahan). · The 
supreme essence (aci wisésa) left · [1450] the great body (sarira ageng) departed · shaken free it finally 
slipped away. · The soul was released from its bonds · the essence was released from the soul · equally 
separate and gone. ·  
f.27v [1455] My body (raga) set into ghostliness. · (It was) time to become a deity : · my bonds were 
absorbed into the void · my soul vanished into minuteness · just like that of a god. · [1460] Then (I) 
happened upon a cleared road · found a great open road · with buildings at eve ry crossroads · when 
(there was) a valley it was bridged · steep ground was cut into steps. · [1465] (I) cast glances in both 
directions223 · the broom’s traces were still neat · curving westwards and eastwards. · Pavilions, dams, 
boulders · joined in continuous rows · [1470] lines of flowers sticking close together · displaying 
colourfully224 like fireworks · areca plants spreading like parasi · tiwi areca, ivory areca · tiwi areca in 
full bloom · [1475] ivory areca, radiant yellow · lining up in the middle of the riverbank · hañjuang high 
as your eyes · handelem up to your head · [1479] red handong and 
f.28r (green handong) 
  
 
221 N leaves this untranslated; I have chosen to do the same to avoid jaundicing the interpretation of these two 
cryptic names, walang suji and walang sanga. It is possible they carry a meaning of ‘margin’ or ‘limbo’. 
222 I take this to mean that, in dying, Bujangga Manik’s head slumped onto his walking stick. The walking stick 
interpretation is taken from Rigg (1862:126 sub Gěgěndhir). 
223 N has ‘descents with flights of steps’, linking the uncertain terms to the meaning of the previous lines. I have 
linked them instead to the following lines, and based my interpretation on OJv liriṅ ‘glance, look’ (OJED 
1039:5) and sigar ‘a half, one of two sides’ (OJED 1760:3). 
224 Nambuluk – based on Blust’s PWMP *tambuluk ‘puffy area around the throat of some birds’ (ACD 5494). 
‘Glittering (?)’, as N has it, does not seem quite right here.

--- PAGE: 171 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
158 
 
f.29r […] 
f.29v […] [1589] (ha-) 
f.30r at di janma [diu] sajagat · [1590] biha(ri) basa ngahanan · masa di mad(i)yapada · Rakaki Bujangga 
Manik (·) ngarasa manéh ditaña · umun teher si (y)a ñebut · [1595] né(m)balan saka|yogyana · ñarék 
sekar angen-angen · némbalan sang Dorakala · mumul ma(ng)ñaréken manéh (·) sugan bener jadi bélot 
· [1600] sugan ra(m)pés jadi gopél | · sugan so(r)ga jadi papa · sugan pangrasa ku dapet  · sugan pangrasa 
ku te(m)bey · mumul misaksi na janma · [1605] pangesi buana ini · janma di mad(i)yapada (·) sa|riwu 
saratus tu(ng)gal (·) kilang sa(hiji) mo waya · janma nu teteg di car ék · [1610] réya nu papa naraka  · 
kilang déwata kapapas (·) ku ngaing dipajar réñéh · ja daék milu ngah(arac?)225 (·) 
f.30v ja da ék dibaan salah  · [1615] ku nu dusta jurujana  · k ucawali h é(ng)gan hiji  (·) saksiing 
sangh(i)yang berang · saksiing sangh(i)yang peting · candra wulan dengen wé(n)tang · [1620] dengen 
(sang)h(i)yang pratiwi · i|tu nu ngingu mirengeh · pratiwi nu lewih ilik · akasa nu liwat awas · hidep nu 
ñaho di bener · [1625] iña nu ngingetken rasa · itu nu ngingu na bayu  · éta nu milala sabda  · iña nu | 
mirengeh tineng · nu milala tua(h) janma  · [1630] bisa di bélot di bener · ñaho di gopél di ra(m)pés · 
hé(ng)gan sakitu saksiing · carék aki Dorakala · samapun sangh(i)yang | ngatma · [1635] mu(ng)ku aing 
mire(b)utan226 (·) ja na rua mu(ng)ku samar · na awak hérang ngalé(ng)gang · na rua diga déwata · kadi 
asra kadi manik · [1640] na awak ruum ti candu · mahabara ti candana (·)  
  
 
225 The leaf has broken off at the bottom. The final aksara is probably ⟨ca⟩, but it may have a virāma. Haraca 
(or similar) would be one syllable too long. N has ngahuru ‘burn (something)’, but I find this somewhat 
doubtful. I suppose it is possible that the leaf was intact when he handled it.  
226 N’s emendation. The MS has mirehutan.

--- PAGE: 172 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
159 
 
f.29r […]  
f.29v […] [1589] · “…kind 
f.30r to all the people of the world? · [1590] formerly when living · back in the Middle World?” · 
Venerable Bujangga Manik · felt himself being questioned. · Then on his knees he responded · [1595] 
replied in full propriety · spoke from the heart · replied to honoured Dorakala: · “(I’m) unwilling to 
speak for myself · lest straight become crooked · [1600] lest good become bad · lest heaven become hell 
· lest (my) feelings close tight 227 · lest feelings be taken as the foundation. · (I’m) unwilling to call 
human witnesses · [1605] the inhabitants of this world · humans of the Middle World. · One thousand 
one hundred and one · (among them) there’s not even one · a human resolute in speech. · [1610] Many 
are the hell-bound sinners · even the gods are under attack. · I accuse them and drive them out · as they 
want to join in …228 
f.30v · as they want to be carried away wrongfully · [1615] by malign evildoers. · There is, however, a 
lone exception: · My witness is the sacred daylight · my witness is the sacred night. · The radiant moon 
and the stars · [1620] and the sacred Earth · those who take care and watch. · The far-seeing Earth · the 
farsighted Sky · the Mind that knows what is true · [1625] those who reflect on their feelings · those who 
attend to the vital airs229 · those who pay attention to the voice · those who watch over their thoughts · 
who pay attention to human sin · [1630] learned in truth and in falsehood · knowledgeable in bad and in 
good · those are my only witnesses.” · Elder Dorakala spoke: · “My respects, O sacred soul. · [1635] I 
won’t quarrel · as your appearance is not indistinct: · A body distinctly swaying230 · with the appearance 
of a deity · like gems (asra) and jewels (manik) · [1640] a body more fragrant than opium · more valuable 
than sandalwood  
  
 
227 Where dapet = ‘fixed, glued’ – cf. OJv ḍapĕt (364:6), MSd dapit. 
228 The leaf is broken here. N has ngahuru ‘burning’, but I cannot see that in the MS. 
229 Bayu – lit. ‘wind’ but also ‘vital air’ etc. 
230 N has ‘clear and bright’, but lénggang is to do with sinuous movement or a masculine swagger (cf. Mal, OJv, 
MSd), and I feel it should particularly be interpreted as such when preceded by the active prefix nga-.

--- PAGE: 173 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
160 
 
f.31r amis ti kulit masui 231 · k itu pamulu nu bener  · é ta na ki(ng)kila so(r)ga  · [1645] samapun 
sangh(i)yang ngatma · Rakaki Bujangga Manik · le(m)pang sakarajen-rajen · s(i)ya ka na kaso(r)gaan 
· sa|mu(ng)kur raing ti iña · [1650] le(m)pang na(ñ)jak ñangto(ng)gohken · husir kéh na taman hérang · 
dibalay ku p(e)ramata · pa(ñ)curan ta(m)baga sukla · cangkorah salaka pirak · [1655] ditungtung ku | 
cudiga · pésék dipopokan omas · pañi(m)beh u(n)dem salaka · ma(n)di ngabreséka manéh · nu ma(n)di 
ngalaan késang · [1660] a(ng)ges ma s (i)ya nu ma(n)di  · ulah kara(ta)ken teing · | s(i)ya di na taman 
hérang · aya ra(m)pés na husir en · husir la(m)bur ngurung jalan  (·) [1665] dilulurung besi wulung · 
diselang deng purasani · dipasek ku besi kebel · tihang gading benang ukir · tatapa- 
f.31v kan goong Jawa · [1670] d(i)balay ku kaca C(i)na · d(i)s(e)la(ng) ku batu kr(e)sna · d[…] p[…] 
p[…] g[…] t[…] ru st[…] l[…] · d(i)s(e)la(ng) d(e)ng(e)n pramata · m(i)pam(i)kul p(i)rak apu · [1675] 
d(i)lay(e)san ku aduan  · m(i)hat(e)p232 | sirap ta(m)ba(ga)  · mipamaras omas ngora  · disaréyan ku 
panamar · dipiwaton omas kolot · [1680] diselang ku pirak apu  · dijejetan omas Cina · diselang deng 
kawat Ja|wa · e(n)teng Jawa dipahetken (·) u(ng)gal tihang lambur éta · [1685] diña paranti dih yas · 
méméh ñorang kasorgaan · di iña na pihiyasen · naha ngaran(n)a ku ha(n)te · e(n)teng Jawa | pinarada 
· [1690] sisir gading batri ngukir · pamiñakan kaca Cina · esina lenga wangsana · kapur Barus di na cupu 
· bunga resa di na juha · [1695] dédés di na u(ng)keb gading · candana ruum sacupu · pucuk 
 A lacuna of a single leaf follows. 
f.32r […] 
f.32v […] 
  
 
231 The ⟨su⟩ appears to have been converted from an aksara swara ⟨i⟩. 
232 The top of the leaf is broken, cutting off the uppermost sandhangan on the first line. Line 1670 is a mystery; 
the other lines are formulaic, and N’s interpretations appear sound.

--- PAGE: 174 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
161 
 
f.31r · sweeter than massoy bark. · That’s the face of one who is true · that is the sign of heaven. · [1645] 
My respects, O sacred soul · venerable Bujangga Manik · Walk where you wish · you may enter 
heaven.”233 · ‘After I had turned away from there · [1650] I walked, climbing upwards · proceeding – 
look! – to a bright garden · paved with gemstones. · Waterspouts of bright copper · a silver basin · [1655] 
ending in a spout · a place for washing coated in gold · with a silver scoop for a ladle. · (I) bathed and 
cleansed myself.’ · “The bather removes sweat · [1660] After you’ve finished bathing · don’t go 
wherever you like · you, in that bright garden · there’s a good place to proceed towards. · Proceed to 
the building blocking the road · [1665] paved with black iron · alternating with Khorasani (iron) · wedged 
in place with long-lasting iron · (with) poles of carved ivory · 
f.31v Javanese gongs for their foundations · [1670] inlaid with Chinese glass · alternating with rock-of-
Kṛṣṇa · […] · alternating with gemstones · with capitals of lime -white silver · [1675] with rafters of 
paired elements234 · roofed with copper shingles · with the appearance of light gold · floored with 
coverings · with floorboards of dark gold · [1680] alternating with lime-white silver · interwoven with 
Chinese gold · alternating with Javanese wire. · Javanese mirrors are chiselled · onto every pole of that 
building · [1685] there for the purpose of beautification · before passing into Heaven. · The adornments 
there · what kinds are there not? · Gilded Javanese mirrors · [1690] ivory combs worked with engravings 
· Chinese glass cruets · containing excellent sesame (oil) · Barus camphor in a round box · resa flowers 
in a container · [1695] civet in a lidded ivory pot · a round box of fragrant sandalwood · [1697] pucuk...”235 
Another leaf is missing here, resulting in another significant lacuna. 
f.32r […] 
f.32v […]  
 
233 N has Dorakala’s speech continue after this point. 
234 A tricky line; the key term, aduan, is not wholly clear. 
235 Pucuk means ‘sprout’ or ‘shoot’ (of a plant), but it was also the name in the archipelago of a botanical 
product derived from a Himalayan species (Saussurea costus). Context may suggest the latter.

--- PAGE: 175 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
162 
 
f.33r [1753] tresna · Rakaki Bujangga Manik  · [1755] tuluy dirawu dipangku  (·) diais dipagantiken · 
diu(ng)gahken ka sudangan · ti sudangan ka wangsana · wangsana carana gading (·) [1760] tu(m)pak di 
camara putih · camara | lili(ng)ga omas (·) dikikitiran ku mirah  · diwé(n)tang-wé(n)tang ku omas  · 
dipuñcakan manik[a niu] asra · [1765] dibalay ku mutéhara · diselang pramata mirah · pramata ko(m)bala 
hi(n)te|n (·) na sarba é(n)dah sagala · pakarang cacaritaan · [1770] carita Darma Kañcana · ti manggung 
kula(m)bu hurung · ti ha(n)dap kulambu lé(ng)gang · pahetna naga patengteng · di tengah naga wérati 
· [1775] ti ha|(ndap na)ga pahe(m)pas · merak ngigel di pu ñcakna · na sarba é(n)dah sagala · liwat na 
sarba mul(i)ya · atita amahabara · [1780] murug mu(ñ)car pakatonan · branang s(i)yang sarba warna · 
gumilap luma- 
f.33v rap-larap (·) sarua sekar pamuja236 · ruana sangh(i)yang ngatma · [1785] diwereg ku tatabehan · 
goong ge(n)ding diba(n)dungk en · gangsa pabaur d eng caning · tatabeh(an) saréyana · sangh(i)yang 
pabura(ñ)cahan237 · [1790] gang|sa rari dirinduken · sa(m)peran aluy-aluyan · payung hapit sutra Keling 
· tunggul bungbang kiri kanan · lu(ng)sir putih ngaba(n)daley · [1795] uñut238 mungpung sama dulur · 
bitan | ku(n)tul sri manglayang  · payung lu(ng)sir pu ñcak gading · payung ke(r)tas pu ñcak omas · 
payung hatep sutra Keling · [1800] galéwér parada Cina · na bantele ratna urey · taluki | ratna kañcana · 
camara lili(ng)ga omas · tapok239 térong omas ngora · [1805] pu(ñ)cak mirah naga ra(n)tay · pajalé ratna 
sumanger · kilat padulur deng téja · diliung ku kuwung-kuwung · [1809] di i- 
f.34r  (ña) […] 
 At least one leave is missing after f.33v. This is the end of the manuscript as it stands today. 
* 
  
 
236 N: pamaja. 
237 N has pabura(n)caheun. 
238 This word is an enigma; I am tempted to emend it to hañut. See VI.1.3. 
239 The ⟨k⟩ here appears to have been converted from an aksara ⟨ta⟩. It closely resembles ⟨i⟩.

--- PAGE: 176 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
163 
 
f.33r [1753] …thirst.240 · Venerable Bujangga Manik · [1755] then was picked up and carried in their 
arms · and on their backs, one after the other · brought up to the platform · (and) from the platform to 
the seat · a seat made of ivory241 · [1760] on the back of a white yak · a yak with a golden knob · spangled 
with rubies · starred with gold · topped with jewels and gems · [1765] inlaid with pearls · alternating 
with gemstones and rubies · gemstones, tassels, diamonds · all altogether extraordinary; · curtains 
(decorated) in the form of a story · [1770] the story of Darma Kañcana · glowing gauze curtains on high 
· swaying gauze curtains from below; · carved with dragons facing one another · an aloof dragon in the 
middle · [1775] dragons overlapping from below · a dancing peacock on its top · the whole altogether 
beautiful · the whole beyond value · exceedingly expensive · [1780] blazing and glittering before one’s 
eyes · every colour shining bright · gleaming  
f.33v and flashing past. · Resembling an offering flower242 · the appearance of the sacred soul. · [1785] 
(He was) stirred by percussion instruments 243 · gongs and gendings overlaying one another 244 · flat 
gongs mixed in with canings245 · numerous percussion instruments · sacred place o f burañcah246 
instruments · [1790] the smaller flat gongs were played steadily · in response, resounding altogether. · 
Flanking South Indian silk umbrellas · bungbang banners left and right · trailing white silk (lungsir) · 
[1795] all carried away together · like great egrets in splended flight . · Silk (lungsir) umbrellas (with) 
ivory tops · gold-peaked paper umbrellas · thatch umbrellas (with) South Indian silk  · [1800] dripping 
with Chinese gilt · (and) a rim of tumbling jewels · (with) gold jewelled muslin. · A fly-whisk with a 
golden knob · an emerging aubergine of light gold · [1805] the top a chain of dragon rubies · (and) 
blessed pajalé jewels247. · The accompanying lightning and its afterglow · ringed by a rainbow · [1809] 
there 
 
240 Tresna (N: ‘love’) comes from Skt tṛṣṇā ‘thirst, desire’, ultimately PIE *ters- ‘to be dry’ (whence also English 
‘thirst’). 
241 As I see it the description from here down to line 1782 concerns the ivory seat or the yak and its decorations.  
242 N read the word here as pamaja, derived from maja (Aegle marmelos), whose blossoms may be the flowers 
referred to here. However, there is a faint panyuku below the ma – pamuja ‘offering’. 
243 N has ‘instrumental music’, a suggestion of Wim van Zanten.  
244 I interpret ge(n)ding as a kind of gong, as in OJv (OJED 514:12), rather than as a melody (as in modern 
Javanese). 
245 Caning – a bronze metallophone (Jv: saron). 
246 An OJv word (OJED 275:16). Its referent is unfortunately unknown. 
247 Possibly related to words for Job’s tears (Coix lachryma-jobi), a cereal grown for its seeds.

--- PAGE: 177 ---
Part II. Transliteration and Translation 
164 
 
 […] 
 The text ends abruptly here. 
*

--- PAGE: 178 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
165 
 
 
PART III: 
Place in Bujangga Manik 
Bujangga Manik is full of  long lists of place names. Most are th e names of rivers, mountains, and 
settlements in Java/Sunda encountered by the ascetic on his journey; others are ethnonyms or toponyms 
relating to places outside Java. The reader may find BM a difficult text to categorise – or even enjoy – 
due to its reliance on these place name lists; they are such a prominent feature  that answering the 
questions of how and why BM uses place is tantamount to answering the question of what kind of text 
BM even is. 
In my MA thesis I argued that the listing of toponyms in Bujangga Manik was a manifestation 
of a common trope in Malayo-Polynesian literatures, both oral and written, which appears in a range of 
different genres found across the Indo -Malaysian archipelago and the Pacific (A. J. West 2017). The 
listing of place names does not constitute a genre in its own right – but the trope nonetheless appears to 
have an ancient history in MP literatures, with examples of essentially the same form found in oral 
compositions from Hawai’i, the Solomon Islands, and elsewhere in the Indo-Malaysian archipelago. A 
reader of Bujangga Manik may find still find the text monotonous, but the possibility that its form 
reflects an ancient indigenous literary form is nonetheless rather interesting. I outline this argument in 
section III.1 below as part of a broader discussion of place as it appears in Bujangga Manik. 
I will also provide an overview of the  ascetic’s routes across Java (discussed in greater detail 
in Noorduyn’s 1982 article) and examine some of the more interesting places featured in the text, both 
Javan and extra-Javan, in section III.2. To further contextualise these places I will give a brief sketch 
of the landscape of fifteenth-century Java-Sunda as it is known to us from contemporary sources, noting 
in particular changes that have occurred since that time and describing interesting features of the human 
and natural landscape where relevant. 
*

--- PAGE: 179 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
166 
 
 
III.1 Listing Places 
Sunda was an ‘Indianised’ 248  kingdom. The religion practised by the elite was some variety of  
Hinduism, and references to the Hindu pantheon can be found in many OSd texts. (Buddhist ones are 
notably absent; the Hindu-Buddhist synthesis for which late-medieval Java is well-known appears not 
to have been present.)  BM implies that a Śaivist mantra (OSd nama siwaya, from Skt namaḥ Śivāya) 
was used as a greeting, at least on formal occasions (BM 447); the Old Sundanese script(s) is/are derived 
from an Indian source; stories of Rāma and Rāvaṇa are found in OSd texts; and an OJv translation of a 
Sanskrit text on yog a is one of the  better-known surviving texts to have been copied in Sunda  (Acri 
2011). The phenomenon of carving the foot- and handprints of kings and gods into rocks, common in 
Sunda (and much less so in Java), has its origins in an early Indian practice (Bisscho p 2004:20). Even 
the name ‘Bujangga Manik’ comprises two Sanskrit loanwords. 
Bujangga Manik is written, however, in Old Sundanese, a language in the Malayo-Polynesian 
branch of the Austronesian language family , and not in Sanskrit or another Indic language . Direct 
contacts between India and Sunda were probably limited, at least afte r the Tārūmanagara period, and, 
although demographic data are difficult to come by, most of the people who lived in Sunda were 
probably native Sundanese. It is unlikely that many of the m were literate in Sanskrit, and the Sanskrit 
loanwords in BM and other OSd texts often appear to have been loaned indirectly via OJv . (It is also 
noteworthy that Bujangga Manik knows and can translate OJv [BM 106 1-1065], but Sanskrit itself is 
not mentioned.) It would not be right to characterise Sunda in this period as an extension of India or to 
treat its culture and literature as having been inevitably derived from Indian models.  
BM’s focus on and listing of mundane place names in particular has no clear parallels in Indian 
literary tradition, unlike the narrative structures of other texts written or copied in Sunda at the time . 
Journeys and quests can of course be found in many Sanskrit and other South Asian texts, including 
some, like the Gaṇḍavyūha sutra, which were certainly known in medieval Java (as evidenced by reliefs 
at Borobudur – Fontein 1967, 1992:34), and travelogues from later periods are known from India as 
well (although these do not appear to have any Southeast Asian literary links – in any case see e.g. Alam 
and Subrahmanyam 2007, which covers the period up to 1800). Lists of toponyms do occasionally occur 
in Indian texts  as well, as in the Skandapurāṇa, a text whose earliest -known manuscript dates to the 
ninth century and which includes a list of place names ordered by travel between them (Bisscho p 
 
248 Cœdès (1948) in fact used the term ‘Hinduised’ (hindouisés) to refer to the Southeast Asian civilizations 
influenced by India and Sanskrit culture, and this is probably a more accurate position to take on Indian 
influence in the region. See also Trautmann (2015:ch7).

--- PAGE: 180 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
167 
 
2004:12). The differences are clear, though, when one looks at the details : Unlike the Skandapurāṇa, 
which focuses exclusively on spiritual and supermundane places,  BM is centred on mundane place 
names, only some of which are said to be holy . The journeys that link BM’s toponyms crisscross the 
island of Java and cannot easily be characterised as circumambulation or pradakṣiṇa (as in the 
Skandapurāṇa). BM’s ascetic is not intending to visit holy people to learn from them as Sudhana does 
in the Gaṇḍavyūha sutra – indeed, he hopes to remain as far away from other people as possible. 
BM’s narrative structure thus appears to have few connections to anything in Classical Indian 
literature, and it would sit uncomfortably within early modern Javanese genre conventions ( as in  
Setyawati 2015). Other literary traditions have made use of lists of place names in one form or another, 
and in a European context reference might be made to Horace’s Iter Brundisinum (Musurillo 1955) or 
Oswald von Wolkenstein’s Durch Barbarei Arabia (Vienna, ÖNB, Wolkenstein-Handschrift A, f.49r; 
Müller 2011:234-239; von Wolkenstein 2007:196-203). There is no realistic possibility that these texts 
are connected to BM, of course, and there are in any case some significant differences; Wol kenstein’s 
is a list of countries rather than of villages and streams, and Horace’s is more  a satire than a simple 
itinerary. Bujangga Manik stands out from these other examples. It is not, however, wholly sui generis. 
 Lists of place names are  nonetheless unusually common i n the literatures of Malayo-
Polynesian-speaking societies, particularly so when describing journey s or recounting the acts of 
ancestors. The anthropologist James Fox labelled such narratives ‘topogenies’, basing his analysis on 
the use of such lists in the oral traditions of Roti and Timor in eastern Indonesia (Fox 1997a, 1997b). 
The classic topogeny is a myth about the origins and migrations of a clan’s or lineage’s progenitors in 
which places feature prominently and are often combined with genealogical information to strengthen 
claims to land or other kinds of rights  – and it is indeed easy to find examples of such stories in  the 
literary traditions of languages in different branches of the  Malayo-Polynesian family: in Hawai’ i 
(Beckwith 1951; 1970:354-355); in Malaita, in the Solomon Islands (Guo 2001:77-78); in West Timor 
(McWilliam 2002); in Rejang surat ulu texts (Jaspan 1964:5); and elsewhere in South Sumatra (Sakai 
1997). Fox expanded the concept of the ‘topogeny’ to encompass almost any recitation of named places, 
however, and it is unclear what the defining features of topogenies are aside from an emphasis on place 
and toponyms. 
 My view on ‘topogenies’, as described in my MA thesis (2017), is that  toponym lists in MP 
literatures are related to one another , and that their similarities should not be reduced to mere family 
resemblance, but that  they do not form a literary genre – that texts (oral or written) in the Malayo -
Polynesian world employing the device of listed place names are not one kind of text.  Such lists 
constitute a trope rather than a genre: a device used to tell stories and recount events, something an

--- PAGE: 181 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
168 
 
audience can expect to encounter and that helps them orient themselves in the text and its world.249 The 
compositions that make use of this toponym-listing trope may be incantations, as in Sulawesi (Waterson 
2012:405); they may be intended to give geographical information, as with the lists used to teach 
nautical lore in the Caroline Islands ( Gladwin 1970:205 -207; Riesenberg 1972:22 ); they may be 
historical narratives, as with a pair of texts from Sikka in east -central Flores analysed by E. D. Lewis 
(1999); they might be modern Minang pop songs (Barendregt  2002); or they may even be Hindu 
narrative poems, as with BM. Lists of mundane place names are also encountered in medieval Javanese 
texts; the Deśawarṇana contains lists of places in Java linked by travel between them (e.g. cantos 19 -
25) as well as lists of places outside Java that described as Javanese vassals (13-15). This is in addition 
to the Hawaiian, Rejang, Malaitan, and Timorese compositions mentioned above which better fit with 
Fox’s original vision of the ‘topogeny’. These are all discussed in more detail in A. J. West (2017). 
  The expressions used in listing places and narrating journeys in compositions from different 
MP communities are often strikingly similar. Compare, for instance, BM’s verbs-of-motion formulae 
with the oral traditions recorded by Guo Peiyi on Malaita in the Solomon Islands, the original language 
of which is Langalanga, a distant relative of Sundanese in the Southeast Solomonic branch of MP: 
“‘…they came out from Feratal a and came down to a place called Ore Ore. Keldai came out 
from Feratala to Ore Ore. Keldai came to a place called Mauro. After he left Maru then he came 
to a place called Fakarua…’” (Guo 2001:78). 
Or see the language used in what Jaspan called the ‘Bemanai Clan Chronicle’, a text on daluwang (paper 
mulberry [Broussonetia papyrifera] bark) from South Sumatra dating to the mid-eighteenth century: 
‘…Gadja Meram stayed in the village of Rukam; Gadja Biring went to Pupuk; Gadja Merik 
went to Pundjau; Gadja Gemeram went to Muara Ganau; Gadja Beniting went to Tjita 
Mandi…’ (Jaspan 1964:28-29, 64). 
Areal influence is not possible across this area: Hawai’i, the Solomons, and Sunda (etc.) are simply too 
far apart. The similarities must be due to shared ancestry . The ultimate reason BM contains long 
passages of listed place names is because MP -speaking communities appear to have always put such 
lists in their compositions. This may go back to an Ur-‘topogeny’ wherein genealogies and toponyms 
were mixed as part of lineage -based claims to land and title, but the examples of ‘topogeny’ -like 
compositions in the ethnographic record are varied and go beyond advancing such claims. BM is not an 
exception in this regard. 
The prominence of place names in these narratives may imply a particular relationship between 
the people and the land, something Fox emphasised in his original formulation wherein the connection 
 
249 Such tropes can be used in narratives of many kinds over long periods of time – see e.g. the Indo-European 
literary motifs in Watkins 2001; M. West 2007).

--- PAGE: 182 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
169 
 
between genealogy and toponomy created a hierarchy of places akin to the social hierarchies found in 
Austronesian- or MP -speaking societies (1997b:91) . BM’s reference to the places survey ed from 
Papandayan’s summit as ‘remnants of the Forbidden One’ (BM 1182) suggests that the entire landscape 
was considered holy – not just hermitages and sacred sites. It is difficult, however, and beyond the scope 
of this study, to reconstruct an ideology of place from BM alone. 
Mountains as ‘Pillars’ 
A curious feature of the BM is the section betwee n lines 1184 and 1265 in which the ascetic 
looks out from his vantage point on Mount Papandayan and enumerates all the mountains in Sunda (and 
some outside of it), labelling them the tanggeran ‘pillars’ of their respective communities (discussed in 
Noorduyn and Teeuw 1999). What this means is not entirely clear, although it appears to represent the 
peak of Bujangga Manik’s worldly knowledge before his retirement and death, seeming to fuse Śaivist 
veneration for mountain peaks with an Austronesian interest in the same.  The role of mountains in 
orienting the landscape has been documented in other MP-speaking communities (see e.g. R. H. Barnes 
1974; Howell 1995:154; cf. the studies in Senft 1997), and it is commonplace for specific mountains to 
be sacred to certain communities (like Bukit Seguntang for the rulers of Śrīvijaya [Andaya 2001:320]). 
As Noorduyn and Teeuw (1999:214) note, BM’s mountains are referred to as either bukits or gunungs; 
in Malay/Indonesian gunung means ‘mountain’ and bukit ‘hill’, but in BM there does not appear to be 
a significant distinction between them; Merapi is referred to as both gunung and bukit (BM 1102 and 
775).250 Bukit is no longer common in Sundanese , and Noorduyn and Teeuw believed it was u sed 
because of Malay influence, but I suspect Malay bukit and OSd bukit share the same form because of 
their common GNB ancestry (going back, incidentally, to PAn *bukij ‘mountain’ [ACD 1506]). 
The mountains do not appear to be listed in any particular order – the view flits from west to 
east seemingly at random and the ir heights  concerned do not seem to be relevant, although some 
mountains around what is now Bandung are mentioned in a cluster, including Tompo Omas, Ceremay, 
Patuha, and Tangkuban Parahu, as are the mountains of what is now Banten province, like Mount Anten 
near the city of Banten and Burung Jawa ‘Javanese bird’, a peak on Hujung Barat – modern Ujung 
Kulon in Java’s far southwest . After this come a nu mber of unidentified peaks that seem to be in 
Kanékés/Baduy areas, and then some in Central Java, including Sundara (modern Sindoro). The names 
and identities of these mountains, insofar as they are known, can be found in Appendix B. 
 Encyclopaedism 
 The trope of listing toponyms  overlaps with the ‘encyclopaedism’ frequently encountered in 
Austronesian literatures, including Indo-Malaysian ones. Lists of commodities, perfumes, weapons, and 
much else are common in medieval and early-modern Javanese and Malay literature, leading Vladimir 
 
250 Cf. OJv wukir (cognate of bukit) – ‘mountain’ rather than ‘hill’ (OJED 2322:6).

--- PAGE: 183 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
170 
 
Braginsky to propose that attention to seemingly irrelevant detail is the principal indigenous component 
of Classical Malay literature, something generally absent from the Persian and Arabic sources on which 
Malay texts were frequently built (Braginsky 1993:45; see also Bausani 1962:178-179; Day and Derks 
1999). 251 OJv texts are also wont to contain such ‘irrelevancies’, as in the list of animals in the 
Deśawarṇana (50.5 – adapted from Robson 1995:60): 
‘... Pigs, barking deer, wild bulls, buffaloes, porcupines, chevrotains, 
Monitor lizards, monkeys, wild cats, rhinoceroses, and so on.’A6 
BM includes a great deal of this  – there are  more named varieties of betel than there are named 
characters, for instance , and we hear more about the gifts Jompong Larang brought to the ascetic’s 
mother than about Jompong herself. (These aspects of material culture are explored in Part VI.) Constant 
reference to the real world and items in it creates verisimilitude, situating the ascetic’s journey to death 
in a tangible place and time. Although BM is fiction – it contains, after all, first-person descriptions of 
heaven – it is set in the recognisably real world of late -medieval Java. Little in the poem could be 
considered ‘supernatural’ until the ascetic’s death, and even the heaven to which he ascends is treated 
in the same detail -oriented manner and contains essentially the same things as our mundane ‘Middle 
World’ (mad(i)yapada – BM 1591, 1606).  
 There are in any case limits to the capacity of Indic/Sanskrit literary comparisons to explain the 
features of medieval Indo-Malaysian cultural history, and the literary and religious traditions found in 
Bujangga Manik are at least as ‘Austronesian’ as they are ‘Indianised’. N owhere is this more evident 
than in the structure of the text itself. 
 
III.2 Toponyms and Routes 
The routes taken by the ascetic Bujangga Manik through Java have been covered in a detailed article 
by Noorduyn (1982), in which he was assisted by Bernd Nothofer, and with regard to the identification 
of places in Java little more can be added . In this section I will, however, summarise Noorduyn’s 
conclusions and discuss probable changes in Java’s landscape since the poem’s composition  (III.2.1). 
After this I will summarise the poem’s geographical information and toponymy, briefly describing the 
major places mentioned therein. In III.2.2 I will focus here on the better-known Javan toponyms – Java, 
Demak, Majapahit, Balungbungan, etc. – before looking at the places outside Java in section III.2.3 . 
For details of the route  the reader should consult Noorduyn’s article  (which can also be found as an 
 
251 On the other hand, painstaking attention to material cultural detail is also found in Vijayanagara -era Kannada 
poetry (Dallapiccola 2003:3). This feature is not exclusive to Indo-Malaysian literatures.

--- PAGE: 184 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
171 
 
appendix to Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006, albeit without the hand -drawn map [1982:417]) . I have 
summarised some of the details in Appendix B as well, particularly the identifications of the rivers and 
mountains. Some of these are still unidentified. 
* 
 Thanks to Noorduyn the ascetic’s routes are easily summarised. On his first trip, Jaya Pakuan 
– then the ascetic’s name – leaves Pakuan, the capital of Sunda and identifiable with the northernmost 
parts of modern-day Bogor, heading east along the Puncak Pass  north of Mount Gedé/Pangrango. He 
crosses the Cipamali (‘Taboo River’ , now the Brebes ), causing him to enter Javanese territory ( alas 
Jawa), most of which, it seems, was governed by Majapahit . No concrete information is given about 
the ascetic’s final destination on this journey, although it is implied that he travelled to Rabut Palah 
(Candi Panataran in East Java) and stated with certainty that he went to Damalung (Mount Merbabu in 
Central Java).  He appears to have studied at one or both of these places.  He becomes homesick , 
however, and walks to Pamalang (Pemalang) on the north coast of Central Java, from where he takes a 
ship (parahu) to Kalapa (modern -day Jakarta). From Kalapa he then walks to Pakañcilan, the royal 
district of Pakuan and the starting point of his journey, where a woman, Jompong Larang, falls in love 
with him. 
 After rejecting Jompong, the ascetic travels east again, hoping to arrive at Balungbungan 
(Blambangan) in the far-eastern corner of Java. He sets out through the territory of Saung Agung and 
past the mountain of Tompo Omas (‘basket of gold’, modern-day Tampomas) in kab. Sumedang, before 
heading through Kuningan, still in Sunda, where he comes to Arega Jati (‘teak mountain’), apparently 
home to a bathing place ( jalatunda) and a memorial to the Sundanese hero Silih Wangi. Still tending 
east, the ascetic passes several mountains, including Gunung Agung  ‘great mountain’  (i.e. Mount 
Slamet), and comes into the vicinity of Pa(n)danara(ng), which Noorduyn  (1982) identified with 
Semarang. Heading south he comes near Damalung  again and enters Medang Kamulan, a historical 
region near what is now Yogyakarta renowned in Javanese kidungs. He again heads east, passing a 
number of mountains and historical regions, notably Mount Lawu  on the Central/East Java border ; 
Daha, where the Majapahit court is said to have retreated after the encroachment of the coastal sultanates 
in the early sixteenth century; and Mount Wilis. He crosses the Cironabaya (the Brantas River) and goes 
to Majapahit by way of Bubat, site of a semi-legendary massacre of Sundanese soldiers by the Javanese 
in the fourteenth century. From Majapahit he walks to Pawitra (Mount Penanggungan), home to several 
medieval candis, noting incidentally that the port of Gresik lay to the north. He finally makes it to 
Balungbungan (BM 840), where he sets himself up as a hermit. Perturbed by the arrival of a  friendly 
woman who wishes to become an ascetic herself, he walks to the shore and takes a ship to Bali. 
 Disliking the hubbub of busy Bali, after only a year or so Bujangga Manik takes a jong (junk) 
back to Java. In a final lengthy journey, he wanders through Java looking for somewhere appropriate to

--- PAGE: 185 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
172 
 
practise asceticism, passing through several religious sites in East Java, some of which – like Dingding, 
the seat of an abbot (déwaguru) – are explicitly labelled as such. Some important mountains are noted 
in this stretch of the journey, including Brahma (Bromo) and Mahaméru (Semeru) in the Tengger massif 
(still essential in the ritual lives of non-Muslims in the region today – Hefner 1990:33). He visits the 
renowned Majapahit sanctuary of Rabut Palah (Candi Panataran); the poet describes it as ‘venerated by 
the Javanese’ (BM 10 60). Here Bujangga Manik  reads some texts  in Javanese ( the Darmawéya, 
unidentified, and the Pandawa Jaya  ‘victorious Pandawas’, perhaps a reference to the kakawin 
Bhāratayuddha, the OJv  Mahābhārata) but, disturbed again by noisy humans, he eventually  leaves. 
Continuing westward he wanders past mountains and villages, passing through the region of Galuh (BM 
1162). Finally he arrives at Mount Papandayan (‘place of smiths’) in kab. Garut, West Java, where he 
has his aforementioned vision of the world. He sees Java’s major peaks and their associated settlements 
laid out before him, and even the countries of the world as far west as Delhi and as far east as Banda. 
 After this the ascetic travels about forty kilometres west to Mount Patuha. Near its slopes he 
encounters a kabuyutan (‘sanctuary, archive’) with a jewelled lingga. Here he sets up his final hermitage 
with several buildings and a garden, and after ten years of meditation at the site he dies without illness, 
undergoing liberation (kamoksahan) and becoming a god. 
* 
III.2.1 The Landscape 
The ascetic must have used ferries252 to cross larger rivers, but BM gives the impression that the ascetic 
shuns human contact whenever possible and walks everywhere alone. A traveller would not have been 
alone at all times, of course, and must have relied on strangers for help; villagers may even have been 
legally obligated to help travellers in Java as they were in Sumatra: The fourteenth- or fifteenth-century 
Malay Nītisārasamuccaya (the ‘Tanjung Tanah’ manuscript, f.13) says that  ‘if there is a traveller or 
simple wanderer, bring him drink and food, and allow him on his way’ (Kozok 2015:76).A7 In any case, 
modern-day Urang Kan ékés are known for travelling on foot, other forms of transport often being 
prohibited, and Hasman and Reiss (2012:33) report that Kan ékés people can walk over 50 kilometres 
in one day. Pires reports, though, that it took two days to cover the roughly 50 kilometres  between 
Calapa (Kalapa/Jakarta) and Dayo (Pakuan), so this should be seen as exceptional. There are few hints 
of travel difficulties in BM – no accounts of wild animal attacks or ankles sprained on jagged rocks or 
other injuries – but the descriptions of footbridges and well-cut steps in steep hillsides in the heavenly 
landscapes of both BM and Sri Ajnyana (SA 377-380) suggest that travel in the earthly realm was 
difficult, and that an easily traversed landscape was literally heavenly. 
 
252 For which a well-known source is the OJv copperplate Ferry Charter of 1358 (Pigeaud 1960:I:108-112).

--- PAGE: 186 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
173 
 
 Java’s landscape is characterised by innumerable volcanoes both large and small , and it is 
sometimes claimed to be the most volcanically active island in the world (Whitten, Soeriaatmadja, and 
Afiff 1996:93). The north coast between Jakarta and Semarang is a plain, as flat and featureless as 
Holland, although mountains, most of them andesite stratovolcanoes,  can often be seen to the south. 
This plain has expanded over the centuries as the short rivers flowing into the Java Sea have silted up, 
but the northern coastal plain (palataran) is mentioned in BM 85. Heading south from this plain leads 
one into the mountains , although further east there are many more fertile plains and valleys (Cribb 
2000:19). The fact that foreign visitors tended to approach Java from the north, with densely forested 
mountains in the distance and a large inland population  evidenced by Java’s wealth and demand for 
foreign goods, gave rise to a belief among many in the medieval world that Java was the largest island 
in the world (Polo: la greingnor isle / qe soit au mõde – Paris, BnF, Français 1116, f.74vb), a belief that 
was not dispelled in Europe until the middle of the sixteenth century (Figure III.1). 
 
Figure III.1. Java (Lytil Jaua ‘Little Java’) stretching to the south in a south-up map of Southeast Asia in the Boke of 
Idrography, an atlas made for Henry VIII of England by the French cartographer Jean Rotz (London, BL, Royal MS 20 E 
IX, f.9v – c.1535-1542). Cf. Java (Jaua maior) on the Queen Mary Atlas of 1555-1559 (London, BL, Add MS 5415 A, 
f.18r). 
The soil in much of West Java is often rust-red and leached of nutrients – a function of the high 
rainfall and year -round high heat the region receives (see Kricher 1989:73 ; Sutlive 1978:15 -16 for 
concise explanations of the process). Dry rice, usually grown on unterraced hillsides, is still a popular 
crop in Sunda ju st as it must have been in earlier times, in part because the region’s oligotrophic

--- PAGE: 187 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
174 
 
laterite/latisols will not support wet rice fields. As one travels from west to east, the dry season grows 
longer and the problem of leaching is dramatically lessened, resu lting in richer soils conducive to 
irrigated wet-rice agriculture and dry -seeking plants like lontar palms (Borassus flabellifer – whose 
leaves were used to make the BM manuscript). The soil  in the east  is a deeper brown, and  a person 
travelling from west to east would surely have noticed the change. The concurrent higher human 
population density in the east would also have been obvious, and indeed BM comments disapprovingly 
on the number of people living in Java and Bali (BM 96 8-975). Java probably had a lower population 
density than most of Europe at the time,  however, and much lower than China or the Indo -Gangetic 
Plain (Reid 1988:11-17). 
The dangers of Southeast Asia’s fauna were known across the medieval world. The Russian 
traveller Afanasij Nikitin (c.1472) mentions that monkeys and ‘baboons’ attacked travellers on the roads 
in Шабат (šabat), a name related to ‘Java’ but which probably referred to Sumatra (or equatorial 
Southeast Asia in general). Monkey attacks were particularly feared at night: 
‘And in the woods there one finds baboons and monkeys and they attack people on the roads, 
so that no one dares travel at night because of [them].’A8 
The possibility of monkey attacks in Java and the need to placate the creatures is also mention ed by 
thirteenth-century Chinese administrator Zhào Rŭkuò, who says that ‘in the mountains [of Java] there 
are lots of monkeys who do not fear humans’ ( 山中多猴不畏人 ). A trip to the woods in Java is 
sufficient to show that this aspect of the landscape has not changed. As noted in the Introduction, 
however, other animals, including such dangerous ones as wild cattle ( banténg), tigers, and wildcats,  
are now less common than they once were. Presumably Bujangga Manik carries a rattan whip (BM 255) 
for fending off such animals. 
In medieval Sunda one would likely have seen dry rice fields framed by banana trees ( Musa 
spp.), sugarcane ( Saccharum officinarum), taro ( Colocasia esculenta and C. antiquorum), and yams 
(Dioscorea alata), as well as decorative plants like Cordyline fruticosa and Codiaeum variegatum. 
Irrigated rice paddy would have been significantly more common in the east of the island. Coconut 
palms (Cocos nucifera) were likely no less common than they are today; the slender stalks of areca 
palms ( Areca catechu) would doubtless have been more frequently encountered due to the earlier 
importance of betel chewing (since replaced by tobacco [Nicotiana spp.] as the local narcotic of choice). 
Aquaculture has a long history in Java, particularly farming of the giant gourami ( Osphronemus 
goramy) and the lele (Clarias batrachus); a necklace from the tenth-century Wonoboyo hoard (now in 
the Museum Nasional) made up of golden lele fish testifies to the importance of the fish in the Middle 
Ages, culinary and otherwise.

--- PAGE: 188 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
175 
 
Java’s landscape has undergone significant changes over the last six centuries, however. 
Volcanic eruptions in particular have violently rent the land . Papandayan, the mountain from whose 
summit the ascetic sees a vision of the world,  is a volcano, and an active one ; it exploded in August 
1772, killing three thousand people  and permanently altering the landscape, losing millions of tonnes 
of material from its summit  (Whitten, Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 1996:99). Any view from the summit 
that may have been visible in the Middle Ages is lost to us . Progradation of the coastline  also means 
that what were port-cities in BM’s day are now many kilometres inland, including Demak and Banten. 
American plant species have  changed the character of fields and roadsides; papaya ( Carica papaya) 
and manioc (Manihot esculenta) are commonly seen fringing fields, as are chilis (Capsicum annuum) 
growing in gardens. Forestry campaigns have also noticeably altered the landscape: A visit to the craters 
of Tangkuban Parahu, for instance, the volcano twenty kilometres north of the modern city of Bandung, 
involves a drive through a forest of pine trees. These are Pinus merkusii, the Sumatran pine, a species 
not native to Java. The trees were planted in the 1970s as part of a regreening programme (Whitten, 
Soeriaatmadja, and Afiff 1996:135-136).253 
Java’s urban profile has been transformed as well . Some towns that were once major centres 
have shrunk to become vill ages, like Bujangga Manik’s destination of Balungbungan (modern 
Blambangan, now a small satellite of Banyuwangi). Domestic architecture has also changed: Most 
houses in medieval Java were thatched – notwithstanding the survival of some terracotta tiles from what 
must have been higher-profile residences – and most had walls of wood, cloth, and woven palm leaves. 
Little survives archaeologically of such houses, although references in the extant literature suggest tiled 
stone-walled houses were rare if present  at all (e.g. Deśawarṇana 26.2 and 32.6 ; Miksic 2013:112 ). 
Low-density urban sprawl probably characterised island Southeast Asia’s major cities at this time, with 
houses separated from one another by gardens and orchards instead of densely packed together behind 
city walls (as in much of temperate Afro-Eurasia) (Cribb 2000:63). 
BM’s domestic sections suggest that a Sundanese noble’s house (imah or bumi) was built on 
piles (or ‘stilts’), a structure one would ascend (unggah) a ladder to enter. This is in common with most 
traditional dwellings in the archipelago from Sumatra to New Guinea  and into the Pacific, a tradition 
that probably began in Neolithic southern China and which has been largely abandoned in Java  under 
modern Chinese and European infl uence (Blust 2013:13; Kirch 1997:47; Waterson 1997:1, 15 -16). 
Houses built on low piles can still be seen at Kampung Naga near Tasikmalaya, though , and the 
Kanékés/Baduy build their houses on piles as well (Hasman and Reiss 2012:16 -19). Reliefs at 
Borobudur suggest that pile-houses were also common in the Central Javanese period (Figure III.2). 
 
253 There is no local name for the trees, and they are referred to as pinus (from the Latin generic name).

--- PAGE: 189 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
176 
 
 
Figure III.2. A house depicted in a relief on the north side of the first gallery of Borobudur, Central Java, mid-ninth century. 
Note the bulbous tops of the piles intended to prevent ingress of vermin (cf. Chen 1968:284-285). Author’s photograph, 
November 2018. 
Tomé Pires says, describing the palace of the king of Sunda: 
‘The city has well-built houses of palm leaf and wood. They say that the king’s house has three 
hundred and thirty wooden pillars as thick as a wine cask, and five fathoms high, and beautiful 
timberwork on the top of the pillars . It’s a very well -built house’ (Cortesão 1944:168 ; Pires 
2018:191).A9 
Writing almost three centuries earlier, Zhào Rŭkuò (c.1225) says that the people of Xīntuō (新拖 – i.e. 
Sunda) ‘all build their houses using wooden poles, roofing them with palm bark, with flooring of 
wooden planks and screens made from strips of cane’.A10 The ‘wooden poles’ (木植) are probably piles 
on which the house was built. Piles have a number of advantages, serving to raise the house above water 
in case of flooding, allow for a freer flow of air, and protect the inhabitants from enemies and vermin 
(see Waterson 1997). Other buildings not intended for human habitation are also built on stilts, including 
the traditional Sundanese leuit ‘rice barn’ (Hasman and Reiss 2012:15). These buildings (OSd: leit) are 
mentioned in the Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (L630, f.2r, line 1) ; I doubt their design has 
changed much since. The parañjé ‘chicken coop’, another piece of Sundanese architecture mentioned 
in SSKK, was probably placed between the piles under the floor  of the house  (Rigg 1862:354 sub 
Paranjé).

--- PAGE: 190 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
177 
 
Other words for buildings are harder to precisely envision, particularly lamin ading, a free -
standing house probably related to wedding rites or marriage. It has beams, a skirting board, and space 
for furniture (palangka ‘couch, bed’). Ading is a variant of gading ‘ivory’, but lamin is not found (or is 
uncommon) in MSd. In some of the Bornean Malayic languages, lamin means ‘longhouse’, which suits 
the context, although longhouses themselves are principally a Bornean phenomenon. Wilkinson’s 1932 
Malay dictionary gives ‘bridal pair; household’ for the derived term kelamin (#19816), and the use of 
pelaminan for ‘bridal dais’ in modern Malay/Indonesian is well-known. Jiří Jákl (p.c.) notes that similar 
terms may be found in Old Javanese court poet ry with the meaning ‘wedding pavilion’.  The original 
referent of lamin may thus have been the married couple, with the meaning of ‘house’ or ‘longhouse’ 
an extension resulting from houses being built for a couple upon their marriage, a practice  attested 
elsewhere in the MP-speaking world (e.g. Bloch 2005:39-45). Balay also presents some pitfalls, as it 
can refer to houses or pavilions, possibly for religious functions (cf. OJv bale, from PMP *balay [ACD 
513]); to low walls and paving (dibalay – BM 1413); or to couches/beds (as in parts of eastern Indonesia 
– Andaya 1993:80). Rigg (1862:34) reports that it was also used in reference to ‘ancient and sacred 
spot[s], for making offerings and prayers’.254 
Cloth was part of the furniture  and indeed the construction of island Southeast Asian houses, 
as BM’s lists of curtains (kasang) attest. Controlling air-flow through the home was important in a hot 
and humid climate like Java’s; hanging openings with cloth was a simple and attractive way of doing 
this.255 The fourteenth-century Bishop of Quilon in India, Jordanus of Catalonia, says that people in the 
islands to the east, including Java/Sumatra (Jana), ‘make their walls from cloth’ (1839[~1330]:51; Yule 
1863:30-31).A11 We should not imagine that the wooden and palm-leaf architecture of Java at this time 
rendered the landscape monotone. 
 By the fifteenth century some of the ‘Hindu-Buddhist’ monuments that can be seen today were 
already in ruins (perhaps because of poor construction techniques – Dumarçay 1986:3). The kakawin 
Śiwarātrikalpa, composed in the 1470s and thus contemporary with BM, contains a great deal of 
description of the landscape of Java256 at this time, including a fascinating image of a ruined temple that 
the protagonist – an illiterate hunter – passes (3.1): 
‘A great temple-complex from ancient times rose near a mountain stream, and the path there 
was lonely / The curved trunks of the water-elephants had fallen and crumbled, and for lack 
of care its wall had almost tumbled down. / The monster-heads seemed to be weeping as their 
 
254 Interestingly, the term for ‘temple’ in Tikopia, fare, is cognate with OSd balay (Kirch 2000:107). Kirch 
(2000) speculates that houses in Tikopia became temples over time due to ‘a pervasive and presumably ancient 
cultural pattern [in Austronesian societies] in which the houses of the living become transformed into houses of 
the ancestors’ (2000:114). 
255 I am indebted to Hélène Njoto for this observation. 
256 Helen Creese says of OJv kakawin: ‘…although the names of the heroes, kingdoms, rivers, and mountains 
may be Indian, the world the poets are describing is […] Javanese’ (2004:40).

--- PAGE: 191 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
178 
 
covered faces were overgrown with a profusion of creepers / And as though sad and weary 
the temple-guardians were lying rolled over flat on the ground’ (Teeuw et al. 1969:73; see 
also Zoetmulder 1974:205-206, 359-366).A12 
A similar description of a tumbledown temple can be found in the Deśawarṇana, written a century 
earlier, implying that temples ruins could be found in East Java  even at the he ight of the Majapahit 
period: 
‘See how to the north of the platform of the stair its remaining earth is already level; / The 
nāgapuspa planted there are spreading and others in the courtyard are sprouting and budding. / 
Outside the gate the refectory is hi gh, but its grounds are abandoned, / Its broad courtyard is 
covered with grass, its path is overgrown with weeds and full of mosses ’ (37.4 – Robson 
1995:50).A13 
It would, however, be a mistake to exaggerate the ruination of Java’s temples in the fifteenth 
century. Other temple sites were certainly in use when BM was written, including Candi Panataran, 
known in the poem as Rabut Palah and said to be ‘venerated by the Javanese’ (BM 1060 – see Kieven 
2013 for an interpretation of the site’s reliefs). The ascetic is annoyed by the noise of the temple’s many 
visitors, so Rabut Palah must still have been  busy even in the 1470s; inscriptions suggest it was still 
being renovated as recently as 1454. On his return journey from Bali to Sunda the ascetic passes several 
religious sites in East Java , some of which survive today, particularly Candi Kendalisodo on Mount 
Penanggungan (known in the poem as Pawitra and Gunung Gajah Mungkur ). This was built in the 
fifteenth century and features a terraced sanctuary and meditation cave, with some walls decorated with 
reliefs depicting Pañji stories (Kinney, Kieven, and Klokke 2003:260 -265). Mount Lawu in Central 
Java, which is mentioned only in passing and at which Bujangga Manik does not appear to have stopped, 
is also home to two enigmatic temple sites, Sukuh and Ceto (or Cetho), both built in the fifteenth 
century. The former has been interpreted as a ‘state temple’ for opponents of the Majapah it centre, 
although this is speculative (Kinney, Kieven, and Klokke 2003:272). Either way the temples existed in 
the 1470s, and an inscription dated to 1472 from Ceto attests to the presence of an active community  
there. 
Other monumental buildings could be seen at Majapahit itself (i.e. the capital near what is now 
Trowulan in East Java), particularly what the Deśawarṇana (8.1) describes as the ‘awe-inspiring royal 
palace’ (purādbhuta) with a wall of red brick built ‘thick and high’ all the way around it (Robson 
1995:29). Garbled descriptions of such grand and busy sites were probably responsible for Odoric of 
Pordenone’s well-known if fanciful early -fourteenth-century claims of a resplendent palace made of 
gold and silver in which the great king of Java supposedly lived – claims which made their way into the

--- PAGE: 192 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
179 
 
tales of the fabulist ‘John Mandeville’ and which can thus be found in some of the oldest surviving texts 
on Java in English and Dutch.257 
Linggas are occasionally encountered by the ascetic on his travels. A lingga is an aniconic or 
phallic representation of Śiva, the premier Hindu  deity worshipped in Java in the fourteenth and 
fifteenth centuries. A typical Javanese lingga, like the Indian models on which it was based, comprised 
a rounded stone cylinder with an octagonal base, often surmounting a larger yoni (an aniconic/vulvic 
representation of the goddess Śakti ), an example of which can be seen in Figure III. 3. In Java (as in 
India), however, linggas varied dramatically in s ize and shape. A lingga in the form of a broadly 
anatomically correct phallus was found at Sukuh, for instance; it is thought to have been placed atop 
the main temple building, which has  therefore been interpreted as a huge yoni (Kinney, Kieven, and 
Klokke 2003:268). In West Java the oldest known linggas have the traditional rounded-cylinder shape 
– several of these  from the first-millennium site of  Candi Batujaya can be seen in the Museum Sri 
Baduga – but those of the later Sunda kingdom are rough-hewn, more like standing stones found in 
other parts of Indonesia than Indian linggas. 
 
Figure III.3. Three linggas from Java (L-R): a) the gigantic phallus from Sukuh (Leiden, UBL, PK-F-60.843); b) a stone 
from Kawali labelled sanghiyang ling/ga h(i)yang (Kawali III – Leiden, UBL, KITLV 87616); and c) a decorated lingga-
yoni from East Java (Leiden, UBL, PK-F-61.356). 
Two of the Kawali stones are known to be linggas because they are inscribed with the word 
‘lingga’. Sundanese yonis are also shaped rather differently, usually consisting of a triangular 
indentation at the base of the lingga. Examples of these can be found below the Batutulis inscription – 
which may force us to interpret the inscription it self as a kind of lingga – and at Kawali (Herlina 
 
257 See, for instance, London, British Library, Harley MS 3954, f.38v, an early-fifteenth-century Middle English 
Mandeville, or The Hague, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, 131 B 14, f.99r, a Middle Dutch version of Mandeville 
dated 1462 (for which see Cramer 1908). The Dutch Mandeville – the earliest MS of which is Cape Town, 
National Library of South Africa, Grey Coll. 4 b 17 (Sjoerd Levelt, p.c.) – is probably the oldest Dutch text to 
mention Java by name.

--- PAGE: 193 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
180 
 
2017:18; Munandar 2017:277). BM also describes some linggas as ‘jewelled’ ( li(ng)ga manik – BM 
1408), although precisely what this means is unclear. In BM 1289 the ascetic puts up a lingga himself, 
and the verb used (na(ñ)jerken ‘raise, erect’) suggests that this was akin to a standing stone. Either way 
we cannot be sure what to picture when the poem uses the term lingga in each case, and such stones are 
not now typically encountered by travellers across the island except at archaeological parks and national 
monuments. 
The references to sakakala are also rather unclear. The word comes from the Sanskrit śakakāla 
‘Śaka era’ by way of OJv ‘chronogram’ (OJED 1603:5), and in some OSd texts it does appear to carry 
a similar meaning of ‘(in) the reign of (so-and-so)’, as in the first plate of the Kebantenan I copperplates 
(Jakarta, Museum Nasional, inv. no. E.42a) . In BM sakakala appear to be memorials to legendary 
figures, however. Six pre-existing sakakala (BM 698, 733, 773, 776, 1243, and 1367) are encountered 
by the ascetic, who also builds a sakakala himself (BM 1291 – teher ñi(y)an sakakala). This suggests 
that these sakakala were physical objects – inscription stones, perhaps? 
One of the sakakalas commemorates Sang Kuriang (BM 1243), whose appearance in BM seems 
to be the oldest reference to the legend in Sundanese literature. In the tale, the wild man Sang Kuriang, 
who has been separated from his parents and lived in the wilderness since he was a baby, encounters 
his mother as an adult and falls in love with her . He asks to marry her. She realises that Sang Kuriang 
is her child and sets him several impossible tasks – to dam the Citarum River in one night, for example 
(alluded to in BM 1244-1245), and to build a boat before daybreak – that he must complete before she 
will agree to the marriage . As expected, Sang Kuriang fails, leading him to kick over the boat he had 
been working on in rage (whence Mount Tangkuban Parahu [BM 120 3], lit. ‘overturned boat’).  
Remarkably, this story appears to have retained its essential form in Sundanese oral tradition for at least 
five-and-a-half centuries. 
Another sakakala commemorates Silih Wangi, the legendary king Siliwangi (BM 733). This 
sakakala was located at a place called Jalatunda (not the well-known tenth-century bathing place known 
as Jalatunda/Jolotundo near Mojokerto)  near Arega Jati (‘teak mountain’ – unidentified) just on the 
Sundanese side of the Cipamali in Kuningan . Why Silih Wangi would be commemorated there is 
unknown, but the reference suggests in any case that Siliwangi/Silih Wangi  was already legendary in 
the fifteenth century. He cannot therefore be identified with a late-fifteenth- or early-sixteenth-century 
king (as modern Sundanese tradition would have it). 
III.2.2 Javan Toponymy 
Bujangga Manik’s toponyms can be divided into Javan and extra -Javan ones – ‘Javan’ (as 
opposed to ‘Javanese’) meaning place names in Java and Sunda, and ‘extra-Javan’ meaning the names 
of places off the island. The former far outnumber the latter. In this section I will take a brief look at

--- PAGE: 194 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
181 
 
the structure of Java’s toponyms as they appea r in BM before addressing some of the more prominent 
place names in the political history of the island , among them Pakuan, Jawa, Majapahit, Demak, and 
Gresik. In the following section  (III.2.3) I will examine the extra-Javan places. The identities of the 
mountains and rivers that feature in BM are summarised in Appendix B and the details of the route can, 
as mentioned above, be found in Noorduyn (1982) and Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006). 
I have also listed the more common place name elements in BM’s Javan toponyms in Appendix 
B (Table B.1) with their probable etymologies , but I shall summarise their features here . The Javan 
toponyms are usually made up of two morphemes containing two or three syllables apiece, a pattern 
found elsewhere in the region (Kuala Lumpur ‘muddy estuary’ in Malaysia or Fatu Le’u ‘medicine 
rock’ in West Timor) and common in Java’s modern toponymy, although such names are now  often 
written using one orthographic word (e.g. Wonosobo ‘forest meeting place’, from Skt via OJv). Of these 
elements most are Javanese or Sundanese but, while BM’s structure and approach to place may be based 
on indigenous concepts, many are Sanskrit (or from other Indic languages). Monomorphemic toponyms 
can also be found in the text, although these are  rarer (and noticeably less common than in kakawin). 
Some place names have their origins in myth, as with Tangkuban Parahu (lit. ‘overturned boat’ [BM 
1202]), a volcano north of present-day Bandung claimed to have been formed when the aforementioned 
Sang Kuriang kicked over the boat he was building in a rage . Others are more prosaically descriptive, 
like Gunung Agung ‘Great Mountain’, the old name for Mount Slamet in Central Java (BM 736). 
Pakuan 
Having already examined the name ‘Sunda’ in the Introduction, I shall start the examination of 
BM’s political toponymy with Pakuan, Sunda’s capital city. The Sunda kingdom and its capital are both 
known in oral tradition as Pajajaran, but a more common designation for the capital in OSd manuscripts 
and inscriptions is Pakuan. Pakuan occurs alone in the Kebantenan II copperplates (Jakarta, Museum 
Nasional, inv. no. E.43) and it is the only form found in BM. It is almost certainly identifiable with the 
location of the modern city of Bogor, about forty kilometres south of Jakarta (Kalapa – not ‘Sunda 
Kelapa’ as is popularly claimed), the kingdom’s principal port. Pakañcilan (‘place of chevrotains’) 
seems to have been a district of Pakuan, home to the palace (dalem or jero) in which Bujangga Manik 
grew up; this is thought to have been in the north of the modern city (Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:443). 
Pakuan Pajajaran  appears in the first of the Kebantenan  I copperplates (inv. no. E.42a  recto), 
suggesting that Pajajaran and Pakuan were different names for the same region or conurbation, and the 
occurrences of Pajajaran on the (seventeenth-century?) Ciéla map and ⟨Padjadjaram⟩ on a chart drawn 
by the Dutch cartographers Isaac de Graaff and Pieter Scipio in 1695 ( The Hague, Nationaal Archief, 
VEL1172 – Landkaart van Batavia na de Zuydzee), both on the Ciliwung (BM’s Cihaliwung), suggest 
that Pajajaran was the name of a region ar ound Pakuan, the old Sunda capital. In the latter case the 
reference to ‘T Fort Padjadjaram ‘Pajajaran Fort’ in the area around Bogor corresponds to the discovery

--- PAGE: 195 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
182 
 
of remnants of a fortress and several statues there (Andaya and Andaya 2015:105).  The capitals or 
capital regions of Southeast Asian polities were often used as pars pro toto for the polity (cf. Majapahit), 
whence perhaps the later use of Pajajaran for the kingdom. 
Pakuan does not occur in foreigners’ accounts until the arrival of the Portuguese, and even then 
not under that name . Tomé Pires uses the name Dayo or Daio (Cortesão 1944:168), and the word 
appears on some sixteenth -century European maps (e.g. the 155 5-1559 Queen Mary Atlas). Dayo 
(probably pronounced [daju] – Snow and Burke 1996:173 -174) is doubtless derived from Sd dayeuh 
(OSd dayeh) ‘chief town, capital’, perhaps from PAn *daya ‘upriver, towards the interior’ (ACD 7210). 
The word may have been a nickname and it does not appear t o have been exclusive to Pakuan; the 
derived form  dayehan occurs in  the Kebantenan copperplates  (E.42a verso), where it refers to the 
establishment of religious communities  (Zahorka 2007:35-36). There is little question, however, that 
Dayo, Pakuan, and (some of the time) Pajajaran referred to essentially the same place: the Sundanese 
capital on the Ci(ha)liwung. 
Jawa 
Travelling east from Pakuan Bujangga Manik crosses the Cipamali and enters the territory of 
Java (alas Jawa), a name which was known internationally, but was poorly understood, in the Middle 
Ages. The origin of the word ‘Java’ (Sd, Mal., Jv Jawa) is a complicated topic that has generated a great 
deal of controversy in recent years , and I do not wish to wade into that dispute (for which see Mahdi 
2013). It is in any case clear from BM that Jawa referred exclusively to the Javanese-speaking parts of 
the island. Sunda was not part of Jawa, and there does not appear to have been a name for the island as 
a whole. This seems to have been the n orm in Southeast Asian texts, including Javanese ones, and it 
can be connected to a wider trend in MP geographies that focused more on settlements and people than 
on islands per se (see below). Jawa in BM is an alas – a term that in OJv meant ‘forest’ and came from 
PMP *halas ‘forest’ (Blust 2013:13) but which in OSd seems to have meant a ‘region’ or ‘territory’ of 
varying size; the alas of Jawa contained the alas of Demak, as Noorduyn (1982:415) notes. 
Terms related to or derived from Jawa referred to a several different entities in medieval texts 
from outside Southeast Asia . Sumatra was often known by a Jawa-like name, particularly in the 
fourteenth century, as in Polo’s Jaua le menor ‘smaller Java’ (Français 1116, f.3r) and Ibn Baṭṭūṭa’s al-
Jāwa (Gibb and Beckingham 1994:876). Afanasij Nikitin’s Шабат (šabat) is probably derived from 
Jawa, perhaps via Arabic, and likewise seems to have referred to Sumatra. The idea that there were two 
Javas was popular; Polo contrasts Jaua le menor with la grant isle de Jaua ‘the big island of Java’ (i.e. 
Java) and Ibn Ba ṭṭūṭa likewise distinguishes al-Jāwah from Mul Jā wah (i.e. Java – Gibb and 
Beckingham 1994:883). Niccolò de’ Conti’s mid -fifteenth-century accounts, meanwhile, distinguish 
two Javas, one big ( Giaua maȝor on the Fra Mauro map) and one small ( Giaua menor), the latter of 
which was supposed to be Java (the former unidentified but sometimes associated with Borneo; it cannot

--- PAGE: 196 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
183 
 
be Sumatra as Conti refers to that as Sciamutera – Guéret-Laferté 2004:114-115). Odoric of Pordenone, 
by contrast, reserves his Java-like name for the island now known as ‘Java’, calling it an ‘island’ (ylle 
in Royal MS 19 D I, f.141r), and we find the same usage in Chinese texts, where 爪哇 (pinyin: Zhǎowā) 
and the earlier 闍婆 (pinyin Shépó, MC dzyae-ba) seem to have referred to the entire island (as on the 
Mao Kun map) or, in several accounts, including Mǎ Huān’s, to both an island and a ‘state/kingdom’ (
國). Such uses continued into the sixteenth century, and  Sunda is notably depicted as wholly separate 
from Java on the Portuguese Miller Atlas (1519 – Paris, BnF, GE DD-683). Confusion appears to have 
resulted from both the aforementioned difficulties of the etymology of Jawa itself (which may originally 
have referred to parts of Sumatra, Java, or even Borneo – as argued by Sergey Kullanda [2006]) and , 
perhaps more importantly, from the fact that island Southeast Asians did not often confer names on the 
islands they lived on.  
In BM the border between Sunda and Java is established at the Cipamali (‘taboo river’ – modern 
Pemali or Brebes River), now in Central Java. Curiously, Tomé Pires places the border at the Cimanuk 
(chemano) much further to the west  and, indeed, says that this border was claimed to have been laid 
down by God himself (Cortesão 1944:166-167). A parsimonious explanation for the difference between 
these two claims may be that when BM was composed the border was further east, Javanese speakers 
having encroached on coastal Sundanese territory in the meantime, part of the Muslim expansion across 
Java during the fifteenth century. Pires could simply have been mistaken, however. 
Jawa’s States and Cities 
Though Jawa was evidently an ethno-linguo-geographical identifier, foreigners in the Middle 
Ages took it to refer to the kingdom that dominated it . This may have reflected the circumstances in 
Java for much of the Majapahit period  (1293-c.1500?), when a kingdom based at Majapahit (modern 
Trowulan) in East Java does indee d appear to have governed all of Jawa such that ‘Java’ and 
‘Majapahit’ were essentially synonymous. Mǎ Huān uses ‘Majapahit’ (滿者伯夷 pinyin: Mǎnzhěbóyí, 
early Mandarin: [mɔn-tʂia-paj-ji] [Pulleyblank 1991]) to refer to the capital ; it is, he says, ‘where the 
king of the country lives’ (Mills 1970:86).A14 BM uses ‘Majapahit’ in both senses. In BM 801-804 the 
ascetic approaches the city via Bubat, a grand open space to the north of the city linked to it by a royal 
highway (rājamārga – as in Deśawarṇana 86.2). The city itself is not described in any detail, and it is 
curious that Bubat is similarly neglected, as the massacre of a Sundanese delegation at the site in the 
fourteenth century – described, however, only in later sources ( Carita Parahiyangan, Pararaton, and 
Kidung Sunda) – is one of the more famous events in Sundanese history.

--- PAGE: 197 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
184 
 
Precisely when Majapahit hegemony  over Jawa came to an end is unclear  (see Djafar 2013; 
Noorduyn 1978 for the evidence ). 258  The last non -Islamic ruler  mentioned in inscriptions  is Śrī 
Girīndrawardhana dyah Raṇawijaya, who appears as the benefactor in the Padukuhan Duku and Jiyu 
inscriptions of 1486 and who wa s apparently ruler of Majapahit  (Casparis 1997:52) . B y the 1513 
Portuguese expedition to Java , though, it is apparent that the ‘heathen’ ( gentio) kingdom of Java had 
moved from Majapahit to Daha ( i.e. K aḍiri, cf. BM 79 4 – Cortesão 1944:175 , 190n3 ; see also 
Pigafetta’s Daha [f.93v]). Majapahit still seems to have been an important entity when BM was written 
– its capital intact, its non-Islamic religious sites bustling, and its territory apparently stretching right 
up to the border with Sunda (BM 84).  BM 85 (palataran alas Demak) suggests, though, that Demak, 
an Islamic sultanate in Central Java known in Portuguese as Demaa or Dema (Cortesão 1944:159), had 
established itself as a place of some importance.  The beginning of Demak’s ascent, perhaps initially 
under the leadership of a Chinese Muslim, is dated to the 1470s, its great mosqu e having been built in 
1479 (Cribb 2000:45; Graaf and Pigeaud 1974:46). Ibn Mājid, who called the city d-m-k (دمكsays 
c.1489 that it was ‘“the capital of the kingdom”’, although, as Tibbetts notes, ‘which kingdom is not 
stated’ (1981:499). In Pires’ day  the lord of Demak was the ‘the chief pate [lord] in Java’ (Cortesão 
1944:184; Pires 2018:206).A15 These differences between BM and the ethnohistoric texts suggests that 
the poem was written in the 1470s or 1480s, when Majapahit was still vibrant but Demak had  
nonetheless been established. 
Demak was not the only Islamically oriented  Javanese port in BM’s day,  nor the only one 
mentioned in the text. Gresik, a city near Surabaya reportedly established by Chinese settlers and ‘the 
oldest and most respected Islamic centre in the pasisir  [i.e. Java’s north coast] ’ (Reid 1992:189), is 
mentioned in BM 811. The ascetic does not visit Gresik but passes some distance to the south, so it is 
notable that it is singled out for comment.  Gresik was known internationally before the arrival of the 
Portuguese – Ibn Mājid calls it Jarshik (جﺮشيك) Tibbetts 1981:498) and Mǎ Huān refers to it as ‘New 
Village’ (新村 – sometimes also 廝村 ‘latrine village’ [Mills 1970:86]) – and it is described by Pires, 
who calls it Agracii (vel sim), as ‘the great trading port, the best in all Java’ A16 (Cortesão 1944:431). 
Gresik’s association with Islam goes back to the early fifteenth century at the latest, with the arrival of 
Malik Ibrāhīm, the probably Persian Muslim teacher who died at Gresik in 1419 (822 AH). His tomb 
was made of stone from Khambhat (Cambay) in Gujarat and bears an Arabic inscription  (Casparis 
1997:52; Tagliacozzo 2009:87). 259  The city was evidently extremely multicultural and of great 
importance in late -medieval trade, particularly  in cloth imported by Gujarat is (Pires’ guzarates). 
Noorduyn’s comment that ‘Islam is completely absent’ from the content of Bujangga Manik (Noorduyn 
 
258 The issue is further confused by probable hoaxes (like that of ‘Poortman’/Parlindungan – Graaf and Pigeaud 
1984). 
259 Malik Ibrāhīm is now considered the first of the Wali Songo, the saints credited with bringing Islam to Java.

--- PAGE: 198 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
185 
 
and Teeuw 2006:438) is strictly correct in that Islam is not mentioned per se, but Muslims, both foreign 
and local, are nonetheless present in the background.  
 
Figure III.4. One of the inscriptions from Candi Sukuh – 1363 Śaka or 1441 CE. The script is known only from Sukuh and 
Ceto. Much of the text is obscure. Leiden, UBL, OD-7168. 
BM mentions other historical regions – Gegelang (789), Medang Kamulan (790), and Urawan 
(1086) – that appear  as ‘kingdoms’  in several historical and para -historical narratives from Java, 
particularly in the Pañji stories (Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:447-448). BM gives few indications of their 
status, although the implication of BM 84 is that the various lurahs of Java (including e.g. Gegelang) 
were in some sense under Majapahit suzerainty. Various long-fifteenth-century sources nonetheless 
suggest that  state power in Java  was weak  at the time , and there are indications of intra -Javanese 
violence in the accounts of Conti (1448), Varthema (1510), and Pires (1515) and in some inscriptions 
– notably that on the Garuḍa statue from Sukuh dated 1441, which describes an attack on Rajěgwěsi by 
the people of Měḍaṅ (Medang) (Figure III.4).A17 
Chinese sources from earlier in the century, and even as early as 1379, suggest that the Javanese 
kingdom was already divided into at least two parts  and that the unity of Majapahit under the rul er of 
Hayam Wuruk and Gajah Mada, and its ability to project power outside Java (implied in Deśawarṇana 
13-15), did not last long after their deaths.260 In the Pararaton there is a reference to a war between the 
 
260 In particular the well-known reference in the Ming Shilu to the presence of two palaces in Java, one western 
and one eastern (dated 8th November 1379): Wade, Geoff (trans). Southeast Asia in the Ming Shi-lu: an open

--- PAGE: 199 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
186 
 
eastern and western regions in the year 1406 (1328 Śaka) known as the Rěgrěg (of uncertain meaning 
– see OJED 1529:5), perhaps corroborating the Chinese account . The war was won by the Majapahit 
centre (or ‘western palace’ – Jv kaḍaton kulon), with the pretender Wīrabhūmi of the ‘ea stern palace’ 
(kaḍaton wetan) having been defeated and killed. Majapahit may have been permanently weakened by 
this war, although as it is only noted in the Pararaton and obliquely in some Chinese sources not much 
can be said for certain. Either way the sparkling descriptions of Java by foreigners in the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries – Polo’s account of Java’s immense wealth ; Odoric’s of the Great King’s golden 
palace; Ibn Baṭṭūṭa’s of the extraordinary loyalty of the king’s guards (Gibb and Beckingham 1994:883-
884) – are replaced in the fifteenth century by dismay at the violence of everyday life (as in both Conti 
and Mǎ Huān). 
The ‘eastern palace’  was probably simply another palace in Majapahit controlled by another 
branch of the royal family (Wayan Jarrah Sastrawan, p.c.), but by the time the Portuguese had arrived 
a power had arisen much further east, at Blambangan in the eastern salient. This is BM’s Balungbungan, 
the destination of the ascetic’s second journey. Even in the sixteenth century this was not an Islamic 
sultanate, and Pires credits the lord of Balungbungan – bulambuam, similar to the OSd name (Cortesão 
1944:435; Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:451) – with having prevented the complete Islamic conquest of 
the island. Balungbungan was the preeminent port in the eastern salient, and Pires notes the abundance 
of its crops and its lord’s horses (Cortesão 1944:198, 435-436; Pires 2018:217). 
About Bali, fi nally, BM has surprisingly little to say. The island’s local toponyms are not 
mentioned in the text, and we are simply told that Bali is too crowded – more densely populated than 
southern Sumatra or Java (BM 96 7-977). Pires gives similarly few specifics, calling it Baly and 
grouping it with its neighbours as just another island full of heathen pirates.A18 
Java at the time of BM was well-populated, politically divided, in the midst of religious change, 
and rife with violence . Interestingly, thoug h, little of this can be seen in the poem.  Vastly more 
toponyms than personal names appear in the text; humanity is an apparent afterthought. Few people are 
encountered, and those Bujangga Manik does meet – the female ascetic in Balungbungan, the ships’ 
captains – are friendly and caring, not at all what one would expect from reading the ethnohistoric 
accounts. 
III.2.3 Extra-Javan Place Names 
 BM mentions a number of places outside Java, particularly during Bujangga Manik’s vision 
from Papandayan (BM 1266-1279), an interlude discussed at length in Noorduyn and Teeuw (1999). In 
this section I will describe and contextualise these extra-Javan toponyms in order of appearance using 
 
access resource. Singapore: Asia Research Institute and the Singapore E-Press, National University of 
Singapore. http://epress.nus.edu.sg/msl/reign/hong-wu/year-12-month-9-day-29. Accessed 29-07-2020.

--- PAGE: 200 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
187 
 
comparative evidence from other medieval and early modern texts. (Extra-Javan toponyms not featured 
in this list are discussed elsewhere – e.g. section V.2.3). The analysis below first requires the dissection 
of a troubling term, however – nusa, conventionally but inaccurately rendered as ‘island’. 
Nusa 
Islands were not always named in medieval Indo-Malaysia. Indeed, it is rare for larger islands 
to have names of their own in the Austronesian-speaking world: Sumatra is named for the Sultanate of 
Samudra (aka Pasai), not the other way around, and the modern name of Madagascar (even in Malagasy 
– Madagasikara) is that conferred on it by Marco Polo, which seems to have resulted from a garbled 
understanding of Mogadishu in Somalia (Room 2006:230). As noted above, Jawa does not appear to 
have referred to the entire island of Java before modern times, and BM does not supply a name for the 
island – only for its constituent parts, Sunda and Jawa. Terms for ‘island’ in BM and other such texts 
can therefore present challenges, and it should perhaps not be surprising that foreign observers in the 
Middle Ages misunderstood the archipelago’s toponymy. 
The key is nusa, a word  which now means ‘island’ in Malay, Sundanese, and ot her Indo -
Malaysian languages, and which Blust reconstructs to proto -MP *nusa ‘island’ (ACD 7054) . This 
evidently does not refer to islands as we know them in BM, however: In the list in BM 1266-1279 China 
is a nusa, as are Delhi and Lampung – none of which are islands in any meaningful sense. Similar uses 
in medieval and early modern Indo-Malaysian texts make it doubtful that nusa meant simply ‘island’. 
In the Javanese Caritanira Amir, for instance, the derived term nusantara refers to vassals or allies of 
the Persian emperor; these kingdoms were not islands as we now use that term, and nusantara did not 
refer to the Indo-Malaysian archipelago (Bernard Arps, p.c.). This suggests that OJv nūsāntara, defined 
by Zoetmulder as ‘ the other islands ’ (OJED 1203:24, Deśawarṇana 13-15) and common ly used in 
modern Indonesian ( Nusantara) as a non/anti -colonial name for the Indo -Malaysian archipelago,  
originally referred to the relationship between a polity and its vassals. It was not a purely geographical 
term. A different conceptual framework appears to have been applied to land in island Southeast Asia 
as compared to other parts of Afro-Eurasia: Islands per se do not appear to have been considered salient, 
unless they were particularly small (e.g. Nusa Kambangan [BM 1266] and Nusa Barong [BM 1031]). 
The important larger entities seem to have been settlements and polities rather than the islands on which 
they sat. This may help explain differences between local and foreign texts, particularly the application 
of ‘(Little) Java’ to Sumatra in Polo and Ibn Baṭṭūṭa. 
The List 
BM 1266-1279 is thus a list of nusa. Some of these nusa, like Banda, are tiny, and some, like 
China, are vast, but all seem to have been considered significant . Interestingly, the octosyllabic metre 
is largely abandoned here, separating the list off from the surrounding text. A similar list appears in the

--- PAGE: 201 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
188 
 
Deśawarṇana (13-15), and another can be found on ff.20r-v of the gebang manuscript of SSKK (PNRI, 
L630), where all the places are said to be nusa. The latter is worth quoting in full: 
f.20r, line 2: 
…lamun dék nyaho dicarék para nusa ·  carék Cina · Keling · Parasi · Mesir · Samudra · 
Bangga|la · Makasar · Pahang · Palémbang · Siem · Kala(n)ten · Bangka · Buwun · Béten · 
Tulangbawang · Séla · Pasay · Parayaman · Ngaradekan · Dinah · Andeles · Tégo · Molo|ko · 
Ba(n)dan · Pégo · Malangkabo · Mekah · Burétét · Lawé · Saksak · Se(m)bawa · Bali · Jenggi 
· Sabini · Ngogan · Kanangen · Kumering · Sampang Tiga · Gumantung · Manu(m)bi · 
f.20v: 
Bubu · Ñiri · Sapari · Patukangan · Surabaya · Lampung · Jambudipa · Séran · Gedah · Solot 
· Solodong · Bali261 · Indragiri · Tañjungpura · Sakampung · Cempa · Baluk · Jawa|262 
Some of these nusas are unidentified, but important ones not mentioned in BM include Jenggi ‘Africa’, 
from Persian Zangi (زنگی)  ;Mesir ‘Egypt’ (Arabic Miṣr [مِصر]); Mekah ‘Mecca’; Parasi, presumably 
Persia; Banggala ‘Bengal’; Siem ‘Thailand’ (cf. Khmer siǝm ស ៀម; Portuguese Sião); Pégo ‘Bago’ in 
southern Myanmar, then a port known to the Portuguese as Pegu, to Ibn Mājid as Fījū (فيﺠو), and to 
Afanasij Nikitin as пeвгoу; Se(m)bawa ‘Sumbawa’ in Nusa Tenggara Barat; and Moloko ‘Maluku’ in 
eastern Indonesia, source of all the medieval world’s cloves .263 The selection in BM clearly did not 
exhaust Sundanese knowledge of the world c.1500. 
Twenty names appear on the BM list, the first of which is Nusa Kambangan, a tiny island off 
Java’s south coast now home to a notorious prison. After that comes ‘Sailors’ Land’ (nusa layaran), a 
reference to Kambangan or perhaps another location in the archipelago. The list continues: 
nusa Dilih · nusa Bini · [1270] nusa Keling · nusa Jambri · nusa Cina Ja(m)budipa · nusa Gedah 
deng Malaka · nusa Ba(n)dan Ta(ñ)ju(ng)pura · [1275] Sakampung deng nusa Lampung · nusa 
Baluk nusa Buwun · nusa Cem|pa Ban(i)yaga · Langkabo deng nusa Solot · nusa Parayaman · 
/0/ · 
Dilih probably refers to Delhi, then the capital of the Delhi Sultanate  under the Lodi dynasty. 
The name was known across western Afro-Eurasia: Ibn Baṭṭūṭa, who knew it as Dihlī (دهلي), says that 
Delhi was ‘the largest of all the cities of Islam in the East’  in his day (Mackintosh-Smith 2002:160), 
 
261 Bali appears twice. 
262 My transliteration here differs somewhat from the published text. 
263 The etymology of ‘Maluku’ (Moluccas) is controversial and the word is often said to come from Arabic 
(jazīrat al-mulūk ‘islands of kings’). It may be of local origin, however; moloko, notably the same form as found 
in OSd, means ‘mountain’ in Galelarese and Tobelorese (spoken in Halmahera), and it may have been an old 
name for Ternate (situated on a volcanic cone off Halmahera) (Adeney-Risakotta 2005:152n165; Andaya 
1993:47; Monk, de Fretes, and Reksodiharjo-Lilley 1997:2).

--- PAGE: 202 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
189 
 
and it appears under the name Delli on the contemporaneous Catalan Atlas (1375 – Paris, BnF, Espagnol 
30, f.11) as a very wealthy place with a  solda ‘sultan’ who owned many elephants . In the sixteenth -
century Portuguese accounts we find  the renho de Deli  ‘Kingdom of Delhi’ (e.g. Barbosa 
2000[1516]:91). All these names derive from Hindustani Dillī. 
Nusa Bini presents some difficulties (cf. SSKK’s ⟨sabini⟩). No place with this  name can be 
identified, although Coolsma (1913:82) says it refers to a mythical ‘Island of the Amazons’  (cf. OJv, 
Malay bini ‘wife’). This is not an uncommon motif in medieval texts; Polo describes an ysle de femes 
‘Island of Women’ (f.90v) in the Indian Ocean, and on the Catalan Atlas it is said that Java (ILLA IANA) 
is itself home to a ‘kingdom of women’ (recn͠ o femarum). Jordanus says there are women’s and men’s 
islands in th e Indian Ocean, and that men cannot live on the women’s island and vice versa  
(1839[~1330]:57).A19 Zhào Rŭkuò (c.1225) also mentions a ‘land of women’ ( 女人國) with the same 
characteristics, and Pires says that local folklore told of an island near Nias (Maruz Minhac) where only 
women lived (Cortesão 1944:162).A20 BM’s Bini is not exceptional in this context.264 
Keling probably refers to  South India.  This term  originated with the name of the ancient 
kingdom of Kalinga in Odisha, but in Southeast Asia it was used for South Indian people, places, and 
things in many texts of this period .265 Jambri in the same line refers to Jambi in Sumatra , where the 
people speak Malay and remains of pre-Islamic buildings and statues have been found – specifically at 
Muara Jambi, ‘the most extensive and probably most important archaeological site in Sumatra’ 
(McKinnon 1985:28; see also Schnitger 1939). Jambi is sometimes claimed to have been the capital of 
Śrīvijaya after the late eleventh century, although there is little consensus on this  (Andaya 2001:321; 
Wolters 1970:5). It appears in the Deśawarṇana (13.1 – Jāmbi) as a Malay land pledged to Majapahit. 
The spelling in BM, Jambri, is peculiar, but the <-r-> is also found in BM 925, where Jambri appears 
as the home of the ship’s helmsman, so this probably is not a scribal error.  
Cina is China , as in modern  Indo-Malaysian languages. How it came to mean this in the 
archipelago and in South Asia,  and thus also in Portuguese, first appearing in Barbosa’s Livro 
(2000[1516]:409), is not precisely known. It was not used as an autonym by the Chinese. Related forms 
are found in the languages India and the Middle East, and Afanasij Nikitin notably also refers to China 
by its Persian or Hindustani name, čini (чини). Cina is often thought to derive from Qín (秦), the name 
of the Sinitic state that conquered much of what is now China in 221 BCE (see e.g. Laufer 1912; Wade 
2009:7-12), although some scholars have always been sceptical , and Geoff Wade (2009:13 -20) 
provocatively proposes that the Sanskrit name Cina was originally inspired by the name of a Lolo/Yi 
clan, ʐina, in what is now China’s far southwest. Cina is either way a common topo-/ethnonym in BM, 
applied to gilded boxes, master archers, and a nusa – unsurprisingly, as according to M ǎ Huān many 
 
264 Compare also medieval Middle Eastern beliefs about the Baltic (e.g. al-Nuwayri 2016:32).  
265 The word is now a pejorative for people of Indian ancestry, particularly in Malaysia.

--- PAGE: 203 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
190 
 
Chinese people had settled in Java by this time (‘people from Guangdong, Zhangzhou, Quanzhou and 
elsewhere who fled [their homes] and settled in this land’).A21 
Jambudipa first appears c.250 BCE in a Minor Rock Edict of Aśoka, some of the very earliest 
Brahmic inscriptions, as Jambudīpasi, where it appears to be a reference to the land of India as a whole 
(Hultzsch 1925:169-171). The term has a notable continuity of form and meaning between the Edict 
and BM; Noorduyn and Teeuw (1999:217) identify its referent in the poem as the Indian subcontinent. 
The name comes from the Sanskrit dvīpa ‘island’ and jambu ‘fruit of Syzygium cumini’, and it can refer 
to the entire terrestrial world, especially in Buddhist cosmologies, although there is little to indicate 
such a meaning in BM. 
Gedah, or Kedah in northern peninsular Malaysia, is home to some of the oldest inscriptions in 
maritime Southeast Asia, w ith evidence of Hindu and Buddhist sites dating to the fifth century (see 
Jacq-Hergoualc’h 1992) . The same form  occurs on the SSKK list, and indeed Kedah frequently 
appeared in medieval texts from across Afro-Eurasia, including – as Kalah Bār ‘the district of Kedah’266 
– in the first book of the Accounts of China and India compiled by Abū Zayd al-Sīrāfī at the beginning 
of the tenth century, where it is said that the region was subject to the  Great King of Zābaj, probably 
referring to Śrīvijaya  (al-Sirafi 2017:9). The Deśawarṇana (14.2) lists Kĕda as ‘among the various 
islands [nūṣa] that remember their duty’ , implying Javanese suzerainty. A22 By the beginning of the 
sixteenth century the situation was different, as Barbosa notes that Kedah was then controlled by Siam 
(Pires says the same – Cortesão 1944:105): 
‘Past this place, along the coast on the way to Melaka, is another sea -port of the King of Sião 
called Queda, where there are also many ships and great trade in merchandise, where each year 
Muslims ships come from all parts to trade’ (Barbosa 2000[1516]:351-352).A23 
Malaka is Melaka (Malacca), the great port-city on the Malay Peninsula referred to elsewhere 
in BM. Likely founded at the close of the fourteenth century,  and notably not mentioned by Prapañca, 
by the turn of the sixteenth it was known across Afro-Eurasia – as in Portuguese Malaqua, Chinese 滿
剌加 (pinyin: Mǎnlájiā), and Arabic Malāqah (ملاقة) see Wheatley 1966:306 for the date of Melaka’s 
founding). These names all came from the Malay  Melaka (ملاك)a species of myrobalan (Phyllanthus 
emblica) after which the city was named.  Melaka was extremely wealthy and unusually diverse, with 
resident merchants from across the hemisphere, including Hindus and Muslims but also Christians and 
Jews (like the moneylender Khoja Azedim, apparently living in the city at the time of the conquest  in 
1511) (Thomaz 1993:82; see also Wheatley 1966:307 -325). Melaka’s Sultans claimed descent from 
Iskandar Zulkarnain (Alexander the Great), by which the y inserted themselves into Islamic and wider 
Afro-Eurasian traditions  (Ng 2019) . By c.1450 the y were minting their own coins bearing Arabic 
 
266 Where bār is apparently derived from the Sanskrit vāra (Mackintosh-Smith 2017:93).

--- PAGE: 204 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
191 
 
inscriptions (Shaw and Mohammad 1970:2 -4). Foreign travellers often found the city unsafe and 
Muslim visitors like Ibn Mājid found Melakan Islam rather un -Islamic, with wine sold in the markets 
and non -halal food consumed by local  Muslims (Thomaz 1993:79). The outskirts are  said to have 
abounded in orchards and private estates (Malay dusun, Portuguese duções), however, and  Melaka’s 
strategic position on the Strait meant that ships travelling between China and western Afro-Eurasia had 
to pass it. Its low duties and favourable topography – a ‘defensible hill close against a mangrove -free 
shore dominat[ing] a sheltered estuary’ (Wheatley 1966:308) – made it an ideal entrepôt. Varthema said 
of Melaka (Melacha) 
‘… and truly I believe that more ships arrive there than at any other land on Earth, and especially 
that there come every type of spice and huge amounts of other merchandise’.A24 
This is echoed on the Cantino planisphere (Modena, Biblioteca Estense, C.G.A.2), a Portuguese map 
of 1502: 
‘Malaqua – in this city is all the merchandise that comes to Calicut, like cloves, benzoin, 
lignaloes,267 sandalwood, storax, rhubarb, ivory, precious stones of great value, pearls, musk, 
fine porcelain, and many other goods, the great part [of which] come f rom abroad, from the 
land of the Chinese.’A25 
BM’s easternmost toponym is Ba(n)dan – the Banda Islands in eastern Indonesia, just south of 
Ambon. Banda is tiny, with roughly half the land area of The Hague, but it was the medieval world’s 
only source of true268 nutmeg and mace, both products of the tree Myristica fragrans that are mentioned 
in medieval texts from across the hemisphere, including – from the fourteenth century alone – an 
Egyptian aphrodisiac recipe (al-Nuwayri 2016:226), a medicine for hunting falcons  described by the 
Spanish knight Pero López de Ayala  (BAV, Ott.lat.3324 , f.60v) , and even  a section of  Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (in the Tale of Sir Thopas). Nutmeg is notably absent from BM and it rarely features 
in OJv texts, though na mes for the islands  nonetheless appear in texts from across  medieval Afro-
Eurasia, including OJv and OSd ones : OJv Wwaṇḍan (Deśawarṇana [14.5]), Malay Bandan, Latin 
Bandan (Bracciolini 2004[1448]), Venetian bandã (the Fra Mauro map , c.1 460), and Portuguese 
Bandão (vel sim). The islands first appear in Chinese, briefly in the Dàdé Nánhǎi Zhì (大德南海志) of 
1304 and with more description in Wāng Dàyuān’s Dǎoyí Zhìlüè (島夷誌略, c.1349), under the name 
文誕 (pinyin: wéndàn, ’Phags-pa: [ʋundan]).A26 ‘Banda’ is often interpreted as derived from Persian 
bandar (بندر) ‘port, emporium’ (as in Ellen 2003:65, cf. Banda Aceh) but all of the earliest names end 
in [n], which makes this doubtful. Banda’s importance as a n entrepôt, especially for imported Indian 
 
267 The resinous heartwood of Aquilaria malaccensis. More commonly known as ‘eaglewood’, ‘gaharuwood’, or 
‘aloeswood’ to historians of Southeast Asia. 
268 Another nutmeg, M. argentea, of ovoid shape, was also exported from New Guinea. See Ellen (2003:64).

--- PAGE: 205 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
192 
 
cloths, clearly emerges from the sources, however (for Pires’s description see Cortesão 1944:205-209; 
Pires 2018:222-225 – ff.155v-156v in the Paris manuscript).269 
Ta(ñ)ju(ng)pura is Tanjungpura in southwestern Borneo, across the Java Sea from Java/Sunda, 
a place that features heavily (as Tanjung Pura تﻨﺠوڠ  فورا in the Sulalat al-salāṭīn. Zhào Rŭkuò (c.1225) 
mentions a Javanese vassal called Dānróngwǔluō, presumably a phonetic transliteration of Tañjungpura 
(丹戎武囉 – ’Phags-pa [tan-ryuŋ-ʋu-lɔ]), where the people preferred piracy to trade. The Deśawarṇana 
(13.2) reports that Tañjungnagara, probably referring to Tañjungpura and listed among the Malay 
territories, was ‘subject and obedient’ to Majapahit. Barbosa  says of  Tourjoãopura in Borneo 
(2000[1516]:407) that ‘it is the principal  port where diamonds are produced, and among them are the 
finest in the Indies’ ,A27 a claim repeated by Pires  (who calls the place Tamjompura) and others (see 
Cortesão 1944: 223-224; for Bornean diamonds see Spencer et al. 1988) . Diamonds ( hi(n)ten) are  
incidentally mentioned in BM 1767 as decorating the heavenly yak. 
Sakampung (modern Sekampung) and Lampung both occur on the SSKK list. Sekampung is 
now a district of Lampung province in southern Sumatra, just across the Sunda Strait, but Pires describes 
it (under the name Çacampom) as an independent domain, saying that Sekampung’s ‘trade with Sunda 
is large […] They say that it is in sight of Sunda’ (Cortesão 1944:158; Pires 2018:182). He says that the 
land produces cotton, gold, honey, wax, pitch, rattan, pepper, rice, meat, fish, wines, and fruit. Lampung 
appears in the depiction of the southern coast of Sumatra on the Mao Kun map under the name 港邦攬 
(Lǎnbāng gǎng, read right-to-left), and it features in the kakawin Deśawarṇana (13.2) as one of the 
‘Malay lands’ (kṣoṇī ri malayu) that had pledged fealty in some way or other to Hayam Wuruk. In the 
1370s, however, Lampung sent its own embassies to China along with black pepper as tribute (Wolters 
1970:60-61). 
Baluk and Buwun both appear in SSKK and the former is found in BM 253: sulam Baluk ‘Baluk 
embroidery’. Villages named Baluk can be found in both East Java ( kab. Magetan) and Bali ( kab. 
Jembrana); given that the other places listed are all outside Java the latter seems a more realistic 
interpretation. Gunawan (2019) suggests that Baluk can be identified with Balochistan in what is now 
Pakistan, which is possible. Buwun may be identifiable with Buwun Mas in West Lombo k, although 
this is speculative and it is difficult to see why these places would be considered important enough to 
be listed. 
Cempa is Campa (commonly known as ‘Champa’), a region of southern Vietnam originally 
home to the Cham people. Cham is an MP language closely related to Malay, and Campa’s connections 
with the archipelago were old and enduring: Ships in the Middle Ages appear to have sailed  directly 
from Campa to Java, and the two frequently occur together in medieval travel texts (as with Polo’s 
 
269 For the archaeology of medieval and early modern Banda see Lape (2000).

--- PAGE: 206 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
193 
 
Cianba – Français 1116, f.3r). The Deśawarṇana (15.1) claims that Campa is among those countries 
that are ‘always friends’ of the Javanese (Robson 1995:34) , and in later Javanese literature wise men, 
particularly Islamic ones, were often said to have come from Campa, as with Sunan Ampel, one of the 
Wali Songo who are said to have brought Islam to Java in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, as well 
as the wise protagonist in one recension of the seventeenth-century Javanese Serat Jatiswara (Behrend 
1987:101). Baniyaga may be modifying Cempa in this line – ‘Campa of the traders’ (cf. Malay beniaga 
‘trade’, OJv baṇyaga ‘merchant’, from a Middle Indo-Aryan source [Hoogervorst 2017; OJED 205:11]) 
– although this is not certain. 
Langkabo is the Minangkabau Highlands in West Sumatra , known in  OJv as Manangkabwa 
(Deśawarṇana 13.1) and Portuguese as Menancabo (Cortesão 1944:113). The region was renowned for 
its gold production  and had complicated relationship s with Java and the Malay lands (see Wolters 
1970:57-58). Solot could be one of two places, neither in Sumatra: 1) the Sulu Archipelago, now in the 
Philippines, as probably with the Solot in canto 14.1 of the Deśawarṇana, or 2) Flores / the  Solor 
Archipelago, also mentioned under that name in Deśawarṇana (14.5) alongside others in eastern 
Indonesia and known in Portuguese as Solor. Cortesão (1944:202) suggests  that Solor referred 
specifically to Flores (whose modern name comes from the Portuguese for ‘flowers’) rather than Solor, 
which seems likely – Barbosa (2000[1516]:404-405) says that Solor is a ‘very large’ island known for 
its pearls, matching Flores. Parayaman brings the list back to West Sumatra (which may make the 
identification of Solot with an eastern Indonesian island doubtful). Parayaman can be identified with 
modern Pariaman , a port connecting the Minangkabau Highlands to the Indian Ocean. It is the 
destination of Captain Béla Sagara’s junk (BM 983 – see Part V.2), and Pires – who called it Pirjaman 
(vel sim ) – says it was a ‘rich kingdom’ ( o riquo regno de Piramã – Pires 2018:183) bordering 
Minangkabau country with a heathen king and populace. Pires goes on to say: 
‘This land of Pariaman has plenty of gold, apothecary’s lignaloes [i.e. aloeswood/gaharuwood], 
camphor of two kinds, benzoin, silk, wax, honey; it has foodstuffs in plenty for its own land; it 
does a great trade with the land of Sunda’ (Cortesão 1944:160).A28 
* 
Economic and cultural links appear to have gone beyond the limits of concrete toponymy and 
geographical knowledge in medieval Sunda. BM refers to massoy bark from New Guinea and Aleppo 
oak galls from the eastern Mediterranean, neither of whose places of origin are mentioned. This seems 
normal for both the medieval and modern worlds, and not a phenomenon exclusive to the archipelago: 
Commodities from Java were being consumed in Europe and the Middle East before detailed knowledge 
of the island even reached them, for instance. In the Middle Ages cubebs (Piper cubeba) only grew in 
Java – there and nowhere else – but the Abbasid-era cookbook of Ibn Sayyār al -Warrāq recommends 
eating them to soothe a sore throat (Nasrallah 2010:138), and thirteenth-century Danish canon Henrik

--- PAGE: 207 ---
Part III. Place in Bujangga Manik 
194 
 
Harpestræng says in his Yrtæbok, decades before Polo returned to Venice,  that cubebs ( kobebæ) are 
good against constipation (Copenhagen, Det Konglige Bibliotek, NKS 66, f.31v). BM is not exceptional 
in this regard, and it appears from Pires’ Suma Oriental that local people had a better grasp of the 
archipelago’s geography than we find in surviving local texts. 
 Mundane places are in any case at BM’s core. The text seems to be a Hindu manifestation of a 
Malayo-Polynesian trope, a productive fusion of Indian spiritual substance and Southeast Asian literary 
style, one that aids in our understanding of the geography of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago in the late 
Middle Ages. 
*

--- PAGE: 208 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
195 
 
 
PART IV: 
People in Bujangga Manik 
Bujangga Manik has a small cast of characters . Human beings are  evidently not the poem’s focus . 
Indeed, Noorduyn (1982:438) sees in its emphasis on toponyms a tacit message that people are to be 
avoided by those seeking spiritual insight ‘whenever possible, even when travelling through the world’. 
When talking with the heavenly door guardian Dorakala, Bujangga Manik’s soul says that he will not 
call witnesses from the Middle World to vouch for him because 
‘… one thousand one hundred and one · (among them) there’s not even one · a human resolute 
in speech. · Many are the hell-bound sinners · even the gods are under attack. · I accuse them 
and drive them out’ (BM 1607-1612). 
While there is little evidence in BM of a classic Hindu ascetic’s revulsion at the body and its effluvia  
(Olivelle 1995:188-210), the text portrays people as a nuisance to be avoided. The ascetic’s distaste at 
living in a monastic community centres on the number of visiting outsiders ( aré – a term still used by 
the Urang Kan ékés for non-Baduy lowlanders [BM 1327, 1369]), and he complains that Bali is too 
densely populated (BM 971-979). His interactions with the ships’ captains are pleasant and respectful, 
and indeed none of the people he meet s are openly hostile, but the desire to leave the human world is 
nonetheless clear. 
 As noted above, Java in the fifteenth century appears to have been riven with political divisions 
even if much of the island was  nominally loyal to Majapahit, and interper sonal violence is notable in 
foreigners’ descriptions in this period. Mǎ Huān, describing the situation early on in the century, says 
‘[when there is a misunderstanding] they at once pull out these knives270 and stab [each other]. He who 
is stronger prevails’ (Mills 1970:88).A29 Executions by keris were a daily occurrence. Niccolò de’ Conti, 
in Poggio Bracciolini’s De Varietate Fortunæ (2004[1448]:112-117), claimed that debtors were often 
enslaved by their creditors, that a person buying a new sword would test it on passers-by, and that 
‘[o]f all peoples these  [Javanese] are the most inhumane and cruellest. They eat mice, dogs, 
cats, and any other foul animals. They surpass all other mortals in cruelty. They kill people for 
fun without repercussions’.A30 
 
270 This is a reference to the keris, which Mǎ describes as having been worn by Javanese men of all ages, from 
three-year-olds to centenarians, albeit using the word 不剌頭 (pinyin: bùlátóu), from the Malay beladau ‘curved 
dagger’ (Mills 1970:87n6; Wilkinson 1932 #3064).

--- PAGE: 209 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
196 
 
Barbosa (2000[1516]:371) and Pires  (Cortesão 1944:418, 494 ; Pires 2018:197) likewise refer to the 
practice of ‘running amok’, wherein a person in a fit of rage or desperation attempted to kill as many 
people as possible before being brought down in an act of suicide (memorably described centuries later 
by Alfred Russel Wallace [1877:174 -175]). Barbosa says s uch particularly murderous people were 
called amoucos or amocos, which can be compared to the juru amuk ‘master duellists’ in BM 929, listed 
among the crew of the ship on which the ascetic travels to Bali. Indeed, the ships in BM are remarkably 
well-defended – by Chinese archers, warriors from Sulawesi, and th e juru amuk from the Masalembu 
Islands – suggesting that violence (at sea, at least) was something against which precautions had to be 
taken. 
On the other hand, Ludovico di Varthema (1535[1510]:f.70v) believed the Javanese to be ‘the 
most faithful people in the world’A31 – although he and his (Chinese?) Christian companions eventually 
fled the island because of their cruelty (1535[1510]:71v-72r). Portuguese accounts note the haughtiness 
of the Javanese but they have positive things to say about the Sundanese  – ‘the people of Sunda are  
more valiant than those of Java[; they are] good and truthful people’, Pires says.A32 Mǎ Huān says that 
three groups lived in Java at the time: the local population (土人), who ate creepy -crawlies, chewed 
betel rather than drinking tea,  and often killed one another; Muslims ( 回回人), probably including 
Middle Eastern and South Asian settlers; and immigrants from Guǎngdōng, Zhāngzhōu, and Quánzhōu 
in southern China ( 廣東、漳、泉等處人). The customs of the latter two groups appear to have been 
more acceptable to Mǎ, a Muslim Chinese man. Java had been a rather multicultural place for centuries, 
in any case,  as several earlier inscriptions  attest, including  part of the  eleventh-century Patakan 
inscription (Jakarta, Museum Nasional, inv. no. D.22  – Wurjantoro 2018:287 -292; see also Hall 
2011:152-153), which lists among taxpayers in Java merchants from kingdoms and ethnic groups in Sri 
Lanka, Campa, Cambodia, and North and South India.A33 This is echoed in BM in the listed ethnicities 
of the ships’ crewmen (BM 920-931). 
In this section, I will look at the humans of BM, specifically their titles and kin terms (IV.1) 
and then their physical descriptions, characterisations, and and actions in  the poem (IV.2). The ships’ 
captains will be looked at in section V.2; only the core characters are discussed here.

--- PAGE: 210 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
197 
 
 
IV.1 Titles and Kinship Terms 
As in many other Austronesian languages, t itles in Old Sundanese are not typically gendered, making 
it difficult to properly render them in English.271 Both men and women may be tohaan, for instance, a 
word best translated as ‘Lord’ or ‘Lady’  – related to Malay tuan ‘lord’ and tuhan ‘god’ and probably 
originally from PMP *qatuan ‘deity’ (ACD 4365). This term is applied to Bujangga Manik before he 
even leaves Pakuan (BM 12), and must be a noble title, not a term for an elder  (cf. MSd toha, a word 
for elder aunts and uncles). Taan appears to be a short form, applied on its own and as taan urang ‘Our 
Lady’ to Ajung Larang, the mother of Jompong, the woman who falls in love with Bujangga Manik. 
Some OSd titles are from Sanskrit and OJv. In MSd the word prabu is used to denote kings and 
princes – as in Prabu Siliwangi, the standard name in pantun for the legendary king (Ekadjati 1996:122). 
This comes from Sanskrit prabhu ‘lord, king’ (OJED 1378:8). In OSd, however, we find the word prebu 
instead – a different spelling and likely a different meaning , although the ultimate origin is the same . 
Noorduyn (1976:470) connects prebu to paibou or paybou, Pires’ transcription of what he says was the 
Sundanese name for a local lord, equivalent to the Javanese ‘ pate’ (i.e. patih) (f.147v – Cortesão 
1944:413; Pires 2018:191) – and thus not a prince or king. Prabu seems to be a later borrowing from 
Javanese. I have translated p(e)rebu in its sole occurrence, as a title for Jaya Pakuan before he heads 
east (BM 13), as ‘Master’. 
Rakéyan is another noble title, in this case derived from OJv rakryan, used ‘before the name or 
the categorical noun (apatih, tumĕṅguṅ etc) [or] in courteous address, often to a younger person’ (OJED 
1491:7). In BM it appears exclusively before Ameng Layaran, one of Bujangga Manik’s names, and 
only after the name ‘Bujangga Manik’ has been adopte d. Bujangga Manik’s mother uses it to address 
him in descending order of politeness:  
Rakaki Bujangga Manik (·) Rakéyan Ameng Layaran · utun kita ditañaan (BM 458-460) 
‘Venerable Bujangga Manik · Noble Ameng Layaran · my boy, you’ve been asked…’  
Utun probably means ‘boy’ as a term of address (as in MSd – Danadibrata 2006:732; cf. PWMP *utuq 
‘vocative term for boys ’ [ACD 5880]) , and when Bujangga Manik’s mother uses utun it is typically 
preceded by si, an anti -honorific used with some kinship terms (implying familiarity) and with the 
names of demons and lowly people (implying disrespect). Si utun is also used in modern carita pantun 
 
271 Titles are notoriously difficult to translate between languages. A fascinating book-length argument by 
Christian Raffensperger (2017) suggests that the difficulties in translating early Rus’ titulature, for example, 
have had profound effects on the popular understanding of medieval eastern Europe.

--- PAGE: 211 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
198 
 
for the story’s hero, usually a nobleman of ‘Pajajaran’ (Rigg 1862:524), but in BM it does not appear to 
carry this implication. 
Other titles are given to religious figures, including mahapandita ‘great sage’, given to the sage 
at the beginning of the tale and to Bujangga Mani k himself (by Captain Séla Batang – BM 960) after 
his travels to the east. The word is Sundanised Sanskrit – mahā ‘great’ and paṇḍita ‘learned man, seer, 
ascetic’ (source of  English ‘pundit’) . Déwaguru, meaning ‘ superior of a religious community ’ 
(‘abbot/abbess’) in OJv  (OJED 396:4), is another Sanskrit-derived title; it is  applied to the unnamed 
heads of East Javanese religious communities (BM 824, 1105). The word ameng is applied to Bujangga 
Manik by Jompong Larang in BM 250, and it is part of the name he adopts after sailing from Pemalang 
to Jakarta, ‘Ameng Layaran’. It appears to have referred to a category of religious practitioners – ameng 
features in a list alongsi de wiku ‘monks’ and tiyagi ‘ascetics’ in Sri Ajnyana (SA 394), for instance . 
OJv amĕṅ and MSd ameng both mean ‘to play’ or ‘to amuse oneself’ (Coolsma 1913:15; OJED 64.9), 
and in MSd it has a particular implication of  childishness and immaturity. I have therefore tentatively 
translated it as ‘novice’. It may be, however, that the terms are unrelated. 
Kinship and Gender 
Several kinship terms occur in BM, including bapa ‘father’ (dibapa ‘have a father’ – BM 627), 
ambu ‘mother’, and nini ‘grandmother’. Kinship terms in western Indo-Malaysia are often generational, 
so the term for  e.g. ‘mother’ likely also  meant ‘women of ego’s mother’s generation’  (as in 
Malay/Indonesian). Other OSd generational terms include anak(ing) ‘(my) child’ and aki(ing) ‘(my) 
grandfather’, the latter of which the ascetic uses to address the ships’ captains. Rakaki ‘venerable’, a 
word applied to Bujangga Manik himself, is from the OJv cognate (kaki ‘grandfather, old ma n; 
venerable’ [OJED 767:1]) with the OJv honorific ra-. Finally, lañcek ‘elder sibling’ is used by the 
female ascetic at Balungbungan to address Bujangga Manik, perhaps to circumvent accusations of 
romantic desire. In MSd the word ( lanceuk) carries the same meaning; distinguishing  kin by relative 
age is common in MP languages (cf. Malay/Indonesian kakak/adik). 
Tuang ‘revered’ precedes some kin terms, as in tuang a(m)bu  ‘revered mother’ and tuang 
ponakan ‘revered nephew(s)/niece(s)’ (BM 322), the latter a particularly interesting use. The word can 
be connected to OJv twaṅ ‘reverence, awe’ (OJED 2090.7  – see Noorduyn and Teeuw [ 2006:52-53] 
and Eringa [1949:70-72]), although it is used in MSd with a slightly different focus – e.g. tuang-kuring 
‘your very humble servant’ (Rigg 1862:503). Tuang a(m)bu is used by both Ajung Larang (BM 402) 
and Bujangga Manik (BM 89) in reference to the latter’s mother, suggesting tha t the phrase simply 
meant ‘revered’ or ‘honoured’ – but tuang may have been particularly relevant when referring to  in-
laws or marriageable classes . Jompong uses the term tuang ponakan ‘honoured nephew(s)’  when 
describing Bujangga Manik to her mother  Ajung Larang, saying that he is more handsome than Silih 
Wangi, Bañak Catra, and tuang ponakan (BM 322), her mother’s ‘revered nephews’. Ponakan seems

--- PAGE: 212 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
199 
 
to be a loan from OJv kaponakan ‘nephew, niece’ (OJED 800:1), apparently often used in reference to 
the children of ego’s sister. Jompong may have referred to her mother’s nephews (i.e. her own cousins) 
in this context because she would ordinarily have been expected to marry one of them. Ajung’s use of 
tuang a(m)bu when telling Jompong to bring the gifts to Bujangga Manik’s mother , now Jompong’s 
prospective mother-in-law, also suggests a connection between tuang and marriage alliance. 
We cannot glean much from this about the nature of suc h marriages or precisely whom the 
marriageable class included, but it suggests that nobles in Sunda were expected to marry their cousins. 
Indonesian societies show a bewildering range of types of marriage alliance – matrilateral cross-cousin 
marriage, wherein men are expected to  marry their  classificatory mother’s brother’s daughters and 
women their father’s sister’s sons, is common in eastern Indonesian and upland Sumatra, for instance, 
but far from universal  even there (see e.g. Forth 2001:104; R. Needham 1987:136; Renes 1983:226 -
227), and it is rare in western Indonesia (Fox 1989:34). Without more data we can only speculate about 
marriage alliance in medieval Sunda.  Jompong is  in any case  able to assert her own choice , as is 
Bujangga Manik, although the fact that larang ‘forbidden’ occurs in Jompong’s name may be a clue to 
the poet’s views on the appropriateness of the proposed match. 
The status of women in medieval Java is difficult to divine from the extant sources. Most 
depictions of women, and more particularly of marriage, are found in the OJv kakawin, which almost 
invariably describe the lives of noble women and draw on Sanskrit literature for models of how to 
describe women’s lives and bodies ; the extent to which they reflected the situation in Java itself is 
debatable (Creese 2004:89). From these and other sources, though, it seems that women in Java were 
able to inherit land in their own right, preside over legal cases, and rule as sovereigns (Creese 2004:35-
36). They are frequentl y depicted in kakawin as literate, although Helen Creese (2004:39) comments 
that ‘[i]f a distinctive women’s writing ever existed in the Indic courts of Java and Bali, it has been 
irretrievably lost’. Interestingly, the OSd text Séwaka Darma is believed to  have been written by a 
woman, Buyut Ni Dawit (Danasasmita et al. 1987:1). The fifteenth-century OJv work Tantu Paṅgĕlaran 
says that men and women were made by different gods – men by Brahma and women by Wiṣṇu – but 
that they are ‘equal in beauty and perfe ction’ (Pigeaud 1924:57 -58).A34 In modern Kan ékés/Baduy 
communities men and women are considered equal but with separate spheres of activity – men expected 
to prepare rice fields and construct buildings and women expected to weave and dye cloth (as elsewhere 
in the archipelago), prepare betel quids for ceremonies (as in BM), and harvest the rice once  grown 
(Hasman and Reiss 2012:9; cf. Karim 1992:8 ). The depictions of women and gender roles in BM are 
consistent with this. 
Pires says that sati (‘suttee’) was practised in Sunda but that it was not compulsory:272 
 
272 See Geertz [1980:100] for a description of sati in nineteenth-century Bali.

--- PAGE: 213 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
200 
 
‘It is the custom in Sunda for the king’s wives and nobles to burn themselves when he dies; and 
so when anyone of lower rank dies in his house the same thing is done, that is, if they wish to 
do so, not because the women are persuaded by words to die, only those who want to do it of 
their own accord. And those who do not are [anchoresses] leading a life apart and people do 
not marry them. Others marry three or four times. These few are outcasts in the land’ (Cortesão 
1944:167).A35 
Bujangga Manik says that h e grew up without a father (BM 62 7), his father presumably having died . 
His mother  seems not to have  burned herself alongside her husband’s body, consistent with  Pires’ 
description of the voluntary nature of the practice. Assuming Pires was right, the ascetic’s mother could 
not have married again. 
 
IV.2 The Characters 
Bujangga Manik is framed by the speech of a sage (mahapandita) in Pakuan, who overhears crying and 
wailing in the palace at the leaving of Jaya Pakuan, the poem’s protagonist. The frame story is not 
reprised and the mahapandita is not heard from again. Jaya Pakuan, who goes by three names over the 
course of the stor y (Ameng Layaran and Bujangga Manik being the others), clearly dislikes human 
contact. Other aspects of his personality can be seen in his words and deeds, and his physical appearance 
is described briefly upon his return to Pakañcilan (BM 269-274). The ascetic’s mother, referred to once 
as Ratu Bañcana, features as an important secondary character, spurring the ascetic’s eastward journey. 
Jompong Larang (BM 23 6), who falls for the ascetic after he returns to Pakañcilan, and her mother, 
Ajung Larang (aka Sakéan Kilat Bañcana – BM 284), who arranges the marriage negotiations, are also 
essential to the plot; Jompong’s proposal perturbs the ascetic, prompting him. These people, including 
the ascetic in his first incarnation, are all described as tohaan ‘lords/ladies’. 
Later, when Bujangga Manik is ensconced in his hermitage near Balungbungan, he is 
approached by an unnamed tiyagi (wa)don ‘female ascetic’, who wants to join him (BM 851). This, 
too, causes Bujangga Manik to pick up his things and leave, in this case for Bali, where the sheer number 
of people leads him to sail back to Java in frustration.  Other characters include the two ship captains, 
Séla Batang and Béla Sagara, discussed in Part V, and Dorakala, the guardian of heaven (BM 1594) – 
the only supernatural character to  have a speaking role in the surviving leaves. Legendary figures are 
mentioned occasionally – Silih Wangi, Banyak Catra, Sangkuriang, and the mysterious Tuhan Cupak273 
– but only nine people have speaking roles and only eight of them are named. An additional group of 
 
273 This may be a reference to the story of Cupak Gerantang in the folk theatre of Bali and Lombok, but in those 
stories Cupak is not a positive figure or a lord. I am at a loss to interpret Tuhan Cupak’s sakakala.

--- PAGE: 214 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
201 
 
people ask Jaya Pakuan where he is going (BM 37-39), but their speech is described onomatopoeically 
as séyah ‘rustling, tumbling of a waterfall’, and the ascetic does not respond. 
 Bujangga Manik 
 The poem’s ascetic protagonist has three names at different points in his life , retaining two of 
them until the end . The first name is Jaya Pakuan ‘Pakuan’s victory’ (BM 13); the second is Ameng 
Layaran ‘sailing novice’ (BM 123); and the third is Bujangga Manik (BM 457). It is as Rakaki Bujangga 
Manik (‘The Venerable Bujangga Manik’) that the ascetic is usually addressed at the height of his  
earthly powers; he is also referred to as a mahapandita. Noorduyn adopted Bujangga Manik as the name 
of the text for this reason, but, interestingly, a text named ‘Bujangga Manik’ is mentioned in another 
Sundanese lontar text, the Sanghyang Swawarcita (PNRI, L626), suggesting that BM was known by the 
name at the time of its composition.  The name certainly survived in Sunda in the interim : Rigg 
(1862:67.15) says, long before the modern publication of the poem, that Bujangga Manik was ‘the name 
of Ratu Guriang, or the king of the moutain [sic] spirits’ . This suggests that BM’s (missing) finale 
recounted Bujangga Manik’s transformation into a king of the spirits (Rigg’s Ratu Guriang – where 
guriang = guru ‘teacher’ + hiyang ‘god, ancestor’). 
The ascetic is described in his youth – as an ameng ‘novice’ – by an infatuated Jompong Larang 
(BM 269-274). She says that he has round calves, graceful anklets, curved eyebrows, teeth stained red 
from betel-chewing, and long fingernails. (Rigg [1862:480] notes that in his day Sundanese aristocrats 
grew their nails long to show that they did not engage in manual labo ur.) Jompong also refers to the 
ameng’s jojo(m)pong, which seems to mean a ‘tuft of hair’; in modern Sundanese this word is used for 
the mane of a hors e. It may imply that Bujangga Manik wore a śikhā (a tuft of hair associated with 
adherence to Hindu doctrine). After this the ascetic’s physical appearance is not referred to again until 
after his death. While travelling the ascetic wears a cloth ( sace(n)dung kaén) on his head and later on 
is said to carry a walatung-rattan (Calamus caesius) whip and a five -headed walking stick. Examples 
of East Javanese-era mendicants’ metal walking stick finials hung with bells ( khakkhara in Sanskrit) 
survive in museums, including a fourteenth -century one in the Museum  Nasional (inv. no. 6067 – 
Fontein 1990:270-271). Bujangga Manik’s stick might not have been anything like this, though. 
The protagonist aspires to an ascetic  life, in any case,  and he becomes  a great sage 
(mahapandita) some time before his death (BM 1307). The word for ‘ascetic (practice)’ is tapa (cf OJv 
tapa – OJED 1945:5 , from Skt tapa), a term still used in Sundanese and other Indo -Malaysian 
languages. Tomé Pires uses the same word, tapas, in referring to the mendicants and ascetics of Java, 
although Pires’s comment that such ascetics ‘do not go about alone’ does not accord with the seemingly 
solitary life depicted in  BM (Cortesão 1944:177). A36 Bujangga Manik’s ascetic life involve s 
renunciation of sex and marriage, withdrawal from humankind, disregard for external appearances, and 
meditation on the divine, as well as worship of the lingga, a Śaivist practice, in an attempt to die without

--- PAGE: 215 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
202 
 
illness (i.e. Skt mokṣa, OSd kamoksahan ‘liberation’) and merge with the ‘great soul’ (OSd atma, from 
Skt ātman) to become a god (jadi déwa), a task he achieves after ten years at his hermitage near Mount 
Patuha (BM 1434). The ascetic ideal is summarised at the beginning of the  eleventh-century kakawin 
Arjunawiwāha (1.1): 
‘The mind of the scholar who understands the highest truth has already penetrated the Void 
and passed beyond / His intentions do not flow from a desire for the objects of the senses, as 
if he were concerned with the things of this world’ (kakawin Arjunawiwāha, 1.1 – Robson 
2008:38-39).A37 
Little in BM’s asceticism suggests disgust at bodily functions or the body per se, contrasting starkly 
with bodily revulsion in Indian asceticism (Olivelle 1995) – although in spurning Jompong and the 
female ascetic at Balungbungan Bujangga Manik is evidently determined to renounce both the body 
physical and body social. His rejection of the human world is not total – he still converses with the 
ships’ captains – but his motivation is nonetheless to do away with feelings and appearances  to grasp 
an underlying monist reality. 
 
Figure IV.1. A palm-rib broom at Karang Kamulyan in Ciamis, West Java. Author’s photo, November 2018. 
 An interesting aspect of asceticism in BM and other OSd texts is that of sweeping-as-meditation 
or worship-by-sweeping (puja ñapu – BM 846, 1288). This appears to have been of some importance, 
as the marks of the broom ( tapak sapu – BM 1466) are among the things Bujangga Manik see s as he 
passes from our Middle World (mad(i)yapada) upon his kamoksahan. Brooms (sapu) made of the ribs

--- PAGE: 216 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
203 
 
of palm leaves bound together to form a handle are common throughout the archipelago and can be 
seen in use at Sundanese sacred sites to this day (Figure IV.1). Sri Ajnyana features a more explicit 
description wherein the process of sweeping itself leads to insight: 
‘The lessons of the eminent sage · were a yard swept · clean all over. · Now my mind was full 
of joy · seeing the lustre of the flowers · which made my mind recover’ ( SA 242 -247 – 
Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:222).A38 
 Once Bujangga Manik has crossed into heaven he encounters the door guardian Dorakala, who, 
after some convincing, lets the ascetic enter on the grounds that his body or self (awak) is ‘more fragrant 
than opium · more valuable than sandalwood · sweeter than massoy bark’ (BM 1637 -1639). 
Approximately the same phrases appear in the OSd poem Séwaka Darma, except that the subject is not 
awak ‘self; body’ but aci ‘essence’: acina ruum ti candu · mahabara ti candana ‘their essence is more 
fragrant than opium, more valuable than sandalwood’ (Danasasmita et al. 1987:28). 274 This is the 
reward of asceticism. As the Orthodox Christian theologian Kallistos Ware reminds us (1995:3-15), 
asceticism should not be reduced to renunciation for renunciation’s sake: Ascetic practice in BM often 
seems positive rather than negative, represent ing less withdrawal from the body and more positive 
emphasis on the divine or underlying reality, from which feelings and appearances are but distractions. 
 Dorakala is not described in any detail – we might have more information had f.29 survived. 
The name is derived from Sanskrit dvara ‘door’ (related to English ‘door’ via PIE *dʰwṓr) and kāla, 
whose original meanings included ‘time’, ‘black’, and ‘death’, but which came to be applied to the 
heads or masks of demons that decorated the lintels of doors at temples in early medieval Java 
(alongside other terms, particularly dwarapāla, cawintěn, and kīrtimukha – see Fontein 1990:136-137). 
It is clear from his name and deeds, anyway, that he guards the entrance to heaven. 
 Jompong Larang 
Jompong Larang (‘forbidden youth’) appears to be the daughter of a noblewoman named Ajung 
Larang (‘forbidden beauty’, cf. OJv ajĕṅ ‘goodness, beauty’ [OJED 33:8]?). In BM 276-277 she is said 
to be ‘hurried, rigid, easily frightened’ and to ‘walk like a Javanese elephant’ (although the 
interpretation of the word gajar ‘elephant (?)’, is not certain).  My translation of Jompong’s physical 
description in BM 53 9-548 is based on Aditia Gunawan’s interpretation (2019) , wherein the most 
important traits relate to weaving and dyeing, essential aspects of womanhood in pre -modern Indo-
Malaysia, contrasting starkly with that in  Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006) . Noorduyn treated warangan, 
for instance, as a word for a yellow -ish skin tone. It is better connected to OJv waraṅ, though, whose 
meanings are all related to marriage (OJED 2204:11), whence ‘nubile’. Noorduyn’s ‘invulnerable’ for 
 
274  The published text reads naha bara ta cina(n)dana, but I suspect these are typos. I would correct the text of 
SD to accord more closely with BM in this section in any case.

--- PAGE: 217 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
204 
 
the word karawaléya (BM 543 – from Skt kāravēlla ‘gourd’, re-interpreted in OJv to mean ‘breadfruit; 
tough, invulnerable’ [OJED 806:5]) also seems less plausible than Gunawan’s interpretation of ‘tough 
grip (on the loom)’. 
 Jompong does not appear again after her rejection by Bujangga Manik, although  he interprets 
the gifts she brings to suggest that she is constantly sick and weeping (BM 56 9-573). The poem gives 
no indication as to whether this is true or not. 
 Bujangga Manik’s Mother 
Weaving is an essential part of the poem’s presentation of its female characters, and Bujangga 
Manik’s mother is first encountered weaving and dyeing cloth (BM 159-165), as is Jompong’s mother, 
Ajung Larang. Bujangga Manik’s mother – whom he calls a(m)bu or a(m)buing ‘(my) mother’ – is 
described as having  ‘yellow calves’ (BM 22 6); Noorduyn translated the word for ‘yellow’ here  as 
‘golden’, presumably because ‘yellow’ is not flattering, but ‘yellow’ is nonetheless more accurate. She 
powders her cheeks and wears ‘expensive cloth’ while preparing betel quids for her and her son.  She 
clatters through the house, her tapih (tube skirt) slapping at her heels, presumably carrying the betel and 
other items, including a branch of kupa fruit (BM 208 – Syzygium polycephala275). 
It appears Bujangga Manik’s father is no longer around; perhaps this is what made his mother 
wayward and ‘drunk without drinking palm wine  (tuak)’ (BM 632). In one instance she is referred to 
as Ratu Bañcana ‘queen of deception’ ( BM 223 – OJv bañcana ‘deception, fraud [etc.]’, from Skt – 
OJED 210:1), presumably a comment by the poet rather than a name. It is said that her mother, Bujangga 
Manik’s grandmother (nini), broke taboos (pamali), including eating benter fish (Barbodes binotatus, 
the common barb – Rigg 1862:53) and banana flowers  (jantung, also meaning ‘human heart’) while 
pregnant, causing her daughter to go astray. The ascetic sees her acceptance of Jompong’s proposal as 
deceitful and wrong and, in the most dramatic and consequential interaction in the story, he rejects the 
entire idea, telling his mother that this is the last time they will see each other. He takes an open-work 
bag, puts the book Siksaguru (‘teacher’s instructions’) inside, and sets out east with his walking stick 
and whip, looking for a place to die (BM 652-667). 
 Ajung Larang 
Ajung Larang, who is also known as Sa(ng?)kéyan Kilat Bañcana (a tricky phrase – ‘bearing 
calamitous lightning’?), is Jompong’s mother. She is described in similar terms to Bujangga Manik’s 
mother: She weaves, dyes cloth, prepares betel quids, and rises ‘like a goose’ when getting up to enter 
the house. She is weaving when Jompong goes to speak to her. In BM 278-283, she is said to be sitting 
 
275 Formerly Jambosa cauliflora. The German explorer Justus Karl Hasskarl described kupa (koepa) thus: ‘The 
wood is beautifully red, strong, heavy, [and] coarse and can be used as timber in construction; the fruits are 
sweet and sour and are eaten’ (Hasskarl 1845:85 – my translation).

--- PAGE: 218 ---
Part IV. People in Bujangga Manik 
205 
 
on a kasur (a quilt-mattress made from a cloth stuffed with cotton wool)  beside a gilded Chinese box 
while ‘carelessly dressed’, her waist visible. Ajung Larang arranges the betel quids to be sent over to 
Bujangga Manik to propose the marriage, and she tells her daughter what to say to make the tuang ambu 
amenable to the request. It is notable that the entire process is initiated and controlled by women , and 
male involvement is not required at any point before Bujangga Manik’s rejection of the proposal. 
* 
 People are not the focus of Bujangga Manik and it contains few named characters. The moral 
message is that people are deceptive and easily deceived, and to indulge one’s passions is to be led 
away from the path to heaven. We can nonetheless extract certain interesting features of fifteenth -
century Sundanese society from the  poem’s portrayals of its human characters, particularly regarding 
gender roles and ascetic practice, and the personality of each individual comes across in the nuances of 
their deeds and descriptions (to the extent that we can understand them). 
 In the next section I will examine the portrayal of the ships on which Bujangga Manik sails. 
Unlike many OJv kakawin, which depict sea travel as perilous and ships as often wrecked, BM seems 
to delight in the details of naval construction and the multicultural world of the ship. 
*

--- PAGE: 219 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
206 
 
 
PART V: 
Travelling by Sea 
Three ships are described in Bujangga Manik as the ascetic travels by sea at various points in his life. 
These sections are unusual in offering us indigenous accounts of the construction of at least two kinds 
of seaworthy vessels: parahu and jong. The former – smaller and less powerful boats – are described in 
the ethnohistoric texts as similar to fustas or galleys, reliant on sails and oars to power them along. The 
latter were enormous ocean -going ships with woven rattan sails, comparable in size to the biggest  
Genoese cogs or  European carracks of the sixteenth century. The conclusions derived from these 
sections of BM are supported by th e (principally Portuguese) ethnohistoric evidence and to a lesser 
extent by medieval wrecks excavated in Southeast Asian waters. I will examine the ships’ design and 
construction in section V.1. 
In section V.2 I will look in detail at BM’s description of t he mariners and crew. BM’s ships 
are peopled by gunners, warriors, and mariners; the crews are multi-ethnic; and the vessels seem to have 
been built locally, although the larger junk may have come from outside Java. When they leave harbour 
songs are sung, gongs are hammered, and cannons are fired. It is apparent from that the most important 
cargo on the last ship is Bujangga Manik himself, the sage (mahapa(n)dita), even though he only joins 
the ship for a day. These ships were fascinating places; more than just transportation, Javanese junks in 
particular hosted entire communities of people from birth to death, and the smaller craft described in 
BM are extraordinary for the peoples, languages, and religions that must have mingled on board. 
 
V.1 The Ships 
Here I will describe Bujangga Manik’s ships – their dimensions, their designations, and the materials 
from which they were made (summarised in Table 1 in Appendix C). Some of the bamboos and rattans 
are obscure, found neither in dictionaries nor in the technical literature on the topic (in spite of some 
elaboration in this regard – see Dransfield and Manokaran 1993; Dransfield and Widjaja 1995).  In 
keeping with its ‘encyclopaedic’ nature,  however, some technical description does occur in BM, and 
the martial/nautical focus of many ethnohistoric sources  allows a somewhat coherent image of late -
medieval island Southeast Asian shipping to be synthesised.

--- PAGE: 220 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
207 
 
Parahu 
 The first two ships are known as parahu; this word simply means ‘boat’ or ‘ship’  (from PAn 
*paraqu [ACD 3836]; cf. Mal perahu, OJv parahu [OJED 1280:3]). In itself the word provides few 
indications about the type of ship described, and in BM 1022 parahu is also used once in reference to 
the third ship, a jong, so it may have served as the generic word for all boats or ships. (Rigg [1862:380 
sub Prahu] defines it as ‘a general term for all vessels afloat’).  Sixteenth-century European accounts 
tended to di fferentiate p(a)rahus and jongs, however – see, for instance, the illustrations in Willem 
Lodewycksz’s De eerste schipvaart der Nederlanders naar Oost -Indië (1595-1597, in Donkin 
2003:146, Fig.18), in which the Javanese prahu is distinguished from smaller fishing boats and from 
the jong, which  is larger and  has two rudders. Lodewycksz’s prahu lacks outriggers, and, like a 
Moluccan orembai, has an upward-curved stern and prow. Pigafetta also describes the parahu (Prao) 
as a small vessel, but sometimes a beautiful one, in one case ornamented with gold leaf, a white -and-
blue flag, and peacock feathers at the prow (Beinecke MS 351, f.57v, f.60v).A39 Pigafetta compares the 
parahu to the fuste (f.58r), a galley powered by both rowers and sails (originally Venetian fusta, loaned 
into languages around the Mediterranean [Kahane and Kahane 1982:145 ]), fitting well with the 
descriptions in BM and suggesting that the word parahu had both specific and general referents. 
 The First Parahu 
 The first parahu has no named captain and the crew seem to be Sundanese. The ship takes Jaya 
Pakuan from Pemalang, Central Java, to  Kalapa, a voyage of about 330 kilometres, and the ship is 
described as parahu Malaka ‘a Melaka ship’ – whether headed to Melaka or built there it is hard to say. 
Evidently cannons  and percussion instruments are present on board, as these are fired and played 
respectively as the parahu leaves the harbour. Work songs (kawih tarahan [BM 100] – see below) are 
sung, presumably by the crew; most are unidentified and we have no music or lyrics for them, although 
their enigmatic titles survive (BM 102-104). Kawih seems to have been a generic term for ‘song’ in 
OSd, occurring several times in SSKK and in the titles of several palm-leaf texts from Ciburuy, notably 
the Kawih Katanian ‘song of farming’ (Ilham Nurwansah, p.c.). In MSd it has a more restricted usage 
(Williams 2001:46-47). 
 This parahu is equipped with a lone rudder  of South Indian kamuning wood. Kamuning is 
Murraya paniculata (formerly M. exotica), a tree with streaked yellow wood (as in MSd; OJv kamuniṅ 
[OJED 787:8]; Malay kemuning – from PMP *kamuniŋ [ACD 3097]). M. paniculata is grown for its 
timber, the sapwood of which is yellow (the heartwood being darker).276 The parahu also had a main 
 
276 M. paniculata’s timber is described on the North Carolina State University ‘Inside Wood’ project website 
(http://insidewood.lib.ncsu.edu/ sub Murraya paniculata, accessed 18-01-2019) as having dark heartwood and 
yellow sapwood. Presumably the timber for a rudder would come from trees with large boles and plenty of 
heartwood; we should probably imagine a broadly yellow rudder streaked with dark heartwood. Noorduyn 
misread the line, incidentally, interpreting it as kamudi kamudi Keling ‘her rudder was an Indian one’.

--- PAGE: 221 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
208 
 
mast of laka wood with rattan rigging (a feature of other Indonesian vessels, as on Moluccan kora-kora 
[Ellen 2003:149]). While the word laka is used for many species (some of which were traded out of the 
archipelago – see Heng 2001), the most likely here is Myristica iners, a forest tree with buttresses and 
stilt roots common in Javan freshwater swamp forest (Rigg 1862:240; Yamada 1997:59 -61).277 This 
mast is described as ‘glowing with a “writhing fish” (hi(ng)gul) pattern’, the translation here based on 
Mamat Sasmita’s interpretation of hi(ng)gul as a pattern depicting a writhing fish (Gunawan 2019:88; 
cf. the reference to hihinggulan in SSKK – Danasasmita et al. 1987:84, 107).  A second mast is of 
ñowana bamboo; in spite of the work on Sundanese names for bamboo varietals in Dransfield and 
Widjaja (1995) and Rigg (1862), among others, this is unidentified.  It may mean simply ‘young 
bamboo’. 
 The Second Parahu 
 The second parahu is described in much the same way as the first, using many of the same 
formulae. The description incorporates more detail, however, and the ship has more crew from more 
disparate locales. Bujangga Manik joins the vessel somewhere on Java’s eastern salient and gets off at 
Bali – a journey of at most twenty kilometres. From Bali the parahu was then headed to Bangka, about 
1000 kilometres away off the Sumatran coast. The parahu has a captain named Séla Batang278, and the 
ship is made of teak carved in the form of a dragon rising upwards (jati diukir · ka luhur dinanagaken 
– BM 897-898), agreeing with the depiction of the parahu’s upward-curving prows in Lodewycksz’s 
eerste schipvaart. Its deck is made of kawung or sugar palm (Arenga pinnata – aka aren) overlain with 
séyah (‘rustling’) bamboo. Kawung wood has been used to make bowstaves in the archipelago, implying 
that it has plenty of tensile strength , and the palm is used for a  range of other purposes  as well (see 
Andaya 1993:76). Séyah is an onomatopoeia; it is not clear what species this is.279 The cabin walls are 
made of nipah sprouts (Nypa fruticans, another sugar palm common in saltwater swamp). 
This parahu appears to have a cabin for passengers ( gagarebongan – OJv grĕboṅ ‘type of 
closed wagon’ [OJED 543:5]; MSd gerebong, an old word for a covered space for passengers 
[Danadibrata 2006:223; KUBS 142]), a feature also found on the jong. The verb used when Bujangga 
Manik goes aboard is deuk ‘sit’ (BM 895, 994) – apparently the international standard on the medieval 
Indo-Pacific. Elizabeth Lambourn says that  in his Musannaf the Omani jurist al -Kindi (d.11 62) 
‘stipulated that passengers should remain seated so as not to annoy others or damage cargo’ (2018:208), 
 
277 See also the Flora Malesiana entry - http://portal.cybertaxonomy.org/flora-malesiana/node/5974. The Plant 
List labels M. iners ‘unresolved’; the competitor name is Palala iners. 
278 ‘God’s rock’? Cf. OJv śela ‘mountain, stone’ (OJED 1749:6) and MSd batang ‘a nearly obsolete term for a 
Deity’ (Rigg 1862:43 sub Batang). Batang could have many meanings depending on whether the word is 
analysed as OJv, Mal, or Sd, including ‘branch’, ‘a measurement based on the size of a bamboo cylinder’, or 
even ‘corpse’. 
279 It is clear from Rigg’s lists that the names of bamboos and rattans have changed over the centuries.

--- PAGE: 222 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
209 
 
further noting that the ‘ [medieval] Persian term for a passenger on a ship, kashtī nishastan , meant 
literally “one who sits on a ship”’. 
 The Jong 
 The jong captained by Béla Sagara280 departs from Bali for the eastern salient of Java; it is said 
to be sailing to Palembang and from there to Pariaman on the west coast of Sumatra, presumably via 
the Sunda Strait (a journey of a lmost 3000 kilometres). The route would have taken the jong past 
Krakatau (aka Krakatoa, OSd Rakata). The ship is referred to as a parahu and at one point as jong tutup 
‘closed jong’; what this means is difficult to say, although it may mean simply that the jong was ready 
for departure (BM 1021). It is also referred to as jong kapal, where kapal, another word for ‘ship’, is 
probably present for metrical reasons.281 Kapal derives from Tamil kappal (கப்பல ்) ‘sailing vessel’; 
the word does not appear in the earliest Tamil literature but cognates in other Dravidian languages, 
including Toda kopol, make it likely to be of Dravidian origin (Burrow and Emeneau 1984 #1022). 
Pierre-Yves Manguin pioneered research on Southeast Asian shipbuilding traditions  in the 
1980s, concluding that jongs built in Java and Pegu  were among the biggest and most sophisticated  
ships in the medieval world, with greater burthens (carrying capaciti es) than the Portuguese naus that 
arrived in the region in the sixteenth century  (1980, 1984; see also Reid 1992) . Excavations and 
ethnohistoric sources tell different stories, though: Manguin had initially written about junks based on 
the Portuguese sourc es, which do indeed indicate the existence of Javanese shipyards and locally 
produced monster trading vessels  (Manguin 1980). The Portuguese texts focused on the features of 
Southeast Asian ships indicative of local genius, including sails made of woven rattan, doubled rudders, 
and hulls comprising multiple layers of tropical hardwood (particularly teak – Tectona grandis) held 
together by wooden dowels. However, certain features of the ships known archaeologically from wrecks 
in Southeast Asian waters, including the use of watertight bulkheads in the hold,  are clearly Chinese, 
and nails are much more commonly found at wreck sites than the ethnohistoric record suggest s 
(Manguin 1983, 1984; 1985). Jongs identified archaeologically and showing a mix of all these elements 
are referred to as ‘hybrid’ junks (Flecker 2007). 
Descriptions of many wrecked junks  can be found in Miksic (2013:198 -204); few can be 
ascribed to ‘pure’ Southeast Asian or Chine se categories, although the use of tropical hardwood in 
construction is diagnostic of Southeast Asian origin and a lack of dowelling is more consistent with 
Chinese builds, with true hybridisation only occurring during and after the reign of Yŏnglè (d.1424), 
the period of the treasure fleets under Zhèng Hé . The Chinese type  is exemplified in the Turiang, 
wrecked off the east coast of the Malay Peninsula in the late fourteenth century and the Southeast Asian 
 
280 ‘Ocean sacrifice’? Cf. OJv bela ‘to lay down one's life’ (OJED 239:9) and sāgara ‘ocean’ (OJED 1591:2). 
281 There are comparatively few monosyllabic words in Bujangga Manik. Jong must have presented the poet 
with a few metrical headaches.

--- PAGE: 223 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
210 
 
type in the Longquan, also wrecked in the late fourteenth or early fifteenth century (Miksic 2013:200; 
Sjostrand and Barnes 2001) . European and Middle Eastern descriptions of jongs antedate the true 
‘hybrid junk’ of the fifteenth century, but the word jong probably encompassed all these types. 
The jong’s dimensions are described in BM 997-998: ‘a jong eight [fathoms] wide · its length 
twenty-five fathoms ’. The assumption that a medieval Sundanese fathom  (depa – MSd deupa, ‘a 
fathom, as much as a man can embrace with two arms extended’ [Rigg 1862:106] – from PAn *depah 
‘fathom’ [ACD 7748]) was equivalent to an imperial one (6’, or 1.83 metres) is questionable, but if we 
convert the dimensions into metric on the basis of the modern fathom then BM’s jong would be about 
46 metres long and 15 metres wide.282 Such a ship would be consistent with ethnohistoric texts but less 
so with archaeological evidence: Most known hybrid junks are around thirty metres in length and not 
much more than eight metres wide at their broadest, about the same size as a sixteenth-century carrack 
or an eleventh-century Byzantine dromon (Delgado 2011:190-191) – e.g. the Bukit Jakas (30-32m long, 
1400-1460); Longquan (30m x 8m, fifteenth-century); Royal Nanhai (28m x 7m, c.1465). We must thus 
allow for some exaggeration on the poet’s part. 
Jong (OJv joṅ) may be from Chinese 船 (pinyin: chuán; MC zywen; Old Chinese *Cǝ.lon). This 
etymology is accepted by Jones (2007:137), although some scholars have always been sceptical, in part 
because the earliest  OJv attestation of joṅ antedates the arrival of the first Chinese fleets  (Manguin 
1980:266-267; Miksic 2013:100; OJED 748:4; Yule 1903:472). Linguistic reconstructions strengthen 
the claim but are not conclusive (e.g. the proto-Mĭn reconstruction in Baxter and Sagart [2014:190]). It 
is not out of the question that jong was an early Mĭn/Hokkien Chinese loan and not an indigenous term. 
Manguin notes that the word jong is found in Classical Malay literature, including the Sulalat al-salāṭīn 
and Undang-undang Melaka, as well as several OJv works, but that ‘no technical information at all may 
be gathered from these texts’ (1980:266 -267).283 Either way the word was probably loaned into other 
Afro-Eurasian languages from Malay. It has always referred to ocean-going four- or five-masted ships 
carrying hundreds of merchants and sa ilors and enormous amounts of cargo, and references to such 
jong (‘junks’) or to ships fitting their description can be found in a range of medieval texts. 
 
282 Clifford and Swettenham’s Dictionary of the Malay Language includes as a sample sentence for děpa 
‘fathom’ the line Depa aku tak sampai enam kaki ‘my depa does not equal six feet’ (1894:410). BM’s depa may 
have been similarly short. 
283 This was before the initial publication of Bujangga Manik, of course.

--- PAGE: 224 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
211 
 
 
Figure V.1. A ship with a woven rattan sail depicted on the Catalan Atlas (Paris, BnF, Espagnol 30, f.4r – 1375). Henry Yule 
believed the word for ‘junk’ in the first word in the second row of the text box, ⟨ínchí⟩, to be an error for jũchi, derived from 
Malay jong by way of Arabic. 
‘Junk’ (vel sim) is reported to first appear in Europe in Odoric’s Itinerario (1331) and once, as 
junko, in the disordered recollections of fourteenth -century traveller Giovanni de ’ Marignolli (Yule 
1903:472). The word does not appear to have been familiar to fourteenth -century readers of Odoric’s 
text, and in at least one case – Jean de Vignay’s 1351 French version (London, BL, Royal MS 19 D I, 
f.139v) – the word for ‘junk’ mutated into ⟨coque⟩ (English ‘cog’), a kind of European ship; cogs were 
also huge, so the confusion is perhaps understandable. 284 Odoric says that seven hundred merchants 
were travelling on board.A40 The word also occurs on the Catalan Atlas (1375-1377), as ⟨ínchí⟩, believed 
by Yule to be a copyist’s error for ⟨jũnchi⟩ (Figure V.1 ). It appears likewise on the Fra Mauro 
mappamundi (Venice, c.1459) as ⟨çoncho⟩.A41 Ibn Baṭṭūṭa frequently uses the word junk (جُﻨك ,pl. جُﻨُوك 
junūk – Lee 1829:172)  for such ships  and describes the vessel s as having woven bamboo sails 
(presumably rattan – Yule 1903:472). Other medieval accounts describe similar vessels but do not use 
the word. Niccolò de’ Conti remarks that the ships of ‘India’ (including Java) ‘are much bigger than 
ours [in Italy], carrying two thousand tons with five sails and as many masts’.A42 He also notes the use 
of bulkheads to divide the hull into watertight segments, a feature remarked on  as early as the twelfth 
 
284 Such ships were legendary for their size; the fifteenth-century Italian traveller Cyriac of Ancona wrote a 
letter to his friend Andreolo comparing a Genoese cog to an enormous whale , for instance (2003[1444]:20-24).

--- PAGE: 225 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
212 
 
century by the Chinese essayis t Zhū Yù ( 朱彧 – J. Needham 1986:463) , as well by Polo, whose 
description of (pre-hybridisation) Chinese ships says that they had four masts (sometimes six), a single 
rudder, and some fifty or sixty cabins, each to accommodate a single merchant.A43 
In early modern works the word ‘junk’ is more common. In Pigafetta’s account jong appears 
consistently as Iunce (e.g. Beinecke MS 351, f.61r) and in Portuguese sources they are referred to as 
juncos. The conquistadores found it difficult to defeat jongs as their own ships were too low to board 
the jongs’ decks and shot could not pierce their multi-layered hulls. Albuquerque’s men resorted to 
wearing jongs down by firing at their masts and rudders. When assaulting Melaka, Albuquerque used a 
junco as a platform for attacking the city’s main bridge because ‘junks are very tall [vessels]’ (Earle 
and Villiers 1990:74).A44 François Pyrard de Laval, who saw the wreck of a junk from Sunda (la Sonde) 
in the Maldives in the early seventeenth century, says: 
‘They tell me that this was the richest ship that it was possible to see. There were five hundred 
people aboard – men, women, and children, as the Indians bring the better part of their 
households onto the sea with them. […] This ship came from Sunda, loaded with all sorts of 
spices and other merchandise from China and Sunda; seeing only the mast of this vessel, I 
judged it the biggest I had ever seen’ (1619:270).A45 
 Southeast Asian junks were claimed to be such  large ships that people could live their entire 
lives on board. Barbosa (1516:362 -363), corroborating Pyrard de Laval’s claim and  speaking 
specifically of Javanese vessels, says: 
‘And these junks carry a lot of rice and the meat of cows, sheep, and pigs and slaughtered deer 
in jars, and also many chickens and other victuals […] They bring their wives and children and 
property aboard; they have no other home, and there they are born and die.’A46 
We should not imagine a jong as hosting a transient collection of grizzled mariners ; these ships were 
communities, doubtless including women and children. Games must have been played on board , and 
Barbosa’s mention of chickens may indicate that cockfights also took place; cockfighting was certainly 
a common pastime in Java in the Middle Ages.285 Conti describes it thusly (Bracciolini 2004[1448]:116-
117): 
‘Often [practised] among [the Javanese] is the game in which cocks fight one another. They 
each bring roosters to the fight, each claiming that their own will be the winner, and those 
present in turn bet money on the victory of one of the two; whoever bets on the winning rooster 
takes the money.’A47 
 
285 Robert Blust (2002:96-98) suggests that the sport was introduced to Southeast Asia from India in prehistory.

--- PAGE: 226 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
213 
 
Less brutal games of chance must also have been played.286 Two dice of black wood with bone 
inserts have been recovered from the thirteenth-century shipwreck at Pulau Buaya in Riau (Miksic 
2013:133), and dice games (OJv dyūta, from Skt)  would probably have been played on board  – as 
perhaps would card games. Over the course of the fifteenth century playing cards became increasingly 
popular across Afro -Eurasia (Dummett 1976).  Packs of cards survive from fifteenth -century Europe 
(e.g. the  Ambraser Hofämterspiel – Vienna, Kunstkammer, inv. no s. 5077 -5124) and Egypt  (the 
Mamluk-era set in the Topkapı Sarayı, Istanbul – Dummett and Abu-Deeb 1973), having spread from 
China. Most were used in trick -taking games. No p laying cards have survived f rom medieval Indo -
Malaysia, but ceki, a  trick-taking game associated with the  archipelago’s Chinese community, is 
mentioned in the c.1492 Chinese-Malay phrasebook (Edwards and Blagden 1931:734 #257). The Malay 
equivalent of 棋 (qí, normally ‘board game’) is given as 竹吉 (pinyin: zhújí), the early Míng Guănhuà 
pronunciation of which was [tʂuʔ kji], close indeed to ceki (Coblin 2000:311; 2007:125). 
 
V.2 Crews and their Tools 
Going by the poem’s descriptions, h alf a dozen languages and religious traditions must have been 
represented among the crew  on the second parahu, which featured  (probably) Acehnese -speaking 
Muslims from Pasai in northern Sumatra and heathen warriors from Makassar (Makasar) in Sulawesi. 
BM tells us they ‘came from many lands’ (bibijilan para nusa ), using the same word for ‘land’ or 
‘country’, nusa, as that found in BM’s description of the world (BM 1266-1279 – see section III.2.3). 
The crews are referred to in two ways: Some are simply as ‘those who (verb)’ (e.g. nu badayung ‘those 
who row’), and all of the crew on the first, smaller, parahu are so designated. The second class of crew 
on the second parahu are the juru ‘experts’, including the juru wedil  ‘master gunners’, juru tulup 
‘blowgun masters’, and juru batu ‘plumbline experts’, all from different places in the archipelago (and 
China, or resident Chinese communities). The use of juru to refer to trained seamen is found also found 
in Malay, from which  BM’s terms may derive; Wilkinson  (1932 #14762) lists several nautical juru, 
some of which appear in BM. 
The first parahu has no named captain and Jaya Pakuan does not request to come aboard: it is 
simply said that tuluying nu(m)pang balayar ‘then I sailed as a passenger’ (BM 95). The simplest vessel, 
this Melaka -bound boat appears to have had a largely Sundanese -speaking crew from Kalapa and 
Angké.287 The second parahu, however, has a captain ( juru puhawang cf. Old Malay, OJv puhawaṅ 
 
286 See the enigmatic games discussed in Creese (2004:57). 
287 Evidently the name Angké, now part of Jakarta, is older than the 1740 massacre of the Chinese in Batavia 
after which it is sometimes claimed to have been named.

--- PAGE: 227 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
214 
 
[OJED 1432:1]), Séla Batang, who offers the ascetic a seat in the cabin. Bujangga Manik addresses him 
as akiing ‘my grandfather’ and promises him a gift upon arrival in Bali (BM 888-889); this turns out to 
be a cloth (kaén, BM 954-955).288 The jong, the last ship on which Bujangga Manik travels, is captained 
by one Béla Sagara, who asks for no payment and who respectfully refers to the ascetic as mahapandita 
‘great sage’ (BM 1011). The conversations with the captains are the most pleasant of the ascetic’s 
interactions and the poet appears to have respect ed sea captains, as can be told from the reference to 
valued goods as ‘elder sea captains’ cargo’ in BM 369. 
 Here I will introduce the parahus’ crew according to their origins – Sumatrans, Sulawesians, 
and so on – noting their roles on board, their tools, and other relevant features. 
* 
 Crew Members from Sumatra and Environs 
 The lingua franca on board was probably Malay. Some of the crewmen in BM would have been 
native speakers, particularly mariners from in and around Sumatra, and we know from other sources 
that Malay had become the lingua franca of the archipelago by the sixteenth century (e.g. the Malay 
letters sent by the Sultan of Ternate in 1521 and 1522 , now Lisbon, Torre do Tombo, Reforma das 
Gavetas, liv. 30, f.132 and 133 – Gallop 1994:123) . No Javanese speakers are listed among the 
passengers or crew – remarkable on ships sailing from locations in Java – but several from Sumatra and 
neighbouring islands are , including rowers from Nias, experts in rigging from Pasai,  and blowgun 
masters from southeastern Sumatra (BM 921-932) Chinese, Makassarese, and Sundanese mariners were 
also present, and in such a multicultural environment a common language of communication must have 
been essential. Malay filled this niche nicely. 
 Marus, source of the oarsmen  (nu badayung), is probably Nias or islands near it off the west 
coast of Sumatra; Pires referred to Nias as Maruz or Maruz Mjnhac (Cortesão 1944:162), and Ibn Mājid 
appears to call it Mārūs (مﺎروس – Tibbetts 1981:491). The name does not appear in the Deśawarṇana, 
and there is the slim possibility that it could refer to Maros in South Sulawesi. Bangka (Pires’ Bamca) 
is off the southeastern coast of Sumatra facing Palembang, capital of Śrīvijaya . The Old Malay Kota 
Kapur inscription stone, now in the Museum Nasional, Jakarta (inv. no. D.80), attests to the presence 
of Malay speakers on the island since the late seventh century. The people from Bangka are said to be 
‘those sailing’ (nu balayar); they may have been passengers rather than sailors. The helmsmen (juru 
mudi – cf. kamudi ‘rudder’) are said to be from Jambri, a place near the Sumatran Malay heartland 
(discussed in section III.2.3 above). 
 
288 Java had a cash economy and Chinese cash was in common use, so this should not necessarily be considered 
a typical transaction. ‘Javanese’ cash (caxas de Jaoa) is included among the Sundanese tribute to Portugal in the 
1522 treaty. Cloth was historically used as currency in other parts of the archipelago, however.

--- PAGE: 228 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
215 
 
Juru batu  (lit. ‘stone expert’) probably refers to crew men responsible for plumblines and 
sounding the depths ; batu (‘stone’) refers to the weight on the end of the line (cf. Mal juru batu ‘[a 
seaman] attending to anchoring and sounding’ [Wilk inson 1932 # 14762]). Noorduyn and Teeuw 
(2006:261) translate the term as ‘boatswain’, although in English that name refers to those responsible 
for the maintenance of equipment . These mariners are urang Lampung – from Lampung in Sumatra, 
just across the Strait of Sunda (discussed in section III.2.3 above). 
The juru kilat, which Noorduyn and Teeuw translate as ‘boatswain’s mates’  (as in Wilkinson 
1932 #14762), are said to have been urang Pasay ‘Pasay people’. The term kilat here comes from or is 
otherwise related to OJv kilat ‘rigging; or part of it (sheet)?’ (OJED 868:4); t hese urang Pasay may 
have been responsible for the sails (see Appendix C for identification of the species). Pasay or Pasai is 
in what is now  Aceh province  in northern Sumatra,  and it was  also known as Samudra, whence 
‘Sumatra’. Pasai was one of the archipelago’s oldest Islamic sultanates , the tomb of Malik al -Ṣāliḥ, 
dated 1297, attesting to the presence of Muslim rulers in the region since at least the thirteenth century 
(Miksic 2013:129; Moquette 1913 ; Thomaz 1993:70 ). Fourteenth- and fifteenth -century Islamic 
inscriptions have been found in the area, including the Minye Tujuh inscription containing the oldest-
known Malay syair (781 AH = 1380 CE – van der Molen 2007).  According to the Sulalat al-salāṭīn 
Pasai was initially more powerful than Melaka and second only to Majapahit (Samad Ahmad 1979:93; 
Wolters 1970:2-3).A48 It is thus likely that the riggers on the second parahu would have been Acehnese- 
and Malay-speaking Muslims. 
Pires knew Pasai as Paçe (vel sim), and it was evidently a multicultural place even before the 
arrival of the Portuguese, home to ‘ Rumes, 289  Turks, Arabs, Persians, Gujarat is, Kling, Malays, 
Javanese, […] Siamese, [and] Bengalees’ (Cortesão 1944:142). It was probably in Pasai (Sciamutera) 
that Niccolò de’ Conti ate  durian (Bracciolini 2004[1448]:96-97: durianum; Fra Mauro mappamundi 
[c.1459]: duriã), an experience he seems to have remembered fondly.290 
Malay Blowgun Masters 
 A blowgun or blowpipe is a long tube through which a dart, often poisoned, is propelled by the 
force of the breath. In the fifteenth century they were in use throughout Eurasia as evidenced by 
manuscript illustrations in Europe and the Middle East ( Figure V.2) – but blowguns were probab ly 
invented in island Southeast Asia, perhaps in Borneo, by MP-speaking people (Bellwood 1997:150; Jett 
1970). 
 
289 A term related to ‘Roman’ and probably here referring to either Ottoman Turks or Mamluks; the latter is 
meant by Afonso de Albuquerque in his letters (Earle and Villiers 1990:289), but Pires seems to mean Turks 
(and Greeks?) from Constantinople. 
290 Putting the two Conti accounts together, I argue that Conti’s durian was a red-fleshed durian, probably Durio 
graveolens, rather than the more common D. zibethinus: West, A. J. 2020. Knowledge of the durian. Medium. 
https://medium.com/@IndoMedieval/knowledge-of-the-durian-39f89a6c871f. (Accessed 02-08-2020).

--- PAGE: 229 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
216 
 
 
Figure V.2. L: A relief of a man shooting a blowgun. Borobudur, Central Java, ninth-century. Author’s photo, November 
2018. R: An early illustration of a blowgun from a manuscript of Livre des prouffitz champestres et ruraulx (‘treatise on 
rural economy’) by Pietro de Crescenzi, 1470-1475 (Cranstone 1949). Paris, Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal, Ms-5064, f.265r. 
Al-Mas‘ūdi describes the use of blowguns at sea in Southeast Asia in the tenth century 
(2007[947]:94) and b lowguns appear in reliefs on Borobudur centuries before the first references in 
Persia and Europe (Figure V.2). A name for the device can be reconstructed to PMP (*sumpit, ACD 
8279). A Malay reflex, sumpitan, was something of a medieval Wanderwort, undergoing various 
contortions to become Malayalam tūmbitān, Arabic zarbaṭānah (زربطانة ,)French sarbacane, and Italian 
cerbottana (Hoogervorst 2011:95; Hornell 1924:3 26, 334; White 1960:521-522; Yule 1903:795). By 
the fifteenth century the name was applied around the Mediterranean to a type of thin-barelled cannon 
(e.g. Greek ζαραβοτανε – Chalkokondyles 2016[~1465]:129; Gould 2000:210). When the Portuguese 
sources describe Malay weaponry they use a word  for ‘blowgun’, zarabatana, that had Malay roots 
(Earle and Villiers 1990:89; White 1960:521-522). 
 Although sumpitan does exist in Sundanese (Rigg 1862:463), in BM the word for ‘blowgun’ is 
tulup, probably from OJv (OJED 2058:1; cf. MSd tulup; see also Jákl 2017). Perhaps the use of one or 
the other was forced by the metre; all the modifiers of juru ‘expert’ are disyllabic, and pañumpit, the 
alternative name for a blowgunner attested in SSKK, would be too long to fit . The juru tulup are said 
to be urang Malayu, probably meaning people from Malayu/Jambi in Sumatra. Malayu here may have 
referred to Malays as an ethnic group, as that usage is found in the Portuguese sources, the Malay 
historical literature, and (perhaps, although this is debatable) the Deśawarṇana (13.1 – kṣoṇī ri Malayu). 
Nowadays blowguns are not considered characteristically Malay weapons and are associated more with 
the Austroasiatic-speaking peoples of the Malay Peninsula (Orang Asli) and the Kubu/Lubu in Sumatra 
(Baer 2016; Blust 2013:12; Moszkowski 1909; Skeat 1902; Winstedt 1950:7) – but it is clear from 
Portuguese texts that Malay s in Sumatra and the Peninsula used blowguns in war . The blowgun was 
considered the Malay weapon par excellence by the conquistadores and dart wounds were considered 
invariably fatal – with the exception of one Fernão Gomes de Lemos, hit by a dart at Melak a, whose

--- PAGE: 230 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
217 
 
wound was ‘scalded with salted pork fat as soon as he received it, and that treatment, after God, was 
his salvation’ (Earle and Villiers 1990:73).A49 
Southeast Asian dart poisons are sometimes claimed to be the most powerful on Earth, due in 
part to confusion surrounding upas, an OJv word meaning simply ‘(plant) poison’ (Cranbrook 1997:4-
6; Hannigan 2018; OJED 2135:5; Yule 1903:952-958). The upas legend was already spreading in the 
Middle Ages, and it can be found in Odoric’s description291 of the darts used by the inhabitants of Bintan 
(Panten) as bearing ‘the most dangerous poison that there be’. A50 In fact Southeast Asian dart poisons 
appear to have drawn on a range of ingredients, not simply the notorious sap of the upas tree (Antiaris 
toxicaria) (see Zahorka 2006) . Among additives to the upas formula applied to modern darts  Hall 
(1928:50) lists ‘the poison fangs of snakes, stings of scorpions, arsenic, [raw] Pangium edule (Reinw.) 
[i.e. keluwak] which contains prussic acid  [hydrogen cyanide], and various comparatively harmless 
ingredients such as pepper, tobacco, capsicum, and onion’ (tobacco and capsicum not, of course, being 
available in the fifteenth century). 
 Fighters from Makassar and Masalembu  
Masalembu (kab. Sumenep) is a tiny archipelago north of Madura in the Java Sea. It is difficult 
to find any information about Masalembu beyond government statistics and few books on the islands 
have been published. Paul Piollet’s Salemboe Indah (1997), a photo essay with a short introduction, is 
a rare exception , and preserves the name found in BM, Salembu, in its title. Salted fish has b een the 
mainstay of the islands’ economy; piracy was once common. The current population is largely 
Madurese, but the bupati of Sumenep, interviewed in 1951, claimed that the population had once been 
Buginese-speaking, oriented more towards Sulawesi than  Madura (Piollet 1997:12-13). In  BM 92 9 
Salembu features as home of the juru amuk ‘duellists’. Amuk (MSd amuk ‘fight furiously’; OJv amuk, 
from wuk ‘furious attack’ – OJED 2322:1) is the source of  Portuguese amoco and English ‘amok’, 
(Barbosa 2000[1516]:371; Cortesão 1944:418, 494), the name for one who challenges others to duels 
or who goes on a murderous rampage before being brought down themselves in an act of suicide  – 
similar to Conti’s description of interpersona l violence in Java some decades earlier. It seems likely,  
anyway, that the Salembu duellists fought hand-to-hand. 
These duellists are paired with pamerang urang Makasar ‘Makassarese warriors’ (from perang 
‘war’, cf. OJv praṅ ‘fight, combat, battle’ [OJED 1398:15]). Makassar is now Indonesia’s fifth largest 
city. The peninsula on which it sits has long been Sulawesi’s most densely populated region, subject to 
deforestation and dense human settlement since at least the fourteenth century and located on the route 
 
291 From Odoric it entered Mandeville’s (hoax) Travels, the author of which elaborated on Odoric’s original in 
various ways. In some Mandeville manuscripts an antisemitic coda was added to this section (see Hannigan 
2018). London, BL, Harley MS 3954, f.39r adds that the dart poison is to be feared  ‘ffor treacle [i.e. theriac] 
may not help yu’.

--- PAGE: 231 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
218 
 
between Maluku and Java  (Andaya and Andaya 2015:112;  Bougas 2007 ; Pelras 1999: 9-10, 12 ). 
Medieval Makassar was only sparsely documented, with brief references in the Deśawarṇana (14.5) 
and BM forming some of the region’s only records before early modernity; writing had probably been 
introduced to South Sulawesi by the fifteenth century but no manuscripts from this period have survived 
(Caldwell 1988:11).  In the sixteenth century, however, Makassar grew to become one of the  
archipelago’s most important ports  (Cribb 2000:102).292 The Makassarese language is in the South 
Sulawesi branch of MP and is only distantly related to Sundanese and Malay (Smith 2017b:494). Before 
the conversion of the region’s rulers to Islam in 1605, people in Makassar probably had rather different 
religious traditions to the Hindu -Buddhist sects of Java and Sunda, with traces surviving in the 
traditional literature of South Sulawesi (particularly the Buginese La Galigo – Koolhof 1999) and 
perhaps in the practices of more isolated peoples in the Sulawesian uplands like the Sa’dan Toraja (see 
Cribb 2000:102; Macknight, Paeni, and Hadrawi 2020; Nooy-Palm 1986; Pelras 1996). 
 Little information about Sulawesian weaponry survives from this period but several sources 
depict or discuss arms elsewhere in the archipelago, particularly the Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian 
(L630, f.17r), Brás de Albuquerque’s Commentarios (1576:382), the OJv Nawanatya (Leiden, UBL, 
Ms. Or. Leyden 5091, f.2v – Pigeaud 1960:I:81-82), and reliefs, like the Sukuh forge relief (Leiden, 
UBL, OD-7115) (see Rahardjo 2011:140-142 for earlier Javanese weapons). Modern Indo-Malaysian 
weapons can also be a guide to medieval ones , although there is always the possibility of outside 
influences on recent designs (see van Zonneveld 2001 for an overview). The Javanese are described in 
foreign sources as having produced excellent weapons – good enough that when Francis Drake stopped 
in Java in 1580 he ‘bought reasonable store’ of steel weapons. A51 Fèi Xìn says too that Java ‘ha[d] 
substantial military equipment and mechanical arms’ (Fei 1996:45).A52 Java is poor in iron and the raw 
material for local arms production  had to be imported  from China, Sulawesi, and elsewhere ; iron, 
including ingots for forging, is frequently found at shipwreck sites. Roughly 340 tonnes were recovered 
from the Yuán -era Java Sea shipwreck off Lampung, for example ( Mathers and Flecker 1997:70; 
Miksic 2013:135). 
The sources mention similar array s of weaponry, including the well -known keris, which 
appears in BM 39 6 (and elsewhere) and is depicted in the early -fifteenth-century forge relief from 
Sukuh, as well as (single-edged?) swords (OSd pedang), shorter cutting weapons ( like goloks, 
mentioned in SSKK), spears of several kinds (Albuquerque distinguishes a type that he calls lanças de 
Iaoa ‘Java lances’), and parrying shields (tameṅs and ḍaḍaps, for which see Maxwell 2019). Ibn Baṭṭūṭa 
refers to ‘a knife like a billhook ’ being used at the Javanese court (Gibb and Beckingham 1994:883); 
this was known in OJv as kuḍi (OJED 909:2) and in Sundanese as kujang. The kujang has become an 
emblem of Sunda – it can be seen in the coats-of-arms of several towns in West Java, including Bogor, 
 
292 See the books and papers collected by the OXIS Project for the foundations of these developments: The 
OXIS Group. https://oxis.org/research/oxis/. (Accessed 02-08-2020.)

--- PAGE: 232 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
219 
 
and kujang-shaped pendants are sold at tourist shops – but in SSKK it is mentioned as a ‘ peasant’s 
weapon’ ( ganggaman sang wong tani ), and it was clearly  used by the Javanese  (Figure V.3  – see 
Munandar 2017:43-51). 
 
Figure V.3. The forge relief from Candi Sukuh, Central Java early/mid fifteenth century. Leiden, UBL, OD-7115. Note the 
weapons in the background, particularly the kuḍi near the front and the non-wavy forms of the keris. 
 Armour is mentioned in some sources  but it is seldom depicted in reliefs . Albuquerque says 
laudeis de lamina were captured at Melaka, probably meaning coats of plates and mail similar to the 
(nineteenth-century?) armour photographed by Isidore van Kinsbergen in Kuningan (UBL, KITLV 
87611). This may have been equivalent to OJv  kray ‘coat of mail’ (OJED 899:4), which is also 
mentioned in the c.1492 Chinese-Malay phrasebook as the equivalent of 甲 ‘armour’ (吉剌尾 pinyin: 
jíláyǐ, early Míng Guănhuà ~[kji-la-i] – Edwards and Blagden 1931:734 #266) . Armour nonetheless 
seems to have been uncommon, and several sources say that Southeast Asian pirates wore amulets under 
the skin , believing this protected t hem from iron weapons . Odoric says that  ships’ guards took to 
fighting ‘with spears and arrows without iron, as they know iron cannot harm [the pirates]. And because 
these people are not well-armoured they wound and often kill them’.A53 This may have had more to do 
with the scarcity of iron  than with the amulets ’ powers, though, and wooden and bone weapons are 
known from later times in eastern Indonesia (even where forging was pra ctised – e.g. Sumba [ R. 
Needham 1987:32-33]).

--- PAGE: 233 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
220 
 
Piracy of course answers the question of why ships would need guns and guards – and the 
people of Makassar were often counted among the archipelago’ s pirates (Wolters 1970:11).293 Pires 
asserts that: 
‘[t]hese [Makassar men] are greater thieves than any in the world, and they are powerful and 
have many paraos. They sail about plundering, from their country up to Pegu, to the Moluccas 
and Banda, and among all the islands around Java; and they take women to sea. They have fairs 
where they dispose of the merchandise they steal and sell the slaves they capture’ (Cortesão 
1944:226-227).A54 
 Master Gunners from Bali 
The poem refers to ‘guns’ (wedil, cf. Malay, MSd bedil) three times, each time on board ship. 
Wedil is probably from Tamil வெடில ் veṭil ‘[e]xplosion of gunpowder, a shock’ (Winslow 1862:399; 
Burrow and Emeneau 1984 #5473), although the specific referent is not known. Several cannons have 
been excavated from fifteenth-century shipwrecks in island Southeast Asia, including the Bakau wreck 
in the Java Sea (1400 -1420s) and the Lena Shoal wreck off the coast of Palawan in the Philippines 
(1480s). Some of these cannons are bronze, others iron, while most of the forms are evidently Chinese, 
with short barrels and bulbous chambers designed to absorb the shock of ignition. Some were designed 
to fire arrows rather than bullets (Goddio 2002:41, 239-241; Wade 2016:21). 
The ethnohistoric sources add confusing points. Varthema claimed that ‘no artillery of any kind 
is used [in Java], nor do they know how to make it’. A55 Pigafetta tells us on the contrary that cannons 
could be found in Brunei and were fired frequently during the Victoria’s time in the port (Beinecke MS 
351, f.60r), and Barbosa says that the Javanese were skilled gunsmiths.A56 Albuquerque (1576:382) says 
that Melaka’s gun foundries were as good as those of the Germans – renowned gunsmiths at the time.294 
Three thousand artillery pieces were captured  after the conquest , including  – interestingly – one 
thousand cannons da feição dos nossos berços  ‘of the [same] style as our berços’.295 A berço was a 
small-calibre breech-loading swivel gun invented in Europe in the fourteenth centur y; Portuguese 
berços came in three bore sizes (Gould 2000:209-210). They were certainly unknown in China until the 
early sixteenth century when they were introduced by the Portuguese (and known as 佛朗機砲 pinyin: 
fúlǎng jīpào ‘Frankish cannon’) (Andrade 2016:142 -143). It stretches credulity to suppose that they 
 
293 Christian Pelras believes claims of Buginese and Makassarese piracy are ove rblown, however, calling the 
reputation of the Buginese in this regard ‘entirely without foundation’ (1996:3 -4). 
294 See e.g. the comments of Laonikos Chalkokondyles, an Athenian who wrote a world history following the 
1453 Ottoman conquest of Constantinople. In Book 5 of his account he claims that it was widely believed that 
the Germans had invented firearms and that they ‘spread gradually from the Germans to the rest of the world’ 
(Chalkokondyles 2014[~1465]:383). Pietro Bembo (2007:9, 57), writing in the sixteenth century, makes similar 
comments. 
295 Earle and Villiers (1990:89) give ‘calibre’ for feição, but ‘style’ is more accurate.

--- PAGE: 234 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
221 
 
were common in Southeast Asia before then, although the design may have been  adopted by local 
gunsmiths between the first Portuguese contact and the conquest in 1511. 
 
Figure V.4. A breech-loading cannon from Java. New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, inv. no. 1986.503. 
A Javanese -made bronze breech -loading cannon with an animal -face motif and a Surya 
Majapahit-like symbol cast over the trunnions in the Metropolitan Museum of Art adds to the confusion 
(inv. no. 1986.503 – Figure V.4). Based on the symbol the Met implausibly places the cannon in the 
fourteenth century (when breech -loading cannon were invented in Europe), but  the symbol is itself 
difficult to date  and it cannot be diagnostic in this way. Anti-personnel breech-loaders later became 
popular across Southeast Asia (Manguin 1976; Sint Nicolaas 2007; Wooley 1947); this gun could easily 
have been made in the sixteenth century or later.296 
By 1500 the serpe ntine, an S -shaped iron trigger that  lowered a match  or hot iron  into a 
handgun’s touchhole, was common in Europe, first evidenced in a German manuscript of 1411 (Vienna, 
ÖNB, Codex 3069, f.38v), and Portuguese sources also refer to handguns/muskets in Southeast Asian 
contexts (e.g. ‘muitas espimguardas’ – Barbosa 2000[1516]:374). The Sulalat al-salāṭīn’s claim that 
guns were unknown among Malays before the arrival of the Portuguese is false , and muskets were 
certainly used by both sides at Melaka in 1511: António de Abreu, who only months later led the first 
expedition to Maluku, was shot in the face by a gun, losing part of his tongue and several teeth.A57 BM’s 
wedil probably encompassed both ‘cannon’ and ‘musket’ (cf. OJv bĕḍil ‘firearm (old type)’ – OJED 
232.10) and either way would probably have been anti-personnel weapons with small bores , some 
perhaps shooting arrows or darts. 
The master gunners (juru wedil) are said to be Balinese. Interestingly, one of Clifford Geertz’s 
informants from Tabanan, Bali, remarked of pre-colonial Bali that ‘[t]here were certain specialists (juru 
bedil) who held the few guns there were, and they were placed in the very front of the fi ght’ (Geertz 
 
296 The breech-loaders may have been made by Europeans and brought to the archipelago. This is not as 
implausible as it sounds; Varthema (1535[1510]:78v) says that two Italian gunsmiths were employed by the 
Zamorin of Calicut c.1500, and at least one gun sent by the Zamorin to the Sultan of Melaka was captured by 
the Portuguese in 1511 (‘hum tiro grãde que o Rey de Calicut mandara ao Rey de Malaca’ – Albuquerque 
1576:382). Conti (Bracciolini 2004[1448], lines 656-662) noted as far back as the 1440s that Europeans were 
known in Asia for their gunsmithing skills. See also the cannons on the sixteenth-century Xuande wreck 
(Goddio et al. 2002:239).

--- PAGE: 235 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
222 
 
1980:254). By late pre-colonial times these guns were probably imported rifles (Geertz 1980:91, 206), 
but it is interesting that the term juru bedil was also used in Bali itself. 
Chinese Master Archers 
 By the fifteenth century Chinese communi ties had grown to considerable size across western 
Indo-Malaysia and Chinese people often held important posts in the region’s port -cities. When Zhèng 
Hé arrived in Palembang ( 舊港 ‘old port’) in 1407 he found that what had been the capital city of a 
Malay kingdom, Śrīvijaya, had been turned into a pirate republic run by a Chinese man, Chén Zŭyì (陳
祖義), who had taken over after the city’s previous ruler, Liáng Dàomíng (梁道明), had left for China. 
Chén was brought to China and executed  (Wolters 1970:73-75). The size of the Chinese population 
meant that post -Chén Palembang could not be considered a  wholly foreign country by the Míng; it 
instead became a ‘Pacification Superintendency’ (宣慰使司 pinyin: xuānwèi shǐsī), equivalent to a state 
on China’s borders (Wade 2016:22). In BM, however, the only reference to Chinese people, as opposed 
to goods, comes in BM 927 – juru panah urang Cina ‘the master archers were Chinese’. 
 Chinese archery traditi ons seem to have been conservative in the Middle Ages. T here were 
reportedly fourteen different schools of archery in the early sixteenth century but  specifics of their 
teachings have not survived, and the most commonly cited manual in the Míng had been wr itten over 
seven centuries earlier in the Táng dynasty by Wáng Jū (王琚), a contemporary of seventh-century CE 
Empress Wǔ Zétiān (624 -705). Wáng Jū’s teachings had been transmitted through a Sòng -dynasty 
encyclopedia, The Guided Tour through the Forest of Facts (事林廣記  shìlín guǎngjì ) by Chén 
Yuánliāng ( 陳元靚 ), and they formed the basis of all extant archery manuals into the Qīng. Lĭ 
Chéngfén’s ( 李呈芬) Archery Classic  (射經 shèjīng, written 1646) – which quotes liberally from 
Wáng’s then-millennium-old text – noted that archers were frequently illiterate, so the lack of M íng-
era material is perhaps unsurprising (Selby 2000:278). 
 In Wáng’s method (described in Selby 2000:196 -210), t he bowstring was drawn with the 
thumb; for infantry shooting, as on a ship, Wáng reco mmended the ‘Chinese method’  (中國法 – as 
opposed to the ‘nomad/barbarian method’ 胡法), wherein the middle finger secures the thumb with the 
index finger standing erect along the string. The thumb was normally protected by a thumb-ring, and in 
the Míng there was a fashion for ornamented  stone thumb-rings with raised ridges around the middle 
(see Selby 2000:xvii for images), although most were leather or horn. Mǎ Huān (76) says that the beak 
of the ‘crane’s crest bird’ (鶴頂 – Buceros bicornis, great hornbill), sourced from Palembang, could be 
used to make jǐjī (擠機), which Mills (1970:101) interprets as archers’ thumb rings; BM’s juru panahs’ 
thumb rings might have been made using such local materials. The string was drawn to below the ear, 
and the arrow was drawn so that the arrowhead ‘mounted the thumb’ ( 上指). In infantry shooting the

--- PAGE: 236 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
223 
 
bow was held upright and the feet were placed slightly apart. 297 Upon release the bow was allowed to 
spin forward, finishing parallel to the ground. 
 The materials of a Chinese bow were described in The Rites of Zhou (周禮 zhōu lǐ), supposedly 
written in the Zhōu dynasty but more likely to date to the early H àn (as an ‘Old Text’ [ 古文經] – see 
discussion in Selby 2000:90-91; Nylan 1994). A bow required a wooden core supported on the belly by 
horn (to resist compression) and on the back by animal sinews (to resist expansion) glued together with 
isinglass. The nocks were cut into horn or wooden inserts at either end; in English longer non-moving 
inserts are referred to as ‘siyahs’, although these were less common on early Míng-era bows (Loades 
2016:6-8, 20). The whole was bound with silk and coated with lacquer to protect it from the elements, 
including humidity ( cited specifically  in The Rites of Zhou ). Archery with handbows  (rather than 
crossbows) was common on Chinese ships into the nineteenth century : Later Míng woodcuts clearly 
show bows with elongated siyahs on ocean -going ‘Fujian ships’, and bows are known to have been 
carried on Sòng -era ships too (see Lam 2002:Fig.27 ; Miksic 2013:101 ). Composite bow  are 
significantly more powerful than self -bows, and it is easy to see how an archer with a Chinese bow 
trained in a Wáng Jū-like system could have been an asset on fifteenth-century Indonesian shipping. 
 
Figure V.5. L: A self-bow depicted at Prambanan, Central Java, ninth century – author’s photograph. R: a composite bow in 
a relief depicting part of the Arjunawiwāha at Candi Kedaton, Probolinggo, East Java, c.1370 – Leiden, UBL, OD-3402. 
The 1292 Mongol invasion (see Bade 2013)  may have brought a similar archery tradition to 
Java, although as composite bows were used throughout Afro-Eurasia they could have come to Java in 
 
297 Specifically the posture was described as: 此為丁字不成八字不就 ‘almost a “丁” and not quite a “八”.’

--- PAGE: 237 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
224 
 
any number of ways. Bows from other Indonesian islands are typically wooden or bamboo self-bows 
shooting long unfletched arrows – e.g. the Tanimbarese weapons in Drabbe (1940:93, plates XII and 
XXXII) – and they and the Indian-style self-bows depicted in Central Javanese-era reliefs (Figure V.5) 
were probably less effective than the bows used by Mongol and Mamluk archers. Recurved composite 
bows are depicted in reliefs throughout the Majapahit period ; a  relief at Candi Panataran depicting 
Indrajit as a horse archer298 (see Gommans 2018) has received particular attention, but similar bows are 
depicted elsewhere.299 This could have been mere  fashion, but these reliefs suggest that horn-wood-
sinew composite bows were known in Java in the fifteenth century. 
Bailing Water 
 Bailermen – people who bail water from the boat – are mentioned on both parahus. On the first 
they are identified as coming from Kalapa, but on the second parahu they are referred to simply as nu 
ni(m)ba (BM 93 2, 93 3 – ‘[those] who bail’, from  PMP *timba ‘vessel for drawing water’  [ACD 
10323]). Their bailers (pani(m)ba) are said to be salaka ‘silver’; such utilitarian items are normally of 
wood or bamboo. Noorduyn and Teeuw translate BM 932, nu ni(m)ba jo(m)pong sagala, to mean that 
the bailermen were ‘crested’ ( as in Coolsma 1913:145 sub DJOMPONG, from a word for a horse’s 
mane). Jompong has other meanings in MSd, however, particularly ‘youth’ or ‘pubescent boy’. Rigg 
(1862:177) also gives ‘servant of nobles’, which is a plausible interpretation; the foreign sources suggest 
slaves and servants laboured on ships, and Sunda certainly took part in the slave trade. The more usual 
word for ‘slave’ in OSd is hulun, however, as in SA 253 ( réya hulun mo kasuruh ‘there is no point in 
commanding many slaves’ – from PMP *qulun ‘outsiders’ [ACD 4668]) . ‘Youth’ is perhaps a better 
reading. 
 Musicians? 
 While several musical instruments are mentioned in both parahu descriptions (BM 98-104 and 
BM 939-946), no musicians appear in the text. All of these musical references come as the first and 
second parahus are leaving their respective harbours, and include a range of percussion and woodwind 
instruments as well as the human voice. The songs  (kawih tarahan) seem to have been sung by the 
crew, although the interpretation is complicated by the enigmatic word tarahan. In BM 944 Noorduyn 
and Teeuw left the term untranslated (‘tarahan songs’), although in BM 100 they translated the entire 
phrase as ‘shanties’. Presumably the origin is tahan ‘to endure, to bear’ (Rigg 1862:472) with the -ar- 
plural infix – ‘endurance songs’? Working songs? 
 The instruments on the ships – many of which have been discussed in a recent article by Ilham 
Nurwansah (2020 a) – comprise goong (nipple gongs); gangsa (probably flat gongs; N went for 
 
298 First taken note of by UGM archaeologist Adieyatna Fajri (Jarrah Sastrawan, p.c.). 
299 A particularly clear example can be seen in a relief at Panataran – Leiden, UBL, KITLV 87862.

--- PAGE: 238 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
225 
 
‘cymbals’); goong kuning (‘yellow gongs’, presumably of a brass-like copper alloy, possibly with gold 
inclusions – Goddio 2002:238); ge(n)dang (drums); and sarunay (shawms). Additional musical terms 
occur at the text’s finale while Bujangga Manik is in heaven (BM 1785-1790): ge(n)ding (an OJv word 
that, according to Kunst [19 68:5], ‘has no specific meaning’ ; Danasasmita et al. [1987] translate it as 
‘gamelan players’); caning (a kind of metallophone known in Javanese as saron – Noorduyn and Teeuw 
2006:329; van Zanten 1995:525; see also Kunst 1968:78-81); tatabehan (‘instrumental music’ – Kunst 
1968:3-4); and pabura(ñ)cahan (‘place of burañcah instruments’, burañcah being an OJv word for 
unknown instruments found in the Kuñjarakarṇa – OJED 275:16). 
 
Figure V.6. A relief at Sukuh (Central Java, mid-fifteenth-century) showing a nipple gong. Leiden, UBL, OD-7133. 
 ‘Gong’ is a colonial-era loanword in English, probably from Malay, and BM’s goongs (cf. Mal 
gong, OJv goṅ [OJED 535:14]) were not known in medieval western Afro-Eurasia. These gongs were 
probably bossed or nipple gongs; the vast majority of gongs recovered from shipwrecks of the fifteenth 
century are bossed gongs with only small differences in design (Nicolas 2009:62-63; Goddio 2002:237), 
and gongs of that type appear in reliefs (Figure V.6). These have been recovered in large numbers; 51 
bossed gongs were excavated from the fourteenth - or fifteenth-century Phu Quoc wreck, for example 
(Nicolas 2009:65). BM’s gangsas (Skt kaṅśa, cf. OJv gaṅsa [OJED 492:6]) may have been simple flat 
gongs, found at maritime archaeological sites from the ninth century on. No drums (ge(n)dang, cf. OJv 
kĕṇḍaṅ [OJED 849:3], MJv kendhang, Malay gendang) have been recovered from wrecks, presumably 
because they were made of organic materials, but their appearance on reliefs at several Javanese candi 
suggests they would have been similar in style to those in a modern gamelan ensemble – asymmetrical 
drums tuned with cords. Some of these instruments can be seen in several reliefs of musical ensembles 
on the main temple at Panataran (e.g. Leiden, UBL, KITLV 28255 and KITLV 28254 – see also Kunst 
1968:120-123 for a chronological list of instruments depicted in Javanese reliefs). 
The ancestor of the modern oboe, the shawm was a popular instrument across medieval Eurasia 
– probably as far east as Ternate, where by the sixteenth century shawms were played at ceremonies for

--- PAGE: 239 ---
Part V. Travelling by Sea 
226 
 
the installation of a sultan (L. Andaya 1993:64). T he English name derives tortuously from Latin 
calamus ‘reed’, but the Sundanese one, sarunay (cf. Malay serunai, MJv sruni [Robson and Wibisono 
2002:700]) is from Middle Persian sōrnay (سورنای) compound word referring to reed instruments (سور )
used at a feast (نای( )Mackenzie 1971:78 sub sūr).300 Kunst (1968:Fig.9) sees a possible shawm (or end-
blown flute) in a relief at Borobudur, and a couple at Panataran and Jago (1968:Figs.50, 55), although 
he says ‘[w]e cannot be quite sure that the instruments shown are shawms’ (19 68:28). Interestingly, 
given that the sarunay in BM is played as cannons fire and gongs are hit, in Middle English an alternative 
name for the shawm was bumbard, from bombard ‘cannon’.301 The sarunay must either way have been 
chosen for its commanding sound, able to compete with and complement the din of guns and gongs.302  
* 
 Bujangga Manik  shows that life at sea in fifteenth-century Southeast Asia was extremely 
multicultural. People from some of the tiniest and most poorly documented islands of the archipelago 
rubbed shoulders with folk from some of Eurasia’s greatest ports, and Chinese-inspired guns and bows 
could be found alongside  Persia-derived shawms and native gongs. Although only briefly glimpsed, 
these marine communities are some of BM’s most fascinating sections. Each ship appears to correspond 
to Bujangga Manik’s spiritual authority at different points in his life, starting with a humble, slow -
moving craft crewed by local Sundanese mariners and ending with the biggest ship of all, a medieval 
jong, a ship larger than almost any other in the world. The grandeur of the ships increases as the ascetic 
gains greater understanding. After coming to Balungbungan in BM 101 3, Bujangga Manik heads to 
Rabut Palah again in order to read the Javanese holy texts. After this he goes back to West Java,  
ascending the volcano, Papandayan, and has a vision of the entire known world. This is the peak – literal 
and figurative – of his insight, and it flows directly from his journey from Bali on the jong, a physical 
manifestation of the ascetic’s spiritual accomplishment. 
* 
  
 
300 The shawm seems to have been popular throughout Eurasia, with descendants in Chinese (嗩吶 suǒnà) and 
Cuman (suruna) as in the thirteenth-century Codex Cumanicus (Venice, Biblioteca Marciana, Cod. Mar. Lat. 
DXLIX), one of the earliest records of a Turkic language in Europe (Kuun 1880:103, 297). 
301 Middle English Dictionary. Robert E. Lewis, et al. (eds). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1952 -
2001. Online edition in Middle English Compendium. Frances McSparran, et al. (eds). Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Library. 2000-2018. https://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/middle-english-dictionary/dictionary/MED5471. 
(Accessed 23-08-2020.) 
302 A shawm recovered from the Mary Rose appears to have been rather quieter – a ‘still’ shawm with a gentler, 
less shrill sound (Myers 1983). This says little about instruments in Southeast Asia, but it is a reminder that 
medieval and early modern instruments may have few parallels in the modern world.

--- PAGE: 240 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
227 
 
 
PART VI: 
Things in Bujangga Manik 
Bujangga Manik’s documentation of material culture in fifteenth -century Java goes beyond ships and 
housing. Lists of perfumes, flavourings, dyes, metals, and glass items  make up significant chunks of 
both the mundane and heavenly parts of the poem, with many of the same commodities being found in 
Sunda and in sorga, an idea encountered in other OSd texts ( e.g. SA 469-674). In this section I will 
examine some of these commodities, noting their places of origin and particularly their roles in the 
medieval world. Many of the Indo-Malaysian commodities referred to in BM are discussed at length by 
Tom Hoogervorst (2011) and are well-known in the literature on the region. Others – particularly those 
from outside Indonesia – are less well-documented, and about those I have gone into more detail. I will 
start by looking at plants, animals, and botanical products in various contexts (VI.1) before moving on 
to metal, glass, and other manufactured goods (VI.2). 
 Indo-Malaysian historiography is dominated by  political history and  the ( often dubious) 
exploits of elite heroes like Hayam Wuruk, Hang Tuah,  and Siliwangi. Histories of ‘Hindu-Buddhist’ 
Java focus on diplomatic missions to China and the acts of kings and religious figures recorded in local 
inscriptions. Ordinary lives and interests are often left by the ways ide. This is to the detriment of our 
understanding of the region as a whole, and it is also – if you ask me – rather boring, barely connected 
to life as it is actually lived.  In the absence of the exhaustive documentat ion of daily life required for 
medieval microhistories, we must look for ways to slot ordinary people back into Southeast Asian 
history. Commodities offer us just such a path.  As Joshua Specht (2019) has recently argued , 
commodities and their movements allow us to write global histories connecting disparate communities 
that do not rely on elite linkages. Plant products are often used by the rich and powerful – as, indeed, in 
BM – but they are grown, harvested,  and transported by people who do not otherwise feature in the 
historical record. 
Merchants travelled across the Indian Ocean on relatively predictable routes dependent on the 
regular cycling of the southwest and northeast monsoons (see Wheatley 1966:xviii -xx). ‘Predictable’ 
does not mean ‘fast’ – a round-trip from India to China and back would take three years using the 
monsoon cycle – but departures could be timed by the winds and currents. Ships from India to Melaka 
sailed between April and August , for ex ample, while ships from Melaka to China departed between 
June and August (Miksic 2013:37 -38). The monsoon cycle seems to have been discovered  in the late 
first millennium BCE (see Hourani 1995:24 -26), and exploiting the winds was a skilled activity for

--- PAGE: 241 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
228 
 
experienced but mostly anonymous sailors and navigators (see Lewis 1973 for fifteenth-century travel 
on the Indian Ocean). Many of the commodities mentioned in BM came from outside the archipelago – 
harvested by anonymous  skilled peasants elsewhere in the hemisphere – and they must have been 
brought to Sunda by sailors expertly traversing seas made dangerous by storms and piracy. References 
to commodities in texts like BM are much more than the dull cataloguing of irrelevant minutiae; they 
instead constitute traces of the lives and labour of people otherwise unheard and of the hemispheric 
connections they facilitated. 
 
VI.1 Plants and Animals 
In contrast to other medieval Indo-Malaysian texts like the Deśawarṇana and Pararaton, BM contains 
few references to animals or even animal products.  303 Plants and botanical  commodites take centre 
stage instead. These include Barus camphor, sandalwood, various bamboos, a couple of kinds of timber, 
and different types of incense. Animals appear infrequently and obliquely, chiefly in the form of civet 
(dédés) and in the taboos Bujangga Manik accuses his grandmother of having broken. The Portuguese 
sources’ lists of trade goods  corroborate BM’s items ; they  all seem to have been fashionable 
commodities on the Indian Ocean in the long fifteenth century.304 
In this section I will examine the plants and animals used in textile production (VI.1.1); those 
among Jompong Larang’s gifts to Bujangga Manik (VI.1. 2); those growing in the land Bujangga 
Manik’s soul enters upon his death (VI.1.3); those Dorakala uses to describe the appearance of the 
ascetic’s soul  (VI.1.4); and the more enigmatic items found in heaven proper, including the yak 
Bujangga Manik is said to ride.  Textiles in OSd texts have already  been amply discussed by Aditia 
Gunawan (2019) but, as elsewhere, I will focus on the hemispheric context of the goods described. 
* 
VI.1.1 Textiles 
Ameng Layaran returns home to find his mother outside working on several stages of textile 
production, from cleaning cotton to dyeing yarn (BM 158-164), and as noted above, weaving and dyeing 
feature strongly in BM’s depictions of women. A number of dyes are mentioned here, and others come 
up when describing the curtains (kasang) hung about the house. The weaving of cotton cloth has a long 
history in island Southeast Asia, and a specific term for ‘weaving cloth’, *t enun, can be reconstructed 
 
303 A list of the plants and animals mentioned in the Pararaton can be found in I Gusti Putu Phalgunadi’s 
translation (1996:46-47). 
304 ‘Long fifteenth century’ used here in a rather different sense to that in Cooper and Mapstone (1997).

--- PAGE: 242 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
229 
 
to PAn (ACD 8734). Cloths were certainly made in large numbers in Sunda in the Middle Ages, 
although none have survived from this period. Textiles from other islands have been radiocarbon-dated 
to the fifteenth century, however, including a beautiful heirloom cloth from Lampung (perhaps made in 
Java) that has been dated with 98.5% confidence to 1403-1501 (R. Barnes 2010:36), as well as several 
from Sulawesi and Timor.  Weaving was traditionally an activity for women and it is somet imes 
described in the ethnographic literature on eastern Indonesia as the female equivalent of headhunting 
(as in Hoskins 1996:23 – see also B. W. Andaya 2004; R. Barnes and Kahlenberg 2010:12-13, 28-29). 
Aditia Gunawan has already examined the intricacies of textiles and textile production in OSd 
texts, including BM, in a recent article (Gunawan 2019), and I do not see much p urpose in simply 
replicating his findings here. I will, however, go over some of the botanical components of dyeing and 
weaving as found in the poem, particularly in their medieval/hemispheric context. 
Fabric 
The basic material of native Indo -Malaysian weaving traditions is cotton ( Gossypium 
arboreum), which appears to have been used by MP speakers since prehistory (although there are no 
PMP terms for cotton, and it was probably introduced from India – Boivin et al. 2013:216;  Reid 
1988:90).305 The fabrics in the poem go under different names and they are not always easy to interpret 
even when attested in OJv sources; bayabon, for instance, is identified in OJED as ‘a particular kind of 
cloth’ without specifics (229:1).  Boéh, which now means ‘(white) cotton cloth’ in Baduy Sundanese 
(Hasman and Reiss 2012:103), is used  in OSd to refer to cloths of different materials and patterns – 
twenty-five types of boéh are listed in SSKK, for instance. Types of boéh in BM include calingcing (Sd 
for Averrhoa bilimbi, a small fruit tree, here probably a pattern rather than a dye – BM 213), and lungsir, 
plausibly interpreted as ‘silk’ (BM 189, 352, 1794, 1797 – cf. OJv luṅsir ‘a kind of cloth (silk?)’ [OJED 
1062:3]). Luṅsir often features alongside sutra in OJv texts and is usually interpreted as ‘satin’ or ‘silk 
cloth’. Another term, limur (BM 394, 515), is also presumed to be a kind of silk (cf. OJv limar, limur – 
OJED 1029:1). Unfortunately it is not clear what distinguished the two, and I have rendered them both 
as ‘silk’ in the translation (with the original in brackets). 
China, home of sericulture, has long been associated with silk – so much so that ‘(Maritime) 
Silk Road’ has been adopted as an umbrella term for trade out of China in late antiquity and the Middle 
Ages – but by the fifteenth century silk was also being produced across A fro-Eurasia from Japan to 
Italy. Cloths were certainly being woven from silk in the archipelago at this time; the fifteenth-century 
heirloom cloth from Lampung mentioned above was made with silk warp and cotton weft.  Afanasij 
Nikitin reports that silk (шелкъ [šelkŭ]), was produced in ‘Java’ (f.382v), and Pires mentions that parts 
of Sumatra produced silk, including Pasai (Cortesão 1944:144) . That said, Pires also mentions cloths 
 
305 Before cotton, cloth was probably woven from the fibres of Musa textilis (abacá or ‘Manila hemp’), 
documented ethnographically across the Austronesian-speaking world (including Taiwan – Chen 1968:166).

--- PAGE: 243 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
230 
 
of many kinds (most of them silks) as among the goods imported into Sunda (Cortesão 1944:169), and 
it is clear from other sources that enormous amounts of cloth (silk and cotton) were being imported into 
the archipelago as a whole, as far east as Banda and Maluku . The shawl Bujangga Manik is we aring 
when seen by Jompong Larang is described as sutra Cina ‘Chinese silk’ (BM 254) and one of the types 
of umbrellas found in heaven is made of sutra Keling ‘South Indian silk’ (BM 1799) – sūtra being the 
Sanskrit word for ‘thread’ (cognate with English ‘sew’), whence the meanings ‘silk’ and ‘collection of 
aphorisms, sutra’. 
Dyes 
The dyes mentioned in BM also seem to be vegetable-based. Three dyestuffs are used as verbs 
in BM 162 and 282, nelem nuar ñangkuduan, where, following Aditia Gunawan’s interpretation, I have 
translated them as  ‘dyeing black, yellow, and red’ . These verbs describe the activities of Bujangga 
Manik’s mother and Ajung Larang.  Only the third  dye can be identified conclusively with a single 
species (see Gunawan 2019 for the others ): cangkudu (Morinda citrifolia), the outside of the root of 
which is ground to produce a red (or brown) dye throughout the archipelago (cf. Malay mengkudu, OJv 
wuṅkuḍu – OJED 2331:2). 306 Other dyes are mentioned when describing the curtain s, including 
kacambang, which is apparently to be identified with Ardisia tenuifolia, whose berries produce a black 
dye (according to Rigg 1862:183) , and laka, which elsewhere in BM refers to the wood of Myristica 
iners but which here probably refers to lac, an imported dye  derived from the secretion of an insect 
(Kerria lacca) which to this day carries ‘[a]n aura of luxury’ in Bali (Nabholz-Kartaschoff 2010:195). 
One of the most interesting dyes mentioned is sepang ‘brazilwood’. This is the  wood of the 
brazil or sappan tree (Caesalpinia sappan) that produces a red colour due to the presence of a chemical 
called brazilin (also found in a South American species, Paubrasilia echinata, whence the name of 
Brazil). Sepang goes back to PMP *səpaŋ, and it has relatives in Malay (sepang) and Javanese (secang), 
as well as in Chinese, where the word for ‘brazil’ is sūfāngmù (蘇枋木 – MC su-pjang-muwk, often 
shortened to 蘇木). This is often translated as ‘sappanwood’, but it was known by th e name ‘brazil’ 
(verzin, berçi, etc.) in medieval Europe, where it was used for dyeing cloth and for making paints, just 
as it was in India and the Middle East. Brazil was exported from South and Southeast Asia, particularly 
from Sumatra, where the tree grows natively, and it has even been found among the cargo at medieval 
Southeast Asian shipwreck s (like the Lon gquan junk – Miksic 2013:201). Marco Polo attempted to 
grow a brazil tree in Venice from  Sumatran seeds; they did not sprout, which Polo attributed to the 
colder climate.A58 
 
306 Blust reconstructed a PWMP protoform *baŋkudu ‘Morinda citrifolia’ (ACD 6843). WMP is no longer 
considered a valid clade, however.

--- PAGE: 244 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
231 
 
Brazil is combined with other ingredients as it otherwise swiftly turns brown (Medlej 2020:56). 
It must be used freshly made. The Italian artist Cennino Cennini (c.1360-c.1427) recommended mixing 
kermes (a red insect dye) with brazil to strengthen blue paint in his Libro dell’Arte (c.1400), noting, as 
in BM, that skilled women were the best dye-mixers: 
‘… it is an unusual ability to know how to make [brazil] properly. And know that making it is 
an occupation for pretty girls rather than for men; for they are always at home, and reliable, and 
they have more dainty hands’ (Cennini 1960[~1400]:39).A59 
Hayam, mentioned after sepang in BM 164, is unidentified. N went for ‘making chicken soup’ for the 
phrase ngangen hayam (cf. MSd angeun, the name for a soup or stew), but Aditia Gunawan is probably 
right to see this as the name of a dye and the line as a parallelism. He suggested to me that hayam could 
be saliara (Malay/Indonesian tahi ayam – Lantana camara), but this is a post-Columbian introduction 
and could not have featured in a fifteenth-century text. 
* 
VI.1.2 Jompong Larang’s Gifts 
Jompong Larang gives a number of valuable gifts to Bujangga Manik’s mother in hope of 
securing him as her husband. These gifts are not a dowry; dowries (payments from the bride’s family 
to the groom’s) are rare in an Indo-Malaysian context, and bridewealth (gifts provided by the groom’s 
family to the bride’s) is considerably more common (in both western and eastern Indo-Malaysia – e.g. 
Winstedt 1950:60 -61). Jompong’s gifts should best be seen as  initial prestations  – more akin to a 
marriage proposal than bridewealth or dowry (Rooney 1993:37-38). Such gifts are an important part of 
marriage negotiations elsewhere in the archipelago, and, indeed, characterise relations between lineages 
even in situations that do not involve marriage  (see e.g. Cooley 1962:26-50 for Ambon).307 The most 
important gifts – in terms of the number of lines of description devoted to them (BM 358-379, BM 463-
494) – are betel quids. The association between marriage and betel is widespread in the archipelago, so 
this is not unexpected (e.g. Creese 2004:62 for quids as love tokens in  OJv kakawin; Keane 1997:147 
for Sumba). 
Ajung Larang (on Jompong ’s behalf ) adds a number of more exotic commodities to the 
presents, and t hese are all said to be ‘perfumes from overseas’ ( bubura pe(n)tas sagala , BM 3 91) – 
indicating perhaps that commodites’ exotic origins were as important in Sunda as they were elsewhere 
in the medieval world  (see Freedman 2005). Several human -made products are added, including a 
waistband decorated with wayang figures, a keris, and a silk (limur) cloth. A fruit basket (buah rembey 
 
307 The Dutch missionary Louis Onvlee, for instance, showed that the construction of a dam in Sumba was 
negotiated in the same way as a marriage between two lineages and involved the same initial gift -giving – see 
Onvlee (1949).

--- PAGE: 245 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
232 
 
‘mixed fruits’, BM 39 7) is the final gift on the original list, although Ameng Layaran’s mother also 
mentions ‘jewels and gems’  and a ‘sandalwood raft’ ( rakit candana), apparently made of camphor 
dipped in areca water and wrapped in cotton, in the later enumeration. 
The gifts are a mix of local and foreign, botanical and artificial. There is some male -female 
symbolism apparent in some of the pairings, although some of the items appear to have been valued for 
their inherent properties (scent, medicine, etc.) and not for a particular symbolic role.  I will address 
them here in the order in which they appear in the text. 
 Betel 
 Betel is a mild narcotic formerly chewed by both men and women and formerly popular in Java, 
where it has been largely replaced by tobacco. It is not the product of a single plant but of two (or more); 
a typical betel quid consists of a sliver of the seed of the areca palm (Areca catechu) wrapped in the 
leaf of a vine (Piper betle) trained to grow up areca trunks. Powdered lime (calcium oxide) is the most 
common addition to the quid , but o ther ingredients are sometimes added, including  camphor, musk, 
gambir, and cloves (Rooney 1993:16). 
Like many important Southeast Asian plant species, the areca palm was probably first cultivated 
in New Guinea, where its use appears to long antedate the arrival of Austronesian speakers (Kirch 
1997:39-40). The palm has wild relatives in New Guinea, including A. jobiensis and A. macrocalyx, 
and the ir nuts  are also chewed on the island (May 1984:143).  There is no reliably reconstructed 
Austronesian or MP protoform for ‘areca’ or ‘betel’, and the absence of be tel among the remains at 
Lapita archaeological sites in the Southwest Pacific suggests that its use outside New Guinea ‘may […] 
be a phenomenon of the last two thousand years’ (Kirch 1997:217 ; Rooney 1993:14;  see also 
Hoogervorst 2011:131-140). In OSd the name for ‘areca’ is pinang and ‘betel’ is sereh (MSd seureuh); 
these words have counterparts in Malay ( pinang and sireh/sirih respectively), although finding out 
where these terms came from is not easy.308 Betel is still used on a daily basis in eastern Indonesia and 
is presented as a gift at a range of ceremonies and occasions. Its most common role in modern western 
Indo-Malaysia is in marriage ceremonies – Malay meminang, a verb derived from pinang ‘areca seed’, 
means ‘to ask in marriage’, for example (Rooney 1993:35) – a trait paralleled in eastern Indonesia and 
New Guinea. In fifteenth-century Java betel appears to have been considerably more common: Mǎ Huān 
says that ‘[the Javanese] receive passing guests without tea; they have only betel with which to entertain 
them’.A60 Betel chewing had in any case spread outside the archipelago long before BM’s time, and it 
 
308 These terms lack clear Austronesian protoforms, so although they are widely shared in the Austronesian 
language family it is not obvious that they were known to the speakers of proto -Austronesian or even proto-MP. 
A dispersal of pinang to other MP branches (and other languages, including Chinese 檳榔 [pinyin: bīnláng]) 
from Malayo-Chamic has been proposed, with a possible Austroasiatic source.

--- PAGE: 246 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
233 
 
was popular  across mainland Southeast Asia,  southern China ( Fan 2010[1175]:127-28) and  India 
(Dallapiccola 2003:13; Figure VI.1). 
 
Figure VI.1. Betel chewing depicted in the Ni‘matnāma-i Nāṣir al-Dīn Shāhī, a Persian-language cookbook written in the 
Malwa Sultanate, central India, at the end of the fifteenth century. London, BL, IO Islamic 149, f.100v. See Titley (2005). 
Betel chewing requires certain  tools and implements, although the paraphernalia exhibits 
significant geographical differences (see e.g. Beran 1988 for New Guinea; Rooney 1993:3 for Southeast 
Asia). In western Indonesia betel paraphernalia is based around the tray and receptacles for the various 
ingredients, as well as the specialised betel scissors (OSd kalakatri, probably from Tamil kattari 
கத்திரி ‘scissors’).309 Some of the words used in BM’s betel descriptions are difficult to decipher , 
however, particularly pasileman: N interpreted this to mean ‘betel tray’ (related to OJv silĕm ‘depth’ – 
OJED 1766:11). It occurs in an apparent parallelism with  the term pasiboténg (in N’s transcription), 
however, which I would tend to interpret as pasi bo(n)téng  ‘cucumber slices’  (MSd bonténg 
‘cucumber’). The phrase dihañceng di pasileman  ‘arranged in the pasileman’ (BM 37 8) suggests 
something one could arrange something on top of, but di can also mean ‘among’ (cf. BM 1011) – betel 
quids arranged among slices of something? At a stretch this could be a reference to a citrus fruit, ‘lime 
slices’ (cf. MSd limo ‘small sour orange or lime’ [Rigg 1862:254]; OJv limo ‘a citrus fruit’, mentioned 
in the ninth-century OJv Rāmāyaṇa [OJED 1030:4] – see the discussion in Hoogervorst 2011:151-157). 
Pasileman and the pasi bo(n)téng may be coincidentally similar in form, though, and I have stuck with 
N’s ‘betel tray’ interpretation in the translation. 
Some of the phrases concerning betel processing are also rather tricky, particularly those using 
the term batri (BM 47 3-476, 48 5-486), which has a similar function as benang in making passive 
 
309 The oldest surviving betel cutter is a fourteenth-/fifteenth-century Thai example (Rooney 1993:54).

--- PAGE: 247 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
234 
 
meanings from active verbs; Danasasmita et al. (1987:136) connect it specifically with hard work and 
fatigue, and I have adopted this interpretation. Other betel descriptions are paralleled in MSd: BM 471-
495 is similar to that documente d by Rosidi (1995:146 -148) in a pantun recorded in modern times , 
particularly the notion of  women rolling quids on their bodies and finishing them on the breasts 
(nganggeuskeun dina pinareup  – cf. BM 47 7) before giving them to a man . The phrase  batri 
no(ng)gong-siloken ‘worked with the back turned towards the sun’  (BM 48 6) has an almost exact 
parallel in the same text. 
 ‘Tiwi areca’ and ‘ivory areca’ are probably different A. catechu cultivars, as they appear by 
those names as plants encountered on Bujangga Manik’s way to heaven . Tiwi is hard to relate to any 
OSd, MSd, Malay, or Javanese terms, though I tentatively suggest that it is from Tamil tīvi (தீவி) 
‘tiger’, used as a metonym for aggression and excitement (cf. tīviram ‘pungency, sharpness’ – for both 
see Winslow 1862:244). Areca seeds vary somewhat; the twelfth-century administrator Fàn Chéngdà (
范成大) describes several popular kinds of betel in Guǎngxī, most of them imported from Hainan Island 
(Fan 2010[1175]:127-128): 
‘Those gathered at the time of Ascendant Spring [Shangchun] are made into “soft areca nuts”. 
Those gathered in summer and fall and dried are made into “rice areca nuts”. The smaller and 
pointy ones are made into “chicken-heart areca nuts”. Oblate ones are made into “big bellies”. 
All of these can give off an [identifiable] odor. Those preserved in a salty solution are made 
into “salty areca nuts”.’A61 
Other betel types appear to be the names of quids , including ‘queen of Pakuan’ and ‘pregnant lizard’ 
(BM 491). Unfortunately the referents of these are unknown. The quids included lime, specifically ‘rock 
lime from Karawang’ and ‘sea snail shell lime from Malayu [southern Sumatra]’ (BM 368-369). In the 
latter case t he shells could have been taken from prehistoric middens in Sumatra and the Malay 
Peninsula; this practice is attested for the nineteenth century (Earl 1863:120). 
Chewing betel causes one’s saliva to turn red when chewed, in any case, and frequent chewing 
leads to blackening of the teeth. It is also carcinogenic and can cause asthma attacks. 
 Resa Flowers 
 Resa flowers (bunga resa) are as yet unidentified, although the item occurs in other OSd texts, 
including Séwaka Darma . The fourteenth -century OJv kakawin Pārthayajña has the word wĕsah, 
interpreted by Zoetmulder as ‘a rush-like plant (Amomum maximum?)’; a variant, wrĕsah, is also given 
in OJED (2247:1). The genus Amomum is in the ginger family (Zingiberaceae) and includes cardamom; 
A. maximum produces large aromatic white flowers, and it certainly grows in Java , so it could be the 
referent of resa. The container (juha) for the flowers is also obscure; N chose ‘vase’, but it is not clear 
what kind of receptacle a juha was.

--- PAGE: 248 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
235 
 
Civet and Oak Gall Powder 
Ma(ñ)jakané is the name of  a product made from oak galls  (i.e. growths created by certain 
species of wasp laying eggs in the leaf buds of oak trees)  imported from Persia or the Mediterranean. 
Noorduyn and Teeuw give this word as majakané, but the name may have included the homorganic 
nasal based on the Portuguese evidence and the modern Malay and Javanese names (both manjakani); 
Rigg (1862:265) gives Majakani, however , defining it as ‘gall nuts, imported from Persia’ and 
providing a spurious Persian etymology. The forms found in Indo -Malaysia likely derive from maja 
(‘bael’, Aegle marmelos, but also used in the names of other plants) or possibly Persian māzū (مﺎزوa 
gall-nut’ (Steingass 1892:1137; cf. Hindi/Urdu mājūphal, Malay akar kani). The gall-nuts in question 
came from Quercus infectoria , the Aleppo oak , native to the eastern Mediterranean (as noted by 
Wilkinson 1932 #22710). Q. infectoria galls are particularly high in tannins – up to 60% of the gall, 
compared to only 17% in English oak (Q. robur) galls – and were in demand for ink production in the 
Middle East (Medlej 2020:30). Gall-nuts were also used in medicines: The powder was combined with 
musk, ambergris, and other ingredients to make a p reparation called sukk, and the fourteenth-century 
Mamluk encyclop aedist al-Nuwayri (2016:223-224) includes this sukk in a recipe for a jam  to 
‘strengthen sexual appetite’ (among other things). 
In Barbosa’s account ma(ñ)jakané appears as magicam or mangicão. He says: 
‘…[western merchants] bring in exchange […] some drugs which we do not have [in Portugal] 
called pucho, cacho and mangicão that they bring from the Levant , and other commodities 
which, by way of Mecca, come to Khambhat and then to Melaka’.A62  
This is thus one of the few Middle Eastern goods in BM. Trade between Southeast Asia and the Middle 
East was old even by the fifteenth century, as evidenced by the use of Byzantine and Sassanian glass in 
the manufacture of the fifth -to-seventh-century ‘Jatim’ beads from East Java, some of Java’s earliest 
known exports (Lankton et al 2008 ; Francis 2002:134 -136). 310 It is perhaps surprising that more  
Persian/Middle Eastern commodities are not mentioned. 
The marketing for Resik V Khasiat Manjakani, a feminine hygiene product currently on sale in 
Indonesia, states that it contains ‘ Ekstrak Manjakani dari Persia ’ and that it can help ‘tighten the 
muscles of the feminine area’, emphasising both the Persian connection and the feminine associations 
of the product.311 Whether there was a connection between ma(ñ)jakané and women’s health at the time 
of BM is difficult to say;  ma(ñ)jakané appears only twice (in BM 384 and 497), in both cases pair ed 
 
310 This glass trade was also happening in the fifteenth century, with Venetian glass being brought to Melaka for 
bead production (Francis 2002:171). 
311 ‘Pembersih kewanitaan dengan Ekstrak Manjakani dari Persia, membantu mengencangkan otot -otot 
kewanitaan, membersihkan dan menghilangkan bau tak sedap.’ See http://www.kino.co.id/brands/personal-
home-care/resik-v-manjakani/. (Accessed 18-10-2018).

--- PAGE: 249 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
236 
 
with dédés, the musk312 from a native civet-cat (Viverricula indica) likely now extinct in Java (cf. Malay 
didis – see ACD 2247). The civet may have been imported,  however, explaining the line in BM 3 91 
(‘perfumes from overseas’); V. indica was spread around the Indian Ocean by humans in late prehistory 
(Boivin et al. 2013:215 ), and civet is known to have been used and traded elsewhere in South and 
Southeast Asia (see e.g. Dallapiccola 2003:12 ). Donkin (1999:2) names several civet species  from 
Africa and Asia which were kept in captivity with the musk extracted while the animals were still alive. 
It may be premature to read a masculine/feminine dualism into the pairing of ma(ñ)jakané and civet, 
although such a dualism would not be unprecedented in initial marriage prestations in island Southeast 
Asia (cf. Onvlee 1949). 
  Ma(ñ)jakané also appears in Séwaka Darma (PNRI, L408), again alongside civet (dédés), 
although in the published text this is not explained (Danasasmita et al. 1987:28). Indeed, the line as 
published reads dedes rase majaka nejasa, splitting the final syllable from the word ma(ñ)jakané, and 
the text is left as -is in the accompanying Indones ian translation . Jasa in modern Sundanese is an 
intensifier – ‘very’ or ‘extremely’, usually in an negative sense (Rigg 1862:169; Coolsma 1913:130 sub 
DJASA) – but here it may simply mean ‘excellent’ ma(ñ)jakané.  Here again Aleppo oak galls appear 
in a list of valued goods , perhaps supporting a  long-fifteenth-century date for Séwaka Darma ’s 
composition. 
 Jaksi and Kamisadi 
 Jaksi is a type of pandan (a plant in the genus Pandanus) whose leaves are used in weaving. In 
modern usage there are two varietals of Pandanus tectorius with the label, jaksi bener (‘true jaksi’) and 
jaksi laut (‘sea jaksi’), both important in the mat- and hat-weaving trades (Hofstede 1925). Jaksi is still 
a preferred pandan for weaving in Priangan because of the smoothness of the leaves (Rahayu, Sunarti, 
and Keim 2008:312). Why this should be given as a gift is not entirely clear, although Rigg (1862:343) 
notes that ‘[pandan leaves], especially those about the flower, being shred fine and mixed with flowers, 
are worn in the hair by young natives when they are busy courting’, which indicates some connection 
in Sunda between pandans and romance.  In BM 385 and 498, jaksi is paired with kamisadi – a rather 
mysterious word. Kamisadi may be a type of pandan, but BM 499 – dikukup ratna ko(m)balah ‘covered 
with jewels and gems’ – may suggest militate against this. It could be a kind of  fine (adi) robe (MSd 
kamis – Danadibrata 2006:313), in which case the word would come  from Arabic qamīṣ (قميصand 
ultimately from proto-Germanic via Latin. This is speculative, however. 
 Benzoin 
N translates kameñan in BM 387 as ‘incense’, but it refers more specifically to benzoin (cf. OJv 
mĕñan [OJED 1136:9]; Mal kemenyan ‘benzoin’ [Wilkinson 1932 #16836]), a resin produced by trees 
 
312 Musk and civet should strictly speaking be differentiated (as in Lambourn 2018:77).

--- PAGE: 250 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
237 
 
in the genus Styrax, particularly the Sumatran species S. benzoin. It is frequently referred to in the 
accounts of the Portuguese conquistadores under the name beijoim, a corruption of the Arabic lubān 
jāwī ‘Sumatran frankincense’ (Donkin 1999:11; cf. Barbosa’s lubamjavy, and see Ibn Ba ṭṭūṭa’s 
comments [Lee 1829:199; Gibb and Beckingham 1994:876]).  The Portuguese do not appear to have 
distinguished between the Sumatra n and mainland Southeast Asian varieties (see e.g. Barbosa 
2000[1516]:350). Benzoin is burned as incense, and in the archipelago it has been associated with magic 
(Endicott 1970:140; Winstedt 1950:25). 
 Sesame and Rosewater 
 In BM 389 and 502 two branches of sesame are said to be sprinkled with rosewater, the formula 
for which, diteñuh ku aér mawar , is encountered in other OSd texts, suggesting that rosewater was a 
valued commodity in late-medieval Sunda. Rosewater (air mawar) is also common in Classical Malay 
literature, and in fact the OSd word, aér mawar, is a transparent borrowing from the Malay, using Malay 
aér ‘water’ in place of Sundanese cai. The second part of the term, mawar, is a corruption of the Arabic 
mā’ ward (ماء ورد‘ ) rosewater’ (Nasrallah 2010:138), the first part of which means ‘water’ (from proto-
Afroasiatic *ma’ ‘water’) and the second part ‘rose’, from Old Persian or Sogdian ward (and ultimately 
perhaps proto-Indo-European *wr̥dʰos, hypothesised source of Latin rosa).313 This is therefore both an 
identifiable Malay and Arabo-Persian loanword. 
Rosewater (agoas rosadas) appears in Barbosa’s list of items traded at Melaka by the Javanese 
and Gujaratis , appearing after opium ( anfião) and before saffron ( açafrão), coral, copper, mercury 
(azoigue)314, cinnabar ( vermelhão), grains or chickpeas ( grãs)315, solias (a type of cloth) , saltpetre 
(salitre), and iron (Barbosa 1516[2000]:363). A similar list appears in Barbosa’s discussion of Siam, 
where it is said that rosewater was brought from Mecca and Aden and sold by weight in tinned copper 
casks.A63 Such lists are common in both Pires’s and Barbosa’s accounts, n ot only describing goods at 
Melaka but also at Khambhat and Jeddah; these lists are often repetitious, with the same commodities 
appearing all the way  around the Ocean’s rim. Sesame (Sesamum indicum) grew locally in Java and 
elsewhere in the archipelago, presumably having been brought from India in prehistory  – indeed, it is 
one of the earliest commodities mentioned in text s from the region, appearing in the fourth -century 
yūpa stones from Kutai in Borneo (Vogel 1918; Wisseman Christie 1995:260). It could easily have been 
imported as well.  Interestingly, t he combination of rosewater and sesame is occasionally found in 
medieval Middle Eastern recipes; the ‘Frankish [or : European] roast’ (الشواء الافرنجي  ) in a recently 
 
313 Hušang A’lam. Gol. Encyclopaedia Iranica. XI/1:46-52. Online version: 
https://iranicaonline.org/articles/gol. (Accessed 23-08-2020). 
314 The mercury trade appears in a number of Portuguese accounts, including Barbosa and Pires, and is 
corroborated by finds of mercury at shipwreck sites in the region. See Miksic (2013:139-140, 315-318). 
315 Hobson-Jobson (Yule and Burnell 2015:247) has an entry on this use of the word grão ‘grain’ for ‘chickpea’. 
Whether it referred to chickpeas in Portuguese at the beginning of the sixteenth century is difficult to be sure, 
but in later uses the meaning is clear, and one of Afonso de Albuquerque’s letters is cited as evidence.

--- PAGE: 251 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
238 
 
translated thirteenth-century Syrian cookbook , in which a lamb is rubbed with salt, sesame oil, and 
rosewater and grilled over coals, is a good example (C. Perry 2017:80-81). 
 Narawastu (and?) Agur-agur 
 Next in the list are narawastu and agur-agur (BM 38 9 and 50 2). Noorduyn translated 
narawastu as ‘spikenard’, a term which in English normally refers to Nardostachys jatamansi, a plant 
from the Himalayas (Donkin 1999:49), but this is a troubling identification. Polo says that ‘spikenard’ 
(espí) was one of the commodities found in Java, but this probably did not refer to N. jatamansi.A64 The 
word does not appear in OJv, but it is found in some Malay texts, including Sulalat al-salāṭīn. In Malay 
narwastu can mean ‘spikenard’ or ‘frankincense’, and it is used in t he Malay Bible to translate the 
‘spikenard’ used to anoint Jesus’s feet, although Wilkinson’s 1932 dictionary gives the species as 
Andropogon nardus and a Malay synonym as serai wangi (#24539). Rigg (1862:295) says narawastu 
is the ‘name of a grass with odoriferous roots […] used as a perfume […] Andropogon Muricatus’. The 
genus Andropogon has been broken up significantly since these two authorities were writing, however, 
and serai wangi (cf. OJv sĕre [OJED 323:1]) is now said to be Cymbopogon nardus, citronella grass. 
Rigg’s ‘Andropogon Muricatus’ is now classified as Chrysopogon zizanioides, or vetiver, and this is 
also the species given on Malay Wikipedia for narwastu. Vetiver grows in Java and elsewhere in South 
and Southeast Asia and it is edible, unlike citronella grass. This would seem to better suit the context. 
This narawastu appears to have been used in or otherwise associated with a kind of seaweed -
derived jelly (agur-agur). The English word ‘agar-agar’, derived from Malay agar-agar and related to 
OSd agur-agur, now refers to a jelly produced from algae of the genus Gracilaria. In Indonesia, 
however, such jell ies appear to have been made from algae in the genus Eucheuma, particularly E. 
muricatum and E. spinosum (Tseng 1944:24). A search on the Malay Concordance Project site suggests 
that agar-agar appears by name in only a few  Malay texts, none of them particularly early .316 It is 
difficult to find information on the substance predating BM and it is popularly claimed (e.g. by the FAO 
[McHugh 1987]) that agar-agar was first produced in Japan in 1658 – three decades after the acquisition 
of MS Jav. b.3. (R) by the Bodleian and almost two centuries after the composition of the text. BM 390 
seems to be the earliest reference to agar-agar by name anywhere. 
 Barus Camphor 
 Camphor is  a white crystalline substance  produced by several tree species , including 
Cinnamomum camphora from China and Northeast Asia and several tall gregarious forest trees in the 
genus Dryobalanops from island Southeast Asia, notably D. aromatica and D. lanceolata (see Donkin 
1999; Hoogervorst 2011:185-188; Ptak 2000). The word ‘camphor’ is one of a handful of Malay ( or 
other MP) words that entered European languages in the Middle Ages; kapur, the Malay word that was 
 
316 The Malay Concordance Project. http://mcp.anu.edu.au/Q/info.html. (Accessed 03-08-2020.)

--- PAGE: 252 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
239 
 
loaned to the west, came from PMP *kapuR ‘lime, calcium carbonate’ (ACD 10045, whence also OJv 
apu ‘lime’, also found in BM). It seems to have been applied to any white powder resembling lime, 
including camphor.317 Camphor appears as kāfūra (كَافُورًا) in the Qur’ān (76:5) and  as kāpūr in the 
mid/late-first-millennium Zoroastrian Greater Bundahišn (Anklesaria 1908:118), as well as in a range 
of other texts in other languages. Southeast Asian Dryobalanops camphor trees were probably first 
described by Táng -era author Duàn Chéngshì ( 段成式, d.863 ) in chapter 18 of his ‘Miscellaneous 
Morsels from Yǒuyáng’ (酉陽雜俎) (Donkin 1999:54).A65 In medieval Arabic texts camphor (كﺎفور )
was said to be 
‘used for heat-related conditions. In summertime, it is used to flavour dishes. It is believed to 
induce euphoria, check tooth decay, and prevent it from spreading. However, over sniffing it 
will cause insomnia, inhibit sexual desires, and whiten the hair. Its cold and dry properties can 
be balanced by mixing it with musk and ambergris’ (Nasrallah 2010:655).318 
Barus on the North Sumatran coast was famous across medieval Afro-Eurasia for its camphor 
(from D. aromatica) – so famous, in fact, that kapur barus ‘Barus camphor’, the form found in BM, 
became a generic word for ‘camphor’ in the archipelago, with the formula replicated in other languages 
(e.g. Polo’s canfara fa᷉surí – Français 1116, f.77ra) (see Drakard 1989 and 1990 for overviews of the 
region’s history). In Arabic Barus was known  as Fanṣūr, first appearing in the c.851 account of 
Sulaymān the Merchant ( al-Sirafi 2017:5, 91; al-Mas‘udi 2007:92), probably from the Malay pancur 
‘to flow’, the name of a place near modern Barus.319 Marco Polo used a variant of this name – which 
was frequently distorted by copyists,  however, as in the Fanfur in the Irish version (formerly 
Derbyshire, Chatsworth House, now University College Cork,  Boole Library, The Book of Lismore , 
f.130r). Al-Nuwayri said that the region’s camphor was ‘the finest of all types’ (2016:209). It is notable 
in this context that kapur Barus is one of the few perfumes to appear in heaven in BM (BM 1693). 
The camphor is said to be in a cupu – a small round lidded box made of metal, wood, or ivory 
(cf. OJv cupu – OJED 339:11). The word comes from Tamil ceppu (வெப்பு – Burrow and Emeneau 
1984 #2772; Winslow 1862:204), and is thus one of several Tamil loans into OSd, perhaps via OJv.  
Barus, known in Tamil as Vārōcu (ொரராசு), appears incidentally to have had strong South Indian 
connections in the Middle Ages, with Tamil inscription s found there, including one dated 1088 
 
317 ‘Camphor’ is often claimed to come from Sanskrit karpūra, but this appears to be a back-formation from the 
Malay-derived Pali name. 
318 Camphor was used for a range of different purposes in the Middle Ages, and in Europe  and the Middle East 
it was a common ingredient in gunpowder – as in the 1411 Vienna Büchsenmeisterbuch (Vienna, ÖNB, Codex 
3069, f.2v). See also Donkin (1999:161). 
319 Edmund Edwards McKinnon has doubted the identification of Pancur with Barus, arguing that it was further 
north, near Aceh. See his lecture: 2013. Ancient Fansur, Aceh’s ‘Atlantis’. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 
Singapore. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-1F1JDyCAks. (Accessed 03-08-2020.) Tomé Pires explicitly 
connects the two, however (Cortesão 1944:161 – Paris MS, f.146r).

--- PAGE: 253 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
240 
 
(Subbarayalu 2012:38-47). A Coptic priest writing c.1200, Abū al-Makārim, says that several Christian 
churches, among them one dedicated to the Virgin Mary, had been built in the area by ‘Nestorians’ (i.e. 
members of the Church of the East, which then included South Indian St Thomas Christians).320 A letter 
from the Cairo Geniza suggests that a Jewish merchant died at Fanṣūr in the thirteenth century as well 
(Donkin 1999:114; Wolters 1970:208n38). Whether Christians still lived in the area in the fifteenth 
century is not known, but sporadic references in  the accounts of  Conti (Bracciolini 2004[1448]:138) 
and Varthema (1535[1510]:f.67v) suggest that there were Christian communities in the archipelago pre-
1511. 
* 
Bujangga Manik rejects Jompong Larang’s gifts, seeing in them a disturbing symbolism: He 
says that the sandalwood raft ( rakit candana) tells him that Jompong is ‘always sick’ ( sakit salama). 
The areca water (cipinang) symbolises her tears (cimata). He does not want to hurt Jompong, telling 
his mother to let her down gently (BM 58 6) – but he does not love her, and  instead professes love for 
the teaching he received  at Damalung. Bujangga Manik thus begins his ascetic practice by rejecting 
Jompong, marriage, and worldly things (paralleled in SA 225-329). 
* 
VI.1.3 Plants En Route to Heaven 
After Bujangga Manik dies, his body and essences fall away and he travels to the afterlife as a 
soul or pure self ( atma). This soul comes upon a n open road in a beautiful settled land similar to the 
one it had just left behind, with buildings at each crossroads and ground swept clean by a broom. Several 
plants are described as growing in this land before the lacuna at the end of f.27; among these are patah 
flowers and two kinds of areca, as well as ha(n)delem (Graptophyllum pictum ) and cultivars of 
Cordyline fruticosa known as hañjuang and handong (BM 1475-1477 – noted also among the heavenly 
plants in Sri Ajnyana [SA 536 -593]). Further botanical items are mentioned by Dorakala, the door 
guardian; these are addressed separately below. 
Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:393) left patah untranslated; conceivably, it refers not to a species 
of plant but to plants arrayed in rows (cf. OJv patah ‘arrangement (in lines)’ [OJED 1317:5]). It is 
otherwise difficult to explain the term . The two types of areca, tiwi and ading, have been discussed 
above. The interesting part of the section describing them is the  apparent simile comparing the areca 
palms to parasi (BM 1470), aka Curculigo latifolia, which can act as an artificial sweetener. Zoetmulder 
 
320 The text survives as one manuscript (dated 1368) divided into two - Paris, BnF, Arabe 307 and Munich, 
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Cod.arab. 2570. The description of Barus’ churches is in the undigitised Paris 
manuscript (f.110v – Evetts 1895:300, ٩٣١ .)The editor of al-Makārim’s text, B. T. A. Evetts (1895), mistakenly 
attributed authorship to Abū Ṣāliḥ al-Armanī, an error repeated in Adolf Heuken’s article on Christianity in 
Indonesia (2008:5). In fact al-Armanī was the owner of the manuscript. See Zanetti (1995).

--- PAGE: 254 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
241 
 
(OJED 1291:3) notes that parasi is listed ‘among the delicacies’ in the late OJv Nawaruci after dodol, 
a sweet made of palm sugar, coconut milk, and rice flour. Rigg notes that if a person drinks water after 
eating parasi ‘it has a pleasant, sweet taste’ (1862:354). The simile in BM may refer to the manner in 
which parasi leaves cluster together. It could also be an error for kumarasi ‘blooming’, as in BM 1474; 
ku- and pu- occasionally seem to be confused in BM (cf. Cikutrapinggan, the Ciéla map’s 
Ciputrapinggan), so this interpretation is speculative. 
Handelem (MSd handeuleum) is Graptophyllum pictum (synonym Justicia picta), a shrub with 
purple flowers native to island Southeast Asia and New Guinea. In New Guinea several parts of the 
plant are eaten as vegetables and it is also used medicinally to treat ulcers (May 1984:63; Nala 2003:33). 
The leaf is the useful part of the plant, still marketed under the Sundanese name handeuleum in modern 
Indonesian jamu (Beers 2001:185). Rigg notes that the plant ‘is often planted over t he after birth’ 
(1862:141), although he does not elaborate. 
 
Figure VI.2. Red handong (Cordyline fruticosa) in the Kuala Lumpur Botanic Garden. Photograph by Varvara Andrianova-
West, November 2018. 
 Hañjuang and handong both refer to types of Cordyline fruticosa (cf. OJv andoṅ [OJED 79:5]; 
Mal lenjuang), a plant likely first cultivated in New Guinea (Kirch 1997:37). C. fruticosa is principally 
decorative and the red variety is frequently grown on the boundaries between paddyfields in Java – a 
practice paralleled in other parts of the Indo-Pacific (Figure VI.2; May 1984:51). In light of its presence 
at the boundary between life and death in BM, it is noteworthy that in modern Java the plant is often 
planted in cemeteries, a role also played by other ornamental plants (e.g. Codiaeum variegatum, ‘garden 
croton’) and found elsewhere in Indonesia and the Pacific (Nombo and Leach 2010:44). 321 C. fruticosa 
 
321 See Codrington’s comments on decorative plants in island Melanesia, particularly crotons (Codiaeum 
variegatum) and ‘dracaenas’ (i.e. C. fruticosa) (1891:304).

--- PAGE: 255 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
242 
 
has also been used medicinally; on the Rai Coast of Papua New Guinea, for instance, the heated sap is 
applied to treat sores (Nombo and Leach 2010:68-69). 
C. fruticosa comes in several varieties. OJED notes the existence of both red and green forms, 
and Wilkinson’s 19 32 dictionary of Malay gives four varietals, ‘red’, ‘green’, ‘white’, and batu 
(‘stone’). This variety is only hinted at in BM; BM 1479, the final line in f.27v immediately before the 
lacuna, has three missing syllables . It  begins ha(n)dong bang deng ha - before being cut off . N 
reconstructed the next word syllable as -ndong, not unreasonably given the panéléng that ends the line 
in the manuscript. I would tentatively reconstruct BM 1479 as handong bang deung handong ijo  (or: 
héjo) ‘red cordyline with green cordyline’, given the parallelism of baṅ ‘red’ and ijo ‘green’ in Javanese 
kidung (OJED 205:14.1). 
* 
VI.1.4 ‘Signs of Heaven’ 
 When Dorakala finally assents to Bujangga Manik’s request to enter heaven (BM 1633-1648), 
he says that the ascetic’s body is more fragrant  than opium, more valuable ( mahabara, from Skt/OJv 
bhāra ‘heavy, weighty’ [OJED 213:6]) than sandalwood ( candana), and sweeter ( amis) than massoy 
bark. These, Dorakala says, are the signs of heaven (éta na ki(ng)kila so(r)ga, BM 1641). These words 
find parallels in Séwaka Darma (see VI.2 above), suggesting that  at least two of the substances in 
question were almost proverbial for their heavenliness in late-medieval Sunda, and all three substances 
are interesting as commodities in the medieval world. 
 Opium 
  Candu ‘opium’ probably comes from Tamil  caṇṭu (ெண ் டு), originally ‘chaff’ or ‘empty 
husk’ and later opium for smoking (Winslow 1862:158). The word could alternatively refer to another 
kind of aromatic preparation (cf. Malayalam cāntu – Burrow and Emeneau 1984 #2448), but ‘opium’ 
appears to be the primary meaning of the term in the archipelago  (OJv, MJv, Malay candu) and 
Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006) treat it as such. 
The opium poppy ( Papaver somniferum) originated in western  mainland Eurasia, and across 
Afro-Eurasia it was used for medical (and recreational) purposes in the Middle Ages. The medieval 
trade in opium on the Indian Ocean is known in large part from the accounts of the Portuguese, in which 
the drug is known as some variation on afião, a loan from Arabic ’afyūn (ٲفيون – from Greek ὄπιον). It 
is likely that opium came to Java from further west, perhaps from Egypt, where poppies were reported 
to grow in profusion and whence it was exported  in huge volumes  (Nasrallah 2010:748). It is this 
Egyptian opium to which Chaucer refers in The Knight ’s Tale  (‘fine Theban opium’ )A66 (Emerson 
1919:105), and the connection is further made explicit by Pires, who also uses the name ‘Theban opium’

--- PAGE: 256 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
243 
 
(opio tebaiqo ) when describing  northern Egypt (Cortesão 1944:9 ; Pires 2018:58). T his is the only 
commodity in BM whose most likely origin is African. 
 Sandalwood 
 At least two kinds of Asian timber are known as ‘sandalwood’, including a red variety that 
comes from an Indian tree known as Pterocarpus santalinus. This was used throughout medieval Afro-
Eurasia as a perfume and food colouring, and in OJv it was known as ‘African sandalwood’ ( candana 
jěṅgi) (Donkin 2003:110) . The unmodified word candana, however, usually referred to white 
sandalwood (Santalum album) – a more valuable product. The name  is from the Sanskrit candana, 
which has the same meaning and same form in OJv and OSd (Malay: cendana), and which probably 
came from a Dravidian source ( Donkin 1999:14; Hoogervorst 2011:33; Burrow and Emeneau 1984 
#2448). 
S. album is a small parasitic tree native to the Indonesian archipelago. Although often claimed 
to be native to India, perhaps due to its cultural importance there (and the fact that the words for it are 
Dravidian), the tree is in fact from the Lesser Sundas, and early European sources do not mention India 
as a source of white sandalwood (although it has been transplanted there more recently, apparently with 
difficulty – Donkin 2003:15 -17). Timorese sandalwood was particularly esteemed, and Antonio 
Pigafetta says, dubiously, that Timor (mentioned in the Deśawarṇana [14.5d]) was the sole producer 
of the product.A67 Pires says: 
‘[t]he Malay merchants say that God made Timor for sandalwood and Banda for mace an d 
[Maluku] for cloves, and that this merchandise is not known anywhere else in the world except 
in these places’ (Cortesão 1944:204).A68 
Barbosa (2000[1516]:391-392) gives a similar description, saying that merchants from across Asia 
visited Timor to acquire the wood. Early fifteenth-century Chinese poems about Timor corroborate this, 
as does Wāng Dàyuān (116, 117), who visited the island (which he knew as 古里地悶 [pinyin: gŭlĭ 
dìmèn]) in the fourteenth century (Ptak 1983). The candana BM’s poet was familiar with was therefore 
probably harvested by non -Hindu-Buddhist people on Timor, where societies were  based around 
weaving and headhunting (see Cunningham 1965; Hägerdal 2012; McWilliam 2007; Schulte Nordholt 
1971). The fifteenth century represented a peak in the construction  of fortified hilltop sites in Timor,  
incidentally, correlated with both competition for the sandalwood trade and El Niño -related drought 
(Lape and Chao 2008). 
 Massoy Bark 
BM 1642 contains one of BM’s more intriguing commodities: kulit masui  ‘massoy bark ’. 
Massoy (Cryptocarya massoy) is a forest tree that grows in western New Guinea, specifically on the

--- PAGE: 257 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
244 
 
Bomberai Peninsula, a piece of land that juts out into the Banda Sea just east of Seram  (see Ellen 
2003:137-38; Rigg 1862:275 ). The northwestern part of the Peninsula is known as Onin, and this 
appears to have been the name by which the region was known in medieval Java; Ellen (2003:164-165) 
says that it is still used in Seram to refer to both Onin/Bomberai specifically and to New Guinea at large. 
Rumphius – one of the most detailed sources for massoy exploitation, albeit considerably later than 
BM’s time – says that massoy did not grow in Onin itself but was instead sourced from further east, and 
that outsiders were not allowed into the woods to gather massoy themselves (see also Marsden 
1831:128-129; de Ricci 1884:14). Rumphius nonetheless conferred upon massoy the Latin name Cortex 
Oninius ‘Onin bark’ (2011:89). The etymology of ‘massoy’ is not known; where it grows it is reportedly 
known as ai kor (Rumphius’ aykora), the first word clearly Austronesian (PAn *kaSiw [ACD 7794], 
cf. Mal, Sd kayu). Roy Ellen (p.c.) speculates that ‘massoy’ may have originated among the languages 
of the Gorong Islands southeast of Seram, as the people of these islands likely brought the bark to Java. 
 BM says that kulit masui is ‘sweet’. The fragrance is often compared to coconut and cinnamon, 
but I smell an additional note akin to ethyl acetate or pear drops. Contact with the skin causes it to feel 
unbearably hot, and Beekman, Rumphius’ translator, notes that the ‘sap will cause itching blisters’ 
(Rumphius 2011:89).322 It nonetheless has a pleasant aroma. The earliest description of massoy  use in 
Java is Miguel Roxa de Brito’s in the 1580s; he says that the Javanese used the powdered bark as both 
perfume and medicine, ‘[grinding] it and rub[bing] their bodies with it, as an ointment, even when in 
good health, and they spend a lot of money on it each year’ (Sollewijn Gelpke 1994:133; Ellen 2003:67-
68). The earliest references to massoy in western Indo-Malaysia are older, though. Massoy is mentioned 
in the late -fourteenth- or early -fifteenth-century Malay Hikayat Raja Pasai  alongside other 
commodities sent to Majapahit from eastern Indonesian vassals: 
‘…and those from the east, coming from Bandan and Siran and Larantoka each with their 
offerings [i.e. as tribute], there’s wax, there’s sandalwood, there’s massoy, there’s cinnamon, 
there’s nutmeg and cloves, lots of them all piled up, and yet more of ambergris and musk’.A69 
A further reference is found in the Deśawarṇana (14.5), where Wwanin – i.e. Onin – appears as one of 
supposed Majapahit ’s dependencies. Onin ’s most important ‘commodity’ was probably enslaved 
people (alongside bird-of-paradise plumes – Ellen 2003:4, 134), but this Wwanin can nonetheless be 
interpreted as an oblique reference to massoy. This trade was probably in the hands of people from in 
and around Gorong and southeastern Seram, who transported the b ark directly to Java (a distance of 
around 2,000 kilometres, taking about two weeks at sea, as noted by Conti and others [Ellen 2003:54; 
Rumphius 2011:90]). The Seram/Gorong people kept the Papuans ignorant of the prices massoy could 
 
322 I experienced this when I accidentally touched a vial of massoy oil to my nostril.

--- PAGE: 258 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
245 
 
reach, trading the bark for trinkets and poor  iron blades (Kamma and Kooijman 1973:1-2; Rumphius 
2011:90). 
 New Guinea was known exclusively through foreigners’ accounts until comparatively recently; 
these references to Onin and massoy are among the earliest mentions of the island or its products. They 
remind us that at least part of New Guinea was integrated into the regional economy in the late Middle 
Ages, part of a hemisphere of cultural and economic interactions stretching as far as Iceland, Zimbabwe, 
and Japan.  Fifteenth-century Chinese ceramics have been found at sites in western New Guinea  
(Swadling 2003:136; see also Wright et al. 2013:29 ), and the growth of the sultanates of Ternate and 
Tidore, a result of the hemispheric clove trade, was felt as far east as Biak before the arrival of 
Europeans (see folklore to this effect in Kamma 1975.A:40 -42; also Knauft 1993:32 -33; O’Connor, 
Spriggs, and Veth 2006:16 for the south coast).  It should not surprise us to read of  Papuan products 
mingling with Egyptian and Chinese ones in medieval Java. 
A reference in Pires’ A Suma Oriental  suggests that New Guinea was known by the name 
‘Papua’ in Melaka at the time (although Swadling [1996:33] suggests this was a name for the Raja  
Ampat Islands specifically).323 Papua seems to have been treated in island Southeast Asian folklore in 
much the same way Southeast Asia was in European and Middle Eastern traditions – as a place of 
monsters. Pires says: 
‘…they say that in the island of Pap ua, which is about eighty leagues [ ≈444 kilometres] from 
Banda, there are men with big ears who cover themselves with them. I never saw anyone who 
saw anyone else who had seen them. This story should be given no more importance than it 
deserves’ (Cortesão 1944:222).A70 
 New Guinea is the second -largest island in the world and its extreme geography – with 
mountains so tall they host glaciers barely 400 kilometres from the equator , and with extraordinary 
precipitation and cloud cover throughout (Marshall and Beehler 2007:3-8; Nightingale 1992:10-11) – 
meant that few inhabitants would have heard of Onin, let alone Java. The area around the Papuan Gulf 
was probably completely isolated  from these developments, and indeed the archaeological evidence 
suggests that the south coast of New Guinea went through a protracted period of economic stagnation  
from the seventh century to the fourteenth represented by the absence of ceramic production (a period 
known to archaeologists as the ‘Papuan hiccup’ – Skelly and David 2017:488).  The medieval world 
was bigger than commonly imagined, however, and it should not surprise us that parts of New Guinea 
were involved in trade with places as distant as Java at this time. 
* 
 
323 The distance recorded by Pires is compatible with either Raja Ampat or New Guinea, and shortly afterwards 
New Guinea came to be known as ‘Papua’ in any case.

--- PAGE: 259 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
246 
 
VI.1.5 After Dorakala’s Assent 
Once Bujangga Manik is in heaven he walks uphill to a bathing place, where he removes sweat 
from his body. After this he is instructed to proceed along a n iron path to another building fitted with 
ivory pillars and silver capitals, where he is supposed to beautify  and perfume himself. The perfumes 
here are encountered elsewhere in the text – sandalwood, Barus camphor, and civet. A vial of sesame 
oil also seems to be present. 324 A leaf-length lacuna follows f.31v and the last line is incomplete; it 
begins with the word pucuk, used elsewhere in BM to mean ‘sprout’ or ‘blade’ but which here may refer 
to ‘puchuk’ (Barbosa’s pucho) aka costus (Saussurea costus), a herb from the Himalayas  common in 
the archipelago at the time (and particularly popular in China – Miksic 2013:100). The lacuna means 
we cannot be sure of this, however. 
When the text resumes Bujangga Manik is being lifted onto a decorated palanquin atop a white 
yak (camara – from Sanskrit [Monier-Williams 1899:388]). Yaks (Bos grunniens) do not tolerate high 
heat or low altitude environments well (Bonnemaire 1984), and there is therefore little question of their 
ever having been shipped to Java ; this may seem to place the identification of the camara in doubt. 
Yaks are mentioned, however, in early South Indian texts (as in the Old Tamil Puṟanāṉūṟu 
[புறநானூறு] – Hart and Heifetz 1999:84), and there are Sanskrit- or Pali-derived words for them in 
the languages of mainland Southeast Asia (e.g. Khmer chaamrǝy ចាមរី), lands similarly inhospitable 
to yaks. 325 The verb tumpak ‘mount, ride’ does not work if the word here is ‘fly -whisk’ (Skt cāmara) 
rather than ‘yak’ (Skt camara). The seat on the yak ’s back is replete with gemstones and pearls (the  
poem’s only reference to the latter – BM 1765), as well as curtains and carved dragons and peacocks. 
It has a lingga (phallus?) made of gold. Everything about it is said to be beautiful and expensive. 
Bujangga Manik’s sacred soul is compared to a sekar pamuja, a flower given as an offering at 
a temple. Seated on his yak he hears music played on metallophones and gongs, and the poem describes 
a lavish landscape of banners and umbrellas. The white silk banners, apparently attached to bungbang 
bamboo poles (species unidentified),  are compared to the  splendid movements of the great egret  
(ku(n)tul, Ardea alba modesta). Lightning, rainbows, and a celestial glow light up the scene as the text 
comes to an abrupt finish. 
 
324 N interpreted this as ‘asana oil’, where asana is a tree, Terminalia tomentosa. A derivation from wangsa 
‘noble’ seems more likely. 
325 Yaks were known in medieval Europe, incidentally, albeit not by name. The thirteenth-century Flemish 
Franciscan William of Rubruck says: ‘[The Tanguts] have very strong oxen, with very hairy tails like horses and 
hairy bellies and backs. They are lower than other oxen but much stronger. They draw the great houses of the 
Mongols, and have slender, long, curved horns, so sharp that it is always necessary to cut off their points. The 
cows will not let themselves be milked unless sung to. They have the nature of bulls; if they see a man dressed 
in red they leap at him to kill him’.A71

--- PAGE: 260 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
247 
 
There are some enigmatic terms here , including uñut (BM 1795), which I prefer to  emend to 
hañut ‘be carried away’ (cf. OJv hañut ‘throw sth. into the river, let it be carried away’ – OJED 589:1). 
N treated it as a noun and left it untranslated. Pajalé (BM 1806) is also difficult to identify and m ight 
not be botanical, especially as it is paired with ratna ‘jewels’. It may be related to Malay/Indonesian 
jali, however – a native Southeast Asian cereal, ‘Job’s tears’ (Coix lachryma-jobi), from PMP *zelay 
(ACD 8724). The seeds of C. lachryma-jobi have been used for ornamentation in the archipelago for at 
least five thousand years (Glover 1971:17, cited in Fox 1977:75) and in New Guinea the seeds are still 
worn as beads (Craig 1988:14; Hoffman 2014:8; May 1984:82). This identification with Job’s tears is 
conjecture, however, and the MSd name for the plant, hanjeli, may militate against it.  There are also 
difficulties with BM 1804 , tapok térong omas ngora , probably intended to describe the lingga omas 
(‘golden lingga/phallus’) in the preceding line. N interpreted it as ‘térong calyxes of light gold’. Térong 
is the word for ‘aubergine’ in some dialects of MSd (Rigg 1862:494) , and it may be relevant that 
Dempwolff (1938) originally reconstructed an MP protoform *teruŋ ‘be cylindrical’ (although this is  
rejected by Blust). Tapok could be MSd tapuk ‘piled in a heap’ , or it may be related to OJv tapuk 
‘emerge’ (OJED 1949:6), but it too is mysterious. 
It is perhaps unsurprising that the items in heaven should be harder to identify than those on 
Earth. Nonetheless, it should be clear that many of these items are the same as earthly ones, and that in 
certain respects heaven as envisioned in medieval Sunda was a grander and more orderly version of the 
mundane world. 
 
VI.2 Metals and Miscellaneous Items 
A number of metal , glass, and paper  items are mentioned  at several points  in BM, chiefly in the 
descriptions of heaven, where some of the paths (lurung) are said to be made of metal. Umbrellas and 
glass items also appear occasionally in the narrative.  One metal object also features among the gifts 
Jompong Larang brings, however – a keris, a kind of ceremonial Javanese knife. 
 Keris 
 The keris (‘kris’) is a long Javanese dagger with a  blade that broadens asymmetrically at the 
hilt, often with a flamberged edge and a short handle. The origins of the keris are murky, but  the 
weapons appear in a number of kakawin and kidungs, as in the thirteenth -century kakawin 
Sumanasāntaka (28.7), where ‘evil people’ ( wwaṅ doṣa) are said to ‘roam about, carrying ropes and 
kris with which to stab’ (amawa tali lawan kris pamraṅ-mraṅña habalaṅan) (Worsley et al. 2013:142-
143). By the fifteenth century the weapons were being worn by Javanese men of all ages, as noted by

--- PAGE: 261 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
248 
 
Mǎ Huān, Tomé Pires, and others, and they were exported as far east as Maluku (Andaya 1993:65). The 
prominence of the keris made it an icon of the region in European accounts. Camões refers to the keris 
(in the plural – os crises) in the Lusíadas (X:44): 
‘[…] The poisoned arrows you’ve made, 
The crises with which I already see you armed — 
Amorous Malays, valiant Javanese, 
You will all make obeisance to the Portuguese.’A72 
Keris today are famous for their curves, but the ones depicted in the Sukuh forge relief have leaf-shaped 
blades (Figure V.3 above), as does the fourteenth-century ‘Knaud Kris’ (Figure VI.3). The keris the BM 
poet was thinking of may thus have had a leaf - or tongue-shaped blade, although that is not certain:  
Some surviving sixteenth-century keris have the classic waves (luk), including one brought to Austria 
at the beginning of the seventeenth century (Vienna, Weltmuseum, inv. no. 91.919ab), as do some so-
called keris Majapahit, at least some of which likely date to the Majapahit period (Frey 1988:8-11). 
 
 
Figure VI.3. The ‘Knaud Kris’, the oldest dated Javanese keris, which bears a (now-faded) date equivalent to 1342. 
Interestingly, a man with a blowgun is depicted on the other side of the blade. Amsterdam, Tropenmuseum, inv. no. TM-
6046-1. 
 Though they were certainly used in combat, medieval keris could be elaborately decorated, and 
they appear to have had ceremonial roles for as long as we have records of them. They are still given in 
payment for fines in Kanékés communities and the phrase keris sapucuk is still used when the weapons 
are given as gifts or in such payments (Hasman and Reiss 2012:104). They often have ritual and magical 
uses in communities both in and outside Java (e.g. Endicott 1970:163). 
 The keris is described as maléla. N translated this as ‘plain steel’, as in many modern Indo -
Malaysian languages it means simply ‘steel’, but the word actually comes from Malyāla, referring to

--- PAGE: 262 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
249 
 
Malayali people and Kerala in South India; the meaning ‘steel’ is derived (OJED 1095:8). South India 
was known across the medieval world, particularly in the Middle East, for its production of high-carbon 
crucible steel (the famed ‘wootz’ , its English name probably derived from a word  for ‘steel’ in a 
Dravidian language – cf. Malayalam ukkụ [ഉക്കു], see Burrow and Emeneau 1984 #661 [Bronson 
1986; Pearson 1795; Srinivasan 1994]). The change from Malyāla to maléla is a product of OJv sandhi, 
so this must be an OJv loanword. That the word originally referred to Indian crucible steels seems likely, 
but whether it still referred to Indian steels specifically in the fifteenth century is debatable. 
 Khorasani Iron 
Purasani is a corruption of Khurāsānī (Classical Malay khersani), which in Arabic and Persian 
is simply an adjective for things from Khorasan, a historical region of eastern Persia and Central Asia; 
al-Nuwayri says, for instance, that a melon varietal was known by the name (al-Nuwayri 2016:187). In 
BM, and more widely in island Southeast Asia, purasani (and others like it) came to refer to a specific 
steel, apparently from Khorasan (as in OJv – OJED 1452:8; Jákl and Hoogervorst 2017:210). It appears 
as kuraysani in the Malay Nītisārasamuccaya, a legal text written in the Sumatran kingdom of 
Dharmasraya; stealing it would result in a fine of five mas (Kozok 2015:70, 77; Mahdi 201 5:210-
211).A73 This can be compared to Chinese 鑌鐵 (pinyin: bīntiě) ‘finely fused iron ’ (Kroll 2017:24), 
which Mills (1970:88) says was ‘fine steel […] brought from Persia’, used in Java for the manufacture 
of keris (Mǎ Huān, 55). It can also be connected to ‘Damascus’ steel, a controversial term for what was 
probably Indian crucible steel  pattern-welded with other metals to forge more attractive and  cold-
resistant blades. The first account suggesting that Indian steels were used in Persian blades dates to 
1679 (Tavernier, cited in Bronson 1986:23), but accounts of  Persian patterned steels are older (Polo 
refers to a metal called ondanique ‘wavy’ from Kerman, for instance – Français 1116, f.15r).  That 
purasani is used in the architecture of heaven suggests that it was valued for its attractiveness as well 
as its strength. 
Interestingly, Nikitin says that in ‘Java’ ‘Khorasani soldiers are paid a salary of one tenka326 a 
day each, both the great and the lesser ’A74 and that people from Khorasan were encouraged to settle 
down and marry local women (Zenkovsky 1974:346). 
 Umbrellas 
Umbrellas have a long history in Southeast Asia, appearing in some of the earliest extant reliefs. 
Although associated with ‘Indianised’ elite culture, the Sundanese word payung ‘umbrella’ is a native 
term (cf. Malay payung, Blust’s PWMP *payuŋ). Some of BM’s umbrellas are made of South Indian 
silk (sutra), and feature golden or ivory  finials. P aper umbrellas are also mentioned: The word for 
 
326 An amount of money, probably from Tatar tamga ‘a tax levied by the Tatars; properly a seal on merchandise’ 
(Michell and Forbes 1914:xlii).

--- PAGE: 263 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
250 
 
‘paper’, ke(r)tas, is from Arabic  qirṭas (قرطاس ,)ultimately from Greek χαρτης ‘sheet of paper’ . The 
word was in use in Malay at this time, as evidenced by the 1492 Chinese -Malay glossary, where the 
equivalent of 紙 ‘paper’ is given as 各路剌答思 (pinyin: gèlùládásī) (Edwards and Blagden 1931:734 
#252). The meaning of qirṭas varied over time; Joumana Medlej (2020:14) notes that it originally 
referred to papyrus and was used as such in the Abbasid period, but in later contexts it meant ‘rag paper’, 
as in the twelfth-century Cairo Geniza texts discussed by Elizabeth Lambourn (2018:85n.o; 95). 
Mirrors 
The ‘gilded Javanese mirrors’ mentioned in BM 1689 as among the beautifying tools in the 
heavenly pavilion may have been similar to surviving East Javanese -era mirrors in modern museum 
collections, although most of these are said to date to before the fifteenth century. Such mirrors typically 
consisted of flat polished copper-alloy discs with convex backs attached to T-shaped handles, some of 
which bore inscriptions in a so -called ‘quadratic’ script  (e.g. Oxford, Ashmolean Museum, in v. no. 
EA1991.71; see also Leiden, UBL, OD -35120; for other ‘quadratic’ inscriptions see Griffiths and 
Lunsingh Scheurleer 2014). Others were decorated with scenes from Hindu mythology, like a hollow-
cast handle in the Museum Nasional depicting Garuḍa (inv. no. 5754 – Fontein 1990:276-277; Figure 
VI.4). 
 
Figure VI.4. A copper-alloy mirror handle depicting Garuḍa paying homage. East Java, date unknown. Leiden, UBL, OD-
3511; Jakarta, Museum Nasional, inv. no. 5754. 
Chinese Manufactured Goods 
China was the source of enormous quantities of manufactured goods in the Middle Age s, 
particularly ceramics, large amounts of which  have been recovered from shipwrecks and other 
archaeological sites in Southeast Asia . BM features remarkably few words for them: We hear about

--- PAGE: 264 ---
Part VI. Things in Bujangga Manik 
251 
 
gilded Chinese boxes (ebun Cina), and the mysterious term juha, a container of some kind in which the 
bunga resa were apparently kept (BM 49 7, 1694), but the specifics of these are not clear.  Thai and 
Vietnamese ceramics – which have also been excavated from sites in West Java (Andaya and Andaya 
2015:105) – are similarly absent. Chinese copper cash (for which see Heng 2009:161 -167) is known 
from many sources to have been used in Java at this time – Mǎ Huān notes that ‘[c]opper coins of […] 
successive [Chinese] dynasties are in current use universally’ (Mills 1970:88) .A75 In BM, though, the 
only ‘currency’ mentioned is cloth ( kaén), which Bujangga Manik uses to pay for his trip to Bali  – a 
reminder, if any were needed, that texts and excavations often tell different stories. 
Glass features several times, particularly Chinese gla ss. Unfortunately the glass industry in 
early-Míng China is poorly known and it is not possible to identify likely centres of production for the 
items mentioned in BM (Miksic 2013:338). Derek Heng’s work on Sino -Malay trade (2009) does not 
even mention trade in Chinese glasswar e. It is possible this ‘Chinese’ glass actually came from 
somewhere else – Cina being used in some Indo-Malaysian languages as a synecdoche for all foreign 
lands (e.g. Sina Jawa ‘China Java’ in Adonara [R. H. Barnes 2004:32]) – but this seems unlikely given 
BM’s other Chinese references. 
*

--- PAGE: 265 ---
Part VII. Epilogue 
252 
 
 
PART VII: 
Epilogue 
‘In the 1690s the Dutch described inscriptions, statues, remnants of a fort, and other buildings 
in the Bogor area of west Java, but there is little to show how people actually lived ’ (Andaya 
and Andaya 2015:105). 
‘It must of course be realized that communications may have been difficult in mountainous West 
Java, and that the princedoms that existed there in various periods were never very powerful. 
In contrast, the central and eastern parts of the island were areas of lowland cultures and proud 
dynasties, where great power, sometimes controlling the entire Archipelago, had its seat… ’ 
(Kunst 1968:1). 
Bujangga Manik is a work of fiction, one in which a n ascetic dies and ascends to heaven, narrating 
negotiations with a supernatural door guardian in the first person. It is not an eyewitness account or an 
autobiography. The assumption in this thesis is that the poem nonetheless presents a realistic view of 
daily life in Java and Sunda in the mid-to-late fifteenth century. The text’s references show remarkable 
correspondences with those found in texts written by foreign observers of the late Middle Age s and 
early sixteenth century – and I would say that it is apparent from the references to all manner of imported 
objects, to merchant ships, and to foreign places as far afield as Delhi and Banda – and all the rest – that 
Sunda should not simply be characterised as a backwater. Late -medieval Sunda had its own literary 
traditions, its own script(s), and links with other peoples and societies across the hemisphere. The Sunda 
kingdom stretched from Banten to the Cipamali, making its money from commerce in black pepper and 
enslaved human beings. It may have had close links with the Maldives. Sundanese elites enjoyed 
rosewater and Barus camphor just as contemporaneous Egyptian elites did ; Sundanese mariners knew 
about and used gunpowder; dyestuffs used to colour cloth in Pakuan were simultaneously being used 
by Italian ‘Renaissance’ artists to make paints. The medieval world was bigger than we tend to think : 
By the fifteenth century, plant and animal products from Indonesia were routinely traded in the markets 
of Africa, Asia, and Europe. People in Java knew of East Africa and India; they had heard of Papua; 
they knew Chinese people and products intimately. Traders from Seram travelled in their own boats to 
Java, where they could have encountered Chinese communities ensconced in every town on the coast, 
Makassarese warriors working as guards on local shipping,  Muslims from Khambhat and Cairo who 
had arrived to buy cubebs or sell oak galls, Latin Christian travellers like Niccolò de’ Conti, and perhaps 
(largely unattested) travellers from the Swahili Coast  – or even a Śaivist ascetic from Sunda . These

--- PAGE: 266 ---
Part VII. Epilogue 
253 
 
connections went back centuries if not millennia. The history of the archipelago should not, to my mind, 
be written as a series of diplomatic missions or as the evolution of Indian-inspired religious and political 
institutions. The region was an integral part of half a world of economic and cultural interconnections. 
Understanding that hemispheric context enhances our understanding of Indonesia and understanding 
Indonesia enormously enhances our understanding of the Middle Ages as a whole. 
Why was Bujangga Manik written? It is certainly more than a guide to the geography of Java, 
but it does seem probable that it had a didactic function . Its structure is seemingly rather ancient, the 
focus on place and place names emerging from an indigenous literary motif adaptable to many different 
kinds of text. Its depiction of ascetic practice and spiritual aspiration is simple but profound, combining 
an attempt to know the world and what it holds with renunciation of it , conveying its messages not 
through explicit preaching but rather through the characters’ deeds and the poet’s selective depiction of 
them. 
As it stands, although it is the second crack at the poem, my translation of Bujangga Manik can 
only be described as tentative and provisional. Many features of the text, and of Old Sundanese literature 
in general, are s till mysterious, including some of the grammatical structures and vocabulary. Other 
questions surround the interpretation. Why, for instance, are animals mentioned so infrequently? Why 
is sweeping the ascetic’s activity par excellence? Were there really jongs forty-six metres long? It is 
hoped that, as research on Old Sundanese – and on the history and archaeology of the Indo-Malaysian 
archipelago as a whole – continues to improve, we will be able to answer questions like these more 
fully than I have been able here. 
*

--- PAGE: 267 ---
Appendix A 
254 
 
Appendix A: Primary Source Citations 
 
Primary sources quoted or cited in the text are presented here in their original languages. The references 
are numbered A1- A75 below and with superscript numerals  – e.g. ‘A52’ – flagging them in the main 
body of the text. I have included below only those languages I can read or have reliable information 
for; as I cannot read Arabic or Persian I have relied on translations for those, but most of the Chinese, 
European, and Indo -Malaysian sources can be found below. Editions and manuscripts are noted in 
brackets after the transcription. I have made unashamed use of digitised manuscripts rather than editions 
wherever possible, particularly with the European sources ; manuscripts are both more fun and more 
real than edited texts (if you ask me) . In those cases the transcriptions/transliterations are my own, as  
are the translations (unless other noted). For the Chinese material I have relied on collaborative digital 
editions (described in the Introduction – section 0.3.2). For Pires’s Suma Oriental I have cited the folio 
numbers from the Paris manuscript (Bibliothèque de l’Assemblée nationale, 1248 (ED 19)) as well as 
the page numbers and transcriptions in Rui Manuel Loureiro’s recent edition of the text ( Pires 2018); 
this is both more accurate and easier to read than the well-known edition by Armando Cortesão (1944). 
For Conti/Bracciolini I have used an early manuscript dated to 1460 – Rome, BAV, Urb.lat.224 – which 
has been digitised; the relevant sections are on ff.46r-46v. For Varthema I am using an edition printed 
in Venice in 1535 (Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, It. sing. 1095). For Odoric I have used a few 
different manuscripts because of the peculiar variability of the text. Other sources are noted in brackets 
below or described in the Introduction. 
* 
A1.  ‘In þat327 Ile growyn alle manꝮ328 of spyces more plentyous þã329 ellys qwere, as gyngure and alle 
othyr spycis. Alle þing is þer in plente but wyn’ (London, BL, Harley MS 3954, f.38v). 
A2. ‘Hee Çumda de jemte cavaleyrosa [e] guerreira no maãr. Dizem que tamtos por tamtos mais que os 
Jaãos sam homẽs de bõos corpos, homẽes baços, robustos’ (Pires 2018:190; Paris MS, f.147v). 
A3. In Bosch’s transliteration (1941:49): 
//Ini sabdakalānda rākryañ juru pangā- 
mbat i kawihāji pañca pasāgi marsā- 
 
327 ⟨þ⟩ = th. ‘That’. 
328 ‘Manner’. 
329 tilde = nasal vowel/consonant (e.g. ⟨gra᷉ t⟩ = grant). N.B.: In some Portuguese texts a tilde seems to signify 
very little, and need not always correspond to a nasal.

--- PAGE: 268 ---
Appendix A 
255 
 
ndeça barpuliḥkan hāji su- 
nda// (Bosch 1941:49.) 
My translation, based on Bosch’s Dutch version: ‘This is the commemoration (containing) the 
order of the Rakryan Juru Pangambat (issued) in 854 [932 CE] decreeing the restoration of 
the king of Sunda.’ 
A4.  ‘L’habito suo al modo del Cairo’ (Varthema 1535[1510]:f.64v). 
A5.  ‘天氣長熱如夏’ (Mǎ Huān, 61).   
A6. ‘… wök sĕṅgah gawaya lulāya śalya cihna / goḍeya plawaga wiḍāla gaṇḍakāḍi.’ (Pigeaud 
1960:I:37). 
A7.  ‘jaka urang tandang bajalan basaja, bawa min[u]m makan lalukan’ (Tanjung Tanah manuscript, 
f.13.1). 
A8.  ‘да poлeсоу оуниx мамoны да ѡбeзьꙗны . да пo дoрoгамъ людeи дeроут. ѝнoуниxъ нoчи 
poдoрoгамъ нe смѣють ѣздити . ѡбeзъꙗнъ дѣлѧ да момонъ дѣлѧ ’ (Trinity Recension [1563], 
f.383r). 
A9.  ‘A cidade homde o rey estaa ho mais tempo do anño h é a gramde cidade de Dayo. Tem a cidade 
as casas d’olla & madeira bem obradas. Dizem que a casa do rey hé de trezemtos e trinta esteos de pão 
da grosura de huũ tonell he d’altura de cimqo braças cada huũ, de fremoso emmadeiramento sobre os 
esteos, e muyto bem obrada casa’ (Pires 2018:191; Paris MS, f.147v). 
A10. ‘架造屋宇，悉用木植，覆以椶櫚皮，籍以木板，障以藤篾’ (Zhào Rŭkuò, 新拖國 1.11.1). 
A11. ‘Isti, de pannis quos emunt, faciunt ad modum cortinarum parietes’ (London, BL, Additional 
MS 19513 – Jordanus 1839:51). 
A12.  ‘dharmâgöṅ riṅ usāna koñjuk asamīpa walahar asamun tikuṅ hawan  
runtuh śīrṇa tikaṅ supit makara tan kahuniṅa lalayanya meh rĕbah  
kadyâṅĕmbih ikaṅ cawintĕn asaput mukha winilĕt i pañjrah iṅ latā  
lwir śokâṅlih atîrikaṅ wiwarapāla maguliṅan akuṇḍah iṅ lĕmah’ (Śiwarātrikalpa 3.1 – Teeuw 
et al. 1969:72). 
A13.  ‘naṅ lor batur ni turunanya śeṣabu lmahnya sāmpun aratā  
jrah nāgapuspa tanĕmanya len taṅ i natar mmasmy asalaga  
heṅ niṅ gupuntĕn ikānaṅ pabhaktan aruhur lmahnya katilar  
alwā natārnya dukutĕn hnūnya suktĕn hibĕk lumulumut’ (Deśawarṇana 37.4). 
A14. ‘國王居之’ (Mǎ Huān, 54).

--- PAGE: 269 ---
Appendix A 
256 
 
A15. ‘…este hé o primcipall pate da Jaõa’ (Pires 2018:206; Paris MS, f.151v). 
A16. ‘Chegados somos [a] Agracii, ho gramde porto de trato, o melhõr de toda a Jaõa, omde os 
guzarates e Calecut, bemgalas, syames, chiis, lequios amtigamemte soyam navegũar’ (Pires 2018:213; 
Paris MS, f.153v). 
A17.  ‘lawase rajĕg wĕsi du- 
 k pinĕrĕp kapĕtĕg de- 
 ne woṅ mĕḍaṅ ki hĕmpu ra- 
 ma karubuh alabuh gĕni ha- 
 rĕbut bumi kacaritane 
 babaṭaṅ mara mari setra 
 hanaṅtaṅ baṅo ~ 
 1363’ 
 ‘A long time Rajegwesi had existed when it was attacked and overwhelmed by people from 
Medang. Ki Mpu Rama was defeated and threw himself into the fire. They were fighting over land. A 
story is told of a corpse going to the cemetery, challenging a stork ~ (1441 CE)’ (reading based in 
part on Nugraha 2012:69; translation adapted from Lydia Kieven’s [Kinney, Kieven, and Klokke 
2003:272]; the last few lines are extremely obscure and other translations are possible). 
A18. ‘Sam ladrões, tem lamcharas, amdam a salteeãr. Sam todos jemtiõs’ (Pires 2018:219; Paris MS, 
f.155r). ‘They are robbers; they have lancharas [a type of ship]; they go plundering; they are all 
heathen’ (Cortesão 1944:202). 
A19. ‘Inter istam Indiam et Majorem, dicunt esse feminarum insulæ solarum, et solorum hominum, ubi 
non possunt diu vivere homines illis mulierum, et ẽ contrario’ (London, BL, Additional MS 19513 – 
Jordanus 1839:57). 
A20. ‘Dizem que defromte de Piramã esta huuã ilha […] ẽ que nam há senom molheres, nam tem 
homees’ (Pires 2018:185-186; Paris MS, f.146r). 
A21. ‘國有三等人:一等回回人，皆是西番各國為商，流落此地，衣食諸事皆清致；一等唐人，
皆是廣東、漳、泉等處人竄居是地’ (Mǎ Huān, 64). 
A22. ‘…makādiniṅ aṅeka nūṣātutur’ (Deśawarṇana 14.2). 
A23. ‘Passado este lugar, da banda da costa pera Malaca, está outro porto de mar del-rei de Sião que se 
chama Queda, em que tambem ha muitos naos e grão trato de mercadorias donde cada ano veem tratar 
outras naos de mouros de todas partes’ (Barbosa 2000[1516]:351-352). 
A24.  ‘… Et veramẽte credo che qui arri- 
uano piu nauili che in terra del mõdo & maxĩe che

--- PAGE: 270 ---
Appendix A 
257 
 
qui vẽgono tutte le sorte de specie & altre mercãntie  
assaissime’ (Varthema, f.65r). 
A25.  ‘malaqua em esta cidade ha todas  
as mercadarias que vem a qua- 
liqut . s . crauos, & benjoym, & le- 
nholoe, & samdalos estoraq᷉ , &  
Ruy barbo, & marfim, &  
pedras preciosas de  
muita valia, & ꝑlas, & al- 
mjzquer, &  
porçolanas Fi- 
nas, & outras muitas mer- 
cadarias todas amor par- 
te vem de fora contra a trr᷉a  
de chins’ (Modena, Biblioteca Estense, C.G.A.2). 
A26. ‘文誕: 渤山高環，溪水若淡，田地瘠。民半食沙糊、椰子。氣候苦熱。俗淫。男女椎髻
，露體，繫靑皮布捎。日間畏熱，不事布種。月夕耕鋤、漁獵、採薪、取水。山無蛇
虎之患，家無盜賊之虞。煮海為鹽，釀椰漿為酒。婦織木綿為業。有酋長。地產肉荳
蔻、黑小廝、荳蔻花、小丁皮。貨用水、綾絲布、花印布、烏瓶、鼓瑟、靑磁器之屬’ 
(Wāng Dàyuān, 88-89). ‘Wéndàn [Banda]. A tall ring of swollen mountains — the creek 
water seems fresh but the fields are barren. The people mostly eat sago and coconut. The 
climate is incessantly hot. Their customs are depraved. Men and women wear their hair in 
topknots and their bodies exposed with [only] natural bark cloth tied around them. During 
the day they fear the heat and don’t do any planting or sowing. On moonlit evenings they 
plough and hoe, go fishing and hunting, collect firewood, and fetch water. There’s no danger 
of snakes and tigers in the mountains and there’s no risk of robbers at home. They boil 
seawater to make salt and brew coconut milk into wine. Women work at weaving cotton. They 
have headmen. The land produces nutmeg, black servants, mace, and ‘clove bark’ [i.e. bark 
of Cinnamomum culitlawan]. [You should] trade goods like drinking water, damask twill 
cloth, floral print cloth, black jars, drums and zithers, and green porcelain.’ 
A27. ‘…é o principal porto onde nacem os diamães, e os daqui são os milhores que ha nas partes da 
India’ (Barbosa 2000[1516]:407).

--- PAGE: 271 ---
Appendix A 
258 
 
A28. ‘Tem esta terra de Piramam muito ouro, lenho aloes de butiqua, camfora de duas maneiras, 
beijoym, seda, cera, mell. Tem mamtimemtos em abastãça pera sua terra. Tem gramde trato com a 
terra de Çumda’ (Pires 2018:184; Paris MS, f.145v). 
A29. ‘便拔此刀刺之，強者為勝’ (Mǎ Huān, 56). 
A30.  ‘(H)as homines inhumanissimi omnium crudelissimiꝙ330 inhabitant, mures, ca- 
nes, gatos, & spurciora quelibet animalia edentes. crudelitate exuperãt  
omnes mortales, hominem occidere pro ludo est, nulliꝙ supplicio datur’ (Conti/Bracciolini – 
Rome, BAV, Urb.lat.224, f.46r). 
A31.  ‘… credo che questi habitãti siano li piu fi- 
deli huomini del mondo’ (Varthema 1535[1510]:71v). 
A32. ‘Dizem que a jemte de Çumda hé mais valente que ha de Jaõa. Estes sam boõs homees e 
verdadeiros’ (Pires 2018:194; Paris MS f.148v). 
A33. ‘… kliṅ aryya siṅhala paṇḍikira drawiḍa campa rěměn kmir…’ (Wurjantoro 2018:288, line 14). 
A34. ‘…ndah tan wiha ṅ hyaṅ Brahmā Wi ṣṇu magawe ta sira manu ṣa; lmah kinĕmpĕlkĕmpĕlnira 
ginawenira manuṣa lituhayu pāripūrṇṇa kadi rūpaniṅ dewatā. Mānūṣā jalu hulih saṅ hyaṅ Brahmāgawe, 
mānūṣā histri hulih saṅ hyaṅ Wiṣṇu gawe, paḍa lituhayu paripūrṇṇa…’ (Tantu Paṅgĕlaran – Pigeaud 
1924:57-58). 
A35. ‘Custuma se em Çumda, quamdo ho rey morre, queymaren se suas molherẽs e fidallguos seus, e 
asy quamdo quallquer dhy pera baixo morre, ẽ sua casa tambem se faz outro tamto. E ysto se querem, 
nom porque pera iso as molheres se jã comvertidas por penas a morerẽ, somemte as que de seu moto 
querem, e as que nam, sam beguynas. Seguem apartada vida e nam casam dellas, outras casam tres [e] 
quoatro vezes, sam estas poucas, estranhas na terra’ (Pires 2018:190; Paris MS, f.147v). 
A36.  ‘…e nã amdam sõos’ (Pires 2018:198; Paris MS, f.149v). 
A37. ‘ambĕk sang paramārthapaṇḍita huwus limpad sakêng śūnyatā / tan sangkêng wiṣaya prayojana 
nira lwir sanggrahêng lokika’ (Arjunawiwāha 1.1). 
A38. ‘Pitutur mahapandita · liñih benang aing ñapu · kumacacang di buruan. · Suka angenéng ayena · 
ñeeng mamaya ning kembang · nu mangka kahudang di angen’ (SA 242-247 – adapted from Noorduyn 
and Teeuw 2006:222). 
A39.  ‘… le roy de ceste isle nous enuoya vne nef moult belle, ayant la  
proe et la pouppe ouuree dor/. et sur la proe estoit vne ba- 
 
330 Here ⟨ꝙ⟩ = que.

--- PAGE: 272 ---
Appendix A 
259 
 
niere blanche et azuree auecques de plumes de paon a  
la poincte. Aulcuns sonnoyent dinstrumens de tabours  
(f.58r) 
Et vindrent auecques ceste nef deux Almadies, qui sont 
leurs barques a pescher. Et celle nef sappelle Prao. Qui est com- 
me vne fuste’  (Beinecke MS 351, ff.57v-58r). 
‘ces nauires (appellees Prao) […] qui sont leurs petites barques’ (f.60v). 
A40. ‘et il estoient bñ en ceste coque ·vijc· autres homes marcheans’ (Odoric – London, BL, Royal 
MS 19 D I, f.139v). 
A41. ‘…una naue ouer çoncho de india…’ (Fra Mauro mappamundi – caption #0019 in Falchetta’s 
numbering). 
A42.  ‘… Naues fabricant quasdam lon- 
ge nostris maiores ad duum milium uegetum, quinis uelis totidemꝙ ma- 
lis’ (Urb.lat.224, f.49v – lines 555-557 in Guéret-Laferté’s edition). 
A43.   ‘ie uoç di qe les sunt dou 
leígne qe ẽ apelle abbee ⁊ de çapin 
elle ont une couerte e sus ceste co- 
uerte i a ben en toutes les plusors l.  
lx. chanbre qe en cascune poet de  
morer un mercaant aaiçemant  
elle unt .i. timon. ⁊ iiij. arbres et  
maíntes foies hi gungent enco- 
re .ii. arbres qe se leuent emetẽt  
toutes les foies quil uuelẽt elle  
sunt clauee en tel maínere. car  
toutes sunt dobles’ (Paris, BnF, Français 1116, f.71va). 
A44. ‘…porq̃ [juncos] sã muitos alterosos’ (Albuquerque 1576:373). 
A45. ‘… l’on me dist lors que c’estoit le nauire le plus riche qu’il estoit possible de voir. Il y auoit 
dedans quelque cinq cents personnes, hommes, femmes & enfans, car les Indiens apportent la plus part 
tout leur mesnage sur la mer auec eux. […] Ce nauire venoit de la Sonde, chargé de toutes sortes 
d’espiceries & autres marchandises de la Chine & de la Sonde: à voir seulement le mast de ce vaisseau, 
ie le jugeois le plus grand que j’eusse jamais veu’ (Pyrard de Laval 1619:270). 
A46. ‘E nestes juncos trazem muito arroz e carnes de vacas e carneiros e porcos e veados chacinados, 
em jarras, e assi muitas galinhas e tambem outros mantimentos. […] Nos quaes juncos trazem suas

--- PAGE: 273 ---
Appendix A 
260 
 
molheres e filhos e fazendas; nom teem outras casas e ali nacem e morrem’ (Barbosa 2000[1516]:362-
363). 
A47. ‘frequentissimus apud hos ludus est galli inuicẽ / pugnantes, hosc diuersi producunt ad pugnam, 
quisꝙ suum supera-/turum asserens, proꝙ alterius uictoria pecuniam etiam adstantes inui-/cem ponunt, 
pro cuius uoto gallus superat, pecuniam tollit.’ (Urb.lat.224, f.46v – lines 294-298 in Guéret-Laferté’s 
edition). 
A48. ‘… kerana pada zaman itu tigabuah negeri yang sama besarnya, pertama -tama Manjapapahit, 
kedua Pasai, ketiga Melaka…’ (كارن فد زمان ايت تيگابواه نگري ي ڠ  سام بسرڽ  فرتام٢  منجا فا /فاهيت كدوا فاسي  كتيگ 
ملاك(  ) Sulalat al-salāṭīn [Sejarah Melayu] – Text from London, BL, Or 14734, f.58v . Error in the 
original). 
A49. ‘…& dos feridos com / erua não escapou nenhum, senão Fernão Gomes de Lemos, que em o / 
ferindo foy lógo queimado com toucinho, que depois de Deus lhe deu a / vida’ (Albuquerque 1576:371). 
A50. ‘… venin… le plus perilleux qui soit’ (Odoric – as in Paris, BnF, Français 2810, f.105r). 
A51.  ‘The people are of goodly stature, and warlike, well prouided of swordes and targets [shields], 
with daggers, all being of their owne worke, and most artificially done, both in tempering their mettall, 
as also in the forme, whereof we bought reasonable store’ (Hakluyt 1589; the so-called ‘Drake pages’ 
were slotted in unnumbered in the original print between p.643-644, and this text is on the twelfth/6v). 
A52. ‘實甲兵器械’ (Fèi Xìn, 26). 
A53.  ‘…et se combatent a eulx de lances et de saiettes sans fer. car ilz sce- 
uent que fer ne les puet greuer. Et pour ce que ces gens ne sont mie bñ armez  
les naurent ilz et tuent souvent’ (Odoric – as in Paris, BnF, Français 2810, f.105v). 
A54. ‘Sam estes homeẽs destas ilhas os mores ladroeẽs que todollos do mumdo, e sam poderosos, e tem 
muitos paraos. N avegam roubamdo de sua terra atee Peguũ e de sua terra atee Maluquo e 
Bamdam, por todalas ilhas, por Jaõa, e no mar trazem molheres. Tem feiras omde despacham 
suas mercadarias que furta m, e vemdem os esp ravõs que tomã’ ( Pires 2018:236; Paris MS , 
f.159v). 
A55. ‘Qui nõ se vsa artegliaria de sorte alcuna ne mãco la sanno fare’ (Varthema 1535[1510]:71r). 
A56. ‘Estes jaos som homens mui engenhosos em oficios mecanicos e grandes artilheiros; fazem 
muitas espingardas e espingardões e assi outros muitos arteficios de fogo’ (Barbosa 2000[1516]:386). 
A57. ‘…[de Abreu] foy o primeiro que feriram com hum pilouro de espingardam que lhe deu pelas 
queixadas & leuoulhe muitos dentes, cõ parte da língoa’ (Albuquerque 1576:378).

--- PAGE: 274 ---
Appendix A 
261 
 
A58.  ‘Et si uoç di tout uoíremãt 
qe nos en aportames de celle seme- 
se a uenese ⁊ le semínames sor la ter- 
re si uoç di quil ní nasquí noiant  
e ce a uint por leu froit’ (Paris, BnF, Français 1116, f.77ra). 
‘And I tell you truly that we brought some of these [brazil] seeds to Venice and sowed them in 
the earth there. Indeed I tell you that nothing ever grew, and that was because of the cold.’ 
A59.  ‘… e· vna singhular virtu a ssaperlo·  
ben· fare· essappi· chella piu· a᷈ te di belle· giovani a  
farlo· che non e· a huomeni ꝓchelle si stãno di continuo· ĩ  
chasa et ferme· ⁊ ãno le mani· piu· dilicate’ (Florence, Laurentian Library, MS Plutei 78.23, 
f.53r – Cennino Cennini, 1437). 
A60. ‘遇賓客往來無茶，止有檳榔待之’ (Mǎ Huān, 63) 
A61. ‘上春取為軟檳榔，夏秋採幹為米檳榔， 小而尖為雞心檳榔。扁者為大腹子。悉能下氣
，鹽漬為鹽檳榔’ (Fan 2010[1175]:250). 
A62. ‘…e levam em retorno […] ũa drogaria que antre nós não ha, a que chamam pucho e outra cacho 
e outra mangicão […] que trazem do levante, e outras mercadorias que, per via de Meca, veem a 
Cambaia e daí a Malaca’ (Barbosa 2000[1516]:360-361). 
A63. ‘…em barris de cobre estanhados, a qual se vende a peso com o barril’ (Barbosa 
2000[1516]:351). 
A64.  Polo’s complete list: 
‘il ont peure e noces moscee ⁊ espí 
e ganlanga e cubebe e garofali ⁊  
de toutes cheres espicerie qe len  
peust trouer au mõde’ (Paris, BnF, Français 1116, f.74vb).  
‘They have pepper and nutmeg and spikenard and galangal and cubeb and cloves and every 
rich spice that one can find in the world.’ 
A65. ‘龍腦香樹，出婆利國 […] 樹高八九丈，大可六七圍，葉圓而背白，無花實。其樹有肥有
瘦，瘦者有婆律膏香，一曰瘦者出龍腦香，肥者出婆律膏也。在木心中，斷其樹劈取
之。膏於樹端流出，斫樹作坎而承之’ (Duàn Chéngshì, Miscellaneous Morsels from 
Youyang, ch.18, digitised here: https://archive.org/details/06047415.cn/page/n142/mode/2up 
[accessed 15-08-2020]).

--- PAGE: 275 ---
Appendix A 
262 
 
‘The dragon’s brain perfume [i.e. camphor] tree comes from Borneo. […] The tree is eight or 
nine zhàng [25-30m] tall and the girth can be six or  seven handspans. The leaves are round 
with white backs. There are no flowers or fruit. There are fat and thin trees; the thin one has 
Barus331 fragrance, [though] some say the thin one has dragon’s brain while the fat one has 
Barus fragrance. [The substance] is inside the wood; cut down the tree and [you can] take it. 
Oil flows out from the tree, and it is carried in clefts hewn from [the wood].’ 
A66.  ‘Ffor he hadde yeue his Gailler drynke so  
Of a clarree, maad of a certeýn Wyn  
With Nercotikes and opýe of Thebes fyn  
That al that nýght, thogh þt men Wolde hým shake  
The Gailler sleep, he mýghte noght awake’ – from the Hengwrt Chaucer (Aberystwyth, 
National Library of Wales, Peniarth MS 392D). The copyist – sometimes identified as Adam 
Pinkhurst (see de Hamel 2018:426-465) – has inserted a note in the margins: ‘Opiũ 
Thebaicum’ ‘Theban opium’. 
A67. ‘En ceste isle [Timor] on trouue le sandal blanc, et non ailleurs’ (New Haven, Yale University 
Library, Beinecke MS 351, f.91r). 
‘Tout le sandal et la cire que marchandent ceulx de Iaua et de Mallaque vient de ce lieu’ (f.91v – wax 
[cire] being another of Timor’s major exports). 
A68. ‘Dizem os mercadores malaios que Deus criou Timor de samdallos e Bamdam de maças e as de 
Maluco de crauo, e que no mumdo nom hé sabido outra parte em que estas mercadarias aja, somemte 
nestas’ (Pires 2018:221; Paris MS, f.155v). 
A69. ‘…dan yang dari timur pun datang dari Bandan dan Siran dan Larantoka masing-masing dengan 
persembahnya, ada lilin ada cendana ada mesui ada kayu manis ada pala dan cengkih, terlalu banyak 
bertimbun, dan lagi beberapa daripada ambar dan kesturi’ (Hikayat Raja Pasai – Jones 1987:71). 
A70. ‘Somemte que na ilha de Papua, que sera oitemta leguoas de Bamdam, dizem que há os omeẽs 
das orelhas gramdẽs, que se cobrem com ellãs. Numca vy que[m] vise outro que as vise. Jaz ysto no 
pouco que hee asy’ (Pires 2018:233; Paris MS, f.159r). 
A71.  ‘… Isti hñt boues 
fortissimos hñtes caudas plenas 
pilis sicut equí & ventres pilo- 
sos & dorsa. Bassiores sunt alíís 
bobȝ in tibíís. sed forciores multũ. 
 
331 婆律 Pólǜ (MC ba-lwit), meaning Barus in Sumatra (Kroll 2017:348). ‘Barus fragrance’ and ‘dragon’s brain’ 
should be the same thing, but Duàn distinguishes them.

--- PAGE: 276 ---
Appendix A 
263 
 
Isti trahunt magnas domos mo- 
alloꝝ. & hñt cornua gracilia lon- 
ga acuosa acutíssíma. ita qđ o- 
ꝑtet semꝑ secare summítates eoꝝ. 
Vacca nõ ꝑmíttít se inũngí n(isi) can- 
tetur ei. Hñt et(iam) naturam buba- 
li quia sí uídent h(omine)m índutum 
rubeis. ínsiliũt ín eum volen- 
tes inťficere’ (William of Rubruck – Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 066A, f.83v).  
A72.  ‘Nem tu menos fugir poderás deste, 
Posto que rica e posto que assentada  
Lá no grémio da Aurora, onde naceste  
Opulenta Malaca nomeada.  
As setas venenosas que fizeste,  
Os crises com que já te vejo armada,  
Malaios namorados, jaus valentes,  
Todos farás ao Luso obedientes’ (Camões 2016[1572]:283). 
A73. ‘Maling (basi) kuraysani lima mas (dandanya)’ (Tanjung Tanah manuscript 19.4-5). 
A74. ‘а xоросанцeмъ да-/ють а лафу потeнкѣ на дн͡ь . ѝ вeли-/комoу ѝ маломoу’ (Troitsk 
Recension, f.381v). 
A75. ‘中國歷代銅錢通行使用’ (Mǎ Huān, 57). 
*

--- PAGE: 277 ---
Appendix B 
264 
 
Appendix B: Place Names and Place Name Elements 
Table B.1. Common elements in place names. 
Morpheme Gloss Notes 
ageng big, large OJv agöṅ ‘big, great, strong’ (OJED 517:9). 
agung 
alas territory, region; forest In OJv this usually means ‘forest’ (OJED 47:4), 
but it appears to have a wider application in OSd. 
añar new, fresh OJv hañar ‘new’ (OJED 588:2). 
añcol promontory, headland As in MSd (Rigg 1862:15 sub Anchol). 
arega mountain peak OJv arga ‘mountain’ (OJED 125:3), probably 
from Skt agra ‘summit, peak, beginning’ (etc.) 
(Monier-Williams 1899:6 sub ágra). 
bala strength, power OJv bala (OJED 194:6), from Skt bala (Monier-
Williams 1899:722). 
barang thing, commodity, goods Probably AN, perhaps  PMP *bara ŋ ‘marker of 
indefiniteness’ (ACD 690). 
barat west Ultimately PAn *SabaRat ‘south wind’ by way of 
PMP *habaRat ‘southwest monsoon’  (Blust 
2013:4). 
batang tree trunk, log; spear; a unit of 
land; corpse 
(Rigg 1862:43 sub Batang) – the word has many 
meanings, many of which can be reconstructed to 
PMP *bataŋ (ACD 6481). 
batu stone PMP *batu ‘stone’, PAn *batux ‘stone’. 
benghar rich, wealthy MSd beunghar (KUBS 61 sub beunghar). 
betung a large type of bamboo 
(Dendrocalamus asper) 
This bamboo is more usually referred to as awi 
bitung in MSd; betung is the Malay/Indonesian 
name (Dransfield and Widjaja 1995:80-83). 
bojong river islet Rigg (1862:60 sub Bojong) ‘ the land contained 
within the sharp turn of a river, or stream of water. 
Land projecting into water, a promontory; also an 
islet in a river.’ 
bukit mountain, hill, peak This word is normally translated as ‘hill’ in Malay 
and Sundanese but in Bujangga Manik it can refer 
to both hills and mountains. It has essentially the 
same meaning as gunung. I have translated it as 
‘peak’. 
caringin fig tree Compare OJv wariṅin ‘fig tre e ( Ficus indica )’ 
(OJED 2208:9). The (w > t ʃ) sound change is 
responsible for the initial ⟨c⟩. 
ci- river Proclitic form of Sd cai ‘water’, ultimately PMP 
*wahiR ‘ibid’ (ACD 5891).  Used in the names of 
rivers but also in the names of settlements. 
cinta thought, care, anxiety From Skt cintā (OJED 328:5). 
dalem inner; palace From PAn and PMP *dalem (ACD 7088).

--- PAGE: 278 ---
Appendix B 
265 
 
darma duty, morality, law, etc. Skt dharma ‘ibid’. 
gajah elephant From Skt gaja ‘ibid’. 
galuh jewel, gem; title for princesses Skt galū ‘a sort of gem’ by way of OJv (Monier -
Williams 1899:351 sub galū; OJED 480:10). In 
Sundanese this is most famous as the name of a 
historical region in eastern Priangan. 
guha cave Skt guha ‘hiding place, cave, cavern’  by way of 
OJv (Monier-Williams 1899:360 sub guha; OJED 
548:16). 
gunung mountain As in MSd, Malay/Indonesian, etc. The ACD does 
not supply a protoform. 
haji king OJv haji ‘king, royalty, prince’ (OJED 572:9). 
hiyang god, ancestor Probably a native MP term. The ACD reconstructs 
it to PWMP *qiaŋ ‘ancestor, deity, divinity’ (ACD 
4518) but WMP is no longer considered a valid 
clade. Its precise ancestry is unclear. Cognates of 
the OSd term can be found in MSd, OJv, 
Malay/Indonesian, Toba Batak, etc. 
hujung tip, endpoint; foot of a 
mountain 
From PMP *quzuŋ ‘mountain peak, cape of land; 
tip of anything’ (ACD 4797), with reflexes in OJv, 
Malay/Indonesian, etc. 
hulu source (of a river); head From PAn *quluh > PMP *qulu. Reflexes in OJv, 
Malay/Indonesian, etc. 
jati teak The same form is found in OJv, Malay/Indonesian, 
etc.; it could  also be connected to Skt jāti ‘rank, 
caste, family, race; character of a species’ (Monier-
Williams 1899:418; OJED 732:3; Rigg 1862:170). 
jaya victory, conquest, triumph Skt jaya ‘conquering, winning’ (Monier -Williams 
1899:412; OJED 735:4). 
kalang arena, circle Rigg (1862:190) defines kalang as ‘field of battle’, 
but ‘circle’ and ‘arena’ are its more usual 
meanings. It also appears to refer to a group of 
people with a specialised  occupation, possibly 
woodworking, in OJv (OJED 772:5). 
kandang pen, cowshed Kandang has this meaning in both OJv and MSd 
(OJED 790:1; Rigg 1862:195). 
kayu wood, timber The same meaning and form in OJv, Mal., MSd – 
all from PAn *kaSiw > *kahiw ‘wood, tree’ (ACD 
7794, 7795). 
kidul south A loan into Sd from OJv (OJED 864:4). 
lemah soil, land In both OJv and MSd with the same form and 
meaning (OJED 1004:9; Rigg 1862:249). 
lingga a liṅga (aniconic 
representation of Śiva) 
From the Skt (Monier-Williams 1899:901). 
luhur high, elevated In both MSd (Rigg 1862:258) and OJv (OJED 
1052:1). 
maja a tree (Aegle marmelos), or the 
fruit of the same 
Well-known as part of the name ‘Majapahit’. 
OJED (1091:8) attributes a Skt origin to the word 
and Rigg (1862:264) suggests it comes from majja

--- PAGE: 279 ---
Appendix B 
266 
 
‘marrow, producing marrow’ (Monier -Williams 
1899:773 sub Majja). The first vowel is sometimes 
nasalised ( manja in some Malay dialects). It is 
probably also found in the word ma(ñ)jakané ‘oak 
gall powder’. 
mandala region, district; disk, 
something round 
A Sanskrit word with many meanings – originally 
maṇḍala ‘disk, territory, province, circumference’ 
etc. (Monier-Williams 1899:775; OJED 1099:12). 
manik jewel, gem; bead Found in many island Southeast Asian languages 
with the same form and meaning (Mal., MSd, OJv, 
etc.), originally from Skt  maṇi ‘jewel, gem’ 
(Monier-Williams 1899:774). The word even 
appears (as маник) in Afanasij Nikitin’s Old East 
Slavic account of India and Southeast Asia (written 
~1472). 
medang a historical region (located S 
of Merapi) 
From OJv mĕḍaṅ, which appears in some early 
inscriptions, including side B line 32 of the 
Añjukladaŋ inscription (Jakarta, Museum 
Nasional, inv. no. D.59; Wurjantoro 2018:225 -
238), where it has the form mḍaŋ. The etymology 
of the name is disputed. 
mulah (probably) beginning, origin, 
root 
Presumably from Skt mūla (Monier-Williams 
1899:826; OJED 1157:6). 
munding buffalo A native Sundanese word for the buffalo or kerbau 
(Rigg 1862:288). 
nusa land, country; island An extensive discussion of this word can be found 
in Part III. It is often translated as ‘island’, and this 
is one meaning that it has in some contexts  (e.g. 
Nusa Barong). In Bujangga Manik, however, and 
probably in early Indo -Malaysian texts more 
broadly, it seems to mean ‘land’, ‘country’, or even 
‘polity’ (cf. nusantara). 
pa-…-an place of… This circumfix is used to make toponyms from 
either nouns or verbs: Pacéléngan (‘place of wild 
pigs’), Pakalongan  (‘place of fruit bats’) , 
Pakañcilan (‘place of chevrotains’),  Panéñjoan 
(‘place for looking out from’), etc. 
pada home, abode, place There are several possible meanings of this word, 
but the most likely origin is Skt pada ‘position, 
rank, station, site, abode, home; heaven ’ (Monier-
Williams 1899:583; OJED 1223:2). 
padang bright, light, clear As in MSd (KUBS 323 sub padang) and OJv 
(paḍaṅ ‘clearness, brightness, light ’ [OJED 
1225:7]). This occurs in the now well -known 
prehistoric site of Gunung Padang in Cianjur. 
pahit bitter From PMP *paqit ‘bitter’, which has reflexes in 
Malay, Jv, Sd, etc. Famously part of the name 
‘Majapahit’. 
paken nail, pin; firmness, stability  In MSd pakeun means ‘ingredient, substance, 
material’ (KUBS 326 sub pakeun). Its use in 
toponyms seem more likely to come from OJv

--- PAGE: 280 ---
Appendix B 
267 
 
pakĕn, which OJED derives from pakö ‘nail, pin; 
(fig.) what gives firmness and stability ’ (1236:15; 
1236:12).  
palah - The derivation is not clear. Possibly from Skt 
phala ‘fruit’ or pāla ‘guard, protector’ (1239:10)? 
panas hot Often found in Cipanas ‘hot water, hot spring’, a 
common place name in West Java. From PMP 
*panas ‘warm, hot’ (ACD 3794). 
pañca five From the Sanskrit. 
payung umbrella A common word in the archipelago’s languages. It 
seems to be native MP but borrowings between the 
region’s languages, particularly from Malay, have 
made reconstruction more complicated (ACD 
11194). 
pura palace From Skt pura ‘fortress, castle, city, town’ (OJED 
1451:2) – incidentally cognate with Greek πόλις. 
rabut sacred OJED (1471:2): ‘ prob.: sacred place, object with 
extraordinary (magic) power ’. Found in the old 
name for Panataran, Rabut Palah. 
rañca marsh, bog Rigg (1862:394): ‘ Rancha, a swamp, any boggy 
land abounding in water ’ (also KUBS 384). 
Related to Mal. rawa ‘swamp’, exhibiting the PMP 
*w > Sd *(n)tʃ sound change. 
ratu king From PMP *datu ‘lineage priest (?)’ (ACD 6857). 
Cognates are common throughout the archipelago. 
sagara ocean, sea From Skt sāgara ‘ibid’ (Monier -Williams 
1899:1198; OJED 1591:2). 
saung shed, hut Rigg (1862:433) ‘Saung, a shed, a small temporary 
building, such as put up in a sawah or garden’. 
séla rock, stone Skt śaila ‘made of stone, stone, rocky’ (Monier -
Williams 1899:1089) by wa y of OJv śela (OJED 
1749:6). 
suka happy, prosperous From Skt sukhá ‘ibid’ (OJED 1837:2; Monier -
Williams 1899:1220). 
taji spur (for cockfighting) Found with this meaning, and as a common 
elements in toponyms, in Malay/Indonesian, OJv, 
MSd, etc. (OJED 1902:2; Rigg 1862:473). 
tajur orchard Rigg (1862:474 sub Tajur) ‘To make a plantation 
of fruit trees’. 
talaga lake, pond, pool OJv talaga ‘ibid’ (OJED 1907:1), from Skt taḍāga 
(variants: taḍāka, taṭāka) ‘tank, pool, pond’. 
tañjung cape (land jutting into the 
sea); a kind of tree (Mimusops 
elengi) 
An extremely common place name in the western 
archipelago. In OJv tañjuṅ means ‘a part. kind of 
tree ( Mimusops elengi ) with small fragrant 
flowers’ (OJED 1945:2). Rigg (1862:483) gives 
both the tree a nd the meaning of ‘cape’ or 
‘headland’, the latter being also found in Malay. 
tegal field, open field OJv tĕgal (OJED 1973:3). 
teluk a bend in a river; a bay or 
bend in the coast 
As in MSd (Rigg 1862:490) and OJv ( tĕluk ‘bay, 
inlet’ [OJED 1983:3]). Similar forms are found in 
other MP languages and the ACD reconstructs a

--- PAGE: 281 ---
Appendix B 
268 
 
‘WMP’ term *teluk ‘curved, as a shoreline’ (ACD 
10473). 
timbang weigh; balance A common form in western Indo -Malaysia. The 
ACD relates it to a PWMP protoform (now 
presumably to be interpreted as a Western 
Indonesian form). 
umbul spring, fountain The ACD reconstructs this to PWMP *umbul 
‘spring, fountain’ (ACD 5795), although as noted 
above WMP is no longer considered a valid clade. 
In OJv umbul means ‘arise’ (OJED 2118:6), 
perhaps from an original meaning of ‘spring’. 
wangi fragrant, fragrance OJv waṅi ‘fragrance’ (OJED 2196:5). Ultimately 
PAn *baŋeSiS > PMP *baŋehih ‘fragrant’ (ACD 
804, 10960). 
 
*

--- PAGE: 282 ---
Appendix B 
269 
 
 
Figure B.1. Mountains in Java as described in Bujangga Manik, as well as some of the more prominent human settlements. Relief map adapted from OpenStreetMap® created by user Goran 
tek-en and provided by the OpenStreetMap Foundation (OSMF). Accessed (12-08-2020) from Wikimedia Commons – ‘Java Relief Map’. 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Java_Relief_Map.svg.

--- PAGE: 283 ---
Appendix B 
270 
 
Table B.2. The names of rivers in Bujangga Manik 
Name in BM Line Modern Name Notes 
Cangku 793 Madiun Preceded by the word bagawan, plausibly 
interpreted as ‘(great) river’ (OJv baṅawan). 
Cibérang 1110 
 
Bedog Noorduyn comments that both the modern name and 
that in BM mean ‘chopping knife’ or ‘cleaver’. 
Cibula(ng?)rang 739 
 
Cigunung? Probably a tributary of the Pemali (BM: Cipamali). 
Cicaréngcang 1378 Calancang? Difficult to identify, but possibly related to the peak 
of Calancang to the south of Tampomas. 
Cicomal 746 Comal Flows into the Java Sea between Pemalang and  
Pekalongan. 
Cigentis 703 Cigentis A river in kab. Karawang. 
Cihadéya 1377 unidentified – 
Cihaliwung 49, 141, 
685, 1355 
Ciliwung The source is said to be on bukit Ageng  (Mount 
Gedé/Pangrango). 
Cihéya 1347 Cihéa Now also the name of a village in kab. Cianjur. 
Cihoé 701 Cihoé A tributary of the Cipamingkis, itself a tributary of 
the Cibeet, in turn a tributary of the Citarum. 
Cijerukmanis 75, 722 Cijeruk BM: ‘Sweet orange river’. 
Cikéñcal 134 unidentified – 
Cikutrapi(ng)gan 1151 Ciputrapinggan The modern name occurs on the Ci éla map, which 
may suggest that the BM name should be emended 
to Putrapinggan. 
Cilamaya 716 Cilamaya Flows into the Java Sea about 80 kilometres east of 
Jakarta. 
Cilengsi 695 Cileungsi A tributary of the Kali Bekasi, which flows to the 
east of Jakarta into the Cikeas and thence into the 
Java Sea. 
Cili(ng)ga 55 Cilingga A stream in kab. Purwakarta. 
Cilohalit 1155 Alit Loh comes from OJv lwah ‘river’ (OJED 1070:10). 
Cilohku 1127 Luk Ulo Central Java. Flows into the Indian Ocean. 
Cilohparaga 1114 Praga/Progo Flows into the Indian Ocean SW of Yogyakarta. 
Ciluwer 136 Ciluwar ‘Muddy river’ (MSd). 
Cimanuk 73, 720 Cimanuk ‘Bird river’. 
Cimari(ñ)jung 1366, 1376 Cimarinjung The source is said to be bukit bulistir ‘bald 
mountain’. 
Cimedang 1150 unidentified A river of the same name lies much further to the 
west than the river in BM. 
Cipakañcilan 243, 421 Cipakancilan Apparently flowed through the ‘length of the royal 
residence as is confirmed by [Danasasmita’s 19 79 
reconstruction’, according to Noorduyn (1982). 
Cipakujati 747 unidentified ‘Teak nail river’. 
Cipamali 81, 735 Pemali/Brebes ‘Taboo river’. The boundary between Sunda and 
Java according to Bujangga Manik . The word

--- PAGE: 284 ---
Appendix B 
271 
 
pamali comes ultimately from PAn *paliSi ‘taboo, 
ritual restriction’ (ACD 3774). 
Cipanas 131 Cipanas ‘Hot water’. A common name for hot springs in West 
Java but also the name of a river. 
Cipaterangan 1139 unidentified – 
Cipunagara 70, 717 Cipunegara On the Ci éla map this is called Cicupunagara, but 
the modern name is closer to that in BM. See 
Noorduyn (1982). 
Cirabutwahangan 829 Pinangan ‘Holy ravine river’. Noorduyn (1982) identified this 
river based on its location according to the narrative. 
Cironabaya 797, 1076 Brantas Noorduyn concludes that this must be the Brantas 
River, formerly an important waterway in East Java. 
Cisanti 1379 Cisanti The name of a lake south of Bandung. 
Cisarayu 1132 Serayu Rises east of Purwokerto and flows south, coming 
out into the Indian Ocean east of Nusa Kambangan. 
Cisaunggalah 1340 unidentified A river in the historical region of Saung Galah, West 
Java. 
Cisinggarung 79, 729 Cisanggarung Near Ciremai in Kuningan, West Java. 
Cisokan 1348, 1402 Cisokan The source is said to be gunung Ratu. 
Cita(n)duyan 1148 Citanduy In BM reference is made to the estuary or harbour on 
the river  (muhara Cita(n)duyan), which in modern 
Indonesian is also named muara Citanduy. 
Citarum 68, 708, 
1284, 1344 
Citarum ‘Indigo river’. An important river in Sundanese 
history. The source is said to be on Mount Sembung, 
probably a peak of Mount Malabar. 
Ciwatukara 1118 Bagawanta / 
Bogowonto 
Noorduyn mentions that a village named Watukara 
can still be found in the area. 
Ciwinten 702 - No modern name, but the river appears on the Ci éla 
map under the name Cimintan. 
Ciwulan 1154, 1164 Cikembulan ‘Moon river’. 
Ciwuluyu 788, 1099 Bengawan Solo Java’s longest river. 
 
* 
Table B.3. The names of mountains in Bujangga Manik. 
Name in BM Type Line Modern 
Name 
Notes 
Ageng bukit 63; 
1354 
Gedé / 
Pangrango 
Source of the Cihaliwung (modern Ciliwung). 
Agung gunung 736 Slamet This is the only ‘great mountain’ in the area  and 
thus the only plausible candidate for the name. 
‘Slamet’ is originally from the Arabic salāmah ( 
سلامة.)

--- PAGE: 285 ---
Appendix B 
272 
 
Añar gunung 1054 part of Kelud Noorduyn (1982) connects this to Pararaton 
(29:34), in which a ‘new mountain’ (gunuṅ añar) 
forms in the year 1298 Śaka (1376 CE), probably 
at Kelud. 
Arum gunung 836 unidentified ‘Sweet/fragrant mountain’. Noorduyn suggests it 
could be an old name for Mount Ringgit, west of 
Panarukan. 
A(n)ten gunung 1212 Anten In Banten province in what was then the west of 
Sunda. 
Bajogé bukit 1386 unidentified Difficult to identify. 
Banasraya bukit 1217 unknown A mountain ~1200 metres tall in Banten 
province, west (as BM says) from Mount Kosala. 
Bongkok bukit 711 Bongkok or 
Bangkok 
A hill under 900 metres in height SW of 
Purwakarta, West Java. 
Brahma gunung 819 Bromo Part of the Tengger massif in East Java, along 
with Semeru (BM: Mahaméru). 
Bulistir bukit 1211 unidentified – 
Burangrang bukit 1207 Burangrang Tanggeran of Saung Agung. A 2000m peak west 
of Tangkuban Parahu in West Java. 
Burung Jawa bukit 1209 unknown The peak on Ujung Kulon, Java’s southwestern 
extremity, known in the text as Hujung Barat  
(with the same meaning as the modern name). 
Caremay, 
Cremay 
bukit 77; 
724; 
1196 
Ciremai / 
Cereme 
West Java’s highest point. 
Caru bukit 697 unidentified – 
Catih bukit 1220 unidentified – 
Cawiri bukit 1260 Bukit Cawiri A beauty spot just on the western side of the 
West/Central Java border. 
Cikuray bukit 1174 Cikuray A peak in West Java, near Galunggung and 
Papandayan. 
Cintamanik gunung 1240 Cintamanik Appears to be in West Java, although context is 
not conclusive in these enumerative sections.  
Probably the hill/settlement of this name NW of 
Bogor. 
Co(n)dong gunung 1159 unidentified – 
Cungcung bukit 712 unidentified – 
Damalung gunung 770 Merbabu The same as Pam(e)rihan, identified in both 
Tantu Pa ṅgělaran (Pigeaud 1924:69, 219) and 
the Ngadoman inscription (dated 1449). Appears 
also in a number of OSd texts, including SA. 
Dihéng gunung 767 Dieng The well-known peak/plateau in Central Java. 
Gajah gunung 696 unidentified – 
Gajah 
Mu(ng)kur 
gunung 810 Penanggungan Pawitra (BM 808) has the same referent. Both 
refer to Mount Penanggungan, whose slopes are 
packed with surviving temples and other 
archaeological sites.

--- PAGE: 286 ---
Appendix B 
273 
 
Galunggung gunung 1169 Galunggung In West Java. Mentioned occasionally in other 
OSd texts (notably the one now named Amanat 
dari Galunggung). 
Guha 
Ba(n)tayan 
gunung 1258 unidentified – 
Gu(n)tur gunung 1387 Guntur Near Garut, West Java. 
H(i)yang gunung 834 Argapura / 
Iyang 
In East Java – see Figure B.1. 
Hijur gunung 1234 unidentified – 
Hulu 
Mu(n)ding 
bukit 1222 unidentified – 
Jreding gunung 1254 unidentified – 
(Ka?)lér gunung 1246 Kaler Probably the mountain of this name in kab. 
Tangerang province, going by the context. 
Ka(m)pud gunung 1056 Kelud A mountain in East Java west of Mount Kawi. 
Karang bukit 1215 Karang A tall mountain in Banten province. 
Karesi bukit 1335 unidentified – 
Karungrungan gunung 772 Ungaran An eroded stratovolcano in Central Java. 
Kawi gunung 1050 Kawi A large mountain near Malang, East Java, with 
well-known ancient sites on its slopes. 
Ké(n)dan gunung 1389 Kendang? Certainly in West Java, 
Kedu gunung 769 Sumbing Central Java. 
Kembang gunung 1228 unidentified A common toponym in West and Central Java; 
context suggests this is in West Java, but it might 
not be. 
Kosala bukit 1219 Kasola Probably the mountain in Banten province. 
Kumbang gunung 1293 Kumbang A mountain just east of the West/Central Java 
border. 
Langlayang bukit 1336 Manglayang A hill near Bandung. 
Lawu gunung 1085; 
1092 
Lawu Candis Sukuh and Ceto are on the mountain ’s 
western flanks. 
Mahaméru gunung 817 Semeru East Java – Java’s highest peak. Equated with the 
sacred Mount Meru, abode of the gods. 
Malabar bukit 1385 Malabar A prominent mountain in West Java. 
Manik gunung 1265 unidentified Reportedly faces Nusakambangan, so not the 
Gunungmanik in West Java. 
Marapi bukit and 
gunung 
775 
(b); 
1102 
(g) 
Merapi The only mountain referred to as both a bukit and 
a gunung. 
Marucung gunung 1205 Maruyung? Mt. Maruyung is a mountain in Central Java, near 
the border with West Java. 
Naragati bukit 1213 unidentified –

--- PAGE: 287 ---
Appendix B 
274 
 
Pala bukit 1338 unidentified – 
Palasari – 1337 Palasari A hill SSW of Tompo Omas. 
Pamrihan bukit 597; 
1191 
Merbabu In BM 1190 it is spelled Pam(e)rehan. Another 
name for Mount Damalung (modern Merbabu). 
Pané(ñ)joan – 1178 Papandayan Another name for Papandayan. 
Papa(n)dayan – 1177 Papandayan The volcano from which Bujangga Manik has his 
vision of the mountains and the world. West 
Java. 
Parasi gunung 1160 unidentified – 
Paté(ng)géng bukit 1342 Patenggang Near Bandung. Associated with the legend of 
Sang Kuriang. 
Patuha bukit 1189; 
1393; 
1403 
Patuha A volcano SW of Bandung. Bujangga Manik dies 
at a hermitage near the mountain. 
Pawitra gunung 809 Penanggungan East Java – aka Gajah Mungkur . The word is 
from Skt pavitra ‘holy’. 
Puñcak – 59 Puncak A mountain pass in West Java. 
Raung gunung 766; 
1023 
Raung Noorduyn thinks the first occurrence is a 
mistake, and that the mountain named ‘Rahung’ 
there is Mount Prahu, Central Java. 
Rajuna gunung 812 Arjuna A volcano in East Java south of Surabaya. 
Rakata gunung 1252-
1253 
Krakatau; 
Rakata 
Appears as pulo Rakata ‘Rakata Island’, further 
elaborated on in BM 1252, where it is called 
gunung di tengah sagara ‘mountain in the middle 
of the ocean’. 
Raksa gunung 1261 Raksa The mountain on Panaitan Island in the Sunda 
Strait. Also named Sri Mahapawitra. 
Ratu gunung 1400 unidentified Said to be the source of the Cisokan, in the 
vicinity of Mount Patuha. 
Sangkuan gunung 1128 Karang 
Bolong? 
By the context Noorduyn tentatively suggests the 
hill on the coast at Karang Bolong, Central Java. 
Se(m)bung gunung 762; 
1283 
nr. Malabar Source of the Citarum, and this presumably one 
of the secondary peaks of Mt. Malabar. 
Se(m)pil bukit 710 unidentified – 
Sri 
Mahapawitra 
gunung 1262 Raksa ‘The great holy’ mountain – modern Raksa, t he 
hill on Panaitan Island in the Sunda Strait. 
Su(n)da gunung 1236 Sunda Part of the Tangkuban Parahu volcano. 
Su(n)dara gunung 768; 
1257 
Sindoro, 
Sundoro, 
Sundara 
A large volcano in Central Java. 
Talaga 
Wurung 
– 661, 
837, 
1024 
Baluran Now a national park in the extreme east of Java.

--- PAGE: 288 ---
Appendix B 
275 
 
Tangkuban 
Parahu 
– 1203 Tangkuban 
Parahu 
A large active volcano north of Bandung.  Well-
known in Sundanese folklore. 
Timbun bukit 706 unidentified Certainly in West Java. 
To(m)po 
Omas 
– 719; 
1201 
Tampomas West Java. It is sometimes claimed that the name 
means ‘without gold’ (tanpa omas), but the OSd 
name is actually ‘gold basket’. 
Wangi gunung 1204 Wangi West Java. Tangkuban Parahu is said to be the 
‘pillar’ of Mount Wangi, so presumably also the 
name of a community (?). 
Watangan gunung 1030 Watangan East Java – on the Indian Ocean coast opposite 
Nusa Barong. 
Wayang gunung 1380 Wayang Part of the Wayang -Windu complex in West 
Java. 
Welahulu – 782 Muria? Probably the same mountain as the Wlahulu in 
Tantu Pa ṅgělaran (Pigeaud 1924:69, 124, 126, 
214). Possibly Mount Muria on the north coast of 
Central Java. 
Wilis gunung 1082 Wilis A large volcano in East Java. 
 
*

--- PAGE: 289 ---
Appendix C 
276 
 
Appendix C: Plant and Animal Species and Products 
Table C.1. Plant and animal species and products in Bujangga Manik. 
Name Lines Species & Notes 
aér mawar 389, 502 Rosewater (distilled from the petals of Rosa spp.), imported from the 
Middle East in tinned -copper containers. In BM, sprinkled on sesame 
branches. 
agur-agur 390, 503 Jelly (‘agar-agar’) made from seaweed in the genus Eucheuma, probably 
E. spinosum or E. muricatum. Not the same as Gracilaria agar-agar. 
awi gombong 105, 907 Gigantochloa pseudoarundinacea , a bamboo with thick straight green 
culms often featuring cream and yellow stripes . Used for the boom of a 
sailing vessel. 
awi ñowana 106, 904 The precise referent here is unclear; ñowana is presumed to be related to 
OJv/Skt yowana ‘young’. A bamboo, used for one or other of the spars of 
a sailing vessel. 
benter 640 A fish – Barbodes binotatus, the common barb. Reportedly taboo to eat 
while pregnant. 
buah rembey 398, 507, 
559 
‘Mixed fruits’ – presumably a fruit selection. Locally available fruits in 
West Java would include salak (Salacca zalacca), after which a mountain 
is named, and rambutan ( Nephelium lappaceum ), and of course many 
others. 
bunga resa 384, 497, 
1694 
An unidentified species of flower. Very tentatively the flower of an 
Amomum species. 
bungbang 1793 An unidentified species of bamboo (cf. OJv buṅbaṅ - OJED 274:2; MJv 
wungwang ‘a bamboo pipe open at both ends’ – Robson and Wibisono 
2002 #29778). 
calingcing 213 Averrhoa bilimbi, a small tree producing edible fruits . Probably refers to 
a pattern rather than a dye. 
camara putih 1760, 1761 A white yak (Bos grunniens). 
candu 1640 Probably opium, derived from the opium poppy ( Papaver somniferum), 
perhaps imported from Egypt. Alternatively: a fragrant unguent of 
another kind. 
cangkudu 162, 282 Morinda citrifolia – produces a red/purple/brown dye. Used as a verb – 
ñangkuduan ‘dye with cangkudu’.  
dédés 385, 498, 
1695 
Civet – a musk-like perfume taken from several mammal species while 
still alive, including Viverricula indica , a local civet cat. To be 
distinguished from musk (kasturi). 
eñjuk 867 A fibrous horse hair -like product of the kawung palm (Arenga pinnata), 
used in thatch. 
gading 103, 1668, 
1690, 1695, 
1759, 1797 
Ivory, presumably local elephant ivory but could have been imported as 
well. Used for a range of different purposes in BM. 
handelem 1478 Graptophyllum pictum. An ornamental plant with medicinal uses. 
handong / 
hañjuang 
1477, 1479 Cordyline fruticosa. Another ornamental plant with medicinal uses. 
haur kuning 905 Lit. ‘yellow bamboo’. There are several yellow bamboo species, but the 
most likely is the common Bambusa vulgaris , often used in a nautical 
context (Dransfield and Widjaja 1995:74-75). Used to roll up the sails.

--- PAGE: 290 ---
Appendix C 
277 
 
haur séyah 907 Lit. ‘rustling bamboo’ – species unidentified. 
hoé muka 108, 912 The species here is unidentified. Rigg calls it ‘very brittle and worthless’ 
(1862:149 sub Hoih). 
hoé omas 109, 914 Lit. ‘golden rattan’. Rigg (1862:149) says that hoé omas  is ‘a small 
variety, of no particular use’. The species is unidentified. 
hoé walatung 110, 255, 
657, 913 
Calamus caesius , aka sega or taman rattan, a multi -stemmed small -
diameter cane commonly used for ‘cores, ropes, splits and washed sticks 
which are then used as webbings, weavings, binds, basketry, or furniture 
components’ (Mohmod 19 92:239; see Mohd., Dransfield, and 
Manokaran 1992). ‘The common rattan of commerce,’ as Jonathan Rigg 
put it (1862:149 sub Hoih). Bujangga Manik’s whip is walatung rattan, 
and it is one of the rattans used in the rigging of the parahus. 
jaksi 386, 387, 
499 
A variety of pandan (Pandanus tectorius). Its use in BM is unclear. 
jantung 638 Banana flowers (Musa spp.) – also means ‘(human) heart’. It is taboo to 
eat them. 
jati 898 Teak – Tectona grandis. Used in the construction of the ships’ hulls. 
jerinang 113, 152, 
911 
‘Dragon’s blood’ – the red resin from a number of different rattan species, 
most in the genus Daemonorops. It is used in BM as an active verb form 
ngaj(e)rinang ‘painting with dragon’s blood’, probably as a simile , 
describing parts of buildings and ships. 
kacambang 192, 355 Ardisia tenuifolia, whose berries, according to Rigg (1862:183), produce 
a black dye. 
kameñan 387 Benzoin – an incense made from the resin of Styrax benzoin, a Sumatran 
tree. 
kamuning 107, 908 Murraya paniculata, a tree often used in the archipelago for its strong and 
attractive yellow timber. Used in BM in the ships’ rudders. 
kantéh pamulu 163, 283 Cotton wool – Gossypium arboreum. 
kapur Barus 496, 521, 
1693 
Camphor f rom the timber of Dryobalanops aromatica . E xported from 
Barus in North Sumatra. 
kasturi 495 Musk – to be distinguished from ‘civet’ ( dédés). Used to flavour a betel 
quid. Probably imported from Inner Asia. 
kawung cawéné 906 ‘Sugar palm saplings’, where kawung = Arenga pinnata, an important tree 
with lots of uses (sugar, thatch, timber, etc.). 
kayu laka 111, 909 (In this case) Myristica iners, a tall forest tree native to Java with reddish 
wood, here used for the main mast of a ship . Kayu laka can also refer to 
‘the lower stems and roots of a large liana’, Dalbergia parviflora, but that 
is almost certainly not the meaning here (Donkin 1999:12; Heng 2001). 
kulit masui 1642 Bark of the massoy tree (Cryptocarya massoy) from western New Guinea. 
Used as a perfume. 
kupa 208 A plant with edible fruits – Syzygium polycephala. 
laka 190, 353 In these lines p robably lac – a red insect dye ( Kerria lacca). But this is 
also the name of the root of a liana and of a tall forest tree (see kayu laka). 
lenga 388, 501, 
1692 
Sesame (Sesamum indicum) – in one case as sesame oil (probably) and in 
the others as branches of sesame sprinkled with rosewater. 
leteng 366, 367, 
368 
Calcium oxide derived from both limestone (BM ) and shells (BM ), used 
as a component in betel quids.  Brought to Pakuan from Karawang (W. 
Java) and southern Sumatra. 
lungsir 189, 352, 
1794, 1797 
Probably a kind of silk  cloth (made from the cocoons of the silk moth, 
Bombyx mori).

--- PAGE: 291 ---
Appendix C 
278 
 
mañjakané 385, 498 Tannin-rich powder made from oak apple galls, specifically those of the 
Aleppo oak (Quercus infectoria). Used medicinally. 
narawastu 390, 503 Probably Chrysopogon zizanioides  or vetiver, a kind of fragrant grass, 
perhaps used to flavour a jelly (agur-agur). 
nipah 935 Nypa fruticans, a sugar-producing palm, particularly common along the 
shore and in mangrove swamps. The roofing mats on the second parahu 
are made of nipah sprouts (pucuk nipah).  
pinang 198, 199, 
370, 371, 
372, 493, 
494, 1472, 
1473, 1474, 
1475 
Areca catechu, the areca palm that supplies the ‘nuts’ (actually seeds) 
used in betel quids, alongside sereh (betel vine leaves). Comes in 
several varieties. 
sepang 164 Brazilwood (Caesalpinia sappan), aka ‘sappanwood’. Used as a 
dyestuff. It can produce a range of hues, but red is the most common. 
sereh 197, 360 Piper betle – the betel vine, the leaves of which are used to make betel 
quids with pieces of areca seed (pinang). 
sutra 254, 1792, 
1799 
Silk or silk thread, found in BM as a material in scarves (sampay) and 
umbrellas (payung). Comes in both Chinese (Cina) and South Indian 
(Keling) varieties. 
tales 615 Taro (Colocasia esculenta), the corm of which was a staple food across 
the region. The word goes back to PMP *tales. 
tuak 632 Palm wine – made from any number of palm syrups (including those of 
coconut, kawung, and nipah), usually tapped from the tree and left to 
ferment overnight to produce a mildly alcoholic beverage. 
 
*

--- PAGE: 292 ---
Bibliography 
279 
 
Bibliography 
Acri, Andrea. 2011. Dharmma Pātañjala. A Saiva scripture from ancient Java . Groningen: Egbert 
Forsten. 
Acri, Andrea and Arlo Griffiths. 2014. The romanisation of Indic script used in ancient Indonesia. 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 170(2/3):365-378. 
Adelaar, K. Alexander. 1997. An exploration of directional systems in west Indonesia and Madagascar. 
In Gunter Senft (ed). Referring to space. Studies in Austronesian and Papuan languages . Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
Adelaar, K. Alexander.  2005. Malayo-Sumbawan. Oceanic linguistics. 44(2):357–388. 
Adelaar, K. Alexander. 2019. Dual *kita in the history of East Barito languages. Oceanic linguistics. 
University of Hawai'i Press. 58(2):414–425. 
Adelaar, K. A. and N. P. Himmelmann. (eds). 2005. The Austronesian languages of South East Asia 
and Madagascar. London: Routledge. 
Adelaar, K. A. and  Andrew Pawley. 2009. Austronesian historical linguistics and culture history: a 
festschrift for Bob Blust. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics. 
Adeney-Risakotta, Farsijana R. 2005. Politics, ritual and identity in Indonesia. A Moluccan history of 
religion and social conflict. Unpublished Ph.D dissertation. Radboud University. 
Alam, Muzaffar and Sanjay Subrahmanyam. 2007. Indo-Persian travels in the age of discoveries . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Albuquerque, Afonso Brás de. 1576. Commentarios do grande Afonso Dalboquerque . Volume III . 
Lisbon: Ioão de Barreira. 
Ali, D aud. 2014 . The idea of the medieval in the writing of South Asian history . Social history . 
39(3):382-407. 
Allsen, Thomas. 2019. The steppe and the sea. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Andaya, Barbara Watson. 2004. History, headhunting and gender in Monsoon Asia. Comparative and 
longitudinal views. South east Asia research. 12(1):13-52. 
Andaya, Barbara Watson, and Leonard Y. Andaya. 2015. A history of early modern Southeast Asia, 
1400-1830. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Andaya, Leonard Y. 1993. World of Maluku. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.

--- PAGE: 293 ---
Bibliography 
280 
 
Andaya, Leonard Y. 2001. The search for the ‘origins’ of Melayu. Journal of Southeast Asian studies. 
32(3):315-330. 
Anderson, Edmund A. 1998. The use of speech levels in Sundanese. Pacific linguistics. A90:1-45. 
Andrade, Tonio. 2016. The gunpowder age. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Anklesaria, Tahmuras Dinshaji. 1908. The Bûndahishn. Bombay: British India Press, Byculla. 
Arps, Bernard. 2016. Tall tree, nest of the wind. The Javanese shadow -play Dewa Ruci performed by 
Ki Anom Soeroto. A study in performance philology. Singapore: NUS Press. 
Atja and Danasasmita, Saleh. 1981 a. Amanat dari Galunggung . Bandung: Proyek Pengembangan 
Permuseuman Jawa Barat. 
Atja and Danasasmita, Saleh . 1981b. Carita Parahiyangan . Bandung: Proyek Pengembangan 
Permuseuman Jawa Barat. 
Atja and Danasasmita, Saleh . 1981c.  Sanghyang siksakanda ng karesian. Bandung: Proyek 
Pengembangan Permuseuman Jawa Barat. 
Bade, David. 2013. Of palm wine, women and war. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. 
Baer, A. S. 2016. The importance of tools in Orang Asli prehistory. In Kirk Endicott (ed). Malaysia’s 
original people. Singapore: NUS Press. 
Barbosa, Duarte. 2000 [1516]. O livro de Duarte Barbosa. Edição crítica e anotada. V olume II. 
Prefácio, texto crítico e apêndice. Maria Augusta da Veiga e Sousa (ed). Lisbon: Ministério da Ciência 
e da Technologia. Insituto de Investigação Científica Tropical. 
Barendregt, Bart. 2002. The sound of longing for home. Redefining a sense of community through 
Minang popular music. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 158(3):411-450. 
Barnes, R. H. 1974. Kédang. A study of the collective thought of an eastern Indonesian people. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Barnes, R. H. 2001. Alliance and warfare in an eastern Indonesian principality. Kédang in the last half 
of the nineteenth century. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 157(2):271-311. 
Barnes, R. H . 2004. Community diversity and unity in Witihama, Adonara. In Nils O. Bubandt and 
Andrea K. Molnar (eds). Menghadapi konflik. Indonesia timur diantara decentralisasi dan kerusuhan. 
Jurnal antropologi Indonesia. Special issue. 28(74):31-44. 
Barnes, Ruth. 2010. Early Indonesian textiles. Scientific dating in a wider context. In Ruth Barnes and 
Mary Hunt Kahlenberg (eds). Five centuries of Indonesian textiles. Munich: Delmonico Books.

--- PAGE: 294 ---
Bibliography 
281 
 
Barnes, Ruth and Mary Hunt Kahlenberg (eds). 2010. Five centuries of Indonesian textiles . Munich: 
Delmonico Books. 
Bausani, A. 1962. Nota sulla struttura della ‘hikayat’ classica malese. Annali dell instituto universitario 
orientale de Napoli. 12: 153-192. 
Baxter, William H., and Laurent Sagart. 2014. Old Chinese. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Beckwith, Martha Warren. 1951. The Kumulipo. A Hawaiian creation chant . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Beckwith, Martha Warren. 1970 [1940]. Hawaiian mythology. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Beers, Susan-Jane. 2001. Jamu. The ancient Indonesian art of herbal healing. Tokyo: Tuttle. 
Behrend, Tim. 1987. The Serat Jatiswara. Structure and change in a Javanese poem. Unpublished PhD 
thesis. Australian National University. 
Behrend, Tim. 1996. Textual gateways. The Javanese manuscript tradition. In Ann Kumar and John H. 
McGlynn (eds). Illuminations. The writing traditions of Indonesia. 161-200. 
Bellwood, Peter. 1997. Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago. Canberra: ANU Press. 
Bellwood, Peter. 2013. First migrants. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Bembo, Pietro. 2007 [1548]. History of Venice. Volume I. Books I-IV. Robert W. Ulery (ed and trans). 
The I Tatti renaissance library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Bemmelen, R. W. van. 1934. Geologische kaart van Java. 1:100,000. Blad 36. Bandung: Toelichting. 
Dienst van den Mijnbouw in Nederlandsch-Indië. 
Bemmelen, R. W. van. 1949. The geology of Indonesia . Volume 1. The Hague: Government Printing 
Office. 
Beran, Harry. 1988. Betel-chewing equipment of east New Guinea. Aylesbury: Shire Ethnography.  
Berg, C. C. 1927. Kidung Sunda. Inleiding, tekst, vertaling en aanteekeningen. Bijdragen tot de taal-, 
land- en volkenkunde. 83:1-161. 
Besom, Thomas. 2009. Of summits and sacrifice . An ethnohistoric study of Inka religious practices . 
Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Bisschop, Peter. 2004. Early Śaivism and the Skandapurāṇa. PhD thesis. Rijksuniversiteit Groningen. 
Bloch, Maurice. 2005. Essays on cultural transmission. Oxford: Berg. 
Blurton, T. Richard. 1992. Hindu art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

--- PAGE: 295 ---
Bibliography 
282 
 
Blust, Robert. 2002. The history of faunal terms in Austronesian languages. Oceanic linguistics. 
41(1):89-139. 
Blust, Robert. 2010. The Greater North Borneo hypothesis. Oceanic linguistics. 49(1):44–118. 
Blust, Robert. 2013. The Austronesian languages. Canberra: ANU Press. 
Blust, Robert and Stephen Trussel. 2016. Austronesian comparative dictionary . Online edition: 
https://www.trussel2.com/acd. 
Boivin, N. et al . 2013. East Africa and Madagascar in the Indian Ocean world. Journal of world 
prehistory. 26(3):213-281. 
Bonnemaire, J. 1984. Yak . In Ian L. Mason (ed). Evolution of Domesticated Animals . London: 
Longman. 39–45. 
Bosch, F. D. K. 1941. Een Maleische inscriptie in het Buitenzorgsche. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en 
volkenkunde. 110(1):49-53. 
Bougas, Wayne A. 2007. Gold looted and excavated from late (1330AD-1600AD) pre-Islamic Makasar 
graves. Archipel. 111-166. 
Boutet, Dominique, Thierry Delcourt, and Danièle James-Raoul. 2009. Marco Polo. Le devisement du 
monde. Tome IV et dernier. Geneva: Droz. 
Bracciolini, Poggio. 2004 [1448]. De l’Inde. Les voyages en Asie de Niccolò de’ Conti. Michèle Guéret-
Laferté (ed and trans). Turnhout: Brepols. 
Braginsky, V. I. 1993. The system of Malay literature. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
Braginsky, V. I. 1998. Two Eastern Christian sources on medieval Nusantara. Bijdragen tot de taal-, 
land- en volkenkunde. 154(3):367-396. 
Brandes, J. L. A. 1896. Pararaton (Ken Arok) of het boek der koningen van Tumapel en van Majapahit. 
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Bronson, Bennet. 1986. The making and selling of wootz. A crucible steel of India. Archaeo-materials. 
1(1):13-51. 
Brook, Timothy. 2013. Mr Selden’s map of China. London: Profile Books. 
Brown, C. C. 1952. Sejarah Melayu or ‘Malay Annals’. A translation of R affles MS 18 with 
commentary. Singapore: Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
Brown, Michelle P. 1993. A guide to Western historical scripts from antiquity to 1600 . London: The 
British Library.

--- PAGE: 296 ---
Bibliography 
283 
 
Burrow, T. and M. B. Emeneau. 1984. A Dravidian etymological dictionary. Second edition. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
Caldwell, Ian. 1988. South Sulawesi AD 1300 -1600. Ten Bugis texts.  Unpublished Ph.D thesis. 
Canberra: Australian National University. 
Camões, Luís de. 2016 [1572]. Os lusíadas. Lisbon: Guerra e Paz Editores. 
Casparis, J. G. de. 1975. Indonesian palaeography. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Casparis, J. G. de. 1978. Indonesian chronology. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Casparis, J. G. de. 1997. Hindu revival in fifteenth-century Java. In Dick van der Meij (ed). India and 
beyond: aspects of literature, meaning, ritual, and thought. London: Kegan Paul International. 50-54. 
Cennini, Cennino d’Andrea. 1960 [c.1400]. The craftsman’s handbook . Daniel V. Thompson, Jr. 
(trans). New York: Dover. 
Chalkokondyles, Laonikos. 2014 [ ~1465]. The histories. Anthony Kaldellis (trans). Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Chambert-Loir, Henri. 2017a. One more version of the Sejarah Melayu. Archipel. 94:211–221. 
Chambert-Loir, Henri . 2017b. The history of a history. Variant versions of the Sulalat al -
Salatin. Indonesia. 104:121–77. 
Charney, Michael. 1996. Review of World of Maluku. Journal of world history. 7(1):145-149. 
Chen, Chi-lu. 1968. Material culture of the Formosan aborigines. Taipei: The Taiwan Museum. 
Clifford, H. C. and F. A. Swettenham. 1894. A dictionary of the Malay language. Taiping: Government 
Printing Office. 
Clunas, Craig, Jessica Harrison-Hall, and Luk Yu-Ping (eds). 2016. Ming China. Courts and contacts 
1400-1450. London: The British Museum. [Research Publication 205]. 
Coblin, W. South. 2000. A diachronic study of Míng Guānhuá phonology. Monumenta Serica. 48:267-
335. 
Coblin, W. South. 2007. A handbook of ’Phags-pa Chinese. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Codrington, R. H. 1891. The Melanesians. Studies in their anthropology and folklore . Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
Cœdès, George. 1948. Les états hindouisés d'Indochine et d'Indonésie. Paris: Boccard.

--- PAGE: 297 ---
Bibliography 
284 
 
Cooley, Frank L. 1962. Ambonese adat. A general description . New Haven, CT: Yale University, 
Southeast Asian Studies. 
Coolsma, Sierk. 1904. Soendaneesche spraakkunst. Leiden: A. W. Sijthoff. 
Coolsma, Sierk. 1913. Hollandsch-Soendaneesch woordenboek. Leiden: A. W. Sijthoff. 
Cooper, Helen and Sally Mapstone (eds). 1997. The long fifteenth century. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Cortesão, Armando (ed and trans). 1944. The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires and the book of Francisco 
Rodrigues. London: Hakluyt Society. 
Craig, Barry. 1988. Art and decoration of central New Guinea. Aylesbury: Shire Ethnography. 
Cramer, N. A. 1908. De reis van Jan van Mandeville, naar de Middelnederlands handschriften en 
incunabelen. Leiden: Maattschappij der Nederlandsche Letterkunde te Leiden. 
Cranbrook, Earl of. 1997. Wonders of nature in South -East Asia. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University 
Press. 
Cranstone, B. A. L. 1949. The blowgun in Europe. Man. 49: 119. 
Creese, Helen. 2004. Women of the kakawin world. Marriage and sexuality in the courts of Java and 
Bali. New York: M. E. Sharpe, Inc. 
Cribb, Robert. 2000. Historical atlas of Indonesia. Richmond: Curzon. 
Crosby, Alfred W. 1973. The Columbian exchange. Biolo gical and cultural consequences of 1492 . 
Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Press. 
Cunningham, Clark E. 1965. Order and change in an Atoni diarchy. Southwestern journal of 
anthropology. 21(4):359-382. 
Cyriac of Ancona. 2003. Later travels. Edward W. Bodnar (ed and trans). Cambridge, MA: The I Tatti 
Renaissance Library. 
Dallapiccola, Anna L. (ed). 2003. King, court and capital. An anthology of Kannada literary sources 
from the Vijayanagara period. New Delhi: American Institute of Indian Studies. 
Danadibrata, R. A. 2006. Kamus basa Sunda. Bandung: PT Kiblat Buku Utama. 
Danasasmita, Ma’mur. 2001. Wacana Bahasa dan sastra Sunda lama. Bandung: STSI Press. 
Danasasmita, Saleh. 1973. Ya nu nyusuk na Pakwan. prasasti batu tulis Bogor . Bandung: Lembaga 
Kebudayaan Universitas Padjadjaran.

--- PAGE: 298 ---
Bibliography 
285 
 
Danasasmita, S. et al. 1987. Sewaka darma, sanghyang  karesian, amanat dari Galunggung. Transkripsi 
dan terjemahan. Bandung: Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. 
Darsa, Undang. 1997. Aksara Sunda. Salah satu lambang identitas daerah. Bandung: Fakultas Sastera. 
Universitas Padjadjaran. 
Day, Tony and  Will Derks. 1999. Narrating Knowledge. Reflections on the encyclopedic impulse in 
literary texts from Indonesian and Malay Worlds. Bijdragen tot de taal -, land - en volkenkunde.  
155(3):309-341. 
Delgado, James P. 2011. Ships on land. In Alexis Catsambis, Ben Ford, and Donny L. Hamilton (eds). 
The Oxford handbook of maritime archaeology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Dempwolff, Otto. 1938. Vergleichende Lautlehre des austronesischen Wortschatzes . Band 3 . 
Austronesisches Wörterverzeichnis. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer. 
Djafar, Hasan. 1995. Prasasti Kawali. Depok. 
Djafar, Hasan. 2013. Masa akhir Majapahit. Girindraarddhana & masalahnya.  Jakarta: Komunitas 
Bambu. 
Dodds Pennock, Caroline. 2008. Bonds of blood. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Donkin, R. A. 1999. Dragon’s brain perfume. An historical geography of camphor. Leiden: Brill. 
Donkin, R. A. 2003. Between east and west. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. 
Drabbe, P. 1940. Tanémbar. Leiden: Brill. 
Drakard, Jane. 1989. An Indian Ocean port. Sources for the early history of Barus. Archipel. 37:53-82. 
Drakard, Jane. 1990. A Malay frontier. Unity and duality in a Sumatran kingdom. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
Southeast Asia Program Publications. 
Dransfield, S. and N. Manokaran. (eds). 1993. Plant resources of South -East Asia 6. Rattans . 
Wageningen: Pudoc Scientific Publishers. 
Dransfield, S. and E. A. Widjaja. (eds). 1995. Plant resources of South-East Asia 7. Bamboos. Bogor: 
Prosea Foundation. 
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1986. The temples of Java. Singapore: Oxford University Press. 
Dummett, Michael. 1976. 15th-century card games and the Hofämterspiel. In Ernst Rudolf Ragg (ed). 
Berühmte Kartenspiele. Vienna: Piatnik Wien.

--- PAGE: 299 ---
Bibliography 
286 
 
Dummett, Michael and Kamal Abu-Deeb. 1973. Some remarks on Mamluk playing cards. Journal of 
the Warburg and Courtauld institutes. 36:106-128. 
Earl, George Windser. 1863. On the shell -mound of Province Wellesley in the Malay Peninsula. 
Transactions of the ethnological society of London. 2:119-129. 
Earle, T. F., and John Villiers. 1990. Albuquerque. Caesar of the east. Warminster: Aris & Phillips. 
Edwards, E. D. and C. O. Blagden. 1931. A Chinese vocabulary of Malacca Malay words and phrases 
collected between AD 1403 and 1511 (?). Bulletin of the school of oriental studies. 6(3):715-749. 
Ekadjati, Edi S. 1995. Kebudayaan Sunda. Jakarta: PT Dunia Pustaka Jaya. 
Ekadjati, Edi S . 1996. Cultural plurality. The Sundanese of West Java. In Ann Kumar and John H. 
McGlynn (eds). Illuminations. The writing traditions of Indonesia. 101-128. 
Ellen, Roy. 2003. On the edge of the Banda zone. Past and present in the social organization of a 
Moluccan trading network. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Emerson, Oliver Farrar. 1919. Chaucer’s “opie of Thebes fyn”. Modern philology. 17(5):287-291. 
Endicott, Kirk M. 1970. An analysis of Malay magic. Singapore: Oxford University Press. 
Eringa, F. S. 1949. Loetoeng Kasaroeng. Een mythologisch verhaal uit West-Java. PhD thesis, Leiden 
University. 
Evetts, Basil Thomas Alfred. 1895.  The churches and monasteries of Egypt and some neighbouring 
countries. Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 
Falchetta, Piero. 2006. Fra Mauro’s world map. Turnhout: Brepols. 
Fan, Chengda. 2010 [1175]. Treatise of the supervisor and guardian of the cinnamon sea . James M. 
Hargett (trans). Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Fei, Xin. 1996. Hsing-ch’a sheng-lan. The overall survey of the star raft.  J. V. G. Mills (trans) and 
Roderich Ptah (ed). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag. 
Flecker, Michael. 2007. The South -China-Sea tradition. The hybrid hulls of South -East Asia. The 
international journal of nautical archaeology. 36(1):75-90. 
Fontein, Jan. 1967. The pilgrimage of Sudhana. The Hague: Mouton. 
Fontein, Jan. 1990. The sculpture of Indonesia. Washington: National Gallery of Art. 
Forth, Gregory. 2001. Dualism and hierarchy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Forth, Gregory. 2016. Why the porcupine is not a bird. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

--- PAGE: 300 ---
Bibliography 
287 
 
Fox, James J. 1977. Harvest of the palm. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Fox, James J. 1989. Category and comp lement. Binary ideologies and the organisation of dualism in 
eastern Indonesia. In David Maybury-Lewis and Uri Almagor (eds). The attraction of opposites. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Fox, James J . (ed). 1997a. The poetic power of place . Canberra: The Australian National University 
Press. 
Fox, James J. 1997b. Genealogy and topogeny. Towards an ethnography of Rotinese ritual place names. 
In James J. Fox (ed). The poetic power of place. Canberra: The Australian National University Press. 
Fox, James J. 2005. Ritual languages, special registers, and speech decorum in Austronesian languages. 
In K. A. Adelaar and N. P. Himmelmann (eds). The Austronesian languages of South East Asia and 
Madagascar. London: Routledge. 
Francis, Peter. 2002. Asia’s maritime bead trade. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Freedman, Paul. 2005. Spices and late -medieval European ideas of scarcity and value. Speculum. 
80(4):1209-1227. 
Frey, Edward. 1988. The kris. Second edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Gallop, Annabel Teh. 1994. The legacy of the Malay letter. London: British Library. 
Gallop, Annabel Teh and Bernard Arps. 1991. Golden letters. Written traditions of Indonesia. London: 
British Library. 
Geertz, Clifford. 1964. Agricultural involution. The process of ecological change in Indonesia . 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Geertz, Clifford. 1980. Negara. The theatre state in nineteenth century Bali . Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 
Gibb, H. A. R. and C. F. Beckingham. 1994. The travels of Ibn Battuta, AD 1325 -1354. Volume IV. 
Abingdon: Taylor & Francis. 
Gladwin, Thomas. 1970. East is a big bird. Navigation and logic on Puluwat Atoll.  Cambridge MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Glover, I. C. 1971. Prehistoric research in Timor. In D. J. Mulvaney and J. Golson (eds). Aboriginal 
man and environment in Australia. Canberra: ANU Press. 
Goddio, Franck (ed). 2002. Lost at sea. The strange route of the Lena Shoal junk. London: Periplus.

--- PAGE: 301 ---
Bibliography 
288 
 
Gommans, Jos. 2018. Java’s Mongol demon: inscribing the horse archer into the epic history of 
Majapahit. In Rafael Klöber and Manju Ludwig (eds). Her story. Historical scholarship between South 
Asia and Europe. Festschrift in honour of Gita Dharampal-Frick. Heidelberg: CrossAsia E Publishing. 
249-259. 
Gonda, J. 1958. Some notes on the relations between syntactic and metrical units in a Javanese kidung. 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land-, en volkenkunde. 114(1/2):98-116. 
Gonda, J. 1973 [1952]. Sanskrit in Indonesia. Second enlarged edition. New Delhi: Sata-Pitaka Series 
99. 
Gould, Richard A. 2000. Archaeology and the social history of ships . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Graaf, H. J. de and Th. G. Th Pigeaud. 1974. De eerste moslimse vorstendommen op Java . 
Verhandelingen van het koninklijk instituut voor taal-, land- en volkenkunde 69. Leiden: Brill. 
Graaf, H. J. de and Th. G. Th Pigeaud. 1984. Chinese Muslims in Java. Monash papers on Southeast 
Asia no.12. 
Green, Monica H. 2017. History in a hemispheric mode. Redrawing the medieval map. Bibliography. 
MAA 2017 Plenary. 
Green, Monica H . 2018. Climate and disease in medieval Eurasia. Oxford research encyclopedia of 
Asian history. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Griffiths, Arlo and Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer. 2014. Ancient Indonesian ritual utensils  and their 
inscriptions. Bells and slitdrums. Arts asiatiques. 69:129-150 
Gunawan, Aditia. 2009. Sanghyang sasana maha guru dan kala purbaka. Suntingan dan terjemah an. 
Jakarta: Perpustakaan Nasional Republik Indonesia. 
Gunawan, Aditia. 2015. Nipah or gebang? A philological and codicological study based on sources 
from West Java. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land-, en volkenkunde. 171(2/3):249-280. 
Gunawan, Aditia. 2016. Bhīma Svarga. Étude d’un texte vie ux-javanais et de sa transmission 
manuscrite. Master’s thesis. Paris: INALCO. 
Gunawan, Aditia. 2019. Textiles in old-Sundanese texts. Archipel. 98:71-107. 
Gunawan, Aditia and Holil, Munawar. 2010. Me mbuka peti naskah Sunda kuna di perpustakaan 
nasional RI. Upaya rekatalogisasi. In Perubahan pandangan aristokrat Sunda. Bandung: Pusat Studi 
Sunda. Seri Sundalana 9. 103–146.

--- PAGE: 302 ---
Bibliography 
289 
 
Guo, Peiyi. 2001. Landscape, history and migration among the Langalanga, Solomon Islands. 
University of Pittsburgh. ProQuest Dissertations Publishing. 3038237. 
Hägerdal, Hans. 2012. Lords of the land, lords of the sea. Conflict and adaptation in early colonial 
Timor 1600-1800. Leiden: Brill. 
Hakluyt, Richard, 1589. The principall navigations, voiages, and discoveries of the English nations . 
London: George Bishop and Ralph Newberie. 
Hall, Ivan C. 1928. A pharmaco -bacteriologic study of two Malayan blow -gun poisoned darts. 
American anthropologist. 30(1):47-59. 
Hall, Kenneth. 1985. Maritime trade and state development in early Southeast Asia . Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press. 
Hall, Kenneth. 2011. A history of early Southeast Asia. Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Hamel, Christopher de. 2018. Meetings with remarkable manuscripts. London: Penguin Books. 
Hammond, Lincoln Davis (ed). 1963. Travelers in disguise. Narratives of eastern travel by Poggio 
Bracciolini and Ludovico de Varthema. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Hannigan, Tim. 2018. Beyond control. Orientalist tensions and the history of the “upas tree” myth. The 
journal of commonwealth literature. 55(2):173-189. 
Hardjadibrata, R. R. 1985. Sundanese. A syntactical analysis. Canberra: Australian National University, 
Department of Linguistics. 
Hardjadibrata, R. R. 2003. Sundanese English dictionary. Bandung: PT Dunia Pustaka Java. 
Hart, George L. and Hank Heifetz. 1999. The four hundred songs of war and wisdom . New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
Hasman, Don and Filomena Reiss. 2012. Urang Kanekes. Baduy people. Jakarta: Indonesian Heritage 
Society. 
Hasskarl, J. K. 1845. Aantekeningen over het nut, door de bewoners van Java aan eenige planten van 
dat eiland toegeschreven, uit berigten der inlanders zamengesteld. Amsterdam: Johannes Müller. 
Hefner, Robert W. 1990. The political economy of mountain Java. An interpretive history . Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Heng, Derek Thiam Soon. 2001. The trade in lakawood products between South China and the Malay 
world from the twelfth to fifteenth centuries AD. Journal of Southeast Asian studies. 32(2):133-149.

--- PAGE: 303 ---
Bibliography 
290 
 
Heng, Derek Thiam Soon. 2009. Sino-Malay trade and diplomacy from the tenth through the fourteenth 
century. Athens: Ohio University Press. [Southeast Asia Series No. 121]. 
Heng, Derek Thiam Soon . 2019. Pre -modern island -Southeast-Asian history in the digital age. 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 175(1):29-57. 
Herlina, Nina. 2017. Situs Astana Gede Kawali. Bandung: Universitas Padjadjaran. 
Hermans, Erik. 2020. A companion to the Global Early Middle Ages . Amsterdam: ARC Humanities 
Press. 
Heuken, Adolf. 2008. Christianity in pre-colonial Indonesia. In A history of Christianity in Indonesia. 
Jan Aritonang and Karel Steenbrink (eds). 3–7. Leiden: Brill. 
Hinzler, Hedi. 1993. Balinese palm -leaf manuscripts. Bijdragen tot de taal -, land- en volkenkunde. 
149(3):438-475. 
Hirth, Friedrich and William Woodville Rockhill. 1911. Chau Ju-Kua. St. Petersburg: Printing office 
of the Imperial academy of sciences. 
Hoffman, Carl. 2014. Savage harvest. New York: Harper Collins. 
Hofstede, H. W. 1925. Het pandanblad als grondstof voor de pandanhoedenindust rie op Java . 
Eibergen: Electrische Drukkerij H. Heinen. 
Hoogervorst, Tom.  2011. Southeast Asia in the ancient Indian Ocean world. Combining historical 
linguistic and archaeological approaches. University of Oxford. D.Phil thesis. 
Hoogervorst, Tom. 2017. The role of “Prakrit” in maritime Southeast Asia through 101 etymologies. In 
Acri, Blench, and Landmaan (eds). Spirits and ships. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing. 
Hornell, James. 1924. South Indian blow -guns, boomerangs, and crossbows. Journal of the royal 
anthropological institute of Great Britain and Ireland. 54:316-346. 
Hoskins, Janet. 1996. Introduction. In Janet Hoskins (ed). Headhunting and the social imagination . 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 1-47. 
Hourani, George F. 1995 [1951]. Arab seafaring. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Howell, Signe. 1995. The Lio house. Building, category, idea, value. In Janet Carsten and Stephen 
Hugh-Jones (eds). About the house. Lévi-Strauss and beyond. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hultzsch, E. 1925. Corpus inscriptionum Indicarum. Vol 1. Inscriptions of Asoka. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.

--- PAGE: 304 ---
Bibliography 
291 
 
Hunter, Thomas. 1996. Ancient beginnings. The spread of Indic scripts. In Ann Kumar and John H. 
McGlynn (eds). Illuminations. The writing traditions of Indonesia. Jakarta: The Lontar Foundation. 
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel. 1992. La civilisation de ports-entrepôts du sud Kedah (Malaysia). Ve-XIVe 
siècle. Paris: L’Harmattan. 
Jákl, Jiří. 2017. The sling and the blowgun as combat weapons in pre -Islamic Java. Notes on Old 
Javanese terms gaṇḍi and tulup. Wacana. 18(3):641–657. 
Jákl, Jiří and Tom Hoogervorst. 2017. Custom, combat, and ceremony. Java and the Indo-Persian textile 
trade. Bulletin de l’école française d’extrême-orient. 103:207-235. 
Jaspan, M. A. 1964. Redjang ka -ga-nga texts. Folk literature of South Sumatra . Canberra: The 
Australian National University Press. 
Jett, Stephen C. 1970. The development and distribution of the blowgun. Annals of the association of 
American geographers. 60(4): 662-688. 
Johns, A. H. 1966. From Buddhism to Islam. An interpretation of the Javanese literature of  the 
transition. Comparative studies in society and history. 9(1):40-50. 
Jones, Russell. 1987. Hikayat raja Pasai. Petaling Jaya: Fajar Bakti. 
Jones, Russell; Carstairs Douglas, and Thomas Barclay. 2007. Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay . 
Leiden: KITLV Press. 
Jordanus Catalani. 1839. Description des merveilles d’une partie de l’Asie . Recueil de voyages et de 
mémoires. Livre IV. Paris: La Société de Géographie. 
Kahane, Henry and Renée Kahane. 1982. The Western impact on Byzantium. The linguistic evidence. 
Dumbarton Oaks papers. 36:127-153. 
Kamma, Freerk C. 1975. Religious texts of the oral tradition from western New-Guinea. Two volumes 
A-B. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Kamma, Freerk C. and Simon Kooijman. 1973. Romawa Forja. Child of fire. Leiden: Brill. 
Karim, Wazir Jahan. 1992. Women and culture. Between Malay adat and Islam . Boulder: Westview 
Press. 
Keane, Webb. 1997. Signs of recognition. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Kempgen, Sebastian. 2020. Afanasij Nikitin. Reise über drei Meere . Volume 1. Bamberg: University 
of Bamberg Press.

--- PAGE: 305 ---
Bibliography 
292 
 
Kern, H. 1922. De legende van Kunjarakarna volgens het oudst bekende handschrift. In H. Kern (ed). 
Verspreide geschriften X. 1-76. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Kieven, Lydia. 2013. Following the cap figure in Majapahit temple reliefs. Leiden: Brill. 
Kikusawa, Ritsuko. 2015. The Austronesian language family. In Claire Bowern and Bethwyn Evans 
(eds). The Routledge handbook of historical linguistics. Abingdon: Routledge. 657-670. 
Kinney, Ann R., Lydia Kieven, and Marijke Klokke. 2003. Worshiping Siva and Buddha. The temple 
art of East Java. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Kirch, Patrick Vinton. 1984. The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Kirch, Patrick V inton. 1997. The Lapita peoples. Ancestors of the Oce anic world. Oxford: Wiley -
Blackwell. 
Kirch, Patrick V inton. 2000. Temples as ‘holy houses’. The transformation of ritual architecture in 
traditional Polynesian societies. In Rosemary Joyce and Susan Gillespie (eds). Beyond kinship. Social 
and material reproduction in house societies. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Knauft, Bruce. 1993. South coast New Guinea cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Koolhof, S. 1999. The ‘La Galigo’. A Bugis encyclopaedia and its growth. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- 
en volkenkunde. 155(3):362-387. 
Kozok, Uli (ed). 2015. A 14th century Malay code of laws. The Nītisārasamuccaya. Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies. 
Kricher, John C. 1989. A neo-tropical companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Kroll, Paul W. 2017. A student’s dictionary of Classical and medieval Chinese. Leiden: Brill. 
Lembaga basa jeung sastra Sunda. 2007. Kamus umum basa Sunda. Bandung: Penerbit Geger Sunten. 
Kullanda, Sergey. 2006. Nushāntara or Java? The acquisition of the name. Indonesia and the Malay 
world. 34:91–97. 
Kunst, Jaap. 1968. Hindu-Javanese musical instruments. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. 
Kuun, Géza. 1880. Codex cumanicus, Bibliothecae ad templum divi Marci Venetiarum primum ex 
integro editit prolegomenis notis et compluribus glossariis instruxit comes Géza Kuun . Budapest: 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences. 
Lam, Peter Y. K. 2002. Maritime trade in China during the middle Ming period circa 1500AD. In Franck 
Goddio (ed). Lost at sea. The strange route of the Lena Shoal junk. London: Periplus.

--- PAGE: 306 ---
Bibliography 
293 
 
Lambourn, Elizabeth A. 2018. Abraham’s luggage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lankton et al. 2008. A study of mid-first millennium CE Southeast Asian specialized glass beadmaking 
traditions. In Elisabeth A. Bacus et al (eds). Interpreting Southeast Asia’s past. Vol 2. Singapore: NUS 
Press. 
Lape, Peter V. Political dynamics and religious change in the late pre -colonial Banda Islands. World 
archaeology. 32(1):138-155. 
Lape, Peter V. and Chao, Chin-yung. 2008. Fortification as a human response to late Holocene climate 
change in East Timor. Archaeology in Oceania. 43(1):11-21. 
Laufer, Berthold. 1912. The name China. T’oung pao. 13(1):719-726. 
Lee, Samuel. 1829. The travels of Ibn Batuta. London: Oriental Translation Committee. 
Levathes, Louise. 1994. When China ruled the seas. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lewis, Archibald. 1973. Maritime skills in the Indian Ocean 1368 -1500. Journal of the economic and 
social history of the orient. 16(2/3):238-264. 
Lewis, E. D. 1999. The encyclopedic impulse. Accounts of the origin of the rajadom of Sikka by two 
Sikkanese authors. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land-, en volkenkunde. 155(4): 543-578. 
Liaw, Yock Fang. 1976. Undang-undang Melaka. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. Bibliotheca Indonesica 
13. 
Loades, Mike. 2016. The composite bow. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. 
Lord, Albert B. 1987. Characteristics of orality. Oral tradition. 2/1:54-72. 
MacKenzie, D. N. 1971. A concise Pahlavi dictionary. London: Oxford University Press. 
Macknight, Campbell, Mukhlis Paeni, and Muhlis Hadrawi (eds). 2020. The Bugis chronicle of Bone. 
Canberra: ANU Press. 
Mahdi, Waruno. 2013. À propos de “the problem of the ancient name Java and the role of Satyavarman 
in Southeast Asian international relations around the turn of the ninth century CE”. Archipel. 86:229–
234. 
Mahdi, Waruno. 2015. Script and language of the Tanjng Tanah manuscript. In Uli Kozok (ed). A 14th 
century Malay code of laws. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 1976. L’artillerie légère nousantarienne. Arts asiatiques. 32:233-268.

--- PAGE: 307 ---
Bibliography 
294 
 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 1980. The southeast Asian ship. An historical approach. Journal of southeast 
Asian studies. 11(2):266-276. 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 1983. The Bukit Jakas wreck site. A provisional report. Jakarta: École Française 
d’extrême orient. Special report. 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 1984. Relationship and cross-influences between South-East Asian and Chinese 
shipbuilding traditions. Final report. Consultative workshop on reseach on maritime shipping and trade 
networks in Southeast Asia. Bangkok: SPAFA Coordinating Unit. 213-244. 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 1985. Late mediaeval shipbuilding in the Indian Ocean. A reappraisal. Moyen 
orient et Océan Indien. XVI-XIX siécle. 2:1-30. 
Mann, Charles. 2011. 1493. Uncovering the new world Columbus created. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Marchisio, Annalia. 2016. Relatio de mirabilibus orientalium Tartarorum . Florence: Edizione del 
Galluzzo. 
Marsden, William. 1831. Notice respecting the natives of New Guinea. Transactions of the Royal 
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 3(1): 125-130. 
Marshall, Andrew J. and Bruce M. Beehler. 2007. The ecology of Papua. Part one. Singapore: Periplus. 
al-Mas‘udi, Abu al -Hasan Ali ibn al -Husayn. 2007  [947]. The meadows of gold . Paul Lunde and 
Caroline Stone (trans). London: Penguin. 
Mathers, W. M. and M. Flecker. 1997. The archaeological recovery of the Java Sea wreck. Annapolis: 
Pacific Sea Resources. 
Maxwell, Robyn. 2019. Dance shields of Bali. A legacy of Majapahit. In Bill Evans (ed). War art and 
ritual. Shields from the Pacific. Volume 1. Brussels: Vasco & Co. 
May, R. J. 1984. Kaikai aniani. A guide to bush foods, markets, and culinary arts of Papua New Guinea. 
Bathurst: Robert Brown & Associates. 
McHugh, D. J. (ed). 1987. Production and utilization of products from commercial seaweeds. FAO 
fisheries technical papers. 288. 
McKinnon, Edmund Edwards. 1985. Early polities in southern Sumatra. Some preliminary observations 
based on archaeological evidence. Indonesia. 40:1-36. 
McWilliam, Andrew. 2002. Paths of origin, gates of life. A study of place and precedence in southwest 
Timor. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE: 308 ---
Bibliography 
295 
 
McWilliam, Andrew. 2007. Looking for Adê. A contribution to Timorese historiography. Bijdragen tot 
de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 163(2/3): 221-238. 
Medlej, Joumana. 2020. Inks and paints of the Middle East. A handbook of Abbasid art technology . 
London: Majnouna. 
Meij, Dick van der. 2017. Indonesian manuscripts from the islands of Java, Madura, Bali and Lombok.  
Meijer, J. J. 1891. Badoejsche pantoenverhalen. Bijdragen tot de taal -, land -, en volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsche-Indië. 40(1): 45-105. 
Michell, Robert and Nevill Forbes. 1914. The chronicle of Novgorod 1016 -1471. London: Royal 
Historical Society. 
Miksic, John N. 2010. The A to Z of ancient Southeast Asia. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, Inc. 
Miksic, John N. 2013. Singapore and the silk road of the sea 1300-1800. Singapore: National University 
of Singapore Press. 
Mills, J. V. G. (ed and trans). 1970. Ying-yai sheng-lan. The overall survey of the ocean’s shores 1433 
by Ma Huan. London: Hakluyt Society. 
Mohmod, Abd. Latif. 1992. Processing of rattans. In Wan Razali, Wan Mohd., et al (eds). A guide to 
the cultivation of rattan. Kuala Lumpur: Forest Research Institute Malaysia. 239-260. 
Molen, Willem van der. 1983. Javaanse tekstkritiek. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
Molen, Willem van der. 2007. The syair of Minye Tujuh. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 
163(2/3):356-375 
Molen, Willem van der. 2015. An introduction to Old Javanese. Tokyo: Tokyo University of Foreign 
Studies, Research Institute for Language and Cultures of Asia and Africa. 
Monier-Williams, Monier. 1899. A Sanskrit-English dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Monk, Kathryn A. , Yance de Fretes, and Gayatri Reksodiharjo-Lilley. 1997. The ecology of Nusa 
Tenggara and Maluku. Singapore: Periplus. 
Moquette, J. P. 1913. De eerste vorsten van Samoedra -Pasé (Noord -Sumatra). Rapporten van het 
oudheidkundige dienst. 1-12. 
Moszkowski, M. 1909. The pagan races of east Sumatra. The journal of the royal Asiatic society of 
Great Britain and Ireland. 41: 705-720. 
Muhibbiddin, Muhammad. 2018. Sejarah kelam Jawa Sunda. Yogyakarta: Araska.

--- PAGE: 309 ---
Bibliography 
296 
 
Müller, Ulrich. 2011. Oswald von Wolkenstein. Seine Reisen und Reislieder. In Ulrich Müller and 
Margarete Springeth (eds). Oswald von Wolkenstein. Leben, Werk, Rezeption. Berlin: De Gruyter. 
Müller-Gotama, Franz. 2001. Sundanese. Munich: LINCOM EUROPA. 
Munandar, Agus Aris. 2017. Siliwangi, sejarah, dan budaya Sunda kuna . Jagakarsa: Penerbit 
Wedatama Widya Sastra. 
Musurillo, Herbert A. 1955. Horace’s journey to Brundisium. Fact or fiction? The classical weekly.  
48(12):159-162. 
Myers, Herbert W. 1983. The Mary Rose ‘shawm’. Early music. 11(3):358-360. 
Nabholz-Kartaschoff, Marie -Louise. 2010. Cloths for the ancestors. On the relationship between 
technique and meaning of Balinese ritual textiles. In Ruth Barnes and Mary Hunt Kahlenberg (eds). 
Five centuries of Indonesian textiles. Munich: Delmonico Books. 
Nakada, Kōzō. 1982. An inventory of the dated inscriptions in Java. Tokyo: Toyo Bunko. 
Nala, Abu. 2003. Manfaat apotik hidup. Temanggung: Bina Karya. 
Nasrallah, Nawal. 2010. Annals of the caliphs’ kitchens. Leiden: Brill. 
Needham, Joseph. 1986. Science and civilization in China. Volume IV. Physics and physical technology. 
Part 3. Civil engineering and nautics. Taipei: Cave Books. 
Needham, Rodney. 1987. Mamboru. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Ng, Su Fang. 2019. Alexander the Great from Britain to Southeast Asia . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Nicolas, Arsenio. 2009. Gongs, bells, and cymbals. The archaeological record in maritime Asia from 
the ninth to the seventeenth centuries. Yearbook for traditional music. 41:62-93. 
Nightingale, Neil. 1992. New Guinea. An island apart. London: BBC Books. 
Nombo, Porer and Leach, James. 2010. Reite plants. An ethnobotanical study in Tok Pisin and English. 
Canberra: ANU E Press. 
Noorduyn, Jacobus. 1962. Het begingedeelete van de Carita Parahyangan. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- 
en volkenkunde. 118(4): 405-432. 
Noorduyn, Jacobus. 1976. Concerning the reliability of Tomé Pires’ data on Java. Bijdragen tot de taal-
, land- en volkenkunde. 132(4): 467-471.

--- PAGE: 310 ---
Bibliography 
297 
 
Noorduyn, Jacobus . 1978. Majapahit in the fifteenth century. Bijdragen tot de taal -, land -, en 
volkenkunde. 134(2/3): 207-274. 
Noorduyn, Jacobus. 1982. Bujangga Manik’s journey through Java. Bijdragen tot de taal -, land-, en 
volkenkunde. 138: 411-442. 
Noorduyn, Jacobus. 1985. The three palm-leaf MSS from Java in the Bodleian Library and their donors. 
The journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 1: 58-64. 
Noorduyn, Jacobus and Andries Teeuw. 1999. A panorama of the world from Sundanese perspective. 
Archipel. 57: 209-221. 
Noorduyn, Jacobus and Andries Teeuw. 2006. Three Old Sundanese poems. Leiden: KITLV. 
Nooy-Palm, Hetty. 1986. The Sa’dan Toraja. A study of their social life and religion. Leiden: Brill. 
Noviana, Eka. 2020. The Sundanese script. Visual analysis of its development into a native Austronesian 
script. Braunschweig: Hochschule für Bildende Künste. 
Nugraha, Bachtiar Agung. 2012. Prasasti-prasasti Candi Sukuh. Aksara dan bahasa . Depok: Skripsi 
Fak Ilmu Pengetahuan Budaya Prodi Arkeologi UI. 
Nurwansah, Ilham. 2020 a. Penelurusan jejak musik instrumental dalam naskah Sunda Kuna. 
Manuskripta. 10(1):98-146. 
Nurwansah, Ilham. 2020b. Siksa kandang karesian. Teks dan terjemahan. Jakarta: Perpusnas Press. 
al-Nuwayri, Shihab al-Din Ahmad ibn ‘Abd al -Wahhab. 2016 [c.1333]. The ultimate ambition in the 
arts of erudition. Trans. Elias Muhanna. New York, NY: Penguin Books. 
Nylan, Michael. 1994. The Chin wen/Ku wen controversy in Han times. T'oung Pao. 80:83-145. 
O’Connor, S., Spriggs, M., and Veth, P. 2006. The archaeology of the Aru islands, eastern Indonesia. 
Canberra: ANU E-Press. 
O’Doherty, Marianne. 2013. The Indies and the medieval west. Turnhout: Brepols. 
Olivelle, Patrick. 1995. Deconstruction of the body in Indian asceticism. In Vincent Wimbush and 
Richard Valantasis (eds). Asceticism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 188-210. 
Onvlee, Louis, 1949. Naar aanleiding van de stuwdam in Mangili. Bijdragen tot de taal -, land- en 
volkenkunde. 105(1):445-459. 
Phalgunadi, I Gusti Putu. 1996. The Pararaton. New Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan.

--- PAGE: 311 ---
Bibliography 
298 
 
Pearson, George. 1795. Experiments and observations to investigate the nature of a kind of steel, 
manufactured at Bombay, and t here called wootz. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of 
London. 85:322-346. 
Pelras, Christian. 1996. The Bugis. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Perry, Charles. 2017. Scents and flavors. A Syrian cookbook. New York: New York University Press. 
Perry, W. J. 1918. The megalithic culture of Indonesia. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Pigeaud, Th. G. Th. 1960-63. Java in the 14th century. Five volumes. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Piollet, Paul. 1997. Salemboe indah. Orcines: Piollet. 
Pires, Tomé. 2018 [1515]. A suma oriental . Rui Manuel Loureiro (ed). Lisbon: Centro Científico e 
Cultural de Macau. 
Pleyte, C. M. 1911. Het j aartal op den Batoe-Toelis nabij Buitenzorg. Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, 
land- en volkenkunde. 54:215-425. 
Pleyte, C. M. 1913. De patapaän Adjar soeka resi, anders gezegd de kluizenarij op de berg Goenoeng 
Padang. Tweede bijdrage tot de kennis van het oude Soenda, met vijf afbeeldingen, een facsimile en 
een tabel. Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 55:281-427. 
Pleyte, C. M. 1914. Poernawidjaja’s hellevaart. Of de volledige verlossing. Vierde bijdrage tot de kennis 
van het oude Soenda. Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 56:365-441. 
Pollock, Sheldon. 2009. Future philology? The fate of a soft science in a hard world. Critical inquiry. 
35(4):931-961. 
Ptak, Roderich. 1983. Some references to Timor in old Chinese records. Ming studies. 17:37-48. 
Ptak, Roderich. 2000. Camphor in East and Southeast Asian Trade, c. 1500: A Synthesis of Portuguese 
and Asian Sources. In Anthony Disney und Emily Booth (eds). Vasco da Gama and the Linking of 
Europe and Asia. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 142-166. 
Ptak, Roderic h. 2 018. Review of Suma Oriental by Tomé Pires edited by Rui Manuel Loureiro. 
Archipel. 96:176-179. 
Pulleyblank, Edwin G. 1991. Lexicon of reconstructed pronunciation in early middle Chinese, late 
middle Chinese, and early Mandarin. Vancouver: UBC Press. 
Pyrard de Laval, François. 1619. Voyage de François Pyrard de Laval . Two volumes. Paris: Samuel 
Thiboust and Remy Dallin. 
Raffensperger, Christian. 2017. The kingdom of Rus’. Bradford: Arc Humanities Press.

--- PAGE: 312 ---
Bibliography 
299 
 
Raffles, Thomas Stamford. 1817. The history of Java. Two volumes. London: John Murray. 
Rahardjo, Supratikno. 2011  [2002]. Peradaban Jawa. Dari Mataram kuno sampai Majapahit akhir . 
Jakarta: Komunitas Bambu. 
Rahayu, Mulyati, Siti Sunarti,  and Ary Prihardhyanto Keim. 2008. Kajian etnobotani pandan samak 
(Pandanus odoratissimus  L.f.). Pemanfaatan dan peranannya dalam usaha menunjang penghasilan 
keluarga di Ujong Kulon, Banten. Biodiversitas. 9(3):310-314. 
Rapoport, Yossef and Emilie Savage-Smith. 2018. Lost maps of the caliphs . Oxford: The Bodleian 
Library. 
Reid, Anthony. 1988. Southeast Asia in the age of commerce 1450‑1680. Volume one. The lands below 
the winds. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Reid, Anthony. 1992. The rise and fall of Sino-Javanese shipping, V. J. H. Houben, H. M. J. Maier, and 
W. van der Molen (eds). Looking in odd mirrors . Vakgroep talen en culturen van Zuidoost -Azië en 
Oceanië. Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden. 177-211. 
Renes, P. B. 1983 [1962]. Circular connubium in the Leti archipelago. In P. E. de Josselin de Jong (ed). 
Structural anthropology in the Netherlands. Second edition. Dordrecht: Foris Publications. 223-230. 
Ricci, R. S. de. 1884. The colonization of New Guinea. Foreign and commonwealth office collection. 
London: P. S. King & Son. 
Ricklefs, M. C. 1974. Jogjakarta under Sultan Mangkubumi 1749 -1792. A history of the division of 
Java. London: Oxford University Press. 
Riddell, Peter G. 2001. Islam and the Malay-Indonesian world. Transmission and responses. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press. 
Rigg, Jonathan. 1862. A dictionary of the Sunda language of Java. Batavia: Lange & Co. 
Riesenberg, Saul. 1972. The organization of navigational knowledge on Puluwat. Journal of the 
Polynesian society. 81: 19-56. 
Robins, R. H. 1983. Sistem dan struktur bahasa Sunda. Jakarta: Penerbit Djambatan. 
Robson, Stuart O. 1995. Desawarnana (Nagarakertagama) by Mpu Prapanca. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
Robson, Stuart O. 2008. Arjunawiwāha. The marriage of Arjuna or Mpu Kanwa. Leiden: Brill. 
Robson, Stuart O. and Singgih Wibisono. 2002. Javanese-English dictionary. Hong Kong: Periplus. 
Online edition: http://sealang.net/java/dictionary.htm. 
Room, Adrian. 2006. Placenames of the world. Jefferson, NC: McFarland.

--- PAGE: 313 ---
Bibliography 
300 
 
Rosidi, Ajip. 1973. My experiences in recording ‘pantun Sunda’. Indonesia. 16: 105-111. 
Rosidi, Ajip. 1984. Ciri-ciri manusia dan kebudayaan Sunda. In Edi S. Ekadjati (ed). Masyarakat Sunda 
dan kebudayaannya. 125-161. Jakarta: Girimukti Pasaka. 
Rosidi, Ajip. 1995. Puisi Sunda. Jilid 1. Bandung: CV Geger Sunten. 
Rubinstein, Raechelle. 1996. Leaves of palm. Balinese lontar. In Ann Kumar and John H. McGlynn 
(eds). Illuminations. The writing traditions of Indonesia. 129-154. 
Rumphius, G. E. 2011. The Ambonese herbal. Volume 2. E. M. Beekman (ed and trans). New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 
Sakai, Minako. 1997. Remembering origi ns. Ancestors and places in the Gumai society of South 
Sumatra. In James J. Fox (ed). The poetic power of place. Canberra: The Australian National University 
Press. 
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian epigraphy: a guide to the study of inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and 
the other Indo-Aryan languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Samad Ahmad, Abdul. 1979. Sulalatus salatin. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 
Sandstrom, Alan R. 2000. Toponymic groups and house organization. The Nahuas of Nor thern 
Veracruz, Mexico. In Beyond Kinship. Rosemary A. Joyce and Susan D. Gillespie (eds). Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Sastrawan, Wayan Jarrah. 2020. How to read a chronicle. Indonesia and the Malay world. 48(140):2-
23. 
Schnitger, F. M. 1939. Forgotten kingdoms in Sumatra. Leiden: Brill. 
Schulte Nordholt, H. G. 1971. The political system of the Atoni of Timor. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Selby, Stephen. 2000. Chinese archery. Aberdeen, HK: Hong Kong University Press. 
Senft, Gunter (ed). 1997. Referring to space. Studies in Austronesian and Papuan languages. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Setyawati, Kartika. 2015. Kidung Surajaya. Unpublished PhD. thesis. Universiteit Leiden. 
Shaffer, Lynda. 1994. Southernization. Journal of world history. 5:1-21. 
Shaw, William and Mohammad, Kassim Haji Ali. 1970. Malacca coins. Kuala Lumpur: Departments 
of Museums Malaysia.

--- PAGE: 314 ---
Bibliography 
301 
 
Shepherd, Chris, and Loretta Ann Shepherd. 2012. Mammals of Southeast Asia. Oxford: John Beaufoy 
Publishing. 
Simpson, George G. 1945. The principles of classification and a classification of mammals. Bulletin of 
the American Museum of Natural History. 85:1-350. 
Sint Nicolaas, Eveline. 2007. Drie Indische kannonen e n hun geschiedenis. Bulletin van het 
rijksmuseum. 55(1):40-57. 
al-Sirafi, Abu Zayd Hasan ibn Yazid. 2017. Accounts of China and India . Tim Mackintosh -Smith 
(trans). New York: New York University Press. 
Sjostrand, Sten and Claire Barnes. 2001. The “Turiang”. A fourteenth -century Chinese shipwreck 
upsetting Southeast Asian ceramic history. Journal of the Malaysian branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society. 74(1):71-109. 
Skeat, W. W. 1902. Blowpipe from Kuantan (Malay Peninsula). Man. 2: 145-146. 
Skelly, Robert John and Bruno David. 2017. Hiri. Archaeology of long-distance maritime trade along 
the south coast of Papua New Guinea. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Smith, Alexander D. 2017a. The languages of Borneo. A comprehensive class ification. PhD 
Dissertation: University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
Smith, Alexander D. 2017b. The Western Malayo-Polynesian problem. Oceanic linguistics. 56(2):435–
490. 
Smith, Michael E. 2016. At home with the Aztecs. Abingdon: Oxford. 
Snow, Joseph T. and James F. Burke. 1996. Galician-Portuguese. In Timothy McGee (ed). Singing 
early music. Bloomington: Indian University Press. 
Sollewijn Gelpke, J. 1994. The report of Miguel Roxa de Brito of his voyage in 1581-1582 to the Raja 
Ampat, the MacCluer Gulf and Seram. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 150(1):123-145. 
Specht, Joshua. 2019. Commodity history and the nature of global connection. Recent developments. 
Journal of global history. 14(1):145-150. 
Spencer, L. K. et al. 1988. The diamond deposits of Kalimantan, Borneo. Gems and gemology. 24(2):67-
80. 
Sproat, Richard. 2000. A computational theory of writing systems . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

--- PAGE: 315 ---
Bibliography 
302 
 
Srinivasan, Sharada. 1994. Wootz crucible steel. A newly discovered production site in South In dia. 
Papers from the institute of archaeology. 5:49-59. 
Subbarayalu, Y. 2012. South India under the Cholas. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Suryani et al. 2017. The handwritten Sundanese palm leaf manuscript dataset from 15 th century. 14th 
IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR). 1:796-800. 
Sutlive, Vinson H. 1978. The Iban of Sarawak . Chronicle of a vanishing world . Long Grove, IL: 
Waveland Press, Inc. 
Swadling, Pamela. 1996. Plumes from paradise. Boroko: Papua New Guinea National Museum. 
Tagliacozzo, Eric. 2009. Southeast Asia and the Middle East. Islam, movement, and the longue durée. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Teeuw, A. et al. 1969. Siwaratrikalpa of Mpu Tanakung. Leiden: KITLV. 
Thomaz, Luis Felipe F. R. 1993. The Malay sultanate of Melaka. In Anthony Reid (ed). Southeast Asia 
in the early modern era. 69-90. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Tibbetts, G. R. 1981. Arab navigation in the Indian Ocean before the coming of the Por tuguese. 
London: The Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 
Titley, Norah. 2005. The Ni‘matnāma manuscript of the sultans of Mandu. London: RoutledgeCurzon. 
Trautmann, Thomas. 2015. Elephants and kings. An environmental history . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Tseng, C. K. 1944. Agar. A valuable seaweed product. The scientific monthly. 58(1):24-32. 
Varthema, Ludovico di. 1535 [1510]. Itinerario de Ludouico de Varthema Bolognese nello Egitto (etc.). 
Venice: Alessandro Bindone & Mapheo Pasini. 
Vlekke, Bernard H. M. 1945. Nusantara. A history of the East Indian archipelago. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. 
Vogel, J. Ph. 1918. The yupa inscription of king Mulavarman from Koetei (East Borneo). Bijdragen tot 
de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 74(1/2):167-232. 
Wade, Geoff. 2005. The Ming Shi-lu as a source for Southeast Asian history. Singapore: Asia Research 
Institute and the Singapore E-Press, National University of Singapore. 
Wade, Geoff. 2009. The polity o f Yelang and the origin of the name ‘China’. Sino-Platonic papers. 
188.

--- PAGE: 316 ---
Bibliography 
303 
 
Wade, Geoff. 2016. Domination in four keys. Ming China and its southern neighbours. In Craig Clunas, 
Jessica Harrison-Hall, and Luk Yu-ping (eds). Ming China. Courts and contacts 1400 -1450. London: 
British Museum Research Publication 205. 
Wallace, Alfred Russel. 1877. The Malay archipelago. London: Macmillan and Co. 
Ware, Kallistos. 1995. The way of the ascetics. Negative or affirmative? In Vincent Wimbush and 
Richard Valantasis (eds). Asceticism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 3-15. 
Waterson, Roxana. 1997. The living house. An anthropology of architecture in South -East Asia . 
London: Thames & Hudson. 
Waterson, Roxana. 2012. Flows of words and flows of blessings. The poetics of invocatory speech 
among the Sa’dan Toraja. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land-, en volkenkunde. 168(4): 391-419. 
Watkins, Calvert. 2001. How to kill a dragon. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Wessing, R. 1977. The position of the Badui in the larger West Javanese society. Man. 12(2): 293-303. 
Wessing, R. 1978. Cosmology and social behaviour in a West Javanese settlement. Athens, OH: Ohio 
University Centre for International Studies. 
Wessing, R. 1979. Life in the cosmic village. Cognitive models in Sundanese life. In E. Bruner and J. 
Becker (eds). Art, ritual and society in Indonesia. Athens, OH: Ohio University Centre for International 
Studies. 
West, A. J. 2017. Bujangga Manik. An Old Sundanese topogeny? Leiden University. Unpublished MA 
thesis. 
West, A. J. 2019. Manuscripts and the medieval tropics. In Bryan C. Keene (ed). Toward a global 
middle ages. Los Angeles: The J. Paul Getty Museum. 
West, Andrew Christopher. 1988. Catalogue of the Morrison collection of Chinese books . London: 
University of London School of Oriental and African Studies. 
West, M. L. 2007. Indo-European poetry and myth. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Wheatley, Paul. 1966 [1961]. The golden khersonese. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press. 
White, Lynn. 1960. Tibet, India, and Malaya as sources of western medieval technology. The American 
historical review. 65(3): 515-526. 
Whitten, Tony, R. E. Soeriaatmadja, and Suraya A. Afiff. 1996. The ecology of Java and Bali. Hong 
Kong: Periplus.

--- PAGE: 317 ---
Bibliography 
304 
 
Wilkinson, Richard James. 1932. A Malay-English dictionary. Mytilene: Salavopoulos and Kinderlis. 
Online edition: http://sealang.net/malay/dictionary.htm. 
Williams, Sean. 2001. The sound of the ancestral ship. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Winslow, Miron. 1862. A comprehensive Tamil and English dictionary. Madras: P. R. Hunt. 
Winstedt, Richard. 1950. The Malays. A cultural history. Revised edition. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul. 
Wiryamartana, I. Kuntara. 1993. The scriptoria in the Merbabu -Merapi area. Bijdragen tot de taal -, 
land-, en volkenkunde. 149(3):503-509. 
Wiryamartana, I. Kuntara and Willem van der Molen. 2001. The Merapi -Merbabu manuscripts. A 
neglected collection. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 157(1):51-64. 
Wisseman Christie, J. 1993. Texts and textiles in ‘medieval’ Java. Bulletin de l’école Française 
d’extrême-orient. 80(1):181-211. 
Wisseman Christie, J. 1995. State formation in early maritime Southeast Asia. A consideration of the 
theories and the data. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 151(2):235-288. 
Wolkenstein, Oswald von. 2007. Lieder. Stuttgart: Philipp Reclam. 
Wolters, O. W. 1970. The fall of Śrīvijaya in Malay history. London: Lund Humphries. 
Wooley, G. C. 1947. Malay cannon. Journal of the Malayan branch of the royal Asiatic society . 
20(2):35-38. 
Worsley, Peter , S. Supomo, Thomas M.  Hunter, and Margaret Fletcher. 2013. Mpu Monoga ṇa’s 
Sumanasāntaka. Leiden: Brill. Biblioteca Indonesica 36. 
Wright, Duncan, Tim Denham, Denis Shine, and Mark Donohue. 2013. An archaeological review of 
western New Guinea. Journal of world prehistory. 26(1): 25-73. 
Wurjantoro, Edhie. 2018. Anugerah Sri Maharaja. Depok: Universitas Indonesia. 
Yamada, Isamu. 1997. Tropical rain forests of Southeast Asia. A forest ecologist’s view. Peter Hawkes 
(trans). Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Yule, Henry. 1863. Mirabilia descripta. The wonders of the east. London: Hakluyt Society. 
Yule, Henry. 1903. Hobson-jobson. A glossary of colloquial Anglo-Indian words and phrases, and of 
kindred terms, etymological, historical, geographical and discursive. B.A. London: J. Murray.

--- PAGE: 318 ---
Bibliography 
305 
 
Yule, Henry and Arthur Coke Burnell. 2015 [1886]. Hobson-jobson. The definitive glossary of British 
India. Kate Teltscher (ed). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Zahorka, Herwig. 2006. Blowpipe dart poison in Borneo and the secret of its production. Borneo 
research bulletin. 31:223-232. 
Zahorka, Herwig. 2007. The Sunda kingdoms of West Java. Jakarta: Yayasan Cipta Loka Caraka. 
Zanetti, Ugo. 1995. Abu l -Makarim et Abu Salih.  Bulletin de la Société d’archéologie copte . 34:85–
138. 
Zanten, Wim van. 1984. The poetry of Tembang Sunda. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land-, en volkenkunde. 
140(2/3):289-316. 
Zanten, Wim van. 1995. Aspects of Baduy music in its sociocultural context with special reference to 
singing and angklung. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde. 151:516-544. 
Zanten, Wim van . 2008. The marriage relationship between player and kacapi zither in West Java. 
Ethnomusicology forum. 17(1):41-65. 
Zenkovsky, Serge A. 1974. Medieval Russia’s epics, chronicles, and tales . Revised and enlarged 
edition. New York: Meridian. 
Zoetmulder, P. J. 1974. Kalangwan. A survey of old Javanese literature. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Zoetmulder, P. J.  1982. Old Javanese -English dictionary . Leiden: KITLV Press.  Online edition: 
http://sealang.net/ojed. 
Zonneveld, Albert G. van. 2001. Traditional weapons of the Indonesian archipelago . Leiden: C. 
Zwartenkot, Art Books. 
* 
Manuscripts 
Aberystwyth, National Library of Wales, MS Peniarth 392D – the ‘Hengwrt Chaucer’ (c.1400). 
Berlin, S taatsbibliothek, MS Schoemaan I 21 – the OJv palm -leaf version of the Yoga Sutras of 
Patanjali, copied in Sunda in the late fifteenth century. 
Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 066A  – contains a copy of William of Rubruck’s account of 
the Mongols. 
Cape Town, National Library of South Africa, Grey Coll. 4 b 17 – a Middle Dutch version of 
Mandeville. Probably the oldest extant Dutch text to mention Java by name.

--- PAGE: 319 ---
Bibliography 
306 
 
Copenhagen, Det Konglige Bibliotek, NKS 66 – a c.1300 copy of a thirteenth-century Middle Danish 
herbal by Henrik Harpestræng. 
Cork, University College Cork , Boole Library, the Book of Lismore  (formerly in Chatsworth House, 
Derbyshire) – contains the abridged Irish vernacular Marco Polo. 
Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Portolano 1 – the so-called ‘Genoese’ world map of 1457. 
Jakarta, Museum Nasional, inv. nos. E.42-E.45 – the Kebantenan copperplate inscriptions (OSd, 
perhaps fourteenth-century). 
Jakarta, PNRI, L406 – contains both Carita Parahiyangan and Fragmen Carita Parahiyangan. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L416 & L423 – two MSS of the OSd text Poernawidjaja’s Hellevaart. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L408 – Séwaka Darma, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L410 – Ratu Pakuan, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L419 – Kawih Paningkes, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L422 – Jatiniskala, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L621 – Sanghyang Sasana Mahaguru, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L624 – Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (lontar version), an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L625 – Sri Ajnyana, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L626 – Sanghyang Swawarcita, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L630 – Sanghyang Siksakandang Karesian (gebang version), an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L632 – Amanat dari Galunggung, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI, L633 – Serat Séwaka, an OSd text. 
Jakarta, PNRI,  L1102 – the former designation o f The Sons of Rama & Rawana (aka Pantun 
Ramayana). The MS is now in the Sri Baduga Museum in Bandung. 
Leiden, UBL, Jav. MS No. 74 – Carita Waruga Guru, a late OSd text. 
Leiden, UBL, MS Or. Leyden 5091 – the manuscript of the OJv Nawanatya. 
Lisbon, Torre do Tombo, Gav. 15, mç. 8, n.º 2 – original text of the Luso-Sundanese treaty of 1522. 
Lisbon, Torre do Tombo, Gav. liv. 30 – the letters sent from Ternate to the King of Portugal in 1521 
and 1522.

--- PAGE: 320 ---
Bibliography 
307 
 
London, BL, Additional MS 19513  – contains the sole surviving manuscript  copy of Jordanus’s 
Mirabilia Descripta (c.1330) on f.3r-12r. Unfortunately not yet digitised. 
London, BL, Additional MS 5415 A – the Queen Mary Atlas (1555-1559). 
London, BL, Egerton MS 943 – an annotated early-fourteenth-century manuscript of Dante’s Comedia 
(‘Divine Comedy’). 
London, BL, Harley MS 3954 – a fifteenth-century MS of John Mandeville’s supposed travels. 
London, BL, IO Islamic 149  – the Ni‘matnāma-i Nāṣir al-Dīn Shāhī, a Persian -language cookbook 
from India. 
London, BL, MSS Malay F 1  – a Malay -language text presenting the genealogy of the kings of 
Pajajaran written in Batavia in 1887. 
London, BL, Royal MS 19 D I – a collection of texts describing the east, including Alexander romances, 
Polo, Odoric, John of Plano Carpini, and others (1333-1340). 
London, BL, Royal MS 20 E IX – the Boke of Idrography, a world atlas made for Henry VIII of England 
by the French cartographer Jean Rotz (1535-1542). 
London, SOAS Library, MS 48363  – a Chinese-Malay word-list compiled in 1492 for the mid -Míng-
dynasty Interpreters Institute (會通館). 
Modena, Biblioteca Estense, C.G.A.2 – the Cantino planisphere, a Portuguese world map of 1502. 
Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Cod.arab. 2570  – one part of Abū al -Makārim’s thirteenth -
century list of churches throughout the world. The Paris half is dated 1368. 
New Haven, Yale University Library, Beinecke MS 351  – the oldest surviving manuscript (1525) of 
Antonio Pigafetta’s account of the first circumnavigation of the world (1519 -1522). The language is 
French. 
Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Jav. b.3. (R) – Bujangga Manik. 
Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Selden Supra 105 – the Selden Map. 
Paris, Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal, Ms-5064 – a manuscript of Pietro de Crescenzi’s Livre des prouffitz 
champestres et ruraulx (‘treatise on rural economy’) (1470-1475). 
Paris, Bibliothèque de l’Assemblée nationale, 1248 (ED 19) – the Paris MS of Pires’ Suma Oriental. 
Paris, BnF, Arabe 307 – one part of Abū al-Makārim’s thirteenth-century list of churches of the world. 
The Paris half is dated 1368.

--- PAGE: 321 ---
Bibliography 
308 
 
Paris, BnF, Espagnol 30 – the Catalan Atlas (1375). 
Paris, BnF, Français 1116 – the oldest-known manuscript of the Divisiment dou Monde (c.1310). 
Paris, BnF, Français 2810  – a fifteenth-century French collection of travel literature, including Polo, 
Odoric, and Mandeville. 
Paris, BnF, GE DD-683 – the Atlas Miller, a Portuguese atlas of world (1519). 
Rome, BAV, Ott.lat.3324 – a fifteenth-century copy of Pero López de Ayala’s L ibro de la caza de las 
aves (1386), a falconry manual in Castilian. 
Rome, BAV, Urb.lat.224 – contains works by Poggio Bracciolini, including De Varietate Fortunæ, the 
fourth book of which recounts  Niccolò de’ Conti’s travels. Copied c.1460 by Niccolò di Antonio de’ 
Ricci. 
The Hague, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, 131 B 14 – a Middle Dutch version of Mandeville. 
The Hague, Nationaal Archief, VEL1172 – ‘Landkaart van Batavia na de Zuydzee’, a map of part o f 
West Java and Jakarta by Isaac de Graaff and Pieter Scipio (1695). 
Venice, Biblioteca Marciana, Cod. Mar. Lat. DXLIX  – the Codex Cumanicus, a composite work of 
c.1300 describing Cuman language and culture through Persian, Latin, and Middle High German. 
Vienna, ÖNB, Codex 3069 – The Vienna Büchsenmeisterbuch, a work of military technology (1411). 
Vienna, ÖNB, Wolkenstein -Handschrift A – one of the manuscripts containing the songs of the 
Minnesinger Oswald von Wolkenstein. 
*

--- PAGE: 322 ---
309 
 
Acknowledgements 
This thesis was not written under the best of circumstances and would not have been remotely possible 
without the help and support of Varvara, my wife; my parents, James and Kate; my aunt Geraldine; or 
my supervisors, Bernard Arps and Aone van Engelenhoven.  It would not have come about, either, 
without the work of J acobus Noorduyn, whose text of Bujangga Manik I first read in a cafe on High 
Street in Oxford during my lunch break a couple of years before beginning my doctoral research. Special 
thanks also go to  Panji Topan Bahagia,  Aditia Gunawan, Ilham Nurwansah, and  Wayan Jarrah 
Sastrawan, discussions with whom having helped significantly in the formulation of many of the ideas 
in this work. Copious cups of strong black Irish tea made the work bearable. 
Without my students and colleagues at Berlitz Language Centre in The Hague I doubt I would 
have had the money to make it through the Ph.D. I am also indebted to the large number of people who 
contributed advice, papers, corrections, moral support, help with transcriptions and translations , (on 
occasion) money, and many other things via Twitter and through other networks, online and o ff. It 
would not be possible to note all the people who have assisted in ways large and small, but here is a 
partial alphabetical list nonetheless: Nadeem Ahmad, Anton Alifandi, Timothy Allen, Nurul Azlan, 
Maja Bäckvall, Eric Beckman, Teresa Birks, Jonah Bomgaars, Alina Boyden, Philip Boyes, Bianca 
Buchholz, Eka Budiarti , Ian Burdon, Sara Charles,  John Cheong -Holdaway, Grace Choong , Lars 
Christensen, Paul Clammer, Paul Cobb, Nithin Coca, John Conroy, Ambar Corbridge, Joe Cuthbert, 
Lily Dahmayanti, Scott Davies, Suzanne Doig, Tim Dooling, Jo Edge, Eric Fanning, Peter Frankopan, 
Robert Friedrich, Annabel Gallop, Christine Garcia, Pawel Gaska, Caitlin Green, Monica H. Green, 
Guy Halsall, Tim Hannigan, Andi Haswidi, Ronny Hendrawan, Tom Hoogervorst, Steffen Hope, Sarah 
Hovde, Wen-Yi Huang , Eleanor Janega, Doris Jedamski, Eleanor K. Jones, Garrett Kam, Jonathan 
Katz, Stephanie Lahey, Sarah Lambert, Tom Lecaque, Michael Leadbetter, Janet Lee, Tse Yin Lee , 
Sjoerd Levelt, Herald van der Linde, Timothy Lubin, Ismail Lutfi, Sherri Makhijani, E. C. Matthijssen, 
Katherine McDonald , Stuart McDonald , Joumana Medlej,  Hanneke Meijer,  Joris Meijer , Gregory 
Melle, Cody Michaels , Alicia Miguélez,  Willem van der Molen,  Avery Morrow,  C. A. Mostert,  
Stephennie Mulder, Muhammad Najib, Theo Nash, David Nathan-Maister, Janine Nicol, Hélène Njoto, 
Marianne O’Doherty, Gordon Peake, Natali Pearson, Cliff Pereira, Pradewi TC, Michael Prior-Jones, 
David Pritchard, Josephine Quinn, Abdul Rahman, Greg Ralph, Charles Randles, Yael Rice, Norman 
Ricklefs, Chris Riedel, Karen Robinson,  Intan Paramita,  Óscar Perea Rodríguez , Thomas Rosario , 
Christopher Rouse, Anna Siebach-Larsen, Thomas Schmid, Katherine Schofield, Soon-Tzu Speechley, 
Sara Oberg Stradal, Lena Strid, Sidharto Suryodipuro, Freddy Tedja, Olov Tjerngren, Krithika Varagur, 
Raúl Villagrasa -Elías, Willemijn Waal, Geoff Wade, Kim Walker,  Björn Weiler, Tom Westbrook , 
Odette Westmijze, Edward White, Hope Winberry, Calvin Wong Tze Loon, and Stephen Yeager. 
*

--- PAGE: 323 ---
310 
 
Résumé 
Alexander Joseph West (born Leamington Spa, UK, on the 19th of November 1987) is a citizen of 
Ireland whose schooling  and upbringing took place chiefly in England.  After taking his A-Levels at 
Peter Symonds Sixth Form College in Winchester (2006), he studied for a bachelor’s degree in Chinese 
at the University of Leeds, graduating in 2010 with a 2:i. After that he did an MSc in social anthropology 
at Oxford University (2011), where he focussed on the ethnography of eastern Indonesia. West then 
trained as a teacher of English-as-a-foreign-language and worked in Oxford for several years, during 
which time he learned to read Jawi (Malay in Arabic script) and Old French, among other things. In 
August 2016, he got married and made the mistake of moving to the Netherlands  to pursue an MA in 
Asian Studies, from which he graduated cum laude in 2017 with a thesis on the Old Sundanese narrative 
poem Bujangga Manik. He unsuccessfully applied for Ph.D funding in early 2018, hoping to produce a 
new edition and study of Bujangga Manik at the Institute of Area Studies  at Leiden University . He 
decided to pursue the doctorate regardless, beginning on June 1st 2018 and submitting the thesis on the 
22nd of September 2020 . He worked as an English teacher throughout, first in The Hague an d then 
online during the coronavirus pandemic. 
*

--- PAGE: 324 ---
311 
 
Summary 
This thesis is an edition and study of Bujangga Manik, a narrative poem in Old Sundanese, a language 
of West Java (Sunda) in what is now Indonesia. The poem survives in a single manuscript, MS Jav. b.3. 
(R), which was deposited in the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford in 1627. The text dates to 
the late fifteenth century CE, perhaps to 1480 or so – before the Islamisation of Sunda in the sixteenth 
century, before the establishment of the first European colonies in Southeast Asia in 1511, and before 
the accompanying impact of the Columbian Exchange. It is one of only a few witnesses to this period 
in Sundanese and, indeed, Indonesian history. This dissertation uses the te xt as a starting -point for a 
study of fifteenth -century island Southeast Asia in the round, using archaeological evidence and 
contemporaneous texts in a range of other languages, particularly Portuguese, Classical Chinese, and 
Old Javanese, to provide further information about the people, places, and material culture evinced in 
the text. 
Bujangga Manik relates the travels of a fictional nobleman from Pakuan, the capital of the 
kingdom of Sunda, through Java and Bali, as he leaves his life and family behind in order to improve 
himself spiritually and become an ascetic – and, upon his death, a god. ‘Bujangga Manik’ is one of the 
three names by which this ascetic is known over the course of the text. During his travels, which are 
narrated in the first person, he gains in insight and spiritual authority. This culminates in a vision of the 
world seen from the summit of Mount Papandayan in West Java, after which the ascetic retires from 
travelling and establishes a hermitage. Here he meditates, sweeps the ground wi th a broom, and dies 
without illness a decade later, whereupon he ascends to heaven. The surviving manuscript comprises 
30 lontar leaves, and at least four others are missing, including one (or more) at the end; the poem 
finishes mid-sentence, with the ascetic’s soul riding a bejewelled yak while gongs and metallophones 
are beaten and lightning flashes in the sky. Many articles of material culture are described or referred 
to throughout the poem, including rosewater, cannons, and ocean-going junks, among many others, and 
the small cast of characters, most of them friendly and caring, provide a welcome counterpoint to the 
crude depictions of fifteenth-century Javan people found in accounts written by foreigners.  
The centrepiece of the thesis is an extensively updated edition of the Old Sundanese text with 
an improved English translation (Part II), building on the work of Jacobus Noorduyn and Andries 
Teeuw, who first published a version of Bujangga Manik in 2006. An extensive study of the codicology, 
palaeography, and language of the manuscript and poem precedes the text (Part I), as does an 
Introduction intended to place Bujangga Manik in its proper historical context as part of a wider Afro-
Eurasian hemisphere of interaction and exchange. The remainder of the  thesis is an extended 
commentary on the poem’s contents. This includes a discussion of the important theme of place and of 
the many place names that occur in the text (Part III); an overview of the poem’s characters and their 
roles (Part IV); descriptions of the ships the ascetic travels on and their multi-ethnic crews (Part V); and

--- PAGE: 325 ---
312 
 
finally an analysis of the textiles, dyestuffs, perfumes, toiletries, narcotics, weapons, and other 
manufactured goods mentioned at various points in the text (Part VI). A brief epilogue summarises the 
conclusions of the thesis. 
* 
Samenvatting 
Dit proefschrift is een editie en studie van de Bujangga Manik, een verhalend gedicht in het Oud -
Soendanees, een taal van West-Java (Soenda) in het huidige Indonesië. Het gedicht is bewaard gebleven 
in een enkel manuscript, MS Jav. b.3. (R), dat in 1627 werd gedeponeerd in de Bodleian Library aan de 
Universiteit van Oxford. De tekst dateert uit het einde van de vijftiende eeuw na Christus, misschien uit 
ongeveer 1480 – vóór de islamisering van Soenda in de zestiende eeuw, vóór de oprichting van de eerste 
Europese koloniën in Zuidoost -Azië in 1511, en vóór de bijbehorende impact van de Col umbiaanse 
uitwisseling. Het is een van de weinige get uigen van deze periode in de S oendanese en inderdaad de 
Indonesische geschiedenis. Dit proefschrift gebruikt de tekst als uitgangspunt voor een algemene studie 
van het vijftiende -eeuwse insulair Zuidoost-Azië, met gebruikmaking van archeologisch bewijs en 
contemporaine teksten in een reeks andere talen, met name Portugees, Klassiek Chinees en Oud -
Javaans, om verdere informatie te verschaffen over de mensen, plaatsen en materiële cultuur die in de 
tekst tot uiting komen. 
De Bujangga Manik vertelt over de reizen van een fictieve edelman uit Pakuan, de hoofdstad 
van het koninkrijk Soenda, door Java en Bali, terwijl hij zijn leven en familie achter zich laat om zichzelf 
geestelijk te verbeteren en een asceet te worden - en, na zijn dood, een god. ‘Bujangga Manik ’ is een 
van de drie namen waaronder deze asceet in de tekst bekend is. Tijdens zijn reizen, die in de eerste  
persoon worden verteld, verwerft hij inzicht en spiritueel gezag. Dit culmineert in een gezicht op de 
wereld gezien vanaf de top van de berg Papandayan in West-Java, waarna de asceet ophoudt met reizen 
en een kluizenarij opricht. Hier mediteert hij, veegt de grond met een bezem en sterft een decennium 
later zonder ziekte, waarna hij opstijgt naar de hemel. Het overgebleven handschrift bestaat uit 30 
lontar-bladen en er ontbreken minstens vier andere, waaronder een (of meer) aan het einde. Het gedicht 
eindigt halverwege een zin, met de ziel van de asceet die op een met juwelen getooide jak rijdt, terwijl 
gongs en metallofonen worden geslagen en de bliksem de lucht verlicht. Veel artikelen van materiële 
cultuur worden in de loop van het gedicht beschreven of er wordt naar verwezen, waaronder rozenwater, 
kanonnen en  oceaanwaardige jonken, en vele andere . D e kleine groep personages, grotendeels 
vriendelijk en zorgzaam, vormt een welkom contrapunt voor de ungenuanceerd weergave  van 
vijftiende-eeuwse bewoners van het eiland Java die men aantreft in verslagen van buitenlanders. 
Het middelpunt van het proefschrift is een uitgebreid bijgewerkte editie van de Oud-
Soendanese tekst met een verbeterde Engelse vertaling (deel II), voortbouwend op het werk van Jacobus

--- PAGE: 326 ---
313 
 
Noorduyn en Andries Teeuw, die voor het eerst een versie van  de Bujangga Manik publiceerden in 
2006. Een uitgebreide studie van de codicologie, paleografie en taal van het handschrift en gedicht gaat 
vooraf aan de tekst (deel I), even als een inleiding bedoeld om de Bujangga Manik  in zijn juiste 
historische context te plaatsen als onderdeel van een meeromvattend Afro-Euraziatisch halfrond met 
interactie en uitwisseling. De rest van het proefschrift is een uitgebreid commentaar op de inh oud van 
het gedicht. Dit omvat een bespreking van het belangrijke thema van plaats en van de vele plaatsnamen 
die in de tekst voorkomen (deel III); een overzicht van de personages van het gedicht en hun rollen 
(deel IV); beschrijvingen van de schepen waaro p de asceet reist en hun multi -etnische bemanningen 
(deel V); en tenslotte een analyse van de textiel, kleurstoffen, parfums, toiletartikelen, verdovende 
middelen, wapens en andere producten die op verschillende punten in de tekst worden genoemd (deel 
VI). Een korte epiloog vat de conclusies van het proefschrift samen. 
* 
Ringkasan 
Tesis ini merupakan edisi dan kajian Bujangga Manik, puisi naratif dalam bahasa Sunda Kuna, bahasa 
Jawa Barat (Sunda). Puisi itu bertahan dalam satu naskah, MS Jav. b.3. ( R), yang disimpan di 
Perpustakaan Bodleian di Universitas Oxford sejak tahun 1627. Teks tersebut berasal dari akhir abad 
kelima belas M, mungkin sekitar 1480 – sebelum Islamisasi Sunda pada abad keenam belas, sebelum 
berdirinya koloni Eropa pertama di Asia Tenggara pada tahun 1511, dan sebelum dampak  Pertukaran 
Kolumbus yang menyertainya. Bujangga Manik adalah salah satu dari sedikit saksi tentang periode ini 
dalam sejarah Sunda dan sejarah Indonesia. Disertasi ini menggunakan teks sebagai titik awal untuk 
mempelajari kebudayaan Asia Tenggara abad ke-15 secara keseluruhan, menggunakan bukti arkeologi 
dan teks kontemporer dalam berbagai baha sa lain, terutama Portugis, Cina Klasik, dan Jawa Kuno, 
untuk memberikan informasi lebih lanjut tentang orang, tempat, dan budaya material yang muncul 
dalam teks. 
Bujangga Manik menceritakan perjalanan seorang bangsawan fiksional dari Pakuan, ibu kota 
kerajaan Sunda, melalui Jawa dan Bali, saat ia meninggalkan kehidupannya yang lama dan keluarganya 
untuk meningkatkan diri secara spiritual dan menjadi seorang pertapa – dan menjadi seorang dewata 
setelah kematiannya. 'Bujangga Manik' adalah salah satu dari ti ga nama yang digunakan petapa ini di 
sepanjang teks. Selama perjalanannya, yang diceritakan dalam bentuk orang pertama, dia memperoleh 
wawasan dan otoritas spiritual. Hal ini memuncak pada suatu pemandangan dunia yang dilihat dari 
puncak Gunung Papandayan di Jawa Barat . Sesudah itu pertapa Bujangga Manik menghentikan 
pengembaraannya dan mendirikan pertapaan.  Di pertapaan ini dia bermeditasi, menyapu tanah, dan 
meninggal tanpa penyakit satu dasa warsa kemudian. Lalu dia naik ke surga. Naskah yang masih ada 
terdiri dari 30 daun lontar dan setidaknya empat lainnya hilang, termasuk satu daun (atau lebih) di

--- PAGE: 327 ---
314 
 
bagian akhir. Puisi itu berakhir di tengah kalimat, dengan jiwa sang pertapa mengendarai yak berhiaskan 
berlian sementara gong dan bunyi -bunyian lainnya dipukuli dan halilintar menerangi langit. Banyak 
artikel budaya material dijelaskan atau dirujuk di seluruh puisi, termasuk air mawar, meriam dan kapal 
jong, di antara banyak lainnya. Tokoh -tokoh Bujangga Manik  yang kebanyakan ramah dan peduli 
menantang penggambaran yang tidak menyenangkan dari orang Pulau Jawa abad kelima belas yang 
ditemukan dalam catatan yang ditulis oleh orang asing. 
Inti dari tesis ini adalah teks Bujanga Manik dalam bahasa Sunda Kuna yang diperbarui secara 
ekstensif dengan terjemahan bahasa Inggris baru (Bagian II), yang didasarkan pada karya Jacobus 
Noorduyn dan Andries Teeuw yang menerbitk an versi Bujangga Manik pada tahun 2006. Kajian dari 
kodikologi dan paleografi naskah dan bahasa puisi mendahului teks (Bagian I). Demikian juga sebuah 
pendahuluan yang dimaksudkan untuk menempatkan Bujangga Manik dalam konteks Asia Tenggara 
yang tepat sebagai bagian dari belahan Afro -Eurasia yang lebih luas. Sisa dari tesis adalah komentar 
tambahan tentang isi puisi. Ini termasuk diskusi tentang tema penting yaitu tempat, dan tentang banyak 
nama tempat yang muncul dalam teks (Bagian III); gambaran dari tokoh dalam cerita dan peran mereka 
(Bagian IV); uraian tentang kapal-kapal yang dinaiki pertapa dan awak multi-etnis mereka (Bagian V); 
dan terakhir analisis tentang tekstil, zat warna, wangi-wangian, perlengkapan mandi, narkotika, senjata 
dan barang buatan lainnya yang disebutkan di berbagai tempat dalam teks (Bagian VI). Epilog singkat 
merangkum kesimpulan dari tesis. 
*

