--- PAGE: 1 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
8 
Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra 
An Innovation on Bedhaya Choreography 
 
Saryuni Padminingsih 
Indonesia Institute of the Arts, Surakarta. Indonesia 
 
Abstract 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was a new choreography form of the Bedhaya  dance genre.  This research was conducted 
to create a choreography developed from Bedhaya . The basic assumption of this research was that Bedhaya Sarpo 
Rodra  was based on the Bedhaya  dance form which was processed through development  research. This research 
was a study of innovations for Bedhaya  choreography. Bedhaya  was a form of palace classic choreography that 
had had standard patterns as a form of noble dance. This dance had a high artistic level, not only from its historical 
factor but also from its current position in the Pa lace. The problems examined in this study were: Wha t was the 
shape of Sarpo Rodra 's choreography? What was the expression of innovation from the Bedhaya  choreography in 
Bedaya Sarpo Rodra ? The specific objective to be achieved was to prov ide knowledge and understanding of the 
wider community about the motion patterns that form ed Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  choreography as an innovation in 
Bedhaya  choreography. The target of this research output was to produce a written study of Bedhaya  choreography 
innovations, which were Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra 's choreographic motion patterns. This study used t he 
ethnochoreology approach, as a form of analysis of dance creation work. 
Keywords: Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra, motion pattern, choreography 
DOI : 10.7176/ADS/79-02 
Publication date: December 31st  2019 
 
1. Heading 1 
Introduction 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was a dance model as an innovation of Bedhaya  choreography. This Bedhaya  was arranged 
in 2007 and was performed at the Teater Kecil ISI S utakarta. Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  dance was composed using 
rias  (makeup) paes  and dodot  style costume. The choreography in this dance used  Javanese choreography whose 
structure consisted of maju beksan, beksan, and  mundur beksan . The accompaniment music for this dance used 
Javanese gamelan  equipped with violin, jimbe, bedug, and  kenthongan  instruments. 
The first structure was maju beksan , four dancers moved forward from the four corners of the stage with 
vocals using Indonesian, then followed by three dan cers lined up to enter the stage from the right cor ner of the 
stage. The motion used was kapang-kapang motion, interspersed with rotating motion in place with the mayuk  
body position. 
The fact proved that Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  dance had a novelty. This could be seen in the dance choreography 
and music. However, Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  dance choreography was still thick with the content of bedhaya dance 
choreography rules. Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  was different from classic Bedhaya because of the choice of dancers, 
the choice of motion patterns, and the music. The c horeography composition looked different from the c lassic 
bedhaya. Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  motion pattern was seen as the development of Surakarta traditional female dance 
patterns. This could be seen in the motion of the h ips, facial expressions, hand movements, and the he ight of 
penthangan  astha . 
Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  dance performance was a phenomenon of innovation a nd choreography development 
existence in the Bedhaya  dance. Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  dance was a creation of a Bedhaya  model that was different 
from the other Bedhaya especially the court Bedhaya . This phenomenon became a form of Bedhaya  outside the 
palace walls. This was a fact that caught my attent ion as a choreographer. I wanted to make innovation s in the 
form of bedhaya choreography variations. But the qu estion was whether after experiencing choreographic  
expansion, Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  was included in the Bedhaya  region. 
Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  as a form of Bedhaya  outside the palace was unique in its presentation,  for example 
movements that had fast, strong, rough, large ( rowa ) tempos, hips wiggling, and shoulders shaking. Bes ides, its 
uniqueness was also due to the unstable tempo and gojegan  (jokes) among dancers. Those were things that were  
not usually seen in classic Bedhaya  dance. The music in Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  was not in tune with the dance 
moves. Sometimes music was just an illustration. This was an important note in a work creation study, as an effort 
to analyze Bedhaya's  development and innovation. The main problem of th is research was why Bedhaya Sarpo 
Rodra  used the name " Bedhaya ", given that the presentation was clearly differen t from the classic Bedhaya . If 
Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  was proven to be a form of Bedhaya  dance, how would the choreography development 
innovate? 
Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  was a classic dance innovation, because Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra was based on the 
Bedhaya  choreography. But in its overall composition, Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  had experienced movement, dance

--- PAGE: 2 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
9 
music, makeup, and costume adjustments. 
The information above was an interesting material to be used as an object of research, with the aim to uncover 
some of the following problems. a. How did the Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  pattern of motion form? b. How did 
Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra' s innovation develop as Bedhaya  choreography? The purpose of this research was to provide 
knowledge and understanding to the public about Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  and its innovation and development as 
one of Bedhaya  choreographies. The specific purpose of this research was to provide knowledge and understanding 
of the wider community regarding the innovation in the development of the Bedhaya  choreography. 
Research and writing on the Bedhaya  dance from the perspective of the text and its con text had been widely 
discussed. I also used other writings about Bedhaya  in working on Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra . Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra's 
research was an analysis of dance that I composed m yself. Various sources of literature were used to r eview and 
ensure the existence of this study in order to avoi d plagiarism (imitation). This research used writte n sources that 
were almost the same or related to the topic to be studied. But this research was also used as an anal ysis of the 
work that I did. The thesis was “Hubungan Ekspresi Penuangan Bedhaya  dengan Koreografi Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra   
Susunan Saryuni Padminingsih”. 
“Tari Bedhaya Ketawang : Reaktualisasi Hubungan Mistis Panembahan Senopoat i dengan Kanjeng Ratu 
Kencana Sari dan Perkembangannya” was a thesis by N ora Kustantina Dewi compiled in 1994. This work 
discussed the historical side, the form of performance, and the symbolic meaning of the Bedhaya  dance in palace. 
In addition, it was written that Bedhaya Ketawang  was considered a master for other Bedhaya  dances so that it 
was certain that the choreographic form of Bedhaya Ketawang  was still very original. 
The book written by K.G.P.H. Hadiwidjojo with the title “ Bedhaya Ketawang  Tarian Sakral di Candi-candi” 
in 1981 discussed everything about Bedhaya  which originated from dances in temples before the  Mataram era. 
The discussion in the book focused on Bedhaya Ketawang  dance in terms of its creation, the form of the da nce, 
and the features that the dance had. Besides being used as a reference for the production of Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra , 
this book was also used to position this research as original research because its form was an art work analysis. 
Sunarno Purwolelono's thesis was titled “Garap Susunan Tari Tradisi Surakarta Sebuah Studi Kasus Bedhaya 
Ela-Ela ”, released in 2007. This thesis revealed the creat ion of a classic dance in Bedhaya Ela-Ela . The essence 
of the thesis was that joged Bedhaya Ela-Ela  was considered to have contributed to the developm ent of dance in 
particular Bedhaya  and Srimpi  and Bedhayan  dance in general. Bedhaya Ela-Ela  dance was an example of the 
development of Bedhaya  dance work which was born and grew outside the Surakarta Palace. 
Suraji's thesis titled " Bedhaya Suryasumirat  di Pura Mangkunegaran " in 2001. This thesis examined Bedhaya 
Suryasumirat  in Pura Mangkunegaran which had the distinctive characteristics of the Bedhaya  dance in the palace. 
Bedhaya Purnama Jati Karya K.R.T. Sasmintadipura: E kspresi Seni Jagad Tari Keraton Yogyakata tahun 
2009 , compiled by Y. Murdiyati. This book discussed the techniques and the process of creating Bedhaya Purnama 
Jati , in which it reviewed the philosophical and aesthetic values of the Bedhaya Purnama Jati . The discussion was 
used as a reference in the creation of Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  and at the same time as an overview in positioning  
this original research as an art work analysis. 
Some of the books had discussed various forms of cl assic Bedhaya  dance, Bedhaya  dance which still used 
standard rules applied in the palace even though it had undergone a change in choreography. Research on the form 
of dance Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra which discussed the innovation of this dance had ne ver been disclosed or 
researched in previous studies, so it could be said that this Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  research was an original study. 
This research was a type of qualitative research with descriptive data. The focus of this choreography research 
study was the science of dance. Dance research bega n with the recording process in composing dance whi ch in 
turn became a record in finding dance creation methods. Starting from this process the choreographer could make 
an analysis of his work (Slamet MG: 20016, 183). 
The method used in this research was interactive an d descriptive analytical interpretative methods. This was 
a way of researching the creation process to the po int of reviewing the work and analyzing the work do ne by the 
researcher as a choreographer. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance research applied the stages of dance research as stated 
by Slamet including: 1) Observation. Field research by observation, by describing, and recording; 2) Exploration, 
as a step in searching; 3) Experiment, as a step to try to match the motion obtained; 4) Contemplation, steps to get 
the results of conformity with the desired pattern of work, 5) Formation, steps in the preparation of choreography; 
6) Compile the combination of formations, steps, mu sic, and words obtained to become complete dances; 7) 
Making conclusions (Slamet MD, 2016: 40-44). 
The data collection included: 
The observation was the first step made in this study. Observations were carried out by reviewing the record 
of the process of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra' s dance work as well as making indirect observation s through video, by 
observing some recorded video of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance as in 2007, when it was staged at the Teater Kecil 
ISI Surakarta, in 2008 when it was staged at the Te ater Besar ISI Surakarta, in 2010 when staged at th e Pendopo 
ISI Surakarta, and direct observations when the dan ce was staged at the wedding reception of the daugh ter of the 
composer of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra dance at the Pendop o ISI Surakarta in 2014, and observed the performan ce at

--- PAGE: 3 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
10 
the Teater Besar ISI Surakarta as a bachelor degree final project by Fajar Prasetyani in 2015. 
On this initial stage, I examined the notes and vid eos that recorded the dance creating process. The a ctivity 
helped me recalled the process of composing a pattern of motion that had its own uniqueness. Then I began to look 
at other elements of choreography such as dancers, make-up, costume, and floor patterns. Through these  
observations, I found a different form of performan ce in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra dance when compared to classic 
Bedhaya  dance. This was indicated by the variation of chor eographic elements that were not commonly used in 
Bedhaya  dance. The results of these observations were all used as a process of reviewing the work of research ers 
in an effort to analyze the process of the work and the results displayed, as an analysis of the work of the concepts 
and methods found. 
I conducted an interview by searching for sources t hat provided inspiration for the preparation of Bedhaya 
Sarpo Rodra . Selected interviewees consisted of people who were competent in the field of dance, especially those 
who could provide information about the object of t his research. The main interviewee was the composer  of the 
Bedhaya Sarpra Rodra  dance, S. Pamardi. S. Pamardi was chosen as the main interviewee based on his knowledge 
and experience in the preparation of the Surakarta classic dance. The information obtained covered all  aspects 
related to the Bedhaya Sapra Rodra  dance. 
Supporting interviewees: Didik Bambang Wahyudi, the person in charge of implementing the activity as well 
as the writer of the Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance script. This interviewee was chosen based on his artistic ability in 
making dances. Didik was a dance lecturer at ISI Surakarta who was often involved in dance creation. An interview 
with Didik successfully revealed information about the idea of dance creation and the dance form of Bedhaya 
Sarpa Rodra . The next interviewee was Wahyudi Sutrisno, compos er of music. This interviewee revealed 
information about the composing music idea, the mus ical presentation form, and the dance music notatio n. The 
interviewee from the dancer's side was Surni, one of the dancers of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  and Bedhaya Ketawang . 
The dancer was chosen based on experience and danci ng techniques. This dancer revealed information abo ut her 
involvement in the making of the dance. In addition , this dancer would describe dance moves as a graph ic 
presentation tool, because dancers memorized the co unts and movements of the dance so that it would be  more 
easily written into the dance notation. Supriyadi w as a lighting-man for Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance. He gave 
information about lighting in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra dance performance. Wahyu Santoso Prabowo, one of th e 
dance lecturers at ISI Surakarta who was involved in the preparation of Bedhaya Sapra Rodra dance script. Wahyu 
Santoso Prabowo provided data on the creation of th e Bedhaya  dance and its concept. Literature study was 
conducted to obtain references related to bedhaya and the rules of Bedhaya  choreography. 
 
Discussion 
a.  Motion Pattern 
The sequences of motion and the arrangement of the gending for Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra 's choreography were 
different from those of palace Bedhaya . The motion form or motion pattern was seen from t he structure of body 
movement patterns. Motion pattern as the smallest l ink arrangement of the motion elements that already  has 
meaning (Hadi: 2011, 39). The series of movements at Bedhaya Sarpo Rodra  were arranged to convey the meaning 
of the dance theme. This was what distinguished Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  from palace Bedhaya . Although both had 
themes, palace Bedhaya  still used classic female dance moves. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  had developed in an effort 
to display characters on dance themes. The dancer's body and experience provided a pattern in the motion pattern 
of this dance. Motion patterns that tended to be rough, strong, fast, and rowa  (had large volume). 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra' s choreography presented a different motion pattern  from female classic dance. At 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra , I deliberately widened the volume of female class ic dance moves, to bring up the 
Sarpakenaka concept. This work also left vocabulary of female classic dance moves such as lumaksana, kembang 
pepe, sekarsuwun, and  pendhapan . An example was kembang pepe  motion pattern. The kembang pepe  motion 
pattern was to rotate the body to the position of l ess than 90 °. In Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  choreography, the 
movement was developed to 90 ° with a curved movement position, to get the impression of erotic motion. 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance motion featured Sarpakenaka concept, a figure known for being passionate about 
love. Based on Sarpakenaka concept, new patterns we re arranged that were different from the patterns o f classic 
female dance moves. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  began and ended with the kapang-kapang motion. For mation of 
motion patterns in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was an innovative model of classic female motion. The motion patterns 
that were formed described Sarpakenaka figure. Thes e motion patterns actually existed in the female da nce 
character lanyap , but in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra , they were shown more realistic with various character movements 
which tended to not exist in female dance. 
Innovations in the Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  movement also appeared in the motion patterns that were connecting 
and transitioning, such as the sindhet and srisig . In principle, the formation of the Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  motion 
pattern was still based on classic female dance patterns. The creation of new motion patterns because the characters 
and techniques of motion needed to display the conc ept of Sarpakenaka on Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra . The motion 
patterns in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  were grouped into four categories, namely: gesture , pure motion, Baton signal

--- PAGE: 4 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
11 
motion, displacement movement (Slamet: 2014, 28). 
1.  Maknawai  motion or gesture. Motion that was formed as an im itation and had symbolic meaning. 
This motion pattern was formed from the Sarpakenaka  concept as a snake then the motion pattern 
that was formed was imitative motion, imitating the motion of a snake.                        
 
Pic. 1. Laban notation fot fingers key 
 
 
Pic. 2. Dance Notation for Maknawai  Motion/Gesture, Twisting Motion Pattern 
2.  Pure motion, The motion pattern that was formed due  to aesthetic needs, did not have any message. 
In Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra , the motion pattern which was categorized into pur e motion, for example, 
was kembang pepe  pttern motion.

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
12 
 
Pic. 3. Pure Motion Dance Notation, Kembang Pepe  Motion Pattern  
3.  Baton Signal Motion, motion that was carried out as  an expression enhancer. This motion pattern 
was formed to strengthen the expression of a motion pattern. In Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra , the the baton 
signal motion was manifested in a twisting motion with variations in the hand stretching. 
 
 
Pic. 4. Baton Signal Motion, Twisting Motion Pattern 
4.  Locomotion motion or movement to move places, this was the motion used to change places as a 
change in position for dancers. Motion to change position like this, in classic dance was usually called 
by srisig motion.

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
13 
 
Pic. 5. Dance Notation, Locomotion Motion, SIrisig Motion Pattern 
b.  Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra choreography innovation 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  choreography compilation was based on classic female dance and Bedhaya  keraton that was 
rooted in Bedhaya Pitu . The set of dancers was still using Bedhaya Pitu  concept which consisted of: batak, endhel 
ajeg, apit meneng, apit mburi, gulu, dhadh, and  buncit.  The function of these dancers was not like that of Bedhaya 
Sanga . The number of dancers with only seven people led to the loss of of endhel  weton  dan apit  ngarep  roles. 
These two parts of the body were represented by only one, such as the arms and legs. In this case, endhel weton  as 
the leg and apit ngarep  as the arm. 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was compiled based on the classic female motion patterns. Choreographers innovated 
in this motion arrangement by enlarging the motion volume such as the stretch which initially trap cethik  was 
changed into a straight arm, even at a high level o f straightened arm that was not normally done in fe male classic 
dances. 
 
Pic. 6. High Level of Left-arm Straightened Motion 
Motion innovations were also carried out on jengkeng  motion by mayuk forward to 60 °, thus, new motion 
patterns were formed due to dance needs. In additio n, volume innovation was also carried out on the hoyogan, 
sindhet, and  leyekan  motion pattern,. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was a dance form of Bedhayan  which was different 
from the palace Bedhaya . The motion volume of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was dominant. This was shown in the 
stretch of the hand to get the impression of great motion. Meanwhile twisting mayuk  motion was developed to get 
a depiction of snakes in addition to showing erotic motion.

--- PAGE: 7 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
14 
 
Pic. 7. Wider Arms Volume by Raising the Arms Higher Like Agem in Balinese Dance (Photo: Rindhu, 2015) 
 
 
Pic. 8. Motion Volume by Spreading Both Arms (Photo: Rindhu, 2015)

--- PAGE: 8 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
15 
 
Pic. 9.  Fingers position, Mimicking Snake (Photo: Rindhu, 2015) 
 
 
Pic. 10. Shindet  Motion Pattern with Wider Volume (Photo: Saryuni, 2007) 
 
 
Pic. 11. Kapang-kapang  Motion, Higher (and wider) Penthangan  of the Arms (Photo: Saryuni, 2007) , 
Innovation in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  motion was a demand in its choreography because of the chosen theme. 
On this occasion I deliberately worked on Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra , in the form of Bedhayan  with the intention of 
displaying an innovation in the Bedhaya  choreography, which was usually bound by the classic court dance rules. 
The applied motion innovation was an attempt to get newness in choreography. Changes in a motion pattern could 
be varied with the motion development, such as kapang-kapang  motion was interspersed with rotating srisig 
motion that was performed with different tempo. Lik ewise, the development of srisig, carried out with the 
Yogyakarta style srisig , that was the arm ngrayung , then began mancat madal then  mendak , and walked.

--- PAGE: 9 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
16 
Innovation was also done by giving variations to the sembahan  motion. While sembahan jengkeng  performed with 
the body mayuk  forward. 
 
Pic. 12. Sembahan  Motion Pattern, Body Position in Mayuk  Forward (Photo: Saryuni, 2007) 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was not only developed based on Javanese classic f emale dance, but also based on 
Balinese dance, for example in variations of arms r aised upwards like agem , Malay dance with crossed footsteps 
and tiptoe. Motion variations were made to give the feel of a coreography, arranged in the form of Bedhayan . The 
purpose of this dance innovation was to provide a v ariation for Bedhaya  coregraphy, especially Javanese 
choreography. 
 
Conclusion 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  as a choreography form of the Bedhayan  dance, its form was different from the Palace 
Bedhaya . The form of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was an innovative movement from the classic Bedhaya . The 
formation of this motion became a new form of motio n patterns and new dance from Bedhaya  choreography. 
Bedhaya  dance was a female group dance with nine dancers while being danced at the Palace ( Kraton ) and seven 
in the duchy ( Pura ). 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was different from other Bedhaya  dances. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance motions were 
arranged to realize Sarpakenaka character, which wa s manifested in the imitative motion of the snake. This form 
of motions presented a new motion pattern that tended to twist, and the arm became an imitation of a snake's head. 
The motion arrangement  of this Bedhaya  was not bound by the rules of the Bedhaya  dance. 
The preparation of Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance moves was inseparable from the consideration s of the 
dancer's body work, motion techniques, motion forms , and content. The dancer's body was an important 
consideration in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance, because this dance movement was an explorat ion movement that 
required dancer experience and bodily flexibility. The motion technique in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  motion pattern 
required flexibility and mastery of the technique. The motion form became important when needed as an 
expression that embodies the dance theme. Through t he motion form, variations in motion could be seen in each 
motion pattern. In addition, the motion form was al so useful for viewing the motion track, floor track , motion 
volume and level. 
Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra' s choreography innovation produced a dance that was  different from other Bedhaya . 
This could be seen in the motion patterns which wer e innovations from classic patterns and other dance s such as 
Balinese and Malay dance. This innovation was done to get a new motion pattern according to the dance theme. 
In addition, the motion pattern in Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  did not have to have the same rhythm and tempo as in the 
other Bedhaya . So it could be seen that sometimes the movement r hythm and the count were not in tune with the 
dance accompaniment. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  was a form of Bedhaya  dance that did not strictly follow the patterns 
of Bedhaya  rules, such as makeup, costume, dance moves, floor patterns, and dance music. Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  
was a form of Bedhayan , but not a Bedhaya . Then it could be concluded that Bedhaya Sarpa Rodra  dance was a 
Bedhayan , and was a classic choreographic innovation. 
 
References 
Dewi, Nora Kustantina “Tari Bedhaya Ketawang:  Reaktualisasi Hubungan Mistis Panembahan Senopoati dengan 
Kanjeng Ratu Kencana Sari dan Perkembangannya” tesi s Pengkajian Seni Pertunjukan  UGM Yogyakarta 
tahun 1994  
Hadiwidjojo, K.G.P.H, Bedhaya Ketawang Tarian Sakral di Candi-candi , Jakarta: Balai Pustaka,  1981.  
Herawati, Enis Niken, “Makna Simbolis dalam Tatarak it Tari Bedhaya” TRADISI  Jurnal Seni dan Budaya . Vol. 
No 1 (November 2010): 81-93.

--- PAGE: 10 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.79, 2019 
 
17 
Hucthinson, Ann, Labannotation or Kinetrigrahy Laban. New York: A Thether Arts Book, 1977. 
MD, Slamet, Barongan Blora Menari di Atas Politik dan Terpaan Zaman, Surakarta: Citra Sains LPKPBN, 2014. 
_________, Garan Joged Pemikiran Sunarno . Surakarta: Citra Sains LPKPBN, 2014. 
_________. Melihat Tari . Surakarta: : Citra Sains LPKPBN, 20016. 
Murdiyati, Bedhaya Purnama Jati Karya K.R.T. Sasmintadipura Ek spresi Seni Jagad Tari Kraton 
Yogyakarta.Yogyakarta: Multigrafindo Jogja, 2009. 
Purwolelono, Sunarno “Garap Susunan Tari Tradisi Su rakarta Sebuah Studi Kasus Bedhaya Ela-Ela” Tesis 
Pascasarjana ISI Surakarta tahun 2007 
Suraji “Bedhaya Suryasumirat di Pura Mangkunegaran”  Tesis S2 Pengkajian Seni Pertunjukan Sekolah Tingg i 
Seni Indonesia Surakarta, 2001. 
Suharji . “ Dampak Perubahn Sistem Nilai Terhadap B edhaya Surya Sumirat Sebagai Kreativitas Tari Bedha ya 
Baru Mangkunegaran” Harmonia  Jurnal Pengetahuan dan Pemikiran Seni Vol 9 No. 2 . 2009.
