--- PAGE: 1 ---
*Corresponding Author
P-ISSN: 2087-1236
E-ISSN: 2476-9061
169
Humaniora, 11(3), November 2020, 169-175
DOI: 10.21512/humaniora.v11i3.6540
A REVIEW OF THE ROLE OF INTANGIBLE AXIS TOWARD
THE PATHOK NEGORO’S DESIGN CONCEPT, YOGYAKARTA
Silvia Meliana1*; Octaviana Sylvia Caroline2
1,2Interior Design Department, School of Design, Bina Nusantara University
Jl. K.H. Syahdan No. 9, Palmerah, Jakarta 11480, Indonesia
1silvia.meliana@ binus.ac.id; 2baby@binus.ac.id
Received: 30th June 2020/ Revised: 14th July 2020/ Accepted: 03rd August 2020
How to Cite: Meliana, S., & Caroline, O. S. (2020). A review of the role of intangible axis toward the Pathok Negoro’s 
design concept, Yogyakarta. Humaniora, 11(3), 169-175. https://doi.org/10.21512/humaniora.v11i3.6540
ABSTRACT
The research aimed to review the role of the ‘mystical’ imaginary axis in Javanese cosmology in the Yogyakarta 
that might affect the inner spaces of the Pathok Negoro mosques (Ploso Kuning, Babadan, Dongkelan, and 
Mlangi). The research question was how Yogyakarta’ s imaginary axis affected the inner spaces of these four 
Pathok Negoro. Yogyakarta was known to have a unique Javanese cosmology, cultural, and social life character 
compared to several cities on the island of Java. Yogyakarta kept a harmonious power between human life and the 
universe and still hold strong Javanese animism and was still tightly coupled with the city’ s modern life. Human 
harmony with the universe was seen in the axis of a city that consisted of two main axes in the direction of the 
compass, namely north to south and east to west. The research applied a qualitative method by doing a literature 
study and observation. The research shows that the imaginary axis plays an essential role in Yogyakarta’ s urban 
design and creates a sustainable concept of the four Pathok Negoro. However, it is not directly involved in the 
order of the inner space of the architecture design of each mosque.
Keywords: intangible axis, Yogyakarta cosmology, pathok negoro mosques, mosque design concept, sustainable 
concept
INTRODUCTION
D. I. Yogyakarta is a provincial level area in 
Indonesia, located in the southern part of Java island 
and bordered by Central Java province. Based on Law 
No. 13 of 2012, Yogyakarta is designated as a special 
region because it has unique features in urban and 
cultural spatial. It has historical values not found in 
other cities in Indonesia.
Yogyakarta has a unique morphology of its 
urban layout with a solid imaginary axis pattern. It 
is stretching from north to south, marked by mount 
Merapi in the north and the south coast sea in the south. 
This imaginary axis is closely related to belief in the 
relationship between human life and the universe, and 
human life with God. A specific imaginary axis, which 
acts as a joint, connects the universe’s various cosmic 
forces. Besides, in the city development plan, this 
imaginary axis is applied as a road system (Karsono & 
Wahid, 2008). Yogyakarta’s road system has a stable 
axis when drawn a straight line from north to south and 
from west to east that affects trust religious because it 
is considered a cosmological orientation.
Buildings, roads, monuments, fields, and the 
physical appearance of the city components that 
become icons of the city are markers of city culture and 
civilization. Nevertheless, not all can be called unique 
if there is no explanation of its features (Suryanto, 
Djunaedi, Sudaryono, 2015). Figure 1A shows that 
Yogyakarta’s spatial layout that stretches towards 
the south-north (called the philosophical axis) has a 
significant philosophical meaning. Its configuration 
is marked by the presence of spatial and building 
elements. These elements consist of the Krapyak-
Yogyakarta-Tugu Palace stage, which depicts a 
microcosm concept, namely the realm of real human 
life. The Kraton’s existence is a city spatial structure 
transformation of a fundamental concept as a belief 
system or religion called Sangkan Paraning Dumadi  
(Widyawati, 2017).
--- PAGE: 2 ---
170
Humaniora, Vol. 11 No. 3 November 2020, 169-175
A
 B
Figure 1 A. Philosophical Axis of Yogyakarta City 
(Balai Pelestarian Cagar Budaya DIY , 2017);
B. Pathok Negoro Mosques (Karaton Ngayogyakar-
ta Hadiningrat, 2016)
The philosophical concept explains where 
humans originate, and the direction to which they 
will go from birth proceed through life until finally 
returning to God. This concept is known in the 
Javanese language, Sangkan Paraning Dumadi . 
Figure 1 also illustrates the macrocosm concept, which 
is the imaginary axis of the south-north marked by 
the south sea to the north, namely Mount Merapi. An 
explanation of this imaginary axis is called harmony 
between humans and God, Manunggaling Kawula-
Gusti (Balai Pelestarian Cagar Budaya DIY , 2017).
Yogyakarta spatial concept is built in 1790 by 
Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono I that has extraordinary 
features. The city layout has a cultural concept 
called Hamemayu (Memayu) Hayuning Bawono , 
which has a philosophical meaning to beautify life 
in the world and maintain it well. This philosophical 
concept is embodied in the arrangement of city forms 
known as Catur Gotro Tunggal, namely the Javanese 
cosmology concept. It maintains harmony between the 
microcosm and the macrocosm. The concept is seen 
in the building elements’ arrangement in Yogyakarta 
when it is first built. The establishment of the Kraton 
is considered a leader, a mosque as a pillar of religion, 
a market for economic activities, and reflects culture 
(Suryanto, Djunaedi, Sudaryono 2015). The concept 
continues to be maintained until the reign of Sri Sultan 
Hamengkubuwono X. It refers to the concept of 
sustainable city development, where the Catur Gotro 
Tunggal or Catursagoto pattern preserves four city 
landmarks, namely the Palace, Masjid Gedhe, Pasar 
Gede, and Alun-Alun.
Another specialty found in Yogyakarta, a 
Kingdom City in the interior, is buildings' existence 
to maintain the city's defense itself. The four mosques 
in Yogyakarta's four cardinal directions are believed 
to maintain the spiritual defense of Yogyakarta. The 
mosques that are built during the reign of Sri Sultan 
Hamengkubuwono I are called Pathok Negoro. They 
are located in the four corners of the city, namely 
Ploso Kuning, Babadan, Dongkelan, and Mlangi. 
The philosophy of these mosques' existence is as the 
backrest of the state's power so that the city will stand 
firm supported by four Mosques that seem to be the 
'Soko Guru' of Yogyakarta. It is a substantial milestone 
against the state, which is only found in Yogyakarta. It 
is not found in other cities in Indonesia.
The spatial arrangement of Yogyakarta is also 
set based on Pathok Negoro (Figure 1B). The location 
of Pathok Negoro’s mosques spread out in the urban 
periphery of Yogyakarta. Their existence has been 
regarded as an expression of a philosophical base of 
the urban boundaries (Suparwoko, Raharjo, & Mutaqi, 
2017). The research aims to review the role of the 
‘mystical’ imaginary axis in Javanese cosmology in 
Yogyakarta that might affect the inner spaces of the 
Pathok Negoro. The objective of the research is the 
inner space of the four Pathok Negoro. The research 
question is how Yogyakarta’s imaginary axis affects 
the inner spaces of the four Pathok Negoro.
METHODS
The research applied a qualitative method by 
doing a literature study and observation for collecting 
data. The limitation is to look at the philosophy of the 
imaginary axis found in Yogyakarta and the existence 
of the four Pathok Negoro. The research looks at the 
influence of the imaginary axis on the existence of 
elements of Yogyakarta, especially on the existence 
of Pathok Negoro as a historic building that gives 
influence to the development of the city of Yogyakarta.
Figure 2 Research Design
Figure 2 shows the research’s flow. It starts from 
the research aim, objective, and question about the 
intangible axial of Javanese cosmology in Yogyakarta, 
and the correlation with the urban design concept of 
Yogyakarta.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Pathok Negoro becomes a new boundary for 
Yogyakarta’s region and becomes one of the distinctive 
identities of Yogyakarta’s unique layout (Suparwoko, 
Raharjo, & Mutaqi, 2017). Pathok Negoro mosques are 
built during the reign of Sultan Hamengkubuwono I,                                                                                                              
in the period after the construction of Kraton (Royal 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
171
A Review of the Role ..... (Silvia Meliana; Octaviana Sylvia Caroline)
Palace) of Yogyakarta. The development sequence 
is Mlangi, Ploso Kuning (1724), Dongkelan (1775) 
by Kyai Nur Iman, and Kyai Mursodo. However, in 
Dongkelan and Babadan, it is established to Kyai 
Syihabbuddin for his services to Sultan when in 
conflict. Pathok Negoro mosques are also part of the 
region’s boundary that has a specialty as the plan of 
Sultan Hamengku Buwono I (Suparwoko, Raharjo, & 
Mutaqi, 2017).
Overall, the mosque incorporated in Pathok 
Negoro has a function as a center for education, a 
place for ceremonies and religious activities, and 
a religious court called the ‘Surambi Court’. The 
mosque’s function as the Surambi Court is to make a 
legal decision on marriage, divorce, or inheritance. The 
existence of these four mosques is inseparable from 
maintaining the kingdom’s outer defense system. The 
location of the mosque is on the outskirts of the area so 
that it becomes a boundary as well as a central defense 
area outside the kingdom (Karaton Ngayogyakarta 
Hadiningrat, 2016). The mosque building in 
Yogyakarta is used for the territorial concept. Pathok 
Negoro mosque placement in Yogyakarta’s urban 
spatial layout manifests the transcendent concept 
(Setyowati, Hardiman, & Murtini, 2018).
The existence of Pathok Negoro is a depiction of 
harmony between the macrocosm and the microcosm. 
It is a harmonious relationship between the people 
and the center of power, also known as Manunggaling 
Kawula Gusti . In Javanese philosophy, it is known 
as the papat limo pancer  qibla, which is manifested 
by the existence of the Pathok Negoro’s mosques in 
the four corners of the compass, the center of which 
is in the Gedhe Mosque, Yogyakarta Palace. This 
layout concept is called the Mandala concept (Karaton 
Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat, 2016).
The concept of Mandala is the concept of world 
time, namely the four-dimensional classification of 
space patterned in the four corners of the eye with 
one center; a concept of human obedience and self-
awareness. The existence of the Pathok Negoro’s 
mosques in Yogyakarta is a symbol of the relationship 
between humans and the universe and its creator. It 
is believed to be the philosophy of its people’s lives 
and influence the growth of the surrounding culture 
(Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat, 2016).
Pathok Negoro has a high historical value for 
Yogyakarta, the majority of whom are Muslim. The 
term kagungan dalem  mosque is the mosque that 
belongs to the Yogyakarta Palace. The term kagungan 
dalem follows the designation of the position of Abdi 
Dalem palace placed in four Pathok Negoro mosques. 
Azizah (2017) has also argued that Pathok Negoro is 
a tool to control the Palace’s spiritual boundaries and 
becomes a self-reflection that shows the Yogyakarta 
palace.
According to Abdullah and Khan (2011), the 
principal architectural types of Islamic architecture are 
mosques, the tomb, the palace, and the fort. They have 
argued about symbolism that is the representation of 
a thing by the use of symbols. The strength of Islamic 
art as a whole lies in its ability to synthesize native 
design elements with imported ones. The water’s flow 
in parks or as a fountain and the plantation of trees are 
all symbols that depict something. There is no divinity 
other than God in the fundamental formula of Islam, la 
ila ha illa lah. It means that God is one and only one, 
and everything the image Him to be, He is other than 
(Holy Qur’an) Islamic used to describe the absence of 
icons in Islamic art. So that the Islamic avoids creating 
the illusion of living beings (Abdullah & Khan, 2011).
Islamic art places the highest value on the 
achievement of beauty. Therefore the fundamental 
mandate of architecture in Islam should be to manifest 
a purposeful sense of beauty. The meaning of beauty 
here reflects both require environmental adaptation 
and express principally through Islamic aesthetics 
(Ardalan, 1980). Islamic architecture is a symbol of 
an important role in reflecting the superiority of Allah 
the Almighty. Islamic art and architecture portray the 
highest degree of motifs and ornamentation to make 
auspicious symbols of high quality of aesthetic value 
(Othman & Zainal-Abidin, 2011). They have also 
argued that the decoration of the Islamic art concept is 
flexible, shown in nature, independent form, material 
and scale, and how to transform the space ambiance. 
Those will be the evidence of Muslim communal 
civilization, which measures the ability of technology 
level in one region.
The adaptation space in the mosque is part of 
the sustainable utilization process. The space inside 
the mosque and the interior have been considering 
the efficiency and particular scale’s effectiveness. The 
mosque’s inner space is commonly used as routine 
operational systems, such as praying, lecturing, and 
special events on Islam’s big day. Space can be used 
for the pilgrims, whether men, women, children, or 
even wedding receptions. So the inner space itself 
has multifunction for different activities (Adi & 
Puspitasari, 2016).
According to Syamsiyah and Muslim (2018), 
the mosque ornament uses more variety of flora, 
nature, and religion because it is influenced by the 
pre-Islamic period (the transition from Hinduism 
to Islam). The variety of ornamental flora used in 
buildings has a sacred meaning and symbolizes beauty 
and goodness. The colors usually used are red, green, 
yellow, and gold. The variety of natural decorations 
that appear emphasizes the understanding of the role 
of the universe and God. There is a dualism cosmology 
(day and night, male and female), orientation, and 
topography that is transformed into symbols in the 
form of water, clouds, light, and sun. Whereas religious 
decoration forms the relationship between servant 
and God manifest in symbols that have a meaning of 
majesty and protection. The layout will be adjusted to 
the function of the building (Syamsiyah & Muslim, 
2018).
In the main building of the mosque, there 
is always a mihrab. It separates male and female 
areas, foyer, pawestren, the side of the room, fence, 
and blumbang, namely pond. The Pathok Negoro’s 
--- PAGE: 4 ---
172
Humaniora, Vol. 11 No. 3 November 2020, 169-175
mosques as God’s house is described as an ark, a holy 
house called Baitul-Maqdis. The Pathok Negoro has 
a gate gapura that comes from the word ghofurrur 
rahiim, meaning Allah is forgiving. When entering the 
mosque area, people will always remember that they 
will enter Allah’s house, the most forgiving (Humas 
Sleman, 2018).
In the yard area, there is always a tree sawo 
kecik, which is a symbol that Muslims must always 
be prejudiced. The number of odd stairs and usually 
has three means that humans have three stages of 
faith; faith, Islam, and Ihsan. If humans have done 
all of these stages, it will occupy a high degree and 
position as a Kamil human being. It is symbolized by 
the existence of one roof crowned with mustaka, the 
symbol of the peak of faith in worship. The symbol of 
flower gambir is interpreted as a fragrant that is found 
on the side of mustaka. At the same time, kembang 
luwih is a symbol of the success of one’s faith that can 
reach the peak of perfection that is heaven. It is also 
said that there are four Soko Guru and Usuk that are 
standing tall at the center of the main building. It is a 
symbol of people who pray for forgiveness, seen as a 
hand that is praying (Humas Sleman, 2018).
Other elements in the mosque such as water 
ponds have two meanings, namely as a micro 
symbolic meaning of the extent of the ocean that is 
explored by Noah’s ark, and also as a symbol to purify 
themselves because at that time, there is no flow of 
water and wells (Humas Sleman, 2018). The form and 
existence of the pool in the mosque building present 
the concept of urban development by Dutch known as 
the canal concept (Setyowati, Hardiman, & Murtini, 
2018). The establishment of four mosques known 
as Pathok Negoro, has the location characteristics 
because social conditions influence Yogyakarta, where 
Pathok Negoro has functions and forms that influence 
each other. When viewed from a function, these 
mosques’ existence is the Keraton mosque under the 
influence of the Gedhe mosque in Yogyakarta Palace. 
When viewed from the form, the four mosques have a 
consistent form since its inception (Abror, 2016).
There are four Pathok Negoro’s mosques in 
Yogyakarta. They are Mlangi mosque that is located 
seven kilometers southwest of Kraton, Ploso Kuning 
mosque is located nine kilometers north of Kraton, 
Dongkelan mosque is located three kilometers south 
of Kraton, and Babadan is located five kilometers 
east of Kraton. The Mlangi mosque (Figure 3) is 
found by Kyai Nur Iman, a brother of Sri Sultan 
Hamengkubuwono I. It is standing in the Mlangi 
area around 1758. At first, this mosque has 16 main 
pillars and is made of teak wood and has four pillars 
inside. Another feature characteristic of the Pathok 
Negoro’s mosques is mustaka, which has the same 
shape as other State Pathok Mosques. Servants of the 
Palace inhabit the Mosque area, i.e., people who serve 
the King, so this is a sign that the mosque is Kagem 
Dalem owned by the Palace. Around this time, there 
are many pesantren, an Islamic boarding school for 
Islam’s development.
Figure 3 The Mlangi Mosque
 (Private Documentation, 2019)
Ploso Kuning (Figure 4A) is located in the 
northern area of Yogyakarta. It was built in 1724. 
This mosque is said to have been built before the 
Palace of Yogyakarta. It is founded by Kyai Mursodo, 
the son of Kyai Nur Iman Mlangi. The architecture 
of the building had changed when Sri Sultan 
Hamengkubowono I served as King. At that time, Sri 
Sultan builds the Kraton and the Gedhe mosque in the 
Kraton neighborhood. He changes the roof model and 
mustaka or called the head or crown into two stacks 
or conches to distinguish it from the Gedhe mosque, 
which has three stacks or three overlaps. Among other 
Pathok Negoro’s mosques, the Ploso Kuning mosque 
is more authentic. It can be seen in Figure 4.
A
B
Figure 4 A.  Ploso Kuning Mosque; 
B. The Pool of Ploso Kuning Mosque 
(Private Documentation, 2019)
The uniqueness of the Ploso Kuning mosque is it 
still has many authenticities since it is built, including 
the existence of a pool of water that surrounds the 
mosque. The pool functions to serve the surrounding 
community’s habits, which always clean their feet 
--- PAGE: 5 ---
173
A Review of the Role ..... (Silvia Meliana; Octaviana Sylvia Caroline)
before entering the mosque. Mini pool planning 
(Figure 4B) is an adaptation of the mosque’s building 
to the surrounding community’s culture and habits, 
which does not use footwear during activities.
The Dongkelan mosque (Figure 5A) in the 
south is the witness to the defense system during 
Prince Diponegoro’s war against the Dutch. The 
original building with palm leaves roof is burned 
down, leaving only the original mustaka made of clay 
and stored in the mosque. This mosque’s architecture 
is a typical Javanese joglo house with four soko guru 
(Figure 5B).
A
B
Figure 5 A. The Dongkelan Mosque
B. Soko guru of The Dongkelan Mosque (Private 
Documentation, 2019)
This mosque (Figure 6) is located in Babadan, 
Bantul, and was built in 1774. The architecture of 
the building is the same as that of other state Pathok 
mosques. It has a soko guru and a pool for washing 
feet and washing. The unique thing about this building 
is that there is a particular building for women.
Figure 6 The Babadan Mosque (Private 
Documentation, 2019)
In this research, Pathok Negoro occurs in varying 
shapes and sizes as a fundamental part of Yogyakarta’s 
city planning in Muslim culture that possesses the 
most charge set of visual symbols. A study of the inner 
space through the Pathok Negoro will deal with the 
aesthetic concepts and models of the mosque parts. 
It concerns the issue of constituent forms, surface 
pattern, color selection, and also material usage. The 
architecture designs of the mosques at Pathok Negoro 
are the assimilation of the local wisdom of Javanese 
architecture and the approach of Islamic architecture. 
The Islamic architecture approach can be seen in the 
building’s ornament, such as its flora, fauna, nature, 
and other ornaments.
The local wisdom of Javanese architecture can 
be seen in the Pathok Negoro’s mosques’ architectural 
elements, such as mustaka on top of the  tajug  roof 
(a pyramidal element), sorotan at saka columns, and 
mirong for the columns. Mosque roof structure has 
symbolic meaning as the first layer of the tajug-shaped 
roof. It is a symbol of simplicity for the Javanese 
people and represents the same human degree in 
God’s eyes. The middle layer symbolizes the human 
that has begun to leave worldly life to get a higher 
degree in God’s eyes because of the better quality of 
worship. Then the highest level of the roof means that 
humans have abandoned their worldly life and focus 
on worshiping to go to heaven (Setyawati, 2016).
The roof forms of a traditional Javanese 
building are classified into four types based on the 
community’s social status. They are the tajug for the 
mosque building, joglo for the noble class, and limasan 
middle, kampung and panggang pe for ordinary people 
(Cahyandari, 2012). 
The symbolic meanings are seen in the outer 
space layout. Pathok Negoro’s mosques are messages 
of Islamic cultural acculturation philosophy with 
Javanese vernacular architecture. The mosque is part 
of the spread of Islam by adjusting to local culture. 
It is visible that what appears in the Pathok Negoro’s 
mosques is a cultural product influenced by the 
environment, which is the sultanate of Yogyakarta 
as its center. In general, the mosque is the center of 
Islamic worship activities from its people’s ability. It 
is the representation of the Muslim community that 
gives birth to and prospers it. So that what is seen in the 
Pathok Negoro’s mosques is as part of strengthening 
the existence of the Sultanate of Yogyakarta, and not 
being part of the city’s imaginary axis itself.
When the researcher visited the Pathok Negoro’s 
mosques and the Kauman mosque or Gedhe mosque 
in November 2019, it was seen that the architecture of 
the Pathok Negoro’s mosques resembles the shape of 
the Gedhe mosque in the Sultanate of Yogyakarta. It 
is just that the Pathok Negoro’s mosques are a smaller 
physical form than the Gedhe Mosque. The elements 
in the Pathok Negoro’s mosques can be seen from the 
spatial principles, the function of the mosque building 
for the community and its environment, as well as 
the philosophical meaning of the symbols. It contains 
in the building as a whole; the gapura, the pond, the 
three-steps stair, the terrace, the bedug/kenthongan, the 
main building, the soko guru, the tajuk roof, and the 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
174
Humaniora, Vol. 11 No. 3 November 2020, 169-175
mustaka. The Pathok Negoro’s mosques environment 
itself always consists of three areas. They are the main 
building, the cemetery area, and educational facilities 
such as Islamic boarding schools that nearby buildings.
Based on data findings, the researchers have 
found that the imaginary axis does not directly rule for 
the inner space of the architecture area of the Pathok 
Negoro. The imaginary axis connects all of the Pathok 
Negoro horizontally. When it comes to each inner 
space, the vertical axis's correlation between nature 
and God based on the Islamic rules take part. 
CONCLUSIONS
The existence of Pathok Negoro’s mosques 
can be developed to become the reference for the 
implementation of hamemayu hayuning bawono  (the 
conservation of harmony of human, nature, and God 
relationship). Imaginary axis influences the existence 
of powerful mosques because it is connected and 
centered on the Yogyakarta Palace, a microcosm of the 
lives of Yogyakarta and its King. The philosophical 
concept that is shown in the existence of the Pathok 
Negoro’s mosques is Keblat Papat Limo Pancer , 
where the Ploso Kuning, Babadan, Dongkelan, Mlangi 
mosques become a strong buffer structure in terms 
of the spiritual and cultural growth of Yogyakarta 
at the four cardinal directions of the imaginary city 
of Yogyakarta. It supports the Gedhe mosque in 
Yogyakarta Palace. The perfection of the message 
conveyed is the spirit and qualities of a leader or 
knight.
Physically, the existence of the mosque building 
that surrounds the Palace of Yogyakarta gives a sign 
and a significant influence on the unique features 
of the spatial elements in Yogyakarta. It is because 
the Special Region of Yogyakarta only owns this 
landmark.
The research shows that the imaginary axis 
plays an essential role in Yogyakarta's urban design 
that creates a sustainable concept of the four Pathok 
Negoro. However, it is not directly involved in the 
order of the inner space of each mosque's architecture 
design. Furthermore, all of the Pathok Negoro exist 
for decades by maintaining sustainable aspects 
through design. The sustainability could be achieved 
by combining the local wisdom into the design and 
the harmony of human life and the universe. It gives 
room for the design's order to function well. Future 
research is essential to study the implementation 
of the intangible axis in the city guideline related to 
conservation.
REFERENCES
Abdullah, T. A., & Khan, S. (2011). Symbolism in Islamic 
architecture. In P. S. M. Akhtar (Ed.), Islamic 
Architecture at the Cross Roads.  Delhi: Welworth 
Book International.
Abror, I. (2016). Aktualisasi nilai-nilai budaya masjid 
Pathok Negoro. Esensia: Jurnal Ilmu-Ilmu 
Ushuluddin, 17(1), 63-79. https://doi.org/10.14421/
esensia.v17i1.1279. 
Adi, S. M., & Puspitasari,  C. (2016). Mosque as model 
of learning principles of sustainable architecture. 
Journal of Islamic Architecture, 4 (1), 33-36. http://
dx.doi.org/10.18860/jia.v4i1.3090.
Ardalan, N. (1980). The visual language of symbolic form: 
A preliminary study of mosque architecture. In J. G. 
Katz (ed.),  Architecture as Symbol and Self-Identity 
(pp. 18-36). Philadelphia: Aga Khan Award for 
Architecture.
Azizah, U. (2017). Masjid Pathok Negoro Mlangi: Respon 
masyarakat Mlangi terhadap renovasi masjid pada 
tahun 2012. Juspi: Jurnal Sejarah Peradaban 
Islam, 1 (2), 212-222. http://dx.doi.org/10.30829/j.
v1i2.934.
Balai Pelestarian Cagar Budaya DIY . (2017). Sumbu 
filosofi kota Yogyakarta.  Retrieved on October 5 th, 
2019 from https://kebudayaan.kemdikbud.go.id/
bpcbyogyakarta/sumbu-filosofis-kota-yogyakarta/. 
Cahyandari, G. O. I. (2012). Tata ruang dan elemen 
arsitektur pada rumah Jawa di Yogyakarta sebagai 
wujud kategori pola aktivitas dalam rumah tangga. 
Jurnal Arsitektur Komposisi, 10(2), 103-118. https://
doi.org/10.24002/jars.v10i2.1064.
Humas Sleman. (2018). Masjid Pathok Negoro Sleman.  
Retrieved on June 29 th, 2020 from www.youtube.
com/watch?v=s0lbUyv7MiU.
Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat. (2016). Masjid Pathok 
Negara sebagai pilar kesultanan Yogyakarta.  
Retrieved on October 5 th, 2019 from https://www.
kratonjogja.id/tata-rakiting-wewangunan/3/masjid-
pathok-negara-sebagai-pilar-kasultanan-yogyakarta.
Karsono, B., & Wahid, J. (2008). Imaginary axis as a basic 
morphology in the city of Yogyakarta, Indonesia. In 
International Conference on Built Environment in 
Developing Countries . Yogyakarta, Indonesia. pp. 
187-195.
Othman, R., & Zainal-Abidin, Z. J. (2011). The importance 
of Islamic art in mosque interior. Procedia 
Engineering, 20,  105-109. http://doi:10.1016/j.
proeng.2011.11.144.
Setyawati, E. (2016). Keragaman struktur bangunan masjid 
Islam Jawa (Studi kasus: Bangunan masjid Gedhe 
Keraton Yogyakarta). In Seminar Sustainable 
Architecture And Urbanism, Diponegoro University. 
Semarang, Indonesia. pp. 31-46.
Setyowati, E., Hardiman, G., & Murtini, T. W. (2018). Pathok 
Negoro mosque as the form of territorial defense 
region of Mataram Kingdom of Islam in Jogjakarta. 
IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental 
Science, 106 , 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/106/1/012074. 
Suparwoko., Raharjo, W., & Mutaqi, A. S. (2017). The 
influence of Pathok Negoro mosques on the city 
wide dimension of cultural speciality for the future 
planning and design of Yogyakarta. In Seoul World 
Architects Congress. Seoul, South Korea. pp. 1-6.
Suryanto., Djunaedi, A., & Sudaryono. (2015). Aspek 
--- PAGE: 7 ---
175
A Review of the Role ..... (Silvia Meliana; Octaviana Sylvia Caroline)
budaya dalam keistimewaan tata ruang kota 
Yogyakarta. Jurnal Perencanaan Wilayah 
dan Kota, 26 (3), 230-252. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5614%2Fjpwk.2015.26.3.6.
Syamsiyah, N. R., & Muslim, A. (2018). Kajian 
perbandingan gaya arsitektur dan pola ruang masjid 
Agung Surakarta dan masjid Gedhe Kauman 
Yogyakarta. Sinektika Jurnal Arsitektur, 15(1), 1-6. 
https://doi.org/10.23917/sinektika.v15i1.8989.
Widyawati, L. (2017). Semiotik ruang publik kota lama 
alun-alun selatan Kraton Yogyakarta. Nalars: Jurnal 
Arsitektur, 16 (1), 15-26. https://doi.org/10.24853/
nalars.16.1.15-26.
