--- PAGE: 1 ---
 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTEGRATED ENGINEERING VOL. 15 NO. 6 (2023) 234-241 
 
   
 
© Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia Publisher’s Office 
 
IJIE 
 
http://penerbit.uthm.edu.my/ojs/index.php/ijie 
The International 
Journal of 
Integrated 
Engineering 
 ISSN : 2229-838X     e-ISSN : 2600-7916  
 
*Corresponding author: amuhammad@psu.edu.sa 
2023 UTHM Publisher. All rights reserved. 
penerbit.uthm.edu.my/ojs/index.php/ijie 
234 
Application of Motifs Woodcarving in Preserving Its 
Authenticity in Istana Balai Besar, Kota Bharu Kelantan 
 
Siti Aisyah Muhammad1*, Normaisarah Mohd Rosdi2 
 
1College of Architecture and Design,  
 Prince Sultan University, 11586 Riyadh, KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA 
 
2Faculty of Architecture and Ekistics,  
 University Malaysia Kelantan,16310 Bachok, Kelantan, MALAYSIA 
 
*Corresponding Author 
 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30880/ijie.2023.15.06.027 
Received 16 July 2023; Accepted 30 September 2023; Available online 28 December 2023 
 
1. Introduction 
Numerous research on Malay woodcarving and the preservation of local customs, designs, techniques, and the 
origins of this woodcarving has  been done in the past by previous scholars,  and it seems there has been a long -standing 
interest in appreciating traditional heritage. The invention of woodcarving was intended to support and improve Malay 
culture's artistic endeavours . The practice of traditional embellishment by local Malay woodcarvers is linked with 
carving. A distinctive tradition can enhance a region's sense of belonging. Wood carving's legacy should be preserved, 
passed down from generation to generation, and treasured [1].  
The principal element of a woodcarving consists of motifs, patterns, philosophy, sources, incisions , and decorative 
patterns. Noor & Khoo [ 2] also agreed that Malay woodcarving's physical form is defined by its motifs, designs , 
source, decorative manners, techniques in creating the panels , and incision underlays between the lines and curves.  
Abstract: A palace is the legitimate house of a noble monarchy or excessive dignitary. The palaces of the Malay 
Kings are derived from the architecture of the Malay houses but in a larger scale.  However, since it was a 
government palace, its structure had to be changed to accommodate its dual functional structure. In addition to 
accommodating the king, the palace also functions as a hub for administrative work.  Therefore, traditional Malay 
royal palaces were decorated with carved decorative elements depicting intricate carvings in specific patterns, 
shapes, sizes and arrangements. Various sculptural elements with specific characteristics were created depending 
on their location and the shape of the palace. The woodcarving as embellishment was created at the palace to 
symbolize the king's status. Motifs are considered one of the primary elements behind the creation of woodcarving 
and is visually incorporated into various arts and crafts categories. Motifs also plays an important role in a 
woodcarving composition. Therefore, this study aimed to present  a research to explore the visual forms of motifs 
of the carved component in Istana Balai Besar, Kota Bharu, Kelantan. A qualitative research approach was used to 
collect data through an analytical review of measured drawings and reports of the Istana Balai Besar from the 
architecture gallery at the Universiti Malaysia Kelantan (UMK), interviews with previous local woodcarvers and 
site visits to the selected palace. The final model confirmed that there were four types of motifs, namely flora, 
geometry, cosmos features, and Arabic  calligraphy carved in two and three compositions together with perforated 
and embossed types of  forms and it can be concluded that the  floral motifs are the types of motifs that dominated 
the woodcarving at Istana Balai Besar. 
 
 
Keywords: Woodcarving, motifs, palaces, royal woodcarver 
--- PAGE: 2 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
235 
Traditionally, before beginning to carve, the woodcarver will evaluate the motif that will be chosen based on the proper 
technique for the type of wood and the part that will be carved [ 3]. Hence, in traditional woodcarving, motif is 
employed aesthetically as the primary component and is crucial to many different forms. In arts and crafts, a motif is a 
repeating shape or theme in a pattern or design [4]. A motif also was described as a design that is regularly combined to 
make a pattern in fabric or another type of material, such as timber or another material [ 5]. A motif in a design is  a key 
design feature or pattern used in crafts such as painting, carving, and ceramics . Since choosing a motif with intricate 
features demands the woodcarver to show their talent and precision, the motif of the woodcarving panel is vital to its 
intricacy. Based on this consideration, a study on traditional woodcarving at Istana Balai Besar has been developed. 
This article aims to analyze the motifs used in the woodcarving application at Istana Balai Besar, Kelantan. 
 
2. Literature Review 
2.1 Istana Balai Besar 
Istana Balai Besar is the sacred palace for the descendants of the Kelantan Sultanate and this is where all official 
ceremonies and royal customs take place from 1845 until now. The first official ceremony was held with the Surat 
Sejabat or recognition from the King of Siam to Sultan Muhammad II. The content of this Surat Sejabat  is the 
confirmation of Tuan Senik Mulut Merah as Sultan Muhammad II by the Great King of Siam, who is also the patron of 
Kelantan. Sultan Muhammad II was also given the title Pia Lecha Kelantan  by King Siam [6]. 
The late Sultan Muhammad II constructed this traditional timber royal palace with 175 000 square feet in 1844 
(1261 Hijri) to replace Istana Kota Lama, Kelantan's old primary government edifice in Gunung. Since the 19th 
century, Istana Balai Besar has served as the residence of Kelantan's rulers. It was now officially known as the Office 
of the Sultan of Kelantan. Istana Balai Besar is known for its vast  front hall, throne, and collection of royal instruments 
belonging to the King of Kelantan. Sultan Muhammad II built Istana Balai Besar to replace his palace on Saba Island, 
which floods and riverbank erosion had damaged. 
 
 
Fig. 1 - Istana Balai Besar Site during the era Sultan Muhammad II [4] 
 
The palace's location was chosen based on its accessibility at the time, as it was neither too far nor too close to the 
Kelantan River, where traders used to do business, and the notion that the neighbouring Calumpang tree was magical. 
The Malay people at the time thought that when a Calumpang tree bloomed, it would prevent flooding in the 
surrounding area. 
 
  
Fig. 2 - Istana Balai Besar present perspectives 
 
After the Istana Balai Besar was completed, the inhabitants termed it ‘Kota Bharu’ in association with ‘Istana or a 
new city that was completed’. Over time, this designation became a household term and was adopted as the official 
--- PAGE: 3 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
236 
name for Kelantan's state capital, Kota Bharu. Istana Balai Besar also represents the King of Kelantan's institution, 
which is magnificent in the center of the state capital of Kelantan [6]. 
 
2.2 Traditional Malay Woodcarving 
The Malay Palace is regarded as the first architectural work based on psychology and the highest spiritual 
humanistic philosophy applicable to daily life [ 7]- [10]. A palace known as an Istana in Malay is erected for the ruler or 
king of Malaya's several states. Traditional Malay Royal Palaces are remarkable architectural constructions in Malaysia 
that serve as an essential and distinguishing emblem of the kings and royal families. Traditional Malay royal palaces 
have served a variety of important functions in addition to serving as royal residences and administrative centers  for the 
Sultanate [ 11]. Traditional Malay Royal Palaces are significant architectural legacies serving as residence and 
administration places.
 Wood carving is a kind of art that originated in the Malay population, particularly in the Malay 
Peninsula, and has since merged with it . During the time of the old Malay kingdoms, most Malay monarchs, their 
families, and chieftains lived in carved -timber palaces or dwellings . The aristocracy and the palace employed 
craftsmanship, especially the art of carving, as a sign of authority [ 10].  Thus, wood carvings are used as symbols for 
nobles and kings, and the courtiers act as the ones that evoke the glory of this art [ 6]. Istana Balai Besar is a traditional 
Malay palace composed of wood with exquisite carvings highlighting exceptional craftsmanship. Woodcarvings were 
used in traditional Malay vernacular palace architecture to accentuate the hierarchy of space, wealth, social rank, and 
authority for the people to observe [ 12].
 The traditional wood carving theoretically based on Malay society symbolism 
and traditions eventually earned a particular position in the palace as a consequence  [13]. The carved panel was 
developed for monarchs with the highest design qualities to reflect ideals and status. Hence, the  intricate and massive  
timber woodcarving panel that located  at royal traditional palace of Istana Balai Besar was designed to express the 
symbolization of royal status of the kings and its aristocrats.   
Carvings of varied shapes and designs depicted beauty in these palaces and therefore Malay rulers had skilled 
craftsmen in their palaces. The craftsmen supported themselves purely by their talents, which were promptly 
recognized by their clients, who included Sultans or members of the nobility, and thus reflects the peak of traditional 
Malay woodcarving. When this group elevated the craftsmen' social standing to that of royal sculptor [ 14]. During the 
start of the Malay government's reign, it became necessary for the government to dwell in a home loaded with 
sculptures. As a result, the kings employed their own craftsmen or carvers to embellish their palaces. A significant 
number of cultural villages were constructed near the royal grounds at the period. The greater the number of ornaments 
owned by the kings, the higher their position or rank in the eyes of the people. The elaborate structural designs in 
woodcarvings indicate great social rank in the Malay culture [ 15]. Malay palaces use adornment as a visible statement 
of wealth, prestige, and power. These brilliant craftsmen or royal woodcarvers, who dwell on the palace grounds under 
the patronage of the sovereign, will provide the Sultan with the most magnificent carvings for the palaces and other 
goods such as weapons and crafts  [16]. The Malay palace displays riches, rank, and authority to the people via 
ornamentation. A sultan frequently displayed his or her dominance during those times by decoration [ 17]. 
 
2.3 Elements of Malay Woodcarving 
Woodcarving is a procedure that involves the ability to carve a solid plank or block into relief and non- relief 
components, which can only be learned  through apprenticeship. It manifests the craftsman's imagination for botanical, 
geometric, calligraphic, animal, and cosmic elements, resulting in abstract yet tangible products [ 18]. It symbolizes the 
region's architectural identity and the stylish patterns of the region's artisans. From an intangible perspective, it 
demonstrates Malay craftsmanship in architecture, devotion to God, and a contribution to society [ 19].  Based on an 
interview with a well-known woodcarver, Noorhaiza Noordin [15] postulated that the basis of traditional carving refers 
to the processing and filing of the six main elements, namely the source, motif, pattern, decorative style, technique , and 
philosophy.  
Generally, a woodcarver will apply one or more than one of five motifs consisting of flora, fauna, calligraphy, 
geometric, and cosmos [ 18]. Floral motifs are woodcarvings' most prominent and recurring decorative patterns [ 20].  
The motif will then be translated from its abstract form into an organic shape with elements such as daun sibardayang, 
daun pengasuh, tendrils, stem, and flower buds. 
 
2.4 History of Woodcarving Motifs Development 
Evolution is a term that is used to refer to the processes that produce history. The Malay Nusantara region is rich in 
culture and history. Malay wood carving history goes way back to the country's establishment . But over time, it evolves 
according to the ideology of the people. The first is animism, followed by Hindu-Buddhist ideology, and the third is 
Islamic influence [20] and supported by [ 21] that Malaysia has gone through various cultural, artistic, and religious 
development stages. Prior to the advent of Islam, there were three primary  sources of nature motifs in Malay traditional 
craft: floral (plant), fauna (animal), and cosmic (universe). 
Each time a new religion enters the land, the culture will also experience changes or perhaps some new additions. 
Faith shapes people's lifestyles, affecting how they talk, rule, write, trade, and even express their creativity [ 21]. A 
--- PAGE: 4 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
237 
religion greatly influences the motifs seen in Malay wood carving.  Table 1 shows the motifs comprise a symbolic 
meaning in their original Hindu-Buddhist contexts, which have been passed down to the present. 
 
Table 1 - Evolution of motifs before and after the presence of Islam [22], [23] 
Pre Islam (Before 
14th Century) 
Description Post Islam (Post 14th 
Century) 
Dewa It appears fully equipped and thinks it will make its owner 
invincible during combat. 
Tuhan 
Kala An unruly creature allegedly punished for eating himself, 
Shiva later overturned the judgment and turned it into a 
Protector. 
Punca Bunga Ukir 
Makara Makara has a fish-like body and head, and its mouth is 
joined to an elephant's trunk. 
Sulur Bayu 
Mount Meru Hinduism refers to God. Head 
Stupa It represents the earthen stack in the Indian cemetery and is 
a representation of Buddha entering Nirvana. 
Buah Buton 
Pohon Beringin The naga or dragon is another animal rendered everlasting 
in Malay woodcarving. 
Pohon Budi 
Padma/ Lotus A floral scent Bunga Tunjung 
Naga Not applicable for motifs  Discourage in usage 
Garuda/ Jentayu In addition to being known as Vishnu's chariot, the garuda 
was also used to transport the Malay king and queen in 
ceremonial processions. 
Petala Indera/ Gagak 
Sura 
 
 
3. Methods 
In this study, three sources of data collection were applied: from secondary sources, observation, and analysis, and 
lastly from a survey, which interview methods. All data collected will be applied for data analysis.  
Generally, a typical qualitative approach for gathering data is the interview. In -person interviews are used to gather 
data for the study questions. Therefore, the researcher selected to  interview with a professional craftsman, Mr. 
Muhaimin Hasbollah from Pahang. In addition, Mr. Muhaimin Hasbollah carries the title of Adiguru, master craftsmen 
and is an expert in producing contemporary products with combination in injecting the philosophy into modern design. 
Besides, methods used were collection of data on elements of woodcarving from literature review on existing journal 
by previous researchers, unpublished thesis and books alongside the documentation of measured drawing carried out by 
previous student from the Faculty of Architecture and Ekistics (FAE) from Universiti Malaysia Kelantan (UMK). 
Lastly, site visit to Istana Balai Besar was conducted for on -site verification on motifs applied to each woodcarving 
composition. 
 
 
Fig. 3 - The methods applied in conducting this study 
 
4. Results and Findings 
From the field survey, woodcarving at Istana Balai Besar also functioned as a fenes tration for air and sunlight 
fenestration so that the circulation within the palace is  smooth to give comfort to the atm osphere of the building due to 
the small openings within the palace walls. Aside from assisting the cross circulation of the palace,  the intricate and 
massive woodcarving at timber royal palaces of Istana Balai Besar was designed to symbolize royal status, acting as a 
genius loci and a beauty expression. Another type of woodcarving located at Istana Balai Besar is the  jejala, which 
works as a special decoration, but in this modern- day, the jejala no longer serves as the palace air ventilation system 
--- PAGE: 5 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
238 
but more as the sunlight penetration system. Some of the jejala that still remain to this day at the palace are jejala tebuk 
bunga cina, which was taken from the Chinese leaf flowers and was located at the Balairung Seri, which is near the 
throne. Next is jejala tebuk ladu, which is situated at pagar musang, below the windows, and these types of jejala allow 
wind and light to flow into the palace from the bottom of the wall. The last jejala  is jejala bunga salah penyangga that 
is located at balai bujur walls with the Jawa flower pattern. 
 
 
 
 
(a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 4 – The example of jejala (a) Jejala bunga salah penyangga; (b) Jejala tebuk bunga cina, and; (c) Jejala tebuk 
ladu 
 
Floral motifs dominated the most from the inspirations namely bunga kembang cina, bunga kiambang, bunga 
ketam guri , bunga bayam peraksi , bunga kerak nasi , bunga tampuk manggis  and ketumbit. Table 2  shows a 
woodcarving panel with a complete pattern located in the kitchen area of Istana Balai Besar with its element 
composition. At the same time, Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of woodcarving motifs at Istana Balai Besar. 
Another type of motif applied was a combination motif of flora and calligraphy , designed into a ladu pattern.  In 
Kelantan, Terengganu, and Negeri Sembilan, calligraphy is used as a focal point on the walls and ventilation panels of 
homes. As for the Istana Balai Besar, t he calligraphy translation is the names of four caliphs with circle-shaped flower 
motifs, bunga bayam peraksi. They were Abu Bakar As-Siddiq, Umar Al-Khatab, Usman Bin Affan, and Ali Bin Talib. 
Another type of woodcarving motif at Istana Balai Besar is the cosmos. It can be seen from the upper ceiling of the 
void, namely lebah bergantung and it was made to match the gold-painted plaster ceiling. 
 
Table 2 - Example of woodcarving element in a woodcarving composition in Istana Balai  Besar 
 
Motif  Bunga kerak nasi  
Pattern  Awan larat in complete pattern 
Incision  Silat dada tuma & silat minangkabau 
Techique Embossed carving with incision 
Source  Flower 
 
 
5. Discussion 
5.1 The Application of Floral as Carving Motifs 
The most applied motifs at Istana Balai Besar is flora , the most popular and long-lasting motif types in arts. From 
the interview conducted, Muhaimin cited that for flora motifs, the  sort of plant used depends on what is readily 
available close to the home compound . Furthermore, woodcarving with floral motifs can convey these cultural 
messages and values.  Malay woodcarvers prefer the usage of creeping plants and flower -producing plants because of 
their aesthetic appeal. Flowers and plants are intrinsically beautiful and complicated in their natural forms. 
Woodcarving artists are frequently inspired by nature's enchanting beauty and strive to imitate it.  The chosen plant as a 
motif as due to its uniqueness of plants itself. The traditional sculptor will then translate the plants' features before 
choosing as the motifs.  Creeping plants and blooming plants are preferred by Malay woodcarvers because they are 
attractive to the eye and suited for carving. The stylization of the motifs not only enhanced their beauty but also 
revealed the secret of their application. The chosen motifs were useful in the treatment of various diseases and illnesses. 
Herbaceous plant function knowledge is typically passed down orally from generation.  
In Istana Balai Besar, one of the motifs chosen  was bunga kembang cina,  which stands for purity. The peculiarity 
of this flower is also known as Ban Jien Jieng, which is Malay for "the young throughout the year" . It is recognized for 
its enduring qualities, including tolerance and wisdom. In Malaysian culture, it is also seen as a sign of kindness and is 
frequently utilized as women's decor. Bunga kembang cina  motif is symbolic of attractiveness, prosperity, and good 
fortune. The motif incorporation into woodcarving panels represents a desire for wealth  and well -being. It also 
--- PAGE: 6 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
239 
functions as a form of visual communication and narrative. The arrangement and composition of the floral elements on 
the woodcarving panel can communicate specific messages or descriptions . Therefore, incorporating specific flowers or 
symbols may represent themes such as love, harmony, or unity. The repeating layer in a composition shows its 
complexity and intricacy, making it a focal point reflecting the woodcarver's craftsmanship  in creating the best visual 
presentation for the king. 
Meanwhile,
 floral themes can communicate stories, myths, or meanings. For instance, bunga kiambang is often 
correlated to the harmonic culture within the life of a society , as can be seen in the Malay idiom biduk lalu kiambang 
bertaut, which means to fight and to make peace once again. Bunga bayam peraksi  is famous for the traditional 
medicine, whereby the liquid from grinding and filtering the whole plant believed to treat dengue fever and improve 
blood platelet count. 
 
 
Fig. 5 - The placement of woodcarving motifs application at Istana Balai Besar 
 
 
   
Flora Geometry Cosmos Combination
 
Fig. 6 - The frequency distribution of motifs applied in woodcarving at Istana Balai Besar  
 
--- PAGE: 7 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
240 
5.2 Geometry as Carving Motifs 
The ornament located at the wall of Balairung Seri and ukiran darjah kebesaran  at the royal throne featured non -
figurative motifs like geometry. This non- relief perforated panels have distinct qualities characterized  by two different 
layouts and geometrical designs.  Geometric woodcarving needs high precision, making it an excellent choice for 
talented craftsmen to demonstrate their abilities.  Jejala bunga salah penyangga also applied the geometry motifs 
whereby the vertical stripes dominate the railing panel in a repeated pattern and geometrical flora in horizontal lines. 
On the other hand, the compositional features in a circle  at the exterior wall of the audio and doctor’s room provide a 
sense of visual continuity. The geometric pattern, for the most part, repeats the same motif to  create a sense of 
harmony. Another geometry motif at Istana Balai Besar is the tebuk ladu shape. This shape was designed to symbolize 
excitement, freshness, and being alive; despite not wilting, it has harmony-related features. 
 
5.3 Cosmos as Carving Motifs 
The application of cosmic motifs  to woodcarving panel can inspire and astonish. It may motivate viewers to 
contemplate the universe by telling them of its beauty and intricacy. At Istana Balai Besar, the cosmos motifs are  lebah 
bergantung located at the ceiling of Balairung Seri . Its pyramidal design, wide base, slope side, and solitary peak at the 
top have all been interpreted in various cultural and historical contexts as symbols of power, authority, and unification. 
The pyramid represents the metaphorical imposition of order from above as viewed from the top.  
 
5.4 The Combination of Carving Motifs 
Apart from motifs of flora, cosmos , and geometry, a combination of these designs can be seen on various types of 
carved components at the interior wall of balai surung hadapan. Combining motifs allows the woodcarver to produce a 
visually rich and exciting  composition. Different motifs, such as floral and geometric designs, can complement each 
other and give layers of complexity to the piece. Besides, the juxtaposition of contrasting motifs can create an 
aesthetically pleasing contrast. For example, the interplay between intricate floral designs and precise geometric shapes  
can be visually striking. The  ornament is made up of two different sorts of motifs , which are calligraphy and flora 
motifs. The use of calligraphy written by Abu Bakar As-Siddiq, Umar Al-Khatab, Usman bin Affan, and Ali bin Talib 
is a focal point, surrounded by a floral theme, producing a sense of contrast and variation. 
 
6. Conclusion 
In short, Malay vernacular architecture involves intricate woodcarving that affects both architectural and non-
architectural elements. It stands for an ethereal yet concrete expression of a craftsman's talent. as they artfully translate 
aspects from the natural world onto the canvas of timber. Notably, the designs adorning the carved components of 
Kelantan's Istana Balai Besar display distinct visual features, including a rich tapestry of flora, geometry, cosmic 
themes, and intriguing amalgamations. The lush and organic forms of flora themes dominate the woodcarving designs, 
ushering in a profound connection with the natural environment. 
The conclusions of this extensive investigation undoubtedly contribute significantly to the noble goal of conserving 
our royal heritage. They serve as a historical record and a guidepost for future woodcarvers, providing essential insights 
into these intangibles yet treasured gems of our cultural heritage. In doing so, they bridge the gap between the past and 
the present, ensuring that the delicate and intricate art of woodcarving continues to thrive, evolve, and be treasured for 
future generations. 
 
Acknowledgment 
The authors acknowledge the Prince Sultan University for the support received and Universiti Malaysia Kelantan 
and the Ministry of Higher Education for supporting this project under the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme KPT 
FRGS/1/2021/SSI0/UMK/02/1. 
 
References 
[1] Silah S., Basaree R. O., Isa B. & Redzuan R. S. (2013). Tradition and transformation: The structure of Malay 
woodcarving motifs in craft education. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 90, 823-831. 
[2] Noor A. F. & Khoo E. (2003). Spirit of wood the art of Malay woodcarving. Periplus, pp. 252.  
[3] Yahya M. A. (1995). Simbolisme Dalam Seni Bina Rumah Melayu Kelantan. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, pp. 
108.  
[4] Wallschlaeger C. & Busic-Snyder C. (1992). Basic Visual Concepts and Principles. McGraw.Hill. 
[5] Ostwald Michael J. (2010). The politics of fractal geometry in Russian paper architecture: The intelligent market 
and the cube of infinity. Architectural Theory Review, 15, 125-137. 
[6] Baharin I. (2019). Istana Balai Besar: Mercu Kedaulatan dan Kegemilangan Raja- Raja Melayu Kelantan. Majlis 
Agama Islam Kelantan, pp. 102. 
--- PAGE: 8 ---
Muhammad et al., Int. Journal of Integrated Engineering Vol. 15 No. 6 (2023) p. 234-241 
241 
[7] Abdul Halim Nasir (1987). Traditional Malay Woodcarving.  Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.  
[8] Abd.  Halim Nasir (1985).  Pengenalan Rumah Tradisional Melayu Semenanjung Malaysia. Darulfikir.  
[9] Nasir A. H. (1986). Ukiran Kayu Melayu Tradisi. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, pp. 96.  
[10] Farish A. Noor & Eddin Khoo (2003). Spirit of Wood: The Art of Malay woodcarving. Periplus. 
[11] Zainal Abidin N. & Raja Shahminan R. N. (2012). Influences on woodcarvings in traditional Malay houses of 
Negeri Sembilan. International Conference on Culture, Society, Technology and Urban Development in 
Nusantara (IC-CSTUDN), Indonesia, pp. 2-10. 
[12] Baniyamin N., Jasmani I., Kassim P. S. J. & Samsuddin A. D. (2020). Malay Abstractions Of Ecological 
Patterns Into Geometricised Expressions In Palatial Architecture And The Applied Arts. Voice Academy, 16(2), 
53-67.  
[13] Kraftangan Malaysia (2009). Ukiran    Kayu    Warisan Melayu. Perbadanan Kemajuan Kraf Tangan Malaysia 
[14] Hussin H., Baba Z., Hassan A. & Haji Mohamed E. (2012). The philosophy in the creation of traditional Malay 
carving motifs in Peninsula Malaysia. Malaysia Journal of Society and Space, 8(7), 88- 95. 
[15] Norhaiza Noordin (October 17, 2023). Personal Interview at Seni Ukir Bakawali. 
[16] Daud N. I. M. K., Arbi E. & Faisal M. (2012). The application of Malay wood carving on contemporary 
architecture in Malaysia. Journal of Design and Built Environment, 11(1), 1 -14. 
[17] Utaberta N., Sojak S. D. M., Surat M., Che- Ani A. I. & Tahir M. M . (2012). The typology study of traditional 
mosque ornamentation: An analysis of mosque elements. International Journal of Civil, Architectural Science 
and Engineering, 6(7), 10-17. 
[18] Said I. (2005). Timber species in Malay wood carving. Proceeding of International Seminar in Malay 
Architecture as Lingua Franca, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
[19] Kamarudin Z. & Said I. (2008). Composition of Malay woodcarving: Case studies on two traditional timber 
houses. Jurnal Alam Bina, 11(2), 101-118. 
[20] [2Said I. (2002). Visual composition of Malay woodcarving in vernacular houses in Peninsular Malaysia. 
Journal Teknologi, 37, 43-52. 
[21] Daud N. I. M. K., Arbi E. & Faisal M. (2012). The application of Malay wood carving on contemporary 
architecture in Malaysia. Journal of Design and Built Environment, 11(1), 1 -14. 
[22] Zainuddin A., Hashim A., Lee H. Y. & Mohd Nor N. (2022). 3 -Dimensional design in traditional Malay’s art. 
Jurnal Seni dan Pendidikan Seni, 10, 1-11. 
[23] Shaffee N. & Said I. (2013). Types of floral motifs and patterns of Malay woodcarving in Kelantan and 
Terengganu. Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences, 105, 466-475. 
 
 
