--- PAGE: 1 ---
University of Huddersfield Repository
Rajendra, Anom and Temple, Nicholas
Religious ceremonies in Balinese society: a case study of a cremation ritual in Tabanan
Original Citation
Rajendra, Anom and Temple, Nicholas (2016) Religious ceremonies in Balinese society: a case 
study of a cremation ritual in Tabanan. International Journal of Indonesian Studies, Spring. ISSN 
2203-4692 
This version is available at http://eprints.hud.ac.uk/id/eprint/29104/
The University Repository is a digital collection of the research output of the
University, available on Open Access. Copyright and Moral Rights for the items
on this site are retained by the individual author and/or other copyright owners.
Users may access full items free of charge; copies of full text items generally
can be reproduced, displayed or performed and given to third parties in any
format or medium for personal research or study, educational or not-for-profit
purposes without prior permission or charge, provided:
• The authors, title and full bibliographic details is credited in any copy;
• A hyperlink and/or URL is included for the original metadata page; and
• The content is not changed in any way.
For more information, including our policy and submission procedure, please
contact the Repository Team at: E.mailbox@hud.ac.uk.
http://eprints.hud.ac.uk/


--- PAGE: 2 ---
RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES IN BALINESE SOCIETY: A CASE STUDY OF A 
CREMATION RITUAL IN TABANAN. 
Anom Rajendra, Nicholas Temple. 
 
BIODATA 
Anom Rajendra 
Anom Rajendra is a PhD candidate in the Department of Architecture at University of 
Huddersfield, United Kingdom. He is also a lecturer at Udayana University in Bali.  
Email: u0055305@hud.ac.uk  
 
Nicholas Temple 
Nicholas Temple is a Professor of Architecture and Director of the Centre for Urban 
Design, Architecture and Sustainability (CUDAS) at the University of Huddersfield , 
United Kingdom. Email: N.Temple@hud.ac.uk
  
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper considers the cremation ceremony in the context of the life of the 
inhabitants of a Balinese community, tracing relationships between ritual itinerary and 
topography, and highlighting tensions and conflicts that have emerged between these 
ritual traditions and recent developments in tourism. The unique feature of the 
cremation ceremony is not only its procession, and particular architectural forms, but 
also the accompanying festival events that parade from the house of the deceased to 
the cemetery. In the investigation I will explore the historically important site of the 
Tabanan Palace that forms the geographical and symbolic focus of the ceremony and 
the route of the procession in the context of the cremation service with its community 
of participants/onlookers. The processions, and their related rituals, have long been 
recognised as an integral part of the civic life of the community, which is increasingly 
being jeopardised as a result of the impact of commercial use. The investigation asks 
if the preservation of these ceremonies can exist in harmony with these recent 
developments, without undermining the still vibrant traditional practices of Balinese 
society. 
Keywords: Religious ceremonies, cremation ritual, Tabanan Palace 
 
1 
 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
INTRODUCTION 
Balinese society today is intimately connected to the long historical development of 
Hinduism in Bali which was first identified in the eighth century  along with the visit to 
Bali of Rsi Markandya , a Brahmin Hindu saint from India (Wikarman, 1997: 14- 6; 
Ardhana, 2002: 59- 60). The Hindu religion has inspired people to live in organised 
and harmonious communities, backed up by their own laws and creeds. Traditional 
communities still exist within this social structure , which are of three types: desa 
pakraman, banjar, and s ekehe. Desa pakraman denotes a village in which a local 
community is defined by a sacred and political space and governed by certain taboos, 
ritual protocols, and laws, whilst b anjar refers to a social community/ organisation 
within the village based on mutual needs  especially in religious activities  (Sutjaja, 
2009: 37). Finally, sekehe denotes an organised group, possibly derived from one or 
more villages with a specific social function and distinct professional roles  and 
responsibilities. Clifford Geertz (1980: 47-8) argues that these social structures  were 
clustered as  non-political entities  which were specifically focused on rituals, public 
life, kin groups, and voluntary initiatives.  Whilst the civic and religious organisations 
of these groups are supported by laws and religious obligations , the essence of 
Balinese society is com mitment to  a symbiotic relationship to communal 
(civic/religious) participation. This attitude has historically developed from three basic 
principles of Hindu philosophy, called tri hita karana. This threefold principle advocates 
that serenity and happiness results from harmonious relationships between 
individuals and the gods, between humans , as well as between humans and their 
surroundings.  The root of  tri hita k arana can be found in the Hindu scriptures: the 
Bhagavad Gita1 which states:  
• Article 10: When he created creatures in the beginning, along with the sacrifice, 
Prajapati said: ‘May you be fruitful by this sacrifice, let this be the cow  which 
produces all you desire. 
1 See the Bhagavad Gita (III. 10-12) translated by Johnson (1994: 15-6). 
2 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 4 ---
• Article 11: ‘You should nourish the gods with this so that the gods may nourish 
you; nourishing each other, you shall achieve the highest good. 
• Article 12: ‘For nourished by the sacrifice, the gods will give you the pleasures 
you desire. ‘The man who enjoys these gifts without repaying them is no more 
than a thief.’ 
 
 
These three basic principles of social organisation influence Balinese religious 
activities. The participation  of family members in banjar, desa p akraman, or the 
majority of desa pakraman really depends on the level of ritual activity. Various rituals 
can be broadly categorised under three main conditions ; the divine, the human and 
the environment. The essence of rituals in Balinese society is similar to Hindu rituals 
in other regions of Asia such India and Sri Lanka; differences arise however in the 
implementation, setting and contexts  which are influenced by culture, traditions and 
customs. In addition to these differences, the Balinese have specific and unique ritual 
practices, in which processions are an integral part of religious festivals, supported by 
both banjar and desa pakraman.  One of these  rituals is the cremation ceremony. 
According to Hindu philosophy, death entails the release of the soul from the body, in 
which the body will disappear whilst the soul will stay in the spirit world awaiting the 
next life through reincarnation.
2  But in the Balinese tradition, death signals the 
beginning of the life cycle in which it is based on most anthropological descriptions 
(Lansing, 1995: 32). A cremation in Balinese language is called “pelebon” or “ngaben” 
(pelebon=cremation, ngaben=great effort). The ceremony in Balinese society  in part 
constitutes a form of domestic ritual overseen by the family of the deceased, which 
carries great responsibility. Indeed, it may be said that this ceremony is owned and 
practised by the Balinese family members. 
 
2 The Wrhaspati Tattwa, article 52, states that ‘dead’ is the release of the soul from the body in which 
the body will be disappeared, on the other hand the soul will still be there in the world awaiting the 
next life cycle into reincarnation. 
3 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Cremation is also a great public event, a distinctive ritual procession in which the soul 
of the deceased is expected to return to the creator through ritual acts. This culminates 
in the corpse being burnt, in a way that returns it to the original source from which it 
came. According to Balinese Hindu belief, the origins of the body derive from five main 
substances, or elements; ether/akasa, light/teja, air/bayu, water/apah and soil/pertiwi 
called panca maha b huta. The purpose  of the cremation ritual  is to return all 
substances that constitute the human being  to the universe or its creator.  Besides 
paying full respect and thankfulness to the creator, this ceremony is also part of an 
ancestral homage, in which there is life after death, forged by an intimate relationship 
between the ancestors and descendants a s mentioned in the scriptures of Manawa 
Dharma Sastra. 3 If the ancestors have achieved the heavenly world, they will not 
abandon their descendants in this world, and therefore will maintain their  health and 
prosperity. On the other hand, the reverse is als o possible; d escendants may have 
bad experiences in their lives, as a result of their ancestors being poorly located in the 
universe. For this reason, the family of the deceased must prepare the rituals of the 
cremation ‘with great effort’, in order to achieve the best outcome for the soul of the 
deceased as well as their family.  
 
In the cremation procession, the body of the deceased is placed in a casket and then 
is placed in a deceased building, called bade/ wadah, which is sited in an auspicious 
location (Suastika, 2008). The form of bade/ wadah varies depending on the family’s 
ancestry and decorated with distinctive ornaments that give the site its shrine status . 
The timing of the procession can be determined  in two ways; firstly the family of the 
deceased can arrange a cremation ceremony by requesting a date f or the ceremony 
from the Hindu p riest; secondly the family can choose to bury the body initially, and 
then after some time the body is exhumed and the cremation held as the next stage. 
However the auspicious day of all ritual processi ons is ultimately determined by the 
Hindu priest, since he will lead the rituals and will be responsible for addressing both  
3 The scripture of Manawa Dharma Sastra (III.82) stipulates that that cremation ritual is a form of respect 
and thankfulness to the ancestors since we are in the world because of them,  see Pudja (1983:78).  
4 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 6 ---
good and bad omens through offerings made during a special ceremony. The  
symbolic meaning of this ceremony is based on the scripture of Pamarissudha Alaning 
Dewasa .4 The priest offers several dates as options for holding the ceremony , 
responding appropriately to the family’s time and financial circumstances. The length 
of time normally requires completing all ritual acts in the ceremony within three weeks, 
but may in certain circumstances be up to three months.  
  
As the case study for this investigation, Tabanan is a town located in the southern part 
of Bali and is the capital of the Tabanan Regency (Figure 1). The town has a long 
history which is closely related to the r oyal palace of Tabanan. The first r oyal palace 
was built in 1352 in the village of Buahan, and then moved further south- west t o 
Tabanan, later serving as the new royal palace (Tabanan kingdom ). From this 
complex of buildings developed a flourishing village. Throughout its history, the 
Tabanan has formed an integral part of the original site of the palace and the territory 
of the royal household. Today, remnants of the original village can still be seen within 
an enclave of an expanded Tabanan town. The village comprises 23 b anjar/social 
communities, with around 30,000 inhabitants (Bappeda, 2006). The inhabitants have 
a large cemetery to facilitate their cremation rituals, located at the southeast of the 
central area. This area is approximately 35,000 square metres in area, making it one 
of the largest cemeteries in Bali. Even though the cemetery was relocated following 
the period of Dutch colonialism, the ceremony follows essentially the same route and 
adheres to the same ritual protocols. The only variation to the route is an additional 
200 metres that extends to the more elevated relocation of the cemetery which is more 
demanding for the bearers. 
 
We will explore the historically impor tant site of the Tabanan palace that forms the 
geographical and symbolic focus of the ceremony, and the route of the procession in 
the context of the cremation service and its community of participants/onlookers. The 
4 The scripture of Pamarisudha Alaning Dewasa regulates about kinds of ritual to solve any bad omens 
during a special ceremony, see Anom (2002:46). 
5 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 7 ---
processions, and their related rituals, have long been recognised as an integral part 
of the civic life of the community, which is increasingly being threatened by the impact 
of the changes of land ownership and the adoption of wester n models of 
commercialization. Hence, the investigation asks if the preservation of this ceremony 
can exist in harmony with this ‘modernisation’, without the latter undermining the still 
vibrant traditional practices of Balinese society. 
THE SITE OF THE TABANAN PALACE AS THE GEOGRAPHICAL FOCUS OF 
THE CEREMONY 
The history of the Tabanan p alace starts with the invasion of Bali by the Majapahit 
empire in 1343. After the invasion, Sira Arya Kenceng , one of the troop leaders 
(ksatryan), remained in Bali and built his royal palace in Buahan v illage as a part of 
Tabanan region (Darta et.al. 1996: 12-6).
5 He had two sons, Sri Megada Prabu (Dewa 
Raka) and Sri Megada Natha (Dewa Made), both of whom  continued this royal 
dynasty, whilst two other sons (by another wife) made their royal residence elsewhere 
in Badung. After Sira Arya Kenceng passed away, the younger brother (Sri Megada 
Natha) succeeded his father as the second King of Tabanan (the older  son did not 
want to be the King). According to legend, Sri Megada Natha heard a voice which told 
him to move and build a new palace in a certain place, signalled by the release of 
lightening in the middle of the night. He found that place and then built a new palace 
located approximately 4 km to the southwest from the original site. However, Sri 
Megada Natha did not reside in this palace, but instead became a hermit and lived in 
isolation. The oldest son of the king (Sira Arya Ngurah Langwang) then became the 
third King in the new palace with the appropriate title of Sira Arya Ngurah Tabanan , 
the name given to the palace in the fifteenth century  (Anonymous, 1960; Darta et.al. 
1996: 16).  
  
5 The sources of information about Tabanan Kingdom can be found at the inscription of Babad Arya 
Tabanan. Gedong Kertya Singaraja No. Va 1792/13, published by Yayasan Parisada Hindu Dharma 
Kabupaten Badung, dated 17th  March 1974, and the inscription of Babad Arya Kenceng, owned by 
Kantor Dokumentasi Budaya Bali Propinsi Daerah Tingkat I Bali,  translated by I Putu Mertha (1995).  
6 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 8 ---
After becoming king, Sira Arya Ngurah devised a state structure whic h consisted of 
king/raja, spiritual adviser/purohito or brahmana, prime ministry/werdha mentri, head 
of defence/ mahapatih, generals/ patih, treasury officer/ manca, and head of 
village/prebekel. The persons, who held these positions, commonly had family 
relationships with the king/raja, except the village head  (Arnita et.al, 1997, 15- 6; 
Geertz, 1980:57-9). From historical investigations, it is clear that the titles conferred 
on each member also constituted key elements of the political system ( Table 1). But 
in time, there was a modification of the state structure, when two kings rul ed the 
dynasty of Tabanan (the fir st and second king/raja pemade); the southern territory 
was under the first king/Puri Gde, whilst the northern part was under the second 
king/Puri Kaleran, located only about 100 metres from the northern side of Puri Gde.6 
 
 
Table 1: The initial state structure: name of position and household 
No Name of position Name of living State structure 
1 King/Raja Puri Gde 1 2
3
4
55 56
7 7 7
 
2 Spiritual Advisor/ Purohito Grya/Dalem 
3 Prime Ministry/Werdha Menteri Puri 
4 Head of Defence/Mahapatih Jro Gde 
5 Generals/Patih Jro 
6 Treasury Officer/Manca Jro 
7 Head of Village/Perbekel/Mekel Umah 
 
 
As mentioned above, the site selection of Tabanan palace and royal households was 
foretold by a lightning strike, believing that the lightning originated from a deep well 
6  Deep interview with I Gusti Ngurah Agung is one of Tabanan nobles on17th July 2013 
7 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 9 ---
located in a small temple called Pusar Tasik. This temple was eventually incorporated 
into the Tabanan royal household complex. The selection of this site by supernatural 
means reiterates Joseph Rykwert’s argument about the role of founders of settlements 
in antiquity, in which the selection of a suitable site was determined first and foremost 
by mythical signs rather than by considerations of economic benefit, fertility of land or 
defence purposes (Rykwert, 1976: 33). Nevertheless, in the case of the Tabanan royal 
palace, the location had several practical advantages (relating to defence and fertile 
terrain), since it is  bounded by two rivers to the east and w est, and is located at the 
highest point. Though this region has high levels of humidity, with the dominant east-
west winds, outdoor thermal comfort can be ensured since vegetation along the rivers 
is able to mitigate the high levels of humidity. These factors remind one of Aristotle’s 
four recommendations when choosing a suitable site for settlement; sloping  terrain, 
healthy ambiance, east facing , and good for supporting civil and military activities. 7 
These criteria are further echoed by Vitruvius who proclaimed that a ‘healthy’ site (on 
account of orientation and prevailing winds) should be the first recommendation.8 
 
Meanwhile, the initial arrangement of terrain of the Tabanan r oyal palace was in the 
form of a ‘cross pattern’, based on a motif that was synonymous with royalty in the 
Majapahit era, called catuspatha. The word derives from Sanskrit, meaning that four 
main directions define the centre of a territory (Putra, 2005:61).  According to this 
principle, the cross pattern gave rise to four zones that are utilised in the layout of the 
palace, temple, market and adjacent open space, whilst the intersection of the cross 
becomes an essential location for ritual activity. Significa ntly, the four zones in the 
cross pattern arrangement derive from  a nine zone concept fami liarly known as the 
‘sanga mandala’ (sanga=nine, mandala=within a defined space), in which the   zones 
refer to the nine wind directions called nawa sanga (Gelebet, 1982). The zone of the 
Tabanan palace, in the south- west quadrant of the cruciform layout, is however 
7  Aristotle, Politic, VII, 11, 276, 1330a, in J. Rykwert (1976:41).  
8 Vitruv., I, 5, i. Vitruvius’s insistence on the importance 0f wind follows classical doctrines on the subject 
as set out for instance in the short Hippocratean book ‘on winds’ in J. Rykwert (1976:41). 
8 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 10 ---
different, since other royal palaces in Bali are typically located in the north- east 
quadrant (Figure 2&3).  
 
The central royal territory of the Tabanan is bounded by two rivers , at the east and 
west ends. The rivers are named Tukad Dikis and Tukad Empas, both of which may 
have served defensive purposes. The king’s palace is surrounded by a series allied 
houses associated with the king’s families that coll ectively formed part of the state 
ceremonial structure. The cemetery, which served as an important facility for the state, 
is also located in this area on the west side of the river  Geertz, 1980: 56). The royal 
household of Tabanan, and its allied properties in the centre of the Tabanan village, 
can be seen in the schematic plan below  (Figure 4). From this image, it seems that 
the north- south axis in front of Puri Gde and Kaleran is the main access to 
accommodate ritual activities in which this axis  passes through three processional 
junctions (one is located between the palaces and two junctions are outer side of the 
palaces) that originally framed the Tabanan palace complex. Though using a different 
history and time period, this layout has some similarities with the village of Marzabotto 
in the province of Bologna, Italy , an example Rom an era site dating back to the 
beginning of the sixth century (Rykwert, 1976:80). 
 
Furthermore, the initial site of the Tabanan p alace is approximately 4 hectares,  and 
consists of 33 zones. This is substantially more than most other royal palaces in Bali 
which commonly consist of between 9 and 21 zones. For instance, Puri Kaleran, the 
second king of Tabanan, controlled only 9 zones. Hence the Tabanan royal palace is 
one of the biggest palaces in Bali ( Figure 5).9 The royal household was surrounded 
by a main ceremonial access, except this access was  separated by the king’s family 
house (Jro Subamia) at the rear of the site, appropriately adorned with embellishments 
in accordance with the traditions of Balinese traditional architecture.  The  bayan tree 
referred to earlier is located at the north side of the Palace,  and in front of the Puseh 
9  The documentation photo derives from  Bappeda Kabupat en Tabanan, Laporan RTRK Tabanan   
tahun 2006, Ibid, p.III-24. 
9 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 11 ---
Temple and serving as a key  stopping point in the ritual itinerary  of the ancient 
ceremony. As Mircea Eliade (1959: 12) states , the  adornment of trees gives their 
sacred status and their worship reinforces their hierophan y (holy quality). This 
hierophany, moreover, reveals in the tree an order of reality that is wholly different 
from the “natural”. 
 
Unfortunately, the Puri Gde, the central part of the royal residence, was partly 
destroyed in 1906 and became a ruin when the Dutch colonisers defeated the king of 
Badung and Tabanan. It was eventually demolished by the Dutch, during a revolt after 
the initial defeat . The images (figure 6 & 7) taken in 1906 show the Dutch troops in 
front of the Tabanan palace and the partly destroyed palace’s wall is on the north  
side.10 Hence, under Dutch colonial rule, the central power of the king practically 
disappeared, and the palace, as a centre of spiritual, culture, economic and politic life, 
significantly declined. In this era, one of the royal family houses, located at the 
northern side of the palace, was extended to the south by incorporating the main 
access to the Tabanan palace, thereby closing one direction of the cross pattern. This 
resulted in a significant change from the initial route of ritual processions in the centre 
of the village. During this period, the Dutch also built a bridge to connect the west and 
east sides of the river. Because of this strategically important connection, the 
cemetery on the east side of the river (previously  owned by the former Malkangin 
kingdom), became the main cemetery for the Taba nan village. Indeed, the Dalem 
temple and its cemetery have served the Tabanan village inhabitants for centuries, 
especially the Balinese Hindu.
 
 
After the period of colonialism, the areas controlled by the Dutch came under local 
government ownership. What was left of the palace changed dramatically, since most 
of the area had changed to public and commercial use, such as shops, government 
offices, a town garden,  and public access.   The remaining area of Puri  Gde in the 
10  The documentation photo derives from Bappeda Kabupaten Tabanan,  Laporan RTRK. Tabanan 
Tahun 2006, Ibid, p.III-23-4. 
10 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 12 ---
Tabanan royal household is only approximately one fifth of the original total area that 
was settled by the royal family. The house of the king‘s priest was relocated to the 
north, about 500 meters from its original location. In contrast, the Puri Kaleran (the 
palace of the second king) s till remains relatively intact, although several building 
changes have occurred over time. Today, the historic site of the royal palace forms 
part of the central area of Tabanan town, whilst the former cemetery on the west side 
of the river has become a local government office and electricity service facility. 
Besides the relocation of the cemetery and street intersection, the physical changes 
to the Tabanan royal palace, and its surroundings, have significantly impacted on the 
ritual setting and its urban contexts. The changes in land use of the royal household, 
after colonialism, can be seen in figure 8 below. 
  
These changes in ritual setting, and their urban contexts, have also taken place as a 
result of other developments in the town itself. Reconstruction of temples, for instance, 
has led to changes in the form and performance of rituals , whilst rivers and 
wellsprings, as the source of body purification,  have also been altered as a result  of 
river bank developments. Recently, the local government prohibited the disposal of 
body ash and ritual waste into rivers, thereby necessitating disposal exclusively  by 
sea. At the same time, the bayan tree is traditionally a key part of the cremation ritual, 
planted as long ago as the fifteenth century as part of the sacred landscape of the 
royal palace in Tabanan town. Besides the existence of the bayan tree, the village 
temples still serve the community with several renewals in the use of building materials 
due to life of the buildings, weathering, and other factors (Figure 9).  
 
In regard to ritual festivals, relating to the cremation ceremony, there are several 
important sites associated with the ceremony that have their roots in ancient forms of 
philosophical ethics that form part of their religious beliefs. These places serve as key 
locations in the ritual itinerary, as follows:   
1) The village temples (the places to take holy water for purification of the deceased); 
2) The street intersection of the village ( the route of ritual procession); 
11 
 

--- PAGE: 13 ---
3) The Hindu priest’s temple ( the place where holy water for purification is used); 
4) The wellspring (for purification of the corpse and related ritual equipment);  
5) The cemetery (the area of cremation); 
6) Sacred bayan tree (bayan’s leaf for ritual after the cremation ritual); and 
7) The rivers (for transporting the ash after the cremation to the sea as an option to 
the offering ceremony). 
The levels of intensity , among the important places highlighted above,  can partly be 
determined by the number of rituals occurring in the places of Tabanan village (Figure 
10). The village temples (Dalem, Puseh & Bale Agung temple) and the priest’s temple 
have high levels of activity, since the ritual of collecting holy water for purification takes 
place before, during and after the cremation. At the wellspring, rituals take place 
before and during the cremation ceremony, whilst at the cemetery, the stre et 
intersection and the sacred b ayan Tree, the ritual only takes place once; the day or 
so after the cremation. The rivers, on the other hand, could not be used anymore after 
the prohibition refereed to earlier, resulting in the community of mourners using the 
sea as a medium for transporting the ashes of the deceased. The location of the coast 
from the cemetery is approximately 9 km to the south-west. Significantly, the banning 
of the use of rivers by local government did not provoke resentment, on the part of the 
local communities, since there was general recognition of the urgent need to avoid 
polluting the rivers and preserving their environmental balance. 
THE ROUTE OF THE PROCESSION IN THE CONTEXT OF THE CREMATION 
SERVICE  
The uniqueness of the cremation ceremony, in relation to the historically important site 
of the Tabanan palace and its larger geographical location and symbolic importance, 
persists today. The vibrant religious festivals of the cremation ceremony continue to 
give communal identity and continuity. These and other festival events typically derive 
from the families of the kin g and the priest , whose social status ensured the 
continuation of the ‘ancestral line’. We can see how the relation of the rituals to the 
12 
 

--- PAGE: 14 ---
route of the procession and its social/cultural purpose are defined by the three stages 
of the procession: pre- cremation, cremation ceremony and the post cremation 
ceremony. These rituals, which take place in the Tabanan area, are a special case in 
point on the basis of their dependency on the presence of royal and priestly families. 
This can be summarised as follows: 
1) Pre-cremation Day 
At this first stage, there are two main ritual s that take place in the dwelling of the 
deceased, comprising the ritual bathing of the deceased’s body called melelet, and 
the purification and cremation preparations called Mereresik. Both rituals require 
holy water from the village temples, the priest’s temple and the wellspring. The 
involvement of the banjar community to participate in this ritual typically 
commences on the day after melelet. Meanwhile, mereresik, as the day before the 
cremation ceremony, could be construed as an independent ritual event which 
takes place in the house of the deceased as well as outside, from early morning to 
the middle of the night. Moreover, the routes of the procession for the Mereresik  
ritual can be described as follows: 
- In the morning, members of the family and the banjar community have to collect 
holy water from different places. The first place to collect the holy water is at 
the wellspring, and then it is carried to the priest and the village templ e 
respectively. In the course of the procession the holy water is paraded in the 
streets and concludes with a performance by  the traditional orchestra of 
angklung and gong.  
- The second parade takes place in the afternoon to collect the holy water at the 
wellspring for the purification of the deceased (Figure 11&12).  
After the second collection of water at the wellspring, another event takes place 
which is called Mamios . This event is a unique ritual not found in other places in 
Bali. It entails walking around the inner enclave of the town, parading ritual 
‘equipment’ such as; Saji (small offering with rolled pork), purification tools, 
bandrang (a complete javelin and umbrella), a miniature of the cor pse tower, etc. 
13 
 

--- PAGE: 15 ---
followed by Baris Dapdap (ritual dancers), Ratu Gde Tanah Pegat ( as a demon to 
protect the ritual),  a ngklung and gong (traditional orchestras). This only occurs in 
the presence of the king and the priest’s family. It indicates that the ancient culture 
and customs of the royal household still persist. The main purpose of this tradition 
is to announce to the families and society in generally, that the cremation ceremony 
will take place the following day. 
2) Cremation Day 
On the final day, the ritual does not occur in just one place (i.e. the cemetery), but 
takes place across a number of locations, as highlighted in the following 
sequences of events: 
- The route of the procession begins by collecting holy water for the final 
purification at the same places and the using the same formation of the parade 
as the previous ritual.  
- After the final purification at a pavilion, the body of the deceased, which is 
placed in the casket, is ceremoniously left in a tall structure, called b ade or 
wadah. This structure is then carried by family members and the banjar 
community to the cemetery.  The formation of the parade is headed by the 
traditional orchestra of Angklung, followed by the ritual equipments and special 
offerings, trajang/stair, lembu/singa/petulangan (a giant in the form of bull/lion 
used as the sarcophagus for cremating the corpse of nobility), bade/tower and 
the traditional orchestra of gong serve as the last row of the parade formation. 
The route of the procession goes through the street intersection to the cemetery 
as the final ground of the cremation ceremony. At the main str eet intersection 
and nearby funeral ground, the three building structures (trajang, lembu/singa, 
and bade) are circumnavigated three times in opposite directions, as a symbol 
of the funerary ritual (Figure 13&14). 
- After finishing this parade to the cemetery, the sarcophagus is then placed in 
the funeral ground; the bull’s backbone is opened and the sarcophagus is 
removed and placed in the burning procession. After the burning ceremony, the 
14 
 

--- PAGE: 16 ---
remaining ash is then bles sed and placed in an urn (a yellow coconut), and 
wrapped finally with white cloth, called a bukur. This cloth is carried by family 
members to the coast and delivered into the sea, a ritual undertaking called 
nyukat/nganyud. As members now use private cars, to travel to the coast, there 
is no longer a parade by road as existed in the past. 
 
3) Post Cremation Day 
The post -cremation stage does not entail a reduction in ritual activity .Indeed 
parades still take place to designated locations. But there are different options for 
the deceased’s family to arrange these rituals which depend, in the main, on their 
personal preferences. In some cases, the family can choose to perform a 
continuous ritual event, which normally takes a whole day to complete. The royal  
family of Tabanan usually choose the 11 th and 12th days after the cremation for 
offering the post cremation rituals, though they are also required to perform smaller 
rituals on the 3 rd and 5 th days after cremation. In regard to the route of the 
procession, those rituals on the 11th and 12th days entail the following: 
- The ritual of removing the leaves from the bayan tree (ngalap don bingin) takes 
place on the 11th day. The bayan tree is a symbol of condescendence, in which 
the soul is expected to obtain protection from the new world, and the ancestors 
are able to give ‘condescendence’ to their descendant. In this ritual, a parade 
is held on the road to the Bayan tree, accompanied by the traditional orchestra 
of gong. The bayan leaf is used in relation to the next day ceremony, called 
ngerorasin (ngerorasin means ritual of the12th day). Other names of this ritual 
include mamukur, nyekah, or ngelanus (Suastika, 2008:38). 
- The ritual ceremony then returns to the sea in order to cal l back the soul from 
the dead, through offerings to the goddess of the sea. The soul, is then brought 
back and symbolically placed in the family temple which is in a specific shrine 
called rong tiga (containing three spaces; the right side for the men, the women 
at the left side, and the centre space as the inner ‘sanctum’ of the divine (from 
where immortal originate) . As was the previous case, the procession to the 
15 
 

--- PAGE: 17 ---
coast is undertaken by private car;  a short parade then takes place after the 
family members park their cars and ‘process’ to the sea. 
 
From the various rituals mentioned above, there are several routes of the procession 
which have been carried out by family members of the deceased to symbolically 
important places. In spite of significant physical changes to the area, as a result of 
tourism etc., the routes of the procession reveal only minor changes over time, with 
the relocation of the residence of the royal priest to the north from the initial Tabanan 
royal palace. In addition, the Dalem Temple and its cemetery were relocated further 
east. The imposition of a one way system at the street intersection, however, may 
have had a significant impact on the essence of the historical rite. With a new 
intersection located near the initial site, the sacred nuance may be slightly different. 
However, some royal family members still use the historic intersection as the route of 
the procession, whilst other members do not. As a consequence, the routes of  the 
procession have become longer with different paths introduced toward the c emetery 
(Figure 15).
11    
 
From the route of the procession it can be recorded that the three main access points 
from Tabanan town have become the busiest routes for cremation ceremonies which 
pass along Gunung Agung, Pahlawan, and Gajah Mada Street. Even though Tabanan 
inhabitants have a different method for collecting holy water, when compared to royal 
members or the king’s priest family, they follow the same direction towards the village 
temples. Since the location of the sacred b ayan tree is in  front of Puseh and Bale 
Agung t emple, this area is one of intensive ritual activity when the cremation  
ceremonies take place. The concentration of people, in relation to the route of the 
procession, is apparent both before and after  the cremation. Another interesting 
aspect of this area is that the locations of the temple and tree have not changed from 
the beginning, serving as enduring evidence of the historically important role of the 
palace and temple in the life of the town.   
11   The source of basic map is from Laporan RTRK. Tabanan Tahun 2006: p.III-6. 
16 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 18 ---
 
Even though the ancient Tabanan v illage has become the centre of the expanded 
town, most routes of the religious cremation fest ival still have a dynamic relationship 
with the urban fabric which has persisted over time. Another important urban feature 
of these ceremonies is their relationship to the 23 banjar communities, highlighted at 
the beginning of this paper, which forms an integral part of the village community and 
the larger civic life of the town. T hese communities further support the continuity of 
Balinese society, and form an essential component of the traditional community that 
sustains the meaning of every cremation rit ual. The basic concept of the b anjar 
community is sukha -dukkha, from Sanskrit meaning ‘pleasant -unpleasant’ (Monier-
Williams & Cappeller, 1889:  483, 1220 -21). The term conveys the respect and 
sympathy for each community even in difficult and challenging times. Without this, it 
is unlikely that the family of the deceased would be able to prepare the cremation 
ceremony and use the cemetery in a meaningful way.  
 
From what I can ascertain there is no evidence of a conflict or friction in the use of the 
cemetery or other facilities in Tabanan village today. Banjar  community members 
participate in the cremation rituals, and the onlookers are still eager to witness the  
route of the religious festival and cremation ritual processions, treating these as a part 
of their culture and life. The members still carry the tower/ bade, sarcophagus and 
stair/trajang on their shoulders toward the cemetery, though in other places these 
ceremonial structures (the ‘ritual equipment’ I referred to earlier) are transported on 
wheel-bearing floats rather than being carried. Because of the extension of the 
Tabanan village area, the distance between the deceased place and the cemetery 
has increased by more than 1 km. The use of wheel-bearing floats for these parades 
in Tabanan helps the participants to more efficiently transport the sarcophagus, even 
though it may be less spectacular for the onlookers. 
THE RELIGIOUS PROCESSION IN RELATION TO THE CIVIC LIFE OF THE 
COMMUNITY 
17 
 

--- PAGE: 19 ---
The symbolic meanings of sacred arts, their ethical dimensions and the respect for 
nature, are basic principles for Balinese life in actualising their religion, culture and 
traditions. For instance: a festival procession to collect holy water in the place of a 
wellspring, the priest temple and the village temples for purification of the dead body, 
does not reveal the totality of the procession, but merely pays homage to the  g ods 
and the power of nature at these specific places. In addition, as I have already 
indicated, three traditional orchestras participate in the cremation rituals and festivals 
in Tabanan namely; angklung, gong and gambang, whose names contain syllables 
that invoke sacred symbols.  
 
As Bandem  (1986) argues, every tone of Balinese traditional music has its own 
character and place, such as; dang, ding, dung, deng, dong or ang, ing, ung, eng, ong 
that relate to the cardinal directions; east, west, north, south, centre. The sacred 
Hinduism symbol of ‘OM’, or ‘ONG’, signifies the universe and is derived from three 
letters; A, U, M or Ang, Ung, Mang (in Bali). These letters also symbolise three worlds; 
mother, father, and heaven world, and the sounds emanating from the orchestras 
derive from the words ang, ung, mang and ong, each of which has symbol ic 
connections to the deities Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva  (Bangli, 2005: 104) . The 
angklung orchestra consists of two words; ‘ang’ and ‘ung’, meaning that this orchestra 
is only used for cremation and temple ceremonies. Gong , on the other hand, derives 
from ‘ong’, a word which is used in most kinds of rituals . Gambang contains ‘mang’ 
and is the orchestra that direct the soul to the heavenly realm which consists of five 
players, placed near the pavilion of the deceased. Bangli (2005: 114) also argues that 
the purpose of these orchestras in the cremation ceremony is to direct the soul to the 
heavenly realm. Based on these symbols, only a ngklung and gong participate in the 
festival procession of the cremation, whereby angklung is in the front line and gong in 
the back.  
 
The groups of the orchestras are called sekehe, professional groups who mostly come 
from the banjar community. If the cremation ritual takes place among the b anjar 
18 
 

--- PAGE: 20 ---
themselves, then the banjar members do not perform in the orchestra, as they must 
be directly involved in the ritual and festival act ivities. As a result, the family of the 
deceased will be required to use groups from other places. Due to their laws, all 
families become members of banjar community, and males and females in one family 
must be involved in the cremation ritual from the ini tial purification rituals of the 
deceased to the final day of the cremation. This involvement is an essential part of the 
‘sukha-dukkha’, to the dead and the living family. If members are absent from this 
ritual, they will get fines according to the law. I n exceptional cases, banjar 
organisations, in a final meeting called ‘sangkep banjar,’ can decide to evict one of 
members from their home and the community , if a family does not participate in the 
rituals of the ‘sukha-dukkha’. Though it seems harsh, it may be a strategy to secure a 
unity of the community. So far, there have been no cases of  evicting a citizen in 
Tabanan for this misdemeanour. 
 
As mentioned earlier, the eagerness to carry the tower/ bade without using wheels 
might indicate that the b anjar community members are still strong enough to handle 
the ritual cremation festivals as before. The involvement of the community in the 
festival procession emerged during the time of mamios, involving ritual walking around 
the inner Tabanan village carrying ritual equipments. This festival is mostly supported 
by the younger members, while the elders handle activities to construct temporary 
buildings for cremation and the priest worship ( Bale Pemasmian and Bale Pemujan) 
at the cemetery. They work at the cemetery from morning to afternoon, organising the 
serving of refreshments and food which are provided by other members. On the final 
day of the cremation the young and the old (both female and male) come to the funeral 
ground of deceased to fully support the ceremony,  that takes place from morning to 
afternoon. In the festival procession, the men carrying the tower/bade attempt to hold 
the load on their shoulders on the uphill slope of the route, whilst women carry the 
ritual equipment and ceremonial materials. 
 
19 
 

--- PAGE: 21 ---
Recently, a big dilemma has confronted the b anjar communities in Tabanan village, 
who not only carry the deceased’s ceremonial structures , but also must bear the 
increasing economic costs of the event.  Even though Miguel Covarrubias and others 
have demonstrated clearly that the expenses of a cremation are enormous  there is 
generally no regret or concern on the part of the Balinese,  as they believe the 
cremation represents the accomplishment of the most sacred duty  (Covarrubias, 
1937:359-60). 
 
Besides the enormous expenses, there is also consideration of time and labour in the 
preparation of these events; labour  migrants from other islands who build their own 
houses, places of worship and cemeteries have contributed to transforming the town 
during these occasions . There are now  Muslim communities in B anjar Lod Rurung 
and Pasekan Delodan, located at the southern and northern part of the  town centre. 
This transformation has also led to the development of new laws and a different sense 
of unity of the village and banjar community. For instance, banjar, as the lowest level 
local organisation, has faced some difficulties in implementing laws and regulations 
for new residents who have dif ferent religious beliefs and cultural backgrounds to 
follow the principles of ‘ sukha-dukkha’, even in the ritual cremation activities. The 
different treatment s of, and particular laws relating to,  immigrants have resulted in 
some claims of a degradation of social unity. Intensive migration followed by changes 
of the law, setting and context of settlement , should be considered in parallel to the 
significant impacts of tourism development on the island. 
 
Related to these pressures is the growin g competition between Balinese and non-
Balinese members of society in all aspects of life. Non-Balinese residents, particularly 
from other parts of Indonesia, have traditionally struggled to secure employment, 
which has given them greater motivation in an increasingly competitive job’s market. 
The Balinese, on the other hand, may not have the same level of incentive, partly a 
result of a different philosophy of life guided by Hindu beliefs. Today, Javanese and 
Lombok labou rers have been harvesting rice in s outhern parts of Bali , whilst 
20 
 

--- PAGE: 22 ---
agricultural land has  decreased rapidly due to reuse of land  for tourist facilities and 
other commercial initiatives (Pringle, 2004:9). 
 
Related to issues of economy, fines imposed by non- attendance to ceremonies and 
competition in the commercial market are other conflictual challenges faced by the 
Balinese community in  achieving a balance between the increasingly strict time 
management in working environments and the need to conform to traditional religious 
practice. As government employees those Balinese involved in such ceremonies and 
festivals may have less resistance than residents employed in commercial 
organisations, since local government must be seen to respect the local culture and 
traditions. Indeed there is growing evidence that private companies are increasingly 
resistant to allowing their staff to participate in such events, by providing more flexible 
shifts and periods of works. These challenges sometimes give rise to conflicts in the 
workplace, in regard to adhering and respecting  ceremonial protocols and traditions. 
The situation is usually more problematic if the owner of a company is not Balinese 
and does not respect – or understand- the Balinese culture and way of life. As there 
are many ceremonies that traditionally take place in Bali, this can lead to a negative 
image of the society, in regard to what is perceive by some as unduly long holiday 
periods against the increasing priority on commitment to employment and commercial 
competitiveness. More specific to this investigation, such issues have a bearing on 
the nature and meaning of a civil society in Bali, and how traditional ceremonial 
practices can sustain a sense of th e civic realm against a backdrop of encroaching 
commercialization.   
 
Whilst Tabanan is not located close to Kuta and Sanur, the main centres of growth in 
tourism in Bali since the early 1970s, the regional government has introduced wider 
investment in the tourist sector of this area which  is impacting on socio- cultural, 
economic, political, and environmental aspects of Bali as a whole. Indeed, the central 
government in Indonesia, in conjunction with regional governments, has identified the 
island of Bali as the main centre of tourism in the country . A number of corporations 
21 
 

--- PAGE: 23 ---
in tourism are playing a significant role in encouraging the government to continually 
develop tourist areas, without proper consideration of the needs of the local 
community. Land purchases and sales are inevitable and will continue, as well as the 
conversion of agricultural land for tourism and housing which has seen a major 
expansion in recent years.  
 
Existing laws and regulations seem powerless to prevent such land conversion; 
largely due to abuse of power, corruption, vested interests and nepotism.  According 
to the chairman of the Regional Subak Society of Bali the rate of conversion of rice 
fields to residential dwelling is approximately 750 hectares per year (Windia, 2009:9). 
Previously, the Tabanan region was well known as the rice barn of Bali, having the 
largest area of rice fields on the island, a situation that is under threat by rapid 
(unchecked) development. This also relates more specifically to the expansion of 
Tabanan town centre, which is now up to four times the size of its original area 100 
years ago (Figure 16)
12, further contributing to a significant decrease of rice fields  in 
this area. 
 
In recognition of these changes, the Balinese provincial government has attempted to 
protect religious areas through the implementation of the Regional Land Use Planning 
policy (No. 16/2009). However most of the regency governments have rejected this 
planning regulation, believing that it will not hinder further development of tourism in 
new areas. In any case, with the National Law ( No. 3 2/2004), the regency 
governments have an authority to manage their territories without considering 
provincial regulations. This inconsistency in the formulation and implementation of 
planning policy in Bali is further exacerbating the problem of unchecked tourism and 
commercial development.  
 
It is perhaps not surprising that religious ceremonies  in Bali, such as the impressive 
cremation ceremonies examined in this paper, have become key spectacles in the 
12 The figure is reproduced from the source of Bappeda, 2006). 
22 
 
                                                           

--- PAGE: 24 ---
tourism sector , and therefore contribute in a positive way to sustaining (and even 
enhancing) the tourist economy on the island. The challenge facing all stakeholders 
on the island is to ensure that the Balinese are able to continue to participate actively 
in the religious life of their community,  and that such  religious event s, and the 
cremation ceremonies  in particular , are protect ed and preserved for the benefit of 
future generations.  
CONCLUSION 
This article has investigated the traditional cremation ceremony in Bali as a significant 
and memorable event that continues to be performed during a period of significant 
change on the island in the era of globalisation. The investigation has focused on the 
historically important site of the Tabanan palace, which forms the geographic and 
symbolic focus of the ceremony, and constitutes a historically essential element in the 
civic and religious life of the community. 
 
The ancestral relationship between the descendants of the Tabanan king , and other 
members in the banjar community, still exists as the main support for the cremation 
rituals. P articipation in these rituals demands much time  and manpower and the 
tradition is sufficiently strong to maintain a continuity of funeral practice, without any 
obvious internal confli ct between participants and stakeholders.  However, several 
external factors are beginning to have a negative impact on securing the future for 
these important public events, as highlighted below:  
 The arrival of m igrants from other islands in Indonesia, who become residents in 
the banjar, have created some tensions in the otherwise harmonious  relationship 
among community members.  
 The lack of proper employment laws means that taking time off work, to participate 
in these ceremonies, is becoming more difficult. 
 Since openness and accessibility of land is a fundamental aspect of Balinese 
Hindu culture, the conversion of agriculture land to commercial use is leading to 
an unbalanced environment.  
23 
 

--- PAGE: 25 ---
 Globalisation and the impact of modern lifestyles continue to impose new 
challenges on the culture and traditions of the Balinese people.   
Though tourism has been the prime driver of economic growth in Bali, most tourist  
businesses are actually owned by non-Balinese. This fact has made it difficult to claim 
that tourism in general has empowered the Balinese,  in terms of maintaining or 
enhancing their culture and traditions, as well as their environment. The government 
and other stakeholders, responsible for protecting and maintaining these vital assets 
of Bali, remain focused on enhancing government  revenue through unchecked 
development of the tourism industry, without considering the carrying capacity of the 
island. The case of the cremation ceremony  and its role in Baline se society today, 
highlights the fragility of the situation, and the need to identity policies that will secure 
its survival as a lived tradition.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The majority of this article derives from a historical and empirical study. We would like 
to thank Tabanan Government for supporting additional documents. Also special 
thanks to the School of Art, Design and Architecture, and School of Human, and 
Health Sciences at University of Huddersfield for their Writing Retreat Workshop 
Programme to encourage the completion of this article, as well as the Directorate of 
High Education of Indonesia Republic for their support. 
 
REFERENCES 
Anonym. (1960).  Lontar Babad Tabanan.  Grya Lod Sanur -Denpasar: Fakultas Sastra 
Universitas Udayana.  
 
Anom, IB. (2002).  Caru dan Tawur I . Grya Kediri Paketan, Marga Tabanan: Yayasan 
Dharmophadesa Tabanan. 
 
Aristotle, Politic, VII, 11, 276, 1330a , i n J. Rykwert (1976). The Idea of a Town: The 
Anthropology of Urban Form in Rome Italy and the Ancient World . London: Faber 
and Faber Limited.  
24 
 

--- PAGE: 26 ---
 
 A.R. Arnita, at.al. (1997). Babad Arya Tabanan. Denpasar, Bali: Kantor Dokumentasi Budaya 
Bali, Provinsi Bali. 
 
Bappeda Kabupaten Tabanan. (2006).  Laporan Rencana Teknik Ruang Kota (RTRK) 
Tabanan Tahun 2006. Tabanan: Bappeda Kabupaten Tabanan. 
 
Bandem, IM. (1986). Prakempa: sebuah lontar gambelan Bali. Denpasar: Akademi Seni Tari 
Indonesia.  
 
Bangli, IB. (2005). Mutiara Dalam Budaya Hindu Bali. Surabaya: Paramita Surabaya. 
 
Covarrubias, M. (1973). Island of Bali. London: Cassell. 
 
Eliade, M. (1959). The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion. USA: Harcourt, Brace 
& World.  
 
Geertz, C. (1980). Negara: the theatre state in nineteenth- century Bali . USA: Princeton 
University Press. 
 
Gelebet, IN. (1982). Arsitektur Traditional Daerah Bali . Denpasar: Proyek Inventarisasi 
Kebudayaan Daerah Kanwil Depdikbud Provinsi Bali. 
 
Lansing, J.S. (1995). The Balinese: Case Studies in Cultural Anthropology . U SA: Ted 
Buchholz. 
 
Pemerintah Provinsi Bali, Rencana Tata Ruang Wilayah Provinsi (RTRWP) Bali 2009- 2029 
Nomor: 16/2009 (Denpasar: Pemerintah Provinsi Bali, 2009), p.III1, 5, 60, 100, pp.III 
21-24. 
 
Pringle, A. (2004). A Short History of Bali, Indonesia’s Hindu Realm. Australia: Allen & Unwin: 
Australia. 
 
Putra, IG.M. (2005). Catuspatha: Konsep, Transformasi dan Perubahan . Denpasar: Jurnal 
Permukiman Natah, vol.3 no. 2  Agustus 2005: 61- 101. 
 
Rykwert, J. (1976). The Idea of a Town: The Anthropology of Urban Form in Rome Italy and 
the Ancient World. London: Faber and Faber Limited.  
 
Suastika, P. (2008). Ngaben. Denpasar: CV. Kayumas Agung. 
 
Singgih Wikarman, I Nyoman (1998). Leluhur Orang Bali: Dari Dunia Babad dan Sejarah. 
Surabaya: Paramita. 
 
Suparta Ardhana, Ida Bagus (2002). Sejarah: Perkembangan Agama Hindu di Indonesia. 
Surabaya: Paramita. 
 
Sutjaja, IG.M. (2009). Concise Balinese Dictionary. USA: Tuttle Publishing. 
 
25 
 

--- PAGE: 27 ---
The Bhagavad Gita (III. 10- 12) translated by W.J. Johnson (1994). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 
The Scripture of Manawa Dharma Sastra (I.82)  translated by G. Pudja (1983). Manawa 
Dharma Sastra: Weda Smerti.  Jakarta: Proyek Pengadaan Kitab Suci Hindu 
Departemen Agama R.I. 
 
The Scripture of Wrhaspati Tattwa, article 52,  translated by IGN. Rai Mirsha, et.al. (1994). 
Wrahaspati Tatwa, Ganapati Tatwa, Tatwa Jnana: Kajian Teks dan Terjemahannya. 
Denpasar: Kantor Dokumentasi Budaya Bali Provinsi Bali. 
 
Undang-Undang Republik Indonesia No. 32/2004 tentang Pemerintahan Daerah (Jakarta: 
Pemerintah Pusat, 2004), article 3, 10. 
 
Williams, M.M., and C.  Cappeller. (1899). A  Sanskrit-English Dictionary: Etymological and 
Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo -European 
Languages. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
 
Windya, IW. (2009). Membangun Sektor Pertanian di Perkotaan. Denpasar: Seminar Paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
