DOCUMENT ID: S-2022-cahyadi-01
SOURCE FILE: 2022-Cahyadi-Visual-Narrative-Analysis-of-Earthquake-Prediction-in-Palelindon-Paintings-with-.pdf
TOTAL PAGES: 6

--- PAGE: 1 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.99, 2022 
 
11 
Visual Narrative Analysis of Earthquake Prediction in Palelindon  
Paintings with Wayang Kamasan Styleat Bale Kertha Gosa 
Klungkung   
 
I Wayan Agus Eka Cahyadi* 
Faculty of Arts and Design, Institut Seni Indonesia Denpasar 
Nusa Indah Street Denpasar, 80235, Indonesia 
E-mail: ekacahyadi@ isi-dps.ac.id  
 
I Wayan Adnyana 
Faculty of Arts and Design, Institut Seni Indonesia Denpasar 
Nusa Indah Street Denpasar, 80235, Indonesia 
E-mail: kun_adnyana@yahoo.com 
 
Abstract 
Palelindon's painting at Bale Kertha Gosa Klungkung is a narrati ve painting that illustrates the prediction of the 
effects of earthquakes according to lunar calculati ons (sasih ). This Palelindon painting with Wayang Kamasan 
style is found on the ceiling of the Bale Kertha Go sa building, a building from the Klungkung kingdom.  This 
research aims to explain the visual narrative of Palelindon's  paintings on the ceiling of Bale Kertha Gosa 
Klungkung. The sresearch was conducted at Bale Kert ha Gosa in Klungkung Regency. Data was collected 
through field observations and literature study. Th e findings of this research is the visual narrative  of Palelindon  
paintings with Wayang Kamasan  style arranged in 12  scene themes. Each scene shows a god who is doing yoga, 
accompanied by several human, animal and plant char acters who narrate a condition or prediction of an 
earthquake in a sasih . The scene of sasih kasa (first) is located on the  north side of the middle, moving around in 
a clockwise direction (Pradaksina).   
Keywords: Palelindon , Kertha Gosa, earthquakes , Kamasan 
DOI:  10.7176/ADS/99-02 
Publication date: February 28 th  2022 
 
1.  Introduction 
Bali is an island located in the Pacific Ring of Fi re, an area around the Pacific Ocean where several tectonic 
plates meet, which are prone to earthquake.  Earthquake in Balinese terms is called "linuh/lindu". Myth in Bali 
about earthquake mentions the existence of a giant tortoise (Bedawangnala) that is entangled by two dr agons, the 
dragon Basuki and the dragon Anantaboga as the eart h support. The movement of this giant tortoise is 
considered a trigger for earthquakes. Earthquake wi ll have an impact on building damage and tsunami an d often 
cause fatalities. But on the other side the earthqu ake is also seen as a sign of nature to read and pr edict human 
life.  
Lontar Roga Sanghara Bumi explains the signs and ch aracteristics of nature that can bring good or bad to 
human life, one of which is by observing the occurr ence of earthquakes according to the calculation of  the moon 
or sasih (Paramita, 2018; 41). This knowledge is known as Palelindon . Palelindon is a prediction based on 
understanding of the incident of earthquake or vibr ations in the human body and their good and bad imp acts on 
life (Suarka, 2016: 2). With this knowledge, the Balinese get an explanation of the effects of earthquakes on their 
life according to sasih or month  calculations based on the Saka calendar. Like the e ruption of Mount Agung in 
1963 (Reid, 2005: 65), which caused an earthquake i n Sasih Kaulu (the eighth month) is believed to be a bad 
sign. It is said that there will be a lot of chaos,  people were not calm, etc. This was later linked t o the riots and 
killings in Bali in 1965 against sympathizers of th e Indonesian Communist Party. Palelindon knowledge is 
written in the lontar media (lontar Roga Sanghara B humi) which is written in Balinese script and in Ka wi 
language. In Bale Kertha Gosa this knowledge is ill ustrated in the form of a narrative painting with W ayang 
Kamasan style that is placed on the ceiling of the building. 
Bale Kertha Gosa is a heritage building of the Klun gkung Kingdom. Kertha Gosa is estimated to have bee n 
built in the 17th century along with the constructi on of Puri Semarapura which was built to replace th e center of 
the Balinese kingdom which was previously located i n Gelgel. When the puputan Klungkung occurred which  
marked the end of the royal period in Bali, Bale Ke rtha Gosa became one of the buildings of Puri Semar apura 
that escaped destruction. Apart from Kertha Gosa, t he remains of Puri Semarapura that we can still see  today are 
the Bale Kambang and Pemedal Agung buildings. The p ainting of Palelindon Wayang Kamasan at Bale Kertha  
Gosa has undergone several repairs. Repairs began i n 1918 (probably due to the impact of the 1917 eart hquake). 
In 1933 the fabric media was replaced with asbestos board material. In 1963 a number of paintings were replaced.

--- PAGE: 2 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.99, 2022 
 
12 
Finally in the 1980s a number of damaged images were replaced with new images (Vickers, 2012; 77). 
The visual narration of the Palelindon painting wit h Wayang Kamasan style at Bale Kertha Gosa is very 
valuable and important to study. This painting is a n attraction for tourists to visit Bali. Visitors a re fascinated by 
the existence of this painting, but very few are ab le to read and understand the story and message con tained in 
the painting. It requires an understanding of the c oncepts of visual communication in the Wayang Kamas an 
painting  (Mudana, 2016; 205). The painting on the ceiling of the Bale Kertha Gosa building has a role  as a 
medium to communicate messages visually. Message de livery through the involvement of illustrations as an 
element of visual stimulation, of course, can produ ce an interactivity value (Julianto & Cahyadi, 2020 : 597). A 
number of researchers have researched the paintings  in Bale Kertha Gosa, but no one has ever done anyt hing 
about the visual narration of the palelindon painting on the ceiling of the Bale Kertha Gosa building. 
The purpose of this research is to determine the vi sual narration of Palelindon  painted in the Wayang 
Kamasan style and to find out the method of reading  the Palelindon  images found on the ceiling of the Bale 
Kertha Gosa building. 
 
2.  Research Methods  
The research is conducted at Bale Kertha Gosa in Ta man Gili area, the heritage of Puri or the royal pa lace of 
Semarapura-Klungkung in Klungkung Regency. Data was  collected through field observations and literatur e 
study. Field observations were carried out to obtai n visual data regarding the Palelindon  images in the Bale 
Kertha Gosa building, Taman Gili Klungkung. This vi sual data is identified to classify the type of div ersity of 
the Palelindon  images. Meanwhile, data collection through literat ure study is intended to obtain several theories 
and approaches in analyzing and solving research problems. 
As qualitative research, the analysis of the resear ch also uses qualitative analysis with the followin g details: 
first, the data that has been collected are grouped  and identified to provide an explanation of the el ements in the 
Palelindon images. Second, to analyze the method of reading Palelindon  images found on the ceiling of the Bale 
Kertha Gosa building. 
 
3.  Analysis And Data Interpretation  
Bale Kertha Gosa Klungkung is one of the buildings of the Semarapura kingdom that escaped damage durin g the 
Puputan Klungkung war in 1908. This war occurred as a result of the Dutch invasion of the Klungkung kingdom. 
Before being conquered by the Dutch, the kingdom of  Semarapura Klungkung was the most influential king dom 
in Bali. Dewa Agung, the king of Klungkung, also th e lord of Bali and Lombok, was a leader who had gre at 
influence not only on the island of Bali but also o n the island of Lombok. This kingdom inherited the glory of 
the Gelgel kingdom which reached its peak under the  reign of king Dalem Waturenggong in the 14th centu ry. 
Puri Suwecapura in Gelgel was damaged by the rebell ion in 1651-1686 during the reign of Dalem Di Made.  
Then one of his children, Dewagung Jambe, managed t o reclaim the city of Gelgel. However, because it w as 
damaged, it was decided to move the royal capital t o Klungkung (Agung, 1989: 23). So a new castle or p alace 
was built in Klungkung with the name Puri Semarapur a in 1622 Caka or 1700 AD. It is estimated that at this 
time the Bale Kertha Gosa building was built. 
 
Figure 1. Kertha Gosa Hall, a legacy of Puri Semarapura Klungkung 
(source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
Referring to the floor plan of Puri Semarapura Klun gkung, Bale Kertha Gosa is in the northeast of Puri  
Semarapura (Geertz, 1979; 110). It is located in th e same area as Bale Kambang, known as the Taman Gil i area. 
This area is a very sacred place in Puri Semarapura . In royal time, Bale Kertha Gosa was used as a mee ting place 
for the king of Klungkung with subordinate kings throughout Bali, as well as a place to receive royal guests from 
outside Bali. In this hall, the king usually gives directions and conveys decisions regarding policy t owards the

--- PAGE: 3 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.99, 2022 
 
13 
Balinese kingdom. During the Dutch administration, this hall functioned as a customary court, where al l litigants 
were tried and sentenced here (Pucci, 1992; 17). 
On the ceiling of the Kertha Gosa hall, a narrative  painting in the style of Wayang Kamasan is attache d. 
Wayang Kamasan is drawing tradition of wayang style  that developed in the village of Kamasan. This tra dition 
has existed and developed rapidly during the Gelgel  kingdom and the Klungkung kingdom. Wayang Kamasan 
has a very strong style and grip. The shape and com position of wayang kamasan resembles the narrative reliefs 
on temple buildings and wayang berber paintings tha t developed during the Majapahit kingdom in East Ja va. It 
narrates themes originating from literary works suc h as  Mahabaratha story, Ramayana, Tantri, Panji an d 
astronomical knowledge. Wayang Kamasan is also cons idered to have a close relationship with wong- wongan 
and rerajahan images  which have religious and spiritual meanings. 
The image of the wayang Kamasan in the Kertha Gosa hall displays a number of story themes such as the 
story of Tantri, Bima Swarga, Garuda and Palelindon knowledge. The Palelindon theme is a theme that does not 
come from stories but from knowledge about the prediction of earthquake incidents. 
  
Figure 2. The image of the Wayang Kamasan on the ceiling of the Kertha Gosa hall Klungkung  
(source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
Palelindon knowledge at Bale Kertha Gosa is presented in narra tive images. There are a number of scenes 
arranged in several panels, lined up lengthwise round the ceiling of the building. Each scene is built by appearing 
a number of characters complemented by other iconic  recognizable elements. The characters and elements  in 
Palelindon's drawings include the characters of gods, humans, an imals, trees, and a number of elements of 
everyday equipment. 
The character of a god can be recognized by the app earance of a body shape like the shape of a human b ody, 
with a "sweet", "giant" and "hard" face. The adornm ent corresponds to the nature and position, and the  body 
emits golden rays. The character of the god is show n by sitting or doing yoga on a vehicle  or seat in the form of 
lotus flowers, peacocks, etc. In front of the embod iment of this god there is a text or writing that p rovides 
information about the month or sasih , the name of the god who does yoga and an explanat ion of the impact of 
the earthquake that occurred on that sasih . 
Humans are depicted with everyday clothes that refer to the type of work and status. As a person who w orks 
in the fields (farmers) is shown wearing a conical hat or capil without clothes and or wearing clothes and 
wearing kamben or cloth above the knee equipped with agricultural tools such as sickles, hoes etc. Merchants, 
usually a woman who is shown shirtless, wearing a kamben or cloth and equipped with goods. Dancers are 
shown demonstrating dance moves, wearing flower arr angements on their heads and waving hand fans 
accompanied by male dancer who are also dancing. Penabuh or gamelan  players are equipped with a set of 
gamelan and drums. Aristocracy or leaders are shown  with headdresses that resemble the shape of a gelungan 
that resembles the attributes of wayang panji (a fo rm of wayang that tells the story of panji), wears no clothes, 
and is usually shown carrying a keris in a battle scene. Children are shown with a smalle r body size without 
wearing clothes. 
Animals are depicted in the Wayang Kamasan style re ferring to the forms of animals that exist in natur e, 
such as rats, dogs, buffalo, centipedes etc. Animal s which in fact have a small size are shown with a larger size, 
so that it is easy to be identified. 
Plants are displayed in an iconic way that is easy to be recognized. Types of plants can be identified  from 
the shape of the leaves, flowers, and fruit. The pr esence of plant in each scene is to strengthen the atmosphere 
and describe the environmental conditions. The atmo sphere of the night can be recognized by the presen ce of 
stars depicted in the form of spheres with the emit tance of rays around them and the moon in the form of a white 
crescent moon side by side with the stars. 
The images of Palelindon in Bale Kertha Gosa lined up round the top of Bale Kertha Gosa, in the fifth row 
from the bottom, after the theme of the Tantri story and Bhima Swarga in the second and third row and the theme

--- PAGE: 4 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.99, 2022 
 
14 
of the Garuda story in the fourth row. The images o f Palelindon illustrates a number of scenes according to the 
sasih  calendar.  Sasih  calendar is a system of calculating months in the Balinese calendar or the Caka calendar. 
This system in one year consists of 12 months, name ly: (1) Kasa, July-August; (2) Karo, August-September; (3) 
Third  or Katelu, September-October; (4) Kapat, October-November; (5) Kelima, November-December; (6) 
Kenem, December-January; (7) Kepitu, January-February; (8) Kaulu, February-March; (9) Kesanga, March-
April; (10 )Kedasa, April May; (11) Jiyestha, May-June; and (12) Sadha, June-July. The lunar cycle or sasih of 
the Caka calendar lasts for 29.5 days which is diff erent from the Gregorian calendar calculation (Soed arsono, 
1999: 29). After knowing about the sasih calculation system, then we can search for and read  the narration of 
Palelindon images according to earthquake incidents based on sasih calculations. If the images of Palelindon in 
Kertha Gosa Klungkung are sorted according to the o rder of sasih calculations starting from sasih Kasa or the 
first month in the Saka calendar, then the reading of the Palelindon images starts from the north side of the 
center.  
The image of Palelindon sasih Kasa shows the image of a goddess, namely Dewi Sri who i s depicted sitting 
on a vehicle in the form of a peacock facing to the left. The bo dy of the sakti  of Lord Vishnu is seen to be 
surrounded by the emittance of yellow rays. A numbe r of everyday scenes build the narration of the ima ge of 
Palelindon sasih kasa , such as the scene of an adult man picking coconut s from the fruitful coconut tree, while a 
small child is picking up fallen coconuts, and a wo man holding up a basket full of coconuts. Another s cene 
shows the atmosphere of buying and selling transact ions between traders and buyers. The visualization of this 
scene narrates a safe and prosperous society. This explains the narration about the effect of the eart hquake on 
sasih  Kasa , and the one who does yoga is Dewi Sri, the sakti  of Lord Vishnu. This means that the country will be 
at peace, agriculture and trade will be successful, people will live in prosperity. 
 
Figure 3. Visual Narration of the Panting of  Palelindon Sasih Kasa and Karo  
(source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
From the north in the center, then moving to the ri ght side, you will meet an image of Palelindon which 
explains the earthquake that occurred in Sasih Karo or the second month. The image of Palelindon sasih Karo  
shows a beautiful goddess sitting cross-legged on a lotus flower, in the middle of a pond with the  emittance of 
yellow rays surrounding her body. The figure of thi s goddess is known as the goddess Ganges, the godde ss who 
rules the Ganges River as the source of the spring of life. A number of scenes are shown, such as the scene of a 
woman walks with a basket full of crops followed by  a man with conical hat carrying two bunches of yel low 
paddies. Then to the right of Dewi  there is a scene of people interacting happily. Fl owers bloom and food 
available in abundance. This image explains about t he effects of the earthquake that occurred in Sasih Karo . The 
one who does yoga is goddess Ganges. So that the co untry will be orderly with lots of rain and the pla nts will be 
fertile. 
 
Figure 4. Visual Narration of Palelindon Painting at Bale Kertha Gosa on the East side 
 (source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
Next, move to the images field in the East. This si de shows an image of Palelindon according to the three 
count of sasih,  namely Sasih Katelu, Kapat and Kalima . Starting from the left is Palelindon sasih Katelu. The 
images show Lord Vishnu doing yoga on a lotus flower facing to the right and scenes of farmers who are actively 
working to cultivate ricefields that are abundant w ith water, assisted by women who prepare food. Flow ers and 
seeds grow well, and there is a scene of a woman ho lding up a container (wanci) which usually contains  food 
offerings as a form of gratitude for the gifts that  have been received. The god who does yoga during t he 
earthquake that happened in Sasih Katelu is Lord Vishnu, so it rained heavily and the plants full of fruits.  
Move to the right we will find an image of Palelindon sasih Kapat . Lord Brahma is depicted doing yoga 
who is sitting on a lotus flower with a reddish-yel low light emanating from his body. The narration shows scenes 
of sick people lying limp in bed being fed, young p eople are smoking opium together, agricultural land  being 
destroyed by birds and rats, the harvest is not goo d, and two sick people are being treated by a tradi tional healer 
or balian , but on the roof of their house appears a supernat ural being who does black magic who has transformed  
into a "leak". This illustrates that if an earthqua ke occurs in Sasih Kapat, there will be many disease outbreaks, 
and pests occur everywhere, the country is not safe and full of disasters. 
On the East side on the far right is Palelindon sasih Kalima . It shows the image of god Iswara who is doing 
yoga on a lotus flower. It also shows the scenes of  farmers who are busy getting rid of rats and grass hoppers that 
disturb their crops. There is also a person lying l imp at home being fed and visited by balian , and on the roof of

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.99, 2022 
 
15 
his house there is a white monkey peeking which in Balinese belief is considered a fake monkey that ca use the 
person to get sick. On the other hand, two people u nsheathe their swords to fight under a large tree w ith red 
leaves. This provides information that the god who does yoga in the earthquake in Sasih Kalima  was Bhatara 
Iswara , as a result the country would be shaken. There wo uld be many disease outbreaks and many pests destro y 
crops so that the country is not safe and prone to disputes. 
 
Figure 5. Visual Narration of Palelindon Painting at Bale Kertha Gosa on the South side 
(source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
Move to the south side, the image describes the imp act of the earthquake that occurred on Sasih Kenem, 
Kapitu and Kaulu . The one who does yoga in Sasih Kenem is Dewi Durga who resides in the Prajapati  temple or 
the grave temple. There are a number of scenes show ing a hazardous atmosphere. There are kidnappings o f 
women at night. There are people who are sick becau se of black magic. This confirms that the earthquak e in 
Sasih Kenem and the one who doed yoga is goddess Durga means th at the country suffers and there are many 
disease outbreaks. The one who does yoga in Sasih Kapitu  is Bhatara Guru , a four-handed god who is 
surrounded by emittance of rays. A number of scenes  are shown such as scenes filled with chaos, fight scenes, 
tensions between leaders. The god who does yoga dur ing the earthquake  that happen in Sasih Kapitu  is Bhatara 
Guru  which means that the country is not safe, the people are confused, so there is chaos. 
The god who is doing yoga during the earthquake in Sasih Kaulu  is Bhatara Parameswara. He sits on a lotus 
flower facing to the left. The image shows scenes t hat are prone to fights. People draw swords at each  other to 
fight and many rats are found. This gives informati on that the earthquake in this Sasih  has resulted in people’s 
heart are not calm and must be careful because there are many conflicts. 
 
Figure 6. Visual Narration of Palelindon Painting at Bale Kertha Gosa on the West side 
(source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
Move to the west side which shows the image of Palelindon  sasih Kesanga, sasih Kedasa and sasih Jesta . 
The image of Palelindon  sasih Kesanga  shows Batara Rama who is doing yoga on a lotus flo wer facing left. The 
scenes show coconut trees burning in flames, perhaps due to being struck by lightning which indicates unfriendly 
weather. Farmers hunt the rat pests that damage ric e and corn crops. So, if an earthquake occurs in th is Sasih , 
and the one who does yoga is Batara Rama, then the people will suffer from natural disasters and calam ities. The 
image of Palelindon sasih Kedasa shows the god Narashinga who is doing yoga on a lot us flower facing to the 
left with his body surrounded by reddish yellow lig ht. The scene that accompanies the lion-headed deit y is a 
scene filled with joy, such as men enjoy drinks, th e meeting of men and women, the performances of joged and 
pengibing accompanied by gambelan at a resin-lit night. This indicates that an earthquake  happened in Sasih 
Kedasa and Bhatara Narashinga who does yoga would m ake the country is safe and peaceful and the people  live 
happily. 
The image of Palelindon sasih Jesta shows  white god Sambhu sits on a lotus flower with the r adiance of 
sacred yellow rays. It also shows tense scenes. Dog s bite their master's legs, fights in the household  between 
brothers and sisters, as well as husband and wife v iolence witnessed by small children. If there is an  earthquake 
in sasih Jesta , and Bathara   Sambhu does yoga, the country will be damaged, the country is not safe and there 
will be frequent conflict and violence. 
 
Figure 7. Image of Palelindon sasih Sadha  
 (source: Cahyadi, 2019) 
Image of Palelindon Sasih Sadha  or the twelfth month is in the northern part of th e left side. It Shows the 
god or bathara Anantaboga, the dragon-headed deity who is doing yoga on a lotus flower facing to the r ight 
accompanied by scenes of fighting over farm animals , many venomous animals appear that bite humans. Th e 
earthquake in this Sasih  can cause a lot of riots and the country is not safe. 
 
4.  Conclusion  
Palelindon  knowledge on the ceiling of Bale Kertha Gosa is vi sualized in the Wayang Kamasan style which 
refers to the concept of Tri Hita Karana, narrate t he strong relationship between parayangan, pawongan and

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Arts and Design Studies                                                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2224-6061 (Paper) ISSN 2225-059X (Online) 
Vol.99, 2022 
 
16 
palemahan . Parahyangan as the world of the Gods is expressed by the appear ance of various manifestations of 
the gods who are depicted sitting doing yoga on a l otus flower and a peacock. Pawongan and palemahan  are 
represented by the appearance of human characters i n various social and professional levels, as well a s the 
natural environment (animals and plants) in a narra tion that explains a number of conditions (good or bad) that 
humans may experience as a result of an earthquake in certain sasih. 
Reading the image of Palelindon  Wayang Kamasan on the ceiling of the Bale Kertha Gosa building is based 
on the Pradaksina  concept, which rotates from left to right in a clockwise direction. If it refers to the sequence of 
first sasih  (Kasa ) and so on, then the reading can be started from t he North side of the center. Then in each of 
these sasih . the reading begins by recognizing the image of th e god visualized in that sasih, then proceeds to re ad 
the accompanying narration. 
 
5.  References  
Agung, Ide Anak Agung Gde. (1989). Bali Pada Abad XIX: Perjuangan Rakyat dan Raja-Raja  Menentang 
Kolonialisme Belanda . Yogyakarta: Gajah Mada University Press. 
Geertz, Clifford. (1979). Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth Century Bal i. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Julianto, I. N. L., & Cahyadi, I. W. A. E. (2020). Interaktivitas Ilustrasi pada Ruang Belajar Siswa S D Kelas 1–3 
di Bali. Panggung , 30 (4). 
Mudana, I Wayan, Pande Ketut Ribek. (2017). “Komodi fikasi Seni Lukis Wayang Kamasan sebagai Produk 
Industri Kreatif Penunjang Pariwisata”. Jurnal Mudra, 32 (1) 
Paramita, I Gusti Agung. (2018). Bencana, Agama dan Kearifan Lokal. Jurnal Dharmasmrti , 18 (1).  
Pucci, Idanna. (1992). Bhima Swarga: The Balinese Journey of the Soul.  New York USA: Bulfinch Pr. 
Reid, Anthony. (2005). History and Seismology in th e Ring of Fire Punctuating the Indonesian Past, dal am 
David Henley dan Henk Schulte Nordholt ed. Environment, Trade and Society in Southeast Asia: A  Longue 
Duree Perspective. Leiden: Brill. 
Soedarsono, R.M. (1999). Metode Penelitian Seni Pertunjukan dan Seni Rupa . Bandung: Masyarakat Seni 
Pertunjukan Indonesia.  
Suarka, I Nyoman. (2016). Ramalan dalam Perspektif Budaya Bali. Makalah Seminar Nasional Bertema 
“Ramalan dan Kehidupannya”, diselenggarakan oleh Ke luarga Mahasiswa Sastra Nusantara 
(KAMASUTRA) Bekerjasama dengan Prodi Sastra Jawa, D epartemen Bahasa dan Sastra, Fakultas Ilmu 
Budaya, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta. 
Vickers, Adrian. (2012). Balinese Art: Painting and Drawings of Bali 1800-2010. Singapore: Tuttle Publising. 
Vickers, A. (1990). Balinese Texts and Historiograp hy. History and Theory , 29 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2505223 
 
First Author  is a Lecturer in Study Program of Visual Communica tion Design at Indonesian Art Institute 
Denpasar, (2010–present). I completed my undergradu ate program (S.Sn) in study program of Fine Arts at  the 
Indonesian Institute of the Arts Yogyakarta in 2007 . Then I completed my postgraduate program (M.A) at  Gajah 
Mada University in 2010, in the Study Program of Ar t Studies. From 2018–now, I am studying in doctoral  
program (Dr.) at Indonesian Art Institute Denpasar, Study Program of Science of Art.  
Second Author  is a Lecturer of Study Program of Fine Art at Indo nesian Art Institute Denpasar (2003–present). 
I finished my Bachelor Degree (S.Sn) in the Study Program of Fine Art at the STSI Denpasar (1997–2002) . Then 
completed my Master's Degree (M.Sn) at the Indonesi an Institute of the Arts Yogyakarta (2006-2008), in  Study 
Program of Art Studies. Since 2011–2015, I complete d my Doctoral Degree (Dr.) at the Indonesian Instit ute of 
the Arts Yogyakarta, in the Study Program of Fine Arts Studies.

