--- PAGE: 1 ---
 
B. Hauser-Schäublin
The politics of sacred space; Using conceptual models of space for socio-political transformations
in Bali
 
In: Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 160 (2004), no: 2/3, Leiden, 283-314
 
This PDF-file was downloaded from http://www.kitlv-journals.nl


--- PAGE: 2 ---
BRIGITTA HAUSER-SCHAUBLIN
The politics of sacred space
Using conceptual models of space for
socio-political transformations in Bali
Introduction
The importance of conceptual models in the cultural organization of space
is an old topic in anthropology that was first elaborated by Durkheim and
Mauss (1903). Studies throughout Southeast Asia have revealed the impor-
tance of cosmological models (undoubtedly of Hindu and Buddhist origin)
for the layout of temples, cities, palaces, and principalities. These models have
been treated from different perspectives by scholars of Southeast Asian: Van
Ossenbruggen (1977, first published in 1916), in his famous monca-pat article,
emphasized how the model of the 'fourfold division' works as a principle of
classification. Pigeaud (1977, first published in 1928) spoke of 'chains of cor-
respondences' that link different categories, such as colours, calendrical units,
numbers, animals, plants, gods, astronomical phenomena, and states of mind.
Lombard (1990:56) considered these 'correspondences' between the structure
of society, time, and space to be typical of the agrarian society of inland king-
doms of Southeast Asia. Damais (1969) investigated the origin of the relation-
ship between cardinal points, colours, and cycles of days. Using his concept
of microcosm/macrocosm, Heine-Geldern (1930) demonstrated how people
in various Southeast Asian societies tried to live in harmony with the cosmos
by shaping the state, city; palace, temple, and monastery accordingly; conse-
quently he attributed divinity to the king and kingship (Heine-Geldern 1942).
Most scholars' analyses of these elaborate conceptual, religiously based
models of the organization of space have dealt mainly with cultures that
BRIGITTA HAUSER-SCHAUBLIN is Professor of Anthropology at the Institute of Cultural and Social
Anthropology, University of Göttingen, and holds a PhD from the University of Basle. She is the
author of 'The precolonial Balinese state reconsidered; A critical evaluation of theory construc-
tion on the relationship between irrigation, the state, and ritual', Current Anthropology 44, 2003,
pp. 153-81, and '"Bali Aga" and Islam; Ethnicity, ritual practice and Old-Balinese as an anthropo-
logical construct', Indonesia 77, 2004, pp. 1-29. Professor Hauser-Schaublin may be reached at the
Institute of Cultural and Social Anthropology, University of Göttingen, Theaterplatz 15, D-37073
Göttingen, Germany. Email: <bhauser@gwdg.de>.
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde (BK1) 160-2/3 (2004):283-314
© 2004 Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde

--- PAGE: 3 ---
284 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
vanished a long time ago; Angkor Vat, Borobudur, and Prambanan are prob-
ably the most famous.1 Only a few historical sources give indications of how
the abstract model was applied to the physical world. There is, for example,
an illuminating case from Java described in the Babad Gianti (Lombard
1990:99-101) of how after a devastating defeat a whole capital - Kartasura
- was moved and replaced by a new capital in a new place - Surakarta
- constructed in 1745 according to a pre-existing spatial model. Although an
area with geographically ideal conditions (a flat area without any mountains
or swamps) was available, a much less desirable location (one with swamps
and hills) was chosen. The sites for the palace and the rest of the city were
determined 'a des exigences d'ordre géomantique plus que topographique'
(Lombard 1990:100). The people already living there were evacuated so that
construction could be carried out without any restrictions. The topographi-
cally 'easier' site was disregarded because it was considered inauspicious,
whereas the second location was associated with the hope of a possible con-
version (or reconversion) of the people to Buddhism. This example shows
two things. First, the decision was the result of geomantic practices. This
says something about the relationship between cosmological notions, physi-
cal space, and the human settlement (here, the capital) to be built there. The
relationship, as Tooker (1996) has convindngly demonstrated for the Akha, is
one of alignment: in order to construct a human settlement in which people,
plants, and animals prosper, there must be a positive flux of potency between
the cosmos and the place where humans live. It is this proper alignment
which allows humans to tap cosmological potency. The site not chosen in the
example summarized above would have resulted in improper alignment,
and thus not have allowed the community to tap cosmological potency. The
second issue relevant in the Kartasura / Surakarta example is who the actors
are: those who articulate notions of auspiciousness/inauspiciousness and
those who make the final decision where to build the new capital.
In this article based on fieldwork in Bali,2 I examine the relationship
between the ideational concept and its implementation in the physical world
in the context of politics and social ordering of a village community in Bali.3
1 For a review of such examples, see the contributions on Buddhist and Hindu art, architec-
ture, and religion in Eggebrecht and Eggebrecht 1995; Miksic 1996; De Casparis and Mabbett
1992; Dumargay 1991; Jessup and Zéphir 1997; Klokke 1995.
2 My fieldwork in Intaran (1987-1993) was partly sponsored by Swiss National Research
Funds. In this article I draw on data published in a monograph on the more than fifty temples
of Intaran (Hauser-Schaublin 1997).
3 The geo-cosmological model presented below is the one predominantly dealt with in
anthropological literature. Until recently, the model was restricted mainly to those areas where
brahmana priests dominated religious life. The so-called Bali-Aga villages, most of them in the
mountains, followed different principles for the organization of space; I do not deal with their
principles here.

--- PAGE: 4 ---
The politics ofsacred space 285
Hindu-Balinese culture represents one of the few places where Hindu or
Hindu-Buddhist conceptual models have survived4 and are still relevant in
everyday and ritual practice, even in urban contexts (Lancret 1997) and tour-
ist resorts (Waldner 1998; Hauser-Schaublin 2000). This case of the desa adat
('customary village') of Intaran (nowadays part of the tourist resort Sanur in
South Bali) may also contribute to an understanding of how space was used
in other Southeast Asian cultures as well. I begin by outlining the principles
of concepts of space existing in Bali and how these relate to the model of the
Three Village Temples as well as to stages of the life cycle of individuals. So
far, most anthropologists have implicitly followed the dominant Balinese
discourse on the model by subordinating social space to religious space. The
question of agency - how powerful actors manipulate and apply the geo-
cosmological model to social reality so that the outcome serves their own
political ends - has received little attention (Schulte Nordholt 1991; Hauser-
Schaublin 1993, 1997; Howe 2001). I demonstrate how powerful actors - the
local lord and his brahmana priest(s) - have used the model of the Three
Village Temples (kahyangan tiga) to socially restructure the village, establish-
ing a new social order by means of manipulating sacred space.
The Balinese geo-cosmological model
The Balinese perception of landscape is highly structured. Many different
values are associated with the various cardinal directions and locations; these
are closely related to those of the universe as a whole.5 In Balinese culture
three separate models deal with space: 1. the compass rose, or rose of the
winds, nawa sanga, 2. the microcosm/macrocosm (buana alit/buana agung),
and 3. the model of the two axes, kaja/kelod (mountainward/seaward) and
kangin/kauh (east/west), that of ten crosscut each other. Not all of the mod-
els are equally important for the organization of space. The nawa sanga is
strongly linked to brahmana knowledge and practice. It is the concept of 'the
rose of the winds, the nawa sanga, with the cardinal directions, their patron
gods, their corresponding syllables and the colours of each' (Covarrubias
1986:296). The wind directions, and with them the gods - the 'official' Hindu
gods - complement each other, but the centre combines and integrates all of
them and therefore ranks above all the directions. Offerings of different kinds
(Brinkgreve 1992) are generally based on this model. Houses, compounds,
4 Creese (2001:5) points out: 'Because Bali remained largely untouched by the process of
Islamization that affected its neighbours, the Hindu and Buddhist traditions reflected in Old
Javanese literature have remained an integral part of its religious life'.
5 Budihardjo 1986; DelGuidice 1996; Waldner 1998; Hauser-Schaublin 2000.

--- PAGE: 5 ---
286 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
villages, and temples are mostly organized on a different model, one that
has often been associated with oppositions,6 those between east (kangin) and
west (kauh), and mountainward (kaja) and seaward (kelod). The two axes are
frequently combined with each other, especially when applied to the living
world and the orientation people seek to achieve within it. Both axes are
not static but dynamic. The east/west axis follows the path of the sun, the
mountainward / seaward axis follows the flow of water. The model based on
the two major axes is combined with the centre-focused model in villages
that have a ruling noble's compound (Covarrubias 1986:43, first published
in 1937; Budihardjo 1986:Figure 9). Howe (2001:120-1) suggests that the
palace is located in the centre just as the capital is in the centre of the realm.
However, as I have shown elsewhere (Hauser-Schaublin 1993), in terms of its
organization, the 'centre' relies on the principle of the two intersecting axes,
represented in the village by the intersection of the two main roads. From
a physical perspective, this crossroads is a void space. It is there and not at
the palace where the gods from all directions meet and where all major puri-
fication rituals stop to present offerings. This is the actual centre. A whole
complex of buildings and open spaces, the palace, one of the major village
temples, the market, and the public meeting place are located in the quarters
adjacent to this intersection, according to the notions and values associated
with the mountainward/seaward and east/west directions. This core com-
plex is, symbolically, a condensed form of the village, a 'small world' both
mirroring and intertwined with the 'big world'. But at the same time it intro-
duces the notion of core and superiority in relation to the rest of the village
compounds. The 'big world' (buana agung) and the 'small world' (buana alit)
constitute the model of macrocosm/microcosm (Weck 1986, first published
in 1937). A house, a compound, a temple, a village are structured in analogy
to each other, following the principle of the (perceived) structure of the big
world, with its mountains where the gods live, the valleys people inhabit,
and the sea which is crossed by the souls of the dead when they leave the
world of the living. This model is tripartite since it defines three regions: an
upper region, a middle region, and a lower region. The same tripartite struc-
ture can be recognized in the spatial patterns of the microcosmos, that of
household compounds. The mountainward/eastern corner of a compound
is where the household temple is usually located; in the seaward /western
direction are located the kitchen, the pigsty, and the toilet. In between these
opposite directions He the houses for receiving guests and those for meetings
as well as the sleeping quarters. As a result, within a village each adjacent
6 For a critical discussion of the notion of opposition in relation to the spatial concept of the
two axes, see Hobart 1978. He mentions that the classifications go well beyond purity/impurity
and also include oppositions like gods/demons, male/female, day/night (Hobart 1978:6). I do
not consider these further classifications in this article.

--- PAGE: 6 ---
The politics of sacred space 287
compound defines anew its own cosmos and its alignment. A row of com-
pounds is like a series of individual cosmoses lined up along a village path,
like a chain of recursive microcosms.
This model is applied not only to the space that people live in but also to
the cosmos and the human body. In relation to the body a further axis comes
in: verticality. This axis is not identical to the mountainward/seaward axis,
though the two may have many similarities. Verticality is a dimension of
upright elements like shrines, trees, and the world axis - but also the human
body. Accordingly, the regions, starting with the head (or the heavens, the
realm of the gods) and ending with the feet (or the world below, the realm
of demons) are in hierarchical relation to each other: the highest level is con-
sidered purest, the lowest is impure. The sky is the abode of gods, the earth
is the world of humans, and the world below is the realm of demons. The
top of a shrine is the point nearest to the sky, the world of the gods, and its
'feet' are grounded in the earth, where offerings are to be placed to appease
the demons.
When a Balinese goes to sleep (that is, changes his upright position into
a horizontal one), he carefully avoids having his head pointing toward kelod
or kauh these being inauspicious directions. He will adjust his head to kaja
or kangin. As the analogy between the cosmos, a building, a village, and the
human body clearly shows, these worlds are considered to be identically
structured and mutually constituted by a law of 'nature' which at the same
time is a law founded in religion (see Figure 1). Therefore, the structure of
these domains and their analogues are a divine given; they require proper
alignment in order to achieve harmony and prosperity; improper alignment
has the opposite effect, since the divine potency inherent in these worlds
cannot then flow properly between these worlds.
The model of the Three Village Temples
This tripartite model (sometimes referred to as tri angga) also serves as
the fundamental structuring of a desa adat ('customary village'), where it
is called the model of the Three Village Temples (kahyangan tiga). In two
of his influential articles Goris (1984a, first published in 1935; 1984b, first
published in 1937) argued that the Balinese desa, or village community, is
religious in nature, a topos since then firmly established (see, for example,
Geertz 1980:52; Stuart Fox 2002:23-9). He described the three major village
temples as the cornerstones not only of the village layout but of the whole of
desa society. The territory, he argued, is determined by the location of these
three most important temples. At about the same time as Goris's publica-
tion, Covarrubias (1986:43, first published in 1937) produced a map of the

--- PAGE: 7 ---
288 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
kaja
('mountainward')
pura puseh
(temple of origin)
household temple
headi— *
purity
pura desa
kauh .^^ /, ,\ (village temple) ^^. kangin
('west') /, ,\ living house (<easf)
body
pura dalem
(death temple)
kitchen/ toilet
legs
impurity
kelod
('seaward')
Figure 1. The model of the two intersecting axes and the idealized sites of the
Three Village Temples within the village territory with their analogues in the
human body and the household compound. In South Bali, 'mountainward' is
nowadays often identifïed with 'north', 'seaward' with 'south'.
idealized layout of 'a typical village'. This map not only shows the temples
and the market place; it also makes clear that the palace or noble compound
(puri) of the local ruler was part of the sacred (but man-made) topography.
The embedding of the ruler's compound in the implementation of the geo-
cosmological model appeared as self-evident and as divine as the model
itself, not only to the Balinese but also to anthropologists.
The question7 as to how close the relationship is between the social body of
the village community and the Three Village Temple system has been debated
7 I will not enter the discussion started by Korn (1984) when he spelled out what he (and
others before him) had thought about the Old Balinese village of Tenganan as a socio-politically
bounded entity, the village republic {dorpsrepubliek). Since Old Balinese villages are differently
organized than those strongly influenced by lords and brahmana priests in the south of the island
(on which most anthropologists focused), the discussion would lead too far afield.

--- PAGE: 8 ---
The politics ofsacred space 289
by anthropologists. Geertz (1967, first published in 1959), in his article on
form and variation in Balinese village structure, presents the example of the
village - in this case the large administrative unit of a perbekelan - of Nyalian.8
He points out that there are four sets of kahyangan tiga temples. The general
impression one gets from his description of Nyalian is that the different forms
of social affiliations crosscut each other 'randomly' (Geertz 1967:269-70); he
gives a heterogeneous picture of social life. He then contrasts Nyalian with
another village, Tihingan, that has just one set of kahyangan tiga temples to
which all members of the hamlet (Tihingan proper) belong.9 In conclusion
he shows that territorial and social organization consist of different planes of
organization that are 'to a very large degree independent of one other'.10
Guermonprez (1990:67) has pointed out that 'village studies have failed
to fully understand the significance of the basic configuration of village
society'. He considers the communal temples (the kahyangan tiga system)
and the related rituals as pre-eminent constituents of the village; the village
community is unified by ritual and is a political community as well. The ver-
tical relations between gods and humans structure the village (desa), while
horizontal relations among humans structure the neighbourhoods (banjar).11
This implies that village life rests on religio-social foundations. Or, as Warren
(1993:141) formulates it, 'The village temple system explicitly symbolizes the
integrity of the sacred and mundane order in which living and dead, ances-
tral and divine interact as coeval members of the community'.
The kahyangan tiga system, therefore, is a fundamental structuring prin-
ciple of a desa adat. According to this principle, the Three Temple system12
includes the temple dedicated to the deified village founders, the pura puseh,
often translated as Temple of Origin or Navel Temple. Ideally, this temple
is located in the mountainward/eastern part of the inhabited territory, the
cemetery with the Death Temple, pura dalem, in the most seaward/western
direction. The Village Temple proper, the pura desa, is usually located more
or less in the centre of the settlement. Wassmann and Dasen (1998:693) put
it concisely:
8 In this article, Geertz gives a bewildering picture of what 'villages' in Bali can be like. Since
his goal was to show that there is no such a thing as 'the village', he compares ritual and socio-
political units on different levels with each other. He does not even take into account the policies
of the Dutch colonial administration that merged formerly autonomous villages.
9 Geertz 1967:269-72. The picture of Tihingan presented in Geertz and Geertz (1975:41-5) dif-
fers slightly; only the hamlet of Pau (and not Tihingan proper) seems to be complete in terms of
kahyangan tiga.
10 Geertz 1967:278. See also the critiques by Boon 1977 and Guermonprez 1990.
11 Warren (1993:22) points out that a 'hierarchy' distinction between desa and banjar does not
necessarily imply a subordination of the banjar to the desa.
12 As have others, Stuart-Fox (2002:23-9) has pointed out that in several villages there are only
two (instead of three) village temples.

--- PAGE: 9 ---
290 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
Villages are built prototypically along a kaja-kelod line, with the main temple (Pura
Bale Agung [or Pura Desa]) and the temple of the purified village ancestors (Pura
Puseh) on the mountain side and the cemetery on the sea side.
As these examples show, the analogy between the organization of the macro-
cosm and the microcosm has been repeated by several generations of anthro-
pologists. This assumption implies the acceptance of the equivalence not
only between the natural world, the 'big world', and the 'small world', both
created by the gods, but also the equivalence between these religiously based
worlds and the world created socially by men and women. Implicitly, the
organization of space on all levels is presented as a natural order of gods,
things, and men.
Sacred space and the individual life cycle
Hobart (1978) focuses on the dynamism of the geo-cosmological model.
He views the life cycle of the individual human being as analogous to the
east/west movement of the sun. The different buildings within a compound
are used for different stages of the life-cycle rituals. The first ritual for a new
human being takes place in the household (or compound) temple where the
souls reside. Then the life-cycle rituals for the newly born human being are
carried out in the compound, subsequently moving from stage to stage in a
western direction through the different areas. After death the cycle continues,
leaving the compound and proceeding to the graveyard (where the corpse is
buried at the southern edge of the village). Finally, the soul becomes purified
and moves back to the east, where it again becomes seated in the household
temple.13 Apart from being mere sites for rites of passage focusing on bod-
ies and souls, the cycle represents a cycle of status changes - sites where the
transformation of the person and his/her status within Balinese society takes
place. Within the village territory, Hobart argues, a similar movement of vil-
lage life from mountainward to seaward takes place: from the pura puseh,
the temple where the deified ('pure') village founders are worshipped, to
the pura dalem, the death temple and the graveyard where 'impure' corpses
are buried and demons linger. In contrast to the analogy of mountainward/
seaward motion to the 'flow of water' from high-rariking to low-ranking
people,14 there is no social hierarchy related to the east/west movement of a
13 DelGuidice (1996:42-56) recently came to a similar conclusion, obviously without having
seen Hobart's article, in her chapter on 'ritual in the landscape'.
14 'The flow of water' (in rivers, holy water, and seinen) has been described as following
the path from the superior to the inferior group, be it with holy water (used in rituals) or with

--- PAGE: 10 ---
The politics ofsacred space 291
person. Instead there is a transformation that returns to the east (origin) again
through the world of the unseen (niskala). In this context the axis becomes
a circle. Ottino (1998), drawing on Guermonprez and Hobart, develops an
integrating perspective of the Three Village Temples. She views the kahyangan
tiga as
a construct by means of which the process of reproduction of the desa adat is
ordered into three successive phases: [...] birth, social life and death in the human
life-cycle, and to emergence, fruition and decay in the natural environment. Since,
in Balinese terms, death implies re-birth and decay resurgence, the completion of
the three-stage cycle automatically implies the initiation of a new cycle. This idea
is fundamental to the kahyangan tiga. The temple of origin stands for birth, the
assembly hall for social life, and the temple of the dead for death and preparation
of the next cycle. In this way, the kahyangan tiga forms a conceptual unit where the
mechanisms of reproduction of society are represented in an idealised form, as a
self-generating and dynamic system. (Ottino 1998:29.)
Ottino demonstrates that this reproduction takes place on the psychological
and the physical level for the individual person in relation to the pura dalem,
whereas the coUective identity associated with membership in the desa adat
community is provided through the purah puseh/bale agung.
Physical space and social space
After this brief review of anthropological approaches to Balinese spatial
organization, I conclude that space has been viewed as a given sacred frame-
work that is beyond any human intervention. This is somewhat surprising,
since Hobart has drawn to our attention the analogy between the flow of
water in the domain of social life with that in the physical world. Here,
the interrelatedness of physical space and social space is clear. If we look
at life-cycle and death-cycle rituals, we realize that physical space is used
by members of high standing, for example of brahmana or royal descent,
to make differences visible to ordinary people. As Howe (2001:121-5) has
shown, within a graveyard people of different standing are buried according
to spatial principles that express social difference. As I once had the opportu-
nity to observe, the corpse of a brahmana priest, a pedanda, is kept in an area
semen (in marriage relations between superior and inferior status groups, or 'castes') (Hobart
1978; Schulte Nordholt 1991:155-9,1996:151-5). However, the notion that the flow of breast milk
that goes down from one generation to the next can also 'flow up' in the social hierarchy has
been widely neglected. This occurs when a woman of a non-title-bearing clan marries a man of
higher standing. Their child will have the status of its father even though it has been fed with
the lower-standing mother's 'water'.

--- PAGE: 11 ---
292 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
adjacent to the brahmana compound temple. It is unthinkable that the corpse
of a person of lower ranking would be kept in such a place. Moreover, the
cremation site for a pedanda must be pure and uncontaminated by corpses of
ordinary people; the site is therefore separate from that for 'ordinary' people.
The same applies, mutatis mutandis, to the cremation site for members of a
royal family.
This introduces my next topic. The different meanings and values assigned
to particular parts of physical space are interpreted by the Balinese in terms
of complementarity; but if these meanings and values are transposed to the
social plane, difference is expressed in terms of social inequality. Physical
space - even if culturally defined as having a god-given order - and social
space seem to be interconnected.
According to Bourdieu (1990, 1991), social space has a specific structure
and is multidimensional; there are certain principles of distinction and distri-
bution which govern the social space. Bourdieu identifies different kinds of
power or capital - economie or cultural/symbolic - that constitute the social
arena. The total capital available is always limited; it is therefore the focus of
competirion. The distribution of actors within the social arena depends not
only on the amount of capital the actors own but also on what kind of capital.
Certain factors weigh more heavily in different contexts.
Symbolic capital as Bourdieu has defined it (see also Bourdieu 1993) refers
to the degree of accumulated prestige, celebrity, consecration, or honour and
is founded on a dialectic of knowledge (connaissance) and recognition (recon-
naissance) (Johnson 1993:7). According to Geertz (1980) the social arena in Bali
is determined mainly by symbolic capital, that of titles and status, rather than
by economie capital. As is well known, Balinese society is complex, with its
varna system of titled groups {wesia, satria, and brahmana). The titles Balinese
people bear not only give testimony to a person's claim but also are evidence
of public acknowledgment ('reconnaissance') of that person's status. But most
Balinese do not belong to a title-bearing group. Apart from titles there are
additional different forms of symbolic capital - descent, birth order, gender,
but also consecration, ritual purity, and different forms of knowledge and
spiritual power, sakti. Status is, as Bourdieu has it, an important kind of sym-
bolic capital, a capital for which certain groups of people continuously com-
pete. Many Balinese aspire to attain or create a new title in order to acquire a
higher social standing or more prestige or honour. Due to the absence of an
absolute or fixed order of ranking, the continuous struggle for higher status
has created a dynamic society with continuously shifting positions.
Nowadays the 'invention' of chronicles with high-status ancestors is one
of the strategies ambitious people (sometimes whole kinship groups) in Bali
use to prove their noble descent and the legitimacy of their claims to certain
titles (Schulte Nordholt 1994). Under the modern conditions of a capitalist

--- PAGE: 12 ---
The politics ofsacred space 293
economy, it is especially those people who have significant economie capital
who participate - successfully - in the struggle for titles and ranking. It is
mainly relatively wealthy people who can convince (or pay) some prestigi-
ous brahmana or other learned person to produce a genealogy for them that
'proves' and legitimates their claim to higher status. Therefore, even within
the context of adat15 symbolic capital cannot be completely separated from
economie capital.
One must keep in mind that the actual ranking or social standing of an
actor always depends on the specific situation, the kinds of symbolic capital
at stake, and the relation to other actors present. This fits Bourdieu's descrip-
tions of social space very well. According to him each actor's (or group of
actors') position in this social space depends on the amount of capital he pos-
sesses. I suggest that powerful individuals use the geo-cosmological model
to make visible the unequal positions of actors and groups, reflecting their
distinction and distribution within social space. The macrocosm with its axes
that crosscut each other expresses the complementarity of top and down or
mountain and sea on the one hand, and east and west on the other. Howe
(2001:116) argues, like Guermonprez (1989) before him, that mountainward
and seaward are in a hierarchical relationship to each other.
As we have seen, when the model is applied to a concrete human body
or to the space of a compound or village, the top of an axis is ranked higher
than the bottom, based on notions of purity/impurity. Purity and impurity
are ranked differently according to what Fox (1994) has called precedence.
Therefore, top, mountainward, and east precede down, seaward, and west
respectively. The head precedes the feet, the household temple the pigsry,
and the location of the Temple of Origin {purah puseh) the location of the
Death Temple with the graveyard.16 Although the Balinese are very much
concerned with purity and impurity in ritual contexts, this opposition has
not been translated into categories which allow the separation of people from
each other and their classification into a fixed series of 'higher' or 'lower'
social classes or castes.17 Nevertheless, the geo-cosmological model offers
the Balinese an excellent means to achieve social distinction and to express
ranking and hierarchical relations.
15 In the context of dinas (administrative or business life), traditional titles are less important
than education (in a Western sense), titles gained through education, job position, and economie
potential.
16 If a woman gave birth to twins of opposite sex, the family was considered impure and was
(and sometimes still is) expelled from the village to stay at the graveyard for a couple of weeks
or months. Only after an elaborate purification ritual were the couple allowed to move back to
their house.
17 Dumont (1967) has taken the opposition between purity/impurity as the basis of all hier-
archy in India, purity/impurity being the axis along which the castes are differentiated.

--- PAGE: 13 ---
294 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
Hierarchy is achieved when the different axes and their poles are combined
- and not just considered individually - and when these axes are merged
with the notion of social inequality and social status. This is expressed in
many ways. For example, the number of the superimposed roofs of a shrine
in a temple is not only linked to the social standing of the god or deified
ancestor who is worshipped there but also to the social standing of the family
or clan who 'owns' the shrine. Therefore, the status of gods and the status of
the owner are clearly interrelated. The most powerful clans have the shrines
of their ancestors in the most important locations of the temple as well; at
the same time, the most important and most powerful location is equated
with the most favoured cosmological standing. The socially highest position
in this context is backed by the holiest or most sacred position in the realm
of divine potency. But it is not the individual shrine and its location as such
that expresses highest social standing; only in relation to other shrines, the
number of their roofs, the height of their base, the size and form of their body,
as well as other architectural characteristics and the location of the shrines
does social ranking among the shrines become obvious. And this ranking is
not one based on opposites like superior/inferior; rather, the ranking is based
on a combination of several criteria that finally produces a complex hierarchi-
cal order. Therefore, the building of a new shrine within a public temple is
always of great public interest since its construction simultaneously makes
statements about the ranking of individuals and groups within society. The
renovation of an individual shrine in a larger temple - especially if more than
one social group is responsible for it - is often subject to considerable debate
and negotiation.
Social relations between members of title-bearing groups of differing sta-
tus are negotiated or renegotiated within space at official meetings as well.
The negotiation of space - kaja/kangin (mountainward/east) being the posi-
tion associated with the highest social ranking - proves to be dynamic and
fluid. If people do not know each other, they will, especially if they belong to
a title-bearing group, cautiously sound out the other person's social standing.
In this context the Balinese use a metaphor of physical space to inquire about
the social standing of the other person. The standard question is: 'Where are
you seated?', meaning 'what is your social standing or your membership in a
title-bearing group?' (see also Geertz 1980:123). Sometimes it is the host who
arranges the seating order when people do not know each other. Everybody
will trust him to place people correctly according to their status and rank.
When there is a political meeting of important men, the kaja/kangin position
will be reserved for the highest ranking guest. During the annual festival
in one of the major public temples of Intaran, I observed how some people
who claimed noble descent tried to demonstrate their social position (and
therefore also their standing within the world of cosmological potency) by

--- PAGE: 14 ---
The politics ofsacred space 295.
occupying a location within the temple court that was associated with purity
as well as high social standing. When worshippers gathered in front of the
shrines for a communal prayer under the ritual guidance of a brahmana priest,
it was the kaja/kangin corner that was the most contested location.
As will be clear by now, spatial order as such draws its legitimacy from
the religious, the sacred order of nature, gods, and humans. And of course
there are 'keepers' of the sacred model. They are, in Bourdieu's terms, 'know-
ing' persons (connaissance) who are aware of how sacred and social space are
constituted and what kind of symbolic capital is at issue. In Bali, brahmana
priests, the religious leaders and experts of a community, are considered
- by other Balinese people (reconnaissance) and also by themselves - to be in
charge of 'the model' and its correct use; the appropriate site and direction of
houses and temples is believed to be a prerequisite for a happy and prosper-
ous life. In fact, priests are important actors in determining how the model
should be used - but they are not the only 'knowing' individuals, as I will
show by presenting the case of Intaran.
The political restructuring of the village layout
Remembering what I had read before my fieldwork about the geo-cosmo-
logical model, I looked for the Three Village Temples in the desa adat Intaran.
When I asked people about these temples without making any reference to
Intaran, they reproduced the 'model of' so aptly described by Covarrubias
and Geertz as well as by many other anthropologists: pura puseh, pura desa
and pura dalem. But when I asked the same people about the actual names
and locations of Intaran's village temples, they replied: Pura Bale Agung,
Pura Dalem, and Pura Kahyangan (see Figure 2).
To my surprise, there was no pura puseh, the temple of the deified village
founders, but Intaran did have a Pura Desa. However, the Pura Desa was not
considered one of the Three Village Temples. I became aware that the spatial
distribution of Pura Bale Agung, Pura Dalem, and Pura Kahyangan did not
follow the order of the model. When I pressed people for an explanation of
why their Three Village Temples differed from the way they 'should' be and
why the Pura Desa was not regarded as one of the public temples, they had
no answer.
How could such a discrepancy between the geo-cosmological model and
the spatial organization of the village be possible at all, and in what terms
can it be explained? Was it indeed 'topography' or 'historical accident' that
was responsible for the inconsistency? Of all the authors who have written on
the conception of the spatial model of organization in Bali, only a few have
wondered why they often found deviations from the model when looking

--- PAGE: 15 ---
296 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
Pura Batur II
Pura Batur I
Brahmana
(griya)
Pura Dalem Mimba Pura Kahyangan
sema
Pura Desa
Brahmana
(griya)
\ /
\Wantilan
Puri Abian
Tlmbul
Pura Bale
Agung
Pura Agung
Figure 2. The location and names of the Three Village Temples in
Intaran in the 1990s: Pura Bale Agung, Pura Dalem Mimba, and
Pura Kahyangan (with its adjacent graveyard, or sema)
at a particular village. Wassmann and Dasen (1998:691), approaching their
study of the use of conceptual space in Bali from a cognitive perspective, note
that 'the extensive ethnographic literarure on spatial symbolism has tended
to neglect the spatial concepts in daily use by individual actors'. Hobart men-
tions that the territorial organization of the village he studied followed the
ideal closely. Where this was not the case he attributed it to 'the variation due
to topography and historical accident' (Hobart 1978:10).
In the course of my fieldwork I continued to document the spatial organi-
zation of the village of Intaran. It consists of 18 neighbourhoods spread over
a rather wide area, but the core of the village and its traditional layout can
easily be recognized. After some time, I came across a site where people
spoke of a former puri, a noble compound or palace. Today, no traces of

--- PAGE: 16 ---
The politics of sacred space 297
this palace are left; only ordinary compounds are to be seen. My informants
pointed out that today there still exists another noble compound owned by
a different noble family that had nothing to do with the former puri. People
referred to this still-prominent noble family as gusti, a title for members of
the satria class. Some even used anak agung, an honorary title which expresses
even more respect than the usual title, gusti. Besides these princely com-
pounds there were several griya, or brahtnana compounds, each with at least
one pedanda or brahmana priest. The majority of the inhabitants of the village,
however, bore no title at all. It became apparent that, already a long time
ago, Intaran had been a principality with a pyramid-like social structure; at
the apex had been a local sovereign who in turn was just one among several
other regional nobles in the service of a more powerful raja, or king, who had
been in control of a large part of South Bali.
I gradually formed a coherent picture of Intaran's social stratification by
tracing the spatial distribution of the former and the contemporary puri, the
compounds of members of noble clans as well as brahmana, the market place,
and the major crossroads.
Since interviewing people about the unusual names and locations of the
Three Village Temples brought no results, I developed a complex combina-
tion of methods that focused on the detailed documentation of temples and
of rituals performed in all major temples. In fact, rituals became a major
source of information, since performing a collective ritual apparently acts as
a kind of non-verbalized memory. In the context of the performance of such
a ritual, it was possible to gather verbalized information that emerged spon-
taneously from the memory of participants, stimulated by the ritual context,
that in daily life was almost beyond reach.
A major clue for solving the puzzle of the lack of congruence between con-
ceptual model and social practice came at the annual festival at the Pura Desa,
the temple which, according to its name, should be one of the Three Village
Temples but is not regarded as such. Many people had stated that they would
never enter the Pura Desa because they had nothing to do with it. During the
festival I observed that some of the dozens of pilgrims who came to the temple
went to all the major shrines to give some offerings and to pray. Others left
out some of the shrines and prayed only in front of one or two. I also real-
ized that an almost invisible boundary divided the temple courtyard into two
parts. Some people, when I asked why they did not worship in front of what I
thought was one of the two main altars of the entire temple, told me that they
avoided that shrine because it was dedicated to the ancestors of a 'family'.
Since they were not members of that clan they had no reason to pray there.
Others whispered that this shrine had only the status of a family sanctuary, and
not that of a public temple. 'See,' added one, 'there is a direct door leading to a
compound. This is more or less their [that family's] household temple.'

--- PAGE: 17 ---
298 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
By contrast, the second major shrine within the temple, the one in the
southern part, was dedicated to the god of the hearth, Brahma, who is the
protector of the village and all its inhabitants. All pilgrims stopped to pray
at this shrine.
By relating different bits of information to each other, I came to under-
stand the processes involved. But first and foremost I had to revise my belief
that, as Geertz and others had written, the whole village grounds - and I had
assumed especially temple grounds - was sacred space reserved for the gods,
and people did not interfere. I came to realize that the opposite was true:
sacred space is an arena for staging political battles and the place where the
fingerprints of the winner become visible. These battles, of course, were not
between 'ordinary' people but between the most powerful: noble clans fight-
ing for supremacy to become the local rulers. Sacred space was, indeed, what
Bourdieu had called social space. As it rurned out, it was social space that
inscribed a definite order, that is, the relationships between the various actors
and groups, in the village layout. Conversely, this fixed form of the village
layout established a more-or-less permanent social order - to be torn down
only when the social order of the village came to be turned upside down. The
'cultural patterns' of the 'model of' and 'model for,' to use Geertz's phras-
ing,18 were, therefore, far from being passive entities. I discovered that they
were powerful instruments in the hands of political actors. As a consequence,
I started to investigate the socio-political history of Intaran.
The history of Intaran as a desa probably started in the early seventeenth
century with the imposition of a hierarchical order by an immigrant gentry
clan, Arya Sentong, and its followers. In fact, a village had existed there before,
but it was one with a completely different structure. That village was called
wanua19 not desa and it had a different name, Mimba. Apparently it was not
based on a varna system, with a single ruler at the apex, but on a clan system,
probably similar to what is known from so-called Old Balinese villages.
As soon as the Arya Sentong clan had established its rule over the village,
its first ruler, I Gusti Perean, sent for brahmana ritual specialists (Brahmana
Mas) to move from faraway Perean (Tabanan regency) to Intaran and build
a griya near his palace. Together, the two powerful actors, the satria ruler,
possessing political power, and the brahmana priest, or pedanda, possessing
ritual leadership, founded the first of the Three Village Temples, the Pura
Dalem Mimba, with the graveyard adjacent to it. Such a pura dalem (or
Temple of the Dead) is always the first temple to be built when a new desa
is founded (Swellengrebel 1984:43). The care for the not-yet-purified souls of
18 Geertz 1973a. In Geertz's phrasing, the 'model of' is the ideational concept that is applied
as 'model for' reshaping social reality; 'models of' and 'models for' constitute each other; they
form culture patterns.
19 Wanua is an old term for an uninhabited area; people nowadays translate it as 'forest'.

--- PAGE: 18 ---
The politics of sacred space 299
the ancestors takes place there. In the case of Intaran, the name of the temple,
Pura Dalem Mimba, commemorates the previous settlement. Immediately
afterward they founded the Pura Puseh, the temple of the ruler's deified
ancestors, and the Pura Desa, the village temple proper. The determina-
tion of the sites for the temples, together with the foundation, construction,
and inauguration of each temple, was an act of cooperation between ruler
and priest.20 This cooperation between the worldly ruler and the brahmana
priest illustrates very clearly how the domain of religious concepts and the
domain of social practice interact: the brahmana priest, with the authority of
the religious leader, applies the cosmological concepts, the 'model of', to the
socially and politically pre-structured field or realm of the sovereign. The
location of the ruler's compound {puri), the brahmana's compound (griya), the
main crossroads, and the market had to be integrated into the layout of the
desa. Since the brahmana ritual specialists moved to Intaran only after Arya
Sentong had established itself there, the determination of the individual sites
of the Three Village Temples had to be considered in relation to already exist-
ing spatial elements. The cooperation also implied interdependence: as much
as the ruler needed his puri to be integrated into the sacredly structured vil-
lage layout, the priest needed the king's acknowledgment for his religious
acts to be recognized and accepted by the villagers.
The political potential of the Three Temple model
This dependence of the brahmana priest on 'his' ruler was a critical issue
when political leadership was challenged by a rival. This happened in
Intaran when the social situation in South Bali began to change substantially.
New satria clans seem to have entered the region, challenging the authority
of noble clans who had been there not only for decades but probably for
centuries. Around the end of the seventeenth or the beginning of the eight-
eenth century, the raja of South Bali, located in Kertalangu (today's Kesiman),
was losing power. As oral histories teil it, 'ants' were invading his palace.
He could not get rid of them no matter what he tried. So he left his palace
and went to a new place, but the 'ants' folio wed him wherever he went. His
final location was in the immediate neighbourhood of Intaran, Puri or Pura
Jumenang. The king and his followers were able to stay there only a short
time. Finally, this royal clan dispersed in all directions. Arya Sentong appar-
20 In his artide on temple and authority Schulte Nordholt (1991) demonstrates how important
the establishment of a temple was in Gusti Putu Mayun's attempt to create a new royal centre in
Blahkiuh after the fall of Mengwi. Since Schulte Nordholt attributes the building of the temple
exclusively to this noble man, it is not clear whether he too had cooperated with a pedanda.

--- PAGE: 19 ---
300 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
ently belonged to the raja's local noble vassal clan, the clan that had been
mainly responsible for the large annual ritual in the royal temple on the tiny
island of Serangan. When the raja's position became shaky and he gradually
lost power, the local vassal's sovereignty seems to have weakened as well.
Oral histories teil of 'discontent' arising within the village - although they do
not give the reasons. However, all versions suggest that the local ruler had
also lost divine power or potency; he was no longer able to convince people
of his proper alignment with the cosmos. He was regarded as having lost his
cosmological standing. It seems the local ruler was also the victim of process-
es of decentralization within the village: important religious ceremonies were
carried out not in the Three Village Temples but individually in obviously
clan-owned temples of Intaran. These temples each had their own worship
groups. As Guermonprez (1990) has pointed out, the communal temples and
the rituals are the context within which the village is set. By displacing ritu-
als to temples other than the Three Village Temples, centrifugal social forces
turned against the ruling noble house. Internal solidarity within the desa no
longer existed. Finally, the gentry clan of Arya Sentong and its ruler were
overthrown by an immigrant gentry clan, nowadays called Abian Timbul.21
As oral histories relate it, the aspiring leader beseeched the gods at a small
temple, still in Intaran's territory today, to endow him with spiritual power
or cosmological potency in order to gain the position of a raja. The gods
granted him his wish and therefore he was able to replace his predecessor.
The new ruler did not move into his predecessor's palace. Instead, he
built a new puri to the east of the old one. By choosing this highly valued
location according to spatial concepts, as well as the notions of ritual purity
and social ranking attached to it, he forced the puri of his predecessor into
a less favourable position, that is, a position further to the west. The leader
of the Abian Timbul gentry clan thereby demonstrated his supremacy and
the subjection of the former ruler. His close followers whom he had brought
with him from other places built their houses nearby, to the south of his
palace. This spatial subjugation of the former dynasty was paralleled by its
social degradation. Those members of Arya Sentong who had not fled22 from
Intaran were stripped of their noble title gusti. This honorific title was the
privilege of the ruler in power. Therefore, the former gusti were allowed only
to bear the title of gusi. It was a loss of symbolic capital - title, rank, honour,
and prestige - that the members of the defeated clan had to suffer. For eve-
ryone hearing this title, the social implications were clear: the clan members'
standing within the social space was reduced.
21 This noble house is said to be of Arya Kenceng descent.
22 All reports remain silent on how many, if any, victims resulted from the overthrow of Arya
Sentong.

--- PAGE: 20 ---
The -politics ofsacred space 301
The structure of a village, or desa, is first and foremost linked to its public
temples, at which all inhabitants are supposed to worship during the annual
festival, because village membership means, as Geertz has pointed out, the
performance of ritual obligations: active participation in the rituals of all
'public' temples. The ruler of Abian Timbul descent reshaped these mate-
rial testimonies of history and brought them into accordance with the new
socio-political situation. He did this in cooperation with brahmana priests
(Brahmana Keniten) whom he had brought with him.24 They were allowed
to establish their griya just opposite the puri of Abian Timbul, in a kaja-kauh
relation to it.
The first temple to be reorganized was the Pura Desa. The part of the Pura
Desa which today displays a large shrine at its centre was once the Pura Puseh,
the temple of the deified village founder of Arya Sentong (see Figure 3).
forecourt
bale agung (long hall)
ibu shrine
Figure 3. The major shrines of today's Pura Desa, a temple no longer
included among the Three Village Temples
24 Abian Timbul and the Brahmana Keniten were related to each other by descent. Both were
originally of brahmana origin. Through marriage with a satria woman of a ruling house, one
branch of the family started a new career as satria; the other branch remained brahmana (see also
Rubinstein 1991:65; Howe 2001:126-7).

--- PAGE: 21 ---
302 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
This was the Pura Puseh which Gusti Perean together with his brahmana
priest had founded (see Figure 4).
Pura Batur I
Brahmana {griya)
Mas
Puri Sentong
H-r-
|
I
H—1
Pura Pura
Desa Puseh
pasar
Pura Dalem Mimba
sema
Pura Jumenang
Figure 4. The location and names of the Three Village Temples of Intaran at the
time of the first ruling dynasty, Arya Sentong (probably seventeenth century):
Pura Puseh, Pura Desa, Pura Dalem (with its adjacent graveyard, or sema)
Pura Puseh and Pura Desa were within the same enclosing wall, although
each had its own area as well as its own anniversary. Pura Puseh was used as
the Pura Puseh until the ruling dynasty was defeated by the aspiring gentry
clan Abian Timbul. Since the Pura Puseh lies within the same walls as the
Pura Desa, the members of Abian Timbul's dynasty refused to enter it to pay
homage there. The consequence was that the Pura Puseh had to be degraded
to the category of household temples having the status of an ibu shrine. It
was this ibu shrine which people had pointed out to me during the annual

--- PAGE: 22 ---
The politics of sacred space 303
festival at the Pura Desa. And because this household temple was within the
same enclosing wall as the Pura Desa, this second former public temple was
expelled from the Three Village Temples as well.
This situation has remained up to the present.24 In contrast to the forceful
displacement of the former Pura Puseh, the ritual associated with this temple
still invokes the old relationship between ancestors, the former ruler, and
his followers. When the former Pura Puseh, today's ibu shrine, celebrates its
annual festival, even today the descendants of the first ruler of Intaran, some
coming from quite far away, gather in front of ibu. During the night, when the
ritual reacties its climax, the priests invoke the ancestors and invite them to
descend. The spirit of Gusti Perean is the most honourable among them. He
manifests himself in the guise of a (clan) priest in trance. This is the climax of
the ritual: the deified former ruler is present and reunified with his people.
As soon as he withdraws again, the ritual is concluded.
The Abian Timbul ruler not only degraded the two former village temples
(or rather the combined Pura Puseh /Pura Desa) but also replaced the temple
priests whose office had been handed down from one generation to the next
within a side line of the former ruler's clan. The Abian Timbul ruler, support-
ed by his brahmana priests, proceeded to thoroughly reshape the sacred geog-
raphy of the whole village and placed his own political stamp upon it. First,
the Pura Puseh/Pura Desa had to be replaced. For this purpose the Abian
Timbul ruler built two new sanctuaries. One of them was located northeast
of the Pura Desa. This became the Pura Bale Agung, or assembly hall tem-
ple, where even nowadays the symbols of gods, statues, masks, and other
sacred objects are brought from all neighbourhoods to communally celebrate
certain rituals. The location of the Pura Bale Agung set a new Standard for
what was considered the purest, or kaja-kangin, location. More explicitly, the
frame of reference that defines the cornerstones of a village - the pura puseh
in the kaja kanging corner and the pura dalem in the kelod kauh position - was
shifted. As a consequence, the newly established Pura Bale Agung displaced
the old temple (Pura Puseh/Desa) to a southwestern (thus spatially inferior)
position, that is, a position outside the village core.
During the rule of the first dynasty there had also been a bale agung ('long
hall'). But it had not been a separate temple; it was part of the Pura Puseh/
Desa. Even today this long hall still exists in the Pura Desa. The new temple,
Pura Bale Agung, replaced the long assembly hall in the Pura Puseh/Desa.
Pura Bale Agung received the status of one of the Three Village Temples. The
Abian Timbul ruler clearly expanded the Pura Bale Agung' s function mainly
24 The former Pura Desa is nowadays looked after by the brahmana who were once the part-
ners of Arya Sentong. Only the kaula or followers, of this brahmana family still worship at this
temple.

--- PAGE: 23 ---
304 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
as a meeting place into a strong ritual centre, an institution that his predecessor
had failed either to establish or to maintain. He succeeded in anchoring a large-
scale ritual there that takes place around November every year and in which all
neighbourhoods participate. It focuses on the fertility of plants, animals, and
people. Previously this ritual was carried out in individual 'private' temples or
in neighbourhood temples having their own, separate congregations.
Another monumental ceremony is held there before the 'Day of Silence',
or nyepi, when all symbols of the gods are assembled.in the Pura Bale Agung.
These attributes are then carried to the beach for the purification ritual, in a
procession led by the deity symbols of the Abian Timbul clan and their coop-
erating brahmana priest.25 Both of these annual ceremonies are impressive dem-
onstrations of ritual and political cooperation: the contract between both rulers,
the spiritual and the political ones, is thereby re-enacted. By participating in
these rituals - an unquestioned obligation for all members of the desa adat
- people's trust and belief in the authority of the ruler as well as in that of the
spiritual leader and the gods they represent is expressed in the performance of
the procession. The gods, the brahmana priest, the ruler, and the people merge
during ritual, forming a community which has its hearings in everyday life as
well. Thus the Pura Bale Agung was a means of reinforcing centralization.
Modification and redefinitions
The second important sanctuary that the gentry clan of Abian Timbul estab-
lished is the Pura Agung. Today it is still the largest temple in Intaran. At first
glance, its location - considered in spatial terms - seems to be 'wrong': why
was this location not chosen according to the spatial laws of the kahyangan
tiga model?
Again, it was political considerations that made the Abian Timbul ruler
choose another location, one he must have thought was more powerful. Pura
Agung rests on the foundations of a former royal temple, Pura Jumenang.
This was the last palace or the last royal temple of the former king of
Kertalangu (Arya Pinatih), who once ruled over a large part of South Bali.
At first the Abian Timbul ruler destroyed this royal temple/palace, since
it was a testimony to the former ruler's power. But af ter an intervention of
the gods, who appeared in a dream to the Abian Timbul ruler and protested
against the destruction, he had it rebuilt - in his own name. The intervention
of the gods and their order to rebuild the temple were indications that they
were prepared to grant him their further support if he followed their wishes.
25 Abian Timbul's own position within the procession is at the very end, this being the iead-
ing' position.

--- PAGE: 24 ---
The politics of sacred space 305
By reconstructing the temple, the Abian Timbul ruler laid claim to being the
legitimate successor of the early South Balinese kingdom that had vanished
long before. The model of geo-cosmological ordering of space was therefore
passed over in favour of the political advantages offered by this historically
important site for the location of his new temple.
Pura Agung is dedicated to Gunung Agung, the highest and holiest moun-
tain in Bali; 'mountainward' (or north) is often defined geo-cosmologically as
being in the direction of this mountain. Gunung Agung, in religio-political
terms, is often associated with a deified raja and his descendants. The main
shrine in Pura Agung represents Gunung Agung. At this shrine the ruler's
family worships not only the gods but also their own family's ancestors - and
these had to become the ancestors of the whole village of Intaran as well, in
order to replace those of Arya Sentong formerly venerated in the Pura Puseh.
Accordingly, the history of the village was reconstructed: henceforth the vil-
lage founder was no longer the Arya Sentong gentry clan but that of Abian
Timbul. Pura Agung henceforth had the function of a pura puseh. The names
of I Gusti Perean, the first ruler of Intaran, and his Arya Sentong clan were no
longer allowed to be spoken in public. Pura Agung was not integrated into the
Three Village Temples. It was put into a higher category than kahyangan tiga:
it became a royal or state temple. Typical of süch a state temple is that it con-
tains a rather large number of different shrines, each of them associated with a
specific origin group. In the Pura Agung of Intaran, all names of the gods and
their shrines in the Pura Desa and the former Pura Puseh came to be repre-
sented there, too. Therefore, the contents of the old sanctuary were transferred
to the Pura Agung, thus creating an even more sumptuous replacement for
the former village temple. With the shrines of their clan ancestors represented
in the Pura Agung, people were obliged to venerate their own ancestors there.
At the same time, it was where they also venerated the ancestors of their new
ruler and recognized him as the legitimate village founder. This spatial dis-
placement, the transfer of the shrines of the former Pura Puseh/Desa to Pura
Agung, thereby brought about a social displacement as well as a reconstruc-
tion of village history. The descendants of all clans, whether they had been fol-
lowers of I Gusti Perean or not, had to participate in the ritual of Pura Agung
if they wanted to remain in the village. Therefore, the reorganization of the
temple system is an expression of the reorganization of the whole social life of
the village - and vice versa. The Abian Timbul ruler created a new social and
political reality by reshaping and reinterpreting the earlier one.
But what happened to the ritual specialists, the brahmana, with whom the
Arya Sentong noble had ruled the village? As should be clear by now, the
adaptation of the geo-cosmological model of space to social practice could
succeed only if the brahmana priest used his religious legitimation in the
service of the ruler.

--- PAGE: 25 ---
306 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
As already mentioned, the Abian Timbul ruler brought his 'own' brahmana
priest with him. The spatial reorganization of the village - especially the deg-
radation of the two major pre-existing village temples, Pura Desa and Pura
Puseh, and their replacement by new temples - needed the legitimation of
a spiritual leader who also had to convince the villagers that all this radical
change was the will of the gods. The Abian Timbul ruler, therefore, needed ritu-
al specialists who would bless his drastic innovations and were ready to coop-
erate without any (significant) objections. Over time, however, disagreements
between the noble and priestly families arose. Meanwhile, the members of the
former ruler's brahmana family were still waiting for the new ruler's decision
on their fate. They were convinced that the new ruler 'would not accept the
holy water' they made, that is, would refuse their ritual services. They were
prepared to leave Intaran and to go back to the village they had come from.
As a consequence of the (apparently temporary) disagreement with his 'own'
brahmana priest (Brahmana Keniten), the Abian Timbul ruler seems to have
realized the advantage of having a second ritual partner at hand, the former
ruler's brahmana family (Brahmana Mas). He could be sure that they would be
obedient and would not resist any further plans he had. If they had not been
ready to accept his authority, they would have left the village upon his arrival.
Therefore, instead of sending the old brahmana family off, the Abian Timbul
ruler asked them to stay. Consequently, the brahmana priest and the political
ruler negotiated the conditions of their cooperation. This resulted in renego-
tiating the model for the spatial and social reordering of the village as well.
Obviously the brahmana demanded compensation. Oral traditions say that the
brahmana ritual specialists pointed out that they would also need the source
of their power for a successful cooperation with the Abian Timbul ruler. One
of the major testimonies of their power - or rather of the divine potency they
controlled - was the first temple they had founded as one of the newly estab-
lished kahyangan Hga in Intaran: the Pura Dalem Mimba. The Abian Timbul
ruler accepted their wish that the Pura Dalem was to be kept as one of the
ritual centres, as one of the Three Village Temples. Conversely, keeping the
Pura Dalem as a ritual centre helped the Abian Timbul ruler support his claim
of being the village founder since Pura Dalem thereby became one of 'his'
temples. Once again, the dominant historical discourse about Intaran's past
was adapted to the conditions of the new era, including cooperation between
the political leader and one of his ritual counterparts. However, the Abian
Timbul ruler insisted that the graveyard near Pura Dalem had to be given up
and a new location found for it. He realized that if he entrusted not only the
Pura Dalem, or Death Temple, to the brahmana who had been in the service of
the former ruler, but also the cemetery, this would include the veneration of all
of the dead, including the followers of his predecessor (whose name had to be
wiped out) as well as his own people. Therefore, while he accepted the brah-

--- PAGE: 26 ---
The politics ofsacred space 307
mana family's claim on the Pura Dalem Mimba, he assigned the task of setting
up a new graveyard to the brahmana ritual specialists whom he had brought
with him. He thereby established a division of labour between the two griya.
This put him in the comfortable position of cooperating partly with one and
partly with the other ritual partner. At the same time, both griya entered into
a kind of competition with each other.
The location for the new graveyard was selected carefully and politically,
too, by the new brahmana priest: north of the existing one. The implication was
that the new graveyard, although impure as such, was at least purer than the
old one. In cooperation with his 'own' brahmana priest, the Abian Tïmbul ruler
founded a new temple near the new cemetery: Pura Kahyangan (see Figure 5).
Pura Batur II
Pura Batur I
Brahmana
Mas
(griya)
Pura Dalem Mimba Pura Kahyangan
sema
Puri Sentong
Pura Desa
Brahmana
Keniten
(griya)
s
/
/
\Wantilan
Puri Abian
Timbul
Pura Bale
Agung
Pura Agung
Figure 5. An immigrant gentry clan, Abian Timbul, replaced Arya Sentong in the
eighteenth century and restructured the Three Village Temple system by building
new compounds and temples. The Abian Timbul ruler designated the three village
temples that stül today constitute kahyangan tiga (see Figure 2).

--- PAGE: 27 ---
308 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
This new temple, Pura Kahyangan, became the third of the Three Village
Temples.
Conduding remarks
The question of why the layout of Intaran differs in many respects from the
geo-cosmological model or the idealized village pattern is now rather easy
to answer. It was neither 'topography' nor 'historical accident' - unless this
is understood in a cynical way. According to oral tradition, the kahyangan
liga system with its typical layout was implemented when Intaran was first
established as a desa. A new spatial order was imposed on a pre-existing set-
tlement of quite a different structure. Along with the new spatial order, a new
social order - a single ruling clan with a lord at the apex - was established.
The implementation of the kahyangan tiga model, which draws its legitima-
tion from a cosmological model, must therefore be considered in the context
of socio-political changes already in motion at the beginning of Intaran's
existence. This political dimension becomes even more prominent in the over-
throw of the first ruling dynasty. The model of kahyangan tiga was not changed
as such, but the point of reference - the definition of the 'true' kaja/kangin
position (and, concomitantly, the kelod/kauh position) within village territory
- was changed by the degradation of the former Pura Puseh/Pura Desa and
the construction of a new temple in a cosmologically purer location.
I have reviewed the various positions taken by scholars on the relation-
ship between the social body of the village community, the kahyangan tiga sys-
tem, and the transformation the Balinese person undergoes through spatially
anchored life-cycle rituals. The example of Intaran makes it clear that sacred
space is indeed socio-political space as well.
What is emphasized in temple rituals is that space is sacred space, and if a
brahmana priest agrees to major alterations in the village structure and coop-
erates in implementing them, people will follow, as long as they believe in the
gods and trust in the brahmana priest's authority, backed by the ruler. It is - in
Bourdieu's terminology - reconnaissance that is needed, and reconnaissance
requires faith and trust. By contrast, the dominant actors - the ruler and his
brahmana priest - were the persons who not only had the power to reshape
and restructure the whole village, socially as well as spatially,26 but who also
possessed knowledge (connaissance) of the relationship between sacred and
political space. Due to this knowledge, the geo-cosmological model applied
26 Note that along with the restructuring of the main temples in the village and the replace-
ment of the old puri by a new one, a new sacred crossroads was established (Hauser-Schaublin
1997:232-6); however, the new crossroads did not erase the importance of the previous one.

--- PAGE: 28 ---
The politics of sacred space 309
to the world of village space became, in their hands, a political tooi to change
village space to correspond with the prevailing social space. But physical
space not only 'mirrors' social space. I would go a step further and argue that
- in Bali and beyond - the physical organization of space is the foundation
upon which social space rests, especially if a new order is to be enforced and
accepted by people. In this sense the spatial constitutes the social as much as
the other way around.27
What the example of Intaran also shows is how the restructuring of social
space lies very much in the hands of two powerful individuals, the ruler and
the pedanda. Neither of them is able to carry it out alone; they must cooperate
to implement 'deviations' from the ideational concept and to gain acceptance
for these deviations. If the gods are not willing to move from one temple to the
other - and it is the brahmana priest whose task it is to beseech the deities to
move to a new site - a ruler will never be able to make such radical changes in
the village layout that rests on the corner stones of kahyangan tiga. By the same
token, the pedanda is unable to change the religious structure of a village with-
out the agreement of the ruler or ruling elite. The example of Intaran also sheds
new light on the debate about the relationship between the king (raja) and his
brahmana priest (pedanda; also called purohito in the case of a royal priest), and
which of them ranks higher.28 The case of Intaran's history has shown that
each needs the cooperation of the other, a relationship Guermonprez (1989)
has called 'dual sovereignty'. Perhaps one qualification should be added: a
defeated ruler in every case loses at least his power (if not his life), whereas his
closest cooperator, the purohito, may survive an overthrow and regain recogni-
tion and influence in cooperation with a new ruler, even if he has to share this
powerful position in comperition with other brahmana as well.
The potency of spatial models grounded in religion lies in their capacity
to structure social space. As I have demonstrated, the spatial concept of the
different directions (mountainward/seaward, east/west) has no inherent
hierarchy but is ruled by complementarity. Only if these spatial principles
are applied by people to the physical world can precedence be expressed in
terms of purity of locations in relation to each other, or in terms of hierar-
chy if linked to social standing. In this sense, the 'model of' has never been
simply a 'model for'. The political implications that lie in between the idea-
tional concept and its implementation are, as shown in this article, obvious.
Why have anthropologists overlooked this socio-political dimension for so
long? There may be many reasons. Probably anthropologists would have
27 This fits quite well with Dickhardt's theory (2001) about the constitution of the cultural
through the spatial, and vice versa.
28 For a summary of this debate, see Howe 1996; in a revised version of this article, Howe
(2001) views the relationship between the king and his priest as one that is continually contested.
See also Pitana 1999 on the competition between different types of priests.

--- PAGE: 29 ---
310 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
incorporated socio-political perspectives sooner if the hierarchical concept
of the different layers of the body from top to bottom had been applied to
the social structure of society as well. That is, if the hierarchical organization
inherent in some aspects of the 'worlds' had been applied to differentiate
social classes of people from each other, like castes in India, where notions of
purity/impurity are a means to separate one from the other and to maintain
a caste system (Dumont 1976), the socio-political aspect of space might have
been recognized sooner. Since this is not the case in Bali, spatial principles
and notions of purity/impurity were seen to be located almost exclusively in
the context of religion.
REFERENCES
Boon, James A.
1977 The anthropological romance of Bali 1597-1972; Dynamic perspectives in
marriage and caste, politics and religion. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. [Cambridge Studies in Cultural Systems 1.]
Bourdieu, Pierre
1990 'Social space and symbolic power', in: Pierre Bourdieu, In other words;
Essays towards a reflexive sociology, pp. 123-39. Stanford CA: Stanford
University Press.
1991 Sozialer Raum und 'Klassen'. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
1993 The field of cultural production. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Brinkgreve, Francine
1992 Offerings; The ritual art of Bali. Singapore: Select Books.
Budihardjo, Eko
1986 Architectural conservation in Bali. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University
Press.
Casparis, J.G. de and I.W. Mabbett
1992 'Religion and popular beliefs of Southeast Asia before c. 1500', in:
Nicholas Tarling (ed.), The Cambridge history of Southeast Asia. Vol. 1, pp.
276-340. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Covarrubias, Miguel
1986 lsland of Bali. London/New York: Kegan Paul International. [First pub-
lished 1937.]
Creese, Helen
2001 'Old Javanese studies; A review of the field', Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-
en Volkenkunde 157:3-33.
Damais, Louis-Charles
1969 'A propos des couleurs symboliques des points cardinaux', Bulletin de
l'École Frangaise d'Extrême-Orient 56:75-118.
DelGuidice, Donna Marie
1996 The symbolic landscape of Bali. [PhD thesis, State University of New
York, Syracuse NY.]

--- PAGE: 30 ---
The politics ofsacred space 311
Dickhardt, Michael
2001 Das Raumliche des Kulturellen; Entwurf zu einer kulturanthropologischen
Raumtheorie am Beispiel Fiji. Hamburg: Lit. [Göttinger Studiën zur Eth-
nologie 7.]
Dumarcay, Jacques
1991 The palaces of South-East Asia; Architecture and customs. Singapore:
Oxford University Press.
Dumont, Louis
1976 Homo hierarchicus; Gesellschaft in Indien: Die Soziologie des Kastenwesens,
Wien: Europaverlag.
Durkheim, Emile and Marcel Mauss
1903 'De. quelques formes primitives de classifcation', Année Sociologique
6:1-72.
Eggebrecht, Ame and Eva Eggebrecht (eds)
1995 Versunkene Königreiche Indonesiens. Mainz: Von Zabern.
Fox, James J.
1994 'Reflections on "hierarchy" and "precedence"', History and Anthropo-
logy 7:87-108.
Geertz, Clifford
1967 'Form and variation in Balinese village structure', in: Jack M. Potter,
May N. Diaz and George M. Foster (eds), Peasant society; A reader, pp.
255-78. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
1973a 'Religion as a cultural system', in: Clifford Geertz, The interpretation
of cultures; Selected essays, pp. 87-125. New York: Basic Books. [Harper
Torchbooks 5043.]
1973b '"Internal conversion" in contemporary Bali', in: Clifford Geertz, The
interpretation of cultures; Selected essays, pp. 170-89. New York: Basic
Books. [Harper Torchbooks 5043.]
1980 Negara; The theatre state in nineteenth-century Bali. Princeton NJ: Prince-
ton University Press.
Geertz, Hildred and Clifford Geertz
1975 Kinship in Bali. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gaborieau, Mare
1993 'Des dieux dans toutes les directions; Conception indienne de 1'espace
et classification des dieux', in: V. Bouillier and G. Toffin (eds), Classer
les dieux? Des pantheons en Asie du Sud. Paris: École des Hautes Études
en Sciences Sociales. [Purusartha, Recherches de Sciences Sociales sur
1'Asie du Sud 15.]
Goris, R.
1984a 'The religious character of the village community', in: Bali; Studies
in life, thought, and ritual, pp. 77-100. Dordrecht/Cinnaminson: Foris.
[KITLV, Reprints on Indonesia.]
1984b 'The temple system', in: Bali; Studies in life, thought, and ritual, pp. 101-
11. Dordrecht/Cinnaminson: Foris. [KITLV, Reprints on Indonesia.]
Guermonprez, Jean-Francois
1989 'Dual sovereignty in nineteenth-century Bali', History and Anthropology
4:189-207.

--- PAGE: 31 ---
312 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
1990 'On the elusive Balinese village; Hierarchy and values versus political
models', Review of Indonesian and Malaysian Affairs 24:55-89.
Hauser-Schaublin, Brigitta
1993 'Keraton and temples in Bali; The organization of rulership between
centre and periphery', in: Peter J.M. Nas (ed.), Urban symbolism, pp.
280-314. Leiden: Brill. [Studies in Human Society 8.]
1997 Traces ofgods and men; Temples and rituals as landmarks ofsocial events and
processes in a South Bali village. Berlin: Reimer.
2000 'Dynamik zwischen Dissonanz und Harmonie; Kulturelle Ordnungs-
systeme unter dem Eindruck der Tourismusentwicklung', in: Brigitta
Hauser-Schaublin and Klaus Rielander (eds), Bali; Kultur - Tourismus
- Umwelt, pp. 142-59. Hamburg: Abera.
Heine-Geldern, Robert
1930 'Weltbild und Bauform in Südostasien', Wener Beitrage zur Kunst- und
Kulturgeschichte Asiens 5:28-78.
1942 'Conceptions of state and kingship in Southeast Asia', The Far Eastern
Quarterly 2-1:15-31.
Hobart, Mark
1978 'The path of the soul; The legitimacy of nature in Balinese conception
of space', in: G.B. Milner (ed.), Natural symbols in South East Asia, pp.
5-28. London: School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London. [Collected Papers in Oriental and African Studies.]
Howe, Leo
1996 'Kings and priests in Bali', Social Anthropology 4:265-80.
2001 Hinduism and hierarchy in Bali. Oxford: Currey, Santa Fe: School of Ame-
rican Research. [World Anthropology.]
Jessup, Helen I. and Thierry Zéphir (eds)
1997 Angkor et dix siècles d'art khmer. Paris: Réunion des Musées Nationaux.
Johnson, Randal
1993 'Editor's introduction', in: Pierre Bourdieu, The field ofcultural produc-
tion; Essays on art and literature, pp. 1-25. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Klokke, M.J.
1995 'On the orientation of ancient Javanese temples; The example of Candi
Surowono', in: International Institutefor Asian Studies Yearbook 1994, pp.
73-86. Leiden: International Institute for Asian Studies.
Korn, V.E.
1984 'The village republic of Tënganan Pëgëringsingan', in: Bali; Studies
in life, thought, and ritual, pp. 301-68. Dordrecht/Cinnaminson: Foris.
[KITLV, Reprints on Indonesia.]
Lancret, Nathalie
1997 La maison balinaise en secteur urbain; Étude ethno-architecturale. Paris:
Association Archipel. [Cahier d'Archipel 29.]
Lombard, Denys
1990 Le carrefour javanais; Essai d'histoire globale. Vol. 3: L'héritage des royaumes
concentriques. Paris: École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales.
[Civilisations et Sociétés 79.]

--- PAGE: 32 ---
The politics ofsacred space 313
Miksic, John (ed.)
1996 Ancient history. Singapore: Millet/Archipelago Press, Jakarta: Buku
Antar Bangsa. [Indonesian Heritage 1.]
Ossenbruggen, F.D.E. van
1977 'Java's monca-pat; Origins of a primitive classification system', in: P.E.
de Josselin de Jong (ed.), Structural anthropology in the Netherlands; A
reader, pp. 32-60. The Hague: Nijhoff. [KITLV, Translation Series 17.]
Ottino, Arlette
1998 'The temple system and the reproduction of society in a Balinese desa
adat', Review of Indonesian and Malaysian Affairs 32-1:24-54.
Pigeaud, Th.G.Th.
1977 'Javanese divination and classification', in: P.E. de Josselin de Jong
(ed.), Structural anthropology in the Netherlands; A reader, pp. 64-82. The
Hague: Nijhoff. [KITLV, Translation Series 17.]
Pitana, I Gde
1999 'Status struggles and the priesthood in contemporary Bali/ in: Rae-
chelle Rubinstein and Linda H. Connor (eds), Staying local in the global
village; Bali in the twentieth century, pp. 181-201. Honolulu: University
of Hawai'i Press.
Rubinstein, Raechelle
1991 'The Brahmana according to their babad', in: Hildred Geertz (ed.),
State and society in Bali; Historical, textual and anthropological approaches,
pp. 43-84. Leiden: KITLV Press. [Verhandelingen 146.]
Schulte Nordholt, Henk
1991 'Temple and authority in South Bali, 1900-1980', in: Hildred Geertz
(ed.), State and society in Bali; Historical, textual and anthropological
approaches, pp. 137-63. Leiden: KITLV Press. [Verhandelingen 146.]
1994 'The invented ancestor; Origin and descent in Bali', in: Wolfgang
Marschall (ed.), Texts front the islands, pp. 245-64. Bern: Institute of
Ethnology, University of Bern. [Ethnologica Bernensia 4.]
1996 The spell of power; A history of Balinese politics 1650-1940. Leiden: KITLV
Press. [Verhandelingen 170.]
Stuart Fox, David J.
2002 Pura Besakih; Temple, religion and society in Bali. Leiden: KITLV Press.
[Verhandelingen 193.]
Swellengrebel, J.L.
1984 'Introduction', in: Bali; Studies in life, thought, and ritual, pp. 1-76. Dor-
drecht /Cinnaminson: Foris. [KITLV, Reprints on Indonesia.]
Tooker, Deborah E.
1996 'Putting the mandala in its place; A practice-based approach to the
spatialization of power on the Southeast Asian "periphery" - The case
of the Akha', Journal of Asian Studies 55-2:323-58.
Waldner, Regula
1998 Bali - Touristentraum versus Lebensraum? Ökosystem und Kulturlandschaft
unter dem Einfluss des internationalen Tourismus in Indonesien. Bern:
Lang.

--- PAGE: 33 ---
314 Brigitta Hauser-Schaublin
Warren, Carol
1993 Adat and dinas; Balinese communities in the Indonesian state. Kuala
Lumpur: Oxford University Press. [South-East Asian Social Science
Monographs.]
Wassmann, Jürg and Pierre R. Dasen
1998 'Balinese spatial orientation; Some empirical evidence of moderate
linguistic relativity', Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 4(New
Series):689-712.
Weck, Wolfgang
1986 Heilkunde und Volkstum auf Bali. Jakarta: Intermasa. [First published
1937.]
