--- PAGE: 1 ---
189Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering/May 2004/195
A Study on the History and Development of the Javanese Mosque
Part 1: A Review of Theories on the Origin of the Javanese Mosque
Bambang Setia Budi
Doctoral Candidate, Department of Architecture and Civil Engineering, Toyohashi University of Technology, Japan
Abstract
This paper aims at critically reviewing a number of theories and previous studies on the origin of the Javanese
mosque. Some theories have been put forward by Dutch archeologists and historians since the 1930s, and were
subject to debate until 1960s. Beyond this time, the debate was continued by an Indonesian archeologist in
1962/1963 and a French scholar in 1985. All of these theories will be reviewed as there are some doubts and
unclear parts. The problems of each theory will be explained and discussed. Based on this review and critique,
the most reliable theory will be asserted with new arguments and some evidence from Javanese temple reliefs.
Keywords:  Southeast Asia; origin, Javanese mosque; Dutch; tiered-roof
*Author contact:  Bambang Setia Budi, Doctoral Candidate,
IZUMIDA Architectural History Laboratory, Department of
Architecture and Civil Engineering, Toyohashi University of
Technology.
1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tenpaku, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-8580 Japan
Tel: +81-0532-47-6111 ext. 5627,  Fax: +81-0532-44-6831
e-mail: budi_bambang@gamac.tutrp.tut.ac.jp
(Received November 4, 2003 ; accepted April 6, 2004)
1. Introduction
Islam is the second-largest religion in the world. This
religion has many adherents stretching from Spain and
West Africa eastwards as far as China and Southeast Asia.
Indonesia has the largest number of Moslem
population, not only in Southeast Asia but also in the
world. The majority of Indonesian Moslems live on the
island of Java. Hundreds of old timber mosques
constructed from the 15
th to 19th century still exist in
this island and are evidence that Java is one of the
significant islands in the spread of Islam.
The old timber mosques in Java are not only significant
in understanding the history and spread of Islam but also
in identifying the development of mosque architecture.
The Javanese mosque appears to be a unique building
type or of independent architectural style when compared
to mosques of other areas in Moslem countries. Hence,
the origin of the Javanese mosque have always been
discussed and pointed out in arguments by previous
scholars.
Studies on the origin of the Javanese mosque were
conducted primarily by Dutch, French and Indonesian
scholars. Unfortunately, a number of hypotheses and
studies discussed in this topic are still incomplete and
remain unclear, as well as subject to debate.
This study will not provide a new theory of the origin
of the Javanese mosque, as it would require further
careful study. This paper aims at critically reviewing all
of the theories and previous studies on the origin of the
Javanese mosque. Based on this review and critique, the
paper will conclude with the most reliable theory.
‘Theory’ in this paper refers to the opinions or
hypotheses on the subject that have been put forward
between 1930s and 1960s by Dutch archeologists and
historians such as K. Hidding, J.P. Rouffaer, W.F.
Stutterheim, G.H. Pijper and H.J. de Graff. The debate
was followed by the Indonesian archeologist, Sutjipto
Wirjosuparto, in 1960s and the French scholar, Claude
Guillot, in 1985.
Beyond 1985, not many scholars presented new
theories and just followed one of the previous theories.
Although some scholars have written articles on mosque
architecture in Java including its origin, they did not
develop an argument or provide any evidence. These
types of articles are excluded from this study.
The main sources for this study are documents
discussing the origin of the Javanese mosque in terms
of books, papers and articles. Due to the fact that some
earlier theories were misunderstood by several scholars
that followed, the original sources become significant
to clearly understand the opinions and arguments of each
theory.
2. The Javanese Mosque
The Javanese mosque differs fundamentally from
mosques as constructed in other Moslem countries. This
Indonesian type originated in Java, so that one might
refer to it as the Javanese type.
1
The distinct characteristics of the Javanese mosque
has been described in detail by Pijper (1947), as follows:2
1. its ground plan is a square;
2. it does not stand on poles, as does the old
Indonesian dwelling and the smaller Indonesian
prayer house (Javanese: langgar ; Sundanese:
tadjug ; in Bantam: bale ) but on an elevated
--- PAGE: 2 ---
190 JAABE vol.3 no.1 May. 2004 Bambang Setia Budi
massive fundament;
3. it has a pointed roof, consisting of from two to
five stories, narrowing upward;
4. it has an extension to the western or northwestern
side, provided for the mihrab;
5. it has a veranda, either on the front or on the side
also, called by the Javanese surambi or siambi,
and by the Sundanese tepas masdjid;
6. the open space around the mosque is enclosed by
a wall with only one entrance, a gate in front.
In fact, many scholars present other descriptions of
the Javanese mosque. Although some scholars may have
a slightly different view, the characteristics of the
Javanese mosque will be summarized in general as
follows. It only asserts the important characteristics of
the Javanese mosque.
The original plan of the Javanese mosque is a square
building, covered with a roof that may consist of a
number of stories, and finally ends in an ornamented
top. The symmetry is only broken by a small niche, which
indicates the direction of Mecca called the 
mihrab.3
The pyramidal roof of the Javanese mosque is
generally two to five stories high. The three-stacked
pyramidal roof is the most frequently found in Java. This
roof type is used in almost all of the Great (
Agung )
Mosques in Java built until the 19th century. The Agung
Mosque of Banten (1565) is an exception. This mosque
has a five-storied roof with the three topmost being
equally small. Francois Valentijn, who visited Banten in
1694, stated that the mosque is provided with five stories
or roofs.4 Another example of a mosque with the five-
stacked roof in Java is shown in a description and old
picture of the Japara Mosque by the traveler Wouter
Schouten in the 17th Century.5
Besides the roof, another ancient fixed characteristic
of mosques in Java is a wall surrounding the enclosure.
Wherever one finds the pure type of the Javanese
mosque, this wall is to be found, separating the 
temenos
from the profane soil.6
In many cases, such as the mosque complex of the
Wali (saint) or state founder, there is a cemetery complex
that is usually located behind or beside the mosque. Some
mosques have two or three cemetery complexes and the
surrounding wall extends to cover not only the mosque
but also these cemetery complexes.
Another main characteristic of the Javanese mosque
is its principle structure. The main structure of the
Javanese mosque uses timber master-columns (
saka
guru) in the center of the main prayer hall to support the
upper-hipped roof. The number of saka guru are usually
four, but sometimes six or eight and occasionally only
one (saka tunggal). This principle structure together with
the pyramidal stacked roof provide the tall interior space
and sets up a powerful vertical axiality. This strong
central and vertical axiality act are as counterpoint to
the direction of 
qibla, provide duality in orientation in
the Javanese mosque.
The best examples for describing the Javanese mosque
are the Agung Mosques of Yogyakarta and Surakarta in
the province of Central Javanese, dating back to the
eighteenth century. These two great mosques are
modeled on the first great mosque on the northern coast
of Java, the 
Agung Mosque of Demak (1478).
Fig.1. Agung Mosque of Banten, 2000, photo by Ichsan Hardja.
Fig.2. Jepara Mosque, (de Graaf, 1962).
Fig.3. Demak Agung Mosque, in 1810, (Soekmono, 1973).
--- PAGE: 3 ---
191JAABE vol.3 no.1 May. 2004 Bambang Setia Budi
Other important elements are the veranda ( surambi)
and the minaret, but these two elements are later
additions to the architecture of the Javanese mosque.  For
instance, the east verandas of the Demak Agung Mosque,
Yogyakarta Agung Mosque, and Surakarta Agung
Mosque were built in 1845, 1804 and the Pakubuwana
II period (1830-1875) respectively. Now, this veranda is
usually built in front of nearly every mosque in Java.
7
The history of the minaret in Java is comparatively
recent. The oldest mosques have no minaret (Pijper,
1947, p.278). Ancient Java does not have a tradition for
tall buildings such as the minaret and there are also no
evidence of this in Javanese temple reliefs.
3. A Critical Review of Existing Theories and Previous
Studies
Several hypotheses on the origin of the Javanese
mosque were put forward by Dutch scholars since 1930s
to 1960s. Discussion of the hypotheses was followed by
an Indonesian and France scholar until 1985. The
hypotheses can be classified into two main categories:
1. Theories based on theological (religious)
interpretations. They include Hidding’s (1933)
and Rouffaer’s (1930s) theories.
2. Theories based on empirical studies. In this
category, they are divided into two different areas.
First, theories that mention that the origin of the
Javanese mosque was developed from local
buildings. They are Stutterheim’s (1935), Pijper’s
(1947), and Wirjosuparto’s (1962/1963) theories.
Second, theories that mention that the origin of
the Javanese mosque was developed from foreign
buildings. They are Graaf’s (1947/1948, 1963),
and Guillot’s (1985) theories.
3.1. Theories Based on Theological (Religious)
Interpretation
The earliest theory came from K. Hidding in the article
Het bergemotief in eenige godsdienstige verschinjnselen
op Java in 1933.8 In this article, Hidding suggested that
there were some possibilities to relate the high rising
roof form of mosques in Indonesia with the sacred
mount. He considered that it was theoretically possible
that the old-fashioned mosque was inspired from mount
form.
Hidding’s assumption was also referred to in Graafís
paper 
De Oorsprong der Javaanse Moskee in 1947-1948.
Graaf noted and suggested in his paper, that the Javanese
mosque was derived from mount form. There are, as a
matter of fact, clear indications that the idea of a mount
was something holy and sacred to the Hindu-Javanese
that were living at that time. In his dissertation, the Tantu
Pangelaran (p. 27), dr. Th. Pigeaud wrote that appearance
of the 
Mahameru have been considered as more than an
ordinary mount or even as the seat of the gods, a centre
the world, and a fixed point in universe.9
Another his argument was pointed to the settings of
some mosques are in water. They reinforce this
equalization with the world of mount. These lay in the
world sea, therefore in water. This is similar to P.A.J.
Moojen’s interpretation that the position of 
meru is in
within a pond of the island of Bali. 10
The researcher J.P. Rouffaer tried to argue in religious
thinking even more, beyond searching the construction
work of the building. He considered that the Javanese
mosque arised from a Buddhist building, as mentioned
in Prapantja’s Negarakertagama (expenditure of H. Kern,
1919, p. 254).
11 He may have found this argument, but
the basis of his hypothesis was seen infirm.
To comment on these theories, I would argue that the
dilemma with any religious interpretation to architectural
problems is that it is always unrealistic. In other word,
every metaphysical interpretation is not enough to relate
on to physical aspect. This means that there is a gap
between religious thinking with architectural problems
in physical terms. The hypotheses are not easy to accept,
because they are only based on spiritual thinking and do
not provide real evidence.
Fig.4. The interior of Surakarta Agung Mosque, 2000, photo
by author.
Fig.5. Yogyakarta Agung Mosque, 2000, photo by author.
--- PAGE: 4 ---
192 JAABE vol.3 no.1 May. 2004 Bambang Setia Budi
3.2 Theories Based on Empirical Studies
A Dutch historian, G.H. Pijper, in his paper The
Minaret in Java, in India Antiqua (1947) stated a strong
hypothesis. Based on the distinct characteristics of the
Javanese mosque as described above, he concluded that
the Javanese mosque is not a foreign structure brought
to this country by Islam missionaries from overseas, but
an ancient native one adapted to the requirements of the
Moslem worship.
12
He proposed many arguments. For example: the square
ground plan is well known from the many structures of
Hindu-Javanese art, the 
Candi, still founded in Java. It
is not difficult to see in the raised massive foundation of
any mosque, remnants of the base of the Candi. The roof
of the mosque, consisting of several stories and ending
in a point that is crowned by a peculiar adornment, clearly
indicates that it originated in the pre-Islamic period.
This shape of roof is found on many structures that
have no connection with Islam. He refers to the meru in
Bali, a square tower narrowing upward, having from five
up to ten and more stories in the roof. He assumed that
the stacked roof on some mosques in Java, such as 
Agung
Mosque of Banten or the old picture of Japara Mosque,
is a survival of the meru.13
The archeologist W. F. Stutterheim, in his book
Leerboek der Indische cultuuregeschiedenis, V ol. 3, De
Islam en zijn komst in den archipel , 1935, pp. 137,
considered that the origin of Javanese mosque was
derived from large community hall, on Bali as
hanenklopbaan  (fighting cocks-court) which are still
found in Bali.
The problem with Stutterheim’s hypothesis is that he
did not provide a set of evidence to strengthen the theory.
He also did not mention the specific building as a local
community building. He only gave the 
hanenklopbaan
in Bali as an example, without any explanation.
In contrast, the Dutch historian H.J. de Graaf (1947-
1948 and 1963) created several arguments against
Stutterheim’s theory of derivation, and published them
in two papers. The first paper in 1947-1948, 
De
Oorsprong der Javaanse Moskee, Indonesie 1, pp. 289-
307 and the second in 1963, The Origin of The Javanese
Mosque, in JSEAH Journal of Southeast Asia History,
pp. 1-5.14
Based on his arguments, however, the following may
be brought forward:15
1. The fighting-cocks-court  is a profane, almost
heathen building. A pious Moslem would not
lightly perform his prayers inside such a structure.
2.  The 
fighting-cock-court has no stories.
3.  We only know of the fighting-cocks-court  from
Bali; perhaps they may also have existed in the
same design in Java. We know nothing about the
rest of Indonesia. How could it therefore be
possible, that a building which is only to be found
in a comparatively small area, should have been
initiated in the whole of Moslem Indonesia?
Graaf asserted that it is more acceptable that the
Indonesian mosque, in its simple as well as in its more
luxurious form, was brought to Indonesia by Islamic
merchants, which, following the international trade route,
spread from North Sumatra on to the Moluccas.
He compared another remarkable evidence, which is
that the oldest Moslem graves such as those at Pasei in
North Sumatra and at Gresik (
Grissee) in Java displayed
a strong resemblance to similar graves at Gudjarat. In
many cases, the stones themselves were made overseas
and sent ready for use to Indonesia.
Graaf suggested that, firstly, we must search for the
pattern of the Indonesian mosque in the same country
where these tombstones came from. A mosque in
Malabar must be critically examined, although it is not
square but only rectangular, and has a multi-storied roof,
each one smaller than the one underneath it. In the top
stories, children received religious instructions.
Secondly, he also suggested to consider the square
wooden mosque of Kashmir (Srinagar).
In critically reviewing Graaf’s theory, we must check
the original statement of Stutterheim at first. Graaf
misunderstood in his paper and wrote the Stutterheim‘s
theory that the Javanese mosque must derived in its form
from the fighting cocks-court (now 
wantilan), which are
still found in Bali.
In fact, in the original text, Stutterheim wrote: “Large
community hall, existing from a terrace floor with resting
on styles, from an odd number of deepening existing
Fig.6. The meru in the Besakih temple complex in Bali, 2000,
photo by author.
--- PAGE: 5 ---
193JAABE vol.3 no.1 May. 2004 Bambang Setia Budi
roof, on Bali as hanenklopbaan in, by inserting partitions
tusschen the styles and introducing being still arranged
in this a specific niche to the west used to serve as a
mosque”.16
Conceivably, it may true that the word of
hanenklopbaan means fighting-cocks-courts in Bali, but
this building is only an example in Stutterheim’s
hypothesis that the mosque should be derived from de
groote gemeenschapshal (large community hall).
Secondly, the statement that fighting cocks-court in
Bali is profane is unacceptable. In fact, cock fighting in
Bali is a religious event, as blood offerings to the hungry
earth spirits. In these purification rites, cockfights are
sacred and occur in sacred places. Because cockfights
are considered a sacred activity, gambling is forbidden
at religious cockfights. But there are other cockfights
where gambling takes place secretly in village back lanes
or in family compounds, to exorcise malevolent spirits.
Thirdly, the statement that the building has no stories
is also in doubt. In fact, it has two or three-tiered pavilions
and is often found adjacent to the village temple. This
building has been called 
Wantilan since the 19th Century.
It is a new building type in Bali, which is adapted to
Balinese traditional principles.
17
It usually has solid coconut wood columns and chunky
proportions for the base, plinth, and roof trussing. In
Bali, it is originally to serve not only for the 
fighting-
cocks-court but also to be used for community activities
such as meetings, political rallies, or dance performances
held as part of village temple festivals.
Beyond Graaf’s theory, there were no other Dutch
scholar who discussed the origin of the Javanese mosque.
The discussion was continued by an Indonesian
archeologist, Sujipto Wirjosuparto. He is the first
Indonesian scholar who proposed a hypothesis on the
origin of the Javanese mosque.
Wirjosuparto published as an article entitled 
Sedjarah
Bangunan Mesdjid di Indonesia , in al-Manak
Muhammadiyah, 1962/1963. In his article, he did not
agree with Graaf’s theory that the origin of the mosque
must be sought from the same country where these
tombstones came from (India). He aligned with Graaf’s
hypothesis for several reasons:
18
1. The plan of a mosque in Malabar is rectangular
and a mosque in Taluk (Sumatera) is square.
2. While a mosque in Malabar does not have water
moat around it, a mosque in Taluk does.
The similarity of these two mosques was only in the
tiered-roof, so the hypothesis could not be accepted by
Wirjosuparto. He suggested that the origin of the
Indonesian mosque form might be derived from the
pendapa building in Java. Some of the reasons were that
it was square in plan, and if we added walls as an
enclosure, it seemed to be a mosque. Moreover, if the
orientation was directed to Mecca and added with the
mihrab, it became completely similar to a mosque. For
the tiered-roof, he compared it to the Javanese traditional
house Joglo.19
Wirjosuparto’s theory requires more evidence, because
the building name of pendapa in Javanese is derived from
the Sanskrit word mandhapa, which has resemblance
with part of an Indian Hindu temple. Although it is square
in plan and built on the ground, this building is
considered as an‘element of addition’. The pendapa is
not as the most important element in the complex of the
traditional Javanese house, kraton (palace), or Hindu
temple in India.
The hypothesis of the Joglo also remains unclear.
Although it is true that the Joglo’s roof is multi-storied,
but it is not a pyramidal roof. This type of roof has a
beam on top of the roof (called 
molo), so that the roof
does not finally end in a point at its topmost.
 In 1985, the French scholar Claude Guillot published
an article, La Symbolique de la Mosquee Javanaise , in
Archipel 30, Paris, 1985. He had examined temples that
are tiered in form (
Gedong Sanga , Siwa-Prambanan,
Bima-Dieng), and the form of the old Japara Mosque.
He tried to compare these to the wood and stone
architecture in India and China. He concluded that the
Javanese tiered-roof form is derived from the strong
influences of stone architecture of India and wooden
architecture of China.
20 Another opinion is that meru
(tiered-roof) of the mosque could be derived from
Javanese ‘Cungkup’ (tomb building) in Islam.21
 We need more evidence to accept these opinions. If
the hypothesis is true, the problem lies in which one is
argued to be the earlier existing building, the Islamic
tomb building or the mosque? There is no evidence that
the 
Cungkup building is earlier than the mosque in Java.
The tradition also shows that the roof of the Cungkup
building is not tiered, with only the Giri Cungkup in
East Java as an exception.
4. Concluding Remarks
Each theory still has its weaknesses. Even though it
still contains some problems and is subject to debate,
Fig.7. Puri and wantilan or hanenklopbaan with three-tiered
roofs in Gianjar village, Bali, 1925, KITLV Leiden.
--- PAGE: 6 ---
194 JAABE vol.3 no.1 May. 2004 Bambang Setia Budi
but in this conclusion, I try to divide between those
theories that are most reliable and unreliable.
Based on this review and critique, the reliable theory
on the origin of the Javanese mosque should be derived
from a local public or community building type that
exists in this area. Some evidence can be found as
archaeological proof from the relief of 
candi or temple
in Java, such as in the Borobudur temple relief (see Fig.
8).
This relief shows that some public buildings in Java
have already existed for a long time. Ancient Java has
already the tradition of buildings for people gathering.
Probably, the latest development of this community
building can be seen today such as the 
pendapa in Java
and the wantilan in Bali.
Java also has a tradition of tiered-roof buildings. We
can check this on several Javanese temple reliefs, such
as the reliefs on 
Candi Jago from the Singosari period
and Candi Sukuh from the Majapahit period.
Hence, the reliable theories are Piiper, Stutterheim,
and Wirjosuparto’s hypotheses, even though each theory
need further studies. The most reliable is Stutterheimís
theory, which states that the origin of the Javanese
mosque should be derived from the local community
building, without mentioning a specific building. To
make a definite theory of the origin of the Javanese
mosque still needs further careful study. Not only does
it need historical or archaeological evidence, but an
architectural point of view as well.
The most unreliable theory is Graaf’s hypothesis that
the Javanese mosque may be derived from the same
country where these tombstones came from (India), such
as the mosque in Malabar or Kasmir (Srinagar). The other
theories are also unreliable.
5. Acknowledgments
The author is grateful to Dr. Izumida Hideo, Associate
Professor at the Department of Architecture and Civil
Engineering, Toyohashi University of Technology, for
his generous advice such as information, discussion, and
comments during the writing of this paper. The author
also wishes to thank Dr. Fukami Naoko, Associate
Professor at the Institute of Oriental Culture, The
University of Tokyo, for discussion and several
references, and to Sutrisno Murtiyoso from the
Indonesian Institute for Architectural History (LSAI) for
information and several references.
General References
1) Dumarcay, J. (1986), The Temples of Java , Singapore: Oxford
University Press, Oxford New York.
2) Frisman, Martin J. and Hasan Uddin Khan (eds.) (1994), The
Mosque History Architectural Development and Regional Diversity,
London: Thames and Hudson.
3) Gelebet, I.N. (1978), Pokok-pokok Pengarahan Arsitektur
Tradisional Bali dalam Rangka Pengembangan Kepariwisataan ,
Denpasar.
4) Kempers, A.J. Bernet (1959), Ancient Indonesian Art, Amsterdam:
C. J. P. Van Der Peet.
5) Kempers, A.J. Bernet (1975), Ageless Borobudur , Wassenaar:
Servire.
6) Nou, Jean Louis (1996), Borobudur , Paris: Abbeville press, inc.
Fig.8. Relief showing a meeting room ( sala), typical of
Javanese village architecture, where seafarers were held
prisoners. Borobudur, Paris, 1996, p. 142.
Fig.9. Sukuh. Scene from the Sudamala, 15th Century. Ancient
Indonesian Arts, Bernet Kempers, 1959, Plate 332.
Fig.10. Temple compound, Candi Jago. Ageless Borobudur,
A.J. Bernet Kempers, 1975.
--- PAGE: 7 ---
195JAABE vol.3 no.1 May. 2004 Bambang Setia Budi
Schouten, Wouter (1676), Oost-Indische Voyagie, Amsterdam.
7) Stutterheim, W. F. (1830), Pictorial History of Civilization in Java,
translation by A. C. Winter-Keen. Weltevreden: The Java Institute
and G. Kolff & Co.
8) Valentijn (1726), Beschrijving van Groot Djava ofte Java major ,
etc., vol 4, Dordrecht-Amsterdam.
Selected References
1) Dumarcay, J. (1985), La Charpenterie des mosquees Javanaises ,
Archipel 30, Paris, pp. 21-30.
2) Graaf, H.J. de  (1947-1948), De Oorsprong der Javaanse Moskee ,
Indonesie 1, pp. 289-307.
3) Graaf, H.J. de (1963), The Origin of The Javanese Mosque, JSEAH
Journal of Southeast Asia History, pp. 1-5.
4) Guillot, Claude (1985), La Symbolique de la Mosquee Javanaise ,
Archipel 30, Paris, pp. 8-11.
5) Hidding, K. (1933), Het Bergemotief in Eenige Godsdienstige
Verschinjnselen op Java , Tijdschr. Bat. Gen., p. 469.
6) Moojen, P.A.J. (1926), Kunst op Bali: Inleidende Studie tot de
Bouwkunst, Haag: Poestaka, p. 87, plate LXXIV .
7) Pijper, G.F. (1977), De Moskeen van Java , in Studien over de
Geschiedenis van de Islam in Indonesia , 1900-1950, 1977.
8) Pijper, G.F. (1947), The Minaret in Java , in F.D.K. Bosch et. al.
(eds), India Antiqua. A volume of oriental studies presented by his
friends and pupils to Jean Philippe Vogel (Ö) , Leiden: Brill, Kern
Institute, pp. 274-283.
9) Stutterheim, W.F. (1935), Leerboek der Indische
cultuuregeschiedenis, V ol. 3, De Islam en zijn komst in den archipel,
pp. 137.
10) Stutterheim, W. F. (1952), De Islam en Zijn Komst in de archipel ,
in Cultuurgeschiedenis van Indonesie, V ol III, tweede druk bewerkt
door L.J.F.M. Pannenborg-Stutterheim, J.B. Wolters-Djakarta,
Groningen.
11) Wirjosuparto, Sutjipto (1962), Sedjarah Bangunan Mesdjid di
Indonesia , in Almanak Muhammadijah XXII, Djakarta: Pusat
Pimpinan Muhammadijah Madjlis Taman Pustaka.
Endnotes
  1 Pijper, 1947, p. 274-275.
  2 Pijper: 1947, p. 275.
  3 Graaf, 1963, p.1.
  4 Valentijn, 1726, p. 215 and also Pijper, 1947, p. 276.
  5 Wouter Schouten, 1676, p.39.
  6 Pijper, 1947, p. 276.
  7 The function of the veranda or surambi is not only as an extension
of the praying area but also frequently to accommodate social
activities, such as a meeting place, Islamic celebrations, etc. It may
be seen as an effort to separate secular activities from spiritual
activities. It indicates that some Javanese still consider prayer as a
sacred activity that requires a special place and is separate from
social activities.
  8 K. Hidding, 1933. p. 469.
  9 Graaf, 1947-1948, p. 301.
10 P.A.J. Moojen, p. 87, plate LXXIV .
11 Graaf, 1947-1948, p. 290.
12 See Pijper,1947, p. 275.
13 Pijper, 1947, p. 275.
14 The two publications, even though they may have similar titles in
meaning, but their contents are not exactly the same. In De
Oorsprong der Javaanse Moskee (1947-1948 ), he provided quite
many more samples of Javanese mosque and discussed several
previous hypotheses. In 
The Origin of Javanese Mosque , (1963)
he only focused to criticize Stutterheim’s theory of derivation, and
created other possibilities on the origin of the Javanese mosque
that developed from foreign buildings.
15 Graaf, 1963, p. 3.
16 See the original text: De groote gemeenschapshal, bestaande uit een
terras-vloer met een op stijlen rustend, uit een oneven aantal
verdiepingen bestaand dak, op Bali nog als hanenklopbaan in
gebruik, werd door het invoegen van wanden tusschen de stijlen en
het aanbrengen daarin van een naar het Westen gericht nis geschikt
gemaakt om als moskee te dienen . See W. F. Stutterheim, 1935, p.
137.
17 Gelebet, 1978, p. 118.
18 Wirjosuparto, 1962, p. 68.
19 Wirjosuparto, 1962, p. 69.
20 Guillot, 1985, p. 8-11.
21 Guillot, 1985, p. 11.
