--- PAGE: 1 ---
127
The Construction of Sign that Form 
Kabuyutan Cibulan
Eko Budi Prasetyo1, Arthur S. Nalan2, Een Herdiani3 
Indonesian Institute of Arts and Culture
Buah Batu Street No.212, Bandung, West Java
1ekobpwork@gmail.com, 2nalanarthur@gmail.com, 3herdianieen3@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Cibulan or known as Cibulan Tourism Object is a place that is believed to be kabuyutan. 
This belief is not only seen from the myths that develop in the community around Cibulan, 
but there are signs which are the construction of a kabuyutan. This study uses a paradoxical 
aesthetic approach belonging to Jakob Sumardjo, namely the triple pattern or tritangtu. 
Cibulan has the necessary signs such as Well 7 as a symbol of determination, Batu Petilasan 
as a symbol of speech, and a large tree as a symbol of Lampah which indicates a kabuyutan. 
These three signs are also symbols of Sang Hyang Hurip and Tritangtu. Apart from the 
tritangtu element, Cibulan’s location is at the confluence of the male and female rivers as 
a condition for building a kabuyutan. That is the construction of signs forming kabuyutan 
where this research will explain the signs and the role of the Cibulan kabuyutan in society.
Keyword: kabuyutan, cibulan, sign, river, tritangtu.
INTRODUCTION
Cibulan is a tourist attraction located in 
Manis Kidul Village, Kuningan, West Java. 
This tourist attraction presents a bathing 
pool in which there is a sacred god fish. In 
addition to providing a god fish bathing 
pool, Cibulan Tourism Object also has 
another attraction, namely the source of 
Sumur 7 spring. Sumur 7 is a place believed 
by the surrounding community as a place 
whose spring water can provide blessings. 
Not only that, Sumur 7 has a myth about 
petilasan which is believed to be a petilasan 
from Prabu Siliwangi. Myth is a nation’s 
story about gods and heroes in ancient 
times, containing interpretations of the 
origin of the universe, humans, and the 
nation contains deep meanings expressed 
in supernatural ways (Pratiwi, 2017, p. 2). 
With the Kuningan community’s belief 
in the myths that exist in Cibulan regarding 
sumur 7, petilasan, and God’s fish, makes 
Cibulan a place that has magical and sacred 
power. But whether the sacredness is only 
a belief that is passed down orally from 
generation to generation, or there are signs 
that can be used as a benchmark that this 
place was built with a specific purpose.
Sumur 7 is called buyut or kabuyutan 
which is believed by the community and 
visitors, especially psychics, to be the Tu-
maritis hermitage during the Semar era in 
the puppet show (Noerdjito, et al, 2009, p. 
367). Kabuyutan comes from the word buyut 
which means “taboo ” or forbidden, which 
is a special place that cannot be visited by 
just anyone because the place is sacred and 
isolated from human habitation (Sumardjo, 
2019, p. 115). A place is called sacred be-
cause of the presence of Sang Hyang Hurip 
in that place. Based on Baduy mythology, 
Sang Hyang Hurip consists of Batara Kersa

--- PAGE: 2 ---
128
~  Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya ~
Vol. 8  No. 2 Desember 2023  
(Tekad, Kehendak), Batara Kawasa (Lampah, 
Tenaga, Energi), and Batara Bima Mahakarna 
(Ucap dan Pikiran ). The three entities be-
come a single entity called Batara Tunggal 
or also known as Sang Hyang Hurip in the 
book of Sawaka Darma.
There are certain conditions for Sang 
Hyang Hurip can be present in a place or 
kabuyutan. The condition that must exist is 
that the place must have symbols of Tekad, 
Ucap, and Lampah. The symbol of Tekad 
or sky is a source of water, the symbol of 
Lampah or the earth is represented by the 
presence of forests or large trees around it, 
while for the symbol of Ucap as the human 
world there must be an arrangement of 
large stones (Sumardjo, 2019, p. 119).
Kabuyutan cannot be built just 
anywhere. Kabuyutan can only be built at 
the confluence of two rivers, or it can be 
called Patimuan (Sumardjo, 2019, p. 118). 
The two rivers are also called the male 
river and the female river. The Male rivers 
usually have clearer water. This male river 
enters the female river whose water tends 
to be turbid. The flow of the female river 
comes from upstream to downstream and 
is long. That is why the water in the female’s 
river tends to be turbid. The female’s river 
is also the state river that unites the villages. 
Therefore, people do not have the freedom 
to choose sacred locations, they just look 
for it and find it with the help of mysterious 
signs (Eliade 2002, p. 21).
Judging from it’s environment Cibulan, 
it can be said that Cibulan was built with 
a specific purpose. The location of Cibulan 
has similarities with the characteristics 
that exist in a kabuyutan. But this must be 
examined more deeply because there has 
been no research on whether Cibulan is a 
kabuyutan or just a sacred place.
With the above problems, a study is 
certainly needed that can answer these 
problems. This study will try to see if 
Cibulan has the necessary requirements to 
become a kabuyutan.
This study used Jakob Sumardjo’s 
Paradoxical Aesthetic approach, namely the 
three or tritangtu pattern. The philosophical 
basis of Sundanese society is often referred 
to as tritangtu or three-pattern relationship. 
The philosophical basis of Sundanese 
society is called tritangtu or triple pattern 
relationship. The concept of tritangtu or 
three pattern is harmonizing two different 
things and producing one harmony from 
both.
The Sundanese three pattern comes 
from the cosmology of Baduy and Jatiraga 
Galuh. As a farming community, they 
consider there are three important parts 
in this life. The three important parts are 
the sky as the giver of rain, the land as the 
place where plants grow, and humans who 
harmonizemaarry between the sky and 
the earth or land so that these things can 
happen. Therefore there are three buana or 
worlds known as buana nyuncung (above), 
buana pancatengah (middle, human), and 
buana larang (earth) (Sumardjo, 2014, p. 
177). The symbols of the three worlds are 
water representing the upper world, land 
representing the lower world or earth, and 
stone representing the middle world or 
humans.
The term of tritangtu is mentioned in 
the old Sundanese manuscript, Sang Hyang 
Siksakandang Karesian (1518) on plate 26 
“this is tritangtu on earth, Bayu pinahka 
prebu, sabda pinahka rama, hedap pinahka rei” 
(these are the three provisions in the world. 
Kesentosaan kita ibarat raja, ucap kita ibarat 
rama, budi kita ibarat resi) (Sumardjo, 2019, 
p. 59). The text shows that tritangtu has 
elements of bayu, sabda, hedap or Sundanese 
terms are now better known as lampah, 
ucap, and tekad. Lampah, ucap, tekad can

--- PAGE: 3 ---
129
~  Prasetyo, Nalan, Herdiani: The Construction of Sign that Form Kabuyutan Cibulan ~
be interpreted as something alive or Sang 
Hyang Hurip. This is the reason why in 
Sundanese culture everything is divided 
into three provisions so that everything 
can be hurip or in the sense of being safe, 
healthy, prosperous, perfect, good and 
right.
Based on Baduy mythology, Sang 
Hyang Hurip consists of Batara Kersa (tekad, 
kehendak), Batara Kawasa (lampah , tenaga, 
energi), and Batara  Bima Mahakarna (ucap 
and pikiran). The three entities become a 
single entity called Batara Tunggal or also 
known as Sang Hyang Hurip in the book of 
Sawaka Darma.
Basically, tritangtu is the unity of 
Tekad, Ucap, Lampah (Sumardjo, 2019, p. 
60). Tekad, ucap, lampah  itself actually has 
a contradiction or opposite nature in it. 
Tekad is opposite to Lampah, while Ucap  is 
the connector or mediator of both. Ucap  as 
a mediator is referred to as the middle siger 
or middle sineger. The middle siger is a 
philosophy of harmony which if there are 
two existences that have opposite properties 
(contradictions), then the two existences 
can be harmonized by the existence that 
has the nature of both. Thus, the three are 
one and the one contains the structure of 
the three (Sumardjo, 2019, p. 65).
The method in this research is a 
qualitative method. According to Sugiyono 
(2011), qualitative research methods are 
research methods based on the philosophy 
of post-positivism, used to research 
on natural object conditions. The data 
collection techniques carried out in this 
research are literature studies, observation, 
and documentation.
1. Literature Study
Researchers try to find data by 
reading previous studies or books that 
have relevant data in accordance with the 
chosen research topic. “In the formulation 
of concepts, researchers have the freedom 
to give meaning according to their 
research objectives, or choose from existing 
formulations from previous researchers” 
(Koentjaraningrat, 1977, pp. 29-36).
2. Observation
According to Arikunto (2002, p. 133) 
observation includes loading activities on an 
object using all sensory devices. Researchers 
look directly at the object to be studied to 
obtain data based on the experience gained 
in the place where the research object is 
located. By looking directly at the object 
of research and interacting with the actors 
there, researchers can get data that can be 
used as a reference source and can also be 
a comparison of previously obtained data.
3. Documentation
Sugiyono (2007, p. 329) states that 
documents are records of events that have 
passed in the form of writing, pictures, 
or monumental works of a person. Data 
in the form of writing and images related 
to the object of research are collected 
and researched in order to obtain the 
information needed in the research.
DISCUSSION
A. The requirements of Cibulan as a 
Kabuyutan
Kabuyutan is a sacred place for 
Sundanese people. Sacred places are often 
considered as places that have spiritual 
values, places that have magical power. In 
the life of Sundanese society, it is possible 
that the concept of kabuyutan began to exist 
during the Hindu-Buddhist kingdom era, 
but the written mention of kabuyutan was 
only found in the 11th century AD (Yulifar, 
2018, p. 475). Not a few people believe that 
sacred places are places where supernatural 
things gather. Therefore, there are many 
rules and prohibitions when entering a 
sacred place.

--- PAGE: 4 ---
130
~  Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya ~
Vol. 8  No. 2 Desember 2023  
Not all sacred places can be made into 
a kabuyutan. There are certain requirements 
for a place to be a kabuyutan. A place can 
be called kabuyutan if it has the necessary 
conditions. As Jakob Sumardjo said that the 
great-grandfather or kabuyutan is a sacred 
place where Sang Hyang Hurip is present in 
that place.
The requirement for Sang Hyang Hurip 
to be present in a place is that there must 
be Tekad, Ucap , and Lampah symbols in 
that place. Tekad, Ucap, and Lampah are the 
requirements that must exist in a Kabuyutan. 
This is what distinguishes kabuyutan from 
other sacred places.
In addition to the symbol of Sang Hyang 
Hurip in that place, a kabuyutan can only 
be built between a male river and a female 
river that meets or patimuan. (source)
1. Symbols of Tekad, Ucap, and Lampah 
in Cibulan
Cibulan which is located in Manis 
Kidul Village or now known as Cibulan 
Tourism Object, is geographically located 
in the middle of a settlement. But the nature 
around Cibulan is still well maintained and 
beautiful. The big trees around Cibulan are 
still standing strong more than 50 years 
old. Natural springs in Cibulan are also 
still maintained. The spring is part of the 
Cibulan Tourism Object and is known as 
Sumur 7.
If we try to map Cibulan Tourism 
Objects, it will look like the picture below.
Figure 1. 
Cibulan bathing pool with god fish in it
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
It can be seen that Cibulan has a green 
part which is an area of many large trees 
that are still maintained. The brick-red part 
is part of the Sumur 7 area in which there 
are springs and petilasan stones.
When viewed from the mapping of 
Cibulan Tourism Objects, Cibulan has a 
symbol or sign that is needed as a condition 
for the presence of Sang Hyang Hurip. The 
signs are Tekad, Ucap, and Lampah which are 
one of the requirements for the existence of 
a kabuyutan.
The symbols can be seen as a tritangtu. 
So that we can see the three patterns in it. 
Symbols or signs of Tekad, Ucap, Lampah in 
Cibulan can be seen in table 1.
Symbol
Tekad Spring Source Sumur 7
Ucap Petilasan Stone
Lampah Forest or Big Tree
Table 1. Symbol of Tekad Ucap Lampah in Cibulan
a. Tekad = Spring Source Sumur 7
Cibulan has a spring known as Sumur 7. 
This spring represents the symbol of Tekad 
in Cibulan as one of the requirements for 
kabuyutan. The source of the spring water 
can also represent the sky or the upper 
world. Water evaporates into the sky into 
clouds and drops rain on the earth.
Figure 2.Cibulan Tourism Object Map
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)

--- PAGE: 5 ---
131
~  Prasetyo, Nalan, Herdiani: The Construction of Sign that Form Kabuyutan Cibulan ~
The source of sumur 7 spring water or 
often called Sumur 7 is one of the religious 
attractions in Cibulan Tourism Object. It is 
called sumur because the spring water that 
comes out forms like a small pool or sumur 
(Prasetyo et al, 2022, p. 31). The seven 
Sumur have different sizes ranging from 
1.5 meters x 1.5 meters, but there are Sumur 
that are quite large ranging from 3 meters x 
4 meters, namely the seventh Sumur.
Each Sumur has a name, namely (1) 
sumur kejayaan, (2) sumur keselamatan, (3) 
sumur pengabulan, (4) sumur kemuliaan, (5) 
sumur cisadane, (6) sumur cirancana,  and 
(7) sumur kemudahan. The names represent 
wishes or Tekad.
The seven sumur located in the area of 
sumur 7 can be read as double Tritangtu. 
This is because the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th, 
5th, 6th sumur are Tritangtu which is 
harmonized into the 7th sumur. This is the 
reason why the 7th sumur is the last sumur 
visited after the other 6 sumur which visited 
consecutively and has a larger size than the 
other sumur.
b. Lampah = Tree or Forest
 Figure 3. Map of Sumur 7 with information 
on the sequence of wells, paths, 
petilasan stones and forests
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
Figure 4. one of the wells and springs at 
the sumur 7 area as a tekad symbol
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)
Lampah symbols in the form of forests 
or large trees. Large trees are a symbol 
of the land or can be referred to as the 
underworld. Looking at the Cibulan 
Tourism Object map, there are many large 
trees in Cibulan. In the Sumur 7 area there 
is also one tree surrounded by the seven 
Sumur. the trees in Cibulan are bunut trees 
more than 50 years old.
c. Ucap = Petilasan Stone
Figure 5. Bunut trees around the 
sumur 7 area as a lampah symbol
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
Figure 6. Petilasan stone of Prabu Siliwangi as a 
Ucap Symbol
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)

--- PAGE: 6 ---
132
~  Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya ~
Vol. 8  No. 2 Desember 2023  
The last one is a symbol of Ucap  which 
is a symbol of humans. in the Sumur 7 area 
there is a stone arrangement that is believed 
to be Prabu Siliwangi’s petilasan. The stone 
arrangement is in the form of stones that 
are now covered by white cloth. The stone 
arrangement is in a building that was built 
specifically to protect the stone structure.
Female’s stones or flat stones are found 
at the bottom of the white cloth. Behind 
the white cloth, there are rocks the size of 
coconuts covering the flat rock below. The 
flat stone covered with rocks is believed to 
be King Siliwangi’s footprints.
Male stones are stones that stand up-
right. This male stone is covered by a white 
cloth. When ordinary people see the stone, 
they will think the stone is a tombstone. In 
fact, the stone is not a tombstone. Judging 
from the signs, this petilasan stone is a stone 
of harmony because it has a male stone and 
a female stone in one place.
The source of Sumur 7 springs represents  
tekad dan langit is harmonized with a large 
tree that represents lampah  dan tanah. This 
harmony produces a harmony of the two, 
namely the petilasan stone that represents 
ucap and the human world. Based on the 
signs or symbols, Cibulan can be said to be 
sacred because Sang Hyang Hurip can come 
to the place. This also indicates that Cibulan 
already has one of the requirements as a 
kabuyutan.
2. The Confluence of Two Rivers
A place can be said to be a kabuyutan if 
the place is built between the confluence of 
two rivers. A place that has Symbols of Tekad, 
Ucap, dan Lampah can not be categorized as 
a kabuyutan if it is not between two rivers. 
Places that have the symbol of Sang Hyang 
Hurip but are not between two rivers are 
only categorized as sacred places.
Cibulan can be categorized as a 
kabuyutan if there are two rivers meeting 
and flanking the Cibulan area. These rivers 
are categorized as a male river and a female 
river.  The male river is the river that meets 
the female river. Male rivers tend to be 
clearer water. The female river is a larger 
river than the male river and the water tends 
to be turbid. The female river can also be 
called the state river that unites the village. 
Water from the female river or state is used 
by residents as a source of livelihood that 
irrigates rice fields.
Figure 7. Prabu Siliwangi Petilasan Stone 
(male and female stone)
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
The signs or symbols that exist in 
Cibulan are the application of the concept 
of tritangtu. If it is described it will look like 
in chart 1.
Chart 1. Harmony of the tritangtu symbol in 
the sumur 7 area

--- PAGE: 7 ---
133
~  Prasetyo, Nalan, Herdiani: The Construction of Sign that Form Kabuyutan Cibulan ~
Judging from the mapping above, 
Cibulan is flanked by two rivers. Cibulan is 
not only flanked by two rivers, but Cibulan 
also has a middle river. This middle river 
will later join the female river.  
The second river is the Cijungkulon - 
Cimanis river. Cijungkulon River is a river 
that originates in Balong Dalem. Balong 
Dalem itself is a source of spring water that 
is accommodated into a pond or balong 
and the flow of water is used for fields and 
agriculture. The flow of the Cijungkulon 
river will meet the main river, the Cimanis 
river. The unification of the Cijungkulon 
river that enters the Cimanis river is in the 
Ciniru Jalaksana area.
Figure 8. Flow map of the meeting 
between the male river and the female 
river flanking the Cibulan
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
Figure 9. Small river as a Male River
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
The First River is a small river which 
is a male river. This river originates at the 
foot of Mount Ciremai precisely around the 
Sayana City Forest. The Mount Ceremai 
area has abundant natural resource 
potential, including biological resources, 
land resources and springs (Alviya, 
2006, p. 87). This river flow will meet the 
female river, namely the Cimanis river in 
the Tonjong area of Sangkanurip Village, 
Cigandamekar.
Figure 10. Cimanis river as a female river
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
Figure 11. The Confluence of Two Rivers from male 
river and female river
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
The Cimanis River is the main river in 
the Cibulan district, which is the Female 
River. The Cimanis River is a combination 
of two headwaters, the first being Balong 
dalem and the second being the flow of the 
Cibulan spring. Before the confluence with 
the male river, the Cimanis river has two

--- PAGE: 8 ---
134
~  Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya ~
Vol. 8  No. 2 Desember 2023  
dams. The first dam is Lame Dam located 
in Ciniru Jalaksana Village and the second 
is Katiga Dam located in Sangkanmulya 
Cigandamekar Village. 
B. Old Sundanese Government System 
in Manis Kidul
Nowadays, where Indonesia is the most 
Islamic country in the world, kabuyutan still 
exists. The current government of course 
follows the system established by the 
Indonesian government. If examined more 
deeply, the Sundanese village government 
system can still be read today. 
This dam is used as irrigation to be used 
by the surrounding community. Water in 
Sundanese culture has become a unity of 
life. Without water there is no life. Water 
is not only for the needs of human life, but 
also for agricultural life (Sumardjo, 2015, p. 
85)
The Cimanis River has a Tritangtu 
element. The Cijungkulon River as a 
symbol of Tekad and a small river at the 
foot of Mount Ciremai as a symbol of 
lampah unite to enter the Cimanis River 
which is a symbol of Ucap . The flow of the 
Cimanis river as harmony continues until 
it meets the larger river, Cisanggarung, and 
continues to the sea.
Figure 12. Lame Dam used to 
irrigate residents’ rice fields
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
Figure 13. Katiga Dam used to irrigate 
residents’ rice fields
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
As with the Sundanese government 
system in Kabuyutan Cibulan, which is now 
part of the Manis Kidul Village area, the 
government system can be read based on 
the Sundanese village government system 
influenced by Islamic teachings.
Manis Kidul Village when viewed 
from the map has a Sundanese village 
government system. The division of this 
village can be seen from the existence of 
Buhun, Nagara, and Sara villages. 
Figure 14. Map of Manis Kidul village which is 
similar to the old Sundanese government
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)
Figure 15. The group from Balong Dalem 
was welcomed by a group from Cibulan 
to carry out the Kawin Cai ritual
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)

--- PAGE: 9 ---
135
~  Prasetyo, Nalan, Herdiani: The Construction of Sign that Form Kabuyutan Cibulan ~
Kampung Buhun takes care of customs 
or the place where Kabuyutan Cibulan exist. 
Kabuyutan Cibulan always carries out 
the tradition of the Kawin Cai traditional 
ceremony every year. The Kawin Cai 
ceremony is a procession of uniting water 
from the spring with the Tirtayartra Balong 
dalem water source. This ceremony aims to 
ask the Creator for rainwater for the fertility 
of land and rice fields. 
The boarding school was established in 
1994. Therefore, Manis Kidul Village can 
be said to have a Sundanese village system 
that is influenced by Islamic influence.
C. Kabuyutan Cibulan as The Center of 
Traditional Activities in Manis Kidul 
Village
As a kabuyutan, there are certainly many 
traditional activities that involve Cibulan. 
One of the traditional activities carried out 
is the traditional ceremony of Mapag Cai or 
Kawin Cai. 
Figure 16. Manis Kidul Village 
Office as Kampung Nagara
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)
Nagara Village is a place to take care 
of all administrative matters or the Village 
Head’s Office. The Village Head’s Office is 
a place where the government is carried out 
in the village. 
Kampung Sara is an Islamic village 
where in Manis Kidul village there are 
two large Islamic boarding schools. The 
two boarding schools are Pontren Husnul 
Khotimah (HK) and Pontren al-Multazam 
(AM) founded by KH. Sahal Suhana, SH. 
Figure 17. Pontren Husnul Khotimah 
as a Kampung Sara
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo 2022)
The traditional ceremony of Kawin Cai is 
a ceremony to call rain when drought hits. 
Ceremony for the community is a belief in 
the power of mythology that develops in 
the area where they live, to contribute to 
the welfare of their environment (Djuniarti, 
2017, p. 104). The ceremony of Kawin Cai 
was originally held on the 30th rowah in the 
Islamic calendar system or in the month 
of rajab. Now the date of the ceremony is 
uncertain. The date is determined following 
the arrival of the rainy season but must 
coincide with Friday kliwon.
The procession of Kawin Cai is carried 
out by the Sundanese community as a 
customary tribute to uphold their ancestral 
heritage: combining or harmonizing two 
springs with power and purity (Djuniarti & 
dwimarwati, 2017, p. 333).The first spring 
Figure 18. The group from Balong Dalem is 
preparing to leave to Balong Cibulan
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)

--- PAGE: 10 ---
136
~  Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya ~
Vol. 8  No. 2 Desember 2023  
is Balong Dalem Tirta Yatra spring located in 
Babakanmulya Village. The second spring is 
Cikembulan (Cibulan) spring in Manis Kidul 
village.
Furthermore, after the unification of 
the two springs in the Cikembulan spring 
area, the jar containing the mated water is 
brought back to the Balong Dalem area. The 
water in the jar is poured into Balong Dalem 
Tirta Yatra unites and flows to irrigate the 
villages that are passed by the water flow 
from Balong Dalem spring.
Water from the Balong Dalem Tirta Yatra 
spring is carried in a jar by a group from 
Babakan Mulya village to be delivered to 
Cibulan. After arriving in Cibulan, a group 
of jar carriers from Babakan Mulya Village 
jars containing water from Balong Dalem 
were brought into the Cibulan Tourism 
Object area where Cikembulan Spring was 
in it. After the jar were brought in, water 
was taken from the Cikembulan spring 
source into the jar containing water from 
the Balong Dalem spring. So that there was 
a union of two springs in a jar.
Figure 19. The procession puts water from 
Cikembulan spring into jar
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)
Figure 20. The Procession of Pouring the Mated 
Water into Balong Dalem Tirta Yatra
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)
The next activity is to pour water from 
Balong Dalem to the village leaders who 
are present. By sprinkling the water from 
the unification to village leaders, it is hoped 
that the villages they lead can get blessings, 
the land they live in becomes fertile and does 
not dry out. The village leaders are figures 
from 7 villages including Babakan Mulya 
Village, Maniskidul Village, Jalaksana 
Village, Sadamantra Village, Padamenak 
Village, Ciniru Village, and Nanggerang 
Village. These villages are fed by rivers that 
flow from Balong Dalem spring and Sumur 
7 spring in Cibulan.
In addition to being a form of effort in 
asking for rain and fertility, the Traditional 
Ceremony of Kawin Cai is also related to 
myths believed by the people there. So 
consciously or not, the myths that are 
still believed today are myths that have 
existed for a long time and have developed 
(Tambunan et al, 2017, p. 114). That myth of 
Kebowulan.
Kebowulan is the name of an ascetic 
named Resi Makandria. When Resi 
Figure 21. sprinkling the water from 
the unification to village leaders
(Source: Documentation Eko Budi Prasetyo, 2022)

--- PAGE: 11 ---
137
~  Prasetyo, Nalan, Herdiani: The Construction of Sign that Form Kabuyutan Cibulan ~
Makandria was meditating, he was mocked 
by a pair of birds for not having a wife 
and children. Hearing the ridicule, Resi 
Makandria asked Resi Guru Manikmaya 
for a wife. Hearing the request, Resi Guru 
Manikmaya finally granted the request 
by marrying his own daughter named 
Pwah Aksari Jabung to be married by 
Resi Makandria. But Resi Makandria felt 
embarrassed to marry Pwah Aksari Jabung 
who had a beautiful face like an angel. As 
a middle way, so that the marriage could 
be carried out and Resi Makandria did not 
feel burdened by the beautiful face of Pwah 
Aksari Jabung, finally Pwah Aksari Jabung 
turned into a Deer and Resi Makandria 
became a Buffalo. This marriage gave 
birth to a child named Pwah Bungatak 
Mangalengale. After growing up, Pwah 
Bungatak Mangalengale was married to 
Sang Wreti Kandayun who founded the 
Kingdom of Galuh.
That is the myth believed by the 
surrounding community. The Traditional 
Ceremony of Kawin Cai is also a form of 
respect for the events that occurred in the 
myth of Kebowulan.
CONCLUSION
Cibulan has signs or symbols that 
represent Tekad, Ucap and Lampah in it as 
a requirement for kabuyutan. These signs 
indicate the presence of Sang Hyang Hurip 
there. These conditions become a sign 
construction that makes Cibulan can be 
categorized as kabuyutan.
The signs in Cibulan are  Sumur 7 as a 
symbol of Tekad or the sky. Bunut tree as 
a symbol of Lampah or earth is also present 
in the Cibulan area, the petilasan stones as  
a symbol of the Ucap  or the human world. 
This stone arrangement is a petilasan that is 
believed to be Prabu Siliwangi’s petilasan. 
This petilasan is a pancer or harmony of 
the duality of spring water as a symbol of 
Tekad that is harmonized to the bunut tree 
as a symbol of the earth. Apart from these 
signs, the geographical shape of Cibulan 
also qualifies as a kabuyutan. Cibulan is 
flanked by two rivers that meet each other. 
The male river that flanks Cibulan has its 
headwaters at the foot of Mount Ciremai. 
The female river that flanks Cibulan is a 
canal from the Cijungkulon river and then 
enters the Cimanis river which finally meets 
the male river. 
Apart from having a Kabuyutan, the 
governance of Manis Kidul Village is similar 
to the old Sundanese governance.. The old 
Sundanese governance was characterized 
by the division of territories based on their 
functions. Old Sundanese governance 
adheres to the buhun, nagara, and sara 
systems. Where the buhun village that takes 
care of customs is represented by Kabuyutan 
Cibulan, the nagara village that takes care 
of community administration is the Manis 
Kidul Village office, and the sara village 
that takes care of religion is represented by 
the largest boarding school in Manis Kidul 
Village, namely Pondok Pesantren Husnul 
Khotimah (HK) and Pondok Pesantren al-
Multazam (AM).
Kabuyutan Cibulan as a village that takes 
care of customs based on the old Sundanese 
governance is the center of traditional 
activities in Manis Kidul Village. This can 
be seen from the ceremony of Kawin Cai 
which involves the spring water of Sumur 
7 in Cibulan.
Looking at all the terms and signs owned 
by Cibulan, Cibulan can be categorized as 
a kabuyutan. Cibulan is not only a tourist 
attraction, but also has cultural value 
contained in it. This cultural value must 
be preserved and introduced to the wider 
community, especially Kuningan so that it 
is not lost and will continue to be a legacy 
in the future.

--- PAGE: 12 ---
138
~  Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya ~
Vol. 8  No. 2 Desember 2023  
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arikunto, S. (2002). Metodologi Penelitian 
Suatu Pendekatan Proposal. Jakarta: 
PT. Rineka Cipta. 
Alviya, I. (2006). Penetapan Hutan Lindung 
Gunung Ceremai Menjadi Taman 
Nasional Dan Dampaknya Bagi 
Masyarakat Sekitar Kawasan. Jurnal 
Analisis Kebijakan Kehutanan Vol. 
3 No. 2, Juli 2006 : 87 – 94
Djuniarti. & Dwimarwati, R. (2017). Cosmos 
Matrimony Between Kebo Wulan 
And Pwah Apsari Jabung On Kawin 
Cai. E-Prosiding Pascasarjana ISBI 
Bandung, Proceedings International 
Conference On Arts & Culture, Vol 1, 
No 1 (2017).
Djuniarti. (2017). Sakralitas Air Dalam 
Upacara Kawin Cai Di Kuningan. 
Pascasarjana ISBI Bandung, 
Bandung.
Eliade, M. (2002). Sakral dan Profan. 
Yogyakarta: Fajar Pustaka Baru.
Preasetyo, E, B., Heriyawati, Y., & Saleh, S. 
(2022). Struktur Tanda Pembentuk 
Sakralitas Sumur 7 Objek Wisata 
Cibulan. Pantun Jurnal Ilmiah Seni 
Budaya, Vol. 7 No. 1.
Koentjaraningrat. (1977). Metode-Metode 
Penelitian Masyarakat. Jakarta: P.T 
Gramedia. 
Noerdjito, M., Royyani, M, F., & Widodo, 
H. (2009). Peran Adat dan Pensakralan 
Mata Air Terhadap Konservasi Air 
di Lereng Ciremai. Jurnal Biologi 
Indonesia, 5(3): 363- 376.
Pratiwi, M, K, G. (2017). Mitos-Mitos Di 
Gunung Lawu: Analisis Struktur, Nilai 
Budaya, dan Kepercayaan. Surabaya: 
Universitas Negeri Surabaya.
Sumardjo, J. (2019). Struktur Filosofis 
Artefak Sunda. Bandung: Kelir.
Sumardjo, J. (2014). Estetika Paradoks. 
Bandung: Kelir.
Sumardjo, J. (2015). Sunda Polarasionalitas 
Budaya. Kabupaten Bandung : Kelir.
Sugiyono. 2007. Metode Penelitian 
Kuantitatif Kualitatif dan R&D. 
Bandung: Alfabeta. 
Tambunan, J, B., Hutauruk, S., & Pardede, 
Z, H, S, (2017). Mitos Tradisi 
Perayaan Tahun Baru Imlek. Pantun 
Jurnal Ilmiah Seni Budaya Vol. 2 
No. 2 Desember 2017
Yulifiar, L. (2018). Kabuyutan Cipageran 
Cimahi Dari Zaman Ke Zaman 
Kabuyutan Cipageran Cimahi From 
Time To Time. Patanjala Vol. 10 No. 3 
September 2018: 471 – 486.
