--- PAGE: 1 ---
1Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering/May 2005/8
 A Study on the History and Development of the Javanese Mosque
Part 2: The Historical Setting and Role of the Javanese Mosque under the Sultanates
Bambang Setia Budi
 Doctoral Candidate, Department of Architecture and Civil Engineering,
Toyohashi University of Technology, Japan
Abstract
This paper aims at discussing the historical setting and role of the Javanese Mosques under the Sultanates.
The discussion will focus on where the mosques were built and what was the main purpose of mosques
constructed under each Javanese Sultanate until the end of nineteenth century. Under Sultanates, many mosques
were believed to be founded by 
wali (saint), sultan, sultan’s family, or kyai (Islamic/religious teacher) ordered
by the sultan. Referring to this kind of mosque, 71 surveyed mosques will be analyzed by historical setting and
roles of the mosque, because there are some varieties in each sultanate. Based on this analysis, this paper
argues that there are four types of mosques: 
Agung (Grand) Mosque, Langgar Kraton  (Palace) Mosque,
Community Mosque, and Isolated Mosque. It also argues that the historical setting of mosque always has a
close relationship with its roles in each sultanate.
Keywords: historical setting; main role, Javanese mosque; Islam; Sultanate
*Contact Author: Bambang Setia Budi, Doctoral Candidate,
Architectural History Laboratory, Dept. of Architecture,
Toyohashi University of Technology
1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tenpaku, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-8580 Japan
Tel: +81-0532-47-6111 Fax: +81-0532-44-6831
E-mail: budi_bambang@gamac.tutrp.tut.ac.jp
  ( Received November 11, 2004 ; accepted March 2, 2005 )
1. Introduction
The Javanese mosque appears as a unique architectural
style compared to mosques of other areas in Moslem
countries. Hence, some previous scholars tried to
describe the distinct physical characteristic of the
Javanese mosque in some articles or papers.
1
Nevertheless, this paper will not discuss on building
forms/styles of Javanese mosque architecture, but it aims
at discussing the historical setting and roles of Javanese
mosques since nobody studied from this point. The
discussion will focus on where the mosques were built
and what was the main purpose of mosques constructed
under the Sultanates until  nineteenth century.
Under the Sultanates, many Javanese mosques were
founded by 
wali (saint), sultan, sultan’s family, or kyai
(Islamic/religious teacher) ordered by the sultan.
Referring to this kind of mosque, the study has already
found 71 mosques. This data will be analyzed by the
historical setting and main role of the mosque, because
there are some varieties in each Sultanate. A list of
surveyed mosques on each Sultanate could be listed up
as shown in Table 1.
The main sources are provided by documentary study
and field survey. Unfortunately, historical records
describing historical Javanese mosques are few in
number and so far not available. The stories and
descriptions of historical Javanese mosques are generally
in oral tradition. The study mostly relies on existing
studies and report documentations made by the
Archaeological Department (
Suaka Peninggalan Sejarah
Purbakala), complemented by interviewing the Imam
(leader of prayer), abdi dalem kraton (servants of palace),
older persons, or somebody who maintains the mosque.
A series of research field survey carried out in cities
which were once the capital/center of Islamic political
power took place. In north coast of Java, the survey was
started from Banten, Cirebon, then Semarang, Demak,
Kudus, Jepara, Tuban, Gresik, to Surabaya. In the inland
of Java, it was started from Surakarta, Klaten,
Yogyakarta, Banyumas and beyond. I have interviewed
the people, identified the setting and checked the existing
conditions of these mosques.
2. Overview of the Coming of Islam and the
Sultanates in Java
The adoption of Islam among the communities of the
Javanese north coast is one of the most obscure
phenomenons in Indonesian history. Historian M. C.
Ricklefs argued that no definite conclusions have been
possible because the surviving records of Islamisation
are so few,
 and often so uninformative. It is not
surprisingly, when, why and how the conversion of Islam
for Javanese and Indonesians are still a contentious issue
and causes endless discussion among historian today.
--- PAGE: 2 ---
2 JAABE vol.4 no.1 May . 2005 Bambang Setia Budi
Legenda
X= main hall, Y = pendopo, Z = cemetery, √= exist, 
  = big/wide cemetery complex
 = Interview, 
  = archaeological report documentation
 = mentioned in book/thesis/article
A = West of Alun-alun (public square) of Kraton (palace)
Table 1. A List of Surveyed Mosques under Javanese Sultanate until 19 th Century

--- PAGE: 3 ---
3JAABE vol.4 no.1 May. 2005 Bambang Setia Budi
However, it is agreed by scholars that trade provided
a fertile ground for the early growth of Islam throughout
Java and the Indonesian islands. Muslim traders had
apparently been present in some parts of Indonesia for
several centuries before Islam established within the local
communities.
2 Many of them decided to be permanent
residents and established “Muslim Communities” in the
north coastal areas such as Grisee (Gresik), Surabaya,
Tuban, Jepara, Demak, Cirebon and Banten.3
Regarding early Muslim communities, it could also
obviously argued that many Muslim communities have
existed in Java especially in coastal areas in the middle
of fifteenth century. When the Chinese Muslim Ma Huan
visited the coast of Java in 1433, he reported in his book
Ying-yai Sheng-lan that there were three kinds of people
communities in Java: Muslims from the west, Chinese
(many of them are Muslims) and the heathen Javanese.
4
Along with the Muslims’ community expanding, I argue
that many mosques should be founded before Sultanate.
Unfortunately, it has no strong historical evidence or
physical remains until today.
However, according to Javanese tradition, the most
Fig.1. Map of the Spread of Islam in Java and Indonesia, Reproduced from Hall, 1985
B = inside of the Kraton (palace) complex
C = inside of community/ Kampung (village) or Pesantren (Traditional Islamic School)
C1 = inside of community/ Kampung or Pesantren and tanah perdikan (village/area with special regulation, no land tax, etc).
D = on the slope of mountain, hill, or on upland.
a = as a space/place for Friday prayer of Sultan and the Sultanate, stateís ceremony, etc.
b = as a praying space/place only for Sultan, sultanate family or 
abdi dalem kraton (servants of kraton) or some cases only for women
of the sultanate family and abdi dalem keputren (woman servants).
c = as a praying space/place of community and dakwah (religious proselytizing)
c1 = as a praying space/place for community, dakwah (religious proselytizing), and to support the state (as pillar) in both politics and
religion as the symbol of Sultanate authority
d = as a praying space/place of community and 
dakwah (religious proselytizing) and probably for khalwat (solitude/retreat).
d1  = as complement of cemetery complex. This type of mosque is a part of cemetery complex. It was built in after or at the same time
with the cemetery complex.
Remarks
*1) There are two mosque buildings. First mosque is (believed) founded by Giri in c. 15c, small in size and the second mosque i s
founded by his descendant in 19c, large in size.
*2) There are many changes. The new mosque was constructed in c. 19c and in 2000 A.D.
*3) The data was only based on an old sketch drawn by Wouter Schouten in 17
th Century and published by de Graaf in 1936 in ì De
Moskee van Japara ”, 1936, p. 160-162. It is believed that the founder is Pangeran Hadlirin (husband of Ratu Kalinyamat) in circa
1549 but there is no evidence. Existing condition of the mosque is totally new.

--- PAGE: 4 ---
4
Fig.2. Map of Sultanate and Islamic Spreading in Java, Originally from Lombard, 2000, Modified by Author
Fig.3.  Agung Mosque of Yogyakarta, 2004, Photo by Author
influential Islamic missionaries in Java were holy men
or so-called Wali Songo (nine saints), most of whom lived
in the sixteenth century. Up to this stage of my studies, I
argue that not all of Walis built an own mosque, but all
of their tombs are pilgrimage places of many believers
until today.
Traditions ascribed to the 
Walis  used a cultural
accommodation strategy for introducing Islam in Java.
Therefore, many scholars also argued that there was a
process of acculturation in which Islam value was
absorbed in Javanese culture.
In the last quarter of fifteenth century, one of the
Muslim community leaders - Pate Rodim
5 or Raden
Fatah, supported by Walis - established Demak Sultanate
as the first Islamic Kingdom in Java. When Trenggana
(Rodim’s son) ruled Demak Sultanate, he oversaw the
expansion of Demak’s influence to the east and west,
and the last Hindu-Buddhist state of east Java fell in circa
1527.
After Muslims established the first Islamic Kingdom
(Sultanate) at Demak in 1478, they also established
Cirebon Sultanate (1479) and Banten (1527) at the north
coast of Java. Soon after the collapse of Demak Sultanate,
Pajang (1549) and Mataram Sultanate (1575) emerged
from the inland of Java and the latter became the
strongest Islamic sultanate in Java until nineteenth
century. The period of Pajang Sultanate (1549-1587) was
too short. It was argued that Pajang was a transition
period from coastal area to Mataram in the inland of
Java.
In 1755, through the Treaty of 
Gijanti , VOC
(Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie ) divided the
Sultanate of Mataram into two parts. One was Surakarta
and the other was Yogyakarta. Each kraton built an agung
mosque near their court. Both Yogyakarta and Surakarta
were divided into two for each again in the early
nineteenth century. In Surakarta these were Kasunanan
Surakarta Sultanate and Mangkunegaran Sultanate, while
in Yogyakarta these were Kasultanan Yogyakarta
Sultanate and Pakualaman. Their courts and mosques
still stand until today.
3. Analysis on Setting and Role of Mosques under
the Sultanates
Under the Sultanates, many mosques were founded
by the 
wali, sultan, sultan’s family or kyai ordered by
Sultan. Although, I believe that the data are not complete
yet, I have tried to collect them and found 71 mosques
as shown in table 1. In that table, this research has already
identified mosques in each Sultanate, their location and
main role. The table also shows various main facilities
of each mosque: main prayer hall, 
pendopo , and
cemetery. The minaret is excluded, because only a few
historical Javanese mosques have this element.
From the identification on location/setting and role,
Javanese mosque could be summarized and categorized
into four main groups: 1) Agung  (Grand) Mosques
located on west of alun-alun, 2) Langgar Kraton (Palace)
JAABE vol.4 no.1 May. 2005 Bambang Setia Budi

--- PAGE: 5 ---
5
Mosque located inside of kraton complex, 3) Community
Mosque located inside the community, and 4) Isolated
Mosque located on a slope of mountain, hill or upland.
Each group of mosque has main role, and some cases
have specific roles. It will be explained as below.
3-1. Agung (Grand) Mosque
Except Pajang, every Sultanate always has 
Agung
(grand) Mosque. It is located near the palace and is
always in the west of alun-alun (open square) as the heart
of the city and centre of political power. This type is
also always the largest in size compared to the others.
Its main purpose lies in formal Friday prayer of sultan
and the sultanate, religious and state ceremonies, etc.
There are ceremonies we can still see today, such as
Sekatenan  ceremony in Surakarta Sultanate and
Gunungan ceremony in Yogyakarta Sultanate.6
Fig.4. Setting of Agung Mosque of Demak Reproduced from
Wiryomartono, 1995
Concerning the fact that most of the sultans/ruler have
an own mosque near their palaces, it has been considered
as the special right/authority of the ruler and the symbol
of greatness or majesty of Sultanate since sixteenth
century. The mosque as a religious building seems
comparable to the sacred building which was built near
the king’s palace before Islam influences.
7
3-2. Langgar Kraton (Palace) Mosque
Most of Sultanates built one or two small mosques
which were exclusively privately used inside of kraton
(palace). However, this kind of mosque can not be found
in Demak and Pajang sultanate, because there are no
physical remains or historical records.
Inside of Kasepuhan Cirebon sultanate, there are two
small mosques: 
langgar alit soko tunggal8 and langgar
agung. The langgar agung is bigger than the langgar
alit. Kanoman sultanate has one langgar, named langgar
Kanoman. The term of langgar is always combined with
mosques being small in size and sometimes privately
used. It is said that the mosques are used by sultan and
sultan’s family for praying, reciting the Koran, etc.
Inside of the kraton, Kasunanan Surakarta Sultanate
built the Bandengan mosque while Yogyakarta Sultanate
built a/the Panepen mosque. These mosques are used
for reciting the Koran,  and as a praying place for their
families, especially for the women of the sultanate family
and the abdi dalem keputren (woman servants). In fact,
Kasunanan Surakarta also built the Pudyosono mosque
which is located inside of the kraton. But it is believed
that this mosque was constructed in 1918.9 This mosque
is used as a temporary rest area of the sultan’s corpse
before the corpse is sent to the main graveyard of
Mataram sultanate in Imogiri.10 Hence, it is said that this
mosque is also keramat (sacred).
Fig.5. Location of Agung Mosque of Surakarta. West of Alun-alun,
Originally from Bonnef, 1986, Drawn and Modified by Author
Panepen mosque is also well-known as a place for
marriage ceremonies and located in the keputren
(women) area. It must be used privately, because it is
located inside the kraton (keputren)  and in keramat
(sacred) area.
The Banten Sultanate also built this kind of mosque,
especially in Kraton Kaibon (palace of queen mother).
The mosque was constructed of brick and it is only ruins
now. However, based on size and circulation, it is an
exception. In contrast to the mosques mentioned above,
it is neither so small in size nor privatly used. Probably,
it is not only for the sultan’s family and their servants.
JAABE vol.4 no.1 May. 2005 Bambang Setia Budi
--- PAGE: 6 ---
6
Fig.6. Ruins of the Mosque in Kraton Kaibon, 2004,
Photo by Author
3-3. Community Mosque
The majority of mosques belong to the type of the
community mosque existing inside the community. They
are intended for praying places of the community and
for dakwah (religious proselytizing). The location is
generally inside of a community/ kampung (village) or
pesantren (traditional boarding Islamic school) in both
city and rural area.
In the city, the sultanate built mosques inside of the
community beyond/around the palace. Usually, the
community around the kraton was high level official.
Hence, the mosque was for a praying space/place for
the abdi dalem kraton (servants of Sultanate) or soldiers,
but it was generally also for the community. For example,
Suranata mosque in Kudus, Surakarta, and Yogyakarta
sultanate can be classified into this group. Beside for
abdi dalem kraton  and Javanese, it was said that the
sultanate also supported building mosques for various
communities; for examples Pecinan Tinggi Mosque
(Chinese) and Pekojan Mosque (India) in Banten, and
Panjunan Mosque in Cirebon (Arab), etc.
However, we should note that there is a special kind
of mosques which was ordered by the sultan and located
inside of the community - the so-called 
pathok negoro
mosque in the area of the Kasultanan Yogyarakarta
Sultanate. There are five Pathok Negoro mosques under
the Yogyakarta Sultanate.
  The Pathok Negoro mosques were located in villages
which had a status of tanah perdikan (special land with
no tax, etc.) and were settled by the kyai/ulama with his
pesantren. As Carey in his book Babad Dipanagara an
Account of the Outbreak of the Java War  (1825-1830)
mentioned, Pathok Negara  were centres for ulama
(experts in fiqh (Islamic) laws) who acted as advisers of
the Pengulu (chief religious functionary) in the religious
courts. He also mentioned that before they were
abolished in c. 1830, there were four pathoks (pillars) at
both Yogyakarta and Surakarta answerable to the Pengulu
at the centre, thus recalling the five pillars of Islam. 11
The ulama in pathok negoro supported the Pengulu at
the centre in religious jurisdiction. Raffles in History of
Fig. 7. Location/position of Pathok Negoro in Yogyakarta City:
1) Mlangi Mosque, 2) Ploso Kuning Mosque, 3) Dongkelan
Mosque, 4) Babadan Mosque, 5) Wonokromo Mosque
Table 2. The Number of Mosques by Group
Table 3. The Number of Mosques by Sultanate
JAABE vol.4 no.1 May. 2005 Bambang Setia Budi

--- PAGE: 7 ---
7
Fig.8. Location of Sendang Duwur Mosque, on the Slope of
Mount, Reproduced from Uka Tjandrasasmita, 1970
Java also noted that the court, at least at the seat of
government, consisted of the Panghulu, the officiating
priest of the mosque, and four individuals, also of the
religious order, called Pateh Nagari, meaning literally
the pillars or supporters of the country, to whom, after
the examination of the evidence in capital offences, the
point of law and decision is referred.
12
3-4. Isolated Mosque
Probably, it was influenced by Hindu-Buddha tradition
that the upland (e.g. mountain) was believed more sacred
than level/plain land. Some Javanese mosques were also
built and located on the slope of a mountain, hill or
upland. It is also common, that the cemetery is always
attached in this site near the mosque.
This type of mosque is divided into two: first, in the
early development (Demak and Cirebon Sultanate in the
sixteenth to seventeenth century), mosques are intended
as a place/space for praying, 
dakwah, and probably also
for khalwat (solitude/retreat) . The Mosques of Sunan
Giri, Sendang Duwur and Sunan Gunung Jati are
regarded as examples of this group. It is said that the
cemetery was expanded later but the cemetery of
Mantingan mosque is an exception.
The second, in Mataram Sultanate period, mosques
are intended for a praying place/space for cemetery
visitors. The mosque was built after the cemetery
complex, and in several cases even just as a complement
of the cemetery complex. It is said, influenced by Sunan
Gunung Jati cemetery complex in Cirebon, Sultan Agung
built a cemetery complex on upland of Girilaya, then on
JAABE vol.4 no.1 May. 2005 Bambang Setia Budi
the slope of mountain (Imogiri). Its mosque was built
later.
Girilaya (cemetery) mosque, Banyu Sumurup mosque,
Makam (cemetery) Bayat Mosque and Pajimatan mosque
can be classified into this group. Makam  Bayat and
Pajimatan Mosque in Imogiri were built as only for
complement of cemetery complex.
It is believed that Banten Sultanate also built this kind
of mosque (Cikaduen mosque). Probably it was
influenced by Mataram tradition, because it was built at
the end of seventeenth century.
4. Conclusion
Based on the analysis of the historical setting and role
of the Javanese mosque under the sultanate, the result
can be summed up in the following points:
1. There are four types of mosques: Agung  (Grand)
Mosque, Langgar Kraton (Palace) Mosque, Community
Mosque, and Isolated Mosque. It is argued that the
historical setting of mosque always has a close
relationship with its roles/purposes.
2. The number of 
Agung  Mosques increased in the
Mataram period because firstly, the shifting of court from
Kotagede via other centers to Surakarta, and secondly
the division of the 
kraton into several courts by VOC
after Gijanti treaty (Surakarta and Yogyakarta sultanate)
and in early nineteenth century (Mangkunegaran and
Pakualaman).
3. It is argued that Langgar Kraton Mosque is intended
to closely relate with religious activities of Sultan and
sultanate family especially the woman and their servants.
Because 
Kraton is believed as a source of the life, there
is always no cemetery near this type of mosque.
4. Only in Yogyakarta Sultanate, there is special kind of
Community Mosque called 
Pathok Negoro Mosque. The
mosques were constructed on special land ( tanah
perdikan) and built not only as praying place/space for
community and dakwah (religious proselytizing), but
also as a pillar (pathok) to support the centre (sultanate)
in both politic and religion aspect.
5. There are some changes of roles especially on Isolated
Mosque, between early development in coastal area
(Demak and Cirebon) with Mataram in the inland of Java.
In the Mataram period, the mosque was built as
complement of cemetery complex. Despite almost all
of Javanese mosques have cemetery complex, but in this
case, cemetery is main facility and more popular than
the mosque. It is popular in Java, the historical mosque
has cemetery complex (except 
Langgar Kraton Mosque),
then it is so-called Masjid Makam or Mahsyad (cemetery
mosque).
Acknowledgments
The author is grateful to Dr. Izumida Hideo, Associate
Professor at Architectural History Laboratory, Toyohashi
University of Technology, for his information, discussion
and comments during the writing of this paper. The
author also wishes to thank Dr. Inajati Adisrijanti, Head
--- PAGE: 8 ---
8 JAABE vol.4 no.1 May . 2005 Bambang Setia Budi
of Archaeological Department of Gajah Mada University
(UGM) in Yogyakarta, for her information and
discussion. Finally, the author would like to thank
Archaeological Department (
Suaka Peninggalan Sejarah
dan Purbakala) for the data of documentary study, and
all of the people who have been interviewed by author.
Notes
1 See the summary of general characteristics of the Javanese Mosque
in Bambang Setia Budi, 2004, p. 189-191.
2 See M.C. Ricklefs, 2001, p. 6.
3 See S.O. Robson, 1981, p. 263.
4 Three classes of persons: 1) Muslim people are from the West who
have migrated to this country as merchants, 2) Chinese (T’ang
people) are all men from Kuang tung (Province), Chang (chou),
Ch’uan (chou) and other places; many of them follow the Muslim
religion, doing penance and fasting, 3) the people of the land
(Javanese), they are still heathen. See Ma Huan report in 
Ying-Yai
Sheng-Lan, p. 93, ed. and transl. by Armando Cortesao.
5 As Tome Pires mentioned Pate Rodim, he is a chief pate in Java.
They make him out to be head of all the lords of Java who are his
friends. See Tome Pires’s report in The Suma Oriental , p. 184.
6 Sekaten  is a ceremony to celebrate the birth of prophet of
Muhammad by playing the gamelan (traditional Javanese music).
It is also called garebeg Mulud. Gunungan is a rice mound presented
during the garebeg ceremony.
7 See also de Graaf, 2003, p. 114.
8 It is well-known as langgar saka tunggal, because the main pillar
is only one in the centre of praying hall.
9 See Victor Zimmerman on article The Kraton of Surakarta in the
year 1915 in The Kraton Selected Essays on Javanese courts, edited
by Stuart Robson, 2003.
10 In fact, based on interview with one of the Kraton Surakarta adviser
KPA Hardjonagoro (2004), this mosque was built as replacement
of ruined Suranata mosque. If the mosque was intended for
temporary rest area of sultan’s corpse before the corpse is sent to
main grave Mataram cemetery (Imogiri), the location of the mosque
is not correct. Because 
kraton  was a symbol of source of life,
religious ceremony for the sultan’s corpse should be in outside of
kraton complex.
11 See P.B.R. Carey, 1981, p. 302. However, despite he mentioned
that both Yogyakarta and Surakarta Sultanate have 
pathok negoro,
I argue  that this term is only used in Yogyakarta Sultanate. In
Surakarta, it does not exist, not only the term but also the existing
mosque. Obviously, there are no mosques which have same role
with 
Pathok Negoro Mosque.
12 See Thomas Stamford Raffles, 1965, p. 279.
References
1) Ali, Zakaria, Islamic Art Southeast Asia 830A.D.-1570A.D., Dewan
Bahasa dan Pustaka, Ministry of Education of Malaysia, Kuala
Lumpur, 1994.
2) Atja (ed. and transl.), Tjarita Purwaka Tjaruban Nagari (Sedjarah
muladjadi Tjirebon ). Jakarta: Ikatan Karyawan Museum, Serie
Monografi no. 5, 1972.
3) Budi, Bambang Setia, A Study on the History and Development of
the Javanese Mosque, part 1: A Review of Theory on the Origin of
the Javanese Mosque , Journal of Asian Architecture and Building
Engineering, V ol.3 No.1 May 2004, pp. 189-191.
4) Brakel, L.F. and H. Massarik, “ A Note on Panjunan Mosque ”,
archipel 23, 1982, pp.119-134.
5) Carey, P.B.R, Babad Dipanagara An Account of the Outbreak of
the Java War (1825-1830) , Kuala Lumpur: Art Printing Works,
1981.
6) Cortesao, Armando (ed. and transl.), The Suma Oriental of Tome
Pires and the book of Francisco Rodrigues, 2 V ols, London: Hakluyt
Society, 1944.
7) Graaf, H.J. de, and TH. Pigeaud, Kerajaan Islam Pertama di Jawa
Tinjauan Sejarah Politik Abad XV dan XVI,  transl by Eko
Endarmoko and Jaap Erkelens from De Eerste Moslimse
Vorstendommen op Java, Studien Over de Staatkundige
Geschiedenis van de 15 de en 16 de Eeuw , Jakarta: PT Pustaka
Utama Grafiti., 2003.
8) Graaf, H.J de. “ De Moskee van Japara”, Djawa XVII, Yogyakarta,
1936, pp. 160-162.
9) Hall, D.G.E, A History of South-East Asia, Fourth Edition, London:
Mac Millan Education Ltd, 1981.
10) Lombard, Denys, Nusa Jawa Silang Budaya, transl. by Winarsih et
all, from Le Carrefour Javanais Essai d’historie globale , Jakarta:
PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama, 2000.
11) Ma Huan, Ying-Yai Sheng-Lan, The Overall Survey of the Ocean’ s
Shores  (1433), Ed. Feng Ch’eng-chun; tranl. J.V.G. Mills.
Cambridge: The University Press for the Hakluyt Society, 1970.
12) Pijper, G.F., De Moskeen van Java, in Studien over de Geschiedenis
van de Islam in Indonesia, 1900-1950, 1977.
13) Pijper, G.F., The Minaret in Java, in F.D.K. Bosch et.al. (eds) India
Antiqua. A V olume of Oriental Studies presented by his friends
and pupils to Jean Philippe V ogel, Leiden: Brill, Kern Institue, pp.
274-283.
14) Raffles, Thomas Stanford, 
the History of Java, V ol. 1, KL: Oxford
University Press, 1965.
15) Ricklefs, M.C., A History f Modern Indonesia since c. 1200, Third
Edition, United Kingdom: Palgrave Publishers Ltd,
16) Robson, S.O., “Java at the Crossroads: Aspects of Javanese Cultural
History in the 14th and 15th Centuries”, Bijdragen Tot de Taal-land
end V olkenkunde, V ol. 137, 1981.
17) Robson, Stuart, The Kraton Selected Essays on Javanese Court ,
Leiden, KITLV Press, 2003.
18) Tjandrasasmita, Uka, “Islamic Antiquities of Sendang Duwur”, The
Archaeological Foundation, Jakarta, 1975.
19) Wiryomartono, B., Seni Bangunan dan Seni Binakota di Indonesia,
Jakarta: PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama.
