--- PAGE: 1 ---
229Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering/November 2006/236
A Study on the History and Development of the Javanese Mosque
Part 3: Typology of the Plan and Structure of the Javanese Mosque and Its Distribution
     
Bambang Setia Budi 
 Doctoral Candidate, Department of Architecture and Civil Engineering, Toyohashi University of Technology, Japan
Abstract
This paper investigates and analyzes a typology of the plan and structure of the Javanese mosque and its 
distribution. The study will focus on the plan of the main prayer hall and the soko guru principle structure 
(master pillars in the centre of the main prayer hall, supporting the upper hipped roof of the mosque) since 
these two elements and the roof are the main characteristics of the Javanese mosque. Until today these were 
generally well-preserved elements. The study investigates and analyzes 127 mosques that were constructed in 
the 15
th
-19
th
 centuries in Java. Based on this analysis, the paper argues that the main/original mosque type is 
square in plan with four master-pillars in the centre of the main prayer hall. It also ﬁnds and argues that there 
are many variations on these two elements in its development, but the main type is evenly spread throughout 
Java Island. 
 
Keywords: typology; plan of main prayer hall; soko guru; Javanese mosque; distribution 
1. Introduction  
Even though many scholars have argued that the 
original characteristics of Javanese mosques were 
square in plan with four master pillars in the centre 
of the main prayer hall, their arguments were not 
developed with a set of completed data in their 
analysis. Their arguments were only general statements 
without establishing reliable evidence. There is no 
complete study on the typology of the Javanese 
mosque. Moreover, existing studies of Javanese 
mosques did not also include Javanese mosques of all 
periods from the 15
th
-19
th
 centuries.   
This study investigates and analyzes the typology 
of the Javanese mosque based on the plan of the main 
prayer hall and the structure, especially the main 
pillars or soko guru principle in the central main 
prayer hall. These two elements are parts of the main 
characteristics of the Javanese mosque and until today 
they have been generally well-preserved elements. 
Based on this analysis, the main and original type 
of Javanese mosque plan and its variations will 
be presented and argued. This paper also analyses 
their distribution in Java. The main sources of this 
study were research field surveys and documentary 
studies. The data collection was accumulated by the 
author when the author worked at Masjid2000
1
 in the 
Architecture Department of the Institute of Technology 
Bandung (ITB) in 1999 and was done by conducting 
ﬁeld research throughout the island of Java in March 
2004. The study investigated as many historical 
mosques in Java as possible by measuring, taking 
photos, and through interviews. This study analyzed 
127 mosques that were listed in Table 1. 
Unfortunately, many original historical mosques 
could not be found and identiﬁed because they did not 
exist anymore or were only ruins. Some of them were 
already demolished or were totally changed to new 
mosque buildings. Thus, the main prayer halls' plans 
and structures could not be identiﬁed. 
However, in order to describe where, what, and how 
many unidentiﬁed mosques appeared in this study, they 
are still shown in the table. Conversely, mosques that 
were constructed in the twentieth century are excluded 
from this study because there are so many different 
types with no strong relation to the search for a main/
original type of Javanese mosque. Moreover they 
require a further study. 
2. Basic Requirements of Space/Spatial Elements of 
the Javanese Mosque 
Before analysing the typology of plan and sructure, 
this paper will describe the basic requirements of space 
and spatial elements of the Javanese mosque.   
a. Prayer hall/praying space
Because the mosque serves as the house of worship 
or the place of prostration, a prayer hall is the basic 
requirement of mosques. It is mostly large and open 
without partition, so that Muslims can pray together 
in this space. In the Javanese mosque, the prayer 
hall always has walls as the boundary of the space or 
building enclosure. There are no Javanese mosques' 
without these walls. There are walls as free standing 
elements without structural meaning, and others 
*Contact Author: Bambang Setia Budi, Doctoral Candidate, 
Architectural History Laboratory, Dept. of Architecture, 
Toyohashi University of Technology
1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tenpaku, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-8580 Japan
Tel: +81-532-47-6111 Fax: +81-532-44-6831
E-mail: bambangsetiabudi@yahoo.com
   ( Received October 11, 2005 ; accepted February 27, 2006 )
--- PAGE: 2 ---
230 JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
Table 1. The Javanese Mosque in the 15th-19th Centuries
--- PAGE: 3 ---
231JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
occur as structural members for supporting the roof. 
The veranda ( pendopo/serambi ), as shown in many 
Javanese mosques, is a later addition.
2
b. Mihrab  
The mihrab is a space for the Imam, the leader of 
prayer. In fact, in Arabian lands, the earliest mosque 
that was developed from the house of the Prophet in 
Medina does not use this element.
3
However, in later developments the mihrab became 
the most signiﬁcant feature of mosque architecture in 
the Muslim world. In Java, all historical mosques have 
a mihrab, located on the western side of the prayer-
hall. This element also indicates the direction of qibla, 
facing Mecca.  
c. Roof and its structure 
In areas of tropical monsoon, mosques always have 
a roof that covers the main praying space. Compared 
to the mosque architecture in Arabian lands and other 
Muslim countries, the roof form of the Javanese 
mosque is quite different. The two and three piramidal 
stacked-roofs are frequently found in Java. 
The roof of the Javanese mosque becomes the most 
significant element not only for protection from rain 
and sunlight but also as a symbol and identity. These 
roofs are supported by wooden pillars. Among these 
pillars, there are main/master pillars in the centre of the 
main prayer hall, known as soko guru.
3. Typology of the Javanese Mosque Based on Plans 
and soko guru 
The data shows that the majority of Javanese 
mosques constructed during the 15
th
-19
th
 centuries have 
a square plan (81 mosques). Only some mosques are 
rectangular in plan (14 mosques). The other plan types 
are very few in number. 
In the principle structure, the Javanese mosques 
mostly have four main pillars (soko guru) in the centre 
of the main prayer hall (69 mosques). Several mosques 
have no pillars or soko guru in the prayer hall. The 
others have more than four pillars and one pillar (known 
as soko tunggal) in the centre of the main prayer hall. 
The detailed number of mosques for each type of plan 
and structure is summed up in Table 2.
Fig.1. Basic Requirements of Space/Spatial 
Element of the Javanese Mosque
Fig.2. Principle Structure and Spatial Elements of the 
Javanese Mosque 
Fig.3. Axonometri of the Javanese Mosque Structure (Original Drawing by M. Ichsan, Modiﬁed by Author, 2004)

--- PAGE: 4 ---
232 JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
The data shows that the plan and principle structure 
of 30 historical mosques could not be identified   
because they did not exist anymore or were only ruins. 
Some of them were already demolished or totally 
changed into new mosque buildings. 
Based on the analysis of plans and structures, the 
Javanese mosques could be categorized into two 
types: ﬁrst, the main type, and second, its variations. 
Then, among these variations, several types could be 
identiﬁed: the square plan with one pillar in the centre 
of the prayer hall (soko tunggal type), the square plan 
without soko guru , the rectangular plan with four 
soko guru (mostly in Cirebon), the rectangular plan 
without soko guru (three mosques in old Sundanese 
villages and two mosques as a small mosque/
langgar 
of merchants), the rectangular plan with more than four 
soko guru, and ﬁnally, all others. All of these types will 
be explained below.
3.1 Main/Original Type
According to the analysis of plan and structure, the 
main type of Javanese mosque is square in plan with 
four soko guru in the centre of the main prayer hall. It 
can also be argued that the original type of Javanese 
mosque is the same as the main type because it is the 
majority and was built in the same period. Many of the 
earliest Javanese mosques in Demak, Jepara, Kudus, 
Cirebon Banten, Surakarta, and Yogyakarta show this 
type. 
Moreover, it always appeared in the Agung Mosque 
in Java except the Agung Mosque of Kasepuhan in 
Cirebon (founded in c. 1500). For example, these 
include the Agung Mosque of Demak (founded in 
1479) in Demak Sultanate, the Agung Mosque of 
Banten (founded in 1556) in Banten Sultanate, the 
Agung Mosque of Surakarta (founded in 1757), and 
the Agung Mosque of Yogyakarta (founded in 1773) in 
Mataram Sultanate. 
The Agung Mosques were founded by Sultans as the 
most important mosques in the Sultanate/state. They 
were always located on the west side of the 
alun-alun 
(Open Square) and near the palace of the Sultanate 
in the political centre of the city. Usually they were 
also the largest in size compared to other mosques. It 
is understandable that other mosques tend to follow 
the Agung Mosque in type and this type became the 
majority in number.
Compared to the Agung  Mosques in Java, the 
exceptional features of the 
Agung Mosque of Cirebon 
lay in its extraordinary roof (the upper roof does 
not end in a point at its topmost part) and structure 
(eight soko guru). This existing appearance is always 
discussed by some architects and historians today. 
In fact, tradition ascribed that the Agung Mosque of 
Kasepuhan originally had a mustaka (crown), which 
          structure
 
   plan
With 
four 
soko 
guru
With 
one
 soko 
guru
Without 
soko 
guru
With  
> four 
soko 
guru
Uniden- 
tiﬁed
square 69 4 6 - 2
rectangle 5 - 5 4 -
other - - - 1 -
unidentiﬁed - - - - 30
Table 2. The Number of Mosques by Type of Plan and Principle 
Structure
Fig.4. Plan with Pillar Composition of the Agung Mosque of 
Demak (founded in 1479)
Fig.5. Plan with Pillar Composition of the Agung Mosque of 
Yogyakarta (founded in 1773)

--- PAGE: 5 ---
233JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
was surmounted on the top of the roof such as in other 
Agung Mosques. The mustaka also structurally means 
the roof has a point at its topmost part. However, it 
is believed that the mustaka of the Agung Mosque of 
Kasepuhan was removed.
4
3.2 Variation Type
3.2.1 Square plan
a. With one 
soko guru (Soko Tunggal) 
This type of mosque usually has a square plan with 
only one pillar in the centre of the main prayer hall. 
The pyramidal roof of the mosque is supported by 
this central pillar. In Java, mosques that have only one 
pillar in the centre of the prayer hall are better known 
as Soko Tunggal Mosques, where the word "tunggal
" 
means "single" or "one".  
There were four soko tunggal Mosques constructed 
during the 15
th
-19
th
 centuries. The oldest one is 
Langgar Alit Soko Tunggal, located inside the Kraton 
(palace) Kasepuhan in Cirebon (founded in c. 1479). 
The others are Soko Tunggal Pekuncen in Kebumen 
(founded in c. 1719), Soko Tunggal  Baitussalam 
(founded in c. 1871), and Soko Tunggal Darussalam 
(founded in c. 1913) in Banyumas. These three soko 
tunggal mosques are closely located to each other. 
However, up to the present stage of the study, there is 
no document or evidence that mentions these mosques 
have a relation to each other in history.
b. Without 
soko guru 
Another type of mosque has a square plan without 
soko guru in the prayer hall. They are the Sumpah and 
Desa Bedji Mosques (founded in 
c. late 19c) in Cilegon 
(Banten Province), the Kebon Jeruk Mosque (founded 
in 1786) in Batavia, and others. The most signiﬁcant 
example is the Selo Mosque (founded in 1787) in 
Yogyakarta special territory because it still appears 
in its original form. The mosque was founded by the 
Yogyakarta Sultanate and still exists in original form 
today. The term Selo means stone and it is believed 
that the mosque was constructed with stone.
5
 Its wall is 
very thick at approximately 80 cm.
3.2.2 Rectangular plan 
a. Without soko guru    
This type of mosque has a rectangular plan 
without soko guru in the centre of the prayer hall. 
Consequently, the roof that covers the prayer hall never 
ends in a point at the top. There are ﬁve mosques that 
can be classiﬁed as this type. First, two mosques are 
regarded as a 
langgar (small mosque)
6
 for merchants. 
They are Langgar  Tinggi  Pekojan (founded in 
1828) in Jakarta and Langgar Laweyan (founded in 
1877) in Surakarta. These two mosques are located 
on the second floor and the first floor is usually for 
dormitories. The mosques were founded by Islamic 
merchants – in Batavia by Said Noom, an Islamic 
merchant and missionary, and in Surakarta by a 
Batik 
merchant.  Fig.6. Plan with Pillar Composition of the Astana Mantingan 
Mosque (founded in 1559) in Jepara
b. Selo Mosque (founded in 
1787) in Yogyakarta
a. The Plan and Section of 
Langgar Alit Soko Tunggal 
Mosque (founded in c. 1479) in 
Kasepuhan Palace, Cirebon
   c. Langgar Tinggi         
Pekojan Mosque
    (founded in 1828) 
    in Batavia/Jakarta
Fig.7. Example of a Plan of the Soko Tunggal Mosque Type, 
Square Plan without soko guru Type, and Rectangle
 without soko guru Type
--- PAGE: 6 ---
234 JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
Second, three mosques existed inside an old 
Sundanese village. These are the mosques of Kampung 
Adat Pulo, Kampung Adat Dukuh, and Kampung 
Naga. All of these are located in the Priangan area, 
West Java Province. Even though there are some 
pillars in the prayer hall, they are not the same as the 
principle of soko guru . The mosque floor is usually 
raised around 50-60 cm from the ground. 
b. With more than four 
soko guru 
Structurally, mosques that have a rectangular floor 
plan should be without soko guru or with more than 
four soko guru . There are four mosques that can be 
categorized into this type. They include two mosques 
in Jakarta: Al-Makmur Raden Saleh Mosque (founded 
in 
c.1840) and Hidayatullah Mosque (founded in c. 
1750). In fact, the construction dates of these two 
mosques are still questionable.
The others are Manonjaya Mosque (founded in 1834) 
in Tasikmalaya and Agung Mosque of Kasepuhan 
(founded in c. 1500) in Cirebon. The former is also 
known as the Agung Mosque in Tasikmalaya, founded 
by Bupati (regent) and supervised by the Public Work 
Department or BOW ( Department der Burgelijke 
Openbare Werken ) under the Dutch-Indies Colonial 
Government. The mosque was inﬂuenced by European 
style. The latter is known as the 
Agung Mosque of the 
Cirebon Sultanate.  
c. With four 
soko guru
This type is a mosque that has four soko guru in 
the rectangular plan of the main prayer hall. In fact, 
this type can also probably be classiﬁed into a square 
plan with four soko guru (as main type), because the 
rectangular plan is not formed by structure but by the 
position of the walls, especially the eastern wall. The 
roof is also a pyramidal roof that ends in a point at the 
top.
These are found in several mosques in the Cirebon 
area, West Java Province. They are the Panjunan 
Mosque (founded in 
c. mid 16c), the Kaliwulu 
Mosque (founded in c. end 16c), the Sunan Gunung 
Jati Mosque (founded in c. 1542), and the Kejaksan 
Mosque (founded in c. mid 15c). Moreover, the 
original plan of Pajlagarahan (founded in c. 1452) 
and Pakambangan Mosque (founded in c. mid 15c) 
in Cirebon can probably also be classified into this 
type, but the original plans are not clearly identiﬁed. 
Because of many changes, the mosques are square in 
plan now.
All of these mosques were constructed in the 15
th
-
16
th
 centuries. Hence, this type is regarded as the 
earliest mosque type in the Cirebon area and is also 
examined as one of the early developments of the 
Javanese mosque.  In contrast, the rectangle mosque 
plan type in other areas (outside Cirebon) that were 
constructed in the end of the 17
th
c appears in the later 
development of the Javanese Mosque. 
3.2.3 Others
The other type means that the mosque's plan is 
neither square nor rectangular in plan. This type is very 
few in number. The study found an example at the An-
Nawier Pekojan Mosque (founded in 1760) in Batavia. 
Fig.8. Plan and Pillar Composition of Manonjaya Mosque 
(founded in 1834) in Tasikmalaya
Fig.9. Plan and Pillar Composition of Kaliwulu Mosque 
(founded in c. end 16c) in Cirebon
Fig.10. Plan and Pillar Composition of Sunan Gunung Jati 
Mosque (founded in c. 1542) in Cirebon
--- PAGE: 7 ---
235JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
This mosque has an L-shape plan and many pillars 
in the prayer hall. Probably, this mosque has been 
developed many times without maintaining the original 
plan or structure. Thus, the existing main prayer hall 
is not square or rectangular with many pillars in the 
prayer hall. 
4. Distribution of Type
From this distribution map of the Javanese mosque 
type as shown in Fig.12., there are some places/cities 
where many historical mosques are located: Banten 
(founded by Banten Sultanate), Batavia/Jakarta 
(developed by the Dutch Colonial Government), 
Fig.11. Typology of the Plan and Structure of the Javanese Mosque; The Main Type and its Variation
Fig.12. Distribution of the Javanese Mosque Based on Typology of the Plan and Principle Structure
--- PAGE: 8 ---
236 JAABE vol.5 no.2 November 2006 Bambang Setia Budi
Cirebon (founded by Cirebon Sultanate), Yogyakarta 
and Surakarta (founded by Mataram Sultanate and 
its successors) then Demak, and beyond (Demak 
Sultanate).
The ﬁgure also shows that the main type is found in 
all of the main places/cities. It can also be identiﬁed 
that the main type is evenly spread throughout the Java 
Island and the variation type is mostly developed in 
some areas/cities of Java.   
5. Conclusion
According to the analysis of the typology of plan 
and structure of the Javanese mosque, the conclusions 
can be summed up in the following points:
1. It is obvious that the main/original type of 
Javanese mosque is the square plan with four soko guru 
in the centre of the main prayer hall. This main type 
is evenly spread throughout the Java Island. However, 
there are some variations on the Javanese mosque type, 
but they are mostly developed in some areas/cities in 
Java.   
2. It is argued that mosques with the rectangular 
plan are a later development since this type could be 
categorized as a variation type and was not constructed 
in the earliest times. However, the rectangular plan 
type with four soko guru , as shown on several 
mosques in Cirebon, is an exception, because all of 
the mosques were constructed in the 15
th
-16
th
 centuries 
and are regarded as the earliest mosques in this area. 
In fact, it can also be argued that this type is no longer 
different from the main type of the Javanese mosque 
because the relationship between the soko guru, roof, 
and space underneath (plan) is much more signiﬁcant 
than the plan with soko guru and enclosure walls. 
This argument is reinforced by the fact that all of the 
enclosure walls in this type are freestanding walls and 
not structurally supporting elements.  
3. According to the main type, the rectangular plan 
with four soko guru of Cirebon and the Soko Tunggal 
mosque type become a very signiﬁcant base to study 
the origin and early development of the Javanese 
mosque. At Hindu-Buddhist temples in Java, many 
soko tunggal structures occurred on several Javanese 
temple reliefs. My next study will deal with further 
research on this topic. A study on the origin and early 
development of the Javanese mosque will need not 
only historical and archaeological evidence but also an 
architectural point of view/analysis. 
Acknowledgment
The author is grateful to Dr. Izumida Hideo, 
Associate Professor at Architectural History 
Laboratory, Toyohashi University of Technology, for 
his information, discussion, and comments during the 
writing of this paper. The author also would like to 
thank the Masjid2000 at the Architecture Department 
of the Institute of Technology Bandung (ITB) and 
the Archaeological Institute of the Republic of 
Indonesia for the data and documentary studies of 
mosque architecture in Java. Finally, this research was 
supported in part by the research grant from The Hori 
Information Science Promotion Foundation, Japan.
  
Endnotes
1
 The Masjid2000 was a group-conducted research and documented 
the Nusantara (archipelago) Mosques. At the ﬁrst stage, the group 
did research and documentation on mosques in Java in 1999 
and 2000, by a grand from the Institute of Technology Bandung 
(ITB[0]), Indonesia.
2
 Bambang Setia Budi: 2004, pp.189-191.
3
 According to Creswell, the Prophet's house was not considered a 
mosque because of its meager expression and multitude of secular 
functions. The architectural concept of a mosque held by the 
Prophet does not fit the model of the later Muslim civilization. 
For a detailed discussion, see Rasdi: 1998, p.52; Creswell: 1978, 
pp.4-6.        
4
 The legend of Menjangan Wulung described it. However, this 
local story is an extraordinary tale rather than a logical explanation 
of the structure of a mosque. It is believed that the Grand Mosque 
of Cirebon originally had a 
mustaka (crown) surmounting the top 
of the roof, but the crown was removed as a result of an incident 
brought about by a mystic named Menjangan Wulung , who 
attempted to eliminate Islam and its followers from Cirebon. See 
also Achadiati: 1990, pp.27-28.
5
 In fact, the material is not stone. Probably, because of the thickness 
of the wall, people said stone, so-called Selo or Watu.
6
 The term Langgar in Java means not only a small mosque, but 
also is not used for Friday prayer. This mosque is usually only for 
praying at the ﬁve prayer times and reciting the Koran. 
References
1) Achadiati, Y .S. (ed), Sejarah Peradaban Manusia Zaman Cirebon, 
Jakarta: Multiguna CV , 1990.
2) Atmadi, P., Demak, K., and Jepara M., A Study of Architectural 
Syncretism , Research Report Architectural History and 
Development Laboratory, Gajah Mada University, 1987.
3) Bonnef, M., La <Mosqu ée de pierre > (Masjid Selo ) de 
Yogyakarta, Archipel 30, Paris, pp.31-38.  
4) Budi, B.S., A Study on the History and Development of the 
Javanese Mosque, Part 1: A Review of Theory on the Origin of the 
Javanese Mosque, JAABE, V ol.3, No.1 May 2004, pp.189-191.
5) Budi, B.S., A Study on the History and Development of the 
Javanese Mosque, Part 2: The Historical Setting and Role of the 
Javanese Mosque under the Sultanates , JAABE, V ol.4, No.1 May 
2005, pp.1-8.
6) Budi, B.S., The Material and Construction System of the 
Traditional Saka Guru Grand Mosques in Java, Indonesia , 
Proceeding of the Third International Symposium on Islamic 
Expression in Indonesian Architecture, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 
August 19, 2000.
7) Cresswell, K.A.C., Early Muslim Architecture (2 vols.), Oxford, 
1932/40 (Revised ed. V ol.1, Oxford, 1969); reprinted New York, 
1978/9.
8) Cribb, R., Historical Atlas of Indonesia , London: Curzon Press, 
2000. 
9
Dumarcay, J. (1985), La Charpenterie des mosqu ées Javanaises, 
Archipel 30, Paris, pp.21-30.
10) Frishman, M.J. and Hasan U.K. (eds), The Mosque History 
Architectural Development & Regional Diversity , London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1994.
11) Rafﬂes, T.S., The History of Java, V ol.1, KL: Oxford University 
Press, 1965.
12) Rasdi, Mohammad Tajuddin Haji Mohammad, The Mosque as 
Community Development Centre , Johor Darul Ta'zim: Universiti 
Teknologi Malaysia, 1998.
