--- PAGE: 1 ---
 
 
Catherine Allerton
Introduction: spiritual landscapes of 
Southeast Asia 
 
Article (Accepted version) 
(Refereed) 
Original citation: 
Allerton, Catherine (2009) Introduction: spiritual landscapes of Southeast Asia. Anthropological 
forum, 19 (3). pp. 235-251.  
 
DOI: 10.1080/00664670903278387
 
© 2009 Discipline of Anthropology and Sociology, The University of Western Australia 
 
This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/26782/
 
Available in LSE Research Online: May 2011 
 
LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the 
School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual 
authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any 
article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. 
You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities 
or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL ( http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE 
Research Online website.  
 
This document is the author’s final manuscrip t accepted version of the journal article, 
incorporating any revisions agreed during the peer review process.  Some differences between 
this version and the published version may remain.  You are advised to consult the publisher’s 
version if you wish to cite from it. 

--- PAGE: 2 ---
 1
Introduction: Spiritual Landscapes of Southeast Asia 
 
 
Catherine Allerton 
Department of Anthropology 
London School of Economics and Political Science 
Houghton St 
London WC2A 2AE 
c.l.allerton@lse.ac.uk
 
Abstract 
 
This Introduction foreshadows the main themes of this special issue on spiritual 
landscapes of Southeast Asia. The concept of ‘spiritual landscapes’ highlights the links, 
found throughout Southeast Asia, between spirit beings or potent energies and particular 
sites in the landscape, including trees, mountains and rivers. The concept also broadens 
anthropological approaches to the religious significance of the landscape in two main 
ways. Firstly, it problematises the separation of ‘natural’ and ‘cultural’ environments, and 
secondly, it side-steps the implication that something called ‘sacred geography’ can be 
separated from the pragmatic activities of daily life. In this Introduction, having given an 
ethnographic overview of spirit-places and environmental forces in the region, I suggest 
that we need to take more seriously the claims of many Southeast Asian people that their 
landscapes have agency. In the context of religious conversion, the agency of the 
landscape often becomes a central concern, as reformers and missionaries seek to ‘purify’ 
the environment of such spiritual power. However, in addition to ‘purification’, ongoing 
conversion may also involve new forms of conversation with the landscape, including re-
enchantments, religious syntheses, or reassertions of the landscape’s potency. 
 
Key Words 
Landscape; Southeast Asia; Religious change; Spiritual potency; Agency 
 

--- PAGE: 3 ---
 2
 
Despite the varied histories and religions of Southeast Asian societies, a reading of many 
historical and ethnographic accounts reveals a common understanding that the world 
inhabited by humans was intersected by a spiritual or invisible realm. This understanding 
often manifested itself in what can be called a distinctive ‘spiritual landscape’ of potent 
places, pathways, rivers, trees and mountains. This Special Edition1 seeks to examine 
what has happened to the varied spiritual landscapes of island Southeast Asia in the 
context of new religious forms, migration, changing agricultural practices, and military 
and political projects. How do understandings of spiritual landscapes transform when 
people move (either freely or forcibly) away from their ancestral lands? How do people 
negotiate their allegiances to ‘world’ religions versus the particularities of potent places? 
What are the limits to a Catholic, Protestant or Islamic landscape? What kinds of 
purifications, re-enchantments, syncretisms or anti-syncretisms of the spiritual landscape 
does ongoing religious conversion entail? 
 
‘Landscape’, as a concept in the human sciences, tends to be utilised in one of three 
distinct ways. Firstly, it may be used in the common, everyday sense of a ‘natural’ or 
physical environment, a taken-for-granted backdrop of hills, rivers and valleys. This is 
the way in which landscapes are referred to in most ethnographies. Secondly, ‘landscape’ 
may be used to refer to a distinct ‘way of seeing’, a representation, as in ‘landscape 
painting’. This is the sense of landscape employed most notably in Marxist critique, as in 
Cosgrove and Daniels’ definition of a landscape as ‘a pictorial way of representing or 
symbolising surroundings’ (1988, 1), or Raymond Williams’ historical argument that the 
very idea of the ‘English landscape’ both excluded ‘working country’ and implied 
‘separation and observation’ (1985, 26). However, this representational approach is also 
the perspective adopted in classic anthropological work that sees the prior divisions of 
society as ‘mapped onto’ the ‘space’ of houses and villages (Durkheim and Mauss 
([1903] 1963). Thirdly, ‘landscape’ may be utilised to refer neither to a ‘natural’ object, 
nor to a cultural ‘representation’, but to a historical process of interaction between people 
and the environment in which both are shaped. This is the understanding of landscape 
that I employ in this Introduction, drawing in particular on Ingold’s ‘dwelling 

--- PAGE: 4 ---
 3
perspective’, and his negative definition of landscape as neither ‘land’, nor ‘nature’, nor 
‘space’ (2000, 190). The focus on both historical process and human activity in this 
understanding of landscape necessitates acknowledging that the same physical 
environment affords many possible landscapes, an acknowledgment of real importance to 
the changing spiritual landscapes described in this volume. 
 
Landscapes are cumulative, historical matrixes of places and pathways. They are always 
in process, full of memory, and are entangled in complex, ever-changing ways with 
human lives. There is thus no meaningful distinction that can be drawn between a 
‘natural’ landscape of physical features onto which people project a ‘cultural’ landscape 
of representations and symbols (Ingold 2000, 189). If this seems an unusual statement to 
make, take a moment to think of some of Southeast Asia’s most iconic, endlessly-
photographed landscapes: the steep rice terraces of the Ifugao of the Philippines, or the 
Balinese. As on-lookers, we may admire the way in which hundreds of years of human 
labour have sculpted these mountain terraces, contributing to an ever-shifting patchwork 
of muddy, lush and shimmering fields.2 However, the Ifugao or Balinese who inhabit 
these landscapes do not confront them as a world ‘out there’ (Ingold 2000, 173). Rather, 
this landscape becomes meaningful to them partly through practical activity, as they 
climb up steep paths, walk through deep mud, or bend over in the hot sun to transplant 
rice seedlings. To pre-empt the possible criticism that this understanding of landscape 
somewhat romantically privileges the rural, consider also how urban landscapes may be 
constituted for their inhabitants in daily acts of crossing a busy street, buying vegetables 
in a market, or driving through a suburb. Over time, a landscape, which is never complete 
but always being made and re-made, will become saturated with memories, its places 
often acting as ‘mnemonic pegs’ (Basso 1996, 62) for stories and reminiscences. This 
practice-oriented approach to landscape is one that has been gaining ground in landscape 
archaeology in recent years, particularly in Tilley’s defence of a revitalized, holistic 
concept of landscape that ‘links bodies, movement and places together’ (2004, 24; see 
also Lemaire 1997). However, for anthropologists, such an approach also needs 
supplementing with an attention to the larger forces (missionary, governmental, 

--- PAGE: 5 ---
 4
capitalist) that may shape landscapes in both intentional and unintentional ways (see 
Bender 2001; Baxstrom 2008). 
 
Landscapes and human lives are entangled in ever-changing ways. In particular, 
landscapes are entangled with notions and practices that concern such areas of 
anthropological interest as religion, kinship and morality. This can be clearly seen in 
those ethnographies that follow the lead of their main characters, and put place and 
landscape at the forefront of their analyses. For example, in Wisdom sits in places, one of 
the most evocative ethnographies of landscape, Keith Basso (1996) describes how 
discovering the places, and learning the place-names, of the Apache landscape involves a 
kind of moral education. Other anthropologists have emphasized how, for example, 
landscape and kinship are entangled: ‘country’ becomes the ‘objectification of kin 
networks’ in Myers’ (1986, 68) account of the Pintupi of Aboriginal Australia;3 Gow 
(1995) argues that the Amazonian Piro see kinship (in the form of evidence of habitation) 
when they look at the land; Leach argues, simply but forcefully, that for the Melanesian 
Reite, ‘kinship is geography’ (2003, 31). 
 
This special edition offers a new perspective on the entanglement of landscapes and 
human lives by introducing the concept of ‘spiritual landscapes’. This concept is meant to 
draw attention both to the ways in which people imagine spirit forces and energies to 
emerge from or be connected to places, and to the attitudes that people may have to the 
‘hidden’ or mysterious realms lying beyond, behind or immanent within the visible earth. 
Whilst some of the ethnographic particularities of the papers might tempt us to speak of 
‘enspirited landscapes’, this suggests that the landscape only has spiritual potency so far 
as spirit-beings are thought to reside in it. By contrast, the notion of spiritual landscapes 
allows for the possibility that, with the diminishment of the significance of ‘spirits’, the 
landscape may nevertheless continue to be granted a spiritual role, and to thereby allow 
for the imagination of continuity in the face of change. 
 
Thus, one of the main advantages of the concept of spiritual landscapes is that it broadens 
anthropological approaches to the ‘religious’ significance of place and landscape. There 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
 5
are two main aspects to this broadening. Firstly, since the notion of landscape employed 
in this Introduction (though not necessarily uniformly in the papers that follow) questions 
the distinction between a ‘natural’ and a ‘cultural’ environment, so it also problematises 
the separation of ‘natural’ and ‘supernatural’ phenomena. As Woodward argues, one of 
the main flaws with anthropological discussions of ‘traditional religions’ is ‘the failure to 
observe that for most people the “natural world” includes objects and forces that cannot 
be observed by sense perception alone’ (1989, 23). Though a recent attempt to revitalize 
the concept of ‘supernatural’ as an etic category stresses that the concept does not have to 
be employed in a way that assumes the emic separation of natural and supernatural 
(Lohmann 2003a, 176), I am in sympathy with Aragon’s desire to ‘keep modernist 
ideologies… from prejudging the boundaries of all religions’ (2003, 132). The spirit-
beings and energies that are part of many Southeast Asian spiritual landscapes are 
engaged with as an intrinsic, everyday aspect of those landscapes, rather than as 
paranormal or unnatural phenomena. Of course, what needs to be explored are the ways 
in which such beings and energies may in turn be ‘diabolised’ by the world religions and 
possibly become detached from the landscape.  
 
Secondly, by contrast with such notions as ‘ancestor worship’ or ‘sacred sites’, speaking 
of spiritual landscapes is a way to sidestep the problematic Christian heritage of our 
anthropological concepts (see Cannell 2006). An object, site or place may be said to be 
‘sacred’ if it is thought to possess ‘particular powers demanding respect, reverence and 
ritual’ (Askew 2003, 64). However, though these may at times be the attitudes taken up 
towards the spiritual landscapes we describe, they are by no means necessary for us to 
acknowledge such a landscape. To speak of ‘sacred landscapes’ would imply a 
perception of the environment set apart from the profane activities of daily life. By 
contrast, many of the spiritual landscapes of Southeast Asia are emphatically ‘vernacular’ 
landscapes, in the sense popularised by the American geographer J.B. Jackson, for whom 
landscapes included the roads, sidewalks and houses of the ‘workaday world’ (Meinig 
1971, 228; see Jackson 1997). A spiritual landscape is not necessarily one that we would 
recognise as ‘religious’. It may gain negative potency from deaths and burials during 
military conflict (Bovensiepen, this issue), or it may necessitate acknowledging the 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
 6
original owners of donated farming land (Allerton, this issue). People may engage with 
spiritual landscapes in ritual activities, but also in a more pragmatic fashion in the course 
of everyday life.4 Moreover, even when a converted population abandons older ritual 
forms, many taken-for-granted notions regarding spirits and their places may be retained 
(see Forth 1998, 19). 
 
Geographies of Spiritual Power in Southeast Asia 
 
Many mid- to late-twentieth century accounts of Southeast Asian societies, particularly 
historical accounts of the region’s Indic states, stress the significance of what is 
frequently labelled ‘sacred geography’, or ‘a conceptual system in which certain places 
are of central ritual importance because it is there that one accesses cosmic currents of 
ritual purity and power’ (Lehman 2003a, xvi). These studies emphasise the importance of 
cosmological symbolism to the construction and political significance of temples, palaces 
and kingdoms. In his classic study of conceptions of state and kingship in Southeast Asia, 
Heine-Geldern argued that the structural and spatial organization of Indic states was a 
microcosmic mirroring of the macrocosmos, in which the capital stood as the ‘magical 
center of the empire’ (1956[1942], 3). Later, Tambiah utilised the notion of mandala, a 
composition of two elements, core and container, to describe such a ‘galactic polity’, a 
socio-spatial configuration visible in temples such as Borobudur on Java (1976, 102). 
Similarly, Geertz argues that the nineteenth century Balinese state was a ‘theatre state’, in 
which the king and court stood as the ‘exemplary center’ (1980, 11-18). Woodward, 
writing on the palace (keraton) of Yogyakarta, argues that despite the political upheavals 
of the Indonesian state, notions of ‘Javanese-Islamic sacred geography’ continue to shape 
the potency of the palace as the centre of spiritual purity (2003, 227). 
 
However, as Wolters stresses, mandalas and galactic polities were ‘a phenomenon of the 
lowlands’ (1999, 39), even if some aspects of their influence may have reached to upland 
peoples. Away from these exemplary centres, Southeast Asian peoples held vernacular 
understandings, not of cosmologically-significant ‘sacred geography’, but of the spirit or 
‘soul-stuff’ animating living things (Reid 1988, 6), as well as the spiritual potency of 

--- PAGE: 8 ---
 7
mountains, caves, forests, trees, graves and rivers. Such understandings are described in 
the literature as distinct from, or else in tension with, the world religions, and are 
therefore conceptualised, variously, as ‘animism’ (Skeat 1900), ‘supernaturalism’ (Spiro 
1967), ‘spirit cults’ (Tambiah 1970) or as part of an ‘indigenous religious system’ 
(Benjamin 1979). For example, Skeat described the folk religion of the Malays, as 
distinct from orthodox Islam, as a ‘natural religion’ in which most natural things were 
thought to possess souls, and such distinctive places as oddly-shaped rocks or very large 
trees were thought to be sacred or kramat (1900, 71). Later, building on Skeat’s work, 
Benjamin argued that in the Malay system of animism ‘almost everything in the 
environment that note is taken of has the power to concentrate essence in itself’ (1979, 
11). 
  
Both older and more recent ethnographies provide details on specific places associated 
with spirit beings and forces in island Southeast Asia.5 One common location of such 
potent forces is, most generally, the forest or, more precisely, particular species of tree. In 
nineteenth and twentieth century Java, Ficus tree species were considered sacred, and had 
their own legends of origin (Boomgaard 1995, 53). According to Boomgaard, not only 
did the Javanese think spirit-inhabited trees should be approached with care, they also 
acknowledged entire forest areas that were angker or ‘taboo’, with mortal consequences 
for those humans who ignored such taboos (1995, 55). Similarly, the Ranau Dusun of 
Sabah thought that a particular class of prankster spirits (called ‘Miyons’) inhabited trees 
of the Ficus species, and saw the forest as ‘an almost cosmic entity’ because of its many 
potent energies and spiritual dangers (Harrison 1979, 61, 70). Dix Grimes describes how 
spirits of the jungle are analogous to ‘taboo people’ in Buru cosmology, and consequently 
many practices are taboo in the jungle (1997, 129). Among the Huaulu of Seram, ‘occult 
powers’ fundamentally ‘belong to the forest’, and though they desire to enter human 
villages, are fearful of doing so unless there are wild trees in which they can hide (Valeri 
2000, 23-26).  In this issue, the spiritual potency of trees is stressed by Kari Telle, whose 
paper vividly describes the collapse of a ‘sentient’ tree in the middle of a Sasak 
graveyard, and ensuing worries over the correct ritual response. 
 

--- PAGE: 9 ---
 8
Clear distinctions do not always seem to be drawn in Southeast Asian societies between 
the realms of forest and mountain as spirit domains. For example, the Gumai of South 
Sumatra see the different ‘spheres’ of the world, including a combined sphere of 
mountain/ forest, as ‘controlled by invisible supernatural spirits’ (Sakai 1997, 45). In the 
Karo highlands of Sumatra, keramat refers to ‘powerful and benevolent’ spirits, 
associated in particular with Mount Sibayak, sometimes conceived as nature spirits, 
sometimes as humans metamorphosed into spirits, and sometimes as ‘supernatural sites’ 
themselves (Steedly 1993, 119). In the past, other, more dangerous and mischievous 
spirits were also associated with the mountain’s trees, rocks and streams. Steedly notes 
that ‘entering this spirit-filled world called for a certain fortitude’, and so travellers would 
leave small offerings for the spirits at places along mountain passes (1993, 122). 
Similarly, in the Philippines, Mount Apo is thought to be the abode of mountain spirits 
and to possess an everyday (though increasingly contested) sacredness (Alejo 2000). The 
contested potency of mountains, and their changing spiritual significance, is a central 
theme of both Howell’s and Amster’s papers in this issue. 
 
Spirits have also frequently been described as associated with bodies of water, including 
lakes, rivers and the sea, an association described for the Manggarai of west Flores by 
Allerton in this issue. Such water-spirits may be conceptually fused with other place-
spirits, as in Endicott’s account of Malay animism, which makes no clear distinction 
between jungle spirits and spirits of water (1970, 106). Forth argues that among the Nage 
of central Flores, free spirits known as nitu may be described as the ‘owners of trees and 
stones’, but are pre-eminently associated with bodies of water including, in coastal areas, 
the sea (1998, 65-6). Writing of the island of Luang in the Banda Sea, Pannell notes that 
humans do not have the right to ‘access and use the products of the sea with total 
freedom’, since the right to use a sea product is ‘mediated’ by the relationship between 
the user and a ‘powerful being’ who lives in the sea (2007, 86). Similarly, Spyer has 
described how male divers in the Aru islands speak of (frequently erotic) encounters with 
undersea spirit women, or ‘sea wives’, who demand sacrifices from these divers in return 
for a supply of pearl oysters (2000, 144-6). 
 

--- PAGE: 10 ---
 9
Throughout the region, spirits of forests, mountains and rivers may be contrasted with a 
more general category of spirit known as the ‘owners’ or ‘masters’ of the land or earth. 
Hicks describes such a class of spirits for the Tetum of Timor: the ‘lords of the earth’ 
who own such places as bamboo groves, old trees or lakes (1976, 25). Among the Buid of 
Mindoro, the ‘spirits of the earth’ are those to whom the land ‘belongs’, and whom 
humans must be careful not to offend, whether through the violation of agricultural 
taboos or even the quarrelling of spouses (Gibson 1986, 38, 48, 174). If they remain 
unoffended, such spirits provide the Buid with a ‘general and diffuse sort of protection’ 
(Gibson 1986, 173). These kinds of ‘spirits of the earth’ may be one form taken by the 
phenomenon of ‘founders’ cults’, described by Tannenbaum and Kammerer as ‘part of 
the Southeast Asian matrix of cultural possibilities that reflects widespread beliefs in 
spirit ownership of territory and control of fertility and prosperity’ (2003, 8). Lehman, in 
the same volume, argues that in mainland Southeast Asia ‘the original and ultimate 
owners having dominion over the face of the land are spirit lords commonly associated 
with more or less prominent features of the landscape’ (2003b, 16). Though Lehman and 
the other authors in this volume (Tannenbaum and Kammerer 2003) are most concerned 
with the changing political implications of claims to relationships with such spirits, in this 
special edition we seek to emphasise the contestation that may occur over the landscape 
itself. 
 
Ancestors are clearly a significant presence in many Southeast Asian landscapes, and are 
often associated with mountains (Wolters 1999, 19), or are thought to have come from 
the sea (Boomgaard 2007, 5). Lehman argues against the ‘error’ on the part of the analyst 
of conflating founders’ cults with cults of the ancestors (2003b, 33), but there are clearly 
many ethnographic examples where ancestral spirits are intertwined with other categories 
of land or earth spirit (see both Allerton and Bovensiepen, this issue). Such intertwining 
seems to be more common in societies, such as the Manggarai and Nage, where the 
category of ‘ancestor’ embraces both early, founding ancestors and more recently-
deceased ‘mundane’ forebears (Forth 1998, 243). By contrast, Wolters argued that in 
many Southeast Asian societies, ancestor status ‘had to be earned’, and was not 
automatically granted to ‘mere forebears’ (1999, 19). When ancestral status is only 

--- PAGE: 11 ---
 10
granted to a potent few, the spiritual landscape may be one punctuated by powerful sites 
including individual graves and shrines. Woodward stresses that power in Java, thought 
of as an animating ‘physical substance’, is particularly concentrated at holy (and 
especially royal) graves and shrines (1989, 166). Visiting such graves is therefore not, as 
Geertz had argued, a form of ‘ancestor worship’ (1960, 76), but a way of personally 
accessing such potency. 
 
The Christian-influenced notions of ‘sacred sites’ and ‘ancestor worship’ suggest an 
attitude of reverence and contemplation towards a landscape of ancestral and other 
spirits. By contrast, reading ethnographic accounts, it becomes clear that Southeast Asian 
landscapes of spirits and energies are acknowledged and dealt with pragmatically through 
both everyday and ritual actions. Endicott noted that, because Malay earth spirits resided 
directly under villages and fields, people constantly took them into consideration when 
planting crops, digging the ground or even performing plays (1970, 106). Cannell 
describes how Bicolanos acknowledge the ‘unseen geography’ of their area through short 
greetings addressed to the spirits, or particular forms of avoidance behaviour (1999, 85). 
Dix Grimes argues that Buru spirits of the jungle are like a kind of ‘taboo people’, and 
there are many things that humans cannot do in their (unseen) presence (1997, 128-9). In 
some Southeast Asian societies, the existence of hidden forces in the landscape may not 
necessitate any special rituals, but may nonetheless be feared for the communicative acts 
that such forces transmit. Thus, among the Ranau Dusun of Sabah, the presence of spirits 
in the landscape was thought to be signalled by ‘one of a host of possible omens’ 
requiring uncertain interpretation, including bird omens, rainbows and snakes (Harrison 
1979, 60). In this issue, a key comparative concern is the extent to which a pragmatic, 
and occasionally fearful, attitude towards the landscape may have been replaced by one 
of greater reverence and contemplation. 
 
Landscape, Religion and Agency 
 
In their concern with reading signs and omens, their ritual efforts to placate the spirits, 
and their everyday acknowledgements of the influences of an unseen realm, many 

--- PAGE: 12 ---
 11
Southeast Asian peoples accord a kind of agency to the spiritual landscape. That is, they 
see it as having the power to act in the world. In several of the contributions to this issue, 
we also see such an attribution of agency, for example in Telle’s argument that the Sasak 
see their landscape as possessing ‘a sort of wilful presence’. Comparative ethnography 
shows that approaching the landscape as an animate realm in-and-of-itself is not confined 
to Southeast Asian societies. For example, Harvey argues that for many Andean people 
‘the landscape self-evidently has agency (intentionality and capacity for autonomous 
action) and must be actively engaged if that agency is to be directed favourably towards 
human endeavour’ (2001, 198). Povinelli (1995) engages with the agency accorded to 
Australian Aboriginal landscapes by showing how the sweat and speech produced by 
human labour in turn affect the productivity of the land. Echoing Povinelli’s attention to 
whether rocks might smell or listen, Cruikshank’s work on the intersection of nature and 
culture in the Yukon and Alaska asks ‘Do glaciers listen?’ (2005). 
 
For Guthrie (1993), viewing landscapes, rocks or glaciers as agents is part of a common 
evolutionary strategy by which humans are inherently biased to see the world as social. 
His ‘new theory of religion’ claims that religion ‘may best be understood as systematic 
anthropomorphism: the attribution of human characteristics to nonhuman things or 
events’ (1993, 3). Such anthropomorphism is, according to Guthrie, a ‘good bet’ since, in 
an uncertain and ambiguous world, it makes sense to assume that things are alive until 
proved otherwise (1993, 3). Guthrie views animism as a form of such thinking, an 
unconscious inclination of all people to ‘see nonliving things and events as alive’ (1993, 
39). Ultimately, though, such animistic interpretations are for Guthrie ‘the failures of a 
generally good strategy’, since the things and events to which such interpretations 
attribute life are, ‘in hindsight’, discovered to be inanimate (1993, 6). However, not only 
does Guthrie assume an a priori distinction between (interior) mind and (exterior) 
environment6, but his characterisation of animism as an overextended cognitive strategy 
makes it hard to explain why people might hold onto such ‘failed’ interpretations, even in 
the face of apparently more ‘scientific’ arguments. To put it another way: Guthrie’s 
theory seems unable to explain why, despite missionary critiques of ‘praying to wood and 

--- PAGE: 13 ---
 12
stone’, a Manggarai villager might continue to insist that the land can hear and does have 
an appetite (see Allerton, this issue). 
 
By contrast with Guthrie’s approach, I would like to suggest that we take more seriously 
the (implicit or explicit) claims of our informants that the landscape has agency. To do 
so, one does not have to ‘believe’ that rocks can smell or that glaciers can listen. Instead, 
one needs to be alert to the ways in which places, as particular kinds of things, have ‘real 
material and ideological effects on persons and social relations’ (Tilley 2004, 222). This 
kind of position—that agency may have multiple locations beyond ‘biologically discrete 
individuals’ (Keane 1997, 7)—is emerging from an eclectic body of work on science, art 
objects and materiality (Latour 1993; Gell 1998; Tilley 2004; Miller 2005). Since a more 
thorough consideration of this work is beyond the scope of this Introduction, there are 
two aspects that I want to point to as suggestive. Firstly, contrary to the criticism that the 
term implies some kind of ‘magical mind-dust’ (Ingold 2007, 11), ‘agency’ refers not to 
will or intention but simply to ‘doing’ (Giddens 1984, 10), to exerting power or 
producing an effect. Moreover, agency might sometimes be distributed across ‘networks’, 
the ‘mixes of artefact and idea and person which make up life’ (Strathern 1999, 120), and 
of which landscapes—as I utilise the term in this Introduction—are clearly one form. 
Latour (2000) gives the example of the ‘Berliner key’, a particular kind of key that 
obliges a resident to lock the door behind them when entering a building, thus enforcing 
tight social controls on entry and exit. He argues that the Berliner key is not a mere 
reflection of a social ideal, but actively develops and shapes such ideals. Similarly, Carl 
Knappett argues that speed bumps or ‘sleeping policemen’ (the term is apt) are ‘agents/ 
objects designed to force drivers to conform to a moral code’ (2002, 99). For Knappett, 
these examples demonstrate that agency is ‘widely distributed’ across an environment, 
and inheres in ‘the relationships between the various entities that constitute a field of 
action’ (2002, 100). 
 
The second point to highlight is the way in which the new materiality studies emphasise 
that people can not ‘think about or react to the material world in pretty much any way 
they like’ (Tilley 2007, 19). This is particularly relevant to a consideration of landscapes 

--- PAGE: 14 ---
 13
since, following Gibson (1979), a number of authors have stressed that humans perceive 
the environment in terms of what it offers, in terms of its ‘affordances’ (Ingold 1992, 42-
44; Bird-David 1999, 74). As Telle’s paper in this issue makes clear, a place such as a 
large and old tree can not carry any possible meaning, but affords people certain kinds of 
practices and ideas. Similarly, it seems to be no coincidence that mountains are so often 
conceptualised as sources of spiritual potency, or as sites for new religious identities (see 
Howell and Amster, this issue). Indeed, Tilley argues that we may translate the term 
‘agency’ as meaning ‘providing affordances and constraints for thought and action’ 
(2007, 19). 
 
Having suggested that we may wish to approach places and landscapes as agents, I want 
to return to issues of (ongoing) religious conversion. Questions of agency are not simply 
matters for academic debate. In encounters with Christian missionaries or Islamic 
modernizers, as well as in their increased personal adherence to world religions, people 
often experience a radical clash between different understandings of the location of 
agency. Webb Keane’s recent work (2007) on semiotics and materiality sheds light on the 
processes behind, and the reasons for, such clashes of understanding. Keane is concerned 
with the ways in which the question ‘What beings have agency?’ drove the troubled 
classification of words, things and subjects in the encounter between missionaries and 
followers of ancestral ritual on Sumba. He outlines the concept of ‘semiotic ideology’ as 
a means of elucidating historically-specific, morally-loaded projects of ‘purification’ that 
involve sorting out the ‘proper relations among, and boundaries between, words, things, 
and subjects’ (Keane 2007, 4). The term ‘purification’ is borrowed from Latour, for 
whom it references the constant (and for Latour deluded) efforts of ‘moderns’ to separate 
out humans from non-humans, even as ‘hybrids of nature and culture’ proliferate all 
around (1993, 10). Whilst noting the ‘puzzles’ and over-generalisations of Latour’s 
theory, Keane nevertheless draws from it the important question of why people may be 
led to purify (Keane 2007, 7). Keane shows how the mission encounter on Sumba 
involved a historical clash between the semiotic ideology of Dutch Calvinism, which saw 
speech and materially as utterly distinct, and that of ancestral ritualists, for whom words 
and things were not so radically discrete. In this issue, the tension between various 

--- PAGE: 15 ---
 14
projects of landscape ‘purification’, and more holistic understandings of the multiple 
networks and locations of agency, is an important theme of all the papers. 
 
However, whilst concerns to ‘purify’ place may be seen as much in Muslim as in 
Protestant contexts, the clash of semiotic ideologies that Keane outlines is by no means 
inevitable in the context of ongoing religious conversion. If, like Austin-Broos, we see 
conversion as ‘continuing and practiced’ (2003, 9), constituted not by a singular 
experience but by a passage through social experience, then we can acknowledge that 
conversion may slowly and gradually involve new forms of relatedness with the 
environment. Ongoing conversion may lead not to purification, but to the creation of 
syncretic landscapes (see Bovensiepen, this issue), or to a refusal of religious synthesis 
and an explicit attempt to maintain the boundaries between religion and local places 
(Allerton, this issue). However, it is also possible that conversion may not lead to heated 
exchanges on the existence of spirit-places; rather, and possibly more damningly, 
conversion may involve spirits being ‘merely ignored’ (Lohmann 2003b 109; cf. Amster, 
this issue). This suggests that the passage of conversion may lead to what Weiner terms 
‘topothanatia’, the ‘death, withdrawal, effacement or covering over of places’ (2001, 
234). 
 
Spiritual Landscapes and their Transformations 
 
It is clear that despite the many social, economic, political and ecological changes in 
Southeast Asia over recent decades, landscape and place remain imbued with 
considerable potency. Let us consider three striking, recent examples. Firstly, 
Abdurrahman Wahid, Indonesia’s first democratically elected President, was frequently 
to be found praying at the tombs of Javanese Islamic leaders, before returning to Jakarta 
full of renewed political resolve (Chambert-Loir and Reid 2002, xv). Secondly, around 
the notorious Freeport mine in West Papua, the Amungme people continue to assert their 
primordial link with the landscape through their knowledge of its names, despite the 
landscape’s destruction and the violence symbolised by army graffiti on rocks (Ballard 
2002). Finally, during the 2002 construction of the KL (Kuala Lumpur) Monorail, a 

--- PAGE: 16 ---
 15
unexplained accident in which a wheel fell onto a journalist’s head was widely 
interpreted as caused by a local ghost or god associated with a Hindu temple (Baxstrom 
2008, 194-7). In very different ways, the violently-dispossessed Amungme, the urban 
residents of a Southeast Asian metropolis, and President Wahid all acknowledge the 
unseen power of the landscape. 
 
In this volume, we are particularly interested in the influence of new religious forms and 
practices on different spiritual landscapes. Previous ethnographic work, whilst it does not 
explicitly address the issue of landscape formation, is nevertheless suggestive of the 
influence of the world religions on conceptions of spirits and spirit-places. Cannell, for 
example, describes how Catholicism heightened the ambivalence people in Bicol felt 
towards the tawo spirits, but argues that this ambivalence actually predated the Spanish 
invasion of the lowland Philippines (1999, 126-7). Her ethnography provides nuanced 
evidence of how Catholic Bicolanos try to work out the ‘relative legitimacy’ (Cannell 
1999, 229) of dealings with the unseen spirit realm. Aragon has described what could be 
called a form of purification policing among the Tobaku of Sulawesi, where Salvation 
Army officers attempt to be present at all community ceremonies, including agricultural 
rituals in fields, in order to ensure that ‘ritual protocols meet church specifications’ 
(2000, 236). Bowen’s work on Gayo ritual shows the range of attitudes towards spirits 
that may be held within one Muslim community. He describes how a category of 
powerful spirits known as aulië are seen by the ‘modernist-leaning minority’ as 
exemplary, saintly beings, but by other villagers as ‘mediators between humans and the 
environment’ (Bowen 1993, 198-9). 
 
Of course, pre-conversion understandings of spiritual landscapes were never static, and 
we must beware of portraying them as such in our analyses. Steedly’s account of Karo 
spirits is particularly sensitive to this issue, arguing against the ‘erasure of social-political 
context’, in which historical accounts of spirits are detached from the surrounding social 
experience of, in the Karo case, banditry, colonialism and missionisation (1993, 131). 
Similarly, whilst acknowledging the impact of religious change on spiritual landscapes, 
the papers in this issue also pay attention to significant political, economic and social 

--- PAGE: 17 ---
 16
factors. One such factor is migration, which Amster shows has profoundly shaped, in 
specifically gendered ways, Kelabit experiences of the landscape. In Bovensiepen’s 
paper, she stresses the significance of the resettlement of Funar villagers during the 
Indonesian occupation of East Timor. Since 1999, these villagers have been returning to 
Funar, but they experience considerable anxiety that their previous enforced absence has 
disturbed reciprocal relations with the landscape. In my paper on the Manggarai of 
Flores, I also outline the challenges posed by a more peaceful, state-sponsored 
resettlement, and the ways in which new ritual forms engage with the spiritual aspects of 
a ‘developed’ landscape.  
 
At the beginning of this Introduction, drawing on Ingold’s (2000) work, I stressed that 
those who inhabit a landscape do not confront it as a setting or container ‘out there’, but 
discover its meaning through practical activity and movements. I also emphasised that an 
understanding of the landscape as a lived world needed to be separated from a 
perspective on landscape as a ‘way of seeing’. However, both Amster’s account of 
Kelabit migration and Howell’s focus on town-dwelling members of a ‘mountain 
church’, alert us to the possibility that, as people move to urban centres, they may begin 
to adopt a more detached perspective on the rural landscapes with which they no longer 
daily engage. As a landscape becomes a kind of ‘homeland’ to which people 
intermittently return, so it becomes more possible for it to serve as a representation of an 
ethnic or other identity. By contrast, the papers by Allerton, Bovensiepen and Telle all 
deal with rural communities who cannot adopt such an exterior perspective, since their 
landscapes are the environments in which they continue to fetch water, build their homes, 
plant their crops and bury their dead. This alerts us not only to the links between 
environmental perception and ways of making a living, but also suggests the different 
spatial and temporal scales on which people’s landscapes operate (Bender 1993, 2). 
 
As mentioned, a key theme of this issue is the extent to which world religions necessitate 
a ‘purification’ of the landscape, a separation of what may be seen as properly-human 
agency from material places. In Howell’s paper on the Protestant ‘mountain churches’ of 
northern Luzon, the project of purification seems to have been entirely successful, since 

--- PAGE: 18 ---
 17
agency has been ‘firmly differentiated’ from the materiality of the environment. 
Similarly, Amster argues that Kelabit conversion to Christianity has helped to ‘unhinge’ 
spiritual concerns from a landscape previously teeming with spirits and other entities. By 
contrast, in both Bovensiepen’s paper on East Timor, and Allerton’s paper on the 
Manggarai, notions of spirits and energies remain embedded in the landscape, in large 
part because they have not been explicitly targeted by Catholic priests, who assign such 
notions to a non-religious category of ‘culture’ or ‘custom’. However, there are still 
important differences between these two Catholic examples. Whilst, in Funar, the Church 
(particularly in the form of the Virgin Mary) is conceptualised as a similar kind of force 
to the potency of the land, in Manggarai a stricter separation is drawn between what 
concerns ‘custom’ and what concerns ‘religion’. Here, crosses are merely signs of 
blessing and protection, but cannot contribute to the potent energy of the land. At first 
sight, Telle’s account of Islamic attitudes towards the Sasak landscape suggests a project 
of purification as successful as those in the Protestant cases described by Howell and 
Amster. However, Telle argues that whilst the Sasak may have abandoned older ritual 
practices, they have not abandoned the conception of an animated, sentient landscape, 
and still pay much attention to its ‘signs’. 
 
Despite the successful removal of spirit notions and essences from the landscape, in both 
the mountain churches of northern Luzon, and among the Kelabit, we see an intriguing 
attempt at ‘re-enchantment’ of a now Christian landscape. Thus, Howell describes how 
the mountain landscape of northern Luzon has been ‘re-imagined’ in Christian terms. The 
mountains are no longer seen as having agency, but they do have spiritual significance as 
an ethnic homeland and as a ‘gift from God’. Similarly, Amster argues that Kelabit 
conversion has led to a ‘resacralization’ of local place, particularly in the transformation 
of Mount Murud from a place of primordial spirits to a multi-ethnic pilgrimage site. In 
both of these cases, ‘re-enchantment’ seems to take place partly through a conscious 
approach to the landscape as an object, whether of ethnic attachment or a gift. Perhaps 
the most extreme example of such objectification is Telle’s description of a prayer house 
constructed from the timber of a fallen graveyard tree, a ‘sentient’, living aspect of the 
landscape transformed into a merit-making object. However, Telle’s example, with its 

--- PAGE: 19 ---
 18
stress on the continuity of perceptions of the landscape despite ritual shifts, suggests that 
in this case there are still limits to a fully ‘Muslim landscape’. 
 
Finally, a further common theme explored by the papers is the relative weight given to 
the positive or beneficial versus the negative or harmful aspects of the landscape. 
Bovensiepen describes how, following the end of the Indonesian occupation, the people 
of Funar returned to their village. In doing so, they stressed the health, wealth and well-
being to be gained by living on ancestral land. However, Bovensiepen notes that they also 
say that lulik, or the energy of the land, is dangerous, especially outside of inhabited 
settlements, and in doing so translate such negative spiritual aspects as ‘devils’. Amster 
stresses how, prior to conversion, Kelabit had to continually read the signs and omens of 
the landscape, attributed danger to key sites, and were prohibited from visiting others. In 
many respects, giving up this attitude to the landscape in the course of conversion has 
allowed Kelabit individuals to move freely both within and beyond their surrounding 
environment. Whilst Amster stresses the ‘portable potency’ that Christianity affords, 
Allerton’s paper outlines shifting perceptions of the mobility of ancestral spirits, who are 
being called from the highlands to ensure the fertility of a lowland, state-funded wet-rice 
project. However, in the Manggarai context, a contrast is also drawn between the 
beneficial and harmful aspects of the landscape, and Catholic symbols and objects are 
increasingly utilised to protect against the latter. 
 
As Southeast Asia’s population continues to migrate to work elsewhere in or beyond the 
region, as people continue to move from rural to urban areas, and as the environment is 
increasingly utilised for mining projects or the planting of palm-oil plantations, people’s 
spiritual entanglements with the landscape will continue to change and develop. 
Connections to the land, to its mountains, trees and rivers, can be used as a focus for 
exploring people’s sense of continuity and discontinuity in the face of change. In the 
papers that follow, we see evidence, both historical and contemporary, of the distinctive 
Southeast Asian spiritual landscapes I outlined at the beginning of this Introduction. 
However, we also see evidence, both radical and subtle, of shifts in understandings of 
those landscapes, and of growing contestation over their meaning. 

--- PAGE: 20 ---
 19
 
References 
 
Alejo, A. 2000. Generating energies in Mount Apo: Cultural politics in a contested 
environment. Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press. 
Allerton, C. Forthcoming. Visible relations and invisible realms: speech, materiality and 
two Manggarai landscapes. In Landscapes beyond land: Routes, aesthetics, narratives, 
edited by A. Arnason, N. Ellison, J. Vergunst and A. Whitehouse. Oxford: Berghahn. 
Ammayao, A. with G. Hettel. 2003. Let’s hope the bile is good. In The art of rice: Spirit 
and sustenance in Asia, edited by R. W. Hamilton, 450-567. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Aragon, L. V. 2000. Fields of the lord: Animism, Christian minorities, and state 
development in Indonesia. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Aragon, L. V. 2003. Missions and omissions of the supernatural: Indigenous cosmologies 
and the legitimisation of ‘religion’ in Indonesia. Anthropological Forum 13 (2): 131-140. 
Askew, M. 2003. Transformations and continuities: Sacralization, place and memory in 
contemporary Bangkok. In Sacred places and modern landscapes: Sacred geography and 
social-religious transformations in South and Southeast Asia, edited by R. Lukens-Bull, 
61-107. Tempe, Arizona: Program for Southeast Asian Studies Monograph Series, 
Arizona State University. 
Austin-Broos, D. 2003. The anthropology of conversion: An introduction. In The 
anthropology of religious conversion, edited by A. Buckser and S. D. Glazier, 1-12. 
Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield. 
Ballard, C. 2002. The signature of terror: Violence, memory and landscape at Freeport. In 
Inscribed landscapes: Marking and making place, edited by B. David and M. Wilson, 13-
26. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Basso, K. 1996. Wisdom sits in places: Landscape and language among the Western 
Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 
Baxstrom, R. 2008. Houses in motion: The experience of place and the problem of belief 
in urban Malaysia. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Bender, B. (ed) 1993. Landscape: politics and perspectives. Oxford: Berg. 

--- PAGE: 21 ---
 20
Bender, B. 2001. Introduction. In Contested landscapes: movement, exile and place, 
edited by B. Bender and M. Winer, 1-18. Oxford: Berg. 
Benjamin, G. 1979. Indigenous religious systems of the Malay peninsula. In The 
imagination of reality: Essays in Southeast Asian coherence systems, edited by A.L. 
Becker and A. A. Yengoyan, 9-27. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 
Bird-David, N. 1999. ‘Animism’ revisited: Personhood, environment and relational 
epistemology. Current Anthropology 40 (Supplement): S67-S91. 
Boomgaard, P. 1995. Sacred trees and haunted forests in Indonesia particularly Java, 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In Asian perceptions of nature: A critical approach, 
edited by O. Bruun and A. Kalland, 47-62. Richmond: Curzon Press. 
Boomgaard, P. (ed) 2007. A world of water: rain, rivers and seas in Southeast Asian 
histories. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
Bowen, J. 1993. Muslims through discourse: Religion and ritual in Gayo society. 
Princeton University Press. 
Cannell, F. 1999. Power and intimacy in the Christian Philippines. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cannell, F. 2006. Introduction: The anthropology of Christianity. In The anthropology of 
Christianity, edited by F. Cannell, 1-50. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Chambert-Loir, H. and Reid, A. 2002. Introduction. In The potent dead: ancestors, saints 
and heroes in contemporary Indonesia, edited by H. Chambert-Loir and A. Reid, xv-
xxvi. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Cosgrove, D. and S. Daniels. 1988. The iconography of landscape. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cruikshank, J. 2005. Do glaciers listen? Local knowledge, colonial encounters, and 
social imagination. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. 
Dix Grimes, B. 1997. Knowing your place: Representing relations of precedence and 
origin on the Buru landscape. In The poetic power of place: Comparative perspectives on 
Austronesian ideas of locality, edited by J. J. Fox, 116-131 Canberra: The Australian 
National University. 
Durkheim, E. and M. Mauss. 1963 [1903]. Primitive classification, edited by Rodney 
Needham. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

--- PAGE: 22 ---
 21
Endicott, K. M. 1970. An analysis of Malay magic. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Forth, G. 1998. Beneath the volcano: Religion, cosmology and spirit classification among 
the Nage of eastern Indonesia. Leiden: KITLV Press. 
Geertz, C. 1960. The religion of Java. Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press. 
Geertz, C. 1980. Negara: The theatre state in nineteenth-century Bali. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Gell, A. 1998. Art and agency: An anthropological theory. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Gibson, J. J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton 
Mifflin. 
Gibson, T. 1986. Sacrifice and sharing in the Philippine highlands: Religion and society 
among the Buid of Mindoro. London: Athlone Press. 
Giddens, A. 1984. The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration. 
Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Gow, P. 1995. Land, people and paper in Western Amazonia. In The anthropology of 
landscape: Perspectives on place and space, edited by E. Hirsch and M. O’Hanlon, 43-
62. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Guthrie, S. E. 1993. Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Harrison, R. 1979. Where have all the rituals gone? Ritual presence among the Ranau 
Dusun of Sabah, Malaysia. In The imagination of reality: Essays in Southeast Asian 
coherence systems, edited by A. L. Becker and A. A. Yengoyan, 55-83. Norwood, New 
Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 
Harvey, P. 2001. Landscape and commerce: creating contexts for the exercise of power. 
In Contested landscapes: movement, exile and place, edited by B. Bender and M. Winer, 
197-210. Oxford: Berg. 
Heine-Geldern, R. 1956 [1942]. Conceptions of state and kingship in Southeast Asia. 
Data paper number 18. Southeast Asia Program, Department of Asian Studies, Cornell 
University. 
Hicks, D. 1976. Tetum ghosts and kin: Fieldwork in an Indonesian community. Palo Alto, 
California: Mayfield Publishing Company. 

--- PAGE: 23 ---
 22
Ingold, T. 1992. Culture and the perception of the environment. In Bush base: forest 
farm. Culture, environment and development, edited by E. Croll and D. Parkin, 39-56. 
London: Routledge. 
Ingold. T. 2000. The perception of the environment: Essays in livelihood, dwelling and 
skill. London: Routledge. 
Ingold, T. 2007. Materials against materiality. Discussion article. Archaeological 
Dialogues 14(1): 1-16. 
Jackson, J. B. 1997. Landscape in sight: Looking at America. Edited by H. Lefkowitz 
Horowitz. New Haven and London: Yale University press. 
Keane, W. 1997. Signs of recognition: Power and hazards of representation in an 
Indonesian society. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Keane, W. 2007. Christian moderns: Freedom and fetish in the mission encounter. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Knappett, C. 2002. Photographs, skeuomorphs and marionettes: some thoughts on mind, 
agency and object. Journal of Material Culture 7(1): 97-117. 
Lambek, M. 1996. Afterword: Spirits and their histories. In Spirits in culture, history and 
mind, edited by J. M. Mageo and A. Howard, 237-249. London: Routledge. 
Latour, B. 1993. We have never been modern. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press. 
Latour, B. 2000. The Berlin key or how to do words with things. In Matter, Materiality 
and Modern Culture, edited by P. Graves-Brown, 10-21. London: Routledge.  
Leach, J. 2003. Creative land: place and procreation on the Rai coast of Papua New 
Guinea. Oxford: Berghahn. 
Lehman, F. K. 2003a. The concept of ‘sacred geography’: Its origin and scope. In Sacred 
places and modern landscapes: Sacred geography and social-religious transformations 
in South and Southeast Asia, edited by R. Lukens-Bull, xv-xxx. Tempe, Arizona: 
Program for Southeast Asian Studies Monograph Series, Arizona State University. 
Lehman, F. K. 2003b. The relevance of the founders’ cult for understanding the political 
systems of the peoples of northern Southeast Asia and its Chinese borderlands. In 
Founders’ cults in Southeast Asia: Ancestors, polity and identity, edited by N. 

--- PAGE: 24 ---
 23
Tannenbaum and C. A. Kammerer, 15-39. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asia 
Studies. 
Lemaire, T. 1997. Archaeology between the invention and the destruction of landscape. 
Archaeological Dialogues 4 (1): 5-38. 
Lohmann, R. I. 2003a. The supernatural is everywhere: defining qualities of religion in 
Melanesia and beyond. Special issue, ‘Perspectives on the category “supernatural”’, 
Anthropological Forum 13 (2): 175-195. 
Lohmann, R. I. 2003b. Turning the belly: Insights on religious conversion from New 
Guinea gut feelings. In The anthropology of religious conversion, edited by A. Buckser 
and S. D. Glazier, 109-121. Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield. 
Lukens-Bull, R. (ed) 2003. Sacred places and modern landscapes: Sacred geography and 
social-religious transformations in South and Southeast Asia. Tempe, Arizona: Program 
for Southeast Asian Studies Monograph Series, Arizona State University. 
Meinig, D.W. 1971. Reading the landscape: An appreciation of W.G. Hoskins and J.B. 
Jackson. In The interpretation of ordinary landscapes: Geographical essays, edited by D. 
W. Meinig, 195-244. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Merlan, F. 1998.Caging the rainbow: Places, politics and Aborigines in a north 
Australian town. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Miller, D. (ed) 2005. Materiality. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Munn, N. D. 1996. Excluded spaces: The figure in the Australian Aboriginal landscape. 
Critical Inquiry 22(3): 446-465. 
Myers, F. R. 1986. Pintupi country, Pintupi self: sentiment, place and politics among 
Western Desert Aborigines. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Pannell, S. 2007. Of gods and monsters: Indigenous sea cosmologies, promiscuous 
geographies and the depths of local sovereignty. In A world of water: Rain, rivers, and 
seas in Southeast Asian histories, edited by P. Boomgaard, 71-102. Leiden: KITLV 
Press. 
Povinelli, E. 1995. Do rocks listen? The cultural politics of apprehending Australian 
Aboriginal labor. American Anthropologist 97(3): 505-518. 
Reid, A. 1988. Southeast Asia in the age of commerce, 1450-1680. Vol 1: The lands 
below the winds. London: Yale University Press. 

--- PAGE: 25 ---
 24
Sakai, M. 1997. Remembering origins: Ancestors and places in the Gumai society of 
South Sumatra. In The poetic power of place: Comparative perspectives on Austronesian 
ideas of locality, edited by J. J. Fox, 42-62. Canberra: The Australian National 
University. 
Skeat, W. W. 1900. Malay magic: An introduction to the folklore and popular religion of 
the Malay peninsula. London: Macmillan. 
Spiro, M. E. 1967. Burmese supernaturalism: A study in the explanation and reduction of 
suffering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Spyer, P. 2000. The memory of trade: Modernity’s entanglements on an eastern 
Indonesian island. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Steedly, M. M. 1993. Hanging without a rope: Narrative experience in colonial and 
postcolonial Karoland. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Strathern, M. 1999. Property, Substance and Effect: Anthropological Essays on Persons 
and Things. London: Athlone Press.  
Tambiah, S. J. 1970. Buddhism and the spirit cults in North-East Thailand. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Tambiah, S. J. 1976. World conqueror and world renouncer: A study of Buddhism and 
polity in Thailand against a historical background. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Tannenbaum, N. and C.A. Kammerer (eds) 2003. Founders’ cults in Southeast Asia: 
Ancestors, polity and identity. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asia Studies. 
Tilley, C. 2004. The materiality of stone: Explorations in landscape phenomenology. 
Oxford: Berg. 
Tilley, C. 2007. Materiality in materials. Archaeological Dialogues 14(1): 16-20. 
Valeri, V. 2000. The forest of taboos: Morality, hunting and identity among the Huaulu 
of the Moluccas. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Weiner, J.F. 2001. Afterword. In Emplaced myth: Space, narrative and knowledge in 
Aboriginal Australia and Papua New Guinea, edited by A. Rumsey and J. Weiner, 233-
245. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Williams, R. 1985. The country and the city. London: Chatto and Windus. 

--- PAGE: 26 ---
 25
Wolters, O. W. 1999. History, culture and region in Southeast Asian perspectives. 
Revised edition. Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program Publications, Cornell University. 
Woodward, M.R. 1989. Islam in Java: Normative piety and mysticism in the sultanate of 
Yogyakarta. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Woodward, M. R. 2003. Ini masih kerajaan (This is still a kingdom): Sacred geography 
and social drama in Yogyakarta. In Sacred places and modern landscapes: Sacred 
geography and social-religious transformations in South and Southeast Asia, edited by 
R. Lukens-Bull, 227-245. Tempe, Arizona: Program for Southeast Asian Studies 
Monograph Series, Arizona State University. 
                                                 
1 This Special Edition is based on an original panel on ‘Spiritual Landscapes of Southeast 
Asia’, held at the Association of Asian Studies Annual Conference, Atlanta, April 2008. 
Funding for my attendance at the conference came from a British Academy Overseas 
Conference Grant and the London School of Economics. Mary Steedly was our 
discussant at the panel, and I would like to acknowledge the influence of her perceptive 
comments on this introduction. I am grateful to Gill Hutcherson for her editorial work on 
this issue, and to three anonymous reviewers for Anthropological Forum for their 
comments on a previous version of this Introduction. I would particularly like to thank 
the overall special edition reviewer, who will no doubt dispute my argument here, but 
whose criticisms have helped clarify my position. 
2 Since 1995, the Ifugao rice terraces have been on UNESCO’s World Heritage List as a 
protected ‘cultural landscape’. For more on how Ifugao Christian converts negotiate 
between their new religion and their ancestral rice rituals, see Ammayao (2003, 456). 
3 There is, of course, a rich and continuing tradition of work exploring the entanglements 
of kinship, morality and the ancestral landscape amongst Australian Aborigines, but for 
reasons of space and regional focus I am unable to consider it in any more detail here. 
See, in particular, Povinelli (1995), Munn (1996) and Merlan (1998). 
4 Michael Lambek has stressed how the ‘pragmatic dimension’ is always relevant to ideas 
about spirits: people are less likely to ask ‘Which of these spirits exist?’ than ‘Which of 
them has power to influence my life now?’ (1996, 247). Interestingly, Benjamin argued 

--- PAGE: 27 ---
 26
                                                                                                                                                 
that Islam did not ‘oust the spirit-cults’ in Malaysia in part because it did not explain ‘the 
ordinary peasant’s experience of daily suffering’ (1979, 24). 
5 For the purposes of meaningful comparison across only a few case-studies, the papers in 
this issue focus on the peoples of island Southeast Asia. However, there are clearly many 
comparisons to be drawn with spiritual landscapes and their transformations in mainland 
Southeast Asia, where notions of spirits are also intrinsically connected to place (see, for 
example, Spiro 1967; Tambiah 1970; Askew 2003; Tannenbaum and Kammerer 2003). 
6 By contrast with such an assumption, Knappett draws on alternative cognitive 
perspectives which stress that ‘the mind is embodied, and that the mind is extended’ 
(2002, 98). 
