--- PAGE: 1 ---
13
ORIGINAL ARTICLEBali Tourism Journal 2022; 6(1): 13-16 | doi: 10.36675/btj.v6i1.72
ABSTRACT
Kertha Gosa as Restorative Justice Hall : 
A Law Enforcement with Social Harmony Maintenance
I Komang Bayu Segara1
Legal issues have recently become a public spotlight, especially for victims involved in legal cases. To that end, the Klungkung 
District Attorney established the Restorative Justice Agency to reduce crime by holding a meeting between the victim and 
the defendant. Kertha Gosa, a historical landmark located in the middle of the city of Semarapura, has been chosen to be the 
center of the activity. The Kertha Gosa has served as a venue for trial since the glorious time of the Semarapura Kingdom. After 
the dutch invasion of Indonesia in 1908, the place continued to hold the title of hall of justice, including several functions as 
an educational institution for expatriates. According to its historical facts and values, a decision to make the Kertha Gosa site 
a restorative justice center for Klungkung regency was an excellent resolve. The Regent of Klungkung, I Nyoman Suwirta, 
appreciated the given status of the hall as the center to resolve crime acts. Furthermore, the Head of the Bali High Court, Ade T. 
Sutiawarman, expected the historical site would continue to represent law enforcement but still maintain a good relationship 
in society.
Keywords: Kertha Gosa, Law, Restorative Justice
Cite This Article:  Segara, I.K.B. 2022. Kertha Gosa as Restorative Justice Hall : A Law Enforcement with Social Harmony 
Maintenance. Bali Tourism Journal 6(1): 13-16. DOI: 10.36675/btj.v6i1.72
1Staff of Dyatmika International 
School, Bali 
Ik.bayusegara@gmail.com
Received : 16 March 2022
Accepted : 30 March 2022
Published : 1 April 2022
13
Bali Tourism Journal (BTJ) 2022, Volume 6, Number 1, January-April: 13-16
P-ISSN. 2580-913X, E-ISSN. 2580-9148
http://balitourismjournal.org
BACKGROUND 
Legal issues have recently become a 
public spotlight, especially for victims 
involved in legal cases. To that end, the 
Klungkung District Attorney established 
the Restorative Justice Agency to reduce 
crime by holding a meeting between the 
victim and the defendant. Kertha Gosa, a 
historical landmark located in the middle 
of the city of Semarapura, has been 
chosen to be the center of the activity. The 
regent of Klungkung, I Nyoman Suwirta, 
assessed the selection of Balai Kambang in 
the Kertha Gosa area as the Restorative 
Justice Hall in Klungkung Regency was 
appropriate due to the site’s historical 
value. During the Klungkung kingdom, 
the landmark served as a place for the 
Supreme King’s high court in Klungkung, 
with his subordinate kings throughout 
Bali. In some occasions, the Kertha Gosa 
hall also functioned as a dining hall 
for  Bhagawanta  (priests) and received 
foreign guests.1 
Kertha Gosa phrases comes 
from Sanskrit, consisting of two 
words, Kertha  and Gosita. Kertha means 
good, noble, safe, peaceful, happy, 
and prosperous. Meanwhile, Gosita, 
shortened into  Gosa, means summoning, 
announcing, or broadcasting. Thus, 
Kertha Gosa means a venue to declare a 
satisfactory result to achieve peace and 
prosperity. Some scholars interpreted the 
phrases as a place for the King to discuss 
a plan to achieve the kingdom’s peace, 
prosperity, security and justice. Despite 
being used as venue for trial, the site serves 
as a recreation site for the royal family. 
It represents luxury, and the kingdom’s 
monumental art. As a building that has 
functioned for court proceedings from the 
early seventeenth century to the colonial 
period, the Kertha Gosa showcases the 
various judicial process in the past. The 
prevailing information states that the 
judicial procedures and officials at the 
Colonial Period’s trial continued with the 
previous customary court procedures. 2 
Therefore, the Kertha Gosa, as a venue for 
Figure 1. the Kertha Gosa main entrance, located in center of Semarapura, the capital 
city of Klungkung Regency.3
--- PAGE: 2 ---
14
ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bali Tourism Journal 2022; 6(1): 13-16 | doi: 10.36675/btj.v6i1.72
an open trial, reflects the local wisdom 
perspective that values a fair and open 
legal system.
 
KERTHA GOSA BEFORE AND 
AFTER COLONIALISM
Based on its periodization, the Kertha 
Gosa site belongs to the New Bali 
era period. It classified as the Dutch 
colonial period 4 because the venue was 
an inheritance from the Semarapura 
kingdom (686-1908), which continued to 
function during the Dutch colonial period 
(1908 - 1942). The Kertha Gosa consists 
of several buildings: The Hall, Balai 
Kambang or Gili Park, Pemedal Agung , 
Semarajaya Museum, and court seats.5 The 
ancient building complex was presumably 
established during the reign of the first 
King of Klungkung, Dewa Agung Jambe, 
in the 17th century. Dewa Agung Jambe, is 
the 2nd son of Dalem Dimade, the last King 
of Gelgel, from The Suweca Pura kingdom. 
During the Balinese Kingdom period, 
Klungkung was a prominent kingdom and 
became the capital city. Meanwhile, the 
estimation time when the site have existed 
since 1700 AD, was based on the carving 
of Candra sangkala, above the the Kertha 
Gosa’s entrance.  Candra sangkala   is an 
inscription or image that signifies the year 
of an event. 6 Here, the inscriptions were 
images of Chakra, Yuyu (Crab), and Paksi 
– Paksi (two birds) , which signified the 
year of 1661 Saka. Some argued it was 
1622 or around 1700 AD,7 The year during 
the reign of King Dewa Agung Jambe. 
In 1908, Klungkung reached a 
massive turmoil, resulting in the Puputan 
Klungkung war. The Kertha Gosa court hall 
inherited from the Semarapura Kingdom 
(1686-1908) continued serving as a trial 
court during the Dutch colonial rule (1908-
1942). At least three venues at Semarapura 
palace, namely the Kertha Gosa hall, Bale 
Kambang with the Gili Garden pool, and 
the Semarapura building, became central 
points for the Dutch government. The 
Semarapura building was erected in the 
European architectural style  Balisering, 
at the time served as a Dutch school. 
As part of the indigenous culture and 
subsequently touched by modern colonial 
culture, elements of western culture seem 
to affect the Kertha Gosa Site. 9 Today, the 
building has been used as Museum.
Figure 2. Despite being used as venue 
for trial, the site serves as a 
recreation site for the royal 
family. It represents luxury, and 
the kingdom’s monumental 
art.8
Figure 3. The Taman Gili’s ceiling is decorated with traditional Kamasan-style 
paintings, with shadow puppet motifs. These paintings are a fine showcase of 
the technique known as the Kamasan style.12
The Kertha Gosa and Taman Gili 
buildings have rectangular bases, made 
from solid stone and brick. It is equipped 
with rising stairs, arranged on two floors. 
With a lower base characteristic that is 
wider than the second level. Its roof was 
weaved from palm fiber, with additional 
decorations of statues and reliefs 
surrounding the building. The Taman 
Gili’s ceiling is decorated with traditional 
Kamasan-style paintings, with shadow 
puppet motifs. These paintings are a fine 
showcase of the technique known as the 
Kamasan style, a village in Klungkung 
renowned for its typical painting style 
depicting wayang or traditional Balinese 
shadow puppet figures. Its story scenes 
are generally inspired by episodes from 
notable Hindu epics such as Ramayana 
and Mahabharata.10
 The painting on Taman Gili ceiling tells 
the story of the Sutasoma, Pan Brayut, and 
Palalintangan. Meanwhile, the painting the 
Kertha Gosa’s ceiling portrayed the stories 
of Ni Dyah Tantri, Bima Swarga, Adi 
Parwa, and Palelindon. The main theme of 
the stories is Adi parwa, especially in the 
episode of Swarga Rohana Parwa, a story 
of the Pandavas’ journey to heaven. Since 
the paintings were hundreds of years old, 
the site has received several restorations 
and conservations treatment, both from 
the community and the government. In 
1930 the paintings in the Kertha Gosa 
and Taman Gili ceilings were restored by 
a painting artist from Kamasan. In this 
restoration, the decorated paintings on 
the ceiling, which was originally made of 
cloth or parba were replaced, but the artist 
who responsible for the conservation 
maintained the painting style as the 
original pictures. The last painting 
restoration was carried out in 1960, and 
later the Kertha Gosa building has been 
declared as a Cultural Heritage.11
 In 2015, the Arsari Djojohadikusumo 
Foundation (YAD) organized conservation 
efforts to preserve traditional Indonesian 
--- PAGE: 3 ---
15
ORIGINAL ARTICLEBali Tourism Journal 2022; 6(1): 13-16 | doi: 10.36675/btj.v6i1.72
paintings in the Kertha Gosa Klungkung, 
Bali. Previously, the foundation supported 
conservation efforts by restoring several 
paintings by Raden Saleh, a figure who 
opens the curtain of modern Indonesian 
painting. YAD Chairman Hashim 
Djojohadikusumo, at the Pamungkas 
Thanksgiving Exhibition in Jakarta, 
expressed that Indonesia has long proven 
itself to be a nation with high artistic 
ability and cultural values. Preserving its 
art is a noble act to preserve and restore 
the nation’s dignity. It was said that 
painting conservation activities are part of 
preserving the Indonesian nation’s cultural 
heritage. Therefore, YAD is determined and 
invites all parties to continue to improve 
conservation activities for paintings. YAD 
held a Painting Conservation Training on 
7-8 February 2015, with Susanne Erhards 
from Gruppe Koln, Germany as a speaker 
who presented best practice examples.
In the conservation program for 
paintings by Raden Saleh in 2013, YAD 
collaborated with the Goethe Institute 
and the Secretariat of the President of the 
Republic of Indonesia. The event was also 
attended by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Belgian 
Ambassador Patrick Herman, Austrian 
Ambassador Andreas Karabaczek, and 
representatives from the French and 
Lebanese embassies. Also present were the 
Regent of Klungkung, I Nyoman Suwirta, 
and Ida Dalem Klungkung, a royal 
member of Puri Klungkung.13 
 
KERTHAGOSA BECOMES 
RESTORATIVE JUSTICE CENTER
The restoration approach or restorative 
justice is an effort to settle criminal acts by 
involving all parties to find a solution. The 
restoration approach is an alternative to 
solving criminal problems, emphasizing to 
solve problems or conflicts and restoring 
balance in society. Crime is generally 
seen as a conflict that occurs in the social 
relations of society that must be resolved 
and restored by all parties together. The 
focus of this approach is to repair the 
damage or loss caused by the crime; thus, 
it needs to be supported by the concept of 
restitution, namely an effort to recover the 
losses suffered by the victim.14
 According to the restoration approach, 
crime is not a law violation that the 
state must punish but an act that must 
be recovered through compensation or 
any other things but imprisonment. 16 
The restoration approach seeks to solve 
crimes by rebuilding relationships after 
a crime has occurred. Meanwhile, in the 
international scope, the United Nations 
has issued several policies encouraging a 
restorative approach to settling criminal 
acts. This approach has also been applied 
in various countries, both those that 
adhere to the civil law and criminal law 
systems such as France, Germany, and 
the Netherlands, or those that apply the 
Common law system such as the United 
States, Canada, and Australia.17
  The inauguration of the Restorative 
Justice Agency, at the Kertha Gosa Park 
Klungkung Bali, by the Chairperson of 
the Bali High Court, Ade T. Sutiawarman, 
accompanied by the Kajari Klungkung 
and the Regent of Klungkung. The 
inauguration was marked by the beating 
of the gong, continued to inscription 
signing, and the ribbon cutting ceremony 
in front of the the Kertha Gosa, near Balai 
Kambang Hall. The Head of the Bali High 
Court, Ade T. Sutiawarman said that 
Restorative Justice has a legal basis for the 
Attorney General’s Regulation. Restorative 
justice is expected to resolve criminal issue 
by consensus. In Klungkung, two cases 
have been resolved with this method. In 
addition, in Bali and Indonesia in general, 
the process was ongoing, but so far 
receiving a positive response. Meanwhile, 
the Regent of Klungkung said, with this 
restorative justice, it is expected that the 
community would received justice and 
convenience in every case, thus many 
family level cases can be resolved by 
consensus. Restorative justice is currently 
being adopted and implemented by 
law enforcement agencies in Indonesia. 
Further, to obtain a fair and balanced legal 
decisions for victims and perpetrators, the 
main principle in restorative justice is law 
enforcement, which prioritizes restoration 
to its original state and restores the pattern 
of good relations in society. 18 Restorative 
justice had become one of the alternatives 
for resolving criminal cases, where the 
thing that distinguishes the settlement of 
this case is the restoration of the situation 
back to the situation before the crime 
occurred.19
 
CONCLUSION
Kertha Gosa has served as a venue 
for trial since the glorious time of the 
Semarapura Kingdom. After the dutch 
invasion of Indonesia in 1908, the place 
continued to hold the title of hall of 
justice, including several functions as an 
educational institution for expatriates. 
According to its historical facts and values, 
a decision to make the Kertha Gosa site a 
Figure 4. The Restorative Justice Agency inauguration, at the Kerthagosa Park 
Klungkung Bali, by the Chairperson of the Bali High Court, Ade T. 
Sutiawarman, accompanied by the Kajari Klungkung and the Regent of 
Klungkung.15
--- PAGE: 4 ---
16
ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bali Tourism Journal 2022; 6(1): 13-16 | doi: 10.36675/btj.v6i1.72
restorative justice center for Klungkung 
regency was an excellent resolve. The 
Regent of Klungkung, I Nyoman Suwirta, 
appreciated the given status of the hall 
as the center to resolve crime acts. 
Furthermore, the Head of the Bali High 
Court, Ade T. Sutiawarman, expected the 
historical site would continue to represent 
law enforcement but still maintain a good 
relationship in society.
REFERENCES 
1. Indraguna KE, Atmadja NB, Aryana IG. 
Lukisan Gaya Kamasan di Bale Kertha Gosa 
Semarapura, Klungkung, Bali (Analisis Nilai-
Nilai Pendidikan Karakter dan Implementasinya 
dalam Pembelajaran Sejarah di SMA Berbasis 
Kurikulum 2013). Widya Winayata: Jurnal 
Pendidikan Sejarah. 2018 Apr 12;6(1).
2. Saputra DE. Paruman Kerta Negara: 
perkumpulan raja-raja Bali di awal abad XX 
(studi perubahan sistem pemerintahan kerajaan 
tradisional).
3.  Image of Kertha Gosa sign. 2022. Private 
Collection
4.  Laksmi AA, Mardika I, Sudrama K. Cagar 
budaya Bali: menggali kearifan lokal dan model 
pelestariannya. Udayana University Press; 2011.
5.  Laksmi AR. Nuansa Kearifan Lokal Situs Kertha 
Gosa Dalam Mengkonstruksi Jatidiri pada Era 
Global. InForum Arkeologi 2016 Dec 2 (Vol. 26, 
No. 3).
6.  Engelenhoven A. Kamus Indonesia-Tetun, 
Tetun-Indonesia. Wacana, Journal of the 
Humanities of Indonesia. 2014 Aug 7;10(2).
7.  Artanegara. Kertha Gosa. Kemdikbud. 
2019. Available at URL: http://kebudayaan.
kemdikbud.go.id/bpcbbali/Kertha-gosa/)   
8.  Image of Balai Kambang. 2022. Private 
Collection
9.  Semara IM. Strategi Perencanaan Pembangunan 
Pariwisata Kerthagosa di Kabupaten 
Klungkung. Jurnal Ilmiah Hospitality 
Management. 2013;4(1):33-.
10.  Rai-Mirsha IG. Sejarah Bali. Proyek 
Penyusunan Sejarah Bali Pemerintah Daerah 
Tingkat I Gianyar. 1986.
11.  Juliantara IG. Menanam Angin Menuai Badai: 
Baliseering dan Potret Ambivalensi Wajah 
Politik Kolonial Belanda Abad XX. Jurnal 
Widya Citra. 2021 Apr 23;2(1):15-9.
12.  Image of Wayang Kamasan Ceiling Plate. 2022. 
Private Collection
13.  Y Sukoyo. Karya Seni Lukis Tradisional Kertha 
Gosa Akan Dikonservasi. Beritasatu. 2015. 
Available at URL: https://www.beritasatu.com/
hiburan/255358/karya-seni-lukis-traditional-
Kertha-gosa-akan-dikonservasi 
14.  Lanier MM, Henry S, Anastasia DJ. Essential 
criminology. Routledge; 2018 Apr 19. 
15.  Image from Article ‘Kertha Gosa Jadi Balai 
Restorative Justice’ . Nusa Bali. 2022. Available at 
URL: https://www.nusabali.com/berita/116184/
kertha-gosa-jadi-balai-restorative-justice
16.  Daly K. Restorative justice in diverse and 
unequal societies. Law Context: A Socio-Legal 
J.. 2000;17:167.
17. Hutauruk RH. Penanggulangan Kejahatan 
Korporasi Melalui Pendekatan Restoratif Suatu 
Terobosan Hukum. Sinar Grafika; 2019 Jan 31.
18.  Kerthagosa Menjadi Balai Restorative Justice. 
Kompas[dot]tv. 2022. Available at URL: https://
www.kompas.tv/article/282042/Kerthagosa-
menjadi-balai-restorative-justice 
19.  Jangan ke Pengadilan Dulu! Bali Punya Rumah 
Restorative Justice. Detik. 2022. Available at 
URL: https://www.detik.com/bali/hukum-dan-
kriminal/d-6022279/jangan-ke-pengadilan-
dulu-bali-punya-rumah-restorative-justice. 

