DOCUMENT ID: S-2023-mukhoyyaroh-01
SOURCE FILE: 2025-Anon-Cirebon-Siti_Inggil-Chinese_ornaments_on_the_Siti_Inggil_Ker.pdf
TOTAL PAGES: 15

--- PAGE: 1 ---
https://injire.org | Open Access 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton Kasepuhan building 
from a Religious Moderation perspective 
 
 
Author:  
Mukhoyyaroh1 
Yunus2 
 
 
Affiliation: 
1,2 Pamulang University , 
Banten, Indonesia 
 
 
Corresponding author: 
Mukhoyyaroh 
1dosen00606@unpam.ac.id 
 
 
Dates: 
Received 6 April 2023 
Revised 20 May 2023 
Accepted 23 June 2023 
Available online 30 June 2023 
 
 Abstract 
 
This research aims to analyze the Chinese ornaments in the Siti Inggil building of the 
Kasepuhan Palace and the values of religious moderation. This study uses a qualitative method. 
Meanwhile, the approaches used are historical, anthropological, and semiotic approaches. The 
Chinese ornaments attached to the Siti Inggil building of the Kasepuhan palace in Cirebo n 
align with the values of religious moderation that are growing and developing in Indonesia. Some 
of the ornaments on the Siti Inggil building come from cultures outside of Islam, showing the 
Sultan's moderate attitude and containing the values of religious moderation. First, Siti Inggil 
implies tolerance and accommodation towards Islamic, Hindu, and Chinese cultures within it. 
This means there is a willingness to understand and be ready to live with people of different 
religions and cultures. Second is ceramics, which implies the socio -cultural capital of religious 
moderation. This is because dialogue between culture and Islam has become necessary and 
requires good dialectics to occur to balance (tawazun) in social  life in interaction w ith social 
culture. 
 
Keywords: 
Chinese Ornaments; Siti Inggil Building; Religious Moderation. 
 
 Abstrak 
 
Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis ornamen Cina di bangunan Siti Inggil Keraton 
Kasepuhan tentang nilai -nilai moderasi beragama. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode 
kualitatif. Sedangkan pendekatan yang digunakan adalah pendekatan historis, antropologi, 
dan semiotik. Ornamen Tionghoa yang melekat pada bangunan Siti Inggil keraton 
Kasepuhan di Cirebon sejalan dengan nilai -nilai moderas i beragama yang tumbuh dan 
berkembang di Indonesia. Beberapa ornamen pada bangunan Siti Inggil berasal dari budaya 
luar Islam, menunjukkan sikap Sultan yang moderat dan mengandung nilai -nilai moderasi 
beragama. Pertama, Siti Inggil; menyiratkan prinsip tol eransi dan akomodasi terhadap 
budaya Islam, Hindu, dan Cina di dalamnya. Ini berarti bahwa ada kemauan untuk 
memahami dan siap untuk hidup berdampingan dengan orang-orang dari berbagai agama dan 
budaya yang berbeda. Kedua, keramik; yang menyiratkan modal s osial-budaya moderasi 
beragama di dalamnya. Hal ini dikarenakan dialog antara budaya dan Islam telah menjadi 
keniscayaan yang memerlukan dialektika yang baik agar terjadi keseimbangan (tawazun) 
dalam kehidupan beragama dalam interaksi dengan sosial budaya. 
 
Kata Kunci: 
Ornamen Cina; Gedung Siti Inggil; Moderasi Beragama. 
  
 
Copyright: ©2023.Mukhoyyaroh. Licensee: INJIRE. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution Noncommercial ShareAlike 4.0 License. 
  
Indonesian Journal of Islamic Religious Education (INJIRE), Volume 1 (1) (2023)  
 
Indonesian Journal of Islamic Religious Education 
(INJIRE) 
Journal homepage: https://injire.org/index.php/journal 
e-mail: injireadpisi@gmail.com

--- PAGE: 2 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 28 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 28 of 42 
Introduction 
Harmonization between Cirebon and China has been around for a long time. This argument is 
stated explicitly in the Purwaka Tjaruban Nagari text, that before the Cirebon Sultanate was founded, 
ethnic Chinese in Cirebon had existed for a long time. The relationship between ethnic Chinese 
and the Cirebon Palace occurred in 1415 AD. Ethnic Chinese have lived in the Cirebon area. This 
was proven by the arrival of Cheng Ho and his army of 23,000 , accompanied by 63 boats, which 
landed at the port of Cirebon for seven days. In a short time, Cheng Ho's soldiers married many 
Cirebon residents. Therefore, it can be understood that there was close harmony between Cirebon 
and China before the founding of the Cirebon Kingdom. (Yunus, 2019)(Gazali & Saefuloh, 2019) 
Familiarity was increasingly established in the second stage, the end of the 15th century, 
marked by the arrival of Chinese princesses. The relationship between ethnic Chinese and the 
palace existed during the time of Syarif Hidayatullah (1479 -1568), and the relationship between 
the two was very close through the marriage of Ong Tien's daughter, as the daughter of the 
Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, to Sunan Gunung Djati. It is said that this princess fell in love with 
Sunan Gunung Jati at first sight. However, the emperor did not allow it. Nevertheless, the princess 
persisted in her desire to get permission from the emperor. The princess brought valuable items 
from the Chinese Palace, such as glasses, plates, pots, and other ceramic objects. She traveled to 
Cirebon using the Chinese imperial ship under the escort of Commander Lie Guan Cang and 
Captain Lie Guan Hian. Sunan Gunung Djati and Ong Tien's daughter married upon arrival in 
Cirebon. The princess and her bodyguard converted to Islam  and then changed thei r names to 
Ratu Mas Rara Sumanding. This explanation is in line with some opinions which state that the 
expansion of the Cirebon Palace through porcelain wall decorations from China began with the 
arrival of the Chinese princess. Objects in jars from the Ming Dynasty brought to Cirebon are still 
well preserved today (Mukhoyyaroh et al., 2021). 
The role of ethnic Chinese is quite significant in government . For  example, the 
harbormaster in Cirebon is taken from a Chinese citizen. The Harbor Master's job is to control 
activities at the port and liaise  between the Sultan of Cirebon and traders who want to enter the 
Cirebon area. Ethnic Chinese are also good at making coins or coins. The Sultans of Cirebon gave 
them great confidence in this matter. After the death of Reksanegara and Suradinata as officia ls 
responsible for making coins, the ethnic Chinese were finally ordered by the Sultan of Cirebon to 
make Cirebon coins. During its development, the Cirebon currency used Chinese letters as the 
Cirebon currency was acceptable in trade at that time. Chinese Picis, at that time, had an essential 
role in business in Java  so that  they could control most of the use of money . (Ramli, 2019; 
Suprapto, 2019) 
The Cirebon Sultanate has several palaces, and this research focuses on  the Kasepuhan 
Palace. The reason is that the Kasepuhan Palace is the oldest. Kasepuhan Palace was the first 
palace founded in Cirebon. Kasepuhan Palace is directly related to the early history of Cirebon.  
Kasepuhan Palace was formerly Padepokan Pakungwati , which has unique and different 
characteristics from other palaces in the archipelago. The reason is that the Kasepuhan Cirebon 
Palace combines religious and cultural elements in its construction concept. This palace combines 
several cultural elements: Islam, Hinduism, Europe, and Chinese. (Sutrisno, 2019),. The Chinese 
features found in the front building, Siti Inggil, are interesting to explore from the perspective of 
Religious Moderation values. 
With the arrival of Chinese people in Cirebon, they mingled with the surrounding 
community. The assimilation of Chinese people led to acculturation and assimilation in society. 
They brought traditions, ways of life, and prevailing norms with them. They sta nd firm and have 
a fanatical attitude towards the beliefs of their ancestors. Chinese Muslims carry out religious rituals 
and still adhere to their traditional traditions. This proves that they still respect their ancestors and 
maintain harmony between fam ilies despite their different beliefs. Chinese cultural activities can 
be seen in lion dances, Chinese New Year, and Cheng Beng celebrations, or Chinese Muslims 
commemorating Eid al-Adha and Eid al-Fitr celebrations. (Atabik, 2016)

--- PAGE: 3 ---
29| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 29 of 42 
 
The ornaments of the Kasepuhan palace are thick with foreign culture, especially Chinese 
culture, showing that this Sultanate is accommodating to culture and develops an attitude of 
tolerance towards diversity and religion (Meisar Ashari, 2013) . A tolerant and accommodating 
attitude towards culture indicates a Religious Moderation (Saifuddin, 2019). Religious moderation 
is a spiritual attitude that wants to mediate between two extreme poles, namely groups that are 
very textual and very liberal. So, Religious Moderation tries to be in the middle, neither textual nor 
liberal. (Arafah, 2020) (Mohamad Fahri, 2019) 
The concept of religious moderation does not belong to one religion but exists in the 
traditions of all religions and even in world civilization. All spiritual teachings uphold a fair and 
balanced attitude in all life aspects, including practicing their faith. There is no religious teaching 
that teaches excessive behavior. Religious Moderation is an attitude that mediates between liberal 
and extreme religious attitudes. Those with liberal views tend to be loose in religion. Meanwhile, 
people with extreme views tend to understand religious texts significantly and strictly. They cite 
classical texts and works as a basis and framework for thinking but understand them textually and 
not contextually (Hanafi & M. Saefi, 2022) 
The description above shows that cultural contact between Chinese and native people 
existed long before the Dutch came to the archipelago. Therefore, of course, it is natural that there 
is intensive contact in the spread of Islamic teachings. Intensive cul tural contact results in 
acculturation between the two cultures in physical forms , such as building architecture, shipping 
technology, agriculture, and trade. As for the non-physical, for example, in language and behavioral 
patterns between the two nations . In this research, peaceful cultural acculturation has occurred, 
giving birth to attitudes of tolerance and respect. Indeed, it cannot be denied that there have also 
been fluctuations in relations between indigenous and ethnic Chinese. Conflict arose due to the 
presence of the Dutch. As a result of the divide et imperia policy carried out by the Dutch, the image 
of ethnic Chinese in the eyes of the native population became negative. Harmful stereotypes that 
have developed over time are aimed at them. This condition was made worse by the discriminatory 
policies of the New Order and the actions of several Chinese people who committed fantastic 
amounts of corruption, which was detrimental to the country. 
On the other hand, Cirebon is a very cosmopolitan city . It has been a trade center in the 
past, so it is only possible if there are traces of Chinese ethnicity in Cirebon culture, especially in 
the Cirebon Sultanate. There is some evidence in this direction . First , we can still see foreign 
cultural ornaments, especially Chinese ornaments , decorating artifacts in the Cirebon Sultanate. 
Foreign cultural ornaments, especially Chinese ornaments that decorate artifacts in the Cirebon 
Sultanate, are closely related to the religious beliefs adhered to by the Cirebon Sultanate. Therefore, 
this research is urgent. This research aims to analyze the Chinese ornaments in the Kasepuhan 
Palace and the values of religious moderation. 
 
Methods 
This study uses a qualitative method. This research uses primary and secondary data from the field 
and literature. Meanwhile, the approach used is historical and anthropological. The researcher also 
used a semiotic approach to analyze the symbolic and philosophical meaning of the Chinese 
ornaments on the Siti Inggil building. A hermeneutic approach, Islamic theology, and an 
anthropological approach were used to understand the issue of religious moderation and its 
relevance to the Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil building. 
Data collection regarding Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil building was done by 
recording and documenting, direct observation techniques, and interview techniques with 
informants based on guidelines prepared in advance. The author came to the Kasepuhan palace 
several times to make observations. The author also interviewed Cirebon cultural figures, 
Kasepuhan palace guides, and Cirebon psychologists to obtain additional data. The data that has 
been collected is then processed by data reduction using the inclusion and exclusion process. The 
next step is the coding process so the data can be traced easily and quickly. The notes that have been

--- PAGE: 4 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 30 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 30 of 42 
coded are then edited by sorting, classifying, synthesizing, and making an overview. After that, the 
author interprets the data. The analysis method uses a qualitative descriptive analysis framework. 
 
Results  
Azyumardi Azra emphasized that Wasathiyyah Islam, or moderate Islam, is old traditions, good in a 
way, religious or cultural . Wasathiyyah Islam  has already been introduced by previous scholars, 
counting since its presence in the archipelago. Wasathiyyah Islam meets with diverse cultures and 
ethnicities, emphasizing a “middle” attitude and producing  Indonesian Muslims who are 
wasathiyyah, accommodating, and inclusive. For example, Javanese culture, namely Tepo Seliro, Guyub 
prioritises cultural togetherness, not “win-win,” and no selfishness. Wasathiyyah Islam, or moderate 
Islam developing in Indonesia, has several characteristics: Tawasuth, Tawazun, and Muwathonah. 
The book on religious moderation published by the Ministry of Religion explains  four 
indicators of moderate attitudes toward religion: national commitment, tolerance, non -violence, 
and accommodating towards culture or customs. Thus, according to this book, reasonable people 
can be friendly in accepting traditions and culture, especially local culture, if they do not conflict 
with the main principles of their religion. 
 One of the buildings in front of the Palace is Siti Inggil Wall. On the Siti Inggil wall is a gate 
heading to Bentar Temple and Chinese and Dutch ceramics. Decoration This is placed in front of 
Palace Kasepuhan so you can see everyone. The Bentar Temple gate, which Hinduism influences, 
indicates that although The Sultanate of Cirebon is Islamic, it still honors ancestors at a time 
welcoming element of Hindu culture. Thus, the Hindus saw the Bentar Temple Gate, and the 
Chinese community  felt representativeness when witnessing the Chinese ornament . The 
ornaments attached to the parts in front of the Siti Inggil building show the spirit of moderation. 
There has been since the presence of Islam in the archipelago.  
 
Siti Inggil: principles of tolerance and accommodation towards Islamic, Hindu , and 
Chinese culture 
When entering the Kasepuhan Palace area (built in 1430 AD), you can see a gate made of multi -
story red bricks. The front part of the palace is called Siti Inggil or high ground, whose position 
faces directly towards the field where the palace troops gathered at that time after passing through 
Siti Inggil, which is in the form of a gate and a long fence. At the front of Siti Inggil are also tables 
and benches made of stone. This object came from Gujarat and was a gift from the British 
Governor General, Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles , in 1811 AD. The Siti Inggil building combines 
Islam, Hinduism, and China. The Siti Inggil Gapura has a Hindu influence because if you look 
closely, the shape of the building is the same as the Candi Bentar Gapura (Mukhoyyaroh et al., 
2021). 
 Siti Inggil is surrounded by red brick walls with ceramic plates attached , and the entrance 
is Candi Bentar. Judging from the shapes and ornaments that decorate the building, Siti Inggil 
adopts Hindu culture in the form of the Bentar  Temple and Chinese culture in ceramic plate 
attachments. The structure is a pile of red bricks attached. 
 One of the front buildings of the Kasepuhan Palace is the Siti Inggil wall. On the Siti 
Inggil's borders is the Candi Bentar Gate, a Chinese and Dutch ceramics display. These ornaments 
are placed at the front of the Kasepuhan Palace so everyone can see them. 
 Bentar Temple , as in Siti Inggil (Kaespuhan Palace) , which adopts a culture from 
Hinduism, is often found in several places in Indonesia with different meanings . In his research, 
Yusuf said that Candi Bentar, in the Balinese concept, is a symbol of a gaping mouth. This symbol 
of a gaping mouth makes Bentar Temple the entrance. Yusuf gave the example of Candi Bentar 
in the Pniel Blimbingsari Christian church complex in Bali. The Bentar Temple in this church has 
a cross ornament as a symbol of Christianity. 
 Meanwhile, Zarifa, in her research on the Sendang Duwur Mosque and Tomb: The Manifestation 
of Acculturation, said that there are 4 Bentar Temples in the Sendang Duwur mosque and tomb

--- PAGE: 5 ---
31| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 31 of 42 
 
complex. Moment Temple, known in the Indonesian-Hindu era, is found in the former Majapahit 
Palace complex (Gapura et al.). Ancient buildings (temples) with reliefs like this are located in the 
reserves of Jawi Temple, Jago Temple, and Tigawangi Temple. Zarifa even said that the oldest 
Bentar Temple is at Pura Prasada Bali. 
 The combination of Islamic and Hindu cultures becomes a complementary unity, which is 
realized in the form of buildings in the context of the Kasepuhan Palace, one of which is Siti Inggil. 
As is Fitri's research regarding Gapura Bentar, Gapura Paduraksa, mosque, and tomb in Sendang 
Duwur, Lamongan, East Java. In her study, Fitri said that in the Paduraksa building, some 
ornaments and motifs have symbolic meanings about Islam, for example, the kalpataru tree motif 
decoration, which in Hindu belief calls the tree of life. In contrast, in Islam, it is called the syajarah al-khuld 
tree, which is in Sidrah al-khuld. Vomit. This tree means that it is a tree that can grant all wishes. 
(Mukhoyyaroh et al., 2021) 
 In the context of the Kasepuhan Palace, the Dragon is found on the walls of Siti Inggil as 
the primary and front building, which philosophically means that the Cirebon Sultanate is an 
independent sultanate, not a subordinate kingdom of Pajajaran like when it was still under the 
leadership of Cakrabuana (Mukhoyyaroh, 2021) . Since Syarif Hidayatullah led Cirebon, it has 
separated itself from Pajajaran and become a fully sovereign country (Atja, 1986). The dragon on 
the walls of Siti Inggil also means a prayer to a transcendent Power to always guard and protect 
the residents of the palace, especially the sultan's family and the people of Cirebon in general, from 
all kinds of dangers, epidemics, enemies, and other harm. The implicit meaning is that a king or 
leader must be able to protect and protect his citizens from all kinds  of dangers, whether from 
enemies, hunger, disease, stupidity, or harm. A leader must provide his people with security, peace, 
and prosperity. (Sugiman, 2020) 
 The Siti Inggil wall also contains a picture of a phoenix. The phoenix symbolizes the sun 
and warmth surrounding the South because this creature symbolizes the South. According to Tatt, 
the phoenix has several values and meanings. Namely, a sign of the birth of a 'great person' ; the 
phoenix will only stop at something valuable, bring prosperity, peace, and comfort, and can also 
fight evil. 
 The last image is a picture of a fish. In Chinese tradition, fish means darkness. This animal 
is usually served at Chinese New Year events. The meaning is that everything that is not good and 
a life entirely of night or bad luck in the past must be removed and replaced with something good 
and full of uncertainty. Fish are also a symbol of 'exaggeration' (luxury). So , the ceramic fish 
ornaments attached to the walls of Siti Inggil can also be interpreted as a prayer and hope that the 
people of Cirebon will always be in a state of sufficiency in their material and spiritual aspects. 
(Agus Iswanto, 2021)   
 Meanwhile, in Mandarin, fish is pronounced the same as luck. Fish is one of my favorite 
animals. Everyone who sees fish is happy and at peace. That is why, in real life, we often see people 
escaping their 'anxiety' by fishing. The implicit meaning of the fish image is that the ethnic Chinese 
who came to Cirebon brought a message of peace and wanted to live in harmony with the local 
population, not hostility or war. This aligns with the mission that Chengho brought when he visited 
Cirebon. Even though the troops he brought numbered approximately 27,000 at that time , more 
than the population of Amparan Jati, Cheng Ho did not carry out conquest or colonization. Cheng 
Ho only carried a friendly mission. That is why whatever region or country he stops in, he is well-
received by the local community. That is what differentiates the arrival of Cheng Ho and the West. 
Likewise, there was even a marriage when Ong Tien came with his troops to Cirebon carrying a 
peace mission. 
 Overall, in the interior of Siti Inggil, there are five buildings without walls and with shingle 
roofs. The front row from west to east includes the Mande Malang Semarang, Mande Semar Tinandu, 
Mande Pandawa Lima, Mande Pelinggihan (Bringing) buildings, and Mande Karesmen.

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 32 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 32 of 42 
 
a. Mande Malang Semirang 
 
 
Figure 1. Mande Malang Semirang 
Source: Mukhoyyaroh Documentation, 2021 
 
Mande Malang Semarang is the main building in the middle of Siti Inggil. The function of 
this building is precisely as a seat for the Sultan of Cirebon and his family, especially in 
various activities such as training ceremonies and holding court in Sangkalabuana Square, 
precisely to the north of the Cirebon Palace. Mande Malang Semarang is supported by six main 
pillars, symbolizing the pillars of faith. Counting the total number of posts, there are twenty, 
representing God's twenty characteristics. 
The symbolism of the pillars of faith in Islam in the six main posts of Mande Malang 
Semarang leads to the issue of trust. Meanwhile, there is a discussion regarding faith in Islam, 
one of which is the six pillars of faith. 
The Cirebon people are a community that inherited the noble values of the Islamic 
religious figure in Java, Syarif Hidayatullah (1448-1568), better known as Sunan Gunung Jati. 
The Islamic civilization spread by Sunan Gunung Jati contributed to the formation of a 
worldview that emphasized theocentric aspects of revolving around God, rather than the concept 
of Western civilization, which emphasized anthropocentric elements coming from the local 
wisdom heritage of Sunan Gunung Jati, which continues to be preserved among the people 
of Cirebon to this day. 
Through the Mande Malang Semarang building, Susuhunan Jati emphasizes that the 
Cirebon Sultanate was built on faith or monotheism . Specifically , the twenty supporting 
pillars of the Mande Malang Semarang building symbolize the obligatory nature of Allah. 
Thus, the symbol of the pillars shows how the Cirebon Sultanate is entire of signs of 
monotheism. 
 
b. Mande Semar Tinandu 
 
Figure 2. Mande Semar Tinandu 
Source: Mukhoyyaroh Documentation, 2021

--- PAGE: 7 ---
33| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 33 of 42 
 
 
Mande Semar Tinandu building, as in the picture above, is usually used or functions as a 
seat for the sultanate's advisors, the head of the palace, and the head of the Sang Cipta Rasa 
Mosque. This building, located northwest of Siti Inggil, is supported by two pillars that 
symbolize the two sentences of the creed. Not only limited to symbols, but every year , the 
palace carries out a religious tradition known as the talisman to ⎯commemorate the birthday 
of the Prophet Muhammad SAW, which in the Javanese tradition in Yogyakarta is called 
sekaten. The talisman (kang siji kang kudu dirumat ) ⎯in this context is the shahada. 
Meanwhile, in Islam, the shahada can be interpreted as a statement of promise of 
allegiance. The shahada comes from the word shahada⎯, yasyhadu ⎯shahadatan, or Sudan, 
which means attending, witnessing, knowing, giving testimony, swearing, confessing, and 
bringing. Because the shahada can also mean an oath, it must be fulfilled . It cannot  be 
forgotten because one of the requirements for someone to be considered a Muslim is to 
read two sentences of the shahada, namely a statement or confession that Allah is God and 
Muhammad is Allah's messenger. 
Thus, after someone takes the shahada, it is legal for him to practice Islamic law. Every 
person who wants to convert to Islam must fulfill the five pillars of the creed, as mentioned. 
Meanwhile, those of Muslim descent do not need to take the Shahada pledge like a mu’allaf, 
even though they have never pledged the Shahada all their life. They are already mu'allaf. In 
this context, the shahada is like a spirit for the body , and it is life for all elements of Islam. 
Because of the importance of the shahada in Islamic beliefs, Said Hawwa said that the good 
deeds a person does are meaningless without the shahada (Said Hawwa, 2004). The creed 
that is recited is the creed of monotheism , la illaha illa Allah,  and the philosophy of Rasul 
Muhammadu Rasulullah . These two sentences are called two sentences of the shahada 
(Syahadah) and cannot be separated. 
In the context of Cirebon society, especially in the Kasepuhan Palace, to ensure that 
these two sentences of the shahada are maintained in the Muslim community, there is a 
tradition known as the talisman. The traditional procession or long ceremony of amulets reflects 
the birth process of the Prophet Muhammad SAW. It is the culminating event of a series of 
activities for the Prophet Muhammad's birthday at the Kasepuhan Palace, Cirebon. “ Panjang 
” means a series of various heirloom objects, and “ amulet ” represents siji kang kang kudu 
dirumat (one thing that is respected is the creed “la illaha illa Allah”). If these two words are 
combined, they mean a series of preparations to welcome the birth of a prophet who firmly 
proclaims the creed to the world's people . General ly, each ceremony combines several 
ceremonial elements such as sacrifice, prayer, serving a meal together, procession, 
meditation, etc. The order was determined as a result of the creations of their predecessors, 
which have become a tradition in Cirebon society. (Yadi Ruyadi, 2010) 
Because the length of amulets has become a tradition from generation to generation, 
throughout life, in the view of the people of Cirebon, every Muslim must protect and care 
for his amulet, namely the shahada. This means that a Muslim's faith must be maintained and 
not let go. Suppose you pay attention to the rituals in the long talisman tradition. In that 
case, they are almost like other ceremonies, all confirming the homogeneity of the original 
Javanese model. So, at that time, the king appeared to be performing miyos dalem (the king's 
appearance before his people). The king's ability to achieve unity was used to listen to the 
legitimacy of the palace. At the same time, a king conveys his blessings for the welfare of his 
people (Ismawati, 2000). Simultaneously, the long traditional amulet ceremony in Cirebon was 
held in four places which are the legacy of Syarif Hidayatullah, namely  at the Kasepuhan 
Palace, Kanoman Palace, Kacirebonan Palace, and the tomb complex of Syarif Hidayatullah, 
the founder of the Cirebon Sultanate or better known as Sunan Gunung Djati. 
Thus, the two supporting pillars of the Mande Semar Tinandu building are a symbol of 
two sentences of the shahada , whose philosophical meaning is that the Cirebon Sultanate ,

--- PAGE: 8 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 34 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 34 of 42 
since its inception, was a sultanate that was based on God and adhered to the Islamic creed. 
Because this sultanate is based on Islamic teachings, everything related to state life is 
automatically based on Islamic teachings. Then, theologically, the two supporting pillars of 
Mande Semar Tinandu emphasize the oneness of Allah, and the meaning of Allah's unity is 
explained through the nature of obligation for Allah. 
 
c. Mande Pandawa Lima 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Mande Pandawa Lima 
Source: Mukhoyyaroh Documentation, 2021 
 
Mande Pandawa Lima is a building that functioned as a seat for the commanders and 
personal bodyguards of the Sultan of Cirebon. This building is located right to the left of 
the main building and is supported by five pillars , which symbolize the pillars of Islam. A 
person's faith will be seen from the practice of the Islamic pillars . A person's religion or 
belief is in the heart. The strength or weakness of a person's faith will be seen from how well 
he can practice the pillars of Islam. 
The pillars of Islam are the pillars of a noble religion . As Imam al-Qurthubi said, the 
five pillars (pillars of Islam) are the foundations of the Islamic faith and its rules, which the 
Islamic faith is built on and with which Islam is upheld. Meanwhile, Imam an-Nawawi also 
commented on this hadith by saying that it is a significant point in knowing Islam, and the 
Islamic religion relies on this hadith, which collects its pillars. Apart from these two scholars, 
Ash-Shiddieqy said that al-Bukhari included this hadith in the book of al-Iman to emphasize 
that Islam is the name for work and that Islam and faith sometimes have the same meaning. 
The Mande Pandawa Lima building , which is equipped with five supporting pillars, 
apart from symbolizing the pillars of Islam, also contains a philosophical meaning and 
urgency which can be traced from the explanation of each post in the pillars of Islam, namely 
the creed, prayer, zakat, fasting, and hajj. 
 
d. Mande Pelinggihan (Accompaniment) 
 
 
Figure 4. Mande Pelinggihan (Accompaniment) 
Source: Mukhoyyaroh Documentation, 2021

--- PAGE: 9 ---
35| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 35 of 42 
 
When the sultanate court conducted trials, Mande Pelinggihan (Accompanist) was used 
as a seat for companions or sultanate officials, including judges and prosecutors . This 
building is supported by eight pillars, four in the middle and four at each corner. Apart from 
being used as seats for sultanate officials, the eight supporting pillars have symbolic and 
philosophical significance. 
The Mande Pelinggihan building is strengthened by four supporting pillars in the 
middle, ⎯symbolizing the four essential elements in nature: earth, water, air, and fire. Soil 
is the leading and critical element of the ecosystem. 
Apart from the components of soil and water, air is also an essential element on which 
the entire contents of the universe depend. Air provides benefits for the life of all nature. 
Air is formed from several gases, namely Helium (He), Nitrogen (N), Oxygen (O2), and 
Carbon Dioxide (CO2). All living things need oxygen to breathe. Oxygen gas is also required 
to burn  food in the bodies of living creatures. This combustion produces energy, which 
energy is necessary to carry out all human activities. Besides O2, CO2 also plays a role in the 
human respiratory process. The average human need for oxygen per hour is 53 liters. 
Meanwhile, oxygen produced by the photosynthesis of leaves (plants) to make the 
required 53 liters of oxygen must be made by a minimum of 3000 leaves or around four 
plants, each of which has a minimum of 750 leaves. However, the current fact is that humans 
need to become more active about planting trees. All the courtyards are concreted, and as a 
result, apart from there being no water absorption, the need for oxygen is also not met, so 
the air quality is getting worse, and what is even more worrying is tha t many forests have 
been completely cleared. (Sofiyawati, 2017) 
Thus, there is a message behind the four supporting pillars in the middle of the Mande 
Pelinggihan building which we want to convey to humans as religious creatures : humans 
must be grateful for the blessings of air that Allah has given, and work together to maintain 
the balance of nature and not damage it. This is related to the main task of humans as caliphs, 
namely caring for, prospering, and utilizing nature for the common good. Illegal logging, 
throwing waste into rivers, and burning forests will only d estroy the soul and make the 
existing balance unbalanced. 
Maintaining the balance of nature is a human's duty because humans are an integral part 
of the universe. That is why humans have an equal and equal position with nature and all 
creatures in this nature. This fact must evoke solidarity and unity with nature and other living 
animals. As caliphs, humans also have a moral responsibility towards the universe for its 
existence and preservation. 
 
e. Mande Karesmen 
 
 
Figure 5. Mande Karesmen 
Source: Mukhoyyaroh Documentation, 2021

--- PAGE: 10 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 36 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 36 of 42 
The Mande Karesmen building has the same supporting pillars as Mande Pelinggihan; 
its only function is to store artistic equipment such as gamelan musical instruments. In the 
Sultanate of Cirebon, the tradition of playing the gamelan sekaten (gong sekati) is carried out 
twice a year, especially on commemorations or religious events such as Eid al -Fitr and Eid 
al-Adha. Gamelan was also usually performed in the square, witnessed by the sultan and his 
family. Even though the architecture of the M ande Karesmen building , as in th e picture, 
looks like a Hindu building, this building is entirely of Islamic values. 
This research explains  that cultural acculturation at the Kasepuhan Palace in Cirebon 
occurred for two reasons. First, its strategic location makes Cirebon a trade center, a meeting 
place for various tribes, cultures, and religions between nations. Second, the open attitude of 
the Sultan of Cirebon was the most important factor that resulted in the inclusion of various 
cultural influences on buildings and society, especially on the Cirebon Kasepuhan Palace 
building. Cultural acculturation in the Kasepuhan Pa lace building comes from China, 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Javanese, European, Islamic, and Arabic. Chinese culture can be 
found in the Dalem Agung Pakungwati Building, the Siti Inggil Building , including the 
Mande Malang Semarang Building, Mande Semar Tinandu, Mande Pandawa Lima, Mande 
Pelinggihan (Companion), and Mande Karesmen, as well as Kucung Kutagara Wadasan, 
Pintu Buk Bacem. 
Various archaeological evidence was found in the Kasepuhan Palace , and  various 
cultures colored it. The philosophical meaning is that even though Cirebon is an Islamic 
Sultanate, it is very open to the dynamics of society and includes various cultures and other 
people's religions. This sultanate wants to stand on cultural diversity and respect other 
people's beliefs. 
Islamic studies in the context of moderate Indonesian Islam are also closely related 
to moderation. Hilmy said the concept of moderation has several characteristics, including 
Spreading Islam without using violence but preferring peaceful means; Adopting a moderate 
way of life in all aspects, including science and technology, democracy, human rights (HAM), 
and the like; His way of thinking is rational; Understanding Islam is very contextual, not 
textual; and, using ijtihad if no explicit justification is fo und from the Koran and hadith. 
Some of these characteristics can be expanded with other traits, such as tolerance, harmony, 
and cooperation between religious groups. (Hilmy, 2013) 
The origins of the Indonesian nation, including Cirebon or the Sultanate of 
Cirebon, is a long story about an inclusive community. A country that is open to accepting 
all "good" influences from everywhere without abandoning what already belongs to it may 
take and respond to all external forces that creep in. There is no resistance when outside 
influences come with the spirit of spreading brotherhood without coercion or war. Such an 
attitude creates a bond of unity among the diverse population of this archipelago, including 
the Cirebon Sultanate. 
Tolerance that requires an attitude of willingness to live side by side with parties 
who do not share your religion is called inter -religious tolerance. A perspective  of 
understanding and mutual understanding is required. Of course, in this context, it does not 
mean agreeing with and confirming the teachings of other religions. The emphasis in this 
attitude is not to force others to change beliefs. (Dali, 2017; Muslih, 2010) 
An attitude of tolerance towards inter-religious communities based on the verse " 
La ikraha fi al-Din " (there is no compulsion in religion) can be part of caring for non-Muslim 
citizens to obtain non-discriminatory treatment, which is caused by differences in beliefs and 
religions, which is believed. The reality of life in Indonesia is that we live with all kinds of 
differences and diversity, so we cannot impose one belief on another. (Arafah, 2020; Yunus 
& Salim, 2019) 
Based on the explanation above, the application of tolerance (Masamune) can be 
ideological or sociological. The image of ideological tolerance can be applied between

--- PAGE: 11 ---
37| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 37 of 42 
 
Muslims and religious communities. Regarding da'wah, ideological tolerance always 
prioritizes respect for other schools of thought. Although the most developed is the Syafi'i  
school of thought, other schools are still respected for their practices. The tolerance verse " 
La ikraha fi al -Dn " (no compulsion in religion) is always preached to maintain religious 
harmony. This tolerance can be seen in the harmonious lives of Cirebon people from 
different cultural and ethnic backgrounds. 
 
Ceramics: social-cultural capital of Religious Moderation 
There are many Chinese ceramics, as well as Dutch ceramics, on the walls of Siti Inggil . The Siti 
Inggil Gapura has Hindu influence because if you look closely , the shape of the building is the 
same as the Candi Bentar Gapura. 
 
 
Figure 6. Siti Inggil 
Source: Mukhoyyaroh Documentation, 2021 
 
Siti Inggil, as pictured above, is surrounded by red brick walls with ceramic plates attached , 
and the entrance is Candi Bentar. Judging from the shapes and ornaments that decorate the 
building, Siti Inggil ⎯adopts Hindu culture in the form of the Bentar Temple and Chinese culture 
in ceramic plate attachments. The structure is a pile of red bricks attached. 
The Siti Inggil building not only has Hindu influence but also Chinese culture. Chinese 
culture is rich in meaning and symbols, especially animal-related ones. Buddhism, Taoism, and 
Confucianism also influence Chinese culture as the majority religions of Chinese society. The book 
Tripitaka, as written by Mulyono and Diana, explains  that the Buddha valued the lives of living 
creatures, including animals. Therefore, Chinese society uses animals as symbolic components and 
often associates animal characteristics with the values of human life. Animals are closely related to 
the energy values humans want to achieve health, longevity, strength, prosperity, and protection 
from all dangers. Likewise, the pictures that decorate the ceramics on the walls of Siti Inggil are 
rich in symbolism associated with Chinese culture. The images attached to the ceramics are 
dragons ( lung ), phoenixes ( feng huang ), and fish. 
In the context of the Kasepuhan Palace, dragons are found on the walls of Siti Inggil as the 
primary and front building, which philosophically means that the Cirebon Sultanate is an 
independent sultanate, not a subordinate kingdom of Pajajaran like when it was still under the 
leadership of Cakrabuana. Since Syarif Hidayatullah led Cirebon, it has separat ed itself from 
Pajajaran and become a fully sovereign country (Atja, 1986). The dragon on the walls of Siti Inggil 
also means a prayer to a transcendent Pow er to always guard and protect the residents of the 
palace, especially the sultan's family and the people of Cirebon in general, from all kinds of dangers, 
epidemics, enemies, and other harm. The implicit meaning is that a king or leader must be able to 
protect and protect his citizens from all kinds of dangers, whether from enemies, hunger, disease, 
stupidity, or harm. A leader must provide his people with a sense of security, peace, and prosperity.

--- PAGE: 12 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 38 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 38 of 42 
Apart from the image of a dragon on the walls of Siti Inggil, there is also an image of a 
phoenix, an essential symbol in the traditions of Chinese society. This creature is described as a 
beautiful bird combining several colors. This creature is thought to bring good fortune and 
symbolizes the female emperor, peace, and prosperity. In Chinese wedding ceremonies, the image 
of a phoenix is always juxtaposed with a dragon. The phoenix represents the bride, while the dragon 
represents the groom (Ong et al., 1993). The phoenix image affixed to the walls of Siti Inggil means 
prayer and hope that peace, tranquility, and prosperity will always color the lives of the people of 
Cirebon. The people of Cirebon are kept away from all conflicts, disputes, and wars. When the 
country is peaceful, development in all fields will run well, and the economy will proliferate, 
ultimately leading the people of Cirebon to a prosperous state. 
In Chinese tradition, fish is served at Chinese New Year events. In Chinese practice, fish 
means something bad, wrong, or dark, which must be replaced with something good (Ni et al., 
2006). More than that, according to Jeremy Huang, the fish symbol on the walls of Siti Inggil is 
interpreted as a hope that a person's material and spiritual life will always be filled with goodness, 
especially for the people of Cirebon itself. (Jeremy Huang, 2006). 
Apart from fauna ornaments, the ceramics attached to Siti Inggil also contain flora 
ornaments such as flowers. Plants are considered symbols that have natural strength and are 
resistant to various changes in weather or climate. Plants/flowers that are often used as ornaments, 
one of which is the lotus. For the Chinese people, especially Buddhists, the lotus has a special place 
in their hearts. In Buddhism, the lotus is believed to be the Buddha's seat, symbolizing majesty. In 
Chinese culture, Lotus symbolizes purity and perfection and always grows clean and attractive,  
even in mud or swamps (Polniwati Salim, 2016). About Islam, Opan sees that every Muslim, 
wherever he is, must be able to maintain the nature of his monotheism, lest it fade and be 
contaminated by the environment , which makes him further away from the Most Holy Essence. 
In other words, if you want to be friends with anyone and anywhere, Godly values must always be 
held firmly. Humans must be able to adapt to the environment wherever they are and be as helpful 
as possible to others (Open Safari, 2020). 
Various cultures from outside that color are embedded in the architecture of the Kasepuhan 
Palace, indicating  that cultural acculturation has occurred within the Cirebon Sultanate. This 
research view is in line with Keesing's theory that acculturation is a social process that arises when 
a group of people with certain cultures encounter certain foreign cultural e lements so that the 
foreign culture is gradually accepted and processed into their own culture without causing their 
cultural identity. -each missing (FM Keesing, 1953). 
The existence of Chinese ceramic stickers installed on the front wall of the palace means 
that Chinese ceramics are a culture from the outside, not a local culture. Because this culture came 
from outside, the ceramic plaster was placed on the front wall of the Cirebon Sultanate and placed 
outside. Meanwhile, the presence of Chinese ceramics in the interior of the Kasepuhan Palace 
shows the existence of ethnic Chinese who later became the wife of the Sultan of Gunung Jati, the 
daughter of Ong Tien. Therefore , it is not surprising that until now , the influence of Chinese 
culture is outside and inside the palace. This means that Chinese culture has become an essential 
and integral part of the Cirebon Sultanate, namely with the marriage between Sunan Gunung Jati 
and Puteri Ong Tien. As Opan said, the highest level of acculturation is through marriage. Gillin 
also agrees with this. According to him, intermarriage is the most favorable condition for the 
acculturation process (Gillin & Gillin, 1948). If the sultan had not had a Chinese wife, it is possible 
that Chinese culture would not have colored the Kasepuhan Palace. Opan further said that goods 
or products from China at that time, especially ceramics, were known to be very good in terms of 
motifs and quality. Everyone - from sultans to the people - liked the motifs or ornaments on the 
ceramics or silk that Ong Tien brought. Later in its development, these ornaments came to color 
and influenced the cultures that developed in Cirebon. This opinion is also reinforce d by PR A 
Arief Natadiningrat's statement that Chinese culture has begun to have a significant influence on 
Cirebon culture since the arrival of Ong Tien's daughter.

--- PAGE: 13 ---
39| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 39 of 42 
 
Thus, the available archaeological evidence reveals that the diffusion of Chinese -style 
ceramics to the Cirebon area, especially the Kasepuhan Palace, seems to be related to the 
penetration of Islam because Chinese-style ceramics were found in the Kasepuhan Palace , which 
was an Islamic sultanate. Ceramics can be seen in the palace buildings, Astana Gunung Jati, 
Gunung Jati Mosque, and Sunyaragi Cave. In addition, social symbols have a similar role, as these 
imports are found in high concentrations in the graves of elites involved in maritime trade. These 
exotic goods also functioned as symbols and embodiments of trading power. 
As explained above, various archaeological evidence shows that multiple cultures 
influenced the Kasepuhan Palace . The philosophical meaning is that even though Cirebon is an 
Islamic Sultanate, it is very open to the dynamics of society and includes various cultures and other 
people's religions. This sultanate wants to stand on cultural diversity and respect other people's 
beliefs. For example, one of the buildings at the front of the Kasepuhan Palace is the Siti Inggil 
wall. On the Siti Inggil's walls is the Candi Bentar Gate, a Chinese and Dutch ceramics display . 
These ornaments are placed at the front of the Kasepuhan Palace so everyone can see them. 
Islam as a religious teaching always dialogues and adapts to the local culture where Islam 
exists. There will be a process of mutual influence between religion and local culture, even though 
sometimes culture is more dominant in human life. From this dialogue, a new culture emerged 
that was mutually agreed upon. Any religion, including Islam, cannot separate itself from the reality 
around it and where it is located. Islam was not born in a cultural vacuum. Bet ween Islam and 
reality, a dialogue that takes pl ace dynamically is required . That is why the archipelago people 
accepted Islam with open arms at that time, even though they already had established beliefs and 
convictions. Islam does not displace local culture but instead embraces it. Since the beginning, 
Islam has been integrated with Indonesianism through the teachings taught by the saints. 
Islam appears to be creative in dialogue with local communities and accepts community traditions 
while also modifying them into a new culture that can be taken by local communities and is still 
within the framework of Islam. Therefore, the arrival of Islam in Indonesia greatly supported 
intellectualism, which was not visible during the time of Hinduism and Buddhism. The 
reconciliation of Islam with societal traditions is believed to be a process of acceptance carried out 
naturally and peacefully without conquest. This dialogue between Islam and practice is carried out 
in a spirit of negotiation. Negotiation is a process of interpreting something present and 
interpreting itself to look for something new that is known in culture as something alive. 
Negotiations function to harmonize foreign culture with local wisdom. Through negotiation, not 
everything from outside is accepted but modified and adapted to the recipient's traditions —the 
Islamic negotiation process occurs when dialogue with local culture appears in the scheme of 
influencing and being influenced. Islam influences the culture of local communities and vice versa. 
Islam is influenced by community traditions framed in the spirit of reconciliation. This reciprocal 
process produces a harmonious nuance in the Islamic style of the archipelago. Islam and local 
wisdom are placed in equal positions  for active dialogue so that one of them is not in a subordinate 
position. The creative exchange that occurs between the two does not mean "sacrificing" Islam 
and placing cultural Islam as a type of Islam that is "low" and incompatible with "pure" Islam. 
 
Conclusion  
Buildings in the palace Kasepuhan Cirebon, which contains several Chinese ornaments, align with 
the values of moderation religions that have grown and developed in Indonesia. Several Chinese 
decorations attached to the Siti Inggil building include the importance of religious moderation. 
First, Siti Inggil implies tolerance and accommodation towards Islamic, Hindu, and Chinese 
cultures. This means there is a willingness to understand and be ready to live with people of 
different religions and cultures. The diversity of creation, skin color, language, nation, life system, 
and human thought is the will of Allah SWT. Second is ceramics , which implies that social and 
cultural capital contains the values of religious moderation. This means that Islam, as a spiritual 
teaching, is often open with an attitude willing to engage in dialectics with various cultures

--- PAGE: 14 ---
Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton …| 40 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 40 of 42 
anywhere. Reality and Islam have become a necessity that requires continuity in a suitable 
dialectical manner to balance (tawazun) in religious life in interacting with social culture. 
In tawazun, the principle implemented balances teachings related to Allah SWT ( habl min 
Allah ) and social relations (habl min al-nas). A relationship with Allah SWT is a relationship that is 
oriented towards a personal approach to the Creator through worship , fasting, praying, reading 
the Koran, and so on. Meanwhile, social relations tend towards efforts to implement social ethics: 
helping each other, working together, and respecting others based on affection and mutual respect. 
Study This writer focuses on the ornaments of Chinese buildings in Siti Inggil. Of course, much is 
needed to study the culture in Cirebon, which should have been considered  in the study. For 
researchers Next, the writer recommends several things to be used as the study's focus . First, 
Cirebon culture is influenced outside, besides the Chinese influence.  
 
References 
Agus Iswanto,  dkk. (2021). Narasi Moderasi Beragama Dalam Naskah Serat Carub Kandha 
Religious. Jurnal Lektur Keagamaan, 19(2), 37–68. https://doi.org/10.31291/jlk.v19i1.910 
Arafah, S. (2020). Moderasi Beragama: Pengarusutamaan Kearifan Lokal Dalam Meneguhkan 
Kepelbagaian (Sebuah Praktik Pada Masyarakat Plural). Mimikri: Jurnal Agama Dan 
Kebudayaan, 6(1), 58–73. 
Atabik, A. (2016). Percampuran Budaya Jawa Dan Cina : Harmoni dan Toleransi Beragama 
Masyarakat Lasem. Sabda : Jurnal Kajian Kebudayaan , 11(1), 1. 
https://doi.org/10.14710/sabda.v11i1.13215 
Dali, Z. (2017). Pendidikan islam multikultural. Nuansa, X(1), 9–14. 
Gazali, E., & Saefuloh, H. (2019). Kebutuhan Peserta Didik Dan Rancang Bangun Media 
Pembelajaran Bahasa Arab Di Madrasah Aliyah. Arabi : Journal of Arabic Studies , 4(1), 87. 
https://doi.org/10.24865/ajas.v4i1.117 
Hanafi, Y., & M. Saefi, T. D. dkk. (2022). Students’ perspectives on religious moderation: A 
qualitative study into religious literacy processes. HTS Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies , 
78(1), 2–7. 
Hilmy, M. (2013). Whether Indonesia’s Islamic moderatism?: A reexamination on the moderate 
vision of Muhammadiyah and NU. Journal of Indonesian Islam , 7(1), 24 –48. 
https://doi.org/10.15642/JIIS.2013.7.1.24-48 
Junaedi, E. (2019). Inilah Moderasi Beragama Perspektif Kemenag. Harmoni, 18(2), 182 –186. 
https://doi.org/10.32488/harmoni.v18i2.414 
Meisar Ashari. (2013). Studi Bentuk, Fungsi Dan Makna Ornamen Makam Di Kompleks Makam 
Raja-Raja Bugis. Dewa Ruci, 8(3), 444–460. 
Mohamad Fahri, A. Z. (2019). Moderasi Beragama di Indonesia. Intizar, 25(2), 95–100. 
Mukhoyyaroh. (2021). Akulturasi Budaya Tionghoa dan Cirebon di Kesultanan Cirebon. UIN Jakarta. 
Mukhoyyaroh, Saepudin, D., & Tanggok, M. I. (2021). Chinese Culture in the Cirebon Sultanate: 
Symbolic and Philosophical Meanings. Insaniyat: Journal of Islam and Humanities, 6(1), 15–28. 
Muslih, M. (2010). Wacana Masyarakat Madani: Dialektika Islam dengan Problem Kebangsaan. 
Tsaqafah, 6(1), 131. https://doi.org/10.21111/tsaqafah.v6i1.142 
Ramli, R. (2019). Moderasi Beragama bagi Minoritas Muslim Etnis Tionghoa di Kota Makassar. 
KURIOSITAS: Media Komunikasi Sosial Dan Keagamaan , 12(2), 135 –162. 
https://doi.org/10.35905/kur.v12i2.1219 
Saifuddin, L. H. (2019). Moderasi Beragama (1st ed.). Badan Litbang dan Diklat Kementerian Agama 
RI. https://cendikia.kemenag.go.id/publik/buku_detail/463#flipbook 
Sofiyawati, N. (2017). Kajian Gaya Hias Singa Barong dan Paksi Naga Liman Dalam Estetika 
Hibriditas Kereta Kesultanan Cirebon. Sosioteknologi, 16(3), 304–324. 
Sugiman, I. (2020). Wawancara dengan Iman Sugiman (Pemandu Keraton Kasepuhan Cirebon) 
pada tanggal. In Report. 
Suprapto, W. (2019). Cap Go Meh Sebagai Media Pendidikan Resolusi Konflik Di Tengah

--- PAGE: 15 ---
41| Mukhoyyaroh, Yunus Chinese ornaments on the Siti Inggil Keraton… 
 
 
INJIRE, Vol. 1. No. 1 June 2023 | Page 41 of 42 
 
Keragaman Etnis Kota Singkawang. Jurnal PIPSI (Jurnal Pendidikan IPS Indonesia) , 4(1), 1. 
https://doi.org/10.26737/jpipsi.v4i1.1001 
Sutrisno, E. (2019). Actualisation of Religion Moderation in Education Institutions. Jurnal Bimas 
Islam, 12(2), 323–348. 
Yadi Ruyadi. (2010). Model Pendidikan Karakter Berbasis Kearifan Budaya Lokal (Penelitian 
terhadap Masyarakat Adat Kampung Benda Kerep Cirebon Provinsi Jawa Barat untuk 
Pengembangan Pendidikan Karakter di Sekolah). Proceedings of The 4th International Conference on 
Teacher Education; Join Conference UPI & UPSI, November, 576–594. 
Yunus. (2019). Pluralisme Agama Dalam Pendidikan.  Prosiding Seminar Nasional, Harmonisasi 
Keberagaman Dan Kebangsaan Bagi Generasi Milenial, 96–102. 
Yunus, Y., & Salim, A. (2019). Eksistensi Moderasi Islam dalam Kurikulum Pembelajaran PAI di 
SMA. Al-Tadzkiyyah: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam , 9(2), 181. 
https://doi.org/10.24042/atjpi.v9i2.3622

