--- PAGE: 1 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni  
Vol. 16., No. 1, April 2021, pp. 22-36 
ISSN 1412-4181, eISSN 2685287X 
https://jurnal.isi-ska.ac.id/index.php/dewaruci/             
 
        10.33153/dewaruci.v16i1.3248                                                                        dewaruci@isi-ska.ac.id  
 
22 
 
Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance  
in Pura Mangkunegaran 
Sriyadi 1,*, R.M. Pramutomo 2 
a Master’s Art Study, Postgraduate ISI Surakarta, Surakarta and 57126, Indonesia 
1 yadisri375@gmail.com*; 2 rmpram60@gmail.com 
* Corresponding Author 
Received September 14, 2020; accepted December 22, 2020; published April 2021 
ABS T RACT  
 
 KEYWORDS 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran is a dance repertoire 
Yogyakarta style that successfully has absorbed from Krida Beksa Wirama during 
the reign of Mangkunegara  VII. Though, based on observation, the presentation 
style in Mangkunegaran has a significant difference from the Yogyakarta style. 
This article aimed to study about presentation style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun 
dance in Mangkunegaran to determine the formin g of its presentation techniques. 
This study uses an ethnochoreology approach with archival research methods. The 
results showed that the style could be change as responses to challenges or 
problems from the socio-cultural conditions. The forming of the Bed haya Bedhah 
Madiun dance style in Mangkunegaran does not occur in an event but is a process. 
The presentation style formed because of a problem with the inheritance system so 
that it undergoes significant changes. The problem arises from social, political,  
cultural, and economic conditions. The response against those problems has to form 
the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance characteristics in Mangkunegaran though not 
all were positive. 
 Presentation Style 
Change 
History of Dance  
Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun 
 
 
 
This is an open-
access article under 
the CC–BY-SA 
license 
 
1. Introduction 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun  is a dance repertoire Yogyakarta style that has developed in 
Mangkunegaran.  This dance has name, gending, and movements almost same as bedhaya dance 
Kraton Kasultanan Yogyakarta style. Based on the name of the main gending that had used, Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance called the Bedhaya Gandakusuma dance.  
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran is a result of absorption from Krida Beksa 
Wirama (KBW) Yogyakarta. The absorption has carried out through learning system at KBW. G.R.Aj. 
Siti Nurul Kamaril Ngasarati Kusumawardani accompanied by several relatives and 
Mangkunegaran’s niyaga had been practicing every Sunday at KBW (Sriyadi and Pramutomo 2020). 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance first performance in Mangkunegaran had been performing on June 
16, 1939 in commemoration of Tri Windu Jumeneng Mangkunegara VII  (“Bedaja-Dans van zeven 
jonkvrouwen, uitgevoerd bij gelegenheid van het Triwindhoe -Bestuursjubeleum van Z.H. Pangeran 
Adipati Aria Mangkoenagara VII” 1939; Suharti 1990, 80). 
Based on historical reviews, the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance, apart from being a repertoire of 
the Mangkunegaran dance, also exists in the Yogyakarta dance style. Though based on observations, 
the presentation style of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran and Kraton 
Kasultanan Yogyakarta have significant differences. The Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance 
presentation in Mangkunegaran is by seven dancers, while the expression in Yogyakarta is by nine 
dancers. The difference in the number of dancers affects the formation and floor patterns. The 
difference is not only in the number of dancers but also in movements, dance  music, make-up, and 
costumes. 
The information above develops a problem regarding the presentation style of the Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran. The Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance presentation in 
Mangkunegaran based on Yogyakarta dance style has a significant difference. This article aimed to 
study about presentation style of  Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran. This study is 
crucial to understand the forming of presentation technique s. This article in tends to carry out the 

--- PAGE: 2 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
23 
 
innovation process from the artists in Mangkunegaran. The innovation process is an adaptation of the 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Yogyakarta style in Mangkunegaran because it exists in different 
socio-cultural conditions. 
The presentation style was a result of the creative process of the artists. According to Holt (2000, 
85), the tone was born from the artist’s creative response to his cultural atmosphere. That caused the 
presentation style to have differences from time to time and from one region to another. Prabowo 
(2003, 3) argues that dance's presentation style has influenced the artists' views and ideas related to 
the era's socio-cultural conditions. Changes and adaptations in presentation styles occur to overcome 
socio-cultural constraints. 
The forming analysis of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance presentation style will be using the 
challenge and response theory by Arnold Toynbee. According to Toynbee (1988, 97) , society's 
challenges will change as a result. The community response to the existing challenges is an adaptation. 
According to Kaplan and Manners (2000, 112–14), transformation is a process of connecting a cultural 
system with the environment that aims to maintain cultural continuity. Maintaining the continuity of 
culture has been influenced by various challenges. The artist ’s response to the challenges is an 
adaptation process that caused a change.       
The factors that assume have affected the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance's continuity are social, 
political, cultural, and economic conditions. According to R.M. Soedarsono (2003, 69) , social, 
political, and economic factors often influence the development of art in the world. Theoretically, 
political, social, cultural, and economic factors influence the formation of the Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance presentation style in Mangkunegaran.    
2. Method 
This study has used the ethnocoreology approach. Kurath  uses an ethnocoreology system by 
emphasizing non-Western ethnic dance culture based on the cultural texts that gave birth to dance 
culture (Suharti 2015, 30). It means that dance cannot be separated from a context because dance is 
a local community's cultural text. The ethnocoreology approach formed from a premise borrows from 
various disciplines. This approach relies on qualitative data dominated by the study of literature or 
dance ethnography (Pramutomo, Joko, and Mulyana 2016, 17–18).  
In this research, literature study dominates with the archival research method. This method has 
used because this article is a historical research form that aims to describe the forming of the Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance presentation style in Mangkunegaran. Archival research is a method involving 
the study of historical documents. The document contents are information about an organization, an 
individual, and the activities carried out at a certain time. Historical archiv es are becoming data 
sources to extract data from past events (Ventresca and Mohr 2002, 1–14).  
Pura Mangkunegaran’s archives or documents (art records, letters, certificates, work reports, etc.), 
personal notes, biographies, newspapers, magazines, journal articles, and academic literature (books 
and research reports) had used in this study. Except those, images count as data sources too in the 
archival research method. Endter (2000, 20–21) argues that ideas become the documentation of an 
experience that can use as concrete evidence that the event is valid. According to him, images can 
explain people’s past lives. It means that the pictures can become a collective memory of an event 
that occurred in the past.  
In addition to conducting archival studies, the authors also conducted direct observations and 
interviews. Direct observation is to obtain the latest data from  Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun's 
choreography as a continuity from the past. The use of this data is to present the current choreography 
of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun. The interview explores dance artists’ records in Mangkunegaran  and 
completes and verifies data obtained from archival sources. 
--- PAGE: 3 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
24 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1. Absorption of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Mangkunegaran During the Reign of 
Mangkunegara VII 
One of Mangkunegara VII ’s efforts in advancing Mangkunegaran is by developing the arts. In 
the development of art, Mangkunegara VII had broad views and ideas with a modern and open -
minded which led to the absorption of art from outside and then innovated it. Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance is a result of absorption from KBW Yogyakarta. Mangkunegara VII then made several 
innovations in Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance, so it has several differences. There are two 
assumptions why he is innovating the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance. The first assumption relates 
to cultural differences (dance) that trigger problems in t he absorption process, while the second 
assumption relates to political competition through social development. 
Pura Mangkunegaran has a tradition with a stylistic orientation to the Surakarta style. However, 
specifically for the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun danc e in Mangkunegaran, the direction refers to the 
Yogyakarta style. This orientation creates a problem because the two types have different techniques 
and forms of movement. According to Simatupang (2013, 60) , the habit of body condition with 
certain actions and states of motion will affect body movements’ intensity. Therefore, the aesthetic 
stability of dancers in Mangkunegara , which is familiar in the Sura karta style dance movement , 
makes it difficult to accept the techniques and forms of action of the Yogyakarta style. 
Problems arising from cultural differences (dance) between Mangkunegaran and Yogyakarta 
forced innovation as an adaptation. Innovations occ ur in techniques and movement forms that 
difficult to do. The creation has done under Mangkunegara VII and Gusti Timur's guidance, making 
it seemed luwes and comfortable in dancing it (Suharti 1990, 95) . Apart from the techniques and 
movement forms, problems arise from the music dance have used.  Gending was using is a dance 
musical Yogyakarta style but has a sense of working in Surakarta style. Music dance surely affects 
the application of techniques and movement forms, considering that its rhythm  has a close 
relationship with the music’s rhythm. 
The second assumption has several opinions about culture ’s development as a form of political 
conflict or political competition in Kraton Mataram Islam's four fractions. As quoted by Soedarsono 
(1997, 92)  and Suharti (2015, 4 –5), Anthony Day argues that political competition betwee n the 
fragments of Kraton Mataram Islam led to cultural conflicts. According to Pramutomo (2010, 
186), keagung-binataraan that shackled forced causes Javanese king to be creative to reflect his 
status as the highest individual.     
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun is one of the dance repertoires in Mangkunegaran , was performing in 
ceremonies and state protocols. At formal ceremonies, Javanese aristocrats show their greatness and 
majesty by the ancient traditional methods to maintain degree and prosperity (Sumardjan 1990, 32). 
Be able to perform  adiluhung arts, such as the  bedhaya dance, to prove greatness and majesty 
(Poerwanto 198 9; Supanggah 2000) . Dance performances for ceremonial receptions and royal 
banquets are inherent in the prestige of social strata in Javanese’s sight (Pramutomo 2010, 114–15). 
This prestigious value has assumed stimulating Mangkunegara VII in innovating Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance that absorbed from KBW Yogyakarta. According to Lindsay (1991, 228–29), Javanese 
rulers appear to leave their mark on the arts that had managed, created, and developed under their 
protection. Those actions have been doing to show their creativity and aesthetic authority.       
The risk from Mangkunegara VII’s absorbing and innovating Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance has 
to admit that it is culturally subordinate to the  Kraton Major. It is because as an  adipati, it is not 
allowed to have bedhaya dance with nine dancers. It means that Mangkunegara VII should change 
the number of dancers from nine to seven. The dancers’ number affects the choreography because 
there is an omission of a section on the endhel wedalan ngajeng and endhel wedalan wingking in the 
bedhaya sanga dance. The positive value of Mangkunegara VII’s actions is he can show his ability 
to created innovation of absorption from KBW Yogyakarta as a result, so it has a different 
presentation style. This difference in presentation style c an show the characteristics of the Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran. 
--- PAGE: 4 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
25 
 
  
Fig. 1. Lajur formation in Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran 
(Sketch: Sriyadi, 2020) 
 
Fig. 2. Lajur formation in bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style 
 (Sketch: Sriyadi, 2020) 
Those two assumptions about the causes of innovation seem to support each other between 
weakness and the desire to demonstrate creativity due to cultural competence. Different cultural 
(dance) problems are a weakness that could use  to prove adaptive abilities by innovating Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance, thus forming a new presentation style. Mangkunegara VII's success in 
innovating is proof that Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance s Yogyakarta style in Mangkunegaran  
actively obtained through the learning system  KBW. That means Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance 
Yogyakarta style is not a gift or loan that only have received passively, but it ’s due to internal 
encouragement from Mangkunegaran ’s policies. It can be proving his  creativity to increase his 
authority as the higher of the hierarchy of social strata in Mangkunegaran.    
The innovation of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Yogyakarta style in Mangkunegaran is not 
doing totally, but partially (Soeryosoeyarso and Darmawan 1992) . This partial innovation is the 
factor in the absence of significant differences between Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance movements 
in Mangkunegaran with Yogyakarta style. Structurally, both structure movements and the serving 
structure have been maintaining. The structure of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in 
Mangkunegaran seems like Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun’s structure dance in Yogyakarta style, based  
on the notes of B.R.Ay. Yudanegara (“Badaja Bedah Madhioen,” t.t.; Kusumo 2015) . In the part 
of mundur beksan , only the movement o f lampah pocong  does not apply. So, the formation that 
formed during mundur beksan is tiga-tiga. It is different from the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in 

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
26 
 
Yogyakarta style that uses a  lajur formation (Hastuti 1983, 16) . The lampah pocong movement 
has generally used in  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style in the part of  mundur beksan  as a form 
of milir movement to change the formation of a tiga-tiga into lajur. 
The innovation of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Yogyakarta style in Mangkunegaran does 
not change the structure movements series had used. It had done by changing some of the 
implementation techniques of pose element and movement element, forming the se quence of 
movements. Based on the study of photography and videography, the movement patterns between 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance an d srimpi dances in Mangkunegaran (absorbed from KBW) 
with the dance of bedhaya and srimpi in Yogyakarta style has no significant difference. Photography 
studies show the pose element have used almost the same. Researchers assume this is because 
Mangkunegaran’s dancers learn directly from primary sources with a goodly learning system. The 
different cultural (dance) problems between Mangkunegaran and Yogyakarta can be resolving 
(although not completely), so they do not significantly influence presentation style changes. 
 
Fig. 3. The pose of tinting arms in bedhaya and srimpi dance Yogyakarta style  
(Photo: Ical Yulianto’s Collection, Repro Sriyadi 2019) 
 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
27 
 
 
Fig. 4. The pose of tinting arms in srimpi (also in bedhaya) dance 
Yogyakarta style absorbed by Mangkunegaran 
(Photo: Rekso Pustoko Mangkunegaran’s Collection, Repro Sriyadi 2017) 
According to Hastuti (1983), the difference in presentation style between the Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran with bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style appears in the processing of 
movement techniques or anatomical coordination. Hastuti gave examples of some differences 
between Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Mangkunegaran style and bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style, 
have obtained from R.Ngt. Waluyo Suryosuwito. Here are some of these differences,  
- In Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Mangkunegaran style encot movement has soft accents, 
while in the bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style has strong accents.  
- The process of forming arms movements at the time of nyiku (like 
in nggruda and ngenceng movements) is not too stiff, in contrast with  bedhaya dance 
Yogyakarta style.  
- Legs position in basic pose has a smaller volume than bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. 
- In Bedhaya Bed hah Madiun dance Mangkunegaran  style, laya in gending is faster than 
Yogyakarta, so the movement rhythm is faster.  
Based on data obtained from interviews with Isbandiyah, Bedhaya Bedha h Madiun dance in 
Mangkunegaran technically has several differences with  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. 
In tolehan, the head’s position to the right or left is not  nyoklek, but jejeg. It is different from  the 
bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style, this tolehan seems like tolehan in bedhaya dance Surakarta style. 
Placement of the arms in  trap sumping seems like in the movements series of atrap sumping, ukel 
tawing, and nyamber trisig. It is not sleeping with the fingers facing forward, but the fingers standing 
facing up. This arms position is different from  the bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. 
The udhet application technique is not using  nyathok but kebyok, such as 
using sampur in bedhaya dance Surakarta style.  Seblak and nglawe movements are to the side, not 
to the back corner like  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style.  Seblak and nglawe movements look 
like seblak sampur movement in bedhaya dance Surakarta style. In Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance 
Mangkunegaran style, the arms movements look more flexible, it is different from  bedhaya dance 
Yogyakarta style, which has straight (stiff) arms movements.  
The make-up and costume of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran has different 
significantly from  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta  style. Bed haya Bedhah Madiun ’s make -up and 
costume in Mangkunegaran is in tune to Mangkunegara VII’s taste (Soeryosoeyarso and Darmawan 
1992, 18). With his innovations in make-up and costume, Mangkunegara VII showed his creativity 
and aesthetic authority. Mangkunegara VII in costume innovation tried to combine Kraton 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
28 
 
Kasultanan Yogyakarta, Kasultanan Kanoman Cirebon, and Kraton Kasunanan Surakarta, in order 
to formed his characteristics.  
 Make-up had used in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran is corrective make-
up that beautifies the face by not using godheg and sogokan. It is different from the corrective make-
up on the  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style, which uses  godheg and sogokan made of ve lvet 
decorated with a  gim and ketep. The outfit used was a sleeveless vest ( kotangan) with 
a jamangan hairdo. The jamang took the style from Kasultanan Kanoman Cirebon (Soeryosoeyarso 
and Darmawan 1992, 18) . The costume’s design used samparan, so it significantly differs  from 
the bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style.  Samparan cloth design is commonly used in 
the bedhaya dance Surakarta style while bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style uses seredan cloth design. 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance uses a  samparan cloth design with the same function as 
the bedhaya dance Surakarta style. The winding direction in the samparan cloth design same as the 
winding direction in  seredan, it’s different with  samparan in the  bedhaya dance Surakarta 
style. Samparan in kapang-kapang movement and  sila position functioned like  seredan to fulfill 
ethical and aesthetic values,  and the direction  samparan winding equate d with the direction 
of seredan winding.    
 
Fig. 5. Performance of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance during the reign of Mangkunegara VII 
(Photo: Rekso Pustoko Mangkunegaran’s Collection, Repro Sriyadi 2019) 
The music on bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style in the maju beksan and mundur beksan parts uses 
Western instruments combined with gamelan. Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Yogyakarta style in 
Mangkunegaran does not use Western instruments on maju beksan  and mundur beksan  parts. 
Gending has used in that part is ladrang irama I using bedhug instrument.  
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran at the start was using  kondha, but at the end 
of Mangkunegara VII’s reign, kondha has no longer used. Kondha conveyed about the dance genre 
had presented, the choreographer, a brief history of the dance, the content of the story, and the actors 
or dancers. Format and grammar of the  kondha writing of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in 
Mangkunegaran resemble the writing of the kondha in bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. 
During the reign of Mangkunegara VII, there were qualifications for the presentation of dance, 
namely those presented by  putra-sentana putri (relatives) and abdi dalem . The dance 
of bedhaya and srimpi dance Yogyakarta style successfully absorbed from KBW is dancing by 
relatives. Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance is one of the dance repertoires. It showed from 
the kondha have used in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran (“Gerongan 
Bedhaya” 1995) . Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance has a different position from other dances 
presented by abdi dalem, affecting the inheritance system.  

--- PAGE: 8 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
29 
 
 During the last period of Mangkunegara VII ’s reign, Mangkunegaran experienced a knock due 
to the Japanese arrival. The Japanese a ppearance influenced the intensity of dance performances in 
Mangkunegaran. Dancing activities in Mangkunegaran become rare. Gusti Nurul was not allowed to 
dance, and her fellow dancers getting married and moved to follow their husbands, so there were no 
longer bedhaya and srimpi dances performed by relatives. Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance has a 
function to show the crown princess's existence in Mangkunegaran,  and it is getting fade. Even 
though dancing was prohibited, Gusti Nurul has still assigned to teach Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun 
dance to the abdi dalem Langenpraja Mangkunegaran (Soeryosoeyarso and Darmawan 1992, 16–17; 
Soemarsono, Brotohatmodjo, and Widyohamijoyo 2011, 60). This socio-political situation caused a 
shift in dancers . Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance originally has presented by relatives began to be 
taught to  abdi d alem. The socio -political situation has worsened by the emergence of the 
independence revolution and Mangkunegara VII’s death on July 19, 1944 (Hermono 2014, 101–2). 
3.2. Revolution of Independence and Continuity of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance During 
the Reign of Mangkunegara VIII  
The independence revolution caused the Mangkunegaran economy to decline. Significantly, the 
Mangkunegaran economy slumped as the central government has frozen its assets of plantations and 
companies. After the proclamation of independence, there was a stru ggle for economic resources 
belonging to Mangkunegaran with the central government. Jakarta District Court in 1952 decided 
the central government won the case of struggle financial resources. Based on Penetapan Presiden 2 
July 1952 no. 224/1952 g, Mangkunegaran’s areas in the form and nature referred to 
as Zelbestuursregelen Mangkunegaran Staatsblad, has abolished on July 15, 1946. So, although the 
status of Mangkunegaran ’s assets is not clear, by de facto , it has been controlled by the central 
government and PPRI as an official government -owned institution. They have the right to manage 
Mangkunegaran assets (“Keputusan Pengadi lan Negeri di Jakarta Th. 1952 Tentang Pembekuan 
Harta Benda Milik Mangkunegaran” 1952).  
The elimination of the Mangkunegaran area and nationalization efforts caused all ex -
Mangkunegaran assets to be frozen. Mangkunegara VIII responded by establishing several business 
fields to restore the Mangkunegaran economy. The Biro Pariwisata Mangkunegaran is one of the 
business fields have established by Mangkunegara VIII. According to Mangkunegara, there are 
several things that the central government cannot take  over, including spiritual, cultural, and noble 
values , as Mangkunegaran’s views. Besides, there was Mangkunegaran’s building that is the former 
seat of the Kadipaten Mangkunegaran government, a collection of cultural objects, libraries, and 
other assets collected in  Fonds van Eigendommen Mangkunegaran  (“Penjelasan Mengenai SK Sri 
Mangkunegara VIII 19 Juli 1978 No.78/SP/78” 1978) . It is, of course, can be used as capital in the 
Mangkunegaran economic development through tourism.   
Mangkunegara VIII’s responses to the weak economic situation by developing cultural tourism 
have positively impacted  the development of art in Mangkunegaran. Mangkunegara’s success in 
developing tourism in the cultu ral field can restore an aura that the independence revolution has 
destroyed. Through tourism visits, the introduction of cultural products can return the image of 
Mangkunegaran. 
The establishment of Biro Pariwisata began with the establishment of the Mang kunegaran 
Museum in 1968. The Biro Pariwisata officially established in 1970 the services of K.R.M.H. Suseno 
Suryosumasto, who a relative of Mangkunegaran and the expertise of Mangkunegara VIII and the 
empress (Pudjiyanti 1985, 56; Mulyatno 1992, 22; Daryono 1999, 56) . Since then, Mangkunegaran 
has been opening to the public and has received a lot of foreign tourists. In greeting tourist guests, a 
dance that has develo ped in Mangkunegaran is performing. Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance is one 
of the dance repertoires that often served as a tourist treat in Mangkunegaran (Isbandiyah, interview 
October 19 2019).    
Artwork, including dance, is a form of integrative need born and grows equal to society's interests 
(Jazuli 2014, 47) . Changes in Mangkunegaran ’s interest in Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance 
performance led to a change in presentation style. According to Soedarsono (1999, 237), the form of 
palace dance works that served tourists generally has a duration that is not too long. That is related 
to the cultural transformation that le ads to industrial’s cultural life. In industrial culture, the aspect 
--- PAGE: 9 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
30 
 
of time is concerned. Therefore, the presentation duration in dance takes into account because of the 
aesthetic moments that concentrated to enjoyed a different presentation in the concept of traditional 
culture. In traditional culture, an aesthetic moment can be concerned for a long time, so the duration 
of dance offerings at that time is generally long (Suharti 2015, 117) . This  adaptation is the 
presentation style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangku negaran is a reduction in the 
presentation duration.   
Reducing Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance's duration presentation  has done by not using 
compaction techniques but by cutting techniques. Rustopo (2001, 159) argues that compaction is an 
effort to harmonize dance with the concept of kemungguhan. The harmony referred to is the unity 
between the form and the value of its expression.  Dance compaction is rearranging by minimizing 
repetition of motion, eliminating less significant mo vement, changing the tempo, and variations in 
space (Widyastutieningrum 2012, 2 9). So, compacting is rearranging a dance work without losing 
the essence of the dance work.   
Reducing the duration of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance during the reign of Mangkunegara 
VIII is by eliminating Beksan Pokok I. Part of Beksan Pokok I  had removed because it considered 
insignificant, only part  of Beksan Pokok II has used. Beksan Pokok I or Beksan Ketawang is the 
climax point of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance. However, in the bedhaya dance presentation , 
the Beksan Pokok I and the Beksan Pokok II each have an essence. Beksan Pokok I is a standard part 
(enjeran) in bedhaya dance has a symbolic abstract meaning (“Konser Tari Karaton Ngayugyokarto 
Hadiningrat di Gedung Kesenian Jakarta” 1988). This part contains the philosophy of life through a 
cycle that describes the ‘beginning’ and having to return to the ‘beginning’ (Pudjasworo 1982, 81). 
The technique of reducing the duration by eliminating the  Beksan Pokok I also removes the 
main gending, which generally was using as a naming system for the bedhaya dance. It is certainly 
not following the norms of the previous  bedhaya dance arrangements. The order of G.K.P. 
Mangkunegara VIII chooses the cutting techniques  as the easiest and fastest way to reduce the 
duration of the dish by thematically staying in harmony. The Beksan Pokok II is a part that presents 
the story in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance (Isbandiyah, interview 19 October 2019).   
John Pamberton, on October 19 1976, recorded an audio performance of the Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance at Pendapa Mangkunegaran as part of a tour. The recordings are part of the Cornell 
University digital collection, and the public can access them via the Cornell University webp age. 
The structure of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance presentation in Pemberton’s audio recording is 
in line w ith Isbandiyah ’s opinion. Isbandiyah said there was no replacement or addition to 
the ketawang part taken to change  the d ish’s duration . The reduc tion in time did not affect the 
techniques and forms of movement used previously (Isbandiyah, interview June 17 2020). 
The battles of Panembahan Senopati and Retno Dumilah in Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance has 
depicted through the  gelar formation in the  ketawang part by the roles of the  batak and endhel. 
Based on the Rekso Pustoko document with the title “Badaja Bedah Madhioen,” script code G.17, 
the part of endhel shieth the  patrem as a symbol of Retno Dumilah ’s defeat over Panembahan 
Senopati. The analysis result of John Pamberton ’s audio recordings shows the loss did not indicate 
by the role of  endhel shieth the patrem but drop ping it. The results of this analysis supported by 
Isbandiyah (interview June 17 2020), who at that time often played the role of endhel in the Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance. However, regarding the event when this change is not known with certainty 
because t here is no supporting data. The s ymbolic change of Retno Dumilah ’s defeat, from 
role endhel shieth patrem to become dropping it, has aligned with the 
accompanying sindhenan narrative text. The  sindhenan narrative text used in this part is “ gregel 
kanang keris dhawah gya sinambut.”  
Based on Brontodiningrat’s opinion (1981, 19–20), the battle between roles endhel and batak in 
parts, endhel and batak in bedhaya dance is a lust symbol in humans. In bedhaya dance Yogyakarta 
style, the keris war generally ended up with shieth the keris as a symbol of self-control. It is different 
from the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran though based on  the bedhaya dance 
Yogyakarta style. The change in Retno Dumilah’s defeat symbolic system can provide the different 
views between Yogyakarta and Mangkunegaran ’s people. The symbol system applied in Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance has a specials chara cter that depicts Retno Dumilah ’s defeat against 
--- PAGE: 10 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
31 
 
Panembahan Senopati. Simultaneously,  the symbol system that is involv ed in the  bedhaya dance 
Yogyakarta’s style is universal.  
G.K.P. Mangkunegara VIII around the 1970s innovated Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance costume 
in Mangkunegaran. This innovation has carried out by changing the design clothes of the kotangan to 
become mekak (Isbandiyah, interview 22 June 2020). The design of  the mekak clothes also applied 
to the bedhaya dance which has developed in Kraton Kasultanan Yogyakarta and Kraton Kasunanan 
Surakarta. Each palace has a  mekak clothes design with different patterns. The  mekak used in 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran resembles the design of the  mekak in Kraton 
Kasunanan Surakarta. 
 
Fig. 6. Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran used a mekak clothes design 
 (Photo: Sri Rochana Widyastutieningrum’s collection, Repro Sriyadi 2020) 
The tourism development in Mangkunegaran does not just deliver a positive impact on the 
development of the arts. It also harms the inheritance system of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance. 
The existence of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance as a result of cuttings is more prominent. It caused 
the stagnation of the continuity presentation of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance with a complete 
duration. This vacuum shows that the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance's inheritance system  in 
Mangkunegaran is not running smoothly. The weak inheritance system getting demonstrated by the 
lack of Mangkunegaran’s artists who completely master Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance. According 
to Isbandiyah (interview October 19, 2019), there are only two people who can  completely master 
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance, one of whom is still active in Mangkunegaran is R.Ngt. Waluyo 
Suryosuwito. 
3.3. The Reconstruction of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Mangkunegaran 
Sri Hastuti reconstructed the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun  dance in Mangkunegaran in 1983. The 
reconstruction has based on simple notes found at Rekso Pustoko and a bedhaya dance figure named 
R.Ngt. Waluyo Suryosuwito. In the reconstruction process, Hastuti encountered problems due to  
Suryosuwito’s weak health condition. Suryosuwito suffered from a minor stroke, because of that  
learning process did not imitate the resource person who was practicing. Learning has carried out 
using an approach through a system of terms based on notes from Rekso Pusto ko (Hastuti 1983, 6). 
However, the forms and movement techniques obtained from the learning system were  not much 
different from what Isbandiyah do. Isbandiyah actively and intensively studied with Suryosuwito 
before Suryosuwito suffering a stroke.   
Based on the analysis of the video documentation for the performance of “Tari Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun Gaya Mang kunegaran Rekonstruksi Sri Hastuti” with the support of interview data from 

--- PAGE: 11 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
32 
 
Isbandiyah and Hastuti, the movements patterns used in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in 
Mangkunegaran have no significant differences with the movements patterns in the  bedhaya dance 
Yogyakarta style. Structurally, the movements series has used are not much different from the 
movements of the  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. The difference is in the technique of 
implementing a series of motions. According to Hastuti (interview December 23 , 2019), the 
significant difference between Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran style 
and bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style is the power (intensity) in every implementation of the 
movements pattern. According to him, the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran tends 
to have less power than the  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. The tempo or music of 
the bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style is slower than the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in 
Mangkunegaran, so the application of movements in the bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style requires a 
higher intensity. 
With the permission of Mangkunegara VIII, the Bedh aya Bedhah Madiun dance Hastuti ’s 
reconstruction when presented in ASTI Yogyakarta Anniversary wore a costume from Pura 
Mangkunegaran. The costume used is a kotangan like that worn during the Mangkunegara VII era. 
However, in the costume, several components are different from the Mangkunegara VII era. Those 
components are (1)  garudha mungkur using utah-utahan while during Mangkunegara VII did  not 
use it, (2) did not use a brooch attached to the chest, (3) did not use a keris but using cundrik, and (4) 
did not use a flower  kolong keris or kolong cundrik. For the  kotangan clothes, Hastuti reproduces 
itself based on those used during Mangkunegara  VII. The Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance's 
presentation structur e, which has reconstructed by Hastuti, resembles the Rekso Pustoko 
Mangkunegaran document with the title “Badaja Bedah Madhioen” script code G.17, and “Gerongan 
Bedhaya Bedhahipun Madiun Gendhing Gandakusuma.”  script code F.108. The difference in 
removing kondha in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance presentation resulted from  Hastuti’s 
reconstruction.    
Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance was finally presented again in Mangkunegaran in 1985 during a 
Konferensi Pariwisata. The source or reference in the presentation is Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance 
Hastuti’s reconstructed. In the process of reconstruction, at the start, Mangkunegaran tr ied to build 
it from R.Ngt. Waluyo Suryosuwito. However, due to the informant’s poor health condition and the 
absence of other sources, Mangkunegaran invited Hastuti as a dancer and accompanied Suryosuwito 
in reconstructing Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance (Has tuti, interview December 23, 2019). In the 
reconstruction process, senior dancers who previously actively and intensively studied with 
Suryosuwito were not involved (Isbandiyah, interview October 19, 2019). 
3.4. Social Relations between Dance Artists and the Inheritance System of Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun Dance at the End of Mangkunegara VIII’s Reign to the Beginning of 
Mangkunegara IX’s Reign 
From the end of Mangkunegara VIII’s reign until the beginning of Mangkunegara IX’s reign, 
there was a conflict between dance  artists. The competition is regarding the forms and movements 
of dance that successfully have been absorbed from KBW Yogyakarta, especially the Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance. Each dance artist makes a believable interpretation of the form and movement 
techniques of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran, though not all of the dance 
artists have studied directly at KBW Yogyakarta or have intensively studied this dance. This conflict 
began with the emergence of dance teachers who were not intensively  active in Mangkunegaran 
(Isbandiyah, interview October 19, 2019, and Warsini, interview November 25, 2019). 
Poor social relations between the dance artists cause failure in the inheritance system. The 
collapse in the inheritance system getting indicated by a significant difference between the devisor 
and the heirs. The forms and movement techniques of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance performed 
by Isbandiyah as the heir of Suryosuwito have contras differences fr om the forms and movement 
techniques currently practiced. Failure in the inheritance system caused a loss of knowledge of the 
naming system in the movements series had used  in this naming system, much unknown about the 
shape of the movements series.  
The response against social relationship problems between dance artists through the interpretation 
has a negative and positive impact. The performance's negative effect is a failure in the inheritance 
--- PAGE: 12 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
33 
 
system, so the previous knowledge had developed is not conveyed to future generations. The positive 
impact from the interpretation is the strengthening of the difference between the Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran and the  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. The arrangement that 
had done brings out a signif icant difference between Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in 
Mangkunegaran and  bedhaya dance Yogyakarta style. This considerable difference causes the 
appearance of the characteristics of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran. 
The interpretation of t he Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran is not carried out 
simultaneously but with a process, thus forming a presentation style as is done now. The dancers 
have influenced the interpretation  as the main actors who perform the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun 
dance. That’s an increasingly significant difference factor with the style of presentation of Bedhaya 
Bedhah Madiun dance by Isbandiyah and the results of Hastuti’s reconstruction. This difference also 
causes by the innovations made. These innovations incl ude the arms position when  trisig is with 
a cundrik or patrem property, the  tolehan on the  kapang-kapang movement the part of  mundur 
beksan, and when trisig movement, the legs slightly bent (mendhak) when turning.   
Structurally, several parts of the Bedha ya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran have been 
removed and changed. It is significantly different from the presentation structure based on the Rekso 
Pustoko document “Badaja Bedah Madhioen.”  The Significant changes do not reduce the course 
structure only. They were also changing the movement series that they had used. We see changes in 
the different series of movements in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance reconstructed by Hastuti 
and the existing dances.  These differences exist in almost all series of movements.  The most 
significant differences are in the movements series of panggel, ngunduh sekar, impang majeng, ukel 
tawing, and bangomate. In the panggel movement series, the change occurs because the initial part 
of the movement series removed. In  ngunduh sekar sequence, the same features only found at the 
beginning and e nding, while the middle part has differences. Almost all of the  impang 
majeng movement series have differences,  and the similarities only exist when going to the  sendhi 
gedruk left. Ukel tawing  movement series have innovated into two, namely  ukel tawing  and ukel 
tawing cathok udhet.  
The arms position above looks like in a movement series in ukel tawing, atrap sumping, ngenceng 
ukel tawing, and trisig parallel to the upper chest. It is different from what was done by Isbandiyah 
and the results of Hastuti’s reconstruction. The arms position while on top of the movement series is 
parallel to the ear ( trap sumping  or trap kuping ). This interpretation is n ot in harmony with the 
naming system in the document “Badaja Bedah Madhioen.” Considering from naming system for a 
movement series that sometimes equaled with where the pose elements and movement elements have 
carried out, especially in the arms position above. 
During nyiku in the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun, the arm poses  do not form an angle of 90°, but 
approaches to  cethik around 45° with the forearm lowered. The elements of this arm pose are 
rendered in a series of movements of ngenceng, nggrudha, gidrah, pacak jangga encot, kicat ngewer 
cangkol udhet, kicat boyong, and other similar actions. This arms position is different from the results 
of the reconstruction of Hastuti and that of Isbandiyah. 
The failure of the inheritance system affects ethical knowledge when dancing. Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance is a dance work that developed in the palace. As the court society's views and ideas, 
the ethic has influenced th is dance's presentation styl e. The inheritance system's failure that affects 
ethics is in the ndodok movement technique from the lenggah sila position. 
The method of ndodok movement from the  lenggah sila position that had carried out now does 
not begin with the groin being lifted. The  ndodok action from the lenggah sila position starts with 
the legs brought together in front of the body, the p art of the feet still touching the floor, then the 
right leg has pushed slightly forward and after that to the side. Then, The body has raised with both 
legs as support. The less ethical part of this technique is when the right leg is slightly pushed forward 
and then sideways. It is not following people’s ethics in the palace prohibited from extending their 
legs while sitting in front of a king or royal official. 
The costume of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran changed. One of the most 
significant changes was to the  jamang. Around the early 1990s,  jamang design from Kasultanan 
Kanoman Cirebon no longer used to dance the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance. The gold -
--- PAGE: 13 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
34 
 
plated jamang is a museum collection on display inside at nDalem Ageng Pura Mangkunegaran. 
Instead, the design used resembles a jamang for the lanyap character in the puppet. 
 
Fig. 7. The costume of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance Mangkunegaran style 
at the time it was performed at the Mangkunegaran Performing Art in 2013 
(Photo:  Angga Febri’s collection, Repro Sriyadi 2020) 
4. Conclusion 
The forming of the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun dance style in Mangkunegaran does not occur in an 
event but is a process. Based on the result of the analysis, the presentation style of Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran has formed as a response to a challenge. The challenges come from 
the social, political, cultural, and economic conditions of Pura Mangkunegaran. Challenges that show 
up from social, political, cultural, and economic conditions influence the Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun 
dance's inheritance system to undergo significant changes. The continuity of the Bedhaya Bedhah 
Madiun dance in Mangkunegaran is proof of success in responding to challenges, although not all 
responses are positive. 
Reference 
“Badaja Bedah Madhioen.” t.t. Rekso Pustoko Pura Mangkunegaran’s Collection, G. 17. 
“Bedaja-Dans van zeven jonkvrouwen, uitgevoerd bij gelegenheid van het Triwindhoe-Bestuursjubeleum van 
Z.H. Pangeran Adipati Aria Mangkoenagara VII.” 1939. Rekso Pustoko Pura Mangkunegaran’s 
Collection, MN. 345. 
Brontodiningrat, K.P.H. 1981. “Falsafah Beksa Bedhaya Sarta Beksa Srimpi ing Ngayogyakarta.” In Kawruh 
Joged Mataram. Yogyakarta: Yayasan Siswa Among Beksa. 
Daryono. 1999. “D ampak Pariwisata Terhadap Tari Tradisional di Keraton Kasunanan dan Pura 
Mangkunegaran Surakarta.” Thesis, Performing Arts Study Program Postgraduate UGM. 
Endter, Ingeborg Loni. 2000. “Community Memory Building multimedia archives on the Internet.” Thesis,  
Program in Media Arts and Sciences, School of Architecture and Planning, in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Media Arts and Sciences  at the  Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
“Gerongan Bedhaya.” 1995. Trans. Darweni. Rekso Pustoko Pura Mangkunegaran’s Collection, F. 11. 
“Gerongan Bedhaya Bedhahipun Madiun Gendhing Gandakusuma.” t.t. Rekso Pustoko Pura Mangkunegaran’s 
Collection, F. 108. 
Hastuti, Sri. 1983. “Rekonstruksi Tari Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Gaya Mangkunegaran Tahun 1983.” Sri 
Hastuti’s Collection. 
Hermono, Ully. 2014. Gusti Noeroel: Streven Naar Geluk (Mengejar Kebahagiaan). Jakarta: Kompas. 
Holt, Claire. 2000. Melacak Jejak Perkembangan Seni di Indonesia. Trans. R.M. Soedarsono. Bandung: MSPI. 

--- PAGE: 14 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
35 
 
Jazuli, M. 2014. Sosiologi Seni: Pengantar dan Model Studi Seni. Edition 2. Yogyakarta: Graha Ilmu. 
Kaplan, David, and Albert A. Manners. 2000. Teori Budaya. Trans. Landung Simatupang. Yogyakarta: Pustaka 
Pelajar. 
“Keputusan Pengadilan Negeri di Jakarta Th. 1952 Tentang Pembekuan Harta Benda Milik Mangkunegaran.” 
1952. Rekso Pustoko Pura Mangkunegaran’s Collection, MN. 464. 
“Konser Tari Karaton Ngayugyokarto Hadiningrat di Gedung Kesenian Jakar ta.” 1988. Rekso Pustoko Pura 
Mangkunegaran’s Collection, G. 560. 
Kusumo, Ditta Novita Astuti. 2015. “Analisis Koreografi Bedhaya Bedhah Madiyun gaya Yogyakarta: 
Rekonstruksi Juni 2014 oleh R.Ay. Sri Kadaryati.” Skripsi, Bachelor of Dance Study Program, 
Departeman of Dance, Faculty of Performing Art ISI Yogyakarta. 
Lindsay, Jennifer. 1991. Klasik, Kitsch, Kontemporer: Sebuah Studi Tentang Seni Pertunjukan Jawa . Trans. 
Nin Bakdi Sumanto. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Perss. 
Mulyatno, F. Hari. 1992. “Tari dan Pengembangan Pariwisata Istana Pura Mangkuenagaran.” Research Report, 
STSI Surakarta. 
“Penjelasan Mengenai SK Sri Mangkunegara VIII 19 Juli 1978 No.78/SP/78.” 1978. Rekso Pustoko Pura 
Mangkunegaran’s Collection, Archivial No. 1189. 
Poerwanto. 1989. “Nlusur Tari Lewat Candhi: Tari Jawa Kuna dadi Simbol Status.” Mekar Sari, 20 September 
1989. 
Prabowo, Wahyu Santosa. 2003. “Kreativitas Tari dalam dan antar Budaya: Dataran untuk Penghayatan 
Nasionalitas.” In Isu dan Kreativitas Seni, Series IV:3–10.  
Pramutomo, R.M. 2010. Tari, Seremoni, dan Politik Kolonial II. Surakarta: ISI Press. 
Pramutomo, R.M., Aswoyo Joko, and Aton Rustandi Mulyana. 2016. Revitalisasi Budaya Lokal Berbasis 
Ekspresi Seni Komunitas. Surakarta: ISI Press. 
Pudjasworo, Bambang. 1982. “Studi Analisa Konsep Estetis Koreografi Tari Bedhaya Lambangsari.” Thesis, 
ASTI Yogyakarta. 
Pudjiyanti, Dwi Agustine. 1985. “Istana Mangkunegaran Sebagai Objek Wisata Budaya.” Skripsi, Akademi 
Kepariwisataan Indonesia Semarang. 
Rustopo. 2001. Gendon Humardani Sang Gladiator, Arsitek Kehidupan Seni Tradisional Modern. Yogyakarta: 
Yayasan Mahavhira.  
Simatupang, Lono. 2013. Pergelaran: Sebuah Mozaik Penelitian Seni-Budaya. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra. 
Soedarsono, R.M. 1997. Wayang Wong: Drama Tari Ritual Kenegaraan d i Keraton Yogyakarta. Indonesian 
Edition. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Perss. 
———. 1999. Seni Pertunjukan Indonesia dan Pariwisata. Bandung: MSPI. 
———. 2003. Seni Pertunjukan Dari Perspektif Politik, Sosial, dan Ekonomi . Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada 
University Perss. 
Soemarsono, R. Ay. Yuliastuti, R. Ay. Murni Sinaulan Brotohatmodjo, and R.P. Wishnu P.S. Widyohamijoyo. 
2011. Lembar Kenangan Gusti Noeroel. Jakarta: HKMN. 
Soeryosoeyarso, G.R.Ay. Siti Nurul, and R.Ay. Hilmiah Darmawan. 1992. “Adaptasi Tari Gaya Yogyakarta 
Terhadap Tari Gaya Mangkunegaran Pada Waktu Mangkunegara VII.” In Seminar Kebudayaan Kraton 
Sebagai Puncak Kebudayaan Daerah Pelestarian Warisan Adiluhung Leluhur Bangsa Menyongsong 
Era Tinggal Landas. Wisma Kagama UGM. 
Sriyadi, and R.M. Pramutomo. 2020. “Absorpsi Tari Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Gaya Yogyakarta di 
Mangkunegaran Masa Pemerintahan Mangkunegara VII.” Jurnal Sejarah Citra Lekha  Vol. 5 (1): 28 –
43.  
Suharti, Theresia. 1990. “Tari di Mangkunegaran Suatu Pengaruh Bentuk dan Gaya dalam Dimensi Kultural 
1916-1988.” Thesis, History Study Program Postgraduate UGM. 
--- PAGE: 15 ---
Dewa Ruci: Jurnal Pengkajian dan Penciptaan Seni ISSN 1412-4181, 
eISSN 2685287X Vol. 16., No. 1, April  2021, pp. 22-36 
  
Sriyadi & R.M. Pramutomo (Presentation Style of Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Dance in Pura Mangkunegaran) 
 
36 
 
———. 2015. Bedhaya Semang Karaton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat Reaktualisasi Sebuah Tari Pusaka. 
Yogyakarta: Kanisius. 
Sumardjan, Selo. 1990. Perubahan Sosial di Yogyakarta. Trans. H.J. Koesoemanto. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada 
University Perss. 
Supanggah, Rahayu. 2000. “Kondisi Objektif Seni Budaya Jawa Tengah dalam Prespektif Sejarah Seni 
Pertunjukan.” In Seni Kita, Editor Soegeng Toekio. Surakarta. 
Toynbee, Arnold. 1988. A Study of History: The First Abridged One -Volume Edition, Illustrated . London: 
Oxford University Press. 
Ventresca, Marc J., and John W. Mohr. 2002. Archival Research Methods. USA: Blackwell Publishers. 
Widyastutieningrum, Sri Rochana. 2012. Revitalisasi Tari Gaya Surakarta. Surakarta: ISI Press. 
Interviewees List 
Kus Isbandiyah, R.Ay. (65 tahun), dancer and assisten of Mangkunegaran’s style dance teacher R.Ng. Waluyo 
Suryosuwito. Mlati Beningan, Mlati, Sleman, Yogyakarta. 
Sri Hastuti (62 tahun), lecturer of dance departement Performing Art Faculty ISI Yogyakarta and had been 
reconstructed Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Mangkunegaran’s style in 1983. Mojo streets No. 22, Gendeng, 
Baciro Yogyakarta. 
Umiyati Sri Warsini, Ny.Ng. (64 tahun), pesinden, dance teacher, pengeprak, and the master of Pakarti Pura 
Mangkunegaran. Panti Putra, Keprabon, Banjarsari, Surakarta. 
Biography 
Sriyadi earned a Bachelor’s degree in Dance at the Indonesian Institute of the Arts (ISI) Surakarta in 2018, a 
Masters in Arts from the ISI Surakarta Postgraduate in 2020. He has received a Bidik Misi scholarship during 
his undergraduate studies and the Nusantara Writing Grant 2020 held by the Nusantara Institute for thesis writing 
in Masters studies. Wrote the article “Nilai Estetis Tari Srimpi Pandhelori di Pura Mangkunegaran” with Wahyu 
Santoso Prabowo which have published in the Journal Greget Vol. 17 No. 1, J uly 2018. Writing the article 
“Transformasi Tari Bedhaya dalam Masyarakat Jawa (Ritual, Seremonial, Hiburan)” presented at the National 
Archeology Seminar with the theme “Indonesia Rumah Besar Austronesia dari Masa Prasejarah Hingga Kini” 
which was held by the West Java Archaeological Center in November 2019. With R.M. Pramutomo wrote the 
article “Absorpsi Tari Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun Gaya Yogyakarta di Mangkunegaran Masa Pemerintahan 
Mangkunegara VII” that has published in the Journal Sejarah Citra Lekha Vol. 5 No. 1 (2020). Wrote an article 
“Karakteristik Tari Bedhaya Bedhah Madiun di Pura Mangkunegaran, Surakarta” which received by the NI 
Working Paper Series No. 6, December 2020. Since 2013 until now as a dancer, he has been a member of the 
PAKARTI (karawitan and dance association) Pura Mangkunegaran and Langen Praja Pura Mangkunegaran. 
  
R.M. Pramutomo is the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs and Cooperation at the Indonesian Institute of the 
Arts, Surakarta. He has a doctorate and Masters’s degree in Hu manities from Gadjah Mada University, after 
obtaining a Bachelor of Arts in Dance from the Indonesian Art Institute (ISI) Yogyakarta. He has attended the 
Cultural and Performance Studies Program at the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), United States 
of America, in 2001-2002. In 2009-2010 participated in the Senior Lecturer Fellowship Program of Academic 
Recharge (PAR) at Leiden University, The Netherlands, and was the Head of Management of a Study Center, 
which he founded in 2005 called the Center of Arts Archives and Documents Studies KRT.Wiroguno, based in 
Yogyakarta. Experience in providing workshops and participating in various dance festivals at the national and 
international levels, including in America, Japan, Europe, and Australia. Writing the book Antropologi Sebagai 
Basis Disiplin Etnokoreologi (2005), the book Penulisan Kritik Tari (2007) with Sri Rochana 
Widyastutieningrum, editor of the book Ethnocoreology Nusantara: Batasan Kajian Sistematika, dan Aplikasi 
Keilmuannya  (2007), KRT Wiroguno: Riwayat, Karya, dan Pengabdiannya   (2008), wrote a book on Tari, 
Seremoni, dan Politik Kolonial (Volume I) (2009) and (Volume II) (2010), wrote a book Etnokoreologi Seni 
Pertunjukan Topeng  Tradisional Surakarta, Yogyakarta, dan Malang (2012), w rote the book Langendriya: 
Dramatari Opera Gaya Yogyakarta (2014), wrote the book Jejak Sosio Historis Penciptaan Dramatari Jawa 
(2015), as well as writing several scientific articles in various research journals of universities such as UGM 
Yogyakarta, UNS Surakarta, ISI Surakarta, ISI Yogyakarta, ISBI Bandung, UIN Sunan Gunung Djati Bandung, 
Yogyakarta Muhammadiyah University (UMY), and PGRI Palembang University. Currently, the writer is a 
permanent lecturer at the Faculty of Performing Arts and the Postgraduate Program at ISI Surakarta. 
 
