--- PAGE: 1 ---
THE FOREIGN ARCHITECTURAL 
INFLUENCES ON MELAKA STYLE 
TRADITIONAL MOSQUES 
 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi  
 
University of Malaya 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Sacred architecture is a clear reflection of each region's history, culture, and 
identity and is co nsidered as an especial domain in architectural studies. 
Mosque as the symbol of Islamic art and architecture positions a place of 
importance between artists and scholars worldwide. Although numerous 
materials have been documented about various mosques ’ regional typologies , 
the Southeast Asian mosque style has been surprisingly neglected. Since the 
advent of Islam in Southeast Asia during the 13 th-15th centuries, numerous 
traditional mosques with distinctive architectural form and ornamentation , very 
different from what is known as a mosque in Middle East or Indian 
subcontinent, were erected in the region . Due to the unique geographical 
position of the area the powerful role of Melaka during the 15 th -18th centuries, 
various ethnic groups from different cultures have been always presented in the 
Straits of Melaka . Melaka scenery has been formed as a result of one special 
attribute of local entities; being receptive to new notions and ideas, as long it 
does not interfere strongly rooted local beliefs. Melaka style traditional mosque 
architecture shows foreign influences from great civilizations in east and west 
while still introduce an authentic style of Southeast Asian mosque. This study 
tries to provide a discussion about Hindu -Buddhism and Chinese influences  on 
Melaka traditional mosques by comparing the architectural appearance of  the 
mentioned cultures and three selected traditional mosques in Melaka. Through 
interpretation of the gathered evidence, this study indicates that Hindu -
Buddhist architectural cha racteristics profoundly influenced the Melaka style 
mosque in form , while the Chinese influence in appearance of certain 
architectural elements and ornamentation is discernible. 
 
Keywords: Melaka style mosque, Hindu -Buddhist influence, C hinese 
Influence 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Since the end of the 20 th century, many scholars have been 
intrigued by the significance, aesthetic values and philosophical 
meanings of the most notable symbol of Islamic architecture;

--- PAGE: 2 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 18 
mosques. Although Islam was introduced to Southeast Asia 
between the 13 th, 14 th and the 15 th centuries and since then 
numerous mosques were erected throughout the region, but yet 
the Islamic architecture of this region remains little -known and 
poorly documented probably because these mosques have 
followed local building traditions and climatic conditions and do 
not resemble Islamic architecture of Middle East (Vlarseas, 1990; 
O’Neill, 1994; Michell, 1995). Among all the materials and 
records about mosques architecture and typology, there are few 
scholars who have  mentioned Southeast Asian mosques 
architecture. Frishman & Khan, for instance, in the “The Mosque, 
History, Architectural development and Regional diversity” have 
acknowledged Southeast Asian mosque as one of the seven 
regional mosque typology, which represents one of the fascinating 
architectural styles in mosque design. Figure 1 illustrates 
Frishman’s regional mosque typology. 
 
 
Figure 1: Frishman's Regional Mosques Typology  
(Source: Frishman & Khan, 2002) 
 
As a result of str ongly rooted and extremely vital pre -
Islamic culture in the region, traditional mosques in Melaka have 
wisely inspired from local traditions and environmental 
consideration rather than unfitting imitations from Middle Eastern 
architectural features. Differ ent features in Southeast Asian

--- PAGE: 3 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 19 
mosques such as Minaret, Dome, Prayer hall, Iwan and Mihrab, 
which are the most predominant elements in Middle Eastern 
mosque architecture, have been altered or completely removed in 
Southeast Asian mosques due to the influe nce of domestic or 
foreign cultures (Ghafar, 1999).  The initial perusal on available 
records about Southeast Asian traditional mosques indicates the 
profound influence of Hindu -Buddhist architecture on these 
mosques. Southeast Asia architecture has adopted  certain features 
from Hindu-Buddhist architecture, absorbed them and developed 
its own way of architecture, which illustrates a reflection of 
Hindu-Buddhist architecture beside the indigenous architecture of 
Southeast Asia (Ryan, 1971; Chen, 1998). 
Melaka, the centre of trade and commerce and linkage 
between east and west between 14th and 18th centuries (De Witt, 
2010), and the starting point of Islam's development in Peninsular 
Malaysia (Moor, 1986), not only demonstrates the most 
staggering examples of S outheast Asia Mosque style but also has 
progressed further and established the Melaka Mosque style 
movement (Chen, 1998). Traditional Mosques in Melaka, similar 
to Southeast Asian mosque design strongly resemble local 
architectural styles. Although Melaka style mosques share same 
basic forms in plan and roof with other Southeast Asian mosques, 
they show signs of features from Chinese influences. However, 
there is no study with the focus on the influence of Chinese 
architecture on Melaka style mosques that d istinguishes these 
mosques from other traditional mosques in Southeast Asia. 
In order to study traditional Islamic architecture in Melaka 
into deeper layers it is essential to get acquainted with various 
foreign cultures, which have influenced Melaka style  mosque in 
different ways. This paper attempts to provide relevant materials 
concerning Melaka historical and architectural background. 
Austronesian heritage, Hindu -Buddhist architecture in Southeast 
Asia, Chinese architecture in Peninsula, and Southeast A sia 
mosque architectural style are the discussions, which form the 
literature review section of this paper.

--- PAGE: 4 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 20 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
Austronesian Heritage  
Austronesians, the descendants of whom form the basic 
population of Malay Archipelago, were the last group of various 
ethnic immigrants who reached Southeast Asia (Blust, 1985). 
They spread from the Southern costs of Chinese mainland to 
Southern seas  at some time between 4500 and 4000 BC and 
reached Sumatra, Malaya and Vietnam prior to 1000 BC  
(Bellwood, 1985). Linguistically, certain parts of Southeast Asian 
continent and most of the insular Southeast Asia belonged to the 
Austronesian world, covering the area more than a half way 
around the globe from Easter Island in the eastern pacific to 
Madagascar off  the southeastern coast of Africa (Blust, 1985). 
Consisting around 1300 languages, they are spoken by the people 
of Madagascar, the Malay Peninsula, Malay -Indonesian 
archipelago, Micronesia, Melanesia and Polynesia (Waterson, 
1997; Chen, 1998; Bellwood, 20 06). Since the early days, the 
Austronesian had been active participants of the maritime trade 
and made contacts not only with India and China but had sailed 
far to the Middle East and east coast of Africa (Wheatley, 1976). 
Research concerning the indigeno us architecture in 
Southeast Asia, draws certain analogies between architectural 
practices found in different parts of this region and despite their 
diversity, existence of recurring physical characteristic in these 
buildings indicates one shared provenanc e from thousands years 
ago: “ Austronesian world ” (Waterson, 1990). The evanescent 
nature of main material used by the Austronesian make it hard for 
archaeologists to reassemble the structure, however, some 
findings have enabled experts to penetrate into so me physical 
characteristic of Austronesian traditional architecture (Chen, 
1998). The most prominent of these physical characteristics are 
the pile foundation or the raised floor supported by timber piles or 
stilts; saddle-backed roof with the ridge -line extends beyond the 
gable walls, and application of elaborated carpentry and 
decorative features (Waterson, 1990).

--- PAGE: 5 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 21 
Interaction with India & Hindu -Buddhist 
Architecture in Southeast Asia 
The first indigenous Hindu -Buddhist kingdoms in Southeast Asia 
appeared between the 3 rd BC and the 3 rd AD centuries, which 
means from the beginning these newly emerging states already 
had connections with India, as archaeological evidence both in 
India and Southeast Asia proves that trading contact between the 
two region wa s established as early as the 2 nd century BC 
(Andaya, 2008). Indian penchant for gold, aromatic woods and 
spices attracted them to Southeast Asia lands. The vitality of two -
way trading activities resulted in a rich relationship between two 
regions, which i n Southeast Asia gradually metamorphosed into 
cultural and religious interactions where traders and missionaries 
played an important role (Fisher, 2006). Although countless 
Indian merchants and missionaries visited Southeast Asia lands 
since early time the y never settled permanently in large scale in 
the region (Ryan, 1963; Munoz, 2006). 
Indians who sailed overseas to Southeast Asia brought 
with them the ideas, beliefs and practices of Hinduism and 
Buddhism (Harrison, 1967). Born in India in the 5 th century BC, 
Buddhism spread during the first millennium to Southeast Asia, 
which was followed later by its rival Hinduism (Fisher, 2006). 
The influence of Hindu -Buddhist culture did not fundamentally 
change the practices and beliefs of Southeast Asian people; yet 
Indian influence did bring enrichment to local traditions  
(Harrison, 1967; Ryan, 1971). For over fourteen centuries 
Southeast Asia witnessed the rise and fall of numerous indigenous 
Hindu or Buddhist kingdoms, which were modeled after the 
Indian concept o f royalty and practiced either of or mixture of 
both (Ryan, 1963; Munoz, 2006). 
As Southeast Asian lands were brought into contact with 
Hindu and Buddhist cultures, its architectural methods and styles 
gradually changed (Ryan, 1971). The spread of major In dian 
religions to Southeast Asia during the first centuries of the 
Christian era caused numerous Hindu or Buddhist temples to be 
constructed throughout the region (Dumarcay, 1986). These 
structures are classified into two fundamental types: the candi (the 
mausoleum or tomb temple), and the true shrine (meru tower) 
(Santoro, 1973). Through archeological excavations on Hindu-
Buddhist temples in Peninsular Malaysia,  it is postulated that

--- PAGE: 6 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 22 
these structures were square cella raised on a simply compacted 
base with  supporting pillars below the roof (Dumarcay & 
Smitties, 1998).  Figure 2 represents an attempted reconstruction 
of an Indian temple in Peninsular Malaysia.  Southeast Asian 
architecture that developed prior to the advent of Islam shows 
strong Hi ndu-Buddhist influence, however  it still possesses its 
own identity, unique local characteristics and evolved its own 
technology that distinguished them from Indian architecture found 
in the Subcontinent (Meyer, 1965). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: An attempted reconstruction of Candi Bukit Batu, Kedah  
(Source: Dumarçay & Smithies, 1998) 
 
Advent of Islam 
Although Islam was known in Southeast Asian lands since the 
advent of the religion in her homeland in the 7 th century it is 
impossible to pinpoint where and when Islam actua lly began to 
spread its root  due to the fact that Southeast Asia  extends over 
such a vast territory encompas sing many thousands of islands  (Al 
Faruqi et.al., 1986). However, evidence and written records state 
that it was after the 13 th, 14th and 15th centuries when indigenous 
kingdoms and commoners accepted the new religion as their 
spiritual savor and noticeable Islamic practices started to be held 
within the regio n (Ryan, 1971; Michell, 1995). The first 
documented evidence in the presence of Islam in Peni nsular 
Malaysia goes back to the discovery of Arabic inscriptions on an 
engraved stone in the eastern coast of Terengganu, which is dated 
back to the 14th century (Alijah, 2001).

--- PAGE: 7 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 23 
Southeast Asian receptive entities embraced Islam akin the 
way they had absorbed Hindu and Buddhism thousands years ago, 
gradually and peacefully. Islam like the other foreign cultures did 
not completely change Southeast Asia  and went through a 
metamorphosis before become accepted and appear in Southeast 
Asian culture, art and arch itecture. Traditional mosques in 
Southeast Asia  demonstrate an astonishing example of Islamic 
architecture between various typologies since they represent a 
perfect integration of various foreign ideas , Southeast Asia  
indigenous traditions and Islamic beli efs. Although certain 
adjustments were applied into Southeast Asian traditional 
architecture to redesign them based on mosque requirements , 
these adjustments did not fundamentally change the indigenous 
architectural characteristics of Southeast Asian archi tecture 
(Michell, 1995).  
Although traditional mosques, e rected throughout 
Southeast Asia , demonstrate various variations they also show 
some distinctive shared characteristics.  Centralized columned 
prayer hall, which is  square in  the plan, centralized tie red 
pyramidal roof, raised above the ground on stilts, ceremonial 
gateway, absence of minaret are of the most distinctive 
characteristics of Southeast Asian traditional mosques (Chen, 
1998). Although there are many scholars with different views 
most of them believe that the best and oldest preserved examples 
of Southeast Asia traditional mosques is Demak Mosque  (see 
figure 3) in Java (Chen, 1998; Nasir, 2004 
 
 
 
Figure 3: An attempted reconstruction of original form of Demak mosque, 
Indonesia  
(Source: Dumarçay & Smithies, 1998)

--- PAGE: 8 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 24 
Melaka Kingdom 
Although t he first historical evidence of Islam in Peninsular 
Malaysia can be seen near  the mouth of Terengganu River the 
spread of Islam into the interior and to the north of Malay 
peninsula was a result of the powerful patronage and influence of 
Melaka Kingdom (Vlatseas, 1990). Sumatran prince, 
Paramewara, founded Melaka at the late 14 th century and soon 
after due to its strategic location, the port became one of the most 
famous trading cent ers in Southeast Asia  (Moor, 2004). 
Simultaneously Chinese emperor from Ming Dynasty changed 
China’s trading policies and decided to continue commerce 
activities with west through sea routs rather than Silk Road and 
sent his envoys to visit Southeast Asia  ports such as Melaka 
(Dumarcay & Smithies, 1998). AS a result of  strong ties between 
Melaka and the royal court of China during this period first 
cultural assimilation between to region appeared (Bunce, 2002). 
Islam became the state religion of Melaka duri ng the 
Sultan Muzaffar Shah reign in the mid -15th century (Lloyd, 
1986). Under the powerful leadership of Melaka Muslim rulers, 
the port became the favorite trading center for the Muslim 
merchants from Middle East and Indian Subcontinent, and the 
center of Islamic missionaries (Zakaria, 1994). Melaka flourished, 
and in its peak of prosperity is described as the most prosperous 
trading ports with the greatest number of wholesale merchants 
and abundance of shipping that can be found in the whole world 
(Barbosa, 1921). Rapidly growing Melaka became the center of 
Islamic propagation and played a very important role not only in 
the Islamization of Java, but also the whole archipelago (Rauf, 
1987; O’Neill, 1994; Alijjah, 2001). However, the gradual spread 
of Islam did not seem to have affected the traditional architecture 
of the region where basic Austronesian morphology remains 
(Gunawan, 1998). 
Since the establishment of Islam in Melaka in 15th century 
and its distribution to Peninsula , great number of mosques has  
been erected in the region (Vlatseas, 1990). T raditional Melaka 
style mosques, following Southeast Asia  traditional mosque 
design, consist of a modest centralized columned prayer hall, 
which is axial and symmetrical in the plan and the entrance to this 
space is usually from the opposite end in the direction of qibla, 
but supplementary entrances may also be introduced from the

--- PAGE: 9 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 25 
sides (Lim, 2001). Two or three -tiered pyramidal roof known as 
meru, is crowned with a carved pinnacle and covered by clay 
tiles. Th e inward curved ridges are pronounced with upward 
projected ends (Nasir, 2004). In contrast to other mosques in 
Southeast Asia Melaka style mosques were not erected  on slits 
but sit on a podium (C hen, 1998). The early traditional mosques 
did not have minar et and used traditional ways to call for pray 
such as a drum and taboo. In later practices, a pagoda -like tower 
constructed to function as a minaret and became of monumental 
elements in Melaka style mosques. 
 
   
(a)     (b)               (c) 
 
Interactions with Chinese  
Historical records indicate that initial interaction between China 
and Southeast Asia  was extremely limited (Andaya, 2001). The 
early contacts mainly happened by individual merchants and 
pilgrims from China visiting Southeast Asia  (Wang, 1992). 
Buddhist missionaries and monks from China who intended to 
reach India, the motherland of Buddha, were providing 
themselves with spiritual experiences at first in Southeast Asia 
(Wang, 1992). However, the earliest Chinese individual 
merchants and pi lgrims did not make any permanent appearance 
in the Peninsular, and these contacts made no cultural influence 
on Southeast Asian people (Munoz, 2006; Tan, 2005). Southeast 
Asia, referred generally as Nan Yang (Southern Ocean) between 
Chinese, did not attra ct much attention from them. It was only 
after the 15th century that condition changed. Melaka was founded 
Figure 4: (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) Kampung Keling Mosque, (c) Terengkera 
Mosque, Melaka (Source: Author, 2012)

--- PAGE: 10 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 26 
in the late 14 th century and simultaneously Emperor Yongle of 
Ming Dynasty decided to expand maritime trades so sent his 
envoys to Southeast Asian  islands (Moor, 1986). Admiral Chen 
Ho, the Muslim Chinese, visited Melaka several times between 
1403-1433 in order to establish strong economic and political 
connection with Melaka Kingdom. Parameswara visited China 
three times between 1411-1419 (Hoyt, 1993). In 1409, China and 
Melaka kingdom signed an alliance, whereby China protected 
Melaka against Siamese and Majapahit invasions (Lim, 2006). 
Increasing trade activities between China and Melaka 
since the presence of European in Southeast Asia  from early 
16th century attracted numerous Chinese merchants from southern 
China, who had to stay in Melaka for at least five months waiting 
for seasonal monsoon winds to change and take them back to their 
homeland, so they set up second home in Melaka (Vlatseas, 
1990). The offspring of inter -marriage between Chinese 
merchants and local girls are called baba and Nonya (Tan, 
2005).  The babas were Chinese in religions and practices, 
Chinese and Western in architecture and Malay in language, 
customs (Khoo, 1996). Melaka pr obably had the oldest Chinese 
presence in the Malay Archipelago  (Lim, 2001). It was only after 
the mid-19th century that numerous Chinese labors from Southern 
China migrated to the Peninsula (Pan, 2006). 
Whether merchants or labors, Chinese migrants in Mel aka 
can trace their origins back to the coastal provinces of Southern 
China (Andaya, 2001). These Chinese migrants remained faithful 
to their homeland religions and beliefs and constructed buildings 
inspired by their own traditional style from Southern Chi nese 
architecture (Cheng, 1998). The underlying ideas of Chinese 
architecture in the Peninsula are the courtyard, ornamented roof, 
visible structural components and the application of color (Kohl, 
1984). The other main architectural characteristics or elem ents in 
Chinese examples in Peninsula are three -section gable roof, 
curved roof ridge, and cantilever eave corners (Lim, 2001:93-94). 
The unique hybrid identity of Chinese in Peninsula displayed 
itself beautifully in Straits Chinese architecture in various  forms 
and functions such as temples, pagodas, kongsi or clan houses, 
terrace houses and shophouses. 
In Melaka, the Chinese temple mainly is influenced by 
Southern China style (Khoo, 2001). Instead of the imperial

--- PAGE: 11 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 27 
double-hipped roof of northern China, temp les in Melaka have a 
gable roof in 3 sections following the southern China’s style. The 
middle section is usually raised and inward curved ridges and 
raised copings that separate the roof sections are profusely 
ornamented (Kohl, 1984). The corners of roof eaves are curved 
upward, and dragons, Phoenix and other religion or symbolic 
figures of colorful ceramic pieces decorate the ridges (Yean, 
1992). 
 
Pagoda is the best example of Chinese narration from Indian -
Buddhist architecture, which is inspired from bo th Indian stupa 
and Chinese multi -storied watchtowers in military 
construction  (Wong & Chang, 1982). Pagodas found in Malaysia 
vary in size and structure but mostly are of the tower -style 
pagoda. The most widely publicized pagoda in Malaysia is the 
Ban Po Shu Pagoda of the Ten Thousand Buddha on the grounds 
of the Kek Lok Si Temple complex in Penang. (see figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 6: Ban Po Tha Pagoda, Penang  
Figure 5: Cheng Hoo Teng Temple, Melaka  
(Source: Author, 2012)

--- PAGE: 12 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 28 
(Source: Flikr.com) 
METHODOLOGY 
The influence of different cultures and rel igions in a region on its 
architectural development and subsequently on its Mosque design 
style is inevitable (Bandyopadhay & Sibely, 2003). Melaka style 
architectural studies verify this notion since the influence of 
foreign cultures in these mosques is e vident. To analytically 
justify the idea that Melaka style traditional mosque has been 
influenced by various cultures and to architecturally detect these 
influences Historical -Comparative Research Method with the 
focus on Causal Explanations of History has  been applied. To 
fulfill this method several phases should be carried out: searching 
for evidence, collecting and organizing the evidence in the actual 
flow of time and relevance, evaluation, analysis and 
interpretation, and finally providing a narrative (Nueman, 2003).  
In this paper, primary and secondary data have been 
collected from different sources. Literature review is the process 
in which secondary evidence has been collected. Secondary data 
concerns the historical and architectural background of S outheast 
Asia from the early days until the modern era; Austronesian 
heritage, Interaction with Indians and Chinese as well as Hindu -
Buddhist and Chinese architecture in Peninsula, the advent of 
Islam and Southeast Asia traditional mosque style, and finall y 
Melaka Kingdom and Melaka style mosque architecture are the 
main discussions that literature review focuses on. To enrich the 
data collection, three Melaka style mosques as case studies have 
been chosen. The findings from the fieldwork are considered as 
primary data. Melaka traditional mosque's identification is 
conducted by visit to Melaka Islamic Religious Department, 
PERZIM, and Melaka Historic City Council. Through these visits 
and interviews, over 60 mosques were spotted. To classify these 
mosques into traditional and modern style various websites have 
been visited such as websites of Portal Masjid Negari Melaka, 
PERZIM and IslamGrid. Among the 60 mosques in Melaka, 28 
mosques have been classified as traditional mosques. This paper 
focuses on the earl iest traditional mosques in Melaka, erected 
during the Dutch colonization, which are Kampung Hulu Mosque, 
Kampung Keling Mosque, Terengkera Mosque. 
This paper tried to analyze, evaluate and interpret findings 
from primary and secondary sources and provide the best feasible

--- PAGE: 13 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 29 
comparison between relevant data in order to achieve results. 
Qualitative method has been applied for data obtainment, as it 
suited the best to achieve related material. Qualitative method as 
data collection technique requires the studied  employment and 
collection of an array of experiential materials such as historical, 
observational, and visual texts, cultural texts and productions, and 
also case study, artifacts, inter views and personal experience  
(Denzin, 2005). 
 
 
FINDING ANALYSIS, EVA LUATION & 
INTERPRETATION 
From literature review and fieldwork, it is indicated that pre -
Islamic cultures and architectural styles in Melaka have been 
regenerated as some ideas in traditional mosques and in some 
cases even reshaped some principal elements i n mosque 
architecture. The historical review on Melaka shows various 
foreign interactions between Southeast Asia and different regions 
such as India, China and Europe. Each of these interactions 
happened in different pace, time and approaches. Among the 
foreign influences on Melaka style mosques, Hindu -Buddhism 
and Chinese impacts have gained the attention of this paper due to 
prolong and potent effects of these ancient civilizations on 
Melaka. Hindu -Buddhism since the beginning of Christian era 
and Chinese culture since the foundation of Melaka Kingdom in 
the 15 th century started to enrich already vital culture and 
architecture of the region and have been absorbed, adapted and 
applied in later practices. This section presents descriptions on 
findings from p rimary and secondary data collection and tries to 
provide the best feasible comparisons to show various foreign 
architectural influences on Melaka style mosques in terms of 
form, ornamentation and appearance of special elements. 
 
 
HINDU-BUDDHIST INFLUENCE 
Melaka style mosques following Southeast Asian traditional 
mosque style show strong Hindu -Buddhist architectural influence 
due to long and powerful domination of Hindu and Buddhism in 
Southeast Asia's lands since the beginning of Christian era until 
prior to the advent of Islam in the region. These foreign cultures

--- PAGE: 14 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 30 
have affected Melaka style mosques in basic and fundamental 
characteristics; however, Hindu -Buddhist influence has not 
dominated Melaka style mosques  since Islamic beliefs and 
requirements have been perfectly fulfilled in mosque design while 
indigenous Southeast Asia constructional technique has wisely 
applied in these mosques. 
Melaka style traditional mosque is an evolution of Hindu -
Buddhist structures, which were introduced from India and further 
developed in Southeast Asia. The Melaka style traditional mosque 
derived its form from the buildings' typologies that existed during 
the previous Hindu -Buddhist era. Melaka style mosques are 
clearly inspired by strong regional and cultural forces origina ted 
from Hindu-Buddhist shrines and temples, which were erected in 
the region for about a millennium. The Hindu -Buddhist structures 
have been adopted and adapted by the local builders when they 
erected the new mosque, since Islam did not come with a 
prescribed from its house of worship. Traditional mosques in 
Melaka share the same square and symmetrical plan and multi -
tiered pyramidal roof that can be detected in Hindu or Buddhist 
structures in Southeast Asia. 
 
 
Tiered Pyramidal Roof 
The most significant ar chitectural element in Melaka style 
traditional mosque is its two or three -tiered pyramidal roof. 
Instead of covering the building with the Middle Eastern dome 
Melaka style mosques present a unique form in roof design. The 
multi-tiered pyramidal roof is kn own as meru in Java, tumpang 
roof in Peninsular Malaysia and in some parts of Indonesia and 
atap limas bertingkat in Sumatra. Although there are many 
speculations about the origin of this type of roof, most of the 
scholars believe that the tiered pyramidal  roof or meru is an 
inspiration from Hindu -Buddhist sacred architecture and 
resembles meru tower, which were practiced in Southeast Asia for 
a millennium. 
Meru tower (see figure 8)  in Hindu-Buddhist practices, which is 
used for offerings, comprises a raise d box -like altar, containing 
statue and topped by multi -tiered roofs and sometimes decorated 
with reliefs. Furthermore, the extensive use of radiating beam in

--- PAGE: 15 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 31 
the construction of the pyramidal roof was originated from the 
Indian subcontinent (Dumarcay, 1991). 
 
 
Figure 7: The meru tower, Southeast Asia,  
(Source: Dumarçay & Smithies, 1998) 
 
Square Floor Plan 
The earlier mosques erected in Southeast Asia followed domestic 
typology; however, this adoption did not last long and an 
overwhelming preference grew for the typology of Hindu -
Buddhism shrines, temples and pavilions erected in the region 
prior to the advent of Islam in Southeast Asia . Southeast Asian 
builders realized that a square plan of Hindu -Buddhist shrine and 
pavilion is  more suitable for forming an Islamic prayer -hall as 
both functions as a house of worship and can be easily extended 
to all the four directions. Melaka style mosque possesses a square 
plan inspired from strong regional and cultural forces instead of 
duplicating typical rectangular or hexagonal plan from Middle 
East. 
Although Melaka style mosque was erected under strong 
influence of Hindu -Buddhist typologies in the region, it still 
fulfills Islamic requirements. For instance,  
Melaka style mosques are orient ed toward Mekka in 
contrast to Hindu-Buddhist structures, which were oriented to the 
cardinal points and also the appearance of entrances in three 
facades of north, south and east while the west wall is designated 
as qibla wall.

--- PAGE: 16 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 32 
(a)                                              (b) 
Figure 8: Tiered Pyramidal Roof (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) Kampung 
Keling Mosque, Melaka (Source: Tajuddin, 2003) 
 
CHINESE INFLUENCE 
Unique Melaka traditional mosque style shows an overall 
impression of  Chinese presence. During the time when most of 
the traditional mosques in Melaka were erected, Chinese tradition 
and art have already taken roots in the port. Although the richness 
of indigenous Malay heritage did not permit Chinese architecture 
to dominate Malay architectu ral characteristics, but the close 
interconnection and prolonged contacts between two realms and 
races made Chinese architectural language woven in Malay 
architectural soul. Melaka as the primary center for Chinese 
settlements in Peninsula significantly po rtrays the reflection of 
Chinese architecture in the local architectural scene. Besides the 
Chinese buildings in Melaka, which follow the exact architectural 
traditions from their homeland China (mainly Southern China), 
other constructed buildings in the c ity also reflect signs of 
Chinese architectural elements that enrich Melaka scenery. 
Chinese architectural influence is discernible in Melaka style 
mosque’s roof ornamentation, appearance of pagoda -like minaret 
and mimbar design. 
 
(a)                             (b)                                             (c) 
Figure 9: Square plan of (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) Kampung Keling 
Mosque, (c) Terengkera Mosque, Melaka  
(Source: Tajuddin, 2003

--- PAGE: 17 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 33 
 Ornamentation 
Although the roof form in Melaka style traditiona l mosque is an 
inspiration from Hindu-Buddhist architecture, these mosques bear 
additional elements and characteristics in terms of ornamentation 
and material, which are analogous to Chinese ornamental 
characteristics. Thus, the inspiration from Hindu -Buddhist 
architectural language in the roof remains only in morphologic 
concepts. Comparison between Chinese practices and Melaka 
traditional mosques reveal fascinating analogies in decorative 
features and certain applied materials in roof design and 
construction. However, since in Islamic culture use of animal and 
personage motifs are forbidden, the carvings and decorations in 
Melaka style mosques are mainly in floral motifs. Although 
Chinese in the Peninsula built their buildings inspired from 
Southern Chines e Melaka style mosques show signs of features 
from Northern Chinese architecture. The application of the crown 
on the apex of the building, pronounced ridges, and projected roof 
eaves are of ornamental characteristics in Chinese architecture, 
which regenerate in Melaka style traditional mosques. 
  
Crown: It is true that the majority of Chinese temples in 
Peninsula resemble Southern Chinese architecture and do not 
present crown but interestingly Melaka traditional mosques show 
the influence from National Chi nese architecture by introducing a 
celebrated crown at the apex of each mosque. These crowns are 
elaborately carved in floral motifs. 
 
(a)          (b)                   (c) 
 
 
Figure 10: The Crown- (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) Kampung Keling 
Mosque, (c) Terengkera Mosque, Melaka  
(Source: Author, 2012)

--- PAGE: 18 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 34 
 
 
Ridge: Another decorative feature in roof design, which has 
gotten influen ce from Chinese architecture, is the pronounced 
ridge. Both National Chinese and Southern Chinese architecture 
provide numerous examples of ornamented roof ridges but with 
different decorative motifs and techniques. It has been suggested 
that the roof ridg e in traditional mosques “takes the image of the 
dragon” (Abdullah Bin Mohamed,  
1978: 11). 
 
        (a)                (b)                       (c) 
Eave Corner: Eaves in classical Chinese architecture are known 
not only for their aesthetic qualitie s but also for their functional 
purposes to emphasize unity, while Chinese temples in Melaka as 
similar to Melaka style mosques introduce eaves and corner eaves 
that are restricted to decorative and symbolic purposes. As a result 
of comparison between Clas sical Chinese eave corners, Chinese 
eave corners in Peninsula and Melaka traditional mosques, it can 
be said that eave corner in Melakan Islamic architecture is a 
simplified variation of Southern Chinese and Chinese architecture 
in Peninsula. 
      (a)                    (b)                      (c) 
Figure 12: The Projected Eave Corner- (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) 
Kampung Keling Mosque, (c) Terengkera Mosque, Melaka  
(Source: Author, 2012) 
 
Figure 11: The Ridge- (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) Kampung Keling Mosque, (c) 
Terengkera Mosque, Melaka 
(Source: Author, 2012)

--- PAGE: 19 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 35 
Minaret 
The Islamic monument of Minaret has undergone a fascina ting 
metamorphosis in Melaka traditional style. It is not uncommon in 
Melaka traditional style that a mosque lacked this monument 
while the one that has a minaret represents it in a very different 
way from Middle Eastern style. Melaka style minarets evoke 
tower-style or close -eaves style Chinese pagodas. However, 
Melaka style minarets alike the other architectural elements in this 
style do not represent Chinese architectural influence without a 
process of absorption and integration. These minarets similar t o 
the roof bear ornamental elements of the crown, pronounced ridge 
and projected eave corner. 
        (a)                       (b)                      (c) 
 
Figure 13: The Minaret- (a) Kampung Hulu Mosque, (b) Kampung Keling 
Mosque, (c) Terengkera Mosque, Melaka  
(Source: Author, 2012) 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
Melaka was the prime city where disseminated Islam to 
Peninsular Malaysia under her powerful Muslim kingdom. Thus, 
it is natural that a number of early Malay mosques were found in 
this historic port. Melaka sty le mosques, akin to Southeast Asia 
traditional mosque style followed local building traditions and 
climatic conditions instead of replicating traditional mosques' 
elements from Middle East. The early traditional mosques, 
erected in Melaka, were similar to traditional Malay houses and 
palaces in style and material; however, with foreign cultural and 
technical influences, Melaka style mosques faced major 
alterations in their appearance. Melaka style mosques bear

--- PAGE: 20 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 36 
numerous traces of Hindu -Buddhist, Chinese, Por tuguese, Dutch, 
and British inspirations while distinctive Islamic architectural 
elements from Middle East such as dome and minaret do not 
feature in these traditional mosques. 
Melaka traditional mosque style holds unique identity, 
which differs from tradi tional mosque style in other Malay states 
due to its unique historical background. This historical city not 
only demonstrates the most staggering examples of Southeast 
Asian traditional mosques but also established the Melaka style 
mosque movement. Alike t o Southeast Asian traditional style, 
Melaka style mosques demonstrate a potent influence in 
fundamental characteristics and basic form from Hindu -Buddhist 
structures, which were erected in the region prior to the advent of 
Islam in Southeast Asia while due  to close historical contacts 
between Melaka and China from the 15 th century onwards these 
mosques, moreover, show Chinese influences in ornamentation 
and appearance of certain architectural elements such as the 
minaret. It can be concluded that Hindu -Buddhist architecture has 
influenced Melaka style mosques in shape of the roof, which is 
known as meru and in the square and symmetrical plan of the 
main prayer hall. Chinese architecture has inspired Melaka style 
mosques in ornamentation applied on the roof s uch as crown, 
pronounce ridge and projected eave corner. Furthermore, the 
appearance of pagoda -like minaret and profusely ornamented 
minbar, which is a resemblance of imperial Chinese sedans and 
furniture making are of Chinese architectural and interior de sign 
influences. 
Notwithstanding the preference for Middle Eastern and 
Mongol mosque styles during the recent decades and the decline 
in occurrence of Southeast Asian traditional mosque style, it is 
still the most cherished style in Melaka. The question of  the value 
of an architectural specimen is closely related to questions 
concerning its preservation and restoration. Since Melaka style 
mosques are continually exposed to natural and human forces, 
they cannot maintain their original conditions forever. As a result, 
the preservation and restoration of Melaka style traditional 
mosques as cultural assets become the most important discussion. 
Since these mosques are products of hybrid architectural designs 
and ideas, to preserve their utility, beauty, strength and 
sacredness, it is vital to detect different cultural influences in

--- PAGE: 21 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 37 
these mosques  carefully in order to maintain the identity and 
pristine in preservation and restoration process.  
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Ahmad, A. G. (1999, February ). The Architectural Styles of 
Mosques in Malaysia: From Vernacular to Modern 
Structures. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Mosque Architecture: The Historic and 
Urban Developments of Mosque Architecture, Riyadh. 
Ali, Z. (2010). Malaysian Art: Selected Essays, 1979-2009. Perak: 
Penerbit Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris. 
Andaya, B. W., & Andaya, L. Y. (2001). A history of Malaysia . 
Hampshire: Palgrave. 
Barbosa, D., & de Magalhães, F. (1921). The book of Duarte 
Barbosa: an account of the countries bordering on the  
Indian Ocean and their inhabitants . London: Hakluyt 
society. 
Blust, R. (1988). The Austronesian homeland: a linguistic 
perspective (Vol. 26): University of Hawai'i Press 
(Honolulu). 
Chen, V. F. (1998). The Encyclopedia of Malaysia: Architecture . 
Singapore: Archipelago Press. 
De Witt, D. (2010). Melaka from the Top . Malaysia: Nutmeg 
Publishing. 
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). The Sage handbook of 
qualitative research . London: Sage Publications, 
Incorporated. 
Dumarçay, J., & Smithies, M. (1998). Cultural Sites of Malaysia, 
Singapore, and Indonesia . Kuala Lumpur: Oxford 
University Press. 
Groat, L., & Wang, D. (2002). Architectural research methods . 
New York: Springer. 
Hoyt, S. H. (1996). Old Malacca . Kuala Lumpur: Oxford 
University Press. 
Khan, H.-U., Al-Asad, M., & Frishman, M. (2002). The mosque: 
history, architectural development & regional diversity . 
New York: Thames & Hudson. 
Khoo, J. E. (1996). The Straits Chinese: a cultural history . Kuala 
Lumpur: The Pepin Press.

--- PAGE: 22 ---
JOURNAL OF ARCHITCTURE, PLANNING & CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
 
 38 
Kohl, D. (1984). Chinese Archite cture in the Straits Settlements 
and Western Malaya: Temples, Kongsis, and Houses : 
Heinemann Asia. 
Lim, J. (2001). Transforming traditions : architecture in the 
ASEAN countries : Brunei, Malaysia, Indonesia, 
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand . Singapore: ASE AN 
Committee on Culture and Information (COCI). 
Lloyd, I. (1986). Malacca. Singapore: Times Editions. 
Michell, G. (1995). Architecture of the Islamic world: Its history 
and social meaning. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Moore, W. K. (2004). Malaysia: A Pictori al History, 1400-2004. 
Kuala Lumpur: Archipelago Press. 
Munoz, P. M. (2006). Early kingdoms of the Indonesian 
Archipelago and the Malay peninsula. Singapore: Editions 
Didier Millet. 
Nasir, A. H. (2004). Mosque architecture in the Malay world . 
Bangi, Selang or: Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia. 
Neuman, W. L. (2003). Social research methods: Quantitative 
and qualitative approaches. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Pan, L., & Center, C. H. (2006). The encyclopedia of the Chinese 
overseas. Singapore: Chinese Heritage Centre. 
Rasdi, M., & Tajuddin, M. (2007). Mosque architecture in 
Malaysia: classification of styles and possible influence. 
Jurnal Alam Bina(3).  
Tajuddin, R., Haji Mohamad. (2000). The Architectural Heritage 
of the Malay World: The Traditional Mosque . Skudai, 
Johor: Penerbit UTM. 
Tajuddin, R., Haji Mohamad. (2007). Mosque architecture in 
Malaysia: classification of styles and possible influence. 
Jurnal Alam Bina, 9(3), 1-37.  
Tan, T. J., Ho, W. F., & Tan, J. L. (2005). The Chinese Malaysian 
contribution. Kuala Lumpur: Centre for Malaysian 
Chinese Studies. 
Utaberta, N., Sojak, S., Surat, M., Che -Ani, A., & Tahir, M. 
(2012). Typological study of traditional mosque 
ornamentation in Malaysia: Prospect of traditional 
ornament in urban mosque. World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology, 67, 624-631.

--- PAGE: 23 ---
The Foreign Architectural Influences on Melaka Style Traditional Mosques 
Somayeh Armani and Professor Emeritus Ezrin Arbi 
 39 
Vlatseas, S. (1990). A history of Malaysian architecture . 
Singapore: Longman. 
Waterson, R. (1990). The living house: an anthropology of 
architecture in South -East Asia  (Vol. 168). Singapore: 
Oxford University Press  
Yeang, K. (1992). The architecture of Malaysia . Kuala Lumpur: 
Pepin Press. 
Zakaria, A. (1994). Islamic Art in Southeast Asia, 830 AD -1570 
AD. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.
