--- PAGE: 1 ---
  
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
Volume 2 Issue 1 Year 2023 Pages 24-31 
DOI: 10.31091/jacam.v2i1.2346 
URL: https://jurnal2.isi-dps.ac.id/index.php/jacam 
 
24 
 
Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa Site, Klungkung, 
Bali (A Study of the Shape of the Statue) 
I Putu Putra Suryadana1*, I Wayan Mudra2 
1,2Institut Seni Indonesia Denpasar, Indonesia 
*Corresponding Author: putrasuryadana@gmail.com 
 
Abstract: Pemedal Agung is one of the historic buildings located on the Kertha Gosa site, 
founded by the founder of power and the first throne holder of the Klungkung kingdom in 
Semarapura, namely Ida I Dewa Agung Jambe. The identity of Pemedal Agung has very unique 
forms of statues and ornaments. The uniqueness of the statues in Pemedal Agung can be seen 
from the use of ideas which certainly have their own uniqueness from the use of the id ea of 
placing statues as ornaments or decorative elements in traditional architecture in Bali in general. 
The existence of the statues at the Kertha Gosa site, especially at the foot of Pemedal Agung, is 
not known specifically regarding the form of its embodiment, so this study is considered important 
to answer the proposed phenomenon. The purpose of this study was to find out the shape of the 
statues on the foot of Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa Klungkung site. This study uses a 
qualitative descriptive a pproach, with data collection methods, namely observation and 
documentation. Data collection will be carried out in 2023 at the Kertha Gosa Klungkung Bali site, 
as the whereabouts of the research subject. The results of the study show that the shape of the  
statues found at the foot of Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa site is one of the decorative 
elements of architectural heritage from the royal era in Bali. Researchers hope that this study can 
provide an overview in the form of science related to the exist ence of statues at the foot of 
Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa site which is a decorative element of architectural heritage 
from the royal era in Klungkung. 
 
Keywords: historical buildings, Kertha Gosa, Pemedal Agung, ornaments, statue.  
 
History Article: Submitted 18 January 2023 | Revised 20 February 2023 | Accepted 22 March 
2023 
 
How to Cite: Suryadana, I P. P. & Mudra, I W. (2023). Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa Site, 
Klungkung, Bali (A Study of the Shape of the Statue). Journal of Aesthetics,  Creativity and Art 
Management, 2(1), 24-31. DOI: 10.31091/jacam.v2i1.2346  
 
Introduction 
The Kertha Gosa site is a cultural heritage of the kingdom of Semarapura 
Klungkung, which is a site complex consisting of Bale Kertha Gosa, Taman 
Gili/Bale Kambang, and Gapura/Pemedal Agung. Kertha Gosa is a building 
complex of the former palace or Semarapura Palace which was built around 1686 
by the founder of power and the first throne holder of the Klungkung kingdom in 
Semarapura, namely Ida I Dewa Agung Jambe. At the Kertha Gosa site complex 
there are three buildings as relics from the time of the Semarapura kingdom i n 
Klungkung, of these three buildings there is one building that is still intact and 
has not been able to be restored or restored from when it was first built or built, 
namely Pemedal Agung built around 1622 ( based on the numbers listed on the 
candrasengkala). The uniqueness of the statues in Pemedal Agung can be seen 
from the use of ideas which certainly have their own uniqueness from the use of 
--- PAGE: 2 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
25 
 
the idea of placing statues as ornaments or decorative elements in traditional 
Balinese architecture in general , this refers to the existence of a phenomenon 
and arouses curiosity to find out more about its whereabouts, how the shape or 
form of the statues that are attached to the Grand Pemedal. 
Studying the shape of the statues at Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa 
Klungkung Bali site, the author would like to convey and describe how the forms 
of the statues found on the foot/batur of the Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa 
Klungkung site, seen from their presence in society in the era of globalization, 
received less at tention and known concretely from its existence as an 
embodiment of statues in historical buildings in Bali. This study is referred to 
based on references that are the same or similar in nature but differ in context 
in terms of problems and elaboration, discussing the Grand Pemedal, namely the 
research of Margaret J. Wiener, an anthropologist at the University of North 
Carolina who wrote about her perceptions of the Balinese gate, especially the 
Grand Empowerment found on the Kertha site. Gosa Klungkung. Th e discussion 
is about the role of Pemedal Agung as a silent witness to the resistance of the 
Klungkung royal government against the Colonials. Besides that, it also describes 
the symbols, pictures, and carvings found on Pemedal Agung on the Kertha Gosa 
site. The article was published in the journal of the American Anthropolohical 
Association in 1995. 
Pemedal Agung is a historic building that has a variety of uniqueness from 
its inception to the remains of artifacts that still exist today. So that it refers to a 
study that has been carried out before, discussing the Great Pemedal on the 
Kertha Gosa site, but in the context of the discussion it is still general in nature 
and has not been direct or specific. This is a study or research development that 
is new and has never existed to discuss or examine the related research title of 
Sculpture Forms Study on Grand Pemedals at the Kertha Gosa Klungkung Site. 
the Balinese. What is the shape of the statues found at the foot of Pemedal Agung 
at the Kertha Gosa Klungkung Bali site? 
The study of the shape of the statue at Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa 
Klungkung Bali site aims to be able to provide a contribution or benefit to the 
general public related to the results of the study carried out, in order to provide 
an explanation of the forms of the statue on the foot/batur of Pemedal Agung at 
the Kertha Gosa site Klungkung so that it can become useful knowledge for the 
community regarding the application of the idea of using statues in traditional 
architecture in Bali with knowledge and understanding of its existence. 
This study is very interesting and important in the scientific world, especially 
art (fine arts and crafts). The study of the shape of the statue at Pemedal Agung 
at the Kertha Gosa site in Klungkung Bali ha s its own urgency, in terms of the 
existence of the statue at the Pemedal Agung Kertha Gosa site as time goes by 
the durability of the statue will always be questioned. Therefore, before there is 
any damage to the statue and restoration or restoration is c arried out on the 
Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa site which of course can have an impact on 
a change in the shape structure of the embodiment of its original form, the study 
of the Form of the Statue on the Grand Pemedal at the Kertha Gosa Site, 
Klungkung, Bali very important and urgent to do. 
--- PAGE: 3 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
26 
 
 
Methodology 
This study uses a descriptive qualitative method so that it look like the ones 
done by Diatmika, et al. (2022) and Nugraha , et al. (2022) but with different 
focus, object, and location of research. Determination of data sources is done by 
purposive sampling that is in accordance with the objectives of the researchers.  
The research object or variable is the shape of the statue at Pemedal Agung 
at the Kertha Gosa Klungkung site, with the source of observational data used as 
the main data is the shape of the statue on the Pemedal Agung section feet/batur 
(nista angga). Reference sources are in the form of documents, the research ers 
choose several reference documents in the form of e-journals, books and articles. 
Data collection techniques were carried out using research methods, namely 
observation and documentation. Documentation was carried out through 
research results, article searches and e -journals were obtained through online 
media, namely the internet, then book searches were obtained through the Bali 
Province BPCB. Sampling of research subjects will be carried out at the Kertha 
Gosa Klungkung site, Bali in 2023. 
 
Results and discussion 
The Form of the Statue on the Legs/Batur Pemedal Agung 
Pemedal Agung is one of the historic buildings that has never been restored 
since it was founded on the Kertha Gosa site, made of brick, stone and wood. 
The building is predominantly red, periodized in the XVII century against the 
background of Hindu and Colonial culture. The condition of the building is 
categorized as intact because little damage was found on the building structure. 
The Pemedal Agung structure is in the form of a paduraksa  gate with three 
doorways. The biggest door hole is in the middle with two doors. On the 
dedanga/ulak wood at the top of the main door there is a candrasengkala in the 
form of the bird's eye chakra, each of which is worth 1,6,2,2,1,4. Based on this, 
it is very likely that the work on the gate was completed in 1622 on the 1st month 
4, during the reign of I Dewa Agung Jambe at Semarapura Klungkung. On the 
right and left sides of the main door there is a small door with 1 door. At the 
foot/batur (nista angga) of Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa site, six types of 
statues can be visually observed. Based on observations of the six statues, it is 
not possible to identify concretely the name of each of the characterizations of 
the existing statues which are located at the foot of Pemedal Agung on the Kertha 
Gosa site. Therefore the researcher tries to decipher the name of each 
characterization of the statue with the name of the guard statue, the name is 
taken based on the placement of the statue which in the concept  of traditional 
Balinese architecture is usually always filled with dwarapala figures who are none 
other than figures associated as guardians. In this study, several types of statues 
were found at the foot of Pemedal Agung at the Kertha Gosa site, the foll owing 
are the statues obtained based on the results of the research carried out, 
including; guardian statue 1, guardian statue 2, guardian statue 3, guardian 
statue 4, guardian statue 5, and guardian statue 6. 
  
--- PAGE: 4 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
27 
 
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 1. Gapura/Pemedal Agung 
 
Guardian Statue 1 
 
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 2. Guardian Statue 1 
 
The statue is 75cm high, 32cm wide and 39cm thick, made of stone 
material. It is located on the right side of the small door with one leaf at Pemedal 
Agung. Descriptively, the statue can be seen that it has a squatting attitude, 
wears a hat (a tubular top hat with a rounded edges), thin eyebrows, large eyes, 
large nose, open mouth with both incisors visible, round cheeks, rounded chin, 
wearing scarf (triangular in shape), long-sleeved shirt with vest and one button 
in front of chest, wears cloth with the uncal covering the groin, the right leg is 
folded, the left leg is bent back, sitting on a square-shaped mat. 
 
Guardian Statue 2 
  

--- PAGE: 5 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
28 
 
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 3. Guardian Statue 2 
 
The statue is 95cm high, 37cm wide and 39cm thick, made using rock 
material located on the right side (under the guardian statue 3) of the main door 
with two doors on Pemedal Agung, descriptively the statue can be seen that it 
has an attitude of sitting cross -legged, a hat tube -shaped top with flat edges, 
wearing cloth on head, thin eyebrows, slanted eyes, large nose, round cheeks, 
open mouth, hollow teeth, wide ears, head facing left, has beard, long sleeved 
shirt with front buttons, trousers, wearing a pocket tied at the waist, holding the 
right knee in his right hand, holding banknotes and kepeng in his left hand, sitting 
on a rectangular pedestal decorated with vine motifs. 
 
Guardian Statue 3 
  
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 4. Guardian Statue 3 
 
The statue is 71cm high, 41cm wide and 39cm thick, made using rock 
material located on the right side (above the guardian statue 2) of the main door 
with two doors on Pemedal Agung, descriptively the statue can be seen that it 
has a sitting posture with bent knees right and left leg folded, top hat in semicircle 
shape with flat brims, head wearing cloth tied at the back and braided/braided 
up to waist length, thin eyebrows, round eyes, big nose, thick lips, sharp ears, 
long sleeved clothe s , flower motif bracelet, trousers, wearing shoes (such as 
ballet flats), right hand is placed on the knee of the right leg and holding a long 

--- PAGE: 6 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
29 
 
round object with a curved bottom, sitting on a pedestal with a geometric motif 
in the form of an H motif. 
 
Guardian Statue 4 
 
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 5. Guardian Statue 4 
 
The statue is 73 cm high, 44 cm wide and 37.5 cm thick, made of stone 
material. It is located on the left side (above the guard statue 5) of the main door 
with two doors on Pemedal Agu ng. Descriptively, this statue can be seen as a 
statue with a sitting posture. , semicircular top hat with flat brim and folded up, 
curly hair, thin eyebrows, open eyes, large nose, thick lips, wears a triangular 
shaped cloth around his neck, wears long sleeved shirt with hook buttons on the 
chest, wears a tie plain waist, left leg bent, right leg folded, right hand holding a 
bowl, left hand holding a flat stone. Sitting on a rectangular pedestal with a 
geometric motif in the form of an H motif and a circle of kepeng money. 
 
Guardian Statue 5  
 
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 6. Guardian Statue 5 
 
The statue is 86cm high, 36cm wide and 38cm thick, made using rock 
material located on the left side (under the guard statue 4) of the main door with 
two doors on Pemedal Agung, descriptively the statue can be seen as a statue 
with a sitting posture with t he body facing right, tube -shaped top hat with flat 

--- PAGE: 7 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
30 
 
brim and folded sides up, thin eyebrows, hair in long plaited/braided waist-length, 
slanted eyes, round cheeks, flat nose, open mouth with visible incisors, curly 
beard, ears small, wearing long sleeves, long pants, there is a box-shaped object 
like a test with stripes and handles on it. Sitting on a square pedestal with leaf 
tendrils motif. 
 
Guardian Statue 6 
 
 
[Source: Suryadana, 2023] 
Figure 7. Guardian Statue 6 
 
The statue is 68cm high, 34cm wide and 37cm thick, made of stone 
material. It is located on the left side of the small door with one leaf at Pemedal 
Agung. Descriptively, this statue can be seen as a statue with a sitting posture, 
head turned to the right, wearing a hat. semicircular shape with  a bulge on it 
without a rim, thick eyebrows, round eyes, big nose, round cheeks, thick 
mustache, open mouth showing two upper fangs, right hand holding sword, left 
hand holding sword scabbard, wearing vest, belt, pants long, left leg bent and 
right leg folded to the back, wearing shoes (resembling ballet flats), sitting on a 
square mat. 
 
Conclusion 
Pemedal Agung is one of the historic buildings located on the Kertha Gosa 
Klungkung site, in the context of which no restoration or restoration has ever 
been carried out since its inception. Pemedal Agung was founded by the founder 
of the first throne of the Klungkung kingdom in Semarapura, namely I Dewa 
Agung Jambe around 1622 (based on the number printed on the candrasengkala 
in Pemedal Agung). The existence of Pemedal Agung cannot be separated from 
elements of art in the form of ornaments as decorative elements, one of which 
is the statues found on the foot/batur of the Pemedal Agung. Overall, there are 
six statues at the foot/batur of Pemedal Agung, each of which visually has a 
unique character shape and uses distinctive attributes and varies from one statue 
to another. The statues as a whole are made using padas stone material with 
different sizes according to the pose and style character of each existing statue, 
besides that the placement is made symmetrical on the right and left sides of the 
north foot/batur of Pemedal Agung. 

--- PAGE: 8 ---
Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art Management 
31 
 
 
References 
Adiputra, G. N. T. (2015). The City Image of Semarapura (Between the Balinese 
Architectural Heritage and Five Exterior Elements of Modern Public 
Function). Widyasrama, 26(2). 
Agusintadewi, N. K. (2017). Konservasi Puri Smarapura di Klungkung, Bali. 
In Seminar Ikatan Peneliti Lingkungan Binaan Indonesia (pp. B297-304). 
Artanegara. “Inventarisasi Situs Kerta Gosa” (2019).  
Diatmika, G. N. A. D., Muka, I. K., & Suardina, I. N. (2022). Utilizing Sand as 
Glaze in Agung Glazinia Ceramics. Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity and Art 
Management, 1(1), 59–70. https://doi.org/10.31091/jacam.v1i1.1597.  
Indraguna, K. E., Atmadja, N. B., & Aryana, I. G. M. (2018). Lukisan  Gaya 
Kamasan di Bale Kertha Gosa Semarapura, Klungkung, Bali (Analisis Nilai-
Nilai Pendidikan Karakter dan Implementasinya dalam Pembelajaran 
Sejarah di SMA Berbasis Kurikulum 2013). Widya Winayata: Jurnal 
Pendidikan Sejarah, 6(1). 
Kariani, Ni Made Karian i. (2018). “Pengelolaan Kertagosa sebagai Daya Tarik 
Pariwisata di Kabupaten Klungkung”. 
Nilotama, S. K. L., & Sabana, S. Reading Balinese Traditional Architecture 
Cosmology: The Element Concept of Cosmologic Placing in the Justice 
Court Hall. Case Study: Bale Kertagosa, Klungkung, Bali. In Arte -Polis 3 
International Conference (p. 525). 
Nugraha, G., Adnyana, I. W., & Karja, W. (2022). Iconography of Woman Image 
in Sri Tanjung Relief at Candi Surowono. Journal of Aesthetics, Creativity 
and Art Management, 1 (1), 1 –12. 
https://doi.org/10.31091/jacam.v1i1.1591.  
Pratiwi, L. P. A. D., Atmadja, N. B., & Arta, K. S. (2015). Museum Semarajaya 
Sebagai Sumber Belajar Sejarah Lokal Di Sman 1 Semarapura, Klungkung, 
Bali. Widya Winayata: Jurnal Pendidikan Sejarah, 3(3). 
Sombu, A. S. (2011). Pelestarian arsitektur bangunan Kertha Gosa di Klungkung-
Bali. 
Suryono, A. (2011). Pelestarian Arsitektur Bangunan Kertha Gosa Di Klungkung-
Bali. Research Report-Engineering Science, 2. 
Wiener, M. J. (1995). Doors of perception: power and representation in Bali. 
Cultural anthropology, 10(4), 472-508. 
 
 
