
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
CLIPP 
Christiani Lehmanni inedita, publicanda, publicata  
 
 
 
 
 
titulus  
 Interlinear morphemic glossing 
huius textus situs retis mundialis  
 https://www.christianlehmann.eu/publ/lehmann_img.pdf  
dies manuscripti postremum modificati  
 03.08.2015 
occasio orationis habitae  
 – 
volumen publicationem continens  
 Booij, Geert & Lehmann, Christian & Mugdan, Joachi m & 
Skopeteas, Stavros (eds.), Morphologie. Ein internationales 
Handbuch zur Flexion und Wortbildung. 2. Halbband . 
Berlin: W. de Gruyter (Handbücher der Sprach- und 
Kommunikationswissenschaft, 17.2) 
annus publicationis  
 2004 
paginae  
 1834-1857 
 
===== PAGE 2 =====
Interlinear morphemic glossing 
 
 
1. Basic concepts 
2. Prerequisites of morphological analysis 
3. Principles of interlinear glossing 
4. Boundary symbols 
5. Typographic conventions 
6. Summary 
7. References 
 
1.  Basic concepts 
 
1.1.  Purpose 
 
Given an object language L1 and a metalanguage L2, then an interlinear morphemic gloss 
(IMG) is a representation of a text in L1 by a string of elements taken from L2, where, ideally, 
each morph of the L1 text is rendered by a morpheme  of L2 or a configuration of symbols 
representing its meaning, and where the sequence of  the units of the gloss corresponds to the 
sequence of the morphs which they render. Its prima ry aim is to make the reader understand 
the grammatical structure of the L1 text by identif ying aspects of the free translation with 
meaningful elements of the L1 text. The ultimate purpose may be to aid the reader in grasping 
the spirit of the language, to control the linguist ic argument the author is making by means of 
the L1 example or to scan a corpus for a certain gloss in order to find relevant examples. 
 
(1) Latin 
exeg-i   monumentum  
implement\
PRF -1. SG  monument. N:ACC .SG  
aer-e  perennius 
ore. 
F-ABL .SG  lasting: CMPR :ACC .SG .N 
'I have executed a monument more durable than ore' 
 
(1) illustrates the typical use of an IMG. The firs t line of (1) contains the L1 text line; the 
second line contains the IMG, and the third line contains an idiomatic translation into L2. 
Interlinear morphemic glossing is at the intersecti on of different communicative 
purposes. On the one hand, it is a kind of translat ion that accompanies the original. In this 
sense, it is comparable to the arrangement that one  finds in synoptic editions of original and 
translation. On the other, it is a kind of linguist ic analysis. In this sense, it competes with a 
fragment of a grammar. Its hybrid character leads t o a number of problems and to different 
styles in interlinear morphemic glossing. 
The aim of the following treatment is a standardiza tion of an aspect of linguistic 
methodology on the basis of widespread usage as dev eloped in the 20 
th  century. To the extent 
that linguistics is a science, its methods are susc eptible and in need of standardization. 
Interlinear morphemic glossing has to do with the r epresentation of linguistic data, 
===== PAGE 3 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  2 
comparable in this with a phonetic transcription. J ust as the latter has been successfully 
standardized by the IPA, so interlinear morphemic glossing should be standardized. 
This will be done in the present article in the for m of a set of rules, which are listed in 
section 6.1. Such a standardization only concerns l inguistic science. Linguistic data are often 
presented to a lay public, with the purpose of educ ation, entertainment or divulgation of the 
achievements of our science. Here some kind of inte rlinear glossing may be necessary, too. 
However, scientific formalism tends to damage rathe r than serve the good cause. An example 
how interlinear glossing has been handled in a book  directed to a non-specialist public is 
quoted in the next section (Finck 1909). The presen t article is biased in favor of a more 
formalized treatment, on the assumption that it wil l be easier to derive a less formal 
representation from the proposals made here than th e other way round. The treatment is, 
however, not fully formal, since it focuses on inte rlinear glossing in printed texts. In the 
annotation of texts by markup languages for automat ic retrieval, the same conceptual 
problems, but very different technical problems arise which will not be dealt with here. 
Data are commonly quoted from sources in which they  are already provided by an 
analysis. In linguistic publications, it has been w ide-spread usage to quote data together with 
their IMG and their translation, even if their form  or language is different from the one used 
in the quoting context. That is, such composite dat a representations have been treated as 
indecomposable blocks. Such scruples do not seem to  be warranted. Primary data may be 
quoted and provided with the quoting author's analy sis and translation (cf. Bickel et al. 
2004:1). 
 
1.2.  Precursors 
 
Interlinear glossing has precursors in the descript ive tradition which link it up not with some 
kind of morphological representation, but with effo rts to bring out the spirit of the language. 
The point there is not to provide a formal represen tation of a piece of linguistic data, but to 
render the language-specific construal of the world intelligible. To this end, literal translations 
were provided. For instance, G. Gabelentz (1901:460 ), in a passage arguing that the personal 
verb suffixes in Semitic languages are possessive p ronouns, gives the following Arabic 
example: “ ya-kf 
ī-ka-hùm  er genügt dir gegen sie (eig. er-genügt-dein-ihr)”. 
The IMG is a late-comer in linguistics. Early gramm ars were intended as primers, the 
user was expected to work through them and learn th e morphemes; so no glossing was 
necessary. Many scientific grammars, e.g. of Latin,  Greek, Arabic etc., were meant for the 
initiated who needed no glossing either (not seldom  even the free translations were spared). 
Even comparative studies, historical or typological , left the analysis of the examples of 
diverse languages to the reader. H. C. Gabelentz, i n the middle of a discussion of Lule, Osage 
and other languages, presents the following passage: 
 
"Im Dakota (meine Grammatik der Dakota-Sprache § 34 ) dient die 3 Pers. Plur. 
Act. dazu, das Passivum auszudrücken, sogar wenn ei n Actor im Singularis 
hinzuzudenken ist, z.B. Jesus Jan eñ hi q ix Jordan watpa ohna baptizapi , Jesus 
kam zu Johannes und sie tauften ihn (st. er wurde g etauft) im Jordanfluss." (H. 
C. Gabelentz 1861:465) 
 
Here the reader who does not have the grammar mentioned on his desk is given no chance. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  3 
Pace Gabelentz, IMGs are needed when two conditions  coincide: the level of analysis 
is above morphology, and the reader is not expected  to be familiar with the languages under 
discussion (which is generally the case in typology , but not in descriptive or historical-
comparative linguistics). W.v. Humboldt (1836[1963] :534) invented his own device to help 
the reader identify L2 meaningful elements with L1 morphemes. He gives the following 
example from Classical Nahuatl: 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 1 3 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 
ni- c- chihui  -lia  in  no- piltzin  ce  calli   ich  mache  es  für  der  mein  Sohn  ein  Haus  
 
While dispensing with the IMG proper, this method f ails for L1 elements which cannot be 
rendered by L2 words. 
Beside the literal translation illustrated above, G . Gabelentz (1901) uses a variety of 
techniques. He also has interlinear glosses, as whe n he says: ‘Der Satz “Ich bin Dein Sohn” 
heißt im Maya: 
 
a – me 
χen – en. 
Dein Sohn  ich,’ (Gabelentz 1901:383) 
 
and occasionally (e.g. Gabelentz 1901:400) he uses Latin as L2 in IMGs. 
Finck (1909) is one of the first linguistic publica tions that illustrate the working of a 
language with a sizable text provided with a free t ranslation and an IMG. The following 
sentence from his Turkish text (Finck 1909:83) illustrates his glossing style: 
 
xodža-da  esb 
āb-ın  dzümle-si-ni  
Meister=auch Kleider=(der) Gesamtheit=ihre=die 
ateš-e vur-up  yak-ar  
Feuer=zu  werf=enderweise  verbrenn=end  
Der Meister warf nun 
sämtliche Kleider ins Feuer 
und verbrannte sie. 
 
As may be seen, these forerunners have no grammatic al category labels yet. Finck glosses 
Turkish –ın  ' 
GEN ' by Germ. der  because this word displays a morphological trace o f the 
genitive. Similarly, Turkish –up  ' GER ' is glossed by –enderweise , maybe the closest to a 
gerund that German can muster. This procedure is a tribute to the non-specialist readership 
that the booklet aims at, but necessarily falsifies  the working of the language by attributing 
lexical meanings to its grammatical morphemes. 
It took a long time until interlinear morphemic glo ssing became firmly established. In 
Bloomfield’s Language , of 1933, examples abound, but they are presented like this: 
“Some languages have here one word, regardless of g ender, as Tagalog 
[kapa’tid]; our brother  corresponds to a Tagalog phrase [kapa’tid na la’la :ki], 
where the last word means ‘male’, and our sister  to [kapa’tid na ba’ba:ji], with 
the attribute ‘female’” (Bloomfield 1933:278). 
IMGs that fulfill most of the requirements set out below appear first in the sixties of 
the 20 
th  century. From the eighties on, they become standar d in publications dealing with 
languages whose knowledge is not presupposed. Edito rs and publishers increasingly require 
them even for languages like Latin, French and Germ an that used to be well-known to 
linguists. The development is towards (not only pro viding translations for, but even) glossing 
every language except English. This is apparently a  symptom of a global development in 
===== PAGE 5 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  4 
which every language except English becomes exotic. 
Good IMGs are relatively costly, both for the scien tist and for the typesetter. Authors 
and publishers are therefore not too eager to produ ce them (well). There is at least one 
software on the market that aids the linguist in ge nerating systematic IMGs for his texts, the 
interlinearizer that comes with the program Shoebox , from the Summer Institute of 
Linguistics (cf. Simons & Versaw 1988; Art. 168). 
Since IMGs are fairly recent in linguistics, they have seldom been treated by linguistic 
methodology. The first treatise of the present subj ect is Lehmann (1982). Subsequent work 
includes Simons & Versaw (1988), Lehmann et al. ( 21994), Lieb & Drude (2000), Bickel et 
al. (2004). They have been freely made use of in the present treatment. 
 
1.3.  Levels of representation 
 
Interlinear morphemic glossing must be seen in the larger context of representation of 
linguistic data and, even more comprehensive, of the documentation of a language (cf. Lieb & 
Drude 2000). On such a background, an isolated exam ple given in a descriptive context is a 
particularly constrained case of the edition and an notation (also called ‘markup’ for technical 
purposes) of a piece of primary linguistic data for  posterity. In other words, a general-purpose 
edition of a linguistic corpus is a kind of maximum  model, subject to the full set of rules for 
explicitness, detail and elaboration, from which th e quotation of an isolated example in the 
context of some grammatical discussion represents a  subset delimited by considerations of 
feasibility, usefulness and the like. 
Every linguistic representation of some piece of ra w data, even if it limits itself to a 
phonetic transcription, involves some linguistic an alysis (Lehmann 2004). Insofar, no sharp 
boundary is to be drawn between the sheer represent ation of data and their analysis. Bearing 
this in mind, we can speak of various levels at whi ch linguistic data may be represented. 
Presupposing spoken language data, at least the following are relevant: 
 
(a) raw data recording (video or audio tape), 
(b) phonetic transcription of the utterance, 
(c) orthographic representation of the utterance, 
(d) morph(ophon)emic representation of the utteranc e, 
(e) IMG of the utterance, 
(f) free translation of the utterance into the back ground language, 
(g) descriptive and explanatory comment on pragmati c or cultural aspects of the utterance. 
 
This set may be supplemented by even more represent ations (cf. Lieb & Drude 2000). There 
may be a phonological representation distinct from both levels (b) and (d). There may be a 
syntactic representation, e.g. in the form of a labeled bracketing. And there may be a semantic 
representation instead of, or in addition to, repre sentation (f). In such representations, the 
portion of linguistic analysis is probably even stronger than in the seven levels enumerated. 
The raw data have a temporal structure which is projected onto a spatial line in written 
representations. These representations are synchron ized more or less closely. For instance, 
representation (f) generally matches L1 sentences, units of level (g) may be associated with 
L1 units of any size, and representation (e) may ma tch representation (d) morpheme by 
morpheme. This has different consequences for the t ypographic layout. For instance, units of 
===== PAGE 6 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  5 
level (g) may be associated with the running text b y making full use of a multidimensional 
display, while representation (f) may be in a later al column at the same height as its original, 
as is usual in synoptic editions and also practiced  in the example from Finck (1909) given in 
section 1.2. Other representations should be arrang ed in lines one of which is beneath the 
other and runs in parallel with it. 
For the purposes of descriptive and typological gra mmatical analysis and 
exemplification, the seven-level set is generally reduced to only three. What may be called the 
‘canonical trilinear representation’  of linguistic examples involves: 
- a representation of L1 at one of the levels (b), (c) or (d), 
- an IMG in L2 (level e), 
- an idiomatic translation into L2 (level f). 
An IMG will seldom be paired with a phonetic repres entation, because this serves 
phonetics, while an IMG serves grammar. They theref ore form an unequal pair. If both are 
required, they will generally be mediated by anothe r representation, a morphophonemic or 
orthographic one. 
It makes a difference for the glossing whether L1 i s rendered in a morphophonemic 
representation or in conventional orthography. In t he former case, the rules of orthography do 
not apply, and the linguist may dress up the repres entation in such a way that a biunique 
mapping onto the IMG is facilitated. In the latter case, morpheme boundaries may be 
obscured by the orthography, and there will be deli miters such as blanks, hyphens and 
punctuation marks which do not necessarily represen t grammatical boundaries and may 
interfere with the glossing. However, the choice be tween an orthographic and a scientific 
representation of a text is generally a higher-orde r choice which cannot depend on glossing 
requirements. In particular, an example may be quot ed unchanged from a primary source 
(think of Sanscrit examples). It may then not be po ssible to insert boundary symbols and the 
like in the L1 text. Glossing conventions therefore  have to be adjusted to use with 
orthographic representations. 
If the first line representing the L1 text differs too much from a morphophonemic 
representation, then it is advisable to expand the canonical trilinear representation by an 
additional morphophonemic representation. It will then be this line that the IMG refers to. 
The two languages involved will be called L1 and L2  throughout. However, it should 
be clear that the relationship between them is asym metric: L1 is the object language, L2 is the 
metalanguage. The symbols occurring in an IMG have a different status from the elements of 
the text line that they gloss: For present purposes , the L1 text line consists of morphs, while 
the IMG consists of names of L2 morphemes and of gr ammatical categories (cf. section 3.2). 
There can, thus, be no question of “mirroring” the structure of the L1 expression by the 
sequence of the L2 elements. Instead, an element in  an IMG serves as a kind of mnemonic 
hint to the meaning or function of its corresponding L1 element. 
 
1.4.  Delimitation 
 
The complete set of representations rendering an L1  text may be sufficient to derive a 
grammatical description from it (as postulated in L ieb & Drude 2000, §1.1). However, given 
its inherent restrictions, an IMG cannot by itself compensate for a grammar (or just a 
morphology). Apart from the form of presentation, t he most important substantive difference 
between a grammatical description and an IMG lies i n the fact that the grammar treats of 
===== PAGE 7 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  6 
categories in the sense of classes, while the IMG i dentifies individual morphemes. For 
instance, a grammar treats of the verbal category o f aspect. An IMG contains a gloss for an 
individual aspect morpheme, e.g. PERF , neglecting the question of whether this is actual ly an 
aspect morpheme or rather a tense morpheme, and als o leaving unanswered questions 
concerning other members of the paradigm, let alone  the construction and use of the PERF  
morpheme. Some of these kinds of information may be  given in other representations, e.g. a 
syntactic representation. 
By the same token, the IMG does not indicate the sy ntactic category of a word form. 
For instance, the IMG of Germ. laufend  is ‘run: PART .PRS ’, showing that the form contains a 
morpheme whose function it is to mark a present par ticiple. The gloss is not ‘run(part.prs)’ or 
anything of the sort, meaning that laufend  is a present participle. While the latter is true,  it is 
not the task of an IMG to give this information. 
Moreover, the type of morphological unit is not an object of an IMG. Thus, concepts 
like ‘stem’, ‘root’, ‘prefix’ do not appear in IMGs. Such information may, to a large extent, be 
inferred from a proper IMG, since the gloss of a ro ot differs typographically from the gloss of 
a grammatical formative. 
Similarly, an IMG cannot replace a lexicon. Here ag ain, elements appearing in an 
IMG are but names of elements appearing in the L1 l ine. They are not meant to exhaust the 
meaning of such an element. 
Finally, an IMG is not meant to replace an idiomati c translation. Thus, it cannot and 
should not render closely the sense of an L1 item i n the given context. An IMG is regularly 
accompanied by a free translation which fulfills precisely this purpose. 
 
2.  Prerequisites of morphological analysis 
 
Interlinear glossing might appear to be just an ele mentary form of representing data. As a 
matter of fact, it presupposes a morphological anal ysis. The following analytic problems are 
directly reflected by the glosses. 
 
2.1.  Unmarkedness and zero morphemes 
 
Where the L1 text contains a morph, the IMG contain s an element rendering it. Where the L1 
text contains nothing, the issue of rendering it is  complicated by markedness theory. Germ. 
Herr  may be glossed by ‘master’ or by ‘master( 
NOM .SG )’. Latin mone-t may be glossed by 
‘warn-3. SG ’ or by ‘warn(IND .ACT )-3. SG ’ (according to R16). Moreover, one may believe tha t 
such forms contain zero morphemes and put thus: Herr-Ø ‘master-NOM .SG ’, mone-Ø-Ø-t 
‘warn-IND -ACT -3. SG ’. All of these IMGs are formally correct. The choice among them is not a 
matter of appropriate glossing, but of morphologica l theory. For interlinear glossing, only the 
general rule R1 is relevant. 
 
2.2.  Allomorphy 
 
If the L1 representation to be glossed corresponds to standard orthography, the analyst has no 
decisions to make in its regard. Otherwise, a good option for the representation (as well as for 
===== PAGE 8 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  7 
any writing system) is a morphophonemic representat ion which steers a middle course as far 
as allomorphy is concerned: Phonologically conditio ned allomorphy is resolved (ignored), 
morphologically conditioned allomorphy is not resolved (is rendered). 
The IMG, on the other hand, shows morphemes, not al lomorphs. In order to 
understand what this implies, consider three exampl es. Modern Yucatec Maya expresses 
completive and incompletive aspect by suffixes on t ransitive and (one conjugation class of) 
intransitive verbs as follows: 
 
aspect 
 
valence 
completive incompletive 
transitive -ah -ik 
intransitive -Ø -Vl 
Tab. 169.1: Aspectual suffixes in Yucatec Maya 
 
For instance, t-u hats’-ah  ‘ PAST -SBJ .3  beat-CMPL  (he beat it)’. One might think that the table 
contains four morphemes. Actually, however, transit ivity is inherent in the verb stem and 
conditions allomorphy in the aspect suffix. The con ditioning factor should not make part of 
the gloss. That is, the correct gloss for -ah  is not ‘ TR .CMPL ’, but simply ‘ CMPL ’. See also 4.5. 
Yucatec Maya also has personal clitics that precede  nouns as possessive cross-
reference markers and verbs as subject cross-reference markers. If the noun or verb starts with 
a vowel, a glide is inserted in its front. The choi ce between the two glides w and y is morpho-
logically conditioned: If the pronoun is of first p erson singular or of second person, it is w; if 
the pronoun is of third person, the glide is y. For instance, in watan  ‘ POSS .1. SG  Ø:wife (my 
wife)’, u yatan  ‘ POSS .3. SG  Ø:wife (his wife)’. It is also possible to regard the noun forms 
modified by the initial glide as stem allomorphs, i n which case the glide would not even 
receive the gloss by ‘Ø’. However, in the third per son, a pronominal clitic followed by the 
glide can be omitted. Thus, yatan  by itself means ‘his wife’. (Historically, the glide is indeed 
a reflex of an older cross-reference marker). We th erefore have u y-atan  ‘ POSS .3 Ø-wife’ ~ y-
atan  ‘ POSS .3-wife’, and we face the problem that the same element is not even a morph in one 
context, but a full-fledged morpheme in another. Wh atever the correct morphological analysis 
may be, the IMG presupposes it and brings it out. 
Last, consider gender marking in a language such as  Latin (cf. Art. 48). Puellae bonae  
means ‘good girls’, pueri boni  ‘good boys’. Apart from motion, gender is inherent  in a noun 
stem. It is, however, recognizable by the declensio n suffixes. Nevertheless, the gloss of the 
morph in question does not contain the conditioning category. The noun forms will be glossed 
‘girl. F:NOM .PL ’, ‘boy.M:NOM .PL ’, implying that gender is a category of the stem, not of the 
suffix. What about the adjectives? Gender is not in herent in an adjective stem. We may 
therefore gloss them by ‘good: NOM .PL .F’ and ‘good: NOM .PL .M’. Then one and the same 
element would be a morpheme on adjectives, but a co nditioned allomorph on nouns, and 
therefore it would get two different glosses. Since  two different glosses for the same element 
are not admissible in interlinear glossing (R4), th is would entail that there are two 
homonymous declension suffixes -ae  in Latin, which is obviously undesirable. We may s top 
this consideration here, since the problem is obvio usly not one of glossing, but one of 
morphological analysis. R2 codifies the convention that IMG expressions represent 
morphemes, not allomorphs. 
 
===== PAGE 9 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  8 
3.  Principles of interlinear glossing 
 
3.1.  General 
 
In the canonical trilinear representation, one L1 t ext line is matched by two L2 lines, the IMG 
and the free translation. This entails a division o f labor between the two L2 representations. 
The free translation is the idiomatic semantic equi valent of the L1 line, the IMG is a 
representation of its morphological structure. There is consequently no need for the translation 
to be particularly literal, just as there is no nee d for the IMG to repeat the morphemes that 
appear in the translation. For instance, a polysemo us L1 item will be rendered by its 
contextual sense in the free translation, but by it s basic meaning in the IMG (R8). 
Unnecessary parallelism between the two L2 lines is  redundant; the trilinear canonical 
representation offers an occasion to provide additional information. 
In principle, the degree of detail displayed in an IMG depends on the purpose the 
example with its gloss is meant to serve. However, the author cannot foresee the purposes to 
which others will want to use his examples. A morph ological detail that is not at stake in the 
current discussion may be essential for the argumen t another linguist may wish to base on the 
example. For this reason, the principle is to allow  for as much precision and detail as seems 
tolerable (R3). The following rules specify the pro perties of a complete IMG . They do not 
exclude less detailed IMGs where they suffice. Cf. R13 and R23 for possibilities of under-
specifying morphological structure. 
The IMG of a morpheme is some sort of name for it, a name that alludes to its 
meaning or function and is insofar mnemonic or, at least, more helpful to the non-specialist 
than the L1 morph itself. It must therefore have a certain recognition value. R4, which 
actually is a tightening of R1, therefore requires that given a particular L1 morpheme, its gloss 
will be the same in all contexts; and apart from fu ll synonymy, no two morphemes of L1 will 
have the same gloss. These points will be elaborated in the following subsections. 
 
3.2.  Glossing vocabulary 
 
Glosses are taken from a language L2 that serves as  a metalanguage of L1. L2 is based on a 
natural language – in this article, English –, but with far-reaching deviations from natural 
language use. The glossing vocabulary consists of the following kinds of symbols: 
- vocables: 
• L2 morphemes and stems 
• grammatical category labels 
- boundary symbols. 
The difference between the two kinds of vocables is  the following: Morphemes and stems are 
taken from natural L2 vocabulary and are meant to b e translation equivalents (in a sense to be 
made precise below) of L1 items. For instance, the notation “Germ. Schreib-tisch  ‘write-table 
(desk)’” is to be interpreted thus: The German word  form Schreibtisch  ‘desk’ consists of two 
morphs, of which schreib- means ‘write’ and tisch  means ‘table’. Grammatical category 
labels, on the other hand, are taken from scientifi c terminology and are meant to categorize 
the function of L1 items. For instance, “Germ. schreib-en  ‘write-
INF  (write (inf.))’” is to be 
interpreted thus: The German word form schreiben  ‘write (inf.)’ consists of two morphs, of 
===== PAGE 10 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  9 
which schreib- means ‘write’, while –en  is an infinitive marker (that is, -en  does not mean 
‘infinitive’; it is the German word Infinitiv  which means ‘infinitive’). To bring out this 
essential difference between the two kinds of IMG v ocables, L2 morphemes and stems are 
written in straight orthography, while grammatical category labels are written in (small) 
capitals (R29). 
A grammatical category label represents (i.e. is th e name of) the value of a 
grammatical category (the latter being taken, techn ically, as a parameter or attribute). For 
instance, the label ‘ ACC ’ is the name of the value ‘accusative’ of the morp hological category 
‘case’. Just as a grammatical category label is a n ame of a value of a grammatical category, 
what is called ‘L2 morphemes and stems’ are actually names of L2 morphemes and stems. In 
the following, we will abide by the simpler way of speaking. The choice and use of vocables 
are treated in the following subsections; boundary symbols are treated in section 4. 
 
3.3.  Lexemes 
 
An L1 lexeme is, in principle, glossed by an L2 lexeme (R5(a)). Sometimes more than one L2 
word is necessary, for instance in Germ. fabulieren  ‘invent.stories’. However, profusion is to 
be avoided. Adjectives that do not require a copula  in predicative function are often glossed 
by adding a copula, e.g. West Greenlandic anurli  ‘windy’ is glossed as ‘be.windy’ in 
Fortescue (1984:65). This is only correct if a word  of this class requires an attributor in 
attributive function. Otherwise it wrongly implies that there is no difference between 
adjectives and verbs, and it tends to obscure the f act that the language does not use a copula 
with adjectival predicates. 
L1 cardinal numerals are glossed by Arabic numbers.  An issue arises for proper 
names, which are often not glossed at all. However,  there is no room here for an exception to 
the general rule: a proper name is rendered by its counterpart in L2. Some proper names have 
conventional counterparts that are specific to L2; Engl. John  corresponds to Germ. Hans , and 
Engl. Munich  corresponds to Germ. München . These then appear in the IMG. Whenever there 
is no such language-specific convention, the counte rpart of an L1 name is usually the same 
word in L2. 
If L2 is English, no problem arises for the form in  which L2 lexemes are quoted in the 
IMG. In other languages, lexemes have a citation fo rm in conformity with L2 conventions. If 
this is an inflected form, like the nominative for nouns or the infinitive for verbs, then it is 
excluded from an IMG by 
R5(b), and instead the bare stem must be used. The re ason is that 
such a gloss would seem to imply that there is a no minative, or an infinitive, in the L1 line 
where actually just a stem is being glossed. 
 
3.4.  Grammatical formatives 
 
L1 morphs are, in principle, glossed by citation forms of L2 morphemes. However, interlinear 
morphemic glossing crucially revolves around grammatical properties of L1 items. These will 
differ between L1 and L2. Even if, in a number of c ases, the L2 stem appearing in a gloss has 
the same grammatical properties as the L1 morph tha t it represents, this cannot be expected 
and therefore not be relied upon. For instance, Lat in eum  could be glossed by Engl. him , and 
at the typological level, they do share a number of  features. However, eum  is accusative and 
===== PAGE 11 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  10  
can thus not be indirect object, while him  is the form for direct and indirect object. Theref ore, 
grammatical items of L1 are generally not glossed b y grammatical items of L2, but by a 
configuration of symbols taken from the scientific metalanguage and representing their 
grammatical features, i.e. by grammatical category labels (R6). Thus, Latin eum  may be 
glossed by ‘ ANA :ACC .SG .M’. 
No bound grammatical or derivational morphemes shou ld appear in IMGs. Free 
grammatical morphemes may be used to render free gr ammatical morphemes. However, use 
of those in the second column of Tab. 169.2 is discouraged unless L1 happens to exhibit the 
same ambiguity as English: 
 
word class instead of use 
copulas, 
auxiliaries 
be 
have  (except to mean ‘possess, own’) 
COP , PASS , PROG ... 
PF , OBLG ... 
prepositions by 
with 
for 
as 
from 
to 
of  
AG , ERG ... 
INST , COM , ASSOC ... 
BEN , DEST ... 
EQT , ESS ... 
ABL , DEL ... 
DAT , ALL , DEST , TERM , INF ... 
GEN , ASSOC ... 
subordinators that 
if  
COMP , SR (,  D 3) 
INT , COND .SR  
relativizers that 
who 
which  
REL  
REL .HUM .NOM ... 
REL .NHUM .NOM ... 
Tab. 169.2: Free grammatical morphemes 
 
Some morphemes are extremely deeply entrenched in t he semantic or pragmatic 
system of the language and simply have no translati on equivalent in L2. Two common ways 
out are a) to repeat the significans of the item in  the gloss, and b) to indicate the class of the 
item instead of its meaning. Thus, we find the Germ an modal particle eben  glossed either as 
‘
EBEN ’ or as ‘ PTL ’. Both glosses are inadequate. If there is no translation equivalent in natural 
L2, then the linguist has a specialized metalanguag e to describe such functions. For the sake 
of an IMG that is not devoted to modal particles in  particular, a gloss like ‘ REAFF ’ 
(reaffirmed) will be fully sufficient and more helpful than either of the aforementioned. 
A gloss is a proper name of an L1 morpheme. It does  not give information on the 
grammatical class of the morpheme in question other  than what is implied by the name itself. 
If a gloss is ‘ ACC ’, one assumes that the morpheme belongs to the gra mmatical class of the 
case morphemes. It is the task of the grammar to cl arify whether or not this implication is 
correct in a particular case. The gloss will not be  ‘ CASE .ACC ’ or anything of this sort. For the 
same reason, the gloss of the perfective aspect is simply ‘ PFV ’ and not ‘ PFV .ASP’, and so on. 
From this it follows that the gloss will not be ‘ ASP ’ either. In the literature, one 
frequently encounters glosses such as ‘ PTCL ’ (particle), ‘ AGR ’ (agreement), ‘ ART ’ (article). If 
L1 possesses only one particle, agreement morpheme (hardly imaginable) or article (this is 
possible), then these glosses are sufficient. In al l other cases, this kind of gloss is not helpful 
because it does not give the information on the mea ning or function of the morpheme that a 
===== PAGE 12 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  11  
gloss is supposed to give. Moreover, the whole glos sing becomes inconsistent, as some 
glosses name particular morphemes, while others nam e the class a morpheme belongs to. 
More on this in section 3.9.1. 
 
3.5.  Ambiguity 
 
Each morpheme of L1 should be recognizable by its gloss. The reader is supported in this task 
if glosses are consistent within one publication. I t will rather confuse him if Yucatec Maya 
k’ìin  is once glossed ‘sun’ and the next time ‘day’. Polysemy  is resolved in the idiomatic 
translation. The gloss renders neither the contextu al sense nor the full meaning range of an 
item. Naturally, this does not apply to homonymy . Homonymous L1 morphs represent 
different morphemes and therefore receive different  glosses. This is stipulated by R7, which 
follows from R4. 
If the senses of an item are reducible to a Gesamtbedeutung , then this should be used 
in the gloss (R8). For instance, the Turkish dative /allative suffix –a is glossed by ‘ 
DAT ’. The 
Gesamtbedeutung rather than the Grundbedeutung shou ld appear in the gloss, because it has 
better chances to fit all the diverse contexts in w hich the item occurs. Sometimes, there is 
either no Gesamtbedeutung, or if there is, L2 does not have a term for it. In cases like Yucatec 
Maya k’ìin  ‘sun, day’, there are various alternatives. First,  the Grundbedeutung may be used 
as the gloss; thus Yucatec Maya k’ìin  ‘sun’. However, if all the occurrences of a polysemous 
morpheme in a particular publication reflect the sa me (derived) reading, then generally no 
useful purpose is served if it is consistently glos sed by its basic meaning. For instance, all the 
occurrences of Yucatec Maya k’ìin  in a particular text might mean ‘day’. Then this w ould be 
the appropriate gloss. Finally, any kind of reducti on may seem misleading. Then two or even 
more senses may be indicated in the gloss, separate d by a slash, e.g. Yucatec Maya k’ìin  
‘sun/day’. (2) illustrates the same convention. 
 
(2) Korean 
Toli-n
n kae-hako cal  non-ta. 
Toli-TOP  dog- ADD  often/well play: PRS -DECL  
‘Toli likes to play with the dog.’ 
 
Syncretism often involves extensive polysemy and/or homonymy. If it were to be made 
explicit in an IMG, then e.g. the gloss for Lat. ancillae  would have to be 
‘maid. 
F:GEN .SG /DAT .SG /NOM .PL ’. This may be appropriate if the discussion in the  context 
deals with syncretism. Otherwise, only the category  actually required by the context may be 
shown, e.g.: 
 
(3) Latin 
ancillae  orant 
maid. 
F:NOM .PL   pray:3. PL  
‘the maids pray’ 
 
In other words, in cases of syncretism the last two bullet points of R8 must be resorted to. 
A whole paradigm of markers may be used in two clea rly distinct functions. For 
instance, a set of cross-reference markers may comb ine with a verb to reference its subject, 
===== PAGE 13 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  12  
and with a noun to reference its possessor. Here ag ain, the two alternatives mentioned are 
open: either gloss the verb markers by ‘ SBJ ’ and the noun markers by ‘ POSS ’, or gloss them by 
‘SBJ /POSS ’ in both positions (which is, actually, never done ). A third alternative – one that is 
actually resorted to in Mayan linguistics; cf. Art.  170, section 6.1.2 – is to coin a concept and 
a term for a paradigm that is used in these two functions and use this in the IMG. 
 
3.6.  Features and functions 
 
As remarked in section 1.4, an IMG cannot fill the place of a grammar. In particular, the 
grammatical category label that represents a morpheme in the gloss cannot poss ibly 
represent the full functionality of that morpheme. It can only serve as a mnemonic identifier 
for the reader. We just saw that the full polysemy of an item cannot be accounted for in a 
gloss. The same goes for functional information ass ociated with a morphological position. If 
the slot filler is a verb agreement affix or cross- reference marker, then its meaning is in the 
sphere of person, number and gender. Consider conju gation endings as in Germ. lieb-e ‘love-
SBJ .1. SG ’, lieb-st  ‘love-SBJ .2. SG ’, lieb-t ‘love-SBJ .3. SG ’. The information that these suffixes 
cross-reference the subject is functional information associated with the morphological slot. It 
must be given in the grammar; the IMG may simply read lieb-e ‘love-1. SG ’ etc. 
The same would apply, in principle, if the verb cro ss-references more than one of its 
dependents. Here, however, it has become customary to distinguish the references of the 
cross-reference markers by indicating their syntactic function, as in (4). 
 
(4) Swahili 
ni-li-mw-ona   m-toto 
SBJ .1. SG -PST -OBJ .CL .1-see CL .1-child 
‘I saw the/a child’ 
 
The information that the initial prefix references the subject, while the one following the tense 
prefix references the direct object must be contain ed in the grammar. The task of the gloss is 
to identify the particular element, not to specify the rules of its use. Insofar, adding functional 
information concerning the morphological slot itsel f – ‘ 
SBJ ’ and ‘ OBJ ’ in (4) – is a service to 
the reader that may be useful, but that also clutters up the gloss (cf. R3). 
The distinction between morphological categories an d syntactic or semantic functions 
is also relevant in the domain of case and valence.  The frequent confusion among syntactic/ 
semantic functions, cases and valence-derivational functions also manifests itself in glossing 
habits. One frequently encounters glosses such as T urkish ate ş-in  ‘fire-POSS ’ instead of ‘fire-
GEN ’, ate ş-e ‘fire-IO ’ instead of ‘fire-DAT ’ or ‘...-send-DAT ...’ instead of (5). The quality of the 
glossing reflects the quality of the morphological analysis. 
 
(5) Swahili 
Musa a-li-ni-andik-ia   barua 
Musa 
SBJ .CL .1-PST -OBJ .1. SG -send-APPL  letter 
‘Musa sent me a letter’ 
 
===== PAGE 14 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  13  
3.7.  Derived stems 
 
The morpho-semantic structure of a derived stem may  be completely regular and transparent, 
as in Germ. wolk-ig  ‘cloud-
ADJVR  (cloudy)’, or it may be opaque, as in Germ. heil-ig  
‘salvation-ADJVR  (holy)’. If the discussion focuses on word-formati on, then both of these 
words will be glossed as indicated. If the internal  structure of stems is of no relevance, then it 
will not be shown in the L1 text line, and conseque ntly the glosses can reduce to ‘cloudy’ and 
‘holy’, respectively. 
For opaque complex stems, morphological segmentatio n plus corresponding gloss 
often amounts more to etymology than to morphologic al analysis. It also unnecessarily 
obscures the correspondence of the gloss to the idi omatic translation. This should be borne in 
mind before one carries it through as a general principle in text editions. 
In an ideal methodological situation, an IMG is tak en from a lexicon, where the gloss 
constitutes one of the fields in the microstructure  of each lexical entry. The German lexicon 
may contain, e.g., the three entries Huf  'hoof', Eisen  'iron' and Hufeisen  'horse-shoe'. If the 
latter occurs in an L1 text, then it may either be analyzed or not. In the former case Huf  and 
Eisen  will be looked up in the lexicon and will be match ed by their glosses, while in the latter 
case Hufeisen  will be looked up and be glossed accordingly. 
 
3.8.  Submorphemic units 
 
There are two kinds of submorphemic units: parts of morphemes with a sound-symbolic value 
and strings of phonemes inserted between morphemes for euphonic or similar reasons. The 
former kind is not generally subjected to morphemic  analysis and may therefore be left out of 
consideration here. The latter kind may be illustra ted by the second element in forms such as 
French a-t-il  ‘has he’ and Germ. Weihnacht-s-gans  ‘Christmas goose’. If the submorphemic 
unit is not at stake in the context, then the first  choice is to abstain from an analysis by 
regarding the submorphemic unit as part of a stem a lternant: Weihnachts-gans  ‘Christmas-
goose’. The second choice is to render the submorph emic unit by Ø, e.g. a-t-il  ‘has-Ø-he’. A 
euphonic submorphemic unit may be glossed by ‘ 
EU ’ instead of ‘Ø’. 
 
3.9.  Grammatical category labels 
 
3.9.1.  General 
 
As was said in 3.4, the gloss for a grammatical item is generally not a grammatical item of L2, 
but a grammatical category label (R6). For instance  Yucatec Maya yàan  is not rendered by 
‘be’, but by ‘ 
EXIST ’, one of the reasons being that L2 ‘be’ is a copul a, while Yucatec Maya 
yàan  is not. While this poses few problems for such cat egories for which the European 
grammaticographic tradition possesses terms, it doe s pose a problem for certain classes of 
semi-grammaticalized items such as function verbs and coverbs. Coverbs are words which are 
grammaticalized from verbs to minor parts of speech , mostly adpositions. If they function as 
the latter, they may express a semantic role. In Ma ndarin, for instance, yòng  has the lexical 
meaning ‘use’ and the grammatical meaning ‘ INSTR ’, as in (6). 
 
===== PAGE 15 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  14  
(6) Chinese 
Ta  yòng  sh ŏu z ŏu lù. 
he use/INSTR hand walk road 
‘He walks on his hands.’ 
 
This kind of problem is not solved by putting the l exical meaning in upper case (‘ 
USE ’), since 
‘use’ is neither a grammatical concept in L2 nor a term of the grammatical metalanguage. 
Applying R8 in such cases would imply opting in fav or of the Gesamtbedeutung of the item, 
which in such cases is the grammatical meaning. The  gloss would then be ‘ INSTR ’ (or some 
more language-specific grammatical category which m ay better suit this particular function). 
The problem remains, however, that the same word can occur as the sole predicate of a clause, 
in the meaning ‘use’ (e.g. tā yòng sh ŏu ‘he uses his hand’). An IMG ‘ INSTR ’ would be hardly 
intelligible there. The alternative of only using t he Grundbedeutung – ‘use’ in (6) and 
throughout – would be in conflict with the principl e that morphological analysis must be kept 
distinct from etymology. Here the third alternative  offered by rule R8 may be resorted to, viz. 
providing both meanings in the gloss of each occurrence of the item, thus: yòng  ‘use/ INSTR ’. 
An IMG identifies an L1 morpheme. It names a value,  not a parameter. Mentioning 
the name of the generic category in the gloss inste ad of the specific value is nevertheless 
widespread usage. One finds both Japanese yom-i and yon-de  glossed by ‘read- CONV ’ 
(converb), which hinders the reader in his attempt to keep the converb forms apart. One finds 
Onondaga wa ha-ye kwa-hní:-nu  ‘he bought tobacco’ glossed as ‘ TNS :he/it-
tobacco:buy-ASP ’ (Woodbury 1975:10), which is of no use for somebo dy studying the 
interdependence of incorporation with tense and aspect. 
IMGs not seldom contain labels that do not correspo nd to the principles introduced so 
far. Sometimes, elements without morphological status are separated and glossed. Sometimes, 
the parameter instead of the particular value of a grammatical category is identified. 
Sometimes, syntactic or semantic instead of morphol ogical information is given. Here is an 
incomplete list of labels that have repeatedly been  found in glosses but which should be 
avoided. 
 
label intended meaning comment 
A transitive subject in morphemic glosses, the abbre viation is ERG 
ADV  adverb specify meaning 
AGR  agreement specify agreement categories 
AGT  agent this is not a value of a morphological categ ory 
ART  article only if it has no determinative properties  
ASP  aspect specify particular aspect 
AUX  auxiliary only if there is only one auxiliary morp heme in the language 
CARD  cardinal only if it is a morpheme or grammatical f eature 
CLF  classifier this is a word class 
CLT  clitic this is neither a morphological category no r a value of one 
EP  epenthetic has no morphological status, should not  be separated in the first 
place 
EVID  evidential specify particular evidential 
PAT  patient this is not a value of a morphological cat egory 
PREP  preposition this is a word class 
PTL  particle this is (at best) a word class 
===== PAGE 16 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  15  
TNS  tense specify particular tense 
Tab. 169.3: Labels to be avoided 
 
3.9.2.  List of grammatical categories and their glossing labels 
 
No list of grammatical category labels can be complete. The list following in 
Tab. 169.4  (which 
incorporates the list in Lehmann et al. 21994) only contains the most widespread categories.  
When more than one abbreviation is mentioned, they are given in the order of preference. To 
the extent that these abbreviations are or become w ide-spread, they get the status of linguistic 
abbreviations like ‘NP’, which need not be defined when used. If a publication uses labels not 
contained in the following list, it must explain them in an individual list of abbreviations. 
Grammatical category labels are subject to two conf licting requirements: they must be 
both distinct and short. The former requirement tak es precedence. It is, for instance, not 
possible to use ‘ COMP ’ in one and the same publication to mean both ‘com pletive’ and 
‘complementizer’. The list in Tab. 169.4 avoids such clashes. However, in an individual 
publication that has nothing to do with complementa tion, the aspect may, of course, be 
abbreviated by ‘ COMP ’ (instead of ‘ CMP (L)’, as in the list). Parenthesized parts of an 
abbreviation are only necessary if a distinctness conflict arises. 
Tab. 169.4  contains only such terms which may appear in an IMG. In other publications, 
similar lists of terms for syntactic categories and  functions and for semantic and pragmatic 
functions may be found. 
‘Cross-reference position’ means a morphological slot, usually on a verb, occupied by 
pronominal elements that agree with or refer to a d ependent in a specific syntactic function. 
‘Case’ means a case relator that may take the form of a case affix or an adposition. Verb 
derivational morphemes get these glosses only if th ey are homonymous with nominal case 
relators. 
 
value abbrev. category comment 
1
st  person 1  person  
2nd  person 2 person  
3rd  person 3 person  
abessive ( PRV ) 
(A VERS ) 
 use ‘privative’ and ‘aversive’ 
ablative ABL  local case ‘from’ (= separative) 
absolute ABSL  nominal free non-incorporated form of noun 
absolutive ABS  grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
in ergative system 
abstract ABSTR  nominal  
accusative ACC  grammatical case  
action nominalizer ACNNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
active ACT  voice; case or cross-reference 
position 
in active system 
actor ACR  grammatical case or cross-refer-
ence position 
 
actor topic A voice  
additive ADD  case  
addressee-honorific 2 HON  honorification  
addressee-humble 2 HML  honorification  
adelative ADEL  local case  
adessive  ADESS  local case  
===== PAGE 17 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  16  
adhortative ( HORT )  use ‘hortative’ 
aditive ( ALL )  use ‘allative’ 
adjectiv(al)izer ADJR  derivational or syntactic  
admonitive ADM  mood  
adverbializer ADVR  derivational or syntactic  
adversative ADRVS  interpropositional relation ‘whereas’ 
affirmative AFFMT  opposite to negative normally unmarked 
agent nominalizer AGNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
agentive AG    
alienable AL  possessive attribution morpheme  
allative ALL  local case ‘to’ 
allocutive ALLOC  honorification kind of addressee-honorific 
anaphoric ANA  pronominal  
andative AND  deictic  
animate AN    
anterior ANT  tense relative tense 
anticausative ACAUS  deverbal verb derivation = deagentive, blocking of  actor 
argument 
antipassive APASS  voice  
aorist AOR   tense-aspect perfective past (as opposed to imper -
fect) 
applicative APPL  deverbal verbal derivation subtypes may be disting uished by 
APPL .REC , APPL .INST  etc. 
apprehensional APPR  interpropositional relation ‘lest’ 
assertive ASRT  modality subtype of declarative: high degree of 
commitment 
associative ASS (OC ) adnominal case ‘with, à’ 
assumed ASSUM  evidential  
attenuative ATTEN  deverbal verb derivation  
attributor A T  nominal links an attribute to the head 
auditory AUD  evidential  
augmentative AUG  denominal nominal derivation  
auxiliary AUX   if it is the only auxiliary root 
benefactive BEN  case ‘for’ 
cardinal CARD  numeral if marked grammatically 
caritive ( PRV )  use ‘privative’ 
causative CAUS  deverbal verb derivation  
circumstantial CIRC  interpropositional relation ‘in, by’ 
clamative ( EXCL )  use ‘exclamative’ 
classifier CLF  nominal followed by class identifier, e.g. HUM  
cohortative ( HORT )  use ‘hortative’ 
collective COLL    
comitative COMIT  case ‘with, in the company of’ 
common COMM  gender either masc. or fem.; cf. ‘human’ and 
‘animate’ 
comparative CMPR  degree of comparison  
complementizer COMP  subordinator = SR  
completive CMPL , 
CMP  
aspect normally = perfective 
conative CNTV  mood  
concessive CONC  interpropositional relation ‘although’ 
conditional COND  interpropositional relation; 
mood 
‘if’; 
 
‘would’ 
conjectural 
CONJC  evidential  
conjunctive CONJ  interpropositional relation of non-finite predicat e 
===== PAGE 18 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  17  
connector, -ive CONN   if there is only one 
consecutive CONSEC  interpropositional relation ‘so that’ 
construct CONST  nominal construct state 
converb ( GER )  use ‘gerund’ 
continuous CONT  aspect/aktionsart  
copula COP   if there is only one 
crastinal CRAS  tense tomorrow 
dative DAT  grammatical case  
deagentive ( ACAUS )  use ‘anticausative’ 
debitive ( OBLG )  use ‘obligative’ 
declarative DECL  sentence-type normally unmarked 
deferential DEFR  honorification ~ speaker-humble 
definite DEF  determination  
deictic of 12 person D12 determination  
deictic of 1 st  person D1 determination  
deictic of 2 nd  person D2 determination  
deictic of 3 rd  person D3 determination  
delative DEL  local case ‘down from’ 
demonstrative DEM  determination  
dependent verb form ( SUBJ )  use ‘subjunctive’ 
desiderative DES  deverbal verb derivation  
destinative DEST  local case; 
also on non-finite verb forms (= 
supine) 
‘to’; 
if typically for human destinations, use 
‘benefactive’ 
determiner 
DET  pronominal will normally be DEF , INDEF , GNR , 
SPEC , NSPEC  
detransitivizer DETR  deverbal verb derivation see also ‘anticausative’ and ‘intro-
versive’ 
different subject DS    
diminutive DIM  denominal noun derivation  
direct DR  voice vs. inverse 
direct evidential DIREV  evidential  
direct object DO  cross-reference position  
directional DIR  case or verb derivation ‘towards’; use AND  and VEN  for deictic 
directionals 
distal DIST  determination remote from deictic center 
distributive DISTR  nominal or verbal  
donative DON   auxiliary of benefactive construction 
dual DU , DL  number  
dual exclusive DE  number  
dual inclusive DI  number  
dubitative DUB  mood  
durative DUR  aktionsart  
dynamic DYN  aktionsart vs. stative 
egressive EGR  aktionsart  
elative ELAT  local case ‘out of’ 
emphasizer/emphatic EMPH  funct. sentence perspective e.g., class of pronoun  
equative EQT  1. case; 
2. predicative 
‘as’; 
feature/marker of adjective in nominal 
clause 
ergative 
ERG  grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
in ergative system 
essive ESS  case ‘as’; see also ‘transformative’ 
evidential EVID  verbal  
exclamative EXCL  mood  
exclusive   use ‘dual exclusive’, ‘plural exclusive ’ 
===== PAGE 19 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  18  
exist(ential) EXIST  grammatical verb  
experiential EXPER  aspect  
extrafocal EXFOC  verbal status of subordinate clause of cleft-
sentence 
extraversive EXTRV  deverbal verb derivation transitivization by addit ion of 
undergoer 
factitive FACT  denominal/deadjectival verb 
derivation 
A-FACT  NP ‘make NP A’ 
familiar FAM  pronominal  
feminine F gender  
finite FIN  verbal  
first person dual inclu-
sive 
12  if treated as a quasi-singular; otherwise 
‘dual inclusive’ 
focus 
FOC  funct. sentence perspective  
formal FRM  mood  
frequentative FREQ  aktionsart multiple times on several occasions 
future FUT  tense  
generic GNR  determination  
genitive GEN  grammatical case  
gerund GER  verbal verbal adverb or converb 
gerundive ( OBLG )  use ‘obligative’ 
habitual HABIT  aktionsart ~ customary 
habitual-generic   use ‘habitual’, ‘generic’ 
habitual-past   use ‘habitual’, ‘past’ 
hesitative 
HESIT  funct. sentence perspective  
hesternal HEST  tense yesterday’s past 
hodiernal future HODFUT  tense today’s future 
hodiernal past HODPST  tense today’s past 
honorific HON  honorification  
hortative HORT  mood 1 st  person imperative 
human HUM    
humble HML  honorification comprises ‘speaker-humble, addresse e-
humble, referent-humble’ 
hypocoristic HCR  affect  
hypothetical HYP  mood  
illative ILL  local case ‘into’ 
immediate IMM  tense specifier of other tenses 
immediate/imminent 
future 
IMMFUT  tense  
immediate past ( RECPST )  use ‘recent past’ 
imperative IMP  mood  
imperfect IMPF  tense-aspect imperfective past; vs. aorist 
imperfective IPFV  aspect  
impersonal IMPR   only if formally distinct from the spe-
cific persons 
impersonal passive IPS  voice passive without promotion to subject 
inactive INACT  grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
in active system 
inalienable INAL  nominal possessive attribution morpheme or 
feature 
inanimate INAN    
inceptive ( INGR )  use ‘ingressive’ 
inchoative INCH  denominal verbal derivation N/A- INCH  ‘become N/A’ 
inclusive   use ‘dual inclusive’, ‘plural inclusive ’ 
incompletive, 
noncompletive 
INCMP (L) aspect normally = imperfective 
===== PAGE 20 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  19  
inconsequential INCONS  interpropositional relation  
indefinite INDEF  determination  
independent INDEP  mood only if distinct from indicative 
indicative IND  mood  
indirect object IO  cross-reference position  
inessive INESS  local case ‘inside’ 
inferential INFR  mood or evidential  
infinitive INF  verbal  
ingressive INGR  aktionsart  
injunctive INJ  mood  
instructive ( MAN )  use ‘manner’ 
instrument nominalizer INSTNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
instrumental INST (R) case  
intensive INTS  verbal often aktionsart 
interrogative INT  sentence type particle or morphological category 
intransitive INTR  verbal morpheme or grammatical category 
intransitive subject S cross-reference position only if opposed to both A and P; use SBJ  
otherwise 
introversive INTRV  deverbal verb derivation blocking of undergoer arg ument 
inverse INV  usually verbal vs. direct 
invisible INVS  determination  
irrealis IRR  mood  
iterative ITER  aktionsart several times on one occasion 
jussive JUSS  mood 3 rd  ps. imperative or dependent mood 
lative LAT  local case ‘to ~ from ~ via’ 
ligature LIG  nominal  
linker LNK  nominal links subconstituents of a phrase, typi-
cally an NP; properly includes 
‘attributor’ 
locative 
LOC  local case  
locative topic LT  voice  
logophoric LOG  pronominal or verbal  
malefactive MAL  deverbal verb derivation  
manner MAN  case also on non-finite verbs 
manner nominalizer MANNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
masculine M gender  
masculine personal MHUM  gender  
medial MED  determination medial distance from deictic center 
medial MEDV  verbal verb form in a chain 
mediative MEDT  case ‘between, among; by means of’ 
mediopassive MEDP  voice  
middle MID  voice excludes passive 
motivative MTV  case ‘by’; sometimes called ‘causal’ 
narrative NARR  tense  
near future NRFUT  tense after ‘immediate future’ 
negative NEG    
neuter N gender  
nominalizer NR  deverbal nominal derivation or 
syntactic subordination 
see also the more specific ones 
nominative NOM  grammatical case  
non- N  e.g. NPST  
non-finite NFIN  verbal   
non-future NFUT  tense  
non-human NHUM  gender  
non-masculine personal  NM  gender  
non-past NPST  tense  
===== PAGE 21 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  20  
non-plural NPL  number < 3 
non-singular NSG  number > 1; only if there is a plural for > 2 
non-specific NSPEC  determination  
non-visual NVIS  evidential non-eye-witness 
non-volitional NVOL  verbal  
noun class n CL n  where n is a number or a feature 
object OBJ  cross-reference position  
obligative OBLG  mood  
oblique OBL  case  
obviative  OBV  person vs. proximate 
optative  OPT  mood  
ordinal ORD  numeral  
participle (marker) PART  verbal  
partitive PRTV  case  
passive PASS  voice  
past PST  tense  
patient nominalizer PATNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
patient topic PT   voice  
paucal PAU  number  
pejorative PEJ  affect  
perfect P(R)F tense-aspect  
perfective PFV  aspect  
pergressive ( PERL )  use ‘perlative’ 
perlative PERL  local case ‘through’ 
place nominalizer LOCNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
pluperfect PLUP  tense past or perfect of a past 
plural  PL  number  
plural exclusive PE  number  
plural inclusive PI  number  
pluritive ( PL )  plural of a singulative; use ‘plural’ 
polite ( FRM )  use ‘formal’ 
positional POSIT  verbal  
positive ( AFFM )  use ‘affirmative’ 
possessive POSS  possessive adjective, pronoun and 
cross-reference position 
not for an adnominal case relation; 
that is 
GEN  or AT  
postcrastinal POCRAS  tense future after tomorrow 
postelative POSTEL local case ‘from behind’ 
posterior POST  relative tense  
postessive POSTESS  local case ‘behind’ 
post-hodiernal POHOD  tense future after today 
potential POT  mood  
precative PREC  mood for requesting 
predicative PRED  nominal predicative form 
present PRS  tense  
preterite ( PST )  use ‘past’ 
pre-hesternal PRHEST  tense past before yesterday 
primary object PO  cross-reference position  
privative  PR (I)V case ‘without’ 
processive, -ual PROC  denominal verb derivation  
progressive PROG  aspect  
prohibitive PROH  mood negative imperative 
prolative PROLAT  local case ‘along, by (way of)’ 
proprietive PROPR  case or derivational category ‘having, provided wi th’ 
prospective PROSP  tense-aspect ‘going to’; opposite of perfect 
proximal PROX  determination near the deictic center 
proximate PRX  person vs. obviative 
===== PAGE 22 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  21  
punctual PNCT  aspect or aktionsart  
purposive ( DEST )  use ‘destinative’ 
quality nominalizer QUALNR  deverbal nominal derivation  
quotative QUOT  marking indirect speech  
realis RLS  mood vs. irrealis 
recent past RECPST  tense = immediate past 
reciprocal REC (P) voice or pronominal  
reduplicative   gloss by function 
referent-honorific 3
HON  honorification  
referent-humble 3 HML  honorification  
referentive RFR  case ‘about’ 
reflexive R(E)FL  voice or pronominal  
reinforcement ( INTNS )  use ‘intensive’ 
relational(izer) RELL  nominal  
relative REL  subordinative and/or pronominal in relative clause  
relative ( RFR )  use ‘referentive’ 
remote ( DIST )  use ‘distal’ 
remote past REMPST  tense  
repetitive REP  aktionsart only if distinct from iterative 
reportative RPRT  evidential  
resultative RES  aspect or aktionsart  
reversive RVRS  aktionsart  
same subject SS    
secondary object SO  cross-reference position  
semelfactive SMLF  aktionsart  
sensory SENS  evidential  
separative ( ABL )  use ‘ablative’ 
sequential SEQ  interpropositional relation vs. simultaneous 
simultaneous SIM  interpropositional relation vs. sequential 
singular SG  number restricted 
singulative SGT  nominal vs. collective 
sociative SOC  verbal ‘together’ 
speaker-honorific 1 HON  honorification  
speaker-humble 1 HML  honorification  
specific SPEC  determination  
speculative SPECL  evidential  
stative STAT  aktionsart  
subelative SUBEL  local case ‘from under’ 
subessive SUBESS  local case ‘under’ 
subject SBJ  cross-reference position  
subjunctive  SUBJ  mood  
sublative SUBL  local case ‘to under’ 
subordinator SR  interpropositional relation only for the single un iversal 
subordinator (‘that’) 
superdirective ( SUPL )  use super-lative 
superelative SUPEL  local case ‘from above’ 
superessive SUPESS  local case ‘above’ 
superlative SUP  degree of comparison  
super-lative SUPL  local case ‘to above’ 
terminative TERM  local case or aktionsart ‘up to’ 
topic TOP  funct. sentence perspective  
transformative TRNSF  case ‘becoming’; dynamic counterpart of 
essive 
transitive TR  verbal morpheme or grammatical category 
transitive patient P cross-reference position only if opposed to both S and A; use OBJ  
otherwise 
===== PAGE 23 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  22  
transitive subject A cross-reference position only if opposed to both S and P; use 
ERG  otherwise 
transitivizer TRR  deverbal verb derivation  
translative TRNSL  local case ‘across’ 
trial TRL  number only if distinct from paucal 
undergoer UGR  cross-reference position  
unrestricted ( PL )  use ‘plural’ 
unspecified UNSPEC  person unspecified argument of relational base 
validator   use ‘assertive’, ‘declarative’ 
venitive VEN  deictic  
verbalizer VR , VBZ  verbal derivation  
visible VS  determination  
visual VIS  evidential eyewitness 
vocative VOC  case  
volitional, volitive VOL  verbal  
zero ∅   making no contribution to sentence 
meaning 
 
Tab. 169.4: Grammatical category labels 
 
4.  Boundary symbols 
 
4.1.  Basic rules 
 
Rules R1 and R4 guarantee correspondence between units in the L1 text and in the IMG. They 
do not, however, insure that the vertical alignment  works in a mechanical way. This is 
desirable in certain contexts such as automatic par sing. It can be guaranteed in a fully 
formalized representation, which would then take th e form of a table (s. Lieb & Drude 2000). 
In less formal situations, it cannot be fully guara nteed because there may be good reasons not 
to insert morpheme boundaries in the L1 text while still representing each morph by a 
separate gloss (cf. R13). Correspondence of boundar y symbols in the L1 and the IMG lines is 
therefore not generally an equivalence, but only an  implication: boundary symbols in the L1 
line are matched by corresponding boundary symbols in the IMG (R9). We will review the 
kinds of boundaries and their delimiters in turn. 
The word boundary  is shown by a blank in L1. This is repeated in the  IMG, and 
conversely there is a blank in an IMG only if there  is a corresponding blank in the L1 line. 
This particular rule (R10) is therefore stricter th an R9. R10 
 prohibits two situations: a word 
being rendered by a sequence of two words; and a se quence of two words being rendered by 
one word. The first situation will be discussed in section 4.5. Sometimes a sequence of two L1 
units (words or morphemes) corresponds to one L2 un it. In principle, this situation should not 
arise in the IMG because each of the L1 units shoul d have its own gloss. However, it is 
possible that either the L1 units have no meaning i n isolation or else mean something totally 
different than their combination, the latter being idiomaticized. In such cases, glossing them 
separately might give a misleading impression of th e workings of the grammar. When the 
bisected L1 unit forms an orthographic unit (e.g. a  compound), one may simply dispense with 
the analysis (cf. section 3.7). For instance, inste ad of Germ. be-komm-en  ‘ APPL -come-INF ’, 
one can write bekomm-en  ‘get-INF ’. If the orthography requires a boundary, as in Yu catec 
===== PAGE 24 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  23  
Maya le kah  ‘when’, the first choice is to gloss the items separately (in this case, ‘DEF SR ’) and 
to leave the semantic interpretation to the idiomat ic translation. The second choice is to 
indicate the semantic unity of the two L1 items typ ographically by replacing the blank by a 
boundary symbol that does not interfere with the or thography, e.g. by an underscore: le_kah  
‘when’ (R11). If L1 orthography links the two items  by another symbol that is also an IMG 
boundary symbol, as in Engl. vis-à-vis  ‘facing’, no satisfactory solution is known. 
Apart from special cases to be noted, the morpheme boundary is shown by a hyphen 
in L1 (R12). This is repeated in the IMG; and here again the converse applies, too. Apart from 
the vis-à-vis  type exception, this does not pose any problems. I t does, however, happen that 
the L1 text contains a combination of two morphemes , but no boundary is shown between 
them. Various motivations for this are conceivable,  be it that two morphemes are fused in a 
portmanteau morph, be it that the position of the b oundary is not clear or irrelevant, be it that 
the analyst does not want to disfigure L1 orthography with boundary symbols. In such cases, a 
colon in the IMG is a hint at a morpheme boundary e xisting, but not shown in the L1 line 
(R13). The purpose of R13 is to allow the analyst t o forgo a segmentation while still saving 
R1 and insuring biuniqueness of the other boundary symbols. Several examples may be seen 
in (1). The colon is also used to render a portmant eau morph, e.g. French au  ‘ DAT :DEF ’. More 
on this in section 4.5. 
Special symbols may be introduced to distinguish ki nds of morpheme boundaries. For 
instance, the use of the plus sign to signal a boun dary in compounding , as in German 
Weihnachts+gans  ‘Christmas+goose’ is rather widespread; and occasi onally it is also found 
in derivation, as in German wolk+ig ‘cloud+ ADJVR  (cloudy)’ (R14). 
No orthography distinguishes clitic boundaries from word and morpheme boundaries. 
If L1 is represented in conventional orthography, t hen the simplest solution for an IMG is not 
to distinguish them either. Thus French je le sais  ‘I know it’ will be glossed as ‘ SBJ .1. SG 
DO .3. SG .M know. SG ’, while Latin itaque  ‘and so’ will be glossed by ‘so:and’. If clisis is  
important or the L1 representation is non-orthographic, then the clitic boundary will be shown 
by an equal sign both in the L1 text and in the IMG, thus: ita=que  ‘so=and’ (R15). 
If a zero morph or morpheme is represented in L1 by Ø (cf. section 2.1), no spe cial 
measures need be taken. If it is not there represen ted, then its gloss is enclosed in parentheses 
(R16), like this: Lat. timor  ‘fear. M(NOM .SG )’. In this example, a stem is accompanied by two 
(complexes of) grammatical category labels, ‘ M’ and ‘ NOM .SG ’. The first is separated by a 
period because it corresponds to an inherent featur e of the stem. The second is enclosed in 
parentheses because it corresponds to a separate morpheme. 
 
4.2.  Discontinuity 
 
Discontinuous units – words or morphemes – are like  bisected units in that one semantic unit 
is represented by two expression units. However, th ey present the added difficulty that their 
parts are not adjacent, so the IMG has to make it e xplicit what belongs together. For a 
discontinuous stem  or affix , diverse solutions have been proposed in the liter ature. Among 
them is the proposal (Bickel et al. 2004) to repeat  the same gloss under each part of the 
discontinuous item. However, this seems misleading,  as the syntagmatic cooccurrence of 
synonymous L1 items is not at all rare – e.g. in hy percharacterization – and must be 
distinguished from discontinuity. An unambiguous so lution for a circumfix  is to set it off by 
angled brackets, like this: Germ. ge>lauf<en  ‘< 
PART .PRF >run’ (run (part.prf.))’ (R17). 
===== PAGE 25 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  24  
Discontinuous words are rare. The first choice is t o try and gloss each part independently, as 
done for the German circumposition um … willen  ‘for’ in (7). 
 
(7) German 
um unser-es Heil-es   willen 
for our-
GEN .SG  salvation- GEN .SG  sake 
‘for (the sake of) our salvation’ 
 
The second choice is to treat them by the same form alism as for circumfixes. Consider the 
case of preverbs. In several Indo-European language s, they may be distantiated from their 
host verb to yield a discontinuous verb stem. There  are two options for glossing such 
discontinuous compounds: If the compounding is rela tively transparent, one may prefer to 
provide the preverb and the base each with its glos s. If the compound is completely 
lexicalized, this might be misleading, and so it ma y be preferable to treat it as a discontinuous 
morpheme in the gloss, as in (8). 
 
(8) German 
es hör>-t  jetzt <auf 
it <stop>-3. 
SG  now 
‘it stops now’ 
 
Infixes , too, require a special boundary symbol in order t o insure that the root bisected by 
them is perceived as a unit. This is achieved enclo sing them in angled brackets as shown in 
(9)-(10) (R18). 
 
(9) Latin 
vi<n>c-o 
conquer< 
PRS >-1. SG  
‘I conquer’ 
 
(10) Indonesian 
t<el>unjuk 
<
AGNR >point 
‘forefinger’ 
 
The gloss of a left-peripheral infix precedes the gloss of its host, the gloss of a right-peripheral 
infix follows it (Bickel et al. 2004). 
 
4.3.  Reduplication 
 
Reduplicative segments may have the same kinds of g rammatical functions as affixes, and 
sometimes they are formally not easily distinguishe d from affixes. Therefore they must be 
glossed just like affixes, but at the same time the y must be formally distinguished from 
affixes. This is achieved by providing the same kin d of gloss for them as for grammatical 
formatives, but separating them by a tilde (R19); Bickel et al. 2004), as in (11)-(12). 
 
===== PAGE 26 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  25  
(11) Ancient Greek 
gé~graph-a 
PRF ~write-1. SG  
‘I have written’ 
 
(12) Yucatec Maya 
k’áa~k’as 
INTNS ~bad 
‘wicked’ 
 
4.4.  Other morphological processes 
 
Morphological processes not covered by the above co nventions comprise transfixation, 
internal modification, metathesis, subtraction and suprasegmental processes (cf. ch. VIII). 
These are like infixation in not being peripheral t o the base, but they differ from it in that the 
grammatical meaning in question is not associated w ith a single string of segments which, if 
subtracted, leaves the base. The notation recommended here distinguishes them from the other 
morphological processes, but not from each other. Such a morpheme can hardly be signaled in 
the L1 representation. In the IMG, its gloss follow s the gloss of the base, separated by a 
backslash (R20). An example of transfixation is the  Arabic broken plural, as in buj 
ūt 
‘house\PL  (houses)’. Apophony, metaphony, e.g. German säng-e ‘sing\IRR -1/3. SG  (I/he would 
sing)’, and tone shift, as in Yucatec Maya. hàats’  ‘beat\INTROV  (beat (unspec. object))’ are 
treated in the same way. 
 
4.5.  Semantic and grammatical features 
 
The gloss of a grammatical morph often consists of a set of symbols. They are separated by a 
period, as in Germ. Tisch-es  ‘table-
GEN .SG ’ (R21). The same rule applies in the situation 
mentioned in section 3.3, where an L1 lexeme is glo ssed by more than one L2 words. These, 
too, are separated by a period, as in Germ. fabulier-en  ‘invent.stories-INF ’. 
Lexical stems fall into grammatical classes. Noun s tems, for instance, have gender; 
verb stems have valence. If such grammatical catego ries are covert, this information is not 
deducible from (the gloss of) the lexical meaning. It therefore makes sense to represent it in 
the gloss of the stem. The Latin example puellae  ‘girl. F:NOM .PL ’ of section 2.1 shows how 
this may be done for gender. The same would be poss ible with transitivity. Instead of Yucatec 
Maya hats’-ah  ‘beat-CMPL ’ as shown in section 2.2, we might put ‘beat.TR -CMPL ’. It does not 
seem necessary to have a rule here beyond R3 and R21. 
The period between values of different morphologica l categories cumulated in one 
morpheme is dispensable between person, gender and number, provided the resulting letter 
sequence is unambiguous. Thus, Latin lauda-mus  may be glossed as ‘praise(PRS .IND )-1. PL ’ or 
‘praise( PRS .IND )-1PL ’. 
Sometimes the period is used as a general-purpose s ymbol to hide the lack of an 
analysis, including the function of the colon as re gulated by R13. This is not recommendable 
if – as is usually the case – the period is also us ed in the function regulated by R21. Given 
R21, the notation Lat. orant  ‘pray.3. PL ’ would imply that orant  consists of a single morph. An 
===== PAGE 27 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  26  
IMG should at least make the distinction between a morph and a grammatical feature of a 
morph. In other words, if the author knows the numb er and order of morphs in an L1 form, 
then he should indicate them. If the author does no t even know so much, he probably ought 
not to use the example. Still, in emergency situati ons, R23 may be viable, which allows for 
linking IMG elements by an underscore without any i mplications for L1 morphological 
structure. This would allow for putting orant  ‘they_pray’. 
 
4.6.  Composite categories 
 
Two cross-reference categories may share a morphological slot, as in (13). 
 
(13) Mayali 
Kamak  kan-bolk-bukka-n   ke . 
good  
SBJ .2& OBJ .1-country-show-NPST   your 
‘It is good that you will show me your country.’ (Evans 1997:400) 
 
In principle, the case is analogous to one declensi on suffix showing both number and case. 
However, when actor and undergoer cross-reference i s cumulated in one morpheme, sticking 
to R21 would lead to obscurity. Instead, informatio n on the two dependents should be 
separated by '&' or by '>' (R22). The ‘greater than ’ sign has two advantages here: it is iconic, 
and it dispenses with the use of function labels su ch as ‘ 
SBJ , OBJ , ACR , UGR ’ (simply ‘2>1’ in 
(13)). It has the disadvantage that the same symbol  is used for discontinuous and infixed 
material, which may lead to conflicts. 
This case must be kept distinct from a portmanteau morph, viz. when two cross-
reference categories that generally each have their  own morphological slot fuse in one morph 
occasionally. There R13 applies. 
 
4.7.  Constituency 
 
The IMG abides at the level of morphology. The text  may be represented at other levels in 
addition, if that is desired. Still, IMGs are used most frequently in publications on syntax, 
where not only morphological, but also syntactic properties of the examples are at stake. Very 
often it suffices to identify one constituent in th e example, for instance the prepositional 
phrase or the relative clause that is the subject o f analysis. Then no harm is done, but on the 
contrary the reader is helped in scanning the examp le, if constituency is shown by brackets. 
Thus in (14), the relative clause is identified by the bracketing. 
 
(14) Yucatec Maya 
le máak  chowak u ho'l-e' 
DEF person  [long  
POSS .3  head]-D3 
‘the person who has long hair’ 
 
In principle, this may be done either in the L1 lin e or in the IMG (it need not be repeated in 
both). However, since the IMG line is the one that contains the grammatical analysis, the 
bracketing seems more natural there (R24). In princ iple, an IMG may even be combined with 
===== PAGE 28 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  27  
a labeled bracketing; but above some rudimentary level, this will soon lead to illegibility. 
 
5.  Typographic conventions 
 
IMGs obey a number of typographic conventions all o f which aim at facilitating the reader’s 
task. First, if there are more lines of linguistic representation (cf. section 1.3), for instance one 
of syntactic constituency or lines that show syntac tic, semantic or pragmatic functions of the 
construction, then these follow the IMG, as stipula ted in R25. Second, words (neither larger 
nor smaller units) of L1 are left-aligned with thei r glosses (R27). Further, since IMGs are 
generally longer than the L1 text they render, they  are printed in a smaller type-face (R28), 
and grammatical category labels are abbreviated (R29). 
For comparison, here is an example of a publication  which does not observe these 
rules (Monod-Becquelin 1976:138 on Trumai): 
 
šyšyk letsi k’ate šy hai-ts šyšy-ka-ke 
“avec du piment, je rends le poisson piquant (regarde)” 
// piment / avec / poisson / actualis . / 1ère pers. erg . / piquant- causatif-marque 
d’adjectivisation // 
 
Furthermore, since IMG lines are not sentences, the  relevant orthographic rules of 
punctuation, initial capitalization and syllabification do not apply (R30 – R32). 
 
6.  Summary 
 
Instead of a prose summary, a list of the rules and symbols proposed follows: 
 
6.1.  Rules 
 
6.1.1.  Glossing principles 
 
R1. With the exceptions specified below, there is a  symbol or a configuration of symbols 
in the IMG if and only if there is a morph in the L1 text that it corresponds to. 
R2. The IMG represents morphemes, not allomorphs. T herefore, the gloss of a 
grammatically conditioned allomorph does not contai n the grammatical category that 
conditions it. 
R3. An IMG should be as precise and detailed as tol erable. The limits of precision and 
detail are defined by practical considerations of complexity and intelligibility. 
R4. There is a biunique mapping of individual L1 mo rphemes onto glosses. 
R5. (a) An L1 lexeme is glossed by L2 lexemes. 
(b) L1 stems are glossed by L2 stems. 
R6. The gloss of a grammatical morph is a configura tion of grammatical category labels 
each of which represents the value of a grammatical  category. A grammatical morph 
should not be glossed by an L2 bound morpheme. It m ay be glossed by an L2 word if 
===== PAGE 29 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  28  
that has the same function as the L1 morph. 
R7. Homonymy is resolved in the IMG, polysemy is pr eferably not. 
R8. The gloss of a polysemous L1 item should repres ent, in the order of decreasing 
preference, 
- its Gesamtbedeutung, 
- its Grundbedeutung, 
- the set of its senses, 
- its contextual sense. 
 
6.1.2.  Boundary symbols 
 
R9. Apart from R30, there is a boundary symbol of a  certain type in the IMG if there is a 
corresponding boundary symbol in the L1 text. More strictly, there is a blank, hyphen, 
plus, equal sign, angled bracket and tilde in an IM G if and only if there is an identical 
symbol in the L1 text corresponding to it. 
R10. A word boundary is shown by a blank ( ). 
R11. Two successive orthographic L1 words which mus t be glossed by one L2 word are 
linked by an underscore (_). 
R12. A morpheme boundary is shown by a hyphen (-). 
R13. A morpheme boundary not shown in the L1 text i s indicated by a colon (:) in the IMG. 
This applies also to portmanteau morphs. 
R14. A boundary in a compound stem, and possibly al so in a derived stem, may be shown 
by a plus sign (+). 
R15. A clitic boundary may be shown by an equal sig n (=). 
R16. A gloss of a zero morpheme or allomorph is enc losed in round parentheses (()). 
R17. The string enclosed in a discontinuous L1 item  P1 ... P2 is enclosed in inverted angled 
brackets (P1> ... <P2). In the IMG, P1 receives a gloss enclosed in angled brackets; P2 
is not glossed. 
R18. An infix is enclosed in angled brackets both i n the L1 text and in the IMG. The gloss 
of a left-peripheral infix precedes the gloss of it s host, the gloss of a right-peripheral 
infix follows it. 
R19. A reduplicative segment is glossed like an aff ix (i.e. by a configuration of grammatical 
category labels) and separated from its source by a tilde (~). 
R20. A grammatical meaning expressed by a non-segme ntable morphological process 
(transfixation, internal modification, metathesis, subtraction, suprasegmental process) 
is not signaled in the L1 representation. Its gloss  follows the gloss of the base, 
separated by a backslash (\). 
R21. Elements of an IMG that represent components o f one L1 morph are separated by a 
period (.). 
R22. As a special case of R21, components of one L1  cross-reference morph that have 
distinct reference are separated by the ampersand (‘&’) or, where no conflict with R17 
and R18 arises, by the greater-than sign (‘>’) for actor and undergoer cross-reference. 
R23. An L1 word form whose morphological structure is not represented in the IMG may 
be represented by a set of symbols whose status as representing morphs or features is 
ignored and whose sequence has no implications as t o L1. Such symbols that jointly 
correspond to an L1 word form are joined by an underscore (_). 
R24. If constituent structure is to be displayed, s quare brackets ([]) can be inserted in the 
===== PAGE 30 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  29  
IMG . 
 
6.1.3.  Typographic conventions 
 
R25. The IMG is in the line immediately below the c orresponding L1 text line. 
R26. The distance between an L1 text line and the l ine immediately preceding it is greater 
than that between it and the IMG line belonging to it. 
R27. Each L1 word form is left-flush with the L2 wo rd or complex of symbols rendering it. 
If such an arrangement is impossible, the following is a minimum requirement: If there 
is, in an IMG , an equivalent to an element of an L1 text line, it is contained in the line 
immediately below that line. 
R28. The IMG is printed in a smaller type-face than  the L1 text. If this is impossible, then at 
least grammatical category labels are in small capitals. 
R29. Grammatical terms appearing in IMGs are abbrev iated, without a period at the end, and 
set in (small) capitals. 
R30. There is no punctuation in an IMG. Parentheses  including optional material in the L1 
line are not repeated in the IMG , either (cf. R16). 
R31. There is no sentence-initial uppercase in an I MG. 
R32. There is no syllabication either in the L1 lin e or in the IMG. 
 
6.2.  Symbols 
 
L1 IMG meaning 
x y x y word boundary between x and y 
x_y z x and y are two orthographic words, but one lexic al word 
z x_y x and y jointly render z without morphological analysis 
x-y x-y morpheme boundary between x and y 
x+y x+y x and y form a compound or a derivative stem 
x=y x=y x and y are joined by clisis 
z x/y x and y are alternative meanings of ambiguous z  
xy x:y morpheme boundary between x and y not shown in the L1 text 
 (x) x does not have a significans in the L1 text 
a<x>b ab<x> x is an infix in ab 
x>a<y <xy>a xy is a circumfix around a 
z x\y y is a non-segmentable morphological process on  lexeme x  
z x.y x and y are semantic or grammatical components of z 
z x&y 
(x>y) 
x and y are grammatical components of z cross-refer encing two 
different dependents 
x [x] x is a syntactic constituent 
x [x] 
Y x is a syntactic constituent of category Y 
===== PAGE 31 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glossing  30  
7.  References 
 
7.1.  Specialized literature 
 
Bickel, Balthasar & Comrie, Bernard & Haspelmath, M artin 2004, The Leipzig Glossing Rules. 
Conventions for Interlinear Morpheme by Morpheme Gl osses.  Leipzig: Max-Planck-Institut für 
Evolutionäre Anthropologie 
Lehmann, Christian 1982, "Directions for Interlinea r Morphemic Translations". Folia Linguistica  16, 
199-224 
Lehmann, Christian 2004, “Data in Linguistics”. Linguistic Review  21.2, 000-000 
Lehmann, Christian & Bakker, Dik & Dahl, Östen & Si ewierska, Anna 21994, EUROTYP Guidelines.  
Strasbourg: Fondation Européenne de la Science (EUROTYP Working Papers) 
Lieb, Hans-Heinrich & Drude, Sebastian 2000, Advanced Glossing: A Language Documentation 
Format.  Berlin: Freie Universität (Working Paper). http:// dobes.mpi.nl/documents/Advanced-
Glossing1.pdf. 
Simons, Gary F. & Versaw, Larry 1988, How to use  IT. A Guide to Interlinear Text Processing.  
Dallas, Tx.: Summer Institute of Linguistics (Revised edition, Version 1.1) 
 
7.2.  Sources of examples 
 
Bloomfield, Leonard 1933, Language.  New York etc.: Holt, Rinehart & Winston 
Evans, Nicholas 1997, “Role or Cast? Noun Incorporation and Complex Predicates in Mayali”. Alsina, 
Alex & Bresnan, Joan & Sells, Peter (eds.), Complex Predicates . Stanford: CSLI Publications, 
379–430 
Finck, Franz Nikolaus 1909, Die Haupttypen des Sprachbaus.  Leipzig: B. G. Teubner [Nachdr. d. 3., 
unveränd. Aufl.: Darmstadt: Wiss. Buchgesellschaft, 1965] 
Fortescue, Michael 1984, West Greenlandic.  London etc.: Croom Helm (Croom Helm Descriptive 
Grammars) 
Gabelentz, Hans Conon von der 1861, "Über das Passi vum. Eine sprachvergleichende Abhandlung". 
Abhandlungen der philologisch-historischen Classe d er Königlich-Sächsischen Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften  8, 449-546 
Monod-Becquelin, Aurore 1976, "Classes verbales et construction ergative en trumai". Amérindia  1, 
117-143 
Woodbury, Hanni 1975, “Onondaga Noun Incorporation:  Some Notes on the Interdependence of 
Syntax and Semantics”. International Journal of American Linguistics  41, 10-20 
 
Christian Lehmann, Erfurt (Germany) 
 