
===== PAGE 1 =====
169. Interlinear morphemic glosses 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Basic concepts............................................................................................................... ......1 
1.1 Purpose.................................................................................................................... ....1 
1.2 Precursors................................................................................................................. ...3 
1.3 Levels of representation..............................................................................................4 
1.4 Delimitation ............................................................................................................... .6 
2 Prerequisites of morphological analysis .............................................................................6 
2.1 Unmarkedness and zero morphemes ..........................................................................6 
2.2 Allomorphy................................................................................................................. 7 
3 Principles of interlinear glossing ........................................................................................8 
3.1 General.................................................................................................................... ....8 
3.2 Glossing vocabulary ...................................................................................................8 
3.3 Lexemes .................................................................................................................... ..9 
3.4 Grammatical formatives ...........................................................................................10 
3.5 Ambiguity .................................................................................................................1 1 
3.6 Features and functions ..............................................................................................12 
3.7 Derived stems ...........................................................................................................13 
3.8 Submorphemic units .................................................................................................13 
3.9 Grammatical category labels.....................................................................................13 
4 Boundary symbols ............................................................................................................2 4 
4.1 Basic rules................................................................................................................ .24 
4.2 Discontinuity.............................................................................................................2 5 
4.3 Reduplication ............................................................................................................26  
4.4 Other morphological processes.................................................................................26 
4.5 Semantic and grammatical features ..........................................................................26 
4.6 Composite categories................................................................................................27 
4.7 Constituency .............................................................................................................27  
5 Typographic conventions..................................................................................................28 
6 Summary...................................................................................................................... .....28 
6.1 Rules ...................................................................................................................... ...28 
6.2 Symbols .................................................................................................................... 31 
 
1 Basic concepts 
1.1 Purpose 
Given an object language L1 and a metalanguage L2, then an interlinear morphemic gloss  
(IMG) is a representation of a text in L1 by a string of elements taken from L2, where, ideally, 
each morph of the L1 text is rendered by a morpheme of L2 or a configuration of symbols 
===== PAGE 2 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 2
representing its meaning, and where the sequence of the units of the gloss corresponds to the 
sequence of the morphs which they render. Its primary aim is to make the reader understand 
the grammatical structure of the L1 text by identifying aspects of the free translation with 
meaningful elements of the L1 text. The ultimate purpose may be to aid the reader in grasping 
the spirit of the language, to control the linguistic argument the author is making by means of 
the L1 example or to scan a corpus for a certain gloss in order to find relevant examples. 
E1. exeg-i      monumentum    aer-e     perennius 
LAT implement\PRF-1.SG monument.N:ACC.SG ore.F-ABL.SG 
 lasting:CMPR:ACC.SG.N 
‘I have executed a monument more durable than ore’ 
E1 illustrates the typical use of an I MG. The first line of E1 contains the L1 text line; the 
second line contains the IMG, and the third line contains an idiomatic translation into L2. 
Interlinear morphemic glossing is at the intersection of different communicative 
purposes. On the one hand, it is a kind of translation that accompanies the original. In this 
sense, it is comparable to the arrangement that one finds in synoptic editions of original and 
translation. On the other, it is a kind of linguistic analysis. In this sense, it competes with a 
fragment of a grammar. Its hybrid character leads to a number of problems and to different 
styles in interlinear morphemic glossing. 
The aim of the following treatment is a standardization of an aspect of linguistic 
methodology on the basis of widespread usage as developed in the 20
th century. To the extent 
that linguistics is a science, its methods are susceptible and in need of standardization. 
Interlinear morphemic glossing has to do with the representation of linguistic data, 
comparable in this with a phonetic transcription. Just as the latter has been successfully 
standardized by the IPA, so interlinear morphemic glossing should be standardized. 
This will be done in the present article in the form of a set of rules, which are listed in 
section 6.1. Such a standardization only concerns linguistic science. Linguistic data are often 
presented to a lay public, with the purpose of education, entertainment or divulgation of the 
achievements of our science. Here some kind of interlinear glossing may be necessary, too. 
However, scientific formalism tends to damage rather than serve the good cause. An example 
how interlinear glossing has been handled in a book directed to a non-specialist public is 
quoted in the next section (Finck 1909). The present article is biased in favor of a more 
formalized treatment, on the assumption that it will be easier to derive a less formal 
representation from the proposals made here than the other way round. The treatment is, 
however, not fully formal, since it focuses on interlinear glossing in printed texts. In the 
annotation of texts by markup languages for automatic retrieval, the same conceptual 
problems, but very different technical problems arise which will not be dealt with here. 
Data are commonly quoted from sources in which they are already provided by an 
analysis. In linguistic publications, it has been wide-spread usage to quote data together with 
their IMG and their translation, even if their form or language is different from the one used in 
the quoting context. That is, such composite data representations have been treated as 
indecomposable blocks. Such scruples do not seem to be warranted. Primary data may be 
quoted and provided with the quoting author's analysis and translation (cf. Bickel et al. 
2004:1). 
 
===== PAGE 3 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 3
1.2 Precursors 
Interlinear glossing has precursors in the descriptive tradition which link it up not with some 
kind of morphological representation, but with efforts to bring out the spirit of the language. 
The point there is not to provide a formal representation of a piece of linguistic data, but to 
render the language-specific construal of the world intelligible. To this end, literal translations 
were provided. For instance, G. Gabelentz (1901:460), in a passage arguing that the personal 
verb suffixes in Semitic languages are possessive pronouns, gives the following Arabic 
example: “ya-kfī-ka-hùm er genügt dir gegen sie (eig. er-genügt-dein-ihr)”. 
The IMG is a late-comer in linguistics. Early grammars were intended as primers, the 
user was expected to work through them and learn the morphemes; so no glossing was 
necessary. Many scientific grammars, e.g. of Latin, Greek, Arabic etc., were meant for the 
initiated who needed no glossing either (not seldom even the free translations were spared). 
Even comparative studies, historical or typological, left the analysis of the examples of 
diverse languages to the reader. H.C. Gabelentz (1861:465), in the middle of a discussion of 
Lule, Osage and other languages, presents the following passage: 
„Im Dakota (meine Grammatik der Dakota-Sprache § 34) dient die 3 Pers. Plur.Act. dazu, das 
Passivum auszudrücken, sogar wenn ein Actor im Singularis hinzuzudenken ist, z.B. Jesus 
Jan eñ hi q ix Jordan watpa ohna baptizapi , Jesus kam zu Johannes und sie tauften ihn (st. er 
wurde getauft) im Jordanfluss.“ Here the reader who does not have the grammar mentioned 
on his desk is given no chance. 
Pace Gabelentz, IMGs are needed when two conditions coincide: the level of analysis 
is above morphology, and the reader is not expected to be familiar with the languages under 
discussion (which is generally the case in typology, but not in descriptive or historical-
comparative linguistics). W.v. Humboldt (1836[1963]:534) invented his own device to help 
the reader identify L2 meaningful elements with L1 morphemes. He gives the following 
example from Classical Nahuatl: 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 3 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 
ni- c- chihui -lia in no- piltzin ce calli ich mache es für der mein Sohn ein Haus 
While dispensing with the I MG proper, this method fails for L1 elements which cannot be 
rendered by L2 words. 
Beside the literal translation illustrated above, G. Gabelentz (1901) uses a variety of 
techniques. He also has interlinear glosses, as when he says (p. 383): ‘Der Satz “Ich bin Dein 
Sohn” heißt im Maya: 
 a –  me χen – en. 
Dein Sohn  ich,’ 
and occasionally (e.g. p. 400) he uses Latin as L2 in IMGs. 
Finck (1909) is one of the first linguistic publications that illustrate the working of a 
language with a sizable text provided with a free translation and an I MG. The following 
sentence from his Turkish text (p. 83) illustrates his glossing style: 
xodža-da esbāb-ın dzümle-si-ni 
Meister=auch Kleider=(der) Gesamtheit=ihre=die 
ateš-e vur-up yak-ar 
Feuer=zu werf=enderweise verbrenn=end
Der Meister warf nun 
sämtliche Kleider ins Feuer 
und verbrannte sie. 
As may be seen, these forerunners have no grammatical category labels yet. Finck glosses 
Turkish –ın ( GEN) by Germ. der because this word displays a morphological trace of the 
===== PAGE 4 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 4
genitive. Similarly, Turkish –up GER is glossed by –enderweise, maybe the closest to a gerund 
that German can muster. This procedure is a tribute to the non-specialist readership that the 
booklet aims at, but necessarily falsifies the working of the language by attributing lexical 
meanings to its grammatical morphemes. 
It took a long time until interlinear morphemic glossing became firmly established. In 
Bloomfield’s Language, of 1933, examples abound, but they are presented like this (p. 278): 
“Some languages have here one word, regardless of gender, as Tagalog [kapa’tid]; our 
brother corresponds to a Tagalog phrase [kapa’tid na la’la:ki], where the last word means 
‘male’, and our sister to [kapa’tid na ba’ba:ji], with the attribute ‘female’.” 
IMGs that fulfill most of the requirements set out below appear first in the sixties of the 
20th century. From the eighties on, they become standard in publications dealing with 
languages whose knowledge is not presupposed. Editors and publishers increasingly require 
them even for languages like Latin, French and German that used to be well-known to 
linguists. The development is towards (not only providing translations for, but even) glossing 
every language except English. This is apparently a symptom of a global development in 
which every language except English becomes exotic. 
Good IMGs are relatively costly, both for the scientist and for the typesetter. Authors 
and publishers are therefore not too eager to produce them (well). There is at least one 
software on the market that aids the linguist in generating systematic I MGs for his texts, the 
interlinearizer that comes with the program Shoebox, from the Summer Institute of 
Linguistics (cf. Simons & Versaw 1988). 
Since IMGs are fairly recent in linguistics, they have seldom been treated by linguistic 
methodology. The first treatise of the present subject is Lehmann 1982. Subsequent work 
includes Simons & Versaw 1988, Lehmann et al. 1994, Lieb & Drude 2000, Bickel et al. 
2004. They have been freely made use of in the present treatment. 
 
1.3 Levels of representation 
Interlinear morphemic glossing must be seen in the larger context of representation of 
linguistic data and, even more comprehensive, of the documentation of a language (cf. Lieb & 
Drude 2000). On such a background, an isolated example given in a descriptive context is a 
particularly constrained case of the edition and annotation (also called ‘markup’ for technical 
purposes) of a piece of primary linguistic data for posterity. In other words, a general-purpose 
edition of a linguistic corpus is a kind of maximum model, subject to the full set of rules for 
explicitness, detail and elaboration, from which the quotation of an isolated example in the 
context of some grammatical discussion represents a subset delimited by considerations of 
feasibility, usefulness and the like. 
Every linguistic representation of some piece of raw data, even if it limits itself to a 
phonetic transcription, involves some linguistic analysis (Lehmann 2004). Insofar, no sharp 
boundary is to be drawn between the sheer representation of data and their analysis. Bearing 
this in mind, we can speak of various levels at which linguistic data may be represented. 
Presupposing spoken language data, at least the following are relevant: 
1. raw data recording (video or audio tape), 
2. phonetic transcription of the utterance, 
3. orthographic representation of the utterance, 
4. morph(ophon)emic representation of the utterance, 
===== PAGE 5 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 5
5. I MG of the utterance, 
6. free translation of the utterance into the background language, 
7. descriptive and explanatory comment on pragmatic or cultural aspects of the utterance. 
This set may be supplemented by even more representations (cf. Lieb & Drude 2000). There 
may be a phonological representation distinct from both levels 2 and 4. There may be a 
syntactic representation, e.g. in the form of a labeled bracketing. And there may be a semantic 
representation instead of, or in addition to, representation 6. In such representations, the 
portion of linguistic analysis is probably even stronger than in the 7 levels enumerated. 
The raw data have a temporal structure which is projected onto a spatial line in written 
representations. These representations are synchronized more or less closely. For instance, 
representation 6 generally matches L1 sentences, units of level 7 may be associated with L1 
units of any size, and representation 5 may match representation 4 morpheme by morpheme. 
This has different consequences for the typographic layout. For instance, units of level 7 may 
be associated with the running text by making full use of a multidimensional display, while 
representation 6 may be in a lateral column at the same height as its original, as is usual in 
synoptic editions and also practiced in the example from Finck 1909 given in section 1.2. 
Other representations should be arranged in lines one of which is beneath the other and runs 
in parallel with it. 
For the purposes of descriptive and typological grammatical analysis and 
exemplification, the seven-level set is generally reduced to only three. What may be called the 
canonical trilinear representation of linguistic examples involves: 
•= a representation of L1 at one of the levels 2, 3 or 4, 
•= an IMG in L2 (level 5), 
•= an idiomatic translation into L2 (level 6). 
An I MG will seldom be paired with a phonetic representation, because this serves 
phonetics, while an I MG serves grammar. They therefore form an unequal pair. If both are 
required, they will generally be mediated by another representation, a morphophonemic or 
orthographic one. 
It makes a difference for the glossing whether L1 is rendered in a morphophonemic 
representation or in conventional orthography. In the former case, the rules of orthography do 
not apply, and the linguist may dress up the representation in such a way that a biunique 
mapping onto the IMG is facilitated. In the latter case, morpheme boundaries may be obscured 
by the orthography, and there will be delimiters such as blanks, hyphens and punctuation 
marks which do not necessarily represent grammatical boundaries and may interfere with the 
glossing. However, the choice between an orthographic and a scientific representation of a 
text is generally a higher-order choice which cannot depend on glossing requirements. In 
particular, an example may be quoted unchanged from a primary source (think of Sanscrit 
examples). It may then not be possible to insert boundary symbols and the like in the L1 text. 
Glossing conventions therefore have to be adjusted to use with orthographic representations. 
If the first line representing the L1 text differs too much from a morphophonemic 
representation, then it is advisable to expand the canonical trilinear representation by an 
additional morphophonemic representation. It will then be this line that the I
MG refers to. 
The two languages involved will be called L1 and L2 throughout. However, it should 
be clear that the relationship between them is asymmetric: L1 is the object language, L2 is the 
metalanguage. The symbols occurring in an I MG have a different status from the elements of 
the text line that they gloss: For present purposes, the L1 text line consists of morphs, while 
===== PAGE 6 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 6
the IMG consists of names of L2 morphemes and of grammatical categories (cf. section 3.2). 
There can, thus, be no question of “mirroring” the structure of the L1 expression by the 
sequence of the L2 elements. Instead, an element in an IMG serves as a kind of mnemonic hint 
to the meaning or function of its corresponding L1 element. 
 
1.4 Delimitation 
The complete set of representations rendering an L1 text may be sufficient to derive a 
grammatical description from it (as postulated in Lieb & Drude 2000, §1.1). An I
MG however 
cannot, given its inherent restrictions, by itself compensate for a grammar (or just a 
morphology). Apart from the form of presentation, the most important substantive difference 
between a grammatical description and an I MG lies in the fact that the grammar treats of 
categories in the sense of classes, while the I MG identifies individual morphemes. For 
instance, a grammar treats of the verbal category of aspect. An I MG contains a gloss for an 
individual aspect morpheme, e.g. P ERF, neglecting the question of whether this is actually an 
aspect morpheme or rather a tense morpheme, and also leaving unanswered questions 
concerning other members of the paradigm, let alone the construction and use of the P ERF 
morpheme. Some of these kinds of information may be given in other representations, e.g. a 
syntactic representation. 
By the same token, the I MG does not indicate the syntactic category of a word form. 
For instance, the I MG of Germ. laufend is run: PART.PRS, showing that the form contains a 
morpheme whose function it is to mark a present participle. The gloss is not ‘run(part.prs) or 
anything of the sort, meaning that laufend is a present participle. While the latter is true, it is 
not the task of an IMG to give this information. 
Moreover, the type of morphological unit is not an object of an I MG. Thus, concepts 
like ‘stem’, ‘root’, ‘prefix’ do not appear in IMGs. Such information may, to a large extent, be 
inferred from a proper I MG, since the gloss of a root differs typographically from the gloss of 
a grammatical formative. 
Similarly, an IMG cannot replace a lexicon. Here again, elements appearing in an I MG 
are but names of elements appearing in the L1 line. They are not meant to exhaust the 
meaning of such an element. 
Finally, an I MG is not meant to replace an idiomatic translation. Thus, it cannot and 
should not render closely the sense of an L1 item in the given context. An I MG is regularly 
accompanied by a free translation which fulfills precisely this purpose. 
2 Prerequisites of morphological analysis 
Interlinear glossing might appear to be just an elementary form of representing data. As a 
matter of fact, it presupposes a morphological analysis. The following analytic problems are 
directly reflected by the glosses. 
 
2.1 Unmarkedness and zero morphemes 
Where the L1 text contains a morph, the I MG contains an element rendering it. Where the L1 
text contains nothing, the issue of rendering it is complicated by markedness theory. Germ. 
===== PAGE 7 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 7
Herr may be glossed by ‘master’ or by ‘master( NOM.SG)’. Latin mone-t may be glossed by 
‘warn-3.SG’ or by ‘warn(IND.ACT)-3.SG’ (according to R16). Moreover, one may believe that 
such forms contain zero morphemes and put thus: Herr-Ø (master- NOM.SG), mone-Ø-Ø-t 
(praise-IND-ACT-3.SG). All of these IMGs are formally correct. The choice among them is not a 
matter of appropriate glossing, but of morphological theory. For interlinear glossing, only the 
general rule R1 is relevant. 
 
2.2 Allomorphy 
If the L1 representation to be glossed corresponds to standard orthography, the analyst has no 
decisions to make in its regard. Otherwise, a good option for the representation (as well as for 
any writing system) is a morphophonemic representation which steers a middle course as far 
as allomorphy is concerned: Phonologically conditioned allomorphy is resolved (ignored), 
morphologically conditioned allomorphy is not resolved (is rendered). 
The I
MG, on the other hand, shows morphemes, not allomorphs. In order to understand 
what this implies, consider three examples. Modern Yucatec Maya expresses completive and 
incompletive aspect bys suffixes on transitive and (one conjugation class of) intransitive verbs 
as follows: 
 
aspect 
valence 
completive incompletive 
transitive -ah -ik 
intransitive -Ø -Vl 
 
For instance, t-u hats’-ah (PAST-SBJ.3 beat-CMPL) ‘he beat it’. One might think that the table 
contains four morphemes. Actually, however, transitivity is inherent in the verb stem and 
conditions allomorphy in the aspect suffix. The conditioning factor should not make part of 
the gloss. That is, the correct gloss for -ah is not TR.CMPL, but simply CMPL. 
Yucatec Maya also has personal clitics that precede nouns as possessive cross-
reference markers and verbs as subject cross-reference markers. If the noun or verb starts with 
a vowel, a glide is inserted in its front. The choice between the two glides w and y is morpho-
logically conditioned: If the pronoun is of first person singular or of second person, it is w; if 
the pronoun is of third person, the glide is y. For instance, in watan (POSS.1.SG Ø:wife) ‘my 
wife’, u yatan  ( POSS.3.SG Ø:wife) ‘his wife’. It is also possible to regard the noun forms 
modified by the initial glide as stem allomorphs, in which case the glide would not even 
receive the gloss by ‘Ø’. However, in the third person, a pronominal clitic followed by the 
glide can be omitted. Thus, yatan by itself means ‘his wife’. (Historically, the glide is indeed 
a reflex of an older cross-reference marker). We therefore have u y-atan (POSS.3 Ø-wife) ~ y-
atan (POSS.3-wife), and we face the problem that the same element is not even a morph in one 
context, but a full-fledged morpheme in another. Whatever the correct morphological analysis 
may be, the IMG presupposes it and brings it out. 
Last, consider gender marking in a language such as Latin (cf. art. 48). Puellae bonae 
means ‘good girls’, pueri boni ‘good boys’. Apart from motion, gender is inherent in a noun 
stem. It is, however, recognizable by the declension suffixes. Nevertheless, the gloss of the 
===== PAGE 8 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 8
morph in question does not contain the conditioning category. The noun forms will be glossed 
girl.F:NOM.PL, boy.M:NOM.PL, implying that gender is a category of the stem, not of the suffix. 
What about the adjectives? Gender is not inherent in an adjective stem. We may therefore 
gloss them by good:NOM.PL.F and good:NOM.PL.M. Then one and the same element would be a 
morpheme on adjectives, but a conditioned allomorph on nouns, and therefore it would get 
two different glosses. Since two different glosses for the same element are not admissible in 
interlinear glossing (R4), this would entail that there are two homonymous declension suffixes 
-ae in Latin, which is obviously undesirable. We may stop this consideration here, since the 
problem is obviously not one of glossing, but one of morphological analysis. R2 codifies the 
convention that IMG expressions represent morphemes, not allomorphs. 
3 Principles of interlinear glossing 
3.1 General 
In the canonical trilinear representation, one L1 text line is matched by two L2 lines, the I MG 
and the free translation. This entails a division of labor between the two L2 representations. 
The free translation is the idiomatic semantic equivalent of the L1 line, the I MG is a 
representation of its morphological structure. There is consequently no need for the translation 
to be particularly literal, just as there is no need for the I MG to repeat the morphemes that 
appear in the translation. For instance, a polysemous L1 item will be rendered by its 
contextual sense in the free translation, but by its basic meaning in the I MG (R8). Unnecessary 
parallelism between the two L2 lines is redundant; the trilinear canonical representation offers 
an occasion to provide additional information. 
In principle, the degree of detail displayed in an I MG depends on the purpose the 
example with its gloss is meant to serve. However, the author cannot foresee the purposes to 
which others will want to use his examples. A morphological detail that is not at stake in the 
current discussion may be essential for the argument another linguist may wish to base on the 
example. For this reason, the principle is to allow for as much precision and detail as seems 
tolerable (R3). The following rules specify the properties of a complete I MG. They do not 
exclude less detailed I MGs where they suffice. Cf. R13 and R23 for possibilities of under-
specifying morphological structure. 
The IMG of a morpheme is some sort of name for it, a name that alludes to its meaning or 
function and is insofar mnemonic or, at least, more helpful to the non-specialist than the L1 
morph itself. It must therefore have a certain recognition value. R4, which actually is a 
tightening of R1, therefore requires that given a particular L1 morpheme, its gloss will be the 
same in all contexts; and apart from full synonymy, no two morphemes of L1 will have the 
same gloss. These points will be elaborated in the following subsections. 
 
3.2 Glossing vocabulary 
Glosses are taken from a language L2 that serves as a metalanguage of L1. L2 is based on a 
natural language – in this article, English –, but with far-reaching deviations from natural 
language use. The glossing vocabulary consists of the following kinds of symbols: 
•= vocables: 
===== PAGE 9 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 9
•= L2 morphemes and stems 
•= grammatical category labels 
•= boundary symbols. 
The difference between the two kinds of vocables is the following: Morphemes and stems are 
taken from natural L2 vocabulary and are meant to be translation equivalents (in a sense to be 
made precise below) of L1 items. For instance, the notation “Germ. Schreib-tisch (write-table) 
‘desk’” is to be interpreted thus: The German word form Schreibtisch ‘desk’ consists of two 
morphs, of which schreib- means ‘write’ and tisch means ‘table’. Grammatical category 
labels, on the other hand, are taken from scientific terminology and are meant to categorize 
the function of L1 items. For instance, “Germ. schreib-en (write-INF) ‘write (inf.)’” is to be 
interpreted thus: The German word form schreiben ‘write (inf.)’ consists of two morphs, of 
which schreib- means ‘write’, while –en is an infinitive marker (that is, -en does not mean 
‘infinitive’; it is the German word Infinitiv which means ‘infinitive’). To bring out this 
essential difference between the two kinds of I MG vocables, L2 morphemes and stems are 
written in straight orthography, while grammatical category labels are written in (small) 
capitals (R29). 
A grammatical category label  represents (i.e. is the name of) the value of a 
grammatical category (the latter being taken, technically, as a parameter or attribute). For 
instance, the label ACC is the name of the value ‘accusative’ of the morphological category 
‘case’. Just like a grammatical category label is a name of a value of a grammatical category, 
what is called ‘L2 morphemes and stems’ are actually names of L2 morphemes and stems. In 
the following, we will abide by the simpler way of speaking. The choice and use of vocables 
are treated in the following subsections; boundary symbols are treated in section 0. 
 
3.3 Lexemes 
An L1 lexeme is, in principle, glossed by an L2 lexeme (R5.a). Sometimes more than one L2 
word is necessary, for instance in Germ. fabulieren ‘invent.stories’. However, profusion is to 
be avoided. Adjectives that do not require a copula in predicative function are often glossed 
by adding a copula, e.g. West Greenlandic anurli ‘windy’ is glossed ‘be.windy’ in Fortescue 
1984:65. This is only correct if a word of this class requires an attributor in attributive 
function. Otherwise it wrongly implies that there is no difference between adjectives and 
verbs, and it tends to obscure the fact that the language does not use a copula with adjectival 
predicates. 
L1 cardinal numerals are glossed by Arabic numbers. An issue arises for proper 
names, which are often not glossed at all. However, there is no room here for an exception to 
the general rule: a proper name is rendered by its counterpart in L2. Some proper names have 
conventional counterparts that are specific to L2; Engl. John corresponds to Germ. Hans, and 
Engl. Munich corresponds to Germ. München. These then appear in the I
MG. Whenever there 
is no such language-specific convention, the counterpart of an L1 name is usually the same 
word in L2. 
If L2 is English, no problem arises for the form in which L2 lexemes are quoted in the 
IMG. In other languages, lexemes have a citation form in conformity with L2 conventions. If 
this is an inflected form, like the nominative for nouns or the infinitive for verbs, then it is 
excluded from an I MG by R5.b, and instead the bare stem must be used. The reason is that 
===== PAGE 10 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 10
such a gloss would seem to imply that there is a nominative, or an infinitive, in the L1 line 
where actually just a stem is being glossed. 
 
3.4 Grammatical formatives 
L1 morphs are, in principle, glossed by citation forms of L2 morphemes. However, interlinear 
morphemic glossing crucially revolves around grammatical properties of L1 items. These will 
differ between L1 and L2. Even if, in a number of cases, the L2 stem appearing in a gloss has 
the same grammatical properties as the L1 morph that it represents, this cannot be expected 
and therefore not be relied upon. For instance, Latin eum could be glossed by Engl. him, and 
at the typological level, they do share a number of features. However, eum is accusative and 
can thus not be indirect object, while him is the form for direct and indirect object. Therefore, 
grammatical items of L1 are generally not glossed by grammatical items of L2, but by a 
configuration of symbols taken from the scientific metalanguage and representing their 
grammatical features, i.e. by grammatical category labels (R6). Thus, Latin eum may be 
glossed by ‘
ANA:ACC.SG.M’. 
No bound grammatical or derivational morphemes should appear in I MGs. Free 
grammatical morphemes may be used to render free grammatical morphemes. However, use 
of those in the second column is discouraged unless L1 happens to exhibit the same ambiguity 
as English: 
 
word class instead of use 
copulas, auxiliaries be 
have (except to mean 
‘possess, own’) 
COP, PASS, PROG ... 
PF, OBLG ... 
prepositions by 
with 
for 
as 
from 
to 
of 
A
G, ERG ... 
INST, COM, ASSOC ... 
BEN, PURP ... 
EQT, ESS ... 
ABL, DEL ... 
DAT, ALL, DEST, TERM, INF ... 
GEN 
subordinators that 
if 
COMP, SR (, D3) 
INT, COND.SR 
relativizers that 
who 
which 
R
EL 
REL.HUM.NOM ... 
REL.NHUM.NOM ... 
 
Some morphemes are extremely deeply entrenched in the semantic or pragmatic 
system of the language and simply have no translation equivalent in L2. Two common ways 
out are a) to repeat the significans of the item in the gloss, and b) to indicate the class of the 
item instead of its meaning. Thus, we find the German modal particle eben glossed either as 
EBEN or as PTL. Both glosses are inadequate. If there is no translation equivalent in natural L2, 
then the linguist has a specialized metalanguage to describe such functions. For the sake of an 
===== PAGE 11 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 11
IMG that is not devoted to modal particles in particular, a gloss like R EAFF (reaffirmed) will be 
fully sufficient and more helpful than either of the aforementioned. 
A gloss is a proper name of an L1 morpheme. It does not give information on the 
grammatical class of the morpheme in question other than what is implied by the name itself. 
If a gloss is ‘ ACC’, one assumes that the morpheme belongs to the grammatical class of the 
case morphemes. It is the task of the grammar to clarify whether or not this implication is 
correct in a particular case. The gloss will not be ‘ CASE.ACC’ or anything of this sort. For the 
same reason, the gloss of the perfective aspect is simply PRFV and not PRFV.ASP, and so on. 
From this it follows that the gloss will not be ‘ ASP’ either. In the literature, one 
frequently encounters glosses such as ‘ PTCL’ (particle), ‘AGR’ (agreement), ‘ART’ (article). If 
L1 possesses only one particle, agreement morpheme (hardly imaginable) or article (this is 
possible), then these glosses are sufficient. In all other cases, this kind of gloss is not helpful 
because it does not give the information on the meaning or function of the morpheme that a 
gloss is supposed to give. Moreover, the whole glossing becomes inconsistent, as some 
glosses name particular morphemes, while others name the class a morpheme belongs to. 
More on this in section 3.9.1. 
 
3.5 Ambiguity 
Glosses should be consistent within one publication. Each morpheme of L1 should be 
recognizable by its gloss. The reader is supported in this task by consistent glosses. It will 
rather confuse him if Yucatec Maya k’ìin is once glossed ‘sun’ and the next time ‘day’. 
Polysemy is resolved in the idiomatic translation. The gloss renders neither the contextual 
sense nor the full meaning range of an item. Naturally, this does not apply to homonymy. 
Homonymous L1 morphs represent different morphemes and therefore receive different 
glosses. This is stipulated by R7, which follows from R4. 
If the senses of an item are reducible to a Gesamtbedeutung, then this should be used 
in the gloss (R8). For instance, the Turkish dative/allative suffix –a is glossed by 
DAT. The 
Gesamtbedeutung rather than the Grundbedeutung should appear in the gloss, because it has 
better chances to fit all the diverse contexts in which the item occurs. Sometimes, there is 
either no Gesamtbedeutung, or if there is, L2 does not have a term for it. In cases like YM. 
k’ìin ‘sun, day’, there are various alternatives. First, the Grundbedeutung may be used as the 
gloss; thus YM. k’ìin (sun). However, if all the occurrences of a polysemous morpheme in a 
particular publication reflect the same (derived) reading, then generally no useful purpose is 
served if it is consistently glossed by its basic meaning. For instance, all the occurrences of 
YM. k’ìin in a particular text might mean ‘day’. Then this would be the appropriate gloss. 
Finally, any kind of reduction may seem misleading. Then two or even more senses may be 
indicated in the gloss, separated by a slash, e.g. YM. k’ìin ‘sun/day’. E2 illustrates the same 
convention. 
E2. Toli-n n  kae-hako cal    non-ta. 
KOR Toli-TOP  dog-ADD often/well play:PRS-DECL 
‘Toli likes to play with the dog.’ (Lehmann & Shin 2003, ch. 4.2.3) 
Syncretism often involves extensive polysemy and/or homonymy. If it should be made 
explicit in an I MG, then e.g. the gloss for Lat. ancillae would have to be 
‘maid.F:GEN.SG/DAT.SG/NOM.PL’. This may be appropriate if the discussion in the context 
===== PAGE 12 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 12
deals with syncretism. Otherwise, only the category actually required by the context may be 
shown, e.g.: 
E3. ancillae    orant 
LAT maid.F:NOM.PL  pray:3.PL 
‘the maids pray’ 
In other words, in cases of syncretism the last two bullet points of R8 must be resorted to. 
A whole paradigm of markers may be used in two clearly distinct functions. For 
instance, a set of cross-reference markers may combine with a verb to reference its subject, 
and with a noun to reference its possessor. Here again, the two alternatives mentioned are 
open: either gloss the verb markers by ‘SBJ’ and the noun markers by ‘POSS’, or gloss them by 
‘SBJ/POSS’ in both positions (which is, actually, never done). A third alternative – one that is 
actually resorted to in Mayan linguistics; cf. art. 170, section 6.1.2 – is to coin a concept and a 
term for a paradigm that is used in these two functions and use this in the IMG. 
3.6 Features and functions 
As remarked in section 1.4, an I MG cannot fill the place of a grammar. In particular, the 
grammatical category label that represents a morpheme in the gloss cannot possibly represent 
the full functionality of that morpheme. It can only serve as a mnemonic identifier for the 
reader. We just saw that the full polysemy of an item cannot be accounted for in a gloss. The 
same goes for functional information associated with a morphological position. If the slot 
filler is a verb agreement affix or cross-reference marker, then its meaning is in the sphere of 
person, number and gender. Consider conjugation endings as in Germ. lieb-e ‘love-SBJ.1.SG’, 
lieb-st ‘love- SBJ.2.SG’, lieb-t ‘love- SBJ.3.SG’. The information that these suffixes cross-
reference the subject is functional information associated with the morphological slot. It must 
be given in the grammar; the IMG may simply read lieb-e ‘love-1.SG’ etc. 
The same would apply, in principle, if the verb cross-references more than one of its 
dependents. Here, however, it has become customary to distinguish the references of the 
cross-reference markers by indicating their syntactic function, as in E4. 
E4. ni-li-mw-ona      m-toto 
SWAH SBJ.1.SG-PST-OBJ.CL.1-see  CL.1-child 
‘I saw the/a child’ 
The information that the initial prefix references the subject, while the one following the tense 
prefix references the direct object must be contained in the grammar. The task of the gloss is 
to identify the particular element, not to specify the rules of its use. Insofar, adding functional 
information concerning the morphological slot itself – SBJ and OBJ in E4 – is a service to the 
reader that may be useful, but that also clutters up the gloss (cf. R3). 
The distinction between morphological categories and syntactic or semantic functions 
is also relevant in the domain of case and valence. The frequent confusion among syntactic/ 
semantic functions, cases and valence-derivational functions also manifests itself in glossing 
habits. One frequently encounters glosses such as Turkish ateş-in ‘fire-POSS’ instead of ‘fire-
GEN’, ateş-e ‘fire-IO’ instead of ‘fire-DAT’ or ‘…-send- DAT …’ instead of E5. The quality of 
the glossing reflects the quality of the morphological analysis. 
E5. Musa a-li-ni-andik-ia       barua 
SWAH Musa SBJ.CL.1- PST-OBJ.1.SG-send-APPL letter 
‘Musa sent me a letter’ 
===== PAGE 13 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 13
3.7 Derived stems 
The morpho-semantic structure of a derived stem may be completely regular and transparent, 
as in Germ. wolk-ig (cloud- ADJVR) ‘cloudy’, or it may be opaque, as in Germ. heil-ig 
(salvation-ADJVR) ‘holy’. If the discussion focuses on word-formation, then both of these 
words will be glossed as indicated. If the internal structure of stems is of no relevance, then it 
will not be shown in the L1 text line, and consequently the glosses can reduce to ‘cloudy’ and 
‘holy’, respectively. 
For opaque complex stems, morphological segmentation plus corresponding gloss 
often amounts more to etymology than to morphological analysis. It also unnecessarily 
obscures the correspondence of the gloss to the idiomatic translation. This should be borne in 
mind before one carries it through as a general principle in text editions. 
In an ideal methodological situation, an I MG is taken from a lexicon, where the gloss 
constitutes one of the fields in the microstructure of each lexical entry. The German lexicon 
may contain, e.g., the three entries Huf 'hoof', Eisen 'iron' and Hufeisen 'horse-shoe'. If the 
latter occurs in an L1 text, then it may either be analyzed or not. In the former case Huf and 
Eisen will be looked up in the lexicon and will be matched by their glosses, while in the latter 
case Hufeisen will be looked up and be glossed accordingly. 
 
3.8 Submorphemic units 
There are two kinds of submorphemic units: parts of morphemes with a sound-symbolic value 
and strings of phonemes inserted between morphemes for euphonic or similar reasons. The 
former kind is not generally subjected to morphemic analysis and may therefore be left out of 
consideration here. The latter kind may be illustrated by the second element in forms such as 
French a-t-il ‘has he’ and Germ. Weihnacht-s-gans ‘Christmas goose’. If the submorphemic 
unit is not at stake in the context, then the first choice is to abstain from an analysis by 
regarding the submorphemic unit as part of a stem alternant: Weihnachts-gans (Christmas-
goose). The second choice is to render the submorphemic unit by Ø, e.g. a-t-il (has-Ø-he). A 
euphonic submorphemic unit may be glossed by 
EU instead of Ø. 
 
3.9 Grammatical category labels 
3.9.1 General 
As was said above, the gloss for a grammatical item is generally not a grammatical item of 
L2, but a grammatical category label (R6). For instance YM yàan is not rendered by ‘be’, but 
by EXIST, one of the reasons being that L2 ‘be’ is a copula, while YM yàan is not. While this 
poses few problems for such categories for which the European grammaticographic tradition 
possesses terms, it does pose a problem for certain classes of semi-grammaticalized items 
such as function verbs and coverbs. Coverbs are words which are grammaticalized from verbs 
to minor parts of speech, mostly adpositions. If they function as the latter, they may express a 
semantic role. In Mandarin, for instance, yòng has the lexical meaning ‘use’ and the 
grammatical meaning INSTR, as in E6. 
===== PAGE 14 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 14
E6. Ta ]  yòng   sh ŏu z ŏu lù. 
CHIN he  use/INSTR hand walk road 
‘He walks on his hands.’ 
This kind of problem is not solved by putting the lexical meaning in upper case ( USE), since 
‘use’ is neither a grammatical concept in L2 nor a term of the grammatical metalanguage. 
Applying R8 in such cases would imply opting in favor of the Gesamtbedeutung of the item, 
which in such cases is the grammatical meaning. The gloss would then be INSTR (or some 
more language-specific grammatical category which may suit better this particular function). 
The problem remains, however, that the same word can occur as the sole predicate of a clause, 
in the meaning ‘use’ (e.g. tā yòng sh ŏu ‘he uses his hand’). An IMG ‘INSTR’ would be hardly 
intelligible there. The alternative of only using the Grundbedeutung – ‘use’ in E6 and 
throughout – would be in conflict with the principle that morphological analysis must be kept 
distinct from etymology. Here the third alternative offered by rule R8 must be resorted to, viz. 
providing both meanings in the gloss of each occurrence of the item, thus: yòng ‘use/
INSTR’. 
An IMG identifies an L1 morpheme. It names a value, not a parameter. Mentioning the 
name of the generic category in the gloss instead of the specific value is nevertheless 
widespread usage. One finds both Japanese yom-i and yon-de glossed by ‘read- CONV’ 
(converb), which hinders the reader in his attempt to keep the converb forms apart. One finds 
Onondaga waLha-yeLkwa-hní:-nuL ‘he bought tobacco’ glossed as ‘ TNS:he/it-tobacco:buy-
ASP’ (Woodbury 1975:10), which is of no use for somebody studying the interdependence of 
incorporation with tense and aspect. 
IMGs not seldom contain labels that do not correspond to the principles introduced so 
far. Sometimes, elements without morphological status are separated and glossed. Sometimes, 
the parameter instead of the particular value of a grammatical category is identified. 
Sometimes, syntactic or semantic instead of morphological information is given. Here is an 
incomplete list of labels that have repeatedly been found in glosses but which should be 
avoided. 
 
label intended meaning comment 
A transitive subject in morphemic glosses, the abbreviation is ERG 
ADV adverb specify meaning 
AGR agreement specify agreement categories 
AGT agent this is not a value of a morphological category 
ART article only if it has no determinative properties 
ASP aspect specify particular aspect 
AUX auxiliary only if there is only one auxiliary morpheme in the language 
CARD cardinal only if it is a morpheme or grammatical feature 
CLF classifier this is a word class 
CLT clitic this is neither a morphological category nor a value of one 
EP epenthetic has no morphological status, should not be separated in the 
first place 
EVID evidential specify particular evidential 
PAT patient this is not a value of a morphological category 
PREP preposition this is a word class 
PTL particle this is (at best) a word class 
TNS tense specify particular tense 
===== PAGE 15 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 15
 
3.9.2 List of grammatical categories and their glossing labels 
No list of grammatical category labels can be complete. The following list (which 
incorporates the list in Lehmann et al. 1994) only contains the most widespread categories. 
When more than one abbreviation is mentioned, they are given in the order of preference. To 
the extent that these abbreviations are or become wide-spread, they get the status of linguistic 
abbreviations like ‘VP’, which need not be defined when used. If a publication uses labels not 
contained in the following list, it must explain them in an individual list of abbreviations. 
Grammatical category labels are subject to two conflicting requirements: they must be 
both distinct and short. The former requirement takes precedence. It is, for instance, not 
possible to use ‘ COMP’ in one and the same publication to mean both ‘completive’ and 
‘complementizer’. The following list avoids such clashes. However, in an individual 
publication that has nothing to do with complementation, the aspect may, of course, be 
abbreviated by ‘ COMP’ (instead of CMP(L), as in the list). Parenthesized parts of an 
abbreviation are only necessary if a distinctness conflict arises. 
The following list contains only such terms which may appear in an I MG. In other 
publications, similar lists of terms for syntactic categories and functions and for semantic and 
pragmatic functions may be found. 
‘Cross-reference position’ means a morphological slot, usually on a verb, occupied by 
pronominal elements that agree with or refer to a dependent in a specific syntactic function. 
‘Case’ means a case relator that may take the form of a case affix or an adposition. Verb 
derivational morphemes get these glosses only if they are homonymous with nominal case 
relators. 
 
 
value abbrev. category comment 
1st person 1 person  
2nd person 2 person  
3rd person 3 person  
abessive ( PRV) 
(AV E R S) 
 use ‘privative’ and ‘aversive’ 
ablative ABL local case ‘from’ (= separative) 
absolute ABSL nominal free non-incorporated form of 
noun 
absolutive ABS grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
in ergative system 
abstract ABSTR nominal  
accusative ACC grammatical case  
action nominalizer ACNNR deverbal nominal derivation  
active ACT voice; case or cross-reference 
position 
in active system 
actor ACR grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
 
actor topic A voice  
additive ADD case  
===== PAGE 16 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 16
addressee-honorific 2 HON honorification  
addressee-humble 2 HML honorification  
adelative ADEL local case  
adessive ADESS local case  
adhortative ( HORT)  use ‘hortative’ 
aditive ( ALL)  use ‘allative’ 
adjectiv(al)izer ADJR derivational or syntactic  
admonitive ADM mood  
adverbializer ADVR derivational or syntactic  
adversative ADRVS interpropositional relation ‘whereas’ 
affirmative AFFMT opposite to negative normally unmarked 
agent nominalizer AGNR deverbal nominal derivation  
agentive AG   
alienable AL possessive attribution 
morpheme 
 
allative ALL local case ‘to’ 
allocutive ALLOC honorification specific kind of addressee-
honorific 
anaphoric ANA pronominal  
andative AND deictic  
animate AN   
anterior ANT tense relative tense 
anticausative ACAUS deverbal verb derivation = deagentive, blocking of actor 
argument 
antipassive APASS voice  
aorist AOR  tense-aspect perfective past (as opposed to 
imperfect) 
applicative APPL deverbal verbal derivation subtypes may be distinguished 
by APPL.REC, APPL.INST etc. 
apprehensional APPR interpropositional relation ‘lest’ 
assertive ASRT modality subtype of declarative: high 
degree of commitment 
associative ASS(OC) adnominal case ‘with, à’ 
assumed ASSUM evidential  
attenuative ATTEN deverbal verb derivation  
attributor AT nominal links an attribute to the head 
auditory AUD evidential  
augmentative AUG denominal nominal derivation  
auxiliary AUX  if it is the only auxiliary root 
benefactive BEN case ‘for’ 
cardinal CARD numeral if marked grammatically 
caritive ( PRV)  use ‘privative’ 
causative CAUS deverbal verb derivation  
circumstantial CIRC interpropositional relation ‘in, by’ 
clamative ( EXCL)  use ‘exclamative’ 
classifier CLF nominal followed by class identifier, e.g. 
HUM 
===== PAGE 17 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 17
cohortative ( HORT)  use ‘hortative’ 
collective COLL   
comitative COMIT case ‘with, in the company of’ 
common COMM gender either masc. or fem.; cf. ‘human’ 
and ‘animate’ 
comparative CMPR degree of comparison  
complementizer COMP subordinator = SR 
completive CMPL, 
CMP 
aspect normally = perfective (vs. im-
perfective) 
conative CNTV mood  
concessive CONC interpropositional relation ‘although’ 
conditional COND interpropositional relation; 
mood 
‘if’; 
‘would’ 
conjectural CONJC evidential  
conjunctive CONJ interpropositional relation of non-finite predicate 
connector, -ive CONN  if there is only one 
consecutive CONSEC interpropositional relation ‘so that’ 
construct CONST nominal construct state 
converb ( GER)  use ‘gerund’ 
continuous CONT aspect/aktionsart  
copula COP   
crastinal CRAS tense tomorrow 
dative DAT grammatical case  
deagentive ( ACAUS)  use ‘anticausative’ 
debitive ( OBLG)  use ‘obligative’ 
declarative DECL sentence-type normally unmarked 
deferential DEFR honorification ~ speaker-humble 
definite DEF determination  
deictic of 12 person D12 determination  
deictic of 1st person D1 determination  
deictic of 2nd person D2 determination  
deictic of 3rd person D3 determination  
delative DEL local case ‘down from’ 
demonstrative DEM determination  
dependent verb form ( SUBJ)  use ‘subjunctive’ 
desiderative DES deverbal verb derivation  
destinative DEST local case; 
also on non-finite verb forms 
(= supine) 
‘to’; 
if typically for human 
destinations, use ‘benefactive’ 
determiner DET pronominal will normally be DEF, INDEF, 
GNR, SPEC, NSPEC 
detransitivizer DETR deverbal verb derivation see also ‘anticausative’ and 
‘introversive’ 
different subject DS   
diminutive DIM denominal noun derivation  
direct DR voice vs. inverse 
direct evidential DIREV evidential  
===== PAGE 18 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 18
direct object DO cross-reference position  
directional DIR case or verb derivation ‘towards’ 
distal DIST determination remote from deictic center 
distributive DISTR nominal or verbal  
donative DON  auxiliary of benefactive 
construction 
dual DU, DL number  
dual exclusive DE number  
dual inclusive DI number  
dubitative DUB mood  
durative DUR aktionsart  
dynamic DYN aktionsart vs. stative 
egressive EGR aktionsart  
elative ELAT local case ‘out of’ 
emphasizer/emphatic EMPH functional sentence 
perspective 
e.g., class of pronoun 
equative EQT 1. case; 
2. predicative 
‘as’; 
feature/morph of adjective in 
nominal clause 
ergative ERG grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
in ergative system 
essive ESS case ‘as’; see also ‘transformative’ 
evidential EVID verbal  
exclamative EXCL mood  
exclusive   use ‘dual exclusive’, ‘plural 
exclusive’ 
exist(ential) EXIST grammatical verb  
experiential EXPER aspect  
extrafocal EXFOC verbal status of subordinate clause of 
cleft-sentence 
extraversive EXTRV deverbal verb derivation transitivization by addition of 
undergoer 
factitive FACT denominal/deadjectival verb 
derivation 
A- NP ‘make NP A’ 
familiar FAM pronominal  
feminine F gender  
finite FIN verbal  
first person dual 
inclusive 
12  if treated as a quasi-singular; 
otherwise ‘dual inclusive’ 
focus FOC functional sentence 
perspective 
 
formal FRM mood  
frequentative FREQ aktionsart multiple times on several occa-
sions 
future FUT tense  
generic GNR determination  
genitive GEN grammatical case  
===== PAGE 19 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 19
gerund GER verbal verbal adverb or converb 
gerundive ( OBLG)  use ‘obligative’ 
habitual HABIT aktionsart ~ customary 
habitual-generic   use ‘habitual’, ‘generic’ 
habitual-past   use ‘habitual’, ‘past’ 
hesternal HEST tense yesterday’s past 
hodiernal future HODFUT tense today’s future 
hodiernal past HODPST tense today’s past 
honorific HON honorification  
hortative HORT mood 1 st person imperative 
human HUM   
humble HML honorification comprises ‘speaker-humble, 
addressee-humble, referent-
humble’ 
hypocoristic HCR affect  
hypothetical HYP mood  
illative ILL local case ‘into’ 
immediate IMM tense specifier of other tenses 
immediate/imminent 
future 
IMMFUT tense  
immediate past ( RECPST)  use ‘recent past’ 
imperative IMP mood  
imperfect IMPF tense-aspect imperfective past; vs. aorist 
imperfective IPFV aspect  
impersonal IMPR  only if formally distinct from the 
specific persons 
impersonal passive IPS voice passive without promotion to 
subject 
inactive INACT grammatical case or cross-
reference position 
in active system 
inalienable INAL nominal possessive attribution morpheme 
or feature 
inanimate INAN   
inceptive ( INGR)  use ‘ingressive’ 
inchoative INCH denominal verbal derivation N/A- ‘become N/A’ 
inclusive   use ‘dual inclusive’, ‘plural 
inclusive’ 
incompletive, 
noncompletive 
INCMP(L) aspect use ‘imperfective’ 
inconsequential INCONS interpropositional relation  
indefinite INDEF determination  
independent INDEP mood only if distinct from indicative 
indicative IND mood  
indirect object IO cross-reference position  
inessive INESS local case ‘inside’ 
inferential INFR mood or evidential  
infinitive INF verbal  
===== PAGE 20 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 20
ingressive INGR aktionsart  
injunctive INJ mood  
instructive ( MAN)  use ‘manner’ 
instrument 
nominalizer 
INSTNR deverbal nominal derivation  
instrumental INST(R) case  
intensive INTS verbal often aktionsart 
interrogative INT sentence type particle or morphological 
category 
intransitive INTR verbal morpheme or category 
intransitive subject S cross-reference position only if opposed to both A and P; 
use SBJ otherwise 
introversive INTRV deverbal verb derivation blocking of undergoer argument
inverse INV usually verbal vs. direct 
invisible INVS determination  
irrealis IRR mood  
iterative ITER aktionsart several times on one occasion 
jussive JUSS mood 3 rd ps. imperative or dependent 
mood 
lative LAT local case ‘to’ 
ligature LIG nominal  
linker LNK nominal links subconstituents of a phrase, 
typically an NP; properly in-
cludes ‘attributor’ 
locative LOC local case  
locative topic LT voice  
logophoric LOG pronominal or verbal  
malefactive MAL deverbal verb derivation  
manner MAN case also on non-finite verbs 
manner nominalizer MANNR deverbal nominal derivation  
masculine M gender  
masculine personal MHUM gender  
medial MED determination medial distance from deictic 
center 
medial MEDV verbal verb form in a chain 
mediative MEDT case ‘between, among; by means of’ 
mediopassive MEDP voice  
middle  voice excludes passive voice 
motivative MTV case ‘by’; sometimes called ‘causal’ 
narrative NARR tense  
near future NRFUT tense after ‘immediate future’ 
negative NEG   
neuter N gender  
nominalizer NR deverbal nominal derivation or 
syntactic subordination 
see also the more specific ones 
nominative NOM grammatical case  
non- N  e.g. NPST 
===== PAGE 21 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 21
non-finite NFIN verbal  
non-future NFUT tense  
non-human NHUM gender  
non-masculine 
personal 
NM gender  
non-past NPST tense  
non-plural NPL number < 3 
non-singular NSG number > 1; only if there is a plural for > 
2 
non-specific NSPEC determination  
non-visual NVIS evidential non-eye-witness 
non-volitional NVOL verbal  
noun class n CLN  where n is a number or a feature
object OBJ cross-reference position  
obligative OBLG mood  
oblique OBL case  
obviative  OBV person vs. proximate 
optative  OPT mood  
ordinal ORD numeral  
participle (marker) PART verbal  
partitive PRTV case  
passive PASS voice  
past PST tense  
patient nominalizer PATNR deverbal nominal derivation  
patient topic PT  voice  
paucal PAU number  
pejorative PEJ affect  
perfect P(R)F tense-aspect  
perfective PFV aspect  
pergressive ( PERL)  use ‘perlative’ 
perlative PERL local case ‘through’ 
place nominalizer LOCNR deverbal nominal derivation  
pluperfect PLUP tense past or perfect of a past 
plural  PL number  
plural exclusive PE number  
plural inclusive PI  number  
pluritive ( PL)  plural of a singulative; use 
‘plural’ 
polite ( FRM)  use ‘formal’ 
positive ( AFFM)  use ‘affirmative’ 
possessive POSS possessive adjective, pronoun 
and cross-reference position 
not for an adnominal case 
relation; that is GEN or AT 
postcrastinal POCRAS tense future after tomorrow 
postelative POSTEL local case ‘from behind’ 
posterior POST relative tense  
postessive POSTESS local case ‘behind’ 
post-hodiernal POHOD tense future after today 
===== PAGE 22 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 22
potential POT mood  
precative PREC mood for requesting 
predicative PRED nominal predicative form 
present PRS tense  
preterite ( PST)  use ‘past’ 
pre-hesternal PRHEST tense past before yesterday 
primary object PO cross-reference position  
privative  PR(I)V case ‘without’ 
processive, -ual PROC denominal verb derivation  
progressive PROG aspect  
prohibitive PROH mood negative imperative 
prolative PROLAT local case ‘along, by (way of)’ 
proprietive PROPR case or derivational category ‘having, provided with’ 
prospective PROSP tense-aspect ‘going to’; opposite of perfect 
proximal PROX determination near the deictic center 
proximate PRX person vs. obviative 
punctual PNCT aspect or aktionsart  
purposive ( DEST)  use ‘destinative’ 
quality nominalizer QUALNR deverbal nominal derivation  
quotative QUOT marking indirect speech  
realis RLS mood vs. irrealis 
recent past RECPST tense = immediate past 
reciprocal REC(P) voice or pronominal  
reduplicative   gloss by function 
referent-honorific 3 HON honorification  
referent-humble 3 HML honorification  
referentive RFR case ‘about’ 
reflexive R(E)FL voice or pronominal  
reinforcement ( INTNS)  use ‘intensive’ 
relational(izer) RELL nominal  
relative REL subordinative and/or 
pronominal 
in relative clause 
relative ( RFR)  use ‘referentive’ 
remote ( DIST)  use ‘distal’ 
remote past REMPST tense  
repetitive REP aktionsart only if distinct from iterative 
reportative RPRT evidential  
resultative RES aspect or aktionsart  
reversive RVRS aktionsart  
same subject SS   
secondary object SO cross-reference position  
semelfactive SMLF aktionsart  
sensory SENS evidential  
separative ( ABL)  use ‘ablative’ 
sequential SEQ interpropositional relation vs. simultaneous 
simultaneous SIM interpropositional relation vs. sequential 
singular SG number restricted 
===== PAGE 23 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 23
singulative SGT nominal vs. collective 
sociative SOC verbal ‘together’ 
speaker-honorific 1 HON honorification  
speaker-humble 1 HML honorification  
specific SPEC determination  
speculative SPECL evidential  
stative STAT aktionsart  
subelative SUBEL local case ‘from under’ 
subessive SUBESS local case ‘under’ 
subject SBJ cross-reference position  
subjunctive  SUBJ mood  
sublative SUBL local case ‘to under’ 
subordinator SR interpropositional relation only for the single universal 
subordinator 
superdirective SUPL  use super-lative 
superelative SUPEL local case ‘from above’ 
superessive SUPESS local case ‘above’ 
superlative SUP degree of comparison  
super-lative SUPL local case ‘to above’ 
terminative TERM local case or aktionsart ‘up to’ 
topic TOP functional sentence 
perspective 
 
transformative TRNSF case ‘becoming’; dynamic 
counterpart of essive 
transitive TR verbal if a morpheme 
transitive patient P cross-reference position only if opposed to both S and A; 
use OBJ otherwise 
transitive subject A cross-reference position only if opposed to both S and P; 
use ERG otherwise 
transitivizer TRR deverbal verb derivation  
translative TRNSL local case ‘across’ 
trial TRL number only if distinct from paucal 
undergoer UGR cross-reference position  
unrestricted ( PL)  use ‘plural’ 
unspecified UNSPEC person unspecified argument of 
relational base 
validator   use ‘assertive’, ‘declarative’ 
venitive VEN deictic  
verbalizer VR, VBZ verbal derivation  
visible VS determination  
visual VIS evidential eyewitness 
vocative VOC case  
volitional, volitive VOL verbal  
zero ∅ making no contribution to 
sentence meaning 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 24 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 24
4 Boundary symbols 
4.1 Basic rules 
Rules R1 and R4 guarantee correspondence between units in the L1 text and in the I MG. They 
do not, however, insure that the vertical alignment works in a mechanical way. This is 
desirable in certain contexts such as automatic parsing. It can be guaranteed in a fully 
formalized representation, which would then take the form of a table (s. Lieb & Drude 2000). 
In less formal situations, it cannot be fully guaranteed, because there may be good reasons not 
to insert morpheme boundaries in the L1 text while still representing each morph by a 
separate gloss (cf. R13). Correspondence of boundary symbols in the L1 and the I MG lines is 
therefore not generally an equivalence, but only an implication: boundary symbols in the L1 
line are matched by corresponding boundary symbols in the I MG (R9). We will review the 
kinds of boundaries and their delimiters briefly. 
The word boundary  is shown by a blank in L1. This is repeated in the I MG., and 
conversely there is a blank in an I MG only if there is a corresponding blank in the L1 line. 
This particular rule (R10) is therefore stricter than R9. R10 prohibits two situations: a word 
being rendered by a sequence of two words; and a sequence of two words being rendered by 
one word. The first situation will be discussed in section 4.5. Sometimes a sequence of two L1 
units (words or morphemes) corresponds to one L2 unit. In principle, this situation should not 
arise in the I MG, because each of the L1 units should have its own gloss. However, it is 
possible that either the L1 units have no meaning in isolation or else mean something totally 
different than their combination, the latter being idiomaticized. In such cases, glossing them 
separately might give a misleading impression of the workings of the grammar. When the 
bisected L1 unit forms an orthographic unit (e.g. a compound), one may simply dispense with 
the analysis (cf. also section 3.7). For instance, instead of Germ. be-komm-en ( APPL-come-
INF), one can write bekomm-en (get-INF). If the orthography requires a boundary, as in YM le 
kah ‘when’, the first choice is to gloss the items separately (in this case, DEF SR) and to leave 
the semantic interpretation to the idiomatic translation. The second choice is to indicate the 
semantic unity of the two L1 items typographically by replacing the blank by a boundary 
symbol that does not interfere with the orthography, e.g. by an underscore: le_kah (when) 
(R11). If L1 orthography links the two items by another symbol that is also an I MG boundary 
symbol, as in Engl. vis-à-vis ‘facing’, no satisfactory solution is known. 
Apart from special cases to be noted, the morpheme boundary is shown by a hyphen 
in L1 (R12). This is repeated in the I MG; and here again the converse applies, too. Apart from 
the vis-à-vis type exception, this does not pose any problems. It does, however, happen that 
the L1 text contains a combination of two morphemes, but no boundary is shown between 
them. Various motivations for this are conceivable, be it that the position of the boundary is 
not clear or irrelevant, be it that the analyst does not want to disfigure L1 orthography with 
boundary symbols. In such cases, a colon in the I MG is a hint at a morpheme boundary 
existing, but not shown in the L1 line (R13). The purpose of R13 is to allow the analyst to 
forgo a segmentation while still saving R1 and insuring biuniqueness of the other boundary 
symbols. Several examples may be seen in E1. The colon is also used to render a portmanteau 
morph, e.g. French au ‘DAT:DEF’. More on this in section 4.5. 
Special symbols may be introduced to distinguish kinds of morpheme boundaries. For 
instance, the use of the plus sign to signal a boundary in compounding, as in German 
===== PAGE 25 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 25
Weihnachts+gans ‘Christmas+goose’ is rather widespread; and occasionally it is also found 
in derivation, as in German wolk+ig (cloud+ADJVR) ‘cloudy’ (R14). 
No orthography distinguishes clitic boundaries  from word and morpheme 
boundaries. If L1 is represented in conventional orthography, then the simplest solution for an 
IMG is not to distinguish them either. Thus French je le sais  ‘I know it’ will be glossed as 
‘SBJ.1.SG DO .3.SG.M know. SG’, while Latin itaque ‘and so’ will be glossed by ‘so:and’. If 
clisis is important or the L1 representation is non-orthographic, then the clitic boundary will 
be shown by an equal sign both in the L1 text and in the IMG, thus: ita=que (so=and) (R15). 
If a zero morph or morpheme  is represented in L1 by Ø (cf. section 2.1), no special 
measures need be taken. If it is not there represented, then its gloss is enclosed in parentheses 
(R16), like this: Lat. timor fear.M(NOM.SG). In this example, a stem is accompanied by two 
(complexes of) grammatical category labels, M and NOM.SG. The first is separated by a period, 
because it corresponds to an inherent feature of the stem. The second is enclosed in 
parentheses, because it corresponds to a separate morpheme. 
 
4.2 Discontinuity 
Discontinuous units – words or morphemes – are like bisected units in that one semantic unit 
is represented by two expression units. However, they present the added difficulty that their 
parts are not adjacent, so the I
MG has to make it explicit what belongs together. For a 
discontinuous stem or affix , diverse solutions have been proposed in the literature.  Among 
them is the proposal (Bickel et al. 2004) to repeat the same gloss under each part of the 
discontinuous item. However, this seems misleading, as the syntagmatic cooccurrence of 
synonymous L1 items is not at all rare – e.g. in hypercharacterization – and must be 
distinguished from discontinuity. An unambiguous solution for a circumfix is to set it off by 
angled brackets, like this: Germ. ge>lauf<en (< PART.PRF>run) ‘run (part.prf.)’ (R17). 
Discontinuous words are rare. The first choice is to try and gloss each part independently, as 
done for the German circumposition um … willen  ‘for’ in E7. 
E7. um unser-es   Heil-es    willen 
GERM for our-GEN.SG salvation-GEN.SG sake 
‘for (the sake of) our salvation’ 
The second choice is to treat them by the same formalism as for circumfixes, as in E8. 
E8. es hör>-t   jetzt <auf 
GERM it <stop>-3.SG now 
‘it stops now’ 
Infixes, too, require a special boundary symbol in order to insure that the root bisected by 
them is perceived as a unit. This is achieved enclosing them in angled brackets as shown in 
E9f (R18). 
E9. vi<n>c-o 
LAT conquer<PRS>-1.SG 
‘I conquer’ 
E10. t<el>unjuk 
IND <AGNR>point 
‘forefinger’ 
===== PAGE 26 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 26
The gloss of a left-peripheral infix precedes the gloss of its host, the gloss of a right-peripheral 
infix follows it (Bickel et al. 2004). 
 
4.3 Reduplication 
Reduplicative segments may have the same kinds of grammatical functions as affixes, and 
sometimes they are formally not easily distinguished from affixes. Therefore they must be 
glossed just like affixes, but at the same time they must be formally distinguished from 
affixes. This is achieved by providing the same kind of gloss for them as for grammatical 
formatives, but separating them by a tilde (R19; Bickel et al. 2004), as in E11f. 
E11. gé~graph-a 
A
GR PRF~write-1.SG 
‘I have written’ 
E12. k’áa~k’as 
YM INTNS~bad 
‘wicked’ 
 
4.4 Other morphological processes 
Morphological processes not covered by the above conventions comprise transfixation, 
internal modification, metathesis, subtraction and suprasegmental processes (cf. ch. V III). 
These are like infixation in not being peripheral to the base, but they differ from it in that the 
grammatical meaning in question is not associated with a single string of segments which, if 
subtracted, leaves the base. The notation recommended here distinguishes them from the other 
morphological processes, but not from each other. Such a morpheme can hardly be signaled in 
the L1 representation. In the I
MG, its gloss follows the gloss of the base, separated by a 
backslash (R20). An example of transfixation is the Arabic broken plural, as in bujūt 
(house\PL) ‘houses’. Apophony, metaphony, e.g. German säng-e (sing\IRR-1/3.SG) ‘I/he would 
sing’, and tone shift, as in YM. hàats’ (beat\INTROV) ‘beat (unspec. object)’ are treated in the 
same way. 
 
4.5 Semantic and grammatical features 
The gloss of a grammatical morph often consists of a set of symbols. They are separated by a 
period, as in Germ. Tisch-es ‘table-
GEN.SG’ (R21). The same rule applies in the situation 
mentioned in section 3.3, where an L1 lexeme is glossed by more than one L2 words. These, 
too, are separated by a period, as in Germ. fabulier-en (invent.stories-INF). 
Lexical stems fall into grammatical classes. Noun stems, for instance, have gender; 
verb stems have valence. If such grammatical categories are covert, this information is not 
deducible from (the gloss of) the lexical meaning. It therefore makes sense to represent it in 
the gloss of the stem. The Latin example puellae (girl.F:NOM.PL) of section 2.1 shows how 
this may be done for gender. The same would be possible with transitivity. Instead of YM. 
hats’-ah (beat-CMPL) as shown in section 2.1, we might put ‘beat. TR-CMPL’. It does not seem 
necessary to have a rule here beyond R3 and R21. 
===== PAGE 27 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 27
The period between values of different morphological categories cumulated in one 
morpheme is dispensable between person, gender and number, provided the resulting letter 
sequence is unambiguous. Thus, Latin lauda-mus may be glossed as praise( PRS.IND)-1.PL or 
praise(PRS.IND)-1PL. 
Sometimes the period is used as a general-purpose symbol to hide the lack of an 
analysis, including the function of the colon as regulated by R13. This is not recommendable 
if – as is usually the case – the period is also used in the function regulated by R21. Given 
R21, the notation Lat. orant ‘pray.3.PL’ would imply that orant consists of a single morph. An 
IMG should at least make the distinction between a morph and a grammatical feature of a 
morph. In other words, if the author knows the number and order of morphs in an L1 form, 
then he should indicate them. If the author does not even know so much, he should probably 
not use the example. Still, in emergency situations, R23 may be viable, which allows for 
linking I MG elements by an underscore without any implications for L1 morphological 
structure. This would allow for putting orant ‘they_pray’. 
 
4.6 Composite categories 
Two cross-reference categories may share a morphological slot, as in E13.  
E13. Kamak kan-bolk-bukka-n      ke. 
MAY good  SBJ.2&OBJ.1-country-show-NPST your 
 ‘It is good that you will show me your country.’ (Evans 1997:400) 
In principle, the case is analogous to one declension suffix showing both number and case. 
However, when actor and undergoer cross-reference is cumulated in one morpheme, sticking 
to R21 would lead to obscurity. Instead, information on the two dependents should be 
separated by '&' or by '>' (R22). The ‘greater than’ sign has two advantages here: it is iconic, 
and it dispenses with the use of function labels such as ‘
SBJ, OBJ, ACR, UGR’ (simply ‘2>1’ in 
E13). It has the disadvantage that the same symbol is used for discontinuous and infixed 
material, which may lead to conflicts. 
This case must be kept distinct from a portmanteau morph, viz. when two cross-
reference categories that generally each have their own morphological slot fuse in one morph 
occasionally. There R13 applies. 
 
4.7 Constituency 
The IMG abides at the level of morphology. The text may be represented at other levels in 
addition, if this is desired. Still, I MGs are used most frequently in publications on syntax, 
where not only morphological, but also syntactic properties of the examples are at stake. Very 
often it suffices to identify one constituent in the example, for instance the prepositional 
phrase or the relative clause that is the subject of analysis. Then no harm is done, but on the 
contrary the reader is helped in scanning the example, if constituency is shown by brackets. 
Thus in E14, the relative clause is identified by the bracketing. 
E14. le  máak  chowak u   ho'l-e' 
YM DEF person [long  POSS.3 head]-D3  
‘the person who has long hair’ 
===== PAGE 28 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 28
In principle, this may be done either in the L1 line or in the I MG (it need not be repeated in 
both). However, since the I MG line is the one that contains the grammatical analysis, the 
bracketing seems more natural there (R24). In principle, an IMG may even be combined with a 
labeled bracketing; but above some rudimentary level, this will soon lead to illegibility. 
5 Typographic conventions 
IMGs obey a number of typographic conventions all of which aim at facilitating the reader’s 
task. First, if there are more lines of linguistic representation (cf. section 1.3), for instance one 
of syntactic constituency or lines that shows syntactic, semantic or pragmatic functions of the 
construction, then these follow the I MG, as stipulated in R25. Second, words of L1 are left-
aligned with their glosses (R27). Further, since IMGs are generally longer than the L1 text they 
render, they are printed in a smaller type-face (R28), and grammatical category labels are 
abbreviated (R29). 
Here is an example of a publication which does not observe these rules (Monod-Becquelin 
1976:138 on Trumai): 
šyšyk letsi k’ate šy hai-ts šyšy-ka-ke 
“avec du piment, je rends le poisson piquant (regarde)” 
// piment / avec / poisson / actualis. / 1ère pers.erg.  / piquant- causatif-marque 
d’adjectivisation // 
Furthermore, since I
MG lines are not sentences, the relevant orthographic rules of punctuation, 
initial capitalization and syllabification do not apply (R30 and R32). 
6 Summary 
Instead of a prose summary, a list of the rules and symbols proposed follows: 
 
6.1 Rules 
Glossing principles: 
R1. There is a symbol, or a configuration of symbols, in the I MG if and only if there is a 
morph in the L1 text that it corresponds to. 
R2. The I MG represents morphemes, not allomorphs. Therefore, the gloss of a 
grammatically conditioned allomorph does not contain the grammatical category that 
conditions it. 
R3. An I MG should be as precise and detailed as tolerable. The limits of precision and 
detail are defined by practical considerations of complexity and intelligibility. 
R4. There is a biunique mapping of L1 morphemes onto glosses. 
R5. a. An L1 lexeme is glossed by L2 lexemes. 
b. L1 stems are glossed by L2 stems. 
R6. The gloss of a grammatical morph is a configuration of grammatical category labels 
each of which represents the value of a grammatical category. A grammatical morph 
===== PAGE 29 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 29
should not be glossed by an L2 bound morpheme. It may be glossed by an L2 word if 
that has the same function as the L1 morph. 
R7. Homonymy is resolved in the IMG, polysemy is not. 
R8. The gloss of a polysemous L1 item should represent, in the order of decreasing 
preference, 
•= its Gesamtbedeutung, 
•= its Grundbedeutung, 
•= the set of its senses, 
•= its contextual sense. 
Boundary symbols: 
R9. Apart from R30, there is a boundary symbol of a certain type in the I MG if there is a 
corresponding boundary symbol in the L1 text. More strictly, there is a blank, hyphen, 
plus, equal sign, angled bracket and tilde in an I MG if and only if there is an identical 
symbol in the L1 text corresponding to it. 
R10. A word boundary is shown by a blank ( ). 
R11. Two successive orthographic L1 words which must be glossed by one L2 word are 
linked by an underscore (_). 
R12. A morpheme boundary is shown by a hyphen (-). 
R13. A morpheme boundary not shown in the L1 text is indicated by a colon (:) in the I MG. 
This applies also to portmanteau morphs. 
R14. A boundary in a compound stem, and possibly also in a derived stem, may be shown 
by a plus sign (+). 
R15. A clitic boundary may be shown by an equal sign (=). 
R16. A gloss that corresponds to no element of the L1 text is enclosed in round parentheses 
(()). 
R17. The string enclosed in a discontinuous L1 item P1 ... P2 is enclosed in inverted angled 
brackets (P1> ... <P2). In the I
MG, P1 receives a gloss enclosed in angled brackets; P2 
is not glossed. 
R18. An infix is enclosed in angled brackets both in the L1 text and in the IMG. The gloss of 
a left-peripheral infix precedes the gloss of its host, the gloss of a right-peripheral 
infix follows it. 
R19. A reduplicative segment is glossed like an affix (i.e. by a configuration of 
grammatical category labels) and separated from its source by a tilde (~). 
R20. A grammatical meaning expressed by a non-segmentable morphological process 
(transfixation, internal modification, metathesis, subtraction, suprasegmental process) 
is not signaled in the L1 representation. Its gloss follows the gloss of the base, 
separated by a backslash (\). 
R21. Elements of an I MG that represent components of one L1 morph are separated by a 
period (.). 
===== PAGE 30 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 30
R22. As a special case of R21, components of one L1 cross-reference morph that have 
distinct reference are separated by the ampersand (‘&’) or, where no conflict with R17 
and R18 arises, by the greater-than sign (‘>’). 
R23. An L1 word form whose morphological structure is not represented in the I MG may be 
represented by a set of symbols whose status as representing morphs or features is 
ignored and whose sequence has no implications as to L1. Such symbols that jointly 
correspond to an L1 word form are joined by an underscore (_). 
R24. If constituent structure is to be displayed, square brackets ([]) can be inserted in the 
I
MG. 
Typographic conventions: 
R25. The IMG is in the line immediately below the corresponding L1 text line. 
R26. The distance between an L1 text line and the line immediately preceding it is greater 
than that between it and the IMG line belonging to it. 
R27. Each L1 word form is left-flush with the L2 word or complex of symbols rendering it. 
If such an arrangement is impossible, the following is a minimum requirement: If there 
is, in an I
MG, an equivalent to an element of an L1 text line, it is contained in the line 
immediately below that line. 
R28. The IMG is printed in a smaller type-face than the L1 text. If this is impossible, then at 
least grammatical category labels are in small capitals. 
R29. Grammatical terms appearing in IMGs are abbreviated, without a period at the end, and 
set in (small) capitals. 
R30. There is no punctuation in an I MG. Parentheses including optional material in the L1 
line are not repeated in the IMG, either (cf. R16). 
R31. There is no sentence-initial uppercase in an IMG. 
R32. There is no syllabication either in the L1 line or in the IMG. 
 
===== PAGE 31 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 31
6.2 Symbols 
L1 IMG meaning 
x y x y word boundary between x and y 
x_y z x and y are two orthographic words, but one lexical word 
z x_y x and y jointly render z without morphological analysis 
x-y x-y morpheme boundary between x and y 
x+y x+y x and y form a compound or a derivative stem 
x=y x=y x and y are joined by clisis 
z x/y x and y are alternative meanings of ambiguous z 
xy x:y morpheme boundary between x and y not shown in the L1 text 
 (x) x does not have a significans in the L1 text 
a<x>b ab<x> x is an infix in ab 
x>a<y <xy>a xy is a circumfix around a 
z x\y y is a non-segmentable morphological process on lexeme x  
z x.y x and y are semantic or grammatical components of z 
z x&y 
(x>y) 
x and y are grammatical components of z cross-referencing two 
different dependents 
x [x] x is a syntactic constituent 
x [x]Y x is a syntactic constituent of category Y 
===== PAGE 32 =====
Lehmann, Interlinear morphemic glosses 32
References 
Specialized literature 
Bickel, Balthasar & Comrie, Bernard & Haspelmath, Martin 2004, The Leipzig glossing rules. 
Conventions for interlinear morpheme by morpheme glosses.  Leipzig: Max-Planck-Institut für 
Evolutionäre Anthropologie. 
Lehmann, Christian 1982, "Directions for interlinear morphemic translations." Folia Linguistica  
16:199-224. 
Lehmann, Christian 2004, “Data in linguistics”. Linguistic Review 21/2:000-000. 
Lehmann, Christian & Bakker, Dik & Dahl, Östen & Siewierska, Anna 1994, EUROTYP Guidelines. 
Strasbourg: Fondation Européenne de la Science (EUROTYP Working Papers) (2. ed.). 
Lieb, Hans-Heinrich & Drude, Sebastian 2000, Advanced glossing: A language documentation format. 
Berlin: Technische Universität (Working Paper). 
Simons, Gary F. & Versaw, Larry 1988, How to use IT. A guide to interlinear text processing. Dallas, 
Tx.: Summer Institute of Linguistics (Revised edition, Version 1.1). 
 
Sources of examples 
Bloomfield, Leonard 1933, Language. New York etc.: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Evans, Nicholas 1997, “Role or cast? Noun incorporation and complex predicates in Mayali.” Alsina, 
Alex & Bresnan, Joan & Sells, Peter (eds.) Complex Predicates . Stanford: CSLI Publications; 
379–430. 
Finck, Franz Nikolaus 1909, Die Haupttypen des Sprachbaus.  Leipzig: B.G. Teubner (Nachdr. d. 3., 
unveränd. Aufl.: Darmstadt: Wiss. Buchgesellschaft, 1965). 
Fortescue, Michael 1984, West Greenlandic.  London etc.: Croom Helm (Croom Helm Descriptive 
Grammars). 
Gabelentz, Hans Conon von der 1861, "Über das Passivum. Eine sprachvergleichende Abhandlung." 
Abhandlungen der philologisch-historischen Classe der Königlich-Sächsischen Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften 8:449-546. 
Monod-Becquelin, Aurore 1976, "Classes verbales et construction ergative en trumai." Amérindia 
1:117-143. 
Woodbury, Hanni 1975, “Onondaga noun incorporation: some notes on the interdependence of syntax 
and semantics.” IJAL 41:10-20. 
 
Christian Lehmann 
University of Erfurt 
 