
===== PAGE 1 =====
591
Cosmopolitan and 
Vernacular in History
Sheldon Pollock
F
ew things seem to us as natural as the multiplicity of vernacular languages that
different peoples use for making sense of life through texts, that is, for making
literature. And few things seem as unnatural as their abandonment and gradual
disappearance in the present. In fact, literary language loss is often viewed as part
of a more general reduction of cultural diversity, one considered as dangerous as
the reduction of biological diversity to which it is often compared. The homoge-
nization of culture today, of which language loss is one aspect, seems without
precedent in human history, at least for the scope, speed, and manner in which
changes are taking place. 
This commonsense view of the world needs two important qualiﬁcations.
First, the vernacular ways of being that we see vanishing everywhere were them-
selves created over time. These are not primeval ways of autochthons, for autoch-
thons (like the Spartoi of Thebes, “the sown people” born from the dragon teeth
planted by Cadmus) do not exist outside their own mythical self-representation.
Second, by the very fact of their creation, the new vernaculars replaced a range
of much older cultural practices. These earlier practices, which seemed to belong
to everywhere in general and nowhere in particular, afﬁliated their users to a
larger world rather than a smaller place. They were, in a sense to be argued out in
Public Culture 12(3): 591–625
Copyright © 2000 by Duke University Press
I am grateful to Benedict Anderson for his meticulous and constructively contentious reading 
of the essay. Homi Bhabha, Carol A. Breckenridge, Dipesh Chakrabarty, Caitrin Lynch, and Mica
Pollock helped me sharpen a number of the arguments and bear no responsibility for those that have
remained dull.
F
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 591
===== PAGE 2 =====
this essay, cosmopolitan practices. These great transformations in the course of
the last two millennia—from the old cosmopolitan to the vernacular, and from
the vernacular to the new and disquieting cosmopolitan of today—resulted from
choices made by people at different times and places, for very complex reasons.
Studying the history of such choices may have something important, perhaps
even urgent, to tell us about choices available to us in the future. 
In earlier work I have studied the period following the old cosmopolitan
epoch, which I called the vernacular millennium.
1 This began in southern Asia
and western Europe with remarkable simultaneity in the early second millen-
nium, and it developed with equally striking parallels over the following ﬁve cen-
turies. I say “began” emphatically: vernacular literary cultures were initiated by
the conscious decisions of writers to reshape the boundaries of their cultural uni-
verse by renouncing the larger world for the smaller place, and they did so in full
awareness of the signiﬁcance of their decision. New, local ways of making cul-
ture—with their wholly historical and factitious local identities—and, concomi-
tantly, new ways of ordering society and polity came into being, replacing the
older translocalism. These developments in culture and power are historically
linked, at the very least by the fact that using a new language for communicating
literarily to a community of readers and listeners can consolidate if not create
that very community, as both a sociotextual and a political formation. 
While the literary-cultural processes of this reshaping are remarkably similar
in southern Asia and western Europe, the political logics they followed appear to
have differed fundamentally. In Europe, vernacularization accompanied and
enabled the production of the nation-state; in India, it accompanied and enabled
the production of a political form we may neutrally call the vernacular polity, in
order to signal its difference. In both worlds, however, vernacularization helped
initiate an early-modern era, each again marked by its speciﬁc type of modernity.
And it is only now for the ﬁrst time, when this epoch seems to be drawing to a
close as vernacular modes of cultural and political being are everywhere coming
under powerful pressures from an altogether new universalizing order of culture-
power (call it globalization, or liberalization, or Americanization), that we may
begin to conceive of this past history as a whole and make some sense of it for
cultural and political theory.
I would like here to elaborate on these earlier arguments by situating the ver-
Public Culture
592
1. Sheldon Pollock, “India in the Vernacular Millennium: Literary Culture and Polity 1000–
1500,” in Early Modernities, ed. Shmuel Eisenstadt, Wolfgang Schluchter, and Björn Wittrock, special
issue of Daedalus 127, no. 3 (1998): 41–74. 
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 592
===== PAGE 3 =====
nacular millennium within a comparative-historical account of the cosmopoli-
tanisms that preceded it. These, too, comprised forms of identity that reveal
themselves as produced and entirely provisional; they are located securely in
time and in the choices made by the producers of culture to participate in new
frames of reference, routes of circulation, and kinds of community. And each had
its own speciﬁc political logic. My concerns will be, ﬁrst, with tracing the paral-
lels between these cosmopolitan formations, as well as the dramatic differences
that become perceptible when we place them side by side; and, second, with con-
sidering the ways they may have contributed to shaping the vernacular varieties
that replaced them (whose histories, for their part, I can only brieﬂy summarize
here). Very different cosmopolitan and vernacular practices have existed in the
past, and these may have important implications for future practices in the face of
what often seems to be the single, desperate choice we are offered: between, on
the one hand, a national vernacularity dressed in the frayed period costume of
violent revanchism and bent on preserving difference at all costs and, on the
other, a clear-cutting, strip-mining multinational cosmopolitanism that is bent, at
all costs, on eliminating it.
Let me take a moment to explain how and why I proceed as I do in my histor-
ical analysis of cosmopolitan and vernacular ways of being and the kinds of cul-
tural and political belonging to which they have related, as well as my purpose in
trying to make sense of this history. First, my intention here is to think about cos-
mopolitanism and vernacularism as action rather than idea, as something people
do rather than something they declare, as practice rather than proposition (least
of all, philosophical proposition). This enables us to see that some people in the
past have been able to be cosmopolitan or vernacular without directly professing
either, perhaps even while ﬁnding it impossible rationally to justify either. By
contrast, the attempt to vindicate cosmopolitanism or vernacularism—the pro-
duction of the very discourse on the universal or the particular—seems to entail
an objectiﬁcation and abstraction, and their associated political practices, that
have made the cosmopolitan so often take on the character of domination and the
vernacular, that of inevitability.
Second, the speciﬁc practices I have in mind are those of literary culture, by
which I mean most simply how people do things with texts: writing, reciting,
reading, copying, printing, and circulating texts. These may be expressive, discur-
sive, or political texts, but I am interested at present, above all, in the ﬁrst kind.
For purposes of our discussion here, cosmopolitan and vernacular can be taken
as modes of literary (and intellectual, and political) communication directed
toward two different audiences, whom lay actors know full well to be different.
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
593
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 593
===== PAGE 4 =====
The one is unbounded and potentially inﬁnite in extension; the other is practically
finite and bounded by other ﬁnite audiences, with whom, through the very dynamic
of vernacularization, relations of ever-increasing incommunication come into
being.
2 We can think of this most readily as a distinction in communicative
capacity and concerns between a language that travels far and one that travels 
little. 
Doing things with texts, the practices of literary culture, may seem a long way
from the desperate choice mentioned above. And yet the communication of liter-
ary culture importantly shapes the social and political sensibilities that make
such choices possible. Literature, in particular, constitutes an especially sensitive
gauge of sentiments of belonging: creating or consuming literature meant for
large worlds or small places is a declaration of afﬁliation with that world or
place. The production and circulation of literature, accordingly, are utterly unlike
the production and circulation of things. The universalization of particular tech-
nologies or the particularization of universal ones that characterize a dominant
form of contemporary globalization carries no hint of belonging; the practices of
literary culture, by contrast, are practices of attachment.
3
As for the “literary” in particular, let me stress that this was no open category
in the worlds and places under consideration here, but something reducible and
reduced to a theoretical and practical system of differences from all other kinds
of texts, a system of conventionality and intentionality. Although people who
think about such things now can perceive the literary in all sorts of texts and all
sorts of texts in the literary, in these earlier systems not everything could be liter-
ature and literature could not be everything. At the beginning of the ﬁrst millen-
nium, Sanskrit and Latin writers had yet to read Derrida, and so they failed 
to grasp that there is no way to identify the literary object, that literature has 
no essence, that the documentary is irreducibly rhetorical. Quite the contrary,
Sanskrit literary theorists were true essentialists in their search for what they
called the “self” of poetry. If they failed to agree on what it was, they had no
doubt it existed. Accordingly, the instability of textual types that to our eyes 
may be phenomenologically obvious was to theirs ethno-epistemologically
Public Culture
594
2. On the important idea of incommunication and its history (exempliﬁed in the case of Bangla
and Oriya), see Sudipta Kaviraj, “Writing, Speaking, Being: Language and the Historical Formation
of Identities in India,” in Nationalstaat und Sprachkonﬂikt in Süd- und Südostasien , ed. Dagmar 
Hellmann-Rajanayagam and Dietmar Rothermund (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1992), 25–65, especially 26.
3. See Roland Robertson, “The Universalism-Particularism Issue,” in Globalization: Social The-
ory and Global Culture (London: Sage, 1992), 102.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 594
===== PAGE 5 =====
impossible—and therefore historically irrelevant to us except as a second-order
problem.4
Third, I consider the cosmopolitan and the vernacular comparatively and his-
torically, and I axiomatically reject the narrow European analytical and temporal
frameworks that are usually thought to contain them. The absence nowadays of
any interest in the macrohistorical reconstruction and analysis of these matters is
little short of astonishing. No doubt it is another consequence of what Norbert
Elias once identiﬁed as the social science “retreat into the present”—this despite
the fact that social science is premised on a narrative of the pre-present, espe-
cially the pre-modern, that is still only partially written.
5
The practices of literary communication that actualize modes of cosmopolitan
and vernacular belonging to be examined here are those of southern Asia and
western Europe. And since the analytical framework is comparative and the tem-
poral framework is vast, we need to think in terms of elementary practices and to
be drastically schematic and shamelessly reductive. There exists a remarkable
parallel in the historical development of literary communication in these two
worlds, where a long period of cosmopolitan literary production was followed by
a vernacularity whose subsequent millennium-long ascendancy now everywhere
shows signs of collapse. This historical symmetry, along with a very wide range
of formal congruences, distinguishes the southern Asian and western European
cases sharply from others. Contrast, for example, the wide sphere of Chinese lit-
erary communication, where the vernacular transformation in places like Viet-
nam or Korea occurred so late as to appear to be the project of a derivative mod-
ernization.
6 That said, profound differences are to be found in the ideological
forms and in the modalities of social and political action to which these commu-
nicative practices relate and which they underwrote. One world presents—and
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
595
4. For Derrida’s unhistorical essentialization of the nonessentialized nature of literature, see his
Acts of Literature, ed. Derek Atridge (London: Routledge, 1992), especially 40–49.
5. See Norbert Elias, “The Retreat of Sociologists into the Present,” in Modern German Sociol-
ogy, ed. V olker Meja, Dieter Misgeld, and Nico Stehr (New York: Columbia University Press, 1987),
150–72. The greater part of what is purveyed as the “pre-modern” in a work like Anthony Giddens’s
The Consequences of Modernity (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990), ﬁnds little support, and
much contradiction, in the historical record of southern Asia.
6. Sejong’s demotic reforms in Korea in the mid–ﬁfteenth century, and the development of 
chu-nom script in Vietnam around the same time, did not produce anything remotely comparable to
what we ﬁnd in ﬁfteenth-century southern Asia or western Europe. Instead, the innovations in both
Korea and Vietnam appear to have been largely instruments designed for the promulgation of neo-
Confucianism. Nor does anything of the same cultural or political order pertain to the “vernacular”
novel in China, where vernacularization of the sort considered here never occurred.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 595
===== PAGE 6 =====
here are two sweeping generalizations for which some substantiation will be pro-
vided in what follows—what we may identify as a coercive cosmopolitanism and
a vernacularism of necessity, where participation in larger or smaller worlds is
compelled by the state or demanded by the blood; the other world presents a vol-
untaristic cosmopolitanism and a vernacularism of accommodation, where very
different principles are at work inviting afﬁliation to these cultural-political
orders.
Just as remarkable as the underdevelopment of macrohistorical compara-
tivism is the fact that analyses of cosmopolitanism are themselves rarely cos-
mopolitan. The widespread ahistoricism no doubt contributes to this, as does the
tendency to concentrate on pronouncements rather than practices. Discussion
typically takes place on a highly localized conceptual terrain and in a very ver-
nacular idiom constituted by European culture. But cosmopolitan is not necessar-
ily to be equated with a cultural-political form of universal reason, let alone with
a universal church or empire, any more than vernacular is to be taken to be syn-
onymous with national. On the contrary, as I have already suggested, it has his-
torically been possible to be the one or the other without asserting the compul-
sion of the national-cultural through talk of mother-tongue and mother’s milk
—of language and blood—or offering spurious universalizations of this or that
particular rationality or deity or power. 
As important as it is not to reify the cosmopolitan or the vernacular by fore-
grounding doctrines while ignoring actions, we must guard against ﬁlling either
category in advance with any particular social or political content. My whole
point here is to suggest how variable this content has been and may still be. Yet it
is no easy thing to think outside the Euro-forms, for they inevitably prestructure
for us the content of both the cosmopolitan and the vernacular. The very termi-
nology we use imprisons us, assuming for the moment that we believe etymology
is truth and predetermines the thought even of the etymologically ignorant. The
term cosmopolitan presupposes a great deal, while at the same time it ironically
undercuts its own logic: it assumes the universal intelligibility and applicability of
a very particular and privileged mode of political identity, citizenship in the polis
or Greek city-state. The term vernacular, for its part, refers to a very particular
and unprivileged mode of social identity—the language of the verna or house-
born slave of Republican Rome—and is thus hobbled by its own particularity,
since there is no reason to believe that every vernacular is the idiom of the humil-
iated demanding vindication. 
All this is reasonably well known, but the constraints remain considerable,
and some scholars have tried to ﬁnd ways out. The alternatives are scarcely less
Public Culture
596
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 596
===== PAGE 7 =====
problematic, however. Take the binary “philologies of community” and “philolo-
gies of contact.”7 The troublesome assumptions here are not hard to identify. For
one thing, community is posited as existing primevally and prior to all interac-
tion; for another, universalizing forms of culture are implicitly supposed to affect
community from the outside (through “contact”). Communities, however, are
never uncreated but rather create themselves through a process of interaction—
emulation, differentiation, and so on—with non-community, or, rather, with
what by that very process becomes non-community. Any claim to indigenousness
thus becomes simply evidence of historical ignorance of the source—or suppres-
sion of the source—from which the indigenous has been borrowed. Global cul-
tural forms, for their part, are generated from within communities themselves,
and thus only in a restricted sense stand outside some of them. Instead of cos-
mopolitan and vernacular, therefore, or any one of their conceptual derivatives, I
would actually prefer to use terms of Indian cultures (Kannada, for example, or
Telugu) that make far fewer assumptions—terms, for example, that refer simply
to cultural practices of the great “Way” and those of “Place” ( marga and deshi,
respectively). But, in fact, as we will see, those cultures’ own understanding of
these terms signiﬁcantly restricts their domain of reference.
Last, one needs to ask clearly and unambiguously why we should even bother
to think historically about these matters. For this hardly seems meaningful any
longer in a world where last week’s news seems to be history enough, and where
historical thinking has anyway lost its innocence to ideology critique, discourse
analysis, or—perhaps the worst predator of all—boredom. The problem of why
we want historical knowledge has a degree of urgency directly proportionate to
our awareness of the fact that the past is always written from location in the pres-
ent. In this case, however, it seems especially pressing since we are dealing with
a question that, after all, we raise because it is a matter not of the past or even of
the present but of the future—a matter of choices yet to be made about self and
other, freedom and necessity, even war and peace. Given all this, it strikes me as
unhelpful to say (as a leading intellectual historian of early modern Europe puts
it in a recent analysis of the history of liberty) that our historiographical purpose
should be simply to “uncover the often neglected riches of our intellectual heri-
tage and display them once more to view,” holding ourselves “aloof from enthu-
siasm and indignation alike.”
8 The continual invocation of this sentiment of dis-
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
597
7. Ulf Hannerz, “Culture between Center and Periphery: Toward a Macroanthropology,” Ethnos
3–4 (1989): 210–11. 
8. Quentin Skinner, Liberty before Liberalism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998),
118.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 597
===== PAGE 8 =====
passion since Tacitus ﬁrst gave expression to it makes it no more true or practica-
ble, or anything more than a preemptive strike against critics. Our enthusiasm
and indignation shape our argument willy-nilly. One can hardly doubt, in fact,
that the neo-Roman theory of positive freedom that the historian has so valuably
reconstructed for us is the theory he prefers. And it may reasonably be asked
whether such passions do more to undermine historical argument the more they
are suppressed. 
We must come clean about our purposes, and the more modest these pur-
poses are, the better. There is nothing very problematic or theoretically interest-
ing about examining the past to see how people have acted and trying to under-
stand the acts with bad consequences and the acts with good. We do this even
though we know that the historical knowledge derived from such examination
carries no guarantee of any kind that better practices must necessarily follow. A
history of the cosmopolitan and vernacular might therefore seek—enthusiasti-
cally and indignantly—to compare past choices, when there have been choices,
in order to inform future ones. Such choices will always be responses to condi-
tions of politics and culture far more complex than any single account can hope
to capture, conditions that sometimes seem to exceed the very possibility of
intentional and knowledgeable action. But if intentions and knowledge count,
good intentions are better than bad, and knowledge is better than ignorance.
Shankara, the eighth-century Indian thinker, put it with unarguable simplicity:
“Two persons may perform the same act, both the one who understands and the
one who does not. But understanding and ignorance are different, and what one
performs with understanding becomes far stronger than what one performs in
ignorance.”
9
The pertinence of my long-term and comparative historical analysis of literary
practices and the meaningfulness of past cosmopolitan and vernacular choices to
future ones will become more intelligible if we reformulate them in a more
familiar idiom. This I try to provide in the latter part of this essay by examining
how Antonio Gramsci took up these questions in the 1930s. I then brieﬂy con-
sider how several recent attempts to rehabilitate vernacularism from the left may
be illuminated by this long-term earlier history. To these, in conclusion, are jux-
taposed the views of some postcolonial thinkers who—beneﬁciaries again of a
historical tradition, but one very different from that of Europe—seem to me to
suggest possible escape routes from the dilemma confronting us in the disparate
Public Culture
598
9. K. S. Agase, ed., Chandogyopanisat with the Commentary of Shankara (Poona: Anandashrama
Press, 1902), 1.1.10 (my translation).
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 598
===== PAGE 9 =====
cosmopolitan-vernacular conﬂicts (the case of Serbia being paradigmatic) that
closed out the second millennium.
✦✦✦
If we conceive of the practice of cosmopolitanism as literary communication that
travels far, indeed, without obstruction from any boundaries at all, and, more
important, that thinks of itself as unbounded, unobstructed, unlocated—writing
of the great Way, instead of the small Place—the world of writers and readers
that Sanskrit produced, on the one hand, and Latin on the other, are remarkably
similar.
10 In addition to their universalist spatiality, the two languages are com-
parable in their temporal development as written codes for what both conceptual-
ized as this-worldly ( laukika, saeculare) communication after centuries of the
liturgical, magical, and generally supramundane textuality (and largely oral tex-
tuality) to which they had restricted themselves.
A little before the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium, after centuries of such
geographical and discursive restriction, the two languages embarked on an extra-
ordinary process of spatial dissemination and expressive elaboration. Within four
or ﬁve centuries, Sanskrit would be found in use for literary and political dis-
course in an area that extended from today’s Afghanistan to Java and from Sri
Lanka to Nepal. There was nothing unusual about ﬁnding a Chinese traveler
studying Sanskrit grammar in Sumatra in the seventh century, an intellectual
from Sri Lanka writing Sanskrit literary theory in the northern Deccan in the
tenth, or Khmer princes composing Sanskrit political poetry for the magniﬁcent
pillars of Mebon and Pre Rup in Angkor in the twelfth. Near the end of the cos-
mopolitan epoch, the poet Bilhana—who had himself traveled in search of
patronage through the subcontinent from Kashmir to Gujarat to Banaras and
south to Karnataka—could announce that “there is no village or country, no cap-
ital city or forest region, no pleasure garden or school where learned and igno-
rant, young and old, male and female alike do not read my poems and shake with
pleasure.”
11 His boast may have exaggerated the social circulation of his work,
but he was describing the universe for which Sanskrit poets and intellectuals had
been writing for the preceding thousand years. 
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
599
10. This and the following section draw on evidence and argument from a book I am now com-
pleting, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit and Power 300–1500 , where I
acknowledge the complexity of these questions in a way that is impossible in a short essay such as
this one.
11. Vishwanath Shastri Bharadvaj, ed., Vikramankadevacarita of Bilhana, 3 vols. (Varanasi: Sam-
skrit Sahitya Research Committee of the Banaras Hindu University, 1964), 18.89 (my translation).
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 599
===== PAGE 10 =====
Half a world away, Latin had been disseminated across an equally vast space,
one that at the height of the empire extended on the west from Britannia, His-
pania, and Mauretania (in north Africa) to Mesopotamia and Palestina in the
east. And in places as diverse as Gallia, Lusitania, Tripolitana, Egypt, Cap-
podocia, and Syria, writers were producing literature destined for circulation
throughout this space.
12 Horace could claim readers for his odes in Dacia and on
the Black Sea, and Martial could brag that his work traveled as far as Britannia
and that in towns on the Rhone in Gallia men young and old, and girls as well,
were reading his epigrams.
13 Unlike Sanskrit literary competence and communi-
cation, which remained continuous throughout the ﬁrst millennium, this grand
model of Latinity would be disrupted (by the movements of peoples, the destruc-
tion of educational institutions, and the general erosion of linguistic competence)
in the fourth, seventh, and tenth centuries, and attempts to recreate it largely by
state intervention (the Carolingian and Ottonian renewals) would be made again
and again. Otherwise, both the fact and the perception of universality were in the
two cases remarkably analogous. This universality pertained to substance, too, as
well as to space. For what people wrote was derived from similar modes of cul-
tural discipline, care for language, and study of literary canons and masterworks
of systematic thought. In a very literal sense, both Sanskrit and Latin were writ-
ten to be readable across space and through time—as indeed they were.
With this pair of features, however—unbounded spatiotemporal circulation
and normativity in literary and intellectual practice that sought to ensure that cir-
culation—the parallels between the two types of cosmopolitanism end. In all
other respects, they differed as radically as the historical experiences that pro-
duced them. We may begin our brief review of these divergences by restating an
earlier point about terminology. It is striking to note that there is no speciﬁc San-
skrit term aside from the “Way” itself (which has narrow application to the world
of literary style) for referring to what, as a result, I have named the Sanskrit cos-
mopolis.
14 Unlike the spatial category orbis terrarum and the literary and cultural
Public Culture
600
12. In the eastern part of this world, Latin had to contend with another cosmopolitan language,
namely Greek, which would have its own complex interactions with the Slavic vernaculars in the later
Byzantine empire. See, for example, Byzantium and the Slavs in Letters and Culture , ed. Ihor 
Sevcenke (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute; Naples: Instituto Universitario
Orientale, 1991). 
13. For Martial, see Paul Veyne, “Humanitas,” in The Romans, ed. Andrea Giardina (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994), 365, and William Harris, Ancient Literacy (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1989), 227. Harris also cites Horace on p. 224.
14. Sheldon Pollock, “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, a.d. 300–1300: Transculturation, Vernaculariza-
tion, and the Question of Ideology,” in The Ideology and Status of Sanskrit in South and Southeast
Asia, ed. J. E. M. Houben (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996), 197–247.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 600
===== PAGE 11 =====
category Latinitas, which both appear at the beginning of Latin’s cosmopolitan
career (with Cicero) and become increasingly prominent in imperial Rome, there
is no self-generated descriptor for either the spatial or the cultural sphere that
Sanskrit created and inhabited.
15 Samskrti, the classicizing term adopted for
translating “culture” in many modern South Asian languages, is itself unattested
in Sanskrit in this sense. The fact that Sanskrit never sought to theorize its own
universality is consistent with its entire historical character as a cosmopolitan
formation, an alternative form of cosmopolitanism in which “here,” instead of
being equated with “everywhere,” is equated with “nowhere in particular.”
Latin traveled where it did as the language of a conquest state, ﬁrst Roman
and later (through what Claude Nicolet has called the “nostalgia of ecumenism”)
in the imperial recreations under Charlemagne and Otto, but also as the language
of a missionizing and eventually a conquest church.
16 The state for which Latin
spoke was centralized and militarized; it was standardized (in terms of such
things as currency and law), and rationalized, with populations enumerated for
taxation and territory delimited by frontiers that could be very concrete indeed
(Hadrian’s wall in northern Britain, now a UNESCO World Heritage tourist site,
was designed as a twelve-foot-high, ten-foot-thick, seventy-ﬁve-mile-long barrier
to “separate the Romans from the barbarians”).
17 To impose its will, the Roman
state employed coercion, taxation, legal machinery, intimidation, and, on occa-
sion, a policy of Romanization in cultural and political behavior, with selective
award of citizenship to incorporate elites from the periphery. 
As for the Latin language itself, wherever it traveled it obliterated what it
found. Italic literary cultures and, later, those of the western provinces (Gallic,
Celtic, Iberian) gave way before the same combination of military victory and
administrative cooptation, with profound and lasting transformations of their
cultural systems. By the end of the ﬁrst century b.c., all languages other than
Latin had disappeared from the inscriptional record of Italy; Gallic and the lan-
guages of Iberia vanished within a couple centuries of conquest; and Celtic
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
601
15. On the history of the concept of Latinitas (“‘Latinness’ . . . and especially the literary style
that marked the high literature of Rome and those who sought to perpetuate it”), see W. Martin
Bloomer, Latinity and Literary Society at Rome (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
1997), 1–2, where the point is also made that Latinitas and orbis terrarum are probably calqued on
Hellenismos and oikoumene in the Greek world. We might also compare, without speculating on their
origins, such later terms as Arabiya and Farsiyat.
16. Claude Nicolet, Space, Geography, and Politics in the Early Roman Empire(Ann Arbor: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, 1991), 33.
17. See De Vita Hadriani of Aelius Spartianus 11.1: murumque per octoginta milia passuum
primus duxit, qui barbaros Romanosque divideret . Available as of July 2000 on-line at http://www.
gmu.edu/departments/ﬂd/CLASSICS/sha.hadr.html.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 601
===== PAGE 12 =====
scarcely was permitted to enter the record at all, even in areas where we know it
long persisted as a medium of oral communication. In North Africa, Punic and
Libyan maintained a documentary existence and oral vitality for some centuries,
but their long-term trajectory conformed to that of every other language that con-
fronted Latin: toward extinction. The Roman Near East (west of the Euphrates)
was, according to Fergus Millar’s recent study, the site of even more dramatic lin-
guistic devastation: Graeco-Roman imperial culture allowed little that preexisted
to outlast it; in fact, only the Jews and the Palmyrenes retained their pre-Roman
script languages.
18
In other areas of life, such as religious practices, there seems to be evidence of
a general indifference to the cultural diversity of conquered peoples, perhaps
even an imperial policy of toleration. But in the domains of both the literary and
the political, Romanization represented what has been called “a sort of decapita-
tion of the conquered culture.”
19 Focusing on such practices of culture and power
rather than on professions of moral commitment thus gives us a rather different
vision of Roman cosmopolitanism from what we might infer from the writings
of, say, the Stoics. These thinkers may have thought themselves to be kosmou
politeis, citizens of the world (though they never actually said so in Latin), but
this seems at least in part owing to the fact that they had been able to transform
the kosmos into their polis, or, rather—as the poet Ovid put it on the eve of
Augustus’s eastern campaign—to transform the orbis into their urbs, the world
into their own city. (Here, incidentally, we ﬁnd the historical correlate of the the-
oretical objection made to a recent account of Stoic cosmopolitanism—offered
as a model for ﬁn-de-millénaire Americans unsympathetic to the so-called
national conversation in which they were being invited to participate—namely,
that it is basically “an invitation to those who are different . . . to become like
us.”)
20 Whoever could not be incorporated into the single Roman city, such as the
Public Culture
602
18. Fergus Millar, The Roman Near East, 31 B.C.–A.D. 337 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1993).
19. Ramsay MacMullen, Changes in the Roman Empire: Essays in the Ordinary (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1990), 32 (see also 62).
20. In “The Occidental Tagore,” Boston Review 19, no. 5 (1994): 22, Lloyd Rudolph’s response to
Martha Nussbaum’s “Patriotism and Cosmopolitanism,” in the same magazine. Her essay has since
been reprinted as For Love of Country: Debating the Limits of Patriotism (Boston: Beacon Press,
1996). The prominence given to classical cosmopolitanism in contemporary discussions seems (to this
lapsed classicist, at any rate) to be much exaggerated. The word kosmopolites, for instance, seems to
occur only in the much-cited (Greek) utterance attributed to Diogenes in Diogenes Laertius’s biogra-
phy, as well as in the work of Philo, the (Greek) Jewish philosopher of Alexandria. Neither the word
itself nor any of its derivatives (nor even cosmopolis) occurs in classical Latin. On Ovid’s (ingens)
orbis in urbe (fuit), a common trope, see Nicolet, Space, Geography, and Politics, 114 and cf. 33.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 602
===== PAGE 13 =====
Parthians (Rome’s eastern enemies), became subject to an imperial political
demonology that provoked no counterexpression of cosmopolitan solidarity from
the Stoics. In the face of such imperial declarations as the one Augustus made in
his last testament (“When foreign peoples could safely be pardoned I have pre-
ferred to preserve rather than to exterminate them”—words written to make
known to foreign peoples Rome’s “powers of collective life and death”), the uni-
versalism the Stoics offered was astonishingly timid indeed.
21
The Sanskrit cosmopolis was also created by action, though not the actions of
a conquest state. It was made, instead, by the circulation of traders, literati, reli-
gious professionals, and freelance adventurers. Coercion, cooptation, juridical
control, and even persuasion are nowhere in evidence. Those who participated in
Sanskrit cosmopolitan culture chose to do so, and could choose to do so. This
was not, of course, a world of absolute free will. In addition to everyday limits on
life chances, traces of archaic ritual restrictions on participation in some dimen-
sion of Sanskrit culture (especially its liturgical side) were preserved far into the
cosmopolitan period. The ambivalence about demotic participation in the San-
skrit cosmopolitan order is effectively captured in a verse found in a thirteenth-
century anthology. It praises the Sanskrit poetry of a simple potter, declaring that
“caste is no constraint for those rendered pure by the Goddess of Speech,” and in
so doing afﬁrms the old restrictions on access to Sanskrit even as it seeks to deny
them.
22 Neither was it a cosmopolis entirely without otherness. According to the
representation of the physical world that found its stable formulation by the ﬁfth
century and was to be transmitted more or less unchanged for a thousand years,
the inhabitable sphere was a vast continent “ever beset at its borders by the
uncivilized.”
23 But here again, boundaries and cultural restrictions had far less
salience in action than they may have had in representation. Contrast the very
different practices in our two cosmopolitan worlds in the early centuries of the
millennium at the point where they nearly met in western Asia. Here Rome
sought to contain if not destroy the region’s inhabitants—demonized by Horace
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
603
21. The judgment on Stoic timidity is Veyne’s, “Humanitas,” 348–50. He cites and discusses
Augustus’s Res gestae 3.2 on 353–54. On the Parthians, see, most recently, Philip Hardie, “Fifth-
Century Athenian and Augustan Images of the Barbarian Other,” Classics Ireland 4 (1997): 46–56;
Hardie calls attention to the long afterlife of the images created here.
22. Embar Krishnamacharya, ed., Suktimuktavali of Jalhana, Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 82 (Bar-
oda: Oriental Institute, 1938), 45.69 (my translation). This is a good example of what Freud called
Verneinung, or the negation whereby repression is simultaneously maintained and denied.
23. Vayupurana 45.82 (my translation); as printed in Willibald Kirfel, Bharatavarsa (Indien):
Textgeschichtliche Darstellung zweier geographischen Purana-Texte nebst Übersetzung (Stuttgart: W.
Kohlhammer, 1931), 36.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 603
===== PAGE 14 =====
as the Parthos feroces, the ferocious Parthians—while at the same time peoples
akin to the Parthians, the Shakas and Kushanas, were migrating into the southern
Asian subcontinent. The Shakas helped create the great cosmopolitan cultural
order of Sanskrit by producing the ﬁrst royal public inscriptions that made use of
the language (and, according to some scholars, by stimulating the invention of
new genres of Sanskrit literature itself); the Kushanas patronized new and highly
inﬂuential forms of Sanskrit Buddhism and established a remarkable trans-
regional political order that would link South and Central Asia.
The space of Sanskrit culture and the power that culture articulated were
never demarcated in any concrete fashion; the populations that inhabited it were
never enumerated; nowhere was a standardization of legal practices sought,
beyond a vague conception of moral order (dharma) to which power was univer-
sally expected to profess its commitment. Nor was any attempt ever made to
transform the world into a metropolitan center; in fact, no recognizable core-
periphery conception ever prevailed in the Sanskrit cosmopolis. Every center was
inﬁnitely reproducible across cosmopolitan space, such that the golden Mount
Meru and the river Ganga could be and were transported everywhere. As a
result, people in tenth-century Angkor or Java could see themselves no less than
people in tenth-century Karnataka as living not in some overseas extension of
India but inside “an Indian world.”
24 The production of this kind of feeling
beyond one’s immediate environment, this vast cosmopolitanization of southern
Asia, has rightly been described as “one of the most impressive instances of
large-scale acculturation in the history of the world.”
25 It comprised the synthe-
sis and circulation of a wide range of cultural and political practices through bor-
rowing, lending, and perhaps even the convergent production of comparable
forms across a vast space. This entire culture-power complex was invented on the
ﬂy, so to speak, which makes the very idea of “Indianization” or “Sanskritiza-
tion” a crude sort of teleology, erroneously presupposing as cause what was only
produced as effect. Moreover, the processes of identity formation, cultural
choice, and political governance involved in the invention of the Sanskrit cos-
mopolitan order can be very unfamiliar to us. Power, for example, was interested
Public Culture
604
24. The phrasing is that of Oliver Wolters, “Khmer ‘Hinduism’ in the Seventh Century,” Early
South East Asia: Essays in Archaeology, History and Historical Geography , ed. R. B. Smith and 
W. Watson (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979), 438. The uncentered world of Sanskrit has
quite archaic origins; on the problem in ritualism, see Charles Malamoud, “Sans lieu ni date: Note sur 
l’absence de fondation dans l’Inde Védique,” in Traces de fondation, ed. Marcel Detienne (Louvain:
Peeters, 1990), 183–91.
25. Paul Wheatley, “India beyond the Ganges,” Journal of Asian Studies 42 (1982): 28.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 604
===== PAGE 15 =====
in culture but not in a way that necessarily reduced culture to an instrument of
legitimation, as Weberian sociology might lead us to suppose a priori. Here and
elsewhere, we need to theorize Indian cosmopolitanism from its effects.
One such effect in the domain of language was that, far from proscribing local
script vernaculars, Sanskrit mediated their creation everywhere it traveled and
often at the very moment it arrived. To be sure, these languages would be con-
ﬁned to the realm of the documentary and excluded from that of the expressive
for many centuries—half a millennium in the case of Javanese, Kannada, 
Telugu, or Marathi; a full millennium in the case of Khmer, Hindi, or Newari.
This was, I believe, because the literary function was coterminous with the polit-
ical function, and the sphere of the political—“extending to the horizons”—was,
by deﬁnition, the exclusive preserve of a Sanskrit that knew no boundaries but
the horizons themselves.
26 But for local language to be a language of record—to
inscribe a temple endowment, a mortgage, a deed—was for it to be an instrument
of central cultural signiﬁcance; what we now call French and German were not
authorized for such a function until the fourteenth or ﬁfteenth century. An addi-
tional, small but telling sign of the difference between our two cosmopolitanisms
is the graphic sign itself. Roman script was constitutive of Latin literature: arma
virumque cano could be written in only a single alphabet. The graphic forms of
Sanskrit literature, by contrast, were innumerable: vagarthau iva samprktau
could be inscribed in Javanese script; in Thai, Sinhala, and Grantha in Tamil
country; and in Sharada in Kashmir—a substitutability unique among Benedict
Anderson’s “immense communities” of premodernity.
27
Contrast, moreover, the two foundational cosmopolitan ﬁctions whose open-
ing words have just been quoted—here I make a concession to thinking about
declarations, though these remain declarations about practices. At the opening of
the Aeneid, Virgil “sings of arms and the man,” the ﬂight from Troy to Italy, the
origins of the Latin people ( genus Latinum ), the high walls of Rome, and
imperium without end. In his fourth-century courtly epic, Raghuvamsha, Kalidasa
bows down to the mother and father of the universe, who are “fused together like
sound and sense,” in order that he might more deeply understand sound and sense
when he tells the story of a universalistic political power, the dynasty of the
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
605
26. What is said of the mythic emperor Raghu by the poet Kalidasa in the fourth century—“His
chariot of conquest would rest only at the furthest horizon” ( Raghuvamsha 3.5)—would be repeated
in reference to other, historical kings for centuries to come.
27. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (London: Verso, 1983), 20–25. I am not overlook-
ing the fact that all these scripts ultimately derive from a single Indian prototype. My point is that
regional graphic diversity was allowed to develop, in fact, was even sought.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 605
===== PAGE 16 =====
mythopoetic Raghus (who are only faintly allegorized to the imperial Guptas,
unlike Aeneis to Augustus).28 The two texts are offering us here two profoundly
different visions of the “cosmos” that is meaningful for human life: in the one
case, the “circle of the lands” (orbis terrarum) that have fallen under Roman
power, in the other, “all that moves with life” ( jagat). They also offer two pro-
foundly different conceptions of how literary culture functions purposefully in
the cosmos, whether as a verbal instrument for celebrating power or as a celebra-
tion of the power of the verbal instrument itself.
We have thus two cosmopolitanisms, not a European comprehensive univer-
salism (as T. S. Eliot, for instance, in his own provincial way thought of Virgil)
and a narrow Asian particularism. They were generated by a very similar set of
literary practices that also underwrote, in very different ways, a new vision of
power. And if the cosmopolitanisms were similar in transcending the local and
stimulating feelings of living in a large world, their modalities were radically dif-
ferent: the one coercive, the other voluntaristic.
✦✦✦
Thus a certain symmetry allows for reasonable comparison between the Sanskrit
cosmopolis and Latinitas in the open-endedness of their spatializations and in the
normative practices of literary communication intended to ensure that texts could
circulate across a cultural space and time thought of as endless. The vernacular
formations that superseded them, for their part, have a range of parallels that are
even more astonishing. Like the two models of cosmopolitanism that they
replaced, however, they show important and irreducible differences as well. A
comparative argument about vernacularization obviously presupposes some
shared understanding of the object of analysis. And it is precisely because no
such understanding exists that vernacularization, despite its crucial importance,
has so long been off the map of historical cultural studies.
As I noted at the start, vernacularization is a new way of doing things with
texts, especially written literary texts, in a stay-at-home language. By written, I
exclude the oral, even if the written may continue to be performed and received
orally; by literary, I exclude the documentary. Both these latter categories, the
literary and the documentary, however porous in contemporary theoretical terms,
are fully distinguishable within the subjective universe of the premodern actors
involved. By stay-at-home, I exclude the well-traveled cosmopolitan idiom, and
Public Culture
606
28. See Virgil, The Aeneid of Virgil, ed. T. E. Page (London: MacMillan, 1962), 1.1–7 and H. D.
Velankar, ed., Raghuvamsha (Bombay: Nirnaya Sagara Press, 1948), 1.1.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 606
===== PAGE 17 =====
even though stay-at-home languages may sometimes travel far and eventually
become cosmopolitan themselves (as in fact happened with Latin), the moment
of vernacularization is characterized by a full if sometimes anxiety-ridden aware-
ness of afﬁliation to a domain of literary communication that is ﬁnite. And last,
by new, I afﬁrm not only that vernacularization begins but also that lay actors
know it begins or, rather, know that they are beginning it. Vernacularization can-
not be explained by a natural history of cultural change (the result of an erosion
of competence in a cosmopolitan idiom, for example), and it does not stand out-
side history (despite the common view that every putatively inaugural text
always presupposes lost predecessors, ad inﬁnitum). People invent vernacular 
literary cultures as such, in the same way as they invent the Italian sonnet, the
English epistolary novel, the Kannada champu, and the Marathi abhang.
Thus conceived, the process of vernacularization represents a profound and
wholly active historical transformation in literary-cultural practices, as well as in
the practices of political power, that formed both narrative substance and real-
world context of so much of the literature in question. It will be helpful here to
review very brieﬂy the historical trajectory of vernacularization in western and
southern Eurasia, from its restricted beginnings in the last centuries of the ﬁrst
millennium to its completion in most places by the sixteenth century, while at the
same time noting the character of the political location in which it was fostered
and its relationship toward the cosmopolitan aesthetic that it would replace. In all
these features—chronology, polity, the localization of the global—the southern
Asian and western European cases show quite remarkable parallels. We will then
be in a position to consider the factors that make them different and give one the
character of a vernacularization of necessity and the other a vernacularization of
accommodation.
The vernacularization of the Sanskrit world began in the last century of the
ﬁrst millennium in the central Deccan. Here, in the course of the ninth to
eleventh centuries, Kannada and Telugu were transformed into languages for lit-
erature and political expression after four or more centuries of subliterary exis-
tence, during which Sanskrit functioned as the sole medium for the production of
literary and nondocumentary political texts. The constellation of political and
aesthetic features visible here manifests itself in many other regions over the
coming ﬁve centuries: to a large degree, literary production consisted of texts
derived from cosmopolitan genres and of the appropriation of many of their for-
mal features (in point of lexicon, metric, and the like). But a new aesthetic of
Place (deshi) moderated these borrowings by balancing them with local forms,
while at the same time new projects of spatiality—a kind of vernacular chrono-
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
607
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 607
===== PAGE 18 =====
tope, in Mikhail Bakhtin’s idiom, that plots out the domain of vernacular culture,
that puts culture in its place for the ﬁrst time—began to ﬁnd expression in liter-
ary texts.
29 The primary stimulus for vernacularization in both cases was pro-
vided by the courts of the ruling dynasties in Karnataka (the Rashtrakutas 
and Western Chalukyas) and Andhra (the Eastern Chalukyas), who had begun
likewise to turn increasingly to the vernacular as the language of chancery 
communication.
Around the same time, or in the next few centuries, across southern Asia ver-
nacular cultures burst on the scene of literary history: Sinhala (ninth century),
Javanese (tenth), Marathi (thirteenth), Thai (fourteenth), and Oriya (ﬁfteenth),
among many others. Again, this occurred largely at the instigation of courtly
elites: in Polonnaruwa in Sri Lanka; in the emergent polities of Kadiri, Singhasari,
and Majapahit of eastern Java; among the Devagiri Yadavas of Maharashtra (in
this case the work was in fact lost); at the Thai courts of Sukhotai and Ayuthaya;
and among the Gangas and Gajapatis of Orissa. And everywhere, again, literary
idioms and models from cosmopolitan Sanskrit were assimilated for the creation
of literatures in regional languages, while reordered notions of political space
and aspirations of governance were coded in the new vernacular texts—texts
that for the ﬁrst time began to speak coherently of such places as “the cultivated-
land of Kannada,” “the heart of the land of Andhra,” and “Beautiful Lady Lanka.”
Even Tamil, the one South Asian regional language with a history of literary pro-
duction that long antedated the start of the vernacular millennium, and Hindi,
which was almost certainly ﬁrst fashioned into a vehicle for vernacular literature
outside the domain of the court by Suﬁ poets in the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth cen-
turies, began to develop new modes of expression and courtly characteristics dur-
ing this period. In the ﬁrst case, this took place under the imperial Cholas (in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries); in the second, it took place under north Indian
principalities such as Orcha and Gwalior that fell within the power shadow of the
Mughals (in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries). 
Individual episodes in the history of vernacularization in western Europe are
better known, though it bears repeating that a synthetic account (which theorizes
vernacularity, establishes its historical trajectory, and explores its linkage to the
political sphere) remains to be written. Western European vernacularization
begins in earnest—with the production of texts that enter into a secure tradition
of reproduction and circulation—at the court of Alfred in late-ninth-century
Public Culture
608
29. Mikhail Bahktin, The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1981), 84–258.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 608
===== PAGE 19 =====
England (thus virtually contemporaneously with events in Karnataka). Here Lati-
nate literary culture, especially in its renewed form during the Carolingian
imperium, provides the model consciously followed for an intensive translation
program under direction of the court intellectuals, who at the same time began to
project a far more coherent vision of territoriality and the unity of Angelcynn. It
was this Insular vernacular culture that Anglo-Norman elites discovered at the
end of the eleventh century, and when, as one recent study puts it, they were thus
“confronted . . . for the ﬁrst time with the idea and the fact of an extensive and
glorious vernacular literature” they developed a French analog, the “sudden issue
of imaginative cultural engineering.”
30 The creation of a continental French liter-
ary culture, for its part, begins soon thereafter with an unprecedented prolifera-
tion of new textualizations, above all of the chanson de geste and related genres.
At precisely the same time (but as far as we know, without direct connection),
courts in Occitania created a new genre of literature, the troubadour lyric, that
would help stimulate comparable vernacular transformations at courts across the
western Mediterranean to Italy and Germany.
It was the corpus of northern French chanson de geste that would provide the
model for the Poema de mio Cid (1207), a work without historical precedent in
any Iberian language and which signals the beginning of vernacular literature in
Spain. In the same epoch, the court of Castile (largely in imitation of the wonder
that had been Cordoba) was dramatically creating a vernacular documentary
state of the sort we are soon to ﬁnd elsewhere in western Europe. This attained 
its fullest expression at the court of Alfonso X “El Sabio” in the mid–thirteenth
century, where one major court project was a new law code in the vernacular,
along with a new discourse on the history of the vernacular space ( Estoria de
Espanna).
31 In France, the process attains its most powerful expression at the
court of François I in the mid–sixteenth century. Writers of the Pléiade such as
Pierre Ronsard saw themselves charged with the task of securing the triumph of
the vernacular, and their works need to be understood in relation to the new
forms of language governmentality that the French court was then instituting.
There is no need here to provide further detail or mention the other well-
known developments from Dante to Luther, but it is worth noting one last exam-
ple from central Europe, which presents something of a model instance of the
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
609
30. David Howlett, The English Origins of Old French Literature (Dublin: Four Courts Press,
1996), 165–66.
31. The vernacular story for Iberia is particularly well told in the writings of the late Colin Smith,
most recently “The Vernacular,” in The New Cambridge Medieval History, vol. 5, ed. David Abulaﬁa
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming).
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 609
===== PAGE 20 =====
entire process of cultural-political transformation comprised under the idea of
vernacularization. (The vernacularization of eastern Europe follows an analo-
gous pattern, though it occurs much later and within the context of a very differ-
ent cosmopolitanism: Byzantium and Eastern Christianity.) Among Hungarian-
speaking peoples, for almost half a millennium the medium of textual production
was exclusively Latin. It is only in the sixteenth century, in a turn that may be
linked as much to new political energies stimulated by the Ottoman victory of
1526 as to the Reformation, that vernacular intellectuals begin to inscribe 
Hungarian-language literary texts, almost simultaneously producing an entire
apparatus of Hungarian literary culture on the Latin model (dictionaries, gram-
mars, and histories). Here the social location of vernacularization appears,
exceptionally, to occur outside the centers of political power, though it may have
been precisely the instability of the Hungarian court after 1300 that retarded the
turn toward regional-language literary production. 
Even this brief review should sufﬁce to invite rethinking of a number of long-
held beliefs about vernacularization. Let me brieﬂy look at three. First, we have
seen repeatedly that the bearers of vernacularization in both southern Asia and
western Europe were the cultural and political elites who were associated with or
directly controlled the royal court. Gramsci and Bakhtin, two of the few thinkers
to have understood the signiﬁcance of this transformation while appreciating it
as a political and social (as well as cultural) phenomenon, were thus both wrong
to believe that the vernaculars in Europe were upraised against a Mandarin
Latinity and came to be written down only when “the people” regained impor-
tance, or that the vernacular tout court represented a popular social force to be
distinguished from and set against an “ofﬁcial” Latin.
32 Unquestionably, some
altogether different cultural-political process is at work in the cases we have
mentioned. To understand this process means to understand, among other things,
the new and more limited vision of governance that seems to be projected
through new forms of territorialization in early vernacular texts. For it was now
that, thanks to the work of literary vernacularization, regions came for the ﬁrst
time to be coherently conceptualized as such (if not always for the ﬁrst time to be
actually named): Tamil akam, Kannada nadu, Lanka, Maharashtra, Yavadvipa,
England, France, Hungary. 
Also wrong is the historiography that (following Ernest Gellner) makes indus-
Public Culture
610
32. See Antonio Gramsci, Selections from Cultural Writings (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1991), 188, 168; Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1984), 465–74.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 610
===== PAGE 21 =====
trialization the engine for the vernacular transformation. 33 We may not be able to
say with precision what changes in the material world may have contributed to
the conditions of possibility for vernacularization, but it is certainly clear that
monocausal explanations have to be avoided. A vast expansion of agricultural
production across Eurasia; the development of a new, complex, and proﬁtable
international trading network that linked Bruges in westernmost Europe to Hang-
chow in eastern China through intermediary nodes in South Asia such as Cambay
and Cochin, and that reached its apogee in the mid–fourteenth century; the
movement of nomadic peoples across Eurasia that ﬁrst made this network possi-
ble and that powerfully (if differentially) affected the social and political condi-
tions of southern Asia and western Europe; the expansion of Islam on its eastern
and western frontiers (recall that Gibraltar and Sind were both captured by Arab
armies in the same year, 711) bringing new modalities of literary culture to India
while in Europe disrupting older forms of cultural reproduction—all these
world-historical events no doubt helped create an environment in which, for the
ﬁrst time, the choice to think and write locally began to make better sense than
writing and thinking globally.
34 Then again, the “lonely hour of the last instance”
in which the economic is determinant may never have arrived in this world—
why, after all, should the social science logic of capital be generalizable beyond
capitalism?—and something altogether different may be at issue in this transfor-
mation, something like peer-polity emulation or a new aesthetic value of being
“in place.” Although different proximate causes may thus be identiﬁed for spe-
ciﬁc developments in different regions, there seems to have been a widely shared
sense that everybody was going native, as earlier they had gone global.
The third point in need of rethinking (closely related to the ﬁrst) is the stan-
dard assumption that counterdominant religious movements—those in India
grouped under the inadequate and historically vague term devotionalism (bhakti),
along with Buddhism in Southeast Asia, and even the Reformation in Europe—
drive forward vernacularization. In no instance does vernacularization have
demotic spiritual origins. Here Buddhism, a vehicle of widespread vernacular
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
611
33. See Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983), and Pollock, “Ver-
nacular Millennium,” 66–67. Gellner’s thesis has been much discussed—see most recently The State
of the Nation: Ernest Gellner and the Theory of Nationalism , ed. John Hall (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998)—but not in terms of its fundamental historiographical problems.
34. For a recent attempt to grasp these different factors as a whole—agricultural expansion, pop-
ulation increase, the impact of pastoral nomads, developments in state formation—in explaining new
developments in territoriality in the subcontinent, see David Ludden, An Agrarian History of South
Asia (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), chap. 2. 
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 611
===== PAGE 22 =====
transformation in parts of Asia, is typical in its social location among the mer-
cantile, political, and cultural elite. And whereas the development of new vernac-
ular literary cultures might sometimes draw on the energies of religious change,
as in sixteenth-century Hungary or Suﬁ northern India, many historical cases
show quite clearly that religious movements often reacted against an already
existing high vernacular (what I have called the cosmopolitan vernacular) that
attempted to replicate an imperial culture-power formation at the regional level.
35
In this, the Kannada case is again exemplary. The Militant Shaiva (Virashaiva)
movement that arose in Karnataka during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
advocated a relocalized idiom, perhaps even a return to premanuscript and prelit-
erary culture (since the vacanakaras or “makers of utterances” eschewed both
high-cultural genres and inscription as such), and certainly a political order that
did not seek regional empire. 
But, again, with the creation of the cosmopolitan vernacular, the new reading
communities, and new visions of vernacular political space, comparability between
the two worlds of vernacularization ends.
Recently, I have tried to sketch out some of the remarkable divergences in the
conceptualization of the vernacularization process in southern Asia and western
Europe.
36 These pertain to every aspect of language ideology, including the
sources and moral status of language diversity, the correlation between language
and community, and, perhaps most important, the linkage between vernacular
language and political power. On all counts, the two cases present incommensu-
rate universes. While care for language was as intense in southern Asia as any-
where in the world, no southern Asian writer before the colonial period ever rep-
resented this care by means of an affective attachment to language, as Dante was
the ﬁrst to do when in the introduction to his Convivio he spoke of “the natural
love for one’s own language”: “Not simply love but the most perfect love is what
I ought to have, and do have, for [my vernacular].”
37 Prior to Europeanization, no
southern Asian writer ever biologized the relationship to the vernacular as one of
maternal generation; the notion “mother tongue” itself, as scholars have repeat-
edly noted, has no conceptual status whatever in pre-European South Asia.
Furthermore, no southern Asian writer ever held the view, common at the
start of the vernacular millennium in Europe, that “languages make peoples,” as
Public Culture
612
35. See Sheldon Pollock, “The Cosmopolitan Vernacular,” Journal of Asian Studies57 (1998): 6–37.
36. Pollock, “Vernacular Millennium,” 62–65.
37. Dante, Il Convivio. V ol. 5 of Opere di Dante, ed. G. Busnelli and G. Vandelli (Florence: Felice
Le Monnier, 1964), 1.10.4 ( Lo naturale amore della propria loquela ) and 1.13.10 ( non solamente
amore, ma perfettissimo amore sia quello ch’ io a [mio Volgare] debbo avere ed ho). 
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 612
===== PAGE 23 =====
the epigram of a tenth-century Christian poet puts it. In fact—and here is a dis-
tinction that makes a most serious difference—there exists no explicit discourse
on vernacular language origins at all that ties them with peoples, as there is 
no discourse on the origins of peoples themselves (dynastic lineages excepted).
Origins of languages and peoples, morphing into chronicles and histories of
kingdoms-and-peoples, can fairly be called an obsession in Europe during the
ﬁrst half of the vernacular millennium. These include the late-medieval specu-
lations on the Greek sources of the Spanish language, the Celtic-Gallic or 
Germanic-Frankish sources of French, and the Celtic-British sources of English;
the historical origins myths that trace the French to the Trojans (end of the
twelfth century), the Scots to the Scythians (1320), and the Hungarians to the
Huns (1283); and full-dress historical narratives such as the Anglo-Saxon Chron-
icles (1000), the Alfonsine Estoria (ca. 1270), and the Grandes chroniques de
France (late fourteenth century).
38
In southern Asia, by contrast, if we are to take seriously the term by which
people referred to the vernaculars—they are, after all, ﬁrst and foremost the
“languages of Place” ( desha-bhasha)—then we must conclude it is as much
region as anything that makes language. Kannada, for example, is the language
of “the land of black soil,” Malaya[la] that of “the sandalwood mountains,”
Dakani that of “the south,” Braj that of the place of Krishna’s birth, and Gwalayeri
that of “the mountain of cowherds.” They are, accordingly, not facts of biology,
like the language of the Franks, for example, or of the Angles, which would
eventually underwrite a culture-power region of birth, the natio. On the contrary,
in many cases they seem to be facts of ecology.
39 (How the culture of Place,
deshi, which for a millennium stood in contrast to the cosmopolitan Way, marga,
would be transformed into Swadeshi—“our own place,” that is, “national”—in
India’s early-twentieth-century engagement with colonialism, is a story for
another occasion.)
Nor did any writer in southern Asia ever directly link political power with lin-
guistic particularism like Lorenzo de’ Medici when he counseled ﬁfteenth-
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
613
38. The Christian poet is cited by Robert Bartlett, The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization
and Cultural Change 950–1350 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993), 198: gentem 
lingua facit. No synthetic account exists of the cultural-political genealogies of early modern Europe.
See, for now, Nation und Literatur im Europa der frühen Neuzeit , ed. Klaus Garber (Tübingen:
Niemeyer, 1989), 36; and Susan Reynolds, Kingdoms and Communities in Western Europe 900–1300,
2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997), 250–331.
39. Analogously, the cosmopolitan languages in southern Asia are facts of language processes
themselves (samskrta, “reﬁned”; prakrta, “unreﬁned”; apabhrashta, “corrupted”), unlike the ethno-
nyms of other cosmopolitan languages such as Arabiya, Farsi, English. 
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 613
===== PAGE 24 =====
century Florentines to “work for the enhancement of Florentine power by writing
in Tuscan,” or Wenceslas II, who a century earlier had been offered the crown of
Poland on the grounds that “it is ﬁtting that those who do not differ much in
speaking the Slavic language enjoy the rule of a single prince.” No language in
southern Asia ever became the target of direct royal regulation; sanctions were
never imposed requiring the use of one (like French for legal practices under
François I) or prohibiting the use of another (like Polish under the Teutonic
knights). Indeed, around the time episodes of vernacular extermination were
occurring in Europe, vernacular kings in what is now Karnataka were issuing
royal inscriptions in Telugu in the east and Marathi in the west, as well as in Kan-
nada, and in their court they would be entertained with songs in these languages
as well as in Avadhi, Bihari, Bengali, Oriya, and Madhyadeshiya—producing, in
fact, a virtual cosmopolitanism of the vernaculars.
40
In short, all the indices of vernacular power that the history of Europe invites
us to think of as constitutive of the vernacularization process are absent in the
historical experience of southern Asia. If language was of interest to courtly
elites in southern Asia—and it was most certainly of the greatest interest—the
logic by which they conducted their cultural politics was as unfamiliar as that of
their cosmocratic predecessors, for whom Sanskrit’s principal value seems to
have resided in its capacity for an aestheticization of the political. Thus, despite
striking parallels in the times and structures of cultural change, vernacularization
in these two worlds differed as profoundly as their respective forms of cos-
mopolitanism. In Europe, we ﬁnd everywhere a necessary correlation between
people, polity, and language. In South Asia, by contrast, there appears to have
been some linguistic and cultural accommodation to the conditions of a region on
the part of those who entered it; and if power typically expressed itself in the lan-
guage of Place, power did not make that language instrumental to its own self-
conception, let alone to the being of the citizen-subject. 
✦✦✦
Thus, around the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium, two vast, historically inﬂuen-
tial supraregional cultures and their associated conceptions of power— imperium
Public Culture
614
40. For the citation from Lorenzo’s commentary on his sonnets, see Douglas M. Painter, “Human-
ist Insights and the Vernacular in Sixteenth-Century France,” History of European Ideas 16 (1993):
68. On language prohibition, extermination, and politics, see Bartlett, Making of Europe , 202–3
(where the envoys to Wenceslas II are cited). The cultural practices of Deccani kings are described in
Someshvara’s twelfth-century encyclopedia, the Manasollasa (Baroda: Gaekwad Oriental Series,
1961), vol. 3, 1–83.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 614
===== PAGE 25 =====
sine ﬁne (power without limit) and diganta rajya (power to the horizons)—came
into existence at either end of Eurasia. They were discursively embodied pre-
eminently in a new literature that could be read everywhere because it was com-
posed in a language that traveled everywhere. They shared a wide variety of
additional concerns as well: language discipline, normativity, canonicity, rhetoric.
By the arrest of change and the erasure of the local that they ensured, all these
factors tended to promote the emancipation of literature from space-time—the
great angst of the vernacular is its spatiotemporal entropy—precisely as political
power was meant to be emancipated. The social processes by which these cul-
tural forms were disseminated and adopted and promoted, however, had nothing
whatever in common. They related to power in ways that differed as utterly as
the practices of power themselves, which shared little beyond belief in the inﬁni-
tude of governance. The two formations are rightly regarded as cosmopolitan,
both for their conception of the culture-power as unlimited and for the varied
notions of belonging to—acting in, writing for, speaking to—a limitless world
that, at a certain level of consciousness, they most decidedly comprised. I have
characterized the radical difference in the processes by which this consciousness
was generated as one between compulsion and choice. 
These cosmopolitan orders were dramatically challenged by new forms of cul-
ture and power that were brought into being around the beginning of the second
millennium and, within a few centuries, were transcended by these new forms
almost everywhere. In neither world, it should be stressed, was success ever truly
achieved in reconciling the cosmopolitan and the vernacular, albeit both Latin
and Sanskrit preserved a residual force into the nineteenth century, providing a
code for the display of scholarship or the cultivation of nostalgic antiquarianism
by vernacular intellectuals and writers. We do not yet fully understand the precise
material conditions for the great vernacular transformation, any more than we
understand those for the quasi globalisms that preceded it. But even certitude of
the material grounds would seem to have little bearing on our analysis. What we
are able to perceive clearly is that vernacular languages or languages of Place at
that moment and for the ﬁrst time came to be used for producing written literary
cultures and their concomitant political cultures of the emergent documentary
states. They thus helped, in their different ways, to constitute the nation-states of
Europe and the vernacular polities of southern Asia; helped to constitute, as well,
the early modernity that these new cultural-political formations represented, and
which, accordingly, arrived more or less simultaneously and wholly indepen-
dently in the two regions. 
Here, too, however, ideologies of language and instrumentalities of culture
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
615
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 615
===== PAGE 26 =====
differed profoundly. In the one case, the relationship between different peoples
and their languages was determinate, so much so that peoplehood became a func-
tion of language (a conception that, for all the relativity and contingency that we
ﬁnd to undermine it, continues to weaken strong minds).
41 In the other, this rela-
tionship seems almost ecological: just as places create water and soil, so they
were thought virtually to create languages, which people use like water or soil. In
western Europe, language was held to be subservient to power. Indeed, it became
explicitly the “attendant of empire” (compañera del imperio ) at the very moment
that power was ﬁrst projected in a truly global manner, in Iberian colonialism
(the famous phrase is Nebrija’s, who used it when dedicating his Castilian gram-
mar to Queen Isabella in 1492). In South Asia, language was a vehicle of aes-
thetic distinction, style, or something else that reveals no simple purpose to be
explained according to the functionalist models of modern social science. These
differences I have sought to order by identifying the ﬁrst as a vernacularity of
necessity and the second as a vernacularity of accommodation.
I am very much aware that this brief history of cosmopolitanism and vernac-
ularism and their elementary aspects has ignored vast complexities. An espe-
cially important omission, which would have required far too much space to
make good here, is discussion of the dialectic between cosmopolitan and vernac-
ular that creates them both. (These cultural forms are not just historically consti-
tuted but mutually constitutive, for if the vernacular localizes the cosmopolitan as
part of its own self-constitution, it is often unwittingly relocalizing what the cos-
mopolitan borrowed from it in the ﬁrst place.)
42 I have had to run the risk of car-
icature, too, in creating a largely demonic North to juxtapose to a largely angelic
South, refreshing departure though that might seem; and a complex process of
change has been reduced by and large to a logic of pure idealism. But, granting
all these shortcomings, the historical reconstruction offered here does make
claim to a certain reality that yet further qualiﬁcation should not be permitted to
ﬂatten. First, the cosmopolitan and the vernacular have been actual and profound
culture-power alternatives in Asia no less than in Europe. Second, both were
everywhere and always produced by deliberate choices and conscious practices.
Public Culture
616
41. Charles Taylor, for example, is not alone in his conviction that language is the “essential viable
and indispensable pole of identiﬁcation” and that this identiﬁcation stands outside history. See Pierre
Birnbaum, “From Multiculturalism to Nationalism,” Political Theory 24 (1996): 39 (where the Taylor
citation is given), and compare Anthony Appiah, “Identity, Authenticity, Survival,” in Charles Taylor,
Multiculturalism: Examining the Politics of Recognition, ed. Amy Gutman (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1994), 156. 
42. A modest example is provided in Pollock “The Cosmopolitan Vernacular,” 21–25.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 616
===== PAGE 27 =====
The transformations we have examined in the ways people make culture and
organize power cannot be explained by the naturalization of cultural change,
where mechanisms triggered by material or technological innovation are thought
simply to trigger cultural evolution. By the same token, what some are inclined to
characterize as vernacular primordiality is shown to be a chimera; vernacularity
has always and everywhere been produced. Third, however comparable may
have been the basic conditions of possibility that obtained across the Eurasian
world during the ﬁfteen-hundred-year period that helped produce cultural and
political change of a very comparable sort, the differences in both the cosmopoli-
tan and vernacular formations in the two spheres are deep and irreducible. All
this prompts us to rethink the historical character of local and supralocal attach-
ments, if only insofar as the processes of literary culture considered here—the
production and circulation and consumption of expressive texts—are able to
embody them.
No less complex than the problem of knowing this past, however, is the ques-
tion of why we want to know it at all. Can the understanding of such historical
experiences as we have reviewed here open up for us a domain of alternative pos-
sibilities at a time when the choices of culture-power before us all seem bad and
the dilemmas intolerable yet unavoidable? Cosmopolitanism and vernacularism
in their contemporary Western forms—American globalization and ethnonation-
alism—is one such domain of bad options. It is hard not to see their most
deformed developments in the confrontation between NATO and Serbia that
closed out a century of confrontation. No simple formula will capture the com-
plexity of this confrontation, but it is not too far wrong to see it as pitting a dying
vernacularity—or, at least, something that could be retailed as vernacularity to
the people of Serbia—grown mistrustful, pathological, and ethnocidal, against a
new kind of cosmopolitanism with a mission that some have characterized by the
useful if worrisome oxymoron “militaristic humanism.” 
India, for its part, is hardly immune now to bad choices. The worst at present
is that between a vernacularity mobilized along the most fragile fault lines of
region, religion, and caste and the grotesque mutation of the toxins of postcolo-
nial ressentiment and modernity known as Hindutva, or fundamentalist Hin-
duism. Hindutva’s political organization, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP; Indian
People’s Party), took secure control of the national government in March 1998;
its paramilitary wing, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS; National V olun-
teers Union), and its ideological wing, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP; World
Hindu Council), have now unprecedented access to central power. The very
names of these groups now speak what had never been spoken before, postulat-
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
617
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 617
===== PAGE 28 =====
ing in the one case a single Indian “peoplehood” ( janata) and in the other Hin-
duism as an aggressive universalism ( vishwa). The latter is produced not by an
affective attachment to the large world, but by the dislocations of diaspora, as a
recent RSS tract in its own confused way makes clear: 
For a Hindu, the entire universe is his home. He considers himself as
belonging to the whole world. For him, “Swadesho bhuvanatrayam” 
[The triple world—earth, sky, and heaven—is one’s own Place] is not a
mere slogan, but is the very spirit ingrained in his mind. As such, from
time immemorial, Hindus are widely spread the world over. Hindus reside
in more than 150 countries and have been at-home wherever they have
reached. In fact, in a couple of countries like Mauritius, Fiji, Trinidad,
etc., they form the majority and by this virtue are occupying high posi-
tions in those countries. It is no wonder that when swayamsevaks [RSS
cadres], who take pride in being the harbingers of the Sangh ideology, and
who for other reasons go abroad, also start Sangh Shakhas [Union
branches] in countries they choose to reside in.
43
Universalism exists for the RSS only in the network of its branch ofﬁces, in
the magnitude and extent of its paramilitary network. This Hindutva complex of
which the RSS is part, the so-called Sangh Parivar (Family of Organizations), as
it has recently come to be known, instantiates the very type of “reactionary mod-
ernism” familiar from interwar Europe: it is committed at once to a wholesale
nuclearization of India’s military capabilities (as demonstrated in the BJP’s May
1998 nuclear test), and to a cultural program of pseudotraditionalism that has
cynically coopted and polluted the great cosmopolitan past. Thus the BJP pro-
claimed 1999 the “Year of Sanskrit,” while the RSS now cultivates the practice at
its branch meetings of issuing commands in Sanskrit. All this is carried out in the
name of a new swadeshi, a new militant vernacularism. “The new watchword is
‘Swadeshi,’” according to the BJP vice president: “The world has been told in
unmistakable terms that India cannot be taken for granted.”
44
I want to begin thinking about the kinds of choices between the cosmopolitan
and the vernacular that are now available—mostly bad and bitter and sad choices,
it seems—in relation to the historical past we have just surveyed by putting them
Public Culture
618
43. This is cited from the RSS pamphlet “Widening Horizons,” available as of December 1999 
on-line at http://www.rss.org/rss/library/books/WideningHorizons/ch8.html. For a recent general cri-
tique of Hindutva culture and politics, see The Concerned Indian’s Guide to Communalism, ed. K. N.
Panikkar (New Delhi: Penguin, 1999).
44. See K. R. Malkani, “BJP History: Its Birth, Growth and Onward March,” available as of
December 1999 on-line at http://www.bjp.org/history.htm.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 618
===== PAGE 29 =====
into a more familiar idiom with a discussion of two short texts from the early
1930s by Antonio Gramsci that are concerned with the vernacular-national and
cosmopolitan-universalist problematics. Gramsci, it bears repeating, is virtually
unique in the scholarly record for the innovative and passionate reﬂection he
devoted to the large questions of literary culture and political power over the long
history of the West, though it is not clear that he ever succeeded in developing a
coherent position about the competing claims of the cosmopolitan and the vernac-
ular as either cultural or political values. For one thing, he seems to have placed
the blame for the failure of national consciousness to develop in Italy on a certain
“cosmopolitan casteism” and the long-term alienation of the intellectual class
from the state, something intimately connected in Gramsci’s mind with the contin-
uing use of Latin and the concomitant failure of a national language—indeed,
Dante’s “illustrious vernacular”—to come into being. The very development of
his notion of the “national-popular,” however, as a pure strategy for mass mobi-
lization beyond the Communist Party proper suggests his regret at the unhappy
kinds of compromises required at that historical juncture, to say nothing of his
appreciation of the sheer factitiousness of the national sentiment itself. I doubt I
am alone in often sensing here a tension in Gramsci’s thought between, on the one
hand, an ideal of cultural cosmopolitanism and political internationalism and, on
the other, the very pragmatic pressures of national-popular action.
45 The two
small texts to be considered meditate, in their own way, on these problems. 
The ﬁrst of these texts is actually a summary of and comment on an article
published in 1929 by Julien Benda (with whose ideal of the intellectual “non-
pratique” Gramsci must otherwise have had no sympathy) concerning the rela-
tionship between the particular and the universal in literature.
46 Benda notes that
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
619
45. On the development of the national-popular, see the helpful essay of David Forgacs,
“National-Popular: Genealogy of a Concept,” in The Cultural Studies Reader , ed. Simon During
(London: Routledge, 1993), 177–90. I leave it to others to determine whether Forgacs is correct to
state that Gramsci believed that, in general, “the cosmopolitan traditions of the Italian intellectuals
had impeded the molecular ideological activity by which [an intellectual and moral] reformation
could be brought about” (186).
46. Gramsci, Selections from Cultural Writings , 260–61 (“Julian Benda”). Benda’s article is
“Comment un écrivain sert-il l’universel?” Les nouvelles littéraires , 2 November 1929, 1. (I make ref-
erence to material from the original article inasmuch as it was known to Gramsci, though not explic-
itly addressed in his note.) This largely restates ideas in Benda’s La trahison des clercs(Paris: Grasset,
1927; cf. 97–99, 296–98), which is a still-troublesome text. See, for example, Ernest Gellner, “La
trahison de la trahison des clercs,” in The Political Responsibility of Intellectuals , ed. Ian Maclean,
Alan Monteﬁore, and Peter Winch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). For the ideal that
“le clerc doit se proclamer non-pratique” (except, evidently, when he demands the reform of the cléri-
cature), see Benda, La trahison des clercs, 231–35.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 619
===== PAGE 30 =====
serious people—he mentions André Gide—believe a writer able to serve the
general interest only to the degree that he or she produces work that is more par-
ticular. Gide himself had originally developed this idea within a purely aestheti-
cist paradigm: one cannot promote the universal or any other good without the
perfection of “artistic power, however deﬁned,” and the latter is something
always derived from and depending on the particular. The particular for many 
in the 1920s, however, was, precisely, the national: the question Benda and
Gramsci accordingly ask is whether being particular itself is necessarily a func-
tion of being national, as many conservative intellectuals insisted, such as those
who in 1919 asked in a public manifesto, “Is it not by nationalizing itself that a lit-
erature takes on a more universal signiﬁcation, a more humanly general interest?
. . . Is it not a profound error to believe that one can work on behalf of European
culture through a denationalized literature?”
47
What interests me in these reﬂections on the literary particular, beyond the
genealogy of the idea and its remarkable implications—that the particular is the
real general and that nationalism may “equivocate” as the true universalism—is
the response offered by Benda and endorsed by Gramsci. This takes two forms.
For one, the national particular is said to be only a “ﬁrst-degree” variety, rather
like the species category “mammal” that characterizes all humans, whereas a
“second degree” of particularization, and the more important, is a function of
distinguishing oneself from one’s fellow citizens.
48 For another—and this is 
the far more powerful insight—Benda and Gramsci differentiate between two
modalities of particularity: there is a radical difference, as they emphatically put
it, between being particular and preaching particularism. Expressed in the terms
that have been used in the present essay, this distinction comprises the under-
standing that while vernacularity is essential for art and for life, we can distin-
guish between a vernacularity of necessity and one of accommodation and strive
somehow to achieve the latter.
49
The second text is a brief comment on the past and future of the idea of the
Public Culture
620
47. The signatories of this hypernationalist document, “Pour un parti de l’intelligence,” included
Paul Bourget, Maurice Barrès, Jacques Maritain, and Francis Jammes. 
48. Ernest Renan, says Benda, is not a “necessary effect” of the French consciousness, but “an
arbitrary, even unforeseeable event,” and his true particularity and value lie in the degree of his dif-
ference from the group of which he is part, in the way that any human being’s value is what sets him
or her apart from the species (“Comment un écrivain sert-il l’universel?,” 1).
49. Benda himself, as we can see in hindsight, was dead wrong—or grossly premature—to infer
(on the grounds that one does not pray for the healthy) that the fervor with which the “nationalization
of the esprit” was being preached in 1929 signaled its imminent dissolution in a new European con-
sciousness.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 620
===== PAGE 31 =====
Italian nation-state. Gramsci raises the question of the universal while pursuing
the same basic problem as in the ﬁrst text, wondering now whether the forces that
produced the uniﬁcation of Italy must also inevitably produce a militaristic
nationalism.
50 His response is actually rather curious. He argues that such nation-
alism is antihistorical: “It is, in reality, contrary to all the Italian traditions, ﬁrst
Roman and then Catholic,” which he tells us are cosmopolitan. But then, as if
sensing how unhistorical or incomplete is the answer he has just given, he asks
whether a new type of cosmopolitanism may ever be possible, beyond “national-
ism and militaristic imperialism: Not the citizen of the world as civis romanus or
as Catholic but as a producer of civilization.”
5l In other words: Is it at all possible
to be universal without preaching universalism? 
The antinomy between the particular and the universal, the vernacular and the
cosmopolitan, the national and the international—not all precisely the same phe-
nomenon, to be sure, but now inextricably linked—has lost little of its salience
since Gramsci’s day. Quite the contrary, it seems to have shown itself to be ever
more urgent and intractable, with new and even more complex versions of ver-
nacularity developing in response to what is perceived as cosmopolitanism in its
ugly-American embodiment. To get a sense of where we stand now, it may be
helpful to look very brieﬂy at two recent attempts made by very accomplished
thinkers, inheritors of one of the historical types of vernacularism and cosmo-
politanism whose genesis we have traced, to rehabilitate the national-vernacular
under a liberal or progressive guise. In conclusion, we can ask whether any
response to this new indigenism may be available in a postcolonialism that may
be thought still to bear the impress or stored energy—or whatever may be the
right metaphor—of those other, very different types of cosmopolitan and vernac-
ular histories.
In his recent book on multicultural citizenship, Will Kymlicka introduces the
idea of what he calls “societal culture.” This, we are told, is “a culture which pro-
vides its members with meaningful ways of life across the full range of human
activities, including social, educational, religious, recreational, and economic
life, encompassing both public and private spheres.” In fact, these turn out to be
no different from national cultures and are said to constitute the true basis of
freedom. While Kymlicka is aware that the congeries of practices he terms soci-
etal cultures “did not always exist” but derive (in accordance with Gellner’s
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
621
50. Gramsci, Selections from Cultural Writings , 246–47 (“Interpretations of the Risorgimento
[ii]”). 
51. Gramsci, Selections from Cultural Writings, 246.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 621
===== PAGE 32 =====
ﬂawed theory) from the new elevation of the vernacular in the service of the edu-
cational homogenization required by industrialization, they somehow escape the
historicity of the nineteenth-century moment of their genesis. Vernacular cultures
are given and there; they demand unequivocally to be accommodated just as
they are, unquestioned in any way about their present, let alone historical, con-
stitution. In fact, they are portrayed as the only “meaningful context of choice for
people” and worth preserving at all costs. Violations of the space of vernacular
cultures, accordingly—through open borders, for example—would be a disaster
since “people’s own national community would be overrun by settlers from other
cultures, and . . . they would be unable to ensure their survival as a distinct
national culture.” Most people (somehow Kymlicka knows most people) “would
rather be free and equal within their own nation . . . than be free and equal citi-
zens of the world, if this means they are less likely to be able to live and work in
their own language and culture.”
52 A necessary vernacularism if there ever was
one.
Tom Nairn has a less openly culturological defense of vernacular nationalism;
he approaches the problem through the domain of the political. Nairn argues that
the events of 1989 buried the old internationalism of promoting working-class
solidarity to counteract capitalism and nationalism. In its place has come “inter-
nationality,” the bland but dangerous homogenization of the world whose very
effect (a familiar argument here) is to produce local resistance, often violent
resistance. The only way forward now, we are instructed, must be through and
not outside nationalism (and of course through capitalism). All that internation-
alists have left to do is to “decide what sort of nationalists they will become.” In
other words, the only way to be universal now is to be national. As for the dan-
gers? Well, asks Nairn, “Are the fragmentation and anarchy really so bad?”
These words were written two years into the siege of Sarajevo, ﬁve years into the
renewed struggle in Kashmir, ten years into the movement for Tamil Eelam—
with Rwanda one year away, Chechnya two, Srebrenica three. Of course, these
are not identical situations—nor have all twentieth-century horrors, many far
worse than these, been wholly subsumable under the extreme vernacular mobi-
lization of nationalism. Yet each of these recent cases seems to me to be poised in
its own way on the particularistic brink, the vernacular—or what Nairn calls the
Public Culture
622
52. Will Kymlicka, Multicultural Citizenship (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), 76, 80, 93. Despite
his Gellnerian model, Kymlicka somehow counts Native American cultures as “genuinely distinct
societal cultures,” like those of the Puerto Ricans or Québecois (79–80). A strong critique of Kymlicka
is offered in Jeremy Waldron, “Minority Cultures and the Cosmopolitan Alternative,” in The Rights of
Minority Communities, ed. W. Kymlicka (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), 93–119.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 622
===== PAGE 33 =====
“Ethnic Abyss,” which seems increasingly resistant to Nairn’s denial that “there
is no abyss, in the hysterical-liberal sense.”53
Kymlicka and Nairn represent a wide range of thinkers for whom vernacular-
ity stands outside history (except to the degree that history continually demon-
strates its necessity) and constitutes an essential component of human existence.
They therefore hold the conservation of vernacular culture and the acquisition of
vernacular polity—now coterminous with nationalism—to be a categorical
imperative in the face of a universalism seen only as compulsory. To such a vision
of the present and future we may juxtapose the perspective of those who have
inherited (if not always self-awarely) the very different traditions of the South
Asian cosmopolitan and vernacular sketched out in the foregoing pages. These
are legatees, in addition, of the world’s longest and most fraught engagement
with globalization in its harshest forms, colonialism. It is a striking fact that one
ﬁnds among these intellectuals so rich an inventory of strong formulations about
particulars and universals—especially Asian particulars and European univer-
sals—and related problematics of European thought. Contrast for a moment the
relative indifference to these matters among, say, Chinese intellectuals, with their
very different history. This is something one may account for, I think, as a kind of
sedimentation of historical experience—without thereby committing oneself to
an iron determinism—but its value is harder to assess. Getting beaten up all the
time by the schoolyard bully has a way of focusing the mind on violence more
than is the case for kids left unhurt. No doubt, such historical experience does 
not convert automatically into an advantage for thought or practice, as Dipesh
Chakrabarty has often taken care to remind me, but it clearly converts into a
propensity for thinking. We may not be wrong to suppose, therefore, that these
two powerful formative experiences (a long experience with autonomously 
produced cosmopolitan and vernacular practices, followed by the new and 
heteronomous cosmopolitanism of colonialism) have inclined some thinkers 
to search harder—not for a uniﬁed theory of transcendence, but for what
Chakrabarty has characterized for me as “cracks in the master discourses” and,
more important, for practices for overcoming the dichotomous thinking that
marks our current impasse.
It is from within the world of these intellectuals—I have in mind the recent
work of Partha Chatterjee, but a number of others including the late D. R.
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
623
53. Tom Nairn, “Internationalism and the Second Coming,” in Mapping the Nation , ed. Gopal 
Balakrishnan (London: Verso, 1996), 267–80; the texts quoted are on 274–76. Originally published
in Daedalus 122, no. 3 (1993): 115–40. 
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 623
===== PAGE 34 =====
Nagaraj provide good examples—that some of the more compelling suggestions
are being offered on ways to address the desperate choices imposed by moder-
nity.
54 Might it not be possible, as some of these thinkers suggest, to transcend
the dichotomies of modernizing cosmopolitanism and vernacular traditionalism
by understanding that the new must be made precisely through attachment to the
past, and by recognizing that only such attachment enables one to grasp what can
and must be changed? Take as one example the seemingly irreconcilable alter-
natives of the universalist discourse of the liberal state—where secularism
demands the submergence of religious difference in a homogeneous juridical
order—and the historical particularities of a given community’s ways of life (it
being understood that these are, in fact, historical). Might this irreconcilability
not yield to a strategic politics that seeks to institute such a transformation from
within communities themselves (whether Muslim, Vaishnav, Maratha, or other),
while resisting demands for liberalization or democratization that are ofﬁcial,
top-down, and imposed from the outside? In other words, affective attachment to
old structures of belonging offered by vernacular particulars must precede any
effective transformation through new cosmopolitan universals; care must be in
evidence, a desire to preserve, even as the structure is to be changed. Assuredly,
many of the discursive components in such arguments are available in other con-
temporary debates, but the mix here seems to me special. It consists of a response
to a speciﬁc history of domination and enforced change, along with a critique of
the oppression of tradition itself, tempered by a strategic desire to locate
resources for a cosmopolitan future in vernacular ways of being themselves.
Analogously, the choice between the global and the local, whether in literary cul-
ture or in the organization of power, may now ﬁnd some kind of resolution in the
blunt refusal to choose from among the alternatives, a refusal that can be per-
formable in practice however difﬁcult to articulate in theory.
55
Public Culture
624
54. See, for example, Partha Chatterjee, A Possible India: Essays in Political Criticism (Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1997); D. R. Nagaraj, Collected Essays (Delhi: Oxford University Press,
forthcoming), and D. R. Nagaraj, “Introduction,” in Ashis Nandy, Exiled at Home (Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 1998). I forbear citing my Chicago colleagues, whose engagement with these ques-
tions is on display in this volume.
55. Chatterjee puts several of these ideas well (see A Possible India , especially 261–62 and
280–85). The sensitivity he evinces should not be blithely generalized, however, whether in the
sphere of power or culture. Consider how, in a ﬁt of misguided vernacularism, the Communist
Party–Marxist government of West Bengal in 1981 prohibited English-medium instruction in ele-
mentary education; this law was rescinded in 1998 after heated protests by working-class people who
were outraged at the opportunities for advancement being denied to them (a precedent ignored by the
government of Tamil Nadu, which instituted a similar law regarding Tamil in autumn 1998). The
attempt to preserve vernacularity on the backs of the poor is a familiar liberal strategy; see Gramsci,
Selections from Cultural Writings, 166.
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 624
===== PAGE 35 =====
None of this thinking should be taken as exempliﬁcation of “hybridity” in its
usual connotations of mélange or mongrelization—a banal concept and a danger-
ous one, implying an amalgamation of unalloyed, pure forms, whether vernacular
or cosmopolitan, that have never existed. The practice I have in mind, on the con-
trary, is a tactical reversal of domination—a resistance-through-appropriation,
as it has been described—which, in fact, approximates what I take to be the very
process of vernacularization before modernity.
56 This practice derives from a
realization born of accumulated historical experience of both pre- and postcolo-
niality that the future must somehow become one of And rather than Either/Or.
Such a proclamation admittedly has the ring of a slogan, and a certain unpleas-
antly utopian ring at that. Neither does it mechanically yield policy outcomes
capable of helping us directly address today’s most pressing questions of the cos-
mopolitan and vernacular (such as the minority cultural rights that we must sup-
port or the ethnochauvinist politics that we must resist). In fact, I have borrowed
this particular formulation from the German sociologist Ulrich Beck, whose
argument is not a precipitate of comparable historical experience but derives
instead from an abstract model of risk theory, and precisely for this reason seems
all the less compelling.
57 Yet the proposal to seek And may derive some prag-
matic sustenance from an awareness of the varied cosmopolitan and vernacular
possibilities that have been available in history. To know that some people in 
the past have been able to be universal and particular, without making either 
their particularly ineluctable or their universalism compulsory, is to know that
better cosmopolitan and vernacular practices are at least conceivable—and 
perhaps even, in a way those people themselves never fully achieved, eventually
reconcilable.
Sheldon Pollock is George V . Bobrinskoy Professor of Sanskrit and Indic Studies
at the University of Chicago. He is the editor of the forthcoming Literary Cul-
tures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia.
Cosmopolitan 
and Vernacular 
in History
625
56. See Homi Bhabha, “Signs Taken for Wonders,” in The Location of Culture (London: Rout-
ledge, 1996), especially 112–15. 
57. Ulrich Beck, The Reinvention of Politics: Rethinking Modernity in the Global Social Order
(Oxford: Polity Press, 1997).
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 625
===== PAGE 36 =====
PC 12.3-01 Pollock  11/16/00  3:01 PM  Page 626