
===== PAGE 1 =====
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	25
Jean-Noël Robert
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sciences Religieuses, Paris
The following essay is based on a lecture given at Waseda University in 
December, 2002. In it, the author, a former visiting scholar at the Nanzan 
Institute for Religion and Culture, and professor of Japanese Buddhism 
currently working on Japanese poetry on the Lotus Sutra, attempts a broad 
cultural framework for encompassing the relationship between Chinese-
language scriptures and the Japanese paraphrases that were considered a 
religious practice by medieval monastic poets. 
T
he purpose of this short essay is to expand on some remarks I made 
in a booklet I published a few years ago in Japanese,1 in order to bring 
together scattered facts of cultural history and to define a phenom -
enon which should be the object of a more systematic research.
Although I have always endeavored to keep in mind William of Ockham’s 
warning against the unnecessary multiplication of beings and have for the most 
part tried not to be contaminated by the all too common French disease of 
coining new words and forging trendy concepts supposed to explain more or 
less everything, in the end, I yielded to the temptation myself and p roposed to 
academia a term I felt necessary. Although it is not meant to explain anything, it 
does help define an area that has not, to my mind, been sufficiently considered 
as a matter of investigation, despite its importance. Thus I took the bold step of 
coining the term hieroglossia2 to express a fact and a lack.
Hieroglossia
A Proposal
1. 『二一世紀の漢文――死語の将来』; English subtitle: Kanbun for the XXIst Century: The Future 
of Dead Languages,  Nichibunken Forum, nr. 122, International Research Center for Japanese Studies, 
Kyoto, 2002. 
2. At least as far as I know this is the first time the term is used in this sense, although hierology 
might have been more appropriate, given that it already existed in ancient Greek (hierologia) in a mean-
ing rather close to the one I have in mind (“sacred or mystical language or discourse”). However, it 
===== PAGE 2 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture26
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	27
A Common Cultural Pattern
The fact, if we can speak with any assurance of a cultural fact, is as follows: I 
found that one of the most permanent cultural traits in the written cultures 
of Eurasia 3 (including the Northern part of Africa and Ethiopia) is precisely 
the phenomenon I am calling hieroglossia. By this I mean the sum of relations 
that develop between a language perceived as a central or founding element 
in a given culture area (this language being the hierogloss) and a language or 
languages that are perceived as being dependent, not historically or linguisti -
cally, but ontologically or theologically, on that hierogloss. Within a hieroglos -
sic relationship, the language perceived as dependent, often called the “vulgar 
tongue” or “vernacular” (or, as I will call it, “laogloss”), is clearly considered not 
to be self-sufficient. The “vulgar tongue” will either supply its vocabulary, be it 
abstract, religious, or philosophic, by borrowing massively from the hierogloss, 
content with simply adapting the foreign terms to its own phonetic system; or it 
will undertake, through the work of the clergy and literati, the much more subtle 
and deep task of reconstructing its own vocabulary, reorientating its conceptual 
links on the basis of the hierogloss and attempting to reestablish within its own 
frame the mental association of the model tongue. New associations of ideas 
may develop within the laogloss, but these will be understood as enriching and 
concretizing the potentialities of the hierogloss. This new phenomenon within 
the laogloss will thus be considered an exegesis of the hieroglossic original, but 
not a true innovation. Such a hieroglossic relationship seems to obtain in all the 
religious and cultural areas of Eurasia.
The lack I wish to address is this: In most cases of hieroglossia, the hierogloss 
itself is what is currently labelled a “dead language, ” that is, a language that is no 
longer the mother tongue of a sufficient number of people to allow it to evolve 
further as a living language. It is for all purposes a “frozen language, ” although 
with certain qualifications and nuances that will be taken up later. This historical 
would likely have been ambiguous in modern languages, as most people would take it to mean “study 
of the sacred. ” The word hieroglossia exists in ancient Greek as well (at least under the adjectival form 
hieroglossos, “speaking a divine or prophetic language”), albeit in a somewhat different meaning that 
should not interfere with the present one, inspired as well from the neologism diglossia, coined by 
Charles Ferguson in 1959, which seems to have rendered some service to research to judge from its wide 
adoption. The distinction between diglossia and hieroglossia will follow later in the text.
To be sure, there is some risk in claiming paternity for a newfangled term in this globally intercom-
municating world, but a search on the Internet for hiéroglossie and hieroglossia yielded only one occur-
rence, and that only on some search engines: hieroglossia, referring to my book mentioned in note 1, 
where I gave the word a Greco-Latin form following the construction of the term diglossia.
3. It should be added at this point that limiting my tour d’horizon to Eurasia does not mean that 
Africa, ancient America, or Oceania are irrelevant to the study of hieroglossia. On the contrary, I 
am convinced that many interesting examples could be found in these continents, as can be seen for 
example in the classical study of Michel Leiris, La langue secrète des Dogons de Sanga (Paris, 1948). For 
my part, I must confess all but total ignorance in these matters.
===== PAGE 3 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture26 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	27
jean-noël robert
freeze is one of the main factors contributing to its hieroglossic status, which is 
why we sometimes see that the religious dimension of a hierogloss follows on its 
classification as a traditional “dead, ” or at least definitively settled, language.
Unfortunately, historians and philologists are constrained to narrow their 
researches to a severely limited spatial and temporal field. This is no doubt for 
the best, since to do otherwise would risk falling into amateurism—the very 
thing I fear I shall be accused of in what follows. Moreover, linguists seem, by 
definition, to be interested only in languages in evolution. “Dead” languages are 
taken up as a legitimate object of research only if they go back to the period 
when they were “living, ” that is to say spoken. Although most scholars are dimly 
aware that the same phenomenon is to be found in other fields than their own, 
they tend to regard the written survival of a sacred or traditional language that 
has long since disappeared from the scene, as a kind of historical aberration. 
And not only an aberration, but evidence of a certain cultural backwardness if 
not a sign of the control exercised by a privileged class on the rest of society.
This all too simplistic view is certainly the most generally held, and it is 
routinely repeated even in recent studies, always with the same naïveté—or 
disingenuousness—and the same tone of virtuous indignation. If would suf -
fice if those who avail themselves of the illustrious title of historian to do the 
historian’s work and investigate a little further than their own age to discover 
that the endurance and universality of this phenomenon invalidate the available 
sociological and mechanistic explanations. I would go further. We would have 
been better off if the knowledge of a dead language were enough to secure tyran-
nical control over people. To impose the study of Latin declensions or Chinese 
poetry at school seems to me a very minor form of oppression. Typical of that 
oversimplified interpretation, resulting from excessive confinement to a single 
field, is the book by Prof. Françoise Waquet, Le latin ou l’empire d’un signe, which 
is regrettably the only monograph of some breadth, albeit very partial, on Latin 
hieroglossia in modern Europe.4
As I have said, linguists are by definition only interested in living languages, 
those that are learned as mother tongues and wander freely from mouth to 
mouth. Nowadays they even seem to prefer oral forms of speech to the written 
4. Cf. the well targeted criticism on that work by Prof. Terence Turnberg in the Latin journal Melissa 
110 (2002), 7–9. For an overall historical survey on Latin in Europe, the little book by Joseph Farrell, 
Latin Language and Latin Culture is highly recommended. To be fair, there are also a host of pious 
ejaculations on the Latin language, as Le latin immortel by M.-M. Martin (Paris, 1966) or B. Lécurieux, 
Le latin langue de l’Eglise (Paris, 1964, 2000), that contribute nothing to our understanding of the 
phenomenon apart from testifying to the enthusiasm it generates in certain circles. The same may be 
said of the innumerable academic apologies for the Latin language that fail to take into account other 
cultures, one of the best being perhaps Jacques Perret’s Latin et culture, (Desclée de Brouwer, Paris, nd.). 
See also the work of Paul Berry cited in the bibliography, a work that seems promising but that I have 
been unable to consult.
===== PAGE 4 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture28
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	29
word. One can hence easily understand that dead languages—that is, languages 
mainly transmitted by writing or learned in a traditional form of study and not 
by the “natural” way—inspire little interest in them. When linguists study a dead 
language, they concentrate mainly on materials produced in an age where it was 
considered to be living. Thus it is that the Latin language is now an object of 
great interest by linguists in Japan and the West, in the same way that meticu -
lous and exciting researches are conducted on archaic Chinese. Needless to say, 
I do not intend to criticize linguists or linguistic research. Their methods are 
perfectly suited to their aims and it is only logical that they exclude dead lan -
guages from their fields of investigation, as these have ceased to develop and are 
unresponsive to the stimuli of history. 
Surely such a judgment is myopic, since it is entirely possible to construct a 
philological history of dead languages. But that would consists of a history of 
their teaching and how they correlate to the level of education: the higher the 
level is, the more “correctly” those languages accord with traditional criteria 
concerning their writing or speech, and the less the influence of the vernacular 
is to be felt in their oral or written realization. There is no denying that very 
important studies have been done on the different degrees of influence from the 
hierogloss to the laogloss, and vice versa, as for example studies on the contami-
nation of Japanese on the Sino-Japanese (kanbun) texts, or traits of Old Church 
Slavonic in the grammar of the Russian literary language. Y et no one would sus-
tain that this belongs to the mainstream of linguistic research; moreover, such 
studies are generally centered on the history of the vernacular and not on the 
hierogloss itself.
The phenomenon of the survival and cultivation of dead languages has there-
fore to be approached differently, since linguistic research has little to offer of 
itself. Once a catalogue has been made of all the grammatical mistakes produced 
under the influence of various vernaculars by those writing or speaking a dead 
tongue—arranged according to regions, countries, and epochs—little will be left  
to discuss. 
 A more or less sociological approach would be equally frustrating. There is 
no more reason to neglect such an approach any more than a linguistic one, but 
I fear it would be particularly slanted and susceptible to bias. Indeed, sociologi-
cal research into the use of dead languages unavoidably falls into the rubric of 
diglossia and the ensuing consequences are predictable, as can be seen from 
what the scholar N. Srinivas has called sanskritization, a term that should cover 
at least in part what is of our concern here, but which now seems to have become 
a tag in an ideological fight drifting further and further from what it originally 
purported to define. The same can be said of diglossia, a very useful category for 
encompassing a variety of socio-linguistic situations from the creole languages 
to Modern Greek. If hieroglossia is reduced to a particular aspect of diglossia, 
===== PAGE 5 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture28 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	29
jean-noël robert
it is all too evident that only sociolinguistic approaches will be deemed appro -
priate to its study, and we will land ourselves back in the same pattern of social 
domination, an unhappy prospect if we remember that exploiters elaborated 
much more efficient instruments of exploitation than the use of dead tongues. 
The same sociolinguistic brackets of diglossia can be set around the recur -
rent accusation of “elitism” being cast at certain vestigial forms of European 
pedagogy that continue to preserve the study of classical languages. Professor 
Waquet, referred to above, subscribes to the custom and indeed makes it one of 
the mainstays of her essay. She has apparently been unaware that the paradigm 
has shifted and that nowadays, at least in the French educational system she is 
concerned with, Latin has been replaced by mathematics, with apparently the 
same flaws that should make them the target of more or less the same criti -
cisms. Latin was an instrument of selection, but so now is mathematics; Latin 
is of no use for pupils preparing for adult life in society, but that is also the case 
with arithmetic, especially nowadays when handheld computers can take care 
of all the calculations necessary to daily life. For a grammar school child today, 
studying Latin or Greek offers little in the way of social success; it simply means 
taking on an unnecessary burden for the sheer love of learning. But here we are 
already far beyond the scope of sociolinguistics. 
There is another argument for the uselessness of studying Latin and Greek 
proposed by the same author and proceeding from a deep misunderstanding 
of the phenomenon insofar as she fails to locate it within the broader frame of 
hieroglossia. It is often remarked that there is no use learning those languages, 
since everything  has been already translated and it should be enough for the 
general reader to read ancient works in modern translation. This, to my mind, is 
a quintessentially jejune argument, as one could say quite the same thing about 
English: nobody would be able even to read a significant part of what is trans -
lated each year from English into French, so why bother learning English when 
you can go your whole life reading Anglo-Saxon authors translated in French? 
Or again, the same holds true for Japanese or Russian authors. But apart from 
that, it is simply wrong to say that everything has been translated. We are not 
even close.
The claim that the whole of Latin literature has been translated ignores 
completely the much longer period when Latin was no longer used as a living 
language, but cultivated as a dead, or simply written, language. Of the output 
spanning more more than a thousand years, from the sixth to the eighteenth 
centuries,5 only a small fraction has ever been translated. There is not yet a com-
5. I could choose arbitrarily either the death of Boethius (“the last Roman”) in 525 or the death of 
Isidore of Sevilla in 636 to mark the “end of living Latin. ” For a terminus ad quem I choose the date 
of publication (1741) of the last Latin literary work to have had a general influence in Europe, the 
===== PAGE 6 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture30
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	31
plete modern translation available of the works of Erasmus, or even of the Latin 
works of Petrarch, Pico della Mirandola, or Giordano Bruno, to mention only 
some of the more illustrious names, not to mention the host of medieval theolo-
gians and philosophers who used Latin exclusively in their compositions.
The Persistence of Ancient Languages
There is yet another essential trait of hieroglossia that is in no way limited to 
Latin. While the cult of “natural” or “living” languages has had the effect that in 
Europe not only philologists but also linguists are bent on narrowing their focus 
to only those periods when the literary output was in a living language, the fact 
is that the literary history of the sacred and traditional languages by far exceed 
the “natural” period. Let me quote a few examples.
As we noted earlier, the living literary period for Latin extended from the 
third century bCe to the sixth century Ce, and the “hieroglossic” period from the 
sixth century to the present day—less than a thousand years on one end, and one 
thousand four hundred years on the other.6
Things are more complex with Greek, but also more significant. The Homeric 
tongue, which one may date back to the eighth century bCe, was already dead, if 
indeed it was ever spoken at all and not simply used as the idiolect of wander -
ing poets, when Homer became a reading manual for the whole of the Hellenic 
world. The Attic dialect, the one used by Plato and the tragic dramatists, became 
settled during the fifth and fourth centuries bCe and thereafter was cultivated 
artificially. Thus Lucian of Samosate, who flourished in the second century Ce 
and even today appears lively and witty to those few schoolchildren who study 
Greek, was actually writing in a language so utterly dead in his own time that 
he sought to resuscitate it as the champion of the “atticizing” school. In his day 
“common” Greek, or koinē, which had come to the fore in Alexander’s empire, 
had won the day to become the language first of the Eastern Roman Empire 
and then of the Greek Orthodox church until the nineteenth century. One has 
only to read the translations made by the fourteenth century Byzantine scholar 
Maximos Planoudes7 of the great works of Latin literature or, much later, those 
Underground Travel (Nicolai Klimii Iter Subterraneum)  by Ludvig Holberg (Ludovicus Holbergius; 
1684–1754), a work which, as most modern scholars seem to keep forgetting, was originally written in 
Latin before being translated into Danish. Needless to say, Latin writing has been cultivated even into 
the twenty-first century, although translations are far more numerous than original works. One of the 
most recent is the translation of Patrick Süskind’s novel Das Parfum as Fragrantia by Nicolaus Gross 
(Fundatio Melissa & Musée de la Maison d’Erasme, Brussels, 2004). 
6. It may be added that Latin is by far the most alive of the dead languages on the Internet.
7. See his Greek version of Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy: Boëce, De la consolation de la phi -
losophie. Traduction grecque de Maxime Planude, ed. by E-A. Bétant (Geneva, 1871; reprint Amsterdam, 
1964).
===== PAGE 7 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture30 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	31
jean-noël robert
made by the scholar and adventurer extraordinary Demetrios Galanos (1760–
1833), who translated Sanskrit works like the Hitopadeśa in a good classical 
Greek, to realize that the literary history of the ancient Greek tongue spanned 
nearly three millennia and was by no means restricted to the first thousand years 
to which most scholars would like to contain it.8
Sanskrit is particularly interesting in this regard. Here is a language that 
“died” long ago, but the most famous literary monuments of which, in contrast 
to those of Greek and Latin, include both the period when it was alive and that 
after it died out. If European students had applied to Sanskrit the categories they 
used for Greek and Latin letters after the revolution of humanism, they should 
have stopped with the Upanishads and considered all later production as bone-
less imitations. And that would have meant no more Kalidasa, no more Dandin, 
no Gītagovinda, and no Kathyasaritsagara, all luminaries of a language that was 
cultivated well after it become frozen in time. This was never a question in India. 
It was a matter of course for pundits as well as those in other castes to think and 
compose in Sanskrit. Not before the nineteenth century and the development of 
modern attitudes did the relevancy of such activity come to be questioned.
In China, if the Analects of Confucius or even the works of Zhuangzi or 
Mencius often give the impression of spoken speech directly recorded, or if we 
think we can find in the Guofeng part of The Book of Odes  lively reflections of 
oral poetry, it seems that the rupture between spoken and written speech was 
definitively consumed by the Han dynasty. From that time on, with certain 
notable exceptions, especially in Buddhist literature, the written language, sev -
ered as it was from the tongue of the people, was the only accepted medium until 
the birth of baihua or vernacular literature, which can be dated in several ways 
but was firmly established during the Ming dynasty. The confrontation between 
literary and colloquial language, wenyan and baihua, lasted well into the twenti-
eth century and has not yet completely disappeared. We may recall that between 
the two World Wars, there was a debate raging inside the Chinese community 
in Malaysia (whose usual Chinese dialect was so different from the Mandarin 
speech being promoted at the time for new literary creation as to appear a totally 
foreign language) concerning the option for Mandarin. Not a few writers simply 
advocated a return to Zhuangzi’s style, which in fact was not as alien to them as 
Peking’s parlance.
In Japan the classic literary language is based on the Kansai dialect, but it 
must have diverged in a significant way from the spoken tongue by the end of 
the Heian era. Although subtle qualifications need to be introduced and the 
8. This does not include the Mycenian period, which would bring us further back by half a millen -
nium. I will not deal here with the diglossia of modern Greek, which could be seen as a narrower aspect 
of the hieroglossic question. Of this, more later.
===== PAGE 8 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture32
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	33
“hybrid Sino-Japanese style” (wakan konkōbun) treated separately, we can say in 
general that from the end of the Heian period until the end of World War ii, not 
only literary works, but also scientific, technical, and legal texts were for the most 
part written in a perfectly frozen, “dead, ” language. For example, the Japanese 
Civil Code, inspired by the French Code Civil which the French writer Stendhal 
regarded as a narrative model for the novelist, was compiled in that highly arti-
ficial, pseudo-classical language, and it was not until the final decades of the last 
century that jurists complied to the new trends and eventually had it transposed 
into modern Japanese language. 
The situation in Japan was further complicated by the fact that the diglossia 
between classical (or written) and modern (or spoken) Japanese was part of a 
larger hieroglossic complex where the use of classical Japanese (bungo) paral -
leled the widespread written use of verbalized classical Chinese in Japanese 
(kanbun). Classical Chinese, which, as we have seen, had long since ceased to be 
a spoken language on the mainland (if indeed it had ever had been), has been 
in use in the Japanese archipelago longer than the Japanese language itself. The 
oldest written remnants found in Japan are all in Chinese, though it is a matter 
of considerable debate whether traces of the Japanese vernacular are to be found 
in them. Taking both languages together until the end of the nineteenth century, 
and taking into account all the monastic documents, literature in the widest 
sense of the term, and texts in “near-Chinese” (hentai-kanbun), it is entirely pos-
sible that the sheer volume of texts written in Chinese in Japan slightly exceed 
what was written in Japanese.
I could mention any number of other instances of the survival of dead 
tongues with Tibetan, Tamil, Mongolian, 9 or the very interesting case of 
Armenian (see below), or even, to go back further to ancient Sumerian. 10 And 
we ought not forget Syriac, based on a language whose spoken form must have 
disappeared around the sixth century, although scholars have succeeded in trac-
ing its literary history down to the thirteenth century. Indeed, a modern student 
has produced rich evidence for the literary output in Syriac until the twentieth 
century, and one can still find it cultivated on the Internet. 11 Here, however, I 
prefer to introduce two languages belonging to the same linguistic family but 
whose destiny has been very different, and which have been involved in deep, 
frequent, and even conflictive relationships: Hebrew and Arabic.  
 9. As should be obvious, I persist in considering diglossia a subclass of hieroglossia.
10. See the article by Piotr Michalowski, “The Life and Death of the Sumerian Language in 
Comparative Perspective, ” electronic version of an article to be published in Acta Sumerologica, http://
www-personal.umich.edu/~piotrm/Diglos~l.htm. 
11. I am speaking here of classical Syriac, not of Neo-Syriac or the so-called Assyrian language. See 
Macuch in the concluding bibliography.
===== PAGE 9 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture32 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	33
jean-noël robert
One often hears that modern Hebrew is the sole example of a dead language 
brought back to life. Extinct for at least two thousand years, ever since the  
destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman army in the first century Ce (or even ear-
lier, by some accounts), Hebrew reappeared quasi-miraculously on the lips of the 
people in the twentieth century, thanks to the genius and labors of Eliezer Ben-
Y ehuda, a savant of Lithuanian ascent who emigrated to Palestine in 1881 and 
made up his mind while crossing the Bosporus to speak nothing but Hebrew 
with his wife. He is, so the legend goes, the first person in modern times to raise 
his children in Hebrew and thus restore it to the status of a living language.
Eliezer Ben-Y ehuda’s life is fascinating indeed, and one cannot read it with-
out feeling oneself carried away by his burning desire to see Hebrew restored as 
a living, even national tongue. But to claim that the revival of language after a 
hiatus of twenty centuries is his doing is really an oversimplification.12 Actually, 
as the Australian linguist Dixon reminded us some years ago, the Hebrew lan -
guage had never ceased to accompany the Jewish people throughout its history 
as a hierogloss. The state of language that was resuscitated in the course of the 
twentieth century was definitely not the idiom of biblical times, but a tongue 
much more fluid and richer in vocabulary and grammar which had developed 
in hellenistic and medieval times. Although its morphology was more or less 
stabilized, the Hebrew tongue that was cultivated by religious scholars and poets 
came under the influence of Greek and Aramean languages first, then of Arabic, 
and later of the European languages, among which it stood as fast as a symbolic 
fortress of identity for a people. Immutable in its raison d’être, its architecture 
underwent numerous minor changes and adjustment in the course of history. 
This characteristic can be extended to hieroglossia as a whole: sacred and tra -
ditional languages only seem to be immutable because the overall grammatical 
and semantic structure appears to hold steady over the centuries, but actually, 
insofar as they are not confined to ritual chanting but are positively cultivated, 
they cannot avoid a living relationship with surrounding vernaculars and soak 
up their influence.
The Puristic Trend
This brings me to yet another digression on the subject of linguistic purism. 
Even within a hieroglossic system there can occur sharp oppositions between 
rigorists or purists on one side, and laxists, moderates, or libertarians on the 
other. Some writers or learned groups may decide to follow the language usage 
12. See his autobiography, Le rêve traversé, ed. by Gérard Hadad, Desclée de Brouwer, Paris, 1998 
(first edition in 1988), together with the memoirs of his son Ithamar Ben-Avi, Mémoires du premier 
enfant hébreu.
===== PAGE 10 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture34
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	35
of a certain period, or even of a certain author held to be the model of pure and 
good language, and cast aspersions on all less strict or more eclectic authors who 
deviate from this grammatical and stylistic norm, forging for themselves a more 
personal style elaborated according to models of sundry times and places.
In Latin this situation is exemplified by the great polemics surrounding 
Ciceronianism that raged in the sixteenth century. One might even define the 
European Renaissance, from a purely philological point of view, as the shift from 
medieval Latin—a most striking example of the evolution of a dead language 
that we have alluded earlier. Under the influence of vernacular vocabulary and 
syntax, medieval Latin, while keeping more or less the morphology of classical 
Latin, had acquired a general appearance much closer to spoken languages 13; 
from the time of Petrarch in the fourteenth century erudite writers appeared 
claiming to have returned to the high linguistic style of antiquity and to have 
imposed on themselves a strict compliance to its style and usage. Beginning with 
Italy, the rest of Europe gradually followed suit in looking back to the ancient 
canons. Soon enough, however, a rift appear within the camp of those who came 
to be known as “humanists. ” If they all discarded without regret the “gothic” or 
“scholastic” style of their elders, the degree of the strictness with which they 
adhered to ancient models varied. One need only read the flexible and easy 
flowing style of Erasmus in his Colloquia or Adagia, which gives the impres -
sion of reading an author writing in his mother tongue, in contrast to the much 
heavier and more pompous style of Julius Caesar Scalinger or Antoine Muret, 
to realize how the same notion of classical language took widely different forms 
in the concrete. Purists would refuse to use vocabulary not found in Cicero or 
Caesar. In fact, they would not even consider the looser style of Cicero’s letters a 
suitable model, but held fast to his orations and philosophical dialogues. Some 
would even go so far as to refuse to use verbs in persons or tenses, or nouns in 
cases that were not attested to in Cicero’s canonical works. 
Accordingly, certain scholars have argued that this resurrection of classical 
Latin was the very reason for its demise a century or two later. Had the literati 
remained content with the much simpler Latin flourishing at the end of the 
Middle Ages, it would have been more readily and more widely accessible and 
hence would have kept a status close to a vernacular. As for myself, I cannot 
agree with that view, but it is an interesting proposal and deserves closer inves -
tigation. 
Something of the same phenomenon can be seen in a still more striking 
form in the quarrel that pitted the two main centers of the Armenian culture in 
13. There are solid grounds for arguing that medieval Latin what nothing more than the continua -
tion of vulgar Latin as spoken at the end of antiquity, something that would have been natural in regions 
speaking Romance languages. Dante seems to hold this idea in his De vulgari eloquentia. 
===== PAGE 11 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture34 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	35
jean-noël robert
Europe against each other in the monasteries of the religious order known as 
the Mekhitarists in Venice and Vienna. Founded in the eighteenth century by 
the famous Armenian priest Mekhitar (1676–1749), who had rallied the church 
of Rome, the order that took his name took as its mission the salvaging of the 
Armenian nation. In the effort to lift it out from under oppression and obscu -
rantism, they brought modern European culture and sciences to the people, sub-
scribing to the idea current at the time that the best way to defend Christianity 
among the oriental nations was first to transform the clergy into a cultural élite 
who could raise the rest of the population to the level of Europe. Like most 
languages, Armenian is divided by linguists into three main levels. The first of 
these is the classical tongue, or grabar, which is the language of the translations 
of the Bible and the Church Fathers as well as of the body of original literature 
that grew out of them from the fifth century Ce onwards. Second, we have 
middle Armenian, which flourished after the twelfth century; and third, modern 
Armenian, which is itself divided into two principal dialects: the eastern dialect, 
which is the official language of now independent Armenia, and the Western 
dialect that survived in the diaspora to Lebanon, Europe, and America after the 
slaughter of the prominent Armenian community in Anatolia in the beginning 
of the twentieth century.
 The Mekhitarists engaged themselves in the intensive and admirable enter -
prise of translating not only religious texts, but literary and historical works 
as well from European languages into classical Armenian, among them the 
writings of Latin poets, Greek historians, and medieval theologians. Then an 
unexpected dilemma surfaced. Progress in philology led to the recognition of 
two slightly distinct levels in classical Armenian, or grabar: a first period dating 
roughly from the year 400 to the middle of the fifth century, and a second begin-
ning from the second half of the fifth century, when new grammatical forms 
unknown in the earlier age appeared. 
The nineteenth century saw an unexpected rise of purism, with some monas-
tic writers claiming to hold to the oldest and purest style for translations and 
original writing, and banning all subsequent innovations. Against this view, 
others objected that it is absurd to renounce forms well attested in prestigious 
authors. Things got bitter and the two opinions hardened into opposing camps, 
the Vienna monastery holding fast to the earlier, “Golden Age Armenian, ” and 
the monastery of San Lazzaro in Venice representing the more liberal attitude.14 
With the turn to the twentieth century, the feud drew to an end as the monks 
abandoned the classical language in favor of modern Western Armenian, a 
decision all the more regrettable in that the language of independent Armenia 
14. See Martiros Minassian, Manuel pratique d’arménien ancien, Klincksieck,  Paris, 1976, 24, and 
Marc Nichanian, Ages et usages de la langue arménienne.
===== PAGE 12 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture36
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	37
has now become Eastern Armenian. 15 I had the occasion to ask a monk of San 
Lazzaro if the practice of writing in grabar still existed and was told that it does 
not. Classical Armenian is now a passive hierogloss, studied only with an eye to 
comprehension and not actively cultivated. It, too, has fallen victim to the lack 
of understanding of the phenomenon of hieroglossia and the accompanying cult 
of spoken language, after a dazzling but brief period of revival, possibly inspired 
both by the example of the Latin Renaissance of Europe and by the great wave 
of renewal of classical Arabic language and literature known as Fahda, in which 
Christian Arabs of Lebanon played an important part.16
After digressing on a number of problems unique to hieroglossia and want -
ing in the same form in living languages, 17 we may return to Hebrew, more or 
less the same debate over purism is to be found, particularly in the first gen -
erations of the modern literary revival of the nineteenth century. What is often 
presented in literary history as the first modern Hebrew novel, Ohevet Tsion or 
The Love of Sion by Abraham Mapu (1808–1867), a short narrative, is written in 
a calque of biblical style as regards to grammar, syntax, and vocabulary, which 
led to debates as to how to define the form of language to be adopted by Hebrew 
writers. The question was not an easy one, as shown by the work of Shmuel Iosef 
Agnon, the most famous Hebrew novelist of the twentieth century, who came 
up with a solution of his own. While not submitting blindly to biblical language, 
he introduced assorted elements from a wide range of antique and medieval 
texts. Steeped as he was in traditional learning, he refused to yield to the lure 
of spoken everyday Hebrew as he heard it around him in Palestine. A winner 
of the Nobel Prize for literature and venerated as one of the founding fathers of 
modern Hebrew literature, Agnon seems, unfortunately, not very accessible to 
the younger generations, lacking the traditional religious education to appreci -
ate him. In a word, his is the world of Hebrew hieroglossia, while younger Israeli 
15. Space prohibits me from speaking of Coptic, a language that the Muslim conquest of Egypt 
gradually obliterated from the early Middle Ages. Though no longer spoken, it survived mainly as a 
liturgical tongue under its northern form the so-called Bohairic dialect; the southern dialect, Saidic, 
vanished altogether. In the modern attempts at reviving Coptic, a minority favors rejecting Bohairic in 
favor of Saidic, which is thought to be “purer” for reasons of its antiquity and for the renewed prestige 
it earned with the unearthing of the Nag Hammadi gnostic library, whose texts are written in a dialect 
close to Saidic. Altogether, we cannot help being reminded of the dilemma facing ancient Armenian.
16. Ignorant though I am in these matters, I would venture the possibility of an influence by 
European humanism on the Fahda through the medium of the revival of classical Syriac letters, imple -
mented by Rome with the founding of the Collegium Maronitarum. See Pierre Raphaël, Le rôle du 
Collège Maronite Romain dans l’orientalisme aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles (Beyrouth, 1950). 
17. This is not to say that they are not found at all. One could, for example, cite the novel by Umberto 
Eco, L ’isola del giorno prima, in which the author flatters himself not to have used a word unattested to 
in seventeenth century usage. There are also literary creations by Balzac and Anatole France pastiching 
medieval French. But those are limited examples of scholarly amusement verging on the prankish.
===== PAGE 13 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture36 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	37
jean-noël robert
people received Hebrew as a vernacular, or laogloss, with much less essential 
links to traditional culture.18
The most patent case of active hieroglossia in the modern world is no doubt 
Arabic. Inasmuch as it is more commonly considered in terms of diglossia, the 
description of the case of Arabic has been partial and unsatisfactory. The fact 
is, written Arabic was virtually born with the Koran. Despite the tradition of 
“pre-Islamic poets” who are thought to have flourished in the “age of ignorance” 
and whose authority is sometimes invoked in lexical or grammatical matters, a 
number of scholars have come to assert that this comparatively limited corpus 
actually postdates Islam, or at least was radically refashioned well after the time 
of Mohammed. It is probably safe to say that literary (or “literal, ” as it was some-
times called) Arabic is broadly modeled on the language of the Koran. Traits 
peculiar to the Koranic style have come to make it considered “inimitable’ . ” 
Attempts to imitate it too closely, to the extent that it can appear as pastiche, 
is deemed blasphemy. There was at least one case in the twentieth century of a 
Christian translation of the Psalms whose Arabic appeared to approximate too 
much the style of the Holy Writ, evoking a volley of criticism from the circles 
of the devout.
What is more, the extremely exalted status accorded the Koran in Islam was 
cause for the Arabic language to become the hierogloss par excellence, in con -
trast to what has occurred in Judaism or Christianity. As is well known, in order 
to save Islam from the fate that Christianity suffered with the transmission from 
the Greek to the Latin world, or with the polemics against the Greek Septuagint 
translation from the Hebrew, it was decided at an early stage that the Koranic 
text should not be translated into any other language, the original Arabic being 
recognized as the only received text. The untouchability of the sacred text, 
together with the work of writers and grammarians, gave a durability to written 
Arabic. Even now, apart from texts pertaining to genres regarded as minor, like 
comic strips or comedy, written Arabic or Modern Literary Arabic ( Mla) tries 
to adjust to classical grammatical standards, while the spoken language evolves 
on any number of levels bounded by daily dialect and sustained speech mod -
elled on the written style. Mutatis mutandis, writing in Arabic nowadays could 
18. I must mention here the question raised by linguists like Paul Wexler concerning the alleged 
change of nature in the Hebrew language after its adoption as a vernacular. They argue that it has lost 
entirely its original character as a semitic language (especially in the verbal system) and been trans -
formed into a calque of European languages through the agency of Yiddish, the natural language of the 
majority of the first emigrants. In this regard Wexler takes an extreme position in The Schizoid Nature 
of Modern Hebrew: A Slavic Language in Search of a Semitic Past (Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1991). 
See also the Internet edition of a paper by Shlomo Izre’el: “The Emergence of Spoken Israeli Hebrew, ” 
Symposium Corpus Linguistics and the Study of Modern Hebrew,  Emory University, Atlanta, February 
2000, which concludes: “The emergence of Hebrew as a spoken language was not the revival of a dead 
language, but the creation of a new language. ”
===== PAGE 14 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture38
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	39
be compared to writing in medieval Latin for the speaker of an Italian dialect. 
The only form of dialectal Arabic to be written systematically is the Maltese 
language, clearly belonging to the Maghreb dialect continuum in spite of its 
abundant borrowings from Italian, and written with the Latin script.19
The case of Arabic is so dazzling in its clarity and its singularity among mod-
ern languages that it is not often described as it really is: a language that should 
be called “dead, ” relying on a grammar stabilized during the ninth and tenth 
centuries, which is both a sacred tongue and a language used at all the levels of 
modern life. In Arabic, all the failures that are attributed to diglossia are rectified 
by the simple fact of hieroglossia. That is why we can safely assume that its para-
doxical situation is here to last, notwithstanding critics within and without.
Under the circumstances, it is not hard to see why religious translation is 
not often encouraged; when Islam spread to non-Arabic speaking peoples, only 
juxtalinear translations—glosses, so to speak—were tolerated, and that only 
for certain languages. The only acceptable way of gaining knowledge of the 
Koran was to learn classical Arabic, since no translation could ever measure 
up to the original. Only in modern times do we see a flourishing of versions in 
other languages, at first mainly out of literary interest, then out of concern for 
religious studies, and finally from the commitment of Westerners to Islam. The 
first European translations were made in Latin during the Middle Ages, the aim 
being to give clerics a direct knowledge of Christianity’s principal rival in the 
world as it was known to the West. This rejection of the basic principle of trans-
lation had lasting consequences in the Muslim world, parallels of which exist in 
other cases of hieroglossia but unique in their reach. Even if we leave aside the 
issue of scripts and confine ourselves to languages,20 it is impossible to give even 
the broadest sketch of the situation. I content myself here with the examples of 
Persian and Hindustani, which seem to me typical.
Persian had been the language of an ancient civilization when the Persian 
empire was conquered by the Arabs at the end of the seventh century. At that 
time the language in use was mostly Middle Persian, or Pahlavi, but the Muslim 
invasion and the cultural upheaval that followed in its wake made room for 
19. Maltese is also an interesting case of hieroglossia, with its partition of Arabic and Romance 
vocabulary according to categories involving strong religious elements, e.g. sliem “(interior) peace, ” 
“serenity” v. paċi “peace” (as opposed to war). Cf. Joseph Cutayar, Parlons maltais (L ’Harmattan, Paris, 
1999), 119.
20. The issue of sacred scripts and their relations with the profane, which we could call hierographia 
or, in French, hiérographie (a term that has been coined independently, I am pleased to say, by my 
young colleague M. Jean-Pascal Pouzet, a scholar of medieval English literature, in a paper that is to be 
published in the Comptes rendus des séances de l’année 2004 of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-
Lettres), is too vast to even hint at here. For Arabic script alone, it would involve not only the major 
languages of Islam—Persian, Osmanli and Oriental Turkish, and Urdu—but would cover a vast area 
from Malay, Javanese to Dutch through Serbo-Croatian and Albanese.
===== PAGE 15 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture38 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	39
jean-noël robert
the rise of Modern Persian, which was committed to writing as early as the 
ninth century with an Arabic alphabet adapted to the very different phonetics 
of Iranian languages and became the medium of a rich literature. As was the 
case with English and Franco-Latin vocabulary or the languages of sinicized 
East Asia, the Arabic lexicon made an impressive entrance into Persian, surely 
accounting for between three-quarters and two-thirds of the vocabulary. The 
terms coming from the Arabic hierogloss would naturally relate to religion, 
ritual, and law, but they extended to philosophy, politics, and the arts as well, and 
even to basic daily vocabulary. As in other languages, we notice the important 
number of doublets, words of Arabic origin coexisting with their Persian syn -
onyms and allowing a greater variety of expression.21 
Sooner or later, the massive intrusion of foreign words into any language 
seems to elicit a strong reaction from the receiving side, and Persian was no 
exception. If anything, it reacted comparatively early, as one of the masterpieces 
of Persian literature, the Book of Kings, a long epic poem narrating the legendary 
history of ancient Persia, was composed by Firdausi (d. 1020 or 1026) in a style 
from which all Arabic vocabulary was banned as far as possible. That this was 
not a mere rear-guard action from a doomed world is shown by the resurgence 
in contemporary Iran of the same concern with restoring the integrity of the old 
language against what is felt to be a foreign invasion. One may mention here the 
writer Ahmad Kasravī (1891–1945), who sought to free Persian from the exces -
sive use of Arabic words22 and was assassinated as a slanderer of Islam. There is 
today an Internet site called Pure Persian Project which posts lists of proposed 
Persian vocabulary to replace imported Arabic words. Unlikely as it is that a 
significant number of those revived or coined terms will ever find their way into 
the language, the persistence of this spirit of resistance over a millennium gives 
pause to think. We are not dealing here with some vagaries of cultural chauvin-
ism, but with a deeply rooted tendency in the life of languages. 23
Hindustani illustrates another type of hieroglossic relation with Arabic.  I 
deliberately use the somewhat old-fashioned name for this language which grad-
ually came to be the lingua franca of the Moghul empire and was transformed 
from the eighteenth century, at the hands of great poets, into a refined medium 
21. To pick examples at random from the Persian translation of the Arabian Nights made in the 
nineteenth century by Abdollatif Tajusi Tabrizi, I find on the same page en’ām and pādaš “reward, ” asar 
and nešāne  “sign, ” harakat and jombeš “move. ” (I have adopted the convenient transliteration system 
called Unipers which I discovered on the Internet.)
22. See Peter W . Avery et al. , Modern Persian Reader III. Advanced (Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1962), 5.
23. These separations of heterogeneous lexica within the same language are not always hostile, 
as shown by the example of classical Japanese poetry (waka), from which all Chinese vocabulary is 
excluded. The same writer could cultivate both Chinese-style poetry (kanshi) and waka. This led to the 
very interesting development of Buddhist poetry in Japanese (shakkyōka).
===== PAGE 16 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture40
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	41
written with an Arabian-Persian script and replete with borrowings from the 
same. From the nineteenth century on, non-Muslim Indians in Northern India 
felt the need to reappropriate Hindustani as a literary and official language. It 
began to be written with the old Indian script known as devanāgarī and was elab-
orated on the basis of the dialect called khari-bolī. One of the main tasks of the 
reformers was to replace Arabian-Persian borrowings with the learned Sanskrit 
lexicon. The political problems of the twentieth century and the Partition of 
India only fueled the desire to differentiate the two states of the same Hindustani 
language, now called Urdu and Hindi, the former being a distinguishing mark 
of Muslims, the latter being supported by Hindus and non-Muslims in general. 
While both “languages” are for the most part mutually intelligible in their daily 
usage, they diverge more and more drastically in their religious and learned 
vocabulary.24 The dominance of English on the Indian subcontinent may well 
solve the problem in the not so distant future.
Hieroglossia and the “Three Monotheisms”
This might be the place to sketch, if only briefly, a comparison of hieroglos -
sic relations in the “three monotheisms. ” Given what has just been said, Arabic 
hieroglossia obviously leaves little room for vernacular languages, which are 
all peripheral to the Arabic sacred tongue. As a consequence, any tendency to 
linguistic purism that is not centered on Arabic looks to be opposed to Islam. 
This attitude, however, may not be not universal throughout the Muslim world. 
As far as I know, there is no purist trend in Urdu (a purist Urdu would be 
called Hindi), but Bengali offers a more complicated case in that even after the 
independence of Bangladesh, it did not develop into a dichotomy of Hindu and 
Muslim dialects. Moreover, modern literary Bengali is less fraught with Arabic-
Persian borrowings than Urdu is.25 Could it be that Indo-Aryan vocabulary was 
used in Bengali both for Hindu and Muslim notions? Be that as it may, the only 
language in the Islamic world that seems to have been granted a special religious 
status apart from Arabic would be Syriac, the language, according to Massignon, 
in which the individual judgment (as opposed to the collective Last Judgment) 
is carried out after the death of the individual. It is also believed that Syriac was 
24. It is instructive in this regard to compare Urdu and Hindi translations of the Bible, where almost 
identical sentences differ only by the use of substantives from Arabic-Persian origin, on the one hand, 
and Sanskrit, on the other. See Stuart McGregor, “The Progress of Hindi, Part 1: The Develop ment of 
a Transregional Idiom, ” in Pollock, Literary Cultures in History, 912–57; and Harish Trivedi, op. cit., 
962–71.
25. But see on this question Sudipta Kaviraj, “Two Literary Culture Histories in Bengal, ” in Pollock, 
Literary Cultures in History, especially 531, 541 (with note 53) and 542–3 . Incidentally, I do not see any 
need to change the name of the language from Bengali to Bangla, any more than I would dream of 
requiring English speakers to refer to my language as the Français language, or me of theirs as l’english.
===== PAGE 17 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture40 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	41
jean-noël robert
the language spoken by Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden. This belief has not, 
to the best of my knowledge, had any impact on the use of Syriac within Islam, 
as to this day the preserve of Christians in the Middle East and has never been 
used by Muslim commentators for Koranic exegesis. 26 Belief in the uncreated 
and eternal nature of the Holy Book as coexisting with God from the beginning 
in the Arabic language—a belief that came to be symbolized with the concept 
of the Guarded Table or al-luh al-mahfuz, the archetypal eternal exemplar of 
the Koran, of which worldly copies are no more than a reflection—has contrib-
uted in no small way to giving that language a special place in the pantheon of 
hieroglossia.
In Judaism, of course, the sacred tongue is Hebrew. Although some schol -
ars would not express it in those terms, it is difficult to explain any other way 
the expression lashon ha-qodesh or “tonghe of holyness, ” which is reserved for 
Hebrew. (It is often used in Yiddish, for example.) True, the whole of the Hebrew 
Bible is not written in Hebrew. Apart from the Apocrypha that are written in 
Greek, parts of the Hebrew canon are written in Aramaic, an older form of 
the Syriac language. Although the role of Aramaic is still very restricted in the 
Bible, it held a place of considerable importance within Judaism for its role in 
the Targum and the Talmud. Targum, a word generally meaning “translation, ” is 
used more specially for the originally oral vernacular translation of the scriptural 
verse read in a synagogue service. A ritual place was reserved for such translation 
practices already from early on in Judaism, contrarily to what prevailed in Islam. 
In Hellenistic times, the two main laoglosses used in Targum were Aramaic and 
Greek, both languages that defined the Middle East from Syria to Egypt at the 
time. For reasons most probably linked to the growing assimilation of the Greek 
language into Christianity, as well as to the role of the Septuagint version in the 
new religion, only Aramaic kept its liturgical role and forsook its oral status for 
a written one, witnessed by the fact that up to the present it figures in traditional 
midrash literature as small letters set alongside the Hebrew text of the Bible. 
The other great domain of Aramaic was the Talmud (meaning “learning”) in 
its “Babylonian” edition, a massive body of texts transmitting the “oral” law of 
Judaism and the basis for religious practice. Unlike its predecessor, the Jerusalem 
Talmud, the Talmud of Babylon was written in Aramaic and the important place 
it had in Jewish life made it necessary for anyone aspiring to religious knowledge 
to learn the language. Even books of daily prayers still include verses or whole 
prayers in Aramaic.
26. This demonstrates the different direction taken by European research on Koranic language. 
For a recent example, see Christoph Luxenberg, Die syro-aramäische Lesart des Korans: Ein Beitrag zur 
Entschlüsselung der Koransprache (Verlag Hans Schiller, 2004, 2nd edition).
===== PAGE 18 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture42
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	43
Things did not stop there, however, and Judaism underwent a further devel-
opment that saw Aramaic exalted to the point that one may wonder whether 
it had not come to equal the sanctity of Hebrew itself. This was the rise of 
Kabbala. As is well known, in the thirteenth century there appeared in the world 
of Judaism a book whose reception was extraordinary and which originated 
the most vigorous trend of Jewish mystical thought. The Zohar, or (Book of) 
Splendor, is presented as the teachings on the hidden meaning of the Torah 
attributed to Simeon Bar Y ohai, a scholar of the first century Ce. Most likely 
in order to give his wonderful forgery an atmosphere of genuine antiquity, the 
author of the Zohar, Moses of Leon, chose to write it in an Aramaic style that, 
in Gershom Scholem’s judgment, is largely idiosyncratic but succeeds in giving 
the text a peculiar and recognizable flavor. The veneration that was accorded the 
Zohar in some circles was so deep that, even though the work is directly acces -
sible in the original text only to scholars steeped in its language, the belief arose 
that it was enough to touch the book or apply it to ailing parts of the body to 
benefit from its power. One can hardly get any deeper into hieroglossia, which is 
why I suggested that Aramaic came somehow to equal Hebrew in sanctity. Still, 
given that the Zohar purports to be a mystical exegesis of the Hebrew Bible, the 
hierarchy of the two languages remains in place.
It is perhaps this peculiar relationship between Hebrew and Aramaic that gave 
birth to an idea that I find very interesting for the understanding of hieroglos -
sia. The twentieth century Cabalist Elie Benamozegh posits that the languages 
of mankind number seventy-two, each one revealing in its own translation of 
the Bible deep meanings that can be expressed only in that language. 27 Seen in 
this light, the laoglosses become an integral element of hieroglossia; in them the 
sacred tongue displays the full wealth of its meaning. This idea is very close to 
the views underlying the practice of Japanese buddhist poetry (shakkyōka), as 
I hope to demonstrate at a later time. For now, it is enough to remark how the 
richest hieroglossic situations are those in which room is made explicitly for the 
“vulgar” tongues, these rising in status to the point that they arrive at the level 
of the sacred language.
Christianity presents a rather complex hieroglossic system. Up to the time 
of the Second Vatican Council in the early 1960s, we find three languages with 
the status of sacred tongues: 28 Hebrew, Greek, and Latin (to which we may add 
biblical Aramaic, sometimes called by the old name of Chaldaic or Chaldean, 
an ambiguous appellation that sometimes includes Syriac). For Hebrew and 
Aramaic, as for Greek, the matter is simpler: the fact they are the languages of 
the two Testaments foundational for the Christian faith is sufficient to justify 
27. See Charles Mopsik, Cabale et cabalistes (Paris, 1997, 2003), 172.
28. See Auvray et al. in the concluding bibliography.
===== PAGE 19 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture42 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	43
jean-noël robert
their hieroglossic status. Latin, in contrast, was the civilized language of the 
Western Roman empire, and boasted a prestigious literature that was the basis of 
learning from late antiquity through the Middle Ages until modern times, after 
the demise of Greek culture in the West, but otherwise had no claim to the title 
of a sacred language.29 The success of St Jerome’s translation of the Bible in Latin 
completed in 406, the importance of the Latin Church Fathers, and the essen -
tial role of Latin in the expansion of the Church across Western Europe, not to 
mention the central place of the papacy as the heir of the Roman empire—all 
these things converged to endow Latin with a prestige and primacy that was 
sanctioned by the decision to authorize the Latin translation of the Bible, with 
the fitting appellation of Vulgate, as an authentic text divinely inspired, and to 
raise the Latin language to hieroglossic status.
Very similar developments took place in almost all languages of all Christian 
traditions of ancient origins: Syriac, Coptic, Armenian, Ethiopian, and even 
Slavonic. The translation of the Bible into those languages, which often signalled 
the beginning of their literature, conferred a dignity close to the original Hebrew 
and Greek. Even with the renewal of the translation movement in Renaissance 
Europe, when Protestantism stimulated a wave of biblical translations in the 
vernaculars, each new “vulgar” Bible tended to become in turn a paradigm both 
on the literary plane as well as on the religious. One thinks at once of Luther’s 
German Bible or King James version in English. 
As an example of the natural evolution of religious texts along hieroglossic 
lines, we may cite the fate of Luther’s Bible in America, where the Amish sect, 
whose members came from German-speaking areas of Europe, has kept it as the 
basis of their religious practice and the model of their written language (rather 
much the same as Catholic Europe did with the Latin language during the 
Middle Ages), while the language of daily life is a highly evolved German dia -
lect. There are also cases where translations of the Bible counter the natural flow 
of the language, as we see in the sixteenth century Finnish translation, which 
imitated so closely the wording of the German version that it imposed a clearly 
recognizable biblical idiolect that held on for several generations against the 
opposition of purists and later attempts to produce translations more in keep -
ing with the genius of the Finnish language.30 We may argue that the King James 
version and Luther’s translation are hieroglossic phenomena within English and 
German, something wanting in French, for example, where the same relation is 
rather oriented toward the Vulgate. Accordingly, many Anglo-Saxon novelists 
29. The fact that the reason for Christ’s crucifixion was appended to the Cross in Hebrew, Greek 
and Latin (according to Luke 23:38 and John 19:20) has been often invoked in apologetic literature as 
grounds for the sanctity of Latin.
30. See Aurélien Sauvageot, L ’élaboration de la langue finnoise (Paris: Klingsieck, 1973).
===== PAGE 20 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture44
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	45
have been able to take full advantage of this easily recognizable and so easily 
pastiched biblical idiolect, as we can see, for example in the examples of William 
Faulkner’s Light in August or Cormack McCarthy’s Blood Meridian.
These random remarks permit a clear contrast between the one-directional 
hieroglossia of Islam, on the one hand, and the multi-directional and variegated 
hieroglossia of Judaism and Christianity, for all their differences, on the other. At 
the same time, what makes the hieroglossic phenomenon itself rise above these 
and other analogies is the dominant and clear-cut concept of a sacred or holy 
tongue. Similarities are more easily perceived when seen from the outside. In 
particular, I suggest a glance at the situation obtaining in the Buddhist world or 
in the Chinese cultural sphere, the two of which at times overlap.
The question of language in Buddhism is immensely complex, though I 
confess I developed the concept of hieroglossia from my study of Japanese 
Buddhism. There I found a most transparent hieroglossic situation, indeed an 
exceptionally clear one and all the more interesting since it involves three lan -
guages: Sanskrit, Chinese, and Japanese. Premodern Japanese scholars did not 
define this situation as hieroglossia, but they have left us very articulate reflec -
tions on the religious quality of the relationship among those languages. Many 
of these scholars were also monks and poets, and simply felt the need to explain 
and justify what they were about. I leave the fuller problematic to another occa-
sion and will simply note here that whereas the monotheistic world in its three 
religions had clearly defined some languages as having a status absolutely differ-
ent from the others, Buddhism rejected that assumption a priori from early on, 
probably as a reaction against the too great preeminence accorded to Sanskrit in 
Indian Brahmanism, a situation that calls to mind its parallel in the monotheis-
tic religions. In the course of history, we witness a reversal of this trend with the 
adoption of Sanskrit as the privileged language of the Great Vehicle, the fixation 
of Pāli as the one language of Theravāda, and finally the rise of a hieroglossic 
relationship between Chinese and Japanese within the theoretical framework of 
Buddhist thought.
Of the three monotheistic hieroglossia, it may be noted, the Christian seems 
to have suffered the most in our days, especially in its Catholic form, with the 
fall in status of the Latin language after Vatican ii. One surmises that the fact 
that Catholicism, unlike the other two monotheistic religions, could not focus 
on a single language with theological legitimacy may have been responsible for 
the dispersal and weakening. Protestantism went further still in that direction, 
with the result that hieroglossia would cease to be a factor in the evolution of 
modern Christianity. One may, of course, point to the revival of the Latin liturgy 
in the American Catholic church, as in some parts of Europe, but the purely 
liturgical use of a sacred tongue—or “passive hieroglossia” as I call it—is surely 
the least interesting and more often than not a foreboding of the disappearance 
===== PAGE 21 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture44 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	45
jean-noël robert
of a language in that it demands only minimal knowledge from the believers. A 
bilingual book of prayers is more than adequate in most respects.
Coexistence within One Language
We may now turn to yet another remarkable aspect of hieroglossia, one in which 
the sacred language takes on, as it were, a kind of independent life within the 
vulgar language, that is to say where its influence is not limited to the vocabu -
lary or the semantic transfer, but where the grammar of the former continues to 
work in the latter.
A compelling example can be seen in the Persian language. As anyone who 
has studied Persian knows, even a smattering of the language requires famil -
iarity with the Arabic grammar that governs the Arabic elements that have 
entered into the language. To take one concrete example from one of the most 
widely used handbooks, A. K. S. Lambon’s Persian Grammar, pages 3 to 177 
cover Persian language properly speaking, while pages 181 to 245 describe in 
brief all there is to know of Arabic morphology to be able to handle the Arabic 
vocabulary in Persian. One notices from the start that this minimal grammar 
has mainly to do with the noun, and only derived participial or nominal forms 
of the verb, while almost nothing is said of the personal conjugation of verbs. 
The reason is not hard to understand: the soul of a language, at least of an 
inflected language, resides in its verbal conjugations. Whereas it is a relatively 
simple matter to transfer nouns from one language to another, since they do 
not change categories but remain nouns they are accorted a relative stability. 
But it is hard to imagine one language using two different verbal systems at the 
same time, one imported and one native. When a verb is borrowed, it is mostly 
adapted to the native conjugation, as in the French j’ai shooté (“I took a shot, ” 
e.g., at goal), and Persian is no exception. The Arabic verb fahima “understand, ” 
whose verbal noun is fahm, became with the adjunction of a verbal suffix the 
Persian verb fahmidan, which is regularly conjugated. But only a knowledge of 
Arabic grammar can differentiate the shades of meaning between qasd “deci-
sion” in the sense of “taking a decision” (a verbal noun) and masqud “decision” in 
the sense of “something that has been decided” (passive participle), both coming 
from the same root qsd. The same holds for mayl “willingness, inclination” and 
māyel “willing” (active participle). Such formations are found by the thousands 
in Persian.
More remarkable still is the fact that Arabic pronominal suffixes indicating 
possession are sometimes applied to Persian words, as in the endearing locution 
nure cašmi “light of my eyes, ” where the Arabic suffix –i is for the first person of 
the singular, while cašm “eye” is pure Persian, the regular Persian way of express-
ing the same idea being cašmam. 
===== PAGE 22 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture46
hieroglossia
	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	47
But the most perplexing grammatical trait in Persian is perhaps the pres -
ence of the so-called “intern” or “broken” Arabic plurals, typical of a number of 
Semitic languages. Whereas modern Persian expresses very simply the plural 
by appending the suffixes –ān or –hā to substantives, Arabic nouns undergo an 
internal change in thirty or so possible patterns, only partially predictable from 
the form of the singular. As one example, consider the Arabic word ketāb “book, ” 
the Arabic “broken” plural of which, kotob, coexist in Persian with the more col-
loquial form with the native suffix ketāb-hā. Obviously the ability “correctly” to 
inflect this Arabic vocabulary is a sign of greater literacy and confers, or at least 
once conferred, prestige on the user.
Moreover, the strong hieroglossic link between Arabic and Persian led to the 
current practice of quoting in the original Arabic whole verses from the Koran 
(which would not have to be translated in any case), or from other religious, 
philosophical, or literary works.31 In such cases, the cultivated reader is expected 
to know the whole of Arabic grammar. Deriving from this practice of integral 
quotation is the use of countless adverbial locutions, clichés, and proverbs that 
passed directly into Persian. It would be easy to give examples of the same prac-
tices in the Hebrew-Yiddish or Sino-Japanese hieroglossia.
Questions for Future Research
As intimated earlier, the study of the evolution of Buddhist poems composed 
in Japanese on the basis of excerpts from Chinese-language sūtras (hōmonka) 
led me to the notion of hieroglossia as a way to speak of the set of relations 
occurring between a particular sacred or traditional language and one or more 
languages considered dependent of this language for the higher truths of reli -
gion. It is essentially a religious phenomenon and hence may or may not develop 
along sociolinguistic lines and hence be susceptible to diglossia. But hieroglos -
sia falls in the main outside the scope of sociolinguistics since there is no need 
for a minimum number of persons to make it worthy of study. The case of a 
single individual may be as fascinating as that of an entire religious community. 
The study of hieroglossia would involve the use of history of religions, literary 
studies, philology, linguistics, sociolinguistics, and even psychology. In effect it 
embraces the full relationship between language and religion to the extent that 
one at least of the languages involved is a sacred or traditional one. 
After this admittedly somewhat muddled presentation, I would like to con -
clude by noting hieroglossic attitudes within historical Eurasian cultures, indi -
cating some categories for further possible research:
31. See any page from one of the best read classical works of Persian literature, Saadi’s Golestān. 
Modern editors have felt it necessary to give a Persian translation of the quotations.
===== PAGE 23 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture46 	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture	 Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	47
jean-noël robert
Discourse on supremacy, truth, or efficacy of a sacred language.
 Critical discourse aimed at a sacred language, especially in time of religious 
or scientific reform.
The discourse of the affiliation of vulgar languages with sacred languages.
 Exegesis of religious texts: exegesis performed in the same language, or in 
another language. This admits of various possibilities, according to whether 
it is a “vulgar” language, another sacred language, or at least a language 
endowed with a certain prestige.
Translations of religious texts.
The shift, transfer, and adaptation of religious vocabulary.
 Religious polemics based on translations or borrowings in another lan -
guage.
The access of a “vulgar” language to religious status: the vying for sacrality.
 Liturgical and magic use of sacred languages (the two not to be equated).
Language purism and religion or magic.
There are many other possible headings, any number of which I imagine will 
already have occurred to students of a given religious tradition after a glance at 
the ten points listed above. I deliberately refrain from giving precise examples 
for each of them, as the possibilities are well nigh infinite. 
It is my hope that this new field of study, or rather this unifying term for 
ancient fields, will not be deemed an empty fantasy or a useless adjunct to an 
already overweight catalog of pompous and hollow neologisms, that at least it 
will help some to realize that what they have been doing relates to a wider world 
than they had previously thought.
Bibliography
Auvray, Paul; Poulain, Pierre; Blaise, Albert. Les langues sacrées, “Je sais—je crois, ” 
Encyclopédie du catholique du XXe siècle  (Paris: Librairie Arthème Fayard, 
1957.
Berry, Paul. The Latin Language and Christianity. Texts and Studies in Religion 
104 (New Y ork: Edwin Mellen Press, 2004).
Farrell, Joseph. Latin Language and Latin Culture: From Ancient to Modern 
Times (Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Goldman, Shalom. God’s Sacred Tongue: Hebrew and the American Imagination, 
(University of North Carolina Press, 2004). 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
===== PAGE 24 =====
Bulletin 	30 	(2006)	 Nanzan 	Institute 	for 	Religion 	&	Culture48
hieroglossia
Gross, Benjamin. L ’aventure du langage: L ’alliance de la parole dans la pensée juive 
(Paris: Albin Michel, 2003).
Lanselle, Reinier. Le sujet derrière la muraille. A propos de la question des deux 
langages dans la tradition chinoise (érès, 2004).
Macuch, Rudolf. Geschichte der spät- und neusyrischer Literatur (New Y ork and 
Berlin: de Gruyter, 1976). 
Meershoek, G. Q. A. Le latin biblique d’après Saint Jérôme. Latinitas Christianorum 
Primaeva (Utrecht: Dekker & Van De Vest, 1966).
Mohrmann, Christine. Le latin des chrétiens, i-iV (Rome: 1961).
Nichanian, Marc. Ages et usages de la langue arménienne (Paris, 1989).
Noiville, Florence. Isaac B. Singer (Paris: Stock, 2003): “Du yiddish à l’anglais: le 
‘système’ Singer, ” 141–6; “Deux langues, deux œuvres, ” 146–50. 
Pollock, Sheldon: “Cosmopolitan and Vernacular in History, ” Public Culture 12–3 
(Fall, 2000), 591–626.
___. (ed.) Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia (University 
of California Press, 2003).
___. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power 
in Premodern India (Chicago, 2006). See iias Newsletter 36 (March 2005).
Waquet, Françoise. Le latin ou l’empire d’un signe  (Paris: Albin Michel,  1998). 
English translation by John Howe, Latin, or the Empire of the Sign (London: 
Verso Books, 2003).