Southeast Asia and the Middle East: Islam, Movement, and the Longue Duree. 
Edited by Eric Tagliacozzo. Singapore: NUS Press, 2009.360 pp.
Elizabeth Fuller Collins
This book is the product of a 2004 workshop held at the Asia Research Institute in 
Singapore, when mass-media reports generally treated Islamic terrorism in Southeast 
Asia as directed by radical Middle Eastern Islamic organizations. The essays collected 
here are meant to contribute to a broader and deeper understanding of the dynamic 
history of relations among Muslim societies and Islamic organizations in Southeast 
Asia and Muslim thinkers and educational networks in Saudi Arabia, Cairo, Iran, and 
Yemen. The relationship between Southeast Asian Muslims and Muslim leaders and 
organizations in the Middle East is only now beginning to receive the attention that it 
deserves, largely because until recently few scholars had the language skills necessary 
to describe those dynamics. Indonesianists should welcome the historical essays in this 
volume as a valuable addition to the work of Azra, Laffan, Mobini-Kesheh, and earlier 
scholars. I will first review the essays on the role of Arabs in the Islamization of 
Southeast Asia, then the essays on the Hadrami,1 followed by the three essays in the 
concluding section of the book on Islamist politics in Southeast Asia as of 2004.
Part I, on "The Early Dimensions of Contact," begins with Michael Laffan's essay, 
"Finding Java: Muslim Nomenclature of Insular Southeast Asia from Srivijaya to 
Snouck Hurgronje," a discussion of the referent for the Arab toponym Jawa, which 
later came to designate the Jawi, pilgrims or resident scholars from Southeast Asia in 
Mecca. Laffan suggests that "Jawa," which was later to become an Islamizing "Zabaj" 
in Arab sources, referred to an ill-defined region claimed by Sriwijaya and Java in 
different periods. Laffan argues in this essay that the vague delineation of the Jawi in 
terms of geography and ethnicity was to have consequences in the twentieth century.2 
Because Islamic nationalists failed to name and designate the boundaries of their 
imagined nation, the outline of the Dutch colonial empire was to determine the shape 
of the nation that emerged as Indonesia.
Timothy Barnard's essay, "The Hajj, Islam, and Power among the Bugis," describes 
an account of the hajj performed in 1828 by the Bugis noble Raja Ahmad and his son 
Raja Ali Haji when the Wahabis had taken over Mecca. This essay would be 
appropriate as an addendum to Azyumardi Azra's The Origins of Islamic Reformism in 
Southeast Asia.3 Azra concludes his study of Islamic authority as transmitted orally
1  Five of the eleven essays in the sections on the history of relations between Middle Eastern and Southeast 
Asian Muslims are devoted to the Hadrami, Muslim traders from the Hadramaut region of Yemen who 
are recognized as having played an important role in Islamic and nationalist movements in Malaysia, 
Singapore, and Indonesia in the modern period.
2 See also Michael Laffan, Islamic Nationhood and Colonial Indonesia: The Umma below the Winds (London and 
New York, NY: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003).
3 Azyumardi Azra, The Origins of Islamic Reformism in Southeast Asia: Networks of Malay-Indonesian and 
Middle Eastern "Ulama" in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries (Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'i 
Press, 2004).
Indonesia 89 (April 2010)

184 Elizabeth Fuller Collins
from teacher to student through isnad and silsilah4 with the observation that, at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, new channels for the transmission of Islamic 
authority appeared, including print media and Islamic movements like the Wahabi 
reforms and the modernism of Abduh and Rida. In Barnard's story, the Bugis 
aristocrat Raja Ahmad was able to parlay his experience in Mecca into a claim to be a 
pious orthodox Muslim leader, legitimating his rule over the Riau-Lingga archipelago.
In the section on the colonial period, Merle Ricklefs draws on material he treated in 
Polarizing Javanese Society to describe how reform movements in the Middle East were 
brought back to Indonesia by an ever-increasing flow of Hajjis throughout the 1800s 
and into the twentieth century.5 Wahabi teachings stressing the observance of shari'a 
characterized even the Sufi brotherhoods (tarekat) that had been introduced into Java. 
Eric Tagliacozzo explores inconsistencies and contradictions in Snouck Hurgronje's 
view of Indonesian Islam rooted in tensions between Hurgronje's personal sympathy 
for pious Muslims and colonial anxieties about Islam. In "Southeast Asian Debates and 
Middle Eastern Inspiration: European Dress in Minangkabau at the Beginning of the 
Twentieth Century," Nico Kaptein surveys the debate that emerged at the end of the 
nineteenth century between a younger generation (kaum muda) of reformers and 
traditional Muslims (kaum tua) over whether Muslim men were allowed to wear 
Western dress. This essay provides a vivid example of how Southeast Asian Muslims 
exploited tensions between conservative Islamic authorities in Mecca and leaders of 
the reform movement in Cairo inspired by Muhammad Abduh and promulgated by 
Muhammad Rashid Rida, a subject also explored by Laffan in his aforementioned 
Islamic Nationhood and Colonial Indonesia. Kaptein's essay takes the story a step further 
into the 1930s, when Salafi influence had eradicated more moderate traditionalism in 
Mecca.
Mohammad Redzuan Othman's essay on "The Origins and Contributions of Early 
Arabs" is a broad overview showing how commercial trading contacts between Arabia 
and Southeast Asia led to Islamization in the region. Othman points out that most of 
the Arabs settled in Southeast Asia today can trace their roots to the Hadramaut. He 
suggests that the sharp increase in the number of Hadrami migrants in the second half 
of the nineteenth century can be traced to the impact of Wahabi reforms in their 
homeland and the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. Sumit Mandal's essay describes 
how the respected modernist teacher Soerkati and prominent Hadrami merchant 
leaders in Java mounted a challenge to the status and prestige of the ashraf, a Hadrami 
elite bearing the title Sayyid who claim descent from the Prophet. The debate over 
kafa'ah (social equality) in Islam led to the establishment in 1915 of A1 Irshad, founded 
by Hadrami reformers to raise funds to support Islamic schools that would end sayyid 
domination of education and produce progressive Muslims. This story has been told 
by Mobini-Kesheh; in his conclusion, Mandal emphasizes that the attack on hierarchy 
and sayyid privilege was also an attack on the colonial system that upheld social 
distinctions based on race. Michael Gilsenan's essay is distinctive in focusing not on 
the politics of the Hadrami, but on how the Hadrami were forced into a kind of
4 Isnad means "chains of transmission" and silsilah is Arabic for "chain," used by Sufis to refer to a chain of 
authorities or master teachers, a spiritual genealogy.
5 Merle Ricklefs, Polarizing Javanese Society: Islamic and Other Visions c. 1830-1930 (Singapore: NUS Press, 
2007).

Southeast Asia and the Middle East 185
cosmopolitanism by the need to deal with different legal systems—Islamic, local 
custom (adat), and colonial law—in order to establish property rights and pass on 
wealth through inheritance. The case studies he presents make the point that choices 
about using or appealing to one set of legal institutions rather than another were 
strategic. Gilsenan emphasizes that, over time, colonial law established property rights 
as central to the relationship between people and the state, reshaping Islamic charity 
and providing new channels for people to contest inheritance. Ulrike Freitag tells the 
story of the rise of a Hadrami family in Singapore and evokes the Hadrami ethos 
through translation of a tawsiyya, or letter of advice, to two young men about to depart 
to Southeast Asia as family agents. Mona Abaza presents the life story of Sayyid 
Mohammad Asad Shahab (1910-2001), a man from a prominent Hadrami family active 
in the debates and movements of the era. Her subject was a writer and publisher, an 
anti-communist critic of Sukarno, and an early supporter of the Palestinian people and 
of the Moros in the Philippines. In Saudi Arabia, where Shahab moved after 1965, he 
worked with the Muslim World League. All of these essays expand on The Hadrami 
Awakening, Natalie Mobini-Kesheh's important study of the evolving identity and 
political activism of the Hadrami community in Southeast Asia, emphasizing again the 
complexity of the Hadrami story and suggesting new directions for research.6
In a sense, there are two books here: Parts I— III, addressed to scholars of Southeast 
Asia, and Part IV, strangely titled "Into Modernity," which pursues a discussion of 
radical Islamic groups and Islamic violence in Southeast Asia today (i.e., at least 
through 2004) and appears to be addressed to a general audience. In "Jihad and the 
Specter of Transnational Islam in Contemporary Southeast Asia: A Comparative 
Historical Perspective," the longest essay in the book, John Sidel shows that Islamic 
violence in the Philippines and Indonesia has deep historical roots that go back to 
Spanish, American, and Dutch policies in the colonial period, and that Islamic violence 
was compounded by policies adopted by the authoritarian regimes of Marcos and 
Suharto that marginalized Muslims. Sidel points out that what are viewed from the 
West as "triumphs for global liberalism in economic, political, and cultural terms" 
were not experienced as an extension of inclusive, universalistic freedoms to Muslims 
in Southeast Asia, "but rather as the intrusions of colonizing, particularistic interests at 
the expense of Islam" (p. 312). In Sidel's view, "jihad in Southeast Asia is ... 
overwhelmingly reactive and defensive in nature," responding to national policies that 
have denied Muslims a strong voice in their own society, and "the internationalization 
of jihad most apparent in the Bali and Jakarta bombings" is the consequence of Muslim 
activists taking advantage of a new mode of mobilizing support for their Islamist 
agenda utilizing external resources (p. 312).
In the essay following Sidel's, Moshe Yegar of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem 
makes an argument directly opposed to the one advanced by Sidel. Yegar maintains 
that "any attempt to understand Muslim rebellions in Southeast Asia must take into 
account more than an analysis of the local factors in each country or ... of relations 
between the Muslim minority and the majority government against which it 
struggled" (p. 324). After a review of similarities and differences in the Muslim 
separatist movements in Burma, Thailand, and the Philippines, and the response of the
6 See Natalie Mobini-Kesheh, The Hadrami Awakening: Community and Identity in the Netherlands East Indies, 
1900-1942  (Ithaca, NY: Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University, 1999).

186 Elizabeth Fuller Collins
respective governments, he concludes that "the history of Muslim rebellions in 
Southeast Asia indicates that attempts to seek a solution to the problems of the Muslim 
minorities through economic or social instrumentalities did not succeed" (p. 343). The 
reason for the intransigence of these conflicts, in his view, is that religious identity "is 
the primary element in the lives and ... consciousness" (p. 344) of Muslims, and those 
who live in societies under the rule of non-Muslims will never accept rule by a non- 
Muslim government. Yegar recognizes that the Muslim minority communities in 
Burma, Thailand, and the Philippines endure higher rates of poverty than do the 
majority communities, and that poor communities are not represented in positions of 
political power. But he discounts the significance of these factors in the political 
mobilization of Muslim separatists, citing a survey he conducted that found Muslim 
minorities "saw the conflict in more than socioeconomic terms" (p. 343). The survey is 
not further described; one should presumably turn to Yegar's book Between Integration 
and Secession for more information.7 Yegar's dismissal of socioeconomic grievances as 
important is strange, as he acknowledges that prosperous Muslim merchants in 
Bangkok and Rangoon do not reject rule by a non-Muslim government. He simply 
maintains that minority Muslim communities subscribe to a religious ideology 
according to which "the rule of non-Muslims over Muslims is considered an affront to 
Islam and to the proper order of the world" (p. 325). Consequently, "there is no chance 
that various development programs in the areas of education, or in economic and 
social spheres, will be crowned with the results" (p. 343). One has to wonder whether 
Yegar is seeking to justify Israeli attitudes and the policies of Israel's government 
toward Palestinians.
The concluding essay is by M. Syafi'i Anwar, executive director of the International 
Center for Islam and Pluralism in Jakarta. He describes the vibrant debate in post- 
Suhato Indonesia between proponents of what he calls "radical-conservative" Islam 
(those taking a "legal-exclusive" approach) and "progressive-liberal" Islam (those 
taking a "substantive-inclusive" approach), identifying the leaders and organizations 
on both sides of the debate and the issues being contested. Syafi'i Anwar concludes 
that the future orientation of Islam in Southeast Asia will depend on the success of 
democratically elected leaders in dealing with poverty, growing inequality, corruption, 
and lawlessness. If progress is not made on those issues, people will be inclined to 
accept the view that an "Islamic solution" is required to deal with the problems they 
face.
Taken together (with the notable exception of Yegar's contribution), these essays 
demonstrate the agency of Southeast Asian Muslims in appropriating Islamic ideas 
and values with the goal of improving their own societies. They hold out the promise 
that the scholars who contributed to this volume will continue to expand our 
understanding of Islam in Southeast Asia as a local project. In particular, the essays by 
Sidel and Syafi'i Anwar deserve a broader audience. The public would be better served 
if they were required reading for all journalists who write on Islam in Southeast Asia 
today.
7 Moshe Yegar, Between Integration and Secession: The Muslim Communities of the Southern Philippines, 
Southern Thailand, and Western Burma]Myama (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2002).
