THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 1
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN 
MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND 
WORLD WAR
 Latifah Abdul Latiff  
 
Abstract
This article highlights the history of the Hadhramis from Hadhramaut, Yemen in the 
nineteenth and twentieth century in Malaya.  The Hadhramis appertained to the Sayyid 
Alawiyyah and claimed themselves as the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad SAW 
through his grandson Hussain. In general, Malays respectably looked upon all Arabs 
particularly the Sadah as they were believed as the inheritors of Islamic preaching. For 
this article, records from archives as well as academic works were used as reference. 
According to the archives sources, the Hadhramis who were the majority of the born 
Arabs or Peranakan Arab of non-Arab mothers managed to do well in their lives even 
though they were in a small number. They played a significant role in the society and 
managed to succeed in the economy and political undertaking in Malaya. Thus, being 
a minority group of immigrants did not hinder the Hadhramis from prospering in 
Malaya, and many of them were involved in trade and business ventures as well as 
real estate. In fact, nowadays they have become part of the Malay community and are 
identified as Malays. 
 
Introduction
Nomadic lifestyle is synonymous  with the Arabs. They lived in the 
desert, moving in groups and engaged in business ventures in the whole 
Arabian Peninsula. This tradition continued even after the coming 
2 JURNAL SEJARAH
of Islam. They migrated from one area to another area in the Arab 
Peninsula looking for business chances while performing their duties 
as dā´i spreading Islam. They even migrated to further areas out of the 
homeland, and sometimes crossed the ocean, passing the Red Sea and 
the Indian Ocean to Africa, India, and even further eastward to China. 
On the eastward voyage to China, they would drop in at the Malay 
Archipelagos while waiting for the monsoon to change and also to look 
for the supplies of food and fresh water.
 Through this contact they intermingled with the Malays and some 
would stay and build colonies scattered in several countries in the Malay 
World such as in the East Indies, Philippines, Malaya, Borneo and 
Sulu. The hardship of living in the desert and struggling at sea made 
them appreciate life. They would also try to gain control and expand 
their influence wherever they went. Including using their diplomatic 
skills, ability to exploit the weak sides of the native character, and their 
dignity as the respected and esteemed ‘ulama’ or religious men as well 
as successful traders, to gain certain degrees of social status in the Malay 
World. The Arabs, either through a marital bond or influence managed 
to establish themselves as rulers or having connection with the ruling 
classes in several places, for example Perlis in Malaya, in Siak Kampar 
and Jambi in Sumatra, and Pontianak and Kubu in Borneo. 
Trade Relation 
The indirect contact between the Arabs and Malays had long been 
established since time immemorial. The long distance maritime trade 
between China and the Arab countries that had been established 
and flourished even before the advent of Islam gave impact to the 
development of trade in Southeast Asia especially in Malaya. 1 “The 
Arabs, controlling the ports of Aden and Sacutra and gifted with an 
enterprising nature, had been sailing to South-East Asia and China 
since the immemorial time”. 2 This long distance maritime trade had 
witnessed the involvement of the Arabs as middle men transporting 
and supplying commodities from India, and even China crossing the 
Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. They plied from Arabia to China 
and vice versa, and became familiar with the Malay Archipelago. The 
commodities were loaded at Aden before they were distributed and 
traded in the European markets through Egypt.3 
The Arabs were masters at the sea controlling the maritime trade 
with the East and dominating the eastern merchandise and spices until 
the end of the fifteenth century when Europeans began to discover other 
routes in the East. Merchandise like pepper, cinnamon and ginger were 
traded from Aden to Egypt before being marketed in Europe. Moreover, 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 3
the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf also played an important role in the sea 
trade route between the east and the West Asia. In Hadhramaut itself, 
the people produced frankincense as the source of income.4 
With the emergence of Islam in the Arabian Peninsula in the year 
610 A.D, the teaching was then widely spread in the whole Arabia and 
went beyond the region crossing the ocean reaching till Far East, in 
China and far to the west of Africa in Western Sahara. The Arab Muslim 
traders were now occupied with the new task as the carriers of the new 
faith, Islam. The early Arabs’ contact with India, which was merely based 
on trade had  changed. Ever since, the Arabs’ travel to India was not 
merely for business purposes but also for doing missionary activities.5 
The Arabs took the opportunity sailing and crossing the Indian Ocean, 
passing the Malay Archipelago and voyage up to the Pacific Ocean and 
arrived in China. Their settlements are to be found in the Western coast 
of India, in Ceylon, in Malay Archipelago as well as in China.6
According to R.B. Serjeant, around the twelfth to the fifteenth 
century in India, there were colonies of Arabs who lived in several 
port cities in the coastal areas such as Gujarat, Malabar, Bijapur, and 
Surat. This makes sense as proposed by Mahayudin Haji Yahaya 
and other scholars that the coming of ‘Alawi Sayyids to Southeast 
Asia in particular to Malaya and Indonesia had occurred in several 
stages. Most probably the first phase took place around the sixteenth 
century.7 This was followed by the second phase in the seventeenth or 
the eighteenth century, and the third phase in the nineteenth and early 
twentieth century. This migration occurred directly and indirectly 
from Hadhramawt, Yemen with most of them following an indirect 
course to Southeast Asia. Many of the Hadhramis who came to the 
island of Singapore, Penang and other Malay states in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth century were from the East Indies like Java, Palembang, 
and Aceh. They consisted of religious men, politicians, and traders.8 
Some of the Arabs who came to this region travelled directly 
from India and Indo-China before reaching the Malay Archipelago. 
According to Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas around 1290, Al-
Dimashqi recorded about the Arab population known as Al-‘Alawiyyin 
in Champa ( Sanf) living in the area or peninsula known as Jazirat al-
‘Alawiyyah. Al-Attas further mentioned that al-Dimashqi could have 
referred to two separate emigrations of the ‘Alawiyyin most probably 
around the 7th or 8th century Hijri and the second migration occurred in 
the 13th or early 14th century Hijri. The first migration to the area were 
by a group of ‘Alawis from Makkah and Madinah and most probably 
from neighbouring cities while the second emigration was also by the 
‘Alawiyyin or the ‘Alawis or Bani ‘Alawi particularly from Hadhramaut, 
Yemen.9 Based on this record there was a possibility that the migration 
4 JURNAL SEJARAH
of the Hadhramis of Sayyid ‘Alawiyyah to the Malay Archipelago also 
took place from Champa, the Jazirat al-’Alawiyyah.  
The Origin of Hadhrami Arabs
The nineteenth century had witnessed the expansion of British colonial 
rule in Malaya. The opening of Singapore in 1819 as the British base in 
Southeast Asia to oversee the operation of its long-distance trade in the 
region had opened lots of opportunities to foreign traders. Singapore 
has been opened as a free port. The policy introduced by the British 
had attracted merchants and traders from all over the world, including 
those Arabs from the Middle East countries to trade in the island. Arabs 
from Hadhramaut, Yemen were among those traders who travelled to 
the Malay World to seek fortune in Singapore engaging in business 
ventures on the island. 10  
The Hadhrami society of Sayyid descent in Malaya claimed that 
they were descendants of the Prophet Muhammad SAW through his 
grandson Hussain, one of the sons of Fatimah and Ali. They were 
also called the descendants of al-Sadah or Sadah (plural of Sayyid). 
They called themselves as al-Alawiyyin, by connecting their lineage 
to Sayyid Alawi, grandson of Ahmad bin Isa al-Muhajir 11 in order to 
distinguish themselves from other Hadhramis in Hadhramaut. They 
traced their genealogy back to ‘Ali, the great-grandson of Hussin, the 
sixth generation of Prophet Muhammad SAW’s progeny. Ali lived in 
Basrah and was called Ali al-Qāim Bi-‘l Basrah. From Ali’s offspring was 
his great-grandson Ahmad, who was also famously known as Ahmad 
al-Muhajir, the traveller. He was the son of Isa bin Muhammad bin 
Ali (al-Qāim Bi-‘l Basrah). Ahmad bin Isa then migrated from Basrah 
to Hadhramaut, Yemen. The Hadhramis  took their clan name from 
the grandson of Ahmad b. Isa al-Muhajir, Alawi, thus, they called 
themselves al-Alawiyyin.12 
The descendants of Alawiyyin emerged in Hadhramawt around 
512 A.H./1127 A.D.13 In Hadhramaut, their clan extended and they also 
gained reputable status in the society as the carriers and inheritors of 
the faith of Islam. The Sadah held religious position and were reputable 
‘ulama’ or religious men in society and very much influential in 
preserving Shari‘ah Law and the teaching of Islam. Tarim was one of the 
most important centres in their homeland catering to Islamic learning. 
Many religious scholars were produced in Tarim. They became mufti 
and qādī as well as religious men. The majority of the Hadhramis who 
were the descendants of Prophet Muhammad SAW lived here.14 
Being descendants of the Prophet Muhammad S.A.W secured the 
special place of the Hadhramis in the Malay society. Malays looked 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 5
upon them with respect and deference. Not only for their sacred 
connection with the Prophet Muhammad S.A.W, but also for their 
profound knowledge in Islam, as well as their piety. This factor in a 
way had helped them to be   easily   accepted   by  the  local  Muslims  
as  the  successors of  the  teaching  of  Prophet Muhammad S.A.W 
     Muhammad SAW 
   Fatimah al-Zahra 
Al-Hassan Al-Hussain 
Umar 
Ali Zainal Abidin 
 Ali  Al-Hussain Abdullah   Zaid Muhammad al-Baqir 
   Ali    Jaafar al-Sadiq Abdullah Ibrahim
m 
Muhammad Musa Ismail     Ali  Abdullah   Ishaq  
       Isa 
 Abdullah 
Ahmad al-Muhajir 
     Alawi 
Muhammad
ah 
Source: Modified from  R.O. Winstedt, “The Hadhramaut Saiyids of Perak and Siak”, Journal 
of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , Vol. 79, September 1918;  Mahayuddin Haji 
Yahaya, “Latarbelakang Sejarah Keturunan Sayid di Malaysia”,  Tamadun Islam di Malaysia, 
Kuala Lumpur: Persatuan Sejarah Malaysia, 1980,  pp. 64-6.
The lineage of Al-‘Alawiyyin clan through the Prophet Muhammad 
SAW’s grandson, Hussin. 
6 JURNAL SEJARAH
which secured them a special place and status in the Malay society. They 
became the source of reference for fellow Muslims in matters related 
to religion. In terms of relationship, there is a little gap between the 
Hadhramis and Malays. According to W. Linehan, the Sadah were more 
welcomed and free in their contacts with the royalties and aristocrats 
compared to the Malays. Malays respected the Sadah as much as they 
respected their sultans and rulers.15
In the Malay society, there are certain titles used to address 
respected people. The Sadah also received a special title by the Malays. 
In Pahang, especially in Kuala Tekal, Malays would call them engku and 
in Pekan and other districts they are called habib, tuan or tuan sayyid. In 
Terengganu, they are called Tukku or Tokku. While among themselves 
they would use word ana and anta which means I and you.16 Besides the 
title sayyid they are also called sharif and habib. There is another honorific 
title used in Hadhramaut to refer to the people of the high dignitaries 
of religion in society. It is normally given to teachers, scholars and men 
of religion that forms a group of noble men in Hadhramaut, Yemen 
and they are known as shaykh or mashaikh (plural).17 In Malaya, there 
is another group of Arabs known as shaykh or mashaikh who came not 
only to trade but also actively did the missionary works propagating 
and spreading Islam.18 
The Settlement of the Hadhrami Arabs
The Hadhramis were scattered in almost every state in Malaya during 
the period of the nineteenth and twentieth century. However, the 
number of the Hadhramis in Malaya before that time could not be 
ascertained. Most of the available records were collected during the 
British colonial rule. Unfortunately, the censuses carried out in Malaya 
at that time did not classify the Arab population by clan, but rather 
the Arabs in general, regardless of their country origin. Therefore, it is 
difficult to decide the exact number of the Hadhramis in Malaya since 
their arrival in the country. Moreover, many of the Hadhramis in Malaya 
were those of Peranakan Arabs, a new generation of the Arab that mostly 
born out of the Hadhrami fathers with local women. 
Most of the researchers and scholars in the field recorded that 
the majority of the Arabs in Malaya were from Hadhramut, Yemen. 
There is no way for this study to ignore these censuses as these are the 
only available records to trace the number of the Arab population in 
Malaya. These censuses are important to support the research done in 
order to facilitate the study. Since many of the Hadhramis in Malaya 
were those coming from Indonesia, (a lot of its foreign population of 
Arabs were Hadhramis from Hadhramaut, Yemen) apart from direct 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 7
migration from Hadhramaut, this would suggest that the Hadhramis 
in Malaya were also of Hadhramaut origin. Furthermore, it is apparent 
in their surnames that they are descendants of the Prophet Muhammad 
S.A.W from Hadhramaut, Yemen. Practically, the Hadramis were easily 
recognized by the public as their names were bound with title sayyid.19 
The earliest census on Malaya was carried out in 1871 on the Straits 
Settlements population of Singapore, Malacca and Penang. From this 
record it shows that the total number of Arabs was 1122.20 Many of them 
were concentrated in Singapore with 465 people followed by Penang 
354 and Malacca 303. Out of 1122, 605 were males and the rest 517 were 
females. The Singapore Chronicle record shows that in 1830, the number 
of Arab population was 28 out of the total population of the island 
20,243.21 Based on the Earl’s account, the number of Arab population 
in Singapore in 1833 was 96. All of them were males. 22 Further census 
was conducted in 1881 in the Straits Settlements saw the increase  of 
Arab population in the three states. In ten years time their number 
had increased to 1637 with additional 515. However, the 1891 census 
showed a decrease with 1468 souls. The number slightly decreased in 
comparison with the 1881 census from every state. (Refer to Table 1.)
Whilst in the Federated Malay States, the 1891 census showed 
that their number was 427 with Pahang the mostly populated with 
329 followed by Selangor with 27, Negeri Sembilan 20 and Perak 51 
respectively. The 1901 census carried out in Federated Malay States 
showed the growth of the Arab population from the previous ten years 
with 574 in 1901. In the states of Negeri Sembilan, Selangor and Perak, 
the number of increment was quite small compared to Pahang that saw 
a significant rise from 329 in 1891 to 447 in 1901. 
Table 1: Censuses of Arab Population in Straits Settlements  
(Singapore, Malacca and Penang)
Year
States/ Number of Arabs
Singapore Malacca Penang
1871 465 303 354
1881 836 220 574
1891 806 95 567
1901 919 45 542
1911 1237 135 702
1921 1282 56 520
1931 1939 88 605
Source: Straits Settlements: Report on the Census of the Straits Settlements, taken on the 5th April 
1891, by E.M. Merewether, Eso, Singapore: Printed at the Government Printing Office, 1892.
8 JURNAL SEJARAH
In 1911 the number of the Arabs population in Federated Malay 
States decreased from 574 to 337. However, their number increased to 
656 in the 1921 census with Pahang 395, Selangor 82, Negeri Sembilan 
78, and Perak 101. Their number again decreased to 402 in 1931.23 (Refer 
to Table 2) 
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century Malaya, There 
were Hadhrami entrepreneurs reported to have applied license to 
open land for agricultural, mining as well as timber activities from 
the government of the State of Pahang. For example in 1890, Sayyid 
Hassan was awarded land for mining gold by the Sultan of Pahang. 24 
Sayid Hassan also had a good relationship with the Sultan of Pahang, 
Sultan Ahmad from which he was awarded other 14,000 acres of land 
stretching from Kuala Pahang to Air Hitam for agricultural purposes 
for 99 years.25 In 1921, Sayyid Mohamed Alwi al-Haddad together with 
his partner Ungku Abdul Rahman Ungku Abdul Majid applied for a 
mining license to extract gold in the area of about 2,000 acres in the 
District of Batu Talam, Raub, Pahang.26 The Al-Sagoff and Co. was also 
involved in paper production in Pahang.27 This possibly attracted fellow 
Hadhramis to move to Pahang to work there. Based on the censuses, it 
is found that since the first census carried out in 1871, the Arabs, mostly 
the Hadhramis were found scattered in almost every state in Malaya. 
Table 2: Censuses of Arab Population in Federated Malay States
Year
States
Pahang Selangor N. Sembilan Perak
1891 329 27 20 51
1901 447 31 27 69
1911 152 73 62 50
1921 395 82 78 101
1931 189 70 88 55
Source: Federated Malay States, Census of the Population, 1901, Straits Settlement Population 
1871, J.A.E. Morley, “The Arabs of the Eastern Trade”, p. 175, Federated Malay States Statistics 
1906, Census Taken on 1st March, 1901, Colonial Office Library, pp. 84-85, CO 575/3.
From the 1911 census done in the State of Kedah and Perlis, it 
showed that the number of Arabs was 119 and 10 respectively. From 
the report on the censuses of Kedah and Perlis for the year 1911, it is 
found from Tables III and IV on races and languages, that the Arabs are 
classified as Malays.28 “The large majority of the Arabs were practically 
Malays of remote Arab descent. The Syeds had usually described 
themselves as Arabs”.29 This could probably refer to the spoken language 
where many of them could converse in Malay fluently. It is found that 
intermarriage between different races was common in Kedah and Perlis 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 9
and their descendants learned to speak foreign languages aside from 
their mother tongue. 
Table 3: Censuses of Arab Population in Non-Federated Malay States
Year
States
Johor Terengganu Kelantan Kedah Perlis
1911 699 186 17 119 10
1921 736 567 118 226 154
1931 1345 89 213 113 143
Source: J.E. Nathan, The Census of British Malaya 1921, London, Dunstable and Watford: Printed 
by Waterlow & Sons Limited, 1922, p. 92; Mahayudin Haji Yahaya, Sejarah Penempatan 
Orang Arab di Johor, Seminar Sejarah Budaya Johor Tahun 2000, Johor Bahru, Vol. 2, 2000,  p. 4. 
The majority of the Arabs born in Malaya of Malay mothers speak 
the Malay language. Many of them cannot speak fluent Arabic, but 
some can understand it. Due to the assimilation with the local people 
they easily adapted to the Malay culture and ways of life, including 
language, food, customs and fashions that eventually they could be 
called Malays. (Refer to Table 3)  It shows that the Hadhramis in Kedah 
and Perlis were categorized under Malay race due to their spoken 
language, Malay. Furthermore, due to the assimilation with the locals 
and mix-marriage, their young generation has become Malays socially 
and culturally despite of their Arab blood. 30  
In the state of Johor, Onn Jaafar in his letter to the Medical Director 
Office in Johor on 31 January 1931, discussed about the issue of free 
medical treatment to the Arabs as enjoyed by the Malays. This is 
regarding a complaint made by Sayyid Omar and Sharifah Esah Hussein 
from Muar to the government asking for free medical treatment at the 
General Hospital Muar. In this matter Onn Jaafar considered Hadhramis 
as equal as the Malays and they were to be treated and considered as 
Malays.31 
The Distribution of the Hadhrami Arabs 
The Hadhramis travelled to many foreign countries looking for better 
living. Their colonies were to be found in many places, including in East 
Africa, India and in the Malay World. There were several factors that 
contributed to their emigration overseas, particularly to Malaya and the 
Malay Archipelago. The nineteenth century geopolitical and economic 
situation in Hadhramaut had forced the bulk of its population, especially 
the young to consider migrating to foreign lands. The internal skirmishes 
and uprisings against the Turk army had worsened the situation with 
a security crash in Hadhramaut.32 
10 JURNAL SEJARAH
Hadhramaut also suffered from drought, terrible famine and 
constant tribal wars that made life risky and miserable. This encouraged 
many of them to move overseas as a solution to seek for a better source 
of income and living in foreign countries.33 The Hadhramis of Sadah clan 
were among those Arabs who migrated to the East and many of them 
were to be found in Dutch East Indies, Singapore and Malaya. When 
Penang and Singapore were opened by the British in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries as free ports, the Hadhramis were among the 
earliest immigrants to settle in the islands. They came as traders and 
religious teachers. Therefore, the links between Arab countries and 
Malaya resumed.34 
After the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, travels by steam 
ships became popular and faster compared to traditional ships. This 
made the movement of ships as well as immigrants were easier, faster 
and their number also increased from time to time. The Arab Diaspora 
also spread faster to foreign lands of Indian, African and also in the 
Southeast Asia region including Malaya.35 In Malaya, there were many 
Hadhrami families of ‘Alawiyyah descendants, such as al-Attas, al-
Saqqaf, al-Junied and al-Kaff. Many of these Hadhrami families were 
big names in the society. They were actively involved in business and 
became successful entrepreneurs and businessmen.  When Singapore 
was opened by Stamford Raffles in 1819, the Hadhramis were among 
the earliest merchants who came to trade there. Sayyid Mohammad bin 
Harun al-Junied and his nephew Sayyid Omar bin Ali al-Junied came to 
Singapore in 1819. It was said that they were wealthy merchants from 
Palembang, Sumatra.36 
Accordingly, the majority of the Hadhramis in Malaya were those 
who came from Hadhramaut, Yemen. They were the ‘Alawiyyin, from 
the descendants of Sayyid Alawi, the grandson of Ahmad bin Isa 
al-Muhajir. According to Mahayudin Haji Yahaya, 37 the Hadhramis 
migration to Malaya from Arabian Peninsula occurred in several stages 
that were directly and indirectly from the Arab Peninsula. He further 
noted that direct migration from the Arabian Peninsula rarely happened 
compared to indirect migration that involved the majority of the Arabs 
migrants from Hadhramaut to the Malay Archipelago. Most of them 
were those who came from the Arabian Peninsula through East Indies; 
Indonesia today.38 
Omar Farouk discussed about Hadhramis’ migration to Penang 
in which he mentioned that it began immediately after Francis Light 
took Penang from the Sultan of Kedah in 1786. 39 This movement also 
involved migrated Hadhramis from neighbouring countries such as 
Aceh and Sumatera to Penang. Since Singapore was opened as a free 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 11
port in 1819, it became a gateway to Penang to those Hadhramis from 
the Arabian Peninsula and also Hadhramis from East Indies to Penang.40 
Singapore was the focal point and a place of attraction for the 
Hadhramis to invest their money and skills in trade and business 
ventures in Malaya. Since its opening as a free trade port by Raffles, the 
island managed to attract traders and merchants from all over the world. 
The al-Junieds were believed to be among the earliest Hadhramis to 
settle in the island when it was opened in 1819. Sayyid Muhammad bin 
Harun al-Junied arrived in Singapore in 1819 from Palembang, Sumatra. 
He was a Yemeni Arab who traded in Palembang. Sayyid Omar bin Ali 
al-Junied (1792-1852), the nephew of Sayyid Muhammad also came and 
joined him in Singapore in the same year. The Arab Street became the 
focal area to the Hadhramis in Singapore in the nineteenth century. 
They were actively involved in trading with India and the East Indies 
dominating spices and cloth trade. In Singapore, they were not only 
trading, but were also involved in real property business.41 
The Social Life of the Hadhrami Arabs
In general, the Hadhrami society in Malaya was a mix-culture of Arab 
and Malay. Intermarriage between Hadhramis and local Malay women 
was common in the society. Since the Hadhrami migration involved 
vast numbers of Arab men, it was really rare to hear of the Arab female 
migration. Many of them did not bring along their families and they 
would leave their wives and children in the homeland` in order to seek 
fortune and better living overseas.42 
The Hadhramis were easily adapted to local customs and 
cultures and became part of the Malay community. Since Hadhrami 
community, especially the conservative and traditional Sadah families 
are so concerned about marriage and their lineage; parents would 
prefer to marry their daughters to Hadhrami men rather than to non-
Hadhramis. They only allow marriage amongst the Sadah families.43 In 
contrast to Hadhrami men, since Hadhramis are so concerned with the 
patriarchal lineage, the mix marriage between Hadhrami men and local 
women is common in the society. In the early period of their migration 
to the Malay World particularly in Malaya, many Hadhramis from 
Hadhramaut, Yemen married into the ruling class and royal families. 
Their credibility in religion and social status enabled them to be easily 
accepted by the Malays and were regarded as equal as to their rulers 
and aristocracy. Sayyid Abdul Rahman bin Sayyid Muhammad al-Idrus 
(1817 –1917) better known as Tukku Paloh who lived during the reign 
of Sultan Zainal Abidin III was  married to Tengku Mandak, sister of 
Sultan Zainal Abidin III.44 
12 JURNAL SEJARAH
Through marriage, the Hadhramis managed to acquire secured 
positions in the society. Their attachment with the royalties helped 
them a lot in getting social support from the ruling class as well as in 
their business enterprise. An example of this is in Aceh, where there 
are Hadhramis who inherited the throne and become sultans45 and also 
in Malaya, the Sultanate of Terengganu and the State of Perlis where 
the Sayyid Jamālullail’s family managed to run the state since the early 
nineteenth century until today. 46 Through the close contact with the 
ruling class, the Hadhramis were also granted with a land of concession 
such as Sayyid Hassan al-Attas. He was granted with a Concession Land 
in Ketapang, Pahang and Sayyid Muhamad al-Saqqaf was granted with 
a concession land in Kukob, Johor.47 
Today, many of the Hadhramis in Malaysia are losing their identity 
of Arabness to intermarriage. Their intermarriage with local women and 
intermingling with local people have gradually diminished their cultural 
identity that is commonly characterised by language and culture. This 
phenomenon occurred during the second and third generations of Arabs 
in Malaya from local mothers who do not speak Arabic. According 
to A. Rahman Tang Abdullah, who studied the Hadhrami society in 
Muar, Johor also noted that Hadhramis used to communicate with local 
people especially the Malays using Malay Arabic language, a mix of 
Malay Language and informal Arabic language that is also called bahasa 
Arab pasar.48 
Most of the Hadhramis who married to the Malay women do not 
speak formal Arabic or do not speak Arabic at all. The spoken language 
at home was Malay Arabic language, a mix of Malay and informal 
Arabic language which also called bahasa Arab pasar. They only taught 
their children to recite Qur’an at home. This was one of the reasons why 
the young generations of born Arabs in Malaya could not speak Arabic. 
However, According to Omar Farouk, most of the Hadhramis in Penang 
were familiar with the Arabic language; it just the matter of they can 
speak it or not. The majority of the Hadhrami parents in Penang sent 
their children to English medium schools and English became a common 
language to younger generations compared to Arabic. 49
Most of the children only received formal education at the school 
learning Malay and English. Arabic was only taught at madrasah and 
it became medium of instruction in almost all madrasahs in Malaya. 
Though in the early days, the early generations of wealthy hadhramis 
and those who could afford would send their children, especially boys 
to be educated in the homeland, Hadhramaut. They were taught Arabic 
language as well as religious knowledge.50 Malay was also a common 
language in Hadhramaut. It was also widely spoken and became 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 13
a mother tongue of the children of born Arab from mixed blood of 
hadhramis with Malay or Javanese women.51 
Although J.E. Nathan’s survey was done in 1921 and A. Rahman 
Tang Abdullah’s work was carried out in 1991/92, this issue has long 
been noticed in a survey of census done in Malaya in the state of Kedah 
and Perlis in the year 1911. Since the report was based on languages 
and races, it indirectly has categorized Arabs as Malays. This census 
shows that the majority of the hadhramis in Kedah and Perlis have 
become part of the Malay community. They speak Malay and married 
to local women. The children of the hadhramis born in Malaya of Malay 
mother, the Peranakan Arab also speaks Malay. Moreover, they also have 
adapted to the Malay way of life socially and culturally so  no doubt 
they can be called Malays.52
The Hadhramis were so concerned about their family genealogy. 
In order to ensure the family ties were safely guarded, they would 
record marriages, birth and death of the family members. In Malaya, 
the Hadhrami society known as Rabitah al-‘Arabiyyah based in Singapore 
was responsible for keeping records of Hadhrami descendants in the 
country. They have representatives who record every birth, marriage 
and death within Sadah families.53 The science of genealogy or nasab or 
also known as Ilmu Salasilah is much stressed by the older generations 
of the Hadhrami Sadah.54 
However, in the 1920s and 1930s, there was a conflict between 
the Malays and the Hadhramis, where the Malays started to feel that 
they were being neglected by their Muslim Arab brothers. There 
were Hadhramis who confined to their elitist and exclusive lifestyles 
separated from the Malays abandoned the cause of the Malays for 
their own interests, created an atmosphere of distrust between them. 
The Malays began to question the Hadhramis’ sincerity in religious 
and social responsibilities towards their fellow brothers in Islam. Syed 
Muhd Khairudin Al-Junied stresses on the issues that worried the 
Malays regarding the roles that should be played by the Hadhrami 
Arabs, in which they hoped that it should be focused on improving the 
society (Malay Society), particularly on the economy and not to take 
control over their lives. The Malays also felt that they were being left 
behind compared to their fellow brothers (Hadhramis). As a result, this 
dissatisfaction led to the establishment of an organization known as 
Kesatuan Melayu Singapura (KMS) or Singapore Malay Union in 1926.55 
KMS believed that only the Malay Muslims should be the representative 
of the Malay community and its membership should be restricted to 
the native Malays only.56 
The Malays also printed their own newspaper Utusan Melayu  
in 1939 as a tool to voice out their opinions, and at the same time, 
14 JURNAL SEJARAH
proclaimed that Warta Malaya  that was published by the Al-Saqqaf 
family did not represent the views and opinions of the Malays. This 
situation impinged the Hadhrami Arabs’ reputation in the publishing 
industry in Malaya.57 Then, emerged a new categorisation of Muslims 
in Malaya based on their ethnic and race, such as Darah Keturunan Arab 
(DKA) and Darah Keturunan Keling (DKK), in order to differentiate them 
from the pure Malays.58 
Abdul Rahim Kajai was one of the influential journalists during his 
time (1940) was known to have highlighted the term bangsa, in which 
he says that Islam is “not a bangsa” and further reminds “religious 
leaders that Malay unity must not be neglected in favour of the bonds 
of Islam”. Abdul Rahim Kajai cynically referred to the Malays born 
of mixed ethnic origin with Arab blood; the Peranakan Arab as Darah 
Keturunan Arab (DKA), and those with Indian blood as Darah Keturunan 
Keling (DKK).59 This situation affected the social relationship of both 
communities and it also led to social isolation and adverse effect to the 
Malays - Peranakan Arabs relationship.  
Conclusion
The Hadhramis in Malaya managed to adapt to the Malay culture and 
way of life. They easily adapted to the Malaya culture and way of life 
that enabled them to mingle in the society and eventually become part 
of the Malay community. The mix marriage between and among the 
hadhramis and local women gave birth to a new generation of Arab 
Peranakan. The hadhramis had the tendency to marry into leading 
families, from which they would benefit from the marital bond to gain 
social, economic and political prestige. Many of them managed to 
secure good positions and status in the Malay society. Some of them 
have become successful traders as well as entrepreneurs. While, some 
others have attained the highest level of social life, becoming part of the 
ruling class in the country like the Jamalullail’s in Perlis.
Despite their small number, the Hadhrami community in Malaya 
had played a considerable role in bringing about change in the society 
through their contribution in religion and economy. The land that 
was once foreign to them as a sojourn destination has  now become 
the motherland to the young generations of Peranakan Arab in Malaya. 
In fact, based on the federal constitution as stated under article 160, 
the Hadhrami Arabs in Malaya are eligible to be called Malays. The 
Hadhramis benefitted from the social status and privileged attained in 
the Malay society. Therefore, being a minority group of immigrants did 
not forbid the Hadhramis from prospering in Malaya. They consolidated 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 15
their social, economic and political networking that enabled them to 
survive in Malaya among the Malay community.  
Notes
1 According to J.A.E. Morley, the long distance maritime trade had long been 
established between seaports of Arabia, East Africa, India, Ceylon, East 
Indies and China. These seaports were connected to each other by the sea 
trade link following the changes of monsoon. This shows that the Arabs 
were familiar with the sea route of the Indian Ocean to China including the 
Malay Archipelago’s. J.A E. Morley, “The Arabs and the Eastern Trade”, 
Journal of Malayan Branch of Royal Asiatic Society (JMBRAS), Vol. 22, no. 
1, 1949, p. 143. The Arab settlements were to be found in Canton, China 
around the 2nd century A.D. See S. M. Imamuddin, “Arab Mariners and 
Islam in China”, Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society , (ed.), S. Moinul 
Haq, Vol. 32, no. 3, July, 1948, pp. 168-170. 
2 Affan Seljuq, “Some Muslim Geographers on South-East Asia”, Journal of 
The Pakistan Historical Society, Vol. 37, no. 2, April, 1989, p. 129.
3 S.M. Yusuf, “The Route of Arab Mariners Through al-Zabaj (Further 
India) in the Third and Fourth Centuries H”, in Studies in Islamic History 
and Culture , Delhi: Adam Publishers & Distributors, 1989, p. 132. During 
this period of time (9th – 10th centuries), Arabs’ navigation was at its peak. 
They had travelled past the Indian Ocean and went up to China passing 
the al-Zabaj (further India). In due course they sailed passing the Malay 
Archipelago.
4 J.A.E. Morley, “The Arabs and the Eastern Trade”, p. 15
5 R.B. Serjeant, “The Saiyids of Hadhramaut”, Studies in Arabian History and 
Civilisation, London: Variorum Reprints, 1981, p. 24. See also Mahayudin 
Haji Yahaya, Sejarah Orang Syed di Pahang, Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa 
dan Pustaka, 1984, p. 27. 
6 Abdul Ali, “The Arabs  as Seafarers”, Islamic Culture, Vol. 54, no. 4, October, 
1980, p. 211. 
7 R.B. Serjeant, “The Saiyids of Hadhramaut”, pp. 24-25.See also Mahayudin 
Haji Yahaya, Sejarah Orang Syed di Pahang, p. 27
8 “Penzance’s” Report of Proceeding for Month of March, 1933. Narrative of 
a Visit to the Wadi Hadramaut, Enclosure No. 2 to p. 4, CO 273/551/16; 
Omar Farouk Shaeik Ahmad, “The Arabs in Penang”, Malaysia in History, 
Kuala Lumpur: Malaysian Historical Society, Vol. 21, no. 2, 1978, p. 2.
9 Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction , Johor: 
Penerbit UTM Press, 2011, p. 130.
10 The same approach was taken by Francis Light when he took Penang 
that was later on called Province of Wellesley in 1786. Light introduced a 
policy that attracted many foreign traders to trade in Penang. Duty free 
was exempted upon traders and merchants as well as freedom of acquiring 
land in Penang that had attracted many foreign merchants and traders 
including those from Hadhramaut, Yemen, India, as well as people of 
Malaya to settle there. Police force was also established to look after the 
16 JURNAL SEJARAH
safety and security of the island. See National Archive Malaysia (Kuala 
Lumpur): MISC. 19/1 ANM.
11 Mahyuddin Haji Yahaya, “Latarbelakang Sejarah Keturunan Sayid di 
Malaysia”, Tamadun Islam di Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur: Persatuan Sejarah 
Malaysia, 1980, pp. 64-6, W.H. Ingrams, Aden Protectorate, A Report on the 
Social, Economic and Political Condition of the Hadramaut, London: Printed 
and Published by His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1936, pp. 36-39. Colonial 
No. 123. 
12 Ahmad bin Isa, the al-Muhajir (the traveller) was the great grandson of 
Ali al-Qaim bil Basrah. Ali al-Qaim bil Basrah was the great-grandson of 
Hussain, the grandson of Prophet Muhammad SAW. Ahmad bin Isa 
migrated from Basra to Hadhramaut around 512 A.H./1127 A.D. As 
claimed, they were the descent of Prophet Muhammad SAW. “Penzance’s” 
Report of Proceeding for Month of April, 1933,  Narrative of a Visit to the 
Wadi Hadhramaut, Public Record Office, London (PRO), Colonial Office 
(CO) 273/551/16. 
13 R.O. Winstedt, “The Hadhramaut Saiyids of Perak and Siak”, Journal 
of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , Vol. 79, September, 1918. 
According to Ibn Hazm, a famous historian in the 5 th A.H/11 A.D, he 
recorded in Jamharah Ansab al-Arab genealogy of the Prophet Muhammad 
SAW’s progeny through his grandsons Hassan and Hussain. However, 
the record of the family ends at the sixth generation of the family. 
It is said that there had been confusion on the genealogy of Prophet 
Muhammad SAW since there were fake laims made by irresponsible 
person. However, the historiography of the genealogy of the Prophet 
Muhammad SAW based on the Ḥadrami Sayyids’s sources resumed after 
10th century A.H/ 16 th century A.D. See Jamharah Ansab Al-Arab  Li Abi 
Muhammad ‘Ali bin Ahmad bin Said bin Hazm Al-Andalus 384-456, Abd 
Al-Salam Muhammad Harun (Tahqiq wa Ta’liq), Cairo: Dar Al-Ma’arif, 
1962M/1382H, 39-59.
14 W.H. Ingrams, Aden Protectorate, A report, pp. 36-8. 
15 W. Linehan, “A History of Pahang”,  JMBRAS, Vol. 14, no. 2, May 1936, 
p. 81. 
16 Mahayudin Haji Yahaya,“Sejarah Orang Syed di Pahang”, p. 88.
17 Ibid., p. 694; See also W.H. Ingrams, Aden Protectorate: A Report, pp. 40-41.
18 Syed Ali bin Mohamed al-Attas, Allahyarham Syed Hassan bin Ahmad al-
Attas Seorang Mujahid dan Pembangunan Ummah, Johor: Madrasah al-Attas 
al-Arabiah Johor, 1998, p. 6.
19 L.W.C. van den berg, Orang Arab di Nusantara (trans.), Rahayu Hidayat, 
Jakarta: Komunitas Bambu, 2010, p. 33.
20 Straits Settlement Population 1871, Microfilm no. 242. 
21 Singapore Chronicle, No. 165, Thursday 15 July 1830.
22 G.W. Earl, The Eastern Seas , with an Introduction from C.M. Turnbull, 
Singapore: Oxford University Press, 1971, p. 362.
23 Federated Malay States, Census of the Population, 1901, Compiled by 
George Thompson Hare, Published by Command, Colonial Office Library, 
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 17
1902. See also PRO, CO 575/3, Federated Malay States Statistics 1906, 
Census Taken on 1st March, 1901, Colonial Office Library, pp. 84-5.
24 Aminudin bin Abd. Rashid, Syed Hassan bin Ahmad al-Attas: Satu Kajian 
Biografi, B.A. Thesis, University of Malaya, 1995/6, p. 48.
25 Sultan Pahang 33/1916, National Archive, Malaysia, Kuala Trengganu 
Branch, 1306AH/1888AD.
26 Letter from  District Officer of Raub, Pahang on 14 th March 1921 to the 
District Officer, Johor Bahru regarding the application of Ungku Abdul 
Rahman Ungku Abdul Majid from Bukit Taram, Johore, and Sayyid 
Mohamed bin Alwi al-Haddad for a prospecting license over 2000 acres 
of Land in the Mukim of Batu Talam, Raub, Pahang, CLM 363/1921,
27 See Letter from Al-Sagoff and Co., to District Office of Kuantan on 31 
October 1923. DOK 509/1923.
28 Report on the Census of Kedah and Perlis A.H 1329 (A.D 1911), Penang: 
Printed at the Criterion Press Ltd. 1911. Colonial Office, 10th March, 1911, 
Straits Settlements: Report on the Census of the Straits Settlements, taken 
on the 5th April 1891.
29 Ibid., p.7. 
30 Report on the Census of Kedah and Perlis A.H 1329 (A.D 1911), 7.
31 See a letter sent by Onn Jaafar to Medical Director Office of Johor Bahru, 
Johore on 31 January 1940, GA 27/1940.
32 W.H. Ingrams, Aden Protectorate: A Report, pp. 29-36. 
33 Besides earning more income and had better life in Malaya, where many 
of them married and settled there but they never forget to send home 
remittances every year. With this money they supported lives of the 
relatives, building houses, mosques, schools etc. Many of them became 
successful traders in Malaya. This practice continued until the World War 
II broke out in 1942 when Malaya was attacked by Japanese army. Many 
of them became successful traders in Malaya. 
34 In fact the relationship between Malaya and the Arab countries had 
existed ever since the early decades of the Islamic Era and even prior to 
the advent of Islam. The Trans ocean business venture between the East 
and the West had long been established. Arab merchants crossed the 
Indian Ocean to the Far East passing the Malay Archipelago on the South 
China Sea to China Ocean to get to China. While plying forth and back 
to the East, Arab merchants became acquainted with the Malay World 
and became aware of its development. Some of them stopped at these 
islands and build settlements. Their existence were to be found in several 
areas in the region such as in East Indies, Malaya, Singapore, Borneo and 
in Philippines. In the early times they were focused in trade ports such 
as in Aceh, Malacca and Singapore. The Arabs lost supremacy over the 
trade venture in the East when European powers started dominating 
the maritime trade in the East in the sixteenth century. This incident had 
indirectly slackened the relationship between the Arabs and the Malay 
World, especially Malaya. When Penang was taken by Francis Light in 
1786, and declared it as British colony, this had attracted foreign traders 
to trade in Penang. Arabs were among the earliest settlers in Penang. The 
18 JURNAL SEJARAH
opening of Singapore by British in the 19th century was also seen as a link 
to the Arab-Malay connection. Hence, the ties between Arab countries 
and Malaya resumed.
35 Peter G. Riddell, “Religious Links Between Hadhramaut and the The 
Malay-Indonesian World, C. 1850 to C. 1950”,  in Ulrike Freitag & W.G. 
Clarence-Smith, Hadrami Traders, Scholars, and Statemen in the Indian Ocean, 
1750s – 1960s, Leiden;New York;Koln :Brill, 1997, p. 221,
36 Ameen Ali Talib, “Hadramis in Singapore”, Journal of Muslim Minority 
Affairs, Vol. 17, no. 1, 1997, p. 89.
37 Mahayudin Haji Yahaya, Sejarah Penempatan Orang Arab di Johor, p. 1, 
See also Mahayudin Haji Yahaya, Sejarah Orang Syed di Pahang. 
38 According to Serjeant, R.B, the Hadhramaut Sayyids were said to arrive 
in East Indies just some time before the coming of the Dutch to the island 
in the 18th century. However, this statement could still be argued. They 
could have come to the East Indies earlier than the 18th century. Records 
from the travel’s accounts of Ibnu Battuta and Marco Polo had shown 
that Islam came to the region since the very beginning of the 13th century. 
Even during the glory period of Malacca in the 15 th century, there were 
Arab merchants from the Arab countries trading in Malacca. And these 
traders would stop at East Indies islands such as Perlak and Pasai for the 
monsoon change before sailing back to their countries. R.B. Serjeant, “The 
Saiyids of Hadramawt”, pp. 24-5.
39 See Omar Farouk Shaeik Ahmad, “The Arabs in Penang”, pp. 2-10.
40 It is believed that what attracted Arab people to come to Penang during 
that time was the trade policy introduced by Francis Light that charged no 
import duties to merchants and also the freedom of right to new settlers 
of acquiring land in Penang. Please see R.O Winstedt, A History of Malaya, 
Singapore: Marican, 1962, p. 210. 
41 National Heritage Board, Singapore, the Encyclopedia, Singapore: Editions 
Didier Millet, 2006, p. 28.
42 However, they would constantly send money back home and once they 
accumulated enough, they would return home for good. Enclosure No. 2 
to Penzance’s Report of Proceedings for Month of March 1933, Narrative 
of A Visit to the Wadi Hadramaut. PRO, FO 371/16852. Political Eastern 
Arabia.
43 Omar Farouk Shaeik Ahmad, “The Arabs in Penang”, p. 3. 
44 Mohamad Abu Bakar, “Ulama dan Umara: Tok Ku Paluh dan 
Pemerintahan Islam”, in Muhammad Abu Bakar, Ulama Terengganu Suatu 
Sorotan, Terengganu: Utusan Publications & Distributors Sdn. Bhd, 1991, 
p. 83.
45 Cesar Adib Majul, Theories on the Introduction and Expansion of Islam in 
Malaysia, Philippines: Siliman University, 1964, p. 349.
46 Julie Tang Su Chin, Sejarah Kerajaan Perlis 1841-1957, Malayan Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society (MBRAS), Monograph No. 32, 2002.
47 Alsagoff Concession Kukup, 15 March 1906, J/Pelb., National Archive, 
Malaysia (Johor Bahru Branch), See also Saadiah Said, Kegiatan Keluarga al-
THE HADHRAMI ARABS IN MALAYA BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR 19
Sagoff Dalam Ekonomi Johor 1878-1926, B.A Thesis, Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, 1979, p. 53.
48 A. Rahman Tang Abdullah, Sejarah Masyarakat Keturunan Arab di Muar, 
Academic Exercise, Department of History, Faculty of Arts and Social 
Sciences, University of Malaya, 1991/92, p. 53. 
49 Omar Farouk Shaikh Ahmad, “The Arabs in Penang”, pp. 12-13.
50 J.A.E. Morley, “The Arabs and the Eastern Trade”, pp. 145, 168.
51 W.H. Ingrams, Aden Protectorate: A Report, p. 12.
52 Report on the Census of Kedah and Perlis A.H 1329 (A.D 1911), 7.
53 In Indonesia, there is a board of Hadhrami Sayyid society known as Rabitah 
al-Alawiyyah that is based in Jakarta keeping records of the Haḍrami 
descendants. It also has a branch in Singapore. The society was formed in 
1927 and it was known as The Alawi Union. See Natalie Mobini-Kesheh, 
The Hadrami Awakening: Community and Identity in the Netherlands East 
Indies, 1900-1942, New York: Southeast Asia Program Publications, 1999, 
p. 99. 
54 Sy. Aliedin, “Pengantar Singkat Ilmu Nasab”, paper presented at the 
Seminar Diaspora Arab Nusantara: Peranan dan Sumbangan , Lembaga 
Muzium Negeri Kedah dan Perbadanan Perpustakaan Awam Kedah, 
Wisma Darul Aman Alor Setar, Kedah, 2011, 5 – 7 Mac.
55 Syed Muhd Khairudin Aljuneid, “The Role of Hadramis in Post-Second 
World War Singapore – A Reinterpretation”, Immigrants & Minorities , 
2007, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02619280802018165. 
56 William R. Roff, The Origins of Malay Nationalism , Kuala Lumpur and 
Singapore: University of Malay Press, New Haven and London: Yale 
University Press, 1967, pp. 190-191.
57 Syed Muhd Khairudin Aljuneid, “The Role of Hadramis in Post-Second 
World War Singapore...”.
58 Anthony Milner, The Invention of Politics in Colonial Malaya , United 
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 270.
59 Ibid., pp. 270-71. 