 1 
The Malay Elite: From the Hadhrami Diaspora to the War in Yemen  
Bahareh Sazmand 
 
Abstract 
When Yemen is mentioned, images of a long-term civil war between the government, the 
Houthis, and a complex combination of international actors immediately come to mind. 
But what is less known about Yemen is its diaspora community in Southeast Asia that 
migrated there, especially from the Hadhramaut  region in the south of Yemen. In the 17th 
century, many Hadhramis left their homeland for different regions around the Indian 
Ocean, and most of them settled in Southeast Asia. In fact, today many Arab families in 
the region are descendants of the first wave of Hadhrami businessmen and academics who 
migrated to this region in search of a better life. Therefore, the purpose of writing this 
article is to examine the position of Yemen and Yemenis from the point of view of the 
Malay elites, and to answer the question of what position the Yemenis have from the point 
of view of the Malay elites, and what changes this view has seen since the 17th century? 
In order to answer this question, the author tries to examine this position from the time of 
the migration of Ha dhramis to Southeast Asia, especially the Mala y world (Singapore, 
Malaysia, and Indonesia) until the Yemen crisis (since 2015) and in two The level of 
political elites and civil society elites and using the comparative research method to 
describe this position. 
 
Keywords: Yemen, Southeast Asia, Hadhramaut, Malay world, Hadhrami 
 
Introduction 
Sadat Alatas are Alavi, Hosseini, Hashemi, and Adnani tribes from Sadat al-Ba Alavi tribes 
in Had hramaut, Yemen. They are from the generation of Seyyed Abd al -Rahman bin 
 2 
Aqeel, from whose generation many prominent scholars and famous figures have emerged, 
and they have spread throughout the Arabian Peninsula, the United Arab Emirates, India, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, and Singapore . Therefore, the roots of the Yemenis of the Malay 
world go back to Hadhramaut in Yemen. Haridah is known as the Alatas dynasty’s capital; 
some later moved to nearby valleys and villages.  
But when Yemen is mentioned, images of the long -term civil war between the 
government, the Houthis, and a complex combination of international actors immediately 
come to mind.  What has been less noticed about Yemen is its diaspora community in 
Southeast Asia; The diaspora community who have migrated to Southeast Asia, especially 
from the Hadhramaut region in the south of Yemen. Many Hadhramis left their homeland 
in the 17th century to migrate to different areas around the Indian Ocean, and most of them 
settled in Southeast Asia. In fact, today many Arab families in the region are descendants 
of the first wave of Hadhrami businessmen and academics who migrated to this region in 
search of a better life. 
Upon their arrival in the region, these immigrants established a close relationship 
with the ruling families and prominent political families of the region. Also, migrant 
merchants used their connections in Southeast Asia and Hadhramaut to advance their 
business interests. Some of the fields in which they worked and were active were retail, 
spices, pickles, textiles, transportation, and real estate. Importantly, many of these 
companies achieved considerable commercial success, so that by 1885, about 25% of real 
estate in Singapore, such as the Raffles Hotel, was owned by Ha dhrami individuals or 
families. In the 1940s, the Ha dhrami families were the richest families in Singapore. But 
the important point was that most of the Had hrami families returned their wealth to their 
homeland in Yemen, and in the 19th century, the economy of Had hramaut was highly 
dependent on remittances sent from Southeast Asia and India. This shows how influential 
and successful the diaspora community was and even some of these successful families 
used their wealth to advance political projects in Hadhramaut.  
 3 
In this context, we can mention the actions of Abu Bakr al -Kaaf. Abu Bakr bin 
Sheikh al-Kaaf (1305-1385 AH) was a leader and social reformer in Yemen's Hadhramaut 
who had great political and social influence in the southern region of Arab countries. He 
had a prominent role in establishing peace and extinguishing the fire of tribal wars in 
Hadhramaut, constantly seeking to end the rebellions and differences between the tribes.  
In addition, he spent a lot of money to serve the country and Ha dhrami community in 
various national fields. He was born in the month of Safar 1305 AH / 1887 AD in Singapore 
and his father Sheikh bin Abdul Rahman Al -Kaaf was the owner of huge wealt h in 
Singapore and Indonesia. His father stayed with him in Singapore for five years, then 
returned to Hadhramaut in 1310 AH / 1892 AD. He grew up under the care of his parents 
in the city of Tarem and grew up in an environment rich with many scientists and good 
people and teachers. In 1938, the British government awarded him the title the highest rank 
of the Commander of the British Empire in recognition of his efforts to establish peace and 
security in Hadhramaut and public services such as participation in the creation of many 
major projects for the country. 
In addition to operating in the Hadhramaut region, many of these wealthy immigrant 
families used their wealth in charity projects in the Southeast Asian region and funded 
many schools, hospitals, and mosques.  In this way, they helped the development of their 
host countries. For example, the first mosque in Singapore was financed by the Al -Junaid 
family. Although in the 20th century the wealth and fame of Had hrami immigrants 
gradually decreased, many of their heritages can still be observed. Their contributions are 
remembered with the names of important streets and buildings such as Al-Junaid Road, Al-
Junaid Residential Town, and Al-Kaaf Street in Singapore (The contributions of Yemen’s 
diasporic community in Southeast Asia, 2018). 
In the nineteenth century, Singapore became a staging post for pilgrims wishing to 
make the Hajj . Their transportation was undertaken by Hadhrami -owned shipping 
companies such as those established by the al -Saqqaf (Alsagoff), al -Kaaf, and al -Jifri 
families (Alatas, 2010). Even in the last decade, a large number of Muslims in the Southeast 
 4 
Asian region, especially in Indonesia, considered  a plan for a pilgrimage to Yemen's 
Hadhramaut Valley during the Hajj. 
The unification of North and South Yemen in 1990 resulted in a relatively free 
political atmosphere in which different Islamic groups sought to secure an ideological 
niche for themselves amidst intense public contestations over the country’s future and 
religio-political identity. Despite the unification, people in most parts of the former South 
Yemen remained resentful of northerners. The political leaders of South Yemen continued 
to accuse the north -dominated government of pursuing a systematic economic 
marginalization of the south. Such grievances led to the civil war in 1994 between the 
northern and the southern armies, which ended with the victory of the north and the exile 
of the leading members of the South Yemeni—mostly Had hrami—leadership. Since then, 
the Yemeni state has remained suspicious of what it perceived as the secessionist tendency 
of Hadhramaut, especially due to the fact that the region had historically established strong 
transnational links to the Indian Ocean world. (Alatas, 2014) 
Prior to the unification, the government of North Yemen was actively supporting 
Salafi groups in their attempt to destabilize the socialist South. Ideologically and 
financially indebted to Saudi Arabia, many of these groups presented themselves as the 
bearer of pristine Islam and launched virulent diatribes against ‘traditionalist’ scholars with 
Sufi orientations, including the Ba Alawi of Had hramaut. Following the unification, the 
Yemeni government began supporting Sufi religious establishments in order to balance out 
the Salafis. The government spent money rebuilding Sufi shrines and institutions in South 
Yemen that had been suppressed under the socialist regime. This led to the re-flowering of 
Sufism in the wadi (valley) Had hramaut. Within this context, a young Ba Alawi scholar, 
Habib Umar bin Hafidh (b. 1962) emerged as a fiery orator, defending the Ba Alawi as the 
bearer of authentic Islam, while reviving Sufism and Sufi shrines in Hadrama ut (Alatas, 
2014). 
In 1993, Habib Umar visited Indonesia to rekindle diasporic and intellectual 
connections between Ba Alawi followers living in Indonesia and their ancestral homeland. 
 5 
After spending a month in Indonesia he returned to Hadhramaut with 40 young Indonesians 
(of both Hadhrami and non-Hadhrami descent) who were to be educated under his personal 
care. The 40 Indonesian students became the embryo of Habib Umar’s Dar al -Mustafa 
Academy, founded in 1996. Gradually, students from Yemen and other Arab countries, 
followed by Muslim converts from W estern countries, began to flock to Dar al -Mustafa. 
More and more Indonesians studied at the academy, and in 1999 Habib Umar’s wife 
opened an adjoining school for women named Dar al -Zahra. After spending three to four 
years in Had hramaut, the Indonesian students would return to their homeland with a 
renewed proselytizing zeal. They began establishing majelis taklim (Islamic study groups), 
transmitting what they had learned to the wider public and paving the way for the revival 
of the Ba Alawi tradition in Indonesia. These students became the primary agents in 
reintroducing Had hramaut as a spiritually significant place for Indonesian Muslims  
(Alatas, 2014). Also, Ali Al -Attas (1932-2008) was from the Al -Attas Hadhrami family 
and was appointed as the Minister of Foreign Affairs during Suharto's time, his name was 
raised as a politician in the international arena, and he was one of the senior diplomatic 
officials of this country (Alatas, 2010). 
But apart from this historical and diasporic record, what will be presented in this 
article is the position of Malay political elites towards the war in Yemen, which started in 
2015 and has gained a transnational aspect. The author tried to present the pos ition of the 
political elites of Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore and Brunei, but due to the lack of specific 
and reliable sources about the position of the political elites of Brunei and Singapore, only 
the position of the political elites of Malaysia and Indonesia will be presented. 
 
Literature Review 
No book or scientific article has been published in Persian or English about the position of 
the Malay elites regarding the war in Yemen. However, there are sources in English about 
the Yemeni diaspora in Southeast Asia. Regarding the war in Yemen, articles hav e been 
published in Persian, the most important of which will be introduced below. 
 
 6 
Sources related to the Yemeni diaspora in the Southeast Asian region 
A book titled The Hadhrami Diaspora in Southeast Asia was published in 2009 by Hassan 
Ibrahim and Abu Shouk in English by Brill.  This volume originates from the proceedings 
of an international conference convened by the Department of History and Civilization, 
International Islamic University Malaysia, in collaboration with the Embassy of the 
Republic of Yemen, in Kuala Lumpur, from 26 to 28 August 2005. Twelve out of thirty-
five papers presented at the conference were reviewed, thoroughly revised, and published 
in this volume. The introduction and the twelve chapters address the question of Hadhrami 
identity in Southeast Asia from various perspectives and investigate the patterns of 
Hadhrami interaction with diverse cultures, values , and beliefs in the region. Special 
attention is paid to Hadhrami local and transnational politics, social stratification and 
integration, religio-social reform, and journalism, as well as to economic dynamism and 
the cosmopolitan character of the Hadhrami societies in S outheast Asia  (Ibrahim and 
Shouk, 2009). 
Imam Sabchi (2019),  in a n article titled ‘ History of Hadh rami Community in 
Southeast Asia ’, emphasizes that  Hadhrami-Arabs have played essential roles in the 
Islamisation process across the Southeast Asian region. This article diachronically 
examines the history of Had hrami community and their roles in Islamisation. It looks at 
the dynamics, adaptation, and contestation of Islamisation in the region. This article offers 
actor-centered accounts of how the Had hrami community contributes to Islamic 
proselytization activism (dakwah), politics, and contestation within the community. It 
further argues that, throughout the history of Had hrami in Southeast Asia, political 
adaptation and contestation have been essential elements that shape the current Islamic -
scape in contemporary Southeast Asia (Subchi, 2019). 
Leif Manger (2010),  in the book titled The Hadrami Diaspora: Community-
Building on the Indian Ocean Rim, presents the history of Hadhrami migration to the Indian 
Ocean region . This book aims to contribute to an understanding of the fascinating 
migration history of the Had hramis of South Yemen and the resulting emergence of 
 7 
Hadhrami diasporic communities throughout the Indian Ocean region. Migration from 
Hadhramaut was always a result of many different factors. It was initiated by drought and 
tribal wars at home in Had hramaut but was also the result of people pursuing trading 
opportunities in the Indian Ocean region. Some Had hramis traveled as Islamic 
missionaries. The migration has brought the Hadhramis to South East Asia, parts of India, 
the Comoro Islands in the Indian Ocean, the Swahili and Somali (Manger, 2010). 
 
Sources related to the war in Yemen and its national and regional consequences 
Hatami and Beigi (2019) in the article ‘Perspective of the War in Yemen and its security 
consequences for the Islamic Republic of Iran ’, which was published in the Quarterly 
Journal of International Relations Research in Iran , put forward four scenarios of 
‘continuation of the war ‘, ‘Dialogue’, ‘Division of Yemen into North Yemen and South 
Yemen’ and ‘Referendum’, and argue that these scenarios will be the most likely scenarios 
for the future of the war in Yemen, respectively (Hatami and Beigi 2019). 
 
Hosseinizadeh, Farhadi and Ghafarizadeh (2015), in an article entitled ‘Yemen War 
and Al-Qaeda in the Peninsula’ published in the Political Science Quarterly in Iran, while 
pointing out the importance of Yemen's geopolitical position, put forward this argument  
that the Arab coalition's attack on Yemen led by Saudi Arabia and the tacit support of the 
big extra -regional powers have  led to political and security consequences in Yemen . 
According to the authors, along with the emergence of the Shia Houthis as an  effective 
military-political power with broad popular support, especially in the north of this country, 
Al-Qaeda in the Peninsula as one of the actors in the political arena of Yemen 
(Hosseinizadeh, Farhadi and Ghaffari, 2015). 
 
The position of the political elites of Malaysia towards the war in Yemen 
 8 
The position of the Malaysian political elite from the beginning of the war until now is 
examined in three time periods. In the first period, Malaysia joined the coalition forces of 
Saudi Arabia against the Houthis. In the second term, which was the term of Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohammad, Malaysia announced that it would withdraw from the coalition force 
and withdrew from the coalition forces, and in the third phase, it agreed to the proposal of 
a permanent ceasefire between the conflicting forces under t he supervision of the United 
Nations and has announced that will provide the necessary support. 
 
First period: Companionship with Saudi Arabia in the war in Yemen 
In the first stage, which is referred to as accompanying Saudi Arabia in the war in Yemen, 
Malaysian Air Force planes entered a military air base in Saudi Arabia to participate in the 
Riyadh-led ‘Renewal of Hope’ military operation against the Houthis in Yemen. By joining 
Malaysia, this country officially participated in the Saudi air attack on Houthi positions in 
Yemen.  
At this point, the Saudi government was trying to increase its political, cultural, and 
religious influence in Southeast Asia, especially Malaysia. In fact, the expansion of former 
Malaysian Prime Minister Tun Najib Razak's relations with Saudi Arabia led to widespread 
embezzlement and corruption in the Malaysian government during his primeministership, 
and his corruption case was also pursued in court (Waqari, 2017). 
 
Second period: Separation from the Saudi coalition 
With the victory of ‘ PH’ led by Mahathir Muhammad in the parliamentary elections of 
Malaysia in 2017, the direction of the country's foreign policy also changed drastically. 
The result of this election was not only a very heavy defeat for the UMNO coalition and 
the Barisan Nasion al party led by Tun Najib Razak, but it was also considered a heavy 
defeat for Saudi Arabia because by developing relations with the Razak government, it 
sought to make Malaysia the main ally of Saudi Arabia in the region. 
 9 
Former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Muhammad had a different personality 
from Tun Najib Razak, and he put support for liberation movements, including Palestine, 
and fighting terrorists on the agenda. His victory in the 2017 Malaysian elections had many 
consequences, one of which was the withdrawal of Malaysia from the Saudi coalition in 
aggression against Yemen. With this decision, Mahathir Mohammad's government showed 
that it considers the national interests and the interests of the Islamic world. Sey yed Farid 
Al-Attas, a Malaysian sociologist (from the Al-Attas Hadhrami family) and a professor at 
the National University of Singapore, also stated in a press interview that this decision of 
the Malaysian government is admirable and that Malaysia should not involve itself in the 
interests of Saudi Arabia in the region. This decision of Mahathir Muhammad to withdraw 
the country's military forces from Yemen was welcomed by the people and elites of the 
Malaysian civil society. Political circles and civil inst itutions in Malaysia, such as the 
‘Lawyers for Freedom’ group and the Malaysian writer and thinker Faisal Musa, after this 
decision of the Malaysian government, announced the basic policy of this country to avoid 
any military intervention in the affairs of countries and maintain neutrality. Many political 
and media elites in Malaysia believe that the gifts that the Saudi rulers gave to the former 
Prime Minister of Malaysia are estimated to be over 700 million dollars and that his reward 
was for accompanying Saudi Arabia in the Yemen war (Waqari, 2017). 
 
Third period: agreeing to the proposal of a permanent ceasefire in Yemen 
At this point in time, Malaysia welcomed the Saudi initiative to end the war in Yemen and 
announced that it is ready to help the Saudi initiative. Saudi Arabia presented a new peace 
initiative in 2021 to bring peace to Yemen, provide aid to its people, and end the country's 
six-year war. This plan called for a comprehensive ceasefire under the supervision of the 
United Nations, the reopening of Sana'a airport , and the import of fuel and food through 
Hodeida port, both of which were under the control of Houthi militias. This initiative was 
immediately supported by the Yemeni government and welcomed by the United Nations, 
the United States, the European Union, the Persian Gulf Cooperation Council countries, 
and most Muslim -majority countries, including Pakistan and Malaysia. Malaysia 
 10 
appreciated the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its recent initiative to end the conflict and 
resume the political process in Yemen  (Malaysia Backs Saudi Bid to End Yemen War, 
2021). 
Malaysia welcomed the recent establishment of the Presidential Leadership Council 
in the Republic of Yemen initiated by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) as a positive step towards finding a comprehensive political 
and peaceful solution to the conflict in Yemen. Therefore, at this point , Malaysia fully 
supported the initiatives of the United Nations (UN) Secretary General Special Envoy for 
Yemen including the ceasefire agreement between the Government of Yemen and the 
Houthis. This bodes well for the cessation of hostilities and unimpeded access to  
humanitarian relief for the people of Yemen. 
Malaysia reiterated its support for an inclusive and peaceful solution to the conflict 
in Yemen through dialogue and negotiations. Malaysia was concerned over the prolonged 
conflict and urge d the concerned parties to respect international human rights and 
international humanitarian laws (Malaysia welcomes recent developments in the Republic 
of Yemen, 2022).  
In a statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on Tuesday (Oct 11), it said 
Malaysia strongly believes the immediate resumption of negotiation between the 
concerned parties is crucial to reaching an inclusive and negotiated political settlement in 
Yemen. 
‘Malaysia continues to closely follow developments in Yemen and joins the international 
community in expressing concerns over the missed opportunity to renew the UN-brokered 
ceasefire, following its expiry on Oct 2.  The strong political will by leaders of all parties 
will lead to an amicable solution to the conflict and pave the way for normalcy in Yemen.  
Malaysia is pleased to note that the UN-brokered ceasefire deal since April 2 has resulted 
in improved humanitarian conditions and reduced  civilian casualties in the country,’  it 
 11 
said. (Malaysia calls on all parties to work towards resolving conflict, and recovery 
of Yemen, 2022) 
The position of Indonesia's political elites towards the war in Yemen 
Due to the fact that Joko Widodo has been the seventh president of Indonesia since October 
20, 2014, a consistent and unwavering policy has been adopted regarding the war in 
Yemen, which will be discussed further. 
In September 2015, Joko Widodo made his first Middle East trip to Saudi Arabia, 
Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, and in the city of Jeddah, he was confronted with the 
Saudi Aramco oil company's 10-billion-dollar investment proposal in Indonesia. He 
planned this trip according to Indonesia's economic conditions and shortage of energy and 
also took into account the attraction of capital, the sale of weapons, and social cooperation. 
But Aramco's 10-billion-dollar investment proposal was the most important part of this trip 
and showed Saudi Arabia's effort to attract the opinion of Indonesia  as the most populous 
Muslim country that can be influential in regional political equations and the Islamic world.  
Indonesia has a neutral position regarding Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, and Yemen, and 
before the Saudi-led coalition attacked Yemen, Riyadh invited Indonesia to participate in 
this attack, but Jakarta did not accept it  (Saudi Arabia's attempt to attract Indonesia's 
opinion/ 10 billion dollar offer, 2014). 
In March 2015, Indonesia hosted the 60th Asia -Africa Summit, and in addition to 
Jokowi's clear and transparent position, his deputy Yusuf Kala also called on the conflicting 
groups to end the violence and  choose negotiation and peaceful solutions to resolve 
conflicts and return peace to Yemen. Considering the historical and influential role of 
Indonesia in the issues of the Islamic world countries, Indonesia announced that Jakarta 
was very concerned about the situation in Yemen and hoped that the tensions in Yemen 
would be resolved through dialogue and peace, and even indicated that the Indonesian 
government has submitted a proposal to the ambassadors of the member countries of the 
 12 
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to create a special force to resolve the conflict in 
Yemen (Indonesia: Negotiating the solution to the crisis in Yemen / Creating a special task 
force to end the conflict, 2014). 
Indonesian Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi and her Saudi counterpart, Faisal bin 
Farhan Al Saud, discussed security issues, including the recent developments in Yemen, 
over the phone on Tuesday (September 15, 2020). The situation in Yemen was also 
discussed at a meeting of the UN Security Council the same day. Special Envoy of the UN, 
Secretary General Martin Griffith, and UN Under -Secretary-General for Humanitarian 
Affairs, Mark Lowcock, also gave briefings at the meeting on the latest situation in Yemen. 
‘Basically, the briefing highlighted the anxious situation in Yemen where local people are 
suffering due to the protracted conflict. The briefing also touched on the danger of 
starvation, (which is) endangering most Yemeni people,’ she said. 
Both at the meeting of the UN Security Council and during the phone conversation 
with the Saudi foreign minister, Retno said Indonesia urged all sides to exercise self -
restraint and soon agree on a joint declaration initiated by the special envo y of the US 
Secretary General. Indonesia denounced the attack launched by Houthi on neighboring 
countries, including Saudi Arabia, and was worried about the humanitarian situation in the 
field, particularly in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. To this end, she under scored 
the importance of protecting civilians. ‘Indonesia also called for the reopening of the Sanaa 
Airport since it serves as a gateway for humanitarian aid to Yemen,’ she added. 
Conclusion 
The findings show that the position of the political elites of Malaysia and Indonesia towards 
the war in Yemen has certain differences. The position of the political elites of Malaysia 
has not experienced a uniform process due to the internal political dev elopments of this 
country on the one hand and the type of foreign policy orientation on the other hand, and 
from aligning with Saudi Arabia and participating in the war coalition in Yemen led by 
Saudi Arabia to withdrawing from the coalition and agreeing to a permanent ceasefire has 
 13 
fluctuated. However, the position of the Indonesian political elite has been unified due to 
the lack of change in the government and as a result of the lack of change in the direction 
of foreign policy, and efforts such as asking the conflicting groups to end the violence and 
to negotiate and find a solution  for resolve disputes and return peace to Yemen. The 
important point is that, unlike Malaysia, Indonesia did not directly participate in the Yemen 
war, and even despite the proposals made by Saudi Arabia to accompany Indonesia in the 
Yemen war, Joko Widodo did not accept them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table one. Comparing the views of the elites of the Malay world on the war in Yemen 
 
Country orientation examples Individuals/Entities 
 
Political 
elite/Malaysia 
fluctuate From cooperation in 
the Saudi coalition 
against Yemen to 
withdrawing from 
the coalition and 
agreeing to a 
permanent ceasefire 
Najib Razak/ 
Mahathir 
Mohammad 
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs/ 
Political 
elites/Indonesia 
Uniform Not accompanying 
Saudi Arabia in the 
coalition against 
Joko widodo, Yusuf 
Kala Retno Marsudi 
 14 
Yemen/ not 
entering the war 
 
 
References 
 
- Alatas, Ismail Fajrie (2014) ‘Contemporary Indonesian Pilgrimage to Hadramawt, 
Yemen’ Available at: https://www.mei.edu/publications/contemporary-indonesian-
pilgrimage-hadramawt-yemen 
- Alatas, Syed Farid (ed.) (2010) Hadhrami Arabs Across the Indian Ocean: 
contributions to Southeast Asian economy and society, available at: 
http://b-ys.org.uk/journal/book-reviews/hadhrami-arabs-across-indian-ocean-
contributions-southeast-asian-economy-and 
- ‘Declaration of Indonesia's readiness to mediate to solve the crisis in Yemen’ (2014) 
news code 81577318, available at: 
https://www.irna.ir/news/81577318/ 
- Hatami, Mohammad Reza and Alireza Beigi (2020) ‘The prospects of the Yemeni 
war and its security consequences for the Islamic Republic of Iran’ International 
Relations Research, Volume 10, Issue 3 - Serial Number 38, Pages 65 -90, DOI: 
10.22034/irr.2020.118878, in Persian. 
-     Hosseinzadeh, Seyed Mohammad Ali; Qaffarizadeh, Mehrshad and Zeinab 
Farhadi (2017) ‘ The War between Yemen and Al- Qaeda in Arabian Peninsula 
(2016-2015)’ Political Science, Volume 20, issue 77 - Serial Number 77, Pages 129-
149, DOI: 10.22081/psq.2017.63784, in Persian. 
- Ibrahim, Hassan  and Abu Shouk (2009) The Hadhrami Diaspora in Southeast Asia 
Identity Maintenance or Assimilation?, Brill Publisher. 
 15 
- ‘Indonesia: Negotiating a solution to the Yemen crisis/creating a special task force 
to end conflicts ’ (in Persian), available at : 
https://www.irna.ir/news/81574246/%D8%A7 
- Manger, Leif (2010) The Hadrami Diaspora: Community -Building on the Indian 
Ocean Rim, Berghahn Books, Available at: 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt9qd2wd 
- Marsudi, Reno (2020) ‘ Indonesian, Saudi foreign ministers discuss situation in 
Yemen’ Available at: 
https://en.antaranews.com/news/156850/indonesian-saudi-foreign-ministers-
discuss-situation-in-yemen 
- ‘Malaysia Welcomes Recent Developments in the Republic of Yemen (15 April 
2022, Available at:  
https://www.kln.gov.my/web/guest/-/malaysia-welcomes-recent-developments-in-
the-republic-of-yemen 
- ‘Malaysia backs Saudi bid to end Yemen war’ (2021) Available at: 
https://www.arabnews.com/node/1831667/saudi-arabia 
-  ‘Malaysia will take part in military operations in Yemen’ ( 2015) Available at: 
https://report.az/en/other-countries/malaysia-will-take-part-in-military-operations-
in-yemen/ 
- ‘Malaysia expresses concern over missed opportunity to renew truce in Yemen ’ 
(October 11, 2022) Available at: 
https://www.nst.com.my/world/world/2022/10/839527/malaysia-expresses-
concern-over-missed-opportunity-renew-truce-yemen. 
- Subchi, Imam (2019) ‘ A History of Hadrami Community in Southeast Asia’ DOI: 
10.21274/epis.2019.14.2.169-188. 
- ‘ The contributions of Yemen’s diasporic community in Southeast Asia ’ (11 May 
2018) Available at: https://mei.nus.edu.sg/think_in/the-contributions-of-yemens-
diasporic-community-in-southeast-asia/ 
 16 
- Waqari, Majid (2017) ‘Malaysia's withdrawal from the Saudi coalition in the Yemen 
war’ (in Persian) available at : 
https://newspaper.hamshahrionline.ir/id/21442/%D8%AE%D8%B1%D9%88%D8
%AC-%D9%85%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B2%DB%8C-
%D8%A7%D8%A6%D8%AA%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%81-
%D8%B9%D8%B1%D8%A8%D8%B3%D8%AA%D8%A7%D9%86-
%D8%AC%D9%86%DA%AF-%DB%8C%D9%85%D9%86.html 
-  
 
 
 