Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada:
From a Comparison of the al-‘Aydarus and the
al-Habshi Families
言語: English
出版者: 国立民族学博物館, National Museum of
Ethnology
公開日: 2025-10-09
キーワード: 
作成者: 新井, 和広
メールアドレス: 
所属: 
メタデータ
https://doi.org/10.15021/0002000341URL
131
SENRI ETHNOLOGICAL  STUDIES  114: 131–146 ©2025
“Gyres”, Indian Ocean and Beyond: Discovering the Indian Ocean World
Edited by Hideaki Suzuki and Minoru Mio
Chapter 7  Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada: 
From a Comparison of the al-‘Aydarus and the 
al-Habshi Families
*
Kazuhiro Arai
Keio University
Introduction
The people of the Hadramawt region (henceforth, Hadramis) in South Arabia, are famous 
for their migration in the Indian Ocean region, the oldest maritime world in human 
history,
1) especially East Africa (Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania, and Comoro), India (Gujarat, 
Malabar, and Deccan), and maritime Southeast Asia (Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, 
Brunei and Southern Philippines). It is understood that kinship influenced the migration 
patterns of Hadramis, and the Hadrami sada, who trace their descent from the Prophet 
Muhammad, are no exception. Descendants of each family can be found in any of the 
major regions, but particular families tend to prefer a particular region as their migration 
destination. How and why did that preference arise? By utilizing biographical compilation 
produced from the 17th to the 20th centuries and drawing up genealogical charts, the 
present study attempts to explore the differences in the migration patterns of individual 
families. The particular objects of this analysis are the al-‘Aydarus and the al-Habshi 
families, two highly renowned kinship groups in both present-day Hadramawt and 
regions across the Indian Ocean. The two focal points are, first, the times when those 
families began to expand within Hadramawt and to attain positions of great influence in 
the ‘Alawi Tariqa, which was a Sufi order of the Hadrami sada; and second, their 
relationship with migration to the Indian Ocean maritime world.
I.  History of Hadramawt through Individual Lives
It is difficult to reconstruct the history of Hadrami migration, for in comparison with 
other major regions in the Middle East, historical sources for Hadramawt are scarce, 
essentially limited to chronicles such as Tarikh Shanbal, al-‘Udda al-Mufida , Tarikh 
al-Shihr, and a few others. For the history of political events, there is little scope for 
further analysis, although there is a relatively well-documented collection of biographies.
2) 
As is the case for other regions of the Islamic world, many biographical works on 
notables have been compiled, revised, and updated not only in Hadramawt but also other 
places where Hadrami Sufis and scholars were active. The most famous biographical 
Kazuhiro Arai132
compilation in Southeast Asia is Taj al-A‘ras (Marriage Crown), a Manaqib (hagiography) 
of Salih b. ‘Abd Allah al-‘Attas (d. 1862) which contains information on many Hadrami 
scholars in Southeast Asia in the 19th and 20th centuries. In India, Tarikh Nur al-Safir 
written by an India-born Hadrami sayyid, ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Shaykh al-‘Aydarus (d. 
1628/9) lists Hadrami notables in the 10th century A.H. (15th century C.E.).
3) In 
Hadramawt, al-Jawhar al-Shaffaf , al-Mashra‘ al-Rawi , Ghurar al-Baha’ , Sharh 
al-‘Ayniyya, ‘Iqd al-Yawaqit, and Shams al-Zahira are just a few examples of 
biographical compilations or religious texts with sections of biography of Hadrami 
notables. Indeed, biography occupies the main body of literature on the history of 
Hadramawt, and this present study too relies on biographical literature, mainly on 
al-Mashra‘ al-Rawi, Tarikh al-Shu‘ara’ al-Hadramiyyin , and Shams al-Zahira (3rd 
edition). It must be pointed out that despite the apparent abundance of biographical 
literature, most works focus only on religious figures and those of sada, and to a lesser 
extent al-Mashayikh
4) clans. Although a religious figure was simultaneously a scholar and 
a kind of political figure active in the regional economy, we have little if any information 
on the lives and kinship relationships of peasants, nomads, and townsmen.
 Since biographical literature is the main body of the historic “record,” virtually all 
researchers who have worked on the history of Hadramawt have utilized it. The most 
conspicuous examples of such studies are Ulrike Freitag’s Indian Ocean migrants and 
state formation in Hadhramaut
5) and Engseng Ho’s The Graves of Tarim, 6) while 
examples of family history studies are Anne Bang’s Sufis and scholars of the sea 7) (the 
Bin Sumayt Family), Esther Peskes’ Al-ʻAidarus und seine Erben 8) (the al-‘Aydarus 
family) and my own still-unpublished Ph.D. thesis, “Arabs who Traversed the Indian 
Ocean”
9) (the al-‘Attas family). Those studies reconstruct the history of each family based 
Map Major place names covered by this chapter

Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 133
among other things on biographies, other kinds of religious texts, contemporary accounts 
by both Hadramis and foreigners, and colonial documents. Although every study reveals 
some migration patterns of Hadramis, none fully discusses whether a particular migration 
pattern is a common aspect of all Hadramis, or characteristic only of certain families.
 The purpose of this study is to compare different families and examine whether any 
particular family has its own particular pattern of migration abroad, and for this purpose 
I chose the al-‘Aydarus and al-Habshi families. There are four reasons for the choice. 
First, both families belong to the same clan (i.e., sada), and there seems to be no 
difference between the two in terms of their positions in society, levels of education, 
economic situation, and firmness of belief. Second, both families migrated outside 
Hadramawt on a large scale––one can find figures from both families in East Africa, 
India, and Southeast Asia. Third, the eponyms of both families may be considered 
contemporary, allowing chronological difference to be offset. Finally, as we shall see, 
their migration patterns differ in timing and destination.
II.  History of the Expansion of the al-‘Aydarus Family
The al-‘Aydarus family is one of the major Hadrami sada families whose genealogy goes 
back to the Prophet Muhammad (Löfgren “Aydarūs”; Peskes “al-Aydarūs”). The eponym 
of the family is derived from one ‘Abd Allah b. Abi Bakr (d. 1461) who was known as 
“al-‘Aydarus” and said to have been a famous Sufi and scholar, although the meaning of 
the word al-‘Aydarus is unclear. ‘Abd Allah was the author of al-Kibrit al-Ahmar wa 
al-Iksir al-Akbar, the first monograph on Sufism by a Hadrami sayyid.
10) A Manaqib was 
written for him that has survived in manuscript form (Bā ‘Alawī n.d.). ‘Abd Allah’s 
prominence was probably not the result of chance, for his father too, Abu Bakr (d. 
1418/9, No. 6 in Chart 1) was a famous Sufi who was nicknamed “al-Sakran (intoxicated 
or drunken)” because his appearance while in the ecstatic state of Sufism caused him to 
appear intoxicated. ‘Abd Allah’s grandfather, meanwhile, ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Saqqaf (d. 
1416, No. 7 in Chart 1) had been an even more famous Sufi and scholar in Hadramawt, 
whose descendants are known as the al-Saqqaf family, although many other families 
branched out and became known by different names
11) such as al-‘Attas, al-Shaykh Abu 
Bakr b. Salim, al-Mihdar, Bin Shihab, Bin ‘Aqil, and al-‘Aydarus.
 ‘Abd Allah al-‘Aydarus’s tomb is in the Zanbal cemetery in the town of Tarim, the 
centre of religious activities and learning in Hadramawt. Its cemetery is a place of 
“pilgrimage” for Hadrami sada and followers of the ‘Alawi Tariqa, because it is the 
burial site of many key figures in the development of the clan and the tariqa such as 
Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Faqih al-Muqaddam (d. 1255), ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Saqqaf (d. 
1416), and ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Alawi al-Haddad (d. 1720). However, despite their importance 
in the history of Islam or the ‘Alawi Tariqa in Hadramawt, no mausoleum was built for 
any of those key figures, although there are three mausoleums in the Zanbal cemetery, all 
of which are still well kept. Two of those three are for the members of the al-‘Aydarus 
family, one for the eponym and another, larger one for ‘Abd Allah b. Shaykh al-‘Aydarus 
(1610/1), a direct descendant of the eponym.
Kazuhiro Arai134
Chart 1 Family tree of the al-‘Aydarus
Source: al-Mashhūr 1984; al-Saqqāf 1997; al-Shillī 1982.
d. 865/1461 in Tarim.
Eponym of the al-Aydarus 
family.
Renowned Sufi and Scholar.
Shaykh
Shaykh
Abd Allah
Abd Allah
Abu Bakr 
Ali Zayn al-Abidin
Mustafa
d. 1631 in Daulatabad.  
Warmly received at a 
court in Deccan.
d. 1610/1
in Tarim
d. 1582/3 in Ahmad Abad
d. 1537/8 in Tarim
d. 1513/4
in Tarim
d. 1508/9 in Aden.
Patron Saint of Aden 
until today.
Husayn
Ahmad
Husayn
d. 1662/3 in 
al-Shihr
Ja‘far al-Sadiq
d. 1653/4 in Surat. 
Extinct.
Ali Zayn al-
AbidinJa‘far Shaykh
Mustafa
Abd Allah Abd al-Rahman
Abd al-Qadir
d. 1628/9 in
Ahmad Abad
Author of Nur al-Safir
Descendants in Surat 
and Hyderabad. d. 1631/2
in Tarim?
d. 1778 in Cairo. 
Visited his family 
in India. Extinct.
d. 1771/2 in Surat
d. 1689/90?
in Tarim?
d. 1715 in Tarim. Went to 
India while young and 
accumulated wealth. 
Returned to Tarim and set 
up “infrastructure” 
d. 1750/1 in Tarim. 
Visited India again 
and again.
d. 1729/30 in 
Surat
d. 1744/5 in 
Tarim.  Studied 
in India.
Alawi
Abd Allah
Umar
Abu BakrAhmad
Ahmad
MuhammadMuhammad Abd Allah
Ali
Husayn
Abd Allah
Abu Bakr
Husayn
d. 1798 in Batavia. 
Born in Hadramawt. 
Mausoleum in Luar 
Batang, Jakarta.
AlawiAbd al-RahmanHusayn
Muhammad
Abd al-Rahman
Abu Bakr Alawi
d. 1645/6 in Tarim
Active in Thibi
Descendants in 
Thibi, Malabar, 
Java.
Ahmad
d. 1615/6 in 
Bharuch.
Extinct.
Husayn
Ahmad
Abd Allah Abu Bakr
Ahmad
d. 1663/4
in Hyderabad
d. 1638/9 in 
Daulatabad. Born in 
Hadramawt. Visited 
India after study in 
Hadramawt. Met Shah 
Jahan.
d. 1643/4
Born in 
Hadramawt
d. 1577/8 in 
Tarim
d. 1619/20 in Aden?
Born in Tarim and 
went to Aden where 
he studied under and 
became successor to 
his father.
d. 1616/7 in Tarim
“Sahib al-Taqa”
d. 1511/2
in Tarim
d. 1521/2
d. 1603/4
d. 1640/1
in Mecca
d. 1701/2
in al-Hazm
d. 1700/1
in Tarim
d.1657/8 in 
Mecca.
Born in Tarim
Abu Bakr
al-Sakran
Abd al-
Rahman al-
Saqqaf
Ahmad
Alawi
d. 1707/8
in Tariba, Hadramawt
Descencants in 
Tariba, India 
(Bijapur, 
Malabar... ), 
Java...
Descendants are in al-
Shihr, Surat, 
Terengganu, 
Palembang, Java...
Descendants in 
Bur (Hadramawt), 
Tarim...
Descendants in 
Aden, Abyan, 
Zufar, Java...
Husayn
Descendants in 
Terengganu and 
Java.
d. 819/1416 in Tarim.
Eponym of the al-Saqqaf 
family.  Renowned Sufi 
and Scholar.
d. 821/1418-9
Renowned Sufi and Scholar.
Muhammad
Ahmad
“Tukku Melaka”
“Tukku Tuan Pahang”
Zayn al-Abidin Ahmad
Muhammad
Abd al-Rahman
Muhammad
Mustafa
d. 1917. A notable 
in Terengganu.
“Tukku Paluh”
d. 1878
“Tukku Tuan Besar”
“Tukku Makam Lama”
Moved back and forth 
between Java and 
Terengganu.
“Tukku Makam 
Lama”
Shaykh
“Dato Batu 
Tomiyuh?”
Aydarus
“Tukku Darat”
Abd al-RahmanMustafa Muhammad 
Zayn
“Tukku Lebai?”
“Tukku Tuan Besar”
“Tukku Tuan 
Muda Terus?”
“Tuan Indot?”
Hasan
Ali
Abd al-
Rahman
Aydarus
Became the 
ruler of Kubu, 
Kalimantan in 
1772.
d. 1638/9 in 
Tarim
d. 1591.
Born in Aden
* Italic characters indicate those who migrated or visited India, and Undelined characters indicate 
those who migraed to or visited Southeast Asia. 
** Persons in Arial font indicates that a mausoleum was built on his tomb.
*** This chart does not pretend to be an extensive one as the size of the family is huge.
**** Diacritical marks in the personal and place names are omitted.
Shaykh
Abd Allah
Abd Allah
al-Aydarus
Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 135
II–1.  The Development of the al-‘Aydarus Family in Hadramawt
The al-‘Aydarus quickly developed into one of the most influential families in Tarim. The 
main genealogical line of the family is famous, namely ‘Abd Allah (eponym, d. 1461) - 
Shaykh (d. 1513/4) - ‘Abd Allah (1537/8) - Shaykh (1582/3) - ‘Abd Allah (d. 1610/1) - 
Shaykh (d. 1631) - ‘Abd Allah (d. 1662/3) (see No. 1, 3, and 4 in Chart 1). Indeed, the 
two mausoleums in Zanbal cemetery mentioned above and another in the port town of 
al-Shihr are for individuals of that main branch of the family, the same from which many 
of those who migrated to India and Terengganu, in the Malay Peninsula. In addition to 
Tarim, members of the al-‘Aydarus family are found in Tariba, Thibi, Bur, near Tarim; 
and in the old port town of al-Shihr.
II–2.  The Expansion of the al-‘Aydarus Family outside Hadramawt: Aden
The al-‘Aydarus family began to expand outside Hadramawt just after the eponym’s first 
generation. Among four sons left by ‘Abd Allah al-‘Aydarus, the most renowned figure 
was Abu Bakr (d. 1508/9) who established himself in Aden. He has been recognized as 
the patron saint of the most important port city in South Arabia, and his tomb is 
maintained by the al-‘Aydarus family, even after its destruction during the civil war in 
Yemen in 1994. Another branch of the family, the descendants of ‘Alawi, another son of 
the eponym, moved to Aden (see the left column of Chart 1).
II–3.  Migration to India
The members of the al-‘Aydarus family migrated to most regions around the Indian 
Ocean, although they are most famous for their migration to the Indian subcontinent, 
where they were not mere foreign minorities but played an important role in the 
development of Islam. The al-‘Aydarus family’s migration to and activities in India have 
been studied extensively by multiple researchers such as Ho, Peskes, and Kuriyama 
(2004), and though I have little hard information to add, I believe my visualization of 
their kinship relations and places of activity should be of help in understanding their 
migration pattern. Chart 1 shows the reconstructed al-‘Aydarus family tree based on three 
works of genealogy.
12) The names shown in italics are of individuals who migrated to 
India; those underlined are of people who went to Southeast Asia. I cannot claim that the 
chart is exhaustive, but I do believe it grasps the general picture of the family’s migration 
to the Indian Ocean world.
 Most of those who migrated to India came from the main genealogical line of the 
family, the first migrant being Shaykh b. ‘Abd Allah al-‘Aydarus (d. 1582/3) who died in 
Ahmad Abad. He left at least three sons in both Hadramawt and India. Ahmad b. Shaykh 
(d. 1615/6) died in Bharuch without male issue; another son ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Shaykh (d. 
1628/9) is considered a successor to his father in India and his descendants are said to be 
in Surat and Hyderabad. ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Shaykh was also the author of the above-
mentioned Tarikh Nur al-Safir, a chronicle of the tenth century A.H. that consists of 
biographies of notables of the period. The last of the three sons, ‘Abd Allah b. Shaykh (d. 
1610/1, No. 3 in Chart 1) succeeded his father in Tarim, and from that ‘Abd Allah came 
other family members who migrated to India. Among them, ‘Ali Zayn al-‘Abidin b. 
Kazuhiro Arai136
Mustafa al-‘Aydarus (d. 1715) exerted the greatest influence on Hadramawt, arriving 
there as a young man and going on to accumulate great wealth, returning to Tarim later 
in his life to invest in his homeland’s welfare and infrastructure. One can see the 
influence on Hadramawt of wealthy regions in the Indian Ocean world. However, it is 
safe to assume that their noble blood and high level of education, whether religious or 
not, made them notables in their towns, as intermediaries in disputes and as religious 
leaders. Many of them are said to have been warmly received at courts in various places. 
Indeed, Abu Bakr b. Ahmad al-‘Aydarus (d. 1638/9 in Daulatabad) even had an audience 
with the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan.
13) Many too were involved in the popular type of 
Sufism known as Tariqa ‘Aydarusiyya, a branch of the larger Tariqa ‘Alawiyya. As the 
migration of the family progressed, India became the place for its members to study 
Islamic sciences and Sufism, with, for example, Shaykh b. Mustafa al-‘Aydarus (d. 
1744/5 in Tarim) said to have studied in India as well as Hadramawt. Even those who 
stayed in Hadramawt sometimes visited India to see their families. It seems reasonable to 
suppose then, as previous studies have suggested, that India was an extension of 
Hadramawt, or Tarim. We must also remember that the al-‘Aydarus family migrated to 
India during a time of economic prosperity in the region, when the Mughal empire was 
in its heyday and commerce in the cities and foreign seaborne trade were prospering.
II–4.  Migration to Southeast Asia
After migration to India, members of the al-‘Aydarus family began to head to Southeast 
Asia, where they developed into one of the major families of Hadrami sada descent. 
According to a census taken probably in 1932 by the ‘Alawi Union (al-Rabita 
al-‘Alawiyya), an organization of Hadrami sada, the al-‘Aydarus was the second most 
populous family in Batavia and neighbouring cities (Bogor, Tangerang, Bekasi and 
Karawang) with 344 individuals.
14) This number does not necessarily reflect the situation 
of the whole of Southeast Asia, as a particular family tended to concentrate in a 
particular place. However, considering that Batavia was one of the largest cities in 
Southeast Asia and attracted many Hadramis even from within the region, the figure is 
certainly plausible. Members of the al-‘Aydarus family were to be found in various 
places in Southeast Asia. Looking at Batavia, the most visible legacy of the family is the 
mausoleum of one Husayn b. Abi Bakr al-‘Aydarus (d. 1798) in the Luar Batang district 
that is now a part of northern Jakarta. Abu Bakr is considered the most famous Arab 
saint in the capital of Indonesia, and his tomb attracts many visitors, including 
non-Muslim Chinese. Little is known of the details of Husayn’s life, and he left no issue.
 The al-‘Aydarus family developed into an important Arab-Hadrami-Sayyid clan 
which remains influential today. As for religious matters, rather less is known about the 
Southeast Asian branch of the family, although a set of prayers popular in Hadramawt 
known as ratib, composed by the eponym ‘Abd Allah (known as “Ratib al-‘Aydarus”) is 
read in Southeast Asia. However, other ratibs, by families such as Ratib al-‘Attas and 
Ratib al-Haddad are more popular in the region. The al-‘Aydarus family as a group is 
known for their activities in Kubu, West Kalimantan, and Terengganu, an eastern coastal 
region of the Malay peninsula. ‘Aydarus b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Aydarus became ruler in 
Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 137
Kubu, in 1772, and headship of the state was assumed by members of the family until it 
was abolished in 1958. The rulers of Kubu came from the line of Husayn b. ‘Abd Allah 
al-‘Aydarus (d. 1511/2 in Tarim), another son of the eponym. In Terengganu the members 
of the family came to be known as the family of religion; a man called Zayn al-‘Abidin 
b. Shaykh who was known locally as “Tukku Makam Lama” might actually have been 
the first of them to move to Terengganu. He was the son of Shaykh b. Mustafa (d. 
1744/5) who died in Tarim but had studied in India, and was most probably a first- 
generation migrant from Tarim. He is said to have been accustomed to move back and 
forth between Java and Terengganu. Descendants of Shaykh b. Mustafa lived in both 
India and Southeast Asia.
15) In Terengganu, they came to be known under local titles such 
as “Tukku” and “Dato.” The most famous of the al-‘Aydarus in Terengganu was ‘Abd 
al-Rahman b. Muhammad (d. 1917) or “Tukku Paluh.”
16) In addition to those in Kubu 
and Terengganu, members of the al-‘Aydarus family settled in various places in Southeast 
Asia including Java where the Hadrami sada are most numerous.
III.  History of the Expansion of the al-Habshi Family
The al-Habshi family is another major family of Hadrami sada. Their line too goes back 
to the Prophet Muhammad, and they can be found in virtually every region where the 
Hadramis migrated around the Indian Ocean. Also, Simt al-Durar, known as Mawlid 
al-Habshi, a litany in praise of the birth of the Prophet Muhammad composed by one ‘Ali 
b. Muhammad al-Habshi (d. 1915) is widely recited, especially in Southeast Asia, in the 
Prophet’s birth month in the Hijri calendar. The family has produced many religious 
figures in Hadramawt and abroad, and mausoleums of al-Habshi saints can be found in 
multiple places in Hadramawt, and in Singapore and Surabaya in Southeast Asia. In 
addition to religious figures, the family produced modern thinkers, entrepreneurs, and 
reformers. It can fairly be said that the al-Habshi family is as famous and important as 
the al-‘Aydarus.
 The eponym of the al-Habshi family is one Abu Bakr who died in 1453/4, less than 
ten years before the death of ‘Abd Allah al-‘Aydarus, in Tarim, meaning that the 
eponyms of both the al-‘Aydarus and al-Habshi families were contemporaries and lived 
in the same town. Abu Bakr was known as “al-Habshi” because he stayed in Ethiopia 
(al-Habasha in Arabic) and did da‘wa
17) there. Little is known of his life in Ethiopia, and 
the details of his descendants there are not clear, except that his grandson Ahmad left 
further descendants in Ethiopia (No. 12 in Chart 2). Unlike the eponym of the 
al-‘Aydarus family, Abu Bakr al-Habshi as far as we know left only one son, ‘Alawi b. 
Abi Bakr. ‘Alawi however left at least three sons: the above-mentioned Ahmad, 
Muhammad, and ‘Ali. Descendants of Ahmad are said to have been in Ethiopia, with 
those of ‘Ali in Medina. Another son, Muhammad b. ‘Alawi b. Abi Bakr al-Habshi 
probably lived in Hadramawt, for he died in Tarim in 1566/7. Muhammad left two sons, 
‘Abd al-Rahman and Ahmad (Chart 2). In sum, the al-Habshi family were not so 
numerous in Hadramawt until the time of the eponym’s grandson because either they left 
few sons, or they were outside Hadramawt.
Kazuhiro Arai138
Chart 2 Family tree of the al-Habshi
Source: al-Mashhūr 1984; al-Saqqāf 1997; al-Shillī 1982.
Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 139
III–1.  Expansion of the al-Habshi Family in Hadramawt
The expansion of the al-Habshi family began at the time of Ahmad b. Muhammad (d. 
1628/9, No. 3 in Chart 2), who was known as “Sahib al-Shi‘b (the Master of the 
Canyon).” He was so nicknamed because he lived in al-Husayyisa, between Say’un and 
Tarim in Wadi Hadramawt, and died there. The now uninhabited al-Husayyisa is known 
as the burial place of Ahmad b. ‘Isa al-Muhajir, ancestor of all Hadrami sada who 
migrated from Basra to Hadramawt in the tenth century. His tomb, on a hillside with a 
mausoleum, is still a place of pilgrimage for Hadrami sada in and outside Hadramawt 
and for followers of the ‘Alawi Tariqa. The mausoleum of Ahmad al-Habshi is situated 
just below Ahmad al-Muhajir’s tomb, and both sites are still well maintained today. This 
Ahmad Sahib al-Shi‘b is the genealogical node of the al-Habshi family, for he left at 
least seven sons; the majority of today’s al-Habshi family are descendants of Ahmad.
 After the time of Ahmad, the family began to expand, mainly in the western part of 
the inland wadis. ‘Isa al-Habshi (d. 1713, No. 4 in Chart 2), a grandson of Sahib 
al-Shi‘b, laid the family’s foundation in the village of Khanfar, Wadi ‘Amd, where his 
mausoleum is one of the symbols of the expansion of Hadrami sada influence to the west 
of inland Hadramawt. Zayn b. ‘Alawi (d. 1688/9), another grandson of Ahmad Sahib 
al-Shi‘b settled in al-Ghurfa, a village west of Say’un, and his son Ahmad b. Zayn (d. 
1733, No. 5 in Chart 2) was the most prominent Sufi and scholar during his own 
lifetime. Ahmad b. Zayn was a key figure of the ‘Alawi Tariqa and the author of Sharh 
al-‘Ayniyya, a commentary on a qasida rhyming on the letter ‘ayn composed by his 
master ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Alawi al-Haddad (mentioned above), the most famous Sufi from 
Hadramawt (al-Ḥabshī, Aḥmad b. Zayn 2007). Sharh is considered a standard religious 
text for followers of the ‘Alawi Tariqa. Ahmad b. Zayn moved from al-Ghurfa to the 
nearby Khal‘ Rashid, established himself as a religious leader, and made the place hawta, 
a sacred enclave peculiar to South Arabia. That village is now known as Hawtat Ahmad 
b. Zayn or simply al-Hawta where the mausoleum of Ahmad was built in the middle of 
the graveyard. Yet another Sufi and scholar of the al-Habshi family was ‘Aydarus b. 
‘Umar (d. 1896) of al-Ghurfa, a descendant of the ‘Isa mentioned above and author of 
‘Iqd al-Yawaqit, another important text of the ‘Alawi Tariqa (al-Ḥabshī, ʻAydarūs b. 
ʻUmar 2009). His mausoleum is the largest of its kind in al-Ghurfa. It was Ahmad b. 
Zayn, ‘Aydarus b. ‘Umar and ‘Ali b. Muhammad (mentioned later) who made the 
position of the al-Habshi family in the ‘Alawi Tariqa important. However, none of them 
was based in the traditional centre of Tarim.
III–2.  Migration to India
The migration of the al-Habshi family to India was of small scale in comparison with 
that of the al-‘Aydarus. The first of the al-Habshi to migrate to the sub-continent was 
perhaps Abu Talib (d. 1645/6), a son of Ahmad Sahib al-Shi‘b. He was born in 
Hadramawt and migrated first to East Africa, then to India, where he established himself 
as a religious figure before moving on again to Oman, where he died. Abu Talib’s life is 
representative of the movement of Hadramis in the 17th century, as he lived in all 
regions in the western half of the Indian Ocean, where there are still many Hadramis. 
Kazuhiro Arai140
Little, if anything, is known about his descendants in the region he settled, but other than 
Abu Talib, members of the al-Habshi family are found in different places in India such 
as Hyderabad and Malabar (see Chart 2). They are from different branches of the family 
however, and nothing comparable to the al-‘Aydarus “community” is known in India (see 
names in italic font in Chart 2). For the al-Habshi family, migration to India did not 
become an affair that involved the whole or a certain part of the family. During the time 
the al-‘Aydarus family expanded to India, the al-Habshi family expanded within 
Hadramawt, to the western part of the inland wadis.
III–3.  Migration to Southeast Asia
The main destination for the al-Habshi family outside Hadramawt was Southeast Asia, 
the most important place for not only the al-Habshi family but also other Hadrami 
migrants in the modern period. It is not clear when they started to migrate to the region, 
but al-Habshi were present in 18th-century Penang. Nuh b. Muhammad b. Ahmad 
al-Habshi (No. 7 in Chart 2) was born to a government employee in Penang around 
1788, and since his grandfather owned an estate in the town we may reasonably assume 
that the family had already settled there by the mid-18th century.
18) The reason why some 
detail of that particular family is known to us is that Nuh became a saint, and according 
to his hagiography, which was published in both Malay and English,
19) he moved to 
Singapore around 1819, which was the year Stamford Raffles established a trading post 
on the island. Although his reason for going there might have been to pursue a new 
economic opportunity, he established himself as a religious figure in the island. After 
Nuh died in 1866 a mausoleum was built on his tomb on Mount Palmer, Singapore, 
which still attracts many visitors (mainly local Muslims of Indian descent) seeking 
baraka. Hawl, a yearly festival commemorating a saint is also held there.
 Other than Nuh al-Habshi, at least two members of the al-Habshi family are known 
as prominent religious figures in Southeast Asia. One is Muhammad b. ‘Aydarus 
al-Habshi (d. 1918/9) who was born in Hadramawt and studied in Mecca and Medina 
before migrating to Java. He was buried in a mausoleum in the Ampel district in 
Surabaya together with Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mihdar (d. 1926), a fellow Hadrami 
sayyid of the al-Mihdar family.
 The most famous al-Habshi in Java is ‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-Rahman (d. 1968) of Jakarta, 
who lived in the Kwitang district of the city and was nicknamed “‘Ali Kwitang.” Born in 
Jakarta, he studied in Hadramawt and became the most famous Arab scholar in the 
capital of Indonesia during his lifetime. ‘Ali is known as one of the pioneers in 
establishing the majlis type of Islamic school. His family has a relatively long history in 
Southeast Asia, as the first person to go to Southeast Asia was his great-grandfather 
Muhammad, who was born in Hadramawt and settled in Pontianak, Kalimantan. His son 
‘Abd Allah was born in Pontianak but moved to Java and married in the city of 
Semarang. ‘Abd Allah’s son ‘Abd al-Rahman (father of ‘Ali Kwitang) was born in 
Semarang and moved to Jakarta where he died in 1881. While the family of Nuh 
al-Habshi moved in the British sphere of influence (Penang and Singapore), ‘Ali 
Kwitang’s family were in the Dutch East Indies. The mosque of ‘Ali with his tomb 
Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 141
inside was maintained by his son Muhammad (d. 1993) and grandson ‘Abd al-Rahman (d. 
2018).
 While religious figures of the al-Habshi who physically lived in Southeast Asia left 
an impression on each place, there is another element that makes the name “al-Habshi” 
famous among the Muslims in that region, namely the above-mentioned Simt al-Durar or 
“Mawlid al-Habshi.” While there are arguments about whether recitation of Mawlid is in 
accordance with the orthodox faith of Islam, various works of Mawlid are recited in the 
Islamic world including the regions around the Indian Ocean. In Southeast Asia, there are 
three famous pieces of Mawlid among others; Mawlid al-Barzanji, al-Diba‘i, and 
al-Habshi. Which Mawlid a given group of people chooses to recite depends on the time, 
place, and occasion. There are bands in various places that recite a particular Mawlid. 
The Mawlid al-Habshi was composed by ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Habshi (No. 9 in Chart 2, 
mentioned above), one of the most celebrated religious figures in Hadramawt at the end 
of the 19th and into the early 20th century. ‘Ali lived in Say’un, the central city of Wadi 
Hadramawt where his mausoleum, the largest and most prominently sited in the city, was 
built. ‘Ali, however, never went to Southeast Asia. Mawlid al-Habshi’s popularity there is 
thanks to the efforts of the al-Habshi family in Southeast Asia. Muhammad, ‘Ali’s son, 
succeeded his father as a religious figure in Hadramawt, looking after the mosque and 
ribat of ‘Ali in Say’un. That particular Muhammad went to Java twice during his lifetime 
and left male issue there. The more important of ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Habshi’s sons for 
the dispersion of the Mawlid was ‘Alawi (d. 1953), who settled in the central Javanese 
town of Solo and traded in Batik (cloth with designs imprinted by wax-resist dying). He 
is said to have made a great effort to popularize the Mawlid of his father in Indonesia. 
His son Anis b. ‘Alawi (d. 2006) succeeded his father both in business and the 
propagation of the Mawlid in Indonesia. It was the family’s efforts that made the Mawlid 
al-Habshi spread so rapidly, in spite of its being a relatively new piece compared to the 
other two (al-Barzanji and al-Diba‘i). ‘Ali b Muhammad, the composer of the Mawlid, 
has become a famous saint in Indonesia, and a festival commemorating him and 
attracting tens of thousands of participants is held every year in Solo.
 In addition to those prominent religious figures, members of the al-Habshi family 
migrated to and lived in various places in Southeast Asia, such as Jakarta, Surabaya, 
Semarang, Banjarmasin, Palembang, Aceh, Makassar, Penang, Singapore, and Malacca 
among others. Chart 2 shows that those who were in Southeast Asia came not from any 
particular line but from various branches of the family. It may be said that in the history 
of the al-Habshi family, Southeast Asia is the most important destination of migration.
IV .   Comparison between the Two Families: The Timing of Expansion and 
Migration Abroad
The history of the al-‘Aydarus and al-Habshi families shows that they differ from each 
other in their patterns of migration, although both had similar origins. The al-‘Aydarus 
family began migrating abroad before the al-Habshi family, and their initial destination 
was India. On the other hand, the al-Habshi family did not go abroad on any great scale 
Kazuhiro Arai142
Table 1 Number of individuals in the two biographical compilations
al-‘Aydarus family al-Habshi family
al-Mashra‘ al-Rawi (17th c.) 31 persons 4 persons
Tarikh Shu‘ara’ al-Hadramiyyin (20th c.) 15 persons 12 persons
until the 18th century. What, then, was the reason for that difference? Perhaps it was 
because the two families developed differently in Hadramawt.
 I first saw the difference in the two families when I consulted al-Mashra‘ al-Rawi, a 
17th-century work containing biographies of 284 prominent sada up to its author’s time. 
The book mentions thirty-one members of the al-‘Aydarus family, including those in 
India, but here only four of the al-Habshi family appear, an imbalance perhaps at least 
partly explained by the fact that the author, Muhammad b. Abi Bakr al-Shilli (d. 1682), 
was born in Tarim, Hadramawt, although in later life he was based in Mecca and so had 
access to only a limited amount of information on his homeland. A more plausible reason 
is that the al-Habshi family was not as famous as the al-‘Aydarus until the 17th century. 
The achievement of the eponym of the family is not known except that he did da‘wa in 
Ethiopia, but in many cases that meant no more than simply living as a Muslim, because 
most of the notable sada were educated in Islamic sciences, da‘wa was a normal part of 
their lives. Abu Bakr al-Habshi was perhaps an “ordinary” Hadrami sayyid whose most 
significant characteristic was his experience of life in Ethiopia. No literary work is 
ascribed to him, and he is not mentioned in al-Mashra‘ al-Rawi.
 An interesting fact becomes clear if one compares al-Mashra‘ with the 20th-century 
biographical compilation Tarikh Shu‘ara’ al-Hadramiyyin by ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad 
al-Saqqaf (d. ca. 1960). The latter is a five-volume book of the lives of 207 Hadrami 
poets from the pre-Islamic period to its author’s time. The book deals only with poets, 
but most, if not all, Sufis and scholars in Hadramawt composed poems, so the book 
serves as a biographical dictionary of Hadrami intellectuals. Among them, fifteen were 
members of the al-‘Aydarus family, and twelve were of the al-Habshi. In other words, 
compared to the biographical compilation in the 17th century, the difference between the 
two families is much smaller, suggesting that renowned Sufis and scholars appeared from 
the al-Habshi family only after the 17th century (see Table 1).
 Why are the differences and changes over time important? It is because they might 
well explain the difference in migration patterns between the two families. In Hadramawt 
before modern times, fame as a religious figure or Sufi was closely related to fertility 
and abundance. Many of those who were featured in religious texts and religious 
biographies were wealthy people with some political authority. The eponym of the 
al-‘Aydarus family was born to a celebrated family in Tarim, so that his descendants 
could lay firm foundations there and increased in number relatively early, as Chart 1 
indicates. That proliferation means that a number of them were obliged to seek 
opportunities outside the family’s centre, because there was limited room to make a 
living at home. Some moved to places within Hadramawt such as Tariba, Bur, and Thibi, 
but there were those who chose to go abroad. Their first choice was India, the most 
Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 143
promising place for Hadrami migrants in the 16th and 17th centuries.
 On the other hand, the al-Habshi family had to wait until the time of Ahmad Sahib 
al-Shi‘b to increase rapidly in number. Al-Husayyisa or the domicile of Ahmad did not 
become the centre of the family in any way comparable to how Tarim had for the 
al-‘Aydarus, probably because of geographical limitations. In fact, all descendants of 
Ahmad settled in different places, as mentioned. The absence of a clear centre then 
caused the dispersion of the family’s members that resulted in the foundation of multiple 
centres, such as al-Hawta, al-Ghurfa, Say’un, and Khanfar. Lack of both a clear centre 
and of sufficient accumulation of wealth might well be why so few of the family went 
abroad before the 18th century. In other words, the al-Habshi family searched for 
opportunities within Hadramawt, or anywhere they could go without taking ship. After 
laying solid foundations in Hadramawt, the al-Habshi family finally began to migrate in 
numbers during the 18th century, a time when political instability meant India was no 
longer the most attractive place for Hadramis. Additionally, improvements in 
transportation systems must have made travel beyond India easier, making Southeast Asia 
appear as the new, promising frontier for them.
Conclusion
In this article, I have tried to show differences in migration patterns between two 
Hadrami families, and that the reasons for the differences were connected to their 
particular circumstances. Even though the al-‘Aydarus and al-Habshi families both 
appeared at the same time in the biographical writings, they showed a sharp difference in 
their choice of time and destination for their migrations in the Indian Ocean world. The 
causes of the difference most probably lay in their respective trajectories of development 
and expansion within Hadramawt; the Hadrami migrants certainly did not appear in the 
Indian Ocean littoral from within a vacuum, and I would suggest that an influential 
family such as theirs must have begun to migrate abroad only after the sphere of its 
activities had expanded within Hadramawt to the degree that new members could find no 
room for activities inherent to their family group’s position: their religious duties and 
land-management for sada. That discussion perhaps more than others is likely to remain 
a matter of speculation, but the family’s actual recorded migration abroad should be 
viewed as a continuation of their activities within Hadramawt. Researchers working on 
the movement of people in the Indian Ocean tend to focus on interregional migration, but 
analysis of internal “migration” is surely as important as more visible movements 
overseas.
Notes
* This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP19H00564.
1) For the sake of readability for non-specialists in the Middle East or Islamic studies, most 
diacritical marks representing Arabic characters are omitted in this article except for in the 
Kazuhiro Arai144
bibliography.
2) For biographies of the Hadramis, see Serjeant 1950 and Arai 2021 (in Japanese).
3) Tarikh al-Nur al-Safir’s scope is not limited to Hadramis as it takes up figures of Egypt, Syria, 
Hijaz, Yemen, and India. However, probably on account of the author’s birth and descent, the 
work contains information on many Hadramis including those in India.
4) The al-Mashayikh group has produced Sufis and scholars in the history of Hadramawt as the 
sada did. Their genealogy, however, goes back not to the Prophet Muhammad but to other 
great figures in history.
5) Freitag 2003.
6) Ho 2006.
7) Bang 2003.
8) Peskes 2005.
9) Arai 2004.
10) Peskes 2005.
11) The Arabic word is laqab. Its meaning is not exactly the same as what we understand by “family 
name”, but is rather a nickname or familiar name, given after the place of origin/residence/
da‘wa, some anecdote, or a miracle.
12) al-Mashhūr 1984; al-Saqqaf 1997; al-Shilli 1982. The following accounts of the al-‘Aydarus 
and the al-Habshi family are based on these works unless indicated otherwise.
13) al-Shilli 1982 2: 50.
14) al-‘Arab no. 57 (3 November 1932). The most numerous family is the al-‘Attas (627 figures), 
and the third al-Haddad (322) and the fourth al-Habshi (259).
15) One of Shaykh’s grandsons, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Mustafa b. Shaykh al-‘Aydarus (d. 1778) lived 
in Cairo but left no male heirs, so his patrilineal line became extinct.
16) The life of this person is discussed in Mohamad Abu Bakar’s Sayyid Abdul Rahman bin 
Muhammad al-Idrus (Tukku Paluh): Peranannya dalam Konteks Sejarah Trengganu Abad ke 19 
- Awal 20an. Kuala Lumpur: Perpustakaan Universiti Malaya, 1981. However, the present 
author has not had a chance to consult it.
17) Da‘wa usually means proselytization to non-Muslims. However, it also means a call to 
insufficiently devout Muslims to follow the correct path of Islam.
18) Nuh’s father and grandfather were first-generation migrants as Muhammad was born in Say’un, 
Hadramawt.
19) Surattee 2008 and 2010. The information given here on the lives of Nuh, his parents and 
grandfather is based on these two works.
References
Periodicals
al-‘Arab (Al-“Arab” Journal), Singapore.
Chapter 7 Different Migration Patterns of the Hadrami Sada 145
Books and Articles
Arai, Kazuhiro
 2004 Arabs Who Traversed the Indian Ocean: The History of the al-‘Attas Family in 
Hadramawt and Southeast Asia, c. 1650– c. 1960. Ph.D. dissertation to Department of 
Near Eastern Studies, The University of Michigan.
 2021 Minamiarabia Hadoramauto shusshinsha no denkishū: Gakusha Sūfī no idō ya chishiki 
dentatsu bunseki no junbi sagyō toshite. Jinbun Kagaku 36: 77–105.
Bā ‘Alawī, ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-Raḥmān
 n.d. Fatḥ Allāh al-Raḥīm al-Raḥmān fī Manāqib al-Shaykh al-‘Ārif bi-llāh al-Quṭb 
al-Ghawth al-‘Aydarūs ‘Abd Allāh b. Abī Bakr b. ‘Abd al-Raḥmān (Manuscript).
Bang, Anne K.
 2003 Sufis and Scholars of the Sea: Family Networks in East Africa, 1860–1925. New York: 
Routledge.
Freitag, Ulrike
 2003 Indian Ocean Migrants and State Formation in Hadhramaut: Reforming the Homeland. 
Leiden: Brill.
Ho, Engseng
 2006 The Graves of Tarim: Genealogy and Mobility across the Indian Ocean. Berkeley, Los 
Angeles and London: University of California Press.
al-Ḥabshī, Aḥmad b. Zayn
 2007 Sharḥ al-‘Ayniyya. Dār al-‘Ulūm al-Islāmiyya: Surabaya.
al-Ḥabshī, ʻAydarūs b. ʻUmar and Muḥammad Abū Bakr ʻAbd Allāh Bā Dhīb
 2009 ʻIqd al-Yawāqīt al-Jawhariyya wa-Simṭ al-ʻAyn al-Dhahabiyya bi-Dhikr Ṭarīq al-Sādāt 
al-ʻAlawiyya. Tarīm, Ḥaḍramawt: Dār al-ʻIlm wa-al-Daʻwa.
Kuriyama, Yasuyuki
 2004 16–17 seiki ni okeru Hadoramauto no hitobito no ido iju katsudo. Seinan Asia Kenkyu 
61: 47–66.
Löfgren, O.
  ‘Aydarūs. In: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .
al-Mashhūr, ʻAbd al-Raḥmān b. Muḥammad, and Muḥammad Diyāʼ Shihāb
 1984 Shams al-Ẓahīra fī Nasab Ahl al-Bayt min Banī ʻAlawī furūʻ Fāṭima al-Zahrāʼ 
wa-Amīr al-Muʼminīn ʻAlī . Jiddah: ʻĀlam al-Maʻrifa.
Peskes, Esther
  al-‘Aydarūs. In: Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE.
 2005 Al-ʻAidarūs und seine Erben: eine Untersuchung zu Geschichte und Sufismus einer 
ḥaḍramitischen Sāda-Gruppe vom fünfzehnten bis zum achtzehnten Jahrhundert. 
Stuttgart: Steiner.
al-Saqqāf, ʻAbd Allāh b. Muḥammad b. Ḥāmid
 1997 Tārīkh al-Shuʻarāʼ al-Ḥaḍramiyyīn. al-Ṭāʼif: Maktabat al-Maʻārif.
Serjeant, R. B.
 1950 Materials for South Arabian History: Notes on New MSS from Ḥaḍramawt. Bulletin of 
the School of Oriental and African Studies 13(2): 281–307 and 13(3): 581–601.
Kazuhiro Arai146
al-Shillī, Muḥammad b. Abī Bakr
 1982 al-Mashraʻ al-Rawī fī Manāqib al-Sāda al-Kirām Āl Abī ʻAlawī . n.p: n.d.
Surattee, Mohamad Ghouse Khan
 2008 The Grand Saint of Singapore: The Life of Habib Nuh bin Muhammad Al-Habshi. 
Singapore: Masjid Al’Firdaus.
 2010 Lambang Terukir: dalam Mengisahkan Manaqib Habib Noh bin Muhamad Al-Habsyi 
yang Syahir. Singapura: Unit Dakwah Masjid AlʼFirdaus.