The Old English Gloss 
to the Lindisfarne 
Gospels
Language, Author and Context
Edited by
Julia Fernández Cuesta
Sara M. Pons-Sanz
For an overview of all books published in this series, please see
http://www.degruyter.com/view/serial/36292
ISBN 978-3-11-043856-7
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-044910-5
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-044716-3
ISSN 0340-5435
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A CIP catalog record for this book has been applied for at the Library of Congress.
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; 
detailed bibliographic data are available on the Internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2016 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: Lonely/iStock/Thinkstock
Typesetting: PTP-Berlin, Protago-TEX-Production GmbH, Berlin
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
♾ Printed on acid-free paper
Printed in Germany
www.degruyter.com
Stewart Brookes
The Shape of Things to Come? 
Variation and Intervention in Aldred’s Gloss 
to the Lindisfarne Gospels
Abstract: This paper examines Aldred’s response to the gospel text he was gloss-
ing through close analysis of his choices of script. The focus is on Aldred’s experi-
mentation with different types of letter-forms and the resultant variation in the 
realization of the letters. I suggest that these point to Aldred’s deep engagement 
with the manuscript, prompting him to produce a response to its script and layout 
that positions him as a scribe working in the Northumbrian artistic tradition. The 
paper also argues, however, that Aldred’s script offers evidence of his familiarity 
with Caroline minuscule and Square minuscule and thus of his awareness of the 
scribal fashions previously assigned exclusively to scribes working in southern 
England.
1  Introduction
In his polemical essay Areopagitica, John Milton asserted that “[b]ooks are not 
absolutely dead things, but doe contain a potencie of life in them to be as active 
as that soule was whose progeny they are; nay, they do preserve as in a violl the 
purest efficacie and extraction of the living intellect that bred them” (Wolfe 1959: 
492). This notion seems particularly apposite in the case of Aldred and his tenth-
century gloss to the Lindisfarne Gospels (London, British Library, MS Cotton Nero 
D.iv). The Old English words that Aldred wrote between and around the Latin 
lines of the four gospels represent more than a simple act of explication, transla-
tion and occasional commentary. They are his personal meditation on the gospels 
and bear witness to his spiritual and scholarly engagement with a text that lies 
at the heart of Christian belief. If anything preserves his “living intellect”, it is 
this. A second and interrelated story is that of the physical act of his writing 
the gloss. It must have been a daunting task for Aldred to write alongside the 
elaborate carpet pages, decorative letters and Half-uncial Latin text of what has 
been described as one of the “great monuments of human endeavour” (Brown 
2002‒2003: I, 187). The manuscript had a particular religious significance also, 
being a volume dedicated to Cuthbert, the special saint of the community among 
whom Aldred lived. In this paper, I examine Aldred’s response to the text through 
analysis of his choices of script, focusing on his experimentation with different 
104   
   Stewart Brookes
types of letter-forms and the resultant variation in the realization of the letters. I 
suggest that the motive behind this variation is style: in the scripts he chose for 
his gloss, Aldred offers a creative response to the variation in letter-shapes in 
the decorative script and main Latin text of the Lindisfarne Gospels, one which 
evolves from the Northumbrian artistic tradition in which he was steeped. I argue 
that the variations in the letter-forms afford us insight into Aldred’s intentions in 
glossing the Lindisfarne Gospels, serving as a visual articulation of his self-posi-
tioning as a scribe in dialogue with the manuscript and as a priest responsible for 
translating the Gospels.
2  Variation in the gloss
Written in the years following the mid-tenth century, Aldred’s gloss to the Lindis-
farne Gospels has frequently been described as old-fashioned, a throwback to 
an eighth- or ninth-century way of writing (Brown 1969: 39; Roberts 2005: 15; 
Jolly 2012: 76). For T. J. Brown (1969: 15), Aldred’s choice of Anglo-Saxon pointed 
minuscule marked him out as a relic from the distant past and as a “backward, 
but not necessarily an incompetent, provincial”. Brown (1969: 39) argues that 
because Aldred was located in Northumbria, he was unaware of the style of 
writing current in southern England and thus does not write in the “square” style 
found in glossed manuscripts more or less contemporary with his own. While it 
is not in doubt that Aldred often writes in a Cursive minuscule that owes much 
to the Northumbrian scribal habits and styles of at least a century earlier, there 
is reason to challenge the notion of his isolation from the scribal fashions that 
swept the south.¹ In this paper, I present evidence which suggests that Aldred was 
aware of both Square minuscule and Caroline minuscule and that this is reflected 
in his choice of letter-forms in his gloss. Beyond this, however, is the question of 
the significance of variation in the style of Aldred’s writing. Right from the start 
Aldred signals his intention to use alternative forms of letters, with a straight-
backed d (gesturing towards Half-uncial) alongside a round-backed minuscule 
form on f. 3r4 (2.45).² When Aldred adds a pen trial in the top right corner of f. 
122r, he does so using the “oc” form characteristic of Half-uncial a (4.49), rather 
1 The terminology used in this paper to describe the various grades, hierarchies and types of 
script, including Insular Half-uncial, Hybrid minuscule and Caroline minuscule, is discussed 
with illustrative figures and plates in M. P. Brown (1990: 48–71), Roberts (2005: 13–103) and Rum-
ble (2009: 37–49). 
2 See the first part of Appendix 2 below for explanatory references, and the second part of the 
appendix for images of the letter-forms discussed in this paper. A version of Appendix 2 which 
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   105
than the minuscule in which he mostly wrote. And, most tellingly of all, his pen 
trial of the Tironian symbol in the middle margin of f. 193v shows two quite dif-
ferent forms (1.34). It would seem that his reflex was to experiment with varying 
forms. Only with an awareness of this variation can we understand the creative 
energies that Aldred put into the visual presentation of his gloss.
It would be difficult to overstate the impact of variation in the gloss. It is every-
where: from the range of alternative letter-forms that Aldred deploys to the size 
of his letters, which varies considerably. Some words are written neatly, others 
scratched hastily on to the vellum. On the same folio, minims may be formed 
slowly with frequent pen lifts and feet and wedges added, or they may be written 
hurriedly in the style of the lowest grade of cursive script. And, most surprisingly, 
different types of script are mixed together in the same sentences. In 1.1 and 1.6, 
for example, there are three forms of a (1.1 has Caroline, Square and open forms of 
a; 1.6 has open, pointed and Square forms of a) and in 1.8 there are two forms of g 
in the same passage. The variation extends beyond word-to-word differences: it is 
very common to find different forms of letters within the same word, as we see in 
1.2 and 1.3 (Caroline and open a in “ana” and “sacerdas”), 1.11 (pointed and open 
a in “aras”) and 1.7 (two types of g in “getreowfæstnig”). It is, of course, unusual 
to find this range of letters from different scripts being used alongside each other 
as interchangeable alternatives. The consequence is that letter-types that are not 
usually found in a cursive context start to be adapted to the underlying script 
type; for example, the Caroline a in “ðara” (1.5) is joined with the r which follows 
it.
3  Methodology
Although the above examples give some sense of the range of letter-forms in 
the gloss, a wider sample is required in order to demonstrate the extent of the 
variation. I have, therefore, ‘cut out’ individual letter-forms (or “graphs” to use 
the terminology adopted for the DigiPal project) from across the manuscript.³ 
When selecting graphs for inclusion, I have attempted to present a spectrum of 
the forms that Aldred uses, placing the graphs in groupings according to shared 
features and characteristics. For example, graphs of open a are grouped from 
is linked to the relevant pages of the Lindisfarne Gospels on the British Library digitized manu-
scripts site can be found here:<http://www.digipal.eu/blog/aldred/>.
3 The ‘Digital Resource and Database for Palaeography, Manuscript Studies and Diplomatic’ (Di-
giPal), available at <http://www.digipal.eu>. 
106   
   Stewart Brookes
4.1–4.8, the majority of graphs of g which have a closed tail from 8.45–8.76 and 
2-shaped r from 9.49–9.53. This arrangement also offers the opportunity for com-
parison of various of the component features of the letter-forms; for example, 
6.2–6.18 shows the tongue of e at various lengths, curved, rising and horizontal, 
and 10.1–10.6 gives a sense of the split ascenders which are typical for s. This also 
helps to provide a context for forms which otherwise might seem atypical. For 
example, the long, upright body of the g in “geworht” (1.12) is markedly different 
from the other g in that detail, but it seems less of an anomaly once it is placed 
next to similar instances (8.71–8.76). It is important to remember that the graphs 
are selected from across the complete manuscript, and do not necessarily occur 
on the same folio. In addition, although viewing the letters like this suggests a 
sort of evolution of script, the reality is that variant forms are used alongside each 
other in most sections of the gloss and that overall there is not a progression from 
one type to another.
4  Examples of a and g
Although it is not new to say that Aldred’s handwriting is subject to variation, 
the extent to which this is the case has been underestimated. A useful example 
of the range of letter-forms that Aldred employs can be seen by looking at the 
variants for a in examples 4.1–5.11. The graphs offer instances of virtually every 
possible type of a that was used in the Old English period. Amongst them is the 
“oc” a of Half-uncial (4.46–4.49); open a (4.1–4.8); the decorative enlarged a of 
Anglo-Saxon minuscule (4.87); the point-topped bowl of Anglo-Saxon pointed 
minuscule (4.53, 4.56, 4.57), with a tendency for the back to rise high above the 
bowl (4.50, 4.54); square and lozenge-shaped forms that are clearly influenced by 
Square minuscule (4.14–4.20, 4.37–4.39); and Caroline a (4.76–4.78). In addition, 
there are forms of a that demonstrate a calligraphic flourish (4.89), or an attempt 
to produce a higher grade of script (e.g. 4.43) and round forms (5.9–5.11) that may 
have emerged naturally when writing cursively. Aldred, it is clear, had a magpie’s 
scribal repertoire.
That this multiplicity of forms is typical of Aldred’s writing can be seen from 
the images accompanying this paper. With g, for example, he uses a 3-shape (8.1, 
8.65), a 5-shape (8.4, 8.20, 8.31); the tail may be open (8.2–8.40), three-quarters 
closed (8.41-8.44) and closed (8.45–8.50). The body hangs from the left (8.18), 
from the right (8.1, 8.2), and from the middle (8.53). At times, he creates his g 
from five separate strokes, as can been seen when he neglects to add the bottom 
curve in “bigencga” (1.21, 8.66). One feature to which it is worth drawing atten-
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   107
tion is Aldred’s addition of a stroke to close the tail of the g (8.59–8.64). This is 
unusual for an Anglo-Saxon minuscule script and it seems almost certain that he 
borrowed this from the g in the Latin text where it is ubiquitous (see 16.32–16.34 
and particularly 16.35, which shows Aldred’s g in close proximity to its Latin 
equivalent).
5  Ascenders and feet
The way that Aldred treats his ascenders varies considerably also. They may be 
tall and comparatively straight (2.3), sway-backed (2.24), compressed (2.5–2.6) or 
even squat (2.11, 2.14, 2.16). Some have approach strokes (2.11–2.13), others are 
unadorned (2.1, 2.3) or they may have wedges (2.17–2.22) or flags (2.24, 2.46). The 
ascenders appear forked in a few cases (2.35, 2.36) while in others a decorative 
hairline has been added (2.40–2.45). As so often, some variation in appearance is 
due to the care in execution, with the blob-like additions (2.5, 2.7, 2.14) most likely 
a poorly implemented attempt to add wedges to these letters. In similar manner, 
the minims of letters cover the full range of what one might expect to find across 
different types of script. What one would not expect is to find them together on 
the same page, executed by a single scribe. n may be narrow and tapered to give 
a claw-like appearance (7.24), thickly made and short (7.22) or have a pronounced 
wedge on the minim (7.20). The arch of h, m and n may descend below the line, 
curving inwards to the left (1.20, 7.8–7.10, 7.25), sometimes finished with a thick 
horizontal stroke (7.9, 7.25). At times, Aldred is careful to add feet to minims (7.21, 
1.17, 1.19), but often does not (1.4, 1.7, 1.14, 1.28, 1.29). What is remarkable is that 
the varying forms are found in close proximity to each other, as we see in 1.18 with 
wedges on some minims and not on others. 
The wish to vary letter-shapes seems to run in Aldred’s scribal blood. He just 
cannot write them the same way each time. A clear demonstration of this variety 
can be seen in his treatment of u. As Ross et al. (1960: 23) note, Aldred makes a 
“sharp and unmistakable” switch away from the use of <u> to <v> after f. 203v. 
Having made that decision, Aldred then begins to vary his v, sometimes adding 
wedges, altering the angle at which it is written, and even adding a tail (7.38–7.46)⁴. 
4 “While v is the predominant form from f. 203v onwards, Aldred does still deploy u on occasion, 
often it would seem for the purpose of variation alongside v. See for example, “uv`u´nden” (7.46), 
“suindriga” (f. 204ra10), “fvluande” (f. 204rb20–21), “throvung” (f. 207va12) and “ðvruuardæ” 
(f. 251va4). The v form can also be found on early folios because Aldred began a second campaign 
of glossing, in red ink, after he switched to v; see, for example, “gisomnvng” (f. 5va6).
108   
   Stewart Brookes
Aldred also seems to have delighted in trying out unusual letter-forms that he had 
seen elsewhere, as we see in the k that he uses in the word “stenk” (10.80) which, 
for all its distinctiveness, is not unique.⁵ 
6  A ldred’s minuscule
As noted earlier, Aldred’s writing owes much to an older tradition. It exhibits 
many of the features one might expect to find in Anglo-Saxon pointed minus-
cule of the ninth or very early tenth century, and also betrays the influence of 
Phase II Insular Cursive minuscule which had fallen into disuse by the early ninth 
century (though Roberts (2005: 14) suggests that Phase II Insular minuscule had a 
longer life in the north of England than it did in the south). Examples of Aldred’s 
indebtedness to these older styles of minuscule include occasional low-slung 
l, the lower curve of which swings below the line (2.56–2.59, with a particularly 
graceful example at 2.60); f-shaped y (7.64–7.66); the arch of m and n descend-
ing below the line, curving inwards to the left (7.8–7.10, 7.25), sometimes finished 
with a thick horizontal stroke; and elongated i at the beginning of words, either 
standing on the line, rising to the height of the ascenders of other letters (2.63, 
2.64) or dropping far below it (2.65).⁶ Another tell-tale feature of early Insular 
Cursive minuscules is the placing of subscript vowels below the line in ligature 
(3.29, 3.35, 3.38). Indeed, throughout the gloss there is a frequent use of ligature 
forms, including the distinctive reversed ductus e, with its 8-shape (6.63, 6.66, 
6.68) that Lindsay (1921: 17) notes is par excellence the Insular Cursive form (for 
recent discussion of 8-shaped e, see Sparks 2013: 30). At first glance, Aldred’s use 
of letters in ligature seems typical of older Cursive minuscules. For example, the 
tongue of e is often drawn out to form the top stroke of g (3.1–3.9) and t (3.12–3.15); 
and i may hang from the tongue of f (3.29), the top stroke of g (3.17 and 3.18), the 
lower curve of t (3.20) and the top stroke of t formed from the tongue of e (3.12). 
Aldred goes further, however, constructing a range of idiosyncratic ligatures, 
including o formed in ligature with the top stroke of g (3.19); ligatures between b 
and r (3.22 and 3.23); the tongue of e forming the top of the bowl of d (3.16); and 
the calligraphic yet curiously constructed use of the tongue of e to form the arch 
5 I am grateful to Elaine Treharne for bringing to my attention the analogous instances of k in the 
Parker Chronicle (Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 173), f. 26r (10.82) which probably dates 
from a few decades before Aldred, and to those in the twelfth century London, British Library, 
MS Cotton Vitellius A.xv, f. 49v (10.81). In editions of the gloss, and in Ross et al. (1960), Aldred’s 
k has been read as an nc ligature.
6 Unconventionally, Aldred also uses elongated i in a medial position.
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   109
of h (3.21). His subscript ligatures are noteworthy because in many cases they 
have become stylistic and are no longer really ligatures in the true sense where 
the stroke of one letter serves as part of another (as, for instance, the tongue of 
e does for the top stroke of g (3.2)). So, while Aldred uses the classic subscript 
real ligature of m with open a (3.39) – which Jane Roberts (2005: 39) describes 
as a “relic of earlier practices” in the context of the usage by the first hand of the 
Parker Chronicle – many more of his subscript letters are false ligatures, pushed 
up against, but not joined to, the letter above (3.34, 3.36–3.37, 3.41). Aldred some-
times manages to create true ligatures for traditional combinations such as nt 
and ht (3.26), but on closer inspection there are many that turn out to be loo-
kalikes (3.24, 3.25). In some cases, it is possible that Aldred deliberately allows 
the second element of the ligature to break free in order to create visual impact 
(compare the true ligature of fi in 3.29 with the subscript i in 3.32). This stylistic 
effect is most fully developed in Aldred’s playful hi ligature with its appended 
a (3.31) and his suprascript l rising above d (3.27), both of which seem to be his 
own invention. Another example of Aldred apparently extending the traditional 
model for subscript ligatures, false or otherwise, is in the combinations bi (3.30), 
di (3.33), mo (3.40) and æ (3.44, 3.45). Striking also is his decision to drop e below 
the line, which is purely for visual effect (3.46), and combined with the reverse 
ductus e (3.43) is almost certainly Aldred’s innovation. The reverse ductus e is 
itself of much interest for understanding Aldred’s method: its practical purpose 
was to save scribes time as part of a ligature combination, but he creates a stand-
alone version (6.71–6.79) which is unlike anything I have seen elsewhere; presum-
ably this is to add another form to his repertoire for the purposes of variation.⁷ 
Similarly, we may note the placing of looped cursive y (7.49–7.51) at the end of 
words when in genuinely cursive hands it would be found in a medial position 
where it serves as a means to link letters without lifting the pen. While Aldred 
does use the looped y medially (7.47), economy of effort is not his main concern 
and more often he introduces this form as a feature of style, lending his writing a 
cursive appearance.
Examples of actual cursivity can be seen in the rn of “carchern” (1.26), where 
Aldred clearly did not lift his pen between minims; the is of “israhela” (1.27); and 
the rapidly written ym of “cymeð” (1.25). As is typical in a cursive script, n and 
r (9.10) can look very similar. Another feature of Cursive minuscule is that the 
letters f, p, r and s frequently have a v-shaped “split”. This is the result of Aldred 
moving his pen away from the base of the descender after the initial downward 
7 Due to the idiosyncrasy of this letter-form, Ross et al. (1960: 14) do not recognize this as a form 
of e, describing it as “no more than a change from o to e”. The frequency with which it occurs 
means that they cannot, however, be correct about this.
110   
   Stewart Brookes
stroke. See, for instance, the split ascenders in f, r and s in “getreowfæstnig” (1.7) 
and in p in “papa” (1.7). The split is often deep and very noticeable, of the sort 
seen in r (9.12, 9.16, 9.17) and s (10.1, 10.4, 10.9). Such splitting is a consequence of 
rapid writing as it takes longer to return up the descender with the second stroke 
and is a feature typical of Aldred’s writing. He was capable of minimizing the 
split, as we see in the s of 10.32, and the Hybrid minuscule on the first page (1.35), 
but speed of writing seems often to have been more important to him than care of 
execution. When he does make efforts to avoid the split, the difference is particu-
larly apparent. A good example of this can be seen in the proto-Square minuscule 
of 1.17: the square-ish letters are formed carefully and evenly and are the result of 
frequent pen-lifts between minims.
Another letter-form typical of early Anglo-Saxon Cursive minuscule that we 
find with great frequency in Aldred’s gloss is open a, made up of a bowl and 
c-shaped back (4.1–4.5, 4.7–4.8). Clemoes (1995: 33 n. 77) observes that the use of 
this form of a is an old-fashioned trait of Aldred’s writing and that open-headed 
a was not used for documents after the middle of the ninth century and “killed 
off in non-documentary contexts south of the Humber” by the creation of Square 
minuscule in the early tenth century (1995: 32). The form seems never to have 
been in widespread use in a vernacular context, as is made clear from Ker’s 
(1957: xxviii) description of it as an “unusual” form which appears only in five 
manuscripts. In all of Ker’s examples, open a is used very sparingly, sometimes 
featuring only once, whereas for Aldred it is a standard form used throughout 
his gloss.⁸ Antiquity and scarcity aside, an issue with open a is that it is easily 
confused with u, as can been seen in, for instance, “gebecnades” (1.1), “apostola” 
(1.5), “vallað” (1.6) and “papa” (1.7). Lindsay (1922: 8–9) remarks that this poten-
tial for mistaking the two letter-forms was an issue even in early minuscule and 
that scribes often added small touches to differentiate between them. This is the 
case with Aldred who responds to the problem by adding small wedges on the 
lower curve and the minim of u. Even so, it can be difficult to distinguish between 
the two letters, and there are occasions on which one has to look twice, such as 
“gearuas” (1.9).⁹
8 The five are Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 144, which seems only to have one exam-
ple, the interlinear gloss “aþryid” (f. 26vb24); St. Petersburg, National Library of Russia, MS Lat. 
Q.v.I.18, f. 107r, where it occurs in the three lines of Cædmon’s Hymn added in the bottom margin; 
London, British Library, MS Add. 23211, f. 2r, in the word “hiora” on line 1; London, British Li-
brary, MS Cotton Domitian A.ix, f. 11r, which has a few examples; and Paris, Bibliothèque Natio-
nale, MS Lat. 8824, which has only one instance on f. 19rb26.
9 Newton et al. (2013: 107, 113, 140) fall foul of this, offering “gisulde” instead of “gisalde” in their 
transcription of Aldred’s colophon.
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   111
Aldred’s familiarity with older styles of writing may also be seen in his use of 
the runes for “monn” (13.1–13.4) and “dæg” (13.5–13.7). The introduction of these 
ideographs cannot simply be to save time because he occasionally adds them as 
alternatives to support a word (13.5–13.6). Example 13.2 is particularly intriguing 
because Aldred first wrote the word “monn” and then erased it, writing the rune 
on top of the erasure. Perhaps here we see more than a penchant for variation: 
the use of the runes could be an expression of cultural identity, pointing to the 
ancient Lindisfarne and Northumbrian heritage with which the community at 
Chester-le-Street was associated. With this in mind, we might notice the angular-
ity of many of Aldred’s forms for thorn (11.1–11.12) and wynn (12.7–12.12). Several of 
these appear more epigraphic than designed for a bookhand, and he even seems 
to attempt majuscule forms (11.1, 12.1, 12.6) which might point to a familiarity with 
runes and the runic letters in a carved context.
7  Square and English Caroline minuscule
In contrast to the variety of letter-forms found within Aldred’s Cursive minus-
cule, the founding principle of both Square minuscule and English Caroline 
minuscule was one of simplicity. Accordingly, these scripts moved toward dis-
carding the myriad abbreviations, interchangeable letter-form equivalents, elab-
orate conjoined letters and subscript ligatures that were salient characteristics 
of Insular minuscule (Dumville 1987: 153). Both Square minuscule and English 
Caroline minuscule have been claimed by scholarship to have originated in the 
south of England. The assumption has been that Square minuscule was written 
exclusively in the south: as Ganz (2012: 188) puts it, “south of a line running from 
the Thames to the Severn”. Similarly, Dumville (1987: 143) is “practically certain 
that almost all the surviving specimens were written in Southumbrian England”. 
Although Dumville (1987: 148) remarks that “there is some evidence for its pen-
etration of Northumbria in the third quarter of the tenth century”, he adds the 
caveat that “if one were to judge by the scanty specimens of tenth-century Nor-
thumbrian writing, it would have to be said that Square minuscule had few prac-
titioners in that region”.
As we have seen, however, Aldred’s gloss to the Lindisfarne Gospels (not 
considered in this context by Ganz or Dumville) does include instances of letter-
forms drawn from Square minuscule. In fact, the numbers of Square (and square-
ish) forms in Aldred’s writing suggest that he was familiar with the latest styles, 
as well as slightly older fashions. For example, 1.17 is arguably an example of 
Aldred writing what Dumville (1987: 163) terms proto-Square minuscule, a tran-
112   
   Stewart Brookes
sitional script which shares some of the features of Square minuscule. There is 
a square-ish aspect to Aldred’s letter-forms here, and an even height to minims 
which have feet and wedge-like serifs, creating an appearance radically different 
from, say, the Cursive minuscule of 1.14. What this demonstrates is a familiarity 
with a reformed minuscule, antecedent to Square minuscule, which has some 
of the proportions but not all of the characteristics which identify that script. 
While 1.17 suggests a script style that anticipates Square minuscule, Aldred fre-
quently uses a form of a which meets the distinctive and defining characteristics 
of Square minuscule, an open a closed by a top stroke which may be horizontal 
(4.10, 4.16) or rising from left to right (4.26–4.30). There are many examples of 
the lozenge-shaped a (4.37–4.39), another form within the spectrum of Square 
minuscule. There are examples of “horned” e (6.22–6.38) which also seem to be 
influenced by Square minuscule, looking very much like what Dumville (1994: 
145) identifies as Phase III Square minuscule. The dates Dumville assigns for this, 
c. 940–959, coincide with precisely when Aldred is thought to have glossed the 
Lindisfarne Gospels; Aldred’s use, I argue, is an early instance. 
The above indicates that Aldred was well aware of the latest fashions, and 
that he assimilated some of the features of Square minuscule into his script. This 
is not to say that he wrote what would be termed Square minuscule, but it cer-
tainly demonstrates Aldred’s familiarity with the southern move to create a new 
English minuscule. A point worth noting is that while palaeographers have iden-
tified a progression from Insular minuscule to Square minuscule, that trajectory 
might well not have been apparent to Aldred.
8  Influence of Caroline minuscule
When considering Aldred’s awareness of contemporary scribal practice, one of 
the most significant pieces of evidence is his frequent use of the Caroline form 
of a (4.74–4.78). Ker (1943: 8) was the first to comment upon this, but stopped 
short of calling it Caroline; instead, he said that it “resembles” the Caroline form. 
Ross et al. (1960: 13) were more confident in making the association, noting that 
amongst the variant forms that Aldred uses is one which is “the same as the stan-
dard Carolingian a”. More recently, Roberts (2005: 36) returned to the issue in her 
study of the colophon page, arguing that what has been termed the Caroline-like 
a of Aldred is [...] more likely to have been an inherited feature within his hand”. 
There are, indeed, many examples in Aldred’s writing of the Anglo-Saxon pointed 
minuscule a with a high back of the sort that Roberts cites from Oxford, Bodle-
ian Library, MS Hatton 20, the first hand of the Parker Chronicle (Cambridge, 
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   113
Corpus Christi College, MS 173) and London, British Library, Add. Cht. 19791 (4.40, 
4.41, 4.61, 4.64, 4.88). When one looks beyond the colophon page, however, a 
different picture emerges of a distinctive Caroline a that is noteworthy both for 
Aldred’s confident fluency with the form and his use of it initially, medially and 
in final position. On ff. 5r–5v, for instance, there are 60 occurrences of unmis-
takably Caroline a. The next most common form is the open a, of which there 
are 28 instances; as is usual in Aldred’s gloss, there are also examples of several 
other types of a, which I have not recorded. (See Appendix 1 for the distribution 
of Caroline a and open a on these folios.¹⁰) While the frequency of the Caroline 
form at this point in the gloss is not typical of its distribution in the manuscript 
as a whole, it was clearly an established part of Aldred’s scribal repertoire. It is 
surprising, therefore, to discover that his use of the form seems not to have con-
tinued beyond his work on the Lindisfarne Gospels. Judging by the description of 
Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Bodley 819 by Ross et al. (1960: 32–33), Aldred did 
not use Caroline a in what is taken to be his next project. Nor, it seems, did he 
use it in his extensive glosses to the Durham Ritual: Brown (1969: 25 n. 11) notes 
only four occurrences of Caroline a in the Ritual, and from what I can see in the 
facsimile edition, the examples look like the high-backed forms of a found in the 
first hand of the Parker Chronicle and do not seem Caroline. It is possible that it 
was an experiment introduced for the purpose of variation, but his confidence 
with it is in contrast to his attempts at Hybrid minuscule “oc” a (4.46–4.49), sug-
gesting that he had experience with it prior to the Lindisfarne Gospels. Perhaps 
he saw it as a higher grade of script, not suited to the task of glossing less grand 
manuscripts than the Lindisfarne Gospels.
At any rate, Aldred’s use of Caroline a is not the only indication of his famil-
iarity with Caroline minuscule. For example, he often writes s in a way sugges-
tive of Caroline influence, with the downstroke more or less on the base-line and 
a small wedge half-way up the downstroke (10.41, 10.43, 10.50). Another pointer 
in this direction is the distinctive st ligatures Aldred uses (10.66–10.70), which 
are likely to have been informed by Caroline models. Finally, Aldred occasionally 
deploys a 2-shaped r ligature in both his Old English gloss and occasional Latin 
notes (9.40–9.44).¹¹ The or ligature is not common in an Old English context, and 
10 The forms listed in Appendix 1 are those which seem to have been part of Aldred’s first pass 
at glossing the Gospels, and do not include the later additions that he made. There seems to be 
no pattern or preference for using individual forms with particular words; for example, in this 
sample Aldred uses both Caroline and open a for “regula” and writes both forms alongside each 
other in “aehteða” (1.8).
11 Ross et al. (1960: 15) record fifteen instances of this ligature between ff. 19ra14 and 189ra5. 
114   
   Stewart Brookes
more unusual still is Aldred’s use of the 4-shaped -um abbreviation (9.45–9.46).¹² 
These two ligatures were a borrowing from Latin manuscripts, and were typical 
of Caroline minuscule.
In light of the above, there seems to be enough evidence to argue that Aldred 
was familiar with Caroline minuscule, had a willingness to experiment with 
some of its letter-forms, and had access to resources which would have provided 
a model (whether in the form of manuscripts or other scribes). The implications 
of this argument are significant. Aldred is thought to have written his gloss in the 
middle of the tenth century, or a little afterwards, a time-frame that corresponds 
closely with the earliest dated examples of English Caroline minuscule, which 
would place Aldred’s use of Caroline letter-forms very early on in this chronology. 
His usage would thus be contemporary with the single sheet charters that are the 
earliest datable witnesses to Caroline minuscule in an English context (Rushforth 
2012: 198–199). 
9  Variability in the quality of the writing
While I have focused until now mainly on deliberate experimentation in script 
type, another aspect of the variation is the inconsistency in the quality of the 
writing. The difference between, say, 1.17 and 1.23 is marked and this has led to 
an often contradictory response to the gloss. For Ker (1943: 12) “Aldred’s skill is 
apparent in the Gospels”, whereas Gameson (2013: 83) sees Aldred’s handwrit-
ing as “functional and variable rather than elegant and constant”. Newton et 
al. (2013: 106) describe the gloss as “discreet and orderly throughout”, whereas 
Horobin (2013: 45) classes it as scruffy. G. Baldwin Brown (1903–1937: V, 337) com-
ments that the “neatly written interlinear gloss really does no harm to the manu-
script”, while Gilbert (1990: 154 n. 13) decries it as “an aesthetic disaster unparal-
leled in insular manuscripts”. Aside from the last, all of these comments might 
be judged appropriate to particular stints by Aldred, even if none of them, aside 
from perhaps that of Gameson, is applicable for the gloss in its totality. What the 
differing responses point to is the lack of consistency. There is evidence to suggest 
that the glossing process was not a linear one, and that Aldred moved back and 
forth, adding additional glosses to earlier sections of the manuscript on different 
days. This can be seen most noticeably in the appearance of glosses in red on the 
earlier folios (for example, f. 5va6). While this accounts for a small part of the 
12 Roberts (2005: 50) notes the use in the first hand of the Parker Chronicle (Cambridge, Corpus 
Christi College, MS 173, f. 15r).
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   115
inconsistency, much more of this is down to care and attention in preparation 
of the writing materials. When Aldred’s pen is freshly-cut and the gloss written 
carefully and evenly, his hand is well deserving of the description “neat” (1.17, 
1.19). In many other places though his pen is worn or poorly cut, which gives the 
gloss a rough, scratchy appearance (1.13–1.14, 1.24, 2.54, 4.84, 4.85) and leads to 
letters getting filled in or poorly made (4.92–4.97, 6.52–6.53, 6.57–6.62, 8.6, 8.7). 
The way that Aldred trimmed his quill also had some effect on the size of his 
writing, which differs markedly from folio to folio. What the cut of the quill does 
not account for though are the significant differences in letter-size from line to 
line on the same folio. A clear example of this can be seen on f. 242v (2.49–2.52), 
where the abbreviation sign used for vel – or most likely oððe in a vernacular 
context – exhibits marked differences in height, width and weight (this in addi-
tion to the stylistic variations, such as treatment of the ascenders and the applica-
tion of points either side of the abbreviation). While some variation in the size of 
the writing might, perhaps, be expected between early and later folios over the 
course of glossing such a large volume, the frequent occurrence of differences 
in the size of individual letters on the same folio is unusual. (For a sense of how 
significant the differences in the size of letter-forms can be, see a: 4.43, 4.92; f: 7.1, 
7.2; g: 8.9, 8.76; and wynn: 12.6, 12.26.) When he wants to, Aldred is quite capable 
of writing letters of an even size (1.15, 1.17, 1.19). That he does not always write like 
this suggests that uniformity was not his main priority.
Another highly noticeable variation in the gloss is in the colour of the ink. 
Nominally, the ink that Aldred uses is black, but the colour often drifts from black 
to a brownish hue and may appear washed out before the writing resumes in a 
blacker colour. (See, for example, the sudden ink change at 160rb19.) As has often 
been noted, Aldred switches to a reddish ink for the closing pages of the manu-
script. Despite this deliberate change, there is as wide a variation in the vividness 
of his red ink as there is with his black (235r, 237v). As with the variation in size, it 
seems likely that Aldred was not particularly concerned about this, and certainly 
not enough to expend the considerable effort in careful mixing of the ink and 
making sure his pen was dipped in ink between words. 
That it is possible for a scribe to maintain size and ink colour is clear from the 
enviable and impressive model Aldred had before him. The writing of Eadfrith, 
the artist-scribe who created the Lindisfarne Gospels, is even and disciplined, 
the result of time-consuming attention to detail. Judging by the regularity of the 
writing, Eadfrith was careful to cut his pen to a consistent width and must have 
been diligent in supplying it with ink because the richness of the black is remark-
ably constant over what Gameson (2013: 29) estimates as a line-length of nearly 
two kilometres. If anything demonstrates the craft of the experienced scribe, it is 
this. At his most sedate, with frequent pen lifts and attention to spacing, Aldred 
116   
   Stewart Brookes
achieves a neat and consistent handwriting. More often, though, haste appears to 
have won out over quality of execution.
Of course, what lies behind all of this is the question of presentation. To 
Eadfrith, a balanced visual appearance was paramount and so he wrote in a dis-
ciplined manner, keeping his words parallel to the twin guidelines that he had 
carefully scored into the vellum. Even a brief look at Aldred’s style of glossing 
indicates that he did not have the same intention. His words are often jumbled 
around each other (1.14, 1.23, 1.30, 1.31) or written at an angle, flying away from 
the Latin in a way that suggests the manuscript had not been positioned carefully 
(1.22). The occasional passages of explanatory commentary that Aldred adds are 
sometimes written with an awareness of the visual balance of the page, but just as 
often are squashed around the Latin text. Examples of both of these approaches 
can be seen on f. 45r (14.1) where Aldred squeezes his commentary at an angle 
into the gap between the two columns and yet across the page arranges it care-
fully to the right of the second column (where it has suffered at the hand of the 
post-medieval binder who trimmed the manuscript). When considering Aldred’s 
attitude to presentation, a significant piece of evidence is provided by the colo-
phon and additional material on f. 259r (18.1). Although Aldred put both thought 
and preparation into this, even ruling the section in hard-point, he was not able 
to fit it all into the layout he had planned. We see this on the very first line of 
the new text that he added, with his Latin and its Old English glosses crashing 
into each other, meaning that Aldred had to write sæcvla constitvit (18.1, line 4) 
in two stages above the line in order to preserve the single column width mod-
elled on Eadfrith’s layout (Roberts 2005: 36). One has to be careful, of course, 
not to impose a modern aesthetic on Aldred’s work, assuming that what might 
look careless, ill-planned, or untidy to us would have been viewed in the same 
way by Aldred or his contemporaries. We might also consider the possibility that 
this treatment of the line, and Aldred’s more general practices of layout in his 
gloss, reflects the design of manuscripts that he had seen. In particular, it is pos-
sible that he was familiar with the writing habits found in some Irish manuscripts 
where, as Parkes (1991: 112) puts it, the “finish of the book” was less important 
than preserving the information and this led to an appearance of “comparative 
untidiness”. Lowe (CLA: II, xvi) notes that Irish scribes often treated the line as 
if it were “something elastic, not a fixed and determined space which has to be 
filled in a particular way”. That description has much resonance for Aldred’s 
approach. Nevertheless, one does not need to go in search of Irish manuscripts 
for a model of glossing. Cambridge, Trinity College, MS B.10.5 has an interlinear 
gloss in Latin that spills into the margins in a manner not dissimilar to Aldred’s 
practices. That Aldred might have known this manuscript is suggested by his use 
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   117
of a system of abbreviations in the Durham Ritual that are, as T. J. Brown (1969: 
40) notes, found only in this and one other extant Northumbrian volume. 
10  Artistic variation in the decorative capitals
If we are seeking a paradigm for Aldred’s variation in letter-forms, we need only 
look at the Lindisfarne Gospels. Everywhere, there are twists and turns: stylis-
tic reimaginings, elongations of strokes, inventive ligatures, flourishes and, 
above all, elegant variation in the letter-forms. And yet this variation is subtle 
and nuanced: one both sees and does not see the differences. Eadfrith switching 
between Uncial, Half-uncial, Roman capitals, and minuscule is not the equiva-
lent of eighteen computer fonts on the same page, with Comic Sans alongside 
Garamond, Zapf Chancery, and Chalkduster. Rather, he weaves his letter-forms 
with their arching backs and reaching feet into the atmosphere of the page with 
a lithe congruity, variant forms embracing each other both physically and stylis-
tically. Close study brings the subtleties to the surface, something which would 
not have been lost on Aldred both as a scribe curious about interpreting letter-
forms and someone who demonstrably examined the artistic realization of the 
manuscript in detail. Evidence of this is Aldred’s sketching of Eadfrith’s geomet-
ric patterns (f. 202v), his Uncial pen trial in the top right of f. 122r, his alteration 
of Eadfrith’s Uncial gs (see below), and his tracing of the lamb image on f. 137r. 
These are examples of interventions we can detect; most of his study is, of course, 
hidden from us. In the following lines I will explore examples of variation in the 
letter-forms, starting with the decorative capitals, then moving on to the main 
Latin text.
As an example of the style of letter-form variation in the Lindisfarne Gospels, 
we can begin by discussing the decorative capitals on f. 29r5–6 (15.1).¹³ The letter-
forms in the six words (esset, desponsata, mater, eius, maria, and ioseph) vary 
both from word to word and within individual words. We can see, for example, 
two variations on the angular form of s: the first is constructed of three strokes 
(like a z in modern type, reflected in the x-axis) and is found in esset, the first s 
of desponsata, and ioseph. The second has an additional two strokes towards the 
stem and is filled with a yellow flower motif. Eadfrith elsewhere experiments with 
this further, creating a seven-stroke s (15.2). A third type of s, this time Uncial, is 
to be found in eius, with the round upper and lower curves curling in towards 
13 It should be noted that the variation I discuss is typical of the decorative capitals and that 
there a number of alternative folios which I might have chosen.
118   
   Stewart Brookes
the back of the s to create an oval proportion, the lower half larger than the top. 
(Compare this to the elongated shape and symmetry of the s in plures (15.3).) 
There are three types of e: a Roman capital form in the first e of esset, despon-
sata, and ioseph, with a diamond-shaped tongue; the square second e in esset 
is a variant on the Roman capital form, with additional strokes to create balance 
and a long tongue rising upward forming the top stroke of the t with which the e 
is in ligature; and a round Uncial form of e in mater. In addition, the hook of the 
e in eius curves down to meet the tongue of the e, giving it a Half-uncial appear-
ance. Finally, there are three different types of a. The first of these, the first a 
in desponsata, is derived from Roman capitals, and has a wide cross bar on top 
and an angular connecting stroke which meets the base-line.¹⁴ The second a is 
the Uncial form found in the second a of desponsata, with its long straight back 
and connecting stroke angled towards the base-line, and in the first a in maria 
with a straight connecting stroke and a curved back with a head that curls down 
towards the left, ending in a serif. The third type of a is the Half-uncial a found in 
mater and the second a of maria. While these two Half-uncial forms look similar, 
there are subtle differences: the hook at the top of the c-shaped back of the a in 
mater is flattened out almost to a right-angle and pressed so close to the t which 
follows that it creates the appearance of a ligature-like join, while the hook at the 
top of the c-shaped back of the second a in maria curves downwards, ending in a 
serif which both embellishes its appearance and aligns it with the curved heads 
and tails which finish many of the other letters.
Consideration of the small sample of letter-forms on f. 29r is enough to grasp 
both the variety and individuality of the letters created by Eadfrith. It is worth 
looking elsewhere in the manuscript, however, to get a fuller sense of the range 
of influences behind his style. For instance, the varied forms of g in the decora-
tive capitals, include examples of letter-forms derived from Uncial (15.11, 15.12); 
from Insular Half-uncial (15.13); an angular stylization of Half-uncial (15.14); and 
Rustic capitals (15.15). To this list I would add the point that Eadfrith creates deco-
rative capitals derived from minuscule forms; for example, a form of a with a 
back that curves to the right, and a lower curve that joins with the border (15.7); 
a straight back with serifs at either end and a curved connecting stroke (15.8) or 
a straight connecting stroke (15.9); and in ligature with n (15.10). The range of 
forms for g and a are enlarged majuscule (Uncial, Half-uncial and Rustic capi-
tals) and minuscule forms; angular forms of the majuscule and minuscule which 
owe something to the Anglo-Saxon runic letters carved into wood and stone; and 
14 For stylistic variants on this, see a with a straight connecting stroke (f. 136va3, 15.4); with a 
serif where the connecting stroke touches the base line (f. 3r3, 15.5); and with a triangular head in 
place of the crossbar which is typical of a in Eadfrith’s Roman capitals (f. 27r5, 15.6).
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   119
Roman capitals, which are, like the rune-like forms, ultimately derived from an 
epigraphic context.
11   Letter-form v ariation in the Latin text of the 
Gospels
While the decorative capitals make the case for variation well, Eadfrith’s main 
Latin text is, of course, of the greatest significance when looking for immedi-
ate influences on Aldred’s handwriting. Here too there is a great deal of varia-
tion, and while Half-uncial forms predominate, Eadfrith frequently uses letter-
forms drawn from Uncial and even minuscule. Such variation is, of course, to be 
expected in an Insular Half-uncial manuscript. Lowe (CLA: II, xvi) notes that the 
interchangeable use of d, n, r and s is a salient characteristic of Insular majus-
cule manuscripts, commenting that “[t]hey are handled in a diversity of ways 
in which it is hard to see a design”. The final comment resonates with what we 
saw earlier in Aldred’s usage – that there is diversity without detectable design 
beyond the desire for variation itself. We can see this by looking at Eadfrith’s a, a 
letter that, as we saw, exhibits much variation in Aldred’s gloss. There are three 
types of a in Eadfrith’s main Latin text: Half-uncial, minuscule and Uncial. Half-
uncial a is the most common type, with the characteristic “oc” shape (16.1–16.4). 
Minuscule a occurs much less frequently than the Half-uncial form; the back is 
either upright (16.10) or slanting to the left (16.8, 16.12). The top of the back may 
be level with the bowl (16.6), though often extends to form a distinct head rising 
well above the bowl (16.12, 16.15). The Uncial form is the least common type of a 
found in Eadfrith’s Latin text; the back of the a slants to the left, and the bottom 
of the back stroke often does not descend much or at all beyond the connecting 
stroke (16.17–16.20). With mixed results, Aldred attempts to copy the Half-uncial 
a (4.46–4.49) and it is possible that Eadfrith’s minuscule a also had some impact 
on Aldred’s own minuscule (4.50, 4.51). The most significant influence though is 
not the letter-forms themselves, but the way that Eadfrith mixes them together on 
a line or a single word; see mandata (16.23), which has the three versions of a in 
the same word in a manner comparable to Aldred’s practice. (Similarly, one might 
compare receperunt (16.39), which has two different forms of r in close proximity.)
The possibility that variation in the Latin letter-forms provided Aldred with 
a creative model seems a strong one. Beyond this, the Latin seems to have influ-
enced Aldred in other ways also. We know that he studied closely the construction 
of Eadfrith’s letter-forms because there are frequent signs of his adding strokes to 
the Latin text. Partly his interventions seem to be aimed at removing ambigu-
120   
   Stewart Brookes
ity, as is the case with the wedges he adds to Eadfrith’s Uncial g to differentiate 
it from c (16.29–16.32, 17.9). Another measure he takes to increase legibility is to 
draw a lower curve to create a t where Eadfrith has only a top stroke to represent 
the letter in final position (17.7, 17.16). Once we watch for Aldred’s interventions, 
there are many, including his splitting up the words of scriptura continua on f. 3r 
and isolating easily confused Latin words elsewhere (17.12); adding abbreviation 
marks to identify the nomina sacra (17.8); and introducing apex signs, again to 
assist reading (17.13). This in addition to his constant revisions to the Latin text, 
either by striking out letters (17.14) or inserting those that were missing (17.15). 
Some of his other alterations seem to be motivated by stylistic interests, such as 
his addition of a triangular wedge to the leg of r (17.9), the wedges he adds to y 
(17.3, 17.4), the short stroke he attaches to the back of a (17.6) and a long, curved 
stroke to another a (17.5). On many occasions Aldred attempts to replicate the 
Half-uncial of the Latin, for example when he inserts a missing word or letter 
to correct the text (17.10, 2.24). With this close study in mind, it is perhaps not 
surprising that some of the variants we find in Aldred’s gloss appear to be bor-
rowings from, or at least influenced by, Eadfrith’s text. Aldred’s f, for example, 
occasionally seems to be modelled on the Latin (compare 7.3, 7.4, 17.2); at least 
one instance of f-shaped y looks remarkably like Eadfrith’s (cp. 7.66, 7.67), as does 
the finish of the lower-left branch of x in 17.1. The attention that Aldred paid to 
Eadfrith’s y results in a round y in the gloss that echoes that of the Latin (cp. 7.61, 
7.62). The Half-uncial n which occasionally appears in Aldred’s gloss (7.11–7.15) 
has much in common with the form found in the Latin (7.16) and there are telling 
examples of imitative behaviour to be seen in 7.17, where Aldred offers a version 
of Eadfrith’s i and n, and 7.18 where Aldred attempts Half-uncial n to supply a 
letter omitted from the main text. Aldred’s low-slung l may well betray a similar 
influence (cp. 2.60, 2.61). The subscript i-ligatures in the Latin may also have been 
suggestive (cp. 3.38, 3.47). Finally, on many occasions, Aldred modelled his layout 
upon that devised by Eadfrith, as can be seen in 14.2–14.8, where his spacing, 
vertical writing and splitting of words provides a creative engagement with the 
text he is glossing.
12  Non-scribal interventions
If we are to fully understand Aldred’s interaction with the manuscript he was 
glossing, it is important to note that his efforts extend beyond those expected of a 
glossator and towards those of an artist. Thus, Aldred adds a rough line drawing 
in the top-left margin of f. 202v (17.17), copying what could be seen through the 
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   121
page of the decorative initial I of Iohannes on f. 203v (17.19). He goes much further 
than this, however, introducing a sketch on f. 137r of the calf iconographically 
associated with the evangelist Luke. Aldred’s calf is loosely traced from Eadfrith’s 
portrait of Luke on the other side of the folio and, as is apparent from a compari-
son of 19.1 and 19.2, it is much simpler than its model. Placing the two representa-
tions alongside each other as I have done does not favour Aldred’s line-drawing. 
Eadfrith’s portrait is alive with colour, from the bright mustard-flower yellow of 
the nimbi of Luke and the calf to the rust red of the cushion on which Luke sits. 
The wings of the calf are washed with blue pigment, and the book the calf holds 
is green with yellow edging. In contrast, Aldred’s version of the calf is simplistic: 
the image is reduced to strokes, with no shading or colour, and Aldred makes 
basic errors of anatomy, drawing only three legs and misplacing the calf’s right 
ear behind its head. He does not draw the book or the haloes, seemingly using 
technology of the page to have these present in the form of a show-through. The 
differences in detail and execution led R. L. S. Bruce-Mitford (1960: 126 no. 1) to 
observe that Aldred’s calf is “drawn in rather uneven and shaky lines and is not 
the work of a practised artist”. Rather than focus on Aldred’s lack of artistic flair, 
we would do better to recognize the sketch for what it is, a scribe’s interpreta-
tion of the aesthetic element. Aldred hints at this by placing the left foot of the 
calf on the enlarged letter h of haec, pointing to the letters which make up the 
words of the Gospel, thereby drawing attention to the craft of the scribe. Adding 
the picture in the blank space in the manuscript is another act of completion of 
something which only Aldred saw as not yet done. In doing so, he brings himself 
closer to the domain of the original artist-scribe, Eadfrith.
13  Conclusion
In his study of the development of Square minuscule, Ganz (2012: 190) observes 
that it is scribes, and not scripts, who are at the heart of the story. As I hope to 
have shown, this notion could not be more appropriate in the case of Aldred. In 
his gloss we see ninth-century letter-forms, runes and the latest scribal innova-
tions placed alongside each other, seemingly all in the service of variation and 
an imaginative scribal response to the artistry of the Lindisfarne Gospels. The 
variation in Aldred’s writing that I have discussed here illuminates Aldred’s rela-
tionship with the manuscript he glossed. Aldred’s deep connection to the manu-
script’s style and aesthetic can be traced in his altering of the Latin letter-forms, 
his juxtapositioning of the glosses in response to Eadfrith’s organization and 
layout of the text and, even more significantly, in his imitative behaviour with 
122   
   Stewart Brookes
regard to the variation he saw in Eadfrith’s writing. As a consequence of immers-
ing himself in the patterning of the manuscript, Aldred is taken back to a much 
older time, imbibing the Insular impulse for creativity. As much as he is a glossa-
tor, he is also an interpreter of that visual tradition.
Within Aldred’s script, we witness a clear refutation of the notion that he 
was a rustic, living in a backwater far removed from the shifts in scribal fashions. 
My close analysis of the letter-forms shows that Aldred was familiar with both 
Square minuscule and Caroline minuscule and we see evidence of writing which 
approaches both in his gloss. This finding is particularly significant in light of the 
general scholarly agreement that Aldred’s script is our most important evidence 
for Northumbrian handwriting in the mid-tenth century. With so much variation 
and flirting with other styles, his writing cannot be taken as typical of Northum-
bria. It is, perhaps, typical only of Aldred, and even then only of Aldred when he 
is glossing the Lindisfarne Gospels.
The Lindisfarne Gospels was not just Aldred’s training ground, it was also 
his playground, as his experimentation with features of style and variant letter-
forms makes clear. When we next see his work, it is in a Latin gloss to Bede’s 
commentary on the biblical Book of Proverbs found in Oxford, Bodleian Library, 
MS Bodley 819 (see Roberts, this volume: p. 53) and his writing is more restrained, 
with the most noteworthy variation being the addition of feet to minims about 
half-way through his interlinear additions. Later in his career, when he came to 
gloss and write in the Durham Ritual, Aldred was more expert, as is witnessed 
in his decorative Anglo-Saxon minuscule,¹⁵ but possibly less creatively engaged 
with the manuscript than he had been with the Lindisfarne Gospels.¹⁶
15 Examples of Aldred’s script in the three different manuscripts may be seen on the DigiPal 
website at <http://goo.gl/mm5Ejv>.
16 I am grateful to Francisco J. Álvarez López, Marc Michael Epstein, Jane Roberts, Peter Stokes 
and Louise Sylvester for their encouragement, support and advice at various stages of this 
paper. In addition, I thank Stella Wisdom at the British Library who kindly helped with image 
permissions at a crucial juncture. I also acknowledge the financial support of the European 
Research Council: I was able to pursue this research due to funding of the DigiPal (digipal.eu) 
project by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) under grant agreement 
no. 263751. Finally, I express my deep gratitude to Sara Pons-Sanz for her patience and kindness 
throughout the editorial process.
 
 Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   123
Appendix 1¹⁷
Distribution of Caroline a and open a on ff. 5r–5v
Caroline a
Open a
Caroline a
Open a
“arun”, 5ra2, 5ra5
“alra”, 5ra7
“aehteða”, 5rb3
“aanu(m)”, 5rb11
“fearða”, 5ra20
“æfterra”, 5ra1, 5ra14 “forma”, 5rb20
“aehteða”, 5rb3
“fifta”, 5ra23
“gelicra”, 5ra6
“habbas”, 5rb9 
“aerest”, 5rb20
“forma”, 5ra10
“regula”, 5ra14
“nioða”, 5rb5
“án”, 5rb8
“gegead”, 5ra10
“ðrea”, 5ra15
“regula”, 5rb3
“blaccu(m)”, 5rb14
“gegeadriges”, 5ra10–11
“seofunda”, 5rb1
“regula”, 5rb7, 
5rb21
“regulas”, 5ra3–4
“tal”, 5rb1, 5rb5, 
5rb13, 5rb17, 5rb20
“sceomaes”, 5ra5
“ða”, 5rb1, 5rb5, 5rb7
“seista”, 5ra25
“ðara”, 5rb13
“sua”, 5ra8
“tal”, 5ra10, 5ra17, 5ra23
“ða”, 5ra1, 5ra3, 5ra4, 
5ra17, 5ra20, 5ra23, 
5ra25
“ðrea”, 5ra17, 5ra20
“buta”, 5va19
“æfterra”, 5va23
“æteawdon”, 5vb21
“eadga”, 5vb2
“gearn”, 5va4
“ceasa”, 5va24 
“frumma”, 5vb16
“fæstnunga”, 5v20
“gefundena”, 5va20
“gebecnades”, 5va21
“geembihtatun”,
5vb17–18
“gecunnate”, 5vb11
“gesceaden”, 5va6
“gemerca”, 5va17
“sago”, 5vb12
“gemyndga”, 5vb1
“gesomna”, 5va6
“habas”, 5va16
“ða”, 5vb13, 5vb16, 
5vb16, 5vb21
“hia”, 5vb16
“ilca”, 5va7, 5va10
“talo”, 5va15
“ðinga”, 5vb13
“larwum”, 5vb22 
“sona”, 5va7
“papa”, 5vb2
17 An electronic version of Appendix 1 and Appendix 2 may be found at <http://www.digipal.eu/
blog/aldred/>.
124   
   Stewart Brookes
Caroline a
Open a
Caroline a
Open a
“stowa”, 5va22
“ða”, 5vb6
“tacon”, 5va8
“ðerhwunadun”, 
5vb18–19
“talum”, 5va5
“tuia”, 5va20
“ða”, 5va22
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   125
Appendix 2 
Folio and Line Numbers for the Images
1.1: 
5va20–21
1.2: 
6ra11
1.3: 
125vb7
1.4: 
196va20
1.5: 
6ra7
1.6: 
226ra7
1.7: 
5vb1–2
1.8: 
5rb3
1.9: 
95va3
1.10: 
224ra20
1.11: 
125vb22
1.12: 
7ra24–25
1.13: 
176rb21
1.14: 
134vb22–24
1.15: 
225rb4
1.16: 
223ra9
1.17: 
222r63–5
1.18: 
171ra4–5
1.19: 
7vb4
1.20: 
225vb20
1.21: 
174vb9
1.22: 
52ra1
1.23: 
85va4–5
1.24: 
193vb2
1.25: 
171rb18
1.26: 
106vb21
1.27: 
239vb12
1.28: 
86rb21
1.29: 
254va3
1.30: 
238va17
1.31: 
5vb16
1.32: 
207rb22–24
1.33: 
259ra9
1.34: 
193vb9
1.35: 
3r7
2.1: 
249rb9: ælces
2.2: 
7va10: his
2.3: 
8ra1: hia
2.4: 
171ra6: huoego
2.5: 
236rb4: martha
2.6: 
99rb19: hæfde
2.7: 
220vb8: ł
2.8: 
224va1: villo
2.9: 
236rb12: gebecnas
2.10: 
8rb18: but`te´an
2.11: 
99rb24: hæbbende
2.12: 
70vb1: his
2.13: 
19vb16: hates
2.14: 
123vb3: hwidder
2.15: 
222va4: hvv
2.16: 
7vb9: getal
2.17: 
99rb22: hueðer
2.18: 
19vb17: lichoma
2.19: 
236rb10: hire
2.20: 
8ra2: nabbas
2.21: 
236rb15: heono
2.22: 
20rb5: rehtlic
2.23: 
7vb13: lomb
2.24: 
7vb14: fu`l´gora
2.25: 
105ra3: hal
2.26: 
20rb4: læras
2.27: 
236rb21: vldre
2.28: 
249rb2: vnderhebendvm
2.29: 
236rb11: broðer
2.30: 
232vb21: his
2.31: 
259ra11: villo
2.32: 
161rb23: blodes
2.33: 
259rb13: lindisfearnensis
2.34: 
96ra4: leaf
2.35: 
200va17: his
2.36: 
144rb5: his
2.37: 
99rb21: behealdon
2.38: 
249rb2: vnderhebendvm
2.39: 
99rb21: hine
2.40: 
45rb17: bið
2.41: 
45ra13: his
2.42: 
73ra1: in
2.43: 
194ra1: iuh
2.44: 
33va7: hælend
2.45: 
3r4: neddes
2.46: 
4va6: gelæded
2.47: 
174vb9: ðæm
126   
   Stewart Brookes
2.48: 
5rb12: wið
2.49: 
242va4: ł
2.50: 
242va1: ł
2.51: 
242vb19: ł
2.52: 
242vb5: ł
2.53: 
222rb1: cvðe
2.54: 
193vb3: aldormon(num) 
2.55: 
201vb16: laf
2.56: 
156rb16: geleafo
2.57: 
123va6: lichoma
2.58: 
236rb12: latzar
2.59: 
229va14: lichoma
2.60: 
70vb3: locadon
2.61: 
146vb24: populo
2.62: 
7vb16: ymbiornas
2.63: 
45rb10: iu`e´ra
2.64: 
73vb21: is
2.65: 
41rb2: in
2.66: 
244rb23: ilca
2.67: 
20ra13: is
3.1: 
34va9: eghwelc
3.2: 
44vb10: uoeg
3.3: 
37vb1: legeras
3.4: 
33vb4: tuoege 
3.5: 
258ra21: gesegon
3.6: 
139vb7: boege
3.7: 
108ra7: gesegon 
3.8: 
110va14: tueg
3.9: 
191va19: tuoeg
3.10: 
5rb8: eghwelc
3.11: 
238ra18: egvm
3.12: 
200ra22: su`u´eti
3.13: 
20rb1: mettes
3.14: 
73va14: settas
3.15: 
232va14: gesette
3.16: 
121ra10: sedla
3.17: 
235vb16: gie
3.18: 
178rb8: gif
3.19: 
73ra9: god
3.20: 
249rb4: tid
3.21: 
103vb14: hæl(end) 
3.22: 
72va13: broeðer
3.23: 
72va6: broeðer
3.24: 
20rb19: sint
3.25: 
34vb1: sint
3.26: 
72ra22: penningslæht
3.27: 
99rb23: gete`l´don
3.28: 
46vb7: findes
3.29: 
39vb2: fic beamas
3.30: 
169ra10: bið
3.31: 
91vb1: hia
3.32: 
117rb8: hierusal(em)
3.33: 
8ra14: hlifiendiu(m)
3.34: 
251rb16: eorodmonna
3.35: 
252ra1: anna
3.36: 
8rb13: gewordena
3.37: 
49rb22: ðona
3.38: 
242vb22: mið
3.39: 
255rb21: broema
3.40: 
259 ra24: doemo
3.41: 
203va7: gemana
3.42: 
175vb17: untyn
3.43: 
93ra5: ðone
3.44: 
35va4: gesellæ
3.45: 
90va3: ðæs
3.46: 
221rb1: ðone
3.47: 
147va1: mihi
3.48: 
164ra12: wo`s´anne
3.49: 
72rb24: mo`y´ses
4.1: 
5va24: ceasa
4.2: 
142va18: witgena
4.3: 
34ra13: moniga
4.4: 
61rb14: nallas
4.5: 
5rb11: aanu(m)
4.6: 
255ra12: groefa
4.7: 
161rb1: noma
4.8: 
161rb3: aldormon
4.9: 
5va20: rimas
4.10: 
244rb12: fader
4.11: 
174vb20: hia
4.12: 
161rb21: fasne
4.13: 
201vb9: wuna
4.14: 
199vb1: gast
4.15: 
199vb3: aworden
4.16: 
174va13: gefeall
4.17: 
259rb33: earnvnga
4.18: 
207vb8: ðegla
4.19: 
8va1: hamcuða
4.20: 
100va11: wiðerwearda
4.21: 
135vb18: f(a/o?)la
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   127
4.22: 
221rb25: aec
4.23: 
105rb5: inhlogan
4.24: 
95vb8: andoa/undoa?
4.25: 
174va16: ðailco
4.26: 
39va16: behaldas
4.27: 
3r1: canona
4.28: 
259rb8: mathevs
4.29: 
4va1: ana
4.30: 
3va19: sceawað
4.31: 
244rb6: la
4.32: 
128vb21: aldor(men)
4.33: 
8vb18: bocana
4.34: 
4ra8: aldrum
4.35: 
4ra3: arun
4.36: 
223rb11: avorden
4.37: 
4va1: ana
4.38: 
44va12: hia
4.39: 
3r1: ðara
4.40: 
3va2: fagas
4.41: 
3r5: aefter
4.42: 
3r5: alde
4.43: 
3r6: bissena
4.44: 
99rb14: hlafard
4.45: 
186vb19: abrahames
4.46: 
117rb19: hua
4.47: 
158rb9: ad
4.48: 
259rb10: lvcas
4.49: 
122r (top right margin)
4.50: 
148ra12: ab(raham)
4.51: 
122va6: ilca
4.52: 
259rb29: ora
4.53: 
70rb24: dalf
4.54: 
167vb23: aworden
4.55: 
9ra13: anra
4.56: 
214va1: astag
4.57: 
95r9: esaia
4.58: 
68rb4: sona
4.59: 
207va16: aron
4.60: 
174va10: alle
4.61: 
191va24: alle
4.62: 
5rb20: tal
4.63: 
4ra23: apostol
4.64: 
125vb22: aras
4.65: 
259rb22: aldred
4.66: 
259rA28: aldred
4.67: 
89vb2: heafud
4.68: 
207va13: gebiotate
4.69: 
253rb22: ae
4.70: 
113ra10: an
4.71: 
120va3: alra
4.72: 
145vb2: awundrade
4.73: 
6vb15: awrat
4.74: 
127va4: all
4.75: 
6vb1: aet
4.76: 
5ra2: arun
4.77: 
5rb3: ða
4.78: 
5rb3: regula
4.79: 
259rb15: allvm
4.80: 
125vb1: alle
4.81: 
126va19: arð
4.82: 
128vb1: astigon
4.83: 
204ra10: suindriga
4.84: 
157vb12: aeldeuutu(m)
4.85: 
214va1: æft(er) 
4.86: 
97va25: (bottom left margin) að
4.87: 
259rA7: eadfrið
4.88: 
213vb23: aec
4.89: 
254va3: cempa
4.90: 
174va9: ah
4.91: 
135rb17: f(or)esaga
4.92: 
61ra23: ða
4.93: 
20rb2: ah
4.94: 
102ra11: walana
4.95: 
36vb22: singa
4.96: 
35ra24: haaldum
4.97: 
204rb20: fvluande
4.98: 
74va18: onduarde
4.99: 
215b4: vserna
5.1: 
191va11: mara 
5.2: 
51r2: arises 
5.3: 
106vb13: að
5.4: 
177ra6: afor
5.5: 
167vb16: astyred
5.6: 
5va2: sona
5.7: 
161rb22: sona
5.8: 
245va9: aldormonn
5.9: 
190vb1: buta
5.10: 
245va19: hiona
5.11: 
184va24: monna
128   
   Stewart Brookes
6.1: 
162ra11: tuoelfo
6.2: 
205vb14: f(or)doemendvm
6.3: 
86va19 : wedo
6.4: 
211vb10: hine
6.5: 
201vb5: hine
6.6: 
39va11: suiðe
6.7: 
207vb23: hine
6.8: 
211va10: ne
6.9: 
259ra4: me
6.10: 
20ra9: lufianne
6.11: 
174va23: alle
6.12: 
6vb1: aet
6.13: 
215vb5: onfoas
6.14: 
39va7: rumwelle
6.15: 
207vb23: onsoce
6.16: 
128vb8: seðe
6.17: 
30rb24: me
6.18: 
223vb8: hine
6.19: 
3r2: niwe
6.20: 
3r4: neddes
6.21: 
213vb11: gesegn
6.22: 
23vb3: ðegna
6.23: 
235vb23: genaelle
6.24: 
37ra24: heara
6.25: 
5vb11: gecunnate
6.26: 
33ra1: bebead
6.27: 
34vb11: lehteð
6.28: 
207vb17: tiberiaðes
6.29: 
235vb17: ebolsongas
6.30: 
212va17: begeonda
6.31: 
222va19: eastro
6.32: 
219rb8: earde
6.33: 
205ra5: ðe
6.34: 
21ra15: hine
6.35: 
105va7: haligdoeg
6.36: 
85vb13: fæste
6.37: 
207vb2: lecvord
6.38: 
207va8: brenise
6.39: 
212rb8: gefrvgnon
6.40: 
97rb5: ec
6.41: 
41rb23: onfoeng
6.42: 
107rb26: geseað
6.43: 
45rb18: eorðe
6.44: 
199vb24: iudeæ
6.45: 
19vb6: caeseres
6.46: 
82vb21: menigo
6.47: 
53va7: gewæxe
6.48: 
199vb9: aworden
6.49: 
39va12: bogehte
6.50: 
215vb10: heofne
6.51: 
7vb1: eft
6.52: 
215rb10: geondsværade
6.53: 
35ra23: acueden
6.54: 
83va14: feorra
6.55: 
68rb3: ego
6.56: 
68rb11: sende
6.57: 
258ra20: eorðv
6.58: 
235vb1: ne
6.59: 
34rb24: oehtnisse
6.60: 
75ra10: witnese
6.61: 
37va16: ec
6.62: 
216ra2: hæfeð
6.63: 
213vb17: monnes
6.64: 
86va16: acueden
6.65: 
232va14: gesette
6.66: 
240vb6: engel
6.67: 
34va9: eghwelc
6.68: 
19va21: ðeignas
6.69: 
105va10: gewundrade
6.70: 
19ra4: enne
6.71: 
18vb8: sie
6.72: 
215vb16: gefeage
6.73: 
205va21: f(or)eðon
6.74: 
208ra1: ðirde
6.75: 
45rb10: iu`e´ra
6.76: 
93ra5: ðone
6.77: 
34vb23: cueðo
6.78: 
35ra23: acueden
6.79: 
34ra20: geneolecedon
6.80: 
259rA7: eadfrið
7.1: 
4vb22: eft
7.2: 
235va20: from
7.3: 
222ra4: stefne
7.4: 
29vb11: filium
7.5: 
215rb10: hæl(end)
7.6: 
49ra8: hehsynne
7.7: 
223va6: am
7.8: 
174va19: monnum
7.9: 
73va21: monnum
7.10: 
241rb12: egvm
7.11: 
3r2: niwe 
7.12: 
222rb14: ane 
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   129
7.13: 
70rb14: hreonise
7.14: 
102va14: ðorn  
7.15: 
109vb18: on 
7.16: 
100va9: non
7.17: 
47va14: in
7.18: 
151vb7: era`n´t
7.19: 
73vb14: nallas
7.20: 
122va8: ne
7.21: 
244va13: noma
7.22: 
73vb8: nalleð
7.23: 
143vb22: binna
7.24: 
52ra24: ne
7.25: 
214rb13: biðon
7.26: 
9rb5: tal
7.27: 
119vb3: uut(edlice)
7.28: 
34vb10: sint
7.29: 
217vb7: to
7.30: 
3r6: w`u´ritta
7.31: 
207vb20: ðriu
7.32: 
7vb4: middum
7.33: 
19ra22: wundres
7.34: 
35rb8: unuis
7.35: 
73vb8: uut(edlice) 
7.36: 
34va6: cuoeðas
7.37: 
249ra11: cuom
7.38: 
240vb14: avorpen
7.39: 
243va19: bitvih
7.40: 
214rb3: gevorden
7.41: 
207ra12: svæ
7.42: 
240vb6: cvoedon
7.43: 
240vb14: vt
7.44: 
259ra20: svnt
7.45: 
252ra8: ðegnvm
7.46: 
253ra11: uv`u´nden
7.47: 
135ra16: tocymende
7.48: 
109ra15: wyrcas
7.49: 
179va21: miððy
7.50: 
200rb16: miððy
7.51: 
200rb22: miððy
7.52: 
259ra4: fyl`i´gdvme
7.53: 
173ra4: gegyrdedo
7.54: 
200va8: miððy
7.55: 
173ra10: cymeð
7.56: 
222vb24: styd
7.57: 
202vb18: byrig
7.58: 
202vb5: syn(na)
7.59: 
173ra17: gegyrdeð
7.60: 
259ra3: ðy
7.61: 
6va15: shya
7.62: 
204vb20: mystice
7.63: 
166ra1: wyrðe 
7.64: 
135rb21: gefyldon
7.65: 
256va5: miððy
7.66: 
216rb5: cymmeð
7.67: 
147vb14: symeon 
8.1: 
96ra2: geworden 
8.2: 
39ra18: berg
8.3: 
106vb1 giuge
8.4: 
239vb12: cynig
8.5: 
249vb17: æni`g´h
8.6: 
102rb8: gedegled
8.7: 
44ra18: geeadon
8.8: 
4va16: reglas
8.9: 
204vb9: fvl`g´uge
8.10: 
137r3: gegearuad
8.11: 
127vb19: intinges
8.12: 
106vb1: giuge
8.13: 
157rb20: witge
8.14: 
34rb19: god
8.15: 
49rb4: gefræpgedon
8.16: 
8ra5: god
8.17: 
34va14: monigfalde
8.18: 
181rb3: hlogon
8.19: 
34rb4: gbyes
8.20: 
207vb9: gebecnað
8.21: 
87va10: halga
8.22: 
207va14: ðrovvnges
8.23: 
256ra8: byrgenne
8.24: 
248vb5: geddv(m)
8.25: 
207va10: longvnga
8.26: 
179vb11: f(or)abreng
8.27: 
35ra17: geworðe 
8.28: 
253r11: gewvndvn
8.29: 
5va12: writting
8.30: 
240rb8: gesea
8.31: 
259rb24: gloesade
8.32: 
226vb21: geliornade
8.33: 
83ra8: geongende
8.34: 
5rb18: ungelices
8.35: 
72ra2: geceigdo
8.36: 
4va13: gemendum
8.37: 
214va8: astag
130   
   Stewart Brookes
8.38: 
68vb2: menigo
8.39: 
95r4: godspelles
8.40: 
85vb1: getreudon
8.41: 
135rb1: ænig
8.42: 
95vb9: ðuongas
8.43: 
107rb26: geseað
8.44: 
83va22: somnung
8.45: 
65va14: ingeonga
8.46: 
99rb25: drygi
8.47: 
131ra11: byrig
8.48: 
147vb22: nathaning
8.49: 
53rb12: dæg
8.50: 
88vb2: ge
8.51: 
147vb1: sorobabeling
8.52: 
35ra17: monigfald
8.53: 
35ra21: ingaes
8.54: 
3vb24: girihtæ
8.55: 
131ra3: fostring
8.56: 
88va1: astag
8.57: 
34rb1: gaste
8.58: 
34rb1: unspoedge 
8.59: 
136ra24: tuoge
8.60: 
103vb24: geflugon
8.61: 
54va14: gæs
8.62: 
132vb4: ceping
8.63: 
199vb4: god
8.64: 
199vb1: ofgæf
8.65: 
225rb24: gesende
8.66: 
174vb9: bigencga
8.67: 
157va18: wege
8.68: 
63va4: synngiga
8.69: 
160ra1: astag
8.70: 
173rb20: sgiire(monn)
8.71: 
34ra11: geboeta
8.72: 
181rb3: hlogon
8.73: 
75rb3: gesomnungum
8.74: 
50va15: monigfaldnisse
8.75: 
80ra5: gie
8.76: 
7ra25: geworht
8.77: 
95r1: godspell
8.78: 
19ra23: georne
8.79: 
122va19: gecoreno
9.1: 
3r3: werc
9.2: 
259rb7: trinus
9.3: 
113ra1: sc`r´ibas
9.4: 
121ra11: farmum
9.5: 
7va9: gearwas
9.6: 
3r4: wyrce
9.7: 
131vb10: desc`r´ibturu(m)
9.8: 
259rb8: scripsit
9.9: 
243vb21: fadores
9.10: 
34va15: forðon
9.11: 
99rb13: ræstdæge
9.12: 
103rb14: recone
9.13: 
226vb17: lærde
9.14: 
222vb23: gærs
9.15: 
222vb15: broðer
9.16: 
135vb2: unrod
9.17: 
226vb18: wvndradon
9.18: 
214ra5: wvndar
9.19: 
95va3: gearuas
9.20: 
73vb15: eorðu
9.21: 
85va10: crist
9.22: 
61ra3: mor
9.23: 
5rb14: her
9.24: 
3vb22: gihverfde
9.25: 
202rb13: grapað
9.26: 
106vb21: carchern
9.27: 
258ra22: veron
9.28: 
91rb14: geðreatnum
9.29: 
103ra10: færende
9.30: 
73vb9: laruas
9.21: 
3vb19: grecisc
9.32: 
35rb22: broðre
9.33: 
255rb24: arimaðia
9.34: 
61va1: gefrugnun
9.35: 
85va5: carcern
9.36: 
8vb8: mercunga
9.37: 
238va2: forðon
9.38: 
46va17: forðor
9.39: 
161rb23: hire
9.40: 
35ra18: suiðor
9.41: 
38va18: suiðor
9.42: 
46va17: forðor
9.43: 
110ra22: suiðor
9.44: 
39ra20: porcos
9.45: 
103rb12: gerasenor(um) 
9.46: 
234ra21: singvlor(um)
10.1: 
153rb16: symbeldæg
10.2: 
108ra9: gesprecend
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   131
10.3: 
259rb23: cvðberhtes
10.4: 
113rb6: sona
10.5: 
135vb13: losade
10.6: 
178vb14: scip
10.7: 
135vb18: asales
10.8: 
73vb17: is
10.9: 
191va10: ðas
10.10: 
137r10: lucas
10.11: 
3vb16: swa
10.12: 
102ra11: loswist
10.13: 
73vb16: is
10.14: 
252vb7: ðis
10.15: 
213ra18: sie
10.16: 
34rb1: unspoedge
10.17: 
259rb16: sint
10.18: 
240rb21: vvnas
10.19: 
19vb1: salt
10.20: 
134vb22: soecane
10.21: 
259rb31: milsæ
10.22: 
221rb22: salde 
10.23: 
73rb18: gidyrstig
10.24: 
34rb18: esuice
10.25: 
7ra18: saego
10.26: 
113vb20: soð
10.27: 
109rb7: bissen
10.28: 
196ra3: se
10.29: 
242vb15: soð
10.30: 
191va10: cursung
10.31: 
121ra19: hierusal(em)
10.32: 
44ra19: gemersadon
10.33: 
240va17: gesæh
10.34: 
259rb12: scrip(sit)
10.35: 
191rb17: his
10.36: 
108ra1: gesegon
10.37: 
37rb15: nallas
10.38: 
34rb11: soðfæstnisse
10.39: 
207vb17: seofanv(m)
10.40: 
249vb2: sint
10.41: 
85va4: misus
10.42: 
108va9: sie
10.43: 
134vb6: sinapis
10.44: 
259rb28: seo`v´lfres
10.45: 
137r8: godspelles
10.46: 
223ra11: his
10.47: 
19ra14: geleornas
10.48: 
119vb15: us
10.49: 
242vb17: onfoas
10.50: 
122va19: his
10.51: 
246ra17: ðegnas
10.52: 
182rb1: his
10.53: 
242vb2: wyrcas
10.54: 
195rb16: his
10.55: 
211vb4: væs
10.56: 
224ra18: is
10.57: 
222rb22: moisi
10.58: 
68rb11: sende
10.59: 
46va14: husa
10.60: 
174rb13: seleð
10.61: 
40rb16: huse
10.62: 
68rb11: sende
10.63: 
113vb24: saet
10.64: 
259rb10: scripsit
10.65: 
259rb8: scripsit
10.66: 
191va11: maasto
10.67: 
18va10: cristes
10.68: 
108va9: ðingstow
10.69: 
19rb7: crist
10.70: 
7va4: cristes
10.71: 
145rb17: stigendu(m)
10.72: 
34rb1: ofgaste
10.73: 
7va8: stefn
10.74: 
212vb21: gesiist
10.75: 
97vb2: spræc
10.76: 
190vb19: ðisses
10.77: 
241vb4: sprecend
10.78: 
241ra18: spreccend
10.79: 
9ra14: f(or)esprecon
10.80: 
216ra7: mundus
11.1: 
239v17
11.2: 
97va1
11.3: 
109vb3
11.4: 
135ra22
11.5: 
146rb2
11.6: 
142ra18
11.7: 
159rb12
11.8: 
159rb4
11.9: 
7ra18
11.10: 
253rb1
11.11: 
242vb12
11.12: 
259ra2
11.13: 
4rb19
11.14: 
145rb1
132   
   Stewart Brookes
11.15: 
259ra6
11.16: 
99ra3
11.17: 
243vb3
11.18: 
108va1
12.1: 
125rb8: wæs
12.2: 
4rb16: eftniwige
12.3 
7ra24: geworden
12.4: 
37rb15: wosa
12.5: 
88va11: aworden
12.6: 
3r6: w`u´ritta
12.7: 
3r4: wyrce
12.8: 
3r2: niwe
12.9: 
86va20: wede
12.10: 
74ra3: wæ
12.11: 
74va5: wæ
12.12: 
157vb1: win
12.13: 
86va19: wedo
12.14: 
 73va3: wuðuto
12.15: 
70vb15: wyflo
12.16: 
214vb1: gewyrce
12.17: 
259ra21: worht
12.18: 
6vb15: awrat
12.19: 
7va6: woestern
12.20: 
159ra1: wæs
12.21: 
113vb4: walde
12.22: 
222rb16: woenæ
12.23: 
241rb3: hwa
12.24: 
215vb3: we
12.25: 
230va1: worde
12.26: 
30ra8: cwomun
12.27: 
157va3: weron
12.28: 
194ra1: iw
12.29: 
238va3: wyrces
13.1: 
232va23
13.2: 
117vb20
13.3: 
215ra19
13.4: 
229rb10
13.5: 
193rb16
13.6: 
200rb3
13.7: 
200ra24
14.1: 
45r
14.2: 
101rb24
14.3: 
89va9
14.4: 
27r7
14.5: 
237rb25
14.6: 
90ra1
14.7: 
19rb24
14.8: 
84rb24
15.1: 
29r5–6
15.2: 
27r6
15.3: 
5vb5
15.4: 
136va3
15.5: 
3r3
15.6: 
27r5
15.7: 
27r7
15.8: 
136va3
15.9: 
95r9
15.10: 
95r5
15.11: 
27r5
15.12: 
27r5
15.13: 
19r3
15.14: 
3r4
15.15: 
29r4
15.16: 
203r11
15.17: 
137v2
16.1: 
101vb17: petrosa
16.2: 
101vb9: circa
16.3: 
89rb5: iudaeos
16.4: 
89va7: saeculi
16.5: 
19va5: columba
16.6: 
101vb12: satanas
16.7: 
257va24: erat
16.8: 
97ra11: ianua(m)
16.9: 
43ra19: pharisaei
16.10: 
183va13: intrauit
16.11: 
180rb23: erat
16.12: 
195a23: mea
16.13: 
4ra1–2: librariis
16.14: 
75rb21: prophetas
16.15: 
3vb12: exemplarib(us)
16.16: 
211va3: facta
16.17: 
99ra12: spicas
16.18: 
43ra11: misericordia(m)
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   133
16.19: 
258vb5: tuas
16.20: 
19va1: iordane
16.21: 
92va24: ficulneae
16.22: 
196ra23: uenerant
16.23: 
65va14: serua mandata
16.24: 
245ra20: diligit
16.25: 
90rb4–5: euangelicae
16.26: 
42ra19: grgem
16.27: 
81va10: singuli
16.28: 
90rb25: intellegendum 
16.29: 
20ra9: diligendos
16.30: 
245ra16: diliget 
16.31: 
245ra2: diligam
16.32: 
70rb5: regno
16.33: 
211vb23: gloriam
16.34: 
169va13: generationis
16.35: 
160vb1: ingredi 
16.36: 
90rb21–22: congregationem
16.37: 
131rb2: graecis 
16.38: 
19vb5: glorificandum
16.39: 
211vb8: receperunt
16.40: 
133rb24
17.1: 
175rb1: sex 
17.2: 
174vb3: ficbeames
17.3: 
239vb4: hierosolyma
17.4: 
227rb23: hierosolymis 
17.5: 
212ra12: gratia 
17.6: 
177va10: illa
17.7: 
221ra24: honorificent
17.8: 
95r6
17.9: 
223rb8: regem
17.10: 
234vb8
17.11: 
103rb2: hwæt
17.12: 
72rb5
17.13: 
206vb12 
17.14: 
178rb15
17.15: 
237rb25
17.16: 
240va11: ministrabit
17.17: 
202v 
17.18: 
203r 
17.19: 
203v
18.1: 
259r (detail)
19.1: 
137r (detail)
19.2: 
137v (detail)
134   
   Stewart Brookes
Images are from London, British Library, MS Cotton Nero D.iv © The British Library Board
1.1
1.7
1.12
1.17
1.13
1.14
1.15
1.18
1.20
1.19
1.10
1.16
1.8
1.11
1.3
1.4
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.6
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   135
1.22
1.24
1.25
1.26
1.23
1.27
1.28
1.30
1.29
1.31
1.32
1.35
1.33
1.34
1.21
136   
   Stewart Brookes
2.14
2.17
2.11
2.18
2.20
2.13
2.16
2.19
2.12
2.15
2.1
2.6
2.9
2.3
2.10
2.4
2.5
2.7
2.2
2.8
2.50
2.52
2.53
2.55
2.51
2.54
2.56
2.57
2.58
2.59
2.43
2.44
2.45
2.42
2.46
2.48
2.41
2.49
2.47
2.22
2.23
2.24
2.29
2.21
2.27
2.26
2.28
2.30
2.25
2.39
2.40
2.31
2.32
2.33
2.34
2.35
2.36
2.37
2.38
2.63
2.64
2.66
2.65
2.67
2.60
2.61
2.62
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   137
3.1
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.9
3.4
3.3
3.2
3.10
3.5
3.24
3.21
3.23
3.26
3.22
3.27
3.25
3.37
3.34
3.36
3.35
3.38
3.39
3.40
3.41
3.48
3.49
3.31
3.28
3.30
3.29
3.32
3.33
3.43
3.44
3.45
3.46
3.47*
3.42
3.14
3.19
3.11
3.13
3.12
3.17
3.20
3.18
3.15
3.16
138   
   Stewart Brookes
4.22
4.23
4.24
4.21
4.26
4.27
4.28
4.29
4·.30
4.25
4.97
4.98
4.99
5.1
4.96
4.95
4.94
4.92
4.93
4.91
4.16
4.11
4.12
4.19
4.15
4.14
4.17
4.18
4.20
4.13
4.67
4.63
4.70
4.61
4.65
4.66
4.68
4.64
4.69
4.62
4.74
4.73
4.75
4.71
4.80
4.79
4.77
4.78
4.76
4.72
4.45
4.48
4.50
4.41
4.42
4.47
4.46
4.43
4.44
4.49
4.37
4.38
4.32
4.31
4.39
4.40
4.33
4.36
4.34
4.35
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.1
4.5
4.85
4.89
4.84
4.87
4.88
4.83
4.82
4.81
4.86
4.90
4.51
4.52
4.53
4.55
4.56
4.59
4.57
4.54
4.58
4.60
5.5
5.2
5.6
5.3
5.7
5.9
5.8
5.10
5.11
5.4
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   139
6.11
6.12
6.13
6.14
6.15
6.16
6.17
6.18
6.19
6.20
6.41
6.43
6.44
6.45
6.42
6.46
6.48
6.49
6.50
6.47
6.73
6.74
6.75
6.72
6.76
6.77
6.78
6.79
6.71
6.80
6.51
6.53
6.52
6.54
6.57
6.58
6.60
6.59
6.55
6.56
6.31
6.33
6.32
6.36
6.37
6.38
6.39
6.40
6.34
6.35
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.8
6.9
6.6
6.7
6.1
6.10
6.5
6.61
6.63
6.64
6.65
6.62
6.66
6.68
6.69
6.70
6.67
6.21
6.23
6.24
6.26
6.27
6.28
6.29
6.30
6.22
6.25
140   
   Stewart Brookes
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.8
7.5
7.7
7.9
7.10
7.6
7.1
7.30
7.32
7.31
7.29
7.33
7.34
7.35
7.36
7.37
7.38
7.39
7.40
7.56
7.57
7.58
7.59
7.60
7.61
7.62
7.41
7.43
7.42
7.44
7.47
7.45
7.48
7.46
7.50
7.52
7.54
7.55
7.53
7.49
7.51
7.20
7.21
7.22
7.23
7.24
7.25
7.26
7.27
7.28
7.19
7.11
7.15
7.12
7.14
7.16
7.17
7.13
7.18
7.63
7.64
7.65
7.66
7.67
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   141
8.43
8.44
8.45
8.46
8.47
8.50
8.48
8.49
8.42
8.41
8.12
8.19
8.20
8.17
8.16
8.18
8.11
8.15
8.14
8.13
8.23
8.24
8.27
8.28
8.25
8.26
8.22
8.21
8.30
8.29
8.1
8.8
8.3
8.6
8.9
8.2
8.5
8.7
8.4
8.10
8.39
8.36
8.40
8.37
8.34
8.38
8.31
8.35
8.33
8.32
8.66
8.67
8.62
8.69
8.70
8.63
8.64
8.61
8.68
8.65
8.52
8.57
8.54
8.58
8.56
8.60
8.55
8.53
8.51
8.59
8.73
8.74
8.75
8.72
8.76
8.78
8.79
8.77
8.71
142   
   Stewart Brookes
9.1
9.3
9.4
9.2
9.6
9.8
9.9
9.5
9.7
9.40
9.41
9.39
9.42
9.38
9.43
9.45
9.46
9.44
9.16
9.10
9.12
9.18
9.15
9.14
9.11
9.17
9.13
9.24
9.26
9.19
9.27
9.21
9.22
9.25
9.20
9.23
9.34
9.33
9.32
9.35
9.28
9.36
9.30
9.31
9.29
9.37
10.1
10.2
10.4
10.5
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.3
10.6
10.10
10.13
10.14
10.12
10.15
10.11
10.16
10.18
10.17
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   143
10.60
10.61
10.62
10.63
10.65
10.68
10.69
10.64
10.66
10.67
10.70
10.71
10.72
10.73
10.75
10.74
10.76
10.77
10.78
10.79
10.42
10.48
10.49
10.41
10.43
10.45
10.44
10.46
10.47
10.50
10.51
10.52
10.53
10.55
10.54
10.59
10.58
10.57
10.56
10.29
10.30
10.32
10.33 10.34
10.35
10.36
10.37
10.38
10.39
10.40
10.31
10.25
10.27
10.28
10.26
10.24
10.21
10.22
10.23
10.19
10.20
10.80
10.81
BL, MS Cotton Vitellius A. xv, f. 49v
© The British Library Board
CCCC, MS 173, f. 26r
reproduced by permission of the
Master and Fellows of Corpus
Christi College, Cambridge
10.82
144   
   Stewart Brookes
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
11.11
11.10
12.13
12.16
12.17
12.18 12.19
12.14
12.15
12.7
12.6
12.8 12.9
12.10 12.11
12.12
11.12
12.4
12.3
12.2
12.1
12.5
11.13
11.14
11.16
11.15
11.17
11.18
13.6
13.4
13.7
13.2 
12.20 12.21 12.22 12.23 12.24 12.25 12.26 12.27 12.28
12.29
13.1
13.3 
13.5
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   145
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.6
14.1
14.7
14.8
14.5
146   
   Stewart Brookes
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7
15.8
15.9
15.10
15.11
15.12
15.13
15.14
15.15
15.16
15.17
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   147
16.23
16.24
16.25
16.26
16.27
16.28
16.29
16.30
16.31
16.32
16.33
16.34
16.35
16.36
16.37
16.38
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5
16.6
16.7
16.1
16.9
16.10
16.11
16.12
16.13
16.14
16.8
16.15
16.39
16.40
16.18
16.19
16.20
16.21
16.17
16.16
16.22
148   
   Stewart Brookes
17.3
17.4
17.2
17.1
17.5
17.6
17.7
17.8
17.9
17.10
17.11
17.12
17.13
17.17
17.19
17.18
17.14
17.16
17.15
 
Variation in Aldred’s Gloss   
   149
18.1: detail of f. 259r: Aldred’s colophon
150   
   Stewart Brookes
19.1: detail of f. 137r: Aldred’s tracing of Luke’s calf
19.2: detail of f. 137v: portrait of the Evangelist Luke (reversed in vertical axis) 
