Alderik H. Blom
Glossing the Psalms
Alderik H. Blom
Glossing  
the Psalms
The Emergence of the Written Vernaculars in Western 
Europe from the Seventh to the Twelfth Centuries
ISBN 978-3-11-050037-0
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-050186-5
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-049826-4
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A CIP catalog record for this book has been applied for at the Library of Congress.
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in  
the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed bibliographic data are available  
in the Internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2017 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, C.301 inf, fol. 85r
Typesetting: fidus Publikations-Service GmbH, Nördlingen
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
♾ Printed on acid-free paper
Printed in Germany
www.degruyter.com
Κανένα πλάσμα ζωντανό τ’ αγριοπερίστερα φευγάτα
κι ο βασιλιάς της Ασίνης που τον γυρεύουμε δυο χρόνια
τώρα
άγνωστος λησμονημένος απ’ όλους κι από τον Όμηρο
μόνο μια λέξη στην Ιλιάδα κι εκείνη αβέβαιη
ριγμένη εδώ σαν την εντάφια χρυσή προσωπίδα.
George Seferis, The King of Asine
Nullum opus exsurgit quod non annosa uetustas 
expugnet, quod non uertat iniqua dies.
grammata sola carent fato, mortemque repellunt: 
preterita renouant grammata sola biblis.
Hrabanus Maurus, Ad Eigilum
Acknowledgements
This book could not have been written without the help of numerous people. I 
gratefully acknowledge the time, the work and the manifold suggestions for 
improvement of Valerio Luigi Alberizzi, Rolf Bergmann, Jacopo Bisagni, Liam 
Breatnach, Rolf H. Bremmer Jr., Dagmar Bronner, Thomas Charles-Edwards, 
Franck Cinato, Michael Clarke, Simon Corcoran, David Cram, Richard Dance, 
David N. Dumville, Jan Fellerer, Jürg Fleischer, Elvira Glaser, Shami Gosh, Anna 
Grotans, Wolfgang Haubrichs, Marged Haycock, Ernst Hellgardt, Nikolaus 
Henkel, Dafydd Johnston, Teiji Kosukegawa, Henrike Lähnemann, Pierre-Yves 
Lambert, Rosamund McKitterick, Birgit Meineke, Pádraic Moran, Andreas Niev-
ergelt, Máire Ní Mhaonaigh, Dáibhi Ó Cróinín, Pádraig P. Ó Néill, Andy Orchard, 
Nigel F. Palmer, Erich Poppe, Arend Quak, Elisabeth Rieken, Paul Russell, Richard 
Sharpe, Patrick Sims-Williams, Stephanie Stricker, Marieken Teeuwen, Heinrich 
Tiefenbach, Paolo Vaciago, Lothar Voetz, John Whitman, Claudia Wich-Reif, 
Mark Williams, Jürgen Wolf and Matthew Zink. Needless to say, none of these 
colleagues is responsible for any remaining errors in this work.
I owe a great debt of gratitude to the British Academy, whose Postdoctoral 
Fellowship allowed me to undertake this project and to Corpus Christi College, 
Oxford, for hosting it. Furthermore I wish to thank Jesus College, Oxford, for 
their research grants, and the administrative staff of the Faculty of Medieval and 
Modern Languages, Oxford, whose support and efficiency enabled me to complete 
this book despite the pressures of teaching and administration. A special thanks 
is due to my colleagues at NINJAL, Tokyo and Toyama University, for generously 
hosting two truly inspiring research visits to Japan. 
The staff of various libraries have lent me their professional help: the Bodle-
ian and Taylor Institution Library, Oxford; St John’s College Library, Cambridge; 
the University Library, Cambridge; University College Library, Dublin; the British 
Library; the Lambeth Palace Library, London; the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana; 
the Universitätsbibliothek Heidelberg; the Niedersächsische Staats- und Univer-
sitätsbibliothek, Göttingen; the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, München; the Stu-
dienbibliothek Dillingen; the Bibliothèque nationale de France; the Universiteits-
bibliotheek Groningen and the Biblioteka Narodowa, Warsaw. 
On a more personal level I am deeply indebted to my family for their support 
and encouragement throughout, and to Piers Baker-Bates, Carl-Joakim Gagnon, 
Michael Ledger-Lomas, Ioanna Papaki, Rory Rapple, Kostas Skordyles and Snoepie. 
I dedicate this book to the years I lived in Shotover Cleve, where most of this book 
was written, often ‘in dürftiger Zeit’: semper in aeternum, o mea cella, uale.
Oxford, 4 October 2016
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements 
 VII
Table of Contents 
 IX
List of Abbreviations 
 XV
Part I
Chapter 1:	 Introduction and Scope 
 3
1.1	
Introduction  
 3
1.2	
Structure of the Book 
 5
1.3	
Summary 
 6
Chapter 2:	 Glosses and Glossing 
 9
2.1	
What is meant by the Word ‘Gloss’? 
 9
2.2.1	
Glosses and Glossators 
 12
2.2.2	
‘Paratextual Networks’: Glosses, Glossaries and 
Commentaries  
 14
2.3	
Glossing, Glosses and Glossaries in the Medieval West 
 16
2.4	
Functions and Types of Glossing 
 26
2.4.1	
Introduction 
 26
2.4.2	
Formal Aspects of Glossing: Script, Form and Location  
 27
2.4.3	
Functional Aspects of Glossing 
 29
2.4.3.1	
Substitution Glosses 
 29
2.4.3.2	
Supplement Glosses 
 32
2.4.3.3	
Commentary Glosses 
 34
Chapter 3:	 The Psalms 
 37
3.1	
The Psalms in Monastic Life 
 37
3.2	
The Text of the Latin Psalter 
 38
3.2.1	
Spread and Use of the Different Psalter Versions 
 40
3.2.2	
The Canticles 
 42
3.3	
Psalm Commentaries 
 42
3.3.1	
Introduction 
 42
3.3.2	
The Latin Fathers 
 44
3.3.3	
The Early Middle Ages 
 46
X 
 Table of Contents
3.4	
Psalm Headings (tituli), Collects and Prefaces 
 48
3.5	
Manuscript Presentation: Layout and Punctuation 
 50
Chapter 4:	 Two Psalters with Text Glossing: The Southampton and St Caimín 
Psalters 
 55
4.1	
Introduction 
 55
4.2	
The Southampton Psalter  
 55
4.2.1 	
The mise-en-page 
 56
4.2.2	
Analysis 
 58
4.2.2.1	
Latin Glossing 
 58
4.2.2.1.1	
The First Stratum (G1) 
 59
4.2.2.1.2	
The Second Stratum (G2) 
 62
4.2.2.2	
Irish Glossing 
 64
4.2.2.2.1	
The First Stratum (G1) 
 65
4.2.2.2.2	
The Second Stratum (G2) 
 69
4.2.2.2.3	
A Sample Analysis of Ps 77:46–47 
 73
4.3	
The Psalter of St Caimín 
 76
4.3.1	
The mise-en-page 
 76
4.3.2 	
Analysis 
 79
4.3.2.1	
Latin Glossing: Principal Text 
 79
4.3.2.2	
Irish Glossing: Principal Text 
 82
4.3.2.3	
Irish Glossing: Paratext 
 85
4.4	
Conclusion 
 87
Chapter 5:	 Two Glossed Commentaries: The Milan and Vatican 
Commentaries 
 91
5.1	
Introduction 
 91
5.2	
Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, C.301 inf  
 91
5.2.1	
Text and mise-en-page 
 92
5.2.1.1	
Principal Text 
 92
5.2.1.2	
Paratext 
 93
5.2.2	
Analysis 
 95
5.2.2.1	
Example 1  
 95
5.2.2.2	
Example 2 
 98
5.2.2.3	
Example 3  
 101
5.2.3	
Irish Glossing 
 104
5.2.3.1	
Form 
 104
5.2.3.2	
Function and Typology 
 108
5.2.4	
Latin Glossing 
 110
5.3	
Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Pal. lat. 68 
 112

Table of Contents 
 XI
5.3.1	
Principal Text 
 113
5.3.2	
Analysis 
 114
5.3.2.1	
Example 1  
 115
5.3.2.2	
Example 2 
 117
5.3.3	
Latin Glosses 
 118
5.3.4	
Old English Glosses  
 120
5.3.5	
Old Irish Glosses 
 122
5.3.5.1	
Substitution Glosses 
 123
5.3.5.2	
Commentary Glosses 
 126
5.4	
Conclusion 
 127
Part II
Chapter 6:	 Introduction to Interlinear Versions 
 131
6.1	
Introduction 
 131
6.2	
West Germanic Interlinear Versions 
 132
6.3	
Layout, Structure and Function of Interlinear Versions 
 135
Chapter 7:	 The Old Alemannic Psalter Fragments 
 141
7.1	
Manuscript and Principal Text 
 141
7.2	
Dialectal Affiliation, Date and Provenance 
 143
7.3	
Historical Background 
 145
7.4	
Analysis 
 146
7.5	
Punctuation 
 154
Chapter 8:	 The Vespasian Psalter 
 161
8.1	
Manuscript and Principal Text 
 161
8.2	
Dialect, Date and Provenance 
 162
8.3	
Analysis 
 164
8.3.1	
Substitution Glossing and Agreement 
 164
8.3.2	
Supplement Glossing 
 168
8.3.3	
Structure and Glossing Strategy 
 169
8.4	
Conclusion 
 172
Chapter 9:	 The ‘Lublin/Wittenberg’ Fragments 
 175
9.1	
Manuscript and Principal Text 
 175
9.2	
Script, Dialect and Provenance 
 177
9.3	
Analysis 
 180
XII 
 Table of Contents
9.3.1	
Types of Glossing and Agreement 
 180
9.3.2	
Structure and Glossing Strategy 
 185
9.4	
Conclusion 
 187
Chapter 10:	 The Regius Psalter 
 189
10.1	
Introduction 
 189
10.2	
Script and Text 
 190
10.3	
Analysis 
 192
10.3.1	
Layout, Substitution Glossing and Agreement  
 192
10.3.2	
Other Types of Glossing 
 197
10.3.2.1	
Supplement Glosses 
 197
10.3.2.2	
Commentary Glosses  
 199
10.3.3	
Structure and Glossing Strategy  
 200
10.4	
Conclusion 
 202
Chapter 11:	 The Paderborn Fragment 
 205
11.1	
Introduction 
 205
11.2	
Analysis 
 206
Chapter 12:	 The Lambeth Psalter 
 209
12.1	
Introduction  
 209
12.2	
Text and mise-en-page 
 210
12.3	
Analysis 
 213
12.3.1	
Construe Marks in the Principal Text 
 214
12.3.2	
Construe Marks in the Paratext 
 217
12.3.3	
Types of Glossing 
 221
12.3.3.1	
Substitution Glosses 
 221
12.3.3.2	
Supplement Glosses 
 223
12.3.3.3	
Commentary Glosses 
 226
12.3.4	
Structure and Glossing Strategy 
 226
12.4	
Conclusion 
 229
Chapter 13:	 The Old Frisian Psalter Fragment 
 231
13.1	
Introduction 
 231
13.2	
Analysis 
 233
Chapter 14:	 Interlinear Versions: Conclusion 
 241

Table of Contents 
 XIII
Part III
Chapter 15:	 Glossaries 
 245
15.1	
Introduction 
 245
15.2	
The Leiden/Rz Family and the Mondsee Glossary (M) 
 246
15.3	
The Relationship between Manuscripts Clm 19440 and Clm 
18140 
 250
15.3.1	
Introduction 
 250
15.3.2	
The Manuscripts 
 252
15.3.2.1	
Clm 19440 (BStK 665) 
 252
15.3.2.2	
Clm 18140 (BStK 637) 
 255
15.3.3	
Treatment of Material taken from Clm 19440 
 257
15.3.3.1	
General 
 257
15.3.3.2	
Glosses from Clm 10440 Altered in Transmission 
 260
15.3.4	
Material Not Derived from Clm 19440 
 267
15.3.4.1	
Substitution Glosses 
 267
15.3.4.2	
Other Additional Entries 
 268
15.3.4.3	
Commentary Glosses 
 270
15.3.5	
Latin and Old High German in Clm 19440 and Clm 18140 
 273
15.3.6	
Conclusion 
 281
Chapter 16:	 Glossing the Psalms: Comparisons and Conclusions 
 285
16.1	
Processes of Glossing: Compilation, Copying and 
Transmission 
 285
16.2	
Paratextual Networks 
 287
16.3	
Glossing: A Formal and Functional Analysis 
 288
16.4	
The Uses of Glossed Manuscripts and Glossaries  
 292
16.5	
Epilogue  
 293
Appendix: 	 Functions and Types of Glosses 
 295
Bibliography 
 297
Manuscript Index 
 323
Subject Index 
 327
List of Abbreviations
abl.	
ablative
acc.	
accusative
adj.	
adjective
adv.	
adverb
BAV	
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Vatican City
BL	
British Library, London
BM	
Bibliothèque municipale
BnF	
Bibliothèque nationale de France, Paris
Bodleian	
Bodleian Library, Oxford
BSB	
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Munich
CCCM	
Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis
CCSL	
Corpus Christianorum Series Latina
CSEL	
Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticarum Latinarum
dat.	
dative
fem.	
feminine
fut.	
future
gen.	
genitive
Grk.	
Classical Greek
impf.	
imperfect
impv.	
imperative
ind.	
indicative
Lat.	
Latin
masc.	
masculine
MDu	
Middle Dutch
MHG	
Middle High German
Ml	
Milan Glosses
MLG	
Middle Low German
neut.	
neuter
nom.	
nominative
OE	
Old English
OFri	
Old Frisian
OHG	
Old High German
OI	
Old Irish
ÖNB	
Österreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna
OS	
Old Saxon
part.	
participle
pass.	
passive
PBB	
Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur
perf.	
perfect
PL	
Patrologia Latina
pl.	
plural
poss.	
possessive
pres.	
present
pret. 	
preterite
XVI 
 List of Abbreviations
pron.	
pronoun
sg.	
singular
Sg	
St Gall Glosses
subj.	
subjunctive
Wb	
Würzburg Glosses
Part I
Chapter 1: Introduction and Scope
1.1 Introduction 
For native speakers of Celtic and Germanic languages in early medieval Europe, 
Latin was a foreign language that needed to be learned: literacy meant first and 
foremost Latin literacy.1 However, in order to become literate in that Mediterra-
nean language with its prestigious classical and Christian heritage, the surviving 
manuscript evidence suggests that, besides Latin itself, there was a developing 
role for the vernaculars. Some of the earliest manuscript attestations of the medi-
eval vernaculars of Western Europe therefore occur in the form of glosses: anno-
tations inserted into the Latin texts that were studied. Nonetheless, the unique 
window that glosses provide unto the emergence of the early European written 
vernaculars has yet to be explored. It is with this form of vernacular use, there-
fore, within an otherwise overwhelmingly Latinate context, that this book is con-
cerned.
The close study and comparison of these glossed manuscripts may tell us 
when and why scribes switched from Latin into the vernacular, how the vernac-
ular was used in studying Latin, how verbal glosses interact with other elements 
on the manuscript page such as construe marks and punctuation, and how such 
manuscripts were intended to be read. Only recently has the study of glosses and 
marginalia started to focus on broader issues such as their value as witnesses to 
literary and textual culture, the history of reading and the medieval transfer of 
learning: whereas the study of early medieval vernacular glosses tended until 
recently to be dominated by lexicographers and historical linguists, the last few 
decades have seen a broader and more interdisciplinary approach. This new 
interest has involved a more ‘holistic’ analysis of the entire manuscript context, 
including Latin glossing and other forms of annotation present on the page. This 
renewed interest in glossing has by now broadened its scope to study, among 
other things, the value of glosses as witnesses to literary and textual culture, 
the ways in which glosses were compiled and redacted, and the way in which 
they were used in medieval libraries and classrooms.2 However, while individual 
1 See, for example, Gneuss, ‘Study’; Brown, ‘Dynamics’, pp. 109–118.
2 Cf. Lapidge, ‘Study’; Wieland, ‘Glossed Manuscript’; Reynolds, ‘Glossing Horace’; Schiegg, 
Frühmittelalterliche Glossen. For the later Middle Ages, Hunt, Teaching, remains indispensable. 
A new milestone is Handbuch.
DOI 10.1515/9783110501865-001
4 
 Chapter 1: Introduction and Scope
instances of this phenomenon have been discussed, a large-scale comparison of 
early medieval glossing has not yet been undertaken.3
The recent attempts to trace the dynamics and the Sitz im Leben of glossing 
activity has firmly placed it within the wider context of the history of reading, 
writing and teaching in the medieval monasteries.4 Indeed, glosses have come to 
be regarded as the most important extant source for the study of all these forms 
of medieval literacy. It is glossing, together with other traces of active use such as 
probationes pennae, corrections and other forms of annotation, which can tell us 
anything about whether and how manuscripts were read. Thus, glosses are both 
the handmaiden of, and prime witnesses to, the early medieval acquisition, struc-
turing and exchange of knowledge and thought, as well as to its encyclopaedic 
compilation in the form of glossaries. The study of vernacular and Latin glossing 
therefore directly contributes, not only to the history of the book and that of liter-
acy in general, but also to the history of the exchange and appropriation of Latin 
learning. Glossing provides glimpses into the intellectual workshop of the medi-
eval monasteries and, more specifically, into textual appropriation, translation 
strategies and the role of multilingual communication, as they took place in the 
margins and between the lines of medieval manuscripts.5 
This volume therefore presents an innovative and interdisciplinary study of 
the glossing on one of the most frequently used and most intensively studied Latin 
texts of the Middle Ages: the Psalter. The Latin Psalter is particularly suitable for 
such an undertaking, as the central importance of the psalms in monastic life in 
the Middle Ages has resulted in a large number of surviving glossed psalters, glos-
saries and commentaries from Ireland, Anglo-Saxon England and the Frankish 
territories,6 constituting an early medieval ‘paratextual network’ (see 2.2.2 below) 
which should be studied as a whole. While most of these individual texts have 
received some attention in the past, they have not been included in a large-scale 
cross-disciplinary assessment. Moreover, previous studies have mostly focused 
on the English and German sources, leaving out the pivotally important material 
written in the Celtic languages, especially Irish. Equally important is the fact that 
most of the existing studies have appeared in languages other than English. Many 
3 Cf. Lambert, ‘Rencontres’; Lambert, ‘Commentaires’; Lapidge, ‘School’; Huws, ‘Welsh Manu­
script’; Dumville, ‘Writers’, pp. 56–60. Particularly relevant is Mittelalterliche volkssprachliche 
Glossen, ed. Bergmann/Glaser/Moulin.
4 For the role of scriptoria, see Scarpatetti, ‘St. Galler Scriptorium’, pp. 41–42.
5 Cf. Lendinara, ‘Glosses’, pp. 1–2; Irving, Textual Culture, pp. 390–393.
6 McNamara, Psalms, pp. 20–27; Gretsch, Intellectual Foundations, pp. 13–17. 

1.2 Structure of the Book 
 5
of the glossed texts and their modern scholarship are therefore here presented to 
the English-speaking public for the first time.
Combining historical sociolinguistics, comparative philology, manuscript 
studies and cultural history, this volume therefore assesses and compares the 
interface of Latin and several different European vernaculars in the context of 
medieval bilingual and multilingual textual culture. The extensive reach of the 
volume enables readers to explore and compare when, how and for what purpose 
the Old Irish, Old English and Continental Germanic vernaculars came to be 
employed. It seeks to recover, where possible, what criteria governed a scribe’s 
choice of glossing language and reading strategy in a period covering the seventh 
to the twelfth centuries and in an area stretching from Ireland to Central Europe.
1.2 Structure of the Book
This volume presents a comparative study of the types and functions of Latin 
and vernacular glossing. It treats the mise-en-page of a manuscript as a complete 
unit and concentrates on the understanding of the location and function of the 
glosses within what are complex and multi-layered texts.7 Introducing a new 
glossing typology which includes Latin glossing as well as non-verbal glossing 
such as construe marks and punctuation (see 2.4 below), the uses of vernacular 
glossing are studied in their manuscript context. In a carefully selected corpus 
of manuscripts from Ireland, Anglo-Saxon England and Germanic-speaking 
Europe, the written uses of Celtic (Old Irish) and Germanic (Old English, Old High 
German, Old Saxon and Old Frisian) vernaculars, hitherto mostly studied in iso-
lation, are compared and contrasted in their interface with Latin. The important 
glossing materials in the Brittonic Celtic languages, Welsh and Breton, could not 
be included as they do not concern the psalms.
This study consists of three parts. Each of the three concentrates on a selec-
tion of manuscripts representing a specific type of glossing activity: glossed 
psalters and glossed commentaries (part 1), interlinear versions (part 2) and a 
selection of glossaries (part 3), all written in a combination of Latin and various 
vernaculars. Individual chapters offer new insights into these texts and fre-
quently challenge received ideas on how the glosses were compiled, transmitted 
and used. The book’s chapters present detailed studies of different types of gloss-
ing in a selection of manuscripts, adopting a stimulating variety of perspectives 
and themes. In part 1, the introductory chapters 2 and 3 form a unity with chap-
7 Draak, ‘Construe Marks’; Dumville, ‘Thesaurus’.
6 
 Chapter 1: Introduction and Scope
ters 4 and 5, in that the concepts and methods set out in chapter 2 are illustrated 
by means of two psalters and two commentaries with vernacular glossing from 
the Irish tradition. Part 2, consisting of ten short chapters, shifts the attention to 
interlinear versions. In part 3, finally, chapter 15 treats another type of glossing, 
namely that of text glossaries. The final chapter 16 puts all the varied evidence for 
glossing the Psalms together, evaluating the concepts and methodologies set out 
in the introduction, summarising the results and putting these in a comparative 
European context. The book closes with an appendix on glossing typology and a 
full bibliography.
1.3 Summary
Chapter 2, ‘Glosses and Glossing’, provides the necessary historical, methodo-
logical and theoretical background to this volume. Thus, section 2.3 presents a 
general discussion and definition of glossing activity and introduces the con-
cepts used in this book (paratext, textual stratigraphy and redaction, paratextual 
network), section 2.4 provides a short history and overview of the glossing and 
glossary tradition in the early medieval West, whereas section 2.5 describes the 
various forms and functions which glossing might take and proposes a new typo­
logy, based on textual and linguistic function (substitution, supplementation and 
commentary). 
Chapter 3, ‘The Psalms’, subsequently provides the necessary cultural, textual 
and historical background on the role of the Psalter in monastic life during the 
period covered by this book, and that immediately preceding it. 
Chapter 4, ‘Psalters with Text Glossing’, illustrates the concepts and methods 
presented in chapter 2 with a thorough analysis of two highly complex and mul-
ti-layered texts: the only surviving psalters containing glosses in the Irish ver-
nacular as well as in Latin. The Southampton Psalter and the Psalter of St Caimín 
both date from the eleventh century, even if the glosses can be shown to be signi­
ficantly older. Following the method of comparative analysis set out in chapter 2, 
the analysis centres on the mise-en-page of the two manuscripts as a complete 
unit. Thus, various types of paratext are analysed and traced, the different layers 
of textual accretion in Latin and Irish are identified, and their interaction and 
interrelationship studied in section 4.3.3. The notion of ‘paratextual networks’ is 
illustrated by an analysis of the sources and interrelationships of the paratext, 
both Latin and Irish, with other extant, sometimes much older, manuscripts. 
Most importantly, however, the Latin and the vernacular paratext is compared 
and contrasted in terms of form, script and location on the page, as well as in 
terms of function (substitution, supplementation, commentary) and the extent to 

1.3 Summary 
 7
which it is part of the matrix syntax of the principal text. It is likely that notions of 
textual hierarchy, which also applied to the use of script, informed the different 
uses of Latin and Irish. Perhaps the vernacular was not regarded as prestigious 
enough to be a means of commenting on the ipsissima verba of the Bible, but was 
regarded as a fitting means of glossing its authoritative paratext.
Chapter 5, ‘Glossed Commentaries’, develops the concepts (principal versus 
paratext, textual stratigraphy and redaction, paratextual network) and methods 
(functional typology) introduced previously and extends the analysis presented 
in chapter 4 to a thorough study of the only two surviving psalter commentar-
ies containing glosses in Latin and the Irish and, in the second case, Irish and 
Old English vernaculars: the Milan Commentary dating from around 800 and the 
Vatican Commentary from the mid-eighth century. Again the focus lies on the 
mise-en-page as a complete unit, demonstrating how the Latin and vernacular 
items and the non-verbal glossing (in the shape of punctuation and construe 
marks) function in relation to each other and to the principal text of the Latin 
Psalter they seek to explain. The chapter illustrates how the Milanese manu-
script constitutes a highly complicated text in which Latin and Old Irish glosses, 
together with different systems of diacritical marks, form a complex reading 
system in aid of understanding the Latin commentary. A detailed discussion of 
the Vatican Commentary bears out that such commentaries, when seen as part 
of a paratextual network surrounding the Psalter consisting of Latin and vernac-
ular material, are often very close to what are usually called glossaries. It is also 
demonstrated that some of the paratext in these commentaries, both Latin and 
Irish, also occurs in the two glossed psalters discussed in the previous chapter 
and is a further indication of the interconnectedness of psalters, commentaries 
and glossaries on the psalms. 
The second part of the book, consisting of chapters 6 to 14, shifts the atten-
tion to a different type of glossing only found in the West Germanic languages: 
the continuous interlinear gloss, or interlinear version. A theoretical introduction 
(chapter 6) synthesises previous scholarship – for the greater part never before 
discussed in English – and sets out this glossing technique’s antique roots and 
later medieval development. Subsequently a thorough linguistic analysis is pre-
sented of the layout, grammar, function and pragmatics of a selection of psal-
ters with continuous vernacular glossing in Old English, Old High German, Old 
Saxon and Old Frisian from the ninth to the twelfth centuries. This selection of 
manuscripts shows that interlinear versions occur in psalters with many dif-
ferent uses: classroom book, liturgy, private study and devotion. The separate 
manuscript studies also add a wealth of new information on aspects such as the 
Latin text used, palaeography, punctuation, Latin glossing, and cultural and his-
torical background. A comparison of these manuscripts, finally, illustrates the 
8 
 Chapter 1: Introduction and Scope
resemblances and connections, but especially the striking differences between 
the Anglo-Saxon and Continental interlinear glossing strategies. It shows that the 
forms and uses of interlinear versions are much more variable and complicated 
than hitherto thought and in some cases show many resemblances to commen-
taries and glossaries. 
Chapter 16, ‘Glossaries’, forms the mainstay of the third part of the book, 
which treats a further type of glossing, namely the text glossary. Even though the 
biblical glossaries of early medieval Europe originated in the Anglo-Saxon world, 
this chapter focuses specifically on the tradition as it developed once it been 
introduced to the German-speaking area, as this material has rarely before been 
discussed in English. The chapter opens with a survey of the extant Continen-
tal material and the textual connections with both its Anglo-Saxon antecedents 
as well as its later development on the Continent. The remainder of the chapter 
focuses on two closely related eleventh-century manuscripts associated with the 
abbey of Tegernsee in southern Bavaria: Clm 19440 and Clm 18140. The glossaries 
in these two manuscripts, with entries in Latin and Old High German, are situated 
within their complex mutual paratextual relationships and the overarching tradi-
tion of biblical glossaries and commentaries as a whole. The case study contains 
a detailed analysis of the manner in which the scribe of Clm 18140 excerpted Latin 
and Old High German glosses from Clm 19440, as well as a thorough investigation 
of the material derived from other sources, both Latin and vernacular, which can 
be mostly identified within the library at Tegernsee itself. The chapter therefore 
provides a unique window unto those processes central to the book at large – the 
compilation of glosses and glossaries, the copying and adding of entries, and the 
language choices and changes of dialect this may have entailed – and thus sheds 
new light on the respective roles of Latin and vernacular in the compilation of 
glossaries and the study and teaching of Scripture in general. 
Chapter 17, ‘Glossing the Psalms: Comparisons and Conclusions’, finally, 
puts all the varied evidence for glossing the psalms together, evaluating the con-
cepts and methodologies set out in the introduction, summarising the results and 
putting these in a comparative European context. The themes considered in this 
final chapter include the processes of glossing (compilation, copying and trans-
mission); vernacular language use and language choice, including code-switch-
ing; glossing strategies (substitution, supplementation, commentary); reading 
strategies of glossed manuscripts (the pragmatics of punctuation, construe 
marks, and verbal glossing in their various combinations); the uses of glossed 
manuscripts and glossaries (classroom, liturgy, private devotion, study), and the 
coherence of the glossing tradition on the psalms in terms of paratextual net-
works in Latin and the various vernaculars. The chapter concludes with reflec-
tions on the significant cultural and historical role of glossing.
Chapter 2: Glosses and Glossing
2.1 What is meant by the Word ‘Gloss’?
The study of marginalia, and of glosses in particular, is still a rather marginal 
area of philological study. However, glossing is a very common, and perhaps even 
universal, activity in written cultures all over the world. Indeed, glossing is not 
only typical for the Western tradition, nor is it limited to the European Middle 
Ages.8 Moreover, glossing is not necessarily limited to written cultures. In fact, 
it has been suggested that glosses are intrinsic to language, functioning as a 
metalinguistic aid to elucidate inevitable complexities of homonymy and poly-
semy arising in any utterance. As such, glosses may ultimately find their origin 
in spoken language.9 Therefore, even though this study deals primarily with its 
written manifestations, it is helpful to think of glossing not only in terms of a 
final product, but as a recursive process, especially in those cases where para-
textual elements are added, possibly repeatedly, onto other elements of precisely 
the same type, that is, gloss-on-gloss, or commentary-on-commentary. The recur-
sive properties of glossing, as a process, link it theoretically to very powerful and 
pervasive reflexive properties in natural language.10 These features suggest that 
the practice of reading and writing glosses, summarised in the words of William 
of Conches (ca. 1090–after 1154) as aliorum superflua recidentes, pretermissa 
addentes, obscura elucidantes, male dicta remouentes, bene dicta imitantes ‘the 
cutting of superfluous additions by others, adding which has been omitted, eluci-
dating obscure things, removing what is badly put, imitating what is well said’,11 
must be regarded as a rule, rather than an exception, within any literate culture. 
In fact, glossing should be seen as a prototypical aspect of literary practice, and 
8 Interesting parallels can be found, for example, in the early medieval Sinosphere. In Japan, 
a complicated system of kunten marks was used from the eighth century onwards to clarify the 
meaning and grammatical construction of texts in Classical Chinese; see Harumichi, ‘Japanese 
and Korean Devices’; Komai/Rohlich, Introduction. A similar system, known as kugyŏl, was used 
in Korea; see King, ‘kugyŏl Glosses’. On the East Asian glossing material in general, see Whit-
man, ‘Ubiquity’. For an attempt to apply Western terminology to the East Asian material, see 
Whitman/Oh/Park/Alberizzi/Tsukimoto/Kosukegawa/Takada, ‘International Vocabulary’. For a 
first comparison of the medieval European and East Asian traditions, see Whitman’s, Kosukega-
wa’s and Alberizzi’s contributions in Whitman/Cinato, Lecture vernaculaire.
9 Julia, Fixer le sens, p. 11.
10 D. Cram (p. c.).
11 William of Conches, Glosae super Platonem, prologus; cited in Caiazzo, Lectures, p. 51.
DOI 10.1515/9783110501865-002
10 
 Chapter 2: Glosses and Glossing
its early medieval manifestations are part of a tradition which, despite many 
changes and transformations, continues until the present day. 
Even so, the term gloss is in need of closer definition. As a rule, a gloss cannot 
exist on its own, because its stands in a genetic, more or less specific, relation 
with a part of the text which carries it. The written utterance, whether a single 
word or a group of words, to which the gloss is responding, and to which it is 
inseparably linked, is called its lemma.12 A lemma can generate a large variety 
of different types of glosses. In order to account for this variety, therefore, a clear 
definition, as well as a typology of form and function needs to be outlined at the 
start. 
Scholarship on glossing has hitherto been somewhat hampered by the various 
uses of the term gloss.13 The word gloss itself is derived from Greek γλῶσσα, lit-
erally ‘tongue’ or ‘language’, but also an ‘(obscure) word’.14 Borrowed into Latin 
as glossa it came to mean ‘a difficult word to be explained’.15 A derived form glos­
(ul)a ‘commentary’ added further to the range of meanings attached to the term, 
with the result that long texts providing a running commentary on another text, 
for example the Glossa Ordinaria, a twelfth-century commentary on the Bible, 
are also known as a ‘gloss’. Even so, these definitions only account for a small 
part of the secondary additions which can be found in any annotated manuscript. 
Recent research has therefore indicated that the traditional ‘Isidorian’ definition 
of a gloss as an ‘explicative note on a rare or obscure word’,16 should be aban-
doned in favour of a (much) broader definition, in order to include anything on 
the page which is not text proper, but which is intended to comment on the text.17 
In any annotated manuscript two types of graphic elements can be distin-
guished. On the one hand there is the principal text, on the other the paratext, 
which classifies a given manuscript as ‘annotated’ or ‘glossed’. Normally these 
paratextual elements are distinguished by their different script and position on 
the page, marking them as secondary elements provided to guide and facilitate 
the reading of the principal text.18 The use of a ‘hierarchy of scripts’ and differ-
12 Holtz, ‘Glossaires’, p. 20.
13 Cinato, GLOSE, pp. 77–81.
14 Liddell/Scott, Lexicon, p. 143.
15 Lewis/Short, Latin Dictionary, p. 818.
16 Isidore, Etymologiae 1.30.1, ed. Lindsay (no page nos). Discussed in Irving, Textual Culture, 
p. 221.
17 Tura, ‘Essai’, pp. 299–303; Holtz, ‘Glossaires’; Wieland, ‘Latin Lemma’, p. 96; Wieland, Gloss-
es, pp. 6–7.
18 Holtz, ‘Manuscrits’, p. 142. Cf. Irvine, Textual Culture, p. 392: ‘The manuscript layout [of text 
and gloss] discloses that a text is a sign, the meaning of which can only be represented in an-

2.1 What is meant by the Word ‘Gloss’? 
 11
ent colours to indicate the differing status of principal and paratext predates the 
Caro­lingian period, but was formalised in the ninth century.19 Together with other 
secondary additions such as titles, rubrics, arguments, introductions, various 
accessus, but also corrections, correction notes and commentaries, glosses must 
be regarded as a subcategory of paratextual elements, which act as supplements 
to a particular principal text and dynamically interact with it.20 This subcategory 
eventually developed into the modern footnote, which started to replace mar-
ginal and interlinear paratext from the seventeenth century onwards.21 
Glosses, like other forms of paratext, modify the reading and understand-
ing of a given principal text by providing aids on various levels: lexical, morpho­
logical, syntactical and semantic. While glosses predominately consist of words, 
word-groups, or phrases in one or more languages, they can also appear as 
single letters or abstract graphic signs. This form of glossing is best referred to 
as non-verbal glossing, as opposed to verbal glossing.22 In some cases non-ver-
bal glossing includes punctuation, which is in fact one of the most commonly 
attested forms of paratext.23 However, whereas punctuation is always part of the 
paratext, it does not necessarily constitute a form of glossing (see 2.5 below). For 
this reason in this book punctuation is only analysed in detail where it is part of 
the glossing paratext (in particular in 7.5 below). For all the above considerations, 
in this study I follow the usefully broad definition of a written gloss as formulated 
by Franck Cinato: ‘toute augmentation péri-textuelle qui précise ou diversifie l’in-
formation contenue dans un texte principal’:24 the sum of paratextual accretion 
which specifies and diversifies the information contained within a principal text.
other text – the gloss – in another textual space, a space in which the interior meaning of a text 
is disclosed.’
19 McKitterick, ‘Glossaries’, pp. 27–28. Cf. Caillet, ‘Caractères’; Martin/Vezin, Mise en page.
20 Moulin, ‘Zwischenzeichen’, p. 1662; Genette, Paratexte, p. 12.
21 Grafton, Footnote; Genette, Paratexte, pp. 304–327.
22 By contrast, signes-de-renvoi are excluded from this category, because they visually guide the 
reader from the lemma to the gloss without commenting on the lemma. 
23 Early medieval punctuation remains an understudied area, and more work needs to be done 
before its paratextual nature can be discussed more fully. See Garavelli, Storia; Parkes, Pause 
and Effect. 
24 Cinato, GLOSE, p. 79; Cinato, ‘Gloses’, pp. 429–444.
12 
 Chapter 2: Glosses and Glossing
2.2.1 Glosses and Glossators
The totality of glosses in any manuscript is the result of a process consisting of 
three different activities:25 the composition of original glosses, the selection and 
compilation of existing glosses and the physical copying of glosses. A glossator 
may undertake some or all of these activities while producing, editing, or revising 
a manuscript. One or more of these activities may also be undertaken by any sub-
sequent specialist reader of the manuscript, most usually thought of as a glossa-
tor, either for personal use or for other readers.
The process of transmission often gives rise to complex problems of chro-
nology and authorship. Elements that have been added initially by the author 
of the principal text (frequently including titles and introductions), henceforth 
called ‘authorial paratext’ (paratexte auctorial), must therefore be differentiated 
from those which have been added later on by third parties, henceforth called 
‘allogenic paratext’ (paratexte allogène).26 In her reflections on the author’s role 
in glossing, Anne Grondeux distinguished, at the level of content, the original 
gloss, perhaps no longer extant, from the extant written gloss, and, at the level 
of palaeography, between an anonymous hand and the hand of a known author. 
It follows that a gloss can only be ascribed to a known author when it is both 
original and in the hand of a known individual.27 Authorial glossing in Latin has 
survived from, for example, Boniface (672–754),28 John Scot Eriugena (815–877)29 
and Heiric of Auxerre (841–876).30 Little of the kind has survived in Old Irish, but 
vernacular glosses survive from Eriugena,31 and Irish names are often recorded 
as authorities in marginal glosses. Old High German examples are Otfrid of Weis-
senburg (ca. 800–ca. 870),32 Notker of St Gall (950–1022), Froumund of Tegernsee 
(ca. 960–ca. 1008)33 and Ekkehart IV of St Gall (ca. 980–ca. 1056).34 Similarly, Old 
English glosses survive by Bishop Wulfstan of York (died 1023), whose hand – at 
least, the hand that Neil Ker convincingly argues is his – appears in a handful of 
25 Holtz, ‘Manuscrits’, pp. 142–146.
26 Bain, ‘Paratexte biblique’.
27 Cinato, ‘Gloses’, pp. 439–440, referring to Grondeux, ‘Auctoritas’.
28 That is, if the hand of ‘Glossator A’ in the Fulda manuscript of the Latin version of Tatian’s 
Diatessaron is correctly identified as that of Boniface, see Parkes, ‘Handwriting’, pp. 161–179.
29 Jeauneau/Dutton, Autograph.
30 Hofman, ‘Glosses’.
31 Contreni/Ó Néill, Glossae, pp. 40–55.
32 Kleiber, ‘Otfrid’.
33 Moulin, ‘Froumund’.
34 Bergmann/Tax, ‘Ekkehart IV’. 

2.1 What is meant by the Word ‘Gloss’? 
 13
manuscripts, most famously in MS Hatton 20, where it glosses Alfred’s Preface to 
the Pastoral Care.35 In other cases the identity of the scribe entering the glosses 
is known, even though it is likely that he copied them from an exemplar. An 
example is the case of Aldred, who entered the Old English glosses in the Lindis-
farne Gospels and the Durham Ritual Book somewhere between 950 and 970.36 
In most cases, however, the question of authorship can only be answered in 
more general terms. The glossators discussed in this book are therefore mostly 
anonymous. They are carriers and mediators of early medieval written culture, 
mostly members of (Benedictine) monastic communities, who had access to 
the relevant texts in a scriptorium or library, either for the sake of teaching or 
for private study.37 However, even in the much more frequent anonymous cases 
questions such as: ‘Who wrote what?’, ‘For whom?’, ‘To what purpose?’ and 
‘When and where?’ can be asked. Still, in order to answer such questions for any 
given manuscript, the basic matters of stratigraphy (palaeography) and redac-
tion (textual history) need to be established first.38 The role of oral elaboration 
and transmission of glosses must also be taken into account, despite the written 
nature of the available evidence.
Comparison with other glossed manuscripts of the same principal text will 
often reveal a great deal of overlap, but, while individual glosses often are not 
original, most manuscripts will contain an overall collection of glosses which is 
unique. If a manuscript had once been in the private ownership of, say, a master, 
then the addition of glosses in another hand may indicate a change of ownership. 
If it had been in common ownership in a monastery library, this is not necessarily 
the case. In both scenarios, however, a manuscript would normally have passed 
through several, often many, different hands. Frequently, therefore, glosses can 
be seen to form separate strata: diachronical sequences of layers written in sepa-
rate hands, which can be identified on palaeographical grounds and which form 
the stratigraphy of a glossed manuscript (an example will be discussed under 
4.3.3 below). Establishing this stratigraphy allows for a relative dating of the 
different layers of accretion. Furthermore, when new glosses were entered in a 
manuscript, existing glosses were sometimes corrected, or expanded with other 
material.39 Thus, by a gradual process of accretion and emendation, they form 
35 Dance, ‘Wulfstan’s Language’. However, note that even for the later Middle Ages establishing 
authorial paratext is difficult; cf. Moulin, ‘Zwischenzeichen’, p. 1663 fn. 15.
36 Backhouse, Lindisfarne Gospels, p. 11; Kendrick, Codex Lindisfarnensis, I, p. 23 and II, p. 11; 
Ker, ‘Aldred’. 
37 Bergmann, ‘Ansätze’, pp. 1544–1546.
38 For the following, see Cinato, GLOSE, pp. 103–105.
39 Lendinara, ‘Glosses’, pp. 4–5.
14 
 Chapter 2: Glosses and Glossing
different redactions which can only be established by detailed collation with 
other glossed manuscripts.40
Finally, glossing activity did not merely result from ‘spontaneous’ interaction 
with a given text in the form of interlinear and marginal additions, but consti-
tuted a carefully planned activity reflected in the layout of a manuscript page, 
for example, by deliberately leaving space for glosses and commentaries.41 Such 
manuscripts were not only mediators of a specific text or texts, but were meant to 
constitute ‘reservoirs of knowledge’ (Claudine Moulin calls them ‘Wissensräume’) 
resulting from a continuous, dynamic interaction with the principal text.42 Such 
manuscripts are scholarly collections as much as they are educational tools, and 
they generate new learning as much as they teach old learning.43 Glosses should 
therefore be regarded as three-way mediators between a principal text, its com-
mentary tradition and the teachers or readers.
2.2.2 ‘Paratextual Networks’: Glosses, Glossaries and Commentaries 
It will be clear from the foregoing that written glosses rarely represent sponta­
neous reactions of a reader, whether a teacher or student. The dynamic relation-
ship between a principal text and its glossing tradition may lead to what Claudine 
Moulin has dubbed paratextual networks (‘Paratextuelle Netzwerke’), especially 
when various layers of glossing are added subsequently.44 Furthermore, such 
‘networks’ indicate that, although paratext cannot come into being without a 
principal text, it can nevertheless survive and develop further without one. 
A case in point is the compilation and subsequent transmission of glossaries. 
The term ‘glossary’ is a modern category distinction. In fact, the Latin term glos-
sarium itself is not found until the thirteenth century, and what are now called 
glossaries were titled glossae or interpretationes in earlier manuscripts.45 Such 
glossaries came into being in different ways. On the one hand, the medieval acti­
vities of compilatio and ordo often led to the excerpting of glosses from glossed 
manuscripts (‘Textglossierung’) into collections of so-called glossae collectae.46 
40 For this reason the representation of this type of material frequently leads to difficulties and 
variety in modern editorial practice; cf. Teeuwen, ‘Marginal Scholarship’, p. 20.
41 Bergmann, ‘Geplante Glossierung’.
42 Klaes/Moulin, ‘Wissensraum’. In general, see Ash, ‘Räume’.
43 Teeuwen, ‘Marginal Scholarship’, pp. 22–23.
44 Moulin, ‘Zwischenzeichen’, p. 1664; Moulin, ‘Paratextualle Netzwerke’.
45 Holtz, ‘Glossaires’.
46 Sauer, ‘Glosses’, pp. 22–23; Lendinara, ‘Glosses’, pp. 8–11; Lindsay, Glossaries, pp. 1–16.

2.1 What is meant by the Word ‘Gloss’? 
 15
Such collections consist of lemmas with their interpretations following the order 
of the principal text, and form text glossaries (‘Textglossare’).47 Such a collec-
tion could subsequently be organised on other principles, forming, for example, 
topical glossaries (‘Sachglossare’)48 or alphabetically-ordered glossaries.49 
Alphabetisation existed in the ancient world, of course, but it appears to have 
been early medieval glossaries that marked a major phase in the development 
of this particular method of organizing information in Western texts.50 However, 
not all glossaries were composed from scratch, that is, not compiled from text 
glosses. Indeed, almost certainly the Greek-Latin Hermeneumata were not created 
in this way, as well as later glossaries such as the medieval Irish O’Mulconry Glos-
sary (see 2.3 below).51
However, the transmission of glossaries is not merely one of passive copying 
from exemplars. The material was constantly in flux and adapted to various 
needs, implying an active role on behalf of the scribes (cf. chapter 15).52 Further-
more, material from glossaries would subsequently often find its way back into 
the marginal and interlinear glossing of the principal text, constituting a striking 
circular process between various genres of genetically related text-carriers. For 
this reason the present book discusses glossed psalters as well as glossaries and 
glossed commentaries on the psalms.
Glossaries therefore have their own specific paratextual connection with their 
principal texts. Indeed, many text-glossaries follow the principal text closely and 
their lemmas are identical to those in the principal text. In these cases, the para-
text, even though it is preserved within a different written medium, is very closely 
related, genetically speaking, to its principal text. This (grammatical, semantic, 
genetic) closeness shall be indicated as text proximity (‘Textnähe’), and its corre-
sponding distance as text distance (‘Textferne’). To the latter category belong, for 
example, alphabetically ordered glossaries which have lost their genetic close-
ness to a specific principal text; its entries have become (almost) universally valid.
The accretion of glossing activity into larger collections of glosses, which in 
themselves tended to grow into sizeable corpora, can be traced in various spheres 
throughout the course of the Middle Ages, especially for legal and biblical texts. 
This paratextual accretion developed into the typical presentation of a principal 
47 Wich-Reif, ‘Textglossar’; Wich-Reif, Studien.
48 Lendinara, ‘Glosses’, pp. 12–14; Hüllen, English Dictionaries, pp. 60–66.
49 Stricker, ‘Zur Typisierung’; Stanton, Culture, pp. 16–22; Lendinara, ‘Glosses’, pp. 14–17.
50 McKitterick, ‘Glossaries’, p. 44. Cf. Daly, Contributions.
51 I follow the opinion of P. Moran (p. c.).
52 McKitterick, ‘Glossaries’, pp. 57–62. Cf. Bremmer, ‘Vossianus Lat. Q.69’, pp. 19–53.
16 
 Chapter 2: Glosses and Glossing
text simultaneously with extensive running paratext in the margins and between 
the lines.53 However, this development did not take place without criticism. 
Indeed, the relative overload and the increasing opaqueness of paratextual ele-
ments with regards to their principal texts led authors as far apart in time as Gott­
fried von Strassburg (ca. 1200) and Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592) to complain 
bitterly about it.54 
2.3 Glossing, Glosses and Glossaries in the Medieval West
The early medieval practice of glossing Latin texts is rooted in the late-antique 
tradition, and more specifically in the Greek textual practice of compiling scholia, 
commentaries, lexica and grammatical treatises, in which it originates.55 There-
fore, even though this book focuses primarily on vernacular glossing, Latin gloss-
ing and Latin glossaries are intricately related to this study: they form the neces-
sary background to it and therefore have to be discussed in some detail.
The antique sources of early medieval Latin glossing and glossaries were 
manifold, but the greater part by far was taken up by the work of late-antique 
lexicographers, above all the second-century grammarian Sextus Pompeius 
Festus’ De significatu uerborum,56 as well as Nonius Marcellus’ fourth-century De 
compendiosa doctrina, mostly known through Paul the Deacon’s eighth-century 
epitome.57 Also used were Fulgentius’ Expositio sermonum antiquorum,58 Placi-
dus’ Glossae,59 Eucherius of Lyon’s Glossae spiritales,60 and Isidore of Seville’s 
Etymologiae,61 the last being one of the foundational works of medieval learning. 
Other important sources of Latin glossing were late-antique scholia on school 
authors cited by grammarians such as Servius and Priscian, as well as collections 
53 For a relevant discussion of this typical mise-en-page, see Gibson, ‘Glossed Psalters’, pp. 78–
100. The classic study is Smalley, Study, pp. 46–52. On the tradition of the Glossa Ordinaria and its 
typical mise-en-page, see Gibson, ‘Place’; Gibson, ‘Glossed Bible’. Cf. Holtz, ‘Glosse’, pp. 80–83.
54 Based on Moulin, ‘Zwischenzeichen’, p. 1666.
55 Dickey, Greek Scholarship, pp. 1–7, and p. 11 fn. 25.
56 Festus, De verborum significatu, ed. Lindsay; cf. the report of the AHRC Festus Lexicon pro-
ject, directed by F. Glinister, M. Crawford, J. North and C. Woods: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/history2/
research/festus/.
57 Nonius Marcellus, De compendiosa doctrina, ed. Lindsay. 
58 Fulgentius, Opera, ed. Préaux/Helm, pp. 109–126.
59 CGL, V, pp. 3–158; GL, IV, pp. 3–35.
60 Eucherius, Instructiones, ed. Mandolfo; Eucherius, Opera, ed. Wotke, pp. 65–161. 
61 Isidore, Etymologiae, ed. Lindsay.

2.3 Glossing, Glosses and Glossaries in the Medieval West 
 17
of Latin synonyms (differentiae) such as the widespread Synonyma Ciceronis.62 
Additionally, Latin explanations of Greek words and phrases could be found in 
the Cyrillus Glossary and the Hermeneumata, schoolbooks designed for the teach-
ing of vocabulary and idiom in both languages.63 There were also a number of 
classical and late-antique discussions and compilations of specialized vocabu-
lary in the fields of medicine, law and literature, as well as biblical names, such 
as Jerome’s Liber interpretationis hebraicorum nominum and Hebraicae quaes-
tiones in libro Geneseos.64 The fact that the Bible became a major resource for 
glossary compilers is an obvious consequence of the process of Christianization 
in the late Roman and early medieval worlds.65
It is not entirely clear how these various sources came to be organized in the 
form of collections and glossaries, because of the dearth of manuscript evidence 
before the eighth century. Therefore, paradoxically, in many cases glossaries 
predate glossed manuscripts. As Rosamund McKitterick notes, ‘the gap between 
the first composition of any of the original Roman (or Greek) sources […] and their 
earliest manuscripts means that the new contexts for these texts and possible 
adaptations made to them need to be taken into account.’66 Also, the transmis-
sion of these collections should not be seen as static and copied like any other 
ancient text, but as an ‘inherited format from antiquity that lent itself to adapta-
tion (by alphabetization or the modification of oblique lemmata to the standard-
ized (usually nominative) forms), classification (by thematic groupings of words) 
and selection (by the transfer of particular words or groups of words into new 
lists)’ in order to serve different needs, and therefore difficult to date.67 
These early medieval glossaries are predominantly Latin glossaries, with 
Latin words glossed in Latin, and compiled primarily in the areas ruled by the 
Franks and to a lesser extent in Anglo-Saxon England. However, some Latin-Latin 
glossaries, such as the Épinal, Erfurt and Werden glossaries, also contain items in 
the vernacular, either as integral parts of the definitions or as interlinear inser-
62 Synonima Ciceronis, ed. Gatti.
63 Dionisotti, ‘Hermeneumata’. Cf. Dionisotti, ‘Greek Grammars’; Dionisotti, ‘Schoolbook’.
64 Vaciago, Glossae Biblicae. Cf. O’Sullivan, Glosses, pp. 102–130. Jerome’s two works can be 
found in Jerome, Opera, ed. Morin, I, pp. 1–56 and 59–161, respectively. For analysis, see Kamesar, 
Jerome.
65 McKitterick, ‘Glossaries’, p. 50.
66 Ibid., pp. 51–52 lists the earliest manuscripts.
67 Ibid., p. 57; Dionisotti, ‘Nature’, pp. 205 and 242–247. Even so, alphabetisation is often regard-
ed as a more ‘sophisticated’ way of ordering the material. However, since it is constitutes a very 
simple, mechanical process, the notion that it represents progress is very much a matter of per-
spective.
18 
 Chapter 2: Glosses and Glossing
tions, whereas other Latin-vernacular glossaries, like the Old High German Abro-
gans, are clearly based on Latin-Latin glossaries.68 Such vernacular glossaries 
will be discussed in more detail below.
Several stages can be identified in the early medieval development of Lat-
in-Latin glossaries, all of which are commonly referred to by their first lemma. 
The first of two main groups can be traced to two seventh-century glossaries, 
probably compiled in Spain, which were to become very influential: the Aboli-
ta,69 mainly based on Festus, and the Abstrusa,70 mainly compiled from scholia 
on Vergil and Terence. In the eighth century these two glossaries were combined 
in a manuscript of Central Italian provenance,71 which in its turn would form the 
basis for a number of further glossaries, such as Arma,72 Abauus,73 Abba,74 AA,75 
and Affatim.76 The combination of Abolita and Abstrusa, together with material 
from Placidus, Isidore and a plethora of patristic writings, resulted in the most 
influential glossary of the early Middle Ages: the enormous Liber glossarum, or 
Glossarium Ansileubi, an encyclopedia-like dictionary.77 
The second group of glossaries ultimately derives from the teaching, on the 
Bible and a range of other texts, of Archbishop Theodore of Tarsus and Abbot 
Hadrian in their school at Canterbury in the seventh century. Their notes survive 
in the shape of batches of glossae collectae, in Latin and Old English, in continen-
tal manuscripts. These glosses, ultimately from Canterbury, greatly influenced 
biblical exegesis in the West until they were finally replaced in the twelfth century 
by the Glossa Ordinaria.78
The Carolingian schools of the ninth century subsequently produced their 
own sizeable corpus of Latin glosses and glossaries, mostly on much-read school 
authors such as Boethius and Martianus Capella. Thus, marginal glosses and 
scholia were collected in order to compile commentaries, while the resulting com-
68 McKitterick, ‘Glossaries’, p. 41.
69 GL, II, pp. 91–183; Lindsay, ‘Abolita’.
70 GL, II, pp. 1–90.
71 CGL, IV, pp. 1–198.
72 GL, I, pp. 1–22.
73 GL, I, pp. 23–121.
74 GL, V, pp. 7–143; CGL, IV, pp. 199–298.
75 GL, V, pp. 145–388; CGL, V, pp. 433–490.
76 CGL, IV, pp. 471–581.
77 GL, I; excerpts in CGL V, pp. 159–255.Cf. Gantz, ‘Liber Glossarum’; Bishop, ‘Prototype’; Lind-
say, ‘Abstrusa’; Goetz, ‘Liber Glossarum’. A new edition is currently being prepared by Anne 
Grondeux et al. Since this book went to press it has become clear that the date of the Liber and its 
relationship with other glossaries is radically different than outlined here.
78 Stanton, Culture, pp. 22–27; Lapidge/Bischoff, Biblical Commentaries.

2.3 Glossing, Glosses and Glossaries in the Medieval West 
 19
mentaries were excerpted again to be worked into marginal glosses. The most 
industrious Carolingian commentator and glossator was Remigius of Auxerre 
(841–908), but other notable scholars were John Scot Eriugena, Lupus of Ferrières 
(805–62) and Heiric of Auxerre. A parallel to this development can be seen in 
the Byzantine tradition as represented in the tenth-century Suda (Σοῦδα), which 
developed in a similar manner from earlier Greek compilations such as those of 
Aristophanes, Harpocration, Aelius Dionysius and a lost second-century work 
of Diogenianus.79 Even so, ‘from Byzantium there does not seem to be quite the 
same abundance and variety of early medieval glossaries, so diverse in their per-
mutations and combinations, which survive from Western Europe in the eighth 
and ninth centuries.’80 
However, a distinctive feature of glossing activity in the West is the develop-
ing role of the vernaculars. The custom of glossing in the vernacular as well as 
in Latin first occurs in Ireland, and subsequently in Britain. During the seventh 
century the Irish developed a written register of their vernacular for the expres-
sion of prose and poetry, as well as their own variety of the Latin script in order 
to write it. Thus, they used the majuscule (half uncial) for important biblical and 
liturgical manuscripts, and the smaller, less stately miniscule for all other types 
of writing, including glossing.81 The oldest extant vernacular Old Irish glosses 
occur in a manuscript of the Latin Gospels (the Ussher Gospels) of the late seventh 
century.82 Indeed, the practice of annotating Latin texts in Latin or Irish, or in 
combinations thereof, was widespread already by 700.83 From the eighth century 
Irish glosses have survived, among others, on the Gospel of Mark, Peter’s second 
Epistle and the Epistles of Paul (the Würzburg Glosses); from the ninth and tenth 
centuries considerably more, mostly continental, manuscripts survive with Irish 
glossing, including books of the Bible, but also Augustine’s Soliloquia, Bede’s 
De temporum ratione, canon law, Priscian (in the first place the St Gall Glosses, 
but Priscian manuscripts from Leiden, Karlsruhe, Paris and Milan also contain 
Irish glosses), Eutychius and a commentary on the psalms (the Milan Glosses, 
discussed under 5.2 below).84 Besides these glossed texts, three interrelated glos-
saries, compiled from the eighth century onwards, survive from early medieval 
79 Dickey, Ancient Greek Scholarship; Wilson, Scholars of Byzantium, pp. 145–147; Lemerle, 
Byzan­tine Humanism, pp. 309–346.
80 McKitterick, ‘Glossaries’, pp. 50–51.
81 Ó Cróinín, Early Medieval Ireland, pp. 171–173.
82 Ó Néill, ‘Dry-point Glosses’. 
83 Bischoff, ‘Wendepunkte’.
84 Tabled in Ó Cróinín, ‘Glosses’, pp. 24–27. Now complemented by Bronner, Verzeichnis. 
