University of Groningen
Review
Dekker, Kees
Published in:
NOWELE
DOI:
10.1075/nowele.00065.ald
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Publication date:
2022
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citation for published version (APA):
Dekker, K. (2022). Review: Alderik Blom, Glossing the Psalms: The Emergence of the Written Vernaculars
in Western Europe from the Seventh to the Twelfth Centuries (De Gruyter, 2017). NOWELE, 75(1), 116-
122. https://doi.org/10.1075/nowele.00065.ald
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.
Download date: 25-08-2026
book review
Alderik H. Blom, Glossing the Psalms. The Emergence of the Written
Vernaculars in Western Europe from the Seventh to the Twelfth
Centuries. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2017. xvi + 322pp. with 14 figures.
Reviewed by Kees Dekker (University of Groningen)
The importance of the Psalter in the onset and development of medieval ver-
nacular literacy in North-Western Europe is hard to overestimate. At the time
when the spread of Christianity in early medieval Europe intensified the use of
the written word, the Psalter stood out as a pivotal book in the Old Testament,
not only because of its traditional importance in Jewish and Christian exegesis
and liturgy, but also because in the monastic culture which anchored Christianity
in its newly appropriated territories, the Psalter had to be chanted on a weekly
basis. As Alderik Blom explains in Glossing the Psalms, novices in these monas-
teries were forced to learn the psalms and canticles by heart even before they
had learned to write (pp.37–38), remnants of which practice still lingered on in
denominational schools in the 1960s, as this reviewer can still remember. The
Psalter’s seminal role in early medieval education, liturgy, exegesis and music is
substantiated by a wealth of documents in which the Latin text of the psalms is
clarified with the help of the various vernaculars. Alderik Blom’s groundbreaking
study analyses three strands of such documents: glossed psalters and commen-
taries, psalters with interlinear glosses, and glossae collectae based on the psalms.
All of these documents were written between c. 800 and c. 1200 A.D., in the
context of various emerging Western European vernaculars: Old Irish, Old Eng-
lish, Old High German, in particular the Alemannic dialect, Old Saxon and Old
Frisian. Emanating from a British Academy Postdoctoral Fellowship at Corpus
Christi College, Oxford, Blom’s study enriches our knowledge of the methodolo-
gies of glossing and commenting in the early Middle Ages, as well as the ways
in which early commentators conceived of the relationships between Latin texts
and the vernacular languages. Blom’s excellent book could not have been written
without the author’s profound knowledge of Latin (with occasional excursions to
Greek and Hebrew) as well as all the vernacular languages it discusses. The book
is, therefore, by implication, also an appeal to teach these languages to students of
the Middle Ages.
The formal subdivision of Glossing the Psalms is delineated by the three types
of documents mentioned above: Part One discusses glossed psalters and com-
mentaries (Chapters 4 and 5), but also includes three introductory chapters to the
https://doi.org/10.1075/nowele.00065.ald
NOWELE 75:1 (2022), pp. 116–122. ISSN 0108-8416 | E‑ISSN 2212-9715 © John Benjamins Publishing Company
entire book (Chapters 1–3); Part Two discusses interlinear version of the psalter
(Chapters 6–14); while Part Three contains an analysis of two glossaries (Chap-
ter 15), as well as the conclusion to the entire book (Chapter 16). The book ends
with a very useful appendix on formal and functional aspects of glossing, a bibli-
ography, manuscript index and subject index. An index locorum would have been
helpful, but is not there. Although the book takes the form of a triptych, in which
the middle panel is the centre of attention, it is important not to lose track of
its linear structure and of the importance of its methodology, outlined in Chap-
ter 2.4, for all texts under investigation. It might have been clearer, therefore, to
set off Chapters 1–3 and 16 from the three central studies, as an introduction and
conclusion in their own rights.
The methodology of Blom’s analyses, explained in Chapter 2 and summarised
in the appendix, is not only essential to a good understanding of the main chap-
ters, but also offers new perspectives on the analysis of text glosses. Packaged in
a useful binary distinction, the contents of annotated manuscripts is divided into
‘principal text’ and ‘paratext’ (p.10), the latter term being explained along the lines
of the rather wide definition by Gerard Genette (1997:3). While Blom rightly clas-
sifies glosses among the many forms of paratext subsumed under Genette’s defi-
nition, one may question his decision to adopt Frank Cinato’s blanket definition
of a written gloss as “the sum of paratextual accretion which specifies and diversi-
fies the information contained within a principal text” (p.11). First, should titles,
rubrics or introductions, included among Genette’s forms of paratext, be seen as
glosses, since they might specify or diversify information? And secondly, what
to do with the possibility that the original lemmas are no longer present within
the principal text on the page because of scribal errors or misinterpretations (on
which, see Langbroek 2001). The latter eventuality would certainly be covered by
the concept of intention expressed in Gernot Wieland’s definition of text glosses
as “any one or more words, letters, and symbols written in the margin or between
the lines of a text, i.e. anything on the page which is not text proper [read princi-
pal text], but which is intended to comment on the text” (Wieland 1983:7).
Highly useful for anyone researching glosses and glossaries are the termi-
nological distinctions highlighted by Blom between (a) ‘auctorial paratext’ and
‘allogenic paratext’ (p.12), to diversify between glosses inserted by authors of
principal texts and those added by later scribes; (b) ‘stratigraphy’ and ‘redaction’
(p.13), the former signifying “diachronical sequences of layers [of glosses] writ-
ten in separate hands”, the latter defining the ultimate collection of glosses in a
manuscript in contradistinction to that in other manuscripts; (c) ‘text proxim-
ity’ and ‘text distance’ (p.15), indicating the genetic closeness of a gloss to its
principal text, even across manuscripts, or the distance between a gloss and its
principal text, for example if a gloss occurs in an alphabetical glossary and is
Review of Blom (2017)
117
therefore at least two stages removed from its original position (stage one being
the glossae collectae). Most essential, however, for a good understanding of Blom’s
analyses is his distinction between ‘formal aspects of glossing’ and ‘functional
aspects of glossing’. The formal aspects comprise palaeographical and codicolog-
ical phenomena such as the hands in which the glosses were written, their form
(written out in full, abbreviated or encoded), and their location on the page. The
three functional categories of glossing, ‘substitution glosses’, ‘supplement glosses’
and ‘commentary glosses’ (explained in Chapter 2.4.3) are the filaments holding
the chapters together. While terms such as substitution and supplement seem
to speak for themselves, this section merits careful study. Substitution glosses
replace a lemma with a “more or less exact lexical equivalent or perceived equiv-
alent” (type a), or with an explanation (type b), and can therefore be ‘intra-
lingual’, using the same language as the gloss, or ‘interlingual’ in the case of a
translation. Supplement glosses, on the other hand, add one or more words to
clarify the morphology or syntax of the principal text, either by supplying a com-
plete constituent (subject, object, etc.) (type 1) or by adding words to an existing
constituent (type 2), or by syntactical glosses, in the form of ‘construe or syn-
tax marks’. Four subtypes of commentary glosses complete the list of functional
aspects: lexical and etymological comments (type 1), additional information on
morphology or syntax (type 2), variants from other psalter versions (type 3),
exegetical or historical information (type 4). The functional categories highlight
the importance of morphology and syntax in Blom’s methodology: grammatical
information was, as the analyses in the remaining chapters demonstrate, a promi-
nent aim of early medieval glossators.
The importance of this methodology is proven in Chapters 4 and 5, the
longest chapters in the book, which offer a discussion of two psalters with text
glosses and two glossed commentaries. While most of these glosses are in Latin,
those in the vernacular are nearly all in Old Irish, which provides these chapters
with a linguistically unified corpus. Chapter 4 begins with a discussion of the
glosses in the Southampton Psalter, now Oxford, St John’s College Library, C.9, a
tenth-century psalter written in Ireland, which contains glosses by two glossators,
both inserting inserted text in Latin and Old Irish. Blom’s division of the chap-
ter into hierarchically ordered sections and subsections helps the reader navigate
the complexities of the glosses. First, a distinction is made between Latin and ver-
nacular glosses. Subsequently, for both categories, the glosses are then divided
by strata, and only then are the formal and functional aspects discussed for each
stratum. The advantage of this division is that in the final analysis the vernacular
language(s) are given a central position, high up in the structural hierarchy, even
though the vernacular glosses are outnumbered by their Latin counterparts. The
examples are spaciously laid out, with psalter text in capitals and the gloss text in a
118
Kees Dekker
smaller font, with printing in red and in different font sizes to distinguish between
glosses from different strata. The examples are referenced to the relevant psalms
and verses – not to editions, such as, in the case of the Southampton Psalter, the
recent edition by Pádraig Ó Néill (2012), an important source in Blom’s study, and
not to the foliation in the manuscript. The latter omission is unfortunate, as the
manuscript has been digitised in high-quality images and can now be consulted
online in the Cambridge University Digital Library.1 As the manuscript does not
give the numbers of the psalms, the reader needs to consult an edition or con-
duct hit-and-miss searches in the online facsimile to find the original texts and
glosses. Thus, all examples on pp.60 and 61, with references to psalm 135 can be
found on folio 92v, including the unreferenced example, “HEREDITATEM ISRA-
HEL POPULO SUO …,” (p.61), which occurs at the very top of folio 92v and
derives from psalm 134: 12. Likewise, the Psalter of St Caimín, University Col-
lege Dublin, Franciscan A 1, which is the second Irish psalter analysed here, can
be found integrally online with catalogue description, as part of the Irish Script
Online project, which is the source of Figure 2 (p.78) in the book.2 In an age of
rapidly increasing digitisation of manuscripts, it is essential, in my view, that refer-
ences to manuscripts are included, also to manuscripts which have not (yet) been
digitised, as there is a distinct chance that digitisation will occur well within the
lifespan of a book’s print run. Moreover, it makes a book such as this outstand-
ing study so much more stimulating if readers – scholars and students alike – have
the manuscripts, virtually, on their desks. The major advantage of Blom’s method-
ology is that it allows a comparative analysis of glosses to the psalms in differ-
ent versions, in the case of Chapters 5 and 6, of two psalters with interlinear and
marginal glosses, and two glossed commentaries to the psalms, while also allow-
ing comparisons and distinctions between different kinds of paratext within the
same manuscript, for example, in the case of the two glossed psalters, between
interlinear and marginal texts. The conclusions that are drawn from these four
documents allow for interesting and sophisticated observations about functional
differences between Latin and Irish, in different manuscripts. Most fascinating,
however, are the correspondences. As Blom explains: the use of Irish in the glosses
to the actual psalter text is largely restricted to lexical substitution in the form of
translations, while in glosses to the marginal paratext “the vernacular is used reg-
ularly for longer commentary glosses” (pp.89–90), an observation which Blom
rightly connects with sociolinguistic domains, posing the question of whether the
lower prestige of the vernacular precluded its use in exegetical comments.
1. https://www.joh.cam.ac.uk/library/special_collections/manuscripts/medieval_manuscripts
/medman/C_9.htm
2. https://www.isos.dias.ie/english/index.html
Review of Blom (2017)
119
In the next part of Glossing the Psalter, Blom applies the same method of
analysis to a selection of interlinear versions of the Psalter. These differ from the
psalters in Chapter 5 in being “more or less complete word-for-word, or better
form-for-form transfers into another language or register, provided interlinearly
to a, generally Latin, principal text” (p.131). Since no interlinear versions glossed
in a Celtic language have survived, this part of the book considers only examples
from the West Germanic linguistic realm, i.e. psalters glossed in Old English, Old
High German, Old Saxon and Old Frisian. The specific questions and problems
associated with interlinear versions are discussed in Chapter 6, in which Blom
introduces the reader to the scholarly discussion about the status and function of
interlinear versions, either as proto-translations for which the interlinear glosses
should be read ‘horizontally’, or as aids for reading of the principal text, in which
case the relation between lemmas and glosses is ‘vertical’. In the former case, the
appraisal of these glosses takes place via a reading process, while in the latter case,
there is an important oral aspect of explanation which is not a visible part of the
paratext, but still belongs to it. The seven test cases are presented in a chronologi-
cal order of production, beginning in Chapter 7 with a set of fragments titled ‘the
Old Alemannic Psalter Fragments’, dated to about 820, and concluding in Chap-
ter 13 with the Old Frisian Psalter Fragment which has been dated to about 1200.
Chapters 8, 10 and 12 discuss complete Latin psalters with Old English glosses:
the Vespasian Psalter, the Regius Psalter and the Lambeth Psalter; Chapters 9
and 11 analyse two fragments of psalters with Old Saxon Glosses: the ‘Lublin/
Wittenberg Fragments’ and the ‘Paderborn Fragment’. The decision to present
the psalters and fragments in a chronological order is understandable but also
somewhat remarkable bearing in mind the concluding remark in Chapter 14 that
a chronological development did not cause the varieties observed between the
psalters; instead, more importance is attached to cultural and geographical vari-
ables (p.241). Nonetheless, Blom’s detailed, sophisticated analyses of the individ-
ual psalter manuscripts and fragments open up new horizons for the readers and
bring to the fore the typical characteristics of each interlinear version. The fixed
template of the discussions, following the methodology outlined in Chapter 2,
enhance the possibility for the reader to think along and engage with these dis-
cussions. We are helped in some cases by the repeated use of similar fragments in
the discussions of different psalters, for example psalm 106: 6–10 for the Old Ale-
mannic Psalter Fragments, the Vespasian Psalter, and the Regius Psalter (pp.148,
165, 193). The observations and conclusions are manifold and reveal especially the
variations in glossing principles and methods in the different psalters. Remark-
able examples of the techniques applied (and perhaps invented) by scribes include
the use of punctuation as an instrument to understand the Latin text in the Old
Alemannic Psalter Fragments, and the strict adherence to morphological agree-
120
Kees Dekker
ment between lemmas and glosses, together with relative freedom at a syntac-
tic level, in the Vespasian Psalter. In the end one learns that a similar method
of interlinear glossing was applied differently and with various expectations and
purposes, rendering obsolete the question of what ‘the’ purpose of such glossed
psalters may be and whether, as an entire text category, they were meant to be read
vertically or horizontally.
The third category of texts analysed in Glossing the Psalms concerns glossaries
containing entries (i.e. lemmas and interpretamenta) deriving from the psalms.
Originating in the tradition of glossae collectae (the compilation of glossaries from
glossed texts), such glossaries were copied, rearranged and reformatted in a sub-
stantial number and variety of manuscripts. Blom discusses two families of such
glossaries: one is the so-called Leiden or Rz family, deriving its dual nomencla-
ture from manuscripts containing the earliest representatives: Leiden, University
Library, VLQ 69, and Karlsruhe, Badische Landesbibliothek, Aug 99 (neither of
which contains psalter glosses); the other is the M (for Mondsee) Glossary tra-
dition, which constitutes one of the most important sources of glosses in Old
High German. In the discussion of the Rz family, there are one or two issues
that require adjustment. Of the four Rz glossaries containing glosses (presum-
ably, Blom means Old High German glosses) on the psalms, two are referred
to as St Gall, Stiftsbibliothek 292 (p.247). The information in footnote 798 sug-
gests that the first reference is to St Gall, Stiftsbibliothek 299 (BStK 225) (see
Bergmann & Stricker 2005:536–540); the second is indeed St Gall, Stiftsbibliothek
292 (BStK 221). The two manuscripts under discussion in Chapter 15, Munich,
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Clm 19440 and Clm 18140 both originate from the
library of Tegernsee in Bavaria and belong to the Mondsee family and stand in
direct relation to one another, in the sense that the scribes compiling the glossary
in Clm 18140 used Clm 19440 as an exemplar. Both glossaries are testimony to the
vibrant glossing culture in the monastic community at Tegernsee, where scribes
rearranged and corrected glosses as they copied them from one manuscript to
another, while, as the analysis in Glossing the Psalms shows, the functional char-
acteristics of the glosses in their original glossed psalters or interlinear versions
are still visible. As Blom contends, in Clm 19440, all commentary glosses are in
Latin, while substitution glosses, both in Latin and in Old High German, mirror
the Latin lemma precisely. It seems that Clm 18104 is one step further in the chain,
with a more diverse collection of glosses gleaned from a greater variety of exem-
plars.
In his conclusions to Glossing the Psalms, Alderik Blom rightly points to
the intricacy of the paratextual networks which his investigation has uncovered.
Glossed psalters and commentaries, interlinear versions and psalter glossaries
are far from mono-dimensional. Instead, this book reveals the many dimensions
Review of Blom (2017)
121
which appear when the right questions are paired with the appropriate method-
ology. The combinations of principal text and paratext, Latin and the vernacular,
and grammar and textual history, paint a philological picture of a category of texts
which still offers many new discoveries. With its detailed investigation of texts,
vocabulary and grammar in Latin, Old Irish, Old English, Old High German, Old
Saxon and Old Frisian glosses, Alderik Blom’s study of glossing the psalms is not
for the fainthearted. However, for those who persevere, the chapters constitute a
voyage of discovery through Psalterland which no-one who is interested in the
languages and literature of early medieval North-Western Europe can afford to
miss. Glossing the Psalms makes a highly important contribution to the study of
written culture in the early Middle Ages.
References
Bergmann, R. & S. Stricker. 2005. Katalog der althochdeutschen und altsächsischen
Glossenhandschriften, 6 vols. Berlin: De Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110918250
Genette, G. 1997. Palimpsests: Literature in the second degree, Transl. by C. Newman &
C. Doubinsky. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press.
Langbroek, E. 2001. Frage des eigentlichen Lemmas. Mit einer Abbildung. In R. Bergmann,
E. Glaser & C. Moulin-Fankhänel, Mittelalterliche volkssprachige Glossen, 513–528.
Heidelberg: Winter.
Ó Néill, P. 2012. Psalterium Svthantoniense (= Corpus Christianorum Scriptores Celtigenae 6).
Turnhout: Brepols.
Wieland, G.R. 1983. The Latin glosses on Arator and Prudentius in Cambridge University
Library MS Gg.5. 35. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.
Address for correspondence
Kees Dekker
Faculty of Arts
University of Groningen
PO Box 716
9700 AS Groningen
The Netherlands
c.dekker@rug.nl
Publication history
Date received: 29 October 2021
Date accepted: 4 November 2021
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9259-9449
122
Kees Dekker
