SOURCE: A View on Buddhism - "50 Verses on Guru Devotion" (English translation)
URL: https://viewonbuddhism.org/resources/50_verses_guru_devotion.html
RETRIEVED: 2026-08-26 (page last updated June 12, 2019)
STATUS: Non-academic website; translation follows the LTWA/Dhargyey tradition. Useful for
keyword discovery and for the reception history of guru-devotion discourse in English.

--- PAGE HEADER ---
50 VERSES ON GURU DEVOTION
Written by Indian Master Ashvagosha

Important notice (site editor): These practices are specifically part of the Tantric path as
practiced in Tibetan Buddhism... Before entering into a Guru/disciple relationship, you should
thoroughly check and test the teacher for authenticity and ethical behavior... Below verses can be
helpful in a healthy Guru/disciple relationship, but they can be (and have been) mis-used to excuse
harmful behaviour from a teacher and to silence students.
See also the page on Controversy...

--- CONTENT ---
Homage to Bhagavan Vajrasattva
[Full translation of all 50 verses present on the page; opening verse:]
1. Bowing in the proper way to the lotus feet of my Guru, who is the cause for me to attain the
state of a glorious Vajrasattva, I shall condense and explain in brief what has been said in many
stainless tantric texts about Guru-devotion...
2. All the Buddhas of the past, present and future... have paid homage to the Tantric Masters from
whom they have received the highest initiations...
6. ...there must be a mutual examination beforehand (to determine if each can) brave a
Guru-disciple relationship.
7. A disciple with sense should not accept as his Guru someone who lacks compassion or who is
angersome, vicious or arrogant...
10-16: karmic consequences of despising the guru (diseases, hell Avici etc.)
17-22: offerings to the guru equal to offerings to all Buddhas; guru = Vajradhara
23-46: etiquette rules (shadow, seat, feet, address with honorifics, request teachings three times...)
48-50: colophon - after refuge and bodhicitta, give this text; then tantric initiations and the
fourteen root vows; author claims no personal interpretation added.

Last updated: June 12, 2019

--- KEY DATA POINTS ---
- Popular full English e-text circulating under LTWA-based translation lineage
- Site explicitly flags modern ethical concerns/controversy around guru devotion texts
