Your privacy, your choice

We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media, as well as to allow video information to be shared for both marketing, analytics and editorial purposes.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data.

Manage preferences for further information and to change your choices.

Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Skip to main content
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
 Cart
Home  Journal of Indian Philosophy  Article
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis: The Niryukti-Discourse
Open access
Published: 01 August 2025
(2025)
Cite this article

You have full access to this
open access
article

Download PDF
Save article
View saved research
Journal of Indian Philosophy
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Nalini Balbir 

2072 Accesses

1 Citation

Explore all metrics 

Abstract

This essay argues that the Prakrit Jain verse commentaries called niryuktis form a coherent discourse, the fixed procedures of which illustrate how anekāntavāda works. These procedures are analysed in turn. They are the nayas, the viewpoints. Then come the formalized nikṣepas which apply various parameters to notions or terms in order to circumscribe their meanings and usages. List of synonyms and hermeneutical etymologies similarly aim at extracting all the potentialities of meanings. But, on the other hand, the multi-sided analysis is often reduced to a sharp bipartition or tripartition with polemic purpose especially when it comes to define key-terms of the tradition. Then the ultimate aim is to draw a clear line between what is acceptable in Jain ethics and what is characteristic of other religious groups. Thus the encyclopaedic exegesis of the niryuktis is meant both for transmitting knowledge in the frame of monastic pedagogy and to provide the believer with an adequate frame for proper conduct.

Similar content being viewed by others
In Some Ways: Syādvāda as the Synthesis of Anekāntavāda and Nayavāda in Akalaṅka’s Philosophical Treatises
Article Open access
31 July 2024
Niścaya-Vyavahāra Nayas and Anekāntavāda: A Re-investigation with Reference to Kundakunda and Amṛtacandra
Article Open access
04 November 2025
Jainism and Environmental Ethics: An Exploration
Article 09 August 2018
Explore related subjects
Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.
Buddhist philosophy
Discourse Analysis
Hermeneutics
Hindu Theology
Jewish Studies
Philosophical Inquiry in Buddhist Metaphysics
Introduction

Multi-sidedness is the best known feature of the Jain philosophical approach known through the emblematic term anekāntavāda. In academic scholarship it is mostly discussed and illustrated through the investigation of the classical treatises of Jain philosophy written in Sanskrit by Śvetāmbara and Digambara philosophers from the climax period of the 7th to the 12th century. This paper focuses on the beginning stages of the expression of multiple-angle analysis and the apparatus of anekāntavāda as it unfolds in the strata of Śvetāmbara Jain literature known as niryukti which represents the first phase of Jain scholasticism. This group of versified works is written in the Middle Indo-Aryan (Prakrit) language called Jaina Māhārāṣṭrī with a style which puts them at the crossroads of oral exchanges between teacher and pupil within a pedagogical setting of elucidation and of a strictly written format. Niryuktis (Prakrit Ṇijjuttis) form a constituted body of ten texts, eight of which have come to us. Some of them are attached to a canonical root work in Ardhamāgadhī Prakrit (Ācārāṅga, Sūtrakṛtāṅga, Daśā, Uttarādhyayana, Daśavaikālika) and have a limited size (a few hundreds of verses), while others grew independently of any sūtra, at least in part (Ogha-niryukti, Piṇḍa-niryukti and Āvaśyaka-niryukti) and reach imposing dimensions (ca. 2500 verses for the latter). Though their composition has been ascribed by the Jain tradition to an early teacher known as Bhadrabāhu (first centuries CE), no clear authorship can be proved. Their designation, Pkt. ṇijjutti, has been said to go back to Skt. niryukti, with the root YUJ- conveying the idea of ‘connection’. What is more important is that niryuktis have in common a set of procedures which they apply and which characterizes this sub-genre of exegetical literature. It has often baffled (Western) scholars because if one considers the relation between a root-text and a commentary as direct or univocal, niryuktis do not fit in the picture. They often contain what may first look like excurses or as insertions without direct relation to the root-text they are supposed to explain. On the contrary, if we consider these analytical procedures together and try to understand what their real purpose is, we can see that they combine to shape a connected discourse, which is a new phenomenon not found in the root-texts (the sūtras). This, I argue, is a way to apply in the area of exegesis the typical Jain multi-sided analysis of reality.

The Anuyogadvārasūtra, the Treatise on the doors of exposition, is recorded as a propedeutic work in all traditional lists of what makes the Śvetāmbara Āgamas. So it does not belong to the niryukti genre as such. However, it is a key methodological work on exegesis in the Jain canon, and meant as a kind of guide to read and understand texts belonging to this genre, taking the Āvaśyakasūtra as the key instance for its exposition. In particular, it establishes various sets of angles or parameters to approach the analysis of words, subjects, etc., as niryuktis do: it is in fact ‘an umbrella term for a set of hermeneutical procedures’ that are to be applied in order to access the true meaning (Jyväsjärvi, 2010, p. 147). Therefore, it is justified to use it in order to build the foundation of the present essay. It is available in two English translations (Bothara, 2007; Hanaki, 1970), the consultation of which is always rewarding as the Anuyogadvārasūtra is rather technical and not of easy access. Its language is predominantly Ardhamāgadhī Prakrit (the language of the Śvetāmbara Āgamas as a whole). But it was followed by a Prakrit prose commentary (cūrṇi) and the Sanskrit commentaries (vṛtti) by Haribhadra (ca. 8th cent.?) and Hemacandra Maladhārin (12th cent.), all conveniently edited under the same cover in Jambūvijaya (1999, 2000), which have been used too.

The Bases of Multi-Sided Analysis

In the niryuktis, the term anekānta is not used and the classification into seven viewpoints (sapta naya), which is also fundamental to the Jain approach as attested in classics of philosophy, is mostly not explicit. But it is known in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (which leads one to question the statement of Bhatt (1991, p. 32): ‘The Naya technique is known only to the post-canonical literature’). There, ṇaya is the fourth and last door of disquisition (Pkt. dāra; Skt. dvāra) which is to be applied in the exposition of the chapter Sāmāiya (of the Āvaśyakasūtra) according to the Anuyogadvāra method (Hanaki, 1970, p. 19), so that the list of the seven viewpoints forms the final sūtra of the work.

606. Then what is a standpoint (naya)? Seven basic standpoints have been stated, namely,

(1) negama (popular, Hanaki; coordinated, Bothara);

(2) saṃgaha (synthetic, Hanaki; generalized viewpoint, Bothara);

(3) vavahāra (pragmatic, Hanaki; particularized, Bothara);

(4) ujjusua (straightforward, Hanaki; precisionistic viewpoint or that related to specific point or period of time, Bothara);

(5) sadda (verbal, Hanaki; verbal viewpoint or that related to language and grammar, Bothara);

(6) samabhirūḍha (restricted, Hanaki; conventional viewpoint or that related to conventional meaning and ignoring etymological meaning, Bothara);

(7) evaṃbhūta (functional, Hanaki; etymological viewpoint or that related to words used in original derivative sense and significance, Bothara).

On this (run the verses):

That which ascertains (the object) by various ways of knowledge (is negama) - this is the etymology of (1) negama. The definition of the remaining nayas also I shall propound here, please listen [136]

(They) briefly speak of the (2) saṃgaha-statement as (expressing) the general condensed meaning. The (3) vavahāra expresses the determinate (practicable) meaning in respect of all substances [137]

The (4) ujjusua variety of naya is to be known as comprehending only the (immediately) present object. The (5) saddanaya expects a still more specialized present object [138]

In the (6) samabhirūḍha naya, the transference (of words) from its object (to another object) is unreal. The (7) evaṃbhūta distinguishes between the word, its meaning, and both of them (viz. word-cum-meaning) [139]

One should exert oneself only in the object having been known as either acceptable or non-acceptable. This is the teaching called the viewpoints. [140, my translation; ṇāyammi giṇhiyavve agiṇhiyavvammi ceva atthammi

jaiyavvam eva ii jo uvaeso so nao nāma; see also below p. 17]

Having listened to the diversity of assertions of nayas, because this one is pure from all viewpoints the ascetic is established in the qualities of conduct [in knowledge and conduct, comm.] [141; my translation] (Hanaki, 1970, pp. 211–212, combined with Bothara, 2007, 2, 473–476).

This method is applied in the Anuyogadvārasūtra itself (nayapramāṇa, sūtras 473 and foll.: Bothara, 2007, 2, 316; Hanaki, 1970, pp. 174–177; and foll.) and explained through three illustrations (Pkt. diṭṭhanta; Skt. dṛṣṭānta), that of the wooden measuring pot, that of the abode and that of the space-point. The second one (Pkt. vasahi; Skt. vasati, Bothara, 2007, 2, 323–327; Hanaki, 1970, pp. 175–177) will be selected here as its rather concrete character makes the grasping of the viewpoints (somewhat) easier.

Suppose a certain person asks another person: ‘Where do you live?’ The impure negama viewpoint says: ‘I live in the world.’

‘The world is known as threefold: upper, lower, horizontal. Do you live in all of them?’A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the horizontal one.’

‘In the horizontal world innumerable continents and oceans are known, the Jambūdvīpa etc. up to the Svayambhūramaṇa. Do you live in all these?’

A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the Jambūdvīpa.’

‘In the Jambūdvīpa there are ten lands, namely Bharata, Airāvata, Hemavata, Airaṇyavata, Harivarṣa, Ramyakavarṣa, Devakuru, Uttarakuru, Pūrvavideha, Aparavideha. Do you live in all these?’

A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in Bharata.’

‘The Bharata land is known to have a southern and a northern half. Do you live in all these?’

A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the southern half.’

‘In the southern half there are several villages, towns, walled-settlements, untidy settlements, remote towns, cities connected both by roads and waterways, commercial cities, settlements near mines, castle like settlements, suburbs. Do you live in all these?’

A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in Pāṭaliputra.’

‘In Pāṭaliputra there are several houses. Do you live in all these?’

A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the house of Devadatta.’

‘In the house of Devadatta there are several quarters. Do you live in all these?’

A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the inner quarter.’

Thus according to the negama viewpoint a person living (there) does live there. The same thing for the vavahāra viewpoint. For the saṃgaha viewpoint a person who has climbed on a bed lives (there). For the ujusua viewpoint the person lives in the space-points which he occupies. For the three word-viewpoints [no. 5, 6 and 7] he lives in the self.

Thus one of the functions of this method is to show how an analysis proceeds step by step until it comes to the most refined stage.

The Regular Procedures of Multi-Sided Analysis in the Niryukti Discourse

As rightly pointed out by Alsdorf, ‘Jain monastic scholarship originated and developed from the comparable task of explaining and handling down to pupils the sacred scriptures of Jainism’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 455). This led Jain scholars to emphasize methodology and to evolve different interpretive tools. The three main ones are listed together at the outset of the niryukti on the Daśavaikālikasūtra: nikkhev’ egaṭṭha nirutta (5, and again together in 332). They will now be examined in turn, drawing examples from the shorter niryuktis, those on the ‘seniors’ of the Jaina canon conveniently edited by Bollée (1995). A list of the cases found in the Āvaśyakaniryukti, the largest representative of the corpus, with partial detailed discussion is found in Balbir (1993, pp. 56–63). More examples have been discussed also in Jyväsjärvi (2010, pp. 151–152).

Nikṣepa

The nikṣepa, for the investigation of which Alsdorf’s seminal article remains one of the most accessible introductory studies, consists in ‘subjecting key words to an investigation by applying a scheme of fixed viewpoints’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 455). A word common in Prakrit and Sanskrit, mostly with the meaning of ‘deposit’, it evolves as a technical term in the context of hermeneutical discussions where it means ‘placing’ a notion, a word, etc., in a way similar to what happens in mathematics where numbers are placed and then subjected to various operations. This use is easy to recognize because of the contexts of occurrence and does not exclude other meanings for this word outside these particular contexts. The technical use of this word and the method it refers to have a history, which can be retrieved from Bhatt, 1991, 1978. In short, the dialectical technique consisting in multi-sided analysis is earlier than the term designating it. Nikṣepa in the technical understanding under consideration does not appear in the Śvetāmbara canon stricto sensu (Aṅgas and Upāṅgas), but multi-sided analysis achieved through the application of standard parameters or determinants is common. Listing and decrypting such canonical instances is precisely the purpose of Bhatt, 1978. To mention one example:

The dharma-astikāya is - in short - taught as fivefold, viz. with respect to dravya (substance), kṣetra (space), kāla (time), bhāva (non-physical nature), guṇa (quality).

According to dravya, the dharma-astikāya is one dravya [i.e., one member in the set of astikāyas (= ‘dravyas’). According to kṣetra, it has the measurements of the world. According to kāla, never did it not exist, never does it not exist, never will it not exist, it did exist, it does exist, it will exist, it is firm, eternal, [etc.]. According to bhāva, it does not possess colour(s), smell(s), taste(s), touch(es). According to guṇa, its quality is movement (translation as Bhatt, 1978, p. 42; text in Bhatt, 1978, p. 72).

This passage is found in the fifth Aṅga of the canon, the Vyākhyāprajñapti (Proclamation of explanations), which is an emblematic work of scholastic teaching for its framing and its contents. Whether it reproduces a historical reality or not, in its present form it offers a model of live teaching and discussion connected with orality since its two main characters are Indrabhūti Gautama, the first of Mahāvīra’s disciples, formulating questions, and Mahāvīra providing elaborate answers with recourse to methods of multi-sided analysis. It is no wonder, then, that the only canonical occurrence of Pkt. nikkheva (Skt. nikṣepa) in its technical meaning is found in a list where various such methods are mentioned together (aṇugama-nikkheva-naya-), precisely to describe the contents of the Vyākhyāprajñapti. This takes place in the section of the Samavāyāṅga (fourth Aṅga) devoted to a description of the contents of ‘twelvefold basket’ that constitutes the core of Jain teaching (Samavāyāṅga, Prakīrṇaka section, se kiṃ taṃ Viyāhe?). The method of analysis is attested (without the name) in various canonical scriptures, but, undoubtedly, the fifth Aṅga provides a large panel of examples of the two varieties distinguished by Bhatt, 1978, namely those where the determinants are preceded by an introductory sentence, such as in the dharmāstikāya mentioned above (Bhatt, 1978, pp. 16–20 [Nos. 19–50] and those where the determinants come straightaway with no introduction (22–25 [Nos. 75–91).

The analysis with determinants expressing various angles of understanding is so fundamental to the Jain way of approaching a notion that it can be found illustrated even in a purely narrative canonical scripture such as the sixth Aṅga. In a passage, which admittedly is not narrative, we come across a follower of Sāṃkhya expounding his doctrine:

Among us dharma is known to be rooted in cleansing. And this cleansing is known to be twofold, namely material cleansing and spiritual cleansing. Material cleansing is done by using water and sand, spiritual cleansing by using sacred grass and mantras.

amhaṃ soya-mūlae dhamme paṇṇatte. se vi ya soe duvihe paṇṇatte, taṃ jahā: davva-soe ya bhāva-soe ya. davva-soe ya udaeṇaṃ maṭṭiyāe ya, bhāva-soe dabbhehi ya mantehi ya. (Jñātadharmakathā 1.5; Bhatt, 1978, pp. 97–98)

Here, we have a twofold analysis in contrast which is reduced to what appears to have become the two most important parameters or determinants (davva and bhāva; see also below). At the canonical stage, anyway, ‘the term nikṣepa does not occur, the technique being merely identified by the employment of identical terms for the various aspects (davva = substance, khetta = space, kāla = time, and so on)’ (Bruhn, 1979, p. 103).

In Śvetāmbara Jain exegetical literature (Anuyogadvārasūtra and niryukti corpus), the substantive nikkheva (variant spelling ṇikkheva; Skt. nikṣepa) is of common use to designate this dialectical technique. The corresponding verb is also attested: tamhā āvassayaṃ ṇikkhivissāmi, suyaṃ ṇikkhivissāmi, khaṃdhaṃ ṇikkhivissāmi, ajjhayaṇaṃ ṇikkhivissāmi (Anuyogadvārasūtra 7). Following Alsdorf (1973, p. 456) ‘begging pardon for the word-monster,’ we can render it with the neologism ‘to nikṣepize,’ as Bhatt also does (1991, p. 32). This sentence gives the programme which will be achieved in the rest of the work, successively for āvassaya (sūtras 9–29), for the scripture (30–51), for the division (52–72) and for the chapter (Anuyogadvārasūtra 534 foll.). Occasionally, Pkt. parūvaṇā (based on Skt. prarūp-, ‘to expound, explain’, used in Jain sources) is met with instead of nikṣepa and functions as an equivalent term (Bhatt, 1978, p. 130; DaśavN 283), while the Sanskrit commentaries often gloss it as nyāsa.

The verse following the programmatic sūtra 7 of the Anuyogadvārasūtra opens the way to standardization of the determinants to be applied:

One should fully apply to a subject whatever ṇikkhevas are known about that subject. And to those (subjects) whose ṇikkhevas are not known, one should apply the four (Hanaki, 1970, p. 2).

The four are nāma, ṭhavaṇā (Skt. sthāpanā), davva (Skt. dravya) and bhāva. In practice, these are the ones that the niryuktis resort to. Hence the scheme finally gets a uniformity that was absent in the canonical practice. This holds true, in particular, in the carrying out of the first two determinants which are mostly not expanded upon and appear to be there by convention (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 458). As a matter of fact, nāma refers to the designation as such and does not seem to contain a lot of potential for elaboration and sthāpanā ‘is the pictorial or material representation of the animate or inanimate, concrete or abstract nikṣepa object, its effigy or illustration’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 456) or ‘notional installation’ (Bothara, 2007) and appears to have been regarded as more problematic than applicable (Alsdorf, 1973, pp. 456 and 457) and the commentators mostly brush them away, not providing any detail. Even then, both determinants are always present at the beginning of the lists. In order to make them understood by 21st-century readers, Bothara (2007, p. 23) takes the example of the word ‘mahāvīra’. If it is attributed to somebody just for convenience of identification, even though he is devoid of the qualities conveyed by the word, it is called nāma nikṣepa. On the contrary, bhāva nikṣepa means calling ‘mahāvīra’ either the Jina himself or somebody who has similar qualities. To confer this name to an image, picture, or symbol would be sthāpana, and to recognize the body of a person named ‘mahāvīra’ after his death would be dravya nikṣepa, i.e. physical aspect.

In practice, only the pair dravya ‘material, concrete’ and bhāva ‘moral, religious, spiritual’ is important. It will be considered later, as well as their further subdivision into āgamataḥ and no āgamataḥ ‘doctrinally, non-doctrinally’. On the other hand, even though the fourfold list of determinants is overwhelmingly attested, it does not prevent its increase to six, eight, or even twelve determinants in exceptional cases. Nowhere is there any limitation assigned to their number.

When it is carried out systematically, a nikṣepa applies first to the title of a whole canonical sūtra, then to the title of a given chapter, then to the first words of a chapter, then to any word of the chapter regarded as important. This scheme is formalized as follows in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (534): A nikṣepa is threefold: (1) pertaining to general nomenclature (ohanipphaṇṇe), i.e. the general name of a work or of its part (e.g., ajjhayaṇa), (2) pertaining to the specific name of a chapter (nāmanipphaṇṇe), (3) pertaining to words of specific sentences of verses of the sūtra (suttālāvaganipphaṇṇe). Since ajjhayaṇa (Skt. adhyayana) is a frequent division, its nikṣepa, carried out in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (535foll.), recurs in identical form in various niryuktis (UttN 5-11 = DaśavN 27-33); suyakhandha (Skt. śrutaskandha) ‘section’ is another similar case in point (UttN 12-17; SūN 23). The variety of words that are nikṣepized in the niryuktis is large. In fact, virtually no word is excluded. For instance, a regional word with no clear etymology such as khalunka, which is the title of Uttarādhyayanasūtra chap. 27, is subjected to a nikṣepa (UttN 487-495). More important than any theory here, what counts is to explain that in the material, concrete meaning (davva), the word designates animals (oxen, horses) reluctant to taming and discipline, so much that they may break the goads used by their drivers or turn the carts and drivers upside down, and that in the moral, spiritual meaning (bhāva) it designates reluctant pupils who oppose their teachers, insult others, do not respect or put in practice the Jinas’ teaching, and thus have to be kept aside by wise people. The nikṣepa analysis is liable to extend very far in some cases as its first aim is to cover all the acceptations and applications of a word. Thus in the case of Pkt. saṃjoga (Skt. saṃyoga), the first word of the first stanza of the Uttarādhyayanasūtra (UttN 30–63):

This nikṣepa occupies no less than 32 nijjutti stanzas, for it comprises the diverse and intricate doctrines of the combination (saṃyoga) of atoms to aggregates, of the interpenetration (saṃyoga) of the pradeśas [space-points] of the five astikāyas, of the contact (saṃyoga) of indriyas, manas and sense-objects, the combination of sounds to words, of singulars to duals and plurals, etc. All this does not, of course, contribute anything to the explanation of the Uttarādhyayana stanza, it has nothing whatever to do with it and thus is a good example of what is so bewildering and irritating at the first acquaintance with the nikṣepa: the text passage or title to be explained, the context of the word which has given rise to the nikṣepa is very soon completely lost sight of, so that e.g. in the nikṣepa of the word sūtra (occurring in the title of the second aṅga, the Sūtrakṛtāṅga) we suddenly find ourselves in a treatise on the different threads (sūtra) of textiles [SūN 21]. In the case of saṃyoga—of special interest because this is a well-known nyāya term raising the problem of possible Nyāya influence—the nikṣepa has become a technical device for dragging in a number of difficult chapters of Jaina doctrine which have nothing to do with the text to be explained but the inclusion of which in the teaching programme seemed necessary or desirable if only to make the instruction richer and more rewarding for teacher and pupil (Alsdorf, 1973, pp. 456–457).

In addition to words designating textual divisions, there are also other words which tend to recur from one work to the other, and are expanded upon independently, without any cross-reference. Comparing the treatment of these words makes clear that there is some amount of standardization and repetition, as Alsdorf has noted for the word karaṇa (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 457), or as can be seen when proper names are nikṣepized if they are used as titles of chapters (e.g., Kavila and Nami as Uttarādhyayana chap. 8 and 9, UttN 250–251 similar to 260–261 except for the name). This suggests that the teachers involved in the hermeneutical process (or the authors who have recorded this process in the niryuktis) might have had at their disposal a stock of explanations that they memorized and could use freely in different contexts.

The classical texts apply the method but do not really give any justification for it. The following 21st-century explanation provided by a representative of the Jain tradition is therefore worthy of note:

Jain Philosophy is non-absolutism (jain darśan anekāntavādī hai). In order to explain the true form of a thing and to understand the true and comprehensive meaning of a word it defines that word from numerous viewpoints. Words are limited but their meanings are unlimited. There are numerous meanings concealed in a word. Who wants to convey what meaning at what place and which meaning should one accept can be comprehended correctly and precisely if we employ the process of attribution (nikshep). (Bothara, 2007, 1, English rendering 22; Hindi 20–21).

These observations clearly connect the nikṣepa with both its pluralistic approach and its focus on a correct understanding with the general conception of anekāntavāda.

Synonymy

Listing synonyms of a notion central to a discussion is a regular procedure of the niryukti discourse where numerous instances can be found (see below). But the pattern is already given in the methodological treatise appended to the canon, the Anuyogadvārasūtra, the purpose of which is to apply the various techniques to the concept of āvassaya. Sūtra 29 starts with the following introductory sentence: ‘Of that there are the synonymous names composed of different accented vowels and different consonants’ (Hanaki, 1970, 10, tassa ṇaṃ ime egaṭṭhiyā ṇāṇāghosā ṇāṇāvaṃjaṇā ṇāmadhejjā bhavanti). Pkt. egaṭṭhiya (Skt. ekārthika) or, more often, egaṭṭha (Skt. ekārtha), ‘having the same meaning’ is the standard term used in niryuktis to designate this frequently used technique (inventory in Kusumpragyā et al., 1984) where words are listed one after the other.

‘What is obligatory, what must be done, what restrains the moral activity, purification, the section in six chapters, the right path, the practice for the sake of salvation, the way (to salvation’; Hanaki, 1970, p. 10 slightly modified).

āvassayaṃ avassakaraṇijjaṃ dhuvaṇiggaho visohī ya

ajjhayaṇachakkavaggo nāo ārāhaṇā maggo (sūtra 29)

There is a certain logic or organization in the way the designations are listed. The list starts with words very close in their sounds and formation to the basic term: here, for instance, the first two of the eight (Pkt. āvassaya and avassa) have the fundamental element corresponding to Skt. āvaśyaka or avaśya. Then the list expands to less literal designations which, rather, represent the true contents or the spiritual meaning of the external procedures, thus the purpose of the obligatory duties. The fifth one, though, ajjhayaṇachakkavaggo ‘a sacred text having six sections’, is of a different type as it is in fact a periphrastic designation of the work where these duties are exposed, namely the Āvaśyakasūtra: 1. sāmāiya (Skt. sāmāyika), ‘equanimity’; 2. cauvvīsatthaya (Skt. caturviṃśatistava), ‘praise of the 24 Jinas’; 3. vandaṇaya (Skt. vandanaka), ‘homage’; 4. paḍikkamaṇa (Skt. pratikramaṇa), ‘repentance’; 5. kāussagga (Skt. kāyotsarga); 6. paccakkhāṇa (Skt. pratyākhyāna), ‘resolutions of renunciation’. In the Anuyogadvārasūtra itself, this technique is applied in two more cases, the lists being introduced by exactly the same phrase (‘Of that there are the synonymous names composed of different accented vowels and different consonants’). Suya (Skt. śruta) ‘oral tradition’ is expanded as follows:

‘What has been heard, the indicator of meaning, the collection of meanings, the conclusive truth, instruction, command, sermon, teaching, communication and reliable tradition are the synonyms of sutta, having the same meaning’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 15, slightly modified).

suya sutta gaṃtha siddhaṃta sāsaṇe āṇa vayaṇa uvadese

paṇṇavaṇa āgame yā egaṭṭhā pajjavā sutte (sū. 51, verse 4)

Here, perhaps even more than in the previous example, phonetics, repetition of sounds or pairing of words through common final sounds are part of the technique and clearly support memorization. The movement is similar: starting from the closest to the commented word, then expanding. Pajjava (Skt. paryaya) is here another term for equivalent designation.

Finally comes khaṃdha (Skt. skandha), ‘section’:

‘Group, body, corpus, aggregate, grouping, heap and mass, clod and collection, close union, congregation, gathering are the equivalents of khaṃdha from the view point of essence.’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 18, slightly modified).

gaṇa kāya nikāya khaṃdha vagga rāsī puṃje ya piṃḍa niyare ya

saṃghāya ākula samūha bhāvakhaṃdhassa pajjāyā (sūtra 72)

This example shows that the technique is not confined to religious terminology, but can apply to any word. This is no exception. Synonyms of ‘tree’ and of ‘flower’, for instance, are listed in the DaśavN (35–36), as both together form the compound naming the first chapter of the sūtra: Duma-pupphiya, ‘Flower of a tree’ (Skt. druma + puṣpa; Balbir, 2020, p. 65). The same work includes a list of synonyms for ‘speech’:

vakkaṃ vayaṇaṃ ca girā, sarassaī bhārahī ya go vāṇī

bhāsā pannavaṇī desaṇī ya vai-joga jogo ya (270)

One of them, vai-joga (Skt. vāg-yoga), ‘speech activity’ is somewhat specific to the Jain tradition, but not the others. In a way, such lists are akin to Indian synonymic lexica and foreshadow classics like the Amarakośa or Hemacandra’s Abhidhānacintāmaṇi, to mention a Jain representative of this trend. Applying the technique of synonyms in the niryukti discourse features as a way to circumscribe a notion and, at the same time, a way to grasp all its potential shades of meaning in their diversity.

Etymology

The next technique common in niryuktis and already applied in the Anuyogadvārasūtra is hermeneutic etymology (Pkt. nirutta, nirutti; Skt. nirukta, nirukti). Like synonymy, it relates to language analysis in a very deep and clear way. When defining the name as essence (bhāvappamāṇe), sūtra 293 states that it is fourfold: formed by compounds (sāmāsie), by secondary suffixes (taddhitae), standing for verbal roots (dhātue) and formed according to etymology (niruttie). Each kind of formation is then expanded in turn. The result is a true grammatical exposition in the line of vyākaraṇa. Each of the classes of compounds is mentioned by its technical name (danda, bahuvvīhi, etc.) and described with the help of examples, then nominal derivation is dealt with, then a few names which are roots are listed. Finally, comes a list of seven words which are explained through etymologizing (sūtra 312):

mahyāṃ śete mahiṣaḥ, ‘it lies down on the earth [hence] mahi-ṣa ‘buffalo’.

bhramati ca rauti ca bhramaraḥ, ‘it wanders and hums [hence] bhrama-ra ‘bee’.

muhur muhur lasati musalam, ‘it rises and falls again and again [hence] mu-sala ‘mace’.

kapir iva lambate tthac ca karoti kapittham, ‘it hangs like a monkey and makes ttha [hence] kapi-ttha (a fruit).

ciditi karoti khallaṃ ca bhavati cikkhallam, ‘it makes cid and is viscous [hence] ci-khalla ‘slime’.

ūrdhvakarṇaḥ ulūkaḥ, ‘it has erect ears [hence] an owl’.

mekhasya mālā mekhalā, ‘a garland of clouds [hence] a girdle’.

The process is defined as follows in the Prakrit prose commentary (cūrṇi) on the sūtra: ‘Etymology [is] syllables of a designation being uttered in a way as to get a determined meaning’ (abhidhāṇakkharā ṇicchitatthovaladdhippagāreṇa uccarijjamāṇā ṇiruttaṃ, Jambūvijaya, 1999, p. 341). This is simplified in Hemacandra Maladhārin’s commentary as: ‘Etymology [is] saying, speaking of an ascertained meaning following the syllables of a designation’ (abhidhānākṣarānusārato niścitārthasya vacanaṃ bhaṇanaṃ niruktam, Jambūvijaya, 1999, p. 353). Thus this procedure clearly states the existence of a link between the sounds and the meaning of a word, which is not arbitrary but can always be justified. The analysis is made on the basis of segments that are considered meaningful and connected to words existing in the language or, sometimes, artificially produced. In this area, a broad panel of phonetic manipulations is allowed (e.g., mekha instead of megha and other approximations) so as to render these connections possible. This is in the line with the functioning of the Vedic nirukta as well. But in the above examples no grammatical tool, such as the adverbs tasmāt or tena often met in similar contexts, makes the logical link explicit. The explanatory sentence and the word to be explained are simply juxtaposed. It is interesting to note that they are all in Sanskrit, and that none of the commentaries seems to note this fact. The use of etymology as a methodological parameter being part of the exposition system is again asserted in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (604) where it forms the last of a 26-term list, to a large extent akin to the Tantrayuktis found in the Brahmanical tradition.

Finally, an example of the functioning of hermeneutic etymology is provided in the discussion of the first of the seven standpoints (naya, sūtra 606), to be applied to the remaining ones as well: ṇegehiṃ māṇehiṃ miṇai ttī ṇegamassa ya niruttī (verse 136ab). Ṇegama is divided into two segments: ṇega+ma, each one being linked to different words in order to provide its etymology: ‘It is measured by various standards’. The niryukti discourse follows this method and offers numerous instances (Siddhapragyā & Nirvāṇaśrī, 1984). For example, the niryukti on the Daśavaikālikasūtra connects Pkt. bhikkhu with the root bhid- ‘to split, to break’ and says:

The breaker is the one possessed with religious tradition; what breaks is twofold asceticism (i.e., kinds of fasting as external and study as internal); what must be broken is the eightfold karma and hunger. Therefore through etymology he is a bhikkhu.

bhettāgamovayutto duviha tavo bhedaṇaṃ ca bhettavvaṃ

aṭṭhavidhaṃ kamma khuhaṃ teṇa ṇiruttaṃ sa bhikkhu tti (DaśavN12; cūrṇi in Puṇyavijaya, 1973, p. 241)

The presence of ‘hunger’ (Pkt. khuhā) is necessary for the segmental analysis bhi-kkhu, summed up in the phrase bhindanto yāvi khudhaṃ bhikkhū (cūrṇi, ibidem), but is not taken into account in Haribhadra’s final recapitulation when he says: yaḥ śāstra-nītyā tapasā karma bhinatti sa bhikṣuḥ (cf. Balbir, 2020, p. 64), ‘the one who breaks karma through conduct according to the precepts through ascetic practices is a bhikṣu’, and thus keeps only the moral understanding, which is the one relevant in the context of the chapter. As the instance of bhikkhu makes clear, hermeneutic etymology has little to do with linguistic etymology which, here, would connect bhikkhu with the root bhikṣ- ‘to beg’. Even if this connection is known to the (Jain) Indian tradition, it does not seem to contain as many semantic or interpretive potentialities as the analysis seen above, and is then less adequate to serve the niryukti discourse, the purpose of which, through all its techniques, is to go deep inside a notion or a word in order to cover all its aspects and extract all its meanings, with special focus on moral or ethical ones. Examining the niryukti corpus shows that such etymologies tend to become standard and recur from one work to the other (e.g., for bhikkhu see also UttN 375–379).

Now, is there any connection between the plurality of viewpoints expressed in the naya-theory and between the procedures analyzed above? As far as I know, this is nowhere made explicit. There are, however, points of contact. The recourse to synonyms can be brought close to the fifth viewpoint, the śabda-naya, which focuses on synonymy and highlights the fundamental link between the word and the object. The semantic analysis of a notion and its lexemes which is another feature of the niryuktis has points of contact with the fifth viewpoint, the samabhirūḍha-naya, which insists on the fact that a unique linguistic expression characterizes a unique object. Both these procedures suppose a Cratylus-like understanding of the relationship between word and meaning, in sharp contrast with the Saussurian analysis and the theory of l’arbitraire du signe.

From a Multi-Sided Analysis Back to Bipartition and Single Correct Understanding

As we saw earlier, the basic procedure of analysis of which Śvetāmbara canonical literature provides ample illustration is the opposition between davva and bhāva (see also Jyväsjärvi, 2010, p. 149). The fourfold nikṣepa and its broader variations (sixfold, eightfold) seem to have developed from it. To take a simple example: Pkt. thui (Skt. stuti) is nikṣepized in the niryukti on Sūtrakṛtāṅga 1.6 as it forms the title of this chapter, which provides the earliest hymn to Mahāvīra. This nikṣepa is said to be fourfold (the most common form; see above), but, as usual, the first two determinants are not discussed; here, they are not even mentioned. The concern is the opposition between thui from the davva point of view and thui from the bhāva point of view (84). In the first understanding it is defined as the celebration of a guest by giving him ornaments (such as garlands), in the second one it is defined as the telling of existing qualities. So, as davva, it refers to material objects and external manifestations; as bhāva, it is all internal. Only the latter is relevant contextually as what will follow is a praise of the Jina’s qualities. The paradox of a multi-sided analysis finally resulting into a clear bipartition where only one meaning or understanding is considered right or correct becomes manifest especially when discussions come to notions of primary importance in the Jain doctrine or ethos which are conveyed by terms used in non-Jain traditions as well and have been subjected to reinterpretation or different understanding among the Jains. In these cases, the polemical intention comes into the foreground while the multi-sided analysis goes into the background. For instance, in the UttN on Uttarādhyayanasūtra chap. 9 ‘The going forth of Nami’ (Nami-pavvajjā), the fourfold nikṣepa of pavvajjā (Skt. pravrajyā) is first announced, but the remaining part of the stanza deals only with the parameters davva and bhāva:

The nikṣepa of ‘going forth’ is fourfold; in the material understanding it is that of the other religious groups, whereas in the moral understanding it means renouncing violence and sense of possession.

pavvajjā-nikkhevo cauvviho, anna-titthigā davve

bhāvammi u pavvajjā ārambha-pariggaha-ccāo (UttN 263)

The usual first two parameters (nāma and sthāpanā) are omitted in this verse and they are brushed away without hesitation by the Sanskrit commentator Śāntisūri (nāma-sthāpane prāgvat). The polemical target expressed in the verse is emphasized by the commentator who states the ‘others’ are those whose doctrine have been promulgated by non-Arhats and explicitly mentions Buddhists and other with impurities (te ca Śākya-sarajaskādayaḥ) whose going forth is devoid of purpose. On the contrary, bhāva refers to the Jain going forth defined by two fundamental qualities characterizing the ideal Jain monk. A very similar orientation is seen in the discussion of Pkt. aṇagāra (Skt. anagāra) ‘the homeless (monk)’: in the true or spiritual understanding it refers to the Jain monk who has right faith and is free from staying in a house (bhāve sammaddiṭṭḥī agāravāsā viṇimmukko, UttN 547cd), in contrast with those who proclaim themselves so and belong to heretical trends (this time the word is Pkt. niṇhaga, Skt. nihnava referring to the seven schisms in the Jain church in Mahāvīra’s time). Uttarādhyayanasūtra chap. 25 is called Pkt. jannaijjaṃ (Skt. yajñīyaṃ) and starts with the nikṣepa of the crucial word Pkt. janna (Skt. yajña), which procures an easy basis for a polemical approach. The opposition is here between sacrifice in the material understanding, which relates to brahmins, and sacrifice in the spiritual understanding which is stated to be one’s application to ascetic practices and self-control (tava-saṃjamesu jayaṇā bhāve janno muṇeyavvo, UttN 461cd). This is an adequate initial opposition for the chapter to come as it stages a brahmin versed in the Vedas offering a sacrifice and a monk who is first rebuked by him but later succeeds in teaching him at length the Law and explaining that the true brahmin is defined by ethical behaviour, not by rituals. Similar demonstrations are seen in the nikṣepa-discussion of Pkt. tavo (Skt. tapas, UttN 511), where the material sense refers to the five fires (pañcāgni) in contrast with asceticism in the spiritual meaning defined as twofold, external and internal, i.e. corresponding to the classical Jain view which recognizes a total of 6 + 6 forms of tapas. Instances of treatments of such important notions could easily be multiplied and drawn from all the texts of the niryukti-corpus (e.g., Balbir, 2020, pp. 63–65 for bhikkhu in the DaśavN). In all of them, it appears as if carrying out the full nikṣepa pattern would be a purely scholastic exercise, which is not the main purpose, in contrast with the ethical concern, which is prominent and is fulfilled adequately by the ideological dichotomy, where one angle only (the bhāva parameter) needs to be retained. Hence the practical perspective of proper behaviour almost negates the fourfold multi-sided method of analysis.

A similar orientation is followed by the Prakrit prose commentary (the cūrṇi) on verse 140 of the sūtra (quoted and translated above p. 4) as a conclusion to the definition of the seven viewpoints (naya): ‘These seven viewpoints, the negama and others, come to/ amount to two viewpoints: the knowledge-viewpoint and the ethics-viewpoint’ (ete ṇegamādi satta vi ṇayā dosu ṇaesu avataranti ṇāṇa-ṇaye caraṇa-ṇaye ya). In this same verse the pair giṇhiyavve agiṇhiyavvammi (Skt. grahītavya/agrahītavya; comm. upādeya / anupādeya) ‘acceptable / non-acceptable’ clearly establishes a dichotomy which has an impact on ethics and whose contents is expanded in the commentaries: the cūrṇi only says that acceptable means what is unblamable and causes liberation. Haribhadra’s and Hemacandra’s Sanskrit commentaries first explain ‘acceptable object’ as referring to garland or sandal, but then as correct faith, and explain non-acceptable as designating wrong views (samyagdarśanādi versus mithyātvādi). So putting away all technicalities, they clearly stand in favour of a very simple and powerful contrast aiming at efficiency without confusing.

Another way to express this is the kind of Manichaean opposition conveyed through the pair of antonym adjectives Pkt. apasattha (Skt. apraśasta) and Pkt. pasattha (Skt. praśasta) meaning ‘non-commendable’ and ‘commendable’ or ‘inauspicious’/‘auspicious’ (Hanaki, 1970). In the primary meaning, it refers to negative and positive, i.e., unbeneficial / beneficial actions. For instance, the opposition occurs in the Anuyogadvārasūtra within the nikṣepa-discussion of Pkt. āa (Skt. āya) ‘acquisition’ on the parameter bhāva: ‘acquisition as auspicious is threefold: of determinate knowledge, of intuition, of correct conduct; acquisition as inauspicious is fourfold: of anger, of pride, of deceit, of greed’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 203, slightly abridged), and then within the nikṣepa-discussion of Pkt. jhavaṇā (Skt. kṣapaṇā) ‘eradication’ on the parameter bhāva: ‘eradication as auspicious is fourfold: of anger, of pride, of deceit, of greed; eradication as inauspicious is threefold: of determinate knowledge, of intuition, of correct conduct’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 205, slightly abridged). It is easily understood that it is good to eradicate the four passions (kaṣāya) but not the three jewels of the Jain doctrine. The positive or negative understanding are deduced from the connection between the main word (acquisition/eradication) and its complements (negative versus positive elements). In the niryukti-discourse, more broadly, the area covered by apasattha refers to non-religious meanings, either profane (laukika, loka) or representing non-Jain values, while the second one corresponds to the understanding of a notion within the Jain worldview (lokottara). For instance, Pkt. paṇihi ‘applying the mind’ is one of the words of the eighth chapter of the Daśavaikālikasūtra. As such it is discussed through the nikṣepa-procedure. The non-commendable application of the mind (DaśavN 302) consists in binding the eight kinds of karmas, while the commendable one consists in expelling them (304). This opposition is carried out over several stanzas and culminates in the concluding verse (308) stating that the non-commendable application of the mind is to be left aside and the commendable one is to be resorted to. Pkt. magga (Skt. mārga) ‘path’ is another example. It is subjected to a sixfold nikṣepa (SūN 107, title of chapter 1.11, above p. X). A path is said to be twofold according to the bhāva parameter: commendable or non-commendable (pasattha taha appasattho ya, 109), having good destiny or bad destiny as its result (110). A path in knowledge, faith and good conduct followed by varieties of non-Jain ascetics is a wrong one (micchatta-maggo 112) and those who, being heavy with powers, and savouring tastes or finding pleasure in hurting the six kinds of living beings, teach a path, resort to a path which is bad (113). Those who are rich in asceticism and self-control, having qualities, tell a true path which is useful to all living beings which one regards as correctly enunciated (114). Here, as above, the function of the discussion is thus to provide simple baselines meant to support the believer in his endeavour towards a proper behaviour.

Another pair of contrastive terms where the opposition lies between Jain understanding and non-Jain understanding is conveyed by the distinction between the adverbial ablative āgamao (Skt. āgamataḥ) and no-āgamao (no-āgamataḥ) which form subdivisions of the determinants dravya and bhāva in the nikṣepas. They are mentioned in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (14, 16, etc.) and regularly applied. In the practice of the niryuktis they may or not be stated and are rarely developed (e.g. UttN 65, 237, 250, etc.). They strictly mean ‘doctrinally’ and ‘non-doctrinally’ but in fact ‘Jain’ and ‘non-Jain’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 260).

Such distinctions implying a polemic aspect as an intrinsic component are in fact at the basis of Jain ideology. Right in the Anuyogadvārasūtra, when a notion like Pkt. suya (Skt. śruta) ‘scripture, knowledge through words’ is considered from the point of view of essence (bhāva), the two divisions seen earlier between Pkt. loya (Skt. loka, laukika) and Pkt. louttariya (lokottarika) are established and their contents are detailed without ambiguity (sūtras 47–50). The former, the ‘worldly’, lists the Mahābhārata, the Rāmāyaṇa, Kauṭilya (i.e. the Arthaśāstra), then a number of titles which resist scholarly identification, then the various philosophical schools such as Vaiśeṣika (Vaisesiya), the Buddha teaching (buddhavayaṇa), the Sāṃkhya (as Kavila), the materialists (Loyāyaya, Skt. Lokāyata), the Nyāya (as Māḍhara), Purāṇa, grammar, dramas, the four Vedas with their auxiliaries (Vedāṅga)—thus works or authors regarded as authoritative in Hindu and Buddhist traditions. On the other hand, the ‘extra-worldly’ is said to be represented by ‘the basket of the gaṇadharas’, this generic notion being followed by the list of the twelve Aṅgas. (The twelfth, the Dṛṣṭivāda has not come down to us and is a kind of mythical content). Thus ‘extra-worldly’ clearly means Jain orthodoxy and original teaching. The discussion of the key-term Pkt. āvassaya (Skt. āvaśyaka) follows a similar path, this time referring to rituals and practices because it occurs within the examination of the parameter Pkt. davva (Skt. dravya), so the material aspects of the notion. Here the binary opposition just seen unfolds into a ternary opposition where the middle category has a clearly polemic tinge since it is named kuppāvayaṇiya (Skt. kuprāvacanika). The worldly (loiya) covers various usages or practices followed by ‘royal authorities, nobles, governors, family-heads, fabulously wealthy persons, traders, military generals, caravan-leaders, etc.’ such as ‘washing of mouth, cleaning of teeth, (rubbing of) oil, combing’ and many others (Anuyogadvāra sūtra 20, Hanaki, 1970, p. 7), most of which pertain to the body’s care or elegance. The kuppāvayaṇiya category, ‘belonging to perverse instruction’ (Hanaki, sūtra 21), covers practices of worship to Hindu gods (named: Indra, Skanda, Rudra, Śiva, Vaiśravaṇa), other beings (Nāgas, Yakṣas, Bhūtas) and unidentified names followed by pāsaṇḍatthas (Skt. pāṣaṇḍastha) ‘heretics’. As the text is written from a Jain point of view and as the word is always to be understood relatively as referring to those who deviate from a given orthodoxy, it here refers to non-Jain groups. Ten of them are then listed (Bothara, 2007, 1, 57–59 and Hanaki, 1970, pp. 7–8 for the details, which cannot be elaborated in the present context). As the notion discussed in the text is āvassaya from the material angle, even the ‘extra-worldly’ (loguttariya) category is not positive because it includes those ascetics, who being deprived of qualities of a real ascetic, do not have compassion for the six groups of living beings and are unrestrained (sūtra 22). The same threefold categorisation is then applied to the notion of āvassaya as ‘essence’ (bhāva), in other terms from the moral or spiritual angle. Again, the worldly aspect refers to the study of non-Jain works (named: [Mahā]bhārata and Rāmāyaṇa, sūtra 26), the perverse instruction aspect involves the repetition of the same list of heretics as above and pertains to their performing the āvassayas, i.e. the Jain obligatory duties, with improper behaviour or gestures (sūtra 27), whereas the extra-worldly ‘refers to those who are monks (samaṇe), or nuns (samaṇī), or laymen (sāvae), or laywomen (sāviyā) whose consciousness is fixed on that Āvassaya, [...] whose paraphernalia are employed for that Āvassaya’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 10, sūtra 28). The rest of the development, abridged here, clearly points to the same direction: we are here in a strictly Jain context within the Jain understanding of what obligatory duties are and how they have to be performed.

In the niryukti practice, a notion to which a similar process applies is Pkt. dhamma (Skt. dharma), the first word of the Daśavaikālikasūtra (DaśavN 40–43). This is obviously a fundamental word. The technical understanding devoid of moral connotations typical of the Jain tradition where dhamma designates the principle of motion and is one of the five substances illustrates the dravya-angle. The three divisions are applied to dhamma as viewed from the non-material bhāva angle. As ‘worldly’ (loiya), dhamma is manifold, so this leads to a list which includes practices relating to regional diversity (desa), to town, village, group, assembly usage (puravara, gāma, gaṇa, goṭṭhi), to royal ethics (rājadharma). Then comes the dhamma of wrong communities (kutitthiyadhammo) which is not approved (pasattha) by the Jinas, in contrast with the extra-worldly one (loguttariya) as the Jain scriptural tradition (suya-dhamma) and as Jain ethics (carittadhamma) in all its categories detailed in the corresponding Prakrit prose commentary (cūrṇi, Punyavijaya, 1973, p. 11).

The expositions in a niryukti that might seem unexpected or look like excurses going very far from the context where they start as well as the encyclopedic nature of several developments are not accidents or oddities, but truly constitutive components. The highly formalized character of interpretive strategies as illustrated in a niryukti gives it a curious abstract touch and the impression that it is a self-moving mechanism. In fact, it rather provides an example of scholastic practice and a form of academic teaching and learning within the religious Jain community. All these procedures point in the same direction: they are endeavours to grasp and cover the complexity of reality which cannot be approached in a unilateral manner, especially as it is mediated by language, which may also be unclear or at least ambiguous. This implies a pluralistic approach. But the ultimate purpose is exclusively to defend and to promote the Jain principles for an ethical perspective and thus to define Jain identity in contrast with other ideologies. Thus, despite what could appear at first sight, it is not a package of abstract scholastic techniques. On the contrary, it is firmly anchored in a system of values based on an understanding of reality which demonstrates in its own way that knowledge is a prerequisite of proper behaviour.

Abbreviations
DaśavN:

Daśavaikālikaniryukti [As in Bollée, 1995, 31-73]

UttN:

Uttarādhyayananiryukti [As in Bollée, 1995, 75-117]

SūN:

Sūtrakṛtāṅganiryukti [As in Bollée, 1995, 119-136]

References

Alsdorf, L. (1973). Nikṣepa – A Jaina Contribution to Scholastic Methodology. The Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda), 22: 453-463 [reprinted in Alsdorf, L., Kleine Schriften (ed. by A. Wezler), F. Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1974: 257-265].

Balbir, N. (1993). Āvaśyaka-Studien. Introduction générale et traductions. Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart (Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien herausgegeben vom Institut für Kultur und Geschichte Indiens und Tibets an der Universität Hamburg 45,1).

Balbir, N. (2020). Les débuts de la scolastique jaina: stratégies interprétatives et réception. Les scolastiques indiennes: genèses, développements, interactions, ed. by É. Aussant and G. Colas. École Française d’Extrême-Orient (Études thématiques 32): 57–71.

Bhatt, B. (1978). The Canonical Nikṣepa. Brill.

Book
 
Google Scholar
 

Bhatt, B. (1991). Study of the Word: nikṣepa and other Derivatives in the Śvetāmbara Jaina Canon. Akten des Melzer-Symposiums 1991 (ed. by W. Slaje and Ch. Zinko), Leykam: 15–53.

Bollée, W. B. (1995). The Nijjuttis of the Seniors of the Śvetāmbara Siddhānta: Āyāraṅga, Dasaveyāliya, Uttarajjhāyā and Sūyagaḍa. Text and selective glossary, Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart (Beiträge zur Südasienforschung Südasien-Institut Universität Heidelberg, 169). [Reference to the verse-numbering of this edition for the works it contains].

Bothara, S. (2007). English translation of Anuyogadvārasūtra in Pravartak Amar Muni, Illustrated Anuyog-dvar-Sutra. Delhi, Agra, Jaipur, 2nd ed., 2 volumes [here 2007,1 and 2007, 2].

Bruhn, K. (1979). Review of Bhatt 1978. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 7(1), 103–105. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02561255

Article
 
Google Scholar
 

Hanaki, T. (1970). Aṇuogaddārāiṃ (English Translation). Research Institute of Prakrit, Jainology & Ahimsa, Vaishali.

Jambūvijaya. (1999). Anuyogadvārasūtram Part I the text critically edited by His Holiness Munirāja Puṇyavijayajī Mahārāja with three commentaries Jinadāsa Gaṇi Mahattara’s Cūrṇi, Haribhadra Sūri’s Vivṛti, Maladhārī Hemacandra Sūri’s Vṛtti. Shrī Mahāvīra Jaina Vidyālaya Bombay.

Jambūvijaya. (2000). Anuyogadvārasūtram Part II the text critically edited by His Holiness Munirāja Puṇyavijayajī Mahārāja with three commentaries Jinadāsa Gaṇi Mahattara’s Cūrṇi, Haribhadra Sūri’s Vivṛti, Maladhārī Hemacandra Sūri’s Vṛtti. Shrī Mahāvīra Jaina Vidyālaya Bombay.

Jyväsjärvi, M. (2010). Retrieving the hidden meaning: Jain commentarial techniques and the art of memory. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 38, 133–162. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-010-9086-8

Article
 
Google Scholar
 

Kusumpragyā, S. (1984). Ekārthaka Kośa (samānārthaka kośa). Jaina Vishva Bharati.

Google Scholar
 

Puṇyavijaya, M. S. (1973). Śayyaṃbhava’s Dasakāliyasuttaṃ with Bhadrabāhu’s Niryukti and Agastyasiṃha’s Cūrṇi. Prakrit Text Society.

Google Scholar
 

Siddhapragyā, S., & Nirvāṇaśrī, S. (1984). Nirukta Kośa. Jaina Vishva Bharati.

Google Scholar
 

Download references

Open Access

This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articleÀ€™s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the articleÀ€™s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

Author information
Authors and Affiliations

Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne-Nouvelle University, Paris, France

Nalini Balbir

Corresponding author

Correspondence to Nalini Balbir.

Ethics declarations
Conflict of interests

There is no conflict of interest to be stated.

Additional information
Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Rights and permissions

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

Reprints and permissions

About this article
Cite this article

Balbir, N. Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis: The Niryukti-Discourse. J Indian Philos (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-025-09613-y

Download citation

Accepted
17 May 2025

Published
01 August 2025

Version of record
01 August 2025

DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-025-09613-y

Share this article

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Get shareable link

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Keywords
Jainism
Jain exegesis in Prakrit
Niryukti
Synonyms
Etymologies
Religious identity and polemics
Footer Navigation
Discover content
Journals A-Z
Books A-Z
Subjects A-Z
Publish with us
Journal finder
Publish your research
Language editing
Open access publishing
Products and services
Our products
Librarians
Societies
Partners and advertisers
Our brands
Springer
Nature Portfolio
BMC
Palgrave Macmillan
Apress
Discover
Corporate Navigation
Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Your US state privacy rights Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Privacy policy Help and support Legal notice Cancel contracts here

27.130.230.189

Not affiliated

© 2026 Springer Nature