Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\jinapanjara_critical_study\research-notes\loop_F01\documents\2017-wattanagun-karma_versus_magic.pdf
Total Pages: 23
Health Check: PASS (avg 3059.7 chars/page)
Total Characters: 70374

--- Page 1 of 23 ---
115DOI: 10.20495/seas.6.1_115Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 6, No. 1, April 2017, pp. 115–137
© Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University
Karma versus Magic: Dissonance and Syncretism  
in Vernacular Thai Buddhism
Kanya Wattanagun*
For a number of scholars, syncretism as an analytical approach to a group’s or an 
individual’s religiosity has several shortcomings.  Denoting the mixture of tenets 
or practices belonging to different traditions, syncretism presupposes a clearly 
demarcated boundary between the syncretized traditions (McDaniel 2011, 17).  It 
also implies scholarly wrought labels and categories, which are hardly shared by the 
people whose religiosity becomes the subject of academic scrutiny (Tambiah 1970, 
42; T.
 G. Kirsch 2004, 706).  In this paper I demonstrate that despite its short­
comings, syncretism can be employed to expound vernacular Thai Buddhism, whose 
heterogeneous composition has been argued to be “beyond syncretism” (Pattana 
2005, 461).  Ethnographic cases presented in this paper reveal that several Thai 
Buddhists, noting a dissonance between the doctrine of karma and the belief in 
magic, differentiate Buddhist from non­Buddhist elements.  The rationalization they 
employ to resolve this dissonance is a syncretistic activity that renders their multi­
farious religiosity internally consistent and meaningful.  These cases challenge the 
assumption that syncretism is inapplicable to the highly diversified and hybrid ways 
Thai Buddhists observe their faith since they neither draw the boundary between 
diverse religious tenets and customs nor adhere to a single orthodox ideal.
Keywords: vernacular Thai Buddhism, syncretism, magic, karma
Syncretism: A Problematic Analytical Model?
Syncretism as an approach to an individual’s or a group’s religiosity has been problema­
tized in many respects.  Its descriptive definition, which denotes a process in which 
“elements of two different ‘traditions’ interact or combine” (Shaw and Stewart 1994, 10), 
implies a clearly demarcated boundary between the syncretized elements.  This bound­
ary, however, presupposes static, universal categories, which hardly exist among diverse 
ways people interpret and observe their faiths (McDaniel 2011, 17; Pattana 2012, 14).  
The subjective definition of the term, which means either “illegitimate mixing” in a 
pejorative sense or “legitimate mixing” in a positive sense, also entails grave pitfalls 
* กัญญา วัฒนกุล, Thai Studies Center, Faculty of Arts, Chulalongkorn University, Phayathai Road, 
Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
 e-mail: swornlake@hotmail.com; Kanya.W@chula.ac.th.

--- Page 2 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
116
(Droogers 1989, 8).  The negative interpretation evokes the image of a pure, authentic 
tradition that is debased once it is commingled with foreign elements (Shaw and Stewart 
1994, 2).  The positive application essentializes etic, scholarly wrought categories that 
are not necessarily adopted by the people whose hybrid religiosity becomes the subject 
of academic scrutiny (Tambiah 1970, 42; T.
 G. Kirsch 2004, 706).
This outlook on the discrepancy between emic and etic perspectives, which renders 
syncretism a problematic analytical model for some scholars, articulates two allied senti­
ments.  First, religion as observed by people in real, diverse contexts is distinct from 
religion as defined by elites within the hierarchy of institutional religion or by scholars 
in academia (Yoder 1974, 7–8).  Second, it is biased to refer to the elite’s definition of 
religion as the norm in relation to which laymen’s religiosity is assessed and analyzed 
(Tambiah 1970, 41; Primiano 1995, 46–47).  However, can we discard syncretism on the 
grounds that since laypeople do not differentiate tenets and practices belonging to diverse 
belief traditions, they do not syncretize these elements but rather simultaneously adopt 
them?  Or can we propound that syncretism as an analytical concept is inadequate because 
it inadvertently asserts scholars’ preconceived categories, and laypeople do not make 
sense of their religiosity in terms of these preconceptions?
This paper presents ethnographic cases from Thailand that reveal ways in which lay 
and ordained Thai Buddhists resolve a dissonance within their manifold religiosity.  Prac­
ticing Theravada Buddhism, a branch of Buddhism that gained influence in mainland 
Southeast Asia beginning in the twelfth century CE (Swearer 2010, ix), Thai Buddhists 
have an understanding of a religious goal that revolves around the doctrine of karma and 
its notions of merit (bun), demerit (baab), and rebirth (Piker 1973, 300).  Theravada Bud­
dhism, nonetheless, is not the only tradition that informs Thai Buddhists’ religiosity.  
Elements of non­Theravada origins, such as magico­animistic and Chinese Mahayana
1) 
tenets and practices, constitute Thai Buddhists’ religious repertoires.  The ethnographic 
cases presented in the following section demonstrate that these elements from diverse 
traditions do not always peacefully coexist within the mindset of the believing individual.  
In several cases, rationalizations are made to impose a hierarchy on contradictory tenets.  
This cognitive act resolves the dissonance noted by the believing individual and renders 
his or her manifold religiosity internally coherent.  In light of this undertaking, I suggest 
that Thai Buddhists’ religiosity is not really “beyond syncretism” (Pattana 2005, 461), 
because, as illustrated by the cases presented in the following section, syncretization is 
1) A Chinese Mahayana component whose significance in Thailand’s religious landscape has become 
most notable in the twentieth century is the worship of the Bodhisattva Guanyin (or Kuan Im in 
Thai).  For more on this practice in contemporary Thailand, see Nithi (1994), Jackson (1999), Pattana 
(2005), Cohen (2008).

--- Page 3 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
117
one of many strategies adopted by Thai Buddhists to configure their inclusive and hetero­
geneous religious repertoires.
The thought process Thai Buddhists adopt to align their belief in magic with the 
doctrine of karma, I argue, evinces syncretism, which in this study specifically means the 
conscious synthesizing of tenets or practices considered to be of different categories and 
fundamentally incompatible with one another.
2)  Many studies of Thai Buddhism have 
shown that the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic exist side by side in the religious 
life of Thai Buddhists (Wells 1960, 6; Tambiah 1970, 41; Piker 1972; Terwiel 2012, 
Chapter 9).  As Kenneth E. Wells observes, Thai Buddhism provides its adherents the 
“means for making merit for self and others” and “assurance of safety and good fortune 
by means of devotion, good conduct, amulets, and verbal mantras” (Wells 1960, 6).  Thai 
Buddhists’ subscription to the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic contains a dis­
sonance, which is expressed and redressed by Thai Buddhists interviewed in this study: 
if a person’s karma is accountable for the fortunes and miseries, the successes and 
 failures, that he experiences in his present life, his resort to magic seems illogical.  The 
belief in the efficacy of magic clashes head­on with the doctrine of karma since the former 
holds that a person can secure success and fortunes without having to perform the deeds 
that warrant these rewards.
Scholars who explore the relationship between Buddhism and indigenous beliefs in 
South and Southeast Asia express diverse views about this relationship.  Some, as Barend 
J. Terwiel remarks, are baffled by the way in which Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements 
“become so intermingled that at present it is impossible to draw a distinction between 
them” (Terwiel 1976, 391).
3)  Others, privileging scriptures and scholastic traditions over 
popular aspects of religion, imply that non­Buddhist elements debase “the so­called noble 
ideals of Buddhism” (Ames 1964a, 75).
4)  Another group of scholars, sympathetic to lay 
2) The word “syncretism” has been used to denote different things by various agents in diverse con­
texts of usage.  In Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, a group of Protestant theo­
logians called for the reconciliation of diverse Protestant denominations.  Their opponents, however, 
contended that the reconciliation would lead to syncretism, which means the confusing jumble of 
religious ideas and practices in this context.  In the Renaissance period, the term denoted a continu­
ity between Christian theology and classical philosophy, which the Renaissance philosophers and 
scholars enthusiastically embraced (Shaw and Stewart 1994, 3).  For variable ways in which the 
word has been used and defined, see Droogers (1989, 7–25) and Shaw and Stewart (1994, 2–9).
3) Some scholars who express this view are John E. deYoung (1963, 110), Michael A. Wright (1968, 
1), and Anuman Rajadhon (2009, 35).
4) In a footnote, Ames lists the studies that propound such a view.  The list includes Copleston (1908, 
272–290), Elliot (1921, 42), Stephen (1953), and Ariyapala (1956).  I note here, however, that this 
view, espoused by some scholars of Buddhism several decades ago, seems to greatly diminish in the 
present­day scholarship of Buddhism.  In the case of Thai Buddhism, the pejorative view of popular 
Buddhism has been expressed primarily by ordained Buddhists and lay social critics who commu­
nicate their comments via mass media.  See Taylor (1999, 163–165) and Pattana (2006, 265–267).

--- Page 4 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
118
adherents and their hybrid religious practices, posit that what doctrinalists construe as 
a meaningless jumble of Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements does not necessarily bother 
people who practice Buddhism in real, diverse contexts (Tambiah 1970, 41) and that to 
interpret this intricate combination based on a scholar’s preconceptions of religion is 
counterproductive (McDaniel 2011, 229).
Despite diverse stances on the problem, I hold that these different approaches fail 
to recognize the possibility that people who practice “popular” Buddhism can think about 
their religious practices on a conceptual level.  They seem to concur that laypeople do 
not share concepts and categories held by elites in the institutionalized religion and by 
scholars who study religion in academia.  Therefore, it is quite futile to make sense of 
their religiosity on the basis of the taxonomy and the idioms formulated within scholastic 
tradition or academic settings.  This connotation, I argue, perpetuates the view that since 
people who practice popular Buddhism do not adhere to dogmatic categories or the idea 
of orthodoxy espoused by religious elites and scholars, they incessantly create new com­
binations of Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements to meet their ever­shifting spiritual 
needs.  And they do so without feeling obligated to justify their hybrid religious prac­
tices.
5)  The ethnographic cases presented in this paper prove otherwise.  They show 
that Thai Buddhists do not unreflectively and indiscriminately adopt all religious tenets 
and practices regardless of their different origins and implications.  Individuals inter­
viewed in this study aptly pointed out a dissonance between the doctrine of karma and 
the belief in magic.  They also developed a rationalization aimed at resolving this disso­
nance.  This cognitive process indicates that, to a significant extent, informants make a 
distinction between Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements.  They subordinate the belief 
in magic to the doctrine of karma to maintain the orthodoxy of the Buddhist tenet.
Apart from this introduction, I segment this study into three parts.  The first part 
—“Karma versus Magic: Dissonance and Syncretization”—has two subsections.  “Karma 
versus Magic: A Peculiar Mental Scheme?” discusses a mode of thought that perceives 
a dissonance between the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic.  I argue here that 
this mental scheme is not an idiosyncratic trait peculiar to a few doctrinalists but a 
recurrent view expressed by several Thai Buddhists who are simultaneously engaged 
with the “philosophical” and “practical” aspects of Buddhism.
6)  The discussion in this 
5) McDaniel (2011, 228) directly expresses this view.  Pattana (2005, 464–466) and Jackson (1999, 
311) imply the same, noting the decline of the orthodoxy of state­sponsored Theravada Buddhism 
vis­à­vis the proliferation of newly minted supernatural cults in contemporary, capitalist Thailand.
6) E.
 R. Leach suggests two strata of a religion: philosophical religion and practical religion.  The 
former is prevalent among the intellectuals, to whom religion is an intricate system of ethical prin­
ciples and doctrines.  The latter is religion as observed by “an ordinary churchgoer” (Leach 1968, 
1) whose religious practices are relatively more oriented toward practical, worldly concerns.

--- Page 5 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
119
part is aimed to contextualize ethnographic cases presented in the succeeding subsection, 
“Dissonance and Syncretization.”  This section analyzes oral statements given by indi­
vidual Thai Buddhists who note the dissonance and devise rationalizations to reconcile 
the belief in magic to the karma postulate.  I further argue that by these rationalizations, 
informants can maintain the authority of the doctrine of karma without giving up their 
faith in instrumental magic.  The second part—“Syncretism or Repertoire?”—delineates 
how ethnographic cases presented in the preceding section contribute to a well­rounded 
understanding of vernacular Thai Buddhism.  The final part—“Problematizing Anti­
syncretism”—discusses the ramifications of this study.
Informants’ accounts were collected through my fieldwork in the northeast of Thai­
land from May to August 2013.  In order to protect informants’ privacy, only their first 
names are given.  All Thai sources, when quoted, were translated to English by me.
Karma versus Magic: Dissonance and Syncretization
1. Karma versus Magic: A Peculiar Mental Scheme?
A blog maintained by a lay Buddhist who describes himself as “a college graduate from 
Chiang Mai who has lived in Bangkok for more than seven years” (Norasath 2011) con­
tains the following remark on the efficacy of amulets:
If we Buddhists grant that the law of karma is the Truth, and that people reap the fruit of their 
actions, then let’s consider this scenario.  A vicious person, wearing a powerful amulet around his 
neck—let’s say the amulet was consecrated by Somdet To 7)—, do you think it would safeguard 
him from harm?  Or would it render him invulnerable or invincible?  I have pondered upon this 
question, trying to use my personal logic to solve the puzzle.  If amulets and talismans are always 
efficacious, regardless of the moral quality of those who carry them, then what good do we get from 
observing the law of karma?  All sinners just need to get hold of sacred amulets, then they can 
easily dodge the karmic retribution. (ibid.)
The cited excerpt articulates a dissonance that troubles the blogger.  He seems to be 
fully aware of the fundamental incompatibility between the belief in magic and the doc­
trine of karma, and the fact that both tenets have occupied prominent places in the reli­
gious life of Thai Buddhists.  Feeling obligated to justify the subscription to conflicting 
7) Somdet To is a casual abbreviation of Somdet Phra Phutthachan (To Phrommarangsi), the author 
of the renowned Jinapanjara Gatha.  Somdet To has been much revered by Thai Buddhists for his 
exemplary religious conduct as well as for his reputed spiritual power.  He was the originator of the 
prestigious Somdet Wat Rakang amulets, whose exalted monetary value is well known among Thai 
amulet collectors.

--- Page 6 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
120
tenets that characterizes his own as well as his fellow Buddhists’ religiosity, the blogger 
makes the following rationalization:
I do believe that these items [i.e., amulets and talismans] serve virtuous people.  Honest bearers 
can take refuge in their amulets when facing threats, because miracles save only righteous people. 
(ibid.)
The blogger redresses the dissonance by placing a condition on the efficacy of amulets, 
and this condition is nothing else but bearers’ good karma.  This cognitive process of 
positioning magic vis­à­vis karma to remark on or tackle their fundamental incongruity 
is not an idiosyncratic mental scheme.  A decree issued by King Rama I on August 1782 
lists the names of spirits and deities that Siamese subjects can legally worship.  However, 
the King maintained the supremacy of the law of karma, denouncing the view that sup­
plication rituals addressing spirits and deities could relieve miseries resulting from voli­
tional acts:
Those whose minds were estranged from the Triple Gems, when tormented by the fruit of their 
bad karma, are ignorant of the real agent behind their ordeals.  They thus seek refuge in spirits 
and deities, holding the false view that the Triple Gems fail to rescue them from adversities and 
misfortunes.  When the retribution is complete, and the ordeal comes to an end, they falsely assume 
that spirits and deities respond to their requests.  These people, having totally forsaken the Triple 
Gems, are bound for the lower realms of existence. (Rama I 1986, 418–419)
I share Thomas Kirsch’s view that this decree demonstrates the orthodoxy of the doc­
trine of karma as construed by King Rama I, who holds that “fortune and affliction alike 
ultimately result from karma, not from the actions of spirits or gods” (A.  T. Kirsch 
1977, 241; emphasis in original).  I elaborate on Kirsch’s observation by further arguing 
that the decree gives us a glimpse of the dissonance felt by the King, who seems to 
perceive that the Siamese belief in the power of spirits and deities clashes with the causal 
paradigm posited by the doctrine of karma.  Stanley Tambiah cogently describes this 
conflict:
. . . if the doctrine of karma gives an explanation of present suffering and squarely puts the burden 
of release on individual effort, then the doctrine that supernatural agents can cause or relieve 
 sufferings and that relief can come through propitiating them contradicts the karma postulate. 
 (Tambiah 1970, 41; emphasis in original)
The King positioned the doctrine of karma vis­à­vis spirit worship and discerned the 
contradictory outlooks on cause and effect these two complexes of tenets imply.  Had he 
not noted the dissonance, he might not have reaffirmed the orthodoxy of the karma 

--- Page 7 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
121
postulate by decrying spirit worship.
Despite different configurations of their religious ideas conditioned by their different 
subject positions and time periods, the blogger and the King regard the magical means 
of achieving desirable effects (by resorting to spirits and deities, by carrying magical 
items, or by means of magical rituals) as antithetical to the concept of volitional acts and 
their automatic fruition espoused by the doctrine of karma.  Their remarks evince a mode 
of thought that situates karma and magic in contrast to one another.  The juxtaposition 
results in a recognition that these distinct causal schemes espouse contradictory defini­
tions of consequential actions.  I note here that not all Thai Buddhists imagine karma and 
magic in this particular fashion.  However, this mental scheme is not uncommon.  It has 
been reflected in oral and written statements made by Thai Buddhists from diverse 
backgrounds.  The noted conflict between the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic 
presented in this section is neither peculiar to a few Buddhist doctrinalists nor the prod­
uct of my academic training that indulges in inconsistency on a conceptual level.  Instead, 
it has been discerned by many Thai Buddhists who are not oblivious to underlying mean­
ings of the diverse religious tenets and practices they adopt.
One more example is delineated here to bolster my argument that the felt conflict 
between karma and magic is not a sentiment peculiar to a few intellectual elites.  A book 
on apotropaic rituals titled Kao wat kao thi phithi sado khro (The nine apotropaic rituals 
of nine temples) provides a detailed description of the rituals performed by nine famous 
Buddhist monks from nine temples located in different regions of Thailand.  Regardless 
of their varied ritualistic procedures and the types of merit participants believe they 
convey, all nine rituals address a twofold objective: warding off evil and attracting boons.  
Given the popular framing of the book, apparent in its emphasis on the efficacy of apo­
tropaic rituals and the mystical power of Buddhist adepts who perform these rituals, it is 
not unwarranted to regard the monograph as a manifestation of vernacular Thai Bud­
dhism.  The author, however, maintains that apotropaic rituals cannot ward off karmic 
retribution and that people cannot rely solely on rituals for fortunes and merits because 
all boons are realized by volitional acts that warrant them:
Those cult leaders who tell people to halt or abate karmic retaliation by means of rituals perpetu­
ate the false belief that humans can change or evade the consequence of their actions.  Holders of 
this false view are definitely destined for hell realms.  Humans may take refuge in rituals.  They 
may ward off evil luck or summon good fortune by rituals invented for variable purposes.  How­
ever, they must have faith in the law of karma.  They must first and foremost rely on their actions 
and efforts, which are the surest means to secure fortunes and merits. (Sira 2016, 23–24)
Sira Arsawadeeros, though granting the efficacy of apotropaic rituals, contends that karma 

--- Page 8 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
122
is the supreme causal agent responsible for merits and miseries humans experience in 
their lives.  Karma and magic are positioned in a hierarchical order as the author notices 
that the granted efficacy of magical rituals contradicts the paramount principle of indi­
vidual effort upheld by the karma postulate.  Similar to the two cases mentioned earlier, 
this statement reveals the view of its author that karma and magic entail contradictory 
implications.  Therefore, in order to retain them both, Sira feels compelled to resolve 
the dissonance by subsuming one under the other.  The author’s rationalization that 
apotropaic rituals are efficacious but their efficacy does not override the law of karma 
reveals a syncretism, by which what the believing individual recognizes as incongruous 
religious tenets are reconciled and retained within a single mindset.  In light of this 
analysis, suffice it to say that the author of the quoted excerpt possesses a hybrid religious 
mindset in which syncretism is one of several ordering principles employed to maintain 
sense and consistency.  This argument is reified by ethnographic cases presented in the 
following subsection, which delineates ways in which Thai Buddhists who note the 
 dissonance between karma and magic redress the conflict.
2. Dissonance and Syncretization
The informants whose accounts are presented in this study noted a conflict between the 
doctrine of karma and the belief in instrumental magic.  They addressed this discrep ­
ancy in variable fashions.  Mr. Woravit, a Thai Buddhist who practices meditation and 
studies magic spells, stated that despite his belief in the power of magic and rituals in 
granting a person’s wish, he harbors no doubt about the supremacy of a karmic force.  
Mr. Woravit’s justification, which is presented in the following subsection, is indicative 
of the dissonance between the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic from his per­
spective: if instrumental magic and rituals unfailingly bring about desirable effects, the 
doctrine of karma, which rules that worldly achievements are the fruits of a person’s good 
karma, cannot be true.
In a similar fashion, Venerable Ko, a Buddhist monk in a rural monastery in Buriram 
Province, made a justification that redresses a noted inconsistency within his hybrid 
religious practice.  Being well versed in healing spells and rituals, Venerable Ko claimed 
that the success or failure of a healing rite was determined by a karmic bond between 
the healer and his patient.  The informant made a causal connection between an indi­
vidual’s karma and the efficacy of healing magic to resolve what he construed as a crucial 
dissonance: If magic is believed to be invariably successful in producing desirable conse­
quences, then it can be employed to avert the effect of bad karma or to benefit a person 
despite his vicious deeds.  This assumption is problematic as it contradicts the doctrine 
of karma, which holds that nothing can interfere with the operation of karmic machination.  

--- Page 9 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
123
In the following subsections, I present the accounts given by each informant and discuss 
their implications.
2.1. Mr. Woravit
Mr. Woravit is a lecturer at a vocational college in Sakon Nakhon, a province in the upper 
part of northeast Thailand.  He is a self­professed Buddhist who construes meditation as 
“the science of the mind,” by which he means the empirically verifiable method to disci­
pline the mind for certain ends, such as a total elimination of mental defilements or an 
attainment of mystical power.  Considering his educational background and socioeco­
nomic status, Mr. Woravit is a member of the middle class in a provincial city, whose 
career in the field of electrical technology does not hinder his interest in spiritual matters.  
He wrote and published a monograph on psychic experiences he had while practicing 
profound meditation.
8)  He also attested to the reality of past­life recollection, which is a 
supramundane ability he claimed to have acquired through the vigorous practice of med­
itation.  By the time I interviewed him in July 2013, Mr. Woravit had taken part in an 
archeological expedition that he and his friend had initiated in search of an ancient Khmer 
temple Mr. Woravit saw in his psychic vision.  In our discussion about the efficacy of 
instrumental magic, the informant proclaimed the efficacy of charms and spells.  How­
ever, he argued against the view that magic could yield favorable consequences despite 
the absence of effort to achieve such effects through natural means.  Such belief, he 
elaborated, exaggerated the power of magic.  He said spells and charms do not invoke 
wealth, luck, or other worldly boons out of thin air.  They merely tap into the user’s 
positive karmic force and make its fruit most favorable to him or her.  Within this explan­
atory scheme, magic is useless without the store of good karma its user has accumulated.  
This interplay between karma and magic is described by Mr. Woravit:
Magic does not bring about boons and merits.  People can obtain them only through their just and 
persistent effort, that is, through their good karma.  Spells are merely means through which a 
person taps into the store of his good karma.  By chanting a spell, the chanter’s mind is calm and 
receptive of positive karmic force.  Metaphorically speaking, when a person does a good deed, he 
deposits a sum of good karma in his bank account.  As he performs more good deeds, his balance 
8) Mr. Woravit’s conception of profound meditation and psychic power seems to have a basis in the 
doctrine of six supranormal knowledges (abhiññā) included in the the Sutta Pitaka and Vinaya 
Pitaka.  The doctrine construes mystical power as a quality achieved by a concentrated mind while 
dwelling in an advanced stage of profound meditation (jhāna).  On the relationship between medita­
tion and superhuman power in the Pali canon and Buddhist scholastic traditions, see Clough (2011) 
and Fiordalis (2008, 134–140).  For ways in which this tenet informs lay Buddhists’ conceptions of 
superhuman power and types of individual who possess this power, see Pranke (2011) on contem­
porary Burma, and Scott (2011) on modern Thailand.

--- Page 10 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
124
accumulates.  Spells are passcodes that grant access to this bank account.  You chant these spells 
to withdraw your good karma from your account, and its benevolent force rewards you with suc­
cess, wealth, love, or other good things you wish for.  A person may chant a spell for the success 
of his new business and it works out as he wishes.  Why?  Because he has a sufficient sum of good 
karma in his account.  Another person may do the same but experience total failure.  This is, 
likewise, due to the absence of—or a shortfall in—his good karma. (Personal interview, July 19, 
2013)
Magic that upholds rather than contradicts the law of karma as described by Mr. Woravit 
is not an idiosyncratic concept.  Tambiah quoted the acting abbot of That Thaung temple 
in Bangkok who explained that Thai people wear small Buddha images around their necks 
because they “believe that they will give them body protection, and that they will ensure 
that good action will yield good returns” (quoted in Tambiah 1984, 199; italics added).  
Underlying this explanation is the idea that the magical power of amulets complements 
the benevolent force of an individual’s good karma.  A similar sentiment underlies a 
 comment about the efficacy of magic posted on a Thai website that sells amulets and 
talismans:
Those who do not possess amulets or do not know any useful spells are totally subject to their 
karma.  But people who make good use of these supplementaries can ameliorate the effect of a 
hostile karmic force.  It does not mean, however, that amulets and spells can negate malevolent 
karmic effect.  Yet they can lessen its severity.  To elucidate, a vendor suffering from karmic 
retribution would be unable to sell a single item.  But with the help of amulets and spells, he man­
ages to sell a thing or two. (Krunoi Bandoykam 2014)
These comments, like Mr Woravit’s, reiterate the idea that karmic force is the real agent 
behind the efficacy of instrumental magic.  This justification would not be necessary if 
Thai Buddhists merely observed the doctrine of karma and took part in magic cults while 
being unaware of the different connotations underlying these practices.  Mr. Woravit, 
like the acting abbot and the webmaster whose comments are quoted above, recognizes 
a dissonance underlying his hybrid religious practice in which the role of karma as the 
supreme causal agent clashes with the given efficacy of instrumental magic.  Although 
the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic can coexist within a mindset, one needs to 
be subsumed under the other in order to resolve the dissonance, since these two outlooks 
espouse contradictory views of cause and effect.  The former holds that intentional actions 
automatically yield particular consequences and no external force can compromise this 
automaticity.  The latter, on the contrary, proclaims that intended effects can be induced 
by tapping into mystical power, which can be harnessed and put to use by means of spells 
and charms.  Mr. Woravit resolves this conflict by subordinating the belief in magic to 

--- Page 11 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
125
the doctrine of karma, maintaining that magic is efficacious only when it agrees with the 
user’s karmic build.
The acting abbot’s and the webmaster’s comments reveal a striking divergence from 
the canonical stance on the inalterability of karma.  The Buddha, refuting the fatalistic 
sentiment inherent in the Jain concept of karma, which holds that a person is inevitably 
doomed once he commits wicked deeds, expounded in the Sankha Sutta that the effects 
of past evil deeds could be alleviated by abstaining from evil acts and by developing a 
meritorious state of mind.
9)  As evinced in the Sankha Sutta, the idea that there is a 
method to lessen severe karmic force is not a new concept created by Thai Buddhists.  
Nonetheless, the role of magic in placating hostile karmic force or enhancing benevolent 
karmic force is a new component not found anywhere in the canon.  This new component, 
I argue, results from an acute awareness of dissonance experienced by Thai Buddhists 
as they observe the doctrine of karma and enlist the service of instrumental magic.  The 
noted incongruity induces a rationalization that aligns the belief in magic with the karma 
postulate.
10)  This rationalization characterizes a hybrid religious practice in which a 
person can resort to instrumental magic and still be faithful to his belief in karma.
2.2. Venerable Ko
Venerable Ko, like Mr. Woravit, noted a crucial problem with the belief that magic oper­
ates by its own rules and is not subject to the law of karma.  Underlying this belief is an 
implication—as indicated by the informant—that magic can overpower karmic force.  
Venerable Ko approached this issue from the stance of an ordained Buddhist who also 
serves as a spiritual healer and exorcist.  Venerable Ko grew up in a peasant village in 
Buriram.  Born in the late 1970s to a peasant family, the monk obtained secondary educa­
tion from a village school then moved to Bangkok, where he worked as a menial worker 
for a short period of time.  The informant then returned to Buriram, entered the monastic 
order, and served as an abbot for a new temple in Ban Nongbualong village, not far from 
his native community.  In comparison to Mr. Woravit, Venerable Ko may be designated 
as a member of the working class from a rural area who appears to be more engaged with 
9) The Sankha Sutta or “The Conch Trumpet” (Thanissaro Bhikkhu 1999b) is included in the Saṃyutta 
Nikāya of the Sutta Pitaka.
10) Steven Piker, in his study of inconsistency in Thai Buddhists’ religious beliefs, presents ethno­
graphic cases that manifest variable ways in which Thai Buddhists justify their belief in the power 
of amulets that contradict the doctrine of karma—“the master explanatory principle” (Piker 1972, 
217) that Piker’s informants hold onto.  Most of his informants proclaimed the supremacy of the 
karma postulate, maintaining that amulets could not completely negate the effect of one’s karma 
(ibid., 220).  Piker’s study shows that the noted dissonance between the doctrine of karma and the 
belief in magic, and the felt obligation to resolve it, are not uncommon among Thai Buddhists.

--- Page 12 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
126
“folk” than “doctrinal” Buddhism.  However, the informant preaches orthodox Buddhist 
doctrines as often as he redresses problems regarding magic and spirits.  Given his 
versatile role, it is not surprising that the monk recognized a conflict between the doctrine 
of karma and the belief in magic, which he resolved by construing karma as the agent 
behind the power of magic.
Michael M. Ames, in his study of the relationship between magical­animistic beliefs 
and Sinhalese Buddhism, contends that karma, magic, and spirits are causal theories that 
complement rather than contradict one another.  An illness, if cured by a counterspell, 
is attributed to black magic.  If it is healed by a supplication or an exorcising rite, the 
ailment indicates the evil influence of offended spirits.  If it is, however, irresponsive to 
any remedies, it is taken as retribution for the patient’s bad karma (Ames 1964b, 38).  
Venerable Ko employed a different explanatory scheme to reason why healing spells 
work in some cases but fail in others.  His reasoning reveals his attempt to resolve the 
dissonance underlying the belief that magic spells always work in spite of healers’ and 
patients’ bad karma:
It is next to impossible to guarantee the efficacy of healing spells because several factors are 
accountable for their therapeutic power.  The most pivotal factor, though, is the karmic bond 
between the healer and his patient.  A healing ritual works best when the healer’s positive karmic 
force is attuned to his patient’s.  This agreement is not a matter of chance but the result of a 
meritorious and mutually benevolent relationship the healer and his patient had with one another 
in their past lives.  A person suffering from a supernatural illness may seek help from numerous 
ordained and lay healers, only to experience one failure after another.  This is either because the 
person is under the influence of his bad karma, because the healer’s positive karmic force is not 
sufficient to avert the illness, or because there is an unfavorable or no karmic bond between the 
healer and his patient.  Now you know why some healers cure certain persons but fail to heal  others. 
(Personal interview, June 17, 2013)
Venerable Ko’s explanation solves an ethical problem posed by the image of a wicked 
soul rescued from karmic retaliation by means of healing spells and rituals.  He reiterated 
Mr. Woravit’s opinion that the efficacy of magic requires support from the individual’s 
positive karmic force.  Magic, therefore, does not override the supremacy of karmic 
machination.  It is noteworthy, however, that Venerable Ko focuses on the interpersonal 
aspect of karma, while Mr. Woravit construes it as a personal asset.  The former regards 
human relationships as a distinct class of karma, which determines the circle of people a 
person meets in his present life and the relationships he develops with them.  In this 
particular conception of karma, the power of magic lies in the quality of the past life 
relationship between healer and patient.  If the relationship is, to use the informant’s 
words, “meritorious and mutually benevolent,” healing magic is believed to yield a sat­

--- Page 13 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
127
isfactory result.11)
The notion of karmic bond is not a new concept invented by an ordained Thai Bud­
dhist.  The idea can be traced back to the collection of Jataka stories, which always end 
with the identification of births or samodhāna (Appleton 2010, 6).  The Buddha always 
concludes a story of his past life by matching people from the past with those in the pres­
ent.  Though circumstances change, the Buddha runs into the same group of people 
through his countless rebirths.  Also, the roles of these people in his different lives are 
quite static.  King 
Śuddhodana always shows up as the Buddha’s father, while the Bud­
dha’s cousin Devadatta is invariably his archenemy.  The samodhāna in Jataka stories 
articulates the view that the relationships a person formed in the past generate a karmic 
force that binds him to a certain circle of people.  This force also prescribes the nature 
of his present relationships with those people and the way in which these relationships 
contribute to merits and miseries the person experiences in his life.  Venerable Ko seems 
to draw on this notion of karmic bond as he attributes the efficacy of healing magic to the 
agreement between healers’ and patients’ positive karmic forces.
What does Venerable Ko’s testimony tell us about the relationship between Bud­
dhist doctrines and indigenous belief traditions?  On the one hand, Venerable Ko’s 
account seems to reaffirm the notion that Buddhist doctrines, once transplanted to Thai 
culture, override indigenous beliefs and become normative postulates in relation to which 
indigenous beliefs are interpreted and assessed.
12)  Venerable Ko legitimizes his belief 
in magic by expounding its efficacy in terms of the karma postulate, which, in this case, 
holds epistemic authority.  On the other hand, the way Venerable Ko aligns the belief in 
magic with the doctrine of karma shows that he makes a distinction between these 
separate, distinct sets of beliefs.  He, like Mr. Woravit and other Thai Buddhists whose 
rationalizations were presented in the previous subsection, makes a justification that 
results in a syncretization of an orthodox Buddhist doctrine with local belief in magic.  
They do not merely adopt tenets and practices belonging to Thai magic cults without 
thinking about their proper place vis­à­vis the doctrine of karma.  I discuss the ramifica­
tions of this observation in the next section.
11) A paperback titled The Best Magical Spells of 129 Masters (Sutyot mon khatha 129 khanajarn) reveals 
the four secrets behind the efficacy of a magic spell.  Last on the list is the karmic build of the 
practitioner and the karmic bond he/she has with his/her mentor.  The following statement, similar 
to Venerable Ko’s rationalization, articulates the idea that a meritorious karmic tie between pupil 
and master contributes to the power of instrumental magic:
Some practitioners master magical spells in the initial phase of their training because of their 
supporting positive karma, or because they were pupils of the masters who invented those 
spells in their past lives. (Kongka Himalai 2016, 30)
12) Bernard Formoso’s studies (1996; 1998) on the influence of Theravada Buddhism on the religious 
ideas and values of the Tai delineate this interplay.

--- Page 14 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
128
Syncretism or Repertoire?
In the final chapter of The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk, Justin McDaniel (2011) 
proposes the concept of repertoire, which, he argues, is an analytical scheme devoid of 
prescribed classification that underlies the theory of syncretism.  Syncretism, denoting 
the amalgamation of ideas or practices belonging to different traditions, implies precon­
ceived, clearly demarcated categories.  These preconceptions are counterproductive 
rather than illuminating when applied to the highly diversified and heterogeneous reli­
gious repertoires of Thai Buddhists (McDaniel 2011, 227–229).  Scholars go into the field 
with prescribed labels and categories in their heads, only to discover that the people 
whose religious experiences they study do not perceive their religiosity on the basis of 
these labels and categories.  Such is the case of Thai Buddhists, who do not seem to make 
a conceptual or value distinction between diverse religious tenets or practices that they 
adopt.  McDaniel’s description of his experience in Thailand clearly articulates this 
 opinion:
In my experience and interviews, monks or laypeople prostrating in front of a shrine with statues 
of General Taksin, Kuan Im, Shakyamuni Buddha, Somdet To, Phra Sangkhacchai do not see the 
shrine as a syncretistic stage or themselves as multireligious.  They do not process the images 
separately, with some being local, some translocal, some Buddhist, and some non­Buddhist.  If 
they did, there would be a more tactical attempt to arrange the objects or justify practices. (ibid., 
228)
This seems to be the problem with syncretism as an analytical perspective from 
 McDaniel’s viewpoint: Since syncretism presupposes division and classification, which 
for Thai Buddhists do not exist, it fails to do justice to the heterogeneous, open, and 
indiscriminate nature of their religiosity.  To do away with this shortfall, McDaniel advo­
cates the concept of repertoire,
13) which does not invoke the image of “an integrated and 
prescribed system” (ibid., 230) and thus recognizes the possibility that “a person’s rep­
ertoire, religious or otherwise, can be internally inconsistent and contradictory” (ibid., 
225).  McDaniel further expounds that Thai Buddhists’ religious repertoires are spheres 
where the scholarly defined incongruity does not hinder the amalgamation of diverse sets 
of values and axioms.  An individual may uphold worldly values such as security and 
abundance as much as soteriological principles such as nonattachment and imperma­
13) McDaniel defines the word “repertoire” as follows: “A repertoire is a constantly shifting collection 
of gestures, objects, texts, plots, tropes, ethical maxims, precepts, ritual movements, and expecta­
tions that any individual agent employs and draws upon when acting and explaining action” (McDaniel 
2011, 225).

--- Page 15 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
129
nence.  Given this propensity to encompass anything an individual devotee considers 
relevant, a personal religious repertoire as McDaniel experienced in Thailand
. . . usually takes the form of accretion.  Thai religieux seem to add to their individual repertoires 
but rarely subtract.  Individual memories are expressed in their accumulations.  A monastery is 
valued for its history and the display of that history through its collection of things and recorded 
events.  A monastery accumulates images from many different traditions and many different 
patrons.  Abundance is valued.  The accumulated materials can seem like mere bricolage, and 
sometimes it is, but often it is valuable for its connection to a powerful person, event, or patron. 
(ibid., 226)
It seems that new items, ideas, or practices can be infinitely added to this inherently 
inclusive religious repertoire in which abundance is a governing principle.  Things that 
bear some sort of connection to the pre­existing sacral components or entities, when 
such connection is discerned by the individual devotee, tend to be accepted into his or 
her personal repertoire.  Given this principle of inclusion, an amulet consecrated by a 
disciple of a renowned monk who produced powerful amulets will be valued for its protec­
tive potency as well (ibid.).  This outlook on Thai Buddhists’ religious repertoires seems 
to suggest that as long as a link between pre­existing and new elements is perceived, an 
individual repertoire can be incessantly embellished.
I contend that McDaniel’s analytical orientation is based on two notions about Thai 
Buddhism and its adherents that are not always true.  First, Thai Buddhists ascribe equal 
value to Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements; therefore, they combine Buddhist with 
non­Buddhist practices without feeling obligated to justify their hybrid religiosity.  Sec­
ond, there is no baseline or threshold to restrict diverse elements that Thai Buddhists 
add to their personal repertoires.  Relevance and connection perceived by each individual 
devotee lead to an infinite accretion of elements within the repertoire, which results in 
the limitless possibilities of variable, hybrid ways Thai Buddhists observe their faith.
14)  
Inconsistency and dissonance, therefore, are scholarly wrought problems.  On the basis 
14) This view is expressed in Peter A. Jackson’s study on the excessive desire for wealth that configured 
religious practices of Thai Buddhists during Thailand’s economic boom.  Jackson argues that this 
phenomenon characterizes what he calls “the ‘anything goes’ days of the boom” (Jackson 1999, 
314), by which he means the 1990s—the decade when Thailand experienced rapid economic growth 
and a limitless proliferation of religious symbols and practices.  Jackson argues that the peculiar 
combinations of religious beliefs and practices in this time period “proliferate beyond the power of 
any individual or institutional authority to limit or define” (ibid., 311), and that they manifest “a Thai 
instance of postmodern condition in which faith in the unity of knowledge, power, and being is 
abandoned” (ibid.).  It seems that for Jackson, Thai people during the economic boom did not adhere 
to any orthodox religious concepts nor share any common ideals.  Therefore, all new inventions of 
religious tenets and activities are viable for them.

--- Page 16 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
130
of the ethnographic cases presented in the foregoing section, I argue against these two 
notions.
The two informants are cognizant of the conflict between the doctrine of karma and 
the belief in magic.  They are aware that the uncurbed efficacy of instrumental magic 
defies the karma postulate.  If a person can ward off unfortunate events or achieve his 
heart’s desire by merely using magic, then there is no reason to fear karmic retribution 
or to accumulate good karma.  This noted discrepancy compels informants to justify their 
simultaneous belief in contradicting tenets.  Based on the justifications made by my 
informants, I make two observations about Thai Buddhism and the people who observe 
it.  First, even though there are several circumstances in which Thai Buddhists do not 
make a value distinction between Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements, there are also 
cases in which a hierarchical ordering is made.  Mr. Woravit and Venerable Ko feel the 
need to resolve the dissonance between the doctrine of karma and the belief in magic 
precisely because they perceive them as two separate sets of tenets that espouse distinct 
views of the acceptable way to secure favorable consequences.  By attributing the efficacy 
of instrumental magic to its user’s or a client’s favorable karma, they subordinate a non­
Buddhist tenet to a prominent Buddhist doctrine.  This “hierarchical ordering” (Tambiah 
1970, 41) evinces the notion of orthodoxy held by the informants.  For them, the doctrine 
of karma holds epistemic authority; thus, the belief in magic, espousing the view that 
mystical power can reward or punish a person regardless of his karmic accumulation, 
needs to be curtailed in order to maintain the supremacy of the karma postulate.  Con­
sidering that a distinction and a hierarchical arrangement were made in this case, the 
concept of repertoire as suggested by McDaniel, which highlights accretion and indis­
criminate inclusivity, seems unfit to convey such a process.  Even though the informants 
claim their simultaneous belief in magic and karma, they feel obligated to subordinate 
the former to the latter.  In this light, they seem to syncretize contradicting tenets rather 
than indiscriminately accept them into their religious repertoires.
This initial observation leads us to the second point.  Mr. Woravit’s and Venerable 
Ko’s conceptions of magic, which venerate the doctrine of karma, reveal that even though 
diverse tenets are accepted into informants’ religious repertoires, there is a restriction 
that dictates acceptable and sensible relations between these tenets.  Based on my infor­
mants’ testimonies, I propose that at the core of this restriction lies the orthodoxy of the 
karma postulate, which rules that non­Buddhist elements can be adopted as long as they 
do not contradict or compromise the authority of the doctrine of karma.  If they do, these 
elements need to be aligned with this orthodox dogma.  As McDaniel lucidly describes 
in his study, Thai Buddhists worship and supplicate deities of different traditions.  They 
call themselves Buddhists but carry amulets from Tibet and express the desire to possess 

--- Page 17 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
131
a crucifix (McDaniel 2011, 226–228).  I suggest that these non­Buddhist elements are 
adopted not because Thai Buddhists, not adhering to a single orthodox ideal, accept 
anything from anywhere.  Rather, these hybrid religious practices are possible in the 
context of vernacular Thai Buddhism largely because Thai Buddhists believe that deities 
or magical objects, regardless of the tradition of their origin, do not wield power over the 
law of karma.  Whenever the supplication to deities and the resort to magic are considered 
noncompliant with the doctrine of karma, as evinced in the ethnographic data presented 
earlier, Thai Buddhists tend to make a justification that subsumes the non­Buddhist 
 element under the karma postulate.
Toward the end of his monograph, McDaniel problematizes the analytical perspec­
tive that focuses on detecting and pathologizing inconsistencies within a supposedly 
unified and coherent repertoire of individuals’ religious beliefs.  He construes this indul­
gence in consistency as scholars’ adherence to the dichotomy between orthodoxy and 
heterodoxy, which is inadequate to explain the intricacy of and the dynamic within reli­
gious repertoires of real people in diverse contexts of practice:
Why can’t we expect that a person will hold and act upon simultaneous, multiple ideals?  Why don’t 
we see this as an advantage?  Why is consistency or orthodoxy seen as the ideal? . . . Perhaps it 
would be more accurate to abandon the dichotomy of orthodoxy and heterodoxy, to abandon the 
very notion that these values are inconsistent in favor of a close study of individual events, agents, 
and objects. (ibid., 228)
McDaniel’s argument is cogent since it is based on the ethnographic data he meticulously 
presents in his study.  It is, however, inapplicable to the cases I demonstrate in this study, 
which convey two salient points.  First, consistency and orthodoxy matter to several Thai 
Buddhists.  My informants apparently strived for consistency as they proclaimed that 
instrumental magic merely tapped into its user’s store of karma.  They would not have 
made such a justification had they not deciphered the dissonance between the doctrine 
of karma and the belief in magic and seen it as problematic.  This justification also reflects 
their attempt to keep their hybrid religious practice in line with the orthodox Buddhist 
doctrine, precisely the karma postulate.
15)  Second, it is true that Thai Buddhists, to use 
McDaniel’s words, “act upon simultaneous, multiple ideals” (ibid., 227).  Nonetheless, 
these multiple ideals do not carry the same weight for all Thai Buddhists.  My informants 
believe that magic can empirically induce intended consequences.  Yet they refute the 
idea that instrumental magic can save wicked souls from their bad karma or condemn the 
15) Julia Cassaniti cogently delineates the orthodoxy of the law of karma and its function as the master 
explanatory scheme Thai Buddhists employ to account for merits and miseries a person experiences 
in his present life (see Cassaniti 2015, 149–173).

--- Page 18 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
132
righteous despite their noble deeds.  For them, the power of magic and the operation of 
karmic force are both real.  Still, the veracity of the law of karma overrides that of magic.
These two observations lead to the final argument of this section, which proposes 
that two analytical concepts—syncretism and repertoire—can be combined to make 
sense of hybrid religious practices adopted by Thai Buddhists.  The notion of repertoire, 
in my opinion, needs a slight modification in order to encompass diverse forms of rela­
tionships between Buddhist and non­Buddhist elements in vernacular Thai Buddhism.  
I espouse Tambiah’s view that Thai Buddhism is “a total field” (Tambiah 1970, 41) that 
expresses various relations between Buddhist and non­Buddhist components.  In some 
cases, as McDaniel’s study delineates, these two components exist side by side.  They 
are indiscriminately received by Thai Buddhists who seem not to make a conceptual or 
a value distinction between them.  In other cases, as my study shows, a distinction is 
made, a conflict is noted, and a hierarchical ordering is made to resolve the dissonance 
and to maintain the orthodoxy of Buddhist tenets.  These different scenarios express the 
variety of possible relations between Buddhist and non­Buddhist components within a 
total field of religious beliefs and practices.  These possible relations include, but are not 
limited to, “Distinctions, oppositions, complementarities, linkages, and hierarchy” (ibid., 
42).  The concept of repertoire, when applied to expound the totality of religious beliefs 
and practices Thai Buddhists hold onto, should be sensitive to these various forms of 
possible relations, which certainly do not exclude syncretism.
Problematizing Anti-syncretism
In his study of spirit­medium cults in contemporary Thailand, Pattana Kitiarsa draws on 
the term “parade of supernaturals” coined by Tambiah to describe the diversified, hetero­
geneous composition of religious beliefs and practices in modern Thailand.
16)  Pattana 
highlights the hybridization that characterizes contemporary Thai religiosity by describ­
ing the assorted components of a Thai spirit altar:
The statue of Buddha is always positioned at the top, since he is regarded as the supreme deity in 
Thai religious cosmology and since Buddhism is the country’s state­sponsored religion and has 
traditionally formed its sociocultural foundations.  Below the statue of Buddha are those of Buddhist 
saints, male Indian and Chinese deities and royal spirits; these male deities are positioned higher 
than female deities like Guanyin, Uma or Kali.  The bottom of the altar is the usual place for tute­
lary local spirits and other minor spirits, while flowers, incense, candles and offerings are placed 
16) The phrase “parade of supernaturals” is the title of Chapter 10 of Tambiah’s Buddhism and the Spirit 
Cults in North-east Thailand (1970).

--- Page 19 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
133
in vases or other proper containers on the floor.  Spirit altars in their symbolic and physical sense 
bring together deities from diverse backgrounds and origins; the altar is the sacred site where the 
religious hybridization of popular beliefs actually takes its concrete, collective form. (Pattana 2005, 
484)
Pattana contends that since syncretism “implies something contentious, unauthenticated, 
and impure” (ibid.), it fails, as an analytical concept, to account for this hybridization that 
permeates spirit altars in Thailand.  If Thai Buddhists perceived Buddhist elements as 
emblems of the orthodox faith vis­à­vis heretical, non­Buddhist components, they would 
never admit non­Buddhist deities or local spirits to the site of worship.  For  Pattana, 
syncretism, denoting the subordination of non­Buddhist elements to Buddhist tenets and 
practices, is problematic because it overstates the paramount position of Buddhism in 
the Thai religious landscape (ibid., 464).  It also downplays the commodification of reli­
gious beliefs that has incessantly produced new hybrids to meet the spiritual needs of 
Thai people in the particular context of contemporary Thailand (ibid., 466).  I suggest 
that the overemphasis on hybrid, diversified components that constitute religious reper­
toires of Thai Buddhists entails two problematic ramifications.  First, it implies that Thai 
Buddhists, not adhering to any principle or orthodox ideal, indiscriminately adopt every­
thing that they consider relevant to their needs and desires.  Second, it reiterates the 
problematic assumption that people who practice religion at ground level do not share 
concepts and categories held by elites and intellectuals who study religion in an official, 
institutional setting.  This assumption ultimately perpetuates the dichotomy between 
popular and elite interpretations of religion.
To deny syncretism is to deny the possibility that the believing individual may make 
a conceptual or a value distinction between diverse tenets that they hold.  In a similar 
fashion, to say that Thai Buddhists’ religiosity is “beyond syncretism” (ibid., 461) is to 
downplay the fact that several Thai Buddhists strive to keep their heterogeneous reli­
gious repertoires internally coherent and meaningful.  As Mr. Woravit’s and Venerable 
Ko’s accounts show, such notions are misleading.  The informants syncretized the 
 doctrine of karma with a local belief in magic, fully aware of different sentiments that 
grounded these two sets of tenets.  Their syncretizing activity, precisely their act of 
subsuming the belief in magic under the doctrine of karma, reveals that some forms of 
hybrid religious practice are acceptable only after they are attuned to the authoritative 
Buddhist doctrine.  In fact, the excerpt from Pattana’s study cited above also displays this 
hierarchical ordering.  The fact that the Buddha image is always placed at the top of the 
altar denotes the supremacy of Buddhism vis­à­vis other belief traditions adopted by Thai 
Buddhists.
To deny syncretism is to deny the possibility that people who practice popular reli­

--- Page 20 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
134
gion may adopt a taxonomy or a categorization of religious concepts used by elites within 
institutional religion and by scholars in academia.  Tambiah comments on this ill­founded 
dichotomy between the doctrinal, official religion of the elites and the practical, popular 
religion of the folk as follows:
. . . it has for some curious reason not been seen that contemporary live religion, even that observed 
in the village, incorporates a great deal of the literary tradition.  Brahman priests, Buddhist monks, 
ritual experts and scribes in some measure deal with literary and oral knowledge transmitted from 
the past and which they themselves systematically transmitted to their successors.  And for the 
common people at large such texts and knowledge have a referential and legitimating function, 
even if they themselves have no direct access to them. (Tambiah 1970, 4)
Mr. Woravit’s and Venerable Ko’s attempts at syncretization reify Tambiah’s observation.  
Had the informants been insensitive to the orthodoxy of the karma postulate articulated 
by several sutras included in the Pali canon, they would not have felt the need to maintain 
its authority vis­à­vis the belief in magic.  Also, had they not recognized the belief in 
magic and the doctrine of karma as two distinct sentiments that contradict one another, 
they would not have made an attempt to syncretize them.  Mr. Woravit and Venerable 
Ko seem to adopt the canonical sentiment that neither magic nor deities overrides the 
law of karma,
17) therefore they posit that a person’s resort to magic is futile without the 
support of his good karma.  The informants’ rationalizations highlight the continuity, 
rather than the incongruity, between the doctrinal and the practical aspects of contem­
porary Thai Buddhism.
All observations and arguments that I have made in this paper build to this final 
point: Despite the highly heterogeneous constitution of their religious beliefs and prac­
tices, Thai Buddhists do not indiscriminately accept anything from anywhere that suits 
their whims.  At the very least, they consider the orthodoxy of the doctrine of karma, the 
authority of which they feel obligated to maintain at all cost.  Considering the scenario I 
have presented in this paper, it seems that when it comes to Thai Buddhists’ religiosity, 
we cannot yet do away with syncretism and its connotations of differentiation and catego­
rization.  Reconciling magic with karma, my informants and other Thai Buddhists whose 
accounts are reported in this study syncretized differentiated, contradictory sentiments 
regarding the legitimate means of producing the intended consequences.  They made 
17) Some canonical sutras that convey this view are the Paccha-bhumika Sutta, the Devadaha Sutta, 
and the Cula-kammavibhanga Sutta in the Saṃyutta Nikāya and the Majjhima Nikāya of the Sutta 
Pitaka.  In the Paccha-bhumika Sutta, the Buddha maintains that prayers and supplication rituals 
cannot alter the consequence of volitional actions.  The Devadaha Sutta refutes a Jain theory posit­
ing that bad karma can be burned up by ascetic practice.  The Cula-kammavibhanga Sutta portrays 
karma as the supreme causal agent accountable for humans’ fortunes and miseries.

--- Page 21 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
135
patent an underrated fact that a mindset comprising disparate components does not only 
indicate the hybrid constitution of that mindset.  It also reflects cognitive processes, 
among which are creative interpretation and adaptation, which render these conflicting 
sentiments coherently meaningful for the believing individual.
Accepted: January 6, 2017
References
Ames, Michael M.  1964a.  Buddha and the Dancing Goblins: A Theory of Magic and Religion.  American 
Anthropologist 66(1): 75–82.
ʕ.  1964b.  Magical­Animism and Buddhism: A Structural Analysis of the Sinhalese Religious 
System.  Journal of Asian Studies 23 (June): 21–52.
Anuman Rajadhon.  2009.  Essays on Thai Folklore, edited by Sukanya Sujachaya and Siraporn Nathalang.  
3rd ed.  Bangkok: Institute of Thai Studies, Chulalongkorn University.
Appleton, Naomi.  2010.  Jataka Stories in Theravada Buddhism: Narrating the Bodhisatta Path.  Surrey: 
Ashgate.
Ariyapala, M. B.  1956.  Society in Mediaeval Ceylon.  Colombo: K. V. G. de Silva.
Cassaniti, Julia.  2015.  Living Buddhism: Mind, Self, and Emotion in a Thai Community.  Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Clough, Bradley S.  2011.  The Higher Knowledges in the Pāli Nikāyas and Vinaya.  Journal of the Inter-
national Association of Buddhist Studies 33(1–2): 409–433.
Cohen, Erik.  2008.  Kuan To: The Vegetarian Festival in a Peripheral Southern Thai Shrine.  In Religious 
Commodifications in Asia: Marketing Gods, edited by Pattana Kitiarsa, pp. 68–88.  Abingdon: Rout­
ledge.
Copleston, R. S.  1908.  Buddhism Primitive and Present in Magadha and in Ceylon.  2nd ed.  London: 
Longmans, Green, and Co.
deYoung, John E.  1963.  Village Life in Modern Thailand.  Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press.
Droogers, André.  1989.  Syncretism: The Problem of Definition, the Definition of the Problem.  In 
Dialogue and Syncretism: An Interdisciplinary Approach, edited by Jerald Gort, Hendrik Vroom, Rein 
Fernhout, and Anton Wessels, pp. 7–25.  Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans.
Elliot, Charles.  1921.  Hinduism and Buddhism: An Historical Sketch.  Vol. 3.  London: Edward Arnold.
Fiordalis, David V.  2008.  Miracles and Superhuman Powers in South Asian Buddhist Literature.  Doc­
toral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Formoso, Bernard.  1998.  Bad Death and Malevolent Spirits among the Tai Peoples.  Anthropos 93(1–3): 
3–17.
ʕ.  1996.  Tai Cosmology and the Influence of Buddhism.  Diogenes 174(44): 61–81.
Jackson, Peter A.  1999.  Royal Spirits, Chinese Gods, and Magic Monks: Thailand’s Boom­Time Reli­
gions of Prosperity.  South East Asia Research 7(3): 245–320.
Kirsch, A. Thomas.  1977.  Complexity in the Thai Religious System: An Interpretation.  Journal of Asian 
Studies 36(2): 241–266.
Kirsch, Thomas G.  2004.  Restaging the Will to Believe: Religious Pluralism, Anti­syncretism, and the 
Problem of Belief.  American Anthropologist 106(4): 699–709.

--- Page 22 of 23 ---
Kanya Wattanagun
136
Kongka Himalai คงคา หิมาลัย.  2016.  Sutyot mon khatha 129 khanajarn สุดยอดมนต์คาถา 129 คณาจารย์ [The 
best magic spells of 129 masters].  Bangkok: Phetpraguy.
Krunoi Bandoykam ครูน้อย บ้านดอยค�า.  2014.  Wicha metta mahaniyom วิชาเมตตามหานิยม [On love magic].  
http://www.mahasanae.com/category/55/ เคล็ดวิชาความรู้/วิชาเมตตามหานิยม, accessed December 16, 
2015.
Leach, E. R.  1968.  Dialectic in Practical Religion.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McDaniel, Justin.  2011.  The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing Buddhism in Modern 
Thailand.  New York: Columbia University Press.
Nithi Aeuosriwong นิธิ เอี่ยวศรีวงศ์.  1994.  Latthi phithi jaomae Kuan Im ลัทธิพิธีเจ้าแม่กวนอิม [The cult of 
Kuan Im].  Silapa Wattanatham ศิลปวัฒนธรรม [Art and Culture]: 70–106.
Norasath นรเศรษฐ์.  2011.  Phrakhrueang kap khonthai พระเครื่องกับคนไทย [Amulets and the Thai].  http://
www.norasath.com/thai­amulet/, accessed December 17, 2016.
Pattana Kitiarsa.  2012.  Mediums, Monks, and Amulets: Thai Popular Buddhism Today.  Bangkok: Silk­
worm Books.
ʕ.  2006.  Faiths and Films: Countering the Crisis of Thai Buddhist from Below.  Asian Journal 
of Social Science 34(2): 264–290.
ʕ.  2005.  Beyond Syncretism: Hybridization of Popular Religion in Contemporary Thailand.  
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 36(3): 461–487.
Piker, Steven.  1973.  Comments on the Integration of Thai Religion.  Ethos 1(3): 298–320.
ʕ.  1972.  The Problem of Consistency in Thai Religion.  Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 
11(3): 211–229.
Pranke, Patrick.  2011.  On Saints and Wizard: Ideals of Human Perfection and Power in Contemporary 
Burmese Buddhism.  Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 33(1–2): 453–488.
Primiano, Leonard.  1995.  Vernacular Religion and the Search for Method in Religious Folklife.  Western 
Folklore 54(1): 37–56.
Rama I พระบาทสมเด็จพระพุทธยอดฟ ้ าจุฬาโลกมหาราช.  1986.  Pramuan kotmai ratchakan thi nueng ประมวล
กฎหมายรัชกาลที่หนึ่ง [Legal codes of King Rama I], edited by R. Lingat.  2nd ed.  Bangkok: Thammasat 
University Press.
Scott, Rachelle M.  2011.  Buddhism, Miraculous Powers, and Sacred Biographies: Re­thinking the 
Stories of Theravāda Nuns.  Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 33(1–2): 
489–511.
Shaw, Rosalind; and Stewart, Charles, eds.  1994.  Syncretism/Anti-syncretism: The Politics of Religious 
Synthesis.  London: Routledge.
Sira Arsawadeeros สิระ อาสาวดีรส.  2016.  Kao wat kao thi phithi sado khro เก้าวัดเก้าที่พิธีสะเดาะเคราะห์ [The 
nine apotropaic rituals of nine temples].  Bangkok: Green Panyayan.
Stephen, Reginald.  1953.  Buddhism in Ceylon.  In Studies in Buddhism, edited by F. Max Muller, Monier 
Williams, Reginald Stephen, and Robert C. Childers, pp. 113–133.  Calcutta: Susil Gupta.
Swearer, Donald K.  2010.  The Buddhist World of Southeast Asia.  2nd ed.  Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Tambiah, Stanley J.  1984.  The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets: A Study in Charisma, 
Hagiography, Sectarianism, and Millennial Buddhism.  New York: Cambridge University Press.
ʕ.  1970.  Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-east Thailand.  New York: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press.
Taylor, Jim.  1999.  (Post­)Modernity, Remaking Tradition and the Hybridisation of Thai Buddhism.  
Anthropological Forum 9(2): 163–187.
Terwiel, Barend J.  2012.  Monks and Magic: Revisiting a Classic Study of Religious Ceremonies in Thai-
land.  Copenhagen: NIAS Press.

--- Page 23 of 23 ---
Karma versus Magic
137
ʕ.  1976.  A Model for the Study of Thai Buddhism.  Journal of Asian Studies 35(3): 391–403.
Thanissaro Bhikkhu.  2005.  Devadaha Sutta [At Devadaha].  http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/
mn/mn.101.than.html, accessed December 25, 2016.
ʕ.  1999a.  Paccha­bhumika Sutta [Brahmans of the Western land].  http://www.accesstoinsight.
org/tipitaka/sn/sn42/sn42.006.than.html, accessed January 10, 2016.
ʕ.  1999b.  Sankha Sutta [The conch trumpet].  http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/sn/sn42/
sn42.008.than.html, accessed January 12, 2016.
ʕ.  1999c.  Cula­kammavibhanga Sutta [The shorter analysis of action].  http://www.accesstoinsight. 
org/tipitaka/mn/mn.101.than.html, accessed December 25, 2016.
Wells, Kenneth E.  1960.  Thai Buddhism: Its Rites and Activities.  Bangkok: Police Printing Press.
Wright, Michael A.  1968.  Some Observations on Thai Animism.  Practical Anthropology 15(1): 1–7.
Yoder, Don.  1974.  Toward a Definition of Folk Religion.  Western Folklore 33(1): 2–15.