f all evil.” Three attendants
in a kneeling attitude have a sardonic smile on their faces, and represent the three
.threatened States.

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGA

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN.
—
Dutiya-Palayi-Jat. 230.
Benares is attacked by the King of Gandhara. The King of Benares, sitting
on a canopied throne, discloses his glorious countenance, and addresses his enemy
:
Xmv will I destroy }'our host, as a maddened elephant crushes a thicket of reeds.”
—
Tila-mutthi-Jat. 252.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, received his education under a Brahman of Tak-
kasila, and was beaten with a bamboo stick by two of his school-fellows, under the
orders of his Teacher, for stealing, on three successive days, a handful of sessamum
belonging to an old woman. On attaining to sovereignty, he sends for his Teacher
and threatens him with death for his past castigation.
—
Mani-Kantha-Jat.
253.
Two Brahman brothers become anchorites on the banks of the Ganges, and the
younger is frequently visited by Mani-Kantha or Jewel-Throat, a Serpent-King, who
embraces his friend in his snaky folds.
—
Kundaka-Sindhava-Jat.
254.
An old woman owns a thoroughbred foal, which is sold to the Bodhisat, who
is-
reborn as a horse-dealer, and who re-sells it to Brahmadatta, King of Benares.,
The Bodhisat claps his hands, and holds out one palm upwards, and the foal gets-
upon it, and stands on his master’s hand with his four feet close together.
—
Saluka-Jat. 286.
In Benares, the Bodhisat becomes an ox named Big Redcoat and he has a
vounger brother called Little Redcoat.
One day. Little Redcoat says to his brother, “ Brother, we work for this family,
andwe help them to get their living. Yet they only give us grass and straw, while
they fee ” d yon pig with rice porridge, and let it sleep in a sty ; and what can it do for
them ?
“ Brother, ” says Big Redcoat, “ don’t covet his porridge. They want to make
a feast of him on our younglady’s wedding-day ; that’s why they are fattening him up.,
Wait afew days, and you’ll see him dragged out of his sty, killed, chopped into bits
and eaten up by the visitors.”
Nana-Chanda-Jat.—
289.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, rewards a Brahman for his correct observations
of the constellations. The Brahman’s wife, son, daughter-in-law and maid-servant
arelikewise rew'arded.

132 ARCH.«:0L0G1CAL REPORT.
Supatta-Jat.—292.
Supatta or Fairwing, a Crow-King, attended by his Chief Captain, Suraukhaor
Pretty beak, preaches to Brahmadatta, King of Benares, who is attended bv his
four queens.
—
Kaya-Chinda-Jat.
293.
A Brahman is afflicted with the jaundice. In consultation with his wife, he re-
solves that, if he evergets well, he will embrace the religious life. He does get
well and goes away to the Himalayas, where he dwells in the enjoyment of ecstatic
happiness.
Kama-Tappat
u-Jat.—297.
A poor man is prevailed upon by his wife to steal the safflow'ers of the King,
with wfflich she wants to dye her clothes. He is caught red-handed, and is impaled
under the supendsion of an executioner. Crows fly down to peck at his head and
face. His dying thoughts are of his wife, and he is full of regret that she should
have been deprivedof the pleasure of wearing dyed garments.
K —
omaya-Putta-Jat.
299.
Komaya-putta, attended by two other anchorites, admonishes a monkey, who
used to afford endless amusement to another fraternity of hermits by his grimaces
and antics.
Tittira-Jat.—306
(319).
While a fowler is asleep with his snares and freshly-caught birds by his side, his
decoy partridge questions a hermit whether its occupation is sinful. The reply is that
the absenceof intention in a state of coercion is absolutely sinless.
Mata-Rodana-Jat.—
317.
On the death of his elder brother, the Bodhisat does not weep. His kinsfolk
reprove him for his seeming hard-heartedness. His reply is that all things are trans
tent and that all creatures ate subject to the Eight Wordly Conditions
Sucacca-Jat.—
320.
A
w . as yet K a in P g ri o n f ce B . ena T re h s e ne Q g u l e e e c n ts c h o i m s pl C a h i i ns ef t Q o ue t e h n e , B w od h h o is h a a t s s w h h a o red his exile while he
and wife. ’ reconciles husband
uaddabhaya-Jat.—
322 (a), (b)
staX“
lit
fruit tl, vilva
mu ““
to for its life. The infection of imaginary fear spreads and b
atampedeof all the animals in the forest. The Bodhisal who comes tolfc Hr,

PLAQUES FODSD AT TIE PETLElK PAGODA, PAGAI
V-

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA. PAGAN
••ni

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN-
‘33
reassures the panic-stricken creatures, and saves them from imminent destruction by
finding out the origin of their fear, and by explaining to them its true cause.
Godha-Jat.—325.
The Bodhisat becomes a lizard, and pays frequent visits to a false ascetic. The
latterwishes to catch the lizard and eat its flesh; but his would-be victim runs away
and escapesfrom death.
—
Viseyha-Jat. 340.
Viseyha, a great merchant of Benares, is, liberal and fond of alms-giving, thereby
incurringthe jealousy of Sakka, who suspects that the former has ulterior designs on
his position. Sakka, by his supernatural power, deprives Viseyha and his wife of all
means of alms-giving and reduces them to abject poverty. The husband becomes a
grass-cutter to obtain money for the purpose of givingalms, and falls intoa swoon on
account ofhis unwontedlabour. Sakka appears onthescene and enquires why hegives
alms. He replies “Desiring neither Sakkahood nor Brahmaship, but seeking omni-
;
science do I give.”
Ayakuta-Jat.—
347.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, interdicts animal-sacrifice to the gods, who
commission a savage Yakkha to slay the King. He comes armed with a huge blazing
mass of iron, but his murderous intent is checked by Sakka, who appears most oppor-
tunely.
—
Arnna-Jat. 348.
A Brahman of Banares and his son embrace the religious life and dwell in the
A
Himalayas. border village is harried by brigands, and a damsel flies for refuge to
their hermitage, and, by her seductions, corrupts the virtue of the youth, while the
father is absent gathering fruit. The father, by his admonitions, succeeds in
Teestablishing his son in purity and virtue.
Uraga-Jat.—
354.
The household of a Brahman cultivator consists of six persons : the Brahman, his
wife, son, daughter, daughter-in-law, and a female slave. The son is bitten by a snake
-and dies. There is no lamentation inthe family, and Sakka comes and questions each
member about the cause. The reply given is that, when a man,dies, he shuffles off
his mortal coil as a snake casts off its slough, and that grief and lamentation are of no
.avail.
—
Ahigundiqa-Jat. 365.
The Bodhisat becomes acorn merchant at Benares. To him is entrusted a mon-
key for six days by a snake-charmer. On the seventh day, the owner returns and the
-animal is restored to him. The monkey is beatenby the snake-charmer three times
with a piece of bamboo, and, while the latter is asleep, escapes to the top of a mango-
tree and secures its freedom from bondage,
.. ,

. .
archaeological report.
134
Gangamala-Jat.—421
King Udaya shares his kingdom wth a water-carrier, who is known as King
Addhamasaka, because he persists inhis claim to a half-penny, which he has savedand
hidden in a brick in the City wall. Over each King is a white umbrella, and he is
attended by his Chief Queen,
Catu-dvara-Jat.—439.
MittaA’indaka, a merchant of Benares, is disobedient to his mother, and does not
practise virtue or charity. In the course of his adventures at sea, he unwittingly
reaches IJssada Hell, and espies a man in torment, supporting, on his head, a wheel as
sharp as a razor. Mistaking the instrument of torture for a lotus bloom, he asks for it,
and it is transferred to his head. The Bodhisat appears and preaches the law to him.
K anha-dipayana-Jat. — 444.
Kanha-dipayana, a hermit, is visited by Mandavya, a merchant, his wife and son.
The son, w'hile playing, is bitten by a snake and dies. The dead child is restored to-
life by the combined saccakiriya (Act of Truth) of his parents and the hermit.
N igrodha-Jat.—
-445.
Three students, Nigrodha, (Banyan), Sikha (Branch), and Pottika (Dollie), study
at Takkasila. On the completion of their education, they travel abroad. In the
course of their peregrinations, they sleep under a tree growing within thesacred pre-
cincts of a temple. On that tree roosts a cock, which crows, at dawn, as follows
:
“If any one kills me and eats of my fat, he will become a King this
very morning he that eats the middle flesh, becomes Commander-in-Chief who eats
; ;
the flesh about the bones, he will be Treasurer.” Pottika climbs up the tree, seizes
the cock, kills it, and cooks it inthe embers the fat he gives to Banyan, the middle
;
flesh to Branch, and himself eats the flesh that isabout the bones. The prognostica-
tions of the cock are entirely fulfilled.
Udaya-Jat.—458.
The Bodhisat becomes King of K^si. Having both passed out of Brahma’s
world, he and his Queen have an absolute control over their senses, and they live
together in chastity. The King dies and is reborn as Sakka. In order to test the
virtue of the widowed Queen, he visits her at night, and tempts her, on three
successive occasions, with an offering of a golden, silver, and iron bowl filled with
coins. His efforts being unsuccessful, he reveals his identity.
M
ittamitta-Jat.—
473.
- The Bodhisat comes to life as a courtier, who advises Bramadatta, King of
Benares, on matters spiritual and temporal. At the request of the King, he discourses
on the sixteen tokens of a friend or foe.

ii;••-X-.J:

THE PLAGUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA PAGAN.
135
Kalinga-Jat.-479.
The King of Kilihga is a universal Monarch and is possessed of the Wheel of
Empire and a White Elephant. Riding on this elephant, and in great pomp and splen-
dour, he visits his parents, who are living, as exiles, in a forest. The elephant is
unable to pass beyond the circuit around the great Bo-Tree, the throne of victory of
all the Buddhas.
Sadhina-Jat.—
494.
The virtues of Sadhina, King of Mithila, are noised abroad and the angels of the
Tdvatimsa heaven are anxious to see him. Sakka sends forth Mitali in a celestial
chariot to bring him. Tdvatimsa or the abode of the “ Thirty-three ” is represented
by three devas.
Dasa-brahmana-Jat.—
495.
Koravya, King of Kuru, attended by his two Queens, addresses Vidhura, his wise
Counsellor, expressing his dissatisfaction with the character of the Brahman recipients
of his alms, and requiring him to search for holy men. Accordingly, five hundred
Pacceka Buddhas are invited from the Northern HimMaya.
Bhikkhu-Parampara-Jat.—
496.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, in the course of his peregrinations in disguise,
receives an offering of food from a rich land-owner, and passes it on to his Brahman
Counsellor (lowerrow of figures). The Brahman passes it on to an ascetic, who offers
it to a Pacceka Buddha (upper row of figures). This story illustrates the different
degrees of worth or sanctity, which entitles a person to receive gifts from others.
—
Sumedha-pandita-Jat.
499 (?)
Sumedha consults his treasurer and accountants before he gives away the whole
of his property in alms.
Matanga-Jat.—500
(497).
Mitafiga, a CandMa, is married to Dittha-mahgaliki, daughter of a merchant
of Benares. The issue of the union is a son called Mandavya, who gives alms to the
Brahmans. M4tahga renouncesthe world by becomingan ascetic. One day, at a great
almsgiving, he is beaten under the orders of his son, and the deities of the city, in
•order to avenge such injustice, make Mandavya and the Brahmans unconscious.
Dittha-mahgalik4, attended by a slave-girl, intercedes with MStanga on their behalf.
With the elixir of immortality given by him, she restores her son and all the Brahmans
0 consciousness.
Sivi-raja-Jat.—503
(499).
King Sivi, not content with giving away his property in alms, resolvesto give
-away any part of his own body. Sakka, divining his wish, appears before him in the

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
136
guise of an old and blind Brahman, and asks foran eye. The King summons his sur-
geon, and, after undergoing an operation, offers both his eyes to the Brahman amidst
the remonstrance of his minister and queens.
—
Kim-chanda-Jat. 514 (5li)*
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, turns an ascetic and lives on the banks of the-
Ganges. He is supplied with mangoesby a spirit, who was his chaplain and judge.
—
Kumbha-Jat. 5i5-(5i2).
Sabbamitta, King,of S3,vatthi, orders ajar ofintoxicating liquor to be brought for
him to drink. Sakka appears in the air holding a jar of liquor and discourses on the
eHls of strong drink, thereby saving the King from the imminent danger of acquiring
a bad habit.
—
Chaddanta-Jat. 517 (514).
Chaddanta, an Elephant-King, has two wives, Mahisubhaddci and ChlasubhaddA.-
The latter conceives a grudge against her husband because of his partiality to her
rival. She diesand becomes Queen of Benares. She sends forth Sonuttara, a hunter,
to bring her the tusks of Chaddanta. It being summer-time, the Elephant-King
lives under agreat banyan-tree. The hunter digs a hole under the tree and'shoots the
elephant with an arrow, w'hich, entering at the navel, comes out at the back. The
elephant dies, and the Queen also dies of a broken heart at the sight of the-
tusks presented'to her.
Sambhava-Jat.—518
(515).
Sucirata, Counsellor of the King of Kuru, is asked by his master to explain the-
nature of the Serviceof Truth.- - He confesses his inability , to solve the question, and
procures its solution from Sambhava, the seven-year-old sonof Vidhura, Chaplain of
the King of Benares.
Taw Sein Ko..

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEtK PAGODA, PAGAN
n"'>.},. ^’7

gDftOOT)/ A
3
)?r<nA’'-5

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
The first recorded discovery of sculpture at Mathura {vtdgo Muttra) is that of
the so-called Silenus obtained by Colonel Stacy in 1836and now preserved in the
Calcutta Museum*.
In 1853 regular explorations were started by General Cunningham* on the Katra
and continued in 1862. They yielded numerous sculptural remains; most important
among them is an inscribed standing Buddha image (height 3" 6"), now in the
Lucknow Museum. From the inscription®it appears that this image was presented
to the Ya§a-vihara in the Gupta year 230 (A.D. 549-50). We may conclude that the
Katra site was once occupied by a Buddhist monastery of that name. On the ruins of
.
that building there rose in afterdays a Hindu temple dedicated to Vishnu under the
name of Kesab Dev or Keso Rai, which is mentioned by Bernier, Tavernier, and
Manucci, but in its turn had to make place for a mosque built by Aurangzeb.
In i860, when the foundations were laid for a Collector’s Court house, miles
south-east of the Katra, this locality proved to be another important Buddhist site.
It is referred to by Cunningham as the Jail mound, whereas Growse calls it the Jamal-
pur mound, after a hamlet situated in its proximity. Here thirty,bases of pillars came
to light, half of which are inscribed with dedicatory in.scriptionsA Ten of them
(eight inscribed) were sent to Calcutta, w;here they are now preserved in the Indian,
Museum. These bases presumably belonged to a colonnade, enclosing, the inner
courtyard of a Buddhist monastery, w'hicb, according to the inscriptions, was built in
the year 47 of Kanishka’s era and during the reign of his son Huvishka. From the
wording of one of the inscriptions it appears that this prince himself wms its founder.
That this monastery still existed in the fifth century may be inferred from an inscrip-
tion dated Gupta 135 (A.D. 454-5) and from an inscribed standing Buddha image®
—
S, 15., ^ L V . ol R . . V Stac ( y 1836 J ) . , Pr p i p n . se 5 p 6 , 7 Note (Pl o a n te) t . hedi J s . co A v n e d ry er o s f on a , re C l a i t c a o l f og G u r e ec o i f an th s e cu a l r p c t h u c r e e olo i g n ica U l pp c e o r lle I c n t d i i o a ns , i J n . t A h . e
Indian Museum (Calcutta, 1883), PartI,pp. 169 ff (Cat.No. M. ij J.Burgess, Ancient Monuments^ Plates 60*61.
* Cunningham, i?., Vol. I, pp. 231 ff. Plates XXXIX-XL and VoU III, pp. 13 Plates I-XVI.
Growse. Mathura, <2 3rdedition,Allahabad, 1S83; pp. 103ff.
^ Fleet. Gupta Inscriptions, pp. 25 fiE, No. 4.
^ CfDowson, Ancient inscriptionsfrom Mathura, J. R. A. S.,Vol. V,N.S.(1871), pp. 182fi. Nos.i,2,5
10-17,21-23, and 27. B.L. TMitra,NotesonSanskritinscriptionsfrom Mathura, J. A. S.B., Vol. XXXIX (1870)
Part I, pp.117 ff, Nos. i-ioand 17-20, The Matliura Museum contains now, thirty-four pillar bases, of, which
eighteenare inscribed. One,likewiseinscribed,isinthe ProvincialMuseum, Lucknow.
® Cf. Fleet, Gtipta Inscr., pp. 262 ff, No. 63; Plate XXXIX A and Growse, op. cii.^ pp. 115, and Plate
facingpage 172. .
T

ARCH.-EOLOGICAL REPORT.
138
(height 7' 2") both found on the same site and preserved in the Mathura Museum.
They were discovered shortly after i860, when the Jamalpur mound was
completely levelled under the supervision cf Mr. Hardinge, the magistrate of the
district. The same officer trenched the Kahkali Tila, a mound i mile south of the
Katra, in which some sculptures had been found by men digging for bricks.
In 1869, Mathura was visited by Bhagvanlal Indrajl, who on this occasion
made two important discoveries. The first was that of a life-size female statue,
which he excavated at the Saptarshi Tila on- the right river bank, south cf the city.
It was first deposited in the Delhi Museum, but in October 1907 it was made
over to the Lahore Museum together with all other Gandhara sculptures in the Delhi
collection. The remarkable point about this image is that both its style and
material proveit to be a Gandhara sculpture, a circumstance of great interest for the
history of Buddhist art. Apparently not far from the mound which yielded this
image, Dr. Bhagvanlal discovered the famous lion capital with its eighteen Kharoshthi
inscriptions which throw so much light on the history of the Northern satraps who
ruled in Mathura before the time of the Skythians, It is now in the.British Museum^..
In November 1871, Cunningham resumed the excavation of the Kahkali mound^
which proved more prolific in sculptural remains than any other of the Mathura sites.
He obtained many Jaina images, partly inscribed, as well as portions of railings. The
twelveinscriptions discovered by him range in date from the year 5 of Kanishka’s
reign to the year 98 in that of Vasudeva. To these may be added an inscription of
the year 39 in Huvishka’s reign inscribed on an elephant capital, the present where-
abouts of which are unknown.
Between the Katra and the Kahkali Tila there rises a high mound, named after
the temple of Bhutesar (Skr. Bhute§vara), at the back of which it is situated. On
the top of this mound there stood once a large railing pillar carved with the figure of
a female parasol-bearer over which is a curious bas-relief apparently referring to some
jaiaka. It is now in the Mathura Museum (Cat. No. J i).
In the verandah of a native rest-house near this site Cunningham discovered five
railing-pillars^ (height 4' 4"). On the obverse ofeach there is a female figure standing
on a prostrate dwarf above is shown a balconyover which a pair of figures in amorous
;
attitudes are partly visible. The obverse of each pillar is carved with three reliefs
representing andperhaps, also, events of Buddha’s life. These five pillars and
one previously obtained-by Colonel Stacy must have belonged to the same railing.
Cunningham speaks of two more broken pillars of this railing which he saw in the
Museum at Agra and nowappear to be at Lucknow. It is much to be regretted that
at present they are distributed over different museums. Three, including the one of
Colonel Stacy, are inthe Calcutta Museum, two have remaine . d .at.Mathura, and one
has reached the Provincial' Museum of Lucknow. *
About this .same time Cunningham explored sonje of the Chaubara mounds
situated 3 miles south-west of -the Katra, in one of which a golden relic casket and
. ^ Cf. Buhler, Mathura, Lion illarInscriptions: B.- Indrajl, The Northern Kshatrapas, ]. R. A.S. for 1894,
A The Inscriptionsonthe MathuraLion Capital, Ep. \rrd.,Voh IX -pp 135 ff
(M. - 15 C a u , n D n , i c n ). gh G a r m u , nwede . l y - .i B ? u ., rg V e o s l s . , ri B I u , i p d p h . is 2 i 0 Ar ff t . i P n la I t n e d s ia VI (Lo a n n d d on V , II 1 . 901) A , nd p e . rs 4 o 1 n , , footnote i. Pa B r u t rg I e , s ’ s p , p. A ^ n 8 c 6 ien ff t .
Monuments, ?\3.ies send,
,

THK MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCUr.PlURE.
139
copper celt had been found in 1868 or 1869. His excavations yielded another relic
casket of steatite, norv in the Calcutta Museum, and some sculptures, among which
was a remarkable Indo-Persepolitan capital i3'X 2' X 2') likewise preserved at Calcutta^.
Subsequent exploration of these mounds by Mr. Growse led to the discovery of
numerous other sculptural remains, which were placed in the Mathura Museum.
During the period of his collectorate Mr. Growse examined most of the ancient
sites round IMathura and acquired an important collection of sculptures which he de-
positedin the local museum established on his initiative afewyearsafter 1874^ Perhaps
the most interestingofthis collection is the so-called Bacchanalian group, which Growse
obtained in 1873-74 from a mound outside the village of Pali Khera, It is a counter-
part of Colonel Stacy’s Silenus and there is reason to suppose that this sculpture
originates from the same site®.
In 1881-82, when Cunningham revisited Mathura in order to inspect the newly
established IMuseum, he discovered another sculpture no less remarkable for the
classical influence it betrays. Its subject is Herakles strangling the Nemaean lion
;
or, it would perhaps be more correct to say, it appears to be an Indian adaptation of
this subject. It was presented to the Calcutta Museum^.
Of other finds I need only mention a railing (?) pillar with a dedicatory inscription
in Brahmi of the Maurya period. It was found on the Arjunpura mound to the north-
west of the Sitala Ghatl site, and is of interest, as only one other Maurya inscription
has hitherto been found at Mathura®. To these is to be added the Parkham image
now in the Mathura Museum.
The last archaeological explorations at Mathura were carried out by Dr. Fiihrer
between the years 1887 and 1896. His chief work was the excavation of the Kahkalf
Till, in the three seasons of 1888-91. He explored also the Katra site. Unfortu-
nately no account of his researches is available, except the meagre information
contained in his Museum Reports for those years. The inscriptions and some of the
most remarkable sculptures obtained by him were fully discussed by Professor Biihler.
Subsequently Mr. V. A. Smith published a series of 108 plates which had been
prepared under Dr. Fiihrer’s supervision. These plates, of w^hich only a few are
reproductions ofphotographs andtherest of drawings, illustrate the sculptures acquired
in the course of Dr. Fiihrer’s excavations, but do not throw much light on the explora-
tions themselves. The editor has added brief explanatory notes and reproduced.
Professor Buhler’s readings of the inscriptions®.
1 Anderson, Catalogue,'PaxiI,p. i86(M. 14) and Part II, p.483. Burgess, Ancient Monuments, Plate55.
- Growse,op, cit, pp. 163ff,and Mathurainscriptions, Indian Antiquary, Vol. VI (1877;, pp. 216 ff.
^ Growse, op. cit., pp. 124 and 166 ff. (with two plates) andSupposed Greeksculptureat Mathura, J. A. S, B.,
^ Vol. XLIV (1875), pp. 212ff. (with threeplates).
Cunningham, A. S. R., Vol. XVII, pp. 107ff. Plates XXX andXXXI. Anderson, Catalogue, Part I,pp.
ipff. (M. 17).
5 Cunningham, A. S. R., Vol. XX, pp. 30 ff. Plates II-V. The original is apparently lost. The-other
Maurya inscription is in the Lucknow Museum.
® Fiihrer, Indo-scytkic architecture andsculpture of the Mathura school, J. I. A. I., Vol. V, p. 58. G.
Biihler, faina inscriptionsfrom Mathura^ E^, Ind.,Vol. I, pp. 371 ff. Furtherfaina inscriptionsfrom
Mathura, Ep. Ind.,Vol. I, pp. 393 ff. and Vol. II. pp. 195 ff. SpecimensofJaina sculpturesfrom Mathura, Ep.
Ind., Vol II>pp. 311 ff. Cf. also H. Liiders, Epigrapkical Notes, Ind. Ant., Vol. XXXIII (1904), Vincent
A. Smith, The JainStupa andother.antiquitiesof Mathura, Allahabad, 1901. Cf A. F[oiicher], B.E,F.E,G,
Tome
I, p. 375.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL report.
140
Fertile though the Mathura explorations have been, it is to be deplored that they
tvere not carried out on more systematic lines. Nearly every mound in the neigh-
bourhood was examined, but hardly any of them, except the Kahkall Tlla, was com-
pletely explored. It was aprimary mistake that such excessive importance was attached
to inscriptions, especially dated ones, that the architectural interest was wholly
neco^lected. There can be little doubt that, in the course of those excavations, remains
of buildings were found, and that in some cases architectural members were found in
situ. It is true that with regard to the Kahkall Tila Growse tells us “ that no definite
line of foundation has ever been brought to light nor any larger remains of plain
masonry superstructure but only a confused medley of broken statues without even
; .
the pedestals on which they must have been originally erected.” But Cunningham
distinctly states that, in excavating the west end of this mound, he came on brick walls
and pavements.^ Dr. Fuhrer speaks of two Jain temples discovered in the course of
his excavations, but the general plan published by Mr. Smith does not show the posi-
tion of these buildings. On the Chaubara site Growse notices a pavement with three
pedestals, two of which were still erect, and in the Pali Khera mound three bell-shaped
bases of large columns were found by him in situ. From Cunningham’s account it
w'ould appear that the railing pillars obtained from the Jamalpur (or Jallj mound
were, partly at least, standing in situ, and the same may be assumed with regard to
the thirty bases of pillars discovered on that site on the same occasion.
The number of Mathura sculptures now available is very considerable but, in the
;
absence of plans, no information is forthcoming regarding the buildings to which they
belonged. What is worse, in most cases it is impossible to decide from what parti-
cular mound the individual sculptures originate, as only in the case of inscriptions it
was considered essential to note the exact find-place.
The attempts made by Cunningham and Growse to identify some of the Mathura
sites with localities mentioned by Hiuen Tsiang have signally failed. Both assumed
that the Katra marks the centre of the ancient city, whereas the site of ancient
Mathura is clearly indicated by an extensive elevation of the soil to the south-west of
the town. Hence their identifications, based on a wrong location of the city, are
inadmissible, and both the Upagupta monastery and the monkey tank are still to be
discovered. In order to uphold his theories, Cunningham had to alter the wording of
the Chinese pilgrim’s account and to read "west” Instead of "east ” and "built of
stone” for "cut in the rock.” He proposes to identify Kesopura, the quarter in
which the Katra is situated, with " the Klisobora or Kaisobora of Arrian and the
Clisobora of Pliny.”' It is, however, evident that the Mahalla Kesopura was named
after the shrine of Keso or Kesab (Skr. Kegava) Dev. This temple stood, as
we noticed above, on the rums of a Buddhist monastery which still existed in ’the
middle of the sixth century. It is therefore highly improbable that the name Kesopura
goes back to the days of Arrian.
All we can deduce with certainty from past explorations is the following. The
Katra must have been the site of a Buddhist monastery named the Ya§a-vihara which
was still extant in the middle ofthe sixth century. It would seem that in the
? Grow.se, of. cU., p. ii8. Cunningham, R., Vol. Ill n ?o
2 .4.5. i?., Vol. XX.p. 31.

THE MATHFjRA school OF SCULPTURE.
141
immediate vicinity there existed a stupa to which the Bhutesar railing pillars belong.
Dr. Fiihrer mentions indeed in one of his reports that, in digging at the back of
Aurangzeb’s mosque, he struck the procession path of a stupa bearing a dedicatory
inscription. The Kahkali Tlla contained a Jain stupa named “ Vodva thupa” and
apparently of considerableage, as at the time of Huvishka’s reign its originwas ascribed
to the gods.' Dr. Fuhrer speaks, moreover, of two Jain temples found in his excava-
tion of this mound. Evidently there flourished a Jain establishment here down to the
Muhammadan period. But some sculptures said to have been found in or near the
Kahkali Tila are Buddhist.
The Chaubara mounds represent a group of Buddhist stupas, as is proved by the
discovery of two relic caskets and railing-pillars. One of these pillars, preserved in
the Mathura Museum,bears an undated inscriptionin Brahmiofthe early Kushanatype.
The three pedestals found by Growse near one of the Chaubara mounds may have
belonged to a temple.
On the Jamalpur site there once stood a Buddhist monastery foundedby Huvishka
in the year 47 of Kanishka’s era and, no doubt, connected with a stupa as we may
infer from the discovery of railing-pillars on this site. This Buddhist establishment
also must have been still in a flourishing condition in the middle of the. fifth century as
appears from the two inscribed Buddha images, one dated Gupta 135 and the other
undated, which were found here.
; :
The Arjunpura mound seems to contain the remains of a monument {stupa ?) of
the Maurya period. Jaina sculptures have been found on the site of the old fort
(Sitala Ghati) and in Rani-ki-niandl. Buddhist buildings are still to be discovered in
the Dhruv and Saptarshi mounds.
Though more systematic exploration of ancient Mathura audits monumentswould,
no doubt, have yielded more definite results, it would be unfair not to recognise the
great service rendered to science by former explorers in procuring and preserving so
vast an amount of archaeological material. It w^ould be equally unjust to blame them
for the injudicious disposal of the sculptures which are now distributed over the
Calcutta, Lucknow, and Mathura Museums. Above I have quoted an instance, of six
pillars of the same railing which are placed In three different museums. It is possible
that not only members of the same monument but fragments of the same sculpture
have thus become separated.
The bulk of the sculptures first discovered at the Katra, on the Jamalpur mound
and in the Kahkali Tila were sent to Agra and placed in the Riddell Museum which
then existed at that place. In or shortly before 1875 this institution was broken up
and the greater part of its contents removed to Allahabad. Some sixty pieces,
including ten Mathura sculptures, remained at Agra and were kept in the museum of
a local archaeological society, established in the Diwan-i-'am of the Fort.^
..
When, on the ist July 1884, the reconstituted provincial museum at Lucknow
was opened, most of the sculptures which had gone to Allahabad were removed
to that institution, but some hundred stone sculptures and some twenty terra-cottas
were left behind. Among these the sculptures originating from Mathura have now
1 Biihler, Epigraphia Indica, Vol. II, p. 20,i, No. XX, p.31. V. A. Smith, The JainStupa, p, 12, Plate' VL
- Cf. Transactions ofthe Archceological Society ofAgra (July to December 1875), Agra, 1876, pp. 30

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
142
been returned and added to the local collection. It seems that the sculptures which had
remained at A^ora, likewise reached the Lucknow Museum. The numerous pieces ex-
cavated by Dr. Fu ^ hrerfrom the Kahkali Tila were all sent to Lucknow whi^ch now
possesses the most extensive collection of Mathura sculptures. Unfortunately the
archcBolo^ical section of the Lucknow Museum is badly located and no catalogue is
available of the exhibits.^ It is, however, under consideration to remove the Museum
to a more suitable building.
The Indian Museum at Calcutta contains twenty-eight sculptures originating
from Mathura, which include the so-called Silenus and Herakles strangling the
Kemaean lion. They are well described in Anderson’s catalogue.
The sculptures which were collected by Mr. Growse from various sites round
Mathura are nearly all preserved in the local museum founded at that place at his
instance. It was meant by its originator to be a depository of any antiquities “w'hich,
without anv definite search being made, were bound to crop up and otherwise in
danger of being lost.” The building, originally intended for a rest-house, is well
suited for its present purpose, but does not admit of any considerable extension of
the exhibits. A catalogue of the collection will shortly be published.
The Mathura sculptures which Cunningham had placed in the Lahore
Museum have, at my request, been returned to the place of their origin and have been
added to the local collection. Thisis alsothe case with three inscribed Jaina sculptures
which I noticed in the Municipal Museum at Delhi. The Lahore Museum contains
moreover two fragmentary inscriptions from Mathura which will be returned to the
place of their origin.
If in future the archaeological explorations are resumed at Mathura, it is to
be hoped that the local museum will be extended so as to contain any sculptures or
other antiquities to be discovered. If once a suitable building is available on the
spot, it will be possible to restore to Mathura many sculptures which in the past have
become scattered over different museums, greatly to the benefit of the study of this
important branch of Indian art.
The vast amount of sculptural remains discovered at Mathura would suffice to
show the importance of this place in the history of Indian art. It is remarkable that
the only statue which, on the strength of its inscription, can be assigned to the
Maurya period is found at Parkhara half-way between Mathura and Agra.® The
satraps who ruled at Mathura in the first century B. C. patronised the arts of archi-
tecture and sculpture, as appears from the inscribed lion capital in the British
Museum. The great flourishing period of the Mathura school undoubtedly coincides
with the reign of the great Kushana rulers Kanishka, Huvishka, and Vasudeva.® The
bulk of the inscriptions found on or in connection with Mathura sculptures are written
in Brahmi of the Kushana type. Several of them are dated in the reign of one of
those three kings ; and we'know that the monastery which once stood on the Jamalpur
site was built in the days of Huvishka. That the Mathura school still existed in the
Gupta period is attested by some inscribed Buddha'images, two of which are dated in
1 Babu R. D. Banerji hassince undertaken towriteacatalogueof the Lucknowcollection.
3 - O Cf n . t C h u e n p n o i s n s g ib h l a e m, ex- A i . st S e . nc R e ,, of V a ol f . ou X r X t , h . K p u p s . h .3 a 9 na f. king,. ' H . ushka, cf, Luders^ Ind, Anf.^ Vol. XXXHL

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
143
Gupta 135 (A. D. 454*55) and 230 (A. D. 549-50). But the production during this
period is small as compared with that of Kushana times.
After A. D. 600 the activity of the Mathura sculptors apparently ceased, as hardly
any inscriptions of a subsequent period are found. We may perhaps connect this fact
with the fall of the Gupta empire and the decline of Buddhism.
There can be little doubt that the influence of the Mathura school made itself
“
largely felt throughout the period of its existence. Everywhere in the north-west,”
Cunningham^ says, “ I find that the old Buddhist statues are made of the Sikri sand-
stone, from which it would appear that Mathura must have been the great manufactory
for the supply of Buddhist sculptures in Northern India.”
This observation is remarkably corroborated by epigraphical records which have
since come to light. The colossal Bodhisattva image erected at Benares in the third
year of Kanishka’s reign and the contemporaneous Sravasti statue are not only carved
in the spotted red sandstone of the Mathura sculptures, but both were the gift of
the Buddhist friar Bala whose name occurs also on an inscribed image from that place.^
The famous Nirvana statue of Kasia, which may be assigned to the fifth century,
—
appears to have been thework of Dinna of Mathura the only one of those numberless
artists whose name, though imperfectly, has been preserved.®
A circumstance which from the beginning drew the attention of European scholars
to Mathura sculptures, is the Greek or rather Hellenistic influence which some of
them betray. The first piece of sculpture discovered at Mathura, the so-called
"Silenus” in the Calcutta Museum, was at once described as “a relic of Grecian
sculpture” and attributed to “ an able artist who could not possibly have been a
native of Hindustan.’’ Prinsep refers to it as “a piece of sculpture bearing reference
to Greek mythology, if not boasting as unequivocally of the beauty and perfection
of Grecian sculpture.” “There can be no doubt”, he says, “as to the personage
represented by the principal figure.”
It was at once apparent that, though the sculpture was classical in charac-
ter, it by no means reached even thelowest standard of Greek or Hellenistic art.. For
this reason Grow'se rejected Cunningham’s theory about the existence of “ a small
body of Bactrian sculptors who found employment among the wealthy Buddhists at
Mathura, as in later days Europeans were employed under the Mughal emperors.”
Growse, moreover, after comparing the group with the one found by him in the
Pali Khera mound, came to the conclusion that in neither case did the main figure
represent Silenus. While attempting to find an Indian subject disguised in a classi-
cal form, he was the first to recognize the true nature of Hellenistic influence in
Buddhist art. On both sculptures which apparently have belonged to Buddhist
monuments the main figure is not Silenus. This view was endorsed by Mr. V. A.
Smith.
I may note that among the sculptures recently returned from Allahabad to
Mathura there is a statuette of a corpulent male deity holding in his right hand a cup
‘ A.S.R., Vol. XI, p. 75.
*2 Cf. my Epigraphical discoveries atSdrndth, Ep. Ind., Vol. VIII,pp, 166 ff, ard T. Bloch. Two inscriptions
on Buddhistimages, ibidem,pp. 17Qff Dr. Bloch draws myattentiontoa pedestal with fragmentary inscription
foundin the ruins ofold Rajagriha in 1906. It is made of Mathura sandstone and.belongs to the Kushana
period.
^ Cf. above,p. 49*

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
144
into which a female attendant is pouring some liquid. I have little doubt that this is
the Bacchanalian group in an Indianised form. The interesting point is that here
the main figure holds in his left hand an elongated bag the typical attribute of
Kubera.
It may, moreoverj be remarked that the main figure, as regards its attitude,
bears some reseniblance to the Kubera statues of Gandhara. On the latter we
find regularly attending figures of Cupids evidently meant for Yakshas, and these,
it will be noticed, occur also on both the Mathura sculptures. One of these attending
figures seems to raise the right hand towards that of the main figure, in exactly
the same manner as in the Kubera statue of Mardanh The cups found on Colonel
Stacy’s Silenus may represent the treasure vases of the god of wealth, the rock on
which he is seated Mount Kailasa. We can imagine that the corpulent figure of
Silenus attended by Cupids suggested to the Indian artist Kubera with his Yakshas.''
As regards the architectural meaning of the two sculptures Growse remarked that
the shallow basin at the top of the stone seems to be nothing more than the bed for
the reception of a round pillar.
A question of considerable interest is the relationship between the Mathura
sculptures and those of the Peshawar district (the ancient Gandhara), which likewise
betray classical influence. On this point two widely different theories have been
advanced. Mr. V. A. Smith expressed the opinion that "the Mathura sculptures
have very little in common with those of Gandhara and seem to be the work of a
different school.” For this school he adopts the term Indo-Hellenic to differentiate
it from the Graeco-Buddhist school of Gandhara to which he assigns a later
date.® .. - .
Griinwedel, to whom hardly any specimens of Mathura sculptures were available
for examination, followed Mr. Vflncent Smith in assuming the existence of an Indo-
Hellenic school which flourished at Mathura prior to the Graeco-Buddhist school of
the North-West. He remarks that the Mathura school represents purely Greek
subjects, among which he ranks the representation of Mara with bows and
arro'ws.
I must remark at once, that in Gandhara reliefs, representing Siddhartha’s flight
from Kapilavastu, Mara is commonly shown with a bow in his left hand.' In Mathura,
on the contrary, no such representations have come to light. As to the subjects
themselves, we must assume that both In Gandhara and at Mathura they were
essentially Indian, notvvithstanding their classical form. This classical appearance
is on the whole much more prominent in Gandhara than at Mathura.
It did not, however, escape the notice of Grunwedel that “ some Buddha statues
found at Mathura have also the robe laid over both shoulders and the folds executed
on the dress point to the Gandhara sculptures as models.” This remark is not
quite in agreement with the theory that the Mathura school exhibits an earlier
Greek influence than that of Gandhara. Indeed it lends strong support to the
' Cf. my Noie sur tine statue du Gandhara conserves au muse'e de Lahore B E F E O Tom • e ITT
(1903), pp.6fi. Fig.3.
wine
2
p
I
ro
a
du
m
ce
i
d
n
b
de
y
bt
W
e
o
d
nd
t
e
o
r
D
-
r
t
.
ree
B
s
l
{
o
K
c
a
h
lp
io
a
r
vr
^
ik
v
s
d
h
e
a
r
)
en
i
c
n
t
t
t
h
o
e
M
c
e
o
g
m
h
p
a
a
d
n
u
y
ia
of
I
f
I
ai
3
r
,
d
w
a
h
m
e
s
r
e
e
ls.
Yakshasaredescribedas drinkin^g
pp. 1 ® 40 Gr a cp n c d o 1 R 5 o 6. man Influence on the Cimlization of Ancient India. J. A. S. Vol. LVIII (1880) Part I'

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
145
opposite view which has been propounded by M. Foucher with great lucidity and
which in the present paper I wish to endorse.
The Mathura school, far from being a direct and early expression of Greek
influence, received its classical inspiration indirectly through Gandhara. The influence
of the Grseco-Buddhist school on all later Buddhist sculpture has so clearly been
shown in M. Foucher’s standard w'ork, that no doubt can now subsist on this
— —
point. Mathura, owing to its geographical position and I may add to its political
importance during the Kushana period, w'as the first to feel- that influence. This
explains the mixed character of the Mathura school, in which we find on the one-
hand a direct continuation of the old Indian art of Barahat (Bharaut) and Sanchi
and on the other hand the classical influence derived from Gandhara.^
The Indian character of the Mathura school is nowhere more clearly expressed'
than on the carved railings which once surrounded the stupas and other sacred-
monuments of that place. Such railings, it should be noticed, do not occur in the
North-West. That those of Mathura are derived from Old-Indian examples is proved
both by their construction and decoration.
The most typical feature of the Mathura railing-pillar are the female figures,
standing under trees or balconies, which sincethe days of Cunningham have commonly-
been designated as dancing-girls. An obvious objection to this designation is the
circumstance that in no case are these figures represented dancing. Cunningham”
in-
order to obviate this difficulty, described them as “dancing girls posing themselves in-
various attitudes, some of them more or less immodest, during the intervals of the
dance.” But there is a peculiarity of these Tailing figures which militates against this
explanation. They are very often shown standing on prostrate dwarfs and over them-
we see the foliage of a tree of which they hold a branch. This latter point has led to-
a confusion of these figures with representations of Maya standing under the ^5/tree.
For the interpretation of the so-called “dancing-girls” of Mathura it is of interest,
to compare the well-known figures on the corner-pillars of the gates of Barahat.
Most of these are standing on animals in the case of Kubera, the king of the
;
Yakshas, the vahana is a dwarf. Of special interest are the two marked as Cha[n]da
Yakhi and Chulakoka Devata, which with theirright hand clasp the branch < of a tree-
over their head whilst the left hand touches the girdle. Cunningham remarks that
a corner pillar of the railing of Bodh-Gaya bears a Yakshi in exactly the same
position as Chanda and Chulakoka.
Griinwedel, in treating of these figures in Old-Indian art, refers to the Bhutesar
railing pillars (PI. LI), but without drawing the inference that in both cases the sub-
ject must be the same. The personages on the Barahat gates are denoted in the
accompanying inscriptions as Yakshas, Yakshis, and other demi-gods. They belong
to that class of godlings (Devatas), which play such an important part in Indian
folklore. Cunningham has well explained their meaning in sculpture as guardians of
the sacred monument, at the gates of which they are placed. They iriay thus be
compared with the Dvarapalas (door-keepers) of m.ediaeval architecture and with the-
Rakshasa figures which guard the temples ofJava.
^ A.Foucher, Hart greco-bouddhi^ue du Gandhara (Paris 1905), Tome I, pp. 222 and 615.
3 VoL HI,p. 26.
U

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
146
What reason is there not to assume thatthe Mathura railing figures have the
same meaningas their Barahat prototypes and represent semi-divine beings, presumably
Yakshis? This would explain why they are sometimes shown sword in hand^—an
attribute which would be hardly compatiblewith the character of a nach girl. I may
also note that Yakshas in literature sometimes assume the nature of tree-spiri ^ ts, and
this may account for these figures being so often placed under trees.
As to the dwarf on which the Mathura pillar figures are commonly placed,
w^e have seen that at Barahat Kubera, the lord of Yakshas, stands on a crouching
demon with pointed ears and a prominent belly. Dwarfs occur as Atlantes in the
capitals of the western gateway of Sanchi, where Fergusson surmises them to have
a mythological meaning. At Barahat also they are found as supporting figures.
On some of the Amaravati reliefs they are playing, dancing, and gambolling and,
w^hat is more important, on a relief representing Siddhartha’s flight from Kapilavastu
we see them supporting the hoofs of the horse Kanthaka.^ From this it is evident
that these figures are Yakshas, who indeed in Indian folklore play the same part as
the dwarfs of German mythology. Alternately malignant or beneficent, they are
regarded as the guardians of treasures, and thus their king Kuvera has become
the god of wealth. 1 may remark in parenthesis that the character of such imaginary
beings is necessarily somewhat vague and susceptible ofvacillations both in literature
and plastic art. In the Buddhist scriptures the Yakshas often occur as man-eating
demons and thus actually assume the character of Rakshasas, but under the holy
influence of Buddha’s preaching they promptly abandon their cruel propensities.
I have little doubt that, whilst the Mathura railing figures represent Yakshis,
the dwarfs on which they stand are meant for their male counterparts. may
I
mention here that on a railing-pillar in the Mathura Museum the dwarf is not
supporting the female figure, but crouches at her feet, raising both arms towards a
fruit which she holds in her right hand. xYbove her a head peeps over a curtain
W
suspended between two pillars behind her. e may compare a similar device on
one of the railing-pillars of the Barahat stupa} More commonly we find the top of
the pillar carved with a balcony over which one or two figures are partly visible.
The Bhutesar pillars afford an instance of this device which would seem to be
peculiar to the Mathura school. If, however, we compare the different specimens of
railing-pillars preserved in the Lucknow and Mathura Museums, there can be
little doubt that this feature also is ultimately derived from the Old-Indian
examples.
The Barahat pillar figures which are not placed under a tree are surmounted
by a half-rosette and in one case by abas-relief showing a stupa with its usual railing.
The Mathura Museum possesses two railing-pillars (Nos. J i and 2 ) on which above
the female figure we find a relief evidently referring to ^om^jataka. One of these tw’o
pillars is that, noticed above, which once stood on the top of the Bhutesar mound. The
scene pictured in the top panel seems to have some connection with that of Barahat
in which a giant, perhaps a Rakshasa, is having a tooth drawn by monkeys.
' V. A. Smith, The Jain Stupa, Plates LXII and ClII.
- Fergusson, TreeandSerpent Worship, Plates L, LII.LIX, LXVII, and LXXIV.
^ Cuiinintjbair, Bharhut, Plate XI.

,
THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
147
On the other pillar, the top relief is circular in shape and shows a man with an
umbrella apparently addressing an assembly of persons seated in three rows. This
pillar is also remarkable, because here the supposed Yaksha is not supporting the
female figure but is crouching in a cave beneath her feet. He has pointed ears,
protruding eyes, and a grinning mouth.
In one of the Chaubara mounds Mr. Growse discovered a railing-pillar carved
with a figure which he describes as a dancing-girH, but which undoubtedly represents
a male person of a faun-like appearance standing under a tree. Over the tree there
is the Buddhist railing, which apparently here is simply decorative, but, no doubt, is
the prototype of the balconies with figures which are so common on Mathura railing-
pillars. It should, moreover, be remarked that figures on balconies are very
common both on the bas-reliefs of Sanchi and on those of Gandhara. They form a
purely indigenous element directly copied from actual life and as often pictured in
poetry as in sculpture.
On the back of the Mathura railing-pillars we find either decorative medallions
with rosettes, phantastical animals and sacred symbols, such as are found onthe
Old-Indian monuments, or illustrative panels usually relating to jatakas. On the
peculiar treatment of the latter I shall speak further on.
The coping-stones of the Mathura railings are decorated with borders of conven-
tional floral design, sometimes interspersed with animals. It is interesting to note
that very often such borders are surmounted by a narrow band of bells similar to that
found on the coping-stone of the Barahat railing. The crossbars, bearing rosettes
of the same type as those found on the pillars, again prove the close relationship
between the railings of Mathura and those of the Maurya period.^
As to the toranas, that integral part of the Buddhist railing, no specimen has
been preserved at Mathura. That at Mathura also such gateways existed, is
proved by a detached architrave which was discovered by General Cunningham on
the Katra site in 1862-63 and after many peregrinations has been placed in the
local museum. It is profusely sculptured on both sides with buildings, figures, and
trees including a representation of a torana itself.®
We know of two tablets of homage (Skr. ayagapata) one complete and the
other fragmentary, which give us a picture of a Mathura stupa with a railing around
and in front a torana approached by a flight of steps.^ They show that structurally
these toranas do not differ from those of Barahat and Sanchi, though here their
decoration is less elaborate. It will be seen that on the complete specimen, the
so-called ‘‘ votive stupa” ofthe Holi gate, now in the Mathura Museum, flying figures
are seen hovering over the sacred monument which they adorn with garlands
and flowers. Here as well as on the fragment in the Lucknow Museum nude
female figures are leaning in graceful attitudes against the drum of the stupa. In
1 Growse, Mathura,p. 123, also Ind.Ant,, Vol. VI- p. 219,No. 6, and A, S.B., Vol. XLVII (187S), Pt,
I,p. 118;PlatesXVIII and XX. Itisnow preservedin the Mathura Museum. (Cat, No. J 7).
^ Forreproductions of pillars, coping-stones and cross-bars of Mathurd railings cf, V. A. Smith, The
JainStupa, Plates LIX-LXXXIV.
3 Cf. A. S. R., Vol. I, p. 237 and III, p. 15,and Growse, Mathura,p. jo6,
XV
^ V. A. Smith, TheJain Stupa,Plates XII, and CIII. Cf, also BhagvanlalIndraji Actesdu sixieme
congres international des Orientalistestenu en 1883dLeide Pt. III., Section 11 pp. 142 ff; with
,
plate.

.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
148
view of what has been remarked above, I take these figures to represent not dancing-
girls but Yakshis. Their occurrence together with other semi-divine beings on these
sculptures confirms the proposed Identification. The lost portion of this tablet
of homage must also have contained flying figures, as the feet of one of them are still
preserved. Finally, I wish to draw attention to the pillars placed in the corners of
the stupa railing, which give us a clue as to the actual position of such monuments.
On the northern gate of Sanchi we find the end of the lowermost architrave
supported by curious brackets in the shape of a female figure standing under a tree.
The Kahkali Tila has yielded similar brackets in which the figures are standing on an
elephant, a crocodile and a dwarf.‘ The position of these brackets must have been
the same as at Sanchi. The figures I take to represent Yakshis, which here play the
same role as their male counterparts.
The above remarks will suffice to show that the Mathura school of sculpture is
essentially Indian and in its main characteristics is derived from the art exhibited by
the monuments of the Maurya period. On the other hand, it contains many an ele-
ment which is not found in Old-lndian sculpture and which, as I shall endeavour to
show, can be traced back to the classically inspired school of GandhSra.
The most important innovation is the appearance of the Buddha image. It is a
well-known fact that the oldest Buddhist monuments do not contain any representa-
tion of the Buddha either as a detached statue or in bas-reliefs. Both in Gandhara
and Mathura Buddha statues occur in great numbers, and on the scenes relating to
his life his figure has replaced the ancient symbols. As regards artistic merit, the
Buddha of Gandhara with his expression of benign serenity, his Apollo-like face, wavy
locks, andampie-folded robe is Infinitely superior to the clumsy, rigid, and expression-
less Buddha of Mathura. So great is the difference that at first sight a connection
between the two seems inadmissible. But on closer examination it appears that the
attitudes in both cases are the same. The standing image has invariably the right
hand raised towards the shoulder in thegesturewhichin Buddhisticonography expresses
the imparting of security or protection {abhaya-mudra) The seated images exhibit
the same posture or both hands are placed in the lap in the attitude of meditation
;
[dhyana-mudra). It is noteworthy that other mudras, those of the touching of the
earth {hkumispar'sa-mudra) andof the turningof the w’^heel of the law {dharmachakra-
mudrd) hardly occur in Mathura sculpture. Of the latter I cannot quote a single
instance and of the former only two, representations of Mara’s attack on Buddha under
the bodhi trte. both in the Mathura Museum.
That both in Gandhara and Mathura the Buddha is clad in the garment of a
Buddhist monk, need not imply any dependence. But it is of interest that the folds
of the upper garment (Skr. sanghati) are clearly marked,'and in Gandhara in a much
more classical manner than at Mathura. From the treatment of the dress it has been
rightly inferred by Grunwedel that Mathura has borrowed its Buddha image from
Gandhara. The same is true with regard to the Buddha figure of Amaravati. It
should be noted that this treatment is un-Indian and, though continued at Mathura in
the Gupta period, disappears again inmediaeval Buddhist sculpture.
' V. A. Smith, op. cit. Plates XXXIV, XXXV andXXXVII.

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
149
A good example of the conventional treatment of the drapery is offered by a
colossal standing Buddha image (ht. S' 8") preserved in the Public Library at Allaha-
bad (PI. LII a). Both the style and material of this image prove that it originates
from Mathura or, at any rate, belongs to the Mathura school. The head, which is
refixed to the body, has the samewant ofexpressionwhich, as noted above, is peculiar
to theBuddhasof Mathura. The hair is arranged in schematic curls the ushmsha is
;
clearly indicated on the top of the head. Of the halo ^ only two fragments are left on
both sides of the shoulder. It shows the same scalloped border which is typical for
Mathura images. The robe with its schematic folds covers both shoulders and leaves
the outline of thebody clearly marked. The latterfeature is preserved on the Buddha
images of Sarnath, though here the drapery is no longer indicated. Both the arms of
the Allahabad statue are broken at the elbow, but there can belittle doubt that the
right was raised against the shoulder, whilst theleft held the hem of the garment.
Of still greater interest than the image itself are the three miniature attending
figures. Between its feet wenotice a figurine standing against a cluster of lotus flow-
ers and wearing an elaborate head-dress and ornaments. A mantle or shawl, sliding
down from the left shoulder over the left arm, is slung round the legs beneath the
right knee. Its right hand which is missing must have been raised in the attitude of
protection, its left hand holds a small vessel.
The two other figurines, somewhat larger in size, are apparently a monk and a
lay member {ufasaka) kneeling onboth sides of the Buddha’s feet. The monk, dressed
in a robe which leaves the right shoulder bare, holds a bunch of lotus flowers the
;
upasaka in secular attire holds a wreath as an offering. Itis curious that the monk's
figure wears heavy earrings.
Here I wish to draw attention to a peculiarity ofthe Buddha imageof Gandhara.
Usually its pedestal is carved with a relief showing a Bodhisattva between adoring
figures of worshippers. Elsewhere I havesuggested thatthe latter, originally at least,
were meant to represent the donors of the sculpture on which they occur.^ Anyhow,
it seems highly probable that the three figurines on the Allahabad statue are derived
from Gandhara examples. It is true thatin the present case the figures are placed on
the top of the base. This alteration may perhaps be accounted for by the circum-
stance that the front face is usually preserved for dedicatory inscriptions which at
Mathura are both much more common and more extensive than in Gandhara. The
similarity of the central figurine in dress and attitude with the figures occurring on
Gandhara pedestals leaves little doubt that it represents a Bodhisattva. We may go
a step further and, on account of the vessel in its left hand, identify it with Maitreya.
I may note here that very often between the feet of Mathura statues figures or sym-
bols are shown which possibly are intended fora cognizance of the personage repre-
sented. The kneeling figures of devotees placed on the top or on thefront of the
bases have been preserved all through the later history of Indian art.
The statue of Allahabad, besides showing the type of the Mathura Buddha, has
thussupplied us at the same time with thetype of the Mathura Boddhisattva. Here,
how^ever, we meet with a difficulty. In my opinion,the figurine in royal dress with the
^ Thehalo isafeatureyborrowed from Hellenisticart. Cf. Griinwedel, Buddhist Art inIndia, pp.86f,
2Cf. A,S. 1003-1904,pp.255ff, Plate LXVII.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT-
150
vessel in the left hand is undoubtedly derived from those well-known figures from
Gandhara which, originally designated as ” royal persons, ” have been identified by
Griinwedel as Bodhisattvas and have since been considered as such by otner autho-
rities. —
We possess, however, the two statues ^ of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth both
—
belonging tothe Mathuraschool which in theirinscriptions are defined as Bodhisattvas
but present a type entirely different from the one just described. They wear neither
diadem nor ornaments, but only two plain garments. The under-garment is fastened
round the loins by means of a flat girdle the upper garment is thrown over the left
;
shoulder andarm, leaving the right shoulder bare. Itwould indeed be difficultto derive
these clumsy and unwieldy figures from the graceful Bodhisattvas of Gandhara. It
should, however, be remarked that here also there exists a distinct affinity both in
attitudeand drapery. The Bodhisattvas of Gandhara have their right handraised above
the elbow, whilst the left hand is placed on the hip. The mantle is thrown over the left
shoulder. All this we find in the Bodhisattva statues of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth,
but treatedin a most unartistic and schematic fashion. The right hand is laid flat against
the shoulder, the left fist rests on thehip and the drapery is stiff and unnatural.
The absence of ornaments is a point still to be explained. Here it is only possible
to make conjectures; the following, however, deserves to be noticed. The two
Bodhisattvas in plain dress were erected on spots intimately connected with the career
ofSakyamuni “ on the place where, the Lord used to walk {Bhagavato chankrmne)
There is thus every reason to assume that they were meant to represent no other than
the historical Bsdhisattva.
What particular motive the donors hadin erecting a Bodhisattva and not a Buddha
statue on spots which Sakyamuni was supposed to have visited after his attainment
of enlightenment, it is impossible to decide. But there is every reason to assume
that the images of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth were meant to represent the Bodhi-
sattva Sakyamuni, although the absence of ornaments would point to the period be-
tween the great renunciation and the hbdhi.
We
have seen, on the other hand, that theBodhisattva figurine on the Allahabad
statue, on account of its attribute, may be identified with Maitreya. I feel, therefore
inclined to assume that similar figures in royal dress represent celestial Bodhisattvas.
That these figures are derived from Graeco-Buddhist examples, will be confirmed in
the course of the present paper. As regards Friar Bala’s Bodhisattvas, I believe that
they likewise go back to Gandhara, though in a way they may be called a creation of
the Mathura school. They may indeed be styled Buddhas without monk’s robe or
Bodhisattvas without ornaments.
It is of interest to note here a standing statue in the Mathura Museum (No. A40)
which shows, as it were, a link between the plain and ornamented Bodhisattva type’
Unfortunately the head and the arms are lost, but the attitude was presumably the
same as that of the Sarnath and Saheth-Mahgth statues. The torso is nude, but round
the neck there are two necklaces. The lower portion of the body is clad in a plain
garment probably meant for a dhoti held round theloins by a double flat mrdle Tr^
find-place is unknov/n.
ISals > o C t f h . e A c . a S s . e R w . i , th 19 t 0 h 4 e . P 19 a 0 r 5 k , h P a l m at i e ma X g X e VI an . d is It a is ch n a o r t a e ct w e o r r i t s h t y ic t o h f a t t he bo M t a h th st u a r t a ue s s ch a o r o e l. carved in the round

avcxrsiEXJiM:.
Mi^i'iaixr^aA.
insr
Eaiis-A.T'X’-v-A.

;
THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
‘51
Another Bodhisattva figure \ which exhibits a close affinity with the Gandhara
tvpe, is preserved in the Lucknow Museum. It is said to originate from the ruins of
Gane§vara, 3 miles north-west of Mathura. The head and feet are lost. The attitude
is that of the Bodhisattvas of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth. Specially noticeable is the
cushion-like pad between the raised hand and the shoulder, which is also peculiar to
the Sarnath statue. The torso is nude but for a flat necklace. The WTists are pro-
vided with heavy bracelets. The upper garment is partly thrown over the left arm
which is placed on the hip and partly slung round the right leg. The lower garment is
held up by means of a cord-like girdle ending in a tassel which hangs down between the
two feet. A comparison between this figure and the Gandhara Bodhisattvas will
clearly show both the close resemblance in detail and the enormous difference in style.
Still m-ore clearly is Gandhara influence expressed in an interesting fragment
preseiA-ed in the Mathura Museum (No. A47 PI. LII). It consists of the lower
portion of a figure seated in the European fashion on a wickerwork chair. The
sandaled left foot is placed on an ornamental footstool at the side of the empty right
sandal. Evidently the right leg, which is broken, was drawn up. This peculiar pos-
ture, which has become typical for the Bodhisattvas of mediaeval art, is first found in
Gandhara. It isobvious that this Mathura fragment is a copy of Graeco-Buddhist sculp-
tures like the inscribed Bodhisattva from Loriyan Tangai in the Calcutta Museum.^
From the above remarks it follows that both the Buddha and Bodhisattva images
of Mathura are imitations by Indian sculptors of the prototypes created by the Hellen-
istic artists of Gandhara. The process of deterioration of those types can be traced
in Gandhara itself where the work of the foreign sculptors was continued by their
Indianized descendants or successors.
It has been noticed above that at th'e same time that the Buddha statue is called
into existence, we also see the Buddha figure appear on the bas-reliefs representing
scenes from his life. These scenes are much less numerous and varied at Mathura
than Gandhara where w'e have a complete “Buddha-charita” sculptured in stone. In
mediaeval art such scenes are almost exclusively limited to the four great events of
Buddha’s life ; his birth, enlightenment, first sermon, and death.
Mathura represents an intermediary stage, at which we find, besides the four
great events, a few others of secondary importance. It is not unreasonable to expect
that future explorations at Mathura will reveal the existence of other scenes, but their
number will never reach the exuberant growth of Graeco-Buddhist art. Not only is
Gandhara influencetraceable innearly every individual scene, but their general arrange-
ment is evidently derived from the North-West. The scenes are either carved one
above the other on steles (Sanskrit urdkvapatta) or decorate the frieze of some reli-
gious building.
The most interesting instance of the latter device is presented by the drum of a
miniature stUpa from the Dhruv mound near Mathura, now placed in the local Museum.
M. Foucher in his able discussion of the Sikri stupa drum in the Lahore Museum,
^ V. A. Smith, The Jain Stupa,Plate LXXXVII. The image isneither ‘'Vardhamana” nor “ someBrah-'
manical deity/' The headfigured on the sameplatedoes not seem to belong tothe same image.
“A.S»R., 1903-04,Plate LXVIll C.
3 V. A, Smith, op cii,. Plates CV-CVII. A. Foucher, Les has-reliefs du stupade Sihri {Gandhdfa),
J. A. 1903, p. 323. I ventureto disagree with theauthoras regards the interpretation oftwo ofthe scenes.

archaeological report.
152
has first pointed out the close connection between these two monuments. In both
we find a series of scenes from Buddha’s life separated by little pilasters and surmoun-
ted bv a dental cornice. In the Gandhara example the classical character is much
more clearly expressed, and that from Mathura is merely a debased imitation.
The latter contains eight bas-reliefs representing the following subjects : Bud-
dha’s birth, his enlightenment (expressed by Mara’s attack), his first sermon, his
death, the Gandhakuti of Sravasti (?), his descent from the Trayastrirhga hea^ren, the
presentation of the four cups by the four Lokapalas, and Indra’s visit at the IndraSaila
cave. Thus we have the four great events, followed by four minor events. It is
noteworthy that the latter only partially correspond with the four minor events of the
Buddhist canon. At the time when the Mathura school flourished, they were
apparently not yet definitely fixed. It is also curious that, in order to obtain the five
great scenes in the right order, we have to circumambulate the monument in a direc-
tion opposed to that of the fradakshina.
On the panel representing Buddha’s birth we see Maya standing under the sd^
tree in exactly the same posture as on the numerous Gandhara reliefs relating to that
event. But the scene is here combined with another immediately following it in order
of time. The infant Buddha, marked by a circular halo, is standing between two
Nagas, which issue half-way from masonry wells and fold their hands in adoration.
There can be little doubt that these are the Naga kings Nanda and Upananda who,
according to the Lalita-vistara, issued from the earth and showered two streams of
water over the new-born Bodhisattvak Here we may compare a fragment from Ama-
ravati on which next to the birth-scene we find a bas-relief on which two females, one
carrying a kerchief with the sacred foot-prints and the other holding an umbrella over
it, approach a fountain enclosure from which issues a Naga, the hands joinedin
adoration. Anotheradoring female (?) figure is seen behind^
On Samath reliefs the two Nagas are commonly represented standing in the air
over the infant Buddhaand pouringwater overhis head. It is interesting to note that in
Gandhara sculpture the first bath is administered by Brahma and Indra. Considering
the frequency of Naga scenes in Graeco-Buddhist art, we are led to believe that the
legend of Buddha’s first bath by the two Naga kings must have beenunknown to the
sculptors of the North-West. It was in any case the Mathura sculptors who first gave
We
it visible shape. find it treated in exactly the same manner on a slab from the
. ,
Rajghat in the Mathura Museum (No. Hi). This sculpture contains the four main
events of Buddha’slife and his descent from heaven. There also the scene of the first
bath by the Naga kings Nanda and Upananda is combined with that ofthe Nativity.
The Mathura Museum contains another sculpture (No. H2; PI. LIII) said to-
originate from near the Kahkali Tila, which Cunningham, presumably misled by the
nudity of the central figure, supposed to represent a Jaina sainP. But a comparison
.
with the two sculptures just discussed proves that here again we have the scene of the-
first bath treated in the conventional manner peculiar to Mathura. It is curious that
,
already at this early stage of his life the future Buddha is shown in his. usual attitude
- 1 L F a er l g i u t s a s m o s n t , ar T a re (e e d. a L n e d f S m e a r i p m e ) nt j p W . or 8 s 3 h , i c p f. , H p i . u 3 e 12 n , Ts P i l a at n e g X Si C - I y . u-ki (transl. Beal), Vol. ii, pp, 24 f.
^ At. 5. R., Vol. XX, p. 35, PlateIV.

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
153
the left-hand on the hip, the right raised in the gesture of imparting protection. The
representation of the Nagas issuing half-way from wells, which we findat Amaravati
and on the Mathura sculptures, is a feature evidently borrowed from Gandhara art,
though here again the difference in treatment shows the artistic superiority of the
latter most clearly. The elegant fountain enclosure with its gargoyle has^become a
circular masonry well.
It is curious that, whereas the Sarnath sculptures closely agree with the Lalita-
vistara. in showing the trro Nagas‘‘ standingin the air half-bodied ”, the Mathura reliefs
follow another reading of the legend which is found in Hiuen Tsiangb When visiting
the Lumbini garden, the Chinese pilgrim noticed two fountains ofpure water, by the
side of which had been built two stupas. “ This is the place where two dragons ap-
peared from the earth. When Bodhisattva was born, the attendants and household
relations hastened in everv direction to find water for the use of the child. At this
time two springs gurgled forth from the earth just before the queen, the one cold, the
other warm, using which they bathed him Though, as noticed above, this scene
seems to be acreation of the Mathura school, there is one feature which apparently
isderived from Gandhara. It isthe “ heavenly music ” expressed by five or six musical
instruments suspended in the air which rve notice on the bas-relief in the Mathura
Museum’. The instruments are a flute, a conch, a drum, a lute {mna), a bag-pipe (?)
and a tabor.
Of Buddha’s enlightenment 1 know only two representations from Mathura : one on
the stupa drumofDhruv Tila, and the other on the slab from the Raj Ghat. Both are
now placed in the local museum. The attitude of the Buddha, here as in Gandhara, is
that of touching the earth {bhumispar'sa-mudra). The figure to his right seems to be
Mara to his left we see Mara’s daughters. The latter do not occur on Gandhara
;
examples of this scene andseem indeed to have been first introduced by the sculptors
of Ma'hura. In mediaeval art, on the contrawy, they are commonly shown as takingpart
in “ Mara’s assault.”
— —
Of thethird great scene the first sermon at Benares we possess three examples
from Mathura. Besides those on the stilpa drum of Dhruv Tila and the Raj Ghat
sculpture, we have thefragment of a frieze likewise preserved in the Mathura Museum
(No. H7, pi. LIV) which containsthefirst sermon and the Nirvana. It is interesting
—
to note the dwarf pilasterwhich terminates the latter scene evidently a degenerate
descendant of the Indo-Corinthian pilasters of Gandhara. The scenes representing the
first sermon are exact counterparts of some Gandhara reliefs {e,g., D-15 of the
Lahore Museum) on which we findtheMaster, surroundedby the five Friars, actually
turningthe wheel of the law, which is placed on a pillar at his side. On the Raj Ghat
sculpture the wheel is absent.
Besides the sculptures just noted, the Mathura Museum possesses another frag-
ment (No. H8) with the representationof Buddha’s death®. It evidently formedpart of
a stele {urdhvapaiia) onwhich the fourgreatsceneswere arranged oneabove the other,
1 5i-j/M-/!:/-(transL Beal), Vol. II, pp. 24!.
2 Foucher, U art greco-houddhique du Gandhara, p. 301, Cf. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Suttas S. B. E.,
Vol. XI, pp. loiand 249.
® Foucher, op. cii., p.569. figl-282.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
154
the iSirv5n3. occupying the lowermost compartment. The close connection between
this sculpture and the Grmco-Buddhist representations of the farinirvana will at
once be apparent.. The mainfigure of the scene is the dying Buddha reclining on his
We
couch in the attitude described in the Pali text. notice again the halo with scal-
loped border peculiar to Mathura.
Of the twin sal trees between which the couch was placed only one is preserved,
the opposite corner of the panel being broken. Among the foliage we notice the
figure of the tree spirit in the act of showering flowers. In exactly the same manner
the genii of the sal trees are shown on some of the finest Nirvanas from Gandhara, eg.,
the two from Loriyan Tangai, now in the Calcutta Museumh The mourning figures
standing behind the couch, the hands raised in the attitude of grief, are also regularly
found on Gandhara reliefs. There their number varies. But in both the Mathura
Museum reliefs there are three figures, the central one raising both hands. On the
urdhvapatta fragment there is still some variet)' in the attitude of the two other
figures, one of which hasplaced his right hand on his head, w'hereas the other conceals
his face behind a handkerchief. But on the other sculpture these three figures present
a much more schematic appearance, the central one raising both hands, that to his
right the right and that to his left the left hand. Thus we see the parinirvana scene,
the creation of a Hellenistic artist, gradually modified by the tendency towards sym-
metry and conventionalism. This process is already noticeable in Gandhara itself, as
will be seen from a comparison of the six Nirvana reliefs published by M. Foucher.“
On the stele fragment we notice, next, two figures standing on both sides of
Buddha’s couch. That at his feet wearing monk’s dress has been identified by M.
Foucher with Mahaka§yapa. On the other sculpture these two figures are missing.
It seems that on the sfupa drum from Dhruv Tila the two figures re-occur. Here the
number of attendants is limited to three, the third one standing at the back of the
couch with both hands raised. It is remarkable that the usual figures in front of the
couch are absent here.
On the stele of the Mathura Museum we notice in front of the couch three figures,
one of which, a monk seated in meditation, has been identified by M. Foucher with
Subhadra, the Master’s last convert. The three sticks at his side I suppose to mark
him as a Brahraanical ascetic (Sanskrit tridandni). This figure is invariablv found
on Gandhara reliefs,^either alone or accompanied by a prostrate figure in monk’s dress,
probably meant for Ananda. On the other sculpture in the Mathura Museum we have
again three figures, Subhadra occupying the centre. The other two wearing royal
dress are perhaps meant for Malla chieftains. It would seem that the Mathura
school, out of a sense of symmetry, has retained these three figures which are still
found on the colossal Nirvana image of Kasia, a work of the fifth century which, as
noted above, appears to be wrought by a Mathura artist. At Kasia also the cross-
legged ascetic with his three staffs occupies the centre. The figure on the left is a
lay-member, but that on the right wears monk’s dress and most probably represents
Ananda, who plays such a prominent part in the legend of the Great Decease. This
^ Grunwedel; BuddhistArt in India, figs. 71 and72.
^ A. Foucher, op. cii., figs. 276-281.

SSiiii

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
155
instance illustrates how Mathura was the intermediary between Gandhara and the art
of the Gupta period.
Here I wish to note the curious fact that the mysterious Vajrapani who occurs in
Gandhara. not only in the death-scene, but in nearly every scene relating to the
Buddha legend, as a constant companion of the Master, is totally absent on corre-
sponding reliefs from Mathura. It would seem that the original meaning of this figure
had become lost and the Mathura sculptors did not feel any scruples in eliminating it
from the entourage of the Buddha.
Whereas at Mathura the scenes relating to the life of Sakyamuni are very
few as compared with the long and varied series created by the Graeco-Buddhist
school of Gandhara, the Mathura school exhibits a far greater number and variety of
scenes referring to his previous existences. In this respect, again, Mathura art
shows itself a true descendant of Maurya sculpture as exemplified on the stupa of
Barahat. Yet in the treatment of such scenes by the Mathura sculptors Gandhara
influence is unmistakable. In Old-Indian sculpture the whole story is condensed in a
single bas-relief, the actors being repeated in various attitudes peculiar to their con-
secutive adventures and actions. This treatment imparts an enigmatic character to
these sculptures -which it is only possible to understand with the aid of inscriptions. At
Jamalgarhl, on the contrary, the ViSvantara and Syama/^/flifl^ are pictured in a far
more lucid fashion and evolved in a series of scenes separated by trees. This method
which, simple though it may seem, had not commended itself to the sculptors of the
Maurya epoch, is also found at Mathura.
On the back of one of the railing-pillars of Bhutesar (PI. LI, h) in the Mathura
Museum, there are threescenes representing a passage of the ViSvantara-jataka, in
which that paragon of generosity gives his two children away to a Brahmin. In the
upper panel the Bodhisattva apparently pours water in the hand of his supplicant so
as to solem'-iize the donation. The hermit's hut with its covering of leaves is seen
in the background. In the central panel we see the two children being led away by
the Brahmin and in the lower-most relief theirmother is returning with water and fruit.
It is of interest to note, that, though the treatment of this jataka in a series of
scenes must have originated from Gandhara, the individual scenes of the Mathura
pillar do not show any dependence on the only representation of this jataka we know
of in Gandhara art—that of Jamalgarhl, now preserved in the British Museum. To a
certain extent the treatment of the story may be called original. This is also borne
out by a comparison with the representation of \kv\sjataka on the lower architrave of
the northern gateway of Sanchl.^
The back of the other Bhutesar railing-pillar In the Mathura Museui-n contains
also three bas-reliefs which unfortunately are much damaged. In the upper panel
there is a Buddha or more probably Bodhisattva seated in the usual posture on a
throne. Behindtwo attendants are standing, one of whom holds a fly-whisk {chamard).
Inthe central panel we discern the figure of a Brahmanical hermit seated on a cushion
of holy grass. Another figure seems to stand in front of him, but is too much
^ Fergusson, TreeandSerpent Worship,Plate XXXII, 2, cf. p. loi, where the firstpatof the story is
•describad. Plate LXV, fig. I,gives the Amaravati reading.
X 2

ARCH.EOLOGICAL REPORT.
156
defaced to be identified. The lowermost relief shows a lion or tiger seizing a human
figure between his teeth. In the background there are a hermit’s hut and a tree.
I feel inclined to assume that these three scenes refer to the Jataka of the tiger
{vyaghra-jataka). In this birth-story it is related how the Bodhisattva gave his own
bodv to feed a hunsrv tigress which was about to devour her own cubs. The ascetic
in the central scene and the hermit’s hut in the last one support this identification. It
remains to decide what connection the upper panel can have with this story. The
most plausible explanation seems to me that it represents the Bodhisattva in his
heavenlv abode previous to his taking birth as a Brahmin. It will be noticed that the
seated figure is draped in the same manner as the Bodhisattva statues of Sarnath
and Saheth-Maheth. Thus it would confirm my supposition that these figures
represent the Bodhisattva predestined to become the Buddha Sakyamuni.
The three scenes on one of the railing-pillars of Colonel Stacy, which, as noted
above, belongs to the same railing, have been explained by Cunningham^ as referring
to the miracle of Rajagriha in which Buddha subdued an elephant let loose against
him bv his malignant cousin Devadatta. The central panel bears indeed a strong re-
semblance to the Gandhara reliefs which picture that event but the final scene, in
;
which, according to Cunningham, Devadatta is himself destroyed by the infuriated
elephant does not seem to agree with the written tradition. It is, however, quite pos-
sible that the Mathura sculpture represents a different reading of the story not found
in extant Buddhist literature. Presently we shall meet with a similar instance in the
representation of a Jataka.
If Cunningham’s interpretation is correct, it would follow that the reliefs on the
Bhutesar railing-pillars not only picture Buddha’s previous existences, but also the
last one in which he obtained enlightenment. It is not unreasonable to hopethatsome
day more pillars of this railing will be found which will show whether this view is
correct. Two points are still to be noted with regard to this railing. First of all the
scenes carved on the back of the pillars leave not the slightest doubt that they have
belonged to a Buddhist monument, most probably a stupa. It seems plausible that
this monument belonged to the Ya§a-vihara, which once occupied the site of the
Katra. The other point to which I wish to draw attention is the occurrence of Indo-
Persepolitan pilasters at the side of each scene. This is not only a regular device on
Mathura railing-pillars, but a similar pilaster will also be seen on the urdhvapatta
fragment representing Buddha’s nirvana. It is a feature found also at Barahat
where the panels are enclosed between a pair of pilasters. In the case of the Bhutesar
railing-pillars each pair of pilasters supports an architrave carved with one ogee arch
in the centre and two half-arches at the sides. The ideaapparently was to place each
scene of the sacred legend within a little chapel.
abas- T re h l e ie M f a r t e h p u re r s a en M t u i s ng e t u w m o c m o e nt n a i i n ns th a e f a r c a t gm o e f n k t il o l f in a g r a ai t l o in r g t - o p i i s l e la w r it ( h No s . ti J ck 3 s 6 . ; T fi h g i . s i) sc w e i n t e h
evidently refers to the Kachchhapa-jataka, but it is noteworthy that the death of the
tortoise, as shown on the sculpture, agrees with the version of the Panchatantra and
not with that of the Pali Jataka-book. In the latter it is said that the tortoise, owing-
^ Cur.ningham, A, S. i?.,Vol. Ill, Plate VII. Cf. Anderson, Catalogue, Part I, pp. i86 ff, M. 15-a

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
>57
to his imprudent speech, fell into the open courtyard and split in t\vo\ whereas in the
Panchatantra it is definitely stated that he was “ made to pieces by the townspeople. ’
Under the panel there are two
letters which I read Dasa and
which prove the sculpture to
belong to the Kushana period..
In some jataka scenes pictured
on the Barahat stilpa there is a
considerable discrepancy in details
between the sculptures and the
canonical texts,“ The same
seems to be true of representa-
tions of birth-stories at Mathura.
It remains to consider some
decorative devices of Mathura
sculpture in which Gandhara
influence is even more clearly
expressed than in illustrative bas-
reliefs. Of special interest are
the garland-carrying figures of
Graeco-Buddhist art, because
here the classical prototype can
be pointed out with certainty. In
Gandhara “ they are represented
on string courses, plinths or
friezes, as boyish figures carrying
garlands or playing betw^een gar-
lands. In the intervening portions
]otus-flowers are sometimes intro-
Fig. I. Fragment in Mathura Museum.
duced, or the intervals are filled
in with symbols, animals or birds.”® The two sculptures shown in figure 2 (ht I t
width 3' 10") which are preserved in the Peshawar Museum are fine specimens of this
decorative device. Here the intervals also contain Cupids holding lotus-flowers and
palm-leaves.
Griinwedel was the first to point out that the same device in a modified form is
found on the rail coping of the Amaravatl stupa. Here “the boys at play have-
turned into men who, bearing huge snake-like bodies, advance in studied and graceful
attitudes.” In the intervening spaces "we notice purely Indian subjects such as
the Garuda holding a Nagain its beak. “ Nothing,” Fergusson remarks, “ can wellbe
better, as an architectural ornament, than the wavy flow of the long roll, borne by
^ The Jataka (ed.Fausboll), Vol. II, pp. I75ff. No. 215. English translation (ed, Cowell) Cambridge, 189”,
Vol. II> pp* Pafichatantra (ed. Kosegarten) Bonn, 1848, p. 76.
2 Oldenburg. Noteson Buddhist art, translatedby Leo Wiener in J. A. O. S., Vol. XVIII (1897), p. 185,,
footnote 2.
^ Griinwedel-Burgess, BuddhistArt in India, p. 148. Foucher op, cit., p. 140.

arch.eological report.
1-8
animated dgures and interspersed with emblems appropriate to the dedication of the
Tope.’^^
A coniiectinp; link between Gandhara and Amaravati is afforded by Mathura
where we find the garland-carriers in an intermediate stage of their Indian develop-
ment. The INIathura Museum possesses five specimens of friezes exhibiting this
design. The largest frieze (^Pl. LI\’, d ht. 2' contains one figure, the head of
;
which is lost. It wears ornaments like the Gandhara figures, but of a more elaborate
type. It is of interest to note that, whereas the Gandhara Cupids, apart from their
ornaments, have retained their classical nudity, those of Mathura have donned the
indigenous The open spaces between the garland are filled with palmettes
and lotus-rosettes. The sculpture clearly betrays thattendencytowards conventionalism
and uniformity which is characteristic of Indian art.
Another sculpture in the Mathura Museum (PI. L!V, c ht. 11") has a double
;
frieze; the lower one evidently represents Jataka scenes. In the upper frieze we find
Fig. 2. Frieze in Peshawar Museum.
again the garland-carrying figures. It is remarkable how here as at Amaravati all
proportion is lost between these tiny figures and the heavy garland under the load of
which they seem to succumb. On all Mathura sculptures the Cupids are shown
walking or running m one direction as is the case of Amaravati, whereas in Gandhara
they are standing alternately turned in opposite directions.
A comparison of the three types will clearly show how the Mathura figures re-
present an intermediary stage and bear a character far less classicalthan their parents
of Gandhara, but at the same time much less Indianised than their degenerate des-
cendants at Amaravati.
^ Fergusson. 7'7^ee andSerpent Worship, p. 169, Plate LVI.

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
159
Amon^ our Graeco-Buddhist sculptures -we possess several specimens of semi-
circular or curvilinear bas-reliefs which must have formed the pediments of chapels.
Of the two examphs reproduced on Plate LV one (ht, 2', vudth 2 Y) M'as obtained
in igo2 from Bringan near Rustam (Peshawar district) and is now preserved in
the Peshawar Museum. The other makes part of a collection in the Mission house
We
at Peshawar it- provenance is unknown.^ notice on the one from Bringan the
;
Indo-Corinthian capitals each surmounted by a divine figure in the attitude of adoration
and on the other a frieze of garland-carrying Cupids flanked by two double-domed
chapels. The division of these pediments by means of concentric arches is purely
Indian, for we find it on the pediments of chapels pictured on the Barahat stupa.
But the figures which fill the various compartments are singularly classical in
appearance.
The main scene which represents the submission of the Naga king Apalala^ is
of no special importance for our present subject. Of more interest are the two
upper divisions, in which we find, in one case, Buddha’s alms-bowl and Buddha him-
self, and in the other, two Bodhisattvas worshipped by a group of kneeling or standing
figures, their hands fold--d in adoration. At the end of each group of worshippers
—
there is a winged Triton—presumably meant for a Naga ihe coil of whose snake-like
body effectively fills the narrow end of the lunulate space,
I now wish to draw" attention to aninteresting fragmentamongthe collection in the
Mathura Museum (Cat. No. J i ht. 3') reproduced'on Plate LVI. From its shape and
;
from its being carved on both sides it is evident that it did not serve the same purpose
as the Gandhara pediments. In any case there can be little doubt that its design is
borrow"ed from the Gandhara sculptures just described. On each side w"e find three
lunulate areas separated by concentric arches.
On the obverse the centre of these three compartments is occupied respectively
by the alms-bowl, apparently filled to the brim with offerings, a Buddha seated in the
protecting attitude, and a Bodhisattva in royal garments seated in meditation under a
tree. On the reverse w'e have in the upper compartment Buddha’s head dress, which,
as we know, received the homageof the thirty-three gods, and in the central one a
—
Bodhisattva—perhaps Maitreya, judging from the vessel in his left hand ,who raises
his right handin the conventional attitude of protection. Of the figure occupying
the centre of the lowermost division, only aportion of the halo is preserved.
The worshipping figures are here divine or semi-divine beings flying, as indi-
cated by the position of their legs, and carrying cabbage-like bouquets from which
they are showering flowers. The classical Tritons in the corners are replaced by the
indigenous crocodile, less ornamental, but more familiar to the Indian public. The
connection between these animals and the crocodiles on the ends of torana beams of
We
Barahat is unmistakable.® find the same device on a fragment of a idrana
M
architrave in the Mathura Museum (Cat. No. 2 ; ht. 7f").
1 .For Other specimens cf. Grunwedel—Burgess, Bziddhht Art, figs.44,58, and83. See also p. 131. For
thephotographs of Gandharasculptures here reproduced I am indebted tothecourtesy of Dr. Spooner*
2 Cf. Poacher,op. cit. p?. 544^-, figs. 270-275.
3 Cunningham. Th^- Siicpa of Bharhut. Plate IX. C/.also V. A. Smith, TheJain Stupa, Plates XXIV
andXXV.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
i-6o
On the Mathura sculpture it almost gives the impression that the Devas are
flying straight out of the yawning jaws of these monsters. This observation enables
— —
us I believe to explain a curious design found in later Indian art, namely, that of a
human figure issuing from the mouth of a ma.kara. Finally, we notice in the spandrel
a Garuda treated in a highly conventional fashion, with short clumsy wings, a crooked
beak, and the feathers of the tail spread out on both sides and ending in tendril-
like scrolls. On the Gandhara pediments we have, of course, nothing corresponding
to these Garudas, but it is noteworthy that in Graeco-Buddhist sculpture, the span-
drels of arches are very often occupied by birds, apparently parrots, treated in a
naturalistic manner. They will also be seen on the frieze of garland-carriers repro-
duced above.
With the sculpture in the Mathura Museum may be compared the interesting
sculpture excavated by Dr. Fuhrer from the Kahkall Tlla and discussed by Professor
Buhler.^ This sculpture evidently served the same purpose, but is much more
elaborate and for this reason probably later in date. The division of the slab is in
both cases exactly the same, but on that from the Kahkali Tila the dividing ribs are
richly decorated with various floral designs, and the three lunulate spaces as well as
the spandrels are crowded with figures of the mo.st varied description. Besides flying
celestials, we notice dragon-riders which contrast strangely with the homely country
carts which take part in the procession. I recall, in passing, the Cupids riding on
dragons which occur on the beautiful Nirvana relief from Loriyan Tangai preserved
in the Calcutta Museum.
In the corners we meet again with the ungainly shapes of the yawning crocodiles
but here a new element is introduced. In front of the unwieldly monster a boyish
figure (in one case two) is standing, apparently teasing it by pulling its tono-ue. A
similar device we find on a Mathura sculpture in the Lucknow Museum where the
teasing boy assumes the aspect of a kimnara with leafy girdle.^ Professor Buhler
remarks that a simi ^ lar scene occurs on the Amaravatl stupa where, however it is a
female who takes hold of the m-akara's tongue. It is another proof of the indebted-
ness of Araaravati to Mathura.
“““-f' fig"™, in the sculpture of Kahkali Tiia are unfortunately incomplete
atlnSerw «"'h"ones and are
ed by female fan-bearers. A comparison with the sculpture in the Mathura Mu-
seum ma esIt highlyprobable thattheyare Buddhas andBodhisattvas,
or, if Dr. Buhler
IS right in supposing the sculpture to beJaina, they ought to be Tirthamkaras.
(To be continued?)
Ph. Vogel.
J.
-if g 94 A. S. R.jSouthern India,Vol. I, Plate XXVII, 6

SIE-
12,
•VIE
3E
DR,
(b)
JvIXTBacsXTIvi:,
12<r
SSCJ-O-XiOPT-U-aEtE

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE
IN
KASHMIR.
-(S
DRO.A.DLY speaking, Muhammadan architecture in Srinagar seems to fall under
three heads first, there is the pre-Mug^al masonry style secondly, there is the
: ;
wooden style and thirdly, the pure Mughal style. Of the first there are very few
;
examples. Thebest known is probablythe tomb of Zainu-l-‘abidln’s mother,^ regarding
which Cunningham, Cole and Fergusson had a difference of opinion. Cunningham^ and
Cole® maintained that the enclosure wall of this building was once the enclosure wall of
a Hindu temple. Fergusson^ would have it that the wall was built entirely by Muham-
madans, dating it about i,ooo years later. But the fact remains that Cunningham and.
Cole saw’ the building, while Fergusson did not ; and nobody, I think, can observe
the massiveness of the stones used, and their unmistakably ancient appearance
without agreeing with Cunningham and Cole that the enclosure wall is an old Hindu
wall in situ. If further evidence against Fergusson’s theory is wanted, let me draw
— —
attention to the mouldings of the plinth not includedin FergussoiTs woodcut and to
the section of the coping. Both of these features are essentially Hindu. Again, the
plinth ofthetomb of Zainu-l-‘abidln’s mother is obviously the actual plinth ofan ancient
Hindu temple, and the brick structure above it is a Muhammadan tomb of a common
Persian type, adapted to the Hindu plinth. The torus moulding of this plinth is prac-
tically complete, and from the way the stone'is jointed at the angles on the plan, it is
quite certain that the plinth has never been appreciably disturbed. The small pointed
arches in the enclosure wall which deceived Fergusson, only look like Muhammadan
nt maybe ofinteresttonotethatthechroniclerJonaraja in thesecond Rajataranginf(V. 715) mentions Zainu-
U‘abidin*s motherbythename of Mera Devi,perhapsmeant for MIran (^^Devi” beingaSanskrit title of queens
or princesses), and calls her the daughter of Piruja (Firoz.) the King of Shahbhahga. I do not knowwhat
country is meantbyShahbhanga. The English translation by Dutt has Udabhandapura, which is the present
Undor Ohind onthe Indus,thecapital of Gandharaatthetime of theearly Muhammadan invasions. As the
ruling dynasty was known by the name of Shahi, it isjust possible thatthe name Udaka-bhanda hasbecome
corruptedinto Shahbhanga. It w^ould be Interestingif it could be ascertained from Muhammadan sources
whetherthere existeda King Firoz,somewhere inthe neighbourhood of Kashmir at the time of SikandarButslii’
kan. [J. Ph. Vogel.]
*-2 J. A. S. B., 1848, part 2.
® H. H.Cole, llhisirations ofancient buildings in Kashmir.
^
J.
Fergusson. HistoryofIndian Architecture,p. 281.
Y

ARCH.'EOLOGICAL REPORT.
162
work on a drawing in elevation, because the depth of the recesses and the size of the
stones is not shownh They are in reality quite unlike anything I have seen in any
Muhammadan building in India. It may be added that there are several large stones
bearing Hindu carvings and mutilated sculptures lying about m the courtyard, and
these Lnes, in all probabilitv, belong to the former Hindu building which occupied the
site, and which was demolished by the Muhammadans in the 15th century, when the
tomb of Zainu-l-‘abidin’s mother was built.
The manner in which the Muhammadans adapted their structure to the Hindu
plinth was simple. The usual form of plan used in Muhammadan tombs of this date
Fig.
was that showm in fig. 2. It will be seen at a glance that, given the plan, fig. 2, to
build upon, it required no great ingenuity to fit in the four small cupolas and the large
central dome to which the Muhammadanswere accustomed (fig. 3). Itwas, in fact, so
easy that they did not bother to alter the shape of the plinth at all.
It has already been mentioned that the brick structure on the Hindu plinth is the
tomb of Zainu-l-‘abidln's mother. She was the wife of Sikandar Butshikan, who
stands out as one of the most prominent figures among early Muhammadan rulers of
Kashmir, and whose importance is rivalled only by that of his son Zainu-l-‘abidin.
Sikandar earned his nickname by his wholesale destruction of Hindu temples. Zainu-
l-'abidin was evidently a more tolerant person^ indeed, there is a story that after
;
having been cured of some disease by a Hindu doctor, he gave orders that no further
persecution of the Hindus should be permitted. His grave is said to be one of those
within the disputed enclosure wall, close to the building over his mother’s grave. The
latter is a valuable monument since it is the only one of its kind near Srinagar.
Its principal features are the glazed and mouldedblue bricks,fig. 4, which arestud-
ded at intervals in the exterior walls, the semicircular brick projections on the drum of
the main dome, and the moulded brick string courses and sunk panels on
the drums of the cupolas.
There is one other pre-Muglial building in Srinagar which deserves to
be mentioned here. The tomb of Madani is a small building quite neglect-
ed and very dilapidated, and it does not appear to be included in the
accounts of any traveller or archaeologist. Yet it possesses a feature of
Fig-. 4. extraordinary value and interest in its coloured tilework, fragments of -v'hich
are still adhering to its walls. 1 have found no othersuch tilework in Srinagar, and it is
quite different from that which is commonly seen in India, though similar tiles exist
^ Similar nicheswith pointedarchesliavebeen found among the Gupta remainsat Sarnath. [Ed.]
- Zainu-h'abidin seems tohave been a particularly tolerantruler. This Is evident fromthe praise bestowed
on him by the authors ofthe 2nd and 3rd Rajatarahgini. They assert that he even visited Hindu places of
pilgrimage. [J. Ph. Vogel.]

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR. 163
on the mosque of Zakariya Khan near Lahore, and on a Hindu shrine opposite the
Salimgarh at Delhi. The latter evidently did not originally belong to the Hindu temple,
as the patterns are all jumbled together. Glazed and coloured tilework, as is well
known, was introduced largely into India, probably from Persia, by the Miighals.
Akbar employed it sparingly in Agra Fort and at Fathpur SikrI Jahangir employed it
;
more elaborately at Sikandarah, on some of the cupolas on Akbar’s tomb, and in
Shah Jahan’s time it was lavishly employed, particularly in the Punjab.
The tilework of the Muglials was almost invariably cut in small irregular shapes
according to the different colours in the flowers or ornaments which the tilework re-
presented. That Is to say, the outlines of the colours in the flowers or ornaments
settled the shape to which each tile was to be cut, and the pieces were put together
like mosaic, and stuck on the walls in mortar.
Another kind of tilework has its home in Multan and Sind. This tilework is also
glazed and coloured, and was largely used in Pathan buildings before the advent of
the Mu^bals. It is distinguishedfrom the so-called ^ Kashi' work used by the Mughals,
in that the Multan variety is cut always in squares, and different colours are worked in
contact with each other on the same square. In the old tiles hardly any colours were
used but light and dark blue, and sometimes yellow and brown.
The tilework at the tomb of Madani, near But Kadal in Srinagar, is made in
squares with various brilliant colours in contact with each other on the same piece
of tile. But its great interest lies in the subject which is represented in the southern
half of the spandrel of the great archwaj" in the east fapade (PI. LVII). It is hardly
necessary to remind the reader that animal life was rarely represented in any form of
decoration during Muhammadan rule in India. Akbar did not object to statues of
horses^ and elephants^ Jahangir allowed birds ® and butterflies^ to be carved, and
;
Shah Jahan also had elephants’ set up, and at Lahore Fort he indulged in a
panelled frieze representing elephant fights, and othersubjects, all in tilework. Aur-
angzeb was a bigot, who not only would have none of animal life in any form on his
buildings, but took a delight in smashing any instances of it which came to his notice
whether on Hindu or Muhammadan buildings. It is fortunate indeed that he never
chanced to see the tomb of Madani when he was in Srinagar. His indignation w'ould
surely have been roused at finding, on the tomb of a Muhammadan saint, a repre-
sentation of a beast with the body of a leopard, changing at the neck into the trunk of
a human being, shooting apparently with a bow and arrow at its own tail, while a fox
is quietly looking on among flowers and cloud-forms. These peculiar cloud-forms are
—
common in Chinese and Persian art, and were frequently used by the Mu gfials by
Akbar in the Turkish Sultana’s house at Pathpur-Sikri, Jahangir at Sikandarah, and
Shah Jahan in the Diwan-i-khass at Delhi, to mention only a few instances. The
principalbeast in the picture is about four feet long, and is striking quite an heraldic
attitude. The chest, shoulders, and head of the human being are unfortunately missing.
The tail ends in a kind of dragon’s head. As for the colours, the background is blue,
^ Statueofa horsenear Sikandarah, Agra.
- Hatya Paul, Fatehpur Sikri and Delhi gate, Agra Fort,
^ Akbars tomb at Sikandarah.
' Ditto.
* Hatya Paul, Delhi Fort.
Y 2

ARCH/EOLOCICAL REPORT.
164
the trunk of the man is red. the leopard's body is yellow with light green spots, the
dragon’s head and the fox are reddish brown, and the flowers are of various colours. It
is most probable that if this beast can be run to earth, and similar pictures found in
the art of other countries, some light will be thrown upon the influences bearing upon
the architecture of Kashmir during a period about which little is at present known.
Besides this spandrel there is more tilework in the building. The jambs of the arch-
way are lined with squares of tiles, many of which have fallen out and been put back
in the wrong place. None of these are of particular interest except that they show
that tilework was used on masonry buildings in Kashmir before Mughal days. There
is, however, an interesting narrow border, above the dado on the east facade, repre-
senting a flowing floral pattern interwoven with the heads of donkeys and lions.
We
are fortunate in knowing within narrow limits the date of this building. It
joins on to the mosque of Madam, a building the roof of which is in the wooden style
which willbe discussed presently. As both the buildings are in memory of the same
person it is likely that they were built about the same time, and a well-preserved in-
scription over the doorway of the mosque records that it was built in the year A. H
848 (A.D. 1444). Plate LIX. This falls within the reign of Zainu-l-'abidln.
Apart from its tilework, the tomb of Madani possesses no particular value. It is
evident that both it and the mosque are built on the site of an old Hindu temple
The stone plinth of the mosque is put together with Hindu stones, and the brick
work in the walls is xMuhammadan. Some carved Hindu columns have been used
in the porch of the mosque, and two similar columns are used in the inner chamber
•of the tomb—another indication that the tomb and mosque are of the same date since
columns from apparently the same Hindu temple are used in each of them.
Although Kashmir possesses a very distinctive style of wooden architecture
practically nothing is known about it by the outside world. Brief descriptions of some
•of the principal buildings are given by the travellers Bernier,^ Vigne,^ Hiigel,^ Moor-
croft^ and LowenthaP but these accounts being unaccompanied by
; illustrations and
written by men whose attention was mainly devoted to subjects other than architecture
•convey but a feeble impression of the reality. Fergusson,® though he never visited
Kashmir, shrewdly suspected from enquiries that he made, and from the few photo-
graphs which he was able to obtain, that the subject of its wooden architecture was
one deserving full investigation. Cunningham ’ and Cole « in their accounts of anti-
quities in Kashmir dealt almost exclusively with Hindu and Buddhist monuments, and
left the wooden style, exemplified in the more modern buildings, practically unnoticed
Having before us a clear field it will be worth while to’consider the conditions
under which the style was evolved or introduced. The consistent use of Sara-
cenic detail, and the fact that the style was and is still applied to Muhammadan tombs
and mosques, and not to Hindu structures, indicates in the first place that much ofits
^ Fran9ois Bernier, TraDels in the Mogul empire. Edited by A. Constable, iSgi. ^
2 G. T. Vigne, Travelsin Kashmir, Ladak, etc.
^ C.F. Hiigel, Travelstrans. by MajorJervis.
Moorcroftand Trebeck, Travels in the Himalayan Provinces.
' J ] . . Fergusson, B S i o s m t e or P y er o s f ia I n nd i i n a s n cr A i r p c t h i i o t n e s ct f u o r u e n . din Srinagar, A, S P Vol XyYFTT P- o 378 o , /(18 o 6 r 4)\.
J.A.S. B. September 184S, part 2.
* H H. Cole, Illustrations ofancient buildings in Kashmir, 1869.

KASHMIR.
IN
ARCHITECTURE
MUHAMMADAN

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR. 165
character was introduced into Kashmir from abroad and, secondly, that it came into
;
use in Kashmir with or subsequent to the invasion of Islam. Although Islam was not
widely accepted in Kashmir until the latter part of the 14th century A. Dh, the
chronicle of Kalhana indicates that there was a certain amount of trade intercourse and
pilgrimage between Kashmir and Upper India during the reign of Ananta, .A. D. 1028-
1063.
—
During one of the campaigns of Mahmud of Ghazni Dr. Stein thinks it was the
—
campaign of A. D. 1013 auxiliary forces vere.'sent from Kashmir to help to withstand
,
the invasion of Hindustan." Mahmud won the day, the battle being fought " in one
of the valleys leading towards Kashmir from the neighbourhood of the Jhelum ”5®
but he does not appear to have ever come into Kashmir.
In A. D. 1532 the invasion of Mirza Haidar from Ladak “forms part of the
great movement which carried the last wave of the northern conquerors, the Turks
of Babar, into India. Mirza Haidar took posse.ssion of Kashmir in A. D. 1540,
and the next important historical event was the incorporation of Kashmir into the
Mughal dominions by Akbar in A. D. t.s86.
We
learn from a passage in the Tarlkh-i-Rashidi, which Dr. Stein quotes,® that
a wooden style existed in Kashmir in the days of Zainu-l-'abidin, A.D. 1420-1470,
since reference is made to a palace, all of wmod, which that monarch built. It is
also evident that xAkbar found the Kashmiris more accustomed to building in wood
than stone, since it is recorded in an inscription over the Kathi Darwaza of Hari
Parbat that Akbar sent two hundred masons from India to build the fort. Bernier®
A. D. 1665, says “ some old buildings and a great number of ancient idol temples in
ruins are of stone but wood is preferred on account of its cheapness, and the facility
;
with which it is brought from the mountains by means of so many small rivers ”.
The earliest genuine example of the wooden style in Srinagar, of which the date
is known, is the mosque of Madani, which was converted into a mosque from a Hindu
temple in A. D. 1444, accordingto an inscription. Although the Hindu temple which
occupied the site of the present jami' Masjid wms destroyed shortly after the Muham-
madan conversion, and a mosque erectedin its stead, that mosque and subsequent
reproductions of it have been burned dowm and rebuilt several times. Similar visita-
tions have befallen the mosque of Shah Hamadan and others. It is therefore impossible
to say to what extent the original form and details were copied in the various
-restorations. According to the inscription over the south doorway of the Jami'
Masjid, the mosque was last rebuilt by Aurangzeb. There is reason to suspect that
he copied what w^as there before ' fairly closely, because the building is totally different
from anything that Auranzgeb can have seen in the plains of India and it is quite
;
certain that the present Jami' Masjid is not a first experimentin a new direction.
The lofty pillars in the propylons, the details of the spires and the uniformity of the
whole design, prove that the builders knew what they w^ere about from plinth to finial
1 Rajatarangini of Kalhana transl. M. A. Stein. Vol. I, p. 2S4.
2 Op. cit.
* Op. cii.
^ Op.cit.
^ Op. cit.
® Bernier, Travelsin the Moghulempb'e, p. 398.

3
archaeological report.
66
1
—that they were reproducing forms of which they were masters, and were not
evolving a fresh style as they went along.
Most of the woodwork in the mosque of Shah Ramadan has such a fresh
appearance, the fibres being so little worn, that it is difficult to believe that it has not
been to a great extentrestored within the last fifty years. The richly carved wooden
plinth looks very much older, but how much older I cannot presume to say.
Fig. S-
It is a significant fact that the heavy corbelled cornice at Shah Ramadan’s
mosque should bear a strong resemblance to that of the mosque of Madani and
a similar little mosque at Pampur, both of which have an ancient and genuine appear-
ance and it is therefore fairto assume that the mosque of Shah Ramadan is, in spite
; —
of its restorations, still a truthful example of the style except of course in certain
minor details such as modern turned balusters, mirror work and paint of the vulgar
Sikh style.
There are many other buildings of the same style in or near Srinagar, but the
few which have been mentioned contain all the chief features of the style.
To the travellers Hugel and Lowenthal the wooden style of Kashmir suggested
a Chinese origin. Fergusson^ thought the crowning ornament of Shah Ramadan’s
mosque “ evidently areminiscence ofaBuddhist Tee.’’ In another passage^ Fergusson
remarks upon the similarity between the wooden temples, situated between Kashmir
and Nepal, and the wooden architecture of Scandinavia. No one who has travelled in
’ Fergusson, History ofIndian and Eastern Architecture^p. 608.
* Ibidem p. 30S.

.
MUHAMMADAN' ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR. 167
Norway and Kashmir can have failed to notice this similarity. But when the wooden
buildings of the two countries are compared in detail, it is difficult to seize upon any
feature which points conclusively to a common origin or direct connection between
them, and it would be rash to deny that the characteristics which the two countries
share in common such as methods of laying logs horizontally, stepped roofs, and
the employment of birch bark and turf as a roof covering, might well have been
Independently evolved in countries where pine-woodis the staple building .material, and
where much the same considerations have to be paid to climatic conditions. It is
remarkable that the dragon, which plays such an important partin Chinese and Persian
art, andwhich is the prevailingmotif in numerous examples of Norwegian wood-carving
and metal work, should reappear on the spandrel of the entrance to the tomb of
Madanf at Srinagar.
On the other hand, there are undoubtedly marked similarities betw'een the
art of Kashmir and Afghanistan, if the famous old doors of Mahmud’s tomb, which
were erected at Ghazni and are now' kept in Agra Fort, may be taken as a fair
sample of the latter. Judging from the close resemblance in style and detail between
the distinctive patterns on these doors (Pis. LX and LX I) and those of the
mosques of MadanI (?1. LIX) and of Amir at Pampur, it w'ould not be unreasonable
to suspect that the wooden style of Kashmir owes much of its character to influ-
ence from the quarter of Ghazni.
The mosques and tombs of the wooden Kashmiri style are so similar that their
features need not be separately discussed. The tombs are square in plan (fig. 6)
The mosques are either self-contained square buildings like the tombs—such are the
mosques of Madani, Shah Hamadan (w'here the cloisters w'ere added later) and the
Jami' Masjid at Pampur or else they consist of a group of square planned buildings
:
connected together by a colonnade, like the Jami' Masjid in Srinagar (fig. 7.)
Fig- 7-
The walls are constructed sometimes of brick and mortar, sometimes of logs
laid across each other, the spaces between the logs being in some cases filled with
brickwork. Piers are also constructed of timber in the same way. (Figs. 8 to 10.)
In large chambers where the timbers of the roof or ceiling require intermediate
support, wooden columns are used with very good effect. Sometimes these columns
are elaborately ornamented, and there is a tendency in modern restorations, as for
instance at the mosque of Naqshband, to cover the capitals and bases with coarse

archaeological report.
i68
and unsuitable ornament. Timber trusses do not seem to have been “"derstood by
the ancient builders, but they are non- employed in restoration. The o.
supporting the rafters nas by building up piers formed of logs laid honaontally-a
veSy extravagant arrangement (PI. LXX). The typical roof covering consists of turf
l T a h id e b o i n rc b h i b r a c r h k ba is rk l , ai w d h o i n ch boa re r t d a s in a s nd wa t t h e e r s p e ro in of tu p r r n op a e r r e ti s e u s ppo fo r r ted a g o r n eat ra n t u e m rs b . er T o h f e ye r a o r o s f
is usually surmounted by a steeple, the finial of which is moulded, the largest moulding
being sometimes in the shape of an outspread umbrella, usually covered with metal.
A h l a l d t t h h e em ol r d e e s r tor b e u d i . ldin T gs he ap ol p d e e a s r t e u i m t b h r e e r l t l o a h m a o v u e ld l i o n st gs the a i r r e st p e r e o p b l a e b s l a y nd so fi m n e ials of or th t o o se ha o ve n
the Jami' Masjid at Srinagar, erected in the reign of Aurangzeb. (PI. LXIII.)
Fig. 9-
Fi.?. 8.
Fig. 10.
A remarkable feature in the steeples is the sloping gable which projects from the
sides (PI. LXIV). Window openings and balustrades are commonly filled with
elaborate jali screens, the patterns of which are formed by little pieces of wood fitted
together so as to form geometrical patterns.
The angles of the eaves are generally ornamented with wooden pendants
suspended from the corners, carved like little bells and shaped like cactus leaves
(PI. LX VI). The cornices are very heavy and are formed of logs corbelled out from
the wall face ontimbers laid crosswise. The butt-ends of the cross timbers form a dentil
course, and the space between them is filled with elaborate carving. The best
examples are at the mosques of MadanI in Srinagar and of Amir in Pampur (PL
LXXI).

!«UHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR,
hj..

L3:i.

apichitecture
Ar>AlSr
ivr
AIM
M
U
IVI

KASHMIR.
IN
ARCHITECTURE
MUHAMMADAN

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR.
169
The interior of the mosque of Shah Hamadan is entirely covered with panelling
consisting of geometrical patterns (PL LXXII).
The mouldings are as a rule flat, not deeply recessed, and curved and hollow
members seem to be avoided. They generally consist of flat or nearly fiat fillets, each
of which is differently carved.
The carved ornament is generally Saracenic in character. In the older buildings
the patterns are conventional. In some later restorations realistic flowers are carved,
bearing much resemblance to the stone work of Shah Jahan in the Taj at Agra
and elsewhere.
Of the Mughal style as exemplified by buildings in Kashmir it is not necessary
to say much, because the style is practically the same as that with which we are
familiar at Agra, Delhi and Lahore. The only differences which suggest themselves
are that a local grey limestone was generally used in Kashmir for facework while
;
white marble, owing no doubt to the difficulties of transport, is hardly ever seen. The
only instances of white marble and inlay which I have seen near Srinagar are in the
tomb of Tug-i-baba, a building of uncertain date, but decidedly Mu^al. Here white
marble is used in one of the grave stones, the corners of which end in the characteristic
bed posts, which are found in the tomb of Shah Burhan at Chiniot and other places
in the plains of India. Here too there is a beautiful medallion inlaid with cornelian
and other precious stones over the entrance doorway.
The grey limestone which was used in the Pattar Masjid,^ the mosque of Akhun
Mulla Shah, and the pavilions in the formal gardens, is a splendid building material
for mouldings, carving and hard wear, and the Mu ghal workmen evidently found no
difficulty in working upon it all the details which they commonly used in India.
Although the stone buildings of the Mu^al period in Kashmir are few in number,
there are among them some of the finest examples of the style anywhere to be seen.
They have all been sadly neglected, and in- certain cases are still employed for im-
proper purposes, and their conservation is a most desirable object. The Pattar Masjid,
the mosque of Akhun Mulla Shah, and the large haradari in Shalimar Bagh are
unsurpassed in purity of style and perfection of detail by any buildings in Agra or
Delhi, and they are all the more precious in Srinagar because of the scarcity of other
remains of the Mughal days.
The earliest Mu^al building in Srinagar is the outer wall round the fort, Hari
Parbat, which was built by Akbar. One gateway still remains in good condition, but
the W'all has to a great extent crumbled away. It is probable that Akbar had some
sort of fortress erected on the hill, but there is practically nothing of the original
work left.
To Jahangir’s reign we owe the Pattar Masjid, a large mosque of the usual
shape. It has lost its domes, and the courtyard is now enclosed by store-houses, but
what remains of the prayer chamber is well worthy of preservation.
The mosque of Akhun Mulla Shah is a building of slightly later date, in much
the same condition. Its plan is singular, the design of the prayer chamber being
^ The Pattar Masjid is used as a grain store, and the mosqueof Akhun Mulla Shah is filled with gun-
powder. The tomb of Zainu-h^abidin’s motherj a pre-Mughal buildingpossessing archccological value,lis also
-usedas agrain store.

;
ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
170
repeated on the east side of the courtyard, and forming the gateway. On the north and
south sides of the courtyard are arcades, treated in the same way as the wings
of the praver chamber. Usually the arcades round the quadrangle in front of a
mosqueare treated quite differently from any part of the prayer chamber. The some-
what cramped proportions of the courtyard in this case may be due to the slope of
the hill on which it stands, and the difficulty which would have been experienced in
making the prayer chamber wider.
Another important branch of architecture in which the Mugljals excelled, and in
which they have left their mark upon Srinagar, is formal gardening. Though the
Dhal Lake was, in the days of Jahangir and Shah Jahan, fringed with a great number
of extensive gardens, only three of them retain any vestiges of their former splendour.
These are Shalimar Bagh, Ni^at Bagh, and Chasraas Shahi. The garden of Jahangir
at Aitchibal and the octagonal enclosure which he built round the spring at Vernag
are in much the same condition. These gardens conform strictly to the style of
Ba^
Shalimar at Lahore and Delhi, and other gardens of the same period in India
but nowhere is there to be found a group comprising somany examples as at Srinagar.
W. H. Nicholls,

THE TEMPLE OF BRAHMA
AT KHED-
BRAHMA.
^HE
worship of Brahma is very rare, and temples dedicated to him arefew, indeed,
and far between and, for this reason alone, his shrines are interesting objects
;
when met
w'ith.
It is not necessary to explain here at length who Brahma is, or was, for it is
presumed that most readers are familiar enough withthe triple-headed deity. But for
the uninitiated I may say that Brahma is not to be
confused with Brahma, the supreme self-existent im-
personal spirit, of which the deities Brahma, Vishnu
and Siva are manifestations, and from which all
created things are supposed to emanate. In this
triad of principal gods Brahma embodies the idea of
creation, Vishnu preservation, and Siva destruction or
dissolution. Half human and half divine, they are
credited with the fearsand passions of ordinary beings,
their actions and achievements partaking of the
miraculous nature of their divinity. According to
Manu, Brahma first created thewaters, and deposited
within them a seed which became a golden egg, from
which sprung Brahma. lie is also said to have
sprung from a lotus that issued from the navel of
Vishiju, w'hich has always formed a favourite subject
for the sculptor. Narayana is represented reclining
at full length upon the folds of the serpent Sesha, with his head supported upon his
right hand, as may be seen in the photograph in Fig. 2, p. 1 14 of A, S. R. for 1905-6,
The most characteristic feature of the images of Brahma is his four-faced head.
It is true that in most images only three are shown, but these are they which are in
relief upon wmlls and other surfaces where the fourth face at the back, cannot be
shown. The reason for his many faces, or, more correctly, many heads, is variously

archeological report.
172
given. One is that they represent the four vedas, which are supposed to have
originated with him. But in the Puranas he is even
said to have had five heads. The Matsya Purana accounts
for his five heads in this wise ; “ Brahma next formed, from
his own immaculate substance, a female who is celebrated
under the names of Satarupa Savltri, ijarasvati, Gayatn and
Brahmani. Beholding his daughter, born from his body,
Brahma became wounded with the arrows of love, and
exclaimed, ' How surpassingly lovely she is ! ’ Satarupa
turned to the right side from his gaze but as Brahma
;
wished to look after her, a second head issued from his
body. As she passed to the left, and behind him, to avoid
his amorous glances, two other heads successivelyappeared.
Atlength she sprang into the sky and as Brahma was
;
anxious to gaze after her there, a fifth head was immediately
formed ”, Another account tells us he was born within
the golden egg with five heads. It was not long however Fig. 2.
before he lost one. He and Vishnu having entered into a hot dispute as to who^
was supreme, a third rival, Siva, appeared upon the scene and asserted his pre-
eminence over them both. This moved Brahma to anger
and angry words, and, having abused Siva to his face, the
—
latter caused one of his five heads—the offending one to
be struck off.
One reason that is given for Brahma not being now
w'orshipped is the curse pronounced upon him at the time of
this contentionbetween him and Vishnu as to w'hich was
the greater. Siva, in all his glory, suddenly appeared before
their dazzled eyes w'hen the altercation was at its height,,
and claimed supremacy over both of them. To prove it he
caused his linga to appear, and then challenged the two
gods to find either the top or bottom of it. Vishnu, as a
boar, burrowed down into the lower regions in search of its
root, while Brahma took unto himself wdngs and searched
the heavens. Neither were successful, yet Brahma con-
cocted a lie saying he had reached the top, and, being
Fig- 3- found out, was cursed “ since thou hast childishly and with
:
weak understanding asserted a falsehood, let no one henceforth perform worship to
thee ^ “ The cessation, therefore, of Brahma’s worship appears to have taken
place during the interval that may have elapsed between the composition, or extraction
from the Vedas, of the Upanishads and the compilation of the Puranas for in these
;
last w'orks no mention occurs of either rites or ceremonies or festivals, or temples® or
holy places being dedicated to Brahma, nor in them is there recorded a single legend
to attest and m.agnify his divine power.®
^ Skanda Purdna,
- Exceptat Pushkara, now Pokur near Ajmer,
^ Kennedys Hindu Mythology, p. 281.

THE TEMPLE OF BRAHMA AT KHED-BRAHMA.
I7J
In sculpture Brahma is portrayed in various ways,
upon temple walls, represents him as a man with three
faces, the fourth, as said before, being engaged with
the wall and therefore not seen. Each face is bearded
and moustached, and the hair is generally done up In
rolls high upon the head. The only other deity who
wears a beard is Yama, the Pluto of the Hindu
Pantheonp
Brahma has four arms, two of which, one on
either side, are held In an upright position from the
elbows, while the other two rest upon the knees when
sitting, or straight down by his side wTen standing. In
the right upper hand he holds the sacrificial ladle, in
the left upper a book, probably one of the Vedas in
;
his right lower he passes the mala, or beaded rosary,
through his fingers, and holds the water pot In the
corresponding hand on the left side. He is furnished
with the sacred thread, which passes over his left
shoulder. Beneath him, or down to one side, will
usually be found tfe sacred goose, his vdhana or
vehicle. He is thus seen in the Image standing near
the village at Supara near Bombay (fig. 4). Sometimes
but one of the three faces is bearded, as seen in fig. 3
;
while, again, in most of the earlier images before the
nth or 12th centuries he is found with no beard at
all, as may be seen in the sculpture from Aihoje
in the Bijapur district (fig. 2). In this Image he holds the water pot in his left
upper hand, while allowing his left lower to fall upon his thigh, palm outward and
empty.
One of the most commonjy occurring positions in which we find Brahma Is above
shrine doorways, where, with Siva and Vishnu, he forms a triad of the principal gods.
Just above the lowest band of the door lintel are usually three or more little niches in
a row. The central one is occupied by the god to whom the shrine is dedicated, the
other two, one on either side, are filled with the reniaining two, Brahma usually being
placed on the right of the central figure. He is sometimes, but not often, found
among the deities in the principal belt of figure sculpture running round the walls of a
temple. When the latter has an inner shrine, with a pradakshind or circumambulatory
passage passing round it, between It and the outer walls, the inner walls often have a
large niche in each of its three sides, south, west and north, when thetemple faces east,
in each of which Is placed one figure of the triad. As a separate image for special
A
worship, he is not often met with. very interesting and old one in brass or some-
mixed metal, measuring 3 feet 2 inches high, was, three years ago, dug up in a field
In the Thar and Parkar district of Sind. The head has four faces without beards, but
Sanij one ofthe Nava-graha, ispersonified as aman with abeard.

ARCH.’EOLOGICAL report.
174
onlv two arms, which fact indicates considerable age. The hands are now empty, but,
from their position and the way the fingers are held, I would think that the right held
a book and the left a mala or possibly a water pot. At the Kailasa excavation at
Elura are life-sized representations of Brahma, Siva and Vishnu, standing side by side
with their vahnnas, in which Brahma is shown with three beardless facesd Amongst
the cave scupltures there is a favourite subject, the marriage ofSiva and Parvati, where
Brahma appears as the officiating priest, kneeling beside the ceremonial fire.^ There
is a panel of the same subject, from a very old temple at Ratanpur in the Central
Provinces. Another somewhat rarer sculpture, in which Brahma is portrayed, is that
representing the contention of the three gods, as described above, where Brahma is
represented in mid-air near the top of the lihga. Vishnu as a boar burrows below.
A good illustration of this occurs upon the old temple of Virupaksha at Pattadakal
in the Bijapur district. He occurs sometimes upon Jaina temples. On an old
temple at Sevadi, in the Jodhpur State, he is found with but twm hands and bearded.
In his hands are the viala and water pot.
Scale of 1 I 0 ; la L-j L-j i_j fb to 30 40Feet.;
Fig;-S'~PIati ofTemple ofBrahma at Khed-Brahma.
And this brings me to the subject of this article, the old temple of Brahma at
Khed-Brahma in the Idar State in Mahi Kantha.^ It usedto be thought that the only
temple dedicated to the worship of this deity in India was that at Pushkar in Rajpu-
tana, but this is not so. There is nothing of any age to be seen about the Pushkar
^ Elura Cave Temples (Burgess), Plate XXXI.
^ Elura Cave Temples (Burgess), Plate XXXVI.
3 Thistemple was firstbrought to my notice by the Reverend J. Stevenson of the Irish Presbyterian .Mission

THE TEMPLE OF BRAHMA AT KHED-BRAHMA.
175
temple, image and temple being comparatively modern. The late General Sir Alex-
ander Cunningham records the discovery of a richly decorated temple dedicated to
Brahma at Dudahi,^ over the centre of the shrine doorway of rvhich is an image of the
three-headed god. In the temple is a pilgrim’s record of about the loth or uth
century recording his adoration paid to " Chaturmukha ” and his wife Savitrl, Mr.
E). R. Bhandarkar found another Brahma temple at Vasantgaclh in Rajputana,* in
which the three-headed image still stands in the shrine. He has here but two hands.
Another temple, which the writer believes to have been a shrine of Brahma, before
being taken possession of by the Lihgayats, is at Unkal near HubH in the Dharwar
district. In the Government list of temples for this same district, to which annual
grants are given, are no less than eight temples of “Sri Brahmadeva.”
Khed-Brahma is situated sixteen miles north of Idar, in Mahi Kantha, being con-
nected with it by a very indifferent road. It is placed at the confluence of three
streams—The Bhima-Sarhkari, the
Kau§ambi and the Hiranya (Arana)
Gahga or Harana Gahga, which flow
into the Sabarmati. The temple
stands in the middle of the village and
faces east. It is a re-erection of
the old one, the present sabhamandapa
and roof being modern. The sculp-
tured walls of the shrine are old, and do
not appear to have been much; dis-
turbed. The work on them partakes-
of the twelfth century style (hg. 6).
The old walls of the shrine seem to
have been, in part, rebuilt when the
general restoration was made, but the
original masonry has been retained,
save here and there, where a new slab
has been inserted to take the place of
an old one decayed or broken.
One of the first things that
strikes one, on inspecting these old
shrine walls, are the number of female
images upon them. Apart from the
three principal niches on the north,
south and west, which each contain an image of Brahma, all the panels, save three,
hold goddesses and dancing girls. On temples dedicated to Siva or Vishnu this would,
if found, be most remarkable. On temples of Devi (Parvati) it is common
enough, but then such temples face the north and not the east. Even the usual
hund 1 re Co d lo y n e e a l rs T s o in d c , e h i e n w h r i o s te. Raja T s h t e h r a e n, are sa t y h s er th u i i s ns t o e f mp s l o e me wa r s em “ ar e k r a e b ct l e e d a t b em o p u l t es fou o r f y B e r a a rs hm a a go in Cam n b o o w di n a e , ar w l h y ere a -
thewhole spire of each is formedinto a colossal four-faced headof the deity.
- Arch. Surveyof India Report, Vol. X, p. 93.
® Prog. Reportof the .Arch. Surveyof India, W. C,, 1905-06, p. S®'

arcH.T,0LOGICAL REPORT.
l-jS
ashfadil-palas, or regents of the points of the compass, at the corners, appear in
their female forms. On the west wall, at the back of the shrine, we find the big
central niche occupied by an image of Brahma. On his right, at the north-west angle
of the temple, is \'arunf, with a chain around her shoulders and the 7nakara below.
Between her and Brahma are a dancing girl, a deDi with chakra in each upper hand
and a nude female figure. At the south-west corner is a mutilated figure which may
be Parvati or Durga, with a shield and lion or tiger below her. Between her and
Brahma are female dancing figures, a female chnw'i-\i&3.xQx and a nude Bhairava.
Upon the north wall we again have Brahma occupying the central niche, while among
the other figures are Jndra and several female figures in various attitudes. Brahma is
placed in the great central niche upon the south face, and uponthe same wall are some
six or seven female figures with the bearded Yama at the south-east corner. Brahma,
on the west face, has the usual symbols in his hands, viz., the sacrificial ladle, the
book, viala or rosary, and water pot, but he has Nandi below him On the north face
he has the same symbol and a horse belov/ him, while on the south side there is a
small human figure which might be Garuda. These are the vahanas of Siva, Sorya,
and Vishnu, respectively. The photographs on Plate LXXI 11 show the style of the
shrine walls.
I was, of course, not able to enter the temple, much less the shrine, and had to
content myself with what I could see from the mandapa door, and from what my clerk
and draftsman could tell me of the interior of the temple. I had, however, a good
view of the image, as will be seen from the photograph on Plate LXXIII which
was taken from the doorw’ay. The present image is quite a modern one, being made
of plaster, finished off with a wTite polished surface resembling marble. It is four-
armed and three-faced, has the usual symbols, and a goose stands on either side
below. The image is clothed in a pink cotton dress.
It will be seen that the shrine is not square but oblong, longer in width from
north to south than in depth, and this I consider was the original plan unaltered in the
restoration. On examining the outside of the walls of the shrine it will be seen that
the mouldings and panels are quite regular and show no indication of the south and
north walls having been contracted in their length to suit the shorter sides of the
shrine within. All the figure panelling and the basement offsets and recesses are
planned to suit the oblong shrine, and the principal projecting niches, containing the
Images of Brahma {cf. fig. 7), occupy the centre of each side, that is, they are onthe
twm axes of the shrine within. The shrine, therefore, could hardly have been a §aiva
shrine to contain a linga, as those are alwmys square. The plan w^ould lend itself to an
image of Vishnu and his avataras in line, had it been longer than it is. The width of
the shrine of the old Vaishnava temple at Kadvar in Kathia-w'ad, which seems to have
contained all the avataras, is two and a half times the depth, whereas this is hardly
one and a half But in this case we should expect to find Vaishnava images and
avataras on the exterior, but I find none. In the Lahke.§vara side chapel at Kailasa
at Eiura we have Brahma, §iva and Vishnu, life-sized images, sculptured in a row,
side by side.^ Similarly here, it is quite possible, there were originally images of
the same three deities, Brahma occupying the centre. The female images upon the
^ Elura Cave Temples (.Burgess), Plate XXX.

oo:E2*a^:H:3Ee,
3sro:E^’37:Ea:-''w:E]sar
zbir^^h^ve-a-,
:^
0
i*DE33VEapXiE!
sme/ijsriEi.
:^-
0
*w-a-XjXj
iiT03Ee,a?i3;
OIF*
'X’EaycipxjE!

THE TEMPL'E OF BRAHMA AT KHED-BRAHMA.
17.7
exterior might suggest a temple to a devi originall}', but all temples to dems that
— —
I can remember some ten all face the north. The three images of Brahma,
one in each of the three principal
niches, should settle the question
without further doubt, as to W'hat deity
the temple was originally dedicated
to, but there is the possibility that
the present images are not the original
ones. Upon a very close examination
of all three I have satisfied myself
that the workmanship and setting of
these images differ in no respect from
the other figure sculpture upon the
wmlls. Had the temple been convert-
ed to the w'orship of Brahma when
restored, one could not w'ell under-
stand the reasonwhy a common plaster
- image should have been made for the
shrine when excellent stone ones were
provided for the three outside niches.
Moreover there is a community of
Brahmanas here who have been here
from generation to generation, and who
devote themselves exclusively to the
Fig. 7. worship of Brahma.
Little need be said about the interior of the temple, or of the mandapa and
tower, w'hich are modern. The four pillars, within the hall, are perhaps original ones
re-erected. They are octagonal and are decorated wnth the pendant chain and bell,
above which is a band of Ktrtimukha faces. The doorway to the shrine may or may
not be original it is too much caked with successive coats of whitewash to determine
;
the point. On either side little groups of sculptures occupy panels, one above the
other. Inside of these appears to be a floral border. On the dedicatory block, above
the door, is Ganeia. This does not, of course, imply that the shrine was built for
^aiva worship any more than Gaja-Lakshmi over doors of temples in the south of
m
Maharashtra indicated Vaishnava worship. Both were used as favourite deities the
north and south respectively, even the Jains having freely used Gaia-Lakshmi upon
outer doors of their temples. I am doubtful, though, whether GaneSa would have
surmounted a Vaishnava temple door.
The temple worship is carried out by Khedavala Brahmanas (that is resident
Brahmanas of Khed-Brahma), who are Audicha Brahmanas and followers of the Sukla
Yajurveda. Worship is performed twice a day, in the morning before ten o’clock,
andinthe evening at aboutseven. It is conducted without reciting the Vsdic mantras,
the Puranic mantras only being used. The things used in daily worship are water,
sandal, rice and sugar. The image is bathed on both occasions. On the fifteenth
of ^ravana Buddha the annual maha worship is performed, when, in addition to the
2 A

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
178
things used in daily u'orship, other things are added, ’S12., the ablution with milk,
curds, ghi, honey, and sugar, and then the naivedya consists of cooked food. Maha,
ptijds are also performed on Divdli days, and on the fifteenth of the bright half of
Kartika. Upon the 9th day of Alvina, during the Nanardtra, a homa is performed.
As each offering is thrown into the fire a verse from the Sapta Siti is first recited.
There is no special Ncroardtra ceremony for Brahma as there is in the case of Devi
in Asvina, Rama in Chaitra, Khandoba in M argasirsha, and Surya in Magha,
If a fair be held on the fifteenth of the bright half of Magha, an annual alloAvance
of R28 is granted to the temple by the Durbar of Idar. To the temple was formerly
attached a piece of land, the rent of which was R25, but the Durbar has recently
resumed the land and promised the money equivalent.
Henry Cousens.

lakulTsa.
Fig. I.
wo
T years ago, I contributed, to the J-otir. Bo. Br. R. As. Soo., Vol. LXI, p. 151
and ff., a paper entitled “ An Eklingji stone inscription and the origin and history
of the Lakullsa sect”. Since then it seems to have attracted some attention amongst
European scholars and antiquarians. It was briefly but favourably criticised first by
M. A. Barth in Ccmptus rendus des seances de /’ Academie des Inscriptions et Belles^
Lettres, 1906, and subsequently by Dr. Fleet, who wrote in greater detail, and
approved of most of my conclusions expressed therein, in a paper published in the
Jour. R. As. Soc., 1907, p. 419 ff. Being encouraged by the favourable remarks of
these veteran scholars, I went on making further researches in this matter, and am,
glad to say that my efforts have not been futile. In the course of my travelling:
2 A2

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
i8o
in Rajputana as Assistant Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, 1 found some
more temples connected in some way or another with Lakulisa. It was only in
January last that I could seize the opportunity of visiting Karvan, with which has
heen identified Kayavarohana, where the incarnation of Siva as Lakullsa is sup-
posed to have taken place. This has enabled me to secure the local Muhdtmya
and make a copy of it, and also to personally inspect the objects of Lakulr^a w’orship
that have still survived there. Again, in the commentary on the Shad-darsana-
samncJichaya^ I came across a passage which, though In some respects fantastic
and incredible, is descriptive of the manners and customs of the Pa§upatas, and is
•consequently of some importance in this respect. What I propose to do here is to
supplement my previous paper by piecing together the various items of Information
I have lighted upon since I wmote it, and, as this paper will be accompanied by illustra-
tions, It wfill also add greater interest to the subject. I shall first give a short
summary of the Karvan mdhdtmya and describe the objects of Lakuli^a W'Orship still
to be met with there then enter into the iconographic details, and describe in full
;
the characteristics of the images of Lakullsa that have so far been found, and
finally close this paper with the extract from the Shad-darsana-sa^jmchchaya just
referred to.
Now^, as regards the Karvan mdhdtmya^ a brief summary of it has already
been published in Volume VII of the Bombay Gazetteer, w^hich is devoted to the
Baroda State. It ’was with the greatest difficulty and tact that I was able to secure
this mdhdUnya. There is but one copy of it now left in the village. Formerly
there w^ere two, but one of these wms carried aw’-ay, as 1 was told, by a Subha of
the State many years ago, much against the wishes and entreaties of the people.
So the people w^ere loath to show me the one that is now'’ left, fearing that this
also might share the fate of its companion. The Brahmanas of the place first flatly
denied that they had any copy of the mdhdtmya, but I w^as fortunate enough, after
a brief stay there, to inspire them with confidence, and, the owner of It, wffio seems
to be the head ofthe Brahmana community there, came one night stealthily to my
place and show^ed me the mdhdtmya. This work, however, does not seem to be
an old production, and, as it is, is full of lacunae, solecisms, inaccuracies, and even
inconsistencies. Nevertheless, an abstract of Its contents wfill, I believe, not be
uninteresting, as it wfill, in many points, confirm the views expressedin my first paper.
On the first leaf, the w^ork calls itself Srl-Lakutapdne{nz)sa-mdhdtmyay It begins
with obeisance first to Ganesa and next to Lakulapanl. The ?ndhdtmya consists of
four chapters, i he first ends with iti. STl-Vdyupurdne Sivaf-rasuti'’Sa7'gali [Here
(ends) the canto (describing) the birth of Siva in SrI-Vayupurana]. The second
chapter ends Srl-Sivaftirdne Lakullsa’mdhdtmye samtosha-karanah? ndm-ddhydyah
:
[Here (closes)^the (second) chaptercalled ‘^Generation of satisfaction’’ of Lakullsa md-
hdtmya in Sri-Siva-purana]. The third ends thus iti ^rl^Siva-ptirdnc LakulJsa-mdhdt-
:
myam ndma tritiyo^dhydyoh [Here (closes) the third chapter namedthe “Greatness of
LakuhSa “ in 6ri-Sivapurana]. The last or fourth ends with iti pizrane
Pdr'vatl-Maheha-samvade tirthdnukramanikdydm ^rl-^ulapdni-jafzma-patia-bandh
’ddi-mMdtmyam sampurnam. | Here closes the “ Greatness of the tying of silk
cloth, of the birth of gulapani and so forth” amongst the Catalogue of the

LAKULlSA.
l8l
:sacred places (specified) in the dialogue of Parvati and Mahesa in §ri-Siva-
Purana].
I now proceed to give a summary of the first chapter, which, as will be seen
from the ending words quoted above, is devoted to the birth of Siva, i.e., obviously
of Lakuli§a. The opening verse invokes the blessings of Lakutapani, who is said to
be Mahesa (Siva) incarnated in Kaliyuga. Then wm are informed that Parvati once
asked Mahadeva, when alone, to explain to her in detail the peculiar merits of
F atta-handha. Thereupon Siva gave the following account of his incarnation, which
took place between the Dvapara and Kali There was a sage named Atri,
and in his lineage was born Vi^varupa. His wife was Sudarsana. In order to favour
Virabhadra-gana, Siva incarnated himself in Ulkapurad He was conceived in her
womb in the month of Bhadrapada. In course of time as the month of Chaitra
arrived, she gave birth to a child after midnight on the 14th of the bright half, and
the mother saw, in the lying-in chamber, as soon as born, that her child was of
tawmy eyes and tawny hair, and like heated gold in complexion. The father
invited learned and pious Brahmanas, performed the rite of Jatakarma, and propitia-
ted them with handsome gifts. On hearing of a solar eclipse at the end of Sravana
following, he resolved to go on pilgrimage to Kurukshetra, He exhorted his wife
to perform agnihotra before sunrise, and offer homa after sunset and never to
forget the duties of hospitality to guests and ascetics. Lastly, he conjured her and
his pupils and dependents to take care of the child. And thereupon he left for
Kurukshetra.
The second chapter is a short one. It describes how faithfully the Brahmana-
woraan performed the agnihotra directed by her husband. One night she forgot
to discharge her duty, but the child secretly performed it. This she suspected, and
she kept herself awake the following night to actually witness the child going through
the ceremonial. Her surmise proved correct, and when the husband returned, the
Jact was duly communicated to him. Both the parents sat up to watchthe child.
The third chapter then begins by saying that, having beheld their son occupied
in the ceremonial, they asked him who he was. As soon as their words had been
nttered, he fell senseless on the ground, and Sudarsana was struck with dismay, and
also fell on the ground Afterwards having placed the dead child on her lap, she
threw' him in a pool of w'ater called Devakhata (also called Devahrada), from where
he was taken by the tortoises to where the maha-lihga Jale^vara lay. On making
offerings to the deceased son, the Brahmana fell into a swoon. In the meanw'hile,
through the exercise of miraculous powers, the boy came out of the water, and was
seen playing by the Brahmanas, who were wonder-struck. The sages, on knowing
this deed of the child, were also filled with wonder, and asked him who he was. He
replied : “I am the indescribable vital air abiding in a human body formed of the five
elements and possessed of the five senses.” The JRishis fell to praising him by de-
scribing his various attributes. Thus ends the third chapter, and the fourth com-
mences by telling us that the boy afterwards began to run away from them. He
was, however, followedby them, who were praising him all the while. In a moment
^ Ulkapura is identifiedbythe local Brahmanaswith Avakheh inthesamedistrict, but in the Senior sub-
division.

ARCH/EOr,OGICAL REPORT.
82
i
the child vanished, and stood playing on the bank of the river Aurva, which is Saras-
vatl herself, come down to oblige Bhrigukshetra. On its west is Kayavaro-hana.
His parents and all the Brahmanas then began to cry aloud, and search after him
in theforests that night. Being moved by their heart-rending lamentations, he returned
with the speed of the wind, and revealed himself as Mahe§vara. Thereupon they
trembled, but continued their bewailings for the boy. The child said “ Neither the
:
sages nor my parents dare touch me. There is some important work to be done.
Listen, O JRishis give up thy grief, O thou (woman) with broad eyes, for mother have
;
I none. Listen 0 JRishis, to the ancient history. I am Mahesvara in person, and have
incarnated myself in Ulkagrama for conferring boons upon JRishis, enlightening the
Brahmanas, and re-establishing religion.” The JRishis then praised him, and asked
him to narrate the greatness of Ulkagrama. Thereupon he replied that Ulkagrama had
been a sacred Saiva place for the last seven Manvantaras. Various merits are then
describedby him, that accrue tothedevotees who die after fastingthere who feast the
;
Brahmanas, who bathe in Devakhata, and offer oblations, and so forth. Although
all this explanation of the boy’s birth and incarnation was given, yet his parents with
eyes full of tears followed him, inducing him to return to^them. Thereupon he stupe-
fied them for amoment bythe mayd of Vishnu, and then repaired to Kayavi(va)rohana,
where were l§ana, who had incarnated himself to favour Bhrigu, and Malaksha with
his host ofgoddesses. After awhile he again saw at his back his father and mother.
He knitted his brows, andhis eyes flashed with anger. The Brahmana became sense-
less, The boy was moved with pity, and consoled him. “Let us all dwell together
here, O Brahmana ”, said he. So saying, with his staff he dragged the Ganges
there, and, as, while she was being dragged, long streaks were made, the place has
been known as Dirghikah He then approached the god Vriddhadeva,^ and requested
the latter to grant him a place of refuge. It was then the end of the Dvaparayiiga.
The god, however, replied that the place, where he himself lived, had been over-
crowded. The request was again repeated, and the god then directed him to go to-
Brahme§vara. Having heard the words of the god Vriddha, LakulL^a went to
Brahme^vara, and there merged himself into him. There divine Mahesvara remained
in bodily form, and as he descended to the earth in his very body the place was
called Kayarohana. And so he was merged into the linga called Brahma, with asi-
dandaJ in his left, and htjapiiraka or citron in his right, hand. Mahadeva said “ Thus
:
in Karohana I incarnated myself for sanctifying Bhrigukshetra.’* From the mind of
Brahman sprang Atri, from Atri Atreya, from the latter Agnigarma, from Agnigarma
Soma§arma, from the latter Visvarupa, and from Visvarupa I myself assuminga boy’s
form. In the first Yuga Igana was famous, in the second Mahabala, in the
third Viiddha, and in the fourth I myself, coming down in bodily form for the
purification of Bhrigukshetra. Inthe Krita yuga it was celebrated as Ichchhapurl,
^This isunquestionablythe spacious tank ontheoutskirts ofthevillageof Karvan. See illustration (fig. i}..
- There is still atemple at Karvan dedicatedto Vriddhesvara.
^ The mWtiatmya,aswill beseenfrom thesummarygiven above, speaksnot simply ofdan^abut of asi-dan^a
(staff-like sword) as held by Lakulrsa, but I have notyetfoundany image in which a swordis borne byhim.
Areweto dissolve the compound asi-dandaso as tosignify asword-llke staff?”
^Inthe manuscriptofthe mahatmya,it is stated in a footnotethat Bhrigukshetra isthattract of countries-
which is yojanas round about Bhrigu (Broach).

LAKULlSA.
183
in Treta Mayapuri, in Dvapara Meghavati, and in Kali Kayavarohana". Then are enu-
merated the various merits obtained by the performance of various rites connected
with Lakulifia. The
foremost of these
is pattabandhci
the performanca
of which liberates
a man from future
births. If MaheS-
vara is dressed,
says the Mahat-
mya, with a cloth
of palta or silk,
for as many
thousand yugas as
are the threads of
the cloth is the
man honoured in
Siva-loka.
This is in short the account of the incarnation of Siva contained in the Karvan
mahatmya. This confirms, in the first place, the sense first suggested by Dr. Buhler
for the name Lakullla. In our mahatmya occur the words LakuliSa and Lakuta-
panl§a, both denoting one and the same individual. Lakuln^a must, therefore, be taken
synonymous with Lakutapamsa, and must be interpreted to mean “the god who
bears a lakula or lakuta in his hand In the jEklihgji inscription also occurs the ex-
pression lakid-ofalakshita-karah used in connection with this god, signifying “ one
whose hand is characterised by a lakula^ There is thus a perfect agreement on this
point between the Eklihgjl inscription and the 'K^rv^'n.mdhat?nya, and the explanation
of the name first proposed by Professor Buhler must, therefore, be upheld as correct.
Secondly, the old name of Karvan, as given in the Mahatmya, is Karohana or Kaya-
vi(va)rohana. The Cintra prasasti gives the first name, and the second name is
mentioned in the Eklihgjl inscription. Kayavarohana appears to have been the ori-
ginal name, which was first corrupted into Karohana, and was still further corrupted
into the modern Karvan. The name Kayavarohana literally means “ (the place of)
the descent in bodily form”, and we are distinctly told in the Mahatmya, as we
have seen, that the place was so called because Siva 4sscended there in bodily
form. The Vdyupurdna, however, gives the name Kayarohana, w'hich, as pointed
out by Dr. Fleet, has not the same sense^. “It, on the contrary, means (the place of)
the ascent in bodily form”. This name is intelligible only on the supposition that it
refers to the merging of LakuliSa into the lihga Brahme^vara, also referred to in
the mdhdtm'va. Anyhow it can hardly be doubted that Kayarohana and Kayavarohana
both refer to one and the same place. If any proof were needed that the mahatmya
in question relates to Karvan, it is furnished first by the fact that there is still at this
' Jour, R. As.Soc., 1907. p.22,n.I.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
184
Village a temple dedicated to Nakle.^var (Lakuli§vara), and that the image in the sanc-
tum is pointed out as the conjoint figure of Brahme§vara and LakuMa, confirming
the statement ofthemahatmya that Lakuli§a merged himself into BrahmeSvara. Again,
we have at Karvan a temple to VriddheSvara, whom Lakuli§a first besought for a
place of refuge. Other deities, specified in the mahatmya but not mentioned in the
summary, as they had no direct bearing upon the origin and worship of LakuliSa,
are still shown by the people there. No reasonable doubt need, therefore, be
entertained as to the mahatmya really being connected with Karvan.
I shall now enumerate the various places where I have found new sculptures of
Lakull^a since I wrote my last
paper. The places mentioned
therein, so far as Rajputana
was concerned, were from the
Jhalawar, Kotah, and Udaipur
States. But worship of Laku-
li§a was not confined to the
easternparts of Rajputana only.
In the Western States of
Rajputana also, such as Sirohi
and Marwar, instances are-
not wanting of temples contain-
ing image of Lakuliia. At
Kayadra,’ at the foot of Mount
Abu, there is a temple dedicat-
ed to Ka.§i-Vi§ve§vara. Above
the door of the ante-chamber
to its shrine figures LakuliSa.
At Achale.^vara on Mount
Abu, about six miles from
-Dilvada, Lakull§a can be easily-
recognised on the gateway of
the walled enclosure of the
temple. The same god is
sculptured in the principal
niche, on the southern face,
on the outside walls of the
temple close by. These places
are in the Sirohi territory and, in Marwar, Chohtan, Nana and Belar are the only places,
where images of Lakuli§a have been so far discovered. Chohtan is in Mallani about
twenty-eight miles from Badmer, the principal town of the province. About half-way
,
up the hill of Chohtan are three Saiva temples. One of them is dedicated to.
L.akulisa, on the shrine door of which that divinity is sculptured. On the front of the
lintel, resting on the porch pillars, is engraved an inscription, which begins with a
bow to Lakult§a, specifies the date samDat /jdy varshe fosha-kudi 6 guru-dind, and.

lakulHa.
185
speaks of the temple as being renovated for spiritual merit by Sri-DharmaraSi,
cheld {i.e., pupil considered as son) of SrI-Uttamaragi. Nana and Belar are both inthe
Ball district of the Godvad province. At the former place, on the outskirts of the
village, near the temple of Nilakantha-Mahadeva, are the ruins of three shrines, two
of which contain images of Lakullla in niches facing the south. Near one of these
shrines was an inscriptionstone, which is now stuck up in the ground near the hall
door of the temple of Nilakantha-Mahadeva. The inscription is dated samvat isga
mdgha vadi /j some, when Somasimha, a Paramara king, was mahdrdjddhiydj a, his
son, Kanhada-deva, was yuvardjd or heir-apparent, and one Laksha, a favourite
of the latter, was the jahagirddr of Nanaka (Nana), The object of it is to record
some grant made by Kanhada-deva to the god Lakula(Ii)deva. Three miles to the
north'westof Nana is Belar, outside of which village is a Saiva temple overlooking a
spacious tank, with only three of its attendant shrines now surviving. The outside
wa'ls, both of this temple and the subsidiary shrines, have all images of Lakull§a in
the principal niches on the south All these instances have been adduced so far as
Rajputana is concerned/ but other instances are not wanting. Thus at Ujjain, to
which I paid a private visit last year, I noticed two figures of Lakulf^a on the lintels
of the doors of two inner chambers of what is known there as Bhartri-hari’s gumphd.
Mr. Cousens, Superintendent, Archeological Survey, Western Circle, tells me that he
has found Bvo images of LakuliSa on monoliths found at Lalpeth near Chanda, Central
Provinces. Dr. Bloch, Superintendent,.
Archeological Survey, Eastern Circle,
also informs me that at Bhubane^varin
Orissa, LakulL^a is represented on the
porch of the temple of Para§urame§vara.
This shows that the worship of this divi-
nity was not restricted to Rajputana only,
but had spread as far south as iVIysore, as
pointed out in my last paper, and also,
as we see now, as far east as Orissa.
I have stated in my previous paper
that LakullSa is sculptured not oiily in the
principal niches on the outside w-alls of
a temple, but also on the lintels of shrines,
door-frames and in the interiors of the
sancta. This remark may be seen
thoroughly borne out by the illustrations,
which accompany this article. Illustra-
tion No. 2 represents the exterior wall,
facing the south, of the central temple
at Belar. Here Lakuli^a occupies the
4 principal niche, flanked, on his proper
-
right and left, by Yama and Agni, guardians of the southern and south-eastern
'All these instances Prog. Rep. Archceol. Stirv. Ind. West. Circ. for the year ending
31st March 1507, pp. 2+, 28, and43,andHid., 1908, pp. 49and50.
2 e

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
86
1
directions. Illustration No. 3 is of the shrine door of a dilapidated temple at Atru in
the Kotah State. Therein LakuIiSa figures above the door in the centre, with
Brahma and Vishnu on his right and left respectively. In figs. 4 and 5 we have two
lingas with the images of Lakuli^a sculptured in front, the first of which is in the
temple of Nakle§var, and the second, of Rajraje^var, both at Karvan. As Siva is never
worshipped except in the form of the linga, the figure of Lakuli^a by itself could not
be an object of worship, and had, therefore, to be conjoined to that of a lifiga.
Let us now see how Lakull^a is sculptured. In the Dekkan College Library
there is a MS. called Vikvakarm-a'vatdra-rdstib-'sdstram^ which gives the following
verse as descriptive of the images of Lakull§a
;
This means that Lakuli.^a should be represented with urdhva-medhra as
resting on a lotus seat, and bearing a citron in his right, and a staff in his left hand.
This description holds good in all respects only in the case of Lakuliia sculptured on
the south wall of the temple at Belar and a loose image of that god found in the temple
of Gupte§vara at Mandalgadh, inthe Udaipur State (figs. 2 and 6). Here the citron in
his right, and the staff
in his left, hand are
distinctly visible. He
also occupies a lotus
seat and the fourth point
also agrees. In the
case of the latter, the
lotus is represented as
springing from a stalk,
on each side of which
is a worshipper, thus
reminding us of similar
Buddha sculptures in
ancient cave temples.
The lotus seat is, how-
ever, absent in other
illustrations, but the re-
maining three charac-
teristics are present.
In fact, without them
no image can possibly
be one of Lakuliga.
The urdhva medhra
stamps him as Saiva,
5 - for Siva is often de-
scribed as urdma-retas and urdhva-lihga. Of the objects held in hands, the citron,
again, is not peculiar to Lakulisa, but is found also in the fiands of many forms of Siva

LAKUI.ISA.
187
and Parvatl, though I have not yet seen a case where this fruit is borne by a divinity
not connected in some wav or another with Siva and his consort. The plain staff,
however, is peculiar to Lakullsa, and has not yet been met with in the sculpture of any
form of Siva, The citron is, again, sometimes replaced by another fruit of around
form, which looks exactly like a cocoanut Two of such instances that have come
to my notice are the temples of TaleSvara at Tilasma in Bijolia, Udaipur State, and
the temple of Ka§I-Vi§vesvara at Kayadra in the Sirohi State, where LakuliSa is
represented above the shrine doors with apparently a cocoanut in one of his hands.
Possibly the rough uneven surface of the citron, which was originallv carved, has
worn out, and, therefore, now looks smooth and round, producing the impression that it
is a cocoanut. Sometimes, instead of the fruit, a bowl seems to have been heldin
his hand bv LakulUa. An instance in point is furnished b}'' the two monoliths found
at Lalpelh referred to above. In almost all the cases of LakullSa sculptures,,
however, the fruit can be unmistakably recognised to be a citron, and, in the
majority of instances, it is held in the palm in the right hand, resting on the
thigh. But in the images of the temple of Gupte§vara, the hand bearing the
citron is upraised. The staff {danda), which is also borne by the deity, is, in no two
cases, exactly the same. They are, however, all alike, and can, except in two cases,
be easily recognised as ordinary staves or sofas, as they are called in Marathi, which
are generally used by the ascetics. On the shrine door of the Atru temple, how'ever,
on the loose image in the temple of Gupte§vara in Pdandalgadh, and in the sanctum
of the temple of Nakle.^var at Karvan, it looks more like a police baton than an
ordinary staff.^ Sometimes the objects held in the hand are transposed, the right
bearing a staff and the left a citron. Such instances are rare but are not wanting.
At Belar itself, e.g., in the principal niche of one of the attendant shrines alluded to
above, Lakuliia is so represented. Again, Mr. Cousens informs me that at Man-
dhata, in the Central Provinces, Avhilst these objects are held by Lakull§a in the
proper hands above two of the shrine doors of Siddhanatha, they are seen reversed
on the remaining two. It is worthy of note that sometimes Lakull§a is sculptured
with his legs partially or fully crossed and with a band of cloth running round his
knees apparently to support him in that posture. Thus, of the two images in the
temple of Guptegvara, one that is seated on a lotus throne has the legs fully, and
the other partially, crossed. Another instance of the latter type is supplied by the
im.age inthe sanctum of the temple of Maklesvara in Karvan. In all these cases a
band of cloth may be distinctly seen going round the knee-caps What the signi-
ficance of this is, is unknown to me, but it cannot but remind one of Brahmana priests
sometimes assuming that posture and supporting themselves with their shoulder-scarf
in a similar manner, especially when they give themselves up to gossiping. One
curious image of LakulT§a I found at Chohtan. There Lakuli^a was represented with
his head canopied by a seven-hooded cobra, thus bringing to our mind its similarity
to the figure of the Jaina tlrthamkara Par§vanatha. But the closest correspondence
to the image of a Jina, that has so far been noticed by me, is presented by the
Danda, which is an ordinary staff, must^always be distinguished from khaUmt^ga^ a skull-crowned mace^
Thelatter isno doubtfound in some formsof Siva,but is not peculiar to l^akuliG?.. What is specially charac-
teristic of him is danda only.
2 B 2

ARCHyEOLOGICAI. REPORT.
88
1
singular image of Lakulisa in a principal niche of the temple of Tale§vara at Tilasma
(fig. 7). Here the woolly hair, long ear-lobes, lense-like eyes, the edge of the
garment going diagonally from the left shoulder down to the right thigh, and above
all the svastika mark on the breast, are sufficient to stamp the image as one of a
Jaina tirthamkara, in the eyes of a person who is only short of an expert in
iconography. Nay, the very
bull, which is carved in front
of the seat, but emphasizes
the above conclusion, and is
enough to lead him to regard
it as a figure of Adinatha,
the first tirthamkara, whose
cognizance is the bull. But,
on reflection, it will be seen
that it cannot be the image of
a Jina. The hands, unfortu-
nately, have been broken off
and, consequently, the citron
and the staff are not pre-
Fig. 6. served to distinguish it from
tlrthatnkaras. But the poseof the hands is distinct enough to show that they could
not possibly have been joined and placed, palm above palm, in the hollow between
the thighs, as those of a Jina invariably are. The serpent, again, which encircles
the neck, serves to distinguish it from the image of a tlrthamkara, and points to its
being a Saiva image. Lastly, the urdhva-medhra, which, though a little broken
off, is sufficiently preserved, is an unmistakable indication of its being a figure of
Lakuliga. The close similarity, however, between this image of Lakul§ia and those
of the tlrtha?hkaras can, in no wise, be controverted. But 1 do not think that
Jainism is to be supposed from this to have exercised any Influence on the worship
of Lakulisa. In my last paper, I had occasion to mention two ancient sculptures
of Lak.uli§a from Cave-Temfles, which no less an authority than Dr. Burgess had
thought to be evident copies of Buddha. The truth of the matter appears to be
that the Indian sculptors had their own conventional mode of carving figures of
ascetics, and that consequently the points of similarity, which a Buddha, &tlrthamkara,
and a Lakuli§a bore, were due to their all being sculptured as ascetics, but they w'ere
sharply distinguished from one another by the special characteristics w'hich gave
to each his own individuality.
In my previous paper, I stated that the ascetics of the LakuliSa sect hadtheir
names always ending in rasz. Thus in the Eklihgji iirscription edited by me, the
karapakas, who were in charge ofthe supervision over the building of the temple of
LakuliSa there, are Supu(pu)jitarasi(Si), Sadyorasi(§i), and Vini§chitarasl(§i). The
well-known Chintra prasasti, while introducing Tripurantaka, an ascetic-worshipper
of Lakulisa, to whom great homage was done at Prabhas Patan, speaks of Karttit
kara§i and Valmikira§i as his predecessors in the pontlficial line. Thirdly, the short in-
scription in the temple of Lakulisa, at Chohtan as stated before, records the rebuilding

r.AKULlSA.
of that structure by an ascetic named Dharmarasi, pupil of Uttamara§i. These
are the names of Saiva ascetics we meet with in inscriptions, wTich we for certain
know to be connected with the worship of temples of LakuliSa, But names ending
m
nlst also occur in other inscriptions which, though doubtless Saiva, are not with
certainty known to be Lakulisa, records. Thus a Chitorgadh inscription^ mentions
the names Haritaragi, Mahe§varara§i, and Sivara^l. This honorific suffix can also
be traced in the names of the line of Sawa. gurus specified in an Abu inscription.^
The latest inscription, in which a name ending with ?'asi occurs, was found bv me at
Karvan. It is engraved on a pilaster of about the eighth century now partly embedded
in the ground near the temple of Panche^vara It could not have been more than two
centuries old, and says that a certain sage named Vlrabhadrarasi(§i) observed the vow
of silence for twelve years in Kayavarohana (Karvan).
I have stated in my previous paper that the worshippers of Lakulisa were known
as Pasupatas. Thus, the Eklingji inscription speaks of Kuigka and others, pupils
of LakuliSa, as masters of
Pa^upata yoga. The Crintra
frasasti informs us that it
was for the rigid fulfilment of
the Pa^upata vows that there
appeared the four ascetic
pupils of Lakuliia. The well-
known Harltara^i, the pre-
ceptor of Bapa Raval the
supposed progenitor of the
Udaipur Gehlots, and the
founder of a line of Saiva
gurus, is spoken of in a
Chitorgadh Inscription as
i . i
^rl-Bkalinga-Har-aradhana
^ pasupatacharya. An inscrip-
tion in the temple of Bhadrakali at Prabhas Patan,® which speaks of Bhava
Brihaspati as possessing a body like that of Na(La)kullia, also tells us that he was
really NandlSvara, become incarnate to practise the Pa§upata vows. It will thus be
seen that in North India at any rate the Pa§upatas, mentiond in epigraphic and
other records, were followers of Lakuli§a. What became of these Pasupatas, whether
they were merged into an allied sect or assumed a different name, is a very interesting
question, but I propose to discuss it and give my solution of it in a separate paper.
I shall now, as said at the outset, conclude this paper with an extract from a
Jaina work entitled the Tarkaraliasya-dipika. The latter is a commentary, on the
Shad-dar'sana-samuchchaya, composed by Sri-Gunaratnasuri, pupil of Sri-Devasum-
darasuri (circa 1363 A.D.) of the Tapagachchha. The extract is as follows :
^ Joiir. Beng. As. Soc., Voh LV, pt. I, p. 40.
2 bid. Anf., Vol. XI, pp, 221-222.
3 WeinerZeitschrift, Vol. Ill, p. 7 ff.

ARCH/f;OLOGICAL REPORT.
go
I
^fTUT
flfT: lf^Tf^^?Tcr^ ?;rT^'(S^W ^®5rTrT«Tt f^^TTRlrTT I
“tmfiiaRT^T ?fF»Tr ff^ STTATSfl^ f^lTTf?3T%^’5r^” [l] ^ ^
^S#i7t^TTftWT?TT; ^wf%^TITT^frr ST^l-
fwTWi:
5^k^T^T«:T: ?rT^t
’?rr%^aR?tmT?rT: fsri^^T^ [i] f^:#^T^WTifiT: [i] ^ WirRi^T^ira^T;
^ TTT’llf^^W^T^TftT VfwfsfT [l] 3Tf5Rt ^g?TTW?5TT HTHT^ STjqr [|]
1?:^ TTTfT^Jrrm^Tf^^'gr fu^' f^f^: w^ififT fi]
^’^»TT5T: lffTT^f%W% ^T *TrT: ?iwt^ faj^ig' 5T?T TTm^% [l] #
f^4nrw^frr[l] ^WTITt’^d ’|1%^mTTf^iifT[l] cT^ 'gT^^^TTWfTT’CT
\ ^ n 'i. t^T^; ^ trK^T4: 'o*
^fcr^TWf : c frgTsr^; e \ <= % \ ftf^r^: ir g^sr^: t ^ f'w ^4: ^8
n u
^»r%: ^c[i]t]r^T^t
gr^siTiTfwwTSTf^f^^ rr?T»Ti7Ttf^?f55r:[i] wisTi «?:jt tjw t3^w^t:[i]
^WT^TT ^ H ^4; g fsrf^^TTT^ ’^irtTTT^rmrrfiR^
I
[l] 3T ^ i5Ff%JTr ^ ST fsTft;5TT ST WJT Sf
WW I ^ ST f^f^qr^f ?T|t} g^:TWgfsTvftf%rl?Tt^T^ [ll]^ ^ qg-
^fsTsri irqTTtsi^ irt^vrisiT [i] ^ ^rsqrf^isq^slfqqog^fii];W^ W
^ #; ^STSJT# [li]^?f^Tsf ^S[5^st\ qk?:Tq^TT^t [i] wsf
g fqf%rT [ll]^ gq q’T f? W%ST ggq^ q-qqTfqf: [l] ^sr ffsiiqcrT qT%
fqs^^ifr Hf^qii'iija ?1% qfT<5?l' ttfq^tr^cqqqTfrsq
i
^qrfqqilwfq^Mt fwqiqTTTWrrWTSTf ^RTSiff;;?! fTTqTSTTTTS^'HTq^-
»T^ WT^ ^Trfg^rfT ^»Tqr fml%%fiT^!^[|].
q ^ t^if^irtsT ’qaqx Hqt%[i]fr^# [ii] ’qmTT*TqT^il1sr5f2:Tq=^qqtf^5i:[|]
w:
WTqTT:Tf^fft^ =qgqT w^q%si:[ii]5» qr^^qfrrtq ?T^rq?TX?T:r^5Tr[l]gqT:
gs^iT t^T qq frqf4sn[lR] HqTqsavf^T ^T^3iTaitf^qifrTtr?n^^
Vf^fsrT [l] WTH’flf^q’^fsTqXTr stt%[i]W H ftit H%r
m%
^x^^Tf^%g[i] ^i: ^^qqn: ^Er^Tf^q^ifrqTg ^qr i<a=5i5^[i]
qllfqcRT^ qr^qcfT Tfcr[l]qsT qqifqqrsn^sT Iwfqqi^sf q- qj^-
q?TfxTftT[i]T^ ^rqr traigri ’qT^fw^H ciTrfqiaq^ cT^«ft fq’iq:[i]
Translation.
A summary of what is set forth in the Buddhist doctrine has been given, (and now)
let the abstract, which will be narrated hereafter of the doctrine of the Naiyayikas,,
(i.e.) of Saiva teachings, be heard. “ Yaugas is another name for Naiyayikas, I'and)
first their individuality constituted by special characteristics and others will be spoken
of.” And they bear staves, (and) wear a broad piece of cloth over the privities.

LAKULlSA.
191
They cover (their upper body) with woollen blankets, and bear matted hair. They
smear their bodies with ashes, and put on the sacred thread. They hold water-
pitchers, and take tasteless meals. They generally live in forests, bear gourds hang-
ing from (their) shoulders, eat bulbs, roots and fruit (of trees), and take delight in the
duties of hospitality. Some have wives and others not. Those without wives are the
best amongst them. They are engaged in the performance of the five fire penances,
and even bear a consecrated liiiga in their hands or matted hair. But those, who have
attained to the perfect state of self-restraint, w.^nder naked. After washing their
mouth, feet, and so forth in the morning, they draw' three stripes at atime of ashes on
their body, while meditating on Siva. The lay-W’orshlpper patron, w'hile doing
obeisance, folds his hands and utters “ Om, a bow' to Siva,’' and similarly the preceptor
responds with “to Sivaa bow' ” And they in assemblies asseverate that even he, who,
after resorting to the Saiva initiatory consecration fortwelve years, gives it up, obtains
absolution, be he a male or female slave. To them Igvara (Siva) is God, omniscient,
and causing creation, destruction, and so forth. The following are his eighteen incar-
nations:— (i) Nakuli, (2) Saushya-KauSika, (3) Gargya, (4) Maitrya, (5) Akaurusha,
(6) I§ana, (7) Paragargya, (8'> Kapilanda, (9) Manushyaka, (ic) Kusika, (ii) Atrl, (12)
Pimgala, (13) Pushyaka, (14) Brihadarya, (15) Agasti, (16) Sarhtana, (17) Ra§ikara,
and (18) Vidyaguru. These aretheir to be venerated. The mode of their
w'orship and prayers should be cognised from their scriptures. At all sacred places,
Bharatas only are their worshippers. Salutation to gods should not be made by any
with their faces turnedtow^ards them. Those amongst the^m, who are free from earthly
passions, point out this verse contained in their philosophical literature (verse i) Not
:
the Celestial river (Ganges), not the cobras, not the garland of skulls, not the digit of
the moon, not the daughter of the mountain (Parvatl), not the matted hair, not the
ashes, nor anything else do we adore but that form of I§vara, contemplated by the
primeval sages. (Verse 2) He alone is fit to be resorted to by theascetics. But (the
god Siva), who enjoys sensual objects, is of recent origin, and is meditated upon and
resorted to by those who are covetous of the pleasures of regal power and so forth.”
And ithas been said in their own yoga^sastra : (Verse 3). “ An ascetic, contemplating
(a deity) free from attachment, enjoys freedom from attachment, but the quality of
being possessed of attachment is certain to him, w'ho meditates on (a divinity)
possessed of attachment. (Verse 4) With whatever predominant object a Saiva wor-
shipper (literally the bearer of the mystic diagram) is filled, he is merged into it
like a mirror reflecting multifarious (objects).” All this description of the
characteristics, dress, object of worship, and so forth is to be taken as applying to the
Vaigeshika doctrine. Because although there are differenttheses of the Naiyayikas and
Vaigeshikas, yet, in consequence of theirbeingincluded one in the other, there remains
very little distinction (between the two schools). Hence there is a conformity of their
doctrines. They are both called ascetics {iapasvinah). They are distinguished into
four sects, such as Saiva and so forth. It has been said ; “ The ascetics, who use a
seat, ashes, cloth for privities, matted hair, and sacred thread, are four-fold, in
consequence of the difference of their own practices and so forth. (Verse 2) Saivas,
Pagupatas, Mahavratadharas and Kalamukhas are the four principal divisions amongst
these ascetics. ” Their sub-divisions, again, are Bharatas, Bhaktas, Laingikas

ARCHEOLOGICAL. REPORT.
192
Tapasas, and so forth. As regards the taking up ofthe religious vow in the case of
Bharatas and others, there is no restriction about the castes, such as Brahmanas, and
so forth. He who has devotion for Siva may become any vrati (taker of religious
vow), such as Bharata and others. Butin philosophical sciences, Naiyayikas, being
—
devoted to Sada§iva, are called Saivas. VaiSeshikas, however, are PaSupatas.
Hence the teachings of Naiyayikas are designated Saiva, and Vai^eshika philosophy
Pa§upata. And this has been here recounted by me, according as it has been heard
or seen. The particulars, however, of the various (sects) should be gathered from
their works.
The above extract speaks for itself, and does not call for many remarks. The
idea that the Pagupatas are Vaigeshikas and the Saivas Naiyayikas is no doubtfantastic,
though it is truethat Gunaratnasuri did not himself conceive this, but specified what he
merely heard or was informed of. It represents an attempt of the various religious
sects to affiliate themselves to one of the six recognised schools of philosophy.
One such instance, if required, is that of the Manbhav (Mahanubhava) pantha, well
known in Maharashtra. It is unquestionably aVaishnava sect, but its literature, which
is both in Sanskrit and the oldest Marathi, speaks of it as a branch of the Nyaya
school. Apart from this, the long account of the customs and religious practices of
the Pagupatas may be taken as reliable. And, as the Pagupatas were the worshippers
of Lakuliga, the account must be supposed to refer to the devotees of that god. If
any proof were needed, it is supplied by the list of the eighteen incarnations of Siva
accepted by them. The first five of them can easily be recognised to be Lakuli and
his four disciples, Kiigika, Garga, Mitra, and Kaurushya.
D. R. Bhandarkar.

NOTES THE GORAKHPUR AND
IN
SARAN
DISTRICTS.
The
following notes were collected in the course of a journey in the districts of
Gorakhpur and Saran undertaken by me in the latter half of November and
December, 1906. Dr. Fleet had suggested this area for exploration to the Director-
Generalof Archaeology, and was good enough to supply mewith alistofplaces supposed
to be of archaeological interest, numbering about fifty, which he was anxious for
me to visit and report upon. He also gave me a number of notes relating to the anti-
quities of the districts. As regards the suggested location of Kusinara near Pachrukhi
and cf the spot where Gautama crossed the Anoma, which Dr. Fleet had been inclined
to locate somewhere in the vicinity of Majhauli or at the village of Gautamaiii near it,
the results of my short tour must be regarded as rather of negative than positive value.
But the journey was fruitful in other respects. At Rudarpur I discovered a
colossal basalt statueof Vishnu, which is as interesting for its superior workmanship as
it is valuable for its early date. Another statue of this deity of about the same size
and age which exists at Hasanpura is too good for the malignant hatredwith which it
is looked upon by the population of the village. I have therefore suggested that the
statue may be either set up at a suitable spot at the village itself or better still
removed to the Lucknow Museum. At Sohnag there are the remains of a large
Buddhist establishment consisting of a big monastery and several stupas. These
remains seem to be comparatively late, but they obviously stand on structures of a
much earlier date. Of the inscriptions copied during the tour the most interesting is
one incised on two copper plates recording the endowment of a certain village upon a
brahman called Drona, whosename, I believe, is still perpetuated by the village of Don
Buzurg, where the plates have been found. Incidentally, also, I was able to determine
by' actual local enquiry the correct names of the places included in Dr. Fleet’s list,
some of which proved to be utterly devoid of any visible antiquities and will not be
noticed in the subjoined notes.
Gorakhpur.
-My object in visiting the city of Gorakhpur first of all was to secure a copy
of a vernacular chronicle .of the district called Gorakhpurd.arpan, which Dr. Vogel
2 c

—
ARCHy^;OLOGlCAL REPORT.
194
had kindly suggested I should have with me in the course of the journey. The book
was formerly taught in the schools of the district, but having fallen into disuse is now
exceedingly rare. The copy now before me was obtained through the kindness of
Mr. E.A. Molony, Collector and Magistrate of Gorakhpur, though unfortunately
it did not reach me until I was crossing on to the Saran district. From the preface to
the Gorakhpurdarpan I learn that it is a translation of a history of the district
published by Mr. A. Swinton, Commissioner of the Gorakhpur Division, in 1861. The
booklet contains much useful information about the antiquities of the district.
The remains at and near Gorakhpur have been fully' described by Cunningham,
Fuhrer and others. According to popular belief the present city was founded by
Gorakshanatha, the founder of a Bairagi sect about 1400 A. D.
Sohgaura.
From Gorakhpur I proceeded to Sohgaura, some 18 miles south of Gorakhpur,
and well known for the inscribed copper plate discovered there by Dr. Hoey about
1893. Tradition has it that Sohgaura formerly formed part of a large kingdom ruled
successively by Domras, Tharus and Bhars, the last mentioned of whom were ousted
by a line of Srinet Kshattriya Rajas of Satasi. According to the Vi^ven Vamsa
Vatika published by Raja Lai Khadga Bahadur Malla of Majhauliin 1887, Satasi
(which means eighty-seven) was originally the name of a gift of 87 square kos of land
bestowed upon the Srinets by a certain raja of Majhauli. The Srinet rajas recruited
their preceptors from among the Tiwari brahmans of Sohgaura, to whom they
frequently granted large endowments of rent-free land and other privileges. Paper
records of many such gifts are in the possession of a descendant of the above men-
tioned Tiwari family and would be very helpful in the compilation of a chronological
table of the Srinet clan.
Sohgaura stands on the remains of some very ancient city and the numerous
mounds of ruins which surround it on all sides offer a splendid field for exploration.
The largest of these mounds is Tikar Dih situated on the south bank of the Ami
River, measuring some 220 paces from east to west and about 8o from north to south.
j
It is impossible, of course, as yet to say anything about the nature of the remains
buried under this and the other mounds, but their antiquity is sufficiently attested to by
bricks measuring I'l" by 12" by 4", ancient coins, glazed pottery, broken figures etc.,
that turn up during the rains.
Rudarpur.
Rudarpur is situated some ten miles to south-west of Deoria and has for centuries
been the chief town of the Satasi Raj. The place was closely examined for miles
around by Mr. Carlleyle in 1885 and afterwards by Dr. Hoey. What chiefly attracted
me to Rudarpur was a report about certain very ancient brahmaksharas incised on the
lintel of the Dudhnath shrine. Nothing, however, could exceed my disappointment
when after a tedious journey by a miserable cart-road I found that the record referred
to was a vernacular epigraph consisting of 13 syllables of no value or interest, and
inscribed in — Nagarl characters of the j6th or 17th century. ' I propose to read :
Line 1. Orh (expressed by a symbol) Jbga pa dha ga

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS.
^95
—
Line 2. Chanda jogi leshitah.
The reading of the first line is doubtful. It seems to contain some religious title
like Jogopadhyaya, etc.
Rudarpur is essentially a Saiva town and the only non-Saiva antiquities I
noticed there are (i) a small figure of Mahavira, the last Jaina tirthankara
of the present cycle, l^he Gaurl-Sahkara shrine in the Dudhnath temple,
and (2) a colossal statue, 10 feet high, of Vishnu (PL LXXIV, (a) in fine
grained black stone. This statue is contained in an arched opening cut through the
stone, which it touches only at the top and at the shoulders. The legs are broken
away up to the knees, and the feet, which are consequently totally detached from the
image itself, rest on a boldly executed full-blown lotus. There were originally four
arms, but only the upper right one, which holds the gada, now remains. The base is
adorned with exquisite acanthus decoration. The statue bears no inscription, but from
the style of carving, it may be safely referred to the 6th or 7th century A. D. The
sculpture is now fixed in the ground, to what depth cannot be made out, and is
supported from behind by a low brick built walk Badly cracked as it is both atthe top
and at the base, it can be preserved for a long time to come if only the wall behind it
is repaired and carried up a couple of feet-above its present height.
The ancient remains near Rudarpur are called Chhota and Bara Sahankot or
;
simply Kot. Various conjectures have been proposed regarding the origin of
Sahankot. According to popular belief it was founded by Brahma himself, when he
resided in Kasi, and the author of the Vi^venavarh^avatika surmises that the real name
was Syena-Kotta or the fort of the Syenas, which name he believes to be a corruption
of Vilvena.
Both the small and the great fort are now entirely desolate, and all that remains
of them are the foundations of their circuit walls, covered with heaps of earth.
The whole of the area enclosed by the Chhota Kot is under cultivation, but there
are still several large mounds of ruins in the Bara Kot. Of these, by far the largest
and highest mound is that situated some i oo yards east of the west wall. It is known
as the “ Bara deol,” and apparently represents the remains of some important monu-
ment. It is some 800' in circumference at the base. The top is occupiedby a Sadhu’s
hut, in front of which, on a small platform, I saw a number of mediaeval fragmentary
sculptures belonging to the Vaishnava and Saiva cults. Of the remaining mounds, two or
three, situated to the east of this, are said to have been opened out by Dr. Hoey and to
have yielded Hindu shrines of no great antiquity.
The circuitwall of the Bara Kot shows five large gaps, vis., two on the south side
and one on each of the remaining three, which seem to represent the gateways of the
castle.
The Dudhnath temple stands about a furlong to the east of the fort, in the centre
of a large quadrangle, along the sides of which there are no less than eight shrines,
all of which, with the exception of the octagonal one in the south-west corner, must
have been built within the last forty or fifty years. A few of the images worshipped
in them, together with some fragmentary ones stored in the verandah of the main
shrine, have been obtained from the ruins inside the fort, the most noteworthy being
the one in the shrine occupying the north-west corner of the quadrangle. It
2 c 2

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
196
represents Ganesa in the dancing attitude, and, according to a vernacular inscription
carved in stucco over the doorway of the Porch, was installed in Sarhvat 1936, Fasli
year 1286.
The central shrine has been covered up with a thick coating of plaster which
precludes all possibility of ascertaining its precise date. This much, however, is
certain that it is much older than the short epigraph on its lintel, which was possibly
incised at the time the shrine was surrounded by the verandah. The lingam in it,
which attracts a large gathering on the Sivaratri festival each year, is ail irregularly
shaped block of black stone, probably a meteorite.
Majhauli.
Since there was no route leading direct from Rudarpur to Majhauli, I had to
return to Deoria, where I took train for Bhatpar Railway Station, with which Majhauli
is connected by a good metalled road
That the name was spelt as Majhauli at least as far back as the time of Raja
Bodhmall, a contemporary of Aurangzeb, is proved by a paper document dated in
Samvat 1692 kindly shown to me by the Maharaja Sahib. The same spelling occurs
in a Persian inscription discovered by Dr. Bloch in the Pathar-ki-masjid at Patna,
which states that the material for the building of the mosque was obtained from a
temple and a fort demolished at Majhauli for the purpose.
The Rajas of Majhauli belong to the Visvena family of Kshatriyas, fabled to have
sprung from an ancient sage named Mayurabhatta, who practised penance at a place
now called Kakradih situated some 15 miles south-west of Majhauli. The place is
still considered holy and every new successor to the Raj is anointed at his installa-
tion with clay specially brought from there.
Majhauli at the present day possesses but few antiquities. Indeed, the only
•ones worth mentioning are an image of the Mahishasuramardini Durga, lying under a
tree near the Raja's palace, and a ruined shrine of Dirgheivara Mahadeva of unknown
date, situated among a mass of ancient remains a little to the east of the town.
Majhauli must have been a place of some importance in past ages, if, as suggested
by Dr. Fleet, it should prove to be the place where Buddha crossed the Anuma. It
is true that some four miles from Majhauli near the railway line between the stations
of Salempur and Bhatnl there is a small but ancient village called AnuarhpaP meaning
“across the Anuma ” or more freely “the crossing of the Anuma,” which may well be
an apabhramsa of Anuma, but the absence of any stream of such a name anywhere
in the neighbourhood offers a difficulty in the way of the identification. The channel
running past the village is called Pusi. Nor does the locality show any remains which
can be called Buddhist.
Salempur.
According to the Vi^venavarh^avatika, this village was formerly called Nagar,
and ils present name is due to Raja Bodhmall of Majhauli, who, having been converted
to Islam by Aurangzeb under the new name of Salemkhan, never returned to his
native place but retired to this village to pass his remaining days away from his
1 Dr. Fleet thinks itto be the ‘Anwanpur’ ofthe Indian Atlas sheet No. 102, in lal. 26°ao'long s . od iust
ivUc^eBurseepar. j

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. igy
relatives. The Raja now lies buried under a miserable brick grave 26' x 25' X 5'
high, some 200 yards to the south of Sain-ka-katara, on the east bank of the Little
Gandak oppositethe village of Navalpur. The grave is in the charge of a Muhammadan
faqir but is fast crumbling away.
In the middle of the village is a small temple consisting of a small square cell,
surmounted with a domical roof, which was originally encased in a closed-in brick
verandah, fragments of whose walls still survive. Inside the cell I noticed a few
modem sculptures of Vishnu, Siva, etc. A Muhammadan mosque with a well situated
in the Kasai Mahalla or Butcher Street also deserves notice. The prayer chamber
is a rectangle 41'-7" X i2'-3." The walls are 3' thick. Over the central archway
—
in the facade is a Persian inscription w'-hich reads : Zi daur-i-Shah-i-Jahan shud
bina-i-masjid-o chah. “This mosque and the well were built in the reign of Shah
Jahan.” The hemistich also yields the Hijra year 1065 (A.D. 1654) as the date
of the building.
Sohnag.
Situated some 3 miles to south-west of Majhauli. There is no regular road and
the pathway lies all along through cultivated fields.
The village is noted for Sohanchhatragarh, the popular name of a tank, and some
very extensive and important remains situated on the west bank of it as wmll as a few
comparatively late Brahmanical temples. The first of these is held in great
reverence by the Hindus, who assemble here in large numbers on the 3rd of the
bright fortnight of Vaisakha each year to have a dip in its sanctifying waters. Its
excavation and construction is attributed by the people to a Raja named Sohan, who
being cured of white leprosy by an ablution in its water, deepened and built it at the
instruction of Para§urama, who visited him in a dream. The western bank is still lined,
with a series of brick built stairs, of which the central one is still called Parasurama’s
ghat. The bricks used measure 9I" X f X 3".
The mins on the west bank of the pdkhara, described by Mr. V. A. Smith
in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1900, page 431, are interesting.
Of these the largest structure, the Vihara, is now but a mound of earth, all the
bricks having been used up in the construction of the Bengal and North-Western
Railway. The only portions of the building still under ground are the
south-west corner of quadrangle No. HI, and a part of the west block of cells in the
northernmost quadrangle (see Mr. Smith’s map). This excavation was a piece of
unpardonable vandalism. But perhaps not much has been lost. The interior of the
cells has in no case been disturbed, so that what antiquities were originally here can
still be easily recovered.
Regarding the seven mounds, situated six to the west and one to the east of the
Vihara, I have no doubt that they are all remains of stupas. This view is supported
not orily by the conical shape of the mounds and theforms of bricks peculiar to stupas
with which the tumuli are covered, but also by actual trial digging. The small low
mound, situated some 150' west of Parasurama’s shrine (see Mr. Smith’s site plan)
was opened and revealed a solid brick plinth, 18' east to west and i8'-7" north to
south. There is a double projection on each ofthe north, east and west faces. On the

— —
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
198
south side there is only a single step, 4' wide and jutting beyond the wall, which
probably gave access to a narrow circumambulatory passage on the plinth. The
superstructure was all gone with the exception of a few layers of the drum. The top of
the plinth was found at a depth of between 2 and 3/ below the surface of the mound.
The sizes of bricks used in this stupa are identical with those in the Vihara. Some of
them are highly ornamental.
The following antiquities were found in the course of the excavation :
(1) A headless terra-cotta image of Buddha seated on a full-blown lotus in the
bhumispar^a attitude. The figure is 6^" wide at base. This was found embedded
in the plinth at a point west of east side and froiri each of the north and
south Avails.
(2) A circular clay tablet, complete in four fragments, 3''' in diameter. Contains
in an oval shaped incuse a figure of Maitreya standing in a somewhat crooked position
on a distended lotus and the Buddhist creed in the characters of about the i oth cen-
tury. The right hand of the figure is stretched out, and holds a flask, though the latter
generally appears in the left hand. The left one grasps the middle of a lotus which
rises from near the asana. To the proper right ofthe deity’s head appears a miniature
chaitya and an uncertain object to the left.
(3) Fragment of a large oval shaped clay tablet, long, bearing the figure of a
bodhiiattva-d.&vo\.&t seated on a lotus. The right hand is lifted up, and above it is
depicted a lotus and an asterisk.
I4) Small circular clay tablets stamped with the MahaySna formula, in mediaeval
characters.
(5) Copper coin of Abu-l-Fath Governor of Ibrahim Shah of Jaunpur. Found
near surface of mound.
(6) Copper coin of Shah ‘ Alam, King of Delhi.
(7) Small coin marked vinth a star surrounded with fragments of AA'riting which
cannot be recognised, d'he legend on the reverse is also unintelligible.
These antiquities have been all sent to the Lucknow Provincial Museum.
—
There are altogether three Hindu temples at Sohnag
(1) Mahadeva’s shrine, to the north of the Vihara. This is a modern building
consisting of two rooms, of which the north one contains an image of Vishnu, 3'-3'''
high and wide with the usual emblems and a large §iva-lihgam.
(2) Gauri-Sahkara shrine. Isa square room xi'-g" along each side. The
image enshrined in it is 9" high and 10" wide and is in black stone.
1
(3) Parasurama’s shrine, it is a square room i I'-e'' each way, surmounted by
a Saracenic dome, supposed to have been built by one Navaz Singh Chakladar some
200 years ago. Inside the shrine I saw several sculptures of which the following
deserve notice
:
{a) Vishnu standing, 3' high x 9" wide. (PI. LXXIV, b). On pedestal, Varaha,
Kachchhapa, Matsya, and other avataras. The Buddha-avatara is depicted near the
top of the mace. Material, stone.
{h) Brahma standing. Has 3 faces and 4 hands, of which the upper left holds
the usual palm-leaf manuscript. Material, stone. 2'-5''' highx wide.
(c) Paraiurama with usual emblems. 3'.3" highx i'-/' wide Material,
stone. ^

1
N’OTKS IN THE GORMiHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS.
'99
{d) Another image of Narayana. 4'X2'. Top piece missing. Material, stone.
Bhagalpur.
Some lo miles south-west of Salempur. The inscription on the stone pillar (A. S.
R. XVI, p. 130 and Pis. XXX, XXXI), for which the place is chiefly noted, has
suffered so much from the hand of both time and man that very little can be made ofit.
The first verse praises Bhujagahgaka the serpent-adorned Vishnu. In the second line
we read The third line begins with
This Dasaratha is probablythesame as the father of Ramachandra.
BVom these and other bits of information contained in the record one can easily infer
that the pillar was set up by a \'ashinava King of the solar race. The date, which was
recordedinthe Vikrama era, is unfortunately lost.
Khaira.
Khaira, situated on the right bank of the Ghagra exactly opposite to Bhagalpur
(A. S, R. XXI, p. 108), is the name of a large collection of ruins said to cover an area
of over 70 bighas. The remains are the property of a Vaishnava sadhu who dwells on
the spot, but are being fast swept away by the river which flows quite close to them.
next proceeded to Don Buzurg, visiting en route the villages of Sohagara (once
I
the head-quarters of the Majhauli State) and Silaur.
The former of these possesses extensive remains of a fort, now overgrown with
thick jungle, and a Sivalaya built on a high mound in Chhota Sohagara. Thetemple is
said to have been built by Rani Dilrajkuar of Majhauli, and contains besides the large
black stone lihgarh in the main shrine, a grey sandstone slab bearing figures of the
1
Rudras and other Brahmanic sculptures fixed in the west wall of the compound.
The temple isapproached from the east by means of an imposing flight of steps,
and is constructed in the late Saracenic style.
The village of Silaur is some 5 miles south-east of Sohagara. In the centre of the
village is a modern walled-in court with a collection of Brahmanic sculptures obtained
from the ruins to the south of the village. The most important piece is an image of
Mahishasuramardini, 2'-4'’''x T'-i" (PI. LXXIV, c). Close to this is a large Sivalaya
in a compound with .Saracenic cupolas in the corners. The latter contain well-carved
images of Ganesa, Surya on a chariot drawn by the seven horses, Durga and Hanuman
crushing Ahiravana with his left foot.
The remains referred to above are situated at the south end of the village and
are known as Bhrigu-ka-sthana and the garh. The former is a large platform now
almost level with the ground situated under an ancient Pakri tree, composed of bricks
measuring 15" long and 9" wide.
The garh consists of a small low mound, surrounded by four still smaller ones
which people call the towers ofthe fort. One of these was partly opened but proved
to be only a well 1 2' in diameter filled up with rubble.
Don Buzurg.
Ac Don Buzurg I vms to report on an ancient site known as Dron-ka-ghar, Dron-
ka-ghar or Drop-ka-garh, as it is also called, is now the name of a cultivated field

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
200
situated to the east of the village and separated from it by the pakka road leading to
Mairwa. The field is extensively worshipped by the Hindus with offerings of milk in
me
the month of Sravana. An old man, perhaps the oldest in the village, narrated to
the following legend about it : “ This field marks the exact site of the house of Drona
the well-known military preceptor of the Kaurava and Pandava princes. He was a
skilled physician, and was invited on one occasion to Lanka to prescribe medicine for
Bibhikshana, brother of Ravana, who suffered from some incurable disease. Dronawas-
therefore carried to Ceylon with the house in which he dwelt. On the recovery ofthe
demon king, Drona was permitted to see the capital of the country, and was surprised
to see the markets full of corn of all sorts though the agricultural condition of the coun-
try was far from prosperous. His host, however, explained to him that the abundance
of corn in his kingdom was due to his miraculous powers, which could draw the essence
of the cultivation of the whole world. Drona begged that his village might be ex-
empted from this drain and obtained the reply that a solitary bigha ofland in his village
should yield loo maundsof corn, while the rest would be treated like all else. Drona
thanked him and returned to his village Don) but his house did not.” This legend
(
has to be taken for what it is worth, but thefield, though now cultivated every season,
has certainly contained remains which have been dug away by the cultivators. At a
spot in the eastern edge one can still see survivals of a stout paving composed of a
thick layer of cement laid on a single course of bricks The village itself stands
on a vast plateau of remains extending in the eastern direction as far as the mound
known as Banasur-ka tila. The common size of bricks found does not exceed i i:}"
The people find many gold and copper coins in the rainy season. The
former, they say, are generally round and contain human figures on one side and some
writing on the other. The copper coins found are generally square, I was unable
to procure any specimens.
The village has now become famous in the neighbourhood for the discovery of
a Sanskrit inscription of Govindachandradeva of Kanyakubja carved on two copper
plates accidentally unearthed by a chamar in a field midway betweenthe villages of Don
and Mathiya. The plates are now in the possession of the Maharaja of Majhauli^
to whom 1 am much indebted for all the interest he took in my work. The plates will
be published as a postscriptum to the article I am preparing for the Epigraphia Indica
on the important copper plate found at Saheth in the Gonda District.
Mairwa.
At Mairwa, a Railway Station on the Bengal and North-Western Railway and
connected with Don Buzurg by a good metalled road, I saw :
(i) Chananniyam Dih, a lofty mound, over 600' in perimeter at the base, situated
on an extendve plateau running parallelto the Railw'ay Station. Chananniyarh is said
to havebeenan Ahirwoman about whom the people tell a very indecent story. She is
now worshippedas Durga in a tiny modern shed built in front of the Dak Bungalow,
which occupiesthe top of the mound. There are no means of ascertainingwhatremains
the mound contains. Its external appearance would lead one to consider it a siiipa,
ifi) Hart Baba ka sthan situated on the Jharahi River about miles from the

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. 201
Railway Station. It is a modern shrine built over the saniadh of a sadhu named Hari
Baba. The samadk is a mud platform, faced with stone slabs, and surmounted with
a small mud grave which contains the remains of the sadhu. This recluse is supposed
to have been a disciple of Tulasi. I gather the following account of the baba’s
death from a vernacular manuscript styled Baba Haris Path. “ Hari Baba was born
at Bamnauli 5 miles south-east of Mairwa. His dog and buffalo were snatched
from him by a chief of Mairwa, named Kanak Sahi (his seventh descendant is a
minor). The sadhu devastated his fort and himself committed suicide.”
(3) Mound, a furlong to south-east of (2), It measures 100' north to south and
93' east to west at top and about 200' along each side at the base. Average elevation
20" above surrounding ground. People call it the fort of Kanak Sahi mentioned above.
The small round mounds attached tothe south-east, south-west and north-west corners
seem to have been towers. On the top there is a narrow deep well made up of small
bricks.
Bhantapokhar.
This is another Railway Station on the Bengal and North-Western Railway.
Dr, Fleet was informed of the existence of remains of a brick stiipa at this place.
I carefully searched both the tolas into which the village is divided, but could not trace
any ruins.
Titira.
Near Titira, avillage situated a little to west of BhantSpokhar, there are two ruins
which Dr. Fleet conjectured might be stufas. One of these, known as Muyarngarh, is
a large enclosure 800' north to south by 700' east to west, surrounded by walls which
are all in ruins. In the centre of the enclosure stands a rectangular mound 18T east
to west and 137' north to south, in which brick is exceedingly rare but modern pottery
abundant. A pit on the top appears to be the remnant of a well. The south-west
portion of the enclosure is occupied by a low mound, 400' in perimeter, which appears
to cover a large four-sided brick structure.
The other ruin, called Bhangara and situated about 3^ furlongs south-w’est of the
village of the same name, is also a quadrangular building. It is much smaller in
dimensions (330' east to west and 382' north to south) than the Muyarngarh, but is in-
dicated as decidedly much older by the ancient glazed pottery and large-size baked
bricks with which the site is covered. Here, too, the middle portion of the building
is taken up by a mound 75' north to south and 66' east to west, of the character of
which nothing can be stated with certainty. At the south-east corner of the garh,
however, there is an eminence circular at thebase (180' in perimeter) and pointed at
top, which may perhaps be 3.stupa. It is approximately 20' high and shows indications
of considerable antiquity.
KalinjfS.
The village of Kalinjra, a few miles to the east of Bhantapokhar, is noted for
an earthen castledesignated Cheron-kd-garh by the Hindus : the hluhammadans of
2 D

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
202
the placeattribute its construction to one Raja ‘Ali Bakh^ to be referred to below.
It is a large place, measuring about 440' along each side and about 25' high, 'i'he
ditch around it is 100' wide. The corners are occupied by circular mounds, probably
remains of towers. The whole site is noAV overgrown with thick thorny jungle, and
is seldom approached by villagers.
Siwan.
The ancient remains at Siwan consist of two sites. One of these, known as
Jagattra, is the name of a very small earthern mound about a furlong to the north
of the Railway Station. It is 21' broad from north to south and 25' long from east
to west at the base, and is only 5' high above the level of the fields. An ancient pipal
tree that formerly stood on it has fallen down, and we now see on its top only a
small fragment, 16" high, of modern walling, a platform made of the same
sort of modern bricks, and a small broken sculpture. Two fairs are held on the
spot each year, namely, on the first Sundays occurring in the white fortnight of
argasirsha and Vai^akha. Old men of the place narrate the following story about
IVJ
the mound: “ Two Siaikhs named Bhikh and Kabir saved the state of Majhauli
from some enemy in the absence of the Raja. The latter was delighted and gave
them some land in the neighbourhood of Bhantapokhar. The Shaikhs began to
reside at the village of Khalispur near Kalihjra referred to above. Soon after
they invaded the fort of Raja Jagattra which occupied the whole of the area between
the Radw^ay Station and the Purana Qila‘ to be noticed presently. The fort was
won and the Raja slain. But the spirit of Jagattra haunted them and allowed them no
rest. The Shaikhs therefore approached a faqir named Rodasa, who advised them
to grant land to brahmans and Muhammadan faqlrs. The mound now known as
Jagattra marks the spot where the Raja was beheaded.’"' The grave of Rodasa
stands about 100' yards to the north of Jagattra.
The othersitestands two furlongs to the north of Jagattra and is called the Purana
Qila'or “ Old Fort."' It is alleged to havebeen built by the Shaikhs mentioned above.
It measures 331" from north to south and 221' from east to west. All the buildings
now extant are made of mud. The ditch surrounding the garh is deep and broad.
Another monument to be noticed here is a mosque bearing a Persian inscription
which may be translated as follows : “ The pious ‘Ali Bakhsh built this holy edifice in
A. H. 1165 (A. D. 1751) for the praise of God.”
Qdsopali.
At the village of Gosopali, situated on the Sundi Nadi, 1 was to find old remains
on both the banks of the river. Some remains I did find though not at Gosopali,
but near the village Renuath, i mile to north of Gosopali, and on the west bank of the
stream. They consist of an irregularly-shaped mound, 108" north to south and 42"
east to west. The accumulation of rubbish on the surface exceeds five feet, and
though I dug at one or two promising spots I only found small detached bricks
measuring 8 X8 X , and plenty of calcined bones, but no structures of any kind.

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. 203
Papaur
Possesses a large tank measuring 284' east to west X322' north to south and
lined with low mounds on all sides. That these mounds are not mere heaps of earth
is amply proved by the numbers of punch-marked coins that turn up here frequently.
Andar.
The village of Andar, or Annar, is situated some j 1 miles to the south of Siwan
and about a mile to the south-west of the confluence of the Daha Nadi with Sonna
Nara. To the west of the village there is a large mound of ruins called Masudaham-
ki-dih. It extends towards the east and west 600' and narrows down towards the
north and south to 300' only. Two prominent features of these remains are a conical
mound on the southern portion, and a small brick pavement composed of bricks of the
same dimensions towards the north. The remains on the surface are of a relatively
late date, but that the occupation of the place goes back to very early times was
proved by a little excavation made by me towards the western boundary of the site.
There are mounds also at the villages of Tiarhy and Asaorh a few miles to the west
of Andar on the road from Siwan, but of no great age. The villagers call them the
castles of Iksaria Rajputs, local chieftains of 200 years ago, and I have no reason to
doubt them.
Balahum (on the Jharahi).
At the village of Balahum, situated about 2 miles to the north of the 42nd mile on
the Chupra-Drauli road, there is a rather unusually large image of Mahadeva,
measuring 5^-3" high. The base of the image is rough and square, each way.
There is evidently no basin, though the villagers insist on their having seen it some
forty years ago when the old Pakri tree, under which it originally stood, fell down and
was replaced by the banyan now sheltering it.
From Balahurh I proceeded to Hasanpura where Dr. Fleet had heard of the
existence of considerable traces of remains and an image of basalt. In the course of
the first sixteen miles, which I had to travel by the Chupra-Drauli road, I saw several
temples, but none earlier than the 7th or i8th century, and two large mounds. One of
i
them standing close on the north of the village of Panjwar at the 3 1 st mile on the
road appears to be only a mud-built castle of a local zamindar like those noticed at
Kalinjra, Tiarhy, etc., but the other one situated between the 29th and 28th miles of
the sameroad is more important. It is known merely as the garhorcastle of Kachnar,
the modern village surrounding it on three sides, and measures about 100' each way.
The height exceeds 40 feet, of which the upper 15 or 20 feet are composed obviously
of mud. The lower strata, however, show indications of some very early monument,
which should be excavated. The bricks in it measure ip^X i
The rest of the journey to Hasanpura lay along the Siwan-Siswan road. No
antiquities were met with on the way with the exception of the Siva temple known as
Mehmdar situated near the village of Chainpur. The main shrine is said to have
been built by a certain Gurkha Chief about 200 years ago, but the verandah and the
accessory shrines containing images of Bhairava, Bhagavati, etc., are even more
2 0 2

—
;
ARCHi«;0L0GICAL REPORT.
204
modern. The temple is situated on the bank of a large tank, the extent of which is
described in the following vernacular couplet :
“ Tin sau bighe ka pokhara,
Anthanwe bighe ki ghat
Ek dhur bachal pa,
Uhi merh garal ja jath.”
Translation The tank measures 300 bighas and the landing place 98 the
; ;
wooden post aloneoccupies one dhur (equivalentto six cubits).
Hasanpura,
The village of Hasanpura, situated at the i ith mile on the above-mentioned road,
is said to have been founded by one Makhdum Hasan, who belonged to the Saiyyid
family of Arraq in Persia. Henow liesburied undera small grave in a large open court
{mizar) to the west of the village. The grave is lighted each evening with lamps
placed on a stone stand, probably the capital of a stupa. Itis in front of this enclosure
that the basalt image spoken of above is lying onits face. An ancient and exceedingly
beautiful image of Vishnu, about lo' high, it is being most ruthlessly treated by the
villagers. It is regarded as an inauspicious deoni (fiend) overthrown and turned into
stone by the holy Makhdum who founded the village, and must not be raised orplaced
erect.
Tile image had been lifted only twice before me, once by Dr. Hoey and again by
an officer of the Bengal Government, and no small persuasion had to be used for
permission to photograph it. The image containsno inscription, but onthe evidence of
its style it may be safely assigned to about the 7th century A.D.
This Is all I saw at Hasanpura. Enquiries were repeatedly made about the
existence of any remains of buildings (dihs), but the villagers were evidently not aware
of any.
Sarangpur.
This place was visited from Siwan ; the journey comprised ii-J miles, i.e., i-|
miles on the Chupra to Gorakhpur road, g miles on the Siwan to Basatpur road, and
the remainder by the Gopalganj to Barharia road.
According to the inhabitants of the village, there were formerly several mounds of
remains here, but they have all been levelled dowm. The only one which now
survives, in a small low eminence under an old pakri tree about 2 furlongsto the south-
east of the village, is called the Baramthan. Old coins have turned up in numbers,
but I could not procure any.
Bhikhaband.
Situated at the 14th mile on the Siwan to Tajpur road. The road is here lined
with a series of fields considerably higher than the ordinary ground level and
still
called dihs. The fields have been under cultivation for years, but pottery and
brickbats are still abundant. An ancient well has been recently opened up by the
cultivators in one of these fields, and I have no doubt that there are many other
structures still hidden under the ground.

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. 205
Pachrukkhi.
The village of Pachrukkhi ‘ five trees,’ is at a Railway Station on the Bengal and
North-Western Railway, and it is somewhere in the neighbourhood of this village that
Dr. Fleet is inclined to locate the scene of Buddha’s farinirvana. I carefully
searched several villages round Pachrukkhi for any antiquities that might be still
extant, but in vain.
Tajpuf Basahi.
At Tajpur Basahi, situated about a mile south-east of Saran Khass, I witnessed a
basalt slab carved with the figures of the Navagrahas on one side and an Arabic
inscription in the Tughra character on the other. The slab is now lying on the grave
of a Muhammadan Saint named Khwaja Badsbah, and should be transferred to the
Lucknow Provincial IMuseum.
Chiraiic
In connection wath this place I can only say that I agree with all that Mr.
Carlleyle has said in the A. S. R., Vol. XXII, though I must confess I was unable to
trace the stufa-\i\ke structure on the principal mound to the east of the village. All
these mounds undoubtedly cover numerous ancient remains, of the nature of which
nothing can be said until they are excavated.
D.aya Ram Sahni.

EPIGRAPHY.
'^HE number of inscriptions copied during the year was 771. Of these, 640 were
* copied in the Southern, 53 in the Western, 29 in the Northern, 11 in the Frontier
Circle, and 38 in Burma. To these must be added inscriptions discovered during the
—
excavations at Sarnath. See above pp. 95 loi.
—
Of the Epigraphia Indica, Parts IV VH of Volume VUI, and Part I of Volume
IX were published. They contain several important contributions to the history of
India. In the first place, I may mention Dr. \"ogers edition of the A§oka inscription
and other epigraphs excavated by Mr. Oertel at Sarnath and mentioned in my report
for 1904-05.’-
Dr. Bloch contributes a paper on two inscriptions on Buddhist images belonging
to the Kushana period. One of them is the famous Bodhisattva image found by
Cunningham at Saheth Maheth, which makes it highly probable that that place is
the old Sravasti.’®
Anew
inscription of the Parivrajaka Saiiikshobha, dated Gupta Sarhvat 199
has been published by Pandit Hira l.al, and Professor Hultzsch has edited two
new grants of the Valabhl king Dhruvasena, from the Gupta years 320 and 321 res-
pectively.
Some
interesting contributions to the history of Kanauj are due to Professor
Kielhorn. In a paper on two grants of the time of Mahendrapala, in which mention
is made of some Chalukya feudatories who are not elsewhere known, he shows
that Mahendrapala was also known under the name of Mahendrayudha. This name
recalls the names of kingIndrayudha, who accordingto the Harivamia-Ptirana reigned
in Kanauj in A. D. 783-84, and of Chakrayudha, who succeeded to the throne when
Indraraja (Indrayudha) was defeated by Dharmapala, and whowas himself overcome by
Nagabhata, of whom we have an inscription dated in A. D. 81 5. Another paper deals
' An inspection ofthe collotypeaccompanyingDr.Vogel’s paperwill show that something has been s-ratched
i o s o c f u o r t i v t p h i I t e m io 7 m o n e n , i d r f i 9 i r a 6 n o t a m l el h v y / a n s b i e c c f h o o n r t v e he i t n n h c e a e an d m o s e m t h h o e o e r f t r t t h n h a i e a t n m s d c t e o r h n i e p o i t f s r i i r o h s a n t a l s s w o o o b f r e f d e R o n a u o j f n e a d r t n a hi s i s e n A d i s . n a v s n a c o r A g t i h h p o s e t i i r s m o h i n a S la a p r r o a n n r a c i t a t g h n h e c e y e h l in e l A s i s c n b r o g i e k p l a t o o i f n o g n p t . i s h l e la t r C o o . o r m i a g p A i a s n ' r a i c e f < l ^ o h n s t m e a lv y m i e o n r l s d e n o e m c f r c a t t r i i h k n n e s n
2 It isnot, perhaps, impossibleto derive the form Set directly from Sravasti. A Prakrit Saatthi miaht
Ani., XXAyll^p. iSo, and Ep> Ind., IX, p. 2Qi. [Dr. Bloch informs me that the modern name of the of
D . S t r r s . a w vA a s y t o i c m h t I o S if S th a S e h a e h n t e a h t - m h ^ e ^ ? r ^ e ^ al a l n y d ca w n n h o a t b t e S c t a a a h u k e s e t e n d M a t a s h h e a e l t m a o st a d s e le r t n C te u r f n o t n r o i m b n e o g f h c t a h h m a e n a g s n e p c e d i l e t i n n t t i o t n . a am l ‘ e i I n t g S u r s a a e l v e a m s s s t o I u , t n o d' f . o m ^ r e /r h ’ v J o e - r w V y . d d V i o e d u n b k t t f l h u y e l y ’ a h . a ] f d i d n s d

EPIGRAPHY. 207
with fi\'e copper-plate inscriptions of Govindachandra of the Gahadavala dynasty.
Professor Kielhorn has also republished the important Vasantgadh inscription of the
Paramara chief Puriiapala, who ruled at Mount Abu. The inscription is dated Vikrama
Sarhvat 1099, and Purnapala was accordingly a contemporary of the Paramara Bhoja,
famous in the history of Indian literature. Two poems ascribed to bim and written
in Maharashtrl Prakrit, which were discovered engraved on stone slabs at Dhar in
November 1903, have been edited by Professor Pischel. They are of small literary
value, and certainly not the work of Bhoja himself.
A new dynasty has been brought to light by Pandit Hira Lai in a paper on
the Ragholi plate of Jayavardhana II. He is said to belong to the Sailavarh§a, and
the editor shows reasons for identifying this family with the Gahgavaiti§a. The
family ruled in the Yindhyas, and their capital was probably in the Nagpur district.
Professor Hultzsch has published some inscriptions which throw light on the
history of the Alupas, a little known dynasty which appears to have existed as a ruling
family from the seventh down to the eleventh century.
The same scholar also publishes a copper-plate inscription of the Eastern
Chalukya Sarvalokairaya dated in A.D. 673, and contributes a new edition of the
Nausari plates of Srya§raya Siladitya, who belonged to the Gujarat branch of the
Chalukyas. The inscripiion is dated in Sarhvat 421, which must refer to the Kala-
churi era. Fresh information about the Vaghela line of the Chaulukyas is contained
in a paper coniributed by Professor Liiders about some Jaina inscriptions from Mount
Abu. They also contain genealogies of Tejahpala, the minister of the Chaulukya
king Viradhavala, and of the Paramaras of Chandravatl, who seem to be clearly
connected with the Mount Abu line, to which Purpapala belonged. One of them,
named YaSodhavala, must have been a feudatory of the Chaulukya Kumarapala.
He is stated to have killed Ballala, the lord of Malava, who is not elsewhere known
but who must belong to the troubled times following on the death of Ya§ovarman
(between A.D. 1 135 and 1144).
The history of the Rashtrakutas has been dealt with by Professor Hultzsch and
Mr. Bhandarlar. The former republishes the Undikavatika grant of Abhimanyu, which
probably belongs to the seventh century, and contains the oldest mention ofthe family.
Thebranch towhich Abhimanyu belonged, residedin Manapura, which probably took
its name from Abhimanyu' s great-grandfather Manaiika, “ the ornament of the
Rashtrakutas.” Dr. Fleet has identified Manapura with Manpur in Rewa, but
this identification is not quite certain Mr. Bhandarkar publishes a copper-plate
inscription of the Rashtrakuta Karkaraja, dated Saka 701, in the reign of Govinda II.
The inscription is of importance as it has been doubted whether Govinda II. actually
ascended the throne. The same scholar also republishes two inscriptions of Indraraja
III., dated Saka 836.
Some Pallava inscriptions have also been published in these parts. Professor
Hultzsch’s paper on the Pikira plate of Simhavarman has already been noticed in my
reportfor 904-05. Another Pallava grant published by him, which is now in the British
1
Museum, furnishes the names of the queen of the Yuvamaharaja Vijaya-Buddha-
varman, Chdrudevi, and of her son Buddhyahkura. The same scholar also publishes
a set of copper plates of the second year of Kumaravishnu II,, the son of Buddha-

.
2o8 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
varman, the grandson of Kumaravishnu I. and the great-grandson of Skandavarman.
The inscription seems to be a little later than the Pikira grant referred to above
and the kings mentioned in it may therefore be assumed to have reigned in the
interval between Sirnhavarman and Sirnhavishnu. Mr. Venkayya contributes a paper
on an inscription of the Pallava Dantivarman, whom he assigns to the original Pallava
family of Conjeeveram, which may have continued to reign in a part of the old Pallava
kingdom after the Ganga-Pallavas had taken possession of the greater portion of the
country. The inscription seems to belong to the third quarter ofthe eighth century.
Professor Kielhorn continues his calculation of Chola and Pandya dates. Of the
inscriptions dealt with by him 36 belong to the Cholas and ig to the Pandyas.
Finally, I shall mention Professor Liiders* new editionof the Taxila vase inscription
with an excellent mechanical reproduction, and Mr. G. Venkoba Rao’s edition of
two epigraphs, one in Grantha characters and the other in the Vafteluttu alphabet.
These two papers are of especial importance on account of the characters used in
these inscriptions, viz., Kharoshthi and Vattejuttu.
Of the new inscriptions copied during the year, very few belong to the Maurya
and Kushana periods. The most important ones have already been dealt with above
in connection with the Samath excavations (see pp. 95 and ff. ). Some additional
old Brahmi inscriptions have been discovered in caves in the Madras Presidency.
Such caves have been found at Marugaltalai, ten miles from Palamcottah in the Tinne-
velly District, at Anaimalai near Madura, and at Arittapatti near Melur in the Madura
District. The inscriptions appearto belongto thethird orsecond century B.C., but it has
not as yetproved possible to make anythingout ofthem. The language does not seem
to be Aryan. The opening word of the Anaimalai inscription is apparently iva, which
might perhaps be connected with Tamil tvai, ivan, idii. Impressions of these inscrip-
tions have been sent to Professor Liiders for publication in the Efigraphia Jndica.
About 15,000 coins of Nahapana were found during the year at Nasik. They
have been dealt with in a paper by the Reverend H. K. Scotth who show's that more
than 9,000 have been countersigned by Gotamiputra Satakarni.
The Gupta period is represented by some short inscriptions from Sarnath (see
above pp. 97 ff.) and by a fragmentary image inscription from Kasia. This latter, and
a seal-die with the legend '^Tt-Vishnudvtpaviharihhikshusanghasya have been dealt
with by Dr. Vogel, above p. 60. A name in early Gupta characters has alsobeenfound
engraved in a cave near Mandor in Rajputana. An inscription now deposited in
the Historic Office at Jodhpur in the Marwar State, but W'hich originally came from
an old temple of Dadhimati between the villages Goth and Manglod in the Nagaur
District, IS perhaps dated in the Gupta era (samvatsara 589). It contains the name
of an unknown king Druhlana.
Kiradu is a ruined town near Hatma, about 16 miles north-wmst of Badmer in
the Mallaui District. An inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya Bhimadeva
and dated Samvat 1235, Karttika ^udi 13, was copied in a raised temple there. It
relates how the wife of Tejapala, an officer of the Chohan Madanabrahma, who
again was a feudatory of Bhimadeva, installed a new image in the temple, after the
original one had been broken by the Turushkas, i.e. by the Muhammadans. It
' Journal ofthe Bombay Branch ofthe R. A. Socy., LXII, p. 32i and ff

EPIGKAPHV. Op
2
seems tempting to identify Tejapala with Tejahpala or Tejapala, the minister of the
Vaghela Chaulukya king \nradhavala, who built the Neminatha temple on Mount
Abii.^ The family of the latter is stated to have come from Anahilapura, t.e.
Anahilapataka, the residance of Bhimadeva. It professed the Jaina faith and was
of the lineage of the Pragvatas. Tejapala’s wife Avas AnupamadevL The consecra-
tion of the Neminatha temple took place in Sariivat 1287, and, accordingly, 42 years
after the date of our inscription. This fact perhaps speaks against the identification.
Moreover it might be urged that the wife of a Jaina would not be likely to dedicate
an image in a Siva temple. The question of identification must, therefore, be left
open.
Some new Inscriptions belonging to the family of the Pratiharas have been
discovered during the year. In the outer porch of a Jaina temple at Osia is an
inscription of the Vikrama year 1013, which mentions that the temple was originally
built by the Pratihara Vatsaraja of Kanauj, for whom Jinasena’s Jainaharivam^a
furnishes the date A.D. 783-84. An inscription of Vatsaraja’s son Nagabhatta
dated Vikrama Sariivat 872, was found on the sabhamandapa of a temple in
Buchkala.^ We have seen above that Nagabhata conquered Chakrayudha of
Kanauj, and the succession must have been uncertain in the preceding years.
Two inscriptions of a feudatory Pratihara family have already been published
several years ago by Professor Kielhorn. One of them refers to a chieftain Bauka/
and the other to his brother Kakkuka.^ The former is now found in the fort wall of
Jodhpur, but has almost certainly been brought from Mandor. Professor Kielhorn
reads the date as Sarhvat 4, but Mr. Bhandarkar has shown good reasons for reading
894. The other is dated Sariivat 918, and hails from the Mata-kl sal temple in
Ghatiyala. In the Khdkhu devld temple in the same place Mr. Bhandarkar has now
found three new inscriptions of Kakkuka, on a red sandstone pillar, dated Sarhvat
918.® We learn that Kakkuka put up two pillars, one at Maddodara (Mandor) and
another at Rohirhsaka (Ghatiyala). The former has not been recovered, but in a
cave near Mandhr is a fragment of an inscription belonging to the tenth century, which
mentions a son of Kakka. Now, Kakka was Kakkuka’s father, and the son intended
is perhaps Kakkuka.
Some new inscriptions refer to the family of the Paramaras of Chandra vati. A
short genealogy is given in an inscription found in the Pattanarayana temple at
Girvad (Mount Abu). It only goes back to Dharavarsha, whose son, Somasiriiha,
was the father of Krisbnadeva, whose son Jaitrakarna, is said to have recovered
his kingdom from his enemies. The oldest date as yet forthcoming for Dharavarsha
Samvat 1220, is furnished by an inscription discovered on a stone now deposited
in a shed near the Ka 4i ViSvelvara temple at Kayadra, Sirohi State. Another
inscription from the Madhusudana temple near Mingthala (Mount Abu) couple?
his name with the date Sarhvat 1245. The last known date for this king is-
’ Compare Liiders, Ep. Ind., VIII, pp. 200 and ff.
2 Editedby Bhandarkar. Ep. Ind,, IX, 198 f^.
3 J, R. A. S. 1894, p.4ff.
^ J. R. A. S. 1895, p. 516if.
^ See Ep. Jnd-i IX, 278if
2 E

210 ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
Sarhvat 1274. A quite new family of Paramaras ha; been brought to light by an
inscription from Kiradu, dated Sarhvat 1218.
A new branch of the Chahamana dynasty is described in an inscription found on
the front wall ofthe sahhamandapa of the temple of Kiasaria in the Parbatsar District.
Before leaving the inscriptions of Northern India, mention should be made of < i
inscribed stones which were transferred from Dr. Stein’s office to the Archaeological
Superintendent of the Frontier Circle. One of them, which records the construction
of a tank near Navagrama (perhaps in the Hazara District) by Vanhadaka, in the name
of his father I§vara, the son of Suradi, is of interest on account of its date. The tank
is said to have been constructed laukya-samiach-chhara-tate gaja-trimsadhtke sam-
'vat 38 karitika-huti 13 sanau, i.e. in the Laukya-year 538, onthe13th tithioi the bright
fortnight of Karttika, on a Saturday. This date, which must refer to the Laukika era
usual in Kashmir, is of considerable interest. In the first place, the promiscuous use
of numerals and numeralwords such as sara (arrow) forfive and^aya: (elephant) foreight,
is not common. Then, as is well known, the hundreds are usually omitted in dates
referring to this era. This is so universally the case that it has recently been asserted
that “ if in a date the hundreds are mentioned, it is absolutely certain that it cannot be
referred to the Laukika era.” * Our inscription, which is expressly referred to the
Laukya, i.e., Laukika era, proves that this statement cannot be upheld, and KaSmiri
Pandits such as Mukund Ram inform me that the hundreds are sometimes actually
expressed lake, in common life. It is here of interest that the hundreds are omitted in
the repetition of the date by means of figures. The date corresponds to Saturday, the
17th October 1461. The inscription, which is written in ^arada letters, is also of
interest on account of the use of raised letters. Another Sarada inscription of the
same collection seems to have been a memorial stone. It does not contain any names
or any date, but is apparently a little later than the one just described. It is written
in Prakrit and impresses upon us the instability of everything only fame can make
;
one immortal. The rem iining inscriptions of this collection are too fragmentary to
yield any result.
As usual, the bulk of the new inscriptions comes from South India. An excellent
analysis has been printed in Mr. Venkayya’s Annual Report, and I shall here only men-
tion some of the most important facts brought to light, referring to the historv of
the Vijayanagara kings, the Pandyas andthe Cholas.
It was known before that Kampa I., the son of Sarhgama I. of the first Vijaya-
nagara dynasty,was the founder of a branch in Nellore, and that his son Sannyama II
was reigning in Saka 1278, The new inscriptions copied during the year under review
introduce us to another son of Kampa, called Vira§ri-Savaqna-Odeya, whose capital
was at Udayagiri. His inscriptions are dated §aka’ 1273, 1275 and 1283, and his
accession took place ^aka 1270-71. It therefore seems as if the two brothers were
reigning simultaneously.
Kampa’s brother Bukka 1. is in an inscription brought back to Saka I274-A.D.
•352*53) 3’2d he is stated to have ruled at Dorasamudra and Penugonda. Mr. Rice
has published a still earlier inscription of this kingMated ^aka i266=A.D.
1344-45,
’ See R. D._Banorji,Ir.d. Ant., Vol.XXXVII, 190S. p. 28.
* Epi^raphia Carnaiica X, Mg. 158-

—
EPIGRAPHY.
21
I
where the donee was the Telugu poet Nachana S5ma. This latter inscription also-
mentions the foundation of Viiayanagara by Vidyaranya.
For Devaraya I., whose coronation took place in A.D. 1406, we had formerly
dates down to 1410. Anew inscription couples his name with ^aka r34.o=A.D.
1417-18.
About his son Vira-Vijaya, we learn that he was also called Vijaya-Bukka. He
was made viceroy by his father at Mulbagal in Mysore sometime before A.D. 1408.
According to Nuniz, he reigned six years in ^Hiayanagara, where we find him as king
in Saka i344=A.D. 1422-23. He is probably identical with the Vira Bukka mentioned
in an inscription dated in A.D.1423-24. His son Devaraya II. is stated to have
begun his reign in Saka i343=A.D.1420-21. If Nuniz’ statement is correct, he must
have been anointed during his father’s reign.
The last inscription of Devaraya is dated in A.D. 1446. In the reign of his
brother’s son Mallikarjuna, there must have been an invasion by the Gajapati king
of Orissa. It is alluded to in the drama Gahgadasaprata-pavilasa, and the disturbances
caused by the raid are referred to in two inscriptions. The Gajapati king in
question must be Kapile§vara of Orissa (1434-70).
In my last report, I mentioned that the date of the Pandya Varaguna had been
fixed at A.D. 862-63. Some additional information about the old Pandyas can be
gathered from two sets of copper plates from Sinnamanur in the Madura District.,
One of them refer 6. s to a son of Arikesarin Asamasamari Alahghyavikranian Akala-
kalan Maravarman, the son of Jayantavarman. The prince intended was probably
Jatilavarttian as in the Madras Museum plates. The Sanskrit portion of the second
set, w’hich perhaps belongs to the first quarter of the tenth century, gives the following
genealogy
:
1. Arikesarin.
I
2. Jatila.
3. Rajasimha L
1
4. Varaguna.
5. Maravarman Srivallabba Ekavira.
!
Varagunavarman. 7. Parantaka Viranarayaua..
8. Rajasimha II.
The Tamil portion substitutes Parahku§an for Arikesarin (No. i) and passes from
him to his grandson Rajasimha. Maravarman (No. 5) is called Parachakrakolahala,
and No. 7 figures as §rl-Parantakan ^adaiyan, while Rajasirnha II. (No. 8) has the
epithets Raja^ikhamani Mandaragaurava Abhimanameru.
Arikesarin, who is called Maravarman in the Madras Museum plates, claims to
have defeated the Pallavas at Samkaramahgai. Now the Pallava king Nandivarman
in the Udayendiram grant claims a victory at Batnkaragrama, w'hich is probably
simply.ai Sanskrit translation of Sartikaramangai. If these two statements refer to the
same event, as they probably do, Arikesarin must belong to the middle of the eighth,
century.
2 E 2

,
ARCM.EOLOGICAL REPORT-
.2I 2
The genealogy given above shows that there were two kings of the name
Varaguna. The later of the two, Varagunavarman (No. 6) is then probably the king
whose accession took place in A.D. 862-3.
Maravarman (No. 5) is stated to have conquered, among others, Maya Pandya.
This statement points to the conclusion that more than one branch of the family was
ruling at the same time. This inference is also strengthened by other considerations,
and, on the whole, several points in the history of the Pandyas still remain to be
elucidated by future finds.
Towards the end of the ninth century, the Cholas became the paramount power
in South India. Before that time there was no Chofa kingdom of importance, and
an inscription from ElvanaSur in South Arcot, which was copied in 1906 and which
apparently belongs to the ninth century, seems to show that the Pandyas made their
influence felt even in the Pallava country.
The list of Chola kings represented in this year’s collection opens with Parantaka
I., who figures in more than forty records, ranging from his 3rd to his 41st year. His
accession tookplace between the 15th January and the 25th July 907. An inscription
copied in 1906 in the Manikanthesvara temple at Tirumalpuram in the North Arcot
District, informs us that his father, probably Aditya I., reigned 22 years and died at
Tondaimanarrur, and that he himself was known as Parakesarivarman “ who took
Madirai and I]am (Ceylon).” Parantaka seems to have been at war with the
Pandyas at least three times. His first expedition must have taken place early in
his reign, for the titles Madiraikonda and Madhurmtaka occur in inscriptions of
the third year of his reign. A second war is referred to in records of his 12th year.
After this engagement, in which the Pandyas were assisted by the king of Ceylon,
Parantaka assumed the title of Samgrama-Rdghava a Rama in warfare. After a
third war, towards the end of his reign, he assumed the title Maduralyum Ilam-
um konda, ‘he, who took Madura and Ceylon,’ which occurs in inscriptions ranging
from his 39th to 41st year.
The interval between Parantaka I., the last of whose inscriptions is dated in his
-41st year (A.D. 947-8), and Rajaraja I. Rajakesarivarman, who ascended the throne
between the 25th June and the 25th July 985, is still very unsatisfactorily known.
Parantaka’s son Kajaditya, whoAvas killed about A.D. 949-50 in the battle at Takkolam
against the Rashtrakuta Krishuaraja III., probably did not reign after his father. An
inscription of the 31st year of Parantaka on the west wall of the ^ivalskanatha temple
a Gramain shows that Rajaditya then had an army of his own. He had at least two
brothers, Gandaraditya and Arirhjaya, of both of whom we apparently possess
inscriptions. Arimjaya’s son Parantaka II. was called Sundara Chola, and an inscrip-
tion of his 5th year is found in the ^ivayoganathasvamin temple at Tiruvi§alQr in the
Tanjore District. It is, however, built into the temple and could not be copied in full.
His son Aditya II. Karikala has been identified by Professor Hultzsch,* with the
Parakesarivarman “ who took the head of Vira Pandya” of the Hkkal inscription,
though this king would be expected to have the name Rajakesarivarman. Two new
inscriptions copied during the year belong to the reign of the same Parakesarivarman.
South-Indian Inscriptions, Vol. HI, No. 14, p. 21.

—
EPIGRAPHY.
213
A feudatory of Aditya II. was perhaps the Parthivendradivarman “who took
the head of Vira Pandya,” whose name occurs in seven inscriptions copied during
the year. Another priiice, Anaiyaman or Paramandaladittan, must have been a
feudatory of his again. He is statedto have belonged to the Sagara-Virata dynasty,
and a short genealogy of his family is given, Virata, instead of which we also find
Ilada, must be the name of a country, probably in middle India. It cannot have
anything to do with
Rajaraja I. began to reign between the 25th June and the 25th July 985. An
inscription of his fourth year gives him the name Mummadi Choladeva. Another,
of his nth year, records the gift of a lamp to the shrine of Hanumat at
Tirumalpuram, and thus shows that the worship of Hanumat had been established in
the Tamil country in the tenth century at least. The last known inscription of this
king is dated in his 29th year.
From the time of Rajendra Chola I., who began to reign between the 27th March
and 7th July 1012, and onwards, Chola inscriptions in Tamil have been found in
PuhganurinNorth Arcotand adjoining districts. We learn from these and other records
that Jayahgonda Chola-mandalam or Tondai-nadu extended in the north from
Puiiganur up to the borders of the Nellore District.
The inscriptions discovered in Burma during the year under review are of little
historical interest. Mr, Taw Sein Ko, in his Report, uses some of them in support of
his theory that Burmese Buddhism was originally introduced from India in the
Mahayanist form. I regret to be unable to see that any proofs have been adduced
which make this hypothesis plausible. There can be no doubt that Burmese pilgrims
from the earliest times visited the sacred places in India, and such Indian influence as
can be pointed out can be sufficiently explainedby the intercourse which must naturally
result from the fact that Northern India was the birthplace of Buddhism. I am
however, here only dealing with the history of Burmese Buddhism, so far as
epigraphy is concerned, and I feel bound to say that the fresh proof which Mr. Taw
Sein Ko has found in the legend on a votive tablet from Kyinlo, about eight miles to
the south-east of Nyaung-u, in my opinion does not weigh much. The inscription
runs sabbanniitahanassa fachchayo. Taw Sein Ko translates “ the (attainment of
the) basis of supreme knowledge”, and adds that this expresses the pious aspirations
of a Mahayanist. It is, however, sufficient to refer to Childer’s Dictionary in order to
-show that sabbamiitanma is quite common in Buddhist Pali texts, and it seems
impossible to use the inscription as proof of anything but the fact that Pali, the sacred
language of Southern Buddhism, was in common use in Burma, a fact which does
not need to be proved.
Before leaving the subject of Burmese epigraphy it will be necessary to add
some remarks on a new theory about the development of the Burmese alphabet set
forth inthe Superintendent’s Report for 1906-07, where we read,
' “Priorto the eleventh century A. D., thelapidary art appears to have beenunknown
at Pagan, for no stone inscriptions antedating the rise of Anawrata have been found.
This has created a belief among writers on Burma that, before the conquest of
Thaton by Anawrata, the Burmese did not possess an alphabet, and much less a
literature. Such a belief has, however, been refuted by theresearches recently made

ARCH/EOLOGICAL report.
214
into the origin and development of the Burmese alphabet, and the broad facts elicited
—
may be summarised as follows
;
“ Third century /4.Z).—Burma was conquered by the Kingdom of Shu, one of the
Three Kingdoms into which China was then divided; and she became tributary to
China.’'
—
“ Fourthcentury A. D. The Mahayanistform of Buddhism was introduced into
Burmaby Chinese missionaries, who taught itin Chinese. No Chinese epigraphic remains
have, so far, been discovered, with the single exception of the Chinese inscription set
up by the Mongols at Pagan in the thirteenth century A. D.
—
“ Fifth-Sixth centuries A. D. The Chinese of the South were engaged in an
incessant struggle with the Tartars of the North, and Chinese control and influence
became considerably w’eakened, and Burma escaped from the thraldom of Chinese
•
hieroglyphs and ideographs.^ The Indian form of Mahayanism was introduced by
Indian missionariesfrom Northern and Eastern India, who taught it in Sanskrit, using
the alphabet of the Gupta period.^
—
“ Seventh-Eighth centuries. A.D. In 622 A. 0 under the auspices of King
.,
Srongtsan Gampo, the Tibetanalphabetwas invented on the basis of the Lanca letters, a
variety of the Gupta character, and an active religious propaganda was pursued. In
the eighth century, Nanchao, the Shan kingdom of Talifu, annexed Burifta, andbecame
a medium of communication between Tibet and Burma, and Tibetan religious influences
penetrated into Pagan.
" The Bon religion or Shamanism, and, later on, Lamaism or Mahayanism with a
peculiar hierarchy -superadded, were introducedinto Burma from Tibet. The Tibetan
Bon priests or “ Bon-gyepa” were the precursors of the Burmese pdngyi ofthe present
day. The new systems of faith were engrafted on the prevailing Indian form of
Mahayanism. The Tibetan priests left no appreciable impression on the language
and literature of Burma but the Burmese alphabet, judging from the arrangement of
;
the letters, and the sounds accorded to them, appears to be a blending of the Tibetan
and Sanskrit systems.'*
—
Ninth-Tenth centuries A. D. Tantrism was introduced from Bengal through
Assam and Manipur, and, possibly also, through .Arakan. Its priests, called “ Aris ”
favoured Naga-worship, and the Jus frimae metis prevailed amongst them. They
continued to use the Gupta alphabet, as well as the characters of the Pala dynastv of
Bengal (Soo to 1050 A. D.) Twm gold plates have been found at Prome, which are
inscribed in the Eastern Chalukyan character, a Dravidian script of this period.‘‘
—
“Eleventh centuryA. D. Hinayanism or Buddhism of the Southern School,who-e
vehicle is Pali, was introduced into Pagan after Anawrata’s conquest of Thaton in 1057
A. D. Copies of the Tripitaka in that language, were obtained from Thaton and
Ceylon.
* As remarked bytheauthor above, there are no proofs that they wereever used in Burma. Nor is there anv
evidencetoshow thatthe Mah.ayanist form of Buddhism was introduced from China inthefourthcenturv. Thisis
simplyaconclusiondrawnbythe authorfrom theChineseconquest, aboutthe duration ofwhichwe knownothing,
S), V . 1 —
- Thisis amereguess andnot supported on goodarguments. S. IC.
^ None ofthese statements about Tibetan influence havebeen proved or even-made probable. S, K.
The identification oftheAriswith Tantricpriestsis a mere guess.—S. K.

D
1
EPIGRAPHY. 215
—
“ Twelfth century A.D. Jain, Saiva, and \"aishnava influences completely dis-
appeared at Pagan, as evidenced by the Kyaukku Temple, which was built in 1188
A. D. An outburst ofarchitectural energy took place, which lasted from the eleventh to
the thirteenth centuries A. D. Pure Hinayanism as well as Burmese epigraphy
became firmly established.
—
"'Thirteenth century A. . The Mongols under Kublai Khan overran Burma in
1284 A.D. The Burmese empire broke up, and the Shans and Takings asserted their
Independence. These political upheavals produced no modification in the Burmese
alphabet, which had been fully developed, and had assumed a permament form.
“ The conclusion is inevitable that the Burmese alphabet was primarily based on
the Gupta script of the fifth century A.!3 ., which was imported overland through
Assam and Manipur, and, possibly, also through Arakan, and that it was modified, to
some extent, by the Eastern Chalukyan character of the tenth century A. D., which
reached Pagan by sea through the Takings . Pagan latterly received her letters and
religion from Aryan or Northern India, while Pegu received hers from the Dravidians
ofthe South. It, was in the eleventh century A.D. after the conquest of Thaton by
Anawrata, that the Aryan and Dravidian systems were harmoniously blended at Pagan
and that thenceforward Burmese civilization assumed a definite aspect.”
It will be seen^ that the arguments adduced are mainly based on the supposed
history of Buddhism in Burma, and it may perhaps be objected that so. long as this
history itself is not known, it is not safe to base any conclusions on it, It seems as if
the author is inclined to assume that several foreign alphabets have influenced the
development of the Burmese character.
The Chinese conquest would have left its marks on the general tendencies
towards Mahayanism which might have paved the way for a North Indian form of
Buddhism transmitted in Sanskrit and written in a North-Indian alphabet. In the
Indian Antiquary p. 21iff), Mr. Taw Sein Ko has put together some few
,
Buddhist terms which, he maintains, have been borrowed from China and which rnight
be considered as traces of Chinese influence on Burmese Buddhism. Considering the
fact, however, that Burmese and Chinese are closely connected languages, and the
-extreme uncertainty of some of the equations, the list at the utmost proves that there
has been intercourse between Burmese and Chinese Buddhism at some period. And
.at all events, Chinese influence cannot have played any role in the development
of the Burmese alphabet, and the author does not seem to think so either.
The assumptionthat the alphabet of the Gupta period was introduced by the
Indian missionaries, who, we are told, taught Mahayanism in Burma in the 5th and
6th centuries, is based on Phayre, who says that Pali inscriptions in Devanagari
characters of the time of the Guptas have been found among the ruins of Tagoung.
I have not seen any inscription answering this description, and Mr. Taw Sein Ko, In
an unpublished paper, declares that he has never found any. The discovery of
votive tablets written in Indian characters would not, of course, prove anything. They
might havebeen brought back from India by pilgrims. I am, therefore, unable to attach
Duringmy tour in Burma, in 1907 , communicatedtheremarks which follow to Mr, Taw Sein Ko, and
advisedhimtopostponethe publishingofhisnotes onthe Burmese alphabet till he would be able to adduce
...betterproofs.—'S. K,

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
2i6
anv importance to the argument. If Mr. Phayre’s statement is correct, it only shows
that a form of Gupta characters was used in writing Pali, but it, by no means, show's
that the character was the precursor of the Burmese alphabet. Still less can be
inferred from the find of an inscription in an unknowm language (Old Siamese ?) at
Halingyi near Shwebo.
1 now come to the alleged influence of the Tibetan alphabet, and I must confess
that I am unable to see any traces of it, The fact that the Burmese character has
retained even such Indian letters which are useless for wTiting Burmese and which are
not found in Tibetan, proves sufficiently that the Burmese alphabet is derived from an
Indian one, and there is absolutely nothing to point to any influence exercised by the
Tibetan character. Those points in which the Burmese and Tibetan characters agree
are such as are common to all Indian scripts. The fact that the Burmese alphabet
possesses all the sounds necessary for wTiting Pali, while some signs wdiich are neces-
sary in Sanskrit are missing, seems to make it almost certain that it has been borrowed
from the script used in Burma for noting down the sacred language of Southern
Buddhism, a supposition which agrees with the views commonly held in Europe. It
is in thorough agreement with the fact that the legend on the gold plates from Prome
mentioned by the authorunder the ninth and tenth centuries is in Pali. The remaining
remarks made in connection with these plates have no bearing on the history of the
Burmese alphabet, as there is no evidence to show^ that the Gupta alphabet and the
characters of the Pala kings w^ere used in Burma during this period.'
The whole deduction about the history of the Burmese alphabet before Anawrata
must, therefore, be dismissed till the author furnishes better proofs.
In Anawrata’s times the Burmese alphabet was very little different from the
alphabet then used for Pali. The earliest inscription found at Pagan, on a square stone
pillar near the Myazedi Pagoda, which was erected 1084 -A- l^-. shows side by side
the same text in Pali and Burmese language, and the difference in character is so
insignificant that there can be no doubt that both must be classed together as one
single form of script. The remarks made above about the adaptation in the Burmese
alphabet of signs which are necessary for writing Pali but not for writing Burmese, in
ray opinion show's that this script was originally devised for the purpose of w'riting
Pali. And there cannot, moreover, be any doubt that this Pali alphabet must be
derived from a South Indian character.
Sten Konow.
* See my remarksin my Reportfor 1905-06.

;
THE PALLAVAS.
T^HE
word Pallava is apparently the Sanskrit form of the tribal name Pahlava
or Pahnava of the Puranas. The Pahlavas are described as a northern or north-
western tribe ^ wTose territory lay somewhere between the river Indus and Persia.
They were conquered by Sagara but spared on the intercession of his family
priest Vasistha, Inchapter 64 of the Santiparvan of the Mahahharata, king Mandhatr
questions the god Indra about the duties to be practised by the Pahlavas^ among other
tribes, ^ the several castes that originated from the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, the
Vai§yas and Sudras that lived in the dominions of Aryan kings. In the Harivam^a^
the Pahnavas ^are said to have been Ksatriyas originally, but become degraded in
later times. They are mentioned here along with the Sakas, Yavanas and Kambojas
and their chief characteristic was the beard ® which Sagara permitted them to wear.
In the Visnu-Purana^ the Yavanas, Pahlavas and Kambojas are said to have been
originally Ksatriya tribes who became degraded by their separation from Brahmanas
and their institutions. ^ In Manu, the Pahlavas are mentioned along with the Pundra-
kas, Dravidas, Kambojas, Yavanas, Sakas and other allied tribes. These were all
Ksatriyas originally, but gradually became degraded by their omission of the sacred
rites and transgressing the authority of the Brahmanas. ®
1 In chapter 9 ofthe Bhismaparvanofthe Mahdbkdrata^thQ Pahlavas are mentioned among the barbarians
{mleccha-jdtayah).
2 The form adopted in the edition ofthe epic which is beingpublished by Messrs. T. R. Krsnacarya and
T. R. VyasacaryaisPallava. The editors saythat their text is based mainly on South-Indian manuscripts.
3 Theseare the Yavanas, Kiratas, Gandharas, Ginas, Sabaras, Barbaras, Sakas, Tusaras, Kahkas, Andhras,
Madrakas, Paundras {Usirasin South-Indian texts), Pulindas, Ramatnas and Kambojas
isthereading of South-Indian texts.
^XIV, verses 15 to 19.
5 IntheRd^ndyana (I, 55, verse 18) the Pahlavas are said to have emanated from the bellowing of the
miraculous cow Nandini, which belongedto the sage Vasistha.
®Thebeards ofthe Westerns {i.e. the VavansLS), arealso mentioned by Kalidasa in his Raghuvamsa, IV, 63.
7 Muirs Sanskrit Texts, Vol. II, p. 259, andInd.Ant., Vol. IV,p, 166.
^
we[\ ii
ftnjcTT ij X. 45-44

218 ARCHyf;OLOGICAL REPORT.
The foregoing references may be taken to show that the Pahlavas must have
'
been a ruling tribe already in Puranic times. The admission that they did not con-
form to Brahmanical practices shows that they were either foreigners actually or were
connected with them. In case they were foreigners, their immigration must have
taken place in very early times.
The word fallava means in Sanskrit ‘ a sprout, ’ and the dynasty w'hich bore the
name claims to have been so called, because king Pallava, the progenitor of the race,
was “ suddenly born to him {i.e. Aivatthaman) on a litter of sprouts {^pallava) in the
words of the KaSakudi plates. ^ The form pallava occurs in two of the earliest
inscriptions of the dynasty ® and Palava in the third. ^ These three records are in
Prakrit. The word pahlava, from which the name pallava appears to be derived, is
believed to be a corruption of Parthava, ® Parthiva® or Parthia, and Dr. Bhandarkar
calls the Indo-Parthians Pahlavas.^ The territories of the Indo-Parthians lay in
Kandahar and Seistan,® but extended during the reign of Gondophares (about A.D. 20
to 60) into the Western Punjab and the valley of the lower Indus.® The Andhra king
Gotamiputra, whose dominions lay in the Dakhan,^® claims to have defeated about A.
D. 130 the Palhavas along with the Sakas and Vavanas.®^ In the Junagadh inscription
of the Ksatrapa king Rudradaman belonging to about A.D. 150, mention i.s made of a
Pahlava mini.ster of his named Suvi^akha.^^ The Pallavas of the East Coast (who
finally settled in Kahcipuram) were the political successors of the Andhras in the
Telugu country.^®
Consequently, the Pallavas must have existed during the period of Andhra supre-
macy, either as their allies or as their foes. The Ksatrapa king Rudradaman, whose
minister was the Pahlava SuviSakha, wagedwar against his own son-in-law, the Andhra
king Pulumayi II., who is credited with the removal of the capital to Paithan on the
* In the description ofthe ofking Raghu, Kalidasaseems to locate the Yavanas somewhere in
the West (of India). Raghu is said to have advanced from Trikuta by an inland route to conquer the
Parasikas. The conquestofthe Yavanas followedthat ofthe Parasikas; Raghii’vamsa, IV, 59 to 65.
2 South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 355,verse 17.
3Ep, Ind., Vol. I, p. 5, text line 2, and Vol. VIII, p. 145,text line 2.
^Ibid., VoL VI, p. 86,text line 2.
» Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II,p. 317/., and Ind. Ant, Vol. X, p. 224. The Parthians appearto have
establishedthemselves in the Kabul valley about B.C. i6i {ibid., Vol. XVIII, p. 126).
'Parthivawasthename ofabranch ofthe Kausikas descended through thesage Visvamitra from Kuiika
whowasbroughtup amongthe Pahlavas. InthePahladpurpillarinscription, a king named Sisupala bears the
t X it 5 l C e , " ^ p p p S r . e o e t 3 e h 5 c i 6 t s o t a r o rt o 4 i f 0 c 8 l t . e he en a ti r t m l y ed o “ f A the pe P e a p rt i h n i t v o as th ; e ” e D a r r . ly F h l i e s e t t o ’ r s y Gu of pt I a nd I i n a sc ” ri p p u t b i l o i n s s h , ed p. in 25 t 0 l . ie y. Bo. Br. R. A S ’ Vol
® Prof. E. J. Rapson’s Coins, 15.
Mr. V. A. Smith’s Catalogueof Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, p. 36. From the Periplus com-
a
p
t
os
w
e
a
d
r
ab
a
o
m
u
o
t
ng
A.
t
D
h
.
em
8
s
0
e
,
l
w
v
e
es
le
{
a
I
r
n
n
d.
t
A
h
n
a
t
t
.,
th
V
e
ol
I
.
nd
V
u
I
s
II
v
,
al
p
l
.
ey
33
w
8
a
).
sunderthepower ofthe Parthians, who were continuall^v
o
B
f
ay
My
o “
s
f
o
B T
r
e h
e
n e g
a
a
n
A l n
d
d t
i
h o
n
r i
t
a t
h
s s
e
s e o
n
x u
o
t r
r
c e
t
e n
h
d i
a
e n
s
d t
f
h t
a
e h
r
ei W
a
r e
s
s a
t
t u
h
t e
e
h r o n
r
r
i
i
v
G t
e
h y
r
a a t
N
l s
a
o .
r
n
b
g
a
I t
d
n h
a
e t
.
h c e ou s r o s u e th o , f t t h h e e ir G d o o d m a i v n a i r o i n f w r a o s m c i a ts rr m i o e u d t i h nt o o n th t e he no s r h t o h re e s rn of ^Dar t t h s e
'^1“’ P- Andhra king’s victoryoverthesetribes was not individual but
col,l,ective. The Sakasheadedby Nahapana mighthavebeenthepredominant
partnersof thecoalition.
Ksat « ra I p b a id k ., in V g o - l. VIII, p.49. Suvisakha was not mer M elyaminister butthe governoroftwo rprovinces ' under tuhiec
a a t ls D o ha s f e i e ak p a , (j 2 a 2 J 1 , , (^ b .^ e ? l . ow A , ma n r ot a e va 3. ti m th _ e Gunt t u h r e e D a i r s l t i r e i s c t t), the capital hi o t f he t r h t e o A k n n d ow h n r , as ha ; d Rb ^ a h g i o d ver V n o o l r V un I der n h « i c m »

^
THE PALLAVAS.
319
^
Godavari.^ The Ksatrapa king was victorious but did not pursue his advantage to the
uttermost. Perhaps it was this war that brought about (in some manner at present
unknown) the removal or migration “ of the Pahlavas (or Palhavas\ who had been in
the service of the Ksatrapa king, to the eastern portion of the Andhra dominions.®
They must have remained here a pretty long time before acquiring sovereignty. Irr
fact, the Pahlavas (or Palhavas) must have moved into the Godavari and Kistna deltas
about the middle of the second century. The Andhras ceased to be the ruling
power in the third century A.D. * andtheir place on the East Coast was apparently
taken by the Palhavas, who seem to have transformed themselves into Pallavas. If this-
surmise be proved by future researches, the Pallavas of Kancipuram must have come
originally from Persia, though the interval of time which must have elapsed since
they left Persiamust be several centuries.® As the Persians are generally known to
^ Mr. V. A. Smith’s Early History ofIndia second edition, p. 200.
- It is true no tradition hasbeen preserved of this migration. But it mustbeborne in mind thatalreadyin
Puranic times, theyhadbeen settled in India andwere lookedupon practically as indigenous Ksalriyas.
^ A somewhat similar case is the movement ofthe Calukyasinto the Godavari delta during the reign of
Piilikesin II. from Badami in the Bombay Presidency. Here,thecircumstanceswhich brought aboutthe moveare
known. A branch ofthe Calukyas established themselvesinthe Godavari and the Kistna deltas, whilethe main,
line continued at Badami. In all probability, thewhole Pablava tribe did not moveto the East Coast, but only a
detachment of them. Fromthewayin which the Indian astronomer Varahamihira mentionsthe Pahlavas, it may
beconcludedthat the major portion of the triberemained in their original territory.
^ Mr. V. A. Smith’s Early History ofIndia^ p. 203. Mr. Smith remarks thatthe third
centuryA.D.is one of the dark spaces in thespectrum of Indianhistory, andalmostevery event of that time is.
concealedfrom viewbyan impenetrableveil ofoblivion.^’ Accordingly, we cannot expectto find any record of
themigrationofthe Pallavas into the Telugucountryor oftheirriseto power.
° In the second edition ofhis EarlyHistory ofIndia, Mr.VincentSmith discredits the theory accepted in
thefirsteditionthatthe Pallavasof Southern Indiawere from Persia. On p. 404. he states that the origin and-
affinities of the Pallavasremain obscure but remarks lateron (p.423) that recentresearch does not support the
theoryofthe foreign origin ofthe Pallavas. Hethinks itmorelikely that the Pallavaswerea tribe, clan orcaste
which wasformed inthenorthern part ofthe Madras Presidency, possibly in the Vefigi country, between the-
Krsnaand Godavaririvers (p. 423). This part of the Telugu country was included in the dominions of the
Andhras. Iftheclanwas actually formed there, the process must have commenced long before the Andhras
ceasedto betherulingpower. In fact, the clan must have acquired a distinct political status even while the
Andhraswereinpower. Thus we would have two tribes bearing almost the same name, the Palhavas in
Western India, whom the Andhra king Gotamiputra defeatedalongwith the Sakas and Yavanas, and the Palla-
vasinthedelta of the Godavari, whose political relationship to the Andhras would remain to be disclosed
by future researches. Why the indigenous tribe which was formed in the Godavari delta calleditself
Pallava, a name which wouldlead to their being mistaken forthe Palhavas of Western India is a question
which, to mymind, mustbesatisfactorilyanswered before the theory ofindigenous origin can beaccepted. One
pointwhich mightbetaken asaproofoftheforeign origin ofthe Pallavas has tobe noted here. The indigenous
Ksatriyatribes (oratleastthose which werelooked upon as such) belonged either to the solar or to the lunar
race. Forinstance, the Colas belonged tothe solarraceand the Pandyasto the lunar. The Ceras seem to have
belongedto the solar race. The Calukyas—both the Eastern and Western—were of the lunar race. The
Rastrakutaswerealso of thesame race. Ontheotherhand, the Pallavastrace theirdescentfromthe god Brahma
but not from theSun or the Moon, though they are admitted to have been Ksatriyas. Besides, none of the
ancient kings mentionedin the Puranas figuresinthe ancestry ofthe Pallavas. The indigenoustribes, however,,,
alwaystracedtheir ancestry from some of the famous kings knownfromthe Puranas. The Cslas, for instance
claimed Manu, Iksvaku, Mandhatf, Mucukunda and Sibi; the Pandyas were descended from the emperor
Pururavas;’the Cerashad Sagara, Bhagiratha, Raghu, Dasarathaand Rama fortheir ancestors. TheCalukyas
had along list of Puranic sovereigns in their ancestry. The Rastrakutas were descendants of Yadu and
belonged to the Satyaki branch crcla . n. The Ganga kings ofKalihganagarawere descended from the Moon
andclaimed Pururavas, Ayus, Nahusa, YayatiandTurvasufor their ancestors [Ind.Ant., Vol. XVIII, p. 170).
The Western Gahgas ofTalakad wereapparentlyof thesolar race and had Iksvaku for their ancestor (Mr.
,
Rice’s Mysore Gaz.etteer, Vol. I, p.308). The only king mentioned in the mythical genealogy of the Pallavas
is Asbkavarman, son of king Pallava, who, as Prof. Hultzsch rightly suspects, is probably amodification of
the Maurya emperor Asoka” [SouthHnd,Inscrs,, Vol. II, p. 342). No doubt, the earliest Pallava records were
found inthe Kistna delta, Butthiscannotbetaken topointtoanindigenousorigin ofthe family. Allthese facts
taken together raiseapresumption that the Pallavas of Southern India were not an indigenous tribe in the
sensethattheColas, Pandyas and Ceraswere.
2 Y 2

220 ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORi.
Indian poets under the name Parasika, the term Pahlava or Pallava must uenote the
Arsacidan Parthians, as stated by Professor Weber.
‘ Tondaiyar ’ appears to have beenthe name of the Pallavas according to Tamil
literature^ and the Pallava king was called Tondaiman. The Pallava country was
called Tundaka-visaya^ or Tondaka-rastra* in the 8th century A.D. The origin of the
name is obscure. Tradition has it that the first Tondaiman was the illegitimate son of
a Cola king by a Naga woman. ^ It has also been suggestedthat the original name of
the province bestowed on this illegitimate Cola prince was Tonda- or Tondar-
mandalam, i.e. “ the province of the slaves.” ® This story, if true, ® would make the
Pallavas a mixed tribe made up of the Colas and the-Nagas. ^ The Nagas may only
denote here some aboriginal tribe. But it is doubtful if this story explains the origin of
the Pallavas,® or if it only shows how they got possession of Kancipuram and the
surrounding country at some stage of their history. In the ancient Tamil poem
Manimegalai, reference is made to a Cola king named Nedumudikkifii (XXIV^ 29)®
^ The Pallavakingof Kaiicipuram isoften called Tondaiyar hdn, Toondaiyor marugan occurs in the
ancientTamil poem Perumbdnarruppadai.
2 Ep. Ind.^ Vol. V, p. 203.
3 South'dnd. Insets*, Vol. II, p. 359*
^ Ibid,, p. 377. We are not told where theadventurous Cola methis sweetheart, butthelatter was prudent
enough toobtainthe king’sordersaboutthe disposal ofher issue. It was settledthat sheshouldlet thechild float
on the sea with atwigofthe iondai plant tied roundhiswaist. Theking promised torecognize the child by
thisemblem andto provideakingdom for him. ‘Whetherornotthis is alaterimprovement ofthe story found in
thepoem Manimegalai (tobe mentioned presently) isa questionwhich cannot be answeredat present. The
prince appearsto havebornethe nameor surnameTiraiyan, asthe waves {tirai) ofthe seabrought him ashore.
This name ispreservedin Tiraiyan-^ri, the ancientnameof thevillageTenneri in the Chingleput District {Annual
Report on Epigraphy for 1900-1, paragraph 9). Samudradatta-catiirvedimahgalam, one of the boundaries
of the donative village in the Udayendiram grant, was probably calledaftera Pallava kingor prince named
Samudradatta. The word Samudradatta might, inthat case, be a Sanskrt translation of Tiraiyan, which is
derived from tirai, ‘waves’ or‘the sea’.
® Taylor’s Catalogue, Vol. Ill, p. 427.
® No reference ismadeto the story in any epigraphical record. There is, however, an allusion to it in
the Rayakola plates of Skandasisyavikramavarman, who must have been a Gahga-Pallava. The earlier
Prakrt and Sanskrt charters of the Pallavas do not furnish any mythical genealogy. Theysimplymention
theBharadvaja-§'r;2fr<2to which the dynasty claimed to belong. The Kuram grant of Paramesvaravarman 1.
{South-Ind, Insets., Vol. I, p. 152),theKasakueji platesof Nandivarman Pallavamalla {ibid., Vol. 11 , p* 355),and
the Udayendiram grant ofthe same king {ibid,, p. 370) tell usthat king Pallavawastheson ofthe Mahdbhdrata
hero Asvatthaman. The mother of king Pallava wasthecelestial nymph Menakaaccording tothe second ofthe
above-mentioned copper-plate grants and Madani according tothe Amaravati pillar (now set up in theMadras
Museum) whichmustbelongto a later period [South-Ind. Insets., Vol. I,p. 27). We haveno meansofascertain-
ing why the Pallavas chose A.svatthaman for their ancestor. I would,however, offeraconjecture. Atthe time
whenthemythical Pallavagenealogy was invented, the Panclyas, who were popularly believed to have been
descended from the five Pandavas, werethe enemies of the Pallavas. Asvatthaman’s enmitytothe Pandavas
iswell known. Itwas hethat conceivedand carried out the terrible revenge which ended in the treacherous
slaughter of thePanclavaforces. The Kas'akudi plates tell us [South-Ind. Insers., Vol. II,p. 355) that, “ atthe
risingof Asvatthaman’s anger, Krsna, Arjuna and Bhima became terrified and threw down their weapons
without! any opposition.” ThenamePallava is transferred in the copper-plate grants from the tribe tothe
.firstking. The sameisthe case in early Cola and Pamlya records.
’ThebirudaSamhirnajdtih occurs inthe UppercaveatTrichinopoly. Itwas perhaps meant to be applied
tothe Paliava KingGunabhara (Mahendravarman 1.) who excavatedthecave; Director-General’s Annual for
1903-04, p. 271.
H
* this story has any reference to the origin of the Pallavas, it can only show that they werenot indi-
genous;.
® 1his Colakingalso bore the names Killi-Valavan, Mavan-Killi, Vadiverkilli and Venverkilji, He is
believed tohave foughtabattle on thebank of the river Kari againstthe Cerasand Pandyas. During hisreign
toe town of Kavirippumbattinam appearsto have been submerged in the ocean. There was also a severe
faminein andaround Kaiicipuram duringhis reign. A Buddhist caityabuilt at Kaiicipuram bytwo Cola kings
namedTodukalarkijliandTiinaiyOangilli
is mentioned inthe poem Manimegalai (XXVIII, 172).

CHE PALLAVAS.
221
Avho casually met a Naga^ princess in a grove at his capital Kavirippumbattinam.
Her name was Pilivalai and she was the daughter of the Naga king Vajaivanan.
The Cola king had a son by the Naga princess. But there is nothing here to show
that the province of which Kancipuram was the capital, was conferred on this prince.
Consequently, this story appears to be different from the one mentioned above.^
The Pallavas with whose history we are now concerned, may, until their origin is
satisfactorily established by indisputable evidence, be supposedto be identical with the
Pahlavas, Palhavas and Pahnavas of the Puranas. This identification is based on ety-
mologicalgrounds and supportedbythe fact that the Palhavas formed adistinct element
in the population of Western India early in the second century. Their movement from
Western India to the East Coast is not only possible but rendered likely by known
historical facts. Future researches must disclose the actual circumstances which led
to the movement of the Palhavas to the East Coast and to their assumption of
sovereignty.
As I have already remarked, the Pallavas were the political successors of the
Andhras® in the Godavari and Kistna deltas and consequently, the former must have
acquired sovereignty soon after the latter ceased to be the ruling power. The
Andhras probably lost their dominion about the middle of the third century and the
Pallavas may be supposed to have taken their place about the end of the same
-century.^
Coming now to the history of the Pallavas, we find that the existence of the
dynasty as well as its dominion has been unearthed mainly through the efforts of
epigraphists. The family w^as altogether forgotten and only a few traces of its
existence can be found in South-Indian literature.® This may be partly due to the
fact that the bulk of the existing literature came into existence after the Pallavas
had ceased to be the dominant power in the South.® Mr. Vincent Smith explains
the fact by supposing that the Pallava power was superimposed upon the ancient
^ The Tamilpoem alsomentions atownnamedNagapuram in Savaka-nadu which appears
to be the Tamil name of the island of Java. Two kings of Nagapuram are here mentioned, mz. Bhumi-
candraand Punyaraja, who claimedto be descended from the god Indra. That there was communication in
ancient times between the Indian continentand the island ofJava is provedbytwo Sanskrt inscriptions found
atBuitenzorg mentioning king Purnavarman {Ind, Ant., Vol. IV, plate facing p. 356). These records may
-belong roughly to the sixth century A. D.
2 Thereis, however, considerable resemblance between the two stories. Perhaps the account found in
the Manimegalaiwas added to in later times.
3 Therearesome Pallavacoinswhich in stylebear some resemblance to those of the Andhras and may
therefore, possibly belong to the same period, i.e.secondandthirdcenturies A. D.j Professor Rapson’sIndian,
Coins, p. 37. It isalso worthyofnotethatone ofthelast kingsof the Andhradynastywas Sivaskanda, whilethe
earliest known Pallava kingis Sivaskandavarman. The language and phraseology of the earliest Pallava
recordsalso resemblethoseofthe Andhrainscriptions.
* According to Sir Walter Elliot, the greater part of Dravida bore in ancient times the name of
Kurumba-bhumi, which extended across the whole peninsula from the Coromandel to the Malabar Coast.
The eastern portion of this tract of country received thename Tonda-mandalam on its conquestbythe Colas.
The division of this province into twenty-four kdttamsis attributed to the Kurumbas. The Cola king Karikala
is said to have subdued the Kurumbas. The tribe is, however, noteven referred to in epigraphical records.
Nor isthereany mention of it in the Brhatsamhita of Varahamihira. In local records they are said to have
belongea to the Yadava raceand to havebeen Jainas by religion. It is difficultto decidewhether the Kurumbas
wereactually Pallavasor distinct from them. Sir Walter Elliot assigns some coins to the Kurumbas and
others to the Pallavas.
^ This might also beduetothefact thatthe Pallavaswere looked upon asforeigners.
® EarlyTamil literatureconcerneditselfmainlywiththeindigenoius Colas, Pandyas and Ceras.

archaeological report.
222
territorial states much in the same way as the Mahratha power was in later times
and w*as confined to the levying of tribute and blackmail.^ Accordingly, the very
existence, he says, of the Pallavas was forgotten and tradition never assigned any
normal limits to the Pallava dominions as it did to the Cola, Pandya and Cera.^
The earliest known records of the Pallavas are three Prakrt copper-plate
charters, v{2. (i) the Mayidavolu plates of Sivaskandavarman,® (2} the Hirehadagalli
plates of the same king^ and (3) the British Museum plates of Carudevi." The first
and the third have been found in the Guntur District, while the finding place of the
second is not known. The first two present to us king Sivaskandavarman, presumably
the son ofa king named Bappa. Sivaskandavarman may at present be supposedto have
reigned about the beginning of the fourth century A.D.® In the Mayidavolu plates he
figures as the heir-apparent {yummaharaj a) and as the reigning king in the other.
These two grants give us a glimpse into the condition of Southern India which it is
worth our while to examine for a moment. In the first place, Sivaskandavarman pro-
bably belonged to a period considerably later than the conquest of Southern India by
the Pallavas, whenever that might have been. In other words, it does notlook as if
Sivaskandavaraman had conquered Kancipuram.^ The king is said to belong to the
Bharadvaja-gJ//«. The earlier grant was issued from Kaficlpuram, while the order
contained in it was addressed to the governor at Dhanakada, z.e. Amaravati in the
modern Guntur district, and the donative village was situated in the Andhra country
{Andhreipatha).^ It thus appears that the Pallava dominions included at the time not
only Kancipuram and the surrounding province but also the Tclugu country as far
north as the river Krsna. In the Hirehadagalli plates, Sivaskandavarman is said to
have performed the agnistoma, vajapdya and a^vamedha sacrihees. The last could
have been undertaken by the king only after conquering all his neighbours. That his
dominions must have been extensive is clear from the grant, which is addressed to
“lords of provinces royal princes, generals, rulers of districts, custom-house
officers, prefects of countries ’’and others. The king’s father had presented many
crores of gold and one hundred thousand ox-ploughs. The land granted by
’ Early History of India, pp, 403 and 423.
2 Accordingto the Tondamandala-^atakam, Tondamandalam {i.e, the Pallava territory) was bounded on the
north by theTirupati and Kalahasti mounta A ins; on tlie south bythe river Paklr ; and on the west by the Ghauts
(Taylor’s Catalogue, Vol. Ill, p. 29). verse attributed to the poetess Auvaiyar describes Tondai-
mandalam as the country bounded by the Pavalamalai, i.e. the Eastern Ghauts in the west Vengadam,
;
Tirupati in the north ; the sea to the east ; and Pinagai, i.e. the Southern Pennar in the south. The greatest
length of the provinceis said to be full 20 hddam or nearly 200 miles. Another verse attributed to the same
poetess is said to describe the characteristics of the southern kingdoms; Malai-nadu [i.e. Kerala) has
e o l f ep l h e a a n rn t e s d ; t m h e e n. Col A a v c a o r u i n a t n r t y o h f as the ple n n a t m y e of To f n o d o a d; i- t m h a e nd P a a l n a d m ya is co D u a n n t d ry ak h a a - s na pe d a n r , ls w ; h a ic n h d t i h s e a T p o p n a d r a e i n - t n ly adu de i r s iv fu e l d l
from the Sanskrt Dandakaranya, i,e. the forest of Dandakamentioned inthe Ramdyana andthePuranas.
^ Ep. Ind., Vol. VI, pp. 84 to 89.
^ Ibid., Vol. I, pp.2 to 10.
® Ibid., Vol. VIII,pp, 143 to 146.
® The last Andhra king was Pulumayi III., whose reign might have come to an end in A.D. 236.
Consequently, the Pallavas may be supposedtohaveassertedtheirindependenceabout the end of the century!
Itis,however,possible that the event took placemuch earlier.
7 If he were the first Pallava king of Kancipuram, he would in all probability have mentioned his
conquest of the town. It may^ therefore, be supposed thatthe occupation of Kancipuram bythe Pallavas was
effectedby some pred.ecessorof Sivaskandavarman.
» Andhripatha_ is aterritorial term similarto Uttarapaiha and Dahindpaiha. Va^nga^vali, hich occurs in
1aterBanainscriptions, is apparently aTamiltranslation oftheterm Andhrapatha.

—
THE PALF.AVAS.
223
Sivaskandavarman was to be “ free from taxes. from the taking of sweet and sour
milk from troubles about salt and sugar, from forced labour, from the taking of the
oxen in succession, from thetaking of grass and wood, fromthe taking of vegetables
andflowers.” It thus appears that, unless specially exempted by the king, the vil-
lagers were liable to all these taxes and imposts. The earlier grant threatens with
corporal punishment those who transgress the terms of the royal order. The British
Museum plates appear to be later than the other two and mention three generations of
Pallava kings, viz. the Maharaja Vijaya-Skandavarman ^ his son, the Ymamahdraja
;
Vijaya-Buddhavarman and his son Buddhyahkura. These three Prakrt grants prove
;
thatthere was a time when the court language was Prakrt even in Southern India.
\hsnugopa of Kanci, mentioned in the Allahabad pillar of Samudragupta, might
be later than the foregoing.“ There is not much doubt that Visnugopa was a Pallava
;
and as the Allahabad pillar has been assigned to the middle of the fourth century,^ it is
evident that the Pallavas had by that time become firmly settled in Conjeeveram.
The Sanskrt charters of the dynasty are later, and three of them* furnish the
genealogy for five generations, viz. Skandavarman his son Viravarman; his
;
son Skandavarman II.; his son the Yuvamahdrdja Visnugopa; and his son
Sirhhavarman II/ The Dar§i fragment belongs to the time of the great-grandson
of Vira-Korcavarman,® i.e. Viravarman. Two other charters,’ which are
later, furnish different pedigrees.® The former are dated from Da^anapura,
3 Skandavarman is the earliest name derived from the Sanskrt charters,aswill be pointed out presently.
The interval of timewhich mighthave elapsed between thetime ofSivaskandavarman and Vijaya-Skandavarman
isnotknown. Thelatter was probably earlierthan Skandavarman I. ofthe Sanskrt charters.
Visnugopa may be supposed tobe laterthan Sivaskandavarman, because the latter cannot be assigned to
aperiodsubsequenttothe middle ofthe4th century A.D.
® Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 319*
^ These are (i) the Uruvupalli grant ofthe Yuvamahdraja Visnugopavarman [Ind. Ani.^ Vol. V, p. 50) ; (2)
the Mahgalur grant of Siiiihavarman {ihid., p. 154); and (3) the Pikiragrant of the same king {Ep. Ind,^ Vol,
VIII,p. isQ).
5 Inscriptions have been found only ofthe Yu'vamahdrdja Visnugopaand ofhis son Simhavarman, and all
thatwe canbesureaboutis that Simhavarman reigned foratleast 11 years. As regards the first three kings,
we cannot be certain that they actually ruled untilwe findrecords of their time. In the Tirukkalukkunram
inscription ofthe Cola king Rajakesarivarman {Ep. Ind., Vol. Ill, p. 279) reference is riiadeto a Skandasisya,who
was presumably a predecessor of the Pallava king Narasithhavarman I. of the Simhavisnu line. This
Skandasisyamightbe identical with one ofthetwo Skandavarmans mentioned in the Sanskrt charters.
6 Ep. Ind., Vol. I, p. 397f-
7 These are: (i) the Cendalur plates of Kumaravisnu II. {Ep. Ind.^ Vol. VIII, p. 233) and (2) the
Udayendiram grant of Nandivarman {ihid,, Vol. Ill, p. 142).
® Thesetwo are dated fromthe‘victorious Kancipura.’ The Cendalur plates givethe following pedigree :
Skandavarman.
Kumaravisnu I.
BuddhIavarman.
Kumaravisnu 'll.
Dr. Hultzsch, who has edited the inscription, concludes from palGeographical considerations thatthesefour
kings ruled in the intervalbetween Simhavarman II.' and Simhavisnu. The Udayendiram grant furnishes the
—
following succession:
Skandavarman I.
SimhavaIrman.
, . . . .
Skandavarman II.
,
Nandivarman. ~ .
Itisatpresentimpossible to sayhow thekings inthese two pedigrees were related to one another orif they
wereconnectedwith those Pallava kings whose grantsare datedfrom Palakkada, Dasanapuraand Meitmatura,

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
224
Palakkada, and Menmatura. The grants belonging to this series have been
found mostly in the modern Nellore and Guntur districts. A single one has
been discovered at Udayendiram in the Gudiyatam taluka of the North Arcot district.
But Professor Kielhorn, who has re-edited the text, has called in question its genuine-
ness. The fact that the earlier inscriptions of this series are not dated from Kanci-
puram raises a presumption that that citywas not the Pallava capital for some time
during the interval. If this presumption is established by future discoveries, it may
be concluded that the Pallavas were driven out from Conjeeveram by one of the
indigenous tribes of the Tamil country—say the Colas^- and had to retire northwards
for a time. The kings of this series are generally described as fervent Bhagavatas
meditating on the feet of Bhagavat (Vignu) and as being devoted to the feet of their
fathers. They belonged to the Bharadvaja-^J/ra and were the rightful maharajas of
the Pallavas, who were the abodes of the fortunes of other kings overcome by their
own valour and who, accordingto rule, liad performed many horse-sacrifices. Several
kings of the series bore names connected with Visnu such as Visnugopa and Kumara-
visnu. Perhaps it was a time when the Vaisnava creed was in the ascendant. Future
researches may prove that some of the Vaisnava Ajvars flourished during the period.''^
Vaisnava tradition has it that Tirumalisai-Alvar, one of the early saints, was ill-treated
by the contemporary Pallava king, who had subsequently to repent of his conduct.
The boast of these Pallava kings to have performed horse-sacrifices may prove to
have been borrowed from Sivaskandavarman of the Prakrt charters, who must have
actually undertaken the task. If my surmise prove correct, the Pallavas must have
regained Kahcipuram towards the close of the period with which we are now dealing.
The time when the kings who issued the Sanskrt charters flourished is not known.
But, roughly speaking, they may be assigned to the fifth and sixth centuries A.D.^
The chief characteristic of Pallava history so far is that it has to be made out solely
from copper-plate grants. No stone monuments of the period have been hitherto
unearthed. Perhaps, the temples which did exist were of wood or some other
perishable material. Mr, Fergusson says : “The conclusion seems inevitable that
all the buildings anterior to the year A.D. 700 or thereabouts were erected in wood
or with some perishable materials, and have perished either from fire or from causes,
which in that climate, so soon obliterate any but the most substantial erections
constructed with themost substantial materials.”^
The Pallava dominions probably comprised at the time the modern districts of
^TheColaking Karikala, who probably flourished in the sixth century, claims to have been the overlord of
Trilocana-Pallava. The Cola king is also said to have beautified the town of Kaficipiiram with go\d{Ajinzial
Report onEpigraphy for 1905-6, Part II, paragraph 15). The astronomer Varahamihira,who probablyflourished
atthe beginning of thesixth century A.D., locates the Pahlavas in the soiithwvest division and Kancipuram in
the southern division. Ifthis is not due to a mistake, it maybethatthe Pallavas of the East Coast wereat the
timeoccupying an inferior position. But Varahamihira’s ideas of geography seem to havebeen somewhat haxy.
Helocates the Dravidas in the south-west division. j3utwe know from chapter 9 of the Bhlsmaparvan ofthe
Mahdbhdratathatthe Dravidas were asouthern tribe.
Threeof AeVaisnava.Alvarswerethe earliest, vie., Poygai Alvar, Pudaltalvarand Peyalvar. Thefirst
wasbornatKaficipuram,the secondatKadanmallai or Mavalipuram,j.e. the Seven Pagodas and the third at
T T i o ru n m d a a y h il m a a i n , da i l .e a . m M . ylapore. These three are believed to have been contemporaries. They were allborn in
3 'ihe Simhavisnuline musthavebecomepowerful either at the beginning of the seventh or the end of the
^ixth century A.D., and it may be supposed that therewas some interval oftime between the kings of the
Satxskrtcharter’sandthe Simhavisnuline,
^ Caw Temples of m,

THE PALLAVAS. 225
Nellore, Guntur, Kistna, Kurnool and, perhaps, also Anantapur, Cuddapah, and
Bellary. The Kadambas of Banavasi, who were originally Brahmanas, threatened
to defy the Pallavas. The founder of the Kadamba family was MayuraSarman.
He went to the Pallava capital in order to study the sacred lore. There
he had a fierce quarrel with a Pallava horseman. What the cause of the
quarrel was and how it ended we are not told. “ With the hand dexterous
in grasping the ktila grass, the fuel, the stones, ladle, the melted butter and the
oblation vessel, he {i.e. Mayura§arman) unsheathed a flaming sword, eager to conquer
the earth. Having overcome the frontier guards of the Pallavas, Mayura§arman
occupied the inaccessible forest stretching to the gates of Sriparvata, and levied taxes
from the circle of kings headed by the great Bana. The Pallava king was shrewd
enough to recognize the Brahmana’s bravery, and took him into his service. Mayura-
sarman was rewarded with territory bordered by the waters of the western sea.®
Thus a powerful enemy was gained over and treated as a useful ally. The Brahmana
warrior’s successors do not, however, appear to have been on friendly terms with the
Pallavas. One of them named MrgeSavarman boasts of having been the fire of
destruction to the Pallavas,® and another called Ravivarman is said to have conquered
Visnuvarman and other kings and overturned Candadanda, lord of Kahcl.^ Mr.
Rice mentions a Nanakkasa Pallavaraja as overcoming the Kadamba king
Krsnavarman and assigns him to the middle of the fifth century A.D.^ Discussing
the date of the Kadambas, Dr. Fleet concludes: “At present, all that can be
safely said is that the Kadambas are to be referred approximately to the 6th
century A.D.’’®
Later Eastern Calukya tradition refers to a battle between the Pallava king
TrilScana and the Calukya Vijayaditya,' who claims to have come from Ayodhya
in the north. The latter was victorious, but lost his life.® The battle probably
took place somewhere in the Cuddapah district, as the village of Mudivemu,
where the queen of the victor took refuge after the battle, has been identified by
Mr. Ramayya Pantulu with Peddamudiyam in the Cuddapah District.® The event
may be placed roughly about the beginning of the 6th or end of the 5th
century A.D.“ Though this story is found only in records of the iith century
and is not corroborated by earlier Inscriptions, it is evidently based on the
* Ep. Ind., Vol. VIII, p. 34, verse 13.
2 Ibid., p.35, verse 21.
® BombayGazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 288.
‘ Ibid., p. 289.
5 Ep. Cam., Vol. XI, p.5 (DG. 161.)
* Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I,Part II, p. 291.
’ His son Visnuvardhanamarrieda Pallava princess. He^boasts of having overcome the Kadamba, Gahga
andother kings. He was evidentlyon friendly terms with the Pallavas, though-his father had been killed in a
battlefoughtagainstthem.
® This account occurs for the first time inan inscription ofthe Eastern Calukyaking Vimaladitya, dated in
A. D. 1018 {Ep. Ind., Vol. VI, p.349).
’ Annual Reporton Epigraphy for 1905-06, PartII, paragraph40.
“ This result isarrived at asfollows: The Calukya king Pulikesin II. was reigning about the beginning
of the 7th century A.D. Four generations intervened between him and Vijayadityawhofoughtagainst TrilC-
cana Pallava. Itwasapparentlythe same Pallavakingthatwas afeudatoryofthe Colaking Karikala, as I have
already stated The C.alukyainvasion,the Cojaexpansionandthe Kadambarevolt musthave contributed to the
decline ofthePallavas inthe6thcentury A.D.; seealso note i on thepreceding page.
2 G

archeological report.
1226
belief current in the iith century, that the Pallava dominions extended in those early
times to the modern Ceded districts.
From the reference in connection with the Kadamba Mayurasarman to the great
Bana, it may be presumed that the latter was a Pallava feudatory and that his
dominions lay somewhere in the Ceded districts.^ We are not now concerned with
the later history of the Ranas, who claim to be descended from the demon Mahabali.
It is enough here to remark that a Bana king figures as a feudatory of the Pallava
king Nandippottara§ar—apparently the last of the family, about whom more will be
said in the sequel.^ The Banas seem to have played a very important part during the
period subsequent to the decline of the Pallavas. Accordingly, so far as it is known
at present, the only formidable opponents of Pallava expansion in the north during the
period were the Kadambas. In the south, the Cojas, Pandyas, and Kerajas or any
one of them who happened to be dominant in the Tamil country—must have offered
serious opposition.® But, at present, we have no records testifying to the struggle.
We now enter into a period of Pallava history for which the records are more
numerous. The facts available for this period are definite and the chronology is not
altogether a field of conjecture and doubt. The earliest stone monuments of Southern
India belong to this period.^ In fact, the foundations of Dravidian architecture were
laid by the earlier kings of this series.® The Pallavas now engage in a life-and-death
struggle against the Calukyas of Badami in the Bombay Presidency, which partly
accounts for the expansion of the former in the Tamil country. The hostility between
the two tribes became so intense, that each looked upon the other as its natural
enemy.® The history of this period consists mainly of the events of the war with the
Calukyas which lasted almost a century'^ and which seems to have been the ultimate
cause of the decline and dowmfall of both the Pallavas and Calukyas about the middle
of the 8th century.® The relationship which the Pallava kings ofthis series bore to
the earlier ones is nowhere explained, though four of the latter are mentioned among
‘ This seemstobe implied from the Tajagunda inscription, verses 14to 16 ; Ep. Ind.,Vol. VIII,p. 34 f.
2 AnnualRiport on Epigraphy for 1903-4, paragraph 11.
3 The Colas under Karikalaand Ki]ji-Valavan seem to have been in possession of Kaucipuram see also
5
above, p. 220, note9, and p, 224, note i.
^ Thebedscut intothenatural cavesand the Brahmi inscriptions accompan3dng‘ someof them are, ofcourse,
earlier* Buttheir origin is obscure.
^ The monolithic caves of the Tamil country were excavated by the Pallava king Mahendravarman L The
ratha’i Seven Pagodas probably come next. The temples of Kailasanalha and Vaikuniha-PerumaJ at
Kanclpuram and the Shore temple at the Seven Pagodas have probably to be taken as later developments of
Pallava architecture.
® No satisfactory explanation has, so far, been offered for this natural enmity between tke Pallavas and
Calukyas. Itispossiblethat thehatred had a religiousbasis. The Pallavas were Saivas andhad the bull for
their crest, whilethe Calukyas were devotees of thegod Visnu and had the boar for theircrest. Butthere is no
reasontosupposethatin those early days religious bigotry went so far. The Calukyasare said to have come
from Ayodhyainthenorth andthe firstthingthey didaftergoing tothesouth wasthe defeat cf the Pallava king
Trilocana. From thetimeof PuHkesin II. thisenmitycontinued. Mr. Ricesays: “The name Calukya bears
asuggestiveresemblanceto the Greek name Seleukeia, and ifthe Pallavaswere really of Parthian connection
as theirnamewould*imply, we have a plausible explanation of the inveterate hatredwhich inscriptions admit to
have existedbetw'eenthe two, andtheir prolonged struggles may have been buta sequel of the contests between
the Seleucidse and the Arsacidseonthe banks ofthe Tigrisand Euphrates” {Mysore, Vol. I, p. 320).
7 The war apparently began with the Eastern campaign of Pulike^in IL which musthave taken placesome
timebefore A. D. 634-5 {Ep. Tnd„ Vol. VI, p. 3). Thelastimportantevent ofthe war is theinvasion of Kaild by
the Calukya king Vikram5ditya II., who reigned from A.D. 733-4 to 746*7. Kirtivarman II., son of
Vikramaditya II., also claims to have led an expeditionin his youth against the Pallavas. The Pallava king,
unableta fight in openbattle, took refuge in a fort, bufwas defeatedbythe Calukya prince.
* Ep, Ind., Vol,V, p. 157.

—
^ , ;
THE PALLAVAS. 227
the ancestors of the former in a Pallava copper-plate charter of the 8th century
A. D.^ The following isthe pedigree of this line of Pallava kings :
Pedigree ofthe Simhavisnufa^nily}
Unnamed ancestor.
Simhavisnu. Bhimavarman.
1 .
2. Mah1 endravarman I. Buddhav 1 arman.
3. Nar I asiitihavarman I. A . di.tyava I rman,
4. Mahendravarman II. Govindavarman.
1
5.
Parame§varapotavarman Hiranya[varman]
Paramesvaravarman
1.
Ugradanda-Lokaditya Isvarapotaraja.
6. Narasirnhavarman II.
Rajasirnha-Kalakala
Narasirnhavisnu.
7. Paramesvaravarman II. Mahendravarman III. 8. Nandivarman
Pallavamalla
Nandipotavarman^
The earliest king of this series is Sirnhavisnu,^ who claims to have vanquished the
Malaya, Kalabhra, Malava, Cola and Pandya kings, the Sirnhala king proud of the
strength of his arms and the Keralas.^ His sonandsuccessor was Mahendravarman I.
The war against the Calukyas apparently began during this reign. The causes
which brought it about are nowhere stated. Pulike§in II. of Badami, who was
Mahendravarman’s contemporary, ascended the throne in A.D. 609 and soon
—
overcame the great Harsavardhana of Kanauj the hero of Bana’s Harsacarita.^
Inthe course of his digvijaya, Pulike§in II. turned his arms against the South.® Pista-
pura, the modern Pithapuram in the Godavari district, was first reduced. Pulike^in
subsequently caused the splendour of the lord of the Pallavas, who had opposed the
rise of his power,’’ to be obscured by the dust of his army and to vanish behind the
walls of Kahclpura.
This invasion of the Pallava territory is indirectly acknowledged by Mahendra-
varman, who claimsto have defeated his chief enemies at Pullalara.® The Pallavas were
1 Theseare Skandavarman, Visuugopa, Virakiirca and Simhavarman mentioned in the Kasakudi plates
South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p»343.
2 This pedigreeis copied from the genealogygiven by Dr. Hultzsch on p. 344 ofSouth-Ind. duscrs,, VoL II,
and revised by Dr. Fleet {Bombay Gazetteer Vol. I, Part II, p. 323).
^ The village of Manali in the Saidapet taluka of the Chingleput district was in ancient times called
Simhavisnu-caturvedimafigalam accordingto an inscription of the Cola king Kulottunga I ; South'lnd^ Inscrs,,
Vol HI, p. 134-
4 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 356,verse 20. | ® Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. T, Part [I, p, 355. | ® Ep. Ind., Vol, VT p. it.
This mayimply a previous encounter of Pulikesin againstthe Pallavas.
s South-Ind, Insert., Vol. II, p. 343- It washere that two.battles were fought between the English and
Haidar AH of Mysore.
2 G 2

—
2-28 ARCH.?:OLOGICAL REPORT.
driven out of their possessions in the Telugu country, and their capital Conjeeveram
must also have been threatened. The hostile army evidently advanced as far as
Pullalur near Conjeeveram, where a decisive battle was fought and the enemy was
driven back. The Calukyas permanently occupied the northern part of the Pallava
dominions, and Visnuvardhana, younger brother of Pulikegin 11 who was probably
.,
sent out originally as the viceroy of the newly-acquired dominions, eventually estab-
lished himself at Vehgi and started the Eastern Calukya dynasty sometime before
A. D. 632.’ It is just possible that this defeat and loss of dominion in the north led
the Pallavas to extend their territory in the South. At any rate, no Pallava monu-
—
—
ments either documentary or architectural have been found so far, prior to the 7th
century A.D. in the Tamil country.^
The son of Mahendravarman I. was Narasirtihavarman I., who retrieved the
fortunes of the family by repeatedly defeating the Colas, Keralas, Kalabhras and
Pandyas.® He also claims to have written the word ' victory ’ as on a plate, on
Pullke§in’s back, which was caused to be visible {i.e. which was turned in flight after
defeat) at several battles.^ Narasirtihavarman carried the war into Calukya territory
and actually captured Vatapi, their capital. This claim of his is established by an
—
inscription found at Badami in the Bombay Presidency the modern name of Vatapi
from which it appears that Narasirtihavarman bore the title Mahamalla.® In later
times, too, this Pallava king was known as Vatapi-korida-Naragihgappottaraiyati.'* Dr.
Fleet assigns the capture of the Calukya capital to about A.D. 642.^ The war of
Narasirnhavarman with Pulike^in II. is mentioned in the Singhalese chronicle
Mahavamsa? It is also hinted in the Tam\\ Periyapuranain. The well-known saint
Siruttonda, who had his only son cut up and cooked in order to satisfy the appetite of
the god Siva disguised as a devotee, is said to have reduced to dust the city of Vatapi
for his royal master, who could be no other than the Pallava king Narasirnhavarman.*
The Saiva saint Tirunanasambandar visited Siruttorida at his native village of
Tiruccehgattahgudi, and the Devara hymn dedicated to the Siva temple of the village
mentions the latter and thus helps to fix the date of the former as well as of the
,;^aiva revival of which he was the central figure.
1 Bombay Gazetteer, Vol, I, Part II, p. 352.
2 The earliest architectural monuments of the Pallavas are the monolithic caves and the documentary ones
arethePallava inscriptions found in them.
^ Southind. Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 152.
These took place at Pariyala Manimahgala, Silramaraand other places. If Pulikesin was defeated at
Manimangalam inthe Conjeeveram taluka,he must have advanced into the heart of the Pallava territory. It
is not unlikely that these battlesas well^ as the encounterat PuHalur, were fought in the samecampaign. In the
battlesof Pariayala, Manimahgala and Suramara, Narasirnhavarman probably foughtas against the
invading army and drove it back. The battleof PuHalur, which was apparently earlier, might have been fought
by Mahendravarman himself, who may be supposedto havebeen defending thecapital against the invader.
^ Ind, Ant,, Vol IX, p. 100, and Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 328.
Ei, lnd„-yo\. III, p. 280.
’ Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 359.
Mr. L. C. Wijesinhas Translation, p.41 ff. The Singhalese princeManavammawasa friendof Narasiha
andhelpedhim to crush hisenemyking Vallabha. The grateful Narasiha supplied Manavamma twice with an
army to invade Ceylon. Onthe secondoccasionhe wassuccessful and occupied Ceylon,which he is supposed to
haveruledfrom A.D. 691 to 726.,
y Ep. Ind.,Vo\. Ill, p. 277. Paramelvaravarman I.also claims to have destroyed the Calukyacapital. A
still later conquest of Vatapi IS also known. It was effected by a Kodumbalur chief, apparemly during the
secondhalf oithegth centuryA.D. {Annual Reporton Epigraphyfor 1907-8, Part II, paragraph 85].

—
,
THE PALLAVAS. 229
The war with the Calukyas resulted in the abeyance of their power for some time
in their dominions. The Pallavas probably held the territory during the time of
Narasirhhavarman, his son Mahendravarman II., and during the early part of the reign
of the latter’s son and successor, Parame^varavarman I.^ The Kuram copper-plates of
the last king give a lengthy description of a fearful battle which was probably fought
at a village called Peruvalanallur.^ The battle ended in the defeat of the Calukya
Vikramaditya I., whose army consisted of several laksas and who took to flight
covered only by a rag. But ParameSvaravarman is said in other records to have
destroyed the city of Ranarasika a.htrudaol Vikramaditya I.^ Perhaps the former
repulsed at Peruvalanallar a counter-invasion undertaken in consequence of his attack
on the Calukya capital Vatapi. On the other hand, Vikramaditya I, claims to have
"received by surrender the town of Kahcl after defeating the lord of the Pallavas who
had been the cause of the humiliation and destruction of his family,”* Apparently as
a result of this vdctory, the Kurnool District, or at least a portion of it, which, as I have
already pointed out, belonged originally to the Pallavas, passed into the hands of the
Calukyas. Two copper-plate grants of Vikramaditya and two of his son Vinayaditya
have been found in that district.® Parameivaravarman’s son and successor was Raja-
sirhha,® who bore the surnames Kalakala, Atyantakama,^ Ranajaya, Sribhara, Citrakar-
muka and Ekavira.® He claims to have got rid of all sins by walking on the path of
the §aiva doctrine.® The biruda Sivacudamani,^® which he bore, confirms that Raja-
sirnha was a follower of the Saiva creed.**
^Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p,.362. Paramesvaravarman bore the titles Ugradanda andLokaditya
andwasalso called Isvarapotaraja ; ibid., p. 329and South-Ind. Inscrs,, Vol. I, p, 145.
-Southlnd. Infers,, Vol. I, p. 153^. and ibid,, Vol. II, p.344. The name PeruvalanallSr suggeststhat it
musthavebeen situated inthe Tamil country, and if this be the case, the Pallavas must only havesuccessfully
repelleda Calukyainvasion.
^South‘Ind. insers Vol. I, p. 13*
* Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 362. The ‘humiliation-’ and‘destruction’ of the Calukya family here
referredto mustalludetotheeventswhich happened duringthereign of the Pallavaking Narasirhhavarman.
^ Ibid., pp. 363 and 369. A fifth Calukyagrant, belonging tothe reign of Vikramaditya, is edited in the
volume of Nellore inscriptions, publishedby Messrs. Butterworth and Venugopaul Chetty. It has been re-edited
by Professor Hultzsch [Ep., Ind.,Vol. IX, p. 98). But, asthevillage granted bythe charterhas not been identi-
fied, it isnot quite safeto speculate aboutthe influencewhich the Calukyas of Badami mighthave exercised over
thehistoryof the Nellore district.
® The Kuram plates of Paramesvaravarman mention prince Vidyavinita-Pallavadhiraja, after whom the
Sivatempleat Kuram was called Vidyavinita-Pallava-Paramesvara. One of the niches of the outer wall in the
Kailasanaiha temple at Kancipuram is called Sri-Nityavinltesvara grha, which might owe its name to a
Pallava prince called Nityavinita. Thesetwo princes, Vidyavinita and Nityavinita, do notfigure in the Pallava
pedigree sofaras it has been made out. Thelatter name occursin the Trichinopoly uppercave as a biruda of
Mahendravarman I; see the Director-Generars Annual for 1903-4, p. 271.
’ Atyantakama and Sribhara figure also as thetitles of Narasimhavarman in the Mamallapuram inscrip-
tions; South-Ind. luLiCrs., Vol. I,p, i. Sir Walter Elliotfiguresacoin (Coins of Southern India, PI. I, No. 34)
wh'ch bears on the obverse a standing bull facing the proper leftand the legend Srlbharah over its back.
The reverse seems to bear a star. Thelegend on No. 37 of the sarne plate has been deciphered by Professor
Hultzsch as Srlnidhi andthat on No. 33zsMdnapara.
® Ekavirappadicceri, a quarter of Kancipuram during the reign ofParantaka I.,was evidentlycalled after
Rajasiiiiha ; South-Ind, Insers., Vol. I, p. 139.
p. 14.
The village of Ukkal in the North Arcot District was called Sivaculamanimangalam, apparently after
Rajasiihha ; ibid, Vol. Ill, p. 2.
The birudas Isdnasaranah (South-Ind, Insers., Vol. I, p. 15), Samkarabhahtah and Isvarahhahtah (ibid,
p. 18) of Rajasimha show that he was a devotee ofthe god Siva. It istherefore not impossiblethat heisoneof
the sixty-three canonized Saiva saints. The name Rajasiihha w^ould connecthim with the saint Kalnrcinga-
Nayanar, while the surnames p. 14) and Sri-Ekasundarah (ibid, p. 17) w'ould tempt one to
dentifyhim with the saint Aiyadigal Kadavarkon. Both ofthesesaintswere Pallavakings.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
230
Rajasirhha built the central shrine of the Kailasanatha temple^ at Conjeeveram^,
while the shrine close to it in the same temple owes its existence to Mahendravarman
III.,® son of Rajasirhha. Parame§varavarman II., another son of Rajasirhha,
seems to have constructed the Vaikuritha-Perumal temple at Conjeeveram, which
is called Parame§vara-Visnugrham^ in one of its inscriptions and Parameccura-Vinna-
garam® in one of the hymns of the Vaisnava saint Tirumangai-Alvar, It is not likely
that Parame§varavarman I. built this temple, because no records of his reign have been
found in it, while the death of Parame§varavarman II. is referred to in the ancient
records engraved on a wall of the verandah running round the central shrine.® The
events which took place after his death are depicted by sculptures cut on the walls of
the same verandah.^ The Ka§akudicopper-plates hintthatthere was some dispute about
the succession after the death of Parame§varavarman II.® Nandivarman, also called
Nandivarman Pallavamalla, a collateral cousin of Parame§varavarman, is said to have
been chosenbythe subjects andto havebeen ruling the kingdom of the latter.® At any
rate, there is not much doubt that internal dissensions had set in inthe Pallava family.^®
* Dr. Hult2sch calls the Siva templeon ihe rockin the middle o( the bund of the large tank at Panamalai
inthe Villiipuramtaluka of the South Arcot District a cave temple [South-Ind. Inscrs,, Vol. I, p. 24). The
description of it in the Gaseiteerof the South Arcot District, Vol. I, p. 385, does not warrant its being called a
'cavetemple,’ and Mr. Sewell in his Lists of Antiquities, Vol. I, p. 209, describes itas “an old Siva temple on
a small hill.” The last verse of Rajasiihha’s inscription in the Kailasanatha temple (Rajasimhd Ranajayahy
etc.) is engraved on the Panamalai hillock.
^ A miracle is reportedto have been wrought during the reign of Rajasiihha. He is said to have heard a
“heavenlyvoice without body {ambaragatd nodni sariram •vind). Perhaps this was the cause of his building
the Rajasiihhesvara temple at Kancipuram, though no statementtothat effect is maie. In giving an account of
the life of the Saiva saint Pusalar Nayanar,the Tamil Periyapuranam mentions the building of a Siva temple at
Kancipuram by a Kadava {i.e. Pallava) king. The god Siva is saidto have appeared to the latter in a dream
and informed him that he should alter the date ofconsecration of the temple constructed by him. This was
necessary as the godhad tobe present at an imaginaryshrine built by the saint Pusalar-Nayanar. In the Kaila-
sanatha temple inscription, the nature of the information conveyedby the''heavenly voice without body” is not
given. Consequently, wecannotbe sure if it referstothe story mentionedin the Periyapuranam. But it seemsto
me that a pretty long interval musthave elapsed between the time when the “heavenly voice ” spoke and the date
ofcomposition of the inscription engraved on thewalls of the central shrine in the Kailasanatha temple. Accord-
ingly, we shall notbe far wrong ifwe suppose that the "heavenly voice” was heard and the central shrine was
built duringthe reign of Rajasiiiiha, whilethe inscription commemorating the event was composed during the
reign of Rajasimba’.s son Mahendravarman. This, itseemsto me, would leave asufficient interval for the mysti-
fication of the event which took place in the reign of Rajasimha andfor itstransformation into a miracle.
3 South-Ind. Inscrs-., Vol. I, p. 23. It maybethat Mahendravarman III. did not succeed to the throne and
thereforehe.is not mentioned either in the Udayendiram grant or in the Kasakudi plates.
^ South^lnd. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 344.
8 This is the Tamil form of the name Paramesvara-Visnugrha ; Ep. hid., Vol. VIII, p. 293.
® South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 344.
'^Annual Report on Epigraphy for 1905-6, Part II, paragraphs 2 and 3.
® Nandivarman is described as “descended from a pure mother” {suddha-matr-anvavnyah) and as belonging
totheline of Bhima. It may be thatthe composer of the Ka.sakudi plates wants to convey a hint that Parames-
varavarman n. or the Siihhavisnu line towhichhe belonged was not descended from a pure mother. If this
conjecture isproved by future researches, either Paramesvaravarman If. or Sirhhavisnu must have been the
illegitimate son ofhisfather ; alsosee p. 220 aboveand note 7.
9 South-Ind. Insc/'s., Vol. II, p. 344. How insecure his position W'as in spite of hischoice by the subjects is
shown bythe Udayendiram grant. Here wearetold that the Pallavageneral Udayacandra “ bestowed thewhole
kingdom manytimes onthePallava” {ibid., Vol. II, p. 372) by his victories against the enemies ofthe latter.
1he position whichthe members of Bhimavarman’s lineoccupied is not known. In fact there isno mention
of them except inthe Kasakudi plates. The circumstances that led Nandivarman to rise from the insignificant
position of his arcestors and to assert his independence are nowhere stated. His father Hiranya isevidently
identical with the Hiranyavarma-Maharaja mentioned morethan once in an inscription in the Vaikunlha-Perumal
temple atCorijeeveram. The Tamil Kdyirpuranam informsus thata Gauda princenamed Simhavarman went on
hhHrthaydtra to Cidambaram (thenaforest) wdierehew^as transformed into Hiranyavarman by bathingin a
tans. He is said tohave covered with gold the Sivatempleatthe place. Hiranvavarman is here spoken ofas a
Colaking.

.
THE PALLAVAS. 231
This conclusion is borne out by the Udayendirara plates of the same king. Here we
are told that his general Udayacandra killed with his own hand the Pallava king
Citramaya, who seems to have been allied with the Dramila princes.^ The Calukyas
of Badami were not slow to take advantage of the weakness of the Pallavas. Vikram-
aditya 11 grandson of Vinayadltya, having “ resolvedto uproot completely his natural
.,
enemy, the Pallava, who had robbed of their splendour the previous kings born from
his race, reached with great speed the Tundaka-visaya (Tondai-mandalam), attacked
at the head of a battle and put to flight the Pallava called Nandipotavarman, wno had
come to meet him”.^ The city of KancI was captured by the enemy. The proce-
dure adopted by Vikramaditya after the capture of the Pallava capital shows that the
frequent wars waged in India by ancient kings against one another did not much affect
either the country or the peaceful inhabitants. In fact, the atrocities of later Indian
warfare were unknown in early times. It is said of \ukramaditya that, though he took
Kanci, he did not destroy it and that, having made the twice-born, the distressed and
the helpless rejoice by continual gifts, he acquired great merit by granting heaps of
gold to the Rajasirhhe§vara (the modern Kailasanatha) and other temples. Manu lays
down the laws of war thus®
5T gn' ^ ^ 5T35I’ i
WJcf ^ TTT'ir vii. 201.
II
“ (Let no man engaged in combat smite) one who sleeps nor one who is without
;
the coat of mail nor one who is naked nor one who is disarmed nor one who is a
; ; ;
spectator but not a combatant; nor one who is encountering another.”
’EftrgitiTtrsmwTtw
i
^
vii, 201.
11
“ Having conquered (a country), let (him) respect the deities (adored in it) and
the virtuous Brahmanas let (him) also grant immunities (to the people) and publicly
;
proclaim safety (to all).’’
Megasthenes, who came to India in the 4th century before Christ, remarks as
follows about the Hindu laws of war “For, whereas among other nations, it is
usual in the contests of war to ravage the soil, and thus to reduce it to anuncultivated
^ South-Ind. Inscrs.y Vol. II, p. 372. We are told that Pallavarnalla was besieged in Nandipura by the
Dramilaprinces. It hasthereforeto beconcludedthatthe Dramilaprinces took up thecause of Citramaya, who
was probably the son of Paramesvaravarman II. or someoneelsewhohada righttothe Pallava throne. > Among
the Dramila princes alliedwith prince Citramaya,the Paiidyasmust have been prominent,as theyclaim to have
defeated the Pallavasat Sahkaramangai, w’hich is Sanskritisedin the Udayendiram grantas Sathkaragrama
[Annual Reporton Epigraphyfor 1907-08, Part II, paragraph 28).
2 South-Ind, Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 146. The expedition against Kahcipuram was probably undertaken'by
Vikramaditya II. soon aftpr his coronation in A. D. 733-34 [Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. ’374).
The historical portion of tbe-Kendur plates of Kirtivarman II. edited by Professor K. B. Pathak (£'/>. Ind.,
Vol. IX, pp. 200to 206) is almost identical with that of the Vakkaleri inscription [ibid,, Vol. V, pp. 200
to 205). _
* Apastambasays: ''The Aryas forbid the slaughter of those who havelaid down their arms, of . those w'ho
(beg for mercy) with flying hair or joinedhands,and of fugitives ’’ (II. 5, 10, 11). Baudhayana declares ? “ Let
hirr'not fightwith thosewho are in fear, intoxicated, insane or outof their minds, nor with those whohavelost
theirarmour,nor wdth women, infants, aged men and Brahmanas’’ (L, 10, i8, 11)
^ Mr. R. C. Diitt’s Civilization in A^icientIndia, Vol. I, p. 22b. . .

;
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
332
waste, among the Indians, on the contrary, by whom husbandmen are regarded^ as a
class that is sacred and inviolable, the tillers of the soil, even when battle is raging in
their neighbourhood, are undisturbed by any sense of danger ; for the combatants on
either side, in waging the conflict, make carnage of each other, but allowthose engaged
in husbandry to remain quiteunmolested. Besides theyneitherravage an enemy s land
with fire, nor cut down its trees." These principles inculcated by Manu and observed
in ancient times were evidently not forgotten in the 8th century A.D.
Returning to the capture of KancI by the Calukya Vikramaditya II., we find that
the event is corroborated by an inscription of the king found on a pillar in the temple
of Kailasanatha.^ This defeat of the Pallavas by the Calukyas seems to have dealt
the death-blow to the sovereignty of the former.® Thus the history of the Pallavas
emphasises the oft-repeated lesson of Indian history that, when internal dissensions
set in in a dynasty, its decline and disappearance is only aquestion of time. Powerful
kings could by their personal prowess only put off the downfall,to a more distant date.
Pallava ascendancy came to anendaboutthe middleofthe 8thcentury and, curiously
enough, their rivals, the Calukyas of Badami, also ceased to be the reigning power
about the same time.®
Before tracing the later history of the Pallavas, it is necessary to refer briefly to
the monuments of Pallava rule. A few Pallava temples have been already mentioned.
Architecture in stone began in the Tamil country with the cutting out of caves in the
living rock. Eight of these caves have been discovered so far, vis. (i) the two
rock-cut caves at Trichinopoly,^ (2) the cave at Vallam near Chingleput,® (3) the cave
at §Iyamahgalam® in the Wandiwash taluka of the North Arcot District, (4) the cave
at Mahendravadi near Sholinghur,’ (5) the cave at Dalavanur in the South Arcot
District,® (6) the cave at Mandagappattu in the same district® and (7) the unfinished
^Ef, Ind., Vol. Ill, p.359 f.
-Nandivarman Pallavamalla himself reigned not less than 50 years {Ep» Vol. IV, p. 137) and the
Pallavas appeartohave continued in someform orother untiltheywereconquered by the Cola king Aditya I.
{ibid, Vol. IX,p. 88).
^Ep.Ind., Vol. V, p. 157.
‘Thereare two caves at Trichinopoly, As statedJn two of its inscriptions, the upper one was excavated
during the reign of the Pallava king Gunabhara Satrumalla, i.e, Mahendravarman I. {South-Ind, Inscrs.,
Vol. I, pp. 28-30). The lower one bears no inscriptions, but in all probability it was also cut out by the
Pallavas.
® The inscription in this cave informs us that it was cut out by aservant of Pagappidugu Lajitaiikura
Satrumalla Gunabhara Mahendrappottarasar, z.e. of Mahendravarman 1. 5 South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II,.
P* 34^-
® Thiswasexcavated by king Lalitahkura, i.e, Mahendravarman I. and was called Avanibhajana-Palla-
vesvara; Ep. Ind,, Vol. VI, p. 320. I recentlyinspectedthecaveand the two inscriptions found in it. The two
outerpillars ofthecave on which they areengravedalsobearat the top a well-executed lion (one on each of the
two pillars) with^the tail foldedoverits back. Thetail resembles that of the lion figured in No. 54, Plate II, of
Sir Walter Elliot's Coinsof Southern India,w.hich has been attributedto the Pallavas. It has, therefore, to be
concluded that thelion wasthe Pallava crest atsome periodorotherof their history,
king 7 ^ T n hi a s bh i a s r d a ed “ ic o a n te (t d he t b o an th k e o g f) od the Vi M . a s h nu en a d n r d at w a a t s ak c a all ( e t d an M k a ) h i e n n t d h r e a g - r V e i a s t n ( u c g i r ty ha o . f) M I a t h w e a n s dr c a a p u u s r e a d . t ” o b { e Ep m , ad I e nd b . y ,
V01. 1V
,
p, 153/*
w 19 a 0 s 4- ® 5 c , K al i P l n a e g d rt N ^ a I a I r , t e r p n u a m d r a r a l . a l ( e 3 o . sv r ar N a a l r a e y n a d , ra i p . p e. o , tt t a h r e ai s y h a ri n n ) e w c h a o lle b d o S r a e tr t u h m e al s l u e r s n v a ar m a e ; S A a n tr n u u m a a l lla Rep c o u r t t ou o t n th E i p s ig ca r v a e p , hy whi f c o h r
IS mu • ch T m h d i a s ma c g a e v d e . wa C s ons d e e q d u i e c n a t t l e y d , t t o he t n he am g e od o s ft B h r e a k h i m n a g , wh Is o va e r - a xc a av n a d ted Vi i s t n c u a . nno T t h b e e . m i a n d sc e ri o p u t t ion se w e hi t c he h p i a t rag b r e a ar p s h ,
quoted the precedingnote.

THE PALLAVAS. 233
caves at Pancapandavamalai near Arcot in the North Arcot District.^ The first five
(excluding the lower cave at Trichinopoly) came into existence duing the reign of
Afahendravarman 1. as testified to by the inscriptions contained in themA Of these
five, the one at Mahendravadi is dedicated to Visnu and the other four to Siva. They
must have come into existence during the first half of the seventh century A.D,, as their
excavator Mahendravarman I. flourished during that period,* Of the remainingthree,
the Mandagappattu cave might also have come into existence during the same period.
The Pancapandavamalai cave is perhaps the last of them all,^
About the rathas at the Seven Pagodas, Mr. Fergusson says d “On the whole
it seems more probable that their date is somewhat earlier than 700, but their execu-
tion may have been spread over half a century or even more, so that absolute
precision is impossible in the present state of the evidence. Still until some fixed
date or some new information is afforded, 650 to 700 may, probably, be safely relied
upon as very nearly that at which the granite rocks at Mahavallipur were carved into
the wondrous forms which still excite our admiration there.” This, then, is the
approximate date of the construction of the rathas derivable from a study of the
sculptures and the architecture. Let us see if epigraphical research helps us towards
a closer approximation. The popular name of the Seven Pagodas is Mavalavaram®
which is believed to connect the town with the demon Mahabali overpowered by the
god Visnu in his vamana-avatara or dwarf-incarnation. Mr. Rice is of opinion that
the village owes its existence to the Banas mentioned above as descendants of the
demon Mahabali (or Mahabali-cakravartin).'^ But, in ancient Cola inscriptions
found at the Seven Pagodas, the name of the place is Mamallapurara
which is evidently a corruption of Mahamallapuram,® meaning ‘ the city or town
A
“ The monolithic caveat Paucapandavamalai consists ofseven cellswith six pairs of pillars. short distance
above the cells is arock-cut Jainaimage. On another portion of the same rock is an inscription of the Pallava
king Nandippottarasar, datedin thesoth year of his reign. It records the cutting-out of the image of a Jaina
goddess with that of apreceptor ofthe samecreed. In all probability themonolithic cave is alsoofJainaorigin ;
seeAT 2 ”- At Pallavaram n P e - ar 13 M 6 ad ! ras is a monolithiccavenow occupied by the Muhammada.ns. tT.h,e •inscriptions in
Pallava-Grantha characters found in this cavewere brought to mynotice by Mr. K. V. Subramania Aiyar, B.A.,.
of the Madras Archasological Survey. Theyconsistofbirzidas, som.e of which are similarto those engraved in
the Trichinopoly uppercave(AwitiiaHor 1903-4, p. 271). The Pallavaram cave may also have been excavated
durin'^ the reign of Mahendravarman I. On the hillat Tirukkalukkunram in the Chingieput District is a rock-
cut cavebelonging to the Pallava period.
^ See page 228 above.
There areanumberof other monolithic monuments which may be assigned with considerable certainty to-
the Pallavas. The Dharmaraja-ratha, the Ganesatemple, the Dharmaraja-mandapaand the Ramanuja-manilapa
atthe Seven'Pagodas andthe Atiranacandesvaratempleat Saluvanguppam bear inscriptions which prove beyond
doubtthat they were all excavated by Pallavakings. Besidesthese, there is a pretty large numberof caves at
the Seven Pagodas which bear no inscriptions. These may also be assigned to the Pallava period. At
Mamandur in‘the Arcot taluka of the North Arcot District are four rock-cut caves. One of them bears
an inscription in Pallava-Grantha characters which is very badly damaged. The irrigation tank which is not
far from the^e caves is called Citramega-talakain two Colainscriptions found ^in one of thecaves. Perhaps both
the caves andthetank owetheirexistence to a Pallava king named Citramegha (Director-General’s Annual
foriQO''-4 p 206). At Tirruvellarainear Trichinopolyare twomonolithic caves, onewithinthe enclosure of the
Visnu templeandtheother in the Sivatemple (Annual Report on for 1903-6, Part II, paragraph 4).
At‘Ara<randanallur near Tirukoilur in the South Arcot District is an unfinished rock-cutcave {Gazetteerof the
SouthArcot District, Vol. I, p. 371)- It may, for thepresent, be supposedthatall thesecaves came into existence
during the period of the Paliavas.
^Cave Temples of India, p. no f. = Carr’sSeven Pagodas, p. 66. _ ^ ’ _cS-ee ih..-s Mysore, Vcdi. tI P- 301.
8 Sonth-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 64. The Vaisnava saint Tirumahgai_ Alvar calls the piace Kadaruiialli, z_.e-
t‘ Mallai in the sea.” Mallai wasevidentlythe popularform of Mallapuram or Maharnallapuram.

archaeological report.
234
of Maharaalla.’ I have already mentioned the fact that Mahamalla occurs as a
surname of the Pallava king Narasimhavarman I. in a mutilated record at a ami
in the Bombay Presidency.^ It is thus not unlikely that Mahamallapuram or
Mavalavaram ri-as founded by the Pallava king Narasimhavarman, the contemporary
and opponent of the Calukya Pulike^in II., whose accession took place about A. D.
609 Professor Hultzsch is of opinion that the earliest inscriptions on the rathas are
of a king named Narasimha.’- It may, therefore, be concluded that the
villacre was originally called Mahamallapuram or Mamallapuram, after the Pallava king
Narilriihavarman I., and that the earliest of the rathasvitxt cut out by him. The re-
maining rathas must also have come into existence during the period of Pallava supre-
macy, but, perhaps ata somewhat later date.' Other monuments of Pallava rule" are the
large tank at Mahendravadi built by the Pallava king Mahendravarman 1.® and the
resm-oir at Tenneri in the Conjeeveram taluka.® The original name of the latter was
Tiraiyaneri^ which is mentioned in the Kasakudi plates. Other tanks must also have
existed at the time.' But these two are the only ones which can be identified with
certainty.
The Pallavas appear to have been Saivas at first® and accordingly adopted the
bull for their crest’® and the club {khaivanga) for their banner. Some of the kings
*
Seepage 228above.
- South-Ind, Inscrs., Vol. I, p. i.
3 The Ganesa temple and the Dharmaraja-mandapaare called Atyantakama-Pallaves'uara-grha. The same
nameisengraved on theoutsideof thethird storey ofthe Dharmaraja-ratha. Perhaps the lastwas completed by
Atyantalcama,whomight have constructedthe remainingrathasaswell as theGanesatempleandthe Dharmaraja-
mandapa. The Saliivahguppam cave was excavated by Atiranacanda*Pallava and was accordingly called
Atiranacanda Pallavesvara-grha, The identity of Atyantakamaand Atiranacaiula with anyof the kings known
fromthecopper-plate grants remains tobeestablished by future researches. The Coia inscriptions in the Shore
Temple at the Seven Pagodas mention three shrines at Mamallapuram, mz., Ksatriyasimha-Pallava-Isvara
Rajasimha-Pallava-Isvaraand Pallikondaruliya-devar, which were situated in the temple called Jalasayana, i.c,,
the ShoreTemple. Dr. Hultzsch thinks thetwo latter denoterespectively the Kailasanatha (called Rajasithha-
Pallavesvarainancient times) temple at Kaucipuram and the Srirahganayaka temple at PaHikouda near Virifi-
cipuram. Itseemstomevery unlikely that thetwo latter hadanythingto do with theShore Temple atthe Seven
Pagodas. Ksatri3^adriih3-Pallava-Isvara was in all probabilitythe ancient name of the principal shrine in the
Shore Temple. Rajasimha-Pallava-Isvara might be the name of the smaller shrine in the same temple, while
Fallikondaruliya-devar probably denotesthe shrine connectedwith the larger temple, where a large mutilated
statue ofthe god Visuu is lying. If my conjecture iscorrect,it may be concludedthat the Pallava king Rajasiraha
built the smaller ofthetwo shrines which go bythename of the Shore Temple. It is just possible that Ksatriya-
siihha vas anothername ofthesame king. In thiscase, the wholeofthe Shore Temple must have been built by
thePallava king Rajasimha, who constructed the Kailasanathatempleat Kaucipuram.
^ Itisnot unlikely that the shrine of Kailasanatha at Tiruppattur intheMusiri taluka ofthe Trichinopolv
District was built during the Pallava period ; seetheAnnualReporton Epigraphy for 1907-8,Part II,paragraph 9.
® See page 232above. The town of Mahendravadi wascalled JVlahendrapura in ancient times. Itmight have
beenfounded bythe Pallava king Mahendravarman I. orrenamed by him.
® As pointedout intheearlier portionofthis article (see page 220above, note 4), this tank was apparently
constructed by the Pallava king Tiraiyan, whose identity with any of the kings known from the copper-plate
grants andstoneinscriptionshas tobe disclosedby future researches.
^ South-Ind. Iusers., Vol. II, p. 345.
® The tank called Paramesvara-tataka at Kuram in the Chingleput Districtwas evidently constbucted bythe
Pallava king Paramesvaravarman 1. The reservoirat Mamandurin the Arcottaluka of the North Arcot District
probably came into existence duringthe periodof Pallavasupremacy. The Kaveripak and Uttaraniallur tanks
were probablylater ; see the Director-General’s for 1903-4, pp. 203 to 206.
® This maybe presumedfrom names like f^ivaskandavarman and Skandavarman borne by some of the
•earlier kings. ^ One of the laterkings was so staunch a Saiva that he declares he got rid of all his sins by
following the Saiva creed ; seepage 229above,andnote ii.
ISee alsop. 226 above, note 6 .

—
.
THE PALLAVAS.
235
who Issued the Sanskrt charters were probably adherents of the \'aisnava faith as
I have already remarked^ Jainism seems to have flourished along with these two
creeds and, if the Tamil Peyiyapuranam is to be believed, was in the ascendant
about the beginning of the seventh century A.D. There was a big monastery at a
place called Patalipuram (in the South Arcot District).- At Mayilappur in Madras there
were Jainas at the time when Tirunanasambandar visited the place.^ The Pandya
king Nedumaran was originally a jaina but was converted to the Saiva creed by
Tirunanasambandar,^ According to the Periyapiiranam, the saint Tirunavukkaraiar
(also called Appar), an elder contemporary of Tirunanasambandar, was first persecuted
and subsequently patronised by a Pallava king® wTo is said to have demolished the
Jaina monastery at Pataliputtiram and built a temple of Siva called Gunadaraviccaram.®
As the younger Tirunanasambandar appears to have been a contemporary ofthe Pallava
king Narasirtihavarman I., the elder Appar may be taken to have spent most of his life
in the reign of Narasimhavarman’s father Mahendravarman 1., one of whose surnames
was Gunabhara according to the Trichinopoly cave Sanskrt inscriptions.’ Ifall this be
true, the Pallava king Mahendravarman I. must have excavated a number of rock-cut
caves and dedicated most of them to the god Siva with the proverbial zeal of the new
^ Names like Visnugopa, Kuinaravisnu, and Simhavisnu warrant such a presumption.
- This name occurs in the modern proseversion of the Tamil Penyapuranam, while the original poetical
version of Sekkijar has the form Pataliputtiram. The late Professor Sundaram Pillai identified it with
Tiruppadirippuliyiir, the modern TiruppapuliyurnearCuddalorein the SouthArcot District {Ind. Ant,Vol XXV,
p. 121, note 36). This identification seems unlikely^ because Tiruppadirippuliyur is an ancient place mentioned
in the Tamil De'Ddramasa place sacred to the god Siva. Pataliputtiram, on theother hand, wasthe seat ofJaina
learningand appears tohavebeen acity not far from Tiruvadi in the South Arcot District. The ruler of
Tiruvadi seemsto have been a Pallava feudatory wdth the title Kadava.
^ Ep. Ind.^ Vol. VIIIj p. 290, note 7.
^ He is called Ninra-sIr-Nedumaran, “ Nedumaran of enduring fame.” He is said to have fought a
battle atNelveli and might, therefore, be identical with the Pandya king Maravarman Arikesarin, who claims,
to have defeated the army of Vilveli at Nelveli {Amiual Report on Epigraphy for 1907-08, Part II, para-
graph 28).
5 Comparewith this the followingverse ofthe Trichinopoly Caveinscription :
4 C. N
“Whilethekingcalled Gunabharaisaworshipper ofthelidga, let theknowledge,whichhasturnedbackfrom
hostile {mpaksa) conduct,bespread fora long time in theworld by this linga The ''hostile conduct” seems
toreferto thekingwho seemstohavebecome aworshipper ofSiva shortly before the inscription was engraved
In fact, it is notunlikelythat Gunabharahad originallybeen a Jaina and persecuted the Saivas. In this case,
the identity of Gunabhara with the Pallava king who first persecuted and then patronized the Saiva saint
Tirunavukkarasar becomesveryprobable. This identification isconfirmed bythe fact that Tirunanasambandar,
whose friend Siruttonuawasapparently a general of the Pallava king Narasithhavarman L, was a younger
contemporary ofTirunavukkarasar. It isworthy ofnotehere that the sister's husband of Tirunavukkarasar—*
named Kalippagaiyar—losthislifein fighting for hissovereignagainst the kingof the North.”
® ThePeriyapurdnam hereseemsto use theword Kadava asa synonym ofPallava. in thecase of Aiyadigal
Kadvarkon, whowasadmittedly a Kadava, he issaid to have beenborn in the Pallava family and is called a
Pallava. The forms Kaduvatti, Kadvatti and Kadupatti also oecur in epigraphical records {Ep, Ind.^
Vol. VII, p. 25). How theyare connected with the word Kadava on the one hand and Pallava on the other
are questions which await solution by futureresearches. In thetime of Vikrama-Colatherewas achief ofGingee
in the South Arcot District who called himselfa Kadava {Ind. Ant,, Vol. XXII, p. 143). Kopperunjingadeva,
who subverted the Cola sovereignty duringthe reignof Rajaraja III. (A, D. 1216 to 1248), was a Kadava and
called himselfaPallava Vol. VII, pp. 164 and 167). The name Gunadaraviccaram was evidently
called afterthe Pallava king Gunadara^which is synonymous with Gunabhara, asurname of Mahendravarman 1.
^Accordingly, Tirunavukkarasar must havebeenacontemporary ofthe Pallava king Mahendravarman I. This
conclusion is also warrantedbyotherconsiderations ; see note 5 above.
y Souih'lnd, Inscrs.^ Vol. 1 , p. 29f.
2 H 2

archeological report.
238
This statement implies that he helped the former against the latter. Perhaps, the
three were allied together against the Pallavas. Though almost nothing is known
of the history of the Ceras during this period, it is not unlikely that they combined
with the Colas and Pandyas frequently against the aggressive Pallava, as they seem
to have done during the reign of Pulike§in II.
About the beginning of the 7th century, the Telugu and Kanarese districts of
the Madras Presidencjy w'hich once belongedto the Pallavas, were annexed, respectively
by the Eastern Calukyas of Vengi and the Western Calukyas of Badami.^ In spite of
the repeated boasts of the Pallavas to have conquered the Coks and Pandyas, no
inscriptions of the former have been found further south than Trichinopoly. It has,
therefore, to be concluded that the Pallava dominions in the 7th and 8th centuries
comprised only the Tondai-mandalam including the modern districts of Chingleput
North and South Arcot and the southern portion of Nellore.^
At what exact date the Pallava sovereignty came to an end, it is not at present
possible to say. But Nandivarman Pallavamalla, mentioned above as having been
defeated by the Western Calukya Vikramaditya II., is believed to be the last king of
the family, and he seems to have reigned for not less than 50 years.^ This may take
us to the third quarter of the 8th century.
The later history of the Pallavas has now to be noticed. One branch of the
family claiming some connection with the Gahgas of Mysore occupied a considerable
part of Tondai-nadu until the close of the 9th century.^ These have been called
Ganga-Pallavas in order to distinguish them from the other Pallavas.® The former
also claimed descent from the Mahahharata hero A^vatthaman and belonged to the
Bharadvaja gotra^ Five kings of the family are known, vis., Vijaya-Dantivikrama-
varman, Vijaya-Nandunkramavarman, Vijaya-Nrpatuhgavikramavarraan, Vijya-
Kampavikramavarman, and \diaya-Aparaiitavikramavarman.^ Other kings, who, to
^ After the eastern campaign of Pulikesin II , the kingdom of Vebgi was established by his younger
brother, Kubja-Visnuvardhana. That the Ceded districts had been annexed by the Calukyas of Badami is
rendered probable by their copper-plates found in them, see page 229above.
- See page222 above, note 2. The Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsiangcallsthis tract ofcountry Ta-lo-pi-ch’a or
—
Dravida nnt Tondai-nadu or Tondai-mandalam as it was known in later times. If thisis not due to mere
accident, it maybe thatthe latternamehad notyet been inventedor, at least, had notbecome quite popular.
^See page 232 above, note2.
^Though the Pauranic genealogyofthe Gahga-Pallavas isidentical with that of the regular Pallavas, the
two families have to be kept distinct. No mythical ancestors of the latterare mentioned in thethreecopper-
plates of the family hitherto known. WhileNandivarman Pallavamallaboasts of having been descended from
kings mentioned in earlier records, such as Skandavarman, Visnugopa, Virakurca and Siiiihavarman,
Nrpatunga claimed Vimala, Konknnika and other kingsforhis ancestors [Ep.lnd.> Vol. IV., p. iSi). Konkanika
is evidently connected with Kongunivarman, the first king of the Gaiiga dynast}^ Consequently, the
Gafiga-Pallavas appeartohavebeen related to the Gangas. The exact nature of this relationship must be
disclosed by future researches. The names of the Gaiiga-Pallava kings are in most cases preceded by the
words kdvijaya^ which donot occurin connection with those oftheregular Pallavas.
5 Ep- Ind., Vol. IV, p. 182. 6 p. i8r.
7 The inscriptions of Dantivikramavarman range from the loth to the 51st year of his reign and have
been found at Uttaramallur and Kuram in the Chingleput Districtand Gudimallam and TiruccanurIn the North
Arcot District. The epigraphs of Nandivikramavarman, so farcopied, are from Siyamangalam, Viriilcipuram
Tiruvallam and Sadupperi inthe North Arcot DistrictandfromKiiur, Dalavanurand Perumandur in the South
Arcot District. They range in date fromthe 3rd tothe 62nd yearofhis reign. Theseof Nrpatuboavikrama
have been found at Kaverippakkam, Ambur, Gudimallam and Tiruvalangadu in the North Arcot" District*
Uttaramallurand Kuraminthe Chingleput District; Kiiurand Tiruvadi in the’South Arcot District; Lalgudl
T in he t ^ he ea T r r l i i c e h s i t n k o n p o ol w y n D i i n s s t c r r i i c p t ti ; o T n ir o u f c h c i e s n r n e a i m g b n il i n s d d i a i t n ed th i e n T h a i n s j 7 o i r h e y D e i a s r tr a i n ct d ; t a h n e d la N t a e r st tta i m n a t l h a e i i 2 n 6t t h he y P e u a d r u . kko’ K t a t m a p i a S v t a at r e -
k m a a m n s a r n e d cor S d d s l a a r p e ur f a r m om m Ut t t h a e r N a o m r al t l h ur A , rc U o t t tu D k is k t a r d ic u t an a d nd Ka r v a a n n g t e a f n r d o a m la t m he int 6 h t e h C to hin t g h l e ep 2 u 5 t th Dis y t e r a i r ct; of and his Ka r v e e i r ^ i n ppa O k- f
Aparajita asingle inscription hasbeen copied at Tiruttaniin theNorth Arcot District.

THE PALLAVAS.
239
judge from their names, must have also belonged to the same family are Vijaya-
Narasiriihavikramavarman,^ Yijaya-SkandaSisyavikramavarman^ and Vijaya-Isvaravar-
man.^ The history of the family has not yet been completely worked out and, there-
fore, it is not possible to state what relationship the latter bore to the former.^ The
initial date of the earliest king Dantivikramavarman takes us roughly to A.D. 760,
which may overlap with the reign of Nandivarman Pallavamalla.® Nrpatuhgavikrama
was apparently the most powerful of the family, as his inscriptions have been found
over a larger extent of country than those of the rest." Aparajitavikrama was
evidently the last member of the family.’’ In the battle of Sripurambiya (Tirup-
pirambiyam near Kumbakonam) Aparajita defeated the Pandya king Yaraguna.®
The former was, later on, overcome by the C5la king Aditya and his dominions
annexed by the Colas about the end of the ninth century A.D.® The Western Gahgas
of Gahgavadi in the Mysore State and the Banas were feudatories of the Gahga-
Pallavas. The Banas seem to have been governing a considerable portion of the
North Arcot District, north of the river Palar.’^ One of the chief towns, if not the
capital,^® of the Banas was Tiruvallam in the Gudiyatam taluka of that district, A
number of kings of this feudatory family are knovvn.’^ But we are not concerned with
their history just now. It is enough to remark that the Co|a king Parantaka I.,
who reigned from A.D. 907 to about 948, claims to have uprooted the Banas
and to have made over their territory to a Ganga feudatory of his.^®
Side by side with the Gahga*Pallavas there was another family which probably
^ 'rhree records of this king are known, two from Kijmutlugur in the North Arcot Districtandthe third
from Bahgavadi inthe Mysore State.
2 'I'he Rayakota plates belong to his reign 5 Ep. Ind,, Vol. V, p. 49. Thevillage grantedbythe inscription
musthavebeen situated near Udayendiram in the Gudiyatam taluka ofthe North Arcot District.
Three inscriptions ofthiskingare known, roiz. two from Hanumantapuram inthe Salem District andthethird
from Hebbini inthe Mysore State. They have been editedbyProfessor Hultzsch {Ep. Ind,, Vol. VII,pp. 23 to 25).
^ The localities where the inscriptions of these three kings have been foundshowthat they were probably
governing some province between the Ganga and Pallava territories. The fact that: three ofthese inscriptions
are in Vaiteluttu [Ep. Ind.t Vol. VII,p. 23!.) and three othersexhibit affinities with that alpha.bst (ibid., Vol. IV,
pp. 177 and 360,and Vol. VII, p. 22) is significant. The Ceraswho used the Vattejuttu alphabet must have
indirectly had some influence eitherwith these kings themselves orinthe countryoverwhich they ruled.
5 Ibid.jVol. VIII, p. 292. Itis possiblethat the reignsof theGanga-Pallava kings overlapped with oneother.
In this case, the first Ganga-Pallava ruler might notbe contemporaneous with Nandivarman Pallavamalla.
6 Seenote 7 on page238 above.
7 The dates ofthe other kings do not leave any margin forAparajitavikrama. This isnota sufficientjusti-
fication for saying that Aparajita was onlyanothername of Nrpaiuhga. It is just possible that he was the co-
regent of Nrpatunga forsometime and reigned independently a short periodafterthe deathof Nrpatuhga. At
any rate, unless the identityof Aparajita with Nrpatuhga is established by indisputable evidence, we haveto
presume that they weretwo distinctkings.
8 Ep, Ind., Vol. IX, p. 87. " Ibid.,p. 88 f.
Prthivipati 1. wasthe feudatory of Nrpatuhga, and a certain Rajaditya, son of Prthivigangaraiyar, was the
feudatory of Vijaya-Kampa.
11 The Banas played a very important partduringtheperiod of Gahga-Pallava rule. Originally, they seem
to havebeen the enemies of the Gahgas. There was,however, anintermarriagebetweenthetwo. The daughter of
Prthivipati I. marrieda Bana king named Banavidyadhara. The Nolambas of Nolambavadi were the enemies
ofthe Banas.
12 Theprovince governed bythem wascalled Perumbanappadi, which extended from Puhganur in the west
to Kalahasti in theeast. The southern boundary oftheprovince was probably the river Palar ; Annual Report on
Epigraphyfor 1906*07, Part II, paragraph 45.
They claim to be lords of Parivipuri—perhapsidentical with Parigi near Hindupur in the Anantapur
District. Consequently, their capitalw^asprobably Parivipuri. Tiruvallam is called Vanapuram "the town of the
Banas’ in its inscriptions. Consequently, it may be presumedthatTiruvallam Was at least one oi the chief towns
oftheBanas
s
South-Ind. Inscrs,,Vol. Ill, p.89.
1^ See e.g\ Ep. Ind., Vol. III., p. 75.
1® Ihid.i Vol. IX, p. 217. Parantakaappearstohave reignednot less than 41 years.
1® Soiiih-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 381.

1
archaeological report.
2^0
claimed descent from Nandivarman Pallavamalla and which appears to have
been reigning in a portion of Tondai-nadu Va a y n i d ra o m f eg t a h n e C m o e ] n a tio c n ou e n d tr m y. th D e a N n a t l . a v y a i r r m a a - -
p i M n r a s a h c b a ri a r p a n t j d io a h n a s o m f ha t a h v s e e t T b h r e e i e p n l k i f i c o n a u g n n e d of i i n t n s h c e r C i T o p o t n n i j o d e n a e i ; v y ^ e a r r am ; “ T a e n U d a a rr f e e n w nd v a il N l a a n ge d s ip m pot t t h a e ra T i a y n a ] r o , r w e ho a s n e d
South Arcot districts and Nandippottaraiyar, uho belonged to the Pallavatilaka
familv are the known names of this series of Pallava kings. The last mu.st have
been' a contemporary of the Gahga-Pallava Nrpatunga mentioned above, Future
research must decide what political relationship the Gahga-Pallavas bore to thi _ s family.
Dantiga, ruler of KancI, subjugated by the Rastrakuta king Govinda III. in or just
before A.D. 804,° might have been either a Gahga-Pallava or a regular descendant
of Nandivarman Pallavamalla.
The names of another series of Pallava kings are furnished by the Amaravatl
pillar now preserved in the Madras Museum.® Curiously enough, the inscription has to
be read from the bottom upwards instead of from the top downwards.^ Seven
kings are mentioned here, and their ancestry is traced to Bharadvaja through
Asvatthaman and Drona. Some of thenames occurring in this inscription figure among
those ofthe ancestors of Nandivarman Pallavamalla. Thelastof them, Sirnhavarman 1 .»
isreported to have goneto the mountain Sumeruin order to plant a pillarof victory.*^ He
thencrossedthe Bhagirathi (the Gahga river), the Godavariand Kr-snaverna rivers and
reachedthe townofDhanyaghata, i,e. Amaravatl in the modern Guntur District. There
he visited the Buddhist shrine and listened to a discourse on the law. The rest of
the inscription is mutilated. The importance of this record for Pallava history
is not apparent at present. But the alphabet inwhich it is engraved is not archaic.
As the end is lost, we have no means of ascertaining if it is an original document
or a copy of some older record.® If it is the former, the kings must belong to a
local family, which is mentioned now'here else.^®
' B-p. hid., Vol. VIII, p. 290. ^ ^ Ibid., p. 293.
3 Tillasthanam, Tiruccennambundi and Sendalai in the Tanjore District and Tiruvadiin the South Arcot
District.
^ Ep, hid,, Vol. VI5 p. 331. ° Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 292 f. ® SoutJi-Ind. Inscvs., Vol. I, pp. 25 to 28.
^ Anotherinscriptionwhichhas to be read from the bottom upwards is found at Budamanarayalapadu in
the Fodili division ofthe Nellore District. Itbelongs to the reignof the Eastern Calukya king Vi.suuvardhana-
Maharaja (P. i ofNdlore Inscriptions edited by Messrs. Butterworth and Venugopaul Chetty). A third simi-
larrecordis No. 393ofthe epigraphical collection for 1904from Malepadu in the Cuddapa District. It belongs
tothereignofthe Cola king Vikramaditya Satyaditya. Of the Manimangalam inscription ofthe Cola king
Virarajendra I. {Sonth-Ind. Inscrs,, Vol. Ill, p. 67), lines30 to 35, have toberead upwards from the bottom.
s Unlikethe earlier genealogical inscriptions ofthe Pallavas, the Amaravatl pillar mentionsas son of king
Pallava, a prince,who,to judge from his name, musthave flourished in historical times. This isMahendravarman,
who isprobably meant for Mahendravarman I. In the Kasakudi plates, Asokavarman is referred to as theson
cfking Pallava. Here A.sokavarman isevidentlya reminiscenceofthe Maurya emperor Asuka who lived long
beforethe Pallavas. The fact thata historical name like that of Mahendravarman isgiven in the Amaravatl
pillarto the son of the mythical king Pallava may be taken by itself to show that the inscription belongs
toa periodmuch laterthan thatof the first king whobore the name.
® The names mentionedare thoseof ancient kings. Consequently the Amaravatl inscription might only
beacopy of an older document. The Udayendiram plates ofNandivarman Pallavamalla contain a similar
record. They wereapparently copied 3t a later lime fromthe original document. The events described in them
must have taken place at .a period much earlier than that warrantedbythe alphabet in which the platesare
engraved. Anotherinstance is furnished by some of the stone inscriptions of the Banas foundat Tiruvallam
which are admittedlycopies of older records [Southdnd,Inscrs, Vol. Ill, Nos. 43, 44, 45, 47 and 48).
Onthe first sign of weakness ofthe ColasofTanjore, about the beginning ofthe 12thcenturyA.D.,several
lucal families came into prominence claimingrelationship with the Pallavas of Kaildpuram and theColas o^
Uraiyur. It maybe that Sirnhavarman 11. belonged to that period, if the Amaravatiinscription is an original
document. Neither henor any of his ancestors is,how’ever, known from other records hithertoaccessible.

THE PALLAVAS.
241
It has already been mentioned that the Ceded districts once formed part of the
Pallava dominions. Soon after the disruption of Paliava sovereignty, a separate pro-
vince, known as the Nolambavadi 32,000, came into existence. It comprised the
greater portion of the modern Bellary District and the northern and north-eastern
portions of Mysore. ^ The capital of the province was at first apparently Hemavati
in the Anantapur District, called Penjeru or Henjeru in ancient times.^ The
Nolambas claim to belong to the I§vara-vam§a and were descended from Trinayana-
Pallava,® ruler of Kahci, perhaps identical with the king of the same name, who
was defeated by the early Calukya king Vijayaditya, according to later tradition.* The
earliest records of the family belong to the ninth century A.D. ® At Dharmapuri
in the Salem District has been found a stone inscription of Mahendradhiraja Nolamba,
who boasts of having destroyed the Bana family.® The Nojambas also figure in
Tamil records as committing cattle raids during the Gahga-Pallava period. Two
inscribed stones found at Ambur in the North Arcot District refer to such raids.'' A
later record found near Vellore mentions a chief named Tribhuvanadhira-Nulamba
Pallava-Murari.® These references show how far the influence of the Nolambas
6
extended beyond Nolambavadi. The Western Ganga Marasimha II. (A.D. 963-4
to 974) boasts of having destroyed the Nolambas.® The Cola king Rajaraja I.
(A.D. 985 to at least 1013) also conquered Nulambapadi.^* Kampili in the Bellary
District seems to have been the capital of this province during the period of rule of
the Calukyas of Kalyani.^* Epigraphical references may be adduced to show that
the Pallavas continued in that part of the country and that they exercised some
sort of power as late asthe 13th century A.D.^®
The Pallavas of the Tamil country seem to have taken service under the
Colas after the Gahga-Pallavas were conquered by Aditya about the end of the 9th
century A.D.^® Karunakara-Tondaiman, who, accordingto the Tamil poem Kalingattti-
Parani led the expedition against Kalihga during the reign of Kulottuhga I.
(A.D. 1070 to about A.D. 1118), was a Pallava and was the lord of Vandal, i.e.
Vaiidalur in the Chingleput District.** Among the vassals of Vikrama-Cola mentioned
in the Vikkirama-^dlan-tdS., the Tondaiman figures first.*® In the wmr of Pandya
succession, which took place in the 12th century A.D., the Tondaiman played
a very important part and was the ally of Kula§ekhara, one of the claimants.*®
1 Bombay Gazetteev, Vol. I, Part II, p. 3^^*
2 Mr. Rice’s Mysore, Vol.I, p. 307.
^ Epigrciphia Carnatica, Vol. XII, Si- 28.
4 South’Ind. Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 50*
Ep. Cam, Vol.XII, Introduction, p. 5.
6 A7tnual Report on Epigraphy for 1900-T,paragraph n,
7 Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, p. 182 f. Inthereign of theGanga-Pallava king Nrpatuhga, the Nolambas invaded
Amaiyur (theancient name of Ambur) twice and seized cattle. They were driven back by two officers ofthe
Gangaking.
8 Ihid., p. 83.
9 Hebore thetitle Nolambakuldntakadeva ibid. Vol. V. p. 178.
South-lnd. Inscrs., Vol.Ill, p. 5.
11 Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, p. 214.
Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II,p. 333'
See page 239 above.
Ind. Ant., Vol XIX, p. 337-
Vol. XXll, p. 143-
Mahavamsa, Chapter LXXVII, pp. 248 and 249

,njo archaeological reports.
From the account of this war given in the Mahavaihsa, it appears that the dominions
of the Tondaiinan could not have been very far from the Pandya country. In a
Tanjore inscription belonging to a later period, the name Tondaiman is applied to a
local chief named Samantanarayana, who granted to Brahmanas a portion of the
village of Karundiitaigudi,^ the modern Karattattahgudi. Thus, the name 1 ondai-
maii actually travelled from the Pallava into the Cola country. There is, therefore,
reason to suppose that the Tondaiman of Pudukkottai, who bears the title Pallava
Raja,^ is descended from the Pallavas, who form the subject of this paper.
In the Telugu country, inscriptions have been found of local chiefs tracing their
ancestry to the mythical king Trinayana-Pallava, whose name figures also as
Mukkanti-Kaduvetti.* These chiefs claim to belong to the Bharadvaja-j>‘J/ria: and to
have the bull for their crest. They were also lords of Kancipura and devotees
of the goddess Kamakotyambika, i.e. the KamaksI temple at Conjeeveram. Inscrip-
tions of these chiefs have been found in the Cuddapah, Kurnool and Nellore districts
and reach down to the 13th century." Thus, though the Pallavas ceased to be the
ruling power about the middle of the 8th century A.D., the memory of their dominion
was kept up in the Kanarese, Telugu, and Tamil countries down to a very late period.
We have now to examine if there are any Pallavas in our midst beyond the royal
family of Pudukkottai. The Pallavas are believed to be identical with the Kurumbas,
of whom the Kurumbar of the Tamil country and the Kurubas of the Kanarese
districts and of the Mysore State may be taken as the living representatives.® The
We
‘ aretold that after gathering his troops in the mountains of Tondamana, Kulasekhara regained the
stronghold of Mahgala—perhaps identical with Tirumafigalam in the Madura District. Again, the Singhalese
generalissaidtohave fought against the relationsol Tondamana sometime before capturing SivaliputtSr—the
modern Srivillipputtur in the Tinnevelly district.
- Soiitk-Ind. Inscrs,,\Q\. II, p. 113.
® SirWalterElliot’s Coins ofSouthern India^ p. 43.
KR. 61 I , ns 6 c 2 ri a p n t d io 6 n 3 s ; of an th d e K N G el . lo 2 y 4 e ; Di s s e t e ri 3\ ct s , o t e li d t it A e n d nu b a y l M R e e s p s o r r s t . on But E t p e i r g w r o a r p t h h y f a o n r d 19 V 0 e 7- n 0 u 8 g , op P a a u r l t C II h , et p ty a , ra D g . ra 4 p 3 h , 6 7 9 2’ ;
T Kr h s e na K v o e t r a na ch r i i e v f e s r” cla t i h m ro t u o g h h av t e he ob f t a a v i o n u e r d of the the dis g t l r o i r ct iou o s f T “ r si i . n ' a t y - a th n o a u - s P a a nd lla vi v l a lag l e E s p. o I n nd t . h , e Vo s l o . uth V e ] r , n p. ba 1 n 5- k ) of x t j h , "; g :
Velanandu chief Malia I. is reportedto have “enteredinto an alliance with Trinetra-Pallava, started^for the
conquest of the Dekhan, obtained possessionof the Satsahasracountry and tookuphisresidenceatDhanada-
g d W i n h f r f e a e . n r ” ent { t E h f p e r . o C l m o n a d l . n a , d V p o o m \ w . u e c r I h V b , e la g p t . a e n r 34 t t ) o h . an s P h e o t r w h h e a s T p i r s g i n l t s o h c e o a f n T a r w - i e P n a a a k l y l n a a e n v s a a s - o P a v a n e l d r l c a w o v h a m e e n a , b n y c d o t n h T s e r e i q a n u n e e c t n i t r e l a n y - t , Pa C l s a l o l a m u v e k a y h a o e f re k t i h n m e g en l t o V c i i a o j l n a e y f d a a d m i i w t l e v i r a s e
became possessed of sufficient strength to assert their individuality, they found it convenient to trace their
ancestryto theancient Cola king Karikala or to the ancient Pallava king Trinayana-Pallava The familv of
c t T C i h h n o e i e L l e s a u t f e s h s g e t o u w f - w o A C h . T o n o a d n n a u 1 o j s a p o h l e r e w n e y i R l t e y w h w p e h o r d i r o e t e s t , c t w o n a h n e u r e r m r e E e e b d p f e o i t t r r h g h l e e r e , e i n a s r o p s b h S r l y u r u i d a l g f m i r o e i n r a d f g i t 1 c o o 9 t r a 0 h i c t 5 e g l i - i o a 0 n c n i 6 , o s m , un c c s P t l o a o r a u r y m i l t . e m d e I p d I n o A , l o i t d t f p e i e a c s v w r a c e l a e r g c n r y h t r e i l a e a w p f f t e h s r i l o o l 5 n m c . s l b h a t e i i h F p e m a c w i m o i C n i n t o g l n h l i e a e P c t s s a h t l e e o l l d f i P a k a v e U l a b r l t " y a a h a v e i n d a y c K e s u e s o r s c t t e a a r n s L y t a o n a w p r i d p t c o h s V m e e e e l d i n a t t n h t i - e o o r I n n t d e h o „ d e f
= AnnualReport on Epigraphy for 1905-06,Part II,paragraph
7.
with ' th S e ee Pa p l . la 2 v 2 a 1 s a i b s o a ve s , su n m o e t d e . 4. The I y n M a r r . e C f r u o r l t e h ’ e s r M id a e n n u ti a f l ie o d f w t i h t e h C t h h i e n m g o U d P e u r i n Di P s a t l r l i i c s t a th n e R i V r , V . ntit ^ v of thhe« K v urunibars
ofSouthern India, p. 37, Sir Walter Elliotsays that the Kuru^^s“ wereaSJked
n H a e me e d nco A u d n o t n e d r a e i d o a r n To ob n s d t a i i n m at a e n, re t s h i e st s a o n n ce ( , il b le u g t iti a m f a t t e e r a su c s c t o a r i d ni i n n o g - t e o n s m o p me rp ) v/t o * rbrothe i r j oft j he i rul^er of^" TChhoAlam ^ andalam.
corporated itwith the Cholaterritorieschangingthenameto
Tondamandallm.-^ Atth^ ptrsent'day"the'ir'^
f
th
r
e
om
Cote.
prob.bl^, oFtel ° .f, ' ™ ’“ , P'"*""“““"y ™”<IConteoeram
b.

THE PALLAVAS. 243
kings ofthe Vijayanagara dynasty are also supposed to have been Kurubasd In one of
the inscriptions of the Tanjore temple belonging to the i ith century, a certain
Velan Adittan Is called Pirantaka-Pallavaraiyan, meaning “the chief of the Pallavas of
Parantaka.” ^ Sekki]ar, the author of the Tamil Periyapuranam, was a Vellala
by caste and got from his patron, the Cola king Anapaya, the title Uttama§o]a-
Pallavarayan, meaning “the chief of the Pallavas of Uttama^olaT Uttama-
§ola® and Parantaka"* are titles of Cola kings and the word Pallava seems to
be used in both of the titles as an equivalent of Vellala, or the caste of agri-
culturists to which both of them belonged.® In the Telugu country, too, some
of the Reddis who belonged to the fourth or cultivating caste, called themselves
Pallava-Trinetra and Pallavaditya? Sir Walter Elliot has told us that Pallavaraja
is one of the thirty gotras of the true Tamil-speaking Vellalas of Madura, Tanjore and
Arcot. It is borne by the Cola Vellalas inhabiting the valley of the Kaverl, in Tan-
jore, who lay claim to the first rank. All these facts taken together seem to show that
there was some sort of connection between the cultivating caste and the Pallavas in
the Tamil as wellas in the Telugu country. The available evidence is, however, not
sufficientto formulate the nature of this connection. But it maytentatively be supposed
that some of the Pallavas settled down as cultivators soon after all traces of their
sovereignty disappeared. The other sections of the agricultural class were probably
proud of their association and considered it an honour to be looked upon as Pallavas.
V. Venkayya.
^ In hisCoins of SouthernIndia, p. 90,Sir Walter Elliotsays : However uncertain the sourceof the other
families maybe, thecorrectness of thatassigned tothe earliest Vijayanagara dynastycannotbe questioned, forit
has always been known asthe Kuruba line/*
^ South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 140-
3 This was the surname first of Madhurantaka, son of Gandaraditya and then of Rajarajas .son Rajendra-
Cola I. It must also havebeen borne by Anapaya.
^ There seem to have been several Cola kings bearing thisname. Two ofthem arewell known to students
of Cola history,, viz., Parantaka I., sonof Aditya 1. and Parantaka II., father of Rajaraja I. There seem to
have been severalotherCola princes who bore the name.
« Similarnames are : Mummadi-Soja-Nirttamarayan (i), Pahcavaninadevi-Nadagamayyan (2), Nittavinoda-
Vadyamarayan Arinjigai-Kamarapperaiyan Mummadi-Sola-Kadigaimarayan Mummadi-Sola
(3), (4), (5),
Tongarperaiyan(6), Sembiyan-Perungavidi(7),Rajaraja-Perunayisan(8), Sembiyan-Korrapperuhgani(9),Rajaraja-
Ganitadhirajan (10), Pahcavan-Mahgalapperaiyan (11), Vira-Sola-Perundayyan (t2), Keralantaka-Perundayyan
(13), Ksatriyasikhamani-Perungannan (14), Rajaraja-Perundaccan (15), Ksatriyasikhamani-Perundattan
(ib'i, Mummadi-Sola-Brahmamarayan (17), and Rajendra-Sola-Brahmarnarayan (18). In the foregoing eighteen
surnames or titles, the first portion invariably denotes the nameofa king and the second portion gives the
profession or caste to which the individual belonged, with acomplimentary epithet, the whole title meaning
“ the great dancing-master, dramatist, carpenter, goldsmith, brazier, Brahmana, etc., of the king,’^whose nnme
is prefixedto the title,
6 Ep. hid.s Vol.Ill, p. 286,and Vol. VIH, pp. 9 and lo ; AnnualReport on Epigraphy for iSg^^oo, para-
graph 57.
7 Coins of Southern India, p. 42.
2 I 2

—
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS PUBLISHED
UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY.
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title of work. ofauthor. publication.
India*
Illustrations of ancient buildings H. H. Cole, Lieutenant, R.E., W. H. Allen & Co.,
in Kashmir. Superintendent, Archaeolo- 13, Waterloo Place,
gical Survey, North-West- London, S. W., 1869.
ern Provinces.
Report in connection with oper- Lieutenant H. H. Cole l-C00 0
ations in the N.-W. Provinces
andthe Punjab; etc., for 1869-70.
Four reports made during the A. Cunningham, Director- Government Central
years 1862-63-64-65, Volume I. General, Archaeological Press, Simla, 1871.
(C. S.). Survey of India.
Four reports made during the Ditto Ditto.
years 1862-63-64-65, Volume II.
(C. S.)
Report for the year 1871-72, Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
Volume III. (C. S.) ment Printing,
Calcutta, 1873.
Illustrations of buildings near H. H. Cole, Lieutenant, R.E., W. H. Allen & Co.,
Muttraand Agra, showing the late Superintendent, 13, Waterloo Place,
mixed Hindu-Mahomedan style Archaeological Survey, London, S.W., 1873,
of Upper India. North-WesternProvinces.
“Tree and Serpent Worship'^ James Fergusson, D.C.L., Ditto.
from the sculptures of the F.R.S.
Buddhist Topes at Sanchi and
Amaravati.
Report for the year 1871-72, J. D. Beglar and A. C. L. Superintendent, Govern-
Delhi and Agra, Volume IV, Carlleyle, Assistants, ment Printing,
(C. S.) Archeological Survey of Calcutta, 1874.
India.
-T
of( TInd , ia . ) N , “T w b hich e h x e te c n o d nt o i v n e u r ed th s e er y i e e a s r o s f 1 r S e 6 p 2 o - r 1 t 8 s 84 b . y i A n . clu C s u iv n e n , i a n r g e h m a a m r ( k D e i d re ( c C t . or S - . G ) e i n n er t a hi i s o i f is t t. he Archteolog^ical Ssuurrvveeyy
Therepoits ofthe New Imperial Series, which began in 1874and are still inprogress, are marked (N. J. S.}.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 245
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
l]^D\k—contd.
Report of the first season^s opera- J. Burgess, Archaeological W. H. Allen & Co.,
tions in the Belgam and Kaladgi Surveyor and Reporter to 13, Waterloo Place,
districts. (N. I. S.) Government. London, S.W., 1874.
The Antiquities of Orissa, Volume Rajendraldla Mitra Wyman & Co., Calcutta,
I. '875-
Report for the year 1872-73, A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
Volume V. (C. S.) General, Archaeological ment Printing, Calcutta,
Survey of India. '875-
Report on the antiquities of J. Burgess, Archaeological W. H. Allen. & Co.,
Kathi^w^dand Kachh. (N. I. S.) Surveyor and Reporter to 13, Waterloo Place,
Government, Western London, S.W., 1876.
India.
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
Volume I, Inscriptions of Asoka. General, Archaeological ment Printing, Calcutta,
Survey of India. 1877.
The Rock Temples of Elura or J, Burgess 1877.
Verul.
Report on the antiquities in the Burgess, Archaeological W. H. Allen & Co.,
J.
Bidar and Aurangabad districts. Surveyor and Reporter to 13, Waterloo Place,
(N. 1. S.) Government, Western London, S.W., 1878.
India.
Report of a tour in Eastern Raj- A. C. L. Carlleyle, Assistant, Superintendent, Govern-
putanain 1871-72; and 1872-73, Archaeological Survey. ment Printing, Calcutta,
Volume VI. (C. S.) 187S.
Report of a tour in Bundelkhand J, D. Beglar, Assistant, Ditto.
and Malwa, 1871-72; and in Archaeological Survey.
the Central Provinces, 1873-74,
Volume Vn. (C. S.)
Report of a tour through the Ditto * Ditto.
Bengal Provinces of Patna,
Gaya, Mongir, and Bhagalpur;
TheSantalParganas, Manbhum,
Singhbhum, and Birbhiim, Ban-
kura, Raniganj, Bardwan and
Hughli in 1872-73, Volume
Vlll. (C. S.)
Pali Sanskrit, and old Canarese J. F. Fleet, Bombay Civil G. E. Eyre and W.
Inscriptions from the Bombay Service, and J. Burgess, Spottiswoode, London,
Presidency and parts of the Archaeological Surveyor, 1878.
Madras Presidency and Maisur, Western India.
arranged and explained,
The Stupa ofBharhut; a Bud- A. Cunningham, Director- W. H, Allen & Co,,
dhist monument ornamented General, Archaeological 13, Waterloo Place,
vi^ith numerous sculptures, illus- Survey of India. London, S.WL, 1879.
trative of Buddhist legend and
historyin the third centuryB. C.
1

— —
archaeological reports
246
Name and official designation Press anddate of
Title ofwork. ofauthor. publication.
India contd.
Rep 1 o 8 r 7 t 5- of tours in Central Doab A. C. L. Carlleyle, ist Assis- Superintendent, Govern-
and Gorakhpur in 1874-75 and tant, Archseological Survey, . ment Printing,
76, \"olume XII. (C. S.) Calcutta, J879.
Report of a tour in the Central A. Cunningham, Director- Ditto.
Provinces in 1873-74 and General, Archseological
11887746--75, Volume IX. (C. S.) Survey of India.
Report of tours in Bundelkhand Ditto Ditto, 1880.
and Malwa in 1874-75 and
77, Volume X. (C. S.)
Report of tours in the Gangetic D itto Ditto.
Provinces from Badaon to Bihar
in 1875-76 and 1877-78,Volume
XI. (C. S.)
Report on the Amardvati topeand R. Sewell, Madras Civil G. E. Eyre and W.
excavations on its site in 1877. Service. Spottiswoode, London,
1880.
The Antiquities of Orissa, Rdjendraldla Mitra W. Newman & Co.,
Volume 11. Calcutta, i§8o.
The Cave Temples of India. J. Fergusson and J. Burgess V/. H. Allen & Co.,
13, Waterloo Place,
London, S.W,, 1880.
First Report of the Curator of H. H. Cole, Curator of Government Central
Ancient Monuments in India Ancient Monuments in Branch Press, Simla,
for the year 1881-82. India. 1882.
Report of tours in the South- J. D. Beglar, Assistant, Superintendent, Govern-
Eastern Provinces in 1874-75 Archseological Survey. ment Printing,
and 1875-76, Volume XIII. Calcutta, 1882.
(C. S.)
Report of a tour in the Punjab in A. Cunningham, Director- Ditto.
1878-79, Volume XIV. (C. S.) General, Archaeological
Survey of India.
Report of a tour in Bihar and Ditto . Ditto.
Bengalin 1879-80 from Patna
to Sunargaon, Volume XV.
(C. S.)
Lists of Antiquarian Remains in R. Sewell, Madras Civil Government Press,
the Presidency of Madras. Service. Madras, 1S82.
(N. I. S.)
Pre A l n i c m i i e n n a t ry Mon re u p m o e r n ts ts b i y n C I u n r di a a t . or, H. cie H n . t M C o o n le u , me Cu n r t a s to i r n I o n f di A a n . - Go B v r e a r n n c m h ent Press, C S e i n m t l r a a , l
1881 to 1883,
[a) Madras Presidency
The. Seven Pagodas Ditto
Ditto,

— —— —
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 247
Nameand official designation Press, and dateof
Title of work.
ofauthor. publication.
\nu\K—cont,L
[a] Madras Preside.ncy .cont.d. .
Velur H. PI. Cole, Curator of An- Government Central
cieiit Monuments in India. Branch Press, Simla,
.... r88i to 1883.
Trichinopoly .... Ditto Ditto.
Srirangam .... Ditto Ditto.
Madura .... Ditto Ditto.
ianjore Ditto Ditto.
Kombakonam Ditto Ditto.
Chillambaram Ditto Ditto.
Conjeveram .... Ditto Ditto.
.
Bijanagar Ditto Ditto.
5 Bombay Presid.ency...
( )
Ahmedab.ad .... Ditto Ditto.
Poona ..... Ditto Ditto.
«
Karli Ditto Ditto.
. . ,
Ambarnath „ . . . Ditto . . . Ditto.
Elephanta Ditto Ditto,
, . , .
Bijapur Ditto Ditto.
(<;) , . . . .
[d) Rajputana ....
Mount A.bu .... Ditto Ditto.
Ajmir Ditto Ditto.
Jaipur ....* Ditto Ditto.
, . . .
Ulwar . Ditto . . I Ditto.
ie] H. PI. the Nizam’s Territory
Kalburgan Ditto Ditto.
, <.
1

— —
ARCH/EOLOGICAL reports.
248
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title of work. 1 of author. publication.
—
i
India contd. 1
Punjab
(/)
(Memorandum on Ancient H. H. Cole, Curator of An- Government Central
Monuments in Eusafz^ai^ with cient MonumentsinIndia. Branch Press, Simla,
a description of the explora- 1881 to 1883.
tions undertaken from the 41^
Februarv to the i6th April
1883, and suggestions for the
disposal of the sculptures.)
Second Report of the Curator of Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
Ancient Monuments in India mentPrinting, Calcutta,
for the year 1882-S3. 1883.
Report on the Buddhist Cave J. Burgess, Archaeological Ballantyne, Hanson & Co.,
Temples and their inscriptions. Surveyor and Reporter to Edinburgh and London,
(N. I. S.)
Governmentfor Western and 1883.
Southern India.
Reports of tours in North and A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
South Bihar in 1880-81, Volume General, ArchaeologicalSur- ment Printing, Calcutta,
XVI. (C. S.) vey of India, and H. B. W. 1883.
Garrick, AssistantArchaeolo-
gical Survey.
Preservation of National Monu- J. B. Keith, Superintending Ditto.
ments—Fortress Gwalior. Monumental Preservation.
Catalogue and Hand-book of the J. Anderson, Superintend- Ditto.
Archaeological Collectio—ns in the ent, Indian Museum.
Indian Museum, Part 1 Asoka
and Indo-Scythian Galleries.
Ditto ditto, Part II Ditto Ditto.
Gupta and Inscription Galleries.
Report of a tour in Gorakpur A. C. L. Carlleyle, ist Assist- Ditto.
district in 1875-76 and 1876-77, ant, Archaeological Survey.
Volume XVIIL (C, S.)
Report on the Elura cave temples J. Burgess, Archaeological Ballantyne; Hanson &
and the other Brahmanical and Surveyor and Repo W rter to Co., Edinburgh and
Jaina caves in Western India. Government for estern London, 1883.
(N. I. S.) and Southern India.
Report of a tour in the Central A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
Provinces and Lower Gangetic General, Archaeological ment Printings Calcutta,.
Doab in 1881-82, Volume XVII. Survey of India. 1884.
(C. S.)
Lists of Inscriptions and Sketch R. Sewell, Madras Civil Government Press,
of the Dynasties of Southern Service. Madras, 1S84.
India. (N. L S.)

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 249
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
—
India contd.
Preservation of National Monu- H. H. Cole, Curator of An- Plates prepared in Paris^
ments, India. cient Monuments in India. 1884-85.
(a) Agra and Gwalior Ditto Ditto.
(3) Golden temple at Amritsar, Ditto Ditto.
Punjab.
H)elhi t • • t Ditto Ditto.
[d) Grseco-Buddhist sculptures Ditto Ditto.
from Yusufzai.
{e) Great temple to Siva and his Ditto Ditto.
consort at Madura.
(/) Meywar . . , . Ditto Ditto.
(^) Buildings of the Punjab Ditto Ditto.
(h) Great Buddhist Tope at Ditto Ditto.
Sanchi.
(z) Tomb of Jahangir at Shahdara Ditto • • Ditto.
near Lahore.
(/) The temples at Trichinopoly Ditto Ditto.
Third Report of the Curator of Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
Ancient Monuments in India ment Printing, Calcutta,
for the year 1883-84. 1885.
Report of a tour through Bihar, H. B. W. Garrick, Assistant, Ditto.
Central India, Peshawar, and Archaeological Survey.
Yusufzai, during 1881-82, Vol.
XIX. (C. S.)
Report of a tour in Eastern Raj-- A. Cunningham, Director- Ditto.
putana in 1882-83, Vol. XX. General, Archaeological
(C. S.) Survey of India.
Reports of a tour in Bundelkhand Ditto • • Ditto.
and Rewa in 1883-84 and of a
tour in Rewa, Bundelkhand,
Malwa, and Gwaliorin 1884-85,
XXL
Vol. (C. S.)
Report of tours in Gorakhpur, A. C. L. Carlleyle, ist Assis- Ditto.
Saran, andGhazipurin 1877-78- tant, Archaeological Survey.
79 and 80, Vol. XXII. (C. S.)
Report of a tour in the Punjab H. B. W. Garrick, Assistant, a (40 0000
and RS-jputana in 1883-84, Vol. Archaeological Survey.
XXIII. (C.S.j

250 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS
Nameandofficial designation Press,and dateof
Titleofwork. ofauthor. publication.
—
India confd.
General Index to the Reports of V. A. Smith, Indian Civil Superintendent, Govern-
the Archaeological Survey of Service. ment Printing, Calcutta,
India, Vols. I—XXIII. (C.^S.) 1887.
The Buddhist stupas of Amaravati J. Burgess, Director-General, Ballantyne, Hanson Sc
and JaggayyapetaintheKrishna ArchcTeological Survey of Co., Edinburgh and
District, Madras Presidency, India, and G. Biihler, Ph.D., London, 1887,
with translations of the Asoka LL.D., C.I.E., etc.
Inscriptions at Jaugada and
Dhauli. (N. I. S.)
List (s) of photographs of Ancient Superintendent, Govern-
Buildings and Antiquities. ment Printing, Calcutta,
1887.
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, F. Fleet Superintendent, Govern-
J.
Vol. III. (Gupta Inscriptions.) ment Printing, Calcutta,
1888.
The Sharqi Architecture of Jaun- A. Fiihrer, ArchaeWological Ditto, 1889.
N
pur. (N. I. S.) Survey, orth- estern
Provinces and Oudh, and
E. W. Smith, Architectural
Assistant.
Jeypore Portfolio of—Architectural Colonel S. S. Jacob, C.I.E.
.
Griggs & Sons, London,
Details Parts I X. 1890-98.
;
South Indian Inscriptions (Vol. I). E. Hultzsch, Government Government Press,
(N. I. S ) Epigraphist. Madras, 1890.
List of photographic negatives of J. Wood-Mason and J. D. 1890.
Ancient Buildings and Anti- Beglar.
quities in the Imperial Museum,
Calcutta.
South Indian Inscriptions (Vol. II). E. Hultzsch, Government Government Press,
(N. L S.) Epigraphist. Madras, 1891-95.
The Monumental Antiquities and A. Fiihrer, Archaeological Government Press,
Inscriptions in the North- Survey, North-Western North-Western Provin-
Western Provinces and Oudh. Provinces and Oudh. ces and Oudh, 1891.
(N. L S.)
Epigraphia Indica of the Archcoo- J. Burgess, late Director- Superintendent, Govern-
logical Survey of India (Vol. I), General, Archaeological ment Printing, Calcutta,
(N. 1. S.) Survey of India. 1892.
Ma T a h t e a m b B p o u l d d e h d i h u a n o d r G e t a r h y e a t . G h r e ea B t od B h u i dd t h r i e s e, t A. S to u C r r u v G n e e n y n i e n o r f g a h l I , a nd m i , A a r . c la h t a e eol D o i g r i e c c a - l W. W S. at H W e . . r , lo A 1 l o 8 l 9 P e 2 l n . ac & e, L C o o n . d , on 1 , 3 ’ ,
Epi l ( o g N g . r i a c L p a h l i S S a . u ) r In v d e i y ca of of In t d h i e a [ A V r o c l. he I o I) - . J. S Ge u n r B e v u r e r a y g l e , o s f s, Ind l i A a a r t . c e hae D o i l r o e g c i t c o a r l - Su m p e e n r t in P t r e i n n d t e i n n t g, . C G a o l v cu e t r t n a - ,
1894.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 25*
Titleof work. Name and official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
—
India contd.
Notes on the Antiquities, Ethno- T. H. Holdich, Superinten- Superintendent, Govern-
graphy, and Historyof Las Bela dent, Survey of India. ment Printing, Cal-
and Mekran. cutta, 1894.
South Indian Buddhist Antiqui- A. Rea, Superintendent, Government Press,
ties. (N. I. S.) Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1854.
Madras.
List of Architectural and Archaeo- Ditto Ditto.
logical Remains in Coorg.
(N. 1. S.)
List of photographic negatives Ditto.
belonging to the India Office.
Bower Manuscripts. (N. 1. S.) A. Hoernle, Principal, Cal- Superintendent, Govern-
cutta Madrassah. ment Printing, Cal-
cutta, 1893-97.
The Moghul Architecture— of E. Smith, Archaeological Sur- Government Press, North-
Fathpur-Sikri, Parts I IV. vey, North-Western Pro- Western Provinces and
(N. I. S.) vinces and Oudh. Oudh, 1894-98.
On the Muhammadan Architec- J. Burgess, late Director- Eyre & Spottiswoode,
ture in Gujrat. (N. I. S.) General, Archaeological London, 1896.
Survey of India.
ChMukyan Architecture, including A. Rea, Superintendent, Government Press,
examples from the Ballari Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1896.
District, Madras Presidency. Madras.
(N. I. S.)
Lists of Antiquarian Remains in H. Cousens, Superintendent, Superintendent, Govern-
the Central Provinces and Archaeological Survey, ment Printing, Cal-
Ber^r. (N. 1. S.) Bombay. cutta, 1897.
Monumental Remains of the A, Rea, Superintendent, Government Press,
Dutch East India Company Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1897.
in the Presidency of Madras. Madras.
(N. 1. S.)
Revised lists of Antiquarian Re- H. Cousens, Superintendent, Government Central
mains in the Bombay Presi- Archaeological Survey, Press, Bombay, 1897.
dency. (N. I. S.) Bombay.
South Indian Inscriptions (Volume E. Hultzsch, Government Government Press,
III, Part I). (N. 1. S.) Epigraphist. Madras, 1899.
A list of photographic negatives Dr. T. Bloch, rst Assistant Superintendent, Govern-
of Indian Antiquides in the Superintendent, Indian ment Printing, Calcutta,
collection of the Indian Museum Museum. 1900.
with which is incorporated the
list of similar negatives in the
possession of the India Office.
List of Antiquarian Remains in H. Cousens, Superintendent, Ditto.
His Highness the Nizam's Archaeological Survey,
territories. (N. I. S. ) Bombay.
2 K 2

ARCH/EOLOGICAL reports.
252
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title ofwork. of author. publication.
—
India The cofi M c u ld h . ammadan Architecture J. Burgess, late Director- Eyre & Spottiswoode,
of Ahmedabad, Parti. (N. I. S.) General, Archseoiogical London, 1900.
Survey of India.
Report on results of explorations P. C. Mukherji, lately em- Superintendent, Govern-
in the Nepal Tarai, Part L ployed on Archseoiogical mentPrinting, Calcutta,
(N. I. S.) explorations under the 1901.
Government of the North-
Western Provinces and
Oudh.
The Jaina Stupa and some other V. A. Smith, Indian Civil Government Press,
Antiquities of Mathur^ (N. I. S.) Service. United Provinces, 1901.
Moghul Colour Decoration of E. Smith, ArchaeWological Ditto.
Agra, Part I. (N. I. S.) Surveyor, N orth- estern
Provinces and Oudh.
The Architectural Antiquities of J. Burgess, late Director- Eyre & Spottiswoode,
Northern Gujrat. (N. I. S,) General, Archaeological London, 1903.
Survey of India, and H.
Cousens, Superintendent,
Archaeological Survey,
Western India.
The Muhammadan Architecture of J. Burgess, late Director- Ditto, 1905.
Ahmedabad, .Part II, with General of the Archaeologi-
Muslim and Hindu Remains in cal Survey of India.
the vicinity. (N. I. S.)
Portfolio of illustrations of Sind H, Cousens, Superintendent, W. Griggs & Sons,
Tiles. Archaeological Survey of Li^mited, 1906.
India, Western Circle.
Annual Report of the Director- J. H. Marshall, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
General of Archaeology in India General of Archaeology ment Printing, Calcutta,
for the year 1902-03, Parts I in India. 1904.
and II.
Ditto for the year 1903-04, Ditto . Ditto, 1905-06.
Parts I and II.
Ditto for the year 1904-05, Ditto . Ditto, 1906.
Part
I.
Ditto for the year 1904-05, Ditto , Ditto, 1908.
Part 11.
Par D t itto for the year 1005-06, Ditto . Ditto, 1907.
I.
Ditto for the year 1905-06, Ditto
Part ll. Ditto, 1908.
0
Par D t itto for the year 1006-07 ^ . Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
I. ment Central Branch
Press, Simla, 1908.
Par D t it I t I. o for the vear 1006-07. Ditto . Superintendent, Govern-
ment Printing, Cal-
i cutta, 1909.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 253
Title of work. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
Madras—
Notes on the Amaravati Stflpa J. Burgess, Government Government Press,
Archaeological Surveyor for Madras, 1882.
Western and Southern
India.
Notes and Inscriptions from Tem- Ditto Ditto, 1885-86.
ples in the Madura District,
Vol. IV.
Tamil and Sanskrit Inscriptions Ditto Ditto, 1886.
with some notes on village
antiquities collected chiefly in
the south of the Madras Presi-
dency.
List of ancient monuments for Ditto Ditto, 1886-87.
,
conservation in the Madras
Presidency in 1^84.
Ditto, in 1891 A, Rea, Archaeological Sur- Ditto, 1891.
veyor, Madras.
Epigraphia Indica and Record of E. Hultzsch, Government Superintendent, Govern-
the Archaeological Survey of Epigraphist. ment Printing,
India, Vol. Ill, 1894-95. Calcutta, 1895.
Ditto Vol. IV, 1896-97 Ditto Ditto, 1897.
Ditto „ V, 1898-99 Ditto Ditto, 1899.
Ditto „ VI, 1900-01 Ditto Ditto, 1901.
Ditto „ VII, 1902-03 Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto „ VIII, 1905-06 Ditto Ditto, 1907.
List of tombs and monuments of Government of Madras Government Press,
Europeans, etc., in the Madras Madras, 1898,
District.
List of tombs and monuments Ditto Ditto.
erected in Madras.
List of statues, monuments and Ditto Ditto.
busts erected in Madras in
honour of distinguished servants
of the State.
Annual Report of the Archaeolo- A, Rea, Superintendent, Ditto, igoo.
gical Survey, Madrasand Coorg, Archaeological Survey,
for the year 1899-1900.
Ditto, 1900-01 Ditto Ditto, igoi.
Ditto, 1901-02 Ditto Ditto, igo2.
Ditto, 1902-03 Ditto Ditto, 1903.
Ditto, 1902-04 Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto, 1904-05 Ditto Ditto, 1905.

254 ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORTS
Title of work. Name and official designation Press, and dateof
of author. publication.
—
Madras concld*
Annual Progress Report of thei A. Rea, Superintendent Government Press,
,
Archaeological Survey Depart- Archaeological Survey. Madras, 1906.
ment, Southern Circle, for the
year 1005-06.
Ditto, for the year 1906-07 . Ditto Ditto, 1907.
Ditto, for the year 1907-08 . Ditto . Ditto, 1908.
Re a p c o c r o t mpl o i n shed Epi f gr r a o p m hic J a u l ly w 1 o 8 r 91 k : E. Epig H r u a l p t h z i s s c t h . , Government : Ditto, 1892.
to June 1892.
Ditto July 1892 to June Ditto Ditto, 1893.
1893.
Ditto do. 1893 to do. Ditto Ditto, 1894.
1894.
Ditto do. 1894 to do. Ditto
Ditto, 1895.
1895.
Ditto do. 1895 fo do. Ditto
Ditto, 1896.
1896.
Ditto do. 1896 to do. Ditto
Ditto, 1897.
1S97,
Ditto do. 1897 to do. Ditto
Ditto, 1898.
1898.
Ditto do. 1898 to do. V. Venkayya, ist Assistant to Ditto, 1899.
1899. theGovernment Epigraphist.
Ditto do. 1899 to do. Ditto
1900. Ditto, 1900.
Ditto do. 1900 to do. E. Hultzsch, Government
1901. Epigraphist, Ditto, 1501.
Ditto do. 1901 to do. Ditto
1902. Ditto, igo2.
Ditto do. 1902 to do. Ditto
1903. Ditto, 1903.
Ditto do. 1903 to do. ’ Officiating
1904 - Government Epigraphist. Ditto, 1904.
Ditto do. 1904 lo do. 1 Ditto
1905- Ditto, 1905.
Annual Report of the Assistant \ Venkayya,
Assistant
Archaeological Superintendent ArchaeologicalSuperintend- Ditto, 1906.
for Epigraphy, Southern Circle, ent for Epigraphy.
for the year 1905-06.
Ditto for the ; year 1906-07. Ditto
j ’ Ditto, 1907.
Ditto for the:year 1907-08. Dit—to
| . . j Ditto, 1908.

—
published under official authority.
25s
Title ofwork. Nameand officialdesignation Press, and dateof
of author. publication.
Bombay
The Antiquities of the Kolaba 1854.
Agency. (Ser. Sel. Rec.,
B^bay, N. S. No. 7.)
The Antiquities of Kolhapoor illus-
trated. (Ser. 350j Sel. Rec., 1854.
Bombay, N. S. No. 8.)
Extracts in connection with Maho-
medan Architecture at Beeja- 1857-
poor, in the Satara Districts, etc.
(1854). (Ser. 350, Sel. Rec.,
Bombay, N. S. No. 40.)
Observations on inscriptions on Major G. LeG.Jacob 1855-
copper-plates dugup at Naroor,
in the Koodal Division of the
Sawunt Waree State, 1848;
wdth translations and facsimiles,
1851. (Ser. 350, Sel. Rec.,
Bombay, N. S. No. 10.)
Rock-cut Temples of Western Fergusson, F.R.S., M.R. Cundall & Downes,
J.
India. A.S. London, 1864.
Report on the illustration of the Dr. Forbes Watson and 1869.
Archaic Architecture of India, Mr. Fergusson, General
etc. Cunningham, and Colonel
Meadows Taylor.
Notes to accompany a series of Captain Lyon, late of Her Carey Brothers, Old
^
photographsdesigned to illustrate Majesty^s 68th Regiment College Street, 3,
the Ancient Architecture of of Light Infantry. Geneva, 1871.
Western India.
Memorandum on the Buddhist James Burgess, Archaeolo- Government Central
I
Caves at Junnar. 1 gicalSurveyorand Reporter Press, Bombay, 1874.
to Government, and F.
J.
Fleet, Bo.C.S.
Memorandum on the antiquities James Burgess, Archaeolo- Ditto, 1875.
at Dabhoi, Ahmedabad, Than, gicalSurveyor and Reporter
Junagadh, Girnar, and Dhank. to Government.
Memorandum onthe remains at Ditto Ditto.
Gumli, Gop, and in Kachh, etc.
Provisional lists of Architectural Ditto Ditto,
andother Archaeologicalremains
in Western India, including the
Bombay Presidency, Sindh,
Berar, Central Provinces, and
Hyderabad.

archeological reports
256
Nameandofficial designation Press, and date of
Title ofwork. ofauthor. publication.
—
Bombay contd.
Translations of inscriptions from J. F. Fleet, Bo.C.S., and Hari Government Central
Belgaum and KalAdgi Districts Vaman Limaya, B.A. Press, Bombay, 1876,
in theReportof the first season^s
operations of the Archeological
Survey of WesternIndia and of
inscriptions from Kathiawar and
Kachh.
Buddhist Caves of Ajanta. Prepared by Major R. Gill Ditto, 1876.
Second edition. and revised by James
Burgess, F.R.G.S., M.R.
A.S.
Notes on the antiquities of the W. F. Sinclair, Bo.C.S., and Ditto, 1877.
Talukas of Parner, Sangamner, J. Burgess, Archaeological
Ankole, and Kopergaum form- Surveyor and Reporter to
ing the charge of the 2nd Assis- Government.
tant Collector, Ahmadnagar,
with revised lists of remains in
the Ahmadnagar, Nasik, Puna,
Thana, and Kaladgi Zillahs.
Architectural and Archaeological W. H. Property Collector of Ditto.
remains in Khandesh in 1877. Khandesh.
Reports (from the Collectors) re- Ditto.
garding the Archaeological re-
mains in the Karachi, Haidara-
bad,and ShikarpurCollectorates
in Sindh, with plans of tombs.
Report on the Architectural and Dalpatram Pranjivan Kha- Ditto.
Archaeological remains in the Khar.
Province of Kachh, with 5
papers by the late Sir Alex.
Burnes. (Selections from the
records of the Bombay Govern-
ment, Nc. CLII, new series.)
i%L
Notes on theBuddha Rock-Temp- J. Burgess, Archaeological Ditto.
les of Ajanta, their paintings Surveyor, Western India.
and sculptures, and on the paint-
ings ofthe Bagh Caves, modern
Buddha Mythology, etc.
Inscriptions from the Cave Tem- J. Burgess, Archaeological Ditto, 1881.
ples of Western India with Surveyor, and Bhagwanlal
descriptive notes, etc. Indraji Pandit.
Lists ofthe antiquarian remains in Burgess, Archeological
the Bombay Presidency, Sindh J. Surveyor and Reporter to Ditto, 1885.
and Berir, with an Appendix Government.
ofinscriptions from Gujarat.
Scheme for the protection and A. W. Crawley Boevy, C.S. EducationSociety'sPress,
conservation ofancientbuildings Bombay, i885.
in and around the City of
Ahmedabad.

1
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 257
Title of work. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
—
Bombay contd.
List of photographs of ancient Superintendent, Govern-
buildings and antiquities, mentPrinting, Calcutta,
Bombay. 1887.
The antiquities of the town of James Burgess, LL.D., C.I.E., George Waterston &
Dabhoi in Gujarat. Director-General of the Sons, Edinburgh, 1888.
Archaeological Survey of
India, and H. Cousens,
M.R.A.S., Archaeological
Surveyor, Western Inaia.
List of Photographic Negatives H. Cousens, M.R.A.S., Government Central
of ancient buildings and anti- Archaeological Surveyor, Press, Bombay, i888.
quities of the Bombay Presi- Western India.
dency.
List of Photographic Negatives James Burgess Superintendent, Govern-
.
of the paintings copied frotii mentPrinting, Calcutta,
the Ajanta Caves between 1872 1889.
and 1885 at the Government
School of Art, Bombay. Sup-
plement to the Bombay List of
Photographic.Nega.tives.. .
Bijapur Guide H. Cousens, M.R.A.S., Orphanage Preis, Poona,
1
Archaeological Surveyor, 1889.
Western India.
Notes on the buildings and other H. Cousens, Archaeological Government Central
antiquarian remains at Bijapur, Surveyor, Western India, Press, Bombay, 1890.
with translations of the inscrip- and E. Rehatsek.
tions.
An account of the Caves at Nad- H. Cousens, Archaeological Ditto, 1891.
sur and Karsambla. Surveyor, Western India.
Progress Report of the Archaeo- Ditto Ditto, 1890.
logical Survey of Western India
for the months of December
1889 to April 1890.
Ditto for the months of May 1890 Ditto , Ditto, 1891.
to April 1891.
Ditto for the months of May 1891 Ditto Ditto, 1892.
to April 1892.
Ditto for the months of May 1892 Ditto Ditto, 1893.
to April 1S93.
Ditio for the months of May 1893 Ditto Ditto, 1S94.
to April 1894.
Ditto for the months of May 1894 Ditto Ditto, J895.
to August 1895.

—
258 ARCHiEOLOGICAL REPORTS
1
Title of work.
Name andofficial designation Press,and date of
of author. publication.
Bombay
concld.
Progress Report of the Archaeo- H. Cousens, Archaeological Government Central
logical Survey of Western India Surveyor, Western India. Press, Bombay, 1896.
for the months of September
1895 to April 1896.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1897.
June 1897.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1898.
June 1898.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1899.
June 1899,
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1900.
June 1900.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1901.
June 1901.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1902.
June 1902.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1903.
June 1903.
Di J t u t n o e f 1 o 9 r 04 t . he year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto
June 1905. Ditto, 1905.
Progress Report of the Archeo- Ditto
logical Surveyof India^ Western Ditto, 1906,
Circle, for the months of July to
March 1906, inclusive.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto
March 1907. Ditto, 1908.
Ditto for the year endins^f 31st Ditto
March 1908. Ditto, 1908.
Pai T n e t m i p n l g e s s in of th A e jan B t u a d , dh K is h t and C e a s v h e , ^ Jo o h f n G t r h if e fiths S , ir late J P a r m i s n h c e i d p j a i l 'W. Griggs, London, 1896.
India. Volume I (Pictorial sub- Jijibhai School of Art,
jects) . Bombay, Fellow of the
University of Bombay,
Member
of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asia-
tic Society.
Dito
ditto, Volume
11 Ditto
(Decorative details). Ditto, 1900.
1

. .
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 259
Title of work.
Nameand
official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
1
Bengal—
Account of a visit to Mount A. P 1861.
Parisnath (in Chutia Nagpoor)
and the Jain Temples thereon
in 1827. (Ser. 250, Sel, Rec.,
Bengal, No. 38.)
Ruins of the Nalanda Monasteries xA. M. Broadley, B.C.S, Bengal Secretariat Press,
at Burgaon, Sub-Division Bihar, Calcutta, 1872.
District Patna.
Report on the Archaeology of the H. L. Harrison, B.C.S. Ditto, 1873.
District of Midnapore.
Buddha Gaya, the Hermitage of Rajendraldla Mitra^ LL. D., Ditto, 1878.
Sakya Muni. C.I.E.
List of objects of antiquarian Ditto, 1879.
interest in Bengal.
A
List of the objects of anti- •»«..* Ditto, 1879.
quarian interest in the Lower
Provinces of Bengal (with his-
torical descriptions).
Revised list of ancient monuments Government of Bengal, P.W. Ditto, 1887.
in Bengal, 1886. Department, assisted by
J. D. Beglar and W. B. B.
Some Historical and Ethnical W. B. Oldham, C.I.E., Indian Ditto, 1891.
aspects of the Burdwan District. Civil Service.
Discovery of the exact site of L. A, Waddell, M.B. . Ditto, 1892,
Asoka’s classic Capital of Pata-
liputra, the Palihothra of the i
Greeks, and description of the
superficial remains.
A Brief History of the Bodh Gaya Rai Ram Anugrah Narayan Ditto, 1893.
Math. Singh, Bahadur.
Sikkim Gazetteer Ditto, 1894.
Some Historical and Ethnical W. B. Oldham,C.I.E., Indian Ditto.
aspects of the Burdwan District Civil Service. 1
with an explanatory Index (Re-
print)
List of Statues, Monuments, and Ditto.
Busts in Calcutta of historical
interest.
List of Inscriptions on tombs or C. R. Wilson, M.A., of the Superintendent, Govern-
monuments possessing historical 1 Bengal Educational Service. mentPrinting, Calcutta,
or archseolcgica] interest. 1896.
List of — Ancient Monuments in Bengal Secretariat Press,
Bengal Revised and corrected Calcutta, 1896.
up to 31st August 1895.
2 L 2

— —
ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORTS
26'
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Titleofwork. of author. publication.
~~
!
— 1
Bexgal concld. i
List of ancient monuments :
Dacca Division Bengal Secretariat Press,
•
Calcutta, 1896.
Rajshahi Division Ditto.
Orissa Division Ditto.
Chota Nagpur Division . ...... Ditto.
Bhagalpur Division Ditto.
Chittagong Division Ditto.
Burdwan Division Ditto.
,
Patna Division Ditto.
Presidency Division Ditto.
, ,
Report vv^ith photographs of the M. H. Arnott, M.Inst.C.E., Waterlow & Sons,
repairs executed to some of the Executive Engineer, Bengal Limited, London, W.,
principaltemples at Bhubanes- Public Works. 1903.
var and caves in the Khandagiri
and Udaigiri Hills, Orissa,
between 1898 and 1903.
Annual Report of the Archaeolo- T. Bloch, Archaeological Bengal Secretariat Press,
gical Survey, Bengal Circle, for Surveyor, Bengal Circle. Calcutta, 1901.
the year 1900-01.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto • • Ditto, 1902,
April 1902.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto . , Ditto, 1903.
April 1903.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto , Ditto, 1904.
April 1904.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto
Ditto, 1905.
April 1905.
Annual Report of the Archaeolo- Ditto
. Ditto, 1906.
gical Survey, Eastern Circle, for
1905-06.
Ditto for 1906-07 • A. PI. Longhurst, Officiating Ditto, 1907.
Superintendent, Archeolo-
... gicalSurvey, Eastern Circle.
Ditto for 1907-08 T. Bloch, Superintendent,
Ditto, 1908.
Archaeological Survey
Eastern Circle, ^
United Provinces
De.scription 01 the antiquities at F. Maisey
Kalinian, Baptist Mission Press
1848.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY.
261-
Title of work.
Nameand
official designation Press,anddateof
ofauthor. publication.
United PROviNCEs-~<r^?;^/^/,
List of Photographic Negatives A. Fiihrer, Ph.D., Archaeolo- Superintendent, Govern-
of the monumental antiquities gical Surveyor^ and E- W. Printing,
in the North-Western Provinces Smith, Architectural Sur- Calcutta, 1889.
and Oudh. veyor, North-Western Pro-
vinces and Oudh.
Progress Reports of the Epigra- Ditto Government Press, North-
phical and Architectural Western Provinces and
Branches of the North-Western Oudh, 1892.
Provinces and Oudh from
October 1889 till 30th June
1891.
Annual Progress Report of the A. Fuhrer, Ph.D., Archaeolo- Thomason College Press,
Archaeological Survey Circle, gical Survej^or. Roorkee, 1892.
North-Western Provinces and
Oudh, forthe year 1891-92.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1893.
1893.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1894.
1894.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto
Ditto, 1895,
1895.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto
Ditto, 1896.
1896.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1897.
1897.
.Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1898.
1898.
Ditto for the year ending June V. A. Smith, I.C.S., and Government Press, North-
1899. E. W. Smith, Archaeological Western Provinces and
Surveyor. Oudh, 1899.
Ditto for the year ending 31st E. W. Smith, Archaeological Ditto, 1900,
March Igoo. Surveyor.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto . , Ditto, 1901.
March igoi.
Annual Progress Report of the Government Press, United
Archaeological Survey Circle, Provinces, 1902.
United Provinces, for the year
ending 31st March 1902,
Ditto for the year ending 31st E. B. S. Shepherd, Archaeo- Ditto, 1903.
March 1903, logical Surveyor.
Annual Progress Report of the W, H. Nicholls, Archaeologi- Ditto, 1904.
Archaeological Surveyor, United cal Surveyor,
Provinces and Punjab^ for the
year ending 31st March 1904.

,
262 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS
Nameand official designation Press,and dale of
'1itle ot work. ofauthor. publication.
United Provinces—
Annual Progress Report of the W. H. Nicholls, Archaeolo- Government Press,
A rcbgeological Surveyor, United gical Surveyor. United Provinces, 1905.
Provinces and Punjab, for the
year ending 31st March 1905.
Annual Progress Report of the Ditto Ditto, 1906.
Archaeological Surveyor, North-
ern Circle, for the year ending
31st March 1906,
Ditto for theyear 1906-07. Ditto Ditto, 1907.
Ditto for the year 1907-08. R. F. Tucker, Archaeological Ditto, 1908.
Surveyor.
List of Christiantombs and monu- A. Fiihrer, Archaeological GovernmentPress, North-
ments of archaeological and his- Surveyor, North-Western Western Provinces and
torical interest and their inscrip- Provinces and Oudh. Oudh, 1896.
tions in the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh,
The remains near Kasia in the V. A. Smith, I.C.S. Ditto.
.
Gorakhpur District.
Portfolio of Indian Architectural E. W. Smith, Archaeological Griggs & Sons, London.
drawings. Part I. Surveyor, North-Western
Provinces and Oudh.
Report on the antiquities in the Poorno Chander Mukherji Thomason CollegePress
.
district of Lalitpur, North-Wes- Roorkee, 1899.
tern Provinces.
Platesillustratingthe Reporton the Ditto Ditto.
antiquitiesin the district of Lalit-
pur, North-Western Provinces.
Punjab—
Objects of Antiquarian interest in Public Works Depart-
the Punjab and its dependencies ment Press, Lahore.
compiled from statements fur- 1875-
nished by the several Deputy
_
Commissioners, His Highness
the Maharajah of Kashmir, and
the Superintendents,. Cis-Sutlej,
Bahawalpur,and Chamba Stales.
Descriptive List of the Principal A. Cunningham, Director-
Buddhist Sculptures in the General, Archaeological
Lahore Museum. Survey.
Descriptive List of Photographic J. L. Kipling, Curator COCO
Negativesof BuddhistSculptures Oh
in the Lahore Central Museum.
Report of the Punjab Circle of the iS. J. Rodgers, Archaeological W. Ball & Co., Lahore,
Archaeological Survey, 1888-89. Surveyor.
1891.
List of inscriptions in the Lahore Dr. M. A. Stein
Museum. . , 1899.
j j

—
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 263
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
V\3]^]kB—concld.
Revised list of objects ofArchaeo- C. J. Rodgers^ Archaeological Baptist Mission Press,
logical interest in the Punjab. Surveyor. Calcutta.
Report of the Archaeological Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, Archaeolo- Lahore Caxton Printing
Survey, Punjab Circle, for the gical Surveyor, Punjab. Works, 1901.
period from istJanuary to 30th
June 1901.
Annual Progress Report of the Ditto Ditto, 1902.
Archaeological Surveyor, Punjab
Circle, for the year ending 31st
March 1902.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1903.
March 1903.
Annual Progress Report of the Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, Superinten- Ditto, 1904.
Superintendent, Archaeological j dent, Archaeological Survey.
Survey, Punjaband United Pro- 1
vinces Circle, fortheyearending
31st March 1904.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Economical Press,
March 1905. Lahore, 1905.
Annual Progress Report of the Ditto Ditto, 1906.
Superintendent of the Archeo-
logical Survey, Northern Circle,
for the year ending 31st March
1906.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1907.
March 1907.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, igoS.
March 1908.
N.-W. F. Province
Report on the explorations of the Lieut. A. Crompton, R.E. , 1874.
Buddhist ruins at Jamalgarhi
during the months of March and
April 1873. (Supplementtothe
Punjab Government Gazette of
12th February 1874.)
Report on the explorations of the Lieut. Skene Grant, R.E. 1874.
Buddhist ruins near Kharkai
during the months of March
and April 1874. (Supplement
to the Punjab Government
Gazette of iith June 1874.)
1
Report on the exploration of the Sergeant F. H. Wilcher, R.E. 1874.
Buddhist ruins at Takht-i-Bai
Yusafzai, during the months of
January, February, March and
Apiil 1871. (Supplement to
the Punjab Government Gazette
of 6th August 1874.)

—
archeological reports
264
Nameandofficial designation Press, and date of
Title ofv/ork. ofauthor. publication-
N.-W. F. FROVmCK—concId.
Report on the explorations at Lieut. C. A. Crompton, R.E. 1875-
;
mound Shahji-ka-dheri near
Peshawar. (Supplement to the
Punjab Government Gazette of
i8th November 1875.)
Report on the explorations at Lieut. P. Haslett, R.E. 1876.
Taikal near Peshawar. (Supple
ment to the Punjab Government
Gazette of r8th November 1875
and of 30th March 1876.)
Reports of Buddhist explorations Lieut. C. Maxwell, R.E. Public Works Depart-
in the Peshawar District by the ment, Punjab, 1882.
loth Company of Sappers and
Miners.
Memorandum on excavations at Capt. H. A. Deane, Assistant Punjab GovernmentPress,.
Sikri, Yusafzai. Commissioner. Lahore, 1889.
Detailed report of an Archaeolo- Dr. M. A. Stein, Ph.D., Ditto, 1898.
gical tourwith the Buner Field Principal, Oriental College,
Force. Lahore.
Report of Archaeological Survey M. A. Stein, Ph.D., Inspec- Government Pre.<!s,
work ill the North-West Fron- tor General of Education North-West Frontier
tier Province and Baluchistan for and Archaeological Sur- Province, 1905.
the period from January 2nd, veyor, North-West Frontier
1904, to March 31st, 1905, Province and Baluchistan.
Annual report of the Archaeologi- Dr. D. B. Spooner, Superin- Ditto, 1907.
cal Survey of India, Frontier tendent, Archaeological Sur-
Circle, for 1906-07. vey, Frontier Circle.
Ditto for 1907-08 Ditto ' Commercial Press, Pesha-
war, 1908.
Burma—
List of objects of antiquarian Dr. E. Forchhammer, Government Press,Burma,
interest in British Burma. Govenrment Archaeologist, 1880.
Burma.
Notes on the early History and
Geography of British Burma
T. The Shwe Dagon Pagoda Ditto . . 1 Ditto, 1883.
II. The first Buddhist Mission Ditto Ditto, 1884.
to Suvarnabhurai.
List of objects of Antiquarian and Ditto Ditto.
A.rchaeological interestin British
Burma.
Rep d o o r n t e s in on Bur Ar m c a ha d e u o r l i o n g g ic t a h l e y w e o a r r k s Dr. E. Forchhammer , 18S9.
x879-8g. (Being a Review,
dated 18th June |
1889.)
j

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 36c
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
—
Burma
contd.
The Po U Dauncr inscription, Taw Sein Ko, Government Government Press,
^
erected by King Sinbyuyin in Translator, Burma. Burma, 1881.
1774 A.D.
List of objects of antiquarian Dr. E. Forchhammer, Ditto.
interest in Arakan. Government Archaeologist,
Burma.
List of objects of antiquarian Ditto Ditto, 1892.
interest in Burma.
Inscription of Pagan, Pinya, and Taw Sein Ko, Government Ditto.
Ava (deciphered from the ink Translator, Burma.
impressions found among the
papers of the late Dr. Korch-
hammer).
Report on the Antiquities of Dr. E. Forchhammer, Ditto.
Arakan. Government Archaeologist,
Burma.
Report on the Kyaukku Temple Ditto Ditto.
at Pagan.
The Kalyani Inscriptions Taw Sein Ko, Government Ditto.
Translator, Burma.
Memorandum of a tour in parts Ditto Ditto.
of the Amherst, Shwegyin, and
Pegu Districts.
Note on a tour in Burma in F. 0 . Oertel, Assistant Ditto, 1893.
March and April 1892. Engineer on special duty,
Public Works Department,
W
N orth- estern Provinces
and Oudh.
Not t e h s rou o g n h R a a n ma A n r n c a h d eo e l s o a g . ical tour Ta Tr w ans S l e a i t n or, Ko B , ur G m o a. vernment Rep I r n i d n i t a e n d Ed A u n c t f i r a q o t m u i ar o y na t b h l y e
the
(TheTalaing country of Burma.)
Society’s Steam Press,
Bombay, 1893.
A preliminary study of the Po U Ditto Ditto.
Daung Inscription of Sinbyuyin,
1774 A.D.
A preliminary study of the Kaly- Ditto . • Ditto.
ani Inscriptions.
Notes on antiquities in Ramanna- Lieutenant-Colonel R. C. Ditto, 1894.
Temple, late President,
desa.
Rangoon Municipality;
(The Talaing countryof Buiina.) 1
Burma.
2 M

266 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title ofwork. ofauthor. publication.
B\5RUk~concld.
Some remarks on the Kalyani Taw Sein Ko, Government Reprinted from the
Inscriptions. Translator, Burma. Indian Antiquary by
Educational
the
Society's Steam Press,
Bombay, 1894.
Inscriptions copied from the Maung Tun Nyein, Officiating Government Press,
stonescollected by King Bodaw- Government Translator, Burma, 1897.
paya and placed near the Burma.
Arakan Pagoda, Mandalay.
Inscriptions of Pagan^ Pinj^a and Ditto Ditto, 1899.
Ava.
Translation with notes.
Inscriptions collected in Upper Taw Sein Ko, Government Ditto, 1900--1903.
Burma. Archaeologist, Burma.
IndeXj Inscriptionum B. Birmani- Ditto Ditto, 1900.
carum, Vol. I.
List of objects of antiquarian and Ditto Ditto, 1901.
archaeological interest in Upper
Burma.
List of Pagodas at Pagan under ! Ditto Ditto.
the custody of Government.
(
Report on archaeological work in j Ditto Ditto, igo2.
Burma for the year 1901-02.
DittOj for the year 1902-03 Ditto Ditto, 1903.
Ditto, for the year 1903-04 Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto, for the year 1904-05 Ditto Ditto, 1905.
Report of the Superintendent, Taw Sein Ko, Superinten- Ditto, 1906.
Archaeological Survey, Burma, dent, Archaeological Survey.
for the year ending 31st March
1906.
Ditto, for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1907.
March 1907.
Ditto, for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1908.
March 1908.
Mysore and Coorg—
Mysore Inscriptions . L. Rice, Director of Public Mysore Government
!
Instruction. Press, 1879.
Coorg Inscriptions L. Rice, Secretary to Gov- Ditto, 1886.
ernment.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 267
Title of work.
Nameand
official designation Press, anddateof
ofauthor. publication.
Mysore and CooRQ—condd.
Inscriptions at Sravana Belgola, L. Rice, Director of Archaeo- Mysore Government
a chief seat of the Jains logical Researches and Press, 1889.
(Mysore). Secretary to Government,
Mysore.
—
Epigraphia Carnatica Inscrip- Ditto Ditto, 1894.
tions in the Mysore District,
Part I.
Ditto, Part il . Ditto Ditto, 1898.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Kadur L. Rice, Director of Archaeo- Ditto, 1901.
District. logical Researches.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Hassan Ditto Basel Mission Press,
District in 2 sections. Mangalore, 1902.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Simoga Ditto Ditto, 1902.
District, Parts I and II.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Chital- Ditto Ditto, 1903.
drug district.
Inscriptions at Tumkur Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Inscriptions at Kolar , Ditto Ditto, 1905.
Assam—
Report on the progress of his- E. A. Gait, I.C.S., Honorary Assam Secretariat Print-
torical research in Assam. Director of Ethnography ing Office^ Shillong,
in Assam. 1897.
!
List of archaeological remains in Ditto, 1902.
the Province of Assam.

List of Public Libraries, etc,, to which copies of the Director General’s Annual
Report, Part 11, are regidarly supplied.
r.—COUNTRIES OUTSIDE INDIA.
United Kingdom.
British Museum Library, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London.
Bodleian Library, Oxford.
London University Library, Imperial Institute, London, S.W.
Cambridge University Library, Cambridge.
Edinburgh Edinburgh.
„ „
Glasgow Glasgow.
„ „
Aberdeen „ „ Aberdeen.
Trinity College Library, Dublin.
Folklore Society, ii, Old Square Lincoln’s Inn, London, W.C.
National Art Library, South Kensington Museum, London.
W.
Royal Institute of British Architects, 9, Conduit Street, Hanover Square, London,
Advocates’ Library, Edinburgh.
The Royal Windsor Castle, Berks.
„
Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London.
Royal Society, Edinburgh.
Royal Irish Academy, 19, Dawson Street, Dublin.
National Library of Ireland, Leinster House, Kildare Street, Dublin.
Royal Asiatic Society, 22, Albermarle Street, London.
W.
Society of Antiquaries of London, Burlington House, Piccadilly,
Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, National Museum of Antiquities, Queen Street,
Edinburgh.
Imperial Institute, London.
Indian Institute, Oxford.
Society for Protection of Ancient Buildings, 10, Buckingham Street, Adelphi, W.C.
The Royal Academy of Arts, Burlington House, London.
Society for the Pomotion of Hellenic Studies, London. W
Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 3, Hanover Street,
London.
France.
Biblioth^que Nationale, Paris.
Institute de France, Paris.
Musee Gulmet, 7, Place d’lena, Paris.

11
I.—COUNTRIES OUTSIDE INDlA-confd,
Germany.
Bibliothek der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaff, Halle (Saale), Germany.
Royal Museum for Ethnology, Berlin.
Konigliche Gesell Schaft der Wissenschaften zo Gottingen, Gottingen.
KgL Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften W. 35. Pots damerstrasse 120, Berlin.
Austria.
Imperial Academy of Sciences^ Vienna.
Hungarian Academy, Buda-Pesth.
Italy.
Biblioteca Nazionale, Rome.
R. Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze.
The Societa Asiatica Italiana, Firenze.
British School at Rome.
American School of Classical Studies at Rome.
Other Countries in Europe.
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, Holland.
Royal Institute of Netherlands, India, The Hague, Holland.
Imperial Acadenw of Sciences (for theAsiatic Museum), St. Petersburg, Russia.
Royal Librayv, Copenhagen, Denmark.
National Museum, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Academie Royale d^Arch^ologie de Belgique, Anvers.
University Library, Upsala, Sweden.
Christiania, Norway.
,, ,,
British School at Athens, Greece.
La Societe Archeologique d^Ath^nes, Athens, Greece,
America.
American Oriental Society, 235, Bishop Street, New Haven, Conn, U.S.A.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C., U. S. A,
Secretary, National Museum, Washington, U. S. A.
Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago.
British Colonies.
The Museum, Canterbury, New Zealand.
Literary and Historical Society, Quebec^ Canada*
Melbourne Library, Melbourne.
University Library, Sydney, New South Wales,
Victoria Public Library, Perth, Western Australia.
Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch, Colombo.
Straits Branch, Ro3/'al Asiatic Society, Singapore.
North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Shanghai.
Museum of Arabic Art, Cairo, Egypt.

Ill
I.—COUNTRIES OUTSIDE INDIA—
concid.
Foreign Colonies.
Directeur del’Ecole fran9aise d’extrfeme Orient, Hanoi.
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, Batavia.
Institut Fran^aisd' Archeologie Orientale du Caire, Cairo, Egypt.
Ethnological Survey for the Philippine Islands, Department of Interior, Manila.
II.—INDIA.
(i) Imperial.
Imperial Library, Calcutta.
Indian Museum, Calcutta.
Press Room, Calcutta and Simla.
Provincial.
(2)
Madras.
Secretariat Library, Fort St. George.
University „ Madras.
Public „ „
Presidency College
,,
School of Art, „
Government Central Museum, Madras.
Christian College Library „
Bombay.
Secretariat Library, Bombay.
University »
,,
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Town Hall, Bombay.
School of Art, Bombay.
The College of Science, Poona.
Bengal.
Secretariat Library, Writers’ Buildings, Calcutta.
University Library, the Senate House, Calcutta.
Presidency College Library, i. College Square, Calcutta.
Sanskrit College Library, i, College Square, Calcutta.
Asiatic Society of Bengal, 57, Park'Street, Calcutta.
United Provinces.
Secretariat Library, P. W. D., Allahabad.
Allahabad.
University
,,
Public Library, Allahabad,
Provincial Museum Library, Lucknow.
Sanskrit College, Benares.
Thomason College, Roorkee.
Museum, Mutha.
Archaeological

iV
INDIA—
ll,— conc/d.
Punjab.
Secretariat Library, Public Works Dc-partment, Lahore^.
Punjab Public Library, Lahore.
Museum Library, Lahore.
University Library, Lahore.
Government College Library, Lahore.
Delhi Museum and Institute, Delhi.
North-West Frontier Province.
Secretariat Library, Peshawar.
Museum Library, Peshawar.
Burma.
Secretariat Library, Rangoon.
The Bernard Free Library, Rangoon.
The Phayre Museum, Rangoon.
Central Provinces.
Secretariat Library, Nagpur.
Museum Library, Nagpur.
y\SSAM.
Secretariat Library, Shillong,
COORG.
The Chief Commissioner of Coorg^s Library, Bangalore.
Native States.
Hyderabad^
The Resident's Library, Hyderabad.
Central India,
Library of the Agent to the Governor-General, Indore.
The Librarian, Dhar Museum Library, Dhar.
Rajkinmar College, Indore.
Rajputana,
Library of the Chief Commissioner and Agent to the Governor-General, Ajme
College Library, Ajmer.
Baroda.
Library of the Resident at Baroda,

PRESIDENT’S
SECRETARIAT
librar