THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK
PAGODA, PAGAN.
»
PET-LEIK-PAYA, or " Pagoda of the curling leaf,” is situated at Thiyipyitsaya
(Siripaccaya or ‘‘ accumulation of glory ”), a small village about seven miles to
the south of Nyaung-u, which was once the capital of the Pagan empire. Numerous
shrines of different types of architecture are found in its neighbourhood. The brass
utensils of Indian manufacture, dug up in its fields, and the striking traces of Indian
descent in the features of its people, appear to indicatethat prosperous Indian colonies
were, at one time, established in the locality.
Pet-leik-paya is so called because of its singularly shaped foliated capital
which connects the sikhara with the bell-shaped dome. On the band bisecting
the dome, and facing the cardinal points, are miniature shrines recalling the form
of the Temple at Bodh Gaya. On the northern face, a hole has been made by
treasure-seekers, which has exposed to viewterra-cotta tiles of an ancient, butunknown,
date. On these Dipahkara is depicted as prophesying that Sumedha and Sumitta, a
flower-girl, would respectively become Prince Siddhattha and his wife, Yasodhard.
The Pagoda, as it stands, appears to have been added to from time to time.
At one or two places, where the brickwork of the basement has broken away
mouldings of different patterns and of different periods can be traced beneath and the
;
width of the corridor on the east is only three feet and three inches as compared with
four feet, the width of the corridors on the three remaining faces.
The eastern fa9 ade is the most interesting of all. On this side is a rectangular
courtyard with a masonry flooring, whose northern, eastern, and southern sides arelined
by rows of very low pillars, each one foot six inches in diameter, and standing on a
plinth, which is almost flush wdth the ground-level. These pillars apparently served
as rests or sockets for wooden columns which, at one time, supported the roof of a
porch or mandapa. Near these pillars ashes of wood-work were found, and this fact
coupled with the discovery of a lump of vitrified tiles at a spot marked 6 on the
( )
Plan (PI. XLI), seem to show that the superstructurewas burnt down, either byaccident
or through persecution. Further, the approach to the entrance is lined by stone and
masonry figures of adeer and dragon, broken pieces ofwhich have been found. At aspot
marked (5) on the Plan, was discovered a fragment of an inscription in the Talaing
XXX
language (PI. 11), which has not yet been translated.

ARCH.EOLOGICAL REPORT.
128
The main interest of the Pagoda, however, lies in the iconographical importance
of the terra-cotta plaques, of which 184, in all stages of decay, were found. They
are arranged in a double row on the wall surface of an arched corridor or ainbulatoiy
passage, which runs around the basement of the building (fig. i). They are in low
reliefand illustrate strongly designed and well executedscenes m theJataka or Buddhist
Birth Stories. Each plaque bears a legend in the Burmese variety of the Pali charac-
ter, together with a numeral figure indicating the number of each particular story in
the jAtaka. It is remarkable that, except in a few instances, the numbering tallies
exactly with that of Fausboll’s edition of that work.
Fig. I.
A selection has been made of these plaques, and these are described and
illustrated below.
As regards the age of these plaques, they do not appear to be anterior to the
eleventh century A.D., when Anawrata conquered the Taking Kingdom of Thaton.
Devadhamraa-JM.—
-6.
The Bodhisat, Prince Mahirrishsa, sits on a raised seat and preaches on the
“ god-like character ” to a water-sprite, who kneels before him., with his hands clasped
together. Close to the latter is Prince Sdriya, the youngest of the three brothers,
while Prince Canda, the younger brother, is still in a pool covered with flowering
lotuses, the two younger brothers having been imprisoned by the water-sprite for not
knowing what is meant by the “god-like character.”

Q Loose' ^•JkcccO <f JDra^ru,
f- cLeef‘ xjTu stone' ^JBroke/v pieces cf plxxjCpA^^
(k^eocoCless), S-Broken^ pieced cf uiscriptcor^
£r(Jzerv pieces cfT JOrap'OTV. Ujunxp c/' oitr'i/ied/ t;Cl4s,
I»Xi-A.15r OS’ I>ETIiEI3£:

.
THE PLAQUES FOUiN’D AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN. 129
—
Makhadeva-Jat.
9.
King Makhadeva sits on a throne flanked by two white umbrellas, namely, the
Kanakadanda and the Manohara. His barber sits kneeling before him while receiv-
ing instructions to report any grey hairs on the head of the king. The latter plucks
out a grey hair with his golden tongs from the royal head.
—
Lakkhana-
Jat. 11
The Bodhisat is reborn as a stag, and is represented by the biggest figure on the
plaque. Below him is his elder son, K^la, who returns solitary and alone, having
been bereft, through his foolish leadership, of his entire herd of 500 deer. On the
left side, the topmost figure is Lakkhana, the younger son, who, through his sagacious
guidance, does not lose a single deer of his herd. The 500 deer of his herd are sym-
bolised by five figures.
—
Ayacitabhatta-Jat.
19.
The fairy of a banyan tree expounds on the inefficacy of animal-sacrifice offered
to him by the squire of a village.
—
N
alapana-Jat. 20.
The central figure represents the ogre of a lake, who has assumed the shape of
a horrible monster with a blue belly, a white face, and bright-red hands and feet, and
who devours any living creature that comes down into the water. On the right is the
Bodhisat, the Monkey-King, who is at the head of a troop of 80,000 monkeys. The
monkeys escape from death by sucking the water through canes, which have been
hollowed miraculously.
Titthi-Jat.-25.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, sits on a raised seat, and is informed by the
Royal Mentor that the state-charger, led by a groom, refuses to go down into the
water for a bath because another horse, a sorry beast, has been washed down at the
same bathing-place.
—
Nandivilasa-Jat. 28.
The Bodhisat, reborn as the NandiviHsa bull, wishes to repay his Brahman owner
the cost of his up-bringing, and suggests that a wager should be laid with a rich mer-
chant that his bull can draw a hundred loaded carts. The plaque represents Nandi-
vil^sa yoked to a string of a hundred carts and the Brahman driving him.
Vanarinda-Jat.-T-57.
The Bodhisat is reborn as Vinarinda, a monkey, who lives on the mangoes and
bread-fruits that grow on an island in a river. Midway between the river-bank and
the island is a rock, which is used as a stepping-stone by the monkey. A crocodile,
wishing to eat him, lies in wait for him on the rock. The monkey by means of a
s

ARCH.^OLOGICAL REPORT.
130
Stratagem, asks the crocodile to keep his mouth open, whereby his eyes are kept shut.
Now^, the monkey jumps on the crocodile’s head and regains the river-bank.
Vattaka-Jat—
118,
A fowler, who catches quails and fattens them for sale, one day, catches the Bod-
hisat, who is reborn as a quail, and puts him in a cage. The Bodhisat refuses both
food and drink, and gets thin. The fowler takes him out of the cage and places him
on the palm of his hand to see what ails the bird. When the man is off his guard,
the quail flies off to the forest, where he is accosted by other quails as to the reason
of his prolonged absence.
Araba-Jat.—124.
.
The Bodhisat becomes a hermit with an emaciated body and sits on a raised
seat. He is attended by twm other hermits practising similar austerities. The Bod-
hisat preaches to them that “ One man’s goodness has been the means of supplying
with food all these 500 hermits. Truly, w'e should always be steadfast in right-doing.”
The man referred to is one of the hermits, who, during a great drought, cuts down a
tree and hollows it into a trough, w'hich is filled with water for the animals to drink.
In order to compensate for such kindness, each animal brings its quota of mangoes,
Rambus or bread-fruits.
Rajovada-Jat.—
151.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, and Mallika, King of Kosala, each attended by
a charioteer, meet at a place where the carriage-road is so deeply sunk between
two banks that there is no room for one carriage to pass another. There is a dispute
between the two charioteers regarding the right of way, and it is conceded to the
King of Benares, because he conquers wrath with mildness, the bad wdth goodness,
the miser with gifts, and lies with truth.
Somadatta-
J
at.—211.
Somadatta’s father is a ploughman, who has lost one of his two oxen. His son
teaches him what to say when he meets the King and asks him for an ox. It takes
the old man a whole year to learn his speech. He is so bashful that when he does
meet the King, he presents the latter with his surviving animal instead of asking him
for an ox.
•
Kamaniggaha-Jat.—
228.
The King of Benares is given over to the desire of riches, the lust of the flesh
and the greed ofgain. The Bodhisatta, who is reborn as Sakka or King of the gods,
wishing to wrean him from such lusts, leads him to hope for the conquest of Pahcala
Kuru and Kekaka. Frustrated in such hope, he sickens, and no mortal doctor can
cure him. Sakka assumes the guise of a physician and exhorts the King that “one
ought not to be mastered by desire, as desire is the root of all evil.” Three attendants
in a kneeling attitude have a sardonic smile on their faces, and represent the three
.threatened States.

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGA

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN.
—
Dutiya-Palayi-Jat. 230.
Benares is attacked by the King of Gandhara. The King of Benares, sitting
on a canopied throne, discloses his glorious countenance, and addresses his enemy
:
Xmv will I destroy }'our host, as a maddened elephant crushes a thicket of reeds.”
—
Tila-mutthi-Jat. 252.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, received his education under a Brahman of Tak-
kasila, and was beaten with a bamboo stick by two of his school-fellows, under the
orders of his Teacher, for stealing, on three successive days, a handful of sessamum
belonging to an old woman. On attaining to sovereignty, he sends for his Teacher
and threatens him with death for his past castigation.
—
Mani-Kantha-Jat.
253.
Two Brahman brothers become anchorites on the banks of the Ganges, and the
younger is frequently visited by Mani-Kantha or Jewel-Throat, a Serpent-King, who
embraces his friend in his snaky folds.
—
Kundaka-Sindhava-Jat.
254.
An old woman owns a thoroughbred foal, which is sold to the Bodhisat, who
is-
reborn as a horse-dealer, and who re-sells it to Brahmadatta, King of Benares.,
The Bodhisat claps his hands, and holds out one palm upwards, and the foal gets-
upon it, and stands on his master’s hand with his four feet close together.
—
Saluka-Jat. 286.
In Benares, the Bodhisat becomes an ox named Big Redcoat and he has a
vounger brother called Little Redcoat.
One day. Little Redcoat says to his brother, “ Brother, we work for this family,
andwe help them to get their living. Yet they only give us grass and straw, while
they fee ” d yon pig with rice porridge, and let it sleep in a sty ; and what can it do for
them ?
“ Brother, ” says Big Redcoat, “ don’t covet his porridge. They want to make
a feast of him on our younglady’s wedding-day ; that’s why they are fattening him up.,
Wait afew days, and you’ll see him dragged out of his sty, killed, chopped into bits
and eaten up by the visitors.”
Nana-Chanda-Jat.—
289.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, rewards a Brahman for his correct observations
of the constellations. The Brahman’s wife, son, daughter-in-law and maid-servant
arelikewise rew'arded.

132 ARCH.«:0L0G1CAL REPORT.
Supatta-Jat.—292.
Supatta or Fairwing, a Crow-King, attended by his Chief Captain, Suraukhaor
Pretty beak, preaches to Brahmadatta, King of Benares, who is attended bv his
four queens.
—
Kaya-Chinda-Jat.
293.
A Brahman is afflicted with the jaundice. In consultation with his wife, he re-
solves that, if he evergets well, he will embrace the religious life. He does get
well and goes away to the Himalayas, where he dwells in the enjoyment of ecstatic
happiness.
Kama-Tappat
u-Jat.—297.
A poor man is prevailed upon by his wife to steal the safflow'ers of the King,
with wfflich she wants to dye her clothes. He is caught red-handed, and is impaled
under the supendsion of an executioner. Crows fly down to peck at his head and
face. His dying thoughts are of his wife, and he is full of regret that she should
have been deprivedof the pleasure of wearing dyed garments.
K —
omaya-Putta-Jat.
299.
Komaya-putta, attended by two other anchorites, admonishes a monkey, who
used to afford endless amusement to another fraternity of hermits by his grimaces
and antics.
Tittira-Jat.—306
(319).
While a fowler is asleep with his snares and freshly-caught birds by his side, his
decoy partridge questions a hermit whether its occupation is sinful. The reply is that
the absenceof intention in a state of coercion is absolutely sinless.
Mata-Rodana-Jat.—
317.
On the death of his elder brother, the Bodhisat does not weep. His kinsfolk
reprove him for his seeming hard-heartedness. His reply is that all things are trans
tent and that all creatures ate subject to the Eight Wordly Conditions
Sucacca-Jat.—
320.
A
w . as yet K a in P g ri o n f ce B . ena T re h s e ne Q g u l e e e c n ts c h o i m s pl C a h i i ns ef t Q o ue t e h n e , B w od h h o is h a a t s s w h h a o red his exile while he
and wife. ’ reconciles husband
uaddabhaya-Jat.—
322 (a), (b)
staX“
lit
fruit tl, vilva
mu ““
to for its life. The infection of imaginary fear spreads and b
atampedeof all the animals in the forest. The Bodhisal who comes tolfc Hr,

PLAQUES FODSD AT TIE PETLElK PAGODA, PAGAI
V-

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA. PAGAN
••ni

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN-
‘33
reassures the panic-stricken creatures, and saves them from imminent destruction by
finding out the origin of their fear, and by explaining to them its true cause.
Godha-Jat.—325.
The Bodhisat becomes a lizard, and pays frequent visits to a false ascetic. The
latterwishes to catch the lizard and eat its flesh; but his would-be victim runs away
and escapesfrom death.
—
Viseyha-Jat. 340.
Viseyha, a great merchant of Benares, is, liberal and fond of alms-giving, thereby
incurringthe jealousy of Sakka, who suspects that the former has ulterior designs on
his position. Sakka, by his supernatural power, deprives Viseyha and his wife of all
means of alms-giving and reduces them to abject poverty. The husband becomes a
grass-cutter to obtain money for the purpose of givingalms, and falls intoa swoon on
account ofhis unwontedlabour. Sakka appears onthescene and enquires why hegives
alms. He replies “Desiring neither Sakkahood nor Brahmaship, but seeking omni-
;
science do I give.”
Ayakuta-Jat.—
347.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, interdicts animal-sacrifice to the gods, who
commission a savage Yakkha to slay the King. He comes armed with a huge blazing
mass of iron, but his murderous intent is checked by Sakka, who appears most oppor-
tunely.
—
Arnna-Jat. 348.
A Brahman of Banares and his son embrace the religious life and dwell in the
A
Himalayas. border village is harried by brigands, and a damsel flies for refuge to
their hermitage, and, by her seductions, corrupts the virtue of the youth, while the
father is absent gathering fruit. The father, by his admonitions, succeeds in
Teestablishing his son in purity and virtue.
Uraga-Jat.—
354.
The household of a Brahman cultivator consists of six persons : the Brahman, his
wife, son, daughter, daughter-in-law, and a female slave. The son is bitten by a snake
-and dies. There is no lamentation inthe family, and Sakka comes and questions each
member about the cause. The reply given is that, when a man,dies, he shuffles off
his mortal coil as a snake casts off its slough, and that grief and lamentation are of no
.avail.
—
Ahigundiqa-Jat. 365.
The Bodhisat becomes acorn merchant at Benares. To him is entrusted a mon-
key for six days by a snake-charmer. On the seventh day, the owner returns and the
-animal is restored to him. The monkey is beatenby the snake-charmer three times
with a piece of bamboo, and, while the latter is asleep, escapes to the top of a mango-
tree and secures its freedom from bondage,
.. ,

. .
archaeological report.
134
Gangamala-Jat.—421
King Udaya shares his kingdom wth a water-carrier, who is known as King
Addhamasaka, because he persists inhis claim to a half-penny, which he has savedand
hidden in a brick in the City wall. Over each King is a white umbrella, and he is
attended by his Chief Queen,
Catu-dvara-Jat.—439.
MittaA’indaka, a merchant of Benares, is disobedient to his mother, and does not
practise virtue or charity. In the course of his adventures at sea, he unwittingly
reaches IJssada Hell, and espies a man in torment, supporting, on his head, a wheel as
sharp as a razor. Mistaking the instrument of torture for a lotus bloom, he asks for it,
and it is transferred to his head. The Bodhisat appears and preaches the law to him.
K anha-dipayana-Jat. — 444.
Kanha-dipayana, a hermit, is visited by Mandavya, a merchant, his wife and son.
The son, w'hile playing, is bitten by a snake and dies. The dead child is restored to-
life by the combined saccakiriya (Act of Truth) of his parents and the hermit.
N igrodha-Jat.—
-445.
Three students, Nigrodha, (Banyan), Sikha (Branch), and Pottika (Dollie), study
at Takkasila. On the completion of their education, they travel abroad. In the
course of their peregrinations, they sleep under a tree growing within thesacred pre-
cincts of a temple. On that tree roosts a cock, which crows, at dawn, as follows
:
“If any one kills me and eats of my fat, he will become a King this
very morning he that eats the middle flesh, becomes Commander-in-Chief who eats
; ;
the flesh about the bones, he will be Treasurer.” Pottika climbs up the tree, seizes
the cock, kills it, and cooks it inthe embers the fat he gives to Banyan, the middle
;
flesh to Branch, and himself eats the flesh that isabout the bones. The prognostica-
tions of the cock are entirely fulfilled.
Udaya-Jat.—458.
The Bodhisat becomes King of K^si. Having both passed out of Brahma’s
world, he and his Queen have an absolute control over their senses, and they live
together in chastity. The King dies and is reborn as Sakka. In order to test the
virtue of the widowed Queen, he visits her at night, and tempts her, on three
successive occasions, with an offering of a golden, silver, and iron bowl filled with
coins. His efforts being unsuccessful, he reveals his identity.
M
ittamitta-Jat.—
473.
- The Bodhisat comes to life as a courtier, who advises Bramadatta, King of
Benares, on matters spiritual and temporal. At the request of the King, he discourses
on the sixteen tokens of a friend or foe.

ii;••-X-.J:

THE PLAGUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA PAGAN.
135
Kalinga-Jat.-479.
The King of Kilihga is a universal Monarch and is possessed of the Wheel of
Empire and a White Elephant. Riding on this elephant, and in great pomp and splen-
dour, he visits his parents, who are living, as exiles, in a forest. The elephant is
unable to pass beyond the circuit around the great Bo-Tree, the throne of victory of
all the Buddhas.
Sadhina-Jat.—
494.
The virtues of Sadhina, King of Mithila, are noised abroad and the angels of the
Tdvatimsa heaven are anxious to see him. Sakka sends forth Mitali in a celestial
chariot to bring him. Tdvatimsa or the abode of the “ Thirty-three ” is represented
by three devas.
Dasa-brahmana-Jat.—
495.
Koravya, King of Kuru, attended by his two Queens, addresses Vidhura, his wise
Counsellor, expressing his dissatisfaction with the character of the Brahman recipients
of his alms, and requiring him to search for holy men. Accordingly, five hundred
Pacceka Buddhas are invited from the Northern HimMaya.
Bhikkhu-Parampara-Jat.—
496.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, in the course of his peregrinations in disguise,
receives an offering of food from a rich land-owner, and passes it on to his Brahman
Counsellor (lowerrow of figures). The Brahman passes it on to an ascetic, who offers
it to a Pacceka Buddha (upper row of figures). This story illustrates the different
degrees of worth or sanctity, which entitles a person to receive gifts from others.
—
Sumedha-pandita-Jat.
499 (?)
Sumedha consults his treasurer and accountants before he gives away the whole
of his property in alms.
Matanga-Jat.—500
(497).
Mitafiga, a CandMa, is married to Dittha-mahgaliki, daughter of a merchant
of Benares. The issue of the union is a son called Mandavya, who gives alms to the
Brahmans. M4tahga renouncesthe world by becomingan ascetic. One day, at a great
almsgiving, he is beaten under the orders of his son, and the deities of the city, in
•order to avenge such injustice, make Mandavya and the Brahmans unconscious.
Dittha-mahgalik4, attended by a slave-girl, intercedes with MStanga on their behalf.
With the elixir of immortality given by him, she restores her son and all the Brahmans
0 consciousness.
Sivi-raja-Jat.—503
(499).
King Sivi, not content with giving away his property in alms, resolvesto give
-away any part of his own body. Sakka, divining his wish, appears before him in the

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
136
guise of an old and blind Brahman, and asks foran eye. The King summons his sur-
geon, and, after undergoing an operation, offers both his eyes to the Brahman amidst
the remonstrance of his minister and queens.
—
Kim-chanda-Jat. 514 (5li)*
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, turns an ascetic and lives on the banks of the-
Ganges. He is supplied with mangoesby a spirit, who was his chaplain and judge.
—
Kumbha-Jat. 5i5-(5i2).
Sabbamitta, King,of S3,vatthi, orders ajar ofintoxicating liquor to be brought for
him to drink. Sakka appears in the air holding a jar of liquor and discourses on the
eHls of strong drink, thereby saving the King from the imminent danger of acquiring
a bad habit.
—
Chaddanta-Jat. 517 (514).
Chaddanta, an Elephant-King, has two wives, Mahisubhaddci and ChlasubhaddA.-
The latter conceives a grudge against her husband because of his partiality to her
rival. She diesand becomes Queen of Benares. She sends forth Sonuttara, a hunter,
to bring her the tusks of Chaddanta. It being summer-time, the Elephant-King
lives under agreat banyan-tree. The hunter digs a hole under the tree and'shoots the
elephant with an arrow, w'hich, entering at the navel, comes out at the back. The
elephant dies, and the Queen also dies of a broken heart at the sight of the-
tusks presented'to her.
Sambhava-Jat.—518
(515).
Sucirata, Counsellor of the King of Kuru, is asked by his master to explain the-
nature of the Serviceof Truth.- - He confesses his inability , to solve the question, and
procures its solution from Sambhava, the seven-year-old sonof Vidhura, Chaplain of
the King of Benares.
Taw Sein Ko..

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEtK PAGODA, PAGAN
n"'>.},. ^’7

gDftOOT)/ A
3
)?r<nA’'-5

