Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
675
Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand: Bilingual Modes of 
Philology, Exegetics, Homiletics, and Poetry, 1450–1850
Trent Walker
Stanford University
In the late first and early second millennia, mainland Southeast Asians created 
sophisticated techniques to accurately and efficiently render Pali into local ver-
naculars, including Burmese, Khmer, Khün, Lanna, Lao, Lü, Mon, and Siamese. 
These techniques for vernacular reading, parallel to approaches for reading Latin 
in medieval Europe and Literary Sinitic in Japan, Korea, and Vietnam, led to the 
development of bitexts that contained a mix of Pali and vernacular material.
Such bitexts, arranged in both interlinear and interphrasal formats, gradually 
allowed second-millennium Southeast Asian writers to sprout a vernacular litera-
ture from the established branches of Pali genres. Bitexts themselves formed the 
basis for a new literary style that stemmed from the techniques of vernacular read-
ing, a style that set the standard for belles-lettres until the early twentieth century. 
The spread of Pali-vernacular bitexts in Southeast Asia allowed for the literary 
elevation of the vernacular without renouncing the cosmopolitan idiom of Pali. 
To support these arguments, this article draws on some of the earliest exam-
ples of bitexts in Central Thailand (Siam) and Northern Thailand (Lanna). These 
include a hitherto undeciphered form of manuscript annotation in seventeenth- to 
nineteenth-century Siam; two of the oldest palm-leaf documents surviving in any 
Tai language, from sixteenth-century Lanna; and the oldest known Pali-Siamese 
literary work, thought to be composed in 1482. These bitexts provide detailed evi-
dence for vernacular reading and the emergence of vernacular literature in main-
land Southeast Asian in general and Thailand in particular. 
introduction
The literary culture of second-millennium mainland Southeast Asia, excepting Vietnam, 
emerges from the encounter between classical Indic languages and local vernacular lan-
guages. The leading Indic language of this period in Southeast Asia is Pali, a Middle Indic 
language closely related to Sanskrit, though Sanskrit itself maintained a secondary role in 
the region. The Southeast Asian vernaculars that Pali and Sanskrit intertwine with include 
the Tibeto-Burman tongue of Burmese; the Austroasiatic languages of Mon and Khmer; and 
the Southwestern Tai dialects of Siamese (or Central Thai), Lanna (or Northern Thai), Lao, 
Shan, Tai Khün, and Tai Lü (Dai Lue). At the crux of this meeting between Indic and local 
vernaculars are Indic-vernacular bitexts. 
I define bitexts as texts that are presented bilingually, with portions in one language mixed 
together with portions in another, typically in an interphrasal or interlinear arrangement. 
Indic-vernacular bitexts may be structured in various ways, and need not contain equal pro-
portions of Indic and Southeast Asian material. In most cases, the vernacular portions of a 
Author’s note: I wish to thank the anonymous reviewers as well as Chenxing Han for their particularly detailed 
and thoughtful feedback. The research and writing of this article were supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from 
the Khyentse Foundation during my prior affiliation with the Department of Thai, Faculty of Arts, Chulalongkorn 
University, where my colleagues graciously offered much challenge and inspiration, especially Peter Skilling, Arthid 
Sheravanichkul, and Tossaphon Sripum.

676
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
bitext provide an analytic reading of the Pali or Sanskrit portions, sometimes accompanied 
by an interpretive or literary commentary. Such bitexts, known by diverse names in local 
languages, form a significant portion of all extant written material produced between the 
twelfth and nineteenth centuries in what is now Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Thailand. 1
There have been very few sustained studies of Southeast Asian Indic-vernacular bitexts 
to date. William Pruitt, building on earlier work by Tin Lwin and John Okell, meticulously 
demonstrates the extraordinary range of grammatical particles and abbreviation systems 
employed in a single type of Pali-Burmese bitext. 2 Assanee Poolrak explores a number of 
analogous technical particles found in one Pali-Siamese bitext to show how Indic literary 
modes were adopted in Central Thailand. 3 Justin McDaniel, based on his readings of Pali-
Lao and Pali-Lanna bitexts, claims that such bilingual compositions follow no strict conven-
tions but rather reflect the idiosyncratic approaches of individual teachers. 4
By contrast, my research on bitexts in Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand demonstrates not 
only that strict conventions were followed, but that many of these conventions were shared 
across mainland Southeast Asia from the eleventh century onward. Bitexts, in my reading, do 
not reflect what McDaniel sees as idiosyncrasies of particular local or personal approaches 
to reading Pali. 5 Nor are the technical features of Indic-vernacular bitexts, as documented 
by Pruitt and Assanee, particular to Burmese or Siamese contexts. I argue instead that Indic-
vernacular bitexts spread across mainland Southeast Asia in the second millennium for 
three reasons: 1) they facilitated linguistic exchange not only between Indic and Southeast 
Asian languages but also among different Southeast Asian vernaculars, 2) they structured 
the vernacular reading and translation of Pali (and occasionally Sanskrit) texts, and 3) they 
facilitated the emergence of distinctive styles of bilingual literature that served philological, 
exegetical, homiletic, and poetic ends. This article unpacks the latter two claims. 6
In this essay, I first provide a brief overview of how intellectuals in mainland Southeast 
Asia created sophisticated techniques to accurately and efficiently render Pali and Sanskrit 
into local vernaculars. Some of these techniques parallel various approaches for reading 
1.  The most common local names for bitexts include nissaya (Burmese), naṃ/trā-ai (Mon), nisrai/nissăy 
(Lanna, Lao, Siamese), nāmaśăbd/săpº (Lanna, Lao, Siamese), cuṇṇiyapad (Siamese), ṕlè yak śăbd (Siamese), and 
prè lot prayog (Khmer). Transliteration of Khmer, Lanna, Lao, and Siamese sources and terms in this essay follows 
the system outlined in Trent Walker, “Unfolding Buddhism: Communal Scripts, Localized Translations, and the 
Work of the Dying in Cambodian Chanted Leporellos” (PhD diss., Univ. of California, Berkeley, 2018), xiii–xvii. A 
number of minor additions to this system are described in the footnotes.
2.  William Pruitt, Étude linguistique de nissaya birmans (Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient, 1994); Tin 
Lwin, “A Study of Pali-Burmese Nissaya with Special Reference to the Mahāparinibbhāna-sutta” (PhD diss., School 
of Oriental and African Studies, Univ. of London, 1961); John Okell, “Nissaya Burmese,” Lingua 15 (1965): 186–
227.
3.  Assanee Poolrak, “Năndōṕanăndasūt́r gāṃ hlvaṅ: Kār vigroḥh* śilṕaḥ kār ṕlè lèḥ kalavidhī dāṅ varrṇaśilṕ*” 
(MA thesis, Chulalongkorn Univ., 2012).
4.  Justin McDaniel, Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Education in Laos 
and Thailand (Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press, 2008), 119–60.
5.  For a detailed critique of McDaniel’s arguments in this regard, see Walker, “Unfolding Buddhism,” 351–61, 
370–73.
6.  In reference to the first claim regarding linguistic exchange between Pali and Sanskrit in Southeast Asia, see 
Trent Walker, “Echoes of a Sanskrit Past: Liturgical Curricula and the Pali Uṇhissavijaya in Cambodia,” in Katā me 
rakkhā, katā me parittā: Protecting the Protective Texts and Manuscripts, ed. Claudio Cicuzza, Materials for the 
Study of the Tripiṭaka, vol. 14 (Bangkok and Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute and Fragile Palm 
Leaves Foundation, 2018), 49–116. With regard to Tai-Khmer linguistic exchange in Southeast Asian Buddhist 
contexts, see Walker, “Unfolding Buddhism,” 403–29.

677
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
Latin in medieval Europe and for reading Literary Sinitic in Japan, Korea, and Vietnam. 7 
Following the work of John Whitman and Peter Kornicki on East Asia, we might classify 
Indic-vernacular bitexts in Southeast Asia under the heading of “vernacular reading.” 8 How-
ever, the techniques developed in Southeast Asia for the production of bitexts differ from 
their European and East Asia counterparts in that they supported a wide variety of textual 
genres, including linguistic study, scholastic commentary, public sermons, and versified 
belles-lettres.
To demonstrate these different techniques of presentation, this article focuses on selected 
Pali-vernacular texts from Thailand, including Pali-Siamese and Pali-Lanna examples, dating 
from the fifteenth to the nineteenth century. The examples I selected come from a range of 
contexts within this period; I chose them for the clarity with which they illustrate philologi-
cal, exegetical, homiletic, and poetic modes of presentation. To make the broader context 
for these examples clear, I first address the common features and diffusion history of Indic-
vernacular bitexts in Sri Lanka and mainland Southeast Asia. Since I deal with these themes 
elsewhere, the remainder of this section takes the form of a brief summary. 9
Indic-vernacular bitexts across Sri Lanka and mainland Southeast Asia rely on a common 
model for their composition. Whether they emerged in Burmese, Khmer, Lanna, Lao, Mon, 
Siamese, or Sinhalese contexts, bitexts in second-millennium contexts, including fifteenth- 
to nineteenth-century Siam (Central Thailand) and Lanna (Northern Thailand), are created 
through three required steps: selection, analysis, and presentation. The first step of selection 
has two possible options, the second of analysis encompasses five techniques, and the third 
of presentation has four primary modes, as shown in Table 1 below.
Table 1. The three main steps of bitext composition, along with attendant options,  
techniques, and modes
1. Selection
Selecting an Indic passage to analyze
1a. Citation
Citing an existing Indic text
1b. Invention	
Inventing an Indic text
2. Analysis	
Reading and translating the selected passage 
2a. Parsing
Dividing the passage into its component parts
2b. Amplification
Supplying contracted and implied Indic phrases
2c. Rearrangement
Changing the word order to vernacular syntax
2d. Annotation
Marking grammatical features with particles
2e. Gloss
Providing Indic and/or vernacular definitions
7.  On such practices in medieval Europe, see Mariken Teeuwen and Irene van Renswoude, eds., The Annotated 
Book in the Early Middle Ages: Practices of Reading and Writing (Turnhout: Brepols, 2017) and Alderik H. Blom, 
Glossing the Psalms: The Emergence of the Written Vernaculars in Western Europe from the Seventh to the Twelfth 
Centuries (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2017).
8.  John Whitman, “The Ubiquity of the Gloss,” SCRIPTA 3 (2011): 95–121; Peter Francis Kornicki, “Read-
ing Sinitic Texts in the Vernaculars,” in Languages, Scripts, and Chinese Texts in East Asia (Oxford: Oxford Univ. 
Press, 2018), 157–86. For a recent reappraisal of the evidence for vernacular reading in Vietnam, see Kosukegawa 
Teiji and John Whitman, “On the Significance of the Glosses in Vietnamese Classical Chinese Texts,” Journal of 
Vietnamese Studies 13.3 (2018): 29–50.
9.  See Trent Walker, “Bilingualism,” in The Routledge Handbook of Theravada Buddhism, ed. Ashley Thomp-
son and Stephen Berkwitz (London: Routledge, forthcoming).

678
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
3. Presentation
Tailoring the analysis for a specific purpose
3a. Philological
Selective analysis in an abbreviated style
3b. Exegetical	
Scholastic expansion of analysis in prose
3c. Homiletic	
Narrative expansion of analysis in prose
3d. Poetic
Aesthetic expansion of analysis in verse
All Indic-vernacular bitexts purport to select (1) an Indic text or texts to analyze passage by 
passage, whether that text is an existing Pali or Sanskrit treatise (1a) or one invented for the 
purpose of composing a bitext (1b). Each passage may be quoted in full, in abbreviated form, 
or not at all. The selected passage is then subjected to an analytical reading and translation 
(2). The number of specific techniques of analysis used depends on the linguistic and cultural 
context of the author. In Siamese and Lanna contexts it is not uncommon for all five tech-
niques (2a–2e) to be applied to each passage. 10 Each analyzed passage may be subsequently 
presented in various modes (3). The four most common are philological (3a), exegetical 
(3b), homiletic (3c), and poetic (3d), but variants and combinations of these appear as well. 
Each mode roughly corresponds with a particular intended audience: a philological presen-
tation favors linguistic training, an exegetical approach is suitable for scholastic readers, a 
homiletic mode is honed for public preaching, and a poetic treatment may be intended for 
recitation to court circles or other highly literate audiences. 
These primary steps and their attendant options, techniques, and modes may have arisen 
gradually in the first millennium, though our evidence for this period is thin. There are first-
millennium inscriptions that include portions in two languages, namely a classical Indic 
language (Sanskrit or Pali) and a local tongue (Cham, Khmer, Mon, Pyu). However, in most 
cases, the classical and vernacular sections diverge in form and content; the Indic portion 
often praises a deity in elaborate verse, while the vernacular documents what was donated 
to the deity or religious foundation in prose. 11 Notable exceptions include an interphrasal 
Sanskrit-Pyu inscription tentatively dated to the sixth century and a number of Sanskrit-
Khmer inscriptions, largely from the early second millennium, that include parallel content, 
if divergent form, in the two languages. 12
There are a handful of reliably dated first-millennium Pali-Sinhala bitexts that include 
the three primary steps. The earliest surviving mainland Southeast Asian example is a Pali-
Mon inscription from the late eleventh or early twelfth century. 13 Pali-Burmese examples 
are extant from the late thirteenth century, and several Sanskrit-Burmese bitexts are listed in 
an inscription from 1442. By the middle of the second millennium, the techniques of Indic-
vernacular bitexts are witnessed among several Southwestern Tai groups, including those in 
Siam, Lanna, and Laos. The earliest complete Pali-Siamese bitext is thought to date from 
1482 in Ayutthaya. The earliest securely dated Pali-Lanna bitext surviving in manuscript 
10.  Pali-Sinhala bitexts omit the technique of grammatical annotation (2d), since what Burmese, Mon, Khmer, 
and various Tai languages express through particles may be signaled morphologically in Sinhala. 
11.  Similar Sheldon Pollock, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in 
Premodern India (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 2006), 126–29.
12.  Arlo Griffiths, Bob Hudson, Marc Miyake, and Julian Wheatley, “Studies in Pyu Epigraphy, I: State of the 
Field, Edition and Analysis of the Kan Wet Khaung Mound Inscription, and Inventory of the Corpus,” Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 103 (2017): 43–205; Chhom Kunthea, “Le rôle du sanskrit dans le développe-
ment de la langue khmère: Une étude épigraphique du VIe au XIVe siècle” (PhD thesis, École Pratique des Hautes 
Études, 2016), 319–40.
13.  C. O. Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica: Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Burma, vol. 1, pt. 2, ed. 
Charles Duroiselle (Rangoon: Superintendent, Government Printing and Stationery, Union of Burma, 1960), 93.

679
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
form dates from 1552. 14 A Sanskrit-Lanna example survives from 1578. 15 The oldest extant 
Pali-Lao bitexts hail from a similar period. 16 Pali-Siamese, Pali-Lanna, and Pali-Lao bitexts 
almost certainly existed prior to the late fifteenth century, though the extreme paucity of 
manuscripts before that time precludes firm conclusions.
The examples I draw from in this essay comprise several of the oldest representatives 
in Thailand for the four modes of bitextual presentation. These include 1) two passages 
from a mid-nineteenth-century philological Pali-Siamese bitext, 2) two exegetical Pali-Lanna 
bitexts, one from 1585 and another from 1638, 3) two homiletic Pali-Lanna bitexts, one from 
1563 and another from 1666, and 4) a poetic Pali-Siamese bitext from 1482. Each example is 
among the earliest surviving Indic-Tai bitexts of its type. The philological examples include 
a hitherto undeciphered form of manuscript annotation in seventeenth- to nineteenth-century 
Siam. The Pali-Lanna exegetical and homiletic examples, never analyzed before, are among 
the few dozen oldest manuscripts surviving in any Tai language. The poetic example is one 
of the oldest known literary works in Siamese. Taken as a whole, these examples provide 
detailed evidence for the emergence of Indic-vernacular bitexts in what is now Thailand. 
philological bitexts: interlinear pali-siamese examples  
from the nineteenth century
Most Pali manuscripts from the seventeenth through early twentieth centuries in Siam and 
Cambodia are inscribed on palm leaves. Once the leaves have been prepared for writing, the 
scribe carves the letters into each leaf. The leaves are then washed with ink and wiped clean, 
leaving the ink behind only in the inscribed letters. 
Many manuscripts were then proofread by a second reader, most likely a male monastic. 
He would correct mistakes in the manuscript by writing on it directly with an ink pen, rather 
than re-inscribing the leaves. The proofreader usually wrote “proofreading complete” 17 on 
the cover leaf of each fascicle once his work was finished. Most Pali manuscripts of this 
period, therefore, were fashioned by two sets of hands, those of the original scribe and those 
of the proofreader.
A smaller number of manuscripts, however, were the work of three or more sets of hands. 
The third person to contribute to the manuscript was the annotator. Interlinear annotations in a 
special script for this purpose, known in Thai as khaam hvăt or t́vă kṣien, appear on certain Pali 
palm-leaf manuscripts. 18 These annotations are generally found only on the texts that formed 
the core of the Siamese monastic curriculum in this period, namely the Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa, 
the  Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā, the  Maṅgalatthadīpanī, the  Sāratthasaṅgaha, the  Samanta­
pāsādikā, the Visuddhimagga, and the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. Khaam hvăt annotations 
14.  Digital Library of Northern Thai Manuscripts (DLNTM) 011903027_00 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/
manuscripts/3700, accessed November 27, 2019).
15.  DLNTM 011318001_01 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/4475, accessed November 27, 2019).
16.  To my knowledge, the oldest surviving Pali-Lao bitext in manuscript form, a bilingual version of the 
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, dates from 948 of the Lesser Era (cullasakarāja/cūḷasakarāja), equivalent to 1586 or 
1587 ce (PLMP [Preservation of Lao Manuscripts Programme] Code: 08040102007_04; http://laomanuscripts.net/
en/texts/6166, accessed November 27, 2019).
17.  Siamese dān lèv2; Khmer phdieṅ höy.
18.  For more on the paleographic context of khom hvăt and t́vă kṣien, see Kongkaew Veeraprajak, “Ăkṣar 
khaam khaaṅ daiy,” in Sāy dhār hèṅ1 gvām git 2: Sāranibandh* jöt jū kiert́i dān1 phū2 hñiṅ varuṇyubā snidvaṅś* 
ṇa ayudhyā nīöṅ1 naï varōkās āyu grap 72 ṕī, ed. Vuḍhijăy Mūlaśilṕ* (Bangkok: Kaaṅ dun bīö1 vijākār varuṇyubā 
snidvaṅś*, 2544 [2001]), 330–32.

680
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
are most common in late eighteenth- and nineteenth-century manuscripts, but they are known 
to be found in earlier materials as well. 19
These interlinear annotations are the most abbreviated form of Indic-vernacular bitext 
in Southeast Asia. The mode of presentation is almost exclusively philological in that the 
interlinear notes provide a highly abbreviated analysis of the Pali passage at hand without 
offering further exegetical, narrative, or poetic elaboration. The focus is solely on parsing, 
amplifying, syntactically rearranging, grammatically annotating, and sometimes glossing a 
portion of a Pali text.
Here I propose the first explanation of the meaning and function of these distinctive 
annotations. I cite two examples—one simple, one more complex—from a Dhammapada-
aṭṭhakathā manuscript in the Swift Family Collection at the University of California, Berke-
ley’s Bancroft Library. 20 This manuscript was likely fashioned in Siam in the mid-nineteenth 
century. Its special annotation symbols are shared by many other Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā 
manuscripts from Cambodia and Siam from the seventeenth century onward. 
A diplomatic transcription of the inscribed text, plus the proofreader’s corrections in bold, 
of folio ḍa recto, lines 1–3, reads as follows: 21
buddhānaṃhi / padacetiyaṃadhiṭṭhahitvāakkantaṭṭhāneyevapaññā ◯ yatinaaññattha | 
yesañcatthāyaadhiṭṭhitaṃhoti⟪↓ + ↑ te⟫ yeva ◯ naṃpassanti | tesaṃpanaadassanakaraṇatthaṃ­
hatthī / ādayovāakkamantumahāmeghovāvassatu ◯ verambhavātāvāpaharantunana⟪ṃ⟫
kocimakkhetu⟪ṃ⟫sakkoti | 22
For a footprint of the Buddhas, once established, is only visible in the place where they 
walked, not elsewhere. Moreover, only those for whom it was established can see it. Even 
if, for the sake of making [a footprint] 23 invisible to them, should elephants and other 
beasts stampede, a great rain pour down, or whirlwinds blow, still no one is able to erase it.
After the scribe inscribed these lines in Pali, the proofreader supplied a missing word (te, 
“those”) and two missing niggahīta (ṃ, on naṃ and makkhetuṃ), likely on the basis of a 
reference manuscript. No spaces are added to parse the text; with the exception of string 
hole breaks, line breaks, and sentence-final daṇḍa markers, the whole passage is inscribed in 
scriptio continua, in contrast to modern Pali editions. The proofreader’s duty is to make sure 
that the inscribed text matches the reference manuscript.
19.  For an image of an annotated early eighteenth-century manuscript in the National Library of Thailand, see 
Kongkaew Veeraprajak, Sāranideś cāk gămbhīr* paï lān samăy ayudhyā (Bangkok: Kram śilṕakar, 2545 [2002]), 
47. There are likely examples surviving from the seventeenth century in the National Library of Thailand, though 
they remain unidentified.
20.  Call number: ff 4MS PL4251 no. 14. An image of this particular folio is available at http://cdn.calisphere.
org/data/13030/fx/hb7f59p4fx/files/hb7f59p4fx-FID435.jpg. The entire manuscript is accessible at http://www.
oac.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/hb7f59p4fx/?&brand=oac4 (accessed November 27, 2019).
21.  The scribe did not include any spaces in this passage. Physical divisions and punctuation are transliterated 
as follows: / = line break; ◯ = string hole break; | = daṇḍa [end of sentence marker]. The proofreader’s marks are 
transliterated as follows: ⟪ ⟫ = proofreader’s insertion; ↑ = insertion or correction above the line of text; ↓ = inser-
tion or correction below the line of text; + = proofreader’s insertion marker.
22.  Cf. the Chaṭṭha-saṅgāyanā CD-ROM (CSCD) edition of the same passage: buddhānañhi padacetiyaṃ 
adhiṭṭhahitvā akkantaṭṭhāneyeva paññāyati, na aññattha. yesañcatthāya adhiṭṭhitaṃ hoti, teyeva naṃ passanti. 
tesaṃ pana adassanakaraṇatthaṃ hatthiādayo vā akkamantu, mahāmegho vā pavassatu, verambhavātā vā paha-
rantu, na taṃ koci makkhetuṃ sakkoti (https://www.tipitaka.org/romn/cscd/s0502a.att2.xml, accessed November 
27, 2019).
23.  I use square brackets in my translations throughout to indicate words not explicitly specified in the text.

681
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
At some point in this manuscript’s history, likely shortly after it was inscribed and proof-
read, a monk preparing for Pali examinations in Siam began to study it. The proofreader’s 
marks are in a thin black ink; the monk who subsequently studied this manuscript left his 
annotations in a slightly thicker pen. When the annotator arrived at the last of the three 
sentences in the passage above, he provided a detailed analysis of the sentence in question.
Here is a diplomatic transcription, with the annotator’s insertions in bold: 24
tesaṃ «↓ 4 ↑ janānaṃ» panaadassanakaraṇatthaṃ «↓ 3 ↑ bị̄ö» «↑ –» hatthī «↑ ®» / 
ādayo «↓ 1» vāakkamantu «↓ 2 ↑ –» mahāmegho «↑ ®» vāvassatu ◯ verambhavātā «↑ 
® lamº hva1 tvan1» «↑ ®» vāpaharantu «↑ –» na «↓ $» na⟪ṃ⟫ «↓ kī» koci «↓ ka ↑ ®» 
makkhetu⟪ṃ⟫ «↓ ki ↑ lab» sakkoti «↓ kā » |
The annotator’s interlinear analysis transforms this passage into a philological Pali-Siamese 
bitext. The cited passage is subject to a vernacular reading and translation, comprising the 
analytic techniques of parsing, amplification, syntactic rearrangement, grammatical annota-
tion, and gloss. The presentation of the bitext is distinctly philological, with symbolic abbre-
viation and no exegetical, homiletic, or poetic elaboration.
The first layer of analysis is parsing. Though most of the text remains in scriptio continua, 
the annotator uses two special symbols, an inserted space (–) and a word isolation marker 
($) to mark word and phrase divisions. For instance, he inserts a space between -atthaṃ and 
hatthīādayo to separate an adverbial phrase from the grammatical subject and main verb that 
follow. He also uses an inserted space to divide the final clause 25 from the rest of the sen-
tence. The negation particle na receives a special word isolation marker to separate it from 
the naṃ 26 that follows. This first layer of analysis separates the main parts of the sentence 
from one another for easier reading and translation.
The second layer is amplification. In this passage, the annotator only amplifies one Pali 
word, tesaṃ (“to them”), by supplying another dative/genitive plural form, janānaṃ (“to 
the people”), with a more specific meaning. Janānaṃ is not a gloss of tesaṃ, but rather a 
clarification of what, in the annotator’s view, the implied noun behind the pronoun should be.
The third layer is syntactic rearrangement. Here the annotator seeks to reorder the Pali 
passage so that the word sequence matches how it would be read and translated into Siamese. 
The annotator records this rearrangement through the use of both ciphers and syllables. In 
the first phrase of the sentence from tesaṃ to akkamantu, he uses the numerals 1 through 4 to 
indicate this order. Thus what the Chaṭṭha-saṅgāyanā CD-ROM (CSCD) reads as tesaṃ pana 
adassanakaraṇatthaṃ hatthiādayo vā akkamantu (“Even if, for the sake of making [a foot-
print] invisible to them, should elephants and other beasts stampede”) becomes hatthiādayo 
akkamantu adassanakaraṇatthaṃ tesaṃ [amplified to tesaṃ janānaṃ] (“Should elephants 
and other beasts stampede for the sake of making [a footprint] invisible to those people”), the 
annotator having set aside the particles vā and pana in the process of rearrangement.
In the final clause, the annotator uses the syllables ka, kā, ki, and kī instead of ciphers. 
These four syllables are traditionally used to paginate the verso sides of the first four leaves 
of the first fascicle of a palm-leaf manuscript in mainland Southeast Asia. Thus ka, kā, ki, 
and kī correspond to 1, 2, 3, 4 or a, b, c, d. The annotator uses these syllables instead of 
ciphers to avoid confusion with the first part of the sentence. What the CSCD reads as na taṃ 
24.  The annotator’s marks are transliterated as follows: « » = annotator’s insertion; – = annotator’s inserted 
space; ® = special abbreviation for Siamese ăn vā1, marking the nominative case; $ = annotator’s word isolation 
marker.
25.  CSCD: na taṃ koci makkhetuṃ sakkoti.
26.  CSCD: taṃ.

682
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
koci makkhetuṃ sakkoti hence becomes na koci sakkoti makkhetuṃ naṃ (“no one is able to 
erase it”). The meaning is the same in Pali, but the new order allows for a literal reading and 
translation that matches vernacular syntax. In modern Thai, the syntax would be the same 
(Thai glosses in bold): na koci mai1 mī graï sakkoti sāmārth makkhetuṃ lap naṃ măn tai2. 27
The fourth layer of analysis is grammatical annotation. In this passage, such annotations 
are limited to marking the nominative case with a special abbreviation for ăn vā1, a Siamese 
technical particle that is used in bitexts to mark the nominative case or grammatical subject 
of a sentence. 28 The annotator uses this abbreviation to mark the Pali terms hatthiādayo, 
mahāmegho, verambhavātā, and koci as grammatical subjects in this passage. Other annota-
tors may have marked additional grammatical features, such as case, number, tense, or mood 
with similar technical particles, but presumably the annotator of this passage did not find 
these necessary for his analysis.
The fifth and final layer of analysis is gloss. In this passage, the annotator just provides 
vernacular glosses; other annotators provide Pali glosses as well. Our annotator restricts 
himself to glossing only ambiguous or difficult lexical items. One such word is -atthaṃ, 
which he glosses with bị̄ö (“for the sake of”) so as to clarify that -atthaṃ is not interpreted as 
“meaning,” “benefit,” “wealth,” etc. The relatively rare words verambhavātā and makkhetuṃ 
are glossed with lamº hva1 tvan1 (modern Thai lam hvă tvăn2, “whirlwind”) and lab (modern 
Thai lap, “to erase”), respectively.
The precision of this highly abbreviated form of interlinear analysis, comprising the tech-
niques of parsing​, amplification, syntactic rearrangement, grammatical annotation, and gloss, 
makes it one of the most sophisticated forms of vernacular grammatical analysis to emerge 
prior to the development of modern linguistics. The annotator’s insertions provide an accu-
rate account of how to read and translate this Pali passage into Siamese.
The process of creating a philologically oriented, interlinearally arranged Indic-vernacular 
bitext can be even more complex. In folio ḍo verso, line 1 of the same Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā 
manuscript, the following Pali stanza appears ( _ = scribal space):
ahaṃnāgovasaṅgāme _ cāpātopatitasaraṃ _ 
ativākyaṃtitikkhissa _ dussilohibahujano | 29
The proofreader and the annotator both offer corrections to the inscribed letters. Combined 
with the annotator’s parsing marks, a diplomatic transcription of the stanza, with the proof-
reader’s and annotator’s marks for correction and parsing in bold, reads as follows: 30
ahaṃ «↑ –» nāgo «↑ –» va «↑ –» saṅgāme _ cāpātopatita«ṃ»saraṃ _ 
ativākyaṃtitikkhissa«ṃ» _ dussilo «↑ –» hi «↑ –» ba{{hu}}⟪hū⟫jano |
Revised transcription with proofreading and parsing notes applied:
27.  Many such Pali-Siamese bitexts traveled to Cambodia in the eighteenth through twentieth centuries. Since 
Khmer and Thai have a very similar syntactic structure, the rearrangement of this passage works equally well 
for Khmer: na koci gmān anak e ṇā sakkoti āc makkhetuṃ lap’ naṃ vā pān. For more on the syntactic parallels 
between Khmer and Thai, see Franklin E. Huffman, “Thai and Cambodian: A Case of Syntactic Borrowing?,” JAOS 
93.4 (1973): 488–509.
28.  On the various forms this symbol has taken over the centuries, see Kongkaew Veeraprajak, Sāranideś cāk 
gămbhīr paï lān samăy ayudhyā, 156. I discuss its likely Khmer origins in Walker, “Unfolding Buddhism,” 335.
29.  Cf. Dhammapada 320 in CSCD (https://www.tipitaka.org/romn/cscd/s0502a.att2.xml, accessed November 
27, 2019): 
ahaṃ nāgova saṅgāme, cāpato patitaṃ saraṃ;
ativākyaṃ titikkhissaṃ, dussīlo hi bahujjano.
30.  {{ }} = proofreader’s deletion.

683
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
ahaṃ nāgo va saṅgāme 	cāpātopatitaṃsaraṃ 
ativākyaṃtitikkhissaṃ 	 dussilo hi bahūjano |
I, just like an elephant in battle [would endure] an arrow shot from a bow,
shall harsh words endure; immoral indeed [are] most men.
With corrections and parsing complete, the annotator continues with the remaining tech-
niques of analysis, taking a remarkably thorough approach to this stanza. In his annotations 
above and below the inscribed Pali stanza, he includes no fewer than five Pali amplifica-
tions, fourteen numerals for syntactic rearrangement, two different vernacular grammatical 
particles, and three Pali glosses (see fig. 1).
Diplomatic transcription of inscribed passage and inked annotations (vernacular inser-
tions in bold; Pali insertions in italics):
ahaṃ «↓ 11» «↑ –» nāgo «↓ 1» «↑ 2 thito» «↑ –» va «↓ 10» «↑ maḥ yathā» «↑ –» saṅgāme 
«↓ 3» «↑ 4 titikkhati» _ cāpāto «↑ maḥ dhanuto» «↓ 8» patita«ṃ» «↓ 9» saraṃ «↓ 5» _ 
ativākyaṃ «↑ maḥ pharussavacanaṃ» «↓ 13» «↓ 6 mahāyodhāpurisena» «↓ 7 khitaṃ» 
titikkhissa«ṃ» «↑ mè~ị̄ö» «↓ 12» «↑ 14 evaṃ» _ dussilo «↑ –» hi «↑ –» ba{{hu}}⟪hū⟫
jano |
The Pali insertions include both amplifications of implied words such as thito, titikkhati, and 
evaṃ, as well as Pali glosses of ambiguous or rare Pali words, such as yathā for va (i.e., iva) 
and dhanuto for cāpāto (i.e., cāpato). The vernacular insertions include the grammatical 
marker mè~ị̄ö (modern Thai mè2 mị̄ö1), meaning “even though” or “should it be that,” to 
mark the conditional mood, as well as a special Pali-Pali gloss marker maḥ, a short form of 
maḥ vā1 or moḥ1. This term, equivalent to moḥ in Middle Khmer, muh in Old Khmer, and 
măk vā1 in Lanna, roughly means “that is to say” and is used to separate a Pali item to be 
glossed from its gloss in Pali.
The syntactic reordering in this passage is particularly complex. Without the Pali amplifi-
cations and glosses, the order of the vernacular reading is notated as 11, 1, 10, 3, 8, 9, 5, 13, 
12. With the added words it becomes 11, 1, 2, 10, 3, 4, 8, 9, 5, 13, 6, 7, 12, 14. When read 
in the indicated order, the expanded sentence reads as follows: 31
nāgo thito saṅgāme titikkhati saraṃ mahāyodhāpurisena khit[t]aṃ cāp[a]to maḥ dhanu-
to patitaṃ [i]va maḥ yathā ahaṃ titikkhissaṃ mè~ị̄ö ativākyaṃ maḥ pharussavacanaṃ 
evaṃ. 
31.  Word-division spaces added for clarity; [ ] = my editorial emendations, also for clarity; gls = Pali-Pali gloss 
marker; cnd = conditional mood marker.
Fig. 1. Detail of annotations in a Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā manuscript, folio ḍō verso, line 1.  
Phra Dhammapada-atthakatha kambujjakaksara-nibat (?), phuk 8 [sic, should read: braḥ dhamma­
padaṭṭhakathā kamvujjaksaranvāt phūk 7], Swift Family Collection of Palm Leaf Manuscripts,  
ff 4MS PL4251 no. 14, The Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley. Image available 
from http://cdn.calisphere.org/data/13030/fx/hb7f59p4fx/files/hb7f59p4fx-FID452.jpg  
(accessed November 27, 2019)

684
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
An elephant, standing in battle, endures arrows fired by a great warrior from a bow GLS 
from a bow, shot, just like GLS just how CND I would endure harsh words GLS rough 
speech, in the same way.
The annotations fill in all of the implied Pali words and transform this new, expanded Pali 
sentence into a readily comprehensible vernacular reading.
These examples, however intricate they may seem, only give a partial glimpse of the 
philological practices witnessed in manuscript annotations from Siam. Other passages would 
show a broader range of glosses, including more extensive Pali-vernacular glosses. Some 
manuscripts would reveal more complete grammatical marking, including technical particles 
for all eight noun cases as well as markers for at least five different verbal tenses and moods. 
In short, these interlinear annotations, if written out in full, would provide all of the lexical, 
grammatical, and syntactic information necessary to read Pali texts in Siamese.
With rare exceptions, such annotations are not written out in full in an interlinear format. 
They are usually extremely fragmentary since they are written in ink by a student studying 
the text and usually comment only on particularly difficult words or passages. The phrases 
left unannotated, it seems, are either already understood by the annotator or pose no special 
interest. The aim is to produce a bitext that is philologically useful for a careful student of 
Pali rather than to compose a treatise for public consumption. 
There are a few Pali curricular manuscripts in which interlinear annotations are writ-
ten out in full, providing a complete vernacular reading in Siamese. In these cases, the 
annotations are typically carved directly into the leaves instead of inked on the surface. 
Such inscribed interlinear annotations are most commonly found in palm-leaf copies of the 
Kaccāyanavyākaraṇa, the primary treatise used to teach Pali grammar in Siam, Laos, and 
Cambodia prior to the twentieth century.
exegetical bitexts: interphrasal pali-lanna examples  
from the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries
The philological bitexts examined above are the products of Siamese students sharpen-
ing their Pali reading skills. The Pali-Lanna examples I highlight below are concerned more 
with how to interpret Pali scriptures and commentaries. The primary characteristic of the 
exegetical mode of presentation is the scholastic expansion of a bitext. Early Lanna authors 
of such bitexts were deeply steeped in the Pali grammatical and commentarial tradition, and 
their scholastic expansions read much like the monolingual Pali commentaries they engage, 
including frequent citation of other treatises, stylized application of rhetorical questions, 
refutation of incorrect views, and admission of multiple interpretations. Since these exegeti-
cal bitexts were not intended to be read aloud in a public setting, their contents are highly 
abbreviated, and may seem cryptic or even deliberately confounding at first glance. Upon 
closer examination, however, these bitexts reveal the power of the exegetical mode to care-
fully unpack multiple layers of meaning within a Pali text.
The two examples I have selected are bitextual expositions of the same passage from 
the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā, a twelfth-century commentary on Anuruddha’s 
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, a handbook that elucidates the core concepts of the Pali Abhi­
dhamma. 32 The passage in question comes from the beginning of the Ālambanasaṅgaha 
(or Ārammaṇasaṅgaha in some Lanna manuscripts) in the third chapter of the text. Like 
32.  On these two texts and their relationship, see R. P. Wijeratne and Rupert Gethin, trs., Summary of the 
Topics of Abhidhamma (Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha) by Anuruddha: Exposition of the Topics of Abhidhamma 

685
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
similar portions in other scholastic treatises, this passage shows how key terms are explained 
through their supposed etymological connection (nirukti) to other words:
Ārammaṇānaṃ sarūpato, vibhāgato, taṃvisayacittato ca saṅgaho ālambaṇasaṅgaho. 
Vaṇṇavikāraṃ āpajjamānaṃ rūpayati hadayaṅgatabhāvaṃ pakāsetīti rūpaṃ, tadeva 
dubbalapurisena daṇḍādi viya cittacetasikehi ālambīyati, tāni vā āgantvā ettha ramantīti 
ārammaṇanti rūpārammaṇaṃ. 33 
The compendium of objects (ārammaṇa) by means of resemblance, division, and conscious-
ness having those objects as its object is called the “compendium of objects (ālambana).” 
“Undergoing change in appearance, it manifests (rūpayati) and makes known the state 
of having gone to the heart”; hence it is “form (rūpaṃ).” “That very same form is pulled 
down on (ālambīyati) by consciousnesses and mental factors, just as a [walking] stick [is 
pulled down on] by a feeble man,” or, “those [consciousnesses and mental factors] come 
and rejoice (ramanti) in [form],” hence it is called “object (ārammaṇaṃ).”—thus [the first 
of the six objects] is called “form object (rūpārammaṇaṃ).” 34
The first manuscript example I discuss in this section includes an exposition of the two Pali 
sentences above. This manuscript, titled Nissayº ṭīkā abhidhammatthasańgaha, 35 dates from 
1585 ce (cūḷaśakarāja 947) 36 and is now held at Văt Hlai2 Hin Hlvaṅ (Wat Lai Hin Luang) 
in Lampang province, Thailand, though it was first inscribed for a certain Văt Bvă Tèmº2. 37 
The passage in question appears on folio chyō verso, line 3 through folio chyo (i.e., chyau) 
recto, line 5. 38 The following transcription has been modified slightly from a strict diplo-
matic transcription for clarity. 39 Pali words cited from the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā 
are kept in roman type; Pali words added by the author of the bitext are in italics; vernacular 
Lanna portions appear in bold. For the translation, technical particles for grammatical anno-
tation are signaled as follows: NOM = nominative case particle (®/ănº vā1); ACC = accusative 
case particle (yăṅº); GEN = genitive case particle (hëṅº  40/hèṅº); LOC = locative case particle 
(nai/naï); PL = plural number particle; IND = indicative mood particle. The exposition begins 
with a bitextual analysis of the opening sentence:
ārammaṇa | sańgaho anvā ā naṃ | yăṅº | sa to ca ḍvayº sarºūp kḍī | vi | to ca ḍvayº ănº 
pèṅº kḍī ḍvayº2 tāṅº1 kḍī ḍvaaý kvā | ta | to ca ḍvayº citt dălº mī dī pĕnº gị̄ ārammaṇ 
ănº nănº kḍī | ā ho jị̄ |
ārammaṇasa[ṅ]gaho NOM ā...naṃ ACC sa...to ca whether by resemblance vi...to ca 
whether by division, alternatively, whether by differentiation ta...to ca whether by 
(Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī) by Sumaṅgala, Being a Commentary to Anuruddha’s Summary of the Topics of Abhi­
dhamma (Oxford: Pali Text Society, 2002).
33.  CSCD Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī 3.48 (https://www.tipitaka.org/romn/cscd/abh07t.nrf2.xml, accessed 
November 27, 2019).
34.  For a different interpretation of this passage, see Wijeratne and Gethin, Summary of the Topics, 103.
35.  ń = diacritical ṅ in Tham Lanna script.
36.  This dating is confirmed by both the cūḷaśakarāja year and the Tai year (ḍăpº roº) in the colophon.
37.  DLNTM 030103002_00, first unlabeled folio, image 1 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/4418, 
accessed November 27, 2019). I was unable to ascertain the present-day location and identity of this temple.
38.  DLNTM 030103002_00, images 83–84 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/4418, accessed 
November 27, 2019).
39.  I have ignored all of the original spacing and punctuation, save for the daṇḍas, and have added new spaces 
and paragraph breaks. Words broken by line and string-hole breaks have been reunited, and corrections indicated 
by the scribe silently applied.
40.  ë = diactrical è in Tham Lanna script.

686
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
consciousnesses PL which have that sphere of existence, i.e., that object ā...ho is 
named. 
The analysis includes minor amplification (adding the conjunction ca) and rearrangement 
(putting ārammaṇasańgaho at the beginning in addition to the end). Some Pali phrases 
are grammatically annotated, and others are glossed, but the translation into Lanna is far 
from complete. In addition, many of the Pali phrases are highly abbreviated; ārammaṇānaṃ 
becomes ā naṃ, taṃvisayacittato ca becomes ta to ca, etc. These omissions do not make for 
an incoherent text, however. The author was probably a monk or former monk, and was writ-
ing for readers who had the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā available to them and already had 
a good grasp of Pali. He saw no need to translate common Pali words; his readers could grasp 
their import through a simple grammatical particle alone (e.g., ārammaṇasa[ṅ]gaho nom). 
Likewise, he deemed it unnecessary to write out taṃvisayacittato ca when ta to ca would be 
enough for his readers to understand what phrase in the source text is being analyzed.
One aspect of the bitext is initially puzzling, however. The dative/genitive plural noun 
ārammaṇānaṃ (abbreviated ā...naṃ) is grammatically marked as the object with a technical 
particle (yăṅ) typically reserved for the accusative case (acc). The author, as if anticipating 
an inquiry on his interpretation, immediately follows with a series of rhetorical questions 
and responses:
ārammaṇānaṃ sańgaho ārammaṇasańgaho măkº kdāṃ chănº nī sȃnº grō ḍvayº ănº ḍai 
jamºā thāmº nī ciṅº sai kārak 3 ănº mī tȃnº vā sarupato mā ĺ 41 
vā yăṅ lè gå hị plè hănº | ḍī vā dutiyātappurisasamās ḍāyº | hetºu ḍai vā 
chaṭṭhītappurisamās jamºā khŏ tăṅº dōḍº ḍăṅº nī ĺ | dèlº vibhattipadhāno tappuriso 
tappuris mī vibhatti pĕnº padhānº ĺ hetºu klāvº ḍăṅº nī lĕṅº ḍaṅº vibhatti ĺe gåvºā 
chaṭṭhitappurisasamās ĺ | | băn atth på pĕnº pradhānº kè1 sănº nī ĺ mënº hetºu sańgaho 
vedanā | kicca dvāra ārammaṇasańgaho kḍī gå yaaºm kdāṃ chaṭṭhi chaṭṭhi lȃṅº nai 
dutiyatth |
ārammaṇānaṃ... sa[ṅ]gaho ārammaṇasa[ṅ]gaho “Put this way, by what means is it a 
compendium?” In response to this question there is the insertion of three factors, 
beginning with sar[ū]pato.
“What about the marker ‘ACC’; translated this way, shouldn’t the compound be an 
accusative tappurisa? Why is it instead a genitive tappurisa?”—so goes the accusa-
tion. In truth, vibhattipadhāno tappuriso a tappurisa has case as its predominant ele-
ment. According to this reasoning, when the case is examined, it is called a genitive 
tappurisa compound. Regarding the meaning, however, it is not the predominant 
element in this sense. For just like those sa[ṅ]gaho named “vedanā-,” “kicca-,” and 
“dvāra-,” 42 the ārammaṇasa[ṅ]gaho is likewise rendered with a genitive construction, 
a genitive placed in an accusative meaning.
In this portion of his exposition, the author explains why he chose the particle yăṅº (acc) 
instead of hëṅº (gen) to annotate the compound ārammaṇasaṅgaho. He makes his case with 
41.  ĺ = the Tham Lanna abbreviated form of the sentence final particle lè. The same abbreviation appears in the 
particle of completion ĺvº = lèvº2.
42.  Vedanāsaṅgaho, kiccasaṅgaho, and dvārasaṅgaho are the names of the immediately prior sections of the 
the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā.

687
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
reference to a Pali grammatical principle, vibhattipadhāno tappuriso, 43 “a dependent deter-
minative compound (Skt. tatpuruṣa) has case as its predominant element (Skt. pradhāna),” 
and arguing that in this particular instance, this compound, although containing a genitive 
relationship within it between ārammaṇa and saṅgaha, should be understood in an accusa-
tive sense (dutiyatth). 
The author follows this discussion of case with a different sort of exposition:
bănº că prajum au karaṇa dăṅº 3 băn sarūpato nănº au ārammaṇa 6 mī tȃnº vā 
rūpārammaṇa ĺ bănº vibhāgato nănº au yăṅº cha ārammaṇ pana | vasena ĺ | bănº 
taṃvisayacittato nănº au siṅº jị̄ tanº vā cakkhu ĺ |
Regarding c[a], it jointly applies to all three factors. Regarding sarūpato, it applies to 
the six objects, starting with form object. Regarding vibhāgato it applies ACC to the 
six objects from pana… vasena. Regarding taṃvisayacittato, it applies to the named 
items beginning with cakkhu. 
Here the emphasis is not on providing an abbreviated reading or translation, but rather on 
explaining how the ṭīkā relates to the root text of the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. He links words 
in the ṭīkā, such as vibhāgato, with whole passages in the root text, such as that abbreviated 
by pana vasena (CSCD: pana pasādasukhumarūpacittacetasikanibbānapaññattivasena). 
This is quite helpful to the reader of the bitext, though likely not to a potential listener.
The bitext then takes up the second sentence from the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī passage 
cited above, beginning with vaṇṇavikāraṃ:
yaṃ dhammajātaṃ ® | ā | naṃ thœṅº vi raṃ j́œṅº kār prè vaṇṇ | rupaya hada seti gå hị̄ 
sāṃḍèṅº yăṅº ănº pĕnº ănº thœṅº hvȃ cai j́œṅº hvȃ cai gȃvºā | | iti hetºu | taṃ | rūpaṃ 
jị̄ | 
vā | yăṅº dhammajātaṃ ® | rūpayati pakāseti sāṃ attānaṃ | ā | naṃ thœṅº vikāraṃ j́œṅº 
ha | vaṃ j́ị̄ṅ svabhāv ănº thöṅº nai cai | iti | taṃ rūpaṃ jị̄ ḍvaaý kvā1 
tadeva taṃ eva rūpaṃ yăṅº | pi 44 | hi ănº citt lè cetasi dlā̆yº | ā | ti bœṅ hnaaṅº au | da 
ya ḍucc ḍănº siṅ mī tȃnº vā jāyº mai do | du | na | ăn phū jāyº ănº hrā ǵèṅ på ḍai2 | ā | 
ti hākº bœṅº do bœṅº hnaaṅº kvā1 iti | tadeva rūpaṃ ® | ā | ṇaṃ jị̄ |
vā | tāni cittāni cetasikāni ® | ā | ganvā | ramanti gå srahnuk yinº ḍī sinº ĺ ettha rūpe nai 
iti | taṃ rūpaṃ | ā | ṇaṃ jị̄ | iti hetºu | tadeva rūpaṃ ® rūpārammaṇa gị̄ |
yaṃ dhammajātaṃ NOM ā...naṃ arriving at vi..raṃ ACC the change of appearance rupa-
ya… hada… seti makes manifest ACC that which affects what arrives at the heart, or, 
alternatively, [which affects] ACC the heart; iti hence taṃ rūpaṃ is called. 
vā yăṅ dhammajātaṃ NOM rūpayati pakāseti mani[fests] 45 attānaṃ ā… naṃ arriving 
at vikāraṃ ACC ha… vaṃ which is the condition that arrives inside the heart, iti taṃ 
rūpaṃ is called—this is another interpretation.
43.  I have not been able to trace a source for this formulation, though a similar phrase, vibhattippadhānavasena, 
appears in Saddhammajotipāla’s Suttaniddesa. See Aleix Ruiz-Falqués, “A Firefly in the Bamboo Reed: The Sut-
taniddesa of Saddhammajotipāla and the Grammatical Foundations of Theravāda Buddhism in Burma” (PhD diss., 
Univ. of Cambridge, 2015), 268.
44.  Pi is presumably a scribal error for ci[ttacetasikehi]; pa and ca are easily confused, particularly when an i 
vowel obscures the top portion of either consonant.
45.  The Lanna word sāṃḍèṅº (“manifests”) is abbreviated as sāṃ in the bitext.

688
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
tadeva taṃ eva rūpaṃ ACC [ci]...hi which consciousness and mental factors PL ā… ti 
pull down on da… ya just like things such as walking sticks du...na which a feeble 
man ā… ti IND props himself up on, or, alternatively, pulls down on iti tadeva rūpaṃ 
NOM ā… naṃ is called.
vā tāni cittāni cetasikāni NOM āganvā… ramanti IND thoroughly enjoys ettha rūpe LOC 
iti taṃ rūpaṃ ā… ṇaṃ is called iti hence tadeva rūpaṃ NOM rūpārammaṇa is.
This passage showcases the five principal analytical techniques, namely parsing (tade-
va becomes taṃ eva); amplification (taṃ eva becomes taṃ eva rūpaṃ); rearrangement 
(tadeva dubbalapurisena daṇḍādi viya cittacetasikehi ālambīyati becomes taṃ eva rūpaṃ 
cit[tacetasike]hi ā[lambīya]ti da[ṇḍādi vi]ya du[bbalapurisen]a ā[lambīya]ti); grammatical 
annotation (taṃ eva rūpaṃ is marked with acc to show its accusative function); and gloss 
(in this case featuring relatively complete Lanna translations). But of more specific exegeti-
cal interest is the author’s admission of alternative readings of the passage. The author pro-
vides two different analyses of the section from vaṇṇavikāraṃ to rūpaṃ, separated from one 
another by the Pali conjunction vā. 46 This emphasis on offering multiple interpretations is 
shared by the monolingual Pali scholastic tradition, and links exegetical Indic-vernacular 
bitexts to this broader heritage.
A different Pali-Lanna bitext, dating to 1638, shows an even wider range of exegetical 
techniques. Unlike most exegetical bitexts in Lanna, which were frequently recopied such 
that multiple manuscript witnesses exist, this manuscript appears to be unique. The colophon 
even suggests that the author and the scribe are one and the same person:
Investigation of the “Compendium of Objects”—the former monk Nandapañño studied 
ceaselessly and wrote this down while staying in the monastery of Ṕā Sȃpº near the center 
of the city of Chiang Saen, in a pœkº yī year, cūḷasakarāja 1000 (1638 ce). 47 
Unlike the previous example from 1585, which covered the entire Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī, 
Nandapañño’s exposition only addresses the Ālambanasaṅgaha section. His bitext begins 
with an explication of which phrases in the ṭīkā correspond to which parts of the root text:
sarūpato ḍai2 ḍènº tè1 ārammasańgahe tāva bai thœṅº chabbidhāni bhavanti | vibhāvato 
ḍai2 ḍènº tè1 tattha rupameva bai thœṅº chadhā sańgayhati | taṃvisayacittato ḍai2 ḍenº 
tè1 tattha cakkhudvārikacittānaṃ bai thœṅº sattadhā tattha sańgaho | | 48
“Sarūpato” covers from “ārammasańgahe” tāva until “chabbiddhāni bhavanti.” 
“Vibhāvato” covers from “tattha rupameva” until “chadhā sańgayhati.” “Taṃvisayacittato” 
covers from “tattha cakkhudvārikacittānaṃ” until “sattadhā tattha sańgaho.”
Nandapañño then begins a long exposition, roughly five hundred words in my English trans-
lation, of the phrase taṃvisayacittato, only the very beginning of which I will cite here: 
taṃvisayaciḍº vā1 tānivisayo etesaṃ atthīti taṃvisayāni | tāni ārammaṇāni ® āramº dălº 
ṕhuṅ nănº visayo penº āramº etesaṃ cittānaṃ hëṅº ciḍ dălº ṕhuṅ nănº atthi mī iti heḍº 
ḍăṅº ănº2 tāni cittāni ® ciḍº dălº ṕhuṅ nănº taṃvisayāni jị̄ taṃvisayāni | 
46.  Not to be confused with the Lanna marker of direct speech, vā1, which is often spelled vā in manuscripts.
47.  DLNTM 010720003_01, first unpaginated folio (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/60, image 1, 
accessed November 27, 2019): biccaranā ārammaṇasaṅgaha co2 khahnānº nandapañño ḍai2 ryanº lvaḍ raaºm1 
khyanº vai2 mœa ýu1 ārāmº ṕā1 sȃpº kyaṅº hvȃ vyaṅ jyaṅ sènº ṕī pœkº yī cuḷasakrājº ḍai2 1000 tvȃ vănº nănº. 
48.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio ka recto, lines 1–2. I use the same transcription conventions as in the 1585 
example.

689
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
taṃvisayāni ® ciḍº dălº ănº mī ārȃmm ṕhuṅ nănº pen ārȃmm | penº chaṭṭhībahubbihi 
smāḍ | ḍvayº bahubbihi smāḍº dăṅº mvar penº 2 gị̄ tagguŕṇ ĺ atagguŕṇ | 49
“taṃvisayaciḍº” is expressed as “tānivisayo etesaṃ atthīti taṃvisayāni.” tāni ārammaṇāni 
NOM those objects PL visayo as the object etesaṃ cittānaṃ GEN belonging to those con-
sciousnesses PL atthi there is, iti for that reason tāni cittāni those consciousnesses PL 
taṃvisayānī are named “taṃvisayāni.” 
taṃvisayāni “NOM consciousnesses PL which have those objects as their object” is a 
genitive bahubbīhi compound. For all bahubbīhi compounds, there are two types, 
namely tagguṇa and atagguṇa.
Nandapañño’s analysis focuses on how to interpret the bahubbīhi (Skt. bahuvrīhi) com-
pound taṃvisayāni. He begins with an analysis of how the different parts of the compound 
fit together. The portion cited above engages the standard bitextual analytic techniques of 
parsing, amplification, rearrangement, grammatical marking, and gloss. He then follows this 
with an extended reflection on what type of bahubbīhi compound taṃvisayāni is and how it 
should be construed. 
In the long portion that follows, not shown here, he quotes from a variety of Pali 
grammatical treatises, including the Saddatthabhedacintā, 50 the Balāvatāra, 51 and the 
Saddasāratthajālinī, 52 to first make a case that taṃvisayāni can be read as a tappayoga, a 
particular form of tagguṇa-bahubbīhi (cf. Skt. tadguṇa-saṃvijñāna-bahuvrīhi) compound 
in which the external referent is understood through its actual application (payoga) outside 
the compound rather than being inherent to the compound. In this case, cittāni (“conscious-
nesses”) is the stated external referent for taṃvisayāni (here understood as “those having as 
their object the five sense objects beginning with form”). He cites an earlier passage from 
the Abhidhammavibhāvinī to support this position, namely that consciousness cannot arise 
in the absence of an object. 53 
Nandapañño then makes the case for the opposing claim that taṃvisayāni can instead be 
an aññapatthaka-tagguṇa-bahubbīhi if consciousnesses and mental factors are considered 
a subset of mental objects (dhammārammaṇa). In this case, the qualities of the external 
referent are unstated, being inherent to the compound itself. To make this point, he quotes 
the Abhidhammāvatāra (a fifth-century systemization of the Abhidhamma by Buddhadatta) 
as stating that there are six kinds of objects, the five sense objects plus mental objects. 54 
Although his approach may seem caught up in arcane grammatical arguments, Nandapañño 
makes clear that the phrase-by-phrase analysis of scholastic texts can have significant doctri-
nal implications. His efforts neatly capture the purpose of the exegetical mode of presenta-
tion: to provide skilled readers of Buddhist texts with the tools to unpack difficult passages. 
He is clearly not providing linguistic tools as aids for those learning Pali, since he quotes 
49.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio ka recto, lines 2–4.
50.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio kā recto, lines 1–2; cf. Saddatthabhedacintā 235–236 (http://gretil.sub.uni-
goettingen.de/gretil/2_pali/9_phil/gramm/saddatbu.htm, accessed November 27, 2019).
51.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio kā verso, lines 1–2; cf. Balāvatāra, p. 81 (http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/
gretil/2_pali/9_phil/gramm/balava_u.htm, accessed November 27, 2019).
52.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio ka verso, lines 2–3; cf. the Samāsakaṇḍa of the Payogasiddhipāṭha (https://
www.tipitaka.org/romn/cscd/e0807n.nrf3.xml, accessed November 27, 2019).
53.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio kā recto, lines 3–4; cf. Saddasāratthajālinī, verses 411–413. I am indebted 
to Aleix Ruiz-Falqués for finding this parallel.
54.  DLNTM 010720003_01, folio kā verso, line 4; cf. Abhidhammāvatāra 292 (https://www.tipitaka.org/romn/
cscd/abh06t.nrf6.xml, accessed November 27, 2019).

690
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
extensively from Pali sources without translating them. The extensive abbreviation of the 
root text and the serial delivery of contrasting interpretations make his bitext equally unsuit-
able for public sermons. Just as in the anonymous 1585 example, Nandapañño’s “Investiga-
tion” (biccaraṇā, cf. Pali vicāraṇā) demonstrates how the analytical tools of bitexts may be 
effectively marshaled for sophisticated exegetical purposes. 
homiletic bitexts: interphrasal pali-lanna examples  
from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
Indic-vernacular bitexts may also be presented in a vernacular-focused style with clear, 
unredacted prose that makes them well suited for preaching to lay audiences. There are a 
significant number of such homiletic bitexts, including Pali-Lanna examples from sixteenth- 
and seventeenth-century Lanna. One hallmark of homiletic Indic-vernacular bitexts is their 
explicit invocation of an audience of listeners. A homiletic bitext rarely uses abbreviation of 
any kind. Vernacular translations appear in full prose sentences, often accompanied by expan-
sive explanations that make the doctrinal or narrative context easier to understand. In cases 
where the selected Pali portions are invented rather than cited, the composition may appear to 
be mostly in the vernacular, with just a few Pali phrases here and there. For bitexts based on 
citations of extant Indic texts, a homiletic presentation may include all of the source or only 
short excerpts. No matter the relative proportions of Indic and vernacular phrases, homiletic 
bitexts are presented in such a way as to be easily read aloud as scripts for public sermons.
In this section I offer two brief examples of such bitextual Pali-Lanna sermons, one of 
the Mahosatha-jātaka and another on the Buddha’s epithets from the Sāratthadīpanī. The 
earliest copy of the first example, Nisrai mahosathapaṇḍit, dates to 1563 ce and is currently 
housed at Văt Pān2 Hluk (Wat Ban Luk), Lampang province. 55 It was almost certainly first 
composed by a monk or ex-monk before that time, perhaps earlier in the sixteenth century, 
and continued to be copied in later centuries. 56 While most of the bitext is a bilingual render-
ing of the Mahosatha-jātaka as told in the Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā, the author added two Pali stan-
zas of his own composition at the beginning. Each of these stanzas is inscribed first in Pali in 
the proper word order, followed by a parsed, amplified, rearranged, grammatically annotated, 
and interphrasally glossed version. These verses function as both an opening invocation and 
as an explanation of the purpose of the bitext.
The first stanza, not cited here, offers praise to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. 
In the second stanza, the author clearly specifies the function of the remainder of the bitext 
to come:
gambhirapaññassa mahosathassa
paññāpakāso atiñātagantho
yo tassa atthaṃ abhivaṇṇayissaṃ
sotunamatthaṃ sukhabodhanāya. 57
Belonging to him of deep intelligence, belonging to Mahosatha,
the well-known scripture, which makes intelligence manifest,
I shall illuminate the meanings of that [scripture]
in order to easily make known the meanings to the listeners.
55.  PNTMP 030607170_00 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/5375, accessed January 23, 2019).
56.  One such later copy is PNTMP 070107121_00, housed at Văt Sūṅ Men1 (Wat Sung Men), Phrae province, 
dating to 1768 ce (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/1799, accessed January 23, 2019).
57.  PNTMP 030607170_00, folio ka verso, lines 2–3. Spaces and verse formatting added for clarity.

691
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
In the bitext version that follows, the author makes clear that by “listeners” (sotūnaṃ) he 
means those engaged in “studying and listening to the Mahosatha-jātaka scripture” (ănº ryan 
ănº b́ăṅ yăṅº kambī mahōsathajātak nănº lè):
yo gantho ănº vā kambī ănº ḍai gị̄ mahōsathajātak atiñātagantho ănº penº kambī ănº 
prākȃṭº ñiṅº năk kvā1 jātak dăṅº hlāyº paññāpakāso penº dī sāmḍèṅº hị̄ prākȃṭº yăṅº 
prahñā ănº ȃṅº āḍº chlāḍº nai pañhāvād ănº lökº lèpº1 sukhumālº gambhīrapaññassa 
mahosathassa hèṅ mahosath bōdhisatt tȃnº mī prahñā ănº lökº heḍº āḍº rū2 ḍai yăṅº 
pañhā byākaraṇ ănº lökº lèpº kăṅºpăṅº năkº ahaṃ ® gū abhivaṇṇayissaṃ kdāṃ sad-
datth adhippāyatth hị̄ prākaṭº phraaṅº thaaºṅ ju ănº gå căkº kè2 khai tassa atthaṃ 
yă atth hèṅº kambī mahōsathajātak năn atthaṃ sukhabodhanāya böaº hị̄ rū2 atth 
ṅāyº1 sotūnaṃ kè parisa dăṅº hlāyº ṕhuṅ mī prayojan ănº ryan ănº b́ăṅ yăṅº kambī 
mahōsathajātak nănº lè || 58
any scripture NOM any scripture, that is, the Mahosatha-jātaka the well-known scrip-
ture which is a more greatly known scripture than [the other] jātakas PL which makes 
intelligence manifest [and] is that which expresses to make manifest ACC the sharp 
and clever intelligence with regards to riddles that are deep and subtle belonging to 
him of deep intelligence, belonging to Mahosatha of the bodhisatta Mahosatha, he who 
possessed deep intelligence since he could know ACC the answers to riddles that were 
extremely deep, subtle, and secret I NOM I shall illuminate making the meanings of 
the words and the meanings of the explanations clearly manifest in all respects, shall 
expound the meanings of that [scripture] ACC the meanings of that Mahosatha-jātaka 
scripture in order to easily make known the meanings in order to easily make known 
the meanings to the listeners to all the assemblies, for all to benefit from studying and 
listening ACC to the Mahosatha-jātaka scripture.
This passage once again demonstrates the capacity of bitexts to deliver a fluent vernacu-
lar text that remains grounded in a parsed, amplified, and rearranged Pali source. Technical 
particles for grammatical annotation are placed consistently, and the Lanna glosses are com-
plete. The vernacular portion, even if perfectly comprehensible on its own, remains in close 
proximity to its Pali counterpart, providing a secure basis for its commentarial elaborations. 
For instance, what in the Pali appears as simply paññāpakāso (“which makes intelligence 
manifest”) is expanded to penº dī sāmḍèṅº hị̄ prākȃṭº yăṅº prahñā ănº ȃṅº āḍº chlāḍº nai 
pañhāvād ănº lökº lèpº1 sukhumālº (“which expresses to make manifest acc the sharp and 
clever intelligence with regards to riddles that are deep and subtle”). This expansion fills out 
the narrative signification of the passage, for the long jātaka that follows exhibits the Bodhi­
satta’s skill in solving riddles. At the same time, the process of amplification and syntactic 
rearrangement encourages the Pali text to grow, in this case by inserting words (gantho and 
ahaṃ) that are only implied in the Pali but are necessary for the vernacular gloss.
Moreover, this passage articulates its own method and purpose in impressive detail. In 
glossing abhivaṇṇayissaṃ (“I shall illuminate”), a verb suggesting the composition of a 
commentary, the author writes kdāṃ saddatth adhippāyatth hị̄ prākaṭº phraaṅº thaaºṅ ju ănº 
gå căkº kè2 khai (“making the meanings of the words and the meanings of the explanations 
clearly manifest in all respects, [I] shall expound”). As the lines that follow state, the aim of 
such exegesis is to make the meanings of the text easily known to those to the audience of the 
58.  PNTMP 030607170_00, folio ka verso, line 3 to folio kā recto, line 2. My transcription conventions are the 
same as in the previous two examples.

692
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
sermon. The purpose of the analyzed text and extended prose glosses is to bring a vernacular 
sermon to life with depth and clarity.
The second homiletic example I present here comes from a manuscript dating to 1666 
ce. This bitext is perhaps the second-oldest known Pali-Lanna manuscript to feature the 
term vohānº (Pali vohāra) in one of its colophons. 59 This term is extremely common in the 
titles of Pali-Lanna sermon texts from the late seventeenth through early twentieth centuries. 
Almost all manuscripts bearing this term in their title are bitexts presented in a homiletic 
style. This particular manuscript is called vohānº yo so or ṭīkā yo so, and is currently kept at 
Văt Hlvaṅ Rājasăṇṭhān (Wat Luang Ratchasanthan) in Phayao province. 60 The ten-fascicle 
text is rooted in the Sāratthadīpanī’s 61 exposition of the ten major epithets or qualities of the 
Buddha, beginning with arahaṃ.
The manuscript begins with a citation of two excerpts from the Sāratthadīpanī:
yo so bhagavā samatīsapāramīyo puretvā sabbakilese so bhañjitvā anuttaraṃ 
sammāsambodhi abhisambuddho devānam atidevo sakkānam atisakko brahmānam 
atibrahmāno lokānātho bhāgyavantatādihi karaṇīhi bhagavāsi ladhanāmo so bhagavā.
itipi || arahaṃ so bhagavā itipi sammasambuddho so bhagavā itipi || vijjācaraṇasappanno 
so bhagavā itipi suggato bhaga itipi lokavidu so bhagavā itipi || anuttalo so bhagavā itipi 
|| purissadammasārathi so bhagavā itipi satthā devamanussānaṃ so bhagavā itipi buddho 
so bhagavā iti pi. 62
This is followed by a mostly vernacular section that includes a brief introduction as well 
as a partial analysis and expanded translation of the Pali citations above. The introduction 
is one of the earliest examples of a stock formula witnessed in countless homiletic bitexts 
across Tai and Khmer cultures from the seventeenth century to the present. The formula is 
simple: begin with the Pali word sādhavo (“O good people”) and follow it by an expanded 
vernacular translation that implores the audience to listen and introduces them to the content 
of the sermon:
sādhavō b́ăṅº rā sappuriss dlā̆ cuṅ că tăṅº sōtā prāsāḍº ḍā b́ăṅº yăṅº rassadhammadesanā 
buddh guŕṇ bra buddh cŏ2 ḍvay2 naiyº ḍăṅº rŏ că vissajanā || bai2 hnā2 nī dœaḥ 63
sādhavō Listen, O good people PL, IMP focus your aural faculties and listen well ACC 
to this Dhamma-taste sermon on the buddha-qualities of Lord Buddha in accordance 
with the interpretations that I will unravel in what follows hence.
59.  The oldest is a manuscript that supposedly dates to 1620 ce, cataloged under the title Vammikasutta-vohāra 
(SRI 92.178.01H.035-035; http://www.sri.cmu.ac.th/~elanna/Microfilm/index/index2d.html, accessed November 
27, 2019), though I have not verified the date and it is not clear whether this manuscript or its microfilm still exists.
60.  DLNTM 070710018_00 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/5982, accessed April 27, 2020).
61.  A ṭīkā or sub-commentary, attributed to the Lankan monk Sāriputta, on Buddhaghosa’s commentary to the 
Pali Vinaya.
62.  DLNTM 070710018_00, folio a recto, lines 1–4; cf. CSCD Sāratthadīpanī-ṭīkā, Verañjakaṇḍavaṇṇanā 
(https://www.tipitaka.org/romn/cscd/vin01t1.tik1.xml, accessed November 27, 2019): so bhagavāti yo so samatiṃsa 
pāramiyo pūretvā sabbakilese bhañjitvā anuttaraṃ sammāsambodhiṃ abhisambuddho devānaṃ atidevo sakkānaṃ 
atisakko brahmānaṃ atibrahmā lokanātho bhāgyavantatādīhi kāraṇehi bhagavāti laddhanāmo, so bhagavā. . . itipi 
arahaṃ itipi sammāsambuddho. . .pe. . . itipi bhagavā.
63.  DLNTM 070710018_00, folio a recto, line 4 to folio a verso, line 1. Transcription conventions are the same 
as in the previous Pali-Lanna examples, with the following additions: imp = imperative mood particle; ins = instru-
mental case particle; gls = Pali-Pali gloss marker.

693
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
Immediately after the introduction, the author returns to the Pali passage cited at the begin-
ning of the bitext. In contrast to previous bitexts discussed so far, this author only quotes a few 
Pali phrases in his bitextual analysis and expansion of the passage from the Sāratthadīpanī:
yo so bhagavā ® bra buddh cŏ2 tȃnº ḍai gå dyar yaaºp 64 ḍai2 baṃbeṅº pāramī dhaŕmm 
dălºā 30 dăḍº mī dānapāramī ṕenº glo2 upekkhā pāramī ṕenº dī su ĺvº ĺ 
bra buddh hèṅ2 rŏ mœa yăṅ dhåaºramānº sāṅ bōdhºisȃmbānº ḍai2 ṕenº devapuḍ 
gå yiṅº kvā devapuḍ dălºā mœa ṕenº brayºā ‘īnº gå yiṅº kvā brayºā ‘īnº mœa ṕenº 
brahm gå yiṅº kvā brahm dălºā mœa bai2 pvaḍ bhāvanā gå ḍai2 trăḍº prayºā sabbañū 
hrăkº sie yăṅº kīleḍ dăṅº mvar ĺvº gå ḍai2 ñāṇaprayºā ănº yiṅº ḍvayº2 tȃnº ḍvayº2 ḍī 
klāvº gị̄vºā sabbañūtaññāṇ ĺ ṕenº dī bœṅº kè lōkº1 dăṅº 3 gị̄vºā kāmalōkº1 rūpalōkº1 
arūpalōkº ḍai2 jị̄vºā bhagavā ḍvayº ākānº dălºā mī bhāgyavantatā ṕen glo2
so bhagavā ® bra buddh co2 tȃnº nănº arahaṃ iti pi măvºā evaṃ vuttapakārena ḍvayº2 
prakānº ḍăṅº klāvº ĺvº bāyº hlăṅ nănº ĺ api ca prakānº 1 ® bra buddh co2 tȃnº tăḍº sie 
yăṅº kileḍº dăṅº mvar gå ḍai2 jị̄vºā 65
yo so bhagavā NOM whichever Lord Buddha IND fulfilled the perfection-dhammas PL, 
thirty in all, beginning with the perfection of generosity and ending with the perfec-
tion of equanimity—
our Lord Buddha, when he was still abiding in the world, building up the accumula-
tions necessary for awakening, and was born a god, he was greater than the gods PL; 
when he was an Indra, he was greater than the Indras; when he was a Brahmā, he 
was greater than the Brahmās PL; when he went forth to ordain and cultivate the 
mind, having awakened to all-knowing intelligence and breaking apart ACC all the 
defilements, he obtained insight and wisdom on his own and in the right way, that is 
to say, the insight of omniscience; he is the refuge for the three worlds, namely the 
world of desire, the world of form, and the world of formlessness; he earned the name 
“Bhagavā” INS on account of the characteristics PL beginning with bhāgyavantatā—
so bhagavā NOM that Lord Buddha “arahaṃ” iti pi GLS evaṃ vuttapakārena, INS on 
account of the previously uttered characteristics, api ca including one characteristic 
that NOM Lord Buddha cut off and destroyed ACC all the defilements, thus received 
the name “Arahaṃ.”
Even though only a small percentage of the passage remains in Pali in the author’s pre-
sentation, it still follows the analytic conventions of bitexts. The Pali is amplified in a few 
places, and the technical particles are used to gloss key grammatical features. Most striking, 
however, is the way the author transforms the bulk of the long Pali sentence into a com-
plex, multilayered, yet completely fluent vernacular translation. Certain portions are ren-
dered quite literally in Lanna, such as sabbakilese. . . bhañjitvā (“having broken apart all the 
defilements”) being translated as hrăkº sie yăṅº kīleḍ dăṅº mvar ĺvº (“breaking apart acc all 
the defilements”). Other Lanna passages expand the narrative scope (“when he went forth 
to ordain and cultivate the mind”) or the doctrinal precision (“he is the refuge for the three 
worlds, namely the world of desire, the world of form, and the world of formlessness”) of 
the Pali. Like the 1563 example cited above, this Pali-Lanna bitext from 1666 is explicitly 
64.  I.e., yaaºm1, the consonants ma and pa being easily confused in Tham Lanna script.
65.  DLNTM 070710018_00, folio a recto, line 4 to folio a verso, line 1.

694
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
structured as a sermon that is perfectly comprehensible to a lay audience while still remain-
ing grounded in a particular Pali text.
poetic bitexts: the mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ of 1482
In contrast to the straightforward prose of homiletic bitexts, a relatively small number of 
Indic-vernacular compositions are crafted with aesthetic principles in mind, with the ver-
nacular portions shaped into elaborate verse. These bitexts, many of which were once recited 
as chanted sermons in court or other elite circles, repurpose the analytic tools discussed 
throughout this article for aesthetic ends. These bitexts, in other words, aim to create litera-
ture for its own sake, or what we might call belles-lettres. 
The oldest and most influential such composition in what is now Thailand was penned 
in the late fifteenth century. Believed to have been composed in 1482 under the aegis of 
King Borommatrailokkanat of Ayutthaya (Paramat́railokanāth, r. 1431–1488), the Mahājāt́i 
gāṃ hlvaṅ (Mahachat kham luang) is the earliest extant Tai-language version of the 
Mahāvessantara-jātaka and one of the earliest known pieces of Siamese literature. Only 
seven of the original thirteen chapters survive, excerpts from two of which I examine here. 66 
Though the text is intended to be recited as a sung or chanted sermon, its style is radically 
different from the other bitexts discussed in this article in that the vernacular portions are 
entirely composed in various meters of Siamese poetry. The Siamese portions, while true to 
the Pali and deeply indebted to the technical achievements of ordinary Pali-Tai bitexts, thus 
reach a subtle and expressive beauty. The Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ remained a touchstone for 
Siamese writers long after its composition in the fifteenth century. It was also first in a line of 
famous “royal compositions” or gāṃ hlvaṅ, all of which are either Pali-Siamese or Sanskrit-
Siamese bitexts in a similar literary style.
The literary craft of the Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ is visible from its opening lines in the first 
chapter, Daśabar (“Ten Boons”). After a complex invocation in Pali composed expressly 
for this work, the Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ begins with the initial line of Pali prose from the 
Vessantara-jātaka-aṭṭhakathā. In my transliteration, spaces in the printed Thai-script text are 
shown with underscores:
phussatīvaravaṇṇābheti _ idaṃ _ satthā _ kapilavatthuṃ _ upanissāya nigrodhārāme _ 
viharanto _ pokkharavassaṃ _ ārabbha _ kathesi _ || 67
“Phussatī, she who possessed the light of an excellent complexion”—this the Teacher, in 
dependence upon Kapilavatthu, dwelling in Nigrodha Monastery, having taken up [the 
story] of the lotus shower, spoke. 
The author of the bitext then provides a parsed, amplified, syntactically rearranged, gram-
matically annotated, and glossed Pali-Siamese version:
66.  The remaining six chapters were reconstituted in the early Rattanakosin period (late eighteenth or early 
nineteenth century). On the history of the text and why the relatively late surviving manuscripts are thought 
to be copies of an original 1482 composition, see Niyaḥtā Hlo1sundar, “Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ: kār śịkṣā jöṅ 
ṕraḥvăt́i,” in Rājapăṇḍit́yasthān, Bacanānukram śăbd* varrṇagatī daiy samăy ayudhyā mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ chpăp 
rājapăṇḍit́yasthān (Bangkok: Rājapăṇḍit́yasthān, 2549 [2006]), 721–24.
67.  Transliterated from the Thai-script printed edition of the Royal Institute (Rājapăṇḍit́yasthān, Bacanānukram 
śăbd* varrṇagatī daiy samăy ayudhyā mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ chpăp rājapăṇḍit́yasthān [Bangkok: Rājapăṇḍit́yasthān, 
2549 (2006)], 1). Throughout this section I cite exclusively from this edition rather than from manuscript versions, 
which I have been unable to access. Besides the treatment of spaces, other features are transcribed diplomatically 
using the same conventions as the rest of this article. The kārănt́* diacritic is marked with an asterisk; the b́aaṅ măn 
symbol with an at sign (@).

695
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
@ _ satthā _ ăn vā1 braḥ sarrbéjñ* buddh ayū1 klo2 _ upanissāya _ co2 kū dha stéc 
āśrăy _ kapilavatthuṃ _ kè1 bijăy kapilabăśtu* _ purī răt́anabiśāl _ viharanto _ dha stéc 
siṅ sāṃrāñ sāṃriddhi* _ nigrodhārāme nai bicit́r nigrōdhārām _ ārabbha _ braḥ phū2 
phcañ peñcakām biśăy _ t́ăṅ2 haṛdăy stéc chboḥ _ pokkharavassaṃ _ anugroḥh* kè1 
pōṣkharabarrṣadhārā _ idaṃ dhammadesanaṃ _ yaṅṅ braḥ dhammadeśanā mādhūr 
_ gāthāsahassapaṭimaṇḍitaṃ _ paripūraṇ* ṕraḥtăp ni tvay2 gāthā thịṅ sahăs _ ăkṣar 
arrth pa e _ | 
@ _ phussativaravaṇṇābhetiādikaṃ _ gị̄ phussat́īvaravăṇṇābhe ṕen ādi nī2 _ kathesi _ 
braḥ ká jī2 jāt́i t́è hlăṅ _ kāṃpăṅ ṕai păndūr _ catuvidhaparisānaṃ _ kè catūrabidh 
parrsăṣy daṅṅ phaaṅ _ ăn mā raaṅ răp raśadhaŕm dān1 năn2 68
@ _ The Teacher _ NOM The Omniscient One, the Buddha above my head, _ in depen-
dence upon _ my Lord, having gone to rely on _ Kapilavatthu _ ACC the victorious 
Kapilabastu, _ vast city of jewels, _ dwelling _ he went to live and reside _ in Nigrodha 
Monastery _ in the exquisite Nigrodha Monastery; _ having taken up [the story of] _ 
The Lord, he who had vanquished the sphere of the five sensual desires, _ focused his 
mind directly on _ the lotus shower _ the grace of the waters of the rains of lotuses, _ 
this sermon on the Teaching _ ACC the sweet preaching of the holy Teaching _ adorned 
with one thousand verses _ completely ornamented by the verses numbering to one 
thousand _ of literary meaning, not one more, 
@ _ beginning with “Phussatī, she who possessed the light of an excellent complexion” _ 
that is to say, beginning with this “Phussatī, she who possessed the light of an excel-
lent complexion.” _ spoke _ The Lord IND pointed to a life from the past _ that was 
concealed, and uttered it _ to the fourfold assemblies _ to the fourfold assemblies PL _ 
those who had come to receive the taste of the Teachings.
As in previous examples, the bitextual analysis rearranges the syntax, adds technical par-
ticles to mark grammatical features such as case, number, and mood, and amplifies the Pali. 
For instance, the word idaṃ (“this”) in the aṭṭhakathā version is supplemented here with 
dhammadesanaṃ (“sermon on the Teaching”) and gāthāsahassapaṭimaṇḍitaṃ (“adorned 
with one thousand verses”). These added terms appear in a very similar way at the very end 
of the aṭṭhakathā text 69 as well as in the Vessantaradīpanī, composed by Sirimaṅgala of 
Chiang Mai in 1517. 70 Other amplifications, however, including catuvidhaparisānaṃ (“to 
the fourfold assemblies”), have no known source. The author of the bitext is at once engaged 
with the broader commentarial tradition as well as adding his own interpretations.
The most remarkable aspect of this passage, however, is the poetic style of the glosses 
in Siamese. All of the glosses are linked together into a rhyme scheme called rāy1 yāv, in 
which the last syllable of each line rhymes with any syllable of the following line. Lines are 
defined either by a space or by the presence of an intervening Pali word. Thus the word klo2 
at the end of the first line in the Siamese rāy1 yāv meter, marked by the intervening Pali word 
68.  Rājapăṇḍit́yasthān, Bacanānukram śăbd*, 1. The punctuation in the printed edition, represented here, is con-
fusing in that there is no logical break in the sentence between ăkṣar arrth pa e and phussativaravaṇṇābhetiādikaṃ; 
the daṇḍa, paragraph break, and b́aaṅ măn should be removed.
69.  The Jātaka Together with Its Commentary, ed. V. Fausbøll (London: Kegan Paul Trench Trübner & Co., 
1896), vol. 6: 593: imaṃ gāthāsahassapatimaṇḍitaṃ Vessantaradhammadesanaṃ.
70.  Yukio Yamanaka, “Die Vessantaradīpanī: Ein Pāli-Kommentar aus Nordthailand” (PhD diss., Univ. of 
Freiburg, 2009), 82: idan ti imaṃ Mahāvessantaradhammadesanaṃ vakkhati hi: gāthāsahassapatimaṇḍitaṃ 
Mahāvessantaradhammadesanan ti.

696
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
upanissāya, rhymes with co2, the first word of the next line. The last word of that line, āśrăy, 
rhymes with the second word of the next line, bijăy, and so on. Even in one place where the 
editors of the Thai printed text have inexplicably placed a paragraph break, namely between 
ăkṣar arrth pa e and gị̄ phussat́īvaravăṇṇābhe ṕen ādi nī2, the rhyme pattern continues, with 
e rhyming with phussat́īvaravăṇṇābhe. The Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ provides one the earliest 
examples of the use of the rāy1 yāv meter in Siamese literature.
Within the constraints imposed by the meter, this passage also manages to add a number 
of expressive details. Simple words or phrases in Pali receive elaborate vernacular expan-
sions. Satthā (“The Teacher”) becomes ăn vā1 braḥ sarrbéjñ* buddh ayū1 klo2 (“nom The 
Omniscient One, the Buddha above my head”). Ārabbha (“having taken up” or “with regards 
to”) becomes braḥ phū2 phcañ peñcakām biśăy _ t́ăṅ2 haṛdăy stéc chboḥ (“The Lord, he 
who vanquished the sphere of the five sensual desires, _ focused his mind directly on”). 
Kathesi (“spoke”) is artfully expanded into braḥ ká jī2 jāt́i t́è hlăṅ _ kāṃpăṅ ṕai păndūr 
(“the Lord ind pointed to a life from the past _ that was concealed, and uttered it”). Each of 
these expanded glosses links to the next by rhyme and logical structure, forming a seamless 
paragraph in Siamese:
The Omniscient One, the Buddha above my head, my Lord, having gone to rely on the victorious 
Kapilabastu, vast city of jewels, went to live and reside in the exquisite Nigrodha Monastery. The 
Lord, he who had vanquished the sphere of the five sensual desires, focused his mind directly 
on the grace of the waters of the rains of lotuses, the sweet preaching of the holy Teaching com-
pletely ornamented by the verses numbering to one thousand of literary meaning, not one more, 
that is to say, [the verses] beginning with this [verse]: “Phussatī, she who possessed the light 
of an excellent complexion.” The Lord pointed to a life from the past that was concealed, and 
uttered it to the fourfold assemblies, those who had come to receive the taste of the Teachings.
The use of the rāy1 yāv meter confirms that the vernacular elaborations are not simply scholas-
tic in nature, but rather an attempt to compose an aesthetically pleasing new form of bitextual 
poetry.
The interphrasal treatment continues through the entirety of the bitext; at no stage is 
the Pali abandoned in favor of a purely vernacular presentation. Other passages from the 
Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ, however, reveal an even bolder sense of poetic experimentation within 
the bitextual, interphrasal format. In the seventh chapter, Mahāban (“The Great Forest”), the 
author of the bitext experiments with combining Pali and Siamese verse forms. This chapter 
relates the narrative of the old brahmin Jūjaka as he wanders through the woods in search 
of Prince Vessantara, son of King Sañjaya of the Sivi kingdom. Early in the chapter, Jūjaka 
visits the seer Accuta, who welcomes the brahmin with food and drink. Jūjaka thanks him 
and takes the opportunity to ask where Vessantara resides. 71
In the Pali version, this passage is relatively straightforward, consisting of one brief prose 
portion and three half-stanzas in verse: 
jūjako āha 	
	
	
Jūjaka said:
paṭiggahītaṃ yaṃ dinnaṃ		
“Received is what’s given;	
sabbassa agghiyaṃ kataṃ	 	
the host’s task fully done.	 	
	
	
sañjassa sakaṃ puttaṃ	
	
Sañjaya’s own child,
sivīhi vippavāsitaṃ	
	
exiled by the Sivis—
71.  For the full context of the Pali text in English translation, see Margaret Cone and Richard F. Gombrich, The 
Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977), 50–51.

697
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
tam ahaṃ dassanam āgato		
him I have come to see.	
yadi jānāsi saṃsa me ti. 72	 	
If you know, tell me.”
In the Pali-Siamese bitext of the Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ, this passage in Pali is interwoven with 
one line of Siamese rāy1 yāv and three stanzas in the glōṅ meter:
jūjako āha _ ăn vā1 brāhmaṇavuḍhi* _ khān arrcut́aṝṣī gị̄n taṅṅ nī2
paṭiggahitaṃ yaṃ dinnaṃ	
bhonto khā2 khaay2 t́è1	
ṝṣī
	
yaṃ dinnaṃ tai tī	
klè1 klèṅ2
sabbassa agghiyaṃ kataṃ	
āhār grīöṅ1 kin mī	
em ōj
	
ani bhōjan hvān cèṅ2 khā2 	
khaap hvai2 hnīö hvva
sañjassa sakaṃ puttaṃ	
dai2 dāv2 naṛdōṣ khā2	
khăp hnī
	
lūk rājasībi klvă	
brai1 b́ā2
sivīhi vippavāsitaṃ	
bal mīöṅ pa tū tī	
tāl gyat
	
kralyat lăp lī2 hnā2	
ayū1 srāṅ2 svèṅ puñ
tamahaṃ dassanam āgato	
khā2 tho2 pa ayat thaay2	
mā thịṅ
	
broḥ dăn dịṅ hén khun	
khī1 klo2
yadi jānāsi saṃsa me	
dha hén dī1 dha sịṅ	
săṅvāś
	
praḥkāś kè1 khā2 tho2	
dān1 rā2 braḥ öy 73
Jūjaka said _ NOM The aged brahmin _ replied to the seer Accuta thus:
“Received is what’s given;	
Sir, I am ‘neath you,	
seer.
	
What’s given is good;	
such care! 
the host’s task fully done.	
There’s much to eat, all 	
tasty,
	
such sweet food. Humbly	
I give my thanks.
Sañjaya’s own child,	
The sinless Lord was 	
chased out;
	
the Sivi king’s child feared 	
the folk.	
	
exiled by the Sivis—	
Displeased, the people	
burned with	
	
	
rage and banished him;	
he sought the good.
him I have come to see.	
I, your servant, have	
come here,
	
in hopes I might see	
the Prince.
If you know, tell me.	
If you’ve seen where he	
resides,
	
inform your servant,	
seer, please do!”
The particular glōṅ meter in use here has much stricter constraints regarding syllable counts, 
rhyme, and the placement of tone marks than rāy1 yāv. I have captured only the syllable 
counts in my English translation of this passage. The Siamese portions respond to and trans-
form the Pali verses into a distinctly Siamese metrical style. Whereas Pali meters are struc-
tured on distinctions between light and heavy syllables, Tai verse forms usually depend on 
syllabic and tonal rhyme. This bitextual passage puts these two metrical systems in explicit 
contrast.
The Siamese portions are not assimilated into an Indic system. In fact, a few Pali words, 
marked in italics in my presentation of the passage, are brought into the Siamese meter. In 
the first line in the Siamese glōṅ, “bhonto khā2 khaay2 t́è1 / ṝṣī,” the author adds the Pali 
word bhonto, a respectful vocative plural form, meaning “Sir!” in this context. The addition 
of bhonto serves to emphasize that Jūjaka is addressing Accuta respectfully. The remaining 
72.  Reformatted slightly from Fausbøll, Jātaka, vol. 6, 532–33.
73.  Rājapăṇḍit́yasthān, Bacanānukram śăbd*, 94. The verse formatting here reproduces that of the Thai-script 
printed text; to keep the text uncluttered, I have not transliterated the spaces in the glōṅ portion.

698
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
five syllables in the first line are in Siamese and essentially offer an interpretative gloss of 
bhonto: “I am ’neath you, / seer,” or, more simply, “O Seer!” In the next line of the Sia-
mese, “yaṃ dinnaṃ tai tī / klè1 klèṅ2,” the author inserts a Pali phrase, yaṃ dinnaṃ, which 
is repeated from the root verses. The Siamese line does not translate this phrase, however. 
The reader must understand its meaning in Pali (“that which is given”) in order to grasp the 
import of the whole line (“What’s given is good; / such care!”). Though the lines that follow 
are entirely in Siamese, the author finds novel ways to integrate declined and conjugated Pali 
words into a local metrical system. This passage marks the earliest recorded instance of such 
experimentation.
The remainder of the passage exemplifies how the Siamese portions expand in meaning 
upon the Pali. A simple Pali phrase such as sañjassa sakaṃ puttaṃ / sivīhi vippavāsitaṃ 
(“Sañjaya’s own child [i.e., Prince Vesstantara], / exiled by the Sivis”) is expanded through 
the insertion of the appropriate narrative context: “The sinless Lord was / chased out; / the 
Sivi king’s child feared / the folk. / Displeased, the people burned / with rage / and banished 
him; he sought / the good.” The Siamese poet takes the opportunity here to recount the 
entire first act of Prince Vessantara: After the people of his father’s kingdom of Sivi spurn 
him for giving away a rain-making elephant, he retreats to the forest to seek the fulfillment 
of his spiritual path. The Siamese portions rely on the Pali passages for structure, but they 
enact their own expressive and narrative force in the vernacular. Moreover, the poet’s skillful 
application of various Siamese meters lifts the glosses from a scholastic to an aesthetic func-
tion. The Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ is the first in a tradition of poetic gāṃ hlvaṅ bitexts that bring 
Pali and Sanskrit poetic conventions into conversation with Siamese verse. These celebrated 
compositions, long prized for their aesthetic power, are emblematic of the impact of Indic-
vernacular bitexts on local literary production in mainland Southeast Asia.
conclusion
From the fifteenth to the nineteenth century, the analytic techniques and presentation 
styles of Indic-vernacular bitexts occupied a critical place in the intellectual culture of main-
land Southeast Asia, including Siam and Lanna. Authors and poets from what is now modern 
Central and Northern Thailand used bitexts as tools for learning, teaching, preaching, and 
writing. In this sense, understanding bitexts and how they work is crucial to appreciating 
mainland Southeast Asian approaches to language and thought in the early modern period. 
This article provides examples from four of the possible modes of presentation that Indic-
vernacular bitexts take. Some applications of bitextual techniques are philological in that they 
focus on the close reading and translation of Indic texts. The interlinear Pali-Siamese annota-
tions found in Pali curricular texts, including the nineteenth-century Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā 
examples, demonstrate the philological mode in the context of monks learning to read and 
translate Indic texts. 
Other applications of the core techniques of citation/invention, parsing, amplification, 
rearrangement, annotation, and gloss are best understood as exegetical, for they extend the 
scholastic project of Pali commentaries into a bitextual context. The two contrasting Pali-
Lanna interpretations of the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā unpacked in this article, one 
from 1585 and the other from 1638, showcase the range and depth of the exegetical mode in 
crafting efficient hermeneutical guides for skilled readers of Pali treatises. 
On the opposite end of the spectrum, bitexts in the homiletic mode of presentation are 
explicitly composed for the purpose of reading aloud to lay audiences. The two Pali-Lanna 
examples selected for this article, one of the Mahosatha-jātaka from 1563 and another from 

699
Walker: Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand
1666 that draws on the Sāratthadīpanī, demonstrate some possible forms such bitextual ser-
mons may take. As in the case of the 1563 example, they may retain an interphrasal presenta-
tion throughout, each Pali phrase followed by its vernacular translation and expansion. Or, as 
in the 1666 manuscript, long passages may appear only in the vernacular, with Pali phrases 
inserted sparingly. 
In contrast to the prose format of homiletic bitexts, poetic bitexts use vernacular and inte-
grated Indic-vernacular verse forms to create sophisticated compositions for literary effect. 
The two example passages from the Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ of 1482 exemplify the literary pos-
sibilities present in the analytical tools of Indic-vernacular bitexts. The Mahājāt́i gāṃ hlvaṅ 
and other Pali-Siamese and Sanskrit-Siamese texts inspired by it reveal the skill of Siamese 
authors who harness techniques normally applied to philological, exegetical, or homiletic 
ends to create new forms of poetry. 
Much remains to be done in the study of Indic-vernacular bitexts across mainland South-
east Asia as well as in Sri Lanka. The sheer volume of compositions inscribed in a bitextual 
format on palm-leaf and folded-paper manuscripts across the region is staggering; very few 
have been subject to contemporary methods of critical reading, editing, and translation. As 
these bitexts become more accessible through the digitization of manuscript collections, the 
place of Indic-vernacular bitexts in the global history of reading and translation will come 
into sharper focus.

