m 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF 
CALIFORNIA 

SAN  OIEGO 


PRIZE    PUBLICATION     FUND. 

Founded  by  the  generosity  of 

H.H.    THE    RAJA    OF    COCHIN,    K.C.S.I., 

THE     MAHARAJA     GAJAPATI     RAO.     C.I.E., 

THE    RAJA    OF    PARLAKIMEDI, 
and  other  Chiefs  and  Gentlemen  of  Southern  India. 


DAVID  A. 


/  2  O 


PRIZE  PUBLICATION  FUND 
VOL.   II 


THE 

PALI   LITERATURE    OF 
BURMA 


BY 

MABEL   HAYNES   BODE    Pn.D. 


PRINTED   AND   PUBLISHED   BY   THE 

ROYAL    ASIATIC    SOCIETY 

AND  SOLD   AT 

22  ALBEMABLE    STREET 
1909 


ABBREVIATIONS 


BEFEO.  Bulletin  de  I'Ecole  Franfaise  d'ExtrSme  Orient.    Hanoi. 

1901,  etc. 

GV.  Gandhavamsa  (JPTS.).     1886.     Index,  1896. 

JPTS.  Journal  of  the  Pali  Text  Society.     London.     1882,  etc. 

JRAS.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.   London.    1834,  etc. 

P.TH.  Pitakatthamain.     Rangoon.     1906. 

P.T.S.  Pali  Text  Society. 

SVD.  Sasanavamsadlpa.     Colombo.     1881. 


BIBLIOGKAPfllCAL    NOTES 

Students  may  consult  with  advantage — 

I.  The  whole  of  the  Pali  Text  Society's  publications  (for  the  older  Pali 
literature).     Frowde.     London,  1882,  etc. 

II.  Translations  of  the  same  which  have  appeared  in  various  languages 
(see  the  useful  bibliography  of  works  on  Buddhism,  by  Mr.  A.  J.  Edmunds, 
in  the  Journal  of  the  Pali  Text  Society,  1902). 

Particularly  interesting  for  comparison  of  Burmese  versions  with 
Pali  are  the  translations  of  Jatakas  from  the  Burmese,  by  Mr.  R.  F. 
St.  Andrew  St.  John,  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 
years  1892,  1893,  1894,  1896.  [Of.  the  Jataka,  translated  from  the 
Pali  by  various  hands  under  the  editorship  of  E.  B.  Cowell.  6  vols. 
Cambridge,  1895,  etc.] 

III.  Bibliographies  and  Catalogues  as  follows  : — 

1.  Bibliographies. 

(a)  General.      Scherman   (Professor   L.).      Oriental   Bibliography. 
(Quarterly.)     Berlin,  London,  Paris,  and  New  York. 

(b)  Indo- China.     Cordier  (Henri).     Essai  d'une  bibliographfa  des 
ouvrages  relatifs   a   la  presqu'Ue    indo-chinoise.      Premiere  partie — 
Birmanie  et  Assam.     Toung  Pao,  serie  II,  vol.  vi. 

(c)  Burma.     Ireland  (Alleyne).     The  Province  of  Burma,  a  report 
prepared  for  the  University  of  Chicago  (with  extensive  bibliography). 
Houghton,  Mifflin,  &  Co.     Boston  and  New  York,  1906. 

2.  Catalogues. 

(a)  The  catalogues  of  Pali  and  Burmese  MSS.  and  printed  books  in 
the  Oriental  Department  of  the  British  Museum. 

(b)  The  same  in  the  India  Office  Library. 

(c)  The  alphabetical  list  of  manuscripts  and  books  in  the  Bernard 
Free  Library  at  Rangoon,  by  C.  Duroiselle.     This  collection  offers 
an  excellent  field  for  research,  being  under  the  care  of  Professor 
Duroiselle,  who,  in  his   large  and  intimate  knowledge  of  Burmese 
literature,  stands  alone  among  Palists. 

(d)  Catalogues  of  Pali  and   Burmese   MSS.  in   the   Bibliotheque 
Nationale,  Paris. 

IV.  Finally,  a  few  examples  may  be  given  from  the  mass  of  Pali  and 
Burmese  books  in  the  British  Museum.     They  consist  chiefly  of  editions 
of  celebrated  Pali  works,  commentaries  by  Burmese  authors,  anthologies, 
and  translations  into  the  vernacular.     The  descriptions  are  borrowed  from 
Dr.  Barnett's  catalogue. 

Canonical  Works.  Suttapitaka  (entire).  Edited  by  Ko  Aung  Min 
Hsaya  and  others.  1904. 


Vlll  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    NOTES 

Cariyapitaka,  with  Bxirmese  exegetical  commentary.  Mandalay, 
1899. 

Milindapaiihavatthu.  Burmese  translation  from  the  Milinda. 
Rangoon,  1882. 

Abhidhamma.  Abhidhammatthasangaha,  of  Anuruddha,  followed 
by  Surnangalasami's  Ttka-Kyaw  or  Abhidhammattha-vibhavani  in 
elucidation  thereof,  and  copious  Burmese  commentary.  Rangoon, 
1898. 

Manimedhajotaka  Kyan.  A  Burmese  treatise  on  Buddhist 
psychology,  based  on  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha,  and  illustrated 
from  Pali  texts.  Maulmein,  1882. 

Sankhepavyakarana.  Burmese  epitome  of  Abhidhamma  doctrine 
as  codified  in  the  Abhidhammatthasaugaha,  illustrated  from  Pali 
texts.  Rangoon,  1899. 

Paramatthamedhani  Kyan.  Treatise  on  the  four  conditions  of  the 
absolute.  Illustrated  from  Pali  Texts.  Rangoon,  1895. 

Grammar.  Maharupasiddhi,  with  Burmese  interpretation.  Rangoon, 
1906. 

Nvadi-Moggallana.  Pali  treatise  on  Grammar,  by  Sangharakkhita, 
based  on  the  Grammar  of  Moggallana,  with  Burmese  nissaya. 
Rangoon,  1900. 

Alankara-nissaya.  Being  the  Subodhalamkara  of  Sangharakkhita 
in  Pali,  with  commentary.  Rangoon,  1889. 

Dhatvatthudipaka.  Treatise  in  Pali  verse  on  the  significations  of 
Pali  roots,  by  Aggadhammalamkara,  with  Burmese  commentary. 
Rangoon,  1899. 

Law.  Navadhammasattha,  by  Hsin-pyu-mya-shin,  king  of  Toungoo. 
A  Pali  digest  of  nine  law-books.  Law  of  Inheritance.  Edited  with 
Burmese  translation.  Akyab,  1894. 

Veda.  Makaranda  -  bedin  -  let  -  yo  -  Tika,  commentary  on  the 
Makaranda-bedin,  handbook  of  astrology.  Mandalay,  1905. 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  Pali  literature  of  Burma  owes  its  existence  to  the  Pali 
literature  of  India.  It  is  many  years  since  the  latter  was 
first  explored  by  the  great  scholars  and  pioneers — Fausboll, 
Lassen,  Rhys  Davids,  Trenckner,  Childers,  Oldenberg — whose 
reward  has  been  a  gain  to  Oriental  learning  vast  enough  to 
content  even  them.  With  time  a  part  of  the  material 
discovered  has  been  brought  within  the  reach  of  students 
by  critical  editing.  Buddhistic  literature  is  immense  in 
quantity  and  bewildering  in  varied  interest,  and  it  was  never 
more  difficult  than  now  to  avoid  being  too  much  of  the 
specialist.  But  the  student  of  Buddhism  who  limits  himself 
to  one  language  or  looks  for  solution  of  all  questions  in  one 
literature  risks  slipping  into  an  orthodoxy  of  his  own. 
A  sounder  principle  has  long  guided  Buddhist  studies ; 
modern  research  has  gone  forth,  like  Asoka's  missionaries, 
to  Further  India,  China,  Japan,  Tibet,  Siam,  and  French 
Indo-China,  armed  with  patience  as  they  were  with  conviction, 
as  resolutely  determined  to  learn  as  they  were  to  teach. 

There  is  need  nowadays  to  seek  further  in  Burma,  or  rather, 
need  to  be  better  acquainted  with  what  has  already  been 
found  there.  Among  the  countries  in  which  the  ideas  and 
traditions  of  Buddhism  are  inseparably  bound  up  with  the 
Pali  canon  Burma  possesses  a  special  interest  which  we  hardly 
feel  in  the  case  of  Ceylon,  for  Burma  shows  how  the  leaven 
of  Indian  thought  worked  in  a  race  and  idiom  having  none 
of  the  close  relationship  with  India  which  we  recognize  in 
all  that  is  most  characteristic  of  the  literature  of  Ceylon.  We 
may  say  that  the  essentially  Indian  genius,  the  psychological 
subtleties,  and  high  thoughts  of  Buddhism  have  forced  the 
Burmese  language  to  grow,  deepen,  and  expand  continually. 
When  Burmese  was  at  last  raised  (in  or  about  the  fourteenth 
century)  to  the  level  of  a  literary  language,  it  was  by  the 
addition  of  a  great  body  of  Indian  words  necessary  to  express 
ideas  beyond  the  scope  of  that  picturesque  vernacular.  Being 


X  INTRODUCTION 

an  agglutinative  language,  Burmese  lacks  the  force,  terseness, 
and  delicacy  that  Pali  owes  to  its  nominal  and  verbal  inflections 
and  its  power  of  forming  elaborate  compounds.  Thus  before 
the  translating  period,  authors  of  Burmese  race  had  studied 
Pali  and  learned  to  use  it;  ever  since  the  twelfth  century  it 
has  been  a  tradition  of  Burmese  scholars  to  produce  literary 
work  in  Pali,  and  it  is  with  this  work  only  that  we  are  now 
concerned. 

A  survey  of  the  Pali  literature  of  Burma  is  not  quite  a  new 
undertaking.  In  the  year  1879  a  report  on  the  subject  was 
drawn  up  for  the  Government  of  India  by  Dr.  Emil  Forch- 
hammer,  Professor  of  Pali  at  Rangoon,  who  had  begun  a 
thorough  search  for  manuscripts  in  monasteries  and  private 
collections,  and  whose  premature  death  cruelly  cut  short  a  work 
full  of  promise.  This  and  other  reports  of  Forchhammer,  on 
the  archaeological  remains  of  Arakan  and  Burma,  are  Govern- 
ment publications ;  and  his  studies  of  Buddhist  law  (published 
by  Sir  John  Jardine  with  his  own  valuable  Notes,  1882-3,  and 
in  the  Jardine  Prize  Essay)  are  now  extremely  rare  books,  and 
the  stores  of  knowledge  they  contain  are  not  available  at  every 
moment.  And  we  ought  also  to  profit  by  the  labours  of  that 
brilliant  and  far-seeing  scholar  Minayeff,  to  whom  we  owe 
the  discovery  and  publication  (to  mention  only  one  work)  of 
the  Gandhavamsa  ('  Book  History '),  written  in  Burma,  a  short 
but  interesting  account  of  the  earlier  Pali  literature  of  Ceylon 
and  Burma.  The  Gandhavamsa  is  unfortunately  very  sparing 
of  details,  and  gives  us  little  information  as  to  the  period  of 
the  works  it  enumerates,  but  its  help  is  most  useful  in  settling 
some  questions  of  authorship  and  place.  Minayeff,  who  used 
this  book  for  his  Noitvelles  Recherches  sur  le  Bouddhimie, 
does  not  offer  any  conclusion  as  to  its  date,  but  from  com- 
parison with  the  Sasanavamsa  and  a  still  more  modern  Burmese 
work,  the  Pitakatthamain l  (1906),  it  appears  to  be  a  seven- 
teenth century  production. 

For  both  the  early  and  modern  periods  (from  the  twelfth  to 

1  I  have  to  thank  Professor  Barnett  for  bringing  to  my  notice  this  useful 
Burmese  bibliography  of  Buddhist  works. 


INTRODUCTION  XI 

the  nineteenth  centuries)  we  find  great  help  in  the  Sasana- 
vamsa,1  which,  happily,  observes  the  good  traditions  of  Burmese 
chronicles  and  cares  for  chronology.2  It  enables  us  at  least 
to  sketch  in  outline  a  connected  story,  while  but  for  this  record 
we  could  only  enumerate  works  of  doubtful  date  and  mention 
auth'ors  without  knowing  what  period  in  the  growth  of  their 
country  and  Order  had  brought  them  forth.  The  Sasanavamsa, 
though  a  very  mine  of  interest  as  compared  with  the  arid  little 
Gandhavamsa,  has  its  limitations.  It  is  confused,  rambling, 
and  prejudiced.  The  author,  a  high  ecclesiastic  of  Min-don- 
min's  reign,  belonged  by  all  his  convictions  and  traditions  to 
the  Sihalasangha,  an  important  school  or  sect  having,  as  the 
name  shows,  a  close  connexion  with  the  fraternity  in  Ceylon. 
As  for  the  other  communities,  whose  spiritual  forefathers 
refused  to  look  on  the  Mahavihara,  that  famous  monastery  of 
the  old  commentators,  as  the  very  centre  and  hearth  of 
orthodoxy,  they  interest  him  only  moderately.  He  will  some- 
times dismiss  one  of  their  authors  with  the  driest,  curtest 
mention  of  the  man  and  his  book,  while  he  will  delight  us 
with  details  and  anecdotes  of  more  orthodox  writers.  It 
would  be  interesting  to  have  the  picture  filled  in  for  us  by 
a  biographer  influenced  by  the  old  Taking  tradition,  the 
tradition,  that  is,  of  Lower  Burma.  For  this  school,  known  as 
the  Mrammasahgha  (fraternity  of  Burma),  maintained  that 
there  was  no  need  to  have  recourse  to  Ceylon  for  teachers  in 
the  unbroken  '  line  of  descent '  from  the  ancient  missionaries. 
This  question,  almost  impossible  to  settle  with  certainty,  after 
the  vicissitudes  that  the  Buddhist  Samgha  had  seen  in  both 
countries,  divided  the  Order  in  Burma  with  a  sharp  line  of 

1  This  text  (edited  for  the  Pali  Text  Society  in  1897  by  the  present 
writer)  has  supplied  much  material  for  the  following  chapters.     Other 
sources  have  been  used  to  verify  or  correct  where  it  has  been  possible. 
The  whole  of  the  Sasanavamsa's  literary  information,  as  far  as  it  concerns 
Burma,  is  given  in  the  course  of  the  present  work. 

2  I  have  thought  it  best  to  adopt  throughout  this  essay  the  chronology 
of  my  two  principal  Burmese  authorities,  Panuasami  and  the  author  of 
the  Pitakatthamaiu.    But  I  must  remind  the  reader  that  their  (traditional) 
starting-point,  the  Nirvana  of  the  Buddha,  is  no  longer  placed  by  scholars 
at  544  B.C.  but  some  sixty  years  later.     See  article  by  Dr.  Fleet,  JRAS., 
April,  1909,  The  Origin  of  the  Buddhavarsha. 


XI 1  INTRODUCTION 

partisanship.  Therefore  we  must  beware  of  considering  the 
Sasanavamsa  a  complete  record  of  monastic  work.  Nevertheless 
the  author's  own  point  of  view  is  instructive,  and  we  have  no 
right  to  say  that  he  does  not  try  to  be  impartial.  And  if  we 
follow  only  his  guidance  in  our  choice  of  the  books  to  explore 
we  must  arrive  at  some  knowledge  of  what  is,  after  all,  of  the 
most  interest  in  such  researches ;  we  can  see  the  intellectual 
development  of  Burma  through  Buddhism  and  the  adaptation 
of  the  non-Indian  mind  to  Indian  culture,  with  the  conception 
of  science  and  the  standard  of  literary  art  evolved  in  that 
adapting  process. 

We  cannot,  of  course,  do  justice  to  these  questions  in  a  short 
sketch.  The  effect  of  Indian  Buddhism  on  Burmese  life  and 
literature  has  many  manifestations.  We  can  instance  some 
as  widely  apart  as  codified  law  and  religious  art.  In  the 
remote  past  we  find  both  Brahmanic  and  Buddhistic  sources  of 
Burmese  written  law.  And  the  religious  art  of  the  country 
is  by  no  means  without  its  problems  (for  example,  the  extent 
of  Mahayiina  or  'Northern'  influence),  which  those  who  are 
masters  of  this  subject  are  gradually  solving  for  us.1  So  the 
subject  spreads  in  its  fascinating  complexity,  if  we  will  let  it, 
far  beyond  our  simpler  theme ;  but  it  must  suffice  for  this 
essay  to  follow  (if  with  less  serene  confidence)  the  way  marked 
out  by  the  devout  and  simple  scholars  of  Burma,  who  have 
left  us  a  literature  derived  entirely  from  the  Pali  canon  and 
representing  almost  invariably  the  Hinayana 2  traditions  of 
Buddhist  belief. 

Beginning  with  the  study  of  the  language  consecrated  in 
Ceylon  as  the  instrument  of  the  highest  teaching,  then  com- 
menting and  composing  in  Pali  and  at  last  interpreting  that 
teaching  in  their  native  tongue,  the  Burmese  monks  have  left 
us  a  complete  revelation  of  their  mind.  Neither  the  sculpture, 
painting,  legends,  plays,  customs,  nor  law-codes  of  the  Burmese, 

1  See  p.  vii. 

2  This    Buddhist    phrase,    '  the   lesser  vehicle,'   may  be    employed  as 
a  convenient  term  for  the  tradition  as  observed  in  the  southern  countries 
early  won  to  Buddhism,  a  tradition  more  sober  in  its  legend  and  somewhat 
more  austere  and  practical  in  its  morality  than  the  Mahayana  (or  school 
of  the  '  greater  vehicle '). 


INTRODUCTION  XI 11 

significant  as  they  are,  could  serve  to  show  us  what  their 
religious  literature  alone  unfolds — their  manner  of  grappling 
with  an  abstract  subject. 

Buddhism,  as  any  other  Indian  system  would  have  done, 
gave  them  a  large  opportunity.  They  did  their  best  with  it. 
But'  Buddhist  theories  demanded  an  effort  of  abstraction 
doubly  severe  for  learners  whose  first  lesson  in  philosophy 
was  learned  with  those  theories.1  In  India,  where  certain 
of  the  Upanisads  belonged  to  a  yet  earlier  phase  of  thought 
than  the  doctrines  of  Gotama,  men's  minds  were  prepared  for 
Buddhist  conceptions.  A  philosophical  language  was  already 
formed  in  which  the  teacher  or  the  disputant  could  lead  his 
hearers  step  by  step  in  an  idiom  they  knew  to  conclusions 
not  unfamiliar  to  their  minds.  But  in  Burma  the  grammar 
of  the  Buddhist  texts  first  had  to  be  studied,  and  when  the 
great  legend  of  the  Founder  was  learned  and  the  code  of 
the  Order  had  grown  familiar,  there  was  still  a  new  world 
to  conquer,  a  new  science  to  master.  After  the  Sutta  and 
Vinaya  there  was  the  Abhidhamma  to  interpret.  Here  perhaps 
we  shall  find  the  Pali  compositions  of  Burmese  authors  less 
interesting  than  their  translations  into  Burmese. 

The  Sanskrit  commentaries  composed  in  India  on  Buddhist 
texts  are  enlightening  in  proportion  as  the  student  is  familiar 
with  all  Indian  philosophies  and  can  point  out  parallels  and 
contrasts ;  the  Pali  commentaries  of  Burma  naturally  only  lead 
us  back  to  the  Sinhalese  and  Indian  models  they  faithfully 
copy.  When  we  leave  Pali  and  come  to  Burmese  interpretations 
of  Abhidhamma  texts  we  feel  that  we  follow  our  commentators 
in  a  (to  us)  somewhat  dark  adventure;  but  yet  the  effort  of 
these  authors  in  their  own  vernacular  is  interesting  as  an 
effort  to  do  more  than  recite  the  consecrated  words  of  their 
ancient  masters.  Here  is  the  key  to  the  sense  really  given 
by  the  Burmese  to  Indian  abstractions,  the  key  not  to  be 
found  where  they  use  the  exotic  and  traditional  Pali  form. 

1  A  friend  has  suggested  to  me  a  comparison  between  these  studies  in 
Burma  and  tiie  gradual  mastery  by  Bede  and  Alfred  and  their  followers 
in  England  of  the  philosophy  of  Paul  and  John.  It  was  not  until  Wyclif  s 
time,  six  centuries  after  Bede,  that  these  abstract  questions  were  discussed 
in  English. 


XIV  INTRODUCTION 

By  it  we  have  access  to  some  curious  treasure,  rewarding 
the  search  of  the  scholar  familiar  with  the  Burmese  tongue, 
provided  he  be  a  Palist  and  (be  it  said  without  impiety) 
endowed  with  two  of  the  Buddhist  '  perfections  ' —  the  power 
to  spend  himself  and  be  very  patient.  Knowledge  of  the 
Pali  commentaries  of  Burma  is  the  natural  beginning  of  this 
attractive  enterprise,  but  by  no  means  the  end. 

The  commentaries,  though  the  most  important  part,  are  not 
the  whole  of  the  Pali  literature.  The  technicalities  of  Indian 
grammar  have  attracted  Burmese  authors  from  an  early  period. 
The  work  of  the  famous  Kaccayana  is  all  but  canonical  among 
them,  and  the  procession  of  his  followers  and  commentators 
stretches  through  eight  centuries  of  literary  history.  The 
qualities  of  mind  innate  in  the  quick-witted  Burmese  race 
were  lent  to  the  service  of  the  Word  so  religiously  respected. 
The  Pali  scriptures  had  not  been  a  hundred  years  in  Upper 
Burma  before  a  grammar — the  Saddanlti — was  composed  in 
Pali  that  called  forth  the  wondering  admiration  of  the  scholars 
of  Ceylon,  though  Ceylon  was  certainly  the  forerunner  and 
model  of  Burma  in  exegesis. 

Again,  the  practical  side  of  monastic  life  was  a  subject  well 
within  the  scope  of  the  Palists  of  Burma.  We  have  very 
numerous  examples  of  work  in  this  field,  from  the  time  of 
their  first  controversy  on  Ordination  in  Narapati's  reign 
(A.D.  1167-1204)  till  the  present  day. 

In  the  secular  domain  the  Pali  language  has  been  employed 
(as  we  should  expect)  where  solemnity  was  called  for  or  the 
sense  of  an  antique  tradition  was  needed  to  support  authority ; 
for  instance,  some  important  law-codes  exist,  and  others 
probably  existed,  in  Pali  versions.  Pali  is  also  the  language 
chosen  for  the  collections  of  maxims  known  as  the  '  Nlti ' 
literature,  and  for  various  chronicles  (we  can  instance  the 
Rajavamsa,  Sasanavamsa,  and  Gandhavamsa). 

Finally  we  come  to  the  very  limited  province  of  Pali  verse 
in  Burma.  Here  and  there  among  our  authors  we  catch 
a  glimpse  of  scholars  who  have  a  touch  of  the  poet  in  them 
and  some  of  the  poet's  ambition.  We  do  not  know  that  they 
ever  approached  the  favourite  theme  of  the  poets  of  all  ages. 


INTRODUCTION  XV 

If  they  did,  the  chronicles  have  passed  it  over  in  silence. 
A  love  story  sometimes  forms  part  of  an  edifying  narrative 
from  Pali  sources ;  but  the  love  lyric  is  the  undisputed  realm 
of  the  poets  of  the  vernacular.  Jatakas  and  other  moral 
legends  were  the  material  usually  chosen  for  the  Palist  to 
work  upon.  Sometimes  the  beauties  of  a  city  or  the  glory 
of  the  reigning  king  were  extolled  with  all  the  author's 
resources  of  prosody  and  imagery.  But  scholarship  in  Burma 
has  not  produced  poets  worthy  to  rank  with  those  of  Ceylon. 

The  following  pages  are  but  a  sketch,  and  perhaps  a  sketch 
without  colour.  Our  purpose  is  not  to  describe  again  the 
outward  aspect  of  the  temple,  the  monastery,  and  the  village, 
very  vividly  presented  to  Western  readers  by  learned  and 
sympathetic  writers  from  Bishop  Bigandet  onwards.  So 
many  Europeans  have  come  under  the  charm  of  Burma — of 
the  Burmese  people,  their  life  and  religion — that  there  is  no 
need  to  do  more  than  recall  to  readers  the  names  of  the  writers l 
who  have  made  that  charm  a  familiar  thing  to  us.  We  have 
chosen  for  our  study  the  less  well-known  subject  of  the  Pali 
books  of  Burma.  The  authors  were  the  ancestors  and  masters 
of  the  monks  of  to-day,  through  whom  we  know  those  old-time 
scholars  and  can  still  see,  as  it  were,  a  far-off  picture  of  their 
lives,  their  schools,  and  their  work. 

1  See  the  Bibliographies,  p.  vii. 


THE   PALI  LITERATURE   OF   BURMA 


CHAPTER  I 

THE   CLASSICAL    PALI   LITERATURE — ARRIVAL   OF  THE   PALI 
TRIPITAKA  IN  BURMA 

Burma,  under  which  name  we  may  conveniently,  if  not  quite 
accurately,  include  Pegu,  Arakan,  and  Martaban,  has  been  the 
home  of  Buddhism  for  many  centuries.  No  Buddhist  country 
has  kept  the  antique  faith  more  sheltered  from  change.  Yet 
even  the  chronicles  of  monasteries  and  such  strictly  ecclesiastical 
works  as  the  Siisanavamsa l  cannot  unfold  their  quiet  tale 
without  a  necessary  mention  of  rivalries  and  wars  between 
these  neighbouring  states,  when  the  balance  went  down  first 
on  the  side  of  Burma,  then  of  Pegu,  when  Mongol  armies 
marched  on  the  Burmese  capital,  or  the  Burmese  king  marched 
into  Siam.  Rulers  changed  and  the  fortunes  of  the  Fraternity 
with  them,  but  the  doctrine  and  the  tradition  suffered  hardly 
any  alteration,  and  the  countries  of  Further  India  developed  an 
intellectual  life  which  was  before  all  the  product  of  Buddhist 
ideas  and  the  work  of  Buddhist  monks.  For  Burma  the  first 
language  of  abstract  thought  was  an  Indian  language  ;  the 
rational  and  moral  force  which,  for  a  large  body  of  the 
Burmese  people,  broke  down  the  thraldom  of  ancient  super- 
stitions, was  inspired  by  India.  By  the  predominance  of 
Buddhist  influence  in  Burmese  culture  Burmese  studies  belong 
rightfully  to  the  great  field  of  Indianism. 

We  must,  though  the  subject  has  already  been  fully  and 
admirably  treated  by  others,  remind  the  reader  here  of  the 
form  in  which  the  Buddhist  doctrine,  enshrined  in  a  canon 
of  scripture,  was  conveyed  to  Further  India. 

The  language  was  Pali,  the  literary  dialect  closely  allied  to 
Sanskrit.  Pali  is  usually  called  by  the  Burmese  the  mayadhabhasa 

1  See  Introduction. 


2  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

(idiom  of  Magadha)  l  or  mulab/idsd  ('the  original  language'),2 
but  this  identification  of  Pali  with  the  spoken  dialect  of 
Magadha  is  now  known  to  be  incorrect.  It  seems  needless 
to  add  any  remarks  about  the  Pali  literature,  since  its  capacities 
have  been  described  and,  better  still,  proved  by  the  authors  of 
scholarly  and  beautiful  translations  which  everyone  nowadays 
has  an  opportunity  of  reading.3  But  a  few  words  on  the 
classical  books  may  be  in  place. 

The  Tripitaka. 

The  Tripitaka  (Pali,  Tipitaka),  to  use  the  now  familiar 
Buddhist  name  for  the  three  great  groups  of  canonical  texts, 
the  Vinaya,  Sutta,  and  Abhidhamma  pitahas  ('  baskets  '),  is 
known  in  Burma  in  the  Pali  recension  consecrated  in  Ceylon. 

The  Abhidhamma  and  Sutta  Pitakas. 

For  some  remarks  on  the  last  of  the  three  collections,  the 
Abhidhamma,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Chapter  IV  of  this  essay. 
As  to  the  Suttapitaka,  the  first  thing  we  observe  on  looking 
into  characteristic  collections  of  Pali  -  Burmese  MSS.  and 
books  is  that  of  the  great  Nikuyas  claiming  to  be  the  word 
of  the  Buddha  (the  Ariguttara,  Majjhima,  Dlgha,  Samyutta, 
and  Khuddaka)  the  Dlghanikaya  is  the  best  known,  the  most 
studied,  the  most  frequently  to  be  found.4  On  the  reason 
for  this  preference  we  can  only  risk  a  guess.  The  Dlghanikilya, 
though  containing  the  long  (dlgha)  discourses,  is  the  smallest 
of  the  collections  and  hence  the  easiest  to  study.  It  is 
a  principle  of  the  Burmese  to  avoid  all  unnecessary  pains 

1  The  ancient  kingdom  of  Magadha  was  the  region  now  called  Bihar. 

2  The  late  lamented  Professor  Pischel  (in  a  valuable  paper  on  fragments 
of  the  Buddhist  canon  found  in  Chinese  Turkestan)  speaks  of  the  tradition 
that  the  Magadhi  was  the  language  of  the  first  age  of  the  world  and  spoken 
by  the  Buddhas  :    '  Es  ist  begreiflich  dass  man  spater  die  Magadhi  mit 
dem  Pali  identifizierte.     Dass  aber  der  Palikanon  Spuren  eines  alteren 
Magadhlkanons  aufweist  is  langst  erkannt  worden  '  (R.  Pischel,  Sitzungs- 
berichte  der  konigl.   preuss.    Akademie  der  Wissenschaften,  Mai,  1904, 
p.  807).     See  also  Oldenberg's  edition  of  the  Vinayapitakam,  Introduction, 
and  the  Preface  to  Professor  E.  Miiller's  Pali  Grammar. 

3  See  Bibliography. 

4  This  is  confirmed  by  information  Mr.  Shwe  Zan  Aung  has  kindly 
sent  me. 


THE    PALI   LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  3 

and  trouble.  Without  any  disrespect  to  Burmese  Buddhists, 
it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  they  have  chosen  the  shortest 
task,  especially  when  we  remember  that  the  Dighanikaya 
contains  suttas  of  great  importance.1  For  example,  we  find 
there  the  Brahmajala  Suttanta,  dealing  with  the  Sixty- two 
Wrtmg  Views  ;  the  Samannaphala,  on  the  Fruits  of  the  Ascetic 
Life  ;  the  Mahilsatipatthana,  on  Self-mastery ;  and,  chief  of  all, 
the  Mahaparinibbana  Suttanta,  on  the  Buddha's  last  discourses 
and  death,  that  is,  on  the  supreme  moment  in  the  history  of 
the  Order,  since  it  was  then  that  the  Buddhist  samgha  became 
the  guardian  of  the  departed  Master's  teaching.  On  the 
whole  the  essential  doctrines,  as  the  Burmese  Buddhist 
conceives  them,  are  to  be  found  in  this  collection  and  the 
commentaries. 

The  Khuddakanikaya  calls  for  a  word  of  notice  here.  This 
collection  contains  among  other  texts  the  Dhammapada,  the 
Suttanipata,  and  the  immortal  Jataka  book,  which,  as  might 
be  expected  from  its  character,  has  become  part  of  the  popular 
as  well  as  the  scholarly  literature  of  Burma.  Very  nearly 
connected  with  it  is  the  Paritta,  a  good  example  of  ancient 
wisdom  and  piety  crystallized  into  a  talisman. 

Mahdparittam. 

The  Paritta  or  Mahaparitta,  a  small  collection  of  texts 
gathered  from  the  Suttapitaka,  is,  to  this  day,  more  widely 
known  by  the  Burmese  laity  of  all  classes  than  any  other 
Pali  book.  The  Paritta,  learned  by  heart  and  recited  on 
appropriate  occasions,  is  to  conjure  various  evils  physical  and 
moral.  It  has  naturally  come  to  have  the  usual  value  of 
charms  and  exorcisms,  a  value  hardly  religious  in  the  Buddhist 
sense  of  the  word.  But  some  of  the  miscellaneous  extracts 
that  make  up  the  collection  are  of  a  purely  religious  and 
ethical  tone.  The  best  example  of  these  is  the  famous 

1  The  Dighanikaya  was  chosen  by  Professor  Rhys  Davids  for  his 
selection  of  typical  suttas  translated  under  the  title  Dialogues  of  Buddha. 
The  suttas  instanced  above  have  also  been  translated  elsewhere.  See  the 
useful  bibliography  by  Mr.  Albert  J.  Edmunds,  Journal  of  the  Pali  Text 
Society,  1902-3. 


4  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

Marigalasutta l  of  the  Suttaniputa,  verses  in  praise  of  the  holy 
life,  uttered  by  a  devata  (local  divinity),  who  came  to  pay 
homage  to  the  Buddha  in  the  grove  of  Jetavana. 

The  use  of  the  Paritta  is  said  to  have  had  the  Buddha's 
sanction.2  There  is  an  example  of  this  practice  (by  acknow- 
ledged saints)  in  the  well-known  legend  of  Sona  and  Uttara, 
Asoka's  missionaries  to  Lower  Burma.  Their  first  act  on 
arriving  was  to  vanquish  the  demon  (yakkhinl)  who  spread 
terror  in  the  land  by  devouring  at  their  birth  all  boys  born 
in  the  king's  palace.  The  victory  of  the  holy  men  was 
accomplished  by  the  Paritta.3  We  find  another  illustration 
in  an  interesting  little  incident  related  of  Jetavana,  a  Burmese 
monk  and  famous  teacher  of  the  sixteenth  century.  When 
Jetavana  believed  himself  at  the  point  of  death  he  thought 
of  one  whom  he  considered  fit  to  be  his  successor.  At  that 
moment  the  monk  on  whom  his  thoughts  were  fixed  dreamed 
a  strange  dream  of  a  dead  man,  which,  on  waking,  he  related 
to  the  novice  lying  near  him.  A  paritta  was  then  pronounced 
by  one  of  the  monks  to  avert  any  evil  foreshadowed  by  the 
dream.4 

In  the  days  of  Anorata,5  the  first  notable  king  in  authentic 
Burmese  history  (who  reigned  in  the  eleventh  century),  we 
hear  of  the  Paritta  turned  to  a  dangerous  use.  Corrupt  and 
cynical  monks  proclaimed  it  an  easy  means  of  disembarrassing 
man's  guilty  conscience  from  all  wrongdoing  even  to  matricide. 
But  Burmese  Buddhism  has,  on  the  whole,  kept  exorcism 
within  the  bounds  of  a  superstition,  contrary  no  doubt  to  the 
true  doctrine,  but  not  grossly  transgressing  the  ethical  code 
of  the  religion. 

Burmese  tradition  adds  to  the  fifteen  ancient  texts  of  the 
Khuddakanikaya 6  four  other  works — the  Milindapanha,7  the 

1  See  Fausboll'.s  edition  of  the  Suttanipata,  p.  45  (P.T.S.  edition,  1884  ; 
Glossary,  1894),  and  translation,  SEE.,  vol.  x,  pt.  ii. 

2  See    Milindapanha   (ed.   Trenckner),   pp.    150  ff.,   and   Rhys   Davids' 
translation  (Questions  of  King  Milinda),  SEE.,  xxxv,  pp.  213ft'. 

3  See  Sas.,  p.  38.  *  Sas.,  p.  101.  °  See  below,  p.  12. 

6  Khuddakapatha,     Dhammapada,    Udana,     Itivuttaka,     Suttanipata, 
Vimanavatthu,  Petavatthu,  Theragatha,  Therlgatha,  Jataka,  Mahaniddesa, 
Patisambhidarnagga,  Apadana,  Buddhavamsa,  Cariyapitaka. 

7  See  above. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  5 

Suttasahgaha,1  the  Petakopadesa,2  and  the  Netti  or  Netti- 
pakarana.2  This  last  is  studied  in  Burma  for  its  analysis 
and  explanation  of  passages  from  the  sacred  writings,  with 
which,  as  the  learned  editor  has  said,  '  the  author  possessed 
a  great  familiarity.' 

We  now  turn  to  the  Vinaya  Pitaka. 

The  Vinaya,  as  known  in  Burma,  is  the  monastic  code 
handed  down  by  the  Theravadin  sect  in  Ceylon,  that  is,  the 
sect  professing  the  doctrine  (vdda)  of  the  theras  or  ancients. 
The  name  was  assumed  by  the  strictest  sect  at  the  time  of 
the  celebrated  schisms  beginning,  according  to  tradition,  in 
the  second  century  after  the  Buddha's  death.  The  influence 
of  Ceylon  on  Burma  has  been,  as  we  shall  see,  paramount 
in  questions  of  monastic  discipline,  and  the  code  drawn  up 
by  the  ancient  Sinhalese  theras  has  been  carefully  preserved 
by  the  Burmese  fraternity  in  the  letter  and  the  spirit  ever 
since  its  arrival  in  Burma  in  the  eleventh  century.  A  great 
deal  of  Vinaya  literature,  mostly  explanatory  and  sometimes 
controversial,  has  grown  up  round  the  code  from  the  time  of 
the  early  commentators  to  the  present  day.  The  important 
works  by  Sinhalese  authors  on  this  subject  formed  the  base 
of  Burmese  studies,  and  on  the  other  hand  orthodoxy  in  Ceylon 
has  often  been  reinforced  at  a  later  period  by  teachers  and  texts 
from  Burma. 

The  complete  Yinaya  is  rather  voluminous,3  but  an  epitome 
of  the  Discipline  in  the  form  of  two  short  metrical  texts,  the 

1  See  the  Pitakatthamain,  pp.  12,  13.    The  Suttasangaha  was  written  at 
Anuradhapura  in  Ceylon  by  a  thera  whose  name  is  not  recorded. 

2  In    Buddhist   tradition    the   Petakopadesa    and    Nettipakarana   are 
both  ascribed    to    Mahakaccayana,  the    disciple    of  the   Buddha.      The 
Gandhavamsa  (p.  66)  and  Pitakatthamain  (p.  13)  speak  of  Kaccayana, 
author  of  the  Netti,  as  chaplain  to  Candapajjota  of  Ujjenl  in  the  Avanti 
country  (see  Introduction  to  the  late  Professor  Hardy's  Introduction  to  the 
Netti,  p.  ix,  note  ;  also  pp.  viii  and  xix).     Professor  Hardy's  conclusion 
was  that  the  work  was  composed  at  an  early  date,  perhaps  about  the  first 
century  of  our  era,  and  put  into  its  present  form  by  the  commentator 
Dhammapala,  and  that  the  author's   name   may  have  been   Kaccayaua, 
considered  by  posterity  to  have  been  Mahakaccayana,  the  disciple  of  the 
Buddha.     '  H>3  is,   however,   altogether  different  from   the  grammarian 
Kaccayaua,  who  likewise  was  regarded  as  identical  with  Mahakaccayana ' 
(Netti,  Introd.,  p.  xxxii).     On  Candapajjota  see  Vinaya,  i,  276  ff. 

3  It  has  been  critically  edited  by  H.  Oldenberg  in  five  volumes  (1879-83). 


6  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

Mulasikkha  and  Khuddasikkha,  was  composed  at  an  early 
period,1  and  these  with  the  Dvematika,  consisting  of  the 
Bhikkhupatimokkha  and  Bhikkhunlpatimokkha  (the  ancient 
resume  of  the  code  for  monks  and  nuns  respectively)  and 
the  Kankhavitaranl  (commentary  on  the  Patimokkha),  were 
recognized  as  sufficient  Vinaya  knowledge  for  those  who  could 
not  study  more.2  In  modern  times  the  above  are  called  the 
'  Four  Smaller  Vinayas ',  and  are  studied  by  those  who  have 
not  time  for  the  complete  Vinaya.3 

In  Burmese  Pali  collections  we  find  no  less  frequently  than 
the  Paritta  of  the  laity  the  Kammavaca  of  the  Mendicant 
Order.  These  texts  have  a  purely  ecclesiastical  use,  though 
it  would  be  a  mistake  to  call  them  'ritual'.  The  first  work 
of  the  first  Buddhist  mission  to  Burma  was  undoubtedly  to 
receive  into  the  Samgha  believers  wishing  to  renounce  the 
world.  For  those,  before  they  entered  on  further  studies, 
a  knowledge  of  the  sacred  word  in  Pali  would  probably  begin 
with  the  formal  and  rigid  language  of  the  Kammavaca, 
and  this  association  lends  a  touch  of  interest  to  some 
extremely  wearisome  matter.  First,  the  formulas  of  the 
pabbajja  (renunciation)  and  upasampada  (ordination)  must 
have  become  familiar.  Then  the  ordinary  course  of  monastic 
life  included  various  ceremonies,  each  of  which  had  its 
prescribed  form  for  the  presiding  theras.  The  bhikkhus 
taking  part  were  silent,  unless  dissenting  from  what  was 
proposed,  but  in  cases  where  they  had  offended,  acknowledged 
transgression  of  the  rules  aloud. 

The  Kammavaca  cannot,  of  course,  be  called  literature,  but 
it  must  be  noticed  as  a  text  representing  the  immovable 
tradition  of  old  days  in  Burma.  The  ceremonies  of  admission 
to  the  Sam»ha  and  so  forth  have  continued  to  modern 


1  They  were  written   in   Ceylon.     See  Wickrernasinghe,  Catalogue  of 
Sinhalese  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  Introduction. 

2  Professor  Barnett  has  pointed  outAto  me  that  the  compilation  most 
recently  re-edited  in  Burma  (by  Hsaya  U  Pye)  as  Dvematika  contains  the 
Bhikkhu  and  Bhikkhunlpatimokkha,  the  Kammakammaviuicchaya,  extracts 
from  the   Parivara  and    other  Vinaya  texts,    and  a  Patimokkhuddesa, 
Burmese  notes  on  the  Patimokkha. 

3  I  owe  this  information  to  Mr.  Shwe  Zan  Aung's  kindness. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  7 

times,  accompanied  by  the  ancient  formulas;  and  in  the 
history  of  the  Order  we  find  that  some  lively  movements 
in  literature  and  one  most  important  mission  to  Ceylon  were 
due  to  ceremonial  questions,  particularly  the  question  of 
consecrating  boundaries  (slmd).1  For  this  last  was  a  formality 
on  which  the  validity  of  ordination  and  thence  the  '  legitimate 
descent '  of  teachers  depended,  and  such  consecration  has  always 
been  considered  in  Burma  of  great  importance  to  religion  and 
the  religious  reputation  of  a  region  or  community. 

In  all  these  texts  we  find  the  same  conventional  character 
and  monotonous  repetition.2  Even  the  MSS.  in  which  the 
Kammavacas  are  handed  down  suit  the  texts.  The  thick, 
square  lettering,  pompous  and  decorative,  the  shining  lacquer, 
and  heavily  gilded,  silvered,  or  ivory-plated  leaves,  bear  a  like- 
ness to  church-property  wherever  found.  Yet  we  should  not 
forget  that  they  are  the  texts  of  a  religion  that  has  known 
neither  altar  nor  sacrifice,  and  if  in  Burma  the  system  has 
developed  clerics  and  a  hierarchy,  it  has  never  had  a  privileged 
priesthood. 

The  Vinaya  has  led  to  mention  of 

The  Commentaries. — The  Burmese  tradition  as  to  the  great 
commentators  follows  the  Sinhalese,  which  places  Buddhaghosa, 
Dhammapala,  Buddhadatta,  Nanagambhlra,  Kassapa,  and 
Ananda  in  the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  centuries  A.D.S  The 
earliest  atthakathas  (commentaries)  and  tlkas  (sub-commentaries 
or  glosses)  on  the  three  pitakaa  are  associated  with  these  names. 
Equally  famous  and  authoritative  is  the  compendium  of 
doctrine  known  as  the  Yisuddhimagga  ('Path  of  Purity')  by 
Buddhaghosa.  As  for  the  familiar  story  of  Buddhaghosa's 
career,4  the  Burmese  adhere  closely  to  the  Sinhalese  version, 
but  though  the  scene  of  this  almost  incredibly  prolific 

1  The    boundaries    in    question     mark    the    enclosure    within    which 
ceremonies  such  as  ordination  can  be  properly  performed.    The  observance 
of  these  bounds  is  very  strict,  and  a  ceremony  carried  out  in  a  place 
unfitted  for  consecration  is  not  valid. 

2  '  As  in  law-books  all  the  world  over,'  says  Professor  Rhys  Davids,  who 
has,  in  his  wide  experience,  plumbed  the  depths  of  Vinaya  and  law  both. 

3  Sas.,  pp.  33,  34  ;  Pitakatthamain,  pp.  21  ff. 

4  See  the  article  on  Buddhaghosa  by  T.  Foulkes,  Lid.  Ant.,  vol.  xix, 
pp.  105-22. 


8  THE    PALI   LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

writer's  great  commenting  feats  is  always  considered  to  be 
Ceylon,  he  has  been  gravely  claimed  by  the  Talaings  as  a  native 
of  Thaton.1 

Dhammapala 2  wrote  at  Kaficipura  (Conjeveram)  in  the 
Dekkhan,  the  region  with  which,  according  to  their  ancient 
records,  the  Talaings  kept  up  active  communication.  Know- 
ledge of  Buddhist  texts  in  Lower  Burma  was  derived, 
Forchhammer  thinks,  from  Dhammapala's  country.3  We  do 
not  know  of  any  works  written  in  the  Talaing  country  itself 
during  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  centuries,  a  period  of  great 
literary  activity  in  Ceylon  and  South  India. 

Most  of  the  well-known  tlkas  were  written  in  Ceylon,4  and 
works  such  as  the  commentary  on  the  Nettipakarana  and 
another  entitled  Saccasankhepa  ('Compendium  of  the  Truth').5 
Better  known,  perhaps,  than  any  other  in  Burma  is  the  twelfth 
century  compendium  of  the  Abhidhamma  known  as  the 
Abhidhammatthasangaha,  also  of  Sinhalese  origin.  These 
old  exegetical  books,  which  we  shall  find  again  and  again  in 
our  progress  through  Burmese  literature,  must  be  known  at 
least  by  name  before  we  can  discuss  the  work  of  the  scholars 
of  Burma. 

Some  obscurity  hangs  over  the  beginnings  of  Buddhist 
culture  in  Further  India.  According  to  a  well-established 
tradition  Indian  Buddhism  moved  from  the  south  coast — that 
is,  from  the  region  called  in  the  ancient  chronicles  Suvanna- 
bhumi — northwards,  while  some  archaeological  and  linguistic 
evidence  allows  us  to  suppose  that  it  also  found  its  way  through 
the  mountain  passes  of  the  North.6  But  it  was  certainly  not 

1  Modern  Burmese  scholars  have  abandoned  this  belief.     See  Foulkes' 
'  Buddhaghosa '  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xix,  pp.  113,  114). 

2  Gandhavamsa,  pp.  60,  69  ;  Forchhammer,  List,  pp.  vi,  vii. 

3  Forchhammer,  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  p.  27. 

4  Sas.,  p.  33.      Vide  Minayeff,  Rech'erches,  pp.  273,  274.     The  tlkas  are 
sometimes  mentioned  in  Burmese  lists  under  collective  titles.     The  most 
important  tikas  of  Dhammapala  are  known  as  the  Linatthappakasani  (see 
GV.,  pp.  60,  69).     Pitakatthamain,  pp.  32,  33. 

5  Forchhammer,   Essay,  p.    25.      See    also   SVD.   (Sasanavamsadlpa), 
verses  1194  and  1220. 

6  See  Taw  Sein  Ko,  '  The  Origin  of  the  Burmese  Race '  (Buddhism,  vol.  i, 
No.  3,  p.  445)  ;  also  '  Preliminary  Study  of  the  P0§  U§  Daung  Inscription  ' 
(Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii,  p.  7)  ;  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  3,  4,  14  ;    R.  C. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  9 

in  the  upper  valley  of  the  Irrawaddy  that  the  Pali  literature 
of  Burma  had  its  origin.  This  gift  the  Burmese  owe  to  their 
more  advanced  neighbours,  the  Talaings  of  Ramaiiiiadesa,  now 
called  Lower  Burma. 

The  origin  and  history  of  the  Mon  or  Talaing  people,  who 
were  to  be  (unwillingly  as  it  happened)  the  messengers  of  the 
purer  Buddhism,  need  not  be  discussed  here.1  The  point  from 
which  we  start  is  their  acceptance  of  Buddhist  teaching  from 
India  and  the  rise  of  a  body  of  learned  monks  in  Raman na  who 
preserved  the  ancient  Doctrine  and  Discipline  and  conveyed 
them  to  Upper  Burma,  where  both  had  long  been  forgotten. 
We  say  forgotten,  for  Burmese  authors  will  not  admit  that 
they  were  new-comers.2  But  the  tradition  that  no  less  than 
three  out  of  the  nine  missions  sent  out  by  Asoka  went  to  Upper 
Burma  in  the  third  century  B.C.8  looks  like  a  piece  of  the 

Temple,  '  Notes  on  Antiquities  in  Ramannadesa '  (Ind.  Ant.,  voL  xxii, 
pp.  37  ff.)  ;  A.  Griinwedel,  Buddhistische  Kunst  in  Indien,  pp.  132, 136,  138. 

1  For  views  of  different  authorities  on  this  subject  see  Reports  on  the 
Census  of  Surma,  1891  (Eales)  and  1901  (Lowin).     The  Talaing  chronicles 
and  inscriptions  are  rich  in  material  for  study,  material  which  we  are 
less  and  less  likely  to  unearth  as  time  goes  on,  for  this  ancient  language 
is  fast  disappearing  from  Burma,  and  students  of  it  are  unfortunately 
very  few. 

2  It  is  certain  that  the  accounts  of  Burmese  chroniclers  do  not  support 
Forchhammer's  belief  that  there  was  no  Burmese  civilization  to  speak  of 
till  the  Talaings  conquered  the  upper  country.     Neither  Taw  Sein  Ko 
(Ind.  Ant.,  xxiii,  p.  258)  nor  Phayre  (History  of  Surma,  p.  3)  take  this 
view.     I  have  not  yet  discovered  Forchhammer's  reason  for  concluding 
that  there  was  so  great  a  difference  between  the  two  countries,  though 
the  southern  provinces  were  more  easily  accessible  from  India  than  Upper 
Burma. 

3  The  well-known  names  of  the  regions  visited  by  the  missions  are 
carefully  displaced  by  the  Burmese,  to  cover  regions  in  Further  India. 
See   Sasanavamsa,   Introduction,  pp.   3  ff,    and   note  by  Dr.   Burgess, 
'  Fabricated  Geography '  (Ind.  Ant.,  1901,  vol.  xxx,  p.  387).      As  an  example 
of  the  sources  from  which  we  may  hope  to  add  much  to  our  knowledge 
see  the  Maunggun  Gold  Plates,  by  Tun  Nyein,  an  account  of  two  gold 
plates  found  in  a  brick  in  the  year  1897  at  the  village  of  Maunggun  in  the 
Prome  district.     The  inscriptions  on  the  plates  consist  of  quotations  from 
the  Buddhist  scriptures.     '  They  are  in  the  Pali  language,  and  are  written 
in  characters  which  it  is  believed  were  in  vogue  in  the  first  century  A.D., 
when  the  kingdom  of  Prome  (Sirikhettara)  was  in  the  zenith  of  its  power. 
The  alphabet  corresponds    to    a    large  extent  with  that  used    in  the 
inscriptions  of  Pagan  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  and  several   of 
the  letters  also  resemble  those  of  the  South  Indian  class  of  alphabets ' 
(Epigraphia   Indica,   vol.    v,   p.   101).     The   two  plates  are  now  in  the 
British  Museum. 


10  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

national  pride  that  is  so  inventive  in  these  matters,  and  can 
only  be  quoted  as  an  '  uncorroborated  legend  V 

We  must  seek  a  safe  starting-point  for  our  history  of  the 
Pali  literature,  and  we  find  it  in  the  eleventh  century  A.D.  At 
that  time  the  Pali  scriptures  were  introduced  to  Upper  Burma 
by  Talaing  teachers.  The  existence  of  a  strong  Buddhist 
community  in  the  maritime  provinces  (Ramafinadesa)  long 
before  this  date  is  very  probable.  It  has  been  supposed  that 
Indian  colonies  were  already  flourishing  in  Talaing  territory, 
from  Chittagong  to  the  Straits  (Forchhammer),  at  the  time  of 
the  Asokan  mission.  If  so,  the  early  missionaries  brought  the 
teaching  of  Gotama  to  a  country  where  Indian  religion  and 
customs  had  already  made  a  home,  and  whether  they  were 
opposed  or  not 2  they  could  be  understood ;  and  in  time  the 
doctrine  of  the  Buddha  prevailed. 

There  is  no  elaborated  ancient  Pali  chronicle  for  Further 
India  to  be  compared  with  the  Mahavamsa  and  Dlpavamsa  of 
Ceylon,3  but  there  are  allusions  in  these  works  which  throw 
some  light  on  the  religious  history  of  Pegu  and  Arakan.  The 
Burmese  chronicles  are  of  more  recent  date,  and  help  must  be 
sought  from  monuments  which  do  not  always  yield  up  their 
secret  readily.  But  we  may  safely  say  that  events  in  India 
and  Ceylon  greatly  affected  religion  in  the  maritime  provinces 
(Ramannadesa).  Refugees  from  the  countries  where  Buddhism 
was  persecuted  or  declining,  as  in  India  after  the  eighth 
century,  without  doubt  strengthened  the  Buddhist  element  in 

1  Forbes,    Legendary    History   of   Burma    and  Arakan,    p.    10.     The 
researches  of  Forchhammer  and  other  scholars  who  have  followed  him  in 
this  subject  since  1890  have  been  summed  up  lately  (1908)  by  Mr.  C.  C. 
Lowis  in  the  Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India.     He  says  :  "  A  close  study  of 
the  inscriptions  and  native  histories  has  revealed  the  fact  that  as  the 
religion,  letters,  and   civilisation   of  Upper  Burma   were  influenced   by 
Magadha,  Nepal,  Tibet,  and  China,  so  those  of  the  Talaings  of  Lower 
Burma  were  affected  by  Ceylon,  South  India,   and  Cambodia "   (Article 
1  Burma ',  in  vol.  i,  p.  28,  Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India,  Provincial  Series, 
Calcutta,  1908). 

2  '  According  to  the  Talaing  legend  the  Buddhist  missionaries  on  their 
arrival   met  with   great   opposition  from   the  local  teachers  —  probably 
Brahmins*— being  denounced  and  reviled  by  them  as  heretics.' — Forbes, 
Legendary  History,  p.  10. 

*  See  on  these  chronicles   Dr.  Wilhelm   Qeiger,   The  Dlpavamsa  and 
Mahavamsa  (translated  by  Ethel  Coomaraswamy),  Colombo,  1908. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  11 

the  Talaing  country.1  Captain  Forbes,  who  follows  the  Talaing 
record,  says  of  the  early  days  following  the  Indian  mission : 
'  Gradually  the  new  doctrines  gained  ground,  pagodas  arose,  and 
the  faith  of  Buddha  or  Gaudama  established  itself  in  Thatone, 
to  flourish  amid  all  vicissitudes  for  over  two  thousand  years 
to  the  present  day,  on  the  spot  where  the  great  Thagya  pagoda 
lifts  its  worn  and  ancient  head,  probably  the  oldest  architectural 
monument  of  Buddhism  in  Burma.' 2 

When  a  religious  reform  in  the  eleventh  century  drew 
Ceylon  and  Burma  together  Anorata,3  king  of  Burma,  fresh 
from  vigorous  measures  against  heresy  in  his  own  country, 
agreed  with  Vijayabahu,  king  of  Ceylon,  on  the  Pali  texts 
which  were  to  be  accepted  as  representing  the  true  teaching 
of  the  Buddha.  Afterwards,  in  the  reign  of  Parakramabahu  I, 
a  council  was  held  (A.D.  1165)  in  Ceylon  to  revise  this  agree- 
ment and  settle  all  such  questions.4 

We  shall  see  that  from  the  eleventh  century  onwards  new 
recruits  press  into  Pali  scholarship.  And  whence  ?  Not  only 
from  the  Talaing  country  but  from  Upper  Burma,  an  advance 
which  was  directly  due  to  the  action  of  the  strenuous  Burmese 
king.  The  reforms  with  which  Anorata' s  name  is  associated 
were  greatly  needed,5  and  had  important  results. 

1  Sir  R.  C.  Temple  pointed  out  some  years  ago  that  '  Suvarnadvipa '  was 
the  '  headquarters  of  Buddhism  in  the  East '  in  the  tenth  century.     He 
gives  a  reference  to  a  passage  in  Sarat  Chandra  Das'  Indian  Pandits  in 
the   Land  of  Snow,  where   we  find   mention   of  an  Indian  '  Northern ' 
Buddhist's  visit  to  Chandrakirtti,  head  of  the  Order  at  Suvarnadvipa. 
The  visitor  was  Dipankara  Srijiiana  Atira  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii,  p.  358). 

2  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  10. 

3  The  Anawrata  of  Forbes'  History.     '  The  date  of  the  commencement 
of  his  reign  is  uncertain,  as  the  chronicles  differ  from  each  other '  (Legendary 
History,  p.  221 ;  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  22).    Cf.  Duroiselle,  Bulletin 
de  VEcole  Franqaise  d' Extreme  Orient,  tome  v,  p.  150. 

4  Kern,   Manual  of  Indian    Buddhism,   p.  132    (Grundriss  der  Indo- 
Arischen  Philologie  und  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  iii,  pt.  viii).     The  Sasana- 
vamsa   (p.  61)   says  :    'Jinacakke   ekasatthadhlke  paiicasate   sahasse  ca 
sampatte  kaliyuge  ekasattatadhike  tisate  sampatte  Anuruddharaja  rajjam 
papuni.'     Anuruddha  became  king  in  the  year  1571   of  religion  (lit.  of 
the  Buddha  cycle)  and  the  year  371  of  the  kaliyuga  (the  common  era, 
beginning  638  A.D.). 

8  See  Sas.,  p.  56.  The  Sasanavamsa  agrees  in  certain  details  with  the 
Burmese  chronicles  from  which  Forbes  drew  his  account,  which  is  as 
follows  :  '  It  would  be  difficult  to  decide  what  the  system  of  religion  that 
at  this  time  prevailed  in  Burma  can  be  termed.  It  was  certainly  not 


12  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

A  religion1  which  a  Buddhist  from  the  South  would  have 
scorned  to  call  '  religion  '  completely  possessed  the  region  over 
which  Anorata  ruled,  and  the  Burmese  king  himself,  with 
mistaken  piety,  supported  it  in  default  of  a  better.  A  com- 
munity numbering  many  thousands  of  monks  with  their 
disciples  flourished  on  the  popularity  of  their  debased  doctrine, 
teaching  the  laity  that  the  worst  crimes  need  bring  no  retri- 
bution if  the  guilty  man  recited  (or  engaged  some  one  to  recite) 
an  appropriate  parittct.2  The  tyranny  of  these  monks  went  so 
far  as  to  exact  from  parents  the  handing  over  of  either  sons  or 
daughters  '  to  the  teacher '  before  giving  them  in  marriage.3 

But  in  course  of  time  a  Buddhist  from  the  South  was  in 
Anorata's  counsels,  and  a  sweeping  change  was  brought  about. 
Arahanta,  a  Talaing  monk  from  Thaton  (the  Sudhammapura 
of  the  Pali  chronicles),  became  the  king's  preceptor  and  adviser, 
and  used  all  his  great  influence  to  break  up  the  supposed  order 
of  Samanas  (ascetics).  In  spite  of  the  credulity  of  the  people 
he  succeeded,  for  he  had  convinced  the  king.  But  even  when 

Brahmanism.  The  native  records  state  that  King  Sawlahan  built  five 
hollow  temples.  In  each  temple  was  placed  an  image  resembling  neither 
nat  nor  para.  To  these,  morning  and  evening,  food  and  spirits  were 
offered,  and  so  they  were  worshipped  and  propitiated.  The  priests  or 
teachers  of  this  religion  are  called  the  thirty  great  Arees  and  their 
disciples.  Their  doctrines  are  represented  as  a  complete  subversion  of 
all  moral  law.  They  taught,  it  is  said,  whosoever  shall  commit  murder 
he  is  freed  from  his  sins  by  repeating  a  prayer  or  invocation  ;  whosoever 
shall  kill  his  parents,  by  repeating  a  prayer  he  is  freed  from  the  punish- 
ment due  to  the  five  greatest  sins.  These  teachers  also  were  addicted  to 
the  practice  of  gross  immorality.'  (Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  22  ; 
see  also  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  33.) 

1  A  form  of  Naga-worship,  according  to  Burmese  histories,  had  already 
prevailed  for  some   five  centuries  in  Pagan  before  Anorata's  accession, 
while  '  Buddhism  itself  had  been  corrupted  by  the  Tantric  system,  which 
is  a  mixture  of  magic,  witchcraft,  and  Siva-worship  ;  and  this  Tantric 
Buddhism  apparently  percolated  into  Burma  through  Bengal,  Assam,  and 
Manipur,  and  allied  itself  with  the  northern  school  prevailing  at  Pagan ' 
(Taw  Sein  Ko, '  Introduction  of  Buddhism  into  Burma ' :  Buddhism,  vol.  i, 
No.  4,  p.  589).     The  statements  of  the  Burmese  histories  are  a  help,  but 
the  chronology  needs  careful  sifting. 

2  See  above. 

3  The  Sasanavamsa  gives  no  further  explanation.     The  mention  of  sons 
as  well  as  daughters  prevents  our  concluding  the  custom  mentioned  to  be 
that  prevailing  in  Cambodia,  where  marriageable  virgins  were   yielded 
up  to  a  bonze  before  the  marriage  ceremony  (see  article  by  P.  Pelliot, 

Me'moires  sur  les  Coutumes  du  Cambodge '  :  Bulletin  de  I'Ecole  Franfaise 
d1  Extreme  Orient,  tome  ii,  p.  153). 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  13 

the  communities  were  dissolved  and  the  '  false  Samanas ' ! 
reduced  to  the  state  of  'ownerless  dogs',  confusion,  heresy, 
and  ignorance  still  reigned  in  the  land,  and  Arahanta  pointed 
earnestly  to  the  only  means  of  putting  religion  beyond  all 
danger. 

The  true  doctrine  must  be  obtained  and  guarded  (he  preached) 
with  the  sacred  texts.  They  were  not  to  be  had  in  Burma,  but 
existed  in  abundance  at  Sudhammapura,  besides  relics  of  the 
Buddha.  Anorata  was  full  of  faith,  and  he  was  not  a  man  to 
believe  passively.  He  sent  an  embassy  to  the  Talaing  king 
reigning  at  Thaton,  Manohari,  to  ask,  as  a  believer  having  the 
right  to  ask,  for  relics  and  copies  of  the  scriptures. 

But  Manohari  was,  or  chose  to  appear,  too  strict  a  Buddhist 
to  allow  holy  relics  and  texts  to  go  to  a  country  with  the 
indifferent  religious  reputation  that  disgraced  Burma.  He 
refused  Anorata's  request,  and  refused  in  wounding  and 
contemptuous  terms.2  The  King  of  Burma,  outraged  and 
furious,  descended  the  Irrawaddy  with  his  armies  and  laid 
siege  to  Sudhammapura.  In  the  year  1058  the  Talaing  capital 
fell  before  the  besiegers.  Spoils  and  prisoners,  among  whom 
were  Manohari  and  a  number  of  learned  monks,  were  carried 
off  to  Pagan.  Anorata's  end  was  gained  and  the  Pali  Tipitaka 
came  to  Burma. 

1  Pali,  Samanakuttaka.  -  Sas.,  Introduction,  p.  18. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE  RISE  OF  PALI  SCHOLARSHIP  IN  UPPER  BURMA — THE 
SADDANITI — CHAPATA  AND  THE  S!HALASANGHA — LEARNING 
AT  PAGAN  (ARIMADDANA)  IN  THE  TWELFTH,  THIRTEENTH, 
AND  FOURTEENTH  CENTURIES 

Though  the  Burmese  began  their  literary  history  by 
borrowing  from  their  conquered  neighbours,  the  Talaings — 
and  not  before  the  eleventh  century — the  growth  of  Pali 
scholarship  among  them  was  so  rapid  that  the  epoch  following 
close  on  this  tardy  beginning  is  considered  one  of  the  best 
that  Burma  has  seen.  The  works  then  produced  supplied  the 
material  or  afforded  the  favourite  models  for  much  of  the 
Pali-Burmese  literature  of  later  times. 

The  causes  of  this  speedy  maturity  are  easy  to  trace. 
Ramanna  was  conquered.  Relics,  books,  and  teachers  had 
been  forcibly  carried  to  Burma.  Instead  of  suffering  by 
transplation  the  religion  of  the  Buddha  seems  to  have 
flourished  more  vigorously  in  its  new  centre.  The  Burmese 
king  had  conveyed  the  whole  state  and  dignity  of  the  conquered 
Sudhammapura  to  his  own  capital,  and  even  his  captive 
Manohari  helped  to  add  to  the  religious  splendour  of  Pagan.1 
About  Manohari  a  curious  little  legend  is  related,2  perhaps 
to  show  that  his  religion  needed  purifying,  notwithstanding 
that  he  had  scorned  the  Burmese  as  heretics.  It  is  said  that 
he  possessed  a  magical  power  by  which  fire  issued  from  his 
mouth  when  he  spoke.  Thus,  whenever  he  came  to  pay 
a  vassal's  duty  to  Anorata,  the  flames  burst  forth,  to  the 
great  terror  of  his  liege,  who  anxiously  applied  a  religious 
cure  to  the  dreadful  prodigy.  Food  was  taken  from  a  holy 
shrine,  and  after  due  homage  it  was  given  to  Manohari  to 

1  Called  Arimaddana  in  the  Pali  chronicles.     A  temple  exists  at  Myin 
Pagan,   2   miles   south   of   Pagan,   built    by   Manohari   (or   Manuha)  in 
1059  A.D.     See  Taw  Sein  Ko  in  Archaeological  Survey  of  Burma  (quoted  in 
Bulletin  de  VEcole  Franfaise,  tome  iii,  p.  677). 

2  Sas.,  p.  64. 


THE   PALI    LITERATUBE    OF    BURMA  15 

eat.  The  flames  appeared  no  more.  Manohari,  filled  with 
awe  at  the  loss  of  his  magical  attribute,  sold  one  of  his  royal 
gems  and  devoted  the  price  to  two  great  images  of  the  Buddha, 
which  are  said  to  exist  to  the  present  day.1 

Anorata,  mindful  of  Arahanta's  counsels,  was,  above  all, 
eager  to  enrich  his  city  with  the  sacred  texts.  Those  brought 
from  Thaton  had  been  stored  in  a  splendid  pavilion  2  and  placed 
at  the  disposal  of  the  Sangha  for  study.  Not  content  with 
his  large  spoils,  the  king  sent  to  Ceylon  for  more  copies  of 
the  Tipifaka,  which  Arahanta  afterwards  examined  and 
compared  with  the  Thaton  collection.3  So  the  ground  was 
prepared  for  the  harvest  that  soon  followed.  Anorata  did 
not  live  to  see  the  firstfruits  of  his  husbandry,4  but,  if  we 
can  accept  the  date  of  the  Pitakatthamain,  the  first  essay  of 
a  Burmese  author  in  Pali  scholarship  was  made  in  the 
year  1064  A.D.,  during  the  reign  of  Kyansittha,  a  son  of 
Anorata.5 

Kyansittha  was  the  founder  of  the  celebrated  Kanda 6  or 
Ananda  temple  and  vihara  (monastery)  at  Pagan.  The  legend 
goes  that  the  temple  was  designed  from  a  vision  of  the 
Xandamula  cave  in  the  Himalaya  granted  to  the  king  by 
eight  saints  of  that  region,  who  journeyed  through  the  air 
daily  to  receive  Kyansittha's  hospitality.  These  miraculous 
visits  are  of  smaller  interest  to  us  than  another,  less  sensational 
tradition  of  the  holy  place.  At  this  monastery  Dhammasenapati 

1  Sas.,  p.  64. 

2  Pali,  Ratanamaye  pdsdde  (Sas.,  p.  63).     The  libraries  of  the  ancient 
monasteries  were  mostly  buildings  apart. 

3  Sas.,  p.  64.     The  Sinhalese  chronicles  say  that  a  common  canon  for 
Burma  and  Ceylon  was  arranged  by  Anorata  and  Vijayabahu  the  Great 
(see  appendix  to  Mr.  NevilPs  manuscript  catalogue  of  his  collection,  made 
in  Ceylon  and  now  at  the  British  Museum). 

4  M.  Duroiselle  mentions  inscriptions  which  establish  1059  A.D.  as  the 
year  of  Anorata's  death   ('  Notes   sur  la   Geographic   apocryphe  de   la 
Birmanie '  :  Bulletin  de  I  'Ecole  Fran$aise,  tome  v,  p.  150). 

5  Some  religious  foundations  of  Kyansittha  are  dated  1059  A.D.  (Bulletin, 
tome  iii,  p.  676).     His  Pali  name  is  Chattaguhinda  (Sas.,  p.  75  ;  Forbes, 
Legendary   History,   p.   23  ;    Phayre,   History   of  Burma,   pp.  39,   281  ; 
Pitakatthamrin,  p.  68).     M.  Duroiselle  expresses  some  doubt  as  to  the 
exactness  of  Phayre's  dates  for  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries. 

6  Described  in  Sir  Henry  Yule's  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava,  p.  36,  and 
Craufurd's  Journal  of  an  Embassy  to  the  Court  of  Ava,  p.  114. 


16  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

wrote  the  Karikii,  a  grammatical  work,  in  Pali.1  This  modest 
little  metrical  treatise  has  lived  bravely  through  some  eight 
centuries  and  was  last  republished  a  few  years  ago. 

Dhammasenapati  composed  two  other  works,  the  Etimasami- 
dlpanl  (or  Etimasamidipikii)  and  the  Manohara.2  Beyond 
the  bare  mention  of  these  last  two  titles,  and  the  statement 
that  the  author  wrote  the  KiTrikii  at  the  request  of  the 
monk  NanagambhTra,  the  Gandhavamsa  leaves  us  without 
information.  Sfanagambhlra  of  Pagan  is  perhaps  the  thera 
mentioned  in  the  Pitakatthamain  as  the  author  of  the  religious 
work  Tathagatuppatti. 

During  the  reigns  of  Anorata's  immediate  successors  learning 
took  firm  root  at  Pagan,  and  in  the  year  1154  the  monk 
Aggavamsa  completed  the  Saddanlti,  a  grammar  of  the 
Tipitaka,  described  as  'the  most  comprehensive  in  existence'.3 
It  established  the  reputation  of  Burmese  scholarship  in  that 
age  and  the  fame  of  the  author  to  the  present  day,  for  the 
Saddanlti  is  still  republished  in  Burma  as  a  classic.  It  consists 
of  aphorisms  on  Pali  grammar  divided  into  twenty-five 
paricchedas  or  sections.  It  is  very  interesting  to  see  that  in 
the  second  part  of  the  work,  the  Dhatumala  ('Garland  of  Roots'), 
the  grammarian  gives  the  Sanskrit  equivalents  of  the  Pali  forms. 

Aggavamsa  was  tutor  to  King  Narapatisithu  (A.D.  1167-1202), 
a  powerful  and  peaceable  monarch,  whose  reign  was  the  most 
prosperous  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Pagan.4 
According  to  the  Gandhavamsa,  Aggavamsa  was  of  Jambudipa 

1  GV.,  pp.  63,  73.  Dhammasenapati  is  called  an  acariya  (teacher)  in 
Gandhavamsa,  but  in  Forchhammer's  List  the  author  of  Karika  and 
Karikatlka  is  put  down  as  a  Burmese  nobleman  of  Pagan  bearing  the 
honorary  title  of  Dhammasenapati.  It  is  likely  that  he  was  known  as 
a  man  of  rank  and  importance  before  he  entered  the  Order,  and  perhaps 
he  threw  himself  into  serious  studies  while  still  a  layman.  We  shall  find 
such  cases  later. 

The  Gandhavamsa  (pp.  64,  73)  is  my  only  authority  here.  The  curious 
title  EtimasamidlpanI  appears  to  have  no  meaning  whatever  and  may  be 
wrongly  copied  (perhaps  for  Ehimayasamdipam). 

3  C.  Duroiselle,   Bulletin,    tome  v,   p.   147,   note.     The   Sasanavamsa 
mentions  another  learned  monk  of  Pagan,  sometimes  called  Aggapandita 
and  sometimes  Aggavamsa,  with  whom  our  author  might  be   confused. 
Aggapandita,  who  lived  in  the  thirteenth  century,  wrote  the  Lokuppattipa- 
kasan!  (see  Pitakatthamain,  pp.  60,  66). 

4  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  24. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  17 

(strictly  meaning  India,  but  with  Burmese  writers  often 
Burma).1  Forchhammer  mentions  him  among  the  famous 
residents  in  the  retired  monastery  on  the  northern  plateau 
above  Pagan,  '  the  cradle  of  Pali-Burmese  literature.' 2 

The  Saddaniti  was  the  first  return  gift  of  Burma  to  Ceylon. 
A  few  years  after  its  completion  the  thera  ('  elder  ')  Uttarajiva 
left  Pagan  and  crossed  the  sea  to  visit  the  celebrated  Maha- 
vihara,3  taking  with  him  a  copy  of  the  Saddaniti,  which  was 
received  with  enthusiastic  admiration,  and  declared  superior 
to  any  work  of  the  kind  written  by  Sinhalese  scholars. 

Uttarajiva  was  accompanied  by  his  pupil  the  novice  Chapata,4 
whose  name  was  destined  to  eclipse,  for  a  time  at  least,  even 
that  of  Aggavamsa.  He  received  ordination  from  the  Sangha 
in  Ceylon,  and  lived  in  its  midst  for  some  years,  ardently 
studying  the  doctrine  as  handed  down  in  the  Mahavihara, 
and,  we  may  suppose,  mastering  many  ancient  texts  of  high 
authority  which  had  not  yet  found  their  way  to  Burma.  His 
talents  and  forcible  personality  were  just  the  other  elements 
needed  to  make  his  stay  in  the  sacred  island  important  for  the 
literary  history  of  Burma. 

The  works  usually  ascribed  to  Saddhammajotipala,  otherwise 
Chapata,  represent  the  second  stage  in  the  monastic  scholarship 
of  his  time  and  country. 

The  Suttaniddesa  or  Kaccayanasuttaniddesa  is  a  grammatical 
treatise  explaining  the  '  sutras '  (aphorisms)  of  the  Indian 
grammarian  Kaccayana.5  Forchhammer 6  mentions  the  Sutta- 
niddesa as  a  work,  originally  ascribed  to  Kaccayana,  introduced 

1  GV.,  pp.  67,  72;  see  also  SVD,  verse  1238  ;  Fausboll,  Cat.  Ind.  MSS., 
p.  49. 

2  Forchhammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2. 

3  This  famous  and  ancient  monastery  is  said  to  have  been  founded  by  the 
King  of  Ceylon,  Devanampiya-Tissa,  for  the  thera  Mahinda,  ASoka's  son. 

4  Or  Chapada,  so  called  after  the  village  where  he  was  born,  near  Bassein 
(Pali,  Kusimanagara).      In  religion   his  name  was  Saddhammajotipala 
(Sas.,  p.  74). 

8  For  Kaccayana  see  the  edition  of  E.  Senart,  Paris,  1871 ;  for  MSS. 
consult  Fausboll's  Catalogue  of  Mandalay  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library, 

Sp.  45-8  ;   cf.  Forchhammer,  List,  pp.  xx,  xxi.     For  editions  produced  in 
urma  and  Ceylon  see  British  Museum   Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  and  Pali 
Printed  Books,  1892-1906. 
6  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  p.  34. 


18  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

by  Chapata  into  Burma.  The  Sasanavamsa,  Gandhavamsa,  and 
Sasanavamsadlpa  give  Chapata  as  the  author,  and  say  that 
he  wrote  at  Arimaddana  (Pagan).1  The  Gandhavamsa  adds 
that  he  composed  the  Suttaniddesa  '  at  the  request  of '  his 
pupil  Dhammacari. 

His  other  well  -  known  work  is  the  Sankhepavannana. 
According  to  Forchhammer's  sources  -  Chapata  introduced 
the  Sankhepavannana  from  Ceylon  and  transcribed  it  from 
the  Sinhalese  into  the  Burmese  -  Talaiiig  alphabet,  but  the 
Sasanavamsa,  Sasanavamsadlpa,  and  Gandhavamsa  state  that 
he  composed  it.  According  to  the  Gandhavamsa  it  was  the 
only  one  of  his  eight  works  that  was  written  in  Ceylon.  As 
to  the  basis  of  this  work,  it  appears,  from  the  title  given  in 
the  MSS.,  to  be  a  commentary  on  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha, 
then  recently  written  by  a  Sinhalese  thera,  Anuruddha.  In 
arrangement  the  Sankhepavannana  follows  the  Abhidhamma- 
tthasangaha, being  divided  into  nine  paricchedas? 

The  Slmalankara  or  Slmalahkaratlka,  a  treatise  on  boundaries 
and  sites  for  religious  ceremonies,  is  a  commentary  on  a  work 
by  the  Sinhalese  thera  Vacissara.4  Another  work  on  monastic 
topics  is  the  Vinayasamutthanadlpanl,  written,  as  the  favourite 
formula  has  it,  '  at  the  request  of '  Chapata's  preceptor.5  The 
Vinayagulhatthadlpanl,  again,  is  an  explanation  of  difficult 
passages  in  the  Vinayapitaka.6  The  JNamacaradlpani  ('on 
ethics,'  according  to  Forchhammer,  but  classed  by  the  Pitaka- 
tthamain  as  'Abhidhamma')  may  be  of  Chapata's  composition. 
It  was,  at  all  events,  introduced  by  him  into  Burma." 

The  Gandhisara  or  Ganthisara8  is  evidently  an  anthology 
or  manual  for  study  condensed  from  important  texts.  The 

1  Sas.,  p.  74  ;    GV.,   pp.    64,  74  ;    Sasanavamsadlpa,  verses    1247-8  ; 
cf.  Pitakatthamain,  p.  66. 

2  Jar  dine  Prize  Essay,  p.  35. 

3  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office,  JPTS.,  1882,  p.  85  ;  Fausboll, 
Cat.  Mand.   MSS.,  JPTS.,  1896,  p.  39.     The   Pitakatthamain  mentions 
Sankhepavannana  under  the  heading  Abhidhamma  (P.TH.,  p.  50). 

4  Pitakatthamain,  pp.  43,  49  ;  GV.,  p.  62  ;  SVD.,  verses  12,  13. 

5  GV.,  pp.  64,  74. 

6  P.TH.,  p.  44. 

7  Forchhammer,  Essay,  p.  35  ;  P.TH.,  p.  45. 

8  Gandhisara  in  the  Gandhavamsa,  p.  74. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  19 

remaining  works  ascribed  to  Chapata,  the  Miltikatthadipani 
and  Patthanagananaya,  treat  of  Abhidharama  subjects.1 

It  would  be  rash  to  say,  without  careful  comparison  of  the 
literature  of  the  two  countries,  that,  even  at  that  early  period, 
the  Burmese  Sangha  showed  a  keener  interest  in  the  Abhi- 
dhamma  than  the  Sinhalese,  but  this  was  certainly  the  case 
later.2  The  school  or  sect  founded  by  Chapata  and  known  as 
the  Sihalasarigha  (or  Ceylon  sangha)  of  Burma  was  probably 
absorbed  in  monastic  questions.  For  Chapata  had  returned  to 
Pagan,  a  missionary  of  Sinhalese  orthodoxy.  Deeply  imbued 
with  the  belief  that  the  Mahavihara  alone  had  kept  the 
legitimate  '  line  of  descent ' 3  unbroken  from  teacher  to  teacher, 
and  that  valid  ordination  could  only  be  received  in  Ceylon,  he 
wished  to  confer  the  upasampadd  on  the  Pagan  brethren  who, 
never  having  visited  the  sacred  precincts,  were  still  outside  the 
pale.  To  fulfil  all  conditions  required  by  the  Vinaya  he 
brought  with  him  four  companions 4  qualified  like  himself. 
The  little  group  was  to  be  the  nucleus  of  the  new  Order  in 
Burma,  the  rightful  heirs  of  the  one  tradition. 

But  this  claim  was  stoutly  opposed  in  some  of  the  monasteries 
of  Pagan.  The  traditions  of  the  South  country  and  of  Anorata's 
great  Talaing  teacher  were  still  flourishing.  Arahanta,  it 
was  claimed,  had  been  in  the  '  direct  line '  from  the  ancient 
missionaries  JSona  and  Uttara  ;  his  disciples  had  been  qualified 
to  receive  and  hand  on  the  upasampadd,  and  the  Mahavihara 
itself  could  confer  no  better  title.  The  older  community  there- 
fore declined  to  be  drawn  into  Chapata 's  fold,  and  he,  having 
the  then  reigning  king  on  his  side,  was  powerful  enough  to 
make  them  appear  the  seceders,  while  his  followers  refused  all 

1  The  Pitakatthamaiu  (p.  37)  mentions  another,  the  Visuddhimagga- 
ganthi,  on  difficult  passages  in  Buddhaghosa's  Visuddhimagga. 

*  An  observation  to  this  effect  is  made  by  Mr.  Nevill,  whose  information 
was  supplied,  for  the  most  part,  by  Sinhalese  monks  well  versed  in  the  Pali 
literature  of  their  country . 

3  This  line  is  established  by  the  learning  of '  right  doctrine ',  from  the 
teacher  and  director  chosen  by  the  novice  ;   the  teacher  must  be  duly 
ordained  and  hhaself  a  pupil  of  another  such,  and  so  on  in  direct  ascent 
to  one  of  the  disciples  of  the  Buddha. 

4  Rahula,  Ananda,  Slvali,  and  Tamalinda  (Sas.,  p.  65).     Five  was  the 
smallest  number  of  which   a   Chapter  (for  acts   of  the   Sangha)   could 
consist,  according  to  the  Vinaya. 


20  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

association  with  them  in  ceremonies.1  But  King  Narapati- 
sithu  was  a  Buddhist  of  the  old  magnificent  school,  and 
though  he  believed  devoutly  in  Mahavihara  orthodoxy,  he 
neither  persecuted  nor  neglected  the  communities  that  denied 
it.  The  ruins  of  old  Pagan  still  witness  to  his  bounty  towards 
the  different  Sanghas,2  of  which  the  Arahanta  sect  (called,  to 
distinguish  it  from  Chapata's  Ceylon  school,  the  Mramma  or 
Burma  Sangha)  was  the  most  important.  Names  of  gram- 
marians follow  close  on  one  another  at  this  period.  Schisms 
had  indeed  arisen,  but  the  time  had  not  yet  come  for  works 
of  polemik,  and  the  good  monks  of  Pagan  were  busy  enriching 
the  new  store  of  learning  in  the  country.  In  the  work 
of  Saddhammasiri,  the  author  of  the  grammatical  treatise 
Saddatthabhedacinta,3  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  a  culture  that 
recalls  Aggavamsa.  Saddhammasiri 's  grammar  is  based  partly 
on  Kaccayana's  Pali  aphorisms  and  partly  on  Sanskrit 
authorities.  The  Sasanavamsa  tells  us  that  Saddhammasiri 
also  translated  the  Brihaja  (?)  into  the  Burmese  language.4 
He  was  probably  among  the  first  to  use  Burmese  as  a  literary 
instrument.5  If  the  work  mentioned  is  the  astrological 
Brlhaj  jataka 6  it  could  not  have  put  a  great  strain  on  the 
resources  of  the  Burmese  idiom  (even  before  the  immense 
body  of  Pali  words  added  later  had  come  to  the  aid  of  the 
vernacular),  so  the  feat  was  not  a  surprising  one.  But  the 
thera's  knowledge  of  Sanskrit  is  an  interesting  point.  It  is 

1  See  the  Kalyani   inscriptions  (edited   by  Taw  Sein  Ko),  Ind.  Ant., 
vols.  xxii  and  xxiii. 

2  '  Fraternities  from  Ceylon,  from  the  conquered  Hamsavati,  from  Siam, 
Camboja,  and  probably  Nepal    and  China,  sojourned  in  Pagan.' — Forch- 
hammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2. 

3  GV.,  pp.  62,  72  ;   Fausboll,   Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  pp.  47,  48 ;    Forch-' 
hammer,  List,  p.  xix. 

4  Sas.,  p.  75 :  'So  yeva  thera  Brihajam  nama  Vedasattham  pi  maramma- 
bhasaya  parivattesi.'     Cf.  Pitakatthamain,  p.  68. 

5  M.  Duroiselle  mentions  inscriptions  in  Burmese  of  the  tenth   and 
eleventh    centuries,   containing   words    of  Sanskrit    derivation,   and    he 
expresses  the  belief  that   Sanskrit  was  known  in   Burma   before  Pali, 
which,  so  shortly  after  its  importation  from  Thaton   (at  the  epoch  of 
the  inscriptions),    '  n'etait  connu   que   de  1'elite  des  moines  '    (Bulletin, 
tome  v,  p.  154). 

6  Of  Varaha-Mihira  ;  see  Weber,  Indische  Literaturgeschichte,  2nd  ed., 
pp.  277,  278. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  21 

curious,  too,  to  find  him  busied  with  one  of  the  Brahmanic 
works  known  as  '  Vedas '  in  Burma.1 

Another  grammatical  work  of  some  importance  is  the 
commentary  generally  known  as  Nyasa,  but  sometimes  as 
MukhamattadlpanI,  on  the  Kaccayanayoga.  The  author  was 
Vimalabuddhi,2  who  is  claimed  by  the  Sasanavamsa  as  a  thera 
of  Pagan,  but  is  said  by  some  authorities  to  be  of  Ceylon. 
A  tika  or  gloss  on  the  Nyasa  was  written  by  Vimalabuddhi,3 
to  whom  an  Abhidhammatthasangahatlka  is  also  ascribed.4 

The  Nyasa  was  glossed  by  another  commentator  in  the 
reign  of  Narapatisithu.  The  scholiast  this  time  was  a  man 
of  high  rank  who  addressed  himself  to  the  task  for  love  of 
one  of  the  king's  daughters.  At  least,  the  story,  as  related 
by  the  Sasanavamsa,  is  that  Narapati,  knowing  this  nobleman 
to  be  violently  in  love  with  one  of  the  princesses,  promised 
him  her  hand  on  condition  that  he  should  produce  a  work  of 
profound  learning.5  He  undertook  a  scholium  on  the  Nyasa. 
The  Sasanavamsa  does  not  make  it  clear  whether  he  was  an 
official  at  the  Court  first  and  entered  the  Order  on  purpose 
to  write  his  book,  or  whether  he  was  already  of  the  Order 
when  he  fell  in  love.  We  are  only  told  that  when  he  '  returned 
to  the  lay  life  '  the  king  conferred  on  him  the  title  rdjjuggahd- 
macca.  The  Burmese  title  by  which  his  work  is  sometimes 
mentioned  is  Than  by  in.6 

A  treatise  entitled  Lokuppatti  by  Aggapandita  ~  was  written 
at  Pagan.  The  author  was  a  native  of  Burma.  He  was 

1  For  this  term   applied   to   the   miscellaneous   learning  of  Brahman 
immigrants  to  Burma,  see  below,  Chapter  IV. 

2  Called  Maha-Vimalabuddhi  to  distinguish  him  from  a  later  writer 
(Sas.,  p.  75  ;  P.TH.,  p.  63  ;  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xxiii ;  Fausboll,  Cat. 
Mand.  MSS.,  pp.  47,  48). 

3  GV,  pp.  63,  73.  *  See  SVD.,  verse  1223. 

5  It  seems  that  the  king's  request  was  not  out  of  the  way,  for  the  noble- 
man was  a  learned  grammarian  according  to  the  SVD.,  verse  1 240,  where 
it  is  said   that  the    Nyasappadlpatlka   was    written   '  ekena    amaccena 
saddatthanayaununa '.     Cf.  P.TH.,  p.  64.     There  is  a  tlka  called  Nyasa- 
ppadlpa  (incomplete)  at  the  India  Office.     The  author's  name  is  missing. 
See  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  48. 

6  Sas.,  p.  75  ;  Forcbhammer,  List,  p.  xxiii.     Thanbyin  (rajjuggahamacca) 
was  a  title  given  to  revenue  officers,  nearly  corresponding  to  the  thugyi  of 
modern  times.     See  Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya,  and  Ava,  p.  128,  note. 

7  GV,  pp.  64,  67  ;  Sas.,  p.  74  ;  P.TH.,  p.  60. 


22  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

apparently  one  of  the  few  Palists  of  his  time  who  was  not 
chiefly  devoted  to  the  study  of  the  language. 

The  Gandhavamsa  mentions  a  grammar,  Lingatthavivarana 
by  Subhiitacandana,  who  was  followed  by  Nanasilgara  Avith 
Lingatthavivaranappakasaka  and  Uttama  with  Lingatthaviva- 
ranatlka.  These  three  doctors  were  all  of  Pagan.1  A 
Lingatthavivaranavinicchaya,2  by  an  author  whose  name  is 
not  mentioned,  is  apparently  based  on  Subhiltacandana's  treatise, 
or  explains  difficult  passages  in  it.  Uttama,  the  author  of  the 
Lingatthavivaranatlku,3  also  wrote  a  scholium  on  Balavatilra, 
the  well-known  grammar  by  Vacissara  of  Ceylon."1 

Another  of  the  Pagan  grammarians,  whose  work  has  been 
studied  for  centuries  and  republished  in  recent  times,  was 
Dhammadassi,  a  novice  (samanera)  in  the  Order5  when  he 
composed  his  well-known  treatise  Vacavacaka  or  Vaccavacaka. 
A  commentary  on  it  was  written  by  Saddhammanandi.6 

From  the  Saddatthabhedacinta  of  Saddhammasiri  sprang 
a  number  of  commentaries  of  which  the  best  known  is  the 
Mahatika7  by  the  thera  Abhaya  of  Pagan.  Abhaya's  name 
reappears  as  the  author  of  the  Sambandhacintatika,8  a  com- 
mentary on  the  Sambandhacinta  of  Sangharakkhita.9 

Forchhammer  places  both  Saddhammasiri  and  Abhaya  in  the 

1  GV.,  pp.  63,  67,  72,  73.  The  P.TH.,  p.  72,  ascribes  Lingatthavivarana 
and  the  tlka  to  Saddhammakitti  of  Sagaing. 

3  GV.,  pp.  65,  75. 

;i  GV.,  pp.  63,  67  ;  Forchhammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2  ;  Forchhammer, 
List,  p.  xxiii  ;  P.TH.,  p.  70. 

4  Dharnmakitti  in  Forchhammer's  List  ;  Vacissara  in  India  Office  MS., 
etc.     See  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  46. 

5  Sas.,  p.  75. 

6  See  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  50,  for  commentary  and  tikas  on 
Vaccavacaka.     They  are  entitled  Vaccavacakavannana,  Vaccavacakatlka, 
and  Vaccavacakadipani.     Saddhammanandi  is  the  only  author  mentioned. 
In  Forchhammer's  List  (p.  xxii)  these    works  appear  without  names  of 
authors  ;  cf.  P.TH.,  p.  71,  according  to  which  the  Vaccavacaka  was  written 
at  Pagan  by  a  thera,  '  name  unknown,'  and  the  tlka  by  Saddhammanandi. 

7  GV.,  pp.  63,  73  ;    Forchhammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2  ;  List,  p.  xix. 
The  commentary  in  the  Mandalay  Collection  at  the  India  Office  is  called 
Saddatthabhedacintadipanl ;  v.  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  51). 

8  Fausboll,    Cat.   Mand.    MSS.,   p.    50  ;    Forchhammer,   List,   p.    xxi  ; 
P.TH.,  pp.  69,  71. 

9  The  Sambandhacinta,  on  syntactical  relation,  is  probably  of  the  twelfth 
century.    The  author  was  a  scholar  of  Ceylon,  better  known  by  his  famous 
Subodhalamkara,  on  the  art  of  poetry,  and  the  Vuttodaya,  on  prosody. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  23 

fourteenth  century.1  Unfortunately  the  Sasanavamsa  and 
Gandhavamsa,  usually  careful  to  give  us  the  birthplace  or 
residence  of  our  authors,  rarely  give  us  their  exact  date. 
Without  a  close  comparison  of  the  texts  one  with  another, 
or  a  minute  study  of  the  chronicles  of  monasteries,  we  must 
be  -content  with  conjectures  as  to  the  order  in  which  the 
scholars  of  Pagan  should  appear  in  literary  history.  But  we 
may  perhaps  venture  to  place  most  of  those  just  mentioned 
in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries.  Before  passing  on 
to  the  later  period  of  Pali  literature  at  Pagan  it  will  be  well 
to  look  for  a  moment  at  the  state  of  the  Burmese  Sangha,  or 
rather  Sanghas. 

Narapati's  impartial  benevolence  had  secured  a  peaceful  life 
and  means  of  study  for  all  those  who  sought  them,  but  it 
could  not  prevent  discord  between  the  communities;  and 
when  Chapata  died,  his  school — the  Slhalasangha — split  into 
four  factions,  each  following  one  of  the  four  theras  who  had 
come  with  Chapata  from  Ceylon. 

The  dissensions  (for  they  can  hardly  be  called  schisms  in  the 
usual  sense  of  the  word)  that  arose  within  the  Slhalasangha, 
once  stronger  and  more  united  than  the  other  sects  in  Pagan, 
were  not,  it  seems,  caused  by  questions  of  dogma.  At  all 
events,  the  Sasanavamsa  tells  us  only  of  the  personal  reasons 
for  which  Rahula  separated  himself  first  from  his  colleagues 
and  they  in  their  turn  parted  company. 

Rahula's  defection  was  the  gravest  matter.  The  story  is  that 
he  fell  desperately  in  love  with  an  actress  at  one  of  the  festivals 
given  by  King  Narapati.  His  brother- theras  entreated  and 
reasoned  with  him  in  vain.  Finally,  they  prayed  him  to 
leave  the  country,  and  spare  his  community  the  scandal  of 
his  'return  to  the  lower  life'.  He  then  took  ship  and  went 
to  '  Malayadlpa  ',2  and  in  that  country  became  preceptor  to 

1  Forchhammer,  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  p.  36. 

2  Sas.,  p.  66.     The  reading  chosen  by  Miuayeff  in  his  transcript  of  the 
text,  and,  after  some  hesitation,  by  the   present  writer  in   editing  the 
Sasanavamsa,  was  '  Mallarudlpa '.    The  MS.  corrects  to  Malayadlpa.     The 
episode  is  in',eresting.     The  reading  Malaya  is  confirmed  by  the  Kalyani 
inscriptions.     See  Taw  Sein  Ko,  '  Remarks  on  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions,' 
Ind.  Ant.,  xxiv,  p.  301.     The  ancient  Malayades"a  (an  Indian  colony)  was 
in  the  Malay  Peninsula  (v.  Fournereau,  Le  Slam  ancien,  p.  52). 


24  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

the  king,  who  wished  to  be  instructed  in  the  Yinaya.  The 
end  of  Rahula's  story  is  curious.  Under  him  the  king  studied 
the  Khuddasikkha  l  and  the  tlka  on  the  same  ;  afterwards,  with 
the  largess  that  his  grateful  pupil  bestowed  on  him,  the  thera 
abandoned  the  Order  and  lived  as  a  layman. 

This  little  history  is  no  doubt  told  for  edification  more 
than  for  its  human  interest,  like  the  story  of  Ananda,  whose 
transgression,  less  dramatic  than  Rahula's,  was  also  against 
monastic  discipline.  Narapati  had  presented  the  three  theras, 
Slvali,  Tamalinda,  and  Ananda,  each  with  an  elephant. 
Ananda,  wishing  to  give  his  to  his  relations  in  Kaiicipura, 
was  preparing  to  ship  it  from  Bassein  (Kusimanagara),  when 
the  others  remonstrated  with  him,  pointing  out  that  they,  in 
a  spirit  more  becoming  to  followers  of  the  Buddha,  had  turned 
their  elephants  loose  in  the  forest.  Ananda  argued  that 
kindness  to  kinsfolk  was  also  preached  by  the  Master.  Neither 
side  would  be  persuaded,  and  Ananda  was  cut  off  from  the 
community. 

Slvali  and  Tamalinda  afterwards  disagreed  on  another  question 
of  conduct.  Tamalinda  had  recommended  his  disciples  to  the 
pious  laity  for  gifts  and  other  marks  of  consideration,  an  action 
of  which  the  Buddha  had  strongly  disapproved.2  After  some 
useless  admonishing,  Slvali  refused  to  have  any  further  inter- 
course with  Tamalinda,  and  formed  a  sect  of  his  own.  This 
very  simple  account  of  the  origin  of  the  four  factions  in  the 
Slhalasangha  is  not  quite  satisfying,  but  as  an  example  of 
monastic  traditions  in  Burma  it  has  a  certain  interest.  Besides, 
even  such  fragments  of  the  personal  history  of  theras  sometimes 
give  us  a  glimpse  into  the  course  of  studies  and  scholarship  in 
their  day. 

In  the  meantime,  as  our  list  of  authors  shows,  literary  work 
went  on  at  Pagan.  After  Narapati,  the  next  keen  patron  of 

1  A  compendium  of  the  Vinaya  written  in  Ceylon,  edited  by  Professor 
E.  Miiller  (JPTS.,  1883).     Tlkas  on  this  text  were  composed  by  Revata 
and  Saiigharakkhita,  both  of  Ceylon  (vide  P.TH.,  p.  48). 

2  Sas.,  p.  67.     It  is  here  called  by  a  technical  name,  vacivinnatti.     For 
pronouncements  in  the  Vinaya  on  this  subject,  see  Vinaya,  v,  p.  125 
(Oldenberg's  edition),  and  compare  iii,  pp.  227,  256,  etc. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  25 

learning  was  Kyocva  or  Kya-swa.1  The  works  produced  under 
his  auspices  were  chiefly  grammatical,  but  the  Abhidham- 
matthasarigaha  was  also  one  of  the  principal  subjects  of  study.2 
We  should  expect  to  hear  that  the  students  of  Pali  grammar 
were  chiefly  monks,  eager  not  only  to  understand  the  ancient 
texts  thoroughly,  but  to  master  the  classic  language,  in  order 
to  compose  in  it  themselves.  But  grammatical  knowledge  was 
by  no  means  limited  to  the  monasteries.  We  have  already 
heard  of  the  learning  of  Narapati's  minister.  In  the  time  of 
Kyocva,  too,  there  were  grammarians  at  the  king's  court.3 
Indeed,  Kyocva  is  said  to  have  insisted  on  general  diligence 
around  him,  while  he  himself  set  the  example  by  writing  the 
Saddabindu  and  Paramatthabindu,  both  grammatical  works.4 
A  little  work  on  Pali  cases,  entitled  Yibhattyattha,  is  ascribed 
to  his  daughter.5 

The  Mukhamattasara,6  another  grammatical  work  of  this 
epoch,  was  written  by  Siigara,  called  Gunasagara  in  the 
Gandhavamsa,7  which  states  that  Sagara  wrote  a  tlka  on  his 
own  work,  at  the  request  of  the  Sangharaja  (Head  of  the 
whole  Order),  who  was  King  Kyocva's  preceptor. 

1  Kyaswa  succeeded  Jeyyasinkha  A.D.  1227  (Phayre),  or  A.D.  1234 
(Barnett).  Pagan  is  described  in  a  florid  thirteenth-century  poem,  the 
Manavulu-Sandesaya,  written  in  Ceylon,  ed.  L.  D.  Barnett  (JRAS., 
April,  1905,  p.  265). 

-  For  an  example  of  studies,  see  the  pathetic  little  story  of  the 
monk  Disapamokkha.  who  pursued  knowledge  so  fervently  in  his  old 
age  (beginning  with  Kaccayana  and  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha)  that 
in  time  he  astonished  the  chief  theras  by  his  learning,  and  was  chosen  by 
the  King  to  be  his  acariya  (Sas.,  p.  77). 

3  Pali  grammar  was  a  popular  study  at  that  time  eveu  among  women 
and  young  girls.     A  quaint  and  interesting  passage  in  the  Sasanavamsa, 
reproduced  by  Minayeff  in  the  Recherche*  (Sas.,  p.  78  ;  Recherches,  p.  69), 
describes  how  busy  mothers  of  families  in  Arimaddana  (Pagan)  snatched 
time  to  learn. 

4  Saddabindu  is  ascribed  to  Kyaswa,  and  dated  1234  in  the  Pitakat- 
thamain,  pp.  45,  70.     See  also  G V.,  pp.  64,  73  ;  Sas.,  p.  76.     Saddabindu 
has    been    ascribed    to    Kyocva's    preceptor.      A   commentary    entitled 
Linatthavisodhan!   was   written   by  Nanavilasa  of  Pagan  (Nevill).     The 
tlka  on  Saddabindu,  called  Saddabinduvinicchaya,  in  the  India  Office,  is 
by  Sirisaddhammakittimahaphussadeva  (vide  Fausbb'll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS., 
p.  50).     A  tlka  on  Paramatthabindu  was  written  at  Pagan  by  the  thera 
Mahakassapa  (uitakatthamain,  p.  51). 

5  Sas.,  p.  77  (see  Preface  to  Subhuti's  edition  of  the  Abhidhanappadlpika, 
2nd  ed.,  Colombo,  1883).  6  Sas.,  p.  76  ;  GV.,  pp.  63,  67,  73. 

7  Gunasara  in  Forchhammer's  List,  p.  xxiii. 


26  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

A  Vibhatyattha  was  written,  probably  at  Pagan,  by  the 
thera  Saddhammafiiina  early  in  the  fourteenth  century.1  Sadd- 
hammafmna  was  the  author  of  a  more  important  work  on 
metrics,  the  Chandosaratthavikasim 2  (or  Vuttodayapancika, 
being  a  commentary  on  Vuttodaya)  ,3  and  the  Chapaccay adlpani , 
also  on  prosody.4  Saddhammanana  was  not  only  a  Palist,  but 
a  Sanskrit  scholar,  and  translated  the  Sanskrit  grammar 
Kiitantra  (Kalapa)  into  Pali.5 

The  Gandhatthi,  by  Mangala,  is  a  grammatical  work, 
probably  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  written  at  Pagan.  At 
a  somewhat  later  period,  but  also  at  Pagan,  Sirisaddhammavilasa 
composed  a  Kaccayana  tika,  entitled  Saddhammanasinl.6 

So  far,  the  production  of  learned  works  in  the  communities 
of  Burma  seems  to  have  gone  on  steadily,  in  spite  of  sectarian 
differences,  which,  after  all,  would  affect  grammarians  less 
than  experts  in  the  Vinaya.  But  a  change  had  come  over 
the  fortunes  of  the  Order  in  the  thirteenth  century.  The 
Pagan  dynasty  fell  in  1277 7  under  the  assaults  of  Mongol 
invaders  from  the  north,  while  nearly  at  the  same  time  a  successful 
revolt  in  the  south  completed  the  overthrow  of  the  Burmese 
power.  Shim  rulers  established  their  capital  at  Myinzaing 
(Khandhapura  in  Pali),  and  the  glory  of  Pagan,  where  the 
very  temples  had  been  torn  down  to  fortify  the  city  against 
the  enemy,  was  never  restored. 

The  Sasanavamsa  tells  us  that  many  monks  settled  at 
Myinzaing,  but  no  books  were  written  there. 

1  Forchhammer,  Essay,  p.  36  ;  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  50. 

2  Forchhammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2  ;  Essay,  p.  36  ;  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand. 
MSS.,  pp.  51,  52 ;  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xxiii  ;  Pitakatthamain,  p.  74. 

3  Vuttodaya,  a  twelfth-century  work    by  Sangharakkhita,  written   in 
Ceylon  ;  published  by  Fryer  in  JAS.  Bengal,  1877. 

4  Forchhammer,  Essay,  p.  36. 

5  For  remarks  on  the  Katantra  of  Sarvavarman  and  the  connection 
between    this    system   and    that    of    Kaccayana,    see   Weber,    Indische 
Liter  aturgeschichte,  2nd  ed.,  p.  243,  and  Kuhn. 

6  Forchhammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2,  and  List,  p.  xx.      The  MS.  of 
Sirisaddhammavilasa's  work  in  the  Mandalay  collection  is  called  Kacca- 
yanasara  Tika  (Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  48).     The  Kaccayanasara 
was  composed  in  the  Talaing  country  (see  below,  pp.  36,  37). 

7  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  25  ;    Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  51, 
53,  54  ;  Colonel  Burney's  translations  from  Rajavamsa,  JAS.  Bengal,  vol.  iv, 
pp.  400  ff. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  27 

In  1312  a  Shan  king  Slhasfira  founded  Panya  (Pali,  Vijaya- 
pura),  where,  with  a  new  era  of  peace  and  safety  for  the  Order, 
came  a  revival  of  literary  activity.  In  Slhasiira's  reign 
Sirimahgala  or  Sirisumangala,  one  of  the  most  diligent  of  his 
fraternity,  busied  himself  with  commentaries  explaining  the 
grammatical  construction  of  the  Samantapasadika  (Buddha- 
ghosa's  commentary  on  the  Vinaya)  and  the  Abhidhamma 
commentaries,  also  ascribed  to  Buddhaghosa,  Atthasalini,  and 
Sammohavinodanl.1  This  is  a  good  example  of  reviving 
monastic  industry  in  that  day.  And  it  is  quite  curious  to  see 
in  the  new  court  and  under  the  new  dynasty  a  return  to  the 
traditions  of  Narapati  and  Kyaswa.  An  important  officer  of 
state  (a  caturahgabalamacca,  to  give  him  his  Pali  title)  under 
King  Kittisihasura  -  wrote  a  samvannana  (commentary)  on 
Moggallana's  well-known  Pali  dictionary,  the  Abhidhanappa- 
dlpikil.3  The  same  official  wrote  tlkas  on  the  Koladdhaja  at 
the  request  of  the  thera  Pasadika,  and  on  the  Dandlppa- 
karana.4 

Another  essay  on  Pali  grammar,  written  at  Panya  under 
Kittisihasura's  patronage,  was  the  much-studied  Saddasarattha- 
jalinl  (or  Jalinl)  of  Nagita,  otherwise  Khantakakhipa,  a  monk 
of  Sagu.5 

A  tlka  on  the  Vuttodaya  of  Sarigharakkhita 6  was  written 
(at  Pagan  according  to  Forchhammer,7  at  Panya  according  to 
the  Gandhavamsa 8)  by  Navavimalabuddhi,  otherwise  Culla- 

1  P.TH.,  p.  40. 

2  Came  to  the  throne  A.D.  1351  (Kyoaswa  IV  in  Phayre's  History  of 
Burma,  pp.  60,  282)  ;  Sas.,  p.  88. 

:t  See  Fausboll,  Cat.  Hand.  MSS.,  pp.  46,  51. 

*  GV.,  pp.  63,  73  ;  Sas.,  p.  88.  The  titles  last  mentioned  do  not  suggest 
grammar  or  Buddhist  doctrine,  but  other  branches  of  learning — astrology 
and  poetics.  (See  Appendix.) 

8  The  quaint  nickname  Khantakakhipa  came  from  a  little  adventure  of 
Nagita's  boyhood,  when  he  was  not  more  serious  than  most  boys.  He 
was  so  unwilling  to  be  taken  to  the  monastery,  and  resisted  so  obstinately, 
that  his  father  lost  patience  with  him,  and  threw  him  bodily  into  a  thorny 
bush.  See  Sas.,  p.  88  ;  GV.,  p.  74  ;  SVD.,  verse  1249  ;  Forchhammer, 
List,  p.  xx.  There  is  a  commentary  on  this  work  at  the  India  Office 
entitled  Saramanjusa.  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library^ 
p.  102. 

«  Sas.,  pp.  34,  75. 

~  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2  ;  List,  p.  xxiii. 

8  GV.,  p.  67  ;  the  Pitakatthamain  (p.  74)  says  at  Pagan. 


28  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

Vimalabuddhi,  author  of  a  work  called  Abhidhammapannara- 
satthana,1  explaining  some  passages  of  the  Abhidhamraa.  In 
the  Gandhavamsa  a  Vuttodaya  tika  is  ascribed  to  a  Yepullabuddhi 
of  Pagan,  who  appears  again2  as  the  author  of  (ft)  a  tika  on 
SaddasaratthajalinI ;  (b)  a  Paramatthamaii  j  fisit  (metaphysical); 
(c)  a  tika  on  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha,  called  Dasaganthi- 
vannana  (or  Dasagandhivannana)  ;  and  (d)  a  tika  on  Vidadhi- 
mukharaandana.3 

Another  treatise,  the  Atthabyakkhyiina  (exegetical  or 
grammatical),  is  mentioned  as  the  work  of  a  Culla-Vajirabuddhi 
on  one  page  of  the  Gandhavamsa,  and  put  down  to  Culla- 
Vimalabuddhi  in  another.  Now  among  the  Sinhalese  authors 
enumerated  in  the  Sasanavamsa 4  we  find  a  Nava- Vimalabuddhi, 
author  of  an  early  tika  on  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha  and 
a  Cujabuddha,  author  of  the  Atthabyakkhyana,  whereas  the 
only  work  allowed  by  the  Sasanavamsa  to  the  Burmese  Culla- 
Vimalabuddhi  is  the  Vuttodaya-tlka,  and  to  Vepulla  the 
V  aca  nattha  j  oti.5 

Possibly  the  confusion  in  the  Gandhavamsa  arises  from  the 
author's  ignoring  the  Sinhalese  thera  Vimalabuddhi  (carefully 
mentioned  by  the  Sasanavamsa  in  a  passage  referring  also 
to  Vimalabuddhi  of  Pagan).  The  name  is  absent  from  the 
Gandhavamsa  list  of  theras  of  Ceylon,6  while  the  three,  Nava- 
Vajirabuddhi,  Vepullabuddhi,  and  Nava-Vimalabuddhi,  are  all 
put  down  as  Jambudlplka  (i.e.  belonging  to  Burma)  and  their 
work  as  composed  at  Pagan,  except  in  the  case  of  Nava- 
Vimalabuddhi,  who  wrote,  according  to  this  account,  at 
Panya. 

These  small  bibliographical  puzzles,  which  we  are  not  willing 

1  GV.,  pp.  64,  74,  not  mentioned  in  the  Sasanavamsa 

2  There  is  an  alternative  reading,  Vimalabuddhi,  but  the  editor  (Miriayeff), 
following  no  doubt  the  best  MSS.,  has  preferred  Vepulla  in  these  passages 
of  the  Gandhavamsa. 

3  Apparently  the  Vidagdhamukhamandana  (on  riddles)  of  Dharmadasa 
(see  Appendix). 

4  Sas.,  p.  34. 

8  Sas.,'p.  75;  the  Vacanatthajotika,  gloss  on  Vuttodaya,  ascribed  to 
Vepullabuddhi,  is  probably  a  fourteenth-century  work  Forchhammer, 
Essay,  p.  36  ;  Fausboll,  Cat.  Hand.  MSS..  p.  51. 

8  GV.,  p.  67. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  29 

to  leave  unsolved  but  must  waste  much  time  in  solving,  result 
sometimes  from  the  choice  of  well-known  or  well-sounding 
Pali  names  by  theras  of  different  epochs  and  their  pupils, 
commentators  and  copyists,  sometimes  from  the  renaming  of 
distinguished  teachers  by  their  royal  admirers.  It  would  be 
well  to  have  all  such  details  exact,  but  when  dealing  with  this 
early  period  of  Pali-Burmese  literature  it  is  difficult  to  avoid 
confusing  Burmese  with  Sinhalese  authors. 

The  Saddavutti,  or  Saddavuttipakasaka,  by  Saddhammapala, 
a  grammatical  treatise,  probably  belongs  to  the  fourteenth 
century.1  If  so,  it  was  written  when  the  great  importance 
of  Pagan  as  a  religious  centre  had  declined,  though  the  author 
is  mentioned  by  Forchhammer  as  one  of  those  who  worked 
in  the  famous  retreat  of  the  '  Maramma '  Fraternity  near 
the  old  capital.  Here  also  the  tika  on  the  Saddavutti  was 
composed  by  Sariputta  (also  called  Sariputtara).2  The  Sasana- 
vamsa3  calls  the  author  of  Saddavutti,  Saddhammaguru, 
and  states  that  he  wrote  at  Panya  ;  in  the  Gandhavamsa,4 
however,  Saddhammaguru  is  among  the  acariyas  who  wrote 
at  Pagan. 

The  Niruttisaramanjusa,  a  tika  on  the  Nirutti,5  ascribed  to 
Kaccayana,  is  by  a  Saddhammaguru,6  perhaps  the  author  of 
the  Saddavutti. 

A  grammatical  work  entitled  SainbandhamalinI  was,  according 
to  the  Pitakatthamain,7  composed  at  Pagan.  Neither  the  date 
nor  the  author's  name  is  given. 

Our  list  of  grammarians  does  not  end  even  here.  But  those 
to  be  mentioned  later  belong  to  the  new  period  beginning  with 
the  foundation  of  Ava  (Pali,  Ratanapura)  by  the  Burmese 

1  Forchhammer,  Essay,  p.  36  ;  P.TH.,  p.  71. 

2  Forchhammer,  Report  (Pagan),  p.  2  ;  List,  p.  six.     A  later  tika  arid 
a  Saddavutti vivarana  are  mentioned  in  GV.  (pp.  65,  75),  without  names 
of  authors.    The  tika  in  the  India  Office  collection  is  by  Jagara.    Fausboll, 
Cat.  Mand.  MSS.',  p.  50. 

3  Sas.,  p.  90. 

4  GV.,  p.  67. 

5  Also  called  the  Niruttipitaka,  a  grammatical  treatise.     See  SVD., 
verses  1233,  1234. 

6  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  49. 

7  Pitakatthamain,  p.  73. 


30  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

prince  Sativa   or  Thado-min-bya  in   the  year  1364,  after  the 
fall  of  the  Shan  rulers  of  Panyli  and  Sagaing.1 

As  the  delta  region  had  not  been  without  a  literary  history 
after  the  Burmese  conquest  in  the  eleventh  century,  we  must 
now  turn  back  to  earlier  times,  before  following  the  progress 
of  learning  in  both  Lower  and  Upper  Burma  from  the  fifteenth 
century  onwards. 

1  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  63,  64  ;  2nd.  Ant.,  xxii,  p.  8. 


CHAPTER    III 

BUDDHISM  AND  PALI  LITERATURE  IN  MARTABAN  (MUTTIMA) 
.»  AND  AT  PEGU  CITY  (HAMSAVATI)  FROM  THE  TWELFTH 
TO  THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY — DHAMMACETI  AND  THE 
KALYANI  INSCRIPTIONS — LITERATURE  IN  UPPER  BURMA 
FROM  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  AVA  (RATANAPURA)  TO  THE 
END  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY 

§  1.     Pegu  (Ramannailefsa). 

Buddhist  learning  in  Ramannadesa,  the  Talaing  country, 
may  have  been  greatly  impoverished  by  the  carrying  away 
of  texts  and  scholars  from  Sudhammapura  at  the  time  of 
Anorata's  successful  raid,  but  we  do  not  positively  know  that 
it  was  so.  Indeed,  a  country  so  easy  of  access  from  India, 
Ceylon,  and  Indo-China  must  have  continued  to  receive  new 
contributions  to  its  intellectual  store  ;  the  northern  rulers, 
professing  Buddhism  themselves,  could  have  no  motive  for 
discouraging  students  or  pilgrims  from  abroad,  and  it  is  not 
likely  that  the  Order  suffered  in  any  way  from  the  Burmese 
power  established  in  the  south  after  the  fall  of  Thaton. 

However,  the  first  literary  personage  of  Raman n a  that  we 
meet  in  the  Sasanavamsa  is  Sariputta,  afterwards  named 
Dhammavilasa,  a  twelfth  century  author.1  Sariputta  was  born 
at  Padlpajeyya,  near  Dala  (opposite  Rangoon),  and  entered 
the  Order  late  in  life.  He  was  still  a  novice  (samanera) 
when  he  went  to  Pagan  2  in  the  reign  of  Narapati-si-thu  and 
received  the  upaisampadA  ordination  from  the  thera  Ananda, 
one  of  the  four  who  had  accompanied  Chapata  returning  from 
Ceylon.  Being  thus  inducted  into  the  Sihalasangha,  Sariputta 
could  claim  to  be  in  the  direct  '  line  of  descent ',  to  use  the 
ecclesiastical  phrase,  from  the  ancient  teachers  of  the  Maha- 
vihara.  He  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  sect. 

1  See  Sir  John  Jardine's  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  iv  ;  Preface  to  Forch- 
hammer's  translation  of  the  Wagaru  Dkammat/iat,  p.  5  ;  Forchhammer, 
Essay,  pp.  29,  35. 

-  Sas.,  p.  41. 


32  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

It  is  said  that  the  king  heard  of  the  aged  monk's  learning 
and  holiness  and  thought  of  appointing  him  royal  preceptor, 
but  before  summoning  Siiriputta  he  sent  some  court  officials 
to  find  out  what  manner  of  man  he  was.  When  they  returned 
and  described  him  as  extremely  old  and  feeble  (some  say,  with 
a  slight  deformity  as  well),  Narapati  was  unwilling  to  put  on 
him  the  labour  and  fatigue  of  being  the  king's  dcariya,  and 
contented  himself  with  honouring  the  thera  in  other  ways. 

Sariputta  was  afterwards  sent  to  his  native  country  to 
'  purify  religion '  there,  which  (in  the  Sasanavansa)  means 
that  he  was  to  represent  the  Slhajasarigha  in  the  south. 
This  was  duly  done  by  Sariputta,  who  settled  at  Dala  and 
handed  on  the  Mahavihara  tradition  to  his  pupils.  The 
establishment  of  the  Ceylon  school  in  the  Talaing  country  is 
said  to  date  from  that  time.  It  is  interesting  to  remember  in 
this  connection  that,  according  to  the  Mahiivamsa,  an  earlier 
generation  of  scholars  in  Raman fia  had  supplied  teachers  to 
the  Sinhalese  fraternity,  when  theras  of  Sariputta's  country 
were  called  upon,  in  Vijayabahu's  reign  (A.D.  1071—1123),  to 
come  over  to  Ceylon  and  restore  learning  there.1  Sariputta 
probably  lived  till  the  year  1246.  It  is  difficult  to  distinguish 
his  religious  works  (if  he  composed  any)  from  those  of  the 
other  Sariputtas  of  that  epoch.2  His  most  interesting  work, 
from  the  historical  point  of  view,  was  neither  in  grammar, 
Vinaya,  nor  Abhidhamma,  and  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Sasana- 
vamsa  or  in  the  Gandhavamsa.  Sariputta,  or  Dhammavilasa 
(to  call  him  by  the  name  conferred  on  him  as  a  title  of  honour 
by  Narapati),  is  known  to  be  the  author  of  one  of  the  earliest 
law  codes  of  Burma.3 

1  Kern,  Man.  Ind.  Buddh.,  p.  132,  note  (reference  to  Mahav.,  Ix,  5). 

2  See  Sas.,  p.  33  ;  GV.,  pp.  61,  66,  67,  71  ;  Forchhammer,  List,  pp.  v, 
viii.     Two  Sariputtas  are  mentioned  in  the  Gandhavamsa  list  of  doctors 
of  Ceylon,  one  among  those  of  Burma.     Tikas  on  the  Anguttaranikaya, 
Majjhimanikaya,  the  Saratthadipanl,  and  a  tlka  on  it  were  written  in 
Ceylon  by  a  Sariputta  of  the  reign  of  Parakramabahu  I  (A.D.  1153-84), 
a  contemporary  therefore  of  Sariputta  of  Dala. 

3  Taw  Sein  Ko  says  :  '  The  dates  of  birth  and  death  of  Dhammavilasa 
as  well  as  of  the  completion  of  his  Dhammathat  are  unknown.     Even  the 
Sasanalamkara,  compiled  as  late  as  1832  A.D.  by  the  learned  monk  Maung 
Daung  sa  d6,  Archbishop  of  King  Bodop'aya  at  Amarapura,  is  silent  on 
these  points '  (Ind.  Ant.,  xxiv,  p.  302). 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE   OF   BURMA  33 

Dhammavilasa's  code  stands  at  the  beginning  of  a  series 
of  Pali  and  Burmese  Buddhist  law  texts,  which  are  of  the 
greatest  interest  as  disclosing,  to  quote  Forchhammer's  words, 
'  the  practical  effect  of  a  religious  system  upon  the  social 
and  political  growth  of  the  Talaings  and  Burmans.' 1  The 
question  of  the  remote  origin  of  these  codes  is  a  fascinating 
and  difficult  one. 

Whether  the  Brahmanic  (caste  and  sacerdotal)  element 
was  eliminated  from  them  by  later  Buddhist  lawgivers,  or 
whether  they,  with  all  their  essential  Buddhistic  features,  go 
back  to  '  the  law  of  Manu  as  it  existed  in  India  prior  to  the 
ascendancy  of  Brahmanism ',  cannot  be  decided  without 
a  complete  knowledge  of  the  oldest  law-codes  of  India.  And 
for  our  present  purpose  it  must  be  enough  (however  unsatis- 
factory an  '  enough ')  to  say  that  the  Talaing  monk  Sariputta 
or  Dhammavilasa  was  the  author  of  the  oldest  dhammasattha 
known  by  name  to  future  generations  in  Burma. 

The  Dhammavilasa  Dhammathat 2  was  the  basis  of  later 
codes,  Pali  and  Burmese,  which  took  this  title  ;  and  the 
Talaing  influence,3  to  be  recognized  by  the  presence  of  a 
Hindu  element,  is  visible  in  the  Pali  codes  till  the  eighteenth 
century. 

While  Dhammavilasa  and  his  pupils  were  establishing  the 
'  succession  of  theras '  at  Dala,  a  like  movement  took  place 
in  Martaban  (Muttima).  The  opposition  between  the  Sihala- 
samgha  and  the  other  sects,  which  had  been  manifested  so 
keenly  at  Pagan,  was  thus  continued  in  the  south.  The 
queen's  two  preceptors,  Buddhavamsa  and  Mahanaga,  had 


1  See  the  Jardine  Prize  Essay  (Forchhammer)  and  translations  of  legal 
texts,  accompanied  by  valuable  introductory  remarks  and  notes  published 
in  Sir  John  Jardine's  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  Eangoon,  1882-3. 

2  Forchhammer  did  not  succeed  in  finding  the  original  Pali  Dhamma- 
vilasa   Dhammathat.     He    mentions    a    commentary    composed    about 
1656  A.D.,  and  a  Burmese  version  by  Nandamala,  made  at  Amarapura 
in  1768.    Essay,  p.  29  ;  see  also  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  part  iv  ;  Preface  to 
translation  of  the  Wagarudhammathat  on  marriage  and  divorce,  p.  3. 

3  Another  example  is  the  Wagarudhammathat,  an  important  code  drawn 
up  in  Talaing  by  Wagaru,  king  of  Martabaii  (A.D.  1281-1306).     The  Pali 
translation  was  made  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.     See  Notes  on 
Buddhist  Law,  vol.  iii,  p.  xi. 


34  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

visited  Ceylon,  had  gone  through  a  course  of  instruction,  and 
received  re-ordination  at  the  Mahavihiira.1  On  their  return 
to  Martaban  they  separated  themselves  from  the  other  com- 
munities, and  a  Ceylon  sect  was  formed. 

Afterwards,  for  many  generations,  a  scholarly  rivalry  existed 
between  Pegu  and  Burma,  of  which  we  shall  hear  something 
in  the  later  history  of  their  literature.  Possibly  Talaing 
authors  may  have  been  drawn  together  then  by  a  bond  of 
nationality  stronger  than  the  ties  of  sect,  but  the  Sasanavamsa 
makes  the  distinction  chiefly  between  the  Slhalasamgha  theras 
and  the  members  of  the  Arahantagana,  whose  '  direct  descent ' 
was  denied  by  those  of  the  Mahavihiira  tradition. 

Our  Pali  chronicle  says  little  about  Martaban  and  nothing 
about  Wagaru,  who,  however,  reigned  wisely  for  twenty-two 
years.  We  can  only  suppose  that  he  did  not  protect  the 
Slhalasamgha  with  any  particular  zeal.  A  historian  of  the 
Talaing  country  and  the  old  tradition  could  fill  the  gap  and 
give  us  more  details  of  the  progress  of  learning  in  the  south. 
But  we  know  that  the  well-being  of  the  Order  depended  on  the 
state  of  the  country,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  Sasanavamsa 
leaves  out  very  little  that  is  of  importance  in  the  list,  though 
a  singularly  short  one,  of  works  written  in  Rama  fin  a  during 
the  two  centuries  between  Dhammavilasa's  long  life  and  the 
revival  of  religion  connected  with  the  name  of  Dhammaceti 
in  the  fifteenth  century.  The  Shans,  whose  growing  power 
in  Burma  had  broken  down  the  old  Pagan  dynasty,  were  not 
disposed  to  leave  Martaban  and  Pegu  in  peace.2  The  Zimme 
Shans  had  also  pushed  westward.  Changes  of  rulers  and  the 
skirmishing  warfare  around  the  unstable  thrones  of  the  small 
southern  kingdoms  must  have  deprived  the  monasteries  of 
much  valuable  patronage,  even  if  the  monks  were  left  un- 
disturbed. For  nearly  every  mention  of  important  literary 
work  in  chronicles  like  the  Sa"sanavamsa  is  accompanied  by 
mention  of  some  royal  or  wealthy  patron.  And  this  need 
not  surprise  us  or  force  us  to  conclude  that  the  Order  was 

1  Sas.,  p.  42. 

2  See  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  pp.  26,  27  ;   Phayre,  History  of  Burma, 
pp.  65  ff. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  35 

at  any  time  in  slavish  dependence  on  royalty  and  riches. 
Literary  work  required  a  more  spacious,  convenient  vihara 
than  was  needed  for  the  simple  round  of  the  mendicant's 
ordinary  life,  besides  a  whole  library  of  sacred  texts.  To 
supply  all  these  and  other  necessaries  of  scholarship  was 
a  highly  meritorious  act,  and  rich  laymen  were  as  eager  to 
acquire  merit  in  such  ways  as  the  monks  were  content  to 
accept  their  gifts.  But,  still,  there  were  times  when,  as  the 
chronicles  say,  '  religion  was  dimmed.' 

The  briefer  a  literary  history  is,  the  more  we  need  to  be 
clear  as  to  the  chronology  of  the  works  chosen  to  illustrate  it. 
But  often  this  is  only  placing  together  fragments  by  guess- 
work. "We  are  glad  to  meet  any  evidence  of  the  state  of 
scholarship  at  a  given  period,  such  as  the  Talaing  inscriptions 
found  by  Forchhammer  near  the  Kumaraceti  pagoda  in  Pegu. 
Forchhammer  observed  that  these  inscriptions  (which  record 
the  contributions  of  pious  people  to  the  rebuilding  of  the 
cetiya  and  a  vihara)  are  in  more  ancient  lettering  than  those 
of  the  Kelasa  pagoda  in  the  same  region.  These  latter  can 
be  dated  with  certainty  as  fifteenth-century,  and  Forchhammer 
believed  the  older  writing  to  belong  to  the  beginning  of  the 
fourteenth  century,  'when  with  the  rise  of  Wagaru,  King  of 
Martaban,  a  new  impulse  had  been  given  to  native  learning,  and 
Buddhism  again  had  attained  to  exclusive  predominance  on  the 
shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Martaban.'  l 

A.  south-country  author  who  doubtless  belongs  to  the 
fourteenth  century  is  Medhamkara,  who  wrote  the  well-known 
Lokadlpasiira.  The  Sasanavamsa  tells  us  that  he  was  the 
preceptor  of  Queen  Bhadda,  the  mother  of  Setibhinda,  the  king 
reigning  at  Muttimanagara  (Martaban).2  Medhamkara  had 
gone  through  a  course  of  study  in  Ceylon,  and  lived  afterwards 

1  Forchhammer,  Notes  on  the  Early  History,  etc.,  ii,  p.  8.    Forchhammer 
mentions  elsewhere  an  important  sect  founded  in  the  south  by  Buddha- 
vamsa  (afterwards  known,  for  the  confusion  of  future  Burmese  chroniclers, 
as    Culla-Buddhaghosa).     He  also   had  sojourned  in   Ceylon  and  held 
Sinhalese  views  of  orthodoxy.     Jardine  Prize  Essay,  pp.  64,  65. 

2  Sas.,  p.  42.     Setibhinda,  or  Binga-u,  began  to  reign  A.D.  1348,  and 
assumed  the  title  Hsin-hpyu-shin  (possessor  of  a  white  elephant).     He 
made  Martaban  his  capital. 


36  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

at  Martaban.1  The  Lokadlpasiira  is  described  by  Olden  berg  as 
'  a  collection  of  chapters  on  different  subjects,  arranged  according 
to  a  cosmological  scheme  '.  The  chapters  deal  with  different 
stages  of  existence — in  hell,  in  the  animal  kingdom,  among  the 
pretas  (ghosts),  and  so  forth,  and  the  subjects  are  illustrated  by 
legends. 

Hamsavatl  (Pegu  city),  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Pegu 
from  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  also  had  its  learned 
theras;  the  Apheggusiira,  written  at  Hamsiivati  by  a  scholar 
whose  name  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Sasanavamsa,  deals  with 
Abhidhamma  topics.2 

Some  important  grammatical  work  was  also  done  in  the 
south — and  at  the  ill-fated  Thaton — by  the  thera  Mahayasa 
of  that  city.  Neither  the  thera  nor  his  books  are  mentioned 
in  the  Sasanavamsa,  though  the  Kaccayanabheda  and  Kacca- 
yanasara not  only  became  standard  texts  for  commentators  and 
students  in  Burma,  but  have  since  been  better  known  in  Ceylon 
than  works  of  Burmese  grammarians  usually  are. 

The  Kaccayanabheda,  also  called  the  Kaccayanabhedadlpika, 
deals  with  the  grammatical  terminology  of  Kaccayana ;  the 
Kaccayanasara,  as  the  title  shows,  is  a  resume  of  or  textbook  on 
the  teaching  of  that  great  grammatical  authority. 

A  tlka  on  Kaccayanasara  was  written  by  Mahayasa  himself ; 3 

1  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  42  ;   Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  at  Iiidia 
Oj/ice,   p.    126.      The   Gandhavamsa  calls   the   author    of    Lokadipasara, 
Nava-Medhamkara  (Medhamkara,  the  younger).     The  Medhamkara  who 
appears  in  the  list  of  the  theras  who  worked  at  Pagan  is  probably  not 
the  same. 

2  See  Sas.,  p.  48  ;  also  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xviii,  where  Apheggupatho 
and  Apheggusaradipampatho  are  mentioned.     The  Gandhavamsa  is  silent 
about  this   work.      In    Nevill's    MS.    Catalogue,   Apheggusaradlpaiil    is 
described  as  an  anutlkd  dealing  with   matter  in  the  Abhidhammattha 
vibhavam.      Cf.    Fausboll,   Cat.  Mand.   MSS.,   p.   39,  where   the  author 
proposes  to  give  the  subtle  and  profound  sdra  (essence)  of  '  all  the  books '. 
The  Apheggusaradipam,  according  to  the  Mandalay  MS.,  was  composed 
at  Hamsavatl  by  the  dcariya  of  Queen  Sivall.     He  was  Mahasuvannadlpa, 
the  son  of  Parakkamabahalaraja. 

3  For  Kaccayanabheda  and  Kaccayanasara  see  SVD.,  verse  1250  ;  GV., 
p.  74  ;    Forchhammer,  List,  pp.  xx  and  xxi,  where  the  author  is  called 
Rasa  of  Thatone.     The  name  Mahayasa  is  given  by  Nevill  on  Sinhalese 
authority.     In  Fausboll's  Catalogue,  p.  47,  the  name  is  Rassa  ;   in  GV., 
p.  74,  Dhammananda  ;   the  Pitakatthamain  (p.  69)  says  that  Mahayasa 
was  the  author. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  37 

another  by  Saddhammavilasa  of  Pagan,1  whose  tlka  on  Kacca- 
yanasara  is  known  as  the  Sammohavinasinl.  Yasa's  later 
commentators  were  scholars  of  Burma.  Among  them  we  shall 
find  the  well  -  known  names  of  Ariyalamkara  and  Tipitaka- 
lamkara  of  Ava.2 

As  to  the  date  of  Kaccayanasara,  we  may  say  that  it  probably 
was  not  written  before  the  thirteenth  century,  as  it  contains 
quotations  from  the  twelfth  century  treatises  Balavatara, 
Rupasiddhi,  Culanirutti,  and  Sambandhacinta.3  On  the  other 
hand,  it  was  known  not  only  in  Pegu  but  in  Upper  Burma 
by  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  as  we  know  from  the 
fact  that  a  copy  was  presented  to  a  monastery  at  Pagan  in 
1442.* 

Probably  Mahayasa  belongs  to  the  reign  of  Hsin-hpyu-shin 
(Pali:  Setibhinda),  who  established  his  capital  at  Pegu  in  1370. 
Hsin-hpyu-shin  finished  his  reign  in  comparative  calm,5  and 
was,  after  his  manner,  religious.  There  was  even  a  temporary 
peace  between  Pegu  and  Burma,  but  when  Setibhinda  died  his 
successors  plunged  into  war,  and  a  state  of  things  grievously 
unfriendly  to  scholarship  began  again.  But  in  the  fifteenth 
century  came  a  great  revival  of  religion  under  Dhammaceti, 
King  of  Pegu,  who  reigned  822-53  B.E.  (A.D.  1460-9 1).6 

Dhammaceti's  reign  was  doubly  memorable.  He  was  famous 
far  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  country  for  his  statesmanship 
and  magnificence,  and  renowned  in  the  whole  Buddhist  world 
for  his  piety.  The  story  of  his  elevation  to  the  throne  gives 
us  the  impression  of  a  very  unusual  personality.  He  was  not 

1  Forchhammer,  Report,  Pagan,  p.  2. 

-  Ariyalamkara's  tlka  on  Kaccayanabheda  is  entitled  Saratthavikasinl. 

3  Written  in  Ceylon  ;  see  above,  p.  22. 

4  See  Appendix  to  this  chapter. 

5  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  27  ;    Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  67. 

6  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  290.     Forbes  remarks  (Legendary  History, 

§.  31)  that  the  various  copies  of  the  Talaing  histories  differ  as  to  the 
ates  of  the  several  monarchs  reigning  in  Pegu  'between  710  and  900  or 
A.D.  1370-1538'.  The  Burmese  era  quoted  here  is  the  Kaliyuga  (as  the 
word  is  usually  employed  in  the  Sasanavamsa),  reckoning  from  638  A.D. 
(See  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  14.)  The  date  given  in  the  Sasanavamsa 
for  Dhammaceti's  accession  is  A.B.  2002,  which  corresponds  to  A.D.  1458. 
I  must  correct  here  a  blunder  in  my  edition,  where  202  (dvisate)  should 
be  2002  (dvisahasse).  (Sas.,  p.  43.) 


38  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA. 

of  the  blood  royal,  and  came  first  from  Burma  as  a  simple 
monk,  one  of  two  who  had  aided  the  flight  of  a  Peguan  princess 
from  the  Burmese  Court.  This  princess,  married  against  her 
will  to  the  King  of  Ava,  was  afterwards  the  famous  Queen 
Shin-sau-bu.  When  she  assumed  the  sovereignty  in  Pegu 
(1453  A.D.)  the  sometime  monk  Dhammaceti,  who  had  so 
devotedly  befriended  her,  became  her  chief  minister  and  later 
her  son-in-law  and  successor.1  Dhammaceti  was  not  only  a 
protector  of  the  Order  he  had  quitted,  but  a  reformer  in  the 
orthodox  sense.  Something  of  the  ecclesiastic  reappears  in 
the  monarch's  attachment  to  the  Sihalasamgha,  an  attachment 
to  which  the  celebrated  Kalyani  inscriptions  bear  witness. 
These  inscriptions,  found  in  a  suburb  of  Pegu  city,  were 
carved  on  stone  tablets  by  order  of  Dhammaceti,  and  are  a 
very  interesting  chapter  in  the  Pali  records  of  Buddhism. 
They  relate  how  the  king  determined  to  give  the  Order  in 
Rama  nil  a  a  duly  consecrated  place  for  ceremonies,  and  how, 
after  earnest  study  of  authoritative  texts,  he  sent  a  mission 
to  Ceylon  with  this  object.  The  monks  sent  by  him  received 
the  upasampada  ordination  afresh  from  the  Mahavihiira 
fraternity  within  consecrated  boundaries  on  the  Kalyani  River, 
near  Colombo,  and  on  their  return  consecrated  the  enclosure 
in  Pegu,  henceforth  known  as  the  Kalyimislma.2  Within  these 
boundaries  the  upasampadd  could  be  conferred  as  from  the 
direct  spiritual  successors  of  Mahinda,  the  great  missionary  to 
Ceylon,  and  thus  the  link  was  restored  in  the  '  succession  of 
teachers'  broken  (said  the  Sihalasamgha  doctors)  in  Ramanna. 

1  See  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  84 ;  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  32. 

2  See  Taw  Sein  Ko's  Preliminary  Study  of  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions  of 
Dhammaceti,  1476  A.D.     '  The  ceremonial  [for  consecration  of  a  simd]  has 
been  interpreted  in  various  ways  by  the  commentaries  and  scholia  on  the 
Mahavagga,  such  as  the  Vinayatthakatha,  Saratthadlpani,  VimativinodanI, 
Vinayatlka   by  Vajirabuddhi  thera,  Kankhavitarani,   Vinayavinicchaya- 
pakarana,  Vinayasamgahapakarana,  and  the  Slmalamkarasamgaha  ;  and 
the  object  of  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions  is  to  give  an  authoritative  ruling  on 
these  varied  opinions  and  to  prescribe  a  ceremonial  for  the  consecration  of 
a  stma  which  shall  be  in  accordance  with  what  is  laid  down  by  Gautama 
Buddha,  and  which  at  the  same  time  shall  not  materially  conflict  with  the 
interpretations  of  the  commentators'  (Ind.  Ant.,  xxii,  p.  11).     The  simd 
is  described  in  this  article  as  a  boundary  formed  by  pits  filled  with  water ; 
the  appropriate  Kammavaca  are  chanted  as  the  consecrating  ceremony. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  39 

We  must  not  forget  how  vital  this  matter  appeared  to  Burmese 
Buddhists.  The  Order,  in  so  far  as  such  questions  had  gained 
importance  for  it,  was  somewhat  less  of  a  free  fraternity  and 
more  of  a  '  church ',  and  the  point  of  view  taken  by  the  monks 
was  an  ecclesiastical  one.  The  part  taken  by  the  king  is 
worlhy  of  notice. 

In  the  case  of  the  Kalyanislma  Dhammaceti  used  his  royal 
authority  to  support  his  own  deep  conviction,  and,  as  often 
happened  in  its  history,  the  orthodox  Sangha  had  the  temporal 
power  to  some  extent  at  its  service.  Not  that  the  Sangha  in 
Burma  has  ever  claimed  authority  over  consciences  (i.e.  the 
right  to  persecute).  It  has  been  as  all  other  truly  free  associa- 
tions, and,  with  time,  has  known  divisions  and  developed 
factions,  and  a  sect  has  sometimes  had  powerful  supporters 
who  were  not  content  to  stop  short  at  a  moral  ascendancy  over 
man.  The  perfect  tolerance  inculcated  by  the  religion  was 
hard  for  some  of  these  strenuous  minds  to  accept,  and  even 
Dhammaceti,  though  he  was  far  indeed  from  being  a  despot  in 
religion,  was  anxious  to  establish  orthodoxy  in  his  kingdom. 
The  Kalyani  inscriptions  show  us  to  what  degree  a  religious 
superiority  over  the  rest  of  the  community  was  claimed  by 
those  who  had  received  the  Ceylon  ordination  and  were  called 
the  Sihajasamgha. 

An  interesting  literary  point  is  the  mention  of  the  standard 
authorities  on  Vinaya  subjects  at  the  time,1  and  details  as  to 
the  instruction  required  for  novices  and  monks.  These  treatises 
are  mostly  of  Sinhalese  authorship. 

Besides  those  of  an  older  period  we  hear  of  the  well-known 
Vajlrabuddhitlka  (sometimes  called  the  Vinayagandhi  or 
Vinayaganthi),  a  tlka  or  explanation  of  difficult  passages  in 

1  e.g.  the  Saratthadipani  mostly  by  Sariputta  of  Ceylon  (Sas.,  p.  33 ; 
Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  12),  the  Vimativinodanl  by  Kassapa,  of  the 
Tamil  country  [Damilarattha]  (Sas.,  p.  33  ;  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  13),  the 
Vinaya  tika  by  Vajirabuddhi  (Sas.,  p.  33 ;  GV.,  p.  60),  the  Vinayavinicchaya 
by  Buddhadatta  of  Ceylon  (Sas.,  p.  33 ;  GV.,  p.  59 ;  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  18), 
the  Vinayasamgaha  by  Sariputta  of  Ceylon  (Sas.,  p.  33  ;  Cat.  Mand.  MSS., 
p.  7).  The  Slinalamkara  pakarana  of  Chapata  was  a  result  of  the  Talaing 
thera's  studies  in  Ceylon.  Two  Vinaya  treatises  (the  Patimokkhavisodham 
and  Simabandhani  tlka)  may  belong  to  this  period,  but  neither  dates  nor 
authors  are  mentioned.  See  P.TH.,  p.  44. 


40  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

the  Vinaya  commentaries.  The  author,  Mahavajirabuddhi  of 
Ceylon,  was  a  contemporary  of  Dhammaceti,  to  whom  he  sent 
a  copy  of  his  work. 

§2.  Buddhist  Literature  in  Panya  (Vijayapura},  Ava  (Ratana- 
pura),  Taungu  (Jeyyavaddhana),  and  Laos. — Ariyavamsa. — 
Grammar,  Poetry,  and  Abhidhamrna  in  the  fifteenth  and 
sixteenth  centuries. 

We  must  now  follow  the  rather  faint  track  of  Burmese 
literary  history  from  the  time  of  the  revolt  and  separation  of 
the  Southern  provinces. 

The  chronicles  of  Burma  tell  us  of  a  continual  struggle 
between  different  dynasties  and  the  hostile  races  they  repre- 
sented —  Burmese,  Talaing,  and  Shan.  The  Shims,  forced 
southward  and  westward  by  the  Mongol  armies  of  Kublai  Khan, 
had  become  a  powerful  element  in  Burma  in  the  thirteenth 
century.1  They  had  penetrated  to  the  south,  and  the  Talaing 
population  had  accepted  in  Wagaru  a  ruler  who  was  probably 
of  half-Shan  extraction.  In  Burma  the  King  of  Pagan 
(Kyaswa)  was  deposed  in  1298  by  the  three  Shan  governors 
whose  territories  surrounded  his  diminished  and  enfeebled 
kingdom.  The  three,  being  brothers,  held  together  and  founded 
the  dynasty  that  reigned  at  Myinzaing  (Khandhapura),2  Panya 
(Vijayapura),  and  Sagaing  (Jeyyapura)  till  the  prince  Thado- 
minbya,  who  was  believed  to  be  of  Burmese  royal  race,  made 
himself  master  of  Upper  Burma  and  founded  Ava  in  1364.3 

Ava  (Ratanapura),  though  not  always  of  great  importance  as 
a  capital,  remained  a  religious  and  literary  centre  for  many 
generations  of  authors.  It  is  not  necessary  for  our  present 
purpose  to  look  further  into  the  records  of  war,  revolts,  counter- 
revolts,  marriages,  and  murders  of  those  times,  except  when 
such  events  are  connected  with  religious  history  and,  by  a  rare 
chance,  the  name  of  a  saintly  celebrity  or  the  title  of  a  book 

1  Forbes,  Legendary  History,  p.  28 ;  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  52. 

2  Sas.,  p.   81.      'The  three  brothers,  having  deposed'  Kittitara  in  the 
year  664  of  the  Kaliyuga,  set  up  their  rule  in  Khandhapura.' 

3  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  62.     Sas.,  p.  90,  '  in  the  year  722  of  the 
Kaliyuga.' 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  41 

can  be  rescued  from  the  tangle.  The  city  of  Rataiiapura  did 
not  entirely  supersede  Pagan,  Panya,  and  Sagaing  in  religious 
importance.  From  all  we  can  learn  about  the  place  and  date 
of  the  Pali  works  possible  to  place  between  the  founding  of 
Ava  and  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  it  seems  that 
scholars  were  always  to  be  found  busy  in  the  monasteries 
near  the  chief  cities.  However  turbulent  the  times  may  have 
been,  the  reigning  families  protected  the  Order  and  loaded  it 
with  bounty.  Their  example  was  followed  by  men  and  women 
of  rank  and  wealth.1 

The  Siisanavamsa  gives  us  a  glimpse  into  the  life  of  a  monastic 
scholar  of  those  days  in  the  story  of  Ariyavamsa,  a  celebrated 
teacher  and  author  of  the  fifteenth  century.2  Ariyavamsa,  who 
was  of  Pagan  and  a  member  of  the  Chapata  sect,  settled  in 
Ava  in  the  reign  of  Narapati  (1442-68)  .3  Before  he  became 
famous  he  went  to  Sagaing  to  study  grammar  with  the  learned 
thera  known  as  Ye-din  ('the  water-carrier').  The  chronicler 
tells  us  how  Ye-din  came  by  his  name.  Either  to  restrain 
his  own  inclination  for  talk  or  because  he  found  the  brethren 
too  talkative,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  keeping  his  mouth  filled 
with  water  when  others  were  present.  When  the  young  monk 
from  Pagan  first  arrived  at  his  monastery  there  seemed  little 
hope  that  the  silent  Water-carrier  would  discourse  to  him 
on  grammar.  But  Ariyavamsa  was  not  to  be  discouraged. 
He  came  daily  to  the  vihdra,  performing  all  the  services  of 
a  disciple  for  Ye-din,  till  the  latter  broke  his  silence  to  ask 
the  reason  of  the  thera's  visit.  Ariyavamsa  craved  leave  to 
study  with  the  famous  acnriya,  since,  though  he  had  studied 
many  texts,  he  had  not  grasped  their  meaning,  and,  till  then, 
upndesa  (exposition)  of  other  masters  had  not  helped  him. 
Ye-din  was  touched  and  consented  to  give  some  of  his  time  to 
the  inquirer,  and  then  explained  the  AbhidhammatthavibhavanI 4 

1  See  the  very  interesting  collection,  Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya,  and 
Ava,  edited  by  Taw  Sein  Ko  and  translated  by  Tun  Nyein  of  the  Burma 
Secretariat ;  Rangoon,  1899.     The  list  of  works  mentioned  in  an  inscription 
of  1442  A.D.  is  very  valuable  for  the  chronology  of  works  that  we  could  riot 
otherwise  date.     See  Appendix  to  this  chapter. 

2  Sas.,  pp.  95  ft'.  3  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  285. 
4  Commentary  on  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha. 


42  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

to  him  with  '  various  methods  of  exposition '.  Ariyavamsa  was 
soon  able  to  tell  his  preceptor  that,  thanks  to  his  teaching, 
his  pupil  had  grasped  all  the  knowledge  he  had  missed  till 
then.  The  acariya  then  charged  him  to  do  his  part  in  helping 
others  by  writing  a  commentary  on  the  text  he  felt  best  fitted 
to  expound.  Ariyavamsa  chose  the  AbhidhammatthavibhavanI, 
and  composed  a  commentary  on  it  entitled  Manisaramaiijusa. 
While  writing  it  he  submitted  it,  chapter  by  chapter,  to  the 
criticism  of  his  fellow-monks,  reading  it  aloud  to  them  as  they  sat 
assembled  on  uposatha  days  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Puiifiacetiya. 

A  very  charming  little  anecdote  is  told  of  his  readiness  to 
accept  correction.  On  one  occasion  a  monk  seated  in  the 
assembly  twice  uttered  a  loud  sound  of  disapproval  during 
the  reading.  Ariyavamsa  noted  the  passages  that  had  called 
forth  these  protests,  and  also  found  out  where  the  objector 
lived.  Returned  to  his  own  vihara  he  carefully  reviewed  his 
work  and  found  two  things  to  correct — a  fault  of  composition 
(repeating  the  same  explanation  twice)  and  a  fault  of  grammar 
(a  mistake  in  the  gender  of  a  word).  He  corrected  them, 
sent  for  the  other  monk,  and  mildly  asked  him  what  fault  he 
found  with  the  work  that  had  cost  the  writer  the  intense  labour 
of  long  days  and  nights  to  compose.  The  other  replied  bluntly 
that  there  was  little  fault  to  find  ;  the  book  was  perfect  as  to  its 
words  and  sense,  but  he  had  observed  two  faults,  an  unnecessary 
repetition  and  a  wrong  gender,  and  he  would  not  let  them  pass 
without  protest.  And  Ariyavamsa  rejoiced  in  his  heart  and 
took  off  his  garment  of  fine  cloth  and  gave  it  to  the  other, 
saying,  '  With  this  do  I  pay  reverence  to  thy  knowledge.' 
Few  as  the  words  are,  there  shines  through  them  the  scholar's 
clear  and  simple  soul. 

Ariyavamsa  lived  and  wrote  for  some  time  at  Sagaing,  but 
taught  afterwards  at  Ava,  where  the  king  was  sometimes  among 
his  hearers.  One  of  his  most  important  later  works  was  another 
Abhidhamma  study  entitled  Manidlpa,  a  tlka  on  the  Atthasiilinl1 

1  Commentary  on  the  Dhammasangan!  of  the  Abhidhammapitaka.  See 
Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xviii  ;  GV.,  pp.  65,  67,  75  ;  Sas.,  p.  98;  Fausboll, 
Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  34.  P.TH.  (p.  40)  gives  1442  A.D.  as  the  date  of  the 
Manidlpa. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  43 

of  Buddhaghosa.  He  also  composed  a  grammatical  treatise,  the 
Gandhabharana,1  and  a  study  of  the  Jataka,  Jataka  visodhana. 

These  works  were  composed,  according  to  the  old  scholarly 
tradition,  in  Pali ;  but  Ariyavamsa  was  a  teacher  not  content 
to  write  only  for  the  learned.  He  stands  out  in  the  Sasana- 
vamsa's  record  of  literary  theras  as  the  first  name  connected 
with  a  metaphysical  work  in  the  vernacular.  He  composed  an 
atthayojana  or  interpretation  in  Burmese  of  a  commentary  called 
the  Anutlkii  on  the  Abhidhamma.2  The  Gandhavamsa  attributes 
another  work  entitled  Mahanissara  3  to  Ariyavamsa,  but  there 
is  no  mention  of  it  in  the  Sasanavamsa. 

Ariyavamsa  may  have  been  still  living  when  a  new  writer 
came  to  Ava  whose  talents  gained  him  the  favour  of  the  king.4 
This  was  Sllavamsa,  of  Taung-dwin-gyl,  who  had  already  com- 
posed a  poetical  version  of  the  Sumedhakatha,5  a  poem  entitled 
Buddhalamkara,  and  another,  apparently  on  his  native  city, 
dignified  by  its  Pali  name  Pabbatabbhantara.  Sllavamsa  was 
thirty  years  of  age  when  he  came  to  the  capital.  The  king, 
after  the  manner  of  royal  patrons  of  religion,  established  him 
in  a  vihara  where  other  honoured  teachers  had  lived  before 
him,  and  there  he  lectured  on  the  sacred  texts.  He,  like 
Ariyavamsa,  laboured  to  spread  religious  learning  by  inter- 
preting Pali  texts  in  the  vernacular.  A  Burmese  atthayojana 
of  the  Nettipakarana,6  and  another  edifying  work,  the  Para- 
yanavatthu,  prove  that  he  was  not  merely  a  poet,  though  the 
author  of  the  Sasanavamsa  seems  rather  inclined  to  reproach 
him  for  his  attachment  to  verse. 

1  The  Gandhabharana  (otherwise  Ganthabharana  or  Gandabharana)  was 
studied  and  glossed  by  well-known  Burmese  scholars  of  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  century,  and  re-edited  among  standard  works  recently. 

2  The  work  generally  known  as  the  Amitlka  was  written  by  Dhamma- 
pala  to  supplement  the  original  tika  (of  Ananda)  on  the  Abhidhamma. 
See  the  Sasanavamsa's  list  of  commentaries  composed  in  Ceylon  (Sas.,  p.  33). 

3  I   am  not  sure   that  this  word   should  not  be  Mahanissaya  (chief 
commentary   or  gloss   in    Burmese)  ;   the  work   would  probably   be   the 
atthayojana,  of  which  mention  has  been  made  above. 

4  Dutiya-min-khaung  or  Sirisudhammarajadhipati,  who  began  to  reign 
A.D.  1470.     Sas.,  p.  98,  'the  year  842  of  the  Kaliyuga.'     Phayre,  History 
of  Burma,  p.  285. 

5  The  story  of  the  ascetic  Sumedha  forms  part  of  the  Introduction 
(Nidana)  to  the  Jataka  commentary.     See  Fausboll's  edition  of  the  Jataka, 
vol.  i,  pp.  2-28.  6  See  pp.  5,  8. 


44  THE    PALI    LITERATURE   OF    BURMA 

Another  poet  of  Ava,  Ratthasara,1  born  in  1468,  composed 
metrical  versions  of  the  Bhuridattajittaka,2  Hatthipiilajataka,3 
and  Sam  vara  jataka,4  besides  a  number  of  other  poems.  He 
may  have  been  a  good  verse-maker  and  the  tone  of  his  poems 
religious,  but  he  comes  under  the  same  mild  censure  as  his 
brother-poet.  In  fact,  the  old-time  chroniclers  (pordnd)  exclude 
these  two  from  the  succession  of  theras  precisely  because  they 
not  only  wrote  verses  but  recited  them,  and  instructed  their 
pupils  in  the  same  art  of  recitation.  The  Sasanavamsa  gravely 
explains  that  this  is  a  question  of  discipline  too  large  to  be 
treated  in  the  chronicle,  and  we  are  referred  to  a  modern 
Vinaya  treatise,  the  TJposathavinicchaya,  for  details.  The 
composing  and  reciting  of  poems  was  apparently  a  transgression 
of  the  religious  rule  (*fkk/i6pada)  concerning  singing  and 
dancing.  Taking  part  in  or  looking  on  at  such  performances 
is  forbidden  to  monks  (sanumd)  and  all  those  under  temporary 
vows  (uposatliika),  who  have  undertaken  a  stricter  self-denial 
than  the  ordinary  layman.5 

Sllavamsa  and  Ratthasiira  were  probably  not  the  only  poets 
of  the  monasteries  in  those  days,  but  unfortunately  such 
authors  are  far  less  likely  to  find  mention,  at  least  in  religious 
chronicles,  than  the  grammarians  and  expounders  of  Vinaya 
and  Abhidhamma. 

The  Kayaviratigatha  mentioned  in  the  Gandhavamsa,6  but 
not  in  the  Sasanavamsa,  perhaps  belongs  to  this  epoch.  It  is 
described  as  a  beautiful  Pali  poem  of  274  verses  on  the  subjection 
of  sensuality.7 

1  Sas.,  p.  99,  'in  the  year  830  of  the  Kaliyuga.' 

2  Jataka,  No.  543.     See  Fausboll's  edition  of  the  Jataka  with  its  com- 
mentary, vol.  vi,  pp.  157-219. 

3  Jataka,  No.  509.     Fausboll,  iv,  pp.  473-91. 

4  Jataka,  No.  462.     Fausboll,  iv,  pp.  130-6. 

5  The  Buddhist  laity  are  only  bound  to  observe  five  fundamental  rules 
of  conduct,  whereas  the  Order  observes  ten.     A  layman  may  bind  himself 
to  keep  eight  of  the  ten  on  the  Uposatha  days  (occurring  four  times 
a  month).     See  Kern,  Man.  Ind.  Buddh.,  p.  70  ;   Childers'  Dictionary  of 
the  Pali  Language  (articles  '  Sllam '  and  '  Uposatho  '). 

8  GV.,  pp.  65,  75. 

7  A  tlka  on  it  is  ascribed  to  a  monk  of  Pakudhanagara  (Pegu  city  ?). 
See  the  British  Museum  Catalogue  of  Pali  MSS.  and  Mr.  Nevill's  note  on 
the  copy  in  his  collection. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  45 

Till  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century  religion  seems  to 
have  been  respected  in  the  Burmese  kingdoms  notwithstanding 
their  chronic  state  of  disturbance  and  change.  But  when  the 
Shan  chief  of  Monyin,  after  years  of  raiding  and  plundering, 
overthrew  the  King  of  Ava  l  and  placed  his  own  son  Thohanbwa 
on  {he  throne,  even  the  Buddhist  Order  was  cruelly  persecuted. 
To  Thohanbwa  any  community  of  monks  meant  a  body  of 
unmarried,  disciplined  men,  far  more  dangerous  to  a  despotic 
and  hated  government  than  fathers  of  families,  and  he 
deliberately  set  about  exterminating  the  hapless  mendicants. 
In  the  massacres  that  followed  pagodas  and  monasteries  went 
up  in  flames  and  precious  libraries  were  destroyed.2  But 
even  in  the  terror  and  desolation  around  him  the  thera 
Saddhammakitti,  a  pupil  of  Ariyavamsa,  was  faithful  to  the 
cause  of  scholarship.  He  believed,  as  Arahanta  had  believed 
and  preached  to  the  Burmese  conqueror  of  Pegu  centuries 
before,  that  the  fate  of  religion  was  bound  up  with  the  right 
understanding  of  the  sacred  texts,  and  that  this  must  rest  on 
a  right  knowledge  of  their  language.  And  he  did  the  best 
he  could  for  the  faith  in  those  calamitous  days  by  compiling 
the  famous  vocabulary  Ekakkharakosa.3 

Saddhammakitti  died  at  Taungu  (Ketumatl),  then  the  capital 
of  an  independent  kingdom4  and  a  refuge  for  great  numbers 
of  the  Burmese  who  had  fled  from  the  cruel  tyranny  of 
Thohanbwa.  The  King  of  Taungu,  Mahasirijeyyasura,5 
protected  religion  and  built  cetiyas  and  vihdras.6  Thus,  in 
Taungu,  where  the  Order  was  safe  and  in  peace,  not,  as  in 
Ava,  barely  surviving  a  relentless  persecution,  it  was  possible 
to  discuss  points  of  discipline.  And  a  controversy  arose  on 
the  use  of  fermented  drinks.  Intoxicants  are  forbidden  to  the 

1  Maharajadhipati  (1501-26).     Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  87,  92,  93. 

2  Sas.,  pp.  76, 100.    The  Sasanavamsa  gives  the  date  of  these  dire  events 
as  '  the  year  887  of  the  Kaliyuga '  (=  A.D.  1525). 

3  The  Ekakkharakosa  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Gandhavanisa.     (In  the 
Mandalay    collection    at    the    India    Office    there    is    a    work    entitled 
Sirivicittalamkara  by  a  Saddhammakitti,  but  whether  by  the  author  of 
the  Ekakkharakosa  I  cannot  say.     See  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  52.) 

4  Phayre,  history  of  Burma,  pp.  90  ff. 

s  Came  to  the  throne  in  1485  and  reigned  forty-five  years. 
8  Sas.,  p.  80. 


46  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

Order,  but  the  commentaries  on  the  Vinaya  (for  example,  the 
Kankhavitaram  of  Buddhaghosa)  left  it  doubtful  whether 
the  juice  of  the  palm  and  cocoanut  trees  could  lawfully  be 
drunk  by  the  religious  or  not.  Some  maintained  that  such 
juices  were  lawful  if  drunk  as  they  flowed  from  the  tree, 
others  denied  it,  as  some  commentaries  spoke  of  the  '  elements 
of  intoxication '  latent  in  the  seed,  and  the  dispute  continued 
till  the  thera  Mahaparakkama,  '  seated  in  the  midst,'  settled 
the  question.  According  to  his  judgment,  which  was  accepted 
by  the  disputants,  the  juices  in  question  might  be  drunk,  but 
only  fresh  from  the  tree.  Mahaparakkama  afterwards  treated 
the  whole  subject  in  a  work  entitled  Suravinicchaya l  (Decisions 
concerning  Intoxicants). 

It  would  seem  that  religion  was  not  long  or  greatly  in 
danger  at  Panya,  as  the  Sasanavamsa  assures  us  that  many 
authors  wrote  there.2  Only  two  names  are  given,  however — 
Saddhammaguru,  the  author  of  Saddavutti,  and  Vijitavi, 
celebrated  for  two  grammatical  treatises,  a  Kaccayanavannana, 
or  commentary  on  the  Sandhikappa  (section  treating  of 
euphonic  combination  of  letters)  of  Kaccayana's  grammar,3 
and  the  Vacakopadesa,  still  recognized  by  Burmese  scholars. 
The  Vacakopadesa  '  treats  the  grammatical  categories  from 
a  logical  point  of  view'  (Oldenberg).  These  familiar  names 
are  missing  from  the  Gandhavamsa.  The  MS.  of  a  tlka  on 
Vacakopadesa  in  the  India  Office  4  gives  the  date  of  this 
treatise  as  A.D.  1606.  In  1530  began  a  more  auspicious 
epoch  for  the  Order.  A  warlike  and  able  ruler,  Ta-bin- 
shwe-hti,  succeeded  Mahasirijeyyasfira  as  King  of  Taungu.5 

Ta-bin-shwe-hti  conquered  Pegu,  where  he  not  only  pro- 
tected religion  but  added  to  his  own  glory  by  his  magnificent 
foundations.  In  his  reign  a  revolution  overthrew  the  Shan 

i  Sas.,  p.  81.  2  Sas.,  p.  90. 

3  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  45  ;  SVD.,  verse  1242.     The  Vacako- 
padesa is  mentioned  without  the  author's  name  in  Forchhammer's  List, 
p.  xxii. 

4  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library,  p.  104.     The  com- 
mentary on  Vacakopadesa,  by  another  Vijitavi,  was  written  at  Sagaing. 
The  two  works  and  the  author  are  mentioned  P.TH.,  p.  71. 

6  1530  A.D.,  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  93. 


THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  47 

prince  reigning  at  Ava,  who  had  cruelly  persecuted  the 
monks,  and  before  many  years  the  Shan  rule  succumbed 
before  Bayin  Naung.  Ava  was  taken  by  the  Burmese  under 
this  famous  soldier's  command  in  1555. 

Bayin  Naung,1  one  of  the  most  striking  figures  in  the 
history  of  Burma,  the  sometime  general  and  vice- regent  of 
Ta-bin-shwe-hti  and  successor  to  the  throne,  united  Burma 
and  Pegu  into  one  empire  and  carried  his  conquests  into  the 
Northern  Shan  States,  Laos  and  Siam.  He  was  a  zealous 
Buddhist,  zealous,  indeed,  to  intolerance,  and  forced  an  outward 
profession  of  Buddhism  on  all  his  subjects,  native  or  foreign.2 
Nevertheless,  all  we  hear  of  him  in  the  Sasanavamsa  is  that 
in  1578  'the  Lord  of  many  white  elephants',3  then  at  the 
height  of  his  power  but  near  his  end,  appointed  his  son  regent 
of  Laos  and  sent  the  thera  Saddhammacakkasami  with  him  to 
*  purify  religion '  in  the  conquered  province.  A  few  names 
of  scholarly  monks  and  their  works  are  associated  with  Laos 
in  this  period.  Nanavilasa  wrote  the  Sankhyapakasaka,4  and 
Sirimangala  a  tika  on  that  work  and  the  commentary 
Mangaladlpanl.  A  thera  whose  name  is  not  mentioned  wrote 
the  Uppatasanti.5 

At  HamsavatI  some  work  was  done  in  the  way  of  com- 
menting on  the  Abhidhamma.  The  thera  Saddhammalamkara 
wrote  the  Patthanasaradipanl,  and  Mahanama  a  tika  entitled 
Madhusaratthadlpan!.6  These  works  are  mentioned  without 
any  date  in  the  Sasanavamsa,  which  by  the  way,  differing 
from  the  Pitakatthamain,  gives  Ananda  as  the  author  of  the 

1  The  '  Branginoco '  of  the  Portuguese.     We  have  not  only  Oriental  but 
European  testimony  to  the  magnificence  of  his  reign. 

2  See  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  108  ff. 

3  Sas.,  p.  51. 

4  Nanavilasa  wrote  the  Sankhyapakasaka  at  Ayuddha,  P.TH.,  p.  61. 

5  A  work  consulted  by  Minayeff  and  mentioned  in  his  Recherches.     As 
Dr.  Barnett  has  pointed  out  to  me,  from  this  title  (Sanskrit  :    Utptitasanti) 
the  work  would  appear  to  treat  of  rites  or  charms  for  averting  evil  omens 
or  public  calamities.    For  santi,  in  the  sense  of  expiatory  rite,  see  Sadvims'a- 
brahmana  (Prap.  v),  edited  by  H.  F.  Eelsingh,  Leiden,  1908,  cf.  p.  51  below 
and  Appendix. 

6  Sas.,  p.  48  ;  P.TH.,  pp.  40,  41.     In  the  latest  edition  (by  Hsaya  U 
Hpye,  Rangoon,  1908)  the  author's  name  appears  as  Mahanauda. 


48  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

last-named,  a  tlka  on  the  Abhidhamma.     The  Pitakatthamain 
places  both  in  the  reign  of  Bayin  Naung. 

The  Order  never  again  suffered  from  a  ruler  in  Burma  as 
in  the  evil  days  under  Thohanbwa.  From  the  'time  when 
the  Shan  rule  was  finally  demolished  by  Burmese  kings,  more 
favourable  days  began  for  religion.  The  seventeenth  century 
saw  some  further  changes,  which  we  shall  note  as  we  proceed  ; 
a  religious  literature  in  the  vernacular,  in  the  Burmese 
language  itself,  grew  up  round  the  older  texts,  but  the 
earlier  traditions  of  Pali  scholarship  always  found  faithful 
followers. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY  —  PEGU  AND  UPPER  BURMA  — 
THE  SCHOLARS  or  AVA  AND  SAGAING — TIPITAKALAMKARA, 
ARIYALAMKARA,  AND  OTHERS 

By  the  year  1617  Burma  and  Pegu,  welded  into  one  empire 
by  Bayin  Naung's  conquests,  had  already  been  separated  once 
and  forced  into  a  second  union  by  the  conqueror's  grandson 
Mahadhammaraja.1 

Pegu  city  (HamsavatI),  as  in  Bayin  Naung's  time,  was  the 
capital,  and  we  can  understand  the  Burmese  king's  popularity 
in  the  south  when  we  learn  (but  not  from  the  Sasanavamsa) 
that  he  had  succeeded  in  breaking  up  the  audacious  rule 
of  the  Portuguese  adventurer  Philip  de  Brito,  whose  govern- 
ment of  Pegu  had  been  carried  on  with  the  methods  of 
a  brutal  buccaneer.  De  Brito,  with  wanton  disrespect  for 
the  country's  religion,  had  destroyed  pagodas,  and  we  cannot 
suppose  that  he  spared  monasteries  or  libraries.  We  do  not 
know  if  even  the  Buddhist  monks  interceded  for  him  when 
he  was  vanquished  by  their  champion,  taken  prisoner,  and 
condemned  to  an  agonizing  death. 

There  is  no  record  in  the  Sasanavamsa  of  Pali  works 
produced  in  this  reign.  The  doings,  literary  or  otherwise, 
of  the  Sangha  of  Pegu  are  probably  not  well  known  to  the 
author  of  our  Burmese  chronicle.  Perhaps,  too,  he  is  influenced 
by  a  certain  rivalry  in  scholarship  which  made  the  Talaing 
monks  unwilling  to  believe  in  the  learning  of  Burma,  while 
those  of  the  upper  country  were  equally  sure  of  their  own 
superiority.2 

It  is  almost  touching  to  read  in  the  Sasanavamsa  the  reason 
(as  it  first  appeared  to  the  good  monks  of  the  south)  why  the 
kings  of  Bayin  Naung's  dynasty  preferred  Pegu  as  the  royal 
residence,  even  after  union  with  Burma :  '  As  for  the  monks 
in  Burma,  there  are  none  expert  in  the  sacred  texts  and 
learned  in  the  Vedasatthas.  Therefore,  hearing  this,  the 

1  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  128.  2  Sas.,  p.  106. 


50  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

King1  sent  a  message  to  the  thera  dwelling  at  the  Four- 
storied  Vihara,2  saying :  "  Send  hither  to  Ramaiiua  some 
Mendicants,  from  thirty  to  forty  years  of  age,  expert  in  the 
sacred  texts  and  learned  in  the  Vedasatthas."  So  the  thera 
sent  Tipitakalamkara,  Tilokalamkara,  and  TisasanJilamkara, 
with  thirty  Bhikkhus.  When  they  arrived  at  Pegu  the  King 
built  a  vihara  for  them  on  the  Eastern  side  of  the  Modho 
cetiya,  and  gave  it  to  them.  And  on  Upomtha  days  he 
summoned  those  monks  of  Ramanna  who  were  expert  in  the 
sacred  texts  and  learned  in  the  Vedasatthas,  and  commanded 
them  to  hold  a  discussion  with  the  three  theras.  And  the 
monks  of  Ramaniia  said  :  "  Formerly,  indeed,  we  thought  there 
were  no  monks  in  Burma  expert  in  the  sacred  texts  and 
learned  in  the  Yedasatthas.  But  lo !  these  Burmese  monks 
are  exceedingly  expert  and  learned."  It  seems  to  have  been 
a  triumph  for  Burma. 

An  interesting  point  in  the  little  story  is  the  mention  of  the 
Vedasastras  side  by  side  with  the  Buddhist  sacred  texts.  It 
is  clear,  from  the  list  of  works  given  to  the  libraries  of  Burmese 
monasteries 3  and  from  various  allusions  in  the  Pali  literature, 
that  Brahmanic  works  were  studied  in  the  viharas,  and  we 
know  that  some  were  translated  into  Burmese.  But  this  branch 
of  learning  was  considered  inferior.  There  is  a  mention  in 
the  Sasanavamsa  of  two  monks  living  in  the  reign  of  Maha- 
dhammaraja*  who  gained  the  king's  favour  by  their  aptitude 
for  state  affairs.  They  were  vedasattliakovida  too — expert  in 
the  Vedasatthas — and  therefore,  no  doubt,  acute  and  useful 
advisers ;  but  the  Order  disapproved  of  them.  They  are 
pariyattipatipattisu  mandd  —  weak  in  the  sacred  doctrine  and 
practice.  They  journey  to  Pegu  and  disappear  at  once  from 
our  sight.  They  have  no  place  in  the  '  succession  of  theras  '. 

But  the  Vedasattha  experts  were  probably  innocent  enough 
of  any  religious  interest  in  the  hymns  and  sacrifices  of  the 
Brahmanic  cult,  and  they  were  certainly  not  Vedic  scholars 

1  Ukkamsika,  otherwise   Thadodhammaraja,  succeeded  Mahadhamma- 
raja  1629  A.D. 

2  A  royal  foundation  at  Sagaing  on  the  Irrawaddy. 

3  See  Appendix.  *  Came  to  the  throne  A.D.  1606. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  51 

in  the  Indian  pandit's  sense  of  the  words ;  for  the  Yedas  of 
the  Burmese,  as  Forchhaimner  explains,  are  a  collection  of 
Brahmanic  texts  on  astrology,  medicine,  and  'science'  generally, 
such  as  the  Suryasiddhanta  (astronomy),  Laghugraha  (astro- 
logy), Dravyaguna  (medicine),  besides  Tantrasastras  (manuals 
of  magic)  and  Kamasastras  (manuals  treating  of  love).1  Some 
of  these,  especially  the  last,  cannot  by  the  greatest  stretch  of 
liberality  be  fitted  into  any  scheme  of  monastic  learning ;  and, 
indeed,  we  do  not  hear  that  the  Buddhist  monks  ever  made 
use  of  them  or  the  Brahmanic  texts  composed  for  the  practice 
of  magic.  That,  in  all  its  branches,  was  the  province  of  the 
professional  Brahmans,  of  whom  there  were  always  some,  said 
to  be  experts  in  the  Atharvaveda,  in  the  service  of  the  king.2 
But  there  are  works  reckoned  as  Yedasatthas  in  which  the 
monks  found  food  for  study,  and  '  Veda '  subjects  which  they 
themselves  delighted  to  handle,  either  in  Pali  or  the  vernacular. 
For  a  king's  acariya  must  be  able  to  discourse  on  ethics  and 
polity,  pronounce  moral  maxims,  and  give  advice.  The  Rajanlti, 
Lokaniti,  and  Dhammanlti  represent  this  sort  of  literature 3 
modelled  on  Sanskrit  originals.  The  wise  fables  of  the  Sanskrit 
Hitopadesa  have  also  found  favour  with  Buddhists.  Again, 
certain  Sanskrit  grammatical  works  became  famous  in  Further 
India,  and  lexicons  such  as  the  Amarakosa.  "We  have  seen  how 
stoutly  the  theras  grappled  with  Pali  grammar,  and  we  can 
imagine  the  sober  joy  with  which  a  copy  of  the  Amarakosa4 
would  be  welcomed  in  a  vihdra  library. 

1  See  Jardine's  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  pt.  iv,  Introduction  by  E.  Forch- 
hammer,  p.  17.     Also  Forchhammer,  Report  (1879-80),  pp.  6  ff. 

2  For  instance,  when  Anorata  was  baffled  in  his  attempt  to  take  Thaton, 
the  charm  which  rendered  the  city  impregnable  was  found  out  by  the 
king's  attendant  Brahmans. 

3  See  James  Gray,  Ancient  Proverbs  and  Maxims :  The  Nlti  Literature 
of  Surma,  pp.  119,  141,  and  R.  C.  Temple,  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society 
of  Bengal,  vol.  xlvii  (1898),  pp.  239  ff. 

4  On  the  famous  dictionary  of  Amarasimha  see  Zachariae,  Die  indischen 
Worterbucher.     '  Amara,'  says  Zachariae,  '  war  ohne  Zweifel  ein  Buddhist,' 

though  this  can  be  inferred  only  from  his  dedication  and  his  placing  of 
the  names  of  Fuddhas  before  the  Brahmanic  divinities,  and  not  from  any 
specially  Buddhistic  matter  in  the  rest  of  the  work,  v.  Die  indischen 
Wwterbiicher,  Grundrins,  Band  i,  Heft  iiis,  p.  18.  The  Pitakatthamain 
(p.  73)  is  cautious  on  the  subject,  and  only  states  that  the  Amarakosa  was 
composed  at  Benares  by  Amarasimha. 


52  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

We  shall  have  to  return  presently  to  the  question  of  the 
Brahmaiiic  element  in  Buddhist  Law.1  As  for  other  Brahmanic 
contributions  to  the  literature  of  Burma,  they  were  naturally 
accepted  by  the  fathers  of  Burmese  scholarship,  as  there 
could  be  no  reason  for  cultivating  Buddhist  medicine  or 
Buddhist  arithmetic.  As  far  as  we  know  at  present  the 
fathers  were  sage  enough  not  to  study  the  gems  of  Sanskrit 
poetry. 

Let  us  now  glance  at  certain  features  in  the  seventeenth 
century  literature,  features  which  may  be  traced  clearly 
enough  for  our  purpose  in  a  brief  notice  of  the  best-known 
authors. 

First,  we  find  that  many  of  the  distinguished  teachers 
of  that  time  wrote  in  both  Pali  and  Burmese.  Some,  for 
instance,  Varabhisamghanatha,  author  of  the  Manikundala- 
vatthu,  and  one  of  his  contemporaries,  author  of  the  Satta- 
rajadhammavatthu,  wrote  their  edifying  tales  only  in  the 
vernacular,  or  at  least  produced  nothing  noteworthy  in  Pali.2 
Secondly,  the  devotion  of  the  Burmese  scholars  to  the  study 
of  Pali  grammar,  style,  and  prosody  bore  fruit  in  works  of 
which  the  Rajindarajabhidheyyadrpanl  is  an  instance.  It 
would  not  be  quite  fair  to  call  any  thera  a  court  poet,  but  on 
certain  occasions  theras  composed  Pali  verses  adorned  with 
the  traditional  compliment  and  eulogy  of  royal  patrons.  Thus, 
when  Ukkamsika  was  consecrated  and  took  the  title  Sirisu- 
dhammarajamahadhipati,  the  thera  Ratanakara  wrote  the 
Rajindarajabhidheyyadipanl  (on  the  naming  of  kings)  to 
commemorate  the  ceremony.3 

Mahadhammaraja  and  Ukkamsika  were  both  generous  to 
the  Order,  and  mention  of  monasteries  founded  by  them  occurs 
often  in  the  religious  history  of  the  seventeenth  century. 
Some  of  these  foundations  were  associated  with  well-known 

1  Vide  J.  Jardine  and  Forchhammer,  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law  ;  also 
Introductory  Remarks,  Notes,  pt.  iii,  p.  ix,  for  the  supposed  prevalence  of 
Sanskrit  learning  in  the  courts  of  the  early  kings  of  Pronie  and  Pagan. 

a  Sas.,  p.  105.  These  authors  belong  to  the  time  of  Mahadhammaraja, 
1606-29. 

3  Sas.,  p.  102  ;  P.TH.,  p.  58.  Ratanakara  was  acquainted  with  Sanskrit 
rhetoric  and  poetics. 


THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  53 

and  venerable  names,  such  as  Tipitakalanikara,  Ariyalamkara, 
his  pupil  Ariyalamkara  the  younger,  and  Aggadhammalamkara, 
who  were  among  the  deepest  students  of  their  time.  The 
Sasanavamsa  mentions  Tipitakalamkara  and  the  elder  Ariya- 
lamkara together  as  equally  great  examples  of  learning. 
Tipitakalamkara  was  a  man  of  wide  erudition,  says  the 
chronicle,  but  Ariyalamkara  excelled  in  dliatiipaccayavibliaga, 
in  other  words,  was  an  accomplished  grammarian.1 

Tipitakalamkara  was  born  in  1578  A.D.,  and  went,  while 
still  a  boy,  to  Prome.  He  entered  the  Order  at  the  age  of 
thirteen,  and  his  literary  career  soon  began.  He  studied  with 
passionate  zeal,  and  we  next  hear  that  the  fifteen-year-old 
novice  has  composed  in  Pali  a  poetical  version  of  the  Vessanta- 
rajataka,2  that  the  Burmese  love  most  to  hear,  the  tale  of 
the  Bodhisat's  last  birth  as  a  man  and  his  supreme  acts  of 
merit. 

Tipitakalamkara  received  the  upasampadd  ordination  in  his 
twentieth  year.  His  studious  life  underwent  a  great  change 
when  Prome,  then  an  almost  independent  State,  fell  into  the 
hands  of  Surakitti,3  King  of  Burma.  Tipitakalamkara  was 
invited  or  compelled  to  come  to  the  capital,  and  on  the  banks 
of  the  Irrawaddy  near  Ava  the  king  built  a  vihara  for  him. 
Afterwards,  weary  perhaps  of  royal  vilidran,  Tipitakalamkara 
withdrew  to  the  Tiriyapabbata  to  live  in  the  quiet  of  the 
forest.  However,  in  1602  we  again  hear  that  he  is  in  residence 
in  a  monastery  built  by  the  king,4  and  is  famed  far  and  wide 
for  his  learning  and  piety. 

While  living  at  the  Four-storied  Vihara  built  by  Surakitti, 
Tipitakalamkara,  given  up  to  Abhidhamma  studies,  wrote 
a  commentary  on  the  introductory  verses  of  the  Atthasalinl. 
Later,  at  the  request  of  Nyaung  Ram  Min,  he  composed 
a  lighter  work,  the  Yasavaddhanavatthu.  When  in  retreat 
in  the  quiet  of  the  Tiriyapabbata  he  had  some  occasion  to 

1  Sas.,  p.  106. 

2  Sas.,  p.  105  ;  see  Fausboll's  edition  of  the  Jataka,  vol.  vi,  pp.  479  ff. 

3  Eldest  son  of  Bayin  Naung. 

4  Nyaung  Ram  Min  (1599-1605),  son  of  Bayin  Naung.     Phayre,  Histoiy 
of  Burma,  p.  286  ;  Pitakatthamain,  p.  42. 


54  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

take  up  Vinaya  questions,  and  the  result  was  the  Vinayalam- 
karatlka,  one  of  those  numerous  works  composed  by  theras 
of  high  authority  to  keep  the  old  traditional  '  discipline '  pure. 

The  list  of  Tipitakalamkara's  works  shows  varied  learning, 
but  he  is  remembered  chiefly  as  an  Abhidhamma  scholar  and 
a  saint.  He  was  a  chosen  adviser  of  Ukkamsika,  and  one 
of  his  works  is  called  '  Responses '  to  the  king's  questions.1 

The  theras  of  Sagaing  at  this  period  seem  to  have  taken 
the  lead  in  Abhidhamma  studies.  One  of  these,  the  thera 
Tilokaguru,  toiled  for  many  years  at  tlkas  and  supplementary 
tikas  (anutlka)  on  various  texts.  After  dealing  very  thoroughly 
with  the  Dhatukatha2  he  composed  a  tlkii  on  the  Yamaka. 
But  his  great  feat  was  a  tika  on  the  Patthana,  the  most 
important  book  of  the  Abhidhammapitaka.3 

Tilokagaru  is  but  one  example.  The  Sagaing  monasteries  also 
produced  a  number  of  Burmese  nissayas  (interpretations  or  para- 
phrases) on  Abhidhamma  texts  during  the  seventeenth  century. 
But  it  is  not  easy  to  distribute  these  works  aright  among 
their  several  authors,  whose  Pali  names  are  but  an  indifferent 
help  to  accuracy.  There  were  at  least  four  Ariyalamkara  s 
noted  for  scholarship.  The  monk  mentioned  in  the  Sasanavamsa 
as  the  second  Ariyalamkara  (pupil  of  the  great  thera  who 
was  '  equal  to  Tipitakalamkara ')  is  probably  the  scholar  of 
whom  Oldenberg  remarks  that  the  Burmese  are  indebted  to 
him  for  the  version  of  a  great  number  of  Pali  works.  Those 
ascribed  to  this  Ariyalamkara  are  :  (1)  Interpretations  of 
the  AtthasalinI  of  Buddhaghosa,  the  Sankhepavannanii  of 
Saddhammajotipala,4  the  AbhidhammatthavibhavanI  of  Suman- 

1  See  Bulletin,  tome  v,  p.  167. 

2  See  the  Pitakatthamain,  p.  41. 

3  The  most  important,  that  is,  if  we  place  ourselves  at  the  point  of  view 
of  the  Burmese  Abhidhamma  students  of  that  day.     Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  to 
whose  rare  ability  and  patience  we  owe  a  scholarly  edition  of  a  part  of 
this  text,  remarks,  '  the  aim  of  the  work  seems  to  have  been  more  a  series 
of  exercises  in  a  logic  of  terms  and  relations  than  any  attempt  to  enunciate 
metaphysical    propositions '    (see   Introduction    to    the    Dukapatthana, 
edited  for  the  Pali  Text  Society  by  Caroline  F.  Rhys  Davids,  pp.  x-xiv). 
The  Patthana  is  also  called   the   Mahapakarana   (Great  Treatise).      It 
consists  of  twenty-four  sections,  and  in  manuscript  amounts  to  over  a 
thousand  leaves.     See  Forchhammer's  List,  p.  xv. 

4  See  above,  p.  18,  Chap.  II. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  55 

gala,1  and  the  Vibhanga  of  the  Abhidhammapitaka.2  (2)  A 
Pali  tlka  on  the  Kaccayanabheda,  entitled  Saratthavikasinl. 
(3)  Ariyalarpkara  was  careful  to  add  a  Burmese  version  to 
what  we  should  nowadays  call  his  revised  edition  of  Kaccayana's 
grammar. 

'This  work  was  done  mostly  in  the  Dakkhinavana  vihdra, 
or  Monastery  of  the  Southern  Grove,  near  the  Rajamanicula 
cetiya  at  Sagaing.  Ukkamsika  had  built  four  monasteries, 
one  on  each  side  of  his  famous  pagoda,3  and  presented  them 
to  theras  learned  in  the  sacred  texts.  Another  grammarian 
in  residence  on  the  west  side  produced  an  edition  of  the 
Nyasa,4  'adorned'  (as  the  Pali  phrase  goes),  and  set  forth 
with  various  methods  of  explanation.5 

The  Nyasa  was  taken  up  again  in  the  reign  of  Sirinanda- 
dhammaraja  -  Pavaradhipatiraja  (A.D.  1648)  by  the  king's 
preceptor,  Dathanaga  of  Sagaing.  His  commentary  is  entitled 
Niruttisaramafi  j  usa.6 

We  here  come  across  a  mention  of  Pagan,  once  the  flourishing 
centre  of  grammatical  studies.  The  thera  Jambudhaja  (or 
Jambudlpadhaja,  as  the  king  named  him)  was  one  whom 
Ukkamsika  had  delighted  to  honour.  He  was  of  Pagan,  and 
was  first  brought  to  the  king's  notice  by  Tipitakalamkara." 
The  works  ascribed  to  him  are  Samvannananayadipanl,  Nirutti- 
samgraha  (grammar),  and  Sarvajiianyayadlpanl  (grammar  and 
philology).8  Jambudhaja,  author  of  the  little  grammatical 

1  See  Olden  berg's  Catalogue  of  Pali  MSS.  at  the  India  Office,  pp.  81,  82, 
84,  85,  88-90,  123,  124.     Sumangala  is  also  known  as  Sumangalasami  and 
his  work  as  the  Tlka-kyaw. 

2  The  Vibhanga  is  second  in  order  of  the  seven  Abhidhamma  books. 
Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  points  out  that  it  may  be  considered  a  sequel  of  the 
Dhammasangam,  and  was  probably  used,  like  the  latter,  as  a  manual  for 
study.      For  other  remarks  on  these  studies  see  the  valuable  introduction 
to  the  Pali  Text  Society's  edition  of  the  Vibhanga  (ed.  C.  A.  F.  Rhys 
Davids),  1904. 

3  The  Kaung-mhu-daw  pagoda,  5  miles  from  Sagaing. 

4  See  above,  p.  21.  5  Sas.,  pp.  106,  110  ;  Pitakatthamain,  p.  124. 
*  See  p.  Ill,  SVD.,  verse  1241  ;    Pitakatthamain,  p.  65.     A  work  with 

a  nearly  similar  title  (Niruttimanjusa),  mentioned  in  the  Gandhavamsa 
(pp.  60  and  70),  is  a  tlka  on  the  Cullanirutti  of  Kaccayana. 

7  Sas.,  pp.  115,  116. 

8  These  works  are  mentioned  by  Nevill,  who  saw  them  in  Ceylon.     He 
dates  them  1652  A.D. 


56  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA. 

treatise  called  RfipabhedapakasanI,  is  probably  this  same 
Jamb  ud  Ipadha j  a . l 

The  Abhidhamma  seems  to  have  had  less  attraction  for  him 
than  for  most  of  his  noted  contemporaries,  and  he  devoted 
himself  to  the  Vinaya,  of  which  he  translated  text  and  com- 
mentary into  Burmese.  But  Maniratana,  a  writer  of  the  same 
period,  is  an  example  of  a  life  spent  in  interpreting  the 
abstruser  side  of  sacred  learning  to  those  who  were  only 
capable  of  reading  the  vernacular.  The  Sasanavamsa  mentions 
translations  by  him  of  the  following  works — the  AtthasalinI 
and  SammohavinodanI  (Buddhaghosa's  commentaries  on  the 
Dhammasangani  and  the  Vibhahga)  and  the  Kankhavitaranl 
(Buddhaghosa's  commentary  on  the  Patimokkha  of  the  Vinaya) ; 
this  last  seems  to  have  been  Maniratana's  only  departure  from 
metaphysical  studies.  Then,  turning  to  the  later  exponents  of 
the  Abhidhamma,  he  translated  the  tlkas  Abhidhammattha- 
vibhavanl  and  Sankhepavannana  into  Burmese. 

Another  thera,  Saradassi,  of  the  same  place  (Nayyinyua, 
in  the  Ava  district),  was  the  author  of  some  works  equally 
characteristic  of  the  time.  His  Gfilhatthadlpani  (explaining 
difficult  passages  in  the  seven  books  of  the  Abhidhamma)  2 
and  the  Visuddhimaggaganthipadattha,  a  book  of  the  same 
nature  on  Buddhaghosa's  Visuddhimagga,  are  in  Pali.  He 
also  translated  the  Nettipakarana  into  Burmese,  not  to  shirk 
his  part  in  opening  up  the  Pali  texts  to  readers  without 
learning.  If  he  is  a  little  less  shadowy  to  us  than  some  of 
his  fellow-authors  it  is  because,  with  all  his  grasp  of  abstruse 
questions,  he  had,  for  a  time  at  least,  leanings  that  greatly 
displeased  the  stricter  brethren.  He  lived  in  the  village  itself, 
and  indulged  in  luxuries  such  as  a  head-covering  and  a  fan. 
But  we  are  told  that  he  afterwards  renounced  all  those  practices 
'  contrary  to  the  discipline '  and  went  into  retreat  in  the  forest. 

The  middle  and  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century  were 
not  peaceful  times  for  Burma.  The  country  was  harassed  by 
Chinese  raiders,  rumours  and  evil  omens  troubled  the  people, 

1  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  50. 

2  Sas.,  p.   116 ;   see  Forchhammer's  List,  p.  xxvi,  and  Fausboll,   Cat. 
Mand.  MSS.,  p.  35  ;  Pitakatthamain,  pp.  39,  40. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  57 

the  tutelary  devata  of  the  towns  were  said  to  be  departing, 
and  '  religion  was  dimmed  '.  Great  efforts  were  made  to 
conjure  these  and  other  ills  by  the  practice  of  religion  ; 
the  local  gods  were  conciliated  with  offerings,  and  '  merit ', 
in  the  Buddhist  sense,  was  acquired  by  new  religious  founda- 
tions. When  Mahapavaradhammarajalokadhipati  came  to  the 
throne  in  1651  he  built  some  monasteries,  according  to  the 
custom  of  his  predecessors,  and  presented  them  to  distinguished 
theras.  The  most  eminent  among  these  was  the  Aggadhamma- 
lamkara,  already  mentioned,  who  translated  several  Pali  texts 
into  the  vernacular. 

He  first  paid  the  usual  homage  to  Kaccayana,  but  by  writing 
a  Burmese  translation  instead  of  a  Pali  commentary  ;  after- 
wards he  translated  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha,  and  then, 
as  if  continually  seeking  heavier  and  heavier  tasks,  the  patient 
scholar  toiled  through  translations  of  the  Matika  (of  the 
DhammasanganI),  the  Dhatukatha,  the  Yamaka,  and  the 
Patthana.1  The  last  task  alone  would  have  served  a  less 
diligent  man  for  a  lifetime,  but  Aggadhammalamkara  probably 
had  earnest  students  to"  satisfy.  There  is  no  doubt  about  his 
real  devotion  to  his  subject. 

This  prodigious  worker  was  not  entirely  given  up  to  the 
sacred  texts.  Circumstances  made  him  a  court  historian.  He 
came  of  a  family  of  officials,  and  no  doubt  was  better  fitted 
than  most  Palists  of  his  day  to  carry  out  certain  royal  com- 
missions. The  last  of  his  works  that  we  find  mentioned  in 
the  Sasanavamsa  is  a  Rajavamsasankhepa,  a  summary  of  the 
official  Rajavamsa,  or  a  short  chronicle  of  the  kings.  This 
he  undertook  at  the  request  of  his  protector,  Mahapavara- 
dhammarajalokadhipati.2 

Under  the  auspices  of  the  next  king,  Naravara,3  the  thera 
Tejodipa,  disciple  of  Tilokaguru,  composed  a  tlka  on  the 
Paritta.4  It  is  the  only  literary  event  noticed  by  the  Sasana- 

V  */  »/ 

vamsa  in  this  reign,  which,  in  fact,  only  lasted  a  few  months. 
Under  Naravara's  successor  Siripavaramahadhammaraja 5  a 
thera  named  Devacakkobhasa  conies  upon  the  scene,  whose 

1  Sas.,  p.  111.  .  2  Sas.,  p.  112  ;  Pitakatthamain,  p.  220. 

3  Mahasihasuradhammaraja.        4  Sas.,  p.  115.  5  A.D.  1672. 


58  THE    PALI    LITERATURE  OF    BURMA 

influence  with  the  king  was  evidently  great,  for  the  usual 
reason  —  he  was  learned  in  the  Vedasatthas.  The  usual 
mild  reproach  follows — he  was  '  weak '  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  sacred  texts.1  Nevertheless,  his  system  of  Abhidhamma 
teaching  was  recommended  to  the  Order  by  the  king.  Deva- 
cakkobhasa  made  his  pupils  study  and  recite  the  Patthana  (we 
suppose  in  Pali).  Not  only  the  monks  of  Burma  but  those  of 
Pegu  were  made  to  study  the  Patthana.  By  the  king's  order 
great  religious  festivals  were  held,  and  the  people  were  called 
upon  to  honour  the  Order  in  every  way. 

We  have  now  reached  the  year  1698,  and  can  pause  to  glance 
at  those  features  of  the  Pali-Burmese  literature  which  have 
come  into  clear  relief  during  the  seventeenth  century. 

Our  attention  is  arrested  by  a  new  tendency.  The  zeal  for 
Pali  grammar  seems  to  be  fainter  than  in  the  thirteenth  and 
fourteenth  centuries ;  a  more  abstract  study,  the  Abhidhamma, 
is  occupying  the  learned  among  the  monks,  or  at  least  those 
of  whom  we  hear,  those  whom  we  may  call  the  official  scholars, 
the  theras  who  have  the  title  rajaguru  (king's  preceptor)  and 
work  in  monasteries  endowed  by  the  kings.  We  do  not  know 
much  of  the  lives  of  these  teachers,  but  their  choice  of  subjects 
throws  a  certain  light  on  what  was  demanded  of  them,  even 
by  the  less  learned  among  their  students,  or,  at  least,  what 
they,  the  most  influential  scholars  of  their  time,  insisted  that 
their  students  should  attempt.  We  have  seen  how  the  several 
books  of  the  Abhidhamma  were  interpreted  and  paraphrased 
in  Burmese  during  the  seventeenth  century,  and  we  cannot 
doubt  that  the  disciples  living  near  their  venerable  masters  in 
the  monasteries  by  the  Irrawaddy  persevered  in  studying  the 
third  Pitaka.  And  that  tradition  of  the  seventeenth  century 
has  come  down  to  later  generations,  as  the  most  casual  survey 
of  modern  Burmese  literature  will  show. 

Everyone  who  has  seen  a  collection  of  Buddhist  manuscripts 
from  Burma  must  have  noticed  the  numerous  copies  of 

1  Sas.,  p.  117.  The  Sasanavamsa  tells  us  by  the  way  that  the  well- 
known  Burmese  method  of  preparing  and  decorating  palm-leaf  MSS.  was 
first  put  into  practice  in  this  reign.  See  Symes,  Account  of  an  Embassy  to 
the  kingdom  of  Ava,  p.  339. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  59 

Abhidhamma  texts  with  vernacular  interpretations.  The 
descriptions  we  read  of  Burmese  life  and  character  might 
lead  us  to  expect  a  preference  for  something  less  arid,  more 
picturesque,  more  human,  more  adapted  to  the  native  genius. 
But  there  is  not  really  an  anomaly  here.  In  this  particular 
case' the  Burmese  remember  what  was  said  in  old  days  about 
the  Buddhacacanam,  the  word  of  the  Buddha. 

The  classic  fifth  century  commentaries,  for  instance  the 
AtthasalinI,1  make  an  interesting  distinction  between  the  three 
great  divisions  of  the  Buddhavacanam — the  Vinaya,  Sutta,  and 
Abhidhamma.  The  Vinaya,  they  say,  contains  the  teaching  of 
rules  of  conduct,  prohibitions,  and  prescriptions  (dnddesand), 
the  Sutta  that  of  the  current  practice  or  experience  of  men 
(vohdradesana] ,  the  Abhidhamma  that  of  the  highest  or 
absolute  truth  (paramatthadesana). 

Let  us  see  how  these  three  collections  have  fared  in  Burmese 
Buddhism. 

The  Pali  Vinaya  took  root  quickly  and  profoundly  in 
Burma.  All  students  of  the  subject  are  agreed  on  the 
constancy  with  which  later  Vinaya  literature  reflects  the 
ancient  form  and  spirit.  Buddhism  has  a  lengthy  and  minute 
code  for  the  Mendicant  Order.  That  code  has  been  prodigiously 
commented  and  glossed  in  the  course  of  centuries,  but  the 
novice  learns  the  discipline  from  his  preceptor  in  the  monastery 
by  example  and  habit,  rather  than  from  books,  and  by  everyday 
practice  the  observance  of  the  rules  becomes  second  nature 
without  much  mental  effort.  Of  course,  some  book-study  is 
required,  but  the  essential  knowledge  is  easy  for  the  young 
monk  to  master  even  in  Pali.  And  then  there  is  that  old  and 
kindly  institution  '  The  Smaller  Vinayas  V  containing  the 
essential  precepts  and  formulas  of  the  Discipline. 

Controversial  works  have  been  written  from  time  to  time  on 
matters  of  discipline,  but  to  know  them  is  not  a  fundamental 
part  of  Vinaya  study.  Occasionally  disputes  on  questions  of 
discipline  arose  in  the  Burmese  Sangha  at  times  when  the  word 


1  &  AtthasalinI,  E.  Miiller's  edition  (Pali  Text  Society),  p.  21. 

2  See  above,  p.  6,  Chap.  I. 


60  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

of  the  Buddha  was,  it  seems,  not  very  well  known  to  most  of 
the  monks ;  and  we  read  that  the  king  intervened  in  such 
cases  to  command  research  in  the  ancient  texts,  or  appoint 
teachers  whose  decision  was  to  be  final.  The  king's  privilege, 
however,  was  particular ;  the  attitude  of  the  Burmese  laity  in 
general  towards  the  Order  and  its  discipline  has  been  one  of 
unquestioning  reverence.  The  Vinaya  itself,  being  a  code 
of  prohibitions  concerning  the  monastic  life,  has  not  of  course 
had  a  great  influence  on  culture.  Not  that  it  has  remained 
altogether  without  its  bearing  on  the  lay  life,  for  there  is 
a  Vinaya  element  in  the  Burmese  law  codes.  This  we  might 
expect,  as  religion  and  law  are  inseparable  in  Oriental  polity. 
But  when  we  look  for  the  influence  of  Pali  literature  on 
Burmese  culture  it  is  in  the  Sutta  that  we  find  it. 

Through  the  immense  variety  of  discourses,  verses,  and 
legends  that  make  up  the  Sutta  pitaka  the  path  of  the  saint 
is  traced  for  us  in  every  stage,  from  the  first  moment  of 
religious  effort  to  the  summit  of  achievement — arahatship. 
And  the  Sutta  pitaka  has  abundance  of  human  nature  in  it. 
So  in  widening  and  widening  circles  it  has  sent  a  moral 
impulse  through  the  life  of  the  whole  Burmese  people.  To 
give  two  instances  :  the  Paritta l  is  a  common  treasury  of  good 
words  to  ward  off  the  evils  of  everyday  life  and  keep  the  great 
maxims  of  religion  in  memory,  and  the  Jataka  has  found  its 
way  everywhere,  from  law  codes  and  chronicles  to  popular 
plays.  The  Burmese  child  grows  up  steeped  in  beliefs, 
practices,  and  notions  of  '  merit '  and  '  demerit '  drawn  from 
the  Sutta.  He  has  nothing  new  to  learn  about  this  part  of 
his  faith  when  he  forsakes  the  world  and  enters  on  the  monastic 
life.  What  the  earnest  novice  from  generation  to  generation 
has  set  himself  to  study  in  the  calm  of  the  vihara  is  the  para- 
matthadhamma,  '  the  highest  '  of  the  Master's  teaching,  the 
Abhidhamma. 

If  the  Burmese  student  is  cheerfully  at  home  in  the  Sutta 
he  approaches  the  Abhidhamma  with  awed  respect,  like  his 
brother  Buddhist  in  Siam  and  Cambodia.  The  Buddhist  of 

1  See  above,  p.  3,  Chap.  I. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  61 

Indo-China  is  by  no  means  enamoured,  as  the  Indian  Buddhists 
were,  of  speculation  for  its  own  sake.  He  reads  in  Buddha- 
ghosa  that  there  is  an  exalted  religious  joy  to  be  found  in  only 
considering  the  vastness  of  the  Patthana.  The  mind  of  the 
believer,  launched  upon  that  ocean,  may  allow  itself  to  be 
rocked  to  a  contemplative  calm.  The  virtue  of  this  passive 
reception  of  the  buddhavacana  can  never  have  been  doubted  in 
ease-loving  Burma.  The  Burmese  '  Abhidhammika '  Buddhists 
had  little  in  common  with  the  keen  disputants  of  the  north 
who  thought  in  Sanskrit,  and  from  whom  sprang  the  great 
champions  of  the  Mahayana  system — Asvaghosa,  Asanga,  and 
Santideva. 

The  greater  number  of  Burmese  students  of  metaphysics 
have  depended  from  early  times  on  compendiums  and  manuals. 
The  most  successful  of  these,  after  the  canonical  Dhamma- 
sanganl,1  has  been  the  twelfth-century  textbook  Abhidham- 
matthasangaha.2  This  little  treatise  is  a  summary  of  Buddhist 
theories  on  mental  processes,  on  existence  and  annihilation.  It 
is  a  mass  of  technical  terms  needing  an  extensive  commentary. 
Commentators,  of  course,  were  forthcoming.  The  Sinhalese 
theras  Vimalabuddhi  and  Sumangala  both  composed  tlkas,  and 
the  second,  the  AbhidhammatthavibhavanT,  is  part  of  the  usual 
course  of  (Abhidhamma)  study  in  Burma.3  Two  ancient  and 
authoritative  treatises  from  Ceylon,  the  Abhidhamma  vatara 4 
by  Buddhadatta  and  the  Saccasamkhepa 5  by  Culladhammapiila, 
were  studied  more  in  the  early  period  of  Burmese  scholarship 
than  in  later  times. 

Probably  no  Pali  work  on  the  Abhidhamma  has  been  more 
often  translated  and  paraphrased  than  the  Abhidhammattha- 
sangaha,  of  which  the  Pitakatthamain  alone  mentions  twenty- 
three  different  Burmese  nissayas.  All  the  most  noted  theras 

1  Edited   iu   JPTS.,  1884,  with   introduction    by   Rhys   Davids.      See 
Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  pp.  38,  46,  48  ;  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xvii. 

2  Edited  by  E.  Miiller,  trans,  by  C.  A.  F.  Rhys  Davids. 

3  See   Fausboll,    Cat.  Mand.   MSS.,   pp.  38,   48 ;  Forchhammer,    List, 
p.  xvii ;  Gandhavanisa,  pp.  62,  72. 

4  See  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  pp.  35,  37 ;  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xvii ; 
GV.,  pp.  59,  62,  69  ;  Sas.,  p.  34. 

5  See  Fausboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  pp.  35-7  ;  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xvii ; 
GV.,  pp.  60,  70  ;  Sas.,  p.  34. 


62  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA. 

of  ,  the  seventeenth  century  took  it  in  hand,  and  it  has  been 
carefully  edited  by  modern  h*ai/ds.  A  close  analysis  of  the 
principal  translations  of  this  single  little  text  would  be  an 
explanation,  incomplete  of  course,  but  very  interesting  and 
instructive,  of  the  true  Burmese  view  of  Abhidhamma  theories, 
such  as  we  find  in  the  DhammasanganI,  also  a  manual,1  and 
we  must  not  forget  that  these  theories  are  as  much  a  part 
of  the  Buddhism  of  Burma  as  the  human  and  touching  spirit 
of  the  Sutta. 

Some  curious  elements  have  straggled  in  under  the  accom- 
modating title  Paramattha,  and  sometimes  in  research  we  may 
think  we  have  come  on  a  metaphysical  dissertation  and  find 
a  guide  to  Buddhist  cosmogony.2  Such  productions,  however, 
are  not  characteristic  enough  of  the  Pali  literature  to  need 
more  than  a  mention.3 

To  return  to  the  seventeenth  century.  We  have  seen  that 
some  of  the  most  eminent  scholars  spent  their  time  making 
Burmese  versions  of  Pali  texts.  Either  there  was  a  much 
wider  public,  as  we  should  now  say,  for  religious  works  at 
that  period  than  in  earlier  times,  or  Pali  scholarship  was  at 
a  low  ebb  in  the  Order.  There  is  some  ground  for  this  last 
supposition.  Burma  had  been  in  an  almost  continual  state  of 
change  and  disturbance  since  the  Shan  element  had  become  first 
troublesome  and  then  powerful ;  and  Lower  Burma,  annexed, 
separated,  and  annexed  again,  suffered  no  less. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  something  about  the 
numerical  strength  of  the  Order  at  different  times  during  that 
period.  It  probably  diminished  greatly  when  even  monasteries 

1  See  the  learned  introduction  of  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  to  her  translation 
of  the  DhammasanganI. 

2  An   example  is  the  Pali-Burmese   Paramatthamanjusa,  described  by 
M.  1'Abbe"  Chevrillon  in  the  list  of  Burmese  MSS.  in  the  Bibliotheque 
Rationale,  Paris. 

3  I  do  not  mean  to  imply   that  these  matters  are   included  in  Abhi- 
dhamma literature  without  an  antique  and  scriptural  warrant  for  their 
presence.     Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  has  pointed  out  that  the  last  book  of  the 
Vibhanga,  '  suggesting  by  its  fine  title,  the  Heart  of  the  Dhamma,  more 
than   it   contains,   gives   a   number  of  summaries   and   a  good   deal   of 
affirmation,  much  of  it  mythological,  about  the  conditions  of  life  in  this 
and  other  spheres — in  human  beings  and  other  beings '  (Introduction  to 
the  Vibhanga,  ed.  C.  A.  F.  Rhys  Davids,  p.  six). 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  63 

were  insecure,  and  the  young  men  of  the  population  were  more 
likely  to  be  fighting  than  forsaking  the  world.1  Those  were 
not  times  for  study  to  prosper.  And,  as  the  Sasanavamsa  says, 
'  religion  was  dimmed '  from  time  to  time.  But  the  Burmese 
kings  were  sufficiently  good  Buddhists  to  build  viharas  and 
enco'urage  learning,  and  the  great  theras  were  indefatigable 
workers.  It  is  told  of  Tipitakalamkara  that  he  once  said  in 
jest  to  Aggadhammalamkara,  '  When  I  am  dead  you  will  be 
the  only  learned  man  left  in  the  world.'  And  perhaps  the 
scholarly  tradition  did  at  one  time  seem  likely  to  perish  out 
of  Burma.  But  there  were  always  workers  to  keep  it  alive, 
some  of  whom  we  shall  only  find  in  the  local  chronicles 
(thamain)  of  temples  and  viharan,  and  in  the  eighteenth 
century,  when  another  national  crisis  had  come  and  passed, 
a  literary  revival  began  under  Alaungpaya  and  his  descendants . 

1  In  Ukkamsika's  reign  a  very  curious  situation  was  brought  about. 
The  king,  who  had  fled  from  the  capital  in  consequence  of  a  conspiracy 
headed  by  one  of  his  sons,  took  refuge  in  a  monastery,  where  the  Bhikkhus 
formed  themselves  into  an  armed  guard  to  protect  him.  See  Sas.,  p.  108. 


CHAPTER   V 

PALI  LITERATURE  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  —  THE 
PARUPANA  -  EKAMSIKA  CONTROVERSY  —  FOUNDATION  OF 
AMARAPURA  —  BODOPAYA'S  EULOGIST  —  THE  RAJADHI- 

RAJAVILASINI THE    JATAKA    IN    BURMA 

As  the  eighteenth  century  opens,  the  religious  life  of  the 
country  seems  to  have  passed  under  a  cloud,  and  we  may  be 
fairly  certain  that  there  was  no  intellectual  advance  in  the 
Order.  Perhaps  there  was  even  some  reaction,  if  we  can  judge 
from  the  uninteresting  controversy  that  drags  through  nearly 
a  hundred  years  in  the  chronicle.1 

Even  without  studying  in  detail  the  literature  of  the  time, 
we  notice  the  absence  of  work  such  as  Tipitakalamkiira,  Ariyii- 
lamkara,  and  Aggadhammalamkara  had  produced  in  Upper 
Burma.  In  Ramanna  the  Order  lacked  support.  Since  the 
removal  of  the  capital  to  Ava  in  1634  the  south  had  gradually 
sunk  into  misery  and  ruin.2  Towards  the  middle  of  the 
century,  as  we  shall  see,  a  revolt  against  Burma  was  successful 
for  a  time,  but  the  final  result  was  that  a  later  conqueror, 
Alaungpaya,  broke  down  the  Talaing  nationality  completely 
and  finally.  Thus,  though  Alaungpaya  was  really  a  better 
Buddhist  than  his  milder  predecessors,  the  fortune  of  war 
went  against  scholarship  in  the  ancient  home  of  Buddhism 
from  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  till  the  time  when 
the  Burmese  conqueror's  power  was  firmly  established. 

And  at  the  moment  when,  leaving  the  seventeenth  century, 
we  have  our  next  glimpse  of  literary  history,  there  was  not 
only  a  state  of  gloom  and  listlessness  in  Pegu  but  in  Burma 
also.  The  country  was  no  longer  ruled  by  kings  of  the 
energetic  and  aggressive  type,3  who  were  usually  active  bene- 
factors of  religion  and  therefore  of  Pali  literature. 

1  See  Sas.,  pp.  118ff.,  and  Introduction,  p.  37. 

2  See  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  141,  142. 

3  Phayre  says  of  this  period,  '  Though  the  monarchy  suffered  no  great 
disaster  its  powers  gradually  declined.'     The  raids  of  the  Chinese  in  the 
previous  century  had  been  followed  by  an  invasion  from  Manipur,  and 
some  territory  in  the  north  was  lost  (Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  140  ff.). 


THE   PALI   LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  65 

If  we  turn  to  the  Sasanavamsa,  we  come  straightway  upon 
a  picture  already  familiar.  The  long,  inglorious  reign  of 
Hsin-hpyu-shin !  (in  Pali,  Setibhinda)  has  begun  ;  the  inner 
history  of  the  Order  seems  to  be  quietly  repeating  itself.  In 
a  monastery  at  Ava,  built  by  a  high  military  official,  the 
learned  monk  Ukkamsamala  is  finishing  the  second  of  his 
treatises  Vannabodhana  and  Likhananaya2  (dealing,  as  the 
titles  show,  with  the  Pali  language).  The  chronicle  says  of 
him  that  he  was  versed  in  the  texts,  the  commentaries,  the 
tlkas,  and  the  'other  books'  (gandhantara),  by  which  is  meant 
works  not  strictly  doctrinal  but  necessary  to  a  complete 
Buddhist  education.3 

Ukkamsamala,  fortunately  for  him,  was  peacefully  occupied 
with  words  and  not  with  practices,  but  we  cannot  separate 
the  history  of  Pali  literature  in  the  eighteenth  century  from 
a  controversy  which  went  on,  with  only  a  few  intervals  of 
forced  truce,  for  nearly  a  century  between  the  sects  known 
as  the  Parupanas  and  Ekamsikas.  Their  differences  were 
on  matters  of  monastic  discipline,  but  certainly  affected 
studies. 

The  Sasanavamsa,  in  which  we  find  a  fairly  full  account,4 
tells  us  that  a  monk  named  Gunabhilamkara  in  or  about  the 
year  1698  A.D.  introduced,  and  the  followers  who  gathered 
round  him  quickly  adopted,  the  custom  of  wearing  the 
mendicant's  upper  robe  over  one  shoulder  only,  leaving  the 
other  bare.  But,  according  to  the  rules  for  dress  laid  down 
in  the  Pali  Vinaya,  both  shoulders  should  be  draped,  except 
when  the  right  was  uncovered  as  a  mark  of  respect  in 
addressing  a  superior ;  and  here  at  once  was  a  doubtful  and 
ostentatious  change  which  put  the  simpler,  old- school 
Parupanas  (or  '  clothed '  sect  as  they  were  named)  up  in 
arms.  This  was  not  all.  The  Ekamsika  ('one-shoulder') 
party  carried  fans  when  making  their  begging- rounds  in  the 

1  A.D.    1714-33    (Phayre,  History    of  Burma,  p.  286).     In  Sas.,  1074 
Kaliyuga  (  =  1"12  A.D.). 

2  Sas.,  p.  120. 

3  e.g.,  the  Pitakatthamain  (p.  52)  gives  under  the  heading  gandhantara 
the  Mahavamsa,  Dipavamsa,  and  their  tlkas. 

4  Sas.,  pp.'ll7ff. 


66  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

villages.  These  and  one  or  two  other  innovations,  which 
may  seem  to  outsiders  a  small  matter,  roused  very  strong 
feeling  in  the  Order. 

Grunabhilamkara  and  his  following  were  not  considered 
strong  in  the  sacred  texts,  and  their  opponents  of  the  strict 
school  defied  them  to  bring  forward  a  canonical  text,  com- 
mentary, or  tlka  that  authorized  their  practices.  Here  was 
their  difficulty,  and  the  Sasanavamsa  assures  us  that  they 
were  put  to  the  miserable  expedient  of  producing  a  work 
forged  for  them  by  a  'lay  disciple  of  immoral  life  who  had 
quitted  the  Order  V  They  maintained  that  they  held  the 
views  of  the  orthodox  thera  Saddhammacari  of  Ceylon. 
The  severe  language  of  the  Sasanavamsa  would  lead  us  to 
think  that  some  moral  laxity,  unworthy  of  true  '  sons  of  the 
Sakya  ',2  went  with  these  affectations  of  dress  and  habits 
in  the  new  party.  At  all  events,  the  question  whether  any 
given  monk  was  a  Parupana  or  Ekamsika  was,  for  long  years, 
the  one  by  which  his  fellow-monks  would  judge  him.  It  is 
interesting  to  see  the  part  played  by  the  temporal  power 
in  all  this.  The  hierarchy  of  the  Buddhist  Church  was  not  so 
firmly  established  that  the  Sangharaja  or  Supreme  Head  could 
impose  his  will  on  the  fraternity  without  the  king's  support, 
and  we  shall  see  that  when  the  struggle  became  very  acute 
the  sect  that  was  losing  ground  usually  tried  to  bring  the 
matter  directly  before  the  king. 

In  1733  Maharajadhipati  came  to  the  throne.3  He  was 
an  ineffectual  king  and,  as  events  showed,  a  very  poor  arbiter 
in  religious  matters.  The  Sasanavamsa  records  only  one  of 
his  acts  with  approval ;  this  was  the  appointing  of  the  thera 
Nanavara  as  his  acariya  (tutor  or,  more  exactly,  spiritual 
adviser).  .Nanavara  was  originally  of  Pagan.  When  he 
came  to  the  capital  he  threw  himself  zealously  into  the  work 
of  teaching,  and  the  first  of  his  works  mentioned  in  the 
chronicle4  was  composed  for  the  benefit  of  his  many  hearers. 

1  Sas.,  p.  119. 

2  A  stock  phrase  of  the  ancient  Vinaya,  where  unseemly  conduct  of 
monks  and  novices  is  described  as  asakyaputtiya. 

3  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  140.     Sas.,  1095  K.Y. 

4  Sas.,  p.  121. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  67 

Mindful  of  their  difficulties  in  the  study  of  the  Abhidharamattha- 
sangaha,  probably  then,  as  later,  the  text  most  in  use,  he 
prepared  a  ganthipadattha  or  gloss  on  the  difficult  words  in 
that  famous  work.  Nanavara  then  glossed  the  ancient  com- 
mentary AtthasalinI  (of  Buddha  ghosa)  in  the  same  way.  He 
also  composed  a  work  entitled  Suravinicchaya,  a  name  suggesting 
Vinaya  rather  than  Abhidhamma,1  and  another  work  for  Yinaya 
students  entitled  Patimokkhalekhana.2  Afterwards,  at  the 
king's  request,  as  we  are  told,  the  acariya  continued  the  work 
his  predecessors  had  begun  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and 
translated  the  Adhidhanappadlpika  3  into  the  vernacular. 
His  contemporary  Saradassi,  also  of  Pagan,  is  mentioned 
as  the  author  of  a  Dhatukathayojana,4  either  a  grammatical 
commentary  or  a  translation  of  the  Dhatukatha  of  the 
Abhidhainmapitaka. 

Nanavara's  next  work,  the  Rajadhirajanamattappakasini, 
seems  to  have  been  written  not  so  much  to  instruct  the 
unlearned  as  to  please  a  royal  patron.  Its  subject,  '  the 
naming  of  kings,'  with  the  reigning  king's  name  as  an 
example,  was  not  important  to  the  students  in  the  monasteries. 
The  purpose  of  the  book  was  served,  so  far  as  we  can  see, 
when  it  had  shown  Nanavara's  scholarship  and  interested 
Maharajadhipati  himself.  There  is  a  sort  of  unconscious 
irony  in  the  thera's  essay  when  we  see,  as  the  gentle  monk 
did  not  see,  the  approaching  fate  of  the  '  Lord  of  Kings ',  and 
know  how  ill  he  succeeded  not  only  as  king  but  as  supporter 
of  the  faith.  A  ruler  of  quite  different  mettle  was  needed 
even  to  deal  with  the  affairs  of  the  Sangha  now  in  a  state 
of  acute  disaccord.  Maharajadhipati  made  mistake  upon 
mistake.  When  his  tutor  Nanavara,  who  held  to  the  Parupana 
practice,  and  the  thera  Pasamsa,  of  the  Ekamsika  sect,  were 

1  See  above,  p.  46,  and  Sas.,  p.  81.     The  title  is  perplexing  here,  as  it 
recalls    Mahaparakkama's    Decisions   concerning   Intoxicants,   written   at 
Taungu  in  the  sixteenth  century. 

2  P.TH.,  p.  43.     The  Patimokkha,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  the  funda- 
mental code  of  rules,  the  whole  duty  of  the  monastic  life,  in  a  concise 
form.     The  ceremony  of  the  uposat/ta  days  is  a  solemn  undertaking  of  this 
rule  of  life  by  the  assembled  Sangha. 

3  See  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library,  p.  105. 

4  P.TH.,  p.  41. 


68  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

engaged  in  vigorous  controversy,  the  king  set  an  incompetent 
monk,  a  favourite  of  his  own,  over  both  the  learned  doctors. 
This  monk  is  described  as  ignorant  and  incapable,  '  knowing 
only  enough  to  turn  a  plough's  head  to  the  east  or  the  west,' 
yet  the  king,  as  the  chronicle  says,  '  not  knowing  that  this 
man  was  thus  and  so,'  trusted  him  to  regulate  all  matters  of 
religion.  The  favourite  proved  unable  to  judge  which  of  the 
two  opposed  views  was  false  and  which  was  true.  '  He  was,' 
says  the  chronicler,  growing  more  and  more  indignant, 
'like  a  buffalo,  who  knows  no  difference  between  the  music 
of  a  celestial  lute  played  by  a  Gandharva *  and  the  striking 
of  a  bamboo  stick  by  a  village  lad.'  The  situation  was 
beyond  Maharajadhipati's  own  powers  of  arbitrating.  He 
wished  for  peace,  and  sought  for  a  compromise  which  might 
perchance  last  during  his  own  lifetime.  A  royal  decree  was 
therefore  issued,  the  substance  of  which  was  that  every  bhikk/iu 
was  to  observe  whatever  practices  he  wished.  Only  one  result 
could  be  expected.  As  the  chronicler  drily  observes,  '  their 
dispute  did  not  subside  then.' 

But  this  was  a  time  for  graver  preoccupations.  The  old 
discontent  and  hatred  of  Burma,  that  had  been  seething  in 
Pegu  for  many  years,  had  gradually  mounted  to  the  point  of 
rebellion,  while  the  Burmese  were  harassed  by  Manipuri 
invaders.  In  1740  a  king  was  elected  in  Pegu  and  the  revolt 
became  serious.2  Prome  was  taken  by  the  Talaings,  and 
though  their  first  king  abdicated,  another,  Binya  Dala,  a  brave 
soldier  and  able  leader,  was  solemnly  consecrated  at  Pegu  city 
(Hanssavatl)  in  1746. 

From  this  time  till  the  end  of  the  eventful  campaign  that 
followed  there  is  no  literary  history  to  record.  A  life-and- 
death  struggle  had  begun  between  Talaing  and  Burman,  and 
for  some  time  the  Order  disappears  from  view  in  the  people. 

At  first  the  Talaings  were  successful,  and  the  Burmese  lost 

1  The  Gandharvas  (Pali,  Gandhabba)  are  demigods  attendant  on 
Dhatarattha,  one  of  the  four  '  guardian  gods '  of  the  earth.  The  ex- 
pression '  playing  a  lute  near  a  buffalo '  is  quoted  among  the  '  Burmese 
Proverbs,  aphorisms,  and  quaint  sayings '  in  Judson  &  Stevenson's  excellent 
Burmese  Dictionary,  Appendix,  p.  3. 

a  See  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  142  ff. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  69 

their  capital  and  their  king.  But  the  fall  of  Ava  in  1752  was 
a  turning-point.  With  the  first  attempt  to  exact  general 
submission  to  the  new  rulers  and  payment  of  taxes  there  arose 
an  obscure  captain  determined  to  resist,  a  man  with  indomitable 
faith  in  himself  and  his  countrymen.  This  man  was  the  future 
king  of  Burma,  Alaungpaya. 

Our  subject  does  not  lead  us  far  into  the  history  of  the 
national  hero  and  his  astonishing  success,  from  the  moment 
he  collected  his  first  little  army  till  the  day  when,  anointed 
king  of  Burma,  he  triumphantly  gave  his  southern  capital  the 
name  Rangoon  (in  commemoration  of  the  war).  Here  we 
may  be  permitted  to  follow  the  Sasanavamsa,  which  sums 
up  Alaungpaya's  campaigns  and  victories  in  a  few  words  of 
homely  imagery  :  '  he  drove  the  armies  of  the  King  of  Pegu 
forth  from  Burma  as  one  might  a  famished  bird  from  a  field 
of  grain.' l 

For  our  chronicler  the  great  feature  of  Alaungpaya's  reign 
was  the  religious  revival.  Monks  and  laymen  rejoiced  in 
peace  and  safety  under  a  king  who  was  popularly  believed  to 
be  the  Bodhisat.2  Alaungpaya  was  active  in  pious  works,  and 
determined  that  all  his  family,  ministers,  and  nobles  should 
follow  his  example.  Great  companies  of  the  brethren  were 
invited  to  the  palace  every  upozatha  day,  and  the  members  of 
the  royal  household  had  even  opportunities  for  study.  Whether 
zealous  or  not  for  Pali  learning,  they  probably  found  it  expedient 
to  be  studious.3 

In  this  prosperous  state  of  religion  the  Parupana-Ekamsika 
controversy  revived,  and  the  Ekamsika  school  now  had  a  good 
chance  of  making  their  practice  prevail  in  the  whole  com- 
munity. For  the  king's  acnriya,  Atula  Yasadhamma,  whose 
influence  with  Alaungpaya  was  great,  was  opposed  to  the 
stricter  sect.  The  Sasanavamsa  assures  us  that  Alaungpaya 
wished  to  go  into  the  question  thoroughly  for  himself,  but, 
being  too  much  absorbed  in  state  affairs,  he  put  off  hearing 

1  Sas.,  p.  193  ;  these  events  came  about  in  the  year  1113  of  the  Kali- 
yuga  (  =  1751  A.D.)  and  the  two  years  following. 

-  A  future  Buddha. 

3  Alaungpaya  is  remembered  in  the  secular  chronicles  as  a  patron  of 
literature.  See  J.  Gray's  Dynasty  of  Alaungprii,  p.  13. 


70  THE   PALI   LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

the  two  parties  till  graver  matters  were  dispatched.  In  the 
meantime  he  decreed  that  the  whole  Order  should  follow  the 
ruling  of  his  own  acariya. 

This  command  put  the  Parupanas  in  a  difficulty.  They 
must  either  renounce  what  they  held  to  be  the  only  practice 
warranted  by  the  scriptures  or  resist  the  king's  authority. 
Most  of  them  submitted,  but  a  few  stood  firm.  The  most 
notable  of  the  resisters  was  the  thera  Munindaghosa  of  Pagan,1 
who  not  only  continued  to  observe  the  stricter  rule  but  had 
a  large  following. 

He  is  said  to  have  declared  in  a  full  assembly  of  senior 
brethren  that  he  was  willing  to  die  rather  than  forsake  the 
precepts  of  his  master.  Alaungpaya  was  too  much  the  Oriental 
despot  to  bear  insubordination  even  from  a  mahathera,  and 
Munindaghosa  was  banished,  as  far  as  possible,  from  the 
region  where  his  influence  was  felt.  Quite  undaunted  he 
continued  his  teaching,  and  again  a  group  of  followers  gathered 
round  him.  But  in  his  banishment  he  was  ready  to  turn  from 
controversy  and  instruct  his  pupils  in  more  abstract  matters, 
for  it  was  at  this  time  that  he  translated  the  Abhidhammattha- 
sarigaha  into  Burmese.  He  seems  to  have  gone  on  for  awhile 
unmolested,  but  was  afterwards  summoned  to  Alaungpayii's 
presence  to  answer  for  his  defiance,  a  summons  which  he 
obeyed  with  a  full  expectation  of  receiving  the  death  sentence. 
So  sure  was  he  of  the  fate  awaiting  him  that  he  put  off  his 
monastic  habit  before  the  encounter,  with  the  magnanimous 
wish  to  lighten,  in  some  sense,  the  guilt  of  the  man  who 
would  shed  his  blood.  The  courageous  monk's  life  was  spared, 
but  what  happened  to  him  we  do  not  know.  All  that  the 
chronicle  adds  to  this  strange  incident  is  the  fact  that  when 
Alaungpaya  left  for  his  last  campaign  in  Siam  Munindaghosa 
was  in  prison. 

Alaungpaya  never  found  the  leisure  from  state  affairs  that 
would  allow  him  to  master  Vinaya  questions.  Disease  was 
already  undermining  his  wonderful  vigour  when  he  reached 
his  forty- sixth  year,  and  his  unsuccessful  attempt  to  conquer 
Siam  in  1760  was  the  last  undertaking  of  his  life.  When  the 

1  Sas.,p.  125. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  71 

Burmese  army  returned  from  the  expedition  they  bore  with 
them  the  dead  body  of  their  hero. 

Alaungpaya  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,  Siripavaramaha- 
dhammaraja,1  who  rebuilt  Sagaing 2  (Pali,  Jeyyapura),  while 
the  old  capital,  Ava,  was  occupied  by  a  rebel  force.  During 
this  king's  short  reign  an  attempt  was  made  by  the  Parupana 
sect  to  convince  the  king  that  right  was  on  their  side.  They 
had  hoped  much  from  the  fact  that  Nana,  or  Nanalamkara, 
the  royal  preceptor,3  was  a  Parupana.  But  the  astute  Atula  4 
was  still  leading  the  Ekamsika  party,  and  his  counter- tactics 
were  successful  enough  to  prevent  unsettled  points  of  discipline 
from  being  discussed  before  the  king. 

In  the  meantime  Nana,  who  seems  to  have  had  little  taste 
for  controversy,  won  a  reputation  for  profound  knowledge.  We 
are  told,  as  a  testimony  to  his  untiring  diligence,  that  he  was 
capable  of  mastering  or  teaching  nine  or  ten  chapters  5  of  Pali 
in  a  day.  He  had  been  a  passionate  student  from  his  youth 
up.  In  the  first  year  of  his  monastic  life  he  composed 
a  grammatical  work  called  the  Padavibhaga.  It  was  followed 
by  a  series  of  commentaries,  in  Burmese,  on  the  Nyasa  6  and 
two  Abhidhamma  texts,  the  Yamaka  and  Mahapatthana  (or 
Patthana) . 

In  1763  Naung-doa-gyi  died  and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother, 
who  is  usually  known  as  Hsin-hpyu-shin  (Pali,  Setibhinda).7 
His  accession  gave  promise  of  better  times;  among  other 

1  Naung-doa-gyl,  1760-3.     Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  184.     (Sas.,  the 
year  1122  K.Y.) 

2  Sas.,  p.  127. 

3  The  king  had  brought  this  learned  thera  from   Taungdwin  to  the 
capital  (Sas.,  p.  127). 

4  Atula  had  been  appointed  Head  of  the  Order  by  Alaungpaya.     See 
'  A  Preliminary  Study  of  the  Po°  US  Daung  Inscription',  by  Taw  Sein  Ko 
(Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii,  p.  8). 

5  Literally,  bhdnavara  section  for  recitation  ;  see  Sas.,  p.  127. 

6  See  above,  pp.'  20,  21. 

7  Sas.,  p.   128 ;   Kaliyuga  1125  (the  date  is  given  incorrectly  in  the 
printed  text  kaliyuge  pancavassadhike  dvisate  sahasse  sampatte) ;  Phayre, 
History  of  Burma,  p.  186.     See  also  Taw  Sein  Ko,  '  A  Preliminary  Study 
of  the  Po°  Uo  Daung  Inscription'  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii,  pp.  1  ff'.).     The 
Po°  Uo  Daung  inscription,  engraved  in  a  cave  near  Prome,  is  interesting 
as  commemorating  the  consolidation  of  the  Burmese  power  in  Further 
India  at  this  period. 


72  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

auspicious  changes  for  the  Order  was  the  rebuilding  of  Ava 
(Ratanapura),  which  was  reoccupied  as  the  capital  in  1766. 

The  Sasanavamsa  passes  over  this  reign  very  briefly,  and 
we  must  look  to  other  sources  for  mention  of  the  literary 
work  done.  The  king's  tutor,  Jambudlpa-Anantadhaja,  is 
merely  named,  and  we  may  guess  from  this  that  he  was  either 
of  the  Ekarpsika  sect  or  took  no  interest  in  establishing  the 
Parupana  practices.  He  was  the  author  of  a  grammatical 
commentary  (composed  in  1768)  on  the  Vinayavinicchaya.1 
Either  Setibhinda  or  his  dcariya  (the  wording  of  the  chronicle 
leaves  it  in  doubt  which  of  the  two)  did  nevertheless  take 
strong  measures  against  some  doctrinal  heresy  which  began 
to  spread  in  Burma  about  this  time.  The  heretics  were 
summoned  before  the  head  of  the  Sangha  and  '  made  to 
accept '  the  true  doctrine — how,  we  are  not  told.2 

Hsin-hpyu-shin  is  said  to  have  been  a  generous  patron  of 
literature,  and,  though  a  good  Buddhist,  he  showed  a  certain 
enthusiasm  for  Brahmanic  learning  and  had  a  number  of 
Sanskrit  works  translated  into  Burmese.  The  list  of  these 
books,  according  to  Forchhammer,  begins  with  Vopadeva's 
Sanskrit  Grammar,3  and  contains,  besides,  works  on  astrology, 
palmistry,  medicine,  and  erotics.4 

In  1776  Mahadhammarajadhiraja  (otherwise  Sing-gu-sa),5 
the  nineteen -year-old  son  of  Hsin-hpyu-shin,  succeeded  and 
reigned  for  a  few  years.  He  had  but  little  time  or  peace 
for  religious  works,  but  it  happened  that,  coming  under  the 
influence  of  Nandamala,  a  monk  of  great  learning  and 
authority  on  monastic  questions,  he  became  deeply  interested 
in  the  Parupana-Ekamsika  dispute.  The  chronicle  tells  us 
that  the  young  king  dreamed  a  strange  dream.  The  great 

1  There  is,  I  believe,  a  MS.  of  this  work  in  the  Neville  Collection  at  the 
British  Museum.     The  Vinayavinicchaya  was  by  Buddhadatta  of  Ceylon. 
Sas.,  p.  33  ;  P.TH.,  p.  43  ;  GV.,  p.  59. 

2  Sas.,  p.  128. 

3  The  Mugdhabodha,  written  in  the  thirteenth  century  ;  see  A.  Weber, 
Indische  Literaturgeschickte,  2nd  ed.,  p.  243. 

4  See  Forchhammer  in  Jardine's  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  part  iv,  Intro- 
ductory Remarks,  pp.  ix,  xiv  ;  also  J.  Gray,  Dynasty  of  Alaungpra,  p.  24, 
and  Nlti  Literature  of  Burma,  pp.  6  and  134. 

8  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  209. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  73 

god  Sakra,  clothed  in  white  and  adorned  with  white  blossoms, 
came  to  him  and  told  him  how,  on  the  bank  of  the  '  Nammada 
River  in  the  Aparanta  Country  V  the  sacred  footprints  of  the 
Buddha  were  concealed  by  the  wild  growth  of  the  jungle, 
'  root  bound  up  with  root,  trunk  with  trunk,  and  leaf  with  leaf.' 
Former  kings  in  their  ignorance  had  left  the  place  overgrown 
and  neglected,  but  on  him  whom  the  god  had  enlightened 
fell  the  duty  of  clearing  it.  The  dream  was  explained  to 
the  king  by  a  monk,  who  no  doubt  told  him  of  Nandamala, 
the  eminent  teacher.  The  king  at  once  sent  for  Nandamala 
and  thenceforth  kept  the  thera  near  him.  Nandamala  seized 
the  opportunity  of  explaining  the  Parupana— Ekamsika  contro- 
versy, and  convinced  Mahadhammarajadhirajii  that  only  the 
Parupanas  had  the  authority  of  the  sacred  texts  on  their 
side.  The  king  summoned  both  parties  to  hold  a  debate  before 
him,  in  which  the  Ekamsikas  were  hopelessly  defeated,  and 
a  royal  decree  was  issued  imposing  the  Parupana  discipline 
on  the  whole  Order.  Nandamala  was  appointed  Supreme 
Head.2  It  was  probably  at  this  time  that  he  wrote  the 
Sasanasuddhidlpika  (expounding  "  the  purity  of  religion  ",  or 
"  religious  reform  "). 

When  a  young  man,  shortly  after  his  ordination,  he  had 
translated  some  ancient  and  authoritative  Pali  works,  the 
Vinayavinicchaya,3  Suttasangaha,4  and  Mahavaggatthakatha,5 
into  Burmese.  Nandamiila's  name  is  not  associated  with  any 
work  on  the  Abhidhamma.  Perhaps  his  preference  for  Yinaya 

1  See  C.  Duroiselle's  Notes  sur  la  geographic  apocryphe  de  la  Birmanie 
apropos  de  la  Legende  de  Pilrna,  BEFEO.,  tome  v,  pp.  146  ff.     A  cetiya 
had  been  built  in  the  seventeenth  century  to  mark  the  place  of  these 
footprints,  first  rediscovered  by  the  saintly  acariya  of  Salvan-min-tara 
(1629-48). 

2  His    official    name    thenceforth    was    Xarindabhidhajamahadhamma- 
rajadhirajaguru. 

3  See  above,  p.  38. 

4  See  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library,  p.  80.     The 
Suttasangaha  is  an  anthology  from  the  Suttas,  Vimanavatthus  (legends  of 
the  celestial  abodes),  etc. 

5  Probably  Buddhaghosa's  commentary  on  the  Mahavagga  section  of 
the  Dighanikaya.     The  text  of  the  Mahavagga  had  been  interpreted  by 
Ariyalamkara  ;  see  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library,  p.  69. 
The  Mahavagga  mentioned  may,  however,  be  the  section  of  the  Vinaya 
called  by  that  name. 


74  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

studies l  influenced  his  pupils,  and  had  the  effect  of  bringing 
under  discussion  questions  which  had  been  less  prominent 
in  the  last  reign.  We  might  suppose,  too,  that  his  authority 
would  have  sufficed  for  a  settlement  of  the  Parupana-Ekamsika 
dispute,  but  this,  as  we  shall  see,  was  yet  to  be  delayed  awhile. 

We  can  now  go  on  to  the  reign  of  the  famous  Bodopaya,2 
concerning  ourselves  chiefly,  as  the  Sasanavamsa  does,  with 
its  religious  events,  and  passing  over  its  sinister  beginning, 
in  the  midst  of  conspiracy  and  murder.  Alaungpaya's  fifth  son 
was  soon  established  firmly  on  the  throne.  The  opening  years 
of  his  reign  showed  the  peculiarities  that  were  to  distinguish 
it  to  the  end — reckless  shedding  of  blood  and  lavish  building 
of  pagodas.  His  benefactions  to  the  Order — those  of  the  royal 
family  and  nobles  are  recorded  in  the  chronicle  as  coming 
from  him — were  enormous.  The  chronicler  writing  in  the 
nineteenth  century  and  the  learned  Nana,  who  held  the  post 
of  Supreme  Head  of  the  Order  in  Bodopaya' s  own  time,  both 
paint  the  king  in  colours  through  which  we  can  see  but 
a  dim  outline  of  the  truth.  Bodopaya's  personality  has  not 
lacked  describers,  and  surely  has  never  had  one  more  indulgent 
than  the  good  Sangharaja,  to  whom  was  given  the  task  of  com- 
memorating the  king's  abhiseka  (consecration,  literally  anointing) 
in  his  new  capital,  Amarapura.3  Nana,  or  Niinabhivamsa,  had 
only  been  ordained  seven  years  when  he  was  summoned  to  live 
near  the  king  and  officiate  as  rajaguru.  Naturally  he  soon 
had  a  royal  commission  to  fulfil,  and  his  learning  was  brought 
to  bear  on  the  subject  of  the  consecration  ceremony.  He 
translated  a  treatise  on  the  subject,  the  Rajabhisekagandha,  into 
Burmese.4  He  was  probably  not  the  author  of  the  original 
work,  but  revised  it  after  consulting  ancient  authorities. 

1  The  Pitakatthamain  (p.  4f3)  mentions  a  commentary  on  the  Vinaya- 
sarigaha  written  by  the  acariya  of  King  Sin-gu  at  Ratanapura  (Ava).    The 
Viuayasangaha  was  one  of  the  famous  treatises  consulted  by  Dhammaceti, 
see  above,  p.  38,  and  of  Sas.,  pp.  33,  43. 

2  Bodopaya  came  to  the  throne  in  1782:   Phayre,  History  of  Burma, 
p.  209;  Sas.,  p.  130  (1143  Kaliyuga). 

3  Amarapura,  about  6  miles  from  Ava,  was  occupied  as  the  capital  in 
1783  (Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  211  ;  Sas.,  p.  132). 

4  Sas.,  p.  131.     Nana  is  said  to  have  'purified'  the  Rajabhisekagandha. 
The  Pali  word  used  (parisodhetva]  applied  to  a  text  means  correcting  and 
clearing  away  interpolations. 


THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  75 

The  thera  then  received  the  sonorous  name  Nanabhisasana- 
dhajamahadhammarajaguru  as  a  further  token  of  the  royal 
favour. 

In  a  few  years  he  became  the  leading  personage  in  the 
Burmese  fraternity.  Bodopaya  bestowed  monasteries,  built  by 
different  members  of  his  family,  upon  several  theras  renowned 
for  learning,  gave  to  four  aged  and  eminent  theras  the  title 
sangharaja  (sometimes  translated  '  bishop '),  and  afterwards 
appointed  four  others  with  the  same  title  to  help  them  in  their 
charge.  Nanabhivamsa  was  then  placed  at  the  head  of  all, 
and  entrusted  with  the  reforming  (or,  to  use  the  chronicler's 
expression,  the  'purifying')  of  the  religious  world.  .This  was 
a  decisive  moment  for  the  controversy  that  had  so  long  divided 
the  Order.  As  we  have  seen  in  other  reigns,  the  views  of 
the  king's  chief  acariya  were  most  important  in  those  vexed 
questions  which  were  usually  settled  by  the  king,  and  which, 
under  a  ruler  of  Bodopaya's  temperament,  would  certainly  be 
settled  without  much  discussion.  And  now  the  Ekamsikas 
saw  that  they  had  not  much  to  hope  from  their  old  leader 
Atula.  He  had  been  passed  over  by  Bodopaya  after  holding 
the  post  of  king's  acariya  since  the  reign  of  Alaungpaya.  But 
before  Nana  arrived  at  the  height  of  his  honours  and  dignities 
Atula  made  another  determined  attempt  to  win  the  king  over. 
He  wrote  a  memoir  to  show  that  the  practices  of  the  Ekamsika 
sect  had  been  taught  by  no  less  an  authority  than  the  great 
Moggallana,1  who,  he  maintained,  had  composed  a  text  called 
the  Cu lagan thipada.  How  might  all  this  be  known,  Atula's 
opponents  inquired.  It  was  explained,  he  replied,  in  a  text 
known  as  the  Pitakattayalakkhanagandha,  brought  to  Burma 
from  Ceylon  by  Buddhaghosa.  But  the  Parupana  theras  had 
only  waited  long  enough  to  let  their  adversary  involve  himself 
thus  far  to  this  point,  and  in  a  few  words  they  denounced 
the  fraud  to  the  assembly.  The  text  on  which  the  Ekamsikas 
depended,  said  they,  was  a  treatise  called  Vinayaganthipada,2 

1  The  Arahat  Moggallana,  one  of  the  Buddha's  chief  disciples ;   see 
Sas.,  p.  136. 

2  There  is  a  Vinayaganthipada  in  Forchhammer's  List,  p.  v.    The  author 
given  is  the  Sinhalese  priest  Joti. 


76  THE    PALI    LITERATURE   OF    BURMA 

of  the  twelfth  century,  written  in  Ceylon  by  a  thera  Moggallana 
living  in  the  reign  of  Parakkamabahu,1  therefore  centuries 
later  than  the  time  of  Buddhaghosa,  not  to  speak  of  the  ancient 
days  of  the  Arahat  Moggallana. 

The  story  of  the  debate  is  brief,  except  in  the  description 
of  the  dramatic  moment  when  the  feeble  fraud  was  brought 
home  to  Atula.  He  was,  says  the  chronicler,  like  a  wild 
animal  caught  in  the  hunter's  trap.  But  the  Parupanas 
pressed  him  with  more  questions:  was  the  Culaganthipada 
mentioned  in  the  three  great  Vinaya  tlkas  (the  Vajirabuddhi- 
tlka,  the  SaratthadlpanT,  and  the  VimativinodanT)  ?  2  The 
unwary  Atula  replied  that  it  was.  How  conies  it  then,  said 
his  opponents,  that  in  your  Culaganthipada  we  find  the 
words  '  thus  says  the  Yajirabuddhitlkti,  the  SaratthadlpanI, 
thus  says  the  VimativinodanI '  ?  Another  pitiable  defeat  for 
the  champion  of  the  Ekamsikas.  As  the  Piirupanas  said,  the 
text  he  had  chosen  as  his  refuge  had  proved  to  be  a  peril, 
and  the  quaint  story  of  the  singer  Patali  is  told  to  illustrate 
the  case.3 

This  was  the  end  of  the  Parupana-Ekamsika  controversy. 
The  partisans  of  the  Culaganthipada  might  perhaps  have  made 
another  stand,  but  Bodopaya  was  in  no  mind  for  long  debates. 
He  promptly  issued  a  decree  that  the  Parupana  practices  were 
to  be  considered  orthodox  and  observed  by  the  whole  Order ; 
and  he  was  obeyed. 

1  The  Parakkamabahu  mentioned  is  probably  the  Samghabodhi-Para- 
kramabahu,   1153-84,  who   summoned  a  council  at   Anuradhapura  ;    see 
Kern,  Man.  Ind.  liuddh.,  p.  132. 

2  For  these  three  works  see  Sas.,  pp.  33,  34  ;  GV.,  pp.  60,  61  ;  P.TH., 
pp.  28,  29.      The  Saratthadlpam,  according  to  Sinhalese   and   Burmese 
tradition,  was  written  by  Sariputta  at   the  request  of  Parakkamabahu. 
Vajirabuddhi  and  Kassapa,  the  author  of  VimativinodanI,  also  represent 
Ceylon  tradition,  so  greatly  venerated  in  Burma. 

a  Patali  (Natapatali),  excited  by  drink  after  a  successful  performance, 
was  swept  away  by  the  current  of  the  Ganges  while  attempting  to  cross. 
His  wife,  certainly  with  unusual  presence  of  mind,  cried  out  to  him  from 
the  river-bank  to  teach  her  a  song  before  he  should  perish,  as  she  must 
needs  earn  her  own  living  thenceforth.  The  luckless  actor,  whose  lute,  as 
it  filled  with  water,  was  rapidly  weighing  him  down,  had  only  time  for 
a  few  words  of  lament — that  which  was  the  refuge  of  the  sick  and  afflicted, 
the  water  of  Gaiiga,  must,  alas  !  be  his  death.  (The  story  of  Patali  occurs 
in  the  commentary  on  the  Jataka.  See  Fausboll's  edition  of  the  Jataka, 
vol.  iii,  p.  507.) 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE   OF   BURMA  77 

Bodopaya  had  a  good  share  of  his  father's  energy,  but  a  cruelty 
and  inhumanity,  on  which  all  accounts  agree,1  outweighed  in 
him  the  qualities  that  make  a  leader  of  men.  His  belief  in 
his  own  greatness  amounted  almost  to  mania,  yet  he  could  not 
inspire  others  with  that  belief  as  Alaungpaya  had  done.  His 
attempts  at  foreign  conquest  and  schemes  for  religious  monu- 
ments, such  as  the  world  had  never  seen,  failed,  partly  from  the 
deep  hostility  and  discontent  his  cruelty  had  aroused  among 
his  subjects.  A  few  complacent  scholars  covered  his  name 
with  eulogies  during  his  lifetime,  but  the  Order,  as  a  body, 
refused  to  recognize  his  claim  to  be  the  future  Buddha,  and 
in  this  was  consistent  with  the  old  tradition  of  monastic 
independence. 

The  story  of  Bodopaya's  unfortunate  campaign  in  Siam  in 
the  years  1785  and  1786  does  not  much  concern  us.  An 
interval  of  peace  followed.  Towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century  the  oppressions  of  the  government  brought  about 
a  revolt  in  Arakan,  and  this  led  indirectly  to  the  King  of 
Burma's  first  relations  with  British  India,  the  Burmese  general 
having  pursued  the  leaders  of  the  rebellion  into  British  terri- 
tory.2 One  result  of  the  Arakan  rebellion  was  the  awakening 
of  a  new  ambition  in  Bodopaya,  namely,  to  annex  that  part  of 
Eastern  Bengal  which  had  once  belonged  to  Arakan.3  He 
needed  a  pretext  to  send  secret  envoys  to  some  of  the  native 
princes  of  India,  and  in  his  character  of  patron  of  literature  he 
was  able  to  make  his  negotiations  with  these  possible  allies 
appear  to  be  missions  to  procure  Sanskrit  books. 

Literature,  at  all  events,  gained  by  these  schemes,  for  a  con- 
siderable number  of  Sanskrit  works  were  brought  to  the  capital 
and  some  were  translated.4 

In  the  latter  part  of  Bodopaya's  reign  there  was  active  inter- 
course between  the  Sanghas  of  Ceylon  and  Burma.  Probably 
no  ecclesiastic  in  Ceylon  was  more  respected  by  the  strictly 

1  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  pp.  230,  231.  2  Phayre,  pp.  220 ff. 

3  The  King  of  Arakan  extended  his  territory  to  Dacca  about  1620, 
'profiting  by  the  confusion  which  then  existed  in  the    Mogul    Empire.' 
Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  177. 

4  Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  224. 


78  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

orthodox  Sinhalese  monks  than  Nanabhivamsa,  the  Sangharaja 
of  Burma.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  '  great  benefactor '  to  the 
group  known  as  the  '  Amarapura  sect '  or  school,  and  the 
Amarapura  school  did  in  fact  convey  to  Ceylon  a  number  of 
Pali  texts  either  of  Burmese  authorship,  or  better  known  to  the 
Burmese  fraternity  than  to  the  Sinhalese.1  A  large  number 
of  these  imported  treatises  deal  with  Abhidhamma  subjects. 
Nanabhivamsa  himself  was  very  active  in  Vinaya  teaching. 
He  lived  in  turn  at  each  of  the  several  monasteries  bestowed 
on  him  by  the  king,  directing  the  studies  of  the  Order  in 
'  the  two  Vibhangas  '  (the  Bhikkhu-  and  Bhikkhunlvibhanga, 
sections  of  the  ancient  Vinaya  text  treating  in  detail  the  code 
for  monks  and  nuns).2  He  was  the  author  of  several  works, 
in  some  of  which  we  see  the  teacher  and  guardian  of  the 
doctrine,  in  others  the  royal  preceptor,  whose  duties  included 
writing  edifying  books  at  the  king's  request.  Examples  of 
Nana's  more  strictly  religious  works  are  (1)  a  tlka  entitled 
Petalamkitra3  on  the  Nettipakarana  *  and  (2)  a  tlka  entitled 
Sadhuj janavilasini 5  on  the  Dlghanikaya.  At  the  request  of 
the  king  he  undertook  a  Burmese  translation  of  the  Pali 
commentary  on  the  Jiitaka  (the  Jatakatthakatha).  He  is  also 
the  author  of  some  short  Pali  works  of  the  Jataka  type, 
narratives  containing  religious  and  moral  teaching,  the 
Catusamaneravatthu,  the  Rajoviidavatthu,  the  Chaddantanaga- 
rajuppattikatha,  and  the  Tigumbhathomana.6  Last  on  the  list 
comes  the  RajadhirajavilasinI,  which  deserves  a  few  words  of 
description.  In  the  case  of  this  particular  work  the  king 
himself  supplied  the  subject  and  some  of  the  materials,  and 

1  This  is  the  case  with  many  of  the  texts  found  in  Ceylon  and  described 
by  Mr.  Nevill  with  the  aid  of  Sinhalese  scholars. 

2  Nana  himself  gave   the  example  of  the  stricter  rule  of  life.     The 
Sasanavamsa  tells  us  that  he  continually  observed  at  least  one  of  the 
thirteen  rules  (technically  called  dhutanga)  particular  to  the  more  ascetic 
among  the  recluses. 

3  Sas.,  p.  134  ;  P.TET.,  p.  36.  4  See  above,  pp.  5,  8. 
8  Sas.,  p.  134 ;  P.TH.,  p.  33. 

6  Lit.  'Praise  of  the  Tigumbha '  (Sas.,  p.  135).  The  Tikumbha  or 
Tigumbha  cetiya  is  the  great  Shwe  Dagon  Pagoda  in  Rangoon.  See 
Forchhammer,  Notes  on  the  Early  History  and  Geography  of  British 
Surma,  part  i,  p.  17. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  79 

the  royal  command  to  put  these  into  becoming  shape  was  con- 
veyed by  an  important  official  to  the  Sangharaja's  monastery. 
The  Brethren,  as  the  rule  or  etiquette  of  the  Order  demanded, 
laid  the  charge  on  their  Principal,  who  forthwith  carried  it  out. 
How  far  Bodopaya's  eulogists  flattered  him  is  a  question  for 
impartial  chroniclers  of  events  to  answer.  In  literary  history 
the  RajadhirajavilasinI  is  precious  as  a  specimen  of  the  '  elegant 
scholarship '  of  the  time.  This  curious  little  Pali  work,  written, 
as  explained  above,  on  the  occasion  of  Bodopaya's  consecration, 
is  in  prose,  the  prose  of  the  school  that  had  forgotten  Buddha- 
ghosa's  lessons,  or  was  determined  to  better  them.  It  staggers 
under  a  weight  of  adjectives  that  seem  meant  to  bewilder  the 
reader  with  the  display  of  the  author's  resources  as  each 
sentence  brings  its  load  along.  An  Indian  model  has  been 
copied,  and  copied  faithfully,  except  that  there  is  little  of  the 
true  Indian  fantasy  in  all  the  decoration,  while  allusions  to 
Buddhist  legends  are  brought  in  with  a  curious  sober  care- 
fulness, as  precedents  might  be  cited  in  a  legal  document. 

Royal  heroes  of  old  days  are  called  in  as  examples ;  Mahii- 
sammata,  the  first  king  and  the  ancestor  of  the  Sakya  race, 
comes  first,  and  after  him  a  series  of  dim,  mythical  figures, 
whose  presence  in  the  prologue  is  the  indispensable  compliment 
to  the  rdjadhiraja  enthroned  in  Amarapura.  With  Asoka 
begin  historical  allusions,  and  then  come  quotations  from  the 
Suttas,  from  the  commentaries,  from  the  tlkas,  from  the  Maha- 
vamsa,  from  the  Rajasikkhapada,1  even  a  definition  from  the 
Saddanlti,2  to  bring  forward  all  that  traditional  learning  might 
have  to  say  on  the  anointing  (abhiseka)  ceremony  and  its 
sacramental  virtue.  Launched  upon  this  theme  the  author 
finds  occasion  to  speak  of  everything  that  could  shed  glory  on 
the  '  righteous  king '  as  a  benefactor  of  his  people  and  of 
religion.  Ancient  maxims  are  cited  from  Jatakas  (for  example, 
the  Sankicca  and  Tesakuna  Jatakas,  in  which  the  hero  of  the 
story,  the  future  Buddha,  discourses  on  the  duties  of  kings). 
In  the  matter  of  religion  Bodopaya's  achievements  are  all 

1  Obviously  a  well-known  manual  of  the  duties  of  kings. 

2  See  above,  pp.  16,  17. 


80  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

recorded :  he  had  settled  the  Parupana-Ekamsika  dispute, 
instituted  reforms  in  all  parts  of  his  dominions,1  he  had  received 
and  returned  a  mission  to  Ceylon,  he  had  brought  images  of 
the  Buddha  from  conquered  Arakan  to  his  capital  and  received 
others  from  China,  he  had  built  cetii/as  and  celebrated  great 
festivals  of  adoration.  He  had,  indeed,  done  .everything  that 
befitted  a  monarch  who  aspired  to  be  the  Asoka  or  the  Duttha- 
gamini  of  Burma. 

To  this  man,  of  all  men,  the  symbols  of  power  and  the  external 
show  of  magnificence  were  important,  and  it  so  happened  that 
he  had  acquired  an  auspicious  possession  that  exalted  his 
more  than  normal  self-satisfaction  beyond  measure.  This  was 
a  white  elephant,  captured  in  the  forests  of  Pegu,  named 
Nibbanapaccaya,  and  conveyed  afterwards  with  great  pomp  to 
the  capital,  where,  if  we  judge  from  the  Rajadhirajavilasinl, 
it  was  the  real  hero  of  the  abhiseka  festival. 

Bodopaya's  eulogist,  obliged  to  say  at  least  as  much  about 
the  elephant  as  about  the  king,  attacks  the  task  with  courage. 
He  brings  forward  the  traditional  elephant  lore  embodied  in 
the  Hatthisutta 2  to  show  that  every  kingly  quality  and 
auspicious  mark  was  possessed  by  Nibbanapaccaya.  Perhaps 
we  have  no  right  to  judge  it  all  from  our  own  point  of  view, 
but  as  we  read  we  cannot  but  picture  Nanabhivamsa,  after  the 
sumptuous  festival,  sighing  over  his  weary  task. 

For  us  the  interest  of  the  RajadhirajavilasinI  is  rather  in 
the  literary  references  than  the  matter  or  style,  which  are  both 
tiresome.  The  author  is  very  careful  to  show  that  he  has  not 
neglected  secular  any  more  than  religious  authorities  on  his 
subject.  He  draws  from  the  literature  of  various  periods  and 
from  many  branches  of  learning.  We  pass  from  the  ancient 
suttas  to  the  fifth-century  commentaries  and  to  the  later  tikas, 
from  these  to  twelfth  -  century  grammar,  from  the  famous 
Elephant-book  to  the  royal  chronicle  of  Ceylon,  from  the 
Jataka  glossary,  Jatakabhidhana,  to  Sanskrit  etymology  and 

1  The    '  five    regions  '    RamaniJa,    Kasmira,    Yonaka,    Yavana,    and 
Rakkhanga  are  mentioned. 

2  Lit.  elephant-suttas  (aphorisms),  a  well-known  manual  for  elephant- 
trainers. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  81 

Brahmanic  astrology  and  chiromancy.1  But  the  author's 
favourite  source  is  the  Pali  Jataka  itself.  His  work  is  adorned 
with  verses  and  passages  of  the  commentary  on  certain  tales 
of  this  famous  collection.  In  the  tales  selected  the  hero  is 
almost  invariably  a  righteous  king  or -an  elephant  perfect  in 
all  points ;  among  them  the  Allnacitta,2  the  Silavanaga,3  and 
Vessantara 4  Jatakas  occur  most  frequently.  The  Tesakuna- 
jiitaka,5  the  Dummedha,6  Culapaduma,7  andUmmagga8  Jatakas 
also  provide  illustrations. 

In  this  respect  the  Rajadhirajavilasinl  is  a  typical  piece 
of  Burmese  literature,  and  charms  us,  in  the  end,  for  all  its 
tediousness.  For  the  Jatakas  are  a  possession  common  to  the 
religious  community  and  the  lay- world,  the  learned  and  the 
unlettered.  From  the  days  when  they  were  rudely  pictured 
on  Taruk-pye-min's  temple  walls  at  Pagan 9  to  the  date  of  the 
latest  editions  we  find  in  the  British  Government's  Official  List 
of  Publications,  the  Jatakas  have  been  a  Bible  to  the  Burmese. 
This  comparison  applies  most  aptly  to  the  Jatakas  of  the 
iMahanipata  or  Great  Section  (the  last)  of  the  Jataka  book,  con- 
taining the  longest  narratives  of  the  Bodhisat,  and  relating  his 
deeds  and  golden  sayings  in  his  later  existences  either  as  a  man 
or  a  god.10  Their  art  is  the  old  art  of  the  Oriental  tale-teller, 
with  its  mingling  of  unbridled  fantasy  and  minute  realism ; 
their  wisdom  is  the  wisdom  of  old  proverbs  and  maxims  of 
the  Indian  people ;  their  lesson  the  praise  of  the  Teacher,  the 
supremely  gifted  among  men,  the  Bodhisat,  playing  many 

1  The  Sanskrit  Brihajjataka  and  Samudrikalaksana  are  quoted. 
'  See  Jataka,  Fausboll's  edition,  vol.  i,  pp.  21  ff! 
3  Jataka  (Nidana,  p.  45),  vol.  i,  p.  319. 
*  Jataka,  vol.  vi,  p.  479. 

5  Jataka,  vol.  v,  p.  109.     In  this  charming  tale  the  king's  duties  are 
expounded  to  him  by  the  three  birds  he  has  adopted  as  his  children. 

6  Jataka,  vol.  i,  p.  444. 

7  Jataka,  vol.  ii,  p.  115. 

8  Jataka,  vol.  vi,  p.  329. 

9  1248-79  A.D.     See  A.  Griinwedel,  Buddhistische  Studien.     Veroffent- 
lichungen  aus    dem    konigl.    Museum  fur    Viilkerkunde,   1897,   Band  v, 
pp.  128-31. 

10  In  passing  we  may  mention  the  titles  most  familiar  to  every  Burmese 
Buddhist  from  his  childhood  onward — the  Temi,  the  Janaka,  Suvannasama, 
Nimi,    Mahosadha,    Bhuridatta,    Candakumara,   Narada,   Vidhura,   and 
Vessantara  Jatakas. 


82  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

parts.  The  author  of  the  RajadhirajavilasinI  might  be  thought 
(by  Bodopaya)  to  be  pointing  to  the  virtues  of  the  king  who 
founded  Amarapura,  but  Nanabhivamsa  knew  that  his  readers 
would  see  in  all  a  homage  to  the  Lord  Buddha.  What  these 
edifying  legends  are  to  the  Burmese  to-day  they  were  when 
Nanabhivamsa  wrote,  and  to  many  generations  before  his.  To 
understand  the  literature,  '  serious '  or  popular,  of  Burma  we 
cannot  know  the  Pali  Jataka  too  well. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE  PALI  LAW-TEXTS  OF  BURMA  —  PALI  LITERATURE  IN 
THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  —  MIN-DON-MIN  AND  THE 
FIFTH  COUNCIL  —  THE  ERA  OF  THE  PRINTING-PRESS  — 
CONCLUSION 

Alaungpaya's  conquest  of  the  Talaings  had  been  more  than 
a  feat  of  arras  and  establishing  of  military  supremacy.  He  had 
set  himself  to  crush  the  Talaing  language  and  nationality. 
If  the  consequent  inequality  in  culture  between  Upper  and 
Lower  Burma  was,  after  all,  less  than  we  should  expect,1 
the  reason  is  to  be  sought  in  the  past  religious  history  of 
both  provinces.  The  equalizing  and  unifying  element  in  the 
states  so  often  at  war  or  in  rivalry  was,  and  had  always 
been,  the  Buddhist  religion  and  the  Pali  language.  The 
kings  who  had  ruled  over  the  widest  territory — Anorata, 
Dhammaceti,  Bayin  Naung,  Ukkamsika,  Alaungpaya,  Hsin- 
hpyu-shin,  Bodopaya — each  in  his  turn  and  in  his  own  way, 
had  lent  his  power  to  the  service  of  religion  and  encouraged 
scholarship.  And  even  in  the  worst  times  of  disorder  and 
change  there  had  been  centres  of  learning  where  the  Order 
could  be  comparatively  at  peace ;  there  were  always  remote 
or  protected  monasteries  here  and  there  where  old  texts  could 
be  copied  and  new  commentaries  and  treatises  composed.  The 
stream  of  learning  flowed  wherever  a  channel  offered  itself, 
and,  whether  in  the  north  or  the  south,  was  often  reinforced 
from  Ceylon. 

We  have  seen  how  the  vigour  and  influence  of  the  school 
named,  after  the  place  of  its  origin,  the  Slhalasangha,  continued 
in  Burma  from  generation  to  generation.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  abundant  vitality  of  the  schools  of  Further  India  at  the 
time  of  the  eighteenth  -  century  revival  reacted  on  Ceylon, 
where  the  Burmese  school  known  as  the  Amarapura  sect 

1  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  last  Census  Report  judges  Upper  Burma 
decidedly  superior  to  Lower  Burma  in  the  matter  of  'literacy',  and 
mentions  the  Upper  Burman  pongyl  for  his  '  share  in  the  labours  of  the 
past'  (E.  Lowin.  Report  on  the  Census  of  Burma,  1901,  p.  65). 


84  THE    PALI    LITERATUBE    OF   BURMA 

introduced  a  number  of  texts  either  new  to  the  Sinhalese 
brethren  or  long  fallen  out  of  mind. 

The  intimate  connexion,  religious  and  literary,  between 
Ceylon  and  Burma  from  the  eleventh  century  onwards  needs 
no  further  illustration.  Though  the  Buddhists  of  Indo-China 
have  attempted  to  appropriate  Buddhaghosa,  they  have  always, 
in  all  their  literary  chronicles,  done  ample  and  painstaking 
justice  to  Sinhalese  scholarship  and  honoured  Sinhalese  names. 
Sinhalese  influence  is  seen  at  its  strongest  in  the  earlier  periods. 
When  we  come  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  we  find 
that  a  branch  of  Pali  literature  has  developed  in  Burma  owing 
nothing  or  very  little  to  Ceylon  and  bearing  deep  traces  of 
a  purely  Indian  origin.  We  come,  that  is,  to  the  period  of 
redaction  of  Pali  Dhammasatthas  (Sanskrit  dharmasastra]  or 
law-codes,  of  which  some  were  first  drawn  up  after  Alaungpayii's 
conquest  of  Pegu  and  during  the  reorganization  of  the  greatly 
extended  kingdom  of  Burma.  Others,  as  we  shall  see,  were 
more  ancient  and  had  been  the  patrimony  of  the  Takings. 

These  ancient  codes  of  Burma,  and,  with  certain  differences, 
the  Pali  law-texts  of  later  times,  are  based  on  Hindu 
d/tarmasdstras,  Manu,1  and  others.  This  has  become  clear 
from  the  researches  of  various  scholars  whose  opinions  are 
given  by  Sir  John  Jardine,  formerly  chief  Judicial  Commissioner 
for  Burma,  in  his  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  where  he  adds  much 
precious  material  from  his  own  stores  of  learning  and  experience 
of  Indian  and  Burmese  law.2 

His  collaborator,  Dr.  Forchhammer,  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  Talaing  States  became  political  dependencies  of 
powerful  Hindu  colonies  existing  in  Pegu  before  the  eleventh 
century,  and  adopted  Hindu  codes  from  them.3  We  cannot 
venture  here  to  do  more  than  record  the  Burmese  tradition. 

1  See  The  Laws  of  Manu,  translation  by  G.  Biihler  with  introduction, 
SEE.,  vol.  xxv,  and  J.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  Grundriss,  ii,  8. 

2  The  Burmese  '  Dhammathats '  are  the  base  of  Buddhist  law  as  now- 
administered   in   Burma.      '  The   Pali   scholar,'   says   Sir  John   Jardine, 
4  ought  to  have  preceded  the  judge.'     Sir  John  Jardine  himself  called  the 
Pali  scholar  to  the  judge's  aid,  most  fortunately  for  those  interested  in  the 
Pali  literature. 

3  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  pp.  38,  62,  63. 


THE   PALI   LITERATURE   OF   BURMA  85 

The  vexed  question  of  ancient  origins  is  a  subject  for  a  more 
elaborate  study  and  more  competent  treatment  than  is  possible 
in  the  present  essay.  We  will  now  touch  very  briefly  on  the 
main  points  in  the  history  of  the  Pali  law-texts  of  Burma,  as 
traced  by  the  two  learned  authors  mentioned. 

We  have  already  spoken  1  of  the  ancient  Dhammavilasa  com- 
piled in  Pali  by  the  Talaing  monk  Sariputta  of  Patlppajeyya 
near  Dala2  about  the  year  1174  A.D.,  when  Narapati-si-thu 
reigned  at  Pagan. 

We  come  next  to  the  Wagaru  Dhammasattha,3  compiled  by 
the  king  of  that  name  reigning  at  Martaban  in  1280.  It  is 
typical  and  important.  Forchhammer  in  his  learned  study  of 
this  text  makes  a  careful  comparison  between  the  Wagaru  and 
the  Hindu  Manu  and  other  ancient  codes,  chiefly  Yajiiavalkya4 
and  Narada.5  The  comparison  brings  out  clearly  the  pervading 
Indian  element  in  the  code  ;  at  the  same  time  the  translator 
finds  material  for  some  very  interesting  observations  on  the 
radical  difference  between  the  Buddhistic  law,  of  which  this 
is  the  first  noteworthy  document,  and  the  Brahmanic  law,  from 
which  the  Talaing  code  takes  its  form  and  most  of  its  pro- 
visions. This  difference  is  in  the  spirit.  The  Vedic,  sacerdotal 
element  has  vanished  from  the  Wagaru.  For  instance, 
sacraments  (such  as  marriage),  the  efficacy  of  sacrifice,  the 
possibility  of  expiation  by  penance,  are  all  an  essential  part  of 
Brahmanic  law.  But  the  Buddhist  lawgivers  ignored  the 
sacramental  view  of  marriage,  and  based  their  theory  of 
punishment  on  the  doctrine  of  karma,  which,  as  will  be 
remembered,  takes  the  past  and  future  existences  of  the  indi- 
vidual into  account.  With  this  doctrine  in  mind  they  thought 
out  a  system  of  legislation  to  defend  the  social  order  without 
inflicting  what  must  be,  according  to  their  theory,  unjustified, 

1  See  above,  p.  33. 

2  Opposite  Rangoon.     See  J.  Jardine's  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  pt.  iv, 
Introductory  Preface  by  E.  Forchhammer,  p.  5  ;  and  Notes,  pt.  vii,  Preface 
by  J.  Jardine,  p.  1. 

3  Translated  by  E.  Forchhammer  as  part  of  the  Jardine  Prize  Essay  in 
1885  ;  Rangoon,  Government  Printing  Press. 

4  A.  Weber,  Indische  Literaturgeschichte,  2nd  ed.,  pp.  267,  299. 
8  A.  Weber,  op.  cit,  p.  296. 


86  THE    PALI  LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

useless,  illogical  penalties.  Their  system  is  described  as  a  civil 
code  punishing  every  crime  or  offence  with  fines,  demanding 
'  compensation  which  is  proportionate  to  the  amount  of  damage 
occasioned  by  one  person  to  another '.  '  Morally  no  punish- 
ment can  be  inflicted,'  says  Forchhammer,  '  because  in  the 
Buddhist's  belief  every  deed  will  with  unerring  certainty 
bring  its  own  definite  reward  or  punishment,  which  cannot  be 
increased  or  diminished  by  the  appreciation  or  condemnation  of 
other  beings.' 1  Forchhammer's  study  of  the  Wagaru  led  him 
to  believe  that  the  Taking  law-code,  Indian  in  origin,  reflects 
the  social  and  religious  conditions  of  ancient  India  during 
the  supremacy  of  Buddhism,2  and  can  claim  to  belong  to 
a  Buddhist  Manava  school  earlier  than  the  well-known  Brah- 
manic  recension  of  Manu.3  The  translator  of  the  Wagaru, 
unhappily,  did  not  live  to  follow  up  the  researches  he  had 
begun,  and  by  which  he  might  have  found  a  firm  foundation 
for  this  theory.  It  remains  an  interesting  conjecture.  We 
must  leave  it  for  the  present  where  he  left  it,  to  trace  the 
stages  of  development  through  which  the  Pali  and  Burmese 
Dhammasatthas  passed,  from  the  predominance  of  the  Hindu 
Institutes  preserved  by  the  Talaings  to  the  victory  of  the 
Buddhist  tradition  embodied  in  the  later  codes,  where  the 
Vinaya-  and  Suttapitakas  are  the  authority  and  the  Jataka 
supplies  precedents  and  examples. 

The  Wagaru  was  translated  into  Pali  in  the  sixteenth 
century  by  a  Talaing  jurist  with  the  auspicious  name  of 
Buddhaghosa.4  '  With  him,'  Forchhammer  says,  '  begins  the 
authenticated  history  of  Burmese  Dhammathats.'  Buddha- 
ghosa's  Manusara  is  a  Pali  translation  of  the  Wagaru 
Dhammasattha,  till  then  only  known  in  the  Talaing  language.5 

In  the  seventeenth  century  another  code,  the  Manu- Yin,6  was 

1  See  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  pp.  61,  62. 

2  For  a  description  of  these  conditions  see  Rhys  Davids'  Buddhist  India 
('  Story  of  the  Nations  '  series),  1903. 

3  See  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  p.  38. 

4  Needless  to  say,  the  Buddhaghosa  of  commentary  fame  profits  by  the 
coincidence.    The  Talaing  tradition  makes  the  indefatigable  sage  the  bearer 
of  Hindu  law-books  to  Ramanha  in  the  fifth  century  (Notes,  pt.  iii,  p.  x). 

8  See  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  pt.  viii,  p.  2. 

6  Manoo  Reng.     See  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  Introd.  Remarks,  p.  xii. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE   OF    BURMA  87 

compiled  in  verse.  It  is  in  substance  the  Wagaru  Dhamma- 
sattha,  but  contains  additional  matter  from  the  hpyatton 
or  '  decisions  ',  that  is,  Burmese  ancient  customary  law,  purely 
Buddhistic  and  founded  chiefly  on  certain  Jiitakas.1  A  seven- 
teenth-century version  of  the  Dhammavilasa  Dhammasattha, 
dated  16502  and  drawn  up  by  a  second  Dhammavilasa,  is  also 
called  a  Manu  Dhammasattha ;  very  characteristic  of  the  later 
period  is  the  introduction  of  a  Buddhist  element,  absent 
in  the  Talaing  original,  for  instance,  quotations  from  the 
Dhammapada. 

The  next  stage  in  the  history  of  the  law-texts  is  one  of 
marked  change  and  development.  Alaungpaya  had  proved  him- 
self a  pitiless  destroyer,  but  he  proposed  to  build  up  a  sound 
administration  for  his  new  kingdom.  Some  law-codes  were 
compiled  at  his  command,  a  Manu- Yin  in  1756,  the  important 
Manu-Kyay  in  1758-60,3  and  a  third,  the  Darajjavitaranl. 
The  Manu-Kyay  exists  only  in  the  Burmese  version,4  but  belongs 
to  Pali  literature  by  the  fact  that  it  is  largely  grounded  on 
canonical  Pali  texts,  namely,  Jatakas  (the  Mahosadha  and 
Vidhura  and  other  extracts  from  the  Suttapitaka),  the  Milinda- 
paiiha,  the  Samantapasadika  (Buddhaghosa's  commentary  on 
the  Vinaya),  the  Kankhavitaram  (commentary  on  the  Pati- 
mokkha),  the  Visuddhimagga,  and  the  Saratthadlpanltlka.5 
By  the  time  Burmese  law  is  crystallized  into  this  famous  code 
and  the  hardly  less  famous  Manuvannana,6  we  can  see  how 

1  The  Vidhura  and  Mahosadha  Jatakas  are  examples  of  Jatakas  dear  to 
the  Buddhist  lawgiver.     See,   for  the   Burmese  version   of  the  famous 
Vidhura  Jataka,  the  translation  by  Mr.  R.  F.  St.  Andrew  St.  John  iii 
JRAS.,  1896. 

2  Notes,  pt.  iv,  p.  5,  and  pt.  vii,  p.  2. 

3  See  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  pt.  iv,  Introd.  Preface,  p.  4.     The  author 
was  Bhumrnajeyya  Mahasiri  Uttamajeyya.     Sir  John  Jardine  points  out 
resemblances  between  the  law  of  marriage  and  divorce  in  the  Manu-Kyay 
and  the  Hindu  code,  Vyavaharamayukha,  in  force  in  the  Dekkhan  (Notes, 
pt.  iv,  p.  10). 

4  Published  at  Moulmein  and  translated  into  English  by  Dr.  Richardson 
in  1847. 

5  Tlka  on  the  Vinaya,  by  Sariputtara,  written  in  the  reign  of  Narapati- 
si-thu.     P.TL.,  p.  38  ;   Forchhammer,  List,  p.  iv.      See  also  Notes,  pt.  iii, 
Introd.  Remarks,  p.  12,  and  pt.  iv,  Introd.  Preface,  pp.  4  and  5. 

8  The  Manuvannana  Dhammasattha  was  published  in  1898  by  Colonel 
Horace  Brown.  See  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  pt.  ii,  p.  1. 


88  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

the  spirit  of  Buddhist  ethics  has  permeated  the  Dhammasatthas 
and  supplied  the  place  of  those  religious  sanctions  which  we 
can  hardly  imagine  absent  from  an  Indian  legal  text.  The 
Manu-Kyay  professes  a  respect  for  learning ;  only  such  men, 
it  says,  should  be  made  judges  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
Pitakas  and  the  Vedas.1 

Hsin-hpyu-shin  followed  the  example  of  his  father,  and  by 
his  order  several  law-books  were  written  between  1766  and 
1774  ;  among  these  were  the  Manusara-shwe-myin,  the 
Manuvannanii,2  and  the  Vinicchayapakiisanl.  The  author, 
Vanna-kyaw-din,  was  a  pupil  of  the  Sangharaja  Jambudipa- 
Anantadhaja.  He  is  said  to  have  been  still  a  member  of  the 
Order  when  he  wrote  the  first-named  work.  A  poetical  version 
of  the  Manu-Yin  mentioned  above,  known  as  the  Manuyinlanka, 
is  ascribed  to  him.  The  aid  of  theras  learned  in  the  Tripitaka 
was  thought  necessary  by  this  time,  and  we  are  told  that  the 
monks  Tejosara,  Chandapauna,  and  Toungdwin  Kyaw  assisted 
the  council  of  jurists  called  together  at  Ava  by  Hsin-hpyu-shin.3 

An  example  of  a  modern  law-text  is  the  Mohavicchedan!,4 
written  in  the  year  1832  by  Rajabala-kyaw-din.  It  is  com- 
posed in  Pali  verses  (gat ha).  Forchhammer  has  an  interesting 
note  on  this  work,  in  which  he  says :  '  It  differs  in  one 
important  point  from  all  other  Burmese  law-books.  Manu 
the  Rishi  [i.e.  sage]  has  entirely  disappeared.  Riijabala-kyaw- 
din,  aware  probably  of  the  incongruity  of  placing  Manu  in 
the  Buddhist  pantheon,  as  had  been  done  by  the  jurists  of  the 
Alompraic  period,  and  not  finding  any  reference  in  the 
Buddhist  scriptures  that  could  support  Manu  in  the  dignity 

1  Notes,  pt.  iv,  Introd.  Preface,  p.  7  ;  on  the  Vedas,  see  above,  pp.  50,  51. 

2  There  is  a  rather  significant  difference  between  the  Burmese  and  Pali 
versions  of  the  Manuvannana.     In  the  former  there  are  frequent  allusions 
to  the  Vyakaranas  and  other  works  translated  by  the  king's  command 
from  the  Sanskrit  (on  astrology,  palmistry,  medicine,  and  erotics).     These 
references  are  absent  from  the  Pali  version,  which,  composed  by  a  monk, 
shows  the  influence  of  the  author's  monastic  traditions. 

3  At  this  council  was  prepared  the  Lankasara  (the  collective  name  by 
which  the  Manuvannana  and  Manusara  are  known).    See  Notes  on  Buddhist 
Law,  pt.  iv,  Introd.  Preface,  p.  5. 

4  See  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  pt.  vi,  p.  1.     Note  by  Forchhammer  and 
translation  by  Maung  Theka  Phyoo  of  the  Law  of  Inheritance  according 
to  the  Mohavicchedan!  Dhammathat. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  89 

of  a  lawgiver  to  a  Buddhist  community,  broke  with  the  past 
traditional  history  of  the  law-books  of  his  country ;  he  says  in 
the  introduction  that,  obedient  to  the  request  of  his  king,  he 
proceeds  to  unfold  the  law,  as  it  was  preached  by  the  all-wise 
Buddha  in  his  great  compassion  for  the  ignorance  of  men  and 
recorded  originally  in  the  Magadha  language,  the  first  of  all 
languages,  the  mother  of  all  other  tongues  (mulabhdsa)  .  .  . 
The  text  of  the  MohavicchedanI  is  the  somewhat  rearranged 
but  otherwise  identical  material  of  the  Manu  Dhammathats.' 

Pali  has  never  become  to  any  great  degree  the  language  of 
things  secular ;  its  destiny  seems  to  be  to  return  to  the  service 
of  religion.  In  the  legal  texts  we  notice  the  use  of  the  Pali 
language  (1)  to  preserve  a  Hindu  tradition  derived  from  the 
Talaings,  (2)  to  consecrate  Burmese  customary  law  which 
could,  we  may  suppose,  be  codified  equally  well  in  the  Burmese 
idiom.  The  classic  literary  language,  naturally  chosen  in  such 
cases  as  the  attribute  of  awe  and  majesty  befitting  the  written 
code,  is  here  also  the  reminder  of  the  debt  that  Burmese  custom 
and  law  owe  to  Buddhism.  An  excellent  example  of  Buddhist 
influence  is  the  change  in  the  wife's  legal  position.  But  the 
Pali  law-texts  are  full  of  other  interesting  matter.  The  few 
above  mentioned  could  not  be  left  out  of  an  account,  however 
summary,  of  the  Pali  books  of  the  Burmese.  The  place  due 
to  them  has  of  necessity  been  curtailed  in  this  sketch.  In 
leaving  them,  however,  to  pass  on  to  the  religious  literature 
of  the  nineteenth  century  the  writer  dares  to  hope  that  this 
branch  of  Oriental  history  and  its  problems  will  attract 
scholars  again  as  they  fortunately  did  some  years  ago,  with  the 
results  only  too  briefly  indicated  above. 

We  must  now  return  to  the  history  of  monastic  scholarship 
in  Burma. 

Bodopaya  died  in  1819.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  grandson 
Hpa-gyl-doa.1  '  He  commenced  his  reign  well/  says  Phayre.2 
'  He  remitted  some  taxes  for  three  years,  and  in  a  speech  to  his 
courtiers  promised  to  rule  justly  and  to  follow  the  precepts 

1  Sivitribhavanadityapavarapanditamahadhammaraja,  Sas.,  p.  142. 

2  History  of  Burma,  p.  i32. 


90  THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

of  religion.'  The  Sasanavamsa  is  at  pains  to  show  that  he 
consulted  learned  monks  and  ministers  on  various  questions 
concerning  the  king's  duty  to  the  fraternity,  the  perpetuity 
of  grants  of  land  for  religious  pvirposes,  and  so  forth.  These 
discussions  led  to  much  research  in  ancient  texts.  On  one 
of  those  occasions  a  minister,  who  was  an  authority  on  the 
Vinaya,  laid  down  the  principle  that  lands  granted  by  kings 
in  former  times,  for  the  building  of  celiyas  and  cihuras,  should 
be  perpetually  reserved  to  the  Order.  He  fearlessly  sought 
a  precedent  as  far  back  as  the  time  of  the  Buddha  Sujiita,  and 
the  king  was  entirely  satisfied.1 

Hpa-gyl-doa  was  a  respecter  of  tradition.  Under  his  auspices 
the  modern  Rajavamsa  (chronicle  of  the  kings)  was  compiled 
at  Pagan.2  His  preceptor  Paiiiiaslha3  was  appointed  Supreme 
Head  of  the  Order.  There  is  no  mention  in  the  Sasanavamsa 
of  any  books  written  by  him. 

Hpa-gyl-doa's  time,  either  as  a  patron  of  the  Order  or  as  '  lord 
of  kings',  was  very  short.  In  1824  war  was  formally  declared 
by  the  British  Government  against  Burma,  and  two  years 
of  desperate  fighting  followed.  The  death  of  his  general 
Mahabandula  broke  the  Burmese  king's  courage.  The  queen 
and  other  partisans  of  war  had  perhaps  inspired  him  till 
then  with  some  hopes  of  victory,  but  the  British  occupation 
of  Rangoon,  Pegu  City,  and  Arakan  dealt  these  hopes 
a  mortal  blow.  In  1826  the  Burmese  submitted,  and  the 
treaty  of  Yandabo  was  signed. 

Hpa-gyl-doa  saw  his  kingdom  reduced  and  his  power  crippled. 
Something  in  this  man  failed  then,  where  his  forerunners 
Alaungpaya  and  Bodopaya  would  have  risen  up  in  another 
effort.  He  sank  into  listless  melancholy  and  inefficiency,  and 
in  1837  was  deposed  by  his  younger  brother  Tharawadi-min.4 

Tharawadi-min,  who  died  insane,  showed  in  his  earlier  days 

1  Sas.,  p.  145. 

'2  In  1830.  It  was  printed  in  the  reign  of  Min-don-min.  See  E.  Huber, 
BEFEO.,  tome  iv,  pp.  494  seq. 

3  Of   Salin  -  myo,    afterwards    Munindabhisirisaddhammadhajamaha  - 
dhammarajiidhirajaguru. 

4  Siripavaradityalokadhipati,  1837.     Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  287  ; 
Sas.,  p.  146. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  91 

great  respect  for  the  Order.  His  first  preceptor,  Suriyavamsa, 
was  proclaimed  Supreme  Head  by  a  royal  decree.  When  this 
thera  died  he  received,  the  Sasanavamsa  tells  us,  extraordinary 
funeral  honours.  His  pupil  Neyyadhamma  was  then  appointed 
Sangharaja  ;  it  was  he  who  received  at  Amarapura  an 
important  Sinhalese  mission,  including  the  learned  Paiinatissa 
and  some  others.  Neyyadhamma's  pupils  were  numerous,  and 
he  was  an  enthusiastic  teacher.  As  the  chronicler  says,1  '  in 
order  that  religion  might  long  endure  and  that  his  hearers 
might  easily  arrive  at  full  comprehension,  he,  with  the  aid 
of  various  books,  revised  the  text  of  the  Saddhammapajotika", 
commentary  on  the  Mahiiniddesa,  and  made  a  translation 
thereof  into  Burmese.' 2 

The  Sasanavamsa  does  not  mention  any  other  scholars  of 
this  reign. 

Tharawadi  -  min's  son  and  successor,  Pagan  -  min,3  only 
appears  in  the  Sasanavamsa  to  mark  the  date  of  some  eminent 
scholars  of  the  time,  among  whom  Neyyadhammabhivamsa  is 
mentioned  as  the  author  of  a  Burmese  translation  of  the 
SaddhammavilasinI,4  the  commentary  on  Patisambhidamagga 
(of  the  Khuddakanikaya).  Neyyadhammabhivamsa's  chief 
pupil,  Pannasami,  a  young  monk  of  five  years'  standing,  began 
his  scholarly  career  at  this  time.  His  work  as  a  chronicler 
(he  was  the  author  of  the  Sasanavamsa)  is  of  special  interest 
for  us.  His  first  essay  was  a  translation  into  Burmese  of 
a  commentary  on  difficult  passages  (Ganthipadatthavannana") 
of  the  venerable  grammatical  work  Saddatthabhedacinta.5  Ten 
years  later,  after  much  labour  and  comparison  of  texts,  he 
produced  a  revised  edition  of  the  commentary  on  the  Abhi- 
dhanappadlpika  6  and  translated  it  into  Burmese. 

1  Sas.,  p.  148. 

2  The  commentary    on   the   Mahaniddesa  (the   eleventh   book   of  the 
Khuddakanikaya)  was    composed  in  Ceylon  by  Upasena.      Sas.,  p.  33  ; 
GV.,  p.  70. 

:i  Siripavaradityavijayanantayasamahadhanimarajadhiraja,  1846,  Sas., 
p.  148.  He  is  described  briefly  but  so  drastically  by  Y"ule,  in  the  Mission 
to  the  Court  of  Ava,  that  we  cau  hardly  be  surprised  at  the  silence  of  the 
Sasanavamsa. 

4  By  Mahanama  of  Ceylon.     Sas.,  p.  33. 

5  See  above,  pp.  20,  22.  6  See  above,  p.  27. 


92  THE    PALI  LITERATURE   OF    BURMA 

Paniiasami  succeeded  his  master  as  Sangharaja  in  the 
following  reign.  It  is  rather  curious  that  not  a  single  Pali 
composition  is  mentioned  by  him  as  belonging  to  this  decade. 
His  colleagues  were  nevertheless  very  active,  especially  in 
translating  from  the  Pali.  The  Anguttara-,  Samyutta-,  and 
Dighanikayas  were  translated  with  their  commentaries.  The 
authors  of  these  translations  were  respectively  Paiinajota- 
bhidhaja,  Manijotasaddhammalamkara,  and  Medhabhivamsa.1 

We  now  come  to  the  closing  scene  of  the  old  Order  in 
Burma.  The  last  of  the  pious  and  zealous  Burmese  kings, 
perhaps  the  most  sincere  of  all  and  the  most  single-minded 
in  his  support  of  religion,  came  to  the  throne.  This  was 
Min-ddn-min,  whose  reign,  lasting  from  1852  to  1877,  was 
a  period  of  peace,  good  government,  and  general  content,  while 
religion,  we  are  told,  was  practised  with  a  new  enthusiasm  not 
only  in  the  monasteries  but  in  every  rank  of  the  laity.  The 
king's  command  and  example,  as  of  old,  were  all-powerful  ; 
and  Min-don-min  was  not  like  Bodopaya.  His  tutor  and  eulogist, 
the  author  of  the  Sasanavamsa,  says  less  of  cetiyas  and 
monasteries  presented  to  the  Sangha  than  of  the  vigour  with 
which  religious  studies  were  carried  on  and  the  precepts  of 
the  Buddha  observed. 

These  were  golden  days,  if  they  are  rightly  reflected  in 
the  verses  quoted  by  Paniiasami  from  his  own  poem,  the 
Nagarajuppattikatha,2  written  to  commemorate  the  founding 
of  the  new  capital  Mandalay  (Pali:  Ratanapunna) .3  Paniia- 
sami's  Nagarajuppatti  has  rather  more  artistic  pretensions  than 
the  Rajadhirajavilasinl,  being  composed  in  couplets  (slokas) 
throughout,  whereas  Nanabhivamsa  ventures  into  verse  at  the 
beginning  and  end  of  his  work  merely  to  give  a  few  specimens 
of  metres.  The  tone  of  the  two  works,  however,  is  the  same 
conventional  eulogy,  with  quotations  from  the  Jataka  and 
references  to  legendary  and  historic  kings,  Mahiisudassana, 
Mandhatu,  Asoka.  Needless  to  say,  this  was  an  auspicious 
time  for  scholarship.  Pannasami,  himself  a  prolific  writer, 

1  Sas.,  p.  148.  2  Sas.,  pp.  149,  153. 

3  Founded  in  1857. 


THE   PALI   LITERATURE    OF   BURMA  93 

mentions  the  work  of  some  of  his  contemporaries.1  The 
Sarigharaja  Xeyyadhamma  composed  '  at  the  king's  request ' 
a  work  entitled  Surajamaggadlpanl.  Meanwhile  the  old  tradi- 
tional learning  was  not  neglected.  The  Sangharaja  had  been 
expounding  the  commentary  on  the  Majjhimanikaya  to  his 
pupils.  Under  his  direction  a  Burmese  translation  of  the 
commentary  was  prepared,  embodying  his  interpretation  of 
the  text. 

The  original  text  of  the  Jataka  tales  was  also  translated  at 
this  time  by  the  thera  Medhabhivamsa. 

Finally,  we  have  a  list  of  Pannasami's  own  works  with  their 
dedications.  '  At  the  request  of  the  Queen-Consort '  he  com- 
posed two  works  entitled  Sllakatha  and  Upayakatha,  evidently 
of  an  ethical  character.  At  the  request  of  the  king's  tutor 
(a  layman)  he  then  wrote  the  Akkharavisodhanl,  a  treatise 
on  Pali  orthography,  and  the  Apattivinicchaya,  on  morality. 
Pannasami's  own  preceptor,  the  Sangharaja,  urged  him,  he 
tells  us,  to  compose  the  Nagarajuppattikatha  above  mentioned, 
the  Voharatthabheda  and  Vivadavinicchaya  dealing  with 
monastic  discipline.  For  the  edification  of  certain  ministers, 
the  lekhakamacca  and  drocanalekhakdmacca,2  he  wrote  the 
Rajasevakadlpanl  (on  serving  the  king).  Another  work,  the 
Xirayakathadlpaka,3  was  undertaken  to  please  another  high 
official.  A  distinguished  layman  requested  him  to  write  on 
the  uposatha  rules,  and  the  monk  composed  the  Uposatha- 
vinicchaya.  Lastly,  at  the  request  of  'many  of  his  hearers', 
he  wrote  a  Pali  commentary  on  the  first  Pali  work  that  had 
brought  honour  to  Burmese  scholarship,  the  Saddanlti. 

Thus  the  nineteenth  century  is  linked  with  the  twelfth,  the 
history  of  Pali  literature  in  Burma  repeats  itself.  Perhaps 
the  desire  of  these  modern  theras  was  before  all  to  revive  the 
ancient  tradition  as  faithfully  as  possible.  That  certainly  was 
Min-don-min's  own  ambition,  and  when  he  had  gained  for 
himself  the  title  '  Convener  of  the  Fifth  Council '  he  treasured 
it  thenceforth  beyond  all  others. 

1  Sas.,  p.  514. 

2  Secretaries  and  officials  charged  with  drafting  and  issuing  royal  decrees. 

3  Edifying  stories  of  punishments  in  hell 


94  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

In  1868-71 l  a  great  assembly  of  learned  monks  and  teachers 
was  summoned  together  at  the  capital,  where,  the  king  presiding, 
they  read  or  recited  the  sacred  texts  to  restore  the  best  readings. 
By  the  royal  order  a  complete  text  of  the  Tripitaka  was  then 
engraved  on  stone  tablets  and  placed  in  shrines.  This  traditional 
act  duly  recorded,  we  come  to  another  of  an  importance  perhaps 
little  suspected  by  Min-don-min's  counsellors — the  inauguration 
of  the  first  printing-press  in  Upper  Burma. 

In  1885  Miii-ddn-min's  successor  lost  his  throne  and  the 
British  Army  occupied  Mandalay.  The  palace  and  even  the 
monastery  libraries  paid  their  tribute  to  the  conquerors,  who, 
fortunately,  were  careful  (like  Anorata)  to  bear  their  treasure 
to  safe  places,  house  it  with  honour,  and  keep  it  within  the  reach 
of  inquiring  scholars. 

Of  the  changes  brought  about  in  Burma  by  the  annexation 
we  have  no  occasion  to  speak  here.  They  affected  the 
Buddhist  religion  and  the  Order  very  little.  The  author  of 
A  People  at  School*  points  out  that  the  monks  of  Burma 
have  ceased  of  late  years  to  exert  that  direct  influence  in 
the  affairs  of  the  community  which  they  are  known  to  have 
used  for  good  while  Buddhist  kings  ruled,  and  that  they 
have  withdrawn  more  strictly  into  the  cloistered  religious  life. 
But  their  spiritual  authority  with  the  people  is  by  no  means 
lessened,  and  of  their  literary  activity  we  have  abundant 
evidence  in  the  multitude  of  modern  Pali  and  Burmese  works 
now  printed  in  Burma.  The  elaborate  official  lists  of  publica- 
tions in  Burma  issued  by  the  Indian  Government  are  also 
instructive  and  interesting  from  this  point  of  view. 

We  cannot  conclude  our  brief  survey  without  a  glance  at  this 
latest  period,  the  era  of  the  printing-press. 

We  must  begin  with  Lower  Burma,  where,  in  consequence  of 
the  British  occupation,  printing  was  introduced  earlier  than  in 
Mandalay.  Here  we  find  works  by  modern  Burmese  authors 
and  reprints  of  ancient  classics  published  in  increasing  numbers 
from  1870  onwards. 


Upper  Burma  Gazetteer,  vol.  i,  p.  66  ;  Buddhism,  1905,  p.  425. 
See  Fielding  Hall,  A  People  at  School,  pp.  255,  257. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  95 

There  is  little  to  be  said  about  these  works.  "We  notice 
a  number  of  new  editions  of  short  texts  that  have  become 
household  words  with  the  laity,  such  as  the  Paritta  l  and  the 
famous  Mangalasutta,1  Burmese  translations  of  these  and 
popular  works  such  as  the  Lokamti,  Namakara,  and  Ratana- 
panjara,  the  last  two  of  which  are  devotional  poems.2 

Then  we  come  to  vocabularies,  works  of  grammar  and  rhetoric, 
among  which  should  be  noticed  theKavyasaratthasangaha  (1872), 
by  a  learned  and  prolific  author,  Chakkindabhisiri,  and  the 
Alahkaranissaya,  of  the  Yaw-mya-sa  Atwin-wun  (written  in 
1880).  This  latter  is  an  example  of  that  care  to  preserve 
the  old  traditions  of  scholarship  which  we  have  already  noticed, 
and  which  is  still  characteristic  of  the  Burmese  Palists.  The 
Alankaranissaya  is  an  edition  of  Sarigharakkhita's  Subodha- 
larikara,3  with  a  commentary. 

In  1882  appeared  the  Lokaniti  of  Chakkindabhisiri,  an 
ethical  poem  in  Pali,  published  with  a  Burmese  version. 
A  characteristic  little  work  of  the  same  date  is  the  TTpasaka- 
vinicchaya,  a  collection  of  Pali  quotations  on  the  religious 
duties  of  laymen.  The  collection  was  translated  and  com- 
mented in  Burmese  by  a  monk  of  Prome,  Panfmramsi.  A 
work  bearing  the  Pali  title  Kammavinicchaya,  but  written  in 
Burmese,  may  be  mentioned  here,  as,  fortunately  for  us,  it  has 
been  studied  and  expounded  in  English  by  a  Burmese  scholar, 
Shwe  Zan  Aung.4  The  author's  name  is  Sagaravamsabhidhaja. 

Modern  works  dealing  with  that  standard  work  of  metaphysic, 
the  Abhidhammatthasahgaha,  are  very  numerous.  To  take  an 
example,  a  summary  of  this  important  text,  with  commentary 
by  U  Tin,  was  published  at  Maulmein  in  1883  under  the 
title  Sarupatthadlpan! ;  the  Abhidhammatthasangahaparitta,  by 
Maung  Tun  Aung,  in  1897 ;  the  Abhidhammatthasangahaganthi- 
thit  in  1898  (by  U  Tissa  and  U  Janinda) ;  and  several  issues  of 
the  text  itself  at  various  times. 

1  See  above,  pp.  3,  4. 

2  These  poems  reappear  in  several  modern  collections,  such  as   the 
Hyauk  saung  twe,  Hsay  saung  twe,  etc. 

J  On  rhetoric  (v.  JPTS.,  1882,  p.  55). 

4  Buddhism,  October,  1905,  vol.  ii,  No.  1,  pp.  58  ff. 


96  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 

Jagarabhidhaja  is  a  modern  author  who  has  written  both 
grammatical  and  religious  treatises.  His  works  include  the 
Dhammapana  -  shu  -  bwe  (moral  and  philosophical  stanzas  in 
Pali  with  Burmese  interpretation,  published  in  1894),  the 
Upasakovada  (edifying  discourses  to  the  laity,  1894),  the 
Ovadakatha,  the  Navaniyamadlpam  (254  aphorisms  on  Pali 
grammar),  and  the  SaddamedhanI  (an  essay  on  various  terms 
of  Pali  grammar).  The  same  author  edited  later  (1903)  the 
Parajika  and  Piicittiya  sections  of  the  Vinaya,  with  Burmese 
interpretation.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that  Jagarabhidhaja 
edited  a  passage  from  the  Sanskrit  Lalitavistara  called  the 
Kamadinakatha. 

A  rather  curious  specimen  of  a  modern  work  in  another 
branch  of  Pali-Burmese  literature  is  the  Atthasalinlganthi 
(or  Atthasaliniganthi-thit),  published  in  Rangoon  in  1900. 
This  work,  described  as  '  Notes  on  difficult  points  in  Buddhist 
philosophy',  is  briefly  analyzed  as  follows  for  the  guidance 
of  readers  :  'A  book  of  expositions  on  various  subjects,  namely, 
on  the  grammatical  construction  of  the  Tipitaka  or  the 
Buddhist  scriptures ;  on  the  account  of  Kathiivatthu  or  book 
of  controverted  points  ;  on  the  thirty  events  which  always 
take  place  on  the  conception  of  an  embryo  Buddha ;  on  the 
threefold  divisions  of  the  religion ;  on  the  six  kinds  of  divine 
effulgence ;  on  the  relative  heights  of  the  Bodhi-tree  and 
Buddha's  throne ;  on  the  thirty-two  signs  manifested  on  the 
birth  of  embryo  Buddha  and  on  the  promulgation  of  his  law ; 
on  the  solicitation  of  a  divine  communication  of  the  hermit 
Sumedha  at  the  hands  of  Dipankara  Buddha  regarding  his 
future  Buddhahood ;  on  the  principal  causes  of  existence ;  on 
the  derivation  of  the  names  of  Sariputtara  and  Moggallana  ;  on 
the  four  kinds  of  lions ;  on  the  six  Paniiattis  or  manifestations ; 
on  the  ten  Paramis  or  virtues ;  on  the  Catuparisuddhisllam  or 
four  precepts  of  purity ;  on  the  four  castes  of  the  Brahmins ; 
on  the  attributes  of  Buddhist  Trinity;  on  the  list  of  Rahans 
who  convened  the  Buddhist  councils  ;  on  the  law  of  abstruseness ; 
on  the  numerousness  of  existences ;  on  the  three  kinds  of 
Pahanas  or  getting  rid  of  one's  lust ;  on  evil  acts ;  on  the 
three  methods  of  teaching  Buddhist  scriptures ;  on  the  four 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  97 

kinds  of  Acinteyya  or  incomprehensibles ;  on  the  names  of 
the  Pancavaggi  or  the  first  five  disciples  of  Buddha  ' ;  and  other 
matters. 

Treatises  on  nirvana,  arahatship,  and  the  practice  of  medi- 
tation in  its  various  stages  leading  to  these  ends,  are  numerous, 
for  example:  (1)  the  Visuddhimaggadlpanl-kyan  (on  the  nature 
of  religious  meditation  and  methods  of  practising  it,  e.g.  the 
Samathakammatthana,  Bhavanakammatthana,  and  Vipassana- 
kammatthana.  1900) ;  (2)  the  Asankhatadhammapakasanl-kyan, 
by  U  Pyin-nya-thika.  1899,  on  the  nature  of  nirvana  and  the 
upavamdmtssati  form  of  meditation  leading  thereto ;  (3)  Sati 
we-bon-la-shu-bwe,  which  explains  the  three  kinds  of  death — 
kkanikamarana  or  the  '  momentary  death ',  which  consists  in 
the  continual  wearing  away  of  the  body  and  soul,  aamutimnrana 
or  '  so-called  death ',  the  visible  death  to  which  all  beings  are 
subject,  and  the  aamucchedamarana  or  '  cessation  of  existence ', 
said  of  the  death  of  Buddhas,  Pacceka-Buddhas,  and  arahats. 

We  turn  back  with  relief  to  the  less  perplexing  points 
treated  by  the  authors  who  confine  themselves  to  Vinaya  and 
grammar.  The  learned  Visuddhacara  is  an  example.  Among 
his  works  are  the  Kaccayanavannanacakka-kyan,  a  treatise 
under  six  heads  upon  the  introductory  stanzas  to  Kaccayana's 
grammar  (published  in  1896)  ;  the  Dhatvatthasangaha,  an 
alphabetical  digest  of  Pali  roots  and  their  meanings,  in  verse, 
with  a  Burmese  translation  ;  the  Chandomanjari,  a  Pali  treatise 
on  metre,  followed  by  a  nissaya  in  Burmese  (1897)  ;  and, 
departing  to  another  subject,  the  Visumgamaslmavinicchaya, 
a  treatise  on  the  determination  of  village  boundaries  (1899). 

Scholarship  in  the  twentieth  century  followed  the  lines 
first  traced  as  long  ago  as  the  twelfth  century  in  Burma. 
Let  us  take  as  an  example  a  learned  monk  of  the  most  recent 
times,  the  venerable  Ledi  Hsaya-daw,  and  observe  the  subjects 
treated  by  him  in  various  works  published  in  Rangoon  in  1905 
and  1906.  The  list  of  the  Ledi  Hsaya-daw's  works  is  long  : 
Niruttidlpanl  (a  Pali  grammar,  and  afterwards  a  Burmese 
nissaya  on  the  same  work),  NibbanadlpanI  (a  discourse  on 
nirvana),  Rupadlpanl  (a  treatise  on  Form),  Bodhipakkhiya- 
dipanl,  AnapanadlpanI,  and  Ovada  (the  Way  to  Arahatship, 


98  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

treatise  on  Meditation,  and  Book  of  Instruction),  Paraml- 
dlpanl  (on  Virtue),  Saddasankhepa  (a  manual  of  Pali  grammar), 
PabbcTjaniyakarnmavaca  (Pali  stanzas  for  recitation  as  charms), 
DhammadlpanI  (exposition  of  the  Law),  Maggangadlpani  (the 
'Eightfold  Path'  explained),  Paticcasamuppadadlpanl  (reflections 
on  the  causes  of  transmigration),  Paramatthasankhepa  (manual 
of  Abhidhamma),  Saccatthadlpam  (the  Four  Sublime  Truths 
explained),  Vijjamaggadipanl,  Lakkhanadlpani  (the  Way  to 
Enlightenment,  the  Three  Characteristics),  AharadipanT,  Sila- 
vinicchaya  (on  Food  and  the  Precepts  of  Morality),  Anatta- 
dlpanl  (on  Mutability),  DanadlpanI  (on  Charity),  and  Dhamma- 
desana  (religious  teaching). 

These  works  represent  fairly  well  the  fields  where  Pali 
flourishes  to-day — dissertations  on  points  of  doctrine,  homilies 
and  exhortations,  verses  which  may  be  called  either  charms  or 
prayers,  decisions  on  points  of  discipline,  manuals  of  metaphysic, 
treatises  on  Pali  grammar.  To  abundance  of  new  works  of  this 
kind  modern  scholars  now  add  a  pious  and  most  useful  contri- 
bution, careful  editions  of  the  Tipitaka  texts  and  commentaries. 

A  group  of  writings  very  insignificant  in  size,  but  interesting, 
or  rather  curious,  from  the  mere  fact  of  the  Pali  language 
being  found  in  such  a  connexion,  is  the  class  of  little  works 
headed  'science'  in  the  Pali- Burmese  lists.  The  sciences  in 
question  are  chiefly  astrology  and  cosmography,1  but  medical 
treatises  occur  here  and  there.  And  this  reminds  us  again  of 
a  field  in  Burma  which  merits  diligent  exploration.  While  the 
Pali  literature  represents  vastly  more  than  any  other  the  influence 
of  India  on  Further  India,  we  should  not  pass  over  the  fact 
that  a  store  of  Sanskrit  learning  by  no  means  negligible  has 
existed  from  time  immemorial  in  that  outlying  country.  This 
store  was  always  held  strictly  in  Brahmanic  keeping.  The  kings 
of  Burma  were  generally  not  only  the  nominal  but  real  and 
energetic  patrons  of  learning,  and  the  Brahmans,  at  all  times 
counsellors  and  soothsayers  in  the  royal  palaces,  had  an  indirect 
influence  on  culture.  Forchhammer  encountered  an  extreme 

1  Examples  are  the  Itthipurisa-arigavijja-pakinnaka-kyan,  a  handbook 
of  divination  on  the  formation  of  the  hands  and  other  parts  of  the  body, 
and  a  tlka  on  the  Makarandaveda,  a  handbook  of  astrology. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA  99 

reserve  in  the  Hindu  guardians  of  Brahmanic  lore  which  baffled 
even  his  determination  and  patience  as  an  inquirer.  But  his 
conclusion  was  that  '  there  exists  a  real  Sanskrit  literature 
in  Burma  written  on  paper  like  in  India,  with  Nagari  and 
Bengali  characters.  These  records  are  in  the  hands  of  the 
descendants  of  Hindu  colonists,  who  at  different  periods,  some 
even  before  the  spread  of  Buddhism  in  Burma,  settled  in  this 
country '.  He  adds :  '  Burma  deserves  to  be  drawn  within 
the  circle  of  those  countries  where  researches  of  Sanskrit 
records  ought  to  be  made.' l  And  an  eminent  epigraphist  has 
said  very  lately,  '  we  are  beginning  to  obtain  valuable  records 
in  Burma.'2  Ancient  links  connect  India  with  Burma;  we 
can  only  hope  to  restore  them  gradually,  and  there  are  many 
questions  which,  with  all  its  wealth  of  legend  and  chronicle, 
the  Pali  literature  does  not  answer  fully.3 

The  great  historical  service  of  the  Pali  literature  is  to  show 
the  peculiarly  Buddhistic  character  of  Burmese  civilization. 
History  in  the  modern  and  critical  sense  we  cannot  demand 
of  it  any  more  than  we  demand  philology  or  biology  treated 
with  European  methods.  We  need  not  consider  here  the 
possibility  of  adapting  the  Pali  language  to  modern  know- 
ledge or  critical  discussion.  The  true  Pali  literature  is  tradi- 
tional. We  may  read  now,  as  in  old  days,  of  differences 
of  doctrine  or  opposed  schools  in  the  Southern  Buddhist 
community.4  But  these  seem,  from  our  far-off  point  of 
observation,  to  be  a  hardly  perceptible  eddy  here  and  there  in 
the  calm,  main  stream  of  Buddhist  belief,  as  we  see  it  in  the 

1  Forchhammer,  Report  on  Literary  Work,  1879-80,  p.  13. 
9-  J.  F.  Fleet   in   Indian  Epigraphy,  p.  63  :     The  Imperial  Gazetteer  of 
India :  The  Indian  Empire  ;  Oxford,  1907. 

3  To  take  one  instance  :   the  chronicles  hand  on  an  ancient  tradition 
that  a  royal  Ksatriya  tribe  came  from  India  at  a  very  early  period  and 
founded    an    Indian    dynasty    in    Upper    Burma.      European    scholars 
cautiously  admit  that  there  was  an  Indian  immigration  by  the  northern 
route,  but  at  what  date  and  for  what  reason  we  do  not  know.     See 
Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.   3.      Phayre  points  out  that  in  Lassen's 
opinion  the  legend  of  an  Indian  dynasty  is  not  quite  without  foundation. 
See  Forchhammer, '  On  the  ancient  Mahamuni  Pagoda  in  Arakan ' :  Report 
on  Arakan,  p.  1. 

4  Differences  in  the  sects  are  '  largely  academic '.     See  Burma,  vol.  i , 
p.  41  :  Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India,  Provincial  Series,  Calcutta,  1908. 


100  THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 

religious  and  scholarly  literature  of  Burma.  Having  followed 
that  stream  back  to  its  mediaeval  sources,  and  yet  further  to 
its  remote  Indian  origin,  we  cannot  but  feel  impressed  by  the 
continuity  of  its  progress,  the  force  of  its  unbroken  tradition. 
Buddhism  in  Burma  has  suffered  nothing  parallel  to  the 
Mohammedan  invasion  of  India,  but  the  history  of  Further 
India  has  been  tempestuous  enough.  When  we  follow  in  the 
chronicles  the  struggle  of  those  neighbour  states,  we  must 
needs  wonder  at  the  Law  that  never  failed,  in  the  end,  to 
dominate  barbarism,  to  make  customs  milder  and  laws  more 
just,  to  do  away  with  barriers  by  raising  men  above  them. 
Of  that '  Righteous  Law  '  as  a  social  and  intellectual  influence 
the  Pali  literature  is  an  almost  complete  embodiment.  Thus, 
to  use  the  ancient  metaphor,  India  conquered  Burma.  Of  all 
the  conquests  in  history  none  has  been  more  enduring  or  more 
beneficent. 


APPENDIX   TO    CHAPTER   III 
AN  INSCRIPTION  OF  A.D.  1442 

The  inscription  mentioned  on  p.  50  is  among  those  collected 
by  Forchhammer  at  Pagan.1  It  is  dated  B.E.  804  (1442  A.D.), 
and  commemorates  the  bestowal  of  various  gifts  on  the  Order 
by  the  Governor  of  Taungdwin  and  his  wife.  Together  with 
a  monastery,  garden,  paddy-lands,  and  slaves,  the  pious  donors 
offered  a  collection  of  texts,  of  which  a  list  is  given.  The 
following  list,  copied  from  the  inscription,  is  extremely 
interesting  for  more  than  one  reason.  Besides  helping  to 
fix  the  chronology  of  many  Pali  works  and  giving  some 
indication  of  their  importance,  it  gives  us  another  clue  well 
worth  following  up.  "We  notice  here  a  number  of  titles  of 
Sanskrit  works,  sometimes  greatly  disguised  in  the  Burmese 
transcription,  but  still  recognizable.  These  will  aid  us  to  form 
some  notion  of  the  point  reached  by  the  Sanskrit  scholars 
in  Burma  in  the  fifteenth  century.  We  are  not  obliged  to 
believe  that  each  monastery  contained  students  of  Sanskrit, 
but  we  have  at  least  some  ground  for  supposing  that  certain 
famous  works  on  grammar,  prosody,  medicine,  and  so  forth 
were  treasured  in  Upper  Burma. 

The  discovery  that  the  '  Vedas '  found  in  Burmese,  Talaing, 
and  Siamese  versions  *  do  not  contain  a  trace  of  Vedic  texts ' 
inclined  Forchhammer2  to  some  scepticism  as  to  the  contents 
of  palm-leaf  MSS.  bearing  the  titles  of  famous  old  treatises 
(e.g.  the  Susruta).  I  think,  however,  that  he  is  speaking 
of  MSS.  of  a  later  date.  I  do  not  see  any  reason  to  doubt 
that  the  gift  recorded  in  the  Pagan  inscription  was  a  collection 
really  containing  the  works  mentioned  and  not  their  titles  only. 

References  to  Forchhammer's  List  indicate  that  MS.  copies 

1  Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya,  and  Ava.     Deciphered  from  the  ink 
impressions  found  among  Forchhammer's  papers.     Printed  at  Rangoon, 
1902.     Translated  with  notes  by  Tun  Nyein,  Government  Printing  Press, 
Rangoon,    1899.     The   inscription   containing  the   list   is   mentioned   by 
M.  Pelliot  in  article  '  Deux  itineVaires :,  BEFEO.,  vol.  v,  p.  183. 

2  Report,  1879-80,  p.  11. 


102 


THE   PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 


of  the  works  in  question  are  in  the  Bernard  Free  Library  at 
Rangoon.  A  few  notes  are  added,  but  there  is  obviously  room 
for  many  more  suggestions  and  conjectures. 

List  copied  from  the  Inscription. 
1.  Parajikakanda.1  23.  Dhatukatha. 


2.  Pacittiya. 

3.  Bhikkhumvibhanga. 

4.  Vinayamahavagga. 

5.  Vinayaculavagga. 

6.  Vinayaparivara. 

7.  Parajikakanda-atthakatha. 

8.  Pacittiyadi-atthakatha. 

9.  Parajikakanda-tika. 

10.  Terasakanda-tika. 

11.  Vinayasangraha-atthakatha 

(the  greater). 

12.  Vinayasangraha-atthakatha 

(the  less). 

13.  Kankhavitaram-atthakatha. 

14.  Khuddasikkha-tika  (ancient). 

15.  Khuddasikkha-tTka  (new). 

16.  Kankha-tika  (new). 

17.  Vinayaganthipada. 

1 8.  Vinaya-uttarasincaya 

atthakatha.2 

19.  Vinayasincaya-tika  (later). 

20.  Vinayakandhaniddesa. 

21.  Dhammasangam.8 

22.  Vibhanga. 


24.  Puggalapannatti. 

25.  Kathavatthu. 

26.  Mulayamaka. 

27.  Indriyayamaka. 

28.  Tikapatthana. 

29.  Dukatikapatthana. 

30.  Dukapatthana. 

31.  Atthasalim-atthakatha. 

32.  Sammohavinodani- 

atthakatha. 

33.  Pancapakarana-atthakutlia. 

34.  Abhidhamma-anutlka.' 

35.  Abhidhammatthasangaha 

atthakatha. 

36.  Abhidhanamatthasangaha 

tika. 

37.  Abhidhammatthavibhavani 

tika. 

38.  Silakkhandha.6 

39.  Mahavagga.5 

40.  Patheyya.5 

41.  Silakkhandha-atthakatha. 

42.  Mahavagga-atthakatha. 

43.  Patheyya-atthakatha. 


1  Nos.  1-20  are  works  belonging  to  or  commenting  on  the  Vinaya. 
(Edited    by    Hermann    Oldenberg.     Vinayapitakam,   5  vols.,   1879,  etc. 
Khuddasikkha  and  Mulasikkha.     See  edition  of  E.  Miiller,  JPTS.,  1883.) 

2  Sic  text  of  inscription.     Read  sancaya,  anthology  or  collection. 

3  Abhidhamma  (Nos.  21-37).     See  Dhammasangaul,  ed.  E.  Miiller,  Pali 
Text  Society,  1885  ;    Vibhanga,  ed.  Caroline  F.  Rhys  Davids,  PTS.,  1904; 
Dhatukatha,    ed.    Edmund     Gooneratne,    PTS.,    1892     (with    comm.)  ; 
Puggalapannatti,   ed.   Richard   Morris,   PTS.,   1883  ;   Dukapatthana  and 
Tikapatthana,  ed.  Caroline  F.  Rhys  Davids,  PTS.,  1906 ;    Kathavatthu, 
ed.  Arnold  Taylor,  PTS.,  1894-7,  2  vols. ;  Atthasalim  (comm.  on  Dhamma- 
sangani),  ed.  E.  MUller,  PTS.,  1897. 

4  By  Dhammapala  of  Ceylon.     Sas.,  p.  33. 

6  See  Dlghanikaya  (Nos.  38-46),  ed.  Rhys  Davids  and  Estlin  Carpenter, 
PTS.,  1889,  etc.,  3  vols. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 


103 


44.  Silakkhandha-tika.  66. 

45.  Mahavagga-tlka.  67. 

46.  Patheyya-tlka.  68. 

47.  Mulapannasa.1  69. 

48.  Mulapannasa-atthakatha.  70. 
49:  Mulapannasa- tika.  71. 

50.  Majjhimapannasa.1  72. 

51.  Majjhimapannasa-attha- 

katha.  73. 

52.  Majjhimapannasa-tika. 

53.  Uparipannasa.  74. 

54.  Uparipannasa- atthakatha.  75. 

55.  Uparipannasa-tika.  76. 

56.  Sagathavaggasamyutta.3  77. 

57.  Sagathavaggasarayutta- 

atthakatha.  78. 

58.  Sagathavaggasamyutta-tlka. 

59.  Nidanavaggasamyutta.  79. 

60.  Nidanavaggasamyutta-  80. 

atthakatha. 

61.  Khandhavaggasamyutta.  81. 

62.  Khandhavaggasamyutta- tika. 

63.  Salayatanavaggasamyutta.  82. 

64.  Salayatanavapgasamyutta- 

atthakatha.  83. 

65.  Mahavaggasamyutta. 


Ekadukatika-anguttara.3 

Catukanipata-anguttara. 

Pancanipata-anguttara. 

Cha-  sattanipata-anguttara. 

Attha-navanipata-anguttara. 

Dasa-ek  adasanipata-an  guttara 

Ekanipata  -  anguttara  -  attha- 
katha. 

Dukatikacatukanipata- 
anguttara-atthakatha. 

Pancadi-anguttara-atthakatha 

Anguttara-tika  [1]. 

Anguttara-tlka  [2]. 

Khuddakapatha  text  and 
atthakatha.4 

Dhammapada  text  and 
atthakatha. 

Udana  text  and  atthakatha. 

Itivuttaka    text    and    attha- 
katha. 

Suttanipata  text  and  attha- 
katha. 

Vimanavatthu   text  and 
atthakatha. 

Petavatthu   text   and   attha- 
katha. 


1  See  Majjhimanikaya  (Nos.  47-55),  ed.  V.  Trenckner  (vol.  i)  and  Robert 
Chalmers  (vols.  ii  and  iii),  PTS.,  1888-1902. 

2  See  Samyuttanikaya  (Nos.  56-65),  ed.  Leon  Feer.     5  vols.     VoL  vi 
indices.     By  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids.     PTS.,  1884-98. 

3  See  Anguttaranikaya  (Nos.  66-76),  ed.  R.  Morris  (vols.  i  and  ii)  and 
Edmund  Hardy  (vols.  iii-v),  PTS.,  1885-1900. 

4  See Khuddakanikaya  and  commentaries  (Nos.  77-1 10);  Khuddakapatha, 
ed.  R.  C.  Childers,  JRAS.,  1870  ;  Dhammapada,  ed.  V.  Fausboll  (1st  ed., 
1855  ;    2nd  ed.,  1900) ;   Buddhavamsa  and  Cariyapitaka,  ed.   R.   Morris, 
PTS.,   1882;    Udana,   ed.    Paul   St'einthal,   PTS.,    1885;    Itivuttaka,  ed. 
E.  Windisch,  PTS.,   1889  ;    Suttanipata,   ed.  V.    Fausboll,    PTS.,  1884  ; 
Vimanavatthu,    ed.    E.    K.    Gooneratne,    PTS.,    1886 ;    Vimanavatthu- 
atthakatha,  ed.   E.  Hardy,  PTS.,  1901  ;  Petavatthu,  ed.  J.  P.  Minayeff, 
PTS.,  1889-     Petavatthu-atthakatha,   ed.   E.  Hardy,  PTS.,   1894;   The 
Theragatha  and  Therlgatha,  ed.  H.  Oldenberg  &  R.  Pischel,  PTS.,  1883  ; 
Therlgatha-atthakatha,  ed.  E.  Miiller,  PTS.,  1893  ;  Jataka  and  atthakatha, 
ed.  V.  Fausboll,  7  vols.      Other  texts  are  in  course  of  publication  by  the 
Pali  Text  Society. 


104 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 


84.  Thera(gatha)  text  and  attha-  100. 

katha.  101. 

85.  Then(gatha)  text  and  attha-  102. 

katha.  103. 

86.  Pathacariya.1  104. 

87.  Ekanipatajataka-atthakatha.  105. 

88.  Dukanipatajataka-attha- 

katha.  106. 

89.  Tikanipatajataka-atthakatha. 

90.  Catuka-panca-chanipata  107. 

jataka-atthakatha.  108. 

91.  Satta-attha-navanipata  jataka  109. 

atthakatha.  110. 

92.  Dasa-ekadasanipatajataka  111. 

atthakatha.  112. 

93.  Dvadasa-terasa-pakinnaka- 

riipatajataka-atthakatha.  113. 

94.  Visati  jataka-atthakatha.  114. 

95.  Jatattaki-sotattaki-nidana  115. 

atthakatha.2  116. 

96.  Culaniddesa.3  117. 

97.  Culaniddesa- a^thakatha.  118. 

98.  Mahaniddesa.  119. 

99.  Mahaniddesa.1  120. 


Jataka-tlka. 

D  umaj  ataka  -  atthakatha . 

Apadana. 

Apadana- atthakatha. 

Patisambhidamagga.4 

Patisambhidamagga- 

atthakatha. 
Patisambhidarnagga- 

ganthipada. 

Visuddhimagga-atthakatha. 
Visuddhimagga-tlka. 
Buddhavamsa-atthakatha. 
Cariyapitaka-atthakatha. 
Namarupa-tika  (new).5 
Paramatthavinicchaya 

(new).8 

MohavicchedanT. 
Lokapannatti.7 
Mohanayana. 
Lokuppatti. 
Ai'unavati. 
Chagatidipanl.8 
SahassaramsimalinT.9 
Dasavatthu.9 


1  Text  of  Cariyapitaka  (?). 

2  A  Sotatthakl,  written  iu  Ceylon,  is  mentioned  in  the  Pitakatthamain, 
p.  58. 

3  Mahaniddesa,  a  part  of  the  Khuddakanikiiya,  '  being  an  exposition  by 
Sariputta  of  sixteen  suttas  which  compose  the  fourth  book  or  Atthaka- 
vagga  of  the  Suttanipata'  (see  Catalogue  of  Pali-Burmese  MSS.  in   the 
British  Museum}.     The  Culan"  is  the  second  part  of  the  Niddeaa. 

4  Ed.  Arnold  Taylor,  PT S.  (1905-1907). 

*  Namarupapariccheda[ppakarana]  is  '  a  treatise  belonging  to  the 
literature  on  the  Abhidhamma,  being  an  exposition  of  the  Buddhistic 
philosophical  term  "  Namarupam ",  or  Name  and  Form,  by  Anuruddha- 
cariya'  (B.M.  Pali  and  Burmese  Catalogue).  The  terms  '  new  '  (or  modern) 
and  '  old  '  (ancient)  are  translated  here  from  Burmese  thit  and  houng. 

6  On  the  Abhidhamma.   This  work  (by  Anuruddha)  is  in  Forchhammer's 
List,  p.  xviii. 

7  By  Saddhammaghosa  of  Thaton. 

8  By  Saddhammaghosa  of  Thaton.     See  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xxvi. 

9  Sahassaramsl,  mentioned  in  P.TH.,  p.  55,  is  a  tlka  on  the  Mahabodhi- 
vamsa,  It  was  written  at  Pagan  in  the  reign  of  Narapati,  A.D.  1 1 74  (B.E.  536). 
Dasavatthu,  Sahassavatthu,  and  Slhalavatthu  were  composed  in  Ceylon. 
The  authors  are  unknown  to  the  P.TH.  (p.  57).     On  Petakopadesa  see 
Dissertation,  by  Rudolf  Fuchs,  Berlin,  1908. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA. 


105 


121.  Sahassavatthu.1  141. 

122.  Slhalavatthu.1  142. 

123.  Petakopadesa.  143. 

124.  Tathagatuppatti.2  144. 

125.  Dhammacakka  145. 

[?  °pavattanasutta].  146. 

126.  Dhammacakka-tikii.  147. 

127.  Dathadhatuvamsa.'  148. 

128.  Dathadhatuvamsa  tlka.  149. 

129.  Culavamsa.3  150. 

130.  Dipavamsa.3  151. 

131.  Thupavamsa.8  152. 

132.  Anagatavamsa.3  153. 

133.  Bodhivamsa.'  154. 

134.  Mahavamsa.*  155. 

135.  Mahavamsa-tika.3  156. 

136.  Dhammadana  [?in  text  157. 

dhammandan].4  158. 

137.  Mahakaccayana.  159. 

138.  Nyasa.5  160. 

139.  Than-byin-tlka.s  161. 

140.  Mahathera-tlka.  162. 


Rupasiddhi-atthakatha.6 

Rupasiddhi-tika. 

Balavatara.7 

Vuttimoggallana.8 

Pancika-Moggallana. 

Paiicika-Moggallana-tika. 

Karika.9 

Karika-tika. 

Lingatthavivarana. 10 

Lingatthavivarana-tika. 

M^ukhatnattasara.11 

Mukhamattasaratlka . 

Mahagana. 

Culagana. 

Abhidhaaa.12 

Abhidhana-tika. 

Saddamti.13 

Culanirutti.1' 

Culasandhivisodhana. 

Saddatthabhedacinta . 15 

Saddatthabhedacinta-tlka. 

Padasodhana." 


1  See  note  9  on  preceding  page. 

2  By  Nanagambhira  (?).     Forchhammer,  Lust,  p.  xxv  ;  P.TH.,  p.  60. 

3  Written  in  Ceylon.     P.TH.,  pp.  53,  55-7. 

4  Probably  dealing  with  the  dhammaddndnisamsa,   the  advantage  or 
merit  of  preaching  the  law  to  others. 

5  See  above,  p.  21. 

6  Rupasiddhi,  the  well-known  Pali  grammar  composed  in  Ceylon  by 
Dipankara,  otherwise  Buddhapiya. 

7  By  Dhammakitti  or  Saddhammakitti.     Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xxiiL 
A  Pali  grammar  of  the  Kaccayana  school. 

8  The  Moggallanavyakarana  is  accompanied  with  the  vutti  or  explanation. 
See  Devamitta's  edition,  Colombo,  1890. 

9  See  above,  p.  16. 

10  See  above,  p.  22. 

11  See  above,  p.  25. 

12  Abhidhana,  the  Abhidhanappadlpika  of  Moggallana,  about  1153  A.D., 
*  the    only  dictionary  of    synonyms    in    the    Pali    language '   (Subhuti). 
The  text  was  edited  in  1883  by  the  thera  Subhuti  and  a  complete  index 
(Abhidhanappadlpakasuci)  in  1893. 

13  See  abcve,  pp.  16,  17. 

14  ,Culanirutti,  a  grammar  of  the  Kaccayana  school. 

15  See  above,  pp.  20,  22. 

16  Padasadhana(?).     The  Padasadhana  is  a  Pali  grammar  composed  in 
•Ceylon. 


106 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 


163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 


Sambandhacinta-tika.1 

Rupavatara.2 

Saddavatara. 

Saddhammadipaka. 

Sotamalini.9 

Sambandhamalini.4 

Padavahamahacakka 

[Padavatara  ?]. 
Nvadi  [Moggallana].5 
Kataca  [Krt-cakra  ?]. 

172.  Mahaka  [°kappa  or 

°kaccayana?]. 

173.  Balattajana[Balavatarana?] 

174.  Suttavali.6 

175.  Akkharasammohacchedam.7 

176.  Cetiddhinemiparigatha 


170 

171 


179.  Kaccayanasara.10 

180.  Balappabodhana.11 

181.  Atthasalini. 

182.  Atthasalini-nissaya. 

183.  Kaccayana-nissaya. 

184.  Rupasiddhi-nissaya. 

185.  Jataka-nissaya. 

186.  Jatakaganthi. 

187.  Dhammapadaganthi-nissaya. 

188.  Kammavaca.12 

189.  Dhammasatta.13 

190.  Kalapapancika  [°panjika].14 

191.  Kalapapancika-tlka. 

192.  Kalapasuttapratinnasaku 

[?  °patinnapaka]  tika. 

193.  Prindo-tlka.15 
[sic]  [?].                                   194.  Rattamala.16 

177.  Samasataddhitadipan!.8  195.  Rattamala-tika. 

178.  Bijakkhyam.9  196.  Roganidana.17 

I  See  above,  p.  22,  and  P.TH.,  p.  67.  2  A  treatise  on  inflection  (?). 

3  Sotabbamalim  (?).     The  work  of  that  name  is  a  collection  of  edifying 
tales. 

4  A  treatise  on  syntactical  relation  (?). 

5  Nvadi  Moggallana,  a  treatise  on  gender  by  Sarigharakkbita  based  on 
Moggallana. 

6  Suttavali  =  Sutras  of  Kaccayana. 

7  On  analysis  of  words  or  correct  division  of  syllables. 

8  On  compounds  and  suffixes.  a  Bijakkhyam,  on  algebra  (?). 
">  See  above,  pp.  36,  37. 

II  Written  at  Vijayapura  (Panya),  author  not  known.     P.TH.,  p.  72. 

12  See  above,  pp.  6,  7.     13  L)harmac.astra  (Law  code).  See  above,  pp.  33, 84. 

14  Commentary  on  the  Katantra  grammar  (see  above,  p.  26)  ;  Forch- 
hammer,  Report,  1879-80,  p.  12  ('The  Katantra  seems  to  have  been  the 
most  influential  of  these  later  grammars  [not  belonging  to  the  Paninean 
system],  having  served  as  a  model  for  the  standard  Pali  grammar  of 
Kacchayana  and  for  the  native  grammars  of  the  Tibetans  and  Dravidians ') ; 
A.  A.  Macdonell,  article  Sanskrit  Literature  in  the  Imperial  Gazetteer  of 
India  (The  Indian  Empire,  vol.  ii,  p.  251)  ;  see  also  Weber,  Ind.  Literatur- 
geschichte,  2nd  ed.,  pp.  243, 336  ;  also  the  text  Katantra  of  Sarvavarman  with 
the  commentary  of  Durgasimha,  ed.  J.  Eggeling,  Bibl.  Indica,  vol.  Ixxxi. 

18  Probably  Vrnda,  the  medical  treatise  by  the  author  of  that  name. 
See  Jolly,  Medicin,  pp.  4  and  6  (Grundriss,  iii,  10). 

16  Perhaps  Ratnamala.     Possibly  the  famous  dictionary   Abhidhana- 
ratnamala,  of  Halayudha,  about  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century.     See 
Zachariae,    Die    Indischen    Worterbiicher    (Grundriss,    i,    33),   p.   5,   and 
Ludwig  Heller's  Halayudha 's  Kavirahasya  (Gb'ttingen,  1894). 

17  Medicine,   possibly  the  Madhavanidana  or  a   work  based   on   that 
Hauptwerk.     See  Jolly,  Medicin,  p.  7. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF   BURMA 


107 


197.  Dabraguna.1 

198.  Dabraguna- tika. 

199.  Cbandoviciti.2 

200.  Candaprutti M  [Candra- 

vrtti"]. 

2*01.  Candrapancikara  3 
[°panjika]. 

202.  Kamandakl.* 

203.  Dhammapaniiapakarana. 

204.  Mahosatthi  [Mabosadba?].5 

205.  Subodhalamkara.8 

206.  Subodhalamkara-tika. 

207.  Tanogabuddhi  [?]. 

208.  Tandi  [Dandin  ?J.  7 

209.  Tandi-tika. 

210.  Cankadasa.8 

211.  Ariyasaccavatara. 

212.  Vicitragandha. 

213.  Saddhammupaya.9 


214.  Sarasangaha.10 

215.  Sarapinda. 

216.  Patipattisangaha. 

217.  Sulacharaka.11 

218.  Palatakka  [balatarka  ?,  logic 

for  beginners?]. 

219.  Trakkabhasa12[Tarkabbasa] 

220.  Saddakarika. 

221.  Kasikapruttipalini.13 

222.  Saddhammadlpaka. 

223.  Satyatatvavabodha  [?]. 

224.  Balappabodhana- 

pruttikarana. 

225.  Atthabyakhyam.u 

226.  Cujaniruttimanjusa.14 

227.  Manjusatikabyakhyam.1* 

228.  Anutlkabyakhyam. 

229.  Pakinnakanikaya. 

230.  Catthapayoga  [?]. 


1  Dravyagunasamgraba    (pharmacology).      See  Jolly,    Medicin,  p.   6  ; 
Forchbammer,  List,  p.  xxxv. 

2  Explanation  of  metres. 

3  On  the  Candra  grammar  and  its  relation  to  the  Pali  grammar  of 
Moggallana  see  articles  by  0.  Frauke,  JPTS.,  1902-3  ;  also  A.  C.  Burnell, 
on  The  Aindra  School  of  Sanskrit  Grammarians,  Mangalore,  1875. 

4  For  Kamandakl's  Nltisara  (elements  of  Polity)  see  the  edition   of 
S.  Venkatarama   Sastry,  Madras,  1895,  and  studies  by  Carlo  Formichi, 
Oiornale  delta  Societd  Asiatica,  Florence,  1887. 

8  See  the  Maha-ummagga  Jataka  (in  which  Mahosadha  is  the  Bodhisatta). 
Fausboll,  Jataka,  vol.  vi,  pp.  329-478. 

6  Subodhalamkara  on  rhetoric  was  composed   in  Ceylon    by  Sangha- 
rakkhita.     P.TH.,  p.  75.     See  edition  of  G.  E.  Fryer  (under  title  Pali 
Studies,  1875). 

7  The  work  inscribed  is  probably  Dandin's  Kavyada^a. 

8  Evidently   Cangadasa,   author    of    the    Cangakarika,   aphorisms   on 
grammar  (Katantra  school).     See  edition  of  Jagannadhasvamiy,  Vizaga- 
patam,  1896. 

9  Saddhammopayana  by  Ananda,  ed.  Richard  Morris,  JPTS.,  1887. 

10  Sarasangaha,  '  a  compilation  of  important  points  in  Buddhism '  (so 
described  in  the  British  Museum  Catalogue  of  Pali  MSS.). 

11  Presumably  an  abridged  version  of  the  famous  medical  work  Caraka- 
samhita.     See  Jolly,  Medicin,  p.  11. 

la  The  Tarkabhasa,  on  logic,  of  Ke9avami9ra  (?). 

13  A  commentary  on   the   Kayikavrtti  of  Jayaditya  and  Vamana,  on 
Panini  (?).    See  Zwei  Kapitel  der  Kufika  iibersetzt  und  init  einer  Einleitung 
verschen,  von  Bruno  Liebich,  Breslau,  1892. 

14  Grammatical  commentaries  or  glosses. 


108 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 


231.  Matthapayoga[?]. 

232.  Rogayatra  [on  medicine?]. 

233.  Rogayatra-tlka. 

234.  Satthekavipasvaprakasa  [?]. 

235.  Rajamattanta.1 

236.  Parasava.2 

237.  Koladdhaja.8 

238.  Brihajjataka.4 

239.  Brihajjataka-tika. 

240.  Dathadhatuvanisa  and  tika  .* 

241.  Patiga  viveka-  tika  [?] . 

242.  Alamkara  tika  [on  Subodha- 

lamkara?]. 

243.  Calindapaucika  [com- 

mentary on  C°  ?]. 

244.  Vedavidhinimittanirutti- 

vannana.8 

245.  Niruttibyakhyam. 

246.  Yuttodaya.7 

247.  Vuttodaya-tlka. 

248.  Milindapanha  [in  text 

Malinapanna]. 

249.  Saratthasangaha.8 

250.  Amarakosanissaya. 


251.  Pindo  nissaya. 

252.  Kalapanissaya. 

253.  Roganidanabyakhyam. 

254.  Dabbragana  tika. 

255.  Amarakosa. 

256.  Dandl-tika. 

257.  Dandl-tika. 

258.  Dandl-tika. 

259.  Koladhvaja-tika. 

260.  Alamkara. 

261.  Alamkara- tika. 

262.  Bhesajjamanjusa.9 

263.  Yuddhajeyya  [Yuddha- 

dhyaya  ?]. 

264.  Yatanaprabha-tika 

[Ratana0?].18 

265.  Viragdha.11 

266.  Viragdha-tika. 

267.  Culamanisara. 

268.  Rajamattanta-tika.12 

269.  Mrtyuvancana 

270.  Mahakalacakka 

271.  Mahakalacakka       works?]. 

tika 


1  Cf.  Forchhammer,  List,    pp.   xxxvii  and   xxxviii,   Rajamattam   and 
Rajamattanissayo.     Probably  the  (astrological)  Rajatnartanda. 

2  Laghuparagaryam  (on  astrology)  (?). 

3  This  may  be  the  Goladhyaya  of  the  astronomical  treatise  Siddhanta 
Oiromani,  by  Bhaskaracarya,  A.D.  1114.    See  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature, 
p.  435  ;  other  references  see  Duff,  Chronology  of  India,  p.  139. 

4  The  Brijjataka  of  Varahamihira,  a  well-known  work  on   astrology. 
See  above,  p.  108.     Cf.  Forchhammer,  List,  p.  xxxvii. 

5  P.TH.,  p.  55.  6  An  exposition  of  rules  of  divination  (?). 

7  The  Vuttodaya,  a  standard  Pali  work  on  prosody,  was  written  in 
Ceylon  in  the  twelfth  century  by  Sangharakkhita.     See  edition  of  Major 
Fryer,  JASB.,  1877.     See  in  Mr.  Tha  Do  Oung's  Pali  grammar  (published 
1902)  the  section  on  metrics. 

8  A  medical  work  so  called  was  written  by  Buddhadasa,  king  of  Ceylon, 
in  the  fourth  century  (Jolly,  Medicin,  p.  15). 

9  On  medicine. 

10  A  medical  work  called  Ratnaprabha  is  mentioned  by  R.  Hoernle  in 
JRAS.,  1906,  p.  289  (Studies  in  Ancient  Indian  Medicine). 

11  Probably  a  copyist's  mistake  for  Vidagdha  ( =  Vidagdhamukhamandana 
on  riddles),  by  Dharmadasa.     See  above,  p.  28. 

12  Cf.  Forchhammer,  List,   pp.  xxxv  ff.,  section  v,  the  medical,  astro- 
nomical, astrological  works,  etc.  ;  and  Report,  1879-80,  pp.  10  ff. 


THE    PALI    LITERATURE    OF    BURMA 


109 


288 
289 
290 
291 


272.  Paraviveka  [commentary  on 

Parahita  ?]. 

273.  Kaccayana-rupavatara. 

274.  Pumbharasari  [or  "karasari 

in  text]  [?]. 

275.  Taktavatara [Tattvavatara?] 

276.  Taktavatara-tlka. 

277.  Nyayabindu.1 

278.  Nyayabindu-tika. 

279.  Hetubindu.2 

280.  Hetubindu-tika. 

281.  Rikkaniyayatra  [?]. 

282.  Rikkaniyayatra-tika. 

283.  Barittaratakara  [Vrttaratna- 

kara  ?].» 

1  The  ancient  collection   of  Sutras  on  logic  called  Nyayabindu.      See 
Peterson's  preface  to  his  edition  of  Dharmottara's  Nyayabindutlka,  Calcutta^ 
1889  (Bibliotheca  Indica). 

2  On  logic  (?). 

3  The  Vrittaratnakara  (on  metres),  by  Kedara  Bhatta. 


284.  Shyaramitikabya  [?]. 

285.  Yuttisangaha. 

286.  Yuttisangaba-tlka. 

287.  Sarasangaba-nissaya. 
Rogayatra-nissaya. 
Roganidana-nissaya. 
Saddatthabhedacintanissaya. 
Paranissaya. 

292.  Sbyaramitikabyanissaya[?]. 

293.  Bribajjataka-nissaya. 

294.  Rattamala. 

295.  Narayuttisangaha. 


INDEX 


A 

AJ>haya  (grammarian),  22. 
Abhidhamma,  ix,  18,  19,  28,  32,  36,  42, 

44,  47,  53,  54,  56,  58,  59,  60,  62,  67, 

71,  73,  78,  104  n.  6. 
Abhidhamma-anutlka,  43,  102. 
Abhidhammapannarasatthana,  28. 
Abhidhamma-pitaka,  2,' 8, 27,  54,  55,  58, 

67. 

Abhidhamma  (tika),  48. 
Abhidhammatthasangaha,  18,  25,  57,  61, 

67,  95. 
Abhidhammatthasangaha  -  atthakatha, 

102. 

Abhidhammatthasangahaganthi-thit,  95 . 
Abhidhammatthasangahaparitta,  95. 
Abhidhammatthasangahatika,    21,   102; 

(dasaganthivannana),  28. 
Abhidhammatthavibhavani,  41,  42,  54, 

56,  61 ;  tika,  102. 
Abhidhammavatara,  61. 
abhidhammika     (studying     the     Abhi- 
dhamma), 61. 

Abhidhanappadipika,  27,  67. 
Abhidhana  (ppadlpika)  °tika,  105. 
abhiseka  (consecration),  74,  79. 
Aggadhammalamkara,  57,  63,  64. 
Aggapandita,  16,  21. 
Aggavamsa  (grammarian),  16. 
AharadipanI,  98. 
Aindra    school    (of    grammarians),    107 

n.  3. 

Akkharasammohacchedani,  106. 
AkkharavisodhanT,  93. 
Alamkara,  see  Subodhalamkara. 
Alaungpaya,    64,  69,  70,  71  arid  n.  4, 

83. 

Almacittajataka,  81. 
Alompra,  see  Alaungpaya. 
AmarakoSa,  51,  108. 
AmarakoSanissaya,  108. 
Amarapura  (sect),  78,  83. 
Amarasimha,  51  n.  4. 
dnadesana  (prohibitions),  59. 
Anagatavamsa,  105. 
Ananda  (commentator),  7,  43. 
Ananda  of  Hamsavatl,  47. 
Ananda  of  the  Sihajasangha,  19,  24,  31. 
Ananda  temple,  see  Nanda. 
Anapanadiptni,  97. 
Anattadlpam,  98. 
Anawrata,  see  Anorata. 
Aiiguttaranikaya,  2,  32  n.  2,  92. 
Anguttara-tika,  32  n.  2,  103. 


Anorata,  4,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16, 
51  n.  2,  83. 

Anuradhapura,  5  n.  1,  76  n.  1. 

Anuruddha  (raja),  see  Anorata. 

Anuruddha  (thera),  18. 

Anuruddhacariya,  104  n.  5. 

anutlka  (supplementary  commentary, 
gloss),  36  n.  2,  54. 

Auutlka  (on  Abhidhamma),  see  Abhi- 
dhamma. 

Anutikabyakhyam,  107. 

Apadana,  4. 

Apadana  °atthakatha,  104. 

Apattivinicchaya,  93. 

Apheggupatha,  36  n.  2. 

Apheggusara,  36. 

Apheggusaradlpam,  36  n.  2. 

Arahanta  (thera),  12,  13,  15,  19,  45. 

Arahantagana  (sect),  20,  34. 

Aree  (ari),  12  (n.  5  on  p.  11). 

Ariyalamkara  (of  Ava)  and  Ariyalam- 
kara  (the  younger),  37,  53,  54,  55, 
64,  73  n.  5. 

Ariyasaccavatara,  107. 

Ariyavamsa  (thera),  41,  42,  43,  45. 

drocanitlekhakamacca  (official  charged 
with  issuing  royal  decrees),  93. 

Arunavati,  104. 

Asankhata  DhammaPakasani-Kyan,  97. 

Asoka,  4,  9,  10,  17. 

Atharvaveda,  51. 

Atthabyakhyam,  107. 

Attha-Navanipata-Anguttara,  103. 

AtthasalinI,  27,  53,  54,  56,  59,  67,  106. 

Atthasalini-atthakatha,  102. 

Atthasaliniganthi-thit,  96. 

Atthasalini-nissaya,  106. 

Atthasalim-tika,  see  Manidlpa. 

atthayojana  (interpretation),  43. 

Atula  Yasadhamma,  69,  71,  75,  76. 


B 

Balappabodhana,  106. 
Balappabodhana  pruttikarana,  107. 
Balattajjana  (Balavatarana),  106. 
Balavatara,  22,  37,  105.  ' 
Barittaratakara  (Vrttaratnakara?),  109. 
Bayin  Naung,  47,  49. 
Bhadda  (queen),  35. 
Bhaskaracarya,  108  n.  3. 
Bhesajjamanjusa,  108. 
BhikkhunTpatimokkha,  6. 
Bhikkhunivibhanga,  78,  102. 


INDEX 


Bbikkhupatimokkha,  6. 
Bhikkhuvibhanga,  78. 
Bhuramajeyya  (jurist),  87. 
Bhuridattajataka,    81    n.  10  ;     metrical 

version,  44. 
Bijakkhyam,  106. 
Binga-u,  ste  Hsin-hpyu-shin. 
Binya  Dala  (king  of  Pegu),  68. 
Bodhipakkhiyadlpani,  97. 
BodGpaya,  74,  75,  76,  77,  83,  89. 
Brahmajiila  suttanta,  3. 
Brahmanic  texts,  51,  52,  98  ff. 
Brahmans,  51,  98. 
Branginoco,  see  Bavin  Naunir. 
Bhhaja  (-  Brihajjataka),  20. 
Brihajjataka,  20,  81  n.  1,  108. 
Brihajjataka-nissaya,  109. 
Brihajjittaka-tika,  108. 
Buddhadasa  (king),  108  11.  8. 
Buddhadatta  (commentator),  7,  39  note, 

61,  72  n.l. 
Buddhaghosa  (commentator),  7,  27,  46, 

56,  67,  84,  86  n.  1. 
Buddhaghosa  (Taking  jurist),  86. 
Buddbalamkara,  43. 
Buddhapiya,  105  n.  6. 
buddhavacanam  (the  word  of  tbe  Buddha) , 

59. 

Buddhavamsa  (tbera),  33,  35  n.  1. 
Buddhavamsa-atthakatha,  104. 


Calinda  paficika,  108. 

Candapajjota,  5  n.  2. 

Candaprutti  (Candr.ivrtti),  107. 

Candrapancikara  (°panjika),  107. 

Cangakarika,  107  note. 

Cankadasa  (Cangadasa),  107  and  n.  8. 

Caraka-samhita,  107  n.  11. 

Cariya  Pitaka,  4,  104. 

Cariya-Pitaka-atthakatha,  104. 

Catthapayoga  ('rj,  107. 

Catukaniputa-Auguttara,  103. 

Catuka  -  pafica  -  cbanipata- j  ataka  -  attba- 
katha,  104. 

catnrangabalamacca  (officer  of  state), 
27. 

Catusamaneravatthu,  78. 

Cetiddhinemi  parigatha  (?),  106. 

Ceylon,  literary  and  religious  relations 
with,  2,  5,  8,  11,  17,  18,  22,  29,  31, 
32,  34,  38,  39,  66,  76,  78,  80,  83, 
84,  and  Appendix  ;  missions  to,  7  ; 
Sangha,  see  blhalasangha. 

Chaddantanagarajuppattikatha ,  78. 

Chagatidlpam,  104. 

Chakkindabhisiri,  95. 

Chaudapanna,  88. 

Chandomanjari,  97. 


Chandosaratthavikasim,  26. 

Chandoviciti,  107. 

Chandrakirtti,  11  n.  1. 

Chapaccayadipani,  26. 

Chapata     (Chapada),     otherwise     Sad- 

dhammajotipala,  17,   18,  19,  23,  31, 

39  note,  41,  54. 
Cha-sattanipata-anguttara,  103. 
Chattaguhiuda  (  =  Kyansittha,  q.v.). 
Chronicles,  x,  10,  40;   royal,  57,  90. 
Commentators  (the  great),  7. 
Cujagana,  105. 
Cujaganthipada,  75,  76. 
Cujamanisara,  108. 
Cujaniddesa,  °atthakatha,  104. 
Cujanirutti  (Culla0),  37,  55  n.  6,  105. 
Cujaniruttimanjusa,  107. 
Cujasandhivisodhana,  105. 
Cujavamsa,  105. 
Cuilabuddhaghosa    (Buddhavamsa),     35 

n.  1. 
Cullavimalabuddhi,  see  Vimalabuddhi. 

D 

Dabbragana,  Dabraguna,  "tika  (Dravya- 

guna,  q.v.),  107,  108. 
Dakkhinavana  vihara,  55. 
Danadipam,  98. 
Dandin,  107  n.  7. 
Dandlppakarana,  tika  on,  27. 
Dandi-tika,  108. 
Darajjavitarani,  87. 
Dasa-ekadasanipata-aiiguttara,  1 03. 
Dasa-ekadasanipata  -  jataka-atthakatha, 

104. 
Dasaganthivannana  (Dasagandhi- 

vannana),  28. 
Dasavatthu,  104  n.  9. 
Dathadhatuvamsa,  °tika,  105,  108. 
Dathanaga,  55. 

Devacakkobhasa  (thera),  57,  58. 
Devanampiyatissa  (king) ,  17. 
Dhammacakka  (pavattanasutta),  105. 
Dhammacakkatika,  105. 
Dhammacari,  18. 
Dhammaceti  (king),  37,  38,  39. 
Dhammadana,  105. 
Dhammadassi,  22. 
Dhammadesana ,  98. 
Dhammadlpani,  98. 
Dhammakitti,  22,  105  n.  7. 
Dhammaniti,  51. 
Dhammapada,  3,  4,  87. 
Dhammapada,  °atthakatha,  103. 
Dhammapada  ganthi-nissaya,  106. 
Dhammapala  (commentator),  5  n.  2,  7,  8, 

43,  102  n.  4. 
Dhammapala  (Culla0),  61. 
Dhammapana-shu-bwe,  96. 


INDEX 


113 


Dhammapanna  pakarana,  107. 
Dhammasangani,  55  n.  2,  56,  57,  61,  62, 

102. 

Dhammasatta,  106. 
dhammasattha  (Skt.  dharmagastra],  33, 

84  ff. 

Dhammasenapati,  15,  16. 
Dhajnmavilasa,  85,  87. 
Dhammavilasa  (Sariputta),  31,  32,  34. 
Dhammavilasa  dhammathat,  32,  33. 
Dharmadasa,  28,  108  n.  11. 
Dhatarattha,  68  n.  1. 
Dhatukatha,  54,  57,  102. 
Dhatukatha  yojana,  67. 
Dhatumala  (of  the  Saddamti),  16. 
dhdtupaccayavibhaga  (analysis    of  parts 

of  speech),  53. 
Dhatvatthasangaba,  97. 
Dlghanikaya,  2 ;  preferred  by  Burmese 

Buddhists,  3,  78,  92.     See  also  p.  102. 
Dipankara, ^105  n.  6. 
Dipankara  Srijnana  Atira,  11. 
Dipankara  (Buddha),  96. 
Dipavamsa,  10;    (and  °tika),  65  n.  1, 

105.  " 

Disapamokkha,  25. 
Dravyaguna,  51  ;  °samgraha,  107  n.  1. 

See  Dabbragana,  Dabraguna. 
Dukanipatajataka-atthakatha,  104. 
Dukapatthana,  102. 
Dukatikacatukanipata-anguttara  -  attha- 

katha,  103. 

Dukatikapatthana,  102. 
Dumajataka-atthakatha,  104. 
Dutiva-min-khaung,  43. 
Dvadasa-terasa-pakinnakanipata-jataka- 

atthakatha,  104. 
Dvematika     (compilation      of     Vinaya 

teits),  6. 

E 

Ekadukatika-anguttara,  103. 

Ekakkharakosa,  45. 

Ekamsika  (name  of  a  sect),  65,  66,  68, 

71,  72,  73,  74,  75. 

Ekanipata-afiguttara-atthakatha,  103. 
Ekanipata-jataka-atthakatha,  104. 
Etimasamidipani     or     Etimasamidlpika 

(EhimayasamdipamP),  16. 

G 

Gandhabharana,  Ganthabharana,  Ganda- 

bharana,  43. 
gandhantara  (books  other  than  doctrinal), 

65. 

Gandhatthi,  26. 
Gandhavamsa,  -n,  pastim. 
Gandhisara  or  Ganthisara,  18. 
ffanfhipadatt/ta  (gloss),  67. 


Gojadhyaya  (of  Siddhanta^iromani),  108 

n.  3. 

Gulhatthadipani,  56. 
Gunabhilamkara,  65,  66. 
Gunasagara,  25. 


Halayudha,  106  note. 
Hatthipalajataka  (metrical  version),  44. 
Hatthisutta,  80. 
Hetubindu  °tTka,  109. 
Hitopadesa,  51. 

houng  (Burmese)  (ancient),  104  n.  5. 
Hpa-gyl-doa  (1819  A.D.),  89,  90. 
hpyat-ton  (Burm.)  ('decisions'),  87. 
hsayd  (Burm.  =  Pali:  dcariya),  teacher, 

62. 

Hsay-saung-twe,  95. 
Hsin-hpyu-shin     (Binga-u),    35    n.    2  ; 

(king,    at    Pegu),    37;     65;     (king, 

1763  A.D.),  71,  88. 
Hyauk-saung-twe,  95. 


Indriyayamaka,  102. 

Itivuttaka,  4,  103 ;  (°atthakatha),  103. 


Jagara  (thera),  29. 

Jagarabhidhaja,  96. 

Jalini,  see  Saddasaratthajalini. 

Jambudhaja  (JambudTpadhaja),  55. 

Jambudlpa-Anantadhaja  (acariya),  72. 

jamludipika     (belonging    to     India    or 

Burma),  28. 

Jataka,  3,  4,  60,  78  ff.,  92,  93. 
Jatakabhidana,  80. 
Jataka-ganthi,  106. 
Jataka-nissaya,  106. 
Jatakatika,  104. 
Jatakavisodhana,  43. 
Jatattaki  -  sotattaki  -  nidana  -  atthakatha, 

104. 

Jayaditya,  107  n.  13. 
Jetavana  (thera),  4. 
Jeyyasinkha  (king),  25. 
Joti  (thera),  of  Ceylon,  75  n.  2. 


Kaccayana,  disciple  of  the  Buddha, 
5  note  ;  grammarian,  x,  17,  20,  29,  36, 
97 ;  author  of  the  Netti,  5  n.  2  ;  55. 

Kaccayanabheda  (Kaccayanabheda- 
dipi'ka),  36. 

Kaccayanabheda-tika  (Saratthavikasini) , 
55. 

Kaccayana-nissaya,  106. 

Kaccayana  (pakarana),  25  u.  2. 


114 


INDEX 


Kauciiyaua-rupavattira,  109. 
Kaccayanasara,  26  n.  6,  36,  37,  106. 
Kaccayanasaratlka,    36;    and  see  Sam- 

mohaviniisini. 
Kaccayanavannana,  46,  97. 
Kaccayanayoga,  21. 
Kalapa,  see  Katantra. 
KalapuuMam  108. 
Kalapapaficika  (pafijika)  °tika,  106. 
Kalapasuttapratifmsaku  (?  "patifinapaka) 

tlkii,  106. 

Kalyaiii  inscriptions,  23,  38,  39. 
Kamadinakatha,  96. 
Kamandakl,  107. 
KamaSastra,  51. 
Kammakammaviuicchaya,  C. 
Kammavaca,  6,  7,  38  n.  2,  106. 
Kamraavinicchaya,  95. 
Kankhavitarani,'  38  n.  2,  46,    56,    87  ; 

atthakatha,  102  ;  tika  (new),  102. 
Karika,  16,  105. 
Karikatlka,  16,  105. 
Kasikapruttipaliui  (Kac,ikavrtti°),  107. 
Kasmira,  80  note. 
Kassapa  (commentator),  7;    (of  Damila- 

rattha),   39    note;     (of    Ceylon),    76 

n.  2  ;    (of  Pagan),  25  u.  4. 
Kataca  (Krt-cakra),  106. 
KStantra,  26,  106  u.  14,  107. 
Kathavatthu,  96,  102. 
Kaung-hmu-daw  pagoda  (Rajamanicuhi), 

55  n.  3. 

Kavyasaratthasaiigaha,  95. 
Kayaviratigatha,  44. 
Ke^avamicjra,  107  n.  12. 
Khandhavaggasamyutta,  °t!ka,  103. 
Khantakakhipa,  see  Niigita. 
Khuddakanikaya,  2,  3,  4. 
Khuddakapatha,  4  ;  "atthakathii,  103. 
Khuddasikkha,  6,  24  ;  -tika,  24  ;  ancient 

and  new,  102. 
Kittislhasura  (king),  27. 
Kittitara,  40  n.  2. 
Koladdhaja,  108  ;  -tika,  27,  108. 
Kublai  Khan,  40. 
Kumaraceti  pagoda,  35. 
Kyansittha  (king),  15. 
Kyaswa  or  Kyocva  (king),  25,  27,  40. 
Kyaswa  IV,  see  Kittislhasura. 


Laghugraha,  51. 

Laghupara(;aryam,  108  n.  2. 

Lakkhanadipani,  98. 

Lalita>"istara,  96. 

Law,  customary  (of  the  Burmese),  87,  89. 

Law  codes,  Pali,  Hindu,  32,  33,  84  ff. 

Ledi  Hsaya-daw,  97. 

leJthakamaeta  (secretary),  93. 


Likhananaya,  65, 

Llnatthappakasani    (tlkas   by  Dharania- 

pala),  8  n.  4. 
Liuatthavisodham,  25. 
Lingatthavivarana,  22,  105. 
Lingatthavivaranappakasaka,  22. 
Lingatthavivaranatika,  22,  105. 
Lingatthavivaranavinicchaya,  22. 
Lokadipasai'a,  35,  36. 
Lokamti,  51  ;  of  Chakkindabhisiri,  95. 
Lokapanfiatti ,  104. 
Lokuppatti,  104. 
Lokuppattipakafam,  16. 


M 

Madhavanidaua,  106  note. 
Madhusaratthadlpani,  47. 
Magadhabha.ua  (the  idiom  of  Magadha), 

1,2. 

Maggangadipanl,  98. 
Mahabodhivamsa,  104  n.  9. 
Mahadhammaraja    (grandson   of    Bay  in 

Naung),  49,  52. 
Mahadhammarajadhiraja      (Sing-gu-sa. 

1776),  72,  73,  74. 
Mahagana,  105. 

Mahaka  ("kappa  or  "kaccftyana  ?),  106. 
Mahakaccayana,  see  Kaccayana. 
Mahakalacakka  (°tlka),  108. 
Mahakassapa,  see  Kassapa. 
Mahiiuaga  (thera),  33. 
Mahaniddesa,  4,  91 ;  "atthakatha,  104. 
Mahanissara  (°nissaya?),  43. 
Mahapakarana  (=  Patthana),  54  n.  3. 
Mahaparakkama  (thera),  46  ;  67  n.  1. 
Mahaparinibbana  Suttanta,  3. 
Mahaparittam,  see  Paritta. 
Mahapavaradhammarajalokadhipati(A.u. 

1651),  57. 

Maharajadhipati  (A.D.  1733),  66,67,  68. 
Maharupasiddhi,  see  Kupasiddhi. 
Mahasammata  (king),  79. 
Mahasatipatthana  suttanta,  3. 
Mahasirijeyyasura  (king,  atTaungu),  45, 

46. 
Mahasuvannadipa   (son  of    Parakkama- 

bahalaraja),  36  n.  2. 
Mahathera-tlka,  105. 
Mahatlka,  on  Saddatthabhedacinta,  22. 
Mahavagga  (of  the  Vinaya),  38  n.  2  ;  73 

n.  5. 

Mahavaggasamyutta,  103. 
Mahavaggatth'akatha,  73, 102 ;  °tika,103. 
Mahavamsa,  10,  32,  65  n.  3,  79;   °t:ka, 

105. 

Mahavihara,  vii,  17,  19,  20,  31,  32,  34. 
Mahayana,  61. 
Mahayasa  (Eassa,  of  Thaton),  36  n.  3, 

37. 


INDEX 


115 


Mahinda  (them),  17  n.  3,  38. 

Mahosadhajittaka,  87. 

Mahosatthi  (Mahosadha?),  107. 

Majjhim'anikaya,  2,  93  ;  °tika,  32  n.  2. 

Majjhimapannasa  °atthakatha  °tika,  103. 

Malayadesa,'23. 

Malay adipa,  23. 

Majiavulu-Sandesaya,  25  n.  1. 

Maiigala,  grammarian,  26. 

Mangaladipani,  47. 

Mangalasutta,  4,  95. 

Manidipa,  42. 

Manijotasaddhammalamkara,  92. 

Manikundalavatthu,  52. 

Maniratana  (thera),  56. 

Manisaramanjusa,  42. 

Manjusatikabyakhyam,  107. 

Manohara,  16. 

Manohari  (king),  13,  14,  15. 

Manooreng,  see  Manuyin. 

Manu,  33,  88  ;  (Dhammasattha),  84  ff. 

Manukyay,  87,  88. 

Manusara,  86. 

Manusara-shwe-myiu,  88. 

Mauuvannana,  87,  88. 

-Manuyin',' 86,  87. 

Manuyinlaiika,  88. 

Matikatthndipam,  19. 

Matthapayoga(r),  108. 

Maung  Daung  sa  do,  32  n.  3. 

Maung  Tun  Aung,  95. 

Maunggun,  9. 

Medhabhivamsa,  92.  93. 

Medhamkara  (Xava°),  35,  36  n.  1. 

Milindapanha,  4,  87,  108. 

Min-don-Min,  92  ff. 

Moggallana,  27,  75  n.  1,  76,  105,  106 

n.  5. 

Mohanayana,  104. 
Mohavicchedam,  88,104;  (Dhanimathat), 

88  n.  4. 

M6n  (Taking),  9. 
Mrammasamgha,  vii,  20,  29. 
Mritvuvancana,  108. 
Mugdhabodha,  72  u.  3. 
Mukhamattadipam,  see  Nyasa. 
Mukhamattasara,  25,  105  ;    tika  on,  25, 

105. 
mulabhdsa  ('the  original  language'),  2, 

89. 

Mulapannasa,  °atthakatha,  °tika,  103. 
Mulasikkba,  6. 
Mulayamaka,  102. 
Munindiigbosa  (thera),  70. 

N 

Nagarajuppattikatha,  92. 
Nagita  (thera),  27. 
Xiimacaradipanl,  18. 


Namakara,  95. 

Xamarupam  (name  and  form),  104  n.  5  ; 
-paricchedappakarana,  104  n.  5  ;  -tika 
_  (new),  104. 

Nanabnivamsa  (Nana),  acariya,  74,  75, 
.  78,  80  ff." 

Xanagambhira    (commentator),    7,   105 
_  n.  2;  (of  Pagan),  16. 
Nanalamkara,  71. 
Nanasagara,  22. 
Xanavara,  66. 
^anavilasa,  47. 
Xanavilasa  (of  Pagan),  25. 
Xandamala,  33  n.  2,  72,  73. 
XTarada,  85. 

Xarapati  (king  at  Ava),  41. 
Xarapatisithu  (king),  16,  20,  21,  23,  31. 
Xaravara   (Mahasihasura   dhammaraja), 
^57. 

Xarayuttisangaha,  109. 
XavaniyamadlpauT,  96. 
Xavavimalabuddhi,  see  Vimalabuddhi. 
Xettipakarana,  5,  8,  43,  56,  78. 
Xeyyadhamma,  91. 
5ieyyadhammabhivainsa,  91. 
XibbanadTpani,  97. 

Xidanavaggasamyutta,  °atthakatha,  103. 
Xirayakathadipaka,  93. 
Xiruttibyakhyam,  108. 
Xiruttidipani,  97. 
Xiruttipitaka  (Nirutti),  29. 
Xiruttisaramanjusa,  29,  55. 
Xvadi  (Moggallana),  106. 
Xyasa,  21,  55,  71,  105. 
Xyasappadipa,  21  n.  5. 
Xyasappadipatika,  21. 
Xyaung  Ram  Min,  53. 
Xyayabindu,  °tika,  109. 


0 


Ovada,  97. 
Ovadakatha,  96. 


Pabbajaniyakammavaca,  98. 

Pacittiya,  96, 102  ;  °adi-atthakatha,  102. 

Padasodhana  (°sadhana?),  105. 

Padavahamahacakka  (Padavatara?),  106. 

Padavibhaga,  71. 

Pakinnakanikaya,  107. 

Palata'kka  (Balatarka?),  107. 

Pali :   grammar,   a   popular  study,  25 ; 

revival  of  study,  27  ;  language,  1  ;  in 

Burma,  v,  ix,  20  ;   literature,  1,  2,  3, 

19,  23  ;  studies,  6,  24,  25. 
Pali-Burmese  MSS.,  2  ;    collections,  6  ; 

literature,    beginnings    of,    14,    17  ; 

early  period,  29  ;  later  features,  58. 


INDEX 


Pancadi-  anguttara-  atthakatha ,  103. 
Pancanipata-auguttara,  103. 
Pancapakarana-atthakatha,  102. 
Pancika-moggallana,  °tika,  105. 
Paninean  system,  106  n.  14. 
Panuajotabhidhaja,  92. 
Panfiaramsi,  95. 
Pannasami,  vii,  91  ff. 
Pafifiatissa,  91. 
Parajika,  96. 

Paraiikakanda,  °atthakatha,  °tika,  102. 
Parakkamabahu,  76  and  notes  1  and  2. 
Parakramabahu  I,  11,  32. 
Paramatthabindu,  tikii  on,  25. 
paramatthadesaml ,   teaching    concerning 

the  highest  truth,  59. 
Paramatthamanjusa,  28  ;  62  n.  2. 
Paramatthasankhepa ,  98. 
Paramatthavinicchaya  (new),  104. 
Paramidipam,  98. 
Paranissaya,  109. 
Parasava,  108. 
Paraviveka,  109. 
Parayanavatthu,  43. 
Paritta,  3,  4,  6,  60,  95. 
Paritta-tika,  57. 
pariyattipatipatti   (sacred  doctrine    and 

practice),  50. 
Parupana  (name  of  a  sect),  65,  66,  67, 

70,  71,  72,  73,  74,  75. 
Pasadika  (thera),  27. 
Pasamsa,  68. 

Patali  (Natapatali),  76  and  n.  3. 
Pathacariya,  104. 
Patheyya,      "atthakatha,     102  ;     "tika, 

103. 

PaticcasamuppadadlpauT,  98. 
Patigaviveka-tika,  108. 
Patimokkha,  6,  56,  67  n.  2. 
Patimokkhalekhana,  67. 
Patimokkhavisodham,  39  note. 
Patimokkhuddesa,  6. 
Patipattisangaha,  107. 
Patisambhidamagga,  4,  91 ;  "atthakatha, 

104  ;  °ganthipada,  104. 
Patthana,  54  n.  3,  57,  61,  71. 
Patthanagananaya,  19. 
Patthanasaradipam,  47. 
Patthana-tika,  54. 
Petakopadesa,  5,  104  n.  9,  105. 
Petalamkara,  78. 
Petavatthu,  4;  "atthakatha,  103. 
Philip  de  Brifo,  49" 
Pindonissaya,  108.     See  Prindo. 
pitakas     ('  baskets,'    i.e.     divisions    of 

scripture),  2,  7,  88. 
Pitakatthamain,  54  n.  2. 
Poems  (recitation  of,  against  the  religious 

rule),  44. 
poratid  (old-time  chroniclers),  44. 


Po°  Uo  Duuug  (iu«criptiou),  8  u.  6,  71 

notes  4  and  7. 
Prindo-tika,  106. 
Puggalapannatti,  102. 
Pumbhasari,  109. 
Punnacetiya,  42. 

R 

Rahula  (of  the  Sihajasangha),   19,  23, 

24. 

Rajabala-kyaw-din,  88. 
Rajabhisekagandha,  74. 
llaj adhiraj anamattappakasini,  67 . 
llajadhirajavilasini,  79  ff.,  92. 
Rajamanicula  (cetiya),  55. 
RtVjamattam,  108  n.  1. 
Rajamattanissayo,  108  n.  9. 
Rajamattanta,  108;  -tikii,  108. 
Rajaniti,  51. 
Rajasevakadlpani,  93. 
Rajasikkhapada,  79. 
Ra^avamsa,  57,  90. 
Rajavamsasankhepa,  57. 
Rajindaraj abhidheyyadTpani,  52 . 
rajjiiggahamacca,     Pali     title    given    to 

revenue  officer,  21. 
llajoviidavatthu,  78. 
Itatauakara,  52. 
Ratanapanjara,  95. 

Ratnamala  (Abhidhana0),  ses  Rattamfilil. 
Ratnaprabha,  108  n.  10. 
Rattamala,  106,  109  ;  °tika,  106. 
Ratthasara,  44. 
Revata,  24. 

Rikkaniyayatra,  °tika,  109. 
Rogauidana,  106. 
Roganidana-byakhyam,  108. 
Roganidana-nissaya,  109. 
Rogayatra,  108  ;    -nissaya,  109  ;    -tika, 

108. 

Rupabhedapakiisani,  56. 
RupadTpani,  97. 
Rupasiddhi,  37. 
Rupasiddhi-atthakatha,    105 ;    -nissaya, 

106;  -tlkaj'lOS. 
Rupiivatara,  106. 

S 

Saccasankhepa,  61. 

Saccatthadipani,  98. 

Saddakarika,  107. 

SaddamedhanT,  96. 

Saddaniti,  x,  16,  17,  79,  93. 

Saddasankhepa,  98. 

SaddasaratthajalinI,  27  ;  commentary  on, 

27  n.  5  :  tika  on,  28. 
Saddatthabh'edacinta,  20,  22,  91,  105; 

-dipani,  22  ;  -nissaya,  109  ;  .tika,  105. 
Saddavatara,  106. 


INDEX 


117 


Saddavutti  (Saddavuttipakasaka),  29,  46  ; 

tika  on,  29  ;  later  tika  on,  29  n.  2. 
Saddavuttivivarana,  29  n.  2. 
Saddhammacakkasami  (thera),  47. 
Saddhamraacari,  66. 
Saddhammadlpaka,  106,  107. 
Saddhammaghosa  (of  Thaton),  104  notes 

7  and  8. 

Saddhammaguru,  see  Saddhammapala. 
Saddhammaiotipala,  see  Chapata. 
Saddhammakitti,  see  Dhammakitti. 
Saddhammalamkara  (of  Hamsavati),  47. 
Saddhammanandi,  22. 
Saddhammapai  otika ,  91. 
Saddhammapala  (grammarian),  29. 
Saddhammasiri  (grammarian),  20,  22. 
Saddhammavilasa  (of  Pagan),  37. 
Saddhammavilasini,  91. 
Saddhammupaya     (Saddharamopayana), 

107. 

Sadhujjanavilasini,  78. 
Sagara,  see  Gunasagara. 
Sagara  bhivamsadhaja,  95. 
Sagathavaggasamyutta,       °atthakatha, 

°tika,  103. 

Sahassaramsl,  104  n.  9. 
Sahassaramsimalini,  104. 
Sahassavatthu,  104  n.  9,  105. 
Sakra,  73.      ' 
Salayatanavaggasamyutta ,    "atthakatha , 

ios. 

Salvan-min-tara  (king,  1629),  73  n.  1. 
Samannaphala  suttanta,  3. 
Samantapasadika,  27,  87. 
Samasataddhitadipani,  106. 
Sambandhacinta,22,  37  ;  -tika,  22,  106. 
Sambandhamalini,  29,  106. 
Sammohavinasini,  37. 
Sammohavinodam,  27 ;  -atthakatha,  102. 
Samudrikalaksana,  81  n.  i. 
Samvannananayadipanl,  55. 
Samvarajataka  (metrical  version),  44. 
Samyuttanikaya,  2,  92  ;  see  also  103. 
Sandbikappa  (of  Kaccayana),  46. 
Sangbarakkhita,  22,  24,  26,  27,  106  n.  o, 

108. 

Sankhepavannana,  18,  54,  56. 
Sankhyapakasaka,  °tika,  47. 
Sankiccajataka,  79. 
Sanskrit,  1,  16,  26;   literature,  51,  52, 

98,  101 ;  Buddhist  works  in,  61,  96  ; 

works  translated  into  Burmese,  72,  77. 
s'anti  (expiatory  rite),  47  n.  5. 
Saradassi,  56. 
Saramanjusa,  27. 
Sarapinda,  ^07. 

Sarasangaha,  107;  -nissaya,  109. 
Saratthadipani,  32  n.  2,  38,  39  note,  76, 

87  ;  °tika,  32  n.  2. 
Siratthasangaha,  108. 


Saratthavikashn,  37  n.  2,  55. 
Sariputta  (of  Ceylon),  32  and  n.  2,  39 

note,  76  n.  2. 

Sariputta  (Dbammavilasa),  31,  32,  85. 
Sariputta  (Sariputtara) ,  author  of  Sadda- 

vuttitika,  29. 
Sarupatthadipam,  95. 
SarvajnanyayadTpani,  55. 
^arvavarman,  26,  106  n.  4. 
Sasanalamkara,  32  n.  3. 
Sasanasuddbidipika,  73. 
Sasanavamsa,  rii,  passim. 
Sativa,  see  Thado-min-hya. 
Sati-we-bon-la-shu-bwe,  97. 
Satta-attha  -  navanipata  -  jataka  -  attha- 
katha) 104. 

Sattarajadhammavatthu,  52. 
Satthekavipasvaprakasa,  108. 
Satyatatvavabodha  (?),  107. 
Sawlahan  (king),  11  n.  5. 
Setibhinda,  see  Hsin-hpyu-shin. 
Shin-sau-bu  (queen),  38. 
Shwe  Dagon  pagoda,  78  n.  6. 
Shyaramitikabya  (?) ,  "nissaya,  109. 
Sihajasangha,  vii,  19,  23,  31  ff.,  38. 
Slhajavatthu,  104  note,  105. 
Silakatha,  93. 
Sllakkhandha,  °atthakatha,  102  ;    °tika, 

103. 

Silavamsa,  43,  44. 
Silavanagajataka,  81. 
Sllavinicchaya,  98. 
Simabandhanitika,  39. 
Simalamkara  or  Simalamkaratika,  18. 
Slnialamkara  pakarana,  39  note. 
Simalamkarasamgaha,  38  n.  2. 
Sirimangala  (thera),  27,  47. 
Sirinandadhammaraj  a-Pavaradhipati- 

raja,  55. 
Siripavaramahadhammaraja,  57;  Xaung- 

doa-gyi(A.D.  1760),  71. 
Sirisaddhammakittimahaphussadtjva,  25 . 
Sirisudhammarajadhipati,    see    Dutiya- 

min-khaung. 

Sirisudhammarajamahadhipati,  52. 
Sirisumangala,  see  Sirimangala. 
Sirivicittalamkara,  45  n.  3. 
Sivali  (thera),  19,  24. 
Sivall  (queen),  36  n.  2. 
Sona  (thera,  missionary),  4,  19. 
Sotamalini  (sotabbamalinl  ?),  106. 
SotatthakI,  104. 
Subhutacandana,  22. 
Subodhalamkara,  22,  108;  °nissaya,  95  ; 

°tika,  107,  108. 
Sujata  (Buddha),  90. 
Sulacharaka,  107. 
Sumangala  (of  Ceylon), 61;  (Sumangala- 

sami),  54. 
Sumedha,  96. 


118 


INDEX 


Sumedhakatha  (poetical  version) ,  43. 

Surajamaggadipani,  93. 

Surakitti  (king),  53. 

liuravinicchaya  (concerning  intoxicants), 

46. 

Suravinicchaya  (of  Nanavara),  67. 
Suriyavamsa,  91. 
Suryasiddhanta,  51. 
Suttaniddesa,  17,   18.      See  Kacciiyana- 

suttauiddesa. 

Suttanipata,  3,  4 ;  "atthakatha,  103. 
Suttapitaka,  2,  59,  60,  62. 
Suttasangaha,  5,  73. 
Suttavali  (Kaccayana0?),  106. 


Ta-bin-sh\ve-hti  (king),  46,  47. 
Taktiivatara  (Tattvavatara),  °tika,  109. 
Taking  authors,  31,  34  ;    chronicles,  9  ; 

influence,  33,  in   law  codes,    33,  86  ; 

inscriptions,  35 ;    people,   9,   10,  26, 

64,    68 ;    scholars,    49 ;     states,    84  ; 

teachers  of  Buddhism,  10,  12,  19. 
Tamalinda  (thera),  19,  24. 
Tandi  (Dandin?),  °tlka,  107. 
Tanogabuddhi,  107. 
Tantrasastra,  51. 
Taruk-pye-min,  81. 
Tathagatuppatti,  16,  105. 
Tejodipa  (thera),  57. 
Tejosara,  88. 
Terasakanda-tlka,  102. 
Tesakuna  jataka,  79. 
Thadodhammaraja,  see  Ukkanisika. 
Thado-min-bya,  founder  of  Ava,  30,  40. 
Thagya  (pagoda),  11. 
thamain  (Burmese),  record,  63. 
thanbyin  (Burmese  title,  revenue  officer), 

21  note.     See  Nyasa. 
Than-byin-tika,  105. 
Tharawadi-min  (1837  A.D.),  90,  91. 
Theragatha,  4  ;  °atthakatha,  104. 
Theravadin,  5. 

Therigatha,  4;  "atthakatha,  104. 
thit  (Burmese)  (new),  104  n.  5. 
Thohanbwa,  45,  48. 
thugyl  (Burmese  title,   revenue  officer), 

21  n.  6. 

Thupavamsa,  105. 
Tigumbhathomana,  78. 
Tika-Kyaw,  see  Abhidhammatthavibha- 

vanl. 

Tikanipatajataka-atthakatha,  104. 
Tikapatthana,  102. 
Tilokaguru,  54,  57. 
Tilokalamkara,  50. 
Tipitaka,  grammar  of  the,  16. 
Tipitakalamkara  (of  Ava),  37,  49,  53, 

54,  55,  63,  64. 


Tiriyapabbnta,  53. 
Toungdwin  Kyaw,  88. 
Trakkabhasa  (Tarkabhasa),  107. 
Tripitaka,  see  Tipitaka. 

U 

U  Janinda,  95. 

U  Pyin-nya-thika,  97. 

U  Tin,  95. 

U  Tissa,  95. 

Udana,  4  ;  °atthakatha,  103. 

Ukkamsamala,  65. 

Ukkamsika  (king),  50,  52,  54,   55,  63 

note,  83. 

Uparipannasa,  °atthakatha,  °tika,  103. 
Upiisakavinicchaya,  95. 
Upasakovada,  96. 
Upasena  (of  Ceylon),  91  n.  2. 
Upayakatha,  93. 
Uposathavinicchaya,  44,  93. 
irposathika  (under  temporary  vows),  44. 
Uppatasanti,  47. 
Uttama,  22. 

Uttara  (thera,  missionary),  4,  19. 
Uttarajlva,  17. 


Vacakopadesa,  °tika,  46. 
Vacanatthajotika  (Vacanat'thajoti),  28. 
Vacavacaka  or  Vaccavacaka,  22. 
Vaccavacakadlpam,  22. 
VaccavacakatTka,  22. 
Vaccavacakavannana,  22. 
Vacissara  (thera),  18  ;  (grammarian),  22. 
vaciviitnatti  (recommendation  of  a  monk 

by  another  for  alms,  etc.),  24. 
Vajirabuddhi,    38    n.  2  ;    Malia",    40 ; 

tika,  39,  76. 

Vajirabuddhi  (of  Ceylon),  76  n.  2. 
Vamana,  107  n.  13. 
Vannabodhana,  65. 
Vanna-kyaw-din,  88. 
Varabhisamghanatha,  52. 
Varaha-Mihira,  20. 
Vedas,  works  known  under  this  name  in 

Burma,  21  ;  of  the  Burmese,  51,  88, 

101  ;  88. 
vedasattha  (Vedic  treatises),  20,  49,  50, 

58. 

Vedavidhinimittaniruttivannana,  108. 
Yepullabuddhi,  28. 
Vernacular,    beginning  of  metaphysical 

literature  in,  43 ;  growth  of  religious 

literature    in,    48 ;    translations  into, 

56,  57,  92  ;  Abhidhamma  in,  59. 
Vessantarajataka,  81. 
Vibhanga,  55,  56,  62  n.  3,  102. 
Vibhatyattha,     ascribed    to      Kyocva's 

daughter,  25 ;  by  Saddhammanana,  26. 
Vidadhimukhamandana,  tika  on,  28. 


INDEX 


119 


Yidagdhamukhamandana,    we    Vidadhi- 

mukhamandana . 
Yidhurajataka,  87. 
Yijayabahu  (king),  11,  15,  32. 
Vrjitavi,  46  ;  of  Sagaing,  46  n.  4. 
Yijjamaggadipanl,  98. 
Yimalabuddhi,  author  of  Xyasa  tika,  21, 

61  ;  (Nava°,  Culla"),  27,  28. ' 
Vimanavatthu,  4  ;  "atthakatha,  103. 
Yimativinodani,  38  n.  2,  39  note,  76  and 

n.  2. 
Vinaya    (monastic    code),    19,    24    and 

notes  1  and  2,  39  and  note,  44,  46,  56, 

59,  65,   67,  73  and  n.  5,  78,  96,  97  ; 

Four  Smaller  Vinayas,  6,  59. 
Vinayaculavagga,  102. 
Yinayaganthi  (°gandhi),  39. 
Vinayaganthipada,  75,  102. 
Yinayagulhatthadipani,  18. 
Vinayakandhaniddesa,  102. 
Yinayalamkara-tika,  54. 
Yinaya-mahavagga,  102. 
Yinaya-parivara,  102. 
Vinayapitaka,  2,  5,  27. 
Vinayasamutthanadipani,  18. 
Vinayasangaha  (pakarana),  38  n.  2,  39 

note,  74  n.  1. 
Vinayasangraha- atthakatha  (greater, 

less),  102, 

Vinayasificaya-tika  (later),  102. 
Vinaya-tTka,  38  note  ;  -tikas  (the  great), 

76. 

Vinayatthakatha,  38  n.  2. 
Yinay  a  -  uttarasincaya  -  atthakatha  ,102. 
Vinayavinicchaya  (pakarana),   38  n.    2, 

72,  73. 

Yinicchayapakasani,  88. 
Viragdha"  (Yidagdha?),  108  ;  tika,  108. 


Yisatijataka-atthakatha,  104. 

Yisuddhacara,  97. 

Yisuddhimagga,  7,  56,  87  ;  -atthakatha, 

104  ;  -tika,  104. 
Yisuddhimaggadipanl-kyan,  97. 
Visuddhimaggaganthi,  19. 
Yisuddhimaggaganthipadattha,  56. 
Yisumgamasimavinicchaya,  97. 
Yivadavinicchava,  93. 
voharadesana    (teaching   concerning  the 

current  practice  of  men),  59. 
Yoharatthabheda,  93. 
Yopadeva  (grammarian),  72. 
Vrnda,  106  n.  15. 
Yuttimoggallana,  105. 
Yuttodaya,   22,   26,  27,  108  ;    tika  on, 

28  ;  gloss  on  (Vacanatthajotika),  28. 
Yuttodayapaficika    (see   Chandosarattha- 

vikasinl),  26. 

vyakarana  (exposition),  88. 
Yyavaharamayukha,  87  n.  3. 


Wagaru  (king),  34,  35,  40,  85  ;   °dham- 
mathat,  33  n.  3,  85  ff. 


Yajnavalkya,  85. 
Yamaka,  54,  57,  71. 
Yasa,  see  Mahayasa. 
Yasavaddhanavatthu,  53. 
Yatanaprabha-tika  (Ratana0?),  108. 
Yaw-mya-sa  Atwin-wun,  95. 
Ye-din,  acariya,  41. 
Yuddhajeyya  ( Yuddhadhyaya) ,  108. 
Yuttisanga'ha,  °tika,  109. 


STEPHEN    AUSTIN    AND    SONS,    LTD.,    PRINTERS,    HERTFORD. 


119120 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 

I 


DC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


A     000  709  268     7 


