=== PAGE 1 ===
Burmese Nissaya Literature: A Mainstream Monastic 
Education Learning Method and its Salient Features
Ven. Pannabhoga Herngseng
Acting Dean of Shan State Buddhist University, Head Department of 
Tipitaka Studies, Shan State Buddhist University, Taunggyi, Shan State, 
Myanmar
pannabhoga@gmail.com
Received 9 July 2020 | Revised 28 April 2021 | Accepted 15 June 2021
Abstract 
In some of the earliest Buddhist literature found in Myanmar, a type of translation 
in which each Pali word is followed by its relevant annotative interpretation, known 
as nissaya, can be found. Previous studies (Tin Lwin 1961; Pruitt 1992; McDaniel 
2008; Clark 2015) only examined what a nissaya is and to what literary genre nissaya 
literature belongs. In this paper, I will explore the various ways in which Burmese 
nissaya literature evolved into a mainstream monastic learning method, its role in 
the monastic education in Burma in particular, and further investigate whether the 
nissayas can be applied more generally and what the relationship is between nissaya 
and official Burmese Tipitaka translation. Lastly, this study argues that the Burmese 
nissaya literature can be compared to be on par with the encyclopaedic compilation 
on a specific subject.
Keywords 
nissaya literature – translation – monastic learning method – encyclopaedia – Burma 
history
1	
Introduction
Since the introduction of Theravada Buddhism to Pagan in the late 12th ce 
by Arahan Thera, a native of Thaton, Burmese Buddhism began to grow in 
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the cc by 4.0 license.
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23
Published with license by Koninklijke Brill nv | doi:10.1163/26659077-25010027
© Ven. Pannabhoga Herngseng, 2023 | ISSN: 0859-9920 (print) 2665-9077 (online)

=== PAGE 2 ===
2
tandem with the flourishing Buddhist civilization. Before long the monarch 
and the people embraced the new faith, Pali and Abhidhamma, and learning 
was soon at the forefront of the populace’s interests in this period (Bode 2014, 
12–14). There was a wide range of grammatical treatises written by scholar 
monks. The best known among them was Saddanīti, authored by Aggavaṃsa 
in 1154 ce, a landmark of its kind that points to the level of Pali language and 
grammar skills at the time (Ruiz-Falqués 2017, 2 27). The popularity of Pali and 
Abhidhamma learning also extended beyond the monastic community as can 
be seen, for example, in a Pali language conversation between a young monk 
from Ava and a young mother from Pagan (Siri Sobhana 1974, 103–5).
Subsequently, Burmese literature, particularly those poetic genres such as 
mo gun: – a significant record, pjou – poems of epic proportion, ei: gjin: clas-
sical poems addressed to a royal child extolling the glory of ancestors, and 
dwei:gjou: a kind of Myanmar poem consisting of two stanzas, flourished in the 
late 13th century ce of Pagan and 15th ce of Ava. The motifs of early Burmese 
poetry were most commonly religion, royalty, nature and love (Hla Pe 1985, 
4–6). Dhammasami (2018, 18, 159) asserts that Mahā Raṭṭhasāra (14681-529) 
and his contemporary Mahā Sīlavaṃsa (1453–1518) were well-known for their 
masterpieces of Pyo poetry in the royal court of Ava. Along with this poetic 
literature, it is believed that a kind of Pali-Burmese translation work developed 
in this medieval period, which came to be known as nissaya, a literary genre of 
commentary on Pali texts. Such a literary genre, consisting of a word-to-word 
translation, was already popular in Sri Lanka and found among Pyu and Mon 
literature. Archaeological excavation in Myanmar found that the Sanskrit-Pyu 
nissaya at Srikṣetra in the 7th ce, and Kyansittha’s inscriptions at Pagan in 12th 
ce were the earliest forms of nissaya. The nissaya in its modern form presents 
different ways of interpretating and understanding Pali texts. In the tradi-
tional Burmese monastic learning method, the nissaya plays an important role 
on account of the different levels of meaning that it can extract from a text. 
McDaniel (2008, 131–136) calls this method of learning “lifting words” in similar 
monastic learning institutions in northern Thailand and Laos.
In traditional Buddhist learning, Pannabhoga (2020, 18) states that although 
nissaya is regarded as a sort of translation work, it would be difficult to cat-
egorize it as mere translation in the modern academic sense of the term 
because nissaya may offer more meanings in the monastic education system. 
On the other hand, standard Burmese translations of Buddhist texts have 
been unpopular as the language appears unnatural and not refined enough 
for general readers or academics. The reason is that current Tipitaka Burmese 
translations were obviously adopted from old nissayas. Similarly, Clark also 
(2015, 114) note that the Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyanā official annotated translation of 
Pali texts is nearly identical to that of nissaya wording; the translations are 
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 3 ===
3
merely reproductions or adoptions from a certain nissaya by simply removing 
the Pali words. Until today, traditional Burmese scholars who provide monas-
tic education in institutions throughout the country consider the textbooks of 
nissaya as either guidebooks, manuals or handbooks for students and teachers 
alike. Modern Buddhist scholars: Okell (1965), Pruitt (1992), McDaniel (2008), 
Lammerts (2010), Blackburn (2010), Walker (2020) and others have noted that 
nissaya literature has been important in monastic education since at least the 
15th century if not long before and continues to be so today.
The aims of this paper are to examine how the nissaya plays an important 
role in the pedagogy of monastic education as a living tradition to-date and 
whether the nissaya method can be applied to general Buddhist texts and 
scholarly works. To achieve the above aims, this study provides the historical 
background to nissaya with its development and training in the classrooms 
of monastic educational institutions based on my observations. Additionally, 
the study also investigates the relationship between nissaya and the official 
Burmese Tipiṭaka translation with the adaptation to old nissayas and com-
pares and contrasts samples of both older and modern nissayas in verse as 
well as prose including the interpretive nissaya method.
2	
Research Methodology, Scope and Frameworks
This study discusses a certain method of translation used to interpret the 
Buddha’s teachings in Burmese Buddhist literature and an attempt is made 
to answer why it is so important to the development of Burmese literature in 
general and Buddhism in particular. As mentioned, nissaya literature is one of 
the most ancient ways of interpreting Buddhist texts found in Burma since the 
arrival of Buddhism in 12th ce and its continued relevance is a primary focus 
of this study. To meet this end, this research employs various qualitative tech-
niques, such as interviews with experts and students, targeting specific groups 
of study, sorting primary literature and secondly data and my personal obser-
vations in monastic classrooms. My own observation as an individual is unique 
and significant as I have been a student of monastic education and received 
training for almost two decades.
During my youth as a novice monk, along with fellow monastic brothers, 
I received training in a local monastery. We were instructed to memorize a 
certain Pali passage and then the trainer would produce the interpretation 
of that passage in nissaya format. By this means, we fostered our monastic 
education through the curriculum as a foundation for knowledge. Though, I 
did not know if this interpretive technique would carry on after completion 
of higher monastic training or formal education. The nissaya training trend, I 
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 4 ===
4
now realize, would carry on for the whole of my life as a monastic education 
provider to new generations to come.
Pali literature is originally written in Pali with varied scripts in different lan-
guages. Pali literature is categorized into several types of writing, in accord-
ance with its chronological development. In this research context, it includes 
canonical Pali texts, Aṭṭhakathā (commentaries), ṭīkā (sub-commentaries) and 
Anuṭīkā (sub-sub-commentaries), all of which are translated or interpreted 
using nissaya methods. Due to the language barrier, the texts written in Pali 
are inaccessible to general readers and even learners who have not yet mas-
tered the Pali language. For this very reason nissaya literature exists to support 
one in understanding the texts. Yet, nissaya literature, developed in Burma, not 
only makes Pali texts accessible but also brings Buddhism to the masses.
This paper aims to stress the importance of nissaya’s interpretation to 
Burmese Buddhism and the development of Myanmar culture. For example, 
in traditional Buddhist learning, although nissaya is regarded as a method 
of translation, it is not categorized as “translation” as generally understood 
because nissaya offers not only a definition but usually more than one mean-
ing and caters to varied opinions within. Very often the nissaya authors con-
sult various relevant texts of Aṭṭhakathā, ṭīkā, and anuṭīkā mentioned above 
to interpret the Buddha’s words. In much of the curriculum of the monastic 
education system in Burma, nissaya methods can be found. We not only learn 
through this method but re-contribute and re-transmit our knowledge through 
this means. In this context, I argue that nissaya literature is something more 
than translation and no less than an encyclopaedic source of knowledge avail-
able today.
3	
Burmese Nissaya Literature: Background
3.1	
Nissaya Origin
Theravada Buddhist literature has developed throughout history from as early 
as the 3rd century bce in India and subsequently translated into Sinhalese 
known as Sinhalaṭṭhakathā in the 1st ce. According to Malasekera (2014, 11, 
38), the Pali literature of Ceylon reveals that the extended Pali commentar-
ies (Aṭṭhakathā) today were re-translated from Sinhalese commentaries by 
Buddhaghosa under the supervision of the Mahāvihāra monastery, the base 
and birthplace of Theravada literature and civilization. The works of anthology 
on Pali literature were largely attributed to him and later to Elder Dhammapāla 
and Buddhadatta.
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 5 ===
5
The Pali term nissaya denotes a concept found in the Mahāvagga Pāḷi of the 
Vinaya-piṭaka texts as a requisite rule for the newly ordained novice and nun 
(Oldenberg 1879, 58). In this sense, nissaya is a “guidance”. A newly ordained 
monk or nun is required to live under the “guidance” of his or her preceptor 
(upajjhāya) for a minimum of five years. During this period, the preceptor is to 
instruct the new monk in the teachings (dhamma) and train him in the monas-
tic regulations (vinaya). If the new monk loses his preceptor, he must seek nis-
saya from a teacher. Until one is mature enough to live independently, one 
must seek two mentors, and one who will act as a preceptor (upajjhāya) and as 
a teacher (ācāriya), and live under their guidance and advice.
According to the Pali-English Dictionary of The Pali Text Society (David, 
2004) and A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms: with Sanskrit and English 
Equivalents and a Sanskrit-Pali Index Society (Soothill and Hodous 1996), 
the Pali term nissaya is equivalent to the Sanskrit, niśraya, but corresponds 
in meaning to āśraya, “to sit on, or that on which anything depends.” The 
Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism (E. Robert et al., 2014) defines the Sanskrit 
term niśraya as “requisite,” “reliance,” or “support,” in the sense of a basic 
possession required by any monk or nun. In the Mahāvagga Pāḷi of Vinaya-
pitaka, the disciplinary monastic rules describe four basic requisites which 
are allowed for use by all monks and nuns: (1) food acquired through alms 
gathering (piṇḍiyālopabhojana); (2) a robe (cīvara) made from collected rags 
(paṃsukūlacīvara); (3) dwelling at the foot of a tree (rukkhamūlasenāsana); 
and (4) using fermented urine as medicine (pūtimuttabhesajja). During the 
ordination procedure, when new ordinands “go forth” (pabbajita) as novice 
monks (sāmaṇera) or nuns (sāmaṇerī), they will be apprised of these four 
requisites and encouraged to be content with them for the rest of their lives 
(Oldenberg 1879, 58).
As explained above, the concept of nissaya as a “guidance,” a “reliance,” a 
“support” or a “mentor” is likely to have come from the uses of the Mahāvagga 
Pāḷi of Vinaya-piṭaka and found its way into the Pali literature in general. It 
has been noted by previous studies (Tin Lwin 1961; Pruitt 1992; McDaniel 2008; 
Clark 2015) that nissaya refers to the literary genre of word-to-word translation 
of either canonical Pali or Aṭṭhakathā texts, which is a popular form of Buddhist 
monastic interpretation. However, they are not simply renderings of the Pali, 
rather they are meant to provide various interpretive resources in a compact 
encyclopaedic style. For instance, modern nissayas such as Bhāsāṭikā-s titles 
are some of good examples by the late Ashin Janakābhivaṃsa (1900–1977)1 
who is popularly known as monastic education reformer of the 20th cen-
tury. This is perhaps due to the orientation of monastic learning and focus on 
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 6 ===
6
examinations, whereby Janakābhivaṃsa carefully crafted his nissayas to meet 
the students’ needs.
Burmese nissaya literature was and still is the mainstream of the monastic 
education learning method, the method that developed within the Burmese 
tradition and serves as a pivotal guide for Tipiṭaka studies. Yet, relying on nis-
saya alone, as well-known scholar and learned monk, Ashin Janakābhivaṃsa 
(2000b, 594) has pointed out, is not enough; it is necessary to go beyond nis-
saya for further studies, especially the Sutta studies. His recommendation for 
how nissaya should be used and studied is by following these eight steps:
1.	
First, a word-to-word translation such as nissaya interpretation should be 
produced for the beginner.
2.	
When students can produce good nissaya fluently, they should translate 
every word from Pali into Burmese as prose.
3.	
Those with adequate translation skills can translate the prose of the texts 
without using all Pali words.
4.	
Students should only focus on specific meanings of the Pali word, then 
try to summarize and expand the context.
5.	
Then, those who can handle the text up to this level should focus on spe-
cific words and read the Pali slowly and carefully (without nissaya).
6.	
Those who can read up to this level will be able to compose Pali sen-
tences, mastering verse and even well-spoken Pali.
7.	
When students reach this level, they are not only able to compose Pali 
but devote their faith, wisdom and energy to the Buddha’s virtues, and 
qualities.
8.	
As mentioned in the level 3, when the Sutta Pitaka has been translated, it 
will be of great benefit to Burma and the whole country. Both monastic 
and lay lives will attain a higher level for the promulgation of the Buddha 
Sāsanā (Janakābhivaṃsa 2000b, 594).
The emergence of nissayas in Burma was prior to the modern phenomenon 
of proper Burmese translations and it is to a certain extent true that the exist-
ence of nissayas precluded the development of standard translations (Clark, 2015, 
114). According to McDaniel (2008, 119), a similar genre of Pali literature also 
developed within Theravada Buddhist countries, i.e., in Sri Lanka, as sannaya, 
and in Thailand and Laos as nissaya, namasadda, and vohāra in contempo-
rary periods. The Sutranipāta-sannaya, a Pali-Sinhala word-to-word translation 
written in the 12th ce, is the earliest example of a nissaya, or sannaya literary 
1	 See Janakābhivamsa’s self-authored two autobiographies: Tabhava Thāthanā (“One Life in 
Sāsanā”) (2003); and Tabhava Thanthayā (“One Life in Saṃsāra”) (2000c).
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 7 ===
7
genre found in Sri Lanka. Along with sutra-sannaya, several sutras translation 
into sannayas followed (Pruitt 1992, 278).
According to John Okell (1965, 186–227) nissaya is a linguistic analysis with 
special emphasis on Pali grammar features in the Burmese language. Since its 
early development in the late Pagan period, Burmese has been heavily influ-
enced by Pali grammatical syntax. Although the two languages are primarily 
distinct in language patterns, much of Pali’s morphology and syntax have been 
adapted to Burmese. Burmese was greatly influenced by nissaya literature on 
the one hand and that of Pali grammar on the other.
It is, however, almost impossible to state with certainty when the first 
Pali-Burmese nissaya was written. Tin Lwin (1961, 5–11) claims that the old-
est extant nissaya in Burma is the Khuddakasikkhā Nikāya nissaya, written by 
Mahākassapa during the reign of Narapatisithu (1174–1211). In his unpublished 
master’s thesis, Tin Lwin also classifies nissaya as: canonical works, non-canon-
ical works, secular nissaya works, other types of written nissaya, and the place 
of nissaya in Buddhist Education in Burma. According to Lwin, the develop-
ment of nissaya can be dated back to before and after 1448 and he considers 
that they originate as Pyu nissaya (Srikṣetra), Mon nissaya (Pagan), Sinhalese 
nissaya (sannaya) and then Burmese nissaya. Pyu King Vikrama founded the 
Pyu kingdom at Srikṣetra in 637 ce. A prehistoric excavation (7th ce) by the 
Department of Archaeology, Ministry of Culture, found a Pyu nissaya, consist-
ing of an interpretation of a Sanskrit passage at Srikṣetra, near modern Pyay, 
260km north-west of Yangon (Tin Lwin 2014, 14–15; 43–49). According to the 
archaeological excavation, the Pyu kingdom has been identified as Mawza, 
8km, southeast of modern Pyay. If this finding is to be accepted, the claim that 
“the nissayas have been known to Burmese scholars at least for the last five 
centuries” (Tin Lwin 1961, i) is certainly not overstated. Ruiz-Falqués (2015, 
10) states that when it comes to grammatical literature in Burma, “nissayas 
are later than the Pali grammatical texts. We actually have no record of gram-
matical nissayas from the Pagan period (Ruiz-Falqués 2015, 10).” We can only 
assume that nissaya became popular from the 15th century, as Tin Lwin sug-
gests, although we need further study.
Walker (2020, 678) supports the view that Pali-Burmese examples of nis-
sayas are extant from the late thirteenth century and several Sanskrit-Burmese 
bitexts are listed in an inscription from 1442. The date of the Thaungdwing 
governor’s inscription contains a very interesting and lengthy list of Pali and 
Sanskrit works together with their nissayas which the pious governor and his 
wife offered to the monastery that they built and dedicated that year. The list 
enables us to fix the dates of Pali and nissaya works and to clarify some points 
such as authorship and their popularity.
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 8 ===
8
3.2	
Nissaya and Pali Literature Development
Whatever the date of nissaya or sannaya may be, there is no doubt that the 
word-to-word translation literary genre is extremely important for Pali lit-
erature development in both: Sri Lanka and Burma. Pruitt (1992, 278) states 
“Sinhalese Sanne and Burmese Nissayas have been important in Pali studies in 
the West.” Two well-known scholars from Burma, namely Shwe Zan Aung (1871–
1932) and Pe Maung Tin (1888–1973), also used the nissaya method to translate 
Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha (1910) and Aṭṭhasālini (1920) from Pali into English 
for the Pali Text Society (Pruitt 1992, 294ff). Pruitt states, “[the] texts are given 
word-by-word translation into Burmese, a Tibeto-Burman language, in the 
texts called nissayas”. According to Erik Braun, nissaya is a Burmese text that 
translates and explains Pali works, often on a systematic word-by-word basis. 
He also points out that most translations of Pali to Burmese took place particu-
larly through word-by-word translations called nissayas (Braun 2013, 67 174). 
Along with many literary genres, such as Pali grammar, poetry, Abhidhamma 
and several other aṭṭhakathā and ṭīkā compilations developed in the medieval 
period during the Ava kingdom which is when Burmese culture and literature 
reached their peaks.
King Thalun (1629–1648) was the first to introduce a curricular system of 
monastic education and formal examination (Dhammasami 2004, 11). This 
was the time when Burmese nissaya and literature developed more widely, as 
they became more necessary for educational purposes. Nevertheless, nissaya 
literature produced during this reign rely more on Vinaya texts than sutta or 
Abhidhamma. Dhammasami (2004, 21, 43–77), who studied monastic educa-
tion from the 17th century to the present, explains that “the works on the nis-
saya literature were produced in almost all the reigns from the time of Thalun 
which indicates that there were students learning religious texts, because a 
nissaya was mainly, and still is, for students rather than scholars”. In this 
period, the nissaya works on Vinaya, the disciplinary rules of monastic order 
are more prominent. For example: the nissaya on Shin-kyint-wut, the discipli-
nary rules for sāmaṇera (novice monks), were compiled more than 30 times 
(Dhammasami 2018, 21).
3.3	
Nissaya Interpretation Versus Standard Translation
Clark (2015, viii) observes that a word-for-word Burmese language nissaya 
translation bears similarities to the text of an annotated English translation 
with critical reference to the text’s primary commentary in Pali. He also gives 
examples of how Burmese translation is related to nissaya:
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 9 ===
9
The official Chaṭṭhasaṅgīti Piṭaka Burmese translation of the Apadāna so 
frequently reproduces the interpretation of this nissaya with identical, 
or near identical, wording that it might be supposed that its translators 
partially based their publication upon it. From time to time, I also made 
use of this translation. My translation is annotated throughout with foot-
notes which discuss semantic content and aspects of the translation.
clark 2015, 114.
Pruitt (1992, 278) also points out that from the available Pali-Burmese nissaya, 
only a slight adjustment is needed to bring it up the level of translation as seen 
in the Chaṭṭhasaṅgīti Pitaka Burmese Translation. The current standard trans-
lation of the Tipiṭaka in Burmese language clearly derives from the original nis-
saya with a minimum of adjustment (see figure 3 & 4 with English translation). 
For instance, as we can see in the Chaṭṭhasaṅgīti Pitaka Burmese translation, 
if the nissaya has added words, called pāṭhasesa (“extra text”), the translation 
has included the additional words in parentheses.
Translation: At one time the enlightened one, the lord, was staying at 
Verañjā near Naḷeru’s Nimba tree (which is occupied by a Demon) with a great 
company of five hundred monks. (By that time), a brahmin of Verañjā heard (as 
will be saying): Verily, good sir, the recluse Gotama, son of the Sakyans, having 
gone forth from the Sakyan clan, is staying at Verañjā near Naḷeru’s Nimba tree 
(which is occupied by a Demon) with a great company of five hundred monks. 
The highest praise has gone for concerning the lord Gotama: he is indeed lord, 
perfected one, fully enlightened, endowed with knowledge and conduct, well-
farer, knower of the worlds, unrivalled trainer of men to be tamed, teacher of 
devas and mankind, the enlightened… (Horner 1938, 1–2).
4	
Nissaya literature in Southeast Asia: Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Thailand 
and Laos
As noted previously, a genre of Buddhist literature called nissaya texts are 
found not only in Burma, but also in its neighbouring Theravada countries, 
Cambodia, Thailand, Laos and Sri Lanka. Three variations of literary genres: 
nissaya (“support”), nāmasadda (“glossary”), and vohāra (“lifting words”) are 
popularly used in Northern Thailand and Laos as pedagogical texts while 
students and teachers conduct “languaging”. This is why nissaya can often 
be considered as pedagogical texts, particularly nissaya manuscripts, vohāra 
manuscripts and nāmasadda manuscripts. According to McDaniel (2008, 6), 
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 10 ===
10
the nissayas, (supports), were used by monastic teachers in the pre-modern 
period from the 16th to 19th centuries in Thailand and Laos.
Unlike in Burma, McDaniel explains (2008, 131), in Thailand and Laos nis-
saya, nāmasadda and vohāra genres overlap in style, pedagogical methods 
and social use. He describes how the nissaya and nāmasadda manuscripts are 
characterized by close, word-for-word glosses, whereas the vohāra cite longer 
figure 1	
Sample of nissaya with pāthasesa (inserted terms), Pārājikān 
Nissaya text, Chaṭṭhasaṅgīti Edition. [Image: Author.]
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 11 ===
11
passages of twelve to twenty-five words from Pali source texts and offer exten-
sive and creative vernacular translations and commentaries. Generally, nissaya 
fall between the two genres and often cite four to ten words before offering 
glosses and creative asides.
According to Gandhasārābhivaṃsa, (Personal Interview, 6 February 2020) a 
Thai Pali scholar monk who studied in Burma for over ten years and received a 
higher degree, the Dhammācariya,  nissayas in Thailand are not as influential 
in the learning tradition as they are in Burma. While Burmese nissaya include 
canonical texts, commentaries, sub-commentaries, and so on, Thai nissaya are 
limited to canonical texts and other commentaries. Nissaya texts are called 
figure 3	
A session of nissaya class with instructor and a repeater (zāso), second from left, 
followed by student-monks interlineating nissaya’s interpretation in their printed 
textbook. Veluvan Monastery, Taunggyi, Shan State. [Photo: Author.]
figure 2	
Sample of Burmese translation by Chaṭṭhasaṅgīti Pitaka Burmese Translation. 
Pāthasesa or inserted terms which are not in the original Pali texts shown within 
parentheses. [Image: Author.]
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 12 ===
12
gambhi-nisai (gambhi-nissaya, from Pali gambhīra-nissaya “deep support”), 
which are available to us as Kaccāyana Gambhi-nisai and Saddasāratthajālinī 
nisai for example. He also discovered that nissayas in Burma have different 
recensions according to their historical time periods: for example, nissaya in 
the Pagan and Ava periods tend to have fewer explanations, such as the Ne Yin 
Sayadaw nissaya, while later nissayas offer more explanations and interpre-
tations such as the Pakokku nissayas along with others. Hinüber also (1997, 
100–1) states that nissayas in Thailand can be considered as vohāra or nāmasap 
(from Sanskrit nāma-śabda ‘noun-word’) as a word-for-word explanation and 
that the difference between vohāra and nissaya is not clear. Regarding the 
monastic education system of Thailand, Pathompong (2016, 30–32) highlights 
the fact that in the current curriculum of textbooks both for Naktham Studies 
and Pariyatti Studies, there is no mention of the nissaya interpretation in 
monastic examination of Thai Sangha.2 In short, nissaya is not widely used in 
Thailand even in monastic education itself.
4.1	
Nissaya Influence in Burmese Monastic Education
In Burma, the nissayas are influential texts among the monastic commu-
nity as well as in Burmese society at large. For example, the nissaya of Pali 
2	 Pathompong, Word Order in Early Pali Prose Texts (2016, 23ff). Cf. Dhammasami 2004, 
326–332.
figure 4	
Sample of Ane’-de, with annotated translation in the Aṭṭhasālinī-aṭṭhakathā 
textbook. (Maw Lu Sayadaw student textbook unpublished). [Image: Author.]
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 13 ===
13
passages regarding the Triple-Gems (the Buddha, the Dhamma and the 
Sangha),  “Buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi, Dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi, 
Saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi”. Buddhaṃ – the Buddha [obj], saraṇam – as the 
refuge; gachāmi – I go with, (I go with the Buddha as my refuge), is known to 
all Burmese Buddhists young and old. Moreover, even secular performances 
such as plays try to include nissaya expressions. Nissaya’s passages may be 
extracted to form a dhamma-talk such as in sermons delivered by monks, 
Buddha-vandanā prayers by the laity, or understanding of Pali passages as part 
of Dhamma studies and daily reflection among devout Buddhists. All of this 
constitutes a living tradition in Burma today.
Throughout this research, my analysis shows that the use of nissayas in 
monastic education is sequential. As Dhammasami states, “The students 
learn the Maṅgala-sutta, followed by the Sigālovāda-sutta. He memorises the 
Maṅgala-sutta in Pali first and then its nissaya, before learning their meaning 
as expressed in a few Burmese poems (Dhammasami 2004, 42).” It is clear that 
the Burmese monastic learning method is a memorization system and a stu-
dent’s intellectual level is measured by how accurate he is able to reproduce the 
originality process. In typical learning the Pali stanza or text should be mem-
orized first; then for grammatical analysis, interpretation and understanding, 
one should refer to the relevant nissaya. With regard to nissaya, Khamphorn 
observes that “As Burma is well-known and best known for grammar scholars 
until the present time, most monastic education still focuses on grammatical 
points in the exam. The concept is that Burmese pure translation is considered 
for ordinary and uneducated people as inferior texts. On the one hand, nissaya 
is considered a superior type of text especially for scholars and educated peo-
ple” (Pannabhoga 2020, 26).
5	
Salient Features of Nissaya Interpretative Methods
I have shown that nissaya literature in Burma was at the center of Buddhist 
literary development as it contributed to the core value of Burmese Buddhism 
in general and to monastic education in particular. It has also been determined 
that the nissaya literary genre of translation corresponds to today’s non-stand-
ard translation, yet is very much alive and used in everyday life. Nissaya’s style 
of translation can be found in Buddhist devotional chanting or hymns (van-
danā), monastic education at all levels – from primary to Dhammācariya and 
beyond, and also in Buddhist sermons delivered by monks including several 
nissaya’s translations both in verse and prose.
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 14 ===
14
Different types of nissayas may be employed as different methods of trans-
lation and interpretation. In other words, the word-to-word translation of 
Burmese nissaya uses a spectrum of methods. According to Kāruṇika (2008, 
10), the following seven methods are commonly employed in Burma:
1.	
pāṭhānusārī nissaya method  –  a simple translation of Pali sentences 
without adding words;
2.	
pāṭhasesa nissaya method  –  words may be added in order to better 
explain the text’s actual meaning. In this case, the additional words are 
drawn out from the original Pali text as well as previously mentioned 
statements, canonical texts, commentary or sub-commentary or occa-
sionally from a Tipiṭaka authority expert. The principle is that additional 
words cannot be any of personal opinion but strictly from authoritative 
references or sources;
3.	
saddattha method – interpretation is based on the original similar to ‘lit-
eral translation’;
4.	
saṅketattha method  –  interpretation follows the precedent example 
which is traditionally or conventionally accepted;
5.	
paññatyattha method – same as 4: focus on conventional terminology to 
interpret the texts for better understanding;
6.	
vohārattha method – same as 4 and 5 – focus on conventional usage to 
better understand the meaning of the texts;
7.	
adhippāyattha method – provide nissaya with direct or easily understood 
meaning.
Examples of the variety of nissaya interpretative methods are illustrated in 
Table 1.
As can be seen in the table, various methods of interpretation are used by 
different authors. In fact, there are many methods of nissaya interpretation 
when it comes to textual study.
In his dissertation, Pannabhoga explains two locally well-known monas-
tic learning methods that exist in Burma: the Mandalay method and the 
Pakhokku method. The two methods are unique and differ in their approach to 
the interpretation of the texts. For instance, if the Mandalay method is applied, 
Namotassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa, the most popular 
Buddha-vandanā (Buddha’s homage) formula could be lectured on for months 
consecutively with various analyses using all available methods together with 
commentary and sub-commentary explanations (Pannabhoga 2020, 29). The 
Mandalay approach claims that when students understand all the possible 
meanings of the Namo tassa … formula, they will be able to explore the texts 
by themselves. In this way, students who are capable of using nissaya can study 
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 15 ===
15
the Tipiṭaka on their own. In this sense, nissaya is a guidebook, a manual, a 
handbook or even a teacher to guide a student on a journey of exploration 
through Tipiṭaka. This is how the nissaya has been transmitted for centuries 
in the living tradition of Burma. More discussion on the Mandalay and the 
Pakokku methods of training can be found in the Ph.D thesis by Dhammasami 
(2004, 134–147). Regarding the syllabus of Dhammacariya Examinations, 
the equivalent of a bachelor’s degree organized by the Ministry of Religious 
table 1	
Examples of the variety of nissaya interpretative methods.
Pali 
Words 
Nissaya Interpretation 
Methods 
khīṇāsavo
The one who has completed the 
eradication of the taints.
saddattha
Arahat, or Saint.
paññatyattha, or 
vohārattha, or
saṅketattha
Venerable Sariputta or Moggalāna 
(depends on the context).
adhippāyattha
dvāriko
One who is associated with the 
door.
saddattha
Gatekeeper
paññatyattha, or vohārat-
tha, or saṅketattha
Mr Mark, or Mr John, etc. 
depends on context.
adhippāyattha
buddho
The knower.
saddattha
The Buddha or The Lord.
paññatyattha, or vohārat-
tha, or saṅketattha
Venerable Gotama, or Monk 
Gotama.
adhippāyattha
karopeti
Let him make.
saddattha
Order him to do.
paññatyattha, or vohārat-
tha, or saṅketattha
Please do it or speak out.
adhippāyattha
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 16 ===
16
Affairs, the Myanmar government has many guidelines for nissaya interpreta-
tion. For instance, the interpretation of a single Pali word, phrase or sentence 
can be made according to the different methods and exertion of grammatical 
skill applied in syntactical language.
5.1	
Examples of Nissaya Compilations
There are innumerable nissayas which are relevant to Buddhist texts. For exam-
ple, we may see many nissayas in monasteries stored on the bookshelves. The 
following are some of the popular nissaya authors with their nissayas widely 
used among the students:
Authors 
Nissaya title 
U Budh
Bhikkhu-pāṭimokkha-pali nissaya
Neyin
Sīlakkhandha
Nan Kyaung
Kaccāyana, Padarūpasiddhi
Bagara
Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha
Payagyi
Parajikan
Pyay
Aṭṭhasālinī
Pakhokku
whole set of Tipiṭaka collection
Janakābhivaṃsa
Bhāsāṭīkā series
Ma Oo
Pārajikan
Moe Htee
the whole set of Tipiṭaka
These nissayas are generally well-known to monastic students in Burma. 
However, the Bhāsāṭīkā series by Ashin Janakābhivaṃsa is widely and fre-
quently used at all levels of student-monks more than any other nissaya 
because the author has provided clear explanation, interpretation and 
more additional comments. Furthermore, he also divided his nissayas into 
different levels. For example, in a compendium of Abhidhamma text like 
Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha, he has two kinds of nissaya, one for basic level and 
the second for higher level. The Bhāsāṭīkā series has served as handbooks for 
modern students. Other nissayas, may be used by a few students who reach 
advanced levels only. 
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 17 ===
17
6	
Research Findings and Limitations
Nissaya Training in a Monastic Classroom Learning
In this section I provide the actual nissaya training in a Burmese monastic class-
room based on my observation as a monastic student for over a decade at two 
leading monastic institutes in Mandalay and Pegu. This will substantiate my 
research findings, yet with some limitations. My interest in nissaya goes back 
to the time when I was at a large monastic institution. In Burma, and also in 
Sri Lanka, nissaya authors tend to be learned monks who have received exten-
sive training at a monastic educational institution. Such education focuses on 
canonical texts and Buddhist scholastic literature of various branches. Nissaya 
authors have generally been trained to master many Pali grammatical treatises 
such as Kaccāyana, Moggalāna-vyākaraṇa and Padarūpasiddhi, along with 
other interpretative texts. Most nissaya authors used to be zāso “repeaters” or 
“under tutelage” students. The literal meaning of zāso means poet, composer 
or annotator; the verb zāte means learning Buddhist scriptures under the tute-
lage of a mentor and zāwā- lecture is the course of learning in a Buddhist mon-
astery. The zāso is someone who has acquired proficient knowledge and has 
mastered various genres of literature in the course of learning Buddhist texts. 
Learning by heart is also part of the skill set required of the zāso. The reason 
is that when the teacher introduces new methods, the pupil must already be 
familiar with the various areas. Thus, someone cannot become a zāso unless 
he devotes his time to it and undergoes methodical preparation. A well-known 
modern nissaya producer, Ashin Janakābhivamsa, used to be a zāso when he 
took courses in Pakokku. Having received this lengthy training, he was later 
able to produce many nissayas which are available to monastic educationists 
today.
In a classroom, a nissaya training is mainly an interaction between the 
teacher and a zāso: “the repeater”. Basically, nissaya classroom teaching is where 
the teacher leads by reading out loud and the zāso follows, preferably with a 
louder and clearer voice. One of the requisites is that a zāso should be clear 
with good voice in order to lead the classroom while assisting the teachers. At 
this level, there is only one teacher and one repeater reading the nissaya in 
the classroom. The other students may listen carefully and note their nissaya’s 
interpretations. This process is known as ane’-de: ‘marking annotation in the 
margin’ (see figure 3). An Ane’-de: is a technique whereby they learn a nissaya’s 
interpretation while making notes around the available space of a Pali or an 
Atthakathā textbook. Furthermore, there are many learning and interpretative 
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 18 ===
18
techniques used in the nissaya training, such as ane’ kau’: interpretation; ane’ 
pjan’: translation; ane’ pwa: extended meaning; ane’ hpwin: definition; ane’ hpo: 
elucidation; and ane’ adei’ be: interpreted meaning. Such variety of a word’s 
interpretation and its meaning are also illustrated in the Myanmar-English 
Dictionary. The delivery of these interpretive methods is undertaken by teach-
ers and assisted by the  zāso. By this learning method, students break down the 
sentences and words into smaller parts in order to comprehend the meaning. 
For this reason, a nissaya composer would use the following technique:
paṭhamaṃ kare padacchedaṃ, samāsādiṃ tato kare;
samāsādo kate pacchā, atthaṃ niyyātha paṇḍito.3
Translation: The wise one, first of all, should break up the compound words 
and, hereafter, the meaning should be brought out.
The following is a typical nissaya style gloss translation with reference to the 
above Pali stanza: paṇḍito – the wise one [sub]; paṭhamaṃ – at first (first of 
all); padacchedaṃ – cutting the word; kare – should make; samāsado – the com-
bination etc. [obj]; kate – when it is made; pacchā – afterwards; atthaṃ – the 
meaning; niyyātha – should bring out (Ashin Janakābhivaṃsa 2000a).4 This 
nissaya interpretation will yield the translation of the stanza mentioned above.
The point the above stanza makes is that the ancient teachers who pro-
duced nissayas used the previous stanza to examine passages and the structure 
of the sentences with enormous care and attention, dividing it into different 
parts before they were ready to raise it to the level of nissaya. According to the 
Pali grammatical rule in Sandhi of Kaccāyana (Thitzana 2016, 138-31), this verse 
is best understood by separating the compound words therein into different 
constituent parts before producing the translation and interpretation of the 
text. This will enable students to comprehend the text more easily by means 
of seeing the individual root, stem, prefix, suffix and structure of the words in 
their compound definitions.
In traditional monastic scholarship, whosoever wishes to produce a trans-
lation of the text must rely primarily on the old nissayas. For example, there 
have been a number of nissayas on the popular text of Abhidhammattha-
saṅgaha, the compendium of Abhidhamma among the Little-Finger Manuals. 
3	 Saṃpyaṅṭīkā also spelled as Thanbyin Ṭīkā (1275, 2, 8–9); Ashin Janakābhivaṃsa (2000) 
Abhidhammattha-vibhāvinī Nissaya; Falqués (2015, 168).
4	 This stanza appears in the grammatical text called Saṃpyaṅṭīka (Thanbyin Ṭīkā). It was 
composed by Minister Thanbyin, a Pali scholar who served at the king’s court during the 
reign of Narapatisithu of the Pagan dynasty (1174–1211) (as the oldest attestation and in 
many other grammatical).
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 19 ===
19
According to the History of the Abhidhamma (Abhidhamma Tha-main Chok) 
(1965, cha) in Burma, the 19th century had seen over twenty-two nissayas on 
the Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha alone. There is no doubt that numerous nis-
sayas were produced during the 20th and 21st centuries. This demonstrates 
that many nissayas were produced, reproduced and copied over a period of 
time by different authors on the single text of Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha. In 
this way, it became the most translated text among nissaya manuscripts and 
the most popular among the Abhidhamma manuals.
Similarly, in the history of Burmese literature scholars such as Bode and Ray 
(1903-1081) have pointed out that some Burmese monks, such as Ariyālaṅkāra 
and Tilokaguru (undated), produced several Burmese nissayas (interpretations 
and paraphrases) of Abhidhamma texts during the seventeenth century, espe-
cially in the Sagaing monasteries (Bode 2013, 49). Each nissaya has a charac-
teristic explanation depending on the individual intentions of the author. For 
example, some nissayas are particularly useful for understanding the context 
because they explain a certain word in a particular way, much like a dictionary 
or a grammar manual, or they may emphasize the structure and syntax of the 
text. Therefore, a nissaya may take a unique form depending on the author’s 
preferences and style.
Moreover, nissaya can be considered as pedagogical texts within the tradi-
tional monastic educational system. In the monastic educational training, a 
lecturer must be able to deal with the nissaya properly by selecting the rare 
and difficult vocabulary and facilitating understanding of the meaning. A nis-
saya which offers good explanations of the intricacies of words and sentence 
structure, controversial points of view, and so on, can be considered a good 
and reliable nissaya through which Pali text is traditionally learned. Such nis-
saya would undoubtedly become popular among students.
7	
Conclusion
This study analyses how and why nissaya literature and its methods of trans-
lation are so important not only for the monastic learning community but as 
a living Buddhism for the masses in Burma. My observation and analysis sub-
stantiate that nissaya methods are applied to the monastic education curric-
ulum practically used in classrooms, dhamma-talks or discussions and to an 
higher level of various scholarly works.
The study of the canonical Pali texts, alongside their relevant commentar-
ies, sub-commentaries and later manual texts are challenging, and students 
receive only minimal guidance from the trainer or teacher. Therefore, nissaya 
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 20 ===
20
textbooks serve as compulsory handbooks or encyclopaedic reference. This 
paves the way for the nissaya to become a pedagogical text that can be relied 
on as a guideline or support to understand the canonical texts, and a point of 
reference for textual analysis, criticism and interpretation.
From nissaya development, classroom learning, methods and sampling of 
Burmese Tipiṭaka Translation and, more generally, Buddhist prayers used in 
everyday life, Burmese nissaya has become not only a tool of interpretation, 
but a resource of reference, a handbook for students, and a syntactical text, 
apart from merely a word-for-word translation or bitext as Walker (2020) puts 
it.
This study substantiates that Burmese literature, culture and society devel-
oped through the influence of nissaya literature and its interpretation. It 
explains how and why nissaya exists and continues to remain a popular trans-
lation method and source of reference. It also means that the widely used 
Bhāsāṭīkā series of nissaya texts by Ashin Janakābhivaṃsa in many monastic 
institutions will not disappear anytime soon.
Due to the study’s limitations, much remains to be done in the study of nis-
saya across mainland Southeast Asia as well as in Sri Lanka.
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank the two anonymous reviewers as well as Ajhan Dr K. 
Dhammasami, DPhil (Oxford), Rector of ssbu, Dr Aleix Ruiz-Falqués, Dr Pyi 
Phyo Kyaw (ssbu) and Dr Khamindra Phorn (Chiang Mai) for their thoughtful 
feedback. Their insightful comments and suggestions have allowed me to man-
age the rearrangement of the subtopics and to correct some errors in various 
ways. I appreciate their particularly detailed comments and suggestions.
References
Bode, Mabel Haynes. 2014. The Pali Literature of Burma. Kandy: Buddhist Publication 
Society.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu. 2005. A comprehensive manual of Abhidhamma. Kandy: Buddhist Pub-
lication Society.
Bodhiprasiddhinand, Pathompong. 2016. Word Order in Early Pali Prose Texts. Foun-
dation of His Holiness Somdet Phra Ñāṇasaṃvara Centennial Commemoration: 
Nakornpathom.
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 21 ===
21
Braun, Erik. 2013. The Birth of Insight: Meditation, Modern Buddhism, and the Burmese 
Monk Ledi Sayadaw. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press.
Clark, Chris. 2015. “A Study of the Apadāna, Including an Edition and Annotated Trans-
lation of the Second, Third and Fourth Chapters.” Ph.D thesis., Faculty of Arts and 
Social Sciences, University of Sydney.
Davids, T.W. Rhys, and William Stede (eds), (2005). Pali-English Dictionary. New Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Dhammasami, Khammai. 2018. Buddhism, Education and Politics in Burma and Thai-
land: from the Seventeenth Century to the Present. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Dhammasami, Khammai. 2004. “Between Idealism and Pragmatism: A study of Monas-
tic Education in Burma and Thailand from the Seventeenth Century to the Present.” 
Dphil, The University of Oxford.
Harvey, Peter. 2017. An Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hla Pe. 1985. Burma: Literature, Histography, Scholarship, Language, Life, and Bud-
dhism. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Research.
I. B. Horner, trans. 1938. The Book of the Discipline, Suttavibhaṅga, Vol I. London: The 
Pali Text Society.
Janakābhivaṃsa Ashin. 2000a. Nissaya of Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī (Ti Kar Kyaw). 
Amarapura: New Burma Offet.
Janakābhivaṃsa Ashin. 2000b. Silakkhan Bhāsāṭīkā (Nissaya of Silakkhandhavagga 
Vol.1). Amarapura: New Burma Offet. p.594.
Janakābhivaṃsa Ashin. 2000c. Tatbhava Thanthayā (One Life in Saṃsāra). Amarapura: 
New Burma Offset.
Janakābhivaṃsa Ashin. 2003. Tatbhava Thāthanā (One Life in Sāsanā). Amarapura: 
New Burma Offset.
Janakābhivaṃsa Ashin. 2004. A-hkye-pyuʹ Thin″gyo (Introduction to the Abhidhammat-
thasaṅgaha). Amarapura: New Burma Publishing House.
Janakābhivaṃsa Ashin. 1995. Ratanagunyi (The Quality of the Triple Gems). Amarapura. 
New Burma Offset.
Kāruṇika, Ashin. 2008. Dhammacariya Myatshu (Dhammacariya Method), 3rd Edition. 
Yangon: Siritipitaka Publication.
Kumāravaṃsa Mahathera. 1920. Saccasaṅkhepa Nissaya: The word for word Interpreta-
tion of Saccasaṅkhepa. Yangon: Kawi Myet Hman Publication.
Lammerts, Dietrish Christian. 2010. Buddhism and Written Law: Dhammasattha Manu-
scripts and Texts in Premodern Burma. PhD Thesis., The Faculty of Graduate School 
of Cornell University.
Maw Lu, Sayadaw (undated) Ane’-de, with annotated translation in the Aṭṭhasālinī-
aṭṭhakathā student textbook. an unpublished Manual.
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 22 ===
22
McDaniel, Justin. 2008. Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist 
Monastic Education in Laos and Thailand. Washington: University of Washington 
Press.
Myanmar Language Commission. 2008. Myanmar-English Dictionary. Yangon: Univer-
sities Press.
Myanmar Buddhist Propagation. 1965. History of the Abhidhamma (Abhidhamma Tha-
main Chok). Yangon: Myanmar Buddhist Propagation.
Nyunt, Peter. 2012. Catalogue of the Piṭaka and other texts in Pali, Pali-Burmese, and 
Burmese (Piṭakat-tõ-sa-muiṅ:). Bristol: The Pali Text Society.
Okell, John. 1965. “Nissaya Burmese: A case of systematic adaptation to a foreign gram-
mar and syntax.” Lingua 15 (1965): 186–227.
Oldengerg Hermann ed. 2013. The Mahāvagga, Vinaya-pitaka Vol. I. Bristol: The Pali 
Text Society.
Pannabhoga, Herngseng. 2020. “The Rūpa- and Khandhattaya-pariccheda-s of the Sac-
casaṅkhepa: A study of the text in its Burmese transmission together with an Eng-
lish translation and notes”. PhD Thesis., Mahidol University.
Pruitt, William. 1992. “The Study of Burmese by Westerns with Special Reference to 
Burmese Nissayas.” International Journal of Lexicography 5 (4): 278–304.
Pyi Phyo Kyaw. 2014. Paṭṭhāna (Conditional Relations) in Burmese Buddhism. PhD The-
sis., King’s College London, University of London.
Ruiz-Falqués, Aleix. 2017. The Role of Pali Grammar in Burmese Buddhism. Journal 
of Burma Studies Vol.21 No. I (2017), pp. 1–96. Center for Burma Studies: Northern 
Illinois University.
Ray, Niharranjan. 1946. An Introduction to the Study of Theravada Buddhism in Burma. 
Calcutta: Calcutta University Press.
Rhys Davids, T.W. and William Stede. 2004. Pali-English Dictionary. Oxford: The Pali 
Text Society.
Ruiz-Falqués, Aleix. 2015. “A Firefly in the Bamboo Reed: The Suttaniddesa of Saddham-
majotipāla and the Grammatical Foundations of Theravada Buddhism in Burma.” 
PhD. Thesis, University of Cambridge.
Siri Sobhana, Thera Ashin. 1974. Mahādvāranikāya sāsanavaṃsadīpanī Yangon: Ledi 
Publication.
Soothill, William Edward, and Lewis Hodous, eds. A dictionary of Chinese ­Buddhist 
terms: with Sanskrit and English equivalents and a Sanskrit-Pali index. Motilal Banar-
sidass Publ., 1977.
Thitzana, A. 2016. Kaccāyana Pāli Grammar: Translated into English with additional 
notes, simple explanations and tables. Vol. ii. Onalaska. Pariyatti Press.
Tin Lwin. 1961. “A Study of Pali-Burmese Nissaya with Special References to Mahāparin-
ibbāna Sutta.” M.A. Thesis., School of Oriental and African Studies.
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23

=== PAGE 23 ===
23
Tin Lwin. 1973. ‘Paliʹmyanmarniʹthayaʹkyan″mya″ (Pāli-Myanmar Nissayas)’ in Luʹ-
maikswei-saok. Mandalay: Lu-htuʹ Pon-nheik-taik.
Tin Lwin. 2014. Pāli Myanmar Nissaya-kyan myar: Ei Mūla aza, the Beginning of 
Pali-Myanmar Nissaya.” Myanmar Studies Journal 3 (December 2014): 147–161.
U Budh, Sayadaw. 1903. Saccasaṅkhepa Nissaya: The word for word interpretation of Sac-
casaṅkhepa. Rangoon: Kawi Myet Hman Publication.
von Hinüber, Oskar. 1997. A Handbook of Pali literature. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal 
Publishers.
Walker, Trent. 2020. “Indic-Vernacular Bitexts from Thailand: Bilingual Modes of Phi-
lology, Exegetics, Homiletics, and Poetry, 1450–1850.” Journal of the American Orien-
tal Society 140.3 (2020): 675–699.
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23
