=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Between Idealism and Pragmatism 
A Study of Monastic Education in Burma and Thailand  
from the Seventeenth Century to the Present 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thesis submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy (D. Phil) 
In the Faculty of Oriental Studies 
University of Oxford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By 
Khammai Dhammasami 
St. Anne’s College 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trinity term 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
Between Idealism and Pragmatism 
A Study of Monastic Education in Burma and Thailand 
from the Seventeenth Century to the Present 
 
 
Khammai Dhammasami 
 
St. Anne’s College 
Oxford University 
Thesis submitted for D.Phil 
Trinity term 2004 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
There has been in recent decades an increased academic interest in the Sangha, the 
community of monks, in Burma and Thailand. However, monastic education is still often 
misunderstood there, particularly in the context of the relationship between the Sangha 
and the monarchy. The introduction by the king of monastic formal examinations has 
simply been assumed to be evidence of royal devotion towards the Order, which was 
perceived to be in decline and was therefore in need of royal intervention. This thesis 
attempts to reveal the complex relationship between the Sangha and the kings on the 
question of monastic education, arguing that the need for a monarch to control his people 
during war led him to interfere in monastic education. It also examines the Sangha’s 
inability to define the objectives of its education systems. A large part of the thesis is 
devoted to reconstructing the historical process by looking at the impact of geopolitical 
developments on teaching methods. 
 
The thesis consists of six chapters. Chapter One introduces monastic education, its 
current problems and the conflict between idealists and pragmatists within the Sangha. 
Chapter Two explores monastic education under two strong Burmese monarchs, Thalun 
(1629-1648) and Bodawpaya (1782-1819), who introduced formal examinations and 
used them for political purposes. Chapter Three examines the impact of the colonial 
threat on the Sangha and on the improved relationship between the Sangha and King 
Mindon (1853-1878) with regard to monastic education. Chapter Four looks at the 
impact of the instability under King Narai (1656-1688) at Ayutthaya on monastic 
education. Chapter Five investigates the process of standardisation of monastic education 
under Chulalongkorn (1868-1910). Chapter Six focuses on the current state of monastic 
education in both countries and analyses the Sangha’s lack of proactive vision and its 
failure to reach a consensus on the aims of education.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
Contents 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
i 
 
Abbreviations 
ii 
 
Chapter One: Introduction 
1 
1.1 Aims of the thesis 
1 
1.2 Monastic Education and its Problems 
4 
1.3 Historical Background 
11 
1.4 A Conflict between Idealist and Pragmatist 
14 
1.5 Sources 
18 
1.6 Summary of the Chapters 
19 
 
Chapter Two: The Education of the Sangha under Strong Monarchs 
Monastic Scholarship under Kings Thalun (1629-1648) of the 
Ava and Bodawpaya (1782-1819) of the Kon-Baung Period 
 
 
22 
2.1 Introduction 
22 
               2.1.1 Some General Features of Buddhism in Burma 
25 
                              2.1.1.1 A Monastic Religion 
25 
                              2.1.1.2 Royal Patronage 
36 
                              2.1.1.3 An Educational Institute 
37 
2.2 A Description of Monastic Education before the Twentieth Century 
39 
2.3 Study for Formal Examinations 
55 
2.4 The Beginning of Formal Examinations: Geopolitical Circumstances in 
the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century 
 
63 
               2.4.1 War and Reconstruction in Seventeenth Century Burma 
64 
               2.4.2 Attempts to Popularise Formal Examinations and their 
Excessive Use under Bodawpaya (1782-1819) 
 
78 
               2.4.3 Resistance to the Pathamapyan Examination 
88 
2.5 Conclusion 
98 
 
Chapter Three: A Threatened Buddhist Kingdom and a Nationalist 
Sangha: The Education of the Sangha under King Mindon 
(1853-1878)  
 
 
99 
3.1 King Mindon (1853-1878): A Tolerant Monarch 
100 
3.2 The Rise of Different Fraternities and Mindon’s Modernisation of the 
Kingdom 
 
102 
3.3 A Threatened Buddhist Kingdom and a Nationalist Sangha 
120 
3.4 Monastic Education during the Reign of Mindon: The Transformation of 
the Examinations 
 
126 
3.5 Mindon’s Legacy and the Birth of Various Examination Boards 
134 
3.6 The Remaining Resistance to Formal Examinations at Pakhokku 
143 
3.7 Monastic Education under the British 
147 
3.8 Conclusion 
158 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 4 ===
Chapter Four: The Instability in Siam and its Impact on the Education 
of the Sangha from the late Seventeenth to the early Nineteenth 
Century 
 
 
159 
4.1 Some Important Features of Buddhism in Siam 
161 
               4.1.1 A Monastic Religion 
161 
               4.1.2 An Educational Institution 
166 
               4.1.3 Royal Patronage 
168 
4.2 Monastic Education in Early Ayutthaya 
170 
4.3 Changes in Ecclesiastical Administration and Education in the 
Seventeenth Century 
 
177 
4.4 Why Formal Examinations were Introduced 
178 
4.5 Official Interpretation Unsatisfactory 
179 
4.6 A New Interpretation 
181 
4.7 The Parian 
194 
4.8 The Thonburi Period, 1767-1782 
198 
4.9 The Early Ratanakosin Period, 1782-1809 
200 
4.10 Conclusion 
205 
 
Chapter Five: The Standardisation of Monastic Education and the 
National Integration Process: Ecclesiastical Education under 
King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910) 
 
 
206 
5.1 The Expansion and Change of Focus of the Parian under RAma II (1809-
1824) 
 
208 
5.2 Promotion and Challenges of the Parian during the reign of RAma III 
(1824-1851) 
 
216 
5.3 A Quiet Period under RAma IV (1851-1868) 
226 
5.4 The National Integration process and Monastic Education under RAma V 
(1868-1910) 
 
228 
               5.4.10 The Young King, His Reforms and Reform-minded Brothers 
228 
               5.4.20 The Founding of the Buddhist Monastic Colleges 
232 
               5.4.30 The Mahamakut Curriculum 
236 
               5.4.40 The Mon Parian and its Syllabus 
240 
               5.4.50 The Introduction of Primary Education in the Provinces 
241 
               5.4.60 The 1902 Sangha Act 
247 
               5.4.70 A New Curriculum (Nak Tham) and the Standardisation  of 
Monastic Education 
 
254 
               5.4.80 The Curriculum of the Two-level Nak Tham 
257 
               5.4.90 The Three-level Nak Tham 
258 
               5.4.10 The Three-level Nak Tham Curriculum 
262 
5.5 Conclusion 
263 
 
 
Chapter Six: Idealism and Pragmatism: Dilemmas in the Current 
Monastic Education Systems of Burma and Thailand 
 
265 
6.1 Inevitable Changes 
266 
6.2 The Sangha Left in Control 
270 
6.3 Failure to Improve 
271 
6.4 Inherent Nature of the Tradition 
277 
6.5 Lack of Consensus between Idealists and Pragmatists on the Objectives 
of Monastic Education 
 
279 
6.6 A Mission or a Pretext? 
291 
 
Concluding Reflections 
297 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
Appendix A 
316 
Appendix B 
321 
Appendix C 
326 
 
Selected Bibliography 
333 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
 
 
During the course of my research, I owe a great deal to many people, some of whom I 
wish to mention here. I would like to record my heartfelt thanks for my supervisor, Prof. 
Richard F. Gombrich, a teacher with “open hand”, for his kindness, patience, 
encouragement and guidance. It has been a privilege to work under him.  
 
I am also indebted to my parents for their love and support. Equally, I also owe my 
spiritual teachers, particularly the late abbot of MaNgala Vihara, Laikha; of the 
Dhammaratana Monastery, Taunggyi; of the Veluvana Monastery, Taunggyi; of Kangyi 
Monastery, Yawnghwe, Shan State; and of the SAsana Mandaing Pali University 
Monastery, Pegu, the Union of Burma, for their spiritual teaching as well as their 
encouragement in my academic work. 
 
Strictly on the academic side, I am extremely thankful to Rachael Hall (Clare College, 
Cambridge); Charles and Dr. Sarah Shaw (Oxford); Lance S. Cousins (the Smatha Trust 
& formerly of Manchester University); Dr. Peter Skilling (Fragile Palm-Leaves Project); 
Dr. Justin Meiland (Linacre, Oxford); Nihal Perera; Dr. Doreen Perera (UCL, London) 
and Layla Paterson (Cambridge) for their help with proofreading and useful comments; 
and to Dr. Margaret Charles (Oxford University Language Centre) and Jonathan Higgins 
(Oxford One-to-One) for teaching me academic writing. 
 
On a personal side, I wish to thank Ven. NandavaMsa (Kesi, Shan State); Ven. Visuddha 
(Muse); Ven. Nandamedha (Kengtung); Ven. Cirabandhu (Mongpan); Ven. Jotika 
(SOAS, London); Ven. Maha Somchai (Mongpan); Ven. PaGGAnanda (Tangyan); Ven. 
PaGGAvaMsa and Ven. SIhanAdAlaNkAra (Kelaniya University); Ven. Aggasena 
(Mahamakut/Mahidol); Ven. Sumana (King’s College, London); Ven. Maha Sena 
Suraseno (Mahachulalongkorn); Prof. Suchao Ploichum (Kasetsart, Bangkok); Dr. 
Pathomphong Bodhiprasidhinand (Mahidol); Dr. Jas Elsner (Corpus Christi, Oxford); 
San San May (the British Library) and my youngest sister, Nang Kham Nown (Rangoon 
University) for their moral support as well as for their help in locating primary sources in 
Burmese and Thai.  
 
Finally, I would like to mention how grateful I am to many Buddhist devotees for their 
generous financial and other support during my four years study at St. Anne’s College, 
Oxford. These many groups, consisting mainly of my devotees and students, are led in 
England by Dr. Kyaw Thinn (Psychiatric Consultant), Dr. Aung Soe (Paediatric 
Consultant) and family, Dr. Maung Maung Lwin (nibbana.com), Chandra and Reba 
Kumar, Barbara Jones and Dina Newman (BBC); in Burma by Lily Nyunt (Rangoon) 
and Daw Yee (Moulmein) and family; in Shan State Mea Tsang Ya and family and U 
Sein Tint and family (Kyapyan Cigar); in Singapore by Mary Ng (Visco Enterprises), 
Emma T. Myint and Peggy; in Brunei by Dr. T. T. Nwe; in Germany by Dr. Waltraud 
Brüggemeire; and in Oxford by three Thai restaurants, the Thai Orchid, the Chiang Mai 
Kitchen and the Bangkok House. 
 
 
i

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
 
 
 
All PAli texts cited are the PAli Text Society editions, unless otherwise stated. 
 
A 
 
ANguttara-nikAya 
D 
 
DIgha-nikAya 
M 
 
Majjhima-nikAya 
ROB  
Royal Orders of Burma 
S 
 
SaMyutta-nikAya 
Vin 
 
Vinaya-piTaka 
 
ii

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
Chapter One 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 
                                                
 
 
Iti 
kho 
bhikkhave 
na-y-idaM 
brahmacariyaM 
lAbhasakkArasilokAnisaMsaM, …… YA ca kho ayaM bhikkhave akuppA 
cetovimutti, etadatthamidaM bhikkhave brahmacariyaM etaM sAraM etaM 
pariyosAnan’ti. 
“Monks, the benefit of the religious life is not to gain material profit, nor 
to win veneration, ………… Monks, the purpose of the religious life is 
the unshakeable liberation of mind. This is the essence. This is the goal.”  
MahAsAropama-sutta, M i 197. 
 
 
1.1 Aims of the thesis 
Scholars of traditional Buddhism in Southeast Asia1 have rightly observed that the 
Sangha, the community of monks and nuns, as a national institution has long been under 
the control of the state. However, while considering the changes that have taken place 
over the centuries, those scholars have assumed that the current monastic education 
system, which is orientated to formal examinations, has been the universally accepted 
norm throughout, the examinations being intended to raise and maintain the standards of 
monastic learning. In fact, this is true even of Zack (1977), who has studied at length 
monastic education under Prince-Patriarch Wachirayan[warorot] (1860-1921) of 
Thailand (known as Siam until the 1930s). It is not therefore surprising that previous 
studies have also interpreted royal patronage of monastic education almost always as a 
sign of the monarchy’s great devotion for the sAsana, the Buddha’s teaching, on the one 
hand, and, on the other, as a sign of decline in monastic learning, or, as Ishii puts it, as 
 
1  
For instance, Ray (1946), Brohm (1957), Smith (1965), Mendelson (1975) and Ferguson (1975) on 
Burma and Wyatt (1969), Ishii (1969), Reynolds (1972), Bunnag (1973) and Tambiah (1976) on 
Thailand. 
 
1

=== PAGE 9 ===
evidence of the “serious concern over the scholastic level of the Sangha.”2 These 
interpretations are, in fact, in line with the royal chronicles of the two countries.  
 
However, it is the aim of the present thesis to question that assumption. To that end, we 
shall reconstruct the historical development of monastic education, and thus seek to 
reinterpret the native chronicles themselves in regard to royal patronage and monastic 
scholarship. This study is undertaken in the belief that an understanding of the problems 
currently facing monastic education would be of significance for the study of Theravada 
Buddhism in Southeast Asia in general and the Sangha in particular, because, as we all 
know, the Sangha in both Burma and Thailand, as in India3 and Ceylon4, has always 
been central to Buddhist learning and practice. 
  
The focus of this study is how monastic education has been affected by the relationship 
between the Sangha and the rulers of each country since the seventeenth century. Over 
the centuries, there has been a change from an informal method of textual study, in 
which individual monasteries enjoyed academic freedom, to a formal, examination-
orientated study system, over which boards of formal examinations, consisting of 
government officials or laymen, exerted control.  
 
In that context, we shall deal with the various formal examination boards and their 
syllabuses as far as the historical reconstruction requires. As regards Burma, we trace 
back the development of the earliest form of centralised academic assessment, the 
Pathamapyan examinations. Since they came into existence in the seventeenth century, 
the Pathamapyan have always been conducted by the government and consequently been 
known as government examinations. Also considered are various formal examination 
                                                 
2  
Ishii, “Ecclesiastical Examinations in Thailand” Visakhapuja, 2515 (1872), p.52. 
3  
Mookerji, Ancient Indian Education, p.394. 
4  
Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, p.287. 
 
2

=== PAGE 10 ===
boards and their curricula, such as the SakyasIha and the CetiyaNgaBa, introduced by 
non-governmental Buddhist organisations during the colonial rule towards the close of 
the nineteenth century; the DhammAcariya examinations, introduced by the colonial 
government in 1946, on the model of the degree course of the SakyasIha and the 
CetiyaNgaBa; and the TipiTakadhara examinations, which were set up by the government 
of independent Burma in 1949, and, as the name suggests, test the candidates on the 
entire Tipitaka. Except for the TipiTakadhara, all degree courses are known as 
DhammAcariya, and in order to distinguish them we follow the popular names of 
SakyasIha DhammAcariya, CetiyaNgaBa DhammAcariya and government DhammAcariya. 
All the curricula of these examination boards, ranging from two to seven years, are 
purely religious. They are focussed on here, rather than any of the many other 
examination boards which conduct examinations each year, because the study of these 
earliest boards will suffice to reconstruct the history of the development of monastic 
education in Burma.  
 
As for Thailand, we shall discuss the first ever centralised formal scholastic test, the 
Parian examinations, introduced at Ayutthaya in the seventeenth century. Also discussed 
are the Nak Tham examinations, conceived at the beginning of the twentieth century 
during the national integration process initiated by King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910) and 
formally introduced during the reign of his son and successor, King Vajiravudh (1910-
1925); and the Sai Saman Suksa, a religious-secular curriculum introduced in the 1960s 
when Thailand began its journey towards industrial development. At present, while the 
nine-level Parian give prominence to translation skills from Pali to Thai, and are thus 
known as bae-bali or, Pali translation, the three-level Nak Tham examine the knowledge 
of the Dhamma and Vinaya, “teaching and discipline” of the novices and monks in 
vernacular Thai and are considered the foundation for the Parian.  The ten-level Sai 
 
3

=== PAGE 11 ===
Saman Suksa was created primarily to meet the expressed needs of student-monks who 
would one day return to lay life. Unlike in Burma, there are no boards of examinations 
outside the control of the government, because Thailand has never lost its sovereignty. 
 
 
1.2 Monastic Education and its Problems 
We have noted that in ecclesiastical scholarship there was, over time, a major change 
from the informal textual study method to the various formal examination boards.  The 
earlier method can be called informal because there were no centralised syllabuses or 
forms of assessment. Instead, the syllabuses and method of assessment were in the hands 
of the abbots, who were also the principals. The schools exercised total freedom in 
designing their syllabuses and in assessing their pupils. No worldly rewards were given. 
Students would study the same text more than once with the same teacher or with a 
different one, until they knew the whole text thoroughly and also were familiar with as 
many interpretations as possible. The emphasis was to encourage students, who usually 
were to be ordained after a couple of years, to study the Buddhist texts thoroughly, for 
their moral and spiritual development.  
 
But before the formal examinations became popular in the late nineteenth century, were 
all students spiritually committed to monastic ideals? Of course, not. Some went to the 
monastery not because they wanted to liberate themselves from suffering, as it should be, 
but because that was the only place where education was available in those days. For 
such student-monks, who intended to return to lay life after their study, there was a 
course in which both secular and religious subjects were taught. Every student had also 
to study some Buddhist scriptures. This general course at the primary and secondary 
levels was available at most monasteries. But at the higher level such a general course 
 
4

=== PAGE 12 ===
providing more advanced knowledge of secular and religious subjects, was confined to 
certain royal monasteries. Towards the end of the general course, students made a 
decision whether they would like to continue their study and devote more time to 
fulfilling the aim of the religious life. Those who did proceed would go on to study “the 
great texts”, i.e. the PAli-nikAya.  
 
Most teaching monasteries using this method had always been in the capital and in other 
big cities, for material support was readily available there, and also the king usually 
invited learned monks to reside in the capital. There student-monks could also depend on 
the alms-round for their food, as they do now in Burma and Thailand. But it would be a 
mistake to conclude that learned monks were found only in the capital. As we shall 
discuss in Chapter One, even by the early twentieth century, when the teaching 
monasteries survived only in towns, many village monasteries still had learned abbots. 
For example, important figures in the twentieth-century Burmese monastic Order, such 
as, Ledi Sayadaw (1846-1923) and Mahasi Sayadaw (1904-1983), received the best part 
of their education and training in their village monasteries.5 
 
In both Burma and Thailand, the strength of this informal monastic education system 
was that it was flexible and diverse, and the abbot could design a syllabus or syllabuses 
tailored to the needs of his pupils. The monasteries were thereby able to take into 
consideration also the desire and future of those students who had worldly motives. By 
offering secular and religious knowledge, the monasteries served the educational needs 
of society as well as those of the Order.  
 
                                                 
5  
See pp.50-54. 
 
5

=== PAGE 13 ===
However, at present, the informal method of study has totally disappeared in Thailand 
and remains strong in Burma in only one small town, Pakhokku. Monastic education has 
been standardised, using formal examinations as an instrument. In different parts of 
Burma, apart from the major four examination boards, there are many others with 
different reputations, some of which operate nationally and some locally. But apart from 
these four main boards, all are run and sponsored by non-governmental Buddhist 
associations. To enter for as many examinations as possible, both local and national, is 
seen by his monastery and his lay benefactors as very important for a monk or novice 
and indeed he is under great pressure to do so. 
 
In Thailand, the pressure on monasteries and students to acquire as many examination 
qualifications as possible is similar to that in Burma. Only monks with many 
examination qualifications can expect to be awarded royal titles, which in turn guarantee 
their progress in the ecclesiastical hierarchy.  
 
Although the examinations are not in themselves detrimental to the academic or spiritual 
development of students, they have in Burma and Thailand become problematic because 
of the constant social and political pressure on student-monks and novices, with the 
consequence that the students themselves come to focus only on past examination papers 
and neglect the study of anything else.  
 
Therefore the Pali canonical texts that were studied thoroughly under the informal 
textual learning method no longer receive attention, and parts of these texts are studied 
only if they are likely to appear in the examination papers. Since many texts are 
prescribed at most levels, teachers and students are forced to do their own selection of 
 
6

=== PAGE 14 ===
which part they should study. But here they may totally miscalculate, since the questions 
are set by the scholars appointed by the examination board and not the teacher. 
 
In a wider context, the problems with the monastic education systems have been 
expressed as the Sangha’s gradual loss of cultural leadership; the inability of the majority 
of monks to relate the teaching to social problems; the excessive testing of students; the 
deterioration in moral standards; the decline of Pali study6; and the lack of knowledge of 
canonical texts of most students. Not all these problems will be discussed here, for most 
of them are beyond the scope of this thesis. However, problems related to the historical 
development of monastic education, and to a certain extent to pedagogy, will be 
explored. 
 
Many of these problems have been articulated by leading present-day monastic 
educationists in both Burma and Thailand. In Burma, the founder of one of the leading 
teaching monasteries, Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa (1890-1977), pointed out the problem of 
students being excessively assessed when he said in 1971: “Nowadays monks and 
novices do not benefit spiritually from their study as much as they used to [because] the 
entire monastic scholarship is fixated only on formal examinations. The student’s 
exclusive focus on the syllabuses of formal examinations takes place not only at the 
beginning of their monastic study, but also from halfway until the end of it.” 7  
 
JanakAbhivaMsa’s complaint was echoed by the newly formed Burmese State Sangha 
MahAnAyaka Committee, the highest ecclesiastical body, in its 1982 education report, 
                                                 
6  
Pali-tetgatho sonzanyay kawmiti-e asiyinganza 1941 (Report of the Pali University Enquiry 
Committee, 1941), p.11; JanakAbhivaMsa, “Nan net khin ovada mya (Records of Morning Speeches)” 
Dhamma byuha sarsaung, pp.23-24; Naing gnan daw thangha mahanayaka aphwe pariyatti 
simankein (The State Sangha MahAnAyaka Committee’s Pariyatti Education Scheme), p.6; Thepwethi 
(Payutto), Thit thang karn suksa khong khana song (Directions of the Education of the Sangha), p.9; 
Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer, p.200. 
7  
JanakAbhivaMsa, “Nan net khin ovada mya”, pp.23-24. 
 
7

=== PAGE 15 ===
which referred to current monastic scholarship as belonging to “the epoch of formal 
examinations”. Part of the report reads: “In the present period, the government leads in 
holding [monastic] annual pariyatti examinations. The Sangha and the people also make 
enormous efforts to hold [monastic non-government/private] examinations. Therefore, 
this period may even be recorded in history as the era of formal examinations, sarmeibwe 
khetkAla.”8 (My translation) 
 
The report went on to spell out some of the academic and moral problems facing the 
monastic learning system: “However, despite the great efforts put in by the majority of 
the present generation of monastic students, current formal examinations [examination 
systems] do not contribute to improvement in their moral standards. Some of the students 
are even committing unwholesome deeds by cheating in the examinations; they do not 
have good knowledge of the TipiTaka, the words of the Buddha; despite studying the 
TipiTaka9, they do not appear to have benefited directly from the teachings of the 
Buddha; when they have to preach, speak or write, they are not able to locate necessary 
information easily; they are not good at Pali; despite being Myanmar bhikkhus, they 
cannot even write standard Burmese. Such situations have now arisen. Today we have 
not achieved the modern [education] standard desired by the Sangha and the people.” 
 
In fact, even four decades earlier, while Burma was still under British rule, some of these 
same problems were found. One of the findings of the 1941 Pali University Enquiry 
Committee, which interviewed teachers at more than two hundred and ten leading 
sarthintaik, “teaching monasteries”, was that the top teaching monasteries did not take 
                                                 
8 Naing gnan daw thangha mahanayaka aphwe pariyatti simankein (The State Sangha MahAnAyaka 
Committee’s Pariyatti Education Scheme), p.6. 
9  
By this it means the monastic curriculum as a whole, not necessarily the canonical texts. 
 
8

=== PAGE 16 ===
the study of the Pali language seriously and that the Abhidhamma scholars could not 
understand simple Pali prose without the assistance of a dictionary.10  
 
In Thailand, similarly, Phra Maha Prayud Payutto(1939- ), a well-known scholar, writer 
and preacher, gave a gloomy assessment of the Sangha’s education when he said in 
1984: “The present state of monastic education is similar to the sky, which, although 
with some spots of sunshine, is in fact full of cloud. The sky is not clear. When the 
monks themselves see the dull and overcast sky, they may feel disheartened, tired and 
might as well fall asleep”.11 On specific points, the decline of Pali study has been noticed 
by scholars, such as Payutto himself12 and Tambiah13. Swearer, who, on the one hand, 
acknowledges “an overall improvement in the educational level of monks”, particularly 
at primary and secondary level, following “the standardisation of monastic education”, 
also observes, on the other hand, that the “national monastic examination system 
controlled by Bangkok eventually served to discourage specialised textual expertise”.14  
 
Today in both countries members of the Sangha spend a considerable part of their 
training acquiring qualifications from various formal examinations. These qualifications 
bring with them fame and material rewards; and are considered essential, even if worldly 
and not conducive to the goal of the religious life, by the monks themselves as well as 
their lay supporters. However, in spite of the numerous examinations to be passed in 
                                                 
10  Pali-tetgatho sonzanyay kawmiti-e asiyinganza 1941, p.11. 
11  As I have translated Payutto’s speech freely I shall give the original Thai version here. 
“ว่าถึงทิศทางการศึกษาของคณะสงฆ์ทั้งหมดนั้น ผมได้เห็นสภาพดินฟ้าอากาศวัันนี้ ตอนเช้าเมฆครึ้มมัวมาก มี 
เค้าฝน ก็เลยนึกถึงสภาพการ ศึกษาของคณะสงฆ์ของเราว่าคล้ายๆดินฟ้าอากาศวันนี้ เมื่อตอนเช้า คือพอตื่นขึ้นมา 
ก็เห็นครึ้มฟ้าครึ้มฝน สภาพที่ครึ้มฝน มีเมฆมาก มันก็ค่อนข้างมัวหน่อย ไม่สดใส ไม่สว่างจ้า ไม่โปร่งแจ้ง มันไม่ 
โล่งไป การศึกษาของพระสงฆ์เราก็คล้าย ๆ กับว่าตกอยู่ ในสภาพอากาศเช่นนี้ นอกจากนั้น หลานท่านก็ อาจจะง่วง 
หสงนอนชึม ๆ แล้วก็อยากจะหลับ ชึ่งอาจจะคล้าย ๆ กับสภาพ การศึกษา ของคณะสงฆ์ที่ครึม ๆ เพลินๆ 
ทำให้เกิดเป็น ภาวะที่เรียกว่า เฉื่อยชาขึ้นมาได้มาก …”. Phra Thepwethi (Payutto), Thit thang karn suksa, 
p.9.  
12  Thepwethi, p. 9. 
13  Tambiah, p.200. 
14  Swearer, “Centre and Periphery: Buddhism and Politics in Modern Thailand” Buddhism and Politics 
in twentieth century Asia, p.203. 
 
9

=== PAGE 17 ===
order to gain those qualifications, the quality of their education is still, as the leading 
educationists have pointed out, academically and spiritually unsatisfactory.  
 
Here it seems to me that, while both the Buddhist rulers and the Sangha in both countries 
have attempted to preserve monastic idealism since the late nineteenth century, what has 
in fact characterised monastic education, perhaps unknown to both the rulers or the 
Sangha, is secularization. This has been achieved, ironically, without the student-monks 
being allowed to study secular subjects. On reflection on the similar occurrence of 
secularization of Buddhism in Sri Lanka, secularization of monastic education in Burma 
and Thailand has taken place since the late nineteenth century in at least two stages. The 
first is, as Gombrich puts it, “The most obvious form of secularization…the assumption 
by other institutions of functions that religious institutions used to perform”15, in this 
case, the control of monastic education itself. The other is the change of attitude in the 
student-monks at the higher level towards the objective of their monastic education, 
which has become somewhat worldly.  
 
Although secularization has come about for many reasons, ranging from the impact of 
European colonialism to the “the arrival of modern knowledge and Western-type 
education”, from the availability of “printing and increased use of literacy” to the rise of 
a middle class16 since the early twentieth century, we shall focus, for the purposes of this 
thesis, mainly on the relationship between the rulers and the Sangha, which antedates the 
arrival of European colonialism. 
 
Ignoring the factors contributing to secularization, the problems of monastic education in 
both countries may be summarised in two simple questions: (a) why do the student-
                                                 
15  Gombrich, Secularization, Rationalism and Sectarianism: Essays in Honour of Bryan R. Wilson, p.61. 
16  Gombrich & Obeyesekere, Buddhism Transformed, p.203.  
 
10

=== PAGE 18 ===
monks have to go through formal academic assessments and (b) why do there have to be 
so many formal examinations? The first question has already been touched upon and the 
second will be considered. 
 
 
1.3 Historical Background 
The current system of monastic education in which formal assessments have become so 
important began in the late nineteenth century and coincided with the threat to the 
independence of the two kingdoms, Burma and Thailand, from European colonial 
powers. In Burma, it was under Mindon (1853-1878) that formal monastic examinations 
were accepted by both the monarch and the Sangha. Earlier, however, from the 
seventeenth century up to the mid-nineteenth century, it was only the monarch who 
favoured using formal examinations to promote monastic education, and the Sangha, for 
its part, had been vehemently against it. A formal examination system involved some 
organisational skill and bureaucratic procedures, practices which were at the disposal 
more of the monarch than of the Sangha. But the resistance to the formal examination 
system by the Sangha was not because of its lack of these skills, but rather because the 
Sangha resented the king’s interference in ecclesiastical scholarship.  
 
There were precedents for the king interfering in the Sangha’s education and those had 
led to more control by the temporal power over the Order. For instance, in 1636 King 
Thalun (1629-1648) at Ava introduced, for the first time in the history of Burmese 
monastic scholarship, formal examinations to assess the knowledge of monks and 
novices of the holy scriptures. The motive of the king, this study will suggest, was to 
purge the Order of men who had fled to it to avoid conscription and forced labour, for 
members of the Order were exempt from royal services, and thus to control entry into the 
 
11

=== PAGE 19 ===
Order. His successors at Ava, although they never forced the monks to be assessed for 
their knowledge, retained control over admission to the Order.  
 
However, at Amarapura, the new Burmese capital, King Bodawpaya, also known as 
Badon Min (1782-1819), repeatedly made attempts to impose formal examinations as a 
tool to bring the Sangha under tighter monarchical control. Bodawpaya systematised the 
existing formal examinations, the Pathamapyan, and introduced new ones, the Vinaya 
examinations. Material rewards were given to all candidates: after their success and 
ordination, which followed success in the examinations, the candidates were appointed to 
posts in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, itself created and controlled by the king. Parents and 
close relatives of successful candidates were also rewarded: some were exempt from tax; 
some were elevated in their social status to become royal; and some were given 
employment in the royal service. But, despite all this monarchical persuasion and 
pressure, the education of the Sangha until the mid-nineteenth century was still by and 
large based on informal textual study, the traditional learning method.  
 
In Thailand, likewise, the current system of monastic education began to develop 
towards the end of the nineteenth century and in the early twentieth century during the 
reign of King Chulalongkorn, or Rama V (1868-1910). That development coincided with 
the national integration process undertaken by the king, as in Burma, in response to the 
colonial threat. The main contributor was the king’s half-brother, Prince Vajirayan, who 
became a monk and Pali scholar. Vajirayan was also the one who introduced primary 
education to the whole country. Having completed the introduction of universal primary 
education, he shifted his focus to the Pali examinations, called Parian. He wanted to 
modernise the Parian, which had been in existence for two centuries. However, because 
of his position as the deputy head of the minority fraternity, Dhammayuttika, the 
 
12

=== PAGE 20 ===
majority of the Sangha seems not to have given their backing to his reform. He therefore 
experimented with his reform first in the monastery where he taught, and then at Wat 
Bovonives, the headquarters of the Dhammayuttika.  
 
However, the greater contribution was his creation of a new board of monastic 
examinations to help implement the 1905 Military Law, which exempted phu ru tham, 
“one who knows the dhamma”, from military service. Since the law did not specify the 
qualification of phu ru tham, it was incumbent upon him, now the de facto SangharAja of 
Thailand, to clarify what the qualification should be. The process of assessment for phu 
ru tham thus resulted in a new set of examinations, now known as Nak Tham. Almost all 
the Nak Tham textbooks were written by him and the medium of instruction was to be 
Thai, in contrast to the Parian, for which it had been bi-lingual, Pali and Thai. This was 
to popularise the Nak Tham in the provinces, where Pali was little taught in order to 
incorporate those provinces into the general life of the nation, controlled from Bangkok. 
The actual implementation of the Nak Tham, which had three levels, took place in the 
next reign, under King Vajiravudh (1910-1925). Prince Vajirayan, now the SangharAja, 
went to different provinces to oversee the conduct of the Nak Tham. The Nak Tham 
helped influence the Sangha of different provinces and thus also their followers to 
integrate into the life of the Thai nation centred in Bangkok. 
 
If the introduction of the Nak Tham was well organised and administered, its 
predecessor, the Parian, or at least the first ever formal academic tests that would 
develop into the Parian, had been introduced in a hurry and had to be imposed on the 
Sangha. It was introduced in the late seventeenth century under King Narai (1656-1688). 
As in Ava, the reason was to purge monks from the Order. Ayutthaya was at war with 
 
13

=== PAGE 21 ===
her neighbours. King Narai therefore wanted to raise a big army to defeat his enemies; 
but many fled conscription. 
 
 
1.4 A Conflict between Idealist and Pragmatist 
We can now discuss briefly the theme of this thesis. When the monarchs in both Burma 
and Thailand introduced formal examinations in the seventeenth century and modified 
them in Burma in the eighteenth century, the objective of monastic education was solely 
based on idealism. Here idealism refers to the monastic ideal that one seeks ordination 
for the sake of salvation and, once ordained, a novice or monk should fully dedicate 
himself to the study and practice of the Buddha’s teaching and monastic discipline, 
Dhamma and Vinaya. When this idealism is applied to education policy, it means that the 
study of subjects which are not part of the Dhamma and Vinaya or are perceived to be 
against the spirit of monastic idealism is forbidden. 
 
However, there were people who became novices and monks, not because they wanted to 
achieve salvation, but because they wanted to receive that higher education available 
only to the ordained. Thus the monasteries, the only educational institutions in both 
Burma and Thailand until the end of the nineteenth century, attracted many seeking 
opportunities for education. Many of these candidates wished to study some secular 
subjects current at the time that would enhance their social status, or employment 
prospects, at the royal court, once they left the Order. In fact, the educational need of 
these candidates was that of the society and the kingdom itself. In response to their 
needs, the monasteries did not insist on all candidates studying only the Dhamma and 
Vinaya. Instead, the monasteries took a pragmatic view, based on the needs of the Order 
for monks competent in the Dhamma and Vinaya and of society for men educated and 
 
14

=== PAGE 22 ===
trained for various professions. Some of the Buddhist texts, though not the “great texts”, 
as well as current secular subjects, were prescribed in the syllabuses. 
 
Generally the kings seem to have approved of the Sangha’s approach towards education 
as a whole. However, during times of political instability, this study has found, the 
monarchs appear to have assumed monastic idealism: they introduced and enforced 
examinations which prescribed only the “great texts” or “balie [Pali] books”, thus 
promoting idealism over pragmatism. King Thalun of Ava in his famous decree, dated 5 
August 1636, said that “only those yahan [monks] with the intention of attaining nibbana 
will achieve happiness here and hereafter. Yahans who have been ordained for other 
reasons should be taught to aim for nibbana. Those with other motives must be 
disrobed.”17 Bodawpaya also declared this monastic ideal in one of his decrees, dated 17 
October 1787, quoting the MahAsAropama-sutta and the CUlasAropama-sutta of the 
Majjhima-nikAya18, in which the Buddha makes a compelling simile comparing a tree 
with heartwood to his teaching.  Bodawpaya, who ironically gave various worldly 
rewards to examination candidates, said: “...Monks and novices, ordained with the aim of 
benefiting from this great tree (of the BuddhasAsana), should not indulge in material 
requisites or live heedlessly. Even if one is not able to enjoy the taste of the heartwood, 
sapwood and inner bark, one should take the opportunity to enjoy the taste of the outer 
bark; this enjoyment alone will make the SAsana prosper…”19 In Thailand, King Narai 
also was idealistic when he “caused them [monks and novices to be] examined from time 
to time as to their knowledge with respect [to] the balie language and its books”.20  
 
                                                 
17  Royal Orders of Burma (Henceforth ROB), III, p.255. 
18  M i 192-205. 
19  ROB, IV, p.625. (My translation). 
20  La Loubère, The Kingdom of Siam, p.115. 
 
15

=== PAGE 23 ===
Here the need for the king to assume the moral high ground by claiming an idealist 
position, ostensibly to raise education standards and monastic discipline, should be seen 
in the context of why the king had to purge the monks from the Order. According to the 
king, getting rid of monks who had insufficient knowledge of the Buddhist scriptures 
was to safeguard Buddhism. In reality, however, the king affected an idealist stand in 
order to purge the monks who had fled conscription and been ordained because he 
wanted to raise a large army.  
 
The idealist position was taken by the king, despite the fact that in those days the 
monasteries themselves were following a pragmatic approach by teaching a general 
curriculum of religious-secular subjects for the first few years, and then a specialised 
curriculum, which was in most monasteries purely religious in nature, for those who had 
shown commitment to the holy life. By assuming an idealist position on monastic 
education, the king, in fact, ignored the practical needs of his people for secular 
knowledge. 
 
It is true that, ideally, monastic education should be dedicated to the study of the words 
of the Buddha, known as Dhamma and Vinaya, by a bhikkhu or Buddhist monk for his 
own salvation.21 In practice, however, successive governments over the centuries have 
requested from the Sangha help in providing education for the people, particularly, since 
the early twentieth century, the less privileged, which means that the monasteries need to 
include in their curriculum subjects not directly related to attaining salvation.  This has 
been because the government could not by itself fulfil the responsibility of providing 
education for its citizens. For instance, even as late as the 1960s, in both Burma and 
Thailand, the government education programmes were unable to offer equal 
                                                 
21  See for instance, the CUlasAropama-sutta, M i 198-205; the MahAsAropama-sutta, M i 192-197; the 
AlagaddUpama-sutta, M i 130-142; the DhammavihArI-sutta, A iii 86-89. 
 
16

=== PAGE 24 ===
opportunities in education to the people, particularly those in rural areas, where the 
majority lived.22 For many people, education within their reach existed only in their 
village monasteries or in a nearby town. So the people continued to send their children, 
mostly boys, to the monastery for education.  
 
The Sangha for its part resisted the idealist position of the monarch until the late 
nineteenth century, after Lower Burma had been conquered by the British and Thailand 
was threatened by both France and Britain. Under those threats, the Sangha became 
nationalist and came to accept the king’s idealism in the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth century. That was because Buddhism, of which monastic education was seen 
as the foundation, was linked to the identity of the Burmese and Thai nations, of which 
the monarch was the ruler and the head. When the nation and the monarchy were 
threatened by the external enemy, the Sangha, too, felt threatened, and became 
nationalist. Bechert writes: “.. [M]any Burmese thought the elimination of the dynasty 
would be a heavy blow to the religion itself.”23 In Thailand, too, Bunnag observes that 
“to be Buddhist has been considered a badge of national identity”.24 By the time the 
Sangha became nationalist, western secular education began to be made available by 
Christian missionaries and the colonial government in Burma and by King 
Chulalongkorn in Siam. Ironically, it was now the majority of the Sangha who adopted 
the idealist position, rejecting secular knowledge, but the government consciously 
adopted the pragmatic one for it had to modernise the kingdom and therefore promote 
western secular knowledge.  
 
                                                 
22  Dhitiwatana, “Buddhism and Thai Education” Buddhism and Society in Thailand, p.78. 
23  Bechert, “To be a Burmese is to be a Buddhist; Buddhism in Burma” the World of Buddhism, p.149. 
24  Bunnag, “The Way of the Monk and the Way of the World: Buddhism in Thailand, Laos and 
Cambodia” the World of Buddhism, p.159. 
 
17

=== PAGE 25 ===
Furthermore, the acceptance in the late nineteenth century by the Sangha of the idealist 
position in monastic education proved unwise, as the monasteries would now decide to 
shun western secular subjects at the time when they needed to modernise their curricula 
by including those subjects. The monasteries would thus witness a decrease in the 
number of children attending monastic schools because secular subjects were not taught. 
Society, on the other hand, was still in need of help from the village monasteries to 
provide secular education. But the Sangha failed to consider at that point whether its 
education was just to produce competent members for the future of the sAsana or whether 
it should also look after the educational needs of society, particularly its lay followers.  
 
The inability of the leading members of the Sangha to define the objective of its 
education has resulted in leading members of the Sangha being locked in a debate 
between idealism and pragmatism since the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. 
The lack of a common ground between the idealists, wishing to maintain a conservative 
position, and the pragmatists, proposing reforms, is evident in the fundamental weakness 
in the current monastic education system, which is its lack of flexibility in meeting the 
students’ educational needs.  
 
 
1.5 Sources 
We have primarily consulted in both countries royal orders; royal chronicles; chronicles 
of monastic lineages; historical records; and relevant contemporary and modern 
literature. For Burma, the main source is the extant royal orders, edited and published 
with an English introduction by Professor Than Tun, in ten volumes. These royal orders 
cover the Ava and Kon-Baung periods. For the late nineteenth up to the mid twentieth 
century, we rely on the records of various examination boards and those of monastic 
 
18

=== PAGE 26 ===
lineages, for instance the Mandalay thathanawin (History of Buddhism in Mandalay) in 
five volumes. It is fortunate for us to have at our disposal materials that were not 
available to those previous scholars whose work on the Sangha remains otherwise 
standard in the field. 
 
As for Thailand, our sources for the Ayutthaya period, in the absence of surviving royal 
orders, are the royal chronicles of Ayutthaya, written after the main period under 
discussion; and the records of travellers and envoys to Ayutthaya. The Ratanakosin 
period is better recorded, with extant royal orders published in various forms, for 
instance phongsawadan (chronicle) and kotmai (law). We also make use of well-known 
monastic records, for instance, that of Wat Bovonives, by different authors as well as the 
more recent excellent works of Professor David Wyatt and unpublished doctoral 
dissertations by Brohm, Ferguson, Moy Myint on Burma, and Reynolds and Zack on 
Thailand, all completed at Cornell University.   
 
 
1.6 Summary of the Chapters 
The thesis is arranged in five chapters, with two separate chapters for each country. 
Monastic education in Burma and Thailand is dealt with separately because the treatment 
of the subject is primarily historical. Out of the first two chapters dealing with Burma, 
the first begins with the general characteristics of Buddhism in royal Burma from the 
earliest times to the late nineteenth century, when the last king, Thibaw, was deposed. It 
then proceeds to deal with the main subject matter, monastic education, from the Ava 
period up to the mid Kon-Baung period, by outlining in brief early monastic education 
that had two types of curriculum: general, with secular-religious subjects; and 
specialised, with only religious subjects, in the form of “higher texts”. In this chapter, we 
 
19

=== PAGE 27 ===
argue that King Thalun (1629-1648) of the Ava period introduced formal examinations 
for political reasons; and that King Bodawpaya (1782-1819) of the Kon-Baung period 
attempted to use formal examinations excessively as a tool to control the Sangha.  
 
Chapter Two continues the Kon-Baung period, giving particular attention to the reign of 
Mindon (1853-1878). In the prevailing political situation, characterised by fear and 
uncertainty, we discuss how Mindon used the precarious situation to his advantage and 
persuaded the Sangha to accept formal examinations as a way of promoting and 
perpetuating Buddhism. Also examined are the developments in monastic education 
from the fall of the Burmese monarchy up to the time of the Sixth Buddhist Council 
under the Government of U Nu (1948-1958, 1960-1962). Attention is especially given to 
two developments: the transformation of monastic examinations under Mindon and his 
legacy, in the form of newly established examination boards, this time by the Sangha and 
the community leaders who had become nationalist since the end of the Second Anglo-
Burmese War, 1852-1854. In fact, what has taken place in monastic education since the 
end of the Burmese monarchy can be characterised as Mindon’s legacy. 
 
Chapter Three attempts to examine an unstable Siam at Ayutthaya under King Narai 
(1656-1688) and how that instability affected the relationship between the monarchy and 
the Sangha, and ultimately monastic education. The chapter describes the general 
characteristics of Buddhism in Siam before it discusses monastic education prior to the 
interference of Narai. Monastic scholarship after Narai until the reign of Rama I is also 
considered briefly in this chapter. 
 
Chapter Four deals with the standardisation of monastic education in Thailand under 
King Chulalongkorn, or Rama V (1868-1910), who steered the national integration 
 
20

=== PAGE 28 ===
process through, by which the many autonomous provinces were brought under the 
control of Bangkok. The emphasis is on how a new set of formal examinations, Nak 
Tham, was created in the light of the political integration process. Discussed also in this 
chapter are the 1902 Sangha Act and its subsequent amendments and the syllabuses of 
various examinations, namely the Parian, the Nak Tham and the Sai Saman Suksa, along 
with their historical development. 
 
Chapter Five summarises the problems in monastic education in both Burma and 
Thailand through the theme of a conflict between idealism and pragmatism. In general, a 
criticism, focusing on the twentieth century, is made of the Sangha as a whole for lack of 
proactive vision in education. In particular, the discussion emphasises the debate 
between conservatives and reformists in the Sangha as to how to define the objective of 
monastic education.  
 
21

=== PAGE 29 ===
 
Chapter Two 
 
The Education of the Sangha under Strong Monarchs 
Monastic Scholarship under Kings Thalun (1629-1648) of the Ava and 
Bodawpaya (1782-1819) of the Kon-Baung Period 
 
 
                                                
 
 
2.1 Introduction 
In the previous chapter, we discussed in brief the problems in the current monastic 
education system in Burma. The rise of the various formal academic examination boards 
since the late nineteenth century has contributed ironically, not to the progress of the 
existing monastic education standards, but rather to their decline. As already noticed, 
some of those problems have been spotted by an education committee as early as the 
1940s and acknowledged by leading members of the Sangha since the 1970s.1  
 
 The monastic education system has come to define education narrowly, along the lines 
of the syllabuses of various formal examinations, and does not encourage learning in a 
wider context. Students are condemned to repeating the same syllabus and sitting the 
examinations until they pass or give it up. Whereas the present generation of students 
spend almost twice as much time on education as their nineteenth-century counterparts, 
their study is not as effective as their predecessors’. The study of Buddhist scriptures is 
now being engaged in as a pursuit of prestige and fame for the monastic institutions 
concerned. The monasteries themselves are compelled to compete with one another by 
the government and the society. Unlike teaching monasteries that flourished until the end 
of the nineteenth century, current monastic institutions have no freedom to choose their 
own syllabuses or assess their own students; instead, the government and Buddhist 
associations, largely dominated by lay people who are devout Buddhists but are not 
 
1  
Pali-tetgatho sonzanyay kawmiti-e asiyinganza 1941, p.11; JanakAbhivaMsa, “Nan net khin ovada 
mya”, pp.23-24; Naing gnan daw thanga mahanayaka aphwe pariyatti simankain, pp.6-7. 
 
22

=== PAGE 30 ===
scholars in Buddhist scriptures, have come to exert real influence on these institutions. 
This development is partly, as far as this study is concerned, a product of historical 
developments; and partly, Chapter Six of the present thesis will suggest, due to the lack 
of a proactive vision on the part of the Sangha. 
 
By a historical product we refer to certain geopolitical circumstances that the monastic 
education system has had to face over the centuries. In order to carry out their teaching 
activities, monasteries needed the support of kings and governments. Thus the 
monasteries always had a close relationship with the monarchy. However, this mutually 
beneficial link in the history of Buddhism in Burma experienced, every now and then, 
some testing times, which left a long-lasting impact on the Sangha as a whole and on its 
education in particular. This was more so under strong monarchs, such as Thalun (1629-
1648) and Bodawpaya (1782-1819), who were known as ardent supporters of the Sangha 
and its education; ironically, these monarchs also forced or attempted to force a large 
number of monks to leave the monkhood, allegedly in the name of “the purification of 
the Order”.2 However, despite these claims, it seems that “purification” of the Buddhist 
Order was not the only reason, if it was one at all, for the kings to take stern action 
against the monks.3 We will argue that geopolitical circumstances, which required the 
king to have more control over the population of young males in the kingdom for war 
expeditions and construction, played a greater part in King Thalun’s purging of the 
monks in large numbers from the Order and in also King Bodawpaya’s excessive use of 
academic examinations in an attempt to force monks to leave the Order. 
 
In this chapter, divided into four sections, we shall first discuss some general features of 
Buddhism in Burma from its beginnings in the second century AD, to the end of the 
                                                 
2  
ROB, I, pp.254-256, 395-396; IV, pp.625-626; Than Tun, “Administration Under King Thalun, 1629-
1648” Essays on the History and Buddhism of Burma, p.130. 
3  
ROB, IV, pp.610 & 626. 
 
23

=== PAGE 31 ===
nineteenth century, when the last king, Thibaw (1878-1885), was deposed. Three 
particular characteristics, Buddhism being a monastic religion, receiving royal patronage, 
and being an educational institution will be discussed. Second, we shall give a brief 
account of how the monastic education systems before the twentieth century flourished 
through informal textual study, in which the academic freedom of the teacher and the 
monastery was upheld. In this, the student career of a famous scholar-monk, Ledi 
Sayadaw, will be used as an example of the informal textual study system. Third, we 
shall look at how informal textual study was gradually replaced by formal examination-
orientated study from the beginning of the twentieth century. Our study of the changing 
process in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries will be confined to education 
in this chapter; more of the historical development related to this process will be dealt 
with in the next chapter, in chronological order. To demonstrate the gradual change in 
ecclesiastical pedagogy, the student careers of four other monks will be considered 
briefly. Finally, in an effort to unearth some of the factors behind the process of change 
in the monastic education system from informal textual to formal examination-orientated 
study, we shall look at how formal examinations were introduced in the seventeenth 
century. In so doing, geopolitical circumstances during the reign of Thalun (1629-1648) 
at Ava will be examined; then how Bodawpaya (1782-1819), under similar 
circumstances, used formal examinations in order to control the Sangha will be analysed; 
and finally the resistance by the majority of the Sangha to formal examinations will be 
discussed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
24

=== PAGE 32 ===
2.1.1 Some General Features of Buddhism in Burma 
2.1.1.1 A Monastic Religion 
The general features of Buddhism4 in royal Burma can be described in three important 
terms: it was a monastic religion; enjoyed royal patronage; and was an educational 
institution. First of all, the Buddhism that became the religion of the people of Burma, 
then known as Śr´ K·etra or the Pyu Kingdom, at least “from about the second century 
AD”,5 was a monastic religion. By monastic religion we mean that the Sangha was (and 
still is) at the heart of the Buddhist religion. Gombrich thus remarks: “The fortunes of 
Buddhism as a historical phenomenon, then, are the fortunes of the Order.”6 There are 
two reasons why the Sangha has occupied such as important place in Buddhism. Firstly, 
as Gombrich states: “Buddhists have traditionally believed that for a layman to attain 
salvation is virtually impossible”.7 That is because there are more hurdles for him: he 
lives in a sensual world (kAmabhogino,8 rajopatho9); and as a householder his life is so 
busy with family and social commitments that he can hardly make any real effort to 
purify his mind so as to eradicate desire (taBhA).10 In contrast, the life of a “renouncer” is, 
according to a well-known passage in the Sutta-piTaka, free as an open space.11 A 
renouncer can therefore devote his time to achieving Enlightenment, the purpose for 
which he left home. 
 
                                                 
4  
By this we mean Theravada Buddhism, unless stated otherwise. 
5  
Stargardt, The Ancient Pyu of Burma, I, p.192. We follow Stargardt’s date here because all the extant 
chronicles of Burma tell of the history of Buddhism only from the Pagan period (1044-1287). These 
chronicles, composed only in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries by the now dominant 
Burman scholars, are silent on the history of Buddhism not only in the Pyu kingdoms of Beikthano 
and Śr´ K·etra but also in the Mon kingdom of Thaton that was devastated by King Anoratha 
(Aniruddha) of Pagan. Both the Pyu and the Mon kingdoms preceded Pagan. 
6  
Gombrich, “Introduction: The Buddhist Way” The World of Buddhism, p.10. 
7  
Ibid, p.9. 
8  
KAmabhogI-sutta, A v 177. See also A ii 6. 
9  
D i 63; SumaNgalavilAsinI i 180-181. 
10  saMbAdho gharAvAso rajopatho………., na idaM sukaraM agAraM ajjhAvasatA ekantaparipuBBaM 
ekantaparisuddhaM saMkhalikhitaM brahmacariyaM carituM. D i 63.  
11  abbhokAso pabbajjA. Ibid. 
 
25

=== PAGE 33 ===
A layman, for his part, takes responsibility for providing the material needs of the 
monks, whom he sees as a fertile soil in which to grow the seed of his generosity, in the 
belief that his action will accumulate for him the merit necessary not only for betterment 
in saMsAra, the circle of life, but also help him ultimately to achieve nibbAna. In return 
for his generosity, the monk teaches him the basic moral teachings of the Buddha and 
ways to improve his kamma. To go beyond these practices, however, he needs to join the 
monkhood, which is open to all. Here although the general description applies equally to 
the Order of nuns, bhikkhunI-sAsana, we speak only of the order of monks, bhikkhu-
sAsana, because the bhikkhunI-sAsana in Theravada countries had disappeared long 
before the seventeenth century, the beginning of the focus of this study.12  
 
Secondly, “the Order preserves the scriptures”, usually considered synonymous with the 
Doctrine.13 The teaching has been, since the Buddha passed away, the guide to the 
Eightfold Path leading to emancipation. The profession of maintaining the Doctrine has 
given the Order an unparalleled position in the history of the Buddhist world. It is 
believed that the need to study and safeguard the Doctrine was emphasised by the 
Buddha himself, who said that if the monks did not engage in study and teaching, the 
result would be the disappearance of the Saddhamma [true Doctrine].14 And the Order 
has taken this task very seriously. The need for the preservation of the scriptures, 
remarks David Wyatt, a historian of Thailand, requires of the monkhood “a relatively 
high degree of scholarship and wide distribution of literacy”.15 
 
                                                 
12  The bhikkhunI-sAsana disappeared in the eleventh century in Sri Lanka. For more information see 
Skilling, A Note on the History of the BhikkhunI-saNgha (II): The Order of Nuns after the ParinirvABa, 
WFB Review, XXX, IV; Gunawardena, Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in 
Early Medieval Sri Lanka, p.39; Bartholomeusz, Women Under the Bo Tree: Buddhist nuns in Sri 
Lanka, p.21.  
13  Gombrich, “Introduction: The Buddhist Way”, p.9. 
14  A iii 176-180.. 
15  Wyatt, The Politics of Reform in Thailand, p.6. 
 
26

=== PAGE 34 ===
This emphasis on scholarship in Buddhist monasticism, according to Walpola Rahula, 
began in the first century BC. That was indeed a turning point in the history of 
Theravada Buddhism, as study became more prominent than practice.16 In the first 
century BC, after “a foreign invasion” and “an unprecedented famine”, two schools of 
opinion in Sri Lanka debated whether “learning” or “practice” was the basis of the 
sAsana, “the Buddha’s dispensation”. “Ultimately it was decided that learning was the 
basis of the sAsana, and not practice.” This decision, which went against the fundamental 
position of early Buddhism, strengthened the separation between the two vocations, 
gantha-dhura, “vocation of books” and vipassanA-dhura, “vocation of meditation”, and 
created two separate groupings.17  
 
Both vocations were probably present in the Pyu kingdom of Burma, although there is so 
far no direct evidence of the vipassanA-dhura there. However, we can conclude with a 
degree of certainty that those following the “vocation of books” were present, 
particularly at Śr´ K·etra. The archaeological findings between 1897 and 1929 at Prome 
(now Pyi), the old Śr´ K·etra, have re-written not only the early history of Buddhism in 
what is now Burma but also unearthed evidence of the excellent state of monastic 
learning, unknown to us before. Twenty gold-leaf Pali manuscripts, all excerpts from the 
Pali canon, were found at pagodas and mound hills in and around three villages, namely 
Mawza, Kalagangon and Kyundawzu, situated a few miles from the present Prome. 18 
                                                 
16  Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, pp.157-160.  
17  Gombrich literally translates gantha-dhura as “book-duty” and vipassanA-dhura as “meditation-duty”. 
Gombrich, Buddhist Precept and Practice, p.368. A more complete discussion on the two dhura can 
be found in Cousins, “Introduction” in Ananda Maitreya Nine Special Qualities of the Buddha and 
Other Essays, pp.i-ix. 
18  A summary of the findings was given by Stargardt “The Oldest Known Pali Texts … from Śr´ 
K·etra”, Journal of the PTS, XXI (1995), pp.199-213. Details also have been reported by various 
scholars over the years. They include Finot “Un Nouveau Document Sur Le Bouddhisme Birman” 
Journal Asiatique, XX , 1912 and XXI , 1913; Duroiselle, “Excavations at Hmawza” Archaeological 
Survey of India, Annual Report, 1926-1927, pp.171-181 & 1928-1929, pp.105-109; Lu Pe Win, “The 
Pali Text from Khin Ba-gon” Report of the Superintendent of Archaeology, Rangoon, 1940, pp.12-22. 
The Pali passages inscribed on those gold plates are from the Vinaya- and Sutta-piTaka. The question 
 
27

=== PAGE 35 ===
These were indeed evidence that the “vocation of books” was very strong at Śr´ K·etra.19 
All native chronicles, on the other hand, are silent on the question of the history of 
Buddhism before the Pagan period (1044-1279). 
 
At Pagan, the Sangha was generally divided into two fraternities: the village-dwellers, 
known as “monks living in monasteries” or kloN niy so sangha, and the forest-dwellers, 
known as “the lords dwelling in the forest”,  taw mlat kri, taw skhin or taw kloN sangha.20 
Among the village-dwellers, the students, or cAsaN, were perhaps the most important 
group. We do not know their exact number but we learn from an inscription dated 1101 
AD that there were a great number of monks in Pagan. In a house-building ceremony “all 
the four thousand and one hundred and eighty monks” were invited “with our lord Chief 
Monk Arahan, who was the leader in reciting the Paritta blessing”.21 Arahan, a Mon 
monk from Thaton (Sudhammapura), was credited in the Burmese chronicles with 
introducing Theravada Buddhism to Pagan.22 The number of monasteries, libraries and 
schools dedicated to the monks following the “vocation of books” also suggests that they 
were more numerous than those following the “vocation of meditation”, usually taken to 
refer to the forest-dwellers. In an inscription dated 1236 “a donor built five school 
buildings for students and a monastery for the thera in one compound”.23 Another 
inscription mentions that seven years later, in 1243, the Queen “built as many as twenty 
monasteries encircling a hollow pagoda, a library, a monastery and a hall of law, and 
dedicated three hundred pay of land, thirty slaves and fifty cattle for students of the Most 
                                                                                                                                                
surrounding the language of those passages has also been settled by modern Pali scholars: the 
language is now known to be pure Pali, not Pyu-Pali as previously considered. 
19  Than Tun, History of Buddhism in Burma, pp.52-53. 
20  Ibid, pp.91& 96. 
21  Duroiselle, Epigraphia Birmanica, II, Rangoon, p.38, cited in Than Tun, cit., p.56.  
22  Maung Tin, trans. The Glass Palace Chronicle, pp.71-75. 
23  Than Tun, pp.96-97. 
 
28

=== PAGE 36 ===
Reverend Vinayadhara”.24 And there were many other donors who supported the 
students in this way.25 
 
Meanwhile the forest-dwellers, caN araG, at Pagan were by no means living as recluses.26 
Instead, they had monasteries of their own “with hundreds of monks living in them under 
taw mlat kri, the Most Reverend Lords of the Forest”.27 They also received donations 
from the royals, who provided slaves and lands to them.28 During the Pagan period the 
majority of the forest-dwellers lived in areas far away from Pagan, such as Minnathu, 
Pwazaw, Myinmu and Monywa, where there were centres of forest monasteries. But 
“some of them” also lived in Pagan.29 According to John Ferguson, who has studied the 
Burmese Sangha, the forest-dwellers at Pagan were also known as panthaku (paMsukUla) 
gaing or the fraternity of ragged robes.30 At Pagan, the forest-dwellers were powerful 
only under King Alaungsithu (1112-1167); otherwise the village-dwellers were 
dominant.  
 
However, during the periods of Sagaing (1315-1364) and Ava (1364-1555 and 1605-
1752), there was a less clear distinction between the two professions of the monks, 
“books” and “meditation”. Certainly it was no longer possible to state that the village-
dwellers followed “the vocation of books” and the forest-dwellers that of “meditation”. 
From the Ava period onwards a particular lineage would usually trace its roots to more 
than one tradition of ordination, and often its roots might go back to both professions.31 
This is likely to explain how the concept of an ideal Burmese monk developed. It is said 
                                                 
24  Ibid, p.96. 
25  Ibid, pp.97-99. 
26  Ibid, p.120. 
27  Ibid. 
28  Ibid. 
29  Ibid. 
30  Ferguson, The Symbolic Dimensions of the Burmese Sangha, p.167. 
31  Ibid, p.164-165; Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect” Essays on the History and Buddhism of Burma, 
pp.152-153. 
 
29

=== PAGE 37 ===
that a monk should study for ten years, then teach for another ten years, after which he 
should become a forest-dweller.32 However, after ten years of teaching, if he did not 
choose to become a forest-dweller, he usually took a twin role by continuing as a teacher 
and at the same time also becoming an administrator, as an abbot.  
 
The convergence of the two vocations is described by Ferguson as one of the “type[s] of 
adjustive mechanisms” through which interaction took place between different monastic 
lineages over the centuries.33 Here, to illustrate the cross-over between the two vocations, 
we cite a famous story of two monks. In Sagaing, there was a famous forest-dweller, 
Shwe Oo Min Sayadaw, also known by his ordained name, Shin Jambudhaja, whose 
nissayas on the Vinaya-piTaka and its commentaries are still in use today.34 One of his 
contemporaries was Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw, also known by his ordained name as 
Munindaghosa and by his title, TipiTakAlaNkAra, for his fame in learning.35 The encounter 
between these two learned monks tells us about the fusion of the two vocations. It is said 
that Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw visited Shwe Oo Min Sayadaw at his forest hermitage on the 
Sagaing Hills and saw the latter sweeping the compound of a pagoda nearby. Not 
knowing who the sweeper monk was, the former asked to meet Shwe Oo Min Sayadaw 
to consult him over a work on the Vinaya that he, Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw, was in the 
process of writing. It seems the ragged robes worn by Shwe Oo Min did not help to 
identify him as a scholar known for his thorough knowledge of the Vinaya-piTaka.  
 
On learning who the sweeper monk was, Taung-bil-lar Sayadaw introduced himself and 
found that both of them had been ordained on the same day. Tradition dictates that the 
junior should pay respect to the senior by bowing to him three times and letting him walk 
                                                 
32  SaMvara, head of the Sasana Mandaing Pali University, Pegu. Personal communication. 
33  Ferguson, p.165. 
34  Pitakatthamaing, pp.181-183; PaBDitasirI, Shwegyin-nikAya thathanawin, (History of the Shwegyin-
nikAya), pp.83-85. 
35  Pitakatthamaing, pp.182-183.  
 
30

=== PAGE 38 ===
ahead if both were to go the same way. So, there was a decision to be made: who would 
walk in front when they were to leave the pagoda for the hermitage of Shwe Oo Min? 
Taung-bi-lar offered the privilege to Shwe Oo Min for his virtue of being a forest-
dweller. In fact, Swhe Oo Min himself had been a village-dweller and indeed a royal 
tutor.  But he declined and said that Taung-bi-lar should walk in front because he was 
now the royal tutor. Upon learning in subsequent discussions that Shwe Oo Min was 
writing a commentary on the same work and that it seemed to be of a better quality, 
Taung-bi-lar is reported to have stored his own version away in a purpose-built pagoda, 
without making it available to any reader. He did so in honour of Shwe Oo Min.36 Soon, 
“weary perhaps of royal viharas”, Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw “withdrew to the tiriyapabbata 
to live in the quiet of the forest”.37 Ferguson mentions that both sayadaws had studied 
under the same teacher but it must have been at different times as they do not seem to 
have known each other well.38 Here we can see pursuit of scholarship by forest-dwellers, 
and retreat to the forest by village-dwellers.  
 
From the beginning of the Pagan period, contact was maintained with Ceylon, the centre 
of Theravada Buddhism. An inscription in Pagan dated 1233 AD “mentions the 
presence” of a monk, BuddharaMsI, from sinkhuih, Ceylon, “who was then the head of a 
monastic establishment [in Pagan] to which the donor gave land and slaves”.39 
BuddharaMsI must have been one of the Sinhalese monks who were settled in Pagan. 
One inscription mentions many Sinhalese monks witnessing a donor’s “deeds of 
merit”.40 Monks from Pagan looked to Ceylon for authority. Many of them, indeed, went 
to the island for ordination and study. One of the famous scholars of Pagan, Chabada, for 
example, received his education and ordination in Ceylon. On his return to Pagan in 
                                                 
36  Ibid. 
37  Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma, p.53; PanDitasirI, pp.83-84. Also Ferguson, p.169. 
38  Ferguson, p.167. 
39  Than Tun, p.119. 
40  Ibid. 
 
31

=== PAGE 39 ===
1180, after ten years in Ceylon, he founded a new fraternity, the Sinhalese MahAvihAra 
tradition, SIhaLasangha, for which the king, Narapatisithu or NarapatijayasUra (1167-
1202), came to have “a feeling of great esteem and reverence”. 41 Chabada wrote some 
commentarial works in Pali. These included the Suttaniddesa, on KaccAyana’s Pali 
grammar, and the SaNkhepavaBBanA, on the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha of Anuruddha.42 
The trend continued even during the unstable political situation towards the end of the 
Pagan period:  an inscription of 1268 tells us of an educational mission, “under the 
leadership of DhammasirI and SubhUticanda to Ceylon probably between 1237 and 
1248”.43  
 
An even more far-reaching event in the contact between the Burmese and Sinhalese 
Sangha, however, came during the reign of a Mon king at Hamsavati, Pegu era (1287-
1539). Dhammaceti (1472-1492), himself an ex-monk, sent twenty-two monks to 
“SIhaLadIpa” [Ceylon]… “to receive at their (“the spiritual successors of the priests of 
the MahAvihAra”) hands the upasampadA ordination in the udakukkhepasImA consecrated 
on the KalyABI river, where the Fully Enlightened One enjoyed a bath”.44 On their return, 
the king had all the old chapter halls, SImA, re-consecrated and all other monks in his 
RAmaGGa kingdom re-ordained in the “pure form of the SihaLa upasampadA ordination”.45 
Altogether 15, 065 monks were re-ordained. 
 
By the eighteenth century, however, the monastic Order in Burma was stronger than the 
Sinhalese. During the reign of Bodawpaya, it was the Sinhalese who came to Amarapura, 
the capital, for ordination. After their ordination, they took back with them “a number of 
Pali texts either of Burmese authorship or better known to the Burmese fraternity than to 
                                                 
41  Ibid, p.119 & KalyABI Inscriptions, pp.8-12. 
42  Bode, pp.17-19. 
43  Than Tun, p.119. 
44  KalyABI Inscriptions, p.19. 
45  Ibid, p.34. 
 
32

=== PAGE 40 ===
the Sinhalese”.46 Those Sinhalese monks who had received ordination at Amarapura in 
1800 came to be known as the Amarapura-nikAya in their own country.47  
 
With regard to the administration of the Sangha, the main administrative work was the 
responsibility of the abbot. However, there were ecclesiastical offices such as sAsanApuin 
(old spelling of thathanabaing), supreme leader of the Sangha, and wineNdhuir (old 
spelling of vinayadhara), ecclesiastical judge. SAsanApuin was usually appointed the 
preceptor of the king but Than Tun thinks that the sAsanApuin at Pagan was not as 
significant as the thathanabaing during the Kon-Baung period.48 Every monarch had at 
least one learned monk as his tutor, to advise him on educational and religious affairs. 
SyaN DisAprAmuk (DisApAmokkha), a sAsanApuin in the reign of the last king of Pagan, 
however, advised the king also on political affairs and was despatched to China by the 
king on a peace mission.49 An ambitious king might appoint more than one tutor. At 
Ava, King Thalun had at least five tutors: Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw of Ava, already 
mentioned, and Shin AriyAlankAra from Sagaing, Shin Nandadhaja, Anuruddha Sayadaw 
and Bamei Sayadaw.50 However, one of them, Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw, rejected the capital 
and retreated to the forest just three years after Thalun ascended the throne.51 On the 
other hand, Bamei Sayadaw, a Mon monk who had fled to Ava, was so knowledgeable in 
astrology and magic that the king invited him and his eleven pupil-monks to march with 
him, the king, on all his military expeditions. The wineNdhuir or Vinayadhara, for his 
part, was an ecclesiastical judge, usually a senior monk, well-versed in the Vinaya. He 
was elected and authorised by the Sangha to decide on disputes among its members. 
 
                                                 
46  Bode, p.78. 
47  Malalgoda, Buddhism in Sinhalese Society, pp.97-98. 
48  Than Tun, pp.116-117. 
49  Ibid, p.126. 
50  ROB, II, pp.365, 467. 
51  Ferguson, p.169. 
 
33

=== PAGE 41 ===
However, during the Kon-Baung period (1752-1885), the administration of the Sangha 
became more highly organised, particularly at the highest level. Selected royal tutors 
were appointed to a newly created council, called Sudhamma. Sudhamma had been the 
name of the royal religious hall (zayat) since the Ava period. At Amarapura, the fourth 
capital of the dynasty52, Bodawpaya appointed in 1783 four sayadaws to the council. He 
called them thathanahtein, “the guardians of the SAsana”.53 He divided the kingdom into 
four territories and gave ecclesiastical jurisdiction in each to one of the sayadaws, calling 
for them to convene a meeting of the council to discuss matters that any one of them 
could not solve alone. While this concept of collective leadership through a 
saNghakamma, “ecclesiastical act”, had been the main characteristic of early Buddhist 
monasticism, such collective responsibility was new to the history of the thathanabaing 
in Burma.  
 
Kelatha, in his work, Mandalay Thathanawin (History of Buddhism in Mandalay), says 
that Bodawpaya expanded the Sudhamma Council a year later with another eight 
sayadaws, to a total of twelve.54 However, according to the royal order dated 24 May 
1784, in which is mentioned the appointment of the sayadaws55, eleven in total, not 
twelve, the four-member Sudhamma Council was neither expanded nor were its 
members included in the eleven. The eleven sayadaws were, in fact, appointed as 
examiners in the Pathamapyan examinations, which we shall discuss later in this 
chapter56, and not as members of the Sudhamma Council. Two years later, on 27 June 
1786, the king replaced the four-member Sudhamma Council with one thathanabaing 
when he appointed GuBamuninda to take charge of appointing gaing ok and gaing dauk, 
                                                 
52  Shwebo, Sagaing and Ava were used as capital by the early Kon-Baung rulers. 
53  ROB, IV, p.252. They were ŇāBavilAsa; Mingala Shwebon; MahA Mingala Shwebon; and 
Bonkyawweiyan Sayadaw. 
54  Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin (History of Buddhism in Mandalay), I, pp.258-259.  
55  ROB, IV, p.338. They were: Ma-le; Palaing; Hmundaw; Me-htee; Hanlin; Hsonhtar; Taung lay lone; 
Shwe Taung; Maung Taung; Sinte; and Katoe Sayadaw. Ibid. 
56  See pp. 85-88. 
 
34

=== PAGE 42 ===
and of religious activities in the kingdom.57 The same order also appointed twelve other 
sayadaws as vinayadhara, ecclesiastical judges.58 However, in the following year, 1787, 
GuBamuninda was himself replaced by one of the twelve vinayadharas, Maung Taung 
ÑABAbhivaMsa, who, as one of the eleven examiners appointed in 1784, had been in 
charge of copying the TipiTaka.59 
 
Mindon (1853-1878) revived the Sudhamma council, consisting of a thathanabaing as its 
head and eight other members.60 U Ñeyya, the second Maung Taung Sayadaw, who was 
thathanabaing during the reign of Pagan (1839-1847), was appointed the 
thathanabaing.61 After the thathanabaing died in 1866, Mindon did not appoint a 
successor. So the Sudhamma Council was in charge of the whole ecclesiastical 
administration until the next reign. Thibaw, the last king of Burma, appointed two 
thathanabaings, one for the new fraternity, the Shwegyin-nikAya, and the other for the 
majority, now called Sudhamma-nikAya, a name derived from that of the royal religious 
office. However, only the thathanabaing for the Sudhamma-nikAya agreed to be on the 
Sudhamma Council and thus became its head. As we shall see in Chapter Three, the 
Shwegyin thathanabaing refused even the title of thathanabaing. Nevertheless, he was in 
sole charge of the Shwegyin-nikAya, of which, in any case, he was himself the founder. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
57  ROB, IV, pp.501-502. 
58  They were: Taung Lay Lone; Mahadanwun Kyaung; Ein Shyay Kyaung; Palaing; Hmundaw; Shwe 
Taung; Bagaya; Mehtee; Sinte; Katoe; Maung Taung; and Nyaung Kan Sayadaw. Ibid. 
59  Ibid, p.414. See also pp. 91-92. 
60  Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect”, p.156; Shwe Gain Tha, Mandalay hnit taya pyi (The Centenary of 
Mandalay), p.231.  
61  Ibid & Kelatha, I, p.99. 
 
35

=== PAGE 43 ===
2.1.1.2 Royal Patronage 
As a spiritual institution, the Order attracted royal patronage. In Burma, the rulers saw it 
as their duty to use temporal power to protect the BuddhasAsana.62 The king might 
sometimes purge insincere monks or prevent them from exploiting the Order and the 
generosity of devotees63; but he also supported the Sangha with material requisites, and 
led the people in merit-making, in order to instil Buddhist morality64 and enhance their 
kamma with final release, nibbAna, in mind.  
 
As far as discipline was concerned, royal attention was given to the maintenance of the 
unity of the Sangha and strict observation of the PAtimokkha rules by individuals. In 
practice, this meant the backing of the authority of the good monks by royal temporal 
power. On the grounds of poor discipline, many monks were forced by rulers to leave the 
Order from time to time. There will be further discussion later of the purging of the 
Order by the monarch, in the context of the introduction of formal examinations. As 
already briefly discussed, to maintain the unity of the Order and strict adherence to the 
Vinaya, a system of ecclesiastical hierarchy was created by the king. 
 
As to the generosity of the king and his role in leading his Buddhist subjects to support 
the Sangha, it has been noted by many that most of the celebrated pagodas and 
monasteries throughout the country were built by kings.65 The king and other wealthy 
donors even donated lands and slaves for the maintenance of the pagodas and 
                                                 
62  Alaungpaya considered himself to have a “destined role of the defender of the faith. He had to do 
everything in his power to promote Buddhism as it was believed in Burma”. Than Tun, Introduction to 
ROB, II, p.xvi. 
63  ROB, VII, pp.i-ii. 
64  In his royal order dated 20th Feb. 1782, a month after ascending the throne, Bodawpaya spelled out his 
moral concerns to the people. He also asked people to observe the Five Precepts in the order dated 10th 
March 1782. ROB, VII, pp.i.-iii. Mindon encouraged lay people to observe uposatha-sIla 
(eight/nine/ten precepts) on four Sabbath -days each month (Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin I, pp.69-
70). 
65  Yule, Mission to the Court of Ava, p.36; ROB, I, p.163, 286; II, pp.x-xiv, 86-89; Than Tun, History of 
Buddhism, p.9; Kon-Baung set mahayazawindagyi, pp.548-9. 
 
36

=== PAGE 44 ===
monasteries.66 Here one thing worthy of notice is that in ancient Burma only the king and 
some members of the royal family had the authority and resources to donate a complete 
set of the TipiTaka because “a copy of the piTaka was more costly than erecting a hollow 
pagoda. In fact for less than one and a half times the cost of the piTaka a big monastery 
with ‘flame pediments’ could be built”.67 The king also asked the people, sometimes by 
order, to look after the monasteries and feed the monks. 68 
 
 
2.1.1.3. An Educational Institution  
However, the Order received royal patronage not only because it was the spiritual focus 
of society but because it was also an educational institution. Indeed, as has been noted, 
the measures taken by kings over the centuries were also intended to promote monastic 
education.69 This tradition continued until the time of the last king, Thibaw (1878-1885). 
In addition, learned monks would usually be invited to live in the capital, where the king 
could support them and at the same time benefit from their service; it was one of those 
monks that the king usually appointed to the post of sayadaw, royal tutor. Nearly all of 
the sayadaws were authors.70  
 
Indeed, providing education for society was the major means of recruitment into the 
Order. This was because ordination was a pre-requisite for higher study. During the time 
of the Buddha, ordination was motivated by a desire for salvation; but, centuries later, 
when Buddhism had been established outside India, study became the primary 
motivation. This was true in the Pyu kingdom from the time of the arrival of Buddhism, 
                                                 
66  For more information see Than Tun, History of Buddhism, chaps. IX (Religious Buildings) and X (The 
Slaves and Medieval Burma). 
67  Ibid, p.135. 
68  ROB, I, pp.239, 369, 377,381, 431- 432.  
69  See also p.16. 
70  See Bode, pp.16, 32, 45, 53, 55, 74; Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin in 5 volumes. 
 
37

=== PAGE 45 ===
perhaps at Beikthano, and certainly at Śr´ K·etra, right up to the early twentieth century. 
Monasteries were the only places to which people could send their children for 
education.  
 
Education at that time in principle meant the study of morality as understood in the 
Buddhist religion; it was about “the development of moral and spiritual character”71 here 
and hereafter. “Mere learning devoid of this purpose was considered worthless”.72 
Throughout Buddhist education the dominant theme was therefore kamma, the teaching 
on the intention behind our actions. Kamma taught one about good and bad actions and 
taking responsibility for those actions. Education in the monastery was to instil a sense of 
that responsibility in the student. Kamma, being the law of causality, also applied to the 
whole existence of living beings. People in the higher strata of society had accumulated 
much good kamma in the past and their present privileged position reflected that. Those 
in the lower strata, on the other hand, had not accumulated much good kamma, or 
perhaps may have even done some bad kamma, which was now reflected in their life. To 
get to a higher level in society, one had to increase one’s good kamma, and the 
conventional means for doing that was to follow the Five Precepts73; to be generous; and 
to cultivate respect towards the Sangha, teachers and elders. 
 
Those who were considered to have accumulated more wholesome kamma than even 
those in the higher strata of secular society were members of the Sangha. This was 
reflected in their spiritual gifts, in receiving ordination, which made them holy 
(monmyat), and in studying the words of the Buddha. Admiration for members of the 
Order also came from the fact that the ordained committed themselves to following the 
                                                 
71  Rahula, p.290. 
72  Ibid. 
73  An undertaking to abstain from killing, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, telling a lie and 
taking intoxicants.  
 
38

=== PAGE 46 ===
Vinaya, numerous and far superior codes of conduct to those of laymen, and that they 
sought to liberate themselves from the mundane world. This soteriological way of life 
was seen as hard to follow, for it involved not only avoiding immoral and degenerate 
actions but also the rejection of all worldly pleasure. Members of the Sangha, therefore, 
led an exemplary life and, with their knowledge of the TipiTaka, were ideal teachers in 
the eyes of the lay society. 
  
Parents sent their sons, usually aged between eight and ten, to a monastery to receive 
education; these boys were known as kyuang tha, “students” (though this term applies 
only to “temple-boys” nowadays). They received instruction in reading and writing in 
Burmese, and served their masters. Shin MahAsIlavaMsa, a poet monk at Ava, recorded 
this tradition in his famous poem, Shin MahasIlavaMsa Sounmasar (The Admonition of 
Shin MahasIlavaMsa).74 From this poem we also know that some of the students were 
residential while others came to classes only during the daytime. After one or two years 
those in residence were ordained. Many spent a few years in the Order studying, and then 
left. This temporary ordination became a part of Burmese Buddhist culture. As in all 
other Theravada countries, a boy was normally initiated as a novice, sAmaBera, if he 
received ordination before he was twenty. A young man of twenty and above would be 
given a full or higher ordination, upasampadA.  
 
 
2.2 A Description of Monastic Education before the Twentieth Century 
The entrance into the Order of those seeking education, rather than salvation, forced 
monasteries to include in their curriculum subjects which were not directly related to 
attaining nibbAna. These subjects were later to be called secular subjects (lawki phinnya 
                                                 
74  “om;wdkhrSmvnf;/ ynmvdkcsif/ ausmif;uef0ifaomf/roifwcg/oifwcgESifh/ rvmwaeh/ vmwaehvnf;/ qdkIrEdkif...” “Shin 
MahasIlavaMsa Sounmasar” (paragraph, 58) Thammata se zaung dwe (A Collection of Ten Texts), 
p.267. 
 
39

=== PAGE 47 ===
in Burmese). The point here is that the Sangha had had to redefine their curriculum. The 
aim was now not only to educate those who wished to free themselves from suffering but 
also those who had a worldly motive. The Order did well before the end of the nineteenth 
century: it produced a curriculum for general education that took account of the needs of 
both the Order and society. In essence, this curriculum included lessons or texts on basic 
moral and monastic training as well as on vocational subjects current at the time. 
Occasionally secular arts and sciences were integrated into the monastic curriculum, to 
fulfil the needs of the wider society.75 This type of curriculum was designed and 
modified by individual abbots to suit the needs of their students, and never adopted 
nationally, despite similarities in curriculum between monasteries. But we do not know 
for certainty what texts were actually used to teach monks and novices in individual 
monasteries.  
 
However, the fact that there existed some common needs in training students, many of 
whom went on to become monks, suggests that in ancient Burma there was some 
standardization of the curriculum even before the introduction of formal examinations. 
This can also be deduced from the fact that some texts were more popular and widely 
used than others and therefore may have been widely studied. Here, through a careful 
study of the biographies of leading sayadaws in their early years during the Kon-Baung 
period, we may learn of the texts they studied and thus conclude that the following texts 
may have usually formed a foundation syllabus in Burma, at least from the thirteenth 
century onwards. 
 
The syllabus included a devotional formula; accounts of the Buddha’s victory over MAra, 
“the devil”; some selected suttas; LokanIti; Paritta; rules and regulations for sAmaBera, 
                                                 
75  Wyatt, The Politics of Reform, p.4. Also Rahula, p.161. 
 
40

=== PAGE 48 ===
“novices”; the JAtakas; and three further texts considered to be essential for the study of 
the TipiTaka. A devotional formula was generally known as awkatha (Pali, okAsa) 
because it always began with the word awkatha. The word okAsa in the Pali canon has 
several meanings, including “permission”76, the one that was adopted in this formula. 
Permission was asked by one who recited the awkatha from the Triple Gem, namely the 
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. The devotional formula was also called paya 
shikho (bk&m;@dSckd; = worship of the Buddha) because that was how the Burmese 
worshipped the Buddha. Contained in the formula are a request for forgiveness from the 
Triple Gem for unmindful actions; praise of the Buddha; paying homage to the Triple 
Gem; and an expression of wishes (qkawmif;) by the worshipper, in which he usually asks 
to be freed, by virtue  of his humility and devotion, from all the woeful states. The 
awkatha was usually in Burmese and ran from half a page to a full page. But, in addition, 
a learned teacher might teach his students another formula in Pali, always in verse, for 
instance, the famous namakkAra gAthAs and the saMbuddhe gAthA. While the namakkAra 
gAthAs run to seven pages in thirty-three verses77, the saMbuddhe gAthA is only one verse. 
They were composed locally by eminent monks. The awkatha was recited by every 
Burmese every time he paid homage to the Buddha or observed the Five Precepts. This 
tradition is still alive and is unique to the Burmese. 
 
Not unlike common prayer in Christian culture, the tradition of the awkatha formula 
provided a way for the common folk to maintain contact with the Buddha. As common 
prayers may differ from one diocese to another, so did, and still does, the awkatha in 
Burma. A Burmese saying has it that “each kyaung (monastery) says a different gatha 
                                                 
76  For instance, okAsaM karoti paGhassa-veyyAkaraBAya (D i 51; M ii 142; S iv 57; Vin i 114); okAsaM 
yAcati (M ii 123). See also Pali-English Dictionary, p.163. 
77  Se zaung dwe (A Collection of Ten Texts), pp.49-55. 
 
41

=== PAGE 49 ===
(verse) and each village has its own awkatha”.78 In fact, it was an argument over 
different wordings of the awkatha between the people of two villages, who met on a full 
moon day at a pagoda in Prome in 1856, that led to a debate between two great monks of 
the time79 and contributed to the founding of one of the modern nikAyas, DvAra-nikAya, 
in Burma. The dispute centred on whether to say kAya-vacI-mano-kamma or kAya-vacI-
mano-dvAra. No common ground was achieved and thus they were unable to join 
together for their recitation.  
 
The accounts of the Buddha’s victory over MAra were poetical translations of the 
jayamaNgala-gAthas, common also in Ceylon and Thailand. The translations were made 
by different authors through the ages. The eight victories were interpreted as victories 
against the enemies within oneself as well as without. To the Burmese, therefore, there 
were sixteen victories, half of which were achieved internally and half externally. This 
explains how MAra is interpreted in Burma, both as a real god and as a personification of 
defilements within oneself. Together with the awkatha, these victory stanzas were the 
first lessons a Burmese learnt about the Buddha. 
 
Next, the student learnt the MaNgala-sutta, followed by the SigAlovAda-sutta. He 
memorised the MaNgala-sutta in Pali, and then the nissaya, before learning their meaning 
as expressed in a few Burmese poems.80 The learning of the MaNgala-sutta must have 
been very significant, as parents usually celebrated the day their son began the sutta and 
the teacher would choose an auspicious day for it.81 The sutta teaches the thirty-eight 
kinds of practice, usually known as blessings, covering, by means of explanation, every 
aspect of Buddhist culture: education, family, vocation, moral and mental development. 
                                                 
78  wpfausmif; wpf8gxg wpf7GmwpfAk'fqef;? 
79  Ok Po Sayadaw, the founder of the DvAra-nikAya, and Kyee Thee Lay That Sayadaw, famous for his 
poems on the Life of the Buddha, JinatthapakAsanI. 
80  Se zaung dwe, pp.274-286. 
81  JanakAbhivaMsa, Anagat thathana yay (Future of the SAsana), p.320. 
 
42

=== PAGE 50 ===
Once the student had learnt the MaNgala-sutta, he would be taught the SigAlovAda-sutta, 
in which the Buddha gives advice to a young man, SigAla, who took his father’s dying 
wish literally and worshiped different directions every morning. In this sutta, the Buddha 
explained what was actually meant by worshipping different directions: the way to 
worship different directions was to fulfil one’s duty and responsibility towards different 
people in society.82 As this sutta is composed in the form of poems and long, and the 
student had not yet learnt Pali at this point, it was learnt only in Burmese. Obviously, this 
sutta was chosen to instil in the student a sense of duty and responsibility, whatever way 
of life he chose to lead. After this, the student had lessons on the LokanIti, a text 
composed by a minister, AnantasUriya Amat, during the Pagan period. Arranged in seven 
chapters, the text itself is an expanded version of a Sanskrit work and deals with 
“prudential rules and principles of morality”.83  
 
Then the rules and regulations for a sAmaBera, novice, called in Burmese shin kyint wut, 
were taught. Shin kyint wut is a collection of rules from the MahAvagga of the Vinaya-
piTaka and is basically an equivalent for the sAmaBera to the PAtimokkha. It includes the 
reflections on the four requisites, namely robes, food, shelter and medicine; ten rules, for 
the breaking of which a sAmaBera is to be expelled from the Order (linga-kamma)84; ten 
other rules, for the transgression of which a sAmaBera has to undergo some form of 
punishment (daBDa-kamma)85; the seventy-five rules on decorum (sekhiyA dhammA); and 
the fourteen communal rules (khandakavatta). The text has the original Pali passages as 
well as their nissaya. It also includes explanations for each rule. The nissaya has been re-
written many times over the centuries; and the explanations exhibit differences as to their 
                                                 
82  D iii 180-193. 
83  Gray, Ancient Proverbs and Maxims From Burmese Sources Or, NIti Literature of Burma, pp.viii-x, 
1-36. For more complete information on the LokanIti see Bechert & Braun, “Introduction” PAli NIti 
Texts of Burma, pp.xxxviii-liv. 
84  Vin i 83-84. 
85  Ibid, 84. 
 
43

=== PAGE 51 ===
comprehensiveness; thus there have been many versions of shin kyint wut. Among those 
currently in use the most comprehensive was written by Shwegu Sayadaw in Pegu in 
1956. This version, reprinted 57 times in 48 years, explains all the rules with the help of 
not only the whole Vinaya-piTaka but also the various Vinaya traditions.86 Some versions, 
for example, the Mahagandhayon shin kyint wut, first published in 1852, include pictures 
to illustrate rules on decorum.87 
 
Following the shin kyint wut was the Paritta, a set of eleven discourses selected from 
various Pali NikAyas. The Paritta was memorised only in Pali; its nissaya and meaning 
were not studied, except those of the MaNgala-sutta, which we have already discussed. 
The study of the Paritta, used to ward off evil and bring blessings on appropriate 
occasions, was intended to train the students to perform rituals once they were ordained. 
Monks had to perform simple rituals, such as chanting, on a regular basis in return for 
the material support they received from lay people. The chanting of the Paritta was 
popular because people believed that it not only dispelled evil but also brought good 
luck. 
 
The JAtakas also formed part of the syllabus in many monasteries. Since the fifteenth 
century onwards there have been numerous works on the JAtaka. At Sagaing AriyavaMsa 
wrote in Pali a guide to the study of the JAtaka, the JAtakavisodhana.88 But from the 
seventeenth century, the JAtaka came to be studied in the vernacular language. At Ava, 
Taung-bi-lar Sayadaw wrote a commentary in Burmese verse (byo) on the Vessantara-
jAtaka. Thalun’s successor, King Pindale (1648-1661), had some 430 JAtaka painted at a 
pagoda at Sagaing in 1649.89 The king ordered that the captions for the paintings were to 
                                                 
86  Shwegu shin kyint wut, pp.i-iii.  
87  Tatbhava thathana (One Life in the SAsana), p.608. 
88  Bode, p.100. 
89  ROB, I, pp.467-471.  
 
44

=== PAGE 52 ===
be written in four languages, “Burmese, Mon, Shan and Yon (Lanna Thai) so that the 
paintings would please them when they came to the pagoda”.90  The JAtaka as a whole 
began to inspire more moral debate from the beginning of the Kon-Baung era (1752-
1885), featuring, for instance, in the correspondences between the kingdoms of Ava and 
HaMsavatI, dealing topics such as with war and peace.91 He learnt the JAtakas from his 
teacher, Than Htun Sayadaw, in his village, Mok soe pho.92 Bodawpaya had most 
learned monks in the capital compose nissaya on many JAtakas.93 However, the JAtaka as 
a text became accessible to lay people only in the early nineteenth century, when it was 
translated into Burmese by three scholar monks, U ObhAsa, Shin NandamedhA and Shin 
PaGGatikkha during the reign of Bodawpaya (1782-1819).94 Up to this point in the 
syllabus, the foundation course was aimed only at the moral and spiritual development of 
the student. It was at this stage that some students, aged between fifteen and seventeen, 
whose parents were poor, often had to return to lay life to work with their parents.  
 
Those who continued their study would now be taught some important texts, three 
altogether, which could be called the core texts that form the architecture of the Burmese 
monastic high school level curriculum. They were KaccAyana’s Pali grammar, the 
AbhidhammatthasaNgaha and the PAtimokkha. KaccAyana’s grammar was to provide a 
good knowledge of Pali grammar, while the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha was to give him a 
summary of the Abhidhamma-piTaka. The PAtimokkha, on the other hand, was taught as a 
preparation for the Vinaya-piTaka. These three texts, known simply in Burmese as thatda 
(grammar), thingyo (compendium) and vinee (discipline) respectively, were thus 
considered a preparation course for higher study. At the end of this course, the student 
                                                 
90  Ibid, p.467. 
91  ROB, III. pp.32-34, 162, 167-168. Some of the JAtakas referred to in the correspondence are the 
BhUridattha JAtaka (no. 543), the SaMvara JAtaka (371), the MahasIlava JAtaka (51) and the DighAvu 
JAtaka (462). 
92  Myat Thu, Alaungpaya, pp.37-38. 
93  Pitakathamaing, pp.194-197. 
94  ObhAsa, Vessantara zat taw kyi, pp.3-5. 
 
45

=== PAGE 53 ===
might choose to follow entirely the canonical texts and their commentaries, known as 
kyan-gyi (great texts); or he might choose to focus equally on these great texts and some 
secular subjects. The latter option might be taken by students who intended to pursue a 
career at the royal court, if they were to leave the Order at the end of their higher study, 
mostly aged between twenty-three and twenty-five95. 
 
Some of the secular subjects taught at the time were, for instance, astrology 
(sUryasiddhanta 
/ 
laghugraha), 
medicine 
(dravyaguBa), 
mathematics, 
magic 
(tantraśAstras) and law96, though they may have been available only in selected 
monasteries. For instance, the Lokuttara Kyaung in Taungoo during the Ava period97 and 
the Bagaya Kyaung at Amarapuran98 during the Kon-Baung period were two of the few 
institutions where such specialised subjects were available. Men with expertise in these 
subjects were in such great demand at the royal court that even if they were in the 
monkhood, their service would still be required by the king. We have already mentioned 
the Mon monk, Bamei Sayadaw, who was an expert in the Atharvaveda and who served 
King Thalun in his expeditions. But Vedasattha (Sk. VedaśAstra), “Veda scriptures”, was 
not confined to Mon monks, like Bamei Sayadaw, who volunteered to bless soldiers in 
the front lines. In fact, during the reign of Thalun’s predecessor, Anaukpetlun (1605-
1628), three sayadaws, whom the king summoned from Ava to debate with the monks of 
RAmaGGa at Pegu, were all learned not only in the TipiTaka but also in the Vedasatthas. 
The debate was arranged by the king, who had overheard RAmaGGa monks saying that 
“[a]s for the monks in Burma, there are none expert in the sacred texts and learned in the 
Vedasatthas”. The debate brought deserved recognition for the monks of Ava from their 
                                                 
95  Andrew Huxley, (Reader in Politics, School of Oriental and African Studies, London), speaking at the 
conference on “Buddhism, Power, and Political Order in South and Southeast Asia”, Harris 
Manchester College, Oxford, 14 April 2004.  
Bode, pp.50-52. See also Huxley, Andrew “Buddhism and Law: The View from Mandalay” Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 1995. 
97  ROB, I, pp.467-471. 
98  Huxley. Personal communication. 
 
46

=== PAGE 54 ===
hosts.99 Another secular subject greatly in demand at the royal court was law. In the 
thirteenth century, a Mon monk, SAriputta alias DhammavilAsa, wrote the oldest law 
book in Burma, Dhammasattha.100 Based on DhammavilAsa’s work, the tradition of 
monks studying and teaching continued to develop. For example, in the Kon-Baung 
period (1752-1885), two famous law texts in Burmese, the Manuyin (1756) and the 
Manu Kyay (1758-1760), were written.101  
 
There was another type of curriculum for those who stayed in the monastery longer as 
monks and were thus more committed to the religious life. This second category of 
curriculum was specialised, focusing entirely on the Dhamma and Vinaya, and it was 
presumed that those who studied this curriculum were committed to serious spiritual 
practice and would themselves one day become leading members of the Order. The aim 
of this curriculum was to preserve the doctrine, as the Dhamma and Vinaya are known. 
 
In this purely religious curriculum, the chief objective for which the students had to 
strive was to see the Buddha in his own words, as found in the Pali NikAyas. While one 
may question whether the texts were studied academically in the modern sense of 
modern academic study, those trained by this method had nearly every single piece of 
information from the TipiTaka at their fingertips after an average of ten years’ study. 
They learnt no sutta by heart. Their main concerns were going through every sentence of 
the Pali NikAyas and consulting information from different parts of it. The point was to 
become familiar with the Pali canonical, commentarial and sub-commentarial texts, 
known as “great texts”, by going through them thoroughly and as quickly as possible. 
  
                                                 
99  SAsanavaMsa, p.106; Bode, pp.50-51; Ferguson, p.170. 
100  Bode, p.33. 
101  Ibid, pp.86-87. 
 
47

=== PAGE 55 ===
In brief, the method employed in this informal textual study primarily consisted of two 
elements: reading a text through a paraphrasing exercise, which usually went with 
syntactical exercises; and philosophical analysis of each passage from the text. 
Paraphrasing, also known as nissaya, was done initially by the teacher, and was repeated 
aloud by all students. Every sentence and paragraph was studied. After some weeks or 
months when most of the students were considered competent, the teacher would 
delegate the task of paraphrasing to the best student in the class. He would then be 
known as zar-so, “reciter of the Burmese paraphrase”, and was treated as an assistant 
teacher. He needed to prepare himself well, reading related texts, including 
commentaries and sub-commentaries to each sutta, in advance.102 For a zar-so, study was 
more intensive than for others. Appointing a student as zar-so was one of the various 
ways the teacher assessed his students. In the course of a paraphrasing exercise, 
philosophical expositions were usually given. Students were not usually allowed to read 
the nissaya by others in their preparation for the class because that would misled the 
teacher when he assessed the competence of his students in Pali and comprehension; 
instead, students were required to work on the original text itself and a new paragraph 
would only be studied when the current one had been well digested (sar-kyay).  
 
Students usually studied a text several times, under either the same teacher or a different 
one, until they mastered it. This was called digging through the same great texts again 
and again, so that one became a real master of them. Once regarded as having dug 
through the great texts, a student became known as usrf;}uD;ayguf (kyan gyi pauk) “one 
who has dug through the great texts”, and in fact this term was the recognition of a 
scholar. 
 
                                                 
102  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbhava thanthaya, p.144. 
 
48

=== PAGE 56 ===
It is this method that we shall call informal study in the subsequent discussions because it 
had no standardised curriculum; it offered no formal qualification; and there was no 
formal assessment. Another method of study, which would over the centuries replace 
informal study, is termed formal study simply because it offered qualifications thorough 
assessment conducted regularly first at the instigation of the monarch and later also by 
the Sangha and Buddhist community leaders. As already discussed, the former 
emphasised the thorough study of a text page by page and retained the academic freedom 
of the teacher. The latter, on the other hand, as we shall see, had a standardised 
curriculum, on which students were assessed and qualifications awarded to successful 
candidates. While formal study seems more practical for an institution, like the Buddhist 
monastic community, to train its members, it would nevertheless lead to the decline over 
the years of a specialised curriculum, which values mastery of the great texts.  
 
In the absence of formal examinations, in the informal tradition of study a student’s 
qualification was assessed in many ways: he might be measured as a zar-so103; or he 
might be asked to help teach some basic texts to his juniors; or he might write or be 
asked to write a book104, and sometimes a commentary in Pali on any text he saw fit or 
one chosen by his teacher105; or he might be asked to preach on full moon days.106   
 
The teachers, especially those who were famous for teaching the great texts, were often 
requested by the king to reside in the capital, where the king and his ministers could look 
after them and their numerous students for their material needs. Lessons on the great 
texts were therefore mostly available only in the capital.  But despite such strong royal 
patronage, abbots were in total control of the administration and also of education in 
                                                 
103  Ibid, pp.133-134. 
104  SobhanasirI, MahadvAra-nikAya sAsanadIpanI, pp.134-136,323-324. 
105  Ibid. 
106  Kelatha, cit., II, pp.23-24, 124-125, 128, 131-132, 172-173, 184.  
 
49

=== PAGE 57 ===
their monasteries: they selected their own candidates for ordination and designed their 
own syllabuses. There was total academic freedom on the part of the teachers. 
 
This informal textual study, which formed the central part of Burmese ecclesiastical 
pedagogy until the end of the nineteenth century, then began to give way to the practice 
of focusing entirely on syllabuses for formal examinations. Novices and young monks 
started to come under pressure to sit formal examinations.  Here, in order to demonstrate 
how monastic education systems have changed over the centuries, we shall briefly look 
at the student life of three leading monks, Ledi Sayadaw and two of the other four, in the 
twentieth century.  
 
First, we shall look at the life of a well-known scholar and meditation master, Ledi 
Sayadaw (1846-1923), whose education was obtained exclusively through informal 
textual study. Ledi Sayadaw, also known as Shin ÑABadhaja before he set up a monastery 
at a place called Ledi, began his study at his village monastery107 at the age of ten. The 
abbot, U Nanda, taught him Burmese and gave him basic moral and monastic training 
similar to what we have described earlier as a curriculum for general education. 
Following his ordination at fifteen, ÑABadhaja studied from the same teacher 
KaccAyana’s Pali grammar, the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha, the Vithi let yo (a text in 
Burmese on the thought process), the MAtikA, the DhAtukathA, the Yamaka and the 
PaTThAna. In 1869, three years after he had received upasampadA, he went to a famous 
teaching monastery, San Kyaung, in Mandalay, for higher study. There he studied under 
the abbot, San Kyaung Sayadaw, all the Vinaya canonical texts and their commentaries. 
He repeated not only the same texts but also the Abhidhamma canonical texts and their 
commentaries under two other famous teachers, MakuTArAma Sayadaw and Salin 
                                                 
107  His village was called Zaing Pying Ywa and situated in Depeyin, near Mon Ywa in Upper Burma. 
 
50

=== PAGE 58 ===
Sayadaw (a member of the Sudhamma Council during the reign of Mindon, 1853-1878). 
Under Salin Sayadaw, ÑABadhaja became a zar-so. At twenty-eight ÑABadhaja was 
appointed a teacher by San Kyaung Sayadaw.  
 
We can see here how ÑABadhaja chose to study the Vinaya and Abhidhamma-piTaka 
several times, undoubtedly following the norm at the time and all under the informal 
textual study system. While teaching at San Kyaung monastery, he also continued to 
study with other sayadaws in Mandalay, probably some of the Sutta-piTaka. In this 
system we see not only the absolute freedom enjoyed by the teachers in managing their 
own syllabuses but also the depth of study to which the student was willing to go. As a 
result, the system produced scholars such as ÑABadhaja. He compiled in Pali works on 
important Buddhist tenets, such as the PaticcasamuppAda (Dependent Origination), the 
ATThaNgika-magga (Noble Eightfold Path), the Bodhipakkhiya dhammA (Factors of 
Enlightenment). He also engaged in an academic debate through his writing. In his work, 
the ParamatthadIpanI, also composed in Pali, he pointed out what he considered to be 
mistakes in 245 places in the highly respected work on Abhidhamma, the 
AbhidhammaTThavibhAvinI-TIkA. His criticism of this twelfth-century work sparked a 
series of debates among Burmese Abhidhamma scholars, who then wrote works in Pali 
in defence of the AbhidhammaTThavibhAvinI-TIkA.  Ledi Sayadaw was also one of the best 
scholars in the Burmese language. He pioneered writing on essential Buddhist topics in 
the vernacular language, criticising author-monks of the time for compiling work “full of 
quotations in Pali from the Sutta, the commentaries, the sub-commentaries and learned 
words from the nissayas, which are useful only for monks [for they knew Pali], but 
leaving ordinary lay people with no Pali knowledge unable to taste the Buddha’s 
teaching…”108 
                                                 
108  Ledi Sayadaw, Ledi DipanI Paung Chok (Collection of Ledi Sayadaw’s DIpanIs), I, pp.c-d. 
 
51

=== PAGE 59 ===
However, as noted earlier, by the turn of the century such informal textual study began to 
lose ground to formal study, focused on examination syllabuses, due to the increasing 
pressure faced by teaching monasteries and their students. This shift will be evident 
when we briefly examine the student life of Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa (1899-1977), the 
founder of one of the most famous teaching monasteries, and Mahasi Sayadaw (1904-
1983), one of the foremost Vipassana meditation masters, in recent Burma. Both were 
well trained in textual study in the early part of their training but came increasingly under 
pressure to sit formal examinations.  
 
JanakAbhivaMsa’s monastic education began when he was nine, at MahAvisuddhArAma, 
the headquarters of the Shwegyin-nikAya, in Mandalay. According to his autobiography, 
at the MahAvisuddhArAma he was taught only some but not all of the traditional 
curriculum for general education, which Ledi Sayadaw had been taught before he was 
fifteen. Instead, JanakAbhivaMsa, from the age ten, was taught Pali grammar and the 
AbhidhammatthasaNgaha, which were parts of syllabuses for formal examinations, called 
Pathamapyan, which we shall discuss later in this chapter.109 Although he was also 
taught twice, through the informal textual study technique, the Dhammapada and its 
commentary, which were not part of formal examination syllabuses, it was clear that the 
aim of his teacher, as well as his own, was that he sit formal examinations and this 
motivated him to focus on those syllabuses. At fifteen he passed the first level of the 
Pathamapyan examinations.  
 
It is interesting to note that at fifteen ÑABadhaja began to study the Abhidhamma-piTaka, 
whereas JanakAbhivaMsa began his examination career without having been through the 
Abhidhamma-piTaka or any other piTaka. Although he completed the textual study of the 
                                                 
109  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbhava thanthaya, pp.70-71. 
 
52

=== PAGE 60 ===
whole DIgha-nikAya and its commentaries at seventeen, he would thereafter pursue his 
studies, until he was twenty-seven through the syllabuses of two boards of formal 
examinations, the Pathamapyan, and the SakyasIha [an examination board created to 
support the study of Buddhist scriptures in British-ruled Burma,] which we shall discuss 
in the next chapter. During his student career of almost two decades, JanakAbhivaMsa 
seems to have been inspired by an education system based on the syllabuses for formal 
examinations. He repeatedly sat the Pathamagyi, the highest level in the Pathamapyan, 
until he achieved the highest marks in the whole country, a condition for attaining a 
special grade called Pathamakyaw. Even when engaged for six years in the study of the 
great texts at the MahAvisutArAma monastery, in Pakhokku, at the request of his teacher, 
ÑABAbhivaMsa, JanakAbhivaMsa came back to Mandalay to sit the Pathamapyan and 
SakyasIha examinations, despite the effort of his teachers at the MahAvisuddhArAma in 
Mandalay and the MahAvisutArAma in Pakhokku to prevent him.110 JanakAbhivamsa said 
that by the time he came back to Mandalay to sit the examinations, most of his 
contemporaries there had already passed them and he certainly felt the pressure of having 
to do the same to win recognition as a competent teacher in the Dhamma.111 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa’s contemporary, Mahasi Sayadaw (1904-1983), also known as Shin 
Sobhana before he became a well-known meditation teacher, equally felt the pressure of 
having to pass examinations. Sobhana had most of his monastic training and study at his 
village monastery and two other nearby village monasteries. He began school at his 
village monastery, Seik-khun, Shwebo, at the age of six and was ordained as a novice at 
twelve. Under the abbot he studied the curriculum for general education, described 
earlier, and by the time he was seventeen he had also learnt through informal textual 
study the whole Vinaya-piTaka, which was considered a part of the specialised 
                                                 
110  Ibid, p.160. 
111  Ibid, p.161. 
 
53

=== PAGE 61 ===
curriculum. By nineteen he had completed, under the abbots of two nearby village 
monasteries, Shwetheindaw and In-gyindawtaik, the whole TipiTaka, its commentaries 
and sub-commentaries.  
 
Although he had completed the textual study of the whole TipiTaka under two teachers in 
eight years, Sobhana would not feel competent for his future monastic career without 
having passed formal examinations. This was because “monks were considered learned 
only if they passed formal examinations”.112 Without particularly studying the syllabuses 
for the Pathamapyan examinations, Sobhana would sit all the three levels within four 
years, 1924-27, while travelling back and forth between Upper and Lower Burma.113 He 
then went to Mandalay to repeat, for nearly two years under famous sayadaws, such as 
Khyanthagyi Sayadaw and Khinmagan Sayadaw, some of the texts he had already learnt. 
For the next ten years or so, Sobhana busied himself with teaching novices and intensive 
meditation. At this point, one would think that Sobhana would not sit any more 
examinations, for he had become a well-known meditation teacher in Shwebo. But when 
the colonial government introduced degree examinations, called DhammAcariya, in 1940, 
Sobhana decided he would sit the degree examinations, which he did a year later, in 
1941, and passed with honours. This time his intention in sitting the examinations was to 
gain the trust of the meditators as a competent teacher, not only in meditation but also in 
the scriptures.114 
 
Here we can see the beginning of “the era of formal examinations” through the 
perception of two leading monks, Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa and Mahasi Sayadaw. They 
decided to sit examinations, the Pathamapyan and the SakyasIha for JanakAbhivaMsa, 
                                                 
112  SilAnandAbhivamsa, Mahasi Sayadaw payagyi e atthokpatti (Biography of the Venerable Mahasi 
Sayadaw), p.13. 
113  Ibid, pp.13-14. He missed the examinations for one year, in 1925, due to his travels. Ibid, p.13. 
114  Ibid, pp.35-36. 
 
54

=== PAGE 62 ===
and the Pathamapyan and the DhammAcariya in the case of Mahasi Sayadaw, simply 
because of the prestige brought by success in the formal examinations. Many, including 
monks, considered passing examinations synonymous with being a learned monk. The 
change in monastic education in Burma may also be noticed by comparing the two 
Buddhist councils in Burma held over eight decades apart. The Sixth Buddhist Council, 
ChaTThasaNgAyanA, held between 1954 and 1956, was dominated by the DhammAcariya 
degree holders, who had not only been trained in textual study but had also gone through 
formal examinations; but, in contrast, the Fifth Buddhist Council, PañcamasaNgAyanA, 
held in 1871, was led purely by scholars trained intensively in the system of informal 
textual study. Ledi Sayadaw was one of the few who recited parts of the TipiTaka from 
memory before more than six hundred members of the Council read it aloud together.115 
Both JanakAbhivaMsa and Mahasi Sayadaw became prominent during the Sixth Buddhist 
Council. Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa was on the editorial committee and was also one of the 
patrons, while Mahasi Sayadaw was the questioner (pucchaka).  
 
But a more radical change, not necessarily for the better, was to take place in the next 
half century. This will become clear as we discuss the life of a student monk in Burma 
today.  
 
 
2.3 Study for Formal Examinations 
We mentioned at the very beginning of this chapter that the Sangha MahAnAyaka 
Committee, the highest ecclesiastical administrative and education authority in Burma, 
described the existence of many formal examinations and the emphasis on them by 
novices and monks as “the era of formal examinations (sarmeipwe khet)”. The highest 
Sangha authorities have also concluded that “… they [students] do not have good 
                                                 
115  He recited the KathAvatthu. 
 
55

=== PAGE 63 ===
knowledge of the TipiTaka…… [W]hen they have to preach, speak and write, they are not 
able to locate information easily to do so.” Even monks who have passed the 
DhammAcariya examinations have not read some basic texts, such as the Dhammapada 
and the MahAvagga of the Vinaya-piTaka, or suttas, such as the Dhammacakkapavattana-
sutta and the SatipaTThAna-sutta. This is because the whole monastic education system is 
defined only by syllabuses for formal examinations and these texts are not in them.  
 
The majority of the “great texts” which are not part of the examination syllabuses are no 
longer studied. The teachers and the institutions themselves are under pressure to have as 
many students as possible pass examinations, to attract material support from the 
government and devotees. However, within one academic year it is impossible to 
complete, through the textual study method, the syllabus of each level. Therefore the 
monasteries no longer teach the whole text; instead, only selected chapters or paragraphs 
are studied, leaving students unable to contextualise what they study. Besides, since 
students do not read through of the texts, their Pali knowledge has deteriorated 
considerably. This has led to many students failing examinations. A quick answer to this 
problem has been to focus more on examination papers, for if a student fails 
examinations more than a certain number of times – and there is at present no limit to the 
number of times a candidate can sit the same examination - he should be expelled from 
teaching monasteries. Nowadays in Burma students who do not wish to sit examinations, 
but wish instead to go through the great texts which are not a part of the syllabuses, are 
not admitted to top teaching monasteries any more. The teaching is focused entirely on 
the syllabus. 
 
Here we will briefly describe the teaching at one of those top monasteries, Sasana 
Mandaing, in Pegu, Burma today. However, first we should give some general 
 
56

=== PAGE 64 ===
information on how a student joins a teaching monastery. If the student is of tender 
years, say ten to twelve, the normal age of entry, parents or guardian(s) have to take him 
in person to the head teacher, taik-oak, of the teaching monastery, to request admission, 
usually in June, a month before the rains-retreat begins. If the student is older and 
currently under a teacher, it is his teacher who will take him to the taik-oak. The 
interview takes places only between the two teachers, his current one and the taik-oak. 
Once he is accepted, the two teachers will usually discuss how they will jointly look after 
the academic and spiritual progress of this pupil.  
 
Then at the teaching monastery the student will be supervised every day in his learning 
and practice. The supervision is carried out by just a single teacher-monk in the 
monasteries affiliated to the Sudhamma-nikAya, which accounts for over eighty percents 
of the Sangha population; but in the Shwegyin monasteries, which has just under ten 
percents of the Sangha population, the role is split into two. An example is the Sasana 
Mandaing, where one who supervises moral training is called ah-ma-khan saya, literally 
meaning a guarantor-teacher. He is a moral tutor. The request on the part of the student 
to his prospective moral tutor to accept him into his care, and the acceptance on the part 
of the moral tutor, have to be formally made in front of all the Sangha in the monastery 
on the day the academic year begins. There is a special formula for both request and 
acceptance. The formula is rather long but in essence the student asks his moral tutor to 
admonish him on both worldly and spiritual matters; and the tutor, for his part, accepts 
that responsibility to admonish the pupil and announces it formally to the entire Sangha 
of the monastery. The point of announcing the request and the acceptance in front of the 
whole Sangha in the monastery is to involve the other members of the monastery in the 
relationship between the moral tutor and his pupil. 
 
 
57

=== PAGE 65 ===
In the Shwegyin monasteries, as part of his academic training, the student is each day 
given Pali passages to memorise by his supervisor, who in some monasteries may be also 
his moral tutor. He reads the passage and will have to recite it by heart in front of his 
supervisor the next day. If he does it well, he will be given a new passage or passages to 
read. The tutor keeps a record sheet of every recitation made by the students assigned to 
him and has to send a report to the taik-oak.  In the evening, the student is encouraged to 
recite on his own what he has learnt. There are lessons during the day. These lessons, on 
different texts, are given in a class where the teacher dictates either the nissaya or 
standardised comments related to parts of the text. The students spend most of the time 
taking down the dictation. The standardised answers generally run to just three or four 
lines. 
 
In the usual lesson there is no discussion of the contents: the most important task is to 
understand what each Pali passage means. And there is usually no homework, except in 
lessons on Pali grammar and on the Abhidhamma canonical texts. Of course, the teacher 
explains the meaning of the Pali passages. In addition, there is also no essay writing on 
any subject. These classes may number two to five a day, depending on the level: the 
higher the level, the more the classes. In between, generally about three times a day, all 
the students are assembled in a large building to learn by heart texts prescribed for their 
level. Only students studying for a DhammAcariya degree are exempt from this 
gathering, called sar-ahn-kyaung, or recitation class; this exception is to give them more 
time for reading. There is a teacher to supervise the recitation class. This teacher does not 
pay attention to any particular student; he is there to preserve order and keep the time. 
The concern of the teacher in his teaching is to cover some past questions but a more 
dedicated teacher may also identify passages on which new questions could be set in the 
examinations. All the questions and answers are standardised, and teachers in the whole 
 
58

=== PAGE 66 ===
country would dictate the same question and answer to their students, who would copy 
them in class or buy a printed book containing these questions and answers. Below is 
how 
the 
teacher 
dictates 
a 
standardised 
question 
and 
answer 
on 
the 
AbhidhammatthasaNgaha to his students. 
Q. List the phenomena that can condition result. 
A. The phenomena that can condition result are the 12 unwholesome consciousnesses  + 
the 21 wholesome consciousnesses + 52 cetasikas.116 
 
Students are prepared for many examinations each year. Central to all of them are the 
examinations conducted by the government, called Pathamapyan and DhammAcariya. 
The Pathamapyan, which offer a foundation in Buddhist scriptures, have three levels, 
and the DhammAcariya, which are for higher study, have one general degree course and 
six honours degree courses. Both the Pathamapyan and the DhammAcariya are 
conducted annually throughout the country. A large majority of monasteries follow the 
syllabuses of these two examinations. But there are also other examinations, conducted 
locally and open only to local students. Their syllabuses are closely modelled on those of 
the Pathamapyan and DhammAcariya. On the other hand, there are also other 
examinations held locally but open to students nationally.  
 
Before a novice is entered for the Pathamapyan examinations in April, he is taught a 
basic course. And in Pegu this course includes basic vinaya training for novices, for 
which there is a local examination set for all the monasteries in Pegu. The examinations, 
known as Vinaya Tankhun (The Banner of the Vinaya), are held in December and are set 
by hundreds of novices. After the examinations, the novices begin immediately to study 
KaccAyana’s Pali grammar and the AbhidhammaTThasaNgaha. They will sit no more 
                                                 
116  TilokAbhivaMsa, Abhidhamma let saung (The Gift of the Abhidhamma), p.186. 
 
59

=== PAGE 67 ===
examinations for that year. But by July, when the new academic year begins, those 
novices who have passed their Vinaya Tankhun examinations are expected to study the 
syllabus of the Pathamagne, the first level of the Pathamapyan examinations.  
 
All the candidates for the Pathamapyan examinations are expected to complete the 
syllabus and sit the examinations for each level every year. It is in order to help them to 
do so that standardised answers are prepared by the teachers on different subjects. The 
Pathamapyan candidates are entered for local examinations, called VinayAdhika, in 
December and then the Pathamapyan examinations in April. It is important to enter these 
examinations as the big monasteries compete with one another for prestige, both locally 
and nationally. The examinations require students to understand the questions and 
provide standardised answers for them. Mock examinations are held every week in each 
monastery and a fail in them incurs a punishment. The marks scored by all the students 
in the mock examinations are revealed to all on the same day, putting pressure on the 
students to study even harder for the examinations. 
 
Big monasteries may choose to prepare their students for all the most famous 
examinations in the country, such as the SakyasIha in Mandalay, the CetiyaNgaBa, a 
sister examination board of the SakyasIha in Rangoon, the TipiTakadhara, which has the 
Vinaya-piTaka, the Abhidhamma-piTaka and the DIgha-nikAya as its syllabus in Rangoon.  
This is to confer more prestige on the monastery and, indeed, on the students themselves. 
Apart from the TipiTakadhara, the different examinations have similar syllabuses and, 
apart from the Pathamapyan and the DhammAcariya, almost all the examination 
syllabuses can be and are pursued through self-study. But, ironically, despite similarities 
in the syllabuses, the success rate in these examinations is relatively low, for several 
reasons. First, the students themselves do not have time to digest all the texts because too 
 
60

=== PAGE 68 ===
many texts are prescribed for each level. Second, the similarity in the syllabuses has led 
to a situation in which question-makers avoid setting questions from the original text but 
focus on auxiliary ones, which students have not studied. For instance, instead of setting 
a question directly from the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha, the question would be set from the 
AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI-TIkA. This is again to increase the prestige of the examination 
board itself, because the board which sets the hardest questions and has the fewest 
successful candidates is considered to be of high standard, and thus receives high esteem 
among fellow scholars.  
 
The pressure on each monastery to get as many students through the most famous 
examinations in the country as they possibly can has increased over the years. In the 
1920s, Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa entered all the examinations held in Mandalay, the 
Pathamapyan and the SakyasIha. But fifty years later, monks would go for more 
examinations, to get recognition as a competent dhamma teacher. A bright monk from 
the Sasana Mandaing, Ashin SIvali (1956-), studied the syllabuses of four examinations 
boards, the Pathamapyan, the SakyasIha, the CetiyaNgaBa, and the SusamAcAra (of 
Mawlamaying) for over twenty years. That was because he had to sit them again and 
again, until he passed them. Unfortunately, he passed only the Pathamapyan and the 
CetiyaNga. Another bright monk, SUriya (1962-), who came either first or second in the 
whole country in all the three Pathamapyan levels, went to Mandalay to pursue the 
SakyasIha and Cetiyanga examinations for ten years, but failed in all of them. He spent 
ten years pursuing that recognition, but ended up reading the same syllabuses time and 
again. By the time they stopped their study in their mid-thirties, the two bright students at 
the Sasana Mandaing, SIvali and SUriya, despite having been in monastic education for 
about twenty years, had not read the Dhammapada, the Dhammacakkapavattana-sutta or 
the MahAvagga of the Vinaya-piTaka. This is simply because, as noted earlier, these texts 
 
61

=== PAGE 69 ===
and suttas are not part of their examination syllabuses. Some less gifted students repeat 
the DhammAcariya examinations for several years but in the end give up. For in the 
DhammAcariya examinations system only approximately five or six sentences from the 
prescribed Pali commentaries, namely the AtthasAlinI, the SumaNgalavilAsinI and the 
SamantapAsAdikA, are selected each year as the subject of questions. If a student has no 
idea where these sentences belong, he will not be able to contextualise them and thus 
will not be able to answer the majority of the questions. The relatively high marks 
required for a simple pass, 65%, makes it even harder for students to pass the 
DhammAcariya.   Many are also stuck at the Pathamagyi, the highest level of the 
Pathamapyan. They are condemned to repeat the same syllabuses until they have passed. 
However, these students could not turn their backs on the examination-orientated method 
of study and instead pursue the study of “great texts”, because the majority of the 
monasteries are not teaching those texts any more. 
 
However, competition between the monasteries is not the only reason behind the 
situation in which the Burmese monastic education systems have become so “fixated 
with formal examinations”.  Examinations have been consciously promoted by the 
government over the centuries. In the next section in this chapter, we shall explore how 
formal examinations came into existence in Burma. In the next chapter we shall discuss 
how the Burmese ecclesiastical education system has come to have so many formal 
examinations.   
 
 
 
62

=== PAGE 70 ===
2.4 The Beginning of Formal Examinations: Geopolitical Circumstances  
in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century 
Formal examinations began in the seventeenth century in Burma. So far it has been held 
that they were introduced by “King Thalun [who] held examinations every year for the 
shin laung [candidates for novicehood] and pazin laung [candidates for monkhood] in 
the month of nayon [June or July] to select royal candidates for ordination”.117 The 
reason for that, according to some noted historians on Burma, for instance Than Tun, 
was the decline of monastic discipline and scholarship.118 The abuse of people’s 
generosity by members of the Buddhist Order was also blamed for King Thalun’s 
actions. However, although they show the Sangha in a negative light, the measures have 
put the king in a very favourable context. King Thalun has come to be seen as one of the 
“great righteous kings”(min-taya-gyi/ rif;w&m;}uD;)119.  
 
However, these explanations are unsatisfactory. We have found no evidence to support 
these claims. In fact, far from holding examinations every year to select candidates for 
ordination, King Thalun, as we shall show shortly, did not even allow any ordination 
service to take place from 1638 until the end of his reign, in 1648. The formal 
examinations that did take place were, therefore, all held before 1638, and most certainly 
within three years, between 1636 and 1638, with the particular aim of purging monks 
from the Order. The use of formal examinations was necessary for the king because it 
was hard to screen and prove the motives of a monk according to Thalun’s six 
categories, which we shall deal with in the next section. The examinations were purely 
an academic rather than a spiritual measure and could be used as a more direct method, 
                                                 
117  Pariyatti pyinnya yay ci man kain, p.5. 
118  Than Tun, “Administration Under King Thalun”, p.125. 
119  ROB, III, p.286. See also Koenig, The Burmese Polity, pp.76-89. 
 
63

=== PAGE 71 ===
albeit still artificial, for assessing motives. This indeed would be the case in the Kingdom 
of Ayutthaya, half a century later. We discuss this at length in Chapter Four. 
 
We will now examine the circumstances surrounding the introduction of formal 
examinations under Thalun (1629-1648) and the misuse of formal examinations by 
Bodawpaya (1782-1819), in order to reduce the number of the Sangha. We will suggest 
that the principal reason for their introduction was not any major decline in monastic 
study or discipline, but rather political. 
 
 
2.4.1 War and Reconstruction in Seventeenth Century Burma 
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries especially, South-east Asian nations were 
at war with one another, consolidating their empires. In Burma, then known as Taung-oo 
(KetumatI), the building of an empire began in the sixteenth century with the conquest of 
territories by King Tabin Shwehti (1530-1551), such as Pegu (HaMsavatI), Arakan 
(DhaGGavatI), the Shan States (Kamboja), Martaban, Prome and Ayutthaya.120 He made 
the Mon capital, Pegu, the seat of his power. His brother-in-law and successor, Bayin 
Naung (1551-1581), attacked the Siamese empire of Ayutthaya, capturing Lanna, a 
principality of Ayutthaya121. However, in the reign of Nandabayin (1581-99) many of the 
territories gained earlier were lost.122 
 
Nandabayin’s brother and successor, Nyaungyan (1599-1605), who, as a commander, 
had earlier resided at Ava, ruled from both Pegu and Ava and his reign was characterised 
                                                 
120  Than Tun, 1984, “Ayut’ia Men in the Service of Burmese Kings, 16th &17th Centuries” Tonan Ajia 
Kenkyu (Southeast Asian Studies) Journal, XXI, IV, pp.401-402. 
121  Ibid; Wood, A History of Siam, pp.117- 119; Wyatt, Thailand, pp.100-101. 
122  ROB, II, p.xv. 
 
64

=== PAGE 72 ===
by wars in an attempt “to re-establish the empire of Bayingnaung”.123 It was during this 
reign that the Portuguese, who became powerful in Pegu under Tabin Shwehti, were 
defeated; many of them were led to Shwebo, the heartland of the Burman people as 
slaves.124 Nyaungyan’s brother and successor, Anaukpetlun (1605-1628), waged wars to 
regain the lost territories as far as Arakan in the west and Chiangmai and Ayutthaya in 
the east. He was killed by his son, Minyedipa (Minredeippa), who was soon in turn put to 
death by one of his uncles and an army commander, Thalun (1629-1648). It is interesting 
to note that in his last hours, Minyedipa made a plea to Thalun to be allowed to become a 
monk, which was sternly rejected. 
 
Thalun himself faced a revolt when his first coronation took place at Pegu in 1629. The 
rebels were “the men in charge of building and… Moulmein Talaings”, who had been 
traditional rivals of the Burman people, to whom Thalun belonged. The rebellion, which 
was not successful, “led to a Talaing exodus into Siam”.125 This instability in Pegu and 
other parts of the Mon country must have contributed to Thalun’s decision to move his 
capital permanently to Ava in 1635, where he crowned himself for the second time126.   
 
To expand and maintain the empire that had begun to be re-established from the time of 
his father, Nyaungyan, King Thalun built up very large armies. In 1635, Thalun ordered 
his army to be increased by 20 times, from 20,000 men to 400,000. Than Tun estimates 
the population of Burma under Thalun at two million. So one in five people were in the 
army. The target was to have 100,000 guns, 10,000 canon, 50,000 bows, 6,000 boats, and 
                                                 
123  Scott, Burma, p.131. 
124  Ibid, pp.132-133. 
125  Harvey, History of Burma, p.193. 
126  Ibid, pp.193-194. 
 
65

=== PAGE 73 ===
100,000 shields.127 However, it is very unlikely, in my opinion, that Thalun achieved this 
target; but the immense strain his policy placed upon the populace was beyond doubt.  
 
Furthermore, during his reign Thalun oversaw major reconstruction, at least in the first 
years. As soon as he came to power he caused monasteries to be built in Pegu. Indeed, it 
was “the men in charge of building his monasteries” who “plotted” the first rebellion, 
during his first coronation. In their efforts to promote the religion as well as to earn 
recognition for their pAramI, here meaning power, in the eyes of their subjects, it was the 
practice of Burmese kings to build pagodas and monasteries and to donate them to great 
monks, who were requested to come and reside in the capital. In 1635, as he moved his 
capital to Ava, Thalun also built a new palace there.128 In every construction undertaken 
by the king, everyone except novices and monks was obliged to provide free labour, or 
rather, forced labour. 
 
It was therefore during these periods of war and reconstruction that a large number of 
able-bodied men joined the Sangha; for members of the Sangha were exempt from 
conscription and forced labour. Although some may have left home after seeing no end 
to the suffering brought by successive wars, the main reason was to escape conscription 
and forced labour. The Sangha was accorded several privileges: no corvée obligation; no 
taxes; and in many cases offenders in the yellow robe were not punishable by the law of 
the land. These privileges had been afforded to members of the Sangha from the early 
days of the Order. This was evident in the conversation in the DIgha-nikAya between the 
Buddha and King AjAtasattu, in which the king said to the Buddha that he would not 
                                                 
127  Than Tun, “Administration Under King Thalun, 1629-1648”, p.119. 
128  Ibid, p.117. 
 
66

=== PAGE 74 ===
force anyone, a former servant, a farmer or a householder, who had joined the Sangha, to 
leave their religious life but would offer them homage and material support.129 
 
So if conscription was indeed the main reason for the deterioration in relations between 
the monarch and the Sangha, this raises a question: was it right for the Order to admit 
those fleeing conscription as members? 
 
The Buddha forbids the Order from ordaining anyone who is already “in the king’s 
service” (abhiGGAtam rAjabhaTam), military or civil. This rule was laid down by the 
Buddha at the request of one of his main supporters, King BimbisAra, the father of King 
AjAtasattu.130 According to the account in the Vinaya, one day King BimbisAra ordered 
his generals to suppress a rebellion in a remote part of his kingdom, Magadha. On 
hearing the news, some soldiers, realising that war was about killing, did not want to 
commit that “evil and sin” but rather wanted to do good. On seeing that the Buddhist 
Order was where one could achieve that object, they became monks. The generals found 
out and reported this to the king, who then asked the Buddha not to ordain soldiers. So it 
is clear that a soldier, conscript or voluntary, or even someone not on active service but 
on the list of reservists for service, cannot be ordained. This is to balance the traditional 
privileges afforded to the Sangha. The Order was a means of social mobility, because 
slaves and other underprivileged people could free themselves from their unfortunate 
lives by becoming monks. This was acknowledged by King AjAtasattu, who asked the 
Buddha to detail the benefits of being ordained. 
 
As far as conscription in Burma under Thalun is concerned, particularly in the first six 
years of his reign, from 1629 to 1635, there may have existed confusion. There was no 
                                                 
129  For more, see the SAmaGGaphala-sutta, D i 60-62. 
130  “…na bhikkhave rAjabhaTo pabbAjetabbo. Yo pabbAjeyya, Apatti dukkaTassa”. Vin i 73-74. 
 
67

=== PAGE 75 ===
official reserve list, nor was there any conscription law or any other law specifically 
barring people of a certain age from ordination. This confusion was the reason why he 
issued royal decrees, which we shall discuss later, dealing with the above questions. As a 
result of these decrees, the Sangha was prohibited from admitting new members, as all 
un-ordained young men were now royal servants. In fact, the absence of such laws could 
create not only confusion but also tension, as we shall see happened at Ayutthaya under 
King Narai, the subject of our discussion in Chapter Four. 
 
Under the absolute monarchy the people faced extreme hardship. Under Thalun, the men 
had to fight for the king. During the time when they were not at war, they also had to 
look after themselves by growing their own food or returning to their trade. It is 
interesting to note that on the day he ordered the purification of the monastic Order, 5 
August 1635, the king also issued another order to his senior officials to check that his 
servicemen were ploughing their fields and trading goods for their own income.131  
 
Under such circumstances, the monasteries would be attractive to more people than they 
would otherwise have been, not least because the monasteries provided not only shelter 
for those fleeing danger but also education and enhancement of social standing for 
individuals who were ordained. It seems, as we shall see shortly, that officials and 
servicemen, both of whom were regarded as rif;u|ef (min kyun), “slaves of the king”132, 
were the first to exploit this loophole, by sending their sons to monasteries, partly to be 
educated and partly to escape a life of extreme hardship.133 Given the good education 
that was provided at the monastery, a man could attain a high position in the royal court 
once he left the Order, or even receive royal status, which seems to have happened under 
                                                 
131  ROB, I, p.259. 
132  Ibid, I, p.395. 
133  Ibid, p.257. 
 
68

=== PAGE 76 ===
Thalun. So the king again issued a decree, not only barring such a short cut to high 
positions and royal rank but also condemning those who attempted to do so because 
“they were not of real royal blood”.134  
 
There were two social classes in Burma at the time: the ruler and the ruled. The ruled 
were again divided into three groups: royal servicemen, freemen and slaves. What is 
interesting is that one belonged to these three categories by birth. The son of a royal 
guard, for instance, would be regarded by the king, as we shall see shortly135, as 
belonging to the department of royal guard. Freemen were also liable to be in the king’s 
service, particularly in times of great instability, but they were not usually considered 
servicemen. Ironically, slaves were exempt from the king’s service. Monks were 
considered to be outside these categories; they did not belong to the group of freemen, 
for they were not subject to royal service, even in times of political instability. Any man 
could become a monk, although those from two groups, the servicemen and the slaves, 
required the consent of the king and their master respectively. 
 
For those whose children were not bright enough to gain admission to a monastery, their 
only alternative way to avoid potential conscription was to send their children to become 
slaves of some officials. A royal order dated 5 August, 1636, reads: “The guards shall 
not keep their children among the slaves. Do not hide your children. Investigate those 
who evade conscription.”136 Under Thalun, there were two kinds of slaves: those who 
were born slaves; and those who became slaves through marriage (to a slave). On getting 
married to a slave, a free person would become a slave if he or she decided “to follow his 
or her spouse to the village of slaves. [Therefore their children would be born slaves.] 
However, if he or she decided to remain with free people, not only he or she but also the 
                                                 
134  Ibid, pp.395-396. 
135  See pp.75-76. 
136  Ibid, I, pp.257&393. 
 
69

=== PAGE 77 ===
offspring would be regarded as free people, although his or her spouse would remain a 
slave.” 137 The king was therefore very keen to liberate the descendants of servicemen 
who had become slaves through their marriage, so that they could be enlisted into the 
royal service.138 The problem of fleeing conscription through voluntary slavery or 
through marriage into a slave family, as we shall see, was not unique to the reign of 
Thalun, but was common under all rulers for the next one hundred years. 
 
To retain manpower for war expeditions and for reconstruction, therefore, Thalun took 
several measures. First, as noted, he issued an order on 5 August 1636 allegedly under 
the guise of the purification of the sAsana. We have also mentioned earlier that Thalun 
focussed his attention on the monasteries in the more populated Taung-oo district, which 
were in one way or another supported by and connected to the officials.139 The abbots 
were ordered to “weed out” (hnin le kon) undesirable monks. The royal order divided 
monks into six categories: (1) those who wished to be teachers and therefore became 
monks; (2) those who sought the good life of a yahan, (bhikkhu); (3) those who had run 
away from debt or starvation; (4) those who had fled slavery; (5) those who wanted to 
look after their parents (using the privilege of the Sangha); and (6) those who had been 
ordained through faith in the Buddha. Only the monks deemed to belong to the last 
category were to be allowed to stay.140 However, the king did not provide ways and 
means of assigning monks to these various categories.  
 
Next, the king made a list of the sons of servicemen, to make sure they did not abuse the 
position of their fathers and, as noted earlier, evade royal service.141 That was why a 
separate order was issued on 5 August 1635 to this effect. In fact, the king made one 
                                                 
137  Ibid, I, p.258. The royal order is dated 14 January 1636. 
138  Ibid. 
139  Ibid, p.256. 
140  Ibid, pp.254-256. 
141  Ibid, p.257. See also ibid, p.392. 
 
70

=== PAGE 78 ===
other announcement on the same date, asking his officials to update the list of 
servicemen.142 The purification order, itself issued on the same day, was therefore to be 
read out first in the monasteries in Taung-oo. For it was from that area that most of the 
senior hereditary officials, who occupied most of the senior ranks in the royal guards, 
had originated and had maintained contact since the time of King Mingyinyo, the 
founder of Taung-oo and the father of Tabin Shwehtee.  
 
Another measure taken by Thalun was to increase the birth rate of the population. He 
ordered that unmarried women aged below “forty-five or forty-six” should be made to 
marry soldiers who were widowers. And from the day the order was issued, 28 
September 1638, no young man or young woman of marriageable age “shall remain 
single”. The same order also had a provision for officials to make a list of the unmarried 
people in the kingdom.143 
 
The third act was to prohibit the ordination service. This order was also dated 28 
September 1638, three years after the purification order had been announced. Under the 
order, a list of young males was to be compiled. Part of the order prohibiting ordination 
reads: “I have been in this golden capital i.e. Ava, for four years. Do not allow yahan 
[bhikkhu] ordination. Do not allow shin [sAmaBera] ordination. Call the parents and 
inform them…”144  
 
However, more than two years later, although the monasteries in one of the old capitals, 
Taung-oo, and the current capital, Ava, seem to have followed the royal order, the 
monasteries outside the capitals were still defying the order and continuing to ordain 
men. These men were descendants of war captives from Ava’s neighbours, such as the 
                                                 
142  Ibid, p.387. 
143  Ibid, pp.294, 391-398; Than Tun, “Administration under King Thalun” p.130 
144  Ibid, p.294. 
 
71

=== PAGE 79 ===
Shan States, Lanna, Ayutthaya, Manipur and Mon; these ethnic communities had been 
relocated to populate the Ava kingdom; and some of them were located in Panya, near 
Ava, where they were made to serve in the royal guards.  The king, therefore, had to 
issue two directives, one in April 1641 and the other in May 1644, to implement the 
order prohibiting ordination strictly among these ethnic people. Following the first 
directive, the king asked his officials to interview the monks from the minority ethnic 
backgrounds. Part of the order reads: “when interviewing the yahans, leave out the 
Myanmar yahans [The native and majority ethnic group of Ava had been covered by the 
order dated 28 September 1638, which banned all ordination ceremonies.]. Interview the 
Shan, Yon [Lanna], Yodaya [Siamese of Ayutthaya], Dawei [people from Dawei 
Province], men from Tanessarim, Talaing, Kala [Indians] yahan and thamane [monks 
and novices], [from whose communities] men still become ordained”. 145 When, 
however, the officials first began to summon the monks to their offices for interview 
instead of going to the monasteries, the king cautioned them that this would damage the 
image of Myanmar naing ngan (Myanmar Kingdom) in the eyes of outsiders in that the 
“Myanmar people did not trust even their monks”.146 This was because traditionally 
monks and novices had nothing to do with the administrative offices run by laypeople, as 
they were answerable only to their abbot. For the monks and novices to go to the 
laymen’s administrative offices would certainly arouse curiosity and suspicion among 
ordinary people. As a result, the monks and novices were now to be interviewed in their 
monasteries, not in the offices of the officials. 
 
The second directive was also aimed at “Mon, Yun, Shan, Kathe [Manipuri], Yodaya, 
Dawei who became yahan and thamane”. But what is unique to this directive is the 
king’s expressed doubt about the motive of these monks, whom he called “thila thadin 
                                                 
145  ROB, I, p.427. 
146  Ibid, p.427. 
 
72

=== PAGE 80 ===
the [those who observed precepts] and the servants of ministers. The king said that 
“although these thila thadin the were under the instruction of a teacher, most of them 
were not interested [in instruction].” It was therefore “reasonable to interview them”. 
Apart from the monks, “the people who had been asked by the ministers to do various 
jobs and thus entered or left the capital” were also questioned.147 This shows that the 
monasteries and some high officials were suspected by the king of aiding some people to 
evade conscription. 
 
It was thus primarily to prevent the able-bodied from fleeing conscription and forced 
labour in the reconstruction of his kingdom that King Thalun introduced for the Sangha 
the formal examinations. However, we have no record of any syllabuses or texts on 
which the monks were supposed to be examined. This was because it was hard to 
develop a proper curriculum in the three years, between 1635 and 1638, during which the 
examinations may possibly have been held. In fact, the examinations, as we have noted, 
did not proceed after 1638, due to Thalun’s earlier dictates.  
 
After the death of King Thalun, the kingdom of Ava began to decline, due partly to the 
political instability resulting from the overthrow of the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) in 
China, and partly to some weak rulers at Ava. When Pintale (1648-1661) succeeded his 
father, (Thalun), Yunhli, the last of the Ming dynasty, and his defeated army were 
exacting levies from Mong Mao and Senwi in the Shan States and preparing from 
Nankin to make a last stand against their enemy, the Manchu Tartars. When they did 
attack the Tartars in 1658, they were defeated and sought refuge at Ava. It was when 
they were on their way there that Yunhli’s followers destroyed Burmese garrisons and 
frightened the people. But when he and his men arrived at Ava three years later, Yunhli 
                                                 
147  Ibid, p.440. 
 
73

=== PAGE 81 ===
apologised to King Pintale for the deeds of his men and gave him a hundred viss of gold. 
Meanwhile the Mon at HaMsavatI, who had earlier been summoned to aid Ava when 
Yunhli’s men ransacked parts of it, deserted and fled to Siam. To recapture the Mon, 
Pintale sent an army to Siam but it was repulsed. It was the instability and the increase in 
population at Ava resulting from the arrival of the Chinese, and the consequent scarcity 
of rice, that led to the downfall of Pintale.148 
 
His successor and brother, Pyi (also spelled Pye) (1661-1672), was suspicious of Yunhli 
and his followers at the outset and soon arranged a ceremony for them at a pagoda, 
ThUpArAma, at Sagaing, to take an oath of allegiance. This turned into a battlefield 
because the Chinese thought they were about to be slaughtered by the new king. Yunhli 
and some of his men survived, only to be handed over to the Tartars when they came a 
year later to demand Yunhli’s head. 149 By the end of the next reign under Minrekyawdin 
(1673-1698), Ava had become so weak that the Manipuris, who had once paid tribute to 
Bayin Naung (1551-1581), began to raid and loot many areas of Ava, and this was to 
continue until 1749.150 Meanwhile the Mon, whose kingdom had been destroyed by 
Tabin Shwehtee a century earlier, had re-established their kingdom at HaMsavatI, and 
eventually were strong enough to conquer Ava itself in 1751. 
 
On the other hand, during these waning decades that followed Thalun, successive kings 
showed signs of piety by building pagodas and monasteries in the capital. For example, 
Pintale built Ngathatgyi [five spires] pagoda and shrine, containing a large Buddha 
image. He also completed the construction of a huge Sinhalese style pagoda, 
Kuanghumdaw, near Sagaing, started by his father, Thalun.151 King Sane (1698-1714) 
                                                 
148  Phayre, History of Burma, pp.136-138; Harvey, Burma, pp.196-199 & Scott, Burma, pp.138-139. 
149  Phayre, p.139 & Harvey, pp.198-201. 
150  Phayre, p.139. 
151  ROB, I, pp.467-471. 
 
74

=== PAGE 82 ===
built the Manaung pagoda, also in Sagaing district. His successor, Taninganwe (1714-
1733), built the Lawkamanaung pagoda at Ava. The monasteries they built were mostly 
for the Sayadaw, the royal tutor, and a few other learned monks.152 
 
However, despite expressing their piety by building pagodas and monasteries, these 
kings also continued to prohibit ordination ceremonies for servicemen and their sons. But 
there is no evidence so far to suggest that the ban in the post-Thalun period went as far as 
Thalun’s (dated 28 September 1638), when the ban was applied to all men. Instead, 
Thalun’s successors focussed on prohibiting ordination ceremonies for “royal servants” 
or “slaves of the king” (rif;u|ef), because once ordained they would no longer be in royal 
service.   
 
In this connection, there are three surviving royal orders, each issued by a different 
monarch. The first order was issued by Pyi (1661-1672), the second son of Thalun, dated 
14 June 1666. Pyi said that “royal servants are the slaves of the king, and must not marry 
people who are not in the royal service.” This was because there was the likelihood of 
losing the offspring of the royal servants to social groups such as ordinary slaves, who 
were exempt from conscription. The king also modified the social rule on marriages that 
had already taken place between a slave and a free person (alutthu/tvGwfol) as defined 
earlier by his father, Thalun. Thalun left the decision to the couple of a mixed marriage 
between a slave and a free person whether or not their children should become free 
people or be born slaves, depending on which social group the couple joined after 
marriage. Pyi, however, overrode that decision and ruled that regardless of which social 
group, free or slave, the couple chose, “two thirds of the children would be free and only 
one third would remain slaves”, apparently to increase the population of free persons and 
                                                 
152  Pitakathamaing, pp.158, 171, 206 & 209. 
 
75

=== PAGE 83 ===
thus also of servicemen.153 The king, however, did not say how that numerical definition 
would work if the couple had only one or two children. 
 
The second decree, dated 10 April, 1679, was by Minrekyawdin(1673-1698).154 He 
categorised royal servants into twenty-six types. They included not only guards of 
different kinds but also physicians, astrologers, gardeners, all youth of Shan origin and 
all war captives from Chiangsen.155 This decree refers to men from these groups who had 
not received ordination and said that “they must not become shin pazin [novice and 
monk]. But those who had already been ordained may stay in the monastic Order.”156 As 
to marriage between various social groups, Minrekyawdin allowed intermarriage 
between his twenty-six types of royal servants. The status of the offspring in royal 
service, however, was to be decided by which group their parents had chosen after their 
marriage. This meant that when a son of educated parents, whose learning automatically 
made them royal servants, married a daughter of a guard, and decided to live in the 
village of the royal guards, their offspring would be enlisted in the royal guards. 
However, if a royal servant married a slave and had children, Minrekyawdin, like his 
predecessor, Pyi, said that two thirds of the children would be born free and one third as 
slaves. It is interesting to see the relationship between poverty and slavery and how 
popular it was to be a slave, because the king warned: “without actually being in debt, 
royal people must not pretend and live a life of dependence on a creditor. Even with 
some debt, people should afford to pay and free themselves. And if a royal servant is in 
debt, he should be helped to pay his debt from the royal exchequer.” The last decree was 
issued by Taninganwe (1714-1733), who by and large re-inforced his predecessors’ 
                                                 
153  ROB, II, p.152. 
154  Ibid, pp.176-178. 
155  Ibid, p.176. 
156  Ibid. 
 
76

=== PAGE 84 ===
decrees.157 On mixed marriage, Pyi’s definition was reaffirmed, and on ordination 
Minrekyawdin’s order was restated. Taninganwe also warned all royal servants against 
seeking ordination. But those already ordained were allowed to stay in the monkhood.158 
 
As far as monastic education in the post-Thalun period is concerned, at royal monasteries 
in the capital and the surrounding areas, learning seems to have continued. The 
Pitakathamaing (History of the PiTaka) by Maingkhaing Myosa, the chief librarian under 
Mindon (1853-1878), mentions a number of works written during this period.159 The fact 
that works on the nissaya literature were produced in almost all the reigns from the time 
of Thalun indicates that there were students learning religious texts, because a nissaya 
was mainly and still is for students rather than scholars. 
 
With regard to formal examinations, we can infer from the limited evidence that there 
must have been some changes after the death of Thalun. Instead of employing formal 
examinations as an instrument to purge the Order, Thalun’s successors seem to have 
come to use them as a means of gaining merit. A royal order issued in 14 March 1674 
(?), by Minrekyawdin (1673-1698), a year after he came to the throne, reads: “Do 
meritorious deeds such as holding annual examinations and ordinations of monks and 
novices as usual.”160 This change in the use of formal examinations resulted from the fact 
                                                 
157  Ibid, II, pp.337-341. 
158  Ibid, p.337. 
159  Pitakathamaing, pp.158, 171, 173, 180-181,198-199, 204, 212 & 223. 
160  ROB, II, pp.108-109. The date of this order in the ROB, II, is approximate. A different date is given 
by Than Tun as 14 March 1574, which means the order was issued by Bayin Naung (1551-1581). But 
Than Tun himself expresses doubt over the date he has given because the language does not seem to 
belong to that period. However, it is clear to us that this royal order certainly belongs to one of the 
reigns of Thalun’s immediate successors, namely his two sons, Pintale (1648-1661) and Pyi (1661-
1672) or even Minrekyawdin (1673-1698). This is because the order contains the names of two 
monks. One of them is “Lokuttara Sayadaw”, a famous astrologer from Taung-oo, who refused to 
come to Ava in 1648 when invited by Thalun (1629-1648), but agreed to come and supervise the 
celebration of the Kaunghmudaw Pagoda in 1649 when invited by Pintale. (ROB, I, pp.467-471) The 
other is “Akyaw [A]lankA Sayadaw”. This could be AggadhammAlaNkAra, the author of the MAtikA 
ayakauk (Analysis of the MAtikA of the DhammasaNgaBI), mentioned in the Pitakathamaing. 
Elsewhere AggadhammAlaNkAra is also known by his title as TilokAlaNkAra. Pintale converted the 
palace of his father into a monastery and donated it to this learned monk. So, AggadhammAlaNkAra is 
 
77

=== PAGE 85 ===
that during Thalun’s time, as already explained, ordination ceremonies were banned and 
even after him the ban continued to be imposed on people from a large number of 
professions. So there was no need to purge the Order any more. Instead, the kings seem 
to have turned their attention to bright students already in the monasteries and to have 
sponsored their ordination ceremonies.161 Thus candidates who had been ordained in 
simple ceremonies had temporarily to leave their robes because all the candidates for the 
examinations were required to be candidates for ordination as well. This meant that they 
disrobed just before the examinations and were re-ordained immediately afterwards. This 
must have been how the terms pathama shin laung and pathama pazin laung or 
“excellent162 candidate for royal examination” came into existence. It is to this modified 
tradition of formal examinations that the Kon-Baung kings such as Bodawpaya would 
refer as Nyaung-yan dynasty examinations.  
 
 
2.4.2 Attempts to Popularise Formal Examinations and their Excessive Use  
under Bodawpaya (1782-1819) 
In this section we shall discuss how Bodawpaya (1782-1819), another strong monarch, 
made excessive use of formal examinations during his rule as a tool to control the 
Sangha, whose resistance frustrated the king. We shall first give a brief overall view of 
the geopolitical situation during his reign. 
 
                                                                                                                                                
also known as Nankyaung Sayadaw or Palace Monastery Sayadaw. Pitakathamaing, pp.185-186. See 
also Ferguson, cit., p.172. 
161  For more information see SirIsobhana, MahAdvAra-nikAyavaMsadIpanI, p.195-197. 
162  Pathama, a Pali word in origin, means in Burmese first or excellent and can be employed as an 
adjective, as in pathama-dansar, “excellent quality”. We doubt that it indicates “first” in its normal 
sense, for the examinations were not to select a candidate for the first prize nor does the system seems 
to place emphasis on competition among candidates but selected any one who met the required 
standard. Until the present day, the name of this state sponsored examination is Pathamapyan 
samaybwe, “The Excellent Examinations”; the word pyan retains its old meaning of oral test, making 
it clear that the system gives learning by heart an important role. 
 
78

=== PAGE 86 ===
The kingdom of Burma in the second half of the eighteenth century was not different 
from the Burma that we have seen in the early seventeenth century: the king and, by his 
command, his subjects were constantly at war. Ava, the capital, was overrun in 1752 by 
the Mon from HaMsavatI, though they were soon driven out by Alaungpaya (1752-1760), 
the father of Bodawpaya and the founder of the Kon-Baung dynasty (1752-1885). In fact, 
Alaungpaya, who rose from being a village headman in Shwebo through his courage and 
military ability to become the leader of the ethnic Burman people, in 1752 not only 
successfully drove out the Mon who only a few months earlier had overrun Ava, but 
within five years also conquered, indeed ended, the Mon kingdom of HaMsavatI once 
and for all.163 Alaungpaya then began to attack Ayutthaya, the Siamese capital, a mission 
that was unsuccessful because of a shortage of food and other logistic supplies.164 
Indeed, it was during the Ayutthaya campaign that Alaungpaya himself was killed in 
1760. His eldest son and successor, Naungdawgyi (1760-1763), continued his mission to 
subdue Ayutthaya, but it was his second son, Hsinphyushin (1763-1776), who fulfilled 
his father’s ambition when he ransacked and ended the kingdom of Ayutthaya in 1767.165  
 
Bodawpaya, from the day he came to the throne through a coup in February 1782, seems 
to have been determined to follow in the steps of his father and brothers. But before 
embarking on his military conquest he had to crack down in the capital, Ava, on the 
remaining supporters of his predecessors, Singu (1776-1782) and Maung Maung, who 
succeeded Singu, his father, for just seven days.166 Both Singu and Maung Maung were 
executed. The executions were part of the succession problem of the house of 
Alaungpaya. However, although Bodawpaya was able to suppress these remnants in the 
                                                 
163  ROB, III, p.xxiv & Phayre, pp.149-166. 
164  ROB, III, p.xxxii; Letwe Nawratha, Alaung mindayagyi ayaydawpon (The Conquests of Alaungpaya), 
p.141; Dwinthin Taikwun Mahasithu, Alaungpaya ayaydawpon (The Conquests of Alaungpaya), 
pp.226-28. See also Phayre, p.169. 
165  ROB, III, p.xxxv; & Phayre, p.190. 
166  Ibid, IV, p.xxiv; Harvey, p.264; Phayre, p.209. 
 
79

=== PAGE 87 ===
capital, at least for the time being,167 in a matter of weeks, it took him eight months to 
defeat his enemies outside the capital, who were also attempting to overthrow him.168 
 
However, even before the total elimination of these internal enemies was achieved, 
preparations for major campaigns against neighbouring kingdoms had already begun. 
Two months after assuming power, in April 1782, Bodawpaya started to organise his 
fighting forces, summoning all able-bodied men to centres where they were formed into 
units. This was because at that time there was no standing army. Fourteen months later, 
in June 1783, the organisation of the armed forces was completed. The forces, in addition 
to more than two hundred officers, consisted of 21,769 men, divided into 31 regiments 
and four divisions, three-quarters of which were the army and the rest the navy.169 
 
The troops were ordered to march under the leadership of the crown prince, 
Bodawpaya’s son, to the kingdom of Rakhaing, also known by its classical name as 
DaGGavatI. This first major campaign was motivated, according to Bodawpaya, by the 
need “to suppress the unjust and the criminals in the Rakhaing, DaGGavatI country, where 
the sAsana was in decline and where there existed several autonomous minor rulers; to 
establish [that country] in the right belief; and to cause the sAsana to prosper”.170 The 
kingdom of DaGGavatI was crushed and its last monarch and his subjects, numbering 
around 20,000, were led away in February 1785 by the triumphant troops to Amarapura, 
the new capital built by Bodawpaya a year after he came to the throne.171 The biggest 
trophy carried to Amarapura, however, was the famous bronze statue of the Buddha, 
                                                 
167  In July 1785, Prince Pindale and one of the king’s secretaries, Kyaw Saw Nawratha, rebelled but were 
arrested and given a death sentence. ROB, IV, p.456. 
168  ROB, IV, p.xxiv. On 4 October 1782, two commanders, Min Ye Myat Hpone and Gamani, attempted 
to seize the palace but were captured and executed.  
169  ROB, IV, pp.388-395; Harvey, pp.267-267. 
170  ROB, IV, p.329. [My translation] 
171  Harvey, p.268. 
 
80

=== PAGE 88 ===
called MahAmuni.172 (The temple in which the MahAmuni is now enshrined in Mandalay 
is one of the most famous places of worship in Burma.) 
 
Barely five months after the Rakhaing campaign had ended, another major military 
expedition began. In July 1785, Bodawpaya sent troops to annexe Siam, now with its 
new capital in Bangkok, to the Burmese empire. This Siam campaign, which lasted 26 
years, from 1785 to 1811, was a failure not only at the first attempt but also in successive 
endeavours, despite the king leading his troops in person on some of the expeditions.173 
It was during one of these attempts in 1809 that the crown prince, who led the 
expedition, was killed.174 In this long campaign against Siam, we have no record of the 
total number of troops. However, in the last despatch, in 1811, the number of troops was 
mentioned as 80,000.175 
 
After the unsuccessful campaign against Siam, Bodawpaya began to turn his attention to 
Assam and Manipur. Unlike the earlier two major campaigns against Rakhaing and 
Siam, a military expedition to Assam and Manipur was first undertaken, in 1813, at the 
request of one of the two parties in the power struggle between the Assamese Shan and 
the Manipuri princes, who wanted Burmese help to defeat their rival.176 For Burma, the 
request by a Manipuri prince was an opportunity to expand her influence. From the 1813 
intervention, Burma therefore came to regard Assam and Manipur as a tributary state and 
would continue to intervene in all further power struggles; this led to “clashes with the 
British Indian empire”177 that came to be known as the first Anglo-Burmese war (1824-
                                                 
172  Ibid, p.268. 
173  ROB, IV, p.xxvi – xxviii & Harvey, pp.271-272. 
174  ROB, p.xxix. 
175  Harvey,  pp.272-3. 
176  Letwe Nawratha, Alaungpaya, pp.136-141; Dwinthintaikwun Mahasithu, Alaungpaya, pp.226-231. 
177  Scott, p.188. 
 
81

=== PAGE 89 ===
1826) in the next reign, that of Bagyidaw (1819-1837), the son and successor of 
Bodawpaya. 
 
When engaging in these military campaigns, all able-bodied men, as noted earlier, were 
conscripted, always in haste, just before the order to march arrived. Regarding the 
conscription of men into the fighting forces, Sangermano, an Italian missionary at Ava 
during the time of Bodawpaya, said that men left “their sowing, reaping, and whatever 
occupation they may engage in” when ordered to march to war.178 For those military 
campaigns, the first to be conscripted were men in the capital. Even the scribes who were 
employed by the king to copy the TipiTaka were taken into the service. That can be seen 
from at least three royal orders in which the king asked his officials to exempt the scribes 
and return those of them who had been conscripted.179 One of the orders was prompted 
by the thathanabaing, who complained of the scribes being forced to enter the armed 
forces.180 Men from as far as the Shan States under different Saophas, the ruling princes, 
and the old Mon kingdom181 were also conscripted. Even after the war had begun, 
recruits from various towns in all parts of the kingdom were taken and sent to the front 
lines.182 Recruits fleeing the battlefield or men fleeing conscription were condemned to 
death and were burnt alive with their families.183 Provincial governors were ordered to 
find men who might have fled and hidden in the area under their control. A failure to 
find a runaway would bring the governors the same fate.184 
 
                                                 
178  Sangermano, Burmese Empire A Hundred Years Ago, p.99. 
179  ROB, IV, pp.414, 482-483. 
180  Ibid, p.414. 
181  Mon recruits were taken from towns such as HaMsavatI, Martaban, Sittang, Yunzalin, Dala and 
Bassein. ROB, VI, pp.776, 804, 838, 849, 851. 
182  Ibid & p.836. 
183  Ibid, IV, pp.652 & 855. 
184  Ibid. 
 
82

=== PAGE 90 ===
The war caused enormous hardship to the people at large. There was therefore unrest 
among the poor. The first outbreak of this took place in the old Mon kingdom in 
September 1783, when the attack on Rakhaing was under way.185 But the unrest was by 
no means confined to the Mon people. Less than a year later, according to Bodawpaya’s 
own account, in August 1784 some Burman people also revolted. The king ordered 
ruthless suppression. But the unrest seems to have continued for at least several years, 
for we see that the king ordered in September 1787 any headman who could not suppress 
those public disturbances to be sent to “Chiang Mai war zone and made to go in front” as 
punishment for his failure.186  
 
It is in these circumstances that we should examine the Sangha and its relationship with 
Bodawpaya; and the latter’s excessive use of formal examinations as a tool to control the 
former. The Sangha was strong when Bodawpaya ascended the throne: there were five 
thousand monks and novices in the capital alone.187 Their number was recorded when the 
king invited them in October 1782 for seven days to receive alms and robes in the palace. 
The number was very high given that the population of the capital and its surroundings 
was estimated at only 200,000.188  
 
But what may have been more worrying for the king than the high number was the 
potential involvement of some monks in conspiracies against him. Two months after the 
king seized the throne, in 30 March 1782, four monks were forced to leave the Order and 
then exiled to different forests “for not practising towards achieving magga [the path] 
and phala [fruit] and for befriending lay people and engaging in political discussion”.189 
                                                 
185  Harvey, p.265. 
186  ROB, IV, p.593. 
187  Ibid, p.xxiv. 
188  Sangermano, p.68. 
189  ROB, IV, p.233. The monks were Kyaik-bhandaing yahan [yahan is bhikkhu in Burmese]; Thawutthi 
yahan; Sipar yahan; and Htantapin yahan. 
 
83

=== PAGE 91 ===
These monks are not identified by their ordained names, but by the names of their 
villages, indicating that they were abbots of their village monasteries. The involvement 
of abbots in a plot against the king can, therefore, indicate the existence of some 
considerable political opposition among the people.  
 
However, if there existed a conflict between the Sangha and Bodawpaya, it was due not 
so much to the Sangha’s interference in politics, for there is no other evidence than the 
above mentioned, but rather to the king’s own interference in monastic education. Four 
months after ascending the throne, Bodawpaya asked the senior monks to examine the 
knowledge of the monks on religious texts,190 although it is not clear how, why and on 
which texts the monks were examined. Two years later, on 12 March 1784, the king 
asked the sayadaws “to continue to examine novices and monks who had not been 
examined”. The king also said that, among those already examined, some knew the 
sikkhApada, “monastic rules and regulations” well, but some did not, and he inquired 
“who built monasteries for those who do not know the sikkhApada; it is no use,” 
continued the king, “to either the monk or the donor if the monks do not know anything 
and live in the monastery.” 191 Despite the king’s mention of sikkhApada, there is again 
no mention of what texts were used to examine the monks.  
 
In the meantime, Bodawpaya revived the robe controversy between the “one-shoulder” 
and the “two-shoulders”. The controversy has been studied by many scholars and so we 
have no reason to repeat it here.192 However, three points which have so far been 
overlooked should be made here regarding the robe controversy. First, the controversy 
focussed only on the novices (sAmaBera), and not the monks (bhikkhu). Second, the 
controversy was more than an argument about covering the shoulders. In fact, those who 
                                                 
190  ROB, IV, p.xxiv. 
191  Ibid, p.316. 
192  See Thathanalinkara sardan, pp.186-233; Ferguson, pp.176-199; Mendelson, pp.58-61. 
 
84

=== PAGE 92 ===
believed in covering one shoulder also asked the novices who were their pupils to tie 
round their waist a saNghATi, one of the three pieces of robe usually reserved for 
bhikkhus, and to wear a hat. This led to those who argued for covering both shoulders to 
point out that a saNghATi was not for novices but only for bhikkhus. These distinctions 
have been overlooked by western scholars such as Bode, Mendelson and Ferguson, 
although the relevant royal orders and the native chronicles clearly pointed to them. The 
last point is related to Bodawpaya and the robe controversy. We should bear in mind that 
the one-shoulder party had been weakened twice already by two predecessors of 
Bodawpaya. Hsinpyushin (1763-1776) exiled the leader of the group, Atulayasa 
Sayadaw; and Singu (1776-1782), who revived the debate, had also backed the two-
shoulder party and banned the one-shoulder. Moreover, the champion of the two-
shoulder party during the reign of Bodawpaya was Bagaya Sayadaw193, the same scholar 
who had already defeated Atulayasa Sayadaw in the previous reign. Now there was 
nothing new to be said or banned any more and it was therefore unnecessary for 
Bodawpaya to revive the debate. In fact, Bodawpaya needed only to implement the order 
passed by Singu, whom he had executed. 
 
Returning to monastic education, Bodawpaya took several measures to attract candidates 
to enter formal examinations. They were called Pathama sar taw pyan, “excellent 
candidate for royal examination”, which soon came to be known by its abbreviated form 
Pathamapyan. The first of the measures was to appoint twelve examiners, as we 
mentioned earlier194, in 1784. The twelve sayadaws were to examine only one candidate 
at a time. But the sayadaws may have thought it unnecessary for so many examiners, 
most of whom were learned and had been royal tutors, rAjaguru, since the previous reign, 
to be examining just one candidate. Some of the sayadaws may have also regarded 
                                                 
193  See also p. 92. 
194  See also p. 34. 
 
85

=== PAGE 93 ===
formal examinations themselves as unnecessary. So many of them did not turn up. The 
king, therefore, in his royal order dated 8 July 1785, rebuked the sayadaws when he said: 
“Sayadaws must not absent themselves. Examinations are the affair of the sAsana. I have 
heard that they did not come, even when summoned. Unless ill, do not evade the duty. It 
is the business of the sAsana.”195 This decree is extraordinary for the three points it 
contains. First, Bodawpaya made a point that formal examinations were “the affair” and 
“the business of the sAsana”. Second, the king was so desperate that he decreed that all 
the sayadaws must enter at least one pupil of their own for the Pathamapyan 
examinations.196 And, lastly, a Buddhist monarch treated the senior and learned 
sayadaws with little respect. In fact, the king made no secret of his disrespect for the 
sayadaws when he asked the commissioner of religion, mahadanwun, “to report every 
six months if the sayadaws were free from corruption in their assessing of the 
candidates”.197 
 
The second measure was designed to popularise the formal examination, by rewarding 
candidates for entering the examination.198 The system of rewarding successful 
candidates with materials and positions in the hierarchy, argued King Bodawpaya, “was 
intended to benefit both teacher and pupil not only in this life but also in the next”.199 We 
will first describe the rewards the king bestowed upon the candidates for the monkhood 
or pazin laung levels. On their way to the examination hall, Sudhamma,200 all candidates 
were dressed in royal costume, wearing jewels and rings; anyone who entered for the 
preliminary pazin laung level had thirteen people to carry him on a palanquin and to 
                                                 
195  ROB, IV, pp.447-453. 
196  Ibid, p.447. 
197  Ibid. 
198  ROB issued on 8 July 1785. Ibid, IV, pp.450-452. 
199  Ibid, p.447. 
200  Sudhamma was the headquarters of the ecclesiastical administrators appointed by the king. It is from 
this word, Sudhamma, that the largest nikAya in Burma now derives its name. 
 
86

=== PAGE 94 ===
bring royal requisites associated with his status. In addition, the parents of the candidates 
for the preliminary level of pazin laung were exempted from royal service. 
The requisites and the allowances increased with the level entered for. At the 
intermediate pazin laung level, not only the parents but also the brothers and sisters of 
the candidate were exempted from royal service; and the candidate had 20 people to 
carry him and his belongings. For the higher pazin laung level, there were thirty 
attendants to carry him and his personal belongings, while seven generations of his 
relatives were elevated to royal status and given titles. A successful candidate would 
receive royal patronage for his ordination. After his ordination, he received certain 
allowances from the palace: a monthly food ration and a pair of robes annually. 
However, the personal allowances for the pazin laungs granted after their ordination 
were given only if they lived in the capital, an incentive for them to remain near the king.  
 
The candidates for the shin laung levels, or the candidates for royal sponsored 
novicehood, were honoured with the same royal status just before they sat for the 
examinations. At the preliminary level, the candidates had seven attendants to carry them 
and their belongings on their way to the examination hall, while at the intermediate and 
the higher levels the candidates had ten and thirteen people respectively to attend them. 
But only the higher shin laung candidate’s parents were exempt from royal service.  
 
After ordination, these royal bhikkhus would be closely monitored with the mahAdanwun 
reported to the king every six months on the “religious activities”. And patronage for the 
ordination of successful candidates was provided for not only by the king but also by the 
crown princes, princesses, ministers and mayors who were asked by the king to do so. 
Usually after his ordination, and as long as he remained in the monastic order, the monk 
one supported would become one’s tutor, thus creating mutual patronage. At a mundane 
 
87

=== PAGE 95 ===
level, this practice of mutual patronage between such a learned monk and a high ranking 
official was to maintain an inner circle for the king loyalty to him. 
 
The third measure was to expand the examination system by introducing four more 
levels, making six altogether. He reasoned that people were born with different levels of 
intelligence and should not be made to compete by the same criteria, as that would not be 
fair to the less intelligent.201 Clearly, this was to make the Pathamapyan appealing not 
only to the highly intelligent but also to the average and below. With the introduction of 
the preliminary, intermediate and higher level,202 each level of the Pathamapyan under 
Bodawpaya was expanded into three. Here it is interesting to see Bodawpaya’s choice of 
words. He used the words ayok (t<kwf), alat(tvwf), and amyat (t_rwf), meaning “lower”, 
“medium” and “higher class” respectively. The word ayok nowadays does not mean 
preliminary, nor is amyat used to mean higher. Instead, ayok now means low quality or 
inferior while amyat means noble or superior, and these terms may be considered 
repugnant by many. In fact, even in those days they must have carried some 
awkwardness with them and this must be the reason why King Mindon (1853-1878) 
decided to abandon these terms and chose more neutral ones i.e. gne, lat, gyi (i<f| vwf | 
}uD;) meaning “junior”, “middle” and “senior” respectively.203  
 
 
2.4.3 Resistance to the Pathamapyan Examination 
However, despite the encouragement and promotion of successive kings, the Sangha for 
its part did not show much interest in the examinations. The general response of the 
Sangha to these encouragements over the following two centuries could be described as, 
                                                 
201  Ibid, IV, p.447.  
202  Ibid, pp.448-449. 
203  See also p.128. 
 
88

=== PAGE 96 ===
at best, passive. The main reason for the Sangha’s resistance was the desire to retain full 
freedom in educational management. By and large, teaching monasteries were not 
persuaded to adopt the centrally prescribed texts for their students.204 This was because 
studying for examinations that provided qualifications and worldly awards, the Sangha 
believed, would inevitably corrupt the young minds of the student-monks. Instead, the 
teachers, who were usually also abbots, created their own syllabuses. Students could 
choose which teacher they went to for the study of a particular text, the main reason for 
the choice being the reputation of the teacher as a scholar. And it was normal for students 
to repeat more than once a certain text under the same or a different teacher.  
 
It may be asserted here that by and large the monastic scholastic tradition was 
maintained outside the formal examination system. As a result, in Burma, within an 
average of ten years, students became well versed in Pali, including both the TipiTaka and 
the commentarial works. Some became grammarians and some specialised in 
Abhidhamma.  
 
The continuing resistance on the part of the abbots, who saw formal examinations as 
having potential to corrupt the monks, may also have been due partly to how the 
Pathamapyan curriculum was received in the monastic community, and partly to how the 
Pathamapyan examination was introduced and then conducted. The Pathamapyan 
curriculum, from what we see in Bodawpaya’s reign205, was rather more of an academic 
training than a spiritual one. The abbots, who were also the principals in the teaching 
monasteries, could thus argue that the Pathamapyan curriculum was not essential for 
candidates wishing to join the monastic order. This may have been one of the reasons, or 
                                                 
204  For more information, see Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin; MahAvisutArAmika gaBavAcakanikaya 
thamaing hmatdan, (Records of the MahAvisutArAma teaching tradition), & biographies of prominent 
monks in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in Burma. Mendelson also discusses the 
subject briefly in Sangha and State, pp.150-157.  
205  See Appendix A. 
 
89

=== PAGE 97 ===
rather excuses, for the abbots’ lack of enthusiasm for entering their students for the 
Pathamapyan. More importantly, though, a reason for continued resistance to the 
Pathamapyan may have been the resentment felt by the ecclesiastical scholars at 
interference in the Sangha’s affairs by the monarch. The Sangha felt particularly 
humiliated by the fact that candidates for ordination had been forced to  take the 
examinations under Thalun. The Pathampyan, which continued to be held after Thalun, 
thus carried with it, at least from some ecclesiastical scholars’ point of view, the stigma 
of their candidates being suspected by the secular authorities of fleeing conscription. 
 
As the abbots continued to insist on their freedom to assess their pupils on their own 
terms, Bodawpaya was therefore prompted to take stern measures to force the Sangha to 
enter the examinations. We have noted earlier that some of the sayadaws who were the 
recipients of royal titles (ta seik ya/ wHqdyf7 q7mawmf), and some examiner-sayadaws, 
failed to attend the examinations held at the Sudhamma hall.206 Possibly to counter the 
argument that the Pathamapyan focused only on the academic aspect of the monastic 
training, King Bodawpaya introduced in October 1787 another set of examinations and 
this time forced not the candidates for ordination, but those who were already ordained to 
sit them.207 This new examination was called the Vinaya examination, as its curriculum 
consisted mainly of some basic vinaya texts describing essential monastic rules and 
regulations.208 Every sAmaBera (novice) who had been ordained for two years and every 
bhikkhu (monk) who had been in the monastic Order for five years was required to sit the 
vinaya examination if they wanted to remain in the religious life.  
 
                                                 
206  Ibid, IV. p.453. 
207  Ibid, p.615. 
208  Ibid. 
 
90

=== PAGE 98 ===
In the Vinaya examinations, the sAmaBeras were required to recite from memory, but not 
yet required to know the meaning of, the PAtimokkha, the monastic rules for the 
bhikkhus. However, they had to learn by heart and explain the meaning of 75 rules of 
training in propriety (sekhiya)209 and some khandhaka rules, such as the 10 rules for the 
expulsion of sAmaBeras (liNganAsana)210, and the 10 offences by sAmaBeras which were 
punishable (daBDakamma)211. The syllabus also included the Aggikhandhopama-sutta of 
the ANguttara-nikAya. 212 The bhikkhus who had been ordained less than five years were 
required not only to recite from memory the PAtimokkha and the Aggikhandhopama-
sutta but also explain their meaning; if he failed, a sAmaBera or bhikkhu had to leave the 
Order with a tattoo mark on his ribs to show that he was a failure.213 However, since the 
prescribed texts were essential for the spiritual life of a novice and a monk, and would 
have been widely taught in almost all the monasteries, there were not many monks who 
failed the test.  
 
Such an extreme measure did not please the Sangha, not even the senior monks 
appointed by the king. Indeed, the resistance to formal examinations by the leading 
sayadaws was one of the many reasons why the king dismissed the thathanabaing 
GuBamuninda and the twelve vinayadhara sayadaws.214 The king argued that he had to 
dismiss the sayadaws because, being still puthujjana, “ordinary” in their spiritual 
attainments, the sayadaws were prejudiced in their judgement, even though no evidence 
has been recorded to support this claim.215 Contrary to his claim, in fact, the reason for 
                                                 
209  Sekhiya is also a part of the PAtimokkha but it was mentioned separately.  
210  Vin i 83-85, 119. 
211  Ibid, 84. 
212  A iv 128. In this sutta, the Buddha said that it was better to embrace and lie down upon raging flames 
than to live in the guise of a monk and accept generosity from the faithful while guilty of evil conduct. 
213  ROB, IV, pp.615.  
214 See also pp.34-35. 
215  Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin I, pp.258-259. 
 
91

=== PAGE 99 ===
the removal of the sayadaws from their office was because they resisted the king’s 
excessive use of formal examinations to control the Sangha.  
 
This is evident in two of Bodawpaya’s orders, one dated 17 and the other 28 October 
1787. Part of the first order reads: “the Buddha sAsana is purified only when supported 
by a thathanapyu king who punishes and teaches through the wheel of power and the 
wheel of law… So all the monks, both those who have received titles and those who 
have not, must go to the Sudhamma Council and enter the Vinaya examinations twice a 
month; then report the list to the Sayadaw [GuBamuninda before he was dismissed], who 
would send it to the king. The [thathanabaing and the vinayadhara] sayadaws wrote to 
me that they discussed in concord…” [My translation] It is clear here that the king used 
his absolute power unnecessarily to force the monks, including the most learned ones, to 
enter the Vinaya examinations. It must have been a humiliation for the most learned ones 
to have to enter examinations with such a very basic syllabus. The last sentence of his 
order also shows that the king blamed the sayadaws for not working in concord. The 
other order, dated 28 October 1787, also makes it clear that the sayadaws were not 
interested in the Vinaya examinations. Part of the decree reads: “The order for the 
Sangha to enter the examinations was not carried out. From 28 October 1787 they must 
carry it out every day.” 
 
Another reason behind the dismissal of the sayadaws was the rejection by them of a new 
calendar, created by the king, called pondaw. The sayadaws were independent and did 
not hesitate to reject even a royal proposal. One of them, Bagaya Sayadaw, who was 
 
92

=== PAGE 100 ===
specially asked by the king to comment on the new calendar, paid the highest price. He 
was forcibly disrobed for his refusal to endorse the pondaw calendar.216 
 
However, Bodawpaya retained the youngest of the twelve vinayadhara sayadaws, 
Maung Htaung Sayadaw, whose ordained name was ÑABa, also ÑABAbhivaMsa (1752-
1831). When appointed thathanabaing on 19 March, 1787, he was only 35, while those 
dismissed were in their 70s and 80s. The appointment of ÑABAbhivaMsa, first as one of 
the vinayadharas and afterwards as the sole guardian of the sAsana in the kingdom, also 
owed much to the former tutor of Bodawpaya, U Htun Nyo, an ex-monk, who was now a 
minister with a title twin thin taik wun mahasithu. Not only did he come from the same 
village as ÑABAbhivaMsa, but he was also his teacher while he was still in the monkhood. 
With those connections, ÑABAbhivaMsa was therefore more likely than any of the other 
sayadaws to support the king and his new ideas.  
 
Indeed, it was ÑABAbhivaMsa’s unquestioning loyalty to the king that had caused discord 
within the ecclesiastical hierarchy, namely the thathanapyu sayadaw and the 
vinayadhara sayadaws. Many monastic establishments boycotted ÑABAbhivaMsa, and 
they became known as the visabhAga group, while the monastic establishments which 
continued to associate with ÑABAbhivaMsa were called the sabhAga group. VisabhAga is a 
technical term in the Vinaya, denoting “monks who were not in association with each 
other through their refusal to participate in a PAtimokkha ceremony”; sabhAga is the 
opposite. It seems the king wanted to make sure that no disassociation or boycott was 
supported by any of the sayadaws and accordingly made them promise that they would 
be “in sabhAga with the Sayadaw [ÑABAbhivaMsa]”.  However, a year after the 
appointment of ÑABAbhivaMsa as thathanabaing, in March 1788, one of the vinayadhara 
                                                 
216  Htun Mayt, “Bagaya Sayadaw” Maynma zwe zone kyan (Encyclopaedia of Myanmar), VIII, pp.303-
305. 
 
93

=== PAGE 101 ===
sayadaws, Taung Lay Lon, rescinded his promise and joined the visabhAga group. His 
move angered the king, who prohibited people from supporting Taung Lay Lon Sayadaw 
and his two monastic establishments. The order reads: “No one shall visit or support with 
requisites the Taung Lay Lon phongyi [monk], Taung lay Lon Taik and On-In Taik. 
Anyone who visits or makes donations to them shall have his feet cut off.”217 But this 
ban was lifted the next day at the request of ÑABAbhivaMsa himself.218  
 
However, the discord between ÑABAbhivaMsa and the visabhAga monks continued for 
another seven years until the king forced all the visabhAga monks to leave the Order. 
Their leader, Kyaw Aung San Htar Sayadaw, who was not a member of the vinayadhara, 
and all the visabhAga monks were falsely accused by the king of having been bogus 
monks and, as a result, forced to disrobe. Part of the king’s order reads: “Kyaw Aung 
San Htar Sayadaw and the visabhAga [monks] have no nissaya [teacher] and upajjhAya 
[preceptor] but pretend to have them, and thus claim to be yahan, although they are not. 
They should not be in the monkhood. Kyaw Aung San Htar and all visabhAga monks 
must be disrobed.”219 The king’s resorting to this desperate measure in his attempt to get 
rid of monks showing any sign of dissent shows how divisive the king’s approach 
towards the Sangha and its education was. Contrary to the king’s claim, Kyaw Aung San 
Htar Sayadaw’s monastic lineage was well-known; his teacher and preceptor, the first 
Kyaw Aung San Htar Sayadaw, or ÑABavara (1705-1753), was the thathanabaing during 
the reign of MahAdhammarAjAdhipati (1733-1752). Since the death of his teacher, 
ÑABavara, in 1753, Kyaw Aung San Htar Sayadaw, or rather the second Kyaw Aung San 
Htar Sayadaw, had become the leader of the Kyaw Aung San Htar scholarly tradition and 
                                                 
217  ROB, IV, p.406. ROB dated 17 March, 1788. 
218  Ibid, p.408. ROB dated 18 March, 1788. 
219  Ibid, p.565. ROB dated 28 June, 1895. 
 
94

=== PAGE 102 ===
had lived through the reigns of Alaungpaya and his successors up to Bodawpaya 
himself.220 
 
On the other hand, despite being the subject of boycott by the Sangha for his 
unquestioning loyalty to the king, ÑABAbhivaMsa, apart from his connection with the 
king’s former tutor, was a very learned monk himself. At 25, he wrote a sub-commentary 
in Pali on the SIlakkhandhavagga, the first thirteen suttas of the DIgha-nikAya.221 He 
composed many other works in both Pali and Burmese, and two of his pupils, 
thathanabaing U Ñeyya and the author of the SAsanavaMsa, PaGGAsAmi, were to become 
famous in the next reigns. And, it was during his tenure as the sangharAja that 
Ambagahapitiye ÑABavimala of the AmbarukkhArAmaya at Välitara and five novices 
from Ceylon arrived in 1800 at Amarapura “with the aim of obtaining higher 
ordination”.222 ÑaBAbhivaMsa gave them ordination, a proper training and also, on their 
return, many texts no longer available in Ceylon. However, for some reason not 
documented anywhere, ÑaBAbhivaMsa himself left the Order in 1814, and served 
Bodawpaya as a minister, with the title Yazathingyan Amat. He was to lead a 
commission of learned men and monks in compiling the now famous Burmese chronicle, 
Hamnnan Yazawin, in 1829 at the request of King Bagyidaw (1819-1837). 
 
Let us return to the Vinaya examinations. The king now threatened to punish any monk 
who failed the Vinaya examination. And, in fact, in the first ever Vinaya examinations 
held four months after the dismissal of the thathanabaing GuBAmuninda and the 
vinayadha sayadaws, there was a monk from a monastery called Shwe Myin Mi who had 
to leave the Order with a tattoo on his ribs on 11 October 1787 when he failed the 
                                                 
220  SobhanasirI, MahAdvAra-nikAya sAsanadIpanI, pp.192-197. 
221  This work is known as SIlakkhandha abhinava-TIkA. 
222  Malalgoda, pp.97-98. For more on the Amarapura-nikAya, see Ibid, Ch. II, pp.87-105; Ch. III, pp.139-
143 & Ch. IV, pp.144-172. 
 
95

=== PAGE 103 ===
examination.223 He was sentenced to jail for seven days224 but was released after five 
days by the king, who warned the monks that they faced the same fate as Shwe Myin Mi 
if they failed.225  
 
The king also decreed that a saya, “preceptor”, had himself to leave the Order if his pupil 
did not pass the examination.226 So, the preceptor of the monk Shwe Myin Mi must have 
been disrobed, to take responsibility for his pupil’s failure. The Shwe Myin Mi incident 
led the king to form a perception that such ignorance of the Vinaya must have been 
widespread among senior members of the Sangha. Therefore, the senior monks, namely 
Gaing Ok, those in charge of monks in a district, and Gaing Dauk, assistants to Gaing Ok 
and responsible for a smaller area, had to sit the vinaya examinations twice a month for 
eight months (28 October 1787 to 18 July 1788). All other monks were also compelled to 
enter the vinaya examinations.227  
 
The severe actions taken by the king might suggest that there was a general decline in the 
study and practice of the Vinaya. However, there is no clear indication that that was the 
case. Apart from the Shwe Myin Mi monk (who had earlier earned  the king’s 
displeasure for having houses in the compound of his monastery and for befriending with 
political dissents228), there is no record of any other monks failing the vinaya 
examinations, although every monk had to enter them. In fact, during the reign of 
Bodawpaya there were learned teachers and authors such as, to name a few, The-Inn 
Sayadaw, Pyi Sayadaw, Bagara Sayadaw, Maung Htaung Sayadaw, Saling Sayadaw, 
                                                 
223  ROB, IV, pp.615, 619.  
224  Ibid, p.619. 
225  Ibid, p.626. 
226  Ibid, p.615. 
227  Ibid. 
228  Ibid, p.606. The order dated 23 September 1787. 
 
96

=== PAGE 104 ===
Taung lay Lon Sayadaw and Minbu U Awbhatha, whose works remain standard up to 
the present day.229 
 
As to the number of candidates, we have not been successful in our efforts to estimate 
how many entered for the different levels of the examinations each year during 
Bodawpaya’s reign, in order to determine the success or failure of his initiatives. We can 
say with certainty, however, that there were never candidates for all levels every year. In 
the examination held in May 1801, after the king asked the senior monks to enter their 
pupils for the Pathamapyan,230 there were only two sitting and they were for the pazin 
laung levels; these two candidates, both pupils of Ku-gyi Sayadaw, were appointed 
vinayadhara, “experts on the Discipline”, after the completion of the examination.231 In 
1806 there were only twenty-eight candidates entered for the preliminary shin laung 
level, and there were no candidates for other levels.232  
 
The examinations were in theory conducted by the thathanabaing, the Sudhamma 
sayadaws, the examiners and observers, all with titles bestowed by the king. In practice, 
however, only a handful of sayadaws examined one candidate at a time while the rest 
listened. The examinations were entirely oral. There was no paper for writing at that 
time. Even the royal court used only palm leaves for writing. All the sayadaws were also 
given palm leaves that bore royal insignia for their official use. The examinations were 
conducted in Nayon, the third month of the lunar calendar (June), which falls a month 
before the beginning of vassAna.  
 
                                                 
229  Pitakathamaing, pp.189, 212. 
230  ROB, V. p.643.  
231  Ibid, p.645. 
232  Ibid, p.865. 
 
97

=== PAGE 105 ===
Despite Bodawpaya’s efforts to widen participation in the formal examination, the 
abbots were still not yet persuaded of the merit of examination. Even when ordered by 
the king, as we have seen, not many came forward to enter their pupils for the 
Pathamapyan. Instead, they continued to ignore the Pathamapyan examination and 
focused on the traditional method of education, which has been discussed earlier, by 
which students were tutored in their textual study and then assessed in the way the 
teacher favoured.  
 
 
2.5 Conclusion 
In this chapter we have discussed how monastic education was affected from the 
seventeenth century up to the early nineteenth century by strong monarchs who busied 
themselves with war and the construction of their capital. One of the most visible signs 
was the introduction of formal examinations by the kings. Despite the claim by some 
historians and the official view that the severe actions by the kings reflected a decline in 
monastic study and discipline, we have shown that the main cause of those actions was 
in fact the military ambition of the monarch.  
 
 
98

=== PAGE 106 ===
 
Chapter Three 
 
A Threatened Buddhist Kingdom and a Nationalist Sangha 
 The Education of the Sangha under King Mindon (1853-1878)  
 
 
 
 
In the previous chapter we discussed how the informal textual study, the core 
ecclesiastical pedagogy for centuries in Burma, had been replaced by an education 
system defined narrowly by syllabuses for formal examinations. We have argued that 
formal examinations were the results of geopolitical circumstances under war-like 
monarchs, namely Thalun (1629-1648) and Bodawpaya (1782-1819) who attempted to 
control the Order.  
 
However, the use of formal examinations as a tool to control the Sangha was not 
confined to strong kings. In fact, a weak king used as much ecclesiastical education to 
control the Sangha as did the strong ones. This happened particularly in times of political 
instability, for example, in Burma under Mindon (1853-1878), whose position was 
weakened at the outset by circumstances following the loss of Lower Burma to the 
British in first and second Anglo-Burmese wars (1824-1826 & 1852-1854). But unlike 
many of his predecessors, Mindon was a diplomatic and “enlightened” monarch and as a 
result his use of formal examinations was not seen by the Sangha as interference in their 
academic freedom but rather as a promotion of Buddhism itself. In this chapter we 
consider monastic education under Mindon’s reign, particularly how the Sangha, who 
once resisted using formal examinations, came to be persuaded of the merit of formal 
examinations by Mindon. We shall argue that the Sangha became nationalistic1 after the 
end of the second Anglo-Burmese war (1852-1854), in which Burma lost the whole of 
Lower Burma to the British, and that that nationalistic sentiment, coupled with Mindon’s 
                                                 
1  
See pp.121-124 for more on the Sangha’s nationalism.  
 
99

=== PAGE 107 ===
tactful approach, had led the Sangha to the weakening of its resistance to formal 
examinations and thus the loss of academic freedom in the monasteries. 
 
First we shall briefly discuss the personality of Mindon, described as a tolerant monarch. 
Second, we shall analyse in detail the rise of different fraternities, namely Shwegyin and 
Sudhamma, in the context of Mindon’s modernisation programmes. Third, we shall 
consider how, in the threatened Buddhist kingdom of Mindon, the Sangha became 
nationalistic. Fourth, monastic education under Mindon, particularly the transformation 
of formal examinations, both Vinaya and Pathamapyan, will be explained. Fifth, we 
shall discuss the legacy of Mindon in the birth of various monastic examination boards 
set up by the Sangha and its lay followers. Sixth, we shall describe the fate of the 
remaining force of resistance to formal examinations within the Sangha. And, lastly, a 
brief account will be given of the development of monastic education under colonial rule 
and in post-independent Burma. 
 
 
3.1 King Mindon (1853-1878): A Tolerant Monarch 
King Mindon, who as a senior prince held the post of president of the council of state 
under his half-brother and predecessor, Pagan (1846-1853), came to the throne in 1853 in 
“a bloody struggle”2 in the middle of the second Anglo-Burmese war (1852-1854). 
“Grown up in the shadow of British power”, he represented a “forward-looking and 
modernising” faction, which was against “a continued prosecution of the war”, as 
opposed to “the conservative and militant wing surrounding [King] Pagan”.3 On 
ascending the throne, Mindon was “anxious that the war should come to an end”.4 He 
                                                 
2  
Thant Myint-U The Making of Modern Burma, p.104. 
3  
Ibid, pp.104-105. 
4  
Ibid. 
 
100

=== PAGE 108 ===
quickly sent a message to the British “agreeing a comprehensive ceasefire”.5 Considered 
to be a diplomatic and enlightened monarch, even British colonial officials, such as Sir 
James Scott, described him as “tolerant” and “the best king Burma ever had”.6  
 
Mindon, indeed, displayed a great degree of tolerance towards ministers who disagreed 
with him or even refused to obey his orders. One of them, Po Hlaing, better known by 
his title and penname Yaw Mingyi U Po Hlaing, for example, once had a public 
argument with the king on whether drinking htanye (botanical name: chireta) juice from 
a coconut-like plant, from which jaggery (Hindi, jAgrI) was produced, infringed the fifth 
precept of a lay Buddhist. 7 The king believed it broke the precept, while his minister 
held a different view. Despite threatening to punish Po Hlaing both for his views and 
indeed for actually drinking it himself, the king in the end took no action against Po 
Hlaing. (Alaungpaya ordered anyone drinking alcohol “to be cut off at his neck” and 
Bodawpaya also passed the death penalty on those who drank alcohol.8) The king was 
also tolerant of his ministers on more serious issues. He gave in, for example, to another 
minister, Pakhan, who refused to introduce a new tax to be used entirely for religious 
purposes. Pakhan is said to have also protested to the king for ignoring Hlutdaw, the 
cabinet, on important issues, and at one time disregarded the king’s order to annex the 
Karenni State to Burma.9  
 
                                                 
5  
Ibid. 
6  
Scott, Burma, pp.298-300. 
7  
Ibid, p.58.  
8  
Alaungpaya “ordered that there shall be no killing of cattle for meat nor consuming any kind of 
intoxicant drinks or drugs, in his kingdom. Animal sacrifice at the time of harvest was strictly 
prohibited.” Than Tun, Introduction to ROB, II, p.xv. On 1st January 1760, he threatened anyone 
breaking his order not to drink with capital punishment. Bodawpaya spelled out his moral concerns to 
the people in his royal order dated 20th Feb. 1782, a month after ascending the throne. He also asked 
people to observe the Five Precepts in his order dated 10th March 1782. ROB, II, p.229; III, pp.229; 
ROB, VII, pp.i-iii. Mindon ordered people not to eat meat (ROB, IV. p.442) and encouraged lay 
people to observe uposatha-sIla (eight/nine/ten precepts) on four uposatha -days each month (Kelatha, 
Mandalay thathanawin, I, pp.69-70). 
9  
Kyan, “Mindon’s Councillors” Journal of Burma Research Society (henceforth JBRS), XLIV, i, 
pp.54-55. 
 
101

=== PAGE 109 ===
Mindon was also “known to be tolerant and charitable towards other religions: he built 
churches, missionary schools for the Christians10 and helped the Muslims to build 
mosques in Mandalay”.11 He also gave money to some Burmese Muslims to build a rest 
house at Mecca12 just as he repaired one for Buddhists in 1877 near Buddhagaya, which 
had been built by a Burmese king in 1105-06; he erected an inscription about the repairs 
at Buddhagaya, and this became one of the physical marks which convincingly identified 
Buddhagaya in the dispute between the Buddhists led by AnagArika DharmapAla of 
Ceylon and the Hindu Mahants.13 
 
 
3.2 The Rise of Different Fraternities and Mindon’s Modernisation of the Kingdom 
Concerning different traditions within the Order, Mindon was also far less despotic, a 
significant contrast to how his predecessors dealt with quarrels among members of the 
Sangha.14 Mindon recognised the right of members of the Sangha to defy the 
thathanabaing and to live outside the authority of the Sudhamma Council, of which the 
thathanabaing was head, as long as they lived by the vinaya. Thus it was during his reign 
that the Sangha became divided into two separate groups: Sudhamma and Shwegyin. 
Mendelson, however, lists along with these two groups also the DvAra, the Ngetdwin-
nikAya and the Pakhokku scholarship tradition, and calls them “Mindon’s sects”. 
However, the inclusion of the latter three can be misleading.15 Therefore, before dealing 
with the major groups, we shall first show why identifying the DvAra- , the Ngetdwin-
nikAya and the Pakhokku academic tradition as “Mindon’s sects” is inappropriate. 
 
                                                 
10  See also Marks, Forty Years in Burma, p.4; Scott, Burma, pp.300-301; Thant Myint-U, p.114. 
11  Yegar, The Muslims of Burma, p.15.  
12  Ibid, p.15. 
13  DharmapAla, “The History of the Maha-Bodhi Temple at Buddha Gaya” Return to Righteousness, 
pp.602-603. 
14  See pp.91-95. 
15  Mendelson, Sangha and State in Burma, pp.84-88. 
 
102

=== PAGE 110 ===
The DvAra-nikAya developed in 185216 in British Lower Burma from a local dispute on 
the validity of a sImA, “chapter hall” where all the bhikkhus of Okpo town performed an 
uposatha ceremony. Okpo Sayadaw (1817-1905), the future leader of the DvAra-nikAya, 
argued that the sImA in question, built in a lake, was not a valid udakukkhepa sImA, “an 
ordination hall built in a river or in a lake”, for it had a permanent bridge linking it with 
the land, and thus all the ordination ceremonies performed in that particular sImA were 
invalid. The dispute remained local for some time. Indeed, after this argument, Okpo 
Sayadaw continued to associate with members of the Sangha from other parts of the 
country because many other sImAs in those areas were still acceptable to Okpo Sayadaw 
and he did not consider ordination ceremonies in those sImAs invalid. It is held by the 
followers of the DvAra-nikAya that when this dispute reached the court of the 
thathanabaing in Upper Burma in 1857, the thathanabaing’s judgement on the sImA in 
question coincided with the opinion of the Okpo Sayadaw.17  
 
However, Okpo Sayadaw and his followers in Lower Burma became of wider concern 
later, not for the dispute over a sImA, but for a disagreement with other Buddhists from 
their neighbourhood on the wording of awkatha (okAsa), a formula commonly recited by 
Burmese Buddhists to pay homage to the Buddha.18 Okpo Sayadaw and his followers 
argued that people could only pay homage to the Buddha through three “doors” (dvAra), 
and not kamma, and thus the traditional awkatha formula which had kAya-, vacI- and 
mano-kamma in it was incorrect. Instead, it should read kAya-, vacI- and mano- dvAra. 
But this quarrel began among the laity in Lower Burma, followers of Okpo Sayadaw and 
their Buddhists neighbours, not between members of the Sangha. No one in Upper 
                                                 
16  SirIsobhana, MahAdvAra-nikAya sAsanavaMsadIpanI, pp.334-335.  
17  Ibid, p.334. 
18  See pp.41-42. 
 
103

=== PAGE 111 ===
Burma disagreed with Okpo Sayadaw, nor did they see any point in doing so.19 Indeed, 
leading Sayadaws in Upper Burma, such as the thathanabaing Sayadaw U Ñeyya, Ledi 
Sayadaw and Shwegyin Sayadaw, made desperate attempts to calm the situation.20 
Mendelson, however, failed to recognise the issue at the beginning of the development of 
the DvAra-nikAya as a local dispute rather than a matter of national concern. This led him 
not only to look for kan gaing, or the nikAya that advocated kamma as against dvAra, in 
Mandalay, which he did not find, but also to consider the DvAra as a Mindon sect, which 
was incorrect historically because Mindon himself did not contribute to the emergence of 
the DvAra-nikAya. However, the term may be applicable in a broader sense if the DvAra-
nikAya is included among the Mindon sects simply because it developed during the reign 
of Mindon, albeit in Lower Burma, then no longer under his rule. 
 
As to the Ngetdwin-nikAya, which called itself SatipaTThan gaing or SatipaTThAna-nikAya, 
Mendelson writes that “he [U PaBDava, the future Ngetdwin Sayadaw] had to leave 
Upper Burma on account of his difficulties with the king there and the council 
[Sudhamma]. But he found that British rule in Lower Burma gave greater freedom of 
expression”.21 These two factors may have been taken into account by Mendelson as 
historical background to his assessment of the Ngetdwin as a Mindon sect. But this 
version of events is inaccurate. The records of the Ngetdwin show that U PaBDava (1831-
1910) left Sagaing for Konkhyankone, a town in Lower Burma, in June 1886. That was 
more than seven months after the fall of King Thibaw (1778-1885).22 Moreover, when U 
PaBDava left Mandalay for the Minwun Hills in 1867, he did so with the permission of 
                                                 
19  The debate on the right wording between dvAra and kamma reached Mandalay only when two lay 
men, Nga Thit and Nga Pawlar, each representing a party in the dispute from Lower Burma went to 
Mandalay for a decision. For detail see Sayadaw U ÑABavamsa’s letter conveying the message from 
the thathanabaing to his teacher, Okpo Sayadaw. SirIsobhana, MahAdvAra-nikAya sAsanavamsadIpanI, 
p.345.  
20  Ibid, pp.344-351. 
21  Mendelson, p.107. 
22  Hla Paing, CatubhUmika matgin thathanawin thamaing, (History of the CatubhUmika lineage), pp.69-
70.  
 
104

=== PAGE 112 ===
his teacher, Thingazar Sayadaw, a member of the Sudhamma Council; and the purpose of 
his departure to the Minwun Hills, where he meditated in a cave called Ngetdwin, by 
which he would come to be known, was “to practise satipaTThAna meditation himself 
more seriously”.23 Far from having “difficulties with the king”, U PaBDava, the future 
Ngetdwin Sayadaw, while in his early thirties, was promoted by Mindon to First Class 
Tutor (pathama sar khya) and received a monthly allowance from the king.24 U PaBDava 
was also honoured by Mindon with a title, tipiTakAlaNkAra, for his role as the tutor of the 
chief queen and for his preaching at the palace, where he is said to have consoled the 
king and his followers after the assassination of the Crown Prince, Kanaung, in 1866.25 
The royal support for U PaBDava continued even after he left Mandalay to practise 
meditation in Ngetdwin cave at the Minwun Hills, where one of “Mindon’s junior 
queens”, Kyay Myint Myo Sa, and her daughter, Hteik Su Kyi Princess, built a 
monastery for him.26  
 
Contrary to Mendelson’s statement that he (U PaBDava) left Sagaing in search of “greater 
freedom of expression”,27 U PaBDava went to Lower Burma to meet and perhaps enlist 
the help of a friend in promoting his way of practice.28 In Lower Burma in a small town 
called Konkyankone there was a monastery called Lepaw, where the abbot, U UkkaTTha, 
had been a classmate of U PaBDava, at Thingazar monastery in Mandalay. On his arrival 
there U PaBDava was asked to help with the teaching. A year later, in 1887, he was 
elected by all the Sangha in Konkyankone, 300 monasteries altogether, to become their 
leader. In 1888, the abbot, U UkkaTTha, died and U PaBDava succeeded him. It was when 
                                                 
23  Ibid, p.58. 
24  Ibid, p.55.   
25  Hla Paing, pp.46-49. 
26  Ibid, p.61. The princess was one of those captured and taken by the British to India in 1885. On her 
release and return to Burma in 1892, she went to learn meditation under Ngetdwin Sayadaw. Ibid, 
p.51; Ngetdwin Sayadaw, SAsanavisuddhi, pp.196-232. 
27  Mendelson, p.107. 
28  Hla Paing, pp.46-49. 
 
105

=== PAGE 113 ===
arranging the funeral ceremonies for the late abbot that U PaBDava and other members of 
the Sangha in Konkyankone began to disagree with each other. U PaBDava wanted none 
of the grand rituals that traditionally went with the funeral of a senior Burmese monk; 
instead, he wanted a simple funeral for his friend and urged the laity who came to the 
funeral to practise daily “satipaTThAna meditation” and observe AjIvaTThamaka-sIla, i.e. 
Eight Precepts that include right livelihood as the eighth,29 in place of the normal Five 
Precepts. But the others wanted to retain the traditional ceremony, usually very grand, 
for the late abbot and the Five Precepts for the laity. It was on this issue that U PaBDava 
and his pupils became distinct and thus a nikAya.30 It can therefore be seen that it was 
incorrect to include the Ngetdwin among the Mindon sects. 
 
Mendelson, in his view of the Ngetdwin, is probably influenced by Htin Aung, who 
considers “the Ngetdwin Sayadaw [U PaBDava] to have been ‘the first challenge to 
Mindon’ and the Sudhamma Council.31 Htin Aung perhaps overstresses some of the 
distinctive features of the Ngetdwin, such as the nikAya’s insistence on the 
AjIvaTThamaka-sIla; on making offering to the Sangha only as community property 
(saNghika-dAna); on only accepting candidates for ordination that have been trained in 
meditation; and on monks residing no more than two or three years in one place. 
However, not only are these practices not against the early teaching of the Buddha, they 
also provide an alternative training for those who might otherwise not benefit from 
current prevailing practices.  
 
                                                 
29  ĀjIvaTThamaka-sIla was not directly recommended by the Buddha. It is only recorded in some Pali 
commentaries. This sIla differs from the Five Precepts in that it expands false speech, musAvAda, into 
four, instead of one. It does not include the last of the Five Precepts, refraining from taking intoxicant. 
However, it integrates right livelihood, one of the eight constituents of the middle path. 
30  Hla Paing, pp.71-75. 
31  Mendelson, p.107; Htin Aung, Burmese Monk’s Tales, pp.24-25. 
 
106

=== PAGE 114 ===
As to the more important point that Htin Aung raises that Ngetdwin Sayadaw denounced 
the offering of food, flowers and light to the pagodas as a practice that “dirtied shrines 
and encouraged rats”,32 this has to be taken in the right context. Let us describe how an 
offering is currently made at a pagoda in Burma, which possibly was also common 
during the time of Mindon, so that we may appreciate Ngetdwin Sayadaw’s 
condemnation of offerings at pagodas. The Burmese usually offer food, flowers and light 
to a pagoda, a very important religious custom. The more famous the pagoda, the greater 
the offering. But the problem is that people leave the offering behind in the shrine. Since, 
unlike in Sri Lanka or Thailand, the pagodas in Burma in most cases are not situated in 
monasteries, the monks and novices do not go and clean the offering. If a pagoda has no 
keeper, the shrine is bound to become dirty and breed rats. This is why Ngetdwin 
Sayadaw in the 1860s criticised the offerings at pagodas in Mandalay. We should 
remember that he did not comment on making an offering to a Buddha image at home or 
in a monastery. And his criticism of the offerings at pagodas should not be taken to mean 
that he accepted only meditation as Buddhist practice, and excluded acts of generosity. In 
fact, Ngetdwin Sayadaw praised the virtue of dAna, acts of generosity, as a whole, in 
many ways.33 
 
Concerning Mendelson’s labelling of those following the Pakhokku scholarship tradition 
as Mindon sect,34 it will become clear when we discuss later in this chapter the 
development of monastic education after the fall of the Burmese monarchy that 
Mendelson has not understood the history of monastic education in late nineteenth 
century Burma; and when we analyse the development of monastic education after the 
fall of King Thibaw, the origin of the Pakhokku will also be discussed.35 
                                                 
32  Ibid. 
33  Ibid, pp.90-91. 
34  Mendelson, p.111. 
35  See pp.143-146. 
 
107

=== PAGE 115 ===
Now let us turn to the actual “sects”, or rather fraternities, of Mindon: the Shwegyin and 
Sudhamma. The Shwegyin-nikAya came into existence in 1861. Its origin is usually 
attributed, both by the followers of the Shwegyin-nikAya and by their opponents, to a 
special royal order called gaBavimutti, “liberation from the gathering of a sangha”, 
issued by Mindon in 1860. A gaBavimutti order was not an innovation by Mindon; in fact 
it had been issued by some of his predecessors to highly respected and senior forest 
monks so that they could devote more time to meditation. Always to benefit individual 
monks, as against a group, a gaBavimutti order exempted the monk referred to in the 
royal order from all ecclesiastical administrative business; even the thathanabaing could 
not summon him any more. Mindon’s gaBavimutti order was passed to free U JAgara 
(1822-1894), later to be known as Shwegyin Sayadaw, from the jurisdiction of the 
thathanabaing. However, unlike previous gaBavimutti orders, there were two unique 
points, so far not noticed by scholars, to Mindon’s royal gaBavimutti. First, Shwegyin 
Sayadaw was not, at the time the order was issued in 1860, a forest monk, although he 
used to study meditation under a well known meditation teacher and forest monk, Thilon 
Sayadaw36, himself a beneficiary of a gaBavimutti order by King Thayawadi (1837-
1846).37 In fact, at that time Shwegyin Sayadaw had just moved to Mandalay, the capital, 
to take charge of four monasteries built by Mindon for him and his pupils. Second, 
because the gaBavimutti was issued to a town-dweller monk, as Shwegyin Sayadaw was, 
it gave rise to the opportunity for the followers of Shwegyin Sayadaw to interpret the 
royal order as covering not only Shwegyin Sayadaw but also, by extension, all his 
followers. 
 
The reason for the issue of this royal order, a conflict between the thathanabaing and 
Shwegyin Sayadaw, has been interpreted along the sectarian lines. The followers of 
                                                 
36  He passed away in 1860. Than Tun, The History of Shwegyin-nikAya, Appendix, p.3. 
37  PaBDitasirI, Shwegyin-nikAya thathanawin, p.94. 
 
108

=== PAGE 116 ===
Shwegyin Sayadaw have maintained that their leader, on being invited by the king to 
reside in Mandalay, in 1860, made a courtesy call on the thathanabaing three times, but 
was ignored. Consequently, Shwegyin Sayadaw refused to call on the thathanabaing 
again even when summoned. The opponents of the Shwegyin, however, argued that 
Shwegyin Sayadaw had never called on the thathanabaing; in fact he refused to do so 
even after being summoned by the thathanabaing three times.38 However, the two 
groups seem to agree on one point: when the thathanabaing asked the mahadanwun, the 
commissioner for religion, to produce him by force, Shwegyin Sayadaw planned to 
escape to Lower Burma or Ceylon. At that point, the king intervened: “let the 
thathanabaing summon Shwegyin Sayadaw no more in the future, and let the latter 
remain in the capital”.39 This order has been taken by the Shwegyin monks to mean that 
the king had granted them a separate nikAya.40 As far as we are concerned, the above 
encounter and the subsequent gaBavimutti royal order are only a partial explanation for 
the origin of the Shwegyin-nikAya. In fact, the gaBavimutti order following the story of 
the encounter between the two sayadaws order raises more questions than it answers. As 
Myo Myint, who studies the survival tactics of Mindon, notices, the reason for the 
thathanabaing to summon Shwegyin Sayadaw has never been established.41 
 
However, before we provide a fuller explanation for why the Shwegyin-nikAya came into 
existence, let us first look at some of the previous interpretations regarding the birth of 
the Shwegyin-nikAya. Mendelson, in his analysis of the rise of the Shwegyin-nikAya, pays 
attention to Mindon’s actions. Mendelson says: “The Shwegyin sect thus clearly retraces 
its origin to Mindon’s actions and plans.” According to Mendelson, Mindon divided the 
Sangha in order to rule. This divide-and-rule policy was “to play off various monks on 
                                                 
38  Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect”, p.158; Mendelson, pp.96-97 
39  Ibid. Also, Shwegyin-nikAya se nga kyaing myauk aci away ji hmattan (Records of the 15h Shwegyin-
nikAya Convention), p.21. 
40  Ibid. 
41  Myo Myint, The Politics of Survival in Burma, p.182. 
 
109

=== PAGE 117 ===
his council against each other and to use the thathanabaing’s position to create 
antagonism among the great monks of the time…” Mendelson also asserts that Mindon’s 
championship of the Shwegyin-nikAya was to compensate for the situation in lower 
Burma, now lost to the British and, therefore, where the kind’s religious policies no 
longer applied: Shwegyin Sayadaw was not a member of the politicised Sudhamma 
Council and would therefore be acceptable to the people and the British rulers if he were 
to be sent to British territory in Lower Burma to carry out the king’s Sangha purification 
programme.42  
 
Than Tun, who studies the Shwegyin-nikAya, however, focuses on Shwegyin Sayadaw’s 
behaviour. He says: “Obviously U JAgara [Shwegyin Sayadaw] had no respect for the 
Sudhamma sabhA, though he took care that there was no adhikaraBa – trouble that would 
lead to an open schism.”43 He does not believe the account that when Shwegyin Sayadaw 
first arrived in the new capital, Mandalay, he went to pay his respects to the 
thathanabaing three times, because it is hard to believe that the thathanabaing, not 
known for his arrogance, would treat the Shwegyin Sayadaw so coldly. Than Tun also 
claims that Shwegyin Sayadaw had worked out a compromise before agreeing to the 
king’s request to come to reside in Mandalay. He says: “He [Shwegyin Sayadaw] would 
not mind helping the king in his programme [purification programme] if the king 
allowed him and his group to remain separate from all other Sangha.”44 Than Tun’s 
position has been taken up by some Burmese scholars, for instance, Tin Maung Maung 
Than.45 
 
                                                 
42  Mendelson, p.101.   
43  Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect”,  p.158. 
44  Ibid, p.156. 
45  Maung Than, “Sangha Reforms and Renewal of SAsana in Myanmar” Buddhist Trends in Southeast 
Asia, p.9.  
 
110

=== PAGE 118 ===
In the light of new research and evidence, however, these interpretations are 
unsatisfactory. It is necessary to appreciate Mindon’s style of administration in order to 
comprehend the rise of the Shwegyin-nikAya. As Thant Myint-U has demonstrated, 
Mindon’s was “a period of sustained innovation and attempts at adaptation to rapidly 
changing local and global conditions”46: centralising the kingdom’s administration; 
bureaucratising “royal agencies”47; and modernising the tax system.48 He passed a law 
for press freedom49; sent at least seventy students to India, Italy, England and France for 
education50; made an attempt to send a delegation to participate in the World Fair, a trade 
exhibition held in Paris in 186751; and despatched his chief minister, Kinwun Mingyi, in 
1871 to study developments in other parts of Asia and Europe52. Mindon thus 
concentrated more on modernising the country than on engaging in expansionist wars, 
the tendency of most of his predecessors. Scott, the first British political commissioner in 
colonial Burma, remarks: “The king started factories of all kinds and bought all manner 
of machinery”.53 
 
In his modernisation programme, considered crucial for his survival, Mindon appreciated 
any one, monk and lay alike, who could advise him. Myo Myint, remarks: “… King 
Mindon, more than his predecessors, tapped the social and moral authority of the 
monkhood for the good of his administration”.54 As far as this study has been able to 
uncover from surviving royal orders, one of those important advisers was Shwegyin 
                                                 
46  Thant Myint-U, pp.9-10, 104-129. 
47  Ibid, pp.105, 115. The king was usually in consultation with his principal ministers. See also Kyan, 
“Mindon’s Councillors” JBRS, XLIX, pp.50-58. 
48  Ibid, pp.118-125. 
49  Mindon saw the benefits of media on education, communication, trade and culture. He foresaw that 
his country would soon be known to the whole world. ROB, IX, pp.840-843. 
50  That was between 1859-1875. Among those sent included one to Turin and one to Sorbonne. Thant 
Myint-U, pp.113-114. 
51  Ba, “King Mindon and the World Fair of 1867 Held in Paris” JBRS, XLVII, ii, pp.18-23; Thant 
Myint-U, pp.113-114. 
52  For more see Kinwun Mingyi, Kinwun mingyi London khayee thaw nayzin hmatdan (Diary on the 
London trip). 
53  Scott, Burma, p.300; Thant Myint-U, p.113. 
54  Myo Myint, p.193.  
 
111

=== PAGE 119 ===
Sayadaw.55 For example, before introducing a new system of taxation, thatthamedha 
(o\ar"tcGefawmf), in 1860, the king consulted Shwegyin Sayadaw, who gave his opinion 
on some trade and tax policies. Awarding a monopoly to anyone was against the second 
Buddhist precept, Shwegyin Sayadaw wrote to the king, because “it would prevent poor 
people from acquiring wealth”.56 “The ruler owned [or had the right to] only the tax 
already collected, not that which had yet to be collected” (my translation), and therefore 
the king should not pass a law that could affect the creation of such wealth. In addition, 
tax must not be levied at more than 10% of income.57 Shwegyin Sayadaw made it clear 
that failure on the part of the king to follow the ten Buddhist ideals, in this case also 
raising tax to more than 10%, would be a cause of decline for both the country and the 
religion. Therefore the king “should make every effort to accept the advice of the Sangha 
without any excuse when sent through a sangha’s petition (oHCmharwWmpm)”.58 Therefore, 
under Mindon the tax rate was 10% (q<fzkd.wzdk. q<fcdkifwcdkifusom aumufcHqufoGif;ap?).59 
Mindon’s decision to stick to a 10% tax was very significant in the context of the 
economic situation in the country. Because of the control of all the sea-ports by the 
British since 1826, and because of the recent war (1852-1854), the kingdom’s treasury 
was in a very depressed state. Therefore the king’s decision to retain this tax policy 
showed the influence and close involvement of Shwegyin Sayadaw in Mindon’s 
modernisation programmes. 
 
However, Shwegyin Sayadaw was not the only high profile monk of his time to be 
involved in Mindon’s administrative matters. For example, the thathanabaing himself 
                                                 
55  See the two letters from Shwegyin Sayadaw to Mindon in February 1864. Collection of Upade, I, 
pp.1-10. 
56  Shwegyin Sayadaw, “akhun bandadaw hnit satlyin ywe mae lyauk ya phyay so daw mu chet (An 
Answer to the Royal Question on Taxation and Treasury)” Collection of Upade, II, pp.5-10. 
57  Shwegyin Sayadaw, “Thathanawithodani sardan (On purification of the sAsana)” Collection of 
Upade, II, p.1. 
58  Ibid, I, pp.1-5. 
59  ROB, IX, p.596. 
 
112

=== PAGE 120 ===
supported the king in his controversial decision to move the capital from Amarapura to 
Mandalay60, and in 1862 urged the reluctant king, at the request of the British envoy Sir 
Arthur Phayre, to conclude the Anglo-Burmese Commercial Treaty of 1862. The 
thathanabaing also edited the sittan [royal gazette] and inscriptions.61  
 
Mindon also needed the assistance of the Sangha, in particular the Sudhamma Council 
and the provincial ecclesiastical governors, known as gaing ok (provincial governor) and 
gaing dauk (assistant provincial governor), to persuade people to return to Upper Burma 
under his rule. This was because a sizeable number of his subjects had fled upper Burma 
in the period leading up to and during the war, to take refuge with the British, because of 
the heavy taxes levied by Mindon’s brother and predecessor, King Pagan (1846-1853), to 
fund the war efforts, and also because of threats from the corrupt officials who collected 
tax. Even during the reign of Mindon, especially after the 1866 rebellion, in which the 
crown prince was killed, many people fled to Lower Burma. Indeed, three extant decrees 
issued within the period of nine months from May, 1867 to January, 1868, one each from 
the king, the cabinet and the Sudhamma Council, show that Sudhamma Council, at the 
request of the king and his ministers, agreed to persuade those who had fled to Lower 
Burma after the 1866 uprising to return. 62 The ecclesiastical council agreed to urge the 
people to return to Upper Burma on the condition that the king would grant them an 
amnesty and that no tax was to be collected from them for five years. But we have no 
evidence whether the Sangha did, in fact, persuade those who had fled in the earlier reign 
to return. 
 
                                                 
60  Kon-Baung set yazawin  III, p.242.  
61  Win Maung, Mandalay khet Buddha thathanawin (History of Buddhism in the Mandalay Period), 
pp.154-155. 
62  For detail see orders of the king, the cabinet and the Sudhamma Council dated 15 May, 1867 and 19 
January 1868. ROB, IX, pp.640-641, 655. 
 
113

=== PAGE 121 ===
Mindon also needed help from the Buddhist clergy in his attempts to rein in corrupt 
officials63, for “the monks… were occasionally the only checks on the tyranny and 
exploitation of powerful officials”.64 In this regard, the provincial ecclesiastical 
governors wielded enormous power in the provinces under their control. They confirmed 
the royal appointment of myothugyi (administrative head of a town) and ywathugyi 
(village headman), and in certain cases the ecclesiastical leaders in a province would 
request the king to appoint their chosen candidates to those positions. Every quarter of a 
year, the provincial ecclesiastical governors reported directly to the king on both 
religious and political affairs in the provinces. These monks were asked for their 
opinions on whether the people could pay tax and supply rice to the royal granary.65 
They also submitted to the Hlutdaw, the cabinet, lists of people who should be exempted 
from taxation.66 
 
On the other hand, these powerful ecclesiastical chiefs, using their moral and social 
status, also intervened on behalf of the people. Apart from ensuring safety for the people 
at different levels and the fair and just taxation described above the ecclesiastical 
governors also convinced, for instance, in 1859 and 1873, the king to return to their 
owners the lands which had been confiscated for the army in Mandalay and Meikhtila 
respectively.67  
 
A few years earlier, in 1856, there had been a turning point in the history of the Sangha 
under Mindon, when he issued the purification order, omoem_yK 7mZtrdef.awmf.68 In the 
declaration, containing 22 points, so far noted by scholars such as Than Tun only for its 
                                                 
63  Ibid. 
64  Scott, p.382. 
65  Ibid & Collection of Upades, IV, pp.9-13. 
66  Win Maung, p.138. See also Myo Myint, The Political survival in Burma, pp.194-195. 
67  Gazetteer of Upper Burma and Shan State, No. I, Vol. I, p.2. 
68  ROB 15 February 1856. ROB, IV, pp.433-438. 
 
114

=== PAGE 122 ===
impact on the Sangha69, Mindon asked his ministers and officials to follow the examples 
of minister-bodhisattas, such as Mahosadha, Vidhura and Nandisena, who are portrayed 
in the JAtaka, the stories of Buddha’s former lives. In brief, the officials were urged to 
cultivate three qualities, namely “rAja, dhamma and loka”, or loyalty to the king; 
righteousness (i.e. Buddhist practices); and concerns for the worldly development of the 
kingdom. The king himself promised to follow the path of a bodhisatta, a Buddha-to-be, 
and of a thathanapyu min, “missionary king”, like kings AjAtasattu, KAlAsoka and Asoka 
in India, who had done so much for the SAsana. The author of this declaration, according 
to Than Tun, “was U Nanda”, better known as Shankalaykyun Sayadaw, who was a 
senior colleague of Shwegyin Sayadaw and a fellow-reformer.70  
 
Both U Nanda and Shwegyin Sayadaw had been invited to the new capital Mandalay to 
propagate the dhamma. They were invited because their teacher, Thilon Sayadaw, had 
declined a similar invitation to come and reside in the capital. Here it seems Mindon had 
been inspired by and determined to use Thilon Sayadaw as an exemplary monk in his 
kingdom. The king saw the three of them as reformers who followed the vinaya strictly 
and had a good administrative system in their monasteries.  
 
But U Nanda died in 1858, before the construction of Mandalay was completed, and 
Shwegyin Sayadaw, who was the next in line, accepted the royal invitation to come and 
reside in the capital. At only 36 and not a member of the Sudhamma Council, Shwegyin 
Sayadaw’s influence on the king may have now caused irritation among some senior 
sayadaws, especially the thathanabaing Sayadaw. After the death of Shankalaykyun 
Sayadaw, it was Shwegyin Sayadaw who had become the target of the conservative. 
Indeed, tension may have arisen between the thathanabaing and the associates of the late 
                                                 
69  Ibid, pp.151-179; Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin, I, pp.79-83. 
70  Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect”, p.154. 
 
115

=== PAGE 123 ===
Shankalaykyun Sayadaw immediately after the declaration of the purification order. The 
thathanabaing’s uneasiness had delayed the issue by the Sudhamma Council (of which 
he was the chairman) of a string of edicts to back up the 1856 purification order to local 
monks.71 Such orders, when they were issued, came only after the death of the 
thathanabaing, who himself never took any measures to strengthen the purification 
order. 
 
The thathanabaing, despite being one of the most learned monks of his days (he was the 
forefather of the now famous Pakhokku academic tradition) and strict in vinaya practice, 
does not seem to have taken a keen interest in administrative matters. This is evident in 
the only three orders of his extant today: they were short; all were issued on the same 
day; and at least one of them was prompted directly by the king. All the three orders 
were issued on 25 March 1856. One required the Sangha not to hold pArisuddhi 
uposatha, “a brief ceremony for confession without recitation of the PAtimokkha”, but to 
perform sutt-uddesa uposatha, that includes confession and recitation of the whole 
PAtimokkha. The second urged some monks involved in arranging festivals to refrain 
from such unholy business. If they refused to follow this order, the gain-ok were asked to 
expel the miscreants from the gaing, the local group of the Sangha. The third order 
concerned monks picking meat from dead animals such as elephants and horses. This 
order mentioned that the people had complained about the behaviour of monks who took 
meat from dead animals. Unlike Sudhamma Sayadaws’ orders issued after his death 
(1865), the thathanabaing’s did not refer to the purification order of 1856, which had 
been issued more than a month earlier. 72 In his orders, the thathanabaing usually asked 
gaing-ok, “monastic governors”, to expel the rule-breaking monks, indicating further his 
lack of interest in rehabilitation, whereas Shwegyin Sayadaw’s orders required the gain-
                                                 
71  Collection of Upade, II, pp.169-204, 227-234. 
72  ROB, IX, pp.440-442. 
 
116

=== PAGE 124 ===
ok to bring the miscreants to the Shwegyin taik (monastery) for rehabilitation and 
training, after which they were to be sent back to their own monasteries. 73  
 
On the other hand, as we have seen, the office of the thathanabaing seems to have been 
bypassed in the drafting, issuing and implementing of the purification order of 15 
February 1856.74 Neither the purification order nor another royal order, issued on the 
same day, to ensure the implementation of purification programmes, mentioned the 
thathanabaing. This suggests that Mindon was determined to put the thathanabaing 
aside from the beginning, or that the thathanabaing himself had refused at the outset to 
participate in the purification programmes, something he would continue to do until he 
passed away in 1865. Either way, there seems to have been a deterioration in 
coordination between the king and his thathanabaing. So far, we do not know if 
Shwegyin Sayadaw, and his senior colleague, Shankalaykyun Sayadaw, were partly 
responsible for this breach of protocol. What we can be sure of, however, is that the 
breach of protocol must have been a major cause of tension, and may explain why the 
thathanabaing gave a cold reception to Shwegyin Sayadaw when he came to Mandalay 
for the first time.  
 
The refusal of Shwegyin Sayadaw in 1860 to appear before the thathanabaing, if this 
account is true, should not be seen as a disrespectful act towards the Sudhamma Council 
as a whole, but a manifestation of the tension that existed between two individuals, the 
thathanabaing and Shwegyin Sayadaw. This is because, despite Than Tun’s claim that 
Shwegyin Sayadaw “had no respect for the Sudhamma SabhA”, Shwegyin Sayadaw had, 
in fact, had a good working relationship with and even shown respect for the Sudhamma 
                                                 
73  Shwegyin Sayadaw, “Talok myo nay thanga to nai athetkaing nayakawithodaka saya to hma ca ywe 
kyint saung yan upade (Rules for the sAsanasodhaka sayadaws resident in the Talok area.)” Collection 
of Upade, II, 205-226. 
74  ROB dated 15 February 1856.  
 
117

=== PAGE 125 ===
Sayadaws. In one of the royal orders issued only a year after the gaBavimutti order was 
passed, in 1861, we learn that Shwegyin Sayadaw was one of the five senior Sayadaws – 
the others being members of the Sudhamma Council- who jointly issued a directive to all 
the gaing oks and gaing dauks in the provinces to help oversee tax collection by the four 
tax commissioners sent from the capital.75 These commissioners, all lay people, were 
also asked by the five sayadaws to observe and report the way the gaing oks and gaing 
dauks trained the monks under their care. 76 The Shwegyin-nikAya records show that a 
member of the Sudhamma Council during the time of Mindon, Thingazar Sayadaw, had 
great respect for Thilon Sayadaw, the teacher of Shwegyin Sayadaw.77 In fact, Than Tun 
himself claims that “Thingazar and Thetpan [two members of the Sudhamma Council] 
were, like Shwegyin, former disciples of Thalon [Thilon Sayadaw]”.78 The relationship 
between Shwegyin Sayadaw and the Sudhamma Sayadaws seems to have become even 
better in the next reign. Shwegyin Sayadaw, on being appointed a thathanabaing by 
King Thibaw in 1881, sent a letter to some of the Sudhamma Sayadaws, reaffirming his 
respect for them, and asking them for exhortation and guidance in his missionary work.79 
 
Mendelson, on the other hand, claims that “Mindon’s support of Shwegyin Sayadaw” 
was to fill the vacuum resulting from the loss of Lower Burma to the British: he sent 
Shwegyin Sayadaw to Lower Burma to implement the purification order, because 
Shwegyin Sayadaw, not being a member of the Sudhamma Council, would not arouse 
the suspicion of the British authorities. However, this claim is not logical, because there 
is no evidence that Shwegyin Sayadaw was appointed by Mindon to implement the 
                                                 
75  Collection of Upades, III, pp.1-2. The four members of the Sudhamma Council were Mattaya 
Sayadaw, Maung Htaung Sayadaw, Hla Htwe Sayadaw and Salin Sayadaw. Maung Htaung Sayadaw 
was a pupil of the thathanabaing and he is better known as PaGGAsAmi, the author of the SAsanavaMsa. 
76  Ibid. 
77  PaBDitasirI, Shwegyin-nikAya thathanawin, p.p.100, 108-110. 
78  Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect”, p.157. 
79  Five Sayadaws to whom the letter was addressed and sent through wungyi were Parakkama Sayadaw, 
MangalarAma Sayadaw, Sankyaung Sayadaw, Thetpan Sayadaw and MahAvijitArAma Sayadaw – all 
members of the Sudhamma Council under Thibaw. For the letter from Shwegyin (and Taung-daw) 
Sayadaw and responses from the addressee Sayadaws, see, Collection of Upade, II, pp.272-277.  
 
118

=== PAGE 126 ===
purification order in Lower Burma; and Thingazar Sayadaw, a member of the Sudhamma 
Council, himself frequented Lower Burma on his preaching tours and did not incur any 
suspicion from the British authorities.80 
 
As far as Mindon was concerned, a king should be neutral in ecclesiastical disputes. 
Mindon was not a strict authoritarian like his predecessors such as Alaungpaya and 
Bodawpaya.81 When he issued a decree preventing Shwegyin Sayadaw from being 
summoned by the thathanabaing Sayadaw, he was attempting to mediate. As explained 
above, Mindon did not intervene in the DvAra dispute nor did he take any action when 
the future Ngetdwin Sayadaw started to criticise Buddhist rituals. Mindon’s attitude 
towards building a unified order was different from that of his predecessors.  
 
To Mindon, the Order should and would be unified only through peaceful means. His 
patronage on a grand scale of the fifth Buddhist Council and the Pathamapyan 
examinations, which we shall discuss later, should be seen against this background. 
Mindon made every effort to smooth relationships within the Sangha. He attempted to 
bring Shwegyin Sayadaw into the establishment, by offering him membership of the 
Sudhamma Council or even the post of the thathanabaing. Though such efforts were not 
successful, the king certainly succeeded, as already described, in making the Sudhamma 
sayadaws work together with Shwegyin Sayadaw.  
 
We can now see that the origin of the Shwegyin-nikAya was linked not to a single but to 
several factors. In the context of his modernisation programmes, Mindon put to use all 
human resources, monks as well as lay. This intention was clear when Mindon, instead 
                                                 
80  “Maha Yen Sayadawpayagyi e atthokpati akyin [A Brief Biography of Maha Yen Sayadaw” Mahayin 
gaing lo saingyar yayphay sarmaypwe hnint dhammavinaya sarpyan pwe tawgyi hnit yarpyi magazine 
(Centenary Magazine of the Mahayin-nikAya and Dhammvinaya Examinations), pp.8-9. 
81  See also pp.83-86, 91-97.  
 
119

=== PAGE 127 ===
of following the tradition of appointing his own tutor, U CandimA as the thathanabaing, 
chose U Ñeyya for the top post on the grounds that the latter was knowledgeable in 
worldly affairs.82 However, U Ñeyya, who had also been the thathanabaing during the 
reign of Mindon’s father, Thayawadi, was too elderly and proved inadequate for 
Mindon’s ambitious modernisation programmes. It was Shwegyin Sayadaw who, at the 
age of only 36, had under him around one thousand monks in five large monasteries, 
who became the favourite adviser of the king for his administrative skills. Despite, as 
Than Tun observes, his desire for a “strong and united” Sangha, 83 Mindon made, in my 
opinion, a mistake in issuing a gaBavimutti order to a town-dweller monk with a large 
following. Had Mindon found a way to solve the tension between the thathanabaing and 
Shwegyin Sayadaw without resorting to a gaBavimutti order, the followers of Shwegyin 
Sayadaw would have been just another distinct lineage, like that of Bagaya or Maung 
Htaung, and not a separate nikAya. Mindon’s successor, Thibaw (1878-1885), 
contributed further to the establishment of the Shwegyin-nikAya by appointing Shwegyin 
Sayadaw as a thathanabaing for his followers, although the Sayadaw declined the 
position. But not until the deposition of Thibaw by the British that the Shwegyin-nikAya 
acquired the identity of a separate nikAya, with its own constitution and administration.84  
 
 
3.3 A Threatened Buddhist Kingdom and a Nationalist Sangha 
However, despite causing some tension within the Sangha, Mindon did achieve strong 
cooperation between the Sangha and the monarchy. This strengthening cooperation may 
have resulted from a shared sense of imminent danger. In other words, the cooperation 
was achieved because the Sangha now perceived the British threat to the Burmese 
                                                 
82  Shwe Kaing Tha, Mandalay hnit tayapyi, p.126. 
83  Than Tun, “The Shwegyin Sect”, p.157. 
84  See also Than Tun, History of [the] Shwegyin Nikaya (Shwegyin Sect in the Order of Buddhist 
Monks); and “The Shwegyin Sect”. 
 
120

=== PAGE 128 ===
kingship as a threat to Buddhism itself because royal patronage had been so important to 
the Order. As Bechert observes, this was also because the British, who now ruled Lower 
Burma, belonged to a different religion, Christianity.85 It is in this sense that the Sangha 
became nationalistic. 
 
This nationalistic feeling among members of the Sangha, who saw the British 
colonialists as a danger to both the Burmese monarch and the Buddhist religion, can be 
seen, for instance, in the famous poem, The Deposition of Our Lord given below.  
 
The Deposition of Our Lord (ygawmfrlwrf;csif;, par taw mu tan chin ) 
…………………………………………… 
Did you, Ministers, undermine your Lord? 
You have coerced your monarch; 
What fools you are! 
 
Did you secretly plot with your enemies? 
You have become depraved; 
Traitors indeed you are! 
 
Our Lord, aged only twenty-seven, 
In the eighth year of his reign, 
Exiled was he from Mandalay, his birthplace of magnificence, 
To the Kala country86, fraught with wrong views and ignorance. 
 
No sooner has he spent all his good karma, 
                                                 
85  Bechert, “‘To be a Burmese is to be a Buddhist’: Buddhism in Burma” The World of Buddhism, p.149. 
86  India. 
 
121

=== PAGE 129 ===
Even a Sakka falls from celestial existence. 
Alas! What a sudden and devastating loss; 
And, so it was with our Lord’s disappearance! 
 
Gotama’s religion in our kingdom 
Shines no longer anywhere. 
The Myanmar are being made slaves; 
They live desolate, in fear and despair.  
………………………………………….87 (My translation) 
 
In these verses, the fate of Buddhism is perceived to be closely related to that of the 
monarchy. This famous poem was composed by Seepanni Sayadaw (1817-1894), who 
was the abbot of Seepanni, a royal monastery, during the reigns of Mindon (1853-1878) 
and Thibaw (1878-1885). It blames the “senior and junior ministers” for the fall of the 
last Burmese kingdom in 1885, and sheds light on the reaction of the Sangha to the 
political developments in nineteenth century Burma. In this poem, Seepanni Sayadaw 
criticised corrupt ministers and officials for the fate that the king, the kingdom and the 
Buddhist religion were now suffering. On hearing this, Kinwun, who had toured Europe 
as a senior minister under Mindon and was the prime minister under Thibaw, responded 
with a poem, in which he placed the fault with the monarch himself for not adhering to 
righteous rule. Seepanni Sayadaw, however, wrote another poem, as a response to 
Kinwun, arguing that the king entrusted the administration of the kingdom to his cabinet, 
and so the responsibility was that of the ministers.88  
                                                 
87  qD;yef;eDq7mawmf. ygawmfrlwrf;csif;? … rSm;rdkufvSpGm/ udk,frSD7mudk/ udk,fomzsufqD;/ zdumpD;onf/ rSL;juD;rwfi,f/ rmavmEG,fodkh/ 
0SufuG,fvSnfh0dkuf/ olhbufvdkufI/ p@dkufapmif;iJh/ opPmrJhajumifh/ ESpfq,fhckepfESpf/ eef;pH@SpfwGif/ uopfbHkae/ odjum;ajuGodkh/ csufa@$odk7m/ 
ref;_ynfomrS/ rdp>marm[/ yGrf;yGrf;xonfh/ ukvmhEdkifiH/ v$Ja_ymif;pH@Sifh/ avmu"Htõ/ obm0ajumifh/ a*gwrbkef;acgif/ omoema7mifvnf;/ 
ra_ymifr@$ef;/ tarSmifpGef;cJh/ u|ef;oa_y'D/ "7%Dxuf/ cdkrSDae@dk;/ _refhvlrsdK;wdkh/ vefhpdk;xdwfv/ … Kelatha “Seepanni thathanawin (The 
Lineage of Seepanni)” Mandalay thathanawin, IV, p.359. 
88  Ibid, pp.358-361. 
 
122

=== PAGE 130 ===
Although the poem specifically refers to the deposition of the last king, Thibaw, and his 
subsequent exile to India by the British, the sentiment it expresses had been widespread 
since the end of the first Anglo-Burmese war, 1824-1826. However, the second Anglo-
Burmese war is taken as a turning point because the territories lost at the end of the first 
Anglo-Burmese war traditionally belonged to non-Burman people, such as the Mon and 
Arakan, and had been annexed to the Burmese empire less than a century earlier. Their 
loss was not felt as much as the loss of those territories inhabited by the Burman people 
at the end of the second war. The change of attitude on the part of the Sangha towards 
formal examinations, which we will discuss shortly, justifies our point that nationalism 
began soon after the end of the second Anglo-Burmese war.  
 
Trager, on the other hand, sees Burmese nationalism as arising at the end of the Burmese 
monarchy.89 Mendelson agrees with him when he says that nationalism began “as 
colonialism entered the scene”, meaning after the fall of Thibaw or the third Anglo-
Burmese war,90 and concludes that the Sangha did not involve itself in nationalism91. 
However, it seems to me that these scholars have overlooked the way in which the 
Sangha reacted to the political development that occurred immediately after the second 
Anglo-Burmese war and before the third Anglo-Burmese war. 
 
In contrast to Trager and Mendelson, Smith thinks that the Burmese, including the 
Sangha, had been nationalist for centuries, long before the British occupation, and 
therefore Burmese nationalism, which he calls “traditional Burmese nationalism”, was 
not “a reaction to British rule”. But Smith seems to contradict himself because the only 
evidence he quotes is Thibaw’s proclamation of 1885, issued just before the outbreak of 
the third Anglo-Burmese war, in which the king denounced the British as “heretic 
                                                 
89  Trager, Burma, p.43. 
90  Mendelson, pp.173-235. 
91  Ibid, p.173. 
 
123

=== PAGE 131 ===
barbarians” and promised to “uphold the religion, […] the national honour […], and the 
country’s interest […]”.92 Thibaw was born and bred in the shadow of the British, and 
was in this proclamation rallying his subjects to defend the religion, the national honour 
and the country. However, although similar proclamations had been made by previous 
Burmese kings who had conquered their neighbours, there is no evidence that the Sangha 
itself had become nationalist before the end of the second Anglo-Burmese war. In other 
words, the Sangha did not see any danger to the religion when earlier monarchs invaded 
the neighbouring kingdoms; but it was the British advance that was seen as a threat to 
Buddhism. 
 
One of the examples of good cooperation between Mindon and the nationalist Sangha is 
the holding of the fifth Buddhist Council, paGcama saNgAyanA, in 1871.93 In this 
Buddhist Council, which lasted five months and three days, all the Pali canonical texts 
and their commentaries were recited, inscribed both on palm-leaves and on 729 marble 
slabs, by 2400 bhikkhus and some learned officials; and the marble slabs are now 
preserved in the Kuthodaw Pagoda, next to the Sudhamma Hall and the Palace in 
Mandalay.94 So enthusiastic was the king that at one point he, his queen and the crown 
prince took charge of the transcribing of the Suttanta-, Abhidhamma- and Vinaya-piTaka 
respectively.95 Their participation – certainly they did not transcribe the texts themselves 
- was primarily aimed at accruing merit for themselves and providing public affirmation 
of the good work itself. The tradition has it that the decision to inscribe the scriptures on 
marble, despite the cost, was taken to ensure the future of the Buddhist scriptures in the 
event of the whole kingdom falling under the British. This decision was significant in 
                                                 
92  Smith, Religion and Politics, pp.81-86. 
93  ROB, IX, p.748. This recognition is by no means universal even among the Theravada countries. The 
history of Buddhist Council in Thailand differs from that of Burma. Thailand does not recognise the 
Fifth Council held in Mandalay and Burma recognises none of the Buddhist councils held in Chiang 
Mai, Ayutthaya and Bangkok. 
94  Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin, I, p.99. 
95  Ibid, p.86. 
 
124

=== PAGE 132 ===
that it meant the TipiTaka in print book form would not be produced, although a printing 
press was already available in Mandalay. Marble slabs were considered stronger and 
more lasting. This could be interpreted as demonstrating that both the king and the 
Sangha felt besieged by the British who had already occupied Lower Burma. 
 
There was a precedent for a Burmese monarch forging a closer relationship with the 
Sangha after a defeat in battle. One of his predecessors, Bagyidaw (1819-1837), who 
succeeded Bodawpaya and who led the kingdom in the first Anglo-Burmese war, also 
took calculated steps to bring the monarchy closer to the Sangha. Presumably in bad 
times, the king wanted to exploit the moral authority of the Sangha, who wielded great 
influence over the people in the kingdom.  
 
King Bagyidaw began to busy himself, even while he was in the midst of settling 
compensation demanded by the British96, with work that he considered would help the 
sAsana survive longer, such as moving old Buddha statues from place to place for the 
people to worship them97; making new big marble statues of the Buddha98; building 
pagodas and sImAs99; copying the TipiTaka100; and holding the Pathamapyan 
examinations101. It is noteworthy that after losing the war, the king, who now boldly 
claimed to aspire “to become omniscient” in the future102, made every effort to turn 
people’s attention to cultural and religious matters. He made sure that people celebrated 
all the festivals103 and ordered one person from every household to attend the “rejoicing 
ceremony” when he donated a bell to a pagoda.104  
                                                 
96  Harvey, p.302; ROB, VIII, pp.579-580. 
97  ROB, VIII, p.514-517, 536.  
98  Ibid, pp.538, 540-542, 545, 547-561, 564-565, 570.  
99  Ibid, p.537, 609.  
100  Ibid, pp.530-531, 610. 
101  Ibid, pp.576, 612-615. 
102  Ibid, pp.518-519, 528-529, 588. 
103  Ibid, p.559. 
104  Ibid, p.548. 
 
125

=== PAGE 133 ===
3.4 Monastic Education during the Reign of Mindon:  
The Transformation of the Examinations 
In order to show how Mindon set out to forge closer ties with the Sangha, we shall now 
focus on his patronage of monastic education. Despite the difficult political situation he 
faced, Mindon put an enormous effort into promoting monastic education by 
transforming the formal examinations, namely the Vinaya and the Pathamapyan 
examinations; but, unlike Bodawpaya, he did so with diplomacy and shrewdness. In fact, 
Mindon transformed these examinations so shrewdly that the Sangha came to change its 
thinking on monastic education drastically, embracing the formal examinations it had 
once so vehemently opposed.  
 
Mindon transformed the Vinaya examination, started under Bodawpaya (1782-1819), 
from a basic Vinaya examination into a specialised pursuit. Earlier, under Bodawpaya, 
the Vinaya examination syllabus had been too basic105, a training which novices had 
acquired soon after their initiation; and to test any monk on that elementary syllabus 
amounted to humiliation. Although the old syllabus of the Vinaya examinations 
introduced by Bodawpaya continued to be taught during the time of Mindon, it was not 
included in the new syllabus. Indeed, Mindon no longer asked the Sudhamma Sayadaws 
to assess the monks and novices on that old syllabus; instead the abbots used the old 
syllabus as a foundation course to teach their students in their own monasteries. This 
acceptance modified use of the old Vinaya syllabus also suggests a shift in opinion on the 
part of the abbots. 
 
During Mindon’s time, the Vinaya examinations had all the Vinaya canonical texts as its 
syllabus, which was designed to encourage students to specialise in the Vinaya. These 
                                                 
105  See p.90-91. 
 
126

=== PAGE 134 ===
texts were regarded as the golden words of the Buddha and were the highest authority in 
monastic discipline. A candidate might sit for part or the whole of the Vinaya canon, 
which was divided in Burma into five books. This change apparently satisfied the 
scholarly pride of the monks and also had the effect of raising self-esteem in the 
monastic community.  
 
An increase in the number of candidates in the Vinaya examinations showed the 
psychological effect the change had on the Sangha. In 1860, a year after the founding of 
the capital, Mandalay, there were as many as 60 bhikkhus reciting from memory different 
portions of the Vinaya-piTaka in the Vinaya examinations. The thathanabaing and other 
Sudhamma Sayadaws conducted the examinations, while the king and his queen and 
consorts respectfully listened to the recitation in silence.106  
 
To strengthen the new concept of specialisation-orientated examinations, Mindon 
introduced another examination for those who wished to study the Abhidhamma in depth. 
This examination included in its syllabus all the Abhidhamma canonical scriptures, seven 
texts in total. This further move delighted many leading abbots because the Abhidhamma 
had long been considered in Burma as the most difficult and most important subject of 
the Buddhist scriptures. In fact, as tradition has it, the study of the Abhidhamma was so 
vital to the perpetuation of the Buddhist religion itself that the first sign of the decline of 
Buddhism was thought to be signalled by the disappearance of the PaTThAna, the last book 
of the Abhidhamma. Indeed, in line with this belief, there was in 1870 a three- months-
long discussion of the PaTThAna led by the Sudhamma Sayadaws at a specially built hall 
called PaTThAna Hall.107 In the Abhidhamma examinations, the candidate could choose to 
enter for a part or the whole of the Abhidhamma-piTaka. This development can be 
                                                 
106  Kelatha, cit. I, p.95.  
107  ROB, IX, pp.729-730. 
 
127

=== PAGE 135 ===
considered as the first attempt by the Sangha to encourage memorisation of a collection 
(piTaka/nikAya) on a massive scale. 
 
For the Vinaya and Abhidhamma examinations held in November 1861 there were 350 
candidates. Some recited from memory the whole Vinaya-piTaka; some memorised parts 
of the Abhidhamma-piTaka. The comprehension test was based on what one had recited 
in the oral examination. Mindon came to listen to the recitation with his mother and 
queen in order to accumulate merit. The candidates were not only from the capital, 
Mandalay, but also from nearby cities such as Ava, Sagaing and Amarapura. 108  
 
The modification of the Pathamapyan under Mindon, however, lay not so much in the 
total transformation of its syllabuses, but rather in that of its format. The earlier format, 
as already mentioned, comprising two levels before Bodawpaya and six during his 
(Bodawpaya’s) reign, was divided into two categories: one for candidates for the 
novicehood; and the other for the monkhood. Their design into two levels was obviously 
linked, as discussed in the previous chapter, to the purging of monks and novices by 
Thalun. Recognising the resentment on the part of the Sangha of these two categories 
and the stigma attached to them, Mindon dropped the words shin laung (would-be-
novice) and pazin laung (would-be-monk), thus removing the need to keep Bodawpaya’s 
old Pathamapyan system of two categories and six levels. The decision to drop these two 
derogatory terms also showed that the king had now decided to abandon the 
Pathamapyan as an instrument to control the Sangha in general, and those wishing to 
enter the Order in particular. Instead the new system, comprising four levels, signalled a 
purely religious and academic pursuit, relatively free of any political agenda on the part 
of the monarch. For its part, the Sangha was pleased with this move, as it enabled it for 
                                                 
108  Kelatha, cit., I, p.96. 
 
128

=== PAGE 136 ===
the first time in two hundred years to set aside the unhappy past and its associated 
stigma; and to see the Pathamapyan in a new context.  
 
With some minor changes to the curriculum, the new set-up of the Pathamapyan, as 
noted, had four levels; in fact, only three levels, as we shall see, in terms of its 
syllabuses. The first three levels, called pathamagne (yxri<f), pathamalat (yxrvwf) 
and pathamagyi (yxr}uD;), were respectively the “primary”, “intermediate” and 
“advanced” levels. The highest level, pathamakyaw (yxrausmf) had no separate syllabus. 
Pathamakyaw was the title awarded to the candidate who passed and scored the highest 
marks in the pathamagyi level examinations; so there could be only one pathamakyaw a 
year. A candidate might attempt the pathamakyaw more than once, even though he had 
passed the pathamagyi level. 
 
The new Pathamapyan syllabuses were designed so that a student who passed the 
primary level had a solid foundation in Pali literature and the Abhidhamma, and was able 
to read by himself the suttas in Pali, although no sutta was actually a part of the 
syllabuses. However, Sanskrit was dropped from the new syllabus. Generally, Sanskrit 
was an expertise of the Brahmins, usually from India, at the Burmese court, rather than 
that of monks. Although selected monasteries had studied the subject since the Pagan 
period, only during the reign of Bodawpaya was it introduced, perhaps at the request of 
his thathanabaing, ÑABavaMsa, a Sanskritist, who sent several missions to India to bring 
back Sanskrit works.109  
 
                                                 
109  Between 1808 and 1815, no less than seven missions were sent to India to bring religious and non-
religious texts from there. ROB, VI, pp.xxvi-xxxi. This shows how India was the main source of 
intellectual development for both Bodawpaya and the thathanabaing.  
 
129

=== PAGE 137 ===
The reason for the withdrawal of Sanskrit from the syllabuses is not recorded anywhere 
in the royal orders or in the chronicles of monastic lineages; it can only be inferred here. 
Burmese monastic scholarship had advocated what it considered to be the pure orthodox 
Theravada tradition. Part of this tradition was the preservation of the Pali language, in 
which the Theravada scriptures have been handed down, as against Sanskrit, in which the 
Vedas and the early scriptures of the Mahayana school were written. This sentiment 
famously became a sticking point between the Burmese and Sinhalese learned monks 
who were members of the final editorial committee during the Sixth Buddhist Council, 
chaTTha saNgAyanA, held in Rangoon between 1954 and 1956. The argument, which was 
on which reading of one particular Pali word to choose110, took place between Mahasi 
Sayadaw, also known as U Sobhana, of Burma, and Venerable Ānanda Maitreya, the 
deputy leader of the Sinhalese bhikkhus at the Council and the only representative of the 
Sinhalese Sangha on the final editing committee. Mahasi Sayadaw rejected the 
preference of Venerable Ānanda Maitreya, who backed his argument with a Sanskrit 
text. Mahasi Sayadaw said: Buddha dhamma [the Buddha’s teaching] does not need 
Sanskrit books … [and] it was wrong to seek the help of Brahmanic texts to edit the 
Buddha dhamma.111 Ānanda Maitreya, however, explained that Sanskrit was but a 
language and not a doctrine; and the Pali language itself had borrowed many words from 
Sanskrit. Neither side gave in. But the committee, which had four Burmese 
representatives, voted by a majority to reject the variant reading that was backed by the 
Sanskrit text. 
 
The Burmese Theravada monks view Mahayana school of Buddhism as being corrupted 
by Brahmin beliefs and Sanskrit, in which the early Mahayana scriptures were written 
and preserved, has thus been seen as not suitable for monks to study, lest it corrupts their 
                                                 
110 patthapatthamUlakaM/ patthapatthapulakaM. Vin iii 6. The Committee chose patthapatthamUlakaM. It is 
also the choice of the PTS version (1881). 
111  DhammAlaNkAra, Venerable înanda Maitreya, pp.41-43. 
 
130

=== PAGE 138 ===
Theravada doctrine. This view on Sanskrit language is, however, not shared by every 
Burmese scholar monk. From their biographies, it seems that the minority nikAyas, such 
as the Shwegyin and the DvAra, favoured the study of Sanskrit.112 The second head of the 
Shwegyin-nikAya, the VisuddhArAma Sayadaw of Mandalay, was an expert in Sanskrit. 
He quoted Sanskrit works extensively in his writing. One of his prominent pupils, 
AbhayArAma Sayadaw of Mandalay, wrote a nissaya on the AbhidhAnapadIpikA, a Pali 
dictionary, using Sanskrit works as his authority. The AbhayArAma Sayadaw was famous 
for his teaching of classical Sanskrit grammar, PABiBi’s. 
 
No information we have found so far indicates the year in which the changes in the 
Pathamapyan examinations took place. We only know that, towards the end of Mindon’s 
reign, the new Pathamapyan syllabuses had gained momentum and witnessed a 
substantial increase in the number of candidates. It can be assumed that the 
transformation of the Pathamapyan examinations under Mindon took place only after the 
Fifth Buddhist Council was held in 1871. Before that, the old system modified by 
Bodawpaya must have been in practice. About three years after the Fifth Buddhist 
Council in Mandalay, in 1874, there is evidence that the new system of the Pathamapyan 
examinations had been introduced. There were almost one thousand candidates for the 
examinations according to the new system, including one for the pathamakyaw, and 19 
for the pathamagyi.113 The examinations were also conducted at various halls at 
Sandamuni Pagoda, as Sudhamma Hall, the usual venue, could no longer accommodate 
all the candidates. This clearly shows that the majority of the Sangha had now accepted 
formal examination as a means to promote and perpetuate Buddhism, and resistance at 
this time had thus decreased considerably. 
 
                                                 
112  See JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbhava thanthaya; PaBDitasirI, Shwegyin-nikAya thathanawin; SirIsobhana, 
MahAdvAra-nikAya sAsanavamsadIpanI. 
113  Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin, I, p.113. 
 
131

=== PAGE 139 ===
Mindon also encouraged his sons to study and enter the examinations. Mindon himself, 
as a prince, had studied in a monastery in Amarapura until he was twenty-three years of 
age and knew the monastic scholastic community in the capital well. He “had the best 
education the Buddhist monasteries could give”114 and was “decidedly” the “best 
Burmese monarch of the house of Alaungpaya”.115 We do not know if Mindon ever sat 
the Pathamapyan examination. However, Mindon’s son and his successor, Thibaw, 
completed the pathamagne level in 1875, after which he was ordained as a sAmaBera and 
continued his study. In the following year, he passed the pathamalat and in 1877 the 
pathamagyi.116 On the other hand, although we know of princesses being taught by nuns 
in the palace, we have no record of their taking part in the Pathamapyan examinations.  
 
Syllabuses of the Pathamapyan under Mindon are as follows. 
Preliminary (Junior) Level, (yxri<f/Pathamange) 
1. Eight chapters of the Great Grammar (i.e. KaccAyana): Pali, Burmese paraphrase 
and morphology. 
2. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: the whole text. 
3. Vuttodaya 
4. SubodhAlaNkAra 
5. AbhidhanappadIpikA: PAli and Burmese translation. 
6. MAtikA: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
7. DhAtukathA: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
8. The first five chapters of the Yamaka: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
 
                                                 
114  Scott, p.204. 
115  Marks, Forty Years in Burma, p.145. 
116  Kelatha, cit., I, pp.114-115. 
 
132

=== PAGE 140 ===
Intermediate Level (yxrvwf/ Pathamalat) 
1. Eight chapters of the Great Grammar (i.e. KaccAyana’s): Pali, Burmese 
paraphrase and morphology. 
2. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: the whole text. 
3. Vuttodaya 
4. SubodhAlaNkAra 
5. AbhidhAnappadIpikA: PAli and Burmese translation. 
6. MAtikA: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
7. DhAtukathA: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
8. The whole text of the Yamaka: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
 
Advanced (Senior) Level (yxr}uD;/ Pathamagyi) 
1. Eight chapters of the Great Grammar (i.e. KaccAyana): Pali, Burmese paraphrase 
and morphology. 
2. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: the whole text. 
3. Vuttodaya 
4. SubodhAlaNkAra 
5. AbhidhAnappadipikA: PAli and Burmese translation. 
6. MAtikA: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
7. DhAtukathA: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
8. The whole text of Yamaka: Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis. 
9. PaTThAna: the whole kusala-tika. 
 
 
 
133

=== PAGE 141 ===
3.5 Mindon’s Legacy and the Birth of Various Examination Boards 
Mindon’s legacy in his successful persuasion of the Sangha to accept formal 
examinations was to continue during and after the reign of his son, Thibaw (1878-1885). 
Under Thibaw the Pathamapyan examinations continued to be held with some changes. 
For the pazin laung levels, some works of Burmese authors were added: for example, on 
Pali grammar the SaddatthabhedacintA and the SaddatthasAratthajAlinI, and on the 
Abhidhamma, the SaNkhepavaBBanA and the MaBisAramaGjUsA-TikA were added.117 For 
the first time in history, Thibaw also introduced written examinations while also 
retaining the recitation of text from memory and the interview which usually followed 
it.118 The examinations were conducted up to 1884, a year before Thibaw was deposed 
by the British.119 
 
After the deposition of Thibaw, Mindon’s legacy became even stronger. The growing 
legacy of Mindon is also manifest in the fact that the Sangha itself now took a leading 
role in the promotion of monastic study through formal examinations. The sections of the 
Sangha who continued to resist were now a minority and eventually had to move out 
from Mandalay. This shows that the Sangha’s cooperation with Mindon in promoting 
formal examinations was genuine. In other words, the change of attitude on the part of 
the Sangha towards formal examinations resulted not only from Mindon’s shrewdness in 
his transforming the syllabuses and more importantly the formats of the examinations, 
but also from the fact that the Sangha itself had become nationalist, as discussed earlier, 
since the end of the second Anglo-Burmese war.  
 
                                                 
117  “The Pathama sartaw pyan upade (Regulations for the royal Pathamapyan Examinations)” Collection 
of Upade, II, pp.363-380. 
118  Ibid. 
119  Ibid, pp.381-384. 
 
134

=== PAGE 142 ===
With the capture of King Thibaw, there came the suspension by the British authorities of 
the Pathamapyan examinations, indeed, of all forms of monastic examinations that had 
been held under the patronage of the Burmese king, despite the thathanabaing’s request 
to the British for their continuance. This was because the British adopted a policy of so-
called neutrality towards religion, as stated in Queen Victoria’s proclamation of 1858, 
part of which reads: “…we do strictly charge and enjoin all those who may be in 
authority under us that they abstain from all interference with the religious belief or 
worship of any of our subjects on pain of our highest displeasure.”120 The British also 
rejected from the outset the traditional protection afforded by a Buddhist ruler,121 and 
ended all support for the Sangha. In addition, the judicial power of the thathanabaing 
was taken away. 122  
 
Therefore the Sangha, the people and the old bureaucrats at the Burmese court feared 
that under British rule the end of Buddhism was now a real possibility. During the reign 
of the last Burmese king, Thibaw, there were 1166 monks teaching in Mandalay alone; 
but that number was reduced to less than half in four years.123 The lack of state support 
for the Sangha was considered to be the main factor contributing to this decline as the 
monks left the capital for villages where they could support themselves on alms. But 
there were not many advanced students in the villages, and the villages were not big 
enough to support a big teaching monastery. So, scholar-monks retired to a quiet 
meditative life, leaving their teaching behind. The leading sayadaws in Mandalay were 
one in their opinion that "the sAsana of the Lord Buddha should no longer be neglected as 
it is now, or the sAsana will gradually decline and disappear; even if one cannot support 
the sAsana with material requisites as the Burmese kings did, good Buddhists should 
                                                 
120  Quoted in Kaye Christianity in India, pp.391-2. Also cited in Smith, p.42. 
121  Bischoff, Buddhism in Myanmar, p.58. 
122  Hall, A History of Southeast Asia, p.623. 
123  The Pariyatti SAsanahita hnit taya pyi thahmaing (History of Centennial Pariyatti SAsanahita), p.14. 
 
135

=== PAGE 143 ===
come together to carry out this duty as far as they could, and if the sayadaws were also to 
promote the sAsana through the teaching, the sAsana would certainly prosper".124  
 
This view helped bring the leading members of the Sangha and prominent community 
leaders together in 1898 in Mandalay to consider measures that would help the sAsana 
endure, for the sAsana was the symbol of the Burmese kingdom.125 The prominent 
sayadaws included the thathanabaing Moe Htar Sayadaw U SujAta and the abbots of the 
seventeen largest monasteries126, fourteen of whom had once been royal tutors. Among 
the community leaders were thirteen traders from Mandalay, two barristers, one senior 
government servant, seven Shan Saophas (Sawbwas) from the Shan States, two traders 
from Rangoon, some businessmen from the ruby-town, Mo Gok, and Moulmine and 
Hinzada127and a former minister for marine transportation, a former commander of Mong 
Pai and the son of Kinwun Mingyi, who had been the last prime minister under 
Thibaw.128  
 
It may be noted here that these community leaders came together to support to save their 
religion but ended up becoming influential decision makers in how the textual-orientated 
monastic education system would gradually lose its grounds to the one based on the 
syllabuses for formal examinations. Their support to teacher-monks who taught the 
syllabuses for the SakyasIha examinations and the student-monks who passed those 
examinations meant they were now the real promoters of formal examinations. But few 
of them seems to have realised that this promotion, despite its good intention, would 
                                                 
124  Ibid, p.24. 
125  Ibid, p.13. 
126  The 17 largest monasteries were Moe Htar, Maing Khaing, Moe Gaung, âakkhiNArAma, Kinwun, 
üahAvisuddhArAma, Dok Hlan, Taung Khwin, äaNkArAma, Kyuak Pan Daung, Akauk Wun, Anaukh 
Taik, Allakappa, Anauk Tai Daw Mauk Kyo, Anauk Taik Paung Koo, Bay-me and Khemathivan. 
Ibid, pp.13-4. 
127  Ibid, pp.16-9. 
128  Ibid. 
 
136

=== PAGE 144 ===
achieve its result at the expense of the centuries-old informal textual study method. The 
community leaders would continue to play a prominent role in promoting the existing 
and also the newly introduced formal examination boards after independence.129  
 
One of the measures taken “to promote the sAsana through the teaching” so that “the 
sAsana would certainly prosper” was the introduction of a board of examinations. This 
was to be established without the support of the state. Its aim was to produce competent 
teachers of Buddhism (DhammAcariya) and support them in their teaching. The 
examination board was formally called the Pariyatti SAsanahita association and was 
formed in Mandalay in 1898. The first ever examinations were conducted four years 
later, in 1902. 130 
 
This Pariyatti SAsanahita association in Mandalay was, however, by no means the first of 
its kind. Four years earlier, in 1894, in Rangoon a similar examination board had been 
founded in a similar way, and for the same reason, by leading members of the Sangha 
and the trustees of the Shwedagon pagoda in Rangoon. It was called CetiyaNgaBa 
Pariyatti DhammAnuggaha Association, “the Association of (Shwedagon) Pagoda for the 
Promotion of Buddhist Teachings”. The important position of the Shwedagon pagoda in 
the very heart of the Burmese Buddhists was the key factor in the launch there of the 
Buddhist examination soon after the end of native rule. Shwedagon was neither a 
monastery nor a university but the oldest, the biggest and the most revered place of 
worship; it thus provided much needed authority and support for both lay and monastic 
communities. No doubt the influence of the CetiyaNgaBa was evident in the formation of 
the Pariyatti SAsanahita, for at least one of the trustee members of the Shwedagon was 
also a founder member of the Pariyatti SAsanahita association. The two boards of 
                                                 
129  See also pp.153-155. 
130  See Appendix B for syllabuses of different examinations of the Pariyatti SAsanahita Association, later 
also known as the SakyasIha. 
 
137

=== PAGE 145 ===
monastic examinations became known by the names of the places where the 
examinations were conducted. The Pariyatti SAsanahita became known as sakyasIha 
because its examinations were held in the SakyasIha Pagoda in Mandalay. The 
CetiyangaBa Pariyatti DhammAnuggaha became known as CetiyaNgaBa, meaning the 
pagoda campus. After 1895, when the colonial government changed its mind and 
decided to support the holding of the Pathamapyan examinations, the examinations of 
the two boards, the SakyasIha and the CetiyaNgaBa, became known as amyotha 
sarmeibwe, or national examinations, in contrast to the Pathamapyan examinations, now 
no longer under the auspices of the Burmese king. 
 
The cooperation between the prominent members of the monastic Order and those of the 
lay communities, first in Rangoon and then in Mandalay, in the 1890s thus proved not 
only the change of attitude of the Sangha during the reign of Mindon, but also heralded 
the birth of a Buddhist nationalist movement in the next decade. Since the founding of 
the two associations, the SakyasIha and the CetiyaNgaBa, many more associations 
inspired by Buddhist and nationalist objectives have come into existence. They include 
the Buddha SAsanA-nuggaha of Mandalay (1897), the SAsanadhara of Moulmein (1899), 
the Asoka Society of Bassein (1902), The YMBA of Arakan (1902), the Rangoon 
Buddhist Association (1904) and the Rangoon College YMBA (1906).131 The theme 
uniting these associations was the preservation of amyo, bhatha, thathana, or [Burmese] 
race, language and Buddhism.132 
 
The two associations, the SakyasIha and the CetiyaNgaBa, followed the traditions of the 
Burmese kings. Both adopted Mindon’s reform by retaining, with some minor changes, 
the Vinaya syllabus as a specialised examination. However, in place of the 
                                                 
131  For more see Maung Maung, From Sangha to Laity, pp.1-8.  
132  Ibid, p.5. 
 
138

=== PAGE 146 ===
Pathamapyan, they introduced an examination to produce competent teachers, and this 
would become the most popular of their initiatives. But only the candidates who 
observed the “rains retreat”, in Mandalay in the case of the SakyasIha, in Rangoon in the 
case of the CetiyaNgaBa, were eligible to enter this examination. The reason for not 
continuing to hold Pathamapyan examinations and for limiting the eligibility of the 
candidates was mainly financial. The king was no longer there and it was the Buddhist 
devotees who had to finance the examinations and to support the qualified teachers 
afterwards. A recognised teacher would receive food allowances on a monthly basis from 
the board; but these allowances were not offered to a successful candidate in the Vinaya 
examination, as they were under the Kon-Baung kings. 
 
On the other hand, earlier, during King Mindon’s rule, the teachers who did not follow 
the Pathamapyan syllabuses were under no obligation to teach according to a set 
syllabus, and, in fact, each monastery offered its own syllabus. We have discussed in the 
previous chapter that U ÑABadhaja, known also as Ledi Sayadaw went to Mandalay to 
learn all the major commentaries, aTThakathA133, from well known saydaws. U ÑANadhaja 
studied the same text under different teachers. However, when these two associations 
came along, they changed the way Burmese monastic education was run. The right of 
monasteries to choose their own syllabus was to be de-emphasised, as the associations 
now conducting examinations were to determine which texts were prescribed. The 
academic freedom and authority were to be taken over from the large monasteries by 
those associations who now held institutional power.  
 
The SakyasIha (and CetiyaNgaBa) qualification examination for teachers consisted of two 
levels, the Special Student Grade (sarthin-tan) and the Special Teacher Grade (sarkhya-
                                                 
133  We have already noted that none of the Pali commentaries formed a part of the Kon-Baung syllabuses, 
however, all the commentaries were vigorously studied throughout the dynasty. 
 
139

=== PAGE 147 ===
tan), with the first level open only to a bhikkhu below 7 years of ordination in the case of 
SakyasIha, and 10 years in the case of CetiyaNgaBa; and the other level to one below 15 
years of ordination. The minimum mark for a simple pass was very high 70%. The 
examinations conducted by these two examination boards were therefore hard to pass, 
with less than five percent of the candidates succeeding each year.134  
 
Those successful in the Teacher Grade, also known as dhammAcariya level, were and still 
are awarded a dhammAcariya degree recognizing them as teachers of the Dhamma. The 
dhammAcariya degree holders from these two associations add the word abhivaMsa, 
“higher lineage” to their name, thus Janaka becomes JanakAbhivaMsa.135 With the suffix 
abhivaMsa, the two associations have created an “ivory” class of teachers in the Sangha. 
Here again, the title abhivaMsa suffixing the name of a successful candidate indicates 
how important the examination board considered it to be to produce and support teachers 
who would ensure the perpetuation of monastic scholarship, which was obviously 
deemed to be in danger under British rule. For the last one hundred years, the holders of 
the dhammAcariya degree from these two examination boards have been the most 
influential in monastic education in Burma. They were to become the leaders in the 
revival of Buddhism once Burma regained her freedom from Britain in 1948. Moreover, 
the two examination boards would inspire the Sangha and the people in other cities, such 
as Moulmein, Thaton and Myingyan, to follow them, by setting up similar boards of 
examination to preserve and promote the study of the words of the Buddha during 
colonial rule.  
 
                                                 
134  The SakyasIha proudly announces in its centenary anniversary that in the first 36 years of its existence, 
there have been only 138 dhammAcariya recipients, and between 1947-70 the dhammAcariya degree 
has been awarded only to 112. Pariyatti SAsanahita hnit taya pyi thahmaing, p.147.  
135  The CetiyaNgaBa adds abhivaMsa to the name of the successful candidates after he completed the 
Student Grade but the SakyasIha confers the title abhivaMsa only after the candidate passed the 
Teacher Grade. 
 
140

=== PAGE 148 ===
The Mandalay method as it is seen in the dhammAcariya examinations may be briefly 
described here. This is the way the questions are set: a passage of usually not more than 
ten lines from the prescribed text would be selected, which is then divided into several 
fragments. Ten questions are set from those fragments to examine the students’ ability in 
translation, Pali grammar, Buddhist philosophy, syntax, Abhidhamma, text connection, 
verse compilation, the use of upasagga and nipAta, “particles”, and other commentarial 
methods such as ways of determining the nature of sentences (vAkyattha).  
 
The Mandalay school has developed numerous treatises on methods of mastering the 
TipiTaka. It takes two years for an exceptionally capable student to read them and up to 
12 years for a less able one. An auxiliary work called Payagyi Niyam is an example of 
how one could study writing in Pali and commentarial methods. Written in Burmese 
poetic language, it is a summary of all Pali grammatical rules, with the length of each 
rule usually two lines, and the whole runs to around 254 sentences or 15 pages of A4 
size.136 One has to study it under guidance in order to comprehend it fully. This Payagyi 
Niyam is widely used throughout the country and was written by Payagyi Sayadaw, the 
abbot of the Payagyi monastery. This is how naywa, “day-lessons”, are taught in 
Mandalay, and thus we have Mandalay-nee or the Mandalay method. 
 
Apart from its emphasis on grammatical study, the Mandalay-nee studies the 
Abhidhamma, both exegetical and canonical works, through tables. For example, one can 
study MUla Yamaka and Khandha Yamaka with only three tables each. One is taught 
how to produce the original Pali passages in the canonical text without ever having seen 
the original. And there are many different interpretations of a passage, not so much of a 
text, in the Mandalay method. So a student may spend as much as several months 
                                                 
136  KhantIcAra, Question and Answer on Payagyi Niyam, pp.1-33. 
 
141

=== PAGE 149 ===
studying only a few passages in a Pali text from various teachers. Therefore it is essential 
to the Mandalay method that one lives in Mandalay and follows lectures by a particular 
teacher, who may be one of those who set the questions. This is known as saya-abaw, 
“teachers’ opinions”, that are final in interpreting any passage of the prescribed texts. 
Mandalay teachers often make literary criticism of each other, although a student is not 
encouraged to present his own interpretation. To study a sutta in the Mandalay method 
one has to have studied some Pali grammar and basic Buddhist philosophy. These basic 
courses are in theory found in the Pathamapyan syllabuses, which follow the Mandalay-
nee. In practice, however, the Pathamapyan syllabuses themselves are no longer 
adequate for students to grasp Pali grammar and basic Buddhist philosophy. Generally, 
the Mandalay method consists of two stages: primary and advanced. This is evident in 
the SakyasIha main examinations, which have two levels, the Special students’ Grade 
(sarthin-tan) and the Special teachers’ Grade (sarkhya-tan). All the necessary 
foundations are given at the students’ level, while three commentaries137, one from each 
PiTaka, are extensively studied at advanced level. In the case of the SakyasIha, at both 
levels questions and answers are short and not always found in printed books.  
 
Despite having learnt many techniques for mastering the TipiTaka in a shorter time, a 
student in the Mandalay method does not become well-read. He may still have to read 
half of the Vinaya-piTaka at the end of his training. This makes him less well-informed 
and does not enable him to develop a general understanding of a certain topic, for 
instance, about the development of the early monastic community, because he has not 
read the whole Vinaya-piTaka. But the good students of the Mandalay-nee are known for 
their thorough knowledge of Pali grammar and for their skill in explaining the hidden 
                                                 
137  SamantapAsAdikA, SumaNgalavilAsinI and ATThasAlinI – traditionally all by Buddhaghosa. 
 
142

=== PAGE 150 ===
meaning of the Pali passages in a canonical text. This is particularly true of the SakyasIha 
students in the first half of the twentieth century. 
 
 
3.6 The Remaining Resistance to Formal Examinations at Pakhokku 
After the teaching method based on formal examinations had come to be known as the 
Mandalay method at the close of the nineteenth century, the other teaching method, 
which had been the main system of monastic pedagogy in Burma until then, came to be 
called the Pakhokku method, and represented the remaining force of resistance to formal 
examinations. As noted earlier, after the fall of Mandalay the resistance became confined 
to a minority within the Sangha in Mandalay. So distinct had those who continued to 
resist become that they came to be seen as a separate school of thought. It is this school, 
the Pakhokku academic tradition, that Mendelson mistakenly calls a Mindon sect. The 
origin of the Pakhokku tradition is linked to the popularity of formal examinations in 
Mandalay. As a reaction to the ever-growing examination-orientated tradition, the leader 
of this school of thought, Sayadaw U GandhasAra, also known as Yezagyo Sayadaw, set 
up a monastery in Pakhokku, and hence the name Pakhokku nee, “Pakhokku method or 
school of thought”. This school of thought believed that the formal examination system 
that had been introduced by the kings could corrupt candidates, due to rewards in the 
form of material benefit and positions in the hierarchy. It also considered the royally 
sponsored examination a measure designed to take away the freedom of a teacher to 
assess his pupils as he saw fit.  
 
A senior pupil of the thathanabaing U Ñeyya, Yezagyo Sayadaw named the new 
monastery after his teacher’s royal monastery in Mandalay, MahA VisutArAma (great 
 
143

=== PAGE 151 ===
famous monastery)138, retaining its emphasis on learning. The MahA VisutArAma 
monastery in Pakhokku was founded in 1901, three years after the founding of the 
SakyasIha association. Within eight years of its founding, the number of students at the 
MahA VisutArAma in Pakhokku rose from fifty to three hundred.139 The MahA VisutArAma 
has since established many branches in Pakhokku as well as in other parts of the country. 
 
Away from both ancient and present seats of governments such as Mandalay and 
Rangoon, Pakhokku was a small town situated on the bustling Irrawady River in central 
Burma. While its economic conditions were generally hard, as “a city of learning” 
Pakhokku has, in the words of some European travellers, “great religious foundations 
akin to the colleges of Oxford or Cambridge”, and was “famed across the land for its 
tradition of philosophy and scholarship”.140 The hundreds of monks attracted to learning 
the “great texts of the Pali NikAyas” 141 from the famous teachers were too many to find 
accommodation in such a small town.  
 
In Pakhokku, there was no particular syllabus for students; it held no examinations of its 
own, and did not enter its students for examinations held in other places. Just as in the 
ancient monastic learning tradition, the emphasis in the Pakhokku teaching was to 
become familiar with the great texts i.e. Pali canonical, commentarial and sub-
commentarial texts, by going through them thoroughly and as quickly as possible; hence 
the name usrf;}uD;azmuf, (kyan gyi phauk) “digging through great texts”. Also encouraged 
in Pakhokku was to “dig through” the same text again and again so that one becomes a 
real master of it. Once regarded as having dug through the great texts, a student became 
                                                 
138  Built in 1854 AD by Mindon. Kelatha, Mandalay thathanawin I, p.88. 
139  By 1980 it had branches in 123 towns and cities with over 2200 teachers. Kelatha, MahA VisutArAma 
gaBavAcaka-nikAya thahmaing hmattan kyan (History of the MahA VisutArAma gaBavAcaka-nikAya), 
pp.1, 15& 28. 
140  Strachan, Mandalay, p.111. 
141  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbhava thanthaya, p.235. 
 
144

=== PAGE 152 ===
known as usrf;}uD;ayguf (kyan gyi pauk) “one who has dug through the great texts”, and in 
fact this term was a recognition of being a scholar. U KoBDaGGa, the first abbot of the 
Payagyi monastery, a branch of the MahA VisutArAma, in Rangoon, was reported to have 
said that “following the instruction of the Pakhokku sayadaws, we have to cover all the 
five nikAyas and [therefore] have no time to teach examination syllabuses”.142 The Pali 
NikAyas formed a central part of the curriculum, and they were studied with 
commentaries and sub-commentaries under a teacher. 143 The Pakhokku disapproved of 
the Mandalay method for wasting time on auxiliary works that do not help one directly 
to “see the Buddha”. Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa acknowledged that in Pakhokku he was 
taught “higher texts (athet-kyangyi) of the Pali NikAyas, which were not usually taught 
[even] in Mandalay144”. Like any ancient informal textual study, the method of study was 
to paraphrase Pali passages into Burmese. According to Pakhokku sayas, “Pakhokku 
masters”, this was the way one could master both Pali and the TipiTaka at the same time. 
The Pakhokku method also retained the tradition of a zar-so, “reciter of Burmese 
paraphrase”, who was treated as an assistant teacher.145 A Pakhokku zar-so was well 
respected in any part of the country. 
 
Up to the 1950s many students went to both Pakhokku and Mandalay for their education, 
indicating the popularity of both schools and their place in the Burmese monastic 
education. Leading Shwegyin sayadaws, such as Ashin Aggadhamma (1878-1943) (also 
known as AbhayArAma Sayadaw), Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa (1890-1977) and Ashin 
VimalAbhivaMsa (1911-2003), the thirteenth head of Shwegyin-nikAya, had been trained 
in Pakhokku. However, given the impracticality for the majority of the students of 
                                                 
142  Shwe, Pariyatti thathana kodwe hmatdan (Personal Experience with Pariyatti SAsana), pp.40-41. 
143  Kelatha, MAhA VisutArAmika gaBavAcaka, pp.76-8. 
144  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tabhava thanthaya, p.23. & Bhatha-thwe, p.89. He had a dhammAcariya degree from 
the SakyasIha examinations, the highest qualification offered in the Mandalay tradition and at 22 was 
also a lecturer at the MahAvisutArAma, Pakhokku. JanakAbhivaMsa, Patimok Bhathatika, p.iii. 
145  JanakAbhivaMsa,Tatbhava thanthaya, p.144. 
 
145

=== PAGE 153 ===
having to stay in both Pakhokku and Mandalay for many years, the number of the Sangha 
trained in both schools, though influential, must have been relatively small. And neither 
of the two traditions committed to memory the suttas, although some basic texts, such as 
KaccAyana’s Pali, the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha and the PAtimokkha, were learnt by heart 
in both schools. 
 
Being a higher study centre, the Pakhokku tradition did not teach a foundation course. It 
also lacked any formal examination in a way that lay supporters and patrons could be 
convinced that the monks had made progress in study. Because of these two factors, the 
Mandalay method has become more popular throughout the country. With oral and 
written tests, and the award of certificates, it was easier for other parts of the country to 
adopt Mandalay teaching method as standard. The most important factor was, however, 
that since the Ava period, as we have discussed so far, the Mandalay method has been 
favoured by successive governments for it had formal examinations.  
 
Each tradition had its own excellence and, perhaps, shortcomings. The Pakhokku student 
was valued for his mastery of a wealth of information, and for the ease with which he 
could locate any reference within the canon. The Mandalay student, however, was 
marked by his mastery of grammar and logic. It was felt that any deficiencies of a 
particular method were remedied when one came to teach: the one who had a lot of 
information at his fingertips learnt coherence and logic through his teaching; the one who 
was skilled in grammar and logic found out how to apply them practically by acquiring 
more information. The problem would, however, be that, as qualifications from various 
formal examination boards became increasingly important, the teachers would not get to 
teach “great texts” which would bring them a wealth of information for students had no 
time to study these texts because, as mentioned in Chapter One, they were not a part of 
 
146

=== PAGE 154 ===
the syllabuses for examinations. Although both methods were highly regarded in the 
Order, nevertheless, successive governments, as we shall see in the next section, have 
ignored the Pakhokku method, and thereby caused damage to both methods, and indeed, 
in the long run, to the study of Buddhist scriptures.  
 
 
3.7 Monastic Education under the British 
If the SakyasIha was the direct legacy of Mindon on the structure of monastic education 
during the colonial rule, that legacy would also be maintained by the colonial 
government, who had initially refused, as noted earlier, to accord traditional support to 
the Sangha but later sought to limit the damage caused by their decision. In fact, the 
promotion of formal examinations was no less of a success under colonial rule than 
Mindon. In this section, we shall briefly describe monastic education in Burma under the 
British, focussing mainly on the Pathamapyan examinations.  
 
Ten years after their conquest of Mandalay, in 1895, the British authorities, who had 
suspended all formal examinations earlier, revived the Pathamapyan, “as a means of 
winning the goodwill of the Buddhist monks and securing their cooperation in the 
general work of education”.146 The colonial authorities wanted to encourage the 
monasteries to teach not only their traditional faith-based curriculum but also the 
curriculum prepared by the Department of Public Instruction, which was secular in 
nature.147 Efforts to induce the monasteries to include some form of secular curriculum 
would be made over the next two decades. Although these efforts, as we shall see in 
Chapter Six, were generally not successful, by 1916, only 3416 out of 19,416 monastery 
                                                 
146  Report on Public Instruction in Burma, 1895-1896, Resolution, p.5. 
147  Ibid, 1891-1892, Upper Burma, p.2. 
 
147

=== PAGE 155 ===
schools were registered with the Department of Public Instruction as incorporating some 
secular subjects in their curriculum.  
 
Meanwhile, the revival by the British authorities of the Pathamapyan examinations came 
during the period when the leading members of the Sangha and the community leaders 
expressed, as noted earlier, anxiety over the future of the Buddhist religion. Indeed, when 
the colonial authorities took the decision to support the Pathamapyan, an independent 
board of monastic examinations, namely the CetiyaNgaBa, had been founded and, 
another, the SakyasIha, was in the process of being formed. It was a timely good gesture 
by the British authorities to revive the Pathamapyan in the name of promoting Pali 
scholarship, without necessarily abandoning their own policy of neutrality towards 
Buddhism. 
 
Under colonial rule the conduct of the Pathamapyan examinations was no less 
successful. Indeed, the colonial authorities did better in some cases because of their 
capable administration. For example, under the Burmese kings the examinations were 
held only in the capital. However, under the colonial government the Pathamapyan were 
conducted concurrently in four cities, namely Mandalay, Rangoon, Moulmein and 
Akyab, and were open not only to monks but also to nuns, laymen and laywomen (at the 
suggestion of Taw Sein Ko, the Commissioner of Archaeology, in 1903). The travelling 
expenses of successful candidates for the journey from their home to the examination 
centres and back were paid by Government. The number of the candidates was, 
therefore, substantially higher than under the native rulers. In 1905 the number of 
candidates was over four hundred, and by 1912 it was 1,200. Though in the early 1920s 
the number of candidates decreased, owing to the pressure of the nationalist movement, 
 
148

=== PAGE 156 ===
throughout the 1930s over 3,500 candidates entered the Pathamapyan examinations each 
year. Between one-fourth and one-third of them were successful.148 
 
The number of the levels in the Pathamapyan examinations remained the same as during 
the reign of Mindon and Thibaw. There were four levels: pathamange (preliminary); 
pathamalat (intermediate); pathamagyi (advanced) and pathamakyaw. Every successful 
candidate, except the one who passed the highest level, was given a certificate, signed by 
the president of the examination committee; and the pathamakyaw, the candidate who 
gained the highest marks at the pathamagyi level, was presented a certificate signed by 
the Lieutenant-Governor, then the highest colonial official in Burma. Although rewards 
given by the Burmese kings to those who were successful in the Pathamapyan were not 
restored, the colonial authorities introduced a new kind of reward in the form of money. 
It was 50, 75, 100 and 150 Rupees respectively for the four levels. To laymen, rewards 
were given in money; and to monks an option was given to choose the form of their 
reward.149 
 
The colonial government also wanted to update the syllabuses of the Pathamapyan and 
set up a modern higher institute of learning for monks. Although the Pathamapyan 
curriculum was not altered in anyway, the government announced in 1939: “The 
Governor of Burma desires to expedite the formulation of a scheme for the establishment 
of a Pali University and Colleges”. A committee of five men was therefore appointed to 
inquire into the possibilities of setting up such institutions.150 But despite a favourable 
report by the committee, the plan to set up institutes of higher learning was abandoned 
due to the advance of World War II. But after the war, the colonial government, which 
                                                 
148  Report on Public Instruction in Burma, Quinquennial Report, 1917-1922, p.22. 
149  Education Code, pp.172-173; Taw Sein Ko, “Pali Examinations” Burmese Sketches, I, pp.248-249. 
150  Report of the Pali University Inquiry Committee, p.12. 
 
149

=== PAGE 157 ===
had returned after the defeat of the Japanese in 1943, introduced a set of examinations for 
higher study.  
 
This degree course was, in fact, not a new creation by the colonial government but rather 
an adoption of the degree course from the CetiyaNgaBa and the SakyasIha, which had 
been in existence for half a century. 151 The SakyasIha dhammAcariya degree holders, 
such as JanakAbhivaMsa, were asked to set questions, ensuring further the legacy of 
Mindon in the wider monastic community, because the government dhammAcariya 
would be held in Rangoon and Mandalay, and then expanded to many big cities 
throughout the country. The highest level in the Pathamapyan examinations, the 
pathamagyi, was recognised as an entrance qualification for the DhammAcariya degree 
course. Following the CetiyaNgaBa and the SakyasIha, the degree course was called the 
dhammAcariya, “the teacher of dhamma”. However, there was a new dimension added to 
the government DhammAcariya degree course. There were six honours degree courses, 
the syllabuses of which belonged to what had been known as the “great texts”, namely 
the Vinaya-piTaka, the DIgha-nikAya (from sutta no. 14 as the first 13 suttas were part of 
the dhammAcariya degree syllabus), the ANguttara-nikAya, the SaMyutta-nikAya, the 
Majjhima-nikAya and the PaTisaMbhidAmagga.152 There were still, however, some texts 
                                                 
151  Pariyatti SAsanahita hnit taya pyi thahmaing, p.33. 
152  Although the government dhammAcariya was created after the CetiyaNgaBa and the SakyasIha model, 
the wording of the title of the government dhammAcariya degree was modified. The wording in the 
CetiyaNgaBa and the SakyasIha dhammAcariya degree was pariyatti-sAsana-hita-dhammAcariya (the 
teacher of dhamma who benefits the learning of the scriptures) whereas in the government 
dhammAcariya, the degree was worded as sAsana-dhaja-dhammAcariya (the teacher of dhamma who is 
the banner of the sAsana). For the degree in Honours Course in Burmese medium was called 
sAsanadhaja-sirIpavara-dhammAcariya (the glorious teacher of dhamma who is a distinguished banner 
of the sAsana) and for one in the Pali medium is sAsana-dhaja-dhammAcariya ANguttara-nikAya -PAli-
PAragU (the teacher of dhamma who is the banner of the sAsana and an authority on the ANguttara-
nikAya and the Pali language), if the paper was the ANguttara-nikAya. The word ANguttara -nikAya 
changed if it was another paper, for example, the DIgha-nikAya, and the degree would be worded as 
sAsana-dhaja-dhammAcariya-DIgha-nikAya-PAli-pAragU). 
 
150

=== PAGE 158 ===
from the Khuddaka-nikAya, for instance the ApadAna and the SuttanipAta, which were not 
included in the syllabuses.153  
 
In any case, this was the first ever attempt to bring most of the “great texts” into the 
syllabuses for formal examinations. If these Honours Degree courses, arranged in two 
mediums, Burmese and Pali, became popular, the study of the “great texts” would not, at 
least in theory, be confined to bookshelves in the monasteries. In practice, however, as 
the practice of textual study gradually lost grounds to the formal examinations orientated 
form of study over the years, these Honours Degree courses came to exist almost merely 
on papers because even in all the six courses there had been less than ten successful 
candidates each year. The number of successful candidates was low. Another reason for 
the drop in the number of successful candidates was the high marks required for an 
ordinary pass, which was 75%. The situation in the Pali medium was even worse because 
of excellent knowledge of Pali that one had to demonstrate in the art of commentary. 
 
Since then, in Burma a monk with a DhammAcariya degree from all these three separate 
examination boards, namely the SakyasIha, the CetiyangaBa, and the government, would 
simply be known as sa.ca.a (o.p.t)154 in brief and be highly respected among monastic 
scholars. The DhammAcariya degree holders would in turn transform the attitude of 
younger members of the Sangha. Almost all members of the Sangha in Burma would 
come to see formal examinations as vital to perpetuating and promoting the words of the 
Buddha. 
                                                 
153  In the Khuddaka-nikAya, the Dhammapada was a part of the Pathamapyan syllabuses for nuns and lay 
people. The JAtaka was also included in the Pathamapyan syllabuses in all levels. The VimAna- and 
Peta-vatthu were considered similar to the JAtaka commentary from literary point of view and were 
not studied as a part of examinations. The MilindapaNhA and the PeTakopadesa had never been part of 
monastic curriculum even before formal examinations became popular. The NettipakaraBa, which had 
been studied by many for the sixteen categories of analysis (hAra) was made a part of the 
DhammAcariya degree course. 
154  o is a Burmese abbreviation for the SakyasIha, p for the CetiyangaBa, and t (tpkd;7) for government. 
 
151

=== PAGE 159 ===
However, despite its successful introduction of the dhammAcariya course, the colonial 
government faced persistent problems in its attempt to set up a Pali university based on 
western university model. The attempt to found a western style higher institution for the 
Sangha was first made in 1924, four years after Rangoon College, affiliated to Calcutta 
University, was established. The plan, devised by Professor Pe Maung Tin, the principal 
of the Rangoon College, was to form a Pali university in Mandalay with existing eminent 
teaching monasteries as its affiliated colleges as Oxford University. This proposal was 
made by Maung Tin following his return from Exeter College at Oxford where he 
translated the famous Burmese historical work, The Chronicle of the Glass Palace and 
The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga). 
 
Monastic scholars in Mandalay, on the other hand, saw no reason why such a university 
should be created as they were doing their job perfectly. While the influence of 
nationalism, already begun in Rangoon, played a part in the Sangha’s rejection of the 
proposal is not known, many members of the Sangha in Mandalay at that time 
considered the proposal as patronising, especially as it came from lay people, albeit 
scholars. The mistake, however, seems, in my opinion, to have occurred during the 
consultation process. The colonial authorities and Maung Tin went to discuss the plan 
with the Sangha only after it had been devised, not at the beginning. Besides, instead of 
using Nalanda, the Buddhist University in India, which was known to the monks, as a 
model, the planners made Oxford, which the monks did not know. The failure also 
resulted from the fact that the plan was purely educational, understandably due partly to 
the neutral policy of the British on religion in their colony, and partly to the fact that no 
whatsoever missionary objective was attached to the plan. The importance of the 
inclusion of missionary zeal would become evident when we look at how U Nu, the first 
 
152

=== PAGE 160 ===
prime minister of independent Burma was successful in persuading the Sangha to agree 
to his Sangha university plan in Chapter Six.155  
 
After Burma had won independence form Britain in 1948, Mindon’s influence in 
persuading the Sangha to accept formal examinations was to continue as three important 
agents, the Sangha, the state and the community leaders, came together to promote a 
shared cause. This was unprecedented because during the reign of Mindon, the king was 
the only driving force and had to persuade the Sangha, which was finally won over. 
Under Mindon, although the royals and ministers participated, the community leaders 
were not involved. Under the colonial rule, first it was the Sangha and the Buddhist 
community leaders, as we have discussed, who promoted formal examinations but when 
the Pathamapyan was revived in 1895 it was only the state and the Sangha working 
together because the community leaders chose to confine themselves to the non-
governmental boards of examinations, such as the SakyasIha. After the independence, 
however, the three main players were involved together in promoting formal 
examinations as the way to revive and advance the BuddhasAsana. A good example was 
the creation of a new board of examinations called the TipiTakadhara Selection 
Examinations, TSE (TipiTakadhara ywe che yay sarmeibwe). 
 
A mere glance at the composition of the board of the TSE would show that the 
promotion of formal examinations in post-independent Burma has been unprecedented. 
Out of the three main components of the TSE, the state was led by two highest 
politicians, President Sao Shwe Thaik, who also held the position of the Shan Saopha of 
Yawnghwe in Shan State, and Prime Minister U Nu, both of whom were known to the 
Sangha for their piety. The Buddhist community was led by Sir U Thwin, a successful 
                                                 
155  See also pp.291-296. 
 
153

=== PAGE 161 ===
businessman, who was also a senator during the colonial time. Members of the Sangha, 
nine altogether, were all the learned sayadaws from Rangoon; none of the famous 
sayadaws from Mandalay was invited to join the Board of TSE because leading monastic 
scholars from there would not have supported any move to form a new board of 
examinations that would challenge what they considered to be the superiority of the 
SakyasIha. Not until 1983, more than three decades after the TSE had begun that the 
Sangha from Mandalay started to accept the TSE and participate in its promotion.156 
 
As indicated by its name, the main purpose of the TSE was to produce “heroes in the 
Buddhist Order”, thathana a-za-ni, “who could recite the whole TipiTakadhara from 
memory”.157 These “heroes”, it has been explained by successive governments, would be 
able “to promote Buddhism in a way that was more advanced” than what others have 
been able to do. The urgent need to set up the TSE, however, was the intention on the 
part of the Burmese government to claim a leading role among the Theravada countries 
in reviving Buddhism after the World War II. To that end, the government wanted to 
hold a Buddhist council, saNgIti, to mark the 2500th anniversary of the Buddha’s 
mahAparinibbAna, in which governments and learned monks from all other Theravada 
countries would participate. However, when a mission was sent to those countries as a 
part of preparation for a Buddhist council, the SangharAja of Thailand expressed 
scepticism if Burma, a country that had been under a foreign rule for a century, would 
have enough learned monks to hold a Buddhist council. It is said that a similar 
reservation was communicated by the leading Sri Lankan monks, whose nation had been 
colonised even longer than Burma, to their Burmese counterparts. However, Prime 
Minister U Nu and Sir U Thwin, and indeed also the Chief Justice, U Chan Htoon, who 
                                                 
156  See TipiTakadhara shweyatu sarzaung (The Golden Jubilee of the TipiTakadhara Selection 
Examinations), pp.124-131. 
157  Sobhita (Chairman of the State Sangha MahanAyaka Committee) “UyyojanakathA (Preface)” 
TipiTakadhara Shweyatu sarzaung, p.5; General Sein Htwa (Minister for Religious Affairs), 
“Ohnyawzin katha (Preface)” ibid, p.9. 
 
154

=== PAGE 162 ===
became another member important member of the TSE board, believed that the Burmese 
Sangha had the ability to lead a Buddhist council but at the same time accepted that 
Burma had to win over the sceptical Thai and Sri Lankan Sangha. To achieve that 
objective, the board of TSE was created by the government who had a bill passed 
through parliament. Through this TipiTakadhara Act (1949), a body called SAsanAnuggaha 
was also formed to assist the TSE. Smith thus observes: “The decision to convene 
another great council to re-edit the scriptures, only eighty-odd years later, derived from 
both religious and non-religious considerations.”158 
 
The syllabuses of the TSE, in theory, covered the whole TipiTaka, Vinaya-, Sutta-, and 
Abhidhamma-piTaka, for oral examinations, and for written tests the commentaries and 
sub-commentaries were also included. In practice, however, only half of the TipiTaka 
syllabus was included for the Sutta-piTaka in the syllabuses included only the Digha-
nikAya. In the first two years, there were few monks who entered even for one part of the 
syllabuses. To ensure the continuity of the TSE, one of the founders, Sir U Thwin, asked 
a monk, Ashin VicittasArAbhivaMsa, whom he was a yahandakA (lay supporter during the 
Upassampada ordination), to enter the TSE. Ashin VicittasArAbhivaMsa was an 
exceptionally bright young teacher, who had had the pathamakyaw and SakyasIha 
dhammAcariya degrees, with a gold seal for completing the two levels, sarthin-tan and 
sarkhya-tan, of the SakyasIha consecutively.  
 
Five years later, in 1954, just before the start of the Sixth Buddhist Council, 
VicittasArAbhivamsa completed the whole syllabuses of the TSE in both oral and written 
examinations. With his achievement, the government of Burma was able to win over the 
sceptical Sangha from Thailand and Sri Lanka. One of the two leaders of the Sri Lanka 
                                                 
158  Smith, cit., p.158. 
 
155

=== PAGE 163 ===
Sangha at the Sixth Buddhist Council, Venerable BalangoDa Ānanda Maitreya said that 
he was very impressed with the TipiTakadhara of Burma, Ashin VicittasArAbhivamsa.159 
Since then, successive governments have sponsored the TSE annually and by 1999, at 
the golden jubilee celebrations, Burma had only six successful candidates in the TSE. 
They were held in the highest esteem by the government, the Sangha and the Buddhist 
population as model monks. Many young monk-scholars have followed their footsteps 
but it is the prestige that being a TipiTakadhara brings that seems to have inspired most of 
the candidates. This is well expressed in an article by one of the TSE candidates, Ashin 
IndapAla, who has himself completed more than two-thirds of the syllabuses. He writes: 
“People from around the country honour a TipiTakadhara with generous donations. These 
donations can then be used [by the monks] for hospitals and schools. People wish to 
listen to the preaching of a TipiTakadhara. They pay more attention to his advice.”160 The 
material benefits from the success in the TSE has been very attractive. For candidate who 
has passed one third of the syllabuses, one piTaka, he is given a VIP ticket for unlimited 
travel on air, by sea and on land within the country. His parents, if still alive, will be 
looked after by the government. The honour brought by a success in the TSE among the 
people is even higher. The TipiTakadhara monks are described as “heroes of the sAsana” 
and are worthy of honour. 
 
However, there has been some negative impact of the TSE felt in many ways. Since the 
TSE candidates prepare for the examinations only by themselves and in special 
monasteries where they are well looked after, the study of the whole canon has not 
become wide spread. On the contrary, it has declined for the way in which the TSE 
candidates are encouraged to prepare for their examinations and because of the 
impression that the “great texts” can be pursued through self-study and are thus no 
                                                 
159  Personal communication. 
160  IndapAla, “khet yew tan phoe shi thi, tan phoe shi ywe khet thi (Worthy Because It is Difficult, It is 
Difficult Because It is Worthy)” TipiTakadhara Shweyatu sar-zaung, pp.236. See also ibid. pp.227-235. 
 
156

=== PAGE 164 ===
longer taught in most leading monasteries. Moreover, those who continue with informal 
textual study of the “great texts”, for example, in Pakhokku, have come to be 
overlooked. The monasteries in Pakhokku are not well supported as those which teach 
the syllabuses for formal examinations because the government would not promote them 
and thus the people from other parts of the country would not know them. As for as well-
to-do lay Buddhists, on whose generosity the teaching monasteries depend, are 
concerned the Pakhokku monasteries are local concerns and, not national as the TSE.  
 
The promotion of formal examinations in post-independent Burma was also intensified 
by the government when it set up, in 1950, a Pali University through the Pali University 
and Dhammacariya Act. The Pali University had no campus but consisted of member 
monasteries from all over the country, whose representatives might sit on the central 
committee. From the central committee the executive committee was formed. In order to 
qualify as a member college, a monastery must have a minimum of ten monks studying 
for the dhammAcariya level. The running of each college and the appointment of 
lecturers were made the sole responsibility by the principal. Membership of the Pali 
University would lapse if, within six years of its enrolment, less than thirty percent of its 
candidates passed or if the number of students was below the required total. A member 
monastery was annually granted fixed financial support of five hundred Kyats. In 
addition, each lecturer received sixty Kyats.161 The impact of the financial assistance on 
member monasteries was, as John Brohm, who has studied the Buddhist revival after 
independence in Burma, notes, minimal; but the prestige of being a member college was 
high, especially in the eyes of the wealthy urban Buddhist laymen, who provided more 
assistance than the government did.162 The government, on the other hand, used the 
                                                 
161  The Pali University and Dhammacariya Act, 1950, Paragraphs, 5-7. 
162  Brohm, Burmese Religion and The Burmese Religious Revival, p.390. For more information on the 
Pali University, see ibid, pp.379-389. 
 
157

=== PAGE 165 ===
affiliation of influential monasteries to the government-controlled Pali University 
programme to assert its influence over the Sangha itself. 
 
Monasteries were eager to have as many pathamagyi successful candidates as possible 
because that was the only way to qualify as a member college of the Pali University. 
Some monasteries attempted to succeed in a way that was against both the law and the 
Vinaya. In 1950, the year the Pali University and DhammAcariya Act was passed, there 
was a leakage of the pathamagyi question papers and one monastery, with more than 
eighty students, was found to be at fault and banned for two years from entering the 
Pathamapyan examinations.163 
 
 
3.8 Conclusion 
In the Burma that faced colonial threat in the mid-nineteenth century under Mindon and 
his successor, Thibaw, the two most powerful institutions, the monarchy and the Sangha, 
became united in the interest of preserving the Buddhist religion, the BuddhasAsana. The 
result, as we have seen, was that the Sangha adopted a nationalistic stance and came to 
accept what they had once resisted: the use of formal examinations as an instrument in 
preserving Buddhist learning, pariyatti. Those who were not persuaded to side with the 
king on the issue became a minority and had to flee the capital to maintain their identity, 
which was embroiled the centuries-old scholarly tradition of the Sangha. Mindon’s 
legacy on promoting formal examinations was then followed by successive 
administrations, including the colonial government. 
                                                 
163  New Times of Burma, August 30, 1950, quoted in Brohm, cit., p.384. 
 
158

=== PAGE 166 ===
 
Chapter Four 
 
The Instability in Siam and its Impact on 
the Education of the Sangha 
from the late Seventeenth to the early Nineteenth Century 
 
 
 
                                                
 
 “The monastery, seemingly shut off from the world by its 
compound walls, is in fact the very hub of village life.”1 
Lester’s observation explains the position in Siam, known as Thailand since the 1930s, 
of “Buddhism’s central institution, its monastic Order”2. 
 
Being at its centre, Buddhism in Siam has influenced society and in turn been influenced 
by it. However, from 1569 to 1809 there were periods of great instability, in which the 
monarchs, if they were strong enough, felt, as at Ava, the need to apply greater control 
over the Order. One of those periods that has drawn our attention is some critical years 
during the reign of King Narai (1656-1688). Towards the end of his reign, now famously 
known as “the 1688 Revolution”3, King Narai is reported by La Loubère, the French 
ambassador to King Narai’s court, to have defrocked “thousands” of monks at Ayutthaya 
on account of their “not being learned enough”. 4 The King employed an instrument, 
formal examinations, later came to be known as Parian, to assess monks’ the knowledge 
of Buddhist scriptures. Traditionally, this incident has been interpreted as one brought 
about mainly by the failure of the Sangha who neglected their duty of study (and to a 
 
1  
Lester, Theravada Buddhism in Southeast Asia, p.6. 
2  
Gombrich, “Introduction: The Buddhist Way”, p.11. 
3  
Hutchinson, trans. 1688 Revolution in Siam: The Memoir of Father de Bèze, s.j. pp.63-103; Desfarges, 
de La Touche & des Verqiains, Three Military Accounts of the 1688 Revolution in Siam; Smithes, A 
Resounding Failure: Martin and the French in Siam 1672-1693, pp.88-98; de Forbin, , The Siamese 
Memoir 1685-1688, pp.177-181; Van Der Cruysse, Siam and the West 1500-1700, pp.427-467; Wyatt, 
Thailand, p.117. 
4  
La Loubère, The Kingdom of Siam, p.114. 
 
159

=== PAGE 167 ===
certain extant of the earlier Ayutthayan kings who ignored their royal patronage).5 In fact, 
after the destruction of Ayutthaya in 1767, King Taksin (1767-1782) of Thonburi and 
RAma I (1782-1809) of Bangkok also took measures that were resulted in the Order 
being placed under greater control of the monarchy. This change of balance in the 
relationship during those periods had a profound impact on the Order. In this paper we 
will look at how the great instability from the late Ayutthaya period (1569-1767) up to 
the early Ratanakosin period (1782-1809) affected the Buddhist monastic Order in 
general and its education in particular. The analysis will be undertaken, in the absence of 
well documented ecclesiastical records of the relevant periods, mainly through the 
available sources on Siamese history in both Thai and English. This paper will suggest 
that the Order, for the most part, was not responsible for King Narai’s uncompromising 
stand, nor, for that matter, for the measures taken, on a smaller scale, by Kings Taksin 
and RAma I; instead, they were rather due, as in Burma, to the circumstances, namely 
geopolitical, by which the two most powerful institutions in Siam, the Sangha and the 
monarchy, were brought into a conflict.  
 
We shall first consider some important characteristics of Buddhism in Siam, with a 
particular focus on its role in education and its relationship with the monarchy in 
Sukhothai and early Ayutthaya. Next, changes in ecclesiastical administration and 
pedagogy in late seventeenth century Ayutthaya will be discussed. After that, the 
interpretation, currently accepted as the official version, of why those changes were seen 
as vital will be analysed; and a new interpretation of those changes, with particular 
attention paid to the period of instability in the latter half of the seventeenth century, will 
then be given. In these contexts, we shall explain one of the changes introduced at that 
time, the introduction of the formal examination, Parian. We shall, finally, discuss the 
                                                 
5  
Prawat karn suksa khongsong (The History of the Sangha’s Education) , pp.14-16. 
 
160

=== PAGE 168 ===
failure of the king of Thonburi (1767-1782) to revive the Order and the standard of its 
education after the destruction of Ayutthaya in 1767; and the subsequent successful 
revival by Rama I (1782-1809).  
 
 
4.1 Some Important Features of Buddhism in Siam 
4.1.1 A Monastic Religion 
As in royal Burma, which we discussed in Chapter Two, Buddhism in Siam has three 
very important characteristics: it is a monastic religion, an educational institution, and 
enjoys royal patronage. First of all, the Buddhism that became the religion of the 
Siamese in the 13th century at Sukhothai (1240-1438) has been described by scholars, for 
instance Ishii, as a monastic religion.6 The description of the central position of the 
monastic Order is, as already described earlier, reasonable for two reasons, namely the 
belief by the Buddhists that nibbAna is unachievable for a layman; and that the life of a 
monk is free from social commitments and a monk can therefore dedicate his time to 
achieving nibbAna. Secondly, the Sangha in Siam has until recently solely preserved the 
TipiTaka, which is usually considered identical with the dhamma.7 This profession of 
preserving the TipiTaka has given the Order an unparalleled position in the history of the 
Buddhist world.  
 
In Siam, from the evidence of inscriptions we can deduce that soon after the founding of 
Sukhothai in the mid-thirteenth century, there were two fraternities of monks: the 
“village-dwellers”, gAmavAsin, and the “forest-dwellers”, araGGavAsin. Generally the 
former followed the vocation of the “books” and the latter of meditation. However, this 
distinction between them was by no means clear-cut: there were forest-monks who were 
                                                 
6  
Ishii, Sangha, State and Society, p.xiii. 
7  
Gombrich, “Introduction: The Buddhist Way”, p.9. 
 
161

=== PAGE 169 ===
learned and wrote commentaries. Here for the sake of preserving chronological order, let 
us first describe the “forest-dwellers”. The fraternity of the forest-dwellers was 
established in Siam by a group of Sinhalese monks who came to Sukhothai via Nakhon 
Sri Thammarat during the reign of Ramkhamheang (1275-1317).8 This fraternity was 
strengthened during King Lithai (also Lidaiya)’s reign (1347-68), when Sumana Thera, 
“return[ed] [from Ceylon] to” his native Sukhothai at the King’s request.9 This fraternity, 
which developed within the MahAvihAra school of Theravada Buddhism, was later 
established in parts of Lanna, namely Lamphum and Chiang Mai, by Sumana Thera 
himself.  
 
These fraternities were officially recognised by the king. His recognition was reflected in 
the appointment by the king himself of the leaders of the fraternities to three highest 
ecclesiastical posts. Two of the three posts were known by their corresponding royal 
titles (ratch-thinnarm/rAjadinna-nAma) namely phutthkhosAchan (BuddhaghosAcarya) and 
phutthAchan (BuddhAcarya). However, there does not seem to have been a royal title, 
particularly at Sukhothai and early Ayutthaya, for the post of the sangharAja, which was 
the most powerful and the head of all the fraternities as well as of all the Buddhists in the 
kingdom. At Sukhothai, the post phutthkhosAchan was generally occupied by the head of 
“the village-dwellers” while the position of phutthAchan was taken up by the chief of 
“the forest-dwellers”. The post of sangharAja was usually occupied by the gAmavAsI, “the 
village-dwellers”. The “village-dwellers” thus held two of the three posts, 
phutthkhosAchan and sangharAja. But Suchao Ploichum, a former secretary to the present 
SangharAja, argues that the top post was appointed from either “the forest-“ or “the 
                                                 
8  
na Nagara & Griswold Epigraphic and Historical Studies, p.424-425.; Udomsri, Karn bokkhrong 
khanasong thai (The Administration of the Thai Sangha), pp.66-67; Bidyalabh, A History of Buddhism 
in Siam, pp.5, 12. 
9  
JinakAlamAlI, pp.82-85; Tambiah, World Conqueror, pp.73-77. Udomsri suggests that Sumana was 
from “Lanka” (Ceylon), which contradicts the JinakAlamAlI. Udomsri, cit., p.66. 
 
162

=== PAGE 170 ===
village-dwellers”. The one who was senior in years of ordination would actually hold the 
post.10 
 
Throughout the Ayutthaya period, contact with Ceylon was maintained. Monks 
continued to look to Ceylon for authority. Many of them, indeed, went to the island for 
re-ordination and study. A group of ten bhikkhus came back from Ceylon to establish a 
new fraternity, this time of gAmavAsIn, that became known as gAmavAsI khwa, “village-
dwellers of the right”. The “village-dwellers of the right” are reported to have been 
ordained on a raft in the Kalyani River in Ceylon in 1423, with Vanaratana MahAthera as 
their preceptor. In fact, the royal title, vanarat, for the head of this new fraternity at 
Ayutthaya was taken from that of their preceptor in Ceylon, Vanaratana. From that time 
Ayutthaya had three nikAyas, “fraternities”: gAmavAsI sai, “the village-dwellers of the 
left”, gAmavAsI khwa, “the village-dwellers of the right” and araGGavAsI, “forest-
dwellers”.11 We do not know why the “village-dwellers” were known as of the right and 
of the left. Perhaps the monasteries of the new fraternity were situated south of the city, 
and those of the older gAmavAsIn in the north. “The right” usually means the south and 
“the left” the north. To the west of the city, however, lived the “forest-dwellers” 
(araGGavAsI).  
 
At Ayutthaya, however, all the three positions, phutthkhosAchan, phutthAchan and 
vanarat (Vanaratana) came to be recognized as sangharAjas indicating the increased 
influence of the heads of the fraternities. As a result, the post of sangharAja that had 
existed during the Sukhothai period came to be known as somdech (phra) sangharAja, 
somdech being the Khmer word for royal. Also, it may be around this time, probably the 
first part of the fifteenth century, that the somdech (phra) sangharAja also was given a 
                                                 
10  Ploichum, Khana song raman nai prathet Thai, (The Mon Sangha in Thailand), p.119. 
11  Udomsri, cit., pp.69-70. 
 
163

=== PAGE 171 ===
royal title, ariyawongsAthipati [AriyavaMsAdhipati]. 12 Here it may be noted that the 
existence at Ayutthaya of more than one sangharAja (three sangharAjas and the somdech 
phra sangharAja) was the reason why La Loubère mentioned in The Kingdom of Siam as 
“sancrats (sangharAjas)”, and not sancrat (sangharAja), when he recorded the 
ecclesiastical authorities who had the authority to conduct ordination.13 The position of 
the somdech (phra) sangharAja was usually occupied by one of the gAmavAsI sai, “the 
village-dwellers of the left”, the older group of the “village-dwellers”.  
 
The office of the somdech (phra) sangharAja was Wat Mahathat. The heads of the three 
nikAyas assisted the somdech (phra) sangharAja in the ecclesiastical administration at the 
central level. But in the provinces ecclesiastical supervision was equally divided among 
these four most senior monks. The somdech sangharAja, apart from being the head of all 
fraternities, had authority over ecclesiastical affairs also in the north, northeast and some 
part of central Ayutthaya. The head of the “village-dwellers of the right” was in charge 
of the south and some parts of central Ayutthaya, while the head of the “forest-dwellers” 
took charge of all belonging to his fraternity in all parts of Ayutthaya14 and in fact, 
according to Ploichum, also of the Sangha of Mon and Laotian descent. 15 (In this 
context, we are not certain if the structure of the Sangha administration was directly 
related to the secular model of the administrative system at Ayutthaya at the time, as 
would be the case from 1902 when King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910) brought in the first 
ever Sangha act to constitute a Sangha hierarchy.) 
 
                                                 
12  In the late Ayutthaya period the title AriyawongsAthipati (AriyavaMsAdhipati) was changed to 
AriyavaMsaGABa. That was again modified by King Mongkut, RAma IV of the Ratanakosin dynasty as 
AriyavAmsagataGABa. All the past somdech sangharAjas held this title. The present somdech 
SangharAja, however, holds a special title called Yanasangwon (ÏABasaMvara). 
13   La Loubère, cit., p.114. See also pp.168-169. 
14  Udomsri, pp.69-70. 
15  Ploichum, cit., p.119. 
 
164

=== PAGE 172 ===
In the Kingdom of Lanna, at present the northern part of Thailand, on the other hand, the 
Sangha was administered independently of Ayutthaya without much interference from 
the monarch. This reflected the fact that for centuries Lanna, with its capital at Chiang 
Mai, was an independent state. In spite of that, the Sangha there always had a close 
connection with their brethren in Sukhothai, Ayutthaya, RAmaGGadesa, Ava and even Sri 
Lanka. These connections help explain the history of the Sangha in Lanna. A strong link 
between the Sangha of different regions was provided by a lineage system: a pupil 
established a tradition he inherited from his teacher in his home region. For example, in 
the mid-fourteenth century, a Sukhothai monk, Sumana Thera was trained in Martaban, 
RAmaGGadesa under UduMbara MahAsAmi, a teacher of Sinhalese lineage16, and then 
went to Lanna with ten Mon monks to spread the word of the Buddha. Sumana Thera 
thus provided a link between the sanghas of different regions i.e., RAmaGGadesa, 
Sukhothai and Lanna. The Sinhalese tradition brought by Sumana Thera was the 
fraternity of the “forest-dwellers”. In the early fifteenth century, a group of twenty-five 
Lanna monks, who studied and were ordained in Sri Lankan, returned to Chiang Mai to 
found another Sinhalese fraternity. Accompanying them to Lanna were eight monks 
from Lopburi, which was then a part of the Ayutthaya Kingdom, and one Mon monk; all 
of them were also trained and ordained in Sri Lanka. This group of monks came to be 
known in Lanna as the new Sinhalese tradition (Lankawong sai mai); and one of the 
famous monasteries in Chaing Mai, Wat Padaeng (Red Forest Monastery), was built for 
them by the king.  The other Sinhalese tradition, established by Sumana Thera, was now 
called the old Sinhalese fraternity (Lankawong sai kao); their main monastery was Wat 
Suan Dok (Flower Garden Monastery).  It was these lineages that became “the leading 
intellectual and cultural force in the kingdom for the next two or three centuries”.17 
 
                                                 
16  Wyatt, Thailand, pp.75-76. 
17  Ibid, p.76. 
 
165

=== PAGE 173 ===
There was also, according to Ploichum18, a Mon fraternity. It may have been established 
by some of the Mon monks who accompanied Sumana Thera or the group of Lanna 
monks who established the new Sinhalese fraternity. In addition to these three 
fraternities, the Mon and the two Sinhalese traditions, there came a fourth fraternity from 
Ava, as Burma was then known. Phra SujAta of Wat Sri Boondaw was particularly 
known in this Burmese tradition. So, from the time the Burmese conquered Chiang Mai 
for the first time in 1558, there were in Lanna four main lineages or fraternities: the Mon, 
the two Sinhalese and the Ava.  
 
However, the influence of the Mon and the Burmese traditions seems to have been 
limited in most parts of Lanna; those fraternities probably existed only in the cities. And 
the two Sinhalese traditions appeared to have become divided into the fraternity of the 
“village-dwellers” and of the “forest-dwellers”. Despite Sumana Thera’s connection to 
the “forest-dwellers” community, his successive pupils at Wat Suan Dok became known 
as “village-dweller” monks. This was the reason why, in the time of Queen Mae Ku 
(1551-1578), in most parts of Lanna, as Ploichum writes, the three fraternities of the 
Sangha were: “village-dwellers” (huan wieng), “forest-dwellers” (huan pa) and the Sri 
Lankan NikAya or Lankawong (LankavaMsa). Each of these three communities was ruled 
by a governing body of its own consisting of two levels: sangharAja and bu khru.19 
 
 
4.1.2 An Educational Institution 
As already discussed in Chapter Two, in addition to being the spiritual focus of the 
society, the monastery was also an educational institution. Indeed, as in Burma, 
providing education for the people was the major means of recruitment into the Order. 
                                                 
18  Ploichum, cit., p.114 
19  Ibid. 
 
166

=== PAGE 174 ===
This was because ordination was a pre-requisite for higher study. During the time of the 
Buddha ordination was motivated by a desire for salvation; but centuries later, when 
Buddhism was established outside India, study became the primary motivation. This was 
true in the Siamese kingdom from the time of the arrival of Buddhism at Sukhothai right 
up to the 1930s, when secular primary education, which had been introduced about half a 
century earlier, was made compulsory throughout the country. Indeed, monasteries were 
the only places to which ordinary people could send their children for education, as the 
royal school, samnak ratchpandit, situated in the palace, was reserved for children of 
royal descent.20 
  
As in Burma, parents sent their sons to a monastery to receive education21; these boys 
were known as dek wat, “temple-boy”, receiving instruction in reading and writing in 
Siamese, and serving their master. Many boys spent a few years in the Order studying, 
and then left. This temporary ordination became a part of Thai Buddhist culture and was 
one that often caused “needless readjustment within the community” as the monastery 
had to devote human and material resources to training them. 22 Ordination “was 
considered as part of a man’s education”.23 It was felt in those days in Siam that the 
objective of ordination was to study, bot-rian, “to ordain and study”.24 As with all other 
Theravada countries, a boy was normally initiated as a novice, sAmaBera, if he received 
ordination before he was twenty. A young man of twenty and above would be given a 
full or higher ordination, upasampadA. Study after ordination, on the other hand, was 
focussed on raising the monk’s knowledge of Buddhism. Learning the Pali scriptures, the 
                                                 
20  Prawat krasong suksathikarn (History of Ministry of Education), pp.1-2. 
21  Young, Village Life in Modern Thailand, p.118.  
22  Bunnag, Buddhist Monk and Buddhist Layman, p.41; Zack, Buddhist Education Under Prince 
Wachirayanwarorot, pp.45-46. 
23  Ishii, Sangha, State and Society, p.26. 
24  Payutto, Prawat karn suksa khana song khong thai (The History of the Education of the Thai Sangha), 
p.16; Thewethi (Payutto), Phra phutthasasana gap karnsuksa nai adid (Buddhism and Education in 
the Past), p.117.  
 
167

=== PAGE 175 ===
TipiTaka, preserved in Siam only in Khmer script until the mid-nineteenth century, was 
one of the most important factors in monastic life. One studied for one’s own practice. 
This was to enable one to live by the discipline, vinaya, and to practise meditation. In 
addition, secular arts and sciences were occasionally integrated into the monastic 
curriculum to fulfil the needs of the wider society.25 In the twentieth century, this gave 
rise to debate on the nature of the curriculum in monastic education, for the secular 
subjects not directly related to the Buddhist teachings were considered inappropriate by 
some conservative educationists in the Order. 
 
 
4.1.3 Royal Patronage 
As a spiritual and educational institution, the Order attracted royal support. In Siam, as in 
other Theravada states, kings viewed it as their duty to support the Order to earn merit 
for themselves and to perpetuate the religion. On this tradition Gombrich remarks:  
“History has shown the importance for the Order of the favour of kings and 
governments”.26 The monarchs were interested in two aspects of the Order: maintenance 
of discipline and study of the scriptures.  
 
As far as discipline is concerned, royal attention was given to maintaining the unity of 
the Sangha and strict observation of the PAtimokkha rules by individuals. Many rulers 
forced monks to leave the Order from time to time on the grounds of poor discipline. To 
maintain the unity of the Order and strict adherence to the Vinaya, a system of 
ecclesiastical hierarchy, with a saNgharAja at the top, was instituted by the kings in the 
early days of the Siamese kingdom.27 According to European visitors to 17th century 
Ayutthaya, such as the Dutchman van Vliet and the French Catholic missionary de 
                                                 
25  Wyatt, The Politics of Reform, p.4. See also Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, p.161. 
26  Gombrich, “Introduction: The Buddhist Way”, p.9. 
27  na Nagara & Griswold cit., pp.274, 277. 
 
168

=== PAGE 176 ===
Bourges, by the late Ayutthaya period there were at least four “highest regents”, i.e. 
saNgharAjas, at any one time; all saNgharAjas were appointed by the king; and one of them 
was made “supreme dignitary” of the whole Sangha in Siam.28 Here three of the four 
“highest regents” were clearly the deputy-saNgharAjas, one each from the “village-
dwellers of the south”, the “forest-dwellers” and the Mon Sangha. 
                                                
 
Over the centuries, the kings took measures to promote monastic education. The monk 
appointed to the post of saNgharAja would usually be the most learned (and senior), often 
described as one who knew “all the three piTakas in their entirety”.29 Here the question 
may be raised whether every past saNgharAja actually knew all the scriptures very well. 
Peter Skilling, for example, argues that the term tipiTakadhara, “one who knows all the 
three-baskets”, did in fact become a title or rank, and thus should be regarded as a 
metaphor.30   The tradition of appointing a learned and senior monk to this highest 
ecclesiastical post began during the Sukhothai period. King Ramkhamheng (1279-1298) 
appointed a learned “forest-dweller” from Nakhon Sri Thammarat as saNgharAja, for he 
“has studied scriptures from beginning to end and is wiser than any other monk in the 
kingdom”. 31 That enthusiasm on the part of the monarch in promoting monastic 
education meant that sometime kings themselves took up the task of teaching the 
TipiTaka to members of the Order. At Sukhothai, King Lithai (1346-1368), the author of 
the famous work on Buddhist cosmology, Traiphum Phra Ruang or TribhUmikathA, 
taught monks.  At Ayutthaya, King Song Tham (1611-1628), who was a very senior 
monk with the title Phimontham (Vimaladhamma), before leaving the Order to ascend 
the throne, taught monks and novices the TipiTaka “in the three pavilions (chom thong, 
 
28  na Pombejra, A Political History of Siam Under the Prasathong Dynasty, p.91. See also p.164. 
29  na Nagara & Griswold cit., p.492. Swaeng Udomsri, Karn Bokkhrong Khanasong Thai, p.66. 
30  Personal communication. 
31  Ibid, pp.261-262, 274, 298. 
 
169

=== PAGE 177 ===
golden spires) in the palace”.32 As a part of their support for monastic education, the 
kings throughout the centuries also provided learned monks with requisites and built 
them monasteries. These monasteries have come to be known as wat laung, “royal 
monastery”.  
 
 
4.2 Monastic Education in Early Ayutthaya 
However, despite such strong royal patronage, abbots, as in early Ava, were in total 
control of the administration and also of the education in their monasteries: they selected 
their own candidates for ordination and designed their own syllabuses.33 With regard to 
administration, no permission was required to admit a new member into their 
monasteries. La Loubère reported that even “Sancrats  have not any jurisdiction nor any 
authority, ……. over the Talapoints, which are not of their convents”.34  
 
In education, consequently, there were no centrally designed syllabuses for all 
monasteries to follow.35 “The nature of traditional education” provided in the monastery 
“was clearly determined by perceived traditional needs”. The subjects were not 
necessarily religious alone, but reflected “instead whatever academic abilities the teacher 
had such as mathematics or poetry, for example”.36 Having taught reading and writing in 
Siamese to new students, various teachers must have adopted different texts or parts of 
them of their own selection to plan a curriculum. But we do not know what texts were 
actually used to teach monks and novices in monasteries. 
 
                                                 
32  Besides these pavilions, there was a chapter house in the palace compound, called Wat Sri Sanphen.  
33  Bodhiprasiddhinanda, “Kansuksa khongsong nai adid, (The Sangha’s Education in the Past)” Roi pi 
mahamakut withayalai (The Centenary of the Mahamakut Royal University) p.418. 
34  La Loubère, p.114. 
35  Keyes, Thailand, 184.  
36  Zack, p.44.  
 
170

=== PAGE 178 ===
However, from the fact that some texts were more popular and widely used than others 
we may possibly deduce that in ancient Siam there was some standardization of the 
curriculum, or, in the words of Justin McDaniel, a researcher on the nissaya literature in 
northern Thailand (and Laos), even a “curricular canon” or “practical canon”.37 Charles 
Keyes, in his work Thailand: Buddhist Kingdom as Modern Nation-State, lists three 
“key” texts which he considers to define basic parameters of Buddhist education in Siam 
because they were “in almost every monastic library”.38 These texts are the Traiphum 
Phra Ruang (TribhUmikathA), the Phra Malai and the Vessandon [Vessantara-jAtaka]. 
 
The Traiphum Phra Ruang, written in 1345 AD by Phya Lithai, at that time the heir 
apparent of Sukhothai and later its paramount ruler, is an “expression of the orthodox 
Theravada tradition, and a sermon that seeks to make the Dhamma more accessible to the 
laity”.39 Working “closely with the leading Theravada monks of his day”, Phaya Lithai 
drew the materials from “the scriptures, commentaries, and treatises that had been 
transmitted and endorsed by the Theravada elders”.40 It is a sermon, as Phya Lithai 
endeavoured to put the message of those scriptures “in a new and more accessible form” 
because he feared, as George Coedès puts it, that the Three Baskets, the Buddhist 
canonical scriptures, would disappear.41 The Traiphum Phra Ruang deals with the way 
to enlightenment, mainly but not exclusively in a cosmological form. As Frank and Mani 
Reynolds have observed, the cosmological vision is also seen by Phaya Lithai as 
                                                 
l
t
t
i
i
t
it
37  McDaniel, “The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos” Manussaya: Journal of 
Humanities, 4:2002, pp.20-59.  
38  Keyes, p.179. 
39  Reynolds & Reynolds, Three Worlds According to King Ruang, p.5. For more information see na 
Nagara & Griswold, Epigraphic and Historical Studies, pp.424-425; Lausoonthorn, Study of Sources 
of Triphum Praruang, p.11. 
40  Lausoonthorn lists 28 texts as identified sources of the Traiphum Phra Ruang. They are JinAlankAra, 
PAleyya 
(MA eyya), 
JAtaka, 
CariyApiTaka, 
BuddhavaMsa, 
Dhammapada, 
PapaGcasUdanI, 
MadhuratthavilAsinI, Manora hapUraBI, MahAkaLapa, MahAnidAna, MahAvagga, LInatthapakAsinI, 
MilindapaGhA, Lokuppatti, LokapaGGatti, Visuddhimagga, SAratthasangaha, Saman apAsAdikA, 
SAratthadIpanI, 
SAratthapakAs nI, 
SumangalavilAs nI, 
AnAgatavaMsa, 
Abhidhammatthasangaha, 
CaturAgamaTThaka ha, 
AbhidhammAvatAra-TIkA, 
VinayaTthakathA-TIkAs 
[KaNkhAv araBI, 
PAlimuttakaTThakathA, Vajira-, Vimati-, KaNkhA- and VinayamaGcUsA-TIkA] and AruBavatI-sutta.  
41  Coedès, Recueil des Inscriptions du Siam, Part I, pp.77-90 cited by Reynolds, p.6.  
 
171

=== PAGE 179 ===
complementary with the psychologically orientated analysis of consciousness and 
material matters (nAma-rUpa). The Traiphum Phra Ruang explains the differences in the 
universe as conditioned by the inhabitants’ own karma, the law of intention-based action. 
This work “has exerted a powerful influence on the religious consciousness of the Thai” 
and is described by the Reynolds as “the most important and fascinating text that has 
been composed in the Thai language”.42 
 
The Phra Malai is the collective name of texts that tell the legend of an arahat MAleyya 
(MAlayya), believed to have lived in Aruradhapura, Sri Lanka, during the reign of the 
legendary Sinhalese King DuTThagAmaBi (101-77 BC). The majority of the texts were 
composed in Thai dialects such as Lanna, Laotian and central Thai.43 All the texts were 
based on the Pali version of the Phra Malai called MAleyyadevatthera-vatthu. The exact 
details of this work remain unknown despite several attempts by different scholars.44  
However, despite the uncertainty surrounding its origin, the various versions of Phra 
Malai in Thai dialects have dominated the Thai monastic syllabuses throughout the 
centuries.  
 
The Phra Malai, in summary, portrays the good life in heavens and the suffering in hells 
which the monk, Phra Malai, visited “repeatedly” using “his supernatural power and 
                                                 
42  Reynolds & Reynolds, p.7. 
43  Brereton, Thai Tellings of Phra Malai, p.1. 
44  Denis in his thesis at Sorbonne in 1963, for example, thinks that the work was not known in Sri Lanka 
and was probably written in a Southeast Asian country, though he did not mention which country. 
Denis, “L’Origine cingalaise du P’rah Malay” Felicitation Volume of Southeast Asian Studies 
Presented to H.H. Prince Dhaninivat, pp.329-38., cited by Brereton, Thai Tellings of Phra Malai, 
p.38. Supaporn Machang, however, in her doctoral work on the origin of Phra Malai, writes that the 
Pali version of Phra Malai was composed in Burma by a Burmese monk sometime between the tenth 
and the twelfth century, based on a Sinhalese work Cullagalla, which itself is a part of another work 
MadhurasavAhinI. Supaporn Makchang, “Khwan pen ma khong malai sut (The Origin of the Maleyya 
Sutta)” Wattanatham: somphot krung rattanakosin 200 pi (Culture: The 200th anniversary of the 
Ratanakosin Dynasty), p.1-14. But Bangchang suggests that the work was written by a Thai monk in 
the late fifteenth or late sixteenth century. Supaphan na Banchang, Wiwithanakan gnankhian thi pen 
phasa bali nai prathet thai (Research on Work Written in the Pali Language in Thailand), p.320. 
 
172

=== PAGE 180 ===
knowledge”. 45 The Phra Malai, “one of the most pervasive themes in Thai Buddhism”,46 
helps simplify the intention-based Buddhist moral teaching of cause and effect, kamma, 
for ordinary folk. It was through heavenly rewards and hellish tortures that the majority 
of the Buddhists were taught about the importance of moral action and its consequences. 
The monk Malai, through his conversation with Sakka, “the king of gods”, and with the 
future Buddha, Metteyya, was able to give hope of enlightenment, the final goal, to the 
laity, who usually thought that liberation was impossible for them. Moreover, the Phra 
Malai leaves a powerful impression on listeners that the actual verification of kamma and 
its effect is beyond the capacity of ordinary people.  In a comparison of the Traiphum 
Phra Ruang and the Phra Malai, we find that the former attempts in some way to justify 
the differences between  social classes in the human world but the latter focuses on the 
impact of present action on future existence. The monk Phra Malai brought back to the 
human world a message from the future Buddha, Metteyya, that in order to meet and 
listen to him (Metteyya), and attain enlightenment, people should “listen to a complete 
recitation in one day of the Great Vessantara Birth-Story”,47 which is known in Thai as 
the maha chat (great life). The Phra Malai in northern and eastern Thailand (and Laos) 
has therefore been used as a preface to the preaching of the Vessantara-jAtaka.48 
 
The Vessantara-jAtaka, the last of the three important texts that Keyes mentions, is, 
according to Cone and Gombrich, “the most famous story in the Buddhist world”49. As is 
well known to most, Prince Vessantara “gave away everything, even his children and his 
wife” and this story “has formed the theme of countless sermons, dramas, dances, and 
                                                 
t
l
45  Collins, trans. “The Story of The Elder Maleyyadeva” The Journal of the PTS, XVIII (1993), p.65. 
46  Brereton, p.1. 
47  MahAvessan arajAtakaM ekadivase yeva pariniTThitaM suBantu.. “Brah MA eyyadevattheravatthuM” (ed. 
Denis) The Journal of the PTS, XVIII (1993), pp.44-45. See also Collins’ translation on p.85. 
48  Brereton, p.61. 
49  Cone and Gombrich, The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara, p.xv.  
 
173

=== PAGE 181 ===
ceremonies”.50 It was from this popular JAtaka that many Buddhist values, for instance, 
generosity, which is foremost among them, but  also others, e.g. loyalty to one’s family, 
determination, and Buddhahood as the highest possible goal in life were conveyed.  
 
The Vessantara-jAtaka attracted the interest of two Siamese monastic commentators: the 
first, whose name is unknown, wrote a commentary on it in the vernacular language at 
the request of King Boromatrailokanat (1448-1488) of Ayutthaya, and this work is 
believed to be the one known today as mahA chat kham laung, “the Royal Version of the 
Great Life” and forms the heart of every thed mahA chat (chanting of the Great Life) 
ceremony;51 the second author, a monk by the name of Siri SumaNgala, composed in 
1517 a commentary in Pali, which he named VessantaradIpanI.  
 
Apart from these three “key texts”, there may have been some other texts that served 
both as popular literature, at least among the erudite scholars, and as part of a monastic 
curriculum. Such texts were those that prompted the writing of numerous nissayas and 
other forms of commentary on them. Justin McDaniel lists some of the most popular 
nissayas. They include the Dhammapada, the Paritta (Sutmon) (which are discourses 
selected for chanting),  the PaBBAsa-jAtaka (a post-canonical work composed in Lanna), 
the MAtikA (the contents of the DhammasaNgaBI), the ATThasAlinI (commentary to the 
DhammasaNgaBI), the ATThasAlinI–yojanA (commentary on the ATThasAlinI), the 
SaccasaNkhepa and the vAcA (texts for ordination and other ecclesiastical rituals).52  
 
Besides these nissayas, at its higher level the Siamese monastic education system 
emphasised the study of a certain tradition of Pali grammar, perhaps KaccAyana’s; we 
                                                 
50  Ibid. 
51  Wyatt “The Buddhist Monkhood as an Avenue of Social Mobility” Studies in Thai History, p.208; 
Thailand, pp.73-75; Wood, A History of Siam, pp.84-85; A history of Wat Rachathiwat (Samorai), also 
mentions these facts. See Prawat Wat Rachathiwat (History of Wat Rachathiwat), p.31. 
52  McDaniel, “The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos”, pp.28-30. 
 
174

=== PAGE 182 ===
assume that bi-lingual versions of KaccAyana’s grammar or sections of them were used. 
One of those bi-lingual versions of the KaccAyana’s grammar extant today is a work 
called MUlakaccAyana-atthayojanA written by ÑABakitti Thera in the late fifteenth century. 
The influence of KaccAyana’s grammar is evident in the way commented words 
(saMvaBBetabba-pada) are explained, for example, in the MaNgalatthadIpanI.  
 
The Abhidhamma, some of the Vinaya-aTThakathAs and the Visuddhimagga were also 
studied, at least in some of the bigger monasteries. ÑABakitti Thera’s works are a good 
indication of this fact. His various works on the seven texts of Theravada Abhidhamma 
and on the Vinaya were all called atthayojanA, indicating that they were composed to aid 
students. ÑABakitti Thera wrote commentaries on the Bhikkhu-pAtimokkha, the 
SammohavinodanI, and also a work on sImA, “chapter hall”. Another monk, by the name 
of UttarArAma, wrote a commentary on the Visuddhimagga, and named it 
VisuddhimaggadIpanI. 53  
 
We do not know which suttas were selected for syllabuses. But we know that the famous 
MaNgala-sutta of the Sutta-nipAta was one of them. Siri SumaNgala, the author of the 
VessantaradIpanI, already mentioned earlier, composed a Pali commentary on the 
MaNgala-sutta in 1524 at Chiang Mai. It is clear from this famous work that the author 
was well versed in the Pali canonical and commentarial texts, which he cited often as his 
authorities. The MaNgalatthadIpanI is about ten times longer than Ācariya Buddhaghosa’s 
commentary, written a thousand years earlier. The MaNgalatthadIpanI was the only Pali 
commentarial work which is still a part of the monastic curriculum today and is the few 
                                                 
53  Khruathai (ed.) “Bod nam (Introduction)” Wannanukam phutthasasana nai Lanna (Buddhist 
Literature in Lanna), pp.14-15. 
 
175

=== PAGE 183 ===
works from Siam to be known to monastic scholars in Burma54, Cambodia55 and Sri 
Lanka. 
 
The   history of the SAsana may have also been part of the monastic curriculum at 
Ayutthaya. Well-known among the chronicle works composed in Siam are JinakAlamAlI 
(1516), written by RatanapaGGA Thera; MUlasAsana by BuddhakAma (year unknown); and 
CAmadevIvaMsa (1407-1457) and SihiNganidAna (1411-1457), both by BodhiraMsI Thera 
(1460-1530). RatanapaGGA Thera and BodhiraMsI Thera (1460-1530) were Siri 
MaNgala’s contemporaries.  Although most of these works were written in Lanna, the 
northern part of present Thailand, they undoubtedly reflected the nature of monastic 
education in Ayutthaya as well. This was because the Sinhalese fraternity, Lanka wong, 
to which these authors in Lanna belonged, was first established at Ayutthaya before 
expanding into Lanna. The Sinhalese connection explains the high standard of Pali 
knowledge in Ayutthaya and Lanna, which in turn helped develop Thai literature. 
 
It may be noted here that nearly all the Pali and bi-lingual works, twenty-eight out of 
thirty-one,56 composed during the early history of Siam were produced between 1407 
and 1530 before Chiang Mai and Ayutthaya were conquered by the Burmese, when the 
people and the monastic Order enjoyed peace and stability.   
 
In the Siamese monastic education system before the late seventeenth century, there were 
no formal examinations, and in their absence a student’s qualifications were judged in 
several ways, for instance as a teacher or a preacher. With respect to the reputation of a 
monk as a learned teacher, one such instance is recorded in the inscriptions and in the 
                                                 
54  SAsanavaMsa, p.51. Bode, p.47. 
55  Dutt, Buddhism in East Asia, p.100. 
56  Khruathai, Wannakam putthasasana nai Lanna (Buddhist Literature in Lanna), pp.14-15. 
 
176

=== PAGE 184 ===
JinakAlamAlI. 57 MahAsAmi SangharAjA, whom we have mentioned earlier, attracted to 
“Maung Bann” (Martaban) the future leaders of the two Sukhothai fraternities, forest-
dwellers and village-dwellers, Sumana and Anumati.58 They decided to go to study with 
MahAsAmi SangharAja when they heard of his reputation in learning and observing 
monastic rules, and submitted themselves to the SangharAja’s rules and course of training. 
As to preaching, La Loubère observed of Ayutthaya: “When they (the Talapoints) preach, 
they read the Balie [Pali] text of their Books, and they translate and expound it plainly in 
Siamese, without Action, like our Professors, and not our Preachers.”59  
 
 
4.3 Changes in Ecclesiastical Administration and Education 
in the Seventeenth Century 
However, there were developments at Ayutthaya in the late 17th century such that the 
abbots lost absolute control over administration and education. In administration, the 
abbots were not permitted to conduct ordinations. They were to be conducted only by 
one of the four senior monks in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, namely sangharAjas, who 
were all appointed by the king. La Loubère thus reported: “None but the Sancrats 
[sangharAja] can make Talapoints, as none but Bishops can make priests”.60  
 
In education too, an equally far-reaching transformation had taken place: the introduction 
of formal examinations. Towards the end of his reign, King Narai (1656-1688) is 
believed to have introduced formal examinations for the monks. Consequently, the 
abbots, who had until then enjoyed total freedom in devising syllabuses for their students, 
                                                 
57  JinakAlamAlI  p.6. 
58  Ibid, pp.82-85. 
59  Ibid, p.61. 
60  La Loubère, p.114. 
 
177

=== PAGE 185 ===
had to take into consideration the syllabus of the royal pundits, that is to say the texts on 
which they occasionally tested the knowledge of monks.  
 
King Narai, wrote La Loubère, who was the first to record formal examinations in Siam, 
“causes them [the monks] to be from time to time examined as to their Knowledge, 
which respects the Balie Language and its Books”.61 Oc Louang Souracac,62 a twenty-
eight year old and the son of a commander in charge of elephants, was charged with the 
task of examining the monks and novices. The “forest-dwellers”, araGGavAsins, resisted 
being examined by a layperson and demanded that they be examined only by their own 
superior. It was unlikely that the demand was granted. At the end of those exercises 
“several thousand” monks and novices were forced to return to “the secular condition” 
for “not being learned enough”. 63 In the next section, we shall examine the 
circumstances in which these developments took place. But before that, we shall discuss 
the current official position as to why King Narai found it necessary to introduce formal 
examinations.  
 
 
4.4 Why Formal Examinations were Introduced 
According to the currently accepted interpretation, King Narai instituted formal 
examinations for the Sangha to prevent the standard of monastic study from further 
decline.64 The deterioration, the official version claims, was due to two factors: first, the 
early Ayutthayan kings, unlike their predecessors at Sukhothai, neglected their duty to 
provide royal patronage. As a result, the gAmavAsins, the “village-dwellers”, who were 
once influential over the monarchy and the people, lost their prominence, and neglected 
                                                 
61  Ibid, p.115. 
62  He became King Süa (Tiger King) (1703-1709). 
63  La Loubère, p.114. 
64  Prawat karn suksa khong song, pp.14-16. 
 
178

=== PAGE 186 ===
their main profession, teaching. Second, the “Aranyik” [AraGGakavasins], “the forest-
dwellers”, on the other hand, exploiting this royal negligence, began to study astrology, 
magic and mantra (saiyasart wetha katha), which were “the animal sciences” that the 
Buddha forbade monks to study.65  
 
We consider this interpretation to represent the official voice because the book, Prawat 
karn suksa khong song, (The History of Education of the Sangha) (1983), containing the 
above arguments was published by the Department of Religious Affairs (krom karn 
sasana), (the Religious Studies Section) with an introduction by the Director of the 
Department. It bears no authorship, the mark of an official paper in Thailand, and carries 
several announcements by the somdech SangharA a, Minister for Education, and Director 
of Religious Affairs. 
j
                                                
 
 
4.5 Official Interpretation Unsatisfactory 
However, this official interpretation of the causes for the decline is unsatisfactory for a 
number of reasons. Firstly, the early Ayutthayan kings, particularly those before King 
Narai, were themselves strong supporters of the Order. King Boromatrailokanat, for 
example, who ruled at Ayutthaya and Phitsanulok between 1448 and 1488, was an ardent 
supporter of the Sangha. According to the “Law of the Military and Provincial 
Hierarchy” (1454 AD) “the educated monks and novices received higher sakdi na grades 
[by which they were given land indicating their social status] than those who were not 
educated”.66 He also vacated the throne temporarily to become a monk; and, as noted 
earlier, he caused the Siamese version of the Vessantara-jAtaka (mahA chat) to be written. 
 
65  Ibid. This opinion is also held by other Thai writers, for instance Bodhiprasiddhinanda. See “Karn 
suksa khong song nai adid (The Sangha’s Education in the Past)” Roi pi mahamakut withayalai (The 
Centenary of the Mahamakut Royal University), p.418. 
66  Wyatt, “The Buddhist Monkhood as an Avenue of Social Mobility”, p.208; Thailand, pp.73-75; 
Wood, A History of Siam, pp.84-85;  
 
179

=== PAGE 187 ===
King Song Tham (1610-28), another predecessor of King Narai, was very religious, and 
as already discussed, taught the TipiTaka to monks. While we have no evidence to assess 
the impact of his scholarship on the learning of the Sangha, it is possible to discern his 
keen support for monastic education. This fact has been cited by Bhikkhu Prayut 
Payutto.67 But, although this historical fact was quoted also in Prawat karn suksa khong 
song, “The History of the Education of the Sangha”, it had no impact on the way the 
official interpretation was reached. Furthermore, up to 1634, about two decades before 
King Narai came to power, there were no signs that the Sangha was neglected by the 
king and the people. Van Vliet, who was in charge of the Dutch East India Company at 
Ayutthaya between 1629 and 1634, estimated that there were “about 20, 000 
ecclesiastics” and wrote that “they live partly on what the king and the mandarins bestow 
on them.... But most they receive from the common people, who furnish them with food 
and other necessities.” 68 While the number of the members of the Sangha, if true, might 
be unusually high for the population of Ayutthaya at that time, there was no evidence 
that the Sangha and their “beautifully gilded and painted” monasteries were uncared for 
in any way. 
 
Secondly, the attribution of astrology and magical practices to the “forest-dwellers” 
alone was hardly reasonable. The “village-dwellers” were equally sympathetic to the 
needs of lay society, and thus would have been persuaded by lay people to give 
astrological advice. In fact, Gervaise, a missionary who travelled widely throughout 
Siam, reported that “they [both village-dwellers and forest-dwellers] were asked 
regularly to calculate auspicious times and dates, to tell fortunes and to find hidden 
objects… They also gave charms to sick people, travellers, and young children to ward 
                                                 
67  Payutto, Karn suksa khong song thai, p.6. Prawat karn suksa khong song, p.15. 
68  Cited by Tambiah, pp.179-180. 
 
180

=== PAGE 188 ===
off evil. A Buddhist monk could thus be teacher, preacher, astrologer, and magician to a 
community.”69 
 
 
4.6 A New Interpretation 
Having shown the inadequacy in the current official position, we shall now argue that the 
introduction of formal examinations was due to a combination of internal and external 
political circumstances.  
 
Internal political problems at Ayutthaya were already evident by the beginning of the 
seventeenth century. The waning days of the famous Thammaracha dynasty (1569-1629), 
that included the reign of Naresuan, the great warrior king, were characterised by 
succession problems that would persist until the end of Ayutthaya. The following 
dynasty, that of Prasat Thong (1629-1688), therefore saw a systematic undermining of 
the political power of princes by the reigning monarchs, lest they challenge the throne. 
The kings were also concerned about the threats posed by powerful nobles, who 
controlled both manpower and government departments. To reduce the influence of the 
nobles, the responsibilities for controlling manpower were divided between Kalahom, 
the Defence Department, and Mahathai, the Interior: the former took charge of the 
southern provinces and the latter the northern. There was also another department (krom 
tha) to maintain “centralised registers of all freemen [phrai laung] liable for labour 
service”.70   These internal politics at the capital, Ayutthaya, affected the king’s ability to 
control manpower from the provinces. Wyatt therefore argues: “Kings seem to have had 
                                                 
69  Gervaise, The Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam, p.83. Also cited by na Pombejra, 
pp.95-96. 
70  Wyatt, Thailand, pp.75-76. 
 
181

=== PAGE 189 ===
continuing difficulties in controlling the provinces and manpower and in maintaining a 
ready military force”.71  
 
Other domestic problems resulted from wars. Due to the campaigns in the early years of 
Narai’s reign (1656-1688), when people had no time to plant their crops, there had been 
a severe shortage of rice; as a result, rice export was banned, except by the Dutch, who 
had by that time successfully negotiated economic concessions from the Siamese. The 
wars also damaged the economy of the provinces, such as deer-hunting in Phitsanulok; 
deer-meat too was exported by the Dutch. The crumbling economy in the provinces 
threatened the power of the khunnang, the governors of those provinces. 
 
Developments at Ayutthaya from the 17th century on, or even earlier, in the 16th century, 
were related to geopolitics at the time: Southeast Asian states were at war with one 
another, building and consolidating their empires. Ayutthaya was overrun for the first 
time by the Burmese in 1569. The invaders “thoroughly looted the city and led thousands 
of prisoners, both commoners and nobles, away to captivity in Burma” and installed 
Maha Thammaracha (1569-90) on the throne.72 A son of Maha Thammaracha, Prince 
Naresuan, was taken as a captive to Pegu as a surety for his father’s good behaviour until 
his sister was presented to Bayinnaung, alias Burennaung, the Burmese king (1551-1581) 
at Hamsavati, the then capital of Burma. In 1593, a year after escaping from Burma and 
soon after succeeding his father, Naresuan (1590-1605) defeated the invading Burmese 
troops under Nandabayin (1581-1599), the son and successor of Bayinnaung, in what has 
become famous as the battle of Nong Sarai. Naresuan’s brother and successor, 
Ekathosarot (1605-1611) subsequently continued to repel Burmese attacks and to rebuild 
Ayutthaya.  
                                                 
71  Ibid, p.108. 
72  Ibid, p.100. 
 
182

=== PAGE 190 ===
When Narai came to the throne in 1656, the kingdom of Ayutthaya had been at war with 
her neighbours, especially with Burma, for most of the past century. Although Ava, as 
Burma was then known, under Pintale (1648-1661) and Pyi (Pyei) Min (1661-1672) was 
no longer its former self, and could hardly pose a threat to Ayutthaya due to the 
incursions from China and Manipur73, her earlier aggression meant Ayutthaya had to be 
on guard at all time. Apart from Ava, Ayutthaya had other wars to fight. Another 
neighbour, Cambodia, attacked Ayutthaya no fewer than six times, according to Wyatt, 
in the two decades after the fall of Ayutthaya in 1569. On the other hand, Ayutthaya also 
expanded its power whenever given the opportunity. “The Lao country”, (i.e. the present 
northern part of Thailand), Cambodia and remote parts of Burma were the usual targets. 
In 1660, just four years after coming to power, King Narai marched thousands of troops 
to conquer “the Lao country” i.e. Chiang Mai. In December 1668 Narai blockaded 
Cambodia with several vessels. But from now onwards the king would choose to stay 
behind and ask Phrakhlang, a minister, to lead his troops into battle. This was because of 
the increasingly dangerous political situations at home: a conspiracy involving his half-
brothers and some khunnang, “nobles”. As a result, some provinces over which 
Ayutthaya often fought with Burma (Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim) were at times 
administered by foreigners, who were employed at the Siamese court by the Ayutthayan 
king. The picture we get here of Ayutthaya, described by Tambiah as being a “galactic 
polity”, is a state constantly at war, having to marshal all its human and natural resources. 
Tambiah, in fact, comments on the “galactic polity” as being “no effective cybernetic 
system” for it “lacked… mechanisms that produced homeostasis and balance.”74 
 
Whenever the Ayutthaya kingdom was under attack or the king wished to occupy 
another country, for example, Cambodia or “the Lao country”, all able-bodied men in the 
                                                 
73  Phayre, pp.136-148. 
74  Tambiah, p.123. 
 
183

=== PAGE 191 ===
capital and other provinces were conscripted. This was because there was no standing 
army before RAma V (1868-1910).75 Narai conscripted thousands of men in his various 
war expeditions. The Dutch recorded that he levied sixty thousand men in 1658 and 1659. 
When he actually marched, not to Ava, but to “the Lao country”, i.e. Chiangmai, in 
December 1660 the number swelled to two hundred and seventy thousand men, and that 
army was joined by another two hundred thousand men from Phitsanulok province.76  
Even foreign communities at Ayutthaya had to contribute manpower to such 
expeditions.77 Na Pombejra observes: “The years 1659-1665 thus saw Siam’s manpower 
resources being constantly drained.”78 
 
As mentioned earlier, there was a plot by some senior princes and nobles against the king, 
preventing him from personally leading troops to war. In those circumstances, it was 
understandable that the king would look to outsiders for help. Foreigners to whom the 
king turned were from among those settled at Ayutthaya as well as merchants, 
missionaries and diplomats. They were appointed in many capacities, from that of 
bodyguard to adviser and even minister and prime minister.  
 
The king recruited Japanese, Chams and Malays, all settled at Ayutthaya, as royal 
bodyguards, although such recruitment was not always in the best interest of the 
kingdom: the risks were evident during the power struggles, for example in 1611 and 
1629, between King Suthat (Si Saowaphak) (1610-1611) and Song Tham (1611-1628), 
and between King Athittayawong (Aug - Sept 1629) and Prasat Thong (1629-1656), in 
which the Japanese in the royal bodyguard supported the opposition, Song Tham and 
Prasat Thong respectively. Sometimes members of the foreign communities at Ayutthaya 
                                                 
75  For more information see Wyatt, Thailand, pp.100-09. 
76  A letter from Van Rijck, representative of the Dutch company V.O.C at Ayutthaya written to 
Governor-General Maetsujcker cited by na Pombejra, pp.286-287. 
77  Ibid, p.288. 
78  Ibid, p.307. 
 
184

=== PAGE 192 ===
were conscripted for war expeditions: there were one hundred and fifty Portuguese men 
conscripted in the war against “the Lao country” in 1660. Some of the men were 
“stationed at strategic points above Ayutthaya to stop deserters fleeing downriver”.79  
 
Some foreign merchants and even adventurers were also employed by the king. A few 
Englishmen, for instance Richard Burnaby and Thomas Ivatt, from the East India 
Company, and a former English army captain, Williams, were hired by the Crown. 
Williams trained the king’s bodyguards while the others were employed at the royal 
court.  
 
French and Portuguese Catholic priests, who had already established themselves in Siam 
as early as 1662, were not directly employed by the king, but he and also the Ayutthayan 
people appreciated their learning and involvement in education.80 Jesuit priests, most of 
whom were mathematicians, advised King Narai when he built another palace at Luvo, 
now Lopburi. To strengthen their presence at Ayutthaya, two French Catholic bishops81 
came to Ayutthaya with a letter from Pope Clement IX and King Louis XIV in 1673.82 
 
Foreigners who by far exceeded all expectations and became extrenely powerful 
ministers were some Persians, for instance Sheikh Ahmed, his younger brother, 
Muhammad Said, and their descendants. In 1630 during the reign of Prasat Thong, the 
predecessor of Narai, Sheikh Ahmed was made the minister responsible for trade, 
phrakhlang, and then for home affairs, mahatthai, and eventually prime minister, 
samuhanaiyok. He was succeeded by his son, Chaophraya Aphiracha (Chun), and his 
(Sheikh Ahmed’s) grandson, Chaophraya Chamnanphakdi (Sombun), at the mahatthai 
                                                 
79  Ibid, p.288. 
80  Tachard, Voyage to Siam, pp.195-196, 202-204. 
81  Vicar-apostolic Pallu, Bishop of Helipolis, and Lambert de la Motte, Bishop of Beritus. 
82  na Pombejra, p.321; Wyatt, Thailand, p.113. 
 
185

=== PAGE 193 ===
office, which was controlled by the family for more than half a century.  Muhammad 
Said’s son, Aga Muhammad Astarabadi (Okphra Sinaworarat), also became prime 
minister under Narai. 83 The dominance of this Muslim Persian family was only 
interrupted by the appointment of another foreigner, Constance Phaulkon (1647-1688). 
This Greek adventurer was first employed as a court official, and finally became prime 
minister in the later years of Narai’s rule in 1685.  
 
In the meantime, foreigners trading with Ayutthaya, such as the Dutch, French, English, 
Chinese and Japanese competed with one another for privileges. The commercial 
concessions, such as exclusive rights to export and deer-hunting, enjoyed by the Dutch, 
were biased against other foreign nationals, some of whom, notably the Portuguese, the 
French and the English, already had a strong presence in South and Southeast Asia. Now 
King Narai had to turn his attention to balancing his relationships with these foreign 
powers. However, he did not always succeed. For example, the Dutch blockaded the 
ships of China and Japan in 1663, which resulted in the 1664 Siamese-Dutch Treaty: the 
treaty prohibited Narai from using Chinese and Japanese crews on his ships, and from 
punishing Dutch citizens breaking Ayutthayan laws. The Dutch, whose first ships had 
arrived at Ayutthaya more than half a century earlier, also seized some possessions of the 
prime minister, Aga Muhammed (Okphra Sinaworarat), saying that he owed them 2,700 
guilders.84 In future the Dutch were to conduct commerce in Siam wherever they chose. 
 
The French were determined, however, not to be bound by any such agreement between 
the Dutch and the Siamese. The Siamese were equally keen on good relationships with 
France in order to balance the influence of the English in India and the Dutch in Java. 
France, in order to obtain political and commercial privileges for herself, used her 
                                                 
83  na Pombejra, p.301 & Wyatt, cit., pp.108-109. 
84  Ibid, p.301. 
 
186

=== PAGE 194 ===
missionaries at Ayutthaya, who had been in the kingdom more than a decade. By 1680 
their efforts “over the preceding 15 years” resulted in the exchange of diplomatic 
missions between the two countries. King Narai sent a diplomatic mission to France in 
that year. The mission was accompanied by Jesuits, who acted as translators. By now 
Phaulkon, a Greek Orthodox Christian, had converted to Catholicism, and the increased 
influence of the French at the court of Ayutthaya owed much to his involvement. Even 
before he was appointed prime minister in 1685, he began to oversee an improved 
relationship between Siam and France.  
 
Over the course of time, the French missionaries were able to convince their king, Louis 
XIV, that the aims of his mission to Ayutthaya should include securing not only 
commercial privileges but also the conversion of King Narai to Catholicism.85 The leader 
of the first French diplomatic mission to Siam in 1685, Chevalier de Chaumont, was 
specifically despatched to achieve this divine assignment,86 and the second mission, led 
by Simon La Loubère in 1687, was also partially tasked with this undertaking. 87 With 
the second mission came six hundred French troops. They requested King Narai to 
permit them to set up garrisons at Ayutthaya and Bangkok, the two strategic points, 
perhaps to pressure Ayutthaya into offering better commercial deals. The demands by the 
French to set up garrisons ultimately culminated in the Great Revolution of 1688, in 
which the French had to leave Ayutthaya, King Narai was dethroned and Phaulkon was 
executed.88  
 
In their religious mission, too, the French seem to have been equally frustrated with the 
outcome. When King Narai had still not been converted even after the two diplomatic 
                                                 
85  Smithies (ed.) in his “Introduction” to the Chevalier de Chaumont and the Abbé de Choisy, Aspects of 
the Embassy to Siam in 1685, p.4. See also Wyatt, Thailand, p.113. 
86  Kuloy, in his “Introduction” to Tachard’s Voyage to Siam, p.4.  
87  Ibid, pp.420-421. 
88  See also footnote no. 3 of this chapter. 
 
187

=== PAGE 195 ===
despatches from France, a senior Jesuit, Father Guy Tachard, is reported to have told the 
French envoy: “that in the future Narai ought to be instructed by a Jesuit who was 
proficient in Siamese.”89 For Bishop Metellaopolis, despite being in Siam for almost 
twenty-five years, had not been able to convert King Narai to Christianity. On realising 
this lack of progress, Phaulkon had earlier told the missions that “Christianity hath made 
no greater progress in Siam after so many years of endeavours….” and counselled them 
that “there must be another House of Jesuits, where they should as much as lay in their 
power lead the austere and retired life of the Talapoints, that have so great credit with the 
people”. 90 For this, Lord Constance, as Phaulkon was then known to the French, 
promised the French missionaries that “he would protect and favour [them] in all things 
that lay in his power”.91  
 
It is interesting to note here that it was Phaulkon, known officially to the then Siamese as 
Phaya Wichaiyen, was the prime minister who ordered the monks to leave the monastic 
Order and put them in the royal service. The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya records: 
“Many were the monks and novices whom he unfrocked and brought to perform royal 
services”.92 Phaulkon’s instruction to defrock the monks and novices brought him into a 
“conflict” with Oc Louang Soracac (also Sorasak), the royal pundit who had earlier 
examined the monks and novices under Narai’s order. Realising that King Narai would 
not stop Phaulkon, Oc Louang Soracac is said to have physically “struck” and “knocked 
down” Phaulkon.93 
 
These internal and external political developments worried the Siamese, particularly the 
most privileged groups: the princes, the nobles and the monastic Order; and we have 
                                                 
89  na Pombejra citing Cébéret’s journal. Ibid, p.421. See also Tachard, Voyage to Siam, pp.204-205. 
90  Tachard, pp.203-204. 
91  Ibid, p.203. 
92  The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya, pp.303-304. See also Prawat karn suksa khong song, p.15. 
93  Ibid, p.304. 
 
188

=== PAGE 196 ===
already pointed out how the senior princes and the nobles, having witnessed how their 
powers were being undermined, conspired to depose King Narai.  
 
The Sangha, too, had seen their relationship with King Narai deteriorate over the years. 
The most controversial area was, as at Ava under Thalun, conscription. Even the official 
version of why the formal examinations were introduced recognised that a large number 
of men took refuge in the Order as ordained persons. The reason for this was officially 
considered to be the generosity of the king himself towards the Sangha, which attracted 
many into the Order: many became monks for a comfortable life.94 The Sangha was 
accorded a few privileges: no corvée obligation; no taxes, and in many cases offenders 
were not punishable by the law of the land while in the yellow robe. These privileges had 
been afforded to members of the Sangha from the early days of the Order. This was 
evident in the conversation between the Buddha and King AjAtasattu, in which the King 
said to the Buddha that he would not force anyone, a former servant, a farmer or a 
householder, who had joined the Sangha to leave their religious life but would pay them 
homage and material support.95  
 
It is indeed possible as indicated in the official interpretation of the event during King 
Narai’s time that some joined the Order for an easy life, some for a short cut to wealth 
and fame. The privileged position of the Order was always open to abuse, as indeed 
suggested in King Narai’s claim and other royal edicts. Yet we cannot rule out other 
reasons, such as continuous conscription. If conscription was the main reason for the 
deterioration in relations between the monarch and the Sangha, this raises a question: is 
it right for the Order to admit those fleeing conscription as its members? On this, we 
                                                 
94  Prawat karn suksa khong song, p.15. 
95  For more, see the SAmaGGaphala-sutta, D i 60-62. 
 
189

=== PAGE 197 ===
have already explained in Chapter Two that the Buddha forbids the Order from ordaining 
anyone who is already “in the king’s service” (abhiGGAtam rAjabhaTam), military or civil.  
 
But what if someone is not on the official reserve list, and there is no conscription law or 
any other law specifically barring people of a certain age from ordination? Whilst, as we 
have explained, there was continuous conscription under King Narai and there is 
evidence that there was a drastic increase in the number of monks and novices at 
Ayutthaya, we do not know if the Order during the reign of King Narai admitted men 
who were already on active or reserve service. Nor do we have any evidence to suggest 
that King Narai himself passed a law prohibiting men of a certain age from receiving 
ordination, as indeed was the case under King Mongkut alias RAma IV about two 
hundred years later. There are different reports on whether a man needed permission 
from the authorities before becoming a monk: La Loubère, who was in Siam after formal 
examinations were introduced, said that every citizen was free to become a monk. 
However, Nicolas Gervaise, a missionary who had visited various provinces of Siam 
before the introduction of examinations, reported that all candidates for ordination 
needed permission from an official of the crown.96  
 
Yet the fact that some form of formal examination had to be introduced suggests that 
there were no effective measures to stop men from entering the Order. The absence of 
such a law may have led to confusion and then tension between the King and the Order 
on the question of conscription. Because, on the part of the Order, turning away fleeing 
men who came as candidates for ordination was not an option, even on the grounds of 
their avoiding potential conscription. In other words, whilst the spirit of early Buddhism 
emphasises the importance of the right motive for entering the Order, the Vinaya, 
                                                 
96  Gervaise, cit., p.83. 
 
190

=== PAGE 198 ===
particularly the rules dealing with ordination procedures, on the other hand, stress the 
absence of wrong motive. Here the wrong motive, fear of conscription, was extremely 
difficult to prove. In such a situation, the Order might have to accept anyone who had 
met the normal requirements for ordination even though it was evident that the 
candidates were likely runaways from enlistment in the army. This may have created a 
situation in which many able-bodied men joined the Order, and members of the Order 
were reluctant to leave their robes, apparently for fear of conscription. 
 
This state of confusion and tension was brought to an end only two centuries later by 
King Chulalongkorn, RAma V. He promulgated a law, the military act, in 1905, requiring 
men of a certain age to serve in the armed forces. But if someone had already been in the 
Order before that age, and if he was judged to be a phu ru tham, “one who knew the 
Buddha’s teaching”, he would not be required to leave the Order, but would be exempt 
from military service. (At present, men in the armed forces or government service may 
be ordained with the permission of their superior. And most of the cadet-trainees at the 
Royal Military Academy become a monk for one month during their course as a part of 
their training.) 
 
If men were ordained with a worldly motive such as fleeing conscription, the case we 
have mentioned under King Narai, this would be a burden on the abbot, for it was more 
difficult to administer or teach a larger group of men with motives other than faithfully 
following the path to salvation. The increase in number (vepul amahattaM), the Buddha 
himself was reported to have said, was one of the four main reasons why the Order was 
becoming corrupt. The other reasons are when the Order has attained “long standing” 
(rattaGGumahattaM), “greatness of (material) gains” (lAbhamahattaM) and “great 
l
 
191

=== PAGE 199 ===
learning” (bAhusaccamahattaM). These conditions had necessitated the prescription of 
monastic rules and regulations, sikkhApadAni.97   
 
With those who had fled conscription, the number of monks and novices at Ayutthaya 
swelled to “thousands”, as noted by Gervaise at Ayutthaya, causing shortages of 
manpower. The king was therefore prompted to keep a separate register of all the monks 
“in the state’s population polls”. This was to retain the control of manpower on which his 
authority depended.  
 
The king’s difficult relationship with the nobles, as explained earlier, was most likely 
further to complicate the relation between the crown and the Order, already strained over 
the question of fleeing conscripts. 98 The dissatisfaction felt by the nobles towards the 
king was likely to have spread among some important members of the Order, because 
“the kings and chaos, [nobles,] had their favourite monks”.99 The “forest-dwellers”, for 
example, used to have great respect from Narai’s father, King Prasat Thong. He built for 
the “forest-dwellers” a monastery, Wat Chai Watthanaram, considered to be “the 
grandest building project of his reign”, and appointed its chief a sangharAja. 100 The Order 
itself, on the other hand, was not totally outside politics. Succession problems often 
dragged influential members of the Sangha into political affairs. Support from the 
Sangha or a section of it would go a long way in any power struggle. As Father Claude 
de Bèze said, King “Narai won the throne with the support of certain talapoints”. 101  His 
successor, Petracha, also received, in his attempts to gain the throne, the blessing of the 
                                                 
i
 
r
97  Yato kho SAr putta saMgho vepullamahattaM patto hoti, atha idh’ekacce AsavaTThAniyA dhammA 
saMghe pAtubhavanti, atha satthA sAvakAnaM sikkhApadaM paGGapeti uddisati pAtimokkhaM tesaG Geva
AsavaTThAniyAnaM 
dhammAnaM 
paTighAtAya. 
Vin 
iii 
10; 
…the anavamajjhimAnaM 
vasena 
vepullamahattaM patto… SamantapAsAdikA i 194. 
98  na Pombejra, p.325. 
99  Ibid, p.93. 
100  Ibid; The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya, pp.215-216. 
101  Hutchinson, 1688 Revolution in Siam, p.54; also cited by na Pombejra, p.94. 
 
192

=== PAGE 200 ===
SangharAja of Lopburi. The SangharAja was rewarded for his part when King Petracha 
donated the palace in Lopburi (built by Narai) to the Sangha of Lopburi. Narai, however, 
may have lost the favour of the Order soon after coming to the throne as a result of the 
power struggles between the king and the higher-ranking princes or the nobles early in 
his reign. Indeed, in 1676 the Dutch had already reported that king Narai had “lost much 
of his credit” in the eyes of the Buddhist clergy. Interestingly, that was when the French 
missionaries increased their profile with the arrival at Ayutthaya of two Bishops to head 
the mission.  
 
For their part, the Sangha may have been concerned about the influence over the Crown 
of the Europeans, particularly the French. It must have been known to some of the nobles, 
and therefore also to the Sangha, that first the French missionaries and then the envoy, 
Chaumont, had tried to convert the king to Catholicism. It is said that a few months after 
the departure of Chaumont in 1686, there was a petition “attached to a tree in front of the 
palace” in Lopburi, which warned of “the dangers that threatened the Buddhist faith, and 
invited all men to open their eyes to a matter which concerned the public weal.” 102  
 
It was in these circumstances, in which the king, as na Pombejra notes103, needed 
manpower, that King Narai ordered the monks to be examined, between 1684 and 1686, 
on their knowledge of the scriptures. Consequently, as already mentioned, “several 
thousand” monks and novices with insufficient knowledge of the scriptures were 
required to disrobe.  
 
However, these uncompromising actions by King Narai did not seem to have affected, in 
the long run, the traditional custom of temporary ordination among the Siamese during 
                                                 
102  Ibid, pp.409-410. 
103  na Pombejra, p.94. 
 
193

=== PAGE 201 ===
which boys received the best education the monastery could offer. In fact, the harsh 
measures were confined only to the last four years of King Narai’s thirty-two- year reign. 
And, as far as education was concerned, even during those decisive years, the abbots by 
and large retained their freedom in designing syllabuses for their monasteries because the 
examination syllabuses were not standardised for the next one and half a centuries; nor 
were there enough candidates to hold state examinations regularly, even once in every 
three years, for another two centuries or so.  
 
Over the following centuries, in contrast to King Narai’s rigid approach, the kings 
adopted a more diplomatic tactic: through their generous support for the successful 
candidates, the kings made efforts to popularise formal examinations within the Sangha. 
Though never compulsory after the time of King Narai, as indicated earlier, 
examinations were used, whenever possible, as an instrument to strengthen the 
ecclesiastical hierarchy: administrative posts within the Sangha came increasingly to be 
filled by candidates successful in the examinations. As a result, in the subsequent reigns 
the influence of these examinations was to become increasingly perceptible.  
 
 
4.7 The Parian 
Despite the evidence showing that King Narai introduced formal examinations, the early 
development of formal examinations in Siam remains sketchy. Nothing about Parian or 
any other form of formal examination is mentioned in The Royal Chronicle of Ayutthaya 
or any other documents related to the period. The first evidence of the existence of the 
Parian is found only in one royal order, phonsawadan, issued by RAma I (1782-1809), 
just after he came to the throne. Part of that order reads: “Appoint MahA Mee, Parian Ek, 
of Wat Blieb as vinayarakkhita (“the guardian of ecclesiastical disciplines”) replacing 
 
194

=== PAGE 202 ===
Phra UpAli…..Appoint MahA Thongdi, Parian Ek, of Wat Hong (haMsa) as the abbot of 
Wat Nag (NAga)”.104 In this order, the king mentioned of MahA Mee and MahA Thongdi 
as  Parian monks with a Parian ek degree, confirming that the Parian had existed before 
he came to the throne. And, based on this evidence that Phya Damrong concluded that 
the Parian examinations had begun sometime during the Ayutthaya period, for there is 
no record of King Taksin of Thonburi (1767-1782) sponsoring any Parian 
examinations.105 
 
Here it is presumed that Narai introduced only some form of formal examinations, for 
the sole reason, as argued earlier, of purging the Order; but these examinations in the 
form that had been introduced may not have continued under Narai, and it was for 
sometime before the formal examinations, which we now know as Parian, developed at 
Ayutthaya. This was because Narai introduced formal examinations, as described earlier 
in detail, for the wrong reason, and at the wrong time. The examination was introduced 
just four years before he died. During that time the political situation in the kingdom was, 
as we have seen, fragile and dangerous, and the Sangha was no longer in good terms 
with the king. It would not have been possible even to devise a systematic syllabus for 
the Parian in those circumstance, let alone to complete it. As we shall see later, it took at 
least two years to study Pali grammar at that time, and many more years for a candidate 
to be able to enter the Parian examination with a syllabus based on the centuries-old 
classification of the TipiTaka: the Vinaya, the Sutta and the Abhidhamma. 
 
                                                 
104  Phra phongsawadan Krung Ratanakosin Ratchkarn thi nung, (Chronicle of the First Reign of the 
Ratanakosin), p.13. (MahA Mee became SangharAja during the reign of Rama II). 
105  Rachanubhab,“Athipai reung karn sop phra pariyatti tham” (Account of the Pariyatti Examinations) 
Tamnan tharng phra phutthasasana (Chronicle of Buddhism), p.341. 
 
195

=== PAGE 203 ===
However, regardless of when they became fully developed, the Parian examinations 
were the only formal examinations in Siam from late Ayutthaya to early Bangkok.106 
They were also informally known as blae Balie [the Thai pronounce Pali as Balie], 
“translating Pali”, because candidates studied and translated the Pali nikAyas at the 
examinations. Among students, the examinations were identified as Parian Balie or P.B 
for short, because the emphasis was on learning Pali and translating passages from Pali 
texts. Hereafter we shall use the word Parian to refer to these examinations.  
 
The origin of the word Parian is not clear. It could be the Thai pronunciation of pariyatti, 
meaning learning. 107 We assume that it may have been derived from Pali PariGGA, 
“knowledge”. Peter Skilling and Praport Assavavirulhakarn108 think that this is more 
probable.109 It may have been first used by the Khmer to mean one who had full 
knowledge of the dhamma and then adopted by the Siamese at Ayutthaya. According to 
the PariGGA-sutta and the PariGGeya-sutta of the SaMyutta-nikAya, pariGGA is equal to the 
extinction of greed, hatred and delusion (rAgakkhaya, dosakkhaya, mohakkhaya).110 If 
this was the case, we could see that the principal object of examinations in monastic 
education was supposed to be to liberate students from defilements. Incidentally, pariGGA 
is now the Thai word for “knowledge at university level”, and the term pariGGA-batr is 
used for an academic degree.111  The term Parian, apart from the examinations, was also 
applied, according to the Royal Thai-Thai Dictionary (1986), to mean “students of 
Buddhist scriptures”.112 But, as far as written history is concerned, at least by the end of 
the Ayutthaya period, the term Parian may have come to apply specifically to being a 
graduate. The word was added to the names of monks who had passed the examinations. 
                                                 
106  The Life of Prince-Patriarch VajiraGABa, p.60. 
107  I owe this point to my supervisor, Gombrich. 
108  Professor of Sanskrit, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok. 
109  Personal communication. 
110  S iii 26, iv 32-33, v 29, 159, 182, 191 & 236. 
111  Thai-Thai Dictionary, p.126. 
112  Ibid, pp.126, 144. 
 
196

=== PAGE 204 ===
Once all the three levels were completed, a monk was called mahA parian, or mahA in 
short, which was added in front of the names of successful candidates.  
 
There were three levels in the Parian examinations, following the division of the Pali 
Buddhist scriptures into Vinaya-, Sutta- and Abhidhamma-piTaka. At the highest level, i.e 
Parian ek, all the canonical texts from the three PiTakas were prescribed. At the 
intermediate level, i.e Parian tho, the Sutta- and Vinaya-piTaka were examined and at the 
preliminary level, i.e Parian tri, the whole Sutta-piTaka was the syllabus. Theoretically, 
the examiners could examine candidates on any passage from the Canon. However, we 
have no evidence in our hands to suggest that the Canonical texts were so thoroughly 
examined.  
 
A candidate took about three years to prepare for each grade. So to complete all levels 
took nine years or more on average. Students preparing for the Parian examinations first 
studied KaccAyana’s Pali grammar, which, the Prince-Patriarch and Prince Damrong said, 
took about two years.113 That was before students were introduced to canonical texts. As 
a result, KaccAyana’s Pali grammar was known at the time as mUlakaccAyana, “basic 
KaccAyana’s grammar” or simply as mUlapakaraBa, “the foundation text”.114  
 
The main task of the candidates in the examinations was to translate at sight, orally, 
selected passages from the texts. It was held that understanding the teachings of the 
Buddha depended on one’s ability to read the original Pali texts, and the best way to 
ensure this was to examine the translation skills of students. Until the reign of RAma II, 
the translation was from Pali to Thai; hence, the informal but popular term blae balie, 
“translating the Pali canonical texts” for the Parian examinations. As in Sri Lanka and 
                                                 
113  Rachanubhab, “Athipai reung karn sop phra pariyatti tham” p.340. 
114  Prawat Mahamakut Ratchwithayalai, p.3.  
 
197

=== PAGE 205 ===
Burma, the TipiTaka was preserved in Pali in Thailand. Following the centuries old 
TheravAda tradition that emphasises preserving the teachings in the original, people were 
not keen on translating the TipiTaka into the local tongue for fear it would alter the words 
or meaning of the teachings.115  
 
The Parian examinations were held only when there were candidates. During the 
Ayutthayan and early Ratanakosin era, once a student felt confident enough to be 
examined on his knowledge of the texts, he informed the abbot, who applied on his 
behalf to the king. We have found no record of the number of candidates during the 
Ayutthaya period. Over the following century, we may assume that the Parian 
examinations did take place when there were candidates and the kingdom was stable 
enough. However, during the period of great instability leading up to the destruction of 
Ayutthaya by the Burmese in 1767, it was unlikely that Parian examinations were held. 
 
 
4.8 The Thonburi Period, 1767-1782 
During the Thonburi period, 1767- 1782, as a direct result of the destruction of the “old 
capital” or krung kao, King Taksin failed to revive the Order and its education. Although 
no records survive concerning the Parian examinations, we know that King Taksin, who 
liberated both Ayutthaya and Lanna from the Burmese yoke, restored some political 
order and supported learned monks.  
 
Initially, the king’s efforts to restore order in the kingdom were successful: the chaotic 
situations were brought under control. The royal chronicle of Thonburi reports King 
Taksin quelled a revolt in Swangapuri that was led by dissident monks under the 
                                                 
115  Rachanubhab, cit., p.341. 
 
198

=== PAGE 206 ===
leadership of Phra Fang, who seized political control. These monks, who claimed 
supernatural powers and invincibility, also took control of another neighbouring 
principality, Phitsanulok, in 1770. And almost a decade later, the King suppressed 
another monk in the “old capital”, Ayutthaya, who had declared that he had supernormal 
powers and rebelled.116  
 
However, King Taksin’s work to revive the monastic Order was, in the long run, 
unsuccessful. At first, the king showed much enthusiasm for restoring the ecclesiastical 
hierarchy and promoting monastic learning: he commissioned the Traiphum Phra Ruang 
to be copied with illustrations. (One of the copies was taken to Germany in the 19th 
century, and it is presently kept in the Museum of Indian Arts in Berlin.117) The king also 
wrote a version of Phra Malai, which was several times longer than the original one. 
Then the King assigned a noble to find out monks knowledgeable in the holy scriptures. 
The monks were then offered new robes and other requisites as a mark of honour for 
their learning. He also asked them to come and reside in the capital. But the king soon 
caused uneasiness among the Sangha.   
  
Whilst his commanders were sent to restore law and order in remote areas, and to regain 
parts of territories lost during the destruction of Ayutthaya, the king devoted most of his 
time to study of scriptures and meditation. Shortly thereafter he started behaving 
strangely, asking learned monks to check signs on his body to see if they matched those 
of a great man, mahApur sa, described in the Pali canon as belonging to either a Buddha 
or a universal monarch. He even declared himself to have reached the stage of a stream-
winner, sotApanna, and demanded that members of the ordained community prostrate 
themselves in front of him to acknowledge his superiority in spiritual achievement. 
i
                                                 
116  Phraratphongsawadan krung thonburi (Royal Chronicle of Thonburi), p.190. 
117  Reynolds & Reynolds, p.244. 
 
199

=== PAGE 207 ===
Monks who refused to follow his order were either forced to disrobe or demoted. This 
deterioration of the relationship between the monarch and the Order started to create 
tension in society and put the newly re-established Siamese kingdom at risk once again 
from external threat. King Taksin was, therefore, dethroned by one of his generals, 
Chakri, in 1782, and subsequently put to death.  
 
 
4.9 The Early Ratanakosin Period, 1782-1809 
By contrast, General Chakri, or RAma I, who founded a new dynasty, Ratanakosin, in 
1782, brought not only prosperity to the people by restoring political order but also 
normalcy to the Sangha through his promulgation of ten laws. Mostly issued in the first 
two years of his reign, the edicts in their main contents dealt with specific disciplinary 
matters that arose at that time, recording the offenders and other details exactly. Some of 
the laws pointed out to lay people how their attitude and actions affected the purity of the 
monastic Order, and exhorted them to respect the “world of the monastery with its 
special code”.118 The king, who moved the capital to Bangkok, sought to strengthen not 
only the observation of the Vinaya, “the monastic rules”, by the monks but also the 
practice of Buddhist moral conduct by his officials. Indeed, the laws “were addressed to 
both monks and lay officials, such as provincial governors, to obtain their co-operation in 
implementing them”.119  
 
Laws number Two, Three and Four were, respectively, to deter monks from engaging in 
vocations “contrary to the Dhamma” such as astrology and medicine; to prevent the 
Order from being used as a base to rise against the state; and to prohibit monks or ex-
monks from claiming supernatural power. Law number Seven was enacted to re-
                                                 
118  Reynolds, pp.36, 40. 
119  Tambiah, p.182. 
 
200

=== PAGE 208 ===
establish in the administration of the Order the supremacy of sangharAja and rAjagaBa, 
“royal appointed ecclesiastical authority”, the positions which were created by the state 
in the times of Sukhothai. The need to ensure the power of the sangharAja indicated how 
the monastic establishment in the capital and its surroundings had been severely 
disrupted, noticeably from 1754, when Alaungpaya of Burma (1752-60) began his 
campaign to subjugate Ayutthaya, until the founding of Bangkok in 1782. In such 
circumstances of chaos and disorder, preceptors (upajjhAya) were no longer able to 
“retain control of their disciples”, so that RAma I had to order relatives of the monks and 
officials to report misbehaviour of monks to the authorities concerned.  
 
Even in the Ratanakosin era, the incidence of monks or ex-monks claiming mystical 
power to attract a following in their attempts to revolt against the state was far from over: 
just a month before RAma I promulgated this Law number Three, some ex-monks in 
Nakhonnayok were reported to have induced “each other to scheme and deceive, 
extolling supernatural power to take the throne”.120 To prevent such incidents, Law 
number Three therefore required a monk to carry an identification paper bearing his 
name, monastery, seniority, the name of his preceptor and the seal of the sangha officials 
in the region; and abbots were asked to forward a register of monks in their monasteries 
to the department of religious affairs, thus tightening the state’s control over the Sangha.  
 
Tambiah commented that these registers, which paralleled the civil registers, were not 
only to control manpower mobilization but also to discourage monks from wandering.121 
However, the obvious intention of the registrars was to assist, if not force, the preceptors 
to take responsibility for their pupils rather than to discourage the monks from wandering. 
As indicated earlier, there was a declining relationship between preceptors and pupils 
                                                 
120  “Kot Phrasong 3 (Sangha Law No. 3)” Kotmai tra sam duang (Laws of the Three Seals) II, pp.177-78. 
See also Reynolds, pp.42-43. 
121  Tambiah, p.185. 
 
201

=== PAGE 209 ===
following the Burmese invasion. When this happened, it is apparent that the first of the 
two layers - and evidently the more fundamental one - of the ecclesiastical administration, 
i.e supervision within the monastery, had broken down. This necessitated the 
strengthening of the other layer, which was a hierarchical one involving groups of 
monasteries and the secular authority.  
 
Some of the Laws were designed to rebuild the unity of the Sangha, which had faltered 
since it was divided into two camps by the claim to supernatural power and sainthood by 
King Taksin. When the king of Thonburi demanded that monks bow down to him, the 
SangharAja and two other top-ranking monks had refused to do so and were consequently 
demoted; but they were reinstated by RAma I.  
 
The last law was similar in its contents to Law number Two, which concerned the 
observation of the PAtimokkha. While the former law stressed to monks, officials and lay 
Buddhists in general the importance of the practice of Vinaya, for it was synonymous 
with the vitality of the SAsana, the last ecclesiastical law was to reinforce the Vinaya in a 
certain context. Law number Ten caused more than a hundred monks to be expelled from 
the Order for their alleged decadent behaviour. It is interesting to note here that, like his 
contemporary in Burma, Bodawpaya,122 RAma I decreed that the unfrocked monks “shall 
have their arms tattooed as royal commoners and shall serve the government at heavy 
labour”.123 These ten ecclesiastical laws were so far unique to RAma I because they, 
observes Wyatt, “represent the king’s assumption of religious authority”.124 From the 
extant records, only two decrees had been promulgated prior to the First Reign. One was 
by King Borommakot (1733-1758) of Ayutthaya who reminded that the monks should 
                                                 
122  See p.95. 
123  “Kot Phrasong 10 (Sangha Law No. 10)” Kotmai tra sam duang, IV, p.226. See also Ishii’s Sangha, 
State and Society, p.65. 
124  Wyatt, “The Subtle Revolution of King Rama I of Siam” Studies in Thai History, p.148. 
 
202

=== PAGE 210 ===
mind their own business and not interfere in secular affairs. The other by King Taksin of 
Thonburi was a restatement of the PAtimokkha rules.125 
 
The monastic administration at the beginning of the Bangkok era continued to be headed 
by the SangharAja, whose position was for life, save in exceptional circumstances. The 
power of the SangharAja was dependent on his relationship with the reigning monarch. 
The office of SangharAja is further discussed in the next section. The SangharAja was 
assisted by a few dozen rAjagaBa ranking monks, all of whom were also appointed by the 
king. Among them, several were responsible for specific tasks. The vinayarakkhita, “the 
guardian of the Vinaya”, for instance, was the ecclesiastical judge who had responsibility 
for judicial matters. This shows that the king had not only created a hierarchy in the 
Sangha, but also was in total control of every official, for he was appointed, and could be 
removed, by the king. To co-ordinate between the king and the Sangha, there were two 
departments: Sanghakari and Krom Thammakarn were responsible for ecclesiastical 
affairs, with the second one also in charge of education. 
 
With the discipline and administration of the Order strengthened, ecclesiastical education 
became the focus of RAma I. He is said to have gathered all the senior monks and put to 
them certain questions on traditional Buddhist cosmological knowledge, based on the 
TraiphumkathA (Three Worlds), composed by King Lithai (1247-1274) of Ayutthaya. 
Having found that most of the monks were not familiar enough with the contents of the 
TraiphumkathA, he caused it to be copied so that the monks could study it. Some say that 
the version of the TraiphumkathA produced at the request of RAma I was not the same as 
the one composed by Phaya Lithai. This was because the king and his pundits could not 
obtain a copy of the TraiphumkathA  at that time. So the royal pundits decided to write a 
                                                 
125  Kotmai tra sam duang, Vol. 4, pp.306-311; Buddhajayamongkhon 8 phraratchkamnot phrachao 
krung Thonburi was duei sin sikkha (The Eight Blessings of Buddhism, and Royal Decrees of the 
King of Thonburi Concerning the Precepts of the Monastic Life), (dated 13 February 1774) pp.28-59. 
 
203

=== PAGE 211 ===
new version, taking them nearly two decades to complete, and which was, despite all 
those efforts, not satisfactory to the King, who then ordered them to write another 
edition. 126 This edition is what is now known as the Traiphum VinicchayakathA. 127 
However, as we now know not all copies of the TraiphumkathA by Phya Lithai were lost 
in the kingdom, and soon this famous work continued to dominate Siamese Buddhist 
education. To revive Buddhism, RAma I also built monasteries, appointed learned monks 
to the abbotship and supported the teaching of the TipiTaka in monasteries by sending 
royal pundits to help teach the monks there and by promoting the most learned of the 
monks with Parian degrees up the ladder of the hierarchical order, as can be seen in 
some of his edicts.128 These Parian monks were those who had obtained their degrees 
during the waning years of Ayutthaya for we have no record of successful Parian 
candidates during the Thonburi period and the First Reign of the Ratanakosin periods. In 
fact, only after two decades of sustained efforts in reviving the Buddhist Order and its 
education, RAma I was able to preside over, as had been the tradition since King Narai of 
Ayutthaya, the conduct of the Parian examinations. The examinations were held from 
December 1803 to January 1804. A part of the royal efforts to revive the Buddhist 
teaching was the revision of the TipiTaka. That was more than ten years before the first 
ever Parian examinations of the new dynasty could be conducted. In 1788 a council of 
more than two hundred monks and lay scholars was convened at Wat Mahathat, the seat 
of the SangharAja in Bangkok, a task never undertaken in Siam since King Tilokarat of 
Lanna in the fifteenth century, and produced a new edition, now known as the Golden 
Edition.129 
                                                 
126  Thipkhakorawong, Phraratchphonsawadan krung Ratanakosin ratchkarn thi nueng (The Royal 
Chronicle of the First Reign of the Ratanakosin Era), p.304. 
127  Traiphum lok winitchai, camlong cak chabap luang (Exegesis of the Three Worlds Copied from the 
Royal Edition), p.3. I am thankful to Peter Skilling for reminding me of this important point. 
128  See Phra phongsawadan Krung Ratanakosin Ratchkarn thi nung, p.13. See also pp.194-195 of this 
chapter; Reynolds, pp.56-57; Van Rawanswaay, “Translation of Jeremias Van Vliet’s Description of 
the Kingdom of Siam” in JSS, VII, p.77; Wyatt, Thailand, p.88. 
129  The king collected the Ayutthayan laws, revised them, and codified them. Ancient texts were also 
collected and copied. (He himself wrote a Thai version of the RAmAyana, known as Ramakien.) 
 
204

=== PAGE 212 ===
Siamese literary activities were revived, with classical works from other Asian languages 
being translated into vernacular Thai. Works in Chinese, Persian and Mon were 
translated into Thai. The first translation of the MahAvaMsa, the great chronicle of Sri 
Lanka, was also made during this period. 
 
 
4.10 Conclusion 
We have thus shown how the internal instability and changes in geopolitical 
circumstances during the seventeenth century at Ayutthaya up to the early nineteenth 
century in Bangkok, have led to changes in the relationship between the monarchy and 
the monastic Order. Those changes which took place under King Narai and subsequently 
under King Taksin of Thonburi and RAma I of Bangkok have increased the influence of 
the monarchy over the monastic Order. This trend culminated in 1902 in the creation or 
rather formalisation of “a tradition of ecclesiastical hierarchy” in Siam. Such a hierarchy, 
as Mendelson and Tambiah have observed, has “materialised under powerful kings”.130 
The ecclesiastical hierarchy is sustained and strengthened through the monarch’s 
exertion of greater control over ecclesiastical education, more specifically formal 
examinations, a process that was clearly witnessed in Siam under another powerful king, 
Chulalonkorn (1868-1910). This subject we will explore in the next chapter. 
                                                 
130  Mendelson, pp.66-67; Tambiah, p.179. 
 
205

=== PAGE 213 ===
 
Chapter Five 
 
The Standardisation of Monastic Education and 
the National Integration Process: Ecclesiastical Education 
under King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910) 
 
 
                                                
 
 
In the previous chapter we showed how the instability from the mid seventeenth century 
at Ayutthaya to the late eighteenth century at Bangkok affected the Sangha and its 
education system. These circumstances led strong monarchs such as King Narai and 
RAma I to exert a greater control over the Sangha. Particularly, we discussed how the 
instrument of formal examination was employed to put monastic scholarship firmly 
under royal supervision. However, in the century or so following King Narai, the formal 
examinations were not effective, because the Sangha remained passive towards the 
system of formal examinations and did not actively promote them as a means of raising 
the standard of monastic scholarship so that there were very few candidates. 
 
From the early nineteenth century, however, in the “new Siam”, which had become “a 
stable and enduring empire at least in the minds of those who lived within its compass”1, 
successive monarchs sought to encourage the Sangha through various measures to accept 
the formal examinations as a means of promoting the study of the words of the Buddha. 
In this chapter we shall examine how, from the reign of RAma II (1809-1824), the formal 
examinations were promoted, culminating in the standardisation of monastic education 
under RAma V, also known as King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910), who united the whole 
of Siam with his modernisation and national integration programmes.      
 
 
1  
Wyatt, Thailand, pp.145-160. 
 
206

=== PAGE 214 ===
In the discussion in this chapter we shall try to provide the geopolitical background to the 
development of monastic education and, wherever deemed necessary, ecclesiastical 
administration under the three monarchs, RAma II (1809-1824), III (1824-1851) and IV 
(1851-1868). Particular attention will be given to: the first change to the Parian 
examination curriculum under RAma II; the birth of the Dhammayuttika reform Order 
under RAma III; and, ironically, the lack of change in monastic education under RAma 
IV, also known as King Mongkut, the founder of the Dhammayuttika.  
 
Next, we shall proceed to our main discussion, the standardisation of monastic education 
under RAma V. To this end, following the chronological order of events, the various 
modernisation programmes introduced by RAma V will first be sketched in. Then we will 
begin a more comprehensive assessment of reforms on the religious front. Here special 
attention will be given to the periods 1892-1910 under RAma V and 1910-1921 under 
RAma VI. During the periods mentioned, the following subjects will be discussed in 
order: the founding of two monastic colleges in 1893; the dynamic innovations at the 
Mahamakut Royal College in the form of Mahamakut Parianled by Prince Wachiarayan; 
Mon and European influence on the Dhammayuttika thinking on education; the 
subsequent dominant role of the Mahamakut of the Dhammayuttika in the development 
of the Mahachulalongkorn Royal College for the majority of the Sangha, the 
MahAnikAya; the crucial role of the Sangha and their leader, Prince Wachirayan, in the 
introduction of primary education in the provinces between 1898 and 1902; the Sangha 
act of 1902; and finally the relationship between the 1905 Royal Edict on Conscription 
and the standardisation  of monastic education through the creation of a new curriculum, 
the Nak Tham.     
 
 
 
207

=== PAGE 215 ===
5.1 The Expansion and Change of Focus of the Parian under RAma II (1809-1824) 
The reign of RAma II (1809-1824) is seen by historians such as Wyatt as “quiet” and an 
“interlude between the First and Third Reigns because there was no major crisis or 
warfare”. Although his peaceful succession to his father is considered a watershed and a 
sign of stability, RAma II himself has, nevertheless, been described as a “hesitant and 
uncertain” ruler because under his rule there were no radical changes in the civil and 
political administration. 2  
 
In fact, as far as monastic education was concerned this reign was one of the more 
dynamic periods; and the king took measures to popularise the Parian, formal 
examinations. Those measures included a programme to translate the TipiTaka into Thai, 
which went on well into the next reign. Another immediate and direct measure towards 
popularising the Parian was to make its curriculum more straightforward. This change 
was introduced towards the end of his reign when a Parianmonk, Maha Mee, was 
appointed sangharAja in 1816. Here, before we discuss the measures undertaken by RAma 
II and the SangharAja concerning religious scholarship, it would be appropriate to 
appraise the Sangha administration during the time of RAma II, also known as the 
Second Reign. 
 
The administration of the Sangha under RAma II, also known as Phuttha Lert Larn, 
remained much the same as in the previous reign. That is, an ecclesiastical hierarchy 
headed by the sangharAja continued to govern the Sangha, and the Sangha continued to 
receive royal patronage. However, in this reign the Sangha administration did undergo 
some minor developments. These changes occurred mainly on geographical grounds. For 
administrative purposes, the Sangha, in particular the village-dwellers or gAmavasins, 
                                                 
2  
Ibid, p.154. 
 
208

=== PAGE 216 ===
throughout the country was divided into three geographical regions: Bangkok; northern 
and north-eastern; and southern. Bangkok, the capital, now became a separate 
administrative region, 3 indicating its increasing prosperity, with the capacity to 
accommodate a larger population, monks and lay alike. Each of the three regions had an 
ecclesiastical governor called chao-gaBa, whose formal title was somdet-chaogaBa. In 
contrast, the forest-dwellers, or AraGGavAsins, in the whole kingdom were administered 
by their own chief, as had been the case since the Ayutthaya period. Under the governors 
of the three regions and of the forest-dwellers there were abbots, of whom those in 
charge of the royal monasteries, usually with the rank of phra rAjagaBa, wielded more 
power than other abbots.  
 
In 1816 the rAjagaBa who had been promoted to the position of head of the ecclesiastical 
judiciary, vinayarakhit, under RAma I, MahA Mee, became sangharAja. SangharAja Mee 
himself was a Parian-ek degree holder (i.e. comparable to a doctorate). His appointment 
by the king to the most senior position in the Sangha thus signalled RAma II’s intention 
to promote the Parian. It was during the tenure of MahA Mee as SangharAja between 
1816 and 1819 that the Parian underwent some crucial modifications. One of those 
changes was that the three levels of the Parian examination were now expanded into 
nine levels. But the fundamental change was the decision of SangharAja Mee to replace 
the canonical scriptures with non-canonical ones and to specify a text or part of it as a 
prescribed text for each level.  
 
These changes were the first modifications since the Parian had been introduced in the 
seventeenth century.  The changes marked a major shift in the direction of Pali study in 
Siam. As Ishii points out, the Pali canonical texts were no longer part of the core 
                                                 
3  
Udomsri, Karn bokkhrong khanasong thai, p.73; Tambiah, p.231, citing Bishop Pallegoix’s 
Description du Royaume Thai ou Siam, II, pp.27-28. 
 
209

=== PAGE 217 ===
curriculum.4 While we have no means of guessing how much emphasis was given to 
studying the Pali canonical scriptures in Siam before or since the seventeenth century, 
the non-canonical Pali commentarial works by Buddhaghosa were always popular 
among traditional scholars. This is evident in the works the Siamese Pali scholars 
produced, in which Buddhaghosa’s commentarial works were cited as authorities. 
 
Here the replacement of canonical texts with commentarial works was aimed mainly at 
encouraging more students to go in for the Parian examinations because commentarial 
literature were considered easier than canonical. Before this change was made, the 
students previously had to study a number of different canonical texts before they 
decided to sit for the Parian, because no one particular text was specified. As described 
in the previous chapter, the whole TipiTaka was divided into three “baskets”, and one had 
to complete at least one of them to sit for each of the three Parians.5  
 
Now the students and their tutors knew exactly which text they had to study for the 
examinations. From now on, no doubt, the student-monks who were fortunate enough to 
study at royal monasteries in the capital would be persuaded more than ever of the merit 
of the Parian. And, indeed, this is evident from the increase in the number of Parian 
entries in the following reigns.6 We shall discuss these increases in the number of 
candidates in the relevant sections of this chapter when we consider monastic scholarship 
in each reign.  
 
Now in the second decade of the nineteenth century that the SangharAja himself was 
leading the promotion of the formal examinations and that measures had been taken to 
attract more candidates, the once passive Sangha, or at least some sections of it, had 
                                                 
4  
Ishii, “Ecclesiastical Examination in Thailand” Visakha Puja, 2515/1972, p.53. 
5  
See pp.196-197. 
6  
See also p.225. 
 
210

=== PAGE 218 ===
begun to warm to the idea that formal examination was a useful instrument in preserving 
phra phutthasAsanA, (buddha sAsana) “the Buddha’s dispensation”. In fact, as would 
become evident in successive reigns, the Parian came to be considered as vital not only 
in safeguarding the phutthasAsanA but also in creating some social mobility: the Parian 
degrees enabled intelligent people who were “not men of good family” subsequently to 
climb up the social ladder. The chance to enter government service was thus a huge 
incentive to the Parian degree holders, the majority of whom were “sons of farmers” 
from the provinces. 7  
 
However, despite the fact that the candidates for the Parian came from simple 
backgrounds in the provinces and that the formal examinations, Parian, had become 
more popular than ever before, instruction for the examinations remained confined to the 
élite circle in the monastic education system in the capital. This was to go on for some 
time, well into the next century. 
 
As far as the new syllabuses for the Parian were concerned, they became more 
organised; they were narrowed down to a few texts; and they were, as already explained, 
all commentarial literature. From now on, understanding the teachings of the Buddha 
would be achieved in the context of the established Pali commentarial traditions. 
Buddhaghosa’s work would dominate the way the doctrines were interpreted, while the 
works of SAriputta and SumaNgalasAmi, of the Polonnaruwa period, Sri Lanka, and of 
SrImaNgala, a local Pali scholar, would also enter the syllabuses. 
 
In this new curriculum, each Parianlevel was divided into prayogs, and thus three 
Parians became nine prayogs. The word prayog originally meant ‘passage’ because in 
                                                 
7  
Wyatt, “The Buddhist Monkhood as an Avenue of Social Mobility in Traditional Thai Society” 
pp..207-218. 
 
211

=== PAGE 219 ===
the examinations candidates had to draw, through a lottery system (salak), ‘a passage’ or 
‘passages’ that had been selected by either the SaNgharAja or one of the senior monks 
with rAjagaBa rank. But prayog soon came to mean ‘level’. Although the word was 
equally applicable to the procedure during the Ayutthaya period, it seems that the term 
prayog was used only from MahA Mee’s time. The first three prayogs were recognised as 
Parian sAman, “ordinary Parian”, while the fourth prayog marked the completion of 
Parian tri, the lowest of the three levels of Parian. In other words, to attain Parian tri, 
one had to pass the first four prayogs. The fifth and sixth prayogs constituted Parian tho. 
The last three prayogs, seventh, eighth and ninth, were called Parian ek, “first class 
Parian”, with the seventh officially termed Parian ek sAman, (“ordinary Parian ek”), the 
eighth Parian ek majjhima (intermediate Parian ek) and the ninth Parian ek udom 
(highest Parian ek).8  
 
As will be seen shortly in the syllabuses, the new system focused on texts that would be 
useful for monks in preaching moral values to the laity, such as commentaries on the 
MaNgala-sutta and the Dhammapada. The new formula also emphasised the Theravada 
Vinaya tradition by prescribing not only the commentaries but also the sub-commentaries 
on the VinayapiTaka. This emphasis perhaps reflected the expertise of the SaNgharAja 
Mee. On meditation and monastic training as a whole, a complete guide was found in the 
Visuddhimagga-aTThakatha and it was therefore made a part of the curriculum. No texts 
from the Pali NikAyas appeared in the curriculum. This may be because, as we have seen, 
the Ayutthayan curriculum, which had all the Pali NikAyas as its prescribed texts, seemed 
too difficult for the candidate and attracted few students to the examinations. Nor was 
any text on the AbhidhammapiTaka prescribed. This must be the reason why the 
                                                 
8  
Rachanubhab, “Athipai rueng karn sop phra pariyattitham”, p.343. 
 
212

=== PAGE 220 ===
SAratthadIpanI had to give way to the AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI by Sri SumaNgala (12th 
AD) later, probably after SaNgharAja Mee had passed away.  
 
The syllabuses of the nine prayogs will be given here with some related information. It is 
important to see what the texts in the syllabuses are in order to determine the nature of 
the training the candidates received. From the outset, the training afforded by the Parian 
system was directed more to book learning and not to the regular training that monks and 
novices had received at the feet of their teachers in monasteries around the country for 
centuries. The prescribed texts for the Parian have not so far received much attention 
from scholars, and among those who have studied them, some, for example, Ishii, are not 
sufficiently familiar with the texts. Ishii incorrectly calls both the SAratthadIpanI, a Pali 
sub-commentary on the Vinaya, and the AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI-TIkA, a commentary 
on the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha, sub-commentaries on the Visuddhimagga. 9   
 
The nine prayogs and their syllabuses are as follows. Prayogs One - Three: 
Dhammapada-aTThakathA.10 This commentary on the stanzas of the Dhammapada has 
traditionally been ascribed to îcariya Buddhaghosa, the great Pali commentator, though 
doubts have been raised whether he really was the author of this work.11 This 
commentary has been particularly popular as a textbook. This may be because the work 
commented on i.e., the Dhammapada, is itself one of the most famous books in the Pali 
Canon, containing most important doctrines in 423 precise verses, more than half of 
which are also found in other texts. The language of the commentary was easily 
                                                 
9  
Ibid, pp.84, 96; Ishii, “Ecclesiastical Examinations”, pp.53-54. 
10  Rachanubhab does not say specifically Dhammapada-aTThakatha, but only calls this Dhammapada. But 
the account of Prince-Patriarch Vajirayan mentions it in his biography as Dhammapada-aTThakathA and 
his account is more reliable as he had to sit the Parian examinations in this system himself. See 
Rachanunbhab, “Athipai rueng karn sop phra pariyattitham”, p.243; The Life of Prince-Patriarch 
VajiraGABa, pp.56, 59.  
11  For more information on the debate over the authorship of the Dhammapada-aTThakathA see Norman, 
History of Indian Literature, VII, pp.58-60. See also Burlingame, Buddhist Legends, Part I, p.26; Law, 
A History of Pali Literature, II, pp.450-451; Malalasekera, The Pali Literature of Ceylon, pp.95-98; 
Hazra, Pali Language and Literature, II, pp.582-590.  
 
213

=== PAGE 221 ===
intelligible to students, providing them with a good foundation for pursuing “the great 
commentaries”, such as the SamantapAsAdikA. The Dhammapada-aTThakathA also contains 
stories and tales that are interesting to read: names and personalities in the NikAyas are 
also introduced at various points in these stories. In short, the Dhammapada-aTThakathA 
was considered to provide not only the necessary grounding in the commentarial Pali 
language but also for moral teaching, with illustrations for monks to use in preaching. 
JanakAbhivaMsa calls this commentary the aTThakathA ache byu, “introductory 
commentary”; and he has compiled a guide to the Pali commentaries in which he 
explains all the Pali commentarial methods, using the Dhammapada-aTThakathA as 
illustration.12   
 
Prayog Four: MaNgalatthadIpanI, Volume one. 
The MaNgalatthadIpanI was written at Chiang Mai in 1524 by a Lanna Thai monk of the 
Sinhalese fraternity, Sri SumaNgala, during the reign of King Muang Kaeo (1495-1526), 
a grandson of the great King TilokarAja (1442-87).13 The work comments on the famous 
MaNgala-sutta of the SuttanipAta, which teaches thirty-eight kinds of blessings in daily 
life. About a thousand years earlier, Buddhaghosa had written a commentary on the 
MaNgala-sutta. In the MaNgalatthadIpanI, which was ten times longer than 
Buddhaghosa’s commentary, each of the 38 maNgala, “blessings”, was explained at 
length. The MaNgalatthadIpanI was the only Pali commentarial work produced in 
Thailand to have found its way into the monastic curriculum in the entire history of the 
ecclesiastical examinations. Also known to monastic scholars in Burma14, Cambodia15 
and Sri Lanka even before the availability of printing press in the mid nineteenth century, 
                                                 
12  JanakAbhivaMsa, ATThakatha akhye byu, (Introductory Commentary), pp.i-vi. 
13  Siri SumaNgala also wrote three other Pali works: VessantaradIpanI (1517), CakkavALadIpanI (1520) 
and SaNkhyApakAsaka-TIkA (1524). Siri MaNgala’s two contemporary Lanna Pali scholars were 
RatanapaGGA Thera, the author of the Pali chronicle work JinakAlamAlI (1516), and BodhiraMsI Thera 
(1460-1530), who wrote CamadevIvaMsa and SihiNganidAna.  
14  SAsanavaMsa, p.51. Bode, p.47.  
15  Dutt, Buddhism in East Asia, p.100. 
 
214

=== PAGE 222 ===
the MaNgalatthadIpanI was reprinted in Thailand ten times between 1910 and 1962.16 It 
was also translated into Thai in 1938 by a group of monks from the MahAmakuTa-
rAjavidyAlaya.17 The first volume, running to about 175 pages, consists of the explanation 
of the first four stanzas i.e. the explanation of the blessing factors from asevanA ca to 
anAkulA ca kammantA.  
 
Prayog Five: PAlimuttakavinayavinicchaya. This was also known as Vinayasangaha by 
SangharAjA SAriputta of Polonnaruwa, Sri Lanka. Commenting on the VinayapiTaka, it 
gave concise explanations of Vinaya rules.    Later it was replaced by the 
SAratthasaNgaha but we do not know when and why. From the reign of RAma III to that 
of RAma V, however, we do know from the Prince-Patriarch that SAratthasaNgaha was 
prescribed.18 Like the PAlimuttakavinicchaya, this work commented on the VinayapiTaka, 
and was written in Sri Lanka during the reign of Bhuvaneka-BAhu by Siddhattha Thera, a 
member of the VanavAsI fraternity and a pupil of Buddhapiya Thera, the author of the 
grammar PadarUpasiddhi.19 
 
Prayog Six: MaNgalatthadIpanI, Volume two. This is the commentary on the last six 
stanzas of the MaNgala Sutta, the explanation of the blessing factors from dAnaG ca 
(giving) to khemaM (security).  
 
Prayog Seven: SamantapAsAdikA. Commentary on the Vinaya Pali by  Buddhaghosa. 
Highly respected for its explanation and interpretation throughout the ecclesiastical 
judicial courts in Theravada countries, this commentary has also been a part of the 
                                                 
16  Yamnadda, MaNgalatthadIpanI, p. ix. 
17  MaNgalatthadIpanI, Thai Translation, MahAmakuTarAjavidyAlaya, p.iii. 
18  The Life of Prince-Patriarch VajiraGABa, p.59. 
19  See also Malalasekera, The Pali Literature of Ceylon, pp.228-229. 
 
215

=== PAGE 223 ===
Burmese curriculum since 1894, when the CetiyaNgaBa Examinations were started in 
Rangoon. 
 
Prayog Eight: Visuddhimagga. This is the most famous work of Buddhaghosa and 
regarded as a compendium of the TipiTaka. 
 
Prayog Nine: SAratthadIpanI-TIkA. Written by SangharAjA SAriputta in Sri Lanka during 
the reign of Parakkama-BAhu (1153-1186), it was a sub-commentary on the 
SamantapAsAdikA of Buddhaghosa. The work was divided into two parts, cUla and mahA, 
and both were prescribed for this level.20 
 
Later the SAratthadIpanI-TIkA was replaced with the AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI-TIkA 
written by SumaNgalasAmi. As mentioned earlier, this was probably to widen the 
curriculum to cover some materials on the Abhidhamma. 
 
 
                                                
 
 
5.2 Promotion and Challenges of the Parian during the reign of RAma III  
(1824-1851) 
At his death, RAma II was succeeded in 1824 by his son, Prince Chetsadabodin, later 
known as RAma III. During this reign, on the political front the kingdom was internally 
stable. The king, observes Wyatt, “kept on nearly all his father’s ministers”21, then a sign 
of continuity and orderliness. However, “the most urgent business of the early years of 
the Third Reign was concerned with foreign and military affairs”.22 Britain had just 
annexed the coastal regions of Burma in the First Anglo-Burmese war, 1824-1826. This 
meant that Siam had to deal with the British as her neighbour. Moreover, conflict in the 
 
20  Ibid, p.192. 
21  Wyatt, Thailand, p.168. 
22  Ibid. 
 
216

=== PAGE 224 ===
Malay Peninsula, where the Siamese traditionally claimed suzerainty, began to involve 
the British. The urgency of the need for amicable relations with the British was 
highlighted by the mission of Captain Henry Burnley in 1825 that resulted in the 
agreement of a commercial treaty signed a year later. In the meantime, Siam also 
continued to engage in military conflicts with her neighbours, namely Laos, Cambodia 
and Vietnam.23 
 
As far as monastic education is concerned, the Parian continued to receive the keen 
attention of the king. Soon after he came to the throne, in 1826, the king complained of 
the rAjagaBas’ inactivity in preparing their pupils for the Parian. The complaint was 
made when RAma III personally observed the conduct of the Parian examinations and 
found out that not a single monk had passed even the first level, except Prince Mongkut, 
who achieved the Prayog Five level.24 The senior monks promised the king that they 
would produce more Parian monks to succeed them. In fact, the monks even went as far 
as to imply in their reply to the king that the knowledge of the TipiTaka was synonymous 
with a Parian degree and that the Pali degree was vital to preserve the sAsana. 25 The 
king asked the SangharAja, Prince Paramanuchit, and other rAjagaBas, namely Phra 
Phutthakhosachan [BuddhaghosAcAriya], Phra Phrommuni [Brahmamuni] and Phra 
Yanwiriya [ÏABaviriya], to produce at least five or six monks of “the highest 
qualifications” every year. 
 
The Parian examination system itself continued without change under the reign of RAma 
III, except that he made it a point to hold the examinations regularly once every three 
years, a sign of stability missing since the destruction of Ayutthaya in 1767. Rama III 
                                                 
23  Ibid, pp.166-174. 
24  Prachum phraratchputcha phak 4 (Collected Royal Questions, Part 4), pp.75-87. See also Reynolds, 
The Buddhist Monkhood, pp.158-159. 
25  Prachum phraratchputcha phak 4 (Collected Royal Questions, Part 4), pp.85-86. 
 
217

=== PAGE 225 ===
systematised the promotions of the Parian monks by rewarding them not only with 
rAjagaBa ranks but also by freeing their parents from slavery, if they were slaves. In 
addition, the relatives of the Parian monks were recognised as yom song, “the (Parian) 
SaNgha’s devotees” if they had been in the royal army, thus exempting them from further 
military service.26 To the king the Parian examinations were an important means by 
which he could supervise Buddhist learning. He therefore urged the senior monks in the 
capital “to persevere in their study of Dhamma” because “if Buddhism flourishes with 
monks and novices knowing the TipiTaka at various levels in this way, the Dhamma rises 
like a fragrance and is diffused back and forth by the wind, enrapturing all men and 
deities”.27 
 
Although used to promote standards in monastic scholarship, the Parian examination 
system did not go unchallenged. In fact, the challenge was directed against not only the 
new Parian but also the whole tradition of monastic learning that had existed so far 
largely outside the Parian system, despite sustained royal efforts to promote the latter. 
This challenge came neither from the “forest-dwellers” who had defied King Narai, nor 
from the “village-dwellers”, who until the early part of the Ratanakosin period had also 
been passive towards the royal-controlled Parian examinations, but from Prince 
Mongkut, a half-brother of RAma III himself, who had been ordained just days before 
RAma III came to the throne.  
 
It was said that the ordination of Prince Mongkut, now Bhikkhu Wachirayan 
[VajiraGABa], was hurriedly arranged by his dying father, RAma II, and the prince felt 
obliged to continue in the monkhood to avoid a succession problem after his father died. 
                                                 
26  Phra Thamthajmuni and Colleagues, PhutthasAsana prawat samai ratanakosin ratchwong roi pi 
(Buddhism in One Hundred Years of the Ratanakosin Dynasty), p.126.  
27  Reynolds, p.62; Prachum phraratputcha phak thi 4 phraratchputcha nai ratchakan thi 3 (Collected 
Royal Questions, Part 4, The Royal Questions of the Third Reign), pp.75-76.  
 
218

=== PAGE 226 ===
Despite being the eldest son of the chief queen, to whom the throne would normally be 
expected to pass, Prince Mongkut was not selected by the council of princes, ministers, 
nobles and Sangha responsible for selecting a successor to the throne in the Ratanakosin 
dynasty. Selection took place only after the death of the king, who as the reining 
monarch thus had no direct influence on the selection process. In fact, the council chose 
Prince Mongkut’s half-brother Prince Chetsadabodin (RAma III), who was his senior in 
years and was also at the time more experienced in state affairs. Prince Mongkut himself 
wrote some years later that his ordination was the result of “a careful estimation of the 
power realities he faced”.28 Whatever the reason for Prince Mongkut’s 27 years stay in 
the Order, his initiatives in education and the training of the Sangha within his authority 
as an abbot of a royal monastery were to be far-reaching. His life and reign have been so 
well documented that we see no need to repeat them here.29 However, we shall concern 
ourselves with his reform movement in the Sangha and his initiatives in monastic 
education, which began, as already pointed out, in the reign of Rama III.  
 
The monastic life of Bhikkhu Wachirayan, except for the circumstances surrounding his 
dying father, began as that of any other prince before him. Following the centuries-old 
custom, he was ordained at 20. After his ordination, he was sent to Wat Samorai (now 
Wat Rachathiwat), a forest-dwellers’ monastery in the outskirts of Bangkok for training 
in meditation. The newly ordained prince monk was interested not only in the regime of 
religious austerities such as the meditation in which he was instructed there, but also 
“wanted to know the reasons behind such practices”.30 Through his inquiring approach, 
                                                 
28  Reynolds, p.74. See also Mongkut, Phraratchniphon phasa bali nai phrabatsomdetch phra chomkao 
chaoyuhua wa duai phraratchphongsawadan krng Ratanakosin (Essay by King Chomkao on the 
Royal Chronicles of the Bangkok Period), p.14. 
29  For more information on his life as an able monarch see, Prince Chula Chakrabongse, Lords of Life: A 
History of the kings of Thailand; Griswold, King Mongkut of Siam; Wyatt, Thailand,  Chap. Seven, 
pp.181-191; Tambiah, World Conqueror  pp.204-224. For a brief but comprehensive account of 
Mongkut’s reforms, see Vella, Siam Under Rama III, Chap. IV, pp.38-42. 
30  Vella, Siam Under RAma III, p.39. 
 
219

=== PAGE 227 ===
he soon discovered that the meditating monks had deviated from the actual aim of the 
practice. Some of them appeared to meditate so that they may achieve supernatural 
powers, which had been discouraged by the Buddha. Many followed meditation 
instruction without understanding it or at least without being able to explain their 
practices to this royal monk. Obviously, he also found the knowledge of the Pali 
canonical scriptures among the senior monks unsatisfactory. This was, to Bhikkhu 
Wachirayan, the failing of the new Parian system, which prescribed only non-canonical 
texts, as much as of the Siamese monastic scholarship as a whole, which had not 
emphasised a rational approach. 
 
Consequently, the disappointed Bhikkhu Wachirayan thought of leaving the monkhood. 
But he then came across a Mon monk, BuddhavaMso, who provided him with all the 
answers he had sought. This very important meeting between Bhikkhu Wachirayan and 
the most senior Mon MahAthera has been described by many as one that took place by 
chance or even by the power of a vow that the prince had made. Bhikkhu Wachirayan’s 
vow was “.. [i]f the lineage of ordination which comes down from the times of the 
Sugata [Buddha]… still remains in any land… may I see or hear the news regarding it 
within three or seven days. If my vow does not succeed…. I shall understand that the 
lineage of the BuddhasAsana has disappeared already. I shall disrobe and become a 
layman and keep the Five Precepts according to the strength of my faith.” 31 
 
Despite the attribution of a miracle to the meeting between the Mon monk and Bhikkhu 
Wachirayan, their meeting was not entirely unpredictable. Buddhavamso MahAthera was 
at the time the head of the Mon Sangha (khana rAman), with the royal title Phra Sumed, 
and resided at a royal monastery, Wat Bovonmongkhon, just across the river from Wat 
                                                 
31  Pavaresvariyalongkorn, “A Brief Account of King Mongkut (Rama IV): from the time of his 
ordination as a bhikkhu until his passing-away” Visakhapuja, 2513 (1970), pp.20-21. See also 
Ploichum, Khana song raman, pp.152-154. 
 
220

=== PAGE 228 ===
Mahathat, in Bangkok. It is likely that he was well known in the royal circle. Bhikkhu 
Wachirayan himself was not ignorant of the Mon population in the kingdom. In his early 
teens, he had gone to a border province on behalf of his father, RAma II, to receive some 
Mon refugees fleeing from persecution in Burma.32 For his role in helping Bhikkhu 
Wachirayan, this Mon MahAthera, was later criticised continually by a senior prince, 
Rakronnaret, informally known as Mom Kraison. Prince Rakronnaret, the head of 
Kromsanghakari department, in charge of supervising lay support for the Sangha, also 
demonstrated his resentment at Bhikkhu Wachirayan’s academic achievements and 
increasing popularity.  
 
Inspired by the Mon tradition, Bhikkhu Wachirayan studied Pali at Wat Mahathat. 
However, he did not study the scriptures under the Mon monk, Phra Sumed, but under 
Phra Wichianpricha (Phu), who was a lay teacher and the head of the Royal Pundits he 
followed instead the traditional Parian syllabuses by studying Pali and some prescribed 
texts. Intelligent and naturally rational, Bhikkhu Wachirayan worked hard in his Pali 
study, enough for him to pass the highest Pali examinations within three years in 1826. 
Now a Pali degree holder, he was entrusted by the king with responsibility for the Parian 
examinations, then the only form of examination in the country.  
 
The high profile prince-monk continued to reside at Wat Mahathat, the residence of the 
SangharAja. There he began to attract some monks with his own critical interpretation of 
the TipiTaka. But he soon discovered that Wat Mahathat was the heart of the tradition that 
he sought to reform and was hardly a place for him to start his criticism of the tradition, 
for he would risk invoking opposition at the highest level before he could persuade 
others of the merit of his reforms. So in 1829 he moved back to Wat Samorai, where he 
                                                 
32  Ploichum, pp.144-46. 
 
221

=== PAGE 229 ===
would “no longer be constrained by the watchful eyes of the elders” at Wat Mahathat.33 
By that time he had been five years in the Sangha and according to the Vinaya could live 
apart from his preceptor. 
 
Within three years of his return at Wat Samorai, Bhikkhu Wachirayan received a new 
ordination on a raft moored to the river bank nearby. This re-ordination ceremony, later 
known as daLhIkamma, was performed by Mon monks, all of whom had been ordained in 
the KalyABI-sImA in Pegu.34 This was to set himself apart from the majority of the 
Sangha, from whom he had received his first ordination. It was also a way of settling his 
own doubt about the validity of the existing ordination halls (sImA), for Bhikkhu 
Wachirayan discovered that the sanctuary boundary stones were of incorrect sizes; and 
this discovery threw into question the validity not only of the ordination halls but also of 
the ordination ceremonies performed in them. This re-ordination of Bhikkhu Wachirayan 
set an example for all the members of the Dhammayuttika-nikAya, requiring them also to 
go through a second ordination. 
 
Here in Bhikkhu Wachirayan’s drive for reform the influence of what Lingat describes as 
“the tradition of the Burmese Mon Sangha” was evident.35 In the Dhammayuttika’s 
formative years Mongkut sought legitimacy from the Mon tradition, which itself had 
been purified by Dhammaceti, a Mon king, in Pegu in 1476:36 Bhikkhu Wachirayan 
asked the Mon monks to assist him in important ecclesiastical rituals because the prince-
monk considered the Mon ordination to be valid and more pure. It may be said, though, 
that as the reform advanced, the changes taking place were also influenced by western 
rationality and the Sinhalese tradition, which we shall shortly discuss in further detail. 
                                                 
33  Reynolds, p.81. 
34  Ibid, p.82. 
35  Lingat, “La vie religieuse du roi Mongkut,” Journal of the Siam Society, p.129. 
36  For more information see The Kalyani Inscriptions. 
 
222

=== PAGE 230 ===
Nevertheless, the Mon influence, such as their Pali pronunciation, which was considered 
to be closer to the Sinhalese pronunciation of Pali, was to persist for a long time to come.   
 
A few years after Bhikkhu Wachirayan had started his reform at Wat Samorai, he was 
appointed in 1837 by the king as the abbot of Wat Bovonives, a royal monastery in 
Bangkok. This could be considered as recognition by the king of the ecclesiastical 
reforms carried out by Bhikkhu Wachirayan. Now, with royal backing and a learned 
prince-monk, Bhikkhu Wachirayan, as its head, Wat Bovonives was to become a leading 
centre for Buddhist studies in Siam.  The monastery housed a printing press set up by 
Wachirayan to promote the study of the Pali canonical texts. Wachirayan himself studied 
Latin and English and some western sciences from French and British missionaries to 
whom he offered facilities in his monastery so that they could preach Christianity. It was 
believed that his encounter with these missionaries helped develop his rational approach 
even further, which he put to use in the development of his reform group, 
Dhammayuttika, “adherers to the Dhamma”.37  Reynolds, however, is of the opinion that 
“Mongkut’s Sangha reforms owed less to the missionaries’ proselytizing than to the 
cultural fields they opened to him”.38  
 
With the help of the king, Bhikkhu Wachirayan organised three expeditions to Sri Lanka, 
then Ceylon, to borrow copies of the TipiTaka, the first in 1840, nearly a century after 
Siam had given some of those texts to Ceylon. The first mission brought back forty 
volumes of the TipiTaka to be compared with those in Siam. Many Sri Lankan bhikkhus, 
sAmaBeras and laymen also came to Siam with the party. The second party was 
despatched in 1841 and returned with thirty more volumes of the TipiTaka with some 
Sinhalese bhikkhus now settled at Wat Bovonives to help with the task of editing. The 
                                                 
37  For more information see Reynolds, pp.84; Bradley, “Prince Mongkut and Caswell” Journal of the 
Siam Society, LIV, 1 (Jan, 1966), p.34. 
38  Reynolds, p.84. 
 
223

=== PAGE 231 ===
formal revision of the Siamese TipiTaka started in 1842 and was completed ten years 
later.39 In addition, it is possible that as a result of contact with Sri Lanka, Wachirayan 
abandoned some of the Mon practices.  
 
During his tenure as the abbot of Wat Bovonives, Bhikkhu Wachirayan emphasised 
knowledge of the Pali language and study of canonical texts as opposed to the Parian 
curriculum and non-canonical literature. For example, instead of the usual topics such as 
the commentary on the Vessantara-jAtaka or the Phra Malai, the Anguttara-nikAya, one of 
the collections from the Pali canon, was chosen as the material for regular sermons at 
Wat Bovoranives. The stress on canonical study reflected Bhikkhu Wachirayan’s 
determination to search for a pure and rational message in the Buddha’s teaching, for he 
saw the Buddhism followed at that time in Siam as superstitious, irrational and deviating 
from the original teaching of the Master. In addition to their strict interpretation of the 
Pali canon and dedication to the vinaya practice, Bhikkhu Wachirayan and his followers 
at Wat Bovonives were also distinguished from the majority of the Siamese Sangha by a 
new way of chanting Pali, which Bhikkhu Wachirayan himself introduced, and a Mon 
style of robe wearing.40  
 
“The aim of the reform movement in essence, was to expunge from Siamese Buddhism 
all that was not in accordance with the HInayAna canon.” 41 However, in reality, 
Mongkut changed, as we shall see, “the spirit of the Siamese religion” by reforming 
monastic discipline, changing details in ritual, and defining and purifying the canon.42 
These were drastic changes, the more remarkable since they were introduced by such a 
                                                 
39  See also Lingat, p.84. 
40  See Reynolds, pp.82-90. For more information on the development of chanting, first introduced by 
Bhikkhu Wachirayan and then expanded by his successors, in the Dhammayuttika see Ploiphum, 
Tham niam haeng khana thammayuttika-nikai (The Practice of the Dhammayuttika-nikAya).  
41  Vella, Siam Under RAma III, p.39 
42  Ibid. 
 
224

=== PAGE 232 ===
relatively junior bhikkhu as Wachirayan. But, his learning, charisma and “high birth in 
the royal family” may have “insured him support that may have been denied a more 
humbly born reformer”.43  
 
Despite his emphasis on the study of canonical literature and its rational interpretation at 
Wat Bovonives and its branches, however, as chairman of the Parian examination board, 
Bhikkhu Wachirayan was unable to effect any significant change in the Parian system in 
line with his other reforms. Instead, he appears to have played the role of chairman of the 
Parian mainly to preserve the status quo.  This may suggest that he had taken the 
position as chairman only to please the king who had appointed him, whereas his heart 
was focused on reforming the state of Siamese Buddhism as a whole. Or it may have 
been that he was not able to overcome the opposition of the traditionalists. So for the 
time being the return to a puritanical approach to study and practice was confined only to 
the few who belonged to the Dhammayuttika. In fact, the restriction of the reforms to 
these few namely, those at Wat Bovonives and one or two other monasteries, would 
continue when he became the king known as RAma IV. 
 
Although therefore the Parian system does not seem to have been modified significantly 
during Bhikkhu Wachirayan’s term of office as its chairman, the success rate in the 
Parian examinations, on the other hand, increased dramatically. There were sixty-six 
successful candidates in 1841.44 These increases took place as a result of the measures 
taken by RAma III in 1826 when he, as mentioned earlier, made a complaint to the senior 
monks for not being active in producing Parian monks.45  
  
                                                 
43  Ibid, p.38; Reynolds, p.66. 
44  Prachum phraratchputcha phak thi si, pp.87-89. 
45  See p.210. 
 
225

=== PAGE 233 ===
The royal pundits, and also a few other lay teachers, who had been ordered by the king to 
produce more  Parian monks, were employed by the crown to give instruction to the 
Parian candidates on Pali and the texts prescribed in the Parian curriculum. The classes 
were conducted in special halls in the palace. In fact, the lay teachers were hired not only 
by the crown but also by the nobles, who began to dominate the court of Siam until 
RAma V reversed the situation in the 1880s, to give religious instruction to the novices 
and monks in their mansions or at the monasteries they sponsored. The role of the royal 
pundits and the lay-teachers consequently became very important in preparing candidates 
for the examinations. The royal pundits could, therefore, be considered the driving force 
behind the king’s promotion of formal examinations. And unlike the abbots, who had 
responsibility for both monastic training and academic guidance for their pupils, these 
royal pundits and lay teachers had responsibility for guiding novices and monks only in 
their academic study.  
 
 
5.3 A Quiet Period under RAma IV (1851-1868) 
On the death of RAma III in 1851, the council of nobles, ministers and Sangha requested 
Bhikkhu Wachirayan to leave his 27-year long ascetic life and assume the throne. He 
became known as King Mongkut, or RAma IV, and he laid the foundation for his son and 
successor, King Chulalongkorn, to modernise the kingdom in “an extraordinarily 
dangerous time”. King Mongkut was different from his predecessors in that he had the 
opportunity to “study and read widely” both Buddhist and western literature. 46 He was 
the only ruler to hold a Parian degree and was, as has been discussed, a proved reformer 
of the Theravada Sangha in his country. Therefore, if anything, his monastic experience 
may have prepared him better for the throne. During his monkhood he did also “travel 
                                                 
46  Wyatt, Thailand, p.181. 
 
226

=== PAGE 234 ===
throughout the country and meet with people with whom princes only rarely came into 
contact”.47 His study of western languages and sciences while a monk also meant that he 
was the first monarch to speak English and hire European teachers for his children. His 
ability to communicate in English enabled him to present his case better to the European 
monarchs. 
 
As to his reform group, the Dhammayuttika-nikAya, a large number of monks had 
already been trained by him, at Wat Bovonives and a few other monasteries, by the time 
he left the Order. During this reign, the Dhammayuttika reform movement continued 
under the leadership of his immediate disciples, some of whom, such as Prince-Patriarch 
Pavares, would play a prominent role up to the next reign. Some new monasteries were 
founded for the Dhammayuttika order by the king during his 17 year rule and all the 
abbots of these monasteries were chosen from the best educated at Wat Bovonives.48 The 
monastery continued to be preferred by royalty, and indeed also nobles, whether they 
ordained on a short or a long term basis. All future kings were to be ordained there. It 
was therefore natural that there was a good relationship between the Dhammayuttika 
fraternity and the powerful nobility, which in turn guaranteed not only the continuity of 
the reform order but also “compensated for its numerical minority”,49 despite the king’s 
neutrality towards both orders. In the meantime, the reforms that Mongkut had begun as 
a monk, including an emphasis on canonical texts, was continued at Wat Bovonives by 
his senior pupils. As we have seen, these reforms were not to spread far and wide, but 
were confined to the reform group. It remained so for a while even after he died. 
 
As a monarch, RAma IV displayed both rationality and neutrality in his approach towards 
different groups within the monastic Order. He showed balance in his patronage of both 
                                                 
47  Ibid, p.182. 
48  Wat Somanassavihar (1853), Wat Pathumvan (1857), Wat Rachapradith (1864) and Wat Makutkasat. 
49  Reynolds, p.65. 
 
227

=== PAGE 235 ===
orders, Dhammayuttika and MahAnikAya. He demonstrated no prejudice in making 
appointments in the Sangha hierarchy and in invitations to chant at royal ceremonies. 
Prince Damrong said that King Mongkut refused to rule in favour of the Dhammayuttika 
in a petition regarding the manner of wearing robes. Despite a request from a senior 
prince, Somdet Chaophrya Prayurawong, for royal permission to wear the robe in the 
Dhammayuttika style, the king issued a decree permitting monks to wear the robe the 
way they wished. It was argued by the king that the robe style was a matter for the 
Sangha to decide, not the state.50  
 
There were no changes in the Parian examinations under his reign. In fact, King 
Mongkut effected the reforms in the Sangha only as a bhikkhu with “the privileged 
status” that came with his “high birth”, but without the backing of the state: it was only 
towards the end of the Third Reign that the reforms introduced by him actually “gained 
the king’s (RAma III’s) hesitant support”.51  
 
 
5.4 The National Integration process and Monastic Education  
under RAma V  (1868-1910) 
5.4.1 The Young King, His Reforms and Reform-minded Brothers 
King Mongkut died in 1868 and was succeeded by his son Prince Chulalongkorn, then 
aged fifteen. During his reign Siam faced new political realities, with “the threat of 
imperialism” from European colonial powers.52 “Siam was awkwardly placed between 
Britain with her Malayan protectorates [and Burma] to the west and France with her 
                                                 
50  Rachanubhab, Khwamsongcham (Memoirs), pp.86-87. 
51  Reynolds, p.65. 
52  Ibid, pp.21-23, 27, 61-62 & Wyatt, Thailand, pp.187-208.  
 
228

=== PAGE 236 ===
colony to the east.”53 London and Paris “could [also] clash in Siam” for their shared 
“interest in China and India”.54 Moreover, the interest in Siam that was shown by these 
colonial powers was equally a great threat to Siam’s sovereignty. For example, Wyatt 
observes that as “British teak-exploitation activities in lower Burma moved into north 
Siam in Mongkut’s reign, British interests and involvement in that area began to worry 
the Siamese”.55 To safeguard its independence, not only did King Chulalongkorn have to 
unite his kingdom through national integration programmes but he also had to modernise 
it.56  
 
Although generally the reign of RAma V has been considered the threshold of the modern 
era in Siam, there were, however, no rigorous programmes for modernisation in the early 
years of his reign. The reason for this was partly his youth, for he ascended the throne at 
the age of fifteen, and partly the resistance of the nobles. When he ascended the throne, 
King Chulalongkorn had not even finished his education, and the administration of the 
kingdom was in the hands of the regent. The nobles, who had become increasingly 
powerful since the beginning of the Ratanakosin dynasty in 1782, stood to lose from the 
king’s reforms.57 In fact, not only the nobles but also the heir apparent resisted the 
reforms. The heir, known by his title as the Second King (wang na), was an older prince 
and was appointed to his position on the death of King Mongkut by the Regent 
(Chaophraya Sisuriyawong), “because they shared an aversion to reforms which were 
perceived to be a threat to their interests”.58   
 
                                                 
53  Nish, “The Policies of the European Powers in Southeast Asia, 1893-1910” King Chulalongkorn’s 
Visit to Europe: Reflections on Significance and Impact, p.14. 
54  Jacquemyns “European Perception of King Chulalongkorn’s Visit to Europe” King Chulalongkorn’s 
Visit to Europe: Reflections on Significance and Impact, p.5. 
55  Wyatt, Thailand, p.194. 
56  Ibid, pp.208-212. 
57  Charit Tingsabadh, King Chulalongkorn’s Visit to Europe, p.23. 
58  Ibid. 
 
229

=== PAGE 237 ===
But after the king had his second coronation, when he reached the age of 20 in 1873, he 
began to introduce many changes, both political and religious. On the political side, the 
king introduced measures to consolidate power in central Siam, with its capital in 
Bangkok. In 1874 the king created the Council of State, or cabinet, consisting of twelve 
members who were mostly his half-brothers such as Prince Devawongse and Prince 
Damrong, “in order to effect reforms through legislation”.59 The “progressive 
institutional innovations” initiated by King Chulalongkorn, including those on finance, 
education, defence, infrastructure, health and the civil service, brought disadvantage to 
the Second King and the nobles. As expected, they came into conflict with the king and 
his cabinet. The clash between the king and his heir apparent resulted in what is now 
known as “the wang na crisis” in 1875. The Second King fled to the British Consul in 
Bangkok and finally lost the sympathy of both the Siamese elite and the foreign powers. 
Some of the other nobles were exposed for their abuse of power while some of them 
were too elderly to continue to oppose the young king.   
 
On the religious front, it was his half-brother Prince-monk Wachirayan[warorot] (1860-
1921) who was the main architect of the changes. The Sangha underwent administrative 
and educational reorganization. But before we discuss these transformations, let us first 
briefly recount the life of Prince Wachirayan, which has been well studied by Reynolds 
(1972). Prince Wachirayan was one of the sons of King Mongkut and half-brothers of 
King Chulalongkorn. He received the best education his country could offer at the time, 
studying Thai with his aunt, Princess Worasetsuda; Pali from the royal pundits; and 
English, mathematics, geography, history and poetry from Francis George Patterson, an 
Englishman hired by King Chulalongkorn to educate his half-brothers. In brief, he was in 
the same royal school as his half-brothers such as Prince Damrong and Prince 
                                                 
59  Ibid. 
 
230

=== PAGE 238 ===
Devawongse, who would one day become RAma V’s indispensable lieutenants in his 
reform drive. Prince Wachirayan also received the best Buddhist education in the 
Dhammayuttika under the senior disciples of his father, King Mongkut, the founder of 
the reform Order.  
 
After a period in government service, Prince Wachirayan decided to lead the life of a 
monk. His ordination took place at Wat Bovonives but he continued his Pali studies 
under some royal pundits at Wat Makutkasat, another important monastery of the 
Dhammayuttika. Three years after his ordination, he was encouraged by the king and his 
teachers to enter the Parian examinations in 1882. He passed up to Prayog Five at the 
first attempt and as a result was given a royal rank, Krommamun, and made the deputy 
head of the Dhammayuttika-nikAya by the king. The head of the Dhammayuttika at the 
time was a senior prince-monk, Kromphrya Pavares[variyalongkorn], who finally 
became the SangharAja (supreme patriarch) of the Siamese Sangha. He was the preceptor 
of Prince Wachirayan, and has therefore been known as “Prince-Preceptor”.  
 
For the next decade, Prince Wachirayan spent his time teaching Pali and writing 
textbooks for his students at Wat Makutkasat, the monastery built by his father, King 
Mongkut. Two of the books he compiled there, NavakovAda, an instruction for the newly 
ordained, and a Pali grammar which ran to four volumes, would come to dominate the 
curriculum of the Siamese Sangha after this reign. Generally, at Wat Makutkasat he 
experimented with some new ideas about textbooks and teaching methods which we 
shall shortly discuss. In his experimentations, which were limited to a handful of 
Dhammayuttika monasteries, Prince Wachirayan faced some frustration in implementing 
his reform ideas thanks to resistance from some senior monks. It should be noted that the 
reforms that King Chulalongkorn initiated also progressed only slowly between 1888 and 
 
231

=== PAGE 239 ===
1892 when the transfer of power had not been completed. During that time the king 
arranged to transfer the responsibilities for reform from the old ministers to his half-
brothers, who were now the best educated people in Siam and highly motivated 
reformers.60  
  
 
5.4.2 The Founding of the Buddhist Monastic Colleges 
Towards the end of 1892, the new minister in charge of education, formally called Public 
Instruction, Phraya Phatsakorawong (Phon Bunnag), proposed to the king and thereafter 
to the cabinet to set up a new higher and modern college at the Dhammayuttika 
monastery, Wat Makutkasat, obviously because Prince Wachirayan had established a 
reputation for excellent learning there. This proposal would not only give the 
Dhammayuttika, the minority in the Siamese Order, leverage with the majority fraternity, 
the MahAnikAya, but also help the Dhammayuttika achieve institutional acceptability. 
This acceptability would therefore be attained not mainly because of the increase in the 
number of monks in the reform Order but also because of its more rigorous academic and 
monastic training. In fact, from now on we shall see how the expansion of the 
Dhammayuttika academic plan would dominate the history of monastic education in 
Siam and culminate in its standardisation a few decades later.  
 
However, the establishment of a college for the Dhammayuttika was a sensitive decision 
for the king. He did not want to be seen, on the one hand, to favour one or the other 
fraternity and, on the other, he was also a pragmatic ruler who wanted to give 
responsibility to the ablest. Wat Mahathat, the seat of the sangharAja since the early days 
of the Bangkok era and now the centre of the MahAnikAya, had long been considered a 
                                                 
60  Wyatt, Politics of Reform, pp.91-93. 
 
232

=== PAGE 240 ===
place of higher study in Pali and Buddhist scriptures. To deprive Wat Mahathat of its 
central position in Siamese monastic education would be an extremely risky decision for 
the king, for he would alienate the majority of the Sangha from his reforms. However, 
the king knew himself that the Dhammayuttika Order had overtaken Wat Mahathat in the 
field of education and had therefore more potential to help him realise his reforms in 
general, and in education in particular. The king, while a young prince, was ordained a 
novice at Wat Mahathat, but then moved to Wat Bovonives, where he was taught the 
Dhamma.61 The two monasteries belonged to two different nikAyas, the first being the 
MahAnikAya and the other the Dhammayuttika. His move to Wat Bovonives suggested 
that the monarchy considered at the time that a better Buddhist education was available 
there. Indeed, Wat Bovonives had become an excellent institution for the study of Pali 
and Buddhism when his father, King Mongkut, then a bhikkhu, had been the abbot. So, 
the king would have to make a careful decision so as not to upset the MahanikAya, on the 
one hand, and on the other, to make use of what the reform Order, the Dhammayuttika, 
could offer. 
 
In the end, the cabinet decided in 1892 to found two academies. One of the two colleges 
was to be based at Wat Mahathat and the other at Wat Bovonives. Wat Makutkasat, 
which had featured in the proposal of the Minster of Public Instruction, had to give way 
to Wat Bovonives, for the king thought the latter was already the centre of the 
Dhammayuttika Order and was also centrally located in the capital.62 The objectives in 
establishing these monastic colleges, according to Prince Damrong and Prince 
Wachirayan were: to promote the study of Buddhist scriptures, which had been crucial 
for the future of Buddhism, phutthasAsanA, so as to produce able Buddhist monks who 
could explain the Dhamma well to the Buddhist population “like the Christian 
                                                 
61  Rachanubhab, Phrarachphongsawadan Krung Ratanakosin Ratchkarn thi ha, p.51. 
62  Reynolds, p.175. 
 
233

=== PAGE 241 ===
missionaries did”; and to standardize the way novices and monks were taught.63 Here the 
two princes can be seen as being clearly influenced by western civilisation.  
 
The decision to set up two separate monastic colleges came amid fear among some of the 
cabinet members that having two different institutions could further divide the 
Dhammayuttika and the MahanikAya; they suggested that the two Orders should 
therefore share a single academic institution in the interest of the unity of the Sangha, 
which was vital for the future of the kingdom. The king himself was aware of this 
delicate issue and had therefore taken the measure of reassuring the MahanikAya by 
transforming Wat Mahathat into a modern college at the same time. In promoting the 
traditional learning centre at Wat Mahathat of the MahanikAya, the king renamed Wat 
Mahathat after himself as Mahachulalongkorn Royal College. It was generously 
endowed by the king, and was given special attention because it coincided with the 
cremation of his son, the crown prince, Vajiranuhid. In fact, a new building at the 
Mahachulalongkorn College was constructed in the memory of the late crown prince.  
 
On the academic side, however, the Mahachulalongkorn Royal College was encouraged 
by the ministry of Public Instruction to adopt the Mahamakut curriculum, which we shall 
shortly discuss.64 This intervention was not without risk, given the tension that had 
existed between the two Orders since the founding of the Dhammayuttika.  
 
Meanwhile, there had been an important development at Wat Bovonives. In October 
1892 the Prince-Preceptor passed away, and was succeeded by Prince Wachirayan, who 
now became the abbot of Wat Bovonives and the head of the Dhammayuttika; but not 
                                                 
63  Rachanubhab & Prince Wachirayan,” Karn tang Mahamakut withayalai (The Establishment of the 
Mahamakut Royal College)” Parian ratchkarn thi 5 (The Parian Examinations During the Reign of 
RAma V), pp.2-3.  
64  Reynolds, pp.181-185. 
 
234

=== PAGE 242 ===
sangharAja, because the king decided to leave the top post in the Siamese Sangha vacant 
for the rest of his reign. Prince Wachirayan also became the head of the Mahamakut 
Royal College (RajAvidyAlaya), which was opened in October 1893.65  
 
At Mahamakut Royal College Prince Wachirayan introduced a new Pali curriculum. For 
the first time there were to be written examinations in place of the traditional oral ones. 
The new curriculum had six levels. The first three levels were called nak rian (student) 
levels and the rest Parian. The highest nak rian level was made equal to prayog III of the 
old Parian. The Mahamakut curriculum came to be known as Parian mai, “new Parian”, 
in contrast to the old Parian that had been held at the palace (sanam laung). The 
introduction of the Mahamakut curriculum was the first change in monastic learning to 
take place under RAma V. The students at the Mahamakut could choose to enter both or 
either of “the old Parian”, which still maintained oral examinations, and the 
“Mahamakut Parian” examinations. This choice was also given to students at Wat 
Mahathat and other monasteries. This arrangement was made possible because after 1894 
the Mahamakut took over responsibility for the administration of both its own Parian 
and the old Parian.  
  
The Mahamakut curriculum does not seem, at first glance, to be very different from the 
curriculum of the old Parian. However, a close examination of the curriculum of the 
Dhammayuttika reveals a very significant change that in some way linked the 
“deteriorating” state of Siamese Buddhism to the nature of the curriculum of the old 
Parian. We noted earlier that King Mongkut, soon after his ordination in 1824, found the 
knowledge of Pali canonical literature and the practice of the Vinaya among the Siamese 
monks to be distressingly unsatisfactory. The texts chosen in the Mahamakut curriculum 
                                                 
65  “Preface”Prawat Mahakamut Ratchvithayalai nai boromarachupatham (History of Mahamakut Royal 
University) (p.i), mentions that it was founded in October 1892. 
 
235

=== PAGE 243 ===
were intended to address these two problems. Therefore the Mahamakut curriculum itself 
would represent a very important change in monastic education in Siam. Let us now 
briefly examine the Mahamakut curriculum. 
 
 
5.4.3 The Mahamakut Curriculum66 
         Levels 
                                       Syllabus 
Nak RianTri 
 (Preliminary Dhamma 
Student) 
 
Pali grammar 
Nak Rian Tho  
(Intermediate Dhamma 
Student) 
 
Dhammapada-aTThakathA, Part I; nidAna to be memorised. 
Nak Rian Ek 
(Advance Dhamma 
Student) 
 
Dhammapada-aTThakathA, Part II; Explanation of verses. 
ParianTri 
(Preliminary Parian) 
MangalatthadIpanI, Part I. 
ParianTho 
(Intermediate Parian) 
Ubhatovibhanga of the VinayapiTaka 
ParianEk 
(Advance Parian) 
CULavagga and MahAvagga of the VinayapiTaka 
 
 
The study of Pali grammar had been essential for all Parian students since the Ayutthaya 
period. However, Pali grammar had never been a part of the curriculum. This had led to 
an unsatisfactory situation in the teaching of Pali grammar: it took longer than it should 
                                                 
66  Prawat Mahamakut ratchvithayalai, p.30. 
 
236

=== PAGE 244 ===
to acquire basic knowledge of Pali grammar sufficient for the student to read and 
translate the TipiTaka by himself. And by the time many students had grasped Pali 
grammar, many of them had decided to return to lay life, exhausting their enthusiasm for 
further study before they had even begun reading the important texts of the TipiTaka. This 
trend was responsible for the situation in which the Order was left without “higher 
Parian” monks to teach and run the Sangha’s affairs. When there were not enough 
“higher Parian” monks to teach, there would not be enough Parian monks produced. 
Moreover, some Parian monks were given a rAjagaBa rank even before they attained 
higher Parian. Their rAjagaBa position brought with it administrative responsibility and 
kept them away from further study. So in the eyes of the promoters of the Parian 
examinations, namely Prince Damrong and Prince Wachirayan, the neglect of the study 
of Pali grammar had resulted in this vicious circle.67 To solve this problem, Prince 
Wachirayan radically transformed the method of studying Pali grammar: instead of 
studying Pali grammar in the Pali language as had been the case before, the student 
would now learn Pali grammar in Thai. For that, Prince Wachirayan compiled a 
comprehensive guidebook to Pali grammar. With this book, a student would be able to 
acquire sufficient knowledge of Pali grammar within one year, and his grammatical 
knowledge would be formally tested according to this new curriculum.  
 
Reading of Pali texts began at the intermediate level. In fact, the student, nak rian, not 
only had to read the introduction (nidAna) to the Dhammapada-aTThakatha, but also had to 
memorise it. Though memorisation had been an important part of monastic scholastic 
activities in Siam for a long time, this was the first time learning by heart was formally 
required of a student. At the Advanced Student level, the student was required to explain 
stanzas from the Dhammapada, and its commentary was prescribed as reading material. 
                                                 
67  Rachanubhab & Prince Wachirayan, Karn tang Mahamakut withayalai,  pp.2-8. 
 
237

=== PAGE 245 ===
This was more than an exercise of translation skills in the old Parian system; and in fact 
the student had to write essays (krathu) on these Pali stanzas. This essay writing was 
unique to the new Parian system and it must have been one of the many influences on 
Prince Wachirayan from his European teachers.   
 
The six levels of the Mahamakut Parian were recognised as equivalent to the nine 
prayogs of the old Parian. However, since the number of the levels in the new and old 
Parian differed, the comparison, especially between the higher levels, was far from 
simple. While the first four levels of the Mahamakut Parian were equivalent to the first 
four prayogs, the fifth level of the Mahamakut Parian(called Parian tho) was recognised 
as equivalent to the prayog level five of the old Parian; but if the student added one text 
from the Sutta-piTaka into the syllabus of this level, then the fifth level in the Mahamakut 
Pariansystem would be equivalent of the prayog level six, and would be called Parian 
tho phiset, “special Parian tho”. Similarly, where the sixth level of the Mahamakut 
Parian was recognised as equivalent to prayog level seven of the old system, if the 
student added one extra text from the Abhidhamma-piTaka, then the sixth level of the 
Mahamakut level would be recognised as equivalent to prayog level eight of the old 
Parian and would be called Parian ek phiset, “special Parian ek”. To achieve the same 
level as the highest level, prayog nine, of the old system, however, the student would 
have to submit a thesis on the Dhamma.  
 
It is clear that the Mahamakut Parian was very different from the old Parian in its 
format, especially at the higher level. The Parian tho, the fourth level in the Mahamakut 
system, was considered to be good enough for an average student. We have mentioned 
that this level was equivalent to prayog five of the old Parian. The highest level of the 
Mon Parian, which we shall briefly look at later, was also equivalent only to prayog 
 
238

=== PAGE 246 ===
five. The fact that Prince Wachirayan himself and his father, King Mongkut, both 
attained only prayog five, but had been competent enough to carry out great reforms in 
education and monastic discipline, meant that prayog five of the old Parian, or its 
equivalent, was considered the standard required of the many candidates in Siam. The 
aim of the Mahamakut Parian was, therefore, to produce as many successful candidates 
for prayog five, or its equivalent, as possible. And that would have met the three 
objectives of the founding of the two Buddhist colleges. 
 
For those who were academically more able, however, the Mahamakut system opened 
the way to achieve their potential. We may notice that the added texts that a student had 
to work on for the levels higher than the Parian tho of the Mahamakut Parian were not 
commonly taught at the time in Siam. Moreover, no text, but only the piTaka, was 
specified, leaving most of the decision to the student. The most significant feature of the 
Mahamakut Parian, however, was the requirement of the submission of a thesis for the 
highest level, the formal title of which has not survived. And other aspects of this 
requirement, for example the number of words, the time limit and supervision, were not 
defined. But it was specifically stated that the thesis would be examined by both internal 
and external examiners. Despite the lack of these details, there remains the fact that the 
Mahamakut Parian represented a radical reform in the Siamese monastic education 
system.  
 
In the Mahamakut curriculum, particularly the three highest levels, the influence of the 
Mon Parian syllabuses was evident. The Mon Parian had the whole Vinaya-piTaka as its 
syllabus. While the Dhammapada-aTThakatha was retained, possibly to keep a link with 
the old system and therefore encourage students already familiar with the old system to 
 
239

=== PAGE 247 ===
accept the new one, all the texts from the Vinaya-piTaka, except the ParivAra, became 
compulsory in this curriculum.  
 
 
5.4.4 The Mon Parian and its Syllabus 
Let us now briefly analyse the Mon Parian examinations. The Mon Parian probably 
attracted the attention of people from outside the Mon community in Siam when Prince 
Mongkut was able to clear his doubt about the scriptures and practice with the help of the 
head of the Mon Sangha, Phra Sumed, in 1824.68 We do not know when the Mon Parian 
began. No record of Ayutthaya or early Ratanakosin mentions it. However, we can say 
that the Mon Parian was not introduced earlier than the reign of RAma II, during which 
the three-level Parian was expanded to nine prayogs. This was because it was officially 
made known that the third level of the Mon Parian was equivalent to prayog four of the 
old Thai Parian; and the Mon Parian four was considered equivalent to prayog five of 
the Thai. In the examinations, the candidate of the Mon Parian had first to give his 
answer in his mother tongue, the Mon language, and then had to provide the syntax in 
Pali to the Thai examiners, who did not understand Mon.69 This procedure for the Mon 
candidate took longer than for his Thai counterpart and he was judged by both Thai and 
Mon members of the Parian examinations committee. The Mon Parian examinations 
were abolished in 1892 under RAma V when written examinations were introduced to the 
new Thai Parian at the Mahamakut. The Mon Parian syllabus is given below. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
68  See pp.220-221. 
69  Prawat karn suksa, p.36. 
 
240

=== PAGE 248 ===
The Mon Parian Syllabus70 
            Levels 
                                  Syllabus 
Parian One 
ParAjika-aniyata PAli or PAcittiya PAli of the VinayapiTaka. 
Parian Two 
MahAvagga or CULavagga, VinayapiTaka. 
Parian Three 
PAlimuttakavinayavinicchaya. 
Parian Four 
SamantapAsAdikA. 
 
The first two levels of the Mon Parians prescribed canonical texts from the Vinaya-
piTaka, while the latter two had a sub-commentary and a commentary prescribed 
respectively. This syllabus reflected the emphasis on the Vinaya by the Mon monks. At 
Parian level one, the student studied the vibhaNga of the Vinaya-piTaka and at Parian 
level two, the khandhaka. A Mon monk would only be given a rAjagaBa rank if he had 
attained the highest level, Parian four. The Mon Parian examinations are no longer held 
at present and we do not know when they were held for the last time. So far we only 
have records of the Mon Parian between 1893 and 1900. During these years, there were 
only fifteen candidates achieving second and third levels (equivalent to third and fourth 
of the Thai Parian respectively), and none attained the highest level.71   
 
 
5.4.5 The Introduction of Primary Education in the Provinces 
In the meantime one of the central plans of King Chulalongkorn for the modernisation of 
Siam, the introduction of primary education, seems to have been in difficulty. This 
education programme was conceived in 1875 but began to be implemented only in 1888 
when Prince Damrong became the Minister for “Public Instruction” [i.e. Education]. 
However, when Prince Damrong was promoted in 1892 to the Interior Ministry to lead 
                                                 
70  Prawat Mahamakut ratchwithayalai, p.27; Prawat karn suksa, p.49. 
71  Chao Phraya Thammathikoranathipadi, Parian ratchkarn thi 5.  
 
241

=== PAGE 249 ===
the introduction of the civil service to the provinces, “a more pressing national 
requirement”, the primary education programme seems to have stalled.72 But even before 
that the success of the introduction of primary education was limited to Bangkok alone. 
And Prince Damrong’s successor at the Ministry of Public Instruction, Phraya 
Phatsakorawong, did not sustain that progress.  
 
Consequently, in 1898 the king decided to bypass his own minister and give the 
responsibility to Prince Wachirayan, who had established himself as an educationist for 
the last sixteen years and was now the head of an inspiring Buddhist college.73 Prince 
Wachirayan was to introduce primary education to the provinces. This was a very 
important task, for through this project he would lay the foundations for further 
educational and administrative changes in the Sangha, which, as we shall see later, were 
central to the national integration process.  
 
For many reasons Prince Wachirayan was in a better position than the Minister of Public 
Instruction to carry out the task of introducing primary education to the provinces. He 
had attended, as mentioned earlier, the first English School founded in the palace by his 
father, King Mongkut, and had also gained a Pali degree.74 Moreover, by virtue of being 
the head of the reform Order, the Dhammayuttika, and of the Mahamakut Royal College, 
he was certain to gain the trust of the people on educational matters. He also had at his 
disposal some Parian monks and other academic staff at the Mahamakut Royal College 
to help him communicate with the monasteries in the provinces, where traditional 
learning had existed for centuries. Above all, Prince Wachirayan himself was a reformer, 
who understood the need for the kingdom to modernise in order to preserve her 
                                                 
72  Wyatt, Politics of Reform, p.144. 
73  Ibid, pp.216-217. 
74  See pp.230-232.  
 
242

=== PAGE 250 ===
independence. (In fact, Prince Wachirayan appointed monks who held Pali degrees to 
implement the education programme in the provinces.75) 
 
Moreover, King Chulalongkorn might have foreseen that the provincial education 
programme could be introduced by the Sangha more safely than by the Ministry of 
Public Instruction because of political sensibilities in the provinces. The traditional rulers 
in the provinces, particularly in the north, south and east, would resist any effort to bring 
them under the control of Bangkok. To solve this problem, the education-director monks 
from Bangkok would directly approach the provincial Sangha, which was influential 
over the population in the provinces, rather than the ruling families. But the traditionalist 
monks in the provinces could still oppose the type of curriculum already introduced in 
Bangkok on the grounds that it emphasised “modern secular subjects”. Although the 
provincial monasteries never opposed secular subjects, these subjects have never formed 
the core of the curriculum. But the main objections of the traditionalist monks in the 
provinces would have been the dominant role of lay teachers that the teaching of modern 
secular subjects would bring and the use of the central Thai alphabet in place of the 
alphabets unique to each dialect in their areas.  
 
To overcome these hindrances, Prince Wachirayan in his persuasion of the monks said 
that the Sangha should “not let people think that the Sangha is under the control of the 
Ecclesiastical Department” of the Ministry of Public Instruction.76 The education-
director monks should distribute the Dhamma books written by Prince Wachirayan in the 
central Thai language (Thai klang) to the provincial monks and those monks would see 
no reason to object to a dhamma book. In addition, a book for learning central Thai, 
called the Rapid Reader, would be given to those provincial monks only as something to 
                                                 
75  For more information on these monks see Wyatt, Politics of Reform, pp.237-255; Prawat Mahamakut 
ratchwithayalai, pp.102-136.  
76  Wyatt, cit., pp.237-238. 
 
243

=== PAGE 251 ===
be read at leisure and not as a textbook. It would be up to the provincial monks whether 
or not to make use of it. The textbooks on actual modern secular subjects would follow 
only after some time, partly to give time for the education-director monks to prepare the 
ground and partly because the textbooks had still to be composed. Although some 
textbooks had already been composed a few years earlier, new textbooks had to be 
written because of the situation in the provinces, where there were not enough lay 
teachers to teach the modern secular subjects. (The standard of education in the 
provinces was apparently lower than in Bangkok.) 
 
Due to the provincial sensibilities, observes Wyatt, the king himself did not mention 
secular subjects in his decree on provincial education. Instead, he only said that he 
would “extend his patronage to all monks” and “provide them with government 
textbooks on moral and other useful subjects”. This would be interpreted by the 
provincial monks as the king’s desire to promote many of their monasteries to the status 
of royal monastery, wat laung, and that would be appreciated.77  The king then officially 
gave Prince Wachirayan the authority to organise the “religion and education of the 
Buddhist population” and made the Mahamakut Royal College the headquarters of 
national education in Siam.78 It was here at the Mahamakut, where there also existed a 
Thai school and a teachers’ training school, that some provincial monks would soon 
come to train as teachers and go back to their home towns to raise educational standards. 
Apart from executing the plans and supervising the director-monks, Prince Wachirayan 
also had to compile textbooks, mostly with the use of reference books the Thai 
ambassador in London had acquired for the purpose. 
 
                                                 
77  Ibid, p.236. 
78  Ibid, p.237. 
 
244

=== PAGE 252 ===
The primary schools were to continue to have their premises in the monasteries, the 
traditional seats of learning for centuries. Monks were to be recruited as teachers. In fact, 
many of them already were. Textbooks were distributed free and the first step was only 
to persuade the provincial monks to accept the idea of a unified education under Prince 
Wachirayan; the next step would be to focus on the curriculum. These steps were in line 
with what Prince Wachirayan and also Prince Damrong thought, that “in the initial stages 
quantity was more important than quality and starting more important than waiting 
indeterminately”.79  
 
In 1902, after three years, Prince Wachirayan had successfully “completed” the 
introduction of the primary education system “as a part of the general integration of the 
provinces into the life of the Thai nation”.80 There were only 177 schools at the 
beginning, but that number increased to 790 in 1898 and jumped to 6183 in 1899/1900 
and 12062 in 1900/1901. The “popular demand and support for provincial education” 
was so solid, especially at the lower social levels, that it “was left to develop of its own 
accord without either compulsion or inducement from the government”.81   
 
This success, however, came at a price. During the three years or so when Prince 
Wachirayan and his staff at the Mahamakut were absorbed in the provincial education 
project, the development of the Mahamakut as an institution for higher education had 
been neglected. As a result, after the examinations in 1900, the Mahamakut stopped its 
own Parian programme and instead decided to enter its students for the old Parian 
examinations. The decision was not taken lightly and the Mahamakut informed the king 
of their decision. The king in his letter to Minister of Public Instruction said that the 
decision to stop the Mahamakut Parian was a “setback” and that the Mahamakut 
                                                 
79  Ibid, p.254. 
80  Ibid, p.246. 
81  Ibid, p.253. 
 
245

=== PAGE 253 ===
teaching method was “very good”. However, the king had one criticism to make of the 
new Parian: “though very good, the Mahamakut Parian was very different from the old 
Parian, and whenever a new programme is introduced, it should be made compatible 
with the old system; the result was all that was important and the [compatibility] would 
be very desirable”.82 From this comment it can be seen that the king for his part wished 
to maintain impartiality between the two Orders, the MahAnikAya and the 
Dhammayuttika, and was extremely cautious not to upset the balance of power in favour 
of one or the other. 
 
As a result of the education director-monks going to the provinces, the Sangha in 
Bangkok exercised more and more control over the provincial Sangha through 
education. Also, given the speed of the modernisation programmes of the country 
through centralisation, it was inevitable that the Sangha in various parts of the country 
would also be brought under central control. It was only a matter of time before a law 
was brought in to give legal status to what had already been launched and achieved in 
connection with national education. The directors of education sent to the provinces had 
organised some form of ecclesiastical hierarchies, filled vacant positions themselves in 
certain instances and strengthened monastic discipline. Reynolds notices that the 
directors focused their attention on “the celebration of Buddhist rites, (and) matters 
which pertained more directly to the integrity of the Sangha, and which varied from 
province to province”.83 The director-monks themselves saw that it was essential to have 
a sound hierarchical organisation if the national education initiatives were to progress. 
They suggested in 1899 a structure of the Sangha that would make ecclesiastical and 
civil jurisdiction coincide geographically. That involved the creating of hierarchies at 
tambon (commune), sub-district, district and province level, like those at monthon (group 
                                                 
82  Prawat Mahamakut ratchwithayalai, pp.138-139. 
83  Reynolds, p.235. 
 
246

=== PAGE 254 ===
of provinces) level that had been there since the early Ratanakosin period.84 Their 
suggestion would become the blueprint of the first ever Sangha Act in Siam, which we 
discuss next. 
 
 
5.4.6 The 1902 Sangha Act 
Strengthened by the suggestion of the director-monks, RAma V, who had embarked upon 
a grand scale of integration, passed the Sangha Act in 1902, the first of its kind in Siam 
to cover the whole country. This ecclesiastical act would, as we shall see, bring the 
Sangha from all parts of the kingdom under a single hierarchy, called the Council of 
Elders (MahAthera samakhom), which would hold all the executive, legislative and 
judicial power for the Sangha. The act would also reaffirm the traditional patronage of 
the monarch over the Order, who would have a final say over the appointment of monks 
to all higher ecclesiastical ranks. 
 
The reason behind the introduction of the 1902 Sangha Act has been a subject of interest 
for many scholars. Ishii, for instance, argues that “the law was prompted by the secular 
aim of spreading education”.85 Bhikkhu Payutto, better known in Thailand today as Chao 
Khun Dhammapitaka, on the other hand, seems to judge that the need for a body such as 
the Council of Elders merited the passing of this law. The Council of Elders created by 
the 1902 Act, was “to act as advisor to the king in all affairs concerning the religion and 
the administration and the support of the Sangha”, an explanation also officially given 
by King Chulalongkorn in the text of the law itself.86 Bhikkhu Payutto does not comment 
on other aspects of the Sangha act. However, he does point out that royal patronage of 
                                                 
84  Report of Phra Methathammarot, director for Nakhon Swan Province, in 1899, cited by Wyatt, The 
Politics of Reform, p.247. 
85  Ishii, Sangha, State and Society, p.68. 
86  Rajavaramuni, Thai Buddhism in the Buddhist World, p.22. 
 
247

=== PAGE 255 ===
the Order had already existed before, thus implying that the uniqueness of the 1902 act 
lays in the creation of the Council of Elders. Phra Sasana Sobhana (1967), presently the 
SangharAja Somdet ŇABasangvon, writes in the same spirit when he states that the 
Council of Elders were “the king’s counsellors”. But he cautions the reader to look at the 
matter in its historical context, lest it be misunderstood that the 1902 act brought the 
Sangha under the control of the secular authority. Even before the promulgation of the 
act, he continues, “the SangharAja and the rajAgaBas did not directly rule over the 
Sangha”. It was the Minister of Public Instruction, a lay person, who oversaw religious 
affairs. In other words, the affairs of the Sangha were “closely supervised” by the king 
himself.87  
 
A more general view on the promulgation of the 1902 act is given by Reynolds (1972), 
who maintains that the reason was to formalise “the administration of the monkhood into 
law”88. The principles in the law, though in existence in a fragmented state for some 
time, needed to be made uniform, especially in the provinces that the monk-directors 
found to be varied. Tambiah (1976) agrees with Reynolds when he says the 1902 act was 
for the “formalisation and legitimation of development in ecclesiastical organization 
precipitated by the Sangha’s involvement with the historic experiment of spreading 
primary education in Thailand”.89 The act, indeed, gave centuries-old practices, such as 
the king’s authority in appointing the sangharAja and abbots of royal monasteries, a 
statutory status for the first time in history, though it had been in force during the 
Sukhothai period, and was continued at Ayutthaya, Thonburi and in the early 
Ratanakosin period. In its concept, the 1902 Sangha act, therefore, was nothing new, 
despite the sweeping impact that would follow. The 1902 act also expanded the 
hierarchical structure to include every village and monastery in the kingdom. Moreover, 
                                                 
87  Sobhana, “The Government of the Thai Sangha”,  pp.11-12. 
88  Reynolds, p.236. 
89  Tambiah, p.233. 
 
248

=== PAGE 256 ===
the decree also brought the Sangha, already united doctrinally at a national level yet 
culturally diverse in local traditions, into a programme of national integration, steered by 
Bangkok. The Sangha hierarchy created by this act “directly parallels the provincial 
administrative hierarchy” designed and implemented earlier through the programmes of 
centralisation of the civil service by Prince Damrong and of the state primary education 
system by Prince Wachirayan. 90 (It may be recalled here that that secular counterpart of 
the national hierarchy with the king as its head, was effected a decade earlier, with 
various provinces grouped into monthons.)   
 
We agree with Reynolds and Tambiah that the 1902 Sangha act was a matter of 
formalising a long tradition of royal patronage. However, it should be added here that the 
1902 act, when compared with the developments in Burma and Sri Lanka, directly 
produced two outcomes: firstly, the act, particularly the formation of the Council of 
Elders, provided a practical framework for a smooth co-existence and co-operation 
between the two Sangha nikAyas, the MahAnikAya and the Dhammayuttika. The Council 
of Elders was a unique administrative structure in the history of the Theravada Sangha in 
the world because it brought all nikAyas together in the highest decision-making body. 
This was very important for the unity of the sangha in every country. As far as Burma is 
concerned, it had no such body until 1980, when the state Sangha MahAnAyaka 
committee was created to represent the interests of all the nikAyas. Before that, because 
of the absence of such an all-embracing executive body, no major policies on education 
could ever be agreed among the different nikAyas. In Burma, the failure on the part of the 
Sangha to agree on a set of education reforms proposed by the 1935 Pathamapyan 
Commission and the 1965 Hmawbi Conference was evidence of difficulties that arose 
due to the absence of a unified body in the Sangha hierarchy. As for Sri Lanka, it has 
                                                 
90  Keyes, Thailand, p.140. 
 
249

=== PAGE 257 ===
never had such body in which all the nikAyas come together. As a result, important acts 
such as a Sanghavinicchaya, an ecclesiastical judicial act that would govern the Sangha 
of all nikAyas under the same rule, could not be passed, and consequently discipline 
could not be enforced.  
 
Secondly, the act made sure that the minority nikAya was not put at a disadvantage by its 
relatively small numbers. In Burma and Sri Lanka, by contrast, the small nikAyas were 
and still are disadvantaged. In Sri Lanka the majority Siam-NikAya has had far more 
power and prestige than the two smaller nikAyas, Amarapura and RAmaGGa. In Burma, 
seats in the highest Sangha MahAnAyaka Committee, equivalent to the Council of Elders, 
were located by the percentage each nikAya represented in the population of the Sangha 
nationally. As a result, 87% of the seats went to the Sudhamma, the biggest nikaya, while 
the four smallest nikAyas had no representation in the committee. Moreover, the two 
most powerful positions, chairman and secretary-general, were always occupied by the 
Sudhamma. In fact, in Siam the 1902 Sangha Act even favoured the minority nikAya, the 
Dhammayuttika.91 This was because the act was silent about the role and appointment of 
the sangharAja, leaving it open for the king to manipulate. With good royal connections, 
it was the Dhammayuttika which benefited from the conspicuously unspecified role of 
the SangharAja in the act. This was evident in the unusually high number of members of 
the Dhammayuttika appointed to the post of sangharAja. 
 
                                                 
91  The Dhammayuttika-nikAya is considered by its members to have been established in 1829, when 
Bhikkhu Wachirayan (King Mongkut) moved back to Wat Samorai. Some though take the year 1833, 
as the founding date of the nikAya when he and other RamaGGa monks consecrated a sImA. It is clear 
that the nikAya was well established before 1902 for two reasons: the establishment of the Mahamakut 
Buddhist College (now University) in 1894 for the Dhammayuttika by King Chulalongkorn, and the 
appointment of Prince Bhikkhu Wachirayan as deputy commissioner of the Dhammayuttika prior to 
that. Despite this, there is a popular belief that the Dhammayuttika came into being only with the 
enactment of the 1902 Sangha Act. This is historically incorrect. For more detail, see, Pravat 
Mahamakut Ratch Vidyalai nai phra boromrachupatham, pp.1-4; ŇABasamvara, BuddhasAsanavamsa, 
pp.3-28. 
 
250

=== PAGE 258 ===
However, the 1902 Sangha Act was subject to some changes by the revolutionary 
government which introduced a constitutional monarchy in 1932. In 1941, the 
government attempted to decentralise and democratise the ecclesiastical organisation by 
modifying the Council of Elders into three separate bodies: the executive body called the 
ecclesiastical cabinet (khan song montri); the ecclesiastical assembly (sanghasabhA); and 
the ecclesiastical court (khana winai thorn). The executive body was divided into four: 
administration; education; propagation of the Dhamma; and public work. Owing to these 
changes, the Council of Elders ceased to exist. With more members – up to 45 in all – in 
the executive, legislative and judicial council, reflecting the population of each nikAya, it 
was the minority nikAya, the Dhammayuttika, that was at this time at a disadvantage.  But 
the 1941 version was replaced in 1963 with the earlier version, i.e. the 1902 version, by 
Prime Minister Sarit. And, it is the 1963 version Sangha act, which is now in force.    
 
We should now briefly describe the structure of the Sangha hierarchy created by the 
1902 act. (Note that apart from the changes described above, the administrative structure 
of the Sangha in all the three versions, 1902, 1941 and 1963, has been the same.) The 
ecclesiastical hierarchy had at its summit the sangharAja, who, if he so wished, wielded a 
considerable amount of power. He was appointed by the king. His term was usually for 
life. With twenty other senior monks with the ranks of somdet and rong-somdet (assistant 
somdet), also appointed by the king, the sangharAja formed the MahAthera Samakhom 
(mahAthera samAgama), “The Council of Elders”, the highest authority responsible for all 
executive, legislative and judicial matters. The MahAthera Samakhom thus now 
controlled all Sangha affairs including curriculum, ritual practices and the establishment 
of new monasteries.  
 
 
251

=== PAGE 259 ===
According to the Sangha Act, each province was to be ruled by a Sangha provincial 
governor. Immediately above them were eighteen regional governors (chao gaBa phak), 
each overseeing a few provinces. Five other senior monks were appointed as chao gaBa 
monthons: four of them from the MahAnikAya, which administered the seventeen regions 
among themselves. However, a Dhammayuttika member of the same rank had authority 
over all Dhammayuttika regional governors throughout the country. Lower down the 
ladder in the hierarchy were the head of a district (amphoe), a village (tambon) and a 
monastery (wat), in that order.   The head of a wat (abbot) had direct responsibility for all 
resident monks in his monastery.  
 
The Sangha Act also required all bhikkhus and sAmaBeras to carry an identity card. In 
Thailand all adults carried identity cards, but the much larger one for bhikkhus and 
sAmaBeras was actually a book recording all important personal information since entry 
into the Order, bearing the signatures of all abbots and the district Sangha governor 
under whose jurisdiction one happened to reside.  
 
Notwithstanding the bureaucratisation of the Sangha administration, the abbot remained 
the most powerful authority, as before. He was responsible for the education of monks 
and lay people in his care. He had to notify the authorities about the monks and lay 
people in his care. But, his authority as to admission and termination of residency in his 
monastery was unchallenged. Moreover, the Sangha Act gave all abbots the backing of 
the ecclesiastical and secular authority in the area. If the abbot disagreed with him, a 
resident monk could hardly get any official work done. Today in Thailand, for instance, 
to apply for a passport a bhikkhu needs to collect a string of signatures, starting with his 
own abbot. If the signature of his abbot is not on the application, no higher Sangha 
 
252

=== PAGE 260 ===
authority will pay attention to it. Without the approval of the MahAthera samakhom, he 
cannot expect the government agency to issue a passport.  
 
On the issue of temple property, the Sangha Act stated that a temple was theoretically 
the property of the whole sAsana, though no monastery/temple needed to share its wealth 
with others. This rule made it clear that the abbot was thus only the guardian of the 
donations and property, including compounds and estates dedicated to his monastery. He 
had to keep an account of all the property. He had no power to appoint a successor to 
look after the property nor could he establish a lineage by ordaining someone, as in Sri 
Lanka. Nor had he power to appoint any one he deemed fit, as in Burma. In short, he was 
not the owner but the guardian. 
 
The act, in addition, defined the power of the Council of Elders. The decision of the 
Council “under His Majesty’s grace” was final. The king retained direct appointment of 
abbots in Bangkok, and in the provinces it was the task of the regional governor to call a 
meeting of the monks of the monastery and devotees to select an abbot. If the selection 
by the monks of the monastery and its devotees was disputed, the governor himself 
appointed the abbot. The act also classified three types of monastery: royal, common, 
and ecclesiastical abode, the last of which was yet to get monastery status. The act even 
required that permission be sought for building a new monastery, and also for developing 
a newly repaired monastery or for developing an ecclesiastical abode into a monastery. 
 
The implementation of this historic Sangha act, however, was delayed to give time to 
people to prepare for it. It was early in the next reign between 1915 and 1918 that the act 
was implemented, and during that time the Prince-Patriarch made at least eight 
inspection tours in the provinces. The tours altogether took almost three hundred days 
 
253

=== PAGE 261 ===
and the Prince-Patriarch took the opportunity to meet government officials and the 
Sangha hierarchy everywhere he went. These tours were to implement the Sangha act as 
well as to introduce the newly created curriculum, which would embrace the whole of 
Siamese monastic scholarship for many generations to come. 
  
There was some resistance in the provinces to the centralisation brought about by the 
1902 Sangha Act. This was because the Act gave the Sangha in Bangkok and their 
patron, the king, all the power to make final decisions. In addition, it was also because 
the centralisation, as Donald K. Swearer92 and S. J. Tambiah93 observe, “erecting a 
national Sangha organisation” controlled from Bangkok meant “the elimination of 
regional variants”. Kamala Tiyavanich has taken the subject further by focussing her 
research, Forest Recollections, on some of the best known twentieth-century local 
Buddhist practices outside Bangkok.  
 
 
5.4.7 A New Curriculum (Nak Tham) and the Standardisation  
of Monastic Education 
A few years after the Sangha act had been passed, monastic education was forced to 
reflect the changing political conditions once more. For the first time a standing army 
was established in Siam in 1905 with the Royal Edict on Military Conscription, enacted 
by King Chulalongkorn just five years before he died. This law, which required all able-
bodied men to serve in the army for two years, exempted all bhikkhus from the draft, but 
among sAmaBeras, “novices”, excused only those who were considered to be phu ru 
tham, “ones who know the Dhamma”. The edict, however, did not specify what qualified 
one as phu ru tham. In 1911 King RAma VI (1910-1925) therefore asked Prince 
                                                 
92  Swearer, “Centre and Periphery: Buddhism and Politics in Modern Thailand” Buddhism and Politics 
in twentieth-century Asia, pp.203-205. 
93  Tambiah, pp.245-246. 
 
254

=== PAGE 262 ===
Wachirayan, whom he had promoted to kromphraya rank and the position of SangharAja 
with the title “the Prince-Patriarch (somdet mahA samaBa chao)”, and the MahAthera 
Samakhom to determine that qualification. As a result, a new set of examinations was 
eventually introduced. This new set of examinations, Nak Tham, would radically change 
the way the Siamese Sangha was educated. The effect, which would be felt throughout 
the country within ten years of its introduction, meant that national integration was 
further strengthened through standardisation of monastic education. 
 
The request by the king to the MahAthera Samakhom to define the qualifications of those 
novices to be exempt from conscription was the first time that Siam made a coordinated 
effort to settle once and for all the problem that had often brought the secular ruler and 
the Sangha into conflict. We have already discussed in the previous chapter how the 
problem of conscription brought King Narai and the Order into conflict. But this time 
RAma V, unlike King Narai in the late seventeenth century, was very fortunate in the 
sense that there was now a very important link between the Sangha and the monarchy in 
the person of the Prince-Patriarch, whom Reynolds describes as “the representative” of 
the royal family in the Sangha.94  
 
The Prince-Patriarch, in his communication with the Sangha from the whole kingdom, 
set out to quell any potential resistance within the Sangha. He justified, from canonical 
scripture, that “monks should comply with the government, and not disobey”, quoting an 
incident during the Buddha’s time when the monks were told by the Buddha that they 
should follow the king [BimbisAra]’s request.95 (The request of the king was that the 
monks observe a three months retreat in his kingdom. But since it was during the 
summer, the monks refused. On hearing of it, the Buddha said that monks should follow 
                                                 
94  Reynolds, pp.67-68. 
95  Wachirayanwarorot, Thalaengkarn khana song (Bulletin of the Sangha), pp.122-123. 
 
255

=== PAGE 263 ===
the king’s request.96) This appeal to the Sangha was unlikely to meet real resistance 
because at that time the country had just gone thorough the period when there was “the 
threat of European colonialism”. Indeed, those threats helped foster nationalism under 
RAma VI.  
 
In the same year, 1911, the Council of Elders, led by Prince-Patriarch Wachirayan, 
created a new curriculum to define the qualification of phu ru tham. This creation of a 
new curriculum resulted from the Prince-Patriarch’s conclusion that the Parian 
curriculum was “restricted” to students fortunate enough to study at royal monasteries in 
the capital Bangkok; it had “not spread to the provinces”.97 As all the prescribed texts in 
the Parian examinations were in Pali, which required some time to master, monks and 
novices who did not stay long enough to gain sufficient knowledge of Pali could not 
enter for the Parian examinations. This also meant that they had no chance of reading 
the words of the Buddha, for they were mostly available until then only in Pali.  
 
In fact, in the provinces the monks and novices “have only not studied in this [translating 
based education] method [required in the old Parian examinations], but not in other 
ways either”.98 It was found that even the bhikkhus who had been ordained for several 
years did not have sufficient knowledge of the dhamma and vinaya because they had no 
access to the TipiTaka in the Thai language. Therefore, to test the knowledge of phu ru 
tham in practical terms there should be a new curriculum and it should be in the 
vernacular language. But even in its early stages of conception, the curriculum soon 
proved to outgrow its original objective of providing a measure for exemption from 
conscription, and in fact came to be envisioned as a course that could improve the 
                                                 
96  anujAnAmi bhikkhave rAjAnaM anuvattituM.  
97  Wachirayanwarorot, Thalaengkarn khana song, I, 1913, p.132. 
98  Ibid. 
 
256

=== PAGE 264 ===
religious education of the majority of the Sangha. 99 This will be evident when we 
examine the various stages in which changes to the curriculum occurred. Below is the 
curriculum of the Nak Tham, “the course for dhamma student” as it was created in 1913. 
 
 
5.4.8 The Curriculum of the Two-level Nak Tham 
Level 
Ordinary  
Special 
DhammavibhAga100 
Prayog One 
Essay writing 
+ 
DhammapadaTThakathA, 
translation 
exercise 
Life of the Buddha 
Prayog Two 
Essay writing 
+  Pali grammar and the study of Pali 
syntax 
 
As can be seen in the above table, this course initially had two levels: prayog one and 
two; and each prayog was further divided into two: ordinary and special. At the ordinary 
levels no knowledge of Pali was required. However, the same course would be elevated 
to special grade when a paper on Pali translation or Pali grammar and the study of Pali 
syntax were added. The candidates from Bangkok had to go for the special course from 
the beginning but those in the provinces were allowed to sit for the ordinary prayogs. 
However, once a provincial examination centre had held the Nak Tham for three years, 
all the candidates there had to start with the special courses, meaning that they had to 
study the Dhamma in both the vernacular language and Pali.  
 
A pass in the ordinary prayog level one was sufficient for a sAmaBera in the provinces to 
be exempt from conscription, while his counterpart in Bangkok needed a special course 
at the same level. However, to receive a certificate of the Nak Tham examinations, the 
                                                 
99  Prawt karn suksa, pp.51, 56.  
100  See pp.259-260. 
 
257

=== PAGE 265 ===
student had to also pass another paper, VinayapaGGatti, a work by the Prince-Patriarch 
that explains the PAtimokkha rules. But only bhikkhu students were eligible to sit this 
paper. Therefore, the sAmaBeras who had completed both levels had to wait until they 
had received upasampadA, “higher ordination”, before they were allowed to sit the 
VinayapaGGatti. 101 This certificate of Nak Tham was called Parian tham prayog two and 
was equivalent to prayog three of the old Parian.  
 
It is worthy of notice that three terms, Parian, tham and prayog were used together here. 
The Parian also the formal examination in monastic education, had by this time come to 
be so highly regarded among Siamese monastic scholars so that any new qualification 
had to adopt the name Parian as part of its title. We have seen earlier that both the Mon 
and the Mahamakut curricula also used the term Parian. Another term, tham (dhamma), 
was frequently used by the Dhammayuttika, the reform Order, to differentiate their 
puritanical identity from the traditionalists. The word prayog had been a part of the 
Parian system, and thus carried authority in the history of Siamese monastic scholarship. 
The use of these terms indicates the Prince-Patriarch’s skilful approach in his persuasion 
of the majority of the Sangha to follow the changes he introduced.  
 
 
5.4.9 The Three-level Nak Tham 
Substantial changes were made to the Nak Tham even during its formative years. In 
1915, two years after the Nak Tham had been introduced, the students in Bangkok came 
to be required to pass both levels, prayog one and two, in the same examinations. The 
candidates in the provinces would be required to do the same in three years. This 
requirement effectively combined prayog one and two into Nak Tham tri (third level Nak 
                                                 
101  Prawatk karn suksa, pp.58-59. 
 
258

=== PAGE 266 ===
Tham), the lowest grade in the Nak Tham examination system as we have it now. In 1918 
Nak Tham tho (second level Nak Tham) was introduced and the special Nak Tham levels 
requiring the candidates to have some Pali knowledge were abandoned; for those 
desiring to attain that, the old Parian would remain there. In the meantime the Prince-
Patriarch continued to write textbooks, which we shall discuss below, for the Nak Tham 
curriculum until he died in 1921. The highest level, Nak Tham ek (first level Nak Tham), 
was introduced only after the death of the Prince-Patriarch. 
 
All the textbooks initially prescribed in the Nak Tham were written by the Prince-
Patriarch. But some of them were not organically intended for the Nak Tham and had 
been compiled long before the Nak Tham curriculum was conceived in 1911 to explain 
the problems in the Dhamma and Vinaya. These books included the famous NavakovAda 
(Nawakowart), BuddhasAsanasubhAsita (putthasAsanasuphasit), and Pali grammar; these 
were all written at Wat Makukasat during the ten years 1882-1892, before the Prince-
Patriarch had assumed any important educational and administrative role in the kingdom, 
and indeed in the Dhammayuttika. Although the books were composed to help the initial 
training of his students at Wat Makutkasat, there is no doubt that the author had the 
general problem of ecclesiastical education in Siam in mind. Collected from various Pali 
canonical sources, the books were written in the vernacular language and contained the 
Prince-Patriarch’s commentary. Before they were adopted as textbooks of the Nak Tham 
in the 1910s, these textbooks were used as part of the Mahamakut curriculum. 
 
The NavakovAda, “instruction for the newly ordained”, was initially divided into three 
parts: VinayapaGGatti, DhammavibhAga and GihipaTipatti.  The VinayapaGGatti was an 
outline of the PAtimokkha. Some of the PAtimokkha rules were abbreviated but others 
 
259

=== PAGE 267 ===
were 
expanded 
to 
make 
each 
one 
“simple 
and 
self-explanatory”.102 
The 
DhammavibhAga, “Classification of the Dhamma” was a collection of edifying sayings 
of the Buddha arranged numerically as in the Anguttara-nikAya. The GihipaTipatti, 
“Layman’s Practice”, contains likewise sayings of the Buddha for householders arranged 
numerically. Clearly the first part was to provide guidance to someone newly ordained 
on monastic training; the second to give basic knowledge of the Dhamma; and the third 
to prepare them to become good Buddhist citizens, should they return to lay life. The 
strength of the NavakovAda was, remarks Zack, “its commitment to the use of the 
vernacular language,” with its sources drawn from Pali works “from all levels of the 
traditional curriculum for Parian plus other equally respected scriptures”, providing “ a 
firm foundation in the religious principles accessible to the newcomer”.103 
 
The BuddhasAsanasubhAsita, “Buddhist proverbs”, was compiled at the request of RAma 
V in 1904 in celebration of the Prince-Patriarch’s elevation from Krommamum to 
kromlaung rank. Initially containing 249 aphorisms, the expanded and final version of 
this work had 919 proverbs, gathered from the Pali canon. It was arranged in an 
alphabetical order: aTThaka-vagga, appamAda-vagga etc. 
 
The work on Pali grammar by the Prince-Patriarch was in response to the deficiency he 
found in the study of Pali by the traditional method. Traditionally, KaccAyana’s Pali 
grammar and nAmapadamAla were taught with the DhammapadaTThakathA as an exercise 
to gain translation skills. The Prince-Patriarch saw this method as slow and 
ineffective.104 Now his work, conveniently called waiyakorn (grammar), was written in 
the Thai vernacular and arranged into topic headings covering in stages elision, nouns, 
prefixes, suffixes, verbs etc. It would allow the student to gain a rapid but thorough 
                                                 
102  Wachirayanwarorot, “Introduction” NavakovAda , p.xiv. 
103  Zack, p.194. 
104  The Life of Prince-Patriarch VajiraGABa, p.31. 
 
260

=== PAGE 268 ===
knowledge of the linguistic background of the subject. In contrast to the spoon-feeding 
technique of the old method, this new work urged the instructor to guide the student so 
that he learned how to think for himself. And instead of reciting, as in the old method, 
the student should be asked to translate Pali sentences according to the grammatical 
principles he had learnt before the teacher analysed them and corrected him. The Life of 
the Buddha (phutthapawat) was written in a way that avoided the “accounts of miracles 
[that] may have been accumulated gradually from various sources, the chief one being 
perhaps the imagination of poets, who preferred to relate the story in similes and 
exaggerated form for the sake of the beauty of language”. 105 
 
Besides those composed prior to the conception of the Nak Tham curriculum, there were 
also some textbooks specifically written for the Nak Tham curriculum. These included 
works intended to widen the knowledge of the student on the Vinaya, the lives of the 
immediate disciples of the Buddha, meditation and Abhidhamma. The Vinayamukha, 
providing the training rules outside the PAtimokkha, was mainly drawn from the 
khandhaka of the Vinaya-piTaka and its commentary. The work on the Lives of the 
Disciples (anuputthapawat), never properly collected before, emphasised for each their 
last life during which they met the Buddha, differentiating it from the legendary accounts 
of the previous lives. 
 
The work on meditation, the Essentials of Samatha (hua chai samatha kammathan) and 
VipassanA (wipassana kammathan), was partially written prior to the introduction of the 
Nak Tham curriculum and partially after it. The Samatha part extensively dealt with the 
practice of the thirteen dhutangas and how to overcome the five hindrances of mind 
(nIvaraBa), but the Prince-Patriarch dealt with vipassanA meditation very briefly in this 
                                                 
105  Wachirayanwarorot, The Life of the Buddha, p.14. 
 
261

=== PAGE 269 ===
textbook. Although himself a scholar and administrator, the Prince-Patriarch said that 
meditation practice was important to the understanding of Buddhist texts.106 The work on 
the Abhidhamma was called DhammavicAraBa (thammawicharn), “Investigation of the 
Dhamma”, and it reaffirmed the traditional understanding of the Abhidhamma as 
ultimate dhamma, non-conventional and higher teaching (paramattha-dhamma). Unique 
to the Nak Tham curriculum was a work called MaNgalavisesagAthA, the record of King 
Chulalongkorn’s meritorious deeds and achievements. Although this kind of royal praise 
was not new in Siam, this work would help present the king to the provincial Sangha as 
an ideal Buddhist king who preserved the sAsana and protected the people. Below is a 
table showing how these texts were prescribed in the three-level Nak Tham curriculum. 
 
 
5.4.10 The Three-level Nak Tham Curriculum 
            Level 
                      Curriculum 
VinayapaGGatti 
DhammavibhAga I 
GihipaTipatti 
Vinayamukha I 
BuddhasAsanasubhAsita I 
 
 
         Nak Tham Tri 
     (Third/ Preliminary Level)  
 
The Life of the Buddha 
DhammavibhAga II 
Vinayamukha II 
SangItigAthA 
 
        Nak Tham Tho 
 (Second / Intermediate level) 
BuddhasAsanasubhAsita II 
                                                 
106  Wachirayanwarorot, “Hua chai samatha kammathan (The Essentials of Samattha Meditation)” Tham 
khadi (Themes of the Dhamma), p.179.  
 
262

=== PAGE 270 ===
 
The Lives of the Disciples 
DhammavicAraBa 
Vinayamukha III 
Samatha VipassanA Kammathan 
Vinayamukha III 
BuddhasAsanasubhAsita III 
 
       Nak Tham Ek 
   (First/ Advanced Level) 
MaNgalavisesagAthA 
 
 
The Nak Tham curriculum as a whole, therefore, reflected the intellectual authority of the 
Dhammayuttika reforms: these texts provide information directly from the Sutta- and 
Vinaya-piTaka before students came to study commentaries. The Nak Tham were 
supposed to train students to become rational, for one of the papers encouraged students 
to express themselves freely (krathu tham) as they would preach to people. The emphasis 
on canonical materials was in marked contrast to the existing Parian tradition, which 
taught students the commentarial literature before introducing them to the suttas.  
 
 
5.5 Conclusion 
We have shown that throughout his involvement with the introduction of the Nak Tham 
curriculum the Prince-Patriarch emphasised two points: the standardisation of Siamese 
monastic education and the integration of the provincial Sangha. These two objectives 
were educational and political respectively; they were entwined with one another. His 
concerns were reflected in the way the provincial Nak Tham examination centres were 
treated with favour in the first three years, for fear that they would not be able to catch up 
with the progress already made in Bangkok. This special treatment was in contrast with 
 
263

=== PAGE 271 ===
the Parian system, both the old and the Mahamakut, that had shown no concern for the 
Sangha in the provinces, with its lower standard of education. Moreover, even in 
Bangkok the Mahamakut Parian system was inclined to become more and more 
confined to the Dhammayuttika as the MahAnikAya monks either did not have the 
facilities to study the Mahamakut Parian or chose to preserve the old Parian. The Nak 
Tham curriculum, however, was created to go beyond sectarian and geographical limits, 
although the Dhammayuttika monks were dominant in both the drafting and the 
implementing stages. It should be noticed that the Mahamakut Parian, on the one hand, 
was introduced in 1892 when the full-fledged integration programmes of King 
Chulalongkorn were just about to begin and at the height of the threat of colonial powers. 
The Nak Tham curriculum, on the other hand, which was conceived under King 
Chulalongkorn, was introduced under his son and successor King Vajiravudh (RAma VI) 
after national integration had been achieved.  
 
264

=== PAGE 272 ===
 
Chapter Six 
 
Idealism and Pragmatism 
Dilemmas in the Current Monastic Education Systems 
of Burma and Thailand 
 
 
 
 
In the previous five chapters we discussed how, since the seventeenth century, the 
monastic education system in Burma and Thailand has changed as a result of geopolitical 
influences: ecclesiastical education was brought under the control of the monarch. And 
formal examinations, as a mechanism to control ordination and education in the 
monasteries, were introduced and then used to standardise monastic education.  
 
In this chapter we shall argue that, given the magnitude of the changes, social, political 
or otherwise, which have taken place in Burma and Thailand since the seventeenth 
century, particularly from the mid-nineteenth century, it was inevitable that the Sangha’s 
education would be also affected. We shall then also discuss the development of 
monastic education in the latter half of the twentieth century. In doing so, we will 
examine two important issues: the lack of agreement between reformers and 
conservatives within the Sangha as to the aim of modern monastic education; and the 
impact of western secular education upon the debate between them. Finally, we shall 
summarise our observations with an analysis of actual questions and answers from the 
examination boards of the Sangha in Burma and Thailand. In this chapter we hope to 
point out that Sangha’s lack of proactive vision on education has been one of the main 
reasons contributing to the ineffective state of current monastic education in both 
countries.   
 
 
 
265

=== PAGE 273 ===
6.1 Inevitable Changes 
There are two main reasons why it would have been impossible for the Sangha to remain 
untouched by the changes taking place in both countries. First, as already noted in 
chapters Two and Four, there was a close connection between the monarchy and the 
Sangha from the time Buddhism was introduced to Burma and Thailand. The Sangha 
benefited from the king not only through material support for the upkeep of monasteries, 
particularly teaching monasteries1, but also through protection “not necessarily from 
external encroachment,” as Prince Dhaninivat remarks, “but from the monks’ own 
failings”2. The present SangharAja of Thailand writes that the Sangha not only has “no 
instrument of government which holds together all bhikkhus” but also “lack[s] authority 
to deal with certain matters”, for example, a pupil disobeying his preceptor and refusing 
“to leave the monkhood”.3 The monarch, on the other hand, saw the Sangha as the main 
source of moral legitimation for his political authority and made efforts to maintain close 
ties with influential members of the Order. As a result of this close relationship, it was 
unlikely that the Order could remain untouched by the changes affecting the monarch.  
 
Secondly, the Sangha was at the heart of society, not least because of its role as the 
provider of education to the wider society. But the society needed to modernise itself and 
thus its educational needs changed from time to time. This need for society to have a 
more sophisticated education was urgent in the second half of the nineteenth century, 
when the Burmese and Siamese kingdoms wished to acquire more sophisticated 
“weaponry, 
steamships, 
telegraphs, 
hospitals, 
smoke-billowing 
mills”4 
and 
administrative machinery. As a result, in Burma and Siam, society as a whole began to 
                                                 
1  
Phongsawadan phak thi 51 (Chronicle, Part 51), pp.18-34. 
2  
Dhaninivat, “Monarchical Protection of the Buddhist Church in Siam” Visakhapuja, 2508 (1965), p.6. 
3  
Sobhana “The Government of the Thai Sangha” Visakhapuja, 2510 (1967), p.9. 
4  
Thant Myint-U, p.113.  
 
266

=== PAGE 274 ===
require a more sophisticated general education, and that was not available in the 
monasteries.  
 
Therefore the king had to find alternatives to provide a better general education, that is, 
to send students abroad to where they could obtain such education, and to set up schools 
independent of monasteries. In Burma, in 1859, King Mindon (1853-1878) sent the first 
state scholars to St. Cyr and the École Polytechnique in France. More students, some as 
young as fifteen, were sent to Calcutta, India and Europe, mainly France and England. 
Between 1859 and 1870, Mindon sent a total of at least seventy students abroad for 
western secular education. He also encouraged the Christian missionaries to set up 
schools where western secular subjects would be taught. The first schools for laity not 
run by the Sangha were set up by Dr. John Marks, a British missionary, and Bishop 
Bigandet, a French Catholic missionary, in Mandalay.5 The king provided these 
missionaries with lands and financial assistance to build churches and schools6 where his 
sons, including Prince Thibaw, were educated. 
 
In Siam, King Chulalongkorn sent students first to the famous Raffle’s School in 
Singapore, a British colony, and then to Europe, mainly Germany and England. One of 
his sons, Prince Vajiravud, received his general education in England and later graduated 
from Christ Church, Oxford. In fact, secular schools offering western secular subjects 
had been first set up in the palace in the previous reign by King Mongkut (1851-1868). 
Mongkut was well versed in both traditional Buddhist learning and western sciences, 
which he had studied with American and French missionaries during his monkhood at 
Wat Bovonives. This secular school was expanded by Mongkut’s successor, King 
                                                 
5  
Daw Tin Sein, “The Role of the Christian Missions in the Relationship between Burma and the West- 
17-19th AD” Studies of Burmese History, p.441. 
6  
Shwe Gaing Tha, The Centenary of Mandalay, p.216. 
 
267

=== PAGE 275 ===
Chulalongkorn, in the 1890s when he introduced, as mentioned in the previous chapter, a 
secular primary education system to the whole kingdom.   
 
In fact, the monasteries had not only lacked a general system of education similar to 
western secular education, but also were reluctant to embrace one when it was offered to 
them, as would happen in the next few decades. In Lower Burma from 1866 and in 
Upper Burma from 1896, the colonial authorities made attempts to offer support to 
modernise the curriculum in the existing monastery schools.7 In 1894, the chief 
commissioner wrote in his report: “Where kyaungs (monastic schools) exist, which are 
supported by the people, and in which the instruction is efficient, it is not desirable to 
encourage the opening of lay schools. The efforts of the department should be devoted to 
improving the indigenous institutions of the district8”. However, the monasteries were, as 
Mathews notes, unprepared “to come to grips with ideological and intellectual issues 
associated with modernisation and foreign cultural presence”.9 The monasteries resisted 
introducing additional subjects, even ones such as English and arithmetic.10 So the 
attempts by the British rulers to modernise 20,000 monastery schools failed.11  
 
In Siam, too, there was similar resistance to the introduction of western secular subjects. 
We have discussed how King Chulalongkorn (RAma V) treated the introduction of 
primary education extremely carefully because most schools were situated in monasteries 
and the monks could object to the teaching of what they considered to be secular 
subjects.12 Even some of the most progressive monasteries were not always ready to 
embrace western secular education. For instance, RAma V attempted to make Wat 
                                                 
7  
Smith, Religion and Politics, p.58.  
8  
Report on Public Instruction in Burma, 1893-94, pp.9-10, cited by Smith, p.60.  
9  
Mathews, “Buddhism and the Nation in Myanmar” Buddhism and Politics, p.29. 
10  Smith, p.60. 
11  Report on the National Education in Buddhist Monasteries Inquiry Committee, 1948 cited by 
Mandelson, p.259.  
12  See, pp.243-244. 
 
268

=== PAGE 276 ===
Bovonives the centre of “relevant education in an age of progressive education”13 not 
only “for the whole kingdom of Siam” but also “for other countries”.14 The king’s vision 
of “progressive education” was planned and implemented by his brother Prince-Patriarch 
Vajirayan, who combined the study of Buddhism and the secular subjects newly 
introduced from the west. We have already mentioned that Vajirayan was educated in the 
palace secular school and later also at Wat Makutkasat, where he studied for a Pali 
degree. However, although under Prince-Patriarch Vajirayan Wat Bovonives became a 
teachers’ training college for some time, it did not become the desired centre of learning 
that promoted secular knowledge guided by Buddhist philosophy for the masses. Prince-
Patriarch Vajirayan was the only monk there who had sufficient secular knowledge of his 
time and understood the needs of the kingdom. The others at Wat Bovonives and its 
branch monasteries were initially even reluctant to support the modernization of the Pali 
curriculum introduced by the Prince-Patriarch, let alone the introduction of secular 
subjects. Therefore Vajirayan’s initiatives, such as the teachers’ training school and the 
Thai school at Wat Bovonives, soon came to an end.15  
 
Here, there was also a radical change for the monasteries in what were considered to be 
secular subjects. Secular education was earlier taken by the monks to mean sciences, 
which were not directly relevant or even considered by some to be inimical to achieving 
enlightenment. These subjects ranged from astrology, medicine, healing and carpentry, 
the skill of the blacksmith and goldsmith, and martial arts. However, by the second half 
of the nineteenth century (after the lower part of Burma had been annexed into British 
India), secular education in Burma and Siam came to mean the type of education which 
would secure those who had studied a job, a position in society, and in general the type 
                                                 
13  Prawat mahamakut ratchwithayalai nai phra bromratchupatham, p.73. 
14  Prawat karn suksa khong song, p.103. 
15  Prawat Krasuang suksathikarn, pp.217, 335; Prawat mahamakut ratchwithayalai nai phra 
bromratchu-patham, p.157. 
 
269

=== PAGE 277 ===
of education to make one a good bureaucrat. In brief, people wanted a secular education 
system like that of the West.  
 
It was therefore only a matter of time before the educational role of the Sangha would be 
taken over by the state. The introduction of formal examinations in the seventeenth 
century was but the start of a long process, which would culminate in the Sangha 
relinquishing its role as the provider of education to the wider society. 
 
 
6.2 The Sangha Left in Control 
Although initiatives to introduce formal examinations for the Sangha mostly came from 
the rulers of the land, once established the formal examination boards were, even so, kept 
under the control of the Sangha. The authority to set the curriculum, hold the 
examinations and to evaluate the performance of students and teachers was in the hands 
of leading abbots and monastic scholars, who were on the boards of various 
examinations. Even today, the curricula for the monks are taught only in the monasteries 
by monks. Usually two to three monks, selected from those actively involved in 
teaching, are assigned the task of setting questions for one paper. With their questions 
these monks also provide answers to the board of examinations. In Burma, the identity of 
those who set the questions always remains secret; the answers they provide for their 
questions are also known only to those marking the answer scripts and are not made 
public. However, in Thailand, the examination board publishes the names of those who 
set questions as well as the answers to their own questions as part of their report, which 
is available to the public.  
 
 
270

=== PAGE 278 ===
The marking takes place a month or so after the examinations have been taken. The 
markers, numbering a couple of hundred each year, get together in the headquarters of 
the examination board to evaluate the answers. In Burma, Kabha-aye, the venue of the 
Sixth Buddhist Council in 1954-1956, was the headquarters until 1998, when the military 
government decentralised the Pathamapyan examinations. Since then, the marking has 
taken place at the monastery of the head of the Sangha in every district where the 
examinations are held. In Thailand, the Nak Tham and the Parian examinations remain 
centralised, and therefore the marking is carried out in the monastery of the abbot who 
holds the chairmanship (mea kong sanam laung) of the examinations board.  In recent 
years it has been at Wat Samphraya in Bangkok. 
 
 
6.3 Failure to Improve 
Despite the fact that the control of formal examinations, and thus the monastic education 
system as a whole, has been in their hands, these members of the Sangha responsible for 
it have failed to improve the curriculum and the teaching method. The curricula in both 
countries have been inflexible, with no options for students to choose from. In Burma, 
the prescribed texts in the Pathamapyan examinations have remained more or less the 
same at least since the time of Bodawpaya (1782-1819). The change under Mindon, as 
we have discovered in Chapter Three, mainly affected only the format. These curricula 
were specialised ones and consisted only of religious texts. In Thailand, the first Parian 
curriculum introduced under King Narai of Ayutthaya in the late seventeenth century 
was in use for almost 150 years without change. The modified and expanded Parian 
curriculum that came into existence in the 1820s under RAma II (1809-1824) received a 
review only seven decades later under RAma V. As to the matter of general education, 
there was never a proper curriculum at all in the monasteries. 
 
271

=== PAGE 279 ===
As far as the teaching methods in monastic education in Burma and Siam are concerned, 
the main objective has been to transmit information from teacher to pupil, and thus the 
mnemonic tradition has formed a very important part of the Buddhist monastic learning 
process, reflecting its roots in Indian religious traditions. The mnemonic tradition, as 
Dreyfus points out through his training in the Tibetan monastic education system, is not 
necessarily flawed in itself. In fact, memorisation helps make “apparent” “deeper 
meaning” of a text and combines “scattered bits and pieces of information” “to provide 
actual knowledge”.16 Graham also comments: “memorisation is a particularly intimate 
appropriation of a text, and the capacity to quote or recite a text from memory is a 
spiritual source that is tapped automatically in an act of reflection, worship, prayer or 
moral deliberations.”17 But, as Dreyfus explains, memorisation “is only a preparation for 
the central part of the scholastic education, the interpretation of the great texts.”18  
 
In fact, the Buddha also said that a good learning process consists of five components: 
book study (pariyatti), preaching or teaching (paGGatti), applying logic (vittakka), 
memorisation or chanting (sajjhAya) and practice (dhammavihArI).19 At Ava, Burma, 
Shin MahAraTThasAra, a great poet-monk, elaborated these five components into eight. His 
eight-point educational philosophy is best known in its abbreviated Pali form as su-ci-pu-
bhA-vi-si-li-dhA. According to MahAraTThasAra, a student should use listening (suBeyya), 
thinking (cinteyya), questioning (puccheyya), preaching or speaking (bhAseyya), 
analysing (vicAreyya), practice (sikkheyya), writing (likheyya) and memorising 
(dhAreyya).20  It is clear that memorisation did not come first, but last.  
                                                
 
 
16  Dreyfus, The Sound of Two Hands Clapping, p.92. 
17  Graham, Beyond the Written Word, p.160. 
18  Dreyfus, p.98. 
19  A, iii, pp.86-89. 
20  Naing gnan daw thangha mahanayaka aphwe pariyatti simankain, pp.33-35. 
 
272

=== PAGE 280 ===
However, there is no evidence that either the Buddha’s favoured way of learning or Shin 
MahAraTThasAra’s educational philosophy has become common practice. In fact, there 
were very few attempts to balance a memorisation-based teaching method with an 
analytical one. This led people from outside the Buddhist monastic tradition to make the 
criticism that Buddhist monastic learning did not “esteem the faculties of reasoning and 
discoursing”21 but “emphasises only memory”22. In fact, in recent years the same 
concerns about this short-coming have been expressed in Burma by the leading abbots 
themselves. One of them, JanakAbhivaMsa argues that times have changed and that the 
ancient learning methods are not relevant to the present time.23 The State SaNgha 
MahAnAyaka Education Committee, the highest monastic education authority in Burma, 
too, acknowledged in 1980 that “at present only listening to the teacher and memorising 
what he has said are emphasised and that other factors should be encouraged, to develop 
analytical skills”. 24  
 
In Thailand, Payutto, in his lecture on “the Direction of the Sangha’s Education” at the 
Mahachulalongkorn Sangha University in 1988, conceded that the centuries-old Parian 
system, which is regarded as more advanced than the vernacular system of the Nak Tham 
examinations, focuses on only one aspect: “the ability to translate Pali passages in the 
examination”. “Although the prescribed texts are about the dhamma and vinaya, no 
attention is paid to the contents” and therefore, the “teaching technique” is “narrow in 
focus”.25  
 
                                                 
21  Sangermano, The Burmese Empire, p.181. 
22  Spiro, Buddhism and Society, 1982, p.361. 
23  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbhava thanthaya, p.234. For the attitude of Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa on this 
question, see also, JanakAbhivaMsa, Bhathathwe, p.76. 
24  The Pathamapyan Examinations Syllabuses and Rules and Regulations for Questions, p.4. 
25  Thepwethi, Thit thang karn suksa, p.29. 
 
273

=== PAGE 281 ===
Since their inception, the formal examinations have not encouraged essay writing, in 
which a student may think independently and express his opinion freely.  Before the 
1890s there was no use of writing in the monastic examinations in either country; all the 
questions and answers were given orally. Even after written examinations were 
introduced, the main practice remained mnemonic.  
 
Here we shall demonstrate briefly how dominant the mnemonic tradition now is, dealing 
first with the tradition in Burma. The following are short notes taken from popular 
guidebooks for students.26 They represent standardised answers in almost all 
examinations. The first four are lessons on Chapter Five, VIthimutta, of the 
AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI-TikA, and part of the pathamalat (intermediate level) in the 
Pathamapyan examinations. This guidebook has been written by IssariyAbhivaMsa, a 
leading lecturer at the Gyakhat Waing teaching monastery, Pegu, where there are more 
than one thousand residential students. Although the lessons are arranged in a question 
and answer style, they are the usual notes given in the class. The four notes appear in 
order.  
 
Q: Explain the meaning of the following passage: bhavantara paTisandhAnavasena 
uppajjamAnam’eva patiTThAti bhavantare.  
A: paTisandhi citta connects a previous life with the next one. A new life takes place as 
soon as the connecting takes place. It is not that [something] transmigrates from the 
present life to the future life. 
 
Q: “Once [a person is] dead, [his] soul travels [to the next life]”. Is this belief correct? 
Explain. 
                                                 
26  IssariyAbhivaMsa, TikAkyaw aung pan (Questions and Answers on the AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI-
TikA), pp.126-127. 
 
274

=== PAGE 282 ===
A: This belief is not correct. When a paTisandhi citta takes place in a new life, nothing 
from the previous life travels to the new life. However, without the causes, namely 
avijjA, taBhA and saNkhAra, which happened in the previous life, a new life does not 
happen. It is similar to an echo, a flame or the impression of a seal. 
 
Q: “Living beings exist because God created them”. Is this belief correct? 
A: This belief is not correct. With reference to [the Pali passage] avijjAnusaya 
parikkhittena taBhAnusayamUlakena sankhArena janIyamAnaM – pe – patiTThAti 
bhavantare, living beings exist because of kusala- and akusala-kamma, which are 
rooted in taBhAnusaya and strengthened by avijjAnusaya. 
 
Q:  Give the meaning of paTisandhi, bhavanga and cuti. 
A: PaTisandhi is so called because it connects the previous life with the next one. 
Bhavanga is so called because it is the cause of life, keeping it going on so that it 
does not stop. Cuti is the end of a present life. 
 
The following are notes usually given in classes for the Nak Tham students in Thailand.27 
Q: SaNkhAra is anatta [meaning] without any authority to command [condition] it; it 
happens through cause and effect. Then, for nibbAna, which is also anatta, how do 
you explain it? 
A: NibbAna being anatta means that it is void of being, person, owner, or authority of 
any kind. It is not subject to cause and effect, as in the sankhAra. This is because 
nibbAna is the asankhata dhamma, the dhamma which is not conditioned. 
 
                                                 
27  ÏABagambhIra, Prachum nanapanha thammawicharn chan ek (A collection of Questions and 
Answers for DhammavicAraBa, Nak Tham Ek), pp.68-69. 
 
275

=== PAGE 283 ===
Q: There is a description of the Buddha’s nibbAna as pajjotass’eva nibbAnam vimokkho 
cetaso Ahu, meaning there has been liberation of the mind, similar to the blowing-off 
of fire. Does this mean the Buddha still exists? Explain. 
A: It means that the Buddha still exists. [Even] when we cannot normally see fire, it still 
exists as an element [dhAtu]. This element is manifested in flames when other 
conditions arise. When those conditions end, the flames also cease. However, they 
continue as a fire element.   
 
Q: Explain the two important categories of nibbAna according to the Somdet Phra 
MahAsamaBa chao’s analysis.28 
A: When the defilement is eradicated, but there is still a carimakAya, that is the 
attainment of arahantship [here and now], it is called saupAdisesa nibbAna dhAtu. 
When the carimakAya ceases, it is anupAdisesa nibbAna dhAtu. This is how it has been 
explained by Somdet Phra MahAsamaBa chao. 
 
Q: Why is nibbAna not included in [the passage] sabbe sankhArA aniccA, sabbe sankhArA 
dukkhA but in sabbe dhammA anattA? 
A: Because nibbAna exists all the time and is also the highest happiness, so it is not 
included in the first two. However, nibbAna is anatta, with no self, and is one type of 
the asankhata dhamma. Therefore it is included in the last one. 
 
The Pali words used in the questions and answers are here left untranslated, to 
demonstrate how it is actually taught and explained. It can be seen how complex ideas 
are explained, leaving the main Pali terms untranslated, and therefore unlikely to be 
                                                 
28  Here Somdet Phra MahasamaBa chao is Prince-Patriarch Vajirayan, the author of most of the Nak 
Tham textbooks. 
 
276

=== PAGE 284 ===
understood clearly by students. No concept is introduced. From these answers, it is clear 
that the system enforces standardised answers.  
 
 
6.4 Inherent Nature of the Tradition 
The reasons for the lack of improvement in both the curriculum and study methods were 
the inherent nature of the Sangha’s hierarchal tradition and the lack of consensus in 
defining the aim of monastic education in relation to the society from which the Order 
recruits its members.  
 
According to the hierarchical ancient ecclesiastical tradition in both countries, the abbot 
of a monastery had an unparalleled authority, resulting from his twin roles as a teacher 
and an administrator. He taught students in his monastery, who also came under his 
jurisdiction. He was the only one in his monastery with the authority to admit candidates 
for ordination and also to expel them, either from his monastery or from the Order when 
they broke major rules. In brief, the abbot looked after the students with regard to their 
education, moral and spiritual training, and welfare and well-being. This position made 
him the most important person in the educational development of his students, who had 
in equal measure both fear of and respect for him. Students never questioned his 
authority; instead they felt a sense of gratitude throughout their lives even if they had left 
the Order. 
 
So students did not learn how to question their teacher: they learnt what he taught them. 
To give some examples from Burma, one of the few reformer-monks in Burma, 
JanakAbhivaMsa, had to get an instruction from his teacher, ÑABAbhivaMsa, also known 
as Mayung Mya Sayadaw, as to what lessons he should follow even when he was no 
 
277

=== PAGE 285 ===
longer under his teaching and was now a student at the famous MahAvisutArAma, 
Pakhokku.29 Not until he was appointed a lecturer there himself was he permitted to 
exercise his own judgement on this matter. This kind of practice was seen as an obedient 
gesture on the part of the student, and on the part of the teacher, it was considered 
important to pay minute attention to the needs of his student. This meant that as a student 
Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa never learnt to question his teacher, inside or outside the 
classroom. 
 
This unquestioning obedience was not confined to the early twentieth century, when 
Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa was a student. In fact in my days as a student, including those at 
the Sasana Mandaing Pali University at Pegu, between 1980 and1986, I rarely seldom 
came across a student asking the teacher a question. However, one day in a classroom at 
the Sasana Mandaing, a student with an inquiring mind, by the name of Shin Suriya, 
whom we have met in Chapter Two, put a question in the class to the teacher, U 
DhammAnanda, if the understanding that a paBDaka, “hermaphrodite”, had both sexes, 
i.e. a female sexual organ and a male one, was really correct. The teacher shouted at him, 
and asked him to leave if he could not accept that interpretation. Discouraged and 
embarrassed, SUriya had to keep quiet and, like all other students, never asked a question 
again.  
 
When, in the early twentieth century, the unparalleled authority of the abbot was 
transferred, first in Burma and then in Thailand, to a newly established ecclesiastical 
hierarchy, the decision of the body was not to be questioned. This highest body, initially 
called the Pathamapyan committee and then the Sangha MahAnayaka in Burma and the 
Mahathera Samakhon in Thailand, controlled both administrative and educational 
                                                 
29  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbhava thanthaya, p.154. 
 
278

=== PAGE 286 ===
matters. Members of this highest body themselves also hardly questioned the curriculum 
they had inherited. The Nak Tham examinations in Thailand, for instance, have changed 
little in their curriculum, textbooks or study method since they were introduced by 
Prince-Patriarch Vajirayan in the 1910s and 1920s.  
 
This history of the Sangha’s education has shown that it took an interested government 
and an individual reform-minded monk or monks to make a significant change. Rarely 
has the Sangha as an institution taken initiatives seriously to review or reform its 
education system. This was because the Sangha has been inherently unquestioning and 
its way of learning has been routinised. In other words, when it comes to the education 
system the Sangha as an establishment has shown no proactive vision. 
 
 
6.5 Lack of Consensus between Idealists and Pragmatists  
on the Objectives of Monastic Education 
As to the lack of consensus among monastic scholars on the definition of education, the 
argument centred on idealism versus pragmatism. The ideal life of a bhikkhu was to 
study and practise the dhamma and vinaya, “teaching and discipline”, aimed only at 
liberating himself from suffering. Part of this ideal was for a bhikkhu, when he could, to 
impart his knowledge of the dhamma and vinaya to newcomers into the Order to ensure 
the continuation of the sAsana. However, on a practical level, the life of a bhikkhu was 
interwoven with those around him. Those who joined the Order may not all have had 
liberation from suffering as their immediate aspiration. If the number of such worldly 
aspiring bhikkhus increases, it could cause an institutional problem which reflects the 
reality of the society in which the ideal bhikkhu lives. For this vital argument we shall 
again here summarise the history of the development of monastic education. 
 
279

=== PAGE 287 ===
It has long been recognised that membership of the Buddhist Order required one to be 
literate. Literacy and literature were among the visible signs of the monastic Order. 
However, this expertise in study soon attracted those in society who wished simply to be 
educated, not necessarily for the sake of any spiritual attainment. In this context, we have 
discussed how the monastery was an education centre and was at “the hub of the village” 
and so the entrance into the Order of those seeking education forced monasteries to 
include in their curriculum subjects which were not directly related to attaining nibbAna. 
As we shall see, these subjects were to be called secular subjects, (lawki phinnya in 
Burmese; wicha thang lok in Thai). The point here is that the Sangha had had to redefine 
their curriculum. The aim was now not only to educate those who wished to free 
themselves from suffering but also those who had a worldly motive.  
 
The Order managed those demands well by producing a curriculum that took account of 
the needs of both the Order and society. This curriculum essentially included lessons or 
texts on basic moral and monastic training as well as on vocational subjects known at the 
time. This type of curriculum was designed and modified by individual abbots to suit the 
needs of their students, and never adopted nationally, despite similarities in curriculum 
between monasteries. There was another type of curriculum for those who stayed in the 
monastery longer, mostly as ordained monks. This second category of curriculum, such 
as the Pathamapyan in Burma and the Parian in Siam, focused entirely on the dhamma 
and vinaya, and it was presumed that those who studied this curriculum were committed 
to serious spiritual practice and would one day become leading members of the Order 
themselves. Earlier, we described this curriculum as a specialised one. 
 
But then there came the time, in the second half of the nineteenth century, when the 
government decided to take over responsibility for providing education for its own 
 
280

=== PAGE 288 ===
citizens. Among different education programmes initiated, the most significant in 
relation to monastic education was the introduction of primary education, brought in by 
the British colonial government in Burma and by King Chulalongkorn in Siam.  
 
This development, at least in theory, relieved the Sangha of the need to provide 
education for the society at large, but it could now return to the ideal learning, the 
education in dhamma and vinaya. The aim was to help fulfil the spiritual aspirations of 
individual bhikkhus and to produce “the heirs to take care of the future of the sAsana”. 
The only thing the Sangha needed to do was extend the conduct of the examinations on 
this purely religious curriculum outside the capital. This was because until the early 
1930s they had been held only in the capital. In Burma, the Pathamapyan were held 
alternately in Mandalay and Rangoon, the old and modern capital respectively. In Siam 
(Thailand), the Parian examinations were not even extended to Ayutthaya, the old 
capital, where the Parian had first come into existence. In fact, the introduction of the 
Nak Tham examinations in the 1920s, as we discovered in Chapter Five, was partly 
aimed at expanding the use of a certain monastic curriculum at the national level. In the 
next couple of decades, all these examinations would be held also in the provinces, 
mainly in the bigger towns and cities. This expansion on the part of the Sangha went 
hand in hand with government school programmes, which by now had also begun to 
provide secondary education for the population at large. 
 
However, in both countries the government education programmes still failed to offer 
equal opportunity in education to the people, particularly those in rural areas, where the 
majority lived. For them, education within their reach existed only in their village 
monasteries. So the people continued to send their children, mostly boys, to the 
monastery for education. The monasteries in rural areas had not changed even several 
 
281

=== PAGE 289 ===
decades after the state had taken over responsibility for education. The majority of them 
had never ever taught the curriculum for monastic examinations now widely held in the 
cities. Nor had they yet abandoned their own combined religious-secular curriculum. 
But, as before, their curriculum was too basic, independent and disorganised to be 
accepted by the ecclesiastical education authorities. 
 
Consequently, people from rural areas sent their children to monasteries in towns if they 
could afford to do so. The children were accepted on condition that they were ordained in 
the monastery. Those who were bright enough were subsequently sent by their abbot to a 
teaching monastery in a bigger town, or even to the capital. But, as many found their way 
to the capital in search of better education,30 the monasteries in the capital could no 
longer accommodate every student that came. These famous teaching monasteries 
therefore had to introduce very strict rules for admission. 
 
At the same time the government, recognising its inability to extend universal education 
to all, asked the monasteries to adopt a secular curriculum and accept some non-
residential students in their monasteries to help those who would otherwise be denied the 
opportunity of education. This was why, as mentioned earlier, the British colonial 
officials attempted to persuade the monasteries in Burma to include secular subjects. 
Even after the rejection by the monasteries, as already explained, the colonial rulers 
continued with their attempts at persuasion. In 1939, the Pathamapyan Review 
Committee appointed by the governor, consisting of the influential Pakokku Sayadaws 
and the deputy head of the Shwegyin-nikAya, the AbhayArama Sayadaw of Mandalay, 
                                                 
30  For detail on this point in Thailand, see Palanee Thitiwatana, Kankhlu’anthi khong song (The Mobility 
within the Sangha). In this MA dissertation at Chulalongkorn University, the author traced the origin 
of 2,015 student-monks at the Mahachulalongkorn University, Bangkok between 1963 and 1972 and 
found nearly all the students were from a rural background. Tambiah also mentions that 85.37 % of 
35,550,105 total population of Thailand in 1970 live in rural areas and that the north-eastern region 
where the availability of secular education is behind the other regions is “the powerhouse of the 
country’s sangha”. Tambiah, World Conqueror, pp.270-273. 
 
282

=== PAGE 290 ===
suggested that novices should be taught arithmetic before they studied the TipiTaka.31 
This suggestion was supposed to set a precedent for certain further secular subjects in the 
near future. Many prominent sayadaws were in favour of the proposal. Unfortunately, 
when World War II intervened, the whole process had to be abandoned. 
 
Soon after independence in 1948, Prime Minister U Nu gave some grants to monasteries 
to encourage them to open primary schools, which came to be known as ba. ka in brief or 
monastery schools. U Nu intended to open up to five thousand of such school.32 Some of 
those monasteries that did open primary schools were later upgraded to secondary level. 
These schools accepted both boys and girls. Almost all the teachers were monks. Even 
some teaching monasteries in big cities, especially those in deprived parts of town, were 
requested to open primary schools. The teaching monastery where I was educated and 
taught, the Sasana Mandaing Pali University, in Pegu, was one such monastery. Only 
fifty miles from Rangoon, the capital, Pegu had been a city with good education since the 
time of the British. However, as the city expanded, with many poor people coming in 
seeking employment, the government could not provide education for all. Therefore 
monasteries in the outer parts of the town, such as the Sasana Mandaing, were asked to 
provide education for the people in the vicinity. However, the success was very minimal. 
 
However, the military government that toppled U Nu in March 1962 suspended this 
programme about two years after they came to power. Although no official reasons were 
given, it was at the time believed that General Ne Win, the coup leader, wanted to get rid 
of as many of his predecessor’s programmes as possible. Critics pointed out that Ne Win 
also abolished, almost at the same time, the Pali University system and the Sasana 
University, both of which were the brainchildren of U Nu. But the current military 
                                                 
31  JanakAbhivaMsa, Tatbahva thanthaya, p.377. 
32  Phongyi kyaung pyinnya thinkyaryay mawgun, pp.28-29. 
 
283

=== PAGE 291 ===
government, which came to power in a bloody coup in 1988, has overturned Ne Win’s 
ruling and asked the Sangha to open monastery schools for lay students. So far, only a 
handful of individual monasteries, not the Sangha as an institution, has responded to the 
request. Phaungdaw-Oo monastery high school in Mandalay is one of a few such 
monasteries. 
 
In Thailand, in 1940, the government created special schools (rong rien wisaman) to 
educate monks in secular subjects.33 There were in addition to the existing traditional 
monastic courses, Parian and Nak Tham. The aim was to provide education for the 
monks that was “relevant to the modern age”. The ecclesiastical cabinet, created by the 
government through the amended Sangha Act of 1940, was the official organ through 
which these schools were set up. The introduction of special schools was popular with 
young monks. However, when the 1940 Sangha Act was replaced in 1961 and, therefore, 
the Sangha cabinet no longer existed, the Mahathera Samakhom moved to abolish those 
special schools for monks.34  
 
However, some young monks and novices took their own initiative by attending classes 
at evening schools run by the Department of Adult Education. They studied a secular 
curriculum in the same classes as lay students, including girls. The number of these 
monks is not known because the Department of Religious Affairs did not participate in 
that programme, and at the Department of Adult Education they were simply registered 
as students, not monks. The decision of the young monks to find every possible way to 
educate themselves shocked the senior monks, starting with the Council of Elders. 
Furthermore, for the monks who had taken a vow of celibacy to study in the same 
                                                 
33  Prawat karn suksa, p.142 
34  Ibid, p.143. 
 
284

=== PAGE 292 ===
classroom as “villagers (chao barn)”, including girls, was considered socially 
unacceptable.  
 
As a result, in May 7, 1963, the chairman of the Parian Examinations Board, Somdetch 
BuddhaghosacArya (Pheun Cutindharo), set up a committee to reform the curriculum to 
accord with the vision of the state. The reform resulted in 1967 in a new form of 
curriculum that combined secular subjects with those existing subjects in the traditional 
monastic curriculum. The system started functioning in 1970 and has since become 
popular at the expense of the traditional Parian Tham and Nak Tham examinations. 
Secular subjects are emphasised because the government is concerned that when monks 
leave the order, which many do in Thailand, they will not be equipped with “necessary 
knowledge to become valuable human resources to lay society”.35 In fact, the aim of the 
study was no longer to understand the words of the Buddha and to end suffering alone, 
but to help develop the nation and society. 
 
However, in Thailand, despite the introduction of some form of general education at the 
primary and secondary levels at the government’s encouragement, the conservative 
members of the Sangha continued to resist the change and thus prompted a debate with 
those who wished to modernise monastic curricula. 
 
This resistance arose partly because the combined religious-secular curriculum now 
demanded was more complicated and largely unprecedented in the history of monastic 
education. The education programmes of the government had raised not only the 
standard of general education but also public expectation as to what a curriculum should 
consist of. This was totally different from the kind of general education the monasteries 
                                                 
35  Ibid, p.142.  
 
285

=== PAGE 293 ===
had provided up to a century or so earlier. After all, the primary education being thrust 
upon the Sangha at this time was based on the model of western education, in which the 
Sangha had no expertise.  
 
The main reason for resistance offered by the conservative members of the Sangha was, 
however, that the study of the secular subjects which the governments wished to 
prescribe for monastery schools was not appropriate for monks, and could even be 
considered as “animal science”, tiracchAnavijjA/kathA. The rejection by the leading 
monks of those secular subjects, particularly English and mathematics, appears to have 
been made on a doctrinal basis; in reality, however, only subjects designed to torture 
people are called “animal science”, regardless of the language in which they are taught.36 
It is doubtful if the debate over “animal science” was ever conducted in the light of the 
canonical scriptures. The main objection seems to have been the study of the English 
language,37 although arithmetic has always been mentioned together with it in the debate. 
Before the British colonisation of the whole of Burma in 1885, a debate of such a kind 
on the study of languages, European or Indian, had been unknown in either country. 
 
In Burma, it could be argued that the Sangha’s designation of some subjects, particularly 
English and mathematics, as “animal science” stemmed from the British presence in 
Burma. We have discussed in Chapter Two how the Sangha became nationalist in the 
periods leading up to the British occupation. The Burmese monastic Order saw the native 
kings as the protectors of the faith and the British as the destroyers.38 As occupiers, the 
                                                 
36  For more on “animal science” see D i. 9; Vin i. 73;  
37  SIlAnanda, Biography of Sayadaw Ashin Thitthila, p.51. JanakabhivaMsa, PAtimok bhAthATIkA, p.439. 
38  The destruction, soon after the occupation of Mandalay, of the royal monastery Atumashi Kyaung-taw 
where the British army was stationed was often cited an obvious example. Lord Dufferin, the British 
governor of India in his meeting with the sayadaws in Mandalay in 1886 denied that the British had 
the intention to destroy the SAsana as was rumoured among the people. The denial was among the six 
points he made during the meeting designed to reassure the Order. Shwe Gaing Tha, The Centenary of 
Mandalay, pp.279-80. 
 
286

=== PAGE 294 ===
British adopted a policy of so-called neutrality towards religion,39 refusing at the outset 
the traditional protection afforded by a Buddhist ruler,40 and ended all support for the 
Order. (They had done the same in Ceylon.41) Under the British, the judicial power of the 
thathanabaing was taken away.42 This was, indeed, a fundamental change for the Order, 
and came as a blow to its influence over society, especially in education. The lack of 
material and moral support from the state caused the monastic educational institutions to 
decline, and Mandalay saw a considerable number of teacher-monks leaving the capital 
for other places within a few years of its fall.43 
 
On the issue of designating arithmetic as animal science, JanakAbhivaMsa reasoned that 
one could not study SaNkhyAvAra, the “chapter on numbers” in the PaTThAna, without 
some mathematical skill; the Vuttodaya, a part of the pathamagyi syllabus, also requires 
a good knowledge of arithmetic in the last chapter; the ancient vinayadhara sayadaws, 
“the experts on the Vinaya” themselves, he pointed out, taught arithmetic.44 However, 
none of the sayadaws, at that time suggested the incorporation of English in the 
pathamapyan syllabuses; and, this was understandable, given the strong sentiment of 
nationalism among the people and the Sangha in opposition to the British at that time. 
 
In Thailand, although never colonised by any European power, there was the same 
debate on this issue. We do not know how it all began; but we learn that two of the most 
important figures in the history of Thai Sangha education in the early twentieth century, 
Somdej Khemacari of Wat Mahadhatu (MahA-nikAya) and Somdej Nyanavaro of Wat 
Thep (Dhammayuttika-nikAya), did not allow their students to study English on the 
                                                 
39  Smith, Religion and Politics, pp.38-9,45. 
40  Bischoff, Buddhism in Myanmar, p.58. 
41  Malalgoda, “Buddhism in Post-Independence Sri Lanka” Religion in South Asia, pp.183-4. 
42  Hall, A History of Southeast Asia, p.623. 
43  SAsanAbhivaMsa, The Centenary of the Pariyatti SAsanahita Association of Mandalay, p.14.  
44  JanakAbhivaMsa, PAtimok bhAthATikA, p.439; AnAgat thAthanayay, p.371; BhAthAthwe, pp.82-8. 
 
287

=== PAGE 295 ===
grounds that it was “animal science”; ironically, both were pupils of the English 
speaking Prince-Patriarch Vajirayan.45 
 
When the British left Burma in January, 1948, the anti-British (English) feeling that had 
clouded the debate started to subside. As it also became clear that there was no doctrinal 
conflict in studying English and mathematics, the conservatives then gave a different 
reason. This was that after they had studied English and mathematics, educated young 
monks changed their minds and left the monkhood, which therefore brought a great loss 
to the sAsana. This reasoning caused tremendous anxiety among lay supporters, who 
feared that young monks were now likely to be attracted by the good prospects for 
employment in the lay life.46 In the early 1930s, Ashin Thittila (SeTThila), the translator of 
the Book of Analysis (DhammasaNgaBI)47, was asked by his benefactor in Mandalay 
never to come to his house for alms again because he had heard that Ashin Thittila was 
studying English. For a monk to study English was seen as corrupt and having an ignoble 
aim. This perception was directed even to a dedicated monk, like Ashin Thittila, with 
two degrees, the pathamakyaw48 and the SakyasIha dhammAcariya, and already a lecturer 
at the famous Phayagyi teaching monastery at that time. 
 
But there were also some leading sayadaws who tried to put the issue in perspective to 
allay the fears of the Sangha and the people. One such sayadaw was JanakAbhivaMsa. 
Due to the lack of written records by others on the debate, we shall be referring to much 
of his work here. In one of his famous works aimed at educating lay people, Bhathatwe, 
“The Essence of the Religion”, JanakAbhivaMsa blamed “the lack of a good foundation 
in monastic discipline”, not the study of English, as a factor contributing to the 
                                                 
45  Sivarak, Sarm Somdejs (Three Somdets), p.3. 
46  JanakAbhivaMsa, BhAthA-thwe, pp.139-40; Tatbhava thanthaya, p.256. 
47  Published by the Pali Text Society in 1969 and reprinted in 1988. 
48  Pathamakyaw was considered a degree at that time because the government board of examination for 
the DammAcariya had not been set up. 
 
288

=== PAGE 296 ===
abandonment of the monkhood: if a monk had been well trained in the Vinaya and lived 
under his teacher, he would not leave the monkhood. He argued that the first six 
generations of leading Sayadaws from the Shwegyin-nikAya, including its founder JAgara 
and his successor, Visuddhayon Sayadaw, had studied English; many of them were also 
well versed in Sanskrit and Hindi, and with the help gained from it, they had written 
books on Pali grammar useful to understanding the TipiTaka. 49 If these secular subjects 
were not taught, people would not bring their children to the monasteries any more but 
take them to the Christian convents where they could study these subjects. If those 
educated at convent schools became leaders of the country, they would have little contact 
with or respect for the Sangha.50  He held responsible “for a drop in the number of 
students in monastery schools the attitude of some sayas (sayadaws) that arithmetic and 
English are not appropriate (for a monk) to learn”.51 He said that “arts and science 
subjects that are not prohibited by the Vinaya should be taught (to lay people) by monks 
free of charge. So the monks should make efforts (to study) so that they could teach.”52  
 
In Thailand some forty years later a similar argument was made by one of the leading 
scholar-monks in the twentieth century, Prayud Payutto. In his lecture at the 
Mahachulalongkorn Sangha University in 1984, he said that the Sangha had a 
responsibility towards individual students and the state. Individual students wished to be 
educated and had turned to the Order for help. The quest for good education through the 
Order by certain sections of society was a good opportunity for the Order to instil 
Buddhist values in those students and to propagate the dhamma. The Sangha also had a 
responsibility to assist the state in producing good citizens, because the Sangha as an 
institution could not exist by itself without the support of the state. Eminent educationists 
                                                 
49  JanakAbhivaMsa, BhAthA-thwe, pp.85-8. 
50  Ibid, pp.123, 137-8. 
51  JanakAbhivaMsa, PAtimok bhAthATikA, p.439. 
52  JanakAbhivaMsa, Yok pum shin kyint woot, p.195. 
 
289

=== PAGE 297 ===
such as Vajirayan, Payutto and JanakabhivaMsa all believed that the Sangha’s education 
should be for the sAsana, society and state. 
 
Against the point that educated monks left the Order once they had received a good 
secular education, Phra Payutto argues that taking away an opportunity for monks to 
study secular subjects was not a guarantee of their not leaving the Order. On the 
contrary, among the educated monks who had left the Order, the overwhelming majority 
were trained in a purely religious curriculum and had no knowledge of secular subjects. 
That could be disadvantageous to a monk who left the Order highly educated in religious 
scriptures and yet totally ignorant of any secular subject. He would be lost, unable to 
integrate into the secular life. This would degrade monastic education, and thus the 
Order, in the eyes of society.  
 
However, there was no way that the Order could prevent its members from leaving if 
individual members chose to do so. The Sangha is an organisation of volunteers, which 
upholds the freedom of individuals to join or to leave. Instead of wasting effort in trying 
to prevent the unpreventable, the Order, Payutto says, should concentrate on ways to 
provide education that would benefit both those who decided to stay in the Order and 
those who wished to leave. If the Order could help move its former members up the 
social ladder, not only would that help individual members, it would also bring esteem to 
monastic education from those who were in contact with those individuals. Not only 
would these individuals become better citizens, but the Order could also count on them 
to spread through the society in which they lived the knowledge of the Dhamma and 
Vinaya they had acquired as a monk. 
 
 
 
290

=== PAGE 298 ===
6.6 A Mission or a Pretext? 
Meanwhile the debate to win the hearts and minds of the people was also going on. The 
modernizers sought to address the lay devotees in order to allay their concerns that if 
they studied secular subjects more monks might be tempted to leave the Order. Providing 
monks with both secular and religious knowledge, the reform-minded monks claimed, 
was essential for the promotion of Buddhism in the modern age, especially in the western 
world. The reformers in Burma found a sympathetic audience in the government and 
educated Buddhist people, who considered the notion of sending Buddhist missionaries 
abroad, particularly to western nations who had once ruled the whole world, as a matter 
of national pride. In Burma, the result was the setting up of a Sangha university, 
officially called the World Buddhist University at the Kabha-Aye, Rangoon, where the 
Sixth Buddhist Council was held between 1954 and1956. Indeed, the founding of the 
university was one of the many objectives of that Council.  
 
Mendelson, who visited the new Sangha university to hear formal speeches, “was struck 
by the emphasis upon missionary efforts in the English-speaking world”.53 “The burden 
of virtually all the speeches was the need for learning English as a universal language 
and as the key to understanding the people missionaries would work among”.54 Even 
JanakAbhivaMsa in his argument for setting up two modern universities for the Sangha, 
one in Mandalay and the other in Rangoon, saw their main purpose as producing 
missionary monks.55 Any purpose other than producing missionaries would not have 
won from the outset the support of the people, or even the modernisers, such as 
JanakAbhivaMsa. 
 
                                                 
53  Mendelson, p.304. 
54  Ibid. 
55  JanakAbhivaMsa, Anagat thathana yay, pp.373-374. 
 
291

=== PAGE 299 ===
The founding of the university was not in the end successful, not necessarily because Ne 
Win was determined to abolish it but rather because the Sangha was not ready for 
education that combined both western and Burmese traditions. There were only eleven 
students from Burma, and the Sangha was not able to participate in building up this new 
University or in running the administrative and academic business. However, the 
university was able to inspire some of its students to seek further education, to redress 
the shortcomings of their own monastic education system. But only one batch of students 
graduated from this university before it was closed by Ne Win.  
 
In Thailand, the Sangha universities, Mahachulalongkorn and Mahamakut, also initially 
focussed only on producing missionary monks rather than enhancing academic 
disciplines for their own sake. This was essential to win over the hearts and minds of the 
prospective benefactors and ultimately the powerful conservative members of the 
Council of Elders. We explained in Chapter Five that these two universities were 
founded under King Chulalongkorn. But they continued for half a century as no more 
than big teaching monasteries with the traditional curriculum of the Parian. In 1947, 
however, they decided to modernise their curriculum in line with those of western 
universities. This meant that not only the format but also the subjects were to be adapted 
to the practice in the state universities.  
 
However, this move to bring in secular subjects and new administrative machinery, 
unlike in Burma, had no backing from the government or from the highest ecclesiastical 
administrative body, the Council of Elders. It was rather the two biggest monasteries, 
Wat Mahathat and Wat Bovonives, with a traditionally close relationship with the 
monarchy, that took the initiative to modernise. Ironically, the abbots of the two 
monasteries were also members of the Council of Elders.  
 
292

=== PAGE 300 ===
These two monastic universities have produced many graduates over the years without 
the recognition of the secular and ecclesiastical authorities. When the now most famous 
alumnus, Payutto, graduated in 1956, his degree was recognised neither by any of the 
state universities nor by the Council of Elders. Only in 1969 did the Council of Elders 
recognise the two universities. But the government, for its part, took no measure to 
support this ecclesiastical decision. So in 1973 the Council of Elders passed a motion 
saying that if the government were to recognise the two Sangha universities, that would 
indeed be an appropriate action. However, it was not until more than a decade later, in 
1984, that the government officially recognised the two universities; and, according to 
this 1984 Education Act, the government recognised only the First Degrees and not the 
two universities as institutions. Here we can see that the government itself sent out 
contradictory messages. Although it wanted the Sangha to help shoulder the 
responsibility of educating the underprivileged, it failed to give adequate support to the 
members of the Sangha willing to do so. 56 
 
In Thailand, Payutto has summarised this problem facing the education of the Sangha. 
He said that if the government and the leaders of the Sangha failed to give appropriate 
support, the Sangha would not be able to lead the people in instilling Buddhist values 
into the nation. He cited examples of how the Sangha could not teach Buddhism and Pali 
at state universities because their qualifications were not recognised and argued that the 
higher institutions of the Sangha themselves faced many obstacles in producing qualified 
teachers. He pointed out how universities in non-Buddhist countries have produced 
competent Buddhist scholars and how Buddhist countries themselves could not do the 
same. This comparison came after Payutto visited in the late 1970s some top American 
                                                 
56  Thepwethi, Thit thang karn suksa, pp.16-17, 21-24.  
 
293

=== PAGE 301 ===
universities, such as Harvard and Princeton University, where there has been a long 
tradition of Buddhist studies.57 
 
In Burma, where the debate between monastic scholars on the definition of education 
was quiet for almost two decades, there was a sudden movement in 1980 towards 
providing the Sangha with secular education with an “up-to-date method of study”. 
There were two political reasons for this move. First, General Ne Win, who had been in 
power since 1962, retired from the post of president, although he retained the post of 
chairman in the only party, the Burma Programme Socialist Party (BPSP). This meant he 
would no longer run the country on a day-to-day basis. Another reason was the 
government’s drive to win over the Sangha to support the controversial “purification 
programme”, thathana thant shinn yay, launched in December 1979. 
 
Seizing the moment, Ashin VicittasArAbhivaMsa, the first monk to have been successful 
in the TipiTakadhara examinations,58 who had worked closely with former Prime Minister 
U Nu, took the initiative to set up Sangha universities. The government represented his 
effort as part of their “purification programmes”. But the government did not directly 
finance the project, but left that burden to the voluntary donations of the followers of 
Ashin VicittasArAbhivamsa. The two universities, one in Rangoon and the other in 
Mandalay, focused on the same theme: to send missionary monks abroad. The courses 
would be available in five major languages of the world: English, French, German, 
Japanese and Chinese. In reality, however, there has been only one medium available, 
Burmese; and elementary English is taught for the first few years only three hours per 
week by a visiting lecturer from the Institute of Technology. 
 
                                                 
57  Ibid, p.23. 
58  See pp.155-156. 
 
294

=== PAGE 302 ===
The setting up of the universities was very popular with the public, not only because it 
recaptured the spirit of the newly liberated Burma i.e. to send Buddhist missionaries to 
the English speaking world, but because of the calibre of the leading monk, 
VicittasArAbhivaMsa, who had come first in all the then newly introduced examinations 
boards such as the SakyasIha and the TipiTakadhara. Since then, two more Sangha 
universities have been established, one by one of the graduates from the now defunct 
World Buddhist University, ÑABissara. He led the foundation of a Sangha university at 
Sagaing in Upper Burma. For this project, he receives solid moral support from the 
leading sayadaws of the Shwegyin-nikAya, to which he belongs, and generous financial 
support from wealthy donors, who are attracted to his status as the best preacher in the 
country. ÑABissara continues to build on the earlier appeal of producing missionaries to 
go abroad. The name selected for this new Sangha university, SitagU International 
Buddhist Academy, reflects the view of the lay benefactors and the conservative 
members of the Sangha as to why a bhikkhu may legitimately learn English and other 
secular subjects. SitagU is also named after some major social welfare projects ÑABissara 
has led over the years, for instance, a water scheme for all monasteries and nunneries in 
Sagaing; an eye  hospital, the best in the country, for the Sangha and the people; and a 
rice project for the monks and nuns of Mandalay, Sagaing and Mingun Hills. 
 
The other Sangha university was founded by the present military government with the 
aim of sending Theravada missionaries abroad. The name of this latter university, 
Theravada International Missionary University, shows why the government thinks that 
the monks should study English. Indeed, the very reason the military set up this Buddhist 
University in December 1999 was, according to them, because the existing Sangha 
universities lacked the capacity to teach in the English medium and it was the noble 
intention of the government to address that shortcoming. It may surprise many scholars 
 
295

=== PAGE 303 ===
inside and outside the country to learn that General Khin Nyunt, the chief of the Military 
Intelligence Service and the newly appointed Prime Minister, is the chairman of the 
Academic Committee at this University. Although the current military government 
claims to have made this university a modern higher institution of study for the Sangha 
university with the medium of instruction in English, there has been a shortage of 
English speaking academic staff. This is not surprising, given the fact that the teacher-
monks have received their principal training in the Pathamapyan and DhammAcariya 
systems, which provide no teaching of English or any other European or Asian 
languages. 
 
296

=== PAGE 304 ===
 
Concluding Reflections 
 
 
 
 
We have now given a brief but general picture of monastic education since the 
seventeenth century in Burma and Thailand. We have attempted to demonstrate two 
factors influencing the current state of monastic education in Burma and Thailand. First, 
some of the existing aspects in monastic education, such as the formal examinations and 
the standardisation of monastic education systems and their promotions, are the product 
of historical developments. As discussed in four chapters, Two, Three, Four and Five, 
these developments cover roughly three hundred years, from the seventeenth to 
nineteenth century.  
 
The kings, namely Thalun (1629-1648) and Bodawpaya (1782-1819) at Ava and King 
Narai (1656-1688) at Ayutthaya, introduced and imposed a method of assessment on the 
monasteries. Despite the royal claims that the measures were taken solely as a response 
to the decline in learning and discipline in the Order, this thesis has argued that there was 
a more complex issue involved. The king’s military ambition, his consequent need to 
conscript as many able-bodied men as possible and, in some cases, also the perceived or 
otherwise threat from the monks in succession problems led to the need for the king to 
control the Sangha for his own political aims. The formal examinations were indeed 
introduced to serve those ends. When assessing the monks and the novices, the kings 
followed in the design of syllabuses the monastic ideal, that is to test the monks and 
novices exclusively on the dhamma and vinaya, although no record is left as to the exact 
texts on which the tests were carried out. This exclusive focus on the dhamma and 
vinaya was in contrast with the educational practice current in the monasteries at the 
time. The monasteries had two different types of syllabuses, focussing in the early years 
 
297

=== PAGE 305 ===
on the dhamma and vinaya as well as secular subjects to serve the aims of both the Order 
and that of lay society.  
 
The Sangha, for its part, resisted the introduction and use of formal examinations as a 
means to test the knowledge of the monks and novices, a fact that has never been 
highlighted before in either native chronicles or modern academic works. But this 
resistance disintegrated as early as during the reign of RAma III (1824-1851) in Thailand, 
or rather Siam, and that of Mindon (1853-1878) in Burma. The leading monks now came 
to regard the formal examinations, the Parian in Thailand, and the Pathamapyan in 
Burma, as a means to preserve the Buddha-sAsana. The interest of the Sangha in formal 
examinations intensified in Siam under King Chulalongkorn when the national 
integration programmes were carried out and in Burma in the early decades of British 
rule when the Sangha increasingly perceived an alien rule as threatening to the Buddhist 
religion and the Burmese identity. 
 
The second factor which has contributed to the unsatisfactory state of present monastic 
education is the Sangha’s failure to manage its own education. As we have discussed in  
Chapter Six, there has never been a systematic attempt on the part of the Sangha as a 
whole to develop a strategy to maintain its freedom and to adapt to the changing world. 
Although there have been individual educationist-monks over the years in both countries, 
the Sangha as an institution lacks a proactive vision in education management. While 
leading individual members of the Order continue to debate on whether to follow 
monastic idealism or pragmatism in designing the syllabuses, the motives of students 
entering the existing various examinations, which are based exclusively on monastic 
idealist, have ironically become secularised.  
 
 
298

=== PAGE 306 ===
Today, as the two prominent educationist monks, JanakAbhivaMsa of Burma and Payutto 
of Thailand, have found, the present state of the Sangha’s education is far from being 
satisfactory.1 Regarding this current state of monastic education in the two countries, we 
would like to undertake some remarks. Some of these remarks are concerned with the 
curriculum, while others deal with culture and attitude. 
  
By and large the curricula in both Burma and Thailand are based on textual study. One of 
the problems common to both countries regarding textual study in recent years has been 
a lack of clarity in language teaching. Study of the languages of the primary sources, 
namely Pali, Burmese and Thai, has not been carried out in the context of reading the 
contents of the text, but rather a pure exercise in itself. In Burma, the study of Pali has 
not received adequate attention in recent years.2 The curriculum of the Pathamapyan has 
one paper of translation from Pali to Burmese and vice versa. A certain text, for instance, 
the JAtaka, is prescribed. However, no practice in Pali composition is required of the 
students by the curriculum. This is because earlier it was a tradition for most of the 
monasteries to teach Pali composition to their students. At present, however, the 
monasteries have to struggle to complete the curriculum and teach little outside it. Even 
if Pali composition is required, as Myint Swe, a lecturer in Sanskrit at Mandalay 
University, pointed out, this requirement itself would indicate that even at the 
pathamagyi (the Advanced Level) students still had to practise Pali composition, which 
they should have mastered at the pathamange level. U Myint Swe also criticised the 
teachers who teach a student basic Abhidhamma by using the Pali version of the 
AbhidhammatthasaNgaha before the student has studied Pali sufficiently. Yet this is how 
                                                 
1  
JanakAbhivaMsa, “Nan net khin ovada mya”, pp.23-24; Naing gnan daw thangha mahanayaka aphwe 
pariyatti simankain, p.6; Thepwethi, Thit thang karn suksa, p.9. 
2  
Naing gnan daw thangha mahanayaka aphwe pariyatti simankein, p.6. 
 
299

=== PAGE 307 ===
most of the teaching is done, because the monasteries are under a lot of pressure to 
complete the curriculum.3 
 
The curricula in none of the monastic examination boards in Burma offer any subject of 
general knowledge. As pointed out, this is an on-going debate on the stigma of studying 
what were once considered to be secular subjects. But not studying the so-called secular 
subjects has done more harm than good to the monks. For instance, monks who have 
studied a curriculum offering general knowledge before being ordained are more capable 
of explaining the dhamma to the people, particularly the younger generation and 
educated people. Three monks from Burma can be taken as examples here. They are U 
Jotika, also known as Maha Myaing Sayadaw; U Uttama, better known by his pen-name 
as U San Lwin; and Ashin SandAdhika or Shwe Parami Sayadaw. These three monks are 
now not only some of the best known preachers but also the only ones who can convince 
the people of the dhamma through their writing.  
 
Jotika, now 59, came from a liberal Muslim family. He went to a convent school and 
became an engineer. After converting to Buddhism, he became a bhikkhu, studying Pali 
and the Pali NikAya under a prominent teacher, U SilAnandAbhivaMsa, in Mandalay. His 
meditation training was under the late Taung Pulu Sayadaw, a friend of another reputed 
meditation teacher, Mahasi Sayadaw. Uttama, who died last year at 70, coincidentally 
also came from a liberal Muslim family and went to a Catholic school, before becoming 
a lecturer in philosophy at Rangoon University. He became known for his work on 
comparative religions under the title One Who Has Come to take the Three Refuges, 
(Yatana thone pa ko koe kwe la thu ta yauk I akyaung). Such a work could not be 
produced by a scholar monk who has gone through only the normal training offered by 
                                                 
3  
Myint Swe, Pali pyatthana (The Problem of Pali Study), pp.23-31. 
 
300

=== PAGE 308 ===
the many examination boards. The Bible, the Koran, the BhagavadgItA and the 
Upanishads are considered unsuitable subjects for monks to read, and we have never 
seen them in our library. However, these two monks, Jotika and Uttama, had the 
opportunity to study those religious texts, as well as subjects they were interested in, 
namely philosophy and psychology, before they were ordained. 
 
SandAdhika, still only 36, has not studied these non-Buddhist religious texts like the 
above two, but studied normal subjects such as mathematics, English, history, science 
and Burmese at government schools until he was 18. He came first in the whole country 
at Burma’s Advanced Level examinations in 1986. Instead of proceeding to medical 
school, he decided to become a monk and studied the curriculum of the Pathamapyan 
and DhammAcariya examinations at the Mahagandhayon Monastery, Amarapura. With 
only one DhammAcariya degree, which is not much compared with most of his 
contemporaries, he has become one of the most popular writers on Buddhism in Burma 
today. He is able to understand people’s daily problems and speaks to them directly. The 
most striking feature of the writing of these three monks is that their approach is, unlike 
those who have not studied any “secular subjects”, not exclusively textual. 
 
In Thailand, as it is now, the curriculum of the Parian and that of the Nak Tham do not 
complement each other well. It seems students are made to regard the study of contents 
as less important than Pali as a language or than textual study, if the Parian can actually 
be so described. We have seen in Chapter Five that the Nak Tham textbooks, arranged in 
questions and answers, are based on content, even though the students are not 
encouraged to explore. The students have to pass the Nak Tham first in order to enter for 
the Parian (now called Parian Tham), thus making the Nak Tham the foundation course. 
However, at the Parian levels one has to concentrate only on the linguistic aspect of the 
 
301

=== PAGE 309 ===
prescribed texts, not the content. The teachers have focussed in their teaching on the 
narrow scope defined by the examination papers, and not what is needed to be a 
competent student in the dhamma and vinaya. Many of the topics in the Nak Tham 
curriculum are derived from the Pali nikAyas, and the student will benefit more if he has 
some knowledge of Pali and therefore has access to the original suttas in Pali. 
 
The problem then would be that at a young age, which most of the Nak Tham students 
are, it may not be interesting for them to study a dead language such as Pali, let alone to 
master it. This is the very reason why the vernacular Nak Tham was introduced in the 
first place. However, times have changed. Unlike in the 1910s, when the Nak Tham were 
created, now a complete Thai translation of the TipiTaka also exists and could be made 
available to the Nak Tham students. 
 
Another shortcoming of the curricula is that they prescribe too many texts. This is true 
also of the curricula from major examination boards in Burma such as the Pathamapyan, 
the DhammAcariya, the SakyasIha, the Cetiyangana and the TipiTakadhara; and in 
Thailand the Nak Tham, the Sai Saman Suksa and the Sangha university syllabuses. It is 
not possible for average students to complete the syllabus within a nine-month academic 
year. Whereas there is enormous pressure on the teachers to complete the syllabus. 
Earlier it was possible to complete them because before studying examination syllabuses 
the students spent two to three years learning foundation texts. In Burma, for example, 
the future Mahasi Sayadaw learnt Pali grammar and all relevant texts, including some 
important commentaries and sub-commentaries, in his village monastery, Seik khun, 
Shwebo, sitting at the feet of his teacher, the abbot, until he was 19. When he entered the 
examinations in his early twenties he had no problem in completing the syllabuses. In 
Thailand, Prince Vajirayan had studied Pali grammar and some important texts before he 
 
302

=== PAGE 310 ===
read the Parian syllabuses. At present, however, as students spend less and less time 
learning important texts before they start examination syllabuses, the actual study of the 
syllabus itself becomes less and less effective.  
 
In the case of the Nak Tham syllabus in Thailand, the students study only for three to six 
months. Thus it is not possible for the teacher to go through the syllabus thoroughly. In 
the end, in both Burma and Thailand, the teachers resort to examination question papers 
from the previous years as a guide on what to teach and what to leave out. In Thailand, 
the Sai Saman Suksa syllabuses are the best example to demonstrate that students are 
required to study too many texts and subjects within a year. This reflects the high 
expectations the state and society have of the student. He is expected to be a good Pali 
scholar, a dhamma teacher, a good monk with thorough knowledge of the vinaya, an 
expert in rituals, a good administrator, a peacemaker, a missionary monk, an artist and a 
health worker with all necessary general knowledge of science, geography, English, 
mathematics and archaeology. (See Appendix C for the curriculum.) A system that 
reflects only unrealistic expectations and not the interest of the students in the end 
produces only disenchanted students. The whole Sai Saman Suksa syllabus shows how 
the reformers have adopted a quick-fix solution to the lack of secular knowledge among 
the Sangha. All the subjects are compulsory. The Sai Saman Suksa system, as it stands 
today, neither helps the student achieve the aim of an ideal bhikkhu for the future of the 
sAsana nor produces a knowledgeable person competent in both secular subjects and the 
Buddhist teaching as expected by pragmatists. However, were these subjects to be 
divided into compulsory and optional to reduce the burden for both the teacher and 
student, not only would that help reduce the burden on teacher and students but it would 
also give them more time to study each subject in greater depth than they can at the 
moment. 
 
303

=== PAGE 311 ===
There is also no independent committee or similar instrument to set a general standard 
and maintain it, despite the existence of many examination boards and committees to 
draw up curricula. In both countries, the main tasks for the ecclesiastical education 
authorities have been to produce question papers and mark the answer scripts each year. 
Even if someone complains of a decline in the standard of monastic education, there is 
no channel through which such a complaint can be pursued and problems investigated. 
Therefore in the history of monastic education discussed in this study, we have not heard 
of a proper review of the curriculum.  
 
Another problem common to the two countries is the lack of reference works available in 
the student’s mother tongue. The materials widely available can be categorised into 
three: texts in Pali; guidebooks arranged in the popular format of questions and short 
answers closely following the past question papers; and paraphrase translations such as 
nissaya in Burmese and blae yok sap in Thai. Works to explain the content of the texts 
are very rare. For instance, there is no single work for the student in his mother tongue 
dealing with essential topics of Buddhist teachings such as kamma, the four noble truths, 
dependent origination, the noble eightfold path or meditation.  More worrying is that 
were such works available, the students themselves might well not use them because 
they are not required by the examinations. There is no work which critically studies the 
prescribed texts, either.  
 
This point brings us to another: the absence of a good library in nearly all traditional 
teaching monasteries. Not that the monastery cannot afford a decent library: even some 
of the monasteries with millions of Kyats (Burmese currency) or Bahts (Thai currency) 
do not have a good library. Gya khat waing in Pegu, Burma, Wat Pak Nam, Wat Saket in 
Bangkok, Thailand, for example, are wealthy monasteries; but the culture of keeping 
 
304

=== PAGE 312 ===
books for research at any level simply does not exist. Even in one of the most famous 
teaching monasteries, Wat Bovonives, the library has no good collection. 
 
In Burma, most of the monastery libraries keep only the TipiTaka and some nissaya 
literature currently in use. Old nissaya literature no longer in use for examinations will 
be discarded. No proper library administration is known among the Sangha. In the whole 
of the Sasana Mandaing Pali University in Pegu, where I studied and taught for five 
years, there are only four cupboards for the TipiTaka and some nissaya literature. There 
were not enough copies of them for all students. In fact, all students had to acquire their 
own, including nissaya and other reference books. Those who could not afford them had 
to depend on the lecture in which the teacher gave the necessary information. This is a 
common feature of nearly all the teaching monasteries in Burma. Simply, there is no 
reading culture among the students. The emphasis is not on reading about something, but 
rather on knowing something of a particular text prescribed in the examinations.  
 
Since there is an insistence on the part of the authorities that students follow standardised 
answers in the textbooks, students are neither trained nor given an opportunity to 
comment and question. Students are not given the responsibility to try and understand 
the text themselves or come up with their own answers. In fact, students will get a pass 
only if they are able to provide standardised answers. The examiners expect the standard 
answers as in the following. The questions are for the primary level in Burma.4 The 
subject is the Vinaya and it was held by the Mandalay branch of the Pathamapyan 
examinations Board in 2000.5 
 
 
                                                 
4  
This level has been abolished by the present government in 2002 after twenty years of trial. 
5  
TilokAbhivaMsa, Pathamapyan sarmeibwe akhyay pyu mulatan poksar aphyayson, 2000 (Answers to 
the Questions at the Primary Level of the Pathamapyan Examinations, 2000), pp17-18. 
 
305

=== PAGE 313 ===
Questions 
1. Provide the nissaya translation of the Pali passage related to punishment and 
condemnation in this life of a thief-yahan [bhikkhu]. 
2. Reproduce the Pali passage which is the admonition by good yahans to a 
disobedient yahan. 
3. State the bad result of the sampajAna-musAvAda dukkaTa Apatti (transgression of 
knowingly saying a falsehood) and the good result of redressing it. And what is a 
kuladUsaka? 
4. List the practices to be followed by bhikkhus and sAmaBeras on alms-round in a 
village or town. Give also the number of rules (sikkhApada) which are related to 
eating. 
5. Determine the offence of the following bhikkhus and sAmaBeras. 
a. A sAmaBera who says that dhamma practice does not help to end the circle 
of suffering. 
b. A sAmaBera who says that there is no rebirth but death is the end of life. 
c. A sAmaBera who preaches to someone who is using an umbrella. [my 
translation] 
 
Answers 
1. RAjAno coraM gahetvA haneyyuM vA pabbAjeyyuM vA coro’ti bAlo’ti mULho’ti 
theno’tIti. 
2. MAyasmA attAnaM avacanIyaM akAsi. vacanIyaM ev’AyasmA attAnaM karotu. 
AyasmA pi bhikkhu vadatu sahadhammena. bhikkhu pi AyasmantaM vadanti 
sahadhammena. evaM saMvaddhA hi tassa bhagavato parisA yadidaM 
aGGamaGGavacanena aGGamaGGavuTThApanenA’ti. 
 
306

=== PAGE 314 ===
3. The bad result of transgression: danger to the achievement of jhAna, magga and 
phala. Good result of redressing: helpful to the attainment of jhAna, magga and 
phala. KuladUsaka is the destruction of genuine faith of the devotees by a 
bhikkhu who tries to win their favour by giving them flowers etc. 
4. PinDacArika-vagga. The number of rules related to eating is thirty. 
5.   
a. LinganAsana.   
b. LinganAsana 
c. DaBDakamma. [my translation] 
 
The following are some of the questions and answers of the Nak Tham tri level for the 
Academic Year 2545 (2002) in Thailand.6 The subject is the DhammavibhAga and 
GihipaTipatti.  
 
Questions 
1.    a. What do people who make an unintentional mistake lack? 
b. What do people who are known as kataGGu katavedI practise? 
      2.    
a. What are the Triple Gems? 
 
 
 
b. What does the first gem mean? Explain. 
      3.   
a. What are the three admonitions of the Buddha? 
b. In what kind of dhamma should a man who desires development establish 
himself?  
4.  
a. What does a man attain who succeeds in his objective practise? And what 
are those practices?  
 
 
 
b. What does dukkha mean? And, what is the cause of it? 
5.   
a. From which dhamma practice do “understanding, love and unity” arise? 
                                                 
6  
Reung sop tham khong sanam laung phneak tham (The Royal Dhamma Examinations: Dhamma 
Section), 2545 (2002), pp.57-60.  
 
307

=== PAGE 315 ===
b. What are the aparihAniya-dhamma? How many of them are there? Explain 
one of them. 
6.  
a. What is the meaning of mattaGGutA or being one who knows moderation in 
the sappurisadhamma or the characteristics of a good man? 
b. What is the kind of speech referred to in the Right Speech of the Noble 
Eightfold Path? 
      7.   
a. What is nAthakaraBa-dhamma? 
 
 
 
b. What does kalyABamittatA in the nAthakaraBa-dhamma mean? 
      8.   
a. Who are the four good friends? 
 
 
 
b. Translate the following Pali terms into Thai: 
 
 
 
 
b.1 atithiphalI 
 
 
 
 
b.2 pubbapetaphalI 
 
Answers 
1. 
a. Because he has no sati, which is awareness before he undertakes an action, 
and saMpajAna, which is awareness during the time he is carrying out his 
work. 
b. kataGGU katavedI is a person who returns gratitude. 
2.   
a.  Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha. 
b. Number One Gem is the Buddha. Buddha means the one who taught the 
people to practise wholesome deeds, speech and thought according to the 
dhamma and vinaya, called Buddha-sAsana. 
3.  
 
a.a Refrain from evil through body, speech and mind. 
 
 
 
 
a.b Do good through body, speech and mind, and, 
 
 
 
 
a.c Purify one’s mind from defilement such as greed and anger. 
 
308

=== PAGE 316 ===
b. A man who desires development establish himself should establish himself 
in the following four dhamma: 
 
 
 
 
b.a Associate with a noble man. 
 
 
 
 
b.b Listen to his advice with respect. 
b.c Contemplate deeply through suitable means so as to appreciate what is 
good and bad, and 
 
 
 
 
b.d Practise the good thing learnt from that contemplation. 
4. 
a. Because he practises the four iddhipAdas. They are: 1. chanda, a desire to 
succeed in his task; 2. viriya, endeavour to accomplish the task; 3. citta, 
determination; and, 4. vImaMsA, wisdom to accomplish the task. 
b. Dukkha is being physically and mentally uncomfortable. It is born of taBhA, 
attachment.  
5.   
a. SArABIyadhamma. 
b. AparihAniya-dhamma are the practices that prevent one from declining in 
life. They are: 1. meet regularly; 2. commence the meeting together, decide 
together and end the meeting together; 3. not to lay down what has not been 
laid down by the Buddha, not to abolish what has been laid down by him and 
to practise what has been laid down; 4. approach the senior bhikkhus in the 
Sangha, show respect and listen to them; 5. not to desire power; 6. be 
delighted to live in the forest; and 7. associate with moral and modest monks, 
invite those of them who have not come to the abode to come and help those 
who have come for their comfort. 
6. 
a. MattaGGutA is about knowing moderation in search for food and in 
consuming it. 
b. Right speech means to refrain from telling a lie, slandering, harsh speech, 
and frivolous speech. 
 
309

=== PAGE 317 ===
7.   
a. NAthakaraBa-dhamma is the practice to depend on. 
 
 
  
b. KalyABamittatA means to have good friends and not bad ones. 
8.  
a.a. A friend 1. who is grateful; 2. who shares through thick and thin; 3. 
who wishes one’s well-being; and, 4. who has genuine love. 
 
 
 
b.a. The welcoming of a guest. 
 
 
 
 
b.b. Doing meritorious deeds for the departed. (My translation.) 
 
Now let us discuss some of the problems related to the attitudes of those involved 
directly or indirectly in monastic education. As in most aspects of life, monastic 
education is full of competition. That competition is manifested in the number of 
students and of successful candidates in the examinations. So many students are admitted 
by teaching monasteries that most of them are very crowded. This competition is too 
worldly, the result of competition to win wealthy supporters. As in both countries the 
government’s financial support is minimal for students following religious curricula, 
most of the financial assistance comes in the form of donations from wealthy devotees, 
who select a worthy teaching monastery by its examination results, not unlike school 
league tables in England. Once the results are out, top teaching monasteries in Burma 
publish the names of successful candidates in their annual pamphlets. They include the 
total number of student-monks at each level.7 The most important feature of such a 
pamphlet is the picture of those who have come first, second or third, if any, in the whole 
country. The detailed biography and a photo of such a successful candidate will not only 
convince prospective donors that the teaching monastery is one of the best but will also 
inspire other students to work harder. 
 
                                                 
7  
See VaruBAlaNkAra Mahagandhayon taik gyi hnit khyaukse khayee waso thanga hnint pariyatti lok 
gnan hmattan (Records of the monks during the Rains Retreats and their Studies for the 60 Year 
Journey of the Mahagandayon Monastery). 
 
310

=== PAGE 318 ===
The two teaching monasteries in Burma with most students, the Mahagandhayong, 
Amarapura, founded by Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa and the New Masoeyeing (AsokArAma), 
founded by Ashin SirindAbhivaMsa in Mandalay, share between them more than four 
thousand resident monks and novices. The huge number of students and therefore the 
high rate of success in the examinations have drawn many wealthy donors to these two 
monasteries. In the Mahagandhayon alone there are more than one hundred buildings, 
each one built by an individual donor, and the donors are from all over the country. The 
need to have more students is greater if in the same town the competing monasteries 
belong to different nikAyas.  
 
But paradoxically, as a result of the increase in the number of students, proper attention 
cannot be given to individual students. The number of teachers, on the other hand, does 
not usually increase with that of students. The difficulty in increasing the number of 
teachers is in Burma primarily due to the custom that only a monk who has graduated 
from that monastery will be appointed a teacher. Rarely is a scholar who completes his 
study at one monastery appointed a teacher at a different one. This practice is intended to 
maintain the identity of not only the academic tradition but also the spiritual lineage in 
the monastery. But this practice is often dysfunctional in small teaching monasteries 
which cannot produce a sufficient number of teachers to meet any increase in students.  
 
In Thailand, too, the competition to increase student numbers exists among teaching 
monasteries known as samnak rian. The abbots want to increase them because that will 
accelerate their promotion up the ladder of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. The offer of a 
royal title (patyot) is the most visible sign of such a promotion. Besides, as in Burma, a 
high number of students attracts wealthy donors, who wish to support monastic 
education all over the country. In Thailand, unlike in Burma where government support 
 
311

=== PAGE 319 ===
is minimal, in the monasteries where Sai Saman Suksa classes are conducted, every 
additional student also means that the monastery receives more funds from the 
government.  
 
However, the increase in the number of students is not only due to the above reasons. In 
fact, the teachers themselves have come to have a different attitude towards this matter. 
In ancient days, the teachers were content with a small number of students, to whom they 
paid individual attention in both spiritual and academic training. At present, however, the 
teachers take pride in the huge number of students following their lectures, because the 
high number of students partly indicates popularity. In Burma, reputed teachers such as 
Ashin OdAtasirIbhivaMsa of MahAvisuddharAma Taik, Ashin AggavaMsa of Pauk 
Myaing Taik and U ObhAsa of Payagyi Taik, Mandalay, and Ashin SirindAbhivaMsa of 
MahavisuddharAma Taik, Rangoon, each have around two hundred students in their 
classes. They have to use a microphone. These teachers have no time to check the 
progress of their students. 
 
Another problem of attitude concerns the fact that at the present in both Burma and 
Thailand there are too many examinations for students: they are over-examined. There is 
at least one examination every year and for every level. And a student is under pressure 
to enter examinations conducted by more than one examination board, for example, the 
Pathamapyan and the SakyasIha in Burma, and the Sai Saman Suksa and the Parian in 
Thailand. The pressure of examinations means that the students tend to neglect what they 
consider to be unnecessary for the examinations. This problem is first and foremost the 
product of historical development. In Burma, for example, as we discussed in Chapter 
Three, the SakyasIha examinations were created to replace the Pathamapyan, which 
were suspended by the British when they took over the whole of Burma in 1885. The 
 
312

=== PAGE 320 ===
SakyasIha examinations were, however, not designed to complement the Pathamapyan, 
nor later modified to do so when the Pathamapyan were resumed. Other government 
boards of examinations which came into existence after independence (1948), such as the 
TipiTakadhara examinations and the NikAya examinations, were created to encourage 
monks to read all the TipiTaka. This was because students had not been sufficiently 
familiar with the TipiTaka, a problem created by the earlier examination boards such as 
the Pathamapyan and the SakyasIha.  
 
The real confusion over these separate examination boards began in the late 1950s, when 
the government started to promote monks who had passed most, if not all, of the 
examinations held by those examination boards. We pointed out in Chapter Three that 
these examinations have similar curricula.8 One of the best known monks in the 
twentieth century Burma, VicittasArAbhivAmsa, is a good example. He was a good, 
learned and far-sighted monk, who was devoted to teaching and modernising the 
monastic education system. However, these qualities were not valued by the government. 
Rather, what was given prominence was the degrees awarded to him by those 
examination boards. So, the government, whenever given the opportunity, encouraged 
celebrations in every major town and city and those celebrations took place for over 
thirty years. The government wanted to be seen to be good Buddhists in the eyes of the 
people.  
 
Over the years, with the dominance of the government in the media, the Buddhist people 
came to be persuaded of the need to pass as many examinations as possible. Their 
expectations in turn are passed on to the monks they support. In Burma, a student monk 
is generally looked after by one or two families and nowadays one only receives a higher 
                                                 
8  
See pp.139-143. 
 
313

=== PAGE 321 ===
ordination (upasampadA) when there is a family undertaking to guarantee his material 
needs while in the Order. The lay supporters are called yahan daka in Burmese. These 
patrons, persuaded by the government of the merit of passing many examinations, 
encourage the monks they support to get degrees from as many examination boards as 
possible. The front covers of the books published by so-called role-modelled monks in 
Burma will demonstrate the examination pressure in monastic education. Here their 
degrees are given in brackets. Below are some of the well known ones. 
1. U KovidAbhivaMsa, (SakyasIha, CetiyaNgaBa and government DhammAcariya), 
The Masoe Yeing9 Answers on the SIlakkhandha[vagga], Rangoon, Fourth Print, 
1994. 
2. Ashin 
IssariyAbhivaMsa, 
(SakyasIha, 
CetiyaNgaBa 
and 
government 
DhammAcariya, Vinaya PAlipAragU, PiTakattayapAragU), ÅikAkyaw VijayamAlA: 
designed for the Pathama lat students, Department of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 
2000. 
 
The over-emphasis on passing examinations and acquiring certificates worries most of 
the abbots and teachers. JanakAbhivaMsa told his students during one of his regular 
morning “admonition sessions” (nan net khin ovada) that “[n]owadays monks and 
novices are benefiting little from spiritual growth [because] the entire monastic world 
goes only for formal examinations. They go for examinations not only at the beginning 
of their monastic study, but also from halfway until the end of it.”10 Payutto of Thailand 
echoed this concern when he told his audience in one of his lectures that “people study 
for degrees and certificates, and not for knowledge or for practical development… the 
                                                 
9  
Masoe Yeing [AsokArAma) is the name of one of the most famous teaching monasteries in Mandalay. 
10  JanakAbhivaMsa, “Nan net khin ovada mya”, pp.23-24. 
 
314

=== PAGE 322 ===
motivation has to be appropriate… for the Sangha it [motivation] should be about the 
dhamma...”11 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa commented on the over-emphasis on examinations. He warned his 
students that “only if the aim of our education is spiritual growth and the development of 
knowledge will we be able to bring good to individual students, the nation and the 
religion. It is entirely improper for students and teachers just to focus on passing 
examinations, becoming famous and obtaining material gains. Take the utmost care to 
avoid such unworthy objectives.”12 
 
                                                 
11  DhammapiTaka (Payutto), Bot rian 25 pi khon thai rian ru rue yang (The Lessons of 25 Years: Have 
the Thai People Learnt?), p.22. 
12  JanakAbhivaMsa, cit., p.24. 
 
315

=== PAGE 323 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
 
 
Syllabuses for Other Levels of the Pathamapyan During the Reign of Bodawpaya 
 
Attention is drawn to similarities between the syllabuses of different levels. It has been a 
tradition in Burma that texts considered important are studied at all levels. At the higher 
levels, they are studied with their commentaries. 
 
Intermediate Level for the Candidate for Shin Laung 
1. Eight chapters of Grammar (i.e. the whole text of KaccAyana’s Pali grammar: its 
Pali and Burmese paraphrase and morphology.) 
2. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha (Compendium of Abhidhamma by Anuruddha): the 
first seven chapters in Pali, Burmese paraphrase and analysis of stanzas, the 
eighth 
chapter 
(paccaya-pariccheda) 
with 
comprehensive 
study 
of 
PaTiccasamuppAda. 
3. MAtikA 
4. DhAtukathA: Pali and Burmese paraphrase 
5. MUla Yamaka: Kusala-TIkA 
 
 
Higher Level for Shin Laung 
1. Eight chapters of Grammar (i.e. the whole text of KaccAyana’s Pali grammar): its 
Pali, Burmese paraphrase, morphology and six types of saMvaBBanA, 
“commentary” on the paBAma-gAthA (preface). 
 
316

=== PAGE 324 ===
2. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha (Compendium of Abhidhamma by Anuruddha): nine 
chapters (i.e. whole text): explanation of all prose; citta-vIthi, “thought-process”; 
maraBAsannavIthi, “thought-process-of-near-death”; characteristics of cetasika in 
detail; chapter on summary of function (kiccasaNgaha); characteristics of matter 
in detail; puggalabheda; bhUmicatukka and kammacatukka in detail; explanation 
of both Paccaya and KammaTThAna Chapters. 
3. MAtikA 
4. DhAtukathA: Pali and Burmese paraphrase. 
5. MUla, Khandha, Ôyatana, DhAtu, Sacca and SaNkhAra Yamaka: Kusalatika 
“triplet on wholesome phenomena”; Pali and Burmese paraphrase. 
 
 
Primary Level for Pazin laung 
1. Eight chapters of Grammar (i.e. the whole text of KaccAyana’s Pali grammar): its 
Pali and Burmese paraphrase, morphology and syntax (sasat) of sutta and vutti. 
2. Niddesa (commentary on KaccAyana’s grammar) 
3. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: nine chapters (i.e. whole text): explanation of all prose; 
all citta-vIthi, “thought-process”; six saMvaBBanA on the paBAmagAthA, “stanzas 
on homage to the Triple Gems” at the beginning of the text; Grammatical 
connection exercise on prose; characteristics of cetasika in detail; chapter on 
summary of function (kiccasaNgaha); characteristics of matter in detail; 
puggalabheda; bhUmicatukka and kammacatukka in detail. Six types of 
saMvaBBanA on all stanzas in the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha. 
4. MAtikA 
5. DhAtukathA 
 
317

=== PAGE 325 ===
6. MUla Yamaka (the first six triplets), Khandha, Ôyatana, DhAtu, Sacca, SaNkhAra, 
Anusaya, Citta, Dhamma and Indriya Yamaka (kusalatika, “triplet on wholesome 
phenomena”). 
7. PaTThAna: up to the end of Kusalatika. 
 
 
Intermediate Level for Candidate for Pazin laung 
1. Eight chapters of Grammar (i.e. the whole text of KaccAyana’s Pali grammar): its 
Pali, Burmese paraphrase, morphology and grammatical connection exercise of 
sutta and vutti. 
2. Niddesa (commentary on KaccAyana) 
3. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: nine chapters (i.e. whole text): explanation of all prose; 
all citta-vIthi, “thought-process”; six types of samvaBBanA on the paBAmagAthA; 
grammatical connection exercise on prose; characteristics of cetasika in detail; 
chapter on summary of function (kiccasaNgaha); characteristics of matter in 
detail; puggalabheda; bhUmicatukka and kammacatukka in detail. Six 
saMvaBBanA on all stanzas in the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha. 
4. MAtikA 
5. DhAtukathA 
6. MUla Yamaka (the first six triplets), Khandha, Ôyatana, DhAtu, Sacca, SaNkhAra, 
Anusaya, Citta, Dhamma and Indriya Yamaka: Kusalatika. 
7. PaTThAna: up to the end of Kusalatika. 
8. For naywa “Day Lessons”: little grammars such as KaccAyanasAra, 
SambandhacintA; six types of saMvaBBanA on the first two stanzas of NyAsa. 
 
318

=== PAGE 326 ===
9. é´kŒ-kyaw (abhidhammatthavibhAvinI): up to the end of the comment on the 
stanza “tattha vuttA”: exercise on logical connections of sentences, grammatical 
connection exercise between words. 
10. Vuttodaya  
11. The first three chapters of SubodhAlaNkAra 
12. The first chapter of kalApa [better known as kAtantra]: Sanskrit, Burmese 
paraphrase and etymology. 
 
 
Higher Level for Candidates for Pazin laung 
1. Eight chapters of Grammar (i.e. the whole text of KaccAyana’s Pali grammar): its 
Pali, Burmese paraphrase, etymology and syntax of sutta and vutti. 
2. Niddesa (commentary on KaccAyana); six types of saMvaBBanA on all suttas. 
3. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: nine chapters (i.e. whole text): explanation of all prose; 
all citta-vIthi, “thought-process”; six types of saMvaBBanA on the paBAmagAthA; 
grammatical connection exercise between words in prose; characteristics of 
cetasika in detail; chapter on summary of function (kiccasaNgaha); characteristics 
of matter in detail; puggalabheda; bhUmicatukka and kammacatukka in detail. 
Six saMvaBBanA on all stanzas in the AbhidhammatthasaNgaha. 
4. MAtikA 
5. DhAtukathA  
6. MUla Yamaka (the first six triplets), Khandha, îyatana, DhAtu, Sacca, SaNkhAra, 
Anusaya, Citta, Dhamma and Indriya Yamaka: Kusalatika (“triplet on 
wholesome phenomena”). 
7. PaTThAna: all twenty-four conditions. 
 
319

=== PAGE 327 ===
8. For naywa “Day Lessons”: little grammatical works such as KaccAyanasAra, 
SambandhacintA; SaddatthabhedacintA; six types of saMvaBBanA on the first two 
suttas of NyAsa. 
9. é´kŒ-kyaw (AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI): six saMvaBBanA on the comment on the 
ahetuka citta. 
10. Vuttodaya  
11. SubodhAlaNkAra: All 
12. The first chapter of KalApa (sandhi): Sanskrit, Burmese paraphrase and 
morphology; the first chapter of Vitakka: Sanskrit and Burmese paraphrase. 
 
 
320

=== PAGE 328 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
 
 
Syllabuses of the SakyasIha Teachers’ Qualification Examinations1 
 
1. Special Students Grade 
Day One: 
DvemAtikA (bhikkhu and bhikkhunI PATimokkha) (by heart), 
KaNkhAvitaraBI aTThakathA, its old and new sub-commentaries, 
KhaNkhAvitaraBI-aTThakathA, its yojanA, its mahATIkA, PATimokkha-
padattha-anuvaBBanA and other related commentaries. 
Day Two: 
Great Grammar (KaccAyana’s), Analysis of Words, Analysis of Rules, 
Analysis of Grammar, Six Commentarial on Verses, Forty Methods 
and SaMvaBBanA (by heart). NyAsa, Suttaniddesa, RUpasiddhi, 
RUpasiddhiTIkA, KaccAyanavaBBanA, SaddanIti SuttamAlA, KaccAyana 
bhAsATIkA, RUpasiddhi bhAsATIkA, üogallAna and other commentaries 
on RUpasiddhi. 
Day Three: SaddhatthabhedacintA, 
KaccAyanasAra, 
Vuttodaya 
and 
AbhidhAnappadIpikA 
(by 
heart); 
related 
nissayas, 
AbhidhAnappadIpikATIkA, 
èhedacintATIkA, 
èhedacintAmahATIkA, 
èhedacintAdIpanI, 
KaccAyanasAraTIkA 
(both 
old 
and 
new), 
VuttodayagaBDi, ChappacayadIpanI and VacanatthajotikATIkA. 
Day Four: 
AbhidhammatthasaNgaha (by heart); AbhidhammatthavibhAvinitIkA, 
SaNkhepavaBBanATIkA, åhingyogaBDi-Kran2, Thingyo Analysis3 and 
other commentaries to the AbhidhammatthavibhAvinITIkA. 
                                                 
1  
We shall give the syllabuses of the SakyasIha where they are the same as the CetiyaNgaBa, because 
although the CetiyaNgaBa was first established, the government has shown that it placed the SakyasIha 
in a higher regard when it openly announced that it was adopting the SakyasIha as its model in 
formulating a dhammAcariya syllabus. The Pariyatti SAsanahita Centenary, Mandalay, pp.33-4. 
 
321

=== PAGE 329 ===
Day Five: 
üAtikA, âhAtukathA, the first five chapters of Yamaka (by heart); 
üAtikA âhAtukathA ïaBDi Kran, üAtikA âhAtukathA ÔnugaBDi Kran, 
Yamaka AnugaBDi Kran and related commentaries. 
 
The minimum mark for simple pass is 50%. 
 
2. Special Teachers Grade 
Day One: 
PArAjikakaBDa-aTThakathA, 
SAratthadIpanITIkA, 
VimativinodanITIkA, 
VajirabuddhiTIkA, 
PArAjikakaBDi, 
PArAjikakaBDayojanA, 
NyAsa, 
NettipakaraBa Analysis, SaMvaBBanA and forty commentarial methods, 
Ten Metaphors (upacAra). 
Day Two: 
SIlakkhandha[vagga]-aTThakathA, SIlakkhandha[vagga]TIkA (old and 
new), 
SIlakkhandhagaBDi, 
Vuttodaya, 
SubodhAlaNkAra 
and 
SaMvaBBanA. 
Day Three: ATThasAlinI, ATThasAlinITIkA, ATThasAlinImadhuTIkA, ATThasAlinIganDi, 
ATThasAlinIyojanA, Yamaka (the last five chapters), PaTThAna Analysis. 
 
The minimum mark for simple pass is 70%. 
 
Syllabuses of the SakyasIha SAmaBera Examinations 
The SakyasIha SAmaBera Examinations are for SAmaBeras under the age of twenty only. 
Like the Special Grades for Students and Teachers, the SAmaBeras Examination have 
oral test before one is allowed to sit for the written examinations. The syllabuses are as 
follows:4 
                                                                                                                                                
2  
A text in Burmese explaining the difficult points in the Abhidhammatthasangaha. 
3  
A text in Burmese giving all the analysis of the details of consciousness (citta), mental factors 
(cetasika), their co-relationship, thought process(vIthi) and conditionality (paTThAna). 
4   The Information for the Pariyatti SAsanahita (SakyasIha) Examination, p.4. 
 
322

=== PAGE 330 ===
1. Grade One 
1. Vinaya MahAvagga 
2. ANguttaranikAya: EkakanipAta to TikanipAta (I - III nipAta) 
3. Dhammapada PAli and ATThakathA from Yamakavagga to AppamAdavagga. 
4. KaccAyana’s grammar: four chapters i.e. Sandhi, NAma, KAraka and îkhyŒta. 
5. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: the first three chapters i.e. Citta, Cetasika and 
PakiBBaka pariccheda. 
 
2. Grade Two  
1. CULavagga and ParivAra 
2. ANguttaranikAya: EkakanipAta to ChakkanipAta. (I – IV nipAta) 
3. Dhammapada PAli and ATThakathA: Yamakavagga to DaBDavagga. 
4. KaccAyana’s grammar: the first six chapters i.e. Sandhi, NAma, KAraka, SamAsa, 
Taddhita and îkhyŒta. 
 
                                                
5. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: the first five chapters i.e. Citta, Cetasika, PakiBBaka, 
VIthi and VIthimutta. 
 
3. Grade Three 
1. PArAjikA and PAcittiya PAli. 
2. ANguttaranikAya: all. 
3. Dhammapada PAli and aTThakathA: all. 
4. KaccAyana’s grammar: all. 
5. AbhidhammatthasaNgaha: all. 
Since its first examination in 1950, the SAmaBera SakyasIha examinations have had 416 
SAmaBeras graduating.5 
 
5  
The Pariyatti SAsanahita Centenary, p.219. 
 
323

=== PAGE 331 ===
 
Syllabuses of The SakyasIha Five NikAyas Examination 
In order to encourage monks to study the whole five nikAyas, there is another 
examination by the SakyasIha called NikAya Examination.6 There is no age limit in this 
examination. There is no written examination in this NikAya Examination. The syllabuses 
are all the Theravada canonical texts recognised at the ChaTThasangAyanA, which are here 
categorised into 32 groups. One may enter only for one group and has to finish all groups 
in one nikAya before moving to the next one. They 32 groups, which are given below 
according to the Burmese classification of the TipiTaka: 
(1) PArAjika PAli (2) PAcittiya PAli (3) Mahavagga PAli (Vinaya) (4) 
CULavagga PAli (5) ParivAra PAli (6) Silakkhandha[vagga] PAli (7) MahAvagga 
PAli (Sutta-piTaka) (8) PAthikavagga PAli (9) MUlapaBBAsa PAli (10) 
MajjhimapaBBAsa 
PAli 
(11) 
UparipaBBAsa 
PAli 
(12) 
SagAthAvagga, 
NidAnavagga SaMyutta PAli (13) Khandhavagga, SaLAyatanavagga SaMyutta 
PAli (14) MahAvagga SaMyutta (15) The first four nipAtas of the ANguttara-
nikAya i.e. Ekaka, Duka, Tika and CatukkanipAta ANguttara Pali (16) The 
fifth, sixth and seventh nipAtas i.e. PaGcaka, Chakka and SattakanipAta 
ANguttara PAli (17) the eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh nipAta i.e. ATThaka, 
Navaka, Dasaka and EkAdasakanipAta ANguttara PAli (18) KhuddakapATha, 
Dhammapada, UdAna, Itivuttaka and SuttanipAta PAli (19) VimAnavatthu, 
Petavatthu, TheragAtha, TherIgathA Pali (20) ApadAna PAli (first volume) (21) 
ApadAna PAli (second volume), BuddhavaMsa and CariyApiTaka PAli (22) 
JAtaka PAli (first volume) (23) JAtaka PAli (second volume) (24) MahAniddesa 
PAli (25) CULaniddesa PAli (26) PaTisambhidAmagga PAli (27) NettipakaraBa 
and PeTakopadesa PAli (28) MilindapaGhA PAli (29) DhammasaNgaBI PAli (30) 
                                                 
6  
The CetiyaNgaBa has almost the same syllabuses for the nikAya examinations, except that it divides the 
whole TripiTaka into 39 groups. 
 
324

=== PAGE 332 ===
Vibhanga PAli (31) DhAtukathA PAli and PuggalapaGGatti PAli (32) 
KathAvatthu PAli.7 
Following the early Buddhist tradition, the degrees are awarded as DIghabhABaka for 
those who can recite by heart the whole DIgha-nikAya and so on. The SakyasIha has 
produced 143 bhABakas since its inception in 1970. 
 
The CetiyaNgaBa does not hold these special NikAya examinations like the SakyasIha, but 
holds different examination, whose syllabuses are the whole Vinaya-piTaka, and it is 
called the Vinaya Examination. 
                                                 
7  
Nos. 1 to 5 are the Vinaya-piTaka; 6 to 8 are the DIgha-nikAya; 9 to 11 are the Majjhima-nikAya; 12 to 
14 are the SaMyutta-nikAya; 15 to 17 are the ANguttara-nikAya; 18 to 28 are the Khuddaka-nikAya; and 
the last five belong to the Abhidhamma-piTaka as well as the Khuddaka-nikAya. Information for the 
three examinations of the Pariyatti SAsanahita association, üandalay, pp 5-7. 
 
325

=== PAGE 333 ===
 
Appendix C 
 
 
 
 
The syllabuses of Pariyatti Tham Sai Saman Suksa are as follows.1 
Year One 
a. Pali 
a.a  
Grammar 
a.b  
Basic translation of Pali language 
a.c  
Translation of the DhammapadaTThakathA (part four to be memorised.)   
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics  
b.b 
English 
b.c  
Geography 
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of primary year five of the secular schools.) 
b.e  
Thai 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a 
Basic monastic training 
 
Year Two 
a. Pali 
a.a 
Grammar 
a.b  
Translation of the DhammapadaTThakathA (parts one to four)   
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics  
b.b 
English 
                                                 
1 Prawat karn suksa khong song, pp. 128-136. 
 
326

=== PAGE 334 ===
b.c  
Geography 
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of primary year six of the secular schools.) 
b.e  
Thai 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a 
Basic monastic training 
 
Year Three 
a. Pali 
a.a  
Grammar 
a.b  
Translation of the DhammapadaTThakathA (parts five to eight)   
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics 
b.b 
English 
b.c  
Geography 
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of primary year seven of the secular schools.) 
b.e  
Thai 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
Basic monastic training 
 
Year Four 
a. Pali 
a.a  
Translation from Pali to Thai: MaNgalatthadIpanI (part one) 
a.b  
Translation from Pali to Thai of a selected sutta connected to the  
MaNgala Sutta 
a.c  
Translation from Thai to Pali: DhammapadaTThakathA (part one) 
a.d  
Pali grammar   
 
327

=== PAGE 335 ===
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics 
b.b 
English 
b.c  
Geography 
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary years one and two of the secular 
schools.) 
b.e  
Thai 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
How to write official monastic correspondence 
 
Year Five 
a. Pali 
a.a   
Translation from Pali to Thai: MaNgalatthadIpanI (part two) 
a.b  
Translation from Pali to Thai of a selected Sutta connected to the 
MaNgala-sutta 
a.c  
Translation from Thai to Pali: DhammapadaTThakathA (parts two, three 
and four) 
a.d  
Advanced Pali grammar   
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics  
b.b 
English 
b.c  
Geography 
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary year three of the secular schools.) 
b.e  
Thai 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
How to write official monastic correspondence 
 
328

=== PAGE 336 ===
 
Year Six 
a. Pali 
a.a  
Translation from Pali to Thai: SamantapAsAdikA (part three, four and 
five) 
a.b  
Translation from Pali to Thai of a selected part of the VinayapiTaka 
connected to the SamantapAsAdikA (part three, four and five) 
a.c  
Translation from Thai to Pali: DhammapadaTThakathA (parts five, six, 
seven and eight) 
a.d  
Advanced Pali grammar   
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics  
b.b  
English 
b.c  
Geography 
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary years four and five of the secular 
schools.) 
b.e  
Thai 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
Propagation of the Dhamma. 
c.b  
Introduction to Art and Archaeology. 
Year Seven 
a. Pali 
a.a  
Translation from Pali to Thai: SamantapAsAdikA (part two and three) 
a.b  
Translation from Thai to Pali: MaNgalatthadIpanI (part one and two) 
a.c  
Versification   
a.d  
Advanced Pali grammar 
 
329

=== PAGE 337 ===
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematics  
b.b  
English: Spoken and written 
b.c  
Geography and history: Thai and world geography and history.  
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary years four and five of the secular 
schools.) 
b.e  
Thai: literature and history 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
Propagation of the Dhamma. 
c.b  
Introduction to Psychology 
c.c  
Introduction to Archaeology 
c.d  
Introduction to other religions 
c.e  
History of Buddhism 
 
Year Eight 
a. Pali 
a.a  
Translation from Pali to Thai: Visuddhimagga (parts one, two and 
three) 
a.b  
Translation from Thai to Pali: SamantapAsAdikA (parts one and two) 
a.c   
Versification  
a.d  
Advanced Pali grammar 
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematic  
b.b  
English: Spoken and written 
b.c  
Geography and history: Thai and world geography and history.  
 
330

=== PAGE 338 ===
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary years four and five of the secular 
schools.) 
b.e  
Thai: literature, history and composition. 
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
Propagation of the Dhamma. 
c.b  
Introduction to Psychology 
c.c  
Introduction to Archaeology 
c.d  
Introduction to other religions 
c.e  
History of Buddhism 
c.f  
Logic 
c.g  
The art of commentary 
 
Year Nine 
a. Pali 
a.a   
Translation from Pali to Thai: AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI 
a.b  
Translation from Thai to Pali: Visuddhimagga (parts one, two and 
three) 
a.c   
Advanced Pali grammar 
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematic  
b.b  
English: written, translation, literature. 
b.c  
Geography: North America and Europe. History: Rama I- IV.  
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary years four and five of the secular 
schools.) 
b.e  
Thai: etymology, syntax, literature, composition.  
c. General Knowledge 
 
331

=== PAGE 339 ===
c.a  
Propagation of the Dhamma. 
c.b  
Introduction to Psychology 
c.c  
Introduction to Archaeology 
c.d  
Introduction to other religions 
c.e  
History of Buddhism 
c.f  
Meditation 
 
Year Ten 
a. Pali  
a.a  
Selected sutta or chapter from the three piTaka. (prescribed) 
b. Secular Subjects 
b.a  
Mathematic  
b.b  
English: written, translation, history of literature, report writing. 
b.c  
Geography: the whole world. History: Rama V- to date.  
b.d 
Science (all textbooks of secondary years four and five of the secular 
schools.) 
b.e  
Thai: etymology, syntax, literature, composition.  
c. General Knowledge 
c.a  
Propagation of the Dhamma. 
c.b  
Introduction to Psychology 
c.c  
Introduction to other religions  
c.d  
Skilful means in peace building  
c.e  
Meditation  
c.f  
Propagation of the Dhamma in Thailand and abroad. 
 
 
332

=== PAGE 340 ===
 
Selected Bibliography 
 
 
In Burmese  
Amatgyi, Mahadhammathinkyan Thathanalinkara sartan (Essay on the Lineages of 
Buddhism), Hanthawadi Press, Rangoon, 1956. 
 
Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa e aso amaint mya (Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa’s Teachings on 
Buddhist Ethics), compiled by Chit Kyi Than (trans. into English by U On Pe), Win 
Pitaka Sarpay, Rangoon, 1992. 
 
CetiyaNgaBa pariyatti dhammAnuggaha athin sarpyanbwe simyin-upade (The Rules 
and Regulations of the Examinations of the CetiyaNgaBa DhammAnuggaha 
Association), Rangoon, (undated). 
 
CetiyaNgaBa pariyatti dhammAnuggaha athin sarpyanbwe simyin-upade (The Rules 
and Regulations of the Examinations of the CetiyaNgaBa DhammAnuggaha 
Association), (Yahan taw atwet tha / Only for the Bhikkhus), Thudhammavati Press, 
Rangoon, 1971. 
 
 
Collection of Upade (Laws and Regulations of Myanmar Last Two Kings, A.D. 1853-
1885), 4 vols. ed. Htun Yee, Aichi University, Toyohashi, 1999. 
Gaing paungson sayadawgyi mya e owadakatha mya (The Speeches of the Advisor-
Sayadaws of the All NikAyas), Part. III, Dept. of Religious Affairs, 1983. 
 
Gaing Tha, Shwe Mandalay hnit taya pyi (The Centenary of Mandalay), Gyi Pwa Yay 
Press, Mandalay, 1959. 
 
Ghosita, Ashin AggamahApaBDita Mogok Sayadaw payagyi e tatbhava thathana 
(Biography of the Mogok Sayadaw, AggamahApaBDita), Mogok Vipatthana Aphwe 
(Mook VipassanA Association), (4th Print) Rangoon, 2001. 
 
Hanthawadi: Hanthawadi khet mawkontin sartan mya (HaMsavatI: Collection of 
Papers on HaMsavatI), Myanmar naing gan sarpay pyan pwa yay athin (Association 
for Promotion of Literature in Burma), Rangoon, 1976. 
 
Hla, Pan, Nai Razadhirit ayaydawpon kyan (The Treaty on the Razadhirit Campaign), 
Myawadi Press, Rangoon, 1998. 
 
Hluttaw hmattan (Records of the Hluttaw), collected by Taw Sein Ko & ed. U Aung 
Thein, Ministry of Cultural Affairs, (5th Edition) Rangoon, 1997. 
 
Htut, Than, U Myanmar naing gnan phongyi kyaung pyinnyayay thamaing (History of 
Monastic Education in Burma) (MA Thesis at Rangoon University), Ohn Pin Press, 
Rangoon, 1980. 
 
Htwe, Hteik Tin, Nagabo Ratana-theinkha konbaung mahayazawin akyinn (A Brief 
History of the Ratanasinkha Kon-Baung Period), Ponnya Press, (3rd Print) Rangoon, 
1967. 
 
333

=== PAGE 341 ===
Indobhasa, Kya Baing, U Vimokti thathana (Vimutti-sAsana), Rangoon, 1974. 
 
IssariyAbhivaMsa, Ashin TikAkyaw aung pan (Questions and Answers on the 
AbhidhammatthavibhAvinI-TikA), Ministry of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 2000. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin “Nan net khin ovada mya (Morning Speeches)”, [delivered in 
1971], Dhamma byuha sarsaung, [a monthly Buddhist magazine], Rangoon, 1994. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin Anagat thathana yay (The Future of the SAsana), Department 
of Religious Affairs, Ministry of Religious Affairs, (Reprint) Rangoon, 1995. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin ATThakatha akhye byu, (Introductory Commentary), Dept. of 
Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1979. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin Bhatha-thwe (The Essence of the Religion), New Burma 
Offset Pitaka Press, (Reprint) Amarapura, 1999. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin Bhathayay pyatthana mya aphyay hnint sittat tayadaw 
(Answers to Questions on Buddhism and a Dhamma Talk for the Armed Forces), 
Mahagandhayon Press, (Reprint) Amarapura, 1997. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin Nan net khin ovada mya (Collection of Morning Speeches), 
ed. Ashin MahosadhapaBDita, Mahagandhayon Press, (4th Edition) Amarapura, 1997. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin Tatbhava thanthaya (One Life in SaMsAra) [autobiography], 
Mahagandhayon Press, (3rd Reprint) Amarapura, 1997. 
 
JanakAbhivaMsa, Ashin Yup pon shin kyint wut (Illustrated Training for the 
SAmaBera), Dept. of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1975. 
 
Kala, U Maha Yazawingyi (The Great Chronicle), 2 vols. Burma Research Society, 
Rangoon, 1960. 
 
Kaung, Kinwun Mingyi,U Kinwun mingyi London khayee thwa nayzin hmatdan 
(Diary of Kinwun Mingyi on his London Trip), (Reprint), Rangoon, 1959. 
 
Kelatha, Ashin MahA VisutArAma gaBavAcaka-nikAya thahmaing hmattan kyan 
(History of the MahA VisutArAma gaBavAcaka-nikAya), MahA VisutArAma, Pakhokku, 
1980. 
 
Kelatha, Ashin Mahasi theravuttantavilAsinI (Biography of the Mahasi Sayadaw), 2 
vols. Buddhasasana-nuggaha Aphwe, Rangoon, 1986. 
 
Kelatha, Ashin Mandalay thathanawin (History of Buddhism in Mandalay), 5 Vols. 
Department of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1980 -1986. 
 
Kelatha, Ashin Pathama akyain gaing paungson thanga asiawaygyi thamaing 
(Records of the First All NikAyas Conference), Dept. of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 
1985. 
 
KhantIcAra, Bhaddanta Payagyi niyam amay aphyay (Question and Answer on the 
Payagyi niyam), Dept. of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1999. 
 
334

=== PAGE 342 ===
Kyan, Daw Padethayit Myanmar nai-gnan e zat-thein (The end of the Feudal Burma), 
Ministry of Culture, 1980. 
 
Kyan, Ma “Thibaw min patomu khyain ka british myanmar naing ngan e pyinnyayay 
achay anay (The State of Education in British Burma at the Fall of Thibaw)” Journal 
of Burma Research Society, XLIX, II, Rangoon, Dec. 1966. 
 
“Maha Yen Sayadawpayagyi e atthokpati akyin (A Brief Biography of Maha Yen 
Sayadaw)” Mahayin gaing lon saingyar yayphay sarmaypwe hnint dhammavinaya 
sarpyan pwe tawgyi hnit yarpyi matgazeen (Centenary Magazine of the Mahayin-
nikAya and Dhammavinaya Examinations), [a trilingual magazine], Rangoon, 1999. 
 
Mahasithu, Dwinthin Taikwun Alaungpaya ayaydawpon (The Campaign of 
Alaungpaya), ed. U Hla Tin a. Hla Tha Mein, Dept. of Archaeology, Ministry of 
Culture, Rangoon (undated). 
 
Mahathirizeyyathu, Mingyi Pitakatthamaing, Tipitaka-nikaya Thathanapyu Apwe 
(The Association for the Promotion of the TipiTaka-NikAya), (2nd Reprint) Rangoon, 
1989. 
 
Mandalay myo pariyatti thAthanahita athin nayonla sar-hlyaukmaykhan simyin-upade 
(Rules and Regulations of the Examinations of the Pariyatti SAsanahita ôssociation), 
(7th Print) Mandalay, 1991. 
 
Mandalay myo pariyatti thAthanahita athingyi (SakyathIha) sar maybwe thonyat 
saingyar thiphwe mya (Information on the Three Examinations of the Pariyatti 
SAsanahita Association), Mandalay, 1998. 
 
Maung Maung, Dhammaghothaka, U Thangha ah paya yong khe thi (The Buddha 
Trusted the Sangha), 2 vols. Dept. of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1997. 
 
Maung Tin, Maung, U Kon-baung set maha yazawindawgyi (The Great Chronicle of 
the Kon-Baung Dynasty), 3 vols. Ledi Mandaing Press, (Reprint) Rangoon, 1966 -
1968. 
 
Maung, Win Mandalay khet Buddha thathanawin (History of Buddhism in the 
Mandalay Period), Mandalay, (undated). 
 
Mawlamyaing myo pariyatti thaddhammapala athin gyi e shweyatu thabin (The Gold 
Jubilee Celebration of the Pariyatti SaddhammapAla Association, Moulmein), Dept. of 
Religious Affairs, 1981. 
 
Mya Kyu, Khin (Dr.) trans. Kon-Baung khet myanmar pyinthit setsanyay (History of 
the Relationship between Myanmar and France in the Kon-Baung period), Pattamya 
Gna Mauk Press, Rangoon, 1999. 
 
Myint, Htun “Bagaya Sayadaw” Myanma swe soun kyan (Encyclopedia of Burma), 
Vol. VIII, Burma Translation Society, Rangoon, 1954. 
 
Myint, Htun “Payagyi Sayadaw” Myanma swe soun kyan, Vol. VIII, Burma 
Translation Society, Rangoon, 1954. 
 
 
335

=== PAGE 343 ===
Myint, Htun “Shwegyin Sayadaw” Myanma swe soun kyan, Burma Translation 
Society, Rangoon, 1954. 
 
Naing gnan daw thangha mahanayaka aphwe pariyatti simankein (Report of The 
State Sangha MahAnAyaka Committee’s Pariyatti Education Scheme) (3rd Draft), 
Ministry of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1981. 
 
Navama myauk veluwan-nikAya gaBAdhipati tin myaukbwe (The Ninth Selection of the 
Veluwan-nikAya GaBAdhipati), Rangoon, 1998. 
 
Nawratha, Letwe Alaung mindayagyi ayaydawpon (The Campaign of Alaungpaya), 
ed. U Hla Tin a. Hla Tha Mein, Dept. of Archaeology, Ministry of Culture, Rangoon, 
(undated). 
 
Nimala, Mei Htee Sayadaw, Shin Theravada thathana hset aling-bya wonthadipani 
(Chronicle of the Lineages of Theravada Buddhism), Hanthawadi Press, Rangoon, 
1966. 
 
Nyi, Nyi (Dr.) Sanitthit pyinnyayay (New Education System), Rangoon, 1976. 
 
Ovadacariya Sayadaw mya e mainkhon mya (Addresses of the Advisory Committee 
Sayadaws) (Official Record), Department of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1981. 
 
PaBDitasirI, Ashin Shwegyin-nikAya thathanawin, (History of the Shwegyin-nikAya), 
Buddhathathana Aphwe Press, Rangoon, 1963. 
 
Paing, Hla, Ledi, U CatubhUmika matgin thathanawin thamaing, (History of the 
CatubhUmika Lineage), Kandawkalay Press, Rangoon, 1976. 
 
Pali-tetgatho sonsanyi kawmiti- asiyinkhanaa 1941 (Report of the Pali University 
Enquiry Committee, 1941), Government Printing and Stationery, Rangoon, 1946. 
 
Pariyatti thathanahita athin hnit taya pyi thamaing, (History of the Centenary Pariyatti 
SAsanahita Association) Thukhawadi Press, Mandalay, 1998. 
 
Pariyatti thAthanahita athin hnit taya pyi ahtu htok sarsaung (Special Journal of the 
Centenary Pariyatti SAsanahita Association), Mandalay, 1998. 
 
Pathama AbhayArAma Sayadaw payagyi e hnit taya pyi sartan (Papers on the 
Centenary anniversary of the First AbhayArAma Sayadaw), AbhayArAma Shwegu Taik, 
Mandalay, 1980. 
 
Pathamapyan sarmaybwe byahtankhyet hnint poksarhtok simyin (The Syllabuses and 
Rules and Regulations for Questions of the Pathamapyan Examinations), Dept. of 
Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1998. 
 
Phongyi kyaung pyinnya thinkyaryay mawgun (Records of Monastic Education), 
Ministry of Welfare, Rangoon, 1958. 
 
Pondawgyi kyaung pyinnyayay sonsanyay asiyinkhansar hnint ovadacariya sayadaw 
mya e akyanpaykyet mya (Report of the Enquiry Committee on the National 
Education in the Buddhist Monasteries and the Advice of the Advisor-Sayadaws), 
 
336

=== PAGE 344 ===
Superintendent, Govt. Printing and Stationery, Rangoon, 1948. 
 
Royal Orders of Burma, 10 vols., ed. & introduction in English by Than Tun, Centre 
for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 1983-1991. 
 
SAsanAbhivaMsa, Bhaddanta (AggamahApaBDita), Mandalay myo myataung thathana 
hnit taya pyi thamaing (The Centenary Anniversary of Myataung SAsana), Mandalay, 
1988. 
 
Sayadaw, Ledi Ledi DipanI Paung Chok (Collection of Ledi Sayadaw’s DIpanIs), Vol. 
I, Department of Religious Affairs, Rangoon, 1979. 
 
Shwe, Ohn, U Pariyatti thathana ko twe hmattan (A Personal Record of the Pariyatti 
SAsana), Kuthalawadi Press, Rangoon, 1962. 
 
Shwegu shin kyint wut, (57th Reprint) Rangoon, 1356 (Burmese Era) (1994). 
 
SilAnandAbhivamsa, Ashin Mahasi Sayadaw payagyi e athtokpatti (Biography of the 
Venerable Mahasi Sayadaw), BuddhasAsanA-nuggaha Aphwe, Rangoon, 1979. 
 
SobhanasirI, Ashin MahadvAra-nikAya sAsanadIpanI (History of the MahAdvAra-
nikAya), Ledi Mandaing Press, Rangoon, 1974. 
 
Swe, Myint, U Pali pyatthana (The Problem of Pali Study), Myint Swe Press, 
Rangoon, 1957. 
 
Tatbhava thathana (One Life in the SAsana) (Biography of Ashin JanakAbhivaMsa) 
[co-written by his senior but anonymous disciples], Mahagagandhayon Press, (3rd 
reprint) Amarapura, 2000. 
 
Thammata se zaung dwe (A Collection of Ten Texts), Thammata Press, Mandalay 
(undated). 
 
Thathana lon saing ya Shwegyin-nikAya se gna kyain myauk thanga asiawaygyi 
hmattan (Records of the 15th Conference of the Shwegyin-nikAya), Yawnghwe, 1999. 
 
The State Pariyatti SAsana University (Yangon/ Mandalay) Curriculum and Syllabus 
for the Courses of B.A and M.A Degrees, Dept. for Promotion and Propagation of 
Buddhism, Rangoon, 2001. 
 
Thu, Myat, Myay Lat Alaungpaya, Thein Than Oo Press, Rangoon, 1977. 
 
TilokAbhivaMsa, Ashin Abhidhamma let saung (The Gift of Abhidhamma), Ywama 
Pariyatti Sarthin Taik, Insein, (3rd Print) Rangoon, 1997. 
 
TilokAbhivaMsa, Ashin Pathamapyan sarmeibwe akhyay pyu mulatan poksar 
aphyayson, 2000) (Answers to the Questions at the Primary Level of the 
Pathamapyan Examinations, 2000), Ywama Pariyatti Sarthin Taik, Insein, Rangoon, 
2000. 
 
TilokAbhivaMsa, Ashin Pathamapyan sarmeibwe pathamagyitan poksar aphyayson, 
2000) (Answers to the Questions at the Pathamagyi Level of the Pathamapyan 
 
337

=== PAGE 345 ===
Examinations, 2003), Ywama Pariyatti Sarthin Taik, Insein, Rangoon, 2003. 
 
TilokAbhivaMsa, Ashin Pathamapyan sarmeibwe pathamalattan poksar aphyayson, 
2000) (Answers to the Questions at the Pathamalat Level of the Pathamapyan 
Examinations, 2003), Ywama Pariyatti Sarthin Taik, Insein, Rangoon, 2003. 
 
TilokAbhivaMsa, Ashin Pathamapyan sarmeibwe pathamangetan poksar aphyayson, 
2000) (Answers to the Questions at the Pathamange Level of the Pathamapyan 
Examinations, 2000), Ywama Pariyatti Sarthin Taik, Insein, Rangoon, 2000. 
 
TilokAbhivaMsa, Ashin Pathamapyan sarmeibwe pathamangetan poksar aphyayson, 
2003) (Answers to the Questions at the Pathamange Level of the Pathamapyan 
Examinations, 2000), Ywama Pariyatti Sarthin Taik, Insein, Rangoon, 2003. 
 
Tin, Sein, U Kyauk-thin-baw Sayadaw e theruppatti hnit tayadaw mya (Biography 
and Teachings of Kyauk-thin-baw Sayadaw), Mandalay, 1973. 
 
TipiTakadhara shweyatu sar-saung, 1310-1360 [1949-1999] (The Golden Jubilee of 
the TipiTakadhara Selection Examinations [1949-1999], Dept. of Religious Affairs, 
Rangoon, 1999. 
 
VaruBAlaNkAra, Ashin Mahagandhayon taik gyi hnit khyaukse khayee waso thanga 
hnint pariyatti lok gnan hmattan (Records of the monks during the Rains Retreats and 
their Studies for the 60 Year Journey of the Mahagandayon Monastery), Amarapura, 
1999. 
 
VimalAcAra, U Pathama Weluwon sayadaw payagyi e therokpatti (Biography of the 
First Weluwan Sayadaw), Rangoon, 1986. 
 
 
In English 
 
Aung-Thwin, Michael Irrigation in the heartland of Burma: Foundations of the Pre-
Colonial Burmese State, Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, Northern Illinois 
University, 1990. 
 
Ba, Vivian “ King Mindon and the World Fair of 1867 held in Paris (from documents 
in the French Foreign Office” Journal of Burma Research Society, XLVIII, II, 
Rangoon, Dec. 1965. 
 
Bartholomeusz, J. Tessa Women Under the Bo Tree: Buddhist nuns in Sri Lanka, 
Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
 
Bechert, Heinz “Theravada Buddhist Sangha: Some General Observations on 
Historical and Political Factors in its Development” Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 29, 
1970. 
 
Bechert, Heinz & H. Braun PAli NIti Texts of Burma, The Pali Text Society, London, 
1981. 
 
 
338

=== PAGE 346 ===
Bechert, Heinz & Richard Gombrich eds. The World of Buddhism, Thames and 
Hudson Ltd. London, 1984. 
 
Bigandet, Ambroise, Paul The History of the Catholic Burmese Missionary from the 
Year 1720 to 1887, The White Orchid Press, Bagnkok, 1996. (1st Edition in 1887). 
 
Bischoff, Roger Buddhism in Myanmar, Karunaratna, Colombo, 1997. 
 
Blofeld, John King Maha Mongkut of Siam, The Siam Society, Bangkok, 1987. 
 
Bode, Mabel ed. SAsanavaMsa, The Pali Text Society, Oxford, 1896. 
 
Bode, Mabel The Pali Literature of Burma, Royal Asiatic Society, London, 1909. 
 
Bodhiprasiddhinand, Pathompong Somdet Phra ÏABasaMvara: The Supreme 
Patriarch of Thailand, WFB Review, Vol. XL, IV, Bangkok, 2546/2003. 
 
Bradley, William, L. “Prince Mongkut and Jesse Caswell” Journal of Siam Society, 
LIV, 1, Bangkok, Jan., 1966. 
 
Brereton, P. Bonnie Thai Tellings of Phra Malai, University of Arizona Press, Tempe, 
Arizona, 1995. 
 
Brohm, John, F. Burmese Religion and the Burmese Religious Revival, (Unpublished 
PhD dissertation), Cornell University, Ithaca, 1957. 
 
Buddhadatta, A. P. (AggamahApaBDita) ed. JinakAlamAlI, The Pali Text Society, 
London, 1962. 
 
Bunnag, Jane Buddhist Monk and Buddhist Layman, Cambridge University Press, 
1973. 
 
Burlingame, Eugene, W. Buddhist Legends, Part I, Harvard University Press, 1921. 
 
Cady, John, F. A History of Modern Burma, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1958. 
 
Chakrabongse, Chula, Prince Lords of Life: A History of the kings of Thailand, New 
York/ London, 1960. 
 
Chaumont, De, The Chevalier & Choisy, De, The Abbé Aspects of The Embassy to 
Siam 1685, ed. & trans. Michael Smithes, Silkworm Book, Chiang Mai, 1997. 
 
Cone, Margaret & Richard Gombrich The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara, 
Oxford, 1977. 
 
Cone, Margaret A Dictionary of PAli, Part I, The Pali Text Society, Oxford, 2001. 
 
Carruthers, M. The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990. 
 
Cousins, S. Lance “Introduction” in Ônanda Maitreya, Balangoda, AggamahApaBDita 
Nine Qualities of the Buddha and Other Essays: A Memorial Volume in Honour of 
 
339

=== PAGE 347 ===
Ven. Dr. H. Saddhatissa, World Buddhist Foundation, London, 1995. 
 
Crawfurd, John Journal of an Embassy from the Governor General of India to the 
Court of Ava, 2 vols. H. Colburn, London, 1834. 
 
Cushman, D. Richard, trans., & Wyatt, K David ed. The Royal Chronicles of 
Ayutthaya, The Siam Society, Bangkok, 2000. 
 
Denis, Eugène, ed. & Collins, Steven, trans. “The Story of The Elder MAleyyadeva” 
The Journal of the Pali Text Society, Vol. XVIII, Oxford, 1993. 
 
Desfarges, General, de La Touche, Lieutenant & des Verqiains, Vollant, Jean, 
Engineer Three Military Accounts of the 1688 Revolution in Siam, trans. Michael 
Smithes, Orchid Press, Bangkok, 2002. 
 
DhammAlaNkAra, IttäpAna (Thera) Venerable Ananda Maitreya: the Buddha Aspirant, 
Nandimala, Dehiwela, Sri Lanka, 1996. 
 
Dhaninivat, Prince, H.H. “Monarchical Protection of the Buddhist Church in Siam” 
Visakhapuja, Annual publication of the Buddhist Association of Thailand, Bangkok, 
B.E 2508 (1965). 
 
DharmapAla, AnagArika “The History of the Maha-Bodhi Temple at Buddha Gaya” 
Return to Righteousness, Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs, Colombo, 1965. 
 
Dreyfus, B. J. Georges The Sound of Two hands Clapping: The Education of a 
Tibetan Buddhist Monk, University of California press, London, 2003. 
 
Duroiselle, Charles “Excavations at Hmawza” Archaeological Survey of India, 
Annual Report, 1926-1927. 
 
Dutt, Sukhumar Buddhism in East Asia, Indian Council For Cultural Relations, New 
Delhi, 1966. 
 
Education Code, Burma, Superintendent, Government Printing, Rangoon, 1901. 
 
Ferguson, John The Symbolic Dimensions of the Burmese Sangha, (Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation) Cornell University, Ithaca, 1975. 
 
Forbin, de, Claude, Count The Siamese Memoir 1685-1688, ed. Michael Smithies, 
Silkworm Books, Chiang Mai, 1996. 
 
Furnivall J. S. Colonial Policy and Practice: A Comparative Study of Burma and 
Netherlands India, Cambridge University Press, 1948. 
 
Gervaise, Nicolas The Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam, trans. H. 
S L’Neill, Bangkok, 1928. 
 
Godakumbura, C. E. “Relationship Between Burma and Ceylon” Journal of Burma 
Research Society, Rangoon, 1966. 
 
Gombrich, Richard Buddhist Precept and Practice, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1971. 
 
340

=== PAGE 348 ===
Gombrich, Richard Secularization, Rationalism and Sectarianism: Essay in Honours 
of Bryan R. Wilson, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1993. 
 
Gombrich, Richard Theravada Buddhism, Routledge, London, 1988. 
 
Gombrich, Richard & Gananath Obeyesekere Buddhism Transformed: Religious 
Change in Sri Lanka, Princeton, 1998. 
 
Graham, W. A. Beyond the Written Word: Oral Aspects of Scripture in the History of 
Religion, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
 
Gray, James Ancient Proverbs and Maxims from Burmese Sources Or, NIti Literature 
of Burma, Trubner & Co., London, 1886. 
 
Griswold, A. B. King Mongkut of Siam, Asia Society, New York, 1961. 
 
Guillon, Emmanuel The Mons: A Civilization of Southeast Asia, trans. & ed. James V. 
Di Crocco, The Siam Society, Bangkok, 1999. 
 
Gunawardena, R. A. L. H. Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in 
Early Medieval Sri Lanka, The University of Arizona Press, Arizona, 1979. 
 
Hall, D. G. E. A History of Southeast Asia, Macmillan Education, London, 1987. 
 
Hall, D. G. E. Burma, Hutchinson University Library, London, 1950. 
 
Hall, D. G. E. Early English Intercourse with Burma, Longmans, Green and Co., 
London, 1928. 
 
Hall, H. Fielding The Soul of A People, Macmillan and Co., Ltd., London, 1909. 
 
Halliday, Robert The Mons of Burma and Thailand, Vol. I, White Lotus Press, 
Bangkok, 2000. 
 
Halliday, Robert The Talaings, Orchid Press, Bangkok, 1999. 
 
Harvey, G. E. History of Burma, Longmans, Green and Co., London, 1925. 
 
Hazra, K. H. PAli Language and Literature, Vol. II, D. K. Printworld, New Delhi, 
1994. 
 
Hazra, K. H. Royal Patronage of Buddhism in ancient India, D.K Printworld, New 
Delhi, 1984. 
 
His Majesty King RAma the Fourth Mongkut (the centenary commemoration of his 
passing away), Mahamakut College, Bangkok, 1968. 
 
Hla, Pan, Nai “Eleven Mon Dhammathat Texts” Biliotheca Codicum Asiaticorum, 
Vol. 6, 1992. 
 
Houtman, Gustaaf Mental Cultural in Burmese Crisis Politics, Institute for the Study 
of Language and Culture of Asia & Africa, Tokyo University, Tokyo, 1999. 
 
341

=== PAGE 349 ===
Houtman, Gustaaf The Tradition of Practice among Burmese Buddhists, 
(Unpublished PhD Dissertation) School of Oriental and African Studies, University of 
London, 1990. 
 
Htin Aung, Maung A History of Burma, Columbia University Press, New York, 1967. 
 
Htin Aung, Maung Burmese Monk’s Tales, Columbia University Press, New York, 
1966. 
 
Htin Aung, Maung Folk Elements in Burmese Buddhism, Oxford University Press, 
London, 1962. 
 
Hutchinson, E. W. trans. 1688 Revolution in Siam: The Memoir of Father de Bèze, s. 
j. White Lotus Press, Bangkok, 2002. 
 
Hutchinson, E. W. Adventurers in Siam in the Seventeenth Century, London, 1940. 
 
Huxley, Andrew “Buddhism and Law: The View from Mandalay” Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 1995. 
 
Ishii, Yoneo “Ecclesiastical Examination in Thailand” Visakhapuja, Annual 
publication of the Buddhist Association of Thailand, Bangkok, 2515/1972. 
 
Ishii, Yoneo Sangha, State and Society, trans. Peter Hawkes, Honolulu University 
Press, Hawaii, 1969. 
 
Kaye, William, John Christianity in India: An Historical Narrative, Smith Elder & 
Company, London, 1959. 
 
Keyes, Charles Thailand: Buddhist Kingdom as Modern Nation-State, D.K Book 
House, Bangkok, 1989. 
 
Keyes, Charles The Golden Peninsula, University of Hawai’i Press, Honolulu, 1995. 
(1st Edition in 1975) 
 
Klausner, W. J. “Buddhist Universities under Royal Patronage: A Tribute to His 
Majesty, the King” Visakhapuja, Bangkok, 1973. 
 
Koenig, J. William The Burmese Polity, Centre for South and Southeast Asian 
Studies, The University of Michigan, 1990. 
 
Kyan, Ma “Mindon’s Councillors” Journal of Burma Research Society, Rangoon, 
XLIX, June, 1961. 
 
La Loubère, de, Simon The Kingdom of Siam, Oxford University Press, London, 
1969. (No translator mentioned.) 
 
Lausoonthorn, Niyada (Prof./ Dr.) Study of the Sources of Triphum Praruang, 
Bangkok, 2000. (2nd Print) 
 
Law, B. C. A History of Pali Literature, Vol. II, London, 1933. 
 
 
342

=== PAGE 350 ===
Law, B. C. The History of the Buddha’s Religion, Luzac and Co., Ltd., London, 1952. 
 
Lingat “History of Wat MahadhAtu” Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. XXIV. I, 
Bangkok, 1930. 
 
Lingat “History of Wat Pavaraniveca” Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. XXVI. I, 
Bangkok, 1933. 
 
Lingat “La vie religieuse du roi Mongkut,” Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 20, Part 
Two, Bangkok, 1927. 
 
Luce, G. H. “The Ancient Pyu” Journal of Burma Research Society, Vol. 27, 1937. 
 
Luce, G. H. The Old Burma – Early Pagan, 2 vols. Locust Valley, New York, 1969-
1970. 
 
Luce, G. H. “Women in the Inscriptions of Pagan” Journal of Burma Research 
Society, Rangoon, Vol. 25, 1935. 
 
Luce, G. H. & Pe Maung Tin, eds. Inscriptions of Burma, Pls. 89, 92, 576A, Rangoon 
University, Rangoon, 1933. 
 
Malalasekera, G. P. Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Vol. II, The Pali Text Society, 
Oxford, 1997. 
 
Malalasekera, G. P. The Pali Literature of Ceylon, The Buddhist Publication Society, 
Kandy, 1994. 
 
Malalgoda, Kitsiri Buddhism in Sinhalese Society, 1750-1900, University of 
California Press, Berkeley, 1976. 
 
Mangrai, Saimong, Sao The Padaeng Chronicle and the Jentung State Chronicle 
Translated, Centre for South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of Michigan, 
(Reprint), Anne Arbor, 2002. 
 
Marks, John, E. Forty Years in Burma, London, 1917. 
 
Maung Than, Tin Maung “Sangha Reforms and Renewal of SAsana in Myanmar” 
Buddhist Trends in Southeast Asia, ed. Trevor Ling, Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, Singapore, 1993. 
 
Maung Tin, Pe & G. H. Luce trans. The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of 
Burma, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1923. 
 
Maung, Maung From Sangha to Laity, Manohar, New Delhi, 1980. 
 
McDaniel, Justin “The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos” Manussaya: 
Journal of Humanities, 4:2002, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 2002. 
 
Mendelson, E. Michael State and Sangha in Burma, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 
1975. 
 
 
343

=== PAGE 351 ===
Methews, Bruce “The Legacy of Tradition and Authority: Buddhism and the Nation 
in Myanmar” Buddhism and Politics in twentieth century Asia, ed. Ian Harris, 
Continuum, London/ New York, 1999. 
 
Metteyya, Ananda, Bhikkhu On Religious Education in Burma, Publication of the 
BuddhasAsana SamAgama No. 2, Rangoon, BE 2446 (1902). 
 
Mile, Leslie (Mrs.) Shans At Home, London, 1910. 
 
Mookerji, R. Kumud Ancient Indian Education, McMillan and Co., London, 1947. 
 
Mukherjee, Aparna British Colonial Policy in Burma: An Aspect of Colonialism in 
South East Asia 1840-1885, Abhinav Publication, New Delhi, 1988. 
 
Myint, Myo The Politics of Survival in Burma: Diplomacy and Statecraft in the Reign 
of King Mindon, 1853-1878, (Unpublished PhD Dissertation) Cornell University, 
Ithaca, 1986. 
 
Myint-U, Thant The Making of Modern Burma, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 2000. 
 
na Nagara, Prasert & A. B. Griswold Epigraphic and Historical Studies, The 
Historical Society Under the Royal Patronage of H.R.H. Princess Maha Chakri 
Siridhorn, Bangkok, 1992. 
 
na Pombejra, Dhiravat A Political History of Siam under the Prasatthong Dynasty, 
1629-1688, (Unpublished PhD Thesis), SOAS, University of London, 1984. 
 
Nisbet, John Burma under British Rule and Before, 2 vols. Westminster, 1901. 
 
Norman, K. R. “Pali Literature” History of Indian Literature, Vol. VII, Otto 
Harrassowitz. Wiesbaden, 1983. 
 
O’Connor, Scott, V. C. Mandalay and Other Cities of the Past in Burma, White Lotus 
Press, Bangkok, 1996 (1st Print 1907). 
 
Olivelle, P. The Origin and the Early Development of Buddhist Monachism, M.D. 
Gunasena, Colombo, 1974. 
 
PaGGAsAmi, SAsanavaMsa, (History of Buddhism in Burma), ed. & trans. Bode, M. H. 
The Pali Text Society, 1996. 
 
Pavaresvariyalongkorn, Kromphraya, SangharAja “A Brief Account of King Mongkut 
(Rama IV): from the time of his ordination as a bhikkhu until his passing-away” 
Visakhapuja, Bangkok, 2513 (1970). 
 
Pe Win, Lu “The Pali Text from Khin Ba-gon” Report of the Superintendent of 
Archaeology, Rangoon, 1940. 
 
Peltier, Anatole-Roger, Tai Khoeun Literature, Ecole Française D’Extreme – Orient 
& Social Research Institute, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 1987. 
 
 
344

=== PAGE 352 ===
Pfanner, David E. Rice and Religion in a Burmese Village, (Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation) Cornell University, Ithaca, 1962. 
 
Phayre, P. Arthur History of Burma, Orchid Press, 1998. (1st Edition 1883) 
 
Rajavaramuni, Phra (Prayud Payutto) Thai Buddhism in the Buddhist World, Amarin 
Printing Group, (Reprint) Bangkok, 1987. 
 
Rahula, Walpola History of Buddhism in Ceylon, M. D. Gunasena, Colombo, 1956. 
 
Rawanswaay, L. F. Van “Translation of Jeremias Van Vliet’s Description of the 
Kingdom of Siam” Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. VII, Part I, Bangkok, 1910. 
 
Ray, Niharranjan An Introduction to the Study of Theravada Buddhism in Burma, 
Calcutta University Press, Calcutta, 1946. 
 
Report of the Pali University Inquiry Committee, Superintendent, Government 
Printing and Stationery, Rangoon, 1941. 
 
Report on Public Instruction in Burma, 1895-1896, Resolution, Superintendent, 
Government Printing and Stationery, Rangoon, 1897. 
 
Report on Public Instruction in Burma, Quinquennial Report, 1917-1922, 
Superintendent, Government Printing and Stationery, Rangoon, 1923. 
 
Reynolds, E. Frank Buddhism and Social Kingship: A Study in the History of Thai 
Religion (Unpublished PhD Dissertation) University of Chicago, 1971. 
 
Reynolds, E. Frank & B. Mani, trans. Three Worlds According to King Ruang, 
University of California Press, Berkeley, 1982. 
 
Reynolds, J. Craig The Buddhist Monkhood in Nineteenth Century Thailand, 
(Unpublished PhD Dissertation), Cornell University, Ithaca, 1972. 
 
Rhys Davis, T. W & Willaim Stede Pali-English Dictionary, The Pali Text Society, 
(Reprint) 1999. 
 
Saito, Teruko & Lee Kin Kiong Statistics on the Burmese Economy, the 19th and 20th 
Century, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore, 1999. 
 
Sangermano, Vincentzo The Burmese Empire A Hundred years Ago, White Orchid 
Press, Bangkok, 1995. (1st Edition 1833) 
 
SangharAja Kromphraya Pavaresvariyalongkorn “A Brief Account of King Mongkut 
(Rama IV): from the time of his ordination as a bhikkhu until his passing-away” 
Visakhapuja, Bangkok, 2513 (1970). 
 
Scott, J. G. Burma from the Earliest Time to the Present Day, T. F. Unwin Ltd., 
London, 1924. 
 
Scott, J. G. Burma: A Handbook of Practical Information, Daniel O’Connor, London, 
1921. 
 
345

=== PAGE 353 ===
Scott, J. G. Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States, 2 vols. in 5 parts, AMS 
Press, (Reprint) New York, 1900-1901. 
 
Sein Ko, Taw (trans.) KalyABI Inscriptions, Education Society’s Steam Press, 
Bombay, 1893. 
 
Sein Ko, Taw “Pali Examinations” Burmese Sketches, Vol. I, British Burma Press, 
Rangoon, 1913. 
 
Skilling, Peter A Note on the History of the BhikkhunI-saNgha (II): The Order of Nuns 
after the ParinirvABa, World Fellowship of Buddhist Review, Vol. XXX, No. 4, 
Bangkok, 1993. 
 
Smith, E. Donald Religion and Politics in Burma, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, 1965. 
 
Smithes, Michael A Resounding Failure: Martin and the French in Siam 1672-1693, 
Silkworm Books, Chiang Mai, 1998. 
 
Snodgrass, Major The Burmese War (1824 – 1826), Ava Publishing House, Bangkok, 
1997. (1st Print, London, 1827) 
 
Sobhana, Sasana, Phra [the present SangharAja], Buddha SAsana VaMsa: A Buddhist 
Monastic Lineage, trasn. into English by KantasIlo, Mahamakut Press, Bangkok, 
1992. 
 
Sobhana, Sasana, Phra [the present SangharAja], “the Government of the Thai 
Sangha” in Visakhapuja, Bangkok, 2510 (1967). 
 
Spiro, Melford E. Buddhism and Society, Harper and Row, New York, 1970. 
 
Stargardt, Janice Fruits of Inspiration: Studies in Honour of Prof. J. G. de Casparis, 
Egbert Forsten, Groningen, 2001. 
 
Stargardt, Janice The Ancient Pyu of Burma, Vol. I, Cambridge University Press, 
1990. 
 
Stargardt, Janice Tracing Thought through Things: The Oldest Pali Text and the Early 
Buddhist Archaeology of India and Burma, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, Amsterdam, 2000. 
 
Strachan, Paul Mandalay: Travels from the Golden City, Kiscadale, 1994. 
 
Swearer, Donald “Centre and Periphery: Buddhism and Politics in Modern Thailand” 
Buddhism and Politics in twentieth century Asia, ed. Ian Harris, Continuum, London/ 
New York, 1999. 
 
Symes, Michael An Account of an Embassy to the Kingdom of Ava, London, 1800. 
 
Tachard, Guy Voyage to Siam 1685, Orchid Press, Bangkok, 1999. (1st Print in 1688) 
 
Tambiah, Stanley World Conqueror and World Renouncer, Cambridge University 
 
346

=== PAGE 354 ===
Press, Cambridge, 1976. 
 
Terwiel, B. J. A History of Modern Thailand, University of Queensland, 1983. 
 
Terwiel, B. J. ed. Buddhism and Society in Thailand, Centre for Southeast Asian 
Studies, Gaya, 1984. 
 
The Pali University and Dhammacariya Act, 1950, Ministry of Information, Rangoon, 
1951. 
 
Thet, Kyaw Burma’s relationship with her eastern Neighbours in the Kon-Baung 
period, 1752-1819, (Unpublished PhD Dissertation) London University, 1950. 
 
Tingsabadh, Charit ed. King Chulalongkorn’s Visit to Europe: Reflections on 
Significance and Impacts, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 2000. 
 
Trager, Frank, N. Burma: From Kingdom to Republic, Pall Mall Press, London, 1966. 
 
Tun, Than “Ayut’ia Men in the Service of Burmese Kings, 16th &17th Centuries” 
Tonan Ajia Kenkyu (Southeast Asian Studies) Journal, vol. 21, No. 4, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, 1984. 
 
Tun, Than Essays on the History and Buddhism of Burma, Kiscadale, Whitting Bay, 
1988. 
 
Tun, Than History of Buddhism in Burma A.D 1000-1300, Burma Research Society, 
Rangoon, 1978. 
 
Tun, Than The History of Shwegyin-nikAya (Shwegyin Sect in the Order of Buddhist 
Monks), Mandalay, 1984. 
 
Turpin, François-Henri A History of the Kingdom of Siam up to 1770, trans. 
Cartwright, B. O., Bangkok, 1997. (1st Edition in 1908) 
 
VajiraGABavarorasa, Prince The Life of Prince-Patriarch VajiraGABa, ed. & trans. 
Craig Reynolds, Ohio University Press, Ohio, 1979. 
 
Vella, W. F Siam Under RAma III, J. J. Augustin, New York, 1957. 
 
Wijayaratana, Mohan Buddhist Monastic Life, Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
 
Woodman, Dorothy The Making of Burma, The Cresset Press, London, 1962. 
 
Wyatt, K. David Studies in Thai History, Silkworm Books, Chiang Mai, 1994. 
 
Wyatt, K. David Thailand: A Short History, Yale University Press, (2nd Edition) New 
Haven, 1984. 
 
Wyatt, K. David The Politics of Reform in Thailand: Education under King 
Chulalongkorn, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1969. 
 
Yamnadda, Saksiri MaNgalatthadIpanI, University of Michigan, Anne Arbor, 1971. 
 
347

=== PAGE 355 ===
Yegar, Moshe The Muslims of Burma, O. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1972. 
 
Young, E. de, John Village Life in Modern Thailand, University of California Press, 
Berkeley, 1966. 
 
Yule, Henry The Mission to the Court of Ava, Oxford University Press, Kuala 
Lumpur, 1968. 
 
Zack, Stephen Buddhist Education Under Prince Wachirayanwarorot, (Unpublished 
PhD Dissertation), Cornell University, 1977. 
 
 
In Pali 
ANguttara-nikAya 
 
DIgha-nikAya 
 
JinakAlamAlI 
 
Majjhima-nikAya 
 
SaMyutta-nikAya 
 
SAsanavaMsa 
 
SumaNgalavilAsinI 
 
Vinaya-piTaka 
 
 
In Thai 
Buddhajayamongkhon 8 phraratchkamnot phrachao krung Thonburi wa duei sin 
sikkha (The Eight Blessings of Buddhism, and Royal Decrees of the King of Thonburi 
Concerning the Precepts of the Monastic Life), Bangkok, 1967. 
 
Damrikul, Soonphon Phaendin Lanna (The Land of Lanna), Muang Borarn Press, 
Bangkok, B.E 2539 (1996). (2nd Edition) 
 
DhammapiTaka, Phra (P. A. Payutto), Bot rian 25 pi khon thai rian ru rue yang (The 
Lessons of 25 Years: Have the Thai People Learnt?), Bangkok, 1998. 
 
Jotmaihet ratchkarn thi sam ( Dispatches of the Third Reign), 5 vols. Harnghunsaun 
Samannitibukkhon Sahaprachaphanit Press, Bangkok, 2530(1986) 
 
Kasetsiri, Charnvit Ayutthaya: prawatsart lae karnmaung (Ayutthaya: History and 
Politics), Toyota Thailand Foundation, (3rd print) Bangkok, 2544. 
 
Khruathai, Phanphen, ed. Wannakam phutthasasana nai lanna (Buddhist Literatures 
 
348

=== PAGE 356 ===
in Lanna), Chiang Mai University Press, Chiang Mai, 2540 (1997). 
 
Kotmai tra sam duang (Laws of the Three Seals), 5 vols, Khrusapha Press, Ladphrao, 
Bangkok, 2537 (1995). 
 
Makchang, Supaporn “Khwanpen ma khong malai sut (The Origin of the Maleyya 
Sutta)” Wattanatham: somphot krung rattanakosin 200 pi (Culture: The 
Commemoration of the 200 Years of the Ratanakosin Dynasty), Thonburi Teachers 
College, Thonburi, 1982. 
 
MaNgalatthadIpanI, (Thai Translation) MahAmakuTa Royal University Press, Bangkok, 
1962. 
 
na Banchang, Supaphan phutthatham thi bien rak tharn sangkhom thai kon smai 
Sukhothai theung kon plienplieng karn bokkhang (Buddhism that was the Root of 
Thai Society before the Sukhothai Period until the Change of the Administrative 
System), Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 2535 (1991). 
 
na Banchang, Supaphan Wiwithanakan gnankhian thi pen phasa bali nai prathet thai 
(Research on Work Written in the Pali Language in Thailand), Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, 1986. 
 
ÏABagambhIra Prachum nanapanha thammawicharn chan ek (A collection of 
Questions and Answers for DhammavicAraBa, Nak Tham Ek), Lieng Chiang Chong 
Chroen, Phra Nakon, Bangkok, 2515 (1972). 
 
Panha lae chaluey nai sanam laung phutthaprawat nak tham tho, 2501-2544 
(Questions and Answers of the phutthaprawat, Nak Tham Tho Level, 2501-2544 
(1955-2000), Lieng Chiang Chong Chroen, Phra Nakon, Bangkok (undated). 
 
Panha lae chaluey nai sanam laung thammawiphak nak tham ek, 2501-2542 
(Questions and Answers of the DhammavicAraBa, Nak Tham Ek Level, 2501-2544 
(1955-2000), Lieng Chiang Chong Chroen, Phra Nakon, Bangkok (undated). 
 
Panha lae chaluey nai sanam laung thammawiphak nak tham tri, 2501-2542 
(Questions and Answers of the DhammavibhAga, Nak Tham Tri Level, 2501-2542 
(1955-1996), Lieng Chiang Chong Chroen, Phra Nakon, Bangkok (undated). 
 
Payutto, P. A Prawat karn suksa khong khana song thai (The History of the Thai 
Sanhga’s Education), Mahachulalongkorn University Press, Bangkok, 2532 (?) 
(1988). 
 
Parian ratchkarn thi ha (The Parian Degree Holders during the Reign of RAma V), 
Sophonphiphattanakorn Press, Bangkok, 2463 (1919). 
 
Phonsawadan phak thi 51 (Chronicle, Part 51) (Correspondences of RAma III),  
Sophon Phiphattanakon Press, Bangkok, 1925. 
 
Phra parawat somdet sankharat haeng krung Ratanakosin sip kao ong phrom duey 
hetkarn song roi pi khong prathet thai (The Biography of the 19 SangharAjas of the 
Ratanakosin Period and the Events in Thailand for the last two Centuries), Dept. of 
Religious Affairs Press, Bangkok, 2546 (2002). 
 
349

=== PAGE 357 ===
Phra phongsawadan krung ratanakosin ratchkarn thi nung, (History of the First 
Reign of the Ratanakosin Era) (Royal edicts collected by Chaophya Thiphakwong 
(Kham Bunnag), Suankulab School, Bangkok, 2538 (1994). 
 
Phraratphongsawadan krung thonburi (Royal Chronicle of Thonburi), Royal 
Institute, Bangkok, 1919. 
 
Ploichum, Suchao Khana song raman nai prathet Thai, (The Mon Sangha in 
Thailand), Mahamakuta Royal University Press, Bangkok, 2544 (2001). 
 
Ploiphum, Suchao Tham niam haeng khana thammayuttika-nikai (The Practice of the 
Dhammayuttika-nikAya), Wat Bovonives, Bangkok, 2541 (1998). 
 
Prachum phraratchputcha phak thi si (Collected Royal Questions) Vol. IV, Bangkok, 
1922. 
 
Prawat karn suksa khong khanasong (History of the Sangha’s Education), 
Department of Religious Affairs, Ministry of Education, Bangkok, 2527 (1983). 
 
Prawat krasong suksathikarn (History of Ministry of Education) 2435-2507 (1891-
1961), Khrusapha Press, Bangkok, 2507 (1961). 
 
Prawat Mahakakut ratchvithayalai nai phra promarachupatham (History of Royal 
Mahamakut University), Mahamakut University, Bangkok, 1983. 
 
Rachanubhab, Damrong, Prince Khwamsongcham [Memoirs], Social Science 
Association of Thailand, Bangkok, 1963. 
 
Rachanubhab, Damrong, Prince Reungtang phra rachakhana phuyai nai krung 
Ratanakosin (The Appointment of High Ecclesiastical Ranks in the Bangkok Period), 
Sophonphiphattanakorn Press, (1st Print) Bangkok, 2466 (1922). 
 
Rachanubhab, Damrong, Prince “Tamnan karn buak phra pariyattitham (History of 
Teaching Pariyatti tham)” Tamnan phra phutthasasana (History of Buddhism), Wat 
Phraphiren, Bangkok, 1970. 
 
Rachanubhab, Damrong, Prince Thai rop phma (The Chronicles of our Wars with the 
Burmese, 1539-1767), trans. Phraison Salarak Thein, White Lotus, Bangkok, 2001. 
 
Rachanubhab, Damrong, Prince Phraratchphongsawadan krung ratanakosin 
ratchkarn thi song, Khru sapha, Phra Nakon, Bangkok, 1962. 
 
Rachanubhab, Damrong, Prince Phraratchphongsawadan krung ratanakosin 
ratchkarn thi ha, Khru sapha, Phra Nakon, Bangkok, 1961. 
 
Ratchakawee (Kasem SaGGato), Phra & Colleagues, Prawat wat rachathiwat wiharn 
(History of the RAjAdhivAsa VihAra), Harng Hun Ltd. Soonwat Press, Bangkok, 2000. 
 
Reung sop tham khong sanam laung phneak tham (The Royal Dhamma 
Examinations: Dhamma Section), Dept. of Religious Affairs Press, Bangkok, 2545 
(2002). 
 
 
350

=== PAGE 358 ===
Roi pi mahamakut ratch withayalai (The Centenary of the Mahamakut Royal 
University), 2436-2536, Mahamakut Royal University, Bangkok, 1994. 
 
Srisuwan, Uthit, Samanen Chaleuy panha wicha samphan p. th 3 (A Collection of 
Syntax for the Prian Tham 3 Level), Lieng Chaing Press, Bangkok, 2534 (1990). 
 
Srisuwan, Uthit, Samanen Panha lae chaleuy bali waiyakorn p.th 3 (A Collection of 
Questions and Answers of Pali Grammar, Parian Tham 3 Level), Bangkok, 2534 
(1990). 
 
Tamnan wat bovonives wiharn (Chronicle of Wat Bovonives), Bangkok Press, 
Bangkok, 2528 (1984). 
 
Tannan phra aram lae thamniep samaBasak (Chronicle pf the monasteries and 
Register of the Ecclesiastical Ranks), Thai Press, Saphanyotse, Bangkok, 2457 
(1913). 
 
Thai-Thai Dictionary, Royal Edition, Wattanaphanit Press, Bangkok, 2530 (1986). 
 
Thammathikoranathipadi, Chao Phraya Parian ratchkarn thi ha (The Parian 
Examinations under RAma V), Sophonpatanakorn Press, Bangkok, 1920. 
 
Thamniep samaBasak gup thamniep parian (Register of the Ecclesiastical Ranks and 
the Parian), Wat Chetuphon, Bangkok, 2473 (1929). 
 
Thepwethi, Phra (Prayud Payutto) Thit than karn suksa khong khanasong, (The 
Direction of Monastic Education), Mahachulalongkorn Royal College, Bangkok, 
2531 (1988). 
 
Thepwethi, Phra (Prayut Payutto) Phra phutthasasana gup karnsuksa nai adid 
(Buddhism and Education in the Past), Mahachulalongkorn University Press, 
Bangkok, 2530 (1986). 
 
Traiphum lok winitchai, camlong cak chabap laung (Exegesis of the Three Worlds 
Copied from the Royal Edition), Bangkok, 1913. 
 
Udomsri, Swaeng Karn bokkhrong khanasong thai, (The Administration of the 
Sangha) Mahachulalongkorn Royal University Press, Bangkok, (undated). 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Phra hattha lekha (His Writtings), Mahamakut 
College Press, Bangkok, 2514 (1970). 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Phra maha samaBa winichai (The Resolutions of 
the Venerable Great Monk), Mahamakut College Press, Bangkok, 2514 (1970). 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Phra mongkon wisesakatha (Textbook of the Nak 
Tham and the Thamma Suksa, 3rd Level), Mahamakut College, Bangkok, 2533 (1989). 
(15th Print) 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, 
Kromphraya 
“Prawat 
chaokhun 
chantharakhochorakhun 
(Biography of Chantharakhochorakhun)” in Phraniphon tang ruang (Miscellaneous 
Works), Mahamakut Press, Bangkok, 1971. 
 
351

=== PAGE 359 ===
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Sasanakhadi anusAsanI (Ecclesiastical Judgements 
and Admonitions), Mahamakut College Press, Bangkok, 2514 (1971). 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Tamnan wat bowonniwetwihan (History of Wat 
Pavaranivesavihara), ed. Rachanubhab, Damrong, Sophonphipatthanakon Press, 
Bangkok, 1922. 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Thalaengkarn khana song (Bulletin of the Sangha), 
Vol. 1, Bangkok, 1913. 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Thamma sompat (SaNgItikathA), Mahamakut 
College, Bangkok, 2533 (1989). (24th Print) 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Wannana phra sut (Commentaries on the 
Discourses), Mahamakut College Press, Bangkok, 2514 (1970). 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya Winaimuk (The Entrance to the Vinaya) 3 vols, 
Mahamakut Press, Bangkok, 1969-72. 
 
Wachirayanwarorot, Kromphraya NavakovAda, Mahamakut College, Bangkok, 2536 
(1993). 
 
Wannakapok, Sathienphong SamaBen lao kaw haeng samaBa, (The Family 
Background of the Novices), Mahachulalongkorn University Press, Bangkok, 2541 
(1998). 
 
 
 
352
