Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_24\documents\2004-Ajis-The_Origins_of_Islamic_Reformism_in_Southeast_Asia.pdf
Total Pages: 4
Statistics: Chars=6360, ThaiWords=1272.0, EnglishWords=1115

--- Page 1 of 4 ---
The Origins of Islamic Reformism in Southeast Asia:
Networks of Malay-Indonesian and Middle Eastern
`Ulama’ in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries
Ayzumardi Azra
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2004. 254 pages.
This book, an extension of Azra’s doctoral dissertation, explores the transmission of Islamic knowledge from the Middle East to the Malay-Indonesian
(Jawi) world. Making use of Arabic biographical dictionaries and scholarly
texts, he produces a historical account arguing that the region’s Islamic
renewal and reformism originated in crisscrossing networks of Islamic scholars based in the Haramayn (Makkah and Madinah) during the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. Azra’s detailed historical research substantiates an
earlier intellectual transmission than previously thought. He contends that
the main ideas transmitted comprised a “neo-Sufism” characterized by harmonizing the Shari`ah and tasawwuf (Sufism) and promoting a return to
orthodoxy, purification, and activism. He makes these arguments in an introduction, seven chapters, and a brief epilogue.
Book Reviews 101

--- Page 2 of 4 ---
The author introduces his study and discusses scholarly figures, social
institutions, networks, and reformist discourses in the seventeenth-century
Haramayn, pointing out that the flowering of Malay-Indonesian Muslim
states in the late sixteenth century and their relations with Middle Eastern
states contributed to a rise of Southeast Asian pilgrims and students seeking
knowledge from the highly esteemed scholars of Makkah and Madinah. Traditional Islamic learning, as he describes it, was based in mosques, madrassahs, ribats, teacher’s homes, and the two Haram mosques. Officially, it was
administered through the religious bureaucracy of the chief qadi (judge) and
the directors of Islamic scholars, as well as of each Haram mosque. Scholars
were linked through vertical and horizontal ties into complicated networks of
hadith chains of authority and tariqah (Sufi order) genealogies.
In chapter 2, he describes the “rapprochement between the shari’ahoriented ‘ulama’ … and the sufis,” which reached its climax during this period (p. 33). He shows that the neo-Sufis sought to incorporate Sufism, which
had captured the Muslim world’s imagination, within a Shari`ah-oriented
perspective by combining it with hadith studies. Nevertheless, the neo-Sufis
looked at hadith studies in an untraditional light, as a way of achieving such
spiritual goals as higher levels of the mystical journey. Azra provides examples from the scholarly works of Ahmad al-Qushashi and Ibrahim al-Kurani,
both of whom emphasized the importance of harmonizing Islam’s exoteric
and esoteric aspects. Moreover, the significant presence of Jawi students in
these networks is reflected by three major works of Haramayn scholars during this period, all of which sought the intellectual reform of “excessive
Sufism” in the Jawi world (p. 43). In addition, the networks’ reformism also
emphasized “the exercise of individual judgment (ijtihad) in religious matters” and activism in which Muslims cooperate “with other Muslims for the
betterment of society” (p. 44).
In chapter 3, Azra considers al-Raniri of Aceh, who studied with Ba
Shayban in India and was appointed khalifah (spiritual leader) of both the
`Aydarusiyyah and Rifa`iyyah orders (p. 57). This scholar rose rapidly to the
position of the Sultanate of Aceh’s shaykh al-Islam and launched his campaign for Islamic renewal to correct what he considered to be misunderstandings of Sufi doctrines, such as notions of wujudiyah as propagated by
some local scholars. A prolific writer, he issued a fatwa that led to the persecution of wujudiyah followers and the burning of their books. Al-Sinkili,
also from Aceh, took a more evolutionary and tolerant posture to local interpretations of Sufi doctrines and reassessed the prevailing conceptions of
muslim, kafir (unbeliever), and tasamuh (tolerance), matters still of significance in many contemporary Muslim societies.
102 The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 24:1

--- Page 3 of 4 ---
In chapter 4, Azra notes that al-Sinkili studied with a number of scholars in Qatar, Yemen, Jeddah, Makkah, and Madinah. He learned tasawwuf
and related sciences from Ahmad al-Qushashi, who appointed him his
Shattariyyah and Qadirriyyah khalifah, but reflected Ibrahim al-Kurani’s
tolerant intellectual demeanor and understanding of Islam (p. 75). AlSinkili spent nineteen years in Arabia before returning to Aceh, where the
sultanah appointed him Qadi Malik al-`Adil (chief religious administrator).
He wrote twenty-two works on Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh), Qur’anic commentary (tafsir), theology ( kalam), and tasawwuf, and prepared the first
Malay tafsir of the entire Qur’an.
Chapter 5 considers al-Maqassari, al-Raniri’s student and al-Sinkili’s
contemporary. Born in South Sulawesi, he studied with al-Raniri and his
teacher Ba Shayban before continuing his studies in the Middle East. Azra
reports that he joined the Naqshabandiyyah and Ba `Alwiyyah tariqahs
while apparently studying hadith, tafsir, fiqh, and other Islamic sciences. AlMaqassari traveled to Banten and began rising among the court elite. When
civil war broke out, he supported the sultan and, after being captured, was
exiled to Sri Lanka and later to South Africa. Similar to al-Sinkili, he distanced himself from pantheism by making a clear distinction between Allah
and His creation. He also stressed that students should practice all of the
Shari`ah’s precepts before entering tasawwuf (p. 107).
Chapter 6 focuses upon al-Palimbani, al-Banjari, and al-Fatani, three
scholars from different parts of the Malay-Indonesian world who were also
cohorts with the same teachers in the Middle East during the eighteenth century. Al-Palimbani and al-Fatani never returned, but appealed to fellow Jawi
Muslims to launch a jihad against the Europeans colonizers. Al-Banjari
returned to Southeast Asia, along with several other Jawi cohorts, where he
launched a reform of the qiblah and the system of administering justice.
Chapter 7 elaborates on neo-Sufi calls for jihad and the Sufi and tariqahbased Padri Movement of West Sumatra, which led to long wars against the
Dutch colonizers. He argues that such neo-Sufi activism refutes the “modernist Muslim” notion that Sufism was passive, escapist, and responsible for
the Muslim world’s regression (p. 139). However, he needs to make a distinction here between the neo-Sufis and the “excessive and extravagant” Sufis to
which he refers in several parts of this book as the primary targets of neo-Sufi
renewal and reformism. 
In the epilogue, Azra discusses the issue of secular and religious time and
leaps over the independence struggle to two post-independence intellectuals
striving to reconcile Islam with modernity and development. It would have
been more consonant with the final chapter to discuss the role of Islamic
Book Reviews 103

--- Page 4 of 4 ---
renewal and reformism in the struggle for political independence. Nevertheless, this book is a major contribution to the study of Islam in Southeast Asia
and provides important insights into neo-Sufism’s significance to scholarly
networks and the transmission of Islamic knowledge from the Middle East to
Southeast Asia.
Timothy P. Daniels 
Assistant Professor of Anthropology
Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York
104 The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 24:1