TAU 
00056300 


\s NOT TO BE ISSUED 
)) §=soouT OF THE LIBRARY. 
sesso see 


Fea Ak AR sASSEASAE ES 7 


BY RT ATT NAT TAT TT TNT 
BOMBAY BRANCH 


oF THE 


TOWN HAL, BOMBAY. 
a a Te 


3 
{ 
» ( 
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, q 
{ 
ia 


Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 23 January, 2019 


INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY 


BY 


JOHANN GEORG BUHLER. 


56300 


EpItrep 


AS AN APPENDIX TO 


THE INDIAN ANTIQUARY, 
VOL. XXXIII, 1904, 


BY 


JOHN FAITHFULL FLEET, 


INDIAN CIVIL SERVICE (RETD.), BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. 


BOMBAY : 


BOMBAY EDUCATION SOCIETY’S PRESS, BYCULLA. 


ITIL 


0056300 


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 3 


value of the results which he has placed before us. In the palseographic line, 
however, as also in the historical line, on which it is largely dependent, and, in 
fact, in every line of Indian research, we are steadily accumulating more fucts 
and better materials, and making substantial progress, every year. I venture, 
therefore, to draw attention to a few details, which already might now be treated, 
or at least considered, from other points of view. 

A notable point, regarding which I differ from the opinions of Professor 
Biihler as expressed in this work, is that of both the relative order and 
also the actual dates of the varieties of the Khardshthi alphabet, indicated on 
page 25 under § 10, (3) and (4), which are found in the epigraphic records and 
on the coins of — (following the order in which, in my opinion, they should 
properly be placed) — Kanishka and Huvishka, ‘Sudasa-‘Sodasa and Patika, 
and Gondophernés. Kanishka certainly founded the Malava-Vikrama era, 
commencing B,C. 58. And in that era there are certainly dated, in addition 
to records of the times of him and his direct successors, the dated records of 
the times of ‘Sudasa-'Sodasa, Patika, and Gondophernés, and of Vasudéva, who 
was a contemporary of Gondophernés.? 

A similar remark applies to the order and dates of the varieties of the 
Brahma or Brahmi alphabet, indicated on page 32, under § 15, (8, 9), from 
records of the times of Kanishka, Huvishka, ‘Sudasa-'Sodasa, and Vasudéva. 

As regards the nomenclature of those same varieties of the Kharéshthi 
alphabet, it is now certain that it is erroneous to describe one of them, mentioned 
there and discussed on page 27 f., as a ‘Saka variety. ‘Sudasa-’Sodaisa and 
Patika were not ‘Sakas, or Sakas, if that should be the correct expression 
according to the original form of the name.* None of the Sakas, ‘Sakas, 
ever played a leading historical part in Northern India. 

In respect of the Eran coin, mentioned first on page 8, which presents 
a reversed Brahmi legend running from right to left, we must not lose sight of 
the possibility that the explanation is to be found, as has been suggested by 


2 See J.RAS. 1905, 232 ff. Regarding Vasashka, Vasushka, whom it has not been necessary 
to mention by name above, see ‘bid. 357 f. 

It may be observed hero that on page 40, line 7 from the bottom, in the words “or of the 
4th century of the Seleucid era,” and in the corresponding place on page 4], line 10, of the German 
text, there must be a slip of the pen. The alternative proposed initial date of Kanishka which 
Professor Biihler had in view, is certainly A. D. 89, And in that year there began the Seleucidan 
year 401; that is, the first year of the fifth (not fourth) century of that era, 

3 For the real meaning of the inscription P. on the Mathura lion-capital, which has been 
. ‘Supposed to mark them as Sakas, 7. e, Sakas, see J-RAS. 1904, 703 ff., and 1905, 154 §. 


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 5 


It would, however, have been contrary to the spirit of the arrangement 


with Dr. Triibner, to introduce any comments and additions of my own, either 
in the text or in footnotes. And I do not find it convenient or appropriate to 
present them here, beyond the extent of the indieations given above. Anything 
of that kind must be left for other occasions. 

My editorial functions in the issue of this English version of Professor 
Biihler’s work have thus been confined to details of a formal kind: chiefly in 
the matter of giving more prominence to the titlings of the sections and the 
divisions of them ; in transferring to a more convenient position, as separated 
footnotes at the bottom of the pages to which they belong, the notes which in 
the German original stand massed together at the end of each section ;° and in 
marking, by figures in square brackets in thick type, the commencement of 
each page of the German original, as closely*as has been found convenient. 
Following, however, an example set by Professor Biihler himself in his 
manuscript, | have gone somewhat further still in breaking up some of the 
very long paragraphs of the original. Following his lead in another direction 
also, I have endeavoured to present everywhere the correct spelling, as far 
as it can be ascertained, of all the place-names which occur in the work ; but, in 
conformity with his practice in this work, without discriminating between the 
long and the short forms of ¢ and 0, And I have corrected a few obvious 
mistakes ; for instance, under § 29, A, in line 18 on page 66, I have substituted 
““ Badami ”’ for the “ Aihole” (properly Aihole) of the German original and of 
the manuscript translation. 

In § 29, page 65 ff., and anywhere else where the word may occur, I have 
taken the liberty of substituting the word “ Kanarese”’ for the “ Kanara ” of the 
German original and of the manuscript translation ; and similarly, on page 46, 
line 4, and page 51, lines 21, 27 f., I have substituted “the Kanarese country ”’ 
for the “Kanara” of the original and of the manuscript. The form “ Kanara,” 
with the lingual 7, is nothing but an imaginative advance upon the official 


figment “ Kanara,” 


with the dental n, for which, itself, there is no basis in 
the Kanarese Janguage, nor any necessity. I had thought at first of using, like 
the late Rev. Dr. Kittel and some other writers, the original vernacular word 


’ which, how- 


* Kannada,”—the source of our conventional “ Canara, Kanara,’ 
ever, do not mean the whole of the Kanarese country. And that word, which 
denotes both the country and its language and also their alphabetical characters, 

6 In doing this, I have corrected a few wrong references which came to notice, and have added 
a very few new refezences which seemed likely to be of use. 


AR or As. Res. 


B.ASRSL ... 
B,ASRWI... 
B.ESIP... 
B.IS a 
BOR ove 
BRW eos 
BW eve 
C.ASR_,.. 
C.CAI ees 
C.0IS +e 
C.CMI _... 


CIA (CII. 1) 


C.MG ee 
D.WA ar 
EI ... sis 
Ep. Carn, ... 
E. TSA wes 
F.GI (CII. 3) 
IA .. x 
IP. Sek 
Sou ave 
JA. 
J.AOS 
J.ASB 
J.BBRAS 
J.RAS ‘cae 
LIA oa 
MBh . 
M.M.HASL 
M.M.RV? ... 
PIA eee 
SBE te 
SB.WA ; 
SII... 

S.IP F 
S.NEI 
W.AA 
W.Ind Str. 
w.Is we 


WZKM 


ZDMG 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS. 


Asiatic Researches. 

Buresss, Archeological Survey Reports, Southern India. 

Burcsss, Archxological Survey Reports, Western India. 

Burnet, Elements of South-Indian Palewography, 2nd ed. 

Bis weR, Indian Studies. 

Babylonian and Oriental Record. 

Borupinex and Roru, Sanskrit-Worterbuch, 

Bortutinex, Sanskrit-Worterbuch in kiirzerer Fassung. 

Cunnincuam, Archeological Survey Reports. 

CunnincHam, Coins of Ancient India. 

Cunnineyam, Coins of the Indo-Scythians, 

Cunnixcuam, Coins of Mediwval India, 

Cunnineuam, Inscriptions of Agoka, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, 
Vol. I. 

CunnincHam, Mahabodhi-Gay@; 7. e., Mahabodhi or the Great Buddhist 
Temple under the Bodhi Tree at Buddha-Gaya. 

Denkschriften der Wiener Akademie. 

Epigraphia Indica. 

Epigraphia Carnatica, ed. Ricr, 

Eutine, Tabula Scripturae Aramaicae, 

Freer, Gupta Inscriptions, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol. III, 

Indian Antiquary. 

Inscriptions de Piyadasi, Smart. 

The Jataka, ed. Fauspoiz. 

Journal Asiatique. 

Journal, American Oriental Society. 

Journal, Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

Journal, Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

Journal, Royal Asiatic Society. 

Lassen, Indische Altertumskunde, 2nd ed. 

Mababhasya, ed. KiznHorn, 

Max Minuer, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. 

Max Minter, Reveda-Samhita with Sayana’s Commentary, 2nd ed. 

Prinsep’s Indian Antiquities, ed. Tzomas, 

Sacred Books of the East. 

Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie. 

South-Indian Inscriptions, ed. Huurzscx. 

Szeynanrt, Inscriptions de Piyadasi. 

Senart, Notes d’ Epigraphie Indienne. 

H. H. Winsor, Ariana Antiqua. 

Wepser, Indische Streifen, 

Wesser, Indische Studien. 

Wiener Zeitschrift fir die Kunde des Morgenlandes ; 7.e., the Vienna 
Oriental Journal. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlindischen Gesellschaft. 


CORRECTIONS AND REMARKS, 


Page 24, line 7 from the bottom; read JA. 1888, II, 230, 


” 


25, line 5; Kaldawa seems to be a mistake for Kaldarra (WZKM. 10, 827) or Kaladara 
Nadi (J.RAS. 1908, 14). 

» line 19; da seems to be a mistake (of the original) for dha. 

29, line 5 from the bottom ; for na, read a, 

32, line 5, and in some subsequent places ; for Ghasundi, read Ghasundi, 

» line 2 of the notes, and page 41, § 20, A; for another reproduction of the Girnir 
Pragasti, or Junagadh inscription, of the time of Rudradaman, which is the basis of 
col. VI. of plate III, see, now, EI, 8, 44. 

40, line 9; for Sudasa, read Sudasa. 

» line 7 from the bottom; regarding the words “or of the 4th century of the Seleucid 
era,” see Introductory Note, p. 3, note 2. 

61, note 1; for another reproduction of the Vakkaléri plates of A. D. 757, which are the 
basis of col. XVI. of plate VII, see, now, EI. 5, 202. 

64, note 10, end; read Santivarman (see, now, Ep. Carn. 7, Sk. 176, for one reproduction 
of this record, and EI. 8, 32, for another). 

69, line 9; it may be remarked that the original identification of Kalinganagara with 
Kaliigapattanam (Kalingapatam), on the coast, has been superseded ; the ancient 
city is represented by the site now covered by the villages Mukhalingam and 
Nagarakatakam and the ruins between them, inland in the Gafijim district ; 
see, e. J. EL, 4, 187 £, 

81, line 8 from the bottom ; the German original (p. 77, line 35) has ‘50, 60, 70;” in his 
English manuscript, Professor Buhler wrote “50, 60, 70,” and then corrected the 
50 into 10. 

86, bottom ; it may be remarked that this system of numeral notation is commonly called 
the Katapayadi system, from the initial consonants of the four lines. 


INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY 


FROM ABOUT B.C. 350 TO ABOUT A. D. 1300 
BY 


G. BUHLER. 


I. THE ANTIQUITY OF WRITING IN INDIA AND THE ORIGIN OF THE 
OLDEST INDIAN ALPHABET. 


§ 1.— The Indian tradition! 


Tus tradition of both the orthodox and the heterodox sects of India ascribes the invention 
of writing, or at least of the chief script, to the creator Brahma, and thereby claims it as a 
national invention of the remotest antiquity. The former view is found in the Narada-Smrti,? 
a redaction of the Manusamhija (mentioned by Bina about A. D. 620), and in Brhaspati’s 
Varttika on Manu,® as well as in Hiuen Tsiang‘ and in the Jaina Samavayanga-Sitra (tradi- 
tional date about B. ©. 300), the account of which latter work is repeated in the Pannayani- 
Siitra (traditional date B. C. 168).5 The story is also indicated in the representations of 
Brahma at Badimi of about A. D. 580, where the deity holds in one of his hands a bundle of 
palm-leaves,® for which in later representations an inscribed sheet of paper is substituted.? 


The story, according to which in particular the Indian script ronning from the left to the 
right is an invention of Brahmi (Fam), is told in full in the Chinese Buddhistie Fawanshnlin.® 
The two Jaina works mentioned above, and the Lalitavistara,® indicate its existence by naming 
the most important script baméki or brahmi, These traditional statements make it advisable to 
adopt the designation Brahmi for the characters in which the majority of the Asoka edicts are 
written, and for their later developments. 


Beriini!® mentions a slightly different story. He says that the Hindus once had forgotten 
the art of writing, and that through a divine inspiration it was rediscovered by Vyasa, the son 
of Paragara. Accordingly, the history of the Indian alphabets would begin with the Kaliyuga, 
in B.C. 3101. 


While these myths tend to show that the Hindus had forgotten the origin of their alphabet 
in early times, — perhaps already about B.C. 300, but certainly before the beginning of our 
era, — there are some other portions of their traditions which possess a greater and a positive 
value. The two Jaina Sitras referred to above, contain a list of 18 separate alphabets; and 
the Lalitavistara!! enumerates 64 scripts which are said to have existed in the time of Buddha. 
Several among the names of the two lists agree, and there are in particular four which, as 
may have been already recognised, have a claim to be considered authentic and historical. 


1 BIS. I1J?, 28-85 ; comp. Anecdota Oxon., Aryan Series, I, 3, 67; B.ESIP. 6; A. Lupwie, Yavanani, Sitz. 
Ber. Bohm, Ges. d. Wiss. 1893, IX., and the works quoted by Dr. BUENELL. 


2 SBE, 23, 58 f. + SBE, 23, 304, 4 Siyuki 1, 77 (Bean). 5 W.IS. 16, 280, 399. 
6 TA, 6,366, Pl T Moor, Hindu Pantheon, Pl. 3,4; AR. 1, 248. 8 BOR. 1, 59. 
9 Sansk. text, 143 (Bibl. Ind.), and the Chinese translation of A. D. 308. 10 India 1,171 (Sacw ~ 


Ni loc. ctt. ; a third list, with about 30 mostly very corrupt names, in the Mahavastn 1, 135 (SenaBr). 


2 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. 


Besides the drahmi or bambhi, which is the parent of all the still existing alphabets of India, 
two more can be identified with known scripts. The kharosthi or kharottht is, as the Fawan- 
shalin states,! the writing running from the right to the left, invented by one Kharostha, 
“ Ass-lip,’’2 and is the same character which European scholars formerly used to call Bactrjan, 
Indo-Bactrian, Bactro-Pali, Ariano-Pali, &c. The dravidi or damili of the lists is very [2] prob- 
ably the partly independent variety of the Brahmi, which recently has become known through 
the relic vessels from the Stiipa of Bhattiprola in the Kistna district. Besides, the name 
puskarasari or pukkharasariya is certainly historical, as it is evidently connected with the 
nomen gentile Puskarasadi or Pauskarasadi (with the Northern Buddhists Puskarasari) by which 
one or several ancient teachers of law and grammar are mentioned in Panini’s grammar, 
Apastamba’s Dharmasiitra, and other works. It appears not incredible that a member of the 
family of Puskarasad may have invented a new alphabet or modified an existing one- The list 
of the Jainas includes also the name yaranaliya or yavananiya, which is identical with yavanani, 
“ the writing of the Yavanas or Greeks,” of Panini (traditional date about B, C. 350).4 An 
early acquaintance of the Hindus with the Greek alphabet may have been brought about by 
the expedition of Skylax to North-Western India in B. C. 509, or by the fact that Indian and 
Gandharian troops took part in Xerxes’ war against Greece,> and even by an ancient com- 
mercial intercourse. At all events, finds of Indian imitations of Attic drachmes with Greek 
inscriptions tend to prove the use of the Greek alphabet in North-Western India before the 
time of Alexander.6 


As some names of the Jaina list are thus shuwn to be ancient by the results of epigraphic 
researches and by Panini, as well as by the agreement of the independent tradition of the 
Northern Buddhists, the list is not without historical value. And it may be considered at least 
highly probable that a fairly large number of alphabets was known or used in India about 
B.C. 300. The exact number, 18, which the Jainas mention, must however be taken merely 
as conventional, as it frequently occurs in traditional statements. 


An extract from the lost Drstivida of the Jainas also gives some further account of the 
ancient Brahmi.’ It states that this alphabet contained only 46 radical signs, instead of the 
usual number of 50 or 51. The letters intended are without a doubt: 4, 4,1, 1, U, CU, #, Al, 
O, AU (10), Am, Ah; ka, kha, ya, gha, na, ca, cha, ja (20), jha, iia, ta, tha, da, dha, na, ta, tha, 
da (30), dha, na, pa, pha, ba, bha, ma, ya, ra, la (40), va, &a, sa, su, ha, la; while the matrkas 
R, R, L, L, and the ligature ksa, which in later times was often erroneously considered 
a matrka, were excluded. The four liquid vowels are wanting also in the alphabet of the Lalita- 
vistara,® and in that of the modern elementary schools. In the latter the instruction is based 
on the so-called Barakhadi (Skt, dradasaksart), a table of the combinations of the consonants with 
the twelve vowels mentioned above, ¢.9., ka, ka, to kam, kuh, The antiquity of the Barakhadi, 
which from its Maigala Om namah siddham is at present sometimes called Siddhaksarusamamnaya 
or Sitddhamatrka, is attested by Hui-lin (A. D. 788—810),®? who mentions it as the first of the 
twelve fan or ‘cycles’ (evidently Hiuen Tsiang’s twelve chang)}° with which the Hindu boys 
began their studies. Further evidence for the omission of the vowels FR, R, L, L is furnished 
by Hiuen Tsiang’s remark! that the Indian alphabet of his time contained 47 letters (the Tast 
one being probably the ligature ksa), and by the fragments of the incomplete alphabet of 
Asoka’s stone-masons at Gaya,!? which may be restored as follows: A, *.4, *J, *J, *U, *U, *£, 
*Al,*O, *AU (10), *Am or * 4h, ka, *kha, *ga, *gha, aa, *ca, cha, *ja, *jha (20), *ia, *ta, 


1 BOR. 1, 59. 2 Comp. WZKM. 9, 63, and B.IS. IIf?, 113 f. 8 EI. 2, $23 ff, 

# Mahabhasya 2, 220 (KigLHORN). 5 Herodotus, VII, 65, 6 
6 B. V. Heap, Cat. of Greek Coins: Attica, p. XXXI.f., pp. 25—27. t WIS. 16, 281. 

§ Sansk. text, Bib]. Ind, 145; Leymann, 127, 9 B.IS, ITI 2, 30. 


10 Siyuki 1, 78 (BEAL) ; St. JULIEN, Mémoires des pélerins Bouddhiques 1, 72, and note. 
W Siyuki 1, 77. 12 BIS. III’, 31. 


§ 2, AL] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 3 


All these various points tend to show that the popular Brahmi contained, as the Jaina 
tradition asserts, slate the third century B. C. only 46 letters, and that, as the occurrence of 
the vowels AZ, AU, Am, Ah and the consonant na proves, it was adapted to the wants of the 
Sanskrit language, But it is not [8] improbable that the Brahmans already then used parti- 
cular signs for the liquid vowels in their works on grammar and phonetics. The method, 
however, according to which the actually known signs for these sounds have been formed, 
differs from that adopted for the other vowel-signs. The medial 7, 7, and / were developed 
first, and the initials later ; while in the case of a, 4, &c., the process was the contrary one 
(see below, § 4, and § 24, A, 6,7). The Chinese have also preserved an Indian tradition assert- 
ing that 7, #, and { are later additions to the original alphabet. 


§ 2. — Literary evidence for the use of writing. 
A. — Brahmanical literature.” 


Among Vedic works, the Vasistha Dharmasiitra, which according to Kumirila (about 
A. D. 750) originally belonged to a school of the Rgveda, and which is younger than the lost 
Mianava Dharmasitra but older than the existing Manusamhita,? offers clear evidence for the 
widely spread use of writing during the “ Vedic” period. Vasistha in XVI, 10, 14—15, men- 
tions written documents as legal evidence, and the first of these siitras is a quotation from an 
older work or from the traditional lore, Further, Panini’s grammar, which belongs to the 
Vediiigas, contains, besides the term yavangnt mentiored above, the compounds lipikara and 
litikara, “writer”? (III, 2, 21), which sometimes have been rendered errroneously, against the 
authority of the Kosas, by ‘maker of inscriptions.”4 Jn addition to these few certain passages, 
the later Vedic works contain some technical terms, such as aksara, kanda, patala, grantha, &e., 
which some scholars have quoted as evidence for writing. But others have explained them 
differently, and it is indeed not necessary to consider them as referring to written letters and 
MSS5 Similarly, opinions are much divided with respect to the force of some other general 
arguments for the early use of written documents and MSS., drawn from the advanced state 
of Vedic civilisation, especially from the high development of trade and the complicated 
monetary transactions mentioned in Vedic works, from the use of prose in the Brahmanas 
from the collection, the methodical arrangement, the numeration, and the analysis of the 
Vedic texts, and from the grammatical, phonetic, and lexicographic researches in the 
Vediiigas.6 Though some of these points, especially the first and the last, undeniably possess 
considerable weight, they have yet not gained general recognition, as will always happen if an 
argumentum ex impossibili is used, even if it should be supported by fuller special enquiries than 
Sanskrit scholars have hitherto devoted to these subjects. 


While this kind of evidence will probably not be generally accepted very soon, it is to be 
hoped that the argumentum ex stlentio, — the inference that a Vedie work which does not 
mention writing must have been composed when writing was unknown in India, — will be 
dropped. The argumentum em silentio is certainly net conclusive, because the Hindus even at 
present, in spite of a long continued use of writing. esteem the written word less than the 
spoken one, because they base their whole literary and scientific intercourse on oral com- 
munications, and because, especially in scientific [4] works, writing and MSS. are mentioned 
very rarely. Though MSS., being Sarasvatimukha, “the face of the goddess of speech,” are 


1 B.IS. II, 33. 

2 BIS, III?,5f.; M.M.HASL. 497 ff. ; L.IA.2, 1, 1008 &.; B.ESIP, 1 ff.; Wener, Ind. Streifen 3, 248 f. 

3 SBE. 14, XVII ff. # M.M.RBV.2, 4, LXXII. 

’ M.M.HASL. 521 ff.; Goupstucker, Manava Kalpasitra, Intr. 14 ff.; W.IS. 5, 16 ff.; M.M.RV.3, 4, 
LXXII ff. 

4 WHITNEY, Or. and Ling. St. 82; J.AOS. 6, 563; Benrey, ZDMG. 11, 347; Bouriines, Bull, Pet. Akad. 
1859, 347; PrschEL and GeLpNzR, Vedische Studien, 1, XXIII, XXV1; J. Danumann, Das Mahabh. 185; against 
these views, M.M.RV.24, loc. cit. ; Letter in Takakusn’s transl. of Itsing, X ff.; W-.IS, 5, loo. oit. 


4 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 2, B. 


held sacred and are worshipped, the Veda and the Sastras exist, even for the modern Hindn, 
only in the mouth of the teacher, whose word has more weight than a written text, and they 
can only be learned properly from a teacher, not from MSS, Even in our days, the Hindus 
esteem only the mukhastha vidya, the learning which the Pandit has imprinted on his memory, 
Even in our days, learned discussions are carried on with reference to living speech, and even 
the modern poets do not wish to be read, but hope that their verses will become “ ornaments 
for the throats of the learned” (sata@m kanthabhisana), As far as our observation reaches, 
this state of things has been always the same since the earliest times. Its ultimate cause 
probably is that the beginning of the Hindu Sastras and poetry goes back to a time when 
writing was unknown, and that a system of oral teaching, already traceable in the Rgveda, 
was fully developed before the introduction of written characters. The reasons just stated 
do not permit us to expect many traces of the use of writing in the works of the schools of 
priests or Pandits, or to look in them for frequent references to letters and written documents. 
But, on the other hand, there is nothing to bar the conjecture, repeatedly put forward, that, 
even during the Vedic period, MSS. were used as auxiliaries both in oral instruction and on 
other occasions. And, as an argument in favour of this conjecture, it is now possible to adduce 
the indisputable fact that the Brahmi alphabet has been formed by phonologists or by gram- 
marians and for scientific use.1 


But such Brahmanical works as the Epics, Puranas, Kavyas, dramas, &c., which describe 
actual life, or the metrical law-books which fully teach not only the sacred but also the civil 
and criminal Jaw, as well as compositions such as the Niti-, Natya-, and Kima-éistras which 
exclusively refer to worldly matters, contain numerous references to writing and to written 
documents of various kinds, and likewise evidence for the occurrence of MSS. of literary works. 
Unfortunately, however, it is not possible to assert of any of the existing books of these 
classes, — excepting the two Epics, — that they are older than the period to which the oldest 
inscriptions belong. And even the evidence of the Epics may be impugned, since we cannot 
prove that every word of their texts goes back to a high antiquity. Professor JAcosi’s exami- 
nation of the several recensions of the Ramayana has shown that the greater part of the verses, 
now read, did not belong to the original poem.? As far as is known at present, the MSS. of the 
Mahabharata do not show eqnally great variations. But the existence of the majority of its 
chapters can be proved only for the eleventh century A.D. Though the testimony of the 
Epics can, therefore, only be used with due reserve, yet it is undeniable that their terms regard- 
ing writing and writers arearchaic. Like the canonical works of the Southern Buddhists,* they 
use the ancient expressions [ikh, lekha, lekhaka, and lekhana, not the probably foreign word lips. 


The most important passages of the Epics, concerning writing, have been collected in 
the St. Petersburg Dictionary under the words mentioned, and by J. Dan~mann, Das Maha- 
bharata, 185 ff. Regarding the passages on writing in Manu, see the Index in Sacred Books of 
the East, Vol. XXV, under “ Documents,” and for the legal documents, described in the later 
Smrtis, see Vol. IT. of this Encyclopedia, Part 8, Recht and Sitte, § 35. An interesting collec- 
tion of statements regarding MSS. in the Puranas is found in Hemadri’s Danakhanda, Adhy. 7, 
p. 544 ff. (Bibl. Ind.), The Kamasitra I, 3 (p. 33, Durgaprasid) enumerates pustakaracana, 
“the reading of MSS.,” among the 64 kalis. 


B.— Buddhistic literature,> 


§2, BJ INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY, 5 


and lekhaka, “a writer,’ are mentioned in the Bhik | a-Pacittya 2, 2, and in the Bhikkhuni- 
Pacittiya 49, 2; and the former work praises writing a: branch of knowledge thatis honoured 
in all countries. The Jatakas repeatedly speak of private! and official? letters, They also 
know of royal proclamations,’ of which Mahavagga 1, 43 likewise mentions an instance; and 
they narrate that important family affairs or moral and political maxims were engraved on gold 
plates4 Twice we hear of debtor’s bonds (‘napanna),> and twice even of MSS. (potthaka).® 
A game called akkharika is mentioned repeatedly in the Vinayapitaka and the Nikayas;? accord- 
ing to Buddhaghosa, its main feature was that letters were read in the sky. The Parajika 
section of the Vinayapitaka (3, 4, 4) declares that Buddhist monks shall not ‘“incise” (chind) 
the rules which show how men may gain heaven, or riches and fame in the next life, through 
particular modes of suicide. From this passage it follows (1) that the ascetics of pre-Buddhistic 
times used to give their lay-disciples rules, incised on bamboo or wooden tablets, concerning 
religious suicide, which the ancient Brahmans and the Jainas strongly recommended, and 
(2) that the knowledge of the alphabet was widely spread among the people. . 


Finally, Jataka No. 125, and Mahiavagga 1, 49,8 bear witness to the existence of elemen- 
tary schools, in which the method of teaching and the matter taught were about the same as in the 
indigenous schools of modern India. The Jataka mentions the wooden writing-board (phalaka), 
known (as-well as the varnaka or wooden pen) also to the Lalitavistara? and to Berini,! and 
still used in Indian elementary schools. The passage of the Mahavagga gives the curriculum 
of the schools, leth@, ganana and rapa, which three subjects, according to the Hathigumpha 
inscription of the year 165 of the Maurya era,!! king Kharavela of Kalinga learnt in his child- 
hood. Lekha, of course, means “ writing,” and ganana, “arithmetic,” t.e., addition, substrac- 
tion and the multiplication-table formerly called axku and now ak, while riya, literally “forms,” 
corresponds to applied arithmetic, the calculations with coins, of interest and wages, and tu 
elementary mensuration. These three subjects are still “the three R’s” taught in the 
indigenous schools called gamlt nisal, pathsali, lehéad or toll. 


These very plain statements of the Ceylonese canon refer certainly to the actualities of the 
period between B. C. 506—400, possibly even of the sixth century. Their antiquity is 
proved also by the fact that all the terms for writing, letters, writers, — chindatt, likhati, lekha, 
lekhaka, akkhara, — as well as nearly all the writing materials, wood or bamboo, panna or leaves, 
and suvannapattia or gold plates, point to the oldest method of writing, the incision of the signs 
in hard materials. All traces of the use of ink are wanting, though the statements of 
Nearchos and Q. Curtius regarding the writing materials used at the time of Alexander’s inva- 
sion (see below under C) make it very probable that ink was known in the fourth century B.C., 
and though an ink-inscription of the third or second century B. C. is found on the inner side 
of the lid of the relic vessel from Stiipa No. III. at Andher.!3 Moreover, the Ceylonese bouks 
are not acquainted with the words lipi, libt, dipt, dipati, dipapati, lipikara and libikera for 
“writing,” “to write,” and ‘“ writer,” of which the first six are found in the [6] ASoka edicts 
and the last two, as stated above, in Panini’s grammar. Dipz and liptare probably derived from 
the Old Persian dip:, which cannot have reached India before the conquest of the Patjab by 
Darius about B. C. 500, and which later became lipi.14 


= 


i BIS, IT, 7 £. 2 BIS, IIL, 8 f., 120. 5 B.IS. ITI, 10, 18, 

4 BIS, If2, 10 f. 5 BIS, I1T2, 10, 120. 6 B.IS. IIT?, 120, 

7 BAS, IL, 16. 8 BIS. ITE, 13 #. 9 Sansk, text, 143; comp. BUR, 1, 5, 
10 India 1, 182 (SacHav). lt Sixth Oriental Congress. 3, 2. 154, s 


12 BES. IG, 15 ff; OLDENBERG, Vinzyapitika 1, XXXIV ff.; M. Munuus, SBE, 10, XXIX ff. 
13 CunninaHam, Bhilsa Topes, p. 34, pl. 30, 6. 
4 BIS. TI, 21 f.: Westergaargp, Zwei Abhandl. 33 


6 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 3. 


c.— Tf reign Works, 


To the last quarter of the fon century B. C. refer the statement of Nearchos,! 
according to which the Hindus wrote letters on well beaten cotton cloth, and the note of 
Q. Curtius,? which mentions the tender inner bark of trees as serving the same purpose, and 
clearly points to the early utilisation of the well known birch bark, The fact that, according 
to these two writers, two different ¢ndigenous Indian materials were used in B. C. 827—-325, 
shows that the art of writing was then generally known and was nothing new. Toa slightly 
later time belongs the fragment No. 36 a of Megasthenes,? which speaks of mile-stones indicat- 
ing the distances and the halting places on the high roads. In another often discussed 
passage,4 Megasthenes says that the Indians decided judicial cases according to unwritten 
laws, and adds in explanation that they knew no ypdppora and settled everything dé pynyns. 
According to the now usual interpetation, this statement has been caused by a misunderstand- 
ing. ‘_gasthenes took the term smrti, used by his informants, in the sense of prijun, 
“memory,” while they meant it in the sense of “the sacred tradition concerning law,” or ‘‘ the 
lawbooks,’”’ which, according to Indian, principles, can only be explained orally by one who 
knows the Dharma, 

§ 3.— Paleographic evidence.® 


The results of a paleographic examination of the most ancient Indian inscriptions fully 
agree with the literary evidence, which bears witness to the widely spread use of writing 
during the fifth century B. C. and perhaps even during thesixth. The characters of the Agoka 
edicts, which have to be considered first, prove very clearly that writing was no recent inven- 
tion in the third century B.C. The alphabet of the edicts is not homogeneous. All the letters, 
with the exception of U, jha, na, iia, tha, na, tha and na, have several often very dissimilar forms, 
which are partly local and partly cursive varieties. The number of the variants of oue letter 
sometimes amounts to nine or ten, Thus plate II, 1, 2, cols. II—XII, shows for 4, .4, no less than 
ten forms, among which the eight most important ones may be placed here side by side: — 


AWXNWaA 


The first sign has hardly any resemblance to the last. But the sequence in the row shows 
their connection and their development. The first seven owe their existence to a predilection 
partly [7] for angles and partly for curves, — two mutually contradictory tendencies, which find 
their expression also in the forms of other letters of pl. II, such as gha, da, da, la, &c. The 
signs Nos. J, 2, 3 of the series given above, are due to the first tendency, and Nos. 6, 7 
to the second. Nos. 4, 5 show the transition from the angle to the curve, and No. 8 is 
@ cursive simplification of No. 6. These eight signs are not found in all the versions of 
the Asoka edicts, bat are divided locally as follows. The angular forms Nos, 1, 2, 3 
appear only in the south, in Girnar, Siddipura, Dhauli, and Jaugada, side by side with 
Nos. 4 to 7 And it must be noted that the latter are rare in Girnir and Niddipora, 
but in the majority in Dhauli and Jaugada. In the versions discovered north of the 
Narmada or the Vindhya, we find mostly only Nos. 4 to 7, but in Kalsi No. 8 also is commun, 
and it occurs a few times in Rimpiirva. Hence the angular forms of A, 4, appear to he 
specially southern ones, and they are no doubt also the most ancient, The first inference is 
confirmed by a comparison of the most nearly allied inscriptions. The relic vessels from Kolha- 
pur® and Bhattiprolu (pl. II, cols. XTII—XV), and the oldest Andhra inscription from the 
Nanaghat (pl. II, cols. XXIII, XXIV) again show the augular A, 4, either exclusively or 

1 Straho, XV, 717. 2 Hist, Alex. VIII, 9; comp. C. MUnuer, Fragm. Hist. Graec. 2, 421. 

3 GC. MULLER, op. cit. 430, 

* Frag. 27; C. MULLER, op. cit. 421 ; Scnwanpeck, Megasthenes, p. 50,n. 48; MM HASL.515; B.ESIP, 1; 


LIA. Il, 724; Weser, Ind. Skizzen 131 f, 
5 BIS, TT?, 35—53. 6 B. ASRWI. No. 10, 3. : 


“1 


§3] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY, 


together with the mixed forms Nos. 4, 5, while the numerous inscriptions found further north 
on the Stipas of Safici and Bharahut, in Pabhosa and Mathura (pl. I, cols. XVITI— 
XX) on the coins of Agathocles, and in the Nagarjuni cave (pl. II, col. XVII), offer 
either pure curved letters or mixed ones. An exception in Mahabodhi-Gaya! is probably 
explained by the fact that pilgrims from the south incised records of their donations at the 
famous sanctuary. Similar differences between northern and southern forms may be observed 
in the case of kha, ja, ma, ra and sa,2 and they are all the more important as the circumstances 
under which the Asoka edicts were incised did not favour the free use of local forms.’ But 
the existence of local forms always points to a long continued use of the alphabet in which it 
is observable. 


Equally important is the occurrence of apparently or really advanced and cursive types 
which for the greater part reappear or become constant in the later inseriptions, The 
subjoined table shows in line 4 the most important modern looking signs from t! Aéoka 
edicts, and in line B the corresponding ones from later inscriptions. 


@ he bha ga gha cha ja da 
ooo 


LEE 
# Gs 9 


H+ 4% 2 4 4 
2Ht4?AAn 
> 2 3 #4 = § 6 


oa p2 ‘a- 
4$e$,b6adt 8b Sd’ LU 
BS b 

12 13 14.215 ~~ 17 1§ 19 20 24 23 


Four among these signs, Nos. 2, 7, 10, 21, are, as will appear further on,‘ really archaic, 
but the remainder are partly secondary, partly tertiary cursive forms. To the last-mentioned 
belong in particular Nos, 4, 8. 11,15 and 19. [8] Among the letters from the later inscrip- 
tions in line B, Nos. 9, 11, 12 and 19 appear in the Nagirjuni cave inscriptions of Asoka’s 
grandson Dagaratha ; Nos. 2, 6—8, 10, 13—16 and 21 in Kharavela’s Hathigumpha inscription 
and in the oldest Andhra inscriptions, Nasik No. land Nanaghat, as well as in the archaic 
Mathura inscriptions, all of which documents belong to the period between about B. C. 
170 and 150. Nos. 1,3 and 22 are still later, and occur first inthe inscriptions of the 
Kusanas from Mathura and in the Andhra and Abhira inscriptions from Nisik of the first 
and second centuries A.D. Occasionally the ASoka edicts show also the short top-stroke, 
the so-called Serif, which is so characteristic for the later alphabets and causes numerous 
modifications. Very commonly. too, appear the upward strokes for medial @ and e, the 
cursive roanded ¢ (in Girnfr sometimes not distinguishable from @), more rarely the later 
straight o-stroke, and once a looped o.6 Finally, the Anusvara sometimes stands, as is 
generally the case in later times, above the letter after which it is pronounced.” 


The existence of so many local varieties, and of so very numerous cursive forms, 
proves in any case that writing had had a long history in Asoka’s time, and that the alphabet 
was then in a state of transition. The use of the cursive forms together with archaic ones 
may possibly be explained by the assumption that several, partly more archaic and partly 
more advanced, alphabets were simultaneously used during the third century B. C., and that 


1O.MG. pl. 10, 2, 2 See below, § 16, C. 8 See below, § 16, B. # See below, § 4, A. 
5 See below, § 16, C. 6 See below, 316, C. 1 See below, § 16, D. 


8 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 3. 


the writers, intending or ordered to use lapidary forms, through negligence mixed them with 
the more familiar cursive letters, as has also happened not rarely in later inscriptions. It is 
possible to adduce in favour of this view the above-mentioned tradition of the Drstivada, 
according to which a larger number of alphabets was in use about B, C. 300, The conjecture 
would become a certainty, if it could be shown that the word sefo, “ the white (elephant ),” 
which has been added to Dhauli edict VI. in order to explain the sculpture above the middle 
column, was incised at the same time as the preceding edicts. The two characters of setoshow 
the types of the Kusana and Gupta inscriptions! Thongh it is difficult to understand that, in 
later times, anybody should have cared to add the explanation of the relief, keeping exactly 
the line of the edict, the possibility of the assumption that this was actually done, is not 
altogether excluded. 


The Eran coin with the legend running from the right to the left,? offers a contribution to 
the earlier history of the Brahmi, It shows the ancient sa with the straight side-stroke, but the 
later ma with the semicircular top, and the dha turned to the left. The coin probably dates 
from the time when the Brahmi was written both from the right to the left and from the left 
to the right. Even if one makes due allowance for the fact that coins often reproduce archaic 
forms long gone out of fashion, one can only agree with Cunnincuam (CAI, 101), who thinks 
that the coin is older than the Maurya periud ; and one must allot it, if not to B.C, 400, at least 
to the middle of the fourth century. The time when the Brahmi was written Sovarpopnddy 
probably lies somewhat before the Maurya period, since the Asoka edicts show only few traces 
of the writing from right to left, in the O of Jaugada and Dhanli and in the rare dha of Jangada 
and Delhi-Sivalik (plate II, 8, VI, and 26, V, VI).? In connection with this coin it is also 
necessary to mention the Patna seals (C.ASR. 15, pl. 3, 1, 2), which very likely are older than 
the time of the Mauryas. The first with the legend Nadaya ( Namdaya ),‘‘ (the seal) of 
Nanda,’ shows a da open to the right, [9] and the second with the inscription Agapalasu 
( Amgapalassa ) shows an A in its original position (pl. II, 1,1). More important results for 
the history of the Brahmi may be obtained from the Dravidi of the relic caskets of Bhat- 
tiprolu,‘ already referred to above. This alphabet contains, besides various characters agree- 
ing with the southern variety of the Asoka edicts, (1) three signs, dk, d and OA, in the position 
of the writing running from right to left; (2) three signs, c, j ands, which are more 
archaic than those of the Asoka edicts and of the Eran coin ; (3) two signs, / and /, derived 
independently from the old Semitic originals ; (4) one new sign, gh, derived from g, the mairka 
qha of the Brahmi being at the same time discarded. The reasons for the assertions under 
2 and 8 will be adduced in the next paragraph. But if the assertions themselves are true, it 


" 


§ 4.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 


together with transcripts in Kharogihi.1 These coins are certainly not later than the third 
century B,C. Perhaps they even date, as CunnincHau thinks, from a much earlier time 
about B, 0. 400. Some of them have been struck by neyama or guilds, thuse of the Dujaka 
or Dujaka, of the Talimata and of the Afakataka (2), and one with the inscription Vufasvaka 
probably was issued by a section of the tribe of the Asewhkus (Assakenot), named after the vata- 
tree, the Ficus religiosa, These finds decidedly establish the popular use of the Brahmi in the 
Paiijab, side by side with the Kharoghi, at least for the third century B. C. Mr. Rapson’s 
discovery of Persian stylo¢ with letters in Kharosthi and in Brahmi proves that both alphahets 
were used together much earlier.2 For, in all probability these siylut were current during the 
rule of the Akhaemenians over North-Western India, or before B, C. 331. 


Secondly, Dr. Tayzor’s view regarding the origin of the Kharoxsthi has become more and 
more probable, and it must now be admitted that this alphabet was developed out of the later 
Aramaic characters after the conquest of the Patijib by Darius, which happened about B. C. 
500.2 And it becomes more and more difficult to refuse credence to the conjecture of 
A. Weser, E. THowas and A, Cunyinesan, according to which the principles ruling the already 
developed Brahmi have been utilised in the formation of the Kharosthi.4 According to our 
present information, the Kharosthi is the only alphabet, besides the Brahmi, to which the 
Buddhists possibly could refer. But as it was only a secondary script even in Gandhara, and 
as it was developed only in the fifth century, the possibility suggested becomes improbable, and 
the Brihmi alone has a claim to be considered as the alphabet known to the anthors of the 
Ceylonese canon. 

§ 4.—The origin of the Brahma alphabet.' 


[10] Among the numerous greatly differing proposais to explain the origin of the Brahmi 
there are five fur which complete demonstrations have been attempted: —(1) A, Cun Ninanam’s 
derivation from indigenous Indian hieroglyphics ;?7 (2) A. Weser’s derivation from the most 
ancient Phoenician characters ;3 (3) W. Deecxr’s derivation from the Assyrian cuneiform 
characters, through an ancient South-Semitic alphabet which is also the parent of the Sabaean 
or Himyaritic script ;? (4) I. Taxtor’s derivativu from a lost South-Arabian alphabet, the 
predecessor of the Sabaean ;!0 (5) J. [agvy's derivation from a mixture of Aramaic, Kharogthi 
and Greek letters of the last quarter of the fourth century B. 0.1! 


CUNNINGHAM'S opinion, which was formerly shared by some eminent scholars, presupposes 
the use of Indian hieroglyphic pictures, of which hitherto no trace has been found, On the 
other hand, the legend of the Eran coin, which runs from the right to the left, and tne letters 
seemingly turned round in the opposite direction which appear rarely in the Asoka edicts and 
more frequently in the Bhatiiprolu inscriptions, poiut to the correctness of the view taken as 
granted in all the other attempts at explanation, riz., that Semitic signs are the prototypes of 
the Brahma letters. 


Among the remaining four proposals, J. Hauivy’s @ priori improbable theory may be at 
once eliminated, as it does not agree with the literary and paleographic evidence just discussed, 
which makes it more than probable that the Brihmi was used several centuries before the 
beginning of the Maurya period, and had had a long history at the time to which the earliest 
Indian inscriptions belong. It is more difficult to make a choice between A. WebER’s deriva- 
tion from the oldest North-Semitic alphabet, and the view of W. Dercke and I. TayLor, who 
derive the Brahmi from au ancient South-Semitic script. Neither the one nor the other deriva- 
tion can be declared to be @ privrt impossible ; for, the results of modern researches make 


1 C,CAI, pl. 2, 3. 2 WZKM. 9,65; B.IS, IlI-, 115. 3 See below, § 8, £ Sea below, § 1, B, 4. 
6 B.IS. LI[?, 53—-82, 6 RB. N. Cust, Ling. and Or, Essays 2nd Ser,, 27—52, 7 OTA (CII. 1), 52 ff. 
8 ZDMG. 10, 389 &.; Ind. Skizzen 125 ff. 9 ZDMu. 31, ous 


10 The Alphabet, 2, 314 ff. ; restated with some modifications by F, MUuier, Mélanges Harlez 212 tf. 
11 JA. 1885, 208 ff. ; Revue Sém. 1895, 223 ff, 


10 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 4. 


a high antiquity probable for also the Sabaean script, and point to the conclusion that this alpha- 
bet not only is older than the oldest Indian inscriptions, but that it existed at a period for 
which no evidence for the use of writing in India is available.! But according to these results, 
the question has to be put in a manner somewhat differing from that in which Dexcks and 
Tayior have put it. The point to be ascertained is no longer, whether the Brahmi can be 
derived from an unknown predecessor of the Sabaean alphabet, but whether it can be derived 
directly from the actually known Sabaean characters. 


In all attempts at the derivation of alphabets, it is necessary to keep in mind three funda- 
mental maxims, without which no satisfactory results can be obtained :— 

(1) For the comparison of the characters to be derived, the oldest and fullest forms 
must be used, and the originals from which they are derived must belong to the types of one 
and the same period. 

(2) The comparison may include only such irregular equation: as can be supported by 
analogies from other cases where nations have borrowed foreign alphabets. 

(3) [11] In cases where the derivatives show considerable differences from the supposed 
prototypes, it is necessary to show that there are fixed principles, according to which the changes 
haye been made, 


If one wishes to keep to these principles in deriving the Brahmi from Semitic signs, 
neither the Sabaean alphabet, nor its perhaps a little more archaic variety, the Lihyanian or 
Thammudacan,? will serve the purpose, in spite of a general resemblance in the ductus and of 
a special resemblance in two or three letters. The derivations proposed by Degcke and Tay1Lor 
do not fulfil the absolutely necessary conditions, and it will probably not be possible to obtain 
satisfactory results, even if all the impossible equations are given up, and the oldest Indian 
signs in every case are chosen for comparison. It would be necessary to assume that several 
Sabaean letters, such as Aleph, Gimel, Zain, Teth, Phe, Qoph, Resh, which show strong modifica- 
tions of the North-Semitic forms, had been again made similar to their prototypes on being 
converted by the Hindus into A, ga, ja, tha, pa, kha and ra, In other cases, it would be 
impossible to show any connection between the Sabaean and the Indian signs. These difficulties 
disappear with the direct derivation of the Brihmi from the oldest North-Semitic alphabet, 
which shows the same type from Phoenicia to Mesopotamia. The few inadmissible equations 
which Werper’s earlier attempt contains, may be easily removed with the help of recently 
discovered forms, and it is not difficult to recognise the principles, according to which the 
Semitic signs haye been conyerted into Indian ones. 


Anu examination of the old Indian alphabet in plate IT. reveals the following peculiarities :— 

(1) The letters are set up as straight as possible, and, with occasional exceptions in the 
case of fa, tha and ba, they are made equal in height, 

(2) The majority consist of vertical lines with appendages attached mostly at the foot, 
occasionally at the foot and at the top, or rarely in the middle; but there is no case in which 
an appendage has been added to the top alone. 


§ 4.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. ll 


circumstance that since early times the Indians made their letters hang down from‘an imaginary 
or really drawn upper line,! and in part to the introduction of the vowel-signs, most of 
which are attached horizontally to the tops of the consonants. Signs with the ends of verticals 
at the top were, of course, best suited for such a script. Owing to these inclinations and 
aversions of the Hindus, the heavy tops of many Semitic letters had to be got rid of, by turning 
the signs topsy-turvy or laying them on their sides, by opening the angles, and so forth. 
Finally, the change in the direction of the writing necessitated a further change, inasmuch as 
the signs had to be turned from the right to the left, as in Greek. 


[12] The details of the derivation, for which, with the exception of the evidently 
identical Nos. 1, 3—7, 9, 12, 16, 17, 19—22, only a greater or smaller degree of probability 
ean be claimed, are shown in the subjoined comparative table, which has been drawn by 
Mr. S. Perper of Vienna. Cols. I, II, showing the oldest Phoenician characters and ttose from 
Mesa’s stone, have been taken from Py. BgraEr’s Histoire de YEcriture dans VY £ntiquité, 
pp. 185, 202. Col. IIL comes from Evurine’s Tabula Scripturae Aramaicae.of 1892. And 
cols. [V—VI1, with the exception of the signs marked by asterisks as hypothetical, are taken 
from plate II, of this work. With respect to the single letters, I add the following explanatory 
remarks, brief abstracts of those i in , my Indian Studies, IIT’, p. 58 ff. 


sp 


x. 


QO 
O 


rv 
v 
ceeded eae 


a BOD A 


cs 


L po LQ ses LFF 
ph 


mH-~<CM BP oBHA 
wm 
mM 


OC 


COS+e Ee DO-FT UO 
e& 


B i 
5 
g 
Z 
4 
V4 
“ 
y 
TT 


aH SS SQ Me oll 


r+t&ethowrs o 


x= ABTS O 
— wo. 


1 Compare Berini’s India, 1, 172 (SacHav), 


INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [ § 4, A. 


. 


A. — Borrowed signs. 


No. 1, A, col. V, = Aleph, cols. I, If (Weser doubtfally), [13] turned from right to left 
except on the Patna seal (above, § 3, and pl. II, 1, I), with transposition of the vertical line to 
the end of the angle. — No, 2, ba, col. V, a, b,c, = Beth, cols. I, Il (Weber); the opening of the 
triangular top produced first a sign like that in col. IV, next the rhombus, col, V, a, and finally 
the square and the oblong, col. V, b, c. — No. 3, ga, col. V, = Gimel, cols. I, Il. ~ No. 4, dha: 
col. V, a, 6, = Daleth, cols. I, If (Wexner), set up straight with rounded back (compare the half- 
angalar forms, pl. II, 26, IX, XIX, XXIII, and the triangular, pl. Il, 24, VII—XIT1), 
with or without the turn from right to left. — No, 5, ha, col. V,= He (Weser doubtfully), 
the Siddapura form, col. V, a, being probably derived from the He of col. ILI, @ (Mina of 
Salmanassar, before B. C. 725), which was turned topsy-turvy and from right to left. The more 
similar He of the sixth century B. C. (col. ILI, 4) cannot be the prototype, because it occurs in 
the period when the Brahmi had been developed, and because then the Semitic Aleph, Daleth, 
Sheth, Theth, Waw, and Qoph had become cursive and had been changed so much that they 


§ 4, B.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY, 13 


the curve, col. VI, d, and out of this a new sa, col. VI,e. An immediate derivation of the 
Dravida s from the Samekh of the sixth century B. C. in col. III. ig not possible, for the reasons 
stated under No. 5, and because the characteristic ancient cross-bar is wanting in it, — No. 16, 
E, col. V, = Ain, cols. I, If (Waser), the Indian sign being changed slightly or not at all 
in the ancient forms of KAlsi, col. [V. and col. V, 4, as well as in that of Safici and Hathigumphia, 
col. V, a, but later made triangular, col. V, c, d, e, in order to avoid a confusion with tha and 
dha. — No. 17, pa, col. V, = Phe, cols. I, Il (Weser), turned topsy-turvy; in its original 
position in the Hran form, col. [V ; turned sideways in col. V. 


No. 18, ca, col. V, = Tsade, cols. I, II, turned topsy-turvy, the second hook on the right 
being bent at the same time towards the vertical as in the hypothetical form of col. IV, 
whence arose, with the turn sideways, the angular or round ca of the Brahmi in col, V, a, 6, 
and the tailed one of the Dravidi, col. V, c. — No. 19, kha, col. V, = Qoph, cols. I, I, turned 
topsy-turvy with the addition of a curve at the top, col. V, @, in order to distinguish the letter 
from va. Owing to the use of ink, the circle at the foot was converted into a dot, col. V, 6. — 
No. 20, ra, col. V, = Resh, cols. I, If (WeExeR), the triangular head of the letter being opened 
and the vertical attached to the base of the former triangle, whence arose the forms in col. V, 
a, 6, and later the ornamental ones, col. V, c, d, in which the angles were repeated. — No. 21, 
sa, col. V, = Shin, cols, I, Il (WexeEr), the two angles, standing side by side, being placed the 
one inside the other, and the sign being then turned topsy-turvy, col. V, a, 6,¢. The more 
closely resembling Aramaic Shin of the sixth century B. C., col. III, cannot be the prototype 
of ga, for the same reasons as those stated above under No. 5, and is merely an analogous 
transformation, which the Aramaeans, Phoenicians and Ethiopians have made independently 
at various periods, The older form with two angles has been preserved in the western sign for 
100 = su (see my Indian Stndies, T1T2, 71, 117), — No. 22, ta, col. V, = Taw, cols. I, If 
(Wesne); from a form like that of Sinjirli, col. II, }, or the Assyrian of the time of 
Salmanassar, col. III, a, was derived the ¢a of col. V, a, 6, and hence the regularised form of 
col. V, ¢. 


B.— Derivative consonants and initial vowels, 


The derivative signs, invented by the Hindus themselves, have been formed by means of 
the following contrivances :— 


(1) One of the elements of a phonetically cognate letter is transposed: (a) in s@ and sa, 
where the cross-bar of the oldest sign has been displaced (see above, A, No. 15); (6) in da, which 
has been derived from dha (WEBER) by dividing the vertical stroke, and by attaching the two 
pieces to the upper and lower ends of the curve, whence first the da of the Drividi and of the 
Patna seal, No. 4, col. VI, a, was derived, and, with the turn to the left, the ordinary form of 
the Brahmi, No. 4, col. VI, 4, and further the angular da, No. 4, col. VI, f. 


(2) <A borrowed or derivative letter is mutilated in order to obtain one with a similar 
phonetic value: (@) from da, No. 4, col. VI, 2, comes [15] by the removal of the lower end the 
half round da of Kalsi and the later southern inscriptions, col. VI, c; similarly, from the angu- 
lar da, col. VI, g, the ordinary angular da, col. VI, 4, of the Agoka edicts (WeBER); (6) from 
tha, No. 9, col. V, comes tha, col. VI, a, by the removal of the central dot; and from the latter 
again ta, col. VI, 6, is derived by bisection, the round tha being considered as the product of 
an unaspirated letter and a curve of aspiration, which appears (see below, 5) in various other 
letters ( WenzR ); (c¢) from the triangular Z, No. 16, col. V, c, d, e, comes the J with three dots, 
col, VI, B, a, 6, c, which just indicate the outlines of the older sign ( Prinser), the derivation 
being suggested by the fact that grammatically e is the guna-vowel of 2, for which therefore 
a lighter form of e appeared suitable; (d@) throug» a@ bisection iof the lower portion of va, 
No. 6, col. V, 3, and a straightening of the remaining pendant, is derived U, col. VI, a (see 


14 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 4, C. 


my Indian Studies, III*, 74), the derivation being suggested by the fact that «» commonly 
represents va in weak grammatical forms (samprasadrana); (¢) if the later small circle (pl. IV, 
38, VI) is the original form of the Anusvara, No. 18, col. VI, a, 6, and the dot a cursive 
substitute, the sign may be explained as a mutilated small ma, which has lost the angle at the 
top, and has been thus treated like the small vowelless consonants appearing in the inscriptions 
of the first centuries A. D. (see, e. g., pl. HIT, 41, VIII}; compare also the derivation of the 
Kharogthi Anusvara from ma (see below, § 9, B, 4). 


(8) Short horizontal strokes, which originally, before the change in the direction of the 
writing, stood on the left, are used to derive the long vowels 4, No. 1, col. VI, and 0, No. 6, 
col. VI, d, from short Aand UJ. On account of the peculiar shape of J, a dot is used instead 
for the formation of 7, No. 16, col. VJ, B, g. 


(4) Short horizontal strokes, originally added on the right, denote a change in the quality 
of the sounds: (a) in O, No. 6, col. VI, % g, derived from U, col. VI, @ (with the bar in the 
original and the later position), because grammatically o is the guna-vowel of w; (6) in AJ, 
No. 16, col. VI, A, 4, derived from EF, because grammatically ai is the vrddhi-vowel of e; (c) in 
the | of the Dravidi, No. 12, col. VI, from the original form of la (Lamed), cols. I, II, in which case 
the bar still stands on the right, because the letter has not been turned ; (d) in fa, No. 14, 
col. VI, a, from the original inverted Nun, col. [V ; compare above under A, No. 14; (¢) in za 
(see my Indian Studies, ITI 2, pp. 31, 76; also page 35, below, § 16, C, 12) from na, No. 14, 
col. V, with a displacement of the lower horizontal stroke towards the right, the letter being 
kept in its original position; (f) in na, No.-14, col. VI, 6, from za, the bar protruding at 
both sides of the vertical in order to avoid the identity with nd, ne and O. 


(5) Toe aspiration 1s expressed by a curve in the gh of the Deavidi, No. 3, cok. VI, formed 
out of g, and in the ordinary Brahmi dha, No. 4, col. VI, d, from da, col. VI, ¢, in pha, No. 17, 
col. VI, from pa, col. V, and in cha, No. 18, col. VI, @; in the last sign the curve has been 
attached to both ends of the vertical, and this proceeding led to the development of the cursive 
cha of col. VI, 6. More rarely a hook is substituted for the curve, and then the original sign is 
mutilated; thus bha, No. 2, col. VI, is derived from 4a by omitting the base-stroke, and sha, 
No. 7, col. VI, from the Dravida j, col. V, a, by dropping both bars at the ends of the vertical. 
Both the hook and the curve are cursive substitutes for ha, which in the Tibetan alphabet! ig 
used again in order to form gha, bha, &c. 


(6) [16] The Ia of the Brahmi, No. 4, col. VI, e, has been derived, by the addition of 
a small semicircle, for which we have an open angle in Saiici (pl. II, 41, XVIII), from the half 
round da of col. VI, c, the derivation being very probably suggested by the phonetic affinity of 
da to la, which two letters are frequently exchanged in Vedic and classical Sanskrit and in the 
Prakrit dialects. 


C.— Medial vowels and absence of vowel in ligatures, 
(1)—The system of the Brahmi. 


In accordance with the expressions of the Sanskrit phonologists and grammarians, who 
take into account the spoken language alone? and who call the k-sound ka-Aara, the g-sound 
ya-kara, &c., the medial a is inherent in all consonants, and consequently medial 4 is expressed 
by the stroke which distinguishes A from 4. 


The other medial vowels are either the full initial vowel-signs or cursive derivatives from 
them, which are placed mostly at the top or rarely at the foot of the consonants. The identity 
of the medial o with the initial O is distinctly recognisable in all letters with verticals at the 


1 AR, 2, plate at p. 400. 2 M.M.HASL, 505 &, 


§ 5] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 15 


top, as in ko, No. 6, col. VI, h, ¢, where, on the removal of the dagger-shaped i: below the second 
cross-bar, the signs in col. VI, 7, g, reappear ; compare also go in mego, Girnar edict I, line 11, 
where an initial O has been placed above g. Inthe Jaugada edicts, where only the O of col. VI, 
J, occurs, the medial o has invariably the same form. But in Girnar we have both forms of y, 
though there is only the O of eol. VI, g. Similarly, the full initial U is recognisable in the 
combinations with consonants ending in verticals, as in Lu, pl. II, 9, V; du, 20, VIL; du, 25, 
V; dhu, 31, III, V (compare § 16, D, 4); and inthe dhw of Kalsi, No. 6, col. VI, 4: more 
usually «% is represented cursively, either by the horizontal stroke of U, as in dhu, No. 6, 
col. VI, ¢, or by its vertical as in cw, pl. Il, 18, ITI, and dhu, 26, 11, &c. Medial @ is identical 
with U, if combined with consonants ending in verticals ; elsewhere it is cursively expressed by 
two lines, commonly placed horizontally, as in dh#, No. 6, col. VI, e: but in the later inscrip- 
tions we occasionally find the U of the period used for the medial vowel.) Medial ¢ was 
probably at first expressed by the three dots of the initial I (#1, No. 16, col. VI, B, d), which 
afterwards were joined cursively by lines and converted into the angle used in most of the 
Asoka edicts (Ki, col. VI, B, ce). The medial ¢ has been developed out of the latter form by the 
addition of a stroke, indicating that the vowel is long (ki, col. VI, B, f; see above, under B, 3). 
In order to express medial e, the triangle of the initial E has been reduced cursively first to an 
angle, open on the left, as in ge, pl. II, 11, III, and more commonly to a straight line (/e, No. 16, 
col. VI, A, @). In accordance with the form of the initial 47, which consists of # and a hori- 
zontal bar, medial az is expressed by two parallel horizontal strokes (¢hat, No. 16, col. VI, A, ¢). 


The absence of a vowel is indicated by interlacing the sign for the consonants immediately 
following each other, and in such ligatures the second sign is often mutilated; see below, 
§ 16, E, 2. This proceeding appears to be a practical illustration of the term samyuktaksara, 
“a joined or ligature syllable,” by which the phonologists and grammarians denote a syllable 
beginning with more consonants than one. 


(2)— The system of the Dravidi. 


The notation of the medial vowels in the inscriptions of Bhattiprolu differs from the usual 
one in so far as medial a is marked by the Brahmi sign for @, and medial @ by a horizontal stroke 
from the end of which a vertical one hangs down; see ka, pl. II, 9, XIII; 4a, 9, XIV. Hence 
the consonants have no inherent a. The device is no doubt of later origin, and has been 
invented in order to avoid the necessity for ligatures. 


§ 5.— The time and the manner of the borrowing of the Semitic 
alphabet.? 


[17] According to the preceding discussion, the great majority of the Brahma letters agree 
with the oldest types of the North-Semitic signs, which are found in the archaic Phoenician 
inscriptions and on the stone of Mesa, incised about B.C.890. But two characters, ha and ¢a, are 
derived from Mesopotamian forms of He and Taw, which belong to the middle of the eighth 
century B, C., and two, sa-sa and ga, resemble Aramaic signs of the sixth century B.C. As the 
literary and epigraphic evidence leaves no doubt that the Hindus were not unlettered 
during the period B.C. 600—500, and as the other signs of the Aramaic alphabet of this 
period, such as Beth, Daleth, Waw, &c., are too far advanced to be considered as the 
prototypes of the corresponding Brihma letters, it becomes necessary to regard the seemingly 
modern forms of sa, sa and éa as the results of an Indian development, analogous to that of 
the corresponding Aramaic characters. This assumption, of course, remains tenable only as 
long as the two Aramaic letters are not shown to be more ancient by new epigraphic discoveries, 
which event, to judge from the results of the Sinjirli finds, does not seem to be impos- 
sible. But, for the present, they must be left out of consideration in fixing the terminus a gua 


1 See below, § 24, B, 3; pl. IV, 30, XII, XIV; pl. VI, 30, XII, XX, XXI. 2 BIS, II1?, 88-91. 


16 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. (8 5. 


for the importation of the Semitic alphabet into India; and this terminus falls between the time 
of the incision of Mesa’s inscription and of those on the Assyrian weights, from about B.C, 
890 to about B. C. 750, probably a little more towards the lower than towards the upper limit, 
or, roughly reckoning, about B. C. 800. And various circumstances make it probable that this 
was actually the time when the Semitic letters became known to the Hindus, 


As the ha and the a of the Brahmi are derived from forms of He and Taw not found in the 
Phoenician inscriptions but only in Mesopotamia, it appears probable that this is the Semitic 
country from which the letters were brought over.! It agrees with this inference, that the 
most ancient Indian works speak of sea-voyages in the Indian Ocean at a very early period, 
and sea-borne trade, carried on by Hindu Vanias in the same waters, is mentioned in later, but 
still ancient, times. The well-known Baveru Jataka? bears witness to an early export trade of 
the Vanias to Babylon; and the form of the word, in which the second part t/u is represented 
by eru, points to its having arisen in Western India, where va is occasionally substituted for la, 
as in the Girnair and Shahbazgarhi form Turamaya for Ptolemaios. Several other Jatakas, e. g. 
No. 468, which describe sea-voyages, name the ancient ports of Western India, Bharukaccha 
(the modern Broach) and Sirpiraka (now Supara), which were centres of the trade with the 
Persian Gulf in the first centuries A. D, and much later. As according to the Jatakas the 
Vianias started from these towns, it is probable that these trade-routes were used much earlier. 
Two of the most ancient Dharmasitras likewise bear witness to the earlier existence of trade 
by sea in India and particularly on the western coast. Baudhiyana, II, 2, 2, forbids 
Brahmans to undertake voyages by sea, and prescribes a severe penance for a breach of the 
rule, But he admits, 1, 2, 4, that the “Northerners,” were not strict in this respect. As 
the other offences of the ‘‘Northerners,” mentioned in the same passage, such as dealing in 
wool, selling animals with two rows of teeth, i. e. horses and mules, show, the term applies to 
the inhabitants of western and north-western India. It naturally follows that the sea- 
voyages referred to were made to western Asia. The same author, I, 18, 14, and the still 
older Gautama Dharmasiitra, 10, 33, mention the duties payable to the king on merchandise 
imported by sea.3 In accordance with my estimate of the age of the Dharmasiitras and of the 
materials out of which the Jatakas have been made up, I look upon these statements as refer- 
ring to the 8th—6th centuries B, C.4 From still earlier times dates the well-known Vedic 
myth of the shipwreck of Bhujyu “in the ocean where there is no support, no rest for the foot 
or the hand,” and of his being saved on the “hundred-oared galley” of the Asgvins.5 The 
scene of action must of course lie in the Indian Ocean, and the story points to the inference 
[18] that the Hindus navigated these waters during the earliest Vedic period. As, in addition, 
Semitic legends such as that of the Flood and of Manu’s preservation by a miraculous fish occur 
in the Brahmanas,® we have a sufficient number of facts to furnish some support for the conjec- 
ture that Hindu traders, who probably learnt the language of the country, just as their modern 
descendants learn Arabic and Suahili and other African languages, may have imported from 
Mesopotamia not only the alphabet, but perhaps also other technical contrivances, such as brick- 
making which was so important for the construction of the ancient Brahmanical altars. With 
this assumption, which under the circumstances stated appears at least not quite unfounded, 
the Indian Vanias are credited with having rendered the same service to their countrymen 
which Sambhota or Thon-mi did to the Tibetans, when he fetched the elements of their 
alphabet from Magadha, between A. D. 630 and 660.7 


1 According to BenFey, Indien 254, the Semitic alphabet came to India from Phoenicia ; according to A. WEBER, 
ind. Skizzen 137, either from Phoenicia or from Babylonia. 

2 No. 389, Fauss6ut, 3, 126; compare also Ficx, Die sociale Gliederung im nordést]. Indien, 178 f. 

3 SBE, 2, 228 ; 14, 146, 200, 217 ; comp. Manu, 3, 158; 8, 157, 406, and Danimann, Das Mahabharata, 176 ff, 

& B.IS. IIL, 16 ff, 5 RV.1, 116,5; compre OLpENBERG, Vedische Religion, 214, 

8 OLDENBERG, op. cit. 276. t J.ASB. 57, 41 f, 


§ 5.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 17 


In any case, it is @ priort probable that the Vanias were the first to adopt the Semitic 
alphabet ;! for they, of course, came most into contact with foreigners, and they must have 
felt most strongly the want of some means for recording their business transactions. The 
Brahmans wanted the art of writing less urgently, since they possessed, as passages of the 
Rgveda show,? from very early times a system of oral tradition for the preservation of their 
literary treasures. 


Nevertheless, the oldest known form of the Brahmi is, without a doubt, a script framed by 
learned Brahmans for writing Sanskrit. This assertion is borne out not only by the remnants 
of the Gaya alphabet of Agoka’s stone-masons, which must have contained signs for the Sans- 
krit vowels AI and AU, and which is arranged according to phonetic principles, but also by 
the influence of phonetic and grammatical principles which is clearly discernible in the forma- 
tion of the derivative signs. The hand of the phonologist and grammarian is recognisable in 
the following points: (1) the development of five nasal letters and of a sign for nasalisation in 
general from two Semitic signs, as well as of a complete set of signs for the long vowels,? 
which latter are very necessary for the phonologist and grammarian, but not for men of busi- 
ness, and are therefore unknown in other ancient alphabets; (2) the derivation of the signs for 
the phonetically very different, but grammatically cognate, sa and sa from one Semitic sign 
(Samekh) ; (3) the notation of U by the half of va, from which the vowel is frequently derived 
by samprasarana; (4) the derivation of O from U (0 being the guna-vowel of u) by the addi- 
tion of a stroke; of I by a simplification of the sign for its guna-vowel EZ; of AJ, the vrddhi- 
vowel, from # the guna-vowel of J; and of Ja from da, the former consonant being frequently 
a substitute for the latter, as in tle for ide; (5) the non-expression of medial a, in accordance 
with the teaching of the grammarians who consider it to inhere in every consonant ; the expres- 
sion of medial @ by the difference between A and 4, and of the remaining medial vowels by 
combinations of the initial ones, or of cursive simplifications of the same, with the consonants, 
as well as of the absence of vowels by ligatures of the consonants, which apparently illustrate 
the grammatical term samyukéakeara. All this has so learned an appearance and is 0 artificial 
that it can only have been invented by Pandits, not by traders or clerks. The fact that the 
Vanias and the accountants until recent times used to omit all medial vowels in their corre- 
spondence and account-books, permits even the inference that an Indian alphabet, elaborated by 
such men, would not possess avy such vowel-signs. And it is immaterial for the correctness 
of this inference, whether the modern defective writing is a survival from the most ancient 
period or is due to the introduction of the Arabic alphabet in the middle ages. 


A prolonged period must, of course, have elapsed between the first introduction of the 
Semitic alphabet by the merchants, its adoption by the Brahmans which probably did not take 
place at once, and the elaboration of the 46 radical signs of the Brahmi together with its 
aystem of medial vowels and ligatures. 


As, according to the results of the preceding enquiry, the elaboration of the Brahmi was 
completed about B. C, 500, or perhaps even earlier, the terminus a quo, about B. C. 800, may 
be considered as the actual date of the introduction of the Semitic alphabet into India. This 
estimate is, however, [19] merely a provisional one, which may be modified by the discovery of 
new epigraphic documents in India or in the Semitic countries. If such a modification should 
become necessary, the results of the recent finds induce me to believe that the date of the 
introduction will prove to fall earlier, and that it will have to be fixed perhaps in the tenth 
century B, C., or even before that. 


1 Comp. WestTERGAARD, Zwei Abhandlungen 37 ff. 3 RV, 7, 103, 5; comp. M.M-HASL, 506. 
3 Comp. WAcKERNAGEL, Altind. Grammatik 1, LVII. Ps 


18 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. {§§ 6 & 7. 


Il, THE KHAROSTHI SCRIPT. 
§ 6.— How it was deciphered, 


The Indian alphabet running from right to left, the Aharosthi lipi,! has been deciphered 
exclusively by European scholars, among whom Massoy, J. Prinser, Cu. Lassey, E. Norris, 
and A, Cunxinauam mast be particularly mentioned.2 The coins of the Indo-Grecian and 
Indo-Scythian kings with Greek and Prakrit inscriptions furnished the first clue to the value 
of the letters, The results, which the identifications of the royal names and titles seemed 
to furnish, were partly confirmed, partly rectified and enlarged, by the discovery of the 
Shihbizgarhi version of the Asoka edicts and E, C. Bayxey’s Kangra inscription in Brahmi 
and Kharosthi, The characters of the Asoka edicts are readable with ful] certainty, with the 
exception of a few ‘ligatures (see below, § 11, C, 3, 4). Similarly, the inscriptions of the 
Sakas offer no difficulties, and the new MS, of the Dhammapada from Khotan’ is in general not 
difficult to read. But considerable portions of the inscriptions of the Parthian Guduphara 
and of the Kugana kings Kaniska and Huviska, stil] resist the attempts of decipherers and 
interpreters, 


§ 7.— Use and characteristics. 


In its form, known to us at present, the Kharosthi is an ephemeral, chiefly epigraphic, 
alphabet of North-Western India. The majority of the inscriptions written in Kharosthi 
have been found between 69°—73° 30’ E. Long. and 33°—35° N. Lat., in the ancient province of 
Gandhbiara, the modern eastern Afghanistan and the northern Pafijib; and the oldest docn- 
ments are confined to the districts the capitals of which were Taxila (Shih-Deri) to the east of 
the Indus, and Puskalivati or Carsida (Hashtnagar) to the west of the river. Single inscrip- 
tions have turned up further south-west in Bhiwalpur near Multan, south in Mathura, and 
south-east in Kingra, and single words or letters in Bharahut, Ujjain and Maisir (Siddapura 
Asoka edicts).4 Coins, cameos and MSS. with Kharosthi characters have been carried much 
further north and north-east. The period during which, according to the documentary evidence 
at present available, the Kharosthi seems to have been used in India, extends from the fourth 
century B. C. to about the third century A. D., the earliest letters occurring on the Persian siglot 
(§ 8) and the latest perhaps on the Gandhara sculptures and the Kusana inscriptions.5 As 
the note in the Fawanshulin of A. D. 668 (see above, § 1) shows, the Buddhists preserved a 
knowledge of the existence of the alphabet much longer. 


Hitherto, the Kharosthi bas been found (1) in stone-inscriptions, (2) on metal plates and 
vases, (3) on coins, (4) on cameos, and (5) on a longer known small piece of birch bark from a 
Stiipa in Afghanistan® and on the Bhirja MS, of the Dhammapada from Khotan. The latter 
MS. has probably been written in Gandhara during the Kusana period. The dialect of its 
text shows characteristic affinities to that of the Shahbazgarhi version of the Asoka edicts, and _ 


§ 8.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 19 


its characters agree very closely with those of the Wardak vase.! On the metal plates and 
vases, [20] the letters frequently consist of rows of dots, or have been first punched in in this 
manner and afterwards scratched in with a stilus2 On stone vases they are sometimes written 
with ink. 


In spite of its frequent utilisation for epigraphic documents, the Kharosthi is a popular 
script, destined for clerks and men of business. This is proved by the throughout highly 
cursive character of the letters, by the absence of long vowels, which are useless for the 
purposes of common daily life, by the expression of groups of unaspirated double consonants 
by single ones (ka for kka) and of unaspirated and aspirated ones by the latter alone (kha 
for kkha),and by the invariable use of the Anusvira for all vowelless medial nasals.4 The 
discovery of the Khotan MS. makes it very improbable that there existed another form of the 
script which, being more similar to the Brahmi in completeness, would have been more suitable 
for the Brahmanical Sistras. 


§ 8. — Origin.6 


The direction of the Kharosthi from right to left made it a priort highly probable that its 
elements had been borrowed from the Semites; and the almost exact agreement of the forms 
for na, ba, ra and va with Aramaic signs of the transitional type induced E. THomas to assume 
a closer connection of the Kharosthi with this alphabet.6 His view has never been disputed ; 
but of late it has been given a more precise form by I. TayLor and A. CUNNINGHAM, who assign 
the introduction of the Aramaic letters into India to the first Akhaemenians.? The reasons 
which may be adduced for this opinion are as follows: — (1) The Asoka edicts from the 
western Pafijib use for “writing, edict,” the word dip’, which evidently has been borrowed 
from the Old Persian, and they derive from it the verbs dipatt, “he writes,” and dipapati, “he 
causes to write;’’ see above, § 2, B. (2) The districts where Kharogsthi inscriptions occur, 
especially in earlier times, are just those parts of India which probably were subject to the 
Persians, be it with or without interruptions, from about B.C. 500 to 331, (8) Among the 
Persian sigloi, there are some marked with single syllables in Kharosthi and Brihmi,® whence 
it may be inferred that they were struck in India during the Persian period, and that the 
Kharosthi was current during a great part of the fourth century B. C., certainly before the fall 
of the Persian empire in B. C, 331. Some considerable variations in the Kharosthi letters of 
the Asoka edicts, as well as the strongly cursive forms of several ligatures, such as sta, spa, 
&c. (see below, § 11, C, 2,3), likewise point to the conclusion that the alphabet had had a 
long history before the middle of the third century B.C. (4) Recent discoveries in Semitic 
epigraphy make it extremely probable that the Aramaic, which was used already in Assyria 
and Babylon for official and business purposes side by side with the cuneiform writing, was 
very widely spread during the rule of the Akhaemenians. Numerous Aramaic inscriptions of 
this period have been found in Egypt, Arabia, and Asia Minor, and one even in Persia. Besides, 
Egypt has furnished a number of official Aramaic papyri, and Asia Minor many coins 
with Aramaic legends, struck by Persain satraps.® In addition, there is the curious 
statement in the Bovk of Ezra, IV, 7, according to which the Samaritans sent to Artaxerxes 
a letter written in the rani script and language. Taking all these points together, 
there are sufficient reasons toewarrant the assertion that Aramaic was commonly employed 


1 See S.v. OnpEnBURG, Predvaritelnaé zamjetkao Buddhiiskoi rukopisi, napisannoi pismenami Kharosthi, 
St. Petersburg, 1897, and Senart, Acad. des Inscrs., Comptes rendus, 1897, 251 ff. 

2 TA, 10, 825, 8 W.AA. 111. * BLIS. IT, 97 f. 5 BIS. 1114, 92 ff. 

6 PIA, 2, 144 ff, ; regarding Kharosthi legends on late coins running from left to right, see Proc. J.ASB. 1895, 
$8 f. 

7 I, Tayuor, The Alphabet, 2, 251 f.; C.CAT. 83. 8 J.RAS, 1895, 865 ff. 

® CLERMONT-GANNEAU, Revue Archéologique, 1878-79; Pu. Berar, Hist. de l’Borit. dans lV Antiquité, 214, 
218 ff, 


20 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 9, A. 


not only in the offices of the satraps, but also in the royal secretariate at Susa. The 
ultimate cause for the official use of the Aramaic script and language during the Akhaemenian 
period was, no doubt, that numerous Aramaeans held appointments as clerks, accountants, 
mint-masters and so forth in the Persian Civil Service. [21] When the Persian empire was 
rapidly built up on the ruins of more ancient monarchies, its rulers must have found the 
employment of the trained subalterns of the former governments, among whom the Aramaeans 
were foremost, not only convenient, but absolutely unavoidable. In these circumstances, it is 
but natural to assume that, after the full organisation of the administration by Darius, the 
Persian satraps introduced Aramaean subordinates into the Indian provinces, and thereby forced 
their Indian subjects, especially the clerks of the native princes and of the heads of towns and 
villages, to learn Aramaic, At first, the intercourse between the Persian and the Indian offices 
probably led to the use of the Aramaic letters for the north-western Prakrit, and later to 
modifications of this alphabet, which were made according to the principles of the older Indian 
Brahmi,! and through which the Kharosthi finally arose. The adoption of the Arabic alphabet, 
during the middle ages and in modern times, for writing a number of Indian dialects, is some- 
what analogous, as it Jikewise happened under foreign pressure, and as its characters were and 
are used either without or with modifications. (5) With these last conjectures agrees the 
general character of the Kharogthi, which is clearly intended for clerks and men of business; 
see above, § 7. (6) Finally, they are confirmed by the circumstance that the majority of the 
Kharosthi signs can be most easily derived from the Aramaic types of the fifth century B. C. 
which appear in the Saqqarah and Teima inscriptions of B,C. 482 and of about B. C. 500, while 
a few letters agree with somewhat earlier forms on the later Assyrian weights and the 
Babylonian seals and gems, and two or three are more closely allied to the later signs of the 
Lesser Teima inscription, the Stele Vaticana, and the Libation-table from the Serapeum. The 
whole ductus of the Kharosthi, with its long-drawn and long-tailed letters, is that of the charac- 
ters on the Mesopotamian weights, seals and cameos, which re-occurs in the inscriptions of 
Saqqarah, Teima and the Serapeum, Others? have compared the writing of the Aramaic 
pepyri from Egypt, which partly at least, like the Taurinensis, belong to the Akhaemenian 
period. But it does not suit so well. Many of its signs are so very cursive that they cannot 
be considered as the prototypes of the Kharosthi letters, and its ductus is that of a minute 
current handwriting. Some special resemblances appear to be, on a closer investigation, the 
results of analogous developments. Taking all these points together, the Kharosthi appears to 
have been elaborated in the fifth century B. C. 


§ 9. — Details of the derivation. 


The subjoined comparative table illustrates the details of the derivation. The signs in 
eo]. I. have been taken (with the exception of No. 10, col. I, a) from Eurine’s Tabula Scrip- 
turae Aramaicae, 1892, cols. 6, 8, 9, 11 and 12; those in col. II, from the same work, cols, 13, 
14, 15, 17, 19, and those in cols, III, 1V, from plate 1 of this manual; and all have been 
reproduced by photolithography. 


A. — Borrowed signs.3 


Preliminary remarks, — The changes of the Aramaic signs have been caused chiefly by 
the following principles: (1) by a decided predilection for long-tailed signs with appendages at 
the upper end, the foot being left free for the addition of u, ra and the Anusvara, and by 
an aversion to appendages at the foot alone; (2) by an aversion to signs with heads containing 

1 Weper, Ind. Skizzen,144f.; EH. Tuomas, P.IA. 2, 146; C.CAI. 83; and below, § 9, B, 4. 

2 J, Hanevy, JA. 188, 2, 243-267, believes the Kharosthi to have been derived about B. C. 330 from 16 signs of 
the papyri and of a Cilician coin, and, Revue Sémitique, 1895, 372 ff., from the script of the papyri and of the 
ostraka from Egypt. 

5 B.IS. III, 99 ff. ; compare the more or less differing attempts of E. Tuomas, P.JA. 2, 147; I. Taxtor, The 
Alphabet, 2, plate at p. 236 f. ; J. Hankvy, JA, 1885, 2, 262 ff., Revue Sémitique, 1895, 372 #. 


§9,A.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 21 


more than two lines rising upwards, [22] or with transverse strokes through the top-line, or 
with pendants hanging down from it, -—all of which peculiarities would have been awkward for 
the insertion of the vowels ¢,¢ and 0; (8) by a desire to differentiate the signs which, altered 
according to these principles, would have become identical. 


> «9 t 
Cc 


7 
9 
f 
j 

’ 
7 
¥ 
n 
“A 
A 
q 
) 
Y 
r 
Y 
S 
7 
T 
9 


tta4 


No. 1, A, col. III, = Aleph, col. I, a (Saqqarah), with a cursive change of the head to a 
curve; the position and the size of the letter make a connection with the forms in col. I, 6, or 
eol. II, improbable. — No. 2, da, col. III, = Beth, col, I, a, 6 (Teima, Saqqarah), with a cursive 
curve for the angle at the right ; the cursive forms of the Beth of the papyri, [23] col. II, 6, ¢, 
are further developed than the Kharogthi signs. — No. 8, ga, col. III, = Gimel, derived trom 
col, I. or a similar form (compare col. II, and Evtine, TSA. 1, a), with a cursive loop on the 
right and a curve on the left; similar loops are common in later ligatures, see pl, I, 33, 35, 
36, XII; 34, XTII; and they occur even in ja, pl. 1,12, XII. — No. 4, da, col. III, = Daleth, 
derived from a form like that in col. IJ, >, which, according to col, I, a, occurs already about 


22 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904 ; APPENDIX. [§ 9, A. 


B, C. 600 on Assyrian weights. — No. 5, ha, cul. [{1, = He, derived from a form like that in 
col. I, a (Teima), with the transposition of the pendant in the middle of the curve to the right 
end of the foot in order to facilitate the insertion of 7,¢ and o (see preliminary remarks, 2 
page 20 f., above, and below under No, 17). — No. 6, va, col. ILI, = Wavw, col. I (Teima, 
Saqqarah) ; the papyri in col. II. show more advanced forms, 


No. 7, ja, col. UI, a, = Zain, derived from a form like those in col.I, a, 6 (Teima), the left 
corner being turned upwards still further, whence the usual Kharogthi letter in col. III. is 
derived by omitting the stroke at the foot; the papyri, col. II, show more advanced forms 
unsuitable for comparison. — No. 8, sa, col. III, = Cheth, col. I (Teima), the sound of the Indian 
ga being very similar to a palatal xa,as in the German ?ch.— No. 9, ya, col, III, = Yod, derived 
either from a form like col. I, 5, or directly from one like col, I, a (Assyrian weights), with the 
omission of the bar on the right (see preliminary remarks, 1); analogous forms occurring in later 
Palmyranian and Pahlavi (E.TSA. cols. 21—25, 30-—32, 835—39, 58). — No. 10, ka, col. WI, = 
Kaph, derived by a turn from right to left from col. I, 6 (Assyrian weights, Babylonian seals, 
&c.), and with the addition of a top-stroke, in order to distinguish the new sign from lu 
(No. 11, col. IID) and from pa (No. 15, col. I1T); the signs of the papyri, col. II, differ entirely. — 
No. 11, la, col, II, = Lamed, a form like those in col. I, a, c (Teima) being turned topsy-turvy 
owing to the aversion to signs with appendages at the foot alone (prelimimary remarks, 1), 
and the curved line being broken and attached lower in order to distinguish the new letter 
from A, 


No. 12, ma, col. ILI, a, 6, = Mem, derived from a form like that in col. I, a, (Saqqiirah) 
with a curved head, by the omission of the transverse line and a rudimentary indication of 
tke vertical standing originally on the right, whence comes the semicircular ordinary ma of the 
Asoka edicts, col. III, ¢, still more mutilated on account of the vowel-sigus; the forms of the 
Mem of the papyri, col. 11, are unsuited to be considered the prototypes of the Kharogthi 
ma. — No, 18, na, col. III, a, = Nun, col, I, a, b (Saqqarah), a later derivative being the na of 
col. III, 5; the Nun of the papyri, col. II, is again unsuited for comparison. — No, 14, sa, 
col. III, = Samekh, col. I (Teima), with transposition of the slanting bar to the left end of the 
top-stroke from which it hangs down, and with connection of its lower end with the tail of the 
sign, which has been pushed forward towards the left (see the figures in B.IS. III?, 105) ; 
analogous developments appear in Nabataean (E.TSA. cols, 46, 47) and in Hebrew. — No. 15, pa, 
col. III, a, = Phe, col, I (Teima), turned from right to left to distinguish it from A; in the 
more usual pa of col. ITI, 6, the curve has heen pushed lower down. — No. 16, ca, col. Ill, = 
Tsade, derived from an acute-angled form like col. I, a, b (Teima), with the omission of the 
second hook on the right (see preliminary remarks, 2) and with the development of a hook 
below the head, because the vertical was made separately; the analogous Tsade of col, II, 8, 
has been developed, because the right stroke of the head was made separately and drawn to 
the vertical. 


No. 17, kha, col. LT, = Qoph, derived from a form like col, I, a, 6 (Serapeum) with the 
conversion of the central pendant into an elongation of the top-stroke on the left; similarly, 
the pendant has been transferred to the right end of the letter in the Teima form (E.TSA. 
col. 10).—- No. 18, ra, col. III, = Resh, col. I, a, 6 (Saqqirah), with complete removal of the 
angular protuberance on the right. — No. 19, sa, col. IIL, = Shin, col. 1 (Teima), turned 
topsy-turvy owing to the aversion to tops with more than two strokes rising upwards (prelimi- 
nary remarks, 2), and with a lengthening of the central stroke owing to the predilection for 
long-tailed signs. — No. 20, ta, col. III, = Yaw, derived from a form like that in col. I, a 
(Assyrian weights) or in col. I, 6 (Saqqarah), with the transposition of the bar to the top of 
the [24] vertical, as in col. II, a, the new sign at the same time being turned from right to left 
in order to avoid the resemblance to pa (No. 15), and being broadened in order to distinguish it 


§ 9, B.] INDIAN PALEOGRA PHY. 23 


from va and ra (Nos. 6, 18); the older form and the intermediate steps appear in tha (No. 20, 
col. IV, a) and fa (No. 20, col. 1V, 5) where the original Taw has been preserved, and in fa 
(No. 20, col. IV, c) where the bar stands at the top; compare below, B, 1, c, and B, 2. 


B. — Derivative signs. 


(1) Aspiration. — The aspiration is expressed by the addition of a curve or a hook, which 
probably represent a cursive Aa (Taytor), and for which cursively a simple stroke appears; at 
the same time, the original mairka is sometimes simplified. — (a) A curve or a hook is added 
to the right of the vertical of ga in gha, No. 3, col. IV, to the top of da in dha, No. 4. col. IV, a, 
and to the end of the second bar of ¢¢, No. 20, col. LV, c, from which it rises upwards, in tha, 
No. 20, col, LV, d (properly tho). — (b) A hook, a curve, or cursively a slanting stroke, appears 
to the right of ba in bha, No. 2, col. IV, a, 6, the head of 6a being converted at the same time 
into a straight line and pushed somewhat more to the left, in order to avoid the identity with 
ka, No. 10, col. III. — (c) In the following aspirates appear only cursive straight strokes, added 
on the left in jha, No. 7, col. LV, and pha, No. 15, col. IV, and on the right in cha, No, 16, 
col. IV, dha, No. 4, col. IV, c, and tha, No. 20, col. IV, a, all of which letters show, however, 
additional peculiarities. In cha, the little pendant on the left of ca has been made horizontal 
and combined with the stroke of aspiration to a cross bar, In dha, the head of da has been 
flattened into a straight line. Tha has been formed out of the ancient Aramaic Taw, No. 20, 
col, I, a, turned from right to left, and the stroke of aspiration continues the bar of Taw towards 
the right. 


(2) Linguals. — Ya has been formed out of the older Taw, turned from the right to the left, 
by the addition of a short bar, which in the Asoka edicts usually stands on the right and lower 
than that on the left, as in No, 20, col. IV, 6. Incol. IV, ¢, the sign of lingualisation stands on 
the left, below the fa with the bar atthe top. This form of fa, which appears rarely in the Asoka 
edicts, must formerly have been common, as the tha has been derived from it (see above, B, }, a). 
The da of No. 4, col. 1V, 4, exactly resembles the common Aramaic Daleth in col. I, 6 (Teima) 
and may be identical with it. If the alphabet imported into India contained two forms for da 
(col. I, a, 4), both may have been borrowed, and the more cumbrous one may have been used for 
the expression of the fuller sound, It is, however, also possible that the da has been formed out 
of the da of No. 4, col. III, a, by the addition of the bar of lingualisation, placed vertically on 
the right. The na, No. 18, col. IV, a, is likewise derived from na, col. III, a, 6, by the addition of 
a straight stroke going downwards ; compare what has been said above, § 4, B, 4, regarding the 
use of a short stroke for denoting the change of the quality of a borrowed or derivative sign in 
forming the AJ, O, na, ia and na of the Brahmi. 


(3) The palatal #a, No, 13, col. IV, 4, c, consists of two na (col. IIL, 2) joined together 
(4. Tomas), and illustrates the modern Indian name for ia and na, which the Pandits often 
call the big nakaras, The sign, which is really not necessary for a clerk’s alphabet, has perhaps’ 
been framed only because it existed in the Brahmi, the Pandit’s alphabet. 


(4) Medial vowels, absence of vowel in ligatures, and Anusviara. — Long vowels are not. 
marked, and a inheres, just as in the Brahmi, in every consonant. Other vowels are marked by 
straight strokes. In the case of 7, the stroke passes through the left side of the top-line or 
top-lines of the consonant ; in u, it stands to the left of the foot; in e, it descends on the left 
side of the top-line; in 0, it hangs down from this line, see sho, No. 20, col. IV, d@; for further 
details see below, § 11, B. Joined to A, the same strokes form J, U, E and O (No.1, col. IV, 
a—d), The absence of a vowel between two dissimilar consonants, except nasals, is expressed, 
as in the Brahmi, by the combination of the two signs into a ligature, in which the second 
letter is usually connected with the lower end of the first, But ra stands invariably at the foot 


RE INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXIIT, 1904; APPENDIX. f§ 10. 


of the other consonant, whether it may have to be pronounced .before or after it. Double 
[25] consonants, except nasals, are expressed by single ones, and non-aspirates and aspirates by 
the aspirates alone. Nasals immediately preceding other consonants, are always expressed by 
the Anusvara, which, in the A’oka edicts, is attached to the preceding matrka. 


The non-expression of a, and the rules regarding the formation of the ligatures, no doubt, 
have been taken over from the Brahmi, only minor modifications being introduced. And it 
seems probable that the use of straight strokes for 7, u, ¢ and 0 comes from the same source. 
For, already in the Brahmi of all the Agoka edicts, u, e¢ and o are either regularly or 
occasionally expressed by simple strokes, and in Girndr 7 is represented by a shallow curve, 
often hardly distinguishable from a straight stroke; moreover, 7, ¢ and o stand in Brahmi, just 
as in the Kharosthi, at the top of the consonants, and wu at the foot. A connection of the two 
systems of medial vowel-signs is therefore undeniable, and that of the Brahmi must be regarded 
as the original one, since its signs, as has been shown above, § 4, C,1, evidently have been 
derived from the initial vowels, 


The notation of J, U, E and O by combinations of A with the medial vowel-signs is 
peculiar to the Kharosthi, and is attributable to a desire to rimplify the alphabet. Among the 
later Indian alphabets, the modern Devanagari offers an analogy with its siy and sit, and 
the Gujarati with its 3 E, aj AI, 2 O,and wi AU, Several among the foreign alphabets 
derived from the Brihmi, as ¢. g. the Tibetan, show the principle of the Kharosthi fully 
developed. 


The Anusvara, which is used, as in the Brahmi, for all vowelless nasals, is derived from ma 
(E. Tuomas). In mam, No. 12, col. IV, it still has the full form of ma, but usually it undergoes 
cursive alterations; see below, § 11, B, 5. 


§ 10.— The varieties of the Kharosthi of Plate I.! 


According to plate I, the Kharosthi shows four chief varieties, viz.: — (1) the archaic one 
of the fourth and third centuries B.C., found in the Agoka edicts of Shahbizgarhi (photolitho- 
graph of edict VII, in ZDMG. 43, 151, and of edict XII. in EI. 1, 16) and of Mansehra 
(photolithograph of edicts [—VIII. in JA, 1888, 2, 330, = Sewart, Notes d’Epigraphie Indienne, 
1), with which’ the signature in the Agoka edicts of Siddipura (photolithographs in ET. 3, 
138—140), the legends on the oldest coins (autotypes in C.CAI. pl. 3, Nos. 9, 12, 13) and 
the syllables on the Persian sigloi (antotypes in J.RAS. 1895, 865) fully agree. 


(2) The variety of the second and first centuries B.C. on the coins of the Indo-Grecian 
kings, which is imitated by some later foreign kings (autotypes in P. Garpner’s Catalogue of 
Indian Coins in the British Museum, pl. 4—21), 


1 Preparation of Pate I: — 

1—87, cols. I—V, and 38, 39, cols. I—XIII, traced by Dg. DepzExinp from Dr. Buresgss’ impressions of the 
Asoka edicts of Shahbazgarhi and Mansehra, and reduced by photography. 

1—37, cols. V1, VIL, and 38, 39, col. XIV, drawn by Dr. W. CARTELLIERI from P, GaRDNER’s autotypes of 
Indo-Grecian ovins, 

1—37, cols. VIII, IX, and 22—25, col. XIII, traced from Dr. Burerss’ impressions of the Mathura lion 
capital and the photograph of the Taxila copper-plate of which a collotype has since then been published in EI. 4, 
53 (la and 14, ool. VIII, and 25, col. XII). 

1—37, cols. K—XII, and 31—37, col. XIII, traced or drawn according to Dr, HoERNLE’s facsimile of the Sué 
Bihar inscription, supplemented by some signs from the Manikyala stone aud gelatine copies of the Wardak and 
Bimaran vases by Dr. 8S. von OLDENBURG. 

235—30, col. XIII, drawn according to P. GARDNER’s autotypes of the older Kusana coins, 

1—20, cols, XIII, XIV, numerals drawn according to the impressions and facsimiles of the Asoka edicts and 
later insoriptions. 

Older tables of the Kharosthi alphabet, in P.IA. 2, 166, pl. 11; W.AA, 262; C,IA(CIE. 1), pl. 27: P. Garpyzn, 
Cat. I. C. Br. Mus. p. LXX. f. ; Von Sanuet, Nachfolger Alex. d. Gr. (end); G@. H. Ozwa, The Ind, Pal. pl. 26, 


§ 11, A.J INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 25 


(3) The variety of the Saka period, first century B. C. to first century A. D. (?), on the 
Taxila copper-plate of Patika (lithograph in J.RAS, 1863, 222, pl. 3, and collotype in EI. 4, 56), 
and on the lion-capital of the satrap Sodasa or Sudasa from Mathura, which occurs also on some 
sculptures from Gandhira (autotype in J.ASB. 58, 144, pl. 10; Anzeig. phil. hist. Cl. WA. 
1896), on the Kaldawa stone (WZKM. 10, 55, 327) and on the coins of several Saka and Kusina 
kings (autotypes, P. Garpwer, op. cit., pl, 22—25). 


(4) The strongly cursive script of the first and second centuries A. D, (?), which begins 
with the Takht-i-Bahi inscription of Gondopherres (autotype in JA, 1890, I, = S.NEI. 3, pl. 1, 
No. 1) and is fully developed in the inscriptions of the later Kusgana kings Kaniska and Huviska 
(autotype of the Zeda inscription in JA. 1890, 1, = S.NEL. 3, pl. 1, No. 3, of the Manikyala 
stone, JA. 1896, I, = S.NEL 6, pl. 1, 2, of the Sué Bihar inscription, IA. 10, 324, lithograph of 
the Wardak vase, J.RAS. 1863, 256, pl. 10),! and occurs also in the MS. of the Dhammapada 
from Khotan ; see above, § 7. 


§ 11. — The archaic variety? 
A.— The radical signs, 


(1) [26} A small stroke, rising upwards at an acute angle, may be added at the foot of 
every letter ending with a straight or slanting line, in order to mark its end (plate I, 1, IT ; 
6, i, V; 7, 11; 8,11; &c). If a letter ends with two slanting lines, like ya and éa (34, IT), 
the upstroke may be added to the left. In the Asoka edicts of Mansehra, da receives instead 
occasionally a straight base-stroke (18, V). 


(2) Ca has three varieties, (a) head with obtuse angle (10, I, II, 1V); (6) head with curve 
(10, V); (c) head with curve, connected by a vertical with the lower part (10, IIT). — (8) The 
head of cha is likewise sometimes angular (11, I, IV) and sometimes round (11, II), and loses 
occasionally the cross-bar below the head, as in the later types. — (4) The full form of ju 
occurs at least once in Shabhazgarhi (12, I, V)} and oftener in Mansehra, where once (edict V, 
1, 24) the bar stands to the left of the foot. The left side-stroke of ja is often curved 
(12, TIT). — (5) In ita, the second shortened na (see above, § 9, B, 3) is sometimes added on 
the right (14, 1, V) and sometimes on the left (14, III, 1V). Occasionally, the right side of 
the letter is converted cursively into a vertical, as in the later inscriptions (14, IX). 


(6) The normal form of fa is that of 15, I, II; but the bar on the left stands occasionally 
lower than that on the right (15, V ; 38, II), or both bars stand on the left (38, VI), or the 
bar on the right is omitted (commonly in Mansehra) (15, IIT). 


(7) Zu (20) is mostly shorter and broader than ra (31), and either its two lines are of 
equal length, or the vertical one is shorter. Forms like 20, V, are rare. — (8) Di (22, II) 
shows twice, in Shibhizgarhi edict IV, 1. 8, and Mansehra edict VII, 1. 33 (where the 
transcript in ZDMG, has erroneously dr), a curve to the right of the foot, which is probably 
nothing but an attempt to clearly distinguish da from na. — (9) Dha with the left end turned 
upwards (23, V) is rare and a secondary development (see above, § 9, B, 1), In the abnormal 
dha of 88, VIII (déra), from Mansehra, the second bar is a substitute for a very sharp bend 
to the left (23, V).— (10) The ua with the bent head (24, HI) occurs not rarely in the 
syllable ne. 


1 Other facsimiles of Kharosthi inscriptions: — (1) Asoka edicts in J.RAS. 1850, 153; C.IA(CII. 1), pl. 1, 2; 
_C.ASR. 5, pl. 5; S.IP, 1 (end); IA. 10, 107 ;— (2) later inscriptions in P.IA. 1, 96 (pl. 6), 144 (pl. 9), 162 (pl. 14); 
W.AA, 54 (pl. 2), 232; C.ASR. 2, 124 (pl. 59), 160 (pl. 63); 5, pl. 16, 28; J.RAS. 1863, 222 (pl. 3), 288 (pl. 4), 250 
(pl. 9), 255 (pl. 10), and 1877, 144; J.ASB, 23, 57; 81, 176, 532; 89, 65; IA. 18, 257; S.NEI. Nos, 3 (JA. 1890, I, 
pl. 1, No. 2) and 5 (JA. 1894, IT, pl. 5, Nos. 34, 36): all useless except the last three. 
2 Compare ZDMG, 43, 128 #f., 274 ff. 


26 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. {$u,B&O, 


(11) The greatly mutilated ma (29, I) is more common than the forms with remnants of 
the old pendant (compare above, § 9, A, No. 12). It appears invariably in connection with 
vowel signs and owes its existence to such combinations, 


(12) La with a curve on the left, as in the later inscriptions (32, VIII), is rare in the 
Asoka edicts, but occurs in Mansehra edict VI, 1. 29. 


(13) The cursively rounded éa of 34, III, is rare ; but once, in Shihbazearhi edict XIII, 
]. 1, appears a ga hardly distinguishable from ya, — (14) The sa with a triangular head (36, II), 
and that with a rounded head (86, I, III, IV), are cursive developments from the old 
polygonal form (86, V). The vertical stroke of sa is occasionally omitted, as in Mansehra 
[27] edict VI, 1. 27, 

(15) The common forms of ha with a curve (37, I, IV) or a short hook (37, ITI, V) at the 
foot, are cursive developments of the ha of 37, II; see above, § 9, A, No. 5. 


B. — Medial vowels and Anusvara. 


(1) The i-stroke goes regularly across the left side of the horizontal strokes of the con- 
sonants (6, III; 7, III; 15, If, II; &.); in letters with two horizontal or slanting top-strokes, 
it passes through both (14, III; 16, III; 38, 111, VI; &c.), likewise through both the top-strokes 
of na (19, X). In I (2, 1), di (22, I), and nz, it stands just below the head, and in yt (80, II) 
it hangs in the left side, 


(2) The e-stroke corresponds in form and position to the upper half of the 7-stroke 
(4, I; 6, IV ; 12, IT; 19, III; &.); in FB (4, I) it may also stand straight above the head of A. 


(3) The o-stroke mostly corresponds in its position to the lower half of the ¢-stroke (5, 1; 
12, IV; 14, IV; &c.), but it stands further to the right in the angle, formed by the upper part 
of the letters, in go, gho (9, II) and so (36, IV). 


(4) The u-stroke stands regularly at the left lower end of the consonant (3,1; 8, III; 10, 
IV; 12, III; &c.), but a little higher up if the foot of the consonant is curved to the left 
(U, 3, 11), or to the right (du, 22, TV), or has a hook on the right (pru, 25, V; hu, 37, IV). 
In mu it stands to the left of the top of ma (see mru, 29, V). 


(5) The Anusvira has the full form of ma (see above, § 9, B, 4) only occasionally in man 
(29, IV). More commonly it is represented cursively by a straight stroke as in mam (38, XI), 
or by two hooks at the sides of ma as in mam (38, X), In combination with other consonants 
ending in a single slanting or vertical line, the Anusvira is marked by an angle, opening 
upwards, which the foot of the consonant bisects (8, [V; 11, IV; 17, V; 19, V; &c.), or, rarely 
in Shahbazgarhi, oftener in Mansehra, by a straight line, a substitute for the curve of ma, as in 
tham (21, V). If the foot of the consonant has some other appendage, the Anusvira is attached 
higher up to the vertical, as in fiam (14, V); dam (18, V); vram (33, V); ham (37, V). The 
angular Anusvara is always divided in yam (30, V) and in gam, and the one half is added to 
the right end of the matrka, and the other to the left. This may also be done in kam and in 
tham (28, IV). 

Cc. — Ligatures. 

(1) Bhye (88, 1X), mma (88, XII) and mya (38, XII, 6) show no changes or only very 

slight ones in the combined letters. In other cases, one or the other is usually mutilated, 


(2) For ra, which must be pronounced sometimes before and sometimes after -its matrka 
(exception in rta in Mansehra edict V, 1. 24), appears, besides slightly mutilated forms (in rti, 
38, IV, and rea, 39, 1), (a) a slanting line, with or without a bend, which goes through the 
middle of the vertical of the combined consonant (as in gra, 38,1; rfa, 38, I1; rt, 38, IiD); 
(b) also a curved or straight stroke at the foot of the combined sign (rtd, 38, V; hra, 6, V; gra, 8, 
V ; tra, 20, V; dhra, 23, V; 38, VII; pru, 25, V; bra, 27, V3 vram, 33, V; éru, 34, V; stri, 39, 


§ 12, A.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 27 


WII, IX). In combination with ma, the ra-stroke stands invariably at the right top, as in mrw 
(29, V), and in kra and bhra (28, V), occasionally at the right end of the hooks of those letters. 
Semetimes, especially in Mansehra, a curve open above, as in ¢hra (21, IV), is substituted for 
the straight stroke. The stroke and the curves, of course, are cursive substitutes for a full 
ra, attached to the foot of the combined consonanis, 


(3) In vru (89, II) the two consonants have been pushed the one into the other, so 
that the vertical does duty both for the va and the ra. The same principle is followed in the 
formation of the ligature s¢a (which consists only in Shahbazgarhi edict I, 1. 2, srestamat?, of 
sa with a ta hooked into the vertical, 839,1V). At the same time sa is mutilated, the middle 
of its top remaining open and the hook on the left being omitted. This is clearly visible in sti 
(89, V) and séri (89, TX), while séa (39, ITI), sti (89, VID, stu (89, VID, and sétri (39, VIII) are 
made more negligently. The ligature of sa and pa is formed according to [28] the same 
principles, but the sa is mutilated still more and merely indicated by a little hook at the top 
of the vertical of pa in spa (39, X) and spt (39, XII)! In spa (89, XI) the hook stands on the 
side-limb of pa. 


(4) The ligature in 38, VII, seems to have two different meanings. In Shihbazgarhi 
edict X, 1. 21, the sign appears in the representative of the Sanskrit ¢adatvaya, which in the 
dialect of the Asoka edicts might be either tadatvaye or tadattaye, and in Mansehra it occurs 
frequently in the representative of the Sanskrit aiman, As the Kusana inscriptions offer 
a similar sign (31, XIII) in the representative of the Sanskrit satvanam, we have probably to 
read tva in Shahbazgarhi edict X, ]. 21, and to assume that the curve at the foot of ta 
represents @ va, just as it stands in thra (21, IV) for the similar ra. This explanation is 
confirmed by the ligatures 30, XIII, and-37, XIII, which most probably are equivalent to sve 
(isvara) and sva (visharasvamini). In Mansebra (especially edict XII) the sign 38, VII, bas 
to be read tma.? 


§ 12.— Changes in the later varieties.3 
A,-—- The radical signs. 


(1) The meaningless upward stroke connected with the foot of the verticals occurs 
only occasionally on the Indo-Grecian coins (7, VI; 20, VI; 36, VI). More frequently it 
appears detached to the left of the signs, as in A (1, VI), and even with ha (87, VI). 
A cursive substitute is the very common dot, as in ha (37, VII) ; compare also ma (29, VII). 
Finally, various letters, like ta (20, VII) and na (24, VII), receive on the Indo-Grecian coins 
a horizontal base-line (see above, § 11, A, 1), In the variety of the Saka period, the ends of 
the verticals show sometimes a meaningless hook, as in ca (10, VIII) and in sa (36, IX), or a 
straight stroke on the right, as in si (35, VIII). The:same hook appears also in the cursive 
script of the Kugana period (sa, 35, X), or a horizontal stroke to the left, as in A (1, XI), ka 
(6, X), dha (23, XI), ma (24, X11), 64 (27, XT), ya (80, X), as well as cu: yos both to the right 


the curve has been added to the vowel-stroke, 


(2) In the Saka and Kusana varieties, the head of ka is commonly converted into 
a curve (6, VIIT), and in the Kusana variety this curve is connected with the side-limb of ka 


10, Franxez, Nachr. Gott. Ges, d. Wiss., 1895, 540, and ZDMG. 50, 603, proposes to read fa and ji for the 
signs which I read spa and spi. 

2 The MS, of the Dhammapada shows this same sign both in the terminations of the absolutives in tva (tva) 
and in atma (atman), and thus further confirms the explanation proposed. 

8 Regarding the characters on the Indo-Grecian coins, see WAZKM. 8, 193 f.; regarding the script of the 
Saka and Kusana insoriptions, see J.RAS. 1868, 238, pl. 4 (where, however, in ].1 the second ch must be deleted, 
in 1. 2sa must be substituted for si, and tha for ¢#, and in 1, 3 rya for 7S, and the signs for sy in 1. 4 are doubtful), 
and O, Franke, ZDMG. 50, 602 ff, 


23 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXITI, 1904; APPENDIX. fs 12, B. 


(see 6, X).— (3) In all the later varieties, the top of kha is made longer and curved to the 
right (7, VI—XI; 39, XIV). 

(4) In the Saka type, we have a cursive form of ca; derived from 10, III, in which the 
left end of the lower portion of the sign is attached to the short vertical. below the top. 
Similar, still more cursive, forms are common in the Kusana variety ; see 10, X, and XII. 
— (5) All the later varieties show the cha without the cross-bar, and the vertical is occasionally 
made to slant so that the sign looks like mo. — (6) In the later varieties, the left side-limb of 
ja is nearly always rounded, and in the Kusana variety the head of the sign often consists of 
a shallow curve, from the left end of which the vertical hangs down (12, XI). Hence is deve- 
loped the looped ja (12, XII) of the Bimaran vase. The full ja with the bar across or to the. 
left of the foot occurs on the Indo-Grecian coins (12, VII). — (7) In all the later varieties, one 
side of jia invariably shows a vertical (14, VILL, IX). 


(8) The only known fa of the Saka period in the ligature ste (22, XIII) shows thc 
archaic form with one bar on the left; compare 15, III. In the Kusana variety, the two 
bars to the right and left (15, I) are converted, into a straight line, whereby fa becomes tha 
(15, X—XID). The small strokes at the top of éw (15, XI) are, as Fieer’s impression of bhe 
Sué Bihar inseription shows, due to rents in the copper. The correct reading of the word, in 
which it occurs, is kutubini instead of kichubini (HOERNLE). — €9) In all [29] the later varieties, 
tha (16, VIII, X, XI) loses the hook at the end of the second bar. 


(10) On the Indo-Grecian coins, ta (20) is very similar to r@; in the Saka inscriptions 
it is only one-third of the size of ra, and in the Kusana variety the two letters are again very. 
similar. — (11) The Saka da of do (22, IX) is derived from the form 22, II, while the signs 22, 
VII, and X, come from the ordinary da of the Asoka edicts. The Kusana.form (22, XI) 
shows an inverted curve at the head, 


(12) The inscription of Gondopherres, and some coins. of that king and of Azilises 
(P. Garpner, Cat. Ind. ©, Br; Mus. p. 94, No. 22), show — the first in the king’s name — 
a peculiar sign (26, X) usually read pha, but possibly meant for ya, as O, FRaNKE proposes 
MG. 50, 603. — (18) In the Kusana variety, the right end of the horizontal top of bha is 


g 13.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 29 


XIT) or receives a hook at the end (4, XI). Occasionally e stands also at the fuvt of other 
letters, as in ge (34, 1X, Mathura lion-capital), 


(3) On the Indo-Grecian coins, medial u keeps its old form; but in ju (12, VID the 
stroke rises upwards on account of the base-line of ja, likewise in pu (25, VII) on account of 
the bend in the pa. In later times, wu is represented by a curve or a loup, as in. U (8, VID), ku 
(6, XD), khu (7, XI), &c.; in mu (29, IX, XII), the curve opens to the right, 


(4) The Anusvira is marked by a ma, laid on its side, which either is connected with its 
matrka, as in dm (1, VLD), Im (2, VIL), thim (16, XD), or stands separate tu the left, as in yan 
(30, VII), or may be placed below (see mahamtasa in the Taxila copper-plate, line 1). 


C, — Ligatures, 


(1) The ligatures of the Indo-Grecian coins, such as kra (6, VII), kare (39, XIV), stra 
(88, XIV), and those of the Saka inscriptions, ste (22, NIII), khsa (25, XITD), sta (23, NILE), 
show only small changes. The same remark applies tou the livatures on the cvins of the 
Sakas and the older Kuganas, where, however, sume new groups appear, such as psa (2H, 
XIID), rma (28, XIII; compare the shape of ma in P. Garpyer, up. cit., pl. 25, 1, 2), spa (29, 
XIII), which has been mostly misread spa on account of the Greek Spalyrises, sva@ (30, XIII) 
with the va turned into a curve (see above, § 11, C, +), and the doubtful representative vf 
dphi (27, SILT) in Kuc'phis:s. the upper part of which is plainly pi, while the lower one does 
not correspond to any known letter. 


(2) Among the ligatures of the cursive Kusana inscriptions, some, like gra (8, XI), 
bhva (283, XII), exactly agree with the archaic forms, and [80] during this period we still 
find even the old era (rva) (39, I) in the word sarva. The ligatures fra (81, XITD), dé (22, 
XLII), often misread as fsa, ska (85, XIII), and stu (36, XIII), show the new Kazana forms 
of the component parts. But the sa of sva (37, XIII) is badly mutilated, and the loops of 
rya (34, XIIL), rva (33, XIL), sya (385, XID), and sya (86, XIL)! are new cursive formatious. 
In all words where one would expect sta, the Kuyana inscriptions show tha (16, X, XI). 
Probably the omission of the bar on the right (compare 23, XIIL) is merely cursive, and the 
sign has to be read both tha and sta, as the case may require. The MS. of the Dhammapada 
has both signs, 


Ill. THE ANCIENT BRAHMI AND DRAVIDI FROM ABOUT B. C. 350 
TO ABOUT A, D, 450. 


§ 13. — How it was deciphered. 


The first scholar who read, in 1836, an inscription in the oldest Brahma characters, t’ 
Jegend on the coins of the Indo-Grecian king Agathocles, was Cu. Lagscn.2 But the whole 
alphabet was deciphered by J, Prinsup in 1837-88.3 His table‘ is, with the exception of the 
signs for U and O, quite correct, as far as it goes. Since his time, six missing signs have 
becu funnd, among which, L, 7, sa, sa and la have been given in plate IL. of this manual, while 
nz, discovered by GrreRson iu Gayd, is tigured in my Indian Studies, III®, pp. 31, 76, and 
on pase 35 below. The existence of Al” in the third century B.C. is assured by the Gayd 
alphabet of Aguka’s masous.5 U and ga have been first recognised by Cunnixnauim.® One form 
of sa has been first pointed out by Snnari,? and another by Hournue.® Ihave found Ju in 
the Siiici votive inscriptions® Regarding J, compare below, § 16, C, 4. 


1 OU. Franke, op, cit. 604, proposes to read this ssa ; but compare 35, XIII, which can be only sya. 

% (ASR. 1, SIL. 3 C,ASR. 1, VILI—XI; J.ASB. 6, 460 ff. 

4 J.ASB. 6, 223 ; P.TA, 2, 40 (pl. 39). 6 B.YS. ITP, 31, 6 C,TA(CII, 1), pl. 27. 
7 S.1P. 1, 33. & J. ASB. 53, 74. 9 EL. 2, 262. 


30 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. (8 14, 


§ 14. — Common characteristics of the ancient inscriptions. 


The forms of the Brahmi and Dravidi, used during the first 600 years, are known at 
present only from inscriptions on stones, copper-plates, coins, seals and rings,! and there is 
only one instance of the use of ink from the third or second century B, C2 The view of the 
development of the characters during this period is, therefore, not complete. For, in accord- 
ance with the results of all paleographic research, the epigraphic alphabets are mostly more 
archaic than those used in daily life, as the very natural desire to employ monumental forms 
prevents the adoption of modern letters, and as, in the case of coins, the imitation of older 
specimens not rarely makes the alphabet retrograde. The occurrence of numerous cursive 
forms together with very archaic ones, both in the Agoka edicts (see above, § 3) and also in later 
inscriptions, cléarly proves* that Indian writing makes no exception to the general rule. And 
it will be possible to use the numerous cursive letters for the reconstruction of the more 
advanced alphabets, which were employed for manuscripts and for business purposes. 


The full recognition of the actual condition of the Indian writing is obscured also by the fact 
that the inscriptions of the earliest period, with two exceptions, are either in Prakrit or in 
a mixed language (Githa dialect), and that the originals, from which they were transferred to 
stone or copper, were drafted by clerks and monks who possessed little or no education. In 
[81] writing Prékrit these persons adopted nearly throughout — (in writing the mixed dialect 
less constantly ) — the practically convenient popular orthography, in which the notation of long 
vowels, especially of and #, and of the Annusvara, is occasionally neglected as a matter of small 
importance, and in which double consonants are mostly represented by single ones, non-aspi- 
rates are omitted before aspirates, and the Anusvara is put for all vowelless medial nasals.4 
This mode of spelling continues in the Prakrit inscriptions with great constancy until the 
second century A.D. The constant doubling of the consonants appears first in a Pali inscrip- 
tion of Haritiputia Satakannt, king of Banavasi, which has been recently found by L, Ricz.5 
The longer known inscription of the same prince (IA. 14, 331) does not show it. Besides, we 
find in some other, partly much older, Prakrit documents, faint traces of the phonetical and 
grammatical spelling of the Pandits. Thus, the Asoka edicts of Sbahbizgarhi offer some 
instances of mma (see above, § 9, B, 4), the Nasik inscriptions Nos. 14, 15, and Kuda No. 5, have 
the word siddha, and Kanheri No, 14 ayyakena.6 Such deviations from the rule indicate that 
the writers had learned a little Sanskrit, which fact is proved also for the writer who drafted the 
Kalsi edicts by the, for the Pali absurd, form damhmane for bambhane (Kulsi edict XIII, 1, 39). 


With the exception of the Ghasundi (Nagari) inscription, which contains no word with 
a double consonant, all the documents in the mixed dialect offer instances of double consonants 
which sometimes even are not absolutely necessary. Pabhosa No. 1 has Bahasatimittrasa and 
Kaéssapiyanam, No. 2 has Tevaniputtrasya, Nasik No. 5 has siddham, and Karle No. 21 has 
Setapharanaputtasya.” And the Jaina inscriptions from Mathura furnish numerous analogous 
cases.® The only known Sanskrit inscriptions of this period, the Girnir Prasasti from the reign 
of Rudradiman and Kanheri No. 11,° in general show the orthography approved by the phono- 
logists and grammarians, with a few irregularities in the use of the Anusvara, e. 9., pratauam @ 
(Girnir Pragasti, 1. 2), sambamdha? (1. 12), which have heen caused by the influence of the 
popular orthography, but are found in the best MSS. written by Pandits, The orthographic 
peculiarities, just discussed, have therefore nothing to do with the development of the alphabet, 
bat merely show that in ancient, as in modern, India the spelling of the clerks differed from that 
of the learned Brahmans, and that both methods, then as now, mutually influenced each other 
and caused irregularities. 


1 J.BBRAS. 10, XXIII, 2 See above, § 2, B (end). 3 BIS. III4, 40—43, 
& See above, § 7. 5 According to an impression and a photograph kindly sent by Mr. L. Rice. 
© B.ASRWI. 4, pl. 45 and 52; 5, pl. 51. TEL‘ 242; BASRWI. 4, pl. 52and 54, 


8 BI. 1, 871 fF, 2, 195 fi 9 B.ASRWI. 2, pl. 14; 5, pl. 51, 


§ 15.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 31 


A second peculiarity,| found in many inscriptions in Prakrit and in the mixed dialect, 
is the frequent erroneous employment of the signs for the sibilants. In the Asoka edicts of 
Kalsi, of Siddapura, and of Bairat No, I[,2 on the Bhattiprolu vases, in the cave inscriptions 
of Nagarjuni and of Rimnith,® and in the Mathura inscriptions of the Kusana period, nay even 
in the two oldest Ceylonese inscriptions, sz or g¢ are used often for sa, and Sa for sa, and sa for sa 
and sa. The reasons for this promiscuous use of the sibilants are, first, the circumstance that the 
school alphabet, which the clerks learned, was originally intended for Sanskrit and contained 
more sibilants than the ancient vernaculars possessed, and secondly, the negligent pronunciation 
of the classes destitute of grammatical training. The western and southern Prikrits very 
probably possessed, then as now, both the palatal and the dental sibilants, and it was probably 
the custom, as is done also in our days, to exchange the two sounds in the same words. The 
natural consequence was that the feeling for the real value of the signs for éa and se disappeared 
among the Prikrit-speaking classes, while the sa of their school-alphabet, for which there was 
no corresponding sound in their vernaculars, must have appealed to them as a sign suitable to 
express sibilance, The Sanskrit inscriptions of all centuries, especially the land-grants which 
were drafted by common clerks, the MSS. of works written in the modern Prakrits, and the 
documents from [82] the offices of modern India, with their countless mistakes in the use of the 
sibilants, offer abundant proof for the correctness of this explanation of the errors in the old 
inscriptions. The explanation is also confirmed by the occasional occurrence of na‘ for na, — 
once in the separate edicts of Dhauli and once of Jaugada, — though na alone is permissible 
for their dialect. In these cases, too, the error seems to have been caused by the fact that 
the school-alphabet contained both na and na. The clerks, who had learned it, each made once 
a slip, and put in the, for them, redundant sign. The different opinion,’ according to which 
the exchange of the sibilants in the Asoka edicts indicates that the values of the Brahma signs 
were not completely settled in the third century B. C., rests on the, now untenable, assumption 
that the Brahmi was elaborated, not for writing Sanskrit, but for the Prakrit dialects. 


§ 15. — The varieties of the Brahmi and Dravidi in Plates If. and III.® 


Plates II. and IIL. show the following fifteen scripts of the first period : — 
(1) The variety of the Eran coin, running from the right to the left (pl. II, col. I), which 
probably dates from the 4th century B, C. 


1 B.IS, ILI, 43, note 3. 2 C.IA(CII. 1), pl. 14. 8 C.1A (CIL 3), pl. 15. 

« B.ASRSI. 1, 128, note 45; 129, note 33, 6 SIP. 1, 83 ff. ; B.ESIP. 2, note 1. 

6 Preparation of the Plates :— 

Prats II. 

Col. I; drawn according to a caste of the Eran coin; compare C.CAT. pl. 11, No. 18: A from Patna seal, 
C.ASR. 15, pl. 2. 

Cols. Il, III ; cuttings from facsimile of Kalsi, EI. 2, 447 ff. 

Cols. IV, V ; cuttings from facsimile of Delhi-Sivalik, IA. 13, 806 ff. 


Cols. VI, VII; cuttings from facsimiles of Jangada, B.ASRSI. 1, pl. 67, 68, 69: 20, VI, from Radhia, EJ. 
2, 245 ff, ; and 44, VII, drawn according to impression of Sahasram. 
te via ent 3 enttings from facsimiles of Girnar, EI. 2, 417 £.: 31, ra, between VII, VIII, from Ripnath, 

. 6, 156, 

Cols. XI, XII: enttings from facsimiles of Siddapura, ET. 3, 134 ff.: 44, XII, drawn according to impression 
of Bairat, No.1; 45, XI, according to faosimile of Bharahut, ZDMU. 40, 58 ff. 

Cols. XHI—XV ; cuttings from facsimiles in EL. 2, 323 ff, 

Col. XVI; traced from the facsimile in J.ASB. 56, 77, pl. 5 a. 

Col, XVII; cuttings from facsimile in IA. 20, 361 ff. 

Col, XVIII; traced from the facsimile in IA. 14, 189: 6 from facsimile of Bharahut, No. 98, ZDMQG, 40, 58: 
and 41 from impression of Safici Stupa I, No. 199. 


Col, XIX; cuttings from facsimile in EL. 2, 240 ff. 

Col. XX; cuttings from facsimiles in EI. 1, 396, No, 33, and EI. 2, 195, No. 1. 

Cols. XXI, XXII; drawn according to ConnineHam’s photograph of the Hathigumpha inscription of 
Kharavela. 

Cols. XXIII, XXIV; cuttings from facsimiles in BASRWI. 5, pl. 51, Nos. 1, 2. 


Prats IIE. 
Cols. I, IL; cuttings from facsimiles in BI. 2, 199, Nos. 2 and 5, and CunnineHam’s photograph of the 


Mora well inscription: compare C.ASR, 20, pl. 5, No. 4. — (Note continued on the nert page.) 


§ 16, A & B] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 33 


the ornamental variety of the same district with more fully developed southern peculiarities, 
from the Kuda and [83] Junnar inscriptions (cols. XV, XVI), 2nd century A. D.; the highly 
ornamental variety of the eastern Dekhan from Jaggayyapeta (cols. XVII, XVIII), 3rd 
century A. D. (?); and the ancient cursive alphabet of the Prakrit grant of the Pallava king 
Sivaskandavarman (cols. XIX, XX), 4th century A. D. (?). 


§ 16.— The older Maurya alphabet; Plate II. 
A.— Geographical extension and duration of use.! 


The older Maurya alphabet was used over the whole of India, and it seems to have found 
its way into Ceylon at the latest about B. C. 250. For, the two oldest Ceylonese inscriptions,? 
from the time of the king Abaya Gamini, which probably belong to the end of the 2nd or the 
beginning of the 1st century B. C., show characters which appear to have been developed from 
those of the Asoka edicts. And the close relations between Asoka and Tissa of Ceylon, 
reported by the Southern Buddhists, make an importation of the Brahmi from Magadha into 
Ceylon not improbable. It is, however, possible that the Brahmi alphabet was introduced even 
earlier into Ceylon by Indian colonists.? 


The upper limit of the use of the older Maurya alphabet cannot be fixed with any certainty. 
But the shape of some of the characters on the Persian siglot (above § 15, 1) makes it probable 
that even its more advanced forms existed before the end of the Akhaemenian rule in India 
(B. C. 331). Its oldest primary forms, no doubt, go back to much earlier times, as also the 
statements of the tradition, discussed above, tend to show. [84] The lower limit of the use 
of this type cannot be very distant from the end of ASoka's reign (about B. C, 221), and must 
fall about B. C. 200. This estimate is supported by the character of the writing in the inscrip- 
tions of Agoka’s grandson Dagaratha,4 which were incised “immediately after his coronation ” 
(Gnuntaliyam abhisitena), i, e., probably just about the end of the 8rd century B. C., and of the 
legends on the coins of the Indo-Grecian kings Pantaleon and Agathocles, who ruled in the 
beginning of the 2nd century B,C.5 The letters of the Nagirjuni cave inscriptions (pl. II, 
col. XVII) are sharply distinguished from those of the Asoka edicts, partly by the far advanced 
forms of ja, ta, da, la, and partly by the invariable and considerable reduction of the vertical 
strokes. The second peculiarity re-occurs on the coins of the two Indo-Grecian kings, which 
show also a further development of the northern ja of pl. II, 15, III. Though the shortened 
letters were by no means unknown to the writers of the Asoka edicts (see table on p. 7), their 
constant use for epigraphic documents is, to judge from the available materials, a characteristic 
of the types of the second and subsequent centuries. And I believe that all inscriptions 
showing long verticals must be assigned to the third century B.C., and those with short 
ones to later times. 


B. — Local varieties. 


The peculiar circumstances, under which the Asoka edicts were incised, were most unfavour- 
able to a full expression of the existing local varieties. First, the fact that all of them were 
first drawn up in the imperial secretariate at Pataliputra and then forwarded to the governors 
of the provinces, must have proved a serious obstacle. As the differences in the grammatical 
forms and small alterations in the text indicate, the edicts were copied by the provincial clerks 
before they came into the hands of the stone-masons. It isa matter of course that the scribes 
of the Rajukas, in copying them, were influenced by the forms of the letters in the originals, 
and that they imitated them, be it involuntarily or out of respect for the head office. Further, 
it is probable that the provincial clerks were not always natives of those districts in which they 


1 Compare B.IS. III?, 49 #. 2B. Muuwer, Ane, Insers, from Ceylon, pl. 1. 
5 Compare M. Ds Zinva WICKRAMASINGHE in J.RAS., 1895, 895 ff. € LTA, IT?, 257 ff, 
5 Von Sauer, Nachfolger Alex. d, Gr., 31; P. GarDner, Cat. of Ind, Coins Br. Mus., XXVI, 


34 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 19vt; APPENDIX, L§ 16, C. 


served ; and this circamstance must have contributed to efface or to modify the use of the local 
varieties. Most of Asoka’s governors will, no doubt, have been sent from Magadha, the home of 
the Maurya race, and many will have been transferred in the course of their service from one 
province to another. Those acquainted with. the conditions of the Civil Service in the Native 
‘States of India, which still preserve the ancient forms.common to the whole of Asia, will regard 
it as probable that the governors, on taking charge of their posts, imported their subordinates, 
or at least some of them, be it from their native country or from the districts which they 
formerly governed. The case of Pada, the writer of the Siddipura edicts, confirms this 
inference. As he knew the Kharosthi, he probably had immigrated, or been transferred, to 
Maisiir from the north of India. 


In spite of these unfavourable conditions it is possible to distinguish in the writing of the 
Asoka edicts at least two, perhaps three, local varieties. First, there is a northern and a 
southern one, for which, as in the case of the later alphabets, the Vindhya or; as the Hindus say, 
the Narmada, forms the dividing line. The southern varicty is most strongly expressed in the 
Girnar and Siddipura edicts, less clearly in the Dhauli and Jaugada edicts, by differences in the 
signs for A, 4, kha, ja, ma, ra, sa, the medial i, and the ligatures with ra (see below, under O, D). 
A comparison of the characters of the most closely allied northern and southern inscriptions 
confirms the assumption that the differences are not accidental. If the characters of the 
Siddipura edicts do not always agree with those of Girnir, [85] the discrepancies will have to 
be ascribed to the northern descent of the writer Pada or to his service in a northern office. 


Even the writing in the northern versions is not quite homogeneous. The pillar edicts of 
Allahabad, Mathia, Nigliva, Paderia, Radhia, and Rimpirva, form one very closely connected 
set, in which only occasionally minute differences can be traced,.and the edicts of Bairit No. L, 
Sahasrim, Baribar, and Sijici, do not much differ. A little further off stand the Dhauli 
separate edicts (where edict VII. has been written by a different hand from the rest), the Delhi- 
Mirat edicts, and the Allahabad Queen’s edict, as these show the angular da. Very peculiar 
and altogether different is the writing of the rock edicts of Kalsi, with which some letters on the 
coins of Agathocles and Pantaleon (but also some in the Jaugada separate edicts) agree. Perhaps 
it is possible to speak also of a north-western variety of the older Maurya alphabet.! 


C.—The radical signs. or Matrkas. 


Signs beginning with verticals show already in the Asoka edicts. occasionally a thickening 
or a very short stroke (Serif) at the upper end, as in cha (pl. II, 14, II), pa (28, VII); compare 
the cases noted EL, 2, 448, and B.ASRSI, 1, 115. 


§ 16, C.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 35 


consisting of two dots side by side with a third dot above on the left, thus:.. In later times 
(see pl. VI, 4, V, VII) the angles of the square are turned towards the top and the bottom lines. 


(5, 6) Husrzsca (ZDMG, 40, 71) admits that the sign 6, XVIII, looks like J, but prefers 
to read O for linguistic reasons, which seems to be unnecessary according to- E. Mixer, 
Simplified Pali Grammar, 12f. The existence of 7 in the 3rd century may be inferred from 
the Gaya alphabet of the masons. 


(7) Add the horseshoe-form of H (Kalsi edict V, 16, &c.) from the comparative table on 
page 11 above, No, 16, col. V,%. The half-round £ of col. XXII. occurs also in Saiici Stiipa I, 
No. 173, The AI, which has been placed in this row (col. XXID), existed in the 8rd century, 
as may be inferred from the Gaya alphabet of the masons. — (8) Regarding the O of Dhauli 
and Jaugada in col. VI, see above, § 4, B, 4, a. 


(9) The dagger-shaped ka occurs occasionally in all versions of the Aéoka edicts, most 
rarely in Girnar. — (10) The oldest among the seven forms of kha is that in col. Il (Kalsi) and 
col, VI (Jaugada separate edicts and Bharahut Stipa inscription). Hence come first the northern 
kha, with the loop on the right, col. ITI (Kalsi and Bharahut), and a form, nearly identical with 
that of col. XVIII, in Jangada separate edict I, 1.4. The next derivative from this is the kha 
with a bent vertical and a dot at the foot, in cols. I1V, V. Likewise of northern origin is the kha 
with the triangle at the foot, in Ahya, 43,V ; compare Mahibodhi-Gaya, pl. 1U, No.3, and Bharahut. 
Another derivative from the primary form in col. III. is the Aha of cols. VII, IX—XII, with 


36 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 16, C 


————_ 


Mirat, Delhi-Sivalik, Allahabad Kosambi edict, and Allahabad Queen's edict), and (4) the 
cursive da in cols, VII, IX (Girnar, Jangada, &c., rarely), — (26) The original dha of 
cols. V—VII appears only in Delhi-Sivalik (rarely) and in the Jangada separate edicts 
(constantly), 


(28, 29) The angular pa and pha of col, XII, and col. VI. occurs here and there in various 
versions. — (30) Add the da of the comparative table, page 11 above, No. 2, V, a, which is not 
rare in Kilsi and other versions. — (31) The secondary dha with the straight stroke on the right, 
col, XVI, and that with the rounded back, col. VI (Jangada separate edicts), appear also in 
Bharahut (constantly), Saici (often), Barabar, and Kalsi. — (82) The secondary ma with the 
semicircle at the top occurs throughout in the northern inscriptions, except in the Sohgaura 
copper-plate, which offers a ma with an open square, similar to that of Siddapura, cols, XI, 
XII. The older ma with the angle above the circle, cols. VIII—X, is a southern form, and 
is confined to Girnar (exclusively) and Dhauli and Jaugada (rarely). 


(38) The notched ya in cols. IV, V, VII, XI, is used either constantly or chiefly in Delhi- 
Sivalik, Delhi-Mirat, ah Radhia, Rimpirvi Nigliva, Paderia, and Kalsi. It is also very 
common in Dhauli op d $i But in Girnir the ya with the curve below is 


§.16, D & BE] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 37 


D. — Medial vowels and Anusvara, 


(1) The originally straight stroke for @ is often turned upwards in Kalsi (see, for instance, 
a, 37, 111) and occasionally in other versions, after the manner prevalent in later times. In 
kha (10, V, VI), j@ (15, VI, &c.). fa (18, ID), tha (lu, LL), tha (24, 11), the &stroke is added 
to the middle of the letter. Bharahut offers also a j@ like that of 15, XXI. 


(2) The angular z (see, for instance, khi, 10, 11) beeomes, regularly in Girnar (see ¢hi, 
21, 1X) and rarely in the Jaugada separate edicts (see khi, 10, Vil), a shallow curve, which 
in khé (10, VID), in ni (27, IX), and other letters ending in verticals, may be attached to the 
middle of the consonant, and which frequently is very much like & In Kalsi edict XIII, 2, 
lu, the medial i of # (48, IL, stands twice to the left of its consonant, likewise in @ in 
Allahabad edict I (end), and in hi iu the Suhgaura copper-plate, line 4.— (3) The medial 
i of Girndr usually consists of a shallow curve bisected by a vertical (di, 25, 1X); but in #% 
(18, IX) it is marked by two vertical strokes, and in «ht (24, 1X) by two slanting ones. 


(4) The full u which is identical with U occars in the dhy (26, I11) of Kalsi several 
times. It is also recognisable in ku (9, V), gu (11, LX), du (20, VII), and other letters ending 
in verticals, which latter have to do double duty as parts ef the consonants and of the vowel; 
see below, the remarks on some ligatures under E, t, Elsewhere we have secondary forms: 
(2) such as omit the horizontal, in dhw (26, 11), pu (28, LL), &c. ; (4) such as omit the vertical, 
in tu (23, V), &c. In tu the wstroke is occasionally turned upwards, as in 28, VIII. and 43, 
IIL; compare the later ¢é of pl. ILI, 21, XLX.— (5) The identity of medial @ with J is still 
recognisable in letters ending in verticals, as in 6h@ (31, X), &c., where the vertical again does 
double duty. But mostly the vowel is expressed by two strokes, either parallel ag in 
dhe (26, X) and in ya (33, VII) or placed otherwise as in pa (28, VILL, XVI). 


(6) Signs like ge (11, IV) perhaps offer still remnants of the hooB-form of medial e, into 
which the originally super-imposed triangle no doubt was reduced at first (see above, § 4, C, 1) ; 
and the e-strokes of khe (16, ILL), ge (11, IIL), and gye (42, VII), which slant downwards 
from the left to the right, may have to be interpreted in the same way. In je (15, VII), 
te (18, V), fhe (1%, XIE), and che (24, XLD, the vowel stands opposite to the middle of the 
consonant ; in khe it is often attached to the left end of the hook, — (7) Medial a? oceurs only in 
trai (23, IX) and thaz (24, X), both in Girnar, and in ma. (32, XI1; Siddapura) 

(8) Medial 0 preserves mostly the original shape of O very faithfully (see above, § 4, ©, 1). 
The later cursive o with the two bars at the same height appears however in go (11, V; Delhi= 
Sivalik) and ho (40, V; Delhi Sivalik), as well as in the yo of the Persian sigloé. In mo (82, 
Vil, X; Jaugada separate edicts, Mathia, Radhia, and Girnar), the o has been formed in 
similar manner. In the second form, the bars stand opposite the middie, and indicate that 
analogous ma and me existed already in the 3rd century B. C,, just as later; see pl. II, 30, 
X, XVIL. In the no of Kalsi edict V, line 14 we have a looped 9, similar to that in to of pl. IH, 
33, XX, and in later signs. 


(9) The Anusvara mostly stands opposite the middle of the preceding Matrka, as in mam 
(32, VIIT). But in connection with 7 it is placed regularly in [88] Delhi-Sivalik, Delhi-Mirat, 
Mathia, Radhia, Jaugada, and Dhauli, inside the angle of the vowel, as in fim (18, VI). There 
are also other cases in which it occusionally appears, as in the later scripts, above its Matrki, 
and sometimes, as in mam (32, II), it sinks to the foot of the latter; see above, § 4, B, 2. 


E. — Ligatures. 


(1) In the erdinary ligatures of the Asoka edicts (42, II-VI, X—XII; 43, V—VIII, 
XI, XU; 44, ITI—VII, XI, XII; 45, IV, V, X), in those of Bharvahnt (45, XT) and of 
Ghasnndi (42, 43, X VD, the consonants are placed belosy each other {n their natural order and 


38 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. (§ 17. 


——_— 


suffer no material changes. Occasionally. however, as in kya (42, II, IV), Aye (42, 111). gya@ 
(42, VI). and gye (42, VIL), a single vertical stroke does duty both for the upper and the lower 
consonant, just as in the modern ligatures H, 7H, and so forth; compare also the Kharosthi 
ligatures, § 11 above, 0, 3. 


(2) But there are cases of greater irregularities, especially in Girnar, where (a) the second 
sign is sumetimes greatly mutilated or mate cursive, as in vya (44, II), mya (44, VIID, sti 
and stu (45, VIIT, |X) ; (4) the sign for the second consonant is sometimes placed first (Girnar 
and Siddapura) for convenience sake,! as in s/@, sti (42, VILL, 1X), tpa, tpa (43, 1X, X), oy 
(44, X. ?); and (c) in lizatures with ra, this sign ix either (both in Girnar and Siddapura) 
inserted in the vertical lines of the other consonant (kra, 9, KX; tram, 23, X; dra, 25, XII; éra, 
30, X; era, 36, X 3 sru, 39 Xi, or (in Girndr alone) is indicated by a small hook at the top of 
the combined sign (traf, 23, 1X ; pra, pra, 28, 1X, X ; &e.), The position of ra always remains 
the same. whether it is to be pronounced before or after the combined consonant, and thus 
36, X, has the value both of rra and of vra. ‘The insertion of ra in the left vertical of ba in éré 
(30, X) probably goes back to the period when the writing went from the right to the left. 
Otherwise it ought to stand in the right vertical. 


§ 17, — The Dravidi of Bhattiprolu; Plate II. 


To the remarks on the value of the Dravidi of Bhattiprola for the history of writing in 
India (above, page *), and to the explanations of its peculiar signs (above, § 6, A, 3, 7, 12, 15, 
18; B, 4c, &; and C, 2), i have now to add the reasons for the assumed reading of the sign in 
pl. U, 38, XII—XV. It seems to me certain that originally it had the value of s. For 
there can be no doubt that it expresses a sibilant, and that the Dravi i is, like the Brahmi, 
an alphabet invented in order to write Sanskrit (see above, § 6, C, 2). As signs for two 
of the three Sanskrit sibilants are easily recognisable, — the palatal in 37, XIII, XIV, and the 
dental in 39, XILI, xf, XV,— the third sign can only have been intended to express the 
lingual sibilant, But it is a different question, whether in the words of the Prakrit Bhattiproiu 
inscriptions, in which the sign occurs, the lingual sibilant was actually pronounced, or whether, 
owing to the negligent orthography of the clerks, the sign has been put where the pronunciation 
was ors. A certain anvswer to this question is for the present impossible. It could be given 
only if we knew more about the ancient Prakritof the Kistna districts [89] than is actually the 
case Bat the correct use of ga in gamanudesanam WBhattiprolu, No. X) indicates that the dialect 
possessed two sibilants; and it can only be doubted, whether gs has been put erroneously for 8, 
as often happens in the Jaina inscriptions from Mathnra (compare EI 1, 37), or whether it 
was still the lingual sibilant. Another point in the character of the Dravidi, which requires 
special mention, is, that its signs, which agree with those of the Brahmi, in several cases 
present characteristic peculiarities of the southern variety. ‘Ihis may be seen (1) in the 
angular A, 4; (2) in the kh (10, XIII, XV) consisting, like that of Girnar, merely of a vertical, 
with a hook at the top; (8) in the di, which has the same position as that of tue Jaugada 
separate edicts and the Na: aghat inscriptions ; (4) in m, which, though turned topsy-turvy, 
retains the angle of the ma@ of Girnadr; and (5) in 8, which mostly has the straight side-limb, as 
in Girnir and Siddapura. 


As the inscription on the crystal prism (No. X), found with the stone vessels. shows the 
ordinary brahmi except in the da opening to the right, it follows that the Didvi-i was not 
used exclusively even in the Kistna districts, but together with the common old !ndian alphabet. 
The small namber of the inscrij tious hitherto found, makes it impossible to say anything 
definite regarding the spread ot this alphabet, And it is equally difficult to fix with certainty 
the time and the duration of its use, As king Kubiiaka er Khubiraka (Knbera) is 1 
from other sources, we can only fall back on the never absolutely certain paleographic 1 


1 QO. Franks, Gurupijakaumud, 26, thinks that these groups should be read tsa, fsi, as the aro 


§ 18:] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 89 


The signs, which agree with the Brahmi, point to the time immediately after Agoka, or about 
B.C. 200, In favour of this estimate is particularly the occurrence of the long verticals, 
the invariably round g, and the r, which is always represented by a straight line. 


“  § 18. — The last four alphabets of Plate II. 


In addition to the inscriptions of Dasaratha (col. XVII), which very probably belong just to 
the end of the 3rd century BC. (see above, § 16, A), only those of the Ceta king Khiravela 
of Kalinga (cols. XXI, XXII) and those of the Andhra queen Nayanika in the Nanaghat cave 
(cols. XXIII, XXIV) can be dated approximately. [Kharavela’s inscription must have been 
incised between B. C. 157 and 147, as the king's thirteenth year is said to correspond to the 
year 165 of “the time of the Muriya (Mauriya: kings,”! and it fixes also the time of the 
Nanaghat inscription. F'or, accoiding to line 4, Kharavela assisted in the second year of his 
reign a western king called Satahani. This Satakani probably is identical with the first 
Andhra prince of that name mentioned in the Puranas, whose inscribed image is found in the 
Nanaghat cave. Hence the date of the large inscription, which was incised during the regency 
of Satakani’s widow Nayanika, cannot be much later than Bb. C. 1£0.2 

Paleographic evidence is almost the only help for fixing the time of Dhanabhiiti’s inscrip- 
tion on the turana of the Bharahut Stipa «col, XVIL1), which was incised “ during the role of 
the Sufgas,” as well as that of the Pabhosa cave inscriptions (col. X1K) and of the oldest 
votive documents from Mathura (col. XX), all of which ot er (see above, § 15, 5) the Suiga 
type of the ancient Brahmi. To judge from the evidently close connection of their characters, 
partly with the younger Maurya alphabet and partly with the Kaliiga script, the signs of 
cols. XVILi, XIX, probably belong to the second century B. C. Those of col. XX. may date 
from the first century 8. C., as the elongation of the lower parts of the verticals of A, A (1, 2), 
the broad back of é@ (37), the cursive lu (41) and the subscribed rain dra (42), which is twisted 
to the lelt, point to a later time. 


The tendency to shorten the upper vertical lines, mentioned already above (§ 16, A), is, 
though here and there not fally carried through, common to all the four scripts. The broaden- 
ing of the letter or of tle lower parts of ga, ta, pa, bha, yw, la, saand ha is found only in 
the last [40] three alphabets; and the thickening of the tops of the upper verticals, and the 
use of the so-called S-rf, are particularly remarkable only in the Suiga and Kalinga alphabets. 
Tendencies in the direction of later developments are found, not only in the letters of col. XX, 
already mentioned, but also in the round da (-0, AXII, XXI11T), so characteristic for the later 
southern alphabets, in ;@ with the curved upper horizontal line (22, XVII{, XIX) in the 
partly or entirely angular »a (32, XIX, XXI11) in the semicircular medial t of ké (9, XXID, 
bi (8u, XXL), and vi (46, XXIV), as well as in the detached o ot 4o (11, XXID), tho (19, XXIV) 
and tho (24, XXIV). The single medial aw of the plate, in pau (28, XVIII), deserves to 
be noted. 


As regards the gergraphical distribution of these types, the younger Maurya alphabet 
belongs not only to the north-east (Bihar), but also to the north-west, where its ja and sa are 
found on the coins of the two Indo-Grecian kings, mentioned above (§ 15, 4). The Kalinga 
alphabe is of course that of the south-eastern cvast, and the type of the Nanaghat inseriptions 
that of the western Dekhan. Finally, the Suiga type prcbably represents the script of the 
centre of India. It, however, extends also to the west, as the same or very similar characters 
are found in the caves of the Maratha country; compare § 15 above, 4, note 3. 


Very little can be said regarding the duration of the use of these scripts. The Indo- 
Grecian coins show that the younger Maurya characters were used in the first half of the 2nd 


1 Sixth Oriental Congress, 3, 2, 149; compare Ostreichische Monatsschr ftir d. Or., 1884, 23] ff. 
2 Sixth Oriental Congress, 3, 2, 146; differently Bhandarkar, Marly Hist. of the Dekkan?, 34, who assigus 
Satakaui to the period B. C. 40 to A. D. 16. 


40 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1901; APPENDIX. [§19,A &B. 


century B. C.1 Tne Kalinga script is visible also in the inscriptions of Khiaravela’s next 
descendants.2, If Burezss has correctly fixed the time of the Pitalkhora caves,> it would 
follow that the script of the Nanaghat inscriptions continued to be used in the first 
century A. D. 


§ 19.-- Fhe precursors of the northern alphabets. 
A.-—~ The alphabet of the Northern Ksgatrapas; Plate IFT. 


Immediately connected with the latest forms of the Sunga type in the oldest Jaina inscrip- 
tions from Matharé (pl. IL, col. XX) is the alphabet of the Northern Kgatrapas on the coins and 
in the inscriptions of the Mahikgatrapa Rajuvula or Ra ‘jubula and of bis son Sudasa or Sudara, 
who ruled in the first century B. C. or A, D. (?) over the same town.4 And some “archaic” 
votive inscriptions from Mathura, as well as legends on certain Indian cvins, exhibit the early 
letters of the same type5 


The characteristics of this type (plate ILI, cols. I, II) are the eqnaliaation of all the upper 
verticals, except in la (33. [); the constant use of the Sert/, occasionally replaced, as in dha 
(29, I, by a nail-head or wedge; and the constant use of angnlar forms for gha (10, I), ja 
(13, I, Il), pa (26, I, 11), pha (27. 1D, ma (80, I, 11), ta (33, 1), 92 186, 1), and he (38, I, IT). 
Other, mostly cursive, innovations are found in the peculiar ca (11, 1); in the slanting angolar 
da (18, I); in da (23, I); in the broadened bha (29, I, II); in ra with the curve at the end 
(82, I, {1), which occasionally reappears also later (see pl. IV, 33, IV) in northern inscriptions ; 
in the medial vowels @ (which in Ad, 38, II, rises upwards, but in ré@, 32, I, keeps its ancient 
form),é (in di, 23, I), o (in gho, 10, I, and so, 35, ET); and in the position of the Anusvara above 
the line (in nam, 20, I}. The 4a shows, besides the old form in 7, |, IT, the later one with the 
bent bars in ksa (40, 1). The upper part of the abnormal za (34, [T) with two triangles, which 
sometimes is found also in the Kugana inscriptions® and elsewhere, [41] probably represents 
a hollow wedge. The inscriptions of this class for the first time show? the medial r which 
consists, exactly like that of the Kugana inscriptions in vr (34, III), of a straight line slanting 
towards the left. 


“ B,—The alphabet of the Kusana inscriptions; Plate III. 


The next step in the development of the Brahmi of Northern India is illustrated by the 
mseriptions from the time of the Kusana kings Kaniska, Huvigka and Vasuska or Vasudeva 
(plate III, cols, IEL—V), the first among whom made an end of the rule of the older Sakas in 
the eastern and southern Panjab. The inscriptions with the names of these kings, which run 
from the year 4 to the year ¥8 (according to the usually accepted opinions, of the Saka era of 
A, D. 77-78, or of the 4th century of the Seleucid era),? are very numerous in Mathur& and its 
neighbourhood, and are found also in eastern Rajputana and in the Central Indian Agency 
(Saiici)® In spite of great variations in the single letters, which occasionally exhibit the more 
modern forms in the older inscriptions and the earlier forms of the Northern Kgatrapa type in 
the later documents, the alphabet possesses a very characteristie appearance, and nobody who 
ence has seen the squat and broad letters of the Kusana period will ever make a mistake by 
assigning them to other times. 

1 Compare above, § 16, note 4, 2 Sixth Oriental Congress, 8, 2, 179, Udayagiri inscription Nos, 3, 4. 

5 Buddhist Cave Temples, 245. # See above, § 10. 

5 Comp. also facsimiles in C.ASR. 3, pt. 13, No. 1; EI. 1, 392, No. 17; C.CAL, pl. 3, No. 14; pl. 6; pl. 8, No. 2 ff. 

6 EI. 2, 201, No. 12; 207, No. 32; hollow wedges are found also in the facsimiles in C,ASR, 10, pl. 23, No. 13 
F.GI(CIL 3), No. 23. 

7 In vrsnvgam, C,ASR. 20, pl. 5, line 2. ; neo 

S$ JA, 10,213; C.CIS, 51,57; BaiyparKak, Early Hist. of the Dekkan®, 23, note 1, thinks that Kanigka 
ruled later ; but 8. Lévn, J.A. 1897, I, 5 ff., places even Vasudeva in the first century A, D.; the yoars 4 and dof 


this era occur m EI, 2, 201, Nos, 11,12; Kaniska, the year 7, EI, 1, 391, No, 19. 
§ See faosimile, FI %. 369 


§. 20; A.] INDIAN PALEOGRAHY. 41: 


As regards the details, the following innovations deserve special mention: ! — (1) Side by 
side with more ancient signs, the A of col. IV. shows a form leading up to the modern A of the 
Nagari of Western India ; compare also pl. 1V, 1, IX, XI ff. (2) The bar denoting the length 
of A is attached low down (2, III, IV) ; compare pl. IV, 2, VII ££. (3) Three strokes, one of 
which is set up vertically, take the place of the three dots of I (3, III). (4) The horizontal 
stroke of U occasionally shows a curve at the left end (4, 1V). (5) The base of the triangular 
E (5, LV, V) is mostly at the top; compare pl. 1V, 5, X ff. (6) The kha (8, I1I—V) is mostiy 
triangular below, and its book is often small. (7) One of the two originally horizontal strokes 
of na is always turned into a curve notched in the middle, and sometimes both are changed in 
this manner, as in 20, III, 1V; occasionally the vertical is split up into two lines, which are 
attached to the ends of the left horizontal line, each bearing a portion of the curved top-bar 
(20, V). (8) The ta shows sometimes, but rarely, a loop, as in sti (43, 1V). (9) The lower end 
of da (23, L1I—V) is drawn further to the right, and the bulge on the right becomes larger. 
(10) The dka (24, III, LV) becomes narrower and pointed at the ends. (11) The horizontal 
stroke of na is curved (25, III) or looped (25, IV), whereby the still more modern looking form 
in 25, V, is developed. (12) The ya (81, 1IIF—V) mostly has a hook or circle on the left limb, 
and in ligatures is either looped as ia ryya (42, III), or bipartite as in ryya (41, V). (13) The 
va is occasionally rounded on the left (34, V), or becomes similar to ca, as in rvva (42, 1V). 
(14) The é@ (35, III—V) becomes narrower, and its middle stroke lies horizontally across the 
interior; sometimes the left down-stroke bears a Serif at the end, or the right one is made 
longer, just as in ga (9, V); compare pl. IV, 36,1. (15) The central bar of sa (36, III—V) 
goes straight across the interior of the letter. (16) The left limb of sa is occasionally, but 
rarely, turned into a loop (87, 1V); compare plate LV, 38, I ff. 


All these peculiarities, as well as the advanced forms of the medial vowels, of @ in ra (32, IV), 
of win ku (7, IV, V) and in sty (43, V),2 and of o in to (21,1V), reappear constantly in the 
northern alphabets of the next period, those of the Gupta inscriptions (pl. IV, cols I—VII) and 
of the Bower MS. (pl. VI, cols. I—ILD), or are precursors of the forms of those documents, The 
literary alphabets used in Mathura during the first two centuries A. D., very likely were 
identical with or closely similar to the later ones, and the admixture of older forms. observable 
in the inscriptions of the Kusana period, may be due purely to an imitation of older votive 
inscriptions. 

Attention must be called to the medial r in ¢r (21, TV) and [42] in vr (34, IT), for which 
we have also once® the form of pl. IV, 3, III ; likewise to the rather common final m, which 
resembles that in ddham (41, VIII), and to the Visarga, which looks exactly like the modern 
one (compare 40, 41, IX) and first appears in these inscriptions.‘ The broad strokes of the 
letters and their thick tops indicate that they imitate an alphabet written with ink. 


§ 20. — The precursors of the southern alphabets. 


A.— The alphabet of the Ksatrapas of Malva and Gujarat; Plate III. 

While the inscriptions of Northern India thus show in the first and second centuries A. D, 
the beginning of the development of a new local variety of the Brahmi, we find in the 
documents from Western and Central India, as well as from the Dekhan, the first steps leading 
up to the later southern alphabets. The inscriptions and coins of the Ksatrapa dynasty of 
Malva and Gujarat, descended from Castana or Tiastanes, illustrate the western writing, and 
eol. VI, taken from the Girnir Praégasti of the reign of Rudradiman (about A. D. 160)® gives 
a specimen of it. This script agrees with the later southern alphabets (§{ 27, below) in the 
following characteristic points: — (1) in the curves at the ends of A and 4 (1, 2), ka (7), 


1 Compare my remarks, EI. 1, 371 ff, ; 2, 197. 2 Compare the iu of plate II, 43, IMI. 

8 EI. 1, 389, No. 18. # Compare, for instance. nati, EI. 1, 882, No. 8. 

5 Buayparkag, Early Hist. of the Dekkan?, 26 ff., C.CMI.8—5; BHAavANLAL, J-RAS, 1890, 642; Bustier, 
Die ind, Inschr. u. das, Alter d. ind. Kunstpoesie, 46 ff. 


4% INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. { § 20, B. 


ta (1), ra (32), and of medial u and @ (not im the plate) ; (2) in the ronnd-backed da (18) ; (3) in 
the ba (28),notched on the left; (4) in the la (33) with the vertical bent to the left; and 
(5) in the medial r (see sr, 37), which is difficult to distinguish from ra. Its other letters, for 
instance, éu (35) and. the tripartite subscribed ya of lya (42), partly agree with those of the 
inscriptions of SodSsa, and partly, — for instance, kha (8), na (25) with the bent base-line, 
pa (26) with the notch in the left vertical, ya (3)) with the curve on the left, and the frequently 
rounded va (34), — with the types of the Kugana period. Peculiar is its fa (16). Its cursive 
medial #, which is used only in n@ (25) and in ré (compare pl. VIL, 33, III), and the au in 
yau (31), besides which the older form of pl. LI, 28, XVIII, is used, appear here for the first time. 

The letters on the somewhat older coins! of Rudradiman’s grandfather Castana and of his. 
father Jayadaman, which probably were struck in Ujjain, exhibit no material differences. 
Among the. later Kgatrapa inscriptions,? that from Junagadh, incised during the reign of 
Radradaman’s son Rudrasimha, fully agrees with the Girnar Praéasti, The Gunda inscription 
of the same prince from the year 103 (or, according to the usual assumption, from A, D, 180), 
and the Jasdan inscription of Rudrasimha’s son Rudrasena from the year 127 (?) or A. D. 
204-205, show a few more advanced characters. Both these documents offer the bipartite sub- 
ascribed ya; and the seeond has several times the northern ma of the Gupta period (pl. IV, 31, 
I ff ), ad well as the e standing above the line (compare, for instance, ne, pl. VII, 27, V). The 
same ma, or a similar sign with a straight base-stroke, appears also frequently on the coins of 
the later Kgatrapas.3 Its oecurrence probably indicates a northern influence, perhaps that 
a northern alphabet was used at the same time;.compare § 28 below, A. 


B.— The alphabets. of the cave-inscriptions of the western Dekhan 
and the Konkan; Plate III. 

[43] The writing of the western Dekhaa and the Kofkan in the caves of Nasik, Junnar, 
Karle, Ka pheri, Kuda, &c., shows three varieties, an “archaistic” or retrograde type, & more 
advanced one witb mostly faint traces of southern peculiarities, and an ornamental one. The 
first two appear in the oldest dated inscriptions of the Saka Ugavadata or Usabhadita 
(Rsabhadatta),4 the son-in-law of the Ksaharata king and Ksatrapa Nahapana from the years 41 
to 45 of, according to the usual assumption, the Saka era,® or from A. D.118to122. The Karle 
inscription No. 19 (col. VII) offers the ‘‘archaistic” or retrograde type, among the letters of 
which gha (10), ja (18),.da (23), bha (29), ya (81), la (33), sa (37) and ha (88) come close to the 
forms in the older alphabets of pl. II, especially to those of the oldest Andhra inscriptions in 
cols. XXLUI, XXIV. The same variety is found in some other, partly older, inscriptions of the 
same caves,® and must be regarded as a direct development from the ancient Andhra type. It 
shows only very faint traces of the southern peculiarities enumerated above. The curves at the 
ends of the verticals.are only rudimentary. The vertical of la is curved, but to the right. The 
triangular dha (24), which appears. here for the first time, is found also in other alphabets of 
this plate (see col. XI ff.); the abnormal kha (8) is confined to Karle No. 19. 

Against this rather clumsy alphabet, we find in Usavadita’s inscriptions from Nasik 
(cols, VIII, IX) very neatly made letters, the ductus of which resembles that of Sodisa’s 
macriptions (col. I) and of the Girnar Prasasti (col. VI). They show no trace of archaic forms, 
and the traces of the southern peculiarities are faint or entirely wanting. Only the southern 
da (18) is distinct and constant. Noteworthy are sa (35, 42,. VII), which agrees with that of 
sol. VI, the final m in ddham (41, VIII), and the tripartite subscribed ya in bhyah (41, IX). 

1 O.CMI. pl. 1; J.WAS, 1890, pl. at p. 638; B.ASRWL. 2, pl. 7. 

2 Compare facsimiles in B.ASR WI. 2, pl. 20; J.BBRAS. 8, 234 ; Sanskr. and Prakr., Insers, Bhaunagar, pl. 17—19 
unreliable). 

3 See the plates cited in note 1 above. * Usabhadata only in Karle No. 19, B.ASRWI, 4, pl. 51. 

5 Thas Boannarxar, Early Hist. of the Dekkan?, 26, and BHaavanuat, J.RAS, 1890, 642°; see also BUHEER, 
Die ind. Inschr. u. das. Alter der ind. Kunstpoesie,.57 f.; while Cunningham, CMI. 3 f., refers Nahapana’s dates te 


the Malava era of B. C. 57-36, and OLDENBERG, IA. 10, 227, places Nahapana between A.D. 55 and 100. 
® Karle, Nos, 1—14, B.ASBRWIL., 4, pl. 47, 48;. Nasik, No. 4, op. cit., pl. 51, 


§-20, C.J INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 48 


Very similar to this script is that of the Nasik inseriptions (No. 11, a, 6, = col. X) of the 
Andhra king Gotamiputa Satakani, who destroyed the Ksaharata dynasty, — possibly just 
Nahapaina and Usavadiata, — and of his son Siri-Pulumayi, Pulumai or Pulimavi (Nasik 
No. 14, = col. XI), who is mentioned by Ptolemy as Siri-Polemaios or Polemios.! The only 
material difference occurs in the triangular dha (24, XI; compare col. VII), which however is 
by no means constant. Nearly of the same type are the alphabets shewn in col. XII. from the 
Nasik inscription of the somewhat later Andhra king Gotamiputa Siriyaiia Satakani, in 
col. XIII. from the undated inscription Nasik No. 20, and in col. X1V. from Nasik No. 12, incised. 
during the reign of the Abhira king Isvarasena2 In col. XII, however, we havea peculiar form 
of ta (21) developed from a looped form, a looped na (25) somewhat differing from the northern 
form in col. IV, a ra (32) with a stronger curve, and a /u (33) with the vertical bent towards 
the left ; further, in col. XIII. a looped ta (21), and in eol, XIV. a éa (21) and a na (25) derived 
from looped forms, a ya (31) with a curve on the left, a le (33) bent towards the left, a cursive 
subscribed “ia in siiah (40), and a peculiar, 7-like, medial w in du (23), which reappears in later 
southern inscriptions ; compare, for instance, 6hu, pl. VII, 30, XII, and the @ in ¢a, pl. ILI, 21,. 
XVII, XIX. 


Cols, XV, XVI, give two somewhat differing specimens of the ornamental variety of this 
period according to the undated inscriptions of Kuca (Nos. 1—6, 11, 20) and of Junnar (No. 3). 
Both ‘agree in the ornamental treatment of medial iand i, But the Kud& inscriptions extend 
it to the curves at the ends of all verticals, and show notches in the left [44] strokes of pa (26) 
and 6a (23; compare col. VI). In col, XVI. there are two other noteworthy signs, the bipar- 
tite subscript ya in yya (40), aud the gu with the horizontal bar in grz (41 ; compare 35, JII—V). 
Ornamental forms, resembling those of cols. XV, XVI, are found also in the approximately 
datable inscriptions of Pulomiyi in Karle Nos. 20, 22, and of the minister of the queen of his 
successor Vasithiputa Sitakani in Kanberi No. 11, The first two of these documents show 
a looped ta and a na like that of col, XVII; the third exhibits the neat characters of Western. 
Kgatrapa inscriptions. itis, therefore, certain that during the 2nd century A. D, all these three 
varieties were nsed promiscuously in the western Dekhun and the Konkan,’ and the inscriptions. 
from the Amarivati Stipa prove that they occurred. also on the eastern coast of India. The 
contemporaneous employment of more advanced types and of more archaic ones with an 
admixture of more inodern signs will have to be explained in this,.as in other cases, by a desire to 
select archaic and monumental forms for epigraphic purposes and a failure to completely carry 
out this intention. 

C.—The alphabet of the Jaggayyapeta inscriptions; Plate III. 

In the Kistna districts of the eastern coast, a still more ornamental alphabet, found in the 
dJaggayyapeta inscriptions from the time of the Iksvaku king Sirivira Purisadatta (cols. XVI, 
XVILL), as well as in some Amaravati inscriptions,® was developed out of the ornamental 
variety just discussed, probably somewhat later, in the 8rd century A. D. One of its most 
prominent characteristics is the very considerable elongation of the verticals of A, 4, ka, fa, ra 
and la, as well as of the medial i,i#andu. Toa later time point the cursive forms of tha and 
ha, which latter agrees with the northern Gupta form (pl. IV, 39, I, VI), and the medial e of 
me (380), which, with its downward curve, agrees with the e of the later southern inscriptions 
(compare 30, XIX, XX, and pl, VII, 35, XII), and the medial @ in t# (21; compare col. XIX, 
and pl. VII, 30, XX). The medial @ of ¢@ (40), in which the stroke expressing the length of 
the vowel has been attached to the head of the consonant, is entirely abnormal.. 

1 See the works quoted in note 5 on page JZ above. 

2 According to BaaavaNLAL’s estimate, J. RAS. 1894, 657, ‘‘ somewhat later than Nahapana.”’ 

3 Compare facsimiles in B.ASRWI. Vol. 4, pl. 45, Kuda Nos, 12—18; pl. 46, Knda Nos. 22—26; Mahad 
Nos. 1—4; Kol Nos. 8, 5; pl. 47, Bedsa Nos. 1-3; pl. 48, Karle Nos. 15—18; Sailarvadi No. 19; Junnar: 
Nos, 1, 2; pl. 49—51, Junnar Nos. 4-84 ; pl. 52, Nasik No. 6a; pl. 54, Junnar No. 32 ; Karle No. 20; pl..55, Nasik. 
Nos, 17—19, 21—24 : and Vol. 5, pl. 51, Kauheri Nos, 2—5, 10, }2—14. 

* B.ASRSE 1, pl 53, 57; pl. 58, Nos. 28—34, 37; pl. 59, Nos. 89, 43; pl. 60, Nos, 44, 45, 47-50; pl. 61+ 
Nos, 51—53, 55, 56 ;. and the autotypes of the Andhra coins, C.CAI. pl. 12, and J.BBRAS. 13, pl. 8. 

6 B.ASRSL. 1, pl. 68, Nos. 85, 36 ; pl. 59, Nos. 38, 40—42 ; pl. 60, No. 46; pl. 61, No. 54; pl. 62. 


44 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 21. 


D.— The alphabet of the Pallava Prakrit land-grants; Plate III. 


The highly cursive writing of the Prakrit land-grants of the Pallava kings Vijayabuddha- 
varman and Sivaskandavarman from Kiici (Conjeveram) in the Tamil districts] shows in its 
dustus a certain relationship to the Jaggayyapeta inscriptions. But it is not doubtful that these 
documents are much later, though it is for the present impossible to fix their dates exactly. 
The use of Prakrit for official purposes perhaps indicates that they are not later than the first 
half of the 4th century A. D. The broad # (5, XX) with the radimentary vertical to the right 
(compare pl. VII, 6, XI ff.), the da with a tail in ndam (40, XX; compare pl. VII, 19, IV f), 
the subscribed tha open on the right in ttha (41, XIX; compare pl. VII, 45, XX), and the 
constantly looped o in Jo (33, XX; compare pl. VU, 34, III f., X111, XVII) point to the later 
period. 

Iv. THE NORTHERN ALPHABETS FROM ABOUT A, D, 350.2 


§ 21.— Definition and varieties. 


[45] By the term ‘ northern alphabets” I understand with Bureess, Freer and others, 
that large group of epigraphic and literary scripts, which from about A. D. 350 conquers the whole 


2 Compare facsimiles in3A.9, 100; ET. 1, 1 ff 
2 Preparation of Plates IV, V, and VI: — 


Puate IV. 
Cuttings from facsimiles. 

Cols. I, II, III; from Furxr, Gupta Inscriptions Cols, XTII, XIV; from F GI (CTI. 8), pl. 41, A. 
CII, 3), pl. 1. Cols. XV, XVI; from plate at ET. 1, 10. 

Col. IV; from F.GI (CII. 2), pl. 5. Col, XVII; from plate at IA. ¥, 172, Nos, 7, 8 9. 

Cols. V, VI; from F.GT (CII. 3), pl. 9, AL Cols XVIIJ, XIX ; from F.GI (CII. 8), pl, 28, 

Col. VIL; from F.GI (CLI, 3), pl. 9, B. Col. XX ; from plate at IA. 1°, 234. 

Col. VIII; from plate at EI. 1, 288. Col. XXI; from plate at IA. 15, 112. 

Col, IX ; from F.GI (CHI. 3), pl 15. Co. XX!1; from plate at IA. 11, 1€8. 

Col, X ; from F.GI (CII. 3), pl. 22. Col. XXII ; from plate ut LA. 15, 140. 

Cols, XI, XII; from F.GI (CII. 8), pl. 30 B, and 
31, A, B. 

PLATE V. 

Col. I; from photolithograph of impressions of EI. Col. XI; from plate at TA. 6, 192. 

1, 97, Col. XII; from plate at JA. 18, 11. 
The other columns cut from facsimiles : — Col. XIII; from p'ate at EI, 1, 234. 

Col. II; from plate at EI. 1, 160. Col. XIV; from plate at IA, 16, 205. 

Col. II1 ; from plate at EL. 1, 242, Col. XV: from plate at EI. 2, 297. 

Col. IV ; from plates at 1A. 6, 65, and 11, 158. Col. XVI; from Bhaunagar Sankr. and) Prakr. Ine 

Col. V; from unpublished facsimiles of IA. 13, | scriptions, plates 10, 41. 
184, Cul. XVII; from piate at IA. 16, 22. 

Col. VI; from plate at TA. 17, 316. Col. XVIII; from plate at EI. 1, 308. 

Col. VIE; from unpublished facsimiles of EI. 1, Col. XIX; from pl:te at Ef, 2, 350, 
162, Col. XX; from plate at IA. 18, 130, 

Col. VIII ; from plate at ET. 1, 77. Col. XXI; from plates at IA. 11, 71, 837. 

Col. 1X ; from plate at EL. 2, 120. Col. XXII; from plate at 1A, 16, 254. 

ol. X; from plate at IA. 6, 50. Col. XXIII; from plate at EI. 1, 34. 

PLatTs VI. 
Cuttings from facsimiles, 

Cols, {, II, III, IV; from plates in HozrnwE’s Bower Col. XIII; from BENDALL, op. cit., pl. 1, 3. 
MB., parts 1, 2. Col. XIV; from Anecd. Oxon., Ar. Series, 1, 1, 

Cols. V, VI, VII, and IX; from Anecd. Oxon., Ar. | pl. 4. 
ser., 1, 8, plate 6, cols, 1, 2, 3. Cols, XV, XVI, XVII; from Leomann, photogr. 

Col. VIEL; from plate at Vienna Oriental Congress, | of Deccau College Collection, 1880-81, No. 57:7, XV, 
Aryan Section, 127 ff. XVI ; 14 and 16, XV; 18, XV, XVI, XVII; 19 and 33, 


Col, IX; see above, with cols. V, VI, and VIL. cy ea ce ee 
. adde om sesavasyaka, pl. ; 4, 

Col. X; from Bunparx, Cat. Buddh. MSS., pl. 2, | xvrr, and 8, 9, 10, XV, and 12, 14, 15, XVI, added 

4, and Berlin Oriental Congress, Indian Section, pl. 2, 1. from photoar. of the Royal Asiatic Society’s Gana- 


Col. XI; from BenDALL, op. cit., pl. 3, 1. ratnamahodadhi. 
Col XII; from Berlin Oriental Congress, Indian Cols. XVIII, XIX; from platesat Vi + 0 y 
Section, pl. 2, 2,3. Congress, Aryan Section, 111 ff. 


Seale of the three plates = two-thirds of the facsimiles, 
2 F.CI (CII. 8), 3 £., and passim. 


§ 21.] _ INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY, 45 


wide territory north of the Narmada, with the exception of Kathiavad and northern Gujarat, and 
which, spreading in the course of time more and more, finally is used in a number of varieties for 
nearly all the Aryan languages of India. Their origin is to be found in the cursive forms, which 
first appear in the addition to the Agoka edict VI. of Dhauli, and in a number of signs of the 
KaAlsi version (see above, page 6 f.), and later are found, occasionally or constantly, in some of 
the Jaina votive inscriptions of the Kugana period (see above, § 19, A). Their general type is 
that of a cursive alphabet with signs reduced at the top to the same height, and made 
throughout, as much as possible, equal in breadth. As the occurrence of ancient MSS. and 
various peculiarities of the letters, such as the formation of wedges out of the Serij's at the ends 
of the verticals, clearly prove, they were always written with a pen ora brush and ink, Their 
most important common characteristics are : — (1) The absence of curves at the lower ends of 
the verticals of A, 4, ka, aia, &c. (with occasional exceptions for ra); (2) the use of the Serf at 
the left down-strokes of kha, ga, and ga; (3) the division of the original vertical of na and of its 
apper bar; (4) the use of a looped na and of a ¢a without a loop ; (5) the transformation of 
the lower portion of ma into a small knob or loop attached to the left of the letter; (6) the 
shortening of the vertical of la; (7) the turn of the medial 7 to the left, which is soon followed 
by the twist of medial 7 to the right; (8) the development of curves, open to the left, at the 
end of the originally horizontal medial «~; and (9) the use of a curve, open to the right, for 
medial 7. 


While all the alphabets represented in plates IV, V, VI, show these common characteristics 
or further developments from them, they may be divided acccording to other peculiarities, 
into seven larger groups, most of which again comprise several varieties : — 


(1) The epigraphic North-Indian alphabet of the 4th and 5th centuries, commonly called 
the Gupta alphabet, which, according to Horernit’s researches,! has an eastern and a western 
variety, among which the second again has two branches, and with the western variety of 
which the literary alphabet of the Bower MS. and of some other documents from Kashgar is 
closely connected. 


(2) The acute-angled or Siddhamitrka (?) alphabet with wedges at the verticals of the letters, 
which is first found in the palm-leaves of Horiuzi, and towards the end of the 6th century in 
the Mahinaman inscription from Gaya and in the Lakkhimandal Pragasti. 


{3) The Nigari with its long-drawn, tailed, letters, and long top-strokes, the first certain 
traces of which occur in the 7th centary. 


(4) The Sirada alphabet, a northern variety of the western Gupta type, first found about 
A. D. 800. 


(5) The eastern Proto-Bengili alphabet with much rounded, cursive letters, and with 
hooks or hollow triangles at the tops of the verticals, first traceable in the 11th century. 


(6) The hooked alphabet of Nepal, [46] which is closely connected with the Proto-Bengili 
and occurs in MSS. from the 11th century onwards. 


During the 4th and 5th centuries, the rule of these alphabets to the north of the Narmada 
is by no means undisputed. In the west we find, as far north as Bijayagadh (Bhartpur), 
inscriptions in southern characters, or with an admixture of southern letters (see below, § 27). 
In the 6th and 7th centuries this mixture no longer occurs. Only the so-called “ arrow-head”’ 
type (see below, § 26, C), the seventh variety on plates IV—VI, which appears in rather late 
times in Bengal and Nepal, offers an instance of the importation of a southern script into 
Northern India. 


1 J.ASB. 60, 80 ff. ; and IA, 21, 29 ff, 


46 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [ § 22, 


On the other hand, we meet, from the 7th century, with inscriptions in northern characters 
first on the coast, in the west in Gujarat, and in the east even beyond Madras.2 Documents of 
this kind appear from the middle of the 8th century also in the central Dekhan, and during 
the 12th and 13th centuries they penetrate as far as Vijayanagara im the Kanarese country (see 
below, § 23). But they never come into sole use beyond the northern limit of the Dravidian 
districts. 


The ancient MSS. hitherto found in Kashgar, Japan and Nepal, the oldest of which 
probably were written in the 4th century,’ show only northern letters. The palm-leaf MSS. 
of Western India, which begin in the 10th century, agree with the inscriptions of the period, 
and prove that the northern Nagari was generally used in Rajputana, Gujarat,‘ and in the 
northern Dekhan as far as Devagiri (Daulatabid).6 The gradual advance of the northern 
characters towards the south probably is explained by the predilection of many southern kings 
for northern customs, and by the immigration of northern Brahmans, castes of scribes, and 
Buddhist and Jaina monks, to which facts the statements in various inscriptions and the 
historical tradition bear witness.® 

§ 22.— The so-called Gupta alphabet of the 4th and 5th centuries A. D.; Plate IV. 

A.— Varieties. 

The differences between the eastern and western varieties of the so-called Gupta [47] 
alphabet appear in the signs for la, sa and ha.? In the eastern variety the left limb of la 
(plate IV, 34, I—I1I, V, VI) is turned sharply downwards; compare the la of the Jaugada 
separate edicts (see above, § 16, C, 35). Further, the base-stroke of sa (IV, 37, I—III, V, VI) 
is made round and attached asa loop to the slanting central bar. Finally, the base-stroke of 
ha (IV, 39, I—IIH, V, VI) is suppressed, and its hook, attached to the vertical, is turned 
sharply to the left, exactly as in the Jaggayyapeta inscriptions (see above, § 20, C). In the 
western variety these three letters have the older and fuller forms. 


The specimens of the eastern variety in plate IV. have been taken from the oldest Gupta 
inscription, Harisena’s Allahabad Prasasti (cols. I—III), which certainly was incised during the 
reign of Samudragupta,® probably between A. D. 370 and 390, and from the Kahaum Praéasti 
of A. D, 460 (cols. V, VI) of the time of Skandagupta. It appears, besides, in Fiert’s Gupta 
Inscriptions (CIT. 3) Nos. 6—9, 15, 64, 65, 77; in BuacvAnLAt’s inscriptions from Nepal, 
Nos, 1—3;® and in Cunnincuam’s Gaya inscription of Samvat 641° The fact that FLEet’s 
No.6 is found far west, near Bhilsa in Malva, may be explained by its having been incised, 
during an expedition of Candragupta II. to Malva, at the command of his minister, who calls 
himself an inhabitant of Pataliputra. Nothing is known regarding the origin of Fuexrt’s 
No. 77, which is incised on a seal, purchased in Lahore, but possibly manufactured in Hastern 
India. 


1 Fragments of inscriptions with northern characters of this period, from Valabhi, are preserved in the 
Museums of Bombay (the Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society) and Rajkot. Compare also the sign-manuals on the 
Gurjara land-grants, J.RAS., 1865, 247 ff. 

2 B.ESIP, 53, and plate 22a; IA. 18, 161, 172, 

3 T agree with HozENLe, who considers certain portions of the new Godfrey collection from Kashgar to be older 
than the Bower MS. ; TASB, 66, 258. 

4 KIELHORN, Renast on Sanskrit MSS., 1880-81, 1 ff.; Pererson, Second Report, Appendix I, and Third 
Report, Appendix I. 

6 J.RAS, 1895, 247, 6 Compare B.EISP, 20, 53 ff, ; Fuxet in EI. 3, 2. 

7 Compare Hozrn uz, J.ASB. 60, 81, who mentions sa alone, because his remarks refer also to the type discussed 
below in § 28. 

§ SB.WA. 122, XI, 32 ff. 

9 TA. 9, 163 ff. ; in my opinion the era is not, as Frx7T holds in Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), Introduction, 95, 
i ff., that of A, D. 318-19, but one peculiar to the Nepalese, the exact beginning of which has still to be 
determined, 

10 C.MG. pl. 25; the era may be that of the Guptas. 


§ 22, BJ INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 47 


The western variety of the Gupta alphabet again appears in two forms, a cursive round- 
hand and an angular, monumental, type. The second form, which shews very characteristic 
thick top-lines and a hooked ra (83), is represented in plate 1V, col. IV, by the alphabet 
of the Bilsad Prasasti of A.D. 415, Another fine example is found in Frieet’s No. 32, from 
the Meharault iron pillar near Delhi. Specimens of the cursive form are given in col. VII. 
from the Indor copper-plate of A. D. 465, in col. VIII. from Toramana’s Kura inscription, 
probably of the second half of the 5th century,! and in col. 1X. from the Karitalai copper-plate 
of Jayanatha of Uccakalpa, dated the year 174 or probably A. D. 423.2. The same type is foand 
in Frieet's Nos, 4, 13, 16, 19, 22—31, 36, 61, 63, 66, 67, 69, 74, 76, and in the Jaina votive 
inscriptions from Mathura, new series, Nos. 38, 39.3 It deserves to be noted that Frexrt’s 
No, 18 from Bhitari is found in a district where one would expect the eastern variety. 
Furer’s No. 61, the Jaina inscription from Udayagiri in Malva, shows a mixture of the 
northern characters with southern ones, as it offers throughout A, 4, with a curve, and once 
a southern 7. Perhaps the same may be said of FiEer’s No. 59, the Bijayagadh inscription 
from Bhartpur in Rajputina, where ra shows a curve at the end and medial 7 and % resemble 
those in plate III, col. XVI. The characters on the Gupta coins‘ are frequently retrograde; 
and offer, e. g., the angular ma of the Kusana period. 


B,— Characteristics of the epigraphic Gupta alphabet. 


The following particularly important or characteristic peculiarities of the Gupta inscriptions 
deserve to be noticed in detail: — 


(1) The lower parts of the right-hand verticals of A, 4, ga, da, ta, bha and ga are so much 
elongated, and those of 4a and ra remain so long, that these eight signs have about double the 
length of those without verticals. This is particularly visible in the older stone inscriptions ; 
on the copper-plates they are often shortened. 


(2) The right-hand portion of gha, pa, pha, sa and sa shows an acute angle, whereby 
later the development of tails or verticals on the right of these signs has been caused. 


(8) Since the middle of the 5th century, the lower portion of the left limb of A (1, IX, 
XI) shows the curve, open to the left, which appears in all the later forms of the letter; the 
sign of the length of 4 (2, VII—IX) [48] is attached to the foot of the right vertical. 


(4) In addition to the I of the Kugana.period (3, I, V), there occur, owing to the 
predilection for letters flattened at the top, the also later frequent I with two dots above 
(8, VIL), and that consisting of a short horizontal line with two dots below (3, IX), which 
latter is the parent of the later southern J (plates VII, VIII, and § 28 below) and of that of 
the Nagari (below, § 24, A, 4). 


(5) The rudimentary curves at the left end of U, U and O are more fully developed in 
the 5th century ; compare above, § 19, B, 4. 


(6) The guttural ia begins to appear instead of the Anusvira before éa and ha (11, VII), 
perhaps in consequence of the faulty pronunciation, blamed in the Siksis. 


(7) The third horizontal line of ja (14, I—III, VII, VIII) begins to slant downwards, 
and occasionally shows a curve at the end, whereby later the new forms of cols, XXI—XXIII. 
are caused. 


1 TA. 18, 225, 
& Aeoordieg to Fuze, TA. 19, 227 f., the kings of Uccakalpa probably dated according to the Cedi or Kalacuri 
49. - 
10, # J.ASB, 53, pl. 2—4; J-RAS., 1889, pl. 1—4, and p. 34 ff., and 1893, pl, 2. 


u, Wedischer Accent, 64, 


48 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 22, C. 


(8) The palatal aa (16, I, I; 42, I, VI, VIl, XI) is frequently made cursive and round, 
and is occasionally laid on the side in order to save space; compare also jiah, plate III, 40; 
XIV. But older, angular, forms likewise occur (42, V)}. 


(9) The ta (17, I—III, TX) is often flattened down at the top. 


(10) The na of 21, 1, I, shows a little stroke at the right end, caused by an inexact 
formation of the hook on the right, and in the second sign a cursive loop on the left ; in 21, III, 
the letter has been laid on the side and somewhat resembles the Nagari na. 


(11) The tha (23, I, V—IX) is mostly elliptical or flattened on the right, and a cross-bar 
often replaces the dot in the centre ; but the old form likewise survives (23, II, ITI),} 


(12) The ya (82, I—IX) is mostly tripartite, but sometimes, particularly in ye, yai and yo, 
transitional forms with the loop, like the later ones in 32, XIII, XVI, appear, which lead up to 
the bipartitite ya.2 The oldest instance of the independent looped ya is found in Fieszt’s 
No. 59 of A. D. 371, but the Kusana inscriptions show the looped subscript ya even earlier 
(see above, § 19, B, 12). 


(18) The left limb of sa (38, I—III, V, VI, VIII) often becomes a loop, as happens 
already in some Kugana inscriptions (§ 19, B, 16). A substitute for the loop is the triangle 
(probably giving the outlines of a wedge), which occurs in the three most ancient inscriptions 
from Nepal; compare the later sa of 38, XII, But the older hook is equally common. 


(14) The rare Ja (40, I—IID) is found also in Furet’s No. 67, line 1. 


(15) The signs for the medial vowels agree in many particulars with those of the Kusana 
period. But the open semicircle for @ in ta (17, II), which is found also in n@, is an innovation. 
Further, the medial ¢, for instance, of khd (8, ILI, VI, IX), is drawn further to the left than in 
the earlier inscriptions. In some inscriptions like Mathura, new series, Nos. 38, 39, the medial i 
consists merely of a curve, going to the right, though the form with two horns (as in di, 24, I), 
and a looped one (as in bhé, 830, IV), are more common. Medial u is mostly represented by the 
still used curve, which in ru (33, III, VI) appears abnormally at the end of ra; but in gu (8, IT, 
VI), tu, bhu (30, I) and gu (36, III) the vowel rises upwards. For medial @ there are, besides 
an old form in gz (9, IV), other combinations in 6a (30, II, VI) and te (42, II) and a later 
very common, cursive form in dha (25, 11, VI). One of the Matriis of ai and o is often placed 
vertically, as in gai, 32, III ; in go, 9, TfL; and in no, 21, III. 


(16) The desire to save space causes the cursive iia, fa (see sta, 45, IX) and tha (see stha, 
45, V ; stha, 46, IX) to be laid on the side, in case they form the second elements of ligatures. 
From the 5th century, rya (45, VII) is expressed by a full ra with a subscript ya. 


(17) The first certain Virima (see ddham, 43, VII), consisting of a horizontal stroke above 
the small final, dates likewise from the 5th century; the northern Jihvamiiliya (2ka, 46, II) 
and the Upadhmaniya (pa, 46, IIT) occur already in the 4th century. 


C.—The Gupta alphabet in manuscripts. 


Among the types of the Bower MS., whieh belongs, according to Hoernis’s and my own 
opinion,® to the 5th century, I have given [49] in plate VI, cols. I—IV, only the alphabet of 
the portion which Hogrniz marks A, since the published parts of his B. and C. are not suffi- 
ciently extensive for a paleographic enquiry. Its characters differ very little from those of the 
epigraphic documents of the Gupta period, especially from the copper-plates. The Seri/s atthe 
tops of the vertical strokes, however, are made more carefully and nearly throughout worked 


1 Compare facsimile in Fiext’s Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), No. 61. 2 J, -ASB CA, 88348 
3 J.ASB, 60, 927.; WZKM, 5, 104f. The discovery of an inscription of the 7th century wy t 
yu, EL. 4, 29, makes a modification of HOERNLE’s argumentation necessary, but does not invalid > | 


§ 23] INDIAN PALROGRAPHY. 49 


up with the latter into real wedges. If a letter like ght (plate VI, 13, I—IV) has several 
upstrokes, the Seri/s are added regularly to all of them. Similarly, the lower ends of vertical 
strokes more regularly bear Serifs or are converted into wedges or little buttons. The 
greater regularity of the writing is what may be expected in a good MS., the material of 
which offers fewer difficulties than stone or copper. The invariable use of the Seri/s has led 
to the formation of the ‘a (15, IV) with the loop on the left! (compare 15, ¥, I1l), which 
appears occasionally in the Bower MS., but is noticeable only later, since A. D. 588-8) (see 
plate 1V, 7, XIII), in the inscriptions, Further, the Bower MS. offers in rare cases,e g. in 
prayojayet (fol. 31a, 11), an archaic form of the bipartite yz. Finally, it makes us acquainted 
with some signs which, owing to the rarity of the sounds expressed by them, cannot occur 
frequently in the inscriptions and hitherto have not been triced in those of the 4th and 
5th centuries, To these belong the long F (4, 1), in which the upper and lower dots of the 
ancient sign (compare plate VI, 4, V, VIL) have been converted into a straight stroke, and 
further the short R, which clearly consists of ara and a medial r (compare above, § 1; and 
below, § 24, A, 7), also the 4U (14,1, IL), which fully agrees with the epigraphic character of 
A. D. 532 (plate [V, 6, X), and the subscript r of nr (34, ILI) which consists of two r, placed 
horizontally side by side. 
§ 23. —Tho acute-angled and Nagari types; Plates IV, V, VI. 


About the beginning of the sixth century we find in the northern inscriptions, both of 
Eastern and Western India (plate IV, cols. X—XII),* distinct beginnings of a new develop- 
ment, which first leads to the forms of the Gaya inscription of A. D. 538-3) (plate IV, cols. 
XIII, XLV) and of the probably not much later Lakkhimandal Pradusti (plate FV, cols, XV, 
XVI)3 Their chief characteristic is that the letters slope from the right to the left, and show 
acute angles at the lower or at the right ends, as well as that the tops of the vertical or slanting 
lines invariably bear small wedges, and their ends either show tiie same ornaments or protu- 
berances on the right. These peculiarities are observable in a large number of inscriptions of 
the next four centuries, and it seems to. me advisable to class the characters of the whole group 
as those of the ‘acute-angled alphabet.” Formerly‘ the term “ nail-head-d” was frequently 
applied to them. Of late this has been given up and no new generic name has been proposed. 
Thus Fucer says, in his edition of the Gaya inscription,® only that the letters belong to the 
northern class of alphabets. Possibly the Indian name may have been Siddhamfitrka 
({lipi). For Berini® states that an alphabet [50] of this name was used in his time 
{about A, D. 1030) in Kashmir and in Benares, while the Nagar? was current in Milva. If the 
usual writing of Benares resembled that of Kashmir, it cannot have had the long horizontal 
top-strokes which always characterise the Nagari. Beriini’s note is, however, too brief and 
vague for a definite settlement of the question. 


The two inscriptions, mentioned above, which, like the other contemporaneous cognate 
documents, are connected with the western Gupta alphabet, mark the first step in the develop- 
ment of the acute-angled alphabet during the sixth century. And to the same subdivision 
belong, among the MSS., the Horiuzi palm-leaves, which according tu the Japanese tradition 
certainly existed in the second half of the 6th century.’ If fourteen years ago, when I wrote 
my paleographical essay on these leaves in the Anecdota Oxoniensia, the facsimiles of the Gaya 
and Lakkhimandal inscriptions had been accessible, it would have sufficed to compare their 
letters in order to prove the correctness of the statements of the Japanese. 


1 Anecdota Oxoniensia, Aryan Series, 1, 3, 76, 

2 Compare also the facsimiles in FLEeEt’s Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), Nos. 20, 24, 33, 31, 33, 37, 47, 51, 70, 75, 
and of the seal of Kumaragupta II., J.ASB. 58, 84. 

8 Compara also the facsimiles in Gupta Inscriptions (CIL. 3), Nos, 72, 76, 78, 79, 80. 

# See, e,g., Top, Annals of Rajasthan, 1, 700 #,, Madras edition, 5 Gupta Inscriptions (CTI. 8), 274. 

® India, 1, 173 (SacHav), . T Aneo, Oxo n., Ary. Series, h, 8, 6 


50 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 238. 


The characters of Améuvarman’s inscription of A. D. 635 (plate IV, col. XVII) and of the 
nearly contemporaneous Aphsad Prasasti of Adityasena (plate IV, cols, XVIII, XIX) show the 
further progress of the acute-angled alphabet during the 7th century, It must, however, be 
noted that Amsuvarman’s inscriptions and other Nepalese documents of the same time have the 
round s@ and thus are allied with the eastern Gupta character, while the Aphsad Pragasti and 
its allies from India proper are connected with the western variety of the old northern 
alphabet.! Firet calls this second variety, on account of the more marked twist of the lower 
ends of the strokes, “ the Kutila variety of the Magadha alphabet of the 7th century.”? JI feel 
disinclined to adopt the term “ Kutila,” which was first used by Prinsep,’ and since has been 
employed by many other writers, because it is based on an erroneous rendering of the expres- 
sion kuila aksara in the Deval Prasasti.4 Iwould remove it from the paleographic terminology. 
Kre.norn likewise avoids it in his paleographic remarks on various inscriptions of this period.® 


During the 8th—10th centuries, the development of the acute-angled or Siddhamatrki 
alphabet progresses more and more in the direction of its successor, the Nagari alphabet, which 
latter in its old North-Indian form is distinguished merely by the substitution of straight 
top-strokes for the wedges on the verticals, Documents with a mixture of wedges and straight 
top-strokes are also found; and occasionally it becomes difficult to decide how a particular 
inscription is to be classed. 


To this third and last variety® of the acute-angled alphabet belong the characters of the 
Multai copper-plates (plate IV, col. XX) of A. D. 708-709,? of the Dighva-Dubauli plate, 
probably of A. D. 761 (plate IV, col. XXJ),® of the Gwalior inscription of A. D. 876 (plate V, 
col. II), and of the Ghosrava inscription of the 9th cr 10th century (plate V, col. VI),® as 
well as, among the MSS., those of the Cambridge MS. No. 1049 (plate VI, col. VII), dated in 
the year 252,10 probably of AmSuvarman’s era of A. D, 594, or in A.D. 846. An intermediate 
position between the acute-angled and the Nagari alphabets, is occupied by the letters of the 
Pehoa Pragasti of about A. D. 900 (plate V, col. II), of the Deval Pragasti of A. D, 992 or 
993 (plate V, col. VIII) and of the copper-plates of the Paramara king Vakpati II. of A. D. 974 
(plate V, col. X)12 They, no doubt, show the wedges; but these are so broad that they 
produce the same effect as the long straight top-strokes, and that, ¢. g., the open tops of A, 4, 
gha, pa, &e., are closed, just as in the Nagari inseriptions. Specimens of the mixture of wedyes 
and straight top-strokes, mentioned above, are found in the Radhanpor and Vani-Dindori 
copper-plates of the Rastrakiita king [51] Govinda III. of A. D. 807-808 (plate V, col. IV),¥ 
and the Harsa inscription of the Cihamana Vigraha II. of A, D. 973 (plate V, col. IX).¥4 


1 Compare also the facsimiles in IA. 9, 163 ff., Nos. 4—10, 12; BEwpDALL, Journey in Nepal, 72, Nos, 1, 2; and 
Horgen e's remarks in J.ASB. 60, 85. 

2 Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), 201, 284; EY. 3, 328, note 1. 3 J.ASB. 6, 778, pl. 41, 

‘ EI. 1,76. In confirmation of my explanation of the phrase kutilanyaksarant vidusa, “by him who knows 
crooked letters,’’ t.e., letters difficult to read, I would point to Vikramankacarita, 18, 42, where we have the 
statement that queen Stryamati did not allow herself to be cheated kayasthath kutila-lipibhili, ‘‘by writers using 
crooked alphabets,” 

§ Compare his remarks on inscriptions of this class, 1A. 17, 308; 19, 55; 20, 128; 21, 169; EI. 1, 179; 2, 117,160, 

6 Compare, for this and the preceding varieties, the facsimiles at IA. 2, 258; 5, 180; 9, 174 ff., Nos. 11, 13, 14, 
15; 10, 81; 17, 310; 19, 58; BenpaxL, Journey in Nepal, pl. 10,11, 18; EI. 1, 179; 4,29; C.ASR. 17, pl. 9; and 
the autotypes of coins in C.CMI. pl. 8, Nos. 7—14; pl. 6, No. 20; and pl. 7. 

7 According to Fizet, IA, 18, 281, ‘‘ transitional type from which the North-Indian Nagari alphabet was soon 
after developed.”’ 


8 According to Firet, IA. 15, 106, ‘‘ North-Indian Nagari.” ® Compare IA. 17, 808, 
1° Benda, Cat. Cambr. Buddh. MSS, from Nepal, XLI. ff. ; Anec. Oxon., Ary. Series, 3, 71 ff. 
nS, Lévi, JA. 1894, IT, 55 ff. 12 EL 1, 76; IA. 6, 48. 


33 TA, 6, 59; 11, 158 ; compare algo facsimiles in EJ, 3, 103, and IA. eg 200, 
44 Compare also facsimile, IA. 16, 174, 


§ 23.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 51 


The last-mentioned two inscriptions are, however, by no means the oldest documents, in 
which Nagari letters occur. The first undoubtedly genuine specimens! are found in the signa- 
tures of the Gurjara princes on the copper-plates of Kaira (of A. D. 628 and 633), of Dabhoi 
(A. D. 642), of Nausari (A. D. 705), and of Kavi (A. D. 786),?2 the texts of which are written 
in a southern alphabet. In the first-mentioned three signatures, the Nagari letters are in the 
minority,as most of the signs show either more archaic northern or southern forms. Only 
in the fourth signature the Nagari is used throughout and is fully developed. But the most 
ancient document, written throughont in Nagari, is the Simangad grant of the Rastrakita king 
Dantidurga of A. D. 754 (plate IV, col. XXII).8 Much of the same type are the characters 
of the Kanheri inscriptions Nos, 15 and 43 (plate V, col. V),4 which were respectively incised 
in A. D, 851 and 877 during the reigns of the Silahara princes Pullasakti and Kapardin II. 


The Samangad and Kanheri inscriptions, together with some others of the 9th centary,® 
snow the archaic variety of the southern Nagari, the fully developed form of which is exhibited 
in the copper-plates of Kauthem (plate V, col. XVII),° which were incised during the reign of 
the Calukya king Vikramaditya V. in A. D. 1009-10, The southern Nagari, of the 8th—11th 
centuries, which differs from its northern sister of the same period chiefly by the want of the 
small tails slanting to the right from the ends of the verticals, and in general by stiffer forms. 
besides occurs in numerous inscriptions of the Silaharas and Yadavas from the Maratha country 
and the Koitikan, as well as of a Ratta prince from the Belgaum collectorate.? Its latest 
development during the 13th—16th centuries is found in the inscriptions of the kings of 
Vijayanagara or Vidyanagara in the Kanarese country.® It still survives in the Balbodh 
or Devanagari of the Maratha districts, and in Southera India it has produced the so-called 
Nandinagari which is still used for MSS. 


In Northern and Central India, the Nigari appears first on the copper-plate of the 
Mahiraja Vinadyakapala of Mahodaya (plate IV, col. XXIII),!° probably of A. D. 794, which 
however exhibits some archaisms and peculiarities in the signs for kha,ga,and na, found also in 
later inscriptions from Eastern India, The fact that an earlier inscription from the Kanarese 
country, the incision of which is due to a Brahman from Northern India (see EI. 3, 1 #.), shows 
a mixture of Nagari and acute-angled letters, makes it probable that the northern Nagari was in 
use at least since the beginning of the 8th century. From the next century, we have only 
a few inscriptions in northern Nagari. But after A. D. 950 their number increases, and in 
the 11th century the script becomes paramount in nearly all the districts north of the Narmada. 


The characters of the Siyadoni inscriptions from Central India (plate V, col. VII), the 
dates of which run from A. D. 968, and those of the copper-plate of the first Caulukya of 
Gajarat, incised in A. D. 987 (plate V, col. XI),!2 show the forms of the northern Nagari of the 
10th century. The copper-plates of the Rastrakita (Gahadavala) king Madanapala of Kanauj 
in Northern India, dated A. D. 1097 (plate V, col. XII), the Udaypur Prasgasti of the Paramiaras 
of Malva (probable date about A. VD. 1060) in the west of Central India (plate V, col. XIII), 
the Nanyaura plates of the Candella Devavarman of A. D. 1050 (plate V, col. XIV) and of 


1 The genuineness of the earlier Umeta and Bagumra plates (1A. 7, 63; 17, 199) is disputed (IA. 18, 91 ff.) ; 
their Nagari letters have been given in Anec. Oxon., Ary. Series, 1, 3, pl. 6. 

2 See the facsimiles, J.RAS. 1865, 247 ff.; EL. 5, 40; IA. 5,118; 18, 78; and the remarks in SB,WA. 185, 8, 2. 

3 TA. 11, 105. # TA, 18, 285; 20, 421. 

5 Compare, e. g., the Ambharnath inscription, J.BBRAS. 9, 219; 12, 334; IA. 19, 242, 6 TA, 16,15 ff. 

7 Compare also the facsimiles, IA. 7, 304; 9, 32; 14, 141 ; 17, 122; J.BBRAS, 13,1; 15, 386; EI. 3, 272, 300f., 
306 f. 

8 Compare the facsimiles, EI. 3, 38 f., 152 ff. ; B.ESIP. pl. 30, and the alphabet, pl. 20. 

9 B.ESIP. 52 (where the Nandinagari is derived erroneously from the Siddhamatrka), and pl. 21. 

10 TA, 15, 140. 11 See the facsimile, IA. 18, 64, 

12 See above, § 21, p. 44, note2; compare also the facsimiles at IA. 12, 250, 268; 16, 202; EI. 1, 122; 
J .BBRAS, 18, 239, 


52 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XX XI, 1904; APPENDIX. (§ 94, A. 


the Kalacuri Karna of Tripura, dated \. D. 1042 (plate V, col. XV), both from the eastern 
part of Central India, and the plates of the Caulukya Bhima I. of Gujarat, dated A. D. 1029 
(plate V, col. X VF), give specimens of the northern Naigari of the 11th century. Finally, the 
northern Nagari of A. D, 1100—1207 is illustrated by the alphabets of a plate of Jayaccandra, 
the last Rastrakiita (Gihadavala) king of Kananj, dated A, D. 1175 (plate V, col. XX), of the 
plates of the last Caulukya of Gujarat, Bhima JI., dated A. D. 1199 and 1207 [52} (plate V, 
col. XXI), of the plate of the Paramara Udayavarman of Malva, dated A. D. 1266 (plate V, 
col. XXII), and of the Ratnapur stone inscription from the reign of the Kalacuri Jajalla of 
Tripura, dated A. D. 1114 (plate V, col. XXIIL).2 


With the characters of these Nagari inscriptions, agree those of the now numerous ancient 
palm-leaf MSS. from Gujarat, Rajputina and the northern Dekhan, the dates of which run 
certainly from the 11th, and possibly from the 10th century. Cols. XV—XVIL. ef plate VI. 
exhibit their alphabet chiefly according to LEumann’s photographs and tracings of the 
Visesavasyakabhasyatika, dated A. D. 10:1, together with some supplements from the Royal 
Asiatic Society’s Ganaratnamahodadhi, of A D. 1229.3 But a number of MSS. from Nepal, 
belonging to the 11th and 12th centuries, show the northern Nagavi of the preceding century. 
And col, XH. of plate VI. offers a specimen from No, 866, the oldest Cambridge MS, of this class, 
which is dated A, D, 1008.4 Of the same type is the alphabet of plate VI, col. XIV, taken 
from the reproduction of col. 1 of Wrtte’s copy of the Vajracchediké in Anecdota Oxoniensia, 
Aryan Series, 1,1, plate 4, 


§ 24.—Details of the changes in the acute-angied and the Nagari alphabets.® 
A.—The Mitrkas, 


Among the numerous changes, which the letters of the acnte-angled and Nagari scripts 
andergo in course of time, the following more important ones, affectivg the Matrkas or radical 
signs, deserve special mention : — 

(1) The signs for Z, gha, ca, tha, dha, pa, ba, ma, ya, la, va, sa ands, develop gradually, — 
the later the more distinctly, — shorter or longer tails, which first slant off towards the right 
below the bottom-line of the letters, but later, in the Nagari, become vertical strokes, except in 
the case of E. [53] From the 10th century similar pendent lines appear in the middle of cha 
(plate V, 16, If, Ill, &c.), and of dha (plate V, 238, H), of pha (plate V, III, &c.) and of ha 
(plate V, 42, I—IV, &c.), which the Nagari, too, retains in cha and ha and converts into a medial 
vertical in the case of pha. In the acute-angled script, kha, ga, tha, dha, and ga frequently show 
on the right a small horn-like protuberance or an elongation of the vertical, which, owing to the 
flattening of the tops, the Nagari again discards except in the case of dha. Both the last- 
mentioned peculiarities are due to the circumstance that the writers drew the left and right 
portions of the letters separately and neglected to join carefully the two halves.6 In course 
of time these irregularities became characteristic features of most of the Jetters, 

1 See above, § 21, p. 44, note 2; compare also the facs:m.les at 1A. 6, 53, 54; 8, 40; 12, 126, 202; 15, 36 ; 16, 
208 ; 18, 84; EI. 1, 216, 316 ; 3, 50. 

2 See above, § 21, p. 44, note 2; compare, e. g., the facsimiles at IA. 11, 72; 17, 226 ; 18, 180. 

8 KirtHorn, Report on Sanskrit MSS, for 1880-31, pp. VII, 7; J.RAS, 1895, 247, 504; compare also the 
facsimiles, Pal. Soc., Or. Series, pl, 1, 2, 3, 58; Cat. Berlin Sanskr. und Prakr. Héschft., Band 2, 3, pl. 1. In the 
marginal glosses of the Visesavasyaka and other MSS., frequently appear other cursive alphabets ; see LevmANN’S 
edition, pl. 85. 

« BENDAUL, Cat. Buddh, Sanskrit MSS. from Nepal, pp. XX1V f., 1. ; e-mpare alco the facsimile, Pal. Soc., 
Or. Series, pl, 15, According to S, v. OLDENBURG (letter of 7th April, 1897), the alphabet of these Nepalese MSS. 
is the so-called Laija script, in which is written a complete MS. of the Sadcharmapundarika, preserved jn 
St. Petersburg. 

5 Compare, for this paragraph, BENDALL, Cat, Cambridge Erdchist MSS, from Nepal, KLHI—LI; Anee. 
Uxon., Aryan Series, 1, 3, 73—87. 

6 Aneo, Oxon,, Aryan Series, 1, 3, 70. 


§ 24, A.J INDIAN PALEOG RAPHY. 53 


—_— 


(2) In consequence of the elongation of the ends of the wedges.and: of the use of long 
straight top-strokes, the heads.of A, A, gha, pa, pha, ma, ya, sa, and sa are gradually closed, 
both in the acute-angled and the Nagari scripts. 


(3) The lower portion of the left half of A and 4 almost invariably consists of a curve, 
open towards the left, which first appears oceasionally in the Kusana inscriptions (see above; 
§ 19, B, 1) and later regularly on the Uccakalpa plates (plate IV, 1, IX). It is preserved in the 
Balbodh of the Marathis and is common in the Bombay editions of Sanskrit works. In other 
late specimens of the Nagart, it is replaced by two slanting strokes (plate V, 1, 2, XVI), te 
which a third, a remnant of an earlier wedge at the foot of the vertical, is added lower down, 
This form is the parent of the 4, 4, used in the Benares and Calcutta prints. Up to the 8th 
century, the long A is invariably differentiated by the addition of a curve to the right end 
of A. Later, its mark is a downward stroke, which is attached either to the right of the top (¢. g., 
plate IV, 2, XXI) or to the middle (plate IV, 2, XXII) and thus reoccupies the same positions 
which the corresponding horizontal bar has in the Agoka edicts.2_ In the MSS., the downstroke 
at the top is found even earlier (plate VI, 2, VI). 


(4) The sign for I is mostly derived from the Gupta form of Indor (plate IV, 3, VIT) by 
the substitution of a curve for the third dot (plate IV, 3, XI—XXIII; V, 3, H—IV, é&e.; VI, 3; 
V—IX). But in addition there is (plate V, 3, V, XII, XIU, &c.; VI, 3, XII—XV) a derivative 
from the 7 of the Uccakalpa plates (IV, 3, IX), in which the upper dot is replaced by a straight 
line; and this Z is the parent of the modern Devanagari J, in which the two- lower dots have 
been changed into carves and finally have beenconneeled. Inu Jaina MSS., the J with two dots 
above and a curve below occurs occasionally as Jate as the 15th and 16th centuries. The 
unique early forms of the long I (plate VI, 4, V, VII), as well as their later development 


(plate VI, 4, XV), which has followed the analogy of J, deserve attention. 


(5) U and U invariably show at the lower end a tail, drawn towards the left, which in 
course of time is developed more and more fully. 


(6) The curve of R, attached to the right of the ra, becomes very shallow and long in the 
Horiuzi palm-leaves (plate VI, 7, V), and this shallow curve is the precursor of the vertical line 
of the Jater palm-leaf MSS. of Western India (plate VI, 7, XV—XVII). In the Cambridge 
MS. No, 1049 (plate VI, 7, VII) and in No. 1691, the r-curve is attached to the lower end of 
the ra. 


(7) Among the signs for R, L and Z, which are first traceable in the MSS. of this period 
(plate VI, 8—10, V, VII, X), the long B is cleavly formed by the addition of a second 7-curve 
to the short R. In the Cambridge MSS. Nos. 1049 and 1691, EL is represented by a cursive 
southern lz (see plate VII, 34, VI-—IX), jast as the oldest medial / in k/ (VII, 42, XIV) is 
identical with another form of la; and the long Z is derived from the short vowel by the addi- 
tion of a second la, turned in the opposite direction. In the Z and L of the Horiazi palm- 
leaves (plate VI, 9,10, V), the la has been turned round towards the left, and respectively one 
and two r-curves have been attached to the foot. And the combination l(a)-r remains [54] also 
in the Nagari both of the palm-leaves from Western India (plate VI, 9,10, XV) and of our days, 
the reason being no doubt the pronunciation ér, which is customary both there and in other 
parts of India, These paleographical facts agree with the tradition of the Chinese Buddhists, 
who, as 8. Lévi has discovered,’ ascribe the invention of the signs for the liquid vowels to 
a South-Indian, either to Sarvavarman, the minister of the Andhra king Sataviihana, or to the 
great Buddhist teacher Nigirjuna. 


1 See above, § 23, pare 50, 2 See above, § 16, D, 1,2; and plate II, 2, 1I—x. 
8 Communication by letter, 


54 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIIT, 1904; APPENDIX. (§ 2%, A. 


(8) £ and 4I invariably turn the base of the triangle upwards, and this innovation is 
found already in the inscriptions with transitional forms (plate IV, 5, X, XI). 


(9) Ka shows almost invariably! on the left a loop, caused by the connection of the end 
of the bent eross-bar with the Serif or wedge at the foot of the vertical, except in combinations 
with the subscribed vowels w and r (see, e. g., plate IV, 7, XIV; V, 10, IL; VI, 15, XVI, 
XVID or with other consonants (see, ¢. 9., plate lV, 41, XVI; V, 43, IF, IIL; VI, 49, V, XV, 
XVID. In the Niagari inscriptions, the looped form occurs, however, not rarely also in the 
latter cases (see, ¢. g., plate IV, 7, XX, XXII; V, 43, VII, X—XIII). 


(10) The loop or triangle of kha, which represents the ancient circle (plate II, 10, VI, and 
above, § 3, A, 19), stands, in all the greatly varying forms of the letters, at the left of the 
verticals. The very considerable differences in the shape of the left limb are partly due to the 
flattening of the top of the letter and still more to the various ornamental changes of the 
wedge, which first was added to the lower end of the ancient hook. 


(11) The dot to the right of na, which is so characteristic in the modern Devanagari 
letter, appears already on the Benares copper-plate of Karna of A. D. 1042 in the word 
jangama (line 11, end),? while our plates offer only an example from a much Jater doenment 
(see plate V, 14, XIX), The dot may possibly have been derived from the protuberance, which 
is often found at the end of the top-stroke of the letter (see, e. g., plate V, 14, V, VI, VITD). 


(12) The central bar of ja first is made to slant downwards (plate IV, 14, XXI—XXIIL, 
&ec.) and then changed into a vertical (V, 17, XIII, &c.; VI, 22, XII, &e.). At the same time, 
the upper bar becomes the top-stroke of the letter, and the lowest is gradually converted into 
a double curve. 


(18) The right limb of the independent ita of the Horiuzi palm-leaves (VI, 24, V) is 
turned upwards, and the same form occurs occasionally in ligatures. But in the latter the sign 
is usually laid on its side, its angles are converted into curves and the right limb is attached 
to the end of the greatly shortened vertical. Hence it ¢ften looks like na (see plate IV, 16, XI, 
&ec.; V, 19, IV, V, &.). In the Nagari of the 11th and later centuries, the subscript iia is 
attached to the left limb of ja (plate V, 19, XII—XIV; VI, 24, XVI), and the cursive iia of 
the modern Devanagari, which the Hindus now consider to be a Matrka, is due to a simplifica- 
tion of this form. 


(14) Since the 6th century, a wedge is often placed above the lingual ta (plate IV, 17, 
XVII; V, 20, II, VI; VI, 25, V1); and in the Nagari a horizontal line with a short vertical or 
slanting stroke appears in the place of the wedge (plate IV, 17, XXI, XXII; V, 20, XIII, &. ; 
VI, 25, XV). 


(15) Similar additions appear above the lingual tha since the 10th century (plate V, 21, 
X, &c.; VI, 26, XV). 


(16) Since the 9th century, the round-backed lingual da of the southern alphabets, ending 
with a curve open to the left, comes into use (plate V, 22, II, VEIT, &c.), 


(17) The suppression of the original base-stroke of the lingual na occurs in ligatures (nda, 
plate IV, 21, XIX) since the 7th century, and in the uncombined sign since the 8th century 
(plate V, 24, III) ; compare also above, § 22, B, 10, and plate IV, 21, III. The sign soon after 
assumes the modern form and consists of a straight top-stroke with three lines hanging down 
from it (plate V, 24, VII, &.; VI, 29, XV, &c.). 


1? An exception is, e. g., the Jhalrapatan inscription, A.V, 180, which shows throughout the old dagger-shaped 
form. 
2 EL. 2, 297. 


§ 24, A.J INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 5A 


(18) The modern form of ta with the vertical on the right, which occurs already in the 
Asoka edicts, reappears in the 8th century (plate IV, 22, X XJ) and becomes the regular one in 
the 10th century. 


(19) The modern form of tha, which has been derived from the notched one of the 7th 
century (plate IV, 23, XVII), is found already in the inscriptions of the same period (plate IV, 
23, XVIII, &c.). 


(20) [55] In the 7th century, the lower end of da is more clearly defined by a Serif (plate 
IV, 24, XVII, &c.), which soon after is changed into the characteristic tail of the modern letter. 


(21) Already in the 7th century, the right side of na becomes occasionally a vertical, to 
the left of which the loop is attached (plate 1V, 26, XVIII, XIX) ; compare also below, § 30. 


(22) On the transformation of pha by the development of a central vertical (see above, 
under 1), the curve of aspiration is attached first to the top of the new sign (plate IV, 28, 
XXIT; V, 31, IIL, &.). But in the 11th century it sinks lower down (plate V, 31, XIT), and 
it occupies already in the 12th century the position which it has in the modern Devanagari 
letter (plate V, 31, XX—-XXIII). Retrograde archaic-forms, like thuse in plate V, 31, II, XIV, 
are, however, not rare. Their occurreuce has probably to be explained by the influence of the 
popular cursive alphabets, 


(23) As va was very generally pronounced 6a, the ancient sign for ba was lost in Northern, 
Central and Western India, and it was replaced by ra in the inscriptions of the 7th and later 
centuries (plate IV, 29, XX ; V, 32, II, &c.). In the MSS. the substitution occurs even earlier 
(plate VI, 37, V, VI). A new 4a, consisting of v¢ with a dot in the centre of the loop, occurs 
since the 11th century (plate V, 32, XVI), and this form is the parent of the modern 
Devanagari letter. 


(24) The left limb of bha, mostly an inverted wedge with the point towards the right, is 
frequently changed into a triangle, open at the apex, from which the lower portion of the 
original vertical hangs down (plate IV, 30, XIX, &c.; V, 33, I, &c.). The modern Devanagari 
bha appears in the 12th century (plate V, 88, XX, &c.) and seems to be derived from the form 
with the wedge, for which latter a Serif was substituted. 


_ (25) Since the 8th century, ma usually has on the left a cursive loop (plate IV, 31, XX, 
XX), which in the MSS. is mostly filled in with ink (plate VI, 39, XV—XVII). 


(26) Both the MSS.,and most inscriptions, with the exception of one from Udaypur (above, 
page 48, note 3) and some from Nepal (page 50), offer exclusively the looped or the bipartite 
ya, which latter occurs already in the inscriptions of the Kusana period,! and has been 
derived from the looped form.? In the Nepalese inscriptions of the 7th century, which show 
the eastern sa,? we find a tripartite ya with a small circle at the top of the first upstroke (plate 
IV, 32, XVII); the Udaypur inscription has both the ordinary tripartite ya of the Gupta 
period, and also the bipartite letter. 


(27) The right extremity of the wedge at the lower end of ra is often greatly elongated 
in the inscriptions of the 7th and later centuries (plate LV, 33, XVILI—XXI, &e.), and some- 
times only the outlines of the wedge are marked. These forms are the precursors of the 
modern tailed ra, 


(28) Since the 7th century, we find a cursive ga (plate IV, 86, XVIII; 42, XIX; V, 39, 
Il, II, &e.; VI, 44, XV—XVID, the left half of which has been turned into a loop with 
a little tail on the right. . 


1 See above, § 19, B, 12. 2 J.ASB. 60, 87. 5 J.ASB. 60, 85. 


56 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 24, B & O. 


B. — Medial vowels and so forth. 


(1) Medial @, e, 0, au, as wellas one of the Mitris of ai, are placed very frequently above 
the line, and are then, particularly in the stone inscriptions, treated more or less orunamentally 
(see, ¢.g., plate IV, cols, XIII—XVIID. More rarely, medial zand # are treated in the 


same way. 


(2) The tails of the curves of medialéand ¢ are regularly drawn down low, respectively to 
the left and the right of the Maitrka, while the differences in the curves at the top disappear. 
These forms lead up to the ¢ and ¢ of the modern Devanagari. 


(3) Medial zis expressed very frequently by the initial Y of the period (plate IV, 30, 
AIl, XIV, XVI, XX; VI, 44, VI). [56] But an older form, found, ¢. g., in pz (IV, 27, V1), 
is also common and appears to be the parent of the modern #, which occurs already in the 
western palm-leaf MSS. (see pi, plate VI, 85, XVI). 


(4) Since the 7th century,! — first on the Banskhera plate of Harsa, — the Jihvamilliya 
is occasionally expressed by a cursive sign, consisting of a loop under the wedge of ka (plate 


V, 47, IID). 


(5) Since the 7th century, the Upadhminiya is occasionally expressed by a curve open 
above, with curled ends and sometimes with a dot in the centre. This sign is attached to the 
left side of the Matrka (plate IV, 46, XXIII; V, 48, VII). It seems to be derived from a form 
like that in plate VII, 46, 1V. 


(6) In the older inscriptions, the Virima is still frequently placed above the vowelless 
consonant, for which invariably a final form is used; and it receives a tail, which is drawn 
downwards to the right of the Matrka (see, ¢.g., plate IV, 22, XIV). But even more com~ 
monly it stands below the consonant, and it occurs in this position already in the inscriptions 
with transitional forms (plate 1V, 22, XI).? 


Cc, — The ligatures. 


(1) Both in the inscriptions and in the MSS, of the 6th and later centuries, we find 
occasionally ligatures, in which the second consonant is placed to the right of the first, instead 
of below it (see, é. g., plate IV, 45, XI; V, 47, IL; VI, 51, VI).8 


(2) For the stone inscriptions of the acute-angled alphabet, the subscript ya frequently 
is made ornamental and drawn far to the left. Since the 7th century, and occasionally even 
earlier, the right-hand upstroke of ya@is drawn up as far as the upper line of the whole sigh 
(see, ¢. g., plate IV, 46, VIII, XIX ;. 43, 45, XTIL; VI, 51, VI). 


(3) Ra, being the first part of a compound consonant, usually stands above the line and 
18 expressed by a wedge, or by an angle or a curve open to the right. But in rma the left side 
of mais shortened, and the top of the wedge, which is placed on this shortened line, does not 
protrude above the upper line (plate VI, 49, VI). Similar depressions of the superscribed ra 
are found in connection with other consonants iv the Aphsad inscription,’ on Harsa’s copper- 
plates, and in some MSS. (plate VJ, 51, XIII, XIV). Until the 9th century, rya is often 
expressed by a full ra with a subscribed ya (see, e¢.g., plate IV, 44, XVIIL; 45, VIL; and 
compare ET, 8, 103). 


1 Compare the facsimile of fhe Jhalrapatan inscription, TA. 5, 18) ; see also TA. 18, 162, 
2 This is the regular form since the 9th century. 3 Anec, Oxon., Aryan Series, 1, 3, 87. 
* Fixer, Gupta Inscriptions (CIT. 3), 262; KizuHorn, EL. 1, 179 £. 


§ 25.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 57 


§ 25. — Tho Sarada alphabet; Plates V. and VI, 


A. — The Sirada script,! which is easily recognised as a descendant of the western Gupta 
alphabet, appears since about A. D. 800 in Kashmir and in the north-eastern Panjab (Kangra 
and Chamba), The oldest known Sarad@ inscriptions are the two Baijnath Pragastis from 
Kiragrama (Kangra), dated A. D. 804; see plate V, col. I. Not much later are the coins of the 
Varma dynasty of Kashmir, where the Sarada forms are likewise fully developed.? And it is not 
improbable that the Bakhshali MS., found in the Yusufzai district (plate VI, col. VIII), belongs 
to the same or even a somewhat earlier period. The third specimen of the ‘Sarad& in plate VI, 
col. IX, which ultimately is derived from BurkuHarn’s plate I. in his edition of the Kash- 
mirian Sakuntala,4 dates perhaps only from the 16th or 17th century; it has been given 
merely because at present no reproductions of more ancient MSS. are accessible.5 In conse- 
quence of the frequent emigrations of the travel-loving Kashmirian Pandits, Sdrada MSS. are 
found in many towns of North-Western India and further east in Benares, and marginal glosses 
in Sarad& characters are found even in ancient Nagari MSS. from Western India.® A [57] 
modern cursive variety of the Sarada is the so-called Takkari or Tikari? of the Dogras in 
Jammii and the neighbourhood, which of late has been imported also into Kashmir. 

B. — A general characteristic of the Sarada of all periods is found in the stiff, thick, 
strokes, which give the characters an uncouth appearance and a certain resemblance to those 
of the Kusana period. The following signs show, already in the earliest period, peculiar 
developments :—~ 


(1) The I, which consists of two dots, placed side by side,and (compare the [ of the Bower 
MS.) a 7a-like figure below, which represents the other two dots (plate V, 4,1; VI, 4, IX). 


(2) The quadrangular ca (plate V, 15, 1; VI, 20, VII, 1X). 


(8) The lingual da, which shows in the middle a loop, instead of an acute angle, and 
a wedge at the end (plate V, 22,1; VI, 27, VII, IX). 


(4) The dental ¢a, which, being derived from a looped form, has lost its left half, while 
the right has been converted into a curve (plate V, 25,1; VI, 30, VIII, IX). 


(5) The dental dha, which is flattened at the top and is below so broad that it resembles 
a Devanagari pa. 


(6) The va, which, owing to the connection of the left side of the curve with the top- 
stroke, closely resembles dha (plate V, 38,1; VI, 48, VIII, IX). 


(7) The quadrangular ga, which exactly resembles a Nagari sa (plate V, 39,1; VI, 44, 
VIII, 1X). 


(8) The angular medial r (plate V, 45, I; VI, 43, VIII), and the detached 0, which stands 
by itself above the line (plate V, 24,1; VI, 31, IX), and without doubt is derived from the 
Gupta o (plate IV, 34, IV). 


(9) The ra, which, as a first part of ligatures, is inserted into the left side of the second 
letter, Just as in the Aphsad inscription.® 


The other letters of the earlier documents differ very little from those of the western 
Gupta alphabet, and the changes, which are found, all occur also in the acute-angled script. 


1 Compare, for this paragraph, Kashmir Report (J. BBRAS., 12), 31; J.ASB. 60, 83. 2 C.CMI. pl. 4, 5. 
8 Seventh Oriental Congress, Aryan Section, 188 ; IA. 17, 38, 275, ¢ SB.WA. CVII. 
5 A good facsimile from a Sarada MS, of the same period is found in the Catalogue of the Berlin Sanskrit and 
yakrit MSS., Vol. 2, 3, pl. 2; an inferior one, from the India Office MS. 3176, together with # table of the letters 
and ligatures, in Pal. Soc., Or, Ser., pl. 44. 
6 SB.WA, CXVI, 534, ? Kashmir Report (J.BBRAS. 12), 32; for the alphabet, see J.RAS, 1891, 362. 
8 See above, § 24, C, 3. 


58 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 26, A. ° 


— 


The constant use of the bipartite ya, of the na with the suppressed base-stroke (see above, § 24, 
A, 17), of the i andi, drawn down respectively to the left and the right of the consonant 
(§ 24, B, 2), and of the simplified Jihvamiiliya (plate V, 47, I), indicates that the separation 
of the Saradai from the Gupta alphabet did not take place before the 7th century. 


In the later Sarada (plate VI, col. 1X), further abnormal developments are noticeable in 
U, &£, AI, 0, AU, ja, ita, bha, rtha (which latter occurs also in plate VI, col. VIID, and owing 
to the use of long top-strokes the heads of several letters, such as A, 4 and ya, are closed. 

§ 26. — Eastern varieties of the Nagari alphabet and the arrow-head. script. 
A. — Proto-Bengali; Plates V. and VI. 

Towards the end of the 11th century, the Nigari inscriptions of Nastern India shew such 
distinct traces of changes leading up to the modern Beng4li writing, and these changes become 
so numerous in the 12th century. that it is possible to class their alphabets as Proto-Bengili. 
An approximate idea of the development of the Proto-Bengali may be obtained by comparing 
the characters of the following documents, represented in our plates : — (1) of the Deopara 
Pragasti! of about A. D. 1080-90 (plate V, col. XVIII), which includes the Bengali Z, kha, tia, 
ta, tha, ma, ra, la, and sa; (2) of Vaidyadeva’s land-grant? of A. 1). 1142 (plate V, col. XIX), 
with the Bengali R, E, Al, kha, ga, iia, ta, thu, dha, ra, and va; and (8) of the Cambridge 
MSS.‘No. 1699, 1, 2,3 of A. D. 1198-99 (plate VI, col. X), which offers the Bengali A, 4, U, R, 
R, L, L, E, AI, AU, ha, kha, ga, ta, tha, na, ma, ya, ra, va and sa, as well as transitional forms 
of gha, fia, na and ga. 

Only a few among the Proto-Bengili letters are new local formations. The great majority 
occurs already in other older scripts, be it in exactly the same or in similar shape. [58] Thus, 
its R, R, Land L agree closely with the corresponding characters of the Horiuzi MS, (plate VI, 
7—10, V), its U with that of the oldest MS. from Nepal (plate VI, 6, VIL ; compare also the 
Sarada, VI, 6,1X), and its AU with that of the Bower MS. (plate VI, 14,1, II). Its signs 
for A, A, ka, na, ma, ya, va, sa, and sa occur repeatedly in various alphabets of the 8th—10th 
centuries, givea in plates IV, V. Its kha, opened on the right, finds an analogy in that 
of the Bower MS. (plate VI, 16, I), and its tha, likewise opened on the right, somewhat 
resembles that of plate V, 26, IX. Finally, the ga and n@ with the verticals, rising on the right 
above the line, have precursors in the letters of the 9th and 10th centuries with horn-like 
protuberances (plate V, 12, 24, II—IV, VI; compare also above, § 24, A, 1). Even the ra, 
resembling va (plate V, 36, XIX; VI, 41, 49, X), may easily be recognised as due to 
a slightly abnormal development of the wedge at the end of the letier, for which, forms from 
Western and Central India in plate V, 36, SILI, XIV, offer more or less close analogies. Only 
the Hand AJ, open on the left, and the peculiar fia in fica (plate V, 19, XVIII) and in jira 
(plate VI, 24, X), appear to be purely local new formations. And this may be true also of the 
fa (plate V, 25, XVIMI, XIX; VI, 30, X), whieh, however, does not differ much from the 
Sirada sign and from the final ¢ of some other alphabets. 

The most striking and important among the peculiarities of the Proto-Bengali, discarded 
in the modern Bengali script, are the small triangles with the rounded lower side and the 
“‘ Nepalese hooks,” which are attached to the left of the tops of various letters. The triangle 
is found in kst (plate V, 47, X VIII) and in very many letters of plate V, col. XIX; while the 
hock oceurg in the 4a and ¢a of plate V, 25 and 48, XVIJI4 If further we compare the 
Turpan-Dighi inscription of Laksmanasena,® where the triangles and hooks frequently appear 
alternately in connection with the same letters, if becomes evident that the “ Nepalese hook” 

1 BL 1, 205 f. 2412,3 7 
* Gompare Brnnatt, who slizhtly differs in Cat. Sanskr. Buddhist MSS. from Nepal, XKAVI, and letter-press 


of Pal. Soc., Or, Series, pl. 81. 
+ Both the triangle and the hook are found in the Gaya inscription, IA. 10, 312, 6 J.ASB. 41, pl. 1, 2. 


§ 26, A] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 59 


is a cursive substitute for the triangle. The triangle itself is a modification of the top-stroke 
with a semi-circle below, occasionally met with in ornamental inscriptions from Northern and 
Ceniral India, as, e. g., in Vindyakapila’s plate (letters with this peculiarity have not been given 
in plate IV, col. X XIII) and in the Candella inscription in Cunnineuam’s Archeological Reports. 
Vol. 10, plate 33, No.3. This last-mentioned form again is connected with, and gives the 
outlines of, the thick top-strokes, rounded off at both ends, which are not rare in ornamental 
MSS. like that figured by Brnpaut, Catalogne of Sanskrit Buddhist MSS, from Nepil, plate 2, 
Nos. 1, 2, and in the alphabet of plate VI, col. XIV (see particularly lines 5, 7, 15, 30, 34, 
37, 49), 


Among the abnormal single signs, not received into the modern Beng3li, the following 
deserve special remarks :— 


(1) The forms of J in plate V, 3, XVIII, and VI, 38, X, are cursive developments of the 
ancient J in plate IV, 8, IX, &e. But the J and J of plate V, 3, 4, XLX, appear to be southern 
forms; compare plate VII, 3, IV—VI. 


(2) The curious ta of plate V, 20, XIX, seems to have been produced by an abnormally 
strong development of a ‘‘ Nepalese hook” with a Serif at the end, placed above the ancient 
round fa, which is represented by the second lower curve on the left; compare the fa of 
col, XVIII, and that of the Cambridge MS. No, 1693 (Bewpatt, op. cit. plate 4). 


(3) The na of plate V, 29, XIX, withont a connecting stroke between the loop and the 
vertical, is due to the strongly developed predilection for cursive forms, which is visible also in 


other letters of Vaidyadeva’s inscription, such as A, 4, ga and the ligature tkr (plate V, 47, 
XIX). 


(4) The triangular medial u, for instance of ku (plate V, 10, XIX), which appears also in 
Laksmanasena’s Tarpan-Dighi grant and other eastern inscriptions, gives the outline of the 
older wedge-shaped form, found, e. g., in thu (plate V, 26, XVIII) and in su (plate VI, 45, IT), 


(5) The Anusvira of za’ (plate V, 38, XIX) and of sam (plate VI, 15, X) has been placed 
on the line, as in the Old-Kanarese (see below, § 29, C, 5) and the modern Grantha, and 
wu Virdma stands below it. 


(CG) In the Om of plate V, 9, XVIII, we have the oldest example of the oceurrence of the 
modern Anunasika. In this case, it shows a little circle instead of the more usual dot, which 
is found in the Om of plate VI,18, XI. Both forms are rather frequent in the eastern inscrip- 
tions of the 12th century,! whereas in the west? they are more rare and are confined to the word. 
On, The Anunisika, which I have not found in any Indian inscription older than the 11th 
century, probably is an intentional modification of the Anusvara, invented because in Vedic 
MSS, the Anunasika must be substituted for an Anusvara followed by liquid consonants, 
sibilants and ha. 


(7) [58] The Visarga of vah (plate V, 38, XVIII) carries a wedge at the top, which 
additiow appears also in other ornamental scripts (see, e. g., plate VI, 30, XIV); iu the h of 
plate VI, 51, X (compare also VI, 41, XI, and the Gayi inscription), it has been changed 
cursively into a form resembling our figure 8. In the Gaya inscription (IA, 10, 342), as well 
as in MSS of this period,® it receives also a small tail (compare tah, plate VI, 30, XIV). 


1 Compar? the Gaya inscriptions in C.ASR, 3, pl. 37, No. 12; pl. 38, No. 13. 

2 See the Mahoba inscription, C.ASR. 21, pl. 21. 

3 Compare the facsimiles of Bengali MSS, in Pal. Soc., Or. Series, pl. 38, 82,69; RayenpBALAL Mirra, 
Notices of Sanskrit MSS., Vol. 3, pl. 5,6; Vols, 5 and 6 ; and the Proto-Bengal: inscription, J.ASB, 43, 318, pl. 18, 


60 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 26, B&C. 


B.—The Nepalese hooked characters; Plate VI. 


According to Brnpatt’s careful examination of the MSS. from Nepal,! the hooked 
characters first occur in the 12th century and disappear towards the end of the 15th. The 
facts, stated above, which prove the occurrence of the “ Nepalese hooks ” in Bengal inscriptions 
of the 12th century and explain their origin, leave no doubt that the introduction of this 
modification of the top-strokes is due to the influence of Bengal, which, as Brnpat has recog- 
nised,? makes itself felt also in other points, 


The first of the two specimens of this character in plate VI, col. XJ, which is derived from 
the Cambridge MS. No. 1691, of A. D. 1179,3 shows in the majority of the letters the forms of 
the Horiuzi palm-leaves and: of the Cambridge MS. No. 1049 (cols. V—VII), with a few small 
modifications, such as might be expected in a much later document. Irrespective of the hooks, 
special Bengali peculiarities are observable only in I, 7, Zand AI. Generally speaking, these 
remarks hold good also for the second specimen in plate VI, col. XII, from the British Museum 
MS., Oriental No, 1439, of A. D. 1286.4 But in this script the Bengali influence is visible in 
#, na, dha and éa (compare the transitional forms of V, 39, XVIII, XIX), while its J is very 
archaic> 


Nepal and Tibet seem to have preserved a number of other, mostly ornamental, alphabets 
of Eastern India,® hand-drawn tables of which have been given by B. Hopcson (Asiatic 
Researches, Vol. 16) and by Sarat Canpravis (J.ASB., Vol. 57, plates 1 to 7), But up to the 
present time no reliable materials are available, on which a paleographical examination of these 
scripts could be based. 


C.— The arrow-head alphabet; Plate VI. 


The arrow-head alphabet, plate VI, cols. XVIII, XIX, which C, BenDatt, its discoverer,” 
is inclined to identify with Berini’s bhatksuki lipi, appears to be confined to Eastern India. It, 
of course, has no connection with the Nagari, but, as BenpALu points out in his very careful 
description, is the immediate offspring of an ancient form of the Brahmi. It would seem that 
the 4, A, ka, ia, ra and perhaps also the jha of the present alphabet have curves at the lower 
end. This peculiarity, as well as the peculiar Z, noted by Benpa.t (compare plate VIII, 8, 
VIII) and the absence of a difference between y and ra, seem to indicate that the present 
alphabet belonged to the southern scripts, for which these points are characteristic (compare 
plate ITI, cols. X—XX, and plates VII, VIII). Its pointed kha, ga, and ga likewise occur in 
southern alphabets (see plate III, 8, VIL; VII, 9, XI, XIV; VII, 11, XVII; 36, IV, XVI, 
XX). And the forms of za, ta,and na perhaps point rather to the south-west than to the 
south (compare plate VII, cols. I, II, &c.). Only in the case of the looped sa it is possible 
to think of northern (Gupta) influence; but the possibility that it is an independent new 
formation is not excluded. An inscription in the same alphabet, and shewing wedges instead 
of arrow-heads at the top of the letters, has been discussed by Benpaut in LA. 19, 77 £ 


1 BenpaLt, Cat. Sankr. Buddhist MSS, from Nepal, XXII ff. 2 Op. cit, EXXV, XXXVI. 

3 Op. cit. pl. 3, 4; Berlin Oriental Congress, Indian Section, pl. 2, 1. 

€ Pal. Soc., Or. Ser., pl. 32; Berlin Oriental Congress, Indian Section, pl. 2, 2, 3. 

5 For facsimiles of MSS, with Nepalese “ hooked characters,’’ see BENDALL, Cat. Sanskr. Buddhist MSS. from 
Nepal, pl. 8; Pal. Soc., Or. Series, pl, 48, 57; Cowen. and Ea@cEtine, Cat. Buddhist MSS. of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, JAS, 1876, 1, ff.; for the alphabet, see BenDAtL, op. cit. pl. 4; J. Kuart, de CCC Canakyae 
sententiis, pl. 

6 Compare also FLEET’s remarks on ornamental characters, IA. 15, 334. 

7 Seventh Oriental Congress, Aryan Section, 111 ff. ; and Tenth Oriental Congress, Part II, 151 ff. 


INDIAN PALEOGRA PHY. 


V. THE SOUTHERN ALPHABETS, 


§ 27, — Definition and varieties. 


[60] With Burnett and Fier, I understand by the term ‘‘southern alphabets” the 
scripts of plates VII. and VIII,! which, developed out of the characters of the Andhra 
period, have been generally used since about A. D. 350 in the territories south of the Vindhya, 
and most of which still survive in the modern alphabets of the Dravidian districts. 


Their most important common characteristics are: — 


(1) The retention of the ancient forms, open at the top, of gha, pa, pha, sa aud sa, of the 
old ma, and of the tripartite ya which is looped only occasionally, especially in the Grautha. 


(2) The retention of the long stroke on the right of Ja, which however is mostly bent 


towards the left. 
(3) The da with the round back. 


(+) The curves, originally open at the top, at the ends of the long verticals of A, 4, ka, ita 
and ra, as well as of the subscript ra and of medial wand z. 


(5) The medial » with a curled curve on the left, with occasional exceptions occurring 


in kr, 


1 Preparation of Plates VII. and VIII: — 


Puate Vil. 


Cuttings from facsimiles. 


Col. I; from Fuzet, Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), 
No.5, pl. 8 B; with E from No. 62, pl. 38, B. 

Cols, II, III ; from F.GI (CII. 8), No, 18, pl. 11. 

Col. IV ; from plate at IA, 7, 6v. 

Col. V ; from plate at IA. 5, 205; with A, A, U, gh, 
thau, ha, ksa, ia, from plate at IA. 6,9, and nta from 
plate at IA. 7, 58. 

Col. VI; from F.GI (CII, 3), No, 38, pl. 24. 

Col, VIT; from F.GI (CHI, 3), No. 39, pl. 25. 

Col, VIII ; from plate at EI. 2, 20, No. 1; with I, fia, 
ba, fica, bra, lya, from No. 3, at p. 22. 

Col, IX; from plate at IA. 18, 78. 

Col. X ; from F.GI (CIE. 8), No. 55, pl. 84; with U 
and AU from No. 41, pl. 27, and U from Ajanta No. 3, 
B,ASRWI. 4, pl. 57. 

Col, XI; from F.GI (CIT, 3), No. 56, pl. 35, 

Col, XII; from plate at IA, 7, 35. 

Col. XIIL; from plate at LA. 7,37; with I, nga, jye, 
nam, tsa, from plate at IA. 6, 24, 


Col. XIV; from plate at IA. 10, 58; with A, U, and 
ccha from plates at IA, 7, 161, and ki from plate at IA, 6, 
72, and la from plate at IA. 8, 44, 


Col. XV ; from plate at IA, 10, 104, Furet's No. 94; 
with I (3, XV, 6), age, §t, and Ji from FLEET’s Nos. 99, 
100, plate at IA. 10, 164, and Ua from Fuuntr’s No. 95, 
plate at IA. 10, 104, 


Col. XVI; from plates at IA. 8, 24 ff. 

Col. XVII; from plate at IA. 18, 187, 

Col. XVIII ; from plates at IA. 8, 320. 

Col. XIX; from plate at IA. 13, 128. 

Col, XX ; from plates at IA. 5, 50 ff. 

Col. XXI; from plates at IA, 5, 154 ff. 

Col. XXII; from Huutzscr’s SIT, 2, pl. 10, 
Col. XXIII ; from Huirzscu’s SII. 2, pl. 9. 
Col. KXIV ; from Hunrzscu’s SII. 2, pl. 11. 


Puats VII, . 


Cuttings from facsimiles. 


Col. I; from plates at IA. 12, 158 ff, 

Col. If; from plate at LA. 11, 126, Fnuer's No. 128. 

Col. IIT; from plates at IA. 12, 14. 

Col. IV ; from plates at TA. 13, 186 ff. 

Col. V ; from plates at IA. 7, 16. 

Col. VI; from plates at IA. 14, 50 ff. 

Col. VII ; from plate at IA. 6,188; with 4, U, ca, 
and téa from plate at IA. 9, 75. 

Col. VIII ; from plates at TA, 11, 12 if. 

Col. IX ; from plate at EI. 3, 62. 

Col. X; from plate at IA. 13, 275. 


Col. XI; from plate at IA. 18, 144, 

Col. XIL; from plate at EI. 3, 18, 

Col. XIIL; from Hountrzsca’s SII, 2, pl. 13. 

Col. XIV; from plate at EI. 3, 76. 

Col. XV; from plate at EI. 3, 14. 

Col. XVI; from HuxitTzscu’s SII. 2, pk. 12. 

Cols, XVII, XVIII; from HuirascH’s SII. 2, pl. 4, 

Cols, XIX, XX; from plate at EI. 3, 72, the lower 
part. 

Cols, XXI, XXII; from plate at EI. 3, 72, the upper 
part, 


62 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXIJI, 19¢4; APPENDIX. [$ 28, A. 


According to other peculiarities, the southern alphabets may be divided into the 
following varieties :!— 


(1) The western variety, which, being strongly influenced by the northern alphabets, is 
the ruling script between about A. D. 400 and about A. D. 900 in Kathiivad, Gujarat, the 
western portion of the Maratha districts, 7. e. the Collectorates of Nasik, Khandesh and Satara, 
in the part of Haidaraébad (Ajanta) contiguous to Khiandesh, and in the Konkan, and which 
during the 5th century occasionally occurs also in Rajputaina and the Central Indian Agency, 
bat altogether disappears in the 9th century in consequence of the inroads of the Nagari 
alphabet (see above, § 21). 


(2) The Central-Indian script, which in its simplest form closely agrees with the western 
variety, but in its more developed form, the so-called “box-headed alphabet,’ shows greater 
differences, and which from the end of the 4th century is common in northern Haidarabid, the 
Central Provinces and parts of the Central-Indian Agency (Bundelkhand), but appears also 
occasionally further south in the Bombay Presidency and even in Maisir. 


(3) The script of the Kanarese and Telugu districts of the Dekhan, — 7. e. of the 
southern portion of the Bombay Presidency (the Southern Maratha States, Sholipur, Bijapur, 
Belgaum, Dharwar and Karwar), of the southern territory of Haidarabad (roughly speaking 
south of Bidar), of Maisir, and of the north-east portion of the Madras Presidency (Vizagapatam, 
Godavari, Kistna, Karnal, Bellary, Anantpur, Cuddapah, Nellore), — which appears first in the 
Kadamba inscriptions of the 5th and 6th centuries, and after a long development leads to the 
very similar and temporarily identical Kanarese and Telugu round-hand, 


(4) The later Kalinga alphabet of the north-eastern coast of the Madras Presidency 
between Cicacole and the frontier of Orissa (Gaiijim), which is strongly mixed with northern 
letters and in later times also with Grantha and Kanarese-Telugu characters, and which occurs 
in inscriptions of the 7th—12th centuries. 


(5) The Grantha alphabet of the eastern coast of Madras, south of Pulikat (North and 
South Arcot, Salem, Trichinopoli, Madura and Tinnevelli), which first appears in the ancient 
Sanskrit inscriptions of the Pallava dynasties, and survives in the modern Grantha and its 
varieties, the Malaydlam and the Tulu. 


The Tamil alphabet of the same districts and of the western coast of Madras (Malabar) 
probably is derived from a northern script, imported in the 4th or 5th century, but greatly 
modified by the influence of the Grantha. A cursive variety of the Tamil alphabet is found in 
the Vatteluttu (the ‘“‘ round-hand,” Burnett) or Cera-Pandya (Hy.tzscx),2 which is known 
through inscriptions from the western coast and the extreme south of the -Peninsula, 
and according to Burnett [61] has fallen into disuse only in recent times.3 Though these two 
alphabets come from a different source, they have been included in this chapter, because they 
occur in the same districts as the other five. 


§ 28, — The western script and the script of Central India; Plates VII, and VIII. 
A.— The western script. 


The western variety of the southern alphabets is found in the inscriptions of the 
Imperial Guptas and their vassals since the time of Candragupta II.,4 of the kings of Valabhi,® 
of the Gurjaras of Broach,® of some of the Calukyas of Badimi (Pulakesin I], and Vijayabhatta- 


1 Compare B.ESIP, 14. 2 TA, 20, 286. 8 B.ESIP, 48, 

# Compare the facsimiles in FLeET’s Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 8), Nos, 5, 14, and 62, plates 3B, 8, 38 B, 
and FLEE?’s remarks. 

° Compare the facsimiles in F.GI (CII. 8), Nos. 38, 39, plates 24, 25; IA.1,17; 5, 204 ff. ; 6,14 ff.; 7, 63 ff. ; 
8, 392; 9, 2388; 14, 328; J,BBRAS. 11, 363; ETI. 8, 320. 

6 Compare the facsimiles at J.RAS. 1865, 247; IA. 13, 78; [ 7,62; 18, 116; 17, 200; disputed ] ; EI. 2, 19 ff, 


§ 28, A.J INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 63 


viki), and of Nasik and Gujarat and their vassals,! of the Traikitakas,? of the Aémakas (?) of 
Khindesh,? and of the Rastrakitas of Gujarat,‘ a3 well as in numerous votive inscriptions in 
the caves of Kanheri, Nasik and Ajanta. Ordinarily, its characters no doubt were written 
with ink, just like those of the northern alphabets (see above, § 21). This is made highly 
probable by the use of wedges on the tops of the letters during the Gupta period (see plate 
VII, cols, I-III) and by the thick, frequently knob-like, heads of the signs of the Valabhi, 
Gurjara and Ragtrakita grants (plate VII, cols. IV—IX, and plate VIII, col. 1), both of 
which ornaments can only be drawn with ink, Another argument is furnished by the fact 
that all the copper-plates from Gujarat have been cut according to the ordinary size of the 
Bhirja leaves (BURNELL), on which it is not possible to write with a stilus. 


The finds of nearly or quite contemporaneous inscriptions with northern characters in 
Rajputina, the Central-Indian Agency,® and Valabhi, as well as the Nagari signatures of the 
Gurjara princes,’ prove that northern scripts were being used simultaneously with this 
southern alphabet. And this circumstance is no doubt the cause of its showing traces of 
northern peculiarities in the following letters: — (1) in the kha with a large loop and a small 
hook (plate VII, 9, I—IX; VIII, 12, I), instead of which the true southern form appears 
only very rarely ;® (2) in the ca, rounded off on the right (plate VII, 13, I—I1X ; VIII, 16, 1) ; 
(3) in the ancient ta without a loop (plate VII, 22, I—IX; VIII, 25, I); (4) in the 
narrow dha (plate VII, 25, I—IX ; VIM, 28, I; compare plate IV, 25, I~III); (5) in the 
looped na (plate VII, 26, I—IX; VIII, 29,1), which agrees more exactly with the northern 
forms of plate IV, 26, than with the southern one of VII, 26, XIII (compare below, § 29, A); 
(6) in the Matras often placed above the line in medial e (plate VII, 26, V), a¢ (plate VII, 10, 
IV) and 6 (plate VIII, 35, 1), which latter, however, has a peculiar looped form in Jo (plate VII, 
34, III, IV); (7) in the medial au, consisting of three strokes above the line (VIJ, 25, V; 36, 
III) ; and compare plate IV, 7, IV); (8) in the subscript ia, which occasionally, as in plate 
VII, 42, VII, shows the northern cursive form. The inscriptions Nos. 17 and 62 of FLeet’s 
Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), plates 10, 38 B, which are not represented in plate VII, show, 
[62] besides, the northern 4 and ka without the curve at the foot. <A ka of this description 
occurs also sometimes in the Valabhi inscriptions (plate VII, 8, V). 


Irrespective of these northern peculiarities, which throughout remain almost unchanged, 
the characters of this script show three stages in their development, that of the 5th century 
(plate VII, cols. I—III), that of the 6th and 7th centuries (cols. IV—VI, VIIL), and that of 
the 8th (col. IX) and 9th centuries (plate VIII, col. I) which last is very markedly cursive. 


Among the single letters the following deserve special remarks: — 


(1) The I (plate VII, 8, IV, ff.; VIII, 3,1), which here, as in most southern alphabets, 
consists of a curved line with a notch in the centre and of two dots below, and which appears 
to be a modification of a form like that in plate IV, 3, IX. 


(2) The Tf (plate VII, 3,1; VIII, 4, 1), which, like that of the Bower MS. (plate VI, 
4,1), has been developed by the transformation of two dots into a line, but in addition has the 
curved tail, characteristic of the southern alphabets. 


(3) The £, which usually consists of a triangle with the apex at the top, and is irregu- 
larly broadened on the left (plate VII, 6,1; and compare AI in VII, 6, VII), and which from 


a 

1 Compare the facsimiles at EI. 3,52; IA. 7,164; 8, 45; 9, 124; J BBRAS. 16,1; Seventh Oriental Congress, 
Aryan Section, 238; IA. 19, 310. 

2 Compare the facsimiles at B.ASRWI. No. 10, 58. 5 Compare the facsimile at IA. 16, 98. 

* Compare the facsimiles at LA. 12, 158; J.BBRAS. 16,105; BI. 3, 56. 

6 Compare the facsimiles at B.ASRWI. 4, pl. 55,9; pl. 58, 5and 9; plates 59, 60; vol. 5, pl. 51, 6—9. 

Compare the facsimiles in F.GI. (CII. 3), No. 6, 17, 61, plates 4 A, 10, 38 A. 
7 Compare above, § 21 end. 8 Compare, for instance, likhitant, facsimile at IA. 7, 72 


64 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXIII, 190!; APPENDIX. [§ 28, B. 


the end of the 6th century frequently, especially in Gurjara inscriptions, is opened at the top 
(plate VII, 6, VI) and finally resembles a northern [a (plate VUE, 8,1. 


(4) The da, which in its oldest form (plate VII, 19, II), as mostly in the southern 
alphabets, is undistinguishable from da, but from the 6th century develops a little tail 
(piate VII, 19, IV—IX), or, in some inscriptions of the 8th and 9th centuries, a loop at 
the end (plate VII, 48, VII; plate VIII, 22, 1). 


(5) The ¢ha with a ringlet on the base-line (plate VII, 23, I1I, IV, V1) instead of 
the cross-bar (plate VII, 23, I, II), developed out of the ancient dot, or since the end of the 
6th century with the southern notch in the base (plate VII, 23, VII—IX; plate VIII, 26, I). 


(6) ‘The la with the diminutive main portion of the original sign and the enormous tail 
(plate VII, 34, VI, VIID, which latter since the 7th century frequently becomes the sole 
representative of the letter (plate VII, 384, VI, IX), 


(7) The ga, which shows regularly in the Gurjara inscriptions (plate VIII, 39, I) and the 
Nasik Calukya inscription? and occasionally in the Valabhi inscriptions,? a cursive combina- 
tion of the cross-bar with the vertical on the right, which occurs also in the north.* 

1 


(8) The sa, which occasionally shows (plate VII, 38, V) a cursive combination of the 
left limb with the Sert/ occurring also in southern scripts (plate VITI, 41, XI). 


(2) A number of cursive forms in ligatures, thus: — (a) The prefixed Za which often 
foxes the hook on the right and looks like au (compare also plate V,19, V, VII. (l) The 
prefixed na, which especially before ta, thu, dha and na (see the nta of anumaniaryah, plate 
VII, 42, V) consists of a horizontal or bent stroke and looks like ta.’® (c) The subscript ke, 
which occasionally, as in ska (plate VII, 46, VIII), is looped on the left (compare IA. 11, 305). 
(1) The subscript ca of iica (plate VII, 41, VIII, 1X), which since the 6th century remains 
open on the right and bears the hook of ji@ on its base. (¢) The subscript na, which already 
since early times is merely indicated by a loop (see rnna, plate VII, 41, 1V). (7) The subscript 
tha, which, as in other southern alphabets (compare, ¢. g., plate VII, 45, XX), is changed to 
a double curve open on the right (plate VII, 45, IV; plate VIII, 49, I). 


B. — The script of Central India. 


The Central-Indian script is found fully developed in the inscriptions of Samudragupta 
at Eran and of Candragupta II, at Udayagiri,® on the copper-plates of the kings of Sarabha- 
pura,’ of the Vakatakas,? and of Tivara king of Kosala,® and in two early Kadamba inscrip- 
tions! In all these documents, the heads of the letters bear small squares, which are either 
hollow (plate VII, col. XT) or filled in (plate VII, col. X). These squares, to which on account 
of their resemblances to small boxes the script owes the name “ box-headed,”’ are, like the 
wedges, artificial developments of the Serz/s. The solid, filled in, squares probably have been 
invented by writers who [63] used ink, and the hollow ones by persons writing witha stilus, 
who feared to tear their palm-leaves, Both varieties of “box-heads” occur occasionally or 
constantly in other districts and in connection with other alphabets (see, ¢.g., the Valabhi 


1 Transitional forms occur in the Calukya inscriptions. 2 Compare facsimile at IA. 9, 124. 

3 Compare IA. 6, 10, and facsimile at 14, 328. £ Compare facsimile at J.ASB. 64, 1, plate 9, No, 2. 
5 See also my remarks in IA. 3, 110, and below, § 28, B. 

6 F.GI (CII, 3), Nos. 2, 3, pl. 2, A, B. 7 Op. cit., Nos. 40, 41, plates 26, 27. 


8 Op. oit., Nos, 583—33, plates 33, A, to 35; IA. 12, 239; B.ASRWL. 4, pl. 55, No. 4; pl. 57, No.8; EL. 8, 260; 
the earliest of them belong in BHa@VANLAL INDRaJI’s and my opinion to the 5th, according to FieetT to the 7th, 
century, 

°F GI (CII, 3), No. 81, pl. 45; according to Fuzet from the 8th or 9th century; according to KIELHOorN, 
HI. 4, 248, undoubtedly from the 8th, 

10 See FLeet, 1A. 21,93: of the same type is, according to an impression presented to me by L. Ricg, the 
Talguud (Sthanakundiira) Pragasti of Kubja from the reign of Santivarman, Ep. Carn. 7, Sk. 176 ( ET. 8), 


§ 29, A.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 65 


inscription of plate VII, col. V, the archaic Kadamba inscription of plate VII, col. XII, the 
Pallava inscription of plate VII, col. XX), and even in Nos. 21 and 21, A, of the Campa inscrip- 
tions from Further India.! But the very peculiar appearance of the Central-Indian inscriptions 
of this class is due to the more or less rigorous modification of the letters by the contraction of 
their breadth and the conversion of all curves into angular strokes. This is best visible in the 
grants, figured in ETI. 3, 260, and in Frzer’s Gupta Inscriptions (CII. 3), Nos. 40, 41, 56, 81, 
plates 26, 27, 85, 45, among which No. 56 is represented in col. XI. of our plate VII, while 
col. X. offers the less carefully modified characters of F.GI (CII. 3), No. 55, plate 34. Both these 
inscriptions were issued in the same year from the Dharmadhikarana of the Vakitaka king 
Pravarasena IT. 


Traces of the influence of the northern alphabets are visible in this script just as in the 
western variety, and particularly in the letters ¢a, dha, na, and in the Matras of medial e, ai 
and o, which in F.GI (CII. 3), No. 81, plate 45 (not in our plate), shew the peculiar tailed 
northern form of the 7th and 8th centuries, But in the ligatures (see, for instance, nta, 
plate VII, 48, X), we meet repeatedly with the looped ta and with the na without the loop, and 
even an independent looped ta appears exceptionally? in the word snaétanam (No. 55, line 7 ; 
No. 56, line 6). Medial aw has the tripartite western and northern form in F.GI (CII. 3), 
Nos. 2, 3,40, 81, plates 2, A, B, 26,45, but the southern bipartite form (see dau, plate VII, 24, XI) 
in the Vakataka inscriptions. The kha, which has a big hook and small loop, and the oblong 
ca with the vertical on the right, likewise agree with the southern forms. But F.GI (CII. 3), 
No. 2, line 17, offers once, in gulka, the northern ka withovt the curve at the foot. 


The other letters of this script frequently show greater or smaller variations. Our plate 
offers a few in the case of A, ja, tha, ba and la. More have been pointed out by Fuser and 
Krensorn in their editions of the inscriptions in F.GI (CII. 3) and in EI. 3. I may add to 
Fieer’s remarks, that his Nos. 40, 41, and 81 have the angular form of ma of the later 
Kanarese-Telugu alphabet (see below, § 29, B, 6). 


§ 29.— The Kanarese and Telugu alphabet; Plates VII. and VIII. 
A,-- The archaic variety. 


[64] The archaic variety of this script is found: — (a) In the west, in the inscriptions 
of the Kadambas of Vaijayanti or Banavisi (plate VII, cols, XII, XIII), and of the early 
Calukyas of Vatipi or Badimi, e.g. of Kirtivarman I. and Mahgalesa (plate VII, col, XIV), 
Pulakesin II., and Vikramaditya I. (sometimes), (6) In the east, on the Salankayana plates, 
and on those of the first two Calukyas of Veigi, Visnuvardhana I. and Jayasithha I. (plate VII, 
col. XVII). The date of the Salaikiyana plates, which used to be assigned to the 4th century,4 
is uncertain.’ The Kadamba grants probably belong partly to the 5th and partly to the 6th 
centuries; for, Kakusthavarman, who issued the oldest known record, was the contemporary 
of one of the Imperial Guptas, probably of Samudragupta,® and his descendants all ruled before 
the overthrow of the Kadamba kingdom by Kirtivarman I., between A. D. 566-67 and 596-97. 
The archaic Calukya inscriptions fall between A. D. 578 and about 660.7 


During this period, the characters of the western and eastern documents do not differ 
much, The alphabet of the Salaikiyana plates® agrees very closely with that of plate VII, 


1 BeERGAIGNE-BaRTH, Inscriptions Sanskrit du Campa et du Cambodge, 2, 23; the Campa inscriptions show 
the northern ka and ra without curves at the end. 

2 Fuxet and KizLHORN assume that the writers by mistake put na for ta and vice versd. 

8 Compare facsimiles of Salankayana inscriptions at B.ESIP. plate 24; IA. 5, 176; EI. 4,141; of Kadamba 
inscriptions at IA, 6, 23 ff. ; 7, 88 ff. ; J.BBRAS. 12, 300: of Western Calukya inscriptions at IA, 6, 72, 75; 8, 44, 
287; 9,100; 10, 58; 19, 58 ; and of Eastern Calukya inscriptions at B.ESIP. pl. 27. 

« B.ESIP. 16, pl. 1, 5 Fuizext, JA. 20, 94, 6 Academy, 1895, 229. 

7 See Fieet’s dates of the Calukyas, EI. 3, table at p.2; IA. 20, 95 ff, ® B.ESIP. pl. 1. 


66 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIUI, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 29, A. 


col. XIII ; and in the first half of the 7th century the letters of the Calukya inscriptions from 
Vatipi and from Vengi show an almost perfect resemblance.1 But the more considerable 
differences between cols, XII, and XIII, which both are derived from grants of the Kadamba 
Mrgeéavarman issued within a period of only five years, have to be explained by the assumption 
that the letters of col. XIII, with which nearly all the other Kadamba inscriptions agree, 
imitate writing with ink, and those of col. XII. writing with the s/ilus. This explanation is 
suggested by the thinness of the signs of col. XII, and by the much greater thickness of those 
in col, XIII, and by the wedges and solid squares at their heads (compare above, § 28, B), 


The letters of the older documents of this period remain very similar to those of the 
Andhra inscriptions of plate III, the so-called “cave-characters.” In the Silaikiyana grant, 
and in those of the Kadambas Kakusthavarman, Santivarman, Mrgegavarman and Ravivarman, 
we find only few, and by no means constant, traces of the development of the later characteristic 
round forms. Thus, col. XII, no doubt offers rather far advanced signs for A and ra, but at 
the same time a more archaic 4, and the facsimile frequently shows even an angular ra 
with a not very long upward stroke. In the grants of the last Kadamba king Harivarman and 
in those of the Calukyas between A. D. 578 and 660, the A, A, ka and ra, characteristic of the 
next stage of development, occur not rarely, but never constantly. Thus col. XIV, derived from 
the Bidaimi inscription of Kirtivarman I. and Mangalega, has the Aa closed on the left. But 
this form is the only one used there, and it never appears on Mangalega’s copper-plate, nor on 
the Haidarabad plates of his successor Pulakegin IJ.2 Further, this ka, as well as the closed ru 
of 33, col. XV, occur on the Neri plates of Pulakegin II.3 Finally, the Aihole stone inserip- 
tion, of the time of Pulakedin II.,4 has exclusively the older 4a and ra, but occasionally the later 
Aofcol. XV. This vacillation indicates that between A. D. 578 and 660, and perhaps even 
earlier, the round-hand forms of the middle Kanarese alphabet existed, but that they either had 
not completely displaced the older ones, or that they were not yet considered as really suitable 
for inscriptions, though the clerks occasionally introduced them by mistake into the official 
documents (compare above, § 3, page 8). 


Among the other signs, the following may be noted especially : — 


(1) The nea (plate VII, 21, XII—XIV, XVII) which is never looped, but looks as if it 
were cursively developed from a looped form similar to that of col. I, ff. 


(2) The ¢a, which keeps the old form of the western inscriptions without a loop in 22, 
XIII, but shows in cols. XII, XIV, XVII, a cursive development from the looped ¢a of 
cols. XX—XXIII, which likewise is not rare in Kadamba and Calukya inscriptions of this 
period, 

(3) The tailed da (24, XIV, XVII) agreeing exactly with the western form [65] of dua 
(19, IV—IX). 

(4) The na, which sometimes has the looped form (26, XIII), and more frequently that 
without the loop (26, XII, XIV—XVID) ; the latter being, however, apparently derived fron 
the looped one. 


(5) Lhe very exceptionally looped ya (in ya, 45, XIV), which thus is identical with the 
much older northern form, 

(6) The medial vowels: — (a) & in pa (27, XIII), a cursive substitute for the a of ya 
(32, VI), cz (18, IV), &c.; (4) the subscript r of ky (8, XII, XVII; 41, XIV), somewhat 
resembling a northern r (which latter actually occurs once on the seal figured in IA, 6, 24, in 
Mvryesa), but probably independently derived from a not uncommon r in the shape of an 


4 Compare also the facsimile at IA. 6, 72, and B.ESIP. pl, 27. 2 1A, 6,72. 
3 TA. 8, 44. * See the plates at IA. 8, 241 ; EI. 6,6, 


§ 29, B.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 67 


unconnected semicircle before ka; (c) the exceedingly rare | of kl (42, XIV), which, differing 
from the northern subscript / (plate VI, 35, X VII), but agreeing with the northern initial sign 
of the Cambridge MS., consists merely of a cursive la; (d) the Matra of e (in ne, 2], XII), of 
ai (in cai, 18, XII; and vai, 35, XIII), and of o and aw (in thau, 23, XII), which, except in 
connection with le (see le, 34, XII, and lo, 384, XIII, XVID), frequently stands at the foot of 
the consonant ; (e) the au (in pau, 27, XII, XIV), the right-hand portion of which invariably 
and in all southern alphabets consists of a hook, formed by a cursive combination of the second 
Mitra with the a-stroke (compare yau, plate III, 31, VI). 


B.— The middle variety. 


This second variety is found from about A. D. 650 to about A. D. 950 : — (a) In the west. 
in the inscriptions of the Calukyas of Vatipi or Badimi, of their successors the Rastrakiitas of 
Miinyakheta (in cases when they did not use the Nagari, see above, page 51), of the Gaigas 
of Maisir, and of some smaller dynasties; (b) in the east, on the copper-plates of the Calukyas 
of Vengi aud of their vassals, During this period, some marked differences are observable in 
the ductus between the several classes of documents. The copper-plates of the Western Calukyas 
(plate VII, col. XVI)! mostly show carelessly drawn cursive signs sloping towards the right, 
aud their stone inscriptions (plate VII, col. XV) upright, carefully made, letters, which 
especially in the ligatures are abnormally large. With the characters of the latter agree those 
of the inscriptions of the Ristrakiitas (plate VIII, cols II, I11),? with the exception of the 
sign-manual on the Baroda copper-plate of Dhruva II.8 In this royal signature and in the 
inscriptions of the Calukyas of Veigi (plate VIII, cols. IV, V), the letters are broader and 
shorter, and in this respect resemble very closely the Old-Kanarese.4 


In addition to the above-mentioned rounded forms of A, 4, ka and ra, which become 
constant during this period, the following letters deserve special remarks : — 


(1) The very rare R (plate VII, 5, XVI; compare also the earlier letter in the facsimile 
at 1A. 6, 23, end), which seems to be a modification of the northern form of plate VI, 7, I, II. 


(2) The strongly cursive kha (plate VIII, 12, IIJ—V), which is identical with the 
Old-Kanarese letter, and which according to Firer® never occurs before about A, D. 800, but 
actually appears in the cognate Pallava inscriptions (plate VII, 9, XXIII; compare below, 
§ 31, B, 4) already since the 7th century. 


(3) The ca, which from the 9th century begins to open in fica (plate VII, 41, XIX} 
plate VIII, 19, III, IV). 

(4) The da (plate VIII, 27, 11, IV, V) the tail of which begins to turn apwards since the 
9th century. 

(5) The éa, opened above (plate VIII, 32, V), which according to Firer® first occurs 
about A. D. 850. 

(6) The ma (plate VII, 31, XVII; VIII, 34, II—V), the upper part of which is drawn 
towards the right and placed nearly on the same level as the lower one, and which thus becomes 
the precursor of the Old-Kanarese ma. 


(7) The abnormal cursive Ja (plate VII, 34, XVI), which elsewhere appears only as the 
second part of ligatures (as in élo, plate VII, 44, XVIII). 


1 Compare the facsimiles at IA, 6, 86, 88 ; 7,300 ; J. BBRAS. 16, 223 ff. 

2 Compare the facsimiles at IA. 10, 61 ff., 104, 166, 170 ; 11, 126 ; 20, 70 ; Ep. Carn. 3, 80, 87, 92 (for the last ut 
these see also EL. 6, 54). 

5 See the facsimile at IA. 14, 200. 

* Compare the facsimiles at IA. 12, 92; 18, 214, 248; EI. 3, 194. 5 BI. 3, 162 ¢. 6 EI. 3, 135. 


68 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 29, ©. 


(8) The M&tras, which occasionally stand below the consonant (as in dhe, plate VIII, 
28, V). 

(9) The vertical Virima, above final m (plate VII, 41, XVIII ; plate VIII, 46, V) and 
final 2 (plate VIII, 45, V). 


(10) The Dravidian ra (plate VII, 45, XV, XVIII; 46, XVI; plate VIII, 47, II, III) 
(66] and Ja (plate VII, 46, XV, XVIII; plate VIII, 49, If, V), which first appear in the 7th 
centary. The first of them, ra, may possibly represent two round ra, and Ja may be a modifi- 
cation of a /a like that in plate VII, 40, XIV, XVI. The occurrence of these signs proves 
that the Kanarese language had a literature already in the 7th century. 


C.—The Old-Kanarese alphabet. 


The third and last variety of the Kanarese-Telugu alphabet, which Burye.t calls “ the 
transitional ’? and FLerT more appropriately ‘‘Old-Kanarese,” does not differ much from the 
modern Kanarese and Telugu scripts. In the east, it first appears in the Vengi inscriptions of 
the 11th century; in the west, a little earlier, in a Ganga inscription of A. D. 978 and in a not 
much later Calukya inscription.!_ Some of its characteristics, like the opening of the loop of me 
and of the head of va, appear however in thé sign-manual of Dhruva II. on the Baroda plates, 
mentioned above under B, The specimens of this script? in plate VIII, among which cols. VI. 
and VII, date from the 11th century, col. VIII. from the 12th, and col. 1X (according to 
Hvrrzsca, Telugu) from the 14th, show the gradual progress very distinctly. 


One of the most characteristic marks of the Old-Kanarese consists in the angles over all 
Matrkas which do not bear superscribed vowel-signs, These angles, which in col. VI, resemble 
those of the modern Telugu and in cols. VII, VIII, those of the modern Kanarese, probably are 
cursive representatives of wedges, and have been invented because the latter did not suit the writing 
with the stilus. Since the 6th century, they occur more or less frequently in single inscrip- 
tions from other districts, such as Guhasena’s grant of A. D. 559-60 (plate VII, col, IV) and 
Ravikirti’s Aihole Pragasti,3 sometimes together with wedges. But it is only in this alphabet 
that they become a constant distinctive feature. 


The most important among the changes in the several signs are: — 


(1) The opening of the heads of # (plate VIII, 8, VI, VIII), of ca (16, VI~IX), of 
bha (38, VI~IX, which in col. IX. becomes identical with 4¢ by the connection of the two 
base-strokes), and of va (38, VII—IX), as well as of the loop of ma (84, VI, VIII) and of the 
right limb of cha (17, VI—IX ; compare also col. V). 

(2) The cursive looped forms of A, A (1, 2, VII—IX), and of J, I (8, 4, VI-IX; 
compare their precursors in 8, II, and 4, III, V), and of sa (39, VII—IX), the central cross-bar 
of which is connected with the curved end of the right side. 


(3) The conversion of the long-drawn loops of ka (11, VI—IX) and of ra (36, VI—IX) 
into much smaller circles. 


(4) The cursive rounding off of the angles of na (24, VI—IX), na (29, VI—IX), and sa 
(41, VI—IX). 


(5) The development of new loops or ringlets to the right of the top of R (7, 1X), na 
(15, VIII, IX) and ja (18, VI—IX; compare col. V). 


1 BuEe@ess and Fuext, Pali, Sanskyit, and Old-Canarese inscriptions, Nos. 271,214; see also, for the Gahga 
reeord, IA, 6, 102. 

2 Compare also the facsimiles at IA. 9, 74; 14, 56; EI. 3, 26, 88, 194, 228 ; Ep. Carn. 3, 116, 121; B.ASWI. 
No. 10, 100 ; and J.RAS. 1891, 135 (the original’of,jPxinsxP’s, Kistna alphabet, which is archaic and retrograed 
A, ka, ra, 1a), 

5 JA 8, 241; EI. 6,6. 


§ -30.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 69 


(6) The exclusive employment of the medial u turning upwards on the right (see, for 
instance, pu, 30, IX), which in earlier times is restricted to gu, tu, bhu and su, but later appears 
also in sw (plate VIII, 41, II, IfI). 


(7) Finally, the appearance of the Anusvira on the line (see ram, 36, VII1), which cannot 
be a survival from ancient times, but must be an innovation intended to make the lines more 
equal (compare page 59 above, § 26, A, 5).} 


§ 30.—The later Kalinga script; Plates VII. and VIII. 


[67] This script has been found hitherto only on the copper-plates of the Ganga kings 
of Kaliiganagara, the modern Kalingapattanam in Gafijam, which in olden times was the 
residence of the Ceta king Khiravela and his successors (see page 39 f, above). The dates of 
these documents run from the year 87 of the Gangeya era. Though its exact beginning has not 
yet been determined, Freer has shown that the oldest Gaiga grants probably belong to the 
7th century? 


The signs of these documents resemble, up to the Gangeya year 183, partly the letters 
vf the Central-Indian script (above, § 28, B) and partly those of the western variety, which 
exhibits the medial au, of the Ajanta inscriptions (above, § 28, A), and they show only a few 
peculiar forms, A specimen of the Kalinga script of the latter kind has been given in 
plate VIL, col. KIX, from the Cicacole grant of the Gafgeya year 148, in which only the 
Grantha-like 4 (2, XIX), and the ga (10, XIX) and éa (36, XIX) with curves on the left, differ 
greatly from the corresponding Valabhi letters. The alpliabet of the Acyuatapuram plates? of 
the Gaiigeya year 87, which exhibits angular forms with solid box-heads, closely resembles the 
Central-Indian writing ; but its na is identical with that of the modern Nagari. The Cicacole 
platest of the Gangeya year 128 show in general the same type; but they offer the ordinary 
looped na of the north and west, and the looped ¢a of the archaic Grantha (22, XX, ff.). 
Finally, the Cicacole plates’ of the Gaigeya year 183 come close to the script of plate VII, 
col, X; but their na is again that of the late Nagari, and their medial 4 mostly stands above 
the lize, as in various northern and also Grantha documents of the 7th and 8th centuries. 


In the grants of the 3rd and 4th centuries of the Gangeya era, and in a late undated 
inscription, the mixture of the characters is much greater, and the same letter is often 
expressed by greatly differing signs. In plate VIII, col. X, from the Cicacole plates of the 
(ihgeya year 51, that is 251,6 and in col. XI, from the Vizagapatam plates of the year 254, 
and ‘in col. XII, from the Alamanda plates of the year 304, we find a northern A, A (1, 2, 
X--XIT), © (3, SD, U (5, X), ka (44, XI, XV), he (12, XI), aga (15, X), aka (15, XID, 
ju (18, XID), ta (in pia, 19, X), da (22, XIL), ne (24, XI, XID), dha (28, 45, XT), na (48, X), 
and pra (47, XIT). The other letters are of southern origin, and belong partly to the middle 
Kanarese, partly to the middie Grantha, or are peculiar developments. The restricted space 
available.in plate VIII. has made it impossible to enter all the variants for each letter. But 
the three different forms of ja (18, 46, and 47, X) show how very great the variations are. 


Still stronger are the mixture and variations in the Cicacole plates of the Gangeya year 
31,7 and in the undated grant of Vajrahasta from the 11th century (Kivraorn),® neither of 
which is represented in our plate. In the first-named document each letter has, according to 


1 Compare for this paragraph B ES1P. 15 ff. 2 TA. 13, 274; 15, 183, 

3 ET. 3, 128. -¢ TA. 13, 120; compare 15, 131 f. 5 KI. 3, 132, 

6 The words Sata-dvaya probably have been left out by mistake after sa:vatsara. 

7 IA. 14, 10 f. ; HuLTzscH’s undoubtedly correct reading of the date has been adopted by FLEET in his Dynastiex 
of the Kanarese Districts, Bombay Gazetteer, vol. 1, part 2, p. 297, note 8, the printed sheets of which I owe to the 
author’s courtesy, Fuser declares this insoription, as well as those represented in plate VIII, cols. X, XII, to be 
suspicious, — in my opinion, without sufficient reasons. 

® BL 3, 220, 


70 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIM, 1904;. APPENDIX [§ 31, As 


Feet, at least two, but sometimes three or four forms. The majority of the signs belong to 
the southern Nagari. But Old-Kanarese and late Grantha signs likewise occur, In Vajrahasta’s 
grant there are, according to KieLuorn’s calenlation, 320 Nagar? letters and 410 southern ones. 
of different types, and each letter again has at least two and sometimes [68] four or more forms, 
Kie.norn points out that the writer has shown a certain art in the grouping of the variants ; 
and he is no doubt right in hinting that the mixture is due to the vanity of royal scribes, who- 
wished to show that they were acquainted: with a number of alphabets. For the same reason, 
the writer of the Cicacole plates of the Gangeya year 183 has used three different systems of 
numeral notation in expressing the date (see below, § 34). The kingdom of the Gangas 
of Kalinga lay between the districts in which the Nagari and the Kanarese-Telugu seripts 
were used, and it was not far from the territory of the Grantha, Its population was probably 
mixed, and used all these seripts,! as well as,.in earlier times,.those employed in the older 
western and Central-Indian inscriptions. The professional clerks and writers of course had to 
master all the alphabets-. 


§ 31.— The Grantha alphabet; Plates VII. and VIIT. 


A.— The archaic variety. 


For the history of the Sanskrit alphabets in the Tamil distriets during the period after 
A, D, 350, we have only the Sanskrit inscriptions of the Pallavas, Colas and Pandyas from the 
eastern coast, among which only those of the first-named dynasty can lay claim to a higher 
antiquity. Corresponding inscriptions from the western coast are hitherto wanting. For this 
reason, and because only a small number of the eastern documents have been published with 
good facsimiles, it is as yet impossible to give a complete view of the gradual development of 
the letters. 


The most archaic forms of the Sanskrit scripts of the Tamil districts, which usually are 
classed as ‘Grantha,” are found on the copper-plates of the Pallava kings of Palakkada and 
(? or) Daganapura? (plate VII, cols. XX, XXI) from the 5th or the 6th century (?), with which 
the ancient inscriptions, Nos. 1 to 16, of the Dharmarajaratha (plate VII, col. X XIT)? closely 
agree. These inscriptions, together with a few others,‘ exhibit what may be called the archaic 
Grantha, the latest example of which occurs in the Badami inscription, incised, according to 
Fieer’s newest researches,® by the Pallava Narasimha I., during his expedition against the 
Calukya Pulakegin II, (A. D. 609 and about 642) in the second quarter of the 7th century ; 
and it seems to have gone out soon after, as the Kiram plates of Narasimha’s son Paramesvara I. 
show letters of a much more advanced type. It is met with also in the stone inscription from 
Jambu in Java; see TA. 4, 356, 


The characters of the archaic Grantha in general agree with those of the archaic Kanarese~ 
Telugu (see above, § 29, A), but shew a few peculiarities which remain constant in the later 
varieties: thus :— 


(1) The ¢ha, the central dot of which is converted into a loop, attached to the right side 
(plate VII, 28, XXI); compare the tha of col. XX, where the straight stroke of the Kanarese- 
Telugu script appears. 


1 The use of northern characters is proved by the Buguda plates, El. 3, 41; compare also B.ESIP. 53, and 
plate 22 b. 

2 TA, 5, 50,154; compare B.ESIP. 36, note 2. 

8 I owe the facsimi es of this inscription and of those used for pl. WII, col. XXIV, and pl. VILL, col. XITI, te 
Hoywrzscu’s kindness ; see now his SII. 2, part 3. 

& TA. 9, 160, No. 22, 1(2, No. 85; 18, 48; EI. 1, 397. 

S- Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts, Bombay Gazetteer, vol. 1, part 2, p. 328, 


§ 31, B.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 71 


(2) The é@ with the cross-bar converted into a curve or loop and attached to the right 
side (plate VII, 36, XX—XXII, 45, XXID) ; compare also the cursive sa of the western script, 
mentioned above, § 28, A, 7, 


(3) The sa with the cross-bar treated similarly (plate VII, 37, XX); compare the ga of 
col, XXI, which shows the older form. 


The characters of plate VII, cols, XX, XXI, show no closer connection with those of the 
Prikrit inscriptions of the Pallavas, discussed above in § 20,.D. 


B.—The middle variety. 


The earliest inscription of the much more advanced forms of the second variety or the 
middle Grantha, is found on the Kiiram copper-plates- (plate VII, col. XXIV) of the reign of 
Paramesvara I., the adversary of the Western Calukya Vikramaditya I. (A. D. 655—680).2 
[69] Compared with this document, which appears to offer a real clerk’s script, the 
monumental inscription of the Kailasanatha temple (plate VII, col. XXIII), built according 
to Freer? by Narasimha II., the son of Paramesvara I., is retrograde, and shows more archaic 
forms for several paleographically important letters. On the other hand, the Kasakiidi copper- 
plates €plate VIII, col.. XIII), incised in the time of Nandivarman who succeeded Mahendra 
III., the second son of Narasimha II., and warred with the Western Calukya Vikramaditya II. 
(A. D. 733—749), agree more closely with the Kiram plates, and offer, besides some archaic 
forms, also much more advanced ones. 


The most important innovations, either constantly or occasionally observable in this 
second variety of the Grantha, are : — 


(1) The development of a second vertical in A, 4, ku and ra (plate VII, 1, 2, 8, 33, 
XXIII, XXIV; plate VIII, 1, 2, 11, 86, XIII), as well as in medial wu and & (plate VII, 
31, 38, XXIV; plate VIII, 34, 40, XIII), out of the aneient hook; compare the transitional 
forms in the facsimiles at IA. 9, 100, 10z. 


(2) The connection of one of the dots of I with the upper curved line (plate VII, 3, 
XXII, XXIV; plate VIII, 8, XIII, a, 6). 


(8) The opening of the top of # (plate VII, 5, XXIV), which however shows ‘closed up 
forms in col, X XITJ, and in plate VIII, 8, XIII. 


(4) The development of a loop to the left of the foot of kha, and the opening up of the right 
side of the letter (plate VII, 9, XXIII), as in the Kanarese-Telugu script (see above, § 29, B, 2). 


(5) The upward turn of the Serif at the left-hand lines of ga and éa (plate VII, 10, 36, 
XXIV; plate VILI,.13, 39, XIII; not in plate VII, col. XXIII). 


(6) The opening up of the loops of cha (plate VIII, 17, XIID), and perhaps also in the 
indistinct cha of the Kiram plates, i, line 5. 


(7): The transposition of the vertical of ja to ihe right end’ of the top-bar, and the 
conversion of the central bar into a, loop connected with the lowest bar (plate VII, 15, XXIV ; 
plate VIII, 18, XIIT;. not in plate VI, col. XXIII). 


(8) The incipient opening up of the tops of dha and tha (plate VII, 23, 25, XXIII, 
XXIV; plate VII, 26, 28, XIII). 


(9) The opening up of the top of Ja, and the transposition of the original top-line to the 


left of the left-hand vertical (plate VII, 29, XXIV; plate VIII, 32, XIII; not in plate VII, 
col. XXills 


1 Hourascu, SIL. 1, 144 ff. ; Fixer, op. cit. (preceding note), 322 f. : 
2 FLEET, op. oit., 329 £, & FLEET, op. cit., 323 ff, 


72 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXTII, 1904; APPENDIX. (§ 31, Cc. 


(10) The adoption of the later northern dia (see above, § 24, A, 24), or the development 
of an exactly similar sign (plate VII, 30, XXIV; plate VIII, 33, X1]I; not in plate VII, 
col. XXIII), 


{11) The combination of the left-hand vertical of sa with the left end of the old side- 
limb, and of the right end of the side-limb with the base-stroke (plate VII, 38, XXIV>; 
a transitional form in col. XXII, and a different cursive form in plate VIII, 41, XIII). 


(12) The frequent separation of medial 4, e, ai, 0, aw, from the Matrka (constant in plate 
VIII, col, XIII), as well as the use of the @ standing above the line, as in the northern alphabet 
of this period and in the Central-Indian script (compare plate VII, 17, 19, 21, 31—33, XXIII; 
8, 24, XXIV). 


(13) The expression of the Viraéma (as in the Kanarese-Telugu script) by a vertical 
stroke above, or in the Kaégikiidi plate also to the right of, the final consonant (plate VII, 41, 
XXIIT; plate VIII, 47, XIII; and compare the facsimiles), 


(14) The transposition of the Anusvira to the right of the Matrki (plate VII, 38, XXIV) 
below the level of the top-line, as in the Kanarese-Telugu script. 


(15) The occasional development of small angles, open above, at the tops of the verticals, 
for the left part of which a dot usually appears in plate VIII, col, XIII. 


The fully-developed and very constant characteristics of the alphabet of the Kiiram 
plates make it probable that they have not arisen within the period of twenty to 
thirty years, which lies between the issue of the Kiam grant and the incision of the 
much more archaic Badami inscription of Narasimha I. (see above, under A). Very likely the 
Kiram alphabet had a longer history. 


‘C,—The transitional Grantha. 


‘The series of the published datable Pallava inscriptions of the 8th century ends for 
the present with the Kaéakidi plates; and facsimiles of documents of the next following 
centuries [70] are not accessible to me. I am, therefore, unable to exactly fix the time when 
the third or transitional variety of the Grantha, Burnewy’s Cola or middle Grantha, came into 
use, which is found in the inscriptions from the reign of the Bana king Vikramaditya’ about 
A. D. 1150 (plate VITI, col. XIV) and of Sundara-Pandya,? A. D. 1250 (plate VIII, col. XV), as 
well as in other documents.2 It would however appear, both from the Grantha signs occurring 
in the Gaga inscriptions (plate Vill, cols. XI, XID and from Burwnew’s Cola-Grantha 
alphabet of A. D. 1080, that the new developments originated partly towards the end of the 
8th century and partly in the 9th and 10th, about the same time when the Old-Kanarese 
script (above, § 29, C) was formed. 


The most important changes, which the transitional Grantha shows, are as follows : — 


(1) The suppression of the last remaining dot of I (plate VIII, 38, XIV, XV ; compare 8, 
AVI, a). 


(2) The formation of a still more cursive Z (8, XIV) out of the Kiram letter (plate VII, 
6, XXIV). 


(3) The formation of a still more cursive kha (plate VIII, 12, XIV, XV), closely 
resembling the later Kanarese-Telugu sign (plate VIII, 12, III, ff.), out of the letter of 
plate VII, 9, XXIII. 


1 EI, 3, 75, 2 HI. 3, 8. 

8 Con pare facsimiles at IA. 6, 142; 8, 274; 9, 45 (EI. 3, 79 £.); EI, 8, 228; Ep. Carn. 8, 166; SII. 2, pl, 2; the 
jast insoription and the last but two are older than the llth century. 

* B.ESIP., plate 13. 


§ 32, A.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 73 


(4) The development of a single or double curve to the left of gha (plate VIII, 14, XIV, 
XV). 


(5) The opening up of the top of ea, and the conversion of its left side into an acute angle 
(plate VIII, 16, XIV, XV). 


(6) The addition of a curve to the right end of da (plate VILI, 22, XIV, XV). 


(7) The development of an additional loop in na (plate VIII, 24, XIV, XV), in accordance 
with the practice of the Tamil alphabet (see below, § 32, A). 


(8) The complete opening up of the tops of tha and dha (plate VIII, 26, 28, XIV, XV). 
(9) The development of a curve at the left side of pa (plate VIII, 30, XIV, XV). 


(10) The closing up of the top of ma (plate VIII, 34, XIV, XV), found already in the 
Gaiga inscription of about A. D. 775 (plate VIII, 46, XI). 


(11) The suppression of the circle or loop on the right side of ya (plate VIII, 35, XIV, 
XV), whereby the letter obtains a very archaic appearance, 


(12) The opening up of the top of va, and the addition of acurve to its left side (plate VICI, 
38, XVI, XV). 


(13) The complete separation of medial 4, e, at, 9 from the Matrkas, and the formation 
of a separate sign for the second half of au, consisting of two small curves with a vertical on 
the right. 


It is worthy of note that the later alphabet of col. XV. has some more archaic signs than 
the earlier one of col. XIV. The reason no doubt is that the latter imitates the hand of the 
clerks of the royal office, while the former shows the monumental forms, suited for a public 
building. All the Grantha inscriptions imitate characters written with a stélus. 


§ 32,— The Tamil and Vatteluttu alphabets; Plate VIII. 
A.— Tho Tamil. 


The Tamil, as well as its southern and western cursive variety, the Vatteluttu or ‘tround- 
hand,” differs from the Sanskrit alphabet by the absence not only of the ligatures, but also of 
the signs for the aspirates, for the mediae (expressed by the corresponding tenuwes), for the 
sibilants (among which the palatal one is expressed by ca), for the spirant ha, for the Anusvira 
and for the Visarga, as well as by the development of new letters for final », and for ra, la and 
da, which latter three characters do not resemble those for the corresponding sounds in the 
Kanarese-Telugu seript. The great simplicity of the alphabet fully agrees with the theories of 
the Tamil grammarians, and is explained by the pecoliar phonetics of the Tamil language. 
Like all the older Dravidian dialects, the Tamil possesses no aspirates and no spirant. Further, 
it has no ja, and only one sibilant, which, according to CaLDWELL, lies between Sa, sa and ca, and 
which, if doubled, becomes a distinct cca. [71] The use of separate signs for the éenues and 
mediae was unnecessary on account of their mutual convertibility. The Tamil uses in the 
beginning of words only ¢enus, and in the middle only double ¢enues or single mediae. Hence, 
all words and affixes beginning with gutturals, linguals, dentals and labials, have double forms.! 
A knowledge of these simple rules makes mistakes, regarding the real phonetic value of ka, ta, 
ta and pa, impossible. The use of ligatures probably has been discarded becanse the Tamil 
allows even in loan-words no other combinations of consonants but repetitions of the same sound, 
and because it seemed more convenient te use in these cases the Virama.? 

1 CaLDwELu, Comparative Grammur of the Dravidian Languages, 21—27. 
® Differently BuRNELL, ESIP. 44, 47 ff., who considers the Vatteluttu as independent of the Brahmi, but 
likewise of Semitic origin, and declares the Tamil alphabet to be the result of a Brahmanical adaptation of the 


Grantha letters to the phonetical system of the Vatéelatiu. This view hag already been characterised “as hardly 
in, accordance with the facta” by Caupwet, op. cit., 9 


74 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1901; APPENDIX, (§ 32, A. 


The occurrence of signs for the Dravidian liquids, which, though the sounds correspond 
with those of the older Kanarese and Telugu, differ from the characters of the Kanarese-Telugu 
script, indicates that the Tamil alphabet is independent of the latter and has been derived from 
a different source. Huttzscx’s important discovery of the Kiram plates,! with a large section 
in the Tamil script and language of the 7th century, confirms this inference. The Tamil 
alphabet of these plates agrees only in part with their Grantha, and many of its letters offer 
characteristics of the northern alphabets. 


Specific Grantha forms occur in U (plate VIII, 5, XVI ; compare plate VII, 4, XXIV); in 
O (plate VIII, 9, XVI; compare col. XV); in ¢a (plate VIII, 25—28, XVI; compare plate VII, 
22, XXIV); in na (plate VIII, 29, XVI; compare plate VII, 26, XXIV); in ye (plate VIII, 35, 
XVI ; compare plate VII, 32, XXIV) ; in medial w in ku (plate VIII, 14, XVI; compare 44, 
XIII) ; in medial e (in ¢e, plate VITI, 28, XVI; compare khe, plate VII, 9, XXIV); and in the 
vertical Virama, which mostly stands above the vowelless consonant but to the right of nm and ~ 
(compare #, plate VIII, 15, XVI; m, 34; 1, 43; n, 49). The Tamil ai (for instance, nai, 
plate VIII, 29, XVI) appears to be a peculiar derivative from the Grantha az, the two Matris 
having been placed, not one above the other, but one behind the other. 


Unmodified or only slightly modified northern forms appear in 4 and A (plate VIII, 1,2, XVI), 
with the single vertical without a curve at the end (compare plate IV, 1, 2, I ff.), and with the 
Joop on the left, which ig found in recently discovered inscriptions from Swit as well as in the 
Grantha; in 4a (plate VIII, 11—14, XVI; compare plate IV, 7, I ff.); in ca (plate VIII, 
16—18, XVI; compare plate ITI, 11, III); in éa (plate VIII, 20—22, XVI ; compare plate IV, 
17, VII, VII); in pa (plate VIII, 30—33, XVI; compare plate IV, 27, I ff.); in ra 
(plate VIII, 36, XVI; compare plate IV, 33, I ff.); in la (plate VIII, 37, XVI; compare 
plate IV, 34, VII ££.) ; in the medial « of pu, mu, yu, eu (plate VIII, 32, 40, XVI; compare 
plate IV, 27, II), and of ru (plate VIII, 36, XVI; compare plate IV, 33, III); and in the 
medial « of fz and la (plate VIII, 44, 46, XVI; compare pé, plate IV, 27, IV). 


The % (plate VIII, 15, XVI) is more strongly modified, as it has been formed out of the 
angular northern a (plate IV, 11, I ff.) by the addition of a stroke rising upwards on the right ; 
and the ma (plate VIII, 34, XVI) is probably a cursive derivative from the so-called Gupta 
ma (plate IV, 31, I ff.). 


The signs for the Dravidian liquids, too, may be considered as developments of northern 
signs. The upper portion of the /a (plate VIII, 43, 44, XVI) looks like a small cursive northern 
la, to which a long vertical, descending downwards, has been added on the right. The ra 
(plate VITI, 47, 48, XVI) may consist of a small slanting northern ra and a hook added to the 
top. And the Ja (plate VIII, 45, 46, XVI) is perhaps derived from a northern Ja (plate IV, 
40, II), the end of the horizontal line being looped and connected with the little pendent stroke 
below; compare also the looped Ja (read erroneously dha) in the Amarayati inscription, 
J.RAS. 189], plate at p. 142. 


The origin of the remaining signs is doubtful. Some, such as va (plate VIII, 388—40, XVI) 
and medial @ (see ké, plate VIII, 12, XVI), occur both in northern and in southern scripts. 
Others are modifications of letters common to the north and the south. The final x (plate VIII, 
49, XVI) is evidently the result of a slight transformation of both the northern and the southern 
na with two hooks [72] (plate ITI, 20, V, XX ; plate 1V, 21, VII f.; plate VII, 21, IV ff.); and 
from this comes the Tamil na (plate VIII, 24, XVI) by the addition of another curve. The 
parent of the peculiar HZ (plate VIII, 8, XVI) may be either that of plate 1V, 5, X ff., or that 
of plate VII, 5, XXIII. Similarly, the angular medial u in ¢w (plate VIII, 27, XVI) and in ru 
(plate VIII, 48, XVI) is due to a peculiar modification of the curve, rising upwards on the 
right, which is found in connection both with northern and with southern letters (see su, plate IV, 


1 SIH. 1, 147; compare 2, plate 12; the characters of the Vallam Cave inscription, op. cit., 2, plate 10, fully agree, 


§ 32, B] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY., 75 


36, III, XVII, and plate VII, 36, II, IV). Finally, the greatly cursive J (plate VIII, 3, XVI) 
appears to be the result of a peculiar combination of three curves, which replaced the ancient 
dots. But an I of this kind has hitherto not been traced. 


This analysis of the Tamil alphabet of the 7th century makes it probable that it is derived 
from a northern alphabet of the 4th or 5th century, which in the course of time was strongly 
influenced by the Grantha, used in the same districts for writing Sanskrit. 


The next oldest specimen of the Tamil script, which is found in the Kasakidi plate! of 
about A, D. 740 (not represented in plate VIII), shows no essential change except in the 
adoption of the later Tamil ma. 


But the inscriptions of the 10th, 11th and later centuries? (plate VIII, cols. XVII—XX) 
offer a new variety, which is more strongly modified through the influence of the Grantha. 
The ta, pa and va have now the peculiar Grantha forms, Besides, in the 11th century begins 
the development of the little strokes, hanging down on the left of the tops of ka, na, ca, 1a and 
na. In the 15th century (plate VIII, cols. XIX, XX) these pendants are fully formed, and 
da shows a loop on the left. It is worthy of note that in the later Tamil inscriptions the use 
of the Virima (Pulli) first becomes rarer and finally ceases, while in the quite modern writing 
the Virima is again marked by a dot. 


B.— The Vatteluttu, 


Among the Vatteluttu inscriptions, the Sasanas of Bhaskara-Ravivarman in favour of the 
Jews (pl. VII, cols, XXI, XXII) and of the Syrians of Kocin,* as well as the Tirunelli copper- 
plates of the same king,® have been published with facsimiles. Trusting to rather weak argu- 
ments, Burnett ascribes the first-named two documents to the 8th century. But the Grantha 
letters occurring in the Saisana of the Jews belong to the third and latest variety of that 
alphabet, and the Nagazi 8@ or gi (probably for srth) at the end of the document, to which 
Huirzscmw has called attention,? resembles the northern forms of the 10th and Lith centuries 
(compare plate V, 39, 47, VIII; 48, X). 


From a paleographical point of view, the Vatteluttu may be described as a cursive script, 
which bears the same relation to the Tamil as the modern northern alphabets of the clerks and 
merchants to their originals, ¢. g., the Modi of the Marathas to the Balbodh and the Takari of the 
Dogras to the Saradi.® With the exception of the 7, probably borrowed from the Grantha, all 
its letters are made with a single stroke from the left to the right, and are mostly inclined 
towards the left. Several among them, such as the za (plate VIII, 15, XX) with the curve 
and hook on the left, the va with the open top and the hook on the left (plate VITI, 38, XXI, 
XXII; compare cols. XVII—XX) and the round ra (plate VIII, 45, 46, XXI, XXII; compare 
47, XVII—XX), show the characteristics of the second variety of the Tamil of the llth and 
later centuries. Aud with the usage of the later Tamil inscriptions agrees the constant omission 
of the Virima. Some other characters, such as the round ta (plate VIII, 20—23, XXI, XXII; 
compare col. XVI), the ma with the curve on the right (plate VIII, 34, XXI, XXII; compare 
col. XVI), and the ya with the loop on the left (plate VIII, 35, XXI, XXII; compare 
col. XVI), seem to go back to the forms of the earlier Tamil. And three, the rounded UV 
{plate VIII, 5, XXI), the pointed FB (plate VIII, 8, XXI) and the n¢ with a single notch 
{plate VIII, 26, XXI, XXII), possibly show characteristics dating from a still earlier period. 

1 SHI. 2, plates 14, 15. : 

2 Compare the facsimiles, of 10th and 11th centuries, at EI. 3, 284 ; STI. 2, plates 2—4 ; of the 15th century, at 
SII. 2, plate 5; uncertain, at SII. 2, plate 8; LA. 6, 142 ; alphabet, B.ESIP. plates 18, 19, 

3 Compare VENKAYYA, EI. 3, 278 ff. 

4 Madras Journ, Lit. Soo, 13, 2,1; IA. 8, 338; B.ESIP. pl. 32a; EI, 3, 72; alphabet, IA, 1, 229; B.ESIP, 
pl. 17. 


5 TA. 20, 292, € TA. 1, 229; B.ESIP, 49; disputed by Hunrzscu, 1A, 20, 289, 
7 KI, 3, 67. 8 Compare above, § 25, note 8. 


76 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 33. 


Perhaps it may be assumed that the “ round-hand ” arose already before the 7th century, but 
was modified in the course of time by the further development of the Tamil and the Grantha 
scripts. Owing to the small [78] number of the accessible inscriptions, this conjecture is 
however by no means certain. 


The transformation of the Vatteluttu ka (plate VIII, 11—14, XXI, XXII), which seems to 
be derived from a looped form, is analogous to that of the figure 4 in the decimal system of 
numeral notation (compare plate 1X, B, 4, V—VII, and IX). The curious éa (plate VIIL, 25— 
28, XXI, XXII) has been developed by the change of the loop of the Tamil letter (compare cols. 
XVII, XVIII) into a notch and the prolongation of the tail up to the head. The still more 
extraordinary na (plate VIII, 29, X XI) may be explained as a cursive derivative of the later 
Tamil na with the stroke hanging down from the top. 


Vi. NUMERAL NOTATION. 
§ 38. — The numerals of the Kharosthi; Plate I.! 


In the Kharosthi inscriptions of the Sakas, of-Gondopherres, and of the Kuganas, from the 
Ist century B. C. and the 1st and 2nd centuries A. D.,as well as in other probably later 
documents, we find a system of numeral notation (plate I, col. KIV)? which Dowson first 
explained with the help of the Taxila copper-plate.$ 


Its fundamental signs are: — (a) One, two and three vertical strokes for 1,2, 3. (6) Au 
inclined cross for 4. (c) A sign, stmilar to the Kharosthi A, for 10. (d) A double curve, 
looking like a cursive combination of two 10 (Baytey), for 20. (¢) A sign, resembling 
a Brahmi tu or tra, for 100, to the right of which stands a vertieal stroke, whereby the whole 
becomes equivalent to IC. 


The numbers lying between these elements are expressed by groups, in which the 
additional ones invariably are placed on the left. Thus, for 5 we have 4 (+) 1; for 6, 
4 (+) 2; for 8, 4 (+) 4; for 50, 20 (+) 20 (+) 10; for 60, 20 (+) 20 (+) 20; for 70, 
20(+) 20 (+) 20(+)10. Groups formed of the signs for 10 (+)1 to 10 (+) 9, and 20 (+) 1 
to 20 (+) 9, and so forth, are used to express the numerals 11 to 19, and 21 to 29, &e. 


The higher numerals beyond 100 are expressed according to the same principle ; thus, 103 
is 100 (+) 3 or IC III. The sign for 200 consists of 100, preceded on the right by two 
vertical strokes. And the highest known number is JIC XX XX XX X IV, which means 
2744 


The few numeral signs in the ASoka edicts of Shahbazgarhi and Mansehra (plate I, 
col, XIIL) show that in the 3rd century B. C. the Kharosthi system of numeral notation differed 
from the later one at least in one important point. Both in Shahbazgarhi, where the signs for 
1, 2, 4,5 occur, and in Mansehra, which offers 1, 2, 5, the inclined cross for 4 is absent, and 
4 is expressed by four parallel vertical strokes, and 5 by five. It is as yet not ascertainable, 
how the other signs looked in the 3rd century B.C, 


Burnet and others® have stated long ago that the Kharogjhi numerals are of Semitic 
origin. And it may now be added that probably they have been borrowed from the Aramaeans. 


3 Compare B. C. BaxLey, the Genealogy of the Modern Numerals, J.RAS, N.S., 14, 335 ff. ; 15, 1 ff, 

2 The signs of ool. KIV, have been drawn according to S.NEI, 3, pl. 1 (JA, 1890, I, pl. 15) ; J.ASB. 58, pl. 10; 
Fieet’s photograph of the Taxila copper-plate (EI. 4, 56); and a gelatine copy of the Wardak vase, kindly 
presented by S. von OLDENBURG. 

8 J.RAS. 20, 228. 

# Thus CUNNINGHAM. SENART, op. oit., 17, reads 84, doubting the existence of 200 (which however is plain 
in the autotype of J.ASB. 58, pl. 10), while Barra reads 284. There is at least one unpublished inscription with 
200, and, according to a communication from Biocg, also one with 300. 

5 Drawn according to Burgsss’ impression of Shahbazgarhi edicts I—IIL, XIII. 

6 B.ESIP. 64; J.ASB. 32, 150. 


§ 34, AJ INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 37 


and that, with the exception of the cross-shaped 4, they have been introduced together with 
the Aramaic letters. According to [74] Kurrne’s table of the ancient Aramaic namerals! 3 to 
10 are marked, as in the Asoka edicts, by vertical strokes, which however, contrary to the 
Indian practice, are divided into groups of three. The Kharogthi 10 comes close to that of the 
Teima inscription, “], and the 20 resembles the sign of the Satrap coins, 3, which is also found 
in the papyrus Blacas? (5th century B. C.), and somewhat modified in the papyrus Vaticanus. 
Both the Aramaeans and the Phoenicians ased the signs for 10 and 20 in the same manner as 
the Hindus, in order to express 30, 40, and se forth. 


For the Kharogthi 100, Eorine’s table offers no corresponding Aramaic sign, and that 
given in his edition of the Saqqirah inscription* is, as he informs me, not certain. Hence, 
there remain only the Phoenician symbols jo, p, which are suitable for comparison. But the 
close relationship of Phoenician and Aramaic writing makes it not improbable that the latter, 
too, possessed in earlier times a 100, standing upright. The Kharosthi practice of prefixing 
the signa for 1 and 2 to the 100 is found in all the Semitic systems of numeral notation. 


The inclined cross, used to express the 4 in the later Kharosthi inscriptions, is found only 
is Nabataean inscriptions incised after the beginning of our era, and is used there only rarely 
for the expression of the higher units. The late oceurrence of the sign both in Indian and in 
Semitic inscriptions makes it probable that both the Hindus and the Semites independently 
invented this cursive combination of the original foar strokes. 


§ 34. — The numerals of the Brahmi; Plate IX. 
A.— The ancient letter-numerals. * 


In the Brahmi inscriptions and coin-legends we find a peculiar system of numeral notation, 
the explanation of which is chiefly due to J. Srevenson, BE. Taomas, A. Cunnincuam, Baad Dasi 
and BuaGvAntaAt Invaasi.® Up to the year A, D. 594-95 it is used exclusively, and later 
together with the decimal system. It appears also exclusively in the Bower MS. and in the 
other MSS. from Kashgar,’ as well as together with the decimal system, — chiefly in the 
pagination, — in the old MSS. of the Jainas of Western India and of the Bauddhas of Nepal 
as late as the 16th century.? And the Malayalam MSS. have preserved it to the present 
day.® 

In this system, 1 to 3 are expressed by horizontal strokes or cursive combinations of sach ;. 
4 to 9,10 to 90, 100, and 1000, each by a separate sign (usually a Matrka or a ligature) ; the 
intermediate and the higher numbers by groups or ligatures of the fundamental signs. In 


} Nabataische Insuhriften, 96.f. 2 Corp. Inser, Sem, P. Aram, 145A (pointed out by Evrinc), 

5 Palaeographical Society, Or. Ser., plate 63. 

« Compare BHAGVANLAL, IA. 6, 42 f. ; B-ES(P. 59 ff., and pl. 23; E. C, Bavuny, On the Genealogy of the 
modern Numerals, J.RAS, N.S., 14, 335 ff, ; 15, 1 ff. 

56 J.BBRAS, 6, 35, and pl. 18; P.IA. 2, $0 ff.; C.ASR, 1, XLII, and J.ASB. 83, 88; J.BBRAS, 8, 225 ff.; the 
results of the last article belong chiefly to BEAGVANLAL InpDBAJI, though his name is not mentioned. 

6 Compare below, § 34, B. The latest epigraphic date in letter-numerals is probably the Nevar year 259 in 
Brnpawuy’s Journey in Nepal, 81, No. 6 ; compare also FigEet, GI (CIT. 3), 209, note 1. 

T See Hozgnuz, ‘‘ The Bower MS, ;'? WZKM. 7, 260 ff. The Bower MS. oocasionally has the decimal 8. 

® Compare BHAGVANLAL’S table, 1A. 6, 42 f.; K1zLH0RN, Report on the Search for Sanskrit MSS,, 1880.81, 
VIII. ff. ; Perzxson, First Report, 57 f., and Third Report, App. I, passim; Lzomann, Silanka’s Commentary on 
the Visesivaéyaka (especially table 35) ; Cowz i and Kacrxine, Cat. Sanskrit Buddhist MSS., 52 (J, RAS, 1875); 
BenDAut, Cat, Cambridge Sanskrit Buddhist MSS., LH ff., and table of numerals, In BenpaLx’s Nos, 1049 and 
1161, the letter-numerals are also used for dates. The latest date in letter-numerals from Nepal (BENDALL’Ss table of 
numerals) is A. D, 1583. Letter-numerals are usually only found in Jaina palm-leaf MSS. up to about A. D, 1450; 
but the Berlin paper MS. No. 1709 (Wesze, Verzeichniss d, Skt. und Peak. Hdschrft., 2, 1, 268; compare D.WA, 
37, 250) shows some traces of them. 

® BenpDaLy, J.RAS. 1896, 789 ff. 


78 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 34, A: 


order to express figures consisting of ters and units, or of hundreds, tens and units, and so 
forth, the symbols for the smaller numbers are placed either unconnected to the right of, or 
vertically below, the higher ones, The first principle is followed in all inscriptions and on 
most coins, the second on a few coins! and in the pagination of all manuscripts. In order to 
express 200 and 2U00, one short stroke is added to the right of 100 and 1000. Similarly, 300 
and 8000 are formed by the addition of two strokes to the same elements. [75] Ligatures of 
100 and 1000 with the signs for 4 to 9 and 4 to 70, stood for 400 to 900 and 4000 to 70000 
(the highest known figure), and the smaller figures are connected with the right side of the 
larger ones. 


The Jaina MSS. offer, however, an exception in the case of 400. In the pagination of their 
MSS., both the Jainas and the Bauddhas use mostly the decimal figures for 1 to 3 (plateIX A, 
cols, XIX—XXVI), more rarely the Aksaras E (eka), dvi, tr’, or sva (1), sti (2), srt (3),? 
the three syllables of the well-known Mangala, with which written documents frequently begin. 
Occasionally the same documents combine the naught and other figures of the decimal system’ 
with the ancient numeral symbols. Similar mixtures occur also in some late inscriptions. 
Thus, the year 183 of Devendravarman’s Cicacole plates is given first in words and next 
expressed by the symbol for 100, the decimal 8, and the syllable lo, i.e. loka=8 (see below, 
§ 35, A), while the day of the month, 20, is given only in decimal figures.‘ 


In the MSS., the signs of this system are always distinct letters or syllables of that 
alphabet in which the manuscript is written, They are however not always the same. Very 
frequently they are slightly differentiated, probably in order to distinguish the signs with 
numeral values from those with letter values. In other cases there are very considerable 
variants, which appear to have been caused by misreadings of older signs or dialectic differences 
in pronunciation, The fact that these symbols really are letters is also acknowledged by the 
name aksarapalli, which the Jainas occasionally give to this system, in order to distinguish it 
from the decimal notaticn, the aikapallt5 A remark of the Jaina commentator Malayagiri® 
(12th century), who calls the sign for 4 the rkasabda, ‘the word ika,” indicates that he really 
pronounced, not catuh, but aka. 


The phonetical values of the symbols in plate IX, A, cols. XIX—XXVI,’ and of some 
others, given by Benpatt (B.), BuaGvantAt Inprasi (Bh.), Kizrnory (K.), Levmann (L.), and 
Peterson (P., see note 8 on page 77 above), are :— 

4 = aka (XIX; compare L., p. 1); with intentional differentiation, rika (L., p. 1.) and 
rnki (XXV); with va for ra and additions, nka (XXVI; B., Bh.), rzka (XXIV; compare E.), 
or pka (KX, XXI), or tka (XXII; B.). 

5dr (XIX, XXI, XXV, XXXVI; B., Bh, K.); with intentional differentiation, 
rity (Bh., K); with a mistaken interpretation of the top-stroke as 6, ra (XXIV); with 


1 Compare J.RAS, 1889, 128, 

2 7A. 5,44; KrizLHoRN, Report for 1880-81, X ; Peterson, First Report, 57. 

5 KigLaornN, loo, cit.; BENDA, Catalogne, LIL. 

€ Compure facsimile in EI 3, 133, and see the dditions and Corrections of that volume; the signs have been 
giyen in pl. 1X, col, XV, under 2, 3, 84, 100a, For other cases of mixtures, see Fier, GI(CII. 3), 292, and JA, 14, 
351, where the date is, however, 800 4 9 = H9, 


6 Oral information. 6 TA. 6, 47. 

7 Preparation of Flute IX, A, cols. KIX—XXV1: — 

Col, XIX; from facsimiles in HozRnue’s “ The Col. XXIV; drawn according to the tables of 
Bower MS.” BuaevanuaL, KIELHoRN, and LEUMANN. 


7 . Col, XXV; drawn from the same sources ; but §, 9, 
Cols, XX—XXIIL, and XXVI; cuttings from } 199 are cuttings from ZACHARIAE'S photograph of the 
Benpauy’s Table of Numerals, Nos, 1049, 17(2, 856, | Saha. ankacarita of the Royul Asiatic Society. 
1643, 1683. Col. XXVI; see above, under cola. XX—XXIII. 


§ 34, A.J INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. "9 


a misinterpretation of the curved ta (compare the sign of B.’s No. 1464), also hr (compare the 
sign of B.’s No. 1645 ff.) or hoa (XXIIT). 


6 = phra (XIX, XXI, XXVI;! B., Bh.) or phu (K.): and with intentional differentiation, 
rphu or rphru (XXIV; K.); with a misinterpretation of an old pha, also ghra (XXII); and 
with dialectic softening of the tenis, bhra (XXIII; compare B., p. LIV). 


7=gra (XIX, XXI, XXVI; Bh.) or gra (XXV; B., Bh. K); with intentional 
differentiation and misinterpretation of the ra-stroke, rqg@ (KX XLV; P.); with misinterpretation 
of ga, bhra (XX ; compare B., p. LIV) or #a (XXIII; compare B., LEV). 


8=hra (XIX, XXI, XXIII, XXVI; B., Bh.; partly with irregular addition of the 
ra-stroke to the hook of 4a) or Ara (XXV; B., Bh., K.); and with intentional differentiation, 
rhra (K.) or rhra (XXIV; K.). 

9= 0 (XIX, XXI, XXIII, XXIV, XXVI; B., Bh) or Os (XXV; K.). 


10 = ny (XIX), formed ont of the ancient #/%@ (cols. IV—VI) through the opening of the 
circle of tha; or dé (XX, XXIII; B., Bh.), the Nepalese representative of older la (cols. X, XT; 
compare TA 6, 47), which likewise is a derivative from ¢/%3 or, especially in Nigari MSS., | 
(XXI, XXV, XXVI; Bh, K.), through a misinterpretation of Ja; and with intentional 
differ: ntiation, -] (XXIV; K,). 

2) =tht? ov tha (XIX—XXI, XXTIIT, XXIV, XXVI; B., Bh., K.); or with intentional 
differentiation, réha and riha (XXV; W.), 

3)=laorla (XIX—XAXI, XXIII, XXIV, XXVI; B., Bh., K., P.); or with intentional 
[76] differentiation, siz and sla (XXV; IC). 

4) = pla and pta (XX, XXI, XXIV, XXIV, XXVI; B., Bh, K.); or with intentional 
differentiation, r fa and rp (XXV; 1K.) 

4) = Anundsika (? BuacvAnbAt), but corresponding only in col. XXIV. to an actually 
traceable form of this nasal (IA. 6, 47); occasionally turned round (XX; B.: XXVIL; K.). 


61 = «4, frequent in Nepalese MSS. (XX, XXI, XXIUI,), or thu, regular in Nagari MSS. 
(XXV, XXVI; Bh, KE); and with intentional differentiation, rh} (XXIV; K.). 

70) = e#, frequent in Nepalese MSS. (XX, XXI, XXIIL; B., Bh.) or tha, regular in Nagart 
MSS. (XXV, XXXVI); and with intentional differentiation, r/Aa (XXIV; K.), 

8) = Upadhmaniya with one central bar (XXITI, XXVI; B., Bh.: compare plate IV, 46, 
LIT), or tater mo lifiel forms of that sign (XXL, XXIV; Bh., K.), which appear also in MSS. 
(K.) aad in inscriptions (plate IV, 46, XXIII). 

90 = Upadhminiya with two cross-shaped bars (X XI, XXII, XXVI; compare plate VI, 
46, V, VI), and cursive forms of that sign (XXIV), or perhaps Jihvamiliya (XXV; Bh.) 
derive 1 from the ma-like sign of plate VIT, 4“, LII, XIIT. 

100 = sz in Nagari MSS, (XXIV, XXV; Bh., K.); or A in Nepalese MSS., owing to 
a misinterpretation of se (XX, XXIIT, B., bh.); or lu in Nepalese and Bengali MSS., the resalt 
of another misinterpretation (ANI XXVI; B., Bh.), 

200 = sz in Nigari MSS. (XXIV, XXV; Bh., K.), or Zin Nepalese MSS, (XX, XXIII; 
B., Bh.), or lé@ in Nepalese and Bengali MSS, (XXVI; Bh., B.). 

300 = si-a@ in Nagari MSS. (XXIV, XXV; Bh.: read st@ by K.), or A-@ in Nepalese 
MSS. (XX), 

400 = su-o (XXV; read s/o by K.) in Nigari MSS. 

2 For this pha, compare plate VI, 33, V. 


2 Common also in the Bower MS. Prverson’s ghe is due tu a misreading of th: « litha, 
® Prrerson’s rghu ia a misreading. 


80 


INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. f§ 34, A. 


In the inscriptions, the phonetical values of the signs often differ from those in the MSS. 
and vary very considerably, and almost every one of the vertical and horizontal columns 
(plate IX, A, I—XVIII)'! shows at least some, occasionally a great many, cursive or 
intentionally modified forms, which possess hardly any resemblance to letters :— 

4=ka (1), At (ILL, in 400, 4000; IV, A; V,A; VI, B), bei (V, B; UX, A), pha (UIT, A; 
VI, A; VIL, A; 1X, B), aka (X, A), tka (facsimile LA. 5, 154), yka. 

5 = tra, mostly with irregular addition of the ra-stroke to the vertical of fa (V, A; 
VII, A,B; IX, B; X, A; XV, A), va (VIL, A), tu (LX, A), nv (LV, B), na, nz CXL, A, B), 
ty (XIII, A), Ar (XIU, B; XIV, A; XVIT, A), Ara (XVI, A), together with two cursive 
signs without phonetic value in V, A, B. 

6 = ja, sa? (E, IL; compive plate IL, 15, IIT; 39, VID, pra (IIL, in 6000; IV, V), para 
(LX, XI), pha (XILD, pha (XIV), together with four cursive signs (VI—VITI, XV), among 
which the first is probably derived from ja, the second from sa, and the other two from phra. 


7 = gra or gu (III—VI, [X—XI, XIII, XV), ga (VIE) with a cursive sign (XII) derived 
from w gra like that in XIII. 

8 = hra with irregular addition of the ra-stroke to the end of 42 (IV, A,B; VT, A), 2a 
(VI, B), 4a (VIL, A; X), Ara (XI, XVIT, XVILD) or in eastern inscriptions pu (VIII, B; XV, 
A; XVI) probably a cursive derivative from fra, together with five cursive signs without 
phonetic value (V, A; VIIL,A; IX, A,B; XV, B), among which the second and the fifth are 
derived from pu, the first from Ara, the third from Ara, and the fourth from ha, 


9=0; really occurring letter-forms in col. V (compare plate IV, 6, IX), in col, VI 
(compare AU, plate VII, 7, X), in col. IX (compare plate VI, 13,1), in cols. XI, XII (compare 
plate V, 47, IX), in col. XIV (compare plate V,9, XV), in col. XVII (compare plate VI, 13, 
V ff.), different from the most ancient form (III, IV) in cols, VII. and XIII, cursive in 
cols. X, and XVI, 


10 = thi} (IIT, in 10000; IV, A, B; V, A; VI, A), hence o cursive sign, derived by 
the opening of the circle of tha (V,B; VI, B; VITA; VIII,1X), which later is converted into 
a (X, XI, A, B), or into rye (XVI, A), or, as in the MSS., into / (XIII, A, B; XVII, A), or 
into kha and ce (XV, A, B). 

20 = tha (III, in 20000; XV), or, as in the MSS., tha, tha, of the type of the period. 


80 = la, as in the MSS. ; occasionally with small modification. 


1 Preparation of Pilate IX, A, cols. I~XVIII: — 

Col. 1; the 4, cutting from Buraxss’ facsimile of 
the Kalsi edict XIII, EI, 2, 435; the 6, 50, 200, drawn 
according to faccimiles of the Sahasram and Riupnath 
edicts, JA. 6, 155 ff 

Col. 11; cuttings from facsimile of the Siddapura 
edict, EL, 3, 188. 

Col. III; cuttings from facaimiles of Nanaghat 
insoriptions, B.ASRWI. 5, pl. 51. 

Col, IV ; cuttings from facsimiles of Nasik inscrip- 
tions, BASRWL 4, pl. 52, Nos. 5, 9, 18, 19; pl. 53, 
Nos, 12—14;: the 70 drawn according to the Girnar 
Pragasti, B ASRWT. 2, pl. 14. 

Col. V ; drawn aecording to facsimiles of Ksatrapa 
coins, J.RAS, 1590, plate at 639. 

Col VI, VI; cuttings from facsimiles at EI. 1, 
381. ; 2, 201 ff. 

Col. VIII; cuttings from facsimiles at B,ASRSI. 1, 
pl. 62, and ET, 1, 2 ff. 


Cols. IX, X ; cuttings from facsimilesat F.GI (CII. 3), 
Nos, 2, 8, 5, 7, 9, 11, 19, 23, 23, 59, 63, 70, 71. 

Col. XI;. enttings from facsimiles at F.GI(CII.3), 
Nos. 38, 39; IA. 6, 9 ff , and other Valabhi inscriptions, 

Col, XII ; drawn according to facsimile at J.BBRAS. 
16, 108. 

Cols. X{II, XIV ; drawn aacordiug to facsimiles at 
IA. 9, 194 ff. 


Col. XV; drawn according to facsimiles at IA. 18, 
120 ff ; EL. 3, 127 ff, 

Col. XVI; cutting from facsimiles at ¥.GI(CI1.8), 
Nos, 40, 41, 55, 53, 81. 

Col. XVII; cutting from facsimiles at IA, 15, 112, 
141, 

Col. XVIIL; drawn according to facsimile at J.ASB, 
40, pl. 2. 

Cuttings reduced by one-third. 


2 Probably to be read thus ; not as a modification of phra or phu, 
5 Thus BayLey, doubtfully ; for the u of the sign in IV, B, compare nw, plate III, 25, 6, 


§ 34, A. INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 81 


—_—- 


40 = pta,as in the MSS., for which occasionally a cursive cross (V, A) or asa through 
a transposition of the ta (V, B; XI, B; XV). 

50 = [77] Anuniasika (? Bhagvinlal), as in the MSS., facing either the right or the left, 
occasionally with small modification. 


60 = pu (TX), together with four different cursive signs without phonetic value. 


70 = pa (IV—VI; IX; XI, A), or pra (XII), together with a cursive cross (VII) and 
another cursive sign (XI, B), both possibly derived from pa. 


80 =Upadhminiya with a diagonal bar, and cursive forms of the Upadhmaniya exactly 
as in the MSS. 


90 = Upadhminiya with the central cross, as in the MSS. 


100 = either su (I, in 200; IIL; IX, A,B; X; XIII, in 300; XIII, in 400; XIV, in 400), 
for which, through a misreading, appears A in the Nepal inscriptions of the 7th and 8th 
centuries (XIII. A, B; XIV, in 3 '0), and Iw in eastern inscriptions! of the 6th and Jater centuries 
(X, in 200; XVIII, in 200), or &« (probably owing to the dialectic permutation of sa and sa) 
in the western? and Kalinga inscriptions (IV; V; XI; XII, in 400; XV, A, B), for which, 
through a misreading, O (XVII, A, B) appears in late northern inscriptions, 


200 and 300 are formed by the addition of respectively one and two horizontal bars to the 
right of the aksera for 100; but in the Ripnath sign (I) by the prolongation of the vertical of 
sa. A distinct @, as in the MSS., appears only in the 200 of col. XVIIL. 


400 = suki (TIL), or su-pha (X; XIILT; XIV), but gu-pha (XI). 500 = gu-tra (IV). 
600 = gu phra (XII). 700 = su-gra (IIT), 


1,000 = vo (IIL), or cu (probable in IV, distinct in XV, in 8,000), or du (IV, in 2,000; 
LV, in 70,009). 2,000 and 3,000 = dw with one or two horizontal strokes (IV). 4,0u0 = ro-ki 
(ULL), or dhu-ki LV), 6,000 = ro-; Ara (III). 8,000 = dhu-hra (IV), or cu-pu (XVI). 


10,000 = ro-thé (III). 20,000 = ro-tha (1II). 70,000 = ddu with the cursive sign for 70. 


The above details show: — (1) That the inscriptions of all periods, even the Asoka edicts 
in the case of 100, differ from the MSS. by offering, side by side with distinct letters, numerous 
cursive or intentionally modified forms, and that, in the case of 50 and 60, just the older 
inscriptions show no real Akgaras, 


(2) That, excepting 7, 9, 30, 40, 80, 90, the phonetical value of the letters varies already 
since the earliest times, and that in many cases, as in those of 6, 10, 60,70, 100, 1000, the 
variations are very considerable. 


(3) That occasionally, as in the case of 10, 60, 70, the distinct letters, used in the later 
inscriptions and the MSS., are derived in various ways from cursive signs withont a phonetical 
value. 


These facts, as well as the incompleteness of our knowledge of the most ancient forms, 
inake an explanation of the origin of the system for the present very difficult. BHaGvaNLAL 
TNDRAJI, who first attempted the solution of the problem, conjectured that fhe numeral symbols 
of the Biahmi are of Indian origin, and due to a peculiar use of the Matrkas and certain 
ligatures for numeral notation. But he declared himself unable to find the key of the system. 


1 Earliest instance in the inscription of Mahanaman, F.GI (CII. 8), No 71; 209 in col. X, 

2 Compare also the date of the Gujarat Calukya inscription, Seventh Oriental Congress, Aryan Section, 211 ff. ; 
and the facsimile at J.BBRA, 16,1 ff. ; and th? Valabhi form at Ef. 3,320, 1. 14, where a §1 of the period. mutilated 
on the left, is used ; and the date of the Kota inscription, LA. 14, 351, with a distinot $a of the th century. The 
form su occurs in a western inscription, lately found at Udepur by G, H. Osuna, in the numeral sa-u or st-a, = 300. 


82 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 34, B. 


In 1877, I agreed with him, and Kern! likewise concurred, but explained the 4 and 5 as 
combinations of four and five strokes, arranged in the form of letters, But BurNneLu differed 
entirely. He denied that the older ‘‘cave-numerals,” with the exception of rare cases, resemble 
letters, and dwelt strongly on the impossibility of finding a principle, according to which the 
Akgaras of the MSS. have been converted into numerals. He further pointed out the general 
agreement of the principles of the Indian system with those of the Demotic notation of the 
Egyptians. From this fact, as wellas from the resemblance [78] of the Demotie signs for 
1 to 9 to the corresponding Indian symbols, he inferred that the “ cave-numerals” have been 
borrowed from Egypt, and after further modifications have been converted into Akgaras. 
Finally, E. C. Baytuy tried to show in his lengthy essay, quoted above, that, thongh tlie 
principles of the Indian system have been derived from the hieroglyphic notation of the 
Egyptians, the majority of the Indian symbols have been borrowed from Phoenician, Bactrian, 
and Akkadian figures or letters, while for a few a foreign origin is not demonstrable. 

Bayuey’s explanation offers great difficulties, inter alia by the assumption that the Hindus 
borrowed from four or five different, partly very ancient and partly more modern, sources. 
But the comparative table of the Egyptian and Indian signs given in his paper, and his remarks 
about the agreement of their methods in marking the hundreds, induce me to give up 
BuaGvANLAL’s hypothesis, and to adopt, with certain modifications, the view of BurnELL, with 
whom also Barru concurs.2 It seems to me probable that the Brahma numeral symbols are 
derived from the Egyptian Hieratic figures, and that the Hindus effected their transformation 
into Akgaras, because they were already accustomed to express numerals by words (compare 
nelow, § 35, A). 

This derivation, the details of which, however, still present difficulties and cannot be called 
certain, has been given in Appendix IJ. to the 2nd edition of my Indian Studies No. III. 
But two other important points may be considered as certain : -— (1) That the varying forms 
in the Asoka edicts show these numerals to have had a longer history in the 8rd century B. C.; 
and (2) that the signs have been developed by Brahmanical schoolmen, since they include two 
forms of the Upadhminiya, which without doubt has been invented by the teachers of the 
Sikgsa. 

B. — The decimal notation. 

For the decimal notation, now occasionally called ankapalli, the Hindus used originally the 
ankas or the units of the ancient system, together with the cipher or naught,? which originally 
consisted of the sunyalindu, the dot (marking a blank, see below, § 35, E), called by abbreviated 
names gimya and lindu (see BW.). Very likely this system is an invention of the Hindu 
mathematicians and astronomers, made with the help of the Abacus (BugneLL, Baruey). If 
HoERNLE’s very probable estimate of the antiquity of the arithmetical treatise, contained in the 
Bakhshali MS., is correct,4 its invention dates from the beginning of our era or even earlier. 
For, in that work the decimal notation is used throughout. At all events, it was known to 
Varahamihira (6th century A. D.), who employs the word azka, “the decimal figures,” in order 
to express the numeral 9 (Parcasiddhantika, 18, 33; compare below, § 35, A). Its most 
important element, the cipher or naught, is mentioned in Subandhu’s Vasavadatia, which Bana 
(about A. D. 620) praises as a famous book. Subandhu compares the stars with “ciphers 
(sinyabindavah) which the Creator, while calculating (the value of) the universe, on account of 
the absolute worthlessness of the Samsara marked with his chalk, the crescent of the moon, all 
over the firmament which the darkness made similar to a skin blackened with ink.” The 
cipher, known to Subandhu, of course consisted of a dot, like that of the Bakshali MS. 
(plate IX, B, col. 1X.). 

“"TTA613 2 B.ESIP, 65, note 1. 


» Compare HomRNLzE’s explanation, Seventh Oriental Congress, Aryan Section, 182; IA. 17, 35. 
# TA, 17, 36, 5 Vasavadatta (ed. F, BH, Hart), p. 182, 


§ 85, A.J INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 83 


The earliest epigraphic instance of the use of the decimal notation occurs in the Gurjara 
inscription of the Cedi year 346, or A. D. 595.1 where the signs (plate 1X, B, col. I) are 
identical with the numeral symbols of the country and of the period (compare the Valabhbi 
column of plate IX, A).2 The same remark applies to the 2 in the date of the month of the 
Cicacole plate mentioned on page 78 above, in which document we find also the later circular 
cipher and [79] a decimal 8 in the shape of a cursive sign derived from pu. Another inscription 
of the 8th century, the Sdmingal plates of Sakasamvat 675, or A. D. 754, offers only strongly 
modified cursive signs (plate 1X, B, col. IL.). 


In the specimens? (plate 1X, B, cols. II~VIII, XIII) from inscriptions of the 9th and 
later centuries, when the use of the decimal figures is the rule, we have likewise only cursive 
signs, which in the 11th and 12th centuries (compare cols. VII, VIII, and XIII) show local 
differences in the west, east and south. But all their figures have been derived either directly 
from the letter-numerals of the older system, or from letters with the same phonetic value. 
The last remark applies to the 9 of cols. IIL, V, V1 ff., which is identical with the signs for O 
used in later inscriptions in the word Om (compare, ¢.g., LA. 6, 194 ff., Nos. 3—6). 


Among the specimens from MSS. (plate IX, B, cols. IX—XIIJ), the decimal figures of the 
Bakhshali MS. show the ancient letter-numerals for 4 and 9. 


The Tamil numerals, which greatly differ from the usual ones and preserve the old signs 
for 10, 100 and 1000, have been given by Burnett, ESIP. plate 23 (compare zd. page 68). 
Those from Kabul are contained in the table accompanying E. C. Baytey’s paper, Numismatic 
Chronicle, 8rd Series, 2, 128 ff. 


§ 35.— Numeral notation by words and letters. 
A. — The word-numerals. 


[80] In many manuals of astronomy, mathematics and metrics, as well as in the dates 
of inscriptions and of MSS., the numerals are expressed by the names of things, beings or 
ideas, which, naturally or in accordance with the teaching of the Sastras, connote numbers. 
The earliest traces of this custom have been discovered by A. WEBER in the Srautasiitras 
of Kityayana and Lityayana* A few examples are found in the Vedic Jyotisa and in the 
arithmetic of the Bakhshali MS. More numerons instances occur in Pingala’s manual of 
metrics, and from about A. D. 500 we find, first in Varahamibira’s Paficasiddhantika, a system 
of this description, which, gradually becoming more and more perfect, extends to the cipher 
or naught, and to nearly all the numbers between ] and 49. During this latter period any 
synonym may be used for the words expressing numbers, and in some cases the same word 
may be used for different numbers. If the words are compounds, they may be represented 
by their first or second part. 


1 Compare facsimiles at EI. 2, 19 ff. ; and see Fuxet in GI (CII. 8), 209, note 1. 
2 The apparent difference in 6 is due to & fanit of the impression. 
3 Preparation of Plate IX, B, cols. III—XIII (for cols. I, II, see the text, above) ; all hand-drawn : — 


Col, III; from facsimiles of Rastraktita insoriptions Col. VII; from facsimile of the Chaulukya copper- 
at Kanheri, Nos. 15, 43 A, B. plate, IA. 12, 202, 

Col, 1V ; from facsimile of the Rastrakata copper- Col. VIIL; the 1, 8, 8, from the Gaya insoription, 
plate from Torkhede, ET. 3, 55. IA, 10, 342; the 5 from C.MG. pi. 28, A, 


Col. V; the 3 and 6 from an impression of the 


Haddala copper-plate (IA, 12, 190); the 4,7, 9, 0, from Cols, IX, X ; HozRnun’s Bakhshali figures. 


facsimile of the Asni inscription, IA. 16, 174; the 5 and8 Cols. XI, XIT; from Benpaut’s table of numeral 
from facsimile of the Morbi copper-plate, IA. 2, 257. in Catalogue of the Cambridge Sanskrit Buddhist MSS. 

Col, VI; from facsimile of the Savantvadi copper- Col. XIII; from B.ESIP. pl. 23, Telugu and 
plate, IA. 12, 266. Kanarese numerals, llth eentury. 


# W.IS, 8, 166 f. 


84 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 35, A. 


This system of numeral notation, of course, has been invented in order to facilitate the 
composition of metrical handbooks of astronomy and so forth. The most important words, 
used to express numbers, are as follows 1— 

The cipher, 0, is expressed by (a) ganya (Var., Ber.), “a void; (6) ambara, akasa, &c., 
“the (empty) space of heaven” (Var., Ber., Bro.), anants (Bro.). 

1 is expressed by (a) rapa (Jyo., Bakh, Piig., Var.) “one piece;” (5) inlu, sasin, 
étfarasmi, &c. (Var., Ber., Bro.), or abbreviated into ragmé (Ber.), “the moon;”’ (c) 44a, mahi, 
&c. (Var, Ber, Bro., Bur.), “ the earth ;”’ (1) adi (Ber.}, “beginning :” (e) pitamaha (Ber.), 
‘*¢ Brahman ;” () névaka (Bro.), “the hero” (of a play); (g) tan (Bro.), “the body.” 


218 expressed by (a) yama, yamala (Var., Ber.), “twins;” (4) asvin, dasra (Var., Ber.), 
“the two Aégvins;” (c) paksz (Var., Ber.), “the two wings, or the halves of the body;” 
(i) kara, &c. (Var., Bur.), the hands;” (e) nayana, &. (Var., Ber., Bur.), “the eyes;” 
(f) taku (Bro.), “the arms ;” (9) burna (Bro.), “the ears ;" (k) kufumba (Bro.), ‘‘the family,” 
?, e., husband and wife ; (¢) ravtcandrau (Ber.), “sun and moon.” 


3 is expressed by (a) aynt, hotr &c. (Var. Ber., Bro., Bur.), “‘ the sacrificial fires;”’ 


(4) ramah (Var. Bro), ‘the three Ramas” (of epic poetry); (c) guna (Var.), érigura (Ber.), 
“the qualities of matter ;” (d) trijagat, lwka (Ber.), “the three worlds ;” (e) érikala (Ber.), “the 
three times ;” () ériyata* (Ber.), “sounds, &c., with three meanings ;” (q) sekodarah (Bro.), 
“ the three uterine brothers ; "5 (h) trinetra, &c. (Bro.), “ the three eycs of Siva.” 


4 is expressed by (a) aya, aya (Jyo.), krta® (Var., Ber), “the (four) dice ;” (6) veda, 
drut (Ping., Var., Ber.), “the Vedas;” (c) abidri, yaladhi, &c. (Pihg., Var., Ber., Bur.), 
abbreviated jala (Var.), dadht (Ber,), ‘‘the oceans;" (d) dis (Ber.), ‘the cardinal points;” 
(e) yuga (Bro.), “the (four) ages of the world;” (/) bandhu (Bro.), “the (four) brothers; "7 
(4, kostha (Bro.), (?); (*) varna (manuscript), ‘the (four) principal castes.” 


5 is expressed by (a) indriya, &c. (Ping., Var., Bur.), “the organs of sense ;” [81] (4) 
artha, visaya, &e. (Var, Ber.), “ the objects of the senses ;” (c) bhuta (Piig., Var., Ber.), “ the 
clements;” (d) ¢su, &c. (Var., Ber, Bur), “the arrows of Kima;” (e) ;andava (Ber.), 
abbreviated (pandu)-suta, putra (Bro.), “the (five) Pindu sons;” (f) prana (Bro.), “the 
vital airs; ’’ (g) ratna® (Ber.) “ the (five) jewels.” 


6 is expressed by (@) rasz (Bakh., Pihg., Var., Ber.), “the (six) flavours;” (6) réw (Pitg., 
Var., Ber.), “the seasons;”’ (¢) aaga (Ber.), ‘the auxiliary sciences of Vedic studies ;” 
(d) masirdha (Ber.), “Sone half of the (twelve) months;” (e) darsana, &c. (Bro.), ‘the (six) 
philosophical systems;” (f) ragz (Bro.), ‘the (six) principal tunes;” (g) a:¢ (Bro.), “the 
(internal) foes (of men) ;” (h) kaya® (inscription), “ the bodies” (?). 


7 is expressed by (@) rst, muni (Ping. Var.), ‘“‘the (seven) seers ;”’ or by atrt, the first 


umong them (Bro); (4) svara (Pitg., Var., Bro.), “the notes” (of the octave); (¢) asva 


1 The abbreviations mark the sources from which the words hare been collected, as follows: — 


Bakh. = the Bakhshali MS., Horgn iz, 180. Var. = Varahamihira’s Pafichasiddhantika, Tze 

Ber, = Bertini’s India, SAcHAU, 1, 178. BAUT'S edition. 

Bro = C. P. Brown’s list, as quoted by BURNELL, A few other instances are given from manuscripts 
HSiP. 77 f. and inseriptions. 

Bur. = Burnevy's additions, ESTP. 77 f. The numerous synonyms, being unnecessary for 

Jo. = the Jyotisa, WeBunr’'s edition, 6 Sanskritists, have heen mostly omitted; but such 


Ping. = Pingala, WEBER, Indishe Studien, 8, 167 f. | omissions have been indicated by “&c.” 
: Sanya may either mean ‘‘the empty place on the Abacus,”’ or be an abbreviation of Sinyabindu (see above, 
34, B). 
: = See Pafiecasiddhantika, 8, 6. This is equivalent to agnt, because Agni is the Hotr-rriest of the gods. 
* See BRW. sub hac voce. 6 Yuchi:thira, Bhima and Arjuna (CARTELLIERI), 
® Thus BRW. sub hac voce ; possibly krta may stand for kitadt yrga. 7 Kama, Laksmana, &e. 
® See Arts, Sanskr.t Dictionary, sub hae voce. ® Compare EI. 1, 324, line 48, 


8 35, AL] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 85 


(Var., Bro.), ‘the horses” (of the sun); (@) aga, &c. (Var.; Ber., Bur.), “the (primeval) 
mountains ;” (e) dhatw (Bro.), “the elements” (of the body) ; (7) chandas (Bro.), “ the (classes 
of the) metres; *’ (g) dhi (Ber.), (2); (2) kalatra (Bro.), (?). 

8 is expressed by (a) anustubh (Pig.), a metre with octo-syllabic Padas or lines ; 
(4) vasu (Piig., Var.), “the Vasa gods ;” (ce) ahi, &c. (Ber., Bur.), “the (eight classes of) 
snakes;” (d) gaja, &c. (Ber., Bur.), “the elephants (guarding the eight points of the 
horizon) ;” (e) maigala, bhati (Ber., Bro.), ‘‘the (eight kinds of) auspicious things ;”! (f) siddhi 
(manuscript), “ the supernatural powers.” 

9 is expressed by (a) aaka (Var., Bro.), “the decimal figures ;” (6) nanda (Var., Ber.), 
“the (nine) Nandas;” (c) chédra, &c, (Ber.), “the cavities of the body;” (d) go, graka (Ber., 
Bro., Bur.), ‘the planets ;” (e}) aidhi (Bur.), “the treasures (of Kubera);” (7) pavana 
(Ber.), (2). 

10 is expressed by (a) disah, &c. (Ping., Var., Ber.), “ the (ten) points of the horizon ;” 
(0) ravanasiras (Ber.), ‘‘the heads of Ravana ;” (c) avatara (Bro.), “ the incarnations (of Visnu) ;"’ 
(1) karman (Ber.), “the (ten Grhya)-ceremonies;” (e) khendu (Ber.), cipher (0) and moon (1), 
te. 10.2 

11 is expressed by (a) rudra (Piig., Var., Ber:), “the (eleven) Rudras,” or by iéa, giva, 
&c. (Var., Ber.), the first of the eleven Rudras; (4, ¢) aksauhint, labha (Bro.), (2). 

12 is expressed by (a) aditya, arka, &c. (Piig., Var., Ber.), “the (twelve) sun-gods,” or 
“suns ;” (6) vyaya (Bro.), (7). 

18 is expressed by (a) visvedevah, abbreviated visva (Var., Ber.), © the (thirteen) all-gods ;”3 
or by kima, the most famous among them (Bro.) ; (4) atijagait (Var.), a metre with thirteen 
syllables in each Pada; (c) aghosa (Jagadicarita),4 ‘the surd consonants.” 

14 is expressed by (a) manu (Var., Ber.), “ the (fourteen) Manus;” (6) indra (Var., Ber.), 
“the (fourteen) Indras ;” (c) loka (Bro.), ‘* the (fourteen): worlds.” 


15 is expressed by (a) t¢hi (Var., Ber.), ‘the lunar days (of a half-month) ;” (6) akan 
(Bro.}, ‘‘ the solar days (of a half-month);” (c):-peksa (Bro.), “half a month: (fifteen days).” 


16 is expressed by (a) asti (Var., Ber.),a metre with sixteen syllables in the Pada ; (6) bhapa, 
&c, (Var., Ber.), ‘the (famous sixteen) kings ;”5 (c) kala (Bro.), “the digits of the moon.” 


17 to 19 are expressed by atyasti (Ber.), dhrti, atidhrti (Var., Ber.), metres with seventeen 
to nineteen syllables in the Pada, 


20 is expressed by (a) krti (Var., Ber.), # metre with twenty syllables in the Pada; (6) nakhe: 
(Var., Ber.), “the nails (of the hands and feet).”’ 


21 is expressed by (a) uékrit (Ber.) ;§ (5) svarga (Bro.),-“ heaven.” 

22 is expressed by jaéi (Bro.), (?). 

24 is expressed by jina (Var., Ber.), “ the (twenty-four) Tirthamkaras of the Jainas.” 
25 is expressed by ¢attva (Ber.), “the principles of the Saikhya philosophy.” 

26 is expressed by utkrid (Var.), a metre with twenty-six syllables in the Pada. 

27 is expressed by bhasamiha (Jyo.), naksaira (Bro.), “the lunar mansions.” 

382 is expressed by danta, &c. (Var., Bro.), “the teeth.” 


1 Compare astamangala. 2 Sten Konow, Deutsche Litt, Int., 1897. 
3 Compare F. E, Haut, Visnupurana, 3, 192, # SBLWA, 126, 5, 58. 

5 Described in the sodasarajakiya-parvan of the Mahabharata, 7, 65—71 (CARTELLIERI), 

6 Probably a mistake for prakrti, a metre with twenty-one syllables in the Pada. 


86 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIIT, 1904; APPENDIX. [$ 33, B. 


33 is expressed by sura, &c. (Var., Bro.), “ the gods.” 
40 is expressed by xaraka (Var., Paticasiddhantika, 4, 6), “the hells.’ 
49 is expressed by ‘ana (Bro.), “ the notes,” 


[82] In the Jyotiga and in the arithmetic of the Bakshali MS., only single words are used 
to indicate numbers. 


In Pingala’s and other metrical manuals, the words with numeral meanings often form 
(sometimes together with ordinary numerals) Dvandva compounds, which must be dissolved 
by “or.” Thus, vedartusamudréh means “ 4 or 6 or 4.” 


In the works of Varahamihira and other astronomers, we find, in addition, longer 
Dvandva compounds, consisting of such word-numerals (be it alone, or associated with 
ordinary numerals), which have to be dissolved by “and,” and then yield long rows of figures 
to be read from the right to the left. Thus, in the Pajicasiddhantika, 4, 44, we have: — 

(0 0 4 4 1 
kha-kha-veda-samudra-sitaragmayah = 14, 400; 


and in 9, 9 of the same work, we have ; — 
009 16 2 
kha-kh-asti-yamah = 21,600, 


Sach Dvandya compounds, which presuppose the existence of the decimal] notation, are 
used also for the dates of inscriptions. Dates expressed in this manner, are found in the 
Kamboja and Campa inscriptions of the 7th century.2 In Java they occur in the 8th century.® 
And about the same time appears the firsé trace of such a notation in an Indian document, the 
Cicacole copper-plate inscription mentioned on page 78 above, where lo, = 3, is an abbrevia- 
tion of loka, Next follow the dates of the Kadab plates of A, D.813,4 and of the Dholpur 
stone inscription of A. D, 842,5 which are expressed in word-numerals; and, in the next 
century, the plates issued by the Eastern Calukya Amma II. in A. D. 945.8 In later times 
the epigraphic instances become more frequent, and the ancient palm-leaf MSS. of the Jainas,7 
as well as the later paper MSS., offer a good many. The notations of this kind have been 
caused sometimes by the vanity of the clerks and copyists, who wished to prove their 
acquaintance with the methods of the astronomers, and perhaps still more frequently by 
metrical reasons in the case of dates given in verse. 


B, — Numeral notation by letters. 


Two systems of numeral notation, according to BuRNELL originally South-Indian, which 
both employ the phonetically arranged characters of the alphabet, have still to be described, 
as they are not without interest for paleography, In the first system,® only the vowelless 
consonan(s have any importance, and their numeral values are : — 


k uh g gh nc ch fj gh ® = 1284567 89 0 
? th d dh n t¢ thd dhn = 128345678 9:0 
p ph b bl Mm ore pee gee ges = 123 4 5 

yr tv & s s hl = 12345697 8 9 


SRR tte ty 


! According to BURNELL, in some modern inscriptions the word-numerals are placed in the usual order of the 
tlecimal figures. 

2 A. Barra, Insers. Sansk. du Cambodge, No. 5 ff.; BerGaIGNE-Bartu, Inscrs, Sansk. de Campa ot du 
Cambodge, No, 28 ff, 

5 TA, 21, 48, No. 2. 

* JA, 12, 11; declared to he suspicious by FuzxT, Kanarese Dynasties, Bombay Gazetteer, i, ii, 399, note 7. 

5 ZDMG. 40, 42, verse 23 ; pointed out by KieL HORN. 6 TA. 7, 18. 

7 KieLHorn, Report, 1880-81, No. 58; Peterson, Third Rep., App. I, Nos. 1876, 251, 268, 256, 270, &¢, 

® Compare B.ESIP. 79; W.IS. 8, 160; IA, 4, 207. 


§ 36, A.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 87 


The consonants are, however, not used by themselves, but for the formation of chronograms, 
containing any vowels and also compound consonants, of which the last element alone has 
numerical value. In the figures, resulting from those chronograms, the units invariably stand 
on the left, and the whole sum has to be turned round. An interesting instance of this 
notation, probably the most ancient hitherto discovered, occurs at the end of Sadguruéisya’s 
commentary on the Sarvanukramani (Macponst., page 168), where the chronogram, according 
to Kre.norn’s undoubtedly correct emendation, is :} — 

23 1 565 1 
khago=ntyan=mesam=apa. 


As the author himself adds, this has the value of 1,565,132, And this figure corresponds, 
as the author likewise says, to the number of the days elapsed since the beginning of the 
Kaliyuga, and yields the vernal equinox, 24th March, A.D. 1184, as the date of the completion 
of the work. The equinox is indicated also by the verbal meaning of the chronogram : — 
“ (Coming) from the last (sign of the Zodiac), the sun reached Aries.” 


The second system to be considered, which is still used in Ceylon, Siam and Burma for 
the pagination of MSS., and according to Burneit formerly also [83] occurred in Southern 
India, utilises the Brahmanical Barakhadi (see page 2 above). According to Burnet, the 
Akgaras ka to fa are equivalent to 1 to 34; ka to 1a = 35 to 68 ; kito li = 69 to 102; and so on. 
But in the Pali MSS. of the Viennese Court Library from Burma, I find ka to kak = 1 to 12; 
kha to khah = 13 to 24; and so on: and in those from Ceylon, where the Barakhadi 
ineludes the vowels r, 7, |, and J, ka to kah =1 to 16, and kha to khah = 17 to 82, whereby 
a somewhat different employment of the Akgaras results. Fausnont has kindly informed me 
that the last two methods alone (not that mentioned by BurneLt) are used in the Pali MSS. 
known to him. And he adds that, after the exhaustion of the whole Barakhadi, the Ceylonese 
MSS. begin again with 2 ka, 2 ka, and so on, and further that the pagination of Siamese MSS, 
agrees exactly with those from Burma. - 


VIL. THE EXTERNAL ARRANGEMENT OF INSCRIPTIONS AND 
MANUSCRIPTS. 


§ 36. — The lines, grouping of words, interpunctuation, and other details, 
A. — The lines. 


Already in the earliest inscriptions incised on smoothed stones, the Hindus have tried to 
form regular straight lines and to make the upper ends of the Mitrkas of equal height. Asoka’s 
masons, however, have rarely succeeded, even in the pillar edicts and in the rock edicts of 
Girnir, Dhauli and Jaugada, to keep the line in more than a few consecutive words, mostly 
those of one group (see below, under B). But in other documents of the same period, as 
in the Ghasundi stone inscription (see page 32 above), the latert and still valid principle has 
been more carefully observed, according to which only the vowel-signs, the superscribed ru 
and similar additions may protrude above the upper line. This regularity probably has been 
attained by marking the upper line with chalk, as is still done, or by ether mechanical 
appliances, 


The lines of the MSS, are always very regular, even in the oldest specimens, such as the 
Dhammapada from Khotan, and probably have been made with the help of a ruler (see below, 
§ 37,J). In the ancient palm-leaf MSS.and in many later ones on paper, the ends of the lines 
are marked by vertical double strokes, running across the whole breadth of the leaves. 


1 TA, 21, 49 £., No. 4 2 B.ESIP, 80. 5 Compare Guruptjakaumnu hi, 110. 
* Thus already in most of the inscriptions from the western caves, and at Amaravati, Mathura, €c. ; compare 
the facsimjles in B.ASRWI. vols. 4and 5; B.ASRSI. vol. 1; EI. 2, 195 ff.; and others. 


&& INDIAN ANTIQUARY,. VOD. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§ 36, B&C. 


In the MSS., the lines always run horizontally, and from the top to the bottom ;- and this is: 
also the case in most inscriptions, But there are a few inscriptions which have to be read 
from below.! 


Vertical lines sometimes occur on coihs, especially on those of the Kusanas and the Guptas.? 
The cause of the latter arrangement of the letters was probably the want of space. 


B.— The grouping of words. 


[84] In addition to the still usual method of writing the words continuously without’ 
a break, up to the end of a line, of a verse, half-verse or other division, we find already in 
some of the oldest documents, such as certain Asoka edicts,3 instances of the separation of single 
words, or of groups of words which belong together, either according to their sense or 
according to the clerks’ manner of reading. A similar grouping of the words occurs also in some 
prose inscriptions of the Andhras and the Western Ksatrapas at Nasik; compare Nos. 5, 
11 A, B, and 13. In the carefully written metrical inscriptions of the later times, the Padas 


or the half-verses occasionally are separated by blank. spaces,‘ and each line contains a half 
verse or a versed 


Similarly, in the Kharosthi Dhammapada from Khotan, each line contains one Gathi, and 
the Padas are divided off by blanks. In other old MSS., as the Bower MS., single words and 
groups of words are often written separately, apparently without any certain principle, 


In inscriptions, the Mangala; especially when it is the word-siddham, often stands by itself 
on the margin.§ 


CG, —-Interpunctuation.” 


Signs of interpunctuation are not found in the Kharosthi inscriptions. But the 
Dhammapada from Khotan offers at the end of each verse a circular mark, often made 
negligently, but resembling the modern cipher At the end of a Vagga appears a sign, 
which is found at the end of various inscriptions, e. g., F.GI (CII. 8), No. 71, plate 41 A, and 
which probably is intended to represent a lotus. 


In connection with the Brahmi, signs of interpunctuation occur since the earliest times,- 
and the signs employed are the following :— 


(1) A single vertical stroke (danda) is used (irregularly and sometimes wrongly) in 
some Asoka edicts® for the separation of single words or of groups. In later times ib serves 
to separate prose from verse,!° or occurs at the end of portions of sentences,!! of sentences,}? 
of half-verses!3 or verses,}4 and occasionally even marks the end of documents.© In the 
inscriptions of the Eastern Calukyas!® the danda has occasionally a small: horizontal top-bar ; 
thus, T. 


1 WZKM. 5, 230 f.; add a lately discovered Kharosthi inscription from Swat. 

2 J.RAS. 1889, pl. 1; Num. Chron,, 1898, pls: 8—10. 

3 Thus in the pillar edicts (excepting Allahabad), and in Kalsi edicts I—XI (see facsimiles EI. 2, 524), and in 
Nigliva and Paderia. 

# Compare, e. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CII. 3), No. 50, pl. 81 B; Ajanta No. 4; Ghatotkaca inscription ; &o. 

5 Compare, é. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CII. 3), Nos. 1, 2, 6, pl. 4A, and 14, pl. 5. 

6 Compare, e. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CII. 3), Nos. 6, pl. 4 A, and 15, pl. 9 A. 7 Compare, B.ESIP, 82, § 3. 

8 Compare facsimile in S. v. OLpENBURG’sS Predvaritelnaé zamjetkao Buddhiiskoi rukopisi, napisannoi 
piamenami Kharosthi, St. Petersburg, 1897. 

® Kalsi edicts XII, XIII, 1; Sahasram. 10 See, e. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 8), No. 21, line 16, 

il See, e. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 8), No, 80, pl. 44. 12 See the-same facsimile, 

13 See, e. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 8), No. 42, pl 28. 

14 See, e. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 3), No. 38, pl. 24, line 35. 

5 See, e. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 8), No. 19, pl, 12 A. 6 See, e. g., facsimiles, IA. 12, 92; 15, 213, 


§ 36, 0.) INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY, 89 


(2) A double vertical stroke, ||, appears in the Junnar inscriptions Nos. 24—29 after 
numerals, and once after the name of the donor. Later it occurs at the end of sentences, 
half-verses,? verses,? larger prose sections and documents.4 From the fifth century, a hook 
is often added to the top of the first stroke; thus, 1.5 Or both strokes receive such 
additions; thus, %.6 Curves and hooks are added also to the foot of one of the strokes or of 
both.” From the end of the 8th centary, a bar is attached on the left, to the middle of the 
first stroke; thus, 4|.8 In the inscriptions of the Hastern Calukyas, bars stand at the top 
of the strokes; thus, TT: and a Kalinga inscription has similarly ¥7.° 


(3) A triple vertical stroke marks occasionally the end of inscriptions,10 


(4) A single short horizontal stroke, placed on the left below the first sign of the last 
line, marks in the Asoka edicts of Dhauli and Jaugada the end of an edict. From the 2nd 
century B, C.!! to the 7th century A. D., this sign, which is often curved or bears a hook at 
one of its ends, serves the same purposes as the single vertical stroke.!2 


(5) A double horizontal stroke, often bent, appears from the Ist to the 8th century A. D. 
in the place of the double vertical.'3 The Kusana inscriptions and some later ones offer in 
its stead a double dot,!4 which looks exactly like a Visarga. 


(6) <A double vertical, followed by a horizontal stroke, occasionally marks the end of 
inscriptions,}5 


(7) A crescent-like stroke, 2, marks the ends of the Agoka edicts at Kalsi, Nos. I—XI: 


(8) A  crescent-like stroke with a bar in the middle, 9, stands twice in Kuyana 
inscriptions after the Mangala siddham.16 


Besides, numeral figures alone occasionally mark the ends of verses, see, e. g., F.GI (CII. 3), 
Nos, 1, 2, and similarly Maigala-symbols (see below, under D) stand at the end of inscriptions 
or of sections of the text, especially in ancient MSS., such as the Bower MS. 


Finally, it is necessary to call attention to the frames surrounding the Asoka edicts in the 
Girnar version, the Jaugada separate edicts, and the Dhauli separate edict No. I. 


What the inscriptions teach us regarding the history of the Indian interpunctuation may 
be briefly summed up, as follows. During the earliest period up to the beginning of our 
era, only single strokes, either straight or curved, are used, and their use is rare. After the 
beginning of our era, we find more complicated signs, [85] But up to the 5th century their 
use remains irregular. From that time onwards, we have, especially in the Pragastis on stone, 
more regular systems of interpunctuation. And the Mandasor Pragasti of A. D. 473-74, 
FE.GI (CII, 3), No. 18, plate 11, first proves the existence of the still valid principle, which 


1 See, e. g., facsimiles, Amaravati, No. 28; IA. 6, 23, 1. 9 (Kakusthavarman’s copper-plate). 
2 See, ¢. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 3), No. 17, pl. 10. 
8 See, ¢. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CIT. 3), Nos. 17, pl. 10, and 18, pl. 11. 
* See, e. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CII. 3), No. 26, pl. 15, 1. 24; No. 33, pl. 21 B, 1.9. 
5 Sea, ¢. g., facsimile, F.GI (CII. 3), No. 17, pl. 10, 1. 32, 1,88; No. 85, pl, 22, last line ; Bower MSS., passim. 
6 See, e. g., facsimile, Nepal inscription No, 4, IA. 9, 168, last line. 
T See, e. g., facsimile, JA. 9, 100, last line. 8 See, ¢. g., facsimiles, IA, 12, 202, 1. 1 ff. ; 18, 63, 
8 See facsimile, EI. 3, 128, last line. 10 See, e. g., facsimile, LA, 7, 79, 
Nl In the Nanaghat inscription, B.ASRWI. 5, pl, 51, line 6, after vano. 
12 See, e. g., facsimiles Nasik, No. 11 A, B, after sidham and siddha; F,GI (CII. 8), No. 1 (end) ; Nos, 3, pl. 2 B, 
9, pl. 4 D, and 10, pl. 5. 
18 See, e. g., facsimiles, EI. 1, 389, No. 14; F.GI (CLL 3), Nos. 3, pl. 2 B, 40, pl. 26, 41, pl. 27, and 55, pl. 34; 
IA. 6,17 (after adadiia). 
14 EL. 1, 395, Nos. 28, 29 (after danam) ; F.GI (CII. 3), No. 38, pl. 24, 1,35; No. 55, pl. 34 (end) ; IA. 5, 200 
(end) ; in these and other cases the sign has been wrongly read as a Visarga, 
15 See, ¢. g., facsimiles, IA, 6,76; HI, 3, 260. 16 EI, 2, 212, No, 42, and note, 


90 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. (§ 36, D. 


SERETEaE 


requires one stroke after a half-verse and two strokes at the end of a verse. But up to the 
sth century there are various copper-plates and stone inscriptions, especially from Southern 
India, without any interpunctuation.! Its methodical development is due tv the Brahmanical 
schoolmen. In the offices, interpunctuation apparently never became a favourite. As 
« comparison of the documents of one and the same dynasty easily shows, the degree of 
regularity with which the signs are used, depends not upon the age of the Sasanas, but on 
individual qualities of the writers, their learning and their carefulness. 


D. — Manhgalas and ornamentation. 


In accordance with the ancient Brahmanical maxim, which requires a Maigala, 
a benediction or an auspicious word, at the beginning, in the middle and at the end of 
# composition in order to insure its completion and preservation, sacred symbols of auspicious 
import are found at the beginning and the end of two Asoka edicts? aud of many inscrip- 
tions of the next four centuries.» The most common Maivala-symbols, employed in this way, 
ure the well-known Svastika, the trident or the so-called Triratna symbol resting on the 
Dharmacakra, and the conventional representation of a Caitya tree.4 But there are also others, 
the names of which are as yet unknown. Once® the Svastika appears after the word 
siddham. 


In later times, we find also Mangala-symbols with greatly modified forms, partly in the 
texts at the end of larger sections and partly at the end of documents or literary works, 
A very common sign of this description is a large circle with a smaller one, or with one or 
several dots in the middle.6 This may be a conventional representation either of the 
Dharmacakra which is still distinctly visible in front of F.GI (CII. 3), No. 68, plate 39, A, or 
ot the lotus, which likewise occars, Asa circle with a dot, ©, corresponds to the ancient tha, 
other signs, closely resembling or identical with later forms of tha, are used as substitutes.? 
And the modern MSS. finally offer the well-known &, which corresponds to one of the 
medieval forms of tha, but is now read cha, 


Since the 5th century, we find also new symbols, consisting of highly ornamental forms of 
the ancient O of the word Om (plate IV, 6, XVIII; plate V, 47, 1X), which latter is a great 
Mangala. They are used both at the beginning and at the end of inscriptions and occasionally 
even on the margin of copper-plates.® 


Many of the sculptures, found in connection with stone inscriptions, appear to have the 
same meaning as the Maigala-symbols just mentioned, Of this kind are, e. g., several of the 
relievos above BuaGyANLAL’s Nepal inscriptions,® such as the Safikhas (No. 3), the lotuses 
(Nos. 5, 15), the bull Nandi (Nos. 7, 12), the fish (No. 9), the sun-wheel and the stars (No. 10). 
It is however possible that the lotus of No. 15 may refer also to the donation of a silver lotus, 
the dedication of which the inscription records. Again, the san-wheel and the stars of No, 10 


1 See, e. g., facsimiles, IA, 6, 83 ; 7, 163; 8, 23; 10, 62—64, 164—171, 

2 See the facsimile of the separate edicts of Jaugada. 

5 See, e. g., facsimiles of the Sohgaura plate ; of Bhaja Nos. 2, 3, 7; of Kuda Nos. 1, 6, 11, 15, 16, 20, 22, 24, 25; 
of Mahad ; of Bedsa No. 3; of Karle Nos. 1—8, 5, 20 ; of Junnar Nos. 2—15, 17,19; of Nasik Nos. 1, 11 A, B, 14, 21, 
24; of Kanheri Nos. 2, 12, 18; EI. 2, 368, Stapa I, No. 358; and BuHaavanLAL, Sixth Oriental Congress, 3, 2, 136 ff, 

* On the non-sectarian national character of these symbols, see BuaagvanLat, los. cit. ; and EI, 2, 312 ff, 

5 Nasik No. 6. 

& See, e.y., “ The Bower MS.,” pt. 1, pls. 3, 5; pt. 2, pl. 1 ff. ; facsimiles, IA. 6, 17; 9, 138, No, 4; 17,310; 19, 
53; EL1,10t. In the Siyajoni inscription, EI. 1,173 ff., Visnu’s Kaustubha seems to be used repeatedly ; 
compare EI. 2, 124, 

1 Compare, é. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CII. 8), No. 71 (end); IA. 6, 67, pl. 2, line 1 (wrongly read as 20); IA, 6, 
392, pl. 2, line 10; EI. 1, 77 (end) ; 3, 278, line 39; 8, 306, Verawal image insoription (end). 

® See, e. g., facsimiles, F.GI (CH. 3), Nos. 11, pl. 6 A (also p. 46, note 8), 20, pl. 12 B, 26, pl. 16, &e.; TA. 6, 32 
(tive times); EI. 8, 52 (end); ‘The Bower MS.,” pt. 1, pl. 1 ; compare also Bertini, India, 1, 173 (Sacwav). 

8 TA,9, 165 ff. 


§ 36, B.] : . INDIAN ,PALEOGRAPHY. 91 


may also be intended to indicate the wish, often expressed explicitly in words, that the donation, 
to which the inscription refers, may last “ as long as sun and stars endure.” 


Similar illustrations of the contents of the inscriptions and symbolical representations of 
the wishes! and of other matters expressed in them, are not rare. Corresponding engravings 
on the copper-plates are less common, But on these the royal coat of arms is sometimes 
engraved below or by the side of the text, instead of on a separate seal, and the stone inscrip- 
tions, too, occasionally exhibit such devices.2 Among the MSS., those of the Nepalese 
Buddhists and of the Jainas of Gujarat are often richly ornamented and perfectly illustrated. 
Specimens of illuminated Brahmanical MSS, are, however, not wanting, 


E, — Corrections, omissions, and abbreviations. 


In the earliest inscriptions, as in the Asoka edicts (see, e 9., Kalsi edict XII, line 31) 
erroncous passages [86] are simply scored out. Later, dots or short strokes above or below 
the line are used to indicate clerical errors. The same signs occur in MSS., where, however, 
in late times the delenda are covered with turmeric or a yellow paste, On the copper-plates, 
they are frequently beaten out with a hammer, and the corrections are then engraved on the 
smoothed spot.’ We possess even entire palimpsests of this kind.’ 


In the Agoka edicts and other early inscriptions, letters and words, left out by mistake, 
are added above or below the line without any indication of the place to which they belong,® 
or they are also entered in the interstices between the letters. In the later inscriptions and 
the MSS., the spot of the omission is indicated by a small upright or inclined cross, the 
so-called kdkapada or hamsapadu, and the addenda are given either in the margin? or between 
the lines. 


A Svastika is sometimes put instead of the cross.8 In South-Indian MSS., the cross is 
used also to indicate intentional omissions, made in Siitras with commentaries. Elsewhere, 
intentional omissions, or such as have been caused by defects in the original of the copy, are 
marked by dots on the line or by short strokes above the line.!© The modern sign for the 
elision of an initial A, the so-called Avagraha, has been traced first on the Baroda copper-plate 
of the Rastrakita king Dhruva, dated A. D. 834-35. A kundala, “ring,” or a Svastika, 
served to mark unintelligible passages ; see Kashmir Report, 71, and Kiznuorn, Mahabhasya, 
2, 10, note. 


In Western India, abbreviations are found first in an inscription of the Andhra king 
Siri-Pulumayi (Nasik, No. 15) of about A. D. 150, and in the nearly contemporaneous one of 
Sirisena- or Sakasena-Midhariputa (Kanheri, No, 14). In the north-west, they are very 
common in the inscriptions of the Kugana period. The commonest instances are: — samva, 
sava, saa and sa for samvatsara; gri, yr or gi for grismah or gimhanam ; va for varsah; he 
for hemantah; pa for pakhe; and diva or di for divasa; and they are only found when the 
dates are expressed by figures. In this connection, they are used regularly in the later 
inscriptions and even in our days. But in these later times we find usually samvat, which 


1 Thus, the wish for the duration of the grant is expressed by representations of the sun and moon. 

* See, e. g., BASRWI. No. 10, ‘‘Cave-temple Inscriptions,” facsimile at p. 101, and KinnHogn’s remarks, 
EL. 3, 307; coats of arms are found in facsimiles at IA. 6, 49 ff,, 192; EI. 3, 14, 

® See, ¢. g., WEBER, Verzeichn. d. Berlin Sank. und Prak. Hdschriften, 2,3, pl. 2; Fifth Oriental Congress, 
2, 2, 189 ff., pl. 2; Pal. Sos., Or. Ser., pls. 18, 831; RAJENDRALAL Mitra, Notices of Sansk. MSS. 3, pl. 1; compare 
also B.ESIP. 52, § 4. 

* Compare B.ESIP. 83, § 5. 5 IA. 7, 251 (No. 47); 18, 84, note 20; EI, 3, 41, note 6. 

6 Sce, e. g., Kalsi edict XIII, 2, line 11; thus also later, see, e. g., facsimile at EI. 3, 314, line 5. 

7 See, e. g., facsimiles, EI. 3, 52, pl. 2, line 1; EL, 3, 278, line 11. 

8 Facsimile, IA. 6, 32, pl. 3. 9 Apastamba Dharmasttra?, p. II (10). 

10 Compare, ¢, g., IA. 6, 19, note, line 33 ; 20, note, line 11; very common in Kashmir MSS. 

NIA. 14,193: compare Fuzer, EI. 3, 329; and Kizuuorn, EI. 4, 244, note 7. 


‘. vi \ QUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [$ 37, A. 


sometimes even is inflected, before the dates of the years; but, before the dates of the month 
falling in the bright half, $e or su di for Suddha- or sukla-paksa-dina, or in Kashmir su or su té 
(tithi), and before those falling in the dark half, ba or va dé for bahwla- or vahula-paksa-dind, 
or in Kashmir da tt. 


From the 6th century, the inscriptions of Western India offer here and there abbreviations 
of other words, such as dé for dataka, dvi for dvitiya.? 


Later, especially since the 11th century, abbreviations of titles and the names of tribes, 
castes and so forth become very common. Inthe MSS. they are noticeable since the earliest 
times. Thus, the Khotan Dhammapada (Paris fragment) has, at the end of a Vagga, ga 30 
for gathé 30; and in the Bower MS., plate II, élo for gloka and pda for pada often ovcur in 
connection with figures at the end of a section. In the inscriptions and MSS. of the 12th 
century we find with names, not with dates, the small circle or bindu,? which is still used to 
indicate abbreviations; e. g., 3° for thakkura. The same sign is used in Prakrit MSS. to 
indicate the omission of one or several letters that can be easily supplied; e. 9., a°tabhavam 
for attabhavam, di°tha for ditihas 


F, — Pagination. 


The Hindus number only the leaves (pattra), not the pages (prstha), of their MSS.; and 
in the Dravidian districts the figure stands on the first page of each leaf, in all other parts of 
India on the second (sankaprstha).6 The same rule holds good in the case of copper-plates, the 
sheets of which sometimes (but rarely) are numbered.® 


G. — Seals, 


According to the law-books,’ all ‘Sisanas [87] must bear the royal seal. Consequently, 
seals, welded to the plates or to the rings connecting the plates, or attached to them by pins, are 
found with the majority of the grants. They show the royal coat of arms (mostly the 
representation of an animal or of a deity), or, in addition to such emblems, a shorter or 
longer inscription, giving the name of the king or of the founder of the dynasty, or the whole 
pedigree, and sometimes merely an inscription.® 


VIII WRITING MATERIALS, LIBRARIES, AND WRITERS. 
§ 37. — Writing materials.® 


A. — Birch-bark. 


{88] The inner bark of the Bharja-tree (Baetula bhojpattr), which the Himilaya produces 
in great quantity, probably is alluded to already by Q. Curtius (see above, page 6) as a writing 
material used by the Hindus at the time of Alexander’s invasion, and later it is frequently 
named as such in Northern Buddhist and Brahmanical Sanskrit works.J° It is even 
called lekhana, “the writing material,” and written documents go by the name of bhirja. 
According to Beriini,!! pieces, one ell in length and one span in breadth, were prepared for use 


1 According to a letter from KrrLHORN. 

2 IA. 7, 73, pl. 2, line 20 ; 18, 84, lines 37, 40 ; 15, 340, line 57. 

3 See, e. g., 1A. 6, 104 ff., No. 4 ff.; EI. 1, 317, line 9. 

* Compare S. P. Panpit, Malavikagnimitra?, p. V, who, as also BURNELL, makes dt°tha stand for dithiha ; 
nee also PiscHEL, Nachr. G6tt. Gel. Ges,, 1873, 205, 

5 On an apparent exception, see WZKM. 7, 231.. 

§ Compare, e. g., B.ESIP. pl. 24; facsimiles at EI, 1, 1 ff. ; 8, 156, 300. 

7 JoLLyY, Recht und Sitte, Grundriss, IT, §, 114. 

8 See, e, g., the cullections of seals in plates at B.ESIP. 106, and EI. 3, 104; 4, 244: see also F.GI (CII. 3), 
plates 30, 32, 33, 37, 43. 

® Compare B.ESIP. 84—-93 ; RAJENDRALAL Mitra, in Gough’s Papers relating to the Collection and Preserva- 
tion of Ancient Sanskrit MSS., p. 15 ff. ; FOHRER, Zeitshrift f, Bibliothekswesen 1, 429 ff., 2, 41 ff. 

10 BRW,, sub voce bhurja. 

1 India, 1, 171 (SacHav) ; the description seems to fit the Kharosthi Dhammapada from Khotan, 


§ 37,B &C.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 93 


by rubbing them with oil and polishing them. The art of the preparation has however been 
Jost in Kashmir, when the introduction of paper during the Moghal period furnished a more 
convenient material.! Buta not ineonsiderable number of old birch-bark MSS. still exist in 
the libraries of the Kashmir Pandits. According to a statement made to me by Baad DAsi, 
birch-bark MSS. occur also in Orissa, and amulets, written on Bhirja, are still used throghout 
all the Aryan districts of India.2 The use of the bharjapatira of course began in the 
north-west ; but it seems to have spread in early times, as the copper-plates of Central, 
Eastern and Western India appear to have been cut according to the size of the Bhiirja, which 
in Kashmir mostly corresponds te our quarto (Burnett). As stated in many classical 
Sanskrit works and by Beriini, all letters were written on Bhirja at least in Northern, 
Central, Eastern and Western India, : 


The oldest documents on Bhirja, which have been found, are the Kharosthi Dhammapada 
from Khotan, and the inscribed “ twists,” tied up with threads, which Masson discovered in 
the Stiipas of Afghanistan (see above, page 18, and note 6). Next come the fragments from 
the Godfrey Collection and the Bower MS., the leaves of which have been cut according to 
the size of palm-leaves, and, like these, are pierced in the middle in order to pass a string 
throngh, intended to hold them together Next in age is the Bakhshiali MS., and then follow 
after a considerable interval the birch-bark MSS. from Kashmir in the libraries of Poona, 
London, Oxford, Vienna, Berlin, &c., none of which probably date earlier than the 15th 
century. : 


B. — Cotton cloth. 


The. use of well-beaten cotton cloth is mentioned by Nearchos (see above, page 6), and 
some metrical Smrtis, as well as some inscriptions of the Andhra period, state that official and 
private documents were written on pata, paltka or karpasika patas According to Burne.t, 
and Rick (Mysore and Coorg Gazetteer, 1877, 1, 408), the Kanarese traders still use for their 
books of business a kind of cloth, called kadatam, which is covered with a paste of tamarind- 
seed and afterwards blackened with charcoal. The letters are written with chalk or steatite 
pencils, and the writing is white or black. In the Brhajjianakoga at Jesalmir, I foand 
a silk band with the list of the Jaina Siitras, written with ink. Recently Pererson (Fifth Report, 
113) has discovered at Anhilvad Patan a MS., dated Vikrama-Samvat 1418 (A. D. 1361-62), 
which is written on cloth. 

C. — Wooden boards, 


The passage of the Vinayapitaka (see above, page 5), which forbids “the incising ” of 
precepts for religious suicide, bears witness to a very early use of wooden boards or bamboo 
chips as writing materials. Equally, the Jitakas, and also later works, mention the writing 
board, used in the elementary schools. Chips of bamboo (salaka), with the name of the 
bearers, served as passports for Buddhist monks (Burnoor, Introd. a l'histoire du Bouddhisme, 
259, note), An inscription from the time of the Western Ksatrapa Nahapana® speaks of boards 
(phalaka) in the guildhall, on which agreements regarding loans were placarded, and Katyayana 
prescribes that plaints are to be entered on boards with pandulekha, ¢.e., with chalk Dandin 
narrates, in the Dagakamiracarita, that Apaharavarman wrote his declaration, addressed to the 
sleeping princess, on a varnished board.? MSS. on varnished boards, which are common in 
Burma, have hitherto not been discovered in India proper; but there are indications that the 
Hindas, too, used beards for literary purposes. Wunternitz informs me that the Bodleian 

1 Kashmir Report, J.BBRAS. 12, App., 29 ff. 

2 RasenDRALAL MitTRA, Gough’s Papers, 17; Kashmir Report, 29, note 2. 

8 J.ASB. 66, 225 ff. ; facsimiles in HozRwie’s Bower MS.; WZKM. 5, 104. 

4 J. Jonzy, Recht und Sitte, Grandriss, IT, 8, 114 ; Nasik inscription No. 11, A, B, in BAASRWI. 4, 104 £. 
¢ 5 Nasik inscription No. 7, line 4, in BASRWI. 4, 102. 

& B.ESIP. 87, note 2. ‘ 1 Désakumaracarita, Voohyaga 2, towar dy thea.end 


94 INDIAN ANTI ‘WARY, VOL, XXXIII, 1964; APPENDIX. 


Library possesses a MS. on wooden boards, which comes from Assam. [89} And 
MrrRa asserts, in Gough’s Papers, p.18, that in the North-West Provinces poor 
religious works with chalk on black boards. 


D, — Leaves, 


According to the canon of the Southern Buddhists (see above, page 5), lea 
were in ancient times the most common writing material. Thongh the texts! do 
the plants which furnished these leaves, it is not doubtful that they came then, as in 
chiefly from the large-leaved palm-trees, the tada or /ala (Borassus flabelliformis) an 
tali (Corypha umbraculifera, or C. taliera), which, originally indigenous in the 
found at present even in the Pafijab. The earliest witness® for the general use of 
throughout the whole of India is Hiuen Tsiang (7th century). But we possess 
that they were used even in north-west India during much earlier times. T 
palm-leaf MS, certainly goes back to the 6th century, and some fragments in 
discovered Godfrey Collection from Kashgar belong, as Horryue has shown o 
graphieal evidence, at least to the 4th century, and are older than the Bower 
the éhurjapattra leaves of the Bower MS, are cut according to the size of palm 
that is also the case with the Taxila copper-plate (see above, page 25), which certa 
later than the Ist century A. D. As the coppersmith then chose a@ palm-l 
model, it follows that palm-leaves must have been commonly used for writin 
the Panjib. A Buddhist tradition, preserved in the Life of Hiuen Tsiang,‘ 
the Canon was written on palm-leaves at the first Council held immediately afte 
death. And the story regarding Samghabhadra’s “dotted MS. of the Vinaya,’ 
by Takaxusv in J.RAS. 1896, 436 £., shows that this tradition is at least two cent 
one inference, which may be drawn from it, is, that about A. D, 400 the Buddhi 
palm-leaves to have been used for writing since immemorial times. 


According to RAsEnDRALAL Mirra,’ the palm-leaves, to be used for writing, are, 
next boiled or soaked in water, then again dried, and finally polished with stones or 
and cut to the proper size. It agrees with this statement, that the leaves of the an 
from Nepil and Western India frequently show traces of an artificial preparat: 
length varies between one and three feet, and their breadth between one and a qua 
inches.6 Against this, Burney’ asserts that the people of Southern India take 
with the preparation, and mostly even neglect to trim the leaves properly. The la 
is not borne out by the appearance of the South-Indian MSS. known to me, thou 
doubt true of the leaves used by clerks and men of business in offices and for letters 


The Horinzi MS., and the fragments in the Godfrey Collection, as well as th 
palm-leaf MSS, of the 9th and later centuries from Nepal, Bengal, Rajputana, Guja: 
northern Dekhan, prove that since ancient times the palm-leaves were written on 
over Northern, Eastern, Central and Western India. Since the introduction of pa 
no longer used in these districts, except in Bengal for MSS. of the Candipiatha.® 


In the Dravidian districts and in Orissa, the letters were, and still are, i 
a stilus and afterwards blackened with soot or charcoal. The oldest MS., found in 
dates according to Burnex.® from A. D, 1428. 


2 BIS. II’, 7 ff., 120, 2 Siyuki, 2, 225 (Beat),' 8 J,ASB. 
« Life of Hinen Tsiang, 117 (Beat). 5 See RAJENDRALAL MirTsBA, in Gough’s Pape 
® See Gough’s Papers, 102, and the measurements in KreLHoRN’s Report for 1880-81, and 
Third Report. 
1 B.ESIP. 83, ® RasenpRaALAL Mrrea, Gough’s Papers, 
# B.ESIP, 87; further researches in Southern India will probably show that older MSS, exist, 


§ 37,E & FJ INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 95 


All palm-leaf MSS. are pierced either with one hole, usually in the middle, more rarely, 
in specimens from Kashgar, on the left, or with two holes on the left and the right, through 
which strings (stéra or garayantraka)! are passed in order to keep the leaves together, 


In Southern India, raw palm-leaves were, and still are, commonly used for letters, for 
private and official documents, as well as in the indigenous schools. For the latter purpose 
they are ulso employed in Bengal2 According to Apams,3 the pupils of the dolls write also 
with Jamp-soot on the large Banana and Sal leaves. 


E. — Animal substances. 


D’Anwis‘ asserts that Buddhist works mention skins among the writing materials, but 
neglects to quote the passages. It is possible to infer from the passage of the Vasavadatta, 
quoted above (page 82, § 34, B) that in Subandhn’s time skins were used for writing. But 
the fact that leather is ritually impure makes the inference hazardous, And hitherto no 
MS. on leather has turned up in India, though pieces of leather from Kashgar, inscribed 
with Indian characters, are said to exist in the Petersburg collections. A blank piece of 
parchment [90] lay among the MSS, of the Jesalmir Brhajj anakoéa. 


Manuscripts on thin plates of ivory occur in Burma, and the British Museum possesses 
two specimens.5 


. F, — Metals. 


The Jatakas® state repeatedly that the important family records of rich merchants, and 
verses and moral maxims, were engraved on gold plates, and BurNe.? mentions that they 
were used for royal letters and for land-grants. A gold plate with a votive inscription in 
Kharosthi has been found in a Stipa at Gangu near the ruins of Taxila.® Specimens of 
small MSS. and official documents on silver likewise are preserved,® and among them is one 
from the ancient Stiipa at Bhattiprolu. In the British Museum there are also MSS. on gilt 
and silver plated palm-leaves. 


It is a matter of course that the precious metals were used only in rare and exceptional 
cases. But, as the exceedingly numerous finds prove, copper-plates (¢~mrapata, tamrapattra, 
tamrasasana, abbreviated tamra) were since ancient times the favourite material for engraving 
various kinds of documents which were intended to last, and especially land-grants, to the 
donees of which they served as title-deeds. 


According to Fahian (about A. D, 400), the Buddhist monasteries possessed grants 
engraved on copper, the oldest of which dated from Buddha’s time! Though this statement 
requires confirmation, the Sohgaura plate (see above, page 32) teaches us that during the 
Maurya period official decrees were committed to copper. Another Buddhist tradition, 
preserved by Hiuen Tsiang," asserts that Kanigka caused the sacred books to be engraved on 
sheets of copper. And a similar story, which BurneuL declares to be untrustworthy, is told 
regarding Siyana’s commentaries on the Vedas.!2 But it is undeniable that copper has been 
used also for the preservation of literary works, as plates with such contents have been found 
at Tripatty, and specimens from Burma and Ceylon (some of which are gilt) are now 
in the British Musenm.8 Photographs of quite modern copper-plates with lists of goods in 
Gurumukhi and Nagari, sent from Kashgar to St. Petersburg, have reached me through the 
kindness of 8. von OLDENBURG, 


1 Vasavadatta, 250 (HALL). 2 Burnwwx, ESIP. 89, 93, RaseENDEALAL Mitra, Gough’s Papers, 17, 
8 Reports on Vernacular Education, 20, ¥8 (ed. Lona). * Introduction to Kacc&iyana, XXVII. 
5 J. Pali T. Soc,, 1888, 135 f, 6 BIS. III.2 10 f. 7 B.ESIP. 90, 93. 8 C.ASR. 2, 129, pl. 59, 


9 B.ESIP. 87; Rea, Arch, Survey of India, New Imperial Series, No, 15, p. 18, and plate 6, No, 22; J, Pali 
T. Soe,, 1883, p. 184 ff. 

0 Siyuki (Beat) 1, xxxviii, . 1 See B.ESIP, 86. 

12. R. V. (Max Murcer), 1, xvii. 18 J. Pali T, Soe., 1883, 136 ff, 


96 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. [§.37, G. 


As regards the technical preparation, the oldest z@mrasisana known, the Sohgaura 
copper-plate (see above, page 32), has been cast in a mould of sand, into which the letters and 
the emblems above them had been previously scratched with a stilus or a pointed piece of wood. 
Hence both the letters and the emblems appear on the plate in relievo. All other copper-plates 
have been fashioned with the hammer, and many among them show distinct traces of the 
blows. Their thickness and size vary very considerably. Some are very thin sheets, which 
could be bent double and weigh only a few ounces ; others are exceedingly massive and are eight 
or nine pounds in weight or even heavier. Their size is partly determined by the nature 
of the writing material commonly used in the districts where they were issued, and partly by 
the extent of the document to be engraved, the size of the clerk’s writing, and so forth. The 
smiths always imitated the originals given them. If these were written on palm-leaves, the 
plates were made narrow and long. If the material was birch-bark, the plates became much 
broader, often almost square. Of the first description are all the copper-plates from Southern 
India, with the exception of those of the Yadavas of Vijayanagara, which imitate stone s/elae? 
To the second class belong all the Sasanas issued further north, with the exception of the Taxila 
plate, which, as stated already, is the size of a palm-leaf. A comparison of the numerous plates 
of the Valabhi kings shows very clearly how their size gradually grows with the increasing 
length of the Prasasti, 


If, as is mostly the case, several plates were required for one document, they were usually 
connected by copper rings passed through round holes in the plates. The single ring is 
usually found in Sasanas from Southern India, and then the hole is usually made in the left 
side of the plate. If there are two rings, the holes go through the lower part of the first plate, 
the upper part of the second, and so on alternately. The rings correspond to the threads 
which keep the palm-leaves together, and they make of many ¢@mraédsanas small volumes, 
which can be opened quite conveniently. The lines run always, except in the Vijayanagara 
plates, [91] parallel to the broadest side of the plate. The letters have mostly been incised 
with a chisel, rarely with a graver (compare above, page 19). In order to protect the writing, 
the rims of the plates are usually thickened, and slightly raised,* and the first side of the first 
plate, as well as the second side of the last, is left blank. The copper seals attached to the 
plates seem to have been cast, and their inscriptions and emblems are raised on & counter- 
sunk surface. According to Bina,® the state seal of king Harga was made of gold. 


Various copper statues show votive inscriptions on their bases, A single inscription on 
iren, that on the iron pillar of Meharauli, near Delhi,® has become known, The British 
Museum possesses a Buddhist MS. on tin.’ 


G@. — Stone and brick. 


Stones of the most various Kinds, rough and artificially smoothed blocks of basalt or trap, 
as well as artistically carved columns of sandstone, or even prisms of crystal, have been since 
the most ancient times the most common materials for making documents, as Asoka expresses 
himself, cirathitéka, “ such as to endure for a long time.” And it is indifferent whether the 
documenta are official or private, whether they contain royal proclamations, treaties between 
kings, or agreements between private individuals, grants and donations or poetical effusions. 
There are even some instances of the incision of larger literary works; large fragments of 


1 The Taxila plate weighs 33 ounces and was found bent double ; the Alina plates of Siladitya VI. of Valabhi 
weigh together 17 pounds, 8$ ounces, see F.GI (CII. 3), 172. But there are still heavier plates, seo B.ESEP. 92, 
where however the historical notes require correction. 

2 B.ESIP. 92; compare the facsimiles at EI, °, 26, 38, &¢. 

® The Kasakidi grant (8th century) is written on eleven plates, the Hirahbadagalli grant (4th oontury), EI. 1, 
1 ff, on eight. 

¢ See Fizz, GI(CIT. 8), 68, note 6, 6 Harsacarita, 227 (Nirnayasagar Press ed.}. 

° ¥.GI (OIL. 8), 189, : T See the list, J, Pali T. Soo, 1888, 194 ff. 


§ 37, H & I] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 97 


plays by the Cahamana king Vigraha IV,, and by his poet-laureate Somadeva, have been 
found at Ajmir,! and a large Jaina Sthalapurana in a number of Sargas, impressions of which 
(unpublished) I owe to Fisrer and G. H. Osama, exists in Bijholli (Rajputina). 


Bricks, showing single or a few letters, have been known for some time, as specimens have 
been found by CunnincHam,? Fiurer and others in various parts of India, and even in Burma, 
But recently a set has been discovered in the North-West Provinces by Hoty, on which 
Buddhist Sitras are inscribed, the characters having apparently been scratched on the moist 
clay, before it was baked.3 


H. — Paper. 


During the period to which this work refers, paper was hardly known or at least 
little used in India, as its introduction ‘is only due to the Muhammadans. RdAJENDRALAL 
Mitra, however, asserts* that a “ letter-writer’’ by king Bhoja of Dhara proves its use 
in Malva during the llth century. The oldest paper MS. in Gujarit is said to date from 
A. D. 1223-24.5 


Paper MSS, dated Vikrama-Samvat 1384 and 1394 (A. D. 1327-28 and 1337-88), the leaves 
of which are cut according to the size of palm-leaves, have been discovered by PrtTeRson at 
Anhilvad Patan.6 It is very donbtful if any of the ancient MSS. from Kashgar, which are 
written on a peculiar paper, covered with a layer of gypsum, are of Indian origin; Horante 
believes that all of them were written in Central Asia.” 


I. — Ink. 


The oldest undoubtedly Indian term for ink is masi or masi, frequently spelt masi or mast. 
The word, which occurs as @ varia lectio already in a Grhyasiitra, is derived from the verb mas 
(himeayam), and means etymologically “powder.”® Further, it serves to denote several kinds 
of pulverised charcoal, which were mixed with water, gum, sugar and so forth, and used for 
the preparation of ink.2 BurneLy ig mistaken when he asserts that in classical Sanskrit 
literature mast, “ink,” occurs only in late works; it was known to Bana (about A. D. 620) and 
to his predecessor Subandhu.!0 


Benesy, Hivcxs and Weser have derived mela, another word for “ink,” from the Greek 
wédas. But itis, no doubt, the feminine (viz., mast) of the common Prakrit adjective maila, 
‘“‘dirty, black,” which cannot have been borrowed from the Greeks." Jfelé, likewise, was 
known to Subandhu, who uses the denominative melanandayate, ‘* becomes an inkstand,”!8 
The Kosas offer for “ inkstand ”’ also melamanda, melandhu, melandhuka, and masimati, and the 
Puranas masipatra, masibhanda and mastkipika}s 


The statements of Nearchos and Q. Curtius (see above, page 6), according to which the 
Hindus wrote on cotton cloth and on the inner bark of trees, ¢. ¢, Bhirja, make it very 
probable that they used ink already in the 4th century B.C. To the same conclusion points 
the fact, that in some letters of the Agoka edicts dots are occasionally substituted for loops.'4 
The oldest specimen of writing with ink, on the relic-vase of the Stipa [92] of Andher (see 


1 JA, 20, 201 . — [Now edited by KienHorn in Gottinger Festschrift, 1901.] aa 


2 C.ASR. 1, 97; 5, 102. 8 Proc. ASB. 1895, 99 ff. £ Gough's Papers, 16. 
5 See my Catalogue of MSS. from Gujarat, &c., 1, 238, No, 147, 6 Fifth Report, 123, 125, 
7 WZKM. 7, 261; J.ASB. 66, 215 ff., 258 f. 8 BRW. and BW., sub voce masi. 


® Indian prescriptions for preparing ink are found in RAJENDRALAL MitrRa’s notes, Gough’s Papers, &c.,16 f,; 
Kashmir Report, 30. ‘ . 

10 Seo, e, g., Vasavadatta, 187 (HALL) ; Harsacarita, 95. : 2 s. 

11 See now also ZAcHARIAE, Nachrichten Gott. Ges Wiss., 1893, 235 ff. 12 BRW., sub hac voce, 

13 Manda and nanda, ‘ water-vessel’ (compare also nandika, andi, ‘ well,’ and xandipata, * cover of a well’ ), 
are derived from nandayati and mandayati, * to cause to rejoice, to refresh,’ . 

ue BIS, TIL2, 61 f. 69, 


98 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. 


dates the Kharogthi Dhammapada from Khotan, as well as the twists of Bh 
vessels with Kharogthi letters in ink from the Stipas of Afghanistan. 8S 
the ancient Bhirja and palm-leaf MSS. with Brahma characters, Painted 
still in the caves of Ajanta? 


Ooloured ink, which in later times the Jainas especially have used e 
MSS.,? is mentioned also in Brahmanical works, e. g., in the sections of th 
donation of MSS.3_ Besides chalk (see above, page 82, § 34, B), red lead or 
was used, already in ancient times, as a substitute for ink.4 


J.— Pens, pencils, &c. 


The general name of “an instrament for writing’’ is lekhani, which of 
sitlus, pencils, brushes, reed and wooden pens, and is found already in the epi 


The varnaka, mentioned in the Lalitavistara, no donbt refers to the li 
a slit, with which the school-boys still draw the letters on the writing-board (s 
The Kosas offer the variant varntka. The varnavartika, which ocenrs in 
DaSakumiracarita referred to above (see page 93 ubove, and note 7), m 
coloured pencil, as, according to other passages, the vartika was used for dra 
Tuli or tu#lika@ probably denoted originally “a brush,” though it is exp) 
modern ésulut, “graver,” a stilus.’ 


The most usual name of the reed pen is the word kalama, xadapos, Cala 
in all eastern languages; the rarer indigenous Indian name is istka@ or tsika, 
Pieces of reed, bamboo or wood, cut after the manner of our pens, are 
India where the use of ink prevails,® and all the existing ancient MSS. on 
Bhirja probably have been written with such pens® The Sanskrit name o 
Southern India is sa/ak@, in Marathi salai. 


Regarding the now very generally used ‘ruler,’ a piece of wood o 
strings fixed at eqnal distances, and regarding its probable predecesso 
Oxoniensia, Aryan Series, 1, 3, 66, and Anzeiger d. W. Akademie, 1897, 
photographs of two specimens have been given. According to a letter 
(April 21, 1897), the Ethnological Museum of Berlin possesses two spe 
Calcutta with the inscription nivedanapattra and one from Madras called kidu 


§ 88.— The preservation of manuscripts and copper-plates, 
treatment of letters, 


A, — Manuscripts and libraries. 


[93] Wooden covers, cut according to the size of the sheets, were plac 
and palm-leaves, which had been drawn on strings, and this is still the custo 
paper MSS.2 In Southern India the covers are mostly pierced by holes, t 
long strings are passed. The Jatter are wound round the covers and knotted. 
was usunl already in early times!2 and was observed in the case of the ol 


1 B.ASRWI. 4, plate 59, 
2 See, ¢. g., the facsimiles in RAJENDEALAL MitTRa’s Notices of Sanskrit MSS., 3, pl. 1. 
8 Hemadri, Danakhanda, 549 ff. . 
 D’Atwis, Introd. to Kacciyana, XVII; Jataka No. 509 (4, 489), pointed out by 8. von 
6 See BRW. and BW., sub hac voce. 6 See BRW. and B 
1 Seo Maheévara on Amarakosa, p. 245, verse 33 (Bo. Gov. Ed.), 8 See BRW. and B 
® Vhis is the case in all the parts of India known to me; compare also RAJENDEALAL 
Papers, 18. 
10 Anecdota Oxoniensia, Aryan Series, 1, 3, 66, 11 Beruni, India, 
12 Compare Harsacarita, 95, where the sulravestanam of a MS. is mentioned. 


§ 88, B.j INDIAN PALEHOGRAPHY. 99 


from Western and Northern India. But in Nepal the covers of particularly valuable MSS. 
sometimes are made of embossed metal; the MSS. (pusaka) which have been prepared in this 
manner are usually wrapped up in dyed or even embroidered cloth. Only in the Jaina 
‘ibraries the palm-leaf MsS. sometimes are kept in small sacks of white cotton cloth, which 
again are fitted into small boxes of white metal. The collections of MSS., which frequently 
are catalogued, and occasionally, in monasteries and in royal courts, are placed under 
librarians, generally are preserved in boxes of wovd or cardboard. Only in Kashmir, where 
in accordance with Muhammadan usage the MSS. are bound in leather, they are puf on 
shelves, like our books. 


The ancient Indian name of a library, 6haratibhandagara, ‘treasury of the goddess of speech,” 
occurs frequently in Jaina works; more rarely the modern synonym, szrasvatibhandagara. 
Such Bhaniagaras were, and still are, found in temples,! colleges (vidyamathz), monasteries 
(matha, upéraya, vihara, sangharama), at the courts of princes and in the houses of many 
private individuals. The Puranas declare it to be the sacred duty of the wealthy to make 
donations of books to temples and so forth. Equally, such donations are obligatory on the 
Jaina and Bauddha laymen, and the Pragastis of the old MSS. prove that the obligation was 
fulfilled in the most liberal manner. A famous royal library of the middle ages was that of king 
Bhoja of Dhara (1ith century); on the conquest of Malva, about A. D, 1140, Siddharaja- 
Jayasimha transferred it to Anhilvad;4 there it seems to have been amalgamated with the 
court library of the Caulukyas, which is repeatediy mentioned in works of the 13th century. 
The dharatibhandagara of the Caulukya Visaladeva or Visvamalla (A. D. 1242—1262) furnished, 
according to an unpublished Praégasti, the copy of the Naishadhiya, on which Vidyaddhara 
wrote the first commentary of the poem, and the MS. of the Kamasiitra, according to which 
Yasodhara composed his Jayamangalatika.© One of the manuscripts of the Ramayana in the 
library of the University of Bonn has been derived from a copy of Visaladeva’s collection.® 


The search for Sanskrit MSS., instituted by the Government of India, has shown that there 
are still a good many royal libraries in India, and the catalogues of several, such as those of 
Alwar, Bikaner, Jammu, Mysore, and Tanjore, has been published. The documents, published 
in connection with the search, have brought to light also a surprisingly large number of private 
libraries. And various notes in older Sanskrit works make it apparent that considerable 
private libraries existed in early times. Thus, Bana (about A. D. 620) tells us that he kept 
a particular reader (pustaka-vacaka), whose manipolation of the MS, of the Vayupurana he 
describes in his Hargacarita.?. BurneLt’s remarks,’ regarding the bad treatment of the MSS. 
by the Brahmans, do not hold good for the whole of India, perhaps not even for the whole of 
Southern India. In Gujarat, Rajputina and the Maratha country, as well as in Northern 
and Central India, I have seen, besides some ill-kept collections, very carefully preserved 
libraries in the possession of Brahmans and Jaina monks. The treatment of the books usually 
depends only upon the worldly circumstances of the owner.® 


B. — Copper-plates, 


The way in which private individuals kept their copper-plate grants, seems to have been 
very peculiar. In many places, e. g., in the ruins of Valabhi, near the modern Vala, they have 
been fonnd immured in the walls or even in the foundations of the honses of the owners. In 


1 Compare the remarks on dunations of MSS. in inscriptions ; ¢. g., Insoriptions du Cambodge, 80, 31; HuLrzsca, 
SIL. 3, 154. 

2 Compare the remark in a Valabhi inscription of A. D. 538 (IA. 7, 67) regarding a donation in order to enable 
the monks of the Banddha monastery of Dudda to buy MSS. (pust:kopakray) of the saddharma. 


3 Hemadri, Danakhanda, 54 ff. * Compare D, Leben des J.-M Hemacandra, D.WA. 183, 231. 
5 Kamastitra, 334, note 4 (ed. DURGAPRASAD), 6 Wratz, die westl, Reo, des Ramayana, 17 f, 
? Nirnayasazar edition, 95, ® B.ESIP., 86, 


® Compare RATENDgATAT Mrrra, in Gongh’s Papers, 21. 


100 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL. XXXIII, 1904; APPENDIX. " [§ 39. 


many other cases [94] the grants have turned up in those fields to the donation of which they 
refer, often hidden in small caches constructed of bricks. 


The finders or poor owners often sell or pledge plates to the Vanids, and this custom 
explains why they frequently come into the hands of European collectors at great distances 
from the places of issue. The originals of the grants, according to which the plates were 
prepared, probably remained in the royal Daftar, the keeper of which, the eksapatulika, is 
frequently mentioned.! 


C,-—- The treatment of letters. 


The Jiitakas already mention the custom of wrapping up important letters in white cloth 
and sealing the packet2 At present. official or ceremonial letters often are sent in bags of 
silk or brocade. In the case of ordinary letters on palm-leaves, the proceeding is simpler; the 
leaves are folded, their ends are split and joined, aad the whole is tied up witha thread.? It is 
probable that letters on Bhirja were treated similarly. According to Bina,‘ the postal runner 
(dirghadhvaga, lekhaharaka) tied each separately to a strip of cloth and wound this round his 
head. 


§ 39. — Writers, engravers, and stone-masons, 


Though the oldest Indian alphabet is a creation of the Brahmanical schoolmen (see above, 
page 17), and though the instruction in writing has remained even in recent times chiefly in 
the hands of Brahmans, there are yet indications that professional writers, and perhaps even 
castes of professional writers, existed already at an early period. The oldest name of these 
men is lekhaka, used in the canon of the Southern Buddhists and the epics (see above, page 5). 
In the Siiici inseription, Stipa I, No. 143,5 it is clearly used to designate the profession of the 
donor; it may, however, be doubted if it means, as I have translated it, “ copyist of MSS.” 
or “writer, clerk.’ In various later inscriptions,® lekhaka undoubtedly denotes the person who 
prepared the documents to be incised on copper or stone. But in the present day a lekhak is 
always a man who copies MSS., and this profession is usually the resource of poor Brahmans, 
and sometimes of worn-out clerks (Kayasths, Karkiins). Sach men were, and are, employed 
also by the Jainas. But many Jaina MSS, have been copied, as their Pragastis show, by 
monks or novices, and even by nuns. Similarly, we find, among the copyists of the Bauddha 
MSS. from Nepal, Bhikgus, Vajracaryas and so forth.’ 


Another name of the professional writers, which was used already in the 4th century B,C., 
is the word lipikara or libekara, discussed above, page 5. In the Kosas® it is given as a 
synonym of lekheka, and in the Vasavadatta? it means “writer” in general. Asoka uses it 
in the 14th rock edict as a designation of his clerks. Similarly, Pada, who copied the Siddapura 
edicts, calls himself lipikasa, and in the Saiici inscription, Stipa I, No. 49,!° the donor 
Subahita-Gotiputa takes the higher title rdjulipckara, “a writer of the king.” In the earlier 
times, lipikara probably was an equivalent for ‘‘ clerk.” 


‘In a number of Valabhi inécriptions of the 7th and 8th centuries, the writer of the 
documents, who is usually ‘‘the minister for alliances and war” (samdhirigrahadhikrta), 


1 Compare STEin’s translation of the Rajatarangini, ¥, 249, £97, oud ee res 

aBAIS. II2.0; Favspoun, Jataka, 2, 173 £, - : 8 B.ESIP, 89. 

4 Harsacarita, 58, 137. as ee 5 BI, 2, 339, 872. 

6 Compare, e. g., the Pallava grant, EI. 1, 1 ff. (end); F. GI (CII. 3), No. 18 (end), No. 80 (end), and FLzEt’s 
remarks in the Index under lekhaka. 

7 Kashmir Report, 88 ; RASENDRALAL M1rR, in Gough’e Papers, 22; Kirnworn’s and Peterson's Reports on 
the Search for Sanskrit MSS., passim; and BENDALL’s Catalogue of Sanskrit Buddhist MSS. from Nepal, passim. 

8 See, e. g., Amarakoga, 183, verse 15; Bombay Government edition. 

® Hatt's edition, 239, 19 BY, 2, 192. 


§ 39.] INDIAN PALEOGRAPHY. 101 
ne Et Sf D 


receives the title divtrapati or divirapati, and the simple word divira occurs even earlier in 
a Central-Indian inscription of A. D. 521-22.1 Divira or divira is the Persian debir, ‘“ writer,” 
which probably became domesticated in Western India during the time of the Sassanians, 
when [95] the trade and intercourse between Persia and India was greatly developed. Divira 
appears also in the Rajatarafgini, and in other Kashmirian works of the 11th and 12th 
centuries. Ksemendra’s Lokaprakasa mentions even various sub-divisions, gafijadictra, “ bazaar- 
writers,” graéma-divira, “ village-writers,” nagara-divira, “town-writers,” and khavasadivira (?).2 


The two works just mentioned, as well as other contemporaneous oues, designate the 
writers also by the term kayastha, which first occurs in the Yajiavalkya-Smrti, 1, 335, and even 
at present is common in Northern and Hastern India. The Kayasthas, however, form a strictly 
separate caste, which, though according to the Brahmanical account it is mixed with Sidra blood, 
yet claims a high rank,’ and in reality frequently has possessed a great political influence. In 
the inscriptions, the Kayasthas occur since the 8th century, first in the Kanasva inscription of 
A. D. 738-39 from Rajputaina.4 


Other designations of the writers in the inscriptions are karana,® karanika® or more rarely 
karanin,’ sasanika’ and dharmalekhin.® Karana is perhaps only a synonym of kayastha,° as the 
law-books mentiou the Karanas as one of the mixed oastes. The other terms, among which 
Laranika has to be rendered, according to Krennorn, by “writer of legal documents (‘arena),” 
appear te be merely official titles without any reference to caste. The development of the 
Indian alphabets, and the invention of new forms of the ‘etters, no doubt is due partly to the 
Brahmans and the Jaina and Bauddha monks, but much more to the professional writers and 
to the writer castes, The opinion, according to which the modifications have been introduced 
by the stone-masons and the engravers of the copper-plates, is less probable, because these 
persons were not suited for such work by their education and their occupation. 


As the remarks at the end of many inscriptions show, it was customary to make over 
a Prasgasti or Kavya, which was to be incised on stone, to a professional writer, who prepared 
a fair copy, and ta set the mason (sitradhara, silakita, ripakara, silpin) to work according to thé 
latter.!2 This custom was observed also in a case which fell under my personal observation. 
The mason received a sheet with the fair copy of the document (the Pragasti of a temple) 
exactly of the size of a stone on which it was to be incised. He first drew the letters on the 
stone under the supervision of a Pandit, and then incised them. In some exceptional cases, 
she authors of the poems assert that they have done the work of the masons,!8 and in others 
the masons say that they have made the fair copies of the inscriptions.'4 


The statements regarding the preparation of the copper-plate Sasanas are less accurate and 
explicit. Usually, the inscriptions mention only the person who drew up or wrote the 
document. And they mostly name as such either a high official (amatya, samdhivigrahika, 


1 F.QL (CII. 3), 122, line 7. 2 TA, 6, 10. 

3 COLEBEOOKE, Bssays, 2, 161, 169 (CowxLL); regarding the Kayastha-Prabhus m Bombay, see Bombay 
Gazetteer, 13, 1, 87 ff. 

«7A, 19, 55; later, the Kayasthas ocour very often in Gujarat, IA. 6, 192, No. 1ff., and in Kalinga, EI. 3, 2 

5 Yajiiavalkya, 1, 72; Vaijayanti, 73, 17; 187, 23; compare BRW. under karaia, 3h, 

6 Compare, e.g., EI. 1, 81, 129, 166; IA. 16,175; 18, 12. 

? Hargacarita, 227 (Nirnayasagar ed.) ; TA. 12, 121. 8 TA. 20, 315. 2 TA. 16, 208, 

19 Compare the compound karanakayastha, IA. 17,18; BENDALL, Cat. Skt. Buddh. MSS., 70, No, 1354. 

1 B.ASBRWI. 4,79 £.; BIS. III.2%, 40, note; IA, 12, 190. 

12 Compare, e. g., EL 1,45, author, Ratnasimha; copyist, Ksatriya-Kumarapala; stone-mason,7iptkara Sampula- 
KI. 1, 49; author, Devagana; writer and mason as above: EI. 1, 81; author, Nehila; copyist, Karanika Gauda 
Takeaditya ; mason, Somavatha, tankavijtanasalin, “‘ export in the art of inoising (letters)’’: also, analogous 
remarks in EI. 1, 129, 189, 211, 279, &c. 

\¥ This is stated by the poet Kubja in Ricx’s unpublished Talgund Praiasti — [now edited by Rice, EC. 7, 
fk, 176, and by Ktzinorn, EL. 8, 31]; — and by Divakarapandita in the Aiijanori insoripfion, JA. 12, 127 

1€ Compare IA, 31, 103, 107 ; 17, 140. 


6306 


102 INDIAN ANTIQUARY, VOL, XXXII, 1904; APPENDIX. "(8 39. 


rahasika) or a general (sena@pati, baladhikria). Occasionally, they assert that the drafting was 
done by a stone-mason, a si¢radhara! or tvasta,2 who, however, in reality merely engraved the 
grant. According to Kalbana,’ the Kashmirian kings kept a special official for this work; 
he bore the title pattopadhyaya, “the teacher (charged with the preparation) of title-deeds,” 
and belonged to the aksapatala office, which Stein believes to be the .Accountant-General’s 
Office, while I take it fo be the Record Office or Court of Rolls (Daftar). 


The Sisanas name only rarely, and in late times, the person by whom the plates were 
engraved (wikirna, unmilita). The engravers mentioned are various artisans, a pilalahara, 
lohakara or ayaskara,s i. ¢., the Kansir or coppersmith of the present day, a sé#radharas 
“gtone-mason,” a hemakara or sunara’ (probably equivalent to sonara), “ goldsmith,” a silpin? 
or vijianika,® “an artisan.” In the Kalinga Sasanas, we find in their stead an aksasalin, 
aksasalika, akhasalin, or akhasale,® whereby a member of the goldsmith caste, now called 
Aksale,!° is meant. 


Finally, the existence of manuals for clerks and writers must be mentioned. We still 
possess several works of this kind, among which the Lekhapatcasiki gives the rules for 
drafting not only private letters, but also land-grants and the treaties between kings, while 
a section of Kgemendra-Vyasadisa’s Lokaprakféa shows how the various kinds of bonds, bills 
of exchange (hundi) and so forth ought to be done.l! 


CONCLUDING REMARKS. 


{96] De. W. Carretymri, whose name appears at the bottom of the Plates, is 
responsible for the drawing and tracing of the letters for which no cuttings from facsimiles 
were available, as well as for the arrangement and the retouche of the cuttings, except in 
the case of plates VII -—IX, which were finished by a young lithographer, Mr. Boum. I have also 
to acknowledge Dr. Carreniient's assistance in the selection of the signs, which in a few cases 
he has made independently, and in others has been influenced by a revision of my proposals ; 
and I have to thank him for various ingenious remarks on the Indian alphabets, as well as for 
a collection of the variants iu the Aéuka edicts, 


If I have been able to illustrate most of the Indian alphabets by cuttings from facsimiles, 
instead of by hand-drawn signs, I owe this chiefly to my friend Dr. J. Burcxss, who during many 
years has kindly furnished me with separate copies of his excellent reproductions of Indian 
inscriptions. Some other donors of facsimiles or photographs, Dr. E. Hunrzscu, Prorgssor E. 
Leumann, and Dr. 8. von OLpensure, have already been mentioned in the notes. 


1 TA, 19, 948; J, BBRAS, 13, 4, 

2 KI. 3, 158, 250, where it is said that the tvasta Viranacarya wrote the grants of Acyutaraya and Venkata. 
raya, as well as that of Sadasivaraya dated A. D. 1556. 

8 Rajatarangini, V, 397 f. (Stz1n). # EI. 4, 170; TA, 17, 227, 230, 235. 

5 TA. 15, 360. 8 KI. 8, 314; IA. 18, 17. 7 YA. 17, 284, 

8 TA, 16, 208 ; the lohakara Kuke is likewise called vinani, %. e. vijfanika, IA. 17, 230, 

9 TA. 18, 123; 18, 145; EL. 3, 19, 218, and the correction of the translation (p. 21) at the end of the volume. 

10 Barnes, Imperial Census Report, 2, 8, where the Aksales of Madras are mentioned. Thev are form’, 
however, also in the Kanarese districts of the Bombay Presidency. 

11 BHANDARKAR, Report on the Search for Sanskrit MSS., 1882-83, 38; Kashmir Report, o hoa! 
writers see also RAJENDRALAL MiTRA, in Gough's Papors, 16, 183, and BURNELL, inf ESIP, & 


AA 


00056300 


Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 23 January, 2019 



